Britannia, Vol. 1 (William Camden (Edmund Gibson, trans.), 1586)
==========================================================
Camden's Britannia (1586) - the founding chorography of Britain; the book that made English antiquarianism. Gibson's English translation (1722), 2 vols. Vol. 1 of 2.

Mr. Camden's BRITANNIA,
EPR re written originally in Latin, was pub-

re liſhed in an Engliſh Tranllation,
with large Additions and Improve-
ments. And though Enquiries of this
nature may ſeem leſs proper for the
| 185 Character and Function of a Divine,
and eſpecially for one of my Age and Station; yet I hope
I ſhall not be cenſured for having continued this Work
under my Care and Inſpection, when it is conſider'd, that
all Ages and Stations muſt be allowed their Diverſions,
and that no Diverſion can be more innocent or laudable,
than the Hiſtory and Antiquities of our Native Country :
The Love of which being grafted in our Nature ; it fol-
lows from thence, that the debarring any Part or Circum-
ſtance of Life from employing it's leifure-hours in thoſe
pleaſing and innocent Amuſements, would be an Unnatural
Reſtraint.

Wherefore, about twelve Years ſince, I turn'd my
Thoughts in earneſt, towards the farther Improvement
and Perfefting of this Work; and now, being about
to ſend abroad another Impreſſion of it, the Reader 1s to

4 [ a | be

The PREFACE.

be acquainted, in what . particulars, and to what degrees,

this Second Edition is further Enlarged and Improved.

I. Tux TRANSLATION, from beginning to end,
hath been collated with the original Latin, and, it 1s hoped,
will be found much better accommodated, than before, to
the Author's Senſe, and the Engliſh Idiom. The Eu-
gliſh Tranſlation alſo hath been ſeparately peruſed with
another View, namely, Eavenneſ and Uniformity of Style;
the want of which (not to be well avoided in a tranſlation
by ſeveral hands) was taken notice of in the former Edi-
tion, but is to a good degree ſupplied and remedied in this.
In which Collation, and Reviſal, the rule hath been, not to
aim-at or affect Politeneſs and Elegancy, but (what was
conceived to be more agreeable to the Subject) to ſee that
the Author's meaning was expreſſed in plain and proper
Language, and, as much as might be, in the ſame Style.

I MusT add one thing more, concerning the 7ranſla-
tion of this Work; That the adjuſting it exactly to the
Latin, will always lay it under one diſadvantage with Eu-
gliſh Readers, which is this: The Original, as written in
Latin, was chiefly intended for the Inſfruction of F oreigu-
ers; and this made it neceſſary for the Judicious and
Learned Author, to inſert particular Explications of many
Terms, Cuftoms, and Methods : Which being Peculiar to
the Engliſh, could not otherwiſe have been underſtood by
Foreigners; but being of vulgar and common uſe amon
Us, they are known before-hand to the meaneſt and moſt
illiterate Engliſh Reader, and may therefore, in an En-
gliſh Tranſlation calculated for Engliſh Readers, feem
not only »feleſs, but in many caſes triſling. Notwithſtand-
ing which, it was judg'd moſt adviſeable in this as
well as the former Edition, to tranſlate Mr. Camden en-
tire ; and although ſuch paſſages, as they ſtand in the
Engliſh Tongue, may at firſt ſight appear mean and low,
yet can they be no diminution of Mr. (One's e
or the Dignity of the Work, in the account of any Rea-
der, who will be fo fair and juſt, as to remember that

they are Explications originally intended for the benefit of
F. „ eigner *

THE

.

79
A
b
_
6
-
®
Ty
*
*
Ly
|
*
<5
*
1
"=
3
*
*
4
7
"Tax
_
wp
.
FA
-
4

WT
—
4
=P
*
9
*
1
.
*
*
—
C
* *
L
8
*
OS)
So

e —

» _ —

The PREFACE. .

offend the eye. By which, the Rea

Tu like Excuſe muſt be made for the Tranflation, if
in ſome places there appear more of the PoeticalStyle, than
is uſual in Proſe ; which could not be avoided without de-
viating from the Original, becauſe in truth Mr. Camden's
Style, eſpecially in the Britannia, leans much to the Poeti-
cal way; riſing to a greater heighth, and abounding more
with Epithets and Alluſions, than Writings of that kind
generally do.

—

II. THE ADDITIONS, which in the former Im-
preſſion were placed at the end of each County, and others
which have been ſince made by way of Improvement in
this, and which are very numerous; are now inſerted at
the Places to which they belong, and Incorporated with Mr.
Camder's Text, but with proper marks of diſtinction (vis.
this at the beginning, and this ] at the end, of every Addi-
tion, throughout the Work; ) ſo plain, as to be diſcerned
at firſt ſight by any Reader who is attending to thoſe Di-
ſtinctions, and not plain enough to 11 70 the page, or

er is now caſed of
the frequent trouble of turning from place to place, and
ſees the full Account of every particular, at one view, and
without the leaſt Interruption; and yet has the Text, in

effect, as entire and ſeparate, as he had before.

III. Or the Additions ſo incorporated with the Text,
very many (as hath been intimated) are New Diſcoveries
and Obſervations, ſuch, I mean, as have been made ſince
the former Edition : the publication whereof conduced
much to excite the Curioſity of many perſons in this way,
and led learned and judicious men, in their ſeveral Coun-
tries, to farther Enquiries and Obſervations; which ( it
mult be faid for their honour ) they have communicated,
with great freedom and readineſs, towards the Improve-
ment of this Work. |

TV. TH AT it might not be unknown or forgotten, to
whoſe Aſſiſtance the Improvements in the former Impreſ-
ſon were chiefly owing; it was reckoned a point of juſtice
to repeat in this Edition a particular Account of their

Names, as it ſtood in the former: Eſpecially, ſince See at .

many of them have been pleaſed to reviſe and enlarge their Pes
Obſervations, in order to perfect the preſent Work; fo far

as

The PREFACE.

as a Subject, in its nature perpetually grouing and vary-
ing, is capable of Perfection, And although the Learned
Mr. Lieyd (to whom the Britannia ſtands indebted for
thoſe moſt uſeful Additions in Wales) is ſince dead, to
the great detriment of Natural Hiftory and Antiquitzes ;
yet it fell out Providentially for this Work, that before
his death he had Reviſed the whole Principality, in order

to this new Impreſſion.

V. So E of thoſe Curious and Learned Perſons, who
contributed to the Improvement of particular Counties
in the laſt Edition, have, in order to this, extended their
Enquiries to other Counties alſo : The Right Reverend
Father in God, William, Lord Biſhop of * Carliſle, to
Cumberland and Weſtmorland (moſtly, his Lordſhip's own
| Dioceſe : ) Dr. Kennet, Dean, and now Biſhop, of Peter-
burrow, to Buckinghamſhire, as bordering upon Oæford-
ſhire, and, in part, the ſubject of his Parochial Antiqui-
ties : Dr. Tanner, Chancellor of Norwich, to Norfolk and
Suffolk, the two Counties, of which that Dioceſe conſiſts:
Mr. Thoresby, to the Eaft and North-Ridings of York-
ſhire, as having carried his Enquiries and Obſervations
throughout that County in a general way, while he was
making more particular Preparations for his uſeful and ac-
curate Account of the Antiquities of Leeds. The ſame
worthy perſon hath alſo enrich'd this Impreſſion with addi-
tional Annotations upon Mr. Camden's four Tables of Saxon
Coins, and hath join'd to them a #ffth Table out of his

own excellent Muſeum, with Remarks upon it.

VI. BESsID Es the Aſſiſtances from former Benefactors ;
this Edition hath alſo receiv'd great Improvement from
ſeveral other perſons, of known Skill in the Subject of An-
tiquities. Cornwall, Devonſhire, and Somerſetſhire, have

been greatly enlarged from Obſervations communicated

by Dr. Muſgrade; Dorſet ſhire, by Mr. Bennett; Leiceſter-
ſhire, by Mr. Rogers late Archdeacon of Leiceſter ; Hun-
tingdonſhire, by Mr. Aftry ; Worceſterſhire, by Mr. Oliver;
the Biſhoprick of Durham, by Dr. miu Prebendary of that
Church; the Account of the P:Fs-wall, by another very
worthy perſon of the ſame Name and Country, whoſe accu-
rate Survey of it is here printed at large; the Iſle of Man,
by the Right Reverend the preſent Lord Biſhop of Man,

In

— * e r

8 .

The PR EFA CE.

Jerſey, Guernſey, &c. in a like Deſcription by the Reverend
Mr. Fall. 1

VII. Mr. Campen had furniſh'd his Reader with ſome
General Rules for diſcovering the Original and Import
of the ancient Engliſh names of PERsoNSs; but it ſeem'd
to be a Defect in the Undertaking, that there was no
Help of the like kind, to diſcover the Original and Import
of the names of Px acts ; eſpecially, in a Topographical
Work. Which defect is now ſupply'd, by the addition
of a like Scheme of General Rules concerning the names
of PLacks, whereby the Reader is directed to the ge-
nuin meaning and ſignification of them in the Saxon
tongue, from whence they were taken. And becauſe, ſince
the former Edition of this Work, England and Scotland
have receiv'd a mutual Increaſe of Peace, Happineſs, and
Strength, by being united and incorporated into one King-
dom ; it was judg'd ns and convenient to connect
the Deſcriptions of thoſe two Countries, with an Hiſtori-
cal Account of that happy UNION.

VIII. Warn Mr. Camden enters upon the Deſcription
of Scotland, he makes a general Apology for all Defeds,
as being much a Stranger to the Affairs of that Kingdom;
and for the ſame reaſon, a like Apology is {till more need-
ful, when we paſs over into /relaud. But it is to be hop'd,
that even theſe Defefs will have one good fruit, namely,
to Provoke ſome learned Perſons in thoſe two Countries to

5 undertake ſeparate Surveys of them, and to give us a full
7 and perfect Account of their ancient and modern State.
More particularly, it is to be wiſh'd, that ſome able hand
in Ireland, would do the ſame juſtice to the Nobility of
that Nation, that Mr. Crawford has lately done to the
Nobility of Scotland; to whoſe Accounts, and to Sir James
Dalrymple's Edition of the Britannia for Scotland, this Work
ſtands greatly indebted ; as doth Ireland to the kind and
uſeful Aſliſtances of Sir Rickard Cox.

IN. Ax the end of the whole, are the Additions which
were made by Philemon Holland, in his Engliſh Tranſla-
tion of the Britannia; together with the pages and lines

| [b] of

The PREFACE. E

of the preſent Edition, to which thoſe Interpolations re- *
late. And if it be ask'd, why theſe alſo were not inſerted
in their proper places, with ſome mark of diſtinction; the
Anſwer is, That the Tranſlator appears not to have been
skill'd in the Subject of Antiquities, but ſeems to have
undertaken that Work merely as a perſon who found much
delight in the tranſlating of Latin Authors into Engliſh;
That his receiving thoſe Interpolations from Mr. Camden
(however conjecturd by ſome) is neither pretended by
himſelf, nor ſhown by others to any degree of ſatisfacti-
on ; and, That he has not thought fit to acquaint us, upon
what Information or Authority thoſe Additions were made.
For which reaſons, it was judg'd molt adviſable to diſpoſe F
of them in a middle way, that is, neither wholly to re-
ject them, nor yet to incorporate them with the Text;
but ( leaving every one to his own Opinion, concerning
the value and uſefulneſs of them,) to print them ſeparate-
ly at the end of this Work, and, by diſtinct references,
to make the recourſe to their proper places as eaſy to the
Reader, as was poſſible in that Separate State. |

X. Havixc faid thus much of the preſent Edition, and
of the Improvements made in it, firſt, in the Tranſlation
and Method, and then in a multitude of Additions and 2 -
Enlargements ; it remains to be obſerv'd, that the Maps
alſo have been revis'd by knowing and skilful Perſons in
each County, and the Errors in the Spellings carefully
amended in the Plates, according to the Corrections
return'd, ſo far as they appear d to be needful ; that is,
where the Name of the Place, as it ſtood in the former
Edition of the Map, did not anſwer either the way of
writing or the common way of pronomcing among the Peo-
ple. If it anſwer'd either of theſe, it was judg'd ſufficient ;
if neither, it is corrected. 125 |

But tho the Maps thus amended, ſerve the purpoſes
of the preſent Work, by carrying the eye of the Reader
from place to place as he peruſes the Deſcriptions, and do
alſo, in the main, anſwer the other purpoſes of ſuch Topo-
graphical Surveys; and tho", of late years, particular Sur-
veys have been taken of ſome few Counties, and Maps
of them publiſh'd with good degrees of Care and Accu-

Wy 4 y L 6 » **
3 . wt #2 f * * . \
„ ood . Rn 3 =, : * 8 7
F * * by « , 26% . 5
.

8 * 3 pee”
Ts > %
2 "> > n q . * 9
2 e- — 4
4 ber i * *

racy: Yet it is much to be wiſh'd, for the honour of
. ))

e e a » 8 1 .
e oi a * * a 3 . *

7 * 8 7
ed we > -+ s WE 4p57 =
2 n ES 13
4 e CINE ,

- 8

—— —

The PREFACE.

—thcſe Nations, that due Encouragement might be found

for ſome skilful and diligent hands, to take New Sur-
veys of the ſeveral Counties of Great Britain and Ireland,

in order to one uniform Body of Maps; fo fair, with

regard to the Letter, and ſo diſentangled with regard
to the diſtances of the Names from each other, as
to be not only uſeful, but eaſy and delightful to the

Eye.

XI. Bur tho' fo great Care and Pains has been taken
in Reviſing, Augmenting, and Digeſting this Work, in
order to ſend it to the Preſs, accurate and complete; and
tho moſt of the Counties, after they were printed off,
have been tranſmitted to skilful hands for their peruſal,

and their Corrections and Amendments (ſo far as was judg'd

neceſſary) are inſerted at the end; yet are we not to ſuppoſe,

that a Work of ſo great Compaſs and Extent, and con-

ſiſting of ſuch a variety of Matter, can be without it's
Errors and Miſtakes. This was by no means the caſe of
Mr. Camden's own Performance, even after it had re-
ceiv'd his laſt hand; and much leſs will it be the caſe of
any other perſon. And therefore there is great need, on
this occaſion, to beſpeak the Reader's Candour, and fa-
vourable Allowance; which, being granted, will be no more
than a juſt and equitable Return, for the great Pains that
has been taken to provide for his Inſtruction and En-
tertainment. But if any Errors which were originally in
Mr. Camden's Text, or in the Addition, to the former
Impreſſion, ſhall happen to be repeated in this; ſo far,
the Reader muſt be content to take the blame to him-
ſelf, for having neglected to give timely notice of ſuch
Errors, when notice was given to him, in the moſt publick
manner, of the deſign of a new Edition.

XII. Ar rx fo particular an Account of the preſent
Worx; I will obſerve but one thing more. It is uſual
with Mr. Camden, to beſtow proper marks of Reſpect
upon Perſons who liv'd in his own time, and whoſe emi-
nent Abilities, and Services to their Country, had either
acquir'd them new Honours from their Prince, or were
an Ornament to thoſe which they had receiv'd front

2 F their

The PREFACE.

0 * . 7 "
— — , L
„mee

— o * 9 Lat = —
— — *
n ET a ora

their Anceſtors. And he vindicates this, as an act of
Juſtice, which was due not only to the Perſons, but to the
Age ; that Poſterity might ſee how fruitful it was in
Virtue, Wiſdom, Learning, Eloquence, and other great
and laudable Attainments. The like liberty is taken, here
and there, in the Additional parts of this Work; as well
by way of accommodation to Mr. Camden's method, as
to let Poſterity ſee that the preſent Age had it's Share
of worthy and honourable Accompliſhments in all kinds;
and this, the Reader will find to be done with great
Juſtice and Impartzality. e

Part

-
—_—_ ET OT -—»
* *
*

*
Y | 4
9
*
*
1
2;
8.
3 4
of
v3 5

MN

5

+;

, *

5
a
*

h * Li
= Cot Ewe Br oi .
* 3
.

e DEED Ss *>
N

——— — — ——

Part of the

PREFACE

N To the Former
EDIT I O N:

Setting forth the Names of the Perſons
who aſliſted therein.

NA FTER the Method, the Reader is to be in-
[AN Sg form'd to whoſe aſſiſtance he owes theſe Im-
pirovements. And this is a juſtice both to the
dots Perſons and to the ork. For, as it is fit that
each County ſhould underſtand to whom it is more particu-
larly oblig'd ; ſo ought it alſo to be underſtood by others,
that-we have not built upon {light grounds, nor deliver'd
matters upon trifling informations. Mr. Anthony Etrick
communicated what he thought moſt remarkable in Dor-
ſetſhire : as Mr. Worſley of Lancolns-Inu tranſmitted ſe-
veral Notices relating to Hamſhire; Mr. Evelyn, to Sur-
rey; and Mr. Harris to Suſſex. The Diſcoveries in Wilt-

ſhire depend upon the authority of Mr. Tanner, who
| | [ c | has

LT,

l

VE
7

r e
o — te 6 *

„» ai. —_—_——

Dr. Tanner,
now Chan-
cellor of

Norwich.

— at r
* * << SL. 8 —

* e

—

e

Part of the PREFACE

—

has made conſiderable progreſs in the Antiquities of that
County. A Survey of Kent and Mzddleſex was made up-
on this occaſion by Dr. Plot. The account of the Ar/enals
for the Royal Navy in Kent, with the Additions to Portſ«
mouth and Harwich, ſo far as they relate to the Royal
Navy, were communicated by Mr. Pepys. From Glo-
cefter ſhire informations were communicated by Dr. Parſons
Chancellor of that Church; and from Oxfordſhrre, by
t NowD:-4. Mr. White Kennet, who will ſhortly publiſh the Anti-

bp. ot 2-- quities of ſome part of that Country. In ſettling the an-
te: barough;

«ho lach Clent Stations in Eſſex, we were particularly aſſiſted by
lac Mr. Oofley, who || is writing the Antiquities of the whole
gf women County; and in the deſcription of Norfolk, by a Survey
utiquities. . . . .
| Since Of that County in * Manuſcript, written by Sir Henry
ge Spelman, and now in the Bodleian- Library. Mr. Thomas
prined, Newſham of Warwick tranſmitted ſeveral very uſeful Par-
be &. ticulars relating to Warwichſpire; and an accurate Ac-
nai. count of the Antiquities of Y/orceſterſhire was communi-
Sine cated by Dr. || V 7 yu Hopkins, Prebendary of the Church
of Worceſter. Some Obſeryations upon the Biſhoprick of
Durham, were extracted by Mr. Rudd, out of the Poſtu-
mous Papers of Mr. Mickleton (a curious Antiquary ) at
t Since the requeſt of the Reverend Mr. + John Smith, a mem-
lena. ber of that Church; and others were tranſmitted by
Dr. Cay of New-caftle. The Weſt-riding of Yorkſhire is
indebted to Mr. Ralph Thoresby of Leeds, of whoſe abi-
lities and exactneſs the large collection of Curioſities he

has made himſelf Maſter of, is a ſufficient argument. In

the Eaft-Riding, Mr. John Burnſall of Hull, contributed
many things very remarkable; and Dr. Jonſton (from

| Since whom || we expect the Antiquities of Yorkſhire ) commu-
nicated ſeveral particulars throughout that whole Coun-
"Since ty, MWeſtmurland is engag'd to Mr.“ Thomas Machel for
many uſeful Diſcoveries ; as its neighbour Cumberland is

to Dr. Hugh Todd, Prebendary of the Church of Car-
Since, Bp. Ii ſle: and laſtly, Northumberland to * Mr. William Nicol-

f Carli
aud nod af ſou, Archdeacon of the ſame Church, eminent for his

Hen. knowledge in the Languages and Antiquities of the Nor-
thern Nations. The fame worthy Perſon was alſo pleas'd
to improve this Work by obſervations throughout the

No in Whole Province of York, towards the Antiquities whereof

the Lina he has made large + Collections. |

and Chap-
ter of Car-

lifle. When

4 ; 4 , % « SITY 5 3 5 | *
2 r — ab et

K.

> SSSR.

J the former Eprriox bf this Wok

the Author of it was, is not certainly known ; but if we

le te AL

When 1 tell you, that the whole Care of the Counties
of Wales was committed to Mr. Edward Lhwyd, Keeper

of the Muſæum in Oxford, no one will doubt the juſtneſs

and accuracy of the Obſervations. His diligence, and
known ability both in Natural Hiftory and Antiquities, as
they remove all Suſpicions of that kind, ſo + might they Sine
do great honour either to his native Country, or to an
particular County in England, in which he ſhould meet
with Encouragement anſwerable to the Undertaking.

Nor can the additional Remarks in Scotland be queſtion'd,
ſince they are grounded upon the authority of Sir Ro-
Bert Sibbalds ; whoſe Natural Hiftory already publiſh'd, and
the model he has given us of his intended Antiquities, are
a ſufficient evidence how great a maſter he is in the Hi-
ſtory and Antiquities of that Kingdom. The Remarks
upon Ireland were alſo communicated by a Perſon very
well acquainted with the Affairs of that Kingdom, Sir Ri-
chard Cox Knight. | 155 | Revis'd

again by

the ſame
The Catalogues of Plants at the end of each County dis Edie
were communicated by the Great Botaniſt of our age,
Mr. Ray. They are the effect of many years Obſerva-
tion; and that * excellent Perſon was willing to take this Since
opportunity of handing them to the Publick.

The Verſes which occur in Mr. Camder's Tet, were

tranſlated by + Mr. Kennet of Corpus Chrifti College in Ox-t Aer,

wards Dr.

Ford. — Of all the Poetry which is quoted by our Author, me, and

the Wedding of Tame and Iſis runs in the beſt vein ; whe- 1
ther we regard the Thought, or the Compoſition. Who dee

now dead.

fix upon Mr. Camden himſelf, J verily believe there will
be no occaſion for a ſecond Conjecture. One Argument
for this, is, that he never names the Author ; whereas he

could not but know him, ſince the Poem was publiſh'd in

his own Time. Then, if we compare the ſubject matter of
this Poem with his own Deſcription of the ſeveral Places
which it touches upon, we ſhall find them to be much the
lame. And, which in my opinion puts it beyond all
Exception, he never quotes the Poem with any the leaſt
Commendation, but always uſhers it in with Coldneſs,

Let it not be thought troubleſome to run over theſe Verſen ©

-
St 2 _ — C — * 1 — — py
p 4 - - 2 * IT = — * — * 3
E A + We SI'S * — 8 — — -

e — Ow VS
„
5 —
ls

Part of the PR EFA C E, Gr.

F you can reliſh them — If you vouchſafe to read them —
You may read or omit them as you pleaſe Expreſſions, be-

coming Mr. Camden's Modelty when he ſpeaks of himſelf.
but very diſagreeable to his known Candour in the Cha-

racters of other Men and their Works. --- N

* of
* x 8 — 8 *
1 r . i 0 |
* 2 "y n 1
r N

+ Vos fy
—

@\

ANTO ;
' «a W

„ X * 2 * * » Fe
Wd Ke LL: 1 SETS Xt * +."
— X r

3 See that + Curwens of Workimton, in- the Coun-
Laer che ety of Cumberland.
x Pirkjaves When Mr. Camden was twelve years
1 in Cock. Lib. Of age, he was ſeiz d by the Me *,
4 : fub Efigie and remoy'd to Iſington, near London;
ul. F. 6,
2 Fe cor- and being fully recover d, he was FR
: | ; eh: Bie to Pauls * Schodl, whe he laid the

* r 4 o
* . *
** .

vas born in the Oli. Ba
., in London, May 2
155 *, His Father,
SIA 9 Sampſon Camden, Was a
3 in London; whither he was ſent
very y from Lichfield, the placeſi
of his birth and education. His. mo-
ther was of the ancient Family of the

tin and Greek Tongues, ro which he
-afterwards arriv'd.

About that time, Dr. Cooper (ſuc-
ceſſively promoted, firſt to the Biſho-
prick of Lincoln, and then to that of

foundation of that accuracy in the La-

Mr. C4 M D E N.

UP ncheſler) was Fdllow of ERR
Bai-| College in Oxford, 'and Maſter of the
2.|School belonging to it. To his care
he was recommended ; and by his
means, probably, admitted Choriſter;
but mut ing of a Demy's. Place, and be-
ing thereby difappointed of his hopes
in that rich and ample N he
hk oblig d to ſeck a new Patron, and
ro ame 2 new eme for his' fu
Fortunes. 9 23
The next Encouragement that he
found, was from Dr. Thomas Thornton.
By 25 he was invited to Broad. gate-
Hat (ſince call'd Pembroke-College, )
where be proſecuted his Studies with great
lication ; and the Latin Graces, us d

by the College at this day, are faid to

[be of his compiling. Ang his other

Acqulibrance he was particularly hap-
py in the rwo Carews, Richard and

George 3 both of this Hall, and both

Fd] addi-

addicted to the Study of Antiquities.

For alchough the firſt was a Member
* Wood! of Chriſt-church, * he had his Cham-
Athen.vol-t- ber in Broad gare hall; and Sir + Wil-
12 Dugdale's affirming the ſecond to
T-3- P:419- have been of Univerſity-College, might be
ditional =occaſion'd by two of the ſirname being
catalogue of Members of this houſe, about the ſame
Scholars in time. And it is very probable, that Mr.
College, Camden's more ſettl d inclination to An-
tiquities, is to be dated from this lucky
familiarity and correſpondence; man-
kind being generally determin d by ſome
ſuch accidents to the particular Studies
and Profeſſions of their Lives.

Here hecontinu'd almoſt three years:
in which time he had, by his diligence
and probity, eſtabliſh'd himſelf fo far
in the good opinion of his Patron, Do-
tor Thornton, that when he was advanc'd

* See his to a Canonty of Chriſt-church, & he
. 16. carry'd Mr. Cantlen along wicht him,
1 entertain d him in his own Lodgin 8.
He was then: ſcarce twenty Vears old;

an age, at which the ſtudy of Arts and
Sciences uſually excuſe young perſons
from concerning themſelves in *

ous Controverſies. And yet then, the

Knowledge which he had attain'd in

thoſe matters, coſt him a remarkable
diſappointment. For, being a Candi-

date for 4 Fellowſhip of AL Souls Col.
lege; the Popiſh party (ſuch, at leaſt,
. inclinations lay that way, what-
ever their Profeſſion was) apprehending
that his advancement would not make
for their cauſe, oppos d it ſo zea-
louſly, chat it was carry d againſt him.
Many years after, upon an imputation
of Popery (which we ſhall have occa-
tEpift. 195. ſion to ſpeak to by and by,) + among
other teſtimonies of his fidelity to the
Church of England, he urg d that in-
ſtance as one; and for the truth of it,
he appeal d to Sir Daniel Dun, then Fel-
low of the College, and a perſon, whoſe

* and integrity recommended

more than once to the choice of

the Univerſity, in their Elections for
Members of Parliament.

After five Years ſpent in the U-

niverſity, and two remarkable diſap-

1 bgr in his endeavours to ſettle
imſelf there; his Circumſtances put

—

Tue LIFE of Mr. CAMDEN.

|

him under a neceſſity of leaving that

place. Whether he had taken the De-

gree of Batchelor of Arts, does not cer-

_ appear. That in June, 1570,

he ſupplicated for it, is evident from

the * Regiſter of the Univerſity ; bur « KK. n
no mention is there made, of whats: b.
followed upon it. Three Years after,

gree, and ſeems to have taken it; but
never compleated it by Determmations.

name of William Camden, Batchelor of” ©”
Arts of Chrift-Church) That whereas
from the time he had taken the Degree

of Batchelor, he had ſpent ſixteen years
in the ſtudy of Philoſophy and other

Liberal Arts, he might be dispens'd-

with for the reading of three folemn
Lecturq; and be admitted to Proceed.

His 8 was granted, on con- 161 z.
dition Wat he ſtood . following
Act; which, it ſcerds, {other occa-

ſions would not permit him to do, no-

thing appearing of it in the Publick
Records of that time. When he atten-
ded the Funeral of Sir Thomas Bodley, he
had the 7 * of Maſter of Arts vo-
luntarily offer d him by the Uniyerſity ;
but whether he Leclineda acgepted it,
does not appear. f 1 *

This was the relation that Mr. Cam-
den bore to the Univerſity of Oxford,
which he left in the year 1571. From
thence, he removed immediately to Lou-
don , but with what proſpect he went,
or what encouragement he found there,
we have no diſtinct account. It ſhould
ſeem, that he did nor preſently fall into
any particular Employment; becauſe
binelf has told us, that, upon his

the Univerſity, he ſurvey'd a

leavi

conſiderable part of England: Reli

Academia, ſtudio meitato, ſatis magnam
Angliæ partem fide oculatd obivi, are his

Brooke. By which, he muſt probably giving of
mean that interval of four or five.
years, between his bidding- adieu to
Oxford, and his advancement to the
ſecond Maſterſhip of Weſtminſter-
School. His natural genius lay fo ſtrong
towards the Study of Antiquities,

| (a) that

he ſupplicated again for the ſame De- 1573.

However, in the year 1588. + we find twood' 4:
him ſupplicating the Convocation (by the then. vol. «.

own words, in his * Anſwer to Mr. 4 In the be.

4 Anſwer

to Brooke.

1
"266 ©
1
+ I
"Jy
1
*
1 -_
by
Gel
A -
.
N,
7
N
1
8
*
-

The LIFE off Mr. CAMpREN.
(a) that even when he was a School- that the Collections and. Obſervations
boy (as himſelf tells us) he could nei- which he had hitherto made, ſeem on-
* ther hear nor ſec any thing of an an- ly deſign'd for private ſatisfaction, and
+ tique appearance, without more than to ſatisfy a ſecret Thirſt, which he had
f ordinary attention and notice. While brought with him into the World. In
. | he was in the Univerſity, all his ſpare the mean time, Ortelius (* the great * Anſwer to
hours were employ'd in the ſame way.|refforer of Geography, as he terms him) x:
After he came to be engag'd in the|came over into England, and apply'd
laborious buſineſs of teaching School, [himſelf particularly ro Mr. Camden, as
(h) he would fain have weaned him- the beſt Oracle he could conſult, in re-
{elf from thoſe Enquiries, and have lation to the Hiſtory of theſe Kingdoms;
A: confin'd his thoughts entirely to the and the regard which he had for the
buſineſs he had undertaken. But when-|Honour of his Country, ſeconded with
ever a Vacation gave him liberty to look the authority and AN of this
abroad, the thirſt returned, and he de- great Man, wrought him by degrees
clares it was not in his power to re- into ſome ſort of compliance; and at
{train himſelf from making Excurſi- laſt, over-rul'd him into a reſolution
ons into one quarter or another, into improve and digeſt his Collecti- |
queſt of Antiquities. ons. |
This propenſity of nature was ſecon-| He enter d upon it with all the diſ- |
ded by Fe importunity of Friends, and|advantages, that could attend an Un-
receiv'd very early encouragement from|dertaking. It was a fort of Learning,
# Anſwer perſons of the beſt rank. + The no- that was then but juſt appearing in the
F Philip Sidney was ever engaging world; when that heat and vehemence
him in thoſe Purſuits, whilſt in Oxford of Philoſophy and School- Divinity (which
and, after his removal, (c) the twoſhad poſſeſs d all hearts and hands for
Goodmans (Gabriel and Godfrey, Do- ſſo many hundred years) began to
tors in Divinity) ſupplied him with cool.
Books and Money. The intereſt al Italy was the place, where theſe Topo-

which the former of theſe had in the|graphical Surveys were firſt attempted,
Collegiate Church of Weſtminſter, pro- for the more eaſe and delightful Read-
| curd fim the place of ſecond Maſter|ing of the Rowan Hiſtories ; and there
in that School. the difficulty was very inconſiderable.
We may well * that his Fame| The expreſs remains of the old names,
ſpread throughout the Kingdom, in preſerved in the new ones, was a ſuffi-
proportion to his knowledge of it; cient direction in many caſes; and,
and cannot doubt but a perſon of ſo where that guide fail d, they were led
great attainments in that way, had ap- to them by their Hiſtories, as by a thread; -
plications from many hands to under- which being ſo many, and withal fo
take the Antiquities of his native Coun-|minute in every the leaſt circumſtance,
try. But the difficulties, on one hand, pant out the Places in the plaineſt man-
appear d ſo great, and the helps, on the ner, and render all Geographical En-
other, ſo inconſiderable, that nothing quiries a very eaſy task. France, Span,
could prevail with him to engage in an and Germany had not this advantage in
Undertaking, which (all things conſi- ſo high a degree; but, as they were ſub-
dered) ſeemed almoſt inſuperable. So dued by the Roman Arms, fo had they

Ree.

(a) Ex quo primum animum ſtudiis excolere capi, inclinatioue neſcio 35 ad inveſtigandam Antiquita-
tem totus propendi : velim nolim huc me natura tulit; adeo ut puer in Schola, quacungue huc ſpectare vi-
debantur avide arripuerim ; adoleſcens in Academia cum Philoſophicis penſis vacuus eſſem, omnes cogitatio-
nes motuſque auimi buc contulerim. Anſwer to Brooke, pag. 1. 5

(b) Poſted ad urbem acceſſi; ubi efſi laboriofiſſimo dacendi mutere fungebar, & hoc Antiquarium Stu-
dium exuere volebam, minime tamen potui. Neque enim poteſt quiſque noſtrùm ſubito fingi, aut natura
converti. Animum ſemper in hac tauquay arcum intentum habui : cùm feriarer, non potui non hac ſtu-
dia recolere, & ſubinde in has vel ills Augliæ partes enſpatiari. Ibid. B

( ) Britannia in Middleſex, e

the

The LIFE of

Mr. CamMDbDenN.

the good fortune to fall under the no-
tice of the Roman Hiſtorians ; who
being ſufficiently acquainted with their
Affairs, by their nearneſs to Italy and
their long ſubjection to the Roman Em-
pire, did deſcribe them with tolerable
exactneſs. But Britam was another world
ro them ; and accordingly when they
undertook to write of our Affairs, and
to give deſcriptions either of People, or
Places, their Accounts were unavoida-
bly confuſed and imperfect. In the
caſe before us, the beſt direction ſeems
to be the Itmerary of Antoninus; and
yet this, as a heap of bare names
without any circumſtances of Action,
is but a poor guide, in ſuch Enqui-
ries.

However, it had been a much more

comfortable bottom to embark on, had it
been ſound and entire. But he found it

ſo mangled, by the Tranſcribers negli-
gence, or ignorance, or both, that he
plainly ſaw he muſt rectifie that, be-
fore he could poſſibly proceed. Moſt
of the ancient Writings of any note,
have been ſufferers in this way ; bur
that kind (in which _ and diſtances
are compendiouſly expreſs d by figures)
is D to the —
ment of Librarians.

To remedy this Evil, he left no corner
unſearch d, from which he might reaſo-
nably promiſe himſelf any Manuſcript or
printed Copy, of Antoninus s Itinerary,
Ptolemy's Geography, or the Notitia; 0 fr
as they related to Britain. His Learned Ac-

uaintance at home were deſired to make

ligent ſearch every where; and we find

x Ep. 25. his Correſpondents abroad, Ortelius,
64 2 Merula, 3 Sweertius, + Puteanus, and
4 Ep. 147, others, earneſtly ſollicited to contri-
3» bute their aſſiſtance. He had alſo heard
5 Ep. 55. of ſome Itmerary Tables in the Lib

of Conrade Peutinger, a Noble-man of
Auſpurg; and he reſted not till he had
obtained that part of them, which be-

lonos to Britain. Theſe are ſince

Peutingerian-Tables ; the Authority of
which, Mr. Camden makes uſe of where-
ever they afford help, throughout the
Britamia.

After he had fix d that point, and

|

ub-
liſhed by Yelſer, under the name a che

begun to trace the ancient Towns and
Stations ; he conlider'd, that the Ro-
mans did not frame a new name for
every place they conquer d, but gene-
rally contented them ves with the name
they found; only filing off the rough-
1 and giving it a Roman Ter-
mination ; ſo that, in truth, the
names and places mention'd in Bri-
tain by Latin-Authors, as eaſie and e-
legant as they ſounded, were generally
barbarous, and of a pure Britifh extra-
tion. This was a language, which he
had no knowledge of; and fo, in ſet-
tling the ancient places, he mult be con-
tinually jealous that ſomething was lodg d
in the meaning and import of the name,
which (if known) might either deſtroy
the notion he had advanc'd, or confirm
him in his preſent opinion. This
brought a new task upon him, and a
very „ one; the learning a Tongue
which had no relation to any of thoſe
that he was maſter of before: How-
ever, he had the comfort to think, that
it was a living language, and that he
wanted not Friends, who were Criticks
in it. 8

At his entrance u the Saxon-af-
fairs, he muſt ſoon ee
the knowledge of this Language alſo
was neceſſary to his deſign; as much,
if not more than that of the Britiſh.
Theſe later Conquerours were not ſo
modeſt, as the former. The glory and
extent of the Empire, was what the
Romans aim'd at; and if the Britains
would be content to ſubmit, they might
enjoy what they had, and live as q
etly as they pleas d. But the Saxons
( whatever they pretended) came over
on another errand : their buſineſs was
not Dominion, but Poſſeſkon ; and when
they had gain'd their end, by drivin
out the poor Britains, their next buſ?
neſs was, to root out all memorials of
them. The ancient names werechang'd,
new methods of Government fram'd,
and in a ſhort time every thing had a
Saxon appearance. So that now, al-
molt all our names of Places are origi-
nally Saxon ; and Mr. Camden muſt E
ſenſible, that it was as vain an attempt
to write the Geography of Britain with-

Our

ub _/

- 2 DRE tpi Sr” Oc tn ron he PTS Ab; SAY:

K TY * 5 A : 1
8 2 4 7 1 Ian. ow Nn. Solan” * RES 7 * I

The LIFE of Mr. Campen.

next reign ſo v

out this help, as to take a Survey of
Greece, or Italy, and all the while be an

utter ſtranger to their ancient Lan-

guage.

The Britains carried their r
with them into the Weſtern parts of the
Iſland, and there defended both it and
themſelves againſt any mixture of fo-
reigners. It was only tranſplanted, and
the change of Soil made little altera-
tion in it; ſo that to this day it is
preſerv d entire, except ſome few words
of Latin original, which had crept in
by their long intercourſe with the Ro-
mans. Had the Saxons taken the
ſame courſe upon the Norman Invaſi-
on, and, when they found themſelves
out- match d, had reſolvd upon a re-
treat, and ſtood it out to the laſt; their's
alſo might have been a living Language,
and learnt (as we do French, Spamiſb,
or Italian) with a little ſtudy and con-
verſation. But their ſubmiſſion to the
Norman, was the loſs of their Lan-
guage as well as their Liberty. Wik
liam, after he had wrought himſelf in-
to a kind of Settlement; and thought
he might practiſe upon the Engliſh
with ſafety, expreſsly order d, That
all Publick Pleadings ſhould be in French,
That their Charters and Writings ſhould
run in the ſame Language, and, that
Children ſhould not be inſtructed in
their Mother tongue, but in the Nor-
man only. And the reign of Edward
the Confeſſor had in ſome meaſure pre-
pared the Nation for this change. For
the Normans bore ſuch a ſway even in
his Court, as to give the Cuſtoms and
Language of their own Country ſome
fort of Credit and Authority in Eng-
land : and it began to be thought a
point of good breeding, to be Maſter
of the French Modes and :
and to deſpiſe the Engl as rough and
barbarous. When the way was thus
prepared and open'd before-hand ; we
need not be ſurpriz d, to find in the
few + who could
even read the Saxon Character; or to
hear, that it was the great objection a-
gainſt Volſtan, Biſhop of Worceſter,

that he did not under ſtand the French

Tongue. In ſhort, the Saxon Language

Mic.

grew out of requeſt a- pace: and * their —
writings about the latter end of Henry

the ſecond's reign, might pals even at

this day for broken Engliſh.

After it was diſus'd in Converlation,-

we cannot ſuppoſe that the Books in
that Language could be much regarded.
The Monks indeed were concern'd to
preſerve their Charters 3 but they who
ſeiʒ d their Lands at the Diſſolution of
Monaſteries, were as much concern'd
to deſtroy them. And to do it more
effectually, they burnt whole Libraries
together; or, if they ſav d them from
the fire, it was with no other deſign,
than to fend them into the Shops of
Mechanicks.

A Language then, which had lain
dead for above four Hundred Years,
was to be reviv'd ; the Books, wherein
it was bury'd, to be (as it were) rak'd
out of the aſhes; and (which was (till
worſe) thoſe Fragments, ſuch as they
were, excceding hard to be met with.
Almoſt all the Remains came into three
Collections; that of Archbiſhop Parker,
given to Bennet-College in Cambridge;
Archbiſhop Laud s, given to the Bod-
lean Library; and Sir Robert Cotton s,
now the richeſt and moſt valuable Trea-
ſure of that noble Library.

Nor was this peculiar to the Saxon
Monuments : for, in truth; our Engliſh
Hiſtorians were left in the ſame condi-
tion upon the Diſſolution of Monaſte-
ries, i. e. diſperſed, and unregarded ; and
yet theſe were of abſolute neceſſity to
the Deſign in view. |

It was a true ſenſe of the uſefulneſs
of ſuch Hiſtories, and of his own great
misfortune in not being better furniſh'd,

chat induced him afterwards to publiſh

an entire Volume of them. Sir Henry
Savil collected another: and theſe two
have been ſince follow'd by the learned
Editors of the Decem Scriptores, and by
Dr. Wats, Mr. Fulman, Dr. Gale, and
Mr. Wharton. Had he enter'd upon
his Work with theſe advantages, he had
met with his Materials in a much nar-
rower compals, and found his Task in-

finitely more calle. |
The old Irmerary being ſettled, the
Britiſh and Saxon Tongues in a good
Fe meaſure

i. Me 4

The LIFE of Mr. CaMDEN.

* Dr. Smich's The occaſion of it was this. * In
3 the year 15 97. upon the death of R-
p-34 Chard Leigh Clarenceux King at Arms,

meaſure conquer'd, our ancient Hiſto-
rians perus d, (d) and ſeveral parts of
England ſurvey d; he now began to
think of reducing his Collections to
method and order. It had been above
ten years in growing, when the firſt E-
dition came out, An. 15 86. dedicated
to that eminent Stateſman William Lord
Burghley, Treaſurer to Queen Eliza-
beth. How well it was receiv'd, we
may gather from the number of Edi-
tions 3 for, in the compals of four
years, there were no leſs than three at
London, beſides one at Francfort in
1 5 903 another alſo in Germany; and again
another in London in the year 1 5 94.
Moſt of theſe Editions had been re-
viſed, enlarged, and cortected by the
Author : but after that of 15 94, he
relolv'd the Work ſhould reſt for ſome
time, in order to the larger Improvements
which he had in view. In order to
theſe, he took a journey to Sarum, and
Helle, and return'd by Oxford; and
two years after, he travell'd as far as
Carliſle, accompany'd by his learned
and dear friend, Sir Robert Cotton. But
in the midſt of thoſe preparations for a

more compleat Edition, he was unex-

edly interrupted ; and, inſtead of

aying out his Endeavours after new diſ-

coveries, was calld to a defence of what
he had already publiſh'd.

already in the College, would entitle him
to the Succeſſion. But, having miſs d
of it; his firſt buſineſs was, inſtead of
acquieſcing in Her Majeſty's Choice,
to find a fair opportunity to ſhow his
Reſentment. Mr. Camden, at the end
of each County had drawn the Hiſto-
ry of the reſpective Earls; and Brooke
thought, probably, chat if any Errors
could be found in his Accounts of Fami-
lies, an Accuſation upon that head would
be moſt ſuitable to ray preſent purpoſe.
As it would have ſhown Mr. Camden's
forwardneſs in engaging on a ſubject
which he was not Maſter of; ſo would
it have convinc'd the Government of
their unreaſonable choice, in preferring
a perſon who knew little, and rejecting
another who wasa Critick in the work.
After two years ſtudy, he publiſh'd a
Book with this title, A Diſcovery of cer-
tam Errors publiſb d in print in the much
commended Britannia, cc. without li-

cence, and without name, either of

Printer or Bookſeller.

Before we enter into the merits of

this Cauſe, be pleas d to obſerve, by
the way, the Aken temper and be-
haviour of theſe two Perſons. It ſeems
to have been ſome opinion of merit, that

rais d in Mr. Brooke a confidence of ſuc-

ceeding, and then an uneaſineſs when
his expectation was not anſwer d. But
ſo far was Mr. Camden from this, that,
till the whole buſineſs was over, he did

Sir Full Grevil recommended Mr. Cam-

den to the Queen, as a perſon every way him. And when the Lord

qualified for that Office, and one who
had highly deſerv'd of Her Majeſty and
Her Kingdoms. The Queen immedi-
ately gave him the grant of it, and
Mr. Camden was created, Offob. 23. in
the ſame year; having the day before
been made Richmond-Herald, becauſe,
by the Conſtitution, none can be K;

at Arms, but who has been firſt Herald.
At that time, Mr. Brooke was York-
Herald, who, upon Legh's death, doubt-
ed not but the ſtation which he had

not ſo much as think of the thing, but
the news of his Succeſs was a ſurpriſe to
Burleigh (who
was his great Patron) expreſs d his diſ-
ſatisfaction, that he had not apply'd to
him upon that occaſion ; he return d
this anſwer, That it was purely a
thought of Sir Full Grevil, without ſo
much as his know] |

It was not for the reputation of Mr.

1599.

Brooke, to lay aſide his true name, Brokeſ=16ia.

mouth, and to take that of Brooke, as
one of greater vogue and dignity. Per-
haps, Mr. Camden had as little temptati-
on to be fond of a Family, on ac-

(d) Beſides his Travels before he came to Weſtminſter, and his frequent Excurſions, ſo often as
his buſineſs in the School would give him leave; in April 1582. he took a Journey into Tork-
ſhire through Suffolk, and return'd through Lancaſhire. See his Diary,

COUNT

— —ũ —
"
1
a Ib
0 3
„
*
-
4
E
-F)
"0
.
*

*
©
*
*

FP

T4
* *
mu
*
*
— $.
—
*
**
br”.
.
5
FS
*
»
9
+
4
1
4
mY

8

The LIFE of Mr. CAM DEN.

bid. lowing inſtance witneſs. Upon a

.

count of any Eminence it could pre- Court; but withall, deſit d Di

tend to; eſpecially on che Father's ſide.ſhips to conſider, that it was a mere
And yet ſo far was he from being a- over. ſight, and that it was the — 4
tham'd of his Name or Parentage, that tunity of the meſſenger which led him,
even out of reſpect to his Fathers Call- contrary to his uſual method, to paſs it
ing, he left a gilt Bow] of ſixteen without deliberation. Brooke, on the
Pounds to the Company of Painter- other hand, declar d openly in Court,
famers in London, with this Inſcripti- that it was from beginning to end a
on, Gul. Camdenus Clarenceux, filius Samp- contrivance of his own, to gain an op-
fonis, Piftoris Londinenſis, dono dedir. portunity of convincing their 9

After Mr. Camden became a member Ps ys of the _ who for
of the College, he diſcharged his Office of a Fee, would be guilty of
with maps; and maintain'd an ſſo grols a knavery. They 2
amicable correſpondence wich all his ſat the confidence of the man; and when
Brethren. How far his Adverſary had His Majeſty heard the circumſtances of
a claim to this Character, let the fol- the caſe, he order d both to be commit-
ted to priſon ; one for treachery, and
che other for negligence.

ate pique againſt one of the Col-
, hecontrived ſuch a malicious pi But, to return. From hence, the
revenge, as is not commonly Reader will be apt to ſuſpect, that
of. He employ d a perſon to carry aſit was not a ſerious concern for
Coat of Arms to him ready drawn, who Truth, or for the Honour of the Engliſh
was to pretend that it belong d to one Nobility, which induc d him to lay o-
Gregory Brandon (a Gentleman who had ſpen what he called the Errors of Mr.
formerly liv d in London, but was then Camden; but rather a vein of #1 nature,
in Spain, ) and to deſire he would ſet which was fo familiar to him. And the
his hand to ir. The man does his er- ſucceſs was anſwerable ; for, the next
rand; and, that there might be no time ſyear, Mr. Camden re- printed his Britan-
for coniideration, wa. that the Veſ=|nia, and at the end of it publiſh'd a
ſel that was to carry it, was juſt ready learned Defence of himſelf and his Work.
to ſail. He, not in the leaſt ſuſpeting|He modeſtly declares, That it is very

any defign, without more ado receives poſſible, he might fall into ſeveral Er-

his Fee, and puts the Seal of the Office, rors ; that, for his part, he never pre-

with his own Name, to the Paper. Pre- tended to be exempt from the common
ſently, Brooke carried it to Thomas Earl failings of mankind; but conceives, how-

of Arundel (chen one of the Commiſ-ſever, that allowance ought to be made
ſioners for the Office of Earl Mar/hal)|for ſome few Errors, where Writers are
and aſſured him that theſe were the Arms ſto deal in ſuch a variety of matter: that
of the Kingdom of Arragonwith a Can- he thinks himſelf, notwithſtanding, ve-
ton of Brabant; and that that Brandon, ry harſhly treated; and to demonſtrate
to whom he had them, was aſat once the impudence, as well as weak-
mean inconſiderable man. The Earljneſs, of his Adverſary, he clears him-
acquainted the King with the wholeſſelf from the objections upon undeni-
matter; and His Majeſty reſolv d, thatſable authorities; and then ſhows, into
the Perſon who had ſet-to the Seal, ſhould|what palpable miſtakes this great Refor-
be turn d out of his place, and, upon mer had fal'n, in the midſt of his Cri-
a hearing in the Star-chamber, be ſevere-|ticiſms.
ly fin d for his affront to the Crown off Another branch of Mr. Brooke's ac-
Spain; but, at the interceſſion of the Earl cuſation againſt Mr. Camden, was Pla-
of Pembroke, his Majeſty grew more giariſm; that whoever would be at the
calm, and was prevail d with to refer|trouble ro compare and examin, would
it to the Commiſſioners. When they find the ſumme and ſubſtance of what
came to a hearing, the Gentleman who was ſaid in the Britamia, among the
had been thus impos d on, ſubmitted 2 ory Papers of Glover and Leland :
himſelf entirely to the mercy of che From whence it would follow, if *
5 c

— ——U ͤ— —jä 7 2 —

The LIFE of Mr. An A N.

Smith, p. 2).

Brooke, p. 6.

that Mr. Camden had no further ſhare in
that Work, than the ranging ſome looſe
Papers into method and order.

The firſt of theſe, Mr. Glover, was
Somerſet-Herald, and ſo eminent a ma-
ſter in his Profeſſion, that (in Sir Vl.

liam Dugdale's opinion) Mr. Camden and
He were the two greateſt men that had
ever been of the College. Had he
liv d longer, he would have made a

reater figure in the world, and we at
his day might have enjoy d the fruit of
his Labours ; but he was cut off at for-
ty five years of age, and left behind
him a confus'd maſs of Collections,
which were purchas'd by the Lord Bur-
ligh, and communicated to Mr. Cam-
den. Of what uſe they were, or could
be, to him, any one may be eaſily ſa-
tified, by comparing the Britannia, with
thoſe Papers, which were repoſited in
the Archives of the College of Heralds.
But if they had been as ſerviceable to
him as his Adverſary would ſug
cannot ſee how he could be fairly

had more than once afforded Mr. Glo-

wer ſuch an * advantageous and honou-

rable character.

As the Itinerary of Mr. Leland has
gain d a greater name and eſteem, ſo it
will be more difficult to remove that
Far be it

branch of the Objection.
from me to injure the memory of that
great man. He was the very firſt who
turn d the eyes of the Nation upon this
kind of Learning; and let it be ſaid to
his honour, that what he did was faith-
ful, and what he deſign d very great and
noble.

In the year 1533. (25 Hen. 8.) he
had a Commiſſion under the Broad Seal,

by which he was empower d to ſearch

the Libraries of all Cathedrals, Abbies,

Priories, Colleges, ec. And in the

28th year of the ſame King, he ob-
tain d a ſpecial diſpenſation to keep a
Curate at Poppeling, where he was Re-

cor; having repreſented to His Maje-

ſty the great advan that might be
ak - apes Moe England, up-
on ſuch a Search. When he had got
| rogether large Collections, he fix d in
London, with a deſign to compoſe ſuch
Books, as he had encourag d the King

eſt, I}
.
with ingratitude or injuſtice, after he

to expect, when he obtain d his Diſ-
penſation. Alſo, in the 37thof Henry
the eighth, he preſented the ſame King
with a Scheme of the ſeveral projects
he had laid, under the title of a Neu-
hear gift; wherein he promis d a De-
(cription of Britain, as under the Ro-
mans ; a Survey and Hiſtory of each
County, in ſixty Books; a Survey of
the Britiſh Iſles, in ſix Books ; and a
work concerning the Nobility of Bri-
tain, in three Books. But the very next
year (out of apprehenſion, as moſt think,
that he Would not be able to compleat
what he had undertaken) he fell di-
ſtracted, and, continuing ſo to his dy-
ing day, left his Papers in confuſion. The
greateſt part of theſe are now in the
publick Library at Oxford, having been
preſented to it by Mr. Villiam Burton
Author of the Antiquities of Leiceſterſhire,
into whoſe poſſeſſion they had at laſt
come, through ſeveral other hands.
The main charge againſt Mr. Cam-
den, was grounded upon the Survey of
Britain, and of the Iſles ; for any one
will readily excuſe him in what relates to
the Romans, who conſiders what ſtr
work they made, who undertook to
ec the ancient Towns in Britain, be-
fore Mr. Camden. But, the ſplendid ti-
tle of an Lrinerary, and a number of
Books anſwerable to the number of the
Counties of England, and Mr. Leland's
affirming that he had provided ample
A for the Work; all this look d
very ſpecious, and was an excellent han-
dle for Cenſure and Ill nature.
But all impartial men will conſider,
at what a low ebb Learning was in Le-
and's time, and how little was then un-
derſtood of the Geographical Hiſtory
of England. To deſcribe the courſe
of a River, and the diſtance of one
Town from another ; or to tell whe-
ther a Bridge was of wood or of ſtone,
or how many arches it had; was rec-
koned an uſeful inſtruction at that time
when travelling was little in faſhion ;
and the Counties of England were poſ-
ſibly greater ſtrangers to the affairs of
their neighbours, than the Nations of
Europe have ſince been to one another.
They would not be at the pains to
View, and they had no Maps to let
them

*
n *
ws, * E +4 4 *
r *, 2 :
— 9 — ISO e a
©

E a, 0 238 * e
. 3 . Wn ly i of
ESE ER rc ate; DSILERIS 5 © fa Br Cr SE;
*

* * * 2 A
** ERC 1
* n

=

—_— Wy 4
td. —

* —

— — ts
o
-

- The LIF

*

E of Mr. CAMDEN:

— * 2 y dy : .
SFr eel 11 . . 2 * '# 47 ot.” 1 - 4 A . 2 . 1 "= Sears;
„ 4 e 5 2 1, 2 Lo r res Bo Ping gr 5 cf ſt 7
. F 1 .
ee eee N F , *

the one alt

ter d remains of others, let him enjoy Volume of Engliſh Hiſtorians, prin-

them ſee at a diſtance ; ſo, every
thing that inform d, was kindly receiv d,
and a Work look d upon as a mighty
Performance, that. at preſent would be
very coldly receiv'd. This was really
the caſe berween Mr. Leland and Mr.
Camden : the different face of things,
in the times of theſe two Writers, had
render d a good part of the Itmerary of
her unuſeful to the
Britamia of the other. The contri-
vance of Maps in the mean time, had
given them at once a view of the whole
Kingdom, and the correſpondence (oc-
caſion'd by the improvement of Trade
and Commerce) had inform'd every
Mechanick, in what before would have
beeri accounted a Diſcovery among
learned Men.

That Mr. Camden had ſeen the Iti-
nerary of Mr. Leland, he does not de-
ny or conceal. That he likewiſe made
uſe of it, is plain, becauſe he has told
us ſo in ſeveral parts of his Book. But

In the year 1607. he put the laſt
hand to his Britamia ; which gained
him the titles, of the Varro, the Strabo,
and the Pauſanias of Britain, in the Wri-
tings and Letters of Learned men. Nor
kd ir ever after meet with an Enem
that I know of; only, * Sir Si
D'Ewes encouraged us to e
verſions upon the Work, after he had
obſerv d to a very great man, that there
was not a page in it without a fault.
But this was only Threatening ; and
neither the World was the better, nor
Mr. Camden s Reputation the worſe for
Ic.

To leave the Britamia, and proceed
to his other Works. His 83
r. Edward Grant, had compos d a
Greek Grammar for the uſe of his School.
This, Mr. Camden, by long experience,
had found to be in {vets things defi-
cient, and; in the whole frame, not ſo
well ſuited to the deſign, as one would
deſire. Whereupon, he contriv'd a

(ay his Adverſaries) does not the Scheme of his own, the effect of two

Britamia oft- times ſpeak the very ſame
things that the Itmerary had done be-
fore, without the leaſt mention of Le-
land's name ? Ir is very true, it does
ſo: but ſuppoſe I ſay, That Canterbury
is a City, That there is a ſtately Caſtle
at Windſor, That Oxford is an Univer-
firy ; am I therefore a Plagiary, becauſe
Leland or any man elſe has ſaid fo be-
fore me? Suppoſe alſo, I obſerve that
St. Auſtin repair'd an old Church at
Canterbury, or that St. Cuthbert was
the Saint of Durham ; will any one
blame me, becauſe I make uſe of Bede's
authority, rather than Lelands? Mr.
Camden enter d upon his Work, with a
prodigious ſtock of Learning, almoſt
in al kinds; he ſurvey'd the greateſt
part of England in perſon, had acceſs
to all Libraries and Records, and had
the aſſiſtance of Learned men both

at home and abroad; and if any one

will ſtill believe, that he made no uſel

of theſe opportunities, but choſe rather

to e thirty years in piecing the ſcat-

his own opinion. All I ſhall ay fur-
ther, is, that Leland's Irinerary is now
publiſhed, and that Publication is the
beſt defence of Mr. Camden,

d twenty years obſervation ; the me-
thod of which appear d upon the pub-
lication, to be ſo clear, calle and com-
pendious, that it has ever ſince been
received and taught in moſt Schools,
as the beſt Introduction to that Lan-
guage.

After the fatigue of the School, he
diverted himſelf among the ancient Mo-
mments of the Kings, Queens, and No-
biliry of England, in the Cathedral
Church of Veſtminſter. And that it
might not be in the power of Time to
deprive Poſterity of the ſame pleaſure,
he copy d them all, andpubliſh'd them
in the year 1600, with an Hiſtorical
Account of the Foundation of that
Church. He had alſo taken ſome pains
in collecting the Monuments in the
Churches and Chapels of the Univer-
liry of Oxford ; as appears from the
Fragments of them ſtill remaining,

But this was only his Diverſion,
and the concern of a particular place.
The next publick Service, was his

ted at Francfort in the year 1603, and
dedicated to his Patron Sir Fulk Grevil,
as an acknowledgment of the good of-
fice he had formerly done him, when

=Y he

Letter to

Animad- Pf. Jr.

TT : p R ] cet

—

The LIFE of Mr. CAM DEN.

he was promoted to be King at Arms.
Part of them were never publiſh'd be-
fore 3 and ſuch as had ſeen the light, he
now ſent abroad much more correct
and accurate.

The next year gave him the like op-

rtunity to pay a publick Reſpect to
2 great Friend and Acquaintance Sir
Robert Cotton, by the edition of his Re-
mains. It appears by the Original, that
at firſt he had deſign d to dedicate this
Work to Sir Full Grewil; but the Vo-
lume of Hiſtorians having already given
him an occaſion to make his acknow-
ledgments there, he now choſe to ſhow
his gratitude to Sir Robert, a Perſon,
whoſe Converſation, and Library, were
the great ſupports of his Studies.

The diſcovery of the Gunpowder-Plot
gave him the next occaſion of employ-
ing his Pen in the Service of the Pub-
lick. His Majeſty did not think it
enough to appoint a ſolemn Thankſ-
giving for that deliverance, but alſo
judged it neceſſary to convince fore
Nations of the juſtice of his proceed-
ings, and to give the Reformed Church-
es abroad timely notice to be upon
their guard, againſt thoſe inveterate E-
nemies of the Proteſtant Religion. Mr.
Camden was pitch d on as a perſon belt
qualified to draw up the whole caſe, in

Latin, and in a ſtile agreeable to the

Index Li ſubject; which was publiſh'd in the year

bibirorum & 1607, and is rank'd among the Books

rum.

Rome, in the year 1667. |
The Grammar, the Weſtminſfter-Monu-
ments, the Volume of Hiſtorians, the Re-

mains, and laſtly the Proceedings againſt

his ſpare Hours ; and the laſt bein
ubliſh'd the ſame year that he finiſh”
fis Britannia, he was now at liberty to
ſet about in earneſt what had been in
his deſign for ten years before, namely,
the Amnals of Queen Elizabeth.
This Work was begun in the year
1597, at the inſtance of William Lord
Burghley ; who had an entire Venera-

tion for the Queen, and by his conſtant

favours had deſervedly a great autho-
rity over Mr. Camden. But he dying
the very next year, and the difficulties o
the Work ſenſibly encreaſing, Mr. Cam-

den did not 228 it with ſo much

reſolution as before; and this coolneſs
was encreas d by the death of the Queen,
which happened ſome years after. But
when he ſaw, that none who had more
ſtrength and leiſure, would undertake
the Task; now the care of his Britan-
nia was over, he began to digeſt his Ma-
terials in the year 1608; and having
carry d his Accounts to the year 1589,
he publiſh'd that Hiſtory, as far as he
had gone.

It had been long expected, and
earneſtly deſir d;; and it met with an
agreeable reception from all hands; as
N by the ſeveral Letters of Thanks

om the greateſt Perſons of that time.

And a very eminent Writer of our own

Nation, ſcruples not to affirm, that

this, and the Lord Bacon's Hiſtory of Seld. Epi.

Henry the ſeventh, are the only two

Lives of the Kings or Ages of Eng- Vinci.

land, that are equal to the dignity of
the Subject, either in fulneſs of matter,
or beauty of compoſition.

The pleaſure which the firſt part af-
forded, encreas d the applications of
his Friends, and made them the more
importunate with him, to remember, that
che Infirmities of old Age were drawing
on, and that he could not better employ
the remaining part of his time, than
in finiſhing what he had begun: Eſpe-
cially, conſidering that himſelf had been

an eye-witnels of the latter part of the

Expurgato- expreſly prohibited by the Church of Queen's reign, and that he had main-

tain d an intimate correſpondence with

ſome, who had born the greateſt ſhare

in the Government. But the Cenſures

which he met-with in the buſineſs of

the Conſpirators, were only the fruits of Mary Queen of Scots, and the private

reſentments of ſome perſons who thought
him too ſevere in the Character of their
Anceſtors 3 made him peremptorily re-
ſolve, that the ſecond part ſhould not
ſee the light, till after his death. The
whole was finiſh'd, in the year 1617,

perſiſted in his former reſolution, a-
gainſt all the importunities of Friends.
And leſt the common fate of Poſthu-
mous Papers ſhould be urg'd by them,
he took care that a fair Tranſcript ſhould

be + depoſited in the hands of his in-, p,te.u;

timate Friend Petrus Puteanus ; and kept V

d
the.

as appears from his * Epiſtles ; yet he g

. 2 eres = , wy $4
* £ AM” in N > I : EL "Fe * bs
3 4 ; - i HTS * * . 8 * 9 0's to

* Dr, Smit
Life of N
Camden.

.
*. *
*
*
I
Ed

The LIFE of Mr. Gu N

* Dr, Smith's

= oy Mr. which he extracted his Amals, are,

DX
1 y
wb ©
*

is Epiſtles.

147.

= pub-+ Diary of the remarkable
iſh'd with

the Original by him, which is now in
the Library of Sir John Cotton. By
this means, the ſecond Tome did not
ſee the light, till the year 1625.

* The Records and Inſtruments out of

molt of them, if not all, in the Corto-
nian Library. We learn from a Manu-
ſcript of Dr. Goodman's (who was af-
terwards Biſhop of Gloceſter) that He
defird them of Mr. Camden, as a Le-
gacy, when he dy'd ; but receiv'd this
anſwer, That no perſon whatever ſhould
have e them more freely, if
they had not been already promis d to
Dr. Bancroft, Archbiſhop of Canterbu-
4 Upon whoſe death, he transferr d
the

title to his Succeſſor Dr. George Ab-
bot (tor he had undertaken to publiſh
them; ) and the Biſhop tells us, in the
ſame Manuſcript, that he heard Arch-
biſhop Laud ſay, they were depoſited in
the Palace at Lambeth. It is probable,
that theſe were only ſuch as related to the
Eccleſiaſtical Affairs of that time, which
Mr. Camden did not think himſelf fo im-
mediately concern'd in. But what they
were, cannot now be known: having
probably been deſtroy dor loſt, when the
Library of Archbiſhop Laud was ran-
ſack d by Prime, Scot, and Peters; for,
after diligent ſearch made by Archbi-
ſhop Sancroft, upon his promotion to
the See of Canterbury, not one Paper
of that kind could be found.

From the end of Queen Elizabeth's
reign, to his own death, he kept a

aſſages in
the reign of King James; being deſi-
rous to contribute all the aſſiſtance he
could, to any, who ſhould do the ſame
honour to the reign of King James,
that had been done by himſelf to that
of Queen Elxabeth.

Thus far of his Works. As to
the ſeveral Stations or Promotions which
he enjoyed; He began with the ſecond
Maſterſhip of Weſftmmſter-School, in the
year 1575, and continu'd in it till the
death of Dr. Grant Head-Schoolma-
ſter (which happened in 1593,) to
whom he Foes. 4" Bur, before that,
Vi. two years after the firſt edition of his
Britannia, he had the Prebend of Ilfar-

ſtow'd on him by Dr. John Piers, Biſhop

of that See. As tothe School; how great
a ſatisfaction it was to him to ſee the
fruits of his Labours there, we learn from
his own expreſſion of it, in a Letter to
Archbiſhop Uſher : At Weſtmmſter (ſays
he) God ſo bleſſed my Labours, that the
now Biſhops of London, Durham, and
St. Aſaph, to ſay nothing of perſons em-
ploy'd m eminent place abroad, and many of
eſpecial note at home, of all degrees, do ac-
knowledge themſelves to have been my Scho-

lars. Here he liv'd frugally, and * bys gyig. 153.

his long labours in the School, gathered a
contented ſufficiency for his FA and a
Supply for many charitable benefacti-
ons at his death. He refus'd a Maſter-
ſhip of Requeſts, when offer'd ; and
kept his School, till the place of Kmg
at Arms was confer d upon him, with-
out his own application, or ſo much as
his knowledge.

Theſe were all the Preferments, that
he was ever poſſeſs d of. We might
have added another, if the following
project had ſucceeded. In the year
1609, Dr. Sutcliff Dean of Exeter, re-
ſoly'd to build a College at Chelſey, for
a certain number of Divines, who were
to make it their whole buſineſs to con-
fute the Errors of the Church of Rome.

The Propoſal was highly approv'd by

King James, who accordingly nomina-May 10.
1610.

ted the Dean, firſt Provoſt of the Col-
lege; and ſeventeen eminent Divines,
under the title of Fellows. And becauſe
it was evident, that matters of Hiſtory
would of courſe fall-in with Controver-
ſies in Religion, they concluded it ne-
ceſſary to provide for ſuch occaſions,
and pitch'd upon two excellent Hiſtori-
ans, Mr. Camden, and John Hayward,
Doctor of the Civil Law. * They be-

drop'd.
How uſeful and honourable a Correſ-
e he had ſettld, both at home and
abroad, and with what candour and
goodneſs he maintain d it, will beſt ap-
pear from his Letters.
Briſſonius, Prime Miniſter of State in
the French Court, being ſent into Eng:
land by his maſter King Henry the third,

comb, in the Church of Salicbury, be-

to treat of a match between his —_—
0

gan to build, but found the Revenue 2
fall ſhort;

and fo the whole Deſign %.

The LIFE of

Mr. CAMDEN.

* Diary,

the Duke of Anjou and Queen Eliza-
beth, would not return, a ſtranger to
Mr. Camden ; who, though bur ſecond
School-maſter of Weſtminſter, and not full
thirty years of age, had thoſe qualities
which recommended him to the friend-
ſhip and converſation of that great man.
Some of the Servants of the Hector Pa-
latine (who came over, about the match
with Elizabeth eldeſt daughter to King
Jane were reprov'd by Gruter, for neg-
ecting todo themſelves that honour. He
wonder'd how they could ſtay ſo many
months in England, and all that while,
Neque conſulere ejus Oraculum unicum, ne-
que adſpicere ejus aſtrum primum, Not
conſult its only Oracle, nor ſee the
brighteſt Star in it. With Gruter him-
ce Mr. Camden kept a conſtant correſ-
ndence, while he livd; and when
be dy'd, left him five Pounds for a
Ring, as a Memorial of their old Friend-
ſhip.

his Letter to him; but what particu-
lars were return d; we know not: only
chus much in general, That he ſhould
by all means be very tender in the
relation of that matter. Thus far we
learn from Thuanus's own Letter ſent the
next year after, with the ſecond Tome
of his Hiſtory : Sed valde wereor (lays
he) ut temperamentum illud, de quo mo-
nueras, in rerum Scoticarum narratione u-
bique ſervaverim. Wherein he further
tells him, That if the Scotch Affairs
of that time could have been wholl

paſs d over, he was ſenſible how muc

odium and ill- will he had avoided ; but
that, being ſo very notorious, and ſo
much in every body's mouth, it had
been an unpardonable crime in an Hi-
ſtorian to omit them. He adds, That he
had deliver d every thing, upon the au-
thoriry of ſeveral of that Kingdom,
who had been eye-witneſſes; and had
laid no further ſtreſs upon what Bucha-

Peireskins (the univerſal Patron of|1an had ſaid, than as he found it con-

Learning) underſtood the value of Mr.
Camdois friendſhip 3 and as he was al-
ways ready to lend him the urmoſt aſ-
ſiſtance he was able, ſo did he find him
highly ſerviceable in whatever related to
the Affairs of England. Particularly,
Monſieur du Cheſue, in his Preface to
the Norman Writers, grateſully acknow-
ledges, that the Elogium Emme, the Wri-
tings of Gulielmus Piftavienſis, and ſeve-
ral Catalogues of the Norman Nobility who
came over with the Conquerour, were
all communicated by Mr. Camden; and
that they were procur'd for him by the
intereſt of Peireskius.

His acquaintance with Thuanus was
late ; Wit once begun, was ve
intimate, and laſted till the death of
that Glory of France, and the Prince of
modern Hiſtorians, as Mr. Camden after-
wards ſtil'd him. *The firſt Letter he
ſent him, was by the hands of Mr. Liſle,
in the year 1606. Whether the ſub-
ject of it was the affair of Mary Queen
of Scots, I know not; but it is cer-
tain, if Thuanus had taken Mr. Cam-
den's advice, he had not givenſo much
offence to the Engliſh Court, by that
part of his Hiſtory.

That he deſird Mr. Camden's infor-
mation upon that head, is plain from

firm d by them. For which reaſons,
he defires, that if any reflections ſhould
be made upon it at our Court, Mr.
Camden would do him the friendly of-
fice, toclear him from all ſuſpicion of
being an Enemy to the Engliſh or Scotch
Nation, and to ſatisfie every one that
he had acted in it with the utmoſt inte-
grity. But King James was extremel

offended, to find the Account run fo
much to the diſadvantage of his mo-
ther ; and the more, becauſe he knew
leveral of the matters of fact, upon
which the charge was grounded, to be
utterly falſe. Whereupon, heemploy'd

Mr. Camden to draw up * Animadverſi-* Since
ted by
Smith, at the

to tranſmit them to Thuanus ; which, obo his
indeed, make the Story much more fair

ons upon that part of the Hiſtory, and

on the Queen's ſide, than either he or
Buchanan had repreſented it.

He eſtabliſhed an intimate acquain-
tance with Hottoman, Secre to Ro-
bert Earl of Leiceſter ; after whoſe re-
turn into France (where he was em-
ploy'd on an Embaſſy into Germany)
theſe two held a conſtant correſpon-
dence. Nor muſt we forget the lear-
ned Franciſcus Pithæus, who ſettld a ve-
ry early familiarity with him; nor Pe-

trus Puteanus, of whoſe fidelity he had
ſo

Monſiet
de Thon.
Wn wer to

. . Fur.

+ Camde
p- 251

SEEN HI OHA nn wen ern

N

=
ws 4 £ R « - 3 MES * js we Bs
: » \ 2 4 # id ;
E RT Eos A. 4 ow 1 £& + , 8 "ICS Po Te Ne. AGEL NE LOR * 2 «> W .
* r p \ &-& Q «E. _ rs 508; LM - RAS > © * 5
* 7 — * #4. 1 FEY * N * 0 "FC * — 2 a "_

—I FENG

9 ſo great confidence, that when heſ and we cannot doubt, but if theſe
| had taken a reſolution to ſupprefs had came to hand, the excellent E-
7 the ſecond part of the Annals of ditôr of his Eprſtles would have al-
4 Queen Hlixaleth till after his death, low them a place among the
#D:.Burnet* he thought he could not depoſit reſt. | | |
Damit the Copy in a fafer hand. | ©
Monſieur At home: Mr. Thomas ,Sapil of

T how. a is 403 Ho
. % Oxford was one of the firſt of his|

* ail Acquaintance; whoſe untimely death, OUR. pat pains to ſatisfi my
12 in the flower of his age, was a very Y deſire, . omitting thereby. your
ſenſible loſs to Mr. Camden : But this| „ua Buſmeſs, bath been | far more
was in ſome meaſure repaired by the han 7 could, wh you ſhould bave um-
friendſhip of his brother Sir Henry] dergane, and much more than I can de-
Savil ; W ind ſo 1 an 1 ſerve; and therefore requireth greater
rer of Mr. Camden 's Learning anul put: thanm words 1 can remember:
Goodneſs, that he would fain have] ju, aſſure yar felf T ill regiſter them
prevail'd with him, to ſpend his la- fa in a moſt thankful mind. As ſoon
2 ter days at his Houſe in Eaton-Col-| 1 ever the year opencth, nth God's
1 lege. 1 am ſure ( lays he) you might grace, I will take a Journey to Cam-
eee De EH
e ee i Po nar
f . ®4* | Catalogue, ce in matters
11
3 6. | riters 0 ace one
Ep. 251, & ceeding ſerviceable to him * in the 28. and CHEE CW eſpecial Notes
Aa ſettlement of his Heſtory-Ledure in|, Fortis in them. 1 the mean, with
Oxford ; having experienc'd the diff -ſa million of hearty thanks to you, and
culties of that Work, by hiseſtablifh- my hearty commendations to Mr. Cau-

CC ˙ [2 pe 5
| Archbiſhop Uſer conſulted him

| on many occaſions, and in return]

+ Ep- 61. + gave him great aſſiſtance in the William Camden.

My loving and good Mr. James,

Your loving Friend,

. F © Attairs of Ireland; * as did the lear-
. Mr. ned Dr. Jobn Jobnſton of Aberdeen,

Sir Robert Cotton was his Compa- * ü
nion, both in Studies and in Tra- ET it not ſeem ſtrange, that I
vels: His journey to Carliſle, in the ſhould conjoin you two thus jointly
year 1600, was render'd much more ſin one, when as love and good hiking,
pleaſant as well as profitable, by the|with the, mother of friendſh1 milieu
company of ſo true a friend, and ſoſ ſtudiorum, hath ſo aſſuredly lmk'd you
great a maſter of Antiquities. And|together. I heartily thank you
Dr. Francis Godwin, firſt, Biſhop of|both, the one for opening the paſſage and
Landaff, and then of Hereford, did ſemrance, and the other for admitting
him the ſame favour, in his journey me into bis amity. And verily, in this
into Wales. | behalf, I do congratulate inwardly t9

Dr. James (the firft Keeper of my ſelf, that I have now gotten ſo good
Sir Thomas Bodley's Library) was ve-|a Friend, unto whom (I ſolemuly vow)

ry uſeful to him in his ſtudies, as I un moſt willingly perform al offices
we learn from divers Letters which |of true friendſhip whatſoever. Only I
he receiv'd from him. I am wil-[am ſorry that I was then abſent, when
ling to take this opportunity off ſhould have enjoy d his preſence the
publiſhing them, becauſe they all|laff Heck at London. But more ſorry

relate to the Affairs of Learning ; am I, that the 4* ** 0 _
| : 8 $9

CCC ˙² A ͤ RAI. . -

JJ ͤ TOM NCT "x ea _— n
n Ny A a doc

— No hls _ q E
— WF 5 1 2 .-
watt — 7 8 1
SEC; $f "SY p F Ms
ö ” 6 l EE wy . of =
h . ——_ ˙ 1.,

8 _
—— — 4 ooo · 2 —

— —

—— —
* þ 3..

3 TE
0 *

"IF"
r

. ˙—⅛ud » ¹ůùuqͥuu

The LTFEN Mr. CAMDEN.

good Manuſcripts hath overſlipp'd me Hall reſt indebted to you for your care
for the Printer, who is impatient of ſtay, herem.

1s now already forward, and my occaſions 3 a |
vill not permit me to come naw 0 Your loving Friend aſſuredly,
Cambridge. T have long ſmce ſeen For-
don, Gervaſius Tilburienſis, Gual- IW. Camden, Clarenceux.
terus Conventrenſis, and Trivet:
ſome Copies are here extant amongſt my E *
friends ; and lately I happen d upon] Juliani.
Talbot Notes in Antonin! Fargy = ;
rium: only I deſire you to into | . |
that Me Feder * liz and Nota-| Sir Henry Spelman calls himſelf bis

bilia Briſtoliæ, Worceſter, if|* ancient Friend ; and in his account ; xg. 226

there be any ſpecial Obſervations ; as aljo|of a Society of Antiquaries which was
in the ele 52 — of Alexander ſabout that time ſettłd in Low
Eflebienfis. As for his Poem of tbe din, makes Mr. Camden one of the
Feſtival days, I long fmce read it over. chief. The Account, in the Author's
Thus commending my 4 to your good own words, will not be unſeaſonable
love conjointly, and you both to the gra- in this place; fince it gives us a fur-
cious ee of the Almughty, J hear- re e the 3 orgy s Ac-

1 bt Il, reſt: e which we are
. ow treating of) and ſhows us
Yours moſt affuredly, what that age took to be the moſt
2 effectual method, for the improve-
9 1 Will. Camden. ment of Ancient Learning,

Right Worſhipful, Gentlemen in London, ſtud:

Gevartius living now at Pa- pointing to meet every Friday weekly in
ris, @ Man by bis Works not unknown|the Term, at a place agreed of, and
to you ſo.converſant among Books, hath\ for Learning-ſake to confer upon ſome
written to me as much is herein enclo-\queſtions in that faculty, and to ſup
fed. My deſire is, that you would ſa-\together. The place, 4 a meeting or
tisfie him by me, if there be in hour tum, became certain at Darby-Houſe,
Library any ſuch Manuſcript of Ma-|where the Herald's Office is (hay and
nilius Aſtronomicon. I have in- tuo Queſtions were propounded at every
form d, that there is one, and that a\meeting, to be bande at the next that
learned Student of your Unzverſity hath| follow d; ſo that every man had a
conferr'd it with Scaliger s Edition. Ifſſe nigbi s reſpite to adviſe upon them, and
this be true, I moſt carneſtly requeſt pouſ then to deliver his Opinion. That which
to connmenicate thus much with him, ſeem d moſt material, was by one of the
and to underſtand whether he be purpos'd\company (choſen for the Purpoſe) to be
to ſet it out humſelf : if not, whether|enter'd in a book, that ſo it
he will be content to impart Variantes main unto poſterity. The Society en-
Lectiones with Gevartius, who ( Ticreas'd daily ; many perſons of great
preſume ſo much of his candour ) will not wurth, as well noble as other Learned,
defraud him of the honour due to his jopning themſelves unto it.

Labour and Learning ; if not, I will Thi it continu'd divers Tears ; but
ſend you a Copy of Scaliger's Edition, as all good uſes commonly decline, ſo
and deſire you to get ſome Student to many of the chief ſupporters hereof, ei-
confer it with the Manuſcript, and I will|ther dying or withdrawing themſelves
ſatisfie him to his full contentation, and from London into the Corey, this a-

—"

BOUT 42 Tears ſmce, divers gi. Henry
Gent, ; 0usNpelman's
N | [of Antiquities, fram'd themſelves into his L.
T ancient good Friend Galper|a College or Sbciety of Antiquaries, ap- Tam.

miobt re-

IV

26.

*

N LIFE Ten

mong the reſt, grew for 20 Tears to 3 3
be diſcontini d. But it then came a-] Thus much of Mr. Camden's E-
gain into the mind of divers principal ducation, his Works, his Promotions,
Gentlemen to revive it; and for that and his Friends, Let us now view
-paſe upon the ----- day of -——- in the him in his Retirement; for the
dar 1614. there met at the ſame place ſake of which, when he was to-
Sr James Ley Kmght, then Attorney|wards fixty years of Age, he took.
" the Court of Wards, fmce Earl a Houle at Cheſulhurſt, ſome ten
arlebury, and Lord Treaſurer f miles from London; where he liv'd
England, Sir Robert Cotton Night till his dying day, and compil'd
and Bar. Sir John Davies His Ma-|there the greateſt part of the Au-
10 s Attorney for Ireland, Sir Ri- nals of Queen Elizabeth.
rd St. George Kmght, then Nor- About two years before his death,
rey, Mr. Hackwell the Queen's Salli- when the pains and infirmities of
citor, Mr. Camden then Clarencieux,|old Age had made him, in great
my ſelf, and ſome others. Of theſe, the meaſure, uncapable of Study, he
Lord Treaſurer, Sir Robert Cot- enter d upon another method of ſer-
ton, My. Camden, and my ſelf, had|ving the Publick, by eſtabliſhing a
been of the Original Foundation, and to| Hiſtory-Lediure ; a thing, that he had
my knowledge were all then living of|retoly'd many years before : Witneſs
char 1 aving Sir John Doderidge|the Concluſion of his Britanma, Ni-
Kmeht, Juſtice of the King's Bench. bil aliud mai reſtat, Nc. quam ut Deo
We held it . jufficient for that time Opt. Max. V Venerande Antiquitati
to revive the Meeting, and only con- Anathema conſecrarem, quod libens me-
ceiv d ſome Rules of Government and rito menc voveo, &c. |
Lamitation to be obſerv'd amongſt us, This was his pious Vow ; and he
whereof this was one ; That for avoi- was willing to ſee it diſcharg d, e're
ding Offence, we ſhould neither meddle|he dy d. Where to beſtow this Cha-
with matters of State nor of Relegi»\rity, was a circumſtance that did
an. And agreeing of two Queſtions for not coſt him much thought : his
the next Meeting, we choſe Mr. Hack-|Education gave the Univerſity of
well to be our Regiſter, and the Con- Oxford a kind of title; To that, ha-
vocator of our Aſſemblies for the pre-|ving ſettl'd it in due form of Law,
ſent ; and ſupping together, ſo de- he ſent his Gift to that Univerſity,
parted, by the hands of his intimate Friend
One of the Queſtions was, touching Mr. Heather. On the ſeventeenth
the Original of the Terms; abo of May, in the year 1622. Dr, Piers

which, as being obſcure and generally Dean of Peterburrow, and then

miſtaken, I beſtow'd ſome extraordmaryſVice-Chancellor, declar'd in Convo-
pans, that coming ſhort of others in cation, That Mr. Camden had foun-
underſtanding, I might equal them if|ded a Hiſtory - Lecture, and, for the
1 could in diligence. But before our Maintenance of a Profeſſor, had
next meeting, wwe had notice that his transfer d all his right in the Ma-
Majeſty took a little miſliłæ of our Su- nour of Bexlcy in Kent, to the Chan-
ciety, not being inſorni d that wwe had\cellor, Maſters, and Scholars: With
reſolu'd to decline all matters of State. this Proviſo, That the Profits of the

et hercupon we forbare to meet again, ſaid Manour (valu'd at about four
and ſo all our labours loſt, But mine hundred Pounds per Anman) ſhould
Hing by me, and having been often de- be enjoy d by William Heather, his
fred of me by ſome of my Friends, 1| Heirs and Executors, for the term of
thought good upon a revmew and awg-|ninety nine years, to begin from the
mentation to let it creep abroad in the death of Mr. Camden; during which
form you ſee it, wnſhing it might beſtime, William Heather ſhould pay to
redify'd by ſome better judgment. the Profeſſor of Hiſtory in Oxt Ws

The LIFE of

Mr. Camopen:

the Sum of one hundred and forty]
Pounds yearly. 1
Hereupon, the Univerſity
him a publick Letter of Thanks;
and becauſe they underſtood that
Mr. Heather was a perſon for whom he
had a ſingular reſpect, they volun-
. tarily conter'd on him the Degree
of Doctor of Muſick ; as alſo up-
on Mr. Orland Gibbons, another of
Mr. Camden's intimate Acquaintance:
This Civility procur'd them a new
Benefactor; for afterwards, Mr. Hea-
ther, as an acknowledgment of this

favour, founded a Muſick-Le&ture,]

and endow'd it with the Annual Re-
venue of fixteen Pounds fix Shil-
lins and eight Pence.
The firſt Hiſtory-Profeſſor was Mr.
Degory bear; being nominated by
Mr. Camden, upon the recommenda-
tion of the Chancellor, Vice-Chan-
cellor, and other Learned Perſons.
His firſt Eſſay was, a General Dire-
chion for the Reading of Haſtorees ;
which he dedicated to his Patron.
Mr. Brian Twxne, a perſon exceeding-
ly well vers'd in the Antiquities of
gland, procur'd a Grant from the
Founder, to ſucceed Mr. Whear ;
but he dying before, the right of
Election devolv'd upon the Univer-
fity for ever.
The little that he had left, he
May 2.1623. difpos'd of by Will (which he drew
up with his own hands, about fix
Months before his death) in Chari-
ties to the Poor, and Legactes to his
Relations, and ſome ſmall Memor:-
als to his particular Friends. All
his Books of Heraldry he gave to th
Office; and the reſt, both Printed
and Manuſcript, to the Library o
Sir Robert Cotton. But, upon th
erection of a new Library in th
Church of Weſtminſter, the print
part was remov'd thither by the
procurement of Dr. John Williams,
Lord Keeper of England, Biſhop of

Lincoln, and Dean of that Church ;
who laid hold of an expreſſion in
the Will, that was capable of a
double meaning.

He liv'd and dy'd a Member of

ſent]

the Church of England ; and gave
ſuch clear proofs of his entire affe-
Ction to it, that it is a wonder, how
a certain Romiſh Author could have
the face to inſinuate, That he only *Anale8. de
diflembled his Religion, and was * =
allur'd ſo to do with the proſpect Hibernia.
of Honours and Preferments. His

zeal againſt Popery Þ loſt him a Fel- t See above:
lowſhip in Oxford, and brought moſt

of his Works under the Cenſure of

the Church of Rome, and * expos'd *Epitt. 15.
him to the laſh of Parſons, Poſſevi-

nus, and others. Many of his Scho-

lars became eminent Members of

our Church; and he converted ſe-

veral Iriſh Gentlemen from Popery,

as the Walſhes, Nugents, O-Rail,,

Shees, the eldeſt Son of the Archbi-

ſhop of Caſſiles, and others. Whe-

ther theſe look like the actions of

an Hypocrite in Religion, or the ef-

fects of a firm perſwaſion and a well-
grounded zeal, let the World judge.

After ſo many teſtimonies, Mr. Cam-

den might well fay, F My Life andi Epid. 194

my Writings ſhall apologize for me:
and deſpite the reproaches of one |
* Who did not ſpare the moſt Reve- bid.
rend and Learned Prelates of our
Church ; + nor was aſhamed to bely* Epiſt. 19;
the Lords Deputies of Ireland, and others
of honourable rank.

He dy'd at Cheſilburſt, the ninth
Day of November, 1623. in the
* 73d year of his Age. Being re-*.By mi-

mov d to London, on the nineteenth ionen
of the fame Month he was carry da. 5
to Weſtminſter- Abbey in great pomp.
The whole College of Heralds at-
tended in their proper Habits, and
great numbers of the Nobility and
Gentry accompany'd the Corps,
and, at their entrance into the
Church, the Prebendarics and the o-
ther Members receiv'd the Corps in
eir Veſtments, with great Solemni-
„and conducted it into the Nave
0 Church. After the Fune-
ral- Sermon ( preach'd by Dr. Su-
ton, one of the Prebendaries ) he
was buried in the South-Iſle, near
the learned Caſaubon, and over-a-
gainſt our incomparable Poet Chau-

| cer,

ſtake, on his

*
*
3
_
W_
1 Fl
Ws q
—_
” 4s (
> *
1 o .
4a ;
*
0
*
4 *
1
I +
% uw
E * 7
* 7
+" .
*
-
ow
n
* 2 4
5 *7S
9
* ä
i
o
2
SY :
the 4
*
3
2
*
1
{Fs
*
2
＋
3
0 Pr
*
* „
*
.
n
*
.
n
"23
#
-
-

8 S

***

The LIFE of

Mr. Campen.

2
2
s Qs
ts]
r

on his
ment,

1 ä 2 Is
AW „ . K „
* A 1 © FaSy WES af M4. + HE \ ww: 1 CELLO * PR! F ,
be «

cer. Over the place, is a handſom
Monument of white Marble, with
his Effigies to the middle, and in
his hand, a Book, with BRITAN-

NIA inſcrib d on the Leaves. U
der which, is the following Inſcrip-

tion:

QUI. FIDE: ANTIQUA. ET. OPERA. ASSIDUA.

BRITANNICAM.

ANTIQUITATEM.

INDAGAVIT.
SIMPLICITA TEM. INNATAM. HONESTIS.
STUDIIS. EXCOLUIT.
ANIMI. SOLERTIAM. CANDORE. ILLUSTRAVIT.

GUILIELMUS

CAMDENUS.

AB. ELIZABETHA. R. AD. REGIS. ARMORUM.
(CLARENTIL. TITU LO.) DIGNITATEM.
- WNGGATUS
HIC. SPE. CERTA. RESURGENDL - IN
-\ CHRISEO-S EE

Q.
OBIIT. AN. DNL. 1623. 9 NOVEMBRE.
SUR. 74

ALATIS.

h Mr.

- —— —
* . 7 26 £< A == — —

X vw 0 2
\ ——ů —
" .
: ——

11§³*51Zö — — — — — —

Mr. CAM D E Ns

PREFACE.

N this laſt EpiT1oN, give me leave to addreſs the courteous
il Reader in the words that I uſed twenty years ſince, upon the firſt
publication of this Book ; with ſome very ſmall additions. The
great Reſtorer of old Geography, Abraham Ortelius, thirty years
ago, did very earneſtly ſollicit me to acquaint the World with
the ancient State of Britain, that is, to reſtore Britain to Anti-
quity, and Antiquity to Britain; to renew what was old, il-
luſtrate what was obſcure, and ſettle what was doubtful ; and
upon the whole, to recover (as much as poſlible) a Certainty in our Affairs, which
either the careleſneſs of Writers, or credulity of Readers, had bereft us of. A
great attempt, not to ſay impoſſible ! to which undertaking, as none know the
Pains that 1s requiſite, ſo none believe it, but they who have made the Experi-
ment. Yet, as the difficulty of the defign diſcourag'd me on one ſide, ſo the honour
of my native Country encourag'd me on the other; inſomuch, that while I dreaded
the task, and yet could not decline doing what I was able for the honour of my
Country, I found the greateſt Contrarieties, Fear and Courage (which I thought could
never have met in any one man) united in my own Breaſt. However, depending
upon the bleſſing of God, and my own Induſtry, I ſet about the Work, and gave
all my ſpare hours, with the utmoſt attention and reſolution, wholly to it.

I have been very wary in my conjeQures about the Etymology of Britain, and
its firſt Inhabitants : nor have I poſitively aſſerted any thing that admits a doubt; for
I know, the originals of Countries are obſcure, and altogether uncertain ; and, like
objects at a great diſtance, ſcarce viſible. Thus, the courſes of great Rivers, their
turnings, their confluence, their mouths, are all well known, while the Springs ge-
nerally lie hid and undiſcover'd. I have trac'd the ancient Diviſions of Britain,
and have given a Summary Account of the States, and the Judicial Courts, of theſe
flouriſhing Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland. I have ſettl'd the bounds
of each County (tho' not to an inch) and examin'd the nature of the Soil, and the
places of greateſt Antiquity, and what Dukes, and Earls, and Barons there have
been, I have briefly mention'd ſome of the moſt ancient and honourable Fami-

lies; for it is impoſſible to mention all. Let thoſe judge of my performance, that

are able to make a true judgment; which will require conſideration : but

Time, that uncorrupt witneſs, will beſt determin this ; when Envy, which preys
upon the living, ſhall hold its peace. Yet this I muſt ſay for my ſelf, that I have

neg-

A rn a W363

: 5 2 „
* 0 8 * —
*
Ly

Mr. Cid: NS PREFACE.

— —

neglected nothing that could give any conſiderable light towards the diſcovery of
Truth in matters of Antiquity. I got ſome inſight into the old Britiſh and Saxon
Tongues, for my afliſtance; I have travell'd almoſt all over England, and have con-
ſulted in each County, the Perſons of beſt skill and knowledge in theſe matters. I
have diligently perus'd our own Writers; as well as the Greek and Latin, who men-
tion the leaſt tittle of Britain. I have examin'd the publick Records of the Kingdom,
Eccleſiaſtical Regiſters, and Libraries, and the Acts, Monuments, and Memorials of
Churches and Cities. :

Theſe, I have built upon, as infallible Teſtimonies ; and have cited them, as I
had occaſion, in their own words, tho' never ſo barbarous ; that by ſuch unqueſtio-
nable evidences juſtice might be done to Truth. Poſſibly I may ſeem bold and im-
prudent, who, tho* but a ſmatterer in Antiquities, have ventur'd upon the Stage
of this learned Age, and expos'd my ſelf to ſuch a variety of cenſures and opini-
ons ; when I might quietly have lain hid. But to ſpeak the truth plainly,
the natural affection I have for my Country (by far the ſtrongeſt affection that is)
the glory of the Britiſh Name, and the perſwaſions of Friends, conquer'd my na-
tural modeſty, and forc'd me, againſt my own judgment, to undertake and publiſh
a Work I am ſo unfit for; and for which I expect to be immediately attack'd on
all fides by prejudice, cenſure, detraction, and reproach. Some there are, who cry
down the whole ſtudy of Antiquities, as a fruitleſs ſearch after what is gone and
paſt; but as I ſhall not altogether contemn the Authority of theſe Men, fo I ſhall
not much regard their Judgment. Nor am I deſtitute of ſuch reaſons, as are ſufficient
to gain the approbation of all true Engliſhmen, who value the honour of their na-
tive Country; and to whom I can promiſe a great deal of pleaſure and ſatisfaction,
in theſe Studies, becoming Men of Birth and Education. But if there are any,
who, defire to be ſtrangers in their own Country, Foreigners in their own Cities,
and always Children in Knowledge ; let them pleaſe themſelves, I write not for
ſuch humours. There are others, perhaps, who will cavil at the lowneſs ad rough-
neſs of my Stile. And I frankly confeſs, that neither is every word wcigh'd in
Varro's Scale; nor did I deſign to gratifie the Reader with a Noſe-gay of all the
Flowers that I could meet with in the garden of Eloquence. But, why ſhould t
object this, when Cicero the father of Eloquence, deny'd, that ſuch a ſubjeR could
arne D ,, i. e. bear a flouriſh ; and when it is not, as Pomponius ſaid, 2 proper
ſubject for Rhetorick, :

Many, perhaps, will fall upon me, for daring to trace the original of ancient
Names by Conjecture only; who, if they will utterly exclude conjecture, I fear will
exclude the greateſt part of polite Learning, and in that, of human Knowledge:
the mind of man being ſo ſhallow, that we are forc'd to trace many things in all
Sciences, by con jecture. In Phyſick, there are the Fnude, rexwheie, and Cale,
Symptoms, Tokens, and Signs, which in reality are little more than conjectures. In
 Rhetorick, and Civil Law, and other Sciences, there is an eſtabliſh'd wance to
Conjecture. And fince ConjeQures are the figns and tokens of ſomewhat that lies
hid, and are (as Fabius ſays) the direQors of Reaſon to find the truth ; I always
accounted them a kind of Engines, with which Time draws up Truth from the
bottom of Democritus's Well.

But if they will admit any conjectures at all, I doubt not but my moderation
in the uſe of them will eafily obtain me that Privilege. Plato in his Cratilus di-
rects us to trace the original of Names to the barbarous tongues, as being the moſt
ancient ; and 8 „in all my Etymologies and Conjectures, I have conſtant
recourſe to the Britiſh, or (as it is now call'd) the Welfh tongue, which was ſpo-
ken by the firſt and moſt ancient Inhabitants of this Country. He would alſo have
a plain agreement between the Name and the Thing; and if theſe diſagree, never to
admit the Conjecture. There is (ſays he) in things S, LY, NSH, a Sound,
a Form, a Colour; and if theſe are not in the word, I reje& it with contempt, As
for Etymologies that are obſcure, ftrain'd, far-fetch'd, and applicable to other things
as well; I thought them not worthy to be inſerted. In ſhort, I have been ſo cau-
tious and frugal in my conjectures, that to an impartial Reader, if I ſeet not Euſoà-
u, lucky in my Adventures, I hope 1 ſhall not ſeem ToAwnege, foo adven-
turous, And tho, in ſo great a compaſs, I may here and there have indulg'd my
Fancy and made two con jectures upon one and the ſame thing; yet in the mean
time I do not forget, that Unity is the ſacred band of Truth. „ -

There are thoſe, it is probable, who will be angty that I have taken no notice
of this or that Family; whereas it was not my deſign to mention any, but ſuch as
have heen very eminent; nor all ſuch neither (for they would furniſn Volumes,
but thoſe only that came naturally under the Method I Propos'd in this Work. And
1 5 (by God's permiſſion) to have an opportunity Hereafter to do right to the
- Engliſh Nobility, But they who take it môſt hainouſſy, may probably be of oo

i num

Z ˙ Tis Ir RR —

Mr. CAM PDE NS PREPACE.

number of thoſe, who have been the leaſt ſerviceable to their Country, and whoſe
Nobility is of a late date. The ſame Perſons, it may be, will condemn me for com-
mending ſome who are living; but I have done it briefly, moderately, and upon
an aſſurance of their merit, from the general conſent of diſcerning and good men,
and not in the leaſt from a principle of Flattery. And, from the commendation
I have given them, they themſelves are admoniſh'd to make their behaviour agreea-
ble to it; and not only to ſupport, but to encreaſe, their Character. Poſterity,
whatever Writers ſay, will do juſtice to every one's Character, and to Poſterity I
appeal from the preſent age. In the mean while, let them rememher, that to praiſe
the Good, is to hang out a light to guide thoſe that come after; for it is a true
ſaying of Symmachus, Imitation is excited by the honour done to good Men; and
an Emulation in virtuous Aflions, is rais'd by the example of another's Honour, If
any one ſay, that I have ſought occaſion to mention and commend one or two
perſons, I confeſs it: and hope it is no crime to treat the Good with due reſpect;

and ſome grains of allowance are alſo to be made to Friendſhip. But however it

comes to paſs, Virtue and Honour have always enemies to encounter ; and Men have
a Veneration for what is paſt, and an Envy againſt what is preſent, Far be it from
me, to judge ſo unjuſtly of Men and Things, as to think that our Age, under
the government of ſuch brave Princes, can want Men of worth and character;
but they who cannot bear to hear the Good commended, may complain alſo that
themſelves are pointed at, by a ſimilitude of manners, in the diſhonourable mention
of the Bad.

Some will accuſe me, of leaving out this or that little Town or Caſtle ; as if I
had deſign'd to take notice of any, but the moſt famous and ancient: nor could it
be worth while to mention them for the ſake of the bare Names. For that which
I chiefly propos'd to my ſelf, was to ſearch for and illuſtrate thoſe Places, which
Ceſar, Tacitus, Ptolemy, Antoninus Auguſtus, Provinciarum Notitia, and other an-
cient Writers, have recorded ; the names whereof Time has either utterly extin-
guiſh'd, or chang'd, or corrupted. And in this ſearch, I neither affirm what is
uncertain, nor conczal what is probable. But it ought not to be laid to my
charge, that I have not diſcovered all (after the expence and trouble of a very
diligent ſearch,) any more than it is objected to the Miner, that he finds only
the larger Veins, and overlooks the leſs. Or, to burrow that ſaying of Columella,
As in a great Wood, it is the buſineſs of a good Huntſman to take all the game
he can; nor was it ever charged on any one as a fault, that he did not take all;
the ſame may be ſaid for me. Somewhat muſt be left for the Lahours of other
Men. Nor is he a good Teacher (ſays a great man) who teaches every thing,
and leaves nothing four the invention of others. A new age, a new race of men,
will daily produce new Diſcoveries. It is enough for me, that I have broken the
Ice; and I have gain'd my end, if I ſet others to work; whether to write more, or
to amend what I have written. ;

There are ſome, I hear, who take it ill that I have mention'd Monaſteries and
their Founders. I am ſorry to hear it; but (with their leave) they are poſſibly
ſuch who are angry, and would have it forgotten, that our Anceſtors were, and we
are, Chriſtians; ſince there are not any more certain and glorious Monuments of their
Chriſtian piety and devotion : nor were there any other Seminaries for the pro-
pagation of Religion and Learning; however, in a corrupt Age, Weeds might run
up, which were neceſſary to be rooted out.

The Mathematicians will lay to my charge the palpable Miſtakes I have committed
in ſtating the Degrees of Longitude and Latitude. But ſpare me a little: I have
collated all the Aſtronomical Tables, new and old, printed and Manuſcript, thoſe of
Oxford, thoſe of Cambridge, and thoſe of King Henry the fifth. In the Latitudes,
they differ much from Ptolemy, but agree pretty well with one another (not that
believe with Stadius, that the Globe of the Earth is remov'd from its Centre ; )
and for that reaſon I have follow'd thein. But all differ as to Longitude ;, and a-
gree no where. What therefore could I do ? Since our modern Sailors have ob-
ſerv'd, that there is no variation of the Compaſs at the Iſles of Azores, I have thence,
as from the great Meridian, commenc'd the Accounts of Longitude, but not every
where with a critical Nicety. .

I need not ask pardon for being obſcure, or fabulous, or for extravagant digreſli-
ons : For I apprehend no danger of being thought obſcure, unleſs it be by thoſe,
who have no taſte of ancient Learning, nor have ſo much as dip'd in our own Hi-
ſtories : and as for Fables, I have ſhown them no countenance : and to keep my ſelf
from Digreſſions, I took Pliny's advice, and often read the title of my Book, and at
the ſame time put the queſtion to my ſelf, What it was I had undertaken ? Maps have
been hitherto wanting and much defir'd in this Work; as that which would not
only add much to the beauty of it, but be of infinite uſe too, as they are in all

| Studies

1 * - * " 18
19 Y —P a4 0 « — þ * f
* - . *. 7. 20 ' = > 23 ö
* 5 F bs „ * 4 52 e 3 K as * A
— Ki ir It bun NE ones WO z ,
=
*

=

"© . „ 7 4 BEST.
5 . —x f
N : on

*
þ
.
4
„
# *
A
8
o
#3
Fl
*
5
1
.

Mr. Cand EN'S | P REFACE

Studies of this kind ; eſpecially when improv'd and explain'd by Deſcriptions of
the Places. But this is a defect, which it was not in my power to ſupply : however,
it is now ſupply'd by the care of George Biſhop and ohn Norton, according to the de-
ſcription of thoſe excellent Chorographers, Chriſtopher Saxton and John Norden.

But I exceed the bounds of a PREFACE, and therefore ſhall only add, That for
many years I have apply'd my ſelf to this Work with the utmoſt diligence and in-
tegrity, in order to explain the Antiquities of my Native Country: I have ſlander'd
no Family, blaſted no Man's Reputation, nor ſported with any Man's Name : I
have impeach'd the Credit of no Writer, not ſo much as Jeffrey of Monmouth's,
whoſe Hiſtory (which I am inclinable enough to favour) is yet of little authority
among Learned Men. Neither have I affected to be thought knowing in any re-
ſpe&, unleſs it be that I am deſirous to know. I frankly own my ignorance, and
am ſenſible that I may oft-times have been miſtaken ; nor will I patronize my own
miſtakes. What Marks-man that ſhoots a whole day, can conſtantly hit the mark ?
There are many things in theſe Studies Cineri ſuppiſia doloſo, which glittering,
are not Gold. Lune rrors are owing to a treacherous memory; for who is able
to treaſure up every thing there, ſo as to be able to produce it at pleaſure? Many
again proceed from unskilfulneſs; for who is ſo good a Pilot, as to cruiſe in this
unknown Sea of Antiquity, without ſplitting upon Rocks? And it is poſſible, I may
have been led into Errors by the Authority of Writers, and of others whom I
reckon d I might ſafely rely on. There is nothing more dangerous (ſays Pliny ) in
the ſearch after Truth, than when a ſlanch Author aſſerts a falſe thing. Inhabitants
may better obſerve the particulars of the places where they live; and if they will
inform me of any miſtake, I will thankfully amend it: what I have omitted 1 will
add; what I have not ſufficiently e plain'd, I will explain better, when I am bet-
ter inform'd : All I defire, is, not 1» be cenſur'd out of Malice or a Contentious hu-
mour, which will ill become Men of Candour and Integrity.

Theſe favours, moſt courteous Reader, let thy gocd nature, and my pains, our
common love for our Country, and the glory of the Britiſh Name, obtain for me

atthy hands ; viz. That I may ſpeak my mind freely without offence to others, 'That

I may ſtand upon the ſame bottom as others have done before me in theſe Studies;
and, That what Errors I own, you will pardon. Theſe Favours are rather to be
expected, than deſir'd from the Candid; and as to thoſe mean partial perſons, whoſe
tongues are ſlandering whenever their teeth are going, who are carping in all Com-
panies, and are full of Envy, Reproach and Malice; I value them not. I have learn'd
of the Comedian, That Slander 1s the treaſure of fools, which they carry in their
om, wool, and have found by experience, that Envy (in ſpight of Envy be it ſpo-
ken) never harbours but in a mean, narrow, ſneaking breaſt. Generous and candid
Souls, as they know how to flight Envy, ſo they know not how to practice it. As for
me and my Works, I humbly ſubmit them, with the greateſt deference, to Men of
Virtue and Learning, who if they do not approve, will I hope pardon, what I
have here attempted out of a moſt zealous Affection to my Native Country.

Adieu.

[i] TEREN-

—I—Aœm— — — — —— = .
» — . Sth
—
- — - :

Pe ny —

-
8 - E ” * A
--
——— oe Oo Oy Ce EE We ©

TERENTIANVS MAVRVS.
VERITATEM

DVMOS INTER, ET ASPERA,
SCRVPOSIS SEQVIMVR VADIS,
FRONTE EXILE NEGOTIVM,
ET DIGNVM PVERIS PVTES;
AGGRESSIS LABOR ARDVVS,
NEC TRACTABILE PONDVS.

Through dangerous Fords, o're ways unbeaten too
The Searchers after Truth are bound to go;

This poor employ can few Profeflors get,

A boyiſh Task, below the Men of Wit.

But tis a work of Hardſhip when begun,

A Load uneaſie to be undergone.

SEDDBLDODEDOCEDOCEROGEDO DEDO ap DEDDDEDODEDODEDO DD DDD RDOS

Pro captu Lectoris habent ſua fata Libelli.

Books take their doom from each Peruſer's will,
Juſt as they think, they paſs for good or ill.

4 . a © + 9 4 *
7. 2 4 eo
* as . K

oF
3

nn

.
3
45 1
1
.

#

LECTOR EM.

n per immenſum celebrata Britannia mundum

i VA I Imperio, populo, rege beata ſuo,

ll Nunc prodit, renovata novis, ornata figuris :

SF Auttior illa tibi, notior illa tibi.

Camdeni liber eſt, ſatis eſt dixiſſe ſcieuti :
Camdenum neſcis ? perlege, notus erit.

Guilielmus Sydleius Eques auratus.

Ad amicum ſuum Guil. Camdenum, Georgii Buc Equitis

aurati Reg. Sp. C. Heptaſtichon.

8 I ome deſcribis terram, Camdene, Britannam,
am graphice, tanta cura, gravitate, fidcque

Heroum velles Britonum res ſcribere geſtas

( Hac etenim ſola neglecti in parte jacemus)

Hiſtoriæ poterat conferri nulla Britannæ.

Hoc tibi reſtat opus, vel non hoc fiet in ævo,

Secula quod binos Phenices nulla tulere.

Ad Guil. Camdenum, Edu. Grant Sacræ Theologiæ Doctor.

E Rgone priſcorum luſtras monumenta virorum,
Ut poſſis facili contexere fingula filo,
Que latuere diu cacis immerſa tenebris,
Antiquata uſu, priſcum ſumptura nitorem ?
Britannorum nomen ? ceperit ortu ?
Incola quis primus celebres habitaverit oras ?
In quavis regione doces, quacunque vetuſtæ
Sunt Urbes, que vera fimul Comitumque Ducumque
Stemmata : qua terre dotes : quis limes agrorum,
Ordine perſpicuo perſtringis fingula plene.
gregium moliris opus, vel judice Momo,
od ſemper praſens, quod poſtera prædicet atas ;
e Patrie ſtimulavit amor, te docta vetuſtas
Excitat, ut cunctis patriæ ſpatieris in agris :
Multi multa canunt, tu multum ſcribere tentas,
Hoc multo multos ſuperas, qui multa tulerunt.
Tu Camdenus eris ſeros celebrandus in annos -
Ergo age, quo tendis greſſu, patriamque venuſta,
Ne labor iſte tuus defit cupientibus iſta.

—

| 4
14
38
7
1

—

*
— —

— ——ͤ . ˙ ors. Ao cc oO.
. T : _
. — N

ä "
3
— -o
—— r 4 *
*

In antiquam Guilielmi Camdeni Britanniam.

E te deque tuo libro dum ſcribere carmen
Meus congeſta velit, meritaſque intexere laudes,
Injonuit mea Muſa mihi, quid carmina quaris ?
Sit ſcripfiſſe ſatis, quod ſcripfit Horatius olim:
Hic meret æra liber Soſiis, hic & mare tranſit,
Et longum noto ſcriptori prorogat ævum.

J. V. Gen.

In poſtremam Guilielmi Camdeni Antiquitatum Editio-
nem, Epigramma. G. Ga.

8 Ementem ſterili quoties tellure recondit,
Luditur optata fruge colonus iners.

Ventiſugæ nunquam dominus diteſcit arena ;
Pinguis at irriguo flumine terra beat.

Fecundum facunde ſolum Camdene ſecaſti,
ud & ingenii nobile flumen aquat.

Atque ut opima ſolet jatto cum ſemine gleba
Parturit innumeris granula adauita modis :

Sic toties cuſus tibi qui fuit ante libellus,
Cultior antiquo prodiit ecce liber.

Heu! nuſquam tanto reſpondent arva colono,
Cujus ab ingenio prominet his genius?

Sume animum. Cim te hinc diſcedere juſſerit atas
Ut quaras trita paſcua lata vid;

Semper Camdenus fimul & Britannia vivent -
Longævus nequit hic, dum manet illa, mori.

In Guilielmi Camdeni Britanniam.

N Eſcia penè ſui, generiſque oblita prioris,
Anglia cum jacuit ſemiſepulta ſitu,
O quis, ait, tantum aut animis, aut arte valebit,
Vindice qui tractet vulnera noſtra manu?
Camden patriæ lugentis imagine motns
Ingenium, artem, animos verſat : opemque tulit :
Mortua reſtituit veteris cognomina gentis,
Mortis & eripuit ſe patriamque metu,
Aternum per te, Camdene, Britannia vivit,
Cumque tua æternum, tu quoque gente manes.

G. Carleton.

Ad eundem.

Nunc, Camdene, orbi munere nota tuo eſt,
que velut fuerat non ulla cupido,
Sic e cupit.
Sed tamen incaſſum : nimia nam dote ſuperba
Indignum nullum non ſui amoris habet.

2 vix nota fibi fuit ante Britannia, utri
he

Janus Gruterus J. C.

Camdeno ſuo Britannia.

Larus ut Eoas ſol adverberat arces,

Et procul invifis ferit aſtra liventia flammis,
Nox petit Oceanum, uultuſque enaſcitur orbi ;
Sic, Camdene, tuum jubar ut fulgere per Anglos
Ceu Phæbi cœpit, mox fugit, & bid dudum,
Multumque heu ſquallens radiare Britannia cæpi.
Non mea nunc Thetis cum deſerit alba profundum
Gratior exurgit, pallentes murice vivo
Inftaurata genas, pigro nec ſydus ab Orco,
Nec dux aſtrorum de wertice veſper Olympi.
Ila ego quam lima repolita Britannia mir4
Mi Camdene tua, nova nunc magno Inſula ponto :
Alla ego rupe ſuper ſcuto horrida, & horrida gaſo,
« Hinc pelagi numen, dea ſpicea viſitur illinc,
« Piſcoſus vallo Nereus, & claſſibus armat,
« Atque Ceres flavos ſpargit ſua ſerta per agros,
ce Faxea deinde ftrues, & que depicta videms
& Fronte libri, veluti fervens 4 fontibus unda,
« Et ſurgens pyramis, noſtre miracula monſtrant
ce Telluris, liber ipſe nequit ( fas) omnia veſter :
Exero nunc vultus echauſtos ante ruins,
Et nunc flore meo marcores pello vietos,
Verùm erit illa dies cùm que micat Anglia forſan
Nebula quaretur, cinere occultata, ſituque,
Atque alios Iychnos dabit : Id Camdene negato
Hiſtoricum vincendo Chaos, qui noris ;
Hac tibi priſca, radux, tuaque nſque Britannia canto,

Edmundus Bolton.

In Britanniam denuo illuſtratam Job. Stradlingus.

Nuula in Oceano quondam notiſſima, cacis
Delituit tenebris vix bend nota fibi.
Ingenii (Camdene) tui radiante tenebras
Lumine (ceu fugiunt nubila ſole) fugas.
Sic rediviva viget, nec qua patet illa latere
Tu potes : Lam tu, te celebrem illa facit.

(k]

i
—

Es

* 2

— 4.»
—

1

. 4
Re -- # 914
11 - — *

KapSliO an vpn pwopipO- i pan.
Ingee * apupicdyer e. Ig mIavy,
Tnwyiry Hl, dor pa Ppeflarin.
Raips gipany ds oN · am eiclu a cht,
Koirwyds mus do TL . ανα nns.

Eis Thy Bperlaviay Ain Kapdrve.

Se Tide, ws N Nixtas Aaor As,
ArnmMapyroa miTehd), vob pi Rols

IIe. SNG. Fro pgior Trois rer hien erex) Toh
754 Kaud . mew % Py.

Eims SoAwy, d Ye pe muTEAS) Jauy,
H dea KapShg ,h opens mureh,

H. Cuffius.

Ad Guilielmum Camdenum, Britanniam Hiſtorica veritate

denuo illuſtrantem.

Amdene, laus eft invidenda, praclarum

Audire civem, patriaque ſervire,
Autoritati, & gloriæ perennamti.

Camdene, dum decus Britannia campum

In æviternæ provehis ſagax Fama,
Nitore regio ſtiloque praclaro :
Præclarus inde civis audis, & jure.
Ouid ? non decore modo Britanniam mattus,
Honore mattus ipſe & gloriæ punttis :
Sed hunc & illum luce tua reples mundum :
Ut, que fibi vix nota erat prius terra,
Utramque nunc domum pulſaverit Solis.
Camdene, laudis hoc tus eſt. Et extenſum
Quo latius volat Britannia nomen,
Camdene, auguſtior tanto tibi ſacro
Adorea in Memoriæ exſtabit altari.
Tam nominis cati eſt, litaſſe regnorum
Fama, inclutaſque protuliſſe virtutes.

Caſpar Dornavius, D.

In Britanniam redivivam K. Parker Caio-Gonvil.
Carmen congratulatorium.

Alve, grata redis (memoranda Britannia) terris,
Quam juvat e tenebris exiliiſſe tuis !

Fallor ? an antiquo mutatus fiſtor in orbe ?
Aut te dum relego, ſecla priora lego?

Fallor ?

Fallor ? an Arthuros, Egbertos, Caſſibelinos
Cerno redivivos ducere caſtra ſua ?
Fallor ? an hic acies ſave certare ſolebant ?
of Hic Offa, hic rigidus tendere Penda ſolet ?
3 Feſtino nmium. Qlla, qualia, quantaque cerno
Surgere Jacra Deo, mania, templa, domus?
Queis hic Normannis donari pradia legi?
Unde ſequens ſoboles nomen & omen babet.
Sed quot cerno domus orbatas ſtirpe vetuſta ?
Heu quas dilapidant alea, vina, Venus?
Ut vidi, ut dolui, nouus ut nunc ſedibus hoſpes
Diceret : hac mea ſunt, ito colone vetus.
Quis Genius talem (veneranda Britannia) nobis
Eſſe velit reducem ? quo duce tanta refers?
Scilicet hoc debes Camdeno : agnoſco parentem,
Et Genium, cujus te tibi reddit amor,
Felix ipſe ſuo libro : felicior ipſa
Praconem talem laudis habere tua. p
Plus loquar, an fileam ? video tantum inſtar in ipſo.
Quas Muſas wocitem ? ſed (mea Muſa) file.
Parcus amor loquitur : major ſtupefactus adegit
Mirari hoc tacite, nec ſcio ſolus, opus.

In Britanniam a Guil. Camdeno illuſtratam F. Adarb.
Carmen.

[tus atrox Hebridas, glacialem Scotus Hibernem
Moverat, Attacotus Vararim, Saxoque Viſurgim
Conjunttis armis, animiſque exſcindere gentes,
Subruere eximias cumulatis cladibus urbes,
Atque Britannorum nomen demergere bellis.
Ut tamen emergant qua ſunt immerſa ruinis,
Et decus antiquum rediviva Britannia cernat,
Ecce vetuſtatem Camdenius eruit omnem,
Magnarum rerum ſcrutatus magna ſepulchra,
Submovit cineres, nigrantes diſpulit umbras :
Inque prius retro ſtudiis ſe contulit avum 3
Contulit atque decus patrieque fibique labore.

In antiquam Camdeni Britanniam H. N. L. ae.
Riſca Britannorum delevit nomina Tempus,

P Antiquas urbes exitioque dedit.

Cuntta triumphato Camdenus tempore reddit,
Ingenio priſcum reſtituitque decus.

Ingenio cedat Tempus, cedatque vetuſtas :
Ingenium majus Tempore robur habet.

Ad eundem.

e® .
13 Antiqua Britannia lumen,
! 8 tuam venit ut illa domum,
Trvenit lumen, manſit, cupienſque poliri ;
Hoſpes ait mihi fis, qui mihi lumen eris.

"4

BRITANNIA.

oy Jaftare licet magnorum munera divim,
Sibique veris fas placere dotibus ;

Cur mihi non videar fortunatiſſima telus ?
Digna eſt malis, bona que parum novit ſua.

Ultima lanigeris animoſa eſt India lucis,
Suis ſuperbus eſt Arabs odoribus.

Thuriferis gaudet Panchaia dives arenis ;
Thera flumen terra jattat aureum.

LEgypto faciunt animos ſeptem oftia Nilt,
Laudata Rheni vina tollunt accolas.

Leta nec uberibus fibi diſplicet Africa glebis;
Hac portubus ſuperbit, illa mercibus :

At mihi nec fontes, nec ditia flumina deſunt,
Sulcive pingues, prata nec ridentia.

Feta viris, fæcunda feris, facunda metallis ;
Ne glorier, quod ambiens largas opes

Porrigit Oceanus, neu quod nec amicius ulla
Calum, nec aura dulcius ſpirat plaga.

Serus in occiduas mihi Phæbus conditur undas,
Sororque noctes blanda ducit lucidas.

Poſſem ego laudati contemnere vellera Batis,
Ubi villus albis mollior bidentibus ?

Et tua non nequeam miracula temnere Memphz.
Verum illa major, juſtiorque gloria,

Quod Latiis, quod ſum celebrata Britannia Graiis,
Orbem vetuſtas quod vocarit alterum.

BOOKS

bo
"<

4

is.

.
4
A
1
n
> *
.
5 4
— ;
5
4
KS

"25

*

59
8
1
: tne?
*
*
"8,
*
*
XN.

*
F 4
F.4

Seb b DD IIIEDSES
TTT
F DE LADEA DEAD FADLADL +

erer DDD

BOOK 8

AND

TREATISES

Relating to the

ANTIQUITIES

O F

ENGLAND.

: | « |Leland's Itinerary. (MS. in the Bodleian Li-
Topo grap ical 2 =) of Eng brary;) ſeveral Tranſcripts whereof have been
land general. taken by Gentlemen of Curioſity ; and it is
| now publiſhed in nine Volumes Octavo,
CEADRWEFD Tolemy's Geography. very accurately, by Mr. Thomas Hearn of Ox-

© = Anrtoninus's Itinerary. | ford. | /
Notitia Occidentalis Imperu. [Harriſon's Hiſtory of England; printed in Ho-
=>) Peutegerian Tables. linſhed's Chronicle.

So far as they concern Britain. |Camden's Remains.
Robert of Gloceſter in his|Drayton's Polyolbion. |
Chronicle of England (MS.) Fuller's Vorthies of England.
has given us the length and breadth of England.] Dugdale's Baronage of England.
Commentary upon the Itinerary of Antoninus, [Dugdale's Monaſticon Anglicanum.
by Mr. Taba. MS. This was much improv d John Speed's Hiſtory of Great Britain, and his
by Dr. Caius of Cambridge, and is now in| Maps, in two large Volumes, Folio.

Caius-College, in two Volumes. : Sir Henry Spelman's 7lare, Quarto & Folio.
Commentary upon Antoninuss Itinerary, by Divi Britannici, Fol. 1675. By Sir Winſton
Mr. Burton. Churchill, Kt. F. R. S.

Dr. Gale's Commentary upon Antoninus's Iti-IThe number of Acres contained in land,

nerary. 45 and the uſe that may be made thereof. By
Various Readings of the Itinerary. And, Dr. Grew. Phil. Tranſ. Numb. 330.

Dr. Talbot's Annotations ; publiſhed in Mr.

Hearn's Edition of Leland's Itinerary. BY An

+ — ——

Books and I REATISES

An Advertiſement for all Navigators up the
Channel of England. Phil. Tranſ. Numb,
207. 1 - |

Natural Hiſtory of the Chalybeat and Purging
Waters of England, by B. Allen, Med.

Bac.

Hiſtory of the Boroughs of England, by Brown
Willis, Eſq;.

Proſpects of Noblemens and Gentlemens Seats.

Templa Druidum, Monumenta Britannica, &c. be-
ing large Collections, and curious Obſerva-
tions, relating to the Antiquities of England,
in four Volumes, MS. By Mr. John Aubrey,
Fellow of the Royal Society.

Note, Blome's Britannia, J/right's three years
Travels; and other Surveys of England,
printed ſince the year 1607, are little more
than Extracts out of Mr. Camden.

BARKSHIRE.

Diſcourſe of the Antiquities of the Caſtle
of Windſor and Chapel there; in Mr.
Aſomole's Order of the Garter.
Mr. Aſbmole's Antiquities of Berkſhire, 1719.
Part of two Letters from Dr. James Brewer,
concerning Beds of Oyſter-ſhells tound near
Reading. Phil. Tranſ. Numb. 261.

BEDFORDSHIRE.

A N account of a ſtrange Tempeſt of Wind,
Thunder and Lightning, at Bedford,

Aug. 19. 1672.

BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.

R. Kennet, the preſent Biſhop of Peter-
borough, hath given deſcriptions of ſe-
veral Antiquities in this County, in his Pa-
rochial Antiquities. Quarto, 1695.
Large Collections towards a Topographical and
Hiſtorical Deſcription of Buckinghamſhire,
by Brown Willis, Eſq; MS.

CAMBRIDGESHIRE.

Iſtory of Cambridgeſhire. By Mr. Laire.
MS.

The Hiſtory of the Univerſity of Cambridge

ſince the Conqueſt, by Dr. Thomas Fuller; b
way of Appendix to his Church-Hiſtory of
Britain.

In Sir William Dugdale's Hiſtory of Imbanking,

are ſeveral things relating to the Funy part of
this Country. |

Indigenous Plants in Cambridgeſhire. By Mr.
Ray.

The "Laianicy of Cambridge, by Dr. John
Caius.

A MS. Treatiſe called Cantabrigienſis, by
Richard Parker, Fellow of Caius-College in
Cambridge. It is mention'd in Fuller's Wor-
thies, pag. 159. :

Mr. Loggan, a little before his death, took the
proſpects of the publick Buildings and Col-
leges, in this Univerſity.

An account of the Lady Margaret's Preachers,
and Profeſſors, by Mr. Baker of St. John's
College. Octavo, 1708. who hath alſo made
large Collections, for the Hiſtory and Anti-
quities of this Univerſity.

CHESHIRE.

8 IR Peter Leiceſter s Antiquities of Cheſhire,

1673.

An Anſwer to Sir Peter Leiceſter's Addenda, or
ſomething to be added in his Anſwer to Tho-
mas Manwaring, by the ſaid Sir Thomas,
167 ©

A Deſcription Hiſtorical and Geographical of
Cheſhire, by William Smith, William Webb,
and Das. King. 1656.

Ancient and Modern Eſtate of the Earldom of
Cheſter, by Judge Doderidge. Quarto, 1630.
A brief Hiſtorical Account of Beeſton-Caſtle.
By Mr. Erdſwick ; annexed to his Hiſtory of

Staftordſhire,

Natural Hiſtory of Cheſhire. By Charles Leigh,
M. D. Folio 1700.

Some Enquiries concerning the Salt-ſprings, and
the way of Salt-making at Nantwich, an-
ſwered by Dr. Jackſon. Phil. Tranſ. N. 5 ;.

Obſervations on the Silt-pits at Nortwich,
Middlewich, and Nantwich, by Dr. Liſter.
Phil. Tranſ. Numb. 156. -

Mr. Ray of the Salt-works.

Extracts of two Letters written by Mr. Adam
Martindale, from Rotherton, concerning the
diſcovery of a Rock of natural Salt. Phil.
Tranſ. Numb. 66.

Mr. Ray, of the Salt-works at Nantwich, added
to his Northern words,

Account of a Roman Altar found at Cheſter.
Phil. Tranſ{. Numb. 22 2.

CORNWAL LI.

Map of Cornwall, by Mr. Norden; for the
A perfe*ting whereof he took a journey thither.
Camden's Epiſt. p. 72.
A Survey of Cornwall, by Richard Carew of An-
tony Elq; 1602.

The fame Book, with ſeveral Additions, was
in the hands of Mr. Chiſwell, Bookſeller.
Hiſtorical Account of Cornwall, by John Nor-

den, MS.

The Laws and Cuſtoms of the SHaunaries.
Concerning the Tin-mines in Cornwall. Phil.
Tranſ. N. 69.

Dr. Merret, ot the Tin- mines, N. x 38.

Mr. Ray of the prepariuig, and ſmelting, or
blowing, of Tin. Northern words, p. 180.
The Improvement of Cornwall by Sea-ſand.

Phil. Tranſ. N. 113.

Judge Doderidge hath written a Treatiſe con-
cerning the Dutchy of Cornwall.

Mr. Newton, of the effęcts of Papaver Cornicu-

latum luteum, growing there. Philoſ. Tranſ.
N. 242.

CUMBERLAND.

Genealogical Account of the Families in
Cumberland, by Mr. Denton. A Manu-

{cript, copy'd into ſeveral hands.
The Eccleſiaſtical Hiſtory of Cumberland, ſince
= 8 of the Biſhoprick of Carliſle,

r. Hugh Todd, Prebenda
. MS Fs
Natural Hiſtory of Cumberland (in Dr. Plot's
method, as to the main of it) by Dr, Ni-
colſon, late Biſhop of Carliſle, and now Bi-
ſhop of Derry in Ireland, MS. a

Hiſtory

Part of a Letter trom Mr. Halley, giving an

5
2
"8
Pad
N
*
9,
*
H
„
5 hy
4
7
2%

relating to the Antiquities of ENGLAND.

"Bi

1 * "BG *
7 =
""
ws,
- .
2
**
* » *
412
= 2 PAY
#7
125
+0
4
7
. ”
%
-
4
*
.
F.
«-}
"Pup
=
EY
*
*
-
©

Hiſtory of the Cathedral of Carliſle. By Sir
William Dugdale. At the end of his Hiſto-
ry of St. Paul's.
trer from Mr. William Nicolſon (now
Biſhop of __ concerning two Runic
Inſcriptions at Beau-Caſtle and Bridekirk.
Phil. Tranſ. N. 176. |
Dr. Liſter, of the Copper-mines. Phil. Tranſ.
N. 200.
Dr. Plot, of the Black-Lead,
N. 240.

A

at Keſwick,

DERBTSHIRE.

A Collection of the Laws, Liberties, Cu-

ſtoms, Cc. of the ſeveral Mines and Mi-
ners in Derbyſhire, by Thomas Houghton.
Lond. 1687. 129.

The benefit of the ancient Baths of Buxton-
Wells, by John Jones, Med. 1572. 4to.

Several Obſervations relating to Buxton=
MS.

A Deſcription of a monſtrous Giant, diſcover'd
by a certain Labourer in this County. Pub-
liſh'd 1661.

The Wonders of the Peak, written in Latin-Verſe
by Mr. Hobbes.

The Wonders of the Peak, by Charles Cotton,
Eſq; in Engliſh Verſe. It is (aid, that he
firſt wrote it in the Diale& of that Coun-
ty, and made a Gloſlary to it; but what be-
came of it, I have not heard.

The Natural and Artificial Wonders of the
Peak, are deſcribed by Dr. Leigh (in Lanc.)
Folio. 1700.

The Liberties and Cuſtoms of the Lead-Mines
within the Wapentake of Mirtſuorth in the
County of Derby, by Edu. Manlove, Eſq;
1653.

IIb.

DEVONSHIRE.

Survey of Devonſhire, by Thomas Riſdon,
who dy'd An. 1636. ( Wood's bs wa,

Vol. x. pag. 516.) 8vo. 1714.

Collections out of the Records, Deeds, &c. be-
longing to the Church of Exeter, MS. by
Mr. Paſmor. -

The Antiquities, and Deſcription, of the City
of Exeter, by John Hooker, 1584.

The ſame Book reprinted in Holinſhed's Chro-
nicle.

Exeter deſcribed and illuſtrated, by Mr. Kacke,
Chamberlain thereof. 8yo. 1677.

Of a conſiderable Loadſtone dug out of the
ground in Devonſhire, weighing 6o pound,
&c. Philoſoph. Tranſa&. Numb 23. 1666.

Of the Mines in Devonſhire, Philoſ. Tran.
Numb. 69.

Extra& of a Letter from Dr. Oliver, concern-
ing an _— and flowing Well, near Tor-
bay. Phil. Tranſ. N. 20

Dr. Bury, of manuring 3 by Sea-ſand.
Phil. Tranſ. Numb. 316.

DORSETSHIRE.

Brief Account of a Medicinal Spring at
Faringdon, by Dr. Highmore. Phil.
Tranſ. N. 56,

DURH A M.

HE Antiquities of the Cathedral Church

8 of Durham, collected out of ancient Ma-
nuſcripts about the time of the Suppreſſion,
and publiſh'id by Jo. Davies of Kidwelly,
1672, 8vo.

The Legend of St. Cuthbert, with the Antiqui-
ties ot the Church of Durham, by B. R. Eſq;
1663.

Hiſtory of the Cathedral Church of Durham.
By Sir William Dugdale. At the end of his
Hiſtory of St, Paul's. 1716.

A ſhort Treatiſe of an ancient Fountain or Vi-
triolin-Spaw near the City of Durham, by
E. W. Doctor of Phyſick, 1675.

Large Collections relating to the Antiquities of
this Biſhoprick, were made by Mr. Mickleton,
an intelligent Antiquary, MS.

The origin and ſucceſſion of the Biſhops of
Durham, together with their Lives and

ctions collected out of the ancient and late

cords of the Cathedral Church of Dur-
ham, and for che moſt part tranſlated out of
Latin into Engliſh, at the Charges of Mr.
J. Hall of Conſet in the County of Durham,
A. D. 1603. MS.

Memorials of the County Palatine of Durham,
and the Royal Rights of the Lord Biſhop of
Durham, berwixt the Tine and Teaſe, and
in the Manors and Lordſhips of Norham,
Holy Iflind, Oc. parcels of the aforeſaid
County Palatine, by Mr. John Spear, Un-
as of the County. A. D. 1697.
MS.

An account of a Roman Monument found near
Shields. Phil. Tranſ. N. 145.

An Account of a Salt-ſpring, and another Me-
dicinal Spring, on the banks of the river
Weare, by Dr. Todd. Phil. Tranſ. N. 163.

A Letter from Mr. Chriſtopher Hunter, concern-
ing ſome Roman Inſcriptions found near
Durham. Phil. Tranſ. N. 266.

Part of a Letter from Mr. Chriſtopher Hunter
concerning a Roman Inſcription found at
Ebcheſter. Phil. Tranſ. N. 278. |

ESS E &.

HE Hiſtory of Maltham-Alley, by Dr.
1 Fuller then Curate there. Lond. 1655.
olio. Printed at the end of his Church-

Hiſtory. ‚

Survey of the County of Eſſex, in a thin Folio,
MS. by John Norden, now, or late, in the
Library ot Sir Edward Turner.

It is ſaid, that Mr. Strangman of Hadley-Caſtle in
Suffolk, hath written the Antiquities of Eſſex.
It {till remains in Manuſcript, but in what
hands I know not.

A Deſcription of Harwich and Dover-Court, by
Silas Tailor, MS.

Mr. Join Onſeley, late Rector of Pantfield, a

on exceedingly well vers'd in the Hiſtories
of this Nation, ſpent many years in colle&-
ing the Antiquities of E/ex, which, at his
death, he left in Manuſcript.

The Antiquity of Numeral Figures in England,
proved from an Inſcription at Colcheſter,
Anno 1090; by Mr. Thomas Luffkin. Phil.
Tranſ. N. 255, 266.

Part of a Letter from Mr. John Taff, con-
cerning ſome large Bones lately found in a

Phil. Tranſ.

A

Gravel-pit near Colcheſter,
N. 274.

Books and T REATISES

A Letter from Mr. Samuel Dale, concerning |
Harwich-Cliff and the Foſſil-ſhells there. Phil.
Tranſ. N. 291.

Mr. Derham, of the quantity of Rain that fell
at Upminſter, for eighteen years. Phil. Tranſ.
N. 341.

An Kar of the Culture of Saftron, by the
Honourable Charles Howard, Eſq; N. 138.
Obſcrvations concerning the ſubterraneous
Trees, in Dagenham, and other Marſhes,
bordering upon the river of Thames. By

Mr. Derham. Phil. Tranſ. N. 335.

GLOCESTERSHIRE.

Dees: of Gloceſterſhire By Sir Ro-

bert Atkins. Folio.

'he Laws and Cuſtoms of the Miners in the
Foreſt of Dean in the County ot Gloceſter,
Lond. 1687. 12mo. :

Annalia Dubrenfia, upon the yearly celebration
of Mr. Robert Dover's Olympick-Games upon
Cotfwold-hills; written by thirty three of the
beſt Pocts of that time, Publiſh'd 1636.

The Military Government of the City of Glo-
ceſter, by John Corbet. Publiſh'd 1651.

Collections relating to the Antiquities of this
County, were made by Judge Hales; which
are now (I think) in Lincolns-Inn-Library,
London, among his other Manuſcripts.

A ſtrange and wonderful Diſcovery of Houſes

under-ground at Cottons-field in Gloceſter-

ſhire,

An Account of Iron-works, in the Foreſt of
Dean. Phil. Tranſ. N. 137.

A Deſcription of Pen-park-hole. Phil. Tranſ.
N. 143.

HAMSHIRE.

HE Antiquities and Deſcription of Min-

cheſter, with an Hiſtorical Relation touch-

ing ſeveral memorable Occurrences concer-

ning the ſame ; with a Preamble of the Ori-

ginal of Cities in general. Folio, MS. by
Mr. Truſſel.

A Treatiſe of the Antiquities of the ſame City
was written by Dr. Bettes. MS.

Some Remarkables concerning the Monuments
in the ancient City of Wincheſter, by Mr.
Butler of St. Edmonds-bury.

Hiſtory and Antiquity of the Cathedral Church
of Wincheſter ; begun by Henry Earl of Cla-
rendon, and continued by Sam. Gale, Gent.
8vo. 1715.

Survey of the Iſle of Wight. By Sir Francis
Knollis, MS,

HEREFORDSHIRE.

Iſtory and Antiquities of the Cathedral
Church of Hereford. |

Propoſals were printed (Anno 1717.) for pub-
liſning the Hiſtory of the City of Heretord,
as to its Eccleſiaſtical and Civil State, by
James Hill of the Middle N Gent.

Collections of the Antiquities, Pedigrees, Epi-
taphs, &c. in this County. By Silas Taylor,
MS |

An Account of ſome Sanative Waters in Here-
fordſhire, Phil. Tranſ. N. 20.

CES * 2
- —
. — F »

HERTFORDSHIRE,

A Chorographical Deſcription of the Coun-
ty ot Hertford was publiſhed by John
Norden, Anno 1593.

The Antiquities ot Herttordſhire, by Sir Henry
Chancey Ke. Serjeant at Law. Folio.

Vallance's Account of ſeveral parts of Hertford-
ſhire. Mr. Hearn's Leland's Itinerary, Vo-
lume V.

Mr. Cheſledon's Account of the Dimenſions of
human Bodies, dug up near St. Albans.
Phil. Tranſ. N. 333.

HUNTING DONSHIRE.
0 or an Interlude

for the general Entertainment of the
County-feaſt held at Merchant-Taylors-hall,
June 30. 1678.
Sir Robert Cotton made ſome progreſs towards a
Survey of this County.

KENT.
Erambulation of Kent, by Malliam Lam-

and 1596, Oc.

A briet Survey of the County of Kent, by
Richard Kilbourn, Lond. 1657 and 1659.

Philpot's ſurvey of Kent.

Another ſurvey of this County was written by
Mr. Norden, and is ſtill in Manuſcript.

Dr. Harris's Hiſtory of Kent at large. Folio.

The Monuments in this County are collected
by John Hever in his Funeral Monuments,

Silas 'Vaylor, of Gavelkind.

The Hiſtory of Gavelkind, or the Local Cuſtoms
of Kent, by Mr. Somner, An. 1660.

The Forts and Ports in Kent, by Mr. Somner,
with the Lite of the Author by Dr. Kenner,
now Biſhop of Peterburough, Onzon, 1693.

The Anriquitics of Canterbury, by Mr. Somner,
Folio; wich Additions, by Mr. Battley.

Antiquitates Rutupinæ. By Dr. Battley, Arch-
deacon of Canterbury. 8vo.

Mr. Somner's Vindication of himſelf about
building the Market-houſe at Canterbury.

His Treatiſe about the Fiſp-lones found in Kent.

Quarto.

The Chronicle of Rocheſter, written by Ed-
mund Bedenham, MS.

Textus Roffenſis, a very ancient MS. belonging

to that Church ; now publiſhed by Mr.
Hearn. See Dr. Hickes's 23 of Ma-
nuſcripts.

Hiſtory and Antiquities of the Cathedral

Church of Rocheſter. 8 vo. 1717. |

Deſcriptio Itineris, Plantarum inveſtigationis ergo
ſuſcepti, in agrum Cantiauum, 163 2.

Survey of the Monaſtery of Feverſham, by Tho.
Southouſe, Lond. 1671. l amo.

A Philoſophical and Medicinal Eſſay of the
Waters of Tunbridge, by Lad. Rowzee, and

P. Madan, M. D. D. 1687.

A Letter concerning ſome formed Stones, found
* Hunton ; by Dr. Halley. Philoſ. Tranſact.
155.

A diſcourſe tending to prove, at what Time and

Place Julius Cæſar made his firſt deſcent upon

Britain; by E. Haley, Phil. Tranſ. N. 193.

A

bert of Lincoln Inn, Gent. Lond. 1576

5»

12
1
4

a. —_—_— ” r „ 8 4 **

* . * „ ai : * 5
2 ,v * 3 2 x

relatim to the Antiquittes of ENGLAND.

9
Of an ancient Moſaick Work at Leiceſter.

Letter of Dr. Wallis, relating to that Ihm,
wy or Neck of Land, between Dover and Calais, |
which is ſuppoſed to have joined England
and France. Phil. Tranſ. N. 275.
part of a Letter from Mr. Stephen Gray, con-
cerning his Obſervations on the Foſſils of
Reculver-Cliff., Phil. Tranſ. N. 268.
Chartham-News; or a relation of ſome ftraiige |
Bones there lately dug up. By Mr. Sommer.
Phil. Tranſ. N. 271.
A Letter of Dr. Wallis, relating to Mr. Somner's
Treatiſe of Chartham-News. Phil. Tran.
N. 276. |
Concerning a Mineral Water at Canterbury.
Phil. Tranſ. N. 212.

LANCASHIRE.

Atural 3 of Lancaſhire, by Charles

Nt cb

Manner of making Salt of Sea-Sand in Lanca-
ſhire. Ray's Northern-words, pag. 209.

The ſtate of this County in reſpe& ot Religion,
about the beginning of King James the firſt,
by Mr. Urmſton. MS. in the hands of Mr.
Brotherton of Heye. :

Holingſworth's Hiſtory of Mancheſter, MS. in
the Library there.

Borlace's Latham-Spaw, 1670. |

Figures of many Saxon Coins found at Harkirk,
1711. Ina fogle Sheet.

The deſcription of a Well and Earth, near Wi-
gan, taking fire by a Candle. Phil. Tran.

26, 245- ;

The figure 5 an Inſcription near Mancheſter,
by Dr. Liſter. Phil. Tranſ. N. 155.

An Account of ſeveral curious Obſervations and
Experiments, concerning the Growth of
Trees, made at Hey; by Tho. Brotherton, Eſq;

Phil. Tranſ. N. 187.

Of the Hœmatites wrought into Iron at Mil-

throp- Forge, by Mr. J. Sturdie. Phil. Tranſ.

N. 199.

A Letter from Mr. Thoresby concerning ſome
Roman Coins found in Lancaſhire. Phil.
Tranſ. N. 2

A Letter . Cay, concerning ſome Wa-
ters in Lancaſhire. Phil. Tranſ. N. 245.

De Aquis Mineralibus, c. per Car. Leigh, M. D.

Richard Townley, Eſq;. concerning the quan-
tity of Rain, falling monthly here for ſeve-
ral years. Phil, Tranſ. N. 208, 249, 297.

LEICESTERSHIRE.

HE Antiquities of Leiceſterſhire, by William

Burton, Eſq;. Fol. 1622. The late learn-

ed Mr. Chetwind of Staffordſhire had a Copy

of this in his poſſeſſion, with conſiderable
Additions under the Author's own hand.

A brief Relation of the Diſſolution of the Earth

in the Foreſt of Charnwood, in one ſheer,

1679.

Phil. Tranſ. N. 331.

LINCOLNSHIRE.

IR William Dugdale's Hiſtory of Imbank- |

ing, gives a large account of ſeveral Fenns
and Marſbes in this County. |
The Survey and Antiquities of the Town of
Stamford in this County, by Richard Butcher

Tempeſt and Overflowing of the Tides in

Lincolnſhire, and Norfolk, 1671.

A. Relation of abundance of Mood found under-

ome in the Iſle of Axholme. Phil. Tranſ.
67.

An . of ſeveral Obſervables in Lincoln-

ſhire, by Mr. Chriſtopher Merret. Phil. Tranſ.

N. 223.

A Table of the Waſbes in Lincolnſhire, by Mr.

Chriſtopher Merret, Phil. Tranſ. N. 224.

A Letter from the 2 Mr. Abraham de la
Pryme, concerning ſome Roman Antiquities

io Lincolnſhire. "Phil, Tranſ. N. 263. nw”

A Letter from the ſame hand, concerning Brough-

ton in Lincolnſhire. Phil. Tranſ. N. 266.

Part of a Letter concerning ſome Roman Coins,

and other matters lately obſerved in Lincoln-

ſhire, near Fleet, and Spalding, by Mr.

Raſtrick. Phil. Tranſ. N. 279.

ID D LES EX

N Orden's Survey of Middleſex.
Fitz-Stephens Survey of London.

The Cuſtoms of London.

De Lawne's preſent State of London, 168 1. $8yo.

Domus Carthufiana, or the Foundation of the
Charter-houſe, by Samuel Herne, Lond. 1677.

Londonopula, by James Howel. Fol.
Stow's Survey of London, 1598 ; of which, a
new Edition is in the Preſs, by Mr. Strype.
The City-Law, tranſlated out of an ancient
MS. and printed 1647.

Hiſtory of St. Paul's, by Sir William Dugdale,
1658, Fol. of which a new Edition hath been
lately publiſhed, with Additions, 17 16.

The third Univerſity of England, (viz. London;)

being a Treatiſe of all the Foundations of
Colleges, Is of Court, &c. by Sir George Buck.
1615.

Origines Juridiciale, by Sir William Dugdale,
Fol. 1666.

Hiſtory of Tombs and Monuments in and about
the City of London, 1668,

A Relation of the late dreadful Fire in London,
as it was reparted to the Committee in Par-
hament, 1667.

Narrative of the Fire of London, by Mr. Ed-
ward Waterhouſe, 1667.
London, King Charles's Auguſta, by Sylvanus

Morgan. A Poem. 1648.

Natural and Political Obſervations upon the
Bills of Mortality.

Two Eſſays in Political Arithmetick, concerni
the comparative Magnitudes, People, —
Wealth, of the Cities of London and Paris,

tending to prove that at this day the City

ot London is the moſt conſiderable upon the
face of the Earth. By Sir William Petty.
Phil. Tranſ. N. 183.

A further Aſſertion of the aforeſaid Propoſitions;
together with a Vindication of the Eſſays,
from the objections of ſome learned perſons
of the French Nation, by Sir William Petty.
Phil. Tranſ. N. 185.

Foundation of the Hoſpitallers and Order of

St. John of Jeruſalem. Fol.

r. Woodward's Account of Roman Urns,
Dand other Antiquities, dug up near Biſhopſ-

gate, London; with Reflections upon the

ancient and preſent State of London. An-

nex'd to Leland's Itinerary, by Mr. Hearne,

Vol. VIII. |

Gent. 1646.

The & ings, Queens, and Nobility buried in Weſt-
minſter-Abbey, 1603. by Mr. Camden.
(m] The

A Relation of the great damages done by a

|
1
'

|
|
N
b

Books aud TREATISES

The ſame enlarged by Hen. Keepe. 8vo.

Deſcriptio Plantarum in Ericete Hampſtedi, per Tho.
Johnſon, in 12m0. 1633.

Deſcription of the Town of Tottenham High-
Croſs, by William Bedyell. 163 1. 4to.

MONMOUTHSHIRE.

Amentable News from Moxmoutkſbire, of
the loſs of twenty-fix Pariſhes, 1n a great
Flood, which happen'd January 1607. b-
liſh'd the ſame year.
The manner of the Wire-Works at Tinton in
Monmouthſhire. Ray, Engliſh-words, pag.
194.

NO RFO LX.

Ceni. By Sir Henry Spelman. Now pub-
liſhed among his Poſthumous Works. Fol.

Many things * this County, in Sir
William Dugdale's Hiſtory of Imbankiug.

With the Hiſtory of the Norfolk-Rebels, by
Alexander Nevil, a Kentiſh-man, is publiſh'd
his Hiſtory of Norwich, and a Catalogue of
the Mayors. Publiſh'd 1575.

Norfolk's Furies, or a View of Kett's Camp,
with a table of the Mayors and Sherifts of
Norwich, 8c. done out of Latin into Engliſh,
by R. W. 1615. .

Antiquities of the Cathedral Church of Nor-
wich; by Sir Thomas Brown, M. D. and con-
tinu'd to 1712.

Naſhe's Lent-Stuff, containing an account of the
growth of Great Tarmouth, with a Play in
praiſe of Red-berring. Publiſh'd 1599.

A deſcription of the town of Great-Yarmouth ;
with a Survey of Little-Yarmouth incorporated
with the Great, &c. in a ſheet.

Of the lamentable Burning of Eaſt-Derham in
Norfolk, July 1. 1581. In verſe. Black Let-
ter, 1582.

A relation of the damages done by a tempeſt
and overflowing of the Tyde, upon the
coaſts of Norfolk and Lincoluſbire.

The Weſt proſpe& of Linn-Regis, a ſheer.

Urn-burial, or a diſcourſe of the Sepulchal Urns
lately found in Norfolk, by Sir Thomas Brown.
1669, and 1712.

Mercurius Centralis, or, a Diſcourſe of Subter-
raneal Cockle, Muſcle, and Oyſter-ſhells,
found in digging of a Well at Sir William
Doylie's in Nortolk, by Tho. Lawrence, A. M.
in a Letter to Sir Tho. Browne. 1664.

Of a great number of Urns, dug up at North-
Elmham. By Peter le Neve, Eſq; Norroy,
F. R. S. Phil. Tranſ. N. 337. who hath alſo
made large Collections towards a Deſcription
and Hiſtory of Norfolk.

Ancient Funeral Monuments within the Dioceſe
of Norwich, collected by Meaver. |

NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.

Atural Hiſtory and Antiquities of Nor-
thampronſhire, by John Morton, F. R. S.

1712. Fol. |
Hiſtory of the Cathedral Church of Pererburrow,
by Simon Gunter, Prebendary. Publiſh'd with

then Dean of this Church, and late Biſhop of
Ely. Fol. 1685.

'The Fall and Funeral of Northampton, in an Ele-
gy; firſt publiſh'd in Latin, fince made En-
gliſh with ſome variations and additions, and
publiſh'd An. 1677, |

a ne 4 Appendix, by Simon Patrick D. D.

The ſtate of Northampton from the beginning of
the Fire Sept. 20. 1675. to Nov. 5. in a
Letter to a Friend. 1675.

Names of the Hides in Northampronſhire, by

p. 349.)

A Survey of this County is ſaid to have been in-
tended by Mr. Auguſtin Vincent. ( Wood's
Athena, Vol. 1. p. 349.)

A relation of two conſiderable Hurricanes in
Northamptonſhire, Phil. Tranſ. N. 71. See
alſo N. 212.

A Letter from Dr. Wallis concerning an Inſcrip-

tion on an ancient Mantle-tree at Helmdon, -

pong the = uſe of Numeral Figures in

ngland. Phil. Tranſ. N. 154.

A Letter from Mr. Morton, containing a Rela-
tion of River and other Shells, dug up in
a bituminous marſhy Earth, near Mears-
Aſhby: With ſome reflect ions thereupon,
Phil. Tran. N. 305.

An Account of the Tubera Terre, or Truffles,
found at Ruſhton. Phil. Tranſ. N. 202.

Dr. Keil, of the death and diſſect ion of John

Bailes of Northampton, aged 130 years.

Phil. Tranſ. N. 306.

NORTHUMBERLAND.

Chorographical Survey of Newcaſtle
ons Thins, by Mr. Grg, An. 1649. *

England's Grievances in relation to the Cole-
trade, with a Map of the river of Tine, and
the ſituation of the town and corporation of
New-caſtle. 1655.

A Survey of the river Tine, grav'd by Mr. Fa-
thorne.

Deſcription of Berwick, and ſome other places
of note in this County, MS. in the Library
at Noward.

The Antiquities of the ancient Kingdom of
Northumberland ; compiled by the Right Re-
verend Father in God Dr. Miliam Nicolſon,
Biſhop of Carliſle, and now of Derry; but {till
remaining in Manuſcript, in the Library of the
Dean and Chapter of Carliſle, with this Title
NopvSanhymbpapic, or, a deſcription of the
ancient Kingdom of Northumberland. The
work conſiſts of eight parts; whereof he tiles
the .

I. Northanhymbria; or, an Account of the
Bounds, and natural Hiſtory of the Coun-

try.

II. 8 ; the Original, Language,
Manners, and Government of the People.
III. Annales: the Succeſſion and Hiſtory of the
ſeveral Dukes, Kings, and Earls; from the
firſt inſtitution of the Government, down to

the Conqueſt.

IV. Eccleſiaſtica: Religious Rites obſerved by
the Pagan Inhabitants before the eſtabliſh-
ment ot Chriſtianity; together with the ſtate
ot the Church, and the ſucceffion of Biſhops
in it, atterwards.

V. Literæ & Literati: the ſtate of Learning;
with a Catalogue of the Writers. .

VI. Vilare the Cities, Towns, Villages, an
other places of note; in an Alphabetical Ca-
talogue.

VII. Monumenta Danica: Daniſh Remains; in
the Language, Temples, Courts of Judica-
ture, Runic Inſcriptions, &c.

To the whole was to be prefix d a Prefatory Diſ-
courſe of the condition that theſe parts of the
Iſle were in, upon (and ſome time before)

the

——— —— —

Francis Tate. MS. (Wood's Athena, Vol. 1.

* * "=
3

3 4 +. SC .
. NF SIX Ep Cos IE

Tr
.
* 8
1
*
*

PV.
+, 4

relating to the Antiquities of EN OL AN D.

7

2
*
Py”
2.
_
*
Bs :
W- "©
=
»
*
4
4
*
*
e
*
=.
1
Fi
£1
5 4.
17
F
Wy
.

> r

r DS

- —- "
Sor... - %
J Kao i =.

Survey of Woodſtock, by Mr. Widows (Athen.

* Ta
4 w 4,
F 22 * o

the coming in of the Saxons : wherein notice
was to be taken of many pieces of Britiſh and
Roman Antiquities never yet obſerved.
Border-Laws. By William Lord Biſhop of Car-
lile, now of Derry in Ireland. 8 vo. 1705.
Large Collections have been made by Sir Robert,
Fhafto, relating to the Antiquities of the
County of Northumberland. | ;
Mr. Clavering of Calaly, a very knowing Anti-
quary, has alſo done great ſervice to his na-

tive Country in this way,
An Account " two Roman Altars found in

Northumberland, By Mr. Ralph Thereby.
Phil. T'ranſ. N. 231.

Part of ſome Letters from Mr. Chriſtopher Hunter,
concerning ſeveral Inſcriptions and Antiquittr's,
found in Northumberland. Phil. Tran.

N. 278.
Dr. Hodgſon's Obſervations of a Subterraneal

SHROPSHIRE.

A* Account of the making Pitch, Tar,
and Oil, out of a blackiſh ſtone in
Shropſhire, communicated by Mr. Martin Ele,
the Inventor. Phil. Tranſ. N. 228,

A deſcription of a Roman Sudatory, or I
cauftum, found at Jroxeter in Shropſhire. By

Mr. John Liſter. Phil. Tranſ. N. 306.

A Letter from Dr. John Harwood concerning the
fore-mentioned Hypocauſtum with part of
two Letters from Mr. Wiliam Baxter to Dr.
Harwood, relating to Hroxeter, and the Hypo-
cauſta of the Ancients. Phil. Tranſ. N. 306.

Natural Obſervations made in the Pariſhes of

Kinardiey and Donington, by Mr. George

Plaxton. Phil. Tranſ. N. 3 10.

Fire, in a Coal-Mine, near Newcaſtle. Phil. An Account of the Eruption of a Burning

Tranſ. N. 130. 5
Dr. Charlett, concerning à Colliery that took
Fire, and was blown up. Phil. Tranſ. N. 318.
Dr. Todd, of the Antiquities found at Cor-

bridge, Phil. Tranſ. N. 330. |

NOTTINGHAMSHIRE.

Spring at Broſeley. Phil. T'ranſ. N. 334.

SOMERSETSHIRE.

T HE ancient Laws, Cuſtoms, and Orders
of the Miners in the King's Foreſt of
Mendipp, in the County of Somerſet. Lond.

1687. 12mo,

HE Antiquities of the County of Ner- Propoſals tor a Natural Hiſtory of Somerſetſhire,

tingham, by Dr. Robert Thoroton, M. D.
1677. Fol.

By Sir William Dugdale. At the end of his
Hiſtory of St. Paul's. 1716. -

OXFORDSHIRE.
tural Hiſtory of Oxfordſhire, by Dr. Ro-

N

A
Hiſtory and Antiquities of the Univerlity of
Oxford; by Anthony a Wood. Fol.

have been formerly publiſh'd by Mr. John
Bean mont. 5

* of the Collegiate Church of Southwell. A Letter trom Mr. Beaumont, giving an account

of Ooley hole and other ſubterraneous Grotto's
in 3 Pail. Tranſ. N. 2.

Oocey bi deſcrib'd, An. 163 2.
Dr, Ems de Thermis Bathonienfibus, 1562.

ol.
Mr. Beaumont of Rock-Plants, their figure, and

growth. Phil. Tranſ. N. 129. 150.

bert Plot : Folio. Therma Redivive, by Mr. John Chapman, 1673.

with an Appendix of Coriat's Rhimes of the
Antiquities of the Bath.

Twine's Vindication of the Antiquity of the Dr. Glanvil of the Bath-Springs. Phil. Tranſ.

Univerſity of Oxford.

| N. 49. x
Dr. Ayloffe's ancient and preſent ſtate of the] Johnſon, in his Mercurius Britaunicus, hath given

Univerſity of Oxford, two Vol. 8vo.

an account of the Antiquities of the Bath,
with a ground-plot of the City. |

Oxon. vol. 2. p. 119. A Diſcourſe of the ſeveral Bathes and hot-

Parochial Antiquities : or, the Hiſtory of Amr
broſden, Burceſter, and other adjacent Towns
and Villages in the North-eaſt parts of the
County of Oxford; delivering the general
Remains of the Britiſh, Roman, and Saxon
Ages; and a more particular «account of Eng-

waters at the Bath, with the Lives and Cha-
rafters of the Phyſicians that haye lived atid
practis d there. Together with an Enquiry
into the Nature of S. Vincem 's Rock near
Briſtol, and that of Caſtl-Cary ; by Dr.
Thomas Guidot.

liſh Memoirs, reduc'd into Annals, from] — Enkrg'd by the ſame hand, with the ad-

1 William the Conqueror to 1 Edward the

dition of ſeveral Antiquities. 16g1,

fourth, with ſeveral Sculptures of ancient Inſcriptions taken at the Bath, by Dr. Liſter,

and modern Curioſities, 4to. By the Reve-

Phil, Tranſ. N. 155.

read White Kennet, D. D. now Biſhop of | Obſervations on the Bath-waters, by B. Allen,

Peterborough.
An Account of Antiquities in and near Oxford.

in his natural Hiſtory of the Chalybeat and
ing Waters.

Hearn's Leland, Vol. II. V. VIII. Dr. Oliver's Practical Diſcourſe on Bath-Waters.

Of the Earthquake at Oxford, and parts adja-

8vo. 1707. 42

cent (1683.) Phil. Tranſ. N. 15 f. The Antiquities of the City of Bath, collected

Hiſtory of Alcheſter. Append. to Bp. Kennets
Parochial Antiquities. |
Diſcourſes concerning the Roman Pavement found |
at Stunsfield near Woodſtock, Ann. 1713. |

RUTLANDSHIRE.

A Neiquities of Rurlandſbire, by Mr.Wright;
Folio, 1687. 4 50 im:

in Latin by Dr. Guidot. MS.

Belgæ : A deſcription of the ancient Places, &c.
in Somerſaſbire and Wilghire. By Dr. Muſ-
grave.

A Letter from Dr. Muſgrave, concerning a

| ; 71 of Antiquity lately found at Athelney.

hil.

Tranſ. N. 247. |
A Letter from Dr. Hickes concerning the ſaid
| Antiquity. Phil. Tranſ. N. 443.
Account of digging and preparing the Lapis
Calamiuaris, near Wrington, by Dr. Pooley.
Phil. Tranſ. N. 198.
Julii

Books and

TREATISES

Julii Vitali: Epitaphium, cum noris Criticis, Ex-
plicationẽ que, J. C. Henrici Dodwelli, & Commen-

tario Guil. Muſgrave. 8 v0. 1711. ;

Promiſcuous Obſervations in this County, by
Dr. Beale. Phil. Tranſ. N. 18.

Captain Sturmy's Obſervations in Hong-road
neat Briſtol, Phil. Tranſ. N. 41.

A brief account of a Salt-ſpring at Eaſt-Chenock.
Phil. Tranſ. N. 56.

Dr. Beale, of damage done by a Froſt near
Briſtol; Phil. Tranſ. N. 9.

STAFFORDSHIRE.

| Atural Hiſtory of Staffordſhire, by Dr. Ro-
bert Plot. Fol. 1686.

A Survey of Staffordſbire, by Mr. Erdſwick, 8vo.

1717.

Sand . of the Cathedral Church of Litch-
field. 8 vo. 1717.

Dr. Liſter's Obſervations of the midland Salt-
Springs in Staffordſhire. Phil. Tranſ. N.

156.

Mr. Bellers, of the ſcattered Strata, of Earth,
Stone, Coal, &c. at Dudley. Phil. Tranſ.
N. 336.

SUFFOLK.

Olections towards 2 ray of = ral
mondsbury. By Dr. John Battely, late
1 Canterbury. MS. 2
A relation of a Sand- flood, which over-whelm'd
a great tra& of Land, in and near Downham
in the County of Suffolk; by Thomas Wright,
Eſq;. Phil. Tranſ. N. 17.

An Eran of ſome Saxon Coins found at
Honedon, communicated by Sir P. S. with Re-
marks thereon, by Mr. *. W. Phil. Tranſ.
N. 189. ; :

A further Account of the foreſaid Coins, by
Mr. Samuel Dale. Phil. Tranſ. N. 203.

SURRET.
Nriquities of Surrey. By Mr. Aubrey.
A In three Volumes.
SUSSE X
HE manner of working the Iron, at the
Forge, or Hammer. Ray's Local Words.
Phil. Tranſ. N. 189.
W ARWICKSHIRE.
HE Antiquities of H/arwickſbire, by Sir
T William Dugdale, 1656.
the Spaw-water at Ilmington. By Sam,
Derham, 8vo. 1685.
WESTMORL AND.
HE Antiquities of Weſtmorland, collected

+ Mr. Thomas Machel, late of Kirkby-Thore, |

in the ſame County, MS.

This County, as to Pedigrees and the Inter-
marriages of grocer Families, has been well
conſider d and illuſtrated, by Sir Daniel Fle-

A Letter concerning ſome Antiquities found at

Kirkby-Thore, | Mr. Machel. Phil.
Tranſ. N. 158. ;

WILTSHIRE.

Tone-henge reſtor d; written by Sir Inigo Jones
8 and publiſh'd by Mr. Webb, 8 1
Anſwer to Sir Inigo Jones, by Dr. Charleton.
8 4 = Inigo Jones, by his Son in Law
r. Webb, ite& to King Char], þ
Publiſh'd 1665. ® W
Mr. Sammes, of Stone-henge ; a ſeparate Diſ-
, _— _ 1
rt Treatiſe upon the ſame Subject
written by Mr. John Gibbons. MS, open
Wilton-garden deſcrib'd, in twenty two Copper
Cuts in Folio. At that time, it had the re-
putation of one of the fineſt gardens in Eu-

rope.

The Reverend Dr. Tanner, Chancellor of the
Dioceſe of Norwich, hath made large
Collections, in order to the Antiquities of
this County, and is ready to communicate
them to any Perſon who ſhall undertake that
Work; ſince he cannot hope to finiſh it him-
ſelf, at ſo great a diſtance, as is the place to

2 2 hath removed him.

Aubrey's Introduction t
Hiſtory 0 Wiltſhire. 8vo. e on

Part of a Letter from Mr. Clark, concerning

| ſeveral Roman Antiquities found near the

Devizes. Phil. Tranſ. N. 268.

WORCESTERSHIRE.

Orceſter's Eulogie ; or, a grateful ac-
wW knowledgment of her A by
J. T. Maſter of Arts, a Poem, 1638.
A large deſcription of Morceſterſbire, MS. in the
hands of the Family of Abingdon in this Coun-
ty, and written by their Anceſtor, an able
and induſtrious Antiquary.
Antiquities of the Cathedral Church of Wor-
ceſter. 8vo, 1717.
Mr. Pitts, concerning the Sorbus Pyriformis,
growing in this County. Phil, Tranſ. N. 139.
An Account of the Salt-waters of Droytwich in
Worceſterſhire, by Dr. Tomas Raſtel. Phil.
* N. 142.
bſervations on the Salt-pits at Droytwi
Dr. Liſter. Phil. Tranf N. 156. ety bp

TORKSHIRE, and RICHMONDSHIRE.

Iſtorical Account of the Cathedral of York,

by Sir William Dugdale, at
his Hiſtory of St. Paul's, bark ch

A Catalogue of all the Bailiffs, Mayors, and |

Sheriffs of the City of York, from the ti

Edward the firſt, to the year I664. 7 ry
 ffopher Hildyard, Recorder of Heddon, 1665.
Since which, a new Edition hath been pub-
liſhed : (Ann. 1719.) under the title of The
Antiquities of York City; with additions from
the Papers of Mr. James Torr; the original
MSS. of which Papers were given by Arch-
bop Sharp to the Library of this Cathe-

The Antiquities of the City of
Thomas Widdrington, MS. Is eb t

ming, who was a great Encourager and Pro-
moter of Antiquities. MS.

the Family of Fairfax,

Hiſtory-

„r

i BYE

r
—

/

relating to the Antiquities of ENU 4 N p.

Sir William Dugdale ; at the end of his Hi-
ſtory of St. Paul's. 1716.

and of Beverly, ibid. bs

Dr. Jonſton of Pontefra& made large collections
in order to the Antiquities of this whole
County; which he left behind him, in Ma-
nuſcript.

The Engliſh Spaw-Fountain the Foreſt of
. by Edw. Dean, M. D. 1626.

Another Book upon the ſame Subject, by Mich.
Stanhop, 1632. ;

Hiſtory of Hull, by Mr. Abraham de la Pryme.
MS.

An Account of Roman Antiquities at York ;
moſtly from Mr. Thoresby, Phil. Tranſ. N. 145,
I t71, 234, 244z 296, 303, 305.

Colle Sons of 12 Janes Torr, relating to the
Hiſtory and Conſtitution of the Dioceſe of
York, according to the ſeveral Archdeacon-
ries. MS. Folio, Vol. V. Now in the Li-
brary of the Cathedral there. '

A Letter concerning ſome _ aged perſons in
Craven, Cc. by Dr. Lyſter. Phil. Tranſ.
N. 160. |

A Letter giving an Account of one Henry Jen-
kins of Bolton, who attain'd to the age of
169 years. Phil. Tranſ. N. 221, 228.

A Note communicated by Mr. Hill, confirmin
the Age of Henry Jenkins. Phil. Tranl.
N. 228,

A Letter from Mr. Ralph Thoresby, giving an
Account of a Roman Pottery near Leeds in
Yorkſhire, Phil. Tranſ. N. 222.

Part of a Letter from Dr. Richardſon, contain-
ing a relation of Subterraneous Trees, dug up
at Toule in Yorkſhire. Phil. Tranf. N. 228.
Two Letters from Mr. Thoresby, concerning ſome
Roman Antiquities found in Yorkſhire.

Phil. Tranſ. N. 234, 244-

Part of a Letter from Mr. Abraham de la Pryme,
concerning Trees found under- ground in Hat-
field-Chace. Phil. Tranſ. N. 275, 277.

A Letter from Mr. Thoresby concerning the
Veſtigia of a Roman Town lately diſcovered
near Leeds in Yorkſhire. Phil. Tranſ.
N. 282, 320.

An Account of ſome Roman Coins, found at
Clifton near Edlington. Phil. Tranſ. N. 303.

Of Roman Coins, and other Antiquities, found
near Cookridge and Adle. Phil. Tranſ. N. 3 16

19, 320.
Of antique braſs Inſtruments, found near Bram-
ham-moor, with Mr. Hearn's Diſſertation.
Phil, Tranſ. N. 322.
Dr. Richardſon's Obſervations in Natural Hi-
ſtory at North-Bierly. Phil. Tranſ. N. 337.
Dr. Liſter, of Roman Plaſticks. Phil. Coll.

N.

Mr. nn of the Iſland ſunk in Humber.
Hearn's Leland, Vol. IX. p. 194.

The Torkſbire-Spaw; or a Treatiſe of four fa-
mous Medicinal Wells near Knaresborough, by
John French, M. D. 1652. 12mo.

Spadacrena Anglica, 1626, 4to. and 1654, 8vo.
printed at Tork.

Scarberough-Spaw ; or a Deſcription of the Na-
ture and Vertues, by Robert Wittie, M. D.
8vo. 1667.

Hydrologia Chymica ; or, Chymical Anatomy of
Scarborough and other Spaws in Yorkſhire, with
animadverſions on Dr. J/ittie's book; alſo the
deſcription of the Spaws at Malton and Knares-
borough, by Wiliam Simpſon, M. D. 8yo.

1669.
Pyrologia Mimica, Cc. in defence of Scarboroug
Spaw, by Dr, Wittie, 1669. 8 vo.

— the Collegiate Church of Rippon. By] Scar * HON . anatomiz'd, by

Geo. Tonſtall, M. D. 1670. 8vo. |
Hydrological Eſſays, &c. being a further diſco-
very of the Scarborough Spaw, and of the
Sweet Spaw and Sulphur-well at Knaresborough,
and of the Allom-works at Whitby, by Dr.
Simpſon, 8 vo. 1670.

Dr. Wittie's Anſwer to Dr. Tonſtal, relating to
the Scarborough Spaw, 1672. 8vo. |

Dr. Tonſtall's Reply, 1672. 8vo.

A diſcourſe of the Sulphur-Bath at Knaresborough

in Yorkſhire, by William Simpſon, M. D. 8 vo.
1679. (This is annex'd to his Philoſophical
Diſcourſe of Fermentation.)

The Hiſtory of Scarborough Spaw, or further
diſcovery of the Vertues, by Dr. Simpſon,
1679. 12mo,

Mr. Ray cf the proceſs of making Allom at
* (North-Country words, p. 201.)
vo.

A Yorkſhire Dialogue in pure Natural Dialect.
1683.

Ducatus Leodienfis; or the Topography of the
ancient and populous Town and Pariſh of
Leeds, and parts adjacent, in the H/et- Riding of
the County of York, with Pedigrees of many of
the Nobility and Gentry, Cc. By R. Thoresby,
F.R.S. To which is added, thin Catalogue
of his Muſzum, with Curioſities natural and
artificial, and with the Antiquities, Coyns,
and Manuſcripts, ancient and modern. Folio.
1715.

Vicaria Leodienfis ; containing the Hiſtory of the
Church, the Memoirs of the Vicars from the
year 1242 to the preſent, the Catalogue of
their learned Works, both printed and Ma-
nuſcript; together with the Lives of ſome
Archbiſhops, Biſhops, and others who have
been Benefactors thereto, being a Specimen
of the Hiſtorical part promiſed in the Ducatus
Leodienſis. M. S. 8 vo.

WALES.

4 Cambrenſis s Itinerary of Wales.
8vo. 1585.

A Manuſcript of David Morganius, mentioned by
Voſſius.

Sir John Price's Deſcription of Wales, perfected
by Humph. Lhwyd, and prefix'd to his Tran-
flation of the Welſh Hiſtory, Ann. 1584.

Hiſtory of the ancient and modern State of the
Principality of Wales, by Sir John Doderidge.
4to. 1630.

Survey and Hiſtory of the four Cathedral
Churches of Wales. By Browne Willis, Eſq;.
_ ua reſtaurata. By Mr. Henry Rows

land. |

Archaologia Britannica; concerning the Lan-

ages, Hiſtories and Cuſtoms of the Ori-
ginal Inhabitants of Great-Britain, by Edw.
Lhwyd, M. A. one Vol. Folio. 1717.

An Account of the ſmelting and refining of
Silver, at the Silver-mills in Cardiganſpire, is
added to Mr. Ray's North-Country words,

17

Strange 3 and effects, in a Coal -
Mine in Flintſhire. Phil. Tranſ. N. 136.

A ſort of Paper made of Linum Acbeſtinum
found in Angleſey. Phil. Tranſ. N. 166.

Mr. Lhwyd of .. lately obſerved in Wales;
and of a fiery exhalation or damp, which burnt
ſeveral Hay-ricks. Phil, Tranſ. N. 208 and
213. in Merionithſhire.

Mr. Aubrey of a medicinal Spring in Glamorgan-
ſbire. Phil. Tranſ. N. 233.

n] Mr.

——

—

—

—

Books and TREATISES

Mr. Thand of a. fore of Coral. Phil. Tranf
N. 252.

His Obſervations in Natural Hiſtory. Phil.
Tranſ. N. 334.

nd of an ancient Inſcription in Angleſey} And Antiquities. Phil. Tranſ. N. 335 and 337.

Phil. Tranſ. N. 269.

TREAT IS ES

Relating to

SCOTLAND,

Chiefly from Sir Robert Sibaldss Mate-

rials for the Scoteh- Atlas.

Eflor Boethius's Deſcription of Scotland;
before his Hiſtory.

Biſhop Leſly's deſcription of Scot-
land ; re his Hiſtory,

Gordon's Deſcription of Edinburgh.

The {Peerage of Scotland. By George Crawfurd.
Folio. 1716.

Sir James Dalrymple's Edition of Camden's
Scotland, With large Additions.

Theatrum Scotiæ, by Robert Gordon; in Latin.

A deſcription of Scotland he Iſles adjacent;
by Petruccio Ubaldino : in Italian;

The like by Nicolas D'Arſeville.

King James the fifth's Voyage round his King-

dom, with the Hebrides and Orcades : in

French.
Heroes Scoti, by John Jonſton.

A Catalogue of the Scotch Nobility ; in Scotch.

Andreæ Melvini Gathelus.

Topographia Scotiæ; by the ſame hand.

Antiquity of the Scotch Nation. By Robert
Mawle, MS.

Scotia illuſtrata. x 4 Sir Robert Sibalds,

Theatrum Scotiæ. Bleau's Atlas.

Theatrum Scotia. By J. Slezer.

Deſcription of Scotland, and of the Northern
and Weſtern Iſles.

Buchanan de Rebus Scoticis.
Vindication of Buchanan againſt Mr, Camden.

By D. H. MS.

Vindication of Scotland againſt Mr. Camden.
By W. Drummond of Hawthornden. MS.

Metals and Minerals in Scotland, by D. Borth-

wick,
And by Mr. Atkinſon, MS.

8.
An Account of Sutherland, by the ſame hand.
An Account of Hadington, delivered by the Ma-
iſtrates of the place.
Deſcription of Aberdeen, 8 vo. 1685.
Mr. Martin's Voyage to S. Hilda. 8 vo. 1698.
Collect ions relating to St. Andrews, MS.
Deſcription of the High-lands of Scotland, MS.
Barclay's Treatiſe of Aberdem-ſpaw : (Vid.
Theatrum Scotiz, pag. 30.)
Large Colle&ions towards a complete Geogra-

ical Deſcription of Scotland, by Sir Robert
Sibalds. MS.

An Account of ſome Inſcriptions in Scotland.
By Mr. Edw. Lhwyd. Phil. Tranſ. N. 269.

IRELAND.

* of Cathneſs, by Mr. William Dun-

2
%
7
.
-E *
IJ
4
4
*

.

relating to the Autiquittes of IR &LAND.

— 4 * — — *

IR E L

112 Waze's Antiquities of Ire-
Giraldi Cambreafis Topographia Hibernie.

8 Tho. Carve's Lyra, 1. e. de Origiue, Mo-
ribus, Cc. Gentis Hibernice, Cc. - 1666.
Richard Stanihurſt's Deſcription of Ireland. In

Holingſhed's ſecond Volume.

A deſcription of the of Weſt-Meath,
MS. in the hands of Mr. Thoresby.

Catalogue of the Nobility of Ireland, from Geo.
Fitz-Girald, Earl of Kildare, toRoger Boyle,
Baron of Broghil, 1627. 4to. with their
Arms and Creſts painted. MS. in the hands of
Mr. Thoresby.

R. O-Flaherty's Ogygia, 1685,

Dr. Gerard Bates's Natural Hiſtory of Ireland,
1652.

Spencer's View of the State of Ireland, pub-
liſh'd by Sir James Ware, 1633.

Sir William Petty's Political Anatomy of Ire-
land, 1691. |

— His Set of Maps, 1685.

———— His Obſcrvations on the Bills of Mor-
tality, 1681.

Of the Bogs and Zoughs of Ireland, by Miliam
King. Phil. Tranf. N. 170.

Sir Richard Bulkley, of the Improvement to be
made by the Cultivation of Maize in Ireland,
Phil. Tranſ. N. 205.

Number of Houſes and Hearths in Dublin;
and of Seafaring men; and of People in the
ſeveral Counties; and of Romiſh Clergy.
Ann. 1698. Phil. Tranſ. N. 261. a

Mr. Lhwyd of the Natural Hiſtory and Anti-
quities of Ireland. Phil. Tranſ. N. 335,
336.

A Letter concerning Lough-Neah, and its petri-
fying quality, trom Dr. Molyneux. Phil.

Tranſ. N. 158.

A Retractation concerning Lough-Neah-ſtone, and
its non- application to the 3 upon Cal-
2 by Dr. Molyneux. Phil. Tranſ.

166. |

An Anſwer to ſome Queries, concerning Lough-

Neah, by Mr. Eduard Smith. Phil. Tranſ.

N. 174.
Francis Nevile's Obſervations upon Lough Neah,
Phil. Tranſ. N. 137. | |

. 5
* "
* © 4
ö 0
- = * * 4 0

Sir Robert Redding of Pearl-Fiſhing in the
North of Ireland. Phil. Tranſ. N. 198.

A Letter from Sir R. B. concerning the Giants
Cauſuay in the County of Antrim. Phil.

| Tranſ. N. 199. a

An Account of the Giants Cauſway, by Dr. Foley,
and Dr. Molyneux. Phil. Tran{. N. 212,

241.

A correct Draught of the Giants Cauſway, with
an Explication of the fame, by W. Molyneux,
Eſq;j. Phil. Tranſ. N. 235.

A Letter from Dr, Molyneux to Dr. Liſter, con-
taining ſome additional Obſervations on the
Giants Caufway. Phil. Tranſ. N. 241.

A diſcourſe concerning the large Horns frequent-
ly tound under-ground in Ireland, by Dr.

Iueux. Phil. Tranſ. N. 227.

Of-a moving Bog, and an Account of the Mo-
tion, Phil. Tranſ. N. 233.

Part of a Letter by Mr. James Frazer, concern-
ing the Lake Neſs, Or. Phil. Franf. N.
254 |

An Account of ſome Inſcriptions in Ireland,

by Mr. Edw. Lluyd. Phil. Tranſ. N. 269.

Of the Pewter-money coined by King James
the ſecond, Phil. Tranſ. N. 297.

An Account of the manner of Manuring Lands,
by Sea-ſhells, as practis d in the Counties of
London-derry and Dvnegal. By his Grace the
Lord Archbiſhop of Dublin. Phil. Tranſ.

N. 31

Dr. St. Ginn, Biſhop of Clogher's, Account
of an extraordinary Meteor, or Dew, reſem-
bling Butter, that fell in the Province of
Munſter and Leinſter. Phil. Tranſ. N. 220.

Dr. Aſh, Biſhop of Cloyne, of the virtues of an
Iriſh Plant, Mackenboy, and of a quarry of
white Marble in Antrim. Phil. Tranſ.
N. 243.

Francis Nevile, of Urns and Sepulchral Monu-
ments. Phil. Tranſ. N. 137.

His diſcovery of a Quarry of Marble in the
County of Fermanagh, ibid. |
Biſhop of Clogher's Account of the ſinking
down of part of a Hill, near Clogher. Phil.

Tranſ. N. 137.

ISLANDS.

- * «£13. — ** =
— ——_—_—— — n
=
4

Books and TREATISES, &c;

—

ISLANDS |

Deſcription of the Iſle of Man, in With an Eſſay concerning the Thule of the
Dan. King's Antiquities of Che-| Ancients.
ſhire. An Account of the Orcades, by Matthew Mac-
Deſcription of the ſame, by James| kaile.
Chaloner, 1653. Folio. A Deſcription of the Weſtern Iſles, by Donald
An accurate Deſcription of the ſame Iſland,, Monroe, Dean of the Iſles.
MS. Several Obſeryations upon the North-Iſlands of
Sam. Stanley's Deſcription of the e of Man.] Scotland, communicated by Mr. Martin.
MS. in the hands of Mr. Thoresby. Phil. Tranſ. N. 233.
Proſpe&s in the e of Man, MS. in the hands] A Diſcovery of the Tides in theſe Iſlands. By
of Mr. Thoresby. the ſame Hand.
An Account of Rona and Hirta, By Sir George Deſcription of Hethland and of the Fiſhery there;
Mackenzy. by Jo, Smith.
; Deſcription of the Sea-coaſt and Iſles of Scot-|A Table of Hethland, with a deſcription of it.
IT land. By Mr. Adair. Obſervations upon the Æbudæ.
i} A Deſcription of Thule, by Sir Robert Sibalds. An accurate Deſcription of Jerſey, by Mr. Ful,
| | A Deſcription of the Orcades, by Mr. 9 to.
8vo. 1700.

J Befides theſe, there are great Numbers of Lieger-Books, Charters, Regiſters, c. relating to the
Religious Houſes, preſerv d in the Libraries of Sir Thomas Bodley, Sir John Cotton, Cc. and in
the hands of ſeveral private Gentlemen : a Catalogue of which, with the Proprietors of them, is given by
the Learned Dr. Tanner in his moſt uſeful and accurate work, entitled, Notitia Monaſtica.

DDD ο e ο SISA ARR

e
OO GC OL EG 8 030, +

ANTONINUS:
ITINERARY

THROUGH

BRITAIN

As it is compard by Mr. Bux rox with
the ſeveral Editions,

*

Iter Britanniarum : 2 Geſſoriaco de Galliis, Ritupis in
Portu Britanniarum, Stadia numero CCCCL.
LF. L |
A. Limite*, id eſt, à Vallo, Pratorium uſque, M. P. CLVI. : In 2
, Þs
2 2 | Editio.

p Fay 8 5 | Suritana. ; 12 Simleriana. a
Ab Remaenio. A Bremenio Corſtopilum. m. p. XX. Bramenio Corſtopitum.

Vindomoram. m. p. ix. |

Vinoviam. m. p. xix. Viconia.

Cataractonem. m. p. xxii.

Iſurium. m. p. xxiv. 5 |
Ebur 17. | Eboracum Leg. vi. ViQrix. m. p. xvii. Ebur=— 17,

Derventionem. m. p. vii. Ax;

Delgovitiam. m. p. xiii.

Prztorium. m. p. xxv.-

LT ER II.
Iter à Vallo ad

Portum Ritupas.
M. P. CCCCLXXXI, ſic;

[o] Ablato

_—

— —— —
. —
ps. -

— <r EEO — IO
— — Do ———

—

—̃ co

8

- * —u—ͤ—

—.
— — —

— —— —
nnn“

<
— 4 : *
a =
— — - ——_—_— — — .
* _— 2 wi
» 1%

* - iS
—

—

p 2
** . — —— O——_—
Af: — — * 1

ANTONINUSS Itinerary through BRITAIN. ©

Editio.
- — — * — | —— ——
Aldina. Suritana. Simleriana.
Ablato Bulg. A Blato Bulgio Caſtra Exploratorum. Ablar.
m. p. ii. 10, 9
u-val. Luguvallum. m. p. xii. u- vall.
* Veal. m. p. xiiii. *
Brovonacim. m. Pp. X111.
Verterim. m. p. * xiii, * al. 20. ＋
Lavatrim. m. p. xiiii. |
* 16. Cataractonem. m. p. xiii. 2
Juriam. Iſurium. m. p. XX1111. Juriam.
Eburacum 18. Eboracum. m. p. xvil. Eluracum. 18.
Cacaria. Calcariam. m. P. ix.
Cambodun. Camulodunum. m. p. xx. Cambodun.
Mamucium. m. p. xviii. Mammuc. & Manuc.
Condate. m. p. xviii.
Vici. Devam. Leg. xx. Victrix. m. p. xx. * Leg. xxiti. ci.
Bovium. m. p. x
Mediolanum. m. p. xx.
Rutunium. m. p. xii.
Urio, Con. Viroconium. m. p. xi. Urio, Con.
Uxaconam. m. p. xi.
Penno-Cruc. Pennocrucium. m. p. xli. Penno-Cruc.
Etocetum. m. p. xii.
Mandues-Sed. * 16, Mandueſſedum. m. p. vi. f t 16 Mandue-Sed.
Venonim. m. p. xii.
Bemavent. 16. Bennavennam. m. p. xvii. Bamauem. © Ban,
Lactodorum. m. p. xii, Lactorod.
Magiovintum. m. p. xvii. Magint. 12.
Durocobrivim. m. p. xii. Duro-Cobr. |
Vero- Lam. Verolamium. m. p. xii. Vero- Lam.
Sullonac. Sulloniacim. m. p. xi. Sullomac. 9.
Londinium. m. p. xii. Longidin.
Noviomagum. m. p. x.
| Vagniacim. m. p. xviii.
Duroprovis. Durobrivim. m. p. ix. Duro-brov.
16. Durolevum. m. p. xiii.
Durorvern. Durovernum. m. p. xii.
Ad Portum Ritupas. m. p. x.
1 TER II.
Iter a Londinio ad
XIIII. Portum Dubrim.
m. p. lxvi, ſic;
+ Dubobrus. + Durobrivim, m. p. xxvii. Dubobrus.
Durarvenno. 15, * Durovernum. m. p. xxv. Durarvemno. 15,
Ad Portum Dubris. m. p. xiv.
IT EN. N.
Iter à Londinio ad 1
Portum Lemanis. A
m. p. Ixviii. fic; en
| Durobrivim. m. p. xxvii. Durobrius. £4
Durarvenno, 15. Durovernum. m. p. xxv. Durarvenno. 15. 1
Ad Pontem Lemanis. m. p. xvi. 5
3 5
IT ER V. a
Iter a Londinio ly, 8
Leguvallio, Guyallum ad Vallum. a |
m. p. Ccccxliil. fic ;
*

Czſaros

"an".

Ax ron fx Jiinerary through BRITAIN.

—

9 C 7 LOS ny LOS N AN - 3 *

Editio.

996＋—

Suritana.

Cæſaromagum. m. p. xxviii.
Coloniam. m. p. xxiv.
Villam Fauſtini. m. p. xxxv.
Icianos. m. p. xviii.
Camboricum. m. p. xxxv.
Durolipontem. m. p. xxv.
Durobrivas. m. p. xxxv.
Cauſennim. m. p. xxx.
Lindum. m. p. xxvi.
Segeloſim. m. p. xiv.
Danum. m. p. xxi.
Legeolium. m. p. Xvi.
Eboracum. m. p. xxi.
Iſubrigantum. m. p. xvii.
Cataractonem. xxiv.
Lavatrim. m. p. xviii.
Verterim. m. p. X111.
Brocavum. m. p. xx.
Luguvallum. m. p. xxii.

— —„

8 Simleriana.

25.

Verelant.
Durocobrius.

Penonis,
Ratas.

12.
Ad Pontum.
Croco-Cal.

LT VA

Iter a Londinio
Lindum. m. p. clvi. ſie;

Verolamum. m. p. xxi.
Durocobrium. m. p. xii.
Magiovinium. m. p. x11.
Lactodorum. m. p. xvi.
Iſannavatia. m. p. xii.
Tripontium. m. p. xii.
Vennonim. m. p. ix.
Ratis. m. p. 12.
Verometum. m. p. xiii.
Margidunum. m. p. xiii.
Ad Pontem. m. p. vii.
Crococalanum. m. p. vii.
Lindum. m. p. 12.

Gelleu.

IT ER VII.

Iter à

Londinium.

m. p. xcvi. fic;
Clauſentum. m. p. xx.
Ventam Belgarum. m. p. x.

Callevam Atrebatum. m. p. xxii. Gall.

Pontes. m. p. xxii.
Londinium. m. p. xxii.

Eburaco.

IT ER VIII.

Iter ab Eboraco

Londinium.

m. p. cexxvii. ſic;
Lagecium. m. p. xxi.
Danum. m. p. xvi.
Agelocum. m. p. xxi.
Lindum. m. p. xiv.

um. m. p. xiv.

Matgidunum. m. p. Av.

Vernemetum. m. p. xii.
Ratis. m. p. xii.
Vennonim. m. p. xii.

Ebur.

Bannavantum.

„„ 5

— . — — py

*

Ax To NIN v $'s Ttinerary through BRITAIN © -

Editio.
* 2 N |
Aldina. | Suritana. Simleriana.

— . Mc

xix. Bannavantum. m. p. xviii. xix.
Magio. Vin. Magiovinum. m. p. xxviii. Magio-Vin.
Durocobrivim. m. p. xii. Durocobrins.
Verolamum. m. p. xii.
Londinium. m. p. xxi.

I TER IX.

* ſcinorum. Iter à Venta * Icenorum kin,
Londinium,
m. p. exxviii. fic ;
xxxi. Sitomagum, m. p. xxxii. xxxi.
Combret, Cambretovium. m. p. xxii. Comb.
Ad Anſam. m. p. xv.
Camolodun. Camulodunum. m. p. vi. Camolod.
Canonium. m. p. ix. '
Czſaromagum. m. p. xii.
Durolitum. m. p. xvi.
Londinium. m. p. xv.

I'TER X

Iter a Glanoven-
ta Mediolanum,
cl. fic;

Galavam, m. p. xvii.
Alonem. m. p. xii.
Galacum. mi. p. xix.
Bremetonacim. m. p. xxvii.
Coccium. m. p. xx.
iii. Mancunium. m. p. xvii. *xviii.
| Condate. m. p. xvili.
* Kix. Mediolanum. m. p. xviii. was

I TER AL
A Segontio

Devam. m. p.
Ixxxiii. fic ;
Conovio. m. p. xxiv.
Varis. m. p. xix.
Deva. m. p. xxxii.

IT ER XI.

Iter a F Mariduno
Viroconioruim. Viroconium. Viroconiorum.
m. p. clxxxvi. fic;
Muridn. Mariduno. m. p. xxxXvi.
Leucarum. m. p. xv.
* Nidum. m. p. xv.
* Bomium. m. p. xv.
Iſceleia Auguſta. Iſcam Leg. ii. Aug. m. p. xxvii. Iſcelegua Aug. 28.

f

+ Studii exemplari, 4 Caleva per Muridunum Viroconium : atq; ita reftius legitur, nam Muridunum
vel Moridunum in medio hoc itinere ponitur. Joſias Simlerus,

* Tranſpoſita ſunt hz due Stationes apud Harriſonum. |

I| Iſcelegs Auguſti, vel Iſcelegia Auguſti : emendo ex Ptol, Iſcaleg. II. Auguſta. Ponit enim Ptol. prope
Iſcamleg. II. fic tamen, ut amborum loca ſemiſſe unius gradus longitudinis diſtent, & quadrante, quoad
latitudinem : que diſtantiam faciunt circiter XXXV, M. P. hic tamen major ponitur diſtantia inter Iſcam
Dumnoniorum & Leg. II. Aug. Jeſias Simlerus.

Burrium,

.

Ax Tox Tx Hs [tinerary through BRITAIN. :

ſ

Editio.

Burrium. m. p. ix.

Gobannium. m. p. xii. | EN
Magis. Magmim. m. p., xxii. Magus.

Bravonium. m. p. xxiv. | Bravinio,

Viroconium. m. p. Xxvii. Viricon.

IT ER XIII.

Iter ab Iſca
Callevam. m. p.
cix. fic ;
Burrium. m. p. ix.

In locum iſtum Gobannium reſtituit Guilielmus Fulco.
Bleſtium. m. p. xi. 5
Ariconium, m. p. xi.
Clevum. m. p. xv:
Durocornovium. m. p. xiv.
Spinas. m. p. xv.
Callevam. m. p. xv.

IT ER XIV,

Alio Itinere
Ab Iſca "BP

Callevam. m. p. ciii. ſis 3
Venta Silurum. m. p. ix.
Abone. m. p. ix.
Trajectus. m. p. ix.
A quis Solis. m. p. vi. |
Verlucione. m. p. xv. '
Cunctione. m. p. XX, 1 — 1
Spinis. m. p. xv.
Calleva. m. p. xv.

*
— — — —— — = — — ——
*

I TER XV.

A Calleva
Iſca Dumnunniorum,
m. p. CxxXxvi. fic ;
Vindomi. m. p. xv,
Venta Belgarum. m. p. xxi.
Brige. m. p. xi.
Sorbiodoni. m. p. viii.
Vindocladia. m. p. xii.
Durnonovaria. m. p. ix.
Moriduno, m. p. xxxvi.
Iſcadum Nunniorum. m. p. xv.

Note, Dr. Gale ſays, in the Preface to his learned Commentary on this Itinerary, that the light be had
from ſome other Copies which were communicated to him, was next to nothing [Quantillas ab his omnibus
ſuppetias accepimus, videbit Le&or,] No alteration appears to be made by them in the Diſtances
(which are the main concern,). except as follows: Iter I. at Iſurium, 'Bently's Copy reads viii. for
xxiv, and at Prætorium, both that and the Oxford Copy read xxii. for xy. ——Iter II. at Lugu-
vallum, the Oxford Copy, for xii. reads xv. and at Deva, Bently's for xx. reads x. lter V.
Voſſius's Copy, at Villa Fauſtini, confirms the reading of xxv. for xxxv, and Iter VI. the ſame Copy, at
Lactodorum, reads xvii. for xvi. e ev) |

:
— _
* .

F

-d

r 7 If
._ Tz e

TTT

THE

GENERAL HEADS,

OF THE

INTRODUCTION),

AND

Counties of England.

RITAIN, 1

— Name of, xxxi

Manners of the Britains, xli

Romans in Britain, xlvii

; Con jectures upon the Britiſh Coins, cix
Additional Con jectures, cxiv
Conjectures upon the Roman Coins, cxix
Additional Con jectures, cxxv
Deſtruction of Britain, | cxxvii
Britains of Armorica, cxxxi
Britains of Wales and Cornwall, | cxxxiii
Pits, cxxxv
Scots, cxliii
Engliſh Saxons, cliii
— Names of the Saxons, clxix
General Rules, to know the Original of Names of Places, clxxii
Saxon Coins, clxxv
Danes, ccv
Normans, ccvii
Diviſton of Britain, | ccxxi
Degrees of England, ccxxxiii

Law-Courts of England,

Diſcourſe concerning the Etymolo Anti uity and Office of
Earl-Marſhal” 7 Wo P79 7 | cclix

—— Concerning the Original and Succeſſion of Earl-Marſhal, cclxv
L of the General Deſcription of Britain, cchxvit

DANMONITL,

*
* 4
3. D ”
8
1
*
— 9
= 5 *. 4
3
*
15
Ep
9
12
2 Pe
x. 4
*&
+ FY

ee LS.

The General Heads in Exarany vs

DANMONTI, : 1 rM 9
DUROTRIGES, $1 Dorſetſhire, 51
: | |Somerſerſire 67
BELGA, 67 | Harnſhire 2
| Iſle of Wight, 151
ATTREBATTII, 159 -Barkſhire, 159
Suth-

REGNI, 179 (uh Jes, —=
CANTIUM, 215 Kent, 215
Arſenals for the Royal Navy iti Kent, 223, 232, 233

Gloceſterſhir

DOB UNI. | 267 Oxfordſhire, *

EO, 1

CATTIEUCHLANI, 325 5 bene
iddleſex, Fa
TRINOBANTES, 363 Tes, 365

Suffolk,
| Norfolk, 2
IC ENI. 433 33 |Cambrdgettie, w=
| Huntingdonſhure, GOL
Northam
pk ma 1m 43s
CORITANI, 311 e 543
Ur 575
Derbyſhire, 585
Warwickſhire, | 597
Worceſterſhire, 617
CORNAVIL 3⁵ See. 83
| O

A

SILURES,

—— — —
pf -

The General Heads in EN GIL AN b.
{Herefordſhire, 685
Radnorſhire, 8 697
682 + Brecknockſhire, 703
SILURES, 2 Monmouthſhire; 709
{Glamorganſhire, 729
| | erer ſhire, 743
| enbrokſhire 753
DIMET A, 743 Ne 767
{Montgomeryſhire, 777
- Meirionydhſhire, 783
| 1Caernarvonſhire, 793
ORDEVICES, 777 Angleſey, Mona, 805
Denbighſhire, 813
AFlintſhire, 821
Princes of Wales, 831
'{Yorkſhire, Weſt-Riding, 845
— Eaſt-Riding, 885
— North-Riding, 903
— Richmondſhire, 917
BRIGANTES, 841 4 Biſhoprick of Durham, 931
| Lancaſhire, 961
| Weſtmorland, 983
Cumberland, 1001
Picts-Wall, 1043

Obſervations on the Picts-Wall, in a Journey made to} 1051

ſurvey it, Anno 1708. |
On that part betwixt New-Caſftle and the Walled 1057

by n

An. 1709.

An Account of the Diviſion of Cumberland
the Conqueror among his Followers,

OTTADINE

I065 Northumberland,

The Union of England and Scotland,

T HE

1059
1067

1113

*
3
E

ö
d
ö
,

1zard Dont

6

Auncham :

-

& Toln Churchill ,

0

A Scale of e

Hold by Abel Swalz

\ "> VL }
Dare Fg,

—

7 4
5 N |

*

; * en. "LI . —
n N

unt

2 . F. N
7

x o
,
_— x

CDIENGCLAND Up
= M—_ N — 4
1 N By Rob Morden \

-
—
—
-
—
"4
—

7
NN

A Scale of . Miles

P

Rr ——— F IJ

ld by Abel Swale Awncham: :
& FTohn Churchil .

Prior } Cuckfield
= ing
— 225 7 4
S Arundel

7

5SOUE'TH Dare K 2 8

- 4 _— — + = 2 =

0
. |

30 |

—

4 7 5 2 e 2 "6 3 2 : if
Us FF 5 r of 1 „„ n D
* . T4 * ot” „ 1 mk 2 2 5 A, 4's 2 ©

EA *
2

—— —— ——

6 4.

s

— a

6 %
Rara Tri- in a * Triangular fo

rs.

£7
A

Ba

0
>
8
= 4
2
*
Por
\
ms

RIT AIN, called alſo A-
bion, and by the Greeks
Bperaria, Bprramyxy, IIe rale,
AS, and *Axdian, the
moſt famous Illand in the
World ; is divided from
the Continent of Europe,
by the Ocean. It lies over-
againſt Germany and France,
rm, having three Promonto-

ries ſhooting out three ſeveral ways, viz. Bele-
rium | the Land's end] towards the Weſt ; Can-
tium | the Kentiſh Foreland] towards the Eaſt ;
and Tarviſium or Orcas | Cathneſs) towards the
North. On the Weſt, between it and Ireland, th.
Vergivian or Iriſh Sea breaks in ; on the North
it is waſhed by the vaſt and wide Northern Oce-
an; on the Eaſt, where it faceth Germany, by the
German Ocean; on the South over-againſt
France, by the Britiſh Chanel. Thus, divided
by a convenient diſtance trom the neighbour-
ing Nations on all ſides, and fitted by its open

harbours for the traffick of the whole World,
it ſeems to have ſpread it ſelf into the ſea, for
See in Kent, the general benefit of mankind. For between
Kent and Calais in France, it runs ſo far into the
ſea, and the Chanel is ſo contracted, that (a)
ſome are of opinion that a breach was made
there to receive the ſea, which till that time had
been excluded : and to confirm it, they bring

Virgil's Authority in this Verſe,

Et penitus toto diviſas orbe Britannos.

And Britain quite from all the world diſ-

joyn'd.

Becauſe, ſays Servius Honoratus, Britain was an-
ciently joyn d to the Continent. And they alſo urge

that ot Claudian, in imitation of Virgil,
a—Noſtro didutta Britannia mundo.
And Britain ſever'd from our World.

And it is not unlikely, that the face and fi-
gure of the earth may by the Deluge and other |

cauſes have been alter'd ; that ſome mountains
may have been rais'd and heighten'd, and many
high places ſunk into plains and vallies; lakes
and meers may have been dried up, and dry
pieces turn'd into lakes and meers ; and ſome

ſlands may have been torn and broken off from

the Continent. But whether this be indeed
true, and whether there were any Iſlands at all
before the Flood, I ſhall not here argue, nor give
a raſh judgment upon God's Works. All know,
that the Divine Providence hath diſpos'd things
very different, to one and the ſame end. And
indeed it hath always been allow'd, as well by
Divines as Philoſophers, that Iſles, ſcatter d in
the ſea, do no leſs contribute to the beauty of
the World, than lakes diſpers'd in the Continent,
and mountains rais'd above plains.

Livy and Fabius Ruſticus have made the Form

of this Illand to reſemble an f oblong Platter, or 4 Sura ob-
|| two-edg'd Ax; and ſuch certainly is its ſhape Jonge.

towards the South (as * Tacitus obſerves,) which , || Bipenni.
yet hath been ill apply'd to the whole Ifland. . Vid: Sir H.

For Northward, the vaſt tract of land ſhooting an. Com
ans fa . ag. utmoſt ſhore, groweth narrow

and ſharp like a wedge. The Ancients thought

it ſo great, and ſo very large in circumference, _ 15
that Cæſar, the firſt of . ra who diſco- Conſtantius,
ver'd it, wrote, that he had found out another falſly entitled
world, ſuppoſing it to be ſo great, that it ſeem'd not o Maximian,
to be ſurrounded with the"ſea, but even to encompaſs

the Ocean. And Julius Solims Polyhiſtor aflerts,

that for largeneſs, it almoſt deſery'd to be call'd

another World. But our age, by the many ſur-

veys made by ſeveral nan fs hath well-nigh

found the exact Dimenſions of the whole Ile.

For trom Cathneſs to the Land's end, reckoning

the windings and turnings of the ſhores, along

the Weſt- ſide, are computed about 812 miles.

From thence along the Southern coaſt to the

Kentiſh Foreland, 320 miles. Hence, coaſting

the German Ocean, with crooked bays and in-

lets for 704 miles, it reaches Cathneſs. So that

by this computation, the whole Iſland is in cir-

cuit 1836 miles; which meaſure, as it talls much

ſhort of Pliny's, ſo is it alſo ſomewhat leſs than

Caſar's. t Schitinins Chizs is not worth the men- Com. | A
tioning, who in ApoLouirs de Mirabilibus (having 4 Schymmos,

(a) White's Hiſt. Brit, L. 11. Not. 11. Burton's Comment. on Antonin,
Britan. Sammes Britan. I. I. c. 4. Verſtegan, |, 1. c. 4. Some Foreigners a
Volſcus, Vivianus, and Du Bartas have favour'd this Opinion,

-

: 2
— — —
. OE eee 2

a

r ———_—__— —_ r OE or IO OO

p: 18, 19. Twin. de Rebus Albion, &
lo, Dominicus Marius Niger, Antonius

told

— nee tens

—U— —

Il

BRITAIN.

—

+ Stadiis,

De Nat.
Deor. J. 2.

Geer.

Probus in Neg.

told us ſtrange ſtories of fruit growing in Bri-
tain without kernels, and grapes without ſtones)
makes its circuit 400 f turlongs and no more.
But Dionyſius Afer in his Deſcription of the
World, bath given a much better account of
Fan Britiſh Tflands, that is, of Britain and Ve-
and,

Tde vel uit @® Gh A Tis any
N., & maono0: Bprrariow loogagiCu

Vaſt is the compaſs of the Britiſh coaſts;
A like extent no rival Iſland boaſts.

And with him Ariſtides and other Greek Wri-

ters agree, who by way of diſtinction have tru-
ly call'd Britain, Mey«aam oo, the great Iſland.

They who have accurately compar'd the ſpa-
ces of the Heavens with the tracts of the Earth,
have plac'd Britain under the 8h Climate, and
within the 18 and 26" Parallels; computing
the longeſt Day at eighteen Equinoctial Hours
and an half. Ihe Land's end, acccrding to the
Spherical figure of the Earth, they place at ſixteen
degrees and fifty ſcruples, and the Kentiſh Fore-
land twenty one degrees in Longitude, As for
the Latitude, they meaſure in the Southern-
parts fifty degrees ten ſcruples; at Cathneſs fifty-
nine degrees torty ſcruples. (%) Britain, by this
ſituation, muſt needs enjoy both a fertile ſoil,
and a moſt temperate air. The Summers here
are not ſcorching, by reaſon of the conſtant
breezes which fan the air, and moderate the
heats. Theſe, as they invigorate every thing
that grows, ſo they give both to man and beaſt,
at the ſame time, bench and refreſhment. The
Winters alſo here are mild and gentle. This
proceeds, not only from the thickneſs and cloſe-
neſs of the air, but alſo from the frequency of
thoſe ſtill ſhowers, which with us do much
ſoften and break the violence of the cold. Be-
ſides that, the ſeas which encompaſs it, do ſo
cheriſh it with their gentle warmth, that the
cold is much leſs ſevere, than in ſome parts of
France and al. Upon this conſideration, Minu-
tius Felix, proving that the Divine Providence
conſults, not only the benefit of the world in
general, but alſo of each part ; makes uſe of
our Iſland as an inſtance. Though Britain (ſaith
he) enjoys not ſo much the aſpect and influence of
the ſun, yet inſtead thereof, it is refreſhed and com-
forted by the warmth of the ſea which ſurrounds it.
Neither need we think this obſervation ſtrange,
which he makes upon the warmth of the fea ;
ſince Cicero makes the very ſame. The ſeas,
ſaith he, toſſed to fro with the winds, grow ſo warm,
that from thence it may certainly be inferred, that
there is a heat that lies concealed in that vaſt fluid
body. To the temperate ſtate alſo of this Iſland
Ceſcenius Gethlicus, a very ancient Poet, ſeems to
allude in theſe verſes concerning Britain.

Non illic Aries verno ferit aera cornu,
Gnoſſia nec Gemini pracedunt cornma Tauri,
Sicca Lycaonius reſupinat phauſtra Bootes.

Not there the ſpring the Ram's unkindneſs
©. mourns,

Nor Taurus ſees the Twins before his horns,

His Northern wain where dry Bootes turns.

Cæſar alſo takes notice, That ſome parts of this
country are more temperate than Gaule, and the
cold leſs And Cornelius Tacitus ob-
ſerves, That in this Mand there is no extremity of
cold : And farther adds, That, except the olive, the
vine, and ſome other fruits peculiar to the otter cli-
mates, it produceth all things elſe in great plenty : and,
That the fruits of the earth, in coming-up, are for-
ward in Britain, but very ſlow in ripening. Of both
which the Cauſe is one and the ſame, the exceſſive
moiſture of the earth and aiv. For our air (as Stra-
bo hath obſerved ) 1s more ſubject to rain than
ſnow. However, ſo happy is Britain in a moſt
plentiful product of all ſorts of grain, that (c) Or-
pheus hath called it The very ſeat of Ceres. For
to this Ifland (d) we are to apply that ex-
preſſion, |

i5* iu $9 ar” Ae
Av puree —_ ——

— Sce here the ſtately Court
Of Royal Ceres! — _

And in former times, this was as it were the
22 and magazine of the Weſtern Empire.
or from hence the Romans were wont every

viſh in the praiſes ot my own Country; and
therefore you ſhall hear an old Orator deliver

nſtantine our Emperour. Thee hath Nature de-
ſervedly enrich'd with the choiceſt bleſſings of heaven
and earth. Thou neither feeleſt the exceſſive colds of
Winter, nor the ſcorching heats of Summer. Thy
harveſts reward thy lalours with ſo vaſt an encreaſe,
as to ſupply thy Tables with bread, and thy Cellars
with liquor. Thy woods have no ſavage beaſts ; no
ſerpents harbour there to hurt the traveler. Innume-
rable are thy herds of cattle, aud the flecks of ſheep,
which feed thee plentifully, and cloath thee richly.
And as to the comforts of life, the days are long, and
no night paſſes without ſome glimpſe of light. For
whilſt thoſe utmoſt plains of the ſea-ſbore are ſo flat
and low, as not to caſt a ſhadow. to create night ; they
never leſe the fight of the heavens and ſtars ; but
the ſun, which to us appears to ſet, ſeems there auly

tor, uſin |
ther of Conſtantine the Great. And I aſſure
you, no ſmall damage was it, not only to loſe the name
of Britain, but the great advantages thence accruing
to our Common-wealth ; to part with a land ſo ſtored
with corn, ſo flouriſping in paſture, ſo rich in variety
of mines, ſo profitable in its tributes ; on all its coaſts
0 furniſhed with convenient harbours, and ſo immenſe
in its extent and circuit. Alſo, Nature's particu-
lar indulgence to this our Iſland, is thus ex-
preſs'd by a Poet of ſome antiquity, addreſſing
himſeit to Britain in this Epigram ; which has
been judg'd worthy the Publication :

Tu nimio nec ſtricta gelu nec ſydere fervens,
Clementi clo teinperieque places.
Cum pareret natura pareus, varioque favore

Divideret dotes omnibus una locis,

—

(b) But later Diſcoveries have better defined the ſite of Britain 3 the Longitude of the Land's end being but
11 Degrees from Teneriff, and Cantium or the Foreland but 58 and an half: the Latitude of the Lizard 50 de-
grees, and of Cathneſs ſcarce 18 and an half, Whence, the longeſt Tropical day is from 16 hours 10 minutes
to 18 hours 2 minutes; that is, from the 13th to the 25th parallel.

(e) Or more truly Onomacritus, as ſaith a late Author. 5

(4) This (if clearly applicable to Britain,) ſhows it to have been known to the Ancients very early.

Sepoſuit

year, in 800 veſſels larger than“ barks, to tran- * Lembis.
{port vaſt quantities of corn, for the ſupply of Zoimus Fu-
their armies in garriſon upon the frontiers of 24pius oe}
Germany. But * I may ſeem too la- Hof.

2 ded. a LOL

its Encomium. O fortunate Britain, the moſt hap- Panegyric te
py country in the world, in that thou didſt firſt behold Conſtantine.

to paſs by. I ſhall here introduce another Ora- Panegyric to
theſe expreſſions to Conſt antius, fa- Conſtaniics,

i * 4 1 . |. C * 5 27 1 * 0 * 7 wu \ 6 * cad & 7 wo Eg &. * * F 22 —
Ly e 3 i eee, I OO ED IE e IOC ee dee i Ea iS ad
F RSS OC POT Peet RS . M .v ITS rn EY

1
Cw AY 6d

1
*
T 3
4
2
z
"=
1.
1
.n
©

Inſule
nate,
Fortun

Iſlands

In his
ment |
Lycoph

S

The
bab!
reaſ
nam

c £0
45.

o
4 5 5
* SL
Ca MEE > *

þ 2 a * a 1 n A = I 7 3 „ 24, a aw.

r I ALE e N 9 1 r $1 3 1 . 4s het e
* * An * , 5 "* ay 2 4 L % e i ard by » p n * 0 © cos” 72 10
S 8 W n WY ASH G TR TO OT WET ITS 17 Wenns +

n Me

The furſt Inhabitants. 3 vi

Inſula Frrtu-
nate, or the
Fortunate
Iſlands.

In his Com-
ment upon
Lycophron,

5

1344.

The firſt In-

Sepoſuit potiora tibi, matremque profeſſa,
Iafula fis feelix plenaque pacis, ait.

Quicquid amat luxus, quicquid defiderat uſus,
Ex te proveniet, vel aliunde tibi.

Nor cold nor heat's extreams thy people fear,
But gentle ſeaſons turn the peacetul year.
When teeming nature's caretul hand beſtow'd
Her various favours on her numerous brood,
For thee th' indulgent mother kept the beſt,
Smil'd in thy tace, and thus her daughter bleſt,
In thee, my darling Iſſe, ſhall never ceaſe
The conſtant joys of happineſs and peace.
What e're can furniſh luxury or uſe

Thy ſea ſhall bring thee, or thy land pro-
duce.

This fertility and pleaſantneſs of Britain, gave
occaſion to ſome to imagine that theſe were the
Fortunate Iſlands, and thoſe Seats of the Bleſſed,
where the Poets tell us, the whole face of Na-
ture ſmiled with one perpetual ſpring. This 1s
affirmed by Jſacirs Tzetzes, a writer of reputa-
tion among the Greeks : And our own Ance-
ſtors, it ſeems, conſidered the ſame notion, as
literally true. For when Pope Clement VI. (as
we read in Robert of Avesbury) had declared
Lewis of Spain, King of the Fortunate [ands,
and to effect his project, had begun to levy for-
ces in France and Italy; our Countrymen were
preſently poſſeſs'd with an opinion, that the
Pope's intent was to make him King of our
Wand, and that all theſe preparations were de-
ſigned for Britain, as one of thoſe Fortunate
Handi. Nay, ſo prevalent was this conceit, that
even our grave Ambaſladors,. then reſident at
Rome, immediately withdrew, and haſten'd home
to acquaint their country with its approaching
danger. Nor indeed would: any man in our age

be of another mind, who. knows and conſiders I

the Fortunate ſtate and the happy circumſtances
of this Iſland. It is the maſter-piece of Na-
ture, pertorm'd when ſhe was in her beſt and
ayeſt humour ; which ſhe placed as a little
world by it ſelf, by the fide of the greater, for
the diverſion of mankind ; the moſt accurate
model, which ſhe propoſed to her ſelf, by which
to beautify the other parts of the Univerſe. For
which. way ſoever we turn our eyes, we are
entertain'd with a charming variety, and proſ-
pets extreamly pleaſant. I need not enlarge
upon its Inhabitants, nor extol the vigour and
firmneſs of their conſtitution, their good hu-
mour, their civility, and their courage and
bravery, ſo often try'd both at home and a-
broad ; and not unknown to the remoteſt cor-
ners of the earth.
But concerning the meſt antient or the very

babitants,and firſt Inhabitants of this Iſland, as alſo the ori-

reaſon of- the

Name,

ow of the name of Bzitain, divers opinions
e been ſtarted ; and a great many (as a cer-
tain writer has expreſs d it) who knew very lit-
tle, have been very poſitive. Nor ought we
Britains to expect more certain evidences in this
caſe, than other nations. For, except thoſe in

rticular, whoſe originals. the holy Scriptures
—— delivered ; all the reſt, as well as we, re-
main under a dark cloud of error and 1gno-
rance, concerning their firſt riſe. Nor indeed
could ir otherwite be, conſidering how deep the
revolutions of ſo many ages mult have ſunk and
buried Truth. The ffrſt Inhabitants of coun-
trics had other cares and thoughts, than the
tranſmitting their ſeveral originals to poſterity.

Nay, ſuppoſing they had ever ſo much defired
it, yet could they never have effectually done
it. For their lite was altogether uncivilized,
perfectly rude, and wholly taken up in wars;
ſo that they were a long time without Lear-
ning; which as it is the effect of a civiliz'd life,
of peace, and leiſure, fo is it the only ſure and
certain means of preſerving and tranſmitting to
poſterity the memory of things paſt. Moxeo-
ver, the Druids, who were the Prieſts among
the Britains and Gauls, and to whoſe care was
committed the preſervation of their ancient Tra-
ditions ; and likewiſe the Bards, who made it
their buſineſs to celebrate all gallant and re-
markable adventures; both the one and the
other thought it unlawful to commit any thin
to books or writing. But, ſuppoſing the had
left any matters upon record ; without doubt,
at ſo valt a diſtance and after ſo many and ſo
great alterations, they muſt needs have been
long ſince loſt. For we ſee, that even Stones,
Pyramids, Obeliſques, and other Monuments, that
were eſteem'd more durable than braſs it ſelf
tor preſerving the memory of things, have long
ſince periſhed by the injuries of time. But in
following ages, there aroſe in many nations a
fort of men, who were ſtudious to ſupply theſe
defects out of their own invention. For when
they could not tell what to deliver for Truth;
that they might at leaſt delight and pleaſe,
they invented divers ſtories (every one accor-
ding to the ſtrength and turn of his on ima-
gination) about the original and names of Peo-
ple. Theſe fancies many reſted in, without a-
ny further ſearch into the trutll; and moſt men
were ſo taken with the pleaſire of thi fables,
thar they ſwallow'd them without more adoe.
But, to omit other writers, one of our own Geoffry of
nation, Geoffry ap Arthur of Minmouth (hom Monmouth.

' would not miſrepreſent in this point) pub-

liſt'd, in the reign of Henry IT. a Hifory- of

Britain, tranſlated, as he pretends, our of the

Britiſh Tongue. Wherein he tells us, That one

Brutus, a Trojan by deſcent, the Son of Silvi-

2, Grandchild ro Aſcanins, and Great-grand-

child to the famous AEneans, (whoſe mother was

Venns, and conſequently himſelf deſcended from

Jove; ) That this man, at his birth, coſt his

mother her lite; and by chance having kill'd his

Father in hunting (which thing the Magicians

had foretold,) was forc'd to fly into Greece;

That there he refcued from ſlavery the progeny

of Helens ſon of Priam, overcame King Pan-

draſus, marry'd his daughter, put to ſea with

the ſmall remainder of the Trojans, and falling

upon the Iſland of Leogetia; was there directed

by the Oracle of Diana to ſteer his courſe to-

wards this weſtern Iſland. Accordingly, that

he {ail'd through the f Hreighes of Gibraltar (where 4 per Hercu-
he eſcap'd the Syrens) and afterwards, paſſing lis Columnas.
through the Tyrrhenian Sea, arrived in Aquitain.

Thar in a pitch'd battle, he routed Golfarins

Pictus, King of Aquitain, together with twelve

Princes of Gaule, who aſſiſted him. And then,

after he had built the city of Tours (as, he ſays,

Homer tells us) and over-run Gaule, he croſſed

over into this Ifland, then inhabited by Gi-

ants. That having conquered them (together

with Gogmagog, who was the greateſt of them

all ; ) from his own name he gave this Illand Brutus in the
the name of Britain, in the year of the world year of the
2855, and 334 years before the firſt Olympiad, world 2855,
and before the nativity of Chriſt, 1108. Thus beſere the

birth
far Geoffry. But there are (e) others, who offer Einig 1 108. \

_—

2

ce) The moſt ancient Iriſh Antiquities deduce the name from Brittan, Son of Fergus Fitz-Nemech ; and ſay,
it was formerly called Inis Mor, agrecably to Ariltides's Inſula magna. Ogyg. P. 11, 12, 66, 170. Seld, Mare clauſum.

-

other

12 — >
- — - —
e
—
—
— bk * - — £
Dy

— —

__ %
———
——

—

, —
—__— .
2 -

—

vii . ai

Mc

other grounds and reaſons for this name of Bri-
tain. Sir Thomas Eliot, Kt. a very learned man, de-
rives it from a Greek Word, ford, which term
among the Athenians ſignified their publick reve-
nues. Humphrey Lloyd, who hath the reputation
of one of the beſt Antiquaries of this King-
dom, with much aſſurance tetches its original
from the Britiſh word Pridcaia, that is to ſay,
Vid. Corn- of a white Colour. Pomponizs Lætus tells us, that
wal, the Britains of Armorica (f) in France, gave it
the name. Goropius Becanins will have it, that
the Danes ſettled themſelves here, and called it
Bridania, i. e. Free Dania. Others derive it from
Prutenia | Pruſſia, ] a part of Germany. Bodin
ſuppoſes it took its name from Bretta, a Spaniſh
word, which ſignifies Earth; and Forcatul»s, from
Brithin, which, as it appears in Athenzus, was
the name of a ſort of drink among the Greci-
- ans. Others derive it from the Brutii in Italy,
whom the Greeks called Bir. But thoſe Pe-
dants are by no means to be endur'd, whowould
have it call'd Britain, from the brutiſh manners
of the Inhabitants. 8
Theſe are all the Opinions (ſo far as I know)
touching the name of Britain. But as we can-
not choſe but think the fictions of Foreigners
in this matter extreamly ridiculous ; ſo divers
of our own Country-men give us no very ſatisfa-
ctory account. And indeed, in theſe and the
like caſes, it is much eaſier to detect a falſity,
than to eſtabliſh a truth. For, beſides that it
is in it ſelf abſurd to ſeek the ground of this
name in a foreign language ; the general con-
ſent of the more noted Hiſtorians doth confute
Latin ; all informing us, that thoſe Britains of
France went from hence, and carried the name
along with them. Alſo, Britain was famous un-
der this name, ſeveral hundred years before the
names of Dania and Prutenia were known in the
world. And what hath our Britain to do with
the Spaniſh Bretta ? (of which indeed I make
a 3 whether it be a Spaniſh word ;) and
why ſhould 2h Iſland be fo call'd, rather than
any other country ? It can hardly be made out,
that the drink Brithin was ever uſed in our
country ; and to deduce the name of our nati-
tion from a liquor of the Grecians, is ridicu-
leus. The Itahan Brutii were indeed, as Strabo
notes, called by the Lucani, Beirhu, which im-
plies as much as Fugitives or Rovers ; But that
the Brutii rou'd ſo far as Britain, can never be
prov'd. Jo come now to the conjectures of our
own Country-men : Eliot's Ig/larie ſeems very
improbable, ſince that word was peculiar to the
Athenians; and the Greeks were wont to call
this Ifland Bprlaniar, not Nprrartiar. Lloyd's Prid-
cain, from whence he derives Britain, ſeems ſo
far tetch'd and ſo overſtrain'd an Etymology,
that I need not obſerve that the word Cain comes
from the Latin Candid ; wh; had crept into
the provincial language of the Britains.
But now, could we be once well ſatisfied,
that this Hiſtory of Brutus is true and certain;
there would be no farther occaſion tor Enqui-
rics after the Original of the Britiſh nation :
that buſineſs would be at an end, and Antiqua-
ries excus'd from a very troubleſom and tedious
Search. For my part, I am ſo far from labour-

a receiv'd Opinion. For ſhall one of my mean
capacity, preſume to give ſentence in a point of
ſo much conſequence ? I refer the controverſie
intirely to the College of (g) Antiquaries, and,
leaving every man to the liberty of his own
judgment, ſhall not be much concern'd at any
one's opinion.

And yet here, I find my ſelf oblig'd to take
notice (and J hope, ſince 1 ſearch after nothing
but truth, with the Reader's pardon) that there
are very learned and judicious men, who endea-
vour divers ways to invalidate this relation, and
are wont to attack me, when I offer to defend
it, with theſe or the like arguments. Their firſt
objection they draw from the age wherein theſe
things are ſaid to have been done; and perem
torily aſſert, that all is purely fabulous (the ſa-
cred Hiſtories excepted) whatever is delivered
by Hiſtorians as done before the firſt Olympi-
ad, i. e. the year 770. before the birth of our
Saviour. Now, theſe things which are told us
concerning Brutus, precede that period by a-
bove 300 years. This exception they ground C Gori
upon the Authority of Varro, the moſt learned 1.
en the Roman writers, in whom the firſt The fabulou-
period of time, which was from the creation to time, or age.
the deluge, bears the title of ”AS»aer, i. e. ob/cure
and uncertain, ſo called from our ignorance of the
tranſactions of thoſe times. The ſecond, which
was from the deluge to the firſt Olympiad, he
calls Muvx%, i. e. fabulous, becauſe moſt of thoſe
Hiſtories are fabulous, even among the Greek
and Roman Authors, who were the learned part
of the world ; and much more, among a bar-
barons and unlearned people, ſuch as were, at
that time, all the inhabitants of theſe Northern
parts. In the next place they alledge, that this
relation is not confirmed by any Authentick
writer; which in all Hiſtories muſt HK allowed
to be the thing moſt material. Now, they call
thoſe, authentick writers, who have antiquity and
learning agreeable ; and in proportion to theſe,
they give more or leſs credit to them. Bur to
all this ſort of Authors, as well as to the anti-
ent Britains themſelves, they confidently aver
that the very name of Brutus was perfectly un-
known. Farther, they ſay, that Cæſar himſelf
hath aſſured us, that above“ 1700 years ago, up- * 1600, C.
on the ſtricteſt 2 he could only diſcover thus
much, that the inland-parts of Britain were inhabi-
ted by ſuch as were the true and ancient natives; but
that the Sea-coaſts were peopled with foreigners, who
had croſs'd over thither out of Belgium. Tacitus
allo (above f 1500 years ago) who had made di-+ 1400, C.
ligent ſearch into theſe matters, ſays, hat ſort
of men did at firſt inhabit Britain, whether bred and
born in that Iſland, or whether they came thither from
foreign parts; among ſuch a barbarous people, caunot
now be diſcovered. Allo Gildas Sapiens (who him-
ſelf was a Britain, and lived || 1100 years ſince)j ioo, C.
ſays not one word concerning this Brutus; nay,
even declares himſelt unſatisfied, whether the
ancient Britains had any records or writings at
all, whereby they might tranſmit their hiſtory
and orjginal to poſterity. And therefore he
plainly confeſſes, That he took all out of foreign
writers, and not out of any writings or records left by
his own country-men. For if there ever had been any

ing to diſcredit that Hiſtory, that I aflure you ¶ſuch, they were in his time quite loſt, having either

I have often ſtrain'd my Invention to the utmoſt,
to ſupport it. Abſolutely to reject it, would be
to wage War againſt Time, and to fight againſt

been burnt by the enemy at home, or carried by ex-
iles into foreign parts. Ninius alſo, a diſciple of

Eluodugus, in the preface to his Chronicle, writ-

* F

* 3 RN Wo

D

3 wx ey 4 We 4

* $c0, (

( f ) In oppoſition to which, the ſame Learned Writer affirms, that we meet with no mention of that Britan-
nia Minor, or Little Bretagne, before Sidonius Apollinaris.
(£) A learned Antiquary hath mace ſeme attempts towards a defence of it, Seld. Polyolb, p. 17.

ten

—
— 2 Y - ,
% 4 *,
r N 1 PY * *
2 7 * p 1
* » 3

LY

— — . — -
—
*
. —— 2 —
4 2, " x”
- — - *

: * .
r — — _— x _ OY

The firft 7 nhabitants. TT x

e

orinus, + 400, .

fabulous

7 or age.

8 NW n

He lived a-
bout the

Year 1440.

gc, C. ren * goo years ſince, complains, That the greateſt

Scholars among the Britains, had but little lear-
ning, and that they had leſt no memorials : And con-
telies, that whatever he had written, was colletted

out of the Annals and Chronicles of the Holy Fu-

thers. They alſo argue, That Bede, William ol
Malmsbury, and all the reſt who wrote before
the year 1160, ſeem not ſo much as to have
heard of the name of our Brutus; there is as
to this particular ſuch an univerſal ſilence among
them.

They obſerve hereupon, that the very name
of this Brut was a ſtranger to the world, till a
barbarous and ignorant age gave opportunity to
one Hunnibald, a trifling writer, to obtrude his
Francio, a Trojan, Son to King Priam, as the
Founder of the French name and nation. Hence
they conclude, that when our country-men had
once heard, that their neighbours the French de-
rived their pedigree from the Trojans, they
thought it below them to come behind a people
in deſcent, whom they equall'd in valour. And
hercupon, f 500 years ago, our Geoffry ap Arthur
of Monmouth, firſt of all gratity'd the Britains
with this Brute, as Founder of the Britiſh Na-
tion, and made him not only of a Trojan, but
of Divine extraction. Before which time they
urge, that there never was the leaſt mention made
ot ſuch a man as Brutus.

They add, that much about the ſame time, the
Scotch writers ſet-up their (/) Scota, Daughter
of Pharaoh King ot Egypt, as the Foundreſs of
their Nation. That then- abouts, ſome perſons
(abuſing their parts, and miſ-ſpending their
time,) without any ground of truth, forged for
the Iriſh their Hiberus; tor the Danes, their
Dans; for the Brabanders, their Brabo; tor the
Goths, their Goth; for the Saxons, their Saxo;
as the Founders of their ſeveral nations. But
now this knowing age hath diſcovered all theſe
Impoſtures ; and ſince the French have rejected
their Fraxcio as a counterfeit, (The French, ſaith
the moſt learned Turnebus, when they lay claim
to a Trojan original, do it purely in emulation of the
Romans. For when they ſaw this people ſo much build
upon that, as the moſt noble Original, they thought it
convenient to veſt themſelves with the ſame honour : )
Since alſo the more ſober and thinking part of
the Scots have caſt off their Scota ; and the force
of Truth hath at laſt entirely prevailed againſt
that Hiberus, Danis, Brabo, and all the reſt of
theſe mock-princes ; they much wonder, why
the Britains ſhould ſo fondly adhere to their Bru-
tus (as the original of their Iſland's name,) and
to their Trojan extraction; as if there had been
no Britains here betore the deſtruction of Troy
(which happen'd about 1000 years after the de-
luge; ) or, as if there had not lived many va-
liant men in the world before Agamemnon.

Farther yet they tell us, that the greateſt part
of the learned Writers, as Boccatius, lives, Ha-
drianus Junius, Polydore, Buchanan, Vignier, Gene-
brardus, Mſolinaus, Bodinms, and other — of
great judgment, do unanimouſly affirm, that
there never was ſuch a man as Brutus. Nay more,
that very many of our own Country-men, per-
ſons eminent tor their learning, reject him as a
meer Impoſtor. Among whom in the firſt place,
they produce John of H/heathamſted, Abbot of
St. Albans, a man of excellent judgment, who
wrote long ago concerning this matter in his
Granaritm. According to other hiſtories (which in
the judgment of ſome men deſerve much more credit)
that whole relation concerning Brutus, is rather poe-

2

tical than hiſtorical, and is for ſeveral reaſons to be
accounted rather fanciful than real. As firſt, we find
no where in the Roman Hiſtories, the leaſt mention,
either of the killing of the father, or the begetting or
baniſhment of the ſon. Secondly, Aſcanius, accor-
ding to ſeveral authors, had no ſon, whoſe proper name-
was Silvius. For they give us an account but of one
that he had, to wit, Iulus, from whom afterward
the Julian family had its original, &c. And thirdly,
Silvius Poſthumus, whom poſ/rbly Geoffry may mean,
was the Son of Eneas by his wife Lavinia, and
he having had a ſon named Eneas, in the 38") year
of his Reign, ended his life, not by any miſchance, but
by a natural death. By all which it is apparent, that
the Kingdom which is now called England, was
not heretofore named Britain, from Brutus the ſon
of Silvius, 2 will have it. But others look
upon the wholt as a ridiculous piece of foppery and
vanity, to lay claim to this nobility of deſcent, when
we cannot ground our pretence upon any probable foun-
dation. It us Virtue alone that gives nobility to a
nation ; and it is a greatneſs of mind, with an ac-
compliſh'd judgment, that makes the true man of Ho-
nour. Suitably hereunto, Seneca in his Epiſtles tells Epiſt. 44.
us out of Plato, That there is no King, who had not

his extraction from flaves ; nor any ſlave that de-
ſcended not from Kings. Let this therefore content
the Britiſh nation, as an evidence of their honourable

original, that they are couragious and valiant in war,

that they have been ſuperior to all their enemies round

them, and that they have a natural averſion to ſer-

vitude. In the ſecond place, they produce Mi-

liam of Newbourgh, a much more ancient wri-

ter, who 1n his rough way fixed the charge of

forgery upon Geoffry, the compiler of the Bri-

tiſh Hiſtory, as ſoon as ever he had publiſhed

it. A certain writer, ſtarted up in our days, hath

deviſed ſtrange and ridiculous tales concerning the Bri-

tains, and with an impudent vanity hath extolled them
far above the gallantry of the Macedonians and Ro-

mans. Hlis name is Geofiry, but he hath the ad-

ditional one of Arthur too, becauſe he ſent abroad,

under the honourable title of a hisFory, the Fables

of King Arthur, taken out of the old fiftions of the
Britains, with ſome additions of his own, which he

hath dreſs'd up in Latin. The ſame man, with yet
greater boldneſs hath publiſh'd, as authentick Prophe-
ſies (pretending that they are grounded upon certain
Evidence) the fallacious predictions of one Merlin;
to which alſo, in tranſlating them into Latin, he hath

added a good deal of his own invention. And a lit-

tle after ; Beſides, in that book of his which he en-

titles The Hiſtory of the Britains, how impudent-

ly and bare-faced he forges every thing, is obvivus to

any one who reads it and is not wholly a ſtranger to

the ancient hiftories. For men, who have not infor-

med themſelves of the truth, ſwallow all Fables that

come to hand. I ſay nothing of thoſe great adven-

tures of the Britains before Julius Cæſar's land-

ing and government; which he either feign'd him-
ſelf, or handed down the fabulous inventions of others,

as authentick. Inſomuch, that Giraldus Cam-

brenſis, who lived and wrote in the ſame age, Deſeript,
made no ſcruple to call it, The Fabulous Hiſtory Cambr. c. 7,
of Geoffry. Others deride Geeffry's fooliſh Topo-

raphy in this narration, and his counterteit te-
Ce from Homer ; and tell us that the
whole Story is a heap of incongruities and ab-
ſurdities. They remark further, that theſe his
writings, together with his Merlin, ſtand con-
demned, among other prohibited books, by the
Church of Rome. Others obſerve, that the
greateſt admirers of this Brutus, are themſelves

wavering and unreſolved-in the point : that Au-

*
WO YO 7 2

(% Tue Iriſh and Scotch, in the buſineſs of Pharaoh's
Ogg. p. 69, 344, 463. Offer. Frimord. c. 16.

—

Daughter, ſhould not be made two different Nations,

is. 8D thor

B ——ꝙ—i?& ße — - 22 tes at — — — o

-
TY — WA. 4

—

thor (ſay they) who takes upon him the name
and title of Gildas, and has tack'd a little Gloſs

of this Iſland. Though indeed theſe firſt Plan-
ters lie ſo in the dark hidden Depths of Anti-

to Niumius, in the firſt place imagineth this our|quity, (as it were in ſome thick grove ; ) that

Brutus to have been a Roman Conſul ; in the

there 1s very ſmall or no hopes of retrieving by

next, to have been the ſon of one Sitvius, and my diligence, what hath for ſo many ages lain
then at laſt of one Heſſicion. T have heard allo, buried in oblivion.

that there is a certain Count Palatine very ear-| To run up our enquiries therefore as high as
neſt to have our Brutus called Brotus, becauſeſwe can; (omitting Cæſar, Diodorus, and other
his birth was jaa to his mother, Bggrhs 1n|writers, who will have the Britains to be * Avrc-
Greek ſignity ing mortal. In the judgment of |S and Aborigines, home-bred, and not tran-
others, theſe men might have beſtowed on |iported from any other place; imagining that
the Britains a more probable, and yet a more|mankind at firſt ſprung out of the earth like
illuſtrious original, it they had drawn their muſhroons;) we are informed by Moſes in the
deſcent either from Brito the Centaur, menti-|{acred Hiſtory, that after the Flood, the three

Bretanus, on'd by Higinus, or from that Bretauus, upon whole

Sons of Noah, Shem, Ham, and FJaphet, when

daughter Celtice (according to Parthenius Nicæ- their iſſue were greatly multiplied, left the
us, a very ancient author) Hercules begat Cel- mountains of Armenia, where the Ark had reſt-
tus, the father of the Celtæ; and from which |ed ; ſeparating themſelves into the ſeveral quar-

Bretanus, Heſychius deriveth the word Britain.

ters of the earth ; and that by them the whole

Thus have I laid before you the Obſervati- world was peopled. It may alſo tarther be pro-
ons and ,Opinions of other men upon this ſub-|ved, as well by reaſon, as by the authority of
ject. It I have any way impaired the credit of that |Theophilus Antiochenus, that when their tamilies
hiſtory concerning Brutus, none can reaſonably |came to be diſperſed by little and little, ſome of
quarrel with me; ſince in matters of this na- their Poſterity at laſt arrived in this our Iſland.
ture every man is allowed the liberty of his|J/hereas (ſays he) in old time there were but few People
own thoughts, and of publiſhing thoſe of other ſin Arabia and Chaldea ; aſter the diviſion of tongues
they encreas d more and more. Hereupen ſome took
it Brutus paſs current for the father and founder [their way toward the Eaſt, others to the great and
of the Britiſo Nation. Let the Britains deſcent |wide Continent ; others travelling towards the North,
ſtand good, as they deduce it from the 'T'ro-[and ſeeking a place to ſettle in, ſtill marched on, ta-
jans. I ſhall never contradict it: nay, I ſhall |king poſſeſſion of all that lay before them, till at laſt

men. For my part, 1t ſhall never trouble me,

ſhew hereafter, how with truth it may be main- they came even to Britain, ſeated in the northern cli-

Livy. tained. I am not ignorant, that in old time, nate. Moſes himſelf doth alſo expreſly aſſert
V. Cornwall, Nations had recourſe to Hercules, in later ages|the ſame thing, when he informs us, that the
Eercults Pro- tg the Trojans, for their originals. And let An-|Iflands of the Gentiles were divided, in the

montorium.

tiquity herein be pardoned, if ſhe ſometimeſ reſpective Countries, by the poſterity of Japhet.

diſguiſe truth with the mixture of a fable, and Te Hands of the Gentiles, Divines do interpret
bring in the Gods themſelves to act a part, |to be thoſe, which lay fartheſt off: and Jolph-
when ſhe defign'd thereby to render the Begin- |gangus Muſculus, a Divine of conſiderable repute,
nings, either ot a city or a nation, more noble ſis of opinion that the nations and families which
and majeſtick. For Pliny well obſerves, That |deſcended from Japhet, were the firſt poſſeſſors
even falſly to pretend a dejcent from illuſtrious per- [of the European Iilands; ſuch are (faith he)
Jens, argues a rejpett for vertue. And I readily | England, Sicily, &. Now, that Europe fell to
agree with Varro, the moſt learned of the Ro-|the ſhare of Japhet and his poſterity, beſides
mans, That theſe originals, fetch'd from the |Divines, Joſephus and other Authors have de-
Geds, though in themſelves falſe, yet are at Jeaſt|livered as their opinion. To which purpoſe,
thus far uſeful, that men, preſuming upon a divine Ilidore cites this paſiage out of an ancient wri-

extraction, may thereby be excited to generous enter-|ter. The Nations which ſprang from Japhet, poſ-
prijes, and purſue them with more than ordinary|ſeſs. from the mountain Taurus to the North, all
zeal ; which makes them ſeldom ſail of extraordinary the middle part of Aſia, and all Europe, as far as

Origen, J. 9.
cap. 2.

Aug uſtin. de ſucceſs. From which words (by the way) St. Au- the Britiſh Ocean, and gave their names beth to the

Civitat. Dei, ſtin gathers, that Varro was inclined to think,
16, 3. cap. 4+ that all ſuch opinions were really groundleſs ;
though he did not openly and expreſly own it.

Places and to the People; a great many whereof have
been fince changed; but the reſt remain the ſame.
And we ſee in the Europeans, that | propheti-

Since therefore men are not yet agreed, ei-|cal] benediction of Noah fulfilled, God ſhal en- Geneſis ix,

ther concerning the original of the name, or the
firſt Inhabitants of Britain ; (and whether as to
theſe points the truth will hereafter be more
clearly diſcovered, now it hath lain ſo long, and
ſo deeply buried, I muſt declare my ſelf ex-
treamly doubttul: ) I hope the reader will ex-
cuſe me too, it I modeſtly interpoſe my own

large Faphet, and he ſhall dwell in the tents of
Shem, and Canaan ſhall be his ſervant. For it
was Europe, as Pliny ſaith, which produced that
people, who were the Conquerors of all other
Nations, and have more than once triumphed
over the other parts, which were the ſhare of
Shem and Cham : and this was peopled by Ja-

Pl: RR » 0s
, © % F<! 2

 &
"4 woot FE a5 <a

GU EAN 2M
5 88 1 1 *
*

—

A 2 *

Are
4 1 4 A, g 4

aan
8 N

+ Of late

Lib. 8. c
Scalig. A
p. 222.

Phil,

Fin
* Ker
and i:
Samt

conjecture, without prejudice to or againſt any |phet and his poſterity. For from his ſeveral
erſon : not in a contentious humour, but as] Sons, came the ſeveral nations; from Mazog, 4 er

1 a perſon, who deſires only to diſcover | the Maſlagetz ; from Javan, the Ionians; from bo

truth; which Iam now attempting with ſuch a |7hubal the Spaniards; and from Meſech, the Moſ-

diſ-intereſted zeal, that even the juſt apprehen-|covites. And his eldeſt ſon Gomer, in theſe our J

ſions of cenſure could not perſuade me to deſiſt. |moſt. remote parts of Europe, gave both origi- 13

And that 1 may with the more eaſe and ſucceſs | nal and name to the Gomerians, who were at- =

diſcover the original of this name, if poſſible ;|terward called (7) Cimbri and Cimmerii. That Cimbri

I will in the firſt place endeavour to find out, name of the Cimbri or Cimmerii, did, in pro- Gimmezii.

as ncar as I can, who were the firſt Inhabitants |ceſs of time, almoſt fill all theſe parts of the

— . ——  — 4

= (1) Of theſe the name of Cimbri ſeems to be the later, and only a Contraction from Cimmerii; which owes
its original to the Greek name iu and yiuuier, whereby they expreſſed the nature of the climate wherein
they lived, for that being under the extreameſt part of the mountain Taurus, the air was cloudy and mifty ; and
p as to the ſeaſon, there was a perpetual kind of winter,

8 world,

X11

's ix.

-
ly

erit.

„
on
4
5 *

* 1

2 ——_— * —

The firft 1 nhabitants. h

n

—— —

xiv

world, and ſpread it ſelf not only in Germany,
but in Gaule alſo. () Joſephus and Zonaras

both obſerve, that Thoſe who are now called Gauls,

were from Gomer formerly named Gomari, Go-

merai, and Gomeritz. And from theſe Goma-

i or Gomeri of Gaule, I have always been of

opinion that our Britains had both their origi-

nal and name ; in which I am confirm'd by the

proper and genuine name of the Britains. For the

Welch to this day call themſelves Kumero, Cym-

10, and Kumeri ; a Welch woman, Kumeraes ;

and their language, Rumeracg. Neither do they

own any other name, although ſome pretenders

+ Oflate, C. to learning f in the laſt age, have from thence
coin'd the new names of Cambri and Cambria.

1b.8. c. 3. And the Grammarian whom Virgil laſhes in his
Scalig. Annot. Catalefts and calleth the Britiſh Thucydides, Quin-
*** tilian faith was a Cimbrian. And from whence
can we imagin theſe names ſhould be derived,

but from that antient Gomer, and from thoſe

Gomeri, who were ſo near to us in Gaule, the

ſeat of the old Gomerians ? The learned are of

opinion, that the Germans are deſcended from

Aſchenaz,, the Turks from Togormah, both ſons

of Gomer; becauſe the Jews at this da

call the latter Togormah, and the former A,

chena% 3 That the Thracians, Ionians, Ri-

pheans, and the Moſchi or Muſcovites, &c. are

the Poſterity of Thirax, Javan, Riphat, and

Moſchus, no man queſtions ; for the affinity of

the names ſufficiently proves it: Likewiſe, that

the Ethiopians deſcended trom Chus, and the
Egyptians from Miſraim, the ſons of Cham, there

is no man but will readily grant; becauſe the

two people are call'd by thoſe very names in

their own languages. Why then ſhould not we

allow that our Britains or Cumeri, are the true

genuine poſterity of Gomer ; and that from him

they derive this name ? For the name it ſelf

ſeems very much to tavour this derivation. And

it is conteſs'd on all hands, that the poſterity of

Gomer planted themſelves in the utmoſt parts

Phil, Metant,ot Europe. Which alſo the very name of Go-
2 mer intimates; a name, which he ow'd not to

5 — chance, but to divine deſignation. For * Gomer
* rlegla. in the Hebrew ſignificth bounding, or the utmoſt
Sammes. border. And here let no man, with intention to
detame our Cumeri or Cimbri, object what Sex-

tus Pompeius writes, that (1) Thieves in the old

Gallick language were called Cimbri. For al-

tho the Cimbri (of whom it is likely our Cume-

ri of Britain were a part) did in that warlike

Age of the world, wherein the Soldier was the

only man of honour, rove from theſe parts of

Europe, as Poſſidenius tells us, plundering all a-
long as they went, as far as the lake Mzotis ;
yet the word Cimber ſignifies no more a
thief, than Egyptian doth a ſuperſtitious perſon ;
Chaldean, an Aſtrologer; or Sybarite, a nice de-
licate man. But becauſe the ſeveral nations had
a general propenſity to ſuch or ſuch things, the
Upon Sextus name of the nation was applied to thoſe who
Pompe ius.

— FU
.

man wonder that I make no uſe of him, from
whom our Writers have borrowed ſo much aſ-
liſtance. To declare my mind once for all, I
have no opinion of the authority of that hiſto-
ry, which paſſeth under the name of Beroſus.
For ] am of the ſame mind with ſeveral of the
moſt learned men of the preſent age, as Vola-
terrams, Vives, Antonius Auguſtinus, Melchior Ca-
nus, and eſpecially Gaſpar Varrerius; who all of
them eſteem it no better than a ridiculous in-
vention of ſome obſcure Impoſtor. Varrerius in

n.

agreed with them in the ſame humour. In this
Cenſure of point, the great Oracle of Learning Joſeph Ka-

his cenſure of — 4 printed at Rome, hath
ſaid enough in reaſon to ſpoil any man's opinion
ot that Author.

This is my judgment concerning the original

of the Britains; or rather my conjecture. For
in matters of ſo great antiquity, it is eaſier to
proceed by conjecture, than to offer at po-

ſitive determinations. Now, this account of
our deſcent from (m) Gomer and Gaule, ſeens
much more ſubſtantial, more antient, and bet-
ter grounded, than that from Brutus and Troy.
Nay, I do not deſpair to prove, that our Bri-
tains are really the off-ſpring of the Gauls, by

arguments taken from the name, ſituation, re-

ligion, cuſtoms, and language of both nations :
For in all theſe, the moſt ancient Gauls and the
Britains ſeem to have agreed, as if they had been
but one people. And, that I may prove this
aſſertion, give me leave to make a large digreſſion.

ken of it before, thus much only ſhall be re-
peated; That as the ancient Gauls were called
Gomeræi, Gomeritæ, and by contraction Cimbri; ſo
likewiſe our Britainsare called Cumeri and Kimbri.
Now, that the Gauls were called Gomeri, Joſe-
phus and Zonaras, as I ſaid before, do both te-
ſtify. And that they were alſo called Cimbri,
may be gather'd out of Cicero and Appian.
Thoſe Barbarians, whom Marius defeated, Ci-

he) gave a check to the Gauliſh forces, who were
pouring into Italy. Now all Hiſtorians agree, that
theſe were the Cimbri ; and the Coat-armour of
Beleus, their King, dug-up at Aix in Provence
where Marius routed them, does evince the

graven upon it in a ſtrange character.

Gauls, who under the conduct of Brennus,
robb'd the Temple of Delphos in Greece ; and yet
that the ſame were called Cimbri, we learn from
Appian in his Hyricks. The Celte or Gauls, ſaith
he, who are called Cimbri. And now, I think
it needleſs to have recourſe to Lucan, who calls
the Ruffian that was hir'd to kill Marius, a
Cimbrian; whereas Livy and others affirm him
to have been a Gaul or to Plutarch, by whom
the Cimbri are called Galloſcythians ; or to Reine-
ras Reineccius, an excellent Hiſtorian, who
grounding upon Plutarch's words in his Serto-
rius, is very poſitive that the Gauls and Cimbri-
ans us'd the ſame 1 Nor will I inſiſt

Berojus, liger concurs with me. But as to Beroſus, let no

upon that Cimbrian word, the only one to be
met with, which Pliny produces out of Phile-

( A later writer is of opinion, that this is not the ſenſe of Joſephus. For though (ſays he) Joſephus does ſay,
that Gomer was the father of the Galatz yet it muſt be underſtood of thoſe Galatz, who invaded the Phrygians and
poſſeſſed themſelves of their Seats, For by Gomer is meant Phrygia (as Bochartus proves) and by Ezekiel it is placed
north of Judæa, nigh to Togarmah. From theſe Gauls Gallogrzcia and Galatia is derived; all which is far enough
from being any part of Gallia, properly ſo called. Sammes Brit. p. 11, :

(1) And Plutarch, KiuCpes tmoruaCuor Trppart vg Auge, i. e. the Germans call Robbers, Cimbri, And in tho
German tongue, Kempher, Kemper, Kimber, and Kamper, according to different dialects, ſiguify a Warriour z which

was formerly only another name for a R6bber.

(m) This opinion of peopling Britain from Gaule is oppoſed by ſome, who are inclin'd rather to think they
came from Germany; not only becauſe Czſar, telling us the Inland Britains were Aborigines, ſeems to im-
ply that he could not diſcover any thing of the Gauliſh tongue among them ; but alſo upon Tacitus's inferring
from the make of their limbs, and other circumſtances, that the Germans planted the moſt northern parts of it.

non,

As touching the Name, becauſe J have ſpo- The name;

cero plainly terms Gauls. Caius Marius ( ſaith Pe Proconſul.

ſame. For theſe words, Beleos Cimbros, were en- Forcatulus
Alſo, out of the

Writers unanimouſly agree, that thoſe were 2 An-

1235.

” . ” .
" "
m 8 1 r rn
—
— —

1

xv B

RI TA T1 N. xvi

Ilorimaruſa. Mon, to Wit, Morimaruſa, i. e. the dead fea,
which is purely Britiſh ; tor Mor in the Britiſh
tongue lignitieth Sea, and Marw, dead.

nat? eing therefore ſe Nations agree in their
Tue Situati- Seeing theretore theſe } g

On.

moſt antient name ; whence can we conceive
that that name ſhould paſs over into this Iſland,
but with the firſt Planters that came hither out
of Gaul; a country ſeparated from it by a very

It makes alſo very much to our purpoſe, what
Cxſar relates; how in his time Divitiacus, who
govern'd a great part of Gaul, had Britain at the
lame time under his Dominion. And what is
of yet greater moment, Pliny reckons the Bri- Britains in

tanni or Britains, among the maritim people o

f Gaul, Some

Gaul, and places them over-againſt our Ifland Fiby bl
of Britain, near the County of Bullen which 3rjanni, not

narrow chanel? For the world was not peopled
all at the ſame time ; but it muſt be granted as
a certain truth, that thoſe countries which lay
neareſt to the Mountains of Armenia (where the
ark reſted after the flood, and from whence
mankind was propagated ) were firſt of all in-
habited. As tor inſtance, the Leſſer Aſia and
Greece, before Italy ; Tah before Gaule ; and
Gaule before Britain. On this occaſion, we may
reflect with pleaſure, how the great Creator,
when he tram'd the world, contrived this con-
nexion between the ſeveral parts ; and plac'd
the Iſlands at ſuch convenient diſtances, that
no one is ſo remote, but that it is within a
clear view of ſome other land. With this de-
ſign, probably, that when countries ſhould come
to be over-burthen'd with people, they might
ſee where to diſcharge themſelves ; till, to the
glory of it's Creator, the Univerſe in all its
parts ſhould be repleniſh'd with people. We
niay theretore reaſonably imagine, that the an-
tient Gemeri; were cither puſh'd on by ſuch as
preſs'd ſorw ard for room, or ſent abroad to eaſe
an over-peopled country, or carry'd from home
by the natural itch which mankind hath to ſee
foreign countries. Upon ſome one or other of
theſe accounts, thoſe antient Gomeri might pro-
bably at firſt croſs the chanel into this our
Iſland, which lay ſo near them, that they could
eaſily diſcern it trom the Continent. For Rea-
fon it ſelf tells us, that every country mult have
received its firſt Inhabitants, rather trom neigh-
bouring, than from remote places. Who would
not judge, that Cyprus had its firſt Inhabitants
from Aſia, next to it; Crete and Sicily, from their
neighbour Greece; Corfica, from it's neighbour
Italy; and, to come nearer home, Zealand from
Germany which borders upon it; and Jſeland
from Norway ; rather than from the remote
parts of Tartary, or Mauritania ? In like man-
ner, why ſhould we not think that our Britain
was peopled by the Gauls, which were our next
Neighbours ; rather than that the Trojans, Ha-
lians, Albans, or Bjutians, who lie at ſuch a vaſt
diſtance, were the firſt Inhabitants? Nor indeed do
Judicicus] writers fetch the firſt Inhabitants of
Britain from any other place, than from Gaul its
next neighbour. The innermoſt parts of Britain,
faith Cæſar, are inhabited by thoſe, who, according
to tradition, are believ'd to be Aborigines; the Sea-
Coaſts, by ſuch as came out of Belgium in Gaul on
purpoſe to make new conquests ; and theſe people are
generally called by the names of the cities from whence
they came, now they are ſettled in their new Planta-
ticus, For there were in Britain, as well as in
Gaule, people called Belge, Atrebatii, Parifii, Ce-
womanni, &c. Tacitus allo ſaith, F we confider all
circumſtances, it is probable that the Gauls firſt peo-
pled Britain, which lies ſo near them. Bede too,
of all our writers the moſt conſtant triend to
truth, gives this as his opinion: At firſt, ſaith
he, this Iſland was inhabited only by thoſe Britains
( from ulem alſo it rock its name) who from Armo-
rica, as it is ſaid, croſſed over into Britain, and
there planted themſelves upon the Southern Coagts.
The Armorican Tract he calls the Sea-coaſt of
Gaul, which lies directly oppoſite to our Iſland.

Eraſmus Mi-
chael of Na-
vigation,

—

alſo Dionyſius Afer, a more antient writer, hath Britanni.
done in theſe verſes,

TY; vr mbpudTlw A N yawy ire veporias

AN Snaxor pueyadypaur t1@- ID

M3x&- in” vrei ggio Terexppirer, xt Popeis

Nxtars woos xiexurar po@®), „d Bertram!

Atoxa 1 qua repuor\au fe Leude.

Near the great pillars on the fartheſt land}
The old Iberians, haughty fouls, command
Along the Continent, where Northern Seas
Rowl their vaſt tides, and in cold billows riſe :
Where Britiſh nations in long tracts appear,
And tair-skinn'd Germans ever fam'd in war.

For theſe words, 2% Bp:rams), where Britains |
ſeem to have reſpect to thoſe other, M3z@- in”
vrelggio. And Euſtathius, who wrote a Com-
ment upon him, thinks the Britains in Gaul to
be here meant 3 Toy 5 BptT ovvwv T&TW) Taganunil a
c rrixtexv Bye rau lã 8 Moe aro his words, | and from
theſe Britains, the Iſles of Britain over-againſt them
tool their denomination, | But Avienus, and Stepha-
nus in his bookot Cities, are ot another opinion.
Moreover, there was one and the ſame Reli- Religion,
gion in both theſe Nations. Among the Britains,
taith Tacitus, you will find the Religion of the
Gauls, and the people poſſeſs d with the ſame ſuper-
ſtitions. The Gauls, ſaith Solinus, after a deteſta-
ble manner, to the injury rather than the honour of
Religion, offer d huinan Sacrifices. That the Bri-
tains did the very {ame, amongſt others Dio
Caſſius aſſures us in his Nero, That both Na-
tions had allo their Druide appears plainly by Druids,
Cæſar and Tacitus; and out ot the firſt, I ſhall
here inſert an entire paſiage concerning this
ſubject. The Druids are preſent at all divine offi-
ces, look after the Sacrifices publick and private, and
interpret the myſteries of religion. The youth in
great numbers apply themſelves to theſe Druids for
education ; and all perſoas have a great reverence for
them. For generally in all controverſies, as well pul-
lick as private, it is they that make the determinati-
on : And whenever there is any outrage or murder
committed, when any ſuites ariſe about eſtates, or
diſputes about bounds, all is left to their judgment.
They appoint rewards and puniſhments at their diſcre-
tion. If any, either private perſon, or body of peo-
ple, abide not by their decree, they forbid him the
Sacrifices. This, among them, is eſteem'd the moſt
grievous of all puniſhments. They who are thus in-
terdicted, are reckon d the moſt proſligate of mankind;
all men ſtudiouſly decline their company and conver-
Jation, and ſhun their approach, as if they feared
Jome injection. They are excluded from the benefit of
the law, can ſue no man, and are uncapable of all
hozours. _ Amongſt all theſe Druids, there is one Chief,
wo hath the ſupream authority. Upon his death, his
Succeſſor is ſome one of the moſt diſtinguiſh d merit
amongſt them, if there be any ſuch ; but if there be
Jeveral of equal worth and merit, one ſucceeds by the
election of the Druids. Sometimes the Sword decides,
which party ſhall carry it. Theſe Druids, at a ſet time
every year, have a general aſſembly in the territory of the
Carnutes, which lies about the midſt of Gaul, in a cer-
tain place conſecrated to that purpoſe. Hither reſort from

all parts ſuch as have any —— depending ; and
they are wholly determin d by the Druids. () This

fort

(*) If the diſcipline of the Druids, ſo conliderable both for Religion and Government, was, as Ca ſar obſery
frſt found in Britain, and thence convey d into Gaul, does it not ſeem

——— —-—

. * - . 88,
to intimate that Bitain muſt have been peo-

pled

gion.

ds,

„„

ä

06 1 „ . nf 0
"_ 4th 8 2 * 1 * CT...» —
1

Inhabitants.

SY,

ith
7

8
+3
rr
2 A
* 24
4
Tee

8
©
b
4
S
yo
+
b
py
4
_
"2
A
3
r
Is
3
5
:
0
*
2
1
©.
2
©:
'S
8
bt.
£4
A
I
fs
*
3
1
D
l *
Na,
E
— Þ
N
Wy
*
">
4
1
2
*
*.4
booed.
* *
2 0
_
WO
2
1 4
© na
*
4
"4
v1.8
by +
by -
*
4 =
£ *
7
mY...
U
of
» *.
4B
E 5
1 1
N
"og
*g
*
1
*
"
8
**
Ln
þ

fort of religious profeſſion is thought to have been firſt

i Britain, and from thence carry d over into Gaul:
And even now, thoſe that defire throughly to be in-
ſtructed in their myſteries, for the moſt part go over
into Britain. The Druids are exempt from all mi-
litary duties; nor do they pay tribute, like the reſt of
the people. And as they are excuſed from ſerving in
the wars, ſo are they alſo from all other troubleſome
Offices whatſoever. Theſe great privileges are the
cauſe that they have ſo many diſciples ; ſome addreſs
themſelves to be admitted, others are ſent to them by
their parents or kindred. There they make them
(as it is ſaid) learn by heart a great number of ver-
fes ; aud thus they continue under diſcipline for ſeveral
years, not being allow'd by their rules to commit what
they are taught to writing ; although in moſt other
affairs, both publick and private, they make uſe of
the (o) Greek Character. This rule they have ſettled
amongſt them, I. ſuppoſe, for two reaſons. , Firſt, be-
cauſe they would not have the vulgar made acquainted
with their myſterious learning ; and next, becauſe they
would have therr ſcholars exerciſe their memories, and
not truſt to what they have in writing 3 as we ſee it
often happens, that when men rely too much upon that
help, their diligence in learning, and care in retain-
ing, do equally abate. One of the principal points
they teach, is, the Immortality and Tranſmigration of
Souls. And this doctrine, removing the fear of death,
they look upon as moſt proper to excite them to Courage.
They alſo make diſcourſes to their Scholars concerning
the ſtars and their motions, concerning the magnitude
of the heaven aad the earth, the natures of things, and
the power and majeſty of the immortal Gods. Where-
upon Lucan thus addreiles himſelt to them,

Et vos barbaricos ritus moremque ſiniſtrum

Sacrorum, Druida, poſitis repetiſtis ab armis,

Solis noſſe Deos, & cali ſydera vobis,

Aut ſolis neſcire datum Nemora alta re-
motis

Tucolitis Iucis, vobis authoribus umbræ

Non tacitas Erebi ſedes Ditiſque profundi

Pallida regua petunt. Regit idem ſpiritus
artus, |

Orbe alio longs, canitis ft cognita, vitæ

Mors media eſt. Certe populi quos deſpicit
Arttos,

Falices errore ſuo, quos ille timorum

Maximus haud urget lethi metus ; inde ruendi

In ferrum mens prona viris, animæque capaces

Mortis, & ignavum eſt rediture parcere vitæ.

And you, O Druids, free from noiſe and
arms

Renew'd your barbarous rites and horrid
charms.

What Gods, what Powers in happy manſions
dwell

Or only you, or all but you can tell.

To ſecret ſhades and untrequented groves,

From world and cares your peaceful tribe re-
moves. |

You teach, that Souls, eas d of their mortal
load,

Nor with grim Pluto make their dark abode,

Nor wander in pale troops along the ſilent
flood:

But on new regions caſt reſume their reign,
Content to. govern earthy frames again.
Thus death is nothing but the middle line,
Betwixt what lives will come, and what have

n.

Happy the people by your charms ſt,

Nor — nor fears diltarb their — 1
breaſt. 5

On certain dangers unconcern'd they run;

And wa with pleaſure what they would not

un.
Defie Death's lighted power, and bravely

ſcorn |
To ſpare a life that will ſo ſoon return.

By what name ſoever theſe Prieſts were known An Oak is
to their C-/tz and to the Britains, in their own Welch is
tongues ; this word Druid ſeems derived from Perw.

a Greek original ; to wit, Apis, an Oak : not

only becauſe they eſteem'd nothing more ſacred

than the AM/elto of an Oak; whence Ovid wri-
teth thus,

At __— Druids, Druidæ clamare ſole-
ant,

Run Druids to the Miſſelto, they ſung.

but alſo becauſe their uſual reſidence was in

groves, amongſt Oaks ; nor did they perform

any of their ceremonies without ſome of the

branches or leaves of that Tree. This their

ns, Pliny hath particularly deſcrib'd ; The Zit. 16. 4.44.
ids ( ſo the Gauls call their men of Religion)

hold nothing more ſacred than the Miſſelto, and the

tree on which it grows; provided it be an Oak. There-

fore they chooſe ſolitary groves, wherein are no trees

but Oaks ; nor do they perform any ceremonies without

the branches or leaves of that Tree: So that from 4 Fronde.
thence (if we attend to the Greek ſignifitation) they

may very well be thought to have taken the name of

Druidæ. Indeed, whatſoever they find ſ growing to, + Adnaſcatur
or upon an Oak, they take to be ſent from Heaven, ilis.

and look upon it as a certain fign, That their God

hath made choice of that particular Tree for himſelf.

But it is a thing very rare to be inet withal; and

when it is found, they reſort to it with great Devoti-

on. In theſe ceremonies, they principally obſerve, that

the Moon be juſt fix days old; with which they begin

the computation of their months and years, and of

that period, which with them is called an age, i. e.

thirty years compleat. And they chooſe the fixth day,

becauſe they reckon the Moon is then of a conſiderable

ſtrength, when ſbe is not 0s yet half full ; and they Fus dimilia.
call it by a name anſwering to || All-heale. The ſa- | Ommie Sa-
crifice, and a feitival entertainment, being prepared nantem. ©
under the Oak, they bring thither two white Bulls,

whoſe horns are then, and not till then, tied. This

done, the Prieſt habited in a white vet ment, climbs

the Tree, and with a golden pruning-knife, cuts 0

the Miſſelto, which is carefully received in a white * Candido Sa-
woollen cloth by them that attend below. Then they go. |
proceed to kill the leaſts for ſacrifice, and make their

prayers to their God, that he would . this his

own gift to thoſe to whom they ſhall diſper e it. They

have a conceit that a deco tion of this Millelto, given
to any barren Animal, will certainly make it fruit-

** a.

—_

pled before Gaul ; as having by longer experience arriv'd at a more compleat ſcheme of religion and govern-

ment ? Behdes, if our Iſland had been peopled from Gaul, would it not look probable, to ſay they mult bring
along with them the religion and diſcipline of the place ?

(o) But from hence we mult not conclude that they had any knowledge of the Greek tongue. Nay, Cæſar

himſelf, when he writ to Quintus Cicero, (beſieg'd at that time ſomewhere among the Nerviens)

nn'd his Let-

ter in Greek, leſt it ſhould be intercepted, and fo give intelligence to the Enemy, Which had been but a poor
project, if the Druids (who were the great Miniſters of State) had been maſters of that language. The learned
Selden is of m_— that the word Gracis has crept into the copies, and is no part of the original. And it was

natural enoug

for Cxſar, in his obſervations of the difference between the management of their diſcipline, and

their other affairs; to ſay in general, that in one they made uſe of letters, and not in the other, without ſpeci-

tying any particulars,

2 jul ;

BRITAIN.

* Caſſibelli-
nuss.
Their Man-

Ders.

=
9 -
- — ©
: — -
*
Vs OO SES 4

- =
at ft el
—_— LL EC ES
—

XIX
Saronida,
Dry.
q
| | | ; Bardi.
1
1
T8
14
1
"Mi
ill
[ | ;
|
g |
Their com-
mon- wealth.

ful : alje, that it is a moſt ſoveraign antidote
againſt all ſorts of forJon. So much Religion do
people commonly place in Trifles. It is tarther
oblervable, That Diodorus Siculus calls theſe
Prieſts of the Gauls, in the ſame ſenſe, ZargSas 3
a word ſignitying Oaks, as all know who un-
derſtand the Greek tongue. And Maximus
Tyrius writes, That the Celtz or Gauls wor-
ſhip Jupiter ; of whom they make the higheſt Oak,
laith he, to be the repreſentation. It may alſo
ſeem to proceed from the Druide, that our Saxon
Anceſtors (as we read in Altric) call'a a Magici-
an in their language, Dpy. If you have a mind
to be farther intorm'd concerning theſe things,
you may conſult Mela, Lactautius, Enſebius de
Praparatioue Evangelica, and the Comedy Aulu-
laria of Pſeudoplautus.

Among their Religious, the Gauls had alſo
their Bards ; whole office it was to {ing to the
harp the ſongs they had made upon the Exploits
ot famous men; on which account the ſame
Lucan thus ſpeaks to them,

Vos quoque qui fortes animas belloque pe-
rempteis

Laudibus in longum vates dimittitis æuum,

Plurima ſecuri fudiſtis carmina Bardi.

And you, old Bards, who made it all your
care

To ſing of War, and Men renown'd in war,

When Peace returning rais'd your joytul
tongue,

Secure continu'd your immortal Song.

The ſame ſort of Men have the ſame name
zmong the modern Britains. For they now
call ſuch Men Bards ; who, beſides this their
Poerical function, do alſo apply themſelves par-
ticularly to the ſtudy ot Genealogies. But there
is no account left us, whether the Britains be-
liev'd, as the Gauls did, that they were deſ-
cended from Dis. For this reaſon it was, that
the Gauls always reckon'd by nights and not
by days, and fer the night before the day in
their account of time. And in this point, it
is certain, our Britaias agreed with them : for
that ſpace of time which the Latins call Septi-
mana, and two Septimana's, the Welſh term Wi-
„us, i. e. eight nights, and Pymthec-aos, i. e.
fifteen nights. (p)

Likewiſe both nat ions ſeem to have fallen into
one and the ſame form of government; tor nei-
ther of them was under the rule of a ſingle per-
ſon ; but as Gaul, ſo allo Britain, had many
kings. And as the Gauls, upon extraordinary
emergencies, us'd to call a publick Council ot
the whole nation, and chuſe one to be Com-
mander in chief; ſo the Britains did the very
fame upon the like occaſions, as we gather
from theſe words of Cuſar, The chief command,
ſaith he, and management of the war was by unani-
moins conſent committed to Caſſivellaunus.

Nor were theſe nations unlike in their man-
ners, cuſtoms, and ways of living. Both were
ſtout and warlike ; both delighted in blood,
and both of equal boldneis and bravery, whe-
ther in Engagements, or in expoſing themſelves
to other dangers; as we find by Strabo, Taci-

&.

tus, Dion, Herod ian, and others. In their man-
ners and cuftoms, ſaith Strabo, the Britains are
ſomething like the Gauls; and immediately he
adds, As to their fighting, they are for the moſt part
fierce and cruel, like ſome of the Gauls. With him
Tacitus agrees, The Britains, that part of them
which the Romans have not yet conquer'd, {ti
remain ſuch as the Gauls were formerly. And in
another place, The Britains are next to the Gauls,
and much like them. Mela tells us, That the Bri-
tains, when they tought, were armed after the
taſhion of the Gauls.

The Britains, ſays Strabo, in their wars, us'd
a great number ot chariots, az do ſome of the
Gauls.

It was the cuſtom of both nations, in the field,
to draw up their men diſtinct, according to their
Provinces ; that the ſeveral People might have
an opportunity to ſignalize their valour. That
this was the practice of the Gauls, appears by
that place in Cæſar; The Gauls, ſaith he, drawn
up in diſtinct Bodies, according to their ſeveral cities,
ſecured the ford. "Tacitus affirms the ſame of the
Britains, in the fight of Caratacus, The troops
of the ſeveral Countries ſtood before the forti fica-
tions.

The Garls, ſaith Strabo, are of @ quick docile
wit, and readily take any fort of learning. Nor
were the Britains herein inferiour to them;
nay, Agricola, in Tacitus, preters their parts
and ingenuity, before that ot the Gauls ; ſo that
the ſame Britains, who formerly rejected even the
Roman language, were now become admirers of
Eloquence.

That the Gauls were a well-meaning honeſt
People, we have FHrabo's authority; and the
ſame is implied in Tacitus, concerning the Bri-
tains, where he tells us, that they chearfully and
readily bore the levies both of Men and mo-
ney, and all other Lrdens impoſed upon them
by the Empire, if they intermix'd not injuries
and provocations.

Cæſar relates, that the Gauls were much in-
clined to alterations in Government, out of a
natural inconſtancy and levity. The Britains
in like manner, ſaith Tacitus, were divided in-
to ſeveral parties and tactions.

By means of this levity of the Gauls, which
Cæſar calls by the gentle name of Jafirmity; they
at laſt became ſo credulous, that the Credulity of
the Gauls grew proverbial, and gave, occaſion to
that of the Poet, |

Et tumid:s Galla credulitate fruar.
And be a Gaul in fond credulity.

Neither in this reſpe& have our Britains dege-
nerated ; for they have an ear always open to
every idle ſtory, and, out of a ſuperſtitious fear
or hope, give credit to the ſillieſt Predicti-
Ons. *

We read in Strabo, that the Gauls would
be highly concern'd, when they ſaw any abuſe
offer d to their relations.
Sympathy dwells in our Britains, above any
other nation, is a thing ſo notorious, and ſo

commonly obſerved, that it needs no proof.

(p) So the Saxons expreſs'd 20, 30, 40 years, by ſo many Winters. And we at this day retain that old way
of reckoning by nights in our ſennigbt and fortnight, which are plainly contracted out of ſeven-night and fourteen-

nig ht.

And whereas Strabo obſerves, that the Britains worſhip'd Ceres and *Proſerpina, the infe

Goddefles,

above any other; Sir Henry Spelman concludes from thence, that this gave bccafion to reckoning nights and

winters z and that the winter particularly was conſecrated to the infernal Goddefſes, becauſe they
that in this ſeaſon, the ſeeds of every thing did owe their preſervation, to their care, Veni.

4 ad a fancy,

The

That the ſame * Propinquir

Sod ME Lit os i io. ed Be ad
4 - a >
6 io n 4 1
» _ 2 #4

7 ke 3 * * >) i f
» SSL , 18 1 12 2 , ” Bn. $3" Lit * *
19 r * * * EL 1 EE %” by N 4

A mba 4
Welch,

ÞBrach.

opiaꝗuic.

—

CES Cats is i ble ei * :
* ak.
. * 1 £1 SY
a *
PF

91 * 2
8 g 8 =” * 4 a 93 *
— r 1 2 - a

"The firſt Tubabitams.

Amballi.
Welch,

Brache.

Language.

The Gault, as we find in Cæſar, according to
their diſtinttion from the reſt either in birth or riches,
had in proportion ſo many more ſervants and depen-
dants in their retinue : theſe they call d Ambacti ;
and this was the ouly piece of State amongſt them.
Nor do our Britiſh Nobility or Gentry, at this
day, account any thing ſo honourable as a great
retinue ; from whom it is thought the Engliſh
learn'd to travel with ſuch troops of Atten-
dants. In which humour, not long ſince, they
far outwent all other Europeans.

Cæſar and Strabo both tell us, that the Hou-
ſes of the Britains were 1n all points like thoſe
of the Gauls, and ſeated in the midſt of
woods.

The Gauls, as Strabo writes, wore chains of
gold about their necks ; and Bunduica the Britiſh
Queen (ſaich Xiphilin) wore a golden chain, with
a garment of many colours. Nor is that ſort of
ornament any where more in uſe in our days,
than in this Ifland, amongſt us and our modern
Britains.

That both the Britains and the Gauls wore
a Ring upon their middle finger, we learn from
Pliny.

Strabo obſerves, That the Gauls took a pride
in having long Hair. Cæſar tells us, That the
Britains wore their hair at full length.

It appears from ſeveral Authors, that the
Gauls uſed a certain fort of Garment, which
in their language they called Brachæ that theſe
were alſo common to our Britains, is proved

by that Verſe of Martial,
Ouam veteres Brache Britonis Pauperis.

Then the coarſe Brachæ the poor Britains
wore.
I paſs over what Silius Italicus writes of the
Gauls,

Quinetiam ingenio fluxi, ſed prima feroces
Vaniloquum Celtz genus ac mutabile mentis.

And talking Celtz, changeable and vain,
All fire at firſt, but ſoon grown cold a-
gain.

becauſe theſe qualities are common to moſt na-
tions. I might here give many more inſtances
of the great agreement there was, between theſe
two nations; bur I forbear, leſt what I ſay
ſhould give occaſion of ſcandal to ill-natur'd
people. Beſides, I always lik'd that rule, Mo-
deration is good in every thing; and perhaps this
argument from a community of manners, will
- reckon'd but an argument of the weaker
Ort.

But now we come to the Language; a parti-
cular, upon which the main ſtreſs of this con-
troverſie lies, as being the ſureſt evidence of the
original of any nation. For there is no man,
1 ſuppoſe, but will readily allow, that thoſe
People who ſpeak the ſame Language, muſt ne-
ceſſarily be derived from one common original.
For inſtance, ſuppoſe all our Hiſtories that ever
were written, had been loſt, and no Author

*

had told us, that we Engliſh are deſcended from
the Germans, or the natural Scots from the Iriſh,
or the Britains of Bretagne in France, from our
Britains of this Iſland ; yet the affinity ot lan-
guage alone would manifeſtly prove it : nay;
would be of much more weight, than the au-
thority of the beſt Hiſtorians. If therefore I can

make it appear, that the ancient Gauls and our ger the 6:
Britains ſpoke the ſame language; the conſe- pinion of If,
quence is undeniable, that they moſt certainly had Portanus, in

the ſame original. Nor is it of any conſequence
in this caſe, what Cæſar hath written, that the
Gauls themſelves ſpoke divers languages; ſince
Strabo tells us, that they diftered only in Dia-
left. They did not all, ſaith he, uſe a language
every way the ſame, but in ſome ſmall matters va-

ry'd from one another. But that the language of
the ancient Gauls was the ſame with that of

the Britains (making allowance for ſome ſmall
variety in the Dialect) we may reaſonably infer
from Cæſar, where he writes, that it was uſual
tor the Gauls, who would be throughly inſtru-
cted in the Diſcipline of the Druids, to go over
into Britain to our Druids to learn it. Now,
ſeeing the Druids had no Books, of neceſſity we
mult conclude that their inſtructions were given
in the language whica was uſed by the Gauls.
And this, Cornelius Tacitus __ affirms, The

Britains and Gauls, ſaith he, differ not much in their

ſpeech. Upon theſe reaſons, Beatus Rhenanus, Geſ-

ner, Hottoman, Peter Daniel, Picardus, and all o-
thers who have ſearched into the depths of An-
tiquity, concur with me in this opinion: Ex-
cept ſome few, who are very earneſt to have
it believed, that the Gauls ſpoke the German

2mden's E-

piſtles, p. 90.

language. But that no man may ever be able In theſe
hereafter to perplex this Truth, I will make a words I made
collection of ancient Gauliſh words, as many uſe of theBri-

at leaſt as can be met with in Authors; (tor

tiſh Lexicon
of William

the body of that language hath been long ſince Salisbury, and
bury'd in oblivion.) And it will ſoon appear another old

that very many of them, without the leaſt MS

ſtraining, nay, with much eaſe and ſcarce any
alteration, agree very well with our Britiſh
words, both in ſound and ſenſe.

That Divona in the Gauliſh tongue, ſignifies Diyona;

the Fountain of the Gods, we have Aulonius's Au-
thority in that Verſe of his concerning a Foun-
tain at Bourdeaux,

Divona Celtarum lingua fons addite Divis.
Divona fountain of the Gods in Gaul.

Now, our Britains call God (4) Dyw, and a
fountain Vonan; of which two words Divonan
is a compound, turn'd according to the Latin
idiom, for verſe- ſake, into Divora.

We find in ſeveral Authors, that Jupiter,
whom from Thunder the Greeks call'd Begilazos,
and the Latins Tonans, i. e. The Thunderer, was
worſhip'd by the Gauls under the name of

(r) Tarams, Now Taran in Britiſh ſignifies Taranis|

Thunder; and ſuitably to this ſenſe, the Ger-
mans may be conceived to have given Jupiter
the name of Thonder ; for, they call Thurſday

Thonderdach, as much as to ſay, The Thunderer's
day.

—

(4) Daunen Dbuw, in Britiſh Ggnifies Fons Dei; but it would be improper to ſay Dauwſynnon in the ſame ſence z

for that wou'd fignihe Deus fontis.

(r) Mr. Camden is charged by a modern writer, as putting Taranis inſtead of Taramis, on purpoſe to reconcile
it better to his Taran, i, e. Thunderer. The charge is too heavy, unleſs he had proved his Taramis to be the true
reading, which I do not find attempted z and why may it not as well be ſaid that he eſpouſed that reading, to
make it agree better with the Phœnician Tarem ? The Cheſter-Altar (the inſcription whereof ſee in Che ſbire)
which gives Jupiter the title of Tanarus, ſeems to favour our Author's conjecture. For, Taran being the Britiſh,

Tanarus inſtead of Taranus is a li
acquainted with the language.
—

p eaſie enough, eſpecially to ſtrangers, whom we may imagine not to be ſo well

The

ͤLX*„ 2 22

8 — e es -

— — —— — — »
The Gauls had another God, called by Lu- As Phalanx was the proper Name of a Legi-
Heſut. can (s) Heſms, by Lactantius (t) Hem the Au-|on among the Macedonians, ſo was Caterva a- Caterve,

Tentates,

Tueſday.

Tib. 1.

Deſii,

thor of the Querolus termed him the Barking |mong the Gauls, as you may ſee in Vegetius.

Anubis, becauſe he was pictur d in the ſhape of a] Nor is this word yet out of date among our

Dog. Now (u) Huad among our modern Britains| Britains, who term a Troop (c) Caturfa ; and

ſignifies a Dog. Ivar, Kad; and the warlike ſtrength of a Le-
It is very certain, that the Gauls worſhiped |gion, Kaderne : in ſome Copies of Vegetius it

Mercury, under the name of Teutates, as the In- is read Caterna.

venter of Arts, and the Guide to Travellers. To this Kad may not improperly be referr'd Cateia.

And (u) Duw-Taith in the Britiſh, imports as] Cateia, which was a fort of warlike weapon a-

much as The God of Journeys. Nor am I igno-|mong the Gauls, as you have it in Kidore.

rant, that Mercury, by Plato, in his Phadrus| (d) Geſſa, a Gauliſh weapon, is interpreted Geſſa,

and Pbilebus, is called Theut. Tho' I know, by Servius a Spear or Pike ; to which the Bri- |

ſome will have Teutates to be the German Tu-|tiſh (e) Cethilou ſeems to be a-kin ; and that

iſco mention'd in Tacitus, and the ſame with (according to Ninnius's expoſition ) ſignifies

Mars; and that from him, we who are deſcen-| ſtakes burnt at the ends, as alſo, a warlike ſeed or

ded from the Germans, call Mars's day, Tueſ- | generation. |

day. Concerning theſe three Gods of the Gauls, | Pauſanias tells us, that the Gauls whom Bren-

take, if you pleaſe, theſe three Verſes off nus led into Greece, call'd that ſort of fight

Lucan. | which conſiſts of three Hotſes [a breaſt] Tri- T3;mars

= marcia. For an horſe, ſaith he, was among the

Et quibus immitis placatur ſanguine diro Gauls called Marca. Now this is purely a Bri-

Teutates, horrenſque feris altaribus Heſns, tiſh word; for Tri with them ſignifies three, and

Et Taranis Scythice non mitior ara Diana. | March, a horſe, _

In the ſame Book, Pauſanias writes, that the

And thoſe vile wretches that with human | Gauls call'd their own Country-Shields, Thireos ; Three, |

blood which to this day the Britains call Tarian.
Teutate's and fierce Heſzs's altars load, | Czxfar relates in his Ephemerides or Journals,
And barbarous Tarams his ſhrine that vies |as we have it from Servius, that once being ta-
With curſt Diana's Scythian cruelties. ken by the enemy in Gaul, and carry'd away

on horſeback in his armour, they were met by

We learn from St. Auſtin and Iſidore, that the|a Gaul that knew him, who inſultingly cry'd

foul Spirits, commonly called Hubi, were ter-|out Cetos Cæſar, which in the Gauliſh language Ceres;

med by the Gauls Dufii, becauſe they daily and |was as much as to ſay, Let go Ceſar. Now,

continuall practiſe their uncleanneſſes. Now] (F) Geduch among the Britains, is a word of

that which is Continual and daily, the Britains the ſame import.

do ſtill expreſs by the word (x) Dyth. Rheda among the Gauls, ſaith Quintilian, is Rea;
Pomponius Mela writes, That a ſort of Re-|a word of the ſame ſignification as Caruca (i. e.

ligious Women, devoted to the ſervice of a|a Chariot) among the Latins. This word is

certain Deity in Gaul under a Vow of perpe-|not now to be found in the Britiſh Tongue;

tual Virginity, were by them called Senæ. I] but it is apparent that it hath been in it b

would rather read it ()) Lene, if I might be|the words at this day us'd ; Rhediad (a 3

allow'd. For, thoſe Religious Virgins whom (g) Rhedec (to run) and Redecfa (a race.) For,

we call Nuns, the Britains, as we find in an] that all theſe came 2 rom Rheda, is

ancient Gloſlary, called (z) Leanes ; from whence | beyond diſpute. Nor ſhould I think it ab- |

came originally the name of Lean-minfer, now |{urd, to deduce Eporedia, the name of a City zporediai |

' Lemfter, a very ancient Nunnery among the |among the Salaſſi, trom the ſame original; ſince

Britains. Fliny ſaith it took that name from Horſe-ta-

Gaſſatæ.

Geſum.

The Gauls, ſaith Polybius, called their mer- | mers.
cenary ſoldiers, Gaſſatæ. And the Britains at! There was alſo another ſort of Chariot, much
this day call their hired Servants (a) Gueſſin. |us'd in both nations, and call'd by one name,
Servius tells us, that valiant men were by | Covinus, and the driver of it Covinarins. And ccni,
the Gauls called Geſj; ; and ( Guaſſdewr a- tho' the word is loſt, and the Chariot too, yet
mong the Britains ſignifies a ſtout and valiant |the Primitive thereof, if I may ſo ſay, remains
man. among our Britains; in whoſe language the
To which alſo may be referred Geſum, a wea- Word Kowain ſignifies () to carry in a Wagon.
n proper to the Gauls, as Pilum was to the | E/edum was alſo a Gauliſh Wagon, or rather Eſſedum:
* and Framea to the Germans. But of |a Chariot fitted for the wars; which Propertius,
this, by and by. as well as Cæſar, attributes to the Britains:

Py

—
he

s) Hizzus and Hazis in the Syrian lan e is ſtrong and powerful in war. Sammes's Brit. p. 61.
8 ess, Mr. — thinks ought — any 4 put the ſame nn but rather, that he is confounded by La-
ctantius with the known name of Bacchus and Hues, worſhiped in theſe parts. See p. 62.

(u) Huad in Britiſh is now obſolete ; but Bathuad (which is a Compound of it, is their common word for a
bound; viz. from Baedbu, to bait z and buad, a dog. The Engliſh uſe (t) where the Germans have (s) as, foot,
fu ʒ white ; weisz water, waſſer, e. and the ſame difference might poſſibly be between the Gauliſh and Britiſh.

(w) Duw-Faith, is the true writing,

(x) It is dydb but the relation between that and Dufiz, ſeems to be too much forc'd.

() This reading cannot be allow'd ; for, beſides that Mela expreſly ſays Senæ, He alſo tells us they were
called by the Gauls Cenæ z now the pronunciation of (s) and (c) is ſo near, that it makes no difference, |

(+ Lheian in Britiſh is a Nun, But (s) and (th) are ſibilating Letters; fo that Sene and Lbeian may poſſibly
have hac the ſame original, though their initials be different.

(a) Gwis, a Servant; Gweſia a petty Servant. (b) Guaſdewr ſignifies a ſtout Servant.

(c) Catyrva or Katerva, at this day denotes in Britiſh an _—_ number : but formerly it is probable it ſignified
a vaſt army, for Kd does not imply war in general, but a ſet · battle; and Kadarn is ſtrong.

(d) Concerning Geſſa, Rheda, Covinus, Efſedum, Cateia, Brache, Peteritum, words alledg'd by Mr. Camden to
confirm his opinion; ſee more in Voſſius de Vitiis Serm. lib, 1. c. 2, and 8. ö

62) This is long ſince obſolete. But if it ever was the ſame with the Gauliſ Ges, we muſt ſuppoſe it a com-
pound, from Kerb, a word that might ſignihe a Dart or Spear, and Ulw, hot embers,

(f) Gadwcb Gaiſar, ſignifies in Britiſh, Cæſarem dimittite ; as Kedwch | or Cedwch] Gaiſar, cuſtodite Cæſarem.

C) Rbedeg in Britiſh, (b) To carry corn from the kelds to the barn,

| Eſſeda

BRITAIN. _

—Q

XXV

Circittss

Penninu

Apennir

Armori

Bauca
Varge, 1
6,

Ey.

All-brog,

Glaſtus

cia.

1

abitants. _xwi

Eſſeda calatis fiſte Britanna jugis.
And ſtop the Britiſh Chariots with engra-
ven yokes.

Circius, Circius is a wind, very well known by that
name, to which Auguſtus Czſar not only vow'd,
but actually built, a Temple in Gaul. Now
Phavorinus, a Gaul by birth, declares in A-
gellius, that it is a word of Gallic original.
Our Gauls, ſaith he, call by the name of Circius,
that wind, which blows from their own coaſt, and
which is the fierceſt in all thoſe parts ; ſo named, 1
ſuppoſe, from its bluſtering and whirling. It gin
tain, that this particular wind 1s more raging
.and violent than any other : And that Cyrch a-
mongſt our modern Britains ſignifies force and
violence, (i) plainly appears by the Welch-Litany.

Penninuss From Livy we learn, that the Pennine Alps, by
Cxſar call'd Summa Alpes, as over-topping the
reſt, took not that name from Annibal Pænus
[i. e. the Carthaginian] but from the very high-
eſt Mountain thereabouts, the top whereot was
conſecrated, and had the name of Penninus given
it by the Mountaineers of Gaul. Now the
(Y tops of Mountains are called Pen by our Bri-

Apenninss. tains at this day: For inſtance, () Penmon-maur,
Pendle, Pen, Penco-cloud, and (n) Pennigent, the
higheſt mountains among us, have all borrow'd
their names from this word : and fo hath alſo
the Apennine 1n Italy.

Armorica, The Cities of Gaul, which border upon the
ſea, Cæſar tells us, were call'd by the Gauls A-
remorica; with whom our modern Britains agree,
in applying the ſame word exactly in the ſame
way. For Armor with them ſignifies By the Sea,
or Upon the Sea. And in the very ſame notion
Strabo calls them in Greek *ATwxtariSas.

In the reign of the Emperor Diocleſian, the
Peaſants in Gaul raiſed a rebellion, and gave

Baucade. their party the name of (x) Baucadæ. Now,
Swine-herds and Ruſticks are called (o) Beichi-
ad by the Britains.

The Thieves of their own Country, ſaith Si-
Verge, Z. 4. donius, are called by the Gauls, Varge. Now, I
Fp. 6. have obſerved in the Gloſlary of the Church of
Llandafte, that Thieves were formerly called
) YVeriad in Britiſh.
All-broges, The Alobrogæ, ſaith that antient and excellent
Scholiaſt upon Juvenal, were ſo called, 1
Br among the Gauls fignifies a Country, an
(a) Alla, yo. Oi 3 as Rows) thither
from ſome other country. Now, Bro in Welch
ſignifies a Country, and (r) Alan, without or
extraneous ; ſo that the Etymology is juſt the
ſame in both languages.
There is, faith Pliny, an herb like Plantain,

xxv The firſt Inh

ters tell us, the Britains us'd to paint them-

ſelves. This is the herb which we now call

Mad It makes a blue or sky colour, which wozd.
colour 1s called Glas by the Welch to this day.

This herb, according to Pliny, was by the

Greeks called Jatis; and the 83 termed it ſſatis.
Vitrum, as we learn from Oribaſius. Out of The Herb
whom Pomponius Mela may eaſily be corrected, = =,
by inſerting vitro inſtead of ultro, in that place "og as
where he ſaith, Britanni, &c. ultro corpora inſe- Pomp. Mela
fi, that is, it is uncertain whether it were for orna- correRed,
ment, or ſome other end, that the Britains dyed their

bodies with Vitrum, or Woad.

The Galatha, (in Aſia Minor] who ſpake the
ſame language with our antient Gauls, as we
learn from St. Jerom, had a little ſhrub which
they call'd Coccus, wherewith they made a deep cuccus.
red or ſcarlet colour ; and that very colour is at
this day called Coch in the Britiſh language.

That the Brachæ was a ſort of habit common Brache.
to the Gauls and Britains, we have ſhewn be-
fore. Diodorus Siculus deſcribes theſe Brachæ
to be a ſort of coarfe party-colour'd garment.

Now, foul tatter'd cloaths are by the preſent
Britains called (5) Bratt.

If Laina was an old Gauliſh wortl, as is hin- Zaina,
ted in that place of Strabo, The Gauls weave
themſelves thick coats of coarſe wool}, which they call
Lainz ; the Britains have not departed much
from it, who now call wooll, by the name of
(t) Glawn.

Feſtus Pompeius tells us, that (a2) Bardus, in Bardus.
the language of the Gauls, ſignifies a Singer :
and that word is abſolutely Britiſh. -

We learn out of Martial and others, that Bar- Bardocucullus,
docucullus was a ſort, of garment worn by the
Gauliſh Bards : now as (x) Bard, ſo the other
part of that word, remains entire among the
modern Britains, who call a cloak (y) Cucul.

Gaul, ſaith Pliny, yieldeth a peculiar ſort of corn,
which the natives call Brance, we Sandalum, a very Brance.
fine ſort of grain. Among the Britains likewiſe,

a ſort of grain which yields a pure white flow-
er, is call'd (z) Guineth Franc, and with us, in
Norfolk, Branbe.

The Herb, which the Greeks from its five
leaves call Pentaphylon, was by the Gauls called
Pempedula, as we find in Apuleius. Now, (a) Pymp Pempedula.
in Britiſh ſignifies five, and Deilen a Leaf.

As Pymp tor five, ſo Petor was the word among
the Gauls for Jour ; as we learn from Feſtus, who
will have Petoritum, a Gauliſh chariot or wag- Petoritum.
gon, to be ſo nam'd from its four wheels, Now,
the word Pedwar ſignifies four among the Bri-
tains. (b) |

Among the wooden inſtruments, the Canteri-
um of the Latins (the ſame which we in Engliſh

Glaſtum. called by the Gaul Glaſtum ; with which, wri-

call a Leaver, ) was cald ( faith Iſidore ) by

—

of violence, there is no reaſon.
(k) And alſo Promontories.

(1) The true writing is Pen maen maur,
ruption from Pen y gwynt, which ſignifes a windy Promontory.

(i) And ſo Kyrch-wynt would fignifie a violent wind; but why Circ alone ſhould Ggnifie that particular piece

() Which is poſſibly a Cor-

(=) They are called by different Authors Bag audæ, Vacaude, Bacaude ; not (as Salvianus witneſſeth) did they
conſiſt wholly of Country- people or Swine-herds, but of many of the better fort too, who, being intolerably op-
preſs'd by the Romans, were forced to take Arms. See Sammes Brit. p. 64.

(e) It fignifies no more than the bellowing of Oxen; nor does it appear that it ever expreſſed a Neatherd.

{p) There is no word in Britiſh beginning with V conſonant, but inſtead of that they make uſe of Gw, How-
ever, were there any ſuch as Gweriad or Veriad, it ſeems too remote from Varga.

(q) Alla (ſays Sammes) does not ſignifie anotber in French, but only in Greek; and the Britiſh Bro comes from

the Pharnician Baro, in the ſame ſenſe.

(r) Alb in compoſition Ggnifies another, as albrudb extraneus. Albrurcich in old Britiſh might alſo bgnify the Ja-

babitants of the mountains.

(s) Brattian; and from thence by our North-country-men Brats.

t) Gwlan in Britiſh is wool.

(u) Concerning the manner of their ſinging, Quantities of their verſes, Ce. ſee Drayton's Polyolb. p. 67, as

Selden there quotes it from Dr. Powel, as alſo p. 97.

(x) Barab in Britiſh, Vates, (3) Cochol, cucullus.

(x) Gwenith Hranł in Britiſh; but it is a modern word, and Gignikes French-wheat, ſo that we mult not fanſy it

to have any relation to the Gauliſh Brance,

(a) Pump- dai] in Britiſh is quinque folia. (b)

And (which makes the relation greater) Rhod is rota.
the

» 3
* — ICIINIT INI "INT "pen pe *. . . we *

„

þ
/
G
N

:
U
ö

——ũ——— ——j—— —

— —

IIa

— r STORING ůüN 71 — os

FS

———— we o_ _ —— won, il, —_

XXVII

_

r a {4 SS art. 4 2

A 1 N |

Guia, the Gauls Guuia; and it is now call'd (c) Guif

in Welch. |
Betula. Betulla, Pliny ſaith, was a Gauliſh tree; we
call it Birch. He would ſay it was a Britiſh tree
too, it he were now alive : for it grows very
plentiſully in Britain; and is called in Welch
(d) Bedw.
Wine diluted with water, Athenzus ſaith,
Dercoma. the Gauls called Derma; and Dur ſignifies
water among our Britains.
In like manner (not to trouble you with too
many inſtances) Fearne, according to Dioſcori-
Nl des, was called Ratis by the antient Gauls; and
is now by the Britains called (e) Redin. The
Scovies. Elder-tree was called Scovies by the Gauls; and
now by the Britains () Jaw. Serratula in
Fetonica, Latin, in Gzuliſh Veronica, is now (g) by the
Britains, and by us alſo, called Betony. That
which in Pliny the Latins call'd Terre adeps,
i. e. the fatneſs of the earth, and the Gauls
Marga. Marea, is by our Britains call'd Marle. That
which the Latins call candida Marga, white
Cliſcomarga. Marle, and the Gauls Gliſcomarga, might pro-
bably be call'd Gluyſmarl by the Britains: for
Tripetia. Gluys in Welch is bright or ſhining. Tripetia, a
word in Sulpitius Severus, ſaid to be uſed b
the Gauls for a three-footed ſtool, 1s by the Bri-
tains termed () Tribet. The meaſure of roo
foot, was called by the Gauls, according to
Candetum. Columellu, Candeturm ; in Britiſh it is (i) Can-
trocd. We read in Suetonius, that the bill or
Becco, beak of a bird was by the Gauls called Bec-
co; the ſame is called (E) Pic by the Bri-
rains.
Nor ſhould I be ſo wild in my conjectures,
as Goropius is, it I ſhould fanſy ſome likeneſs
Galba. between Suetonius's Galla, which ſignifies one
over-fat, and the Britiſh word () Galluns, de-
noting One of a very big xe: Or Verrius Flac-
Bulga. cus's Bulga for a leathern Budget, and the Bri-
Seldurii, tiſh word (mm) Butfiet ; or Soldurii in Cæſar
(which, in him, are ſuch as had vow'd to live
and die together) and (#) Sowdiwr ; or Pliny's
Planarat, Planarat, tor a Plow, and (o) Arat, which in
Britiſh ſigniſies the ſame thing; or Iſidore's
Taxea. Juxca, for Lard, and the Britiſh (p) Tew; or
Zithum, Diodorus Siculus's Zithum, and their () Cider;
Cyder. or Cerviſia, | beer | and Keirch, i. e. Oats, of
2 which the Welch in many places make beer; or
. rather (7) Cwrwf, which we in Engliſh call
Al

e.

That all theſe words properly belong'd to the
antient Gauls, appears by the Authors we have
cited ; and you ſee how exactly they agree in
ſound and ſignification with our Britiſh words.

The ends of Another Argument is, that ſince the antient
the names of names of places in both kingdoms had the ſame
places. terminations, to wit, Dunum, Briva, Ritum, Du-
rum, Magus, &c. it may be inferr'd that thoſe
Nations could not be wholly different. For
this is a convincing evidence, that we Engliſh
are deſcended trom the Germans, becauſe the
modern names of our Towns do end in Burrow,
Berry N Ilam, Sted, Ford, Thorp, and Wich; all
which do, in like manner, exactly correſpond
with the German terminations of Burg, Berg,
Heim, Stadt, Furdt, Dorpe, Wic.

%

On the other hand, ſo rational an account
may be given of ſome Gauliſh words, 6ut of
our Britiſh language, as anſwering exactly to
the nature and property of the things ſo nam'd ;
that of neceſſity we muſt conclude, either thoſe
to have been names impos'd by the Britains, or
elſe that the Britains ſpoke the language of the
Gauls. An inſtance or two to this purpoſe may
be ſufficient.

A third part of Gaul, ſaith Cæſar, is inhabited
by thoſe who in their own tongue are called Celtz, in Celte,
ours Galli ; by the Greeks Gallathz. But whence
theſe people were called Celtz and Gallathæ, the
moſt learned among the French could never tell
us. I wiſh they would conſider, whether this may
not be deduc'd from the Britiſh word () Gualt, Guat,
which to this day ſignifies the hair of the head ;
as Gualtoc doth Comata, i. e. long-haired : from
whence the names of Celtica, and Gallathæ, and
Galli, may very well have been derived ; only
mollified a little into ſome difference, in the
pronunciation, Now, that the Celtæ were call-
ed Comati, from their large heads of hair, which
they always wore at 1ts tull length, is generally
agreed among the Learned: and as for the Let- Lipfus de pro-

y [ters C, K, and G, whether in power or ſound, nunciatione,

there is bur little difference. p. 66.

That the noble River of Garome in France g,,
runs with a mighty violent force, is very well Garonne.
known : From whence the Poets have given
it the epithets of the ſtrong, the ſea-like, the
rapid, Garonne. All which the Britiſh word
(t) Garrw doth import.

The river Arar, or Same, moves ſo incredi- 4rar,
bly flow; that you cannot tell by the eye, which Saonne,
way it flows. Hence by the Poets it is call'd
the ſlow, and the ſtil Arar. Now, Ara among
the Britains ſignifies flow and til. /

Rhodanus, the Rhoſne, which receives the Rhodan;
Arar, runs with a very ſwift and violent cur- Rboſne.
rent; and is therefore term'd quick, ſwift, and
headlong. The word ſounds: not much unlike
Rhedec, which ſignifies ſwiftneſs in running.

Strabo and others tell us, that the Mountains
Gebenna | the Cevennes) run out a long way in Gebenne.

one continued ridge, in Gaul. And that (#) Ke- Mountains of 5

vin ſignifies the ridge of a hill among our Bri- Auvergne,
tains, appears by the Britiſh Lexicon. There es.
is alſo near Ozteley in Yorkſhire, a long ridge of
hills which I have ſeen ; at this day call'd the
Kevin by the people of thoſe parts.
Whereas ſtones were in old time erected in
Gaul upon the Roads, at the diſtance of fif-
teen hundred paces from each other; and where-
as the French Leuca or League containeth, as x,y,
Jornandes obſerves, juſt the ſame number, and
(x) Leach in the Britiſh ſignifies a Se; I would
deſire the learned among the French to conſi-
der, whether their word Leuca may not be de-
rived 2 $ 5
Near the Sea-ſide, in that part of France
which was heretofore called Merken where — 2
Hercules and Albion fought (if we believe the dei. |
old Fable,) the ſtones lie ſo thick, for many
miles together, that one would almoſt think it
had rain'd ſtones there. From whence it is by
writers called the Stony Shore, and the Stony Field.

(e) Gwyn is the truer name, though the modern Authors, uſually writing f for v, ſpell it gwif.

(4) In the Plural Badwen; but this looks ſomething forc'd,

(e) Rbedyn. (f ) Tſcaw.

(g) Betony is no Britiſh word, but expreſs'd by Cribeu St. Fred. (b) Trybedhb. (i) Kant-troed. (k) Pig.

(1) The preſent Britiſh know nothing of any ſuch word. (m) Budget has nothing of Britiſh ; Bol indeed
in that language is a belly, which may ſuit that fancy well enough. |

(n) Sowder is probably pure Engliſh z for the Britiſh always uſe Milwr in that ſenſe,

(0) Aradr in Britiſh is a plough. (p) Tew, is fat.
K wrwv, are no doubt of the ſame original,

(J) Cider is not Britiſh, (r) Cerevifia and the Welch
(s) Gwalbt.

(u) The Britith call mountains Kevn, and in the Plural Number Keynes, that is, backs,

(t) Garw or Garwy, is rough, and Arar, gentle,
(x) Tbecb.
\ The

< *
* -
1404 — 10 HP I

Morint.

Arelate,
Ar les.

Uxe lodunum.

Dunum.

+ Denus,

Epiſt, 4

hs » a +

i MM xxix

The firft Inhabitants.

” d x —

-
| wb. _ *
FY

The French at this day call it /e Craux; and

t they know not the reaſon of that name : But

in Britiſh, ſtones are called (y) Craig.
Morini. The People which in old time inhabited
the Sea-coaſt of Gaul, lying neareſt to Bri-
tain, were in their own language called Morini.
Now, Mor is in Britiſh the Sea, from whence
that word ſeems to have been derived. For,
the Britains call ſuch as live upon the ſea-coaſt,
Morinwyr ; as Aremorica in the old Gauliſh, and
now in the Britiſh, ſignifies by the Sea-fide.

So, Arelate, a famous city of Gaul, which
is ſeated in a marſhy and watry ſoil, ſeems to
have taken the name purely from its ſituation:
For Ar in Britiſh, ſignifies upon, and Laith, moiſt.
Ucellodunum. Uxellodunum, ſaith Cæſar, is a Town having

on all ſides a rocky acceſs, and ſituate on the

top of a high hill. Now, (z) Uchel in Britiſh

Dunum. is lofty, and Dunum among the antient Gauls

ſignified an high ground, or a hill, as Plutarch in

his little book of Rivers tells us out of Cliti-

phon; And the ſame word was alſo uſed in
that ſenſe by the antient Britains.

Pliny places the Promontory CytharifFes in
Gaul, near Marſeilles, where the town of Toulon
now ſtands. And if you ask our preſent Bri-
tains what they call Cythara, i. e. an harp, they
will tell you, (a) Telen.

Again (to pur this matter out of diſpute) it
is very evident, that thoughthe modern French
is made up for the moſt part of the Latin and
German; yet there ſtill remain in it a great
many old Gauliſh words. And I have had it
from ſome who are skill'd in both languages,
that very. many of thoſe French words, which

n be reduced neither to a Latin nor to a Ger-
Nan original (and therefore may be preſumed
to be remains of the old Gauliſh language,) do
come as near the Britiſh as 1s poſſible. For exam-

Arelate,
Ar les.

ibariſtes.

pro

rir, the Britains Guerif, to heal. The French

uſe Guaine, the Britains Guain, for a Sheath.

The French Derechef, the Britains Derche-

+ Deaud. fu, for, F Moreover. The French Camur,

the Britains Cam, for Crooked. The French

Bateau, the Britains Bad, for a Boat. The

French Gourmond for a Glutton, the Britains

Gormod, for, Too much, or beyond mea-

ſure. The French Baton, the Britains Pati un,

for a Staff. The French Accabler, the Britains

Cablu, for, To oppreſs. The French Havre,

the Britains Aber, tor a Haven. And Comb is
yet in uſe in both nations, for a Valley.

Many more words there are of this ſort, by
the recital whereof I ſhould only tire my Rea-
der; tho they immediately tend to confirm this
Point.

Whereas Tacitus tells us, that the Æffii, a

le of Germany, uſed the habits and cu-
oms of the Suevians, but a language that came
nearer to the Britiſh ; this makes nothing a-
gainſt my aſſertion. For the es that are
moſt of all remote, may yet agree in ſome par-
ticulars. So, Augerins Busbequins, late Embaſ-
ſador from the Emperor to the Grand Signior,
obſerved many German and Engliſh words in

the Taurica Cherſoneſus, or Crim-Tartary.
From all which inſtances, this concluſion
0 may be drawn ; That the antient Gauls and

8 & —_—* EE ET EE WEE ET

Epiſt. 4.

a war, not for Honour and

ple; The French at this day uſe the word Gue-

Britains ſpake the ſame

thence, this other neceſſary conſequence, That
the Original of the Britains is to be referr'd to
the Gauls. For it is not to be denied, what
we before obſerved, that Gaul, as nearer to Ar-
menia, muſt of courſe have been peopled be-
fore Britain. Beſides (according to Strabo) as
Gaul abounded in corn, ſo did it much more in
men. It is therefore reaſonable to conclude,
that ſince the Gauls ſent Colonies into Italy,
Spain, Germany, Thrace, and Aſia; they did
the ſame much rather into Britain, a country
ſo much nearer, and as plentiful as any of the
reſt. And it muſt redound much to the glory
of the Britiſh nation, that they had their ori-

ou from thoſe antient Gauls, who were ſo

amous for military Atchievements ; and with
whom the Romans for many years maintain'd
pire, but for
Self- preſervation. And theſe Gauls were they,
who, to uſe the Poet's words rather than my
own,

Au
Importata, gravi paſſim ſonuere tunultu :
Seit 3 adhuc, & quam Turpeia vi-
15
Arx attollentem caput illo in monte ſuperbum,
Pannones Æmathii norunt, ſcit Delphica rupes.

On 1 ſpacious tracts, like winter's
hai

Uge by the North, or boiſt'rous South, they
ce

With furious noiſe; as yet the Roman ſtate
* {ad blow, and mourns her turn of
ate. |
Too well Tarpeian tow'rs their force have
known,
And — 23 Rocks, and Plains of Ma-
ce

And a little after, ”

Intravere Aſia fines : prope littora Ponti
In gentem crevere novam, qua tenditur uſque
Ad juga Pamphilim, Garamantica ſydera

contra
Inter Cappadoces pofita, & Bythinica regna.
O'er-running Aas bounds, their barbarous

wer
Fix d a new kingdom near the Pontick ſhore,
Between Bythinia and Cappadocian lands,

Nor ought we, on this occaſion, to omit the
arguments brought by Others, to prove that the
Britains are deſcended from the Gauls. George
Buc, a perſon eminent for his extraction and

Germans call a French-man, Walon ; and that,
when the German Saxons firſt came hither and
heard the Britains ſpeak the Gauliſh tongue,
they call'd them Walli, i.e. Gauls. (%) Bucha-
nan adds, that Halkh does not barely ſignify a

Stranger among the Germans, but moſt pro-

cmd 4. aa... [i PRI ꝶ 8 88

J This is very often us'd in
(9)

compound names of places,
How true ſoever that may be, it is certain het the

ah

( y ) Stones are called Kerig ; but Kraig is a rock 3 from whenee in our Northern parts we till call them

(a) Telyn is a harp.
Opinion he advances of Wales having its name from

Gaul, is altogether falſe, as is prov'd in Cornwall. And beſides, why might not the Welſb and the Gauls both of
them have their name upon the ſame occaſion, the latter, as being ſtrangers to the Germans, and the former, to

the Saxons ?
*

perly

language f and from

Far as Pamphilian cliffs and Garamantick ſtrands,

learning, obſerves out of Mekercys, that the

— — was
— —

F D rr

. —— * renin

7

** —_ Moe A _—_— ww .,. EA” ha

A e

—:—

xxxi

BRITAIN.

XXXIII

Mr. Sam-
mes.

— — re we SN —— f—ê

perly a Gaul. And withal he obſerves, that the
French at this day call that country Galles,
which we call J/ales: and that the antient Scots
divided all the Britiſh Nations into Gaol, and
Galle, that is (according to his interpretation)
into the Gallaci and the Galli.

[It may not be improper, juſt to mention in
this place, that a + late Author who fetches the
original of the Britains from the Phanicians,
though he cannot deny the affinity between the
Gauliſh and Britiſh languages, proved in ſo ma-
ny inſtances betore ; doth yet endeavour to re-
concile that to his own Conjecture, by ſaying,
1. That the Commerce of theſe two Nations (in-
timated by Cæſar, and other Writers) and that
of the Phenicians with both, might eaſily cauſe
ſuch a common and promiſcuous uſe of parti-
cular Words and Names. To inforce which,
he endeavours to ſhow, 2. That thoſe very
Words, alledged to prove the Britains of a Gau-
liſh original, are all, or moſt of them, found in
the Phenician Language ; and therefore muſt be
brought by that People, immediately, both into
Britain and Gaul. |

But, when all is done, if our Britains, right or
wrong, are reſolved to claim a Trojan Original,
I will not make it my buſineſs to oppoſe them :
but yet (c) if they will take my advice, they
may beſt ground their Relation to the Trojans,
upon their deſcent from the Gauls. For it is

—_

ſaid by ſome ( theſe are the words of Ammianus )
that the deſtruttion of Troy, a few who fled

thence, poſſeſs'd themſelves of Gaul, at that time un-
peopled.

And here, while we have theſe languages The Brity
under conſideration, we cannot but admire and language,

celebrate the divine goodneſs towards our Bri-

tains, the poſterity of Gomer; who, though

they have been conquer'd ſucceſſively by the
Romans, Saxons, and Normans; do hitherto
enjoy the true Name of their Anceſtors, and
have alſo preſerv'd their primitive language en-
tire, although the Normans ſet themſelves to a-

boliſh it by expreſs laws. The reply of that noble G, iz
old Gentleman of Wales was not impertinent, bis Toon.
who, being ask'd by Henry tae ſecond, King of Ph of War

England, what he thought of the ſtrength ot the
Welch, and of his royal expedition againſt them,
made his anſwer in theſe words: This nation, Great
Sir, may ſuffer much, and may be in a great mea-
ſure ruin d, or at leaſt weaken'd, by your preſent
and future attempts, as formerly it hath often been ;
but we aſſure our ſelves, it will never be wholly de-

ſtroyed * by the anger or power of any mortal man, un- Proper b. j
leſs the anger of Heaven concur in that deſtruction. Minis iran.

Nor (whatever changes may happen as to the other
parts of the world) can I believe that any other na-
tion or language beſides the Welch, ſhall anſwer at

the laſt day for the greater part of this corner of the
world. |

—

(c) Our Author, where he diſcourſes of the Continuance of the Romans in Britain, delivers it as his r that

the Britains may beſt claim a relation to the Trojans, by their intercourſe for ſo many hund

of years

with the Romans, who were certainly deſcended from them.

The NAME of

Xe UT you will ſay, if Cumero be
rhe primitive name of the In-
habitants, whence then comes
Albion ? and whence Britain ?
: a name which hath ſo much
FEE TRE prevailed, that the other is al-
moſt forgotten. Give me leave,
as to this point, to deliver my real thoughts,
which, I am ſatisfied, are the real truth. The
ſame things may be conſider'd under various
circumſtances, and thereupon be expreſs'd by
various names, as Plato tells us in his Cratylzs.
And it you will ſearch into particular inſtan-
ces, both of modern and antient times, you
will obſerve that all nations have been called
by Strangers, differently from what they called
themſelves. Thus, they who in the language
of their own Country, were called Jraelites, were
termed by the Greeks, Hebrews and Fews ; and
by the Egyptians, Huefi (as Manethon obſerves,)
becauſe they had Shepherds for their Kings. So,
the Greeks call'd thoſe Syrians, as Joſephus
writes, who nam'd themſelves Aramaans. Thoſe
who call'd themſelves Chufii, were by the Greeks,
from their black faces, call'd Ethiopians. They
who call'd themſelves Celtæ, the Greeks call'd
Gallata; either from their milk-white comple-
xion, as ſome will have it, or from their long
hair, as I juſt now obſerved. So, thoſe who call'd
themſelves Teutſch, Numidæ, and Helena, were |

BRIT AI N-

by the Romans call'd. Germani, Mauri, and Græ-
ci; [ Germans, Moors, and Greeks.) So at this
day (not to produce too many inſtances) they
who are in their own Tongue call'd Muſſelmen,
Magier, Czechi, Beſermanni, are by all the Eur

ans called Turks, Hungarians, Bohemians, and Tar-
tars. And even in England, we, who in our
own tongue call our ſelves Engliſhmen, are by
the Welch, Iriſh, and Highland-Scots, call'd
Saſſon, i. e. Saxons. After the ſame manner
we may imagin that our Anceſtors, who called
themſelves Cumero, were upon {ome other ac-
count, either by themſelves, or by others, call-
ed Britons ; from whence the Greeks fram'd
their Bperarſa, and handed the ſame word to the
Romans. Thus much being premis'd, we will

now enquire into the ſeveral names of this
Ifland.

As to the name Albion, I am not much ſoli- q14;0n.

citous about it. For it was impos'd by the
Greeks for diſtinction- ſake; all the Iſlands that
lay round it being call'd by one general name,
Britannicæ and Britanniz, i. e. the Britiſh Iles. The
Nand of Britain, ſaith Pliny, ſo famozs in the
writings of the Greeks and Romans, is fituate to the
north-weſt, at a great diſtance from, but juſt oppo-

/ite to, Germany, France, and Spain, three Coun-

tries that take up much the greateſt part of Europe.
It is particularly cal d Albion; whereas all the
Nes about it are nam'd Britanniz.

* upon

Where- p,;rannie.

——

XXXUI

—

|

The figure
of Britain,

Inis Wen,

Tib. 1. «
morbi g co

ig ioſis.

Britig
uage,

Topoꝑn. 7

of Wake, J

ter l.

ram.

A

its

xu

" -

* Fine

N „
— 4 a a G4 \

ä 1

a.

— —

xxxiii Tybe fi

Inbubitant o.

„*

The figure
of Britain,

Inis Wen,

apon Catullus, concerning Ceſar; hath this ex-| that took polleſſion of the Iſland, where a for

preſſion, of carnal Spirits got them with child; and thence
| thi iſſued a race of Giants. (f) Nor need I be at
Hunc Galliz timent, timent Britanniz, . |much pains to enqui » Why, in that old Paro-

Both Gaul and Britain our great Czſar {dia againſt Ventidius Ballus, it is called In- Inſuls ca.

dread. [ſula Caruli ; conſidering that it is ſurrounded *.
| with the Sea, which the Poets ſtile Cærulu and
Alſo in the ſame Epigram, he calls this Ultimam Cærulum. So Claudian, concerning Britain,
Occidentis Inſulam, i. e. the fartheſt Iſland of the : |
weſt. The name Albion ſeems to have had its — Cujus veſtigia verrit
riſe meerly from a vain humour of the Greeks, Cærulus. —
and a fondneſs in that people for fables and | te?
fictitious names; which themſelves call'd &5aJoy — - Whoſe ſteps the azure ſea
tvproncey/ar. For ſeeing that nation has, in the Sweeps with his ride,
ure ſtrength of Fancy, named Italy, Heſperia, |
rom Heſperus, the ſon of Atlas; France, Ga- I omit, that it is by Ariſtides call'd the Great

latia, from a certain ſon of Polyphemus, &c.|and the fartheſt land. That it was alſo call'd
Romania, ſeems to be inſinuated by thoſe paſla- Romanid.

I cannot but believe, that in the ſame fanciful
humour they invented for this Iſle the name of Fes in Gildas, where he tells us, that this
Albion, from Albion, Neptune's ſon ; as Perot-|Ifland was ſo abſolutely brought under the Ro-
ns and Lilius Giraldus have obſerv'd before me : man power, That the name f the Roman ſlavery
unleſs one ſhould chuſe rather to derive it I ſtuck to the very ſoil. And a little after; So that
from Axe, a word, which Feſtus ſaith, ſigni- it might now be accounted Romania; rather than
fies white in Greek, whence the Alps may | Britannia. And within a page or two, An Mand,
alſo have taken their name: for our Illand is | bearing the Roman name, but not obſerving the
ſurrounded with white rocks, which Cicero calls | /aws or cu#Foms of the Romans. Nay, Proſper
Mirificas Moles, vaſt and prodigious piles. For |Aquitanus expreſsly calls it, The Roman and.
which reaſon in the (a) Coins of Antoninus Pi- Hither alſo may be refer d that prediction of
us, and Severus, Britain is figured, fitting upon |the Aruſpices or Sooth-ſayers, when the Statues
Rocks, in a woman's habit; and by the Britiſh [of Tacitus and Florianus the Emperors were
Poets is ſtiled (b) Iris Hen, that is, the White |thrown down with Thunder; viz. That out of
Iſland. Not to obſerve, that Orpheus in his|their Family ſhould ariſe an Emperor, who, a-
Argonautics (c) (if they be his) calls that Iſland, mongſt other great actions, ſhould ſet Prefidents
Adnazos xipovs, The white land, which lies next to |over Taprobana, and ſend a Proconſul into the Ro-.
Jerms, or Ireland, and which can be no other |man Ifland ; which the Learned underſtand of F
but our Britain: the ſame, which in a few |our Britain; tho* it was a Province Prefidial,

1b. 1. de T4 for /Adxicaar, Fracaſtorius alſo, in his If ſome will ſtiH believe that it was alſo call'd

morbis con- diſcourſe cqſicerning that peſtilential fever which | Samothea, from Samothes, Japhet's ſixth ſon, I Samothen.

2agiofis,

verſes before, he ſeems to have call'd Nie |and never Proconſular, as we ſhall hereafter ſhew.

rag'd in England under the name of the Sweat-|cannot help it. I know very well whence all
ing Sickneſs, delivers it as his Opinion, that it] that is borrow'd ; out of Annius Viterbienſis,
was occaſioned by the nature of the Engliſh who, like all other Cheats, putting ſpecious ti-
ſoil, which is very much upon Chalk, or a white |tles upon bad wares, hath impoſed upon the
ſort of Marle ; and ſuppoſes that from thence |credulous his own forgeries under the name of
our Iſland took the name of Albion. (d) [So, an | Beroſus.
Iſland in the Indian Sea, was called Leuca, white; But, as to the name and original of Britain,
and alſo another in Pontus, which agreed with |the various opinions concerning it, have made
this of our's ſo far, as to be thought Fortunate, it a very doubtful point; for which reaſon, I
and to be a receptacle of the Souls of thoſe | here apply my ſelf to our Britains, for leave to
great Heroes, Peleus and Achilles, So a place by | interpole my judgment among the reſt; and that
Tyber alſo was called Albiona. | they would put a favourable conſtruction upon
He had but little honeſty, and as little mo- what I do; that as they deſire to know the
deſty, who was the Inventor of that idle ſtory, truth, ſo they would pardon thoſe that ſearch
not to be heard without indignation, That this | after it, and allow me the ſame liberty that
Iſland took the name of Albion from (e) Albi- Eliot, Leland, Lluyd, and others, have taken.
na, one of the thirty daughters of Diocleſian] For if Humphrey Lhwyd, a learned Britain, was
a King of Syria, who on their wedding-night |not blam d, but commended, for producing a
kill'd all their husbands, and then coming over [new Etymology of Britain, different from the
hirher in a veſſel without oars, were the firſt [common one of Brutus, without prejudice to

1 BY

— —

(a) One of thoſe Coins of Antoninus Pius, having Britain ſitting upon the rocks, is in the hands of Mr; Tho»
_ of Leeds, with this inſcription, Antoninus. Aug. Pius. P. P. Tr. P. xviii. Reverſe, Britannia, Coſ. 1111+

(b) The learned Selden (Annot. ad Polyolb, p. 20.) thinks this inſtance the moſt conſiderable of all for this pur-
poſe ; becauſe in Antiquity it is uſual to have names among ſtrangers, correſponding to thoſe of the inhabitants,
So the Redde-Sea is by Strabo, Curtius, Stephanus, and others, call'd Erytbrews ; and Nile, in Hebrew and .-
gyptian call'd black, is obſerv'd by that Prince of 1 eb Kaliger, to lignify the ſame colour in the word
Agur hies, us' d for it by Homer; which is inforced by lack ſtatues, among the Greeks, erected in honour
of Nile, call'd alſo expreſsly Miaas. |

(e) See Uſher's Antiquit. Britan, Eccleſ. p · 378. fol, * ,

(d) As Buchanan will not allow that their Albania could come from a Latin word, fo neither will Somner let
our Albion have that original; but, with Albania, derives it from the Celtick Alpen, Alben, and ſuch like words,
intimating a mountain, bigh bill, &c. which anſwers the nature of the place, whether we conſider the inner parts
of the Iſland, or thoſe moles mirifice (mentioned by Cicero) upon the Sea-Coaſts,

(e) This is fetch'd out of the Chronicle of St. Albans. But our Author ſeems here to confound twe fabulous
opinions into one, making this Albina, at the ſame time daughter of Dioclefian, and one of the Danaides, daughters
of Danaus : for they it were, who are ſaid to have kilłd their husbands, and come over hither,

(F) See Virgitl's Cataleds, and Scaliger upon the place, For this reaſon it is we find, in the Coins of Antoni-
nus Pius, Britain repreſented by a woman ſometimes fitting upon a rock, ſometimes upon a ſort of a globe in the
Ocean, And Proſper the Rhetorisian, calls the Britains Aquores,

- * 2 4a . r N 44

"BRITAIN.

_— nit.

XXxXVIi

that ſtory ; I hope it will be no crime in me,
who here meddle not with the Hiſtory of Bru-

tus, if 1 briefly enquire after another original.

And where can I ſo properly ſearch, as in our
Britiſh language? which as it is pure and un-
mix d, ſo extreamly ancient: and on this dou-

ble account, we may promiſe our ſelves conſi-

derable afliſtance from it. For antient langua-
es are highly ferviceable to the finding out the
fr{t originals of things; and Plato, in his Cra-
tylus, tells us, that the primitive names of
things, long ſince worn out of uſe, are {till pre-
ſerv'd in the barbarous Tongues as the moſt an-
tient. And, though thoſe matters are fo very
obſcure by reaſon of their great Antiquity, that
we rather earneſtly wiſh for the truth, than
have any reaſonable hopes to diſcover it; yet!
ſhall do my utmoſt to clear this point, and ſhall
briefly propound my own judgment, not magi-
ſterially impoſing it upon any man, but being
ready to admit, with the higheſt ſatisfaction,
any other opinion that ſhall be more probable.
For I love Truth of another's diſcovery, alto-
gether as well as my own ; and equally embrace
it, where-ever I find it. |
In the firſt place, I will take it for granted,
with the Reader's leave, that all antient nati-
ons had their own proper names from the be-
ginning, and that the Greeks and Latins, after-
wards, fram'd names for every Country out of
thoſe of the People, with variation enough to
accommodate them to their own Dialet. Or,
to explain my ſelf further, that the People were
known and diſtinguiſh'd by names, before the
Countries they inhabited ; and that the Coun-
tries were atterwards denominated from the
People. Who can deny but the names of the
Jews, the Medes, the Perſians, Scythians, Almans,
Gauls, Getulians, Saxons, Engliſh, Scots, &c. were
in being, before thole of Judæa, Media, Per-

ſia, Scythia, Almaine, Gaul, Getulia, Saxony, En-

gland, Scotland, &c? Nor is any thing more
evident, than that theſe laſt were coin'd out
of the firſt. We read, that from the Sammites,
the Inſubres, and Belga, Livy and Cæſar were
the firſt that call'd the Countries themſelves,
Samnitium, Inſubrium, and Belgium. From the
Franks (in the time of Conſtantine the Great,
as appears by the Coins of that Emperor) the
Country where they were ſeated, firſt took the
name of Francia or France. And Sidonius A-
pollinaris was the firſt, that tramed the name
of Burgundy trom the Burgundianus. Now, we
have all the reaſon in the world to believe, that
after the ſame manner the Inhabitants, or elſe
the Gauls their next Neighbours, gave this
Illand the name of Britain. For there are cir-
cumitances, which make it probable, that the
Natives were called Brit or Brith in the old bar-
barous Language; eſpecially, that Verſe, which
paſles under the name of Sibyl,

"Exxerou &y Bpurtori  & Dames Toxvyplans
"Nxcands xtaaSor Tape ſos cd ni Toma.

The Britiſh tribes and wealthy Gazuls
ſhall hear

I purple waves come rowling from
afar

While tides of blood the wond'ring Pi-
lots fear.

Next, the authority of Martial, Juvenal, and Au-
{onius: This Iſland's being alſo by Procopiuscall-
ed Britia ; then, the ancient Inſcriptions, ſet up
by the Britains themſelves, in which we read
Brito, Britones, Brittus, COH. BRITON. OR-

DINIS BRITTO N, and at Rome, in the

Church of S. Maria Rotunda, NA TIONE
BRITTO. Together with an Inſcription to
be ſeen at Amerbach in Germany ; which I will
here inſert, becauſe ir mentions Triputium,
{ome place in Britain, not yet known,

NYMPHISO

NO BRITTON

TRIPUTIENO
SUB-CURA

MO VLPI
MALCHI

* 7. LEG. XXII.
PO PO FO

The Saxons alſo themſelves, in their own Lan-
guage, call'd the Britains Bpzex,and particular-
ly Witichindus the Saxon, throughout his Hi-
flo; uſes the word Britæ. So that, without

all doubt, Brit is the primitive, from whence BRN

Brito is derived ; and from whence we may ex-
pe& ſome light towards the original of the name
of Britain.

Now, it was the general cuſtom of all na-
tions, to apply to themſelves ſuch names as
had reſpe&t to ſomething wherein they either
excell'd, or were diſtinguiſh'd from the reſt.
Some, trom the dignity of their Founders, as the
Jonians from Javan, the Iſraelites from Iſrael,
the Chananites from Chanan the Son of Cham.
Others, with reſpe& to their particular Na-
tures, Cuſtoms, or Employments ; as the Heri,
according to the Hebrew derivation, becauſe
they were Miners ; the Heneti, becauſe chey
were Wanderers ; the Nomades, becauſe they
employ'd themſelves moſtly about Cattel ; the
Germans, becauſe they were accounted ſtout
and warlike ; the Franks, becauſe free; the Pan-
nonians, in the opinion of Dion, from Pannus, as
wearing cloath-coats with long fleeves ; the -
thiopians trom their blackneſs; and the Albans, as
born with white hair. From whence Solinus
remarks, That even the Colour of the hair did give
name to a nation. And our Country-men, who,
paſſing under the general name of Cimbri or
Cumeri 1n common with the Gauls, had no
other mark or character ſo proper to difference
and diſtinguiſh them from the reſt, as that pe-
culiar Cuſtom of painting their bodies: (For
the beſt writers that are, Cæſar, Mela, Pliny,
&c. do all agree, that the Britains us'd to paint
themſelves with Glaſtum, or woad ; and the

word Glas, ſignifies Blue in Welch to this g.
day:) What, it I ſuppoſe then, that our Bri- Brizons,
tons had that name from their painted bodies; whence took

ra p : : . their name.
or the word Brith, in the antient language of Bend, what

it 15.

this Ifland, ſignifies any thing that is painted
and coloured? Nor can any one in reaſon cen-
ſure this, as abſurd, or over-ſtrain'd, ſeeing it
has the proper marks of a juſt Etymology ; the
words ſound alike, and the name (which is as
it were the picture of the thing) expreſſes the
thing it ſelf, For Brith and Brit are very near
in ſound ; and the word Brith, among the
Britains, expreſles to the full what the Britains
really were, that is, painted, ſtained, died, and
coloured. "Theſe Epithets the Latin Poets uſe

to give them; and Oppian terms them Awavreley Zb. 1.
1.e. having backs of ſeveral colours. negetic.

Nor will it be improper here (though it may
ſeem of no great moment) to ſer down an ob-

ſervation of my own, That in the names of al- Old Britains

4 . al".
— * P — m_ L's s \ , n - a:
— 1 3 4 8 ml „ Yes Sa. * - IS. ner ER es dh $a.
8 — * . as . 4 . 8 4 o "R 4 Je > p W 3 * A = . * A 0 > # d, 4 * 4
2 EE STS . 4 42 42.4 FA 1 F * "a * 1 18 " 4 \ — 22 2 ** 1 F 6 P j o p v p
* EF een * is. E 5 * Sn 1 5 1 F 0" +». 2+ > & 2 4 78 n v o
# 7 rh C3 ft p an # "ts = a 2 e «* N 147 1 7 * 8 * TPO 1 1 4 5 4. . _ L * -
4 a £ A A ( 1 * A "a8 5 " i 4 . - 4 1 * , 1 6 . «
/ TTL 0 — g 4

We. "+
lg
3
5
TY

=}
*
4
©

moſt all the antient Britains, there appears names drawn Þ
ſome intimation of a Colour, which, without from colour.

doubt, aroſe from this cuſtom of Painting. The
Red Colour is by the Britains call'd Coch and
Goch; which word, I fanſy, is part of theſe

names,

In S:rm. 1
tecoſt,

vi

urig.

that

„ „

XXXVII The fixft Inhabitants:

*

1 PIES ns,

— — F JI

4
—

©+ S

5

6

In germ. Pen- St. Chryſoſtom ſaith, was lingua Sibila, a hiſſing

ie coſt,

black colour they call Du; of which methinks] (as Eratoſthenes hath obſery'd ; ) they might
there is ſome appearance in Mandubratizs, Car- either be inform'd, by, the Natives, or learn

timandua, Togodumnus, Bunduica, Cogidunus. The from the Gauls who ſpoke the ſame language,

white colour is called Gwyn, the plain footſteps] that the people of this Ifland were taWd Brith
of which word, methinks, I ſee in Venutius and] and Brithon, and thereupon, to the word Brith
Immanuentins. Gwelk, in Welch, ſignifies a Wa-] might add Tania, à termination, which in
teriſh colour, and this diſcovers it felt evidently] Greek (as the (%) Gloſſaries tell us) ſignifies a

Suella. Blue in Britiſh is Glas ; and that plain-|they compounded the name of Berrad, 'cor-
ly appears in the name of King Cuniglaſus, which |ruptly written Bperarle, i. e. the Country of the
Gildas interprets Fulvus, or, as it is in ſome] Britons. Lucretius and Cæſar have nam'd it
other copies, Furuus Lanio, a dark colour'd| more truly Britamia; and they are the · firſt of
Butcher. Aure, the name for a Gold colour, is|the Latins that make mention of it. |
plain in Cungetorix and Arviragus. A lively and] That the matter ſtands thus as to Britain, I
brisk colour is by them call'd Teg, whereof we] do the more firmly believe, becauſe we find
have a ſlight hint in Praſutagus, and Characta-/ not in all the world beſides, above three Coun-
. And, if we allow that the Britains bor- tries of any confiderable largeneſs, the names
row'd the names of mixt colours, F with | whereof do end in Tuma; and theſe lie in
the colours themſelves, from the Romans (as] this Weſtern part of the world, to wit, Mau-

7. „„ a
+ £
7 =
1
9 —

names, Cogidunis, Argentocoxus, Segonax. The] long rope keeping always cloſe to the ſhore

——

Tania,
So the Ger-

mans now

| dd Landt to
in the names of Vellocatus and Carvillins, and] Region or Country. Out of theſe two words, the names of

Countries,

they did certainly their Werith for Green, from | ritania; Lufitania, and Aquiitania; (i) of which,

Viridis ; and Melin for Straucolour, from Meli-|I queſtion not, but that the Greeks who firſt
mms; ) then I may have leave to fanſy, that II diſcover'd thoſe countries, were the Inventers,
diſcover ſomewhat of the colour call'd Prafinzs,|and that from them the Latins re-
or Graſs- green, in the name of Praſutagus ; and |ceiv'd them. For, from the name of the Mau-
of the colour call d Minium, i. e. Vermilian, in ri, they made Mauritania, The country of the
that of Adiminius, ſon to King Cunobelinus. | Mauri ; which, according to Strabo, was by
Rufina alſo, that learned Britiſh Lady, took her the natives called Numidia. From Luſus, the
name trom the Latin Rufus, the red or flame- Son of Bacchus, they framed Luffitania, that is,
colour: as Alban, the firſt Martyr of Britain, (the Country of Luſus ; and perhaps they call'd
from Albus i. e. White. It any perſon, skill'd in| Aquitain by that name, ab agquis, as Tvo Carno-
that antient language, would in like manner |texfis thinks, ſince it is a country ſeated upon
examine the reſt of the Britiſh names that occur|the water. In which ſenſe alſo (as Pliny tells
in old Writers (of which ſort there are not|us) it was formerly called Armorica, i. e. upon
above four or five remaining) it is very proba-|the Sea-coaſt. As for Turditania and BaFita-
ble he would find in every one, ſome ſignifica-] nia, names of ſmaller countries in Spain (and
tion of a Colour. Nor ought we to omit, that [conſequently lying alſo in theſe Weſtern p

the moſt common names at this day among our ſof the world) they may be very properly

Britains, Gwyn, Du, Goch, Lluid, were taken |duc'd under the {ame head, _ ſeem to ſigni-
from the white, black, red, and ruſſet Colour. So|fy no more than the countries of the Turdi, and
that it cannot ſeem ſtrange, that a nation ſhould |the Baſti. Nor is it unuſual tor Names to be
derive its (g) general name from Painting, where | com ed of a Foreign and a Greek word.

all the people painted their bodies; and where | Morde are compounded, (faith Quintilian) either Lib. 1.

in old time it was, and at preſent is, the faſhi- of our own (i. e. Latin) and a foreign word, as
on among the Inhabitants, to take their names | Biclinium ; or juft the contrary, of a foreign word
from Colours. But to return to our buſineſs; if | and a Latin tack'd to it, as Epitogium and An-
all this can be thought foreign to it. ticato; or of two foreign words, as Epirrhedi-

It is moſt certain, that in the Britiſh Hi-|um. And this is the moſt uſual ſort of Com-
ſtories, an Inhabirant of Britain is call'd in that | poſition, in the names of Countries. Is not
language Britkon. The note of aſpiration is not] the name of Jreland a manifeſt Compound of
to be regarded, ſince the Britains (whole tongue, | the Iriſh Erin, and the Engliſh Land? Is not
Angleterre, a name made by the conjunction of
tongue) were always pleas d with aſpirations, | a French with an Engliſh word? Was not the
which the Latins as ſtudiouſly avoided : and as] name of Hanclond (for ſo our old Saxons called
Brito came from Brith, ſo did Britannia alſo, in | France) a Compound of the French and Saxon
my opinion. Britamia (ſaith Iſidore) was ſo| Language? Came not Poleland likewiſe from a
called from a word of that Nation. And whereas] Poliſh word, ſignifying a plain or level, united
the moſt antient Greeks (the firſt who gave | with a German? Laſtly, was not the name of
the name of Britain to our Iſland) whether on | Denmark compounded of a Daniſh word, and
account of Trade or Piracy, were wont to make | the German March, which. ſignifieth a bound or

——

2

(g) Mr. Somner, not without ſome colour of reaſon, has expreſs d his diſlike of this Original. For 1. It does

not appear (how generally ſoever the Opinion may de receiv'd) that the old Britains did paint their bodies. Glaſto

inficiunt, quod caruleum efficit, atque hoc borribiliores ſunt in pugna aſpetu, &c. ſays Cæſar, and agreeably, Pom-
ponius Mela, Vitro corpora infecti; to both which, Pliny's words do very well ſuit, Simile plantagini glaſtum in Gal-
lia vocatur, quo Britannorum conjuges nuruſque toto corpore oblite, quibuſdam in ſacris © nude incedunt Kthiopum
colorem imitantes. Now, there is a great difference between barely dying, or dawbing the body (which implies no
more than colouring,) and painting, which neceſſarily ſuppoſes certain hgures drawn upon the body, Beſides, ſup-
poling ſome of the Britains did paint themſelves, and Cæſar (the beſt authority of that kind) be interpreted in
this ſenſe; yet it is only the Albion he ſpeaks of; whereas all the Iſles in our Ocean were call'd, by one general
name, Inſulæ Britannicæ; and therefore, unleſs it appeared that all the reit follow'd the ſame Cuſtom (as it does
not) Britannia under that notion cannot properly be rv to them.

(b) The learned Caſaubon has expreſfs'd himſelf diflatisfy'd with the bare authority of Gloſſaries in this point,
unleſs it alſo appear'd that ſome writer had us'd the word rarla in that ſenſe, What he imagirs might occaſion
ſuch a Miſtake in the Gloſſographers, is the Tania, uſed to bgnify a little flip or tongue of land or thore, See
Camden's Epiſt. p. 60.

(z) There are two more which have the ſame termination, Capitania, and Occitania. Ibid,

limit ?

8

A —

—— ICI

xxxix

„1 EC. OW dba. oe. ed

. 222222 «9

BRITAIN

—

That the

limit ? But in a matter ſo evident, more In-

ſtances are needleſs. |
Nor is it at all to be wonder'd, that the Greeks

ſhould give our Iſle this addition of Tania;

when St. Jerom, in his Queſtions upon Geneſis,

oves out of the moſt antient Authors, that

the Grecians had their Colonies and Plantations
along all the Sea-Coaſts in Europe, and in all

the Iſlands, even as far as Britain. Let us,
ſaith he, look into Varro's Treatiſe of . Antiquities,
and that of Sifinius Capito, and into the Greek
writer Phlegon, and ſeveral others eminent for their
learning; and we ſhall ſee, that almoſt all the INands
and Sea-coaſts over the whole world, with the lands
bordering there-upon, were generally poſſeſſed by the
Greeks. For that people (as I have ſaid before) poſ-
ſeſſed all the Sea-catts, from the Mountains Ama-
nus and Taurus, as far as the Britiſh Ocean.

(% That the Greeks did land in this Iſland,

Greeks came and made their Obſervations on the ſituation
into Britain. and nature of it, will be a point paſt all queſti-

on, if we obſerve what Athenzus hath writ-
ten concerning Phileas Taurominites (of whom
more anon) who was in Britain in the 160"
year befdre' the coming of Cæſar: Next, it we
remember the Altar, with an inſcription to U-
lyſles, in Greek Letters: And laſtly, if we
conſider what Pytheas hath related before the
time of the Romans, concerning the diſtance of
Thule from Britain. For who ſhould diſcover
to the Greeks, either Britain, or Thule, or the
Countries of Belgium, eſpecially their Sea-coaſts ;
unleſs the Ships of the Grecians had been in
the Britiſh and German Ocean, and given
their Geographers an account of them ? Can
we imagin, that Pytheas could have known any
thing of what lay ſix days fail beyond Britain, but
that ſome of the Greeks gave him informati-
on? How elſe could the Greeks come to know,
that there were ſuch places as Scandia, Bergos,
and Nerigon, from whence the paſlage lay by
ſea to Thule? Theſe very names ſeem to have

been much better known, even to the moſt an-

tient among the Greeks, than to Pliny, or any
of the Romans. Accordingly, Mela tells us,
That Thule had been telebrated by the Grecian
Poets ; and Pliny faith, Britain was an Nand fa-
mous in the writings of the Greeks and Romam. By
this means, ſo great a number bf Greek words
have crept into the Britiſh and. French language ;
as alſo into the Belgie or Low-Dutch ; and there-
fore, Lazarns Bayfius, and Budzus, have taken
occafion to value their Country upon this, that
the French were in old time @mninlwers, i. e.
Great admirers of the Greeks; building upon a few
French words, which diſcover ſome marks of the
Greek : And Hadrianus Junins ſeems no leſs
pleas'd, when he can light on a Belgick word

that. will admit of a Greek Etymology. By Greek wort,
15 glory in the Bri.
in their Language, ſince it hath a great many tiſh language,

the ſame rule, our (7) Britains may al

words which are deriv'd from a Greek original.

Bur the learned Sir Thomas Smyth, Secretary of 1a bis book of
State to Queen Elizabeth, attributes it rather Engliſh Or.
to this accident, that when all the reſt of Eu- thography.

rope was diſturb'd and harraſs'd with wars,
- great number of Greeks fled hither for
atety.

Thus, you have my thoughts, (m) and per-
haps my miſtakes, concerning the original of
the Britains, and the name ot Britain. If they
are falſe, may the diſcovery of Truth ſhow it.
In this intricate and obſcure ſearch after Anti-
quities, he merits who errs but a little; and it
often happens, that things which at fr? fight
are judged falſe, appear very true upon a more

ſerious conſideration. If I were ſtanding before

Truth her ſelf as my Judge, I could ſay no more.
As for our Country-men the Britains, I do with
all earneſtneſs intreat the learned among them, to
employ their utmoſt care and diligence in this
enquiry ; that fo, at the appearance of Truth,

* Conjettures may vaniſh, like miſts before the
un. .

(* Concerning the knowledge the Greeks and Romans ſeem to have had of Britain, ſee more hereaſter, under

the title Britannorum mores.

(1) And if that be a good bottom, ſo may the Engliſh too, ſeveral of whoſe Words are ſhewn by ſome late Lexicogra-
phers to have a near affinity with the Greek. But, which is more, even in point of Idiom, there do not want inſtances
to ſhew an Analogy between them, For, xap3ia h, in Heſychius, is our beart of a tree; Ice, to rake in band
with us; delle, to put in mind; Tis foot land, in Lucian, to be led by the ncſe; J Toa, in Diogenes Laer-

tius, to make water; inauoalo aanan,

left ſpeaking ; yn9we T7

Teixd Jiarolac, in I ſoerates, bis tongue runs before

bis wit; o,, i} dps, (among the Greek Adagies collected * Schottus) @ rope of ſand ; Alber xvanJ cums 75

gixos & Told, a rowling-ftone gatbers no meſs,

(»») The ſame Author, that has expreſs'd his diffatisfation in Mr. Camden's Brith-tania, has left us a ConjeQure

of his own, no leſs plauſible than learned, viz. that it comes from Brydio, lignifying in Britiſh fervere, æſtuare, fer.
veſcere, calefacere, caleſieri, &c, pointing out the heat and violent motion of this Sea, ſo much talk'd of by Au-
thors. By one it is call'd Occanus barbaris flietibus fremens ; by another it is ſaid, borrendis attolli eſtibus, And
the Iriſh dea is called by Solinus, undoſus & inguietur; toto in anno (lo he goes on) non nifi pauculis diebus eſt na-
vigabile. Giraldus Cambrenſis follows him, and gives us almoſt the ſame deſcription of it: and Camden, in his
account of this matter, has ſhown theſe Seas to have been famous for their ruggedneſs. See him in Kent, and in
his Diſcourſe upon the Britiſh Iſles. Now, ſince this Quality of our Seas has been in all ages ſo eminent; ſince alſo
the Briciſh Brydio ſo fully expreſſes that Quality, we muſt at leaſt allow this Conjecture ſome ſhare of Probability.

Doubtleſs, from che ſame original was their Brydaniaeth, iracundia, fervor, Ce. which leads us naturally to Brydain,

in Saxon Brytane, and with us Britain,

Manners ant
Cuſtoms of
the Britains.

+ Anni; it
the text: ſon
read lamini⸗

Feld. Pr # |
ee

Way of fig}
ing in Cha
ots, Y fe.

words,
Bri.
guage,

ook of
1 Or.
phy,

— __—_—

Cuſtoms of
the Britains.

read Jamins,

Pelyolb.

Stld. Pref. ad cept the head and the upper-lip.

— 080
—

The Manners of the

BRIT

s for the Affairs of the Britains
in elder times, their State and
Government, their Laws and
Cuſtoms ; we were iſed
a treatiſe of them by Mr. Da-
niel Rogers, an excellent Perſon

ons: but he
his age, before he had done any —
th t

ſubject, I will preſent the Reader with theſe few

Manners and Memoirs concerning their Cuſtoms, taken, word

for word, out of ahcient Authors.
Czſar. The mony md by the Britains is Braſs ;

+ Annidlis in or iron rings at a certain weight, inſtead of it.
the text: ſome ey think it unlawful to eat haves, hens, and geeſe ;

however, they keep them for their Pleaſure.

moſt civiliz'd by jar, are thoſe who inhabit Kent, a
country which lies upon the ſea-coaſt, where they are
not much different from the Gauls in their way of Li-
wing. Moſt of the inland People ſow no corn, but
live milk and fleſh ; and are cloathed with skins.
All the Britains dye themſelves with Nad; which
makes them of a skie colour, and thereby the more ter-
rible in Battle. They wear their hair long upon the
head, but cloſe and bare in all parts of the Body ex-
They have, ten or

aud particularly eminent for
learning, and to whom I had great Obligati-
being taken away in the flower of
n that

AINS.

them are inſtead of Cities; for having cut down trees,

there they build huts to live in, and make folds for
their Cattle; whith are not defign'd to endure long.

Cæſar likewiſe, I is call d a Town among the
Britains, when ſome thick wood us fenc'd round with a
trench and rampire z where, to avoid incurſions, they
retire and take refuge. 2

Diodorus Siculus. The Britains live in the
Same manner that the ancients did ; they fight in chari-
ots, as the ancient heroes of Greece are ſaid to have
done in the Trojan wars. Their houſes, for the moſt
part, are made of reeds or wood. They inn their
corn in the ear, and threſb out no more at a time than
may ſerve for one day. They are ſimple and up-
right in their dealings, and far.from the craft and
ſubtilty of our Countrey-men. Their food is plain and
natural, and has nothing of the dainties of the rich.
The Nand is very populors,

Pomponius Mela: Britain has its Nations,
and its Kings over them; but all are barbarons.
And as they are at a great diſtance from the Conti-
nent, they are more unacquainted with the wealth
and riches of other Places; their's confiſting wholly in
cattle and the extent of their Grounds.
their Bodies; whether for ſhow and beauty, or

and encloſed a large round plot of ground with them,

numbers, as ſome of the Gauls alſo db. Woods with Britin towns.

hey * paint Ultro Corpora”
ome infef 1.

But

twelve of them, Mives together in common, eſpecially
brothers with one another, and parents with children;
but if any of the Women bring forth, the child is

other reaſon, is uncertain. They make war upon the in che mergin
| ſlighteſt occaſions, with frequent incurfions upon

laſto vel vi-
one 0 :

another; prompted chiefly by an ambition of Sove-

counted his only who firſt married her. In Battle,

Way of 6ght- their way is generally to fight in Chariots: Firſt,

ing in Chari-they ſcour up and down in them, and fling darts, and Gault: tl
ots. r Efedire many times diſorder the enemy 4 he

rum by the terrour
of their Horſes and the noiſe of their Chariot-wheels.
When they have wound themſelves in among the Horſe,
they skip from their chariots, and fight on foot.
charioteers in the mean time retire, and place them-
ſelves ſo, that their maſters may readily mount again,
in caſe they are
my. uu t
and the ſteadineſs

actice are ſo expert in it, that

both the ſpeed of the Horſe,
upon the fide of a

wer d by the number of the ene- | bouri
the Foot, and by daily uſe and\them.

reignty, and of enlarging their territories. They fight,
not only on horſeback and on foot, but alſo in their
wagons and chariots, armed after the way of the

ſcythes at the axle-trees.
Cornelius Tacitus. The Britains are neareſt to
the Gauls, and like them ; either by reaſon of the ſame

The original, or becauſe, in Countries oppoſite to one another,
a

ike climate gives a like make and complexion. Hows
conſider d, it is probable this neigh-

ng Country was peopled by the Gauls. One
finds the ſame Religions rites and ſuperſtitions among
Their language is not much different, and they
are alike bold and forward in any dangerous Enter-

ever, all things

ſteep hill, they can ſtop and check their horſes at full [priſe ; and, upon an encounter, alike cowardly. Tet

ſpeed ; can turn, and run upon

1 , and from thence whip preſently into their
ariots. and retreat on pur-

ſtance from our

was ſuch, that it proved y dangerons, to purſue

eover, t

ble diftance ; having others ſo poſted that one party tions fight in chariots.

the Britains ſhew more heat and fierceneſs than the
Jother, as being not yet ſoften'd and effeminated by
peace. For we find, that the Gauls likewiſe were
once famons in war, till Cowardice came in with Peace,
and their Valour and Liberty ſunk together. Which
very thing has befallen thoſe of the Britains who
have been conquer d; whereas the reſt continue ſach
as the Gauls were. The ſtrength of their Arms
confiſts in their Infantry ; and ſome of their Na-
The greateſt perſon among

might ſuccour another, and the weary might be re-|them drives, and his ſervants defend him. Hereto-

fore they were govern d by Kings, but now they are

call them Covins, with F hooks and Falcath anl.
bas,

liev'd by freſb ſupplies. |
Strabo. The Britains exceed the Gauls in ſta-
ture, and their Hair is not ſo yellow, nor their bodies

fo well ſet. Let this be a rent ent of their
zallneſs, that I my ſelf have ſeen at Rome ſome of their
Touth taller by half a foot than other men. Tet their
legs were but weak, and the other parts of the Body
not well made nor handſome. 1n their ways and Cu-
ſtoms, they partly reſemble the Gauls, but are in ſome
things more fimple and barbarons : ſo that ſome have
not the art of making Cheeſe, tho they abound with
milk ; others know neither gardening, nor any other
part of Husbandry. They have many Potentates

drawn, under petty Princes, into parties and factions.
Nor was there any thing of greater advantage to the
Romans, againſt the moſt powerſul among them;
than their not concerting one common intereſt. It is

ſeldom that above one or two Cities unite againſt a

common enemy; ſo that whilſt every one fights ſingle,
all are conquer d.

In another place. Ii is common among the Bri-
tains to conſult the Gods, by ſurveying the entrails of

beaſts, and to go to war under the conduct of Mo-

men.
Government. And therefore ſome learned men

They make no diſtinftion of ſex in point of

among them. In battle, they uſe Chariots in great
we. 1 | 1

think that Ae ſpoke of the Britains,

where

_ 4 GS

” » 4 & - up „ *61. & is 4
4 —

9

3 * « 1 882 A 2

**

XxXxXix

BRITAIN.

i— —

limit? But in a matter ſo evident, more In-
ſtances are needleſs. |
Nor is it at all to be wonder'd, that the Greeks
ſhould give our Iſle this addition of Tania;
when St. Jerom, in his Queſtions upon Genelis,
proves out of the moſt antient Authors, that
the Grecians had their Colonies and Plantations
along all the Sea-Coaſts in Europe, and in all
the Iſlands, even as far as Britain. Let us,
ſaith he, look into Varro's Treatiſe of . Antiquities,
and that of Sitinius Capito, and into the Greek
writer Phlegon, and ſeveral others eminent for their
learning; and we ſhall ſee, that almoſt all the lands
and Sea-coaſts over the whole world, with the lands
bordering there-upon, were generally poſſeſſed by the
Greeks. For that people (as I have ſaid before) poſ-
ſeſſed all the Sea-coasts, from the Mountains Ama-
nus and Taurus, as far as the Britiſh Ocean.
That the (k) That the Greeks did land in this Iſland,
Greeks came and made their Obſervations on the ſituation
into Britain. and nature of it, will be a point paſt all queſti-
on, if we obſerve what Athenzus hath writ-
ten concerning Phileas Taurominites (of whom
more anon) who was in Britain in the 160"
year before the coming of Cæſar: Next, if we
remember the Altar, with an inſcription to U-
lyſfles, in Greek Letters: And laſtly, if we
conſider what Pytheas hath related before the

time of the Romans, concerning the diſtance of

Thule from Britain. For who ſhould diſcover
to the Greeks, either Britain, or Thule, or the
Countries of Belgium, eſpecially their Sea-coaſts ;
unleſs the Ships of the Grecians had been in
the Britiſh and German Ocean, and given
their Geographers an account of them ? Can
we imagin, that Py:heas could have known any
thing of what lay fix days ſail beyond Britain, but
that ſome of the Greeks gave him informari-
on? How elſe could the Greeks came to know,
that there were ſuch places as Scandia, Bergos,
and Nerigon, from whence the paſlage lay by
ſea to Thule? Theſe very names ſeem to have

been much better known, even to the moſt an-
tient among the Greeks, than to Pliny, or any
of the Romans. Accordingly, Mela tells us,
That Thule had been telebrated by the Grecian
Poets ; and Pliny faith, Britain was an Nand fa-
mous in the writings of the Greeks and Romam. By
this means, ſo great a number of Greek words
have crept into the _ and. French language ;
as alſo into the Belgie or Low-Dutch ; and there-
fore, Lazarus Bayfius, and Budgus, have taken

occaſion to value their Country upon this, that

the French were in old time @minlwrs, i. e.
Great admirers of theGreeks; building upon a few
French words, which diſcover ſome marks of the
Greek : And Hadrianus Junins ſeems no leſs
pleas d, when he can light on a Belgick word
that. will admit of a Greek Etymology. By Greek word
the ſame rule, our (7) Britains may at glory in the Bri. '
in their Language, ſince it hath a great many tiſ language.
words which are deriv'd from a Greek original, 1
But the learned Sir Thomas Smyth, Secretary of In bis book
State to Queen Elizabeth, attributes it rather Engliſh Or.
to this accident, that when all the reſt of Eu- thography,
rope was diſturb'd and harraſs'd with wars,
a great number of Greeks fled hither for
ſatety. |
Thus, you have my thoughts, () and per-
haps my miſtakes, concerning the original of
the Britains, and the name ot Britain. If they
are falſe, may the diſcovery of 'Truth ſhow ir.
In this intricate and obſcure ſearch after Anti-
quities, he merits who errs but a little; and ir
often happens, that things which at firſt fight
are judged falſe, appear very true upon a more
ſerious conſideration, If I were ſtanding before
Truth her ſelf as my Judge, I could ſay no more.
As for our Country-men the Britains, I dowith
all earneſtneſs intreat the learned among them, to
employ their utmoſt care and diligence in this
enquiry ; that fo, at the appearance of Truth,
an Conjectures may vaniſh, like miſts before the
un.

Manners ant
Cuſtoms of
che Britains.

+ Anni it
the text: ſor
I cad lamins,

Feld. Praf. ö
Pelyolb.

Way of fig!
bog in cb
ots. * Eſes

(k) Concerning the knowledge the Greeks and Romans ſeem to have had of Britain, ſee more hereafter, under

the title Britaninorum mores.

(1) And it that be a good bottom, ſo may the Engliſh too, ſeveral of whoſe Words are ſhewn by ſome late Lexicogra-
phers to have a near affinity with the Greek. But, which is more, even in point of Idiom, there do not want inſtances

WG
"» F - *

8 2 x
2 .

to ſhew an Analogy between them. For, aaf Jh, in Heſychius, is our beart f a tee; Iſyweiw, to take in band
with us; dete, to put in mind; Tis phos lane, in Lucian, to be led by the ncſe; BJ nov, in Diogenes Laer-
tius, to make water; inauoalo aaaur, be left ſpeaking ; yx5we. Teglgixd Sramias, in I ſocrates, bis tongue runs before
bis wit; goxowior I dps, (among the Greek Adagies collected by Schottus) a repe of ſand 3 AiJz;s xuaind curog 75
gixos & mold, a rowling-ſtone gatbers no moſs,

(»») The ſame Author, that has expreſs his diſſatisfaction in Mr. Camden's Brith-tania, has left us a ConjeQure
of his o, no leſs plaulible than learned, viz. that it comes from Brydio, lignify ing in Britiſh fervere, æſtuare, fer-
veſcere, calefacere, caleſieri, &c, pointing out the heat and violent motion of this Sea, ſo much talk'd of by Au-
thors. By one it is call'd Occanus barbaris flutivus fremens; by another it is ſaid, borrendis attolls æſtibas. And
the Iriſh dea is called by Solinus, undoſus & inquietus ;, toto in anno (ſo he goes on) non nifi pauculis diebus eſt na-
vigabile. Giraldus Cambrenſis follows him, and gives us almoſt the ſame deſcription of it: and Camden, in his
account of this matter, has ſhown theſe Seas to have been famous for their ruggedneſs. See him in Kent, and in
his Diſcourſe upon the Britiſh Iſles. Now, ſince this Quality of our Seas has been in all ages fo eminent; lince alſo
the Briciſh Bridio ſu fully expreſſes that Quality, we mult at lealt allow this Conjecture ſome ſhare of Probability.

VDoubtleſs, from che ſame original was their Brydaniaeth, iracundia, fervor, Ce, which leads us naturally to Brydain,
in Saxon Brytane, and with us Britain,

4

1

: 2 A 'F N Js ans 4A 4 - 7 *
233 . * 2 x Ll r
“àaꝰndʒàa Ee neo OE ITT

9 * * 7s

8

25

s

ES re ts bot

.
1 ö

#- Si > e r la „ bs 5
2 + 2 2 3 ©, Py AF. "i .
3 7 N 5
eh LF, 5

xlii

P S for the Affairs of the Britains
in elder times, their State and
$22 Government, their Laws and

= Cuſtoms; we were promiſed
a treatiſe of them by Mr. Da-
niel Rogers, an excellent Perſon

SS and particularly eminent for
learning, and to whom I had great Obligati-
ons t but he being taken away in the flower of
his age, before he had done any thing upon that
ſubject, I will preſent the Reader with theſe few
Manners and Memoirs concerning their Cuſtoms, taken, word

Cuſtoms of neiei
22 for word, out of ancient Authors.

Czſar. The mony 14 by the Britains is Braſs;
+ Anmilig in oy iron rings at a certain weight, inſtead of it.
_— ſome They think it unlawful to eat hares, hens, and geeſe ;
read lama. |, ever, they keep them for their Pleaſure. The
moſt civiliz'd by far, are thoſe who inhabit Kent, a
country which lies upon the ſea-coaſt, where they are
not much different from the Gauls in their way of Li-
ving. Moſt of the inland People ſow no corn, but
live upon milk and fleſh ; and are cloathed with Skins.
All the Britains dye themſelves with Mad; which
makes them of a skte colour, and thereby the more ter-
rible in Battle. They wear their hair long upon the
head, but cloſe and bare in all parts of the Body ex-
Sell. Pref. ad cept the head and the upper-lip. have, ten or
Pcljolb, twelve of them, Wives together in common, eſpecially

brothers with one another, and parents with children; another; prompted chiefly by an ambition of Sove-
of the Women bring forth, the child is

but if any

counted his only who firſt married her. In Battle,

Way of fight · their way is generally to fight in Chariots: Firſt,

ing in Chari-they ſcour up and down in them, and fling darts, and

ots, * Hedi. many times diſorder the enemy's rithks by the terrour

of their Horſes and the noiſe of their Chariot-wheels.

When they have wound themſelves in among the Horſe,

they skip from their chariots, and fight on foot. The

charioteers in the mean time retire, and place them-

ſelves ſo, that their maſters may readily mount again,

in caſe they are overpower'd by the number of the ene-

my. Thus they anſwer both the ſpeed of the Horſe,

* andthe ſteadineſs of the Foot, and by daily uſe and

practice are ſo expert in it, that upon the fide of a

ſteep hill, they can ſtop and check their horſes at full

Jpeed ; can turn, and run upon the beam, reſt upon

the yoke, and from thence whip preſently into their

chariots. often give ground and retreat on pur-

poſe 3 and when they are at a little diſtance from our

Legions, they come out of their chariots, and fight the

enemy at diſaduantage. The way of their Cavalry

+ was ſuch, that it proved equally dangerous, to purſue

or to be purſued by them. Moreover, they never fought

cloſe, and in Bodies, but thin, and at ſome confidera-

ble diſtance; having others ſo poſted that one party

might ſuccour another, and the weary might be re-

liev'd by freſh ſupplies.

Strabo. Britains exceed the Gauls in ſta-

ture, and their Hair is not ſo yellow, nor their bodies

ſo well ſet. Let this be a ient argument ' of their

zallneſs, that I my ſelf have ſeen at Rome ſome of their

Touth taller by half a foot than other men. Tet their

legs were but weak, and the other parts of the Body

not well made nor handſome. In their ways and Cu-

ſtoms, they partly reſemble the Gauls, but are in ſome

things more fimple and barbarous : ſo that ſome have

not the art of making Cheeſe, tho they abound with

milk ; others know neither gardening, nor any other

part of Husbandry. They have many Potentates

among them. In battle, they uſe Chariots in great |
TY

*

The Manners of the

ne reaſon, is uncertain.

numbers, as ſome of the Gauls alſo dd. Woods with Britiſh towns;
them are inſtead of Cities ; for having cut down trees,
and encloſed a large round plot of ground with them,
there they build huts to live in, and make folds for
their Cattle; whith are not defign'd to endure long.
Cæſar likewiſe. I is cal'd a Town among the
Britains, when ſome thick wood 1s fenc'd round with a
trench and rampire z where, to avoid incurſions, they
retire and take refuge. g
Diodorus Siculus. The Britains live in the
ſame manner that the ancients did; they fight in chari-
ots, as the ancient heroes of Greece are ſaid to have
done in the Trojan wars. Their houſes, for the moſt
part, are made of reeds or wood. They inn their
corn in the ear, and threſh out no more at a time than
may ſerve for one day. They are ſimple and up-
right in their dealings, and far from the craft and
ſubtilty of our Countrey-men. Their food is plain and
natural, and has nothing of the dainties of the rich.
The Nand is very populons,
Pomponius Mela. Britain has its Nations,
and its Kings over them; but all are barbaroms.
And as they are at a great diſtance from the Conti-
nent, they are more unacquainted with the wealth
and riches of other Places; their's confiſting wholly in
cattle and the extent of their Grounds. They paint Ultro Corpora
their Bodies; whether for ſhow and beauty, or ſome infedti. But
They make wer upon the in the margin

ſlighteſt occaſions, with frequent incurfions upon jo a vel vi

reignty, and of enlarging their territories. They fight,
not only on horſeback and on foot, but alſo in their
wagons and chariots, armed after the way of the
Gauls: they call them Covins, with F hooks and
ſcythes at the axle-trees.

Cornelius 'Tacitus. The Britains are neareſt to
the Gauls, and like them; either by reaſon of the ſame
original, or becauſe, in Countries oppoſite to one another,
a like climate gives a like make and complexion. Hows
ever, all things conſider d, it is probable this neigh-
bouring Country was peopled by the Gauls. One
finds the ſame Religions rites and ſuperſtitions among
them. Their language is not much different, and they
are alike bold and forward in any dangerous Euter
priſe; and, upon an encounter, alike cowardly. Tet
the Britains ſhew more heat and fierceneſs than the
other, as being not yet ſoften d and effeminated by
peace. For we find, that the Gauls likewiſe were
once famons in war, till Cowardice came in with Peace,
and their Valour and Liberty ſunk together. Which
very thing has befallen thoſe of the Britains who
have been conquer d; whereas the reſt continue ſach
as the Gauls were. The ſtrength of their Arms
confiſts in their Infantry; and ſome of their Na-
tions fight in chariots. The greateſt perſon among
them drives, and his ſervants defend him. Hereto-
fore they were govern d by Kings, but now they are
drawn, under petty Princes, into parties and jactions.
Nor was there any thing of greater advantage to the
Romans, againſt the moſt powerſul among them;
than their not concerting one common intereſt. It is
ſeldom that above one or two Cities unite againſt a
common enemy; ſo that whilſt every one fights ſingle,
all are conquer d.

In another place. I is common among the Bri-
tains to conſult the Gods, by ſurveying the entrails of
beaſts, and to go to war under the conduct of Wo-
men. They make no diſtinction of ſex in point of
Government. And therefore ſome learned men
think that Ariſtotle ſpoke of the Britains,

t where

+ Falcatis axi-
bas.

— e . 2d
— - . * —

xIIii

The Manners of the Britains.

|

xlv

Magick in

Britain.

+ Celebrat,

Hlaſum
IWoad.

Chener:tes,
Marg a.

Manner of

Painting.

Andlates,

Shipping of
the Britains,

Cur mi.

where he takes notice of ſome warlike nations
beyond the Celtæ, ſubject to the Government of
Women.

Dio Niczus, out of Xiphilin's Epitome, con-
cerning the Britains in the North part of the
Inland. They till no ground, but live upon prey and
hunting, and the fruit of trees : Fiſh (though they
have it in very great plenty) they will not taſte.
They dwell in tents, naked, and without ſhoes. They
ruſe their wives in common, and bring up all the
children among them. They are in a great meaſure a
Democracy. They take mighty pleaſure in robbery
and plunder ; and 775 in chariots. Their horſes are
ſmall and ſwift. They themſelves run at a great rate.
en they are engag d, they are firm and immoveable.
Their weapons are a ſhield and a ſhort ſpear, in the
lower end whereof is a piece ofbraſs like an Apple,
that, by ſhaking it, they may terrifie the enemy. They
have daggers alſo: and they endure hunger, cold, and
all kinds of hardſhips with wonderful patience. For
in the bogs they will continue many days without
food, up to their very heads. In the woods, they live up-
on barks of trees and roots. They have a certain kind
of meat ready upon all occaſions, of which if they take
but the quantity of a bean, they are neither hungry
nor dry.

Herodian. They know not the uſe of cloaths;
but about their necks and bellies they wear iron (think-
ing it an oraament and a ſign of great Riches) as o-
ther Barbarians do gold. They paint their bodies
with ſundry colours and with all kinds of animals re-
preſented in them ; and therefore they wear no cloaths,
left they ſbould hide and cover it. The people are
warlike and bloody, arm'd only with a narrow ſhield,
and a ſpear, and a ſword hanging by their naked bo-
dies. They are altogether ſtrangers to a coat of mail
or helmet; ſuppoſing it would prove but a burthen to
theni, in their march over bogs and moſſes ; from which
ſo much fog aud vapour is exhaled, that the air in
thoſe parts is always thick and cloudy.

What remains (which is but little) I will pick
up here and there, and ſet down as briefly as I
can. Pliny of Magick. But why ſhould I take no-
tice of theſe things, in an Art which hath travers d

the Ocean, and reach*d the utmoſt bounds of Nature? |

Britain at this day exerciſes it with ſo much pomp and
ceremony, that one would imagin the Perfians had been
taught it by them.

The ſame Author. There grows in Gaul an
herb like plantane, call'd Glaſtum, wherewith the
Britiſh wives and virgins dye their bodies all over,
aud jo, like Blackamoors, they are wont at certain Sa-
crifices to go naked. The cloiceſt food among them is
the Chenerotes, à Kind of fowl leſs than a wild
Gooſe. The Britains wear rings upon their middle
finger ; they manure their ground with Marle.

Solinus tells us, That they painted themſelves
with certain maths, which Tertullian calls Brito-
num ſtigmata. He ſays farther, The Country us
partly peſſeſd by Barbarians 3 who have the ſhapes of
ſeveral beaſts artfully cut on the bodies in their youth,
that the prints in the fleſh may grow and increaſe as the
bodies do. Nor is there any thing reckon'd a greater
fign of patience and courage among theſe Barbarons Na-
tions, than to make ſuch ſcars in their limbs, as may
receive the deepeſt dye.

Dio. They worſhip'd Andates, that is to ſay,
the Goddeſſes Victoria and Andraſtes.

Cæſar and Lucan. They had Ships, the keel and
maſt whereof were made of light weod; the other parts
were cover d over with leather. Solinus. The Sai-
lors did never eat, till their voyage was fimiſh'd. Their
drink was made of Barley (and ſo it is by us at this
day,) as Dioſcorides ſays; who miſ-names it
C::rmi for Ruru; for ſo the Welch term what we

—
Xliy ;
—

|

call Ale. Moſt of them had only one wife, as Euſe-
bius ſays, Præpar. 6. Plutarch writes, That
ſome of them would live an hundred and twenty years 3
the natural heat of the body being preſerv d by the
coldneſs of the Country. |
As for thoſe ancient Days of inhuman Tyrants, The Brit
which Gildas ſpeaks of, I know not What he Tyrant,
means by them, unleſs it be thoſe who took up-
on them the Government here, in oppoſition to
the Romans, and were call'd at that time Ty-
ranni. For he preſently adds from S. Jerome,
Porphyry raging in the eaſt like a mad dog againſt Alexander
the Church, proceeds after this vain and wild manner ; the Great
calling Britain a Province plentiful in Tyrants. yer in Bri-
I Mall ſay nothing of their ancient 8 tain,
ſince it was not really a Religion, but a confuſed
heap of Superſtitions, For after the Devil had
bury'd the true Religion in darkneſs, Gildas |
tells us, 'T'hat the ſpectres of Britain were purely Religion of
helliſh, more numerous almoſt than thoſe of Zgypt, of the Britain,
which ſome are yet remaining, ſtrangely featur'd and
ugly, and to be ſeen within and without their for-
ſaken walls, looking ſtiff and grim, after their uſual
manner.
As for the Britains being at the rape of He,
one with Hercules (which is inferr'd from thoſe
verſes of Cornelius, ſuppoſed by ſome to be the
ſame with Nepos, where he deſcribes the mar-
riage of Telemon and Hefione ;

* [aJtex:

Hannibal
yer in Bri
tain,

— Et in aurea pocula fufi
Izvitant ſeſe pateris plebs mixta Britanni, Cc.

With generous wine the golden Veſſels flow'd,

And. well-fill'd bowls went round the un-
diſtinguiſh'd crowd ;

Britains among the reſt.——)

this is plainly poetical; and, that the Author
of it was not Cornelius Nepos, as the Germans
will have it, but Joſephus Iſcanus, I can clearly
demonſtrate. For he makes mention of our
Henry II, and of Thomas Archbiſhop of Can-

terbury. 5

Hiero's 8

w

Whether or no Ulyſſes came thus far (of whom Brodes, |. %% -. >
Solinus ſays, it is manifeſt from an Altar with 6 4: Ho WW inexpedi:
3 es neue
an inſcription of Greek letters on it, that he 10 Britain, e wich. th
landed in Caledonia, is queſtion'd by Brodæus: Cimbria
and (a) I ſhould rather imagine it erected in ho- 12
nour of Ulyſſes, than that it was raiſed by him; :
tho* they would have this Ulyſſes to be Elizza, w
Japhet's grandſon. For it appears by hiſtory
(what we have likewiſe already obſerv'd) that
the ancient Greeks were great Travellers both by
ſea and land ; and therefore it ought not toſeem
ſtrange, if we find their names and monuments
in ſeveral places. And they took thoſe names,
not ſo much from their own Anceſtors, as from
Heroes, who were equally honour'd, if not more,
than Confeſſors and Martyrs among Chriſtians.
As therefore the Countries newly found out,
have their names from St. John, St. Dominic, St.
Francis, and many other Saints; ſo none will
deny, but the ſame was practis'd among the
Greeks. And, of all their Heroes, Which of
them made Voyages, either more frequently, or
more long and tedious, than Ulyſſes? No won-
der then that Mariners ſhould generally make
their Vous to him, and conſecrate the places of
their Arrival to his name. Thus DUH, upon
the mouth of the river Tagus, had its name; and
thus in other places came thoſe monuments of
Ulyſſes, Laertes, and their Companions ; which
are not to be aſcribed to Ulyſſes as the founder,

Br itoma!
Britain,

Tib, 2+

but, as we may ſuppoſe, were dedicated to that

—

(a) See Mr. George Carleton's opinion of this matter, in a letter to Mr. Camden, publiſn'd in his Epiſtles, p. 1 1 2.

Hero

igion of
taim

eg, J.

by”
ye”

Miſcei,
es ner:

itain.

o
n

* —

| The Manners of the Britains.

xlv Avi
Hero by Grecian Travellers, who himſelf was writes, that the Briones, a race of the Cimbri, 9
of all others the greateſt. ſettled themſelves towards the head of the

John Tzetzes, in his Varia Hiſtoria, writes, | Drave, I will not venture to change Briones into

That our Britiſh Kings made Cato the elder | Britones ; though the Criticks of our age ſeldom
(that noted enemy to the vice and debauchery |ſtick at ſuch things.
of the Romans) many Preſents, in honour to his} To give my own opinion once for all: As Britain
Virtue ; and this, long before the name of Bri- | the ans, notwithſtanding they were ſoknomn but
tain was known at Rome. I leave him to] great and eminent, were not known to Hero- 3 *
make good the truth of this ſtory ; but how fa-|dotus nor the ancient Greeks ; and the Gauls Romans
bulous an Author he is, the Learned are ſuſſi- and Iberians were for a long time utterly un-
ciently aware. known to the ancient Hiſtorians ; (6) ſo I have

Alexander Nor would I have the Reader believe, that always thought, that it was late before the

the Great ne- Alexander- the Great came from the Eaſt-Indies
rer in Bri- to the Streights of Gfbraltar, and to Britain;
WR upon the authority of Cedrenus, againſt other
Hiſtorians : (From thence being come into Aphaſis,
* Gades, and the Britiſh nation, and havi 1
niſh'd himſelf with a thouſand hulks, &c.) That of
Trithemius out of Humibald, is juſt as true,
That King Baſſanus * away his wife, the
King of the Orcades's daughter, in the year
before Chriſt 284, and that thereupon he made
war againſt Baſſanus with the auxiliaries which
he had from the King of the Britains.
Neither would I have any one imagin, that

* [aJtigx:

Hannibal ne-
yer in Bri-
tain,

that paſſage of Polybius, in the Ecloge of the
XI Book. Tro Ji Nu ir bafyw ovyxAGouirov THe Berlra-
as eis d- Bexx m,, A. For the place is
corrupted, and it ſhould be read Beira for
Beeſrarlag; 4$ it is alſo in the 42 Book of Dio;
and in both places, they are ſpeaking of the
Brutii in Italy. And yet I will not þ hoy but
the Greeks about this time might arrive in our
Iſland. For Athenzus, deſcribing from Moſ-
Hiero's Ship. chion a very ancient Author, that ſhip of Hiero
which was thought a miracle for greatneſs and
workmanſhip, tells us, That the Main-maſt
of it was, with much difficulty, found by a
Swine-herd in the mountains of Britain, and
from thence convey'd into Sicily by Phileas
Taurominites, a Mechanick : But I fear the
Criticks will here alſo read Beru for Bpi1ravlas,
and refer it to the Brutian-Hills in Italy.
The Britains Yet itis likely, that ſome of the Britains went
in expeditions with the Cimbrians and Gauls in thoſe Expedi-
with the tions into Greece and Italy. For, beſides the

Cimbria = 4 2
+ = gg name common to both ; in the ancient Britiſh
Liber, Book of the Triades, where we find mention

of three great armies rais'd in Britain, it is ſaid,
that a certain foreign Captain drew a mighty
army out of this kingdom ; which, having de-
ſtroy'd great part of Europe, ar laſt ſettled upon
the Grecian ſea ; I ſuppoſe, meaning Galatia.
And that Bremus, ſo famous both in Greek and
Latin Authors, was a Britain; ſome think
may be eaſily made out. For my part, I know
only thus much, that the name 1s not yet quite
loſt among the Britains, who in their language
call a King Brennin. f
However, that Britomarus a warlike Captain
among rhem, and mention'd by Florus and Ap-
ian, was a Britain, is plain from the word it
elf, which ſignifies a Great Britain. I will not
here wreſt that of Strabo (who ſays that Bren-
nus was by birth a Praufian,) ſo as to make
Tib, 2. c. 13. him a Britain: and whereas Otho Frifingenfis

Britomarus, a
Britain,

name of the Britains was heard of by the Greeks
and Romans. As for that Tra& De Mido,
which goes
of the Britains, and Albion, and Hierna; it is
not ſo old as Ariſtotle, but of a much later
date, as the learned think. For certain, this

for Ariſtotle's, and makes mention

of the world was not known to the noble

rt

Hiſtorian Polybius, who, in company with the
famous Scipio, travell'd a great part of Europe
about 370 years before Chriſt. (c) He tells us,
That whatever tract lies north-ward between the
Tanais and Narbo, is unknown to this day ; and
that whatever is ſaid or written of it, is all idle and
Hannibal carry*d on a War in Britain, becauſe of | fictitious. Much after the rate that ſome at
this day may be thought to do, who perſwade
themſelves that Hamil, being ſent by the Car-
thaginians to diſcover the weſtern coaſts of
Europe, arriv'd here many years before ; when
all the while there is no oth

voyage, but a verſe or two in Feſtus Avienus.

er ground for this

And that it was fo late e're Britain was

known, might well be occaſion'd by the ſitua-
tion, as disjoyn'd from the Continent ; and
becauſe the old Britains were then barbarous
(like the other Nations in this part of the
world,) and, living much at home, had no
great commerce with other Countries. Dio is
of the ſame
That it was not ſo much as known to the more an-* Primisy
cient Greeks and Romans, whether there was ſuch a
place as Britain in the world ; and the more modern
of them queſtion'd whether it were Continent or and;
That much was written on both fides by ſome who had
no certain knowledge, (as having neither ſeen the
Country, nor learn'd the nature of it from the Inha-
bitants) but who rely d on their own Conjeftures, ac-
cording as oy hob time or inclination to frame them,
The firſt

mentions Britain, is Lucretius, in thoſe verſes
of his about the difference of Airs.

inion in this matter, ſaying,

tin Author that I know of, who

Nam quid Britamum celum differre putamus,
Et quod in Ægypto eſt, qua mundi claudicat

axis,

How different is the air oth* Britiſh Iſle
From that which plays upon the wand'ring

ile.

Now, it is granted on all hands, that Luere-
tius livd a little before Cæſar: about which

time, Divitiacus King of the f Soiſſons, and + Sueſſiones,

the moſt potent Prince in Gaul, govern'd the
Britains; as Czſar himſelf informs us. But this
is to be underſtood of the ſea-coaſt, For the

©. hes.

(%) Seo what our Author has obſerv'd upon

the Greeks a greater acquaintance with the affairs of this
(e) The circumſtances of Polybius's words ſeem to imply no

ſea encompaſſed the South parts of Africa, (which he tells us
too.

North parts of Europe above Narbo, were encompaſs d
as our Author takes it, is plain from his own deſeri
Ligeris, with many other places of France, which

the third Book, to write of the Outer or Weſt-ſea, and even of

Bretanick.

this head, under the title, Name of Britain, where he ſeems to allow

Island, than here he does.

more, than that as it was doubtful whether the
in the very ſame clauſe ;) ſo was it, whether the
But that he could not mean it in ſo great a latitude
tion of the Fountains of Rbhodanus and Corbilo or
ay aboye Narbo : and alſo from his own promiſe in
the Britiſh Iſlands; which he calls the

My

ſamg

— .

—ꝗ— rt "th _———

- - G_—
—— GE 7

Ld

+

— —— —

—

Z ˙ . nec „ ar AI.
*

- h .
- 4 2 2 * * * *
„ * "_

xlIvii Romans in Britain. xlviii
ſame Cæſar affirms, that no other part of Bri- becauſe the tranſactions of that Period are re-
tain beſides the ſea-coaſt and what lay over- [lated by very good Hiſtorians. But though no
againſt France, was known to the Gauls. And |Nation, how learned ſoever, except the Jews
yet Diodorus Siculus writes, That Britain was|only, had any true hiſtorical relations before
never ſulject to any Foreigner; neither Dionyfins, nor | that age; yet I know very well that the Bri-
Hercules, nor any God or Hero, have ( for ought ap-|tiſh hiſtory of Geofrey begins three hundred
pears) ever attempted to conquer it. C. Caſar, for|and thirty years before the firſt Olympiad,
his great exploits firnamed Divas, is the firſt that|that rude and ignorant Period, eſpecially as to
ever ſubdu'd the Britains, and fore d them to pay thoſe parts, which Varro calls fabulous. Hence
tribute. therefore (leſt I lay a bad foundation, and the

Cenſorinu Here then our Hiſtorian ( whoever he be) Whole Building be accordingly weak) I will

1 die Nata- muſt begin his hiſtory, and not higher : ony begin the hiſtory of the Romans in Britain ;

: weighing what the learned Varro hath ſaid, (which ſeems to be requiſite in this place, and

Three Peri- and I have already hinted ; Namely; That|may give great light to that which is to fol-

ods of time, there are three diſtin Periods of time; the low: ) Not collecting it from Fables, which
firſt, from man's creation to the deluge, which | would argue the Author's vanity in writing, as

Unknown, (by reaſon we know nothing of it) is called Ad well as his folly in believing ; but from the
The ſecond, from the deluge to the firſt Olym-| genuine monuments of Antiquity. And this I
piad, in the year of the world 3189, whick| will do with as much brevity as I can ; for it
(becauſe much of that Hiſtory is falſe and fa-|is not my deſign to rob any one of the glory

Fabulous. þulozs) is call'd Nun. The third, from the] of a larger treatiſe upon this ſubject.
Hiſtorical. firſt Olympiad to our own times, call'd *I5ogzxv),

The ROMANS in

BRITAIN.

HEN Virtue and Fortune| ther about eighty Veſſels to bring over two le-
*,. 70 Ms had conſpir'd, or rather Pro-| gions, and about eighteen more tor the horſe,
ae vidence had decreed, that fer {ail from the country of the Morini, at three
ii Rome ſhould be Miſtreſs. of | in the morning, and about four on the day fol-
che world; Cairns Julius Ca-|lowing arrived in Britain, at a place inconveni-
2 Sx ſar, having conquer'd all |ent for landing; for the ſea was narrow, and ſo
Gaule, caſt his eye towards the Ocean, as if the pent in by the Hills, that they could throw
Roman world was not large enough: that, ha- their darts from thence upon the ſhore beneath.
ving ſubdu'd all, both by ſea and land, he Having therefore got wind and tide both fa-
might by Conqueſts jeyn Countries, which Na- |vourable, he ſet ſail again, and went about
Pomponim ture had ſever d. And in the 54" year before |eight miles farther, and there, in a plain and
Sabinzs, out Chriſt, he made an Expedition into Britain; open ſhore, rid at anchor. The Britains, per-
of d eneca. either provoked by the ſupplies which had been ſceiving his deſign, diſpatch'd away their horſes
ſent into Gaul during the courſe of that war, and chariots, to keep the Romans from land-
or becauſe they had receiv'd the Belovaci Who ing. Here the Romans had one great difficul-
retreated hither, or elſe (as Suetonius writes) [ty : for thoſe large ſhips could not ride cloſe
excited by the hopes of Britiſh Pearls, the [enough to the ſhore in that ſhallow ſea ; ſo
weight and bigneſs whereof he was wont to [that the ſoldiers were forced to leap down from
poiſe and try in his hand; but rather than all |thoſe high Ships in places unknown and under
theſe, for the ſake of Glory, ſince he rejected [heavy armor, and fight at the ſame time with
the offers of the Britiſh Embaſſadors, who, ha- the waves and with the enemy. On the other
ving notice of his deſign, came to him, and ſide, the Britains, who knew the place, were
promis d to give hoſtages and to be ſubject to] free and uncumber'd ; and fought either on dry
the Roman Empire. ground, or but a very little way in the water.
Take the hiſtory of his Entrance into the So that the Romans were daunted, and foughr
Iſland, abridg'd, but in his own words. 'The|not with the ſame heart and ſpirit that they
laces, ports, and havens of Britain being not |us'd to do. But Cæſar commanded the tran-
ufficiently known to Cæſar, he ſent C. Volu-|ſport-ſhips to be remov'd, and the galleys to be
ſenus before with a Galley ; who, having made |row'd up * juſt over-againſt the Britains, and « 4, apertun
what diſcovery he could, return'd to him in five the ſlings, engines, and arrows to be thence Jarus.

days. The Britains having intelligence of Cz-employ'd againſt them. The Britains, territy'd

ſar's intended expedition by the merchants, ſe-|with the form of the ſhips, and the rowing,

veral Cities ſent Embaſſadors into Gaul to offer |and the ſtrangeneſs of the Engines, gave ground.

hoſtages, and to promiſe obedience to the Ro- Ar the ſame time, an Enſign of the tenth Le-

mans. After he had exhorted them to conti- gion, beſeeching the Gods that his deſign might

nue firm in that reſolution, he diſmiſſed them; be for the honour of the Legion (My fellow-

together with Comius Atrelatenſis, who had great |ſoldiers, ſays he, leap down, unleſs you will ſee

authority in thoſe parts (for the Atrebates had [the Eagle taken by the Enemy; for my own

before left Gaul, and ſeated themſelves there,) part, I am reſolv'd to do my duty to my Coun-

and who was to perſuade them to continue true|try and my General) immediately jump'd our,

and faithful to the Romans. But he, upon his] and advanced with his Eagle towards the ene-

firſt landing, was impriſon'd by the Britains.| my; and thereupon all follow'd. (But, if we

In the mean time, Cæſar having drawn toge- ] believe Julian, it was Cæſar himſelf who firſt

leap'd

1

W

wm cs I "AF, wu

n

.

j

—

—
— — co — 2 en

—

—
— — —— 1

— ä— -

— — 6933 Ip Pa — — —

*

—

7,

— d

.

88

, - N a | —
Ain utits of Time: | XXXVI | XXX11 | XXVII. | — xx| EST
n > 1 Num Pro

: ==.
-XT 8 4
18 | Valias .

—U—

| C 2 3 R I 7 4 A N N 1A
3
N

Romana A

Ebuda Oc
 dentalior/

"#54 57

I EEA A _
—— 8

. TT: —
*
_—

=»

—
*

1531

Nd
w « Lac oli on

num Jon

7 VER ius enn

nne chem Lrom +

3
CASSITERIDES INSULA Mo
Lina

Daitinonorum
W DL "T1" "EE HH =
Cr mum

4 a

om

— IFF 1 NI Þ III \ var from London
XX XVI 2 . — 12 3 8 — —— ——_— ” * *

rue. Num Fa

'" . 75147 n.

*
—

*

4 *

o * 5
. —

8 :
———oﬀ  — RR _WCNYM,
=

a

+

-

4 4
249 ＋＋

Ip
W.

Da 5
8 cone 4

EL A
VP,

L GCJOV4

 #DUROTRIC

—— NW x _T r__ —
. I / a E
2 I 1 fy

—
NO N

5 | | 20 $0 & 80

. "WE." I
Hill ria Stadia

= — —
w {xo 4
ennmum

n:
r old un
X — IASC
7 * 4
ſts 7 > > Tone * Condercu
rv? *

8

DPurnorart:

— —

VE

|
|

— — —— — —
*

1X

"1

>,

3 * * - 2

3 s = *

a 2 2 „ x * — * .
c

a + — = . * 2 2
— > a * — . — *
- *

<7 * — 2 —

—

_

—

rn
* * A * 2

3

1 8 th + "WM.

—
—
1 —— — —_

Romans in Britain. | I

4%
ö L
od |
* 4
.
2
—
p 4
I P
FL
E
=”
£2 1
«
Wo «
of
"4 N
M 7 p
oo”
1 c
2
£ 3
hs --
by 1
+ _—_
.
£ 44

leap'd out.) Now began a reſolute fight on
both ſides ; but the Romans, being cumber'd
with arms, toſs'd with the waves, and wanting
footing, and withal confus d; were in ſtrange
diſorder, till Cæſar made the Pinnaces and Boats
ply about with recruits to ſuccour them, As-
ſoon as the Romans got ſure footing on dry
ground, they charg'd the Britains, and quickly
put them o Might ; but could not purſue them,
their horſe being not yet arriv d. The Bri-
tains upon this defeat, preſently ſent Embaſla-
dors (and with them Comius Atrebatenſis, whom
they had impriſon'd) to defire peace ; laying
the fault upon the rabble, and their own im-
prudence. Cæſar, upon this, eaſily pardon'd
them, commanding hoſtages to be given ; which
he receiv'd in part, with a promiſe to deliver
the reſt. This peace was concluded the fourth
day after his landing in Britain.
At the ſame time, thoſe eighteen ſhips
wherein the horſe were tranſported, as they
came in ſight of Britain, were ſuddenly driven
to the weſtward by ſtreſs of weather, and had
enough to do to recover the Continent of Gaul.
The ſame night, the moon then at full, the gal-
leys which were drawn to ſhore, were filled by
the tide, and the tranſport-ſhips which lay at
anchor were ſo ſhaken by the ſtorm, that they
were altogether unfit for ſervice. This being
known to the Britiſh Princes (that the Romans
wanted horſe, ſhips, and proviſion, ) they re-
volted, and reſolved to hinder them from for-
raging. But Czſar, foreſeeing all this, took
care to bring in Proviſions daily, and to repair
his fleet with the timber of thoſe twelve which
were moſt ſhatter'd. While Affairs ſtood in
this poſture, the ſeventh Legion which was ſent
out to forage, being at their work, was ſud-
denly ſet upon by the Britains, and encompaſs d
by their horſe and Chariots. Their way of
fighting in Chariots (as I have already obſerv'd)
is this : Firſt, they drive up and down, and
fling their darts, and diſorder the ranks of the
enemy with the terror and noiſe of their horſes
and Chariots ; and if they once get within the
ranks of the horſe, they light from their Cha-
riots and fight on foot. The Charioteers draw
off a little in the mean time, and place their
Chariots ſo, that in caſe their maſters are over-
power'd by the numbers of the enemy, they
may readily retreat thither. Thus, they anſwer
at once the ſpeed of the horſe, and the ſteadi-
neſs of the foot; and are ſo expert by daily uſe
and exerciſe, that on the fide of a ſteep hill
they can take up and turn, run along upon the
beam, ſtand upon the yoke, and from thence
whip into their Chariots again. But Cæſar
coming luckily to their relief, the Romans took
heart again, and the Britains ſtood their ground;
who in hopes of freeing themſelves for ever (by
reaſon of the ſmall number of the Romans, and
the ſcarcity of proviſions among them) got toge-
ther a great Body, and march'd to the Roman
Camp ; where Czſar engag'd them, put them
to flight, flew many of them, and burnt all

Fighting in
Chariots.

their houſes for a great way together. The ve-[i
ry ſame day, the Britiſh Embaſſadors addreſs
themſelves for peace to Cæſar; and he grants
it, doubling their hoſtages, and commanding
them to be ſent into Gaul. Soon after, * the
Equinox being within a day, he ſer ſail from
Britain, and arriv'd ſafe with his whole fleet
on the Continent : whither only two Cities of
Britain ſent their hoſtages; the reſt neglected it.
Upon Cæſar's letters, and his account to the
7 Supplicatio. Senate of what he had done, a f proceſſion of

twenty days was decreed him; though he had

Proxima
gin ii
die.

ſelf or Rome, but only the glory of making the
oa 9

The next year, having prepar'd a great fleet (for,
including tranſport-ſhips and private veſlels+ qanotin;s,
built by particular perſons for their own uſe, it
conſiſted of above 800 ſail) with five legions and
two thouſand horſe he ſet ſail from Portus Tius,
and landed his army in the ſame part of the
Iſland where he had landed the foregoing ſum-
mer. But there was not an enemy to be ſeen
now ; for though the Britains had been there in
great numbers, yet, terrify'd by this fleet, they
had retir'd into the upland country. Here
Cæſar encamp'd his army in a convenient Place
leaving ten cohorts, and three hundred horſe,
to guard the ſhips. And in the night, march-
ing himſelf twelve miles into the Country, he
tound out the Britains, who retreated as far as
the river, but gave him battle there ; and be-
ing repulſed by the Roman cavalry, betook
themſelves to certain woods, which were for-
tified by art and nature. But the Romans
locking their ſhields together like a roof cloſe J Teftuding
over head, and raiſing a mount, took the place, la.
and drove them trom the woods; however, they
purſu'd them no farther, having a Camp to
tortify that night. |

The day after, Cæſar ſent his army in three
bodies to purſue the Britains ; but ſoon re-
call'd them, upon the news that his fleet was
the night before wreckt, torn, and caſt upon
the ſhore, by a great ſtorm. So, returning to
the ſhips, he drew them to land in ten days
time, and entrench'd them within the circuit of
his camp, and then went back to the wood
from whence he came. Here the Britains had
poſted themſelves with great reinforcements,
under the conduct of Caſſivellaun or Caſſibelin, Caſſibelinz
who, by common conſent, was made their
Prince and General. Their horſe and Chariots
encounter'd the Romans in their march, with
much loſs on both ſides. After ſome pauſe, as
the Romans were taken up in fortifying their
camp, the Britains fell upon the guards with
great fierceneſs, and charg'd back again through
two Cohorts, which, with the flower of two
Legions, Cæſar had ſent to intercept them; and
ſo made a ſafe retreat. The day following, the
Britains appear'd very thin here and there upon
the hills; but at noon, Cæſar having ſent out
three legions and all his horſe, ro forage, the
Britains fell upon them ; but were repulſed
with great ſlaughter. And now thoſe Aids
which they had got together, went off and left
them; ſo that the Britains never after en-
counter'd the Romans with their full ſtrength.
From hence, Cæſar march'd with his army to |
the River Thames, into the territories of Caſſi- The River
vellaun ; where, on the other ſide of the river, Thames.
he found a great army of the Britains drawn up;
having faſten'd ſharp ſtakes in the bottom of the
river. However, the Romans wading up to
the neck, went over ſo reſolutely, that the
Britains quitted their poſt and fled ; but not for
fear of tower-back*d Elephants, as Poliænus has

t. 3

Caſſivellaun, deſpairing now of any ſucceſs by
fighting, retains with him only four thouſand
Charioteers, and reſolves to wateh the motion
of the Romans, ſallying out upon their horſe,
as oft as they happen'd to ſeparate and ſtraggle
in foraging ; and ſo he kept them from ranging
in the Country. In the mean time the Trinobantes The Tyiao-
ſurrender themſelves to Cæſar, deſiring he would antes.
protect Mandubratius (call'd by Eutropius and apandubrari-
Bede, out of ſome loſt pieces of Suetonius, An- us, alſo calfd
drogorius, and by our Britains Androgeus) againſt Androgews.

Dio, lib. 39. gain'd no ing of conſequence, either to him-| Caſſivellaun, and ſend him to be their Gover-

8 nour.

li Romans in Britain,

nour. Cæſar ſends him, and demands forty
hoſtages, and proviſion for his army. After
their example, the Cenimagni, Segontiaci, Anca-
lites, Bibroci, and the Caſſii, ſurrender them-
ſelves ; from whom Cæſar having learnt that
Caſſivellaun's town was not far off, tortified with
woods and fens ; he goes and aſſaults it in two
places. The Britains fly out at another fide ;
yet many of them are taken in the flight, and
cut off.

In the mean time, at the command of Caſſi-
vellaun, four petty Kings of Kent, Cingetorix,
Carvilius, Taximagulus, and Segonax, fell upon
the Camp in which the Romans had intrench'd
their Shipping; but the Romans iſſu'd out, and
beat them off, taking Cingetorix Priſoner. Caſ-
ſivellaun, after ſo many defeats (but mov'd
more particularly by the revolt of thoſe Cities)
ſent Embaſſadors, with Comius Atrebatenfis, to
Czſar, to treat of ſurrendring. Cæſar, having
reſolv'd to winter on the continent, worry 1
hoſtages, and appoints a yearly tribute ro

ad Kom Britain to the. Rains, ordering
Caffivellaun to do nothing prejudicial to Man-
dubratius, or the Trinobantes; and ſo tranſports
his whole army, with a great number of cap-
tives, at two embarkments. 'Thus much from
Czſar, of his own War in Britain.

Eutropius, from ſome pieces of Suetonius
which are now loſt, adds farther :

Scawva, one of Caſar's ſoldiers, and four more
with him, came over before in a little ſhip to a
rock near the Hand, aud were there left by the tide.
The Britains in great numbers fell upon theſe few
Romans; yet his companions got back again. Scæva
continues undaunted, overcharg'd with weapons on all
fides ; firſt, reſiſting them with his ſpear, and after
with his ſword, fingle againf# a multitude. And
when he was at length weary and wounded, and had
loft both. helmet and buckler, he ſwam off with two
* Loriciss * coats of mail to Cæſar Camp; where he begg d

pardon for his raſbneſs, and had the honour to be
made a Centurion. |
Atheneus, When Cæſar firſt came into this Iſland, he
was ſo moderate, and ſo far from the pomp
and ſtate of the preſent age, that Cotas (who
was the greateſt Officer in his camp bur one)
tells us in his Greek Commentary concerning the
Commonwealth of Rome, that all his retinue was
but three ſervants. hen he was in Britain, ſays
— a, and could not endure that his greatneſs
f Id be confin'd within the Ocean, he had the news
+ Ws ſe of his — death, and f the public calamities
center. like to follow thereupon; yet he ſoon overcame his

Pliny. grief, as he did every thing elſe. Returning Con-

queror from Britain, he ofter'd to Venus Gene-
Servius Hono-trix in her Temple, a Corſlet of Britiſh Pearls.
2 Some of his Britiſh Captives he appointed for
| the Theater, with certain tapeſtry-hangings
wherein he had repreſented his Britiſh Victories.
Theſe were often taken away by the Britains,
being the People repreſented in them ; and
hence that of Virgil;

— Utque
Purpurea intexti tollunt aulæa Britanni.

And how the tap'ſtry where themſelves are
wrought,
The Britiſh ſlaves pull down.
e ”
33 And the Britains were not only appointed to
dinal de Car- ſerve the Theater, but alſo (to note this by the
m— by) the Emperor's Sedan ; as appears by an old
Ledticaris- Inſcription of that age, which makes mention
rum. of a Decurio over the Britiſh * Sedan men. Of
this Conqueſt of Cæſar's, an ancient Poet writes
us,

4
i

| thought, that no ſmall damage might be tons
| em

Vis invitta viri reparata claſſe Britannos
Vicit, & hoſtiles Rheni compeſcuit undas.

Unconquer'd force ! his fleet new rigg'd
o recame |

The Britiſh Troops, and Rhine's rebellious
Stream.

Hither alſo may be referr'd that of Claudian,
concerning the Roman valour :

Nec wn oceano, remiſque ingreſſa profun-
m
Vincendes alio quaſivit in orbe Britannos.

Nor ſtop'd he here, but urg'd the bound- |
leſs flood, | =

And __ new Britiſh Worlds to be ſub- -4
u -

Moreover, Cicero in a Poem now loſt, intit!'d ,
Quadrigæ, extols Cæſar for his exploits in Bri- |
tain, to the very skies, and as it were in a poe-

tical chariot : and this we have upon the autho- 1
rity of Nrreriu Pedemontanns. For thus he _
writes, I will draw Britain in your colours, but .
with my own pencil. However, others are of opi- : 2 Nrques.
nion, thathe only frighted the Britains by one =
ſucceſsful battle ; or, as Lucan ſays, who indeed %

had no kindneſs for Czfar's Family, by

Hrabo.

Territa quaſitis oftendit terga Britannis.

Fled from the Britains whom his arms had

ſought.
AndTacitzs, a grave and ſolid Author writes, that : *
he did not conquer Britain, but only ſhew'd it to -

the Romans, Horace hints, as if he ſcarce touch d
it ; when, flattering Auguſtus, he ſays, the Bri-
tains remain'd untouch'd, |

Intaftns aut Britannus ut deſcenderet
Sacra catenatm via.

Or Britains yet untouch'd, in chains ſhou'd
come,
To grace thy triumph, through the ſtreets

of Rome,

And Propertius,

eee

* * = 1 1 a
Y r 3 5 * 6 8
22 x : z * : * a
2 „ J = . ; 4 2 4 - - EO, 4 72
2 p a, — 2 4 ds 4 * . 8 þ 4 8 *
* * 7. a * aw * 8 5 * 4 p

Te manet inviftus Romano Marte Britanuxs,

Britain, that ſcorn'd the yoak of our command,
Expects her fate from your vicorious hand.

So far is that of the Court-hiſtorian Velleius
Paterculus from being true; Ceſar paſs'd twice
through Britain; ſince it was hardly enter'd by
him. For, many years after this expedition
of Czſar, the Iſland was ſubjef# to its own Dio.
Kings, and govern'd by its own Laws.

Auguſtus ſeems induſtriouſly to have neglected qyguſtus.
this Illand; for he reckon'd it a kind of f De-4 co,tum,
cree, as Tacitus ſays (and perhaps he thought it

the wiſeſt way) That the Roman Empire ſhould be

bounded, i. e. that the Ocean, the litre, and the
Euphrates, were the limits which nature had

ſer it: To the end it might be an adamantine h
Empire (for ſo Auguſtus expreſſes it in Julian) In the Ceſar,
and not, like a ſhip which is too big, prove
unweildy, and ſink under its own weight; as
it has uſually happen'd ro other great States.
Or elſe, as Strabo thinks, he contemn'd ix, as if
its enmity was not worth the fearing, nor- any
thing in it worth the having; and it was

*.Y

e 8 - -

PP we It, el : * 8 1 ſe
— e 8
r HE. - 8
aha x . 1 2» : - .
* * 1 4 r 2 ; 1 0 3 29 + 5 _
br ts : W 31 . = 1 FL r EL | r
* * { * . 4

Romans in Britain.

ä 1

lu

Hrabo.

them by thoſe other Countreys about it. But,
whatever might be the cauſe, this is certain,
that after Julius had been here, and the Civil
Wars of the Empire broke out, Britain for
a long while was not regarded by the Ro-

mans, even in peaceful times. Yet at laſt,

Auguſtus was on his Journey from Rome to

invade Britain. Whereupon, Horace at that
time addreſſes himſelf to the Goddeſs Fortune
at Antium ;

Serves iturum Caſarem in ultimos
Orbis Britannos.

Preſerve great Cæſar, while his arms he bends
To ſeek new foes in Britain's fartheſt lands.

But, after he had got as far as Gaul, the Bri-
tains ſent their addreſſes for peace ; and ſome
tty Princes, having obtained his favour by
mbaſſies and by good offices, made oblations

time, he makes no mention of Britain. Yet the
Britains ſeem to have continued in amity with
the Romans ; For Germanicus being on a voy-
age at that time, and ſome of his men driven by
ſtreſs of weather upon this Iſland, the petty
Princes ſent them home again.

It is evident enough, that Caius Cæſar de- C. Caligula
ſign'd to invade this Ifland ; but his own fickle :
and unſteady temper, and the ill ſucceſs of his
great armies in Germany, prevented it. For to Suetonius in
the end he might — Britain and Germany c#/yg«/«.
(both which he threaten'd to invade) with the
tame of ſome prodigious work, he made a
bridge between the Baiz and the Piles of Puteoli,
three thouſand fix hundred paces in length.

But ” 2 nothing = NEE expedition, than re-

ceive Adminius the ſon of Cunobellin, a King of the 44,.:..:
Britains, uo was baniſb d by his father, — or —
ed with a ſmall number of men, and ſurrender d him-

elf to the Emperor. Upon that, us if the whole

Hand had been alſo ſurreader'd, he wrote boaſting

in the Capitol, and rendred almoſi the whole Hand | letters to Rome, often charging the Expreſs that was

intimate and familiar to the Romans; ſo that they

ent, to drive up * into the very Forum aud Senate- 4 forum

pai 4 all impoſts very contentedly, as they do at this ! Houſe, and not to deliver them but in Mars s Tem- atque Curiam.

day, for ſuch commodities as were convey d, to and fro,

ple and in a full Senate, to the Conſuls. Afterward, Pio.

beween Gaul and Britain. Theſe were, ivory, brid/es, | marching forward to the Ocean (as if he deſign'd a

ba Chains, amber, and glaſs Veſſels, and ſuch co
mou ſort of ware. And therefore there needed no
garriſon in the Mand. For it would requi e at leaſt
one Legion and ſome horſe, if Tribute was to be rais'd;

and that would hardly defray the charge of the Forces;
for the impoſts muſt neceſſarily be leſſen d,
* was impos'd; and when violent courſes are once taken,

if a tribute

er us never far off. The next year likewiſe,
2 a je upon Britain, for breach
of treaty ; but he was diverted by an inſur-
rection of the Caztabri and others in Spain. And
therefore there is no reaſon to believe Landinus
Servius, or Philargyris, who would conclude that
A us triumph'd over the Britains, from
thole verſes of Virgil:

Et duo rapta manu diverſo ex hoſte trophæa
Biſque triumphatas utroque 4 littore gentes.

Gain'd from two foes two trophies in his
hands,

Two nations conquer'd on the neighbouring
ſtrands. |

To that Submiſſion of the Britains, without
queſtion, this of Horace relates :

Calo tonantem credidimus Jovem
Regnare ; praſens divus habebitur
Auguſtus, adjectis Britannis
tmperio, gravibuſque Perfis.

When thundring Jove we heard before,
Trembling we own'd his heavenly power.
To Czſar now we'll humbly bow,

Cæſars a greater god below.

When conquer'd Britain ſheaths her ſword,
And haughty Perfia calls him Lord.

Tiberius (no way ambitious to extend the
bounds of the Empire,) ſeems to have follow'd
the policy of Auguſtus ; for he produc'd a book
written with Auguſtus's own hand, containing
the Revenue of the Empire; how many citizens and
allies were in arms, and the number of fleets, king-
doms, provinces, tributes, or impoſts belonging to the
State ; with his advice at laſt, of keeping the Em-
ire within bounds. Which, as Tacitus ſays,
pleas'd him ſo well, that he made no attempt
upon Britain, nor kept any Forces there. For
where Tacitus reckons up the Legions, and in
what countreys they were garriſon'd at that

deſcent upon Britain) he drew up his army on the ſhore;
and then f taking ſhip and launching out a little, re- +T. iremi con-
turned, and being ſeated in a high pulpit, gave tlie ſcenſi.
fignal for battle, commanding an alarm to be jounded;
and en a ſudden ordered the ſoldiers to gather ſpells.
With theſe ſpoils (for he wanted thoſe of the enemy
wherewith to triumph) be pleaſed himſelf as if he had
conquered the very Ocean; and jo having rewa:ded
his ſoldiers, he brought the ſhells to Rome, that his
booty might be ſeen and admir d there. And in me-
mory of his victory, he built a very high tower; from
which, as from a watch-tower, there mi ght be lights Pharus.
kept for the direction of ſailors in the night. The
ruins of it are ſometimes ſeen on the coaſt of
Holland at low water; and it iscalled by the
people thereabouts Britenhus ; where they often
find ſtones with Inſcriptions, one of which was
C.C. P. F. and is interpreted by them, I know
not how truly, Caius Caligula Pharum Fecit. But
more of this, in the Britiſh Hands.

From hence-forward,the inner parts of BritainCjaudius,

(defeated by civil factions of their own rather
than by the power of the Romans, and after
much ſlaughter on both ſides,) fell by little and
little under the ſubjection of the Empire. For,
while they fought ſingly one by one, all were
conquer'd in the end; being ſo bent upon their
own deſtruction, that till they were all ſubdued,

they were not ſenſible that what any part loſt,

was a loſs to the whole. Nay, ſuch was the

power of ambition among ſome of them, that it
corrupted and drew them over to the enemy's
ſide, making them zealous for the Roman in-
tereſt to the deſtruction of their own country.
The chief of theſe was Bericus, who perſwaded "WH
Claudius to invade Britain (which no one had :
attempted ſince 7. Cæſar,) being then embroiled
by faction and civil wars; upon pretence of
their protecting certain fugitives. Claudius
therefore orders Aulus Plautius the Prætor, to lead .
an army into Britain, who had much difficulty to get us.
the ſoldiers out of France ; for they took it ill, that
they were to carry on a war in another world; and
drew out the time with delays. But when Narciſſus,
who was ſent to them by Claudins, mounted the Tri-
bunal of Plautius, and began to ſpeak to them; the
ſoldiers were ſo offended at it, that they fell into the
common Cry, Jo Saturnalia (for it is à cuſtom,
during the Saturnalia, for the ſlaves to celebrate that
feaſt in the habit of their maſters,) and forthwith

ollowed Plautius chearfully. Having divided his
army into three bodies, left, all arriving in one place,

they

Dio.

Romans in Britain.

— 2 8
—— — —. 2——ů — — —
.

they might poſſibly be hindred from landing; they were
driven back by contrary winds, and fo jound ſome
difficulty, in Tranſporting. Tet taking heart again
(by reaſon a meteor run from eat to weft, whither
they were ſailing,) they arrived at the Iſland without
any diſturbance. For the Britains, upon the news 0j
what I have already mentioned, imagining they would
not come, had neglefted to muſter ; and therefore,
without uniting, withdrew into their fens and woods,
Loping to fruſtrate the enemy's deſign, and wear them
out with delays, as they had ſer vd Cæſar. Planting
therefore was at much trouble to find them out.
Aſter he had found them (they were not then free, but
ſubjeft to ſeveral Kings) he fit overcame Catara-
tacus, and after him 'Togodumnus, the ſons of
Cynobelline who was then dead. Theſe flying bejore
him, part of the Bodunni ſurrender d, who at that
time were ſulject to the Catuellani. Leaving a gar-
riſon there, he went on to a certain river; and the
barbarians thinking it impaſſable by the Romans with-
out a bridge, lay careleſs and negligent in their Camp
on the other fide. Plautius therefore ſends the
Germans over, being accuſtomed to ſuim through the
ſtrongeſt current in their arms. Theſe falling upon
the enemy by ſurpriſe, ſtruck not at the men, but al-
together at the horſes in their chariots 3 which being
once diſorder'd, the men were not able to fit them.
Next to them, he made Flavius Veſpaſianus who
was afterwards Emperor, and his brother Sabinus a
Lieutenant, march over; who by ſurpriſe paſs d the
river, and cut off many of the Britains. However,
the reſt did not fly, but engaged them ſo reſolutely next
day, that it continued a doubt which way the vitiory
inclin'd ; till C. Sidius Geta, after be had been well-
nigh taken by the enemy, gave them ſuch a Defeat,
that the honour of a Triumph was granted him at
Rome for this great ſervice, though he had never been
Conſul. From hence, the Barbarians drew back to-
wards the mouth of the Thames, where it ſtagnates by
the flowing of the tide ; and being acquainted with
the nature of the places (which were firm and forda-
ble, and which not,) paſſed it eafily ; whereas the
Romans in purſuing them, ran great hazards. Howr-
ever, the Germans ſwimming, and the others get-
ting over by a bridge above, they ſet upon the
Barbarians, and killed great numbers of them; but in
the heat of the purſuit, they fell among begs aud lost
many of their own men. Upon this indifferent ſuc-
ceſs, and becauſe the Britains were ſo jar from being
daunted at the death of Togodumnus, thas they
made preparations, with greater fury, to revenge it,
Plautius went no farther ; but feariig the worſt, took
care to ſecure what he had already got, and ſent to
Rome for Claudius ; being commanded ſo to do, if
affairs were in a dangerous condition. Fer this expe-
dition, among much equipage aud preparations of other
kinds, Elephants were alſo provided. Claudius,
upon receiving this news, commits the government of
affairs Civil and Military to Vitellius his fellow-Con-
ful (for he had put him in that office with himſelf,
for fix months:) And now he ſails from the City to
Oſtia, and from thence to Marſeilles, and ſo on, the
reſt of his journey, partly by land, and partly by ſea,
till he came to the Ocean : then he ſail'd over into
Britain; where he went direttly to his forces that
were expecting him at the Thames. Having taken
upon himſelf the command of the army, he paſs d the
river, and upon a ſet battle with the enemy, who were
poſted there to receive him, obtained the victory, took
Camalodunum, the Royal ſeat of Cunobellin, and a
great number therein, priſoners ; many by force, and
others by ſurrender. Upon this, he aus ſeveral times
greeted Emperor; a thing, contrary to the Roman
practice: for it was not lawful for a General to aſ-
ſume that title above once in one war. To conclude,
Claudius having diſarmed the Britains, leaves Plau-
tins to govern them, and to ſubdue the ret; and re-

turus himſelf to Rome, baving ſent Pompeius and

Spado he beſtow d ſ a Spear without 1
C. Gavins he gave chains, bracelets, horſe- en * 2

Silanus, his ſons-in-law, before him, with the news
of lis victory. Thus Dio. But Suetonius ſays,
that he had part of the Iſland ſurrender'd to
him, without the hazard ot a battle or the ex-
pence of blood. His ſtay in Britain was about
ſixteen days; and in that time he remitted to
the Britiſh Nobility the Confiſcation of their
goods; for which favour they frequented his
temple, and adored him as a God. And now,
after ſix months abſence, he returns to Rome.

It was eſteemed ſo great an Action to conquer
but a ſmall part ot Britain, that anniverſary
games, triumphal arches both at Rome and ar
Bullogne in Gaul, and laſtly, a glorious tri-
umph, were decreed by the Senate, in honour
of Claudius : at which, the Governours of the
Provinces, and alſo ſome outlaws, were permit-
ted to come into the City, and be preſent. Up-
on the top of the Emperor's Palace, was fixed a
naval crown, to imply his conqueſt and ſove-
reignty of the Britiſh ſea, The Provinces con-
tributed golden crowns ; Gallia Comata one of
nine pound weight, and the hither-Spain one of

ſeven, His entry into the Capitol was by ſteps, -

and upon his knees, ſupported by his ſons-1n-
law on each fide ; and he enter'd the Adriatick
ſea, triumphant, in a great houſe, rather than
in a ſhip. The firſt ſeat was allowed to his
conſort Miſſalina; and it was farther decreed by
the Senate, that ſhe ſhould be carried in a

* Chariot. After this, he made triumphal games,# Carpents.

taking the Conſulſhip upon him for that end,
Theſe were ſhewn at once in two Theatres ;
and many times upon his going out, they were
committed to the charge ot others. He promis'd
as many Horſe-races as could be run that day
yet they were in all but ten matches; for be-
tween every courſe there was bear-baiting,
wreltling, and pyrrhick dancing by boys ſent out
of Aſia on purpoſe. He alſo beſtow'd trium-

phal f honours upon Falerius Aſiaticus, Julius Si-+ Ornaments, Y |

lanns, Sidius Geta, and others, for this victory.
Licinius Craſſus Frugi was allowed to ride next
after him, his horſe in trappings, and himſelf

ken,

B 5
* 8 1
— 8

* Clauſtris

= Cangi,

%
1.4
NP niam Inſu]

4» | aſpectat.

in * a robe of date-tree-work. Upon Poſdius“ Veſte palms · |

trappings, and a crown of gold ; as may” be
ſeen in an antient marble at Turin.

In the mean time, Aulus Plautius carry'd on
the war with ſuch ſucceſs, that Claudius de-
creed him an Ovation, and went to receive him
at his entry into the City; giving him the right-
hand, both as he rid to the Capitol, and re-

turn'd from it. And now Heſpaſian began to ap- eſpatan.

pear in the world; who being by Claudius
made an Officer in the Wars of Britain, partly
under Claudius himſelf, -and partly under Plau-
tins, fought the enemy thirty times, ſubdu'd
two of their moſt potent Nations, took above

twenty towns, and conquer'd the Iſle of Wight. 2 0
Upon this account, he was honour'd with tri- Fg ans
umphal Ornaments, and twice with the Prieſt-

hood in a ſhort time: and alſo with the Con-
ſulſhip, which he enjoy'd the two laſt months
of the year. Here alſo Titus ſerv'd as Tribune
under his father, with the reputation of a labo-
rious and valiant ſoldier (for he ſet his father at
liberty, when beſieg d by the enemy;) and he

was no leſs famous for his character of Modeſty {IF itus,
as appears by the number of his ||Starues, and niere

the Inſcriptions of them, throughout Germany
and Britain. What was tranſacted afterwards
in Britain, till the latter end of Domitiau's
reign, Tacitus (who is belt able) ſhall inform

you. P. Oſterius, Proprator in Britain, found afſ-p Oflorius

fairs in great diſorder, by reaſon of the many inroads Proprextor.

into the territories of our Allies; and thoſe the mcre
| outragibais,

an head; to 14.

* Taur ini.

Brig antes.
1
* 5
The Colo
of Camal,
Num.
JF
== CaraFacus
WE ?9rlovices,
2
1
J
a + Majoru
" JO -
7 in the Ma
W Nationum

TEST;

ye 3 SIE. . £4 2 L1H
POL or TO WTO 0. rs
9 r «its

0
Fo
*
vc
*
ON
*
W

enlo,

ments,

q Gs
;

ini.

-

in
ans

Titus,

inum.

orfus
tor.

e

1 n
* 4 ».-4, J 1 * ASE — ' = py
$59. M, or 4 , FI : * * 1 = 1 4 E . 8 ; - o . b — bl =
"ITS. 0 7 * 2 4 S „ - 5 1 0 +. + ef} * „ N * 7 — 1 > » « : K 8 s 8
w . 93 - *4 4 4 e 2 * 4 * e N 9 R Q nn ' 7 ae, ws 2 2 ” 1 92 % + + dat > * * W 1 / 6 te Hs r N Fi E136 VER, N YES c Y ". 4
. 2 q 1 5 . * a 2 4 9 * 5 N * . ] þ s £6 — a Y * v % 5 * * . 9: 57 * 4 8 - - , — . -
8 : 1 do ES OR oY re he OO I v7 kk 5 A CA, > e - 0 PS 2 — d | i « $4 = 4 2 -
* EF * 2 5 . * e 7 F Fe; 4 8 * b = bd * > 121 5 » * IN. . pe 0 = *
; F 1 * N — ö N 8 4/24 Wa ** 0 0 3 " 4 * ”y 5 * 5 * * AN, - I. FA, Dy. N * 1
. 4 6 x o " 1 * 1 * » aa i * ” * *
6 2 } 2 . > LY N - : 4

D
FIRE 4 ws

* 93
+5 5

FA POLES n AS 1 W *

- ©
N 12
"OE J
1
No a
2
%
**
At
k
55
*
Pa
*

2 ſpear.

F | Caratacus,

Romans in Britain.

-» "hy
Iviii

Them from ſlavery and taxes, and the Bodies of their
wives and children from diſbonour. The ſoldiers, in-
flam'd with theſe ſpeeches, bound themſelves by mu-
tual vows, after their reſpective Rites, that neither
weapons nor wounds ſhould ever make them yield.

outragions, becauſe they did not expert that a Gene-
ral but newly made, and unacquainted with the army,
would take the Fm to oppoſe them in the beginning of
winter. But Oſtorius, ſenfible how much firif E-

vents would either fink or raiſe his reputation, ſet out
againſt them with ſuch Troops as were at had; put This Courage and Reſolution amax d the Roman

thoſe who reſiſted him to the ſword, and purſu'd the] General : a river to croſs, a rampier on the other
rei? who were diſperſed and routed, that they might | fide, ſteep mountains in the way; every thing terrible,
not rally and unite again. And becauſe a treacherous] and ſtrongly guarded ; all this quite daunted him.
and ſlight peace would be no ſecurity to the General or | However, his army clamour'd to be led on, crying, that
his Army, he prepared to diſarm the ſuſpicious, and|nothing was impregnable to Valour ; which zeal was
to poſt his forces upon the rivers Antona and Sabrina,
em,
5 could not brook this, a potent nation, and not yet ſba- might be won, and what not, leads them on in this
ken by the wars 3 having before ſought the friendſhip ur), and paſſes the river without any great difficulty.
of the Romans. By their example, the bordering | Being advanc'd to the rampier, while the darts play d
nations riſe likewiſe; encamping in a convenient place on both fides, we loſt more men, and had more
fenc d with an earthen rampier, and acceſſible by a
narrow paſſage only, to prevent the entrance of the
horſe. The Roman General, though without his Le- regular pile of ſtones, and engaging them hand to hand,
gions, drew up his Auxiliary troops to force the jorced them to the tops of the mountains, whither
Camp; and, having poſted hs Foot to the beſt advan-
tage, brought up the Horſe likewiſe for the ſame ſer-
vice. The ſignal being given, they forc'd the ram-
part, and diſorder d the Enemy pent up and hinder d

order; having neither head-piece nor coat of mail to
by their own * entrenchments. However, they de- defend them.

* Clauſtris. If they made a ſtand againſt the Auxi-

their own baſeneſs in revolting, and ſenſible that their the Legionaries; if they faced about to the Legionaries,

the more encreas d by the outcry of the * Officers to the 4 Prafed; as
to check them upon all occaſions. But firſt, the Iceni ſame purpoſe. Oſtorius, obſerving what paſſes Tribuns,

wounded. But the Romans, f clofing their ranks and+ Fafa teſtu-
their targets over-head, threw down that looſe and ir- 49.

they were purſued by the Soldiers, || of heavy as well ag Ferentarius
light Armour : the light gali'd them with darts, thegraviſque mi-
other, preſſing up thick and cloſe, put them into diſ- les.

fended themſelves with great valour, being conſcios of| liaries, they fell under the ſword and Javelins of * Pilis.

eſcape was impoſſible. M. Oſtorins, the Lieutenant s they were cut off f by the ſwords and piles of the 1 &
ih,

Jon, had the honour of ſaving a citizen in this] Auxiliaries. This was an entire victory: Caracta-
battle. | cus's wife and daughter were taken; and his Brothers

By this defeat of the Iceni, other States that were | ſurrender d themſelves. He (as one miſchief ever falls -

then wavering, were confirm d and ſettled ; and ſo he|upon the neck of another) craving the protection of
march'd with his army among the Cangi, waſting |Cartiſmandua Queen of the Brigantes, was ſeix d
the fields, and ravaging the Country. Nor dur the|by her, and delivered to the Conqueror, in the ninth
enemy engage us; but, if by ambuſcade they happen d year of the Britiſh war. Upon this, his renown ſpread
to fall upon our rear, they ſulfer d for their treachery.|in the and, and in the provinces adjoyning; Jo that
* Ouod byber- And now he was advancd * as far almoſt as the his name grew famous in Italy; where they long! 4 as
niam Inſulam 1riſÞ Sea, when a ſedition among the Brigantes re-[ſee who he was, that for ſo many years had defy'd the
calPd him; reſolving to make no new conqueſts, till mighty power of the Empire. Nay, the name of
he had ſecur d the old. The Brigantes were ſoon] Caractacus was not inglorious at Rome it ſelf: And
quieted ; a few who had taken up arms being put to|Caſar, by extolling his own vic lory, made the Captive
death, and the ref# pardoned. But the Silures were|more eminent. For the people were called together,
not to be reclaim d by ſeverity or mercy ; and there- as to ſomewhat great and wonderful. The Empe-
ore a Legion was encamp' d there, to awe and reſtrain|ror's guards were drawn up in the plain before their
them. To further this, Camalodunum, a Roman Camp. Then came the King's vaſſals and retinue,
Colony, with a ſtrong body of Veterans, was planted|his trappings, chains, and other trophies, acquir'd in
in the new conqueſts ; as an Aid in readineſs upon any |foreign wars; next, his brothers, his wife, and
revolt, and a means to inure their Allies to law and| daughter; and laſt of all, himſelf. The addreſs of
order. Some cities were given to King Cogidunus ; others was baſe and mean, through fear; but Ca-
according to an ancient cuſtom of the Romans, that] ractacus, not dejected either in Looks, or Words,
Kings themſelves might be their tools to enſlave PY, to this purpoſe, as he ſtood at Caſar*s Tri-
others. unal. |
From hence they marched into the country of the} I the moderation of my mind in proſperity, had
Silures; who, beſides their own natural fierceneſs,| been anſwerable to my Quality and Fortune, I might
rely'd much upon the valour of Caractacus, eminent have come a friend rather than a captive, into this
above all the Commanders in Britain, by his long city); and you, without diſhonour, might have been
experience in affairs both doubtful and proſperous. Confederates to one, royally deſcended, and then at the
He, knowing the Country better than the Enemy, and| head of many nations. As to my preſent condition ;
being at the head of a weaker army, removes the war|to me it 1s diſgraceful, to you it is gloriow. I had
into the territories of the Qrdovices, drawing to his horſes, men, arms, riches; why is it ſtrange that I ſhould
aſſiſtance all ſuch as were averſe to Peace; and there] be unwilling to part with them? But ſince your power
he reſolves to try his laſt fortune, poſting himſelf ſo,| and Empire muſt be univerſal, we of courſe, as well
that the paſſes, retreats, and all other things were on as all others, muſt be ſubjett. If I had forth-with
his fide, and the diſadvantages all on ours. No acceſs, | yielded, neither my fortune, nor your glory, had been
but by ſteep mountains ; and where they were paſſable,|Jo eminent in the world. My grave would have bu-
block'd up with ſtones as with a rampier, and a river ried the memory of it, as well as me. Whereas, i
before him, the fords whereof were difficult and un- Jou ſuffer me to live now, T ſhall ſtand an everlaſt-
+ Majorum, certain, and thole guarded by his f beſt troops. Befides,|ing monument of your Clemency. 1
in the argin their ſeveral commanders went up and down, confirm-| Upon this ſpeech, Cæſar pardon d not only him, but
Nationum, ing and encouraging the ſoldiers, with the great Lopes his wife and brothers; and being all unbound, they
of victory, and the little reaſon to doubt of ſucceſs,| made their addreſſes to Agrippina (with the like com
and ſuch like motives. Caractacus, riding up andſ mendation and reverence as they had done to Cæſar ;)

Cangi.

Brigantes.

The Colony
of Camalodu-

Drievices,

down, put them in mind, that this was the Day, and ſhe fitting in another high Chair at no great diſtance.
and unknown to our Fore-fathers,

this the Engagement, that would either begin their A thing ſtrange | our Fo |
liberty or their bondage for ever; reciting the names|that a woman ſhould fit commanding at the head of
of their anceſtors, who had driven Cæſar the Dittator| the Roman troops. But ſhe carried her ſelf like a part-
out of Britain; whoſe Valour hitherto had preſerv'd| ner and aſſociate in the — as gorten by the —

v

-

1

Romans in Britain.

lour of her Anceſtors. After this, the Senators being
called together, made many glorious ſpeeches concerning
their Priſoner Caractacus; aſſerting it to be no leſs

fallen under the Name and Empire of the Romans,
who are Soveraigns of the whole globe, which is but
the bound and limit of their Dominions : and to con-

great, than when P. Scipio ſbeued Siphaces; or
L. Paulus, Perſes ; or whoever elſe ſhew'd captive-
Kings to the People. To Oſtorius they decreed the
hononr of a Triumph.

clude, it is call'd by many, The Roman world.
For if we ſtate the matter right, the Earth it ſelf is
not of ſo great extent as the Roman Empire ; the Ro-
man Valour has paſs'd the ſea (the bounds of it) in
ſearch of another world, and has found in Britain a
new ſeat, beyond the limits of the earth. So that, in
ſhort, when we would deprive men, not only of the pri-
viledges of Rome, but in a manner of the converſation
of mankind, we ſend them thither, and baniſh them
ont of the world. The ſea is no longer a Bound; the
Romans know all its corners and receſſes. Joſephus
alſo, in the perſon of Titus, to the Jews.

Theſe Victories in Britain are related by
Writers, as the moſt famous monuments of the
Roman Bravery. Hence Seneca. Claudius was
the firſt who could glory in conquering the Britains ;

for Julius Cæſar did no more than ſhew them to the
Romans. In another place alſo,

Ile Britannos What ſtronger wall and bulwarb can there be, than
Ultra noti the Ocean! And yet this cannot guard the Britains a-
Littora ponti, gainſt the apprelenſious of the Roman arins.

Et caruleos

Scuta Brigantes
Dare Romulets
Colla cathenis
Jullit, & ipſum
Nova Romanæ
Jura ſecuris
Tremere Oceanum.

Moreover, we have ſome verſes upon this
ſubject, written by an excellent but unknown
Poet, and retriev'd by the famous Joſeph Scali-
ger, in his Catalecta; which, being not eaſy to
be met with, I will here inſert: for the verſes
are truly valuable. That tue Epigrams are di-
ſtinct, and therefore to be ſever'a, J. Obſoparrs,
a very learned young Gentleman in Germany.
lately inform'd me from {ome old mauuſcripts.

E I 23 25 A” i 3A - dt W — 1 G
* * bs es i + the es + PF +. 1,7 a ag”?
N =_— 1 5 * : 1 1 28 * a
- "77 r r EE Ens onal La lf 22 ©, ST 8 weft? r
iy WY q . p 1 2 2 er 1 0 1 F 4 * 1 1 4 - k
7 * p „ \ 8 0 * p J s 4
© * I% af _ "a 4 4 —'4 - ,
TIS y sf - e 5 * 1
*
LY - - Y.; —
2 q — ,
„

So (a'd,

*T'was he, whoſe all-commanding yoke, 60

The fartheſt Britains gladly took;
Him the Brigantes in blue arms adotr'd,

Auſoniis nunquam tellus violata trivmphis,

Antons |
When ſubject waves confeſs'd his power, Ila tuo, Caſar, fulmine precubuit. Delrio rev ;
Reſtrain'd with laws they ſcorn'd before, Oceanuſque tuas ultra ſe * reſpicii aras, mem "i
And trembling Neptune ſerv'd a Roman Lord. Qui finis mundo eft, f ner erit imperio. for whichin :
ſon hren
And thus Seneca the Tragedian concerning | Vifa prius nulli, jamjam ſpetata triumplo, down the ve
Claudius, in his Octavia, Iliibata tuos gens jacet ia titulos. rio wy 1
Fabula viſa diu, medioque recondita ponto * b
Cuique Britanni Libera vittori jam modo colia dedit. _
Terga dedere, ducibus noſtris Euphrates Ortus, Rhenus * incluſerit arctos, * Recluſcrat,
Ante ignoti, juriſque ſui. Oceanus medium venit in imperium. =
The haughty Britains he brought down, Libera non hoſtem, non paſſa Britannia Regem, oF
The Britaias to our arms unknown ZEternum noſtro quæ procul orbe jacet. =
Before, and maſters of their own. Felix adverſis, & ſorte oppreſſa fecunda, =
Communis nobis, & tibi, Cæſar, erit. F\ i
In the ſame place likewiſe, upon his paſſing the ö
it 'Thames. Ultima cingebat Tibris tua, Romule, regua : '
A; Hic tibi finis erat, religioſe Numa. oy
* En qui oræ Tamiſis primus poſuit jugum. Et tua, Dive, tuum ſacrata potentia cœlo |
| i Ienota tantis clalſibus texit freta, Extremum citra conſlitit Oceauum. 5
| i Interque gentes barbaras tutus uit, At nunc oceanus geminos interluit orbes. 2
0 Et ſava maria, conjugis ſcelere occidit. Pars eſt imperii, terminus ante fuit. 5
| | See! he whom firſt Thames ſtubborn ſtream| Mars pater, & noſtræ gentis tutela Quirine,
1 obe y d, Et magno poſitus Cajar uterque polo.
ul Who unknown ſeas with ſpreading navieshid, | Cernitis ignotos Latia ſub lege Britannos,
of Secure thro* waves, thro' barb'rous foes is Sol citra noſtrum flettitur imperium.
1 come, Ultima ceſſerunt adoperto clauſtra profundg,
1 Heavens! to be murder'd by his wife at Et jam Romano f cingimur Oceano. + Cingiur,
| home. 3
4 Opponis fruſtra rapidum Germania Rhenum, 1
Thus Ægeſippus alſo, concerning Claudius. Euphrates prodeſt nil tibi, Parthe fugax. 2
Of this, Britain is an inſtance; which, lying out of Oceanus jam terga dedit, nec pervius ulli, 5
the world, is by the power of the Roman Empire re- Cæſareos faſces, imperiumgue tulit.
duced into the world. What was unknown to former
ages, is diſcovered by the Roman vittories ; and they] Ia procul noſtro ſemota, excluſaque clo,
are now made ſlaves, who being born to freedom, Alluitur noſtra vitta Britannis aqua,
knew not what ſervitude meant; who were the whole * Semota, & waſto disjuntta Britumia ponto, * Semis,

breadth of the Ocean beyond the reach of any Superior
power, and knew not what fear was, becauſe they
knew none to be afraid of. So that to make a deſcent
upon Britain, was a greater attion than to ſubdue it.
In another place. He added Britain (till that
time lying hid in the Ocean) to the Roman Empire,
8 his conqueſts; which enrich'd Rome, and gave

laudius the reputation of a politick Prince, and
Nero of a fortunate one. And again, which is
the moſt remarkable: The Elements themſelves are

Cinciaque inacceſſis horrida littoribs : "2
Quam pater invictis Nereus vallaverit undis,
Quam fallax aſtu circuit Oceamts.
Brumalem ſortita + plagam : qua frigida ſemper 4 potum.
Prafulget ſtellis ArFtos in occiduis. 2
Conſpecitique tuo devicta Britaunia,' Caſar, 9
Subdidit inſueto colla premenda jugo. 4%
Alſpice, confundit populos imperyia tellus, 3
Conjunttum eſt, quod adhuc orbis, & orbis erat.

Nations,

(ad,
180).

17.46
9 rem
Ki '"

p! e
ich ter
nave t
the *

ect NY
picit.
nc crit.

uſerat.

gitur.

71615,

— 2 „
r
i -

rr
—” 8
& . W

* 0

e .
2200 MEL Sad

Romans in Britain.

Iii

l N rs!

Nations, that never fear d triumphant Rome,

Struck with thy thunder, Cæſar, are o'recome.

The ſubject Ocean does with wonder ſee

Beyond his limits, altars rais'd to thee.

And the laſt borders of the fartheſt land,

Shall ne'er contract the bounds of thy com-
mand.

A land now conquer'd, and untouch'd till
now,

Crowns with new lawrels thy triumphant
brow.

Nations unſeen, and ſcarce believ'd as yet,

To thy victorious yoke their neck ſubmit.

Euphrates th” Eaſt, Rhine clos'd the North be-
tore,

The Ocean now's the middle of thy power.

Unus'd to ſerve, unknow ing to obey,
The fartheſt Britains, who in filence lay,
Now, to their better tortune overcome,
Encreaſe the fame of Caſar, and ot Rome.

Thy lands did Tiber, Romulus, incloſe,

And pious Numa was content with thoſe.

But you, great Caſar, made your heavenly
power

Reach to the Ocean from the fartheſt ſhore.

The Ocean too, now ſees new worlds be-
yond,

And that's the middle, which was once the
end.

Victorious Rome, and all her fortunes are,
And you, great Caſar's, each aglorious ſtar;
Our laws, you ſee, the fartheſt Britains own,
Our realm's not bounded with the ſetting Sun.
The world's great limits to our arms give way,

And the vaſt Ocean's but the Roman Sea.

Mars and Quirinus, whoſe peculiar care 5

In vain you Germans paſs the rapid Rhine,

You Parthians truſt Euphrates ſtreams in vain :
Whenth” Ocean trembles at the Roman ſword,
And, with due reverence, owns its conquer-

ing Lord.

Britain, excluded from our warmer clime,

Is now ſurrounded with a Roman ſtream ;

Whoſe horrid cliffs, unfathom'd ſeas incloſe,

And craggy rocks contemn invading toes.

By Neptune's watry arms, with walls ſupplied,

And ever wet with the inſulting ride.

Where frozen fields eternal winter mourn,

And Stars once riſen, never can return.

By thee, great Cæſar, with a look tis won,

And bears thy yoke, a burden yet unknown.

Thus friends in lands impaſlable we find,

Thus the two worlds are in one Empire
joyn'd. |

To go on in the words of Tacitus. Thus far
Oſtorius went on ſucceſsfully ; but now his fortune
began to turn ; either becauſe the war began to be
carried on leſs vigorouſly, as if it was now at an end
upon Caractacus q removal; or elſe becauſe the ene-
my, in compaſſion to ſo great a Prince, were animated
with revenge. T hey ſurrounded the Camp-maſters,
and the Legionary Cohorts, who were left behind to
build forts in the country of the Silures; and, if they
had not been timely reſcued by ſuccours from the caſtles
and villages adjoining, they had been entirely cut off.
However, the Camp-maſter, with eight captains, and
the moſt eager and forward among the common ſoldiers,
were ſlain. A while after, they put our foragers to
flight, and alſo a body of horſe that was ſent to their
aſſiſtance. Upan this, Oſtorius ſent out ſome light
i

Companies; which yet could not have ſtop d their flight,
if the Legions had not advanced, and received the
enemy. By this ſupply, the battle was equal on both
fides ; and at length we had the better : The enemy got
off with ſmall loſs, for it was now towards night.
After this, they had jeveral skirmiſhes ; generally in
woods and marſhes, upon the incurſions of the one or
the other, by accident or by defign ; ſometimes to rob
and pillage, ſometimes to revenge; ſometimes by their

ficer's command, and ſometime: without. But the
chief Cauſe, was the implacable obſtinacy of the Si-
lures, who were exaſperated at a ſaying of the Ro-
man General, that as the Sugambri were deſtroyed
and tranſported into Gaul, jo the name of the Silures
ſhould be utterly extinguiſh'd. In this heat, two com-
panies of our auxiliaries, ſent out raſbly by ſome gree-
dy officers to pillage, were intercepted by them; and
they, by diſtributing the ſpoil and the priſoners, drew
the other nations alſo to revolt. In this poſture of
affairs Oſtorius dies, being quite ſpent with fatigue
and trouble: The enemy rejoye'd at his death, as a
General no way contemptible ; and the rather, becauſe
though be did not jail in battle, he expir d under the
burthen of that war.

nant; left the Province

ther was quick ; but he found not things in the condi-
tion he defir'd. Manlius Valens with his Legion
had fought the enemy with great loſs ; and they mag-
ni fied their victory, to daunt the new General: He
himſelf likewiſe maguified it; that he might gain the
more reputation if he quieted the preſent troubles; and
might more eafily be pardon'd, if he did not. The.
Silures took their advantage now, and made large
Incurfions ; till at laſt they were driven back by
Didius. |

was not at all of a warlike temper, ſucceeding him,
thought to draw his forces out of Britain ; aud if it
had not been for the ſhame of ſeeming to detratt from
Claudius's glory, he had certainly recall d them.

was born in the City of the

protected by the Romans, and been faithful to them,
during his marriage with Queen Cartiſmandua)
revolts from us, upon a miſunderſtanding with her;
which Revolt grew at laſt into open war. At first,
the quarrel was between themſelves ouly; and Venu-
tius's brother and relations were cut off by the contri-

Enemies, and, out of indignation at the thoughts of
being govern'd by a Woman, they invaded her king-
dom with a fi rong body of arm'd and choice Youth.
We, foreſeeing this, ſent ſome forces thither to aſſiſt
her; who came to a ſharp fight, which at firit was
doubtful, but at la#t projperous on our fide. A legion
alſo commanded by Ceſius Naſica came off with the
like good ſucceſs. For Didius, being very old, and much
honour'd jor his bravery and conduit, thought it ſufficient
to manage the war by lis Officers. What had been
conquer d by his predeceſſors, he took care to keep ; en-
larging the extent of his frontier-garriſons a little, that
he might be ſaid to haue made ſome addition to the
old Conqueſts. Though theſe things were tranſac ted
under two Proprators, Oltorius and Didius, in ma-
ay years ; yet I have given this joint account of them,

left the ſtories ſbould be worſe apprehended. by being

divided.

vance of Cartiſmandua : This attion incens'd her

Cxſar, having advice of the death of his Lieute- He Avi
ould be deſtitute of a Go- Gallus Pro-
vernour, ſent A. Didius to ſucceed. His voyage thi- prztor.

About this time, died Claudius; and Nero, who Nero.

Caractacus being taken priſoner, Venutius, who a Brig I,

Jugantes (the mot EN tium, in the
perienc d ſoldier of the Britains, who had been long margin.

Didins Avitus was ſucceeded by Verannius, uh, -
after ſome ſmall Incurſions into the Country of the Si- proprxror,

lures, was hinder'd by death from carrying the war

further. He had the character of a ſevere General in

his life-time, but ſpeu d himſelf Vain and Ambitions
by the laft words of his Will. For after much flat-
tery to Nero, he added, that if he had liv'd two years
longer, he would have conquer'd the Provinces.

Paulinus

— —ů *—
— —

— —.—
—

—

— — * —
— ——— — - —
JA — _ — —

2 —

** — 2
— . —

ä — *» th th . as.

Ixili Romans in

Britain. _

Paulinus Sue - Paulinus Suetonius was the next Proprator of
ronius Pro- Britain. For lis conduct, and reputation among the
res People (who are ever making compariſons) he was e-
qual to Corbulo, and ambitions to come up to his ho-

nour in reducing Armenia, by defeating the Rebel

here. He prepared therefore to invade the Ile of Mo-

The Ifland of na, which was well peopled, and had been a conſtant
* harbour for fugitives. For this end, he built flat bot-
tom*d veſſels, becauſe that Sea is ſhallow, and, towards

the ſhore, dangerous. Thus the foot paſs'd over; the

horſe follou d by the ford, or by ſwimming where the

water was deep : The Enemy ſtood arm d on the ſhore

to receive them, very thick and numerous; the women

running up and down like ſuries, in a mourning dreſs,

with their hair hanging looſe, and fire-brauds in their

Druils hands; and the Druids round them, holding up their
; hands towards heaven, with dreadful curſes and im-
precations. This ſtrange fight amax d the ſoldiers,

who Nod Hill, as if they had loft the uſe of their

limbs, and like men who were only to receive the wound

of the enemy. But, encouraged by their General, aud

exhorting one another not to fear a rout of Women

and frantick people; they diſplay'd their Colours and there could be no great difficulty in overthrewing a Co-
march'd on, defeating all that oppos'd them, and beat-|lony, which had no forts nor caſtles; jor our Com-

ing them down, and rowling them in their own fires.

*Ficts al-vitis, After this, they garriſon d the towns of the Iſland, Iſure and delight, rather than uſe and le, vice. While
and cut down the Groves, conſecratedto their ſuperſtiti-|things were in this ferment, the image of the Goddeſs |
ous and cruel Rites. For hey thought it . lawful to] Victoria at Camalodunum, without any wijile See Xen

offer the blood of Captives upon their Altars ; and to
+ Fibris, Conſult their Gods by the F Entrails of men.

During this action, news was brought Suetonins of [women foretold our approaching deſtruftion. Strange tarbate.

Praſutagus, the revolt of the Province. Praſutagus, King of the
Iceni, famous for his great treaſures, had made Cæſar
and his tuo Daughters his heirs; thinking by this re-
ſpect and complement, to ſave his Kingdom and Fu-
mily from Inſults. Which happen d quite otherwiſe ;

Boodicia, cal- for his Kingdom was made a prey by the Captains, and|this gave great hopes to the Britains, but deſpair

led alſo Bon- his houſe pillaged by the ſlaves. His wiſe Boodicia,
_ and Je- begin the Tragedy, was whipp'd, and his daughters
_ raviſhed. And, as if the whole was now become lau-
ful booty, the chief of the Iceni were deprived of their
paternal eſtates ; and thoſe of the Blood-royal treated
as the meaneſt ſlaves. Upon this inſult, and to pre-
went worſe, fince they were now reduced into a Pro-
vince; the people began to murmur-at and reſent the
treatment, and to compare one another's misfortunes,
and to aggravate every thing by the worſt conſtructions :
That their patience would only fignifie thus much ; their
bearing one injury, would bring on another. That
heretofore every State had its own King; but now they
were ſub jected to two, the Lieutenant and the Procu-
rator; the firs? 2 he upon their blood, the ſecond up-
on their eſtates. That the enmity and the friendſhip
of the Governours, proved equally pernicious; the one
oppreſs'd them with ſoldiers and Officers, the other
with extortion and affronts. That they could be ſure of
nothing, which either luſt or covetouſneſs might re-
commend to the Romans. That in war, he had the
Spoil who had the moF courage and bravery to take it;
but that they were pillaged by cowards and weaklings.
That theſe were the men that bereft them of their chil-
dren, and preſs'd them at their pleaſure for foreign
ſervice; as if the Britains could fight for auy country
but their own. What vaſt numbers of ſoldiers would
they appear to have tranſported, ſhould the Britains
take an account of their preſent ſtrength ? Thus Ger-
many had freed it ſelf, which has only a River to de-
fend it, and not an Ocean: That they had their
Country, their wives, and parents to fight for and in-
ſpirit them; while the other had only luxury and ava-
rice. That theſe would retreat as Julius Cæſar did,
sf they would but follow the bravery of their Anceſtors:
That they ought not to be diſmay'd at the ſucceſs of one
or two battles : That fierceneſs and reſolution were the

natural effetts of miſery: That Heaven now ſeemed to |followed him, into his army. Thoſe, who by weakneſs
compaſſionate their diſtreſs, in removing the Roman |of ſex or age were ſtay'd behind, or tempted by their
General, and keeping the Legate employ'd in another |affettion to the place, to remain there, were deſtrojed
Hand. That the moſt dangerous part of the defign,|by the enemy. The town of Verulam was overthrown

was what they were ufon, the debating 3 and that it
would be of worſe conſequence to be diſcovered in the
plot, than to attempt the execution.

Having animated one another with theſe and the
like motives, they forth-with took arms, under the con-
duct of Boodicia, a Lady of the Blood-royal, ( for
the Britains make no diſtinition of ſex, in point of
Government ) drawing over the Trinobantes to re-
volt with them, and ſuch others as were not yet thorou-
ly inur'd to flavery : Who ſecretly conſpired to free

the Veterans. For they, being newly planted in the co-
Jony Camalodunum, had thruſt the Inhabitants Colony of c
from their houſes, and diſpeſſeſſed them of their lands, malodunun,
calling them Slaves aud Cal tives; and were encouraged
in this outrage by the younger ſoldiers, who by the ſame
cal ing were iu pes io be cititled to the ſame degrees of
liemtiouſueſs. Mieder, the Temple built in houwour
of Divus Claudius ſeemed to them the foundation of
a perpetual Tyranny, and was a great eje-ſore ; and
the P. ieſts, choſen under a ſhew of religion to officiate
there, ran away with their whole Eſtates. Befides, |

manders had been ſo improvident, as to conſult plea-

cauſe, drop d down, and in the fall turn'd backward, in Nero.
as if yielding to the enemy. Several Enthufiaſtick 4+ In furt

noiſes were heard in the Court, and a perfect howling in

the theatre; and an Apparition * in the ZEſtuary, * Perbaps the
plainly ſignified the ſubverſion of that colony. More- Thames.
over, the ſea look'd bloody; and in the ebb, the effi-

gies of dead-mens bodies were left upon the ſhore. All

to the Veterans; who applied themſelves to their Pro-
curator Catus Decianus, becauſe Suetonius was at
a great diſtance. He ſent them a ſupply but of two |
hundred men at moi, and thoſe ill-armed ; whereas |
the ſoldiers that were in the Colony before, were but
few, and rely d wholly upon the protection of the Tem-
ple. Some of thoſe who were privy to the Conſpiracy,
had ſo much blinded the Colony, that they had neither
made trench nor ditch to defend themſelves, nor ſo much
as ſent away the old men, and the women, reſerving
the youth only: Thus, living ſupinely, as in a pro- |
found Peace, they were 2 * by the barbarous |
multitude. As for other things, they were preſently

overthrown, or conſumed with fire; the Temple,
whither the ſoldiers had fled, was befieged, and on the

ſecond day taken. The Britains being thus Conque-

rors, aud meeting Petilius Cerealis, Lieutenant of the Petilius Cit ©
ninth Legion, which came to their aſſiſtance, routed the alis.

R ES Co "IRE *
r 4 1

got off with the horſe, and retreated to his camp, where
he defended himſelf by the help of the Forti fcatious.
Carus the Proc-:rator was ſo daunted at this over-
throw and the general odium of the Province (which
was thus embroiled by his avarice) that he paſs d over
into Gaul.

Suetonius however, with prodigious courage and
reſolution, marched through the midi of the Enemy to
London; d Hich WAS ut houcdured with the name of a
Colony, but very famous for the concourſe of merchaiis,

war, or not; but, confidering his want of joldiers, and meataum.
how much Petilius had ſuffered for lis raſheſs, he
determined at la#f to ſacrifice this one town to the ſafe-

ty of the ret. And not relenting at the fighs and

tears of the Inhabitants, who entreated bus aid and
protection, he gave orders to march, receiving ſuch as

like-

themſelves, with the utmoſt ſpight and hatred again i 8

—— — — * 2
J * * *
4
8 — 4-4 ES * NY »*
2 L.A: * a 5
= TE SC >

Legion, and put all the foot to the ſword. Cerealis .

and jor | proviſions. Being come thither, he could net pre- + Et commet I
ſently reſolve, whether to make that the Seat of the tu, alias com

——

Ixv

4 Preſidiiſq
militarium
alias 911116
bas.

+ Et defere

tes in tut

lass & def:

dentibus in

7 1 tum.

Fro cornibi

8. Sonoras, al
Vonscreg.

Cune ig.

— - — ͤ !

xv Romans in Britain. Ixvi

an. _—_—

IE + Proſdiiſque likewiſe 3 for the barbarians paſſing by the forts * and] to thoſe of ancient times : for by the report of ſome,
FE militarium, caſtles, pillaged the richeſt and wealeſt places; f be- there were ſlain little leſs than fourſcore thouſand Bri-
alias 97111197” ig intent upon the ſpoil, and regardleſs of the ref. tains; whereas we loſt but about four hundred, and had
tos, leferen- 1 appear d, that ſeventy thouſand citizens and al- not many more wounded. Boodicia poiſoned her ſelf :
A 4 in tutum, lies were ſlain up and down in theſe places, They] And Pœnius Poſthumus, Camp-maſter of the ſe-
ls, & defen- would not give quarter, nor ſell captives, nor prattiſe|cond Legion, upon the news of the ſucceſs and victory
enibus in tu. according to the Laws of war; but did kill, hang, [of the fourteenth and twentieth Legions (having de-
—_ burn, crucifie, by way of retaliation upon their ene-|prived his Legion of a ſhare in that glory, and con-
mies; and all in ſuch haſte, as if they foreſaw they |trary to diſcipline and order diſobey'd the commands of
muſt ſpeedily ſmart for it. his General) ſtab'd bimſelf.
- Suetonius, having with him the fourteenth Le-] After a general muſter and review of his army,
1 gion, with the Standard-bearers of the twentieth, Suetonius too the field again, to put an end to this
of. BY and ſome ſupplies from the places there-abouts almo#? | war. And Caſar reinforc'd him with a ſupply of
un. to the number of ten thouſand fighting men, reſolved two thouſand Legionaries from Germany, eight auxili-
9 without more ado to engage them; and to this purpoſe] ary cohorts, and a thouſand horſe ; by which the ninth
encamp'd in a place acceſſible by a narrow lane only,] Legion was compleated. Theſe cohorts and ſome others
©. being fenced in the rear by a wood; as ſenſible, he|were ſent into freſh winter-quarters; and the Countries
| 7 ſhould then have no Enemy but on the front, and that that were either Enemies or Neutrals, were waſted
the plain was open, ſo that there would be no danger with fire and ſword. But nothing was a ſharper af-
of Ambuſcades. He drew 1p the Legion cloſe in the | fliction to the Britains at this time, than famine; for
7 middle, with the light ſoldiers on both fides, and the] during this uproar, they had neglected to till the
. res cornibus. horſe as the two wings. The Britains in great tri-|ground, and giving up themſelves wholly to proſecute
. umph vent ſhouting up and down in ſuch vaſt mm- the war, had depended upon our proviſions. Thoſe
bers as were never ſeen ; ſo fierce and revengeful, that] nations which were yet unconquer d, were the more a- of
their Wives were brought along with them, and pla- verſe to a treaty, upon the news of a difference be-
ted in carts in the utmoſt part of the plain, to ſee| tween Suetonius and the new Procurator Julius J. Clalſicianus,
the Viftory. Boodicia, with her Daughters by her] Claſſicianus (ſent to ſucceed Catus ;) which was very

R

bun in a chariot, went about to the ſeveral Nations ( for it ſprejudicial to the publick intereſt, He had ſpread a
70, was not unuſual among the Britains to go to war un- report, that a new Lieutenant was to be expected, who,
ſurore der the condut# of Women) aſſuring them, that ſhe without the rancour of an enemy, or the haughtineſs of a
4. 4 went not as one r0yally deſcended, to fight for Empire or cnqueror, would treat ſuch as yeilded themſelves, with

Riches, but as one of the common people for loſt liberty ;|favour and clemency. He wrote to Rome likewiſe,

to revenge the ſtripes they had given her, and the diſ-|that there was no end to be expetted of that war, till

honour they had done her daughters. That now the|Suetonius was recall'd; imputing all miſcarriages

Roman luſt was grown ſo exorbitant and unruly, that |to his perverſe condutt, but what-ever was proſperous

they left none, neither old nor young, unraviſhed.|and lucky, all that he attributed to the good fortune of

That God's juſt Vengeance would ever tread upon the|tbe Common-wealth.

| heels of wickedneſs. That the Legion which had dared Upon this account, Polycletus, one of the Empe- Polycletus;

= to fight them, was already cut ; that the reſt had|ror”s Liberti, was ſent into Britain, to ſee the ſtate of

either kept themſelves in their camp, or fled for their|affairs there; Nero hoping that by his Authority, the

| lives. That they could not endure the very huzza's|difference might be compoſed between the Lieutenant

| and clamour of ſo many thouſands ; much leſs could ſund the Procurator, and the rebellious Barbarians won

they ſtand againſt them. If they did but conſider both|over to a peace. Polycletus took care to ſhew his

armies, and the cauſe of war on both fides, they would|/tate and grandeur to Italy and Gaul, by a great train

ae either to conquer or to dye in that Battle. ſund retinue; and likewiſe to appear formidable to the
hat for her part, who was but a woman, this was|armies here, upon his arrival. This made him ridi-

her reſolution ; the Men, if they pleas d, might live] culous to the enemy, who being then in the full enjoy-

and be ſlaves. | ment of their liberty, knew not what this Power of a

Nor could Suetonius be filent in the midſt of fo|* Freeman meant; and thought it ſtrange, that a* Liberti,

great danger; for though he relied much upon the va- General and his army, after ſuch great exploits, ſhould

F lour of his men, he choſe to animate and encourage] be ſubjeft to a Servant. However, every thing was re-

 Sonoras alias them by Arguments and Entreaties ; That the t cla-|lated as fair as could be, to the Emperour. And

Pon.  mour and threatuings of the Barbarians were contemp-|Suetonius, who was then employ'd in diſpatching

5 tible ; that there were more women than youth among |the publick affairs, having loſt ſome few gallies on the

them ; that being unwarlike and ill armed, they would ſhore, and the men in them, was commanded (as

no ſooner feel the Roman ſwords which had ſo often|though the war continued) to deliver up his Commiſſion

conquer d them, but they would preſently fly ; that out|to Petronius Turpilianus, who had juſt before been perronius

of an Army of many Legions, a few would gain the] Conſul, as a perſon of a more gentle temper, and more T arpilianus,

vittory, and that their glory would be ſo much the|like to quiet the Enemy in the way of Forgiveneſs and

greater, if ſo few did the work of a whole Army; that| Tenderneſs. He neither troubled the enemy, nor was

2 his advice was, that they ſhould fight cloſe, and after| troubled by them; calling this lazy and unattive courſe

3 they had diſcharged their darts, they ſhould follow the by the honourable name of Peace. And thus having

aps the
nes.

-

— e 3

ius CO a

blow with their pikes and ſwords, and not heed the quieted the former broils, without enlarging the con- J 7
booty ; which would of courſe be the conſequence of queſts, he deliver d the Province to Trebellius Trebellius |
1 their victory. The Soldiers were ſo forward and cou- Maximus. erent 5
We - ragious upon this ſpeech, and the veterans betook them He was of an unactive temper, and unexperienc d 8
; comme Bl ſelves ſo readily to their darts, that Suetonius, with|in military affairs ; and ſo govern'd the Province after
alias cor BY great aſſurance of victory, gave the ſignal. And firſt,| as gentle a manner as he could. Now the barbarous [|
1 . the Legion did not ſtir, but kept within the ſtrait, till. Britains began to be tainted, and to yeild to the „

2 : the Enemy had ſpent their darts ; and then it ſallied| charms of vice ; and the civil wars of the Empire

cue. out in * a Wedge upon them. The Auxiliaries were a fair excuſe for the 2 of the Lieutenant: 1

oY made the like Onſet ; and the Horſe with their ſpears|but the ſoldiers grew mutinous; for, being formerly in- }

. breaking in upon the Enemy, routed all that made ured to labour and diſcipline, the preſent Were and 4

©. head againſt them. The reſt got away, but with\idleneſs made them wanton and haughty. 'T rebellius 4

1 great difficulty ; for the paſſes quite round were blocked|alſo grew odious and contemptible to the army, by his n
up by the wagons. The Soldiers gave no quarter, |baſeneſs and avarice. And their indignation was the |
not ſo much as to the women ; which, with the horſes|more enflam*d by Roſcius Czlius, Lieutenant of the
that were ſlain, encreas'd the heaps of carcaſſes. his twentieth Legion, who was formerly at variance with |
Victory was very noble, and the glory of it not inferior| him; and now, by reaſon of the civil wars, more than |

EE ever.

— —
3

„

— — 4
4 —

IXvii

Romans in Britain.

Vectius Bola-

ever. I rebellius charg d Czlius with all the mu-
tinies, and neglett of diſcipline in the Army; and
Czlius charg d him with the ruin and beggary of the
tons. And, by theſe quarrels and contentions,
all ſenſe of duty and reſpett was loſt in the
Army. At laſt, the diſorder was ſo great, that
Trebellius, being deſerted by the wings of his
Army, and by the cohorts, who went over to Cælius,
and being reviled and affronted by the Auxiliaries,
was forced to fly to Viteilius. Notwithſtanding the
abſence and removal of the Conſular Lieutenant, the
Province continued quiet and peaceable; being govern'd
by the Lieutenants of the particular Legions, all of
equal authority; though Czlius's boldneſs gain d him
greater power than the reſt.
During the civil war between Galba, Otho, and

pus, Propræter. Vitellius; Vectius Bolanus was ſent by Vitellius

Cartiſman-
dua,

Veſpaſian the

Emperor.

to ſucceed bim. He made no reformation of diſcipline,
and Tvas as little troubleſome to the enemy as his pre-
deceſſor, and as careleſs of the licentiouſneſs of his
army : only this difference there was, that Bolanus
was innocent and free from crimes which made the
other odious ; ſo that inſtead of authority, he had the
love of the army. And although Vitellius ſent for
ſupplies out of Britain, yet Bolanus deferred it, on
pretence that Britain was far from being quiet. But
ſoon after, the great eſleem which the Province had for
Veſpaſian, induc'd Britain to declare for him; for he
had commanded the ſecond Legion here under Clau-
dius, and was eminent for his bravery and condutt.
Tet this revolt was not without oppofition from the
other Legions ; in which, many Captains and ſoldiers
who had been advanc'd by Vitellius, were very loth
to change a Prince who was ſo well known among them.
The ſoldiers of the fourteenth Legion, call d the Con-
querors of Britain (being remov'd from hence to
the Caſpian war by Nero, and after, while they fided
with Otho, defeated) were ſent into Britain again by
Vitellius, but recall d by a Letter from Mutianus.
During this civil war, there were no mutinies in
the Britiſh army. Aud indeed, in all the civil wars of
the Empire, the troops here were more peaceable and
quiet than in any other proviiice : perhaps their diſtance
and ſeparation jrom the reſt of the world by the ocean,
might cauſe it; or poſſibly by the many expeaitibns
they had made, they had learn d rather to hate the
name of an Enemy. Hywever, encourag'd by theſe
diſſentions, and the frequent news of a civil war, the
Britains, upon Venulius's inſtigation, began to take
heart : for beſides a fierce heady temper that was na-
tural to him, and a hatred of the Romans, he was

 Jpurr'd on in this attempt by a peculiar ſpight to his

Queen Cartiſmandua. Cartiſmandua gewvern'd
the Brigantes; being nobly deſcended, and more
powerful than ever, fince ſhe had treacherouſly tal en
King Caractacus, and given Claudius Cæſar
a Triumph by preſenting him to that Emperor ;
for that ſamous ſhew of Caractacus to the people,
was a ſort of Triumph. From hence grew riches,
and from thence luxury; ſo that, deſpifing her husband
Venuſius, and having cut off his relations, ſhe made
Vellocatus, her husband's armour-bearer, partner of
her led and throne : The Royal Dignity was ſoon
ſhaken with this wickedneſs ; the city adherirg to the
husband, and the Queen's luſt and cruelty to the adul-
terer. Venuſius therefore, having drawn-in all the
aſſiſtance he could, and join d the Brigantes (who
themſelves had revolted to him) reduc'd her to the laſt
extremity. She applied her ſelf to the Romans jor re-

lief, and our forces reſcu'd her from many dangers :|eff

However, the Kingdom fell to Venuſius, and the
Mar to us.

Mile Mutianus govern'd the City under Veſpa-
ſian, Julius Agricola, who had declar d for Veſpa-

Julius Agri - ſian, and was a perſon of great integrity and valour,

cola. Legio was made Commander of the twentieth legion in Bri-

XX,

tain, which had declin'd the Oath for a long time;
and there he heard, that his predeceſſor had carried

himſelf ſeditiouſly. For that legion had run a-bead,
and was become formidable even to the Conſular Legats.
The Pratorian Legat was not able to rule them; but
whether through hs own ill diſpoſitions, or thoſe of the
ſoldiurs, is uiceſtain. Thus, being appointed to ſuc-
ved him, and to puniſh them, he took this admirable
mean, to ſeem rather to have found them dutiful,
than to have made them ſo. And though Vectius
Bolanus was then Lieutenant in Britain, and go-
vern d more mildly than was fit in ſo fierce a Pro-
vince 3 yet Agricola laid a reſtraint upon himſelf,
and ſmother'd the heat of his own temper, that it
might not excrea/e and grew viſible 3 knowing the ne-
ceſſaty of complaiſance, and of conſidering as well what
was fit, as what was right. ;

But when Veſpaſian, with the reſt of the world
had gain d Britain alſo ; he ſent over excellent Gene-
ral:, and brave Armies, and the Enemy's hopes were

gantes, the moſt populous in all this Province ; to
whom he gave many, and ſome of them very blood
Battles; and either Ipoil'd or conquer d the A=
part of their country. Thus, Cerealis ſeem'd to
have ſuperſeded the Care, and eclipſed the Glory of any

predeceſſor, ſuccecded to the ſume charge. He ſubdued
the ſtrong and warlike nation of the Silures : where

fituation, to cope with, Ja this ſtate was Britain,
and in this poſture was the war, when Agricola was
ſent over in the middle of ſummcr.” Our ſoldiers
minds and hopes were bent upon reſt and a concluſion
of the war ; and the enemy long d for an opportunity
to begin it. The Ordovices, a little before the ar-
rival of Agricola, had almoſt entirely routed a wing
of our s that was quartered in the frontiers of their
country ; and by this means the whole Province was
ready to riſe; all approving the example, either as
deſirous of war, or to try the temper of the new Lieu-
tenant.

Agricola, though the ſummer was almaſt over,
and though his forces lay diſpers'd up and down the
Province expetling no further trouble for that year, (all
which retarded and croſs d his expedition ;) and though
ſome thought it more adviſable to ſecure ſuch places as
were ſuſpicious : yet he reſolv'd to foreſtall theſe
dangers ; and having drawn together the Enfigus of
the Legions, and a pretty good body of Auxiliaries, and
finding that the Ordovices durſt not come down into
the plains, he drew up his men, and put himſelf at
the head of them; that by expoſing his perſon alike, he
might make them alike couragious. Having almo$t

purſuing his 'blow, and that every thing hereafter

actions: he determin'd to make himſelf maſter of the
Ilie of Mona; which, as I have already ſaid, would

of the Province had not prevented him. This deſign
being not laid before, they wanted ſhips for the expedi-
tion; but the contrivance and reſolution of the General

auxiliaries (who were well acquainted with thoſe Fords,
and, by the cuſtom of their native country, were able
in ſwimming to govern themſelves, their horſes, and
their arms at the ſame time) to throw afide their bag-
gage, and march over on a ſudden. Which was ſo
effettually done, that the enemy, who expected a fleet,
and were thinking of ſhips, aud a ſea to be paſs d;
were ſurpriſed, and ſuppos'd nothing could be invincible
to men, that began a war with that kind of reſolution.
This, a peace was deſir d, and the Iſland ſurrender d,
and Agricola became great and famous ; as having
upon his firſt entrance (a time uſually ſpent in oſtenta-
tion and ceremeny) carry'd on an Attempt of ſo much

labour and danger.
How-

abated. Petilius Cerealis exceediagly allarm'd and P*tiliusCer,
terrify'd them ; and attempted the City of the Bri- alis Propraty,

that could come aſter bim; when Julius Frontinus, Julius Pro
a great man, and as eminent as could be after ſuch a u Propret

he had not only a ſtout enemy, but à very difficult

cut off this whole nation, and knowing the neceſſity of

would jalk. ont anſucrable to the event of his fir

have been conquer d by Paulinus, if a general revolt To Iſtanl

Na.

ſupply d their place. He commanded a choice body of

We YT n r

Ix1

* Milites
ire.

vin

1 ius Ce.
Propraty,

aul

=

—

Ixix

Romans in Britain.

WW

* Milites aſ-

e.

However, Agricola was ſo far from growing vain

on this ſucceſs, that he would not allow it to be a
Viory or Expedition, which was only to keep thoſe in
order who were formerly ſubdued : he would not Jo
much as ſuffer it to be rewarded with laurel. But by
thus concealing his glory, he encreas d it, every one
thinking, what noble Exploits he muſt have in bis
mind, who could diminiſh ſo great an attion. Now,
knowing the diſpoſition and temper of his Province,
and being taught by the ſad experience of others, that
affairs would never be ſettled by fighting, while wrongs
and injuries were permitted ; he reſolv'd in the next
lace to cut off the cauſe of war : and, to begin
with himſelf firſt, he made a reformation of his own
family; a thing no leſs difficult to ſome, than to
govern a Province. He committed no publick buſineſs
to the management of his ſervauts or his freemen ; He
would never * advance ſoldiers upon private and par-
ticular views, nor upon the recommendation and in-
tercelßon of the Captains ; but would ſtill raiſe the
beſt ; taking it ſor granted that ſuch would be moſt
faithful. He had an eye upon every thing, but would
not rigorouſly exaf# duty. As for ſmall faults, he
would pardon them ; but would ſeverely correct the
more heinous. However, puniſhment was not always
inflited ; oft-times, the repentance of the offender
was accepted by him; chufing rather not to preter ſuch

dence, that theſe were the only new forts in Britain
which were never afterwards attempted.

The following winter was ſpent in a very wiſe pro-
ject. For whereas the Britains liv'd after a rude
ſtraggling manner, and were therefore ready to break out
into open war upon every occaſion ; that he might by
pleaſures induce them to be quiet, he exhorted them
privately, and alſo aſſiſted them, to build Temples, and
Places of publick reſort, and fine houſes : thoſe who
were forward, he commended ; thoſe who were flow
and backward, he reproved. And this the honour of
being his tavourite, impoſed a kind of neteſſity upon
them. Moreover, he took care to have the ſons of
their Nobility brought up in the liberal arts ; pre-
ferring the Wit and Parts of the Britains before thoſe
of the Gauls ; ſo that they, who but lately deſpiſed
the Roman language, did now affect and tFudy the
graces of it. From that time alſo our modes and
dreſſes became in requeſt among them, and the Gown Nga.
was commonly worn. By degrees, they came to thoſe
incitements to debauchery, Portico's, Baths, and
Banquets ; which went by the name of Genteelneſs
among the ignorant, when they were indeed but badges
of Slavery.

In the third year of his wars here, he diſcovered a :
new Country, waſting all as he marched to the very ;
Taus ; for that is the name of the Aftuary. Which 4 3 *

as were like to offend, than to have them condemn'd ſo terrified the enemy, that, though our army was ſad- ©
and puniſh'd for it. He made the payment of corn |ly karraſſed by reaſon of ill weather, yet they durſt

and tribute which was impoſed, more eaſie aud tolera-
ble, by laying it equally, and cutting off the exa&tions,
which were a greater grievance than the tribute it ſelf.

For the people were compell d, before, to wait the open-

Titus Empe-

ror,

ing of the publick Granaries, and both to buy and ſell
their own corn after the rate that was 2 them.
The Purveyors alſo would command them to carry it

about, and into very diſtant places; ſo that the |
_ without fear, each Caſtle being able to defend it

Country ſhould ſometimes carry from the neareſt Camps
to thoſe which were far off and out of the way ; till,
to the particular gain of theſe men, every place com-
pounded for liberty to carry as it might moſt conveni-
ently. By a redreſs of theſe grievances in the firſt
gear of his Lieutenancy, he brought Peace into ſome
credit; which, by the neglect or connivance of his pre-
deceſſors, was little leſs terrible to the Britains, than
War.

Veſpaſian dy d about this time; who, upon
thoſe victories, and his own perſonal valour un-
der Claudius, is thus addreſs'd by Valerius
Flaceus ;

Tuque 0 Pelagi qui major aperti
Fama, Caledonius poſtquam tua carbaſa vexit
Oceanus, Phrygios prius indignatus Iulos.

O you, whoſe glorious reign

Can boaſt new triumphs o'er the conquer'd

main,

Since your bold navy paſs'd the Britiſh Sea,

That {corn'd, the Czſars, and the Roman ſway.
When Titus (the Delight of the world,) ſucceeded

lis Father ; Agricola, as ſoon as the Summer came

on, drew his Army together. Thoſe who in their
march behaved themſelves modeſtly, he commended ;
thoſe who marchi d looſe and ſtraggling, he reprimanded.
He always choſe the place of Encampment himſelf,
and would try the jriths and thickets firſt, in perſon ;

not give us battle; befides, he had leiſure alſo to
build forts and Caſtles. It has been obſerved by the
beſt Maſters of War, that no Captain ever choſe Places
to better advantage: No caſtle of his raiſing, was
ever taken by force, or ſurrender d upon terms, or
quitted as uncapable of defence. Their ſallies were

frequent, and they were always prepar'd with a
year's proviſion again#? long ſieges. us we winter d

ſelf; which diſappointed the enemy, and made them
deſpair. For, formerly they would regain in winter
what they loſt in ſummer, but they were now worſted
alike in both ſeaſons. In all theſe attions, Agricola
never rob'd another of the honour that was due to him;
but let him be Captain, or auy other Officer, he would
faithfully atteſt the bravery of the Action. Some

have accounted him too ſharp and bitter in his reproofs ; :

and it muſi be granted, that as he was affable and
courteous to the good, ſo he was moroſe to the bad.
But then, his anger never outliv d the reprehenfion.
I he paſd a thing by without notice, there was no
fear of malice in the heart; for he thought it more
excuſable, even to commit the offence, than to hate the
offender.

The fourth ſummer was ſpent in ſetling what le
had already gain d; and if the valour of his armies,
and the glory of the Roman Empire, could have permit-
ted it, they needed not have ſought another boundary in
Britain. Glota and Bodotria (wo arms of two
oppofite ſeas, ſhooting a great way into the Country)
are parted by a narrow ſlip of land, which was then
ſecured by our garriſons : ſo that the Romans were
maſters of all on this fide, having pent up the enemy,
as it were within another Iſland.

In the fifth year of this war, Agricola took ſhip-
ing, and ſail d over to nations never known before; :
which, after many ſucceſsful Encounters, he ſubdued,
and then planted forces in thoſe parts of Britain which
lie towards Ireland; more out of hope, than out of

ear. For Ireland, being fituated berween Spain and Ireland.

and, that his own territories might not be piliaged by; Britain, and lying convenient for the French Sea,

the Enemy, he would never let them be quiet from

Excurfions ; and, when he thought he had ſufficiently
allarm'd them, he would give over, that they might
again taſte the happineſs of peace. By this means,
many Cities, which liv'd upon equal terms till that
time, gave hoſtages, and ſubmitted themſelves ; re-
ceiving our garriſons, and permitting us to build caſtles
among them ; which he did with that care and pru-

would with many other advantages have united thoſe
mighty members of the Empire. In bigneſs, it is leſs
than Britain; but larger than the INands of our ſea.
The ſoil, the temperature of the air, and the nature
and manners of the people, are not much different from
the Britiſh. The ports and havens are bet-
ter known, by reaſon of greater trade and com-

merce. Agricola had formerly received a * of
that

—

. Prom rags 2",

TT" ˙—x Q

e
—— ow ww

n

——T—

Ixx1

Romans in Britain.

4

Ixxj

* Ampla Civi. being apprehenſive of a general inſurrection * in thoſe
ras, al. An- large cities and remote countries beyond Bodotria, and
plas civitates. that his march would be made very troubleſome by the

that country, who was driven out by civil wars; and
under pretence of friendſhip, had kept him for a fair
occaſion. I have often heard him ſay, that with one
legion and ſome few auxiliaries, Ireland might be con-
quer d and kept in Obedience; and that it would be
of great conſequence to our intereſt in Britain, if the
Roman forces were planted on all fides of it, and li-
berty baniſh'd out of fight.

About this time dy'd Titus; who for theſe
exploits of Agricola, was ſaluted Emperor fif-
teen times, as Niphilin tells us, and as is
manifeſt from an ancient Coin. Lader Domiti-
an, Agricola, in the fixth Summer of his Lieutenancy,

enemy; ſent out a fleet to try the creeks and havens.
Thus, Agricola was the firſt that ſupported his
land-army by a fleet; and, to our great ho-
nour and advantage, carry d on the war both by ſea
and land. Oft-times it happen'd, that the troopers,
the foot-ſoldiers, and the ſeamen, would meet and
make merry together ; each magnifying his own jeats
and adventures, and making their vaunts and com-
pariſons, ſoldier-like, the one of the woods and high
mountains, the other of the dangers of the waves aud
tempeſtt. The one valuing himſelf upon the land and
the enemy, the other upontheſeait ſelf, ſubdued by him.
The Britains (as we underſtood by the priſoners) were
amar d and daunted at the fight of this fleet; conſi-
dering that if once their ſea was diſcover d, and na-
wigable, all retreat and refuge would be cut off.
Whereupon the Caledonians, with great preparation,
but (as it uſually is in things unknown) not ſo great
as reported, broke out into open war, and aſſaulted
our caſtles ; that, by being the aggreſſors, they might
diſhearten us : fo that ſoine poor ſpirits on our ſide,
under a ſhew of prudence, advis'd Agricola to retire
to this fide Bodotria, and rather to make a Voluntary
retreat, than a forc'd one. Iu the mean time, we
had advice that the enemy's defizn was to divide, and
attack us in many places at once. Whereupon, leſt he
ſhould be ſurrounded by the numbers of the eaemy and
their knowledge of the country, he likewiſe divided his
army, and march'd in three bodies. They, having in-
telligence of this, ſorth-with took another courſe, and in
one entire body fell upon our ninth legion, as the weak-
eſt; and in the night between ſleep and jear, cut off
our centinels, and broke in among them. Thus, the
battle began in the very camp; when Agricola having
diſcover'd the Enemy's march by his ſcouts, trac'd
them, and ſent the lighteſt of his horſe and jeot to at-
tack their rear ; ul ich were ſeconded with the hex xd
of the whole army, and the appearance of thetr co-
lours towards break of day. This danger on all ſides
terrify'd the Britains; and the Romans taking heart,
inſtead of fel ting for their lives, jought now jor ho-
nour. They choſe to make a ſally, and after a ſharp
diſpute at the very gates, put them to the rout ; whale
both our armies were contending, the one to come up
timely with aſſiſtance, the other not to ſeem to need it.
If the Jens and woods had not protected the enemy in
this flight, they had been entirely conquered. Upon
this Brave Action, and the fame of the victory, the
whole army grew ſo reſolute, that they thought nothing
invincible to them; they clamour'd to be led into Cale-
donia, and to, fight their way to the utmo$t Bounds of
Britain. The very men who were but juſt before
adviſing a wary conduct, were forward and bluſter-
ing, now the danger was over. Aud this is akways
an unequitable rule in war ; every one claims a ſhare
in ſucceſſes, but misfortunes are akuays imputed to
one. However, the Britains. attributing all this to
good luck and the conduct of the General, and not to
Valour; were not at all dejected, but went on to arm
their youth, to convey their wives and children into

ſafe places, and by Aſſemblies and Religicus rites to

both armies left the field with minds full of hoſtility.

Captain and ſome Soldiers who were diſpers'd among
them to teach them to Exerciſe; they fled, and embark'd
in three veſſels, compelling the maſters to carry them
off 3 but only one of them doing his duty, the other

voyage (the fact being not yet known) was accounted
miraculous. Afterward, being toſs'd up and down,
and falling upon ſome Britaius who oppos'd them in
their own defence, often conquerors, and ſometimes
conquer d, they came to ſuch want of proviſion at
laſt, that they eat one another ; firſt the weakeſt, and

Skill to guide it, they were taken firſt by the Suevians,
and then by the Friſians, for pirates. Some of them,

maſters brought to our coaſt, grew famous upon the
account they gaue of this adventure.

In the beginning of the ſunrmer, a great misfortune
befel Agricola in his own family; jor he loſt his fon,
who was about a year old. His carriage under this
afflittion was neither vain-g/orious (like that of ſome
great men in ſuch caſes,) nor on the other hand ſoft and
effeminate. Ameng other confolations, he made War
one. Haviug therefore ſent his fleet be/ore (which by
making a deſcent here and there, might render the
coaſteraation great aud uncertain) himſelf made a
quick march, at the head of the Army ; to which he
had added ſome of the ſtouteſt Britains (whom, after
the teſt of a long peace, he had found faithful) and
came to the hill Grampius, where the Enemy had

peſted themſelves. For the Britains, not at all diſ-

wmay'd at the loſs of the laſt battle, and thinking. of
nothing wow but revenge or ſlavery, by leagues and
treaties had united the whole ſtrength of their Cities;
leg ut laſt ſenſible, that a common danger muſt be
diverted by confederacy and union. © Above thirty
thouſand arm d men were now in the field, beſides a

great number of youth, and luſty old men who had

been formerly famous in the Wars, and ſtill retain d

by birth aud merit the chief commauder, while the
multitude was eager to be engaged, is ſaid to have ad-
dreſs'd them in this manner :

When I confider the cauſe of this war, and our
preſent neceſſity, 1 have great reaſon to preſume, that
this day, with this unauimous reſolution, will

give à happy beginning to the freedom of the whole

Hand. We haveliv'd thus long in the full enjoy-
ment of our liberty: and wow there is no other Coun-
try beyond this, nor indeed ſea, to ſecure us, while the
Roman navy hovers upon our coaſts, So that, as ho-
nour will recommend Arms to men of valour, ſo wilt

el preſervation to the moſt cowardly. The battles

which with various ſucceſs have been fought againtt the

expected a turn from it. For we are the ver) flower
of the Britains, and therefore ſeated in the inmoſt
parts of the Country; we are out of the falt of thoſe
Nations who are enſlav'd by the enemy, and our eyes
are yet unpoliuted, and free from the contagion of j0-
reign tyranny. There is no country farther on this
fide, nor liberty on that; this corner, which has been
hitherto unknown to fame, hath hitherto preſerved u.
Now, the remoteſt fart of Britain lyes open to them 3
and people think every thing great and magnificent,
that is ſtrange and unkaown. Beyond us there is no

is vain to curry favour with them by addreſs aud ſub-
miſſion ; their pride and haughtineſs is not to be ſe
laid, who ranſack the univerſe, and when they have

plunder'd
i

eſtabliſh a confederacy among the Cities. And thus

This ſummer, a Cohort of Uſipians rais'd in Ger-
many and ſent over into Britain, undertook a very
ſtrange and memorable Adventure. Having kill'd their

two were lain upon ſuſpicion : and this ſtrange kind of

being bought by the merchauts, and by change of

Romans, have ever had a refuge in our Bravery, and

e ſcars and badges of their bravery. Galgacus, Galgacas,

A

=

country, nothing but waves and rocks ; the land in- 4 jaterives
ward, is all under the Roman Vaſſalage already. It R mani. al.
Infeſtiores .
inter ea ·

*
4 «

* 4
-

*

a;ter that by lot. Thus, having floated round Bri- Britain fans
tain, and loſt their ſhip, in concluſion, for want of round. =

as * E »
N 1 4 oy — 1. FR. 5 4.7
Fs 4 FE, Yau = h Y ; * A &*

e
. „
4 E "I 8 5

„
8
t 4
2 N
a Wd : 1 *
a ae” os a= Jt .

Trinobante

+ Unde of
denmes, al

abunde.

nie, ali:

4,

8 ah 4 1 "POT 2 WY aun. Ad. ttt

n 4

Ixxili Romans in Britain.

Ixxiv

—_—

plunder'd the land, are now plundering the ſea.
There the enemy is rich, there the prize is wealth;
where poor, it is ambition : neither the Eaſt nor the
Weſt have ſufficed them : theſe, and theſe only, gape
after the wealth and poverty of the whole World, with
equal appetite and pleaſure. Spoil, murder, pillage,
paſs with them under the name of Government : and
where they make ſolitude, there they think they make
peace. Children and relations are by nature tender
and dear to every one; yet they bereave us of them,
to make them ſlaves in foreign Countries. Our wives

and fifters, if they eſcape raviſhing in a hoſtile man-

ner, yet under the name of Gueſts and Friends are cer- | effett

zainly debauch d. Our goods and fortunes become their
by the name of tribute, and our corn by that of pro-
| wvifion. Our bodies and hands are put to the drudgery
_—_ paving bogs and woods ; with a thouſand ſtripes and
n a indignities to boot. Thoſe who are naturally born
4 .% ſlaves, are but once ſold, and then maintain d at the
7 owners coff : but Britain daily purchaſes, daily feeds
and maintains, its own bondage, at its own charge.
And, as in a private family, the laſt comer is ever
the jeſt of his fellow-ſervants ; ſo in this ancient Fu-
mily, the World, we (who ſhall be the laſt and the
vileſt ſlaves) are now to be deſtroyed, if they can do
it. For we have no fields to cultivate, neither mines
nor havens to employ us ; and therefore to what. pur-
Poſe ſhould they let us live ? Beſides, the courage and
reſolution of the Conquer d, is ever ungrateful to the
Conquerour. And even this diſtance and privacy, as
it makes us ſafe, ſo will it make us the more ſuſpec ted.

Seeing then we have no mercy to relie on, let 1
on reſolution ; all who tender their ſafety, all who va-
Trinobantes, lue their honour. The T rinobantes, under the con-
duct of a woman, extirpated a Colony, and forced
their Caſtles ; and, if ſucceſs had not flachen d their
diligence, they might have entirely freed themſelves
from the Roman yoke. We are as yet whole and un-
+ Unde often- touch d : we were born free; f let us ſhew them at the
_ al. firſt᷑ onſet the bravery of the men they'll meet with in
unde, * Caledonia. Do you imagin the courage of the Ro-
mans, in war, to be as great as their debauchery in
peace ? Their glory is all owing to our diſſentions ; the
folly of their enemies have rais'd the reputation of their
arms. As nothing but ſucceſs could have kept that
medley army, pick'd up out of ſo many ſeveral na-
tions, together ; ſo upon any miſcarriage you will ſee
them diſſolve ; unleſs we can ſuppoſe, that the Gauls
and Germans, nay, to our ſbame be it ſpoken,
many of our own Countrymen, lending their lives to
1 eſtabliſh a foreign power (who have yet been much
* longer enemies, than ſlaves to them,) can go on with
4 true zeal and affettion in this quarrel. No, this is
b nothing but the effeft of fear and terrour, which are
weak motives of endearment ; theſe removed, their
hatred will break out, as their fear abates. We have
all the motives that excite to Bravery, on our fide.
The. Romans have uo Wives to encourage them to
ſtand, no parents to upbraid them if they run away 3
they have, many of em, either no country at all, or
at leaſt not this. Their number is ſo ſmall, as they
ſtand jull of fear, gazing at the heaven, the ſea, the
woods, and every thing ſtrange about them ; that they
ſeem pent up, and deliver d into our hands by Provi-
Leet us not be daunted by the ſhow they make,
by the ſhining of their gold and filver ; which will
neither defend them, nor hurt us. We ſhall find
'J | Friends in the very body of the enemy. The Britains
4 know it is their own Cauſe : the Gauls are ſtill mind-
4 ful of their loſt liberty ; and the Germans will deſert
4 them, as the Uſipians lately did. There is nothing
befides, that we have to fear; the Caſtles are empty,
* Senum Colo. the © Colonies confiſt of old men, and the Cities are in
nie, alias Co- diſcontent and fattion, while they unwillingly obey thoſe
louis, who unjuſtly govern. Tou ſee the Roman General,
the Roman army, here before you. There are the
tributes, mines, and all the plagues and puniſÞments
that attend ſlavery : it is to be tried by this day's en-

cas.

behind them, he drew up the legion before the camp,

8

gagement, whether we are to endure them for ever, or
to be immediately reveng'd. Therefore, fall on, and
remember what your Anceſtors were, and what your
Poſterity are to be.

This ſpeech was cheerfully received by the army ;
who, after their barbarous faſhion, ſeconded it with

ſongs, acclamations, and the like confus'd clamours.

And now the Troops began to cloſe, and a great glit-
tering to appear; ſome of the bolueſt advanced, and
the army was drawing up; when Agricola, though
he found his men full of courage, and was hardly able
to keep them in, made a ſpeech to them, to this

This is now the eighth year, Fellow-ſoldiers, that
by the valour and fortune of the Roman Empire, ſe-
conded by your loyalty and ſervice, we have carryed on
the Conqueſt of Britain with ſucceſs ; and that by
many expeditions and many encounters, wherein, as
the circumſtances required, we have ſbeved valour a-
gainſt the enemy, or labour and patience againſt na-
ture it ſelf. In all theſe, I have had a faithful Ar-
my, you have had a faithful General. Me have both
exceeded: I have extended this Conqueſt further than any
other Lieutenant, you have done more than any former
army. We are not poſſeſs d of the bounds of Bri-
tain by fame or rumour, but by Camps, and Weapons.
Britain is now found, and ſubdu*d. In our marches
over boggs, hills, and rivers, when we have been ſpent
and weary, how often have I heard the valiant a-
mong uss, asking, when this enemy would face them,
when they would give them battle? We have now
unlennel d them; we have them here before us. We
have our wiſhes, and a brave occaſion to ſhew our
valour. If we win this victory, every thing will be
plain and eaſie; if we loſe it, every thing will go back-
ward. For, as this tedious march, thoſe woods and
aſtuaries we have paſſed, are glorious and honourable
to us while ue advance againſt the Enemy; ſo if we
run away, the greateſt advantages now, will then be
moſt fatal and dangerous. We are not ſo well ac-
quainted with the country as they; not ſo well furniſhed
with proviſions ; but we have as many hands, and as
good arms, and thereby may have every thing elſe.
For my own part, I am long fince convinc di that there
ts no ſafety for General or Army in flight. To dye in the
bed of honour, is better than to live in diſgrace ; and a
man ; ſafety and his honour are inſeparable. Nor will
it be inglorious, to dye in the utmoſt bounds of Earth
and Nature. If a new nation, or an unkntwn ene-
my, were now to encounter you, I would exhort you by
the examples of other armies; but now reflect upon your
former attions, and put the queſtion to your own eyes.
Theſe are the very men, that laſt year fell upon one
Legion in the night, and were routed by meer noiſe
Theſe are the arranteſt cowards of the whole Mand,
otherwiſe they had not been ſo long alive. For, as it
is in woods and foreſts, the ſtrongeſt game is not to be
ſtarted but by force and violence, while the timorous
and fearful are ſear d and ſcoure off upon the firſt
noiſe ; ſo the beſt and ſtouteſt of the Britains we have
already met with, and diſpatch'd; what remains,
is nothing but a herd of cowardly Renegades,
We have at laſt an opportunity to engage them : not
becauſe they give it us, but we have overtaken them,
as they ſtand in the height of confuſion like ſtocks le-
fore , ready to preſent us with a noble and memora-
ble vifdory. Let us then put an end to this war; let
us make this day the happy concluſion of fifty years la-
bour : and let your county ſee, that their army can
neither be charged —_ prolonging _ war, nor ſlipping
ortunities to compleat the conqueſt.

nds wat — on, kh the ſoldiers ſbow'd
great ſigns of reſolution aud eagerneſs ; and with the
utmoſt chearfulneſs immediately ran to their weapons.
Seeing them ſufficiently animated, he drew them up in
this order. The auxiliary foot, in all 8000, he pla-
ced in the middle, and wing'd them with 3000 horſe :

that

Ixxv

Romans in Britain.

—

Ixxy, 4

that the victory might be the more glorious without the
loſs of Reman blood, and that in caſe of neceſſity they
might be ready to aſſiſt. The Britiſh army was drawn
up upon the hill, both for ſhew and terror ; the firſt
battalion on even ground, the reſt higher and higher,
as the bill aſceuded. The field, between, rung with
the noiſe of horſes and chariots, ranging up and down.
Agricola, perceiving the enemy to be too numerous for
him, and fearing leſt he ſhould be over-wing d, and
ſo flank'd by them, ſiretch'd out his front, though
ſomewhat too thin; inſomuch that many advis'd him
to bring up the Legions : but being naturally inclin d
to hope the beſt and to bear up againſt the worſt, he
alighted from his horſe, and put himſelf at the head
of his foot. :

The fight began at fome diſtance; wherein the
Britains ſhew'd great courage and conduct: for with
their broad ſuord and ſhort bucklers, they would
ſtrike aſide or bear off the darts of the Enemy; and
then return great vollies of their own. Agricola there-

+ Cobortatus, upon f commanded three Cohorts of the Batavians and

two of the Tungrians to advance, and make up to thent
with ſword in hand.They were very expert and able at
it; whereas the enemy by reaſon of their little targets
and unweildy ſwords, lay under great diſadvantages :
for the ſwords of the Britains, being without points,

* Complexum were unſerviceable * in cloſe fight, or at a diſtance. Now,
Armorum, & qs the Batavians began to lay about them, to ſtrike

in aperto,

at them with the boſſes of their bucklers, to puſh them
in the very faces, to diſpatch thoſe that ſtood loweſt,
and to fight their way up the very mountain ; the
other cohorts ſpurr'd on with emulation, fell on like-
wiſe, and beat down all before them; ſo faſt, that
many half dead or wholly untouch'd were left behind,
thro haſt to conquer the whole. In the mean time,
the horſe began to fly, and the charioteers mix d them-

' ſelves among the ſoot; and though we were under ſome

apprehenfions from them in particular, yet by reaſon
of the cloſeneſs of their ranks, and the unevenneſs of
the ground, they prov d of no advantage. This was
not like an engagement of Horſe, but cloſe and fix'd 3

and by-places. At laſt, night and wearineſs put an
end to the chaſe. Of the enemy there fell 1 0000, of

| 24 340, among whom was Aulus Atticus Com-

mander of a Cohort ; carried on too far by the heat of
youth, and the eagerneſs of his horſe. The viftory
and the ſpoil made the night pleaſant to the Conquerors,
But the Britains, wandering up and down the field,
which ſounded with the mix d Cries of men and wo-
men, ſpent the night in carrying off the wounded ;
in calling to thoſe who had eſcap i; m forſaking
and burning their own houſes out of rage and fury;
and in ſhifting from one hole to another. Sometimes,
in conſult with one another, and taking heart; then
again, affected with compaſſion, and oftuer with mad-
neſs, at the fight of the dear Pledges of their love.
And it is certain, that ſome of them laid violent hands
upon their own Wives and Children, as the beſt office
they could do them. The day following ſhew'd' the
greatneſs of this victory more fully: Every where
filence and deſolation : no ſtir upon the mountains, the
houſes burning afar off, and not a ſoul to be met with
by our ſcouts ; who were ſent into all parts of the
Country, but found that the flight was uncertain, and
that the enemy were ſcatter d and diſper d. Here-
upon Agricola (the ſummer being far ſpent, ſo that
he could not entirely finiſh the war) marched his army
into the Country of the Horeſti. Having received
hoſtages from them, he commanded his Admiral to ſail
round Britain, furniſhing him with all things neceſ-
ſary ; and, having ſent the terror of the Roman name
before him, he himſelf marched flowly with the
horſe and foot, that by this delay he might awe his
new conqueſts ; and then he put his army into winter-
quarters. About tie ſame time, the fleet, with a fair
wind, and a reputavion no leſs fair, put in at the

and, coaſting along the neareſt f fide of Britain, ar-
rived again there.

—

„ 1 . ap

Trutulenſian Port, the ſame from which it ſet ont ; * B, Rhenanu 1
reads it Rla-

menſit.

And having doubled the point 4 Latere, al 4
of the utmoſt land, they firſt diſcovered Britain to be Litore. f

Mand : and at the ſame time found out the Mes of * Britain fr! |
Orkney, and ſubdu d them; which had been only certainp di.

over-bearing one another with the force and weight of | heard of till then. Oroſius, and others after him, — Mans. 2

the horſes. Many times the chariots, as they ran up | talſly aſcribe this to Claudius. Iſles of Orb
and down at rovers, and the frighted horſes that had Agricola having ſent a plain account of theſe ney.

A.
, A — 9 -
rr

OY

x -
—
— - —— -
_ — 1
- = — — — — RR -

leſt their riders and ſcour d about as their fears guided
them, would over-run thoſe that met them or croſs'd
their way. And now, they on the hill, who had not
been yet engaged, perceiving the ſmall number of our
army, began to advance, and wheel in upon their
back : but Agricola having foreſeen that danger, eaſi-
ly repelꝰd them by four wings which he had kept as a
reſerve 3 and theſe made them retreat as faſt as they
had advanc'd. So now, this project of the Britains
was turn d upon themſelves : for the wings were im-
mediately order d to divide from the front, and wheel
about upon the backs of the enemy. Upon this the
ſcene began to be very tragical along the plain; one
purſuing, another wounding, a third taking, and
killing that priſoner as ſoon as he could take another.
Now whole regiments of the enemy, according to their
ſeveral diſpoſitions, though arm*d and more numerous,
turn d their backs; whilſt others of them, diſarm d,
ran deſperately upon the ſwords of their enemy. The
whole field was nothing but a mixt heap of arms, car-
caſſes, mangled limbs, and blood; and ſometimes a
mixture of rage and valour in the conquer'd : As ſoon
as the enemy drew near the woods, they began to rally,
and enclos'd the moft forward of our men, that had

. Follow'd raſbly, and were unatquainted with the

country. So that if Agricola, who was every where
at hand, had not ſent out ſome of the beſt and lighteſt
of his forces to ſcoure the country, and commanded the
horſemen to light where the woods were thick, and to
range them on horſeback where thin; we might have
22 conſiderably by this rafbueſs. But, when they
ſaw us united, and in an orderly purſuit, they fled
again, not in troops as before, and with an eye upon
one another, but diſpers'd and ſtraggling into remote

—

tranſattions, without either gloſs or addition, by let-
ter, to Domitian; the Emperor receiv'd it (as his
manner was) with a ſhow of great joy; though really
with great trouble and concern. He was conſcious to
himſelf, that his late triumph in Germany was
groundleſs and ridiculous, having bought certain peo-
ple of that country, and dreſt them up in cloaths and
hair, like captives ; whereas now a victory great and
real, wherein ſo many thouſands of the enemy were
ſlain, was univerſally applauded. It was dangerous,
he thought, that the honour of a private man ſhould
eclipſe the glory of a Prince: That be had ſuppreſs'd
the ſtudy of Oratory and other Liberal Arts to no pur-
poſe, if another contd thus out-do him in the arts of
war : That, for other matters, they might be born
with ; but none ought to be a great General. but a
Prince. Being tormented with theſe thoughts, and
(what was ever a ſn of miſchief) very much alone
in his cloſet, he concluded, it would be beſt to conceal
his reſentments, till the noiſe of this viltory, and the
love and reſpeti he had gained in the army, was a=
bated : for as yet Agricola was in Britain. And
therefore he took care that triumphal honours, a noble
ſtatue, and every thing uſual upon ſuch a ſolemnity,
ſhould be decreed him (and that in very honourable
terms) by the Senate ; and withal, cauſed a report to
be ſpread, that the Province of Syria (then vacant by
the death of Atilius Rufus, Lientenant, aud ve-
Jerv'd for ſome perſon of quality) was defigned for him.
I was alſo commonly thought, that he ſent a Free-
man, one of his Cabinet-Conncil, to Agricola, with a
Commiſſion for Syria; and inſtructions, that if he
were in Britain, it ſhonld be delivered; and that the

, meſſenger, meeting Agricola upon the ſea, ſpoke not

one

_ . *
r CA ERR TO "ODT -
4 . 1 42 1 * * g g
. - . 1 1 S *
. 4 N 8 be * :

XXVI f

Röhenarut F
Is it Ra.

fi f.
.atere, J.
re.

ritain fri
ainly dif. ©

Ted to le

land.
of Orb

eren ? rrY——

. 6 110 5 5" N, A fn eo 2

; A
A

0 4, gat i 7 ew Rr OF. 7 7 fe can De __—

1 CG 9 e os, 12, / 2 3 260 1

5
— 8

2 i Caceah 4. 7 MY Son Sous a 22 6119,

4 Auen Oe LEV PTY: CA 72. Ad,

4 a.. 1 eee, Al
hes: * 3 2 ga K. Ae.
6 Ins „„ Phang Lo 112 Hum flup ht
2 5 4 Ar.
hh La ac Ihe a . "24 K. 8

5 4 WA prom N

e 437 4

* d 4 We A. 2
* a4 7 1.

. Aer. 9 36977 *

Oz +2 £ 3 3 Piero . 5 /

he Prue te? Peter „A. ee

6 ;
| N #1: 4 « 1A 4 7. 9 e e a — —
0

A

Mer as Hl, 8 baue 4 ice e,
4
„ a *

ft r bs Ap.

/ 112

2 7 / .

Sund Gene Mm? >

- r

2
1
*

—— — — — — —
—
4
_ >
a, .

— —
— —
V <— Su - —— ——

_ 7
— ͤ —
— —
— — —

6
w—__
—_ —
— — „ „9
— Can - _-
— 5

——
1

I | |

„ 2

W e an nn Be

oluftius L-
llus, Lieu

rant of Bri-

in.
ſrviragus

e Britain.
Stilling- |
et's Orig.
rit, pP · 35

Call'd Ar-
la in an ol
holiaſt of
yenal,

#

>
itain aPrc
u
2 Sritain a
8 refidial Pr
_ INCE,
73
5

__ 5 Ht

Ixxvii

Romans in Britain.

Ixxviii

one word to him, but return d to Domitian : Tet,
whether this be true, or a bare ſurmiſe (as agreeable
enough to the carriage of that Prince) is uncertain.
However, Agricola had ſurrendered his Province
peaceable and quiet to his Succeſſor. And now, leſt
his entry into Rome ſhould be too ſplendid by the
great numbers of Attendants, he declin'd the Com-
pliments of his Friends, and came (as he was order d)
by night into the city ; and at night was admitted in-
to the Palace: where the Emperor receiv'd him with
a dry kiſs, and ſpoke not one word to him ; and ſo he
drew off among the reſt of the Attendants.

& Agricola's ſucceſſor, according to ſome, was
. gt Ln Cn. Trebellius ; but in my opinion, Saluſtizs Lu-
s, Lieu- cullus, who was ſoon put to death by Domirian,
"nant of Bri- for ſuffering a new ſort of ſpears to be called
„ agus Lamec Luculles. At which time f Arviragus
. Britain, fouriſh'd in this Iſland, and not in the days of
=S stilling- Claudius, as Geoffry of Monmouth. romances.
ers * For that of Juvenal is to be underſtood of Domitian,
Writ, p. 35
| Omen babes, inquit, magni clarique triumphi :
Regem aliquem capies, aut de temone Britanno
Excidet * Arviragns.

by : Call'd Ar-

. in an old .

beliad of —— The mighty omen ſee,

oeral. He cries, of ſome illuſtrious victory.

IJ Some captive King thee his new Lord ſhall
own,

Or from his Britiſh chariot headlong thrown,
The proud Arviragus comes tumbling down.

Then alſo flouriſhed . at Rome, Claudia Ru-
fina, a Britiſh Lady, eminent for her extraordi-
nary beauty and learning, and commended by

— Martial in theſe verſes, |

Claudia cæruleis cum fit Rufina Britannis
Edita, cur Latie pectora plebis habet?
Quale decus forms Romanam credere matres

Ttalides poſſunt, Atthides eſſe ſuam.

* Among the painted Britains, Claudia, born,

> By whar ſtrange arts did you to Roman turn?

What ſhapes! what heavenly charms! enough
to raiſe

A noble ſtrite in Zaly and Greece.

This is ſhe whom St. Paul mentions in his ſe-
cond Epiſtle to Timothy, according to J. Bale,
and Matthew Parker Archbiſhop of Canterbury :
nor is it amiſs in point of Chronology ;
though others differ from that opinion.

part of this Iſland was left to the Barbarians,
as neither pleaſant nor fruitful ; but this hither
2 part was reduc'd to a compleat Province ; not
"ZFritain a govern'd by Conſular or Procomſular Deputies, but
u Pro- accounted Prefidial, and appropriated to the
=” Emperors, as being annex'd to the Empire after
the diviſion of Provinces by Auguſtus, and ha-
ving Proprators of it's own. Afterwards, when
Conſtantine the Great had new-model'd the
Empire, this Province was govern'd by a De-
puty under the Prætorian Lieutenant of Gaul;
with whom were joyn'd, in times of war,
the Count of Britain, the Count of the Saxon ſhore
throughout Britain, and the Duke of Britain ;
beſides Preſidents, Receivers, c. Bur farther ;
of the 29 Legions which were the conſtant and
nr. ſtanding guard of the Roman Empire, three
4 2 were garriſon'd here; namely, the Legio ſecunda
.in, Di, Auguſta, the Legio ſexta victrix, and the viceſima
55. victrix. But this is to be underſtood of Seve-

EY
85
1
*
*
*
2
E
+.
=
57
1
l
£
A

4 Wcicain apro- And thus, in Domitian's time, the further |

rus's time ; for before that, we find; here were
other Legions, and alſo more. And although
Strabo writes, that one Legion was ſufficient * Ordo mi-
to awe and ſecure Britain, yet under Claudius tem.
the Legio ſecunda Auguſta, the Legio 9. of Spain,
and the 14th Legion call'd Gemina Martia vitirix,
were garriſon'd here: nay, even about Veſpa-
ſian's time, Joſephus tells us here were Ge
Legions garriſon'd in this Iſland. The words
are, Britain is encompaſſed with the ſea, and is not
much leſs than our world. The inhabitants are re-
duc d to the obedience of the Romans, who keep that
populoms Iſland in ſubjettion with four Legions. And,
doubtleſs, theſe ſtations and garriſons of the Origin of
Legions, and Roman ſoldiers, (a) prov'd very Cities.
often the foundations of Towns and Cities, not
only in other Provinces, but in Britain too.
'Thus, the yoke was firſt laid upon the Bri- The Roman
tains by troops and garriſons (which were con- yoke.
ſtantly kept here, to the great terror of the
Inhabitants ;) and then by tribute and impoſts:
upon which account, they had their Publicans,
that is, Cormorants and Leeches, who ſuck'd
their blood, confiſcated their goods, and exacted
tribute * in the name of the dead. They were* Mortuorum
not permitted to enjoy the laws of their own nomine.
country, but had ſuch Magiſtrates as the Ro-
mans {ent with their rods and axes to do juſtice
For the Provinces had their Proprætors, Legats, Rowardus in
Prefidents, Prators, and Proconſuls, and each par- bis Protrivus
ticular City its + peculiar Magiſtrates. The 4.
Prztor held a kind of Aſſize once every year,
and then decided all cauſes of more than ordi-
nary conſequence ; ſitting in great ſtate upon a
high Tribunal, with his Lictors round him,
bearing rods for the backs, and axes for the
necks, of the People; and they were every year to have ©
a different Lord of that kind. Burt that was not all
neither; they tomented diſcord and faction a-
mong the people, giving great countenance to ſuch
as they could make their tools to enſlave others.
Let, however grievous this yoke was, it
prov d very beneficial to us in the event. For,
together with it, came in the bleſſed Doctrine
ot Jeſus Chrift (of which more hereafter ;) and,
upon the light of his glorious Empire, barba-
riſm ſoon vaniſh'd from among the Britains, as
it had done 1n all other places where the Goſpel
was planted. For Rome, as Rutilius ſays,

Legiferis mundum complexa triumphic,
Federe communi vivere anita facit.

—— — Triumphant all the world commands,
And with new laws unites the conquer d lands.

And in another place very elegantly, and very
truly, to the ſame Rome ;

Feciſti patriam diuerſis gentibus unam.
Profuit injuſtis te dominante capi.

Dumque offers victis proprii conſortia juris,
Urbem feciſti quod prius orbis erat.

All countries now in one vaſt nation joyn,
And happily ſubdu'd their Rites reſign.
Thy juſter laws are every where obey d,
And a great City of the world is made.

For, not to mention the other Provinces ; the
Romans (by planting their Colonies here, and
reducing the natives under the Rules of Civil .
Government ; by inſtructing them in the liberal
Arts, and ſending them into Gaultolearn thelaws

of the Romen Empire ; whence that of Juvenal,
Gallia

— —

(a) pou this account it is, that ſo many of our famous Towns end in Cheſter, which is nothing but the remains
of the old Roman Eaſtra.

F

—— — —ür8—P — — —

= * „ —

* * — « . 285 8 1 |
Romans in Britain. | Ixxy

” Galliacauſſidicos docuit facunda Britannos,
Gaul's eloquence taught Britiſh Lawyers art;)

did at laſt ſo reform and civilize them by
introducing their laws and cuſtoms, that for the
modes of their dreſs and living, they were not
The Roman inſeriour to the other Provinces. Their build-
works in Bri- jngs and other works were ſo very magnificent,
. that we view the remains of them at this day
with the greateſt admiration : and the common
people will have theſe Roman fabricks to be the
works of Gyants, whom in the North they
* Fibnicus, call Eatons, for Heathens if I miſtake not.
They are, without queſtion, very wonderful
The Vallum, and ſtately, particularly the Pits wall, of which
or Pitts wall. in its proper place, and the High-ways in all
The Roman parts of the Kingdom, which run in ſome places
military through drained fens, in others through low
Ways, valleys, rais'd and pav'd; and withal are ſo
broad, that two carts may eaſily paſs each other.
Galen, l. 9g. This account of them we have in Galen. Tra-
c. 8. methedi. jan repair d the ways, paving ſuch as were wet and

complain'd, that the Romans put their hands and
bodies to the drudgery of clearing Woods and paving
Fens, with ſtripes and indignities to boot. And we
hnd in old Records; In the days of Honorius and
Arcadius, there were made in Britain certain High-
ways from ſea to ſea. That they were the work
of the Romans, Bede himſelf tells us. The Ro-
mans liv'd within that wall (which, as I have al-
ready obſerv'd, Severus drew 755 the and) to the
Southward ; as the Cities, Temples, Bridges, and
High-ways made there, do plainly teſtify at this day.
In making ſuch ways, the Romans were wont to
employ the Soldiers and the people, that they
might not grow factious by too much eaſe.
High-ways (ſays Iſidorus) were made almoſt᷑ all the
world over by the Romans, to ſhorten the Roads, and
to employ the people. And the Sentence paſs'd
upon Criminals, was, many times, to work at
them; as may be gather'd from Suetoniis, in the

Salamantica, or Silver-way, in Spain, and in
France certain military ways, made by the Rc-
mans; not to mention the Via Appia, Pompeia,
Valeria, and others in Jtaly.

life of Caius. And moreover, we find the Via Cap. 27,

n

i, 4

—

1xxx1

— —

«re
Stipitibus.
4 Muralts
wir

dirty, or elſe raiſing them: ſuch as were rough and
over-grown with thorns, he clear d; and where rivers
were not fordable, he made bridges. If a way lay too
far about, he made it more direct and ſhort ; if it
lay over a difficult or ſleep mountain, he drew it
through places more plain and eafie: if a road was
annoy'd by wild beaſts, or was deſolate, he had it
turn'd through ſuch parts of the country as were better
inhabited ; and if the way was rugged, he took care
to ſmooth and level it. Yet thoſe of Britain are
ſo pared away in ſome places, by the country-
people's digging ſand out of them, that they
are hardly to be known ; thoughotherwiſe, where
they run through by-grounds and paſtures, they
appear in a plain ridge.

Theſe were call'd by the Romans, iz Con-
ſulares, Regia, Pratoriz, Militares, Publice, Cur-
ſus publici, and Aus, as we find by Ulpian and
Julius Frontinus. Ammianus Marcellinus calls
them. 4ogeres Itinerarii and Publici: Sidonius
Apollinaris, Aggeres, and tellures inaggeratæ: Bede
and modern Authors, Stratæ. Our Hiſtorians
(who in that are without all queſtion in an er-
ror,) will have only four ways of this ſort; the
firlt Matliugſi reat, ſo called from I know not
what Vitelianzs, to whole charge this way was
committed, (and, indeed, the Britains call'd
Vitellianus, in their language, Guetalin,) named
alſo Werlaemſtraet, as lying through FVerulam;
and in ſome places High-dike, High-ridge, Forty-
foot-way, and Ridge-way, by the ſeveral Inhabi-
tants. The ſecond, they call'd FKenild-ſtreat,
which began in the country of the Teni: the
third, the Foſſe, becauſe (as ſome think) it was
ditch'd on both ſides: the fourth, Erminſtreat,
a German word, deriv'd from Mercury (as I am
inform'd by the learned J. Obſopaus,) who was
worſhip'd among our torefathers the Germans,
by the name of Imunſul, i. e. Mercury's Pillar.
And that Mercury preſided over the high-ways,
his Greek name E- does ſufficiently intimate;
and beſides, his ſquare ſtatues (formerly called
Hermæ) were every where erected on the high-
ways. Yet ſome 1magine, that theſe ways were
made by one Mulmutins, God knows who, ma-
ny ages before the birth of Chriſt : but this is
ſo far from finding credit with me, that I poſi-
tively affirm, they were made from time to time
by the Romans. When Agricola was Lieute-
nant here, Tacitus tells us, that the people were
commanded to carry their corn about, and into the
molti diſtant countries; not to the neareſt Camps,
but to thoſe that were far off and out of the way.
And the Britains (as the ſame Author has it)

Along theſe High-ways, Auguſtus at firſt had $ueton, i,
young men plac'd at ſome ſmall diſtance from 9aviu,
one another, but after that, f poſt-wagons in- + Pebiculs,
ſtead of them ; that he might have quick and
ſpeedy intelligence from all parts of the Em-
pire. And upon theſe roads were the cities 5
built; as alſo Inns for the accommodation of Manas dl. Priſcus
travellers; and mutations (for ſo thoſe places Mutation, e,
were then call'd, where travellers could change charging WW 8
their poſt-horſes, draught-beaſts, or wagons. ) Plates.
And therefore, whoever ſeeks the places men-
tion d in Antoninus S Itinerary any where but upon
theſe ways, muſt certainly wander, and run in-
to miſtakes. 0
And perhaps it may deſerve notice, that at
the end of every mile along theſe roads, Pillars 9
were erected by the Emperors, with figures cut
in them to ſignifie the number of miles. Hence
Sidonius Apollinaris,

Antiquus tibi nec teratur agger,
Cujus per ſpatium ſatis vetuſtis
Nomen Cajareum viret columnis.

Nor let the ancient cauſey be defac'd,
Where in old pillars Cæſar's name's expreſs'd.

By the ſides of them, were alſo the graves and Parro, lb. u
monuments of famous men; to put the travel- lingua iz Þ
ler in mind of his own mortality. For the re- .
pairing of theſe ways, there were ſtanding laws; Asteninut 7
as we ſee in the Theodoſian Code under the =_ Emp.
Title De Tinere muniendo, to excite every one to BE
further this buſineſs with the utmoſt zcal and readineſs. Re
There where alſo Overſeers appointed for them. Lalla Url
And, in our ancient Laws, there is mention Laws 5 . rr:
made De pace quatuor Cheminorum ; that is, of the Edward. © Capitelinus,
peace of the four principal roads. $

During the time of Nerva, Authors make no Nervs.
mention of this Iſland. Under Trajan, the Bri- Tiajan.
tains ſeem to have revolted ; and, that they of |
were ſubdued again, appears by Spartian. In IR Pauſanias i
Adrian's reign, Julius Severus was Lieutenant 41rian En dg = Arcadi
here; but he being recall'd upon an inſurrection J. S,, ä, 470 * a
of the Jews, the Britains had certainly freed Propræten a. 8
themſelves from the Roman yoke, if Adrian
himſelf had not come hither in perſon : and he
in his third Conſulſhip (or the year of Chriſt
124) ſeems to have ſubdu'd them by mere force.
For in a Coin of his, we ſee a General with =_
three ſoldiers (which, I ſuppoſe, repreſents the -
three legions of Britain) with this Inſcription, |

EXER. BRITANNICUS: and another with

this, RESTITUTOR BRITANNLE. This

Emperor

tions,

K

— 0 * 2 _ .

_ a 2 8

Ixxxi

KRomans in Britain.

JH II

Ixxx11

vow.
Stipitibus.
1 Muralis
pit.

J. Priſcus
Liciaius,
© Propreror of
= britain,

Emperor reform'd many things in the Iſland}
and firſt drew a Wall (tourſcore miles long)
to ſeparate the Barbarians from the Ro-

mans z making it of great 7 timber-planłs fo in

the ground, and joined one to another, not unlike * a
hedge. For Which expedition the Poet Florus
plays thus upon him:

Ego nolo Caſar che,
Ambulare per Britannos,
Scythicas pati prumnas.

Caſar may reign ſecure for me,

I won't be Cæſar, no not I:

To ſtalk about the Britiſh ſhore; .
Be wet with Scythian ſnow all o're:

To which Adrian reply'd;

Ego nolo Florus efſe,
Ambulare per tabernas,
Latitare per popinas,
Culices pati rotundos.

Horus may rake ſecure for me,

I won't be Horus, no not I;

The ſtreets and idle ſhops to ſcower,

Or in by-taverns lewdly roar, 5
With potent rummers wet all Oer.

At this time, M. F. Cl. Priſcus Licinius was
Proprztor of Britain; who was with Hadrian in
his expedition againſt the Jews, as appears by
this old Inſcription on a broken marble ;

M. F. CL. PRISCO.

ICINIO. ITALICO. LEGATO.
AUGUSTORUM.

PR. PR. PROV. CAPPADOCLE

PR. PR. PROV. BRITANNLE LEG. AUG.

„ Oe OS „ „ <Q  - - - > ow

LEG. IIII GALLICLE. PR AF. COH. IIII
LINGONUM. VEXILLO. MIL. ORNA-
TO. A. DIVO. HADRIANO. IN EXPE-
DITIONE IVDAIC.

Q. CASSIUS. DOMITIUS. PALUMBUS.

> Antoninus p;. In the reign of Antoninus Pius (who made a Con-
; | ; ur Emp,

ſtitution that all who were within the bounds
of the Roman Empire, ſhould be citizens of
Rome) the war in Britain broke out again ;

8 Ilivs Ubi. but was fo effectually ended by Lollius Urbicus the

tor.

N q Capitolinus,

Pauſanias in

FX « Proprze. Lieutenant, upon his b. back the barbarians,

and making another wall of earth, that he was
ſirnam'd Britannicus ; and was alſo highly com-
mended for taking from the Brigantes ſome part
of their country, becauſe they had made in-
curſions into Genounia, a neighbouring Province
under the protection of the Romans. And at

bis Arcadice, this time, as may be gather'd from Jabolenus,

Digeſt. 1. 36. Seius Saturnius was Archigubernus of the fleet in

Archigubex.
wag, N

ers K
— —— =

Britain. But whether it be meant, that he
was Admiral, or Chief-Pilot, or the Maſter of a
Hip; the Civilians muſt determin.

he Britains, making one War a pretence to
enter upon another, began to revolt again in rhe

Pre CC OI

time of Antoninus' the Philoſopher. To quiet Antoninus the
this commotion, Calphurnins Agricola was ſent Philoſopher.
over, and ſeems to have ſucceeded. The glory 9
putting an end to this war, Fronto (who was not on- — 5 *
ly not inferior to any in Eloquence, but the greateſi Eumenius Cu-
maſter of it) attributes to the Emperor Antonin. pitolinus.
For, though he remained at his Palace here in the

city, and committed the care of it to another; yet in

his opinion (like the Pilot fitting at the helin of a long

ſhip) he deſerv d the glory of the whole expedition and

voyage. At that time, Helvius Pertinax was a

ſoldier in Britain; ſent thither from the Parthian

Wars, and ther kept. { |

In the reign of Commodus, there was nothing Commolus
but war and ſedition throughout Britain. For Emp.
the barbarous Britains, having -paſs'd the wall,
made great waſte in the country, and cut off the
Roman General and his army.  Ulpius Marcel- Uipius Mar-
lus was ſent againſt them; who ſucceeded ſo ceilas Propre-
well in this expedition, that by reaſon of his tor.
great bravery he began to be envied, and was 11
recall'd. This General was vigilant above all = onto
others; and to the end that thoſe about him inight be ©
as watchful, he wrote every evening twelve Tables, _
fuch as commonly are made of f Linden-wood, and + Tilia.
commanded one of his attendants to carry the ſame to
ſeveral ſoldiers at ſeveral hours of the night. From
whence they might think their General was ever a-
wake, and themſelves might fleep the leſs. Con-
cerning his Temperance, he adds; Though he
was made by nature to live without much ſleep, yet
that he might do it the better, he was ver) ſpare in
his diet. For to the end he might not eat his fill even
of bread, he had it brought from Rome ; that, by
reaſon of it's age and ſtaleneſs, he might eat no more
than was barely neceſſary. Upon his being re-
call'd, the army grew heady, and military diſ-
cipline was relax d; ſo far, that they deny'd
ſubmiſſion ro Commodus as Emperor, though tir-
nam'd Britannicus by his tiatterers. Moreover,
they ſent fifteen hundred of their fellow-ſoldiers
out of Britain into Italy, againſt Perennis (who
had not only a ſhow of tavour, bur a real ſway
and intereſt in the-Emperor ;) accuſing him of
diſplacing Senators to prefer f Gentlemen to Fqueftris
their Offices, and of a plot and deſign againſt“ = 49%
the Emperor's Lite. Commodus gave credit to
it, and deliver'd him into their hands, who
ſcourg'd him ſeverely, beheaded him, and de-
clared him an enemy to his country. Theſe -
broils were at laſt quieted by Helvins Pertinax, n p. Fer-
but not without great danger, being himſelt ark.
well- nigh ſlain (it is certain he was lett as ſuch
among the dead) in appeaſing them.

Thus, Britain was delivered in peace by, F
Commodus, to Clodius Albinus, ſirnamed after- 7945 Albi-
wards, for his great atchievements in Britain, tor. oe
Caſarens : but he was ſoon obliged to reſign to Capir-linus,
Junius Severus, on account of a ſpeech wherein J Srve-
he had inveigh'd, with too much liberty, a- 4 Fer-
gainſt the adminiſtration of the Emperors. 4

At this time, the clouds of ſuperſtition and The Chriſti.
ignorance being diſpers d (not while M. Aure-in , a
Ius and L. Verus were Emperors, as Bede writes
but in the reign of Commodus, when Eluthe-
rus was Biſhop of Rome) the light of the Chri- |
ſtian Religion by the means of King (a) Lucius King Luctuss
began to ſhine in this Iſland. Who (as it is
ſaid in the Old Martyrologies, which were wont
to be read in Churches) admiring the integrity
and holineſs of the Chriſtians, ſent Eluanus and
Meduanus, two Britains, to Pope Eleutherus;

intreating him that he and his ſubjects might be
SY in-

(a) When he lived, in what part of Britain he reign'd, how far he was concern'd in bringing-in the Chriſtian
Religion, and all other circumſtances belonging to that hiſtory, are handled at large by Dr. Stillingfl. Orig,

Britan. p. 67.

* — - —_
999
— —— —
—ͤ—ÿAñ—ñPÿäũ —— S

|
1

*
— — 4

o
_— — =
. — w .
— — — —— — —

— —

— —

—

W » *
[ n
* = — —

8 "Y 92 2 * ht *

Ixxx111

Romans in Britain. Inn |

+ Servitutis

inſtrumenta.

Capitoli nus.

Againſt the
Jews, c. 7.

Bale.
M. Parker,
J. Fox,

inſtructed in the Chriſtian Religion. Upon

this, the Pope immediately. diſpatched certain

holy men hither, namely Fugatius and Donatia- |

nus, with letters which are yet extant, and are
commonly ſuppos' d to be genuine, dated in
the ſecond: Conſulſhip of L. Aurelius Commodus,
which he held together with Yeſpronius ; and by

theſe two Perſons, the King and others were

taught the myſteries of the Chriſtian Faith.
Whence that of Ninnius upon this King ; King
Lucius is firnam'd Leuer-Maur, that is, of great
glory, upon the account of Religion planted here in
this time. (b) As for thoſe who call the ſtory of
King Lucius into queſtion (as many do at this
day) as if there was no ſuch King at that time
in Britain, which they ſuppoſe was reduc'd long
before into a complete Province ; I would have
them remember, That the Romans, by an old
cuſtom, had Kings as f their Tools of ſervitude in
the Provinces ; that the Britains at that time
deny'd ſubmiſſion to Commodus ; that all that
part of the Iſland beyond the Vall was fully en-
joy'd by them ; and that there they had their
Kings. Moreover, that Antoninus Pius, ſome
years before, havmg ended the war, left the King-
doms to be rul d by their own Kings, and the Provinces
to be govern'd by their own Counts. So that no-
thing hinders, but that Lucius might be a King
in thoſe parts of the Iſland which were never
ſubje& to the Romans. For certainly that paſ-
ſage of Tertullian (who wrote about that time)
refers to this converſion of the Britains to the
Chriſtian Religion; and that very aptly, if we
conſider the words, and the time. Some Coun-
tries of the Britains, that proved impregnable to the
Romans, are yet ſuljected to Chriſt, And a little
after, Britain lies ſurrounded by the Ocean. The
Mauri and the barbarous Getulians are block d up
by the Romans, for fear they ſhould extend the limits
of their Countries. And what ſhall we ſay of the Ro-
mans themſelves, who ſecure their Empire only by the
power of their armies? neither are they able, with all
their force, to extend that Empire beyond theſe Nations.
IWhereas, the Kingdom of Chrift, and his Name,
reaches much farther. He is every where believ'd in,
aud worſbipp d, by all the nations above mention d, &c.
But that Britain, before this, even in the in-
fancy of the Church, receiv'd the Chriſtian Re-
ligion, our Eccleſiaſtical writers (who have ſpent
much time and pains in this ſearch) endea our
to convince us from ancient Authors: Namely,
that Joſeph of Arimathæa, an eminent Decurio,
ſail'd out of Gaul into Britain; and (c) that
Claudia Rufina, the wife of Aulus Pudens
(thought to be the ſame, whom St. Paul
mentions in his ſecond Epiſtle to Timothy, and
Martial the Poet ſo much commends) was a
Britiſh Lady. Further, they cite Dorothers,
who pafles under the name of Biſhop of Tyre,
and in his Syopfis relates, that Simon Zelotes, after
he had travell'd Mauritania, was at laſt kill'd
and buried in Britain; and alſo that Ariſtobulus
mention'd by St. Paul in his Epiſtle to the
omans) was made Biſhop' of Britain (to which
alſo Nicephorus agrees ;) but he ſpeaks of

+ The Brutii} Britiana, and not of Britain. Moreover, upon

in Italy.

the authority of Symeon Metaphraſtes and the
Greek Kalendar, they tell us, that St. Peter was

in this Iſland, and diſplay'd the light of the

Goſpel here; and alſo from Sophronius and
Theodoret, that St. Paul, after his ſecond im-
priſonment at Rome, came hither. Hence
Venantius Fortunatus (if we may credit a

Poet) ſpeaks thus, either of him "ae his |

Doctrine :
Tranfiit Oceanum, & qua facit Iuſula portum,
Quaſque Britaunus habet terras, quaſque ultima
» Thule.
The Ocean paſs'd, and ventur'd bravely o're

To Britiſh realms and Thule's fartheſt ſhore.

But there is nothing more conſiderable in
this matter, than that paſſage juſt now quoted

from Tertullian; and what Origen ſays, namely, 4. Upon g

that the Britains had received the Faith, and #1.
were prepar'd for it by their Druids, who had
always taught them to believe, there was but
one God. [ And the argument is yet ſtronger,
if we take Origen's words in a contrary ſenſe Stillirgi.
(which indeed ſeems to be the right)

whereas Britain, before, had worſhip'd many
Gods; ſince they became Chriſtiansthey worſhip'd

but one God. Mien (ſays he) did Britain, before the

coming of Chriſt, conſent in the worſhip of one God?
which implies, that the Britains were then
known to be Chriſtians ; and by being ſo, were
brought off from the worſhip of their Gods,
Taranis, Heſus, Teutates, Belenus, Andate, &c.\

And that of Gildas is in my opinion of great
weight, who, after a ſhort hint of Boadicia's re-
bellion, and an account how the ſame was re-
veng'd, ſays, In the mean time, Chriſt, the true Under Na
Sun, diſplaying his glorious rays upon the whole

world (not like the ſun from his temporal firmament,

but from the moſt exalted throne of heaven, which is
eternal and endleſs) in the latter end of Tiberius
Czſar (as we are aflured) did firſt vouchſafe his

Rays to this cold frozen Maud, ſituated at ſo vaſt a
diſtance from the viſible ſun. And, by the by, thus

alſo St. Chryſoſtom, of the Chriſtian Religion

in this Iſland. The Britiſh Illes fituate beyond our
ſea, and lying in the very Ocean, have felt the power

of the Word ( for Churches and Altars are erected

even there) of that Word, I ſay, which was natu-

rally planted in the hearts of all men, and is now in

their lips alſo. The ſame Author: How often in

Britain have men eat the fleſh of their own kind? In his Sea
Now they refreſh their ſouls with faſtings. S. Jerom uben Peas

likewiſe: The Britains, who live out of our world, Feay1, .

if they go in pilgrimage, will leave the weſtern ſun, Marcela, 1

and ſeek Jeruſalem, known to them only by fame and Widow.
by the Holy Scriptures. |

[Many have been the Opinions con-
cerning the firſt Plantation of Chriſtiani-
ty in Britain, and great the Differences of
Learned men concerning them. The latter Stillingf
end of Tiberius Caſar, i. e. about 37 years after Orig. 5. 2
the Nativity of Chriſt, is the time which ſe-
veral of our Writers have pitch'd on, upon the
authority of the foremention'd paſſage of Gil-
das ; who was a Britain, and . waa oth to be
credited in Britiſh affairs. But, not to obſerve
that this diſagrees with the account which
Scripture gives us of the propagation of the
Chriſtian Faith, viz. that atter the Martyrdom
of St. Stephen, the Diſciples for ſomè time
preach'd the word to the Jeus only, and that Cor-
nelius (fix years after) is ſaid to be the firſt-
fruits of the Gentiles (before which time, according
to that ſuppoſition, there would be Gentile-
Converts in Britain ;) not to obſerve this, I
ſay, that paſſage of Gildas has been evidently
miſunderſtood and miſapply'd. For he ſpeaks

of a double ſhining of the Goſpel ; one more
general

—_———

W_

(5) See alſo the hiſtory of Lucius at large in Biſhop Uſher's Antiquities of the Britiſh- Churches 19. 20, &c,
(c) Uſher's Antiquit, Britannicarum Eccleſiarum, p. 6, pi 1

i

p 4 1 * v 9 Wy "+ x 1 N hy 2
{EO oj, A: ApS Or Mat 15 PRI E; N ä e 1

that Orig P. 51, Þ :

ling, ff 3 . * 8
* 7 — 2 1 — * *
„

pon 5

ngfl,
P. .

er Nen

* b K * * = . *
4 3 3 \ = 4 PREP.
e 4 1 3

K

57
x

=

$5.24 Wr 5

e 22

kat:
1 As

e „1 au,
FA W
-

/

1,
"

2.

7

47

2
, ' fo a —*＋ s blew —
A, 22 4 Cine He a OR

a” ,
9% 0 20 Je. Fe

#

9 =

7 A 191 4 *
, _ .

- g , p 7 -

Ar 4 PP

—
*

2 A "2 5:6

is, O17 4

efl,
8- Br

ri
p. 35.

.
1

—
2
1;

— —
— —
— Sc req — ER

wo
— —_
— — W 2 „ ͤͤ—Z—⁊ͥ 4 ĩ˙ 2 r

„rr r —
*.

=
x 7 * GI

TORT

* 2 * 4 *

IXXXV

Romans in Britain

— —— —V—ꝛ— »

*
*

Ixxxvi

E

I 5cilling-
3 bets Orig,

5 0 P
8

9

1

e
„ Y
FRE
A »

.
, 11 1 ö 11 fd a ret 8 1 8 Fe Ny k
E 3 — . 1 * r he 2 i ts 5 11
bs. 4 4 8 Jaw I J Fd * 13 1 1 I i 1 1 A x
2 K : a y 9 13 k

© Stillingy,

p. 35»

& Monat Ang).
Vol. 1. P. 13. Church at Glaſſenbury the firſt in the King-

general to the world, in the latter end of Tiberizs
Caſar; the other more particular, to this Iſland,
at the time he 1s there ſpeaking of, about the
middle of Nero's reign. So that what he
affirms concerning the firſt r of the
Goſpel, has been unduly apply d to the parti-
cular 2 of it in the Iſland of Britain.
The ſtory of Joſeph of Arimathaa is condemn'd
by the like repugnancy to Scripture, as to the
time and manner of the -firſt preaching to the
Gentiles; and is moreover ſo ill-grounded,
and accompany'd with ſo many abſurdities,
that all ſober and judicious Authors account. it
a Monkiſh forgery, however zealouſly aſſerted
and maintain'd by ſome Writers of the Church
of Rome. Neither Gildas, nor Bede, nor Aſſe-
rius, nor Marianus Scotus, nor any of the ancient
Annals take the leaſt notice of ſuch a Traditi-
on ; nor are the Advocates for it, able to pro-
duce any better Authority, than Geffrey of
Monmouth, and the Legends of Glaſſenbury. The
Charter of St. Patrick (ſo much magnity'd by

; Monaſt. Vol. the Popiſh Writers) is a plain forgery. It be-

gins with the date according to the year of our
Lord; whereas it is well known that that way
of Computation did not come-in till a hundred
years after: and it ſpeaks of Indulgences obtain d
trom Pope Eleutherus ; which name was not
uſed for the Relaxation of Penance, till the
eleventh Century.

The Charter of King Ina, which makes the

dom of Britain, and ſo ſeems to fayour the tra-
dition of Joſeph of Arimathaa ; is of little bet-
ter Authority than that of St. Patrick. It
ſpeaks of K. Ina's calling together the Kings of
Britain, and the Archbiſbops, Biſhops, Dukes, and
Abbots, to paſs this Charter; when it is well
known, that he had no authority, but over the
Wef7-Saxons, and had but three Biſhops, with-
out any Archbiſhop, in his Dominions. One
of the witneſles to this Charter is King Boldred;
whereas none of our Hiſtories mention any
King of that name, till almoſt a hundred years
after. Add to this, thar it refers to other an-
cient Charters of that Church, as to the Ex-
emption of the Monaſtery ; which ſavours of the
known forgeries of the Benedictine Monks, in
England and other Countries; and theſe (it is
clear) muſt be forgeries, ſince the moſt 4
Enquirers have not been able to find any foot-
ſteps of Charters us'd among the Britains, till
very near that time. *
And it is very conſiderable in this matter,
that neither theſe Charters, nor others of the
Saxon times, however ſpeaking of Glaſſenbury
as the fountain of Religion in Britain, ſay any
thing of Joſeph of Arimathæa; who therefore
mult have been pitch'd upon by the Monks
afterwards, for their Founder, on account of
the eſteem he had, for the reſpect ſhew'd by him
to our Saviour's body, and the reverence that
his Name would gain and ſecure to the Place.
To all which we may further add ; that the
Gall. Legend makes the twelve hydes of
Land to be given, among others, by Arviragus
a Britiſh King; but it appears not, that there
was then any King in Britain of that name :
And that, with the Church, a Church-yard was

\ alſo conſecrated ; whereas the cuſtom of com-

mg Churches with Church-yards, is of later
te.

But altho? the Tradition of Foſeph of Arima-
thea cannot (as we have ſeen) be maintain'd
with any degree of probability ; it is affirm'd,
upon very good evidence, that a Chriſtian
Church was planted in Britain, during the
times of the Apoſtles, To this purpoſe, it is

alledg'd, that Euſebius expreſly ſays, that
ſome of the Apoſtles paſs d _ the Ocean
im) os nan, Bperlanxas views, to thoſe which are
cali d the Britiſh lands : That Theodoret as ex-
preſsly names the Britains, among the Nations
converted by the Apoſtles ; and faith elſewhere
that St. Paul * Salvation to the Nandi that
lie in the Ocean : That Clemens Romanus ſaith,
that St. Paul preach'd righteouſneſs through the whole
world, and in ſo doing, went iz} 7, rigua The Sores
to the utmost bounds of the Met; which Britain
was at that time underſtood to be, and is there-
fore call'd by Catullus Ultimam Occidentis Inſu-

Demon.
Evang. l. 3.
e. Jo

Ser. 9. 2 4*

Tom. 1. in
1. 116.

Ep. ad Cor,

lam; as by Arnobius it is made the bounds of In PL. 147.

the Goſpel to the Weft.

From theſe Authorities (eſpecially that of
Clemens Romanus) it follows, not only that
the Goſpel was preached in Britain in the
times of the Apoſtles, but that St. Paul himſelf
was the Preacher of it. This is further con-
firm'd, by obſerving, That from the time of
his being ſet at liberty in the 5th year of Nero,
to his Return to Rome, were ejght years;
which, the ancient Writers of the Church ge-
nerally agree, were ſpent in the Meſtern Parts :
That, having taken his ſolemn Leave of the
Eaſtern Parts, and aſſur d them that they ſhould
ſee his face no more, it cannot be ſuppos'd that he
return d thither, but that he employ'd his time
in planting the Goſpel elſewhere : That Gildas
ſaith, The Goſpel was here received before the fatal
defeat of the Britains by Suetonius Paulinus,
which was the ſeventh or eighth of Nero, f. e.
the third or fourth of thoſe eight years, which
ancient Writers ſay St. Paul ſpent in the
Weſtern Parts: That the Traditions about
S. James, Simon Zelotes, and Philip, as preaching
the Goſpel here, are all deſtitute both of ancient
Teſtimony and Probability: That, as to
St. Peter, that point depends only upon the Au-
thority of Simeon Metaphraſtes and other Legen-
dary Writers, and (What is more) ſeems to con-
tradict the Authority of Scripture, which ex-
preſly ſays, that the Goſpel of the Circumciſion
was committed to Peter, as the Goſpel of the Uncir-
cumciſion was committed to Paul.

on, viz. the ſtory of King Lucius, which (whe-
ther in the time of Aurelius and Verus, or of

To this account there is one obvious Excepti- Stillirgfl.
Orig. Brit,

pP · 67.

Commodus) ſuppoſes that the Chriſtian Reli-+ So ay
gion was planted in Britain a long time after, Arcbb. Uſher,

But, in the firſt place, that ſtory is not only an
Argument againſt St. Paul's converting the Bri-
tains, but ”— the Converfion it ſelf and the
preaching of Chriſtianity in Britain, before that
time; which yet is atteſted (as we have ſhown) b
Writers of far greater Antiquity and Authority,
than any that can be alledg'd in favour of
that ſtory of King Lucius. And (not to men-
tion the ancient Fathers already cited) it is
obſervable of our own Writers, That the Au-
thority of that more early Converſion reſts up-

Britiſh affairs; but the Converſion under King
Lucius, only upon Bede, a Saxon, and in moſt of
his accounts unfriendly to the Britains. So that,
if we muſt either reject the Accounts of that
more early Plantatioa, or the ſtory of Lucius,
there can be no doubt, but the firſt is to be re-
tain'd as true, and the ſecond given up, as fa-
bulous.

That there was ſuch a King in Britain as
Lucius, is prov d by ſo many Authors, that no

and Bp. Stil-
lingfleet.

on Gildas, a Britain and a proper judge of the

diſpute can be rais d about it: And a learned yger, Pri-
Writer tells us, that he had ſeen two Coins,with mord, p. 39.

the image of a Chriſtian King on them (as

he conjectur d by the Croſſes) and the Letters

LIC. which probably denote the ſame Logs
ut

«
* — — —— — — c—_ —
® - —

— — es oo
—
ü ˙àpõᷓ̃̃ͤ -

— — r —

— 32244 — :
-, — — ũ—— —— — wy x -

lh

Ixxxvil

Romans in Hritain.

IXXXVIü

Pertinax
Emp.

But then the 3 Writers make him
King of the whole Iſland, and pen a Letter for
him (as ſent to Rome in form) with evident
marks of Impoſture; and make him frame a
new Conſtitution of a Chriſtian Church in the
place of Flamins and Archiflamins, which, with
many forgeries of the like nature, being re-
jected, as they undoubtedly ought 3 it is no way
inconſiſtent with a former Converſion, to ſup-
poſe, that Lucius, conſider'd as a petty Prince
of ſome ſmall part of the Iſland, might ſend a
meſlage to Rome (where was a Chriſtian-Church
of ſo great fame, and a Biſhop; the twelfth from
the Apoſtles) to receive from thence a more full
and authentick account of Chriſtianity, than he
had yet had. For his meſſage to Rome, and
his deſire to become a Chriſtian, do ſuppole that
he had been inform'd before, what Chriſtianity
was; and he could not fo likely receive ſuch
Information from any, as from the rwo Meſſen-
gers, Who are believ'd by Leland and others to
have been two of the old Britiſh Chriſtians. |
But now let us paſs from the Church to the
Empire.

Commodus being lain, Pertinax was made
Emperor, who immediately diſpatch'd away
Albinus for Britain. Burt Pertinax, after a reign
of eight hundred and two days, being put to
death, Didius Julianus (who quickly had the
ſame fare) ſet up his pretenſions at Rome, Peſcen-
nius Niger in Syria, Clodius Albinus in Britain,

and Septimius Severus in Pannonia; all theſe, at

the ſame juncture, ſet up their pretenſions to

the Empire. Severus (who was neareſt to Italy)
Severus Emp.got firſt ro Rome, and being made Emperor by

conſent of the ſoldiers and the Senate, that he
might not leave an enemy behind him, imme-
diately with great cunning pretended to make

Albinus Emp. Albinus, who then commanded the army of

Heraclianus
Proprætor.
D. . 20.

Tit, 6. Viries ſion of Britain.
Lupus Pre-

prxtor,

|

Caledonii, who had promiſed to check the incut-
ſions of the Mæatæ, had not perform'd that
Article. And finding himſelf unable to curb
their ſudden inroads, by all the ſeverity he
could uſe, he was forc'd to ſend to Severus to
come in perſon to his aſſiſtance. Severus em-
braced the occaſion very joyfully, both that he
might wean his ſons, who grew very debauch'd,
from the pleaſures of the City, and alſo add the
name of Britannicus to his other titles; and,
though now above ſixty years old, and withal
poury” he reſolv'd upon this expedition, with
his ſons, Baſſianus, whom he call'd Antoninus
and Auguſtus, and Geta Caſar, together with
the Legions. The Britains ſent Embaſſadors
immediately, to deſire peace; whom (after he had
deſignedly ſtayd them a conſiderable time, till all
things were prepar'd and ready for the war) he
diſmiſs'd, without coming to any concluſion;
and having left his ſon Geta, whom at his firſt
arrival in Britain he made Anguſtus, in the hi-
ther part of the Iſland which was in ſubjection
to the Romans, to adminiſter juſtice, and the

government, among them; himſelf with Amo-

ninus march'd into the remote parts of the
country, where, without coming to any battle,
he employ'd the time in cutting down woods,
building bridges, and draining the fens : and
yet, by ambuſcades and ſickneſs, he loſt fifty
thouſand of his men. Thus Dis. But Hero-
dian makes him have feveral fucceſsful skir-
miſhes ; the Barbarians, trom the fens and thick

; woods, where they had poſted themſelves, ha-

ving the opportunity to ſally out upon him. Ar

laſt, he fore'd them to a League; upon con-

dition, that they ſhould give up into his hands
a conſiderable ſhare of their country. And,
which was the moſt glorious action of his reign,

| he built a wall from ſea to ſea, quite croſs the
Gaul and Britain, Cæſar; and, by ſtamping his |. Ifland. Upon theſe victories, he ſtamp'd his
image upon the coins, and erecting ſtatues to him, coins with this Inſcription, VICTORIA

and conferring the Conſulſhip upon him, he | BRITANNICA, and aſſum'd the title of

politickly ſooth'd him for the preſent. After ' Britannicus Maximus.

His ſon Geta had

this, he march'd into the eaſt againſt Niger, and | alſo the title of Britannicus, as appears by his
in a ſet battle defeated and flew him. Then he | coins. Yet, without regard to this league, the

laid ſiege to Byzantium, and after three years
took it ; and reduc'd the Adiabeni, Arabians,
and other nations. Thus, exalted with ſucceſs,
he grew impatient of a partner and rival, and
employ*d Aſſaſſins to murder Allinus; but the
event not anſwering his deſign, he openly de-
clar'd him an enemy, and, with all the diſpatch
he could, march'd into Gaul againſt him:
where Allinus with the flower of the Britiſh
army had poſted himſelf to receive him. The
Albinians fought ſo ſtoutly, that Severus threw oft
his purple, and fled with his whole army.
But, while the Britains purſu'd the enemy in

ſome diſorder (as it the victory was already

their's ;) Latus who was one of Severus's Cap-
tains, and ſtood expecting the iſſue of the Battle
with his men freſh and untouch'd (hearing that
Severus was cut off, and thinking that himſelt
might now ſet up for Emperor) tell upon them,
and put them to flight. Upon this, Severus,
having rallied his men, and re- aſſum'd his pur-
ple, purſued them likewiſe with great eager-
neſs, and ſo in the end came off very ſuccelſl-
fully, having, among many others, ſlain Albinus
himſelf. And now Severus, fole Emperor of the
world, firſt ſent Heracliamis, and then Virius
Lupus Proprætor and Legate (call'd by Ulpian
the Lawyer, Prefident of Britain) to take poſſeſ-
This Virius Lupus, as we ſhall
obſerve in its proper place, repaired many Caſtles

ere. However, he was at laſt torced to pur-
chaſe a peace of the Miatæ at a great rate (ha-
ing firſt made ſome of them priſoners) becauſe the

| Britains
gall'd him to that degree, that, in an Oration

|

began afterwards to revolt; whick

to his ſoldiers, he recommended the utter Extir-

' pation of them, in thoſe Verſes of Homer:

Nemo mann fugiat weſtras eademque cruentam,
Non fatus gravida mater quem geſtat in aluo
Horrendam effugiat cadem.

Let none your mercy ſhare,
Let none eſcape the fury of the war
Children unborn ſhall die..

Having in ſome ſort quieted theſe Rebels,

he dy'd at York, not ſo much of any infirmity
; of body, as of griet and concern at the wick-
| edneſs of his ſon Autoninus, who with his own

hands had made two ſeveral attempts upon his
Father's life. He dy'd with theſe words in his
mouth, I receiv'd the Cemmon-eelth diſorder'd in
all its parts; I leave it in peace even among the
Britains. His Body, after the military way,
was carried out by the ſoldiers, and put in the
fire, and the day was ſolemniz'd with races by
the ſoldiers and his ſons. Perhaps it would
look like Levity, it I ſhould relate the prodi-
gies that happen'd before his death; namely,
the blackneſs of the ſacrifices, and the cypreſs
crown otter'd him by a buffoon in theſe words,
You have been every thing; wow be a God. But the
method of Caronization (ſince it may divert
the reader) I will here ſubjoyn.

I

— —

1Ixxx1

—
The Ap»thee
fis, or De1tics
tion of th

Em peror.
Heredian.

ia ob:if:

3 4 Eboreis ſ

3

5 L Purpurat
5 Redbor ibm.

Astenin
ratalla.

| E*]

n

—— —_ out. F "I

8

Tur Romans in Britain. xc

eee N e „

— theo- It is a cuſtom among the Romans to Deij) thoſe
bs or Nibru. Emperors who die, leaving either ſons or Jucceſſors
tion of the / ind them. And they who are thus honour d, are
Emperor» de Hood to be rank'd among the Divi. The city us to

Heredian, be all in mourning, with ſome allay of feſtival ſolem-

nity. They bury his dead body as they do thoſe of

others, in great ſtate: But they make an Image of the

deceaſed, as like as they can, and lay the ſame in the

. entry to the Palace, upon an ivory bed very large and
5 high, with a cloth » ſpread over it. And this
Image lies there, pale, to reſemble the deceaſed. The
bed is attended, the greateſt part of the day, on both

fides ; on the left fide, are all the Senators in black 3

on the right, the Matrous, honourable by deſcent or by

marriage. Of theſe, none are to wear gold, or jewels,

but to be dreſs'd in a thin white garment, like mourn-

' ers. This ſolemnity continues ſeven days, Phyficians

| : coming in daily to the bed-fide ; and, as if the body

} were a real Patient, flill declaring they have 15 _
© « 1:7 bis, leſs hopes. At length, when the party © is declare
| me Dead, the youth of beſt ny among the Knights
aud Senators, take the bed upon their ſhoulders, and
carry it along the Via ſacra into the old Forum,

where the magiſtrates of Rome us'd to lay down their
offices. On both fides the Forum, are certain ſteps
like ſtairs : upon theſe, on one fide ſtand the young
ſons of the ſenators and moſt eminent men in the city
on the other, the principal Ladies; finging hymns, after
a melancholy and mournful manner, in praiſe of the
deceas'd. When this is done, they take up the bed
again and carry it without the City, into Mars's
8 Field: in the broadeſt part whereof, is eret ted a
be. ſquare Roſtrum, eaven on all ſides, and —_ No-
2 2 thing but great timber, like a Tabernacle. The in-
fide of it is ſtuff d with combuſtible matter; the out-
. fide is adorn'd with hangings, richly embroi der d with
PT + Ebrreis ſg- gold and * work of ivory, and beautified with a va-
„ riety pictures. Below this, ſtands another much
9 leſs, but of the ſame make, and with the ſame furni-
* ture; and with wide gates and doors and ſo
We likewiſe a third, and then a fourth, the lower ſtil!
proportional iy leſs than the higher, to the very loweſt,

which is leaſt of all. The ſhape and form of it may

| F be compar'd to thoſe towers, which are built near

« Harbours, for the burning of fires in the night, to
= direſ4 ſea-men ; commonly called Phari, i. e. light-
i houſes or watch-towers. The bed being lifted into the
= ſecond Tabernacle, ſpices and perfumes of all
= with fruit, herbs, and ſweet juices, are provided
and thrown upon it. For there is no country or city, no
perſon of degree or quality, but who in honour of the
dead Prince will chearfully contribute Preſents of that
kind. When theſe ſpices are heaped up to a conſiderable
quantity, and the place filled, they ride round the
Pile, and the whole Equeſtrian Order frame them-
S ſelves into a circular motion in the Pyrrhichian way.
© * Purpuratis The Coaches likewiſe are driven round it by the * Se-
= *doribm, mnators ; who perſonate the Roman Generals, and
2 their famous Heroes. When this ſolemnity is over,
the ſucceeding Emperor takes a torch, and puts it to
1 the Tabernacle; then all the reſt put fire to it, and the
1 pile is preſently in a terrible flame, by reaſon of the
N combuſtible matter and dry ſpices that are in it. A-
bout the ſame time, an Eagle is let fly from the upper-
moſt and leaſt Tabernacle, as the top of it ;
which is ſuppoſed to carry the Prince's ſoul into hea-
ven : and henceforth the Emperor is worſhip'd among
the other Deities. This by way of digreſſion;
8 now we will return. |
* —_— ca. Severus's ſon, Antoninus Caracala, continued
_ for ſome little time to proſecute the remains of
the war, by his Captains; but after that, he
made a Peace, and ſurrender'd the forts and
territories to the Enemy. Notwithſtanding
which, he aſſum'd the title of Britanni-
1 cs; nay, he was fo fooliſhly ambitious, as
. to call himſelf Britamnicus Maximus. The name
1 of Aritannicus was likewiſe us d by his brother

Geta. For thus ſomeCoins of his, which I have
ſeen, are inſcrib'd; IMP. CAS. P. SEPT.
GETA PIVS. AVG. BRIT. PONTIF. TRI.
P. III. COS. II. PP. |
From hence-forward, Writers for a long time
together, omit the affairs of Britain: for Alex-
ander Severus was not ſlain in Sicilia, a town of
Britain (as ſome would have it,) but in Gaul.
Thus much only appears from an old Iuſcripti-
on, that Nonius Philippus, under Gordianus Ju- Nonius Philip
nior, was Proprætor here. — N
Gallienus growing extreamly luxurious, th Gallienus
Roman Empire (either for want of care and Emp.
conduct, or elſe becauſe the Fates would have it 7an<2yrick
ſo) fell to pieces; and among the reſt, this pro- —_— aac
vince alſo revolted. For at that time, the thirty hirty Ty-
Tyrants became competitors for the Empire, in raats.
the ſeveral parts of it; of whom, Lolianus,
Victorinus, Poſthumus, Tetrici, and Marius, were
governors in this Iſland, as I ſuppoſe ; for their
Coins are daily found here in great plenty. Un-
der Aurelian, Bonaſus, a famous drunkard, and Bonoſu.
by birth a Britain, together with Proculus, en-
deayour'd to make himſelf Emperor; claiming
all Britain, Spain, and that part of Gaul catled
Braccata (which had been govern'd for two
months by Horianus:) But, being at laſt defeated
by Probus, after a very long and ſharp engage-
ment, he hang'd himſelf: and it was ſaid of
him, There hangs a + Butt, and not a man. + Ampbora.
However, Probus found other troubles to ex- p,obus Emp,
erciſe him in Britain. For one whom Probus Zofimus.
himſelf (induc'd by the recommendation of his
familiar friend Victorinus Maurus) had promoted
here, was raiſing a revolt ; and therefore he ex-
poſtulated with Victorinus upon it. Viftorinus
having obtained leave to go to him, went as one
making his eſcape from the Emperor; and being
kindly received by the Tyrant, kill'd him by
night, and return'd to Probus, and reſtor'd the
Province to its former quiet. Who this Tyrant
was, we are not inform'd by any Author; he
ſeems to be that Cl. Corn. Lalianus, whoſe Coins Lelianus
are found in this Iſland and in no other Coun- Emp.
try. Prob alfo tranſplanted the Burgundians Burgundians
and the Vandals (Whom he had reduced,) and and Vandals
ſettled them here: and they afterwards prov d in Britain.
very ſerviceable to the Romans upon any com-
motion. But whereas Yopiſcus writes, that Pro-
bus permitted the Britains to have Vines; a ve-
ry learned man is of opinion, that this paſſage
might ſlip from him unawares, as if the Coun-
try were unfit for Vines; whereas we not only
have vines now, but for certain had great ſtore
in former days. The many rival-Tyrants in
Britain at that time, occaſion'd that exclamati-
on of Porphyry who liv'd in the ſame age; Bri- Jerom,
tain a Province fruitful in Tyrauts |
After this, Carus Augrſtus gave Britain to his Carus and ca-
Son Carinus, with Gaul, Spain, and Dlyricum. inus Emp.
That he carried on a war here, ſome infer from
thoſe verſes of Nemeſianus ; but to me the Au-
thority ſeems but weak: |

ec taceam qua nuper bella ſub arts
Felici, Carine, manu confeceris, ipſo
Pene prior genitore Deo.

Nor, great Carinus, e'er ſhall lateſt fame

Forget our noble actions in the North,

When round the Pole you ſpread your awful
name,

And match'd the God your Sire's immortal
worth.

—

_—

In Diocleſian's time, Carauſi, a Menapian Dir :
born (of mean extraction, but of good conduct? nt

G : an Emp,
and courage, and eminent for his braveryatSea) 4
m Was

|
|
i
þ

J

2 —

xci

Romans in Britain.

1

Xcii

was made Governour of Bononia in Gaul, to
ſecure that ſea againſt the Saxon and French
Pirates who infeſted it. Having from time to
time taken many of the Barbarians Priſoners,
and neither brought all the prizes to the Em-
peror's Exchequer, nor reſtor'd them to the
* right owners in his Province ; and afterwards
taking very fewof them, it began to be ſuſpect-
ed that he ler them paſs on purpoſe, in hopes
of intercepting them with the booty they had
taken, whereby he might enrich himſelf. Up-
on this, he was to have been lain by order of
Maximian the Emperor. But having intelli-
gence of it, he took poſſeſſion of Britain under
the character of Emperor: thither he brought
the Fleet which he had with him to defend
Gaul; there he built more ſhips after the Ro-
man model, was joyn'd by the Roman Legion,
kept out foreign T'roops, preſs d the French
merchants to his ſervice, garriſon'd Bononia,
and converted the revenues of Britain and Bata-
via to his own uſe. Moreover, by the hopes of
booty in the Provinces, he drew abundance of
the Barbarians to be his Allies (particularly the
Franks, whom he had train'd to ſea-ſervice,)
and infeſted all the neighbouring ſea-coalt.
+ The Thebe- Maximian, With a brave army (ſ ſome of them
an Legion. ſuffer d Martyrdom gloriouſly in this expedition)
march'd againſt him; but when he was advanc'd
tothe ſea-coaſt (wanting ſeamen,and being daunt-
ed at the roughneſs and danger of the Britiſh
Ocean,) he made a halt, and there began a
feign'd treaty, whereby it was concluded that
Cararſius ſhould enjoy the Government of Bri-
tain, as the more proper perſon, by reaſon of
his great intereſt here, to defend the Country a-
gainſt all Invaſions. This is the reaſon, that in
all Carauſim's ſilver Coins, we find two Empe-
rors ſhaking hands, with this Inſcription round
Aaguſtorum. it, CONCORDIA AUGG. Maximian
march'd with his army againſt the Franks, who
then inhabited Batavia, and had aſſiſted Carau-
ſius; and they being ſurpriz'd by him, forth-
with ſubmitted. In the mean time, Carauſius
govern'd in Britain, with great authority, and
in perfect peace; he repair'd the wall between the
out hi of the Clud and Carun, to keep out the
Barbarians (as Ninnius, Eluodugus's Scholar,
tells us,) and fortified the ſame with ſeven caſtles ;
aud moreover built a round houſe of hewen ſtone up-
on the bank of the river Carun, ſo called from his
own name; with a triumphal Arch in memory of his
Victory. But Buchanan thinks, it was the
Temple of Terminus; as we ſhall obſerve in
Scotland.

WhenDicclefianand Maximianhad made Conſtan-
tiusChlorns and Maximianns Galerius ſ their part-
ners in the Empire ; to the end they might keep
what they had got, and recover what they had
loſt, Conſtant inis, lin ing raiſed an Army, march'd
with incredible {peed to Bononia in Gaul, other-
wiſe called Ge{/oriacum (which Carauſius had
ſtrongly garriſon'd) and inveſted the place: He

* block'd up the haven with huge beams driven
into the ground at the entrance, and heaps of
great ſtones, like a rampart ; which, notwith-
ſtanding the violence of the tides, continued
firm for many days. But, as ſoon as the Town
was ſurrender'd, it was ſo ſhaken by the very
firſt tide, that the whole work was disjointed,

Eumenius the and broken to pieces. And while his Fleet was

Paregyrilt, preparing for the Britiſh expedition, in this and

other places; he cleared Batavia of the Franks
who were then poſſeſſed of it, and tranſplanted

any of them to cultivate the barren parts of
the Empire,

+ Provincia®
libus,

Cerauſucs
Emp.

+ Caſares,

In this juncture, Carauſius was treacherouſly c. Alleg,,
ſlain by Allectus, his boſom friend and prime Emp.
Miniſter ; who thereupon uſurp'd the Govern-

ment. Upon this news, Conſtantius mann'd out
ſeveral diſtinct Fleets ; ſo that Allectus, know-
ing neither what courſe to take, nor where to
expect him, grew ſenſible that the Ocean was
not ſo much his Refuge, as his Priſon. The
Fleet ſetting out in tempeſtuous weather, did,
by the help of a Fog, eſcape the Britiſh Navy,
which lay off of the Iſle of Wight, on purpoſe
to obſerve and attend them : and as ſoon as he
was arrived and had put his army a- ſhore, he ſet
fire to his hole fleet, that there might be no
hopes of ſafety but in victory. Allectus, when
he ſaw Conſtantiuss fleet upon the coaſt,
quitted the ſhore where he had poſted himſelf,
and in his flight was accidentally met and en-
countred by Aſclepiodotus F Captain of the Lite- + Praſedun
guard; but his confuſion was ſuch, that, like a ©7#%ri,
madman, he ran on deſperately to his own
ruin : for he neither drew up his army, nor
put his cavalry in order, but with his barba-
rous mercenaries (having firſt put off his Robes
that they might not diſcover him) he ruſh'd
upon the enemy, and in that tumultuary kind
ot fight was kill'd, without any note of di-
ſtinction about him. So that they had much
ado to find him among the bodies of the Barba-
rians, which lay about the field and on the hills.
Upon this, the Franks and other ſurviving
Barbarians, determined to plunder London, and
go oft with the booty : but a party of ours,
that were ſeparated from the army in foggy
weather, coming luckily to London at the ſame
time, fell upon them with great ſlaughter in all
parts of the City ; not only to the reſcue and
lafety, but to the great joy and pleaſure,
of the Citizens. By this victory the Province
was recovered, after it had been about ſeven
years govern'd by Caraufius, and three more by
Allectus. Upon that occaſion, Eumenius writes
thus to Conſtantius. O important victory! wor-
thy of many triumphs ; by this, Britain is reſtored,
by this the Franks are utterly defeated, and other na-
tions in that rebellious confederacy reduc'd to Obedience.
To conclude, the ſea it ſelf is ſcour d, to eſtabliſh
our quiet in thoſe parts. ou, great Caſar, for your
part, may with juſtice triumph in this diſcovery of
another world ; and, by reſtoring the Naval glory of
Rome, may boaſt that you have added to the Empire a
larger Element, than all their former Dominions.
And a little after, to the ſame Conſtantius ;
Britain is ſo perfetHy reduced, that all the neigh-
bouring nations are under abſolute ſubjeſtion.
Towards the end of Diocleſians and Maximi- per ſccutiotit
aus reign, when that long and bloody Perſecu- Britain.
tion in the Eaſtern Church broke into the
Weſtern Church with great violence, many
Chriſtians ſuffered martyrdom in Britain. The
chief among them, were, Albanus Verolamienſis, St. Alban.

V hom in their proper places. For the Church ſur- um.
viv d it with great triumph and happineſs ; and
could not be deſtroy'd by a continu'd perſecution of ten
years.
Diocleſian and Maximian having abdicated Conſtantius

time governed under the title of Cæſar, was
made Emperor. To his ſhare, fell aly, Africa,
Spain, Gaul and Britain. Italy and Africa he
ſurrender'd to Galerius, and contented himſelf
with the reſt, While he was a Soldier in Bri-
tain under Aurelian, he marry'd Helena, the
daughter of Cælus or Cælius a petty Prince here,
and by her had Conſtantine the Great, in Britain.
For in this all writers agree with the great

Baronin ;

Julius, and Aaron a citizen of Exeter, &c. of * I Lt 3

the Empire, Conſtantius Cblorus, who till that Horus Eur BY

—

xciii
r SIR
Baronius,

Hiſt. Eccle ſ

5 h Helena.

* Stabulu mm.

1
of the deat
7 co ol:us,

|| Stercorars:

Euſebius,

ee Suidas,
= why he w.
called Poor,

SS Conſtantine
= the Great

Emp,

APanegyri
ipoken to
Conttantin'
the Great,

Gelaſus 1
Zicenus, 1,
Act. Conc
Nicer, ©

3

—_—.

1

cii xciii

Romans in Britain.

xciv

Bissrius, Haronius, (a) except one or two modern Grecks
id. Eccleſ. (who are inconſiderable, and vary from one
another) and a certain learned perſon, who
grounds his difſent upon a faulty paſſage of
7. Firmicus. Chlorus was compell'd by Maxi-
mian to divorce this wife, and marry his
daughter Theodora. This Helena is the ſame,
who in old Inſcriptions is call'd Venerabilim &
Piiſſima Auguſta, and is ſo highly celebrated by
Eccleſiaſtical Writers, for her Chriſtian piety,
her ſuppreſſing of Idols at Jeruſalem, and erect-
ing a Church in the place where Chriſt ſuffered,
and for finding the Croſs of Chriſt, Let the
Jews and Gentiles call her, in reproach, Habu-
laria, becauſe the Manger where Chriſt lay,
"4 was ſought out by this pious Princeſs, and a
Ws 5:4: Church built in the place where * the ſtable
| food. Hence, St. Ambroſe : They tell us, this
Lady was firſt an In-keeper, &c. This good In-
keeper Helena haſten'd to Jeruſalem, and there found
out the place of our Lord's Paſſion, and diligently ſought
the manger where her Lord lay. This good Inn-keeper
was not ignorant of him, who cur d the traveller that
| the robbers had wounded. This good Inn-keeper did not
.. Stercrraria, are || how baſe and vile ſhe was thought, Jo ſhe could
5 5 but gain Chriſt. Conſtantius her husband is no
leſs commended for his piety and wiſdom. 4
man, who rejecting the ſuperſtition and impicty of
many Gods, has frankly own'd the being of one only
God, the Governour of all things. Whereupon, to
diſcover the Faith of his own Courtiers, he
gave them free liberty, either to ſacrifice to
their Gods and ſtay with him, or to refuſe and
be gone. But thoſe who choſe to go, rather
than leave the worſhip of the true God, he
kept; and thoſe who gave up the worſhip of
the true God, he cafſhier'd ; concluding, that
ſuch could not be true to him, who were trea-
cherous to their God. This excellent Emperor
WT... Sud, J d in his laſt expedition in Britain againſt the
e. I u Caledonians and other Picts, at York; and was
called Poor, ſucceeded by his Son Conſtantine, who had been
E declared Cæſar before.

Some few days before the death of Conſtantius,
his Son Conſtautine went poſt from Rome to
York ; (and, that none might follow, he rook
care to lame all the horſes belonging to the State
for thoſe ſervices, except ſuch as himſelf us'd ;)
and there he received his Father's laſt breath.
Hence, this Addreſs of an antient Orator: You
enter d the ſacred Palace, not as ambitious of the
Empire, but ordain d and appointed to it; and f;ith-
with your father's Houſe had the happineſs to ſee you
its lawful Governour. For there was no doubt but he
had the right and title, who was the ja ſon that
Providence beſtou d upon the Emperor. However, he
ſcem'd to be forc d upon this high ſtation by the
ſoldiers, and particularly by the importunity of
Erocus, King of the Almans, who came along

AParegyrick with him, as an Aſſiſtant. The Soldiers, with
wn. 3 : regard to the publick, and not out of private intereſt,
14% de Gre: aft the royal robes upon him; he wept, and ſpurr d a-

| * way his horſe, that he might avoid the importunity of
the army, &c. but his modeſty at laſt yeilded to the
good and happineſs of the Common-wealth. Hence,
the Panegyriſt exclaims, O fortunate Britain, and
happy above all Nations, in firſt ſeeing Conſtantine,

Emperor. |

Cæſar, at his ſetting out, proſecuted thoſe

wars which his father had n 2gainſt the

Celacus Ci. Caledonians and other Pitts ; and fell upon the re-
zicenus, 1, 1. moter parts of Britain, and thoſe Iſlanders, who,
Act. Conc. as a certain Author words it, are witweſſes of the
Nicen, e. 3. ſun's ſetting. Some of them he ſubdu'd by torce,
others (tor he had Rome, and greater things, in

letus

5 Helens.

7 oc the death
efc Mm KM Theodoſius.

rie.

WS Evſcbius.

i Conſtantine
= the Great
rap.

utionil Wn
in. 22

ning

s Emp,

his eye at that time) he drew to his alliance by
money: ſome who were his enemies he recon-
cild to be his friends; others, who were
inveterate againſt him, he drew over to be his in-
timates. After that, he made ſuch a glorious
Conqueſt of the Franks in Batavia, that golden
coins (one of which I have ſeen) were ſtamp'd
with the image of a woman fitting under a
trophy, and reſting one hand upon .
with this Inſcription under it, FRANCIA ;
and GAUDIUM ROMANORUM round
it. So, having defeated the other Barbarians in
Germany, and made the Germans and Gauls
his Friends, he drew his ſoldiers out of Britain,
Gaul, and Germany, amounting to the number
of 90000 foot and 8oooo horſe, and ſet for-
ward for Italy. Maxentius (who, at Rome, laid
claim to the Empire) was likewiſe overcome by
him : and thus, having defeated the T'yrant and
reduc'd Italy, he reſtor'd the world to the bleſ-
ſings of peace and liberty. And as it is in an
old Inſcription ; INSTINCT U DIVINITA-
TB, MENTIS MAGNITUDINE, CUM
EXERCITU SUO, TAM DE TYRAN-
NO, QUAM DE OMNI EJUS FACTI-
ONE, UNO TEMPORE JUSTIS REM-
PUBLICAM ULTUS EST ARMIS. i. e.
By divine impulſe, and the greatneſs of his own ſoul,
he ſo manag'd his Army, as to triumph over the Ty-
rant and all his adherents; and ſo at once, by a juſt
war, did revenge the quarrel of the Republick.

That he return to Britain, is hinted by
Euſebius in theſe words; At aft, Conſtantine
ſailed over to Britain, which is ſurrounded by the ſea :
and having overcome them, he began to think of other
parts of the World ; that he might relieve thoſe who
needed his aſſiſtance. Likewiſe, in another place,
After he had inſtill 'd into his Army the principles of
Humanity, modeſty, and piety; he invaded Britain,
a country encloſed by the fea, which, as it were, ter-
minates the Sun's ſetting with its coaſts.

Alſo, thoſe Verſes of Optatianus Porphyrius to
Conſtantine, are to be underſtood of Britain.

Omnis ad Arc lois plaga finilbuis horrida Cauro
Pacis amat cana & comperta perennia jura,
Et tibi fida tuis ſemper bene militat armis,
Reſque gerit virtute tuas, populoſque feroces
Propellit, ceditque Iubens tibi debita rata,

Et tua vittores ſors accipit hanc tibi fortes,
Teque duce invicte attollant ſigna cohortes.

The Northern nation vex'd with Weſtern
ſtorms,

To your commands and peaceful laws con-
forms :

Serves in your arms, and to your colou
true,

Subdu' d herſelf, helps others to ſubdue.

Her eaſie tribute uncompell'd ſhe pays,

While your brave troops your conqu'ring
Eagles raiſe,

And heaven rewards you with deſerv'd
ſucceſs,

About this time (as is manifeſt from the The- Pacatianus

f . zu Vicegerent
odoſian Code) Pacatianus Was Vicegerent in Britain ir the

I

— —

Britain ; for then, here was no ſuch thing as 12th year of

a Proprator and Legate, but in lieu thereof a Conitantine
the Great,

Vicarins.

This Emperor was highly commended ; and he
highly deſerv'd it. For he did not only ſet the
Roman Empire at liberty; but, diſpelling the
clouds of ſuperſtition, he introduced the pure

light of the Goſpel, opened Temples for the
| worſhip

_—

—

(a) See the learned Lipſius's opinion of this matter, in his Letter to Mr. Camden, publiſh'd among his Epiſtles
pag. 64. See alſo.Uſher's Antiquitates Britannicarum Ecclefiarum, pag. 92. fol. cap. 8.

*

XCV

Romans in Britain.

—

XCy1

— —

worſhip of the true God, and ſhut up thoſe that

were dedicated to the falſe. For as ſoon as the

ftorm of that Perſecution was over, the faithful ſer-

wants of Chriſt, who had withdrawn in thoſe dange-

rous times, and abſconded in woods, deſerts, and

caves ; began to appear in publick. They rebuilt the

Churches that were thrown down, they begun, carry'd

+ Baſilics. on, and finiſh'd Temples in honour of the holy mar-

* tyrs; and, diſplaying as it were their victorious Ban-

ners, they celebrated feſtivals, aud with pure hearts

and hands performed their holy Solemnities. And
therefore he 1s honour'd with theſe Titles,

IMPERATOR FOR TISSIMUS AC BEA-
'TTISSIM US. PHSSIM US. FOELIX. URBIS
LIBERATOR. QUIETIS FUNDATOR.
REIPUBLICA INSTA URATOR. PUBLI-
C LIBERTATIS AUCTOR. RESTI-
TUTOR URBIS ROME ATQUE OR-
BIS. MAGNUS. MAXIMUS. INVIC-
TUS. INVICTISSIM US. PERPETUUS.
SEMPER AUGUSTUS. RERUM HU-
MANARUM OPTIMUS PRINCEDBS.
VIRTUTE FORTISSIMUS, ET PIE-
TATE CLEMENTISSIMUS. And in the
Laws: QUI, VENERANDA CHRISTI-
ANORUM FIDE ROMANUM MU-
NIVIT IMPERIVM. DIVUS. DIVE
MEMORLE. DIVINA MEMORILE,
&c.

That is,

An Emperor moſt valiant, moſt bleſſed, moſt pious,
happy, Redeemer of the City, Founder of Peace, Eſta-
bliſher of the Common-wealth, Author of the publick
Liberty, Reſtorer of the City of Rome and the World :
Great, Greateſt, Invincible, Moſt Invincible, Per-
petual Auguſtas, Beſt Prince and Governour, Moſt
Valiant, Moſt Merciful. And in the Laws, He
who fortified the Roman Empire with the venerable
Faith of Chriſt, Sacred, Of bleſſed memory, Of di-
vine memory, &c.

And he is the firſt Eiuperor, that I can find,
who in Coins and publick Monuments was ever
ſtil'd Dominus noſter ; yet at the ſame time I
am not ignorant, that Diocleſian was the firſt
after Caligula, who would allow the title of Do-
minus to be publickly given him.
However, it ſeems to have been a great over-
ſight in this mighty Emperor, that he open'd a
paſſage for the Barbarians, into Britain, Ger-
many, and Gaul. For, when he had reduc'd
the northern nations to ſuch a degree that they
were not able to annoy him, and had newly
built the city of Conſtantinople, to ſuppreſs the
mighty growth of the Perſians, who threaten'd
the Roman empire Eaſtward ; he drew away
the legions out of the frontier garriſons, partly
into the eaſt (building forts and caſtles to ſup-
ply the want of them) and partly to the cities
remote from the Frontiers. So that preſently
after his death, the Barbarians forc*'d the towns
and caſtles, and broke into the Provinces. For
this reaſon, Zoſimus ſpeaks ſo diſhonourably ot
him, as the firſt and greateſt ſubverter of that
flouriſhing Empire.
Government Bur ſeeing Conſtantine did new-model the Em-
in Britain un- pire; it will not be improper to obſerve, in
der the later ſhort, how Britain was govern'd under him and

* Feed the ſucceeding Emperors. He appointed four *
1 Chief Præfects for the Eat, Ih rium, Italy, and
1 Militum Gaul; and ||two Maſters of the ſoldiery, one over
Magiſtri. the Horſe, the other over the Foot, for the Welt ;

who were call'd Praſentales.

As for Civil Affairs, they were adminiſter'd
in Britain by the Præſectus Pratorio of Gaul, who
exercis'd that Office here by a deputy, honour'd

1

*

with the title of Speftabilis. Under him were

two Conſular Deputies, anſwerable to the num-

ber of the Provinces; and three. Prafidents, who

82 to determine all Cauſes, Criminal and
ivil.

As for military matters, they were under the
rule and management of the Maſter of the Fvot
in the Weſt : and to him were ſubject, the
Count of Britain, the Count of the Saxon ſhore
throughout Britain, and the Dux Britanniarum;
who had each the title of Spec tabilis.

Vicegerert a
ritain,

over the inner parts of the I{land ; and had the tain,

command of ſeven f companies of foot, and + Numer

nine * Troops of Horſe.
The Count of the Saxon ſhore (who was to de- Count of ty

Ammianus is call'd Comes Tractus Maritimi) had
under him ſeven f companies of foot, two 4 Numer,

Cohort.

The Duke of Britain, who was to defend the
Marches againſt the Barbarians, had the com-
mand of 38 garriſons, conſiſting in all of 14000
foot and goo horſe : ſo that, in this age, if
Pancirollus hath caſt up his account right, the
ordinary Forces in Britain were 19200 toot and
1700 horſe, or thereabouts.

ror's gifts and largeſſes. He had under him in Selle.
Britain, a Rationalis Summarum Britanniz, or
Receiver-General; Prapofitus Theſaurorum Au-
guſtenſium in Britannia, or Lord-Treaſurer ; and
a Procurator Gynegii in Britannia, or an Overſeer
of the Gynegium in Britain, the place where the
Cloaths of the Emperor and army were woven,
Alſo, the Comes rerum privatarum (or Keeper of
the Privy-Purſe) had here in Britain his Ratio-
nalis rei private or private Auditor: not to
mention the Procurator Ludi Gladiatorii, or
Maſter of the Fencing-School in Britain (men-
tion'd in an old inſcription;) with others of an
inferior rank.

[In the time of this Emperor, the Britiſh
Church ſeems to have been, not only in a calm
and quiet, but in a ſettled Condition; inaſmuch
as we find three Britiſh Biſhops (Eborius, Reſti-
tutus, and Adelfius) in the year 3 14, ſubſcribing
in form to the Council of Arles.

Upon the death of Conſtantive, Britain fell ro Conſtantine
the ſhare ot his ſoa Conſtantive ; who, being EP
ſpurr'd on by ambition to invade the Domini- -
ons of others, was {lain by his brother Conſtans. Conſtam
Conſtans, exalted with this victory, poſ- Emp.
ſeſs'd himſelf of Britain, and the other Pro-
vinces, and came hither with his brother Con-
ſtantius. Hence, that addreſs of Julius Firmicus
(not the Pagan Aſtrologer, but the Chriſtian,)
to theſe two. In the winter, a thing which never
was, nor ever will be done, you have triun:ph'd over
the boiſterous and ſwelling waves of the Britiſh Ocean.

A ſea almoſt unknown to us, hath trembled, and the
Britain are ſurpris'd at the unexpetted coming of their
Emperer. I hat furiter world you atchieve ? The
elements themſerues ſulmit to your Valour, This
Conſtaus conven d a Council at Sardis avainſt
the Arrians, which conſiſted of 300 Bimops;
and among theſe were the Bi hops of £Ericzin,
who having condemn'd the hereticks, and con-
firm'd the Nicæne Creed, gere their Voices tor

Prince, witiourt tarther application to ſtate- Apol. 2.
aftairs, grew difiolute aud - voluptuous : this

made him burthenſome to the Provinces, and Magnentis.
unacceptable to his ar y; fo that Magneutins, cal!

|

the village ot helena as he was hunting, and lene.
there

The Count of Britain ſeems to have preſided Count of Be. 4

*Vexillation,

tend the ſea- coaſt againſt the Saxons, and by Saxon ſbore, |

troops of horſe, the ſecond legion, and a ail, ] Angelus Ro-
; 2 ds

There were beſides theſe, the Comes Sacrarum Count of th £

Largitionum, who had the care of al! the Empe- Imperial Lu - Ft

1.14.

the Innocence of Athanajivs. But the yourg Athanaſus is 3

ed alſoT
Rag 2 +; a4... B00 fe ©
Count of the Jovii and Hercalei, fer upon him“ in's Js vio E

1 F Gratianus

—_ F:narus,

"IJ 4 Prafuit 7
: caſtyenfi.

= A. Marcell:

E : Cenſt ant ius.

Paulus Cat

8 4 9
1

Ammian.

Marcellin.

Martin, V

gerent of!
tain.

* Comitat

Imperato1

+ Princi
fra, 2

+ Egquule

KCy1

int of Bei. 4

ume ros.

Nt of the

on ſhore,

umery,

illationg,

nt of the
erial Lu. &.

5.

=
+.
2

"WM xcvii

—_ F:ynarus,

senf.
A Harcelli- from a Rope, which in his youth he carry d about to

Paulus Care- ted to Conſtantius;
. Notary, born in Spain, was ſent hither, who, under

= 4. 14.

gerent of Bri-

* Comitatus

I Equules.

*
Y

Romans in Britain.

D a
*
8 =

XCVIII

. —

there ſlew him; fulfilling the propheſie, that
he ſhould end his lite in his Grandmother's lap;
from whom that Village had the name. This
Magaentins was born amongſt the Læti in Gaul,
but his Father was a Britain: and now, upon
the murder of Conſtans, he aſſumed the Impe-
rial robes in Gaul, and drew-over Britain to ſide

with him; but tor three years together was fo |

warmly encounter'd by Conſtantius, that at laſt
he laid violent hands upon himſelf. He was
the moſt fortunate of Princes, for favourable
weather, plentiful harveſts, and peace with the
Barbarians ; things, which mightily raiſe the
reputation of Princes among the vulgar. Bur,
for what reaſon this Magnentius, in an
old Inſcription long ſince dug-up at Rome, is
call'd Taporns, I leave others to enquire. For
thus it is read there; ſpeaking of the Obelisk,
erected in the Circus, |

= Angelus Ro- Interea Taporo Romam vaſtante tyranno,
_ -.. Auguſti jacuit donum ſtudiumque locandi.
Under vile Taporu's tyrannick ſway,
The royal preſent unregarded lay.
ca. At this time, Gratian, ſirnamed Funarius, was

WS + 2 fit „t General in Britain; who was father of Fa-
| lentinian the Emperor. He was called Funarius,

nu,

ſell ; and though froe ſoldiers attempted to take it from
him, they could aot with all their force do it. Upon
his return home, and the loſs of his Commiſſion, his
200ds were confiſcated to the Emperor; becauſe he was
reported to have — -_ 1 .
„antun., Magnentius being murder d, Britain ſubmit-
— 1 and torthwith one Paul, a
the mask of friendſhip and kindneſs, would carry on
the ruin of others, with great dexterity. That he
might puniſh ſome ſoldiers who had conſpired
with Magnentius (when they were not able to make
reſiſtance, and ke had outragiouſly like a torrent broke
in upon them ;) he ſeized many of their Eſtates.
And thus he went on with great flaughter and ruin,
condemning many of the freemen to Irons, and ſome
to bonds and fetters, by arraigning them of faults that
were no way chargeable upon them. Hereupon, ſo
foul a crime was committed, as muſt brand the
Reign of Conſtantius with eternal infamy. There
Martin,Vices war one Martin, that governed theſe Provinces, as
Deputy ; who, out of compaſſion to the calamities of
theſe innocent people, had often applied himſelf to Paul,
that the guiltleſs might be ſpar'd. When he found his
interceſſion was to no purpoſe, he threatened to leave
the Province; hoping that that would awe and ſtop the
proceedings of a malicious perſecutor of theſe harmleſs
and quiet people. Paul, thinking this would ſpoil
his trade, and having a moſt dextrous head at lay-
ing contrivances (from which very faculty he was
called Catena,) took care to hook the Deputy, who
defended others, into the like dangers. And he went
very near to bring him bound, with the Tribunes, and
many others, before the Emperor's * Privy Council.
This imminent danger ſo inraged Martin againſt Paul,
that he drew his ſword and made a paſs at him; but
being not home enough to diſpatch him, he flabb'd him-
Jelf in the fide with it. And this was the unhappy
fate of that juſt man, who had the courage to el
Jo many others from injury and oppreſſion. After this

Ammian.
Marcellin.

tain.

Imperatorit.

| 1 rincipis ca-Uillany, Paul, all in blood, returned to the F head

quarters, bringing ſeveral with him ready to fink un-
der their chains, and reduced to great miſery ; upon
whoſe coming, the * burning-horſes were jet up, and
hooks and other Inſtruments of Torture prepar'd by
the Executioner; ſome were outlaw'd, ſome baniſhed,
and others put to death. Ar laſt, the Vengeance
of God tell upon him, and himſelf receiv'd the

8

juſt reward of his cruelty; being burnt alive in
the reign of Julian. |

Ajterwards (theſe are the words of Ammianus
Marcellinus) when, by the inroads of thoſe barbarons
nations the Scots and Pitts, the peace of Britain was
diſturbed, the frontiers waſted, and the Provinces tir d-
out and grown heartleſs with the many laughters that
had been made 3 Julian (who by Conſtantius was de-
clared Cæſar and Partner in the Empire) being then
in his winter-quarters at Paris, was in ſuch diſirati-
ed circumſtances, that he durſt not venture to relieve
them (as we have told you Conſtantius before him had
done) leſt he ſhould leave Gaul without government :
confidering alſo, that the Almans were forming an
injurrettion at that time. He took care therefore to
Jend Lupicinus to ſettle matters in theſe parts, who Lupicinus.
was * Maſter of the Armory, a warlike man, and* Magiſter
| an expert Soldier, but very proud and haughty ; Armorum.
of whom it was doubted, which was his greater Fault, Caftrenfis
Covetouſneſs or Cruelty. He therefore, with a ſupply gl ang
of light ſoldiers, Herulians, Batavians, and ſeveral
Companies of the Mzfians, marched in the midſt of
winter to Bologn. Having got ſhips, and embarked
his men, he took the advantage of a fair wind, and
arrived at Rhutupiz, a place juſt oppoſite, and Rhutupie.
from thence marched to London; that there he might London.
take meaſures according to the ſtate of affairs, and

eed immediately to give them battle.

Under this Conſtantius, who was a great
favourer of the Arians, the Arian hereſie crept
into Britain ; where, trom the beginning of
Conſtantine the Great, a ſweet harmony between
Chriſt the head and his members, had continu'd; till
that deadly herefie of Arius, like a ſerpent ſpitting
her venom upon 1s from beyond ſea, made even
brothers inveterate againtt᷑ one another. And this, a
paſſage being made over the Ocean, and all other cru-
el ſavages ſpouting out of their mouths the deadly poi-
Jon of their herefies, wounded their own Country; ta
which novelty is ever grateful, and which is never firm ;
in any principle. In favour of theſe Arians, Sulpitius Se-
ſtantius conven'd a Council of four hundred“
weſtern Biſhops at Ariminum ; allowing all of
them the neceſſary proviſions. But that was deemed
by the Aquitanes, Gauls, and Britains, very unbe- „„ . 15
coming; and therefore, refufing that maintenance from 7m Nap -
the Emperor, they choſe rather to live at their own Biſhops, calls
charges. f Three only out of Britain, who were not thoſe, Eiſhops
able to maintain themſelves, were maintained by the of the Pro-
State, having refuſed contributions from the reſt ; dd *
thinking it more honourable to be a burthen to the pul- pytjico.
lick, than to particular perſons. |

After this, upon the death of Conſtantius, Ju- Julian Empe-
lian the Apoſtate (who had ſet up for Emperor” greg
in competition with Conſtantius) baniſh'd Pal-j;,.
ladius, one of his great Officers, into Britain; * Primum ex
and ſent away Alipius, who was Prefect in this magiſtro ,
Iſland, to Jeruſalem, to rebuild it; where ſuch feierum.
ſtrange flaſhes of fire broke out near the foun-
dations, as deterr'd them from that attempt;
and many thouſand Jews, who were forward in
advancing the work in oppoſition to the decrees
of Providence, were kill'd in the ruins. This
diſſolute Emperor, and pretended Philoſopher,
durſt not (as is already obſerved) come to the
relief of the oppreſſed Britains ; though at the
ſame time he exacted every year great quanti-
ties of corn for the ſupport of his German
Armies. |

In the reign of Valentinian the Emperor, Falentinian
when the whole world was at war, Britain was Emp.
continually infeſted by the Pitts, the Saxons, the
Scots, and the Attacotti. Upon this, Fraomarius,
King of the Almans, was ſent hither, and made
Tribune of a body of Almans (who at that
time were very conſiderable for ſtrength and
numbers) to heck the Barbarians in their In-
curſions.

n : However,

em

a A. a a

—_

-
—

—_ „
Os „ „„ *

K«K«K„„4„4„4 GAR

— —_—

2 —

—_ ww i þ
— — <<_ „% _ , wr

CES -
4 a@dt oc. a a”

— ⏑⏑⏑·¹ ¹ --- ͤ—ͤ

— — BS —

lim
Tendos called T3
Auguſta, an ancient town calied in after-ages Auguſta. Hu-

-
Ann * a of

xcix Romans in Britain.

_ * — . **

Am. Marcel. However, by confederacies among theſe barbarous
2 1. 27 Y People, Britain was reduced to extreme miſery;
x Nectaridus, Count of the ſea-coafF was flain, and
Bulchobaudes the General was ct off by treachery.

This news was received at Court with great conſterna-

tion, aud the Emperor ſent Severus, at that time

1 Domellice-... Steward of kis Houſhold, to puniſh theſe inſclencies 3
rum Comitem. i fortune ſhould put it ia his power. But he was ſoon
after recalied, and ſucceeded by Jovinus, who ſent

+ Poſſibly a back Proventulides with 'all ſpeed, to intimate the
place corrupt- ,uce/ſity there was of greater ſupplies, in the preſent
28 Fate of uſjairs. At laft, upon the very great di-
Theodoſus. ſtreſs the Mund was reported to be in, I'heodoſius,
eminent for his exploits and good fortune, was diſ-

patcl/d hither with all ſpeed Having ſclected a

ſtrong body out of the Legions and Cohorts, he began

pins. his expedition very hopefully. The Picts were at that
time divided into to nations, the Dicalidonæ and

Attacotss the Vecturiones; and likewiſe the Attacotti, a
Koln. warlike people, aud the Scots, rang d the country,
for ſpoil and booty. As for Gaul, the Franks and

Saxons (who border upon it) were perpetually making

inroads by ſea and land; and by the ſpoil they took,

the towns they burnt, and the men they Eid, were

very troubleſome neighbours. If fortune would have

favoured; this brave Captain, now bound for the re-

moteſi part of the world, was reſolv'd to curb them.

Mien he came to the Coaft of Bologn (whichis jever d

from the oppoſite Country by a narrow ſea, ebbing and

flowing, apt to ſwell and rage at certain ſeaſons, and

dangerous conſequence, if it had not been timely pre-

vented. One Valentinus, of Valeria Pannonia, 4 Valentin,
proud haughty man, and f trother-in-law to Maxi- faiſes a gi.
minus (that inſupportable Deputy, and afterwards 3 in
Lieurenant,) was baniſh'd for a leinous crime, imo Cn '..
this Iſland; where, like a ſavage of a reſtleſs temper, ter, ts *
be put all things in diſorder by plots and inſurrec liens 4
against Theodoſius; and that purely from a deſpe-

rate ſpirit, and out of pride and envy ; he being the
only man that could cope with him. However, that
he might proceed with conduct and ſecurity in theſe
ambitious purſuits, he endeavour'd to dratu=14 all exi/,s
and ſoldiers, with the encouragement and proſpect of
booty. But theſe defigns taking air, and coming to
the General's ear before they were ripe for exec::ticn, he
took care like a wiſe man to be bejoe-hand with the
conſpirators : Valentinus himſelf, with ſome of the
chief of his cabal, he committed to Dulcitius to ſee
them executed; but, upon laying things together ( for he
was the wiſeſt and moſt experienced ſoldier of his time.)
he would ſuffer no further eaquiry after the ether
Cun;pirators, left the general terror it world raiſe,
might again imbroil the Province, which was row in
Peace and quietneſs. From this, he tura d his theuglus
upon ſome neceſſary Rejormations; which be could at-
tempt without danger, now it appear d that fortune was
Jo favourable to all his defigns ; and ſo he applied him-
elf to the repairing of Cities and Garriſins (as we
have ſuid,) and to the ſtrengthening the Freatiers with
watches, and intrenchments. Havins recovered the

LES

again to fall into à plain level ſurface, at which time
it 1s aavigable without danger,) he ſet ſail, and with |
a gentle courſe arriv'd at Rhutupiz, a Jaje harbour |
over-againit it. The Batavians, Herulians, ze |
Jovii and Victores (brave bold men who followed
„) being alſo landed, he ſet forward for London,

ving divided his army into ſeveral bodies, he fell up-
on the enemy; who were roving. up aud down the
country for prey, aud laden with ſpoil and booty. |
They were ſoon routed, and forced to leave their booty
behind; which was, cattle and priſoners, that they had
talen from the miſerable Tributaries. After he had
made reſtitution of the booty to the reſpective owners,
ſeviag only ſome ſmall part to refreſh his army; he
entered the City in great ſtate, which (though in the
ut mot affliction and miſery till that time) ſoon re-
vived upon it, in hopes of recovery, and protection for
the ſuture. This ſucceſs ſpurr'd him on to greater de-
aus; yet, to proceed warily, he confider d, upon the
intelligence he had got from ſugitives and captives,
that ſs great a multitude as the Enemy (compoſed of ſe-
veral nations, and thoſe of a fierce heady temper)
were not to be routed, but by ſtratagem and ſurpriſe.
Having publiſh'd an Act of Indemnity, he order d ail
deſerters and others diſpers'd up and down the country
for proviſion, to repair to him. This brought-in ma-
ny ; upon which reinſorcement, he thought to take the
field, but deferr'd it upon ſeveral accounts, till be could
Civiliss have Civilis ſent to be Deputy-Governour in Britain;
(a man ſomewhat paſſionate, but very juſt and up-
Dulcitius. right ;) and alſo Dulcitius, a gallant Captain and
of great experience in Mur. Afterczards, taking
heart, he went from Auguſta, which the Ancients
cal*d Londinum, with a good army (which he had
raiſed with diligence) and proved a great ſupport to
the finking ſlate of the poor Britains. He took in all
Juch places as might favour him in cutting off the ene-
my by ambuſcade, and impoſed nothing upon the com-
mon ſoldiers, but what himſelf would lead the way to.

Thus, he diſcharged the office of a out Soldier, as
well as of a brave General; and, having defeated ſe-
veral nations, who, preſuming upon the ſecurity they
were under, had the inſolence to invade the Roman
Empire; he laid the foundation of a laſting peace:
rebuilding and repairing the Cities and Caſtles, which
bad been exceedingly damag d. In this juncture, there

happen'd a terrible attempt, which might have been of

Province which was poſſlſed by the enemy, he reſtored

it ſo compleatly to its former ſlate, that f at his mo- + Eodemrel
tion, it had a * lawfal Governor ſet over it, and dc ',.
ajterwards by the Prince order call'd Valentia. The * Rector le
Arcans, an Order of men inftitnted by the ancientsgeere 19045.
diſplaced by him as degenerated into feveral vices, mn
plainly conviited of giving intelligence to the Barba-

rians for reward. For their proper buſineſs was to

run to aud jro betceen our Captains, with the news

of any miſchief they found brewing ia the neighbour-

ing Countries. After theſe and other regulaticas,

made by him with great wiſdom, he was ſent-/or to
Court, leaving the Provinces in ſuch a joyful and
flouriſhing condition, that he was no leſs eminent for his

many and important victories, than Furius Camil- |
lus, or Curſor Papirius. And fo, being attended 1
with the acclamations of all to the ſeuſitie, he ſailed |
over with a gentle gale, and arrived at the Prince's
camp, Where he was received with great joy and com-
mendation. For theſe famous exploits, a ſlatue

on horſe-back was erected in honour cf him, as "

Smmachus, addreſſing himſelt to his fon Theo-
doſius the Emperor, intorms us. The founder of
your ſtock and family, one that was General both in
Africa and Britain, was lonour d by the Scyuate with
Statues on horſe-back among the ancient Heroes, Thus
Claudian likewiſe, in his Commendation,

Ie Caledoniis poſuit qui caſtra pruinis, a7

Qui medio Libye fub caiſtde pertulit æſtus,
Terribilis Maure, debellatorque Britanni
Littoris, ac pariter Borez vaſtator & Anſtri.
Quid rigor aternus ? Celi quid ſydera proſunt?
Inotumque fretum ? maduerunt Saxone fuſo
Orcades, incaluit Pictorum ſanguine Thule,
Scotorum cumulos fle vit glacialts Hiberne.

Brave he, that quell'd the Caledonian toe,
And pitch'd his trozen rents in conſtant ſnow,
That on his faithful creſt undaunted bore
The furious Beams on Lybia's parched ſhore.
How vain's eternal froſt, and angry ſtars, Fl
And ſeas untried by feartul Mariners ? *
The waſted Orkreys Saxon gore o'ertlow'd, 13
And. Thule now grew hot with reeking blcod : 3
Cold Ireland mourn'd her ſlaughter'd ſons in
vain,
And heaps of Scots that cover'd all the plain.
| And

4 Gratian

1 Empe ror,

Maximus t
T ) rai nt,

« 2 mas.

Or ſus.

5 Proſper Thr

© Cregorius 7
© rncnſis,

Celdrenus,

Priſcillian;
Sulpitius |
Verus,

1 Or fits,

PX C:lrenus.

RY ”% as. A. PTA. 9. +. > WP - »

Romans in Britain.

ſucceeded 1n the Empire, who alſo declared
Theodoſius (ſon of the Theodofius before-mention-
ed) Auguſtns, Which was ſo ill taken by Maxi-

EZ 1Mximss the mus his rival (born in Spain, deſcended from

8 Tyrant. Conſtantine the Great, and then commander of
& 7 jms. the Army in Britain) that he ſer up for Empe-
ror himſelf; or, as Oroſius ſays, was againſt

his will greeted Emperor by the ſoldiers. A
man valiant and juſt, and worthy of that ho-
nour, it he had not come to it by uſurpation,

EM! Proſper Thro. and againſt his allegiance. Firſt, he routed the

Pitts and Scots, as they made their inroads; and
then embarking the flower of the Britains, and
arriving at the mouth of the Rhine, he won-
over all the German torces to his party, fixed his
Court at Tiers (whence he was called, Imperator

© Greg ow Tu- Trevericus,) and thence, as Gildas has it, ſtretch-
nen.

ing out his wings, one to Spain, and the other
to Italy, he levied taxes and tribute upon the
moſt barbarous nations in Germany, by the
meer terror of his name. Gratian at laſt took
the field againſt him, but after ſeveral skir-
miſhes for tive days together, was deſerted by
his army, and put to flight. Upon that, he
ſent St. Ambroſe, his Embaſlador, to treat of
peace; which was concluded, but with great
treachery. For Maximus diſpatched away An-
dragathins in a cloſe chariot; ſpreading a report,
that it was Gratian's wife arriv'd from Britain,
Upon this news, Gratian went afeCtionately to
meet her ; bur as ſoon as he open'd the chariot,
Andragathing leap'd out with his gang, and mur-
ther d him. Ambroſius was ſent again to beg
the Body; but was not ſo much as admitted,
becauſe he had refuſed to communicate with
thoſe Biſhops that had ſided with Maximus;
who, exalted with this ſucceſs, had his ſon
Victor declar'd Czſar, puniſhed the Captains
that adher'd to Gratian, and ſettled his affairs
in Gaul.He was alſo acknowledg'd Emperor, at
the requeſt or rather demand of his Embaſſa-
dors, by Theodoſius Auguſtus, who then go-
verned in the Eaſt; by whom alſo his Statue
was publickly ſhown to the Alexandrians. And
now, having made every man's Eſtate his prey,
his Covetouſneſs wrought a general Poverty a-
mong the People. His pretence for tyranny,
Piſcilianiſtæ. WAS, to defend the Catholick Religion. Priſcil-

12 Sulpitius Se- lian, and ſome of his ſect, being convicted of

Verus,

hereſie at the Council of Bourdeaux, and ha-
ving appeal'd to the Emperor, were by him
condemn'd to death; notwithſtanding that
Martin, the Holy Biſhop of Tours, humbly be-

C11
Caen And in another place, concerning the ſame ſought the Emperor to abſtain trom the blood of 1
perſon: thoſe unfortunate People; alledging, that the
ſentence of Excommunication would be a ſuſf-
em littus aduſtæ cient puniſhment, and that it was a thing new,
Horreſcit Lybia, ratibuſque impervia Thule, and unheard of, that a ſecular Judge ſhould
lle leves Mauros, nec jaljo nomine Pic los give ſentence in an Eccleſiaſtical matter: Theſe
Edomuit, Scotumque vago mutrone ſequutus were the firſt, who (to the ill example of after-
Fregit Hyperboreas remis audacibus undas ; ages) were put to death by the Civil power, for
Et geminis fulgens utroque ſub axe trophais, Hereſie. After this, he enter'd Italy in ſuch a
" Tethyos alterna refluas calcavit arenas. formidable manner, that Yalentinian fled with
his mother to Theodofizs, and the Cities of Italy
Scorch'd Lybia's borders tremble at his power, | opened their gates to him, and did him all the
And Thule's clitts that ſcorn the labouring oar. | honours imaginable; particularly, Bononia, x here
He the light Moors in happy war o'ercame, this Inſcription ſtill remains :
And Pitts that vary nothing from their name.
With wandring arms the timorous Scots pur- | DD. NN. MAG. C. MAXIMO, ET FL.
ſu'd, 3 VICIT OKI, PII, FELICIBVS, SEMPER
And plough : with ventrous keels the Nor- AVGVSTIS B. R. NAT IS. * Bono Reipubs
thern flood.
Spurn'd the bold tide, as on the ſand it rowls, In this juncture, the Franks made in- Sun
And fix d his trophies under both the Poles. | roads into Gaul; but Namizs and Quintinus, Alexander.
t two great Captains (to whom Maximus had . eres
Thus, Pacatus Drepanus alſo concerning him. | committed the education of his ſon, and the go- —
* That need 1 mention the Scot, 7 * to his boggs, or | vernment ot Gaul,) repell'd them with great
# Emperor. the Saxon, rum d by ſea-fights ? After him, Gratian | (laughter, forc'd them to give hoſtages, and to

deliver up the authors of the Inſurrection.
Valentinian addreſs'd himſelf to Theodoſius to
relieve him, being thruſt out ot his throne by an
Uſurper ; but he had tor ſome time no more
anſwer than this, That it was no way Hrange te Zonaras.
ſee a ſeditious ſervant ſuperior to that maſter, who had
himſelf rejected his true Lord: For Valentinian
was tainted with Arianiſm. Yet at laſt, atter
much importunity, he ſet out with an army a-
gainſt Maximus, who was then, withour the
leaſt apprehenſion, at Aqrileia ; for he had guard-
ed all the paſſes through the mountains, and ſe-
cured the ſea-coalt with his fleet; and did,
with great reſolution and bravery welcome
Theodoſius with a battle at Siſcia in Pannonia; Zoſmu,
and again with another under the conduct of his
brother Marcellus: but both with ſuch ill ſuc-
ceſs, that he was oblig'd to retreat to Agrileia,
and was there taken by his own ſoldiers (as he
was diſtributing money among them,) and
ſtrip'd of his royal robes, and led to Theodoſius.
By whoſe order he was immediarely put to
death, after he had reign'd five years. Hence,
that of Auſonius, in praiſe of Aquileia :

Non erat iſte locus : merito tamen aufta recenti,
Nona inter claras Aquileia cieberis urbes

Tala ad Illyricos objetta colonia montes,
Manibm & portu celeberrima : fed magis illud
Eminet, extremo quod te ſub tempore legit,
Solverat exatto cui juſta piacula luſtro
Maximus, armigeri quondam ſub nomine lixæ:
Felix qui tanti ſpettatrix lata triumph,
Puniſti Auſonio Rutupinum Marte latronem.

And thou, ſince new deſerts have rais'd thy
name,

Fair Aguileia ſhall't be ninth in fame.

Againſt Illyrian hills thy cliffs are ſhown:

Thy walls and harbour gain theevaſt renown:

Bur this new praiſe ſhall make thee ever

roud, |

That here the Tyrant choſe his laſt abode,

And pay d the vengeance he ſo long had
ow d:

That thou vile Maximus did'ſt laſt receive,

Rais'd to a Monarch from a'Knapſack-ſlave.

Bleſt town! that all that noble triumph
view'd,

And ſaw Rhutupium's thief by Roman arms
ſubdu'd !

Andra-

—
-

C111

Romans in Britain.

Cty

+ Durum.

Procopius.

Honorius
Emp,

Andragat ins finding his condition deſperate,

- threw himſelf over- board into the Sea, Victor,

Maximus's ſon, who was in Gaul; was like-
wiſe routed, taken, and put to death. Ihe
Britains who ſided with Maximus (as ſome
writers ſay) invaded Armorica and ſeated them-
ſelves there. Theodoſius, ſoon after his victo-
ry, enter'd Rome with his ſon Honorius, in tri-
umph, and made an Edict, That no perſon ſpould
challenge any honour conferr'd by the Brant; but
ſhould be reduced to his former ſtate, and not preſume
to claim more, Valentinian likewiſe ; A Editts
of Maximus, the worſt of tyrants, we repeal,
Ambroſius, at the funeral of Theodoſius, had
this ſaying; Maximus and Eugenius are wretched
inſtances now in hell, how | dangerous it is. to rebel
again? a lawful Prince. In a word, this victory
was thought ſo great and memorable, that the
Romans od thence-forward made that day a
yearly feſtival. a
Theodoſiis was ſucceeded in the weſt by his ſon
Honorius, a boy of ten years old ; who was
committed to the tuition of Flavius Stilico, a
>rſon of great eminence : He had accompanied
heodoſius in all his wars and victories; and
was by him gradually rais'd to the greateſt Ot-
fices in the army, and permitted to marry into
the Imperial family : yet, cloy'd with this ſuc-
ceſs, and falling into ambitious attempts, he
made a miſerable end. For ſome years, he at-
tended the affairs of the Empire with great di-
ligence, and ſecur'd Britain againſt the Picts,

Scots, and Saxons. Hence that of Claudian,

making Britain ſay,

Me quoque vicinis pereuntem gentibus, inquit,
Munivit Stilico, totam quum Scotus Hybernem
Movit, & infeſto ſpumavit remige Thetis.
Ilins effeflum curis, ne bella timerem

Scotica, nec Pittum tremerem, nec littore toto
Proſpicerem dubiis venientem Saxona ventis.

And I ſhall ever own his happy care,

Who ſav'd me ſinking in unequal war.

When Scots came thundring from the Iriſh
ſhores,

And th* Ocean trembled, ſtruck with hoſtile
oars.

Secur'd by him, nor Scottiſh rage I mourn,

Nor fear again the barbarous Pics return.

No more their veſſels, with the dubious tide,

To my ſafe ports the Saxon pirates guide.

At that time Britain ſeems to have been ſafe
from all Enemies; for in another place of the
ſame Poet, it is ſaid,

domito quod Saxena Thetis
Mitior, aut fratto ſecura Britannia Pitts.

That ſeas are free, ſecur'd from Saxon power,
And Picts once conquer'd, Britain fears no
more.

And when Alaric, King of the Goths,
threaten'd Rome, the Legion which was garri-
ſon'd in the frontiers againſt the Barbarians,
was drawn from hence ; as Claudian in his ac-
count of the ſupplies ſent- for from all quarters,
ſeems to intimate:

Venit & extremis legio prætenta Britannis,
Quæ Scoto dat frana truci, ferroque notatas
Perlegit exanimes Picto moriente figuras.

Here met the Legion, which in Britain laid,
That curb'd the fiery St, and oft ſurvey'd
Pale ir'n- burnt figures on the dying Pitts.

4

About this time, flouriſt*d Faſtidizs, Biſhop Fan,
of the Britains, who wrote ſeveral Books iu Genadiu,
Divinity, very learned and worthy fo high ag
ſubject : as allo Chryſanthus, ſon of Martin the Neth,
Biſhop ; who, having been under Theodofius a
* Conſular Deputy in Italy, was made Vice-* ce

erent in Britain; where he was ſo much and /talis, *
ſo dzſervedly extoll'd and admir'd for his admi-
niſtration, that againſt his will he was made Bi-
ſhop of the Novatians at Conſtantinople. "Theſe
people began a ſchiſm in the Church, and were |
called f Cathari, and had their peculiar Biſhops, + f. . Pur

and were 8 a 2 ect; obſtinately, "4
bur impiouſly, denying, That any one relapſing in- , i
to fin after baptiſm, could be reſtor d to a 2 40 Hine i
vation. This is that Biſhop, who (as we read) =
was wont to take no more of the Church-re-
venues for his own uſe, than two loaves every
Sunday.

As the Roman intereſt began to decline in the
welt, and the barbarous nations on all hands to
break into the Provinces on the continent ; the
Britiſh army, to prevent their being involv'd
in the like broils, and conſidering the neceſſity
there was of a brave Emperor for repelling the
Barbarians, proceeded to the Choice. Fir, SS
They choſe Marcus, and obey'd him as Emperor Marcus Em EL
of thoſe parts. He, not anſwering their hu- |
mour and expectation, was put to death ; and
then they ſet up Gratian, a f country-man of Gratian En,
their own ; and, having put the royal robes and + Municzz«
crown upon him, attended him as their Prince; G.
but falling into a diſlike of him too, they de- en
throned him after a reign of four months, and _
put him to death. Next, they choſe Conſtan- Conſtantine
tine, one of the common ſoldiers, ſolely on the EP:
account of his name, as attended with a good
omen. For, from the very name of Conſtantine,
they had conceiv'd moſt certain hopes, that he
would rule with courage and ſucceſs, and de-
feat the Barbarians; as Conſtantine the Great
had done, who was alſo made Emperor in Bri-
tain. This Conſtantine ſetting ſail from hence,
arrived at Bologn in Gaul, and eaſily drew in the
whole Roman army as far as the Alps, to ſide
with him. He detended Yalentia in Gaul with
great bravery, againſt the forces of the Emperor
Honorius ; and tortity'd the Rhine, which had
for a long time been neglected, with garriſons.
He alſo built Forts to command the paſles of the
Cottian, Pennine, and Maritime Alps. In Spain,
by the conduct of his ſon Conſtans (who of a
Monk, was now made Auguſtus) affairs were
likewiſe carry'd on with ſucceſs : and, upon his
excuſing himſelf by letter to Honorius for ſuffer-
ing the Soldiers to caſt the Purple upon him,
Honorius preſented him with an Imperial Robe.
This exalted him fo much, that having paſſed
the Alps, he thought of marching to Rome;
but upon the news, that Alarick the Goth was
dead (who was a great promoter of his intereſt)
he went back to Arles; where he fix'd the ſeat of
the Empire, commanding it to be called the City
Conſtantina, and cauſing a Convention of ſeven
Provinces to be held therein. His ſon Conſtans
was ſent for out of Spain, that they might con-
cert their common aftairs. Conſtans, teaving his 5
Princeſs and the * furniture of his Court at, , 2...»
Sarragoſa, and committing Spain to the care of u aue.
Gerontius, went ſtreight to his father. When
they had been together many days, and no dan-
ger was apprehended from Italy ; Conſtantine,
giving himſelf up wholly to luxury, command-
ed his ſon to return to Spain. But the Son ha-
ving ſent away his Attendants before, while he
ſaid behind with his father; news was brought
from Spain by Gerontius, that Maximus

F
5

x ;cepbor.
- alliſtus.

*

(one of his ſervants) was made Emperor, and
2 that

„ Ml. FTP" 3a tt. the.

— * r 8 * .
— ah

—
_—

ad.

Romans in Britain.

cvi

i. e. p

1e Trip.
- Hitter, .

.

4

_—

3. * 1

. epbor

« 11 *

ent Ew j
tian Em,
asian, Go-
rrour in
riain.
Panting
p ·

Leſ mus.

ault.

r
8 — 1 $ *

8 © p "Fa 4 * 0 F- N 5
/ NE
n

that he was preparing to advance againſt him

at the head of the Barbarians. Upon this ill
news, Conſtans, with Decimius Ruſticus, who from
Maſter of the Offices was now preferred to be
a Preſet) having ſent Edoleccus before to the
German nations, march'd towards Gaul with
the Franks and Almans, and the other forces,
intending ſpeedily to return to Conſtantine.
But Conſtans was intercepted and put to death
at Nene in Gaul by Gerontius, who alſo be-
ſieged Conſtantine himſelf in Arles. Honorius
ſending one Conſtantius to his relief, put Gerontius
in ſuch a conſternation, that he ran way ; which
{o enraged his ſoldiers, that they inveſted his
houſe, and reduc'd him to ſuch ſtraits, that
firſt he beheaded his faithful friend Alanus, and
then Nunnichia his wife (upon her requeſt to die
with him ;) and laſt of all, laid violent hands
upon himſelf. Conſtantine, upon the cloſeneſs
ot the ſiege and the unhappy Engagement of
Edoleccus, began to deſpair ; and, after he had
held out four months, and reigned four years,
threw off the Imperial robes, and the burthen
that attended them: Then he took upon him the
Order of Presbyter, ſurrender'd Arles, was
carried into Italy, and beheaded, together with
his ſon Julian (to whom he had given the title
of Nobiliſimus) and his brother Sebaſtian. From
that time, Britain returned to the Government
of Honorius; and was happy for a while under
the wiſe and gallant conduct of Vittorinzs, who
then governed the Province, and put a ſtop to
the inroads of the Picts and Scots. In commen-
dation of him, Rutilius Claudius has theſe
verſes, very worthy of their author:

Conſcins Oceanis virtutum, conſcia Thule,
Et quacunque ferox arva Britanws arat.

Qua prafettorum vicibus franata poteſtas
Perpetuum magni fœmus amoris habet.

Extremum pars illa quidem diſceſſit in orbem,
Sed tanquam medio rector in orbe fuit.

Plus palms eſt illos inter voluiſſe placere,
Inter quos minor ef diſplicuiſſe pudor.

Him Thule, him the vanquiſh'd Ocean knows,

And thoſe vaſt fields the fiery Britain ploughs.

2 their power where yearly Prætects

ar

A bleſt increaſe of love rewards his care.

Tho* that great part another world had
ſhown,

Yer he both worlds as eaſie rul'd as one.

"Tis nobler gentle methods there to uſe,

Where rougheſt means would merit juſt
excuſe.

Alarick having taken Rome, Honorius re-
call'd Victorinus with the army; upon which
the Britains took up arms, and ſeeing all at
ſtake, reſcued their cities, and repell'd the Bar-
barians. All the country of Armorica, and the
other Provinces of Gaul, follow d their exam-
ple, and reſum'd their freedom; caſting out
the Roman Governours, and forming themſelves
into diſtin& Common-wealths, according to
ſuch models, as each thought beſt. This rebellion

of Britain and the Celtick Nations, wo.) js ft

at the ſame time that Conſtantine uſurp'd the
Empire; when by his negle& and ſupineneſs,
the Barbarians were encourag'd to inſult the
Provinces. Yet, a little while after, rhe cities
of Britain apply'd themſelves earneſtly to Hono-
rius for aid; in anſwer to which, he ſent them
no ſupplies, but only a Letter, exhorting them
to take heart and defend themſelves. 'The Bri-
tains, animated by this letter of Honorius, took
up arms accordingly to defend their cities ; but

--

1

being over- powerd by the Barbarians (who
from all quarters eame in upon them) they ſent
their earneſt requeſt to Honorius the Goon

time, to ſpare them one Legion. This, he iftoria Mit-
their arrival, they cella.

granted them, and, u
routed a great body of the enemy, drove the
reſt out of the Province, and caſt up an carthen
wall between the Frith of Edenburgh and the

Cluid; which yet prov'd of very little uſe. For,
no ſooner was the Legion recali'd to defend

Gaul, but the Barbarians return'd, and eaſily
broke through this frontier, and with great out-
rage plunder'd and deſtroy'd all before them.
Again, they ſent their Embaſſadors, with cloaths
rent and ſand upon their bare heads (obſerve
the manner,) to beg aſſiſtance of the Romans.

Upon this, three f companies under the con- + Militares

duct of Gallio of Ravenna were ſent by Va- ange.

lentinian ; and theſe likewiſe routed the Barba- 72% Raves

rians, and in ſome meaſure reſcu'd the Pro-

vince from its preſent Calamity. They alſo made Gildas-

a wall, not lite the other, but of ſtone, at the pul-
lick and private cha;ge, with the labour of the poor
ratives ; built aſier the uſual manner, and running

quite croſs the country from the one ſeu to the other, by 3 the
outh of

thoſe cities that were caſually built there again# the

enemy : They exhorted them to be couragions, and leſt Eden

them patterns to male their weapons by. Upon the * Inftituendo-

South-coaſt of Britain, where their ſhips lay (becauſe rum Armo-

a deſcent of. the Barbarians was aljo apprehended {rom v um.

that quarter) they bailt turrets at ſome diſtuuce from
one another, which lool d a lung way into the ſea ;
and ſo the Romans, intending to returi wo more, tock
their laſt farewell.

Now was the ſtate of affairs, on all hands,
miſerable and deſperate : 'The Empire (like a
Body lame and decrepit) ſinking under the
weight of old Age; and the Church grievoully
peſter'd with Hereticks, whoſe poy ſons ſpread
moſt ſucceſsfully in times of war. One of
theſe, was Pelagins, a Britain born, who deroga-
ting trom the Grace of God, taught this Iſland,

That perſect righteouſneſs was to be attain'd by works. Sigib. Pembl,

Another, was Timothezs; who blaſphemouſſy aa. 428.

diſputed againſt the Divinity and Jucarnation of
our Saviour.

Now did the Roman Empire in Britain ex- Chronicon

pire, in the four hundred ſeventy ſixth year from Anglo-Saxon,

Cælar's coming over. In the reign ot Y/alenti-
nian III. the Roman Forces were embark'd by
Gallio (whom we mention'd before) tor the de-
fence of Gaul; and, having buried their trea-
ſures, and bereft Britain ot her youth by fre-

uent muſters, they left her incapable of de-
tending herſelf, and a prey to the barbarcus
Picts and Scots. So that Proſper Aquitanus truly
ſays, At this time, through the Roman weakneſs, the
ſtrength and vigour of- Britain wvas totally exhauſted.
And our Malmsbury-Hiſtorian : When the B-
rants had left none but half-foreigners in our fields,
none but gluttcns and debauchees in our cities ; Britain,
robb'd of the ſupport of her vigorous youth, and the
benefit of the liberal, Arts, became a prey to her neige
bours, who had long mark'd her out jor deſtruttion.
For immediately after, multitudes lo;t their lives by
the incurfiens of the Pitts and Scots, villages were
burnt, cities demoliſh'd, and all things laid waſte by
re and ſword. The Iahabitants of the Mand were
greatly perplex'd, and thought it better to truſt to auy
thing, than a battle: ſome of them fled to the moun-
tains ; others having buried their treaſures (many of
which have been diug-up in our age) becook tlemſelves
to Rome jor aſſiſtance. But as Nicephorus truly
ſtares the matter, Val:ntinian the Third, not oaly
could not recover Britain, Spain, and Gaul, which
were rent from his Empire; but he lof# Africa too.
It was not withour reaſon therefore, that Gil-

das cried out at that time: Britain is rod of her
0 military

— e
— —
—— —

— r PX FO TY

cvii Romans in Britain.

military forces, of her Rulers (barbarors as they werey) |
and of her numerous youth. For, beſides thoſe |
whom Maximilian the Uſurper and the laſt

Conſtantine, drew off ; it is plain, from ancient
Inſcriptions and the Notitia, that the 3
forces were in the ſervice of the Romans; diſ-

pers'd through the Provinces, and continually |

recruited from Britain:

Ala Britannica Milliaria

Ala IIII. Britonum in Ægypto.

Cohors Prima Alia Britonum.

Cohors III. Britonum.

Cohors VII. Britonum.

Cohors XX VI. Britonum in Armenia.
Britanniciani ſub Magiſtro peditum.
Invicti juniores Britanniciani j inter auxilia
Exculcatores jun. Britan. Palatina.
Britones cum Magiſtro Equitum Galliarum.
Invitti Juniores Britones intra Hiſpanias.
Britones Seniores in IAhrico.

No wonder then, that Britain was expos'd to
the Barbarians, when ſo many and ſuch conſi-
derable forces were daily drawn away into fo-
reign parts : which confirms that remarkable
truth in Tacitus, That there was no ſtrength iu the
Roman armies, but what came from abroad.

Whilſt I rreat of the Roman Empire in Bri-
tain (which laſted, as I ſaid, about 476 years,)
it comes into my mind how many Colonies of
Romans muſt have been tranſplanted hither in
ſolong a time ; what numbers of ſoldiers were
continually ſent from Rome, for Garriſons ;
how many Perſons were diſpatch'd hither, to
negotiate aftairs, publick or private; and that
theſe, inter-marrying with. the Britains, ſeated
themſelves here, and multiplied into Families:
For. where-ever (ſays Seneca) the Roman conquers,

8 he inhabits. So that I have oft-times concluded,

tan ar de. that the Britains might derive themſelves from

riv d from the the Trojans by theſe Romans (who doubtleſs

Trojans, deſcended from the Trojans,) with greater pro-
bability, than either the Arverni, who from Tro-
jan Blood ſtiled themſelves brethren to the Ro-
mans, or the Mamertini, Hedui, and others, who
upon fabulous grounds grafred themſelves
into the Trojan ſtock. For — that common
Mother (as one calls her) challenges all ſuch as
citizens

Quos domuit, nexuque pio longinqua revinxit.

Whom conquer'd ſhe in ſacred bonds hath

tied.

And it is eaſie to believe, that the Britains and
Romans, by a mutual engrafting for ſo many
ages, have incorporated into one Nation. ;
ſince the Ubii in Germany, but twent
eight years after their Colony was land,
made this anſwer with reſpe& to the Romans

there: This is the proper country of thoſe who were Tacitus ll
tranſplanted hither ; thoſe who have married among hilt,

iu, and the iſſue of thoſe marriages. Nor can we
think you ſo wicked or unjuſt, that you would have
us murder our own Parents, Brethren, and Children.
It the Ubii and the Romans, in ſo ſhort a ſpace,
were come to the relation of Parents, Brethren,
and Children; what ſhall we think of the Britains
and Romans, who aſſociated for ſo great a num-
ber of years? What may we ſay of | the Bri-
tains, compared with] the Burgundians, Who,
from a tincture of their blood (during a ſhort
abode in the Roman Provinces) call'd themſelves

the of pring of the Romans? Not to repeat Amy,

what I have already ſaid, that this Iſland was
call'd Romania, and the Roman Iſland. *

Thus much (all fictions a- part) I have ſum-
marily obſerv'd out of the ancient monuments
of Antiquity, touching the Roman Govern-
ment in Britain, their Lieutenants, Proprætors,
Preſidents, Vicegerents, and Rectors. But I
could have done it more fully and accurately,
had Auſonius kept his promiſe, to enumerate all,
who

Aut Ialum populos, Aquilonigenaſque Britannes
Præſecturarum titulo tenuere ſecundo.

In Italy or Britaius Northern ſhore,
The Præfect's honour with ſucceſs have bore.

Since it is agreed among the learned, that an-
cient Coins do very much contribute to the un-
derſtanding of ancient Hiſtories ; I thought it
not amiſs to preſent the Reader with ſome
Pieces (as well of the Britains, whofirſt ſtoop'd
to the Roman Yoke, as of ſome Roman Em-
perors who had more immediate relation to Bri-
tain) out of the Collection of the famous
Sir Robert Cotton of Connington ; who with great
diligence made that Collection, and with his
wonted kindneſs and humanity did communi-
cate them to me,

C O N-

. Af

mga ů — o
— — — — ä — — Ca frm
— — * * mu 4 9 * 51 — 3 non
= — ——— = —ͤ—I4. — — — —ñ—— 9 - 2 — / :
- —— Ä 8 — — — __ _ * 1 22 Es — a — — ov”
e ——é— . ⁵˙ NN . Do * —_ *. — ——— — — — - — tn ESE |
_— © PLS 8 — — A nog. << _ A OO CO TIT Oo er — —— — wm — i, AT FS Ip * _—_ : PE ——_— PR
_— — | — —— — ——— — — . A
— — — tc — —— — — —_— — AAA oe en—_— — — — —— —— — — — 7 IR ms
— — — <a - — IT 1 3 —— ——
* Sr K — * — — 1
2 — — — — *
444 ĩ 2 TOY Ge Een ons oe
* *
*
*
o
—
—
* - > - V
1 *
-
_—_
a \ 15
'*
*
0 £
1 0 2
4
*
.
| 4
. ,
CLE
| = 2”
:
0 -
1 N
.
*
- *

7
fe.
i
i

'
4
:

reel. lis,

me.

D

* ”
„ + %*

e, Den;

þ

et

57 7 1

+ Fo ſaid
ann, 160

,

CX

+ & ſaid.
ann, 1607,

eee ses

e

3
Sc S

CONIECTURES

UPON THE

5 r is probable, you will
expect that I ſhould make
ſome ſhort remarks upon
the Coins which I have
here repreſented. Burt for
my part, I freely declare
my ſelf at a loſs, what
to ſay to things ſo much
obſcur'd by age ; and,
you, When you read theſe conjectures, will
3 perceive that I have grop'd in the
r

I have obſerv'd before from Cæſar, that the
ancient Britains uſed braſs-money, or rings, or
plates of iron by weight; and thereare thoſe who
affirm, that they have found ſome of theſe in
urns. Beſides which, there are found in this
Iſland, Coins of gold, filyer, and braſs, of ſe-
veral ſhapes and weight ; moſt of them hollow
on one ſide : ſome without letters, others with
letters curiouſly engraved. And I could never
hear that ſuch were dug-up in other Countries ;
till f of late, Nicholas Faber Petraſcius (a noble
young Gentleman of Provence in France ; who

great knowledge and ſagacity in the Study
of Coins,) ſhewed me ſome ſuch, that had been
found in France. But to come to thoſe which
I have here given you.

The firſt 1s Cunobeline's, who flouriſh'd under
2 and Tiberius; upon which (if 1

iſtake not) are engraven the head of Janus,
poſſibly, becauſe at that time Britain began to
be a little refined from its barbarity. For Janus
is ſaid to have firſt chang d barbarity into hu-
manity; and for that reaſon, to be painted
with two faces, as having in effect chang'd the
ſame viſage into ether im,

If it be a Janus (ſays Mr. Walker) I had ra-
ther apply it to the ſhutting of Janus s Temple
by Auguſtus; in whoſe time Cunobeline lived at
Rome; and both himſelf and the Britains were
benefited by that general peace. But I fear,
that is not the head of Janus; for the faces up-
on his Temple and Coins were divers, one old,
the other young ; but this ſeems made for two
young women's faces, whether Cunobeline's wives,
ſiſters, or children, I know not. |

The ſecond likewiſe is Cunobeline s, with his
face and name; and on the reverſe the mint-
maſter, with the addition of the word TASCIA ;
which in Britiſh ſignifies a Tribute-Penny (as
I am inform'd by David Powel, a perſon admi-
rably skill'd in that language ;) ſo call'd, per-
haps, from the Latin Taxatio; for the Britains
do not uſe the letter X. And on the ſame ac-

Britiſh CO IN S.

82 we often ſee Moneta upon the Roman
ins. |

The third is alſo the ſame Cunobeline s, with a
horſe and CUNO ; and with an ear of corn, and
CAMV. which ſeems to ſtand for Camalodunum,
the 2 of Cunobeline.

[I conceive (ſays Mr. Walker) the horſe was
ſo frequently - ſtamped upon their Coins, be-
cauſe of their extraordinary goodneſs in this
country (the like is upon divers Cities and
Provinces in Gallia:) or, to ſhew, that they
were, in their own opinion, excellent horſe-
men. The Boar alſo, and Bull, were Emblems
of ſtrength, courage, and fierceneſs : and I find
that anciently the Romans uſed for their En-
ſigns, horſes, wolves, bears, &c. till Cains Marius's
third Conſulſhip, who then firſt ordained rhe
Eagle only to be the ſtanding Enſign of the
Legions : as Trajan, after the Dacian War, ſer
up Dragons for Enſigns of the Cohorrs.

The fourth, by the VER, ſhould ſeem to
have been coin'd at Verulam.

The fifth likewiſe, is Cunobeline's.

The ſixth, having no Inſcription, I know no-
thing of.

The horſe (as Mr. Walker thought) ſeems
faſten'd by one fore and the oppoſite hinder-foot,
to ſome weight; as if it ſignified the inventi-
on of one of their Princes, to teach them ſome
pace or motion. The wheel under him, a-
mongſt the Romans, intimated the making of
an High-way for Carts : So many of which be-
ing in the Romans time made in this country,
well deſerved ſuch a memorial. |

The ſeventh, which is Cunobelin's, with
this Inſcription Taſe Novanei, and a woman's
head, I dare not directly affirm to have been the
Tribute-money of the Trinovantet, who were
under his government. Mr. Walker thinks,
the Novanei may denote ſome unknown City in

the Dominion of Cunobeline. | || Apollo with his || Reverſe, a
harp and the name of Cunobeline on the reverſe, #2 and Wolf

bring

concorporated

to my mind what I have ſomewhere ob- n, Mr. Wal-

ſerv'd of the God Belinus; namely, that the ker.

ancient Gauls worſhip'd Apollo under the name
of Belinus. And this is confirmed by Dioſco-
rides; who expreſly ſays, that the Herba Apolli-
naris (in the juice whereof the Gauls uſed to
dip their arrows) was call'd in Gauliſh
Belinuntia. From which I durſt almoſt make
this inference, that the name of - Cunobeline,
as alſo that of Caſſibilin, came originally
from the worſhip of Apollo; as well as Phebitius
and Delphidius. Unleſs one ſhould rather ſay,
that as Apollo, for his yellow hair, was called by

a 8 — ted. tt

Britiſh

COINS.

—

cxu

8.
+ Zſedarius
Equus,

10.

11.

12.

—

the Greeks Zatde, and by the Latins Haus;
ſo he was call'd by the Britains and Gauls, Be-
lin: Since a man of a yellow complexion, is in
Britiſh call'd Meliz, Belin, Felin; and for that
reaſon, the ancient names of Belin, Cunobelin,
and Caſſibelin (called alſo Caſſivellaun,) ſeem
to import as much as Tellow Princes. For
the Britains tell you, that CUNO is a
name of dignity ; and at this day they call
a thing that 1s principal or chief, Cynoc. That it
was 2 term of honour, is evident from Cungeto-
rix, Cunobelinus, Cuneglaſus, Cuneda, and Cuneda-
gius, among the Britains; and Cyngetorix, Convitto-
litanus, and Conteodunus, among the ancient Gauls:
all, names of Princes. And I know too, that
tho' Gildas renders Cuneglaſus in Latin Lanio
fulvus or furvus, i. e. a deep yellow or black
butcher, yet he is called by others a sy or g/aſs-
colour'd Prince: as they alſo interpret Cuneda, a
good Prince. But that the German Koning,
and our King, came from this Cuno, I have yet
no ground to believe. In the mean time, I am

content to have ſported thus far in a variety of

Conjectures only, that I might not, by being po-
ſitive, make my ſelf a ſport to others.

The eighth has a f Chariot-horſe with a
wheel underneath ; and, by the BODVO on
the reverſe, ſeems to have belong'd to the peo-
ple of the Boduni, or to Queen Bodicia ; called
alſo Veadicia, and Bunduica.

The ninth, is one on horſe-back with a ſpear
and ſhield ; and CAERATIC in ſcattered let-
ters: from which I ſhould guels it to be a Coin
of that warlike Caratacus, fo much commended
by Tacitus.

[The Britains (ſaith Mr. Walker) called him
Caradauc, and gave him the Epithets Hic frue,
ſtrong-arms. Burt others read it Epatica ; which
may keep its native ſigniſication, ſince we find
Parſly, the Palm, Vine, Myrtle, Cynoglefſum,
Laſerpitium, and other plants, ſometimes figured,
ſometimes only named, upon Coins ; as you

may ſee in Spaxhemins. |

The tenth, on one ſide whereof is written
REX under a man on horſeback, and COM
on the other ; ſeems to me and others to be a
Coin of Comius Atrebatenſis, whom Ca ſar men-
tions. [But (ſays Mr. Walker) I cannot con-
ceive this to have been Comius, made by Cæſar
King of the Arrebates (Arras ;) becauſe he
ſeems not to have had any power in Britain,
where the greateſt part of his ſtay was in pri-
ſon; and ar his return into his own country he
headed a rebellion againſt the Romans. Be-
ſides, in other Coins it is Comm. which either
ſignifies that ſome City, or other Community,
coined it; or that it was ſtamped in the time
of Commodus the Emperor. For I cannot think
that it ſignified Commorus ; by Gregorius Tu-
ronenſis, or Venantius Fortunatus, named Duke
of Britannia Armorica. A. C. 5 50.

The eleventh, which has on it a little half-
moon with this Inſcription REX CALLE,
may well relate to Calena, a famous City.

The tweltth has a winged head, with the
word ATEVLA ; and on the Reverſe a Lion,
with this Inſcription VLATOS. All my en-
quiry after the meaning of theſe words, has
been in vain. Only, I have ſeen the Goddeſs
Victoria in the very ſame figure upon the Ro-
man Coins; but do not yet find that the Bri-
rains ever called Victory ATEVLA. That
they nam'd Victory Andate, I have already ob-
ſerv*d from Dio; but whether that was the ſame
with ANDARTA, who was worthip'd by the
Vecontii in Gaul, Ileave to the judgment of others.

Here alſo you ſee the thirteenth, with the
word DIAS in a Pentagon ; and on the reverſe,
a horſe. |

[This G 8 Mr. Walker, who ſpeaks cf it as
an Oftogen) ſeems to have been the Coin of à
Chriſtian Prince; for by it the Chriſtians an-
ciently figured the Font for baptiſm. In Gruter's

Inſcriptions f are verſes of St. Ambroſe, upon + Pay, 1144

the Font of St. Tecla,

Oftogonus fons ef# munere dignus eo.
Hoc numero decuit ſacri baptiſmatis aul.um
Surgere, quo populo vera ſalus rediit.

The Font an Ottogon, - deſerves the ho-
nour.

A number, which befits that ſacred Veſſel,

Wherein Salvation is rc{:or*d to Man.

And it is a common obſervation, that as fox
was the number of Antichriſt, fo c, of true
Chriſtianity. ]

The fourteenth, with a hog, and this inſeri
ten VANOC; and the head of a Goddels,

poſſibly of Venn, or of f Venutius, mentioned + So, Heel

by Tacitus, | as a valiant King of the Brigantes,
and married to Cartiſmandua, who betray ed the
noble and gallant Caractacus. Mr. Walker
thinks the other fide to be a wolf and boar, tuo
fierce beaſts joyned together, and the head of a
rown or city, and fo Yano Civit.\

The fifteenth, a head with a helmet upon it,
and DVRNACO ; but whether he was that
Dumnacus, a Prince of the Andes, whom Cæſar
mentions, 1 know not. | Durnacum (favs
Mr. Walker) is the City of Tourna), and the
head is, as they uſually decipher Cities.

The ſixteenth, with a horſe, and ORCE TI,
[which (ſays Mr. Walker) it rightly ſpell'd, is
ſome City unknown to us. On the other ſide;
is a Woman's head.]

The ſeventeenth, the Image of Auguſtus, and
Taſcia ; on the reverſe, a bull puſhing.

The eighteenth, CV NO within a laurei
Crown ; and on the reverſe, a horſe, with
TASCE.

I have likewiſe ſeen another with Pegaſus and
CAMV ; and on the reverſe, a man's head
with an helmet, and a ſhield between ears of
corn, and CVNO. Another, with a horſe ill-
ſhap'd, and EISV, perhaps ISVRIVS; and on
the reverſe, an ear of corn. Another, a ſoldier
with a ſpear; and on the reverſe, between a
wreath or chain, SOLIDV. I cannot believe,
that it was the piece of money called Solidus,
which in that age was always gold; whereas this
is ſilver. It may with greater probability be re-

terr'd to the Solidurii ; for ſo the ancient Gauls Solidarii.
called thoſe t who had reſolved to live and die + Vires der
together. The terms were theſe, That they tet. Caf. Gn:

ſhould enjoy all the advantages of lite in common;
and that it violence was ofter'd to any of them,

they ſhould either joyn in the ſame fortune, or

kill themſelves. Nor was there ever any ot
theſe, that retuſed to die, atter the party was

flain to whole friendſhip he had ſo devoted him

lelf. Whether Soldiers, who as ſtipendiaries
are devoted to ſome Prince or State, and are
call'd in ſeveral nations of Eurore almoſt by the
ſame name, Soldiers, Soldats, Soldades, &c. whe-
ther theſe (I ſay) had their name from the Sol-
durii, is a point which I had rather recommend
to the conſideration of others, than determin
my ſelf. Tho' I am inclin'd to another opinion,
that they were call'd Solidarii in after ages, to
diſtinguiſh them from ſuch as by reaſon of their
Feudal tenures, ferv'd without the ſolidi or
ay.

Whether this ſort of money paſs'd currant in
the way of trade and exchange, or was at firſt
coiu'd tor ſome ſpecial uſe; is a queſtion among
the

—

1

15.

16.

17.
18.

„ ̃ . 2 a 1 ] ů w! 1]. !) ],

5 + Pro Tributo
2 Capitationts, |

el.

der

Cn.

FBriiſb COIN BM

as. 1 4

cxiv

the learned. My opinion (if I may be allow'd

to interpoſe it) is this. After Cæſar had ap-

pointed how much tribute ſhould be paid year-
ly by the Britains, and they were oppreſs'd
Grandin Auguſtus) with the payment of f Cu-
ſtoms, both for exporting and importing com-
modities; and had by degrees othet taxes laid
upon them, namely for * corn-grounds, plantations,
groves, paſturage of greater and 75 cattle; as be-
ing now in the condition of ſubjetts, not of

ſlaves : I have thought that ſuch Coins were

firſt ſtamp'd for theſe uſes ; for greater cattle,
with a horſe ; for leſſer, with a hog; for woods,
with a tree; and for corn- ground, with an ear of
corn; as that of Verulam or St. Albans, which
is inſcrib'd VERV. But thoſe with a Mans

1 + Pro Tributo head, ſeem to have been coined t for Poll-money,
piano. which was perſonal, or laid upon the Head of
8 every ſingle perſon; upon women, at twelve,

and upon men, at fourteen years of age. Which
Bunduica or Boadicia,
complains of to her ſubjects in theſe words: Te
graze and ye plow for the Romans ; nay, ye pay an
annual tribute for your very bodies. I have thought,
that in old time there was a certain ſott of mo-
mey coin'd on purpoſe for this uſe ; ſeeing in
Scripture it is called expreſly the Tribute-monty,
and Heſychius interprets it, x, d43&- ryloual®
iTixiqaaaie; 1. e. Cenſus, a certain piece of money
paid for every head. And I am the more confirm'd
in this opinion, becauſe in ſome of them there
is the Mint-maſter ſtamping the money, with
TASCIA, which among the Britains ſignifies
a Tribute-penny. Not but I grant, that after-
wards theſe came into common uſe. Nor can I
reconcile my ſelf to the judgment of thoſe, who
would have the hog, the horſe, the ear, the Ja-
nus, & c. to be the Arms of particular People,
or Princes; ſince we find by the foregoing
Coins, that one and the ſame Prince and People
us d ſeveral of theſe, as Cunobeline ſtamp'd upon
= coins a hog, a horſe, an ear, and other
ings.

But whether this Tribute- money was coined
by the Romans, or the Provincials, or theirKings,
when the whole world was tax'd by Auguſtus ;
I cannot ſay. One may gueſs them to have been
ſtamp'd by the Britiſh Kings ; ſince Britain,
from the time of Julius Cæſar to that of Clau-
dius, liv'd under its own Laws, and was left to
be govern'd by its own Kings; and ſince alſo
they have ſtamp'd on them the effigies and titles
of Britiſh Princes. For it was a receiv'd cu-
ſtom among the Romans, to have Kings as
their inſtuments of ſlavery ; who, as they were
in ſome meaſure the Allies of the Romans, by
degrees (as is uſual for the conquer'd) fell in-
to their cuſtoms, and ſeem to have begun to
coin their money by the Roman methods and
weights ; and to ſtamp their own names upon
it. But we find a contrary inſtance in Judza,
as gather'd from our Saviour's Anſwer, That
they had Cæſar's Image and Superſcription, and
therefore were probably coin'd by the Romans.
Which Cardinal C. Baronius, a moſt admirable
Eccleſiaſtical Hiſtorian, tells us in theſe words :
It was a cuſtom among the Romans, that money
Should be coin d by the Emperors according to the tribute
or tax, and ſhould not always keep the ſame Standard ;
but riſe or fall in proportion to the increaſe or decreaſe
of tributes. It differed herein from common money,
that this had always the ſame value, but the tax or
tribute-money was alter'd according to the different
quality of the tribute : Tho ſome learned men do
not agree with Baronius in this point.

Britiſh

Queen of the Britains, |

[CONJECTURES
UPON THE |
COIN S,
Which are added
To thoſe of Mr. CA M D EN.
By Mr. ALTER.

1

14 B. I.

HE Coins which follow, are partly out of

Speed's Hiſtory, partly from other friends.
Before we come to the particulars, I deſire to
premiſe in general,

I. That we find very little mention of the
Britains, or their affairs, till Julius Cæſar; who
left a brief but material deſcription of the
country and people, and of their manners and

oms ; particularly, concerning their traffick,

and the great inſtrument of it, money: Which,
he ſaith, was not Coin, but rings and pieces of
braſs and iron, deliver'd out by weight ; as it
was alſo in the beginning at Rome. So that
they had no mark upon their metals of ex-
change ; which ſeems ſomewhat odd, ſeeing the
invention is ſo eaſie, ready, and uſeful for hu-
man converſation. But eſpecially, ſince in
Abraham's time, coined or ſtamped money was
current amongſt merchants, and called by a
particular name, Hebel, taken (it may be) from
the weight of it. And Jacob is ſaid to have
given or paid to Hemor, father of Sichem, for
part of a field, centum agnos ; which is inter-

explained, centum mage nummos, tried pieces.
This ignorance, I ſay, is ſtrange ; except we
affirm the Tranſmigration of the Predeceſſors of
the Britains, to have been before Abraham's
time, from the Northern parts of Aſia (not ſo
well civilized as the Eaſtern ;) where Coin ſeems
to have been antiently, even before Abraham,
the current inſtrument of traffick. Long before
Cæſar's time, Polybius tells us, that theſe Iſlands
were frequented both by Greeks and Phanicians;
trading for tinn and other commodities. But it
ſeems thoſe crafty people were careful to con-
ceal from theſe, generally accounted, heavy
Northern nations, the value and uſefulneſs of
money.

II. The Coins I have ſeen of the Britains, for
the moſt part are neither gold nor good fllver,
but of mixed metals; and thoſe compoſitions
very different, and not as yet by any, that I
know, endeavoured to be diſcover'd : perhaps,
becauſe the quantities of them are ſo ſmall,
and their value taken from the fairneſs of their
impreſſion. Nor can we give any certain ac-

count of their weight, becauſe we have very

few of one ſtamp, or perfect; and ſome of
them alſo may be probably thought counter-
feited.

III. The Coins of the Britains are not un-
like thoſe of the antient Gauls; as thoſe of our
Saxons are not unlike thoſe of the firſt race
of the Kings of the Franks, who ſettled in
France near the time that the Saxons invaded
Britain: concerning which a farther account
ſhall be given by and by. But in this, we find

| the Saxons (as the Engliſh after them, ) to differ
p both

preted, not lambs, but pretio argenti ; commonly ag, 4, 16.

5

CX

© Britiſh CN

19.

* Mr. Cam- ters ill wrought

den hath onl
18 Britiſh
Coins,

both from the Gauls and Franks, that they did

not ſo often change the weight or value of their

Coins; much leſs raiſed and decryed the fame

piece, according to the pleaſure or neceſſities of

the Prince. An action, lawful indeed; but,
without very great caution, detrimental and
prejudicial to the Subject. But in this, them-
ſelves confeſs the Engliſh to- underſtand their in-
tereſt better than the French.

IV. I can hardly ſatisſte my ſelf, why we
have ſo many Coins of Cunobeline, and ſo few of
other Prifices mare famwus, at leaſt'in Roman
ſtory ; (for of Britiſh Hiſtorians, we have none,
certainly, more antient than Gildas ; and he on-
ly ſpeaks of thoſe near or of his own time.)
But we have nothing of Caratacus, Arviragus,
&c. but conjectural. Some of thoſe of Cunobe-
line, I know, are modern; perhaps alſo Cuno,
ſignifying (as Camden obſerves) a Prince, may
be applied (eſpecially ſince many Coins have no
more than Cuno,) to divers Princes, as it is ad-
ded to the end of the names of ſeveral, men-
tioned in Gildas ; perhaps alſo he reigned a long
time, Bur the beſt reaſon ſeems to be, either
becauſe he lived ſome while at Rome; or that
London was then a famous city for trade ; and
therefore had both more money, and better
preſerved.

The * ninetcenth is in Mr. Speed, but the let-
and placed: he reads it Cafibe-
lan, the firſt General of the Britains againſt the

omans. His country ſeems to have been North
of the Thames, and to have comprehended
part of Hartford and Buckingham ſhires. Yer he
conquer'd the chief Ciry of Inanuentius, whom

See Tab. 11. he ſlew, and whoſe ſon Mandubratius fled to

Co. 4.
20.

23.

24.

25.

26.

Vit. Baſing:

Cæſar in France, and brought him hither.

The twentieth is of Cunobeline, fon of The-
omantius, nephew to Caſibelan; by the Britiſh
writers called Kymboline. The head ſeems to
be of a woman. On the Reverſe, a Sphinx, a
figure ſo acceptable to Auguſtus, that he en-
graved it upon his ſeal. Wherefore, it may be,
it was placed upon this Coin, topleaſe the Em-
peror, a more than ordinary friend to Cunobeline,
who was declared a friend to the Romans; and
who is ſaid to have lived many years in Rome.

In the twenty-third, ſeems to be the head of
a City: The Inſcription Vanit. ſeems to be the
ſame with Fanoc. Co. 8.

The rwenty-tourth ſeems not to be the head
of a perſon, but of a place, probably Camalo-
dunum, when Chriſtian.

The twenty-fifth, Arivogius, is, both by Speed
and Archbiſhop Uſer, thought to be Arviragus;
of whom more Co. 27. Ononus I underſtand not.

The twenty-ſixth is probably of Cartiſman-
dua, Queen of the Brigantes, whereof Caledonia
was one part. A woman infamous for betray-
ing the warlike Caractacus into the hands of the
Romans, and for abuſing her valiant husband
Venutius.

The rwenty-ſeventh, a crowned head, with
many ſtrings of pearls about it, is thought to
be Arviragus. I wiſh there were more than
bare conjectures for it. For I do not find that
Arviragus was a Chriſtian, as this Coin declares,
there being a croſs and a ſtring of pearls about
it ; an ordinary ornament of the Croſs, in the
firſt peaceable times of the Church. Harding, I
think, is the only Author who affirms him a
Chriſtian : but it is generally ſaid of him, erga

Religionem Chriſtianam bene allectus, that he was
well affected to the Chriſtian Religion, and that
he gave to the firſt preachers oY Glaſſenbury ſo
many hides of land, as helped much to main-
tain them, And Gildas ſaith, that it was well

*

known, that the Chriſtian Religion was brought
into Britain in the latter end ot Tiberius's time.
He lived in great reputation in Domitian's time,
whoſe flatterers, upon ſome prodigies appear-
ing, foretold to him ſome great good fortune,
as that Arviragus ſhould be thrown down from
his chariot.

The rwenty-ninth Dr. Plot, who hath pub-
liſhed theſe three, thinks to be Praſutagus and
Boadicia ; but I ſee no reſemblance of one or
more faces. I rather imagine it to be ſome
fortification. |

The one and thirtieth was put into my hands,
as belonging to York ; which in Antoninus and
antient Authors, is written Eluracum. But 1
take it to be a Gallick Coin, and to ſignifie either
the Eburovices, or rather Eburones, who were in-
habitants of the country of Liege. The head
ſeems to be of a City, rather than, as Bouteroue
thinks, of Ambiorix, Cotivulczys, or {ome other
of their Princes.

The three and thirtieth alſo was meant to
deſign ſome ciry or country, it may be of the
Auſcii (now Aruſch in Gaſcoine) or ſome other,
unknown. It is to be noted, that after the
example of the Romans (who ſtamped the arm-
ed head of a young woman, probably Rome, a
notable Virago, who gave name to the city,
with the word Roma, on one fide of their Coin,)
other cities and countries placed alſo the head ;
yet not always helmeted, but commonly in the
dreſs of the place Where coined.

Britiſh Coins. TA B. II.

That the firſt was of ſome Britiſh Prince in
eſteem for an holy man, I collect from the pearls
about his head, ſet in the ancient form of a
glory : as alſo by the hand under the horſe, for
the reverſe. Many of theſe Britiſh coins are
adorned with pearls. I conceive the reaſon to
be, the plenty of them in this country; fo
great, that Julius Cæſar is ſaid to have under-
taken his expedition for obtaining them, and
that at his return he dedicated a ſhield covered
with Britiſh Pearl, in the Temple of Yenus.

29,

31.

33.

1.

In ſome coins of Conſtantine the Great, and of Crete U.

Arcadius, Eudoxia, and others, is an hand ſigni-
fying ſome favourable action of Providence to-
wards them: as, reaching to take Conſtantine in-
to heaven, crowning Arcadius, &c. In this, it
may intimate the ſuſtaining of his Cavalry.

This is only conjecture; ſince we know not the

perſon.

The ſecond, as Mr. Thoresby obſerves,
ſeems to have been a Prince conſiderably enga-
ged either in making or repairing the great mi-
litary roads or high-ways, as 1s intimated by the
Wheel below the horſe. This, and the third,
by their rugged and unhandſome looks, ſeem to
have been ſome of the ancient Britiſh Princes ;
but the letters being worn out, we are forbid to
gueſs who they were.

The fourth is Caſſzvelarnus ; others name him
Caſſibelinus or Velanus, as it he were a Prince of
the Caſſii, a people not far from the Trinobantes;
part of the dominion of his brother Imanuen-
tius, whom he flew, and alſo depoſed his fon
Mandubratius, who thereupon fled to Cæſar, and
was reſtored by him to his juſt dominion. Bur
this action cauſed Mandubzatius to be looked up-
on as an enemy and traitor to his country, and
ſo hated, that he accompanied Cæſar in all his
wars; and left the Kingdom to his fon, or ne-
phew, Cunobeline. His lon lived in Rome with
the favour of Auguſtus and the Senate, who as:

clare

c. 15, 16,

2, 3.

Britaonmc: . ; ; As- 7 XXXVIIL

"Hilo
1

— — — —
—
—

— — -

*

*.*

iT!
By
£34

Age

erm. 22.
Ne Diverſ,

Waſet y.
ST bry/. Cu
25 2
Deut.

Guide of
( ilors.

10.

The title of

Britiſh

COINS.

erm. 22.
ee Diverſ.

® aſety.

10.

clared him a Friend of the Romans, as is plainly
intimated in that Speech of the generous Prince-
Caraftacus. From theſe tranſactions we may ob-
ſerve, 1. That the Romans, by this ſubmiſſion
and requeſt of Mandubratins, had a juſt cauſe of
War againſt Caſſibelinus, and conſequently a-
gainſt all theBritains, who choſe him their Ge-
neral. 2. That this conqueſt was exceedingly
beneficial to the nation and country ; which, by
the Romans, acquired civility, if not humanity
alſo, and prudent government; good husbandry
too, and improvement of wealth and trade
both b
them for receiving the Goſpel. 3. That the
Britains quickly apprehended theſe benefits and
advantages; and therefore more readily embra-
ced, and more cheerfully, than moſt other na-
tions, ſubmitted to the laws and cuſtoms of the
Romans; as appears by Tacitus in the life of
Agricola. And though it may be, that the
doctrine of the Druids, deſpiſing the heathen
Gods, and acknowledging only one God and
rewards and puniſhments after death, might
contribute to their embracing the Goſpel ; yet I
think that the very great courage, high genero-
ſity, and excellent parts of the people, did more,
when they were once convinced, that
the Roman laws and government were better
than their own.

Of the fifth, the letters are too imperfect:
If the reverſe be not a pavilion, or ſeat of ſtate,
I know not what 1t is.

The ſixth ſeems to be a Viſor, the letters now
not viſible: or it might be ill- made in imitation
of Commodus, who is uſually ſet forth with
his head wrap'd in a Lion's skin, feigning him-
ſelf ro be Hercules.

The ſeventh is a Britiſh, rough, uncomb'd
head ; the letters are vaniſhed. Thoſe above
the Horſe on the reverſe ſeem to be ſet the a-
verſe way, from the right to the left hand.

The eighth, as likewiſe the twenty-fourth and
thirty- ſixth, ſeem to be a Ship or Galley with
oars. In Monſ. Bouterove, in Clothaire, An.
Ch. 5 11. the figure is better expreſſed, than in
ours. It was coined by a Chriſtian Prince or
City ; becauſe all of them are adorned with
croiles, either upon the ſtern or yards. S. Au-
guſtin ſaith : It 1s neceſſary for us to be in the ſhip,
and to be carried in the wood that can paſs through
the ſea of this world. This wood is the Croſs of
our Lord. Paulinus ſeems to refer it to the

de title of yards, Et rate ornata | titulo ſalutis. S. Chryl.

rather to the ſtern, Crux * navigantium gubernacu-
lum. The ſame doth Ephr. Syrus. Upon di-
vers Coins of the Roman Emperors, is a ſtern
joyned to a globe; as if they ſteer'd the whole
world. On the reverſe is Duro, which I que-
ſtion not was Durobernia or Canterbury, now the
chief ſeat of the great Archbiſhop and Primate

. of the Nation.

The ninth is an Horſe, under the Sun and'
Moon: whether it ſignified (according to their
opinion) that beaſt to be chiefly ſubject to thoſe
Planets ; or, that next the Sun and Moon, the
chiefeſt benefit they reaped was from the Horſe,
or what other imagination ; I am ignorant.

The tenth is an Head, and I think, foreign,
not Britiſh ; moſt of thoſe being without orna-
ment, but this hath a Crown or Garland. And
What if D#ubzo ſhould be miſtaken for Dumnorix,
or ſome other Prince unknown to us?

The eleventh hath an Head with a Diadem of
two rows of Pearls; perhaps for ſome of the
Oriental Emperors, and, not unlikely, of
Conſtantine the Great, both for the goodneſs
of the face, and his being one of the firſt who
carried that fort of Diadem. He may well be

ſea and land; and theſe prepared |

placed here, as being born of a Britiſh Lady.
The reverſe is a Dove hovering over a Croſs, an
emblem not unuſual in the firſt times of Chriſti-
anity ; intimating that the Croſs is made
beneficial unto us by the Holy Spirit.. Maf-
ſeius and Oforius teſtifie, that the Chri-
{tians at their firſt coming to Maliapor (the
city of St. Thomas) found ſuch a one there en-
graved in ſtone, in his own time, as was verily
believed. The like is reported by Boſus in the
vault of St. John Lateran ; and by Chiffetizs up-
on an Altar-ſ{tone in Beſangon.

The twelfth of Cunobeline: the letters upon
the reverſe begin the name of ſome place; but
what, I know not.

The thirteenth, by the letters BR, ſeems to
be the head of Britannia, as there were many
the like of Rome and other places : the reverſe
is alſo, according to many Roman Coins, a man
on horſe-back, as engaged in that exerciſe which
they called Decurſio.

The fourteenth ſeems to be a Nmans Head,
with a Crown ; the letters worn out. On the
reverſe, compared with the ſixteenth, twenty-
tourth, and thirty-fifth, there ſeems to be in-
{cribed ſome ſacred veſſel or utenſil.

The fifteenth, ſeventeenth, and eighteenth,
having no inſcriptions, are to us unintelligible.
The ſixteenth ſeems an ill-ſhapen Galley with the
keel upwards.

The nineteenth ſeems to be the head of ſome
Town or Country: ſome ſay, that Julius Cæ-
ſar, but it is more certain, that Claudius,
brought one or more Elephants into Britain a-
gainſt their enemies.

The twentieth hath an Head covered with
an antick ſort of Helmet. The reverſe ſeems to
be an ill-faſhioned Gryphon. It is ſomewhat
ſtrange, that thoſe fond kinds of imagination
ſhould have laſted ſo long, and in theſe remote
parts of the world. |

Concerning the twenty-firſt, See Tab. 1.
c. 29, What it, or the twenty-ſecond ſignifies,
I cannot imagin.

The twenty- third ſeems to be the figure of
an ordinary Britiſh foor-ſoldier, with a head-
piece and armour down to his thighs ; and a
club upon his ſhoulder.

The twenty-fourth hath a Galey with a
Croſs upon the ſtern, yet not at the handle of
the ſtern, being upon the wrong ſide of it.
(Vid. Coin 8.) The letters I underſtand not, as
neither the reverſe. The twenty-fifth alſo is
utterly unknown.

The twenty-ſixth ſeems to be the head of
ſome of the Gothic kings of Spain ; the like
being found in Ant. Auguſtinus, and Monſieur
le Blanc. On the reverſe, 1s a kind of Dragon,
which is ſeen alſo upon the Greek and Gallick
Coins, as well as Britiſh. Such a one as

Childebert's.

The twenty-ſeventh, twenty-eighth, and
twenty- ninth, having Runic inſcriptions, might
probably be made for ſome of the kings of Cum-
berland, in which County are ſtill extant ſome
Runic Monuments.

The thirtieth hath an Head, which I would
gladly believe to be of Arviragus; becauſe on
the reverſe is an Eſſedarius or Covinarins, a
fighter upon a chariot, with his dart, or ſuch
like weapon, in one hand, and his quiver of
arrows at his back. A kind of fight, which
was ſtrange to Julius Cæſar, and forced him to
turn his back.

Territa quaſitis oſtendit terga Britannis.

Great Cæſar flies the Britains he had ought,”

12.

13.

14.

15, 16,
17, 18.

19.

20.

31, 22

23.

24+

25.
28.

this, is by Monſieur le Blanc deſcribed for Pag. 58.

275 28,
29.

30.

cxix

Roman COINS.

31.

So terrible was it to the Romans, that his flat-
terers upon ſome imagin'd prodigy, took it to
be an omen of the overthrow of Arviragus, a
very couragious and warlike Prince. De temone
Britauno excidet Arviragus.

The thirty-firſt is, in the learned Monſieur
Bouterone's judgment (from whom it is copied)
ſuppoſed to be king Lucius, the firſt Chriſtian
king of Britain. The truth of whoſe ſtory is
largely diſcourſed by Archbiſhop Uſer in his
Primord. Eccleſ. Britan. where he ſeems to ſay,
that it is confirmed by all Hiſtorians, that king
Lucius, king in Britain, was the firſt Chriſtian
king in the world. (Which alſo ſeems ſtrongly

Pag. 41, 42. confirmed by what he ſaith, That the Scots be-

32.

33.
34.

yond the wall, did under Victor I. (immediate
ſucceſſor to Euariſtus, under whom Lucius was
converted) receive alſo the Chriſtian Faith :) But
that there is ſome difference about the time
when king Lucius lived, and greater about what
part of Britain he reigned in ; as likewiſe, con-
cerning his reſigning the kingdom, and going
to preach the Goſpel in Bavaria, and being
martyr'd near Coire, in the Griſons Country,
then called Rhatia.
The thirty-ſecond alſo is out of Monfieur
Bouterove, who rationally thinks it to be the
head of Boadicia, wife to Praſutagus king of
Norfolk and Suffolk, &c. a woman of prodigi-
ous wit and courage. Gildas calls her Leanam
doloſum, the crafty or deceitful Lionnefs. She flew
80000 of the Romans, and deſtroy'd their chief
City and Colony, Camulodunum; and Verulamium
alſo, and ſome ſay London. She flew the ninth
Legion ; but being overcome by Paulinus, ſhe
either died of griet, as ſome ſay ; or by poiſon,
as others.

The rhirty-third is eaſily intelligible. _

The thirty-fourth is explained in the de-
ſcription of Weſtmorland. It was, faith
Mr. Thoresby, part of the Cabinet of the
© old Lord Fairfax (the General ;) of whoſe
« Executors it was purchaſed, with the reſt of
* his Medals, by Mr. John Thoresby of Leeds,
« in whoſe Muſæum it now remains, and is
« the principal glory of it. For tho? there be
« ſome Runick Inſcriptions yet remaining up-

—

cc

on Rocks, and ſome very antique Monu-
c

ments, this is the only piece of money (whe-
ether ever deſigned to be current, or (ac
* as an Amuler, I pretend not to determin)
* with an intelligible Runick Inſcription, in
any Collection in Europe.”

The reverſe of the thirty-fifth ſeems to be a
Tabernacle; or ſome ſuch holy veſſel, ſtanding
upon a foot, and having a Croſs upon the top.
I underſtand it not ; nor any of the reſt, be-
ing all ancient Runic characters: nor doth it
appear whether roy avg, to this Country,
or to Spain. The Runic Characters ancientiy
were the writing of the Vi, or Weſtern Goths,
who lived in Denmark, Norway, Jutland, Cc.
For the Oftro, or Eaſtern Goths of Sweden,
and thoſe Countries, ſwarmed, and conquered,
Eaſtward, in and towards Aſia : who, though
they ſeem to have had the ſame language with
the Vifigoths, yet had a different character;
which was framed as it ſeems from the Greek,
ſome ſay by Ulphilas their Biſhop, near or upon
the Black-ſea. It is ſtill preſerved in the copy
of the Goſpels tranſlated into that language by
him ; and is for the moſt part extant in that
they call the Codex Argenteus, being wholly writ-
ten in filver letters, and preſery'd with great
and deſerved veneration in Sweden : but tran-
ſcribed, and printed, by the very worthy and
learned perſon Mr. Franc. Juniis, the younger.
But the Viſgoths ſeem to be thoſe who came
Weſtward ; who conquer'd part of ah, and of
France ; and all Spain, and part o Aﬀfrick ;
where they reigned in great ſplendor many
years, till the invaſion of the Moors. They
alſo acquired the Northern Parts of Britain,
keeping (as it ſeemeth) their ancient Runic
Characters. And though I have ſeen moſt of
the ancient Runic Coins, either in Ant. Auguſti-
nus, Paruta, or Laſtannoza's book de las monedas
deſconocidas ; yet I have only ſet down thoſe
which are new to me, and which being ſent by
that very courteous, intelligent, and diligent
Antiquary, Mr. Ralph Thoresby of Leeds in
Yorkſhire, I conceive rather belong to thoſe of
Northumberland, Cumberland, Cc.

—_ — — a

CONJECTURES upon the

Roman CO INS.

——

HE firſt of the Romans after
Julius Caſar, that reſolv d to
ſubdue Britain in earneſt, was

Claudius; who ſhipping over

& EA his army, reduc'd the ſouth-

4 part into the form of a Pro-
vince. And about that time,
this firſt piece ot money, with an abbreviated

Inſcription, ſeems to have been coin'd: ITI.
CLAVD. CAS. AVG. P. M. TR. P. VIIII.
IMP, XVI. i. e. Tiberius Claudius Caſar Au-

guſtus, Pontifex Maximus, Tribunitia poteſtate 9.
Imperator 16. To explain theſe titles once for all.
After Julius Cæſar, who laid the foundation of
the Roman Monarchy ; all his ſucceſſors in ho-
nour of him aſſumed the titles of Cæſar or Au-
guſtus (as if they were above the pitch of hu-
mane nature; for things that are ſacred we call

AN

* —
* 2
en

|

ſacred and inviolable.

AuguFt ;) and alſo that of Pontifices Maximi or
High-Prieſts, becauſe they were conſecrated to
all the kinds of Prieſthood, and had the Over-
ſight of all Religious Rites. They uſurp'd
likewiſe the Tribunitian power (but would not by
any means be call d Tribunes,) that they might be
For, in vertue of this

authority, if any one gave them rude language,
or offer d violence to their perſons, he was to be
put to death without hearing, as ſacrilegious.
hey renew'd this Tribunitian power every year,
and by it computed the years of their reign.
Art laſt, they were call'd Emperors, becauſe
their Empire was large and Ample; and under
that name was couch'd the power both of Kings
and Diftators. And they were ſtil'd E 5 aS
oft as they did any thing very great and ho-
nourable, either in perſon, or by their
Generals.

35»

O—_—_

— „%

—

—— . —— TD

-
0
*
* *
23
x
_ %

—— ——— — — — — 1

2.

4
%
. ä
A p-
— *
WE N
q
4 -
:
. 7%
Y p
>
8
A
«
2
—2 Y
= 4
£ 4.
ö
— 1
» }
\%
4
C
<<
*
2
by
Y
N
2
4
*
%
* 4
*
5
—*Y
2
ty
Fg
”
4
4 /
*

e 2 — 22 2

r rr

cxxi

*

5 Roman 'C ol N .

ae mt

5, 6.

Generals (a). But, ſince in the reverſe of this
coin there is a triumphal arch, with a man on
horſe-back between two trophies, and the title
DE BRITAN ; I ſhould imagin, that in the
gth year of Claudius (for ſo I reckon, according
to his Tribunitian Power) there were two Vitto-
ries over the Britains.

In the ſecond Coin (which alſo is one of Clau-
dins Auguſtus ;) from this Inſcription TI.
CLAVD. CAES. AVG. GER. TR. P. XII.
IMP. XIIX. we learn, that in the twelfth year
of his reign, after he had been ſucceſsful in
Britain, he was ſaluted Emperor the eighteenth
time ; and the Ploughman with a Cow and a Bull,
inform us that at the ſame time a Colony was
plac'd in Camalodumm. The Romans (ſays Ser-
vius) being about to build a City, and clad after the
Gabine faſhion, (i. e. with part of the gown covering
the head, and the other part tuck'd up,) yok'd on the
right hand a Bull, with a Cow on the inner-fide, and
in that habit held the crooked plough-tail ſo as to make
all the earth fall inwards. By drawing a furrow,
they mark'd out the track of the walls, lifting up the
plough where the gates were to be.

[To this (fays Mr. Walker) I have added
another ; a Britain naked, fighting with a man,
armed with ſword and buckler ; out of the
judgment of divers learned men, though I have
not ſeen any with ſuch inſeriptien.]

The ſon of Claudius (whoſe the third Coin
is, with Greek characters) was by a Decree of
the Senate honour'd with the ſirname of BRI-
'TANNICVS, as peculiar to himſelf; upon the
account of his Father's ſucceſs. He it was, for
whom Seneca pray'd, That he might quiet Ger-
many, f make an inroad into Britain, and maintain
his father s triumphs, with new ones of his own. But
what then muſt be the meaning of that half ſhip
with an Inſcription to this ſenſe, The Metropolis
of King Etiminins? Who this Etiminins ſhould
be, does not appear to me ; unleſs we imagin
him to be that Adiminius, Cunobelin's ſon, who
(as Suetonius ſays) took protection under C.
Caligula. Fa

In this Coin (ſaith Mr. Walker) is expreſſed the
manner how the Romans ſettled the Countries
they conquered : which was by planting ſtrong
Colonies of Romans in places convenient; where-
by they both kept the conquered in peace, and
m_ into + 9m and buſineſs 3 =
introducing frugality, husbandry, trading, Cc.

The n Coin, is ir with this
Inſcription, HADRIANVS AVG. CON-
SVL III. PATER PATRIAE ; and on the re-
verſe EXERCITUSBRITANNICVS(theBri-
tiſh army) repreſented by three ſoldiers : I ſhould
imagingit to point out the three Legions,

'd in Britain in the year of Chriſt
120 (f then he was third time Conſul,) name-

ly, theWecunda Auguſta, the Sexta Victrix, and
the Vicchia Viftri

th and fifth (both of Antoninus Pius)
with this Inſcription, ANTONINVS AVG.
PIVS. P. P. T COS. III. and on the
reverſe of the one, Britain ſitting on the rocks,

with a ſtandard, a ſpear, and a ſhield ; on the

*

reverſe of the other, the ſame Britain ſitting u
on a globe. Theſe ſeem to have been ſtamp'd
by the Britiſh Province, in honour of Antoninus
Pius, at his coming to the Empire in the year
of Chriſt 140. That military habit of the
vince of Britain, ſignifies, that at that time it
flouriſhed in military diſcipline. So the money
coined by Italy, in honour of that Emperor, and
upon the ſame occaſion, has ſuch a figure ſitting
upon a globe, with a Cornucopia, to ſignifre
plenty of all things : that coined by Sicily, has
the figure, with ears of corn, to denote fruit-
tulneſs : and that by Mauritania, has a perſon
holding two ſpears, with an horſe, to imply
the iar glory of that Province in Cavalry.
And to this head alſo is to be referr'd the
ninth, which is the ſame Antoninus s, but not
in its proper place.

The ſeventh (which is Commodus's) only ſhows
that upon account of a victory over the Britains,
he took the name of Britannicus : for on the re-
verſe, we ſee Victory with the branch of a Palm-
tree, holding a ſhield, and leaning upon the
ſhields of the conquer'd Britains, with this In-
ſeription, VICTORIA BRITANNICA.

[But tho” Commodus (ſaith Mr. Walker) was
by his flatterers called Britannicus; yet the Bri-
tains either endeavoured to chuſe, or actually
choſe, another Emperor.

The eighth (which is Caracalla s, but is not put
in the proper place) plainly ſhews, by the Nu-
merals, that he conquer'd the Enemy in Bri-
tain in the year of our Lord 214; and this alſo
appears by the Trophy, which Virgil in theſe
verſes has deſcrib'd more lively, than the beſt
Engraver can poſſibly do,

Ingentem quercum decifis undique ramis
Couſtituit tumulo, fugentiaque induit arma
Mezenti ducis exuvias, tibi magne tropheum
Bellipotens : aptat Le ſanguine criſtas,

Telaque trunca viri.
And firſt he lopp'd an Oak's great branches

round,

The trunk he faſten'd in a riſing ground:
And here he fix d the ſhining Armour on,
The mighty ſpoil from proud Mezentius wor.
wy _ was plac'd above that drop'd with
bl
A grateful trophy to the warlike God ;
And ſhatter'd ſpears ſtuck round.

The ſame Judgment is to be made on the
twelfth, which is the fame Caracalla s.

ficulty. |

Who this ZZlian was, does not appear. Some
reckon him to be that 4. Pomponius Ælianus a-
mong the thirty Tyrants. Others make him
Cl. Æliamm among the fix Tyrants under Dio-
cleſian. And ſome there are, who think this
was the very Tyrant in Britain under Probus
the Emperor, whom Zoſimus mentions in general
without telling us his name; and of whom we

have ſpoken before. [I find (ſaith Mr. Walker)
q one

——
*

(a) Imperator, at firſt (ſaith Mr. Walker) was an appellation of Honour given by the ſoldiers to their Commander,

who had obtained a great victory over the

enemy; but afterwards it was a title given to the chief General of their

armies, as all the Emperors were, The Tribunes alſo of tbe people were accounted ſacred perſons, and therefore might
ſafely accuſe any man to the people. They were always of Plebeian families; but the Emperors being Pont ces
Maximi were Patrician. And therefore that their power might be uncontroulable, not being capable of the Tribune ·

ſhip, they obtained to have Tribunitiam poteſtatem, i. e. all the

er of a Tribune; which was conferred up-

on them mn_ year, or as often as they deſired it. Sometimes they refuſed it, and ſometimes they conferr'd it on

one of their
Camden amon
of Coins and

onfidents 3 and ſometimes for five

in Auguſtus,

-

years, So that it is not true, which moſt of the Medal Writers, and
them, ſay, that the number of the Tribunitia poteſtas was the number of their reigns, See the book

In thoſe of Severus and Geta, there is no dit-

cxxii

12.

TO, 11.

13.

th

Roman COINS.

14.

I5.

16.

one Æliaum choſen Emperor by the Army of
Lollianus, after they had ſlain him at Mentz.
But at what time ſoever he liv'd, I am of opi-
nion that he was called Auguſtus in Britain, be-
cauſe his Coins are found only in our Iſland
with this Inſcription, IMPERATOR CL.
ALIANVS PIVS FOELIX AVGVSTVS.
On the reverſe, VICTORIA AVGVSTI,
which implies that he ſubdu'd the Barbarians
ſome where.

The Coin of Carauſius, with this Inſcription,
IMPERATOR CAIVS CARAVSIVS PIVS
FOELIX AVGVSTVS, and on the reverſe,
PAX AVGVSTI, ſeems to have been ſtamp'd
after he had clear'd the Britiſh Sea of the
Pirates. [He was (ſaith Mr. Walker) a man of
very mean birth ; but by his parts, courage and
induſtry, together with the money he had got
from the Pirates (never reſtoring what he took,
either to the Emperor, or the perſons robbed) he
advanced himſelf to that high degree. He was
of Menapia, but (as it ſeems) not that in Galla,
but in Zreland. |

When Alettus (who made away Carauſius)
had uſurp'd the Government, and behaved him
ſelf ſtoutly againſt the Barbarians ; he ſtamp'd
this Coin, with the Inſcription, VIRT'VS
AUGVSTI. By the Letters Q. L. ſome
would have meant, Quartarixs coyn'd at London;
others, a Quaſtor or Treaſurer of London.

Aiter Conſtantin Chlorus had ended his days at
York, and was ſolemnly deified, this was coyn'd
in honour to his memory ; as appears by the In-

+ Rather, the ſcription, and the f Temple between two Ea-

Altar.

17.

gles. The letters underneath, P. LON. ſhew
that the money was ſtamp'd at London.

His wife, Flavia Helena, a Lady of Britiſh
birth (as our Hiſtories tell us, and the excellent

Hiſtorian Baronius confirms,) after her ſon Con-

* Fudiſſet.

18.

19.

* Deſig natis
ale ſuc-

eefſoribus.

ſtantine the Great had * routed the Tyrant

Maxentius, and (having ſecur'd the Common-
wealth,) receiv'd the titles, Fundator quietis,
Founder of peace; and Liberator orbis, Deliverer of
the world ; ſhe alſo had this money coyn'd in ho-
nour of her at Triers, as appears by the Letters
S. TR. i. e. Signata Trevirs, ſtamp d at Triers.
[And in the Muſzum of Mr. Thoresby, there is
a very fair one of her's, minted in her Native
Country, at London.]

Fl. Conſtantinus Maximus Auguſtus, the great
ornament of Britain, coin'd this at Conſtantinople
(as appears by the letters underneath, CONSA.)
with the Inſcription of GLORIA EXERCl-
T'VS, to ingratiate himſelf with the army ;
for in that age they, and not the Emperor, had
the diſpoſal of the Empire.

Roman Coins. T a B. II.

Conſtantinus Junior, ſon of Conſtantine the
Great (to whoſe ſhare Britain fell, among o-
ther Countries) ſtamp'd this Coin while his fa-
ther was living. For he is only ſtil'd Nobilis
Cæſar, a name that was given to the“ Heirs
apparent of the Empire. We may gather, from
the Building, and PROVIDENTIAE CAES.
that he and his brother built ſome publick
work; and from P. LON. that it was coyn'd
at London. |

This Coin, inſcrib'd Dominus noſter Magnen-
tius Pius Felix Auguſtus, ſeems to have been
ſtamp'd by Magnentins (whoſe father was a
Britain,) and to have been deſign'd to ingratiate
himſelf with Conſtantius, after he had conquer'd
ſome publick Enemy. For the Characters DD.
NN. AVGG. i. e. Domini noſtri Auguſti, inti-

mate that there were then two Auguſti, or Em-
perors. The words VOTI V. MVLTIS X.

gnify that the people then f ſolemnly pray'd e
That the Emperor might flouriſh fue years, and pabai,

| multiplying that number, with unanimous ac-

—

clamations wiſh'd him many ten years. And
this is further made out by that paſſage in Na-
zari the Panegyriſt, The Ouin uennial feaſts of
the bleſſed and happy Caſars poſſeſs all hearts with
abundance of joy ; but in the appointed revolutions of
Ten years, our eager vows and ſwiſt hopes are at a
ſtand. The letters P. AR. ſhew this Denariys
to have been ſtamp'd at Arles. |

Conſtantius, after he had * defeated Magnen-
tins, and recovered Britain, had this coined in
honour of the army. 'The R. in the baſis, poſ-
ſibly ſhews that it came out of the mint at
Rome.

This Coin (ſtamp'd at Antioch, as appears by
the ſmall letters underneath) was made in ho-
nour of Valeminian, after he had rais'd Britain
from a ſinking ſtate, and call'd that part which
he had recover'd, from his own name, Va-
lentia.

To this Coin of Gratian's I have nothing to
ſay, but what I juſt now obſerv'd upon that of
Magnentius.

When Magnus Maximns was created Emperor
by the army in Britain, as alſo his ſon Havius
Victor, this money was coin'd in compliment
and honour to the ſoldiers: and Theodoſixs, after
he had diſpatch'd thoſe two out of the way,
ſtamp'd that other with the Inſcription VIR-
TV TE EXERCITVS, upon the very ſame
account,

In that golden Coin of Honorius, there is no-
thing obſervable, but that from AVGGG. we
may infer that there were then three Auguſti,
or ler which was after the year 420,
when Honorius was Emperor in the Weſt, Aus-
dofius Junior in the Eaſt, and Conſtantizs (who had
conquer'd our Conſtantine, him who was elected
here upon account of his name,) was made Em-
peror by Honorius. As for that CONOB, it

XN

21.

* Fuſe D :

7

25,
26.

7

ſhews it to be t pure gold, ſtamp'd at Conſtan- + Olriza N

tinople.

For, as far as my obſervation has carry'd me,
CON OB. is never upon any Coins, but golden
ones. ;

I could add a great many more Roman Coins
(for there are prodigious quantities found here,

in the ruins of old demoliſhed cities, * in the * ">

treaſure-coffers or vaults which were hidden in

ris © faz >
lib, 1.4 k

that age, and in funeral urns:) And I was very a p.

much ſurpriſed how ſuch great abundance proſe. 3
12, 1,
de ſuſeep f
prap']

ſhould remain to this day, till I read that the

melting down of ancient money was prohibited

by the Imperial Conſtitutions. 8
Having repreſented thoſe ancient Coins (Bri-

tiſh and Roman) + in their proper forms; it + Su 74 :

may be for the Reader's Benefit, if we inſert
here a Chorographical Table of Britain (as it
was a Roman Province,) together with the an-
cient names. Not that I promiſe to make it
compleat ; for who can pretend to that? Bur
ſuch a one, as, if you learn nothing elſe from it,
will at leaſt teach you, Thar there are continual
changes and alterations in this world ; new
foundations of cities laid, new names of nations
rais'd, and the old ones buryd. So that (as the
Poet ſays,) * |

Non indignemur mortalia corpora ſolvi,
Cernimus exemplis oppida poſſe mori,

Vain morrtals, ne'er repine at heaven's decree,
When ſad examples ſhew that towns them-

ſelves can die, |
C O N-

hy

*

306.

1 N

—

— —

= 1 E 8
— —

nas n_ bon ——

. — aum. ae omas. Page XCVIII

4 — WJ»

A , = 2
9 1 a 7
s \
s WL 2 8
. *

> A vel tantillum Paging Pacaret, Wife ert addere, fore Cx
u. tiffemo 2 outerovo Alphabetum niunmmiuis Mn t: HS Arup lum.

A 1. A. KA KN. A. A&A & „
S. B. 9
EL, KL . der
„ . e. G. G. r. a 2
. F. F. T. K. F. FA
G6. F. GW. G. T. F. O. K. &. .
KH. 1. M. K. ' EY |
KK 5. %. PF. p
> A A y. Nh.
E. F. A. R. &. N. ..
A. V. &. . H. . e.
2. g.

— "EY

— — _—

oman COINS.

| 2 2

[CONJECTURES
Roman CO IN S,

Which are added

To thoſe of Mr. CAM DEN.
By Mr. WALXER.

_—

TAB. II, continued.

H E twenty eighth is added, becauſe, tho

thoſe contain nothing upon them expreſly
concerning Britain, yet Julim Cæſar was the
firſt that diſcovered the nation, and made ſome
ſmall progreſs in reducing it. No mention, of
this is on his Coins, becauſe then he was not
ſupream, but acted as a General commiſſioned
by the Senate; and the power of goons bor
Image upon Coins was not given him till after-
wards, and till he had obtained the ſupream
power. The reverſe of this is, Auguſtus ; be-
cauſe under him the Britains lived in peace and
liberty; probably ſecured by Clobelinus, who
(as we ſaid before) lived at Rome in his
dime.

The twenty-ninth is of Yeſpafian, who con-
tributed more than any other to the conqueſt of
Britain ; and by his valour and ſucceſs here,
. that glory, which brought with it the

mpire. | |

he thirtieth is of Decimis Clodius Albinus, a
great Gourmond, but a good Juſticer, and a
valiant and expert ſoldier. He was a noble Ro-
man, but born at Adrumetum. Commodus
would have made him Ceſar, I ſuppoſe becauſe
he was accounted of a gladiatorian humor alſo ;
but he refuſed it, yet accepted it from Severus.
When Severus went againſt Peſcennius Niger, to
keep him quiet in Britain, where he comman-
ded the Legions, he named him Cæſar, and So-
phinius ; and a little after, made him partaker
or companion in the Empire. But Peſcennius
being overcome, he went ſtreighr againſt 4/bjnns ;
who hearing of it, met him with his Britiſh

Legions in arms; where divers ſore battles
were fought with various ſucceſs. Till, at
_ Albinus, by the treachery of ſome of his
fficers, was vanquiſh'd, and ſorely wounded,
and baſely and unworthily uſed by Severus;
who cut off his head, ſending it to Rome,
where it was ſet upon the publick Gallows, and
his body left in the Pratorivm till it ſtunk, and
was torn by dogs. It appears by divers of his
Coins, that he was alſo Auguſtus, but not long
before his death.
The thirty-firſt is of M. Aurelius Marius, and
is placed here, becauſe ſome ſay that he was
born in Britain: at firſt he was a ſmith, but, be-
ing afterwards a ſoldier, and of prodigious
ſtrength and valour, he got himſelf to be
choſen Emperor, upon Poſthumus's death.

Some ſay, that he reigned but three days;

but by his many Coins, it appears that
he reigned longer, both in Britain and Gaul.
The ſoldier who killed him, upbraided him,
that it was with a ſword which himſelf had
made.

The thirty-ſecond. I had here placed Bono-

us, a Britain, ſon of a Rhetorician, a very va-

liant warlike man, and the greateſt drinker of
his age. He commanded Rhetia (the Griſons
country) and the confines of the Roman Em-
pire towards the Germans : and having loſt the
fleet upon the Rhine which was left in his
charge, for fear of puniſhment he rebelled, and
declared himſelf Auguſtus. Probus, after a great
battle, took and hanged the Uſurper. In his
ſtead therefore I have taken the Coin of Aimili-
anus, being very rare ; becauſe I could not find,
either in metal or writing, any one of Bonoſus.
The thirty-third, being a rare Coin of Del-
matius, I have deſcribed (though not ſo nearly
related to Britain, being ſon to the brother of
Conſtantine the Great,) chiefly, to fill up a vaid
lace.
: As alſo (becauſe Roman Coins are ſo well
known, 'and there are very few more than whar
are here deſcribed, which concern Britain ;) for
the better underſtanding of exotick Coins, as
of the Franks, Britiſh, and Saxon, I thought it
not amiſs to fill up the remaining ſpace, with
an Alphaber of ſuch letters as are uſually found
upon them. Some I omitted, becauſe I did not
know them. The firſt Alphabet is of the
Runic ; which alſo hath ſome part in moſt of
the reſt. ]

31.

32»

33»

cxxvii

aSSHRMAOM ISR
© FLY Gals res
5

1 6

e e ee ALY AUK OAK RAY PAY AAAS OY LAY OE
IF WAP A IE PS Os SK ES Ss

eg

2

DESTRUCTION

E

BRITAIN

oy ts ed r
NT „ e

EST \

AN IE L

: TOY e *
4

HE Romans TN now
withdrawn their Forces
and abandon'd Britain,
the whole frame of affairs
fell into great diſorder

and miſery ; Barbarians

EN invading it on one hand,

and theInhabitantsbreak-
ing out into factions on
the other; whilſt each one was uſurping the
Government to himſelf. They lived (ſays Ninius)
about forty years together, in great conſternation. For
Vortigern their King was apprehenſive of the Pitts

and Scots, and of ſome attacks from the Romans who

ſtill remained here. He was alſo fearful of Ambro-

ſius Aurelius or Aurelianus ; for he ſurviv'd that

| eV ,
*

F

hopeleſs diſperſion than ever. Still the enemy give
them chaſe, ſtill more cruel puniſhments are prepa-
red; as Lambs by the bloody butcher, ſo were theſe

creatures cut to pieces by their enemies. So that,
while they ſtay d there, they might juſtly be compared
to herds of wi beaſts. For 1 miſerable people
did not ſtick at robbing one another for preſent ſuſte-
nance 3 and ſo, domeſtick diſſentions enhanc'd the miſery
of their ſufferings from abroad, and brought things to
that paſs, by ſpoil and robbery, that the very ſupport
of life was wanting in the country, and no comfort of
that kind was to be had, but by recourſe to hunting,
Again, therefore, the remaining Britains ſend a la-
mentable petition to Etius (a perſon of great autho-
rity in the Roman State) as follows :

a Nequitie ·
- 7 0 benignt- ]
ee.

ings anoint l

3

deſperate engagement, wherein his parents, the then | . . This is i : |
Governour's, were cut off. Upon this, Vortigern To Et mums 3 thr Ice Conſul, ſome C & ;

ſent for the Saxons out of Germany to his aſſiſ- * iin
tance ; who inſtead of auxiliaries, became the The Groans of the Britains. others is A
moſt cruel enemies, and after the various Events out the w

Gilds. of a long war, at length diſpoſſeſs d the poor | The Barbarians drive us to the Sea, the Sea a- mera.

—_—_ o Britains of the moſt fruitful parts of the Iſland,
Britain, their ancient inheritance.

Bur this woful deſtruction of Britain, ſhall

be repreſented (or rather deplor'd) in the melan-

choly words of Gildas the Britain, who liv'd a

little after, and who is all in tears at the

* This Gilda, thoughts of it. * The Romans being return'd

gain to the Barbarians ; thus, between two
_ we periſh, either by Sword, or by
ater.

Notwithſtanding, they obtain no remedy for theſe
evils. In the mean time, a terrible famine grows a-
mong the faint and ſtrouling Britains; who, reduc d

COCUDUYTETUWTNEPT TL ²˙“ TUFF TIES” = on OE oO LL . ,, r WW umn ECW rn e '" WW Yr tw . OR oY RT

is in ſome home, there creep in great crowds out of the little nar- | to ſuch ſtraits by theſe intolerable ſufferings, ſurrender Plague, |
MS. Copies rob holes of their f Carroghes or Carts (in which they | themſelves to the enemy, that they may have food to 4
1 were brought over the Scitick vale, about the middle | recruit their ſpirits, However, ſome would not com-
2 g * of ſummer, in a ſcorching hot ſeaſon,) a duskiſh ſwarm | ply, but cheſs rather to infeſt them from their moun-
it from the fa- of vermine, a hideous crew of Scots and Pitts, ſome- | tains, caves, and thickets, with continual ſallies. |
mous Barnab. what different in cuſtoms, but alike thirſting after | From that time forth, for many years, they made
* ontus. blood. Who finding that their old confederates, the | great ſlaughter of the enemy as oft as they went to
+ xy wart Romans, were march'd home, and refus'd to return 3 | forage 3 not relying on their own ſtrength, but truſt- |
put on greater boldneſs than ever, and poſſeſſed them- | ing in God, according to that of Philo, The help of
ſelves of all the North,and the remote parts of the Ring- God is certainly at hand, when man's help tail- |
dom to the very Wall; as if they had been the true | eth. The boldneſs of our enemies ceasd for ſome
Proprietors. To withſtand this invaſion, the towers | time, but the wickedneſs of our Britains was without
along the wall are defended by a lazy garriſon, un- | end. The enemies left us, but ue did not leave our
diſciplin d, and too cowardly to engage an enemy; vices. For it has ever been the cuſtom of this nation |
being enfeebled with continual floth and idleneſs. In] (as it ts at this day,) to be faint-hearted in repelling an |
the mean while, the naked enemy advance with their | Enemy, but valiant in killing one another, and
hooked weapons, by which the miſerable Britains, being | bearing the burden of our Iniquities, &c. Well, theſe
| pulPd down from the tops of the wall, are daſh'd a- | impudent Iriſh robbers return home, with a defign to =. :
4 gainſt the ground. Tet they who were deſtroyed after | come again ſhortly. The Picts in the remoteſt parts of 1 4 —

| | that manner, had this advantage in an untimely death, | the Mand, began from henceforth to be quiet; ouly + In the 1
4 | that they eſcap'd thoſe miſerable tortures which imme- | now and then they made a little ſpoil and ravage. Inſulæ; in
| diately befell their brethren and children. To be ſhort, In theſe ceſſations of arms, the ſcars of the famin be- margin *""
| having . their Cities and the high Wall, they | gan to wear out among the deſolate Britains, but 4. 3
emſelves to flight, in a more deſperate and | another diſeaſe more keen and virulent ſucceeded. For
| ; during

betake t

2 % FEI PO” CO "I" —

a DM A

*

Deftrufion of BR 1 TA 1N.

— .
* * 1

Cxxx

Nui i

3 0 benignt+
„.

ings anoint

during the forbearance of theſe Inroads, the Kingdom |
enjoy d ſuch exceſſive plenty, as was never remember d
in any age before; and that is ever accompany d with

a —

be invited into the Iſland (like ſo many wolves into the
ſheep-fold,) to repel the northern Nations. A thing
more deſtructive and pernicious, than ever bejel this

debauchery, which then grew to ſo high a pitch, that it
might be truly ſaid, Here is ſuch fornication, as is
not named among the Gentiles. Nor was this the
only prevailing fin, but the) had all other vices inci-
dent to humane nature, eſpecialy ſuch as at this day
overthrow all goodneſs; a hatred of truth and the
teachers of it, a fondneſs for yes and thoſe that forge
them, an imbracing evil for good, a veneration f for
Vice inſtea4 of virtue, a defire of darkneſs rather than
light, and the entertaining Satan before an Angel of
light. Kings were not anointed by God, but were ſuch
men as they knew to be more cruel than the rent; and
were ſoon after put to death without Tryal, by their
own Anointers, and others more — and cruel
elected. If any one of theſe Kings ſeemed more mild
than other, or more jut in his proceedings; all their
malice was darted at him, as the ſubverter of Bri-
tain ; and they weigh'd every thing that offended them,
in the ſame ſcale : If there was any difference, it
was the condemning of good attions, which were moi?
diſpleafing ; Jo that the prophefie denounced of old a-
gainſt Iſrael, might well be apply d to them, Ah!
ſinful Nation, ye have forſaken the Lord, ye
have provoked the holy one of Iſrael unto an-
ger : why ſhould ye be ſtricken any more, ye
will revolt more and more, the whole head is
ſick, and the whole heart faint. From the ſole
of the foot even unto the head, there. is no
ſoundneſs in it. Thus they acted contrary to their
own ſafety, as if no cure were beſtow'd upon the
world, by the mighty Phyſician of us all. Nor was
this the demeanor of the Laity only; but of the Clergy
and Paſtors alſo, whoſe examples ſhould be a guide to
others. Many of them were notorious drunkards,

Kingdom | O groſſneſs of apprehenſion | O the incura-
ble ſtupidity of theſe Souls | Thoſe, whom at a
diſtance they dreaded more than death, the fooliſh
Princes of Egypt woluntarily invite into their oun
houſes ; giving mad counſel th Pharaoh.

Then that kennel of whelps iſſued out upon 118,
from the den of the barbarous Lioneſs, in three veſſels,
with full ſails, and lucky omens and auguries, por-
tending that they ſhould poſſeſs the land whither they
were bound, for three hundred years3 and, that one
hundred and fifty years (being half of that time)
would be ſpent in ravages. Having firſt landed ii
the eat part of the Iſland, by the appointment of this
unfortunate Tyrant, they ſtuck cloſe there, pretending
to defend the country; but rather oppreſs'd it. The
Joreſaid Lioneſs, being advis'd that her firſt brood
ſucceeded, pours in a larger herd of theſe devouring
brutes ; which arriving here, joyn themſelves to the
former ſpurious iſſue. From hence, the ſeeds of ini-
quity, the root of bitterneſs, thoſe plagues juſtly due to
our impieties, ſhoot out and grow among us with ter-
rible increaſe. Theſe Barbarians being received into
the and, obtain an allowance of proviſions, pretend-
ing themſelves falſly to be our guards, and that they
were willing to undergo any hardſhips for the Jake af
the kind Britains, their Entertainers. This favour
being granted, ſtopped (as we ſay) the Cur's mouth,
or ſome time. Then they complain that their

ſions of quarrel,) and declare that they would break
their league, and plunder the Hand, unleſs a more
liberal ſubfiſtance was allow'd. Without more ado,
they preſently ſhew they were in earneſt by their

called in their language Cyules, or long Galleys , The German

Cyules,

* monthly pay was too little (1nduſtriouſfly ſeeking occa- * Epimenia,

ſwoln with pride and animoſity, full of contention, | actions ( for the cauſes which had pul/'d down venge-
full of gall and envy, and incompetent judges of good | ance upon us before, were encreas d:) From ſea to ſea,
and evil. So that (as it is at this day) the Princes | the country is ſet on fire by this prophane eaſtern crew,
were contemned and lighted, and the people ſeduc d by | who ceaſed not to conſume the Cities and country a-

xons let in- :
the llland. deſtruction,

paths which lead to happineſs. Wherefore (as Solo-
mon ſays) when the obſtinate ſervant is not reform'd
with words, he is whip'd for a fool, and continues in-

Plague, ſenſible. For a plague rag d ſo terribly among this
fooliſh people, and, without the help of the ſword,

ſwept off ſuch numbers, that the living could ſcarce
bury the dead. But they were not yet amended by
this judgment : that the ſaying of the Prophet Eſay
might be alſo fulfilled in them, And God called
them to weeping and mourning, to baldneſs
and ſackcloth ; but behold the killing of calves,
and ſlaying of rams; behold eating fleſh and
drinking wine; and ſaying, Let us eat and
drink, tor to morrow we die. For the time drew
near, wherein the meaſure of their Iniquities, like
that of the Amorites, was to be full. They took
counſel, as to the mo? effectual courſe for withſtanding
the frequent inroads of thoſe barbarous nations, and
how the booties which they took, ſhould be divided.
Then the whole Council, together with the proud Ty-
rant, being infatuated, deviſe this ſecurity, or rather
pr their country; that the Saxons of
execrable memory, deteſted by God and man, ſhould

Colonies were overturned with Engines; and the inha-
bitants, together with Biſhops, Prieſts, and People,
were cut off by fire and ſword, together. In which
miſerable proſpett, a man might likewiſe ſee in the

ſtately gates ; the remains of high walls ; the ſacred
altars, and limbs of dead bodies, with clods of blood,
hudled together in one mixt ruin, as in a wine-preſs :
for there were no other graves for the dead bodies, than
what the fall of houſes, or the bowels of beaſts and
fowls, gave them.

In reading this account, we ought not to be
angry with honeſt Gildas, for inveighing ſo
keenly againſt the vices of his Country-men the
Britains, and the barbarous outrages of the
Picts and Scots, and the inſatiable cruelty of our
Saxon Anceſtors. But being now, by enzraftings
or mixtures tor ſo many ages, become all one
people, and civilized by Religion and Humani-
ty, let us conſider what they were, and what
we ought to be; leſt God, provok'd by our (ins,
ſhould tranſplant other nations hither, that may
either root us out, or enſlave us.

r BRITAINS

u bn their own follies into endleſs Errors. In the mean | round, till the whole ſurface of the Nand, as far as

e Cor Wl time, God intending to purge his family, and reform it the weſtern Ocean, was burnt by theſe dreadful flames.

tim from ſuch corruptions by the apprehenſion of miſeries at Ii this devaſtation, not inferior to that of the Aſſy-

* 7 . hand, a report is again broach'd, and preſently flies rians heretofore upon Juda, was fulfilled in us (ac- |

2 i <1 abroad, that now our old Enemies are approaching, cording to the Hiſtory) that which the Prophet, by way

ab, with defign to deſtroy us, and to inhabit the land, as | of lamentation, Jays, They have burnt thy ſanctu- 1
they did formerly, from one end to the other. Not- of with fire, they have polluted the tabernacle #
withſtanding all this, they became not penitent, but | ot thy name in the land. And again, O God, |
like mad horſes, refuſing the reins of reaſon, run on | the Heathen are come into thine Inheritance, thy |
in the broad way of wickedneſs, leaving the narrow holy temple have they defiled, &c. So that all the 4

ſtreets, the ruins of towers pulled down, f with their F Edite car-

dine.

a © =o 1 —
cXxAü cxxx
— —
BRITAINS of
ARMO RICA 50
| Orig Brita
x) Q "A a_ p- 1 7.
Gildas N theſe miſerable and woful |ſedly: 1 cannot diſpute the authority of theſe
times, the remains of the poor | Writers; nay, I am of opinion, that the chil-
Britains, . who were found in the dren of theſe Veterans, were they who receiv'd
mountains, were buteher d in great | the Britains that fled afterwards out of their
Ge. numbers; aud others, almoſt᷑ kill'd | own Country. However, the name of Britains
YS with famine, ſurrendered them- | does not appear by the Writers of that age to
ſelves to the enemy as their flaves | have been in theſe parts before the Saxons came |
for ever, provided they might not preſently be put to | into our Britain ; except thoſe whom Pliny _ 1. 4polins
death, which was to be taken for a very great favour. ſeems to place in Picardy, and who are called
Some retired beyond ſea, finging under jail after a | Brinani in ſome Copies. For if an conclude
+ Celeuſmatis howling manner (f inſtead of the Mariners Cry,) | with Volaterranus, from the fourth book of
vice. Thou haſt given us, O Lord, as ſheep to the | Strabo, that Britannia was a city of Gaul ; let
ſlaughter, and ſcatter d us among the heathen. | him but look upon the Greek Text, and he will fin. 470.

* Superiores

Ferras.

Others remain'd in their native cuntry, but with
great fears ; truſting their lives to vaſt mountains,
dreadful precipices, intrenchments, thick woods, and
rocks in the ſea. Part of thoſe who paſs d over
the ſea, were they (without queſtion) who to
ſecure themſelves went in great numbers to Ar-
morica in France, where they were received very
kindly by the Armoricans. Which (not to
mention a community of (a) language, that of
Armorica being almoſt the ſame with our Britiſh

or Welch, nor other Writers who agree in this

point) is prov'd from an Author of the next
age to it, and born in Armorica, who wrote
the life of S. Vingualof the Confeſſor. A race
of Britains (ſays he,) imbarł d in little veſſels,
were tranſported over the Britiſh ſea to this land; the
barbarous nation of the Saxons, all of the ſame ter-
rible and warlike ſpirit, having poſſeſs d themſelves of
their native Country. ben that dear race ſPut them-
ſelves within this corner; where, being before almost
worn out with fatigues, they are ſettled in a quiet
country. Let our Hiſtorians tell us, that the
Britains were ſeated on that coaſt long before
this. Malmsbury ſays, That Conſtantine the
Great was ſaluted Emperor by his army; and, ha-
ving order d an expedition for the upper-parts,
brought away with him many Britiſh Soldiers: by
who means, having obtain'd the Empire by ſeveral
ſucceſsful Engagements, he planted ſuch of them as

quickly ſee that Strabo ſpeaks there of the
Hand of Britain, and not of a City. As for
that verſe of Dionyſius Afer, which I have al-
ready cited; ſome are inclin'd rather to under-
ſtand it (as Sephanus does) of our Britains, than
(with Euſtathizs) of the Britains in Armorica
eſpecially ſeeing. Feſtus Avienus, an ancient
Writer, has thus render'd it,

—Cauris nimium vicina * Britannis :
Flavaque caſariem Germania porrigit ora.

Cold Britain, plac'd too near the Northern
winds, : |
And yellow hair'd Germany her coaſt extends.

hence ; who were only thoſe Troops that were
rais'd in our Britain. | |
Before the arrival of our Britains, this

after that, to the ſame ſenſe, it was call'd in our

and, by our Latin writers of the middle age,
Letavia. And therefore I ſuppoſe theſe to be
the Leti that Zoſimus ſpeaks of in Gaul,
where he takes notice that Magnentius the T'y-
rant was born among the Let; there, and that

* Briton,

Nor let any one think, that the Britanniciani Britamic-
mention d in the Notitia, came originally from .

Country was called Armorica, i. e. by the ſea-fide; {mi

* haps i
Britiſh tongue, Llydaw, that is, wpon the ſhore ; Pliny.” ,

Zonara.

his father was a Britain. Theſe * Armorici (du- * Called h
ring the Teng of that Conſtantine, who was 3
choſen for the ſake of his name; and at the, ,norte,
time when the Barbarians, over-running France, the County
turned out the Roman Garriſons) made them- it ſelf *
ſelves a diſtinct Common-wealth. But Palenti- Calles“

a horn of
nian the Younger, by the aſſiſtance of Ati, x, ance,

and the mediation of St. German, reduced them.

were paſt᷑ ſervice, in a certain part of Gaul towards
the ue upon the ſhore; where to this day their po-
ſterity remain, incorporated with the Natives, and
ſomewhat alter d in modes and language from our
Britains. This was an Order of Conſtantine the
Emperor : Let the Veterans enterupon the vacant
lands, and hold them freely for ever. Likewiſe
Ninius, Maximus the Emperor, who flew Gratian,

Conſtantinus,

2, * world not ſend home the ſoldiers that had followed him At that time, Exuperantius ſeems to have go-
out of Britain, but gave them ſeveral countrys, from | vern'd them; of whom Claudius Rutilius writes
the Lake above Mons Jovis, to the city called Cant- thus : g

+ Cumulus, guic, and to the weſtern t heap, Cruc-occhidient. He As an old
who writes notes upon Ninius, adds, without Cujus Aremoricas pater Exuperantins oras — — *

Nunc poſi liminium pacis amore docet -
Leges reſtituit, libertatemque reducit,
Et ſervos famulis non finit eſſe ſuis.

ground, That the Armorican Britons beyond ſea,
went from hence.in an expedition with Maximus the
Tyrant ; and when they could not return, deſtroy d
the weſtern parts of France ; and taking their wives
and daughters to marriage, cut out their tongues,
lef? the children ſhould ſpeak their language: And
upon this account, we call them in our language Lhet
Vydion, i. e. half filent, becauſe they ſpeak confu- |

Aurelius Co-
anus, alſo
called Canj-
Where great Exuperantius gently Ways, .

And makes the Natives love return in peace; 2
Reſtorestheir laws, andgrateful freedom gives,
Nor baſely lets them be his ſervant's ſlaves.
From

Vortiporius,

—

(a) See Cornwall; as alſo Jſacius Pontanus, in his Letter to Mr. Camden, publiſhed among his
Epiſtles, p. 90.

Ul

*
Js 18
;

274.

8 $14, Apollinar.

, en ola phibalus of che Abbor (* a ſacred veſtment hairy

= called Conz. Parricides and adulteries, and hating the peace of his

cxXXIIi Britains of Watts and CORNW AI. I. cxxxiv

— Prom theſe verſes, it is poſſible, AZgidius
Maſerius might conclude, that the Britains were
ſervants to the Armorici, and regained theit
freedom by force.

The firſt mention of the Britains in

+ $tillingl, * Armorica that I know of, was in

Orig: Britan. the year 461, about thirty years after the

p. 5 Saxons were call d into Britain; for then,
Manſuetus a Britiſh Biſhop (among others of
that Order in France and Armorica) ſubſcrib'd
firſt in the Council of Tours, The ninth year
after, theſe new inhabitants of France, ſeeing

the Viſigoths poſleſs themſelves of the fertile |

countrys of Anjou and Poictou, fell upon them,
and were the only people that hinder'd them
from conquering all France. For they ſided
with Authemius the Roman Emperor, againſt
the Goths; ſo that Arvandus was -condemn'd.
of high treaſon, for writing letters to the King

of the Goths, adviſing him to conquer the Bri- heavy yoke

tains who lived above the Loire, and to divide
France between the Goths and Burgundians.
An, 470, Theſe Britains were @ ammning ſort of people, war-
like, ſeditious, and ſtubborn, upon the account of their
valour, numbers, and allies, ſays Sidonius A-
pollinaris in his complaint of them to his friend
Riothimus, as he himſelf calls him (but Jornan-
des ſtiles him King of the Britains,) who be-
ing afterwards ſent for by Anthemius, went with
ay ro of 12000 men to the aid of the Ro-
mans; but before he could joyn them, was de-
feated in a ſet Battle by the Goths, and ſo fled |
tothe Burgundians, who were then Confederare |

*

| SPSS 8 oy |

with the Romans. From that time (the Armorici
being ſubdu'd. by little and little) the name of
Britains prevail'd ſo much in this their new
country, that the whole body of the Inhabitants
began to fall under it, and the tract it ſelf to be
call d Britannia Armorita, and to be ſtil'd by the
Franks Britannia Ciſmarina. Hence J. Scaliger;

Vicit Aremoricat animoſa Britannia gentet,
Et dedit impoſto nomina priſca jugs.

Armorica ſtout Britain overcame,
And with her yoke impos d her ancient name.

For, that they fell upon their friends who had

entertained them, is manifeſt (among other Au-

thorities) from the words of Regalis Biſhop of 1

* Vames, concerning himſelf and his friends. 5, Ven-tenſs.

We are enſlav'd to the Britains, and undergo a 5 18
yoke. In after- times, they courageouſly c. g.

defended their lives and liberties againſt rhe

Franks ; at firſt under the conduct of

Kings, and afterwards under Counts and

Dukes; though (as Glaber Rodolphus has it,)

their whole wealth confifted in | freedom from tribute, F Libertas

and in plenty of mitk. And henee William of ici Ppablici.
Malmsbury,who wrote * fix hundred years ago, * Five, C.
ſays thus of them; They are a generation of men very
needy at home”; and t e they earn foreign pay
in other places by very toilſom work. be but
well paid, they flick not (out of any regard to Right,
or Kindred) at engaging in civil wars; but are mer-

renary, and for the fide that bids moſt,

The BRITAINS of
Wales and Cornwall.

HE reſt of the miſerable Bri- |
AL tains (who were forc'd to ſeek
Na Country in their native one)
underwent ſuch terrible Cala-
mities as are not to be ex-
preſs'd: being not only har-
raſs'd with a cruel war carried
on in all parts by the Saxons, Pigs, and Scots,
but every where oppreſs d by the intolerable in-
ſolence of Tyrants. Who and what theſe were
about the year 500, you ſhall hear in ſhort from
Gildas, who liv'd at that time, and was him-
ſelf an 1 of all this. Conflantine, a-
mong the Damnonii, though he had bound himſelf by
an expreſs oath before God and the Saints, that be
would do the duty of a Prince, yet flew tuo
children of the blood royal, and their two Tutors
(both valiant men) in two Churches, under the Am-

== T

AE?
22
4x»

- -
B
A
15 MS,
=

;

Gloſſary in- on both fides 3 having mam years before Put away

n lawful wife, and defil'd himſelf with repeated
adulteries.

Aureli .

8 Aurelius Conanus, walbwing in the filth of

Aus, country, was left alone like a tree withering in the open
His father and brothers were carried away
with their own wild whimſeys, and furpris d by un-

a deaths. f
Frtiporics, Vortiporius, @ tyrant of the Dimeta, the un-
worthy ſon of a good father ; like a Panther in his
manners, and being as much ſpotted with 3
fitting in the throne in bis grey hairs, full of craft aud

turn d off his wife, and committed a rape upon her
daughter, and then kill d her. |

Cuneglaſus, in Latin Lanio * fulyus (a yel- Cuneg laat.

therwiſe

low Butcher) a bear riding upon many, and the dri-

ver of the chariot which carries the bear, a deſpiſer of

God, and oppreſſor of the Clergy, fighting againſt God

with fins, and againſt men with Arms ; he turn d

his wife, perſecuted the Saints, was proud of his own

wiſdom, and truſted in the uncertain ſtrength of his

own riches, |
Maglocunus, an Mand Dragon (who had de- Maglocuiint,

prived many tyrants of their Kingdoms and lives) was

writ furvus,

the fantaſtick thoughts of reigning in an arbitrary
manner were gone, he fell into ſuch remorſe of con-
ſcience, that he profeſs'd himſelf a Mont; yet he ſoon
return d to his vomit, and breaking his monaſtick Vow,
deſpis'd his firſt marriage, and fell in love with the

fe of his own brother's fon then living ; he kill d
the fon, and his own wife, aſter he had lib d ſome
time with her; and then he marry d the brothers ſort s
wife, on whom he had before ſettled his affefions. But
the relation of theſe things belongs toHiſtoriansz
who have falſly made thefe T'yrants to ſucceed
one another: whereas it was at the very ſame

ſubtilty, and defil'd with parricides and adukerics

time (as appears from Gildas who ſpeaks to
| t

CXXXV

The PICTS. |

CX Xx

Cornwealas,
Britwealas,

them all ſeverally) that they uſurp'd the Go-
vernment in ſeveral parts of the Iſland.

'Theſe tew remains of the Britains withdrew
themſelves into the weſtern parts of the Iſland,
namely, thoſe which we call Wales and Cornuall;
which are fortified by nature with hills and
æſluaries. The Inhabitants of the firſt of thoſe

| 2 8
Walſh, Welſh. Countries were call'd by the Saxons * Brit

amen.
* VA. Som-

wealas, and the others, Cornwealas ; as thoſe in
Gaul were call'd Galwealas. For, whatever was

ner's Gloſſary exotick and foreign, they call'd, Walſb; from

at the end of

the Decem

whence alſo the Walbones in Holland, and the

Seriptores, un-V/aliachi upon the Danube, were originally

der the title nam'd. Theſe Britwealas, or Welſhmen, were a

Wallia.

Statutum
Wallis.

warlike people, and for many ages maintained
their liberty under petty Kings of their own.
Although they were ſeparated trom the Engliſh
by a wondertul trench caſt by King Offa ; yet
they were ever now and then making Inroads,
and waſting their cities with fire and ſword ;
and likewiſe were repay'd by the Saxons in the
ſame kind. Ar laſt, in the reign of Edw. I.
(as he writes of himſelf ) The Divine Providence,
which diſpoſeth all things rightly, among other diſpen-
ſations by which ſe has vouchſafed to bleſs us and our
Kingdom of England, hath now by his mercy ſub-
jetted the Kingdom of Wales, with the inhabitants
thereof (who were before Feudataries to us) wholly
and fully without let or bindrance, to dur dominion 3

having annexed and united the ſame to the crown of

our ſaid Realm, as a member of the ſelf ſame body.
Notwithſtanding, in the next age, nothing
could perſwade them to continue in ſub-
jection, no accommodation could be made,
nor could the hatred between the rwo Na-
tions be utterly extinguiſh'd, till Henry the
ſeventh (as born among them) ſhew'd great
favour and indulgence to the Country, and
Henry the eighth admitted them to the benefit
of the ſame laws and liberties that the Engliſh
enjoy. Since that, and a long time before, the
Kings of England have tound them upon many
occaſions a People of untainted loyalty. But the
Cormvalli were ſoon reduc'd under the dominion
of the Saxons, in ſpight of all the oppoſition

Cs,

they could make in defence of their country;
being over-match'd in numbers, and their ter-
ritories not well enough guarded by nature to
protect them.

Thus much may ſuffice concerning the By;-
tains and the Romans. However, ſince I am
treating of the Inhabitants, I muſt take notice
of what Zoſimus relates (though I took notice
of it before,) That Probus the Emperor tranſ-
planted the PYandals and Burgundians whom he
had conquered, into Britain; who bei

where they could be ſeated, unleſs in Cambridge-
ſhire, I cannot tell. For Gervaſius Tilburienſis
makes mention of an old Yallum in this County,
which he calls Vandelsburg, and ſays it was a
work of the Landals.

I would not have any imagin, that in the time
of Conſtantius, the Carthaginians were ſeated
here, grounding upon that paſlage of Eumeni-
us the Rhetorician; Niſi jorte non gravior Bri-
tanniam ruina depreſſerat, quam fi perfuſa tegeretur
Oceano, que proſundiſſimo Poenorum gurgite liberata,
ad conſpectum Romanæ lucis emerſit, i. e. It that de-
ſtruction of Britain were not greater, than if it
had been overwhelm'd with the Ocean: But now,
being freed from a deep gulf of the [ Pæni,] ſhe

lifrs up her head at the fight of the Roman light.

| For there is an old Copy which belong'd to
Humphry Duke of Gloceſter, and after that
to the Right Honourable Baron Burghley Lord
High-Treaſurer of England, wherein it is read
Pænarum gurgitibus. And he ſeems to treat of
thoſe Grievances and Calamities, which they
endur'd under Carauſius.

Nor, from that of Agathias in the ſecond book
of his Hiſtory, The Britains are a nation of the
Hits, would I have any one aſperſe our
Britains, or conclude them to be Hunns. For
in the Greek Copy it is read Birlops and not
Britones, as I was aſſur'd long ſince by the
learned Francis Pithaus ; and as J. Lewenclaius, a
very excellent Hiſtorian, has now publiſh'd
It.

1 A -

I

O W, of the other Inhabitants

of Britain: And firſt of the
IQ Pitts; who, in point of Anti-
quity, are allow'd by Hiſtori-
ans to come next in order to
the Britains. Hector Boëtius
derives theſe people from the
Agatbyrſi; and Pomponius Lætus, Aventinus, and
others, from the Germans. Some fetch them
from the Pictones in Gaul, and Bede from the
Scythians. It happen'd (ſays he) that the Picis ſailed
from Scythia (as the report goes) in ſome few gallies
into Ireland, aud having in vain defired of the Scots a
ſettlement there, they went over to Britain by their

advice, and fix'd in the north parts of it, about the

year 78, according to the receiv'd opinion.

In ſuch (a) a variety of Conjectures, I know
not which to adhere to; however to ſhow, as

—

near as I can, how this matter ſtands, I will de-
liver my own thoughts of it. And if the Au-
thority of Venerable Bede were not an over-
balance to all Conjettures; I ſhould be apt to
think that the Pits were not tranſplanted from
any other country, but were originally Britains,
I mean thoſe very Britains, who, before the Ro-
mans came here, inhabited the north parts of
the Iſland ; thoſe who, refuſing to be ſlaves to the
Romans (as they are a People moſt ayerſe tv
ſervitude) afterwards join'd them. For as thoſe
Britains, who upon the Saxon invaſion were
loth to part with their liberty, withdrew and
retreated to the weſt parts of the Iſland, viz.
Wales and Cornwall, which are full of ſteep and
craggy hills; ſo doubtleſs the Britains, in the Ro-
man war, rather than be brought under ſlavery
(the worſt of evils) ſhifted to theſe northern

parts,

(a) See Biſhop Uſher's Antiquitat. Britan, Eccleſ. cap. 15, where their original is fully diſcuſſed, Dr. Stilling-
fleet, Orig. Britan, p. 246. proves them to have their original from Scandinavia. |

ſertled J. !« Vu» WR

f dal
here, proved very ſerviceable to the Romans, —＋ =
upon all Seditions and Inſurrections. But Brian

ee pops 0

% q ——

cxxX

„

F
t
t
U
1
\
r
＋
t
1
|
<
£
ſ
|
{
|

Ny.

. Ve
Ind By,

ans 12

n.

ce pag. cx),

parts, which are defended by the inclemeney of
the air, by rough and craggy mountains, and by
the Sea, and the Bogs ; where they were ſecu-
red, not ſo much by their weapons, as by the
ſharpneſs of the air, and, by degrees, grew up
with the natives into a populous Country. For
Tacitus tells us, that the enemies of the Ro-
mans were driven into theſe parts (as into ano-
ther Iſland) by Agricola his father-in- law and
no one queſtions, but they were Britains who
peopled theſe remote parts of the Iſland. For

can it be imagin'd, that thoſe Britains who were

at war with the Romans (an army of 30000
fighting men, led out againſt Agricola; who alſo
gave Severus ſuch terrible defeats, that in one
expedition ſeventy thouſand of his Roman and
confederate Troops were cut off,) were every
ſoul of them deſtroy'd, without one remaining
to propagate a Poſterity, ſo as we muſt needs
people the place with toreigners from Scythia or
Thrace ? J am ſo far from believing it (though
Bede hath ſaid it, upon the credit of others,)
that I ſhould ſooner affirm them ro have been
fruitful to ſuch a degree, that their own coun-
try was unable to hold and maintain them, and
that therefore they were conſtrain'd to break in
upon the Roman Province; as afterwards they
certainly did, when the Scots had ſettled among
them. Bur becauſe Bede ſays it, according to
the common report of thoſe times ; I am very
apt to believe, that ſome from Scandia (which
was, heretofore, with all that northern tract,
call'd Scythia) might arrive among theſe Northern
Britains, by the help of that conrinu'd ſer of
Iſlands, lying. almoſt cloſe to one another.

Leſt any one ſhould imagin that I ſuffer my
ſelf to be impos d on by a ſpecious lie; I think,
I can ſhew from the manners, name, and
language of the Pits (in all which they will ap-
pear to agree with our Britains,) that they
were indeed the very Britains themſelves.

Without obſerving, that neither the Pits (ac-
cording to Bede,) nor the Britains (according to
Tacitus) made any diſtin&ion of Sex in point
of Government, or excluded the Females from
the Crown; it is certain, that the faſhion of
painting, and dawbing themſelves with colours,
was common to both nations. Thus much we
have already obſerv'd among the Britains; and

Claudian will ſhew us the ſame among the
Picts,

ec falſo nomine Pictos
Edomui

—

In happy war o'ercame.
The Pi#s that differ nothing from their name.

Again,
Ferroque notatas
Perlegit exanimes Pitto moriente figuras.
— And oft ſurvey'd

Pale ir'n-burnt figures on the dying Pitt.

Iſidorus is no leſs clear in this matter. The
name of the Picts anſwers their body; becauſe they
Jqueeze out the juice of herbs, and imprint it on their
bodies by pricking their skins with a needle ; ſo that
the ſpotted nobility bear theſe ſears in their painted
limbs, as a badge of honour. But how can we
imagin that theſe Picts were Germans, who ne-
ver had any ſuch way of painting among them ?
or that they were the Agathyrfi of Thrace, a
people ſo very far off; and not rather the very
Britains, ſeeing they were in the ſame Ifland,
and had the very ſame cuſtom of painting ?

cxxxvII The P 1 C T 8. cxxxviii

—

But as theſe were known for a long time by no {

language, nor what multitudes of Latin words |

Nor are thoſe Barbarians (who fo long in-
felted the Romans by allies out of the Caledo-
nian wood and the moſt northerly parts there-
abouts,) mention'd by any other name in ancient
Authors, Dio, Herodian, Vopiſens, &c. than
that of Britains. Likewiſe Tacitus (who gives
a full account of the wars of his father-in-law
Agricola in theſe extreme parts of Britain) calls
the Inhabitants by no other name than this of
Britanni, and e Caledonia Britami ; whereas theſe
new-comers the Pitts had been here ten years
before, according to our modern writers; which
deſerves our obſervation, ſince Tacitus knew
nothing of them in his time. Nor would thoſe
Roman Emperors, who carried on the war
ſucceſsfully againſt them, Commodus, Severn,
and Baſſianus and Geta his ſons, have afſum'd the
title of Britannici upon the conqueſt of them,
in caſe they had not been Britains. Without
doubt, it the Romans (with whom every thing
unknown, was magnificent) had conquered any
other nation different from the Britains and un-
known before, whether they had been call'd
Pitts or Scots, they would have had thoſe titles
of Pitts or Scots in their Coins and In-
{criptions. Tacitus conjectures from their red
hair and the bigneſs of their limbs, that they
came originally from Germany; but immedi-
ately after, he aſcribes it more truly to the
Climate, which models the bodies of men. }
Whereupon, Vitruvius : The parts towards the #1
north-pole produce men of huge bulk, tauniſh colour, ;
and lank red hair. Moreover, that the Caledo-
nians (who without diſpute were Britains) were 9
the very ſame Nation with the Pits, we have 4
another hint in that of the Panegyriſt, Caledo- ;
num aliorumque Pittorum ſylvas, &c. i. e. the |
words of the Caledonians and other Pitts ; imply-
ing, that the Caledonians were no other than the
Picts. And that theſe Caledonians were a
Britiſh Nation, Martial intimates in this
verſe,

Quinte Caledonios Ovidi viſure Britannos.

Friend Ovid, who your voyage now deſign
To Caledonian Britains, &c.

Auſonius alſo ; who at the ſame time tells us
they were painted, when he compares their co-
lour to green moſs mix'd with gravel ;

Viridem diſtinguit glarea muſcum
Tota Caledonits talis pictura Britannis.

Green moſs with yellow ſand diſtinguiſh'd
WS,
Juſt ſo the Caledonian Britain ſhows.

other name than that of Britains, and this name 1
was from their painted bodies; ſo afterwards a- . , 9
bout the time of Maximinian and Diocleſian (before |
which, the word Pits is not to be met with in .

any Writer,) when Britain had been ſo any, a [1

Province that the Inhabitants began to under-
ſtand the Provincial Latin ; theſe ſeem firſt to
have been call'd Pitts, to diſtinguiſh them from
thoſe who were confederate with the Romans,
and call'd Britains. And what could give occa-
ſion for calling them Pits, but that they painted
themſelves? If any one make it a queſtion,
whether our Britains uſed the Provincial Latin,
he has not obſerv'd, what pains were taken by
the Romans to bring the Provinces to ſpeak that |

have crept into the Britiſh tongue. Not to | 1
urge the authority of Tacitus; who writes,
IS that

tf A „ͤ• OO AI on

9 * 3833888 A — _ — —
DT — —
- a — — — —
6

— ͤ—ę—ẽ— — — — — — —

cxxxix

The P IC T. | 2 4 cxli

Lib, 4. c. 37.

Language
the Pick.

that in Domitian's time, the Britains affected
the very Eloquence of the Roman language. But
as for this name of Pitti, the authority of Fla-
vius Vegetius will clear all doubts concerning it.
He ſhows very plainly, that the Britains us d
the word Pitt to expreſs a thing colour d, in
the very ſame ſenſe that the Romans did. For
he ſays, the Britains cail'd your Scout-pinnaces
Pictæ, the ſails and cables thereof being dy
blue, and the mariners and ſoldiers clad in
habits of the ſame colour. Certainly, it the
Britains cali'd ſhips from their ſails of a blue-dye,
Pictæ, there is no reaſon in the world, why
they ſhould not give the name Pi:7i to a people
that painted their bodies with ſeveral colours,
and eſpecially with blue ; for that is the dye
that woad gives.

It is alſo to our purpoſe, that the Northern
Pitts, who were converted to Chriſtianity by
the preaching and example of S. Columbanns,
are call'd in the old Saxon Annals (a) Briitus
Peobtas, i. e. Britiſh Pitts.

of The reaſon why there are not more arguments

from the Language of the Picts, is, becauſe
there is hardly a ſyllable of it to be found in
any Author : however, it ſeems to have been
the ſame with the Britiſh. Bede tells us, that
a Vallum began at a place call'd in the
Pictiſh tongue Penuahel ; now Pengual in Britiſh
expreſsly ſignifies the head or the beginning of the
Vallum. Moreover, in all that part of the lland
which was longeſt poſſeſs'd by the Pics (name-
ly, the Eaſt-part of Scotland,) many names
places ſavour of a Britiſh original : for exam-
ple, Morria, and Marnia, from the Britiſh word
Mor, becauſe thoſe countries border upon the
fea: Aberdn, Aberlothnet, Aberdore, Aberneith ;
that is, the mouth of the Den, of the Lothnet, of
the Dore, and of the Neith ; from the Britiſh
Aber, which ſignifies the mouth of a river. So
Strathbolgy, Strathdee, Strathearn, that is, the Vale
of Bolgy, of the Dee, and of the Earne ; from
Strath, which is a wall in Britiſh. Nay, the
very Metropolis of the Picts has a name that is
evidently of Britiſh Extraction; I mean Edin-

' burgh (which Ptolemy calls Caſtrum alatum ;) for

Aden ſigniſies a wing in Britiſh. Nor will I
ſtrain it into an argument, that ſome of the
petty Kings of the Picts were called Bridii,
that is, in Britiſh (as I have often obſerv'd al-
ready) (b) painted.

From what has been ſaid, we may reaſonably
inter that the language of the Picts was not dit-
ferent from that of the Britains; and therefore
that the nations themſelves were not different.
Bede indeed ſpeaks of the language of the Picts
and Britains as different; in which place, he
ſeems to mean the dialects only, by the word
Language. ;

Nor is it ſtrange that the Pic ſhould by their
incurſions 2 a terrible ſlaughter of their
Countrymen the Britains; ſeeing at this day, in
Ireland, thoſe who are ſubject to the Engliſh,
have no ſuch malicious and ſpiteful enemies as
their own fellow- natives the Mild- lriſb. For,
as Paulus Diaconus has it, As the Gothe, Hyp-
pogoths, Gepidians and Vandals, changing their name
only, and ſpeaking the ſelſ ſame language, were fre-

quently at wars with one another; juſt ſo were

the Picts and Britains; eſpecially after the laſt
became Confederate with the Romans. Theſe
are the motives that have induc'd or rather
forc'd me to think the Pifs, a remainder of the
Britains. But perhaps the Authority of Bede

of | Pitts, if they were no other than the old Bri-

may overbalance all theſe; and if the Reader
ſo _ I am _—_— that a Tradition handed
by fo great a man, and built only upon the report
of yoo ny do prevail againſt theſe Conjettue,

And that account which Bede gives, of their Stin;
coming from Scythia, is prefer d by a late learned Orig, %,
Hiſtorian, before the foregoing Opinion, That P. 239.
they were originally Britains. Againſt which it is
urg'd by him, That Eumenius the Panegyriſt
(the firſt who mentions the Pits) expreſsly di-
ſtinguiſhes them from the Britains, and ſuppoſes
them to be Enemies to each other, The Bri-
tains, ſays he, were exerciſed by the arms of the
Pitts and Scots: That tho' Dio ſets down the
names of diſtinction then us'd for the Extra- pro- |
vincial Britains, he divides them into two ſorts, iner d.
Maatæ, and Caledonii; but ſays nothing of any _ 2!
Pifts : That, at that time, Zonaras calls them 8
all by the name of Britains: That, as to the
Authority of the Panegyriſt, who ſeems to call
the Caledonians (who were undoubtedly Bri-
tains) Pitts, in that expreſſion, Non dico Caledo-
num aliorumque Pittorum Sylvas ; the reading,
as Valeſius obſerves, ought to be, Non Dicale-
donum alioru Pittorum, agreeably to Ammi-
anus Marcellinus's Diviſion of the Picts into
Dicaledones and Vetturiones That if it be ask d,
why Tacitzs, Dio, Herodian, Vopiſcus, &c. take
no notice of any Enemy to the Romans in thoſe
parts, beſides the Britains, if there was another
diſtinct Nation; it may as well be ask d, why
the later Writers do ſo diſtin&ly mention the

tains ? If they were not, they were painted from

the beginning, and whence then came the new

name of Picts ſo long after? and why do the

Roman Writers, all of a ſudden alter their

ſtyle, and exchange the name Britains, ſo famous

among the Romans, for that of Pitts, which

was not heard of before? In favour of Bede's

Opinion, that they came from Scythia (taking

Sythia, according to Strabo's account of the

ancient diviſion, for the whole north- part of

Europe, as Celtia was the weſt,) it is alledg'd, =

That Claudian makes Thule the country of the Ate. «3 up

Picts, and Olaus Rudbeck h:th made it very =

probable that by Thule, Scandinavia is meant, as |

beſt agreeing with the ancient relations con-

cerning Thule That it appears from the old

Gothick Hiſtories, to have heen the cuſtom of 9 f

the Scythians, to make frequent Expeditions to ace.

ſea, for booty and for new ſettlements : That 5

Pliny reckons the Agathyrſi among theſe Scythi-

ans, and it appears that che Agathyrfi were re-

markable heretofore for painting their Bodies,

from that of Virgil, Pictique Agathyrfi, and VE

from what Solinus ſays of them, That their *

* Bodies were painted Colore cæruleo, juſt as the |

ce old Pits were.“ That Tacitus obſerves of

the Arii, a fierce Northern People, that they

had tincta corpora, or in other words were Pitts;

and Virgil ſaith the ſame of the Geloni, who 2

were next neighbours to the Agathyrf. Since "0

therefore, Olaus Rudbeck ſettles the Agathyr/# |

upon the Baltick Sea; this may ſeem to point

out to us the proper original of our Picts, or

the place from whence they came over into this

northpart of Britain. _—
Ammianus Marcellinus divides the Picts into 1 „..

Dicalidonii and Vefturiones ; 1 ſhould rather read © , BE

it Deucalidonii, and ſuppoſe them to have in- Fic

habited the Weſt coaſt of Scotland, where the

Deucalidonian Ocean breaks in. Although I for-

'merly imagin'd them to be ſo called, as if one
| | ſhould

—

(a) In all the Copies I have ſeen, they are ſimply called Pibtas. (b) The true ſgnifcation of Briib, ſee before,

under the title, Name of Britain; and Somner's Gloſſary to the Decem Seriptores, under Britannia, 2

The 5

—_—

FA

os ſhould ſay Nigri Caledonii (for Dee ſignifies black

in Brivifh 3) juſt as the Iriſſi at this day call the

| imer.

Scotch of that country Duf Alibawn, that is,
black Scots; and as the Welch call'd the Pirates
who infeſted them from that coaſt, Tu du, the

black Army. But it is more probable, that they

took that name from their ſituation. For Deheu
Caledonii ſignifies the Caledonians Irving on the right
hand, that is, to the Weltward : as the other
Picts dwelling to the left, or the Eaſt (which
Ninniz calls the /eft-hand quarter) were term'd
Vefturiones, perhaps from the word Chwithic,
which ſignifies the iet hand in Britiſh ; and are
fanſy'd by ſome to be corruptly nam'd in Pto-
lemy, Vernicones.

[But, in oppoſition to this conjecture, Arch-
biſhop Uſher proves, that by the right hand
and Jeft hand among the Britains, is underſtood,
not the weſt and the eaſt, but the ſouth and the
north; agreeable to Bede's diviſion of the Picts
into and fouthern, by a ridge of Moun-
tains, which was probably the Mons Grampins,
and was afterwards the bound between the Scots
and the Pifs, after the Scots had ſettled them-
ſelves in that part of the Territories of the
Picts, which lay next to Ireland. ]

An old Saxon Fragment ſeems to expreſs the
Picts by the word Pegweorn, for under that name
it ſpeaks of a Nation at enmity with the Bri-
tains; whereas, the ancient Saxons called the
Pits, (a) Pehits, and Peoktas. Hence in Whit-
kindus, Pehiti is every where inſtead of Pitts.

.es ans The manners and cuſtoms of thoſe ancient

Wanners of
| de Picts.
Lee Rar
_ by

calm

and barbarous Britains, who afterwards ſ went
by the name of Piſti, are already deſcrib d from
Dio and Herodian. It remains now, that I con-
tinue the hiſtory of them. Upon the decline of
the Empire, when the Romans unwarily rais'd
thoſe Troops of Barbarians; ſome of the Picts
were added by Honorius (when there was every
where a profound peace) to the ſtanding Army
of the Empire, and call'd Hexoriaci. Theſe, in the
reign of the tyrant Conſtantine, (he (b) who was
elected for the ſake of his name) laid open the
paſſes of the Pyrenees, and let the Barbarians
into Spain. And at length (having firſt by
themſelves, and after, with the Scots their Al-
lies, exceedingly annoy'd this Province of the
Romans) they began to be civiliz d. Thoſe of
the South were converted to Chriſtianity by
Ninia or Ninianus the Britain a molt holy man,
about the year 430; but thoſe of the North
(who were ſeparated from the others by a crag-
gy ridge of high mountains) were converted by
Columbanus, an Iriſh-Scot, and a Monk of ex-
traordinary ſanctity, in the year 565. He taught
them (wherever he learn'd it) to celebrate the
feaſt of Eaſter, between «the 14th day of March
and the 2oth, but always upon Sunday ; and
alſo to uſe another kind of Tonſure than the
did, namely, that which reſembles a

Crown. Theſe points were ſharply conteſted
a long time in the Iſland, till Naitan, King

of the Picts, with much ado brought his Sub-
jects to a conformity with the Roman Church.
In this age, many of the Picts, according to the
cultom of thoſe times, went in Pilgrimage to
Rome; and, among others, one of them is. re-

" RE. corded in the Antiquities of St. Peter's Cathe-
ecu erin, a dral there, in theſe words, Aſterius, Count of the
» 27 the Pitts, and Syra with his men, perform d their Vows.

Ar laſt, they were ſo overpower'd by the Scots
flowing in upon them from Ireland ; that, be-
ing deteated in a bloody Engagement about the

PO

year 740, they were either
or did ſlide by little and little into the name and
nation of the Scots. Which very thing befel
the mighty Kingdom of the Gauls; who, being
conquer d by the Franks, came by degrees under

the ſame name.

When the Pa iſt intimates, that before
Czſar's time Britain was haunted by its half-

naled Enemies the Pifts and Scots, he ſeems to
ſpeak the language of his own age; for * cer-,

tainly they were not then in Britain, under the
name of Pifts, . |

And when Sidonins Apollinaris ſays, in his

Panegyrick to his Father-in-law,

= 9
gna 0s tranſvexit ad Britannos
W & quantum Scotum, & cum —

———T ho' Caſar's conqu'ring arms as far
As Caledonian Britains urg'd the war,
Tho" Scots and Pitts with Saxons he ſubdu'd.

I cannot but out in the words of |
ther Poet, . 1 85

& nulla fides augentibus omnia Mufis.

No credit juſtly ſnould the Muſes find,
That ſoar ſo high, they leave the truth

Czſar, who is prodigal enough in his own
praiſes, would never have conceal'd theſe ex-
ploits, if he had done them. But ſuch writers
are not unlike ſome well-meaning Authors of
this age, who, in the hiſtory of Klar, tell us
that he conquer'd the French in Gaul, and the
Engliſh in Britain; whereas, at that time there
were no ſuch names in being, neither that of
the Engliſh here, nor of the French there; for it
was many ages after, that theſe People came in-
to their reſpective Countries.

But an argument has been rais'd from the
foregoing paſlage of Eumenius the Panegyriſt,
not only to make the name of the Picts more
ancient, but alſo to prove that they were in
Czſar's time a diſtin& Colony dwelling in Bri-
tain. The words of the Panegyriſt are theſe,
Ad hoc Natio etiam tunc rudis, & ſoli Britanni
Pictis modo & Hibernts aſſueta hoſtibus, adbuc ſemi-
nudis, facile Romans armis figniſque ceſſerunt, i. e.
In Czſar's time, an undiſciplin'd Nation, the
Britains alone, a Nation that knew no Enem
but the Pics and Iriſh, and a People half-nak
were eafily put to flight by the Romans. The

—

quite extinguiſhed,

Pag. xl,

* drawn from hence by a learned Writer Buchan. 1. 2.
of the

Scotch Nation, is, that the Panegyriſt
ſpeaks of the ugh d
is evident that he there lays the compariſon be-
tween the Victories of Cæſar and Conſtantius
in Britain, and gives the advantage to that of
Conſtantius, in this reſpe& among others, that
Czſar had none but the Britains to en-
counter; but Conſtantius was to fight alſo a-
ainſt a Roman Legion, and other foreign ſoldiers
t were drawn over to the ſide of Carauſius
and Allectus; as it is ſer forth in the very next
paragraph. And belides, if Eumenius had
meant the Britiſh ſoile, he would have ſaid ſo
Britannici, and not Britanni ; in the ſame man-
ner that he ſaid in the ſame Oration, Victoria
Britannica; and in another, Britannica Trophaa.\

That

*

—

*

(s). Pibtas is common in the Saxon z but Pebits I never obſerved. (b) See a more diſtin account of his Electios
and Actions, given by mY in the County of Southampton,

the Britiſh ſoyle ; whereas it Stillingf.

rig. Brit.

: That the Pictones of Gaul were the ſame na-
tion with our Picts, I dare not, with Johannes

Picardus, believe ; ſeeing the name Pittones was
very famous in Gaul, even in Cæſar's time; and

cxlm

Pitoness

theſe of ours are no where expreſs d by that
name: unleſs it be in one paſſage of the Pane-
ri where I know that Piclonum, by a {lip
ot the tranſcriber, is put for Piftorum.

S © © FF

H E place, among the Britiſh
(Rf Nations, next to the Pitts, is
in juſtice due to the Scots :
ay i] Bur before I proceed (leſt ſome
PAIN ſpitcful and ill-natur'd per-

WH ſons ſhould miſconſtrue thoſe

1
— 8 ——  Wwy WW AF *)

bodies, becauſe they are marked by iron needles and ®
ink, with various figures. Which is alſo alledg'd 1
in the ſame words by Rabanus Maurus, in his |
Geography, to the Emperor Lodovicus Pius; to
be ſeen in Trinity-College Library at Oxford.

But ſeeing Scotland has thoſe within her ſelf

| things for calumny, which
with all fincerity I have collected out of ancient
Writers concerning them) I muſt caution the
Reader, once for all, that every word is to be
underſtood of the old, true, and genuine Scots;
whoſe poſterity are thoſe that ſpeak Iriſh, poſ-
ſeſſing tor a long way together that tract which
we now call the Weſt part of Scotland and the

who are able to trace her Original from the
higheſt ſteps of Antiquity, to their own honour
and that of their Country, if they will but
heartily ſet themſelves to it; I will only point
out the Fountain from whence I conceive theſe
Truths are to be drawn, and offer ſome things,
which I would have them diligently conſider :
for in this point I profeſs my ſelf a Sceptick.

Iſlands thereabouts ; and who are commonly
term'd Highlaud-men. For the more civilized
who inhabit the Eaſtpart of the country,
though adopted into that name, are not really
Scots, but of the ſame German original with us
Engliſh. This, they cannot but confeſs, and we
cannot but acknowledge; they, as well as we,
being called by the Highlanders, Saſſones. Be-
ſides, they ſpeak the ſame language, namely
the Saxon, with ſome variation in Dialect only;
which is an infallible proof of the ſame origi-
nal. In which regard, I am ſo far from caſting
any reflection upon them, that I have always
loved them the more, as men of the ſame blood
and extraction, and reſpected them highly, even
when the Kingdoms were diſtin& ; and now
much more, ſince by the good Providence of
God we are ꝗ united into one body, under one
Sovereign Head of England and Scotland;
which Union may the Almighty ever bleſs, to
the happy, proſperous, and peaceful ſtare of
both nations.

5 The f original of the Scotch nation, as well as its
1288 neighbours, and the etymology of the name, are
quitat,Britan, {0 wrapt up in obſcurity, that even the ſagacious
Eccleſ.cap+ 15+ Buchanan either did not diſcover it, or only diſ-

cover'd it to himſelf : for he has utterly fail'd the
expectation of the world in this point. Upon

which account, I have long forborn to enter the

liſts ; not caring to play the fool, as others have

done, in admiring fables. For, one may as proba-

bly refer the original of Scotland to the Gods,

S:01a, Pha- as to Scota the ſham-daughter of Pharaoh
roah's daugh- King of Egypt, married to Gaithelus ſon
Were of Cecrops the founder of Athens. But, as
this opinion is rejected by the ingenious among

the Scots themſelves, as a groſs ignorance in
Antiquity ; ſo that other of a later date, ab-

ſurdly terch'd from a Greek original, as if the

Scots were ſo call'd quaſi oui, that is, obſcure 3

is alſo to be exploded, as ſpightfully invented,

to the diſhonour of a moſt famous and warlike

nation. Nor is the opinion of our Horilegus,

that the Scots are ſo called as ſprung from a con-

tuſed medley of nations, univerſally receiv'd.

In the mean time, I cannot but admire, upon

what grounds Iſidore could ſay, That the Scots in

Zib. g. c. 2. their own tongue have their name from their Painted

Firſt therefore of their original, and then of „elan tt:
the place from whence they were tranſplanted Countey a
into Ireland. For it is plain, that out of Ire-*
land (an Iſle peopled by the Britains, as ſhall be
ſhown in its proper place,) they came over into
Britain; and that they were ſeated in Ireland,
when they firſt became known to Writers by
that name. So Claudian, ſpeaking of their in-
roads into Britain;

| rothel, or
ilel, and
6•

FToram cam Scotus t Hibernem + lernen
Movit, & infeſto ſpumavit remige T hetis.

When Scots came thundring from the Iriſh
ſhores,

And th' ocean trembled ſtruck with hoſtile

OAars.
+ Under

James I, In another place alſo,

Scotorum cumulos flevit glacialis * Hiberne.
And frozen Ireland moan'd the crowding

heaps
Of murther'd Scots.

This laſt paſſage is by a late learned Advo-
cate for the Antiquity of the Scots in Britain, .
apply d, not to Ireland, but to Scotland, and to
Strathern a particular Province thereof, ſo call'd
from the river Ern, from whence the Country
might be call'd Jerne. But this, however an
ingenious conjecture, ſeems to be inconſiſtent
with that other paſſage of Claudian, juſt now
mention'd ; which plainly ſuppoſes the Scots to
be then in Ireland, and to croſs a Sea into Bri-
rain. And ſo Buchanan himſelf underſtands this
paſſage of Claudian ; and Gildas, where he

ives an account how the Scots infeſted Britain,
peaks of their coming by ſea, and carrying away
their prey beyond the ſea, and ſays, that the Ro-
man forces drove them trans maria, beyond the
Seas. Nor does it ſeem, by any means, to be
a fair ſolution of this difficulty, to ſay that
theſe Seas were only the Friths, over which the
Scots paſs'd from one part of Scotland to ano-
ther. For altho' it is true, that theſe Friths are
ſometimes - call'd Maria or Seas, yet they
| cannot

os | | /
bs...

ni tie
ntry o&

n his po- we a
Fans. Getz, Getici, Gothi,

"TY FOE. © GR 1

cannot be meant on this occaſion, becauſe Gil-
das and Bede expreſsly tell us, © That when the
« Roman Legion firſt defeated the Pitts and
« Fcots, they commanded a wall to be built
between the two Seas to hinder their Incur-
« Gon” ; which would have ſerv'd no end or
* if their former cuſtom had been, to
croſs over the two Friths, and land on this ſide
the Wall. So that the plain meaning muſt be,
that the Scots croſs d the ſea from Ireland, and
landing in the north-parts of Britain, joyn'd
the Picts, and ſo march d towards the Wall, and,
as the ſame Hiſtorians ſay, pull'd the poor Bri-
tains from it with hooks, and forc'd their paſ-
ſage into the Roman Province ; which had been
needleſs, if their way had been, to paſs over
the Friths, between which the Wall was built.
But to proceed. ] Oroſius likewiſe writes;
Ireland is peopled by nations of the Scots. Agree-
able to which is that of Ifidore. Scotland and
Ireland are the ſame : but it is called Scotland, be-
cauſe it is peopled by nations of the Scots. Gildas
calls them Hibernos graſſatores, Iriſh robbers.
Bede alſo, The Scots, who inhabit Ireland, an
Hand next to Britain. And ſo in other places.
Eginhardus, who lived in the age of Charles
the Great, expreſsly calls Ireland, the land of
the Scots. Thus alſo Giraldus Cambrenſis,
That the Scotch nation is the off-ſpring of Ireland, is
ſufficiently prov'd by the reſemblance of Language and
Dreſs, as well as of arms and cuſtoms, continu'd to
this day. But now of the Points, which I had
to offer, to be further conſidered by the Scots.
Since they who are the true genuine Scots,

. * 1n4 Own not the name of Scots, but call themſelves
Pe).

Gaiothel, Gael, and Albin; and many People are
call'd by their neighbours after another name than
what they give themſelves, by which the firſt
riſe of nations is often traced ; (for inſtance,
the people of the lower Pannonia, who call them-
ſelves Magier, are call'd by the Germans Hun-
ari, becauſe they were originally Hunns; the
eople bordering upon the forelt of Hercynia,
go by the name of Czechi among themſelves,
whereas they are call'd by others Bohami, becauſe
they are the oft-ſpring of the Boii in Gaul; the
Inhabitants of Africa, who have alſo a peculiar
name among themſelves, are call'd by the Spa-
niards Alarbes, becauſe they are Arabians; the
Iriſh, who call themſelves Erenach, are by our
Britains call'd Gwidhil; and both the Iriſh and
Britains give the Engliſþ no other name than
Saſſon, becauſe we are deſcended from the
Saxons:) Since theſe things are ſo; I deſire it
may be enquir'd by the Scots, whether they
were not ſo call'd by their neighbours,
Scythe. For, as the Low-Dutch call both Scythi-
ans and Scots by one name, Scutten ; fo it may be
obſerv'd from the Britiſh writers, that our Bri-
tains likewiſe called both of them ESt. Nin-
nius alſo expreſsly calls the Britiſh inhabitants
of Ireland, Sythe, and Gildas calls that Sea
which they paſs'd over out of Ireland into Bri-

nba. tain, Vallis Scythica. For ſo it is in the Paris

Edition, whereas other Editions abſurdly read

it Styticha valls. Again, King Alfred (who,

Seven, C, | eight hundred years ago, turn d Oroſius's Hi-

| ſtory into Saxon) tranſlates Scots by the word

Scyttan ; and our own borderers on Scotland do

not call them Scots, but Scyttes and Scetts. For as

the ſame people (ſo Walſingham has it) are call d

Socket 3 Jo from one and

the ſame original come Scythæ, Scitici, Scoti,
Scotici.

But whether the name was given that nation
by the neighbours, on account of its Scythian
manners, or becauſe they came from Sqtbia; is
What I would have them conſider in the next

quaſi | be ſav'd in this point, unleſs they be tranſplant-

place. For Diodorus Siculus and Strabo expreſsly Lib. 6.

compare thoſe Britains, who were the original Strabo, lib. 4.

Inhabitants of Ireland (the true native country

of the Scots) to the Scythians, in point of barba-

rity. Beſides, they drink the blood out of the

wounds of the lain, they ratifie their leagues

with mutual draughts of blood, and the wild

Iriſh and thoſe who are true Scots think their

honour greater or lefs, in proportion to the

numbers they have ſlain ; as the Sythians here-

tofore did. Farther, it is obſervable, that the

main weapons among the Scots, as well as among

the Scythians, were bows and arrows. For

Orpheus calls the Sythians +okogdest, as lian
Julius Pollux, Sagittarii, Archers ; and upon

this, the learned are of opinion that both na-

tions took that name from their skill in ſhooting.

Nor is it ſtrange, that ſeveral nations ſhould

take the ſame name, from the ſame Cuſtoms ;

ſince thoſe who have travell'd the Weſt-Indies,

tell us, that their ſtout men who uſe bows and

owing: = N r all over India 4. the Iſlands .,

about it, e common name of Caribes, tho Benz, lib. >:

they are of — nations. n 3
ut that the Scots came from Scythia, the Iriſh

Hiſtorians themſelves relate ; for they reckon

Nemethus the Scythian, and long after, Dela (de-

ſcended from the poſterity of Nemethus, or, in -

other words, of Scythian extraction) among the

firſt inhabitants of Ireland. Ninnius alſo, Eluo-

dugus's Scholar, expreſsly writes thus: In the

fourth age of the world (the ſpace berween the

building of the Temple and the Babyloniſh
Captivity) the Scythians poſſeſs d themſelves of Ire-

land. Agreeable to this, is the authority ot

modern writers; of Ciſner in his Preface to

Crantz ius; and of Reinerus Reineccius, who ſays, Tom. 1. p. 37;
There remains a nation of the Scots in Britain, de-

ſcended from the Scythians. And a late learned |
Iriſh Antiquary declares, That it appears by 34. O.
all their ancient Records, that they had their Fend *
original from the Sthians; obſerving alſo, that Orig. Brie,
a part of their Country in their own language Przt. p. 37.
is called Gethluighe, i. e. Gothland, from the

Goths or Scythians who took poſſeſſion of it.] Yer

I much queſtion, notwithſtanding the Getes were

a Scythick nation, whether Propertius means

our Iriſh, when he ſays, |

- Hibernique Getæ, Pictoque Britannia curru.

And Iriſh Getes, and Britiſh foes that ride
In painted Chariots — —

But perhaps the honour of the Scots is not to From hence

the Scots
came into

ed from Spain into Ireland: For this, both they Ireland.
and their Hiſtorians do as zealouſly contend for,

as if their lives and liberties were at ſtake ; and Sts,
indeed not without ſome reaſon. And there- Scythians ig
fore all this is but loſt labour, if there are no T.
Scythians to be found in Spain. But that there

were Scythians in Spain (not to mention the
Promontory among the Cantabri, called Scythi-

cum, next to Ireland; nor what Strabo writes,

that the Cantabri were like the Scythians in man-

ners and barbarity,) is clear from Silius Italicus, |
who was born in Spain. For that the Cancani, Cuncani,
a nation of Cantabria, were the oft-ſpring of the

Maſſagetæ, i. e. the Scythians, appears by this

verſe of his;

Et que Maſſagetem monſtrans feritate parentem 2 Ital,
Cornipedis fuſa ſatiaris Concane vena. id. 3.

Concans, that ſhow themſelves of SHthian ſtrain,
And horſeꝰs blood drink from the reeking vein.

' Some

—

cxlvii

The SC OT F.

Some few lines after, he informs us that the
Farmatæ (who are granted by all to be Scythians)
built Suſana, a City of Spain;

Sarmaticos attollens Suſana muros.
Suſan, that rears her proud Sarmatian Walls.

From theſe Sarmate or Scythians, the Luceni,
whom Oroſius places in Ireland, ſeem to be
deſcended (ſeeing Suſana is reckon'd by the
Spaniards themſelves among the Lacenfii ;) as

likewiſe the Gangani of Ireland, from theſe

Concani. For the Lucenſii and Concani among the

Cantabri, were neighbours; as the Luceni and

Gangani were, on the coaſt of Ireland which

lies towards Spain. If any one ſtart the queſti-

on, What Scythians theſe were that came into

Spain? I can ſay nothing to it, unleſs you al-

low them to have been Germans. And I wiſh,

the Scots themſelves would conſider this point.

Germans in That the Germans formerly enter'd Spain (not
— to urge the authority of Pliny, who calls the Ore-
tani of Spain, German,) Seneca, who was him-

De Conſul, ſelf a Spaniard, will ſhew us. The Pyrenees,
ad Albin. (ſays he) did not ſtop the paſſage of the Germans 3
2 + 12. %½ f Levity of human nature forc d it ſelf through
4 Sov mona theſe impaſſable and unlnoum ways. And that the
Germans were called Scythians, may not only be

gather'd from Ephorus and Strabo, who call all the
nations towards the north Scythians ; but alſo
from Pliny. The name of Scythian (ſays he) is every
where uſed among the Sarmatz and Germans.
Aventinus is my witneſs, that the Germans
were call'd Sythe and Scythulz by the Hunga-
rians. Now, to derive their Original from
the Scythians, can be no max diſhonourable,

Lucens,

ſince they are not only a molt ancient people, |

but have conquer'd many other nations; have
been invincible themſelves, and free from any
foreign yoke. I muſt not omit, that the Cauci
and Menapii (who were reckon'd among the
moſt famous nations in Germany) are placed
by Ptolemy, under the ſame names and at the
ſame diſtance, in Ireland; which makes it pro-
bable, that they had both Name and Original
from the Germans.

If the Scots are not deſcended from theſe ; I
would have them conſider, whether they are
not the off- ſpring of thoſe Barbarians, who
were driven out of Gallæcia in Spain by Con-
ſtantine the Great, according to the Chronicle
of King Alphonſus. For it is from thoſe parts,
that they would have themſelves tranſplanted
into Ireland. It they examin who theſe Bar-
barians were ; I doubt nor, but they will agree
with me, that they were Germans. For in the
reign of Gallienus, Oroſius ſays, that the more
remote Germans poſſeſs d themſelves of Spain f then
waſted ; and who could theſe remote Germans
be, but the Sqthians? But Aurelius Viclor,
publiſhed by Andreas Schottus, calls thoſe
Germans, Franks. Yet, ſeeing theſe Franks and
the remoter Germans ſailing out of Germany,
were carry*d by ſtreſs of weather a long way
into the Ocean, and, as Nazarius ſays to Con-
ſtantine, infeſted the Spaniſh coaſts all along
our ſeas ; who can believe that they left Ireland
(a moſt fruittul Iſland, and excellently ſituated
tor Deſcents into Spain) for the dry barren ſoil
* Cantabriz. of Biſcay ? Nay rather, as the Norwegians

from Scandia, in the time of Charlemain and

after, often invaded Ireland and got footing

there; ſo we may probably imagin that former-

ly the Franks did the ſame, and that they
paſs'd from thence into Spain; and, being
Qrefius, lib. 7. driven out there by Conſtantine the Great, return'd
to Ireland. Ir is alſo likely, that more of them

Faſſ.cus.

+ Abraſa,

| afterwards went thither ; as well when i 3

Vandals and Goths made thoſe terrible de-
vaſtations in Spain, and the barbarians were at
war among themſelves, and kill'd and plunder'd .
one another; as when the inyaſions of the Saracens
gaul'd the Spaniards, and drove many of them
into Gallitia and Cantabria. But let others clear
theſe matters; it is enough for me, that I have
ſhown my willingneſs to remove the cloud.

The next Query I would offer to them, is,
how it comes to paſs, that the Iriſh (the An-
ceſtors of the Scots) and the Scots themſelves,
glory in the name Gael and Gaiothel ; and that
their language is call'd Gaiothlac; and why the
nam'd that part of Britain where they rl.
ſettled, Argathel ? From what original can they
derive theſe names? From the Gallæci in Spain,
many of whom doubtlefs ſhifted into Ireland ;
and whoſe original is to be fetch'd from the
Gallati or Gauls ? or from the Goths, as ſoms
moderns are of opinion, who would deduce the
word Gaiothel (as Cathalonia in Spain) from the
Goths? Here, they will naturally ſeek for proofs,
in ſome reſemblances between the Gothick
language, and that of the Iriſh ; which yet hasno
congruity with any other language of Europe that
I can find, but only the Britiſh and the German.
How true that of Huntington may be; The Scots
came from Spain to Ireland in the fourth age of the
world ; and part of them ſtill remain behind, and
Jpeak the ſame language, and are called Navarri ; I
lay, how true this paſſage is, let others judge.
I take no notice ot David Chambres, a Scotch-
man, who was informed by the Jeſuits, that
the Scotch language is ſpoken in the Eaſt-Indies.
I am afraid, the diſtance of that country might
prompt the credulous man to take the liberty of
telling a lye which he never made.

It arguments may be drawn from Habits ; we Got wt Þ
ſhall find the ſame dreſs and apparel among the Highlanin

Highlanders of Scotland, that was formerly uſed haue de
by the Goths ; as appears by Sidonius, who in
his deſcription of a Goth, has given you the
picture of a Scotch Highlander. They ſhine (ſays
he) * with yellow ; they cover their feet as high as * Cv,
the ancle with hairy untanu'd leather ; Their knees,

legs, and calves, are all bare. Their garment is

high, cloſe, and of ſundry colours, hardly reaching

down to their hams. Brac
root of their arms. Their inner coat is green, and"

edged with red fringe. Their belts hang down from

the ſhoulder. The lappets of their ears are cover d

with * Locks of hair hangiag over them (for ſo the“ Heli
* ſeparate twiſts in the hair of the Scotch

and Iriſh, are properly call'd.) Their Arms are

hooked Spears (which Gildas terms uncinata tela)

and I hatchets to fling. They wore alſo ſtrait-bodicd)) Securit
coats (as Porphyry ſays) without girdles. Whether miſſion.

In Horat. 9

this is not the very habit of the Jriſþ-Secots, I Arte Port
appeal to themſelves. I would alſo have them
conſider this paſſage of Giraldus Cambrenſis in
his firſt Book Of the Inſtitution of a Prince : When
Maximus paſs'd out of Britain into Gaul to poſſeſs
himſelf of the Empire, with the whole ſtrength of men,
and arms, that the Iſland could raiſe ; Gratian
and Valentinian, brothers aud partners inthe Empire,
ſhipp'd over the Goths (a nation hardy and valiant,
being at that time either their allies, or ſubjefts, and
ſecur d to their Intereſt by ſome Imperial favours) from
the borders of Scythia, into the north parts of Bri-
tain, in order to annoy the Inhabitants, and make
them recall the uſurper with their Youth. But being
too powerful for them, both by the natural valour of
the Goths, and by finding the Iſland deſtitute of their
wonted ſtrength ; of Invaders they became Inhabitants,
and poſſeſs d themſelves of no ſmall territories in the
north parts of the Hand. But who theſe Goths

were (unleſs you allow them to, be St) others

mult

1 %
Cxlvii

ſame Appar g

Their ſleeves only cover F the I Brackira |

4995
emmils.

=D; -lorus

e Alus.

.der the
| ar 77.

mans,

| pathias,

I,

en the
rs came
BHBritain
| Buchanan

Lhuidus.

T be SCOTS.

cl

0 —

Lib. 2. de

muſt find out; and perhaps they may have ſome
light from Procopius, where Beliſarius anſwers
the Goths, — ee why they had granted
Sicily to the Romans, in theſe words; We per-

Bello Gotho- mit the Goths likewiſe to have Britain (a much

1 5 rum-

eres
8 ratiam.

o. 6. cap.
"1

XJ -vinm

| Emnins,
5 Di dorus
Wc las.
hs ard
Hlanden
e the
CA ppith
Croc,
rackira eder the
cpi. an 77.
mans,
Jagels this,
. ; 2
curiba
lib. |
Horat. 3
e Port,

n the
ss came
VBritain
Bucha nan

Lhuidus. ,

more excellent Country than Sicily) heretofore conquer d
by the Romans. For it ic but reaſon, that they who
have beſtow'd favours, ſhould receive f equal thanks,
or an equal return of kindneſs. To this head alſo
we may probably reter what the Scots write of
Fergufius the Scot ; how he was a companion of
Alarick the Goth at the ſacking ot Rome:
And what [renicus tells us of Genſricus King of
the Vandals going over to Scotland and Britain
and what Cambrenfis (wherever he had it) re-
lates of the Gaideli or Scots, deriving not only
their name, but their original, from the /andals ;
who (as P. Diaconus informs us) were the ſame
with the Gothe. Nor is it to be thought any
diminution of the glory of the Scots, to own
themſelves the Fraser of the Goths; when
the moſt potent Kings of Spain value themſelves
upon that extraction; and the greateſt of the
Italian Nobility either do in truth derive their
pedigree from the Goths, or at leaſt pretend it.
And the Emperor Charles the fifth was wont
to ſay, that all the Nobility of Europe were
derived from Scandia and the Gotha. However,
all this weighs not ſo much with me, as to
make me believe that the Scots are the oft-
ſpring of the Goths.

In ſhort, I would have the learned part of
the Scots conſider, whether they are not de-
ſcended from the old Britiſh Inhabitants of Ire-
land (for it is certain, that the Britiſh formerly
inhabited Ireland ;) and whether they were not
call'd Scythe or Scott, becauſe they were like the
Scythians in manners, or becauſe they wete the
real Scythians that came out of Scandia or Scy-
thia, to whom the Gallæci, Franks, or Germans
(being driven out of Spain) and alſo the Goths
or Vandals, joined themſelves, when Spain was
imbroil'd in a bloody war; or elſe, that medley of
people that flock'd into Ireland, and thereupon
took the name from their Neighbours. The
language of the Iriſh (faith Giraldus) is called
Gaidelach, being as it were a compound of all
other languages. And Florilegus, whenceſoever
he takes it ; The Scots have their Original from the
Pitts and Iriſh, as being made up of ſeveral na-
tions. For that is called Scot, which is a maſs of
Jeveral thing.. Thus the Almans (according to
Aſinius Quadratus) went by that name, be-
cauſe they ſprung from a medley of People.
Neither can it ſeem ſtrange, that ſo many na-
tions ſhould formerly crowd into Ireland ; ſee-
ing that Iſland lies in the center between Bri-
tain and Spain, and very commodious for the
French-Seas; and in theſe eight hundred years
laſt paſt, it is clear from our Hiſtories, that
many Norwegians, and Ouſtmans from Germany;
and Engliſh, Welſh, and Scots out of Britain,
have planted and ſettled themſelves there.

This is the ſum of what I would deſire the
Scots to conſider, In the mean time, let them
remember that I have aſſerted nothing, but only
hinted . ſome 1 which may ſeem pertinent
to this enquiry, all this give no light to the
original oft the Scots, they muſt apply them-
ſelves for it elſewhere, for I am perfectiy in the
dark in this point; and have purſu'd the truth
(which has ſtill led me) with much labour to
little purpoſe ; however, I hope nothing has
been ſaid, that can reaſonably give offence.

Concerning the time when the name of Scots
Was firſt known in the world, there is alſo
. ome difficulty ; and upon this very point Hum-
rey Lhuid is attack'd by Buchanan, the beſt of

Antiquaries by the beſt of Poets. For Lhuid
having ſaid that the name of Scoti was not to
be found in any Author before Conſtantine the
Great, Buchanan flies upon him with all the
violence imaginable, and tries to diſpatch him

with two petty arguments; the one drawn from

a Panegyriſt, the other from his own conjecture.
Becaule an old Panegyriſt ſays, that Britain in
Cæſar's time was infeſted by enemies from Ire-
land; by conſequence (forlooth,) the Scots at
that time muſt be planted in Britain : whereas
none ever {aid before, that thoſe Iriſh had then
any ſettlement at all, much leſs that they were
Scots. ThePanegyriſt, without queſtion (as is
uſual with Writers) had his eye upon his own
times, and not upon Cæſar's. As for the Con-
jecture, it is not his own, but the learned Joſeph

Ile Britaunos
Ultra noti
Littora ponti
Et caruleos
Scuta Brigantes
Dare Romulets
Colla Cathenis

Juſſit, Cc.

He puts it Scotobrigantes; and then cries out,
that the Scots are indebted to him for the diſ-
covery of their original. For my part, I am
ſorry I cannot ſecond this opinion, having ever
honour d him upon many accounts, and been a
great admirer of his learning. But this con-
jecture is not the product of Copies, but of his
own fancy, and the ſenſe will bear either Read-
ing, ceruleos ſcuta Brigantes as all the Copies have
it, or Cæruleos cute Brigantes, as the learned Hadr.
Junims reads it. Yer Buchanan (chuſing rather
to pleaſe himſelf with his own and other men's
fancies, than to cloſe with the common and
true Reading) cries up this conjecture to the
Skies. Firſt, becauſe Authors do not inform
us, that the Britains painted their ſhields.
Secondly, that Seneca lid Scoto-Brigantes, to di-
ſtinguiſh them from the Brigantes of Spain and
Ireland. Laſtly, becauſe in this verſe he ſepa-
rates the Britaius and the Brigantes, as different
nations. But if one may have leave to diſpute
this point with him; what ſhould hinder them
from painting their ſhields, who painted them-
ſelves and their chariots? What need was there
to coin the new word Scoto-Brigantes for di-
ſtinction's ſake > When he calls them Caruleos,
and ſays they were ſubdu'd by Claudius, does not
this ſufficiently diſtinguiſh them from the other
Brigantes ? That obſervation, of the Britains
and Brigantes, different nations, does not look
like the Poet; who could never be ignorant of
the poetical Liberty of expreſſing the whole by
a part. Since then theſe pleas will not hold, I
will reinforce Buchanan with a ſupply from
Egeſippus, who is commonly thought very an-
cient. For where he treats of the greatneſs of

Scaliger's. For, in his notes upon Propertius, See before,
where he is, by the way, reſtoring that place P+ lix.
of Seneca to the true Reading,

the Romans, he ſays; * Scotland f which owes no- f. e. Tres

thing to other Countries, dreads them ; and fo does land. lib, 3.
Saxony, inacceſſible by reaſon of its bogs. But hold: ＋ g;
this will not come up to the point neither; "> tg

he liv'd ſince Conſtantine, as appears by his own guitar. Bri-
Writings; nor does this make any more for the tamnicarum

Scots living in Britain, than that verſe of 81-4 p. 329.

donius which we cited but now. A more
weighty reaſon, than all this, is that which the
famous and learned J. Craigs, after a nice En-
quiry, has ſtarted, out of Josephs Ben-Gorion

concerning the deſtruction of Jeruſalem; mrs n
e

— — — > wg —

— - —

AY

"The FCO.

—

cli

the year 404.

the Hebrew copy they are expreſsly call'd Scots,
whom Munſter in his latin tranſlation falſly calls
Britains vinſtead of Scots. But I have not yet
found, in what age this Ben-Gorion liv'd. It is
plain, he lived ſince Flavius Joſephus, ſeeing he
makes mention of * Franks. 4
If I ma e ſo many great men in this
— 3 "No far as I have obſerved, the
firſt mention of the Scotch nation in any Au-
thor, is in the reign of Aurelian. For Porphy-
ry, who then wrote againſt the Chriſtians,
takes notice of them in theſe words, as

Againſt the S. Hierom tells us. Nor has Britain (a province
Pelagians, tofruirful in Tyrants) nor the Scotch nations, nor any

of thoſe barbarous nations all around to the very
Ocean, heard of Moſes and the Prophets. At which
time, alſo, or a little before, Antiquaries ob-
ſerve that the names of thoſe mighty nations
the Franks and Almans, were firſt heard of, in
the reign of Gallienus. The opinion therefore
of ſome Authors is not grounded upon good
authority, That the Name and Kingdom of the
Scots, flouriſh'd in Britain many ages before the
birth of Chriſt. Rather take the time of it
from Giraldus. hen Nellus the Great reigned in
Ireland, the fix ſons of Muredus King of Ulſter
polſeſt d the north parts of Britain. So, from theſe
a nation was propagated, and call d by a peculiar name
Scotland, which inhabits that corner even to this day.
But that this happen'd about the time when
the Roman Empire fell to decay, is thus in-
ferr d. While Lagerius ſon of this Nellus reign'd
in Ireland, Patrick the Iriſh Apoſtle came thi-

ther; it being then about the year 430 after the

birth of Chriſt. So that this ſeems to fall a-
bout the time of the Emperor Honorius. For,
whereas before, they liv'd after a rambling
manner without any fixed abode, as Ammianus
tells us, and had long infeſted Britain and the
marches thereof; then they ſeem to have ſettled
themſelves in Britain.
that they then return'd- from Ireland, whither
they had withdrawn themſelves when routed
by the Romans and Britains; and they take
this paſſage of Gildas to be meant of that
time; The Iriſþ robbers return home, with defign to
come back again ſhortly. About this time, Reuda,
mention'd by Bede, is thought by ſome to have
ſettled in this lfland, upon a winding of the
River Cluid northward, either as a Conqueror
or Confederate. From this Captain (ſays he)
they are called Dalreudini to this day : for in their
tongue dal ſignifies a part ; and from this Reuda it
is (as others think) that we call them Redſhanks.
It is thought alſo, that Simon Brech (whom the
Scots affirm to have been the founder of their
nation) flouriſh'd about that time. The true
name of him was Sinbrech, that is, freckled Sin,
as we read in Fordon; perhaps the very ſame
Brichus,who about the age of S. Patrick infeſted
Britain, with Thuibaim, Macleius and Auſpacis,
all Scots ; as we read in the life of S. Carantocus.
But ſince the Scots who live in Britain, call
the Country which they inhabit Alban and Albin,
and the Iriſh themſelves call it Alalany; it may
be no abſurd enquiry, whether this Alabany may
not have ſome remains of the old name Albion;
or whether it may not be from Albedo white-
neſs (which they call Ban,) ſo as Elanban may
be in Scotch, a white land; or whether it might
not come from Ireland, which is call'd by their
Poets Banno, and ſo Allabany ſignify another Ire-
land, or a ſecond Ireland. For Hiſtorians call
Ireland Scotia Major, and the kingdom of the

But they would have it,

Scots in Britain Scotia Minor. Moreover, ſeeing
the Scots call themſelyes in their own language
Albin (whence Blondus has named them Scoti
Albienſes or Albinenſes, and Buchanan Albini,)
let the Criticks conſider, whether that of
S. Jerom, where he inveighs againſt a certain
Pelagian, a Scotch-man, ſhould not be read
Albimum for Alpinum ; He calls him, An Alpine An Alyiy
Dog, huge and corpulent, who can do more wiſth Dog,
| with his heels than with his teeth, for he is the off= S. Albin ,
Jpring of the Scotch nation borderi the My
n.

Albin
Albin"

dering upon Britain:
And he ſays in another 12 he Gs Spe BY
with Scotch ſ fourmetie. I do not remember that Albinu,
I ever read of Alpine Dogs ; but that the (a) + Pal,
Scotch Dogs were then famous at Rome, appears
from Symmachus. Seven Scotch Dogs (ſays he) 2th Dy,
were ſo admired at Rome the day before the Plays, « F. 21% WY
that they thought them brought over in iron-cages. 3
After the Scots (b) were come into Britain, to
the Picts ; though they annoy'd the Britains
with continual skirmiſhes and ravages, yet the
Scotch kingdom came not immediately to it's
growth, but they continu'd a long time in the
corner where they firſt arriv'd : nor did they 2
(as Bede ſays) for the ſpace of one hundred and 215. l. ,,
twenty ſeven years or thereabouts, take the 9
field againſt the petty kings of Northumber-
land; till at the ſame time they had well-nigh
routed the Picts, and the kingdom of Nor-
thumberland was utterly deſtroyed, by Civil
wars and the invaſion of the woe Then,
all the north part of Britain fell under the name
of Scotland, together with that hither-country
on this ſide the Cluid and Edinburgh Frith. For,
that this was part of the kingdom of Nor-
thumberland, and in the poſſeſſion of the Saxons,
is univerſally agreed. Whereby ir comes to
paſs, that all the inhabitants of the Eaſt part
of Scotland (called Lowland-men, as living Low)
are originally Saxons, and ſpeak Engliſh. But
ſuch as live toward the Weſt (called Highland-
men, from their bigh ſituation) are real Scots
and ſpeak Iriſh, as we obſerv'd before ; being
mortal enemies to thoſe Lowlanders who ſpeak
Engliſh.
hat the Attacotti, a warlike nation, did in-
feſt Britain, along with the Scots; we have the
authority of Ammianus Marcellinus : and, that
theſe were part of the Scotch nation, is the o-
— of H. Lhuid; how true I know not.

Who tells us, that when he was young (proba-
bly in the time of the Emperor Julian) he ſaw in
France the Attacotti a Britiſh People, feeding upon
man's fleſh ; and that when they found in the woods,
droves of hogs, and herds of beaſts or ſheep, they
us'd to cut off the buttocks of the herdſmen, and the
paps of the women, and look upon theſe as the richeſt
dainties. For we are to read it Attacotti, upon
the authority of Manuſcripts, and not Scotz
with Eraſmus; who. at the ſame time owns the
place to be faulty. Though I muſt confeſs, in 2
one Manuſcript it 1s Attigotti, in another Cata- Vincertia 1
cotti, and in A third Cattiti. a
cannot be underſtood ; as it commonly is; for reads it 4

Jerom in that place, ſpeaking of the Cuſtoms of"...

following, thus, The Scotch nation has no wives belong= they ate,
ing to particular men, &c. And in another place, N |

where he mentions the Attacotti, Eraſmus puts
in the room of it Azoti. Theſe (as we learn
from the Notitia) were Stipendiaries, in the de-
cline of the Roman Empire. For they are

mention'd among the Palatine-Aids in Gaul,
Ps Attecotti

8

”

(a) Of what great value the Britiſh Dogs were, ſee at large in Hamſbire.
(b) Of the firſt coming of the Scots into Britain, ſee Stillingſleet's Orig. Britann, p. 280.

St. x, 2. m f
erom expreſly calls them a Britiſh People: Jouiaum i

But of the Scots it his See

ſeveral nations, begins the ſentence immediately geogrpt!

*
5 2 -
» 2 *
1 A
_ 4
*
=
*
a
— —_— — . - - ? . . A
= = Y * ja 1 - rs — — ”
_— *

8 N
„n, f
aly
.
=,

1.74
I Wl

ele

Itter,

p 1
:

* 0 F
|
t
4
N
1
*
4
?
4

*
*

i.

—]— — —

_

——

TS —— —

e | 24 x1 uss unduroosg N 9 "Ow
'

% urenuos d | * | f
, 12 4 4
5 „lex 4 gs ax e "CA
932 aw | 4 <A 5 44 10
: ſ v3. « | / IAX:IS _
— hb. "CT © N 2 ; 48 N N ab Ao dera
£5 r | | | 0 vdo 3 8 *
4 24228 2 48
? | Thi * | |
4 AN pr 6 . XI27 epkdriv, 4 * —
. XXI IS Mt G88! KANN
K S SE by - 4 7 A o
| . r
| 7 8 c INI * . by * Pn, 4
v1 aA { AC — 2
te,
. OY >
* 5 lv duij
f 282 G- ddodguaa g ; 4
1 9 9 nlq * > .
%
lee qlouo da 1
1 „
W ua And
. be _—_ + * 8
A .
aller foreleg, 4
N FI 4 . * yr v9 A 0 | 8 VI. c
Hay . 42707
2 Fl 3 Eyril 5nd. 9
14 3 4 4% 4 er e 1 J ve
44 5 17 27 Q | mne 27
Lune. 2 Dre - 4 77 B i leu
nene, ar- tre uu * 77 —
oy vudi 4lrgur |
Q
: /
OT ds v1 yunqlagno o F-

*
We |

Yplan

-PITUOXTYS

VFINNY.LLIUHq

4

Aa

e dodꝰoq J. 7
\ ['LOA |

djno.l ailn2g un 87

|

© Snliqloagunuyeg' gg

a1dYgilong

ts

* _ 3

4am |

oyWoeg

1 und uro

oma i

11

2

6
, OW —
r

*
——

„„ EL Addr. aut ww i Vie ot he 26's

Ambrones
Engliſh
Saxons.

Call'd alſo

"TA

A
=
ID
Z

wrtigern.
0 + Trans n
Freficam.

.

7 n 5 2 2 * - -
. . ·˙ 3 2 — — a Pe P

:

b
!
|
t

*
1
1
1
.
:
:
——— — — — * —
— — — —— ' —— OE ũ r-̃— —
— "a — — — — —

e AM

2.4 The EN G L

1

Is H- S ANTON SV.

= Ambrones
.

Attecotti juniores' Gallicani, and  Attecotti Homori
Seniores; and in Italy, Attecotti Honoriani jumiores.
By this addition of Honoriani, they ſeem to have
been ſome of thoſe Barbarians with whom H
norius the Emperor made a+ League, and liſted
them in his army; not without great damage
to the Hnpir e:: 100d % t ]
Among the nations which made incurſions
into Britain, the Ambrones are reckon'd by John
Caixa (one, who” has employ'd his time to ex-
cellent purpoſes, and to whom the Common-
wealth of Letters is extreamly indebted ;) and
he does it upon the Authority of theſe words of
Gildas where he treats of the Pifts and Scots.

Thoſe former enemies, like ſo many * ravenous wolves,

—— — ut a

eng d with hunger and thirſt, leaping over the

with e wings of oars, the arms of rowers, and ſails
drivex\ forward by the winds ; break through, and
butcher all they come near. Here, the good old
man remember d that he had read in Feſt
how the Ambrones (warm'd into Italy along wi

—=> » —
— —

the Cimbrians; but then he had forgot that
Ambro (as Iſidore obſerves) ſignifies a Devourer

And neither Gi/dag,nor Geoffrey of Monmouth (who
alſo calls the Saxons Ambrones) uſe the word in
any other ſenſe... Nor have I found in ancient

Authors, that any ether Ambrones did ever in-

6 * Y | as

HEN che Roman Empire, un-
a 7 \

—7

was declining apace; and Hri-
tain, both (a) robb'd of her
a bleſt men by frequent levies,

and abandon'd by the Roman
garriſons, was not in a condition to withſtand

der Valentinian the younger,

w + Dr

1 * R

ENGLISH-SAXONS.

| and building upon the cowardice of the na-
tives; under pretence of ill pay and ſhort diet,
they enter into a league with the Picts, raiſe a
molt bloody wat againſt their Entertainers the
Britains, put the poor ig Inhabitants
in all parts to the ſword, walte their lands, raze

| olds, and the ſhepherd not appearing ; carried

| their cities 3 and after many turns and changes
ond ade che incurſions of the Pics and Scots: Vor-] in their ſeveral battles with Aurelius Ambrofius Aurelius Am- |
ungern. tigern (who either was conſtirured Gene- | (who had taken upon him the government, (f) brobus ; by |
ral by the Britains, or, as ſome think, | in the adminiſtration whereof his parents had A |

uſurp d that title) (6) in order to confirm his | loſt their lives) and with the (g) warlike Arthur; ——

I W — ———
. -

overnment, and recover the ſinking State,
ends for the Saxons out of Germany to his re-
lief. He was, (lays 2 prehenſtue of
danger from the Piłts and Scots, (c) Fr the Roman
power, and from Aurelius Ambrofins. TheSaxons,
immediately, under the command of Hengilt
and Horſa, (d) arriv'd in Britain with their
Ciules (e), (tor ſo they call'd their flat-bottom'd
boats or pinnaces,) and, by their ſucceſs againſt
the Scots and Picts in two ſeveral engagements,
rais'd their reputation conſiderably. And be-
cauſe the Britains did Ig depend upon
their Valour, they ſent for freſh ſupplies out of
Germany, partly to man the frontier garriſons,
and partly to annoy the enemy by ſea. Guorti-
gem (ſays Ninnius) at the inſtance of Hengiſt,
ſent for Octha and Ebiſſa to come to his aid; and
they, with forty of their Ciules, ſailing round the
Piftiſh coaſts, waſted the Orcades, and poſſeſs d them-

BY: ro makes of « ger many Hands and conic by
; Num,

the Frith, as far as the borders of the Pitts. At
length, being mightily pleas'd with the lands,
the way of living, and the plenty of Britain,

" d
a. FI , 2 4 Ado

at length they diſpoſſeſs the Britains of the beſt
part of the Ifland, their hereditary eſtates. At
which time (in a word) the miſerable natives
ſuffer d whatever the Conqueror could infli&, or
the r fear. For auxiliary troops flock-
ing daily out of Germany, ſtill engag'd the
harraſs'd Britains afreſh,: ſuch were the Saxons,

and the Angles, They were indeed, ſtrictly
(peaking, diſtinguiſh'd by theſe names; bur
yet promiſcuouſly. call'd Angles and Saxons. Bur
let us no treat ſeverally and - briefly of each;
that, as far as is poſſible, we may diſcover the
originals of our own nation.

+, Only, I muſt firſt ſer down v hat I/itichindu,

us concerning the coming over of the Saxons.
Britain, having been before reduced into the
form of a Province by Veſpafian the Emperor, and
flouriſh'd a great while under the protettion of the
Romans; was at laſt invaded by the neigh-
bouring nations, as ſeeming to be abandoned by

the Roman aids. For the Romans, after
| u | Martian

FS 4 — n a a 4 a6

a. as ä wy of,

(a) It was moſt of all exhauſted by the proceedings of Maximus z who, being ſet up Emperor by the 2 2

Britain, to ſecure himſelf againſt Gratian and Valentinian, carried over t
let them return home, See Ninnius, cap. 23. Stillingfl. _ Brit, F.
Pits, as his own Subje 0

(5) Not ſo much againſt the Scors an

ho flower of the Britains, and wou
288. ,

&s, r- tho” thoſe northern nations did (no doubt)

very much terrifie him; yet he had more reaſon to be jealous of the Britains themſelves, if what Gildas tell us be true,

that, in the confuſion 4 Ca were left, tbey ſet up Kings and

uichly detbroned them, advancing worſe to that dignity.

(e) This muſt be meant of the Roman party left in the [Nland, who might be 1 to have a greater reſpect

for Ambroſius, * For the Northern nations, breaking in upon Rome at that time, di

that no harm could be fear'd from thoſe parts,
(d) See Biſho

P Uſher's Antiquit, Britann. p. 207, Ce.
(e) I rather think it was a general name for their ſhips.

ſo effeAually divert that nation,

For William of Malmesbury, deſcribing their coming,

fays, they brought three Ciules, which the Saxon Annals expreſs by Scipas. And it is a word too, very commonly
made uſe of fo the names of men, which generally conſiſted of ſore hing ſublime, and never of diminutiver. Unlets
theſe Ciules were their pirating veſſels; for then, we need not wonder that they paſs d into the names ot men, fince

piracies were tlie peculiar talent and glory of that nation.

( f Probably murder d by their own ſubjects z according to Gildas's character of their behaviour af that time.
(g) How far the Britiſh Hiſtory of Arthur may be admitted; See Stillingfieet's Orig, Britan, p. 335

Ulher, Primord; p. 61, &c.

the Jutes (for that is their right name, not Vites) |

a Saxon born, and an ancient writer, has left

— —

eur

|
| Mar tialis;
1 but in the
| margin, Poſ-
| fibly Marti.
anus,
i

— -

—

The EnGLISH-SAXONS,

2 | b
ch

ln the text“ Martian the E was murder d by the ſoldiers,

were henvil) d with foreign wars, and fo were
not able ff toi alles with aids, as they had
formerly done. However, before they quitted the na-
tion, they built à large wall for it s defence, ruming
along the borders thereuſ from ſen to fed, where they
ima; in d the enemy 4 malo their Inroads. But
after a ſoft und lazy people were left to encounter a
reſolute and well-diſtiplin'd enemy, it was found no
hard matter to demoliſh that - work. - In the mean
time, (a) the Saxons grew ſumsus for their ſucceſs in

arms, and to them they diſpatch*d an humble embaſſy |

to defere their aſſiſtemee. The Embaſſadors, being ad-
mitted to audience, made their addreſſes as follows.

Brett, for /t noble Saxons, The miſerable || Britains, ſhat-'

\ Britanni.
|

* Pehitz, in
the margin
Picti.

Stillingfl.
| Orig. Brit.
1 | p. 320.

the Saxons.

ter d and worn out by the frequent incurſions of their
enemies, upon the news of your many ſignal victories,
have ſent us to you, Tumbly requeſting that you would
aſſiſt them at this juncture. A land large and
ſpacious, abounding with all manner of neceſſaries,.
they give up entirely to your diſpoſal. Hitherto, we
have liv'd happily under the government and protection
of the Romans; next to the Romans, we know none
of greater walour than your ſelves, and therefore in
your courage do now ſeek refuge. Let but this courage-
and thoſe arms make us conquerors, and we refuſe no
ſervice or duty you ſhall pleaſe to impoſe. The Saxon
Nobles return'd them this ſhort anſwer. Aſſure your
Jetves, the Saxons will be true friends to the Britains;
and as ſuch, ſhall be always ready to relieve their ne-
ce/ſities, and to advance their intereſts. The Embaſ-
fadors, pleas'd with the anſwer, return home, and
comfort their country-men with the welcome news. At-
cordingly, the ſuccours they hid promis d being diſ-
patch'd imo Britain, are joyfully recetv d by their
allies ; and do in a very little time clear the kingdom
of Irvaders, and reſtore the country to the Inhabitants.
And indeed, therewas no great diſficulty in doing this,
fince the fame of the Saxon Valour had ſo far terrify'd
them, that their very preſence was enough to drive
them away. The prople who infeſted the Britains,
were the Scots and * Picts; and the Saxons were ſup-
ply'd by the Britains with all neceſſaries to carry on the
war againſt them. Upon which, they ftaid in the
country for ſome time, and liv'd in very good terms
with the Britains ; till the Commanders (obſerving that
the land was large and fruitful, and that the natives
were not at all incliu d to war ; and confedering that
themſelves, and the greateſt part of the Saxons, had no
fix d habitation) fend over for more forces, and ſtri-
king up a peace with the Scots and Pitts, make one
body againſt the Britains, force them out of the na-
tion, and divide the country among their own people.
Thus far Mirichindus; | who yer ſeems too laviſh
in the Promiſes of duty and ſubmiſſion ſup-
poſed to be made by the Britiſh Ambaſſadors.
For neither Bede, nor Ethelwerd (both Saxons)
mention the leaſt promiſe of ſubmiſſion ; and
Gildas expreſsly ſays, That their firſt pretence of
Quarrelling, was for greater Allowance (call'd by
him Epimenia, and by Bede Amonæ ;) which |
ſhows, that they came over as mercenary ſoldiers, |
upon promiſe of pay.]

Ihe original and apology of the Saxons,
like thoſe of other nations, have been con-
founded with fabulous conje&ures, not only by
Monks, who underſtood nothing of Antiquity,
but even by ſome modern Pretenders. One
will have them deriv'd from Saxo, ſon of Neg-
non, and brother of Vandalus; another, from
their ſtony temper ; a third, from the remains of

the Macedonian army; a fourth, from certain

a.

knives ; which gave occafion to that rhime in |

Engelhuſius,

Quippe brevis gladius apud 5 Sana vocatur,
Ude fibi Sam nomen traxiſſe pututur.

The Saxon people did, as moſt believe,
Their name from Saxa, a ſhort ſword, receive.

Crantzaus derives them from the German Cart; ;
and the learned Capnio, from the Phrygians.
Of theſe, every man is at liberty to take
his choice; nor ſhall I make it my buſineſs to
confute ſuch fabulous opinions. Only, I think
the conjecture of thoſe learned Germans, who
imagin that the Saxons are deſcended from the

Sacæ, the moſt confiderable People of Aſia; (i) that 2 :

that is, the Sons of the Sacæ; and that out of
Scythia or Sarmartia Aſiatica, they came by lit-

'tle and little into Europe, along with the Getes,
the Sue vi, and the Daci; this, in my 2 2 Melanibn
0

deſeryes credit the beſt of any other, For in-
deed, the opinions of thoſe who fetch the Saxons
out of Aſia, Where mankind had its riſe and
growth, has ſome colour of reaſon : Since, be-
ſides what Strabo affirms, that the Sacz (as the
Cimerii had done) did invade remote Countries,
and call a part of Armenia, Sacatena, after their
own name; beſides this, Ptolemy places the
Saſſones, Snevi, Maſſagetes, and Dabi, in that
part of Scyrhia-; and Ciſner has obſerved, that
thoſe nations, after they cons into Europe,
retain'd in great meaſure fame vicinity
which they had formerly in Aſia.

Nor is it lefs probable, that our Saxons came y;.4v4
from either the Sacæ or Saſſones of Aſia, than it Mane

is that the Germans are deſcended from the
Germani of Perſia, mention'd by Herodotus ;
which yet they poſitively conclude from the
affinity of thoſe Languages. For the learned
Joſeph Scaliger has told us, that Fader, muder,
brader, tutchter, band, and the like, are ſtill uſed
in the Perſian Language, in the ſame ſenſe as
Father, mother, brother, daughter, bond, are with us.

However, this original of the Saxons from g,;n;,4 Þ
the Sace of Aſia, may be thought too far Org. 8 |
tetch'd; unleſs there were ſome fair hiſtorical p. 30

account, how the Saxons came to be propagated
by thoſe Sacz ; and no ſuch account being given,
it may ſeem to be little more than a poſſibility.
Nor may that other original from the ſhorr
ſwords call'd Sachs ſeem altogether vain, when
it is conſider d, that the Quirites had their name
from Quiris, a ſhort ſpear, and the Scythians
from Scytten, to ſhoot with a Bow. Tacitus
alſo, ſpeaking of ſome of the Northern Ger-
mans, ſaith, That the common Badges they wear, are
round ſhields, and fhort ſwords ; and the Arms of
Saxony to this day, as Pontanus obſerves, are
two ſhort ſwords a-croſs.1

But when the Saxons firſt began to have a
name in the world, they liv'd in Cimbrica Cher-

Janeſus, which we now call Denmark; where they

are ſettled by Ptolemy, who is the firſt that
makes mention of them. And in that place of
Lucan, |
—Longiſque leves Aucnes in armis.
Light Axons in long arms,

ve

8

— a *

*

— - — . FONTS
.
4

(a) The former experience that Britain had had of the Saxon courage, was ſuſficient to point cut that nation be-
fore any other, For even in the times of the Romans, they were not afraid to prey upon our coaſts 3 and to that
degree, as to oblige them to guard the coaſfls, with the Officer call'd Ces Litrerss Saxon.

(5) See Seld, Polyolb, p. 27.

they are ſo called, as if one ſhould ſay Sacaſones, Ala.

11.

Ciſner,

I. FAIRY *
>

—

clvii
.

Axones.a P
ple of Gau

In leges v

epti,

Zoſumus.

einerd

ephew's
ephew to

ö ing Adulf

puriſh'd a
put the ye;

0.

Jes,

=

Iſaer.

icbael

aner, ,

clvii
.

tals *
.

* *. FRY A ts. PC.

r ae n WER

The EnGLisSH-SAxoON s.

2Peo-it) but the true reading is Aon: [And that
ole of Gaul, £ reading is the ſame in Ptolemy, where he

I leger re- had poſſeſſed themſelves of Holland; being re-

= pri,

Zams.

tel werd
Nepbew's

ephew to

We Alulſ. Dane-marc. This Author (not to conceal the

puriſh'd a

| ie the year name of a perſon, who has been ſo ſerviceable

c.

N ſecond
of Ley-

tes,

we are not to read Saxones (as ſome Copies have

places them in the Cimbrick Cherſoneſe, is pro-
bable, from a MS. which belong d to Mr. Sel-
den, and which leaves out the initial T.]

While they liv'd in that Cimbrica:Cher ſoneſus, in
the time of Diocleſian, they came along with
their neighbours the Franks, and mightily an-
noy d our coaſts ; and the Romans committed
it to the care of Carauſius to repel them.
(a) Afterwards, paſſing the river Albu, part of
them broke in by degrees upon the SuevianTer-
ritories (which at this day is the Dukedom of
Saxony,) and part took poſſeſſion of Friſia and
Batavia, which the Franks had quitted. For
the Franks, who had formerly inhabited the
inmoſt of thoſe Fens in Frifeland (ſome where-
of are now waſhed into that Sea, which at this
day we call the Zuider-ſee,) and who afterwards

ceiv'd into protection by Conſtantius Chlorus,
and Conſtantine the Great, and his ſons, and
ſent to cultivate the deſarts of Gaul : theſe (
ſay) either forcing a paflage with the ſword into
more plentiful countries, or elſe (as Zofimus
tells us) driven out by the Saxons, left Hol-
land. From which time, all the inhabitants of
that German Coaſt, who lived by piracy, have
gone under the name of Saxons, as before they
were called Franks. Thoſe (I mean) who lived
in Jutland, Slefwick, Holſatia, Ditmarſe, the
Biſhoprick of Breme; the County of Oldenburg, Eaſt
and Weſt Friſeland, and Holland. For the Saxon
nation (as is obſerved by Fabius Quæſtor Ethel-
werd, who was of the Royal line of theSaxons)
included all the Sea-coaſt, between the river Rhine,
and the city Donia, which now is commonly called

to me) was firſt diſcovered by the eminent
Mr. Thomas Allen of Oxtord, a perſon of great
learning and humanity, and was, with many
others, communicated to me.

From this coaſt it was, that the Saxons, en-
couraged by their many ſlaughters of the Ro-
mans, made frequent Inroads into the Provinces,
and for a long time annoy'd this Iſland, till at
laſt Hengiſt himſelf came. That this Hengiſt
ſet ſail for England out of Batavia or Holland,
and built the Caſtle of Leyden, is confirm'd, not
only by the Annals of Holland, bur alſo by the
noble Janus Douſa, a perſon of admirable parts
and learning, who of that burg, or tower,
writes thus,

Quem circinato menium ut ambitu,
Sic arcuatis fornicibus nouum
Putatur Hengiſtus Britanno

Orbe redux poſuiſſe vittor.

The mighty Hengiſt, if we credit fame,

On circling arches rais'd this ſtately pile,

Oer Bririſh Seas when he in triumph came,

And brought new Lawrels from the con-
quer'd Iſle.

The Futes, ſo call'd (as (1) many think) from
the Gutes, Getes, or Goths (tor a Manuſcript copy
reads Geatun) did certainly inhabit the upper

part of Cimbrica Cherſoneſus, which the Danes to

this day call Juitland. It is poſſible, they may
have deſcended from the Gutti, whom Prolemy
places in Saxdia,. and whoſe preſent ſeat is
Gothland. But here I muſt caution you againſt
afleuring to the opinion of that this
was the — of thoſe Goths, who conquered
and over-ran Europe; ſince the moſt ancient

and beſt approved writers have told us, that fell

* * p
* — % 1
2 9
11 *
— ** 1

lan, Treas

ws Pollio

they liv d beyond the Iſter, near the Euxine Sea, —
0.

and were formerly called Getes.

In what place the Angles liv'd, is a debated The Angles

point, and the opinions concerning it are va-
rious. Moſt * — place them in Weſtpha-
lia, where Engern now ſtands, and where the
Suevi-Angli, mentioned by Tacitus and Pto-
ems had their abode. With whom I agree,
it they mean of Tacitus's age; but I fanſy
they came down afterwards to the. Sea-coaſts.
Others ſeek them in Pomerania, where there is
a very conſiderable town called Angloen. But
ſeeing theſe reach into the more inland parts of
Germany, at ſo great a diſtance from the ſea,
we mult ſeek ſome. other place where to ſeat our
Augles ; and Bede has directed us to look for

them between the Saxons and the Jutes. The Zib. 1. c. 15.

Angles (ſays he) came out of that country, which is
called Angulus, and is ſaid from that time to le
waſte, between the countries of the *
Saxons. Seeing between Fuitland an

utes and * Outaram.

Holſatia And in the
margin of

(the ancient ſeat of the Saxons) there is a ſmall Canden. 5,
province in the Kingdom of Denmark and un- te Manu-

der the City of Flemsburg, called at this day ſcript reads it,
t Angel, which Lindebergius in bis Epiſtles"! 7 —

terms Little-Exgland; I am pretty well aſſur'd,
that I have found the ancient Seat of our Fore-

rk z., the

at of the

fathers; and that from this very place the Angles.

Angles came into our Iſland. And what makes
me more confident herein, is the authority of
that ancient Author Ethelwerd, who writes thus;
Old Anglia « fituated between the Saxons and Giots,
the capital town whereof is called in Saxon Sleſwick,
but by the Danes Haithby. In the very ſame
place, Ptolemy ſeems to ſeat the Saxons; ſo
— the middle-age Poet is probably in the
right, |

— Saxonia protulit Anglos,
Hoc patet in lingua, niveoque colore .

Their riſe to Saxony the Angles owe,
Their language, this, and native whiteneſs
ſhow.

Some of theſe Angles, marching into the in-
ner parts of Germany, and mixing with the
ds and Sueviant, broke into Italy, and
are generally ſuppoſed to have left behind them
ſome remains of their name; ſuch are, Engel-
beim, the native country of Charles the Great,
Ingolſtad, Engleburg, Englerute in Germany, and
Angleria in Italy. |
What the etymology of the name is, I dare
not ſay : however, I utterly reject that Angulus,
Son of Humblus, and his . Angela, whom
ſome filly people would have to be the founders
of our Nation. Nor can I believe, that it had
the name from , 4 corner (as if it were
a corner of the world) which is intimated in
thoſe common verſes,

Anglia

1—

(a) Whether the early piracies of the Saxons u

—

that coaſt (mention'd by many Authors,) is to be ſo interpret

» as if they then dwelt between the Elb and the Rhine, or only drew down thither to carry on their trade of
robbing, whilſt ſtill their habitation was in the Cimbrick Cherſoneſe 3 is a queſtion amonglt the learned. Camden
here, and min (Orig. Britan. p. 309.) favour the former Opinion, But Archbiſhop Uſher (Primord.

.) thinks they came down much later.

. 12. | ned
( See Sir Henry Spelman's Gloſſary, under the title Guti.

—

—ů — wc” ny Ro, —_—

OR —

8

clix

The ENGLISH-SAXONS.

Anglia terra ferax, & fertilis angulus orb;
Inſula pradives que toto vix eget orbe.

Wirh richeſt wares, that fake their happy
birth

Or from the face, or bowels of the earth,

Our fruitful corner of the world is bleſt,

Nor joyn'd, and ſcarce beholden to the reſt.

And as for Goropius's conjecture, that the
Angli are derived from an angle, i. e. a Fiſhing-
rod, or Fiſhing-hook, becauſe (as he adds) they
hook all to them, and are, as we commonly ſay,
good anglers ; this does not deſerve ſo much to
be credited, as laughed at. But whoever finds
out the etymology of Engelbert, Engelhard, and
ſuch like German names, does in all proba-
bility at the ſame time diſcover the original
of the Ang/i, That the Friſons came along
with them into Britain, is plain from Proco-

ins. And becauſe that book is not extant,
it may not be amiſs to give you the place en-
tire, as I had it tranſcribed from a Copy in the
King's Library at Paris, by that ſingular good
man, and compleat Antiquary, Franciſcus Pithæus.
De Bell. Goth. Berry lar Thu οο tO Tela worvardewnorale . Par
Lib. 4. os Ts ds autor is igicunt, & bropa xira To7s Theor
drei, Ayynei, Y Oglorong, Te of wow Guwrpor Belr-

Torts» Toogu]y Ii r iu movardewT ia gie don,

Agi d wary roc nave monnrs whine A) ule EU

gurat}, % wal is gegyprs Kopior of 3 dn, WworniCuo

is de e oqueriens vl igtpuortexy ond c draw Y an

c ur Thy Viooy wpganodoJou qaoiy Gt apiat & Wong

Ann, 1 607.

TegTtgg! © geayywr Paonnds im} wgrofen Tor of Imily-

Jad Twas = Caonia Ts5iviany is Rig d rio gel aas d vd eg,
dul ix r Aypiaur Fuulert fert g , ws & #
woes wie Dees dun dre. i. e. (in my
rude tranſlation;? The and of Britain
is inhabited by three moſt populous nations, each
whereof has their ſeveral Kings.
the People are, the ANGLES, the FRISONES,
and thoſe of the ſame name with the Iſland, the
BRITONS. As to the inhabitants, they ſeem to be
Jo numerous, that every year they flock over in great
companies, with their wives and children, to the
Franks, who aſſign them that part of their Iſland,
which is leaſt cultivated. Upon this, they pretend a
claim to the whole and of | Britain ;] and it is not
long, fince the King of the Franks, diſpatching ſome of
h his own ſubjefts on an embaſſie to Juſtinian at Con-
ſtantinople, ſent along with them ſome of the Angles,

out of pure aſtentation, as if the Maud were part of

his dominioas. \
UſherPrimord, [And yet this paſlage is refer'd by others,
2. 216. not to our Britain, but to Brittia; placed by
the ſame Procopius between our Iſland of
Britain, and Thule, which in him is Scandiua-
via, And Iſacius Tzetzes is to be underſtood
of the ſame, when he ſpeaks of the Iſland of
Britain (read Britia,) with Britain on the Weſt,
and Thule on the Eaſt. |,
Saxons, An= "Theſe are the ſeveral people of Germany,
gles, and Ju. who ſeated themſelves in Britain. That they
ten. were but one nation, and called by one general
name, ſometimes Saxons, ſometimes Angles, or
(to diſtinguiſh them from thoſe who were left
behind in Germany) Anglo-Saxons; is plain from
Gildas, Boniface, Bede, Paulus Diaconus, and
others. But in Latin they are moſt frequently
term'd Gens Anglorum (i. e. the nation of the
Angles) and in their own Language, to the ſame
ſenſe, Engla-Theod.
The @) exact time when they were invited
into Britain by Vortigern, is a diſpute amongſt

When the
Saxons came
into Britain,

The names of

writers : but to wave the reſt, Bede and his
followers do thus ſettle the Chronology of thoſe
dark and confuſed times.

In the 23d year of Theodoſius the Younger,
and that of Chriſt 430, the Britains, over-
power'd by the Pi&s and Scots, deſire aid of
Ztius, then in his third Conſulſhip ; but with-
our ſucceſs.

Under Valentinian the third, S. German
came over into Britain two ſeveral times, to op-
poſe the Pelagians ; and leading-up the Britains
againſt the Pits and Saxons, by virtue of his
interceſſion to God gain'd them the victory.

In the firſt year of Martian, and that of
Chriſt 449, the nation of the Engliſh Saxons
came over into Britain.

Bur ſince it is evident from the Kalendar of
the Conſuls, that the third Conſulſhip of Zti-
1 fell in the xxxixth year of that Theodoſius, and
of Chriſt 446; and ſince it appears by the

in the year of Chriſt 435 ; there is great reaſon
to ſuſpe& that the numerals in Bede have been
corrupted, and that the Saxons came over hi-
ther before the year of Chriſt 449. For other-
wiſe, how is it poſſible that 8. German, who
died in 435, ſhould lead up the Britains againſt
the Saxons, who by that computation were not
then come over? Beſides, Ninnius affirms,
that S. German return'd out of Britain into his
own country after the death of Vortigern, who
was the perſon that invited the Saxons into
Britain : fo that their coming over mult neceſſa-
rily have been before the year 435, (6) the laſt
of S. German's life. Farther yer, in the ſecond
year after Leo the Great was made Pope (which
talls in with that of Chriſt 443.) Proſper Tiro,
who lived at the ſame time, tells us, That Bri-
tain, after ſeveral bloody defeats, was at laſt ſub-
dued by the Saxons. Which puts it beyond all
diſpute, that they came over betore that year, I
mean 449. Bur to remove all ſeruples about
that matter, let me add this Chronological note,
which is at the end of ſome copies of Ninnius,
and ſatisfies me beyond all the reſt.

and Rubellins, to that of Stilico, 373 years.
From Stilico to Valentinian, ſon of Placidia, and
to the reign of Vortigern, 28 years.

From the reign of Vortigern, to the Diſcord be-
tween Gaitolinus and Ambrofius, are 12 years :
which is Guoloppum, i. e. Cathguoloph.

Vortigern reign'd in Britain when Theodoſſus and
Valentinian were Conſuls; and in the fourth year
of his reigu the Saxons came over, and were re-
ceived by Vortigern, when Felix and Taurus were
Conſuls.

From the year that the Saxons came into Britain,

anus, are 69 years.

By this computation, the Engliſh-Saxons
muſt have come into Britain in the 21ſt year of
Theodoſius the Younger, which is neareſt to
Bede's account, that is, the year of Chriſt 428;
for then Felix and Taurus were Conſuls: and
other circumſtances, both of perſon and time,
agree to it.

ZEtius, and after the death of Theodofins ; and
finding that this Chronological note at the end
of Ninnius, agrees not with either, they choſe
to govern themſelves in this matter by the Au-
thority of Gildas and Bede, with the Series of the

Britiſh

4 A.

(a) See this matter ſlated at large by Biſhop Uſher Antiquitat, Britann, p. 217, &c. and Dr. Stillingfeet, Orig.

Britan. p. 316.

(b) Corcerging the preciſe time, when 8.

German lived, fee Stillingfl. Orig. p. 208.

But others think, that in this matter there Sill |
are but two certain Characters as to the Time, viz. Orig 5
That it was after the third Conſulſhip ot p. 3%

ch clxi
Uſher. 1
p. 204»

moſt authentick writers, that S. German dy d Barmnix,

From the Conſulſhip of the tuo Gemini, Ru Re kung

(

and were received by Vortigern, to f Decius Valeri- H. iu la |
linus.

Ari The ENnGLISH-SAXONS.

Britiſh and Roman affairs at that time; by
which it falls at or after the year 449.

And the foregoing Arguments, upon which
| it is fix d to a more early date, ſeem to them

Uſher. Prim. to be liable to ſeveral Exceptions. The firſt is
p. 204 · grounded upon St. German's dying in the year

35; but that he liv'd much longer is prov'd

m Honoratus in the life of Hilary Biſhop of
Arles, who mentions St. German as preſent
when Chelidonius was depoſed by Hilary in
his Viſitation 1 2 =
Dom. and which appears to ightly
plac'd by the Epiſtle of Leo, and the Reſcript
of Valentinian upon Chelidonius's Appeal,
which bears date in the year 445. Add to this,
what Bede ſaith, That he was kindly receiv'd by
Valentinian and Placidia, at Ravenna, and
there died; and what Conſtantine faith in his
life, That he ſat thirty years after Amantor in
his See, who died in the year 418. The ſe-
cond Argument from Proſper Tiro, is objected
againſt, becauſe it contradicts Gildas, who may
deſerve greater credit than Proſper Tiro in
matters relating to the Britiſh Hiſtory. And
the third Argument from the Calculation at the
end of Ninnius, is therefore diſlik d, becauſe
it makes their coming-in to be near twenty
years before the third Conſulſhip of Arius.]

1 think fit to advertiſe the reader of one
thing more (not in the mean time, to aſſume
the character of a Critick) (a) that in many
copies of Gildas, from whence Bede took that

allage about Ætius, it is read Agitio III. Con-

li ; and in others, the numerals are omitted,
and it is written Ægitio; and in one, ZEquitio
Cos. But I could never find in the Faſti, any
Conſul of that name, (6b) unleſs we may
imagin that he was an extraordinary Conſul.

Bur at what time ſoever they came over, it 1s
h certain they ſhew'd wonderful courage, and this
Wa ofthe demper with great prudence. For in a ſhorr
Fun, time, they became ſo conſiderable, both for
| numbers, diſcipline, and Conqueſts, that they
were in a moſt proſperous — powerful condi-
| tion, and their victory in a manner entire and
Ned fa WR abſolute. All the conquer'd, except ſome few
| who took refuge in the uncultivated Weſtern

parts, yielded, and became one Nation with
them, and embrac'd their Laws, name, and
language. For beſides Exgland, the Engliſh-
Saxons poſſeſſed themſelves of the greateſt part
of Scotland (and the High-landers, who are the
true Scots, call them Saſſons to this day ;) where
they uſe the ſame language with us,only varying
a little in the Dialect. And this language we
and they have kept in a manner uncorrupted,
together with the kingdom, for 1150 years.
By which it appears how trivial and falſe that
was (like others of the ſame nature) which the
Gila, Saxon Prophets foretold, when they ſet fail for
this Iſland, That they ſhould ſtay here only 300
Sepius wa- years, and that 150 w4 theſe ſhould be f taken up in
WPaturos, Foe Wars.
: he ſubje& matter, and place, ſeem next to
require, that ſomething be added concerning the
Manners and Cuſtoms of our Fore-fathers the
Saxons ; and therefore I ſhall ſer down what 1
have obſerved upon that head.
ultoms and The Saxons were in general a warlike nati-
1 on; and (as Zoſimus has told us) were looked up-
on to be the moſt valiant of all the Germans, both

Rint,

tiliag .
Fig Be
„ 31%

|

for greatneſs of mind, th of body, and a hardy
conſtitution. Marcellinus obſerves, That the Ro-
mans dreaded them above all others, becauſe their
motions were always ſudden. And Orofius ſays,
that, for their courage and activity, they were terri-
ble. Saxony is a place inacceſſible by reaſon of the
marſhes, and the frontiers of it are unpaſſable. But
tho this may ſeem to ſecure them in great meaſure a-
gainſt invaſions, and though the captive Saxons fre-
quently made up a part in the Roman triumphs ; yet
are they accounted a moſt ſtout People, excelling all
others in piracies : however, in theſe they rely more
yu — 1 Fo _ their courage, and _ it
their bufineſs, not ſo to fight, as to run: Thus %% vw
tar Egeſippus ; who is 2 by Iſidore: * 82
Saxons, fituate upon the Sea-ſhore, and among fenns
unpaſſable, are very ſtout and very active. From

whence they took their names, as being athardy reſo- + Saxum,
lute ſort of men, and in piracy out-doing all others.

They were eminent for their tallneſs, ſymmetry

of parts, and exactneſs of features: Where-

upon, Witichindus the Monk has left us this
deſcription of them; The Franks were amazed to

ſee men of ſuch vaſt bodies, and ſo great ſouls. They

wondered at their ſtrauge habit and armour, at their

hair hanging down upon their ſhoulders, and above all

at their courage and reſolution. Their cloaths were

* cloſe-coats ; their armour, long ſpears : when they * Sage.
ſteod, they lean d upon little ſhields ; and wore a ſort

of large knives, hanging before. But tormerly they

us'd to ſhave their heads to the very skin,

except a little about the crown, and wore a

plate round their heads; as Sidonius Apollina-

ris plainly intimates in theſe verſes;

Iſtic Saxona carulum videmus,
Adſuetum ante ſalo, ſolum timere,
Cujrs verticis extimas per oras,

Non contenta ſuos tenere morſus,
Altat lamina marginem comarum.
Et fic criuibus ad cutem reſciſſis,
Decreſcit caput, additurque vultis.

Here twas we ſaw the purple Saxon ſtand,
US'd to rough ſeas, yet ſhaking on the land.
The frozen plate that on their crown they
| wear,
In one great turf drives up their buſhy hair:
The reſt they keep cloſe ſhav'd ; and thus

their face
2 ſtill bigger, as their head grows
leſs.

What their Habits were, may be learnt from
Paulus Diaconus's obſervation upon the Longo-
bards : Their cloaths were looſe, and generally linnen,
ſuch as the Engliſh-Saxons uſe ; the trimming, broad,
and of ſeveral colours.

They were admirably well skill'd in naval The Saxons
affairs; and by their long and continual pira- Kill in naval
cies had inured themſelves ſo to the ſea, that fairs,

(as one has it) they dreaded the land. They

annoy'd the coaſts of Britain and France, even

as far as Spain, to that degree, that it was

found neceſſary to guard the ſhores of both

kingdoms with officers and ſoldiers, againſt any

attempts they might make upon them. And *

theſe, for that reaſon, were called (c) Counts of 250 2 of
the Saxon-ſhore along Britain and France. But for q,,,.

all that, by the help of their nimble Fly-boars,

they made a ſhift very frequently to plunder
x our

no Conſul, but only a perſon of great note and authority

no room for it, See Biſhop Stilling

.

; : biftorici noſtri Cunſules; i. e. Our Hiſtorians very often call eminent men, Conſuls, Sht he
- if the numerals — left out (as they are indeed in ſome Copies ;) but if they are ſuppoſed to ſtand, there is plainly
© deer Orig ines Britannica, p. 300. ES |
(c) See more of theſe in Kent; and Sir Henry Spelman's MS. Leni, in Bodley's Library.

x . | d ms to be of opinion, that this Ktius was really
S 2 88 _ for (ſays be) Iluftres ſepius Viros indigitant

Which conjecture might hold,

clxii

„„ 1 S >> —

*
n 4. | © "9

—_y A .

clxiii

The ENGLISH. SARXO RMS.

—

Clxiy

dur coaſts. To which allude thoſe verſes of
Sidonius Apollinaris :

Quin & Aremoricus piratam Saxona trattus

4 * Sperabat, cui pelle ſalum ſukare Britamum
e 2 & aſſuto glaucum mare findere lembo.

Armorica the Saxon pirates fear'd,

That on the Britiſh coaſts in ſhoals appear d,

And thro' the narrow ſea in boats of lea-

ther ſteer'd.
But in France, near Little-Britain, they got
ſeſſion of all that part about Baieux, and kept
: it a long time; as is evident from Gregorius
Baivcaſſin Turonenfis, who calls them Saxones Baioca(ſini, as
Saxons,
the vulgar term them Sſues Beſſins.

2 1 With what barbarity they plunder d our
ad Nl coaſts, Sidonius himſelf will tell you. The
um. meſſenger (ſays he) whom we diſcourſed pretty large-

+ Pando:

paronese
the margin

Ciuli.

Z. 2.
46.

ly about your affairs, aſſured us that you had lately
charged the enemy at ſea, that you were wholly taken
up between rowing and fighting, and that you were

boats of the Saxons. And in theſe, aſſure your
of as many head-pirates as there are rowers :
are all at the ſame time both maſters and ſervants, all
teach and learn in this their trade of robbing. So
that a caution to take great care of your ſelf, is highly
neceſſary at this time. It 1s the moſt terrible Enemy
you can engage. He takes you unawares, is gone in a
moment, deſpiſes oppoſition, and certainly worſts you,
if you are not very well provided. If he purſue, he
undoubtedly catches you ; if he fly, he always eſcapes.
Shipwracks are ſo far from frighting him, that they
harden him. Theſe people do not only underſt
the dangers of the ſeas, but are intimately inted
with them. In a Tempeſt, if they are fon. it
gives them an opportunity of eſcaping ; if they are
purſuing, it ſecures them againſt being diſcovered at a
diſtance. They readily venture their lives among
waves and rocks, if there is any hope of ſurpriſing
the enemy. Always, before they weigh anchor and ſet ſail
homewards from the Continent, their cuſtom is, to take
every tenth Captive and put them to death by equal
and exquiſite tortures ; which is the more melancholy,
becauſe it proceeds from ſuperſtition ; and, after thoſe
who are to dye, are got together, they pretend to temper
the injuſtice of their death, by a ſeeming equity of Lots.
Such are their vows, and with ſuch vittims do they
diſcharge them. Thus, being rather polluted with ſa-
crilege, than purified by ſacrifices, thoſe bloody mur-
derers look upon it as a greater piece of religion to
rack a poor captive, than to let him be ranſom'd.
To this purpoſe is that fragment of an ancient
Hiſtory, which we find in Iſidore. The Saxon
nation relies more upon their fly-boats, than their
courage; and are always provided rather to run than
fight. And that of Salvian (who lived in thoſe
times) concerning the barbarous nations, The
Alani are immodeſt, but not treacherous; the Franks
are guar ws but 07 3 8 . Saxons are
very cruel, but exceeding chaſte. 0 t con-
ſtancy and reſolution were they (if 4 may ſo
call it,) that they would rather chuſe to mur-
der themſelves, than be expoſed to the contempt
of others. So that when Symmachus had pro-
vided a number of them againſt the publick
ſhows, the very day they were to be brought
into the Theatre, they ſtrangled themſelves, and
ſo diſappointed the people of that piece of di-
verſion. Of theſe, Symmachus himſelf writes
thus: The number of the Saxons is leſſen d by death;
for the private guards not watching narrowly enoug h

ne the winding ſjea-coaſts, giving chaſe to the 7
they

the wicked hands of that deſperate nation, the firſt

day of the ſword-play diſcovered nine and twent
them ſtrangled, without a halter. PE

he Saxon nation was likewiſe ſtrangely ſu-
perſtitious ; for which reaſon, whenever they
had any weighty matters under debate, they
were, belides their ſoothſaying, principally
directed by the neighing of horſes, which they

our Hengiſt and Horſa had their names from an
horſe (for both theſe names in Saxon ſignifie an
horſe) is a myſtery to me; unleſs it was to por-
tend their warlike courage ; according to that
of Virgil,

Bello armantur equi, bella hac armenta minantur.

Horſes are arm'd for war, approaching war
Such beaſts preſage. - NO

They alſo very much us'd the caſting of Lots: Alan h.
for, cutting a branch from ſome fruit-tree, they menks tet
divided it into little lips : each of theſe they **** t tl

diſtinguiſhed by ſeveral marks, and ſo caſt them mul

citut to the

look'd on as the ſureſt Preſage. (a) And this , *
may poſſibly be the reaſon why the Dukes of A; 06 8

e,
Saxony bore in their Arms a horſe. But why Sue,

promi ſcuouſly upon a white cloth. Next, it Sueu.

the conſultation was upon publick affairs, the
Prieſt, but if upon private, the maſter of the
family, after interceſſions to the Gods, looking
up to heaven, took each of them up three ſe-
veral times, and then gave an interpretation
according to the mark ſet upon them. To
foretell the events of war, they uſed to take a
Captive of the Nation againſt which their De-
ſign was, and to oblige him to fight a duel with
ſome one of their own country ; each was to
fight with the arms of his country; and by the
iflue of this, they concluded which fide would
be conqueror.
was Mercury, whom they called I boden; his
ſacrifices were Men; and the day conſecrated to
him, was the fourth of the week, which we

therefore at this day call Jedneſday ((). The Wedreſty.

ſixth day, they conſecrated to Vm, whom
they called Frea and Frico, from whence we call

that day Friday as Tueſday is derived from Fri.
Tuiſcoh, the founder of the German nation. Tei.
They had alſoa Goddeſs called Eofter, to whom Th. Gs

he God they worſhipped moſt, Saxon Cd.

they ſacrificed in the month of April; where- Eier

upon, faith Bede, they called April, Eoſter-
monath ; and we at this day call the Paſchal
Feaſt, Eaſter. The Angles (ſaith Tacitus) as did

the other neighbouring nations, worſbip d Herthus, Herth, 1
i. e. their mother earth; as (c) believing that ſhe in- ©

tereſted her ſelf in the affairs of men and nations. In

Time of %
criſice.

oddels,

our language, that word ſtil! ſignifies earth, but part,

not in the German; for they uſe Arden to fig-
nifie earth. The foremention'd Erhelwerd has
left us this account of their Superſtitions, as to
what relates to his own times. The Northern
Infidels have been ſeduced to ſuch a degree, that to
this day the Danes, Normans, and Sueuians, wor-

ſhip Woodan as their Lord. And, in another
place, The barbarous nations bonour'd Wocdan

as a God ; and thoſe Pagans fer d Sacrifice to lim,
to make them victorious and valiant.

But Adam Bremenſis gives a more full ac-
count of theſe matters. In a Temple (cal d in
their tongue Ubſola, the furniture whereof is all of

old) the people worſhip the Statues of three Gods.
hor, the moſt powerful of them, has a raom by him-
elf in the middle; and on each fide of him, are,

Wodan, and Fricco. The f emblems of them are + Sienifi®

theſe: Thor they take to be the ruler of the air, and".
10

(a) See Barkſhire, under the Title, Vale ef White-borſe,
row, &c. in Wiltſhire,

—_—
— 4

(b) From the ſame original is Wodenſdic, Wedensburs
(e) See Sir Henry Spelman's Gloſſary, under the title 9 .

8 1 * U ˙· - K ETON
n 8 n 5 rl „ ee BARE 9 Wa 7 c ;
* 7 "2 . . 5 9 5 2 ow a Y
ry 1 *
* * * » p
, ; 2 18 Th. ,
PE SITY oo IRE A MT Toe os 2 l 8 x OW SA TAE La tho gow; ht 5
5 2 * « . 8 I ned. - < 8 . a p

1 FE ae”
a © By "x I . 9
II had” 55 1
8 *

Priapo in

E enti.

Monarc
ways, eve
r the Saxo
eptarchy i

Wb, 2. 4 5

= 596-
Nuſtin the

vp rgliſh Ap
ie.

ET onverſion
he Engliſl
WS Chriltiar

£ 6, 2, 6. 1

Drirne

dneſdu.

Frid .

ueſd- ' '

e Godt
ter.

me of +

ice.

rthus, 1

ddels,

tb.

Sign -

nes.

, : ib. 2. C. 1. tradition.

Thur.

er „
N

xv The EN GLISRH- SAXONS.

* 4 .
_ _—_ — > nn, 8 irt

clxvi

to ſend, as he ſees convenient, thunder and lightning,

winds and ſhowers, fair weather,and fruit. Wodan, he
ſecond, is more valiant ; it is be that manages Ways,

and inſpires people with courage againſt their Enemies.

Priapo in.
ens.

Scepter of Jupiter. But theſe errors have at

length fled before. the Truth of 2
Monarchy After they had fix d in Britain, they divided
Iways, even jr into ſeven Kingdoms, and made it a
Wo the Savon Fieptarchy. But even in that, he who was moſt
= _— powerful, was (as Bede has obſerv'd) ſtil'd
52. c.5. King of the Engliſh nation ; ſo that in the very
Heptarchy, there ſeems always to have been a
fort of Monarchy. Afterwards, Auſtin, com-
ve monly call'd the Engliſh Apoſtle, was diſparch'd

Wuſtin t

raum Apo- hither by Gregory the Great; and, baniſhing
$ "jy 8 thoſe monſters of heathenifh profaneneſs, did

with wonderful ſucceſs plant Chriſt in their
FCorverſion of hearts, and convert them to the Chriſtian Faith.
e Fogli How it came to paſs that 98 ſhould have
& Chrilliani-f peculiar a concern for the Converſion of rhe
4 Engliſh nation, we may learn from venerable
Bede, who has left us what himſelf receiv'd by
The report goes, that on a certam day,
when the merchants were newly come, and great va-
riety of wares were expoſed to ſale, many Chapmen
flock'd together, and amongſt the reft Gregory Him-
ſelf. He took notice, among other things, of ſome
boys that were to be ſold : their bodies were white,
their looks ingenuous, and their hair very lovely.
After he had view'd them, he enguir d (as the flory
goes) from what country or nation they came
told him, from the Iſle of Britain, the inhabitant
whereof were all of that make and complexion.
Next, he ask'd them, whether the people of that
were Chriſtians, or were yet involv'd in the
errors of Paganiſm ? The anſwer was, that they were
Pagans. At which, fetching a deep figh, Alas!
( ſays he) that the father of darkneſs ſhould be mafter
of fuch bright faces, and that fuch graceful looks
carry with them a mind void of inward grace.
Another queſtion he put to them, uus abont the
name of that country. told him, the people
were called Angles. And (ſays he) not amiſs : 2
as they have Angelical looks, ſo it is fit that ſuc
ſoould be fellow-heirs with the Angels in heaven.
But what was the name of that peculiar Province
from whence theſe were brought ? It was anſwer d,
.Drirneſs, the inhabitants of it were called Deiri. Tes ( Jays
. he) Deiri, as much as de ira eruti, i. e. deliver d
from wrath, and call d to the mercy of Chriſt. What
is the name of the King of that Province ? They told
bim, Elle. And, alluding to the name, it ij fit

( ſays he) that Alleluia ſbould be ſung in thoſe parts,
to the praiſe of God our Creator. this, going
to the Pope this happen d before he was made Pope

himfelf) he beg d him to fend the Nation of the
Angles, in Britain, ſome Miniſters of the Goſpel,
by whoſe preaching they might be converted to Chrift ;
adding, that himſelf was ready, by the aſſiſtance of

to perform this great work, if it ſhould pleaſe
the Pope to have it done.

Concerning the .ſame Converſion, Gregory
the Great writes thus: Behold, it has pierced the
hearts of all nations | how the utmoſt bounds of Eaſt
and Weſt are joyned in one common Faith | Even the
Britiſh tongue, which uſed to mutter nothing but bar-
barity, has a good while

Hebrew Halleluia in divine Anthems. And in a
Ln to — himſelf : Ibo can expreſs the
general joy and ſatisfaftiop among all faithful people,
fince the Engliſh nation Ty the Grace of Almighty

and the endeavours of you our Brother) hath quit-
ted the Errors of Darkneſs, and is enlighten'd with
the beams of our holy Faith ; fince, with a mo##

|

e begun to eccho forth the |

pros zeal, they now tread under-foot thoſe Idols, be-
fore which they formerly kneeled with that blind ve-
neration. In an ancient fragment of that age,
we read thus : Upon one fingle Chriſtmas-day (to
the eternal honour of the Engliſh ' nation) Auſtin
baptized above ten thouſand men, befides an infinite
number of women and children. But pray, how
ſhould Prieſts, or others in holy Orders, be got, 9 long river
— ſuch a prodigious number ? The Archbiſhop, Vork hire
he had 3 the river Swale, commanded, Bede tells this
by the Criers and principal men, that they ſhould with whole matter
faith go in two by two, and in the name of the holy of Paulinus,
Trinity baptize each other. Thus were they all rege- .
nerate, by as great a miracle, as once the People of Auſtin,
Iſrael paſſed thro the divided Sea, and thro” Jordan,
r 2 — manner
e, Jo great a variety of ſex and age, paſt d ſuch a
deep chanel, and yet (which in human — in-
credible) not one receiv'd harm. A ſtrange miracle
this was ! but what is yet a greater, the River cures
all diſeaſes and infirmities. JW horver s in faint
= prof mh ard yo , Whata
joyful fight was this els men! S0
thouſands of a Proſelyte nation, coming out of the
chanel of the ſame River, as out of the womb of one
Mother ! One fingle pool preparing ſo many inhabi-
rants for the beavenly manfions ! Hereupon, Pope
Gregory (with all the companies of the Saints above)
broke farth into joy; and could not reſt till he had
written to Eulogius, the holy Patriarch of Alexan-
dria, moſt joyfully to congratulate him upon ſo vaſt
a number being baptized on one Chriſtmas-day.
No ſooner was the name of Chriſt preach d Religion of
in the Engliſh Nation, but with a waxy fervent the Saxons,

? They | zeal they gave up themſelves to it, and employ'd

their utmoſt vours to promote it, by diſ-
charging all the duties of Chriſtian Piety, and
by erecting Churches, and plentifully endowing
them : ſo that no part of the Chriſtian world
could ſhow either more or richer Monaſteries,
than they. Nay, even ſome of their Kings
18 Religious life before their very Crowns.

many holy men did it produce, who, for
their firm protefſion of the Chriſtian Religion,
their reſolute perſeverance in it, and their un-
feigned piety, were Sainted ; that in this point
it is equal ro any country in the whole Chri-

h | ſtian world. And as that prophane Porph

ſtiled Britain 4 Province fruitful in tyrants, ſo
England might juſtly be called an and moſt

n to promote humane The learning
help of Winifrid, Wille-of the Saxons.

Hec tamen Artois laus eft æterna Britannis,
od poſt Pannonicis vaſtatum incui ſibus orbem,
a bonus artes, & Graia munera linguæ,
Stellarumque vias, & magni H dera eli
Obſer vans, iterum turbatis intulit oris.
Quin ſe relligio, multum debere Britannis
Servata, & late circum diſperſa fatetur :
is nomen, Winfride, tuum, quis munera neſcit?
e duce, Germanis pietas ſe vera, fideſque
„ cæpit ritus abolere prophanos.
id non Alcuino facunda Lutetia debes?
rare bonas ibi qui feliciter artes,
Barbariemque procul ſolus depellere cpit.
A ? tibi divinumque Bedam, doctiſſimus olim
am varias unus bene qui cognoverat artes

Debemus. —

Let this to Britain's laſting fame be ſaid,

When barbarous troops the civil world
o'reſpread, ;

And perſecuted Science into exile fled :

»Twas

|
J
f
|

"I
© *

r

2 . 1 — — —
YT —— vũ — —

— —

cs
"BS oaom,., A
Ss i”
— —

— — a
-

clxvii

The Encitim-Sixons.

mg |
Clxyii 3

Tas happy ſhe did all thoſe arts reſtore,

That Greece or Rome had boaſted of before :

Taught the rude world to climb the untrod
ſpheres,

And trace th* eternal courſes of the ſtars.

Nor Learning only, but Religion too,

Her riſe and growth to Britiſh ſoil doth owe.

*T'was thou, bleſt Winifred, whoſe virtue's
light |

From our dull climate chas'd the fogs of
night :

Profaneſ rites thy pious charms obey'd,

And trembling ſuperſtition own'd thy power
and fled.

Nor ſmaller tokens of eſteem from France

Alcuinus claims, who durſt himſelt atrance

Single againſt whole troops of ignorance.

Tvas he tranſported Britain's richeſt ware,

Language and arts, and kindly taught them
h

ere.
With him his Maſter Bede ſhall ever live,
And all the learning he engroſs'd, ſurvive.

Britain twice And Peter Ramus farther adds, that Britain
Sehool- was twice School-miſtreſs to France; meaning,
nan to firſt by the Druids, and then by Alcuinus, who
. vas the main inſtrument made uſe of by
Charles the Great, in erecting an Univerſity at
Paris.
The march · And as they introduc'd into Germany Learn-
ing back of ing and Religion, ſo alſo did they introduce
— Paxors military diſcipline. Nay, what is more, thoſe
ny. Saxons who live in the Dukedom of Saxony
are deſcended from them, it we may depend
upon Eginhardus's words : Saxon nat ion. (ue
Antiquity tells us) leaving thoſe Angles which inhabit
Britain, out of a defire, or rather neceſſity, of ſettling
in ſome new home, paſs'd the ſea, making to the Ger-
man Coaſt, and came aſhore at a place named Hadu-
loha. t was about that time, that Theoderick
King of the Franks made war upon Hirminfrid,
Duke of the Thuringi, his ſon-in-law, and barba-
rouſiy waſted the land with fire and ſword. After
two ſet battles, the victory was ſtill depending, tho
abundance of Blood had been ſhed on both fides. Upon
which, Theoderick, diſappointed of his hopes of Con-
queſt, ſent Ambaſſadors to the Saxons. Their Duke
at that time was one Hadugato ; who, as ſoon as he
heard their bufineſs, and their propoſals of living to-
gether in caſe of vittory, marched with an Army to
their aſſiſtance. By the help of theſe (who fought it
out ſtoutly, as if they had been diſputing for their own
Liberty and Property) he conquer d the enemy, ſpoil'd
the inhabitants, put moſt of them to the ſword, and,
according to promiſe, yeilded up the land to the Auxi-
liaries. They divided it by lot ; and, becauſe the war
had reduced them to ſo ſmall a number that they could
not people the whole ; they let out part of it, eſpecially
that which lies Eaſtward, to the Boors ; each of
which, according to his quantity, was to pay a certain

the Angles, who, of the three nations that came

Rent. The reſt they cultivated themſelves. 8 |
the South-fide of them, liv'd the Franks, and a / off |
party of the Thuringi, who had not been engaged in
the late war ; from whom they were divided by the
river Unſtrote. On the North-fide, were the Nor-
mans, a fierce and reſolute nation : on the Eaſt, the
Obotriti ; and ou the Weſt, the Friſians. Againſt
theſe they were akvays maintaining their ground, ei-
ther by truce, or by Engagements when neceſſary. But
now let us return to our Exglifh Saxons.

The Saxons, for a long time, liv'd under
their Heptarchy in a flouriſhing condition; till
at laſt, all the other Kingdoms, ſhatter'd with
civil wars, were ſubdu's to that of the Weſt-
Saxons. For Egbert, King of the Weſt-Saxons,
after he had conquered four of theſe Kingdoms,
and had a fair proſpe& of the other two; to
unite them in name, as he had already done in
government, and, to keep up the memory of his N
own nation, publiſn d on Edict, wherein it was Abo 4, Þ
ordered that the whole Heptarchy which the year 3, Þ
Saxons had poſſeſſed themſelves of, ſhould be
called Englelond, i. e. the land of the Angles. From Englanl,
hence came the Latin name Anglia ; taken trom

over, were the moſt numerous and moſt valiant,
The Kingdoms of | Northumberland and Mer-
cia, two of the largeſt, with that of the Eaſt-
Angles, were theirs ; whereas the Jutes had no
more than Kent, and the Ifle of igt; and
the Saxons, the territories of the Eait, Weſt,
and South-Saxons ; very narrow bounds, if
compared with thoſe large territories of the
Angles. From theſe, many ages ſince, they
were call'd by one general name, Angles, and
in their own language, Englatheod, Anglcynne,
Exgiqnne, Engliſcmon ; tho' at the ſame time , .
every particular Kingdom had a diſtin name bY
of its own. And this is evident, as trom other

Writers, ſo eſpecially from Bede, who entitles

his hiſtory, The Hiſtory of the Engliſb nation. So, of
even inthe Heptarchy, the Kings who were more r Uf.
powerful than the reſt, were ſliled Xings of the 1
Engliſh nation. Then it was, that the name of
Britain fell into diſuſe in this Iſland ; and was

only to be found in Books, being never heard in
converſation. So that Boniface, Biſhop of Fiſt. 4
Mentz, an Engliſh-man born, terms our nati- I ;
on Tranſmarine Saxony. But King Eadred (as = Ard
appears from certain Charters) ſtil'd himſelf ;

King of Great Britain, about the year 948 ; and
Eadgar, about the year 970, Monarch of all
Albion.

When it was firſt called England, then were
the Angles in the height of their glory ; and as
ſuch (according to the common tate of things
in this world) were ready for their fall. For
the Danes, after they had prey'd upon our
Coaſts for many years together, began at laſt to
make miſerable havock of the Nation it ſelf.

, Zal.

Bal

out the al
ar 300, il

gland,

cum.

0d, i.e,
ation,

F. ; Ard.

Buy b.

Ceol,

7 If, Uf. Ce. .

T H

NAMES of th ENGLISH-SAXONS.

Had deſign'd here, to inſert
WT] the order and ſucceſſion of the
Saxon Kings, as well in the
Heptarchy as Monarchy; but
becauſe this may not be a pro-
per place for them, and a way
of bare names may not be ſo
acceptable ; perhaps I ſhall 1 the reader
more, by drawing up a ſhort ſcheme of the
obſervations I have made (eſpecially out of Al-
frick the Grammarian) concerning the force,
original, and ſignification of their Names.
Not that I pretend to explain every name, for
that would be too laborious a Work; beſides,
that ſuch barbarous names (wherein there is a

11 . Plæ · great emphaſis, a conciſe brevity, and ſomething

of ambiguity,) are very hardly tranſlated into
another language. But becauſe moſt of them
are compounds, the ſimples whereof are very
few ; I ſhall explain the latter, that ſo the ſigni-
fication of the former (which always implied
ſomerhing of good luck) may be more eaſily
diſcover'd ; and to ſhew that the sere nom

num (the derivation of names) mentioned by Plato,

is to be found in all nations.

Fat, 41, EL. EAL and AL in compound names (as

na, in the Greek-compounds) ſignifies al or al-
together. So, AÆluin, is, a complete conqueror :
Albert, all illuſtrious : Aldred, altogether reve-
rend : Alfred, altogether peaceful. To theſe,
Pammachius, Pancratins, Pamphilius, &c. do in
ſome meaſure anſwer. |
ELF. (which according to various dialects,
is pronounced uf, wolph, hulph, hilp, helfe, and
at this day helpe) implies aſſiſtance. So ZElfwin,
is victorious aid: /fwold, an auxiliary gover-
nour: Alfziſa, a Lender of aſſiſtance. With
which, Boetius, Symmachus, Epicurus, &c. bear
a plain analogy.

ARD. ſignifies natural diſpoſition. As Godard,
is a divine temper : Reinard, a ſincere temper :
Giffard, a bountiful and liberal diſpoſition :
Bernard, filial affection, &c. |

ATHEL. Adel. and Ethel. is Noble. So
ZEthelred, is noble for counſel : AEthelard, a no-
ble genius: A£thelbert, eminently noble: Æthel-
ward, a noble Protector.

BERT. is the ſame with our bright; in the
latin illuſtris and clarnus. So Ecbert, eternally fa-
mous or bright: Sigbert, famous conqueror :
And ſhe who was term'd by the Germans Ber-
tha, was by the Greeks call'd Eudoxia, as is
obſerv'd by Luitprandus. Of the ſame ſort
were theſe, Phadrus, Epiphanius, Photins, Lam-
pridins, Fulgentius, Iluſtrius.

BALD. as we learn from Jornandes, was
us'd by the northern nations to {ignifie the ſame
as the latin audax, bold; and 15 etl in uſe. So
Baldwin (and by inverſion MVinbald) is bold con-
queror ; Ethelbald, nobly bold: Eadbald, hap-
pily bold. Which are of the ſame import, as
Thraſeas, Thraſymachus, Thraſybulns, &c.

[BURH. is a Tower, and, from that, a defence
or protettion 3 ſo, Cwenburh is a woman ready to
aſſiſt ; Cuthburh eminent for aſſiſtance.

CEO UL. an initial in the names of men, ſig-
nifies a 4, or Ciule, ſuch as thoſe that the Saxons

landed in.

C. ad K. CEN. and Kin, denote Linsfolk. So Cinulph,

is a help to his kindred : Cinehelm, a protector

|

of his kindred : Cinburg, the defence of his
kindred: Cinric, powerful in kindred.
CUTRH. ſignifies knowledge, or kill. So Cuth-
win, is a knowing conqueror: Cuthred, a know-
ing counſellor : Cuthbert, famous for skill.
uch of the ſame nature, are Sophocles, So-
phianus, &c. | p
EAD. [KD. ED. I in the compound, and
Eadig in the ſimple names, denotes happineſs,
or bleſſedneſs. Thus, Eadward is a happy pre-
ſerver: Eadulph, nappy aſſiſtance : Eadgar,
happy power : Eadwin, happy conqueror. Which
Macarins, Eu „ Fauſtus, Fortunatus, Felicianus,
&c. do inſome meaſure reſemble. Ead may alſo,
in ſome caſes, be derived from the Saxon eath,
which ſignifies Eaffe, gentle, mild.
FERI H. and FORTH. common Termina-
tions, are the ſame as in Engliſh, an Army ;
coming from the Saxon-word xyp3.1
FRED. is the ſame with peace ; upon which
our fore-fathers call'd their ſanctuaries fred-ſtole,
i. e. the ſeats of peace. So, Frederic, is power-
ful or wealthy in peace: Winfred, victorious
peace: Reinfred, ſincere peace. X
GAR. in Saxon fignifies a weapon; ſo Eadgar,
is a happy weapon; Ethelgar, a noble weapon. ]
GISLE.. among the Engliſh-Saxons ſignifies
a pledge. Thus Fredgiſte, is a pledge of peace:
Giſtebert, an illuſtrious pledge: like the Greek

2

ſ[HEARD, ſignifies a Keeper; and is ſome-
times initial, as Heard-bearht, a rex Keeper,
ſometimes final, as Cyneheard, a Royal-keeper.)

HOLD. in the old Gloſſaries is mention'd in
the ſame ſenſe with wold, i. e. a governor or
chief officer ; but in ſome other place, for love,
as Holdlic, lovely.

HELM. denotes Defence; as Eadhelm, happy
defence: Sighelm, victorious defence: Berthelm,
eminent defence: like Amyntas, and Boetins, a-
mong the Greeks.

cutb.

Fad,

Ferths

Fred,
Gar,
Giſte.

Heard.

Hold.

Helm.

HARE.andHERE.differing in pronunciation , 184

only, ſignifie both an army, and a lord.
Harold, is a General of an army: Hareman, a
chief man in the army : Herebert, famous in the
army : Herwin, a victorious army. Which are
much like Stratocles, Polemarchus, Hegefiſtratus, &c.
among the Greeks.

HILD. in Ælfrick's Grammar is interpreted
a Lord, or Lady. So, Hildebert, is a noble
Lord: Mahtild, an Heroick Lady : and in the
ſame ſenſe, is Wiga alſo found.

LEOD. ſignifies the Aa : [or rather a Na-
tion, Country, &c. Thus Leodgar, is one of
great intereſt with the People, ſor Nation.]

LEO F. denotes love. So Leofywin, is a winner
of love: Leoſſtan, the beſt belov'd. Like theſe,
Agapetus, Eraſmus, Eraſtus, Philo, Amandus.

ſ\LERE. is derived from the Saxon mæp,
famous, great, noted: ſo, Almere, is, all famous;
ZEthelmere, famous for nobility. |

MUND. is peace; from whence our Lawyers
call a breach of the peace, Mundbrech. So,
Eadmund, is happy peace: Æthelmund, noble
peace: Æimund, all peace: with which theſe
are much of the ſame import, Irenaus, Heſy-
chius, Lenis, Pacatus, Sedatus, Tranquillus, &c.

ORD. ſignifies an Edge or Sharpneſs ; as in
Ordbelm, Ordbright, &c. and in the Iflandiſh
tongue Or ſignifies a ſpear or dart. 115

Y

„Here.

ill.

Wiga,
Legd.

Tecf.

Mere.

Mund.

Or 4.

1 - -

— . SE

—— — POET

þ

_

-———- d

hs 8%

w —

PRA 2

— — *
a
ä ＋ꝓ — — — - AO OE

2
* - — * ff —
cw — 7 ET 8 _— LL — *
* * — 4 = — 9 — —
— = = — —— ” pn —— 2 4

clxx1

The Names of the ENGL18H-SAXoNs.

a. red, red. RAPD. red. and rod. diftering only in dialect,

Sig

Stan.

+ Vid. Sax.
Gram. de
AdjeRivis.

Weard.

Wr,

172.

iht.

illi.

Wins

old.

The name
Britain re-
new'd.

+ Circ, Ann,
1607»

* Now, a-

bout 900.
+ Fac, Is

, Jace 1.

ſignifie counſel ; as Conrad, powerful or skilful in
counſel: AÆtbelred, a noble counſellor: Rod-
bert, eminent for counſel. Eululus and Thraſy-
bulus have almoſt the ſame ſenſe.

RIC. denotes a powerful, rich, or valiant
man ; as Fortunatus has told us in thoſe verſes :

Hilperice potent, fi interpres barbarus adſit
Adiutor fortis hoc quoque nomen habet.

Hilp'ric Barbarians a ſtout helper term.

So, Alfric, is altogether ſtrong : AEthelric,
nobly ſtrong, or powerful. To the ſame ſenſe,
are Polycrates, Crato, Plutarchus, Opimins.

SIG. was us'd by them for Victory; as
Sigebert, famous for victory : Sigward, victorious
preſerver : Sigard, conquering temper. And
almoſt in the ſame ſenſe, are Nicocles, Nicoma-
chus, Nicander, Victor, Vittorinus, Vincentius, &c.

STAN. amongſt our forefathers was the ter-
mination f of the ſuperlative degree. So, A-
thelſtan, moſt noble: Berſtan, the beſt : Leofſtan,
the — Wiſtan, the wiſeſt : Dunſtan, the
higheſt.

TWEARD. whether initial or final, ſignifies
watchfulneſs or Care; from the Saxon peanoan,
to ward or keep. ]

WI. holy. Thus Wimund, holy peace:
IWibert, eminent for ſanctity : Alui, altogether
holy. As, Hierocles, Hieronymus, Hoſius, &c.

WIG. being a termination in the names of
men, ſignifies war; or elſe a Heroe, from piga,
a word of that ſignification.

WIHT. an initial in the names of men, ſig-
nifies ſtrong, nimble, Iuſty ; which are imply'd in
that word, being purely Saxon. |

WILLI. and Vili. among the Engliſh-Saxons
(as Billi at this day among the Germans) ſigni-
ty'd many. So Willielmns, is the defender of
many: Mildred, worthy of reſpe& from many:
Wilfred, peace to many. Which are anſwer'd,
in ſenſe and ſignification, by Polymachus, Poly-
crates, Polyphilus, &c.

[WIN. whether initial or final in the names
of men, may either denote a maſculine temper,
from pin, which ſignifies in Saxon War,
Strength, &c. or elſe the general love and eſteem
he hath among the People ; from the Saxon
pine, i. e. dear, beloved, &c.]

WOLD. and Wald. with them, ſignify'd a
ruler or governour. From whence Bertwold, is a
tamous governor ; ZEthehwold, a noble gover-
nour : Herwald, and by inverſion MWaldber, a
General of an army.

But here let us {top ; ſince others as well as
my ſelf, will think I have ſaid too much upon
ſo trifling a ſubject.

It may perhaps be more conſiderable if I tel!

ſterity (ſuppoſing theſe papers to have the good
W to live) what I my ſelf am t an eye-witneſs
of ; That as Egberr ordered this nearer part of
Britain, then his own dominion, to be call'd
England; ſo now, after about 800 years,

while I am reviſing this work, King f James

being by the favour of heaven and his own he-
reditary title, inveſted with the Monarchy of
this Ifland, to the general ſatisfaction 1 all
good men (that, as the Iſland is but one, en-
compalſs'd with one ſea, under one perſon, and
one crown, with the ſame language, religion,
laws, and judicial proceſs; ſo, to ſettle it in
laſting happineſs, and to remove all old quarrels,
it might be call'd by one name:) King James
(I ſay) in the ſecond year of his reign, did by
Proclamation aſſume the ſtile and title of King
of Great Britain in all caſes whatſoever, except
in the Inſtruments of Law.

General Rules, whereby to know the

OrIGIiNAL of the Names of
PLACES in England.

B, in the beginning of names of Places,

is oft-times a contraction of Albot, and

implies, either that a Monaſtery was there, or
that the place belonged to ſome Monaſtery.

AC,AK, being Initials in the names ot Places,
ſignify an Oak, from the Saxon Ac, an Oak.

AL, ATTLE, ADLE, do all ſeem to be
corruptions of the Saxon fEþel, Noble, famous;
as alſo ALLING and ADLING, are corrup-
tions of Speling, noble, ſplendid, famous.

AL, ALD, being initials, are derived from
the Saxon Eals, ancient; and ſo is oft-times the
initial All, being melted by the Normans, from
the Saxon ealo.

AL, HAL, are derived from the Saxon
healle, i. e. a hall, a Palace: So, in Gothick;
alh ſignifies a Temple, or any other famous
Building.

ASK. ASH, AS, do all come from the Saxon
ærc, an Aſþ-tree.

BAM, BEAM, being initials in the name of
any place, uſually imply it to be, or at leaſt to
have been, woody ; from the Saxon beam, which
we uſe in the ſame ſenſe to this day.

BARROW, whether in the beginning or end
of names of Places, ſignifies a Grove ; from
beappe, which the Saxons us'd in the ſame

ſenſe.

BRAD, 4 * initial, ſignifies broad, ſpa-
2 from the Saxon bpae, and the Gothick
brai

BRIG (and = alſo BRI) is derived
from the Saxon bhicg, a bridge ; which to this
day in the northern Counties is called a brigge,
and not a *

BRUN, BRAN, BROWN, BOURN,
BURN; are all derived from the Saxon bopn,
boupn, bpunna, bupna; all ſignifying a River.

BUR, BOUR, BOR, come from the Saxon
bup, an inner chamber, or place of ſhade and Re-
tirement.

n . 32 — 3 are cmd
rom the Saxon bunz, by pig, a City,
Tower, or Caſtle. Ho FA

BYE, BEE, came immediately from the
Saxon by, ag i. e. a dwelling.

CAR, C „in the names of places, ſeem
to have relation to the Britiſh Caer, a City.
. ee 3 are derived from

e Saxon cearcep, a City, Town, or Caſtle; and
that, from hs Fake ** ; the . 1 chu-
ſing to fix in ſuch places of ſtrength and figure,
as the Romans had before built or fortified.

CHIP, CHEAP, CHIPPING, in the names
of places, imply a 1 1 from the Saxon
cyppan, ceapan, to or ty . 7

"COMB, in the 2 A in the be-
ginning of names, ſeem to be derived from the
Britiſh bum, which ſignifies a low fituation.

COT, COTE, COAT, are all from the
Saxon coc, a Cottage.

CRAG, is in Britiſh a rough ſteep rock, and is
uſed in the ſame ſenſe in the northern Coun-
ties, at this day.

DEN, may lignifie either a Valle), or a woody
place; for the Saxon den imports both.

DER, in the beginning of names of Places, is
generally to be derived from deop, a wild-beaſt:
unleſs the place ſtand upon a river; for then
it may rather be fetch'd from the Britiſh dur,
1. e. Water.

i | ER,

niet x xii
—

x1
— 7

Ixxiii

General Rules to know the Names of PL Acks.

— —

ER, a ſyllable in the middle of names of
places, comes by contraction from the Saxon
papa duellers. a 8
ERNE, ERON, do immediately flow from
the Saxon enn, eann, a cottage, or place of retire-

ment.

EY, EA, EE, may either come from ig an
Wand, by melting the Saxon x into y, which is
uſually done ; or from the Saxon ea, which
ſignifies a water, river, &c. or laſtly, from leag
a field, by the ſame kind of melting.

FLEET, FLEOT, FLOT, are all derived
from the Saxon pleor, which ſignifies a bay, or
ul}.

i GRAVE, a final Syllable in the names of
Places, is from the Saxon ghæp, a Grove, or Cave.

HAM, whether initial or final, is no other
than the Saxon ham, a houſe, farm, or village.

HOLME, HOWME, whether jointly or
ſingly, comes from the Saxon holm, a river-
Itand; or, it the place be not ſuch, the ſame
word ſignifies alſo a hill, or mountain.

HOLT, whether at the beginning or end-
ing of the name of any place, ſignifies, that it is,
or hath been, woody, from the Saxon holt, a
wood; or ſometimes, poſſibly, from the Saxon

bol, i. e. hollow, eſpecially when the name ends |

in tun or dun.

HYRST, HURST, HERST, are all from
the Saxon hynrt, a wood or grove.

INGE, in the names ot places, ſignifies a
meadow, from the Saxon ing of the ſame import.

LADE, is the mouth of a river, and 1s deri-
ved from the Saxon lade, which ſignifies a pur-
ging or diſcharging; there my, a diſcharge ot the
waters, into the Sea, or into ſome greater river.

LEY, LEE, LAY, are all from the Saxon
Leag, a field or paſture; by the uſual melting of
the letter g;.

LOWE. LOE, come from the Saxon þleap,
a hill, heap, or barrow; and ſo the Gothick
blaiw, is a monument, or barrow.

MARSH, MARS, MAS, are derived from
the Saxon menrc, a fern, or femm place.

MER, MERE, whether in the beginning,
middle, or end, always ſignify the ſame with
the Saxon mene, 1. e. a pool, or lake.

OVER, hath a double ſignification in the
names of places, according to the different ſitu-

ations of them. It the place be upon, or near,
a river, it comes from the Saxon open, or oppe,
a brink, or bank: But if there is in the neigh-
bourhood another of the ſame name, diſtin-
guiſhed by the addition of Net her; then Over
is from the Saxon ura, i. e. upper, and nether
from the Saxon mþep, i. e. lower.

PRES, PREST, ſeem to be derived from the
Saxon Ppeort, a Prieſt ; it being uſual, in after-
| times, to drop the letter (o) in like caſes.

RIG, RIDGE, ſeem to lig the top of 4
hill falling on each fide ; from the Saxon hhigge,
and the Iſlandick hriggur, both ſignifying a back.

STEAD, STED, being in the name of a
Place that is diſtant from any River, comes
from the Saxon pred, cydò a place; but if it be
upon a river, or a harbour, it is to be derived
trom rade, a ſhore, or ſtation for ſhips.

STOKE, STOAK, ſeem to come from the
Saxon xeocce, ſignifying the ſtock or body of a
tree.

STOWE, STOE, whether ſingly or jointly,
are the ſame with the Saxon cop, a Place.

THORP, THROP, THREP, TREP,
TROP, are all from the Saxon popp, which
ſignifies a Village.

TON, T UN, are derived from the Saxon
cun, a hedge, or wall; and this ſeems to be from
dun a hill; the Towns being anciently built on
hills, for the ſake of defence and protection, in
times of war.

WEALD, WALD, WALT, whether ſingly
or jointly, ſignify a wood or grove, from the Saxon

peals, a word of the ſame import.

WERTH, WEORTH, WYRTH, whether
initial or final in the names of Places, ſignify a
farm, court, or village, from the Saxon peopS15,
uſed by them in the ſame ſenſe.

WIC, WICH, come from the Saxon pic,
which, according to the different nature and
condition of Places, hath a threefold ſignificati-

the winding banks of a river, or a Caſtle.
| WIN, in the names of Places, implies a
battle fought there; for ſo the Saxon pin
ſignifies.

WOLD, whether ſingly or jointly, ſignifies
a plain open Country ; r polo, a plain,

and a place without wood.

Wy | 7 7
2 N WP,

7 _—
- E 2

clxxiv

on; implying, either a village, or a bay made by

- 4 -
«<< _ — — — —
6— ES o——_— 4

—

|
/
|
:
|

—— — ———

clxxv

— — TN n Freer CAC an EASY WSN!
28 2 AA AAA AS OS IANA LOT
- * 1 .
| > HCMC Og orgy
. 2 - 22 E'J o SA 4 E'J . AQ 2
88 5 8 X - 7 * - O * 4 8 Ty, SE ICT = N FEES . SITE RS r —— > ITS
»%. 4 1 * 0 | 9 9 * * * * 8 P A 0 R x .

NOTES

UPON THE

SAXON

* & * al

COINS.

General Remarks, by Mr. WALK E R.

HE Saxons and Franks bordered
Ry, upon one another in their anci-
* PRA

ent ſeats between the Elbe and
the Rhine, and changed their
countries much about the ſame
time; 4. e. a little before the

ear of Chriſt 450. For a

King of the al dying, left two ſons, who
contended for the Kingdom; the elder (whoſe
name we know not) took part with Attila, and
brought an army to him; as the younger did
to Aetius. This ſeems, by good authors, to
have been Meroveus, a very valiant Prince, and
great friend to the Romans. To him, after
that great battle, Aetius gave part of Gallia,
then very much depopulated by thoſe deſtructi ve
wars : which he going to poſſeſs, took with him

the whole remainder of his nation; into whoſe

country the Saxons ſucceeded. Buta few years
after, a conſiderable part of them relinquiſhed
it, accepting that invitation into Britain. Both
nations ſeem to have ſpoken the ſame language,
and retained the ſame cuſtoms, and to have
imitated one another, as in many other things,

ſo in their coins; both as to figure, weight,

and manner of ſtamping. On the one fide
placing the King's face, and ſometimes his
name only; on the other, the name of the
4" malgengs fl and ſometimes of the governour
of the place where coined. So that there is
little or no Erudition to be gained by them :
(though their predeceſſors, the Britains, were
careful, after their embracing Chriſtianity, to
expreſs ſome of its cuſtoms and ceremonies.)
Bur in this they differed, that the Franks uſed
more variety, and frequent changes, both of
allay, weight, and value, in their coins; and
their Princes made more uſe of their ſeigneurage,
or ſovereign power of coining, to the no ſmall
diſadvantage and trouble of their ſubjects; in-
ſomuch that they petition'd King Charles VII.
to quit this his prerogative; and on that condi-
tion they would conſent, that he ſhould impoſe
upon them tailles (taxes) and aides. To which
the King conſented; reſerving to himſelf only
ſuch a proportion of the ſeigneurage, as might
pay the Officers of the mint, and the charges
of fabrication, Whereas, this Nation hath ve-

ry ſeldom practiſed it, either then, or ſince.
And though the French writers very much ap-

laud us for it; yet the reaſon may be, that we

ve not ſuch great occaſions and neceſſities to
force us to it. Therefore neither have we ſuch
variety of laws, records, or regulations of
moneys, as in France are in the Court des monnoies,
eſtabliſhed for thoſe orderings and pleas con-
cerning their money. And I conceive the rea-
ſon to be, becauſe very much more money was
requiſite to be coined in that rich and ſpacious
dominion (which was, becauſe of its ſitua-
tion, exceedingly frequented by merchants ;)
than in this ſmall corner : as, I think, appears
from this, that all our money is readily tabri-
cated in one place, whereas in France more
than twenty are hardly ſufficient. And though,
in the Saxon times, the like licence was granted
to ſeveral cities and large towns; yet it ſeems,
by the remains which we find of them, that no
great quantity was here coined ; nor can 1
imagin whence they ſhould procure any great
quantity of bullion.

Though there be not much Erudition in
theſe coins (as indeed neither was there in the
times of the later Emperors of Rome, who after
Aurelian, did more regard the profit of the
money, than the honour of their a&ions,) yet

ſomething now and then occurs. But I think

there is no man who would not be glad to ſee
the countenances, and other reli&s, of their
victorious Anceſtors. For, notwithſtanding
what ſome have written, it ſeems very difficult
to ſhew ſuch a ſucceſſion of worthy Princes in
any nation, as were thoſe of the Saxons; eſpe-
cially the progeny and ſucceſſors of Cerdic in the
Weſt. For, even when Pagans, they were very
active, valiant, and warlike ; and governed their
people in great juſtice and peaceableneſs. A-
mongſt ſo many of them, it is wonderful to {ce
how few were ſlothful, or vicious.

Concerning their coins in general, it is ob-
ſervable, that we had much fewer of braſs,
than filver; ¶ till a vaſt quantity of them were

found at Rippon, Amr. 1695. But as to Gold,.

there are no Saxon moneys of that metal in any
Repoſitory now in being, nor mention of ſuch
in any authentick Record. ] Moſt of their Coins

are

VT OT 5
—
.

,

Il

1. R_e
8 2

1
T. Tor % 4

—

—

ume

33 '-

. Thoresb

cIxxvii

Faron COINS.

——_—

clxxviii

6

= + 0ras-

IV.

= v.
. 7hrecly, which are diſtinguiſhed from the reſt by their

are alſo ſmall (pennies) equal to about three of

our pence. They are likewiſe thin, to hinder

falſitying. The Kings, even when the King-'

dom was reduced to one Monarchy, had ſeve-
ral minting-houſes. Divers Biſhops alſo, and
ſome Noblemen, had privileges to coin. King
Athelſtan had at London eight; at Wincheſter
ſix; at Lewis, Haſtings, Hampton, Wereham, in
each two ; at Chicheſter one ; at Rocheſter three,
(the King two, the Biſhop one) ; at Canterbury
ſeven, (the King four, the Archbiſhop two, the
Abbot one) &c. The reverſe upon their coins
was for the moſt part quarterly divided: for at
firſt they made no other money, and when they
would have a halt-penny or- farthing, ny
broke them into two or four parts; and theſe
are called broken money to this day. Hoveden
faith, that Henry I. was the firſt that coined
halt-pence and farthings, becauſe before his time,
when any one would pay a half-penny or farthing, it
was done by breaking t he penny into two or four parts.
Harding alſo faith, that Edward IV. was the
firſt, who coined groats or great pennies ; which I
think is falſe, for thoſe peices were ſtamp'd in

r. Ttoresby. Edward the third's time, [as appears by ſeveral,

coined in that reign, both at York and London,

and now preſerved in the Muſzum of Mr.

Thoresby. One of which (to put this matter

out of all doubt) has Aquitain; which ſhews that

it was minted before the Kings of England

aſſumed the title of France. But in the noble

Repoſitory of the Right Honourable the Earl of
Pembroke, an accurate Judge in this, and ma-

ny other parts of Learning, there is a much

greater Rarity, viz. a Groat of King Edward

the Firſt; which Prince (and not Henry I.) took

away the uſe of broken monies, and coined

half:pence and farthings round, which conti-
nued till the reign of King James I. who left
off coining of filver farthings.] The Danes
alſo, whilſt they governed here, uſed the
Saxon-like penny; though they reckoned by
tOres; but having never ſeen any of them,

I conceive it was not the name of any coin, but

uſed only in accounting ; as with us, a mark;
a noble, &c.

Ingulfus obſerves, that the Saxon alphabet
was changed by King Alfred, who being very
learned and curious, introduc'd the French
manner of writing. Their former hand ſeems
to have borrowed much from the Runic, as you
may ſee in the Table added to the laſt plate of
the Roman Coins. That which he introduced,
was according to the beſt Roman at that time
uſed, though he took it from the French. For,
by thoſe characters, we may make a good
judgment of the writings of thoſe times, and
the antiquity of the Manuſcripts. Their A
(the torm whereof may be ſeen in the Saxon
Alphabet) was peculiar to them: it ſeems to
have been in pronunciation the ſame with the
VY conſonant”; which anciently, I believe, did
not partake of the B. For that ſound, the Em-
peror Claudius invented the Digamma ZEolicum 3
but, after his death, it was diſuſed. Vir the
Saxons pronounced were ; vallum, wall ; vidua,
widwe a widow, and the like. The Greeks
expreſſed Veſpafianus, by Oveanaoians : oh-; the
Latins called vinum, the Saxons wine. More
may be obſerved concerning their alphabet;
2 perhaps may be conſidered in another
place.

[The Saxon Coins in the following Tables,

largeneſs, are ſuppoſed by perſons of Curiofity

to be indeed larger by far than the Originals ;

and tho' Speed hath delineated them ſo, before

the lives of the Monarchs, it is certain, that
i

the Saxon pcilling was merely nominal, as our
Marks and Nobles, and that no larger pieces
were ever coined, than their Pennies, which in
their dimenſions are between the Sizes of the
three pences and groats of the late hammered mo-
mes. And to put this matter beyond diſpute,
tho' ſome of theſe large pieces are aſcribed to
Sir Ardrew Fountain and Mr. Thoresby, they

have, in their reſpective Muſeum's, none larger

than the common ſort ; one only excepted, F Fountain's

which yet is no larger in Num. Sax.
y rger, than according to the 224 * Nam,

incert. 11,

f draught thereof.
To make the Saxon Coins more intelligible to

ſuch as are not well oy, with their
Characters; beſides Mr. Walker's Notes, the

Inſcriptions in each Table are given in modern
characters by Mr. Thoresby ; the remaining let-

ters of each word (not expreſſed in the Inſeri
tion) being added in ſmaller letters. £

1

Saxon Coins, TA B. I.

Notes upon Tab. I. by Mr. WALKER.

HE firſt and ſecond are of the ſame
Cuthred King of Kent, (there ſeem very
few coins of the Kings of Kent, extant). There
were alſo two of the ſame name; Weſt-Saxons,
and Chriſtians. This Curhred was by Coenuulf
King of Mercia made King inſtead of Ead-
— 45 — = reigned (though obſcurely,
as being ſet up by an enemy) eight years, and
5 F e
The third is of P „Amo $90. choſen

by God and all his Saints (faith the Saxon Chro-

| nicle) to be Archbiſhop of Canterbury: He

was a perſon of excellent worth, for learning,
prudence, and devotion : at firſt, an Hermit
living near Cheſter ; whence he was brought
by King Alfred, both to inſtruct him when
young, and adviſe him when he came to his
ingdom ; by whom alſo he was thus ad-
vanced. He was in great veneration in the
whole Church, as appears by the Archbiſhop of
Rhemes letters : he — Anno 923.
The fourth, Ceolnoth; conſecrated Archbiſhop,
Sept. 1. 830, and Anno 831 received the Palli-
um; he died Ann. 870. He was commonly
called, The good Biſhop.

The fifth, Eadberht, was the name of two
Kings of Kent, and of one of Northumberland.
Which of theſe coined this money, is uncertain.
His name (as too many of thoſe of our ancient
Kings) is diverſly written, as Edbert, Ead-
bert, &c. The Reverſe (a Dragon) if yet it be
a Dragon (v. Tab. 1. Sect. 3.) was an enſign
uſed by divers of the Northern Princes. This
ſeems copied from one of Antiochus Epiphanes.

The Romans, from Trajan's eonquering of the

Dacians, uſed it alſo; but their's was in the
form of a great ſerpent, and not of an Imagi-
nation, as this 1s.

The 6th, Ecgbert, was the name alſo of di-
vers Saxon Kings ; one of Kent, one of Nor-
thumberland, one of Mercia ; beſides him of
the Weſt-Saxons, who reduced all the King-
doms into one Monarchy. For whom this coin
was made, is to me unknown: he ſeems placed
between two croſſes in imitation of ſome of the
Eaſtern Emperors. The reverſe ſeems to be
only the name of the Mint-maſter. Uiborhtus is
a name ſtill in reputation in the North; it may

be this Ecberht was the Northumbrian,
2 The

VI.

— - - -
a . 45 - 2 * — —— — 2 = *
1 ———— ,,, Choe. i el” ht TIC

Ts

4 —_— * — 223

clxxix

g Saxon COINS. a

7.

f 8.
|
x 9.
|
(
5
4 10.
1
1
q
„ !
1
if
| TE,
|
| 15
|
1
27 13, 14.

8 "The ſeventh, Cuthred; whether the ſame
with the former, is not known. I rather think
him to be the Weſt-Saxon, the brother of Ethel-

' werd, about the year 740; a valiant and victo-

rious Prince. Sigebert ſeems to have been the
Noble-perſon, — was commander of the place
where this was coined.

The eighth, Alred, is Alhred King of Nor-
thumberland Anno 765: he reigned eight years,
and, at Yotk, was expelled his Kingdom Anno
774. On the reverſe, Edwin, ſeems to have
been a Nobleman. :

The ninth, Eanred, may either be Eanfrid
or Eandred, both Kings of Northumberland.
Eanfrid, eldeſt ſon of Ethelfrith, was expelled
his country by Edwin; who had flain his father,
and uſurped the Kingdom Anno 617, but bong
{lain by Ceadwalla and Penda, Eantrid returne
to the crown Anno 634, and was baptized, and
built St. Peter's Church at York (of which
S. Edwin had laid the foundation) making

Paulinus Biſhop. Eadwin on the reverſe, ſeems

to have ſucceeded Eanfrid, after ſome years.
The tenth, Alfred, ſeems by the cypher or
monogram on the reverſe, to have the
King of Northumberland (the face not corre-
ſponding to that of Alfred the Weſt-Saxon).

He murthered his true and lawful Prince Anno

765; and himſelf was expelled alſo. He is
{aid to have been very learned : to ſhew which,
it may be, he ſtamped that Monogram on the
reverſe : (after the example of divers Conſtanti-
nopolitan Emperors, but not after thoſe of the
Franks ;) which was by Charles the
Great, probably becauſe he could not write ſo
much as his name, as Eginhart faith ; and
that, even in his old age, he vainly endeavoured
to learn.

The eleventh, Edilred, ſeems to have been
Ethelred King of the Northumbers, ſon of
Mollo. After he had reigned four years, he
was driven out, and Readuulf crowned ; who
being ſlain by the Danes at Alvethlic, Ethelred
again ſucceeded. But carrying himſelf tyran-
nically, particularly murthering Oelf (Altus
and Oeltwin, (Altwin) ſons of Alfwold, he
was again expelled, and died in baniſhment.
There was alſo another Ethelred, ſon of Ean-
dred, a tributary King of the Northumbers ;
who was forced Gow his Kingdom in the fourth
year of his reign: and, being again reſtored, he
was {lain four years after.

The twelfth Eandred, fon of Eardulf, King
of the Northumbers, reigned thirty years after
Altwold the Uſurper: Afterwards, he ſubmit-
ted to Egbert.

The thirteenth and fourteenth belong to Offa,
the Mercian King (the reverſe being the ſame
in both, who ſeems to have been a Nobleman,
and not a Mint-maſter.) Three of that name,
An. 803. ſubſcribed the Synod at Cloveſho, and
another ſucceeded S. Boniface in the Arch-
biſhoprick of Mentz. Offa having ſlain Beorn-
red Ann. 557. reigned over the Mercians : a
Prince he. was of great courage and ſucceſs in
arms; but not juſt nor virtuous : for he baſely
murthered Ethelbriht King of the Eaſt-Angles
(enticing him to his Palace that he might mar-
ry his daughter,) and ſeized upon his kingdom.
He had much entercourſe, and at length
friendſhip alſo, with Charles the Great. He
drew a Trench of wondrous length from ſea to
ſea, ſeparating the Mercians from the Welch ;
part whereof remains viſible to this day. He
was the firſt who granted a perpetual Tax to
the Pope out of every Houſe in his Kingdom, at
his being at Rome; and gave very bountifully,
after his return, to the Clergy, by way of Pe-
nance for his Sins. He died Au. 794-

The fifteenth Beormuulf, a valiant man,
uſurped the Kingdom of Mercia from Ceoluulf;
and in his third year was overthrown by King
Egbert at Elendon, An. 823. He retired thence
to the Eaſt-Angles (as part of his dominion,
by the ſeiſure of King Offa,) with the re-
mainder of his army, and was there encounter'd,
and ſlain: Whereupon the Eaſt-Angles ſur-
render d themſelves to Egbert. The reverſe I
take to be Moneta.

The ſixteenth, Ludican, ſucceeded Beornuulf
in Mercia, An. 824. He reigned only two
years : then, preparing to revenge the death of
Beornuult, his kinſman, upon the Eaſt-Angles,
he was by them, with his five Conſuli, ſurprized
and ſlain. The reverſe I underſtand not.

The ſeventeenth Berhtulf, An. 838. reigned
in Mercia, but as feudatary to the Weſt-Saxons :
being much moleſted with the invaſions of the
Danes, he quitted his Kingdom, and retired
to a private life. The reverſe is Uulfhean ; but
who he was, is unknown.

The eighteenth, Burgred was byKing Etheluulf
made King of the Mercians, and married his
daughter Ethelſwith. To avoid the oppreſſion
of the Danes, he reſigned his kingdom, and re-
tired to Rome ; where he lived in great repu-
tation of Sanctity till his death. His Queen
alſo enter'd into a Monaſtery at Pavia, and
there died. The reverſe is /vhne, only the
Mint-maſter. There are divers other of his
Coins, but, differing only in the names of the
Mint-maſters, they ſeem not worthy to be
inſerted.

The nineteenth ſeems (however unlike the
faces are on the Coins,) to have been of the ſame
perſon. The reverſe ſeems to be Moneta Uulf-
fard; who he was, is not known.

The twentieth, is of Adulf or Aldulf, King
of the Eaſt-Angles, ſon of Ethelwald's brother;
a very worthy and pious Prince, as appears by
the reverſe ; and a great friend to venerable
Bede: What Priſin means I know not. The
reverſe is remarkable, becauſe his name is other-

) | wiſe ſpell'd, than upon the Coins.

The one and twentieth is St. Edmond, King
of the Eaſt-Angles, crowned at fourteen years
old, at Buers, againſt his will: a very pious,
valiant, and hopeful Prince. In the year 87 1.
his kingdom was invaded by the 5 a-
gainſt whom moſt valiantly fighting at Theotford,
his army was routed, and himſelf taken and
ſhot to death with arrows. Neither this, nor
the two following, ſeem to have been Coined
by him ; but, as I conceive, by ſome of the
Weſt-Saxon Edmunds, who were all very much
devoted to this holy martyr ; tho' they may alſo
denote king Alfred. The reverſe ſeems to be
the name of the Mint-maſter.

The reverſe of the two and twentieth, Oda
Moneta ; the place I underſtand not.

On the three and twentieth, Jomam me fe-
cit, ſignifies, that Jomam was the Mint-maſter.
Me fecit, 1s common upon the Coins of the
Franks, in Gala.

The twenty-fourth, Æthelred Rex Anglorum,
ſeems not to have been one of the Weſt-Saxons;
the firſt of whom is commonly written ZEthered ;
and the ſecond is neither in countenance nor
habit like this. There are mentioned in our
Hiſtories, an Æthelred, ſucceſſor to his brother
Wulfred in Mercia: another, the ſon of Mollo;
and another the ſon of Eandred, of whom we
have already ſpoken. He is ſaid to have mar-
ried Leofrun, mother to Ethelbert, who was
murthered by Offa ; and to have reigned fifty
years: little beſides is known of him. The
reverſe ſeems to be a devout n of

is

Rr
Clxx
2 won

15.

16,

17.

18.

19.

20.

22.

23,

24

25.

26.

27.

*

r

*

XX

clxxxi

"Saxon COINS.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.
30.

31.

32.
33.
34

19.

20.

35

22.

23.

2+

10.

4 * Note in
glo- Sax.

his being ſuſtained by the hand of Almighty
God, who is Alpha and Omega. Who Holizard
was, is not known. This ſeems to have been
coined at Norwich.

The twenty-fifth is like this reverſe, on
both ſides, but of what Prince unknown: it is
read Tuna moneta Eaxceaſter, as J conceive, I
cannot make ſenſe of the Reverſe.

The twenty- ſixth ſeems to be Sigfrid Moneta,
a King of the Eaſt-Saxons; called alſo Suuefred,
and denominated Sigfrid the good. He makes no

reat figure in our Annals. It is not uſual to
add Moneta to the King's name. Concerning
Eunura, I can find nothing.

The rwenty-ſeventh ſeems to have been King
of the Eaſt-Saxons, ſon of Siger; a very come-
ly and virtuous perſon, and exceedingly be-
loved of his people. Yet, devotion prevailing,
after a ſhort reign, he, with Kenred King of
Mercia, went to Rome in the time of Pope
Conſtantine, and there retired into a Monaſtery.
Iba on the reverſe, ſeems to be ſome Noble-
man.

The twenty-eighth, Edmund Rex, ſeems to
have been one of the Weſt-Saxon Edmunds. The
reverſe may be, Edmund Martyr.

The twenty-ninth I do not underſtand.

The thirtieth. For which of the Athelſtans
this was, I know not, as neither the reverſe.

The thirty-firſt, Eunaa Rex. I cannot find

Bs c.. Tboreſ any ſuch name in all our Hiſtories. The re-

on this verſe ſeems to mention f Oxford.
oin, below.

The thirty- ſecond: Icannot find any mention
of Heareth and Herred.

The thirty-third is imperfect.

The thirty- fourth ſeems not to be Alfred the
Weſt-Saxon, becauſe the name is ſpell'd other-
wiſe. Ounig is alſo unknown.

The thirty- fifth is to me unknown.

Notes upon Tas. I.

By Mr. THORESBY.

iſt, VTHRED REX. Reverſe, EABA.

C 2d, CVTHRED REX CANTij.
Reverſe, EABA MONETArius. |

3d, PLEGMVND ArCHIEPiſcopus. Re-
verſe, EIDM VND MOnetarius.
- 4th, CEOLNOTH ARCHIE PFiſcopus. Re-
verſe, DIALA MONETA DORObernenis.

5th, EOTBEREHT'VS. Reverſe, a Dragon
without any Inſcription : Speed takes this for
Ethelbert, the firſt Chriſtian King of Kent :
Sir Andrew Fountain, more probably, for Ead-
bert King of Northumberland, to which the
ſmallneſs of the piece (being no bigger than
the braſs ciccar of thoſe —_— inclines me.

6th, ECGBERT the Northumbrian King.
Reverſe, VIBEREHT'VS.

7th, CVTHRED REX. Reverſe, SIGE-
BERHT.

8th, EALRED REX (Northumbriæ.) Re-
verſe, EADWINI. |

gth, EANRED REX (Nor.) Reverſe,
EADWINI.

roth, AELRED REx (Vor.) the 4 at the
King's Beard, ſtands for the Letter X, for which
there is no room in its due place, as“ Dr. Morton

ummes, p. 1. er Well obſerves. Upon the Reverſe, a Cypher

or Monogram, which Mr. Edward Thwaits con-
jectures to be CIVITas NORTH VICum, and
conſequently aſcribes the Coin to Alfred the
Great ; Norwich not being a place of any note in
the time of the Northumbrian Alfred. (Mr.
Hearn s notes upon King Alfred's life, p. 164.)

11th, EDILRED rex North. Reverſe,
MONNE.

12th, EANRED REX (North.) Reverſe,
FORDRED.

11 OFFA REX ( Mfr.) Reverſe,
LVLLA.

14th, Same Inſcription.

15th, BEORHWLF REX (Mprc.) Reverſe,
MOHN.

16th, LVDICA REX MErciorum. Re-
verſe, WERBALD or BALDWER MONEta
(or 3

17th, BERHTVLF REX (Merciorum.) Re-
verſe, VILLEHEAH.

18th, BVRGRED REX (Mprc.) Reverſe,
WHNE or WINE MONE TArius. Dr. Hot-
ton inclines to have the E, after WIN in the
reverſe, to ſignify Eopl, the Earl's money.

19th, BVRCGCRED REX (Merc.) Reverſe,
VVLFEARD MONETArius.

20th, AVDVLFIVS PRISIN (what the
latter word ſignifies, I know not.) Reverſe,
VICTVRIA ADVLEFO.

21ſt, SC (Sanctus) EADMVND REX A.
Reverſe, WINEFeR MONETArius. Dr.
_ makes it WINIF Regis MONETA-

us.

22d, Reverſe, ODO MONERLIA.—
ODO MONEtarius Regis LINcoln, Dr.

Witton, 10 9. ;

23d, IOMA. Monetarius ME FECIT.
Theſe three were coined in memory of St. Ed-
mund, King of the Eaſt Angles; and, I ſuppoſe,
from the A in the Center, by King Alfred.

24th, ETHELRED REX ANGLORum
(An. 978.) Reverſe, FOLCEARD MOneta
NOR THumbrorum, ; as Mr. Walker in the
latin Edition of King Aljred's life; or Norwich,
as Sir Andrew Fountain. +

25th, TVNA MoOnetarius EAXEEST
(Exeter.)

26th, SYCFRADNII. Reverſe, EVVRA
MHO (monetarius).

27th, OFFA. REX. Reverſe, IBBA.

28th, EADMVND REX (941.) Reverſe,
EADMVND Monetarius.

29th, Unknown.

zoth, A THELSTAN REX (925.) Re-
verſe, FVLLSIG or WAVLLSIG, (Wulſiz.)
The Building is revers'd by the Engraver's
miſtake.

31ſt, What is ſuppoſed to refer to Oxford, is
certainly King Osbright; only the Letters are to be
read the contrary _y OSBVEH IL MAX. Re-
verſe + EVNAARE. The Letters are very
often thus miſplaced in the braſs pieces of that
age; and ſometimes, tho* much more rarely, I
have met with them ſo upon the Roman Coins
of the Baſs Empire.

32d and 33d. Theſe ſeem imperfect.

34th, ELFRED REX. Reverſe, OYDIG
MONetarrus.

35th, Seems to be of Edmund the Martyr, his

name is inverted DNVMꝗ; but what to make

of the reſt of the Letters, I know not. Reverſe,
ENSAM MoOneta. perhaps for Eveſbam or
Eſpam in Worceſterſhire. |

Saxon

. "I

It:
12,
13.

14.
15.

16.

17.
18.

19.
20.

21.

22.

23.

24,

25.
26.

27.
28.

29.
30.

31.

325
34.

35

33.

— * * — — -
- _ 6» l * — oo - 1 . 4 - > —_— —
— OY a — "IA = —
— - - — — — —_ ——
„ „„ — .ä—

. 2

—— —— —

— _— — * —
- » — - ” 2 &Y — 4 — —— CERES * — — 4 —
„ .... — 1K . OR > E

—

clxxxili

Faxon COINS.

— —
e > = 2 — 2” — 9 PTL * — mY *
. ˙ Kü . — — —kU — —ñ—ö——Br —— — tt. ——ů .

Saxon Coins, TA B. II.
Notes upon Tab. II. by Mr. WAL K E R.

O the firſt ; there were two Ethelueards,
one of the South, the other of the Weſt-
Saxons ; this ſeems to be of the latter. In
ſome writers he is called Ethelheardus. Little 1s
remember'd of him ; beſides that when King
Ina went to Rome, Anno 728, he aſſumed the
government of the Kingdom, and fought a
battle with Prince Ofwald : with what ſucceſs,
is not mentioned. He is ſaid to have governed
fourteen years. On the reverſe is Edmund,
with a ligature of ſeveral letters, which can-
not ſtand tor St. Edmund the Martyr, ſince that
happened not till Anno 870. After which time
there was none, except Ethelbert, the ſon of
Etheluulf; but he alſo was before the Martyr-
dom of St. Edmund. I rather think that cy-
pher to ſignify ſome mark of the Monetarius.

The ſecond Coenuulf, called commonly Ke-
nulph, Kinulf, Ceoluulf. One of that name was
adopted to be King .of the Northumbers by
Oſric. Little more 1s known of him, than that
he left his Kingdom, and became a Religious
at Lindisfarn. — was King of the Weſt-
Saxons, who reigned in great ſplendor and re-
nown thirty one years. He was once worſted
by the great Offa at Benſington (now Benſon) in
Oxfordſhire. He was flain at Mereton in
Surrey (by Kinheard, a ſeditious noble man,
who had been baniſh'd by him) as he was with
a Lady there, too much affected by him, about
Anno 786. But this Coenuulf ſeems to have been
a King of Mercia, a very worthy Prince.
This Coin is of him; he was a very powerful
and victorious, as well as pious Prince; and ac-
counted one of the great Saxon Monarchs.
He diſpoſſeſs d Ethellertus Pren, King of Kent,
and took him priſoner, but atterwards releaſed
him without ranſome or other condition.

The third, Beormerick (by Speed called Bri-
thric ; for of that other name we find no men-
tion in hiſtories) was King of the Weſt-Saxons,
and ſucceeded Coenuulf. In the third year of
his reign, was the firſt appearance of the Pi-
rates upon theſe coaſts. Pirates, I call them,
becauſe they were not owned by any Sovereign
Prince till long after: but were a confluence of
all ſorts of thieves, who, by ſpoil and robbery,
arrived to much wealth, and had the confidence
to erect a kind of Community or Republick at a
ſtrong town, now called Wollin in — ;
whence they went out to rob, and laid up their
prey there. Brihtrick baniſhed Ecgberht, fear-
ing both the goodneſs of his title, and his great
abilities ; yet dying childleſs, he left the King-
dom to him, An. 800. He was poyſoned by
his wife, the wicked Eadburga ; taſting by
chance of a Cup which ſhe had prepared for
one of his favourites. Upon his death, ſhe
fled, with all her treaſures, into France ; when,
coming to Charles the Great, he ask'd her whom
ſhe deſired to marry, himſelf or his ſon, there
preſent? She fooliſhly anſwer'd, that if it were
in her choice, ſhe would marry his ſon, becauſe
he was the younger. Whereupon the Emperor
told her, that it ſhe had choſen himſelt, ſhe
ſhould have married his ſon ; but now, that
ſhe ſhould retire to ſuch a monaſtery, Whence
alſo, for her incontinency, ſhe was ſhortly
turned out, and died begging.

The fourth, Ecgberht, partly by conqueſt,

partly by the ſubmiſſion of other Kingdoms,

united all into one dominion, calling it England ; |

becauſe, as it is ſaid; himſelf, the King of the
Weſt-Saxons, was an Angle. It ſeems that Al-
mighty God ſaw it neceſſary, for reſiſting the
violence of the heatheniſh Pirates, to unite the
intire force of all the Nation, yet little enough
to defend themſelves. He was a Prince (though
but of ſmall ſtature) of extraordinary wiſdom
and valour ; for, being baniſhed by Brithric,
he apply'd himſelf to Charles the Great, who be-
ſtowed upon him a conſiderable poſt in his
Army. And he was ſignally bleſſed with a
numerous ſucceſſion of moſt worthy Princes of
his _ and blood; which indeed was neceſ-
ſary for the preſervation of the Nation, and its
ace and unity.

The fifth, Cenedryd Regina, ſome ſuppoſe to
have been wite to the great Offa, the Mercian,
and to have reigned after his death; and that
Eopa was one of her chief Miniſters. But ſhe
rather ſeems to have been the eldeſt daughter of
Kenuulf the Mercian : to whom alſo he left the
care of Kenelm his ſon ; whom, out of ambi-
tion, ſhe caus'd to be murthered by his Edu-
cator. After his death, ſhe reigned ſome time;
and perhaps might be married to ſome of the
Weſt-Saxon Princes: As Eopa (a name frequent
amongſt the Saxons) was the Son of Ingilidis or
Ingilfus, brother of Ina; and therefore probably
might be in ſome great, perhaps the chief, em-
ployment under her, or elſe married to her:
and for that reaſon placed upon her Coin ;
and not as a King, or a Biſhop, though he hath
a Croſs in his hand. That ſhe was a Mercian,
* by the letter M upon the reverſe.

he fixth and ſeventh are of King ZEthel-
wolf, ſon and heir of Egbert, a peaceable and
devout, yet very valiant, Prince. He firſt gave
the tithe of his own Eſtate, and afterwards of
the whole Kingdom, with the conſent of the
Nobility, to the maintenance of the Clergy.
He obtained a very great and glorious victo

over the Danes at | Aclea. He ſubdued alſo + perky
part of North-wales, upon the intreaty of 0cihen, i
Burhred, King of Mercia; and, out of great Suri.

bounty and moderation, reſigned it to him.

After, ſetling the Kingdom, he had ſo much

leiſure, as to go to Rome (a journey mentioned
with honour by Anaſtaſius Bibliothecarius;)
where he ſojourned in very great eſteem twelve
months. In his return, he married Juditha,
the beautiful daughter of Carolus Caluus; who,
after Etheluulf's death, was re-married to Baldwin
ferreum-latus, Foreſter, and afterwards Count of
Flanders. At his return, his undutiful, if not
alſo rebellious ſon, ZAthelbald, endeavoured to
exclude him the Kingdom. Yet, notwith-
ſtanding the Nobility freely offered their aſſiſt-
ance againſt Athelbald ; rather than engage in
a war with his own people, he, in wonderful
moderation, conſented to divide the Kingdom,
and contented himſelf with the worſe half.

The eighth, Plegmund, is out of its place ;
yet not to be omitted, becauſe on the reverſe is
the Pallium, or Archiepiſcopal ornament re-
ceived from the Pope, who thereby acknow-
ledged and authorized ſuch an one to the dig-
nity of an Archbiſhop ; and from this alſo,
ſeems derived that which is now ſince, even till
this time, the Arms of that Archbiſhoprick,
though otherwiſe faſhioned. This of Pleg-
mund is not unlike the Pedum of the oriental
Biſhops.

The ninth. It is uncertain, for which
FEthelſtan this was made, for there were divers.

One was King of Kent, a very valiant and

victorious Prince againſt the Danes (whether
he was the ſon of Egbert or Ætheluultf, is 1
eaſily

6, 7.

- %
8
8

r SE EARS. EA. AC

r

<<

*

i.

Mami | J axonce

HP. age CXXXIX

Yorkſhi
Beverley.
10.

4 J _
Ar 1 —_— YVES oh

© oo_—_ ca -

1
.
\ 4 "
1 8 75 +1 j [1 * * 3+ j 1
o »*» 1 " * { a ;
, K .
, *
| : , 4 4 .
1 ; Thy |
. 4
| : F on *
| SY x vx
Pd LY # | | | |
. — A , | | 5 ä |
* \ * : ; | |
4 9 4 — o + 3 « * 8 ö ) 3
v -
— , % 4 a ö | \ | |
-
* *%% L 6
* Pl * 3 |
. ; q
o
F
;
» | 0 |
— 4
| * yy 7
*
| *
.
g
f -
| .
%
Oo
* *
*
*
* —
8
*
—
”s
*
; ,
4
x oy | |
A
#* ;
P .
7
*
4
*
*
1
- . *
—_ - —— —  — —
— —

” 1 —
— — — ; — i — *
— UU— — "Ds —

8

—

clxxxv

Saxm COINS, I

clxxxvi

—

hron, Sax.

eaſily diſcovered from our authors; I rather
think him the ſecond ſon of Egbert.) Another
was a Daniſh King, called Godrun, who was
overcome by King Alfred at Edington, and
afterwards Chriſten'd, and call'd at his baptiſm
thelſtan; of whom hereafter. But this ſeems
moſt probably to have been the ſon and ſucceſ-
ſor of Edward Senior. Regnald on the reverſe,
ſeems to have been the ſon of Guthferth, the
ſon of Sihtric, a Daniſh King in Northumber-
land. An. 923. he took York ; which he
ſeems to have kept, till recover'd by Æthel-
ſtan ; yea, though Au. 924, it be ſaid, that the
Scots, and Regnald, and the ſon of Eadulf, and
all the inhabitants of Northumberland, had
choſen Edward Senior to be their Lord and fa-
ther. 'That was only for fear of his arms, and
they rebelled again preſently after his death. 1
cannot but lament the miſery of this Nation in
thoſe times. When (v. g.) in Northumber-
land, The Daniſh Invaders had one King, the
Saxons another; and they had not their limits
diſtinguiſhed, but lived promiſcuouſly one a-
mongſt another; ſo that here was always cer-
tain war, or uncertain peace. In the time of
King Edmund, Ar. 945. Regnald was baptized ;
but relapſing (as it ſeems) he was by King
Edmund driven out of his Kingdom. The
Building upon the reverſe may perhaps ſignify
ſome repairing of the Minſter ; and AC may
alſo ſtand for Archiepiſcopus. It is reported by
divers of our Hiſtorians, that Ethelſtan, in his
march towards the North, ſeeing a great num-
ber of people going upon the way, demanded
whither they went ? and being anſwer'd that
they went to viſit the Shrine of St. John of Be-
verly, who wrought many miracles, he reſolved
to go thirher alſo, and after having paid his de-
votions, vow'd, that if St. John would pray to
God for victory over his enemies, he would
redeem his knite (which he there preſented and
left) with ſomewhat of value ; which he did at
his return with victory. And I have been in-
form'd, that about 1660, the people going to

Yorkſhire repair ſomething in that Church of Beverley,

eres ſey.

10.

II.

light accidentally on the Coffin of St. John; up-
on the opening of which, they found the dried
body of the Saint, and an old faſhioned Knife
and Sheath.

The tenth and eleventh are of the valiant,
devout, and bountiful third ſon of King
Etheluulf. He fought many and ſore battles
againſt the Danes, moſt-what ſucceſsfully. At
Aſbdrwn (near Lamborn in Barkſhire) was a
moſt terrible fight againſt the whole body of the
Daniſh forces, divided into two wings; one
under two of their Kings, the other led by
their Earls. King Ethered divided his army
likewiſe into two bodies ; the one commanded
by his brother ZElfred, the other by himſelf.

lfred was ordered to ſuſtain their charge,
whilſt King Ethered heard publick Prayers;
and though word was brought -him that the
battle was begun, and his brother fiercely
charged, yet would he not riſe from his Prayers
till all was ended ; and then, after a moſt ter-
rible battle, he obtained an entire and-glorious
victory, wherein were lain one of their Kings,
and moſt part of their Earls and chief Com-
manders. In another battle, this moſt worthy,
valiant, and benign Prince, was mortally
2 and died at Winborn in Dorſet-

re.

In the eleventh, the name is Æthered, as it is
alſo in the Teſtament of King Alfred : the let-
ters of the former reverſe I cannot interpret;
in the latter, is Oſgut moneta. The other letters I
rſtand not.

From the twelfth to the eighteenth, they are
of the great Alfred: The reverſes of all, or
molt of them, ſeem to be Noblemen and Go-
vernours. The reverſe of the twelfth, ſeems
to be in honour of St. Cuthbert, one of the firſt,

teſt, and moſt famous of our Engliſh Saints.
is life is written both in proſe and verſe by
Venerable Bede, who was born ſome time be-
fore Cuthbert died, ſo that his ſtory was then
freſh in memory. When King Alfred was in
his loweſt eſtate, abſconding in Athelney, St.
Cuthbert is ſaid to have appeared to him, and
to his wife's mother, declaring to them, that
Almighty God was reconciled to him, and par-
doned his oftences (the chiefeſt whereof were
the neglect of his duty, and too much addiction
to hunting in his youth, as St. Neor warned
him) and would ſuddenly give him a ſignal
victory over his enemies (which happened at
Edington in Wiltſhire,) and would reſtore him
to his Kingdom. The King, in gratitude,
gave to the ſervice of God, in St. Cuthbert's
Church, the Province called now the Biſhoprick
ot Durham, and put his name upon his Coin :
as he did likewiſe that of Uulfred, Count
or chief governour of Hamſhire, upon the
thirteenth. |

Ot the fourteenth I underſtand neither fide.

| The reverſe ſeems to be Bernualed; but it is

unknown to me who he was. So is alſo that of
the fifreenth, only it was an eminent name a-
mongſt them; as was alſo Athelſtan on the
ſixteenth. That upon the ſeventeenth, was
likely rhe valiant and noble Viceroy of Mercia,
married to the King's daughter Ethelfleda, a
woman of admirable wiſdom, courage and zeal ;
in ſum, a daughter worthy of ſuch a father.

The eighteenth, is of Edward Senior, that
victorious and glorious ſon and ſucceſſor of King
ZElfred ; equal to his father in valour and mili-
tary skill, but inferiour to him in learning and
8 His actions are ſufficient for a vo-
lume. On his head is a cloſe (or imperial)
crown, which is born by few, if any other, be-
ſides the Kings of England. The reverſe is
Leofwine, or Lincoln.

he twenty-third, Beornwald. I rather
read it Deorwald, i. e. Deirorum ſylvua, York-
woulds ; the chief Town whereot was Bever-
ly. And the rather, becauſe of the twenty-
tourth, Diora Moneta, which ſeems to be the
money of rhe Deiri, or Torkſhire-men.

The reſt of the Coins of this Prince are
eaſily underſtood. The names upon the re-
verſes ſeem to have been Noblemen or Go-
vernours. The twenty-fifth is remarkable for
the ſpelling, Jedword; the reverſe is Arnerin on
Egferuic, 1. e. York. The twenty-ſixth hath
the reverſe Othlric on Ring; which might be
Ringhornan in Lancaſhire, a large Town, and
one of the eight which was built by his ſiſter
Ethelflede. Of the twenty-ſeventh, I do not
underſtand the reverſe.

The twenty-eighth is of that moſt famous and
worthy King ZEthelſtan, the true progeny of
ſuch a father and grandfather. In his youth,
his grandfather King Alfred ſaw ſuch a ſpirit
and indoles in him, that he foretold, if it
ſhould pleaſe God that he came to the Crown,
he would perform very great actions for the
good of his country; and he made him alſo.
(I think the firſt that we find to have received
that honour in this nation) a Knight, and gave
him ornaments accordingly; the more likely,
becauſe Zlfred alſo order d the robes and cere-
monies of the Coronation. This Prince ex-
tended his Victories Northward, even into
Scotland : Which countries, till his time, were
never

13.
14.

15.
16.

17.

18.

23.

24-

25.
26.

27.
28.

=
= SEES N

* —
—

—

— —

2 —
: * AF, Aa . — —
2 —
— =
. = PX: 7 — —
— — o " - ww, * *
— * >
_ — = _ — —
— 2 — 4s!
_— — — - — —

5

—— SS ER *. ——

- — — — i

- * * a _ — — —
. ads” we. LORIREP 8 * „ „%ͤ EIS 1— 25 — 3 2 — 1 — —
& Y 7 —

——

* 3 11 —

ES
— —— — — — — — - — : ——— — —— X
» © *

ISS, oO — —

— —

__ MM

* *

th . "CRE. *

x es . a * 4

n

clxxxvii

Far COINS.

:

29.

30.

—

clxxxyii

'%

never peaceably ſettled ; becauſe the two na-] and flower of his youth, he ſicken'd, and died, ©

tions, the Saxons and Danes, were mingled toge-
ther in their habitations; and yet, having ſeve-
ral Kings and Laws, they could never be long
in quiet. Upon the borders of Scotland, he
fought one of the moſt terrible battles that
ever was in England, againſt Anlaf King of
Ireland, Conſtantine King of Scotland, and a
very mighty and numerous Army. Wherein
were ſaid to be lain five Kings, and ſeven Earls
or chief Commanders, beſides vaſt numbers of
inferior Officers and Soldiers. Authors ſay,
that King Zthelſtan's valiant Chancellor and
General Turketill, did with wonderful courage

and ſtrength, break through the enemies ranks,

till he met with King Conſtantine, and flew him
with his own hand. Others ſay, that Conſtan-
tine was not ſlain, but his ſon. Turketill,

after all his wars and greatneſs, reſigning his

eſtates and wealth, repaired to the Monaſtery of
Croyland, and lived in it till his death. Lhe
reverſe is Biorneard moneta Londonenſis civitas or
Holond ci- The former reading is the true.

The twenty- ninth is King Edmund, Brother,
and not inferior in valour or counſel, to Æthel-

ſtan. He purſued the deſign of reducing all

his ſubjects to perfect unity and peace, by ex-
tirpating thoſe rebellious irreconcileable ene-
mies, the Danes. In the — of his
Reign, he cleared Mercia of them. For King
Edward, ſeeing the Kingdem ſo much depopu-
lated by thoſe deſtructive*wars, ever ſince the
entrance of the Danes; did, upon promiſe and
oath of fealty and obedience (as his father alſo
had done amongſt the Eaſt-Angles) permit
theſe Danes to live amongſt his natural Sub-
jects ; and chiefly in the great Towns: think-
ing, that becauſe of their profeſſion of arms and
ſoldiery, they would better defend them than
the Saxons, who were more induſtrious, and
Skilful in labour and husbandry. The Danes
alſo, having been themſelves beaten and con-
quered by him, were very ready to, —
obedience, peace, and loyalty. But the Saxons,
by their labours growing rich, and the Danes
retaining their former tyrannical and lazy diſ-
poſitions, began to oppreſs and domineer over
the natives. Edmund therefore, began, after
Mercia, to reduce Northumberland, where re-
mained the greateſt number of them (tor Ed-
ward himſelf had ſuppreſſed thoſe in Eaſt-
Anglia,) and to reduce thoſe Northern coun-
ties into the form of Provinces : and commit-
ted Cumberland (as a Feud) ro Malcolme King of
Scotland. His zeal for juſtice colt this heroical
Prince his life. For, celebrating the feſtival of
St. Auſtin, and giving thanks for the Converſion
of the nation; he ſpied amongſt the Guelts one
Leof, a notable thief, whom he had before ba-
niſhed. The King's ſpirit was ſo moved a-
gainſt him, that riſing from the Table, he ſeized
upon him, threw him to the ground, and was
about to do ſome violence unto him. The
Thief fearing what he had deſerved, with a
ſhort dagger, which he concealed, wounded
the King mortally; who died in a ſhort time,
to the great grief and affliction of his
ple. The reverſe is very imperfect; but it may
perhaps be Edward Moneta Theodford, or rather
Eadmund Martyr, to whoſe Church he gave the
Town called S. Edmund's-bury.

The thirtieth is Eadred, who did not degene-
rate in the leaſt from his father King Edward, or
his brethren the precedent Kings. He compleated
the reduction and ſettlement of the North;
making Oſulf the firſt Earl of it. The Scots

voluntarily ſubmitted, and ſwore Allegiance to
him. An. 955. in the fifth year of his reign, |

and KaSExceatingly lamented of his ſubjects.

The'thiF-firſt is Eadwig, ſon of King Ed-
mund, who being come to age, received the
Kingdom : fo lovely a perſon, that he was na-
med the Fair. His actions are variouſly reported
by Hiſtorians ; generally, they accuſe him of
voluptuouſneſs, and negle& of his affairs: in-
ſomuch that a great part of the North applied
themſelves to his Brother Edgar, and ſet him
up againſt $qwy, ho with ſorrow (as it is
thought) ſicken d, ànd died, An. 958. Heriger on
the reverſe, ſeems to have been Mint-maſter.

The thirty- ſecond, & Eduy, is here placed
next to his names ſake: but it is a miſtake, for
it ſhould be &“ Edwynzs. There were two
St. Edwins, both Northumbers ; the firſt a
Monk, the ſecond a King. He laid the foun-
dation of the Cathedral of York ; and was lain
by Penda and Cadwallin the Britain (to whom
Penda, being taken Priſoner, had ſworn ſub-
miſſion;) Offred his ſon, and the, whole Army,
being diſperſed. His head was brought to
Vork-minſter ; and that whole Kingdom came in-
to very great diviſions and calamities. But this
was not coined by him, nor do we know by
whom : neither 1s it known to what King
Badi, the Mint-maſter, belonged ; only, that
letter A is upon divers Coins of the Weſt-
Saxons, and therefore probably this alſo be-
longed to ſome of thoſe Kings.

The thirty-third, Eadgar, ſon of King Ed-
mund, peaceably enjoyed the fruits of the la-
bours and dangers of his predeceſſors. A man
admired by all, both foreigners and natives, for
his great piety, juſtice, 1 and induſtry
in governing the Kingdom. Sine pralio omnia
gubernavit prout ipſe voluit; i. e. he govern'd all
at his pleaſure, and that without war. The
reverſe is, Leofsig Moneta Hamptonenfis.

The thirty- fourth is of Eadward, ſon of King
Edgar, by Ethelfleda the fair (called alſo Eneda,)
Daughter of Duke Ordmear. He is much com-
mended for a virtuous, well-diſpoſed, and
hopeful Prince; and ſuch, the ſmall remainders
of his Hiſtory do truly repreſent him to be.
But, by order of his Step-mother Alfritha, to
whom he was too obedient, he was murthered,
to make way to the Throne for her ſon AEthel-
red Edward was accounted a Saint and Mar-
tyr, becauſe of the many miracles ſaid to be-
done at his Tomb; which occafioned the re-
moval of his body from J/ereham to a more ho-
nourable place (Shaftesbury :) and the Murderer,
repenting of that wicked a&ion, ſpent the reſt
of her days in grief and ſevere penances. Who
that Heremod on the reverſe was, we know not.

The thirty-fifth is of Æthelred, ſon of Edgar
by Aljritha, the only weak and ſlothful Prince of
all the line of King Egbert; as endeavouring to
govern his Kingdom, not by true juſtice and
valour, as his predeceſſors had done, but by
tricks, and (as they call it) Policy. Firſt, he
gave an opportunity to the Danes to renew
their invaſions; and then, negligently or un-
fortunately, oppoſing them, he brought the

peo - Kingdom into great poverty and calam its and

afterwards into ſubjection unto thoſe an-
cient enemies and robbers of the country : by
his lazineſs, loſing all that his forefathers by
their induſtry had acquired ; as Hiſtorians ſay
St. Dunſtan foretold of him at his Baptiſm.
Egbert began the advancement of the Kingdom,
by reducing it into one Monarchy ; his ſucceſſors
valiantly defended, and ſettled and augmented
it, by ſubduing the Danes and all other ene-
mies : Edgar enjoyed it in full peace, proſpe-

rity, and glory; and his ſon, this Athelred,
ſuffered

31,

32

33.

34

35"

93 WIR, ben

wh 8 1 ad » I * * - -
n þ 4 x 12 8

r

— er — K
PT ˙¹wAU ü ⁴ . ¼ ůot A ] —·˙ et or

*
7

a * 2 „

429 *

3%

33.

_

1

ys.

T7 < © = R-©

Ld
Q

8.

1—

—

r
_— . 8

—
, . 5 —
ja SEE

Ar Re ey ur rr II IIS oo

„ _

—
„

NON .

Page TH IVI a |

ws 9 oma =—_ST y Wwe

*

: Faxon C 01 NS. |

CXC.

10.

15.
16.
17.
18.

clxxxix

fuſtered it to run down again into a worſe con-
dition than ever. And indeeg. it would be
ſtrange to imagine ſo great a chagg in one
man's time; did it not appear, that thefe was no
cauſe of ruin left unpractiſed in his long reign, viz.
his own negligence, cowardiſe, want of intelli-
ence, and unskilfulneſs in war; and the great
tations, enmities, and treaſons of the nobility :
the particulars whereof have filled the tedious
relations of our Hiſtorians.
: -
A,. 7

_

— —

nn

—

Notes upon TA B. II.

Ey M-. T HO RE s Bx:

iſt, THELVEARD REX (Occident.
Saxonum.) Reverſe, EADMVND
Monetarius.
2d, COENV VLF REX (Merciorum.) Re-
verſe, LVL.
za, BEORMIRIC REX (Conwulf's Suc-
ceſſor.) Reverſe, EELHEARD ; whether no-
bleman or Minter, is uncertain.
4th, ECGBEARHT REX (the Great.) Re-
verſe, DEBLS MONETArius ; the monogram
makes EBORACum.
5th, EOBA ; but the head of Cynethrith, the
Wife of Ofa. Reverſe, CYNETHRETH
REGIN--M (in the Center) is for Merciorum.
6th, AETHELVVLF REX. Reverſe,
BRITH MONETArius.
7th, EtheLVVLF REx. Reverſe, DVNN
MONETArius.
8th, PLEGMVND ARCHIEPiſcopus; a
Paſtoral Staff. Reverſe, ETHELVVLF MO-
netarius.
gth, ETHELSTAN REX (the Monarch;)
the Reverſe is evidently EBORAC. A. (AEc-
cleſia as Eccleſia is frequently writ in the bar-
barous Age:). Civitas REGNALD MONeta.
roth, ETHELRED REX ANGLOrum.
The Reverſe ſeems to have been GodRIC
MOneta On LVND or LIN.
11th, ETHERED REX ANGLOrum.
Reverſe, OSGVT MOnetarius On WINCear-
den (Wincheſter.)
12th, ELFRED REX. Reverſe, CVD-
BERHT. |
i1zth, AELFRED REX. Reverfe,
VVLEFRED. |
14th, ALFRED. below ORSNA and a-
bove FORDA, as it is by Sir Andr. Fbuntain
more correctly deſcribed ; it ſeems defign'd for
Oxford, which was ſometimes writ Oxnaford, as
appears by the Saxon Chron. Ann. 912. Re-
verſe, BERNFALED or BERNFALD Re-
gis MOnetarius. (D and R being interwoven
in the true draught of it.)
15th, ELFRED REX. Reverſe, LVDIG
MONerarius.
| 16th, Reverſe, ETHELSTAN ' MOneta-
rius.
17th, ETHERED (ÆEthelred, E and L in
one) MOnetarius. |
18th, EADy (W) ARD REX ANglorum.
Reverſe, LEFWINE ON LINK (Lincoln.)

This with the reſt of the ſame form, I take to

be Edward the Confeſſor's (not Edward Sen.) and

communicated them as ſuch to Sir Andrew
Fountain, who has afforded them his Sanction.

The next is EADWEARD of a different Or-
thography ; upon which it may not be amiſs to
obſerve, that as there were Three Edwards be-
tore the coming of the Normans, ſo there are as

many material diſtinctions upon the Coins that
bear the ſame name ; which, in my ſlender
opinion, may be thus beſt accommodated to the
| ſeveral Princes. Thoſe with the Half-face and
Scepter, to Edward Senior: Thoſe with the full-
face and arch'd Crown, to Edward the Confeſſor :
And thoſe without either Crown or Scepter,
and indeed, for the moſt part, without any
Effigies at all, to Edward the Martyr ; which
have alſo this further diſtin&ion in the form of
the VV, not /; and they differ alſo in the
Orthography, the latter part of the name be-
ing alyays WEARD not FARD. By this di-
ſtribution, each King has his diſtin& moneys ;
and without this, Edward the Martyr is wholly
excluded : which is hard upon him who
reigned five years in an Age wherein the Saxon
moneys are molt plentitul.

19th, EADVVEARD REX. Reverſe,
EADMVND MONetra.

20th, Same. Reverſe, ETHERED MOneta.

21ſt, Same. Reverſe, WLFHEARD
MONeta. |

22d, Same. Reverſe, BEANSTAN (or
BEAHSTAN Beeſton.) MOneta.

23d, Reverſe, BEORNWALD MOneta.

24th, Reverſe, DIORA MONEta.

25th, IEDF (W) ERD REEX. Reverſe,
ARNERIM ON EOFERFic (vrt) in which
Northern parts the name is often by the vulgar
pronounc'd Tedward to this day. Dr. Motton
reads the Reverſe, 'ARN. Eopl Regis MONe-
tarius EOFRPic. And ſo the next OÞPL
REgis MONetarius.

26th, EADWEARD REX. Reverſe,
ODeLRIc MONeta (or Monetarius) de
RINLofa, hodie Ruxckhorne, as Sir Andrew
Fountain reads it.

27th, EADWARD REx. Reverſe, Sy (W)
EART. MONetarius PIncearten, Wincheſter,
with PAX in the middle.

28th, ETHELSTAN REX. Reverſe, BI-
ORNEARD MOnera LONDini ClIvitatis.

29th, EADMVND REX. Reverſe, EAD-
GAR MOneta de NORTHWIC.

zoth, EADRED REX. Reverſe, VNBEIN
MONETArius.

;3iſt, EADWIG REX. Reverſe, HERE-
GER MO.

32d, SC (Sanctus) EADWI. Reverſe, BADI
MONerarius. | oy

33d, EADGAR REX ANGLOrum. Re-
verſe, LEOFSIC MOneta HAM Tonenſis.
- 34th, EADWEARD REX. Reverſe,
HEREMOD Monetarius.

35th, ETHELRED REX ANGLOrum.
Reverſe, ODA MOnetarius de WELINGtord :
In the four quarters, is CRVX.

7

tl dM. "I *

Saxon Coins. Tas, III.

Notes upon Tab. III. by Mr. WALKER,

LL the firſt ten, are of Cyr (called the

| Great) the firſt Daniſh King of Eng-
land. There are very many of his Coins ex-
tant. I have only deſcribed thoſe wherein is
ſome. notable variety. Though Swane his fa-
ther made divers conqueſis, and ſeveral coun-
tries as well as perſons (preterring his activeneſs
before Æthelreds ſloth, withour regarding the
juſtice of the cauſe) ſubmitted to him, and paid

| largely for his protection; yet was he never

King,

26.

27.

4 a. At 0

”— — — — -
*

* 1 — a . 1 4 * 2
- * 2 i
...... „
1 * _ — _

cxci

Saxm COINS.

WB. BD wo

9:9. 99

King, nor aſſumed (he nor his ſon) the title;
till Edmund Hronfide conſented to divide the
Kingdom with him. Amongſt all theſe figures
of Gut, only one (the ſeventh) is with a
crown ; and that an open one 2 to that
of the Engliſh Kings before him, and adorn d
with lilies ; which would make me ſuſpect that
Coin to be counterteit, were it not that our
Hiſtorians ſay, that when he was yo he
wore his Crown at the great aſſemblies of the
Nobility, ſo many times in the year; as was
the cuſtom, both here, and in France and Ger-
many, and I think with all European Princes
in thoſe times. But one time, being mightily
flattered by his Courtiers, he chanced to be up-
on the ſea-banks, whither he commanded his
chair to be brought ; where, ſitting down upon
the beach in great Majeſty, he told the ſea,
that that was his land, and the water his wa-
ter; Wherefore he commanded the ſea to be
content with its own chanel, and not to cover
any part of the land. Which he had no ſooner
ſaid, but the water daſhed upon him: where-
upon he told his flatterers, tha: they ſhould
hence-forward forbear all boaſting of his power
and greatneſs. After this, it is reported that
he would never wear a Crown. Others ſay,
that he never wore a Crown after his corona-
tion; and that then alſo, at his coronation,
preſently after the Crown was ſet upon his
head, he took it off, and fixed it upon the head
of our Saviour crucified. The ordinary cover-
ing of his head was ſometimes a Mitre (as
fig. 6.) at other times a cap (as fig. 5.) and at
other times a triangular covering, uſed after
him by Andronicus the Eaſtern Emperor, and
by St. Edward the Confeſſor. The reverſe of
the firſt, is Farthein Monet Eoforwic, i. e. York;
of the ſecond, Sunolf ; of the third, Crinam.
The fourth is H/ulzoth. All coined at York.

The fifth is Leodmer, and ſeems to have been
coined at Raculfminſter, now Reculver.

The ſixth hath Luffwine, or Dover.

The ſeventh hath H/ulfric on Lunden.

The eighth is Selwi, at Theoford.

The ninth is Outhgrim, at York.

The tenth is Cut, aged, with a Diadem a-
bout his head. The reverſe is Nodwin Moneta :
The name of the place I cannot read. In his
younger years, he ſpared no labour, nor any
art, juſt or unjuſt, —_— or murder ; to
acquire and ſettle the Kingdom to himſelf and
Polterity. Which being performed, as well as
he could, he endeavoured to act more juſtly
and plauſibly, that he might retain the obedi-
ence of the people, which he had ſo jetty
gotten. Yet not long before his death, he diſ-
poſlefled Olavus King of Norway of his domi-
nion, about An. 1029.

The eleventh is of Harold, Cnut's ſecond ſon,
called for his ſwiftneſs Hares-foor. To his eldeſt
ſon Suane, ſuſpeted to be none of his own,
Cnut gave the Kingdom of Norway: to Harold,
his ſecond ſon (by foreign writers alſo called a
Baſtard) the Kingdom of England : and to
Hardacuut, his fon by Emma, he gave Denmark.
Harold's Reign was ſhort, about four years,
and employed more in endeavouring to ſettle
his title, than in performing any worthy action.
The reverſe is, Godric at Theotford.

The twelfth is of the ſame, with a Diadem
about his Helmet. The reverſe is, Sliwine on
Theodford.

The thirteenth is of Harthacnut. He reign'd
about rwo years, and died ſuddenly at a great
feaſt in Lambeth. Little of note is mention'd
of him, beſides that he was very affectionate to
his mother's children; and that he loved good

eating, making four meals a day. The reverſe
is Elnuine on Wice. perhaps Worceſter.

The fourteenth is of St. Edward the Confeſſor ;
of whom there are very many Coins ſtill extant.
I have preſented only thoſe of moſt variety. This
repreſents him as a young man ſitting with a
ſtaff or ſcepter (which amongſt the Romans
was the Haſta pura and Steptrum, ſometimes
made of Ivory, and many times with an Eagle
on the top of it ; inſtead of which, our Kings
uſed commonly a Croſs, thoꝰ not always of the
ſame faſhion ; ſometimes alſo a Lil :) In his
left hand, a globe, with a croſs faſten'd in it.
This was uſed only by Chriſtian Emperors and
Kings, as intimating that they had that power
through the virtue of the Croſs, or Paſſion, of
our Saviour. The Pagan Roman Emperors
uſed rather a ſtern or oar faſten'd to a globe,
ſhewing that they ſteer'd the world; not ex-
preſſing whence they receiv'd that power. Where-
as Suidas faith of Juſtinian, that in his left
hand he carried a globe with a croſs upon it;
ſignitying, that by faith in the Croſs of Chriſt he
was advanced to be Lord of the world, i. e.
that he obtained that dominion by Chriſt cru-
cified, who was now made Lord ot Lords, and
Prince over the Kings of the earth. This
Prince was ſon to King /Ethelred; ſo that in
him, to the great joy of the Engliſh (the Da-
niſh Government being extinguiſhed) the no-
ble ancient Saxon Line was reſtored. He was
a Prince of very great juſtice, devotion, mild-
neſs, bounty, and many other excellent virtues.
And indeed, ſeveral things reported to his pre-
judice, ſeem capable of a rational Apology 3 as
the hard uſage of his mother Emma, and his
wite Edith. Neither wanted he courage, or di-
ligence : but the factions of the great nobilitv,
and the ambition of Earl Godwin, required a
more ſevere, if not auſtere, Government. The
reverſe, Othgrim on Efrwic, I conceive to be ork.

The fifteenth is of the ſame Edward, but
with an unuſual ornament upon his head : in
his hand, a ſcepter ending in a Lily, The re-
verſe perhaps is Ailmer on Scrobe. coined at
Shrowesbury.

The ſixteenth is of the ſame, with an Im-
perial or cloſe crown : his ſcepter hath three
pearls croſs-wiſe. On the reverſe, is a Croſs
between four martlets, I ſuppoſe ; which was
the original or firſt of thoſe Arms they call the
Arms of the Weſt-Saxons (though Arms and
Scutcheons, Oc. are of a later invention,) and
are now of the City of London, and of divers
other places : Bur they are, in ſeveral particu-
lars, alter'd from what they were in his time;
perhaps for the greater beauty. The reverſe of
the ſixteenth is imperfect. That of the
ſeventeenth, I cannot read: perhaps, it is the
ſame with that of the nineteenth.

Of the eightcenth, the reverſe is Malter on
Eoferwick.

The nineteenth is Edward, with a crown Im-
perial, and Scepter ; on it, a croſs like that of an
Archbiſhop. The Reverſe is, Drintmer on Wal.
perhaps Walingford.

The twentieth is Edward, with a crown
pearled : the reverſe may be dinnit on Leiceſter.

The twenty-firſt hath another unuſual orna-
ment on his head: the reverſe is Sietmait on
Sut ho perhaps ſome place in Suthfolk.

The twenty-ſecond is of Harold, a younger
ſon of Earl Godwin. How he gain'd the King-
dom, whilſt the rightful Heir Edgar was alive,
except by force and power, I know not. Some
ſay, King Edward bequeath'd it to him ; con-
caving Edgar not ſo able to govern : others,
that he was choſen by the conſent of the

Nobility ;

1

11.

16.

17,
18,

I

20.

21.

22˙

%
22.

26.

8, 29,

30.

31

3?

* tif Wd MO Op. JI

= ie

21.

22.

16.

Sans CO INS.

cxciv

31.

33.

34.

Nobility ; but this is not probable. But his
father as long as he lived had uſed all means,
juſt and unjuſt, to get the great offices of
command into his hands, which, coming after
his death to Harold, the beſt and worthieſt of
his children, he made uſe of accordingly. Before
his reign, he had ſhewed himſelf very valiant,
diligent, and loyal alſo: at leaſt more than his
brethren : and, as ſoon as crown'd, he endea-
vour d by all prudent and fitting means to ob-
tain the favour of the people. But his reign
jaſted not long, and was taken up with wars
and troubles: At laſt, fighting raſhly and in-
diſcreetly with William Duke of Normandy,
he was flain with two of his brethren; the
third being killed before in a battle near York.
And ſo ended the great power and ambition of
Earl Godwin and his family: as alſo of the
Kingdom of the Saxons. ?
From the twenty-third to the twenty- eighth,
is Saniti Petri moneta ; molt ot them coined at
York, yet with ſeveral ſtamps. 1 am in great
doubt, whether theſe were coined for Peter-pence
(or Romeſcot) which was an annual tax of a
nny each houſhold ; given for the Welſt-
ls Kingdom byKing Ina, about Ano 720 ;
and for Mercia by King Offa ; and paid at the
feſtival of S. Petri ad vincula : At firſt, as ſome
ſay, for the education of Saxon Scholars ar
Rome; bur afterwards, as a Grant for the uſe of

the Pope himſelf, not then ſo well provided as |

afterwards. (The like tax, of three half- pence
and a ſieve of oats for each family, was about
the ſame time given by the Polonians, upon the
ſame reaſons.) Or it may be, it was the ordi-
nary money coined by the Archbiſhop, whoſe
famous Cathedral was St. Peter's. For amongſt
the great number of ſuch coins, I have ſeen
very few (one is, the 26th in this table)
ſtamped other where. Beſides, there is ſuch

reat variety in the ſtamps, that very many

more than ſeem to be neceſſary for that pay-
ment) muſt needs have been coin'd : nor is the
ſword a proper ſymbol for St. Peter.

The twenty-fixth. What the word in the
reverſe ſignifies, whether the name of a perſon
or place, I know nor.

he twenty- eighth, and twenty-ninth, S.
Neglino, I do not underſtand, as neither the
thirtieth. Theſe coins of St. Peter, with the
three following, and divers others ſcattered in
the other plates, were found at Harkirk in the
pariſh of Sephton in Lancaſhire, as they were
digging for a burying-place ; and were all after-
wards engraved and printed in one large ſheet:
but having ſeen many of the ſame, it was not
fitting to omit them here.

The thirty-firſt is of Berengarizss, King of
Italy, in Charles the Great's time. The reverſe
ſhews the building of ſome church ; but what
church we know not : the words Chriſtiana Re-
ligio ſhew alſo ſo much.

The thirty-ſecond is Ludovicus Pics. The
reverſe much the ſame.

The thirty-third is of Carlus Magnus ; and
informs us of his true name, which was not
Carolus from Charus or Carus; but Carls, in the
Northern languages ſignifying a man, vir, or a
ſtrong man. Metullo was one of the coining
places in France, in his time.

The thirty-fourth is Aulaf Cyning ; a name
very bebe about the times of Æthelſtan,
and after. There ſeem to have been two of
them; one, King of Ireland; another, of ſome

art of Northumberland. V. Tab. II. c. 28.

What that not unelegant figure in the midſt

implies, as alſo that in the reverſe, except it be
the front of ſome church, I cannot conceive; as

f

neither, who that Furhin or Farting was. 1
much doubted, why Anlaf a Pagan ſhould
ſtamp a church with croſſes upon his coin; till
Mr. Charleton ſhewed me on a coin of Sihtric
(Anlaf's father) a Chriſtian, the very ſame
figures; the Mint-maſter for haſte, or ſome
other reaſon, making uſe of the ſame ſtamp. -

The thirty-fifth is of the unfortunate Æthel-
red, and is mentioned here, becauſe coined by
Earl Godwin in Kent. Whence appears what
I hinted before, that the ' Nobility and Go-
vernors put their names upon the coins; and
not only the Mint-maſters, as was more fre-
quent in France.

The wer = is of Harold; the ſon of
Godwin. The reverſe is Brunſtan on Lot fecit.
Brunſtan ſeems to have been only a Mint-
maſter; where Lot is, I know not.

The thirty-ſeventh is of Harold ſon of Cnut.
The reverſe is Leofwine on Brightſtol,

The thirty-eighth hath the reverſe Brintan-
mere on Wallingford, as I conceive. Theſe three
by misfortune were miſplaced, yet fit to be
known becauſe of the places of their ſtamping.

Notes upon Tas. III.
By Mr. THORESBY.

rſt; Cn REX ANGLorum. Reverſe,
4 FARDEIN MOnetarius de EOFer-
wick (Lork.)

zd, Reverſe, SVNOLF MOnetarius de
EOFerwick.

3d, Reverſe, CRINAN MOnetarius de
EOFeRwick.

4th, CNVT. Reverfe, WiLNOTH MO-
netarius de EOFeR Wick.

5th, CNVT REX. Reverſe, LEODMER
ON RINCofa (Runcofam, built by Ethelfleda,
Sax. Chron. Anno 913.

6th, CNVT REX ANGLorum. Reverſe,
LVFEWIN ON DOF (Dover.)

7th, CNVT REX ANGLORVM. Re-
verſe, WVLFRIC ON LVNDene (London.)

$th, Reverſe, SELWIN ON THEOTFOrd
(Thetford.) ;

gth, Reverſe, OVTHGRIM MOnetarius
de EOFerwick.

1oth, CNVT REX. Reverſe, NODWIN
MONetarius de IIRAT.

11th, HAROLD REX AN GLorum. Re-
verſe, GOTHRIC ON THEO T Ford, with
PAX in the Center.

12th, HAROLD REEX Anglorum. Re-
verſe, SLEWINE ON THEO Dford.

tzth, HARTHACNVT REX. Reverſe,
ELWINE ON WIGEpacearren (Worceſter.

14th, EDWARD reX ANGLORum.
verſe, OTHGRIM ON EFeR Wc (Tork.)

15th, EDWErD REX. Reverſe, ALMER
ON SCROBErbymyg (Shrewsbury.)

16th, EADWARd reX ANGLOrum. Re-
verſe, BRAN on Walingford.

17th, BRINTRIL ON WALIngford.

= e eee REX. Reverſe,
WALTER on EOpep pic.

19th, EAD WA R D REX. Reverſe,
DRINTMER ON N

zoth, EADWaRD REX. AN GLOrum.
Reverſe, RDIN NIT (or rather BRIN) ON
LElceſter.

21ſt, EDWERD REX. Reverſe, SIET-
MAIT ON SVTHO: as Mr. O. W. or ra-

b b ther

of

35

36.

37.
38.

16.

17.
18.

19.

20.

21.

4 „ „„ .

CXCV

Saxon COINS.

—

22.

23.

24.
25.
26.

27.

28.

29.

30.
31.

32.

33+
34

35-

36 BRVNNSTAN ON LOTF; I ſuppoſe for

37+
38.

2.

ther SIETMaN MONetarius de SVDIC : as
Sir Andrew Fountain more accurately, for Sud-
bury, (call'd 56uSbep1, Sax. Chron.)

22d, HAROLD REX. Reverſe, SWAFA
ON LINCOLN.

23d, SCI (Sancti) PETRI. Reverſe, E-
BOR ACEnfis or EBORACEnſium CIViras.

24th, SCI. PETRI. Moneta. Reverſe, E-
BORACEns: CIVirtas. .

25th, SCI. PETRI MOneta. Reverſe, E-
BORACEns: CIVitas.

26th, SCI. PETrI MOneta. Reverſe,
ERIVHT or ERMIT M.

27th, SCI. PETRI. MOneta. Reverſe, E-
BORACEns: clvitas. The two next are,
doubtleſs, deſign'd by the bungling minters
thoſe ages, for the ſame Inſcriptions.

28th, SC (Sanctus) N (for P) ETI N
(for M) O. Reverſe, EBORACEns: Clvitas.

29th, Same miſtake. Reverſe, EBORAcens:
CIFE for CIV Eras. by change of V conſonant
into F, as is frequent in other languages:
(Mr. Lhuyd's comparative Etymol. in his Arch.
Brit.)
Pg As engraved, I can make nothing of it.

31ſt, BERENGARIVS REX. Reverſe,
CHRISTIANA RELIGIO.

32d, HLVDOVVICVS IMPerator. I have
one of them, and the laſt three letters are
very diſtintly IMP. not IRE, as engraved
betore. Reverſe, XIPSTIANA RELIGIO.

33d, CARLVS REX FRancorum. Reverſe,
METXVLLO. ;

34th, ANLAF CVNINC (King.) Re-
verſe, FARNAN MONETA. Dr. Wotton
ſuppoſes this coined at Furne-Iſland, when
Anlaf was baptized, and this to be the book
with ſeven Seals, &c.

35th, XTHELRAED REX ANGLOrum.
Reverſe, GODWINE MOneta CANTipane
(Cantwari,) the people of Kent.

36th, HAROLD REX. Reverſe,

DEOTFord. .
37th, HAROLD REX ANGLorum. Re-
verſe, LEOFWINE ON BRIczrcop (Briſtou.)
38th, BRINTNER (or MAR) ON
FALingponò: in the center of each is PAX.

ä ——

Saxon Coins, Tas, IV.

Neves upon Tab. IV. by Mr. WALKER.

N this plate are colle&ed divers unknown
coins, yet ſuch as I conceive to have be-
longed to theſe Nations : ſome alſo of former
Kings are repeated ; but for the moſt part the
faces, and in all, the reverſes, are divers. They
are added here, in hopes that it may not be
ungrateful ro them who have the curiofity to
collect theſe rarities, to have the more aſſiſ-
tance for the underſtanding of them.

The firſt is of the unfortunate King ZEthelred,
the face unlike the ordinary one ; the reverſe
CRVX. between the four branches of the croſs,
Winſtan 22 on 3 l hf

he ſecond, a ſprea e, An ing.
The reverſe FEthelred minetric. which bens 1
be Mint-maſter.

The third is Eadmuud Rex. Reverſe, Re-
ingrim moneta. Which Edmund this was, is un-
certain. Beſides the ſon of Edward Sen. (of
whom we have ſpoken before, Tab. II. c. 29.)

there is none famous in our Hiſtories, but
Edmund ſirnamed , the valiant ſon of
King ÆEthelred, and St. Edmund King of the
Eaſt-Angles. Edmund Ironfide reigned ſo ſhort
a time, that there are very few, if any, coins
extant of him ; thoſe which may probably be
thought his, are in this Table. He was a very
bold indefatigable Soldier, but unfortunate ;
being in moſt of his enterpriſes betrayed or de-
feated by the Traitor Edric. Who, being a
man of a mean family, got by his inſinuations
into power ; of a crafty wit, and fair-ſpoken tongue :
he exceeded all men living of thoſe times in malice and
treachery, in pride and cruelty. His brother Agel-
mer was the father of ¶ulnoth, the father of

of | Earl Godwin.

The fourth is Ethelſtan Rex Anglorum. Re-
verſe, Hegenredes moneta on Deorabi. Coined at
Darby.

The fifth is another face of King Ethelred.
Reverſe, Watlfreth moneta Gippeſwic, Ipſwich
the place of coining it.

he ſixth is Eadmund. Reverſe, Boin LYG.
Who it was, I know nor. |

The ſeventh ſeems to be of Coenuulf, Kin
of the Weſt-Saxons. Of whom ſee Tab. II.
c. 2. of the Northumbers. I know not where
to begin to read the letters on the reverſe ;
nor do I underſtand them.

The eighth is Eadred Rex. The reverſe,
Mama moneta. This face reſembles not that in
Tab. II. c. 30.

The ninth, eleventh, twelfth, and thirty-
ſeventh, ſeem to be of the ancient Iriſh Kings,
the only ones that I ever ſaw. The letters are
very unuſual, and therefore difficult to be read
or underſtood. The ninth, I conjedture to be
Dida Medino. The reverſe, two hands in the
oppoſite angles of a croſs. The word ſeems to
be Iniconeic, a name (as I am inform'd) ſtill ex-
tant in Ireland.

The tenth, if it be not Offa, I know not
who it is.

The eleventh is of an Iriſh Prince (I con-
ceive) by the words Midino on the ninth coin.
Midini upon this and the twelfth, ſeems to re-
ter or belong to Midia, now called Meath, one
of the diviſions and countreys in Ireland,

The thirteenth is Eadzar Rex. Reverſe,
LEthered moneta Lundoniz. It was probably one
of the Edwards, but the effigies being like none
of the other, I know not of whom it is.

The fourteenth, Dmo, unleſs it be one of
the Edmonds, I cannot gueſs at it; but the
countenance, cloaths, &c. are not like any of
the other. The reverſe alſo is equally un-
known.

The fifteenth, I do not underſtand.

The ſixteenth is Coenuulf a Mercian ; but not
like any of thoſe already deſcribed. The re-
verſe, Ceolheard, I underitand nor.

The ſeventeenth is ſet down, becauſe of the
beauty and unuſualneſs of the reverſe.

The eighteenth. There were divers Ætbel-
ftans ; one was the ſon either of Egbert or
ZEtheluulf, and was King of Kent; another
was the ſon of Edward Sen. of whom before :
the third was a Daniſh King called Gormund,
who being overcome by Alfred at the battle of
Eddington, ſubmitted himſelf and his army,
either to embrace the Chriſtian Religion or de-
part the whole Countrey. Himſelf with thirty
of his chiefeſt Commanders were baptized,
with a great part of the Army ; the reſt quitted
the Realm. King Elfred was his Godfather,
and call'd him /Ethelſtan, and gave him the
Kingdom of the Eaſt-Angles, then very much

diſpeopled by the cruel wars. I take this coin
do

Jo.

II,

13.

14

15.
16.

17.
18.

Cxey1

2 82 1 *r N ** „ 9 . I” 4 * PER 4 = * 9 Wen „
* e 1 1 7 * 5 * at = n * 4 8 9 mo A * * 9 2 * © "Br *
bf on 7 — ft * 3 IR V BS * - "wo r N — A ” e
Nn „

— FF TR CIOnes SY a a
nf mw” 9 FRA) * * 22 ** — 8 £5) wth g
r *

a —
* p 20 *
ao * *
„ *
* .

. a w 8 9 „ * * Pe * * * * + Ft IE had 28
” a - e 28 0 F og a * q * OE. * EY * at - ab — * 9 * K 9 „„ * ä ;

* * N — 42 a 4 ä * * "I N __ a 5

ds der IN > %% i eas Ee bn ES a mn.

A ? „ f ä wa "FN my * RE TAs WP

— —

*

9 92

"Wi Om {as ONCOL
N 6 4 * \ 8 X /

Hage xlen

ne

„
cdcyn

2

*
_—_— *

Saxm COT

=

a 4...

— NO 2

CXCV

iii

.

19.

20.

21.

22.
Perhaps,
ini
1.
. Dun.
.
1. Tit.
. p. 606.
| 23.
24

25.

Mt. Tho-

; Ss own
vt,

26.
27.

28.

29.

to be of him; and the rather, becauſe the re-
verſe ſeems to be Daniſh language, and not
underſtood by me.

The nineteenth is of Edmond I ſhould at-
tribute it to the valiant Jronfide, it I could find
others of his coins; bur his reign was ſhort and
troubleſom.

The twentieth is of St. Edward the Confeſſor ;
publiſhed here, becauſe by the reverſe it ſhould
ſeem, what I have read alſo, that he either
founded or re-edified the great Church of St.
Edmond at Bury.

The twenty-firſt is Æthelnoth on Snotenegham
(Norttingham.) Who is meant by it, I know
not; but it is of no value, ſince both ſides are
the ſame. |

The twenty- ſecond ſeems to be of the great
FEthelſtan ; what [to Brie] means, I know not f.
The reverſe is Regnald moneta Eoferwic.

The twenty-third, I believe, was of Ethel.
ſtan King of Kent, a very valiant Prince, and

forrunate againſt the Danes: he died young.
The reverſe is Berharbed on; but no place
named.

The twenty-fourth, is of King Edgar, of
whom we have ſpoken before. The reverſe is
Wermod moneta.

The twenty-fifth, &i Canuti. This rare coin
was lent us by that ingenious and worthy Gen-
tleman Mr. Ralph Thoresby ; which he ſaith was
fent him out of Swedeland ; being found in a
vault in Juitland. The reverſe in a croſs IHC
(Jefus) INRI (Jeſus Nazarenus Rex Judzo-
rum). A and D are conjectured to be Anglia
and Dania : that King (as Saxo Grammaticus,
Hiſt. lib. Ixii. noteth) looking upon his preten-
ſions to the Crown of England as juſt as any of
his Predeceſſors, was reſolved to attempt the

ining of it.
"The twenty- ſixth, I cannot interpret.

The twenty- ſeventh is alſo of Ethelſtan, pro-
bably King of Kent; becauſe of his helmet
made after an antique faſhion, but uſeful;
covering the nape of the neck, and a bar de-
ſcending as low as his noſe : he hath alſo a
gorget. The reverſe, Smala, I take to be the

name of the Mint-maſter.
The twenty-eighth is Wiglaf. After that
the Ealt-Angles, and

Beornuulf was lain 4
Ludican by Egbert; This Wiglaf obtained (I

know not how) the Mercian Kingdom. But
he being alſo overcome by Egbert, reſigned, and
Egbert reſtored it to him under a certain tribute;
and ſo he reign'd thirteen years. Little is re-
corded of him. Redward was Mint-maſter.
The twenty-ninth is Sihtric Rex DHGH.
What theſe letters ſignify, is unknown to me.
He was a Daniſh King in Northumberland,
and was, for his pride and tyranny, very much
hated of his neighbours. To ſtrengthen him-
ſelf, he deſired to marry Edith the ſiſter of the
eat ÆEthelſtan; who would not conſent, till

e promiſed to become Chriſtian, as he did,

and was baptized, but died not long after. His
two ſons, becauſe they would not turn Chriſti-
ans, fled their country. Gudferth went into

Scotland, and Anlaf into Ireland ; where they
wrought all the miſchief they could againſt the

Engliſh, till Æthelſtan utterly vanquiſhed
them both. V. Tab. II. c. 9. The reverſe is
Colbrand. Why may not this be that Colbrand,
in the Romance of Guy of Warwick, men-
tioned by Knighron and others to have comba-
ted, and been vanquiſh'd by, that famous Earl ?
whoſe valour deſerved better, than to have been
diſcredited by thoſe fabulous, if not ridiculous,

xaggerations. However, it appears by this
coin, that thoſe perſons were emporaries,

in the time of King Zthelſtan, and of a Da-
niſh King (whom the fable miſcalls) enemy for
a long time to Æthelſtan. The two comba-
tants alſo ſeem to have been very eminent for
their valour and employments. Upon theſe
true conſiderations (according to the cuſtom of
the times about the holy war) ſome ill-employ'd
perſons raiſed that ſorry childiſh fable.

The thirtieth is of Æthelſtan; to brie I under-
ſtand not. The reverſe, Pauls moneta Leicc.
ſeems to imply its being coined at Leiceſter.

Fhe thirty-firſt, I read Eadred Rex. The
reverſe, Garuurd moneta.

The thirty-ſecond, Eadward Rex. The re-
verſe, Uulfgar, under the front of a church,
probably Weſtminſter-Abby.

The thirty-third is Berthulf Rex, of the
Mercians; whom we have mentioned before.
The reverſe is Byrnuuald.

The thirty-fourth is Anlaf Rex to de; the
meaning unknown. The reverſe is Radulf, un-
der ſuch a plant as is alſo in a coin of
St. Edward's.

The thirty- fifth is a very old face; if of any,
I ſuppoſe it muſt be of St. Edward. The re-
verſe is Thorr on Eoferwic.

The f thirty-ſixth, St. Neglin. I have al-
ready declared that I knew not who he was.

he thirty-ſeventh ſeems to be of an Iriſh
Prince ; to menot legible.

The thirty-eighth is Edwin Rex. This ſeems
to have been the glorious King of the Nor-
thumbers ; who, being forced out of his country
by a cruel and tyrannical Uſurper, betook him-
ſelf to Redwald King of the Eaſt-Angles; who
alſo, after many promiſes and threats, agreed
to deliver him up to his enemy. At which time
the worthy Edwin was comforted by a meſſenger
from God, promiſing him ſafety, his King-
dom, Cc. and, laying his right hand upon
Edwin's head, bad him remember that ſign
which when it came to paſs, he ſhould receive
the Goſpel. This, Edwiz faithfully promiſed,
and afterwards faithfully . as may be
read in Venerable Bede in his ſecond book of
the Eccl. Hiſtory, which, in great part, is con-
cerning this valiant, victorious, religious Prince.
His converſion fell out in the year of Chriſt
627. The reverſe is Sefwel on Eoferwic.

The thirty-ninth hath a coronet upon his
helmet, Æthel. Rex may either be Ethelred,
Ethelwolf, or Ethelſtan; though the face re-
preſents none of them, The reverſe is not
legible.

= — is taken one 4 ng och 1

Oxfordſhire ; it was found in digging the
— at Oxford, and is, or not long 1
in the poſſeſſion of Sir John Holman. It is ſup-
poſed to be the gold given by St. Edward the
Confeſſor at his curing the Scrophulæ, or the Kings-
Evil. It is worth noting that it hath upon it
the of a woman veiled (not unlike a
Nun;) whether of the Bleſſed Virgin, or ſome
other holy woman, I cannot determine. Bur it
ſeems much more proper for that function, than
that now uſed of an Angel ; which was taken
from the French.

———

_ OP .

ceived theſe coins. HA were ſuch as were
found in making a burial-place at Harkirk in
the Pariſh of Sephion in Lancaſhire. :
JS, is John Speed in his Chronicle; which
he copied out of Sir John Cotton's ſtore in his
famous library. 5
WC, are thoſe which were, with great care,

judgment, and expence, collected by that moſt
worthy

N

30.

31.
32.

33+

34?

35+

37-
38.

39.

4x

+ — Mr.

Thoresby's own
ote.

It remains that we declare whence we re- Mr. Walker's
account, from

whom he had
the Coins.

Saxm COINS

—

16.

warthy and ingenious treaſurer of ancient
learning, Mr. William Charleton; whoſe kind-
neſs deſerves a greater teſtimony, than this
place permits. ;

RT, is Mr. Ralph Thoresby, of Leeds in
Yorkſhire; who by his great induſtry hath aug-
mented his father's conſiderable ſtock of this
ſort of knowledge.

CH, is Mr. Charles Hills, very well known
by his eminent skill in all natural and alſo
antique learning.

D P, is Dr. Plot, well known every where ;
DT Dr. Trumball ; W K is Will. Kingſley
Eſq; of Canterbury. Divers alſo of them are
in our own poſſeſſion.

Notes upon Ta B. IV.

By Mr. THORESBY.

iſt, THELRED REX AIGISIA, which
ſeems to be deſigned for REX AN-
GLOrum, and to be either the Engraver's or
Minter's miſtake. Reverſe, WINSTAN MO-
netarius de WINceapren, (Wincheſter) CRVX.
2. ANLAF CVNVN CIT. Reverſe,
ATHELFERD MINETRIL or MINETepe
REGis, as Dr. Wotton reads it. IT rather take
the bird for a Raven, than an Eagle, becauſe it
was the celebrated Enſign of the Danes; as
Mr. Hearne in his notes upon King Aljred's lite
(p. 61.) very probably conjectures.
3d, EADMVND REX (PT before the X
ſeem redundant.) Reverſe, REIN GRIM
MONETArius.
4th, EIHELRED REX ANGLOrum.
Reverſe, WALTFERTH MOnetarius de
GYPESpic (Ipſwich) or GYPESlip (HMip) as
Dr. Wotton. This piece is mine; and I cannot
but obſerve, that there are more apparent ſigns
of the Piety of this King upon his moneys,
than of moſt of the other Saxon Kings upon
theirs ; as here, a hand (to denote the divine
Providence) betwixt Alpha and Omega, and upon
others CRVX. So that he ſeems to deſerve a
better Character than Mr. O. V. (too much in-
fluenced by the Monkiſh Hiſtorians of thoſe
ages) is pleaſed to afford him in Tab. III. n. 35.
5th, EDELSAN REX AXORDM for
Anglorum, or REx SAXON VM (Orientalium)
as an ingenious Author reads it; but upon the
Coin it ſelf it is ſtrictly RVM. Reverſe,
HEGENREDES MOnetarius ON DEORA-
BYI or BYE (Darby.)
6th, EADM VND the contrary way. Re-
verſe, BOINLVC or BOL Fn an ,
LVTerpeld as Dr. Wotton.
7th, COENWLF REX. Reverſe ſeems
to be PODELT or POOQEL, whence the fa-
mily of Pool or Powel.
8th, EADRED REX. Reverſe, MANNA
MONETA.
toth, OFFA REX. Reverſe, EOBA, a
nobleman.
13th, EADGAR REX. Reverſe, ATHE-
RED MONETA LVNdoene (London.)
15th, SC (Sancti) EADI, St. Edmond, by
King Alfred or ſome ſucceeding King. Re-
verſe ſeems to be CIRVE MOneta, cy pic rcear,
Church- money; or Cymcbypmyg, Chirbury,
built by Ethelſleda Queen of the Mercians.
16th, COENVVLF REX Merciorum.
Reverſe, CEOLHEARD.

EMOD, a nobleman, or minter.

18th, ATHELSTAN REX, the averſe
way. Reverſe, ABERTEE MOneta EOfer-
wick, York; where there is a ſtreet to this day
which bears his Daniſh name, Godrun- (as in
the Saxon Chron.) or Gudrum-gate.

19th, EADMVND REX. Reverſe, per-
haps, EVGEAN ON EII or EN. Dr. Hotton
reads it CVRCA MONETarius, and deduces
thence the name of Croke.

2oth, EADWEARD REX. Reverſe, EAD-
MVND.

21ſt, ETHELNOTH ON SNOTENG-
HAM (Norringham ;) the Original is a very
beautiful Coin, but, by ſome accident, both
fides are alike ; ſo that there is no King's
name: tho perhaps none was ever deſign'd, but
Ethelnoth's only, who was a nobleman, deſer-
vedly celebrated in the Saxon Chronicle for his
ſervices againſt the Daxes, Anno 894. In which
Century, we find the names of two Archbiſhops
Ceolnoth and Plegmund, upon their reſpective
moneys, whoſe Example poſſibly this noble
Eal>opman imitated, or might have the like
Privilege granted him by Royal Authority.
This I am the rather induced to believe, be-
cauſe the coin is on both ſides one of the faireſt
minted pieces of thoſe ages.
22d, ETHELSTAN REX TOtius BRI-
Tanniz. Reverſe, REGNALD MOneta
EFORWIC (Tork.) I wonder a perſon ſo cu-
rious as Mr. O. V. ſhould be at a loſs as to

totius Britanniæ adeptus eſt imperium, he was the
firſt King of al Britain: and leſt this ſhould be
thought the language only of his own age (Anno

Original Charter, wherein one of the Saxon
Kings (Anno 730) ſubſcribes himſelf Rex Bri-
tanniæ.
23d, ETHELSTAN (Son of Edward Senior,
as Sir Andrew Fountain apprehends) REX.
Reverſe, BERNARHDE ON. bur no place
mentioned. Dr. J/otion makes the three laſt
Letters to ſignify Eopl On NopSpic.
24th, EADGAR RE 8 Reverſe,
DVRMOD MONEtrarius Our com-
mon Chroniclers are ſo taken up with this
King's Title of the Peaceable, that they almoſt
wholly wave his wars; but it appears by a
certain Charter of his (in the Introduction to
Ireland, tit. Ouſtmanni) that he conquered the
greateſt part of Ireland, with her moſt noble City,
Dublin. Of which noted paſſage, this rare coin
ſeems to be a Confirmation : it being found in
digging amonglt ſome ancient Ruins at Dublin,
from whence it was ſent me under the notion of
an. /riſþ coin; and ſo it may be in ſome reſpect,
though of our Britiſþ Monarch. During whoſe
Wars it ſeems to have been coin'd there ; Dur-
mod, or Dermot, being a name familiarly known
to thoſe that are converſant in the Iriſh
Annals.

25th, Of St. Canntus was found under-ground
in Gotland, an Iſland in the Baltick Sea, and was
ſent me by a friend from Sweden. It is in-
ſcribed + CI. CAN (Sancti Canuti) —-ANG.
(Anglia) that King looking upon his pretenſions
to the Crown of England to be as juſt as the
greateſt of his Predeceſſors. Reverſe, within 2
croſs A and D, for Anglia and Dania, with IHC
(Jeſs) and INRI. the Initials of Pilate's In-
ſcription. This name is written ENV in all
the Coins found in England ; but it is written
CANVTVS, in old latin Gothic Characters,

upon

«2th, EADVVEARD REX. Rererſe, 7.

the meaning of TO BRIT. Simeon Dunelmenſis, Dec, &
ſpeaking of this Monarch, faith, primuſque = p- *

1160) the learned Selden puts it out of doubt, Tit dn
that this title was uſed in thoſe ages, by an p. 6

((
7.
18.

19.

22.

— — — — : a : ' ud
I FEY ht * p 4 „ Wt
+ ap "7 "Sx . - 0
—y———̃ — —ꝛ— — *
— — — ——

- —

— —— ͤ wu:ꝛ— — —T— K

* * g *

"%

*s 4

y r F

ai
* 5 vs 5 4

2 8 —
*

Fu . —

AY . 7

"4s

42
.
42
«>
=
E:
b =
E

* * —— . 8 N 8
„ ß STR

Savon COINS. 5 ccii

38.

39.

40.

upon his Coffin found in a Vault when
Sc. Camutuss Church in Ottenſee was repaired,
Anno 158 2. :

The 26th is not ſtrictly engraved ; having on
one fide EBORACI though rudely performed;
the other fide I cannot unriddle, though by the
hand it may be ſuppos'd to be Ethelred's.

27th, ETHELSTAN REX (Cantii.) Re-
verſe, MALA MON ETArius, a croſs Croſs-
let, as it is called in Heraldry, In anſwer to
Dr. Wotton's Query, the Coin it ſelf has both
-+ and S before MALA.

28th, WIGLAF REX Merciorum. Re-
verſe, REDMAN. Monetarius.

-9th, SIHTRIC REX DHGH (but theſe
four letters are not intelligible by me.) Reverſe,
COLBRAND. PIODGH, perhaps PEONHO,
Pen in Somerſetſhire, a place noted for the Da-
niſb aftairs. Saxon Chronicle.

zoth, ETHELSTAN REX TOtius BRI-
tanniEk. Reverſe, PAVLS MON Tarius
LEICeſter. |

ziſt, EADRED REX. Reverſe; SAR-
VVARD MONETarius.

32d, EADWEARD REX. Reverſe,
WLFGAR.

33d, BERHT VLF REX (Mercorum:) Re-
verſe, BYRNV VALD.

34th, ANLAF REX TO Do, perhaps de-
ſign'd for NORD (Northumberland.) Reverſe,
RADVLE. |

25th, ED/ (W) AERD REX. Reverſe,
THORR ON EOFERP (W) 1. c. Tork. By
Domeſday-book it appears, that Torr or Thor,
one of the Saxon Barons, had a vaſt eſtate in
theſe Northern parts (particularly in Richmond-
ſhire) in the time of Edward the Confeſſor ; of
which being 9 by cke Conqueror,
moſt of it lay waſte at the time of that memo-
rable Survey: The place of his Reſidence, ac-
cording to the cuſtom of thoſe ages, was called
Thorsby, from the Saxon Bye habitatio ; from
which place the family of that Sirname
came, Which is yet at „ in the ſame
County.

36th, SCI (Sancti) PETRI MOneta. Reverſe,
EBORACEnſis CIVitas: The Letters of both
ſides are inverted.

37th, I can make no more of the thirty-
ſeventh, though I have the Original before me,
than of Ne g : 11: 12: and 14; which Mr.
Walker ſuppoſes to be the ancient Iriſh.

38th, EDy (W) IN. REX Anglorum. Re-
verſe, SEEVEL ON EOFERwic. This moſt
rare piece is juſtly ſuppoſed to be the ancienteſt
of any piece now in Being of the Engliſh Na-
tion ; and Seevel the nobleman upon the Re-
verſe, may very well be preſumed to be one of
the Anceſtors of the ancient and honourable
family of the Saviles, of which Sir John, after-
wards Lord Savile, and father to the Earl of
Suſſex, was the firſt Alderman of Leedes, which
place had been the Seat of the Kings of Nor-
thumberland, after this Edwin's martyrdom 2]
the Pagans. Sir Henry Savile, by his noble E-
dition of Chryſoſtom, &c. hath made the name
as famous abroad, as his brother Sir John the
Judge, and others, have done at home.

39th, ETHEL--- REX angLOrum. Re-

verſe, imperfect.

4oth, That Edward the Confeſſor was the firſt |

of our Kings who cured the Struma, is acknow-
ledged by all, and that it was called the Kings-
Evil upon that account, is probable enough ;
bur that he and the ſucceedingKings gave pieces
ot Gold in this form, may, I think, be juſtly
ſerupled, and can never be proved from EC, the
ſuppoſed Initials of his name, who is never
ö

|

{tiled Confeſor upon any moneys or medals of
undoubted Antiquity ; and if Gold had been
coined and diſtributed upon this or any. other
occaſion in thoſe ages, a greaternumber of them,
no doubt, would have been found in the Ca-
binets of the Curious, as well as their current
moneys ; whereas, nothing of that metal ap-
pears till Edward the 34's time; and that,
perhaps, no other, than the current ſilver -mo-
neys of each Prince, except gilded for diſtincti-
on. Such an one, with an hole for the ribbon
to be hung about the neck, was amongſt the
Curioſities in the old Lord Fairfax's Muſzum,
and is yet preſerved in this: It has the full face
(as he is repreſented upon his Great- Seal in
Speed's Hiſtory) with the arched Crown, and
may poſſibly be one of the ſame numerical
pieces given upon that occaſion. As for the
Curioſity deſcribed by the Ingenious Dr. Plot in
his Hiſtory of Oxfordſhire, and from him tranſ-
mitted to number forty in this table, 1 look up-
on 1t as a ſort of Amulet (for which thoſe
darker ſuperſtitious ages had an extraordinary
Veneration,) like that noble one of King Al-
fred, deſcribed by the Learned Dr. f Hicks; and + In his Te-
do conclude with Dr. ///o:ton, that thoſe pieces /««r«5 Ling.

inſcribed St. Edmond, were of the like nature. 288

—

* Saxon Comms. TAB. V. b, M. The.

resby, ſince
| the laſt Edi-
By Mr. THORESBY. de f the

Britannia,

iſt, E REX nORSan hymbpapic. x,
1, Reverſe, DIARVALD MOneta.

Diarwald, Deirorum Silva, Potk⸗Molds. This
piece of the Northumbrian Elfred, was probably
coined at Beverley (which is upon the Holds, as
they are call'd to this day) Be the uſe of the
Deiri, Diera, or Porkſhire-men. Some in-
cline to read it, Rex Doroberniæ, for Canterbury;
bur that Ciry occurs not, I think, upon any
of the moneys of the Saxon Kings, by the
name H Dorobernia, but Cantwaraburg. Though
where LANT or Cent. follows Rex, it may
perhaps re ner denote Langpapa, the people
of Kent : for though the place of mintage be
mentioned on the reverſes of ſeveral of theſe
ancient Coins ; yet where ſuch a name ſucceeds
that of the Prince, I think it not properly con-
fined to a City (King of Canterbury ſounding
harſhly) but rather to denote the people of
ſuch a Province: as, Offa rex Merciorum. So
Ceolwulf, of the ſame. So, afterwards, up-
on the Reduction of the Heptarchy, the
Monarchs were ſtiled, Rex Anglorum ; ſee
Tab. III. 35, &c. The Square (as on
this Coin) occurs frequently upon the pieces
coined in thoſe Northern parts; and I remem-
ber not, whether upon any other.

2d, BVRGRED. REX (Merciorum.) Re- 2.
verſe, DVDA MONETArius.

zd, EPELRED REX ANGLORum 3.
(the King's head.) Reverſe, EADy (W) OLD
MOnetarius ON (de). LENTpapabypig.

1 This is that AEthelred or /Ethered, who was

elder brother to King Alfred.

4th, AELFRED REX. Reverſe, ADE- 4.
LVLF MOnetarius: It is a Coin of Alfred the
Great.

5th, EDy () ARD REX (King Edward 5
Senior, with half face and ſcepter.) Reverſe,
DORR ON EOFERy (V) IC, York.

19.

20.

21.

22.

6th, EPELSTAN REX, the King's head.

| Reverſe, ELFy⁵ (W) ALD MOneta (or Mo-

netarius) LON Dini CIVItatis.

7th, The ſame. - Reverſe, DRINTVALD
MONetarius : Dr. Morton reads it M CON
(the M and C interwoven, and the C angled)
Monetarius CONrvenene; and fo it is engraved
in Sir Andrew Fountain's Numiſmata (6th of
ZEtbelſtan's ;) but this piece wants the ineolæ
that ſhould compoſe the C with two angles.

8th, ADELSTAN REX TOtius BRTI
(Britannia) no head. Reverſe, DEORVLF
MO (moneta) LEGECElceſter (Cheſter.)

gth, EDELZTAN REX (no head.) Re-
verſe, RDT MONEtrarius, the averſe way.

roth, ZDELSTAN REX, the King's head
very well perform'd. Reverſe, WLFHEARD
MOnetarius WIN: CI. (Wincheſter Civitats.)

11th, EADRED REX, the King's head.
Reverſe, ADELVERD MONETArius.

12th, EADRED REX (no head.) Reverſe,
RICYLF MONetarius.

13th, EADGAR REX (no head.) Reverſe,
HERIG/ER MOnetarius.

14th, EADGAR REX, the King's head,
very well done for thoſe Ages. Reverſe, PIRIM.
MONETA HVNTEnoune; this piece is

neither in Sir Andrew Fountain, nor the Britannia,

before.

15th, EADWEARD REX, the head of
Edward the Martyy. Reverſe, BEANRED
MO Netarrus. |

16th, The ſame Inſcription ; but no head,
Reverſe, BOIGA monetarius.

17th, The like. Reverſe, ORDVLF MO
(monetarius).

18th, EPDELRED REX AN GLORum:
The King's head and ſcepter. Reverſe, 4 (W)
INTERLEDA M O (moneta) EO Feppic
(rk) with CRVX in the Quarters of the
Croſs. In others of the ſame Prince we have
SVMERLED, to ballance this.

19th, EADM VN REX: whether the Mar-
vr, or Jronfide, I determine not. Reverſe,
OJfEIMuND MOnetarius: the name ſcarce
legible ; but the ſame with Sir 4. F.'s V. 17.

20th, EADy (W) ARD REX, the head of
Edward the Confeſſor. Reverſe, VETEL ON
EOpeppic. I think the time ſcarce agrees to
Osketel the Archbiſhop ; as an ingenious Au-
ther inclines to read it.

21ſt, The like. Reverſe, BRININ Moneta-
rius ON TAme; as I chooſe to read it, ra-
ther than MONETA; Tame, in Oxfordſhire,
being a noted place in thoſe ages.

22d, HAROLD REX ANGLOrum, the
King's head crown'd, and ſcepter. Reverſe,
5 (W) VLFGEAT ON GLEape-cercen (Glo-
ceſter) with PAX in the middle.

All thoſe above are Silver : Thoſe which fol-
low, are of the braſs rrycar; eight of which
(as the Liards de France) made a penny, as ap-
pears by the Saxon Verſion of Marc. XII. 42.
A conſiderable number of theſe (and, amongſt
others, the firſt, I think, that ever were diſ-
cover'd of King Ala's coin) were found Anno
1695, near Rippon, at a place called Alice- hill,
I preſume, for Ala's-hill, who was ſlain Ano

Saxon C OINS. ns: all

8 26 (not 926, as Speed, and from him Iaſon,
miſtake :) Moſt of thoſe found here, were the
Kings of Deira, and Sub-reguli, after Egbert
had reduced it to be part of his Monarchy. |

A a « *

iſt, L' Thellert. EDELRET Rex. Reverſe, |
V BRODER. ; ;
2d, Alred. ALRED REX (the Land R re- 2.
vers'd, as they are frequently in theſe Coins :
Reverſe, LADDL
3d, Alred. ALRED REX. Reverſe, IVV ;.

RED.
4th, AELREV. Reverſe, VVNAV. 4.
5th, Eaured. EANRED REX. Reverſe, 5.
VVLEFRED.
6th, Same. Reverſe, pORDRED. 6.
7th, EANRED. Reverſe, MONNE, the 7, + They are
averſe way. . | en called
8th, EANRED REX. Reverſe, BRODR. 8, e vi
gth, Ethelred. EDILRED REX. Reverſe, 9. ng

EARDVVLE. This  Eardwulf was after- | ——hoa |
wards King. Another has EDILRED RE |
Another only EDILRED R. Some have only
a ſingle point, others a ſtar of fix Rays in the
Center, and others a Croſs. |

ioth, EDILRED REX. Reverſe, ANRED. „

1ith, Reverſe, MONNE. it

12th, Reverſe, BERHTVE HDFL; the 12.
F and L in Bertwulf are conjoined. Dr. Wotton
takes the latter word for DVNEL.

13th, Reverſe, LEOFDES M. Dr. Wotton 13.
reads it FEOFREE. M.

14th, EDELYEY. Reverſe, YOE Mone- 14,
tarius.

15th, Eardulf, or Ardulf. EARDVVE. x;,
Reverſe, I---ſn VEFX. bg

16th, VRDVVLF VI ( Ardulf cuning.) 16.
Reverſe, BRODER, Broder or Brother: The
name continued till the Daniſh times: Ego Selden',
BROTHER miles, occurs with other Knights, Tit. af h
Cc. as witneſſes to a Charter of Canutus. Pe 77h,

17th, Ethelhelm EDILHELm. Reverſe, 15.
BRODER. Neither of theſe perſons occur in
the moſt accurate liſt now remaining of the
Kings of Northumberland. Ethelbelm, 1 ſuppoſe,
was ſome Sub-regulzs or unden-cyning, (as the
Nobleman is render'd, John iv. 46) in the con-
_ which 1t was reduced to in its declining

te.

18th, Osbright. OSBWLH. L RAX. Reverſe, g.
MONNE. Another has the very ſame in-
ſcription ; yet the form of the Letters and
Points ſo difterent, as ſhew it coin'd in another

Mint.

19th, OSBERLEH IL REX. Reverſe, WIN- 19.
BER Ht or Bertuine. Another has the T in
Winebertt, which this wants. Another has OS-
BER VLHT, without Rex or ſo much as R.

zoth, OSBERLH x, (r) EX. Reverſe, EyN- 29.
VVIE fer Earwilf: This bas been covered
with a white waſh to reſemble ſilver. Another,
different only in the central points :.: or =

21ſt, OSBERL HL REx. Reverſe, ELNA 21.
MONerarius Regis, as Dr. Horton reads it.

22d, O. I q \HREB. Reverſe, VVLFSLYX.
(Wuljfizz, Dr. Wotton.)

23d, Ala; ALLHE Rx. Reverſe not in- 2.
telligible to me.]

ARRWhS San SA A. mm A ww

Vicciaga.

2
* 2

eres Tr DOwOtE WHAcCwnyg mg eee eee

| 1
_— ere ccvi
* - — .

© AI —
„„

2

Nr

Hat the —— of the“ Danes
LS was, themſelves are in a great
=y meaſure ignorant. Danus the
= giant, ſon of Humblus, is
= long ſince diſcarded by An-
tiquaries, together wi
. ropius's derivation from a
henue. Andreas Velleius, a Dane and a very
learned man, fetches it from the Dahi a _—
of Scythia, and (a) Marc, which does not ſig-
nify bounds, but a countrey. Our countryman
Ethelwerd was of opinion, that the name came
from the city Donia. For my part, I have al-
ways thought, that they were the poſterity of
the Dancioues, plac'd by Ptolemy in Scandia
(who by the change of a letter, are in ſome
copies call'd Daucioxes,) and that from thence
they unburthen'd themſelves into Cimbrica Cher-
ſoneſus, which the Angles had left; till the
learned and moſt judicious antiquary Jonas Ja-
cobrs Venufinus, made a very curious diſcovery of
ſome plain remains of the Daniſh name in the
Sinus Codanus, and Codanonia, which Pomponius
Mela mentions in thoſe parts. Theſe names,
the northern people pronounc'd groſly Cdan and
Ide Mar. Canons 3 but Mela to reduce them to the ge-
. nefbus, nius of the Latin, made them Codanxs and Coda-
fabula que nonia; as after- ages mollify'd Gdanum intoDangk,
eis ſe Clodovæus into Lodouic, &nutus into Canutus.
— No mention is made of the name before
| the time of Juſtinian the Emperor, about the
year of our Lord 570. For about that time,
they began to make inroads into France; and
the Latin-writers of the hiſtory of England
call them Mictingi, from their trade of piracy ;
Winks (as we are aſſur'd by Alfric) ſignify-
ing in Saxon a pirate. They likewiſe term them
Pagani (the Pagans,) becauſe at that time they
were not converted to the Chriſtian Religion.
But the Engliſh themſelves, in their own lan-
guage, call d them Deniſcan, and very commonly
Heathow men. Give me leave to ſet down here
what Dudo of St. Quintin, an author of con-
fiderable antiquity, has ſaid concerning theſe
Danes ; as I had it out of the library of that
indefatigable Antiquary, John Stowe, a Citizen
of London, to which 1 had always free acceſs.
The Danes, like bees out of a hive for confuffon, and
a barbarous manner with their ſwords drawn,
dout of Scanza (i. e. Scandia ;) when their
leacherous heat had improv'd them to ſuch an infinite
number. For when they were grown up, their way
N Was to ms with their fathers or grandfathers, and
I very among themſelves, about the Eftate ; the
: land they then had, net being large h for them,
Upox which, according to an ancient enflom, a num+
ber of their young men were muſter'd by lot, and

| by our i. 9 *
CORR \: ,\7
| bake, Daci, 4 . „5 N -

18,
Vicciaga.

19.

20.

21.

2
*

23.

CIT

IGEIEISIAL III I AMIE

Gor |

3

N
Deere

DANES

driven into foreign parts, to cut but their fortunes Religion of
with the ſword. When they were ready to be diſ the Danes.
patch'd away, their cuſtom was, to ſacrifice tot Thur, f From hence
the God whom they anciently worſip'd ; not with 4, Put Tb.
ſheep, or oxen, but the blood of men. This tbey lo d
upon as the moſt precious of all ſacrifices : and after
the Prieft had determin'd by lot who ſhould dye, they
were barbarouſly knock d on the head with yokes of
axen, and kill'd at one ſtroak. Each of thoſe who
were to die by lot, having his brains daſb d out at a
fingle blow, was afterwards ſtretch'd upon the ground,
and ſearch was made for the fibre ou the left fide, that
is, the vein of the heart. Of this they us d to take
the blood, and pour it upon the heads of ſuch as were
defign'd for the march and, imagining that this had
ſecur d the favour of the Gods, they immediately ſet
fail, and = to their oars. There was another
way which the Danes had, of appeaſing their
Gods, or rather of running into moſt deteſtable
ſuperſtition; which Ditmar, a Biſhop, and an
author ſome what older than Dudo, thus de-
ſcribes. But becauſe I have heard ſtrange things of Lib. 1.
the ancient ſacrifices of the F Normans and Danes, I4Northmanni.
would not willingly paſs them over. There is a place
in thoſe parts, the capital city of that Kingdom,
calPd Lederun, in * the province of Selon. There * Page.
they meet once every nine years, in January, a little
ter our Twelfth-day, and offer to their Gods
Ninety-nine men, and as many horſes ; with dogs and
cocks inſtead of hawks : being fully perſwaded (as I
obſery'd before) that theſe things were moſt acceptable
to their Gods.

Abour the time of King Egbert, in the eight The Daniſh
hundredth year after Chriſt, they firſt annoy'd plunders.
our coaſts. Afterwards, making havock of every
thing, and plundering all over Eng/and for ma-
ny years, they deſtroy'd the Cities, burnt the
Churches, waſted the lands, and with moſt
barbarous cruelty drove all before them ran-
ſacking and over-turning every thing in their
way. They murder'd the Kings of the Mer-
cians and Eaſt-Angles, and then took poſſeſſion
of their kingdoms, with great part of that of
Northumberland. To put a ſtep to thefe out-

a heavy tax was impos d upon the miſe-

rable Inhabitants, call'd f Dangelt; the nature i» e. 4 cer-
of which, this paſſage, taken out of our old oy Sn paid
laws, will fully explain. The Pirates gave firſt from the 8
occafion to the paying of Danigeld. For they made on Gyidan, to
ſuch havock of the nation, that they ſeem'd to aim at Pay 3 and
nothing leſs than its utter ruin. And, to ſuppreſs 9,11
their inſolence, it was enafted, that Danigeld ſhould
be yearly paid (which was twelve pence for every hide

land in the whole nation,) to maintain fo many

ces as might withſtand the Incurfioxs of the Pirates.
All Churches were exempt from this Danigeld ;

| nor did the Lands in the immediate poſſeſſion of the

Church,

—

4) Marc I think is never us d to ſigniſy a Countrey : our Marches, tis true, contain a certain plot or quantity of
ground; but then the original of the name, was there being frontiers, or bounds.

9 nnn —

4 8 St.

ccvii

The NORMA NS.

—

cceyiu

19012.

Nordmanni.

in which ſenſe they are likewiſe term'd (a)

fence of arms.

point with Alfred King of the Weſt-Saxons,
he, what by retreats, and what by attacks, did

Church, contribute any thing ; becauſe they put greater
confidence in the prayers of the Church, than the de-

But when the Danes came to diſpute the

not only drive them out of his own territories,
but flew the petty King of the Mercians, and
in a manner clear'd all Mercia of them. And
his ſon, Edward the Elder, purſuing his Fa-
ther's conqueſts, recover d the Country of the
Eaſt-Angles from the Danes; as Athelſtan his
natural ſon, to crown their victories, after a
great ſlaughter of them ſubdu'd the Kingdom
of Northumberland, and by his vigorous pur-
ſuit put the Danes into ſuch a tright, that part
of them quitted the kingdom, and the reſt
ſurrendered themſelves. By the Valour of theſe
Princes, was England deliver'd out of that
gulph of miſeries, and had a reſpite of fifty
years from that bloody war. Bur after Athel-
red (a man of a cowardly ſpirit) came to the
Crown, the Danes raiſing treſh hopes from his
unactive temper, renew d the war, and made
havock of the nation ; till the Engliſh were
forc'd to purchaſe a Peace with annual contri-
butions, which were very great. And fo in-
ſolently did they behave themſelves, that the
Engliſh form'd a Plot, and in one night flew all
the Danes through the whole nation, to a
man: hoping, that ſo much blood would
quench the flaming fury of that people ; and
yet as it happen'd, it did but add more fuel
to it. For Sueno, King of the Danes, incens'd
by that general maſſacre of his ſubjects, inva-
ded England with a powerful army, and, in
an outragious and violent manner deſtroying

all before him, put Ethelred to flight, and

conquer'd the whole nation, and left it to his

ſon * Canutus. He, after a long war with = cn
Ethelred, who was return'd, and with his ſon Coins, **
Edmond firnam'd f{ronfide (but without any Th
decifrve battle :) was ſucceeded by his two ſons, inſets .
Harold his natural ſon, and Canutus the Bold. land 2 ©
After the death of theſe, the Daniſh yoke was pars fegt

- ſhaken off, and the government return'd to the about 2c,

Engliſh. For Edward (whoſe ſanctity gain'd

him the name of Confeſſor, the ſon of Ethelred Edu
by a ſecond wife, ) recover d the Regal Dignity. Conſels,
England did now begin to revive; but preſent-

ly is the Poet ſays)

Mores rebus ceſſere ſecundlis.
The loads of Fortune ſunk them into vice :

The Clergy grew idle, unactive, and igno-
rant; the Laity gave themſelves over to luxury
and ſupineneſs; all diſcipline was laid afide ;
the State, like a diſtemper'd body, was con-
ſum'd with all ſorts of vice: but Pride, that
forerunner of deſtruction, had of all others
made the greateſt progreſs. And as Gervaſius
Dorobernenſis obſerves of thoſe times, They ran
Jo greedily into wickedneſs, that it was look'd on as a
crime to be innocent. All theſe things plainly
tended to ruin.

The Engliſh at that time (ſays William of
Malmsbury) wore cloaths that did not reach beyond
the middle of the knee; their heads were ſhorn, and
their beards ſhaven, only the upper lip was always let
grow to its full length. Their arms were loaded with
golden bracelets ; and their skin dy d with painted
marks. The Clergy, content with a ſuperficial ſort of
learning, had much ado to mutter out the words of
the Sacraments, &c.

2 firſt, and afterwards the Sax-
ons, coming out of that Eaſt-
WAP Coaſt of Germany as it lies
from us, I mean, the more
Northerly parts of it;  annoy'd
RT. Gaul and Britain with their
Piracies, and at laſt became maſters, the Franks
of France, and the Saxons of Britain : ſo in
ſucceeding times, the Danes firſt, and then the
Normans, follow*d the ſame method, came from
the ſame Coaſt, and had the ſame ſucceſs. As if
providence had fo order'd it, that thoſe you
ſhould conſtantly produce and ſend out a ſet of
men to make havock of Gaul and Britain, and
eſtabliſh new kingdoms therein.
The Normans had their name from the
Northern parts from whence they came (for
Noxdmanni ſignifies no more than Northern men,)

Sl S in former ages, the Franks
«

Nordleudi, i. e. a Northern People, as being the Nella
flower of the Norwegians, Suedes, and Danes, Helwiis
In the time of Charles the Great, they carry'd

on their trade of Piracy in ſuch a barbarous

manner, both in Friſeland, Holland, England,

Ireland, and France ; that that Prince, when

he ſaw their veſſels in the Mediterranean, cry'd

out with a deep ſigh, and with tears in his eyes; |
How am I troubled, that they ſhould venture upon Liber At
this coaſt, even while I am living. I plainly foreſee, de a F
what a ſcourge they are like to prove to my ſucceſſors. on
And in the publick Litanies of the Church,
there was afterwards inſerted, From the fury of
the Danes, Good Lord deliver us. They reduc'd
the Franks to ſuch extremities, that Carolus
Calvus was forc'd to buy a truce of Haſting,
the commander of the Norman Pirates, with
the Earldom of Chartres: and Carolus Craſſus
gave Godfrid the Norman, part of Neuſtria

with his daughter. After that, by force, of

arms

(a) From the Saxon Teod, a people or nation,

— ä —ů— — — =

ann —

r

B.

Cguata.

2 2 — 2 wm wo . — 90 29 2 =, 2

18 * 2 as as 1

mee E FE © mM Ty — So PF Too”

— — Ws 4+ jþ WY A az hk...

—
—

K.

md 5%, FL

Vu ceix
. n
Wt in 6 L
ns, U Vuſt ria.
ö Dz
ted E,
1 20
7s, teig:
ut wy
ward :
—

Biged.

Nor ili.

= WI FI

ö ee * * >.
EE ²˙ + SED

The NOR MTN N

cc

Cryngta,

Normen s,

1066.

arms they fix d near the mouth of the Seine, in
thoſe parts which formerly had been call'd by
corruption Newſtria, as being part of WW:ſtrafia
(tor ſo the middle-age writers term it:) the Ger-
mans ſtil'd it Meſtenriich, i. e. the Weſtern King-
dom: it contains all between the Loyre and the
Seine to the ſea-ward. They afterwards call'd
it Normannia, 1. e. the Country of the Northern men;
when Carolus Simplex had made a grant of it in
Fee to their Prince Rollo (whoſe Godfather he
was) and had given him his daughter to wife.
When Rollo (as we are inform'd by an old
Manuſcript belonging to the Mohaſtery of An-
giers) had Normandy made over to him 55 Carolus
Stultus, with his daughter Giſla; he would not ſub-
mit to kiſs Charles's foot. And when his friends urg d
him by all means to kiſs the King's foot, in gratitude
for ſo great a favour, he made anſwer in the Engliſh
zougze, NE SE BY GOD, that &, Not ſo by
God. Upon which, the King and his Courtiers de-
riding him, and corruptly repeating Is anſwer, call d
him Bigod ; from whence the Normans are to this
day term'd Bigodi, For the ſame reaſon, it is
poſſible, the French alſo at this day call hypo-
crites, and your ſuperſtitious ſort of men, Bigods.

This Rollo, who at his Baptiſm was nam'd
Robert, is by ſome thought to have turn'd
Chriſtian out of deſign only: by others, with
deliberation and ſeriouſneſs. 'Theſe latter add,
that he was mov'd to it by God in a Dream ;
which (tho' Dreams are a thing I do not give
much heed to) I hope I may relate without the
imputation of folly, as I find it atteſted by the
writers of that age. The ſtory goes, that as
he was aſleep in the ſhip, he ſaw himſelf deep-
ly infected with the leproſie; but that waſhing
ima clear ſpring at the bottom ot a high hill, he
recover'd, and afterwards went up to the top of
it. This he told a Chriſtian captive in the
ſame ſhip, who gave him the following inter-
pretation of it: That the Leproſie was the a-
bominable worſhip of Idols, with which he
was defil'd ; the Spring was the holy laver of re-
generation, where-with being once cleans'd, he
might climb the mountain, that is, attain to
great honour, and heaven it ſelf.

This Rollo had a ſon call'd William, but
ſirnam'd Longa Spata, from a long ſword which
he us'd to wear. William had a ſon call'd

Richard, the firſt of that name, who was ſuc-

ceeded by his ſon and grandſon, both Richards.
But Richard, the third of that name, dying
without iflue, his brother Robert came to the
Dukedom, and had a ſon by his concubine,
nam'd William; the ſame is commonly called the
Conqueror, and Baſtard. All theſe were Princes
very eminent for their atchievements, both at
home and abroad. Whilſt William, now come
to man's eſtate, was Duke of Normandy ; Ed-
ward the Holy, ſirnam'd Confeſſor, King of
England and laſt of the Saxon Line, to the great
grief of his ſubjects departed this life. He
was ſon of Emma, a f Couſin, of William's (as
daughter to Richard the firſt of that name,
who was Duke of Normandy,) and while he
liv'd under baniſhment in Normandy, he had
made William a promiſe of the reverſion of the

Crown of England. But Harold, the ſon of 4

Godwin, and Steward of the Houſhold under
Edward, got poſleſſion of the Crown : where-
upon, his brother Toſto on one hand, and the
Normans on the other, us'd their utmoſt en-
deavours to dethrone him. After he had ſlain
his brother Toſto and Harold King of Norway
(whom Toſto had drawn over to his aſſiſtance,)
in a ſet-battle near Stamford-bridge in York-
ſhire, and, tho' with loſs, had gain d the victo-
Ty 3 within Jeſs than nine days, William fir-

i

nam'd Baſtard, Duke of Normandy (building
upoh the promiſe of King Edward, lately de-

| Ceas'd, as alſo upon his adoption, and relation

to Edward) rais'd a powerful army, and land-

ed in England, in Suſſex. Harold preſently

advanc'd towards him ; tho? his ſoldiers were
harraſs'd, and his army very much weaken'd by

the late fight. Not far from Haſtings, they en-

gag' d; where Harold advanced in perſon into

the heat of the battle, and behaving himſelf

with great valour, loſt his life. Abundance of

the Engliſh were ſlain; though it is almoſt
impoſlible to find out the exact number. Wil-

liam, after he had won the day, march'd

through Walingford with his army, towards

London, where he was receiv'd and inaugura-

ted ; The kingdom (as himſelf expreſles it) being Charter of
allotted him by divine Providence, and granted by William the
the favour of his Lord and Coufin the glorious King "Wert,
Edward. And a tew lines after, he adds, That

the bounteons King Edward had by adoption made

him heir to the Crown of England. Tho, if the

hiſtory ot S. Stephen of Caen may be credited,

theſe were the laſt words that he ſpoke, upon

his death-bed. The Regal Diadem, which none of Hiſtory of St;
my Predeceſſors wore, I gain d, not by any hereditary Stephen's
title, but by the favour of Almighty God. And a Monaſtery at
little after; I name no heir to the crown of Eng- cue Note
land, but commend it wholly to the eternal Creator, _
whoſe I am, and in whoſe hands are all things. It

was not an hereditary right that put me in poſſeſſion of

this honour ; but, by a deſperate engagement and

much blood-ſhed, I wreſted it from the perjur'd

King Harold, and, having ſlain or put to flight all

his abettors, made my ſelf Maſter of it.

But why am I thus ſhort, upon ſo conſider-

able a revolution of the Britiſh State? If you

can have the patience to read it, take what I

drew up (it is poſſible, with too little accuracy

and thought, but however, with the Integrity

of an Hiſtorian) when raw and young, and

very unfit for ſuch an undertaking, I had a de-

ſign to write the hiſtory of our Nation, in Latin.

Dward the Confeſſor dying withont iſſue, the The Norman
Nobility and Commonalty were put into great Conqueſt,

diſtraftion about naming the new King. Edgar,

commonly called Ætheling, Edmund Ironfide's great? Abnepos ex

great grandchild by a ſon, was the only perſon left of ili0.

the Saxon Line; and as ſuch had an hereditary

title to the Crown. But his tender years were thought

altogether uncapable of Government ; and befides, his

temper had in it a foreign mixture; as being born in

Hungary, the ſon of Agatha daughter to the Empe-

ror Henry the third, who was at too great a diſtance

to bear out the youth, either by aſſiſtance or advice.

Upon theſe accounts, he was not much reſpetted by the

Engliſh, who valu d themſelves upon nothing more, |

than to have a King out of their own body. The Harold's

general inclination, was towards Harold Godwin s Character.

ſon, much fam'd for his admirable conduct both in

Peace and War. For tho' the nobleueſs of his Birth

lay but on one fide, and his father had by treaſon and

plunder render d himſelf eternally infamous ; yet,

what by his courteons language, good our,

his liberal temper, and warlike courage; he had

ſtrangely inſinuated himſelf into the affettions of the

eople. As none undertook dangerous attempts with

greater chearfulneſs ; ſo in the utmoſt extremities uc

man was ſo ready with advice. His courage and

ſucceſs were ſo eminent in the Welſh wars (which he

had ſome time before happily brought to an end) that

he was look d upon as a moſt actompliſb d General,

and ſeem'd to be born on purpoſe to ſertle the Engliſh

Government. Moreover, it was hop'd that the

Danes (who were at that time the only dread of this

nation) would be more favourable to him, as being

the ſon of Githa, Siſter to Sueno King of Denmark.

| From what other parts ſoever, attempts, whether
d d foreign

| ccxi

The NOR MAN F.

foreign or domeſt ick, might be made; he ſeem'd|
Tufficiently ſecur'd againſt them by the Afections of

the Commonalty, and his relation to the Nobility.
He had married the ſiſter of Morcar and Edwin,
who at that time bore the greateſt ſway : and Ed-
ric (firnam'd the Wild) a man of a high ſpirit
and great authority, was his near kinſman. It fel
out too very fortunately, that at the ſame time Sue-
no the Dane was engag d in the Suediſh wars; and
there was an ill underſtanding between William the
Norman and Philip King of France. For Edward
the Confeſſor, while he liv'd under baniſhment in
Normandy, had made this William an expreſs pro-
miſe of the Crown, in caſe himſelf died without iſſue.
And Harold (who was then kept Priſoner in Nor-
mandy) was bound under a trig Oath, as Gua-
rantee, to ſee it perform d. and made it one part of
the Conditions, that he ſhould marry the Duke s
Daughter. For theſe reaſons, many thought it moſt
adviſable, to make a Preſent of the Crown to the
Duke of Normandy, that, by diſcharging the pro-
miſe, they might prevent both the war that threaten d
them, and deſtruttion, the certain puniſhment of per-
jury; and that by the acceſſion of Normandy to
England, the government might be eftabliſh'd in the
hands of ſo great a Prince, and the ſtrength and fi-
gure of the Nation conſiderably increas'd. But Ha-

Harold made rold quickly cut off all debates that look'd this way;

King.

William's
Meſſage to
Harold.

for, 22 that delays would be dangerous, the ve-
ry day that Edward was bury'd, contrary to the ge-
eral expeitation he poſſeſs d himſelf of the govern-
ment ; and with the applauſe of thoſe about him
who proclaim d him King, without any ceremony of
Inauguration he put en the Crown with his own
hands. This attion of his very much diſguſted the
Clergy, who look'd upon it as a breach of Faith.
But, as he was ſenſible, how difficult it was for a
young Prince to eſtabliſh his government without the
reputation of piety and virtue ; to cancel that crime
and to ſettle himſelf on the throne, he bent all his
thoughts towards promoting the intereſt of the Church
and the dignity of Monaiteries. He ſhow'd Edgar
LEtheling Earl of Oxford, and the reſt of the No-
bility, all the reſpect imaginable ; he eas d the peo-
ple of a great part of their taxes; he beſtow'd vaſt

Jums of money upon the poor; and in ſhort, what by

the affibility of his diſcourſe, and patience in bear-
ing others, and equity in all cauſes, he gain'd him-
Jelf wonderful love as well as authority.

As ſoon as William, Duke of Normandy, had
certain intelligence of theſe matters, he pretended to be
infinitely afflicted for the death of Eduard; when,
all the while, the thing that lay upon his heart,
was his being diſappointed of England, which he
had made himſelf ſure of. Without more ado, by
advice of his Council, he ſent over Embaſſadors to
remind Harold of his promiſe and engagement ; and
to demand the Crown. Harold, after mature deli-
beration, return'd him this anſwer, That as to Ed-
ward's promiſe, the Crown of England could not be
diſpoſed of by promiſe 3 nor was he obliged to take
notice of it, fince he govern'd by right of Election
and not of Inheritance. And, for what concerned
his own Engagement, that that was plainly extort-
ted by force, treachery, and the fear of perpetual
impriſoument ; and did likewiſe tend to the manifeſt
damage of the Nation, and the prejudice of the No-
bility ; and therefore he look d upon it as null in
it ſelf : That if he could make good his promiſe,
he ought not; or if he would, it was not in his
power ; fince it was made without the knowledge of
the King, or concurrence of the People : That the
demand ſeem'd highly unreaſonable, for him to ſur-
render the government to a Norman Prince, who
was altogether a ſtranger ; when he had been inveſt-
ed with it by the unanimous conſent of all Orders.
The Norman Duke did not at all reliſh this an-

ſuer, but plainly perceived that Harold was laying

out for Salyo's to avoid the charge of perjury. Up-
on which, he ſent over another Embaſſy on the ſame
errand, to put him in mind of the ſtritineſi of his
Oath ; and, that damnation from God, and 12
among men, are the certain rewards of perjury,
But becauſe William's Daughter (who, as betroth*q
to Harold, was a tye upon him for the diſcharge of
his Promiſe) was now dead; they were entertained
with greater coldneſs, and return'd with the ſame an-
fewer as at the firſt. Now, nothing was like to en-
ſue, but open war. Harold prepares a fleet, levies
ſoldiers, places garriſons in the moſt convenient parts
of the ſea-coaſt ; in ſhort, omits nothing which may
contribute towards repelling the Normans.

rold's own Brother. He was a man of a high ſpi-
rit and cruel temper ; and had for ſome time Preſi-
ded over the Kingdom of Northumberland with
great inſolence ; till at laſt, for his barbarous treat-
ment of his inferiors, his inſolent carriage towards his
Prince, and a mortal hatred to his own brethren, he
was caſhiered by Edward the Confeſſor, and went
over into France. And at this juntture, encourag'd
in all probability by Baldwin Earl of Flanders, and
drawn-in by William Duke of Normandy ( for
Tofto and William had married two of Earl Bald-
win's daughters) he declar'd open war againſt his
brother, whom he had for a long time mortally ha-
ted. He ſet out from Flanders with 60 ſail of Pi-
rate-ſbips, and waſted the Ile of Wight, and very
much annoy d the Kentiſh coaſt : but being frighted
at the approach of the Royal Navy, he ſet jail, and,
ſteering towards the remote parts of England, landed
in Lincolnſhire, and plundered that County. There
he was engag'd by Edgar aud Morcar, and defeated:
then he made for Scotland, with a deſign to renew
the war.

Now, were all thoughts in ſuſpenſe, upon the ex-
pectation of a double Invaſion, one from Scotland, and
another from Normandy ; and their fears were

Eaſter, for about ſeven days together. This (as it
uſually does, in troubleſom times) ſet the diſtracted
brains of the people a-work, to preſage what miſe-
ries were to follow. But Harold, having a ſtrict eye
to every part of the Kingdom, fortify'd the South-
coaſt with garriſons. He was not apprehenſive of

Columbus King of Scots was diverted by a civil

War,

vis d with his
and full of hopes ; but all the difficulty was, how to
procure money to carry on ſo important a war. For
upon a propoſal made at a publick meeting of the
States 12 about raiſing a ſubſidy, it was
ung d, That the Nation was ſo exhauſted by their
former wars with France, that if they engag'd in a
new war, they ſhould have much ado even to aft de-
fenfively : that they were concern'd rather to ſecure
their own, than to invade others; that how juſt ſo-
ever the war might be, there was no neceſſity for it,
and that in all probability it would prove of dangerous
conſequence : And laſily, that the Normans were not
bound by their allegiance to ſerve in toreign wars.
No confiderations could bring them to raiſe a ſupply,

utmoſt Zeal; and to encourage others, engag'd to
build 40 ſhips at his own charge for tho rake of
the war. |

The Duke, finding himſelf diſappointed in this
publick way, tries other methods; and ſending for
the wealthieſt of them, one by one, ſpeaks them fair,
and defires that each would contribute ſomething to-

wards the war. This drove them to a ſort of Emu-
lation,

heighten'd by the dreadful appearance of a Comet at A Cone,

In the mean time, what was never ſo much as Tolio n
thought of, the firſt ſtorm comes from Loſto, Ha- Harold.

much danger from Scotland and Toſto, becauſe * Mil- « Adden

In the mean time, William was continually think- Willian .
ing of a deſcent into England. He occaſionally ad- pares fora
Officers, and found them chearful [nyalus,

though William * Fiizosbert, a Man generally be-* Fils
lov'd both by Duke and people, promoted it with the Osbert

— — A -

SED 6 Pt RO OE RE TRIER F N SEE)

Sees eu DD EDO ah S220 Sen-

*

%*
* g * — 1 * at ——— PIR * * 1 1 n

. . 2 © .
" "Y tattered

| wn

r ,

The NORMA

td

* a

CCXLY

NS.

; lation, who ſhould be moſt zealous in the afſj
of his Prince, and made them promiſe largely; and
an account being taken of the contributions, a ſum
beyond expetlation was rait d in an inſtaut. Mat-
ters being carried thus far, he ſollicits his neighbour-
ing Princes for aid, the Earls of Anjou, Poictou,
Mayne, and Bulloigne ; upon this encouragement,
that they ſhould have a ſhare of the lands in Eng-
land. Next, he applies himſelf to Philip King of
France, and promiſes, that in caſe he contribute
his aſſiſtance, he will take an Oath of fealty, and
hold England under him. But co ng it was

not by any means the intereſt of France, that the
neighbouring Norman, who already did not ſeem
odo in much to value them, 2 be ſtrengthen d by the
arold, * addition of England (as Princes are always jealoms

of the growing Power of their neighbours;) Philip
was ſo far from encouraging the deſign, that he uf d
all means to divert him from it. But nothing could
draw him from his reſolution ; wherein he was now
confirm d and juſtified by the authority of Pope Alex-
ander. (The Pope, about thats time, began to
uſurp a juriſdiftion over Princes : and he approv

the _ and ſent him a conſecrated banner as a
token of victory and empire, and excommunicated
all who 8 him.) Hereupon, he rait d a
great Army, and got together a vaſt fleet to F. Va-
leric's (a town at the mouth of the river Some)
where he lay wind-bound for ſome time ; and, that
he might have a fair wind, he ſpar'd neither pray-

ers nor offerings to S. Valeric, the Saint of the
lace.
: Harold, after he had a long time expected him

in vain, reſokved to disbamd his army, lay up his
ſhips, and leave the ſea-coaſt ; partly becauſe provi-

Flanders had = him that William had no -
upon this year. Which he eafily
ok 1 putting to ſea would be very dan-
gerous at that time, when the AEquinox was juſt
at hand. While he was ſettling theſe matters, all
on a ſudden an unexpetted invaſion puts him under
a neceſſity of etting his army together. For Ha-
Puten of rold firuam'd Durus and Harfager, King of Nor-
W* King of uay (who had for a long time pirated upon the

| orway,

the Nes of Orkney) was drawn over by Toſto up-
on a proſpet of the Kingdom of England, and en-
tered the river Tine with about 500 rovers, where
he was joined by Toſto. After they had plunder d
' thoſe parts, they weighed anchor, and ſailing along
the coaſt of Vorkſhire, came into Humber; where
they began to break out into all kinds of military
Execution. But to flop their progreſs, Edwin and
Morcar, two Earls, attack*d them with a confus'd
andiſciplined army ; which being overpowered by the
Norwegians, ran away. The greater part, among
whom were the two Earls, made a ſhift to get off,
but many were drown'd in their paſſage over the
river Quſe. Norwegians, without more ado,
reſolv d to lay fiege to Tork; but upon hoſtages given
on both fides, the place was ſurrender d. A few
= „Harold having got his whole army toge-

Mal:ilma,

liam os
5 for at

aon.

wards the Norwegians ; who had encamp'd in a ve-
by the ſea; on the left, by the bay of Humber,

lim
ti.

and front, by the river Derwent. Notwithſtanding
all this, Harold attack d them very vigorouſly, and
the firſt akirmiſp was at a bridge over the river
Derwent, where, it is ſaid, one fingle Norwe-
gian bore up for ſome time againſt the whole Ex-
liſh army, till at laſt he was ſhot dead. Next, the
battle was removed to the ; where the advan-

C Stanford.
age near

tages on both fides were equal for a while. At laſt,
on the fide of the Norwegians the ranks were broken ;
the

and Harold King of Norwey, with Toſto, and

frons began to fail, and partly becauſe the Earl of

northern parts of Britain, and peſſeſs d himſelf of

„ marched towards York, and from thence to-

ry advantageous place. Behind, they were ſecur d
where their fleet rode at anchor; and on the right

ſtance | greateſt part of their army, were ſlain. The boot

| which Harold got by this victory, was confider a-
bie; gold and filver in great plenty, every ſhip
of that large fleet, except twenty ſmall veſſels, which

he gave to Paul Earl of Orkney, and Olavus (ſon
of Harold who was flain,) to carry off their wound-
ed; firſt taking an Oath of them, that they would
never again diſturb England. Harold was exceed-
ingly hearten d with this victory, and hop'd that it
| would as much diſbearten the Normans ; though his
| own ſubjefts began to hate him, for not diſtributing
the ſpoil the foldiers. All his thoughts were
| ſpent in the — of the Nation, which, eſpe-
cially in thoſe parts, was in a miſerable condition.

In the mean time, William the Norman had a William
favourable uind: he ſet ſail about the end of Sep- lands.
tember, and, by the benefit of a gentle gale, 2
with his whole fleet to Pemſey in Suſſex. He found
the coaſt clear; and to cut off all hopes of eſcaping
2 he fir d the ſhips. After he had built a

le there, for a retreat, he went forward to Haſt-
inge, where he built another, and put a garriſon in
it. Next, be pub liſb d the reaſons of this invaſion ;
To revenge the death of his kinſman Alfred, whom
among many other Normans, Godwin, Harold's
father, had ſlain; and, to take ſatisfaftion for the
injuries which Harold had done, in baniſhing Ro-
bert Archbiſhop of Canterbury, and accepting the
Crown of Eng contrary to his own expreſs Oath.
And he alſo publiſh'd a ſtriłi order among his Soldiers,
that none Would plunder the Engliſh.

News of theſe things was quickly brought to Hu-
rod; who judging it moſt adviſable to engage the
Norman as ſoon as poſſible, diſpatches meſſengers to
all parts, beſeeches his ſubjetts to be true to him,

s bis whole army together, and marches with all
* to London. William ſent an Embaſſador to
him there, who, with great importunity demanding
the Crown, did ſo provoke and incenſe him, that he
very hardly reſtrain'd himſelf from violence. His
late vittory had wrought him up to ſo much inſo-
lence and aſſurance, twat it was a difficult thing to
bring him down. Forth-with, he ſent Embaſſadors
to William, with very ſevere threatnings of what
he was to expect, unleſs he return'd immediately to
Normandy. William diſmiſs'd them with a gentile
anſwer, and with great civility, Harold, in the
mean time, makes a general muſter at London, and
finds his forces confiderably leſſen d by the late battle
with the Norwegians ; but, however makes up a
ſtrong body, out of the Nobility and others, whoſe
concern for the publick ſafety had invited them to take
arms. Preſently, he marches into Suſſex, though al-
together contrary to the advice of his mother ; and
with undaunted reſolution encamps in a plain ſcarce
ſeven miles from the Normans.

Wiliam with his army advanc'd towards him. Preparations
Spies were ſent out by both fides. Thoſe of the Eng-for a Battel.
liſh, either out of ignorance or defign, gave a pro-
digious account of the number, preparations, and diſ-
ciplin of the Normans. Upon this, Gythus, Ha-
rold's younger brother, and a very famous ſoldier,
did not think it adviſable to run the hazard of a
decifeve battle. He told the King, that the iſſue of
War was at beſt dubious ; that victories depended
oftner upon fortune than courage; and that mature
deliberation was the greateſt part of military Conduct.

He adviſed him, in caſe he had made a promiſe to
William of the reverſion of the Kingdom, at leaſt
not to fight in perſon; becauſe no forces could guard
him againſt his own conſcience, and God would cer-
tainly puniſh every breach of promiſe : adding, that
nothing could caſt a greater damp upon the Normans,
than if he ſhould raiſe a new army, to engage thent
afreſh. He farther promiſed, that if he would truſt
him with the management of the Battel, he would
diſcharge the duty of a faithful brother, and a reſo-
| lute General : adding, that as he td the Spore of
as

n  J—_—

Fe NO

—

0 FY _—_— 8

R MAN S. 1 ccxvli
. CxyI SS

a good conſcience, he might defeat the enemy more | ranks, and, not doubting of vittory, purſued the . |
eafily, or at leaſt die more happily in the ſervice of | my in great diſorder. But the Normans, rallying f

his country.

The King did not like ſuch ps as thinking |

that all this plainly tended to the diſhonour of his per-
fon. For as he could be very well content to run the
hazard of a battle, ſo the imputation of cowardiſe
was a thing he could not bear. As for the terrible
account they gawe of the Normans, he made light of
it; and could not think it conſiſted with his dignity
or former behaviour, now he was come to the laſt
hazard, like a coward to run away, and ſo to bring
upon himſelf eternal Reproach. Thus, whom God
has mark'd for deſtruttion, he always intatuates.
IWhile theſe things were going forward, William,
out of a pious care for the intereſt of Chriſtendom,
and to prevent the effuſion of Chriſtian blood, ſent
out a Monk, as Mediator between both: No pro-
pos'd theſe terms to Harold; either to reſign the go-
vernment ; or to own it a Tenure in tee from the
Norman; or to decide the matter in fingle combat
with William; or, at leaſt, to ſtand to the Pope's
determination. But he, like one who had loſt the
government over himſelf, rejected all propoſitions, and
referr'd his cauſe entirely to the tribunal of God.
Next day (which was the 14th of October) he pro-
mis'd to give them battle; fooliſhly flattering him-
ſelf with ſucceſs, becauſe it was his birth-day. That
night, the Engliſh ſpent in revels, feaſting, and
ſhouting ; but the Normans, in prayers for the ſafety
of their army, and for victory. Next morning by
break of day both armies drew up. In Harold's,
the Kentiſh men with their halberts were in the van
( for by an old cuſtom they claim the front of the
battle ;) and | in the rear, was Harold and his bro-
then, the Midland Engliſh, and the Londoners. The
van of the Norman army was led up by Roger of
Montgomery and William Fitzosberne ; and conſiſted
of the horſe of Anjou, Perch, Maine, and Little
Britain; moſt of which had ſerv'd under Fergen-
tas the Briton. The main battle, made up of Poitto-
vins and Germans, was commanded by Geffrey Mar-
tel, and a German Stipendiary. In the rear, was
the Duke himſelf with a ſtrong body of Normans,
and the flower of the Nobility. The Archers were
mix d through the whole army.
The Normans, after a regular ſhout, ſounded to
Battle, and advanc'd. They charged firſt with a
volley of arrows, from all parts; and that being a
ſort of Attack to which the Engliſh were ſtrangers,
prov d exceeding terrible: for they fell ſo thick, that
they thought the enemy was got into the midſt of their
army. Next, they charg'd the front of the Engliſh ;
who, reſolving rather to die upon the ſpot, than re-
treat, kept their ranks, and repulſed them with great
loſs. The Normans attack'd them a ſecond time ;
and they bore up ſtoutly one againſt the other. Thus,
hand to hand, and man to man, they were for ſome
time very warmly engaged; but the Engliſh kept cloſe
in one body, and maintain d their ground with ſo
much bravery, that the Normans being most miſe-
rably harraſs'd, were upon the point of retreating, had
not William atted the part as well of a common
ſoldier as a General, and by his authority prevented
their Retreat. By this means, the battle was con-
tinu'd, and the Norman horſe were ſent with all ſpeed
to reinforce them, while the Engliſh were over-
whelmed with ſhowers of arrows : and yet, for all
that, they kept their ranks. For Harold, behaving
himſelf in all reſpelts like a brave General, was
every where ready with ſuccours; and William, on
the other fide, was nothing inferior. He had two
horſes killed under him; and after he ſaw that no-
thing could be done by force, he began to aft by
ſtratagem. He ordered his men to ſound a retreat,
and to give ground ; but ſtil to keep their ranks.
The Engliſh, taking this for flight, thought the day

was certainly their own : whereupon, they broke their

their troops on a ſudden, renew'd the battle, and
encloſing the Engliſh in that diſorder, kill d great
numbers, while they ſtood doubtful whether they ſhould /

/
run or fight. But a confiderable number, poſti ;
themſelves on the higher grounds, got into a LS s

encourag d one another, and oppoſed the Enemy with
great reſolution ; as if they had made choice of that | 7
place for an honourable death. At laſt, Harold was The v.

ſhot through the head with an arrow, and there, with 17 ”
his two brothers, Gythus and Leofwine, loſt his life, a
Upon this, Edwin and Morcar, with ſome few who
had ſav'd their lives, eſcap d by flight (giving way
to the hand of providence, and the preſent neceſſity,)
after they had fought without imtermiſſion from ſeven

a-dock in the morning to the dusk of the evening. The 1
Normans loſt in this battle about 6000 men, and the I
Engliſh a far greater number. William, overjoy d with 1
his victory, order d a ſolemn Thankſgiving to Alm gbry 9
God, and pitch d his tent in the middle of the ſlain ; L
where he ſtay'd that night. Next day, after he had a
buried his dead, and granted leave to the Engliſh to 1
do the like ; he return'd to Haſtings te conſider of di
proper methods how to purſue his victory to re- 1 Sc
freſh his ſoldiers. 1 1 wa

As ſoon as the news of this victory reach d Lon- 2 2
don and other cities of England, the whole Nation | Ft

8 Fluciarit.

was in a ſurpriſe, and in a manner confounded. Gi-
tha, the King's mother, was ſo overcome with grief,
that no way was found to comfort her. She Iumbly
defir'd of the Conqueror the bodies of her ſons; which
ſhe bury'd in Waltham-Abby. Eduin ſent away
Queen Algitha his ſiſter, into the remote parts of the
Kingdom. The Nobility defir'd the people not to de-
Jpair, and began to confider of methods how to ſettle
the Nation. The Arch-biſhop of Tork, with the

WT he Seal of 701
William the Se
& Conqueror.

City of London, and the t Sea-men (commonly called Cſs; O

Boteſcarles) were for making Eadgar King, and for Bote us

renewing the war with William. Edwin and Mor-

car were ſecretly contriving to get the Government

into their own hands. But the Biſhops, Prelats,

and others upon whom the Pope's Anathema made a

deeper impreſſion, thought it moſt adviſable to ſur-

render, and not to incenſe the Conqueror with a :

ſecond battel, the iſſue whereof was but at beſt —

doubtful ; nor refiſt God, who for the crying fins I.

the nation had deliver'd England into the hands of :

the Normans. 2
William, leaving a garriſon in Haſtings, reſolv d to William 4;

march in a hoſtile manner directly to London; but, to march: u 05

diffuſe a greater terror through the nation, and to make ſpe

all ſure behind him, be divided his forces, and =

march'd through part of Kent, Suſſex, Surrey, 7

Hamſhire, and Berkſhire. As he went, he burnt fe

the villages and houſes, and plunder d them, paſs'd 25

the Thames at Walingford, and fill d all places of

with the utmoſt conſternation. The Nobility all this "i

while were at a ſtand what to do, nor could they be *

perſuaded to lay afide private animeſities, and conſult I 4
the publick intereſt of the nation. The Clergy, 10 3 1
gain abſolution from the curſes and cenſures of the SZ

Pope (by which he did at that time tyrannize over men 8B be Englifh 4
and kingdoms) and conſidering that affairs were now 3 of a

deſperate, ſtood ſo firm to their reſolution of ſur- deir Ho- of
rendering, that many, to ſave themſelves, withdrew 40
out of the City. But Alfred Archbiſhop of York, 3
Wholſftan Biſhop of Worceſter, with ſome other Bi- the
ſhops, and Edgar Etheling, Edwin, and Morcar, na
met the Norman Conqueror at Berkhamſted. He made for
them moſt glorious promiſes ; upon which, hoſtages
were given, and they ſubmitted themſelves to his ci
protection. Forth-with, he went to London, where he ir,
was receiv'd and ſaluted King, with great joy and ac- An
clamation. Next, he prepar'd all neceſſaries for the *
Inauguration, which he had appointed to be on Chriſt- bus
mas-day; and in the mean time employed all his care Ti

and thoughts for the ſettlement of the Nation.
is

VI

—

r

in
6: 0

* „

— © — ." 4

".

r

NORMANS.

ccxviii

ccxvil The

— 8 This was the pericd of the Saxon Government in
Britain, that laſted fix hundred and ſeven years.
Which fignal Revolution inthe Kingdom, ſome impu-
ted to the avarice of the Magiſtrates ; others to the
ſuperſtitions lazineſs of the Clergy ; a third ſort, to
the Comet which then appear d and the influence of
the Stars ; a fourth attributed it to God, who for
hidden, but always juſt reaſons, diſpoſes of King-
doms. But others, who look'd into the more imme-
diate cauſes, charg d it upon the imprudence of King
Edward, who under the ſpecions ſhow of religious
chaſtity, neglected to ſecure a ſucceſſion, and thereby
made the Kingdom a prey to Ambition.

Hat an inſolent and bloody Victory this

was, the Monks, who wrote about it,
do fully inform us: Nor can we queſtion, bur
in this, as in allothers, Diſorder and Wickedneſs
had the upper hand. H/illiam,in token of his con-
queſt, laid aſide the greateſt part of the Engliſh
Laws, and introduc'd theNorman cuſtoms,and or-
der'd that all Cauſes ſhould be pleaded in French.
The Engliſh were diſpoſſeſs d of their here-
ditary eſtates, and the lands divided among his
; Soldiers ; but with this reſerve, that he ſhould
diem remain the + direct Proprietor, and oblige them
| Dininum* to do homage to him and his ſucceſſors : that
| is, that they ſhould hold them in Fee imme-
. len. diately of the King, and themſelves be * Feuda-
E 7). Seal of tory Lords and in actual poſſeſſion. He made a

wan the Seal alſo, oh the one ſide of which was engraven,
N Corqueror.

Hoc Normannorum Gulielmum noſce patronum.

By this the Norman owns great William,
Duke.

On the other ſide,
Hoc Anglis figno Regem futearis eundem.

By this too, England owns the ſame, their
King.

Further (as William of Malmsbury tells us)
in imitation of Caſar's policy, who would not have
thoſe Germans, that ulld in the foreſt of Ar-
denna, and by their frequent excurſions ver) much
anxoy'd his army, ſuppreſs d by the Romans, but by
his allies the Gauls ; that while foreigners deſtroyed
one another, himſelf might triumph without blood-
ſhed : In Imitation of this, William took the ſame
methods with the Engliſh. For there were ſome, who
after the firſt battle of the unfortunate Harold, had
fled into Denmark and Ireland; where they got to-
gether a ſtrong body of men, and returned three years
after : To oppoſe them, he diſpatch'd away an Eng-
liſh army and General, and let the Normans live at
their eaſe. For, which fide ſoever got the beſt, be
found his intereſt would go forward. And ſo it
proved : for after the Engliſh had skirmiſh'd for ſome
time one with another, the victory was preſented to
1 the King without trouble. And in another place:

Dee Engliſh After the power of the Laity was deſtroy d, he made
* — of a pofitive declaration, that no Monk or Clergy-man
Ss, te Engliſh uation, ſhould pretend to any place of
dignity ; condemning the eafineſs of King Canutus,
who maintain'd the conquered party in full poſſeſſion of
their honours. By which means, after his death, the
natives found ſo little difficulty, in driving out the
foreigners and recovering their ancient freedom.

After he had ſettled theſe matters, his prin-
Cipal care was, to avoid the ſtorm of the Da-
niſh war (which he ſaw hanging over his head,)
and even to purchaſe a Peace. On this occa-
lion, he made Adalbert Archbiſhop of Ham-
burgh, his Agent. For Adam Bremenſis ſays,

ere was a perpetual quarrel between Sueno, and

fold diviſion, that is Merchenlage,

the Baſtard ; but our Archbiſhop being brib'd by
William, made it his bufineſs to ſtrike up a peace be-
tween the two Kings, And it is very probable,
that there was a Peace concluded ; tor, from
that time, England was never apprehenſive of
on Danes. . made 1 his whole buſi-
neſs to maintain the dignity of his government,
and to ſettle mY eſtablith the — by
wholſom Laws. For ſo Gervaſius Tilburienſis
tells us, After the famous Conqueror of England .
(King William) had ſubdu d the furtheſt parts of |
the Hand, and terrify'd the Rebels by dreadful ex-
amples ; that they might not be in a condition to
break looſe for the future, he reſolv'd to bring his Sub-
Jjetts under the obedience of written laws. Where-
upon, the Laws of England, according to their three-
1 and
Weſt-Sexenlage, being laid before him; ſome of
them he abrogated, and others he approved, and added
to them ſuch of the foreign Norman Laws, as he found
moſt conducive to the peace of the Kingdom. Next
(as we are aſſur'd by Ingulphus, who lived at
that time) he obliged all the inhabitants of Eng-
land to do homage, and to ſwear fealty to him againſt
all others. He took a ſurvey of the whole nation ; ſo
that there was not a fingle Hide of land in England,
of which he did not know both the value, and the
owner. Not a lake, nor any other place, but was
regiſter'd in the King's Rolls, with its revenue, rent,
tenure, and owner; according to the relation of cer-
tain Taxers, who were choſen in each Traft, to de-
be the places belonging to it. This Roll was called
the Roll of Wincheſter, and by the Engliſh
Domeſday, as being an univerſal and exact ac
count of every tenement in the whole nation. Andy, pare of
I the rather make mention of this Book, be- by Gervaſus
cauſe I ſhall have frequent occaſion to quote it Tilburienſis,
hereafter, under the name of William's Tax-£***" Julie
book, The Notitia of England, The Ceſs-book of Eng a
land, The public Acts, and The Survey of England.
But as to Polydore Virgil's aſſertion, that
William the Conqueror firſt brought in the Jo
ry of Twelve, nothing can be more falſe. For jury of
it is plain from Ethelred's Laws, that it was in Twelve.
uſe many years before the Conqueſt. Nor can
I ſee any reaſon, why he ſhould call it à terrible e
Jury. Twelve men, who are Frecholders, and
qualified according to Law, are duly ſummon'd
out of the Neighbourhood ; theſe are bound
by oath to give their real opinion as to mat-
ter of fact; they hear the Counſel on both
ſides, and the evidence; then they take along
with them the f depoſitions of both parties, and + Iaſtrumen-
are cloſe confined, and deny'd meat, drink, 18.
and fire, till they agree upon their Verdict
(unleſs the want of theſe may endanger ſome
of their lives.) As ſoon as they have delivered
it, the Judge gives ſentence according to Law.
And this method was look d upon by our wiſe
Anceſtors to be the beſt, for diſcovering of
truth, hindering of bribes, and preventing
artiality. :
ö How 5 the Norman Courage was, may 2
be learnt from other Writers: I ſhall only Norns sis, 1
obſerve, that being ſeated in the midſt of 1
warlike Nations, they never made ſubmiſſion
their refuge, but always arms. By theſe, they
poſſeſs'd themſelves ot the noble Kingdoms o
England and Sicily. For Tancred, * Nephew * Neper.
to Richard the Second, Duke of Normandy,
and his Succeſſors, perform'd many glorious
Exploits in Italy, drove the Saracens out of Si-
cily, and ſet up a Kingdom of their own. So that 1
a Sicilian Hiſtorian ingenuouſly confeſſes, that it — 2 1
is entirely owing to the Normans, that the Sici- oder 1
lians enjoy their native Soil, their Freedom, i
and their Chriſtianity. Their valiant beha- "1

viour in the wars of the Holy land, mm tt
e e y *

*

k
CCXIX

The NORMANS.

—

CCxx

+ Soriita re-

floruit.

ly encreas'd their honour. Which gave Roger
Hoveden occaſion to ſay, That bold France, after

had experienced the Norman valour, drew
back; fierce England ſubmitted ; rich Apulia was |
reſlord to her flouriſhing condition; famous Jeruſa-
lem and renoum d Antioch were both ſubdu d. Since
that time, England has been equal, for warlike
Exploits and liberal Educatihn, to the moſt

The Engliſh, flouriſhing nations of the Chriſtian world. So
Guards to the that the Engliſh were peculiarly made choice of
Emperors ot for Guards to the Emperors ot Conſtantinople.

Conſtantino-
ple,

Barangi.

Chaſcondiilas.

For (as our Country-man Malmsbury has told
us) John fon of Alexius Comenus very much
admiring their fidelity, ſhew'd them greater reſpett
than he did any others, and recommended them to his
ſon, as men deſerving lis eſteem ; and they were,
for many years together, the Emperor's Guards.

Britains, the Saxons or Angles, with a mixture
of Normans, and, towards the North, the Scott.
Hereupon, there are two Kingdoms in the
Ifland, England andScotland, which were long
divided; but f were happily united under t Are
one Imperial Diadem in the moſt potent Prince, C.
King James [the firſt *. ed ve Hit. e
It is not material to take notice of the G ar ww
Flemings, who about Þ five hundred years ago, fore Stor ;
came over hither, and had leave of the King to Four C.
ſertle in Wales; ſince we ſhall mention them in in thec
another place. Let us then conclude this part of rab
with that of Seneca; From hence it is manifeſt, De C ;
that nothing has continu'd in its primitive ſtate. one, —
There is a continual floating in the affairs of man- J
kind. In this vaſt orb there are daily revolutions :
new foundations of cities laid, and new names given

ton,

Nicetas Chonjata calls them Inglini Bipenniſeri; to nations, by the extinttion of the former name, or
and Curopalata, Barangi. Theſe attended the Em- | the addition of it to that of a more powerful party.
peror where-ever he went (with halberts upon their | And, conſidering that all theſe nations which
ſhoulders) as oft as he ſtir d abroad out of his cloſet ; | invaded Britain, were Northern; as were alſo

and pray'd in Engliſh for his long life, claſhing their
halberts one againſt another to make a noiſe. As to
the blemiſh which Chalcondilas has caſt upon our
nation, of having wives in common, Truth it
ſelf wipes it off, and confronts the extravagant
folly of the trifling Greek. For (as my moſt

learned and excellent Friend Ortelius ſpeaks |

upon this very ſubject,) What one perſon relates
of another, is not always Goſpel.

Theſe are the People which have inhabited
Britain; of whom there remain to this day, the

.
*>

others, who abour that time over-ran Furope,
and after it, Aſia ; Nicephorus's obſervation, Nile
founded upon the authority of Scripture, is very |
true. As God very often ſends terrors upon men,
from heaven, ſuch are thunder, fire, and ſtorms ;
and from earth, as the opening of the ground, and
earthquakes ; and out of the air, as whirlwinds,
and immoderate rains : So thoſe Northern terrors are
as it were reſery'd by God, to be ſent out for Puniſh-
ments, when, and upon whom, the Divine Provi-

dence ſhall think fit.

r
— » 8
ni OW OY

— —

1

THE

_—_— P 2 AP — *
c
c

I

7
Y
8
1
1
4 *
5
,
1
*
.

1 e Co Pe
Ned. W.
] an

WEDiviions of

:

Britain.

—
*

Cen and
Line Bri.

————— — —p—

3 —— —

—
cexxii

2. 2243S 422424248.
e

ee

11

DIVISION

O F

BRITAIN

Er us now proceed to the | and ſoutherly part of this Iſland, Great, and the
Wy Divifon of Britain. Coun- | farther toward the North, Little; the inhabi-
tries are divided by Geogra- | tants whereof were formerly diſtinguiſh'd into
phers, either Natzrally, ac-| Maiate and Caledonii, that is, into the Inhabi-
cording to the Rivers and| tants of the Plains, and of the Mountains, as
Mountains; or Provincial, | the Scots are at this day into Hechtland-men, and
: with reſpe&t to the ſeveral | Lowland-men. But the Romans neglecting that
Ec. people who inhabit them; or * Arbitrarily, and | farther Tract, becauſe (as Appian ſays) it could be
Eid; With f Political Views, according to the pleaſure | of uo importance or advantage to them, and fixing
1 and juriſdiction of Princes. The firſt and ſe- | their bounds not far from Edenburgh, divided
cond of theſe diviſions are here and there treated } the hither part (after it was reduc'd to the form
of throughout the whole work ; but the third | of a Province) into two, the' Lower and the :
(i. e. the Political) ſeems proper to this place: | Upper ; as may be gather'd from Dio. For he Z. 335. —
which yet is ſo much obſcur'd by Time, that calls the hither part, with Wales, the Upper 3 c a — |
in this matter it is eaſier to detect Error, than | and the farther, lying northward, the Lower. ier.
to diſcover Truth. And this is confirm'd by Dio's account of the
Eivijorsof Our Hiſtorians affirm, that the moſt ancient | Seats of their Legions. The ſecond Legion, Au- Iſca, Caerleon
rien. diviſion of Britain, was, into Loegria, Cambria, | guſta, at Caerleon in Wales, and the Twentieth, ar Vsk.
. and Albania; that is (to ſpeak more intelligibly) call'd Vittrix, at Cheiter or Deva ; are both
; into England, Wales, and Scotland. But I look plac'd by him in Upper Britain. But ne tells us,
2 upon this to be of later date; both becauſe | that the Sixth Legion call'd Victrix, whoſe re-
it is threefold, ariſing from the three People, | fidence was at York, ſerv'd in Lower Britain.
the Angles, the Cambrians, and the Scots, who at | I ſhould think, this diviſion was made by Se-
laſt ſhared the Iſland among them; and alſo be-] verus the Emperor, ſince Herodian aſſures us,
cauſe there is no ſuch diviſion mentioned by | that after he had conquer'd Allinus (the then
claſſick Authors; no, nor by any other, before | General of the Britains, who potle(s'd himſelf
our country-man Geoffry of Monmouth, For (as] of the Government,) and ſettled the affairs of
the Criticks of our age have obſerv'd) his Ro- Britain, he divided the whole Province into
mance had not been all of a piece, unleſs he two parts, and appointed a Lieutenant for the
had given Brute three Sons, Locrinus, Camber, | Government of each.
and Albanactus, to anſwer the three nations | Afterwards, the Romans divided the Pro-
that were here in his time: in the ſame manner | vince of Britain into three parts (a) (as we
as he had before made a Brutias, becauſe this | learn from a Manuſcript of Sextus Rufus) viz.
Ifland was call'd Britain. And they no way | Maxima Cæſarienſis, Britannia prima, and Bri- g,;1annis
doubt, but if there had been more nations at | tannia Secunda : which I fanſy may be traced triplex.
that time in Britain, he would have found more | from the ancient Biſhops, and their Dioceſes.
ſons for Brute. Pope Lucius, in Gratian, intimates that the Di. 8. c 1.
In the opinion of many of the Learned, the | Eccleſiaſtical juriſdiction of the Chriſtians, was
moſt ancient diviſion of Britain is that of Pto- model'd according to the juriſdiction of the
lemy, in his ſecond book of Mathematical Con- | Roman Magiſtrates; and that the Archbiſhops
ſtruction, where, treating of Parallels, he di- had their | £2 in ſuch Cities as had formerly
vides it into Great and Little Britain. Bur with | been the reſidence of the Roman Governors. The |
due ſubmiſſion to Perſons of ſo great Learning; | cities (ſays he) and the places where Primates are Primates,
J conceive they would be of opinion, that our | to prefide, are not of a late model, but were fix d
i Wand is there call'd Britannia Magna, and Ire-] many years before the coming of Chriſt; to the Go-
ca arg land Parva, if they would conſider the diſtances | vernors of which cities, the Gentiles alſo made their
Linie Bri. from the Æquator a little more accurately, and | appeals in their more weighty affairs. lu which ve-
bak compare it with his Geographical Works. Not | ry cities alſo, after the coming of Chriſt, the Apoſtles
; but ſome modern writers have call'd the hither | and their Succeſſors ſetled Patriarchs or *
; wW

* ” * F „ 3 06 - - 4
4 4 4

— —

e

*.

9 e ante: 1 .
OBS ins Se.

r 21

(s) Uſſerii Antiquitat, Britan, p. 5.

ccxxiii

ah * —

The Divifſn F BRITAIN. c

+ Majores
Cauſe.

|| LZimitem,

Britain di-
vided into
hve parts,

Notitia Pro-
Vinciarum,

Lib, 28,

+ Arbitrio.

Britannia
Prima.

Rritannia Se-
cunda.

Flavia Cæſa-
rienſis.
Maxima Cæ-
farienſis,

Valentia,

who hive power to judge the Cauſes of Biſhops, and ſidents. For the Maxima Caſarienſis and Pala.
+ others of great conſequence. Now, ſince Britain | tia were under perſons of Conſular dignity ; and
had formerly three Archbiſhops, London, York, | the other three, Britannia Prima, Secunda, and
and Caerleon; it is my opinion, that the Pro- Flavia, under Preſidents.

vince which we now call Canterbury (tor rhi- | It any one ask me, what grounds I have for
ther the See of London was tranſlated) made | this divifion, and accuſe me of ſetting falſe bounds;
the Britannia Prima; that Wales, which was f he ſhall hear in few words, what it was that
fubje& to the Biſhop of Caerleon, was the Se-] led me into this opinion. After I had obſerv'd,
cunda; and that the Province of York, which | that the Romans call'd the Provinces, Prime,
then reach'd as far as the j| Wall, was the Maxi- | whith were neareſt Rome (as Germania Prima,
ma Cæſarien ſis. i Belgica Prima, Lugdunenſis Prima, Aquitania

The next age after that, when the Conſtitu- | Prima, Pannonia Prima, all nearer Rome, than
tion of the Roman Government was every day | ſuch as are called Secunda) and that the more
chang'd (either through ambition, that more | retin'd writers call'd the Prime, the Upper ; and
might be preferred to places of honour ; of the | the Scundæ, the Lower : I concluded the South-
policy of the Emperors, to curb the growing | part of our Iſland, as nearer Rome, to be the
power of their Preſidents) they divided Britain | Britaznia Prima. For the ſame reaſon, ſince
into five parts ; Britannia prima, Secunda, Maxis | the Secundz Provincia (as they call them) were
ma Caſarienſis, Valentia, and Flavia Caſarienſis. | moſt remote from Rome, I thought Wales muſt
Valentia ſcems to have been the northern-part | be the Britannia Secunda. Further, obſerving
of the Maxima Caſarienfis, which Theodoſius, | that in the decline of the Roman Empire, thoſe
General under the Emperor Valens, recover d Provinces only had Conſular Governors, which
from the Picts and Scots, and, out of comple- | were the Frontiers (as is evident from the No-
ment to his Maſter, call'd it Valentia, as Mar- | titia, not only in Gaul, but alſo in Afric;) and
cellinus teſtifies in thoſe words. The Province | that /alentia with us, as alſo Maxima Caſarienfis,
which had fal'n into the Enemy's hands, he recover d, are call'd Conſular Provinces ; I took it for grant-
and reduc d to its former ſtate ; ſo that by his means,it | ed, that they were neareſt and moſt expos d to
enjoy'd a lawful Governor, and was alſo, | by appoint- the Scots and Picts, in the Parts aboye-men-
ment of the Prince, afterwards cal'd Valentia. It is | tioned. And as for Flavia Cæſarienſu, I cannot
reaſonable to ſuppoſe, that the Son of this Theo- | but fanſy that it was in the middle of the reſt,
doſius (who upon his being Emperor, was call'd | and the heart of England; wherein I am the
Flavius Theodofins, and made ſeveral alterations | more poſitive, becauſe I have an ancient writer,
in the Empire) might add the Flavia; becauſe | Giraldus Cambrenſis, on my fide. Theſe were
we never mect with Britannia Flavia before the | the Diviſions of Britain 4 the Romans.
time of this Flavins. To be ſhort then, Bri-] Afterwards, the barbarous nations invading
tannia Prima was all that Southern tract, | it on all hands, and civil wars prevailing more
bounded on one hand with the Britiſh Ocean, | and more among the Britains themſelves; it lay
and on the other with the Thames and the Se- for ſome time, as it were without blood or
vern-Sea : Britannia Secunda was the ſame with — and without any face or appearance of
the preſent Wales: Flavia Cæſarienſis reach'd | Government. But at length, that part which
trom the Thames to Humber: Maxima Caſa- | lyes northward, was branch'd into the two
rienſis, from Humber to the river Tine, or Se- | Kingdoms of Scots and Pitts, and the Pentarchy
verus's wall: /alentia, from the Tine to the | of the Romans in this hither part, was made
Wall near Edenburgh, call'd by the Scots | the Heptarchy of the Saxons. For they divided
Grameſdike ; which was the limit of the Roman | this whole Roman Province (except Wales,
Empire. which the remains of the Britains pofleſs'd
And here I cannot but obſerve, that very | themſelves of) into ſeven Kingdoms, viz. Kent,

learned men have betray'd a want of judgment, | South-Sex, Eaft- Angle, Weſt-Sex, Northumber- chj.
in bringing Scotland into this number; ſome | land, Eaſt-Sex, and Mercia.
urging that it was the Maxima Caſarienfis, o- | But what this Heptarchy of the Saxons was,
thers, the Britannia Secunda. As if the Romans | as alſo what were the names of the places in that
had not neglected that cold frozen Climate, and | age ; you will more eaſily apprehend, by this
included in this number ſuch Provinces only as | Chorographical Table.
were govern'd by Conſular Lieutenants and Pre-

_

%

Conſidering that ſuch Tracts or Counties, as theſe Kingdoms contain'd, could not ſo con-
veniently be repreſented in a ſmall Chorographical Table, by reaſon of its narrowneſs ;
I choſe to explain it by this other Scheme (which gives the Reader an entire view of
it at once) rather than by a number of words.

"1. The Kingdom of Kent + County of | Kent

tain'd

> |} 2. The Kingdom of the South- . Suſſex.
© Saxons 3 Þ The e 14 Surrey.
2 3. * Kingdom 7 the — The 1 55 — 4
8 4 Angles contain Count C
© | | Cornwall,
2 _
4. The Kingdom of the et- ö ret.
Saxons contain'd | The Counties of, _—
Urs.
Hants.
Berks.

5. The

ccxxv

The Saxon Heptarchv.

=
=
I
_—
;

4

I hide (as
will
ve it) in ·
es as
Much land as

e plow can
Wl ina year;

Nut a5 others,

much as
=. Firgets,
5

AY

Har

The Divifion if BRITAIN.

4

ccxxvi

| W-c1and dis
Ficed into
Wounties,

3
£2
A
1 p
5
1

1 |

E

nde (as

—

5. The Kingdom of Northum-
berland contain'd

1 6. The Kingdom. of the Eaf7F-
Saxons contain'd

The Saxon Heptarchy.

—

contain'd

L

U.T while the Heptarchy continu'd, Eng-

land was not divided into what we call
Counties, but into ſeveral ſmall partitions,
with their number of Hides ; a Catalogue of
which, out of an old Fragment, was communi-
cared to me by Francis Tate, a perſon excellently
Skill'd in our Law-Amtiquities Bur, it only con-
tains that part which lies on this ſide the
Humber.

Myrcua contains 30000 * Hides.
me wil Whoken-ſetna 7000 hides.
Wn Weſterna 7000 hides.
c land as Pec-ſetna 1200 hides.
e plow can Elmed-ſetna 600 hides.
| 1 in a year 3 Lindes-farona 7000 hides,
_ >" waa Suth-Gyrwa 600 hides.
* Firgets. North-Gyrwa 600 hides.
4 Eaſt-Wixna 300 hides.

Weſt-Wixna 600 hides.
Spalda 600 hides.
Wigeſta 9oo hides.
Herefinna 1200 hides.
Sweordora 300 hides.
Eyfla 300 hides. -

Wicca zoo hides.
WWight-gora 600 hides.
Nox-gaga 5000 hides.
Oht-gaga 2000 hides.
Huynca 7000 hides.
Ciltern-ſetna 4000 hides.
Hendrica 3000 hides.
Vnecung-ga 1200 hides.
Aroſeatna 600 hides.
Fearfinga 300 hides.
Belmiga 600 hides.
Witherigga 600 hides.
Eaft-Willa 600 hides.
Weſt-Willa 600 hides.
Eaft-Engle 30000 hides.
Eaft-Sexena 7000 hides.
Cant-Warena 15000 hides.
Suth-Sexena 7000 hides.
Weſt-Sexena 100000 hides.

Tho? ſome of thoſe names are eaſily under-
ſtood at firſt fight, it will be extremely hard to

In. YN

7. The Kingdom of —— The Counties of
|

Lancaſter.

York.

Durham.

Cumberland.

Weſtmorland. VVV

Northumberland; and Scotland to the
Fryth of Edenburgh.

Eſſex.

In. Counties Jdc, and part of Hertfordſhire.

CGloceſter,
Hereford.
Worceſter.
Warwick.
Leiceſter.
Rutland.
Northampton.
Lincoln.
Hunti
Bedford.
Buckingham.

Oxford.
Stafford.

2
Salop.

| Nottingham. |

| Cheſter, and the other part

* ſhire.

don.

of Hertford-

trace out the reſt : for my part, I freely confeſs,
they require a more acute Judgment, than 1
am maſter of.

Afterwards, when King Alfred had the Caned in the
Whole government in his own hands; as our Coins Aelfred.
forefathers the Germans (which we learn from
Tacitus) adminiſter d Juſtice according to the
ſeveral Lordſhips and Villages, taking a hun-
dred of the common-people as aſſiſtants in the
Adminiſtration ; ſo he (to uſe the words of
Ingulphus of Crowland) firſt divided England in-
to Counties; becauſe the natives themſelves commit-
ted robberies, after the example, and under colour, of
the Danes. Moreover, he made the Counties to be
divided into Centuries or Hundreds, and Ti- Hundreds,
things ; ordering that every man in the Kingdom
ſhould be ranked under ſome one hundred and tithing.

The Governours of | Provinces were before that call d
* Lieutenants ; but this he divided into two, * Vicedomini,
viz. Judges (wow called *Fuſtices) and Sheriffs, |
which ſtill retain the ſame name. By the care and
induſtry of theſe, the whole Kingdom in a ſhort time
enjoyed ſuch perfect Peace, that if a traveller had let
fall a ſum of money ever ſo large in the evening, whe-
ther in the fields, or the publick high-ways ; if he
came next morning, or even a month after, he ſhould
find it whole and untouch'd. This is more largely
explain'd by the Malmesbury Hiſtorian. Even
the natives (ſays he) under pretence of being bar-
barians (i. e. Danes,) fell to robberies ; ſo that there
was uo ſafe travelling without arms. But King Al-
fred ſettled the Centuries, commonly called Hun-
dreds, and the Tithings ; that every Engliſh man,
living under the protection of the Laws, might have
his certain Hundred, and his Tithing. If any one
was accuſed of a miſdemeanour, he ſhould get bail in
the hundred and tithing ; or if he could not, ſhould
expect the ſeverity of the laws. But if any one
ſtanding thus accus'd, ſhould make his eſcape, either

| before or after bail, the whole Hundred and Ti-

thing was f liable to be fined to the King, By this + Reg mul-
project, he ſettled peace in the Kingdom; ſo that even tam incurre-
upon the high-roads where four ways met, he com- vel.

| manded golden bracelets to be hung up; thereby to de-

ride the avarice of Travellers, while none durſt ven-
ture to take them away.

tf Theſe

a. * — 2

CI — OY

—

.* . AT, „
ccxxvii The Diviſion of BRITAIN. ccxxyn MY ix
Wappen- Theſe Hundreds are in ſome parts of the | thirty nine. Beſides which, there are thirteen m_—_
tacks, Ti. Kingdom called Wuappentaches; and if you de- more in Wales; (c) fix whereot were in Ed- Wales 3 2385 a
4 and ſire to know the reaſon, I will give it you | ward the firſt's time; and the reſt, Henry the 4d int © l
CORE out of Edward the Conteſlor's Laws. When | eighth ſettled by Act of Parliament. Crantie, Pg

any one received the government of a Wappentach ; In each of theſe Counties, eſpecially in times Lieuez,.. ig G 0
on a ſet day and in the place where the meeting uſed | of publick Diſturbance, there is appointed a by. ic.
to be held, all the elder ſort met him; and when | Deputy under the King, by the name of Lieu- 1 {
he had alighted from his horſe, they roſe up to him. | tenant; who is to take care that the State be tl
Then he held up his ſpear, and took ſecurity of eve- | no way damnify'd. The firſt Inſtitution here- 1
ry one there, according to cuſtom ; for whoever came, | of ſeems to be owing to King Altred, who b
* Cum lanceis touched * his ſpear with theirs; and this touching of | ſettled in every County the Cuſtodes regui, or ir

ſuis ipſius ba-

armour confirm 'd them in one common intereſt, and
fam.

was a publick league. In Engliſh, arms are called
wepun, and caccape is to confirm, as if this
were a confirmation of arms: or, to ſpeak more
azreeably to the Engliſh tongue, (a) Wepentac is
a touching of armour: for wepun ſignifies ar-
mour, and tac is touching. There were alſo o-
ther Juriſdiction above thoſe of Wapentaches,
which they called Ppibingar, as including the third
part of the Province: and they who were Lords voer
them, were ſtild Ppihingeperar. To theſe, Ap-
peals were made in all ſuch cauſes, as could not be
determin'd in the Wapentaches. So that what the
Engliſh nam'd a Hundred, theſe called a Wapen-
tach ; and what was in Engliſh three or four Hun-
dreds, they called () Ppihinge. But in ſome
Provinces, what they called T'rihing, was in Eng-
liſh term'd Lep; and what could not be determin'd
in the Ppihinge, was carry'd into the Shire.
Theſe Counties (which if you would expreſs
in proper Latin, may be term'd either Conven-
tus or Pagi) we call by the Name of Shyres ;
from the Saxon word Syre, ſignifying to branch
and divide. By the firſt diviſion, there were
only 32 Counties; for in the year 1016, in
the Reign of Zthelred, Malmsbury aſſures us
there were no more. In the lite of AEthelred
he writes thus. At this time the Danes invaded
een Counties, whereas there are but thirty two in
all England. And in thoſe Days, the Counties
were divided according to the different ſorts
Diviſion of of Laws. For the Laws of England were
England, ac- three-fold ; thoſe of the Weſt-Saxons, called
cording to JJ/eſt-ſaxenlage ; thoſe of the Danes, called De-
L. nelage; and thoſe of the Mercians, called Mer-
chenlage. Under the W:t-Saxou-Law, were
comprehended nine Counties, Kent, Suſſex,
Surrey, Berkſhire, Hamſhire, Wiltſhire, Somerſet-
ſhire, Dorſeiſbire, and Devonſhire. To the Dane-
Laws belonged fifteen Counties, viz. Yorkſhire,
Derbyſhire, Nottinghamſhire, Leiceſterſhire, Lincolu-
ſhire, Northamptonſhire, Bedfordſhire, Buckingham-
ſhire, Hertfordfhire, Eſſex, Middleſex, Norfolk,
Suffolk, Cambridgeſhire, Huntingdonſbire. The o-
ther eight were govern'd by the Merciau- Law;
theſe were Gloceſterſhire, Worceſterſhire, Hereford-
ſhire, Warwickſhire, Oxfordſhire, Cheſhire, Shrop-
ſhire, and Staffordſhire. But when William the
firſt made his Survey of the Kingdom, there
were reckoned thirty fix Counties, as the Poly-
chronicon tell us; tho' the publick records in
which he regiſter'd that Survey, reckon no
more than thirty four. For Durham, Lanca-
ſhire, Northumberland, Weſtmoreland, and Cum-
berland, did not come into the number; the
three laſt (as ſome would have it) being
then under the Scots; and the other two,
either exempt trom taxes, or included in Tork-
ſhire. But all theſe being afterwards added to
the number, made it (as it is at this day)

Shires,

Lib. M. F.
S. Edlmundi.

Domeſday-
book.

— —

Keepers of the kingdom. Theſe were after-
wards reſtor'd by Henry the third, under the

title of Capitanei. For in the fiftieth year of

his Reign, he (as John of London has it) held

a Parliament, in which this wholeſom Law was
enatted, That in every County there ſhould be one
Captain maintain d by the King, who, by the Ca
7 of the Sheriff, ſhould curb the — of 8
the rubbers. Upon which, many were ſo affrighted,

that they left that trade; and the Royal Authority

began to revive. This was wiſely enough or-

der'd : but, whether Canutus the Dane, when

he made a Tetrarchy in a Monarchy, did notg,, 1,
act more prudently, let our Politicians deter-:8n,
min. For he (as Hermand the Archdeacon ſays)
being a man of very great ſagacity, and dividing the He fo
government of the Kingdom into four ſhares, put in 1079,
each under a Tetrarch, whom he had found faith-

ful to him. The government of the Welt-Saxons,

which was the greateſt, he took to himſelf 3; | Mer- Minds
cia, the ſecond part, he committed to one Edrick ;

the third, called Northumbre, to Ius; and Earl
Turkille had the fourth, 1. e. Eaſt Anglia, a very
plentiful country. This account I owe to the
diligence of Mr. Fr. Thinne, who is a great Ann. 18.
proficient in the ſtudy of Antiquities, and

was pleas d to communicate theſe particulars

ro me.

But every year, ſome one inhabitant, of the Sheri:
f Gentry, is ſet over the County, and ſtil'd 1
Vice comes, i. e. a Deputy of the Comes or Earl ; MU.
and in our language, Sheriff, 1. e. one ſet over
the County; and he may very properly be
term'd the Quæſtor of the County or Province.

For it is his buſineſs to collect the publick to-
venues of the County ; to gather into the Ex-
chequer all Fines, even by diſtraining; to at-

tend the Judges, and execute their orders ; to
empannel twelve men, who are to determin Twelve .
matters of Fact and bring in their Verdict to

the Judges (Who with us are only Judges of

Law, not of Fact;) to ſee ſuch as are con-
demn'd, duly executed; and to give Judg-

ment in petty cauſes.

There are alſo in every County,
renarchæ, or Juſtices of the Peace, ſettled by King
Edward the third, and thoſe take cognizance
of murders, felonies, treſpaſſes, and many other
miſdemeanors. Beſides, every year the King
ſends into each County two of the Juſtices ct Judges af
England, to give ſentence upon Priſoners, and Afi.
to make a Gaol-delivery. But of theſe more
hereafter, when we come to the Courts.

As to the Eccleſiaſtical Government: After
the Biſhops of Rome had affign'd to cach Preſ-

4

4
4
-
=
1
7
2
1
1

1

*

A
IJ "

2 kane.

certain Ei: Juſtices oft
Peace.

byter his Church, and ſet them over diſtinct

Pariſnes; Honorius, Archbiſhop of Canterbu- Englard
ry, about the year of our Lord 636, firſt be- vide9"

ivi . " Pariſhes.
gan to divide England into Pariſhes, as we

| : Pariſtes,
read in the Canterbury-Hiſtory. 1

—
— —

(a) See Sir Henry Spelman's Gloſſary, under the word Wapentachium.

(b) Of which the Ridings in Yorkſhire are a corruption.

(e) But the Statute of 34 and 35 of Hen, 8. Cap. 26, tells us, That eight Shires were of ancient and long time, to
wit, thoſe of Glamorgan, Caermarthen, Pembroke, Cardigan, Flint, Caernarvon, Angleſey, ard Merioneth ; and other
four were made by the Statute of 27 Hen. 8. Cap. 26. beſides Monmouthſhire ; namely, Radnor, Brecknock, Monty ©-
mei, and Denbigh, So that in K. Edward's time there ſeem to have been eight,

At

= * 3: 1em vi tl
3 2 quatuer ab- h

1} Ueneyenſis, 1

9 . 1 1
Wix The Diviſion of BRITAIN. ccxxx
bs m_ At this time, England has two Provinces, , nex'd to thoſe Monaſteries, Biſhopricks, Colle-
Get wm and tuo Archbiſhops ; Canterbury, Primate of | ges, and Hoſpitals, whoſe revenues were but
5 all England, and Metropolitan; and Jork. Un- mall; either becauſe they were built upon
" „ der theſe, are * twenty four Biſhops ; f twenty | their ground, or granted by the Lords of the
* 2, C. one under Canterbury, and the reſt under] Manour, Such a Settlement is expreſs'd in
; ihopricks. York. What theſe Biſhopricks are, with their | law, by being united, aunex d, and incorporated for
4 ſeveral Counties, or Dioceſes, is ſet forth in | ever. But upon the ſubverſion of the Mona-
theſe words of that excellent perſon the molt | ſteries, theſe (to the great damage of the
reverend Father in God Matthew Parker, Arch- | Church) were made * Lay-fees. * Fenda Laices
biſhop of Canterbury, a great Patron of Learn- lia, a
ing, and particularly of Antiquities. Dioceſes. Pariſh- Churches
Churches. appropri-
Ja the Province of Canterbury. ate.
Anterbury, with Rocheſter, contains the Canterbury, 257 140
County of Kent. London, Eilex, Middle- London, 623 189
ſex, and part of Hertfordſhire. Chicheſter, Suſ- Wincheſter, 362 131
. ſex. Wincheſter, Hamſhire, Surrey, and Ifle of Coventry and
2 Wight; with Guernſey and Jerſey, Iſlands ly- Lichfield, F FRE 00
ing upon the Coaſt of Normandy. Salisbury, Salisbury, 248 109
Wiltſhire and Berkſhire. Exeter, Devonſhire Bath and Wells, 388 160
and Cornwal. Bathe and Wells jointly, Somer- Lincoln, 1255 577
ſetſhire. Gloceſter, Gloceſterſhire. Iorceſter, Peterburrow, 293 91
"RN Worceſterſhire and part of Warwickſhire, He- Exeter, 604 239
Io reford, Heretordſhire and part of Shropſhire. Gloceſter, 207 143
Coventry and Lichfield, Staffordſhire, Derbyſhire, ; Hereford, 313 166
uri and the other part of Warwickſhire ; as alſo | © the Pro-] Norwich, 111 3383
my chat part of Shropſhire which borders upon | i f Cary Ely, ut. 75
the River Repil. Lincoln, the largeſt, ſix Coun- | beruf. Pe 98 36
ties, Lincolnſhire, Leiceſterſhire, Huntingdon- Chicheſter, 250 112
* ſhire, Bedtordſhire, Buckinghamſhire, and the | Oxtord, 195 88
other part of Hertfordſhire. Ely, Cambridge- | | Worcelter, 345: - 96
ſhire and the Iſle of Ely. Norwich, Norfolk 1 Briſtol, 236 64
and Suffolk. Oxford, Oxfordſhire. Peterbo- S. Davids, 308 120
rough, Northamptonſhire and Rutlandſhire. Bangor, 107 36
1 Briſtol, Dorſetſhire. To which eighteen Dio- Llandaff, 177 98
ceſes in England, muſt be added thoſe of | S. Aſaph. 121 19
. Wales, which are depriv'd of an Archbiſhop of | | Peculiars in the
en vix their own, and are alſo made fewer ; * ſeven | | Province 0 57 14
0er ab- hardly coming entire into four. Theſe are, Canterbury.
_—_ — hi t. _ Os — is 3 * Davids) 2 — agar x n —
% RE EP daff, Banchor, and Aſaph or . | number in the
n 1 E IT | Province of "month Ina 8219 3303
In the Province of York. — - — —
| York, 581 336
ORK it ſelf comprehends Yorkſhine and | in the Pro-) Durham, 135 87
Nottinghamſhire. * Cheſter, Cheſhire, vince of Tork.) Cheſter, 256 101
Richmondſhire, and Lancaſhire, with part of Carliſle, 93 18
Cumberland, Flintſhire, and Denbighſhire. —_ — —
Ive der Durham, the Biſhoprick of Durham, and Nor- The whole number in York. 1065 592
thumberland. Carliſle, part of Cumberland, —ͥ —
and Weſtmorland. To which number, may The whole number in ace 8 8
be added the Biſhoprick of Sodor, in the Ile of Provinces. a
Man.
Among theſe, the Archbiſhop of Canterbury But in the Book of Cardinal I/olſey, which was
ces of has the firſt place; the Archbiſhop of York, the | written in the year 1520, there are reckon'd
e. ſecond; the Biſhop of London, the third; the | in all the Counties, 9407 Churches. I know
Biſhop of Durham, the fourth; and the Bi- | not how this difference ſhould happen, unleſs
ſhop of Wincheſter, the fifth. The reſt take | it be, that ſome were demoliſh'd in the laſt
place according to the time of their Conſecra- | age; and the Chapels which are Parochial, be
es of tion. Bur if any of the other Biſhops happen | omitted, and others which are barely Chapels,
7 A to be Secretary of State, in virtue thereot he | reckon'd among the Pariſh-Churches. How-
Fab, C. claims the | firſt place, [next to theſe. ] There | ever, I have ſet down the number of Churches
N are beſides, twenty ſix Deaneries, thirteen | at the end of each County, out of that Book
whereof were erected in the larger Churches, | of the Cardinal. :
by King Henry the eighth, upon his expulſion | There were alſo in the Reign of King Hen- Monaſtries,
ot the Monks. The Archdeaconries are fix- | ry the eighth (if it be not a crime to men-
lard i. ty; and the Dignities and Prebends make five | tion them) monuments of the piety of our
4 into | hundred and forty four. fore-fathers, erected to the honour of God, and
ihe. Poriſtes. There are alſo nine thouſand two hundred | the propagation of Chriſtianity, and of learning,
| eighty four Pariſh-churches under the Biſhops ; | and the ſupport of the poor ; I mean, the Re-
ot which, three thouſand eight hundred forty | ligious houſes (i. e. Monaſteries or Abbies, |
five are Appropriate ; as is plain from the Ca- | and Priories,) to the number of 645 : Where- 1
talogue exhibited to King James [the firſt,] | of 40 were ſuppreſs d by a Grant from Pope
which I have here ſubjoyned. Now, Appropri- | Clement the ſeventh, obtain'd by Cardinal Hen, g. had |
ate Churches are ſuch, as by authority of the | Wolſey, who had then laid the foundation 5 _ 1
Pope and the conſent of the King and Biſhop | two Colleges, one at Oxford, and another ar ex ich of i
of the Dioceſe, were on certain conditions an- IÞfwich : And preſently atter, about the 36th Monks i"

of Aliens,

— —
I 4
— — —

.

ccxxxi

The Droifim of BRITAIN.

* The next
Fear, G

of Henry the eighth, a torrent (as it were)
caſting down the banks, broke in upon the
Eccleſiaſtical ſtate of England; and, to the ſur-
prize of the world, and the griet of the nation,
at once caſt down the greateſt part of the
Religious, with their curious ſtructures. For the
{ame Liberty which the Pope had granted the
Cardinal, the King, by conſent of Parliament,
took himſelf. Whereupon, in the year 1536,
all Religious houſes, with their revenues,
which had 2001. a year, or under, were grant-
ed to the King ; in number 376. * And in
the year 1539, under a ſpecious pretence of
rooting out ſuperſtition, the reſt were given-

up to the King's diſpoſal ; with the Colleges
Chauntries, and Hoſpitals, ten years after.
At which time, there were f valu'd or tax'd

ſides thoſe in the Univerſities) 96. Hoſpi-
tals, 110. Chauntries and Free-chapels, 2374.
Moſt of theſe, in a ſhort time after, were de-
moliſh'd, and their revenues ſquander'd away,
and the rich Treaſures which had been gradually
conſecrated to God by the pious munificence of
the Engliſh from the time they receiv'd Chri-
ſtianity, were in a moment diſpers'd, and
(it I may uſe the word without Offence )
Profan'd.

1

—

CCxxx

l

605 religious houſes, ſtanding ; Colleges gd

2 * 9 * 9 *

212 —
eee

Y 0
4 The Prince.

Triaceps ju-

vestutis.

|
. |

| Etheling,
| Clhto,

— 77

Xl CXXXLIT

ccxxxiv

A

ite i.
f,

ren

O

S to the diviſion of our State,
it conſiſts of a King or Mo-
ww narch, the Nobles, Citizens,
B * Freemen (which we call
omen) and Tradeſmen.
The KING, ſtiled by our
| Anceſtors Coning, and Cyning,
Ca name (a) under which is couch'd both

ſuperior but God. As that Oracle of the
Law has deliver'd it, Every one is under him,
Z and himſelf under none but God. He has very
es Maje. MANY t Imperial Rights (which the learned in
W815, the law term The Holy of Holies, and Indivi-
| duals, becauſe they are inſeparable ; but the
common People, The King's Prerogative ; ) and
theſe, they tell us, are denoted by the flowers
in the King's Crown. Some of theſe the King
enjoys by vritten Lau, others by Cuſtom,
which without any expreſs Law is eſtabliſh'd
3 by the tacit conſent of the whole body : and
ra. ſurely he deſerves them, fince by his watchſul-
| neſs every man's Houſe, by his Iabour every man's
Eaſe, by bis induſtry every one's Pleaſure, and by
his toil every one's Recreation, is ſecur d to him.
But theſe things are too ſublime, to belong
properly to our preſent Subject.

| Next the King, is his Eldeſt ſon ; and as
© The Pine. he among the Romans who was defign'd Suc-
| © Zrinceps ju- ceſſor, was at firſt call d“ Prince of the yourh, and

| venturi, afterwards (as flattery prevail'd) Cæſar, No-

A Bran, 16
| c

bs o
— _ :
ob
*
3
P.

| | ble Caſar, and the moſt noble Ceſar ; ſo our's
Kieling. Was by our Saxon Anceſtors term'd ZEthelin

. 1. e. noble, and in Latin Clyto, from the Greek
1 His, famous; that age affecting the Greek

$ tongue. Upon which, that Saying concerning
: Eadgar, the laſt heir male of the Saxon line,
| is ſtill kept up among the People, Eagan
feSeling, Englander Deapling, i. e. Eadgar the

3
2

Seca

„
rr

ENGLAND.

S

9
NS
D ee

THE

DEGREES

F

noble, England's darling. And in the antient

Latin Charters of our Kings, we often read,

Ego E. vel E. Clyto, f the King's fon. But this + Regis filiu.
name of Clyto, I have obſerv'd to be given to

the King's children in general. After the
Norman Conqueſt, he had no ſtanding hono-

rary title, nor any other that I know of, but

barely The King's Son, or The King's eldeſt Son;

till Edward the firſt ſummon'd to Parliament

his ſon Edward, under the title of Prince of Wilte f
Wales, and Earl of Cheſter ; to whom alſo he
afterwards granted the Dukedom of Aquitain.

And the Son, when he came to be King Ed-

ward the ſecond, ſummon'd his own ſon Ed-

ward to Parliament (then ſcarce ten years of

age) under the title of Earl of Cheſter and

Flint. But this Edward coming to the Crown,

created Edward his ſon (famous for his migh-

ty Exploits in war) Duke of Cornwall; ſince

which time, the King's eldeſt ſon (v) is born

Duke of Cornwall. And a little after, he ho-
nour'd the ſame perſon with the title of Prince

of Wales, by ſolemn Inveſtiture. The Princi-

pality of Wales was conferred upon him in

theſe Words, to him and his heirs Kings of Eng-

land. And as the heirs apparent of the Ro-

man Empire were (as I obſerv'd juſt now)

call'd Cæſars; of the Grecian, Deſpotæ, Lords;

of the Kingdom of France, Dauphins ; and of

Spain, Infantes: ſo thoſe of England have been

ever ſince ſtiled Princes of Wales. And this ti-

| tle continu'd till the time of Henry the eighth,

when Wales was entirely united to the King-

17 of England. But * when the divided . Now, C.
Kingdoms of Britain f were reduc'd into one, . Are, C.

| under the government of the moſt potent

Prince King James [the firſt ;1 his eldeſt ſon
Henry, the darling and delight of theſe King-
doms, || was ſtil'd Prince of great Britain: I Is, C.
whom nature made capable of the nobleſt At-
tainments ; and that God would bleſs him with
all the richeſt virtues and honour immortal, that

he + might outdo both * Britain's hopesand the? May, =

ur, =

() Either relating to cene, which in Saxon ſigniſies ſtout, valiant, &c. or to cunnan, which lignifies to know or
underſtand ; from whence a defigning ſubtle man is called a Cunning man.

(6) If he be the eldeſt Son; but if the firſt dies, the ſecond is not born to the ſame Title, See concerning this in
Cornwall, p. 28.

gp glorious

— — — — 3
. 1 2 *
N s
Py. »
Þ » Jn
9 oy — o

— — — — —
462K „ —

—

2 | | tend Sees, eee
ccxxxv The Degrees of England. c xx cXXXVI
glorious atchievements ot his tore-fathers ; that | England (in the Norman times, when the IM : nd

+ May, C. he + might enjoy length ot days, and all other Norman Kings themſelves were Dukes of C
*Is, C. Bleſſings ; * was the conſtant and hearty pray- | Normandy) none had that honour for a long ne
er of Great Britain: But not more conſtant, | time; till Edward the third created Edward =

nor more hearty, than are the Prayers of eve- | his ſon, Duke of Cornwall, by a f garland en Sen, in

ry true Briton at this da who has a juſt va-| his head, a ring on his finger, and a * filver verge :* 801 hi

lue and concern for his Religion and Liberty, | as the Dukes of. Normandy were tormerly Verge add, m

That the like Bleſſings may be plentitully pour'd ! created by a fword and a banner deliver'd towards wan, v

upon his Royal Highneſs, GEORGE Prince them, and afterwards by girding on the ſword d. ti

of Wales, together with his illuſtrious Con- | of the Dutchy, and by a cirele of gold gar- hy

ſort, and their Royal Iflue ; upon whoſe Suc- niſh'd on the top with little golden roſes. p!

ceflion to the Throne (after his preſent Ma- | And the ſame King Edward the third created , ta

jeſty, the beſt of Kings) not only the Happi- | his two ſons, Lionel, Duke of Clarence, and — 0

neſs and Proſperity of theſe Nations, but the | John, Duke of Lancaſter, in Parliament, © By Jobe — &

very Being ot our Conſtitution, under God, ]“ girding on a ſword, and putting upon their D. of Ny. ui

entirely depends. | de heads a turr'd cap, with a circle of gold ſer . 14

Our Nobles are divided into Greater and | © with pearls, and by the delivery of a Char- ut

Leſs. The Greater Nobles we call Dukes, | © ter.“ From that time, many hereditary as
Marquilles, Earls, and Barons; who either Dukes have been created in this Kingdom, *

enjoy theſe titles by hereditary Right, or re- | with theſe and like expreſſions in the Char- ch

ceive them from the King, as the reward of | ters, The name, title, ſtate, ſtile, place, ſeat, pre- 7

their merits. heminence, honour, authority and dignity of Duke of N

Date. A DUKE is the next title ot honour to | N. we give and grant; and do inveſt you therein, it
the Prince. At firſt, this was a name of office, | by the putting en a ſword, and a ca? with a golden th

and not of honour. About the time of Alius | circle upon your head, and the delivery of a golden K

Verm, they who were appointed to guard the | verge. 8.

Frontiers, were firſt called Dales; and thisß A MARQUISS G.e. (a) according to Maris fu

title, in Conſtantine's time, was interior to | the import of the word, one who is fet to guard 2 E

that of a Count. After the deſtruction of the
Roman Empire, the title continu'd to be the
name of an Office ; and the great numbers who
in the Saxon times are ſtil'd Drces in the
antient Charters, were in Saxon only called Eal-
dormen. The ſame alſo who are named Dukes,
are term'd Counts too: for inſtance, moſt peo-
ple call William the Conqueror of England
Duke of Normandy, whereas William of Malms-
bury ſtiles him Count of Normandy. However,
that both Duke and Count were names of Of-
fice, is plain from that form of Creation, which
Marculph; We find in Marculphus, an antient writer.
Formule, The Royal clemency is particularly fignaliz'd upon
this account, that in all the people goodneſs and
watchtulneſs are requir'd 3; nor is it convenient to
commit the judiciary power to any, who has not
firſt approved his loyalty and valour. Since there-
fore we have ſufficiently experienc'd your fidelity and
* Alionem, worth, we commit to you the * Office of a Count,
; Patriciatus. Duke, or f Prefident, || in that Lordſhip which your
I} In pago illa. predeceſſor govern'd, to att in and rule over it. Pro-
| wided always, that you be entirely true to our Co-
verument; and that all the People withia thoſe li-
mits, live under and obey your authority ; and that
you rule juſtly according to lau and caſtom ; that
yore zealouſfly protett widows and orphaus; that you
ſeverely puniſh the crimes of robbers and malefa-
lors ; Jo as thoſe who live orderly under your go-
verument, may be eaſy and undifturb'd and that
i Atione. whatever profit ariſes from | that Office to the Ex-
chequer, you bring yearly with your own hands into
our coffers.
Sigonius, l. 5, It began to be an honorary title under Otho
Regnz 1talici, the Great, about the year 970. For he, to
engage Perſons of valour and wiſdom more ef-
fectually in his intereſt, honour'd them with
* Regalia, What he call'd. “ Rozalties, Thoſe Royalties
were either Dienities, or Lands. in Fee. The
Dignities were thoſe of Dukes, Marquiſſes,
Counts, Captains, Valoaſors, and Vulvaſius. It
was late e'er it became an hereditary title in
France; not till Philip the third, King of
France, granted that they ſhould be thence-
forth {tiled Dukes of Britain, who were before
called promiſcuouſly Dukes and Counts. But in

— — ͤ—a — SISSY — At tres " —_

the marches or limits) 1s a title of honour, the

u at this c

next to a Duke. This title came late into Jen Earls, he
England, none being inveſted with it befofe e. picheus in h
the time of Richard the ſecond. For he made e
his Favourite, Robert Vere Earl of Oxford, * _ fa
Marquiſs of Dublin ; but that honour was Z ot
2 titular: For they who had the care ot ri
the Frontiers, were commonty called Lords 3 re
Marchers, and not Mſarquiſſes, as we ſtile them. 4 b.
They are created by the King, by the girdizg I v
on a ſword, putting on a Cap of hononr and dlig- D ſe
unity, and delivering a Charter. And here I ſhall 4 de
take the liberty to relate what I find rccord- 4 P,
ed in the Parliament-rolls, When John de 4 Her, 1 d.
Beaufort, Earl of Somerſet, was made Mar- I d
quils of Dorſet by Richard the ſecond, and b &
was depriv'd of that title by Henry the fourth, b co
the Commons in Parliament made an humble F th
Requeſt to the King, that he would reſtore 4 of
him to the title of Marquiſs ; but he himſelf j N
oppoſed the motion, and openly declar'd that 4 F
it was f a novel dignity, altogether unknown + Nor. 3 V
to our Anceſtors ; and theretore that he did n
not by — means deſire it, nay, that he ut- 3 a
| terly refuſed it. I fi
The title of EART, which holds the Earl. I fe
third place, ſeems to have been deriv'd from | th
our German Anceſtors. For, as Tacitus tells tl
us, they had always * Earls attending their Prin- Comitts i
ces, for counſel, and for authority. Bur others are C
of opinion, that both the Franks and we re- K
ceiv'd the title from the Romans. For the Em- N
perors, after the Empire was come to its J
height, began to keep about them a ſort of 6 .
domeſtick Senate, which was call'd Cæſar's ; l,
+ retinue ; and theſe, by whoſe Counſel they f 5 b
acted in war and peace, were called Comitcs, Et a
Attendants ; from whence we find frequent- ; 0
ly in old Inſcriptions, Comiti Jupp. In a few FD” ic. from 0
. this name prevail'd ſo much, that all 1

agiſtrates who gave their attendance 2t * gui 2% WI 1
that Council, or had been of it, were ſtil'd cmi (
Comites ; and thereupon it was afterwards He (
extended to all who had the ſuperviſal of any t
buſineſs ; and Suidas (as Cujacius has told us) poraitd 4
defines Comes, 5 aa? d a Governor vj the Poor Cal.

Pie.

(4) From tlie Saxon »;earc, a bound; and mearcan
language.

Alda — Ds.

2

-

mearcian, to ſet out, mark diſtirctly, Cc. in the ſam?

I

Ate,

.

Val

ite;

tat

a
tau
7.

it 40

HB
3
"=
* "I
Y
42
- >
1
.
_
1
1
3
.
AY
B

q

4
42
4
4
<7

GH_—
| cxXXVII
8

62 Earls,

*

. e. from
| mitatus,

The Degrees of England. |

ccxxxviii

1. From whence alſo we learn, that before
Conſtantine the Great, the name Comes was
not a name of Dignity. But he, modelling
the Roman government a- new, and endeavour-
ing to oblige as many as poſſible by favours and
honours, firſt inſtituted the title of Comes, as
merely honorary, without any duty: And there
were certain rights and privileges annex'd to the
title; to accompany the Prince, not only when
he appear'd in publick, but in his palace and
private retirements; and to be admitted to his
table, and to his ſecret conſultations. Upon
which we read in Epiphanius, Or & gag durs,
&c. i. e. Io alſo obtained of the King the Dig-
nity of a Count. At length, ſuch as had the
favour of this title, had other honours confer'd
upon them ro which Duty was annex'd; and
again, to thoſe who were betore in Office, and
engag d in the affairs of State, he ſuper-added
this honour. By this means, the name of
Count came to imply both Dignity and Go-
rernment; and, being at firſt but temporary,
it was atterwards for term ot lite. But when
the Roman Empire was divided into ſeveral |
Kingdoms, this title was ſtill retain'd ; and our
Saxons call'd thoſe in Latin Comites and Con-
ſules, who in their own tongue were named
Ealzopmen. The ſame perſons were ſtil'd by

„ir chis the Danes in their own language, Eorlas, i. e.

honourable men, as Ethelwerd tells us ; and,

. Pitheus in by a little melting of that word, we call them
8 | Memora-

144 Campa-

at this day Earls. For a long time they were
fimply ſo call'd, till at laſt an addition was made
of the nameof the Place, over which they had ju-
riſdiction. Bur this Dignity was not as yet he-
reditary. (The firſt heredicary Earls in France,
by the way, were the Earls ot Bretagne.) But
when William the Norman Conqueror had poſ-
ſeſs'd himſelf of the Government ot this King-
dom, Earls began to be Feudal, Hereditary, and
Patrimonial : and theſe (as appears trom Domeſ-
day) were ſtil'd ſimply Earls, without any ad-
dition, as, Earl Hugh, Earl Alan, Earl Roger,
&c. Afterwards, as appears by ancient Re-
cords, Earls were created with an addition of
the name of the place, and had the third penny
of the County aſſign'd them. For inſtance ;
Mawd the Empreſs, daughter and heir of King
Henry the Firſt, created an Earl in this form of
words; as appears from the Charter, now in
my hands. I Mud, daughter of King Henry,
and Queen of England, do give and grant to Gau-
fred de Magnavilla, for his ſervice, and to his heirs
for ever, the Earldom of Efſex; and that he have
the third penny in the Sheriff's Court, iſſuing out of
the pleas, as an Earl ought to have from his County,
in all things. This is the moſt ancient Creation-
Charter that 1 ever ſaw. Likewiſe, Henry II.
King of England, created an Earl in theſe
words, Know ye that we have made Hugh Bigod,
Earl of Norfolk, namely) of the third penny of
Norwic and Norfolk, ſo as no Earl in England may
beld his County more freely. Which an old Book
belonging to Battle- Abbey explains thus: Tt was
an ancient cuſtom throughout England, that the Earls
of Counties ſhould have the third penny for their
own uſe ; from whence they were call d Comites,
Earls. And another anonymous Author delivers
ir more diſtinctly. Comitatus is deriv'd from
Comes, or elſe this from that. Now he is call'd
Comes (an Earl) becauſe he enjoys in every County
the third part of the profits ariſing from the Pleas.
But yet all Earls do not enjoy them, but ſuch only who
have them granted by the King, hereditarily, or per-

Jonaly, So that Polidore Virgil, as to the

—

—

cuſtom of the preſent age, delivers this matter
right; It u a cuſtom in England, that titles of
Counties be diſpes'd of at the pleaſure of the Prince,
even without the peſſeſſ:on of the places from whence
they derive their title. Upon which account, the King
uſually gives to ſuch as have no poſſeſſions in the
Connty, a certain annual penſion out of the Exchequer,
ia lieu thereof.
They were formerly created, without any
farther ceremony than the bare delivery of the
Charter. Under King Stephen, who ſeiz'd the
Crown while the Kingdom was embroil'd with
civil wars, there were ſeveral that uſurp'd tlie
title of Earl ; whom the Hiſtory of the Church
of H/averly calls falſe Earls, and imaginary* Pſcudocomi-
Earls, where it tells us how they were depos'd tes.
by King Henry II. But King John (as far as
my obſervation has carry'd me) was the firſt
who us'd the girding of a ſword. For Roger Girding of

. Hoveden writes thus: King Jou, on his Coroza- Word.

tion-day, girt Wilttam Marſhall with the fword of
the County of | Strigulia, and Geoffry Fitz-Peter, with% Penbrechia
that of the County of Efſex ; and theſe, tho they in other wri-
were called Earls before, and had the government of ©**
their Counties, had not been yet girt with the ſword
of the County; but that very day they ſerv'd at
the King's table with their {words on. In the tol-
lowing age, there was an additional ceremony,
ot putting on a cap with a golden circle (which
is now. changed into a f Coronet with rays)+ Coronam
and a * Robe of State. Which three, namely 7a4/atam.
a {word and a belt, a cap with a Coroner, and, —— "we
a Robe of State, are at this day carry'd by three 4
ſeveral Earls, before him who is to be created;
and then he is introdue'd to the King upon his
Throne, between two Earls in Robes ot State,
and himſelf in a + Surcoat : where, kneeling up- I Supertunicas
on his knecs while the Inſſtument of his Crea-
tion is read; at theſe words, The ſame T. we
advance, create, appoint and conſtitute Earl of S. and
accordingly do give, grant, aud by the girding of a
ſword inveſt him with the name, title, ſtate, ſtyle,
honour, authority and dignity of Earl of S; the
King puts on him a long robe, hangs a ſword
at his neck, puts a Cap with a Coronet upon
his head, and delivers into his hand the Inſtru-
ment of his Creation, as ſoon as it is read.
Bur theſe things do nor properly belong to my
defign.
As to a cuſtom now in uſe, that whoever is
to be created Earl, if he be not a Baron before,
muſt firſt be advanced to the dignity of a
Baron ; it is a new thing, and only practis'd
ſince the days of King Henry VIII. Among
the Earls or Counts they were by far the mo
honourable, who were call'd (a) Counts Palatine. Counts Pala-
For as the Title of Palatine was a name com- ine.
mon to all who had any office in the King's
palace; fo that of Count Palatine was a title of P. Fitheus,
honour conferr'd upon ſuch who were before
Palatini, with a kind of Royal Authority
to be Judges within their own territories.
After the Earls, the next in order are the Viſcounts,
VISCOUNTS; call'd in Latin Vice-comites.
This, as an office, is an ancient title; as a dig-
nity, but modern; for it was never heard ot
among us, before Henry the ſixth's time.
Among the Greater Nobility, the BA RO NS Barons,
have the next place. And here, tho I am not

ignorant what the learned write concerning the

fignification of this word in Cicero ; yet I am
willing to cloſe with the opinion of Iſidore,
and of an ancient Grammarian, who will have
Barons to be mercenary Soldiers. This ſeems to

be pretty plain from that known place of Hir-
tius

—_—

(4) Of the nature and authority of theſe Counts Palatine, ſee Cheſtire.

7 —

ccxxxix

The Degrees of England.

tius in The Alexandrian war : The 198 1 the
aſſiſtance of Caſſius: for he always uſed to have
— — a — — 5 of Soldiers for ſudden
occaſions, with their weapons ready, about him, and
ſeparate from the reſt. Nor is the old Latin and
Greek Gloſlary againſt us, when it tranſlates
Baro by «ve, a man; as always, in the Laws of
the Longobards, Baro is us'd for a man.

The Erymologies of this name which ſome
have fanſy'd, do not by any means pleaſe me.
The French Heralds will have Barons to be ſo
call'd from Par-hommes in French, that is, of
equal dignity 3 the Engliſh Lawyers ſay it 1s
from robora belli, the finews of war; ſome Ger-
mans think it a contraction of Banner-bheirs,
i. e. Standard-bearers ; and Iſidore derives it
from - Papfis, i. c. grave or weighty. Alciatus
thinks the name comes from the Berones, an
ancient People of Spain, which he ſays were
formerly ſtipendiaries. But that other, from the
German Bar, i. e. a free man, pleaſes me

In his Parer-
La,

better.
See Goldaſtw, The preciſe time when this name came into
* our Iſland, I have not yet diſcover'd : the Bri-
tains diſown it; and there is not the lealt men-
tion made of it in the Saxon Laws, nor is it
reckon'd in Altrick's Saxon Gloſſary among the
titles of honour; for there, Dominus is tran-
ſlated Laſord, which we have contracted into
Lord. And among the Danes, the Free Lords,
ſuch as our Barons are at this day, were called
Thanes, and (as Andreas Velleius tells us) are
term'd ſo ſtill. In Burgundy, the uſe ot this
name is very ancient; for Gregory ot Tours
ſays thus, The Barons of Burgundy, as well Biſhops
as others of the Laity, &c. The firſt mention of
a Baron in England, that I have met with, is
in a Fragment of the Laws of Canutus King
of England and Denmark ; and even there,
according to different copies, it is read Vronis,
Baronis, and Thani. But that the Barons are
there meant, is plain from the Laws of William
the Conqueror; in which, that word in the
Laws of Canutus is tranſlated by Baro. Take
the whole paſſage. Let the * Exercituals be ſo

Lords,

About the
year 580,

4

Heriots or

Reliefs. moderated, as to be tolerable. An Earl ſhall pro-
vide ſuch things as are fitting, eight horſes, four ſad-

dled and four unſaddled; four ſteel caps, and four

+ Tanceæ. coats of mail; eight f javelins, and as many ſhields;

i Poſſibly for four ſwords, and two hundred || mance. of gold.
Mancuſz, i. e. But a King s Viron, or Baron, who is next to him,
30 pence, ſhall have four horſes, two ſaddled and two unſad-
dled; two ſwords, four javelins, and as many ſhields,
one ſteel cap, and fifty mancæ of gold.
In the beginning of the Norman times, the
Valvaſors and Thanes were reckon'd, in order
and dignity, next to the Earls and Barons ; and
the Greater Valvaſors (if we may believe thoſe
who have written concerning Feudal-tenures)
were the ſame that Barons are now. So that
Baro may ſeem to have come from that name;
which time has, by little and little, made
ſomewhat ſmoother. Burt even then it was not
a title of any great honour ; for in thoſe times
there were Earls who had their Barons under
them : and I remember, I have read in the an-
cient Conſtitutions of France, that there were
ten Barons under one Earl, and as many * Chief-
tans under a Baron. It is likewiſe certain, that
there are Charters ſince the Norman Conqueſt,
wherein the Earls write thus, To all my Barons,
as well French as Eugliſh, greeting, &c. Nay,
even Citizens of the better rank were called
Barons : ſo, in Domeſday-book the citizens of
Warwick are {til'd Barons; and the citizens of
London, with the Inhabitants of the Cinque
Ports, had the ſame ritle given them. Bur, a
few years after, as Senators of Rowe were

Many Thanes
in England in
the Conque.
ror's time.

* Capi tane i.

choſen according to their eſtates; ſo they 3
accounted Barons with us, who held their lands
by an entire Barony, or thirteen Knights fees
and one third of a Knight's fee ; every fee (as we
have it in an ancient Book) being computed at
twenty pounds, which in all make 400 Marks. For
that was the value of one entire * 3 and they
who had lands and revenues to this value, were wont
to be ſummon d to Parliament. It ſeems to have
been a Dignity with Juriſdiction; which our
Court-Barons do in ſome meaſure ſhow. And Court B.,
the great number of Barons, is an argument
that they were ſuch Lords who could hold Pleas
within their own juriſdiction (like thoſe whom
the Germans call Free-heirs,) eſpecially if they
had their caſtles ; for then they anſwer'd the
definition of Baldus the famous Lawyer, who
calls him a Baron, that had a f mere and mixt 4 A
government in ſome Caſile, by the grant of the Prince. mixtumgs
And (as ſome would have it) all who held Ba-#nntriun,
ronies, ſeem to have claim'd that honour; fo
that ſome of our Lawyers think, that Baron and
Barony, Earl and Earldom, Duke and Dukedom,
King and Kingdom, were in the nature of Con-
jugates. It is certain, that in that age King Matt. hei,
Henry III. reckon'd 150 Baronies in England, “5 128
From hence it is, that in the Charters and Hi-
ſtories of that age, almoſt all Noblemen are
ſtil'd Barons : a name, which in thoſe times
was exceeding honourable ; the Baronage of Barons. .
Eugland 1 a manner all the prime Englans,
Orders of the Kingdom, Dukes, Marquiſſes,
Earls, and Barons.
But that name has been much more hono-
rable ſince King Henry III. out of ſuch a mul-
titude, which was ſeditious and turbulent,
ſummon'd to Parliament, by Writ, ſome of
the f bef? only. For he (the words are taken + 0ztim:;
out of an Author of conſiderable Antiquity)
after thoſe great diſturbances and heart-burnings be-
tween himſelf, Simon de Montefort, and other Ba-
rons, were laid ; appointed and ordained, that all
ſuch Earls and Barons of the Kingdom of England,
to whom the King ſhould vouchſafe to direct his Writs
of ſummons, ſhould come to lus Parliament, and no
others, unleſs their Lord the King ſhould pleaſe to di-
rect other Writs to them alſo. And what he be-
gan a little before his death, was ſtrictly ob-
ſerv'd by Edward the firſt and his ſucceſſors,
From that time, they only were look'd on as
Barons of the Kingdom, whom the King by
ſuch Writs of ſummons had call'd to Parliament; Summers
until Richard the Second, in the eleventh year Parlizas,
of his reign, created John de Beauchamp of Holt,
Baron of Kederminſter, by the delivery of a
Diploma, bearing date the 1oth of October.
From which time, the Kings have often con-
ferr'd that honour by Diploma (or rather hono-
rary Letters,) and the putting on of an hono-
rary long robe. And that way of creating
Barons by Diploma, and the other of Mit of
ſummons, are in uſe at this day ; tho* they are
mention'd therein not by the name of Baron,
but of Chevalier. They who are thus created,
are call'd Barons of Parliament, Barcns of the
Kingdom, and Barons honorary; to diſtinguiſh
them from thoſe who are commonly call'd Barons
according to the ancient conſtirution; as, thoſe
of Burford, and Walton, and ſuch as were Ba-
rons to the Counts Palatine of Cheſter, and of
Penbroch ; who were feudal, and Barons by
tenure only.

The Parliamentary Barons are not (like thoſe
of France and Germany) Barons by name only; .
but are all by birth, Peers, Noblemen, f the States, f M=
and Counſelors-born ; being ſummon'd by the

as ©
a ”
*
1 __— 1 hos . te a nw LS * A—

5 Hops Ba-

y
1
a 7 A.

i * <0 ſaid,
q af . 1607»

—— ei LA « .. 4a

' Abbots, Par-
F Barons,

”_ we

FF ©, E<-E LP RY RP = CY

.
FT Vavaſcrs,

King in this form, To treat of the weighty affairs
of the nation, and to give counſel upen them, They
hare

{

mors to
amert,

—

e
cxli

The Degrees of England.

ccxlii

ie their peculiar immunities and 1288
43. in criminal cauſes, to be judg'd by their
Peers only; Not to be put to an oath, but to
deliver the truth upon honour ; Not to be im-
pannel'd among the Jury of tuelve ro enquire
into falt; Not to be liable to the Writs Sup-
licavit, Capias, Eſſoins ; with many other pri-
vileges, Which I leave to the Lawyers; whoſe
roper buſineſs it is to treat of thoſe, and other
things of the like nature. | |
Beſides theſe, the two Archbiſhops and all
the Biſhops of England, are Barons of the
Kingdom, or Parliamentary Barons; and ſo
(in the memory of our * grandfathers) were
ſeveral Governours of Monaſteries, of whom
this is a Liſt,

"Glaſſenbury.

St. Auſtin's, Canterbury.

St. Peter's, Weſtminſter.

St. Albans.

St. Edmundsbury.

Peterburgh.

| St. John's, Colcheſter.

Eveſbam.

L inchelcomb.

Crowland.

Battaile.

Reding.

Abingdon.

Abbot of } J/altham, S. Croſs.
Shrewsbury.
Cirenceſter.

St. Peter's Gloceſter.

Barduey.

S. Benedict of Hulm.
| Thorney.

Ramſey.

| Hyde.

| Malmesbury.
| St. Mary's at Tork.

(Selbey.

g. ops Ba-

I [40

| * <0 ſaid,
4 ar . 1007.

bots, Par-
1 la mentary
Bron.

Coventry. CNT Sk
The Order of St. John of Jeru-

' . ſalem, commonly ſtil'd Maſter
rer 0. of the Knights of 5 John ; 205
would alſo be accounted the

firſt Baron of England.

To theſe it belong'd (as it ſtill does to the
Biſhops) by right and cuſtom, in every Parliament
(as the Publick Records have it) to be preſent in
perſon as Peers of the Realm, with the reſt of the
Peers; to conſult, treat, order, decree, and define,
by virtue of their Baronies held of the King. For
William the friſt (as the Eccleſiaſticks of that
| age complain'd, though thoſe of the next look'd
anl. Pars, UPON it as their greateſt glory) put Biſhopricks and
1 Abbies (who held Baronies in Frank almoigne,
and ſo were free from all ſeculay ſervices) under
military ſervice ; enrolling every Biſhoprick and Ab-
bey at pleaſure, according to the number of ſoldiers
which he and his ſucceſſors might demand of them, in
times of war. |

Since that, the Eccleſiaſtical Barons enjoy all
the Immunities which the other B.rons of the
Realm do; except, that they are nut judg'd by
their Peers. For as they, by the Canons of
8 the Church, are not to be preſent in ſanguinary
3 cauſes; ſo, in the ſame cauſes, lhemſclres are
to be judg'd as to fact, by a Jury of twelve.
But whether this be agreeable to the ſtri& rules
of the Law, let the Lawyers determin.

VAVASORS or VALVASORS for-
merly took place next the Barons ; a name, de-
riy d by our Lawyers from FValvæ, folding-doors;

*

and a dignity, that ſeems to have come to us
from the French. For, during their dominion Sigel
in Italy, they call'd thoſe Yalvaſors, who
govern'd the people, or part of them, under
the Duke, Marquiſs, Earl, or Chieftain, and
(as Buteler, the Lawyer, words it) © Had a
full power of puniſhing, but not the right of fairs
and markets. This was a title of honour very
uncommon among us; and, whatever it was,
is long ſince grown into diſuſe, In Chaucer's
time it was not very conſiderable, as appears

from what he ſays of his Frankelin, or free-
holder.

A Sheriff had he been, and a contour
Was no where ſoch a worthy Vavaſour.

The LESSER Noblemen, are the Baronets, Leſſet Noble-
Knights, Eſquires, and thoſe whom we commonly men.
call Gentlemen.

[BARONETS are (as appears by the Baronets.
name) an inferior ſort of Barons, and the
loweſt degree of thoſe that enjoy Hereditary
Honour. This was firſt inſtituted by King
James the firſt, in the eleventh year of his
Reign, and 1s given by Patent to a Man and
the heirs male of his own Body lawfully
begotten. ]

KNIGHTS, call'd by our Engliſh Law-
E in Latin Milites, have almoſt in all Nations

ad their name from horſes. Thus they are

call'd Cavelliers by the Italians, Chevalier by the
French, Reuter by the Germans, Marchog by
the Welſh ; all, with reſpe& to riding. The
are call'd ng 22 only by the Engliſh ; a Sa
that in the Saxon, as alſo in the German
tongue, ſignifies promiſcuouſly a ſervant (or one
that does ſervice) and a young man. And there-
fore in the old Saxon Goſpels, the Diſciples are
call'd Leorming ayhts ; 9h | in another place we
read Iucmht, tor a Client; and our old Com-
mon-Lawyer Bracton mentions the Radaibtes,
i. e. Serving-horſemen ; who held lands upon
this condition, that they ſhould furniſh their
Lord with horſes : from whence, by ſhortening
the name (as we Engliſh love contractions) 1
have long thought that the word Knights de-
ſcended to us.

But for what reaſon the Laws of our Country, Knights why
and all the Writers ſince the Norman Con-call'd Miliies.
queſt, ſhould term them in Latin, Milites;

I do not well apprehend. Not but I know,

that in the decline of the Roman Em-

pire, the name of Milites was transferr'd to

ſuch as were always about the King's perſon,

and had the moſt conſiderable Poſts in the

Prince's retinue. But if I am not much miſta-

ken, the firſt who were call'd ſo among us,

were they that held lands beneficiary or in fee,

to ſerve in the wars. For ſuch Fees were call'd
Militarie, and they who in other Countries

are call'd Feudataries, were with us ſtil'd M-

lites, Soldiers (as the Milites of the King, of

the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, of Earl Roger,

of Earl Hugh, &c.) becauſe they had lands
beſtow'd upon them on this condition, that

they ſhould fight for them, and pay them fealty

jw homage ; Whereas, others who ſerved in the =
wars + as ſtipendiaries, were call'd Slidarii, Le
and Servientes. f

Theſe (Milites or Equites, which you pleaſe
to call them) are fourfold : The moſt honour-
able, are thoſe of the Order of S. George or
the Garter ; the ſecond, the Bannerets; the
third, Of the Bath; and the fourth, ſuch as
we call ſimply, Knights, and in Latin Equites
aurati, or Milites, without any addition. of

h h the

Knights,

8 2 "IR . OS.

4. ab —— Ie

ccxliii The Degrees of England.

the Knights of the Order of S. George I will

ſpeak in their proper place, when I come

to Windſor : Of the reſt, briefly, in this
lace.

Bannerets, F BANNERETS, otherwiſe call'd Baronets
(but falſly,) have their name from a banner; for they
were'allow'd, upon account of their Bravery, to
uſe a ſquare banner as well as the Barons; and from
thence they are by ſome, truly, call'd Equites
Vexillarii, and by the Germans Banner- heires.
cannot trace their antiquity beyond the reign of
Edward the third, when England was at it's
height for martial diſcipline ; ſo that till time
ſhall bring to light a more probable account,
I muſt believe that this honorary title was then
firſt invented, as a reward to Valour. In the
publick Records of that age, among the military
titles, there is mention made of Banneretts, and

Pars 2. Pat. of Homines ad vexillum, who ſeem to be the

| 4. 923 M. ume; and of homines ad arma (men attending

| ; inarms.) And I have read a Charter of King

Edward the third, by which he adyanc'd John

Coupland (for taking David the ſecond King of

Scots, priſoner in a battle at Durham) to the

honour of a Banneret, in theſe words; Defiring ſo

I to reward the ſaid John, who took David de Bruis,

| and deliver'd him up to us, and to ſet ſuch a mark of
Eſteem upon his loyalty and valour, as may give others
an example to ſerve us faithfully for the future; We
have advanc'd the ſaid John to the Dignity of a
Banneret ; and, to ſupport that title, have for us and
our heirs granted to the ſame Joln the ſum of 500 |.
yearly, to him and his heirs, Cc. Nor may it be
improper to mention out of Froſſardus, the
form by which Johiz Chandos, a celebrated ſoldier
in his time, was made Banneret. When Edward
Prince of Wales was ready to engage _— the
Baſtard, and the French, in defence of Peter
King of Caſtile ; John Chandos came to the
Prince, and deliver'd into his hands his banner
folded, with theſe words; My Lord, this is my
banner, may it pleaſe you to unfold it, that I may this
day carry it. For I have, by the bleſſing of God,
ſufficient revenue for this. The Prince and Peter

ing of Caſtile who ſtood by him, took the ban-
ner in their hands, and reſtor'd it untolded,with
words to this effect, Sir John, as you expett ſucceſs
and glory, behave your ſelf with courage, and ſew
what a man you are. Having receiv'd the banner,
he return'd to his men full of joy, and holding
it up, Fellow-ſoldiers (ſays he) behold my banner,
and yours, if you defend it ſtoutly as your own. In
after ages, whoever was to be honour'd with
this title (either before a battle, ro excite
courage, or after, as a reward of bravery) was
brought before the King or his General, carry-

+ Signum. ing an oblong f Enſign call'd Pennon (wherein
his Arms were painted,) and going between
two of the ſenior Knights, with Trumpeters,
and Heralds, before him; and the King or Ge-
neral, wiſhing him ſucceſs, commanded the
end of the Pennon to be cut off, that ſo the
banner inſtead of an oblong might be made a
{quare.

Knights of Concerning the Milites or Equites Balnei

the Bath. (Knights of the BA TH) I have obſerv'd no-
thing more ancient, than that this dignity was
in uſe among the old Franks ; and that Henry
the fourth King of England, on the day of his
Coronation, did in the Tower of London con-
fer Knighthood upon forty ſix Eſquires, who
had watch'd all night before, and had bath'd
themſelves :' that he gave to every one of them
a green coat reaching down to the ancle, ſtrait-
ficey'd, and furr'd with minivere ; and that

* Dublicem they had on the left ſhoulder * two white (ilk

funiculam twiſts hanging looſe, with t Toflels. Theſe,
ex abo ſerico.

+ Porul is.

and were choſen to this honour at the Corona-
tion of the Kings and Queens, or at their
marriages; and ſometimes, when their ſons
were made Princes of Wales, Dukes, or
Knights. It was then done with a variety of
Ceremonies, which are now in a great meaſure

tull account of the Order,) the day before
their Creation, put on a grey Hermit habit, a
hood, a linnen Coif, a pair of boots; and in
that dreſs go devoutly to divine ſervice, to be-
gin their wartare there, as principally intended
tor the honour and ſervice of God. They ſup
together that night, each one being attended
by two Eſquires, and a Page; after ſupper,
they withdraw to their bed- chamber, where
there is prepar'd for each of them a little bed

lies upon them ; with a bathing Veſſel cloſe by,
covered with a linnen cloth, in which, after ha-
ving commended themſelves to God, they waſh,
to put them in mind that they ought to keep
their bodies and minds undefil'd. Early next
morning, they are awaked with muſick, and
dreſs themſelves in the ſame habit. Then, the
High-Conſtable, the Earl-Marſhal, and others
appointed by the King, go to them, and call
them out in order, and give them an oath, to
fear God, and defend his Church; to honour
the King, and maintain his prerogative, and to
protect widows, virgins, orphans, and all others
(as far as they are able) from injury and op-
preſſion. After they have taken this oath, they
are conducted to Morning-prayer by the King's
muſick, with the Heralds before them: and
from thence to their chamber again, where
they put off their Hermit-habit, and dreſs
themſelves in a mantle of red Taffata (the
Emblem of Blood and War,) and a white har
adorn'd with a plume of white feathers over
their linnen coif, with a pair of whice gloves

Horſes are accouter d with black {addles and
Trappings, ſpeck'd with white ; and have a
croſs on their forehead. Each has his Page on
horſe-back, carrying betore him a ſword with a
gilded hilt, at which there hang golden ſpurs ;
and alſo Eſquires, riding on both ſides of them.
In this ſtate, with trumpets ſounding before
them, they march to Court, where they are
conducted by two of the Senior Knights into
the King's preſence. Then, the Page delivers
the belt, and the ſword hanging in it, to the
Lord-Chamberlain, and he with great reverence

Knights there to put on the ſpurs. Theſe for-
merly were wont, after wiſhing them joy, to
kiſs the knces of the perſon to be Knighted.
After the Creation, they us'd heretofore to
ſerve up the diſhes at the King's table. Then,
they dine together, fitting all on one ſide, each
under an Eſcutcheon of his own Arms. At
Evening- prayer, they repair to the Chapel,
and offer their ſwords upon the altar, and then
lay down money to redeem them. As they re-
turn, the King's head-Cook ſtands with his
knife in his hand, admoniſhing them to ſhew
themſelves faithful and worthy Knights, or
he'll cut off their ſpurs, with diſgrace and in-
famy. On the Coronation-day, they attend
the King in their proper ſtation, with
ſwords and ſpurs on, attired in a blue mantle ;

wit

ccxliy

in the“ laſt age, were ſuch of the greateſt of *
the Nobility as had not been Knighted before; an

So ſaid

þ
D. 1897.

diſus d. At f preſent, they who are appointed + S0 «1
by the King to this honour (not that I intend a 40. 167

with red curtains, and the arms of their fami-

hanging at the pendant cordon of theirs gata
mantle. 'Then, they take Horſe ; and their cam

gives it to the King, who f puts it on over-+ Turf
thwart the Knight, and orders the two ſenior cingit-

Knights,

De Moribus
Gorman”rumes

b. 1. c. 22.

= * Vpotem.

: Epiſt. 94,

l

3 |
xliv WW. ccxlv

The Degrees

of England. ecxIvi

ſaid,
1807.

with a knot of white ſilk (the emblem of a
clear and propitious day) in the form of a
croſs, and a hood upon the left ſhoulder. Thus
much may ſuffice, upon a ſubject which my
Deſign does not oblige me to treat of parti-
cularly. _ .

Now, of the Knights ſimply ſo call'd, with-
out other addition; an Order, tho' loweſt at
this day, yet of greateſt antiquity and honour
in the original Inſtitution. For, as the Ro-
mans, whoſe habit was a goun, gave the ſame
to all, as they arriv'd at the ſtate of manhood;
ſo our anceſtors the Germans preſented their
youth with arms, as ſoon as they were found
of ability to manage them. This we learn

De Moribus from Cornelius Tacitus: No one by cuſtom was to
German rum. e arms, till the city judg d him able to bear them.

Ricuclt

u.

2
;
3
4
.
1 q

ante

t,

| : Epiſt. 94,

W + Militis col-

Aud then, in the public aſſembly, either one of the
Princes, or the father, or ſome Relation, honour'd
him with a ſhield and javelin. This is the Gown
with them, this the firſt honour confer d upon their
youth : before this, they are only members of a ja-
mily ; from that time, of the Commonwealth.
Now, ſeeing theſe military Youths were
call'd in their language Kxechts, as they are
alſo in our's; I am ot opinion, that both the
name and the inſtitution are to be deriv'd
from thence. This was the primitive and
moſt plain method of creating Knights ; that
which was in uſe among the Longobards, and
the Franks, and our fore-fathers; all, deſcen-

b. 1, c. 22.ded from the Germans. Paulus Diaconus tells

us of a cuſtom among the Longobards, That the
King's ſon is not permitted to dine with his father,
til arms are beſtow'd on him by the King of ſome
other Nation. And we find in the Hiſtory of
the Franks, that their Kings gave arms to their
ſons and others, and girt them with a ſword;
and Malmsbury ſays, that our King Alfred

© * Yotem, confer'd Knighthood upon his nephew Athel-

ſtan, a youth of extraordinary hopes; giving
him a ſcarlet mantle, a belt ſet with jewels,
and a Saxon {word with a golden ſcabbard.
Afterwards, when Religion had gain'd ſo
great reſpect in the world, that nothing was
thought to be done well or ſucceſstully, unleſs
Religious men had the firſt hand in it ; our
Anceſtors (a little betore the coming-in of the
Normans) were wont to receive the Sword
from them. This, Ingulphus (who liv'd at
that time) tells us. He who was to be conſecrated
to lawtul warfare, did the evening before make
confeſſion of his fins, with contrition, to ſome Biſhop,
Abbot, Monk, or Prieſt ; and being abſolv'd, ſpent
that night in the Church, in order to hear divine
ſervice next day; then, he offer'd his ſword upon
the altar, and after the Goſpel, the Prieſt put it (as
then hallowed) with a bleſſing, f upon the Knight's
ſhoulder ; and fo, having received the ſacrament, he
became a lawtul Kaight. Nor was this cuſtom
preſently diſus'd by the Normans. For thus
_ John of Salisbury in his Polyeraticon:
here was a cuſtom, that on the day when any one
was Knighted, he went to the Church, and laying
his ſword upon the altar, offer d it there; by this
folema profeſſion, devoting himſelf to the ſervice of
the Altar, aud alſo obliging himſelf to be ever rea-
dy to aſſiſt it with his ſword ; that is, to do his du-
ty to it. Petrus Bleſenfis alſo : The young men
at this day receive their fwords from the altar, that
they may thereby profeſs that they are ſons of the
Church, aud that they take their ſwords, for the
honour of the Prieſthood, the protection of the poor,
the puniſhment of malefattors, and the Liberties of
their Country : Yet thefe good ends of the Inſtitution
are little remember'd in our days; for, from the
ver) time of their Knighthood, they rebel againſt the |

i

Lord's azointed, and make havock of the revenues
the Church.
As tor the cuſtom of having a ſword girt
on them, it 1s without doubt deriv'd from the
diſciplin of the Romans. For, as they thought
ir unlawtul to fight an enemy before they had
taken the military oath with their ſwordCic. I. 1.
drawn; fo our Anceſtors believ'd they could Offic. de Ca.
not /awfuly go to war, before they were con- n tlio.
lecrated by this ceremony to the ſervice. And
in taat manner, we find William Ruſus King
ot England made a Soldier in form, by Arch-
biſhop Lanfranck. Yet this Cuſtom by de-
grees grew into diſuſe ; from the time, as In-
gulphus ſays, that it was jeſted on and explo-
ded by the Normans ; and a Synod was held
at Weſtminſter in the year 1102, whereby it
was decreed, that Abbots ſhould ut Create Rrights.
Yer ſome interpret this, that Abbets fhoull not
grant Church-lands to be held by Knigut-ſervice.
Afterwards, it became a cuſtom for Kings
to ſend their ſons to neighbouring Princes, to
receive Knighthood at their hands, Thus,
our Henry the ſecond was ſent to David King
of Scots; and Malcolm King of Scots to our
Henry the ſecond on the ſame errand ; and fo,
our Edward the firſt was ſent to the King of
Caſtile, to receive military arms, or the wirilia ;
tor ſuch was the form and ityle in the Crea-
tions of that time. Then alſo, to the ſword
and girdle, were added the gilt ſpurs, as a
further ornament ; and hence they are call'd at
this day Milites, and Equites, aurati. The pri-
vilege of a ſeal was alſo granted them; for
till they were created Knights, they might nor
uſe a ſeal; as I infer trom the Abingdon-
Book, which has theſe Words. Fhich writing
Richard Earl of Cheſter intended to ſeal with his
mother Ermentrud*s ſeal ; jor (being not as yet
Knighted) all his letters were ſcal 'd with his mo-
ther's ſeal. In the following age, it is pretty
apparent, that Knights were made upon ac-
count of their Eſtates; for they who had a
great Knight's-fee (that is, if we may credit
old Records, * 689 acres of land) claim'd the“ Others 800.
honour of Knighthood, as thereby entit/'d to
it. Nay, in Henry the third's reign, whoever
had the yearly revenue of fifteen pounds in
lands, was compell'd in a manner to receive this
dignity ; fo that the title was become rather
a burthen, than an honour. [a the year 1256 Hi. Minor.
the King iſſu d a Proclamation, whereby it was or- Matthei Paris.
der d and declar d throughout the Realm, that who-
ever had * fifteen | Librats of land or above, ſhould, An entire
be Knighted, for increaſe of the military ſtrength 974 5 12
England, as it was in Italy; and that they uo terre.
would not or could not ſupport the honour of Knight-
hood, ſhould compound for a diſpenſation. This is
the Reaſon why we fo often find in the Re-
cords, For * — of Knighthood, A. of N. J. H. Reſpectu.
Sc; and ſuch Preſentments as theſe by the Ju-
rors, R. of St. Laurence holds an entire fee, and
is of full age, and not yet Knighted ; and therefore
amerc d. To that time, and ſomewhat longer
(unleſs I am much deceiv'd) in all our Law-
forms, where a Jury of twelve is empannell'd
to be judge of fact; he who had a Knights-
fee, was ſtil'd Miles, or Knight, and thoſe
who were created by the King, Milites gladio
cincli. |
And in thoſe days, when the King made a
Knight, as the ſame Matthew Paris relates,
he ſat in ſtate upon his throne, and in robes of gold
of the moſt coſtly * Bawadkin, with a little crown of * BawJyino,
gold upon his Head; and to every Knight he al-
loud 100 8. for f Equipage. And not only theft Harnefia-
King, but the Earls alſo, confer'd Rome tet

I

— — —

— — — — — —

— — =
Wy — 0 — —
—

ccxlvii

The Degrees of England.

—

CCXlyijj

hood, in that age. For the ſame Author has
told us, how the Earl of Gloceſter, having
proclaim'd a Tournament, Knighted his bro-
ther Miliam; and how Simon de Montefort,
Earl of Leiceſter, confer'd the ſame Honour
upon Gilbert de Clare. And ſo it was in
France; as appears from the ſtyle of the Pa-
tents, whereby any one who has procur'd letters to
that purpoſe, is allow'd to be created by what Knight
he P ar. From that time, none have receiv'd
this honour in England, but either from the
King himſelt, or the Prince of Wales (permit-
ted by his Father ſo to do) or from the Gene-
ral of the army as the King's Lieutenant ;
and that, upon account of ſome brave Actions
either done or expected, or elſe for ſervices in
the Civil Adminiſtration.

And this was, without queſtion, a wiſe
contrivance of our Kings, when they had no
more Fees to give away. For nothing could be
more effectual to encourage Bravery , and lay
an obligation upon their beſt and moſt deſer-
ving Subjects, ſuch as were nobly deſcended,

and men of great eſtates ; than, as a teſtimony

of their favour, to beſtow upon them the ho-
nourable title of Knights; which in old time
was a name of Dignity only. For when the
Prince confer'd it deliberately, and upon me-
rit, it was thought a high reward and favour,
and look'd on as a badge of the greateſt ho-
nour. They who were thus Knighted, eſteem'd
it the price of Virtue, a laſting honour and
memorial to their family, and the great glory
ot their Name. So that it is ſaid by our Law-

Miles a name yers, that Miles is a Name of dignity, but not

of dignity,

1306.

Baro. For à Baron in ancient times (if he
was not alſo a Knight) was written barely by
his Chriſtian name and the name of his fami-
ly, without any addition, except that of Do-
minus, which is likewiſe applicable to Knights.
But the name Knight ſeems to have been an
additional title of honour to the greateſt digni-
ties; ſeeing Kings, Dukes, Marquiſſes, Earls,
and Barons, were ambitious both of the name
and dignity. And here I cannot but inſert,
what Matth. Horilegus writes, concerning the
creation of Knights in Edward the firſt's time.
The King, to enlarge his Expedition into Scotland,
publiſh'd a Proclamation throughout England, that
whoever was by hereditary 2 bound to be a

Knight, or had wherewithal to ſupport that dignity,

ſhould be preſent at Weſtminſter at the feaſt of
Whitſontide, there to receive all Kuightly accoutre-

i Equitatura, ments (ſave f Equipage) out of the King's Ward-

robe. n there aſſembled thither 3 00
young Gentlemen, the ſons of Earls, Barons, and

* Diſtribue- Knights, and * had purple liveries, filk-ſcarves,

bantur pur-
pura.

{| Cyclades.

4 Novurm
Templum.

and || robes richly embroidered with gold, beſtowed
upon them, according to their ſeveral qualities.
And becauſe the King's Palace, though very large,
was too little to receive the Gun they cut down
the apple-trees at the f new Temple in London,
and ras'd the walls, and ſet up pavilions and tents,
wherein the young Gentlemen might dreſs themſelves,
in garments embroider'd with gold ; and that night,

* Suas vigi- as many of them as the Temple would hold, * per-

lias faciebant. rm d their Watching therein. Bat

f Conventus
l«bilatio.

e Prince
of Wales, by his father's order, together with the
chief of them, watch'd in the Church of Weſtminſter.
And ſo great was the ſound of trumpets, minſtrels,
and acclamations of joy there, that the + chaunting
of the Convent could not be heard from Quire to Quire.
The day following, the King knighted his ſon in his
Palace, and gave him the Dukedom of Aquitain.
The Prince being thus knighted, went to the Church
of Weſtminſter, that he might confer the ſame
honour upon his Companions. And ſuch was the

preſs and throng about the high Altar, that __

Knights were kil d, and many fainted, though eve-
ry Knight had at leaſt three or four Soldiers to con-
duft and defend him. The Prince himſelf, the
throng was ſo great, was forc'd to knight them upon
the high Altar, having made his way thither by

his * warlike Guards, At preſent, he who is*
7ios belief,

to be knighted, kneels down, and in that po-
ſture is lightly ſtruck upon the Shoulder with
a naked {word by the Prince, ſaying thus in
French, Sois Chevalier au nom de Dieu, i. c. Be
thou a Knight in the name of God : and then he
adds, Avancez Chevalier, 1. e. Riſe up Sir Knight.

What relates further to this Order; how
famous, how glorious, and how eminent a re-
ward it was accounted by men of honour in
former days; how Religious they were in the
point of Fidelity and Plain-dealing, when it
was a ſufficient ſurety it they promis'd »po
the Honour of a Knight ; how liberal and gene-
rous they were ; and what Contribution was
due from every Knight's-fee, when the King's
eldeſt fon was honour'd with this Dignity ;
all theſe things I leave to other Writers. As

Per ders,

alſo, when they had committed a crime that Degr1g,,;,
was capital, how they were ſtrip'd of theirof Krigh,

Ornaments ; their military belt ungirt, their
ſword taken from them, their ſpurs cut off

with a hatchet, their gloves taken away, f and Clergy;

their arms inverted ; Juſt as it is in degrading

thoſe who have liſted themſelves in the Spiri-
tual warfare ; the Eccleſiaſtical ornaments, the
book, chalice, and ſuch like, are all taken
from them.

I leave it likewiſe to be conſider'd, whether
theſe Knights have been by ſome rightly ſtyl'd

tio ime, 1

Knights Bacchallers, and whether Bacchallers were Knights?
not a middle Order between Knights and chelo.

Eſquires. For ſome Records run, The names j, 4,1, f.
of the Milites, Baccalaurei, & Valeiti, of the Earl 51 H. 3.

of Gloceſter. Hence, ſome will have Bacchallers
to be ſo call'd quaſi Bas Chevaliers; though
others derive the name trom Battailer, a French
word which ſignifies to fight. Let them ex-
amin further, whether the honour of Knight-
hood (which formerly, when very rare, was
ſo very glorious, and the eſtabliſh'd reward of
virtue) becomes not mean and little, as it
grows common, and is proſtituted to every
one who has the vanity to deſire it. Emi-
lius Probus formerly complain'd of the ſame
thing, in a like caſe, among the Romans.

Next to the Knights, in order, were the Eſquires

Armigeri, ESQUIRES, call'd alſo Scutiferi,
Homines ad arma, and among the Goths Schil-
por, from bearing the Shield; as heretofore, a-
mong the Romans, Scutari j: Who had that
name, either from their coat of Arms, which
they bore as badges of their nobility ; or be-

cauſe they | carry'd the armour of Princes and; 45 n

2 men.
erv'd by two of theſe; they carry'd his hel-
met and buckler, and were his inſeparable
companions ; holding lands of the Knight,
their Lord, in Eſcuage, as he held of the King
by Knights-ſervice. Eſquires are at this day
of five ſorts; for thoſe I juſt now ſpoke ot,
are out of uſe. The Chief, are they, who are
choſen to attend the King's Perſon. Next
them, are the eldeſt ſons of Knights, and their
eldeſt ſons ſucceſſively. In the third place,
the eldeſt ſons of the younger ſons of Barons
and of others of the Greater Nobility : And
when ſuch heir-male fails, the title dies with
him. The fourth in order, are they whom
the King himſelf, together with a title, ho-
nours with arms, or makes Eſquires; adorning

| them

For anciently, every Knight waSerant,

.

3
=
-
1
=
fn
2
1 24
.'
—_
WW
A
1
* 3
4 *
.
>
A 8
_
IX
A
»
bo
=
3
=
of
*
=
„
=
7
*
.
1
*
=.
4
_ .
C-
©
2 .
2
*

n.

1 * * = 8
2 7 ” "XS N 2 *
„ I” bet > nes © „ N 9 nn...
- ; * * een
: N

„
ccxlix

& aid,
"fl, I 607»

— 4 4&4 Wi © ww” £- & x

de X!r4.
ellic 0. l

Ihts B.
Irs,

i Pa
I. 3.

Aren

FT
ft,

ccxlix

& aid,

oo OO PIETY

*

N

© aw
ad 20S 24,
N

cem with a collar of S. S. of ſilver, and a pair

"fl, 1607»

of filver ſpurs : whence at f this day in the
welt parts of the Kingdom they are call'd
I//bite-ſpurs,..to diſtinguiſh them from Knights, |
or Equites Aurati, who have ſpurs of gold: and
of theſe, the eldeſt ſons only can bear the title.
In the fifth place, they are reputed Eſquires, |
who are in any great Office in the Govern- |
ment, or ſerve the King in any honourable
ſtation. ig

But this Name of Eſquire, which in ancient
times was a name of Office only, firſt crept
in among the titles of honour, as far as I have!
obſerv'd, in the reign of Richard the ſe-

cond.

;

— ——

0 *
- — OT Py a. Dae dad. dt. at * "LEP *

be Degrees England. cel

GENTLEMEN, are either thoſe in gene- Gentlemen,
ral who are deſcended of good families; or

they whom Virtue or Fortune have rais'd a-
bove the common level. CITIZENS, or Bur-Cititens

74155 are ſuch, as are in publick oſſices in their

everal Towns or Cities, or are elected to fit
in Parliament.
The common people or YEOMEN, are Veomen, Ge-

ſuch as ſome ſtyle gen; the Law calls them men, in Sax+

homines legales, i. e. freeholders ; thoſe who can , * ©:
ſpend at leaſt 1 7 ings of their own, yearly. —
; * LABOURERS are ſuch as labour for wa-Labourerg
ges or profit; Artizans, Mechanicks, Smiths, Opificet,
Carpenters, &c. who were term'd capite cenfi, and
Proletarii, among the Romans. XZ

LY
-
A.

i THE

0h ad

PERS ea... 4 ——
— — 5 — _
n — —— * 0 * w
*

a * W 1, p G — ammnuckn — 4
— "= — 8 >
* 9
- oY N * >
* — *

« 23
*

*

—

—
-

* . py *
* — — — — ——
— — 3 — ———— — — —

Parliament.

Stat. 1. Georg.

888887

3 | M05 e:

y N , v N (1 7 1 Et
4 N J WY : 4 Y x *
DD : 2 8 7 YT

T HE

LAW-COURTS

O

s S for the Tribunals or Courts of
Jie in England, there are
BF three ſeveral ſorts of them;

W ſome Spiritual, others 7.
ral, and one mixt; which laſt
I is the greateſt and by far the
S&F moſt honourable, call'd the
Parliament ; a French word of no great antiqui-
ty. Our Saxon Anceſtors nam'd it Prrenagemor,
x is, anaſſembly of the wiſe men, and Fepzonrr,
or Council, and Micil 5ynod (from the greek
word Synod) a great meeting. The Latin writers
of that and the next age, call it Commune Cun-
cilium, Curia altiſſima, Generale Placitum, Curia
Magna, Magnatum Conventus, Præſentia Regis, Præ-
latorum, Procerumque collettorum, Commune totius
regni concilium, &c. And as Livy calls the ge-
neral Council of Ætolia, Panetolium, ſo this of
our's may be term'd my properly Pananglium.
For it conſiſts of the King, the Clergy, the
Nobility, and Knights and Burgeſſes elected;
or, to expreſs my ſelf more plainly in Law-
language, the King, the Lords Spiritual and Tem-
poral, and the Commons, who repreſent the body
of the Nation. This Court is not held at any
ſet time, but is call'd at the King's pleaſure,
when matters of great difficulty and importance
are to be conſider d, for the general benefit of
the State; and then again, is diſſolv'd when he
pleaſes: [{Qnly by a late Statute, he is now

ENGLAND. |

< 38. Before, Obliged, in Law, to ſummon a new Parliament
bys w. & M. once every ſeven years, at ,leaſt :)] It has a

three.

ſupreme and over-ruling Authority in making,
confirming, repealing, and explaining Laws,
reverſing Attainders, determining cauſes of
more than ordinary difficulty between Subject
and Subject; and, to be ſhort, in all things
which either concern the State in general, or
any particular Perſon.

King's Court, Immediately after the coming-in of the Nor-

mans, and for ſome time before, the next to
this was the King's Court, which was held in the
King's Palace, and follow'd the King where-
ever he went. For in the King's Palace there
was a peculiar place for the Chancellor or Clerks ;
who had the iſſuing- out of Writs, and the or-
dering of the Seal; and likewiſe tor Judges,

„
*
—
”
'

Aae ARR Lia Onion
PETE PEEL TED

F

who had not only power to hear pleas of the
Crown, but all Cauſes between private perſons.
There was alſo an Exc for the Treaſurer
and his Receivers; who had charge of the
King's Revenue. Theſe, each of them, were
accounted members of the King's family, and
had their meat and cloaths of the King.
Hence, Gotzelin in the life of S. Edward, calls
them Palatii Caufidici ; and Joannes Sarisburi-
enſis, Curiales. But beſides theſe, and above
them, in the Adminiſtration of Juſtice, was
the Juſtitia Anglia, Prima Juſtitia, Juſtitiarius
Anglia, and Juſtitiarius Anglia Capitalis, i. e. The Clit
the Chief Fuſtice of England; who was con- ulis.
ſtituted, with a yearly ſtipend of a thouſand
marks, by a Patent in this form: The King to
all the Archbiſhops, Biſhops, Abbots, Priors, Counts,
Barons, Viſcounts, Foreſters, and all other his faith-
ful ſubjetts of England, Greeting. Whereas for
our own preſervation, and the tranquillity of our
Kingdom, and for the adminiſtration of juſtice to all
and ſingular the Subjects of this Realm, we have
conſtituted our truſty and well beloved Philip Baſſet,
Juſtice of England, during our Royal will and plea-
Jure ; we do enjoyn and require you by the faith and
allegiance you owe us, that in all things relating to
the ſaid Office, and the preſervation of our Peace and
the peace of our Kingdom, you be aiding and aſſiſting
to him, ſo long as he ſhall continue in the ſaid Office.
Witneſs the King, &c.

Bur in the reign of Henry the third, it was
enacted, that the Common-Pleas ſhould not follow
the King's Court, but be held in ſome certain
place ; and therefore a little after that, the
Chancery, the Pleas of the Crown, and the Ex-
on were remov'd from the King's Court,
and eſtabliſh'd a- part in fix d and certain places;
as ſome (how truly I know not) have told us.

Having  premis'd thus much; I will add 4 Stat
ſomewhat concerning theſe Courts and others Chamber,
that ſprung from them, as they ſtand at this cn

day. And ſeeing ſome of them are Courts of 1 0

po CO a : zu the Council
and *another of Equity,viz. the Chancery ||: I will — Nas

have learnt concerning each. and int

The North, G

4a
L
4
1
.
1
I
P
©
.
5

zz

4
I

=

13

1
IJ
5

„ *
__

_ _

.—

k

4
"x
=
*

5 *
*
*
Ig

=
*

3
1
E
|
=
3
Y
5
=

4
=
1
AH
4
8
43
*%
4
*
1
—
=
.
=
5
4
3

* 8
4
be
=

4 2
3s

e
*

Law, namely, the King -Bench, Common-Pleas,|TheCound | :
Exchequer, Aſſizes, f and the Court of Admiralty ; Requelb 1

briefly inſert under the ſeveral heads, what I. d W |

2 2. Ge 4 45 i es Ve .
* e A
2 2 * £4

Chr PF

2 | 1
; PA 21 n 25

| : |
| "> e
.. 9 „s,

EY

75 2 722273 — 477. Fo
Pt. 7 Jeers, # Le fon

how +45 „s Hilo He Ae. Plss Ss. [ f
Aran hk (a. 22 *

—
- ——
— — a. Se — =
a -
cs

— a=
Wo wa 4.4

a
— —

v—— —— . . — AGE
A .
—

2

8

Aces

of  A_£ 1 1 n

cliii

„

T he Law-Courts of England. ”

9 1 © =
#. my —

1 1

0 King's

och. "

Four, C.

mon
18.

rour, C.

Þchequer.

Y
-
2
4

oer or

Wn, 1607

of the Summons, the Deputy-Chamberlains, two

: | C 77 4,

lains, a Vice-treaſurer, Clerk of the Tallies, Clerk of
the Pelli, four Tellers, two Joyners of the Tallies,
two Deputy-Chamberlains, the Clerk of the Taliies,

Nees Itine-

four
gers broad. Under it, is ſpread a cloath of b
ſtripes diſtant from each other about a foot, or a ſpan.

ſurer i Remembrancer, the Clerk of the Pipe, the

cf all Eccleſiaſtical Benefices ſhould be paid to

The King Bench, ſo call'd becauſe the Kings
themſelves were wont to prefide in that Court,
takes cognizance of all pleas of the Crown,
and many other matters relating to the King,
and weal-publick ; it has power to examin and
reverſe the Judgments of the Common-pleas.
The Judges there, beſides the King himſelf
when he is pleas'd to be preſent, are, the
Chief Juſtice of England, and f three others,
or more, as the King pleaſes.

The Common-Pleas has this name, becauſe the
pleas between ſubje& and ſubjeR are by the Com-
mon law triable therein. The Judges are the
Chief Juſtice of the Common-Pleas, and | three o-
thers, or more, to aſſiſt him. Officers belong-
ing to this Court, are the Keeper of the Writs,
three Protonotaries, and ſeveral others of an in-
ferior rank.

The Exchequer deriv'd that name from a table
at which they ſat. For ſo Gervaſius Tilburi-
enſis tells us, who liv d in the year 1160. The
Exchequer ts a ſquare table about ten foot long, and
froe broad; contriv'd like a dining-rable, to
round. On every fide, it has a ledge about

and no other colour, bought in Eaſter-term, with

A little after : This Court, by report, has been from
the very Conquelt of the Realm by King William ;
the defign and model of it being taken from the Ex-
chequer beyond Sea. this, all matters belong-
ing to the King's Revenue, are heard. The
Judges are, the Lord Treaſurer of England, the
Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Chief Baron, and
+ three other Barons. The Officers of this
Court * are, The King's Remembrancer, the Trea-

Comptroler of the Pipe, the five Auditors of the an-
cient Revennes, the Foreign Oppoſer, Clerk of the
Eſtreats, Clerk of the Pleas, the Marſhal, the Clerk

Secondaries in the office of the King's Remembrancer,
two Secondaries in the office of the Treaſurer's Remem-
brancer, two Secondaries * Pipe, four other Clerks
in ſeveral Offices, &c. the other part of the
Exchequer, call'd f the Receipts, Two Clamb&=

the Keeper of the Treaſury, four Purſevants ordinary,
two Scribes, Cc (a). The Officers alſo of the
Tenths and Firſt-fruits belong to this Court. For
when the Pope's authority was ſuppreſs'd, and
an Act paſs'd, that the Tenths and Firſt-fruits

the King, theſe Officers were Inſtituted. ich
Revenue hath ever fince been enjoy'd by the
Crown, until our late Gracious Soveraign Queen
Anne, out of a tender Concern for Religion,
and the Eſtabliſhed Church, gave it in perpe-
tuity, for the augmentation of the Mainte-
nance of the Poorer Clergy ; which pious Gift was
A 3 Parliament, in the ſecond year of

r Re

Belides theſe three Royal Courts of Judica-
ture; for the ſpeedy execution of Juſtice, and
to eaſe the ſubject of much labour and expence,
Henry the ſecond ſent ſome of theſe Judges, and

were call'd Juſtices Itinerant, or ces in Eyre.
Theſe had juriſdiction as well in Pleas of the
Crown as in common cauſes, within the Coun-
ties aſſign'd them. For that King, as Mat-
2 — ſays, by 3 of his ſon and

e Bi appointe ices in al parts
of the King dow ; in each part Ard ini 2
oath, to do every man right and juſtice. This In-
ſtirution expir'd at length in Edward the
third's time; but was in ſome meaſure reviv d
of A& of Parliament a little after. For, the

unties being divided into ſo many Circuits, x
two of the King's Juſtices go thoſe Circuits
twice every year, for the trial of priſoners or
Gaol-delivery. Hence, in Law-latin, they are
call*d 7 Gaola deliberandæ They are
likewiſe to take cognizance of e no-
vel diſſein and of ſome other thi from
which they are call'd Juſtices of Aſſjrze;) and
are alſo to try all iſſues between party and par-
ty, in any of the King's three great Courts,
by f their Peers. Hence they are commonly + Per Paret.
call'd Fuſtices TIE prius ; from the Writs di-
rected to the Sheriff, which have the words Ni
prius in them.
the Rugs Coon amber, or 8 the — of The Sear-

ing's Council, took cognizance of all Chamber,

matters criminal, Perjuries, Impoſtures, Cheats, * is taken
Exceſſes, 8c. This Court t was, in Age, the molt « Ties, C.
ancient, and in Dignity, the moſt honourable, 4 1s, C.
of them all. For it ſeems to be as early, as
Appeals from the Subjects to their Sovereign,
and the birth and riſe of the King's Council.
The Judges || were perſons of the greateſt ho- Are, C.
nour and eminence ; being of the King's Privy-
Council. It had the name of Star-Chamber, ever
ſince it was held in a Chamber of that name at
Weſtminſter adorn'd with Stars; which f had f Has, C.
been long ſet a-part for that uſe. For, in an
AR of Parliament in Edward the third's time,
we find Conſeil en le Chambre des Eſtoielles, pres de
la receipte al Weſtminſter, i. e. The Council in
the Star- chamber, near the Receipt at Weſt-
minſter. The Authority and Juriſdiction of this
Court was ſo much — * and confirm'd in
Parliament by that wiſe Prince, Henry the
ſeventh ; that ſome have falſly aſcrib'd the In-
ſtitution of it to him. The Judges of this
Court“ were, the Lord Chancellor of England, the * are, C.
Lord Treaſurer of England, the Lord Prefident of
the Council, the Lord Keeper of the Privy-Seal, and
all of the King's Council, whether perſons
ſpirirual or temporal; alſo ſuch of the Par-
liamentary Barons as the King t thought fit to f 54,1 think,
call; with the two Chief Juſtices, or two other C.
Judges in their abſence. The Officers || were || Are, C.
the Clerk of the Council, the Clerk of the Writs,
and of the Proceſs of the Council of Star-thamber, &c.
Cauſes in this Court were not 7.0 gw * Are, C.
Pares according to the Common-Law, but after
the method of the Civil-Law. | Bur this Court,
having been guilty of great Abuſes (as was de-
clave in Parliament) was entirely taken away,
by a Statute made in the fixteenth year of King Cap. x.
Chartes the firſt. ] |

The Court of f Wards and Liveries (ſo call'd The Court x
from Wards or || Minors,whoſe cauſes * were here of Wards.

away,

others, every year, itito each County ; Who

2 oY

2 hy was inſtituted by Henry the eighth. 1
ereas before, their Cauſes were heard in the y Pi,
Courts * Are, C.

F — ——

(a) The preſent Liſt of Officers, as deliver'd by a good hand, is as follows : King's Remembrancer, Deputy

King's Remembrancer, eight Attorneys, Treaſurer's Remembrancer, five Attorneys, of Pleas, Maſter and
four Attorneys, two Auditors of the Impreſt, Auditor, two Auditors of the Revenues, Deputy- Auditor,
Clerk of the Pipe, Comptroller of the 2 „Maſter of the firſt Fruits and Comptroller, Deputy Re-

membrancer of the firſt Fruits, Clerk of the Eſtreatz, Receiver, two Chamberlains, two Deputy-Chamberlains, 3

Chief Uſher, four Under-Uſhers, &c.

—
2 — _—
thn —

— K ů — —dƷ — YR *

* ta

The Law-Courts of England.

cclyj

Courts ot Chancery and Exchequer. For, by an old
Cuſtom (derived from Normandy, and not, as ſome
write, inſtituted by Henry III.) when any one
t died holding lands of the King in capite by
Knight's ſervice, both the heir, and the eſtate,
with the revenues of it, f were in Ward to the
King, till he compleated the age of one and
twenty, and then he f might ſue out his livery,
The Judge in this Court, || was the Maſter-
General ; under him, a Superviſor of the Live-
ries, an Attorney-General, a Receiver-General, an
Auditor, a Clerk of the Liveries, a Clerk of the
Court, forty Feudaries, and a Meſſenger. But
this Court, with all the Powers thereunto be-
longing, was taken away and utterly aboliſhed,
by a Statute made in Parliament in the twelfth
year of King Charles the ſecond. |
In atter-ages, two other Courts were Inſti-
tuted for Correfting of Errors; one, for thoſe of
the Exchequer, the other for thoſe of the King's-
Bench. The Judges of the firſt, are, the Chan-
cellor, and the Treaſurer of England, taking ſuch
of the Judges to their aſſiſtance as they ſhall
think fit; thoſe of the latter, are the Judges of
the Commonu-Pleas, and the Barons of the Ex-
chequer.
The Court of The Court of Admiralty has juriſdiction in
Admiralty, maritime affairs ; and is adminiſter'd by the
* Locumte- Admiral of England, his Lieutenant, a Judge,
TW two Clerks, a Servant of the Court, and the Vice-
Admirals, Now, for the Courts of Equity.
The Court of The Chancery takes its name from the Chan-
Chancery. cellor, a Title of no great honour under the
old Roman Emperors, as we learn from opiſ-
cs. Ar preſent, it is a name of the greateſt dig-
nity, and the place of Chancellor, the highelt
honour in the State. Caſſiodorus derives the
word 4 cancellis, i. e. rails, or Baliſters, becauſe
+ Intra ſecretathey examine matters t in a private apartment
Cancellorum. enclos'd with rails, ſuch as the Latins call'd
Epiſt . Lib. cancelli. Conſider, ſays he, by what name you are
call d. What you do within the rails cannot be a
ſecret : your doors are tranſparent, your cloyſters lye
open, your gates are all windows. Hence it plain-
ly appears, that rhe Chancellor ſat expos'd to
every one's view, within the rails or cancels ; fo
that his nate ſeems to be deriv'd from them.
Now, it being the bulineſs of that Miniſter
(who is the mouth, the eye, and the ear, of the
* Cancelatim. Prince,) to ſtrike or daſh with croſs lines, * lat-
ticenike, ſuch writs or judgments as are againſt
law or prejudicial to the State, which 1s not
improperly call'd Cancelling ; ſome think the
word Chancellor was deduc'd from thence,
And thus we find it in a modern Gloſlary : 4
Chancellor 16 he, whoſe office it is to inſpet# the
writings, anſwers, and orders of the Emperor;
to cancel thoſe that are wrong, and ſign thoſe that are
right. Nor is that of Polidore Virgil true,
namely, that William the Conqueror inſtituted a
College of Scribes, to write Letters-patents; and
nam'd the Maſter thereof, CHANCELLOR:
for it is evident, that Chancellors were in Eng-
land before the Conqueſt.

How great the honour and authority of Chancellor
is at this day, is ſo very well knovn, that Ineed not
enlarge upon it: Toſhew how great it was formerly,

Vill ſubjoyn a word or two from an ancient Author.

Robert. np The dignity of the Chancellor of England, is this ;
vi under to be reputed the ſecond perſon in the Kingdom, and
Hen. 2. next to the King : with the} King's ſeal (whereof he
+ Altera parte hag the keeping) to ſeal his own Injunttions ; to have
illi Regit. the ordering of the King's Chapel; to have the cu-
ſtody of all Archbiſhopricks, Biſhopricks, Abbies, and
Baronies,vacant and fallen into the King's hands; to

be preſent at the King's Council, and to repair thither

without ſummons ; to ſeal all things by the hand of

Cap. xxiv.

a Clerk who carries the King's ſeal; and to have ay
matters diſpos'd and order d with his advice. Alſo,
* that by the grace of God, leading a juſt and up- b. F
right Life, he may (if he will himſelf ) die Arch kante
12 or Biſhop : Whereupen it is, that the CHAN Dei 2
CELLORSHIP is not to be bought. Mi vie

The manner of making a Chancellor (to ob-riar,
ſerve this by the way) was, in Henry the 4%
cond's time, by hanging the Great Seal about ** Fic,
the neck of the perſon choſen to that office,” .
But in Henry the ſixth's reign, the method was
thus, as appears from the Records: Upon the Gu,
death of the Chancellor of England, three great
Seals, one of gold and the other two of filver,
which were kept by the Chancellor, are, immediate-
ly after | his deceaſe, lock d up in a wooden cheſt,
and ſeal'd by the Lords prejent, and ſo conveyd
into the Treaſury. From thexte they are brought
to the King, who in the preſence of the Nobility
delivers the ſame into the hands of the ſucceedirg
Chancellor, (having taken an oath before him,
that he will well and faithfully adminiſter that
Office ;) firſt, the great filver ſeal, next that of gold,
and laſtly, the other of filver. After he has receiv d
them, he puts them into the cheſt again, and ſends
them home ſeaF'd with his own ſeal ; where, before
certain of the Nobility, he cauſes the King's Letters
Patents and Writs to be ſcal d with them. Men a
Chancellor is diſcharg'd, he delivers up the three ſeals
into the K ing hands, in the preſence of his Nobles ;
firſt, the ſeal of Gold, then the broad ſeal of ſilver,
and next, the other ſilver one of a leſs ice. At this
day, only one ſeal is deliver'd to the Chancellor;
nor is there any mention ot theſe three ſeals,
bur in the reign of Henry the ſixth. In proces
of time, much honour and authority was added
to the office of Chancellor by ſeveral Acts of
Parliament ; eſpecially, ſince all that rigour and
ſtrictneſs crept into the Common Law, and the
Pleadings, by niceties to a word, became fo er-
ſnaring, that a Court of Equity was found ne-
ceſſary: and this was committed to the Chan-
cellor, to judge according to the rules of Equi-
ty, and to moderate the rigour of juſtice, which
is oft-· times Oppreſſion. 'There preſide in this
Court, the Lord Chancellor of England, and
twebve Maſters. of Chancery, as Aſſeſſors, the chief
whereof is the Keeper of the Rolls belonging to
that Court, and ther ce cali'd Magiſter Rotulorum,
or Maſter of the Rolls, There f are alſo many f Am.
other Officers belonging to this Court; ſome
concern d about the Great-Scal, namely, the
Clerk of the Croun, the Clerk of the Hannaver, A
Sealer, A Chauff-wax, A Comptroller of the Hanna-
per, twenty four Curfitors, and a Clerk of the Sub-
penamwrits, Others concerned in the Bills ex-
hibited there; a Protonotary, the Six Clerks or
Attorneys of the Court, and a Regiſter. There
are alſo the three Clerks of the petit bag, Clerk
of the Preſentations, Clerk of the Faculties, Clerk
for examining Letters-Patents, Clerk for Diſmiſ-
fions > Ke. .

There f was another Court which ſprung out The Co"?
of the King's Privy-Council, call'd the Court of Rev

; TH + Is, G

Requeſts, trom the addreſſes of Petitioners de-
liver'd there; where private cauſes || were heard || Are, C
as in Chancery, if firſt preſented to the King
or his privy Council ; and ſometimes otherwiſe.
In this Court, buſineſs f was adminiſter d by t ©
the Maſters of the Requeſts, and a Clerk, or Re-
giſter, with two or three Attorneys. As for
thoſe Councils [ which were heretofore] held in
the Marches of Wales, and in the North, I will
treat of them, God willing, in their proper
places. 8

The Chief Spiritual Courts, are; The Synod, Spirit
which is call'd the Convocation of the Clergy, C

and

WY

„* Now, above
ts entys

4 |
* de Court of
Nudience.
be Court of
Huediia -
Wy: bas
Ne Court of

BF -cultics. /
0 Prafeiius. 7

=_
1 N
A

The Law-Courts of England.

celviii

and is always held at the ſame time with the
Parliament ; and the Provincial Synods, in each
Province.

After theſe, are the Courts of the Archbi-
ſhop of Canterbury ; namely, the Court of
Arches ; the Judge of which is the Dean of the
Arches, ſo call'd from St. Mary's Church in
London, famous for its arch d ſteeple. All Ap-
peals within the Province of Canterbury are
made to him; [bur this, nor properly as Dean
of the Arches, in virtue of which title, ſtrictly
ſpeaking, he has Juriſdiction only over di-
vers Peculiars in the City of London; but as
he is alſo Official Principal to the Archbiſhop. |
ove There are in this Court ſixteen Advocates, or
more, as the Archbiſhop ſhall think fit, all of
them Doctors of Law; with two Regiſters, and
+ thirry-four Prottors [or more, it the Arch-
N biſhop pleaſes.
Nie Court of The Court of Audience, where all complaints,
S\utience» cauſes, and appeals of the Biſhops of the Pro-
J vince, are recelv'd.

WT he Court of The Court of Prerogative ; where a Com-

4 _ miſſary judges * of the Eſtates of Perſons
1 deceaſed, whether Inteſtate, or with Mill.

The Court of Faculties; manag'd by a * Ma-
ſter who takes cognizance of the Requelts of

*
- Now, à
Wrwentys

E Te n, Co

75

Hue Court of
. alties.
I Prafeius.

thoſe who deſire that the rigour and ſeverity of
the Canon-law may be moderated ; and by a
Regiſter, to record ſuch Diſpenſ#tions as are

As to the Court of Peculiars (which has ju-The Court of
riſdiction in certain pariſhes exempt from the Peculiars,
Biſhop of the Dioceſe where they tye; and
culiarly belong to the Archbiſhop, with other
things of leſs note) I omit them : For I confeſs
it was imprudent in me, to dip at all in ſub-
jects of this nature; but Guicciardin encourag'd
me in it, by doing the like in his deſcription

granted.

ot the Netherlands.

I intended here to inſert ſome few things,
chiefly concerning the Antiquity of the great
Officers of the Realm ; the Chancellor (of whoſe
Office we have already ſaid ſomewhat) the Trea-
ſurer, the —_ if the Council, the Keeper of
the Privy-Seal, the Lord Great Chamberlain, the
Lord High Conſtable, the Earl Marſhal, the Lord
Steward of the King's Houſhold, &c. But ſince 1
hear, that this is deſign'd by other hands, I am
ſo far from deſiring to foreſtal them, that
I ſhall moſt willingly impart to the Under-
takers, whatever obſervations I have made upon

| thoſe heads,

k k

1 8 8
.

S

S pay I IE BEER LL
3

re G9

A

Poſthumous Diſcourſe

CONCERNING THE

O

ETYMOLOGY, ANTIQUITY, and OpPICE

F

EARL MARSHAL of ENGLAND.

Written in Engliſh by Mr. Camps.

*. H is the uncertainty of
tymologies, that A nts
—— Wo them a ef tad
force, and therefore call'd by
an antient Grecian, Maylvgs
dadCore, as proots only which
do nothing bur ſet a good face
on the matter. Nevertheleſs, whenas Plato
will have them admitted, if there be a conſo-
nancy and correſpondence between the name
and the thing named, we will produce three
Erymologies ot this Word Marſhal, wherein the
name is or hath been anſwerable to the Office
in ſome part or other, in ſignification. For the
word Mareſcalius is uſed for a principal officer
in the court ; in the camp, for a Ferrar, and an
Harbinger. The Germans, from whom the
word was firſt borrow d, call'd him Mareſcalk ;
the Latins mollitying the ſame, Mareſcabus ; the
office, Mareſcalcia : The French, Mareſcaux ;
and we Marſhal. All, deduced from the Ger-
man Mareſcalk ; which according to the receiv'd
opinion is compounded of Mare, or mark, which
do both, ſay they, ſignify an Horſe ; and Scalk,
which doth not ſignify skilful, as ſome will,
but an Officer, Servant, or Attendant. So
Godſchalck is interpreted God's ſervant ; and in
the old German nunc dimittas ſervum, this word
Servus is tranſlated Scalk, So that jointly the
word notifieth an officer and atrendant about
horſes. This Etymology is confirmed firſt, by
the Laws of the Alamanni ; If any Marſhal, who
has the Care of twelve Horſes, kill any perſon, let
him pay four Shillings. Then, out of Choniates,
who writing the life of Baldwin, Emperor of
Conſtantinople; ſaith, that this word Mareſcal-
dos noteth him, whom the Grecians call'd nęa-

lose roc Which, according to the name, doth

ſignify him which marcheth foremoſt before the
Army. To maintain this Etymology, they
ſay, it may not ſeem ſtrange, that ſo high an
office as it is now, ſhould be derived from
horſes; whenas all preferment in antient time,
as one ſaith, had the firſt riſe trom the Stable ;
and ſuch as were there brought up, proved moſt
ſerviceable horſemen ; and many other names,
which time hath advanced to high dignity,
had very mean and {mall originals. But this
Etymology lieth open to ſome obje&ions, as,
that the Marſhals now have no command over
the horſes or ſtable ; but certain it is, that in di-
vers offices, albeit the functions are altered, the
name remaineth. And as Varro yriteth, Equi-
Jo among the Latins doth not only ſignify Ma-
ſter and Ruler of the horſes, but alſo of all other
things committed to his charge; fo accordingly
it is to be ſuppoſed, this word Marſhal, not
only to ſignify an Officer of Horſes, but alſo of
other Civil and Military matters appropriated
to his function. It is ſaid alſo, that Aare doth
not ſignify an Horſe in the German tongue,
but, as in our's, that which is more jgnoble in
that kind, and that names are to be impoſed 4
potiori. And albeit it is moſt certain out of
Panſanias, that Mare ſignify'd an Horſe to the
old Gauls, as it doth {till to our Britains their
deſcendants ; yet they ſay it is unfitting to com-
pound one word of two different Languages.
Bur Quintilian ſheweth the contrary in Epi-
rhedium, Auti-cato, Biclinium, Epitogium ; being
compounded of Greek, Latin, and other
Tongues : and to this Etymology do they in-
cline, which will have the Marſhal to be call'd
in Latin, Magiſter Equitum, rather than Tribu-

nus Molitum.

There

r Rial as oa a

AY © „ ww Het © Hy, nd A 020A "Woad ws os

v a I >. »

mw”

Earl Marſhal of England.

Antiquity,

— [here is alſo another deduction of Marſhal

from Maer, the Latin word Major, and Sala,
which ſignifieth a Kings<court in the High-
Dutch; tor that they were Magiſtri Domus,
and principal officers tor ordering the Court.
There is a third e
Marke, as it ſignifieth a Marche, bound, or li-
mit, and Scalck, which is Miniſter, as we ſaid
before. From Mark in this we have Mar-
chio for a Lord Marcher, and Mark-grave in
the very ſame ſenſe: and therefore he relieth
upon this opinion, which calleth the Marſhal in
Latin, Prator Comitatis Auguſtalis, as being the
civil Judge within the limits of the ,
which we call now the Verge; for that the
Verge or Rod of the Marſhal's authority ſtretch-
eth ſo far: and they alſo, which have the Mar-

' ſhal call'd in Latin, Defignator caſtrorum : for it

was incident > cp ce to 1
harbinger, and to appoint limits and lodgi
beth is war and — Of theſe —
happily one may be true, happily none.

When this word enter d firſt into England,
cannot reſolve. I do not ſind that our Saxons
uſed it, or any other name equivalent unto it,
unleſs it was Stal- here, which ſigni Maſter

this was, I cannot
tion

Henry the firſt, in this Charter,

Marſbal, in certain Tenements, which he

held of him by Service of the 1

and the King reſtored them to Ralph, ſon
* of Wigan, as his Marſbal.)] What Marſhal
| in. The ſecond men-
of Marſhal is in the firſt of Kin John,
and hath alſo a reference to the time of King
where King
John confirmeth the office of Marſhal, unto
William Marſhal Earl of Pembroke, in theſe
words: Johaunes Dei gratia, Oc. Sciatis nos con-
ceſſiſſe, & praſenti noſtra carts confirmaſſe dilefio &
fideli noſtro Milian Mareſcallo Com. de Pembroco
& haredibus ſuis, Magiſtratum Mareſcalcia curie
noſtre, quem Magiſtratum Gilbertus Mareſcallus
Henrici Regis avi. Patris noftri & Johannes filius ip-
s Gilberti diſrationaverunt coram praditio Rege
Henrico in Curia ſud contra Robertum de Venoiz,,
contra Wilkelmum de Haſtings, qui ipſum magiſtra-
tum calumniabantur; judicio, quia defece-
runt ſe 4 retto ad diem, quem eis conſtituerat præ-
dithus Rex Henricus in Curid ſus, ficut carta ipfius
Regis, rom vidimus, teſtatur. i. e. © John, by
the Grace of God, Oc. Know ye, that we
have granted, and by this our preſent Char-

| * rer, have confirm'd, to our well beloved and

of the Stable; but that may ſeem rather an- | faithful Miliam Marſbal, Earl of Pembroke,

ſwerable to the name of Conſtable ; yet Eſgar,
who was Stal-here to King Edward the Conteſ-
for, writeth himſelf in a donation to Waltham,
Regia Procurator aulz ; where:s William Fitz-
Osborne, in the Chronicles of Normandy, is
calll'd the Marſhal. I believe, that William
Tailleur the Author ſpake according to the
time he lived in, and not according to the time
he wrote of. Fauchet, a learne in the
French Antiquities, ſaith, the name of Marſhal
was firſt heard about the time of Lewis le
Groſſe, who was in time equal to our Ki
Henry the firſt, and Stephen of England,

from thence doubtleſs we borrow'd that name,
as many other. The firſt Author that uſed the
word in England, was Petrus Bleſenfis, Chancel-
lor, as he was then called, but indeed Secretary,
to King Henry the ſecond of England, who
uſed this word Mareſcallus for an Harbinger, in
theſe words, complaining of them; Vidi pluri-
mos, qui Mareſcallis manum porrexerunt liberalem ;
hi, dum hoſpitium poſt longi fatigationem itineris cum
plurimo e quæſiſſent, cum eſſent eorum
epula ſemicrudæ, aut cum jam forte ſederent in
menſa, quandoque etiam cum jam dormirent in ſtra-
tis, Mareſcalli ſupervenientes in ſuperbia & abuſione
abſciſſis equorum capiſtris ejectiſque foras fine de-
lettu & non fine jattura ſarcinalis, eos ab hoſpitiis
turpiter expellebant : i. e. I ſaw very many, who
e reach'd out a bountiful hand to the Mar-
„ ſhals. When they had, with much ado,

found a Lodging after the fatigue of a long | ficio

journey, and while their meat was half raw,
< or perhaps while they were ſitting at Table,
* nay, ſometimes when they were aſleep in
their Beds; the Marſhals coming upon them,
* would, in a ſupercilious and abuſive way,
« cut the Collars of the Horſes, and throw out
© the loading without diſtin&ion and not with-
out damage, and turn the people out of their
* Lodgings in a ſhameful manner.

The mention, that I find of a Marſbal
in record, is, in the red book of the Exchequer,
written in the time of Henry the ſecond, which
hath reference unto the time of King Henry
the firſt : Regis aum, that is, Henry the firſt,
feeffavit Wiganum Mareſcallum ſuum de tenementis,
que de eo tenuit per ſervitium Mareſcalcia ſua, &
Rex reddidit ea Radulpho filio Wigani, tanquam
Mareſcallo ſuo. [i. e. The King's Grandfather,
* viz. Hemy the frſt, enfeoffed Wigan, his

and to his heirs, the office of Marſbalfie, in

* our Court; which office, Gilbert, Marſhal of

4 r our Grandfather, and John, ſon

« of ſaid Gilbert, claim'd before the (aid
King, in his Court, againſt Robert de Ve-
** nois, and William de Haſtings, who alſo
* claim'd the ſame office; and in this Judg-
* ment, becauſe they did not make good their
„Claim, at the day which the {aid King Hen-
ry appointed them, as the King's own Char-
ter, Which we have ſeen, witnefſeth——]

Here is to be noted, out of theſe authentick Earls Mar-
Records, that there were Marſhals in the ſhal.

time of King Henry the firſt, anſwerable in
time to the firſt Marſhals of France ; that there
were more Marſhals than one; and, that Wil-

liam Marſhal, Earl of Pembroke, had only Ma-

giſtratum Mareſcalcie Curia, that is, Marſhalſie of
the King's Houle : which office was ſo long in-
veſted in that Family, that it gave them a ſir-
name; as alſo to other families, which have
been Marſhals in great Houſes : and laſtly,
that it was given to William Marſhal and his
heirs, and ſo it was challe by them as he-
reditary. Nevertheleſs it is certain, that the
next ſucceeding King, Henry the third, took
away that office from Richard Marſhal, the
ſon of the ſaid William; for, among che grie-
vances of the {aid Richard, he complain'd, as
appeareth in the Hiſtory of Thomas 8
that the King, in theſe terms, ſpoliavit me of-
o Mareſcalciæ, quod hareditario ad me pertiuet
& poſſedi, nec aliquo ad illud me reſtituere voluit re-
qu riv'd me of the office of
* Marſhal, which belongs to me in right of
Inheritance, and which I was in poſſeſſion
« of; and would by no means reſtore it to me,
* when demanded.} Happily upon this ground,
which Rigordus the French Hiſtorian writeth
in this age of the Marſhalſhip of France, Hæ-
reditaria ſucceſſio in talibus officiis locum non habet.
ſi. e. Hereditary Succeſſion has no place in ſuch

ifitus. i. e.

Offices. ] And after he Was dead, and his bre-

thren, his five ſiſters and co-heirs, which, as
appeareth by the partition, had every one a
thouſand five hundred and twenty pounds year-
ly rent, began to contend about the office of
the Marſhalſhip, and the Manour of Hamſted-
Marſhal, in the County of Berkſhire, E
ng to the ſame; Roger Bigod, ſon of the

i
| eldeſt Daughter, with great difficulty 9

cclxiii

Earl Marſhal F England.

Office.

the ſame. For as Matthew Paris writeth 1246.
Multiplicatis interceſſionibus, conceſſa eſt Mareſcal-
cia cum officio & honore, Comiti Rogero Bigod, ra-
tione Conntiſſa filiæ Comitis magni Willielmi Mare-
ſcalli primogenitæ, matris ſua. i. e. © Upon re-
« peated Interceſſions, the Marſhalſie, with the

* Office and Honour, was granted to Earl Ro-

« ger Bigod, in right of his mother, the Coun-
« teſs, who was eldeſt Daughter of the great
« Earl William Marſhal. | His nephew, Roper
Bigod, Earl of Norfolk, was enforced to ſurren-
der to King Edward the firſt this office, with
all his inheritance in England, Ireland, and
Wales, for certain inſolencies againſt the King:
and this Roger, or his Unkle Roger, was he,
which firſt ſtiled himſelf, as pride is higheſt
when downfal neareſt, Mareſcalus Angliz ;
whereas all his Predeceſſors uſed no other
ſtiles than the ſimple addition of Mareſcallus,
as Gulielmus, Richardus, Gilbertus, Mareſcalus,
Comes Pembrociæ. And no doubt, but as the great-
neſs of William Marſhal the elder, called the

Great Earl, which he had gotten in the mino-

rity of King Henry the third, gave the firſt
greatneſs to this office; ſo there was a far
greater acceſs of dignity thereunto, when King
Edward the ſecond granted to Thomas of Bro-
therton, his half Brother, a Prince of the
blood, the lands of Bigod, and ſhortly after the
office of Marſhalſhip with the rights thereunto
belonging, and performing the ſervice accor-
dingly. After the death of Thomas of Bro-
therton, we find William Montacute Earl of
Sarum, Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick,
Henry Lord Piercy, — Fitz-Alane, Lord
Matravers, Thomas Holland Earl of Kent:
And then Thomas Mowbray, right heir unto
Brotherton, had the office of Marſhal of Eng-
land, with the name, ſtile, title, ſtate, and
honour, granted unto him in the twentieth year
of King Richard the ſecond, de aſſenſu Parlia-
menti ſibi & haredibns ſuis maſculis de corpore. ¶ i. e.
« By aſſent of Parliament, to him, and to
« the heirs male of his Body begotten.] Yet,
nevertheleſs, the next year after, he being ba-
niſhed, it was granted to Thomas Holland
Duke of Surrey, as amply as it was to him ;
that he might as well bear in the preſence as
abſence of the King, a Rod of Gold, enamel'd
at both ends, with the King's Arms in the up-
per end, and his own in the lower end. Af-
terwards, according to the alteration of times,
ſometimes the Mowbrays, and the How-
ards, deſcended from them ; ſometimes others,
by interruptions upon ſundry occaſions, enjoy-
ed the ſame dignity.

What belonged to that office anciently, I
have read nothing ; but that at the Corona-
tion of King Richard the firſt, William Mar-
ſhal Earl of Pembroke carry'd the Royal
Scepter, which had the Croſs on the top ; and
at the coronation of Queen Eleanor, Wite to
King Henry the third, the Marſhal carry'd a

Rod before the King, made way both in|

Church and Court, and order'd the Feaſt, as
Matthew Paris writeth. There is a Treatiſe
carry'd, about the Office of the Earl Marſhal
in the time of King Henry the ſecond, and a-
nother of the time of Thomas of Brotherton ;
where I find, confuſedly, what belonged to
them in court and camp : As in Court, that at
the Coronation, the Marſhal ſhould have the
King's horſe and harneſs, and the Queen's pal-
frey ; that he ſhould hold the Crown at the
Coronation ; that he ſhould have upon high
feaſts, as the high Uſher, the table-cloths and
cloth of ſtate for that day; that he keep the
hall in quiet; that he ſhould bring offenders

that he ſhould aſſign lodgin and when t

King paſſed the . 2 ,-* to his —
that he ſhould have for his livery three winter
robes at Chriſtmas, and three ſummer robes at
Whitſuntide ; that he ſhould allow but twelve
common women to follow the Court (in which
ſervice, I ſappoſe, he had Hamo de Gaynton his
ſubſtitute, which was called Mareſcallus mero-
tricum; by which ſervice, he held the manour
of Cateſball in the County of Surrey ;) that he
ſhould have a Deputy in the King's-Bench ; that
he ſhould keep Vagabonds from the Court.
In Camp, that he ſhould lead the forward ; thar
the Conſtabl:, with him, ſhould hold courts in
camp ; that he ſhould have certain ſpecial for-
feitures, as armour and weapons of Priſoners ;
to appoint lodgings; to be abroad till all be
lodged ; to have fees of armourers and victual-
lers of the camp; to have all the armour and
whole cloth of towns taken by compoſition ; to
have ranſom of Priſoners eſcaped, if they be
taken again; with many ſuch like, too long
here to be ſpecify'd: And, in Peace and Mur,
the Marſhal ſhould execute the Conſtable's
commandments in Arreſts and Attachments;
and that appcareth by the proceſs between
Grey and Haſtings. In the ſecond ſtatute of
Weſtminſter, held 13 Ed. I. when many grie-
vances of the Marſhal were complain'd of, it
was ordain'd in theſe words, Mareſcallus de quo-
libet Comite & Barone integram Baroniam tenente,
de uno palfrido fit contentus, vel de pretio, quale an-
tiquitus percipere conſuevit, ita quod fi ad homa-
gium, quod fecit, palfridum vel pretium iu forma
predifta ceperit, ad militiam ſuam nihil capiat. Et
i forte ad homagium nihil ceperit, ad militiam ſu-
am capiat. De Abbatibus & Prioribus integram
baroniam tenentibus, cum homagium aut fidelitatem
pro Baroniis ſuis fecerunt, capiat palfridum vel pre-
tium, ut prædictum eſt. Hoc idem de Archiepiſcopis
& Epiſcopis obſervandum ft. De his autem, qui
partem Baroniæ tenent, ſiue fint Religioſi, ſive Secu-
lares, capiat ſecundum portionem partis Barcuiæ,
quam tenent. De Religiofis tenentibus in liberam
elymoſynam, & non per Baroniam del partem, nihil
de catero exigat Mareſcallus. | i. e. The Marſhal
of every Earl and Baron holding by an en-
tire Barony, ſhall be contented with one
“ Palfrey, or with the Price of it, ſuch as he
© hath uſed to have of old: fo that, if he took
a Palfrey, or the Price of one, at the doing
of his Homage, in form aforeſaid, he ſhall
* take nothing when he is made Knight : and
jf he took nothing at the doing of his Ho-
« mage, when he is made Knight he ſhall
“ take. Of Abbots and Priors, holding a
* whole Barony, when they do Homage or
% Fealty for their Baronies, he ſhall take one
« Palfrey, or the Price, as afore is ſaid. And
« this ſhall alſo be obſerv'd amongſt Archbi-
« ſhops and Biſhops. But of ſuch as hold
but one part of a Barony, whether they be
Religious or Secular, he ſhall take according
* to the Portion of the part of the Barony that
they hold. Of Religious Men that hold in
free Alms, and not by a Barony, nor part
« of a Barony, the Marſhal from hencetorth
“ ſhall demand nothing. And about that time,
were ſet down all the Droites belonging to the
Earl Marſhal, in a Roll, which was laid up in
the Wardrobe ; but that vaniſhed ſhortly after.
For as it appeareth by Record, in the eigh-
teenth of Edward the third, the King directed
a brief to the Barons of the Exchequer, of the
fees, and all things elſe belonging to the office
of Earl Marfhal; and they returned in their

certificate, annexed to the Brief, nothing but
certain

| within the Verge before the high Steward;

* 1 " * oc *
. _ 4
4 \ 1 % * *
, n by 2 „ 5
1 P >, abate HAS N : * 2 * 3
0 Ky " * £ hls. l 8 * 3
* * ”= . WA Sts 8 2

= Original,

Succeſſio

FO + #6... a td as n

Se

r

*
12 3 — 181 =? »%. a * 22 ence Cr
1 * — . —

. _ 7

2 Earl

Marſhal of

—_ — Alt... "RF =»

certain petty allowances of money, wine, can-
dles, for the Marſhal, and Magiſter Mfareſcallus,
and for the four Marſhals for every day; qua fa-
ciant herbergeriam. And out of the book of
the Exchequer, they certify in theſe words : De

io Mareſcalcia ſuruivit Gilbertus Mareſchal,
Comes de Strigal, cujus eſt officium tumultus ſedare
in domo Regis, liberationes hoſpitiorum facere, oftia
aule Regis cuſtodire. Accipit autem de quolibet Ba-
rone fatto Milite 4 Rege & quolibet Comite ea die
palfredum cum ſella. i. e.“ In the office of Mar-
« ſhalſy, ſurvives William Marſhal Earl of Strigal;
« qphoſe duty it is, to appeaſe Tumults in the King's
« Houſe, and to make delivery of Lodgings, and to
« keep the Gates of the Royal Palace. He hath, of
« very Baron who is made Knight by the King, and
« of every Earl, that day, a horſe, with the Saddle.” |
And by an inquiſition taken about the 11th of

England. ; cclxvi

Henry the fifth, it appeareth, that there be-
longeth to the Earl Marſhal's diſpoſing, the
office of the Marſhal in the King's-Bench, the
Marſhal of the Exchequer, with the office of
the Cryer before the Marſhal, and the Marſhal
of the Hall of the King's Houſe, and ſome o-
ther ſuch Places. But the greateſt encreaſe of
the authority of this Office hath been, fince
there were no Conſtables: for the Kings, ſince
that time, have referred many matters to them,
which in former times were proper to the Con-
ſtable. Neither had the Marſhal any preceden-
1 reſpect of his place, until King Henry
the eighth; in the 3 iſt year of his reign, by Par-
liament aſſigned him place next to the Lord
Conſtable, and before the Lord Admiral.

WILLIAM CAMDEN.

orginal. n O ME Learned men, which
4 have diſcourſed of Offices
and Magiſtracies, in re-
ſpect of ſome conveniencies
hin military matters, have
thought the office of Marſhal
in our age, to be anſwerable
to that of the Tribuni militum in the ancient
Roman ſtate ; and of the Protoſtrator in the late
ſtate of the Greek or Eaſtern Empire. But
this name of Marſhal now in uſe, which in
proceſs of time hath aſcended unto ſo high a
dignity, began at ſuch time as the Goths, Van-
dals, Franks, and other Northern rang over-
flowed Europe, who ſetling themſelves in the
provinces of the Romans, liking well their po-
licy and government, began not only to imitate
the ſame, but alſo to tranſlate their titles of
civil and military dignities into their own
tongues 3 ſo they tranſlated, retaining the fig-
nification; Limitanei Duces into n
Scutati into Shield-Kniglis, Præfettus Palatii into
Seneſchalk, Comes Stabuli into Mar-ſtaler, Mini-
ſter Dei into Gods-ſchalke, Prafettus Equitum into
Mar-ſchalk. For all they, who have lately tra-
ced out Etymologies, do conſent, that as Mar
and Mark ſignify a horſe ; ſo Schalk ſignifies a
Ruler, an Officer, or Provoſt. But the French
mollified this harſh concurrence of conſonants,
and have made of Seneſchalk, Marſchalk, &c.
Senſchal and Marſhal. This name (albeit hap-
pily the office might be) was nor in uſe in this
realm in the Saxon government; only they had
their Haller, which by ſignification and autho-
rity of Hiſtorians, doth ſeem to be all one with
the Conſtable. Burt as this name came our of
Germany with the Franks into France ; ſo out
of France, firſt arrived here with the Normans:
and Roger de Montgomery, which was Mar-
ſhal of the Norman army at the Conqueſt, is
accounted the firſt Marſhal of England.

For ſome years after, there is in Hiſtories no
mention of this office, until in the confuſion under
King Stephen: when, as Maud Fitz-Empreſs, for
ſtrengthening of her part, made Milo, Earl of
Hereford and Conſtable of England; ſo he,
for aſſuring his faction, made Gilbert Clare,
Earl of Pembroke and Marſhal of England,

Succeſſion,

Another Diſcourſe concerning the Original and Succeſſion of the
Earls Marſhals of England.

Written in Engliſh by Mr. Campen.

with the ſtate of inheritance, who in reſpe& of
his uſual habitation at Stryghall, was commonly
called Earl of Stryghall; in which office, his ſon
Richard, firnamed Stronghow, ſucceeded, who
firſt opened the way to the Engliſh for the con-
queſt of Ireland, by whoſe only daughter and
heir, it deſcended to William Marſhall, who
had by her five ſons, which died all without
iſſue ; and five daughters, the eldeſt of them
named Maud, to whom, in the partition, was
aſſigned the office of Marſhal of England, with
the Mannor of Hampſted-Marſhal, which, as
it is in old records, the Marſhals held in Mare-
ſcaugià, & per virgam Mareſchallie.

This Maud was married to Hugh Bigod Earl
of Norfolk, whoſe ſon Roger, in right of his
mother, was Marſhal of England ; and after
him Roger Bigod, his nephew by the brother,
who incurring the diſpleatare of King Edward
the firſt, by denying to ſerve him in Guienne,
to hinder the King's expedition into

landers, and diſſuading the Commons to pay
ſubſidies impoſed by Parliament in that reſpect,
for recovery of the King's favour, ſurrender'd
up to the King for ever, both his Earldom of
Nortolk, and office of Marſhal of England ;
which King Edward the ſecond granted to his
brother Thomas of Brotherton, from whom it
came inheritably to Thomas Mowbray, Earl of
Nottingham, whom Ing nee the ſecond
created Earl Marſhal of England ; whereas in
former time they were {tiled only Marſhals of
England: and ſo from the Mowbrayes to
Howards, late Dukes of Norfolk. Let this
office hath not ſo deſcended without interrup-
tion in the aforeſaid families, but that upon
disfavours and attainders, it hath been often-
times conferred upon others, as appeareth by
this Catalogue of them, wherein they are ſet
down ſucceſſively.

The Marſhals of ENGLAND.

Roger de Montgomery, Earl of Shrewsbury.
Walter Giffard, Earl of Buckingham.
Robert Fitz-Ed:, baſe Son of King Heury I.
Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Pembroke.

Richard his Son, Earl of Pembroke,

=

William

6— —

cclxvii

Earl M arſhal of England.

—
cclxviii

William Marſhall the elder, Earl of Pembroke:

William his ton, Earl of Pembroke.

Richard his brother, Earl of Pembroke.

Gilbert his brother, Earl of Pembroke.

Walter his brother, Earl cf Pembroke.

Anſelme his brother, Earl of Pembroke.

Roger Bigod, Earl of Norfolk.

Roger, his brother's ſon, Earl of Norfolk.

Roger, Lord Clifford.

Nicholas, Lord Segrave.

Thomas Brotherton, ſon to King Edward the
firſt, Earl of Norfolk.

William Montacute, Earl of Sarisbury.

Thomas Beauchamp the elder, Earl of Warwick.

Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March.

Henry, Lord Percye.

John Fitz- Alan, Lord Maltravers.

Thomas Holland, Earl of Kent, half Brother to
King Richard the ſecond,

Thomas Mowbray, Earl of Nottingham.

Thomas Holland, Duke of Surrey.

John Montacute, Earl of Sarisbury.

Ralph Nevill, Earl of Weſtmoreland.

Thomas Mowbray, Earl of Nottingham.

John his brother, Duke of Norfolk.

John Holland, Earl of Huntingdon.

John Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk.

John Mowbray his fon, Duke of Norfolk.

Richard, ſon of King Edward the fourth,
Duke of York and Norfolk,

|

Thomas Grey, Knight. ey WG

John Howard, Duke of Norfolk.

William Marquiſs Berkeley, and Earl of Not-
tingham.

Henry Duke of Tork, fon to King Henry the
ſeventh.

Thomas Howard, Earl of Surrey, afterwards
Duke of Norfolk.

Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk.

Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk.

Edward Seymour, Duke of Somerſet.

John Dudley, Duke of Northumberland.

Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk, reſtored.

Thomas Howard his Nephew, | late Duke of 18 80
Norfolk. ann, 1699

George Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury. ;

Robert Devreux, Earl of Eſſex, deſcended from
Eva de Breoſa, daughter and co-heir of
William Marſhal, Earl ot Pembroke, by the
Bohuns, Earls of Hereford and Eſſex, and
trom Ralph Bigod, brother unto Roger Bigod,
Marſhal, by Lacy, Verdon, and Crophul.

[Thomas Howard, Earl of Arundel and Surrey,

Henry Howard, ſon of Thomas aforeſaid.

Thomas Howard, ſon of Henry, and Duke of
Norfolk.

Henry Howard, brother of the laſt Thomas ;
and to the heirs male ct his Body.

Henry Howard, ſon of the laſt Henry.

Thomas Howard, the preſent Duke ot Norfolk.

[ Conclufion of the GENERAL Deſcription of BRITAIN.]

* rng
mn

Ome perhaps will expect to be
) told from the Aſtrologers, un-
der the influence of what Sign
and Planet our Britain lies. Iam
not wholly a ſtranger in thoſe
learned Errors; and therefore
tor the ſatisfaction of the Curi-
ous, I will ſay ſomething ; tho” the conjeures of
Aſtrologers are ſo different in this point, that
the variety of opinions ſeems to ſhake the rea-
lity of the thing, and to leave no room even
tor truth. M. Manilius, an ancient Poet, in-
timates that Capricorn preſides here, according
to that verſe,

mini upon no better grounds than the reſt; ſo
that there is no manner of agreement among
them.

NOW, by God's aſſiſtance, I will begin my
journey through the Counties of England; in
which (according to the old Wiſh at firſt ſetting
out) may Succeſs and Happineſs attend me.

In my Deſcription of each County, I will ſhew The method
with as much plainneſs and brevity as I can, of the fu
who were the ancient inhabirants, what was the —
reaſon of the name, hat are the bounds of the :
County, the nature of the ſoil, the places of
greatelt antiquity, and of greateſt eminence at
preſent ; and laſtly, who have been Dukes or

Earls ot each, ſince the Norman Conqueſt. In

the ſucceſſions of the Earls (to own ingenuouſly

the aſſiſtance which I have had) I muſt freely ac-
knowledge that Thomas Talbot (a perſon excel-

lently vers'd in the publick Records, and a
compleat maſter of our Antiquities) has given

me very great light.

I will begin this work at the remote? point
weſtward, that is, at Cnuall, and thence will
proceed to a Survey of the other Counties; in
imitation of Strabo, Ptolemy, ' and the moſt
ancient Geographers, who in their deſcriptions
always begin at the moſt Weſtern parts, as firlt
from the great Meridian.

Tu, Capricorne, regis quicquid ſub ſole cadente

Expoſitum .

Thou, Capricorn, preſideſt o're
What e're lies on the Weſtern ſhore.

Ptolemy, Albumazar and Cardan, made Aries;
John de Muris would have Saturn; the Frier
Perſerutator, Eſquidus, and Henr. Silenus,
make the Moon the ruling Planet, becauſe it is,
as they ſay, in the ſeventh Climate. Roger of
Hereford, Thomas of Ravenna the Philolo-
ger, and Hiſpalenſis, prefer Piſces. To con-
clude, Schonerus and Pitatus ſubje& us to Ge-

*
| fs nnn
— 2 .

WALES.

COUNTIES
ENGLAND

. FLY . 1 4 wo 1 , 755 * —
3 ; VP TT 2 of Fn * * 4 F- * 2 F * : g
- 4 8 3 8 "> 3 * e * * — 4 4 1 1 n 9 . q S 4 -
\ 9 3 1 end 8 8 ** » 5 . — as”, 5 . 1 i

— 1 "FY wa Ss Bei 6.45 Bon *
4 = YO TI A th #4 . tg 15 A Wn 2 5 ka 6 ” * N " 7 * , 8 a , Pre on *

7.
E

=]
CY

8

-
py”

ai
507.

2 > J ; 7 hy " — e * IS. * K x ES £0 1
0 W

9 — a 3 — x Has hs 9 7
F ta a
i 4 ? SY <5J C : I ws *

_
© o
- -
4
*
—
.
.
- | r
1
F
*
*
\ P D - —ͤkIt 34. 4 2
a . —— _ aw. —— — —

— — 2 5 — had — — 5 FA — ooo — —— rr 1——

—— — — —— * — _ 4 — — " — — _ —— 4
1 — —— — J———— _ — > y 1 _ — 1
— 2 _— — r —

,

1 *

rr a on Gs ——— ww NES
„ te eee .

15*

XXIII

XII

59
[
[
30
1 * 6 6 \*7
f 8 . * ” Lanbrida Purlace
- Hv » RL
—. 3 | "Wi. flow, R n
* _ Wy 770 2 4
* 5 4 . FePuddau nAg uan l Harm
| ng f nonbigk Frans A. Tg 35 . Hadern P 19 hor -
7 anon v irt] Go ;
A Ane f endon And —» gene © oFerenc 0 «Vans Vu &r ith
1 . -- . Ter Tr e ur Ym La 2 Philack ACamborn 1 —
— 2 ; - L F E
S wt” —_ 2 —> no wudnack V , RR Ker margh Th, a” 7 Dave Trega 0
. wy * 1 — <> A-Hadern 3 Rud, 2 0 Co FA 1 5 7 Trouns Arrothat!
4 89 85 'S — Roſimorum e \ Gmumer * . In
* Sennan H Sancred U (NL  6arbn\ Cn, 1 Kicklow
Scales — 4 Relubas - 2 .
5 — Pp) 7 — Theram
8 Lem Car-horn 9 Pere © Bt 7 9
8 P 117 7 . 82 Do, ell
„ ids Plow N Arden
Te X - » Hhnamber: Hauen
- INH „E
5 80 5 12 Mr 7 b 1endron ufherew 0 N ware Yenan,
Pender Pauls Re. Trewolthal Y Kernan Enw Fe k on 1.
An ar Hreas 1 2 9 Hlerther Un ” S Flute 4 Nt ne
B 0 Trer 94 g - for #7 :
Bel = F Spargor ia Y I
o Bo * a ; g |
* okejtal S Dohns 2 A Maby OM „ * 5 *
2 "Wks elſtoln,/Compenton | Y 3 a.
* 4 0 — Al- — 3 a motitli 5 4,
' 22 5 * . | K . PP
2 af 8 \ / * "Mangan Benalto 5 en tho |
| | : e 8 |
Rundleſton 1 F 0 * |
at * 1 oShiberro iR t 4 * E * |
; Cury, Trela's a 2 20
p "TF 7 —
Pengwenyon Pf Wereertore elford Haven © >
10 1 wh L Anthony ö 2 oF
4 Bonuthon du nin * * AA
G. cunxwallow S.. Trewolthal , he Pont 2
Tembroſag 7 *
T (E E N „e L
: H bees K *
L Aan * Friſe non coe
allo Goon Hilly De
4,99 -N Crade The AManacles
4 |
2 Ne 4
prom. —
T T — * — —
6 Degrees » 159 [40 [30 | 75 —

— —— — — — — ena —— — — - —

— — —½— . — —— — — —

— — —

_—

Lanbrida : P urlgce
L *U N D R; E p.uhat D.

*

Ruan
—_— —

Tee , a; 14
w (Pobewhghte F
0 <1

_—

2

XIX Almmuits of Time

A. Table , Explanation
t mures in Map
t Brelin] ue ſies 5*-Michel
2 Eully 16 Treganyan
3 Garagtf Y Fenton Gallon
421 Bar 55
The 1s - nd of 0 Aerther
6 AntivAhium et z Trewardynock
Hole m | ornelev
6 NantsBall cee h Killiow
Tor, bo a3 Trethurfe
8 Armed Knight A Trehan
9Penma) port 5 Tragardon
10 Trefyſ5 6Tre/ilhan P.
T Fly hing Ft Stephens
12 Ivan 8 Trematon
13 Penkengl bo Shillmgham
4 Tregunnon
—— Üͤ—

le ro

*
-

> Jan
1
Trenouth
0

—

o Can

LColomb*
Trewullock ,F

SIWenn A

o Predraux e 1 f

Sz Padlt

oDetallock —

Trerath Y

* thchas 0 | SD: as _ 4 Ro i . 6 , *
Oo , 3. 1 ao *
. f 4 3 *. - oo Af, 3 * 2 LellWthiel *
zem rene
* 0 * Foy 25 Stephens Luxulian 0 Ali
efrerilleck D Aſteficld \s þ
rampond AMA r
9 ' © * ; ,
%. court 7 * 4

A 4 Paryh

e A Villagi or Hamlet
& .4n 4bby or Religious Place

6 Alaſte
& A Houſe

et PE!
FD R ED

oInan

Avent

ry rget

Here Note f in all Maps Theſe Marks
Srgnefie 4d A. Aarket Town

2, fo
= — -
Pinock
— Tophouſes 5
, Polo * ,

143

% AK." 25

A. Scale of 10 Miles
· 2 [ 7

|

A

77 go

PT EE. ED

Ti

——— ——i
—

l

” 17 Nn N.

—— —
-

ws.

— _——_—

3
7
2

þ © © | © _—

4
r e

— — —¾—q

ian

#
2 - —

+ oe ---. -——
PI

w_ 4 —— — ——

"7

8
r FX

3

a
**
F

Duff.
nes,
ſire th
parts

antiſt
furtbe

hinted

E th
/ale
place,
ment.

rum,
what

and |

FFT....GGGTTbTTGTTTVTVTVTVTVTTTTTTTWTWT

*

7

8 8 e

*
SSS e
ee
*

DANMONII.

Ee gow HA T Tradt, which according to Geographers is as it were the firſt of all
„ Britain, reaching out a long way to the Weſt, and contratted by little and
IC . little; is bounded on the North by the Severn-Sea, on the South by the Bri-
ii Ocean, and on the Weſt by S. George's Channel. It was formerly
an inhabited by thoſe Britains, who are called in Solinus Dunmonii, in Ptole«
my Damnonii, or, as they are more correctly term'd in other Copies, Dan-
monii. Which name, if it be not deriv'd from the inexbanſtibl mines of
Tinn, found in thoſe parts and call'd by the Britains Moina, [and ſo im-
\ plies as much as a hill of mines, for which it bath been always more __
12 ban for any other thing; if, I [ay, it be not derived from thence, it | proba-
PP : SNEE - E i comes from dwelling under the mountains. For throughout the whole Coun-
95 ee ty, they live low and in walleys, a way of dwelling that the Britains call
Danmunith ; in which ſenſe, the very next County is term'd by them
Duffneint, 3. e. low valleys, at this day. But whether the Oſtidamnii, called al
nes, and mention d by Strabo out of Pithæas of Marſeills, be the ſame with our Danmonii, I would de-
ſire the Amtiquaries to conſider a little more accurately. For (as they tell us) they were ſeated in the remoteſt
parts of Europe, upon the Weſtern Ocean, over-againſt Spain, not far from the Iſland Uſhant, or Ux-
antiſla. Which circumſtances do exactly agree in every particular, to this Country of the Danmonii. And
ſurtber, ſince by Artemidorus thoſe Oltiones are called Coſſini (as Stephanus in bis Book of Cities bas
hinted,) 1 would entreat them alſo to conſider, whether inſtead of Coſſini we ought not to read Corini

rum, and ſo makes that to be one of the Roman names of this Tract; how truly, let others judge. But by

whatever names they were anciently called, their Bounds are divided at this day into two parts, Cornwall
and Devonſhire ; of which in their order,

n

* I
*
-
-
*

7

o

CORNW A-L-L.

S ORNWALL, call'd alſo by repreſenting Horns. [So alſo the City Carnon,
modern Writers in Latin Cor- | otherwiſe Carna, was call'd meerly on account

nubia, reaches out to the Weſt of it's ſtanding upon an angle, cut out by
the fartheſt of all Britain, and two high-ways that met there in a point; and
is inhabited by thoſe remains | Corſica was call d by the Pheœnicians, Carnatha ;
of the Britains, which Maria- | which was afterwards mollify'd by the Greeks
nus Scotus calls Weſtern Britains. | into Keenals, Kigrs, Kip; all from it's having
By them, in the Britiſh tongue (for they have | ſo many Promontories. And theſe names, be-

not yet quite loſt their ancient language) it is ling all in the Eaſtern Countries, may ſeem to
call'd Kernaw, as leflening by degrees like a

Promontories, like ſo many borns. For the from the Pheœnicians, who traded hither for
Britains call a horn Corn, and horns in the plu- Tinn; cheren in their language being a born.
ral number Kern : tho' others will have the For, beſides that there is no other Promontory
name Cornwall, deriv'd from one Corineus, a ſup- in our Iſland of that name, tho' the ſhape of
poſed Companion of Brute, and have it called | ſeveral would anſwer it very well (which ar-
Crinia, according to that of the fabulous | gues, that it was no cuſtom amongſt the Bri-

Poet : rains, to give ſuch names ; ) beſides this, I ſay,
the nature of the thing ſeems to favour it: for

Pars Corinea datur Corinæo, de duce nomen the form depending intirely upon the increaſe
Patria, deque viro gens Corinenſis habet. or decreaſe of the ſea-coaſt, Sailors might

better diſcover it at a diſtance, than the inha-
Cornwall by grant to Corinzus came; bitants could do by land, or by the aſſiſtance
The Country from the Prince receiv'd its of. their little boats, with which they ply'd
name. only upon the very ſhores.1
But however this be, it is no wonder that
But if you look into Antiquity, it is no new this tract ſhould be called Kernaw and Corn-
thing for places to take their names from ſuch a ſince it is like a horn, crooked, and (if I may
ſituation, In Crete and the Precopenſian Cher- 'fo ſay) born d with promontories. On account
ſoneſe, ſome promontor ies are call'd keit Arena, of Which, in the times of the Saxon wars, when
Ram's horns, becauſe like Rem's horns they great numbers of the Britains retreated into
oot forth into the ſea. So, Cyprus was for- this country, cruſting to the nature and ſitua-
merly call'd by the Greeks Ceraſtis, becauſe it tion of it; (for, as for the land-roads, they
hangs into the ſea, with large promontoties, knew they were, by _— of mountains and

the

-

Oſtæi and Oſtio- Oftidamnit,

ir this Country is alſo call d Corini. After the ſame manner, 1 Fuſii is read for Furii, Valeſii for 1
F alerii, [Vetuſius, for Veturius. | If tbe Geographers exclude the Oſtidamnii and Coflini from this Inſt; I. 1, e. 4.
place, it will be extreme hard to find any other for them upon the Weſtern Ocean. | Pancirollus in his Com- Liv. |. 3.
mentary upon the Notitia, thinks that the Tribunus Cohortis Cornoviorum ſhould be read Cornubio- Pag. 177»

favour an opinion produced by a || later Author, || Sammes
born, and on every fide running out into high | that this County had the name originally Brit. p. 59»

* _
— —
2

= ms ES 5 —_—__r K
3 _
P — — —  —— td.

2
2
3 ———

7 — 3 —
a Op > = rn,

BAT N MONT I.

= ra cen ů ů——— ———6 — — — — —-—-—¼ẽ — — —

the breaches made by Aſtuaties, in a manner

unpaſſable; and that thoſe by ſea, were ex-

treme dangerous to perſons altogether ignorant

of them; ) then the Saxon Conquerours, who

in their language call'd foreigners and every

* Wealrb, thing that was ſtrange, Weaulh [as pealh- peoò

Camd. a foreign nation, pealb- coò an Interpreter, |
nam'd the inhabitants of this part, Copn-pealar
and Werr- pealar. From hence aroſe the Latin
name Cornwallia, and in later writers Cornubia ;
as alſo that of ſome writers, Occidua Wallia, i. e.
Woeſt Wales.

Another Etymology of the name is from
Carn, which ſignifies in Britiſh @ rock ; and
ic muſt be own'd, this ſeems to be eaſie and
natural. For, that the Place ſuits this conje-
ure, is agreed by all; and our Hiſtories in-
form us, that when the Britains betook them-
ſelves to thoſe parts, they had a particular eye to
the rocks and mountains, as the moſt likely places
for ſhelter ; ſo eminent was that country for
them. Which opinion is the leſs improbable, if
we conſider, that ſeveral of theſe rocky hills to
this day retain the name of Carr, as Carn-Innis,
Carn-chy, Carn-bray, Carn-margb, Carn-ulac, &c.

De Vitiis As to the ſecond branch of the name, “ Voſſius,
Serm. 1. 2. + Puchanan, || Cluver, and others, rejecting the
Sbm forementioned opinion of ic's coming from
orie, l. 2, Wealh, have advanc'd another; affirming it to
German. come from Gaule, by a change of (g) into (w)
Antiqu· l. 1-according to the German dialeR, For (ſay they)
* the Saxons coming over, and obſerving them
to have the ſame language with the Gauls, as
alſo the ſame cuſtoms and ways of living,
preſently term'd them Gaules, or Waules, But,
beſides that the Saxons could not be ſo much
ſurpriz'd at this affinity, having by their piracies
for many years, got a tolerable knowledge of
* Somner's both nations; * the name of Weallar was not
Gloſlar. us'd till the utter ſubverſion and expulſion of
the Britains, Bede calls them Britones, and in
Alfred's Verſion of him we meet with Bpyccar,
and Bpeorene, Bpetene, Bpyrtene, &c. but
not a word of the Weallar or Wallia; whereas
to expreſs Gaule, we find Gallia, and Gallia-
nice. The firſt mention of it is in the Laws of
King Ina, which were made at leaſt a hundred
years after the extirpation of the Britains ; and
when that was effected, what could be more
natural than to call thoſe, peregrinos, and extra-
neos, (pilgrims and travellers) whom they had
forced to quit their native Country, and to
look out for a new ſear ?1

So far is Cornwall from borrowing its name
from the conquering Gauls, as is urg'd by
ſome Writers, out of complement to that Na-
tion. Bur if they were as knowing at home,

Corrovaille as they are inquiſitive abroad, they would
in Armori- find that their Bretagne upon the ſea-coaſt,
oy Bre- is ſo called from ours; and that a little
655 Tract therein call'd Cornovaille, where the Cor-
niſh language is ſpoken, was ſo named from
thoſe of our Nation, who tranſplanted them-
Strabo. ſelves thither. For as thoſe Weſtern Britains
of ours, were aſſiſting to the Armoricans in
France, in their wars againſt Ceſar (which
was indeed his pretence for the invaſion of
Britain,) and afterwards, marching over thither,
and changing the name, call'd it Bretagne; ſo,
in former Ages, they ſent aids to their country-
men the Britains againſt the Franks, and in
thoſe cruel Daniſh wars many of them went
over thither, where they left that more modern

name of Cornovaille.

This County (as if nature had deſign'd to
arm it againſt the incurſions of the ſea) is for
the moſt part mountainous : in the bottoms it is
pretty fruicful of it felf ; but they make i
incredibly rich, with a ſort of ſea- weed called

Orewood. Orewood, and a fat kind of ſca-ſand. The ſea-

coaſt is beaurify'd with many Towns, which
are able to man out a conliderable flee: The
inner parts abound with rich mines. For Tinn T:

to the vaſt advantage of the inhabiran:;, ; *
dug up in great plenty; of which, huuleholg
veilels are made (not inferior to filver in
brighcneſs,) and carry'd for table-ule to all pars,
of Europe. They make their tinn of little
black ſtones, which they either dig, or gather
off the ſands, after they are waſht. Now, there
are two forts of theſe Stannaries or Meta
works: one they call Lodewworks, the Oh
Stream. works. The latter is in the lower place
when they trace the veins of tinn by ditching,
by which they carry off the water [that would
otherwiſe break in upon them ;] the former
is in places that are higher, when they fink
the holes (called Shafts) in the mountains, tg
a vaſt depth, and work by undermining. In
both kinds, they ſhew wonderful art and in.
genuity, as well in draining the waters and
reducing them to one Chanel ; as in ſupporting
and propping up their pits; not to mention
their arts of breaking, waſhing, melting, and
refining their metals; tnan which nothing can
be more ingenious,

Thar the ancient Britains dealt in Tin-mines
is plain from Diodorus Siculus, who liv'd under
Auguſtus ; not to mention Timzus the Hiſto.
rian in Pliny, who tells us, that the Britain;
fetch'd tinn out of the Iſle Icka in their little
wicker- boats cover'd with leather. [From
whence, by the way, Czſar's Portus lecins,
called in ſome Copies [#;us, and in the Greek;
Verſion "Ix; and "Oxlog u might have the
name, as being the chief Port to the Iſland
Ia. For Diodorus tells us, that the Britains
who liv'd in thoſe parts, digging tinn out of x
rocky ſort of ground, carry'd it in carts at
low water to certain neighbouring Iſlands;
and that thence che Merchants tranſported ir
into Gaule, and then on horſe-back in thirty
days to the ſprings of Eridanus, or the city
Narbona, as to a common Mart. Æthicus too,
(he, whoever he was, that groundleisly claims
the honour of being tranſlated by St. Jerom,)
intimates the ſame thing, and, adds chat he
himſelf gave directions ro thoſe workmen. The
Saxons ſeem not to have medled with them, or
at moſt, only to have employ'd the Saracen: :
for the inhabitants to this day call a mine tha:
is given over, Attal. Sariſin, that is, the leaving;
of the Saracens,

After the coming in of the Normans, the
Earls of Cornwall had vaſt revenues from thoſe
mines; eſpecially Richard, brother to Henry 3
And no wonder; when Europe was not fup-
plied with tinn, from any other place. For, 4
tor the mines in Spain, the incurſions of the
Moors had ſhut them up ; and the veins in
Germany (which too are only in Miſnia and
Bohemia) were not then diſcover'd, nor open d
before the year of Chriſt 1240. At which time,
as a writer of that age has it, the metal cal!
Tinn was found in Germany (by a certain Corniſh
man who was baniſh'd his country,) to the gres
damage of Richard Earl of Cornwall, The Linn
allo which is brought from the Eaſt-Indizs,
was but lately found out.]! Afterwards, 2
Charter was obtained for them by Edmund,
Earl Richard's Brother, with ſeveral Immunt-
ties; by whom alſo the Stannary-Laws wer?
fram'd, and confirm'd under his own Seal,
laying a certain impoſt upon the tinn, pay able
to the Earls of Cornwall. ;

Theſe Liberties, Privileges, and Laws [ (part!

cularly recited in Plowden's Commentaries,) Ig;
were afterwards confirm'd and enlarg'd by 1"

Edward 3. who divided the whole ſociety di,
Tinners (till then, as it were, one hoy) into
tout

»* Matic

/ —ꝑ ooo, ²VZ.Z ES 3

r
3

* * 8 mY nm ** "_ oy
ä

. + four towns appointed for that purpoſe;

CORN

WALL

four parts, Or quarters, call'd from the places,
Foy-more, Black-more, Trewarnaile, and Penwith./
He conſtituted one general Warden or Over-
(er over all the reſt, to do juſtice in cauſes
both of Law and Equity, and to ſer over every
company a Sub- warden, who every month
within their reſpective juriſdictions, are to
determin all controverſies ; and fuch Sen-
rences, from the Stannum or tinn, are called
Stzmary Fudgments : but from theſe, an Appeal
is ſometimes made to the Lord Warden him
(if. And leſt the tribute ſhould not be
duely paid, to the prejudice of the Dukes of!
Cornwall (who, according to ancient cuſtom,
for every thouſand pound of tinn are to have;
40 ſhillings ; ) it is provided, that whatever!
einn is made, ſhall be carried to one of the

where twice every year it is weigh'd, and
ſtamp'd, and the impoſt paid: and before
that, nc man may fell or convey ic away,
without being liable to a ſevere fine. The
amp is the ſeal of the Dutchy ; and the Towns
are, Liskeard, Leſt wit biell, Truro, and Helſton ;
to which Penſans alſo is added and made a
Copnage-rown. In Edw. iſt's time, Bodmyn made
up a tifch, but in the reign of Edw. 2. upon a
petition to the King and Council, made by
the men of Leftwithiell, it was given in favour
of the latter, and Bodmyn was deprived of am
privilege. There are alſo two other Comages,
which the Tinners call Poft-Coynages, and for
which they pay 4 4. for every hundred weight:
theſe are at Lady day and Chriſtmas. Aſter the
Coynage and other legal duties are ſarisfy'd,
the Tinner is at liberty to fell his tinn as he

count, as he had propos'd, he was prevailed

wich to accept of 1000 J. for all the pretended

Forfeitures ; granting them his Charter of
pardon. By which Charter he farther granted,
that no Law relating to the Tinners ſhould be
made without the conſent of 24 Stannators ;
and thoſe to be choſen by the Mayor and
Council of a Borough in the 4 diviſions, 6 out
of each.

In the working of theſe tin-mines, there
has been often found mix'd with the tinn, ano-
ther fort of Ore which was yellow, commonly

call'd Mundick ; negle&ed for a long time by Mundick.

the Tinners ; and When it was work'd alon

wirh the tinn, went all away in a ſmoak, which
was look'd upon to be very unwholfom. But
lately it has been try'd and wrought fingly by
{ome curious undertakers, and is found to turn
ro very great advantage, by affording true
Copper. So that whereas before, the value of
the tinn made that neglected; now, the extra-
ordinary return that copper makes, is like to
leflen the value of tinn. This Mundick, as in
ſome reſpects it is very unholſom, ſo in
others it is a ſovereign remedy. Where there
have been great quantities of it; the working
in the mines was very dangerous, by reaſon
of the great damps and unwhoiſom ſteams,
which often riſing on a ſudden, choak'd the
workmen. But for this it makes ſome amends
by another effect; for, being apply'd to any
wound, before it is wrought, it preſently heals
it ; and the workmen when they receive cuts
or wounds (as they often do in the mines) uſe
no other remedy, but the waſhing them in the
water, which runs from the Mwndick-ore. But

thinks fit, except the King or Duke has a mind if it be dreſt and burnt, the water in which

to buy it; for they have a right of Præcmp-
tion. But tho' Cornwall now has the greateſt

ſhare in theſe Mines, (there being little or no
tinn made in Devonſhire; ) yet in King John's
time, there was more found in that County,
than in Cornwall, For it appears that the Coyn-
age of Devonſhire was then fer to farm for
100 J. per An. whereas that of Cornwall yield-
ed but 100 marks. And according to this

44 proportion, the * tenth thereof is at this day

paid by the Crown, to the Biſhop of Exeter.
But K. John did not firſt beſtow theſe tenths
upon the Church (as ſome ſay,) for he only
reſtor'd them, upon a complaint made by the
Biſhop, that choſe who rented the Stannaries
refus'd to pay him his due.

In the 33d year of K. Edw. 1. the Tinners
of Cornwall pray'd and obtain'd a Charter of
their Liberties, diſtin& from thoſe of Devon-
ſhire, according to the form of K. Henry's
confirmation ; and the Merchants buying tinn
in Cornwall, obtain'd a grant of 2 Coynages
yearly, that is, at the Feaſts of S. John and
S. Michael ; and from the date of K. Edward's
Charter the Tinners of Cornwall became a
ſeparate body from thoſe of Devonſhire. Burt
the Officers of the Stannaries in both Counties,
under colour of their Libertics, uſing divers
oppreſſions; upon complaint made, 50 Edw. z.
an Explanation of the Charters was made by
Act of Parliament; which was confirm'd, and
the juriſdiction of the Stannaries further re-
ſtrain'd by a Statute in the 17 Car. 1.

Prince Arthur, eldeſt ſon to K. Hen. 7. made
certain Conſticutions relating to the Stannaries,
which the Tinners refus'd to obſerve ; and,
taking a greater liberty than was juſtifiable by
their Charters, K. Hen. 7. (who ſeldom let
flip any opportunity of filling his coffers) made
that a pretence, after Prince Archur's death,
to take the Stannaries into his own hands. But
finding that they did not turn to ſo much ac-

ic is waſhed, is ſo venomous, that it feſters
any * and kills the fiſh of any river it falls
into. |

Nor is Tinn the only Mineral found here;

of which are as big as a walnut, and only in-
ferior to thoſe in the Eaſt, in blackneſs and
hardneſs. They are alſo exceeding good, to
be cur into Seals, whether of Coats of Arms,
Creſts, or any other Device ; having ſoftneſs
enough to receive the Inſtrument, and hard-
neſs enough to retain the figure ; which they
do, better than filver, gold, or ſteel, or per-
haps than any other ſtone.) Sea-bolme is found
in great plency upon the coaſts ; and all man-
ner of grain, tho' not without great induſtry
in the husbandman, is produced in ſuch plen-
ty, that it does not only ſupply their own
neceſſary uſes, but Spain alſo yearly with vaſt
quantities of Corn. They make likewiſe a
very gainful trade of thoſe little fiſhes they
call Pylchards, which are ſeen upon the ſea-
coaſt in great ſwarms, from July to Novem-
ber: theſe they catch, ſalt, ſmoak, barrel,
preſs, and ſo ſend them in great quantities to
France, Spain, and Italy, where they are a

890, ſometimes 1000 Hogſheads of Fumads's,
are ſaved in a year; but they do not gutt
them (as is uſually done with other kinds of
fiſh ;) the Entrails being the fatteſt part, and
tecommending the reſt.] Upon theſe, Michael

had play'd upon the Corniſh-men, as the fag-
end of the world,) in defence of his country
has theſe verſes, which I ſhall here ſet down
for your diverſion ;

Non

but there is likewiſe gold, filver, and diamonds Corniſh
naturally cut into angles and poliſh'd ; ſome Diamonds,

Sea-holme .

Pylchards,

welcome commodiry, and are called Fumado's. Fumado's, |

At one Fiſhery, viz. Mouſebole, many times —_
iny
Gerres,

a Corniſh-man [who flouriſhed in the year gal. Cent. 4.
1250, and was] by much the moſt eminent N. 10.
Poet of his age, writing againſt Henry of 4 Ant.
Auranches, Poet Laureat to King Henry 3. (who F-;

——— 4 —
”

— -

— —
—

*

— . . -
- —

—
—
* — — — —
K —— — s — — -
— — — — — 1 - —
-

— — —— ṹꝗ : —

— — SO——

PIT NNO NT J

Wraſtling.
Hurling.

+ four, C.

Hauvillan,
in his Ars
cHitrenium.

Weſtern
People the
ſtrongeſt,

Non opus eft ut opes numerem quibus eſt opulenta,
Et per quas inopes ſuſtentat non ope lenta :
Piſcibus & ſtanno nuſquam tam fertilis ora.

*Twere needleſs to recount their wondrous

ſtore,

Vaſt wealth and fair proviſions for the poor;

In fiſh and tinn they know no rival ſhore.

Nor is Cornwall more happy in the ſoil,

than in the inhabitants ; who, as they are ex-

tremely well bred, and ever have been fo,

even in thoſe more ancient times, (for, as Dio-
dorus Siculus obſerves, by converſation with mer-
chants trading thither for tinn, they became remar-

kably courteous to ſtrangers ; ) ſo are they luſty,
ſtout, and of a competent Stature: their limbs
are well-ſert ; and for wreſtling (not to men-
tion that manly exerciſe of hurling the Ball)
they are ſo eminent, that they go beyond all
other Countries, both in art, and firmneſs of
body. And the forementioned Poet Michael,
after a long harangue made upon his country-
men, telling us in his jingling verſe, how
King Arthur always ſet them in the front of

the bactel, at laſt concludes ſtoutly,

Quid nos deterret? ſi firmiter in pede ſtemus,

Fraus ni nos ſuperet, nihil eſt quod non ſuperemus.

What can e'er fright us if we ſtand our

ground ?

culiar happineſs in the air and ſoil ; is not m

buſineſs nicely to conſider. ,
After this account of the Soil, and the la.
habicants ; we will proceed to their Priviledss,
and Language; in which they may ſcem, in
ſome meaſure, to be another kingdom, *
To begin with the Priviledges. In the 2

upon any Engliſh-man within the Dutchy qt
Cornwall, ſhould be diſcharg'd; and that for
the future no Cuſtom ſhould be paid for it
This was firſt granted them by the Black P. ing
and hath always been enjoy'd by them, in con.
ſideration that they have pail, and do till pay
45. for the coynage of every hundred of ting.
whereas Devonſhire pays no more than 84 *
They have alſo the freedom to take ſand out
of the ſea, and carry it through the Whole
County, to manure their ground withal, * Thi.

Cornwall, which is confirm'd An. 45 Hen.
by that King. Whereupon, in the next Reign
on an Inquiſition made, we find a complain
that Saltaſh had lately taken yearly 12 s, for each
Barge that carry'd Sand up Tamar; whereas
nothing ought to have been demanded.

By chis it appears, that ever ſince Hen, z.

upon horſe's backs. Mr. Ray is of opinion,

If fraud confound us not, we'll all confound, |that the virtue hereof depends chiefly upon th:

And this perhaps may have given occaſion to
that tradition, of Giants formerly inhabiting
thoſe parts. For Hauvillan, a Poet who liv'd
+ five hundred years ago, deſcribing certain
Britiſh Giants, has theſe verſes concerning

Britain, | — 5
| Titanibus illa

Sed paucis famuloſa domus, quibus uda ferarum
Terga dabant weſtes, cruor hauſtus, pocula trunci,
Antra Lares, dumeta thoros, cænacula rupes,
Præda cibos, raptus Venerem, ſpectacula cædes,
Imperium wires, animos furor, impetus arma,

Mortem pug na, ſepulchra rubus : monſtriſq; gemebat

Monticolis tellus : ſed eorum plurima tractus
Pars erat occidui, terror majorque premebat
Te furor, extremum Zephyri, Cornubia, limen.

Of Titan's monſtrous race

Only ſome few diſturb'd that happy place.

Raw hides they wore for cloaths, their drink
was blood,

Rocks were their dining-rooms, their prey
their food,

Their cup ſome hollow trunk, their bed a
grove,

Murder their ſport, and rapes their only love.

Their courage frenzy, ſtrength their ſole
command ;

Their arms, what fury offer'd to their hand.

And when at laſt in brutiſh fight they dy'd,

Some ſpacious thicket a vaſt grave ſupply'd.

With ſuch vile monſters was the land op-

pre

But moſt, the farther regions of the Weſt ;

Of them thou Cornwall too waſt plagu'd
above the reſt. Ns

But whether this remarkable firmneſs of con-

ſtitution (which conſiſts of a due temperature
of heat and moiſture) be cauſed in the Danme-

nii, by the fruitful breezes of the Weſt- wind-
and their weſterly ſicuation, (as we ſee, in Ger-
many the Batavi, in France the Aquitani and
Rutheni, which lie furtheſt to the Weſt, are
moſt luſty ;) or rather is owing to ſome pe-

*
a,

CL”:

ſale mix'd with it ; which is ſo copious, that
in many places ſalt is boyl'd up out of a Lisi.
vium made of the ſea-land ; and the reaſon
why ſand, after it hath lain long in the ſun and
wind, proves leſs uſeful and enriching, is, be-
cauſe the dews and rain which fall upon it.
(weep away a good part of it's ſalt.

They had likewiſe a privilege of trading to
all parts of the world, granted them by King
Charles 1. in recompence of their Loyalty ; and

&c. and concludes with an Order, to have it
read and preſerv'd in every Church and Cha-
pel, throughout the County.

a Preſident and Council were erected for the
Weſt : but Cornwall and ſome others, deſirous
to be under the immediate government of the

it; ſo that it came to nothing.

(which is ſomething ſurprizing) is obſerved by
Travellers to be more pure and refind, than
that of their neighbours, Devonſhire and Somer-
ſetſhire, The moſt probable reaſon whereof,
ſeems to be this ; that Engliſh is to them an
introduced, not an original Language ; and
thoſe that brought ic in, were the Gentry and
Merchants, who imitated the Diale& of the
Court. Their neat way of living and houſe-
wifery, upon which they juſtly value them-
ſelves above their neighbours, does probably
proceed from the ſame cauſe, i

The old Corniſh Tongue is almoſt quite
driven out of the Country, being ſpoken only
by the vulgar in two or three Pariſhes at the
Lands-end ; and they too underſtand the En-
gliſh. In other parts, the inhabitants know little
or nothing of ir; ſo that in all likelihood, 3
ſhoce time will deſtroy the ſmall remains that
are left of it. Tis a good while ſince, that
only two men could write it, and one of them

no Scholar nor Grammarian, and then *
| "WI:

of Elizabeth, it was order'd, that all charge Privig
of Cuſtom (for tranſporting of Corniſh Choath)* G

they enjoy by a Grant fiom Richard Duke c,

3. Ata ,

at leaſt, his hath been the chief way of + im. 1,
proving their ground: and they ſtill continue 7...
the ſame method; carrying it ten miles up in. Ns,
to the country; and a great part of the way, i:

the ſame King wric them a || Letter of Thanks, f
which begins thus; We are ſo bigbly ſenſible of |...

the extraordinary merit of our County of Cornwall, $3...

Their Government is now much the ſame...
with the reſt of England; for in the 32 Hen. g. 0 C

King and Common Law, vigorouſly oppos'd

Their Language too, is the Engliſh ; and agg

; p a LSE
4

wit

h as

other
mon to
ſtructiot
Gildas C
breakin
Gildas,

(1 ſay)

diſadva

| Keige

But

be mu
the re
row, |

Me

arlyth

{or

8
:
*
4
tl
*
4
4
5
in
|

*
8
.

| Keig-

CORN

WAL . f 10

with age. And indeed, it cannot well be
mon to them with the Welſh (ſuch as, the de-
ſlruction of their original Monuments, which
Gildas complains of ; and the Roman Language
dreabing · in upon them, hinted by the ſame
Gillas, with Tacitus and Martial ; ) beſides theſe
[ ſay) their language has had tome peculiar
\iadvantages- One is, the loſs of commerce

The Lord's Prayer in

Corniſh, |

Ny Taz ex yn neau, bonegas
Jw tha banaw. Tha Gwlakath
doaz,, Tha bonogath bo gwrez
en nore pocaragen neau, Roe
thenyen dythma yon dyth bara
givians ny gan rabn weery cara
ny givians mens 0 cabin. Ledia
»y nara idn tentation. Bux dil-
wer ny thart doeg.

But they affirm the affinity in general, to
be much greater than appears here. However,
the remains of the Corniſh being ſo very nar-

Another particular cauſe of the decay of the
Corniſh Language, is, that when the A# of U-
niformity was made, the Welſh had it in their
own tongue ; but the Corniſh, being in love
with the Engliſh, to gratify their novelty, de-
ſir'd (it ſeems) to have the Common Liturgy
in chat Language. To which we may add a
third cauſe, namely, The giving over of the
Guirimears, i. e. great Speeches, which were for-
merly us'd at the great Conventions of the
people, and conſiſted of Scriptural Hiſtories, &c.
Theſe were held in the ſpatious and open
Downs, wherein earthen banks were thrown
up on popes large enough to encloſe thou-
ſands of people, as appears by their ſhape in
ſeveral places, which remains to this day.
Theſe (wich the coming in of Artificers,
Trading-men, Miniſters, &c.) muſt have con-
tribured very much to this general negle& of
their original language ; ſo that almoſt nothing
now appears of it in their converſation, and
bur very little in any old writing. Three books
in Corniſh, are all that can be found: One,
written in an old court-hand on Vellum, con-
taining the Hiſtory of the Paſſion of our Sa-
viour in 1036 verſes. It always has Creft for
Chriſt, according to the ancient Roman way of
writing Cbreſtus for Chriſtus : ſo 1 Suetonius,
Judeos, impulſore Chreſto, tumultuantes, &c. But
perhaps this may not be any mark of it's Anti-
quity, becauſe the Corniſh pronounce it Cree.
By the characters and pictures, it looks like
the time of Richard 3. or thereabouts; and po-
tively determins againſt Tranſubſtantiation. The
other two are tranſcrib'd out of the Bodleian Li-
rary ; one is tranſlated, and the other was

ocherwile 3 for, beſide the inconveniencies _

Welſh.

Ein Tad yr bun wyt jn »
nefoedd, ſantteiddier dy en
Deued dy deyrmas ;
ewyllys ar yddaiar megis y mac
Jn nefoedd dyro i ni beddyw
ein bara beunyddiol : a mad.
deu i ni ein dyledion, fel y mad-
dewn ni in dyledwyr : ac nar
arwain mi brofe digaeth, eithy

* in rbag drug.

row, the inſerting the Creed alſo in that lan-

The Creed in Corniſh.

Me agreez en du Taz ollgologack y wrig en neu ban noare. Ha yn Jeſu Creſt y vabe bag agan
arlyth auy conſeuyys dur an ſperiz ſanz, geniz thart an Voz Mareea, ſufferai dadn Ponc Pilat,
we goris dan Vernans ba bet bis, ha thes kidnias the yffarn, y ſavas arta yn tryſa dyth, ba ſetb
war digbow dornyndue taz ollgologack, thurt ena eu ra dvaz, tha juga yn beaw han varaw. Me
agicez yn ſperiz ſanz, ſanz Cathalic Eglis, y» communion |
derivyans yn corf, ban Bowians ragnevers. Andellarobo,

and correſpondence with the Armoricant, under Cauſes of
Henry 7 ; before which time, they had mu- ＋ . .
tual interchanges of families and Princes with gig. i
them; and the preſent language of that peo-

ple, * is no other in it's Radicals, than the · Howell
Corniſh, and they ſtill underſtand one another. Let. 19.
The affinity between them, and the agreement

of Welſh with both, will be beſt apprehended

by a Specimen of the Lord's Prayer in each.

| 1 A. ths

on Tat, 0 en eoln,
ot h Hano — 21 De —
de omp bo Rovintelez, Ha vo-
lonte t gret var an douar
euel en eon Roit dezomp binou
bor bara bemdezier, Ha par-
donnit dexomp hon off anton evel-
ma pardon nomp d'ac re odeus
bon offantet. Ua n bon digaxit

quel e tentation, Hoguen bon
delivrit a droue.

bid dy

guage, as it will gratifie the Lovers of Anti-
quity, ſo will it preſerve to poſterity ſome
of that little we have till left.

yn ſans, yn givzans an pegh, yn

ſon perhaps who then perfe#ly underſtood the

tongue.

Now let us deſcribe the Promontories, cities,
and rivers mention'd by the Ancients, (for that
is our main deſign; ) and beginning at the
utmoſt promontory, take a view of the Sou-
thern, then of the Northern coaſts, and laſtly
of the courſe of the river Tamar, which divides
this County from Devonſhire ; [having firſt
obſerv'd, that on a little Ifland ſeparated from
the Lands-end, ſo as a Boat with Oars may
paſs between, ſtood Caren an Peale, commonly
called The Armed Knight. Caren ſignifies a
rock, and Pele a Spire ; which Spire was ten
fathom above the ordinary flux of the Sea, and
very narrow at the top. In the year before the
beheading of King Charles the firſt, it was pro-
digiouſly cur off by a ſtorm, in that part where
it was fourteen foot ſquare ; and falling, ir
broke in three pieces.) But this, by the way.
The utmoſt Promontory, which lies-out into
the Iriſh Ocean, and is 17 degrees diſtant from
the Fortunate Iſlands, or rather from the Azores,
is called by Pcolemy Bolerium, by Diodorus Be- Belerium or
lerium ; poſlibly from the Britiſh Pell, which Antivelizum-
ſignifies a thing very remote. Prolemy calls it
alſo Arial. or Antiveſt eum, and the Britains
Penrbinguaed, i. e. the Promontory of blood: but
cheſe are only the Bards, or Poets; for the
Britiſh Hiſtorians call ic Penwith, i. e. a Pro-
montory to the left; as the Saxons, Penpiþ- |
rceopt; Steort with them ſignifying ground Steort, wha*
ſtretchd out into the ſea. From hence, the it vgnibes.
whole Hundred is call'd Penwitb, and by the
inhabitants in their language, Pen won las, i. e.
the end of the earth ; in which ſenſe che Engliſh

ome years fince tranſlating by the only | per-

call it the Lands end, as 1 the fartheſt 2 |
0

PTN MONT I

of the Iſland weſt- ward. Now it this Promon-
tory was ever call'd Helenum, as Volateranus,
and the more modern writers atficm; it was not
ſo nam'd from Helenus fon of Priam, but from
Pen Elin, which in Britiſh (as Ancon among
the Greeks) ſignifies an elbow. For ſince the
Greeks call'd crooked ſhores, Ancones (which
Pliny affirms of the Ancona in Italy,) it cannot
be any abſurdity to ſuppoſe that this winding
ſhore was called in the ſame ſenſe by the
Britains Pen-Elin, and that thence came the
Latin Helenum. As to the name Antiveſt eum,
I have ſometimes doubted, whether it was not
of a Greek original. For obſerving it very
common with the Greeks to call places, from
the names of thoſe which were oppoſite to
them (and that, not only in Greece, where they
have Rbium and Antirrbium; but alſo in the A-
rabian gulf, where is Bacchium and Antibacchz.
um, and in the gulf of Venice, Antibarrium, as
directly facing the Barrium in Italy ; ) obſer-
ving theſe, I ſet my ſelf to ſearch, whether
there was any place oppoſite to our Antiveſt e-
um, that went under the name of Veſtæum. But
finding nothing of that, I betook my elf to
the Britiſh Language; and yet, there, can
meet with no ſatisfaction. The inhabitants are
of opinion, that this Promontory did once
reach farther to the Weſt ; which the Seamen
poſitively conclude from the rubbiſh they draw
up. The neighbours will tell you too, from a
certain old tradition, that the land there
drown'd by the incurſions of the ſea, was call'd
Lioneſſe. |

[To which Opinion, of the Promontories
reaching further, theſe hints may perhaps con
tribute ſomething of probability; That about
the middle way between Land's-end and Scilly,
there are rocks call'd in Corniſh Letbas, by the
Engliſh Seven- tones; and the Corniſh call that
place within the ſtones Tregva, i.e. a dwelling ; |
where it has been reported that windows, and
other ſtuff, have been taken up with hooks
(for that is the beſt place of fiſhing ; ) That
from the Lands-end to Scilly, is an equal depth
of water; That S. Michae!'s Mount is call'd in
Corniſh Careg cowſe in clowſe, i. e. the hoary
rock in the wood; That tis certain, there have
been large trees, with roots and body, driven
in by the ſea between S. Michael's Mount and
Penſance, of late years, To theſe we may add
a tradition, that at the time of the Inundation
ſuppoſed here, Trevelyan ſwam from thence,
and in memory thereof bears Gules an horſe ar-
gent iſſuing out of the ſea proper.)

In the utmoſt rocks of this Promontory,
when they are bare at low water, there appear
veins of white lead and braſs ; and the inhabi-
tants ſay, there was formerly a watch-tower,
with lights for direction of Sailors. It was
without doabt deſign'd for a guide to the tra-
ders to Spain; for Oroſius has told us, that the
bigh watch-tower of Brigantia in Gallicia, of a
moſt admirable ſtructure, was built ad ſpeculam
Britanniæ, that is (if I apprehend him right)
either for the uſe of ſuch as traded from Britain
to Spain, or elſe over-againſt the watch-tower
of Britain : for there is no other place in this
Iſland, that looks towards Spain. There now
ſtands a little Village call'd Saint Buriens, for-
merly Eglis Buriens, i.e. the Church of Buriana
or Beriana, dedicated to Buriana, a certain Re-
ligious Iriſh Woman. For this Country did all
along pay ſo much Veneration to the Iriſh
Saints as well as their own, that, between both,
there was hardly a Town, but what was con-
ſecrated to ſome one of them. There is a
Tradition that King Atheltan gave it the pri-
vilege of a Sanctuary, when he arriv'd here

Lioneſſ,

5. Buriens.

it 15 certain, that he builc a Church here
that in William the Congqueror's time he
a College of Canons, to whom the neighbour.
ing grounds belong'd.

from his Conqueſt of the Scili-Iſtandi. However,

3 and

This St. Buriens is an independant Dez.

nery, formerly belonging to tue Pope, and
ſeiz'd into the King's hands by one
Edwards,
the Pariſhes of Burian, Zennen, and 58
and the Biſhops of Exeter holding it in Com.
mendam, all ſpiritual juriſdiction is fo entire
lodg'd in them, that there lies no Apnea
from them, but to the King directly. Ups
Tomb in the Church, is this Inſcription,

one of the
jut iſdiction
Leven

It contains within it's

a 4

5

J

44
2

Vl

WH

WI

A *

—

Dd SDJ

7,
2

n

.

7;

[ys
2

7.

7
32

1
D 5 % SY I = K
RIS MK JL

4

4, vo
J

DT:

The Inſcription is old French ; and the im-
port of it ſeems to be this, Clarice, the wife of
Geffrei de Bolleit, lies here ; God of ber Soul hav?
mercy. They who ſhall pray for ber ſoul, ſhall bave
ten days of pardon. In this Pariſh, is a place called
Bollait, ro which there is no doubt but the
name on the Inſcription refers.

Not far from hence, in a place call'd Biſcaw: Bus
woune, are nineteen ſtones plac'd in a circle, wa-
about 12 foot diſtant one from another ; and
in the center, there ſtands one, much larger
than any of the reſt. We may probably con-

jecture this to have been ſome trophy of the A 7

Let un- envy

? to bay . ,

we.
TH: (ct

iſ

*
2
4

hf ond ts SA '- e „ 22 r * A

Romans under the later Emperors ; or [(if the + C 5

Romans never paſſed the Tamar, + as indeed ne

there are neither Ways nor Coins to prove that .

they did) I the Trophy of Athelſtan the Saxon, jw
after he had ſubdued the Danmonii. 1 Dr. K
| ut gra

adren's

de ti- Wal
| PLATED

1871 (enc

ſton

the ti-
Hut 015+
1

4
4

YU

etebay.

s of

C
In. Am-
WW. |. c.
& of
"FI

T

adren's
we.
TY: cry
"58

3

4

BTR

Ma Cafe RA HE (TP on CONE $62 ©.

2 — that they were ſuch. One particularly in

* a
7 Faw

CORNG LL

But yet it may be worth the Reader's en-
uiry ; whether it is not more probably an
ancient Sepulchral monument of the Britains;
eſpecially, ſince it plainly appears from the
inſcriptions of t other Stones thus ſet up on

Vales, obſery'd by a “ very learned perſon
— indeed, with a ditch, inſtead of

ende + nes,) has an Inſcription to this ſenſe, Mayeſt

awake. |
— hence to the South, the ſhore wheeling
in by little and little, makes a bay in form of
4 new-moon, call'd Mounts-bay ; where they
ſay, that the Ocean breaking violently in,
drown'd the land. Upon this, lies Mouſehole,
in Britiſh, Port. Init, that is, the port of the
land (trom an Illand lying before it,)] for
which the privilege of a market was procurd
of Edward 1. by Henry de Tieis, who had the
Dignity of a Baron, and was Lord of Ahwerton
and Tiwernel in this County. And Penſans, i. e.
the head of the ſand, [or rather the bead of the
ſaint ; for that this laſt is the right name, appears
from the Arms of the town, which are, St.
John Baptifi's head in a charger. If this did
not put ir beyond diſpute ; it would not be
abſurd ro imagin the original name to have
been Penſavas ; which ſignifies the bead of the
channel, and agrees very well with the nature
of the place. I This is a little market-town3 not
far from whence * was that noted ſtone Main-
Amber, which tho' of a vaſt bigneſs, you might
move with your little finger ; notwithſtanding
which, a great number of men could not re-
move it our of the place. [In the late Civil
wars, it was thrown down by the Governour
of Pendennis, not without great labour in the
undermining.

In the pariſh of Penſant, is (a) St. Maddren';
Hell, the cures whereof have been very remar-
kable. * Biſhop Hall cells us, that a Cripple
who for 16 years together was forc'd to walk
upon his hands by reaſon the ſinews of his legs
were contracted, was induced by a dream to
waſh in this Well ; which had ſo good effec,
that himſelf ſaw him both able to walk, and
to get his own livelyhood. 1

Next, upon this bay, ſtands [ Gulwall, where
is the Tombſtone of an ancient Britain, now
turn'd into a foot-bridge, and commonly called
the blew-bridge ; on which, is this Inſcription,

* — WR *
—DIHVIFIUVg 5
——_— pp —J |}

The name, probably, in Britiſh, was Kynadbav'
ap Ichdinow.

9

" WM. th.

Upon this Bay alſo ſtands] Merkin, i. e.
the market of Jupiter, becauſe a market is
there kept on Thurſday [Jupiter's day; ] but
this is no good harbour. In the very cor-
ner, is S. Michael's Mount, which gives name to
the whole bay, call'd formerly Dinſol, as tis in
the book of Landaff; by the inhabitants Careg-

Cowſe, i. e. a hoary rock; and in Saxon Mychel- Mychelſtow,

cop, i. e. Michaels-place, as Laurence Noel has
obſerv'd; a perſon of great learning; who in
the laſt age did firſt reſtore the Saxon language
ſpoken by our Anceſtors, which had been quite
laid aſide and forgotten. Here is a rock pretty
high, and craggy, which, when the tide is in,
is encompaſs'd with water; but when our, is
joyn'd ro the main land. Upon this rock, John
Earl of Oxford, not many ages fince, truſting
co the natural ſtrength of the place, fortify'd
himſelf againſt K. Edward 4. and defended it
bravely, tho' without ſucceſs. For his Men
yielded upon the firſt aſſault of the King's
party. Upon the very top of the rock, with-
in the Fort, was a Chapel dedicated to S. Mi-
chael the Archangel; and William Earl of
Cornwall and Moriton, who by the munitfi-
cence of William the Conqueror held large
poſſeſſions in theſe parts, built a Cell there
for a Monk or two, who pretended that S.
Michael had appear'd in that Mount. But
this Viſion, the Italians alſo are very earneſt
to fix upon their Garganus ; and the French, up-
on their Michael's Mount in Normandy. Act the
bottom of this mountain, within the memory

of our * Grandfathers, as they were digging for“ Fathers, C.

tinn, they met with ſpear-heads, axes, and
{words of Braſs, all wrap'd-up in Linnen ; of
the ſame ſort, with thoſe found long ago in
Hircinia in Germany, and others of the like
kind in Wales. For it is plain from the Monu-
ments of Antiquity, that the Greeks, Cimbri-
ans, and Britains, made uſe of braſs-weapons ;
notwithſtanding, that the wounds made by
them are leſs hurtful, on account of a medici-
nal virtue in Braſs; which Macrobius takes no-
tice of from Ariſtotle. Thoſe ages were not
ſo well verſed in the killing- arts, as outs is. In
the rocks underneath, and all along this coaſt,

S. Michael's

Mount,

Laurence
oel.

+ This, Ce

Braſs Wea»
pons.

breeds the f Hyrrbocorax, a Crow with a red 4 Pyrrbocs-

bill, and red feet; which therefore is not pe-
culiar to the Alps, as Pliny imagin'd. This
Bird is found by the Inhabitants to be an Incen-
diary, and very thieving. For it often ſets hou-
les on fire privately, and ſteals pieces of mo-
ney, and then hides them.

In this place, the country is the moſt nar-
row, and contracted into a ſort of Iſthmus ;

there being ſcarce four miles diſtance between

this and the Upper or Severn-ſea. A little
beyond the mountain, is a bay, pretty wide,
call'd Mountsbay, from the mountain; it is a
very ſafe harbour from the South and South-eaſt
winds, and at low water is fix or ſeven fa-

thom deep. More to the Eaſt, ſtands Godol-

can [(they now call it Godolphin; )] a hill fa- |;
mous for ſtore of tin- mines, but much more hill.

(a) I know not whether this is a diſtin& inſtance, from another that is ſaid to be undoubtedly true. Two perſons

who had found the

preſcriptions of Phyſicians and Chirurgeons ineſſectual, went to this well (according to the ancient

cuſtom) on Corpus Chriſti Eve, and layirg a ſmall offering upon the Altar, drank of the water; lay upon the ground
all night; in the morning took a good draught more, and each of them carry'd away ſome of the water in a bottle.
Within 3 weeks they found the effect of it, and (their ſtrength increaſing by degrees) they were able to move them»
elves upon crutches. Next year, they took the ſame courſe, after which they were able to go up and down by the

help of a
he other

aff, At length one of em, being a fiſherman, was, and, if he be alive, is till able to follow his bulineſs,
was a Soldier under Colonel William Godolphin, and dy'd in the ſervice of King Charles J.

After this, the Well was ſuperſtitiouſly frequented z fo that the Rector of the neighbouring Pariſh was forced to re-
pom * of his Pariſhioners for it. But, accidentally, meeting a woman coming from it with a bottle in her
and, an in

The inſtances
Legendary table
accidentally taſti

of the water claims the whole remedy,

-

g troubled with colical pains, he delir'd to drink of it, and found himſelf eas'd of that diſtemper.
are too near our own times, and too well atteſted, to fall under the ſuſpicion of idle Traditions, or
But it is worth our obſervation, that the laſt Inſtance deſtroys the Miracle; tor if he was cured upon
ng it, the Ceremonies of offering, lying on the ground, Cc. contributed nothing; and fo, the Virtue

noted

rax.
Corniſh
cough.

Mountsbay.

Godolphin-

r

.
> 4. ee. Yd 1 © A
*

m—__

—

= — ,
— — N
— * Wo *
— ——_— - — RO, > — ——

15

DA N M

7

Family of noted for irs Lords of that name, whole virtues
the Godol- are no leſs eminent, than their Family is an-

phins.

Heil on,

Loopole.

Menna.

Aleneg.

cient, ſand whoſe honour, however conſidera-
ble before, hath been greatly augmented of
late years by Sidney Earl of Godolphin, who
was advanced by King Charles the ſecond to
the Dignity of a Baron of this Realm by the
title of Baron Godolphin of Rialton ; and was
afterwards raiſed to the more honourable titles
of Viſcount Rialton and Earl of Godolphin, by
Q. Anne ; in the firſt year of whoſe reign, he
was conſtituted Lord Treaſurer of England 3

in the adminiſtration of which high and im-

portant Office, his Abilities and Integricy were
equally conſpicuous. Godolonac is ſaid by a
Sammes Brit. late writer to ſignifie in the Phoenician lan-
guage à place of Tinn,] But che name in Cor-
niſh comes from a White Eagle ; and this Fa-
mily has a long time born for their Arms, in 4
ſhield gules, an eagle diſplay'd between three flower-

de-luces argent.

From S. Michael's mount to the ſouth, there
jutts out a Peninſula ; at che entrance whereof, !
we meet with Heilſton, in the language of the
natives Hellas, from the ſalt-water thereabouts „
a town, famous for the priviledge of ſtamping |
tinn. And a little lower, by the conflux of a
great many waters, is made a lake two miles
long, call'd Loopole, ſeparated from the ſea by
a liccle ridge running out, and when the vio-
lence of the waves breaks through that, it
makes a wonderful roaring all over the neigh-
bourhood. At a little diſtance from thence,
there is a milicary Camp (chey call ic Earth,)
built in a large circumference of great ſtones,
heap'd one upon another without mortar ; ſuch
as are to be met with, here and there, in other
places; and made, as I ſuppoſe, in the Daniſh
wars. Nor is it unlike thoſe tortifications of
the Britains, which Tacitus calls @ rude and
confus'd ſtructure of great ſtones. The Peninſula
it ſelf (pretty large, and well ſtock'd with litcle
villages,) is calld Meneg ; without all doubt,
the ſame with Menna, which Jornandes in his
Geticks deſcribes from Cornelius (1 know not! G.
whether the ſame with Tacitus,) a writer of, p
Annals; and which ſome Copies read Memma.
It is (ſays he) in the furtheſt part of Britain, and
abounds with ſeveral ſorts of metal; affording good

paſture, and contributing more to the nouriſhment of

DJ
A

*
SY * *
N dy

. 4 IO
JD n
DJ DH
Dad Ds |

The Characters are all plain, except the (>.
cond G in Gnegumi ; who might probably be
{ome Britiſh Prince. A little further, the ſhore
opens] to receive the ſmall river Yale, upon
which, ſomething inward, ſtood an old town

- Wo . =
JS WS
JOODDRYID Ix N
JJ Do E&KERS A
8 J . DD DD JJ
D
RD 5 JJ JD >H- DD DDD
= Dm. Ll V 2 WS SDQ 8
x. SW \ VS N 5 S Y
5 — 5 K dd n N
D 8 V SIDQDISS DV
SHO = WS — \
. * HOO .% JJ J
8 8 :
% => = %. N
D 8 N JW
* D D
NJ =

D

remain in Volemouth or Falemouth. This harbo
is as noble as the Brunduſium of Italy, and very
capacious : for an hundred ſhips may ride in

which an Antiquarian Poet writes thus ;

Pendinas tenet aſperi cacumen

Celſum montis, & intonat frequenter.
Mauditi quoque ſubſidet rotundum
Cattrum, & impetu fulminat furenti,
Portus oftia qua patent Falenſis.

High on a craggy rock Pendennis ſtands,
While ſtrong St. Maudir's anſwers ic below,

Where Falmouth's ſands the ſpacious harbour
ſhow.

calld Voluba, mention'd by Prolemy. Bur it Vola
has, long ſince, eicher loſt ic's being, or it';
name; which yet does ſtill in ſome meaſure

it's winding bays at ſuch diſtance, that, from
no one of them, ſhall be ſeen the top of an.
chec's main-maſt. It is alſo ſecure from wind:
being guarded on all ſides wich high creeks,
At the very entrance, there is a high uneven
rock, call'd by the Inhabirants Crage ; and each
ſide of it is fortify'd with a Caſtle, built by
K. Henry 8, for the ſafety of the place, and
terror of the enemy: that on the eaſt, is 5.
Maudit's ; and that on the weſt, Pendinas ; of Peri

And with it's thunder all the Port commands,

cattel, than of men. But as for what he ſays of
it's abounding with ſeveral ſorts of metal, it is
now ſo far from it, that it ſeems long ſince,
to have been quite drain'd. This Meneg, as

Sammes Brit, alſo the Ertb in it, a late writer will have to

P- 572

be of a Pheœnician original; the firſt, from Me-
neog ſignifying kept - in by the ſea ; and the ſecond,
from Arith, a common name, as he ſays, for
lakes ; and this military fence being placed by
a lake, may well enough be ſuppos'd to have
it's denomination from thence.] It is by the
Seamen call'd the Lizard, by Ptolemy the Pro-

Ocrinum. montory of the Danmonii, and Ocrinum ; by K-
The Lizard. thicus, in that monſtrous Geography of his,

Mawgan.

Ocranum ; and reckoned among the mountains
of the Weſtern Ocean. I dare not be poſitive,
that it took it's name from Ocra, which (as
Sextus Pompeius has it) ſignifies a craggy moun-
tain; tho tis certain that Ocrea among the Alps,
as alſo Ocriculum and Interocrea, were ſo called
from their ſteep rough ſituation. But ſince Ochr
in Britiſh ſignifies an edge, what if we ſhould
ſuppoſe that this Promontory had it's name
from being edg'd and pointed like a cone?

The ſhore, ſhooting-in again from this Ae.

neg, makes a bay full of winding creeks Jin
which is Mawgan, where is a ſtone commonly
called Mawgan-cro/s, with this Inſcription,

ritiſh word Genen, ſignifying a mouth and an

hard by, confirms ; as much as if one ſhould
ſay, # little town at the mouth; [if indeed there
is any occaſion for the diminutive ; as I am in-
form d there is not; and this is the more pro-

bable, becauſe f Tira and by contraction tra in+ b
the Phoenician, is ſo far from ſignifying any“

inconſiderable place, that it denotes 4 Firt er
Caſtle. The not knowing the ſignification of
this word, ſeems in former days to have led
ſome of the Corniſh Gentry into an error, in
taking their coat-armour, according to the im-
port of their name. Thus, Trefuſis (which te-
ally ſignifies a walled town or fortify'd place,) is
turned into three fuſils; and ſo, three ſpindles are
in the arms of that Family. Trenances, is 2
place or town by a vale ; but becauſe it lounds
not unlike tres enſes, a feſs between three ſwords 13
born by this family. Many more inſtances of
this kind might be given, eſpecially where the
initial Tre (as if ic were of a Latin origini!,)
hath determined them to take three of whatever
they chuſe.l But to return. In the reign of
King Charles the ſecond, Charles Lord Berkley,
and Viſcount Firzbarding, was in the 16th year
thereof created at the ſame time Lord Botetor:
and Earl of Falmouth ; but he loſing his life the
year following in the Sea-ſervice againſt the
Dutch, and leaving no iſſue-male, this Honour

was extinct: In which year, an Act of Parlia Sul |
ment was alſo paſſed for the making of the: 0
Church erected here at Falmouth, a Pariſſ-

Church, and no part of the Pariſh of St. 6%

[ z © Ch | f . d ke.
via, or Chapelry of St. Budocke There

But the harbour it ſelf is call'd by Ptolemy cis
nionis oftium ; without all diſpute, from the ofa.

entrance: Which Tregenie, the name of a town Tg-

be FR "
: 20 1.

wy".

4
gon.
4 =

Mr.

WF” 5-7. bill, and +

LE.

OT TTI

CORNWAL IL. 7

There ars ſome towns which ſtand upon the
janer parts of this Harbour. Peryn, a famous
market; where Walter Broneſcombe Biſhop of
Exeter, An. 1283. built a Collegiare Church
(call'd Glaſnith) | with * thicteen Prebendarics ;
as the Hiſtory of che Foundation in the Leiger-

crack. Book of that College, expreſsly laich.] Arwe-

„ek, the ſeat of the ancient and famous family
of the Killegrews. Truro, in Corniſh Truru, fo
called from three ſtreets, in a manner encom-
paſs'd with two little rivers ; and diſtinguiſht by
being a Mayor-town, and by the privileges ir

i. has in the buſineſs of the Stannaries. Gram-

nd, the moſt remote from the harbour; [to
che Burghers whereof, Jobn of Eltham Earl of
Cornwall, in his Charter which is (till extant,
granted and confirm'd the whole Ville of Gram-
pon!, and all the lands of Coyrfala, which in the
Briciſh ſignifies Fala- od and, at this day, there
are certain Lands adjoyning to the town, and
within the precincts of the borough, call'd Cois-
fala, Which remains of the old name, and the
ſituation of the town, exactly agreeing with that
of Voluba in Ptolemy, ſeem to juſtitie a Con-
jectute, that upon erecting the adjoyning bridge
over the river Vale, it exchang'd the name of
ue for Ponſmur ; by which name (in Britiſh
ſignifying a great bridge,) Edmund Earl of Corn-
wall <niranchis'd it; and this being put into
French, is exactly Granpond, or, as it is call'd
at this day, Grampend, Upon the ſea-coaſt at
ſome diſtance, is Tregonan the ſcat of the Tre-
denbamt, an ancient and well-ally'd family.“
Below this, is Roſeland, a plot of ground lying
along the {ca-iide ; fo call'd, as ſome would have
it, from roſetum, a garden of roſes ; or, as others,
b: c:ule ic is exicetum, a heath; for Ros in Britiſh
lignifi's a beath. From whence Roſſe in Scotland,
and another Refſe in Wales, have had their names,
as being a dry, thirſty ground: but this, by
the induſtry of che husbandmen, is made more
rich and Huitful. [ Notwithſtanding which Con-
jectures, this neither borrows the name from a
roſe, nor from heath ; but from Roſe or Roſs,
which is in Corniſh, a Vale or Valley. The
ſound of this word, implying ſomething of a
roſe, and the beauty of that flower, hath led
{ome Families into the ſame error in their ta-
king of Arms, as the foremention'd Tre hath
done others. So Roſagan (which iignifies no more
than a white valley, took 3 red Roſes ; Roſcar-
rock (i. e a rock in the valley) a roſe and a
tench ; Penroſe (i. e. head of the valley) a bend
ſet about with roſes ; wich others of the ſame

a iirck, kind, Farther up in the land, is Lanbidrocł, the

ſeat of the Right honourable the Earl of Radnor,
whoſe Great Grandfather was created Baron ot
Truro by K. Ch. 1, and his Grandfather Earl of
Radnor by K. Ch. 2.1 From Roſeland the ſea im-
mediately follows the dintings of the Land, and
makes a large bay, call'd Trueardraithbay, that
is to ſay, The bay of a town at the ſand.

SCArce two miles from hence, where the river
Fawey runs into the Sea, is Fowy-town, in Britiſh
Foath, ſtretch'd along the creek : it was very fa-
mous, in former times, for Sea-fights ; the me-
mory whereof remains in the Arms of the place,
which are a Compound of all thoſe of the Cinque-
ports, On each fide of the harbour, is a fort,
built by Edward 4; who a little after, upon a
diſpleaſure conceiv'd againſt the men of Fowy,
or preying upon the French coaſts, tho a
Peace had been made with that kingdom ; took
from them all their ſhips and Naval Stores. O-
Ver-againft Fowy, on the other ſide, ſtands Hall,
noted for it's pleaſant walks on the fide of an
the ſeat of Sic William Mobun, Knight,
4 n ancient and noble family; deſcended
e the Mobuns Earls of Somerſet, and the

wrineies, Earls of Devonſhire ; [Since which

——

time, it has been ſold; and the ſeat of the

Lord Moban (while living) was at Bocennock.

Not far from Fowy, is St. Blaiſe, where is as, Blu,
Croſs, by the Almes-houſe ; on two ſides of

which are Inſcriptions, as follow:

4
b
ST a.
= V
D We

In the high-way, near Fowy, is a Stone,
commonly called the Long Stone, on which is
this Inſcription :

;
> \
2

The reading is, Ciruſſus hie jacit Cunomori fili-
us ; for the w in Cunomori muſt needs be an u
reverſed ; the letter W being bur lately intro-
duced into any Alphabet. This man's name
in Britiſh was Kirys ap Kynvor ; and it is pro-
bable, that Pol Kirys (a village, within half a
mile of this Stone) received the name from
him. About a mile from the Stone, is a round
ditch, called Caftle-dore, where, within the me-
mory of man, Urns full of Aſhes have been
dug-up ; and the like hath been heretofore
found in the neighbouring Pariſh of Trewardrith. |

More within land, upon the ſame river, 15,1;
ſtands the Uzella of Prolemy ; and it has not The Britains
yet quite loſt the name, being called at this had not the
day Leſtuthi«ll, from it's ſituation. For it was letter x.
upon a high hill, where is Leformin an ancient
caſtle; tho”, ſince it is removed into the valley,
Now, uchel in Britiſh ſignifies bigh and lofty;
from whence the Uxellodunum in Gaul is fo uUxetlodu-
nam'd, becauſe the rown, as being built upon a num, in
mountain, has a ſteep rugged aſcent every France.
way. This, in the Britiſh hiſtory, is cally
Pen-Uchel-coit, i.e. a high mountain in a wood;
by which ſome will have Exeter to be meant.
But the ſituation of it in Ptolemy, and the
name it has to this day, do ſufficiently ſhew,
that it was the ancient Uzella, Now, it is a
little town and not much frequented ; for the
channel of the river Fawey, which in the laſt
age uvsd to Carry the tide to the very town, and
convey veſlels of good burthen, is now ſo ſtopt How the
up by the ſands coming from the Lead- mines, ports in
that it is too ſhallow for barges : and indeed, Corrwall
all the harbours of this County are in danger gat aol
to be choak'd up by theſe ſands. However it
is the County-town ; where the Sheriff every ”

month holds the County-court, and where the

C War-

— —

rr 4

DANMONI I

Leskerd.

Pylman,

+ 2. C.

The book
of Winche-
ſter Mona-
ſtery.

Warden of the Stannaries has his priſon. For
ic has the privilege of Coynige, by the tavour
(as they ſay) of Edmund Earl of Cornwall,
who formerly had his Palace here. Bur there
are two towns which do greatly eclipſe the
glory of this Uzella; Lerkerd to the eaſt, ſea-
ted on a high hill and famous for an ancient
caſtle, and a market: And Bodman to the north,
ſcarce + four miles diſtant ; in Britiſh (if I mi-
ſtake not) Boſuenna, and in ancient Charters,
Bodminiam, This town is ſeated between two
hills, not very healthfully 5; extended from
eaſt to weſt. Tis a noted market ; popu-
lous, and well built ; and is diſtinguiſh'd by
the Privilege of ſtamping tinn. But it was
formerly more famous for a Biſhop's Ste : For
about the year 905. when the diſcipline of the
Church was quite neglected in thoſe parts, Ed-
ward the Elder, by a Decree from Pope For-
moſus, ſettled a Biſhop's See here, and granted
the Biſhop of Kirton three villages in thoſe
parts, Polton, Cæling, and Lanwitbam ; that be
might every year wiſit the County of Cornwall, in
order to reform their errors ; for before that time, they
reſifted the Truth to the utmoſt, and would not ſub-
mit to the Apottolical Decrees, | Polton is proba-
bly Paulton in S. Breague ; Lawbitton (till be-
longs to the Biſhop ; but where Czling was

Irqu. An. g. ſeared, doth not appear. The Manours men-

Edw. 2.

+ Is, C.

S. Neoth's,

tioned hereabouts to be the Biſhop's, are Law-
hitton, S. Germans, Pawton, Pregaer, Penryn, and
Cargaul, without any mention of Cæling. In
thole Manours, the Biſhops had View of Frank-
pledge, and all other Privileges, except Hue
and Cry.] But afterwards, thoſe diſmal wars
of the Danes breaking out, the Biſhop's See
was tranſlated to S. Germans. Near Leskerd F was
a Church formerly called S. Guerir, which in
Britiſh ſignifies a Phyſician ; where (as Aﬀer
tells us) King Alfred, while he was in the
midſt of his devotion, recovered of a fit of
ſickneſs. But when Neotus, a man of eminent
Sanctity and Learning, was buried in that
Church, he ſo much eclips'd the glory of the
other Saint, that from him the place begun to
be call'd Neotetom, i, e. the place of Neoth, and
now S. Neothb's; and the Religious there were
called Clerks of St. Neot, who had pretty large
revenues, as appears from Domeſday, | At pre-
ſent, the very foocſteps of the old Church or

College are quite gone; ſo that there are no

* Archiv.
B. 31.

St. Clare.

ruins of ic within the pariſh, no body knows
where it ſtood, nor are there any Church-lands
that are known to have formerly belong'd to
it: which makes it probable, that it was alie-
nated long before the Reformation. Here is
at preſent a fine Country Church ; and in the
windows, ſeveral pictures relating to ſome par-
ticular traditions of the Jews; which are exactly
deliver'd in a Corniſh book, now in the“ pub-
lick Library at Oxford. Tis probable they
had theſe traditions immediately from the Jews
themſelves, who were here in great numbers,
about the Tinn.] Hard by (as I have been
told) in the Pariſh of St. Clare, there are in
a place call'd Pennant, i. e. the head of the
valley, two ſtone-monuments ; one, with the
upper part hollow in form of a chair; the
other, called Other-balf-ſtone, inſcrib'd with bar-
barous characters now almoſt worn out.

Www VN ;
W

Which I think are to be read thus, Donier:: Re.
gavit pro anima: unleſs we may imagin, that
theſe two points () after Doniert, are the r.
mains of the letter E; and ſo read, Donicrt erge-
ga vit; implying, that he gave that land to the
Religious, for the good of his foul. 1 cannot
bur think, that this Doniert muſt be that petty
King of Cornwall, which the Annals call Dan
gerth, and tell us he was drown'd in the year
872 ; [not only by reaſon of the affinity of the
names, but alſo becauſe the Letters are exa4ly
the ſame wich thoſe on a Monument in Den—
bighſhire, which was ſet up by Konken King
of Powys, at the very ſame time.

Hard by, is a heap of pretty large rocks ; 4
under which is a great ſtone, form'd ſo like 4 4x

cheeſe, that it ſeems to be preſs'd by the others;
from whence the whole has the name of //7ing-
cheeſe. [They were, doubtleſs, naturally and
accidentally fo piled one upon another; lying
askew, and not perpendicularly, the leaſt at
the bottom.] A great many ſtones likewiſe,
almoſt in a ſquare, are to be ſeen upon the ad-
joyning plain; whereof ſeven or eight are at
equal diſtance from one another. The Neigh-

bouring people call them Hurlers, from a pious Ha

perſwaſion, that they are men transformed into
ſtones, for playing at Ball on Sunday. Others
will have them, to be a trophy, in memory of
ſome battle; and others think, they have been
ſer for boundaries ; becauſe in the Authors that

have writ about Bounds, they have read, that

large ſtones vs'd to be gather'd by both Parties,
and erected for limits. { Theſes are oblong,
rude and unhewn ſtones, pitch'd in the ground
on one end, ftanding upon a Down in three
circles, the centers whereof are in a right line;
the middlemoſt circle the greateſt. They ſcem

neither to be trophies, nor land-marks, but bu- 5!
rying-places of the ancient Britains. For Then”
Other-half-ſtone not far from thoſe Hurlers, bn

pears by the inſcription to have been a ſepulchral
ſtone. And that alſo call'd the Long-Houe, ſtand-
ing in the Downs about half a mile from the
Hurlers (above two yards and a half high, with
a Croſs on both ſides) was doubtleſs a funcral
monument. The figure of it is this,

About two miles from the river Zoo, is the
preſent ſeat of the ancient family of the Tre-
lawnies ; to which, by marriage with one of
the daughters and coheirs of Courtney Earl 0
Devonſhire, a great part of che inheritanc? 0
that noble family came. They were pouch

|

of this place only fince the reign of _

"TY
IL

CORNWALL I. rod

Elizabeth; having, before, been for many a-
ges ſeated fitſt at Trelawny, and aſterwards at
inhinneed (atown diſtant about 6 miles, on the
{ume river Loo,) where they ſtill have a large
houſe (the place of their former reſidence)
c Paal. Towards the northern coaſt oft this
County, is Trerice, the ſeat of the ancient family
of Arundel, of which, Sir Fobn Arundel, in con-
(deration of his eminent Loyalty and Services
to the Crown, Was advanced by King Charles
the firſt ro the dignity of a Baron of this Realm,
by the title of Lord Arundel of Trerice.

"The river Loo opens it felf a paſſage into the

| . . » 9
(-1 upon this coaſt ; and, at its mouth, com-

municites the name to two little towns, joyn-

a ſlip of Staffordſhite on Derhyſhite- ſide; whe-

ther theſe, I ſay, may not have happened on

the like occaſion, can only be reſolved by thoſe

who have opportunity to conſult the private
recorcs and hiſtories of the reſpective Places.

But to return, | Next to Mount-Edgecomb, is
Anthony, remarkable for it's neatneſs, and a fiſh- Anthony.
pond which lets in the ſea, from whence it is
furniſh's wich fiſh, both for uſe and pleaſure ;

but much more, tor the * Lord of it, Richard * Ann. 1607.
Carew, who not only lived up to the dignity of

his anceſtors; but excell'd them all in the orna-

ments of Vircue. Thus far we have been upon

the ſouth-coaſt ; now let us ſurvey the north.

The northern ſhore, from the Lands-end, run-

( together by a ſtone-biidge. That upon the [ning forward on a long tract of fandy banks

+ eaft-tide, as newer, flouriſhes moſt ; but time

has very much decay'd the other which is more

» wetward ; tho” it ſtill retains the Honour of

a Mayor and Aldermen. From hence, we mect
with nothing memorable, till we come to Liver,
A lictle river abounding with oyſters ; which

os by S. Germans, a ſmall village, whither the

th

1 Vai-

4 be.

o

Biſhop's See was tranſlatzd, for greater ſafety,
in the time of the Daniſh war. There is a lit-
0: Religious houſe dedicated to St. German of
Auxerre, who ſuppreſſed the Pelagian hereſie,
then growing again in Britain. After the ſuc-
cellion of fome few Biſhops, Levinus Biſhop
of Kirton, a great favourite of Canutus the
Dane, obtain'd a Royal Grant to have it an-
nex'd to his own See. From which time, there
has been but one Biſhop for this County and
Devonſhire, who now has his See at Exeter ;
and he appointed this little village of S. Ger-
mans, for a leat to his Suffragan. There || was
nothing leſt at it long ſince, beſides fiſhermen's
hutts, who * got themſelves a pretty good live-

| lyhovd by fiſhing in the fea and the neighbour-

ing rivers ; but even that is now wholly laid
aſide. 1 At a few miles diſtance, upon the ſame

river, Trematon ſtill ſupports the name of a ca-

file, by it's ruihous walls; where (as it is in
Domeſday) William Earl of Moriton bad bis
caſtle and market z and it was the head of a Ba-
rony of the Earls and Dukes of Cornwall, as
we learn from the Inquiſitions, When the Liver
has paſs'd by this, it empries it ſelf into Tamara,
the limit of this County (near Saltaſhe, fot-
merly Eſſe, once the ſeat of the + Valtorts, now
pretty well ſtor' d with merchants, and endow'd

waſht-up by the fea, comes to a town hang-

ing into the ſea like a ſort of little tongue, called

S. Ties ; from Jia an Iriſh woman of great piety, S. lies,
who liv'd here. It was formerly call'd Pendinas

and the harbour below, which receives the ri-

ver Haile, has it's name from the Town, being

call'd by the Sea-men S. lies bay. The town it

ſelf is now but ſmall. For the North-weſt-

wind, the tyrant of this coaſt, by heaping-

in ſands upon it, has been fo very prejudicial

to it, that they have removed the ſituation more

than once. From hence, the country grow-

ing broader on both ſides and running Eaſt-

ward, the northern ſhore, with an oblique

winding, goes north-eaſt to Padſtow, meeting

with nothing remarkable in its way, beſides a

Chapel built upon the ſand, and dedicated to

S. Piranus, another Iriſh Saint, bury'd here ; to

whoſe ſanctity, a filly childiſh Writer has attri-

buted the finding proviſion for ten Iriſh Kings

and their armics, for eight days together, with

no more than three Cows ; as allo the bring-

ing to life dead hogs, and dead men. Farther

from the ſhore is Rialton, which gave the title, Rialton.
firſt of Baron, and then of Viſcount to the

Kight Honourable Sidney Earl of Godolphin,

Lord High Treaſurer of England; and! S. C.- s, Columbs.
lumbs, a little market- town, dedicated to Colum-

ba, an exceeding pious woman and a martyr,

and not to Columbanus the Scot (as I am now Camd. Epiſt.
fully ſatisfied by her liſe, [ cranſlated from the p. 91.
Corniſh.)1 Near which, at a little-leſs diſtance.
from the ſea, ſtands Lhanberon, [ heretofore] the Lhanheron.
ſeat of the family of the Arondels Knights, who,

on account of their vaſt riches, were not long

with many privileges ; Where Mont-Edgecombe, |fince call'd Ibe great Arondels, They are ſome-

the Seat of the ancient family of the Edgcombs,
is pleaſantly ſituated, with a proſpect of the
winding harbour beneath it. | This place, and

times ſtil'd in Latin De Hirundine, and appo- Family of
ſitely enough in my mind; for a Swallow in the Arondels.
French is Arondel, and their Arms are in 4 field

a great part of the Pariſh of Maker, though on |ſable fix Swallows argent. It is certainly an an-

the weſt-ſide of Tamar, do not properly be-

cient and noble family, as alſo very largely al-

long to Cornwall, but Devonſhire ; only, as|ly'd ; to the name and Arms whereof, William
to Eccleſiaſtical Juriſdiction, they are within | Brito, a Poet, alludes, when he deſcribes a war-
the Archdeaconry of Cornwall. On the other [like Gentleman of this Family aſſaulting a

hand, the tract over-againſt Saltaſh on the eaſt-
lice of Tamar, is within Cornwall; and fo it
is allo about Nortbamerton. The reaſon whereof

French-man, about the year 1170.

— Hirundelz velecior alite, que dat

is probably this ; that, upon the diviſion of Hoc agnomen ei, fert cujus in egide ſignum,

dhires, ſome eminent perſons living on one

Se rapit agminibus mediit, clypeoque nitenti

ide the river, and having part of their Eſtates Duem ſibi Guilielmus lava prætenderat ulna,

on the other, procured the latter to be inclu-
ded in the ſame County with the former. So,

Immergit validam præacutæ caſpidis baſtam.

the family of Valletort or de Valle torta, having | Swiſtas the Swallow, whence his Arms device,
their manſion on the eaſt-ſide of the river (per-| , And his own name are took, enrag'd he flies

haps, at or about Plimouth, where is yet known

Thro' gazing troops, the wonder of the field,

the Manour of Vawtore or Valletort,) had pro-] And ſticks his lance in William's glittering
bably ſome branch of their eſtate on the weſl- ſhield.

lide, and got that united to Devonſhire. And

thus, all that tract of ground, of which Mount-| At a little diſtance, is a double rampire on

Edgcomb is part, being called by the name ot
Vawtort's bome, continues part of Devonſhire.
Whether that ſmall part of Kent near Wool-

the top of a hill, and a cauſey leading to it:
it is call'd Caſtellan Danis, 1. e. the camps of Caſlie-· Danis
the Danes, becauſe the Danes, when they infe-

wich, lying on Eſſex-ſide; aiſo, a piece off ſted the Engliſh coaſts, encamp'd here, as allo

Oxfordſhire near Culham on Berkſhire-lide ; and

-

in other places hereabouts.
Not

— — —— — — —

23 D A N IN

ͤj—— ä— TT IS

U N12

Not far from hence, is the river Alan, call'd
alſo Camb-alan, and Camel, from it's winding chan-
nel (tor Cam with them implies fo much.) Run-
ning gently into the Upper-ſca, it has at the
mouth a little market-town cali'd Padſtow, con-
tracted from Petrocłſto (as tis cali'd in the Hiſte-
rien of the Saints,) from one Petrocus a Britiſh Saint,
who liv'd here in a Religious way ; whereas,
* Vid. Ut. the town was before call'd * Loderick and Laffe-
And P25 -* xc. [Leland ſays of it, that in old writings it

is called Adelſtom, i. e. Athelſtan's place, King

Athelſtan being lookt upon as the chief Author

of it's Privileges ; but he tells us alſo, that the

Tomb and Shrine of St. Petrock were remain-

ing in the eaſt-part of the Church.) Ir is very
conveniently ſeated for trading into Ireland, be-

ing but 24 hours eaſie fail ; and is very much

adorn'd by a beautiful houſe in the neighbour-

hood, like a caſtle, which N. Prideaux, a Gen-

+ So (aid, tleman of an ancient name and family, f lately
have built in thoſe Weſtern parts. |
Wadebridge. [About 5 miles above Padſtow, is Wadebridge, a
bridge of ſeventeen arches, and much the lar-

|| Lel. Ttine. geſt in the whole country. It was built by
rar. Vol. 2. gne Lovebone Vicar of the place, to prevent thoſe
dangers which paſſengers on horſe-back were
expos'd-to, by ferrying over. The foundations

of ſome of the arches were firſt laid upon quick

{ands ; which made the undertaker deſpair of

eſſecting his deſign, till he laid packs of wool

for the ground-work.] Ar the head of the ri-

ver Alan, is ſeated Camelford, otherwiſe writ

Gaſſelford, Gaffelford, a little village, formerly call'd Kam-
blan in the opinion of Leland, who tells ns that
Arthur, the Engliſh Hector, was ſlain here. For
(as he adds) pieces of armour, rings, and braſs-
trappings for horſes, are ſometimes dug-up here
by the Countrymen ; and, after ſo many ages,
the tradition of a bloody victory in this place,
is ſtill preſerv'd. There are alſo extant ſome

Pa d [? OW.

on a high terrible Rock environed with the
Sea, with a draw-bridge from the reſidue of the
Caitls to it.] Of this a modern Poet Writes
thus:

Eft locus Abrini ſinuoſo littore ponti

Rupe fitus media, refluus quem circuit æſtus;
Fulminat hic lat? turrito wertice caſtrum,
Nomine Iindagium weteres dixere Corini.

On a ſteep rock within a winding bay
A caltle ſtands ſurrounded by the ſea,
le” En thunder ſhakes the trembl
Tindage of old 'was call'd, now Tindagel.

ing

It would be tedious to relate here, from the
Hiſtory of Geoffrey, how Uther Pendragon, King
of Wales, fell in love with the wife of Gerlois
Prince of Cornwall, in this caſtle ; and tow
by art-magick aſſuming the ſhape of her hus-
band, he defil'd the Lady, and begat this Ar-

villan ſhall ſuperſede chat:

Facie dum falſus adulter

Tindagel irrupit, nec amoris Pendragon æſt um
Vincit, & omnifices Merlini conſulit artes,
Mentiturque ducis babitut, & rege latente,
Induit abſentis præſentia Gorlois ora. |

Nor could the Prince conceal his raging

flame,

But in falſe ſhapes to Tindagel he came,

By ans > art transform'd from King to
uke

And Gorloi's Perſon for Pendragon's took.

This Uther Pendragon was à Prince, in whom

thur. The verſes of our countryman Jobn Hau- ge

verſes of a middle-age poet, about Camel's run-
ning with blood, after the battle of Arthur
againſt Mordred: which, becauſe they ſeem to
flow from a good veinv, I will venture to

were all the accompliſhments of a Soldier, and
who valiantly ſupported the ſinking ſtate of his
country againſt the Saxons. I dare not affirm
that the Royal banner of the Engliſh (baving the effi- A tu
gies of a dragon with a golden head, ſo well known dn

inſert:

Naturam Cambala fontis

Mutatam ſi upet eſſe ſui, tranſcendit inundans
Sanguineus torrent ripas, & wolvit in æquor
Corpora cæſorum, plures natare videres

Et petere auxilium, quos undis vita reliquit.

Camel's ſtream

Feels the ſad change, and wonders whence

it came:

The yielding banks are drown'd with riſing

blood, |

And mangled corps lie gaſping on the flood:

Poor half-dead wretches ſpend their fainting
breath

In cries for reſcue from a ſecond death.

It is certain (not to deny the truth of this
ſtory concerning Arthur,) that we read in
Marianus of a bloody battle here between the
Britains and Saxons, in the year 820. ſo that
the place may in ſome meaſure ſeem to be ſa-
cred to Mars. And if it be true, that Arthur
was kill'd here; the ſame ſhore gave him his
firſt breath and depriv'd him of his laſt. For,
upon the neighbouring ſhore, ſtands Tindagium
(the birch-place of the great Arthur,) part of
it as it were on a little tongue thruſt our, and
part upon an Iſland formerly joyn'd to the main-

Tir4:pe, land by 2 bridge. They now call it Tindagel;
Act's tho” nothing is left, but the ſplendid ruins of
ccc PI an ancient ſtately caſtle ; which Leland ſaith,
hach been a marvellous ſtrong and notable for-
treſs, made by che nature of the place in a

to our neigbbours, and ſo terrible to the Pagans in tbec -
Holy wars under Richard the 34,) was deriv'd from *.
him. I rather think we owe it to the Romans, Tiba
who for a long time us'd the Eagle, aſter Ma-
rius had rejected the Standards of a wolf, a
minotaure, a horſe, &. and came at laſt un-
der the later Emperors to make choice of 2
Dragon, Upon which, Claudian,

Hi picta Draconum
Colla le van...

Exalted Banners wrought with dragon's
he ads.

And Nemeſianus,

Signa micant, finuatque truces levis aura Dra-
cones,

In Enſigns mov'd by gentle air
Fierce Dragons heads ere& appear.

That the Weſt-Saxon kings carry'd a Dragon
in their Standards, we have the authority of
Hoveden. But as for that other banner of the Tie=
Saxons (which Bede calls Tufa,) and the Reafan calls
of the Danes; I will ſay nothing of them in

this place, leſt I ſhould be thought to make too
large a digreſſion.

Upon the ſame coaſt ( which is not very
fruitful, and wants wood,) there ſtands expos'd _
to the ſea, Botereaux-caſtle, corrupted by the vul- Bot
gar into Boſ-caſtell, and built by the Lords of it

the Botereauxs, who bore in 4 ſhield argent three

manner impregnable; eſpecially, the Dungeon

toads ſable, William Botereaux was the firſt prion
0

of note an
ry'd Alice
ſiſter was
by her Re
William, e
zrer, onl!
Robert Hun
came ro
augmente
1 riages of
ss. noble fan

. and Thwe

Lord Hu
Lord Hur
Mary, W.
and Hun
firſt of th
caſtle wi
family, |
From
ſhoots it
„C. ty betwe
-.: broad.
row.
upon the
nils. mily of
and nob
dignity
very ſtat
the time
in the C
ately, C. in T the
| Chriſtia
birth by
an Eng:
Ntton. Not fat
noted fe
place,
gain'd ©
the pla
barley,

0 *.

=D
1043+

or tran
Lancell.
the Ch,
The
mara viv. not far
| and vi
is enci
Tamar
Tamert
is Lan
uunſton. monly
tuate
burro!
to one
Willi:
[the 1
as Le
ble h
ſever
bigg!
in Et
as A
call
out «
* William OY
Rarviſt, wall
Ep. of Exe.
ter, Lel.

Calvo

CORNWAL L.

of note and eminence in this family; and mar-
d Alice, daughter of Robert Corber, whoſe
iter was concubine to King Henry 1. and had
by her Reginald Earl of Cornwall. From this
William, eleven flouriſh'd ſucceflively. But Mar-
zrer, only daughter to the laſt, was marry'd to
Robert Hungerford, by whoſe poſterity the Eſtate
came to the Haſtings, after it had been much
augmented in extent and honour, by the mar-
rizges of the Botereauxs with the heireſſes of the
noble families of the AMoeles, St. Laud or S. Lo,
and Tbweng. [By her, Robert had iſſue Robert
Lord Hungerford and Molins, and he, Thomas
Lord Hungerford his ſon, whoſe ſole heireſs,
Mary, was marry'd to Edward Lord Haſtings
and Hungerford ; by whom he had George the
firſt of that Sirname Earl of Huntingdon. This
caſtle with a large inheritance continu'd in that
family, until the reign of Queen Elizabeth.
From hence northward, the land riſes and
ſnoots it ſelf ſo far into the fea, that the coun-
ty between the two ſeas is“ above 30 miles
broad; tho' it has been hitherto but very nar-
„ row. At the greateſt breadth of it, Stow ſtands
upon the ſea-coaſt, the ancient ſear of the fa-
mily of the Grenwills, famous for their antiquity
and nobility ; ſand of later years raiſed to the
dignity of Earls of Bathe; who have built here a
very ſtately houſe.) Among the reſt, Richard, in
the time of William Rufus, ſignaliz'd his courage
in the Conqueſt of Glamorganſhire in Wales; and
deln, C. in t the laſt age ſave one, another of the ſame
Chriſtian- name, exceeding the nobility of his
birth by his own bravery, loſt his life gallantly in
an Engagement with the Spaniard at the Azores.
Not far from this, is Stratton, a market-town
noted for gardens, and its garlick ; | near which
place, the Corniſh forces for King Charles 1.
gain'd a victory over the Parliament-army. In
the place, there follow'd a prodigious crop of
barley, ten or twelve ears on one ſtalk. So, for-
merly, after the battle with the Danes in Sworn-
field; a certain ſhrub ſprang up (therefore call'd
Dane-ball or Dane-wort, by others Dwarf-elder )
which is ſaid to be no where found, but there,
or tranſplanted from thence.] Next to this is
Lancells, a new ſeat of the ancient family of
the Chaumonds, now extinct.
| The river Tamara, now Tamar, riſing here,
mati 772. not far from the Northern ſhore, runs ſwiftly
| and violently towards the South; and, after it
is encreas'd with many little rivulets, paſſes by
Tamara, a town mention'd by Ptolemy, now
Tamerton ; and, at a little diſtance from it,
is Lanſtupbadon, i. e. the Church of Stept en, com-
union, monly call'd Launſton ; a pretty little town, ſi-
tuate upon a riſing; which, out of two other
burroughs, Dune vet and Newport, hath grown in-
to one Town. In the beginning of the Normans,
William Earl of Moriton built a caſtle here;
[the moles whereof on which the Kepe ſtood,
as Leland tells us, were of a large and terri-
ble height; and that the Arx of it, having three
ſeveral Wards, was the higheſt, tho' not the
biggeſt, that ever he ſaw in any ancient work
in England.] It had alſo a College of Canons,
as appears by Domeſday-book, where it 1s
call'd Lawunſtaveten ; which name it had, with-
out doubt, from the College there, dedicated to
d. Stephen, and about the year 1150. converted
into a monaſtery by * Reginald Earl of Corn-

Lb.

*

Calvo

* William

"ger wall. This change, the Biſhops of Exeter (roo

tr, Zej, much carry'd away by paſlion and intereſt,) did
vehemently oppoſe, fearing it might come to be

a Biſhop's See, and ſo leſſen their juriſdiction.

At this day, it is moſt remarkable for the pub-

os 5 lick Gaol, and for the Aſſizes Thaving been
1 Georg 'T conſtantly kept there; till it was provided

by a ſpecial Act of Parliament, that it ſhould

[Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, to appoint a-

ny other place in the County, for the holding
„„ AS. f |
Tamar going from hence, has the view of a

high mountain, ſtretch'd out a great way in
length, call'd by the Saxon annals bengirtef dun,

by Marianus Hengeròoun, and by him inter-

preted the mountain of Hengiſt : the name it |
has at preſent, is Heng Hon-bill, It was formerly Hengſton,
pretty rich in veins of tinn, and the ſtanding i. e. 4 bil! of
place where the Tinners of Cornwall and De- borſes.
vonſhire met every ſeventh or eighth year in

great numbers, to concert their common inte-

reſts. At this place alſo, in the year 831, the
Danmonian Britains, with the aſſiſtance of the Mlartarus
Danes, try ing to break into Devonſhire to drive Scotus,
out the Engliſh who had then got poſſeſſion

of it, were totally routed by King Egbert, and

cut of? almoſt to a man. Lower down near

Salteſſe (a little market-town, as I obſerv'd be- Salteſſe,
fore, plac'd upon a riſing ground, and having

a Mayor, with certain Privileges,) Tamar re-

ceives the river Liver, upon which ſtands the

Town of S. Germans, mention'd above. With

this increaſe, it paſſes to the ſea, and makes a
harbour, call'd in the Life of Indractus, Tamer-

worth; atter it hath been the Boundary between
Cornwall and Devonſhire. For King Athe!-

ſtan (who was the firſt King of England, that
entirely ſubdu'd thoſe parts) made this the

Bound between the Corniſh Britains and his

own Engliſh, after he had removed the Bri-

rains out of Devonſhire ; as we learn from
Malmesbury, who calls the river, Tambra. Where-

upon, Alexander Necham, in his Hymns upon

the Divine Wiſdom, writes thus ;

Loegriæ Tamaris diviſor Cornubieque,
Indigenas ditat pinguibus i ſiciis.

C e England Tamar's ſtreams

ivide |

WRegy wich fat Salmon all the land's ſup-
Piy d.

This place ſeems to require ſomething to be Urſula, and
ſaid concerning Urſula, a Virgin of great ſan- the 11000
icy, born here, and of the 11000 Britiſh Vir- Virgins:
gins. But whilſt ſome hold, that they were prays. Poly-
drown'd in the time of Gratian the Empe- olb. p. 131. at
ror, about the year 383. upon the coaſt of Ger- large.
many, as they were failing to Armorica ; and
others tell us, that in the year 450. at Cologn
upon the Rhine, in their return from Rome,
they ſuffer'd Martyrdom from Attila the Hunne,
that Inſtrument of the divine Vengeance: This
difference among Authors has made ſome, in-
ſtead of believing it an hiſtorical truth, ſuſpect
ic to be a mere Fable. But as to that Conſtan-
tine (call'd by Gildas the ryrannous whelp of an
unclean Danmonian Lioneſs,) and the disforeſting
of all this County under K. John, (for before
that, it is thought to have been a foreſt, Tor
rather, was certainly a Foreſt, as appears by
the Inſtrument of that King, in the 5th year
of his reign, whereby he expreſly disforeſts all
Cornwall: Jof theſe matters let the Hiſtorians
give an account, for they are beſide my buſineſs.

As to the Earls: Candorus, call'd by others Earls of
Cadocus, is mention'd by modern writers as the Cornwall,
laſt Earl of Cornwall of Briciſh extraction: his
Arms (as the Heralds tell you) were 15 beſants,
in a field ſable. The firſt Earl of Norman de-
ſcent, was Robert Moriton, brother to William
the Conqueror, as ſon of Herlotta; to whom
ſucceeded William his ſon. This William, ſi-
ding with Robert the Norman againſt Henry r.

King of England, was taken priſoner, and loſt
both his liberty and honors : in whoſe place,
Henry 2. whilſt he was making warlike prepara-

be in the power of the Lord Chancellor, or

D tions

———ͤ — —— —
—— —

1 3 —— 22 —

nA —

3

ONII.

tions againſt Stephen, advanc'd Reginald, na-

given him by his father, in thoſe parts) con-

tural ſon to Henry 1, to the Earldom : (for that |ter'd the title of Earl of Cornwall upon Pierce
King was ſo very incontinent, that he had no Gaveſton, a Gaſcoine, who had been the great
lefs than 13 Children, that were illegimate.) debaucher of him in his youth. But he being
Rob. de Reginald dying without lawful iſſue male, | ſeiz'd by the Barons for corrupting the Prince
Morte Henry 2. (aſſigning certain lands to his dau h-| and for other crimes, was beheaded ; and ſuc-

1175. ters) reſerv'd this Earldom for his young ſon ceeded by John de Elibam, younger ſon of
John, then but nine years of age; upon whom Edw.2. who being young, and dying without
his Brother Richard 1. afterwards beſtow'd it, iſſue, Edw. 3. erected Cornwall into a Duke-
with other Counties. But John coming to the dom, and, in the year 1 336, inveſted Edward D.
Crown of England, his ſecond ſon Richard had] his ſon, a moſt accompliſh'd
this honour, with the Earldom of Poictou, con- Dukedom of Cornwall, 7 a wreath on bis head,
fer'd upon him by his Brother Henry 3. This|# 757g por bis finger, and a
Richard was a powerful Prince in his time; as] which time (as I ſhall obſerve from the Record,
alſo a religious perſon, valiant in war, and of leaving the Lawyers to make a judgment about
great wiſdom and conduct; behaving himſelf fit ) the eldeſt fon of the King of England is
in Aquitain with wonderful courage ; where born Earl of Cornwall ; and by a ſpecial Aci made Or.
alſo he had great ſucceſs, Going to the Holy |in that caſe, be is to be preſum d of full age aſſoon at Hel.
Land, he forced the Saracens to a truce, refus'd |ever be is born, ſo that be 5 claim livery and
the kingdom of Apulia when offer'd him by ſeiſin of the ſaid Dukedom the ſa 4
the Pope, quieted ſeveral tumults in England, and ougbt by rigbt to obtain it, as if he had fully
and being choſen King of the Romans by ſome | compleated rhe age of twenty one. [ But this ( ac-

of the 7 Electors of Germany in the year 1257

was crown'd at Aix la Chapelle. There is a|is limited to the fr//-born Son, and heir. So
common verſe, which intimates that he bought |that Richard de Bourdeaux fon to the Black

this honour ;
Nummus ait pro me nubit Cornubia Rome.

Cornwall to Rome Almighty money joyn'd.

For before that time, he was ſo famous a mo- here
ny'd-man, that a Contemporary Writer has| The Duke of Cornwall hath alſo Royalties
rold us, he was able to ſpend a hundred marks and Prerogarives in certain Actions, and in the
a day for 10 years together. But the civil wars ſtannaries, wrecks, cuſtoms, c. for which,

Soldier, with the Cons

filver verge. Since

me day be is born,
,|cording to the expreſs words of the Grant, )

Prince was not Duke of Cornwall by virtue
hereof, but was created by Charter; Nor was
Elizabeth, eldeſt daughter to K. Edw, 4. Dutcheſs
hereof, becauſe it is limited to the Son : Nei-
ther was Henry 8, in the life-time of his Fa-
ther, after the death of Prince Arthur, Duke
hereof, becauſe he was not eldeſt ſon.]

breaking out in Germany, he quickly return'd and the like, he appoints ſeveral Officers undec
to England, where he dy'd, and was bury'd at him. But theſe marters are laid open, more
the famous Monaſtery of Hales, which himſelf| diſtinctiy and fully, by Richard Carew of Anthe-
had built; a little after his eldeſt ſon Henry (a perſon no leſs eminent for his 20norable
(in his return from the Holy wars, as he was Anceſtors, than his own virtue and learning,)
at his devotions in a Church at Viterbium in who hath deſcrib'd and draws this County, not
Italy) had been villanouſly murder'd by Guido in little, but at large, and whom I cannot but
de Monte fort, fon of Simon Earl of Leiceſter, in acknowledge to have been my chief Guide
revenge for his fachet's death. Whereupon, his through it.

ſecond ſon Edmund ſucceeded in the Earldom

of Cornwall; who dying without iſſue, that There are in this County 161 Pariſhes,

large Eſtate return'd to the King; he (in the
language of the Lawyers) being found next in
The Arms blood, and beir at law. Now, ſince Richard
of the Earls and his Son Edmund were of the blood Roy-

A Catalogue of more rare Plants growing

of Corr- al of England, I have often wonder'd, as others wild in Cornwall.

wall, have alſo done, how they came to bear Arms

different from thoſe of the Royal Family, viz

Alſine ſpuria puſilla repens, foliis ſaxifragæ

aureæ. Small creepi hoo hebard chick.
in a field argent a Lyon rampant gules, crowned or, reeping round-leaved baſtard c

within a border (ſable garniſh'd with bexants. And

weed, On moiſt banks in many places bath of Corn-
wall and Devonſhire, together with Campanula

the only reaſon I can offer for it, is, that they Cymbalariz foliis. Tbis Plant is figur'd by Dr.
might poſſibly do it in imitation of the Royal] Plukenet Phytograph. Tab. 7. and deſcrib d in Sy-
Family of France, (ſince this way of bearing] nopſ. Stirp. Britan. |

Arms came to us from the French.) For the

Aſparagus paluſtris Ger, marinus J. B. mari-

younger ſons of the Kings of France, have | nus craffiore folio Park. maritimus craſſiore fo-

Arms different from the Crown, to this day ;
Rande d' Or AS We may obſerve in the Families of Verman- growing on the cli
erd'Arar dois, Dreux, and Courtneys, And as Robert Duke Cornwall.
a la bor- of Burgundy, brother of Henry 1, King of
deure de France, took the ancient Arms of the Dukes

Gueules.

of Burgundy ; ſo this Richard, after he had|Round-leaved marſh St. Peter's wort.
the Earidom of Poictou beſtow'd upon him by

his brother K. Henry 3, might probably take
Memoriales the Lyons gules crown'd, Which (as French Au-

lio C. B. a or Sperage, It is found
s at the Lizard-point in

Aſcyrum ſupinum villoſum paluſtre C. B. Park.
Aſcyr. 2. five ſupinum {us Cluſii Ger. emac-
On boggy
grounds about ſpringing waters in many places, moſt
abundantly towards the Land's end in this County.

Campanula Cymbalariæ foliis Ger. emac. Park.

de Aqui- thors inform us) belong'd to his Predecefſors| Cymbalariz foliis vel folio hederaceo C. B. fo-

raine, Earls of Poictou, and might add that border ſable

lio hederaceo, ſpecies Cantabricæ Anguiltare

garniſh'd with bexants, Out of the ancient Arms 7. B. Tender Ivy-leaved Bell-flower. On many moiſt

of the Earls of Cornwall. For as foon as the

and watery banks in this County, and elſewhere in the

younger ſons of France began to bear the Weſt of England.

Royal Arms wich ſome difference, we preſent-
ly follow'd them; Edward iſt's children being
the firſt inſtance. But whicher am I rambling,

Centaurium paluſtre luteum minimum. Te
leaſt Marſh Centory. On @ rotten boggy ground be-
tween S. Ives and Penſans. It grows alſo in ſeveral

, to pleaſe my ſelf with che niceties of my own |the like places thereabouts,

proteſlion ? After Cornwall was united to the
Crown, Edward 2, (who had large poſſeſſions

Chamæmelum odoratiflimum repens flore ſim-
plici J. B. nobile ſeu odoratius C. B. Romanum
Ger.

— I — „11L„ĩ/%“ — W

*
— * * 1
— -
* [hy .
@*% gall k - *
- _ - =
*
*
.
81
F [
*
*
.
* 35
4 |
*
k 5
\*
x
* .
©
*
*.
x
*
*
: er
* 8
, "2
a *
*
\ : h
.
1 " hy :
1
© .
/
Y *
; A
„ - ;
N
4 =
*
I 1 9
2 *
F - ® A * 8
— — 2
2 . .
e -
-
S o 5 » 4-4 x
| „„
.
1 0
*

——— — —— ——— TT

* 2 f XVI : 7 .

— fee Yiu a — er
2

=y

— *

4
. 42 1-14

_— | | *

5 4 M + N 22 * pM £9 11 mn 9

f | ” Tire comb 1 % 0 bY

A ort/l one * e "> "A Am Col emenpil a- ra ombe: |
” Come . 1

Lundy

Part of

* o,4pele ' þ -
L. a Or =

%

Fi Frithel oc 2 Wor - 1X:
| Wn,

= © *

FF = - ui.

G39
tf C r

b Bred,
a wh”
- {/hrrater

Whiteſton X
etcote
« fore
0

f 1 | $ A
5 K
1 E ri
Todes om
P "i Bowtore ;
1 1
r
Penlale n | |

wort
oy o

nn

0 aro. Wo oro S
er =
* &
| Oroberm o well
ow

*
—

Ealejbery SS

—ůů — | . =

N
1 Py 3
Zehe Curryton HUN D
2

222 2 F Yayo
Kellew >
Brentor

. =
* *
1 5
. — *
1 & * MM 4 1
y af
— 2 2 , Ps .
. - — 1
\ ws 4 == — Ws : N 4
4A - 2 . © ; . 2 ,
* 4 1 N . " . — —
RR F 7 p +. | „
”
- N
5 - * > * 2 m —
8 — . : _ *+ +4 *
| 1 _
, — of ö . A
4 0 — 3 . ,
” *# £5 * * a l
- a 7
. ; - Fi
* — mm *
— 1 N RY A #
. * * . 5 =
. p . £ 2 —
C O R 2
=" - a - WEL 2
. * 0 * w - =
. 4 — 2. —
* * * gl 337g 85 A. Dh Nr | Dinoton
1 < - N 2 a —
> , A
* N | _—_ 2 F Zu 24
. PR w % » *. 5 . 4 A : _
: * * "
| —
* 1
£ - 4 1 A — 44
1 Pi ;
8 ,
4 |

Lata ops, ©

t Poinit

20 10

* hs * my
*
* .
* .
- — .
[4 18 — N 1444144 my i

4 elworthy

*

Almjirorthy / Dunfter

*
=
O
*

.
*
.
*
*
.
*
.
.
PR

Py
8
3

, 44 22
Mf \ = Ty ;
J ulverton,” ; * Brtteſfombe 8 0 M E R 8 E .
eee 9 3c Pup table

7 adington

gf
&  Kittefford 2 Ze Ses

8 H I R E

ak erudg

\

we” PE" TITLES — | 41
EN. and. ene. 27

e Tat

* pic, N t E F f -

* 5 WL 42 NY A Reg * o Bapton

Fertan bo hk —
222 5 hs * W |
2 | fire | * 1 con. 2 A Buckland 0
[UN] ; "WP

Hr 675
Aoke A.Lermyo

UND

. Hhatowes
KX en 30 *

5
o
”

4

Broad Clit 7 1l:ito k
”. — 0
* 7 98

Anderton

S, Har Tedborn 23 2
/ Cheryton == '

, * , a. 7 , p | | — ————

Leckintons car

Refpell head, | 8 4
| Zoe 9 DEV ONSHIRE |}

By Rob! Morden .

Wy

Sold by Abel Swale Abwnſham G Tohn Churchill.

”.
2
de.

- 3 8
th FP WO IO — &

— 2 —

CA1
*Deven- tor
ſchy ne. C. tro

_— _—
— — -

- DEVONSHIRE.

30

Ger. Sweet-ſcented creeping Camomile, or common. Piſum maritimum Anglicum. The Engliſh |
Camomile, It grows ſo plentifully upon the downs in Sea-peaſe, The ſame, 1 ſuppoſe, which grows on the
this County, that ou may ſcent it all along as you ride. baich between Aldburgb and Orford in Suffolk, where
Erica foliis Corios mulciflora F. B. Coris fo- ſee the Synonyma. On the baich near Penſans where
lio ſecundæ altera ſpecies Cs. Juniperifolia| the Gnaphalium marinum grows.
Nat bonenſis, densè fruticans Lob. Fir-leaved Heath Linaria odorata Monfpeſfalans J. B. An
with many flowers. On Goon-billy downs going from Linaria capillaceo folio erecta, flore odoro
Helſton to the Lizard point, plentifully. This is C. B? Linar. caryophyllata albicans C. B. Blue
different from the ſecond Erica Coris folio of Clu- | [weet-ſmelling I Near Perin along the hedges
ſius, notwithſtanding that C. Bauhine, and Par- | plentifully, It grows ſometimes a yard high. The leaves
kinlon following him, make it the ſame there- | are * confuſedly on the ſtalk, as in the common Li-
with. For Cluſius himſelf diſtinguiſheth them. | naria, but in rundles at diſtances. The talks are brittle,
Euphraſia lutea latifolia paluſtris. Euph. la- much branched toward the top, and the flewers ſtand
tifolia viſcata ſerrata H. Reg. Bles. Great yellow | not thick cluſtering togetber, but more ſparſed, or at
Marſh Eye-bright. About boggy and watery places, greater intervals : and are of a pale blue, and ſtreaked
eſpecially towards the furt her end of 19is County, plen- | all along, beel and all, with a deeper. The lower lip
_ Figured in Dr. Plukenet's Phyrtogr. | at the gaping is . with yellow.
ab. 27. Linum ſylveſtre anguſtifolium, floribus dilute
Fœniculum vulgare Ger. Park. vulgare minus] purpuraſcentibus vel carneis C. B. ſylv. anguſti-
nigriore & acriore ſemine F. B. vulgare Ger- folium J. B. An Linum ſylveſtre anguſtifolium
manicum C. B. item ſylveſtre ejaſdem. Common 6, Clus ? an Lini ſylv. quinti varietas ejuſdem ?
Fennel or Finckle. All along the cliffs between La-| Narrow leaved wild Flax. In the paſtures by the
lant and St. Ives, and thereabouts, plentifully. Sea-ſide about S. Ives and Truro plentifully.
Geranium puſillum maritimum ſupinum Be-] Peplis J. B. Fer. Park. maritima folio obtuſo
tonicæ folio noſtras, Small Sea-Cranesbill with C. B. Small purple Sea-ſpurge, On the ſandy ſhores
Betony leaves, In ſandy and gravelly places near the between Penſans and Markerjeu plentifully. I have
Sea, about Penſans and elſewhere abundamtly. This | not found this any whert elſe in England; but in bot
is figured by Dr. Plukenet in bis Phytographia, | Countries, as Italy abundantly.
Tab. 31. Fig. 4. Pinguicula flore minore carneo. Butterwort
Gunaphalium maritimum C. B. maritimum | with a ſmall fleſh-colowred flower, in moiſt meadows
multis F. B. marinum Ger, marinum ſeu cotona- | and marſh grounds about Kilkbampton and elſewhere.
ria Park, Sea-Cudweed or Cotton weed. On the} Polygonum Serpyllifolium verticillatum. Po-
baich or gravelly ſhore between Penſans and St. Mi-|lyg. parvum flore alb. verticillato F. B An
chael's mount plentifully. : Polygala repens nuperorum Lob ? repens Park ?
Gramen dactyloides radice repente Ger. daty-| repens nivea C. B. Verticillate Knvt-graſs with

panicula Graminis Mannæ J. B. canarium, I. Springs, between S. Columbe and Michil, and about

chemi paniculis Park, Creeping Cocksfoot graſi. Penſans, and towards the Land's end in many places.

Found by Mr. Newton on the ſandy ſhores between

Penſans and Marketjeu, plentifully. To theſe I ſhall add a fort of grain, ſown
Herniaria glabra. Herniaria Ger. J. B. Mil-|plemiifully towards the further end of this

legrana major ſeu Herniaria vulgaris Park. Po- County; that is,

lygonum minus S. Millegrana minor C. B.

Smoot h- lea ved Rupture-wort. At the Lixard- point! Avena nuda Ger. J. B. C. B. Park. Naked

plentifully. Oats, called bereabouts Pillis or Pill-corn, from its
Hyacinthus Autumnalis minor Ger. Park. Au- | being naturally as it were pilled or denuded of the

tumnalis minimus J. B. ſtellaris Autumnalis busk, wherewith the common Oat is covered. It is

minor C. B. The leſſer Autumnal Star- Hyacinth. On | much eſteemed, and of equal price with Wheat.
be Promontory called the Lixard- point- plent ifully.

DEVONSHIRE.

lon folio arundinaceo majus C. B. repens, cn like leaves. It grows in wa ery places near

Nor is it. C.

HE hither Country of the Dan- to time, at the direction of the Lord-Warden,

monii, already mention'd, is now
commonly call'd Denſhire | and De-
wvonſhire, | by the Corniſh-Britains
ERS Deunan, by the Welſh-Britains
Duffneint, that is, deep vallies, be-

cauſe they live every where low, in the bot-

$*Dey-n. toms; by the Engliſh Saxons * Dernaycy pe,
 1cbyne, C. from whence comes the Latin Devonia, and the

contracted name, us'd by the vulgar, Denſhire ;
and not from the Danes, as ſome, who would
be thought Antiquaries, do ſtiffly maintain.
This Country, as it ſhoots out on both ſides
into a greater breadth than Cornwall, fo has it
more commodious harbours on each. IIt is 54
miles broad ; and 61 long ; and has in ic abun-
dance of rivers, more perhaps than any other
County in England, and bridges to the number
of 166, according to the general computation. )
Nor has it been leſs rich in tin-mines, eſpe-
cially towards the weſt part, [an evidence
whereof, are the four Stannaries or Juriſdicti-
ons, with as many Stannary-Courts and towns
of Coynage, viz. Plympton, Taviſtoke, Aſhburton,
and Chagford, By theſe, are choſen from time

certain Jurates to meet in a general Seſſion ot
Parliament at Crockern-Torr, a high hill in the
midſt of Dartmore, This Parliament has power
to make Laws touching the ſtate of the Mines
and Stannaries, a volume whereof was printed
in Queen Elizabeth's rime, the Earl of Bedford
being then Lord-Warden. Such regular Courts
and Proceedings, give us an Eſtimace of the
great quantities of tinn that muſt have been
formerly dug-up here, the regulation whereof
ſhould require ſo much ſolemnity. Beſides, it
expreſly appears (as was obſervd in Cornwall)
that in King John's time, Devonſhire produced
greater ſtore of tinn, than that County; the
Coynage of this being ſer to farm for 100 J.
yearly, and that only for 100 marks. But now,
Cornwall has almoſt the whole trade ; and
tho” they ſtill work in ſome parts of this Coun-
ty, it turns to no conſiderable Advantage:
however, che Government remains, and the
Devonſhire Tinners are not under the Lord
Lieutenant of the County, but form a ſepa»
rate Militia by themſelves.

There

2 WC

3

31 DANMONTI I. .
There were formerly, in Devonſhire, mines alſo|grievouſly ſhatter'd by the Danes, in the I... by Sir *
| we of gold and ſilver, || as appears from ſeveral 99/7. 'T his town (as it appears from that book continu
Fod. Reg. Grants made by K. Edw. 3. and other Kings, | wherein William 1. took his ſurvey of England) Teave, C
wich a reſervation of the Tenths to the Church.|was wont to be taxed at the ſame time, and conjunC
Iron-mines have been diſcover'd too; but for f after the ſame manner, that London was, [lc name to
want of fuel, and for ſome other reaſons, they |had then in it 140 Burgeſſes; and, as an argu- nu s fort
are not yet wrought to perfection. Mineral ment of what importance it was, the cuſtody been tw
Chaly biate waters are at Cleave, Taviſtoke, La- of the caſtle here was committed trom time to Record:
merton, Lifton, Bampton, and other places in the|time to perſons of the greateſt quality. What- Fete 4. Sutton P
County ; 1 which is alſo enamel'd with finer|ever were the cauſes of it's decay, the Mayo- of the!
meadows, and ſhelter'd with more woods than|ralty of ic is now loſt ; and whereas it ſent the laſt
Cornwall, and very full of towns and houſes. Burgeſſes to Parliament, it was diſcharged to a lar
But the ſoil in ſome places is again as poor and from that obligation, propter paupertatem, in con. in num
lean ; which however makes a good return to ſideration of it's poverty. This lictle river Lid, Lil, day.
the husbandman, if he has skill in husbandry, being here at the bridge pent up with rocks, the ca
with diligence, and a good purſe, For indeed has made it ſelf ſo deep a fall into the ground greatel
there are not many places in England, where|by continual working, chat the water is not to | {ails, a
land requires greater charge in the tillage :|be ſeen, but only the murmur of it to be heard, ſo big,
it is well nigh barren in many parts, unleſs it to the no {mall Admiration of thoſe that paſs are allc
A rich ſand. be improv'd by a“ certain ſand from the ſea, over. in 169
1 3 which renders it very fruitful, and as it were] From Lidford, two or three miles Weſtward, Bent re, erected
Phitof Tranſ, impreg nate: the glebe ; and therefore in places|ſtands Brent-Torr, a name ſignifying a high pable «
N. 103. p. zg. more remote from the ſhore, it is dear: which f rocky place. On the top of this high hill, is a it of 2
dearneſs has, I ſuppoſe, in ſome places put |Pariſh- Church, dedicated to S. Michael, and a houſes,
them under a neceſſity of uſing marle, lime, famous ſea-mark. And hard by, there is a vil- other «
and the turf of the ground skin'd off, and burnt |lage nam'd the Gubbins, the inhabitants whereof The Gu, culated
to aſhes ; a method of Agriculture very agree- have been by miſtake * repreſented as a lawleſs hn | Beſides
+ 1 Georg. able to + Virgil's rule, Scythian ſort of people.] Won Enem)
Lower down, the Teave, a little river, runs : Nicha- Nich.
Spe etiam ſteriles, &c. into the Tamar ; upon which flouriſhes Teaviſtoke, „ which
commonly Taviftoke, formerly famous for an Tit, at the
Wich crackling flames to burn the barten Abbey, which Ordulph the fon of Ordgar Earl The (un up wi
earth, of Devonſhire, being admoniſh'd by a viſion date C, being
Has oft produc'd an advantageous birth; from heaven, built about the year of our Lord" by a
Whether an higher nutriment it get, 961. The place (lays Malmesbury) is pleaſant for thoug
And ſecret vigour from the genial heat: |#he convenience of wood, for fine fiſhing, and for an Royal
Oc 'cauſe the noxious dregs being purg'd by |«niform Church : the banks of the river lie along juſt cond,
ſie, by the ſhops, "which by the force of it's current waſhes 165 G
The uſeleſs juices in moiſt ſumes perſpire: |away all rhe rubbiſh caſt into it. Saint Rumon 8 other
Or that the heat relax the ſtubborn maſs, | Biſhop is much talk'd-of bere, where be lies bury'd. whole
And find new ways for nouriſhment to pals, And there is ſeen in the ſame Mona#tery the ſepulcher we C7
And feed the tender plants : or make of Ordgar 3 and the buge bulk of Mauſolzus his a Ma
It hard, ſo that it no impreſſion take Son is look'd upon as a wonderful Sight : be is call d Ct: him,
From the ſoft Courtſhip of deſcending |Ordult, of a gigantick growth, and prodigious every
ſhowers, . |/ffrength : For he could break the bars of gates, inferi
Or from the ſun's, or wind's more active and go along a little river ten foot broad, ſtride- 16, 17, Chur
powers. | wiſe, if we may credit the ſaid William. But it . N. year
had hardly continu'd thirty three years from the in th
That the Romans were in poſſeſſion of this | foundation, till it was burnt down by the Danes. "2206, the f
County, appears from the Foſe-way croſſing it, | Yet it flouriſh'd again, and, by a laudable In- the e
and from Roman Coyns dug-up in ſeveral pla- ſtitution, here were Lectures of our old mo- Saxon [+ join
ces. As a gold Coyn of Nero in Exeter, and ther-rongue (I mean the Saxon-language, which furs, cern
another of Theodoſius at a place near Barnſta- is now grown into diſuſe,) continu'd down to
ple; ſeveral ſilver Coyns alſo, as of Severus and |the laſt age, left (that which hath almoſt now
other Emperors ; and of braß a great many. |happen'd,) the knowledge of it ſhould be quite
There were indeed two Roman ways, which] loſt. | This School, in which the Saxon-Tongue
led to 1/ca Danmoniorum ; one from Durnovaria, Was taught, is ſtill in being; and (as I have
by the Sea-ſide, taking in Moridunum ; the heard) there was alſo in the beginning of the
other from I1ſchalis, now call'd Ichefter. The|late Civil wars, a Saxon-Grammar printed, in
broken parts of both which Ways are till to. Taviſtoke. Upon the ſame deſign, to preſerve
be ſeen in ſeveral Places. The Weſt-Saxons|that ancient Language, and to promots the
made this County for ſome time the ſear of | Antiquities of our own kingdom, Sir Henry Spel-
their Kingdom; and after their removal thence, | man tounded a Saxon- Lecture in Cambridge. This
committed it to the cuſtody of the Earls, which town has given ſeveral great Lawyers to the
were at that time Officiary, The Danes migh- | State; as, dir Foby Glanvill a Judge, Serjeant
tily inteſted it, and left behind them, on ſeve- | G/anviil his fon, and Sir Jobn Maynard; and
ral high hills, a rude kind of fortificacion, com- hath been further honoured by giving the title
monly call'd Danes-caſtle.] of Marquiſs to the Dukes of Bedford. Two
In deſcribing this County, my way ſhall be, miles from hence, is Lamerton-pariſh, in the Lam?
firſt along the weſt- ſide, bounded by the Tamar ;| Church whereof is an ancient monument of
then along the ſouth, which lies upon the O-|the Tremaines, where may be ſeen the effigies
cean ; from thence, along the eaſtern-bounds| of Nicholas and Andrew Tremaine, twins, who
where it touches upon the Counties of Dorſer, | were alike in all lineaments, ſuffer'd like pain
and Somerſet, I will return to the north-coaſt, |tho' at a diſtance, deſir'd to fleep, walk, cat,
which is bounded by the Severn» Sea. and drink together, and were ſlain together at |
The Tamar (which divides theſe Counties,)|New-haven in France, An. 1663. Nearer to ; Is
firſt, on this ſide, receives the little river Lid|the ſea, is Beare-Ferris, ſo nam'd from the fa- Beate: Fer“ is
from the Eaſt; upon which ſtands Lidfon, a |mily call'd De Ferrariis, anciently famous in this ſo
Lidford, ſmall market-town; and Lidfcrd now a little County. In this pariſh, were Silver-mines in as
village, but formerly a famous town; moſt [the reign of K. Hen. 6; which were re-enter d Fe
7

— —

—
RE

nt-Tory,

ton Le-
res.

merto*

re- Fer

—

.

Capita-

IP |

nog
1 dog.

DEVON

SHIRE.

34

by Sir Joby Maynard, but have been ſince diſ-
continu'd.1 The Tamar, having receiv'd the
Teave, comes to it's mouth; where the Plim, in
conjunction with it, rolls into the ſea, and gives
name to the town Plimouth ſeated on it, which
was formerly call'd Sutton. This ſeems to have
been two Towns; for we find mention in the

Records of Parliament, of Sutton Vautort, and

Sutton Prior, as it partly belong'd to the family
of the Valletorts, and partly to the Priors. In
the laſt age, from a ſmall fiſher-village it grew
to a large town; and is not inferior to a City,
in number of inhabitants, as we ſee it at this
day. The convenience of the Harbour was
the cauſe of this riſe ; which receives the
greateſt ſhips that are, without ſpreading the
{ails, and yields them ſafe harbour tho” never
ſo big, as well in the Tamar, as the Plim. [Here
are allo two Docks, begun in 1691, and finiſh'd
in 1693 ; and of late years, a new Yard was
ereted, 1200 foot ſquare ; and a dry-dock, ca-
pable of a firſt-rate ſhip, with a baſon before
it of above 200 foot ſquare ; as alſo dwelling-
houſes, ſtore-houſes, a Rope-houſe, and all
other conveniences required to an Arſenal, cal-
culated for the Service of ſo important a Place. )
Beſides, it is ſufficiently fortify'd againſt an
Enemy. For in the very middle, the Iſle of S.

Nicha-* Njcholas Tof 2 acres or more, ] lies before it;

which is allo fortify'd. And then the Harbour,
at the town, is guarded on both ſides, and ſhut
up with a chain crofling it, upon occaſion ;
being fortify'd on the ſouth by a baſtion ; and
by a caſtle, on the next hill, builr, (as is
thought) by the Yalletorts, They have alſo a
Royal Citadel, built by King Charles the Se-
cond, conliſting ot five regular Baſtions and
165 Guns ; which, added to the numbers in the
other Fortificatious, make in all, 253.) The
whole town is divided into four Tribes, which
we call Wards ; and which are all govern'd by
a Mayor, conſtituted by Henry 6: and under
him, formerly, a | Captain was appointed to
every ſingle ward; each of whom had alſo his
inferior Officers. | It had anciently but one

15, 17, Church; till a new one was erected in the 16th

year of K. Charles the firſt, and Conlecrated
in the reign of K. Charles the ſecond.) As to
the fable of Corinzus's wreſtling with Gogmagog
the giant, in this place; it may ſuffice to ſub-
join a verſe or two from the Architrenius, con-
cerning our giants:

Hes, avidum belli robur, Corinæus Avarno

Præcipites miſit ; cubitis ter quatuor altum

Gogmagog Herculea ſuſpendit in atra lucta,

Ant bæumque ſuum ſcopulo detruſit in æquor;

Potavitque dato I bet is ebria ſanguine fluctus,

Diviſumque tulit mare corpus, Cerberus um-
bram.

With thoſe rude Monſters bred in wars and
blood,
Brave Corinæus clogg'd the Stygian flood:
High in the air huge Gogmagog he ſhook,
And pitch'd the vile Antæus from his rock:
His hated carcaſs on the waves was toſt,
And Cerberus ſtarted at his monſtrous ghoſt.

That Rock, from which the Giant is report-

k Hay, ed to have been thruſt, is now call'd the Haw, a

hill between the town and the ſea ; on the top
whereof, which is a Celicate plain, there is a
very pleaſant proſpect on all ſides, and a curi-
ous Compaſs, for the uſe of Sailors. The town
15 not very large, but it's name and reputation
is very great among all nations; and this, not
ſo much for the convenience of the harbour,
as for the valour and worth of the Inhabitants.

ing to Sir Francis Drake Knight; in maritim at-

tain of our age. Who firſt, to repair the loſſes
he had ſuffer'd from the Spaniards, as I have
heard himſelf ſay, did as it were, block up the
Bay of Mexico for two years together, with con-
tinual defeats ; and travell'd over the Straits of
Darien ; whence having deſcry'd the South-Sea
(as the Spaniards call it,) it made ſuch impreſſi-
on on his mind, that like Themiſtocles inflam'd
wich the trophies of Miltiades, he thought he
ſhould be wanting to himſelf, his country, and
his own glory, if he did not complete the diſ-
_—_ Therefore in the year 1577. ſetting
ſail from hence, and entring that ſea by the
Straits of Magellan; thro' the aſſiſtance of God,
and his own conduct, tho' not without great
change of fortune, he, next to Magellanus, ſail'd
quite round the world, in two years and ten

months time. Whereupon a certain Author has
thus complemented him,

Drake, pererrati novit quem terminus orbit,
Luemque ſemel mundi vidit uterque polus :

Si taceant bomines, facient te ſydera notum,
Sol neſcit comitis immemor eſſe ſui.

Drake, who in triumph round the world haſt
gone

3
Whom both the Lines and both the Poles have
known ;
Should envious men their juſt applauſe deny,
Thy worth wou'd be the ſubject of the sky:
Phoebus himſelf wou'd ſing thy deathleſs
praiſe,
And grace his Fellow trav'ller with his rays.

But the reſt of his exploits, and thoſe of
others born here, who have been famous for
naval atchievements, being not within the com-
paſs of my deſign, are left to Hiſtorians. 1
will only add, with reference to Sir Francis
Drake, that as both he and Mr. Candiſh began
their voyage from this town, for diſcovery of
the unknown parts of the world ; fo by his
contrivance and at his own proper charge, there
was brought hither a large ſtream from a great
diſtance, through many windings and turnings,
which is a mighty benefit to the Place; carry-
ing ſeveral Mills, and ſerving the other com-
mon uſes of the Inhabitants.] Nor have I any
thing farther to ſay here, but that in the

before the year 1102. the Clergy were not pro-
hibited to marry, here in England. Then,
Anſelm Archbiſhop of Canterbury firſt intro-
duced this violence to the Holy Scriptures and
human nature, as our Hiſtorians of that age
complain ; and as Henry of Huntingdon ex-
preſly ſays of Anſelm : He probibited the Clergy of
England to have wives, who before that were not
probibited. Some thought it a matter of great purity,
others of great danger; leſt affecting cle anneſs above
the power of human nature, they ſhould ſink into
borrible uncleanneſſes, to the great ſcandal of the
Cbriſtian name. |
To conclude ; This place hath given the
title of Earl, firſt, to Charles Fitz-Charles,
created Baron of Dartmouth, Viſcount Totneſs,
and Earl of Plimoutb, in the year 1675; and
ſince, to Thomas Lord Windſor, advanced to
the higher honour of Earl of Plimoutb, in the
thirty fourth year of King Charles the ſecond.
Off of Plimouth, is the EdyFone, a moſt
dangerous Rock to Sailors ; till a Light-houſe

(begun in the year 1696.) was erected thereon ;
which being blown down by the dreadful Storm

or, to mention no more, this town gave be-

chievements, without diſpute, the greateſt Cap-P

reign of William Rufus, Ealphege, a learned and The Ciegy

a marry'd prieſt, flouriſh'd in this place: for firlt reſtrain-

ed from mar-
ry ing, in

in November 1703, an Act of Parliament was
paſſed in the fourth 1 of Queen Anne, we
cho

Sir Francis
rake,

- e—_—__— i
_

_—_

England,

Edyſtons;

35

DAN MON II.

the erecting of a new one, by certain Duties
upon all Veſſels.]

Inward from Plimouth, and not far from the
river Plim, ſtands Plimpton, a pretty populous
market-town, where are ſtill the remains and
deform'd ruins of a caſtle; of which many held
by a Tenure, which our Lawyers call Caffle-
garde, For this was the chief ſeat of the Red-
werſies or Riparii (it is written both ways) who
were Barons of Plimpton and Earls of Devon-
ſhire. [Theſe were accounted The Head of the
Honour of the County of Devon, having 89 Knights
fees appendant. Afterwards, by marriage, the
Caſtle, Manour, and Honour of Plimpton, to-
gether with the Earldom of Devonſhire, and
other large Eſtates, paſs'd into the Family of
the Courtneys.) Next to this, ſtood Plimpton

„At the Dif. S. Mary, which loſt its glory * not long ſince,
| ſolution. when the College of Canons there was dil-
| ſolv'd, which William Warlewaſt, Biſhop of Exe-
| ter, had formerly built. [Here had been be-
Godw. Bi- fore, a College of a Dean and four Prebenda-
ſhops, ries, founded by ſome of the Saxon Kings ;
28 Mo- but becauſe they would not part with their

. wives, they were diſplaced by the ſaid Biſhop,
and a Priory of Canons-Regular erected in
their ſtead.) More Eaſtward, appears Modbery,
a (mall town which belongs to the famous and
ancient family of the Campernulphs, who are alſo
call'd De Campo Arnulphi, and by the vulgar
Champernouns, Knights ; and who received a
great acceſſion of honour by the heir of the
Vautorts, [From the Forteſcues of Wimpſton in this
Pariſh, was deſcended Chancellour Forteſcue, Au-
| thor of the famous book De Laudibus Legum An-
[| gliæ. Between Modbery and Kings-bridge, is a
fair bridge over the river Avon about a quarter
of a mile long. At the mouth of the river,
ſtands S. Michael's Rock, ſeveral acres in circum-
| ference ; in which are to be ſeen the remains

of an old Chapel. This ancient Rhyme ſeems
to refer to it: |

Plimpton.}]

Modbery,

| Champer-

NOUN,

— —— — — 2

Where Avon t waters with the ſea are mixt,
St. Michael firmly on a rock is fixt.

Kingsbridge is a pretty market-town, pleaſantly

| Kings- t
| bridge. ſituated, and particularly deſerves our notice
+ Mr. Crit for the benefaction of a f late charitable citi-

vin, zen of Exeter, who founded here a Free-ſ{chool,
Dodbrooke, and endow'd it. Near which is Dodbrooke, ſin-
' gular for a cuſtom of paying tythe to the Par-
on 195 a certain ſort of liquor, call'd White-
Ale,
From the mouth of the Plim, where the South
ſhore of theſe parts begins, the Country goes on
Stert, a tall, with a wide and large front as far as Srert, ¶ in
| in High- Saxon Steopr1 a promontory, as the word ſigni-
| dutch, fies in that language: But aſſoon as the ſhore
winds back again, the river Dert breaks through
it, which flows from the inner part of the Coun-
ty, and runs ſwiftly through certain dirty and
Dertmore, Mountainous places, thence call'd Dertmore,
where Load- tones have been found. Then the
Dert very ſteep and ſtrong (waſhing away with
it the ſands from the Stannaries, which by de-
Teſta Nevilli. grees choak up its channel,) runs thro' che foreſt
of Dertmore, where David de Sciredun held lands in
Sciredun and Siplegh by Knight-ſervice, on condition
that be ſhould find two arrows, when our Lord the King
came to bunt in that foreſt, It was firſt made a
Foreſt by King John, and had anciently in it
many Tin-works. It is very large; being 20
miles in length and 14 in breadth, and yielding
paſture every Summer to near 100,000 Sheep,
beſides a proportionable number of other Cat-
tle. It alſo ſupplies north, weſt, and ſouth,
with variety of pleaſant Rivers.| Then the
Dertinton, Dert runs by Dertinton, the Barony heretofore
of the Martins (who were Lords of Reims in

Wales,) as far as Totnes, This ancient little
town, hanging from weſt to eaſt upon the ſide
of a hill, was formerly of great note. It 4%
not geld (according to Domeſday) but when Ex
eter gelded ; and then, it yielded 40 pence, and wa
to ſerve upon any expedition either land or ſe
And Toteneſs, Barne-ſtaple, and Lidford, ſerv d, 7
much as Exeter paid. King John granted them
the power of chuſing a Mayor for their chief
Magiſtrate ; and Edward 1. endow'd it with
many Privileges ; and afterwards it was forti..
fy'd with a caſtle by the Zouches ; as the Inha-
bitants believe. It was formerly the Eſtate of
Judeal ſirnam'd de Totenais ; afterwards of Willi.
am Bruier a Perſon nobly deſcended, by one
of whoſe daughters it came to the Breoſes, and
from them by a daughter likewiſe to George d:
Cantelupo Lord of Abergevenny ; whole ſiſter A.
licent being marry'd to Eudo de la Zeuche, brought
it to the Barons Zouche ; and in them it con-
tinu'd, till Joby Baron Zouche being baniſh'd
for ſiding with Richard 3; Henry 7, gave it,
as I have heard, to Peter Edgecomb, a perſon
both wiſe and noble. In the reign of King
Charles the firſt, it gave the ticle of Earl to
George Lord Carew of Clopton, Son of Dr. George
Carew Dean of Windſor ; and in that of King
Charles the ſecond, the title of Viſccunt to
Charles Fitz-Charles Earl of Plimouth.1

Hard by this town ſtands Bery-Pomery, deno- p,

minated from the Pomeries, one of the nobleſt
families in theſe parts; who, ſomewhat more
to the eaſt, and a little further from the river,
had a very neat Caſtle. They derive their pe-
digree from Radulph de Pomery, who, in Willi-
am the Conqueror's time, held Wich, Dunwi-
neſdon, Brawerdine, Pudeford, Horewood, Toriland,
Helecom, and this Berie, &c. The noble Lord-
ſhip of Bery-Pomery, in the reign of King
Edward the fixth, came into the family of the
Seymours.1 From Totneſs, the neighbouring
ſhore was heretofore call'd Totoneſe : and the
Britiſh Hiſtory tells us, that Brutus the founder
of the Britiſh nation landed here ; and Havil-
lanus, in the Poetical way, following the ſame
Authority, writes thus ; |

Inde dato curſu, Brutus comitatus Achate,
Gallorum ow cumulatis navibus æquor
Exarat, & ſuperis auraque faventibus uſus,
Littora fzlices intrat Totoneſia portus.

From hence great Brute with his Achates
ſteer'd,

Full fraught with Gallic ſpoils their ſhips ap-
pear'd 3

The winds and gods were all at their com-
mand,

And happy Totneſs ſhew'd them grateful land.

The fiver Dert ( which I ſpoke of ) being
paſt Totneſs-bridge, where it heaps-up the ſand
brought along with ir from che Stannaries; ſees
nothing on either ſite, but fertile grounds, till
it comes at laſt, flowlz, and as ir were tired, to
it's mouth ; where, upon a long hill, ſtands

Dertmouth, which by reaſon of the commodiouſ- Pena

neſs of a harbour, defended by two Caſtles,
is a town well-ſtor'd with merchants, and with
the beſt ſhips. Ic has a Mayor, by the grant
of King Edward 3. The Zouches, Nicholas de
Teukesbury, and the Brients (according to ſeveral
changes of the times,) were formerly owners
of it; and it hath often ſtoutly reſiſted the
French. In the year 1404. Monſieur de Caſtell
a Frenchman, who had ſhut up the trade in
theſe parts by his piracies, and had burnt Pli-
mouth; whilſt he. attack'd this place, was ſet
upon by the peaſants and the women, and cut
off with his whole party. In the year oo

eorge

Totte 1

In Arch!
nio.

T, Wall
ham.

Nin
thel
poir
per)
plac
Tt)

rem

Philoſophi-

| TrantaR. and

boi!
ver
wir
me.

| 204

de
14 Car, 1. C

pe
de

Crews-Mor- pe
chard. P

Au. 1689.

Caryof p

Pomeg.

In Arch
nio.

Dertmo

I. Wal
ham

DEVON

SH I RE. 38

George Legg was advanced to the title of Baron
of Dartmouth ; and in the year 1710. William
Legg, his only Son, being Principal Secretary
of State to her Majeſty Queen Anne, was
advanced to the honour of Earl of Dartmouth. |
kk. I muſt not here forget to mention Stoke-Fle-
„, ming, Which is hard by; and (taking it's name
F from a nobleman of Flanders formerly Lord
of it,) came by a daughter of Mobun to the
Carews.

The ſhore going back from hence, the ſea

preſſes after ir, and by that great in-let makes
a bay of abour 12 miles in compaſs, call'd at
this day Torbay, which is a ſecure harbour for
ſhips when the wind is at ſouth-weſt ; and has
a ſmall village ſituate upon it of the ſame name,
the ſeat of the Brujers heretofore, (who in Ri-
chard 1, and King John's time, were men of
great note ;) bur afterwards of the Wakes.
[Of late years, it has been memorable for the
landing of the Prince of Orange, afterwards
King William the third, for the deliverance of
thele Kingdoms, when they were upon the
point to be deſtroyed and ſwallowed- up by Po-
pery and Arbitrary Power. Mary-Church, in this
place, was the firſt Church founded in the Coun-
ty, according to tradition. Near this bay, is a
*oohi- remarkable * well, call'd Lay-well, which ebbs
| Tranzat, and flows, and ſometimes bubbles up like a
2:4 boiling pot. The water (as clear as cryſtal,
very cold in ſummer, and never freezing in
winter,) is accounted by the neighbours, to be
medicinal in ſome fevers: Ir appears not, to
have any communication with the Sea, nor is
the water brackiſh at all. The ebb and flow is
every hour, and about 5 or 6 inches.
Mereley, Farther up in the country is Moreley, remar-
kable for it's Church, built upon this occaſion.
In. the time of Edward 1. Sir Peter Fiſhacre
Knight (upon a controverſie between him and
the Parſon of Wordley about tythes) kill'd the
Parſon in a rage; and, being conſtrain'd to an-
{wer the ſame at Rome, was by the Pope con-
demn'd to build this Church ; where he lies
bury'd. From hence towards Dertmore, lies
Wythi- Whthicombe ; where, in a violent ſtorm of chun-
come, der and lightning, a ball of fire came into the
1g Cir. 1. Church in time of divine Service, kill'd three
perſons, wounded 62, turn'd the ſeats upſide
down, and did great damage. A like ſtorm hap-
Crews-Mor- pen'd at Crews-Morchard in this County, which
2 rent the ſteeple, melted the bells, lead, and
, glaſs; and nothing eſcap'd but the Commu-
nion- Plate.

But to return to the ſhore : Near Torbay, is
a ſeat of the Ridgways, a family of good Anti-
quity in this Country; 1 and near the ſame
Cary place ſtands Cockingron, where the family of the
Cockirgton. Carys, different from that of the Carews, have
long flouriſh'd in great repute ; from which
the Barons of Hunſdon (of whom in their pro-
per place) are deſcended, [as alſo the noble
Families of the Earls of Dover and Monmouth ;
and Viſcount Falkland in North-Britain.1 A
Haombe. little higher ſtands Hacombe, where formerly

a liv'd Jordan Fitz-Stephens Knight, denomina-
ted, from this place, de Hacombe ; by whoſe
daughter Cecily it came to the family of the
Archdeacons ; from whom, likewiſe, by Hugh
pe family Courteney, it came at laſt ro the Carews, whole
1 family is very famous and numerous in theſe
parts. For Jane the daughter of this Hugh and
heir to her mother, being marry'd to Nicho-
las, Baron Carew, had many children ; and
their eldeſt ſon Thomas proving undutiful to his
mother, ſhe ſettled this fair inheritance upon
the three younger ſons (from whom are de-
ſcended the three families, of Carews, de Hacombe,

arbaye

- — ——
e A —

a ſecond husband, from whom + were deſcended + Are, C.

the Earls of Oxford ſof that name.]

Hence we come to Teignemouth, a ſmall vil- Teigne-
lage upon the mouth of the River Teigne, from mouth.
which alſo it takes the name; where the Danes
who were ſent before to diſcover the ſitua-
tion of Britain and the harbours, firſt landed The frſt
about the year of Chriſt 800. and having kill'd landing of
the governour of the place, had that early pre- he Danes
ſage of future victory; which afterwards they
purſu'd with the greateſt cruelty, thro' the
whole Iſland. Of late years alſo, the ame Town
was burnt by the French. 1 More inward, near
the riſe of the Teigne, ſtands Chegford, where Chegford.
formerly flouriſh'd the famous Family of the
Prows : then Chidley or Chidleigh, which gives Chidley.
name to the numerous family of the Cbidleys,
ſand the title of Baron to the noble Family
of the Cliffords ; of which family, Sir Thomas,

Lord High Treaſurer of England, was created
Baron of Chudleigh by King Charles the 2d.
Near the mouth of Teigne, is Biſhops-Teignton, ſo B. Teignton.
call'd becauſe it belong'd to the Biſhops ; where,
upon account of a ſanctuary in it, John de
Grandiſon a Burgundian, Biſhop of Exeter, fore-
ſeeing what might happen in after-times, built
a very fine houſe, that bis ſucceſſors (as the words
of his Will are) might bave where to lay their
heads, in caſe their Temporalties were at any time
ſeix d into the King's hands, Yet ſo far was this
from anſwering his deſign, that his ſucceſſors
are now depriv'd of this houſe, and almoſt all
the reſt.

Six miles from hence, the river Iſa, men- The river
tion'd by Ptolemy, which the Britiſh call Iſe, 7.
and the Saxons Ex; flows out of a large Mouth
into the Ocean. Whether it took this name
from Iſcaw, which ſignifies in Britiſh, Elders, I
cannor tell. Some derive it from reeds, which
the Britains call Heat, and with which the nor-
thern nations (as did the Britains) thatch'd
their houſes, and faſten'd the joynts of their Pliny,
ſhips. But ſeeing no reeds are — here, 1
cannot agree to it. The head of this river lies
in Exmore, a filthy barren ground near the Se-
vern-ſea ; the greateſt part whereof is in So-
merſetſhire. [The River riſes after a manner
that is not very common, and which may be of
uſe towards explaining the origin of Fountains,

Some of the Hills in this Moor are very high,
and on the top of one of the higheſt is a Plain,
almoſt of a round figure, near a mile in dia-
meter, which is full of little Springs; and there
being no declivity nor eaſy paſſage for the Wa-
ters, they {well upon the Surface of the Earth.
The perpetuity of which waters, without any
regard to the Seaſons of the year or the wea-
ther, ſeems to be an argument, that they are
not condenſed from Clouds or Miſts, but '
brought hither by an Under-current. ]

In Exmore, ſome monuments of antiquity Exmore. j
{till remain; namely, ſtones ſet in the form of Ancient |
a triangle in ſome places; in others, of a circle; Stones.

and one among them is inſ{crib'd with Saxon or
rather Daniſh letters, for che direction of thoſe, 4
as it ſhould ſeem, who travell'd that road. |
TAlſo, of later years, ſeveral Urns, with Ro- Abr. lon.
man Coins in them (and ſome, Greek) have Brit. MS.
been found, in digging of the Barrows. |] Ex ;
or Iſe flows from hence ſouthward, firſt by Ti-
fordton, ſo call'd from the two fords, at preſent
Teverton, to which the woollen trade brings Teverton.
both gain and glory, ſand which, both Caſtle
and Manour, by match with one of che coheirs
of the Courtneys, came to the Trelawnies ; but
has been for ſome time in the family of the |
Weſts, Here, Peter Blundell a Clothier built a |
free-ſchool, and endow'd it with a liberal main- |

"non gan <> — — *
1 *.

Anthony and Bery,) and upon John Vere her fon by wants tor a ſchool-maſter and uſher, He

gave

AI ae e ——

ö

— —

—

— — ñ— ——

,
|

_ _ DANMONTI. ,

*

Winifrid

the German face, who converted the Heſſians, Thuringers, and

Apoll le.

+ Laſt C.

Cola mb.

Polti more.

Iſca Dan-

moniorum,

Exceſter.

Caer, what
it ſigniſies.

poſterity, as the mother of all future langua-

gave alſo 2 fellowſhips and as many ſcholarſhips | lick Sale, by the Common Cryer) l and in the
to Sidney College in Cambridge, and one fel- higheſt parr, near the Eaſt-gate, it has a ca-
lowſhip and two ſcholarſhips to Baliol College |itle call d Rugemount, formerly the ſear of the Rüge
in Oxtord, for ſcholars bred-up in this ſchool. | Weſt-Saxon Kings, afrerwards of the Earls of © *
Then it runs through pretty rich grounds, and Cornwall ; which now has nothing to recom-
is enlarg'd chiefly by two little rivers, Creden | mend it, beſides its antiquity and ſituation; be-
from the weſt, and Columb from the eaſt. Upon |ing ſuppoſed to be the work of the Romans ;
Creden,in the time of the ancient Saxon Church, and, as a place of great Truſt and Importance,
there flouriſh'd a Biſhop's See in a town of the committed from time to time to perſons of the
ſame name,call'd Cridiantun, now contracted into | beſt rank. | For it commands the city under
Kirton, where was born that Winifrid, or Boni. t, and the country on all ſides; and has a very

pleaſant proſpect to the ſea. In the eaſt part
Friſians, of Germany, to the Chriſtian Religi- of the city, ſtands the Cathedral in the midſt
on. e was Archbiſhop of Mentz, and a- of fine houſes quite round it; built by King
ving had the title of Legate of the Apoſtolical] Athelſtan (as the private hiſtory of this place
See under ſeveral Popes, was martyred by the witneſſes,) in honour to S. Peter, and fill'd by
Pagans ann. 354 ; and his day in the Roman] him with Monks; at laſt, the Monks being te-
Kalendar 1s he 5th of June.) Now, it is 0n-[movd to Weſtminſter, Edward the Confeſſor
ly remarkable for a thin market. It had a houſe |graced ic with an Epilcopal See, having trans-
of the Biſhops of Exeter; and within the me-|ter'd the Biſhopricks of Cornwall and Kirten hi-
mory of the f laſt age fave one, was much|ther, and made Leefric a Britain, firſt Biſhop
more noted for a College of twelve Pre-|of it: whole ſucceſſors have much improv'd
bendaries, who are now diſſolv'd, ſand the|rhe Church, both in buildings and Revenues,
houſe, together with the manour, having been | It was, for a long time, no bigger than our
alienated to the Killegrews, there do not remain | Lady s Chapel, In the year 1112, William Har-
the leaſt footſteps of the Biſhop's having any at, Biſhop, laid the foundation of the pre-
concern there ; except the name of a great ſent Quire. Two hundred years after, Peter
meadow, call'd My Lord's Meadow. The river | Quivell, another of the Biſhops, began the Nave
Columb which comes from the eaſt, waſhes| ot the preſent Church; to which Jobs Grandi-
Columbton, a ſmall town, that takes it's name /n, allo Biſhop, added an Ifle on each fide.
from it; which King Alfred by his laſt Will | An. 1450. Biſhop Lacy built the Chapter-houſe ;
left to his younger ſon ; and, near Poltimore,| and about the ſame time, the Dean and Chap-
the ſeat of the famous and very ancient family ter built the Cloyſter. So that this Church was
of Bampfield, it runs into the river Je. And about 400 years in building: and yet the ſym-
now che I/ (grown bigger, but dividing it ſelf | metry of it is ſuch, as one might eaſily imagin
into many ſtreams, very convenient for mills,)|the work of one ſingle man. The organ here
flows to the City Iſca, to which it leaves it's] is accounted one of the largeſt in England, the
name. Hence Alexander Necham [(once Prior | greateſt pipe being 15 inches diameter, which
of S. Nicholas in this Place ; )] is two more than that of the celebrated Organ

| : at Ulme.] William Bruier, the ninth Biſhop from
3 fams celeberrimus Iſcia namen Leofric, in lieu of the dilplaced Monks, en
; in a Dean and twenty four Prebendaries. In
To Exeter the famous Ex gives name. that age, flouriſh'd Foſepbus Iſcanus, who owes ogg
both birth and name to this place; a Poet of car.
The city is call'd c by Ptolemy, by Anto-| very lively wit, whoſe pieces were fo highly
ninus Iſea Dunmoniorum for Danmoniorum, and by |approv'd, that they met with an applauſe equal
others falſly Auguſta, as if the ſecond Legion|to the ancients. For his poem of the Trojan
call'd Auguſta had quarter'd here; whereas that] war has been twice publiſh'd in Germany, un- Correli
was garriſon'd at the Iſea Silurum, as ſhall be der the name of Cornelius Nepos. . Nepss,
ſhown hereafter. It was call'd by the Saxons| [This city alſo gave birth to Henrietta Maria,
[ Eaxan-cearcep and Exan-cearrep ; and Mon-|youngelt daughter to K. Charles 1; ro William
keton, from the monks ; at this day, it is called Petre, who was Secretary and Privy-Counſellor
Exceſter, by the Latins Exonia, and by the Welſh, to King Henry 8. Edward 6. Queen Mary
Caer-ick, Caer-uth and Pen-caer, that is, a chiet|and Queen Elizabeth, and ſeven times Ambat-
city. For Cer (that I may note it once for all) ſador in foreign parts; and laſtly to Sir Thom u
ſignifies a City in Britiſh ; hence they call Jeru-| Bodley, employ'd by Queen Elizabeth to ſeveral
ſalem, Caer Salem; Paris, Caer Paris; Rome, | foreign Courts; but eſpecially famous for his
Caer Ruffayne. So Carthage in the Punick tongue, | founding the Publick Library in the Univerſity
as Solinus teſtifies, was call'd Cartbeia, that is| of Oxford, call'd after his own name.
to ſay, a new City, Among the Syrians like“ When 1/ca firſt fell under the Roman Juriſdi-
wiſe, 1 have heard that Caer ſignify'd a city ;Iction, does not plainly appear; I am ſo far
and leeing it is taken for granted, that the whole from affirming that it was conquet'd by Veſpaſi-
world has been peopled by them, it ſeems very] an (as Geoffery of Monmouth aſſerts,) when
probable, that they alſo left their tongue co|in the time of Claudius the Emperor, Suetoni-
| us tells us he was firſt ſhown to the world; that
ges. This city, (as Malmesbury ſays) tho the] I rather think it was ſcarce built ſo early. Yer
ground about it is wet and filthy, and will ſcarce bear in the time of the Antonines it was probably of
a crop of bad oats, often yielding empty ears without good note; for Antoninus continues his Itine-
grain; yet, by reaſon of it's ſtately Buildings, as well| rary to this City, and no further. It fell not
as the richneſs of the citizens, and reſort of Strangers, ablolutely under che dominion of the Saxons
all kind of merchandiſe is ſo plentiful in it, that one before the 46 year after their coming into
need lack nothing there that is uſeful or neceſſary. It] Britain. For then, Athelſtan forced the Britains Wil. M.
ſtands on the eaſt ſide of the Iſe, upon a hill, out of it (who, before that, liv'd in the City, in
of an eaſie and gentle riſe to the eaſt, and ſteep] equal power with the Saxons,) and drove them
to the weſt ; encompaſs'd with a ditch, and] beyond the river Tamar, and encompals'd the
very ſtrong walls, with many towers. The| city with a dicch, a wall of ſquare ſtone, and
City is a mile and half in circuit, wich ſuburbs] bulwarks, Since that time, our Kings have
ſhooting our here and there, for a long way: It] granted it many privileges; and among the
contains 15 Pariſh-Churches [ (ſeveral of which|ceſt (as we read in the book of William the
were, in the late Civil Wars, expos'd to pub- | Conqueror) This city did not geld but when London,

York,

1224,

York, and
of ſilver f
edition b)
put hides,
ſered me
by the o
Lord 87
Dane, 1
Hug a Þ
121d leæve
it had f
the Cor
time, tl
gainſt k
reflectic
pening
that ag
a {urre!
it is in
300 hou
forty he
Englan:
ſieges;
Hugh C
war be
ſter : a
Prince
delcer
York,
a very
whom
the C
Swore
Mayc
ly, by
Wien
ſorts
Barot
veran

enen

ward, C. Call 1

von!
citiz

Iſe,

„C. the

bror
tle

belc
of t
wee
imp

tored. PIO

fare, la |

24 Ed. z. ca

ſe
lu
I:
0

1224,

ſephus l.

dus.

orreliy

epos.

ill. Mn.

emoved,

are,

DEV ON

SHIRT.

42

York, and Wincheſter gelded ; that was half a mark
of fu ver for a Knight's fte. And in caſe of an ex-
pedition by land or by ſea, it ſery'd after the rate of
ve hides, It bath alfo, from time to time, ſut-
ſered many and great Diſaſters ; once ſpoil'd
by the out-rage of the Danes in the year of our
Lord 875 ; but, moſt diſmally, by Sueno the
Dane, in the year 1003 (being betray'd by one
Hugh a Norman, the governour:) when it was
laid level from the eaſt to the weſt-gate. And
it had ſcarce begun to recruit, when William
the Conqueror laid cloſe ſiege to it; at which
time, the Citizens not only ſhut their gates a-
gainſt him, but gall'd him with many bitter
reflections. However, part of their wall hap-
pening to fall down (which the Hiſtorians of
that age attribute to the hand of Providence,)
a ſurrender quickly follow'd. At that time (as
ic is in the ſaid Survey) the King had in this city
300 houſes : it paid 15 pounds a year. Eight and
forty houſes were dere d after the King came into
England, After this, ic was preſs'd by three
ſieges ; yet eaſily eſcap'd them all. Firſt by
Hugh Courtney Earl of Devonſhire, in the civil
war between the houſes of York and Lanca-
ſter : again, by Perkin Marbeck, a ſham counterfeit |
Prince, who tho' a young man and of mean
delcenc ; yet, pretending to be Richard Duke of
York, the ſecond ſon of King Edward 4, raisd

a very dangerous war; [for their oppoſition to
whom, the King gave great commendation to
the Citizens; and beſtow'd upon them the

Sword he then wore, to be born before the

Mayor, and alſo a Cap of maintenance : ] third-

ly, by che ſeditious Corniſh, in the year 1549,
wlan the citizens, tho” in extreme want of all

forts of proviſions, continu'd loyal, till John

Baron Ruſſel rais'd the ſiege. [For which deli-

verance, the 6th of Auguſt was appointed to vations in Government.

be, and is ſtil}, annually obſerved, as a day of
Thankſgiving, and commonly called Feſus-day.
As a reward of their Loyalty on this occaſion,
King Edward the ſixth gave them the rich ma-
nour of Ex-Iſland. |

But Exeter has not ſuffer'd ſo much by theſe
enemies, as by certain heaps (Wears, as they

uud. C. call them) which * Hugh Courtney Earl of De-

vonſhire, in a Difference that he had with the
citizens, threw into the chanel of the river
Ic, whereby ſhips are hinder'd from coming to
the crown ; ſo that all merchandiſe 1 was
brought thicher by land from Topeſham, a lit-
tle village three miles from the city, [ that
belong'd to him ; for which one of the Hughs
of this Family (perhaps the ſame,) procured a
weekly Market and a youry Fair ; and for the
improvement whereof, this obſtrution was
probably made.] Nor are theſe heaps || quite
removed, tho” it has been commanded by Act
of Parliament, [ and ſeveral Attempts have been
made for that end ; but none with ſo good Suc-
cels, as the new Works in the time of King
Charles the ſecond ; by the benefit of which
(however vaſtly expenſive to the City,) Ligh-
ters of the greateſt burden do now come up to
the City-key. ] From theſe Wears, a ſmall vil-
lage hard by, is call'd Weare, but tormerly He-
neaton, which belong'd heretofore to Auſtin de
Baa, from whom by right of inheritance it

24 Ed.. came to Joby Holand, who in a ſeal that I have

ſeen, bore @ lion rampant gardant among flower-de-
laces. The government of this City eee
rated by King John,) J is adminiſter'd by 24;
of whom one yeatily is choſen Mayor, who
with four Bayliffs manages all publick affairs;
ſand it was alſo made a diſtin County by
King Henry 8.1 As for the Poſition, the old

Oxford-Tables have defin'd it's longitude to be

19 degrees, 11 minutes ; and ir's latitude, 50
degrees, 40 minutes. |

This City (that I may not be guilty of an Dukes of

omiſſion) has had it's Dukes.
2d King of England of that name, made Jobn
Holand Earl of Huntingdon, his brother by the
mother's ſide, firſt Duke of Exeter. Henry 4.
depriv'd him of this honour, and left him only
the ticle of Earl of Huntingdon ; which (be-
ing beheaded ſoon after) he loſt, together with
his life. Some few years after, Henry 5. be-
ſtowed this Dukedom upon Thomas Beaufort
Earl of Dorſet, deſcended from the houſe of
Lancaſter, and an accompliſh'd Soldier. He
dying without iſſue, John Holand, the ſon of

John already mention'd, (as heit to Richard

his brother who dy'd without iſſue, and to his
father,) was reſtor'd to all again, having his

Father's honours beſtow'd on him by the boun-
ty of Henry 6; and left the ſame to his ſon

Henry, who, whilſt the LancaFtrians ſtood,

flouriſh'd in great Renown ; but after, when the
houſe of York came to the Crown, he became

a melancholy inſtance, how unſafe it is to re-
ly upon the ſmiles ot fortune, For this was

that Henry Duke of Exeter, who, notwithſtand-

ing his marriage With the ſiſter of Edward 4, Phil. Comi-
was reduced to ſuch miſery, that he was ſeen to ntus, cap.
beg his bread, in rags, and bare-footed, in the“.

Low-countries. And at laſt, after Barnet- fight,

where he behav'd himſelf gallantly againſt Ed-

ward 4, he ncver was ſeen more, till his body
was caſt upon the ſhore of Kent, as if he had
been ſhipwrack' d. Long after this, Exeter had
it's Marqueſs, namely Henry Courtney, deſcended
from Catharine, Daughter of Edward 4, and
rais'd to that honour by Henry 8. But to this
Marqueſs, as well as to the firſt Duke, a great
fortune did but raiſe great ſtorms ; which alſo
quickly ſunk him, while he endeavour'd Inno-
For, among other
things, becauſe with money and counſel he had
aſſiſted Reginald Poole (who was afterwards Car-
dinal, and had left England, to intriegue with
the Emperor and the Pope againſt his King
and Country, who had withdrawn from the
Romiſh Communion ; ) he was arraign'd, found
guilty, and beheaded, with ſome others. By

of a moſt excellent father ; being the eldeſt
ſon of William Cecil, Baron Burghley, Lord
Treaſurer of England, whoſe wiſdom did long
ſupport and maintain the peace of this King-
dom. [He was ſucceeded by William his ſon
and heir; who dying without iſſue-male, left
that honour to David Cecil, Son of Sir Richard
Cecil (who was ſecond ſon to Thomas Earl of
Exeter.) Which David was ſucceeded by Jobn
his ſon and heir; who had iſſue Jobn the late

Earl, father of Joby, the preſent Earl of Exe-
ter.

tree, memorable for the birth of Richard Hooker,
the judicious Author of the Eccleſiaſtical Polity,
and of that great Civilian, Dr. Arthur Duck.

ing forth the two Rainolds (John and William,

King Canute to the Church of Exeter ; a re-
preſentation of which gift was to be ſeen not
long ſince in a window of the Pariſh-Church
there, viz. a-King with a triple Crown, and
this Inſcription, Canutus Rex donat hoc Manerium
Eccleſ. Exon. i. e. King Canutus gives this Ma-
nour to the Church of Exeter. Four miles eaſt
of Exeter, we paſs the river Chſt, near which

upon Chſt-heath, the Corniſh rebels were torall
F defeare

the Bounty of K. James [ the 1ſt,] Thomas Cecil Earls of
Lord Burgbley enjoy'd the title of Earl of Exe- Exeter.

ter, a perſon truly good, and the worthy fon 1695+

On the eaſt of Exeter is a pariſh call'd Heawy- Heayy-tree,

The next pariſh is Pinboe, remarkable for bring- pinhoe.
brothers) zealous maintainers both of the Re-

form'd and the Popiſh Religion, in their turns.
Not far from whence is Stoke-Canon, given by Stoke-Canon-

4 Clyſt-heath,

For Richard the Exeter.

r 3

43

DAN MON II.

deſeated An. 1549. by Jobs Lord Ruſſel, after-
wards Earl of Bedford.

From aw to the non of the — 2

:"fler, is nothing of antiquity, beſides Exminſter, for-

OR merly r bequeath'd by King Alfred

Pouderham. to his younger ſon: and Pouderbam, a caſtle

built by Iſabel de Ripariis, which has a long time

been the ſeat of a very noble family, the Court-

nes, Knights; who, being deſcended from the

Earls of Devonſhire, and ally'd to many great

Families, are flouriſhing to this day, and are

moſt worthy of ſuch noble anceſtors. Upon

the very wouth on the other ſide (as the name

Exanmouth. it ſelf ſpeaks,) ſtands Exanmouth; known for no-

thing, but the bare name, and the fiſher-hutrs

there.

Otterey. More eaſtward, Otterey, that is, a river of
Otters or water-dogs, as the name it ſelf implies,
Honniten. runs into the ſea : It paſſes by Honniton, a town

well known to ſuch as travel theſe parts. | Here,
the market was anciently kept on Sundays, as
it was alſo in Exeter, Leunceſton, and divers o-
ther places; till in the reign of King John they
were alter'd to other days. Over the river Or-
Vennyton- ferey, is Vennyton-bridge, at which in the time of
bridge. Edward 6, a battle was fought againſt the Cor-
niſh rebels.1 Orterey gives name to divers pla-
ces. Of which, the moſt remarkable above Hon-
niton, is Mobuns-otterey, which belong'd formerly
to the Mobuns, from whom it came by marriage
to the Carews 3 and below Honniton, (near
Heldcombe, the Seat of the family of Le Denis,
Knights, who derive their original and name
from the Danes,) S. Mary's Otterey, ſo call'd from
the College of S. Mary, which John de Grandi-
ſon Biſhop of Exeter founded, who had got the
wealth of all the Clergy of the Dioceſe, into
his own hands. For he had perſuaded them to
leave him all they had, when they dy'd ; as in-
tending to lay it out in charitable uſes, in en-
dowing Churches, and building Hoſpitals and
Colleges ; which, they ſay, he perform'd very
Religiouſly. [This College was afterwards ſup-
preſſed by a Parliament held at Leiceſter in the
reign of Henry F.!

From the mouth of this Otterey, the ſhore with
many windings goes on to the eaſt, by Budlhy,
[famous for being the birth-place of that great
States-man and Hiſtorian Sir Walter Rawleigh ;

Sidmouth, Sidmouth, now one of the chiefeſt Fiſher-towns in

Seaton. thoſe parts ; 1 and Seaton, formerly, as the other

two, a fine harbour, but now ſo choak'd with
ſand, heap'd before the mouth of them by the
ebbing and flowing of the ſea, that this benefit
is almoſt — loſt. Here, at Seaton, the in-
habitants formerly endeavour'd to cut out a har-
bour, and procur'd a Collection under the
Great Seal for that purpoſe; but now there re-
main no footſteps of that work. 1 That this is
Moridunum. the Moridunum of Antoninus which is ſeated

Budly.

between Durnovaria and Iſca (if the book be

not faulty,) and is maimed, and written Rida-

num, in the Peutengerian Table; I ſhould con-

jecture, both from the Diſtances, and the ſig-

nification of the name. For Moridunum is the

ſame in Britiſh, that Seaton is in Engliſh, name-

ly, a town upon 4 bill by the ſea. Near this, ſtands

Wiſcombe. Wiſcombe, memorable on account of William
Baron Bonevill who liv'd there; whoſe heir Ce-

cih brought by marriage the titles of Lord
—4.— in Bonevill and Harrington, with a fair eſtate in
3 thoſe parts, to Thomas Grey Marqueſs of Dorſet.
Below theſe, the river Ax empties it ſelf
from a very ſmall chanel; after it has paſſed
by | Ford, to which Abbey the Courtneys were
great benefactours. Baldwin, Archbiſhop of
Canterbury, in the reign of King Richard x,
was firſt Monk, and afterwards Abbot here.
Axanminſter, Then it runs to] Axanminſter, a town famous
only in ancient hiſtories for the tombs of thoſe

Ford,

Saxon princes who were ſlain in the bloody
battle at Brwnaburg, and brought hither: it ſtand;
on the very edge of this County. Below this
place, Reginald Mobun of Duniter, to whom the
manour of Axminſter came hereditarily by the
fourth daughter of William de Bruier, built the
Abbey of Newenbam, in the year 1246. The News,
river Ax, after a ſhort courſe in this County, Regie.
runs into the Sea at Axmouth, formerly a good Az
harbour for Ships ; and ſeveral attempts have T
been made by the family of the Earl; to repair
it, but hitherto without Succeſs. 1

From hence, the Eaſtern bound runs in a
crooked line by villages of little note, to the
Severn-ſea ; which we will now coaſt.

The firſt ſhore after we leave Cornwall, ly.
ing for along way upon the Severn-ſea, is call'd
by Ptolemy Hercules Promontory. It retains ſome-
thing of that name in the preſent one of Her-
typoint ; and hath on it ewo ſmall towns, Hertoy,
and Hertlond, formerly famous for the reliques
of Nectan a holy man, to whoſe honour a ſmall
monaſtery was here built by Githa, Earl God-
win's wife, who had a particular Veneration
for Ne#an, upon a conceit that her husband had
eſcap'd ſhipwrack in virtue of his merits. Yet,
afrerwards, the Dinants, call'd alſo Dinbams,
who came originally from Britaine in Armori-
ca, and poſſeſſed this place, were accounted
the Founders ; from whom deſcended Baron
Dinbam, High Treaſurer of England in Hen-
ry the 7th's time, by whoſe ſiſters and heirs
this Eſtate was divided between Zoucbe, Htx-
warin, Carew, and Arundel. The poſſeſſions
of the foreſaid Monaſtery were confirm'd by
Richard x, with the grant of great Immunities;
particularly of a Court holding plea of ali
matters, ſaving life and member, ariſing wich-
in their own lands. In the time of Queen Eli-
zabeth, a Bill was preferr'd in the houſe of
Commons, for the finiſhing of this port. |

The name of the foreſaid Promontory has Whethe:
given credit to a very formal ſtory, that Herey- Hercule
les came into Britain, 2nd kill'd I know not N
what Giants. Whether that be true, which
the Mythologiſts affirm, that there was no ſuch

Herc ules's

Dinbam.

by we ſubdue pride, luſt, envy, and ſuch like
monſters; or whether by Hercules be meant the
Sun, according to the Gentile Theology, and
thoſe twelve labours undergone by him be an
emblem only of the Zodiack and it's twelve
ſigns, which the ſun runs thro' yearly ; as to
theſe, let them that have aſſerted them, look to
the truth of them. For my part, I readily be-
lieve there was a Hercules, nay, if you pleaſe,
that there were 43 of them, as Varro does
all whoſe Actions were aſcrib'd to that one,
the ſon of Alemena. Yet I cannot imagin, that
ever Hercules was here, unleſs he was wafced
over in that cup which Nereus gave him, and
of which Athenzus makes mention. But you'll
object, that Franci/cus Philelpbus in his Epiſtles,
and Lilius Giraldus in his Hercules, affirm this
very thing. With ſubmiſſion, theſe later wrci-
ters may move me, but they will not convince
me ; when Diodorus Siculus, who has writ che
hiſtory of Greece from the tirſt known ages of
it, expreſly tells us, that neither Hercules ner
Bacchus ever went into Britain. And therefore
I rake it for granted, that the name of Hercules
was given this place, either by ſome Greeks
out of vanity, or ſome Britains upon a Religi-
ous account. Theſe, being a warlike People,
had brave men in great admiration; ſuch eſpe-
cially as had deſtroy'd monſters : the Greeks, on
the other hand, dedicated every thing they
found magnificent in any place, to the glory

of Hercules ; and becauſe he was a great *
er,

Proauntory

W. Mala:

man as Hercules, but that it is a meer fiction to V. Sammes,
denote the ſtrength of human 1 where. Brit, p. 5%

eaſt
khampton. nam

ket-t

caſt!
edu. PEAT
belo
ket-
ſend
4 B
7 ,
firſt
of !
Mol
dum ſord · Stan
Courtney, ctio
the
Get
orth-Taw- a 1

V
O
a
Bediford, B
n
4
{

orellys

event
epilter,
Tingutt,

DEVON

SHIRE. 46

crifices, and conſecrate the places where they
arriv'd, to him. Hence comes Hercules Rock in
Campania, Hercules's Haven in Liguria, Hercules's
Grove in Germany, and Hereules's Promontories in
Mauritania, Galatia, and Britain.

Not far from this Promontory, is Clovelh-
harbour, ſecured with a Piere, erected at great
charges by the Carys, who have had their
ſeats here from the time of Richard 2. It
is now the moſt noted place in thoſe parts
for herring-fiſhing. At a little diſtance, lies

b bold. Hole or South-bold, the native place of Dr. Joby

erculgs';
« Malme;

hampton.
inham, eld

dm ſord-

"OY Courtney,

ercules
me into

itain. orth-Taw-

, Sammss,
it. p. 56,

td · Moul·

Bediford,

Moreman, Vicar of Maynbennet in Cornwall, to-
wards the latter end of Henry 8; memorable
upon this account, that he was the firſt who
taught his Pariſhioners the Lord's Prayer, Creed,
and ten Commandments, in the Engliſh tongue
By which we learn, in how ſhort a time this
language did entirely prevail againſt the native
Corniſh.

As the ſhore goes back from the Promontory
of Hercules ; two rivers, the Towridge and Taw,
which are the only rivers in this north-part ot
the County, fall from one mouth into the ſea.
The Towridge riſing not far from the Promontory
of Hercules already mention'd, runs towards the
eaſt ; and receiving the Ocke, which has given
name to Ockbampton | formerly but! a little mar-
ker-town ; where Baldwin the Viſcount had his
caſtle in William the Conqueror's time, as ap-

. pears from Domeſday. [lt had 92 Knights-fees

belonging to it; and is at preſent a good mar-
ket-rown, incorporated by E. [the iſt;
ſends Burgeſſes to Parliament, and gives the title
of Baron to the family of the Mohbuns; of whom,
Jobn, ſon of Sir Reginald Mohun, Baronet, was
firſt advanced to this honour in the fourth year
of King Charles the firſÞ, by the title of Lord

Mobun of Ockbampton. More to the north, lies

Stamford-Courtney, where began a great inſurre-
ction in the time of King Edward 6, by two of
the Inhabitants ; one of whom would have no
Gentlemen, the other no Juſtices of Peace. At
a little diſtance, is North-Tawton, where is a
pit of large circumference, 10 foot deep; out
of which ſometimes ſprings up a little brook
or bourn, and continues for many days. It is
taken by the common people to be a fore-runner
of publick Calamity ; like that Bowrn in Hert-
fordſhire, call'd Woobourmymore, Dire&ly to the
north, upon the river Mouie, lieth South-moulton,
an ancient town incorporate, formerly call'd
Snow-moulton ; at which time it was held by the
Martyns, by Sergeanty, to find a man with a
bow and three arrows to attend the Earl of
Glouceſter, when he ſhould hunt thereabouts.|

The Towridge turns it's courſe ſuddenly to-

Tarington, ward the north, by Tourington, to which it gives

name; ſeated on the fide of a hill, and hang-
ing over it for a good way. TInold Records ic
is called Chepan-Torrington ; an ancient Borough,
which ſent Burgeſſes to Parliament. But that
privilege hath been long diſcontinu'd, both
here, and in other places of this County. It
was incorporated by Queen Mary, by the name
of Mayor, Aldermen and Burgeſſes; and yielded
the ticle of Earl to George Duke of Albemarle,
the great Inſtrument in the Reſtoring of King
Charles 2; and after him, to Chriſfopher his only
ſon. By whoſe death, this, amorig the other
titles, became extinct, and was beſtowed upon
Art bur Herbert, Admiral; and he alſo dying
without iſſue, this place hath given the title
of Baron, to the Honourable Thomas N. 2
a younger branch of the Family of the Earls ot

Bradford. Thence, it runs by Bediford, pretty fa-

mous, for the reſort of People to it, and for an
arched ſtone bridge. This is fo high, that a

ſhip of 50 or 60 tun may ſail under it, For which,

ler, they who travell'd, were wont to offer ſa-[and for number of arches, it equals, if not exceeds

all others in England. It was begun by Sir Thee-
bald Granvill ; and for the finiſhing of it, the

Biſhop of the Dioceſe granted out Indulgences,

to move the people to liberal contributions ;

and accordingly, great ſums of money were
collected. This place hath been in the poſſeſ-

ſion of the Granvills, ever ſince the Conqueſt ; Granvilk,
a family famous for Sir Richard Granvill's beha-

viour in Glamorganſhire, in the reign of Wil-

liam Rufus; and for another of the | oh name

under Queen Elizabeth, who with one ſhip
maintain d a ſea- fight for 24 hours againſt 5o of

the Spaniſh Galleons ; and at laſt yielded upon
honourable terms, after his powder was ſpent,

having flain above 1000 of the Spaniards, and

ſunk 4 of their greateſt veſſels. Which family

hath ſince been honour'd with the titles of Ba-

ron of Bediford and Kilbampton, Viſcount Lans-

down, and Earl of Bath.) Below Bediford, the
Towridge joins the Taw, which, riſing in the

very heart of the County, is firſt carry'd by
Chimligh, a little macker-rown ; not far from Chimligh.
Chettelbampton, a ſmall village, where Hierytha, Chertel-
kalendar'd among the She-ſaints, was bury'd. hampton.
From thence, flowing by Taten, where Werſtan J. Hooker,
and Putta, the firſt Biſhops of Devonſhire, had i the Si-
their See about the year 906; and by Tawſtoke Tops of Exe-
which ſtands over-againſt it, and“ was the feat + js, C.
of the right honourable the Bourchiers, Earls of

Bath; ic haſtens to Berſtable. This is accounted Berſtable.
an ancient town, and for neatneſs and popu-

louſneſs far ſurpaſſes all upon this coaſt; ſitua-

ted among hills in the form of a ſemicircle, and

upon the river, which makes, as it were, the
diameter to it. This river, upon a ſpring-tide

at every new and full moon, overflows the

fields to that degree, that the town it ſelf ſeems

a Peninſula : but then, as the Poet ſays, when g equor re-
the ſea returns into the ſea, tis ſo ſmall, that it fundit in 4
will hardly carry little veſſels ; being diffus'd, 4%.

in a winding Current, among the ſands. On

the ſouth, there is a ſtately bridge, built by

one Stamford a citizen of London ; on the north,

near the confluence of the little river North-

Ewe, are the remains of a Caſtle, which is com-

monly ſaid to have been built by King Athel-

ſtan ; but ſome aſcribe it to Fudael de Totenais,

For the defence of it, certain lands hereabouts

are held is Caſtle-garde. It had formerly walls

quite round, whereof there is hardly the leaſt

ſigu remaining. This Judael de Totenais had it

given him, to hold by || Tenure of King Willi- || Clientelarz
am 1; and, after that, the Tracyes held it a con- je.
ſiderable time: next to them the Martyns ; and

then, in the reign of Richard 2, it came to

Fobn Holand Earl of Huntingdon, who was at-
terwards Duke of Exeter; and laſt of all, to

the Crown. But Queen Mary gave this manour

to Thomas Marrow ; whoſe ſon ſold it. In the

reign of William 1, (as it is in Domeſday,) it

bad forty burgeſſes within the Burg, and nine wit bout.

Henry 1. endowed it with many privileges, and

King John with more. It was govern'd a long

time by a Mayor and two Bailiffs ; but Queen

Mary granted it a Mayor, two Aldermen, and

a Common-Council of four and twenty. The
inhabitants, for the moſt part, are merchants,

who drive a conſiderable trade with France and

Spain. Nor muſt I forget to take notice of

two very learned men and moſt famous Divines
educated in this School; Jobn Fewel Biſhop of john Jewell.
Salisbury, and Themas Harding Profeſſor in Lo- Tho. Har-
vain ; who very warmly, and very acutely en- ding.
gag d each other, upon the ſubject of Reli-

on.

5 From hence, the Taw (paſſing by Ralegb, Ralegh,
which formerly belong'd to it's noble lords ot

the ſame name, and after, to the famous family
ſirnam'd de Chicheſter ; and then being enlarg d

by

—

— — —

— -
— — — 7
„„ _ a

2

47 DAN MON II.

dy the river Towridge ; ) runs into the Severn- t

on in the time of King Henry 6, a Carmelite

Mina finds not the Kinwith-caſtle, mention'd Monk and a learned man, who ficſt read Ati-
Coe * Yet there was = "this coaſt ajſtotle publickly in the Univerſity of Cambridge,
caſtle of that name; and ſo ſituated, that there Where he commenced Doctor, and writ divers

was no approaching it on any ſide but the eaſt;

Books ; and it hath been noted, of late years,

where in the year 879, Hubbs the Dane, who for an excellent Chalybeate Spring.1

had haraſs'd the Engliſh, and cut off great num-

bers of them, was himſelf cut off; and the place,

Hubbellow. rom thence-forward, call'd Habbeſtom by our Hi-

upper ſtorians. At the ſame time, the Daniſh ſtan-

dard called Reafan, was taken by the Engliſh.

Which 1 the rather obſerve, becauſe from a lit-

tte ſtory in Aſer Menevenſis, who has recorded

theſe things, it may be gather'd, that the Danes

had a Crow in their ſtandard, which is (aid to

have been wrought in needle-work by the

daughters of Lothbroc the Dane; and, as they
conceived, made them invincible.

There is nothing, hence-forward, to be ſeen

Braunton. on this Northern-ſhore but | Braunton, where

many hundred acres of land are overflown by

the ſands ; and the place, from them, is called

Santon : tall Trees, ſome of zo foot in length,

Mort, have been dug-up here. And Mort, to which

Sir William Trace, one of the murtherers of Tho-

mas Becket Archbiſhop of Canterbury, retir'd,

23 years after the fact; contrary to what the

vulgar Chronicles ſay, that all who were con-

cerned in that murder, dy d miſerably, in three

Ilfarcombe. years after: and) Ifarcombe, which is a pretty

ſafe harbour for ſhips ; I and remarkable for the

lights kept here for the direction of Sailors;

and much more, for Mr. Camden's being Preben-

dary hereof ; which Preferment belongs to the

Church of Salisbury, and might then be enjoy'd

by Lay. men.] To this joins Combmarton, below

4 Lately ope- Which have been * opened ſome old lead-mines,

red, C. not without veins of ſilver alſo. Now Combe,

Combe, what (that I may obſerve it once for all) which is fre-

it ſgnißes. quently added to the names of places in theſe

n parts, ſignifies a low ſituation, or a vale, and per-

haps may come from the Britiſh word Kum,

which has the ſame meaning ; and the French

alſo retain it in the ſame ſenſe to this day,

Martin de [The addition of Martin, is from Martin de Tours

Tours. a Norman Lord, who had great poſſeſſions

here in the time of Henry 1. The filver-mines

juſt now mentioned, were firſt diſcover'd in Ed-

ward iſt's days, when 337 Men were brought

from the Peake in Derbyſhire, to work here. In

the reign of King Edward 3, they yielded that

King great profits, towards carrying on the

French war. After they had been long neg-

lected, they were re-enter'd in Q. Elizabeth's

In the beginning of the Norman Government
(not to mention Hugh the Norman, whom
Queen Emma had formerly ſet over this Coun-
ty) King William 1. made one Baldwin here-
dicary Viſcount of Devonſhire, and Baron of
Ockbampton : and he was ſucceeded in this ho-
nour of Viſcount by his fon Richard, who dy'd
wichout iſſue-male. King Henry 1. afcerward;
conferr'd upon Richard de Redveriis, firſt, Tiver-
ton, and after that the honour of Plimpton, with
ot ber places appertaining to it; and then made bim
Earl of Devonſhire, granting bim the third penny
the yearly revenue 7 this County. But the revenue;
belonging to the King, did not, at moſt, exceed zo
marks ; out of which the ſaid Earl was to deduct
ten, yearly, for bis own ſhare, After theſe, be ob-
tain'd the Iſle of Wight of the ſaid King, and thence
was ſtil'd Earl of Devonſhire, and Lord of the
Iſle. He had a ſon, Baldwin, who was baniſh'd
for ſiding with Mawd the Empreſs againſt Ste-
pben. Yet Richard, the ſon, recover'd this his
Father's honour; and left two ſons, Baldwin and
Richard, ſucceſſively Earls of Devonſhire, who
dy'd without iſſue ; and then this honour fell to
their Uncle, William, ſicnam'd de Vernon. He

his father 3 having firſt (by Margaret, daughter
of Guarin Fitz Gerold) had Baldwin, the third of
that name, who was Earl of Devonſhire. He
had two children; Baldwin, the laſt Earl of this
family, who dy'd without iſſue (and chang'd the
Gryphon clenching a little beaſt, which his anceſtors
usd in their ſeal, into a ſcutcheon or, a lion rampant
azure; ) and label, who was married to , illi.
am de Fortibus Earl of Albemarle, and had a ſon,
Thomas, who dy'd young; and Avellina, mar-
ry'd to Edmund Earl of Lancaſter, whom ſhe
very much enriched. But ſhe ſoon dying wich-
out iſſue, Hugh Courtney, deſcended (as it is de-

had a fon, Baldwin, who dy'd in the life-cime of

liver'd down to us) from the Royal line of
France, and ally'd co the former Earls, was by
King Edward 3, by his Letter only, without
any other ceremony, created Earl of Devon-

40

Earls & |
vonſhire,

of pos \\

Regie,

ſhire: For ſo he commanded him, to uſe that (,,;

title. He was ſucceeded by his ſon Hugh ; after £4.15
whom Edward, his grand-child by his ſon Ed- 35.in
ward, enjoy'd it; and dying, left it to his fon

Hugh. He likewiſe to a ſon, Thomas, who dy'd

time, who preſented a Cup made here, to the in the 36th year of King Henry 6. This Tho-

then Earl of Bath, with this Inſcription :

In Martyn's combe I long lay hid,
Obſcure, depreſs'd with groſſer ſoyl,
Debaſed much with mixed lead

Till Bulmer came, whoſe skill and toyl
Reformed me ſo pure and clean,

As richer no where elſe is ſeen.

mas had three ſons, Thomas, Henry, and Fobn ;
whoſe Condition, during the bloody wars be-
eween the houſes of York and Lancaſter, was
very uncertain ; they ſtill reſolutely adhering
to the Lancaſtrians. Thomas was beheaded at
York ; and Henry his brother, who ſucceeded,
underwent the ſame fate 7 years after at Salishu-
ry. And altho' King Edward 4. created Humfrey 9 Edu.

Theſe ſilver-mines were again wrought in,
not many years ſince.1
More to the ſouth-eaſt, and adjoyning to So-
Bampton, merſetſhire, ſtands Bampton, formerly Baentun,
which in William the Conqueror's time fell ro
Walter de Doway or Duacenſis, with other very
large eſtates elſewhere ; of whoſe poſterity,
Juliana an heireſs ( marry'd to William Paga-
Pagarell or nell, commonly Paynell) had iſſue Fulco de Bamp-
Paynell, ten: he alſo had a ſon, William, and Chriſtia-
na the wife of Cogan an Iriſhman, whoſe po-
ſterity came to the eſtate ; the heir of William
dying without iſſue: From the Cogans it came
by Inheritance to the Bourebiers Earls of Bath,
through the hands of Hancford, and the Fitz.

Stafford Lord Stafford of Sutbwick, Earl of De-
vonſhire, who dy'd that ſame year; yet John
Coutney, the youngeſt brother, would never
part with this Title, till he loſt his life in
Tewkesbury-fight. From hence-forward this fa-
mily for a long time lay, in a manner, extinct;
yet ic flouriſhed again under Henry 7, who
reſtored Edward Courtney, the next heir male,
to the honour of his Anceſtors. He had a
ſon, William, Earl of Devonſhire, who mar-
ry'd Catharine daughter of Edward 4, by whom
he had Henry Earl of Devonſhire, who was
alſo Marqueſs of Exeter, and was beheaded in
Henry Sth's time. His ſon Edward, a noble
young Gentleman of great hopes, being re-
ſtor'd to all by Queen Mary, dy'd at Padua

warins, I This place brought forth John de Bamp-|in Italy: for, to uſe the words of Quadriga-
rius,

riue, Th
the 46*
Mont fo)
only ©
mous le
tor hav
its forn
and eit
to ſubt
of Dev
and by
riches

ment e
upon, t
create
Earl c
both I.
as did

till by

Queen
reign,

ct De
by Wi
Victue

Th

Mere

Avi
or Pill
this Co

wy

Earl of
vonſhire

_  .S. © 4 AT Foot YEE da

1 .

R O & © 0 —

— 8
*

1

4

DEVONSHIRE.

50

jus, The better the Man, the ſhorter the life, In
= 4164 year sfter his death, Charles Blunt Lord
Aort i ye, Vice-Roy of Ireland ( a perſon not
only cf ancient and noble extraction, but fa-
mous ſor Conduct, and Learning ;) as a reward
tor having recover'd Ireland, and reduc it to
rs former ſtate, by driving out the Spaniard,
and either defeating the rebels, or forcing them
to ſubmit, was by K. James liſt, | created Earl
of Devonthire, advancd to many other honours,
and by the bounty of the King raisd to great
riches : but death ſoon put an end to the enjoy-
ment of all this wealth and honour. | Where-
upon, the ſame King in the 16" year of his reign,
created William Lord Cavendiſh of Hardwick,
zarl cf Devonſhire ; whoſe fon and grandſon,
both Milliams, ſucceſſively enjoy'd that dignity ;
as did alſo his great grandſon, of the ſame name,
till by the ſpecial favour of King William and

Queen Mary, he was, in the ſixth year of their
reign, created Marquils of Hartington and Duke
cf Devonſhirez which Titles are now enjoyed
by William, his Son and heir, a perſon of great
Virtue, and Honour.

There are in this County 394 Pariſh-Churches.

—5—

Mere rare Plants growing wild in Devonſhire.

Avena nuda Ger. J. B. C. B. Park. Naked Oats
or Pillis. This by report is ſown in ſome places of

this County, as well as in Cormwall,

C. Campanula Cymbalariz foliis. Ivy-leaved
Bell: flower. No tif common in this County than in
Cornwall, in the like places,

Eryngium vulgare F. B. vulgare & Camera-
rii C. B. mediterraneum Ger. meditertaneum ſi-
ve campeſtre Park, On the rock which you deſcend
to the Ferry from Plimouth over into Cornwall. This
plant, probably, groweth not wild any where in Eng-
land ſave bere, near Daventry in Northamptonſhire,
and on the ſhore call Friar-gooſe near Newca#tle upon
Tine,

Gramen junceum maritimum exile Plimoſtii
Park. p. 1271. Small ſea Ruſh-graſs of Plimouth.
Near Plimouth on the wet grounds,

Juncus acutus maritimus capitulis rotundis
C. B. acutus maritimus alter Park, Sea-ruſh with
globular heads. Found by Mr, Stephens in Braunton-
boroughs in this County.

Lichen ſeu muſcus marinus variegatus. Fun-
gus auricularis Cæſalpini J. B. Fucus mariti-
mus Gallo-pavonis pennas referens C. B. The
Turkeys feather. Found by the ſame Mr. Stephens on
the rocks near Exmouth, plentifully.

Lamium montanum Meliſſæ folio C. B. Me-
liſſa Fuchſii Ger. Meliſſophyllon Fuchſii Park.
Meliſſa adulterina quorundam, amplis foliis, &
floribus non grati odoris J. B. Baulm-leaved
Archangel, Baſtard-Baulm. In many woods in this
County, and particularly near Totnes, This is the
Plant, I ſuppoſe, that the Authors of Phytologia
Britannica meant by Meliſſa Moldavica, which

they ſay grew in Mr. Champernon's wood by bis houſe

on the bill-ſile near Totnes. For Meliſſa Molda-
vica is a plant ſo far from growing wild with us,

C. Aline ſpuria puſilla repens, foliis Saxifca- that it continueth not long in gardens felfſou'n.

gæ aureæ. Small round-leaved creeping baſtard chick-
weed, This is no leſs frequent in this County than in
C:mwall,, on the like watery banks,

Aſcy rum ſupinum villoſum paluſtre : Marſh
reund-leaved S. Peter's wort. On moiſt boggy grounds
and cbout ſhallow pouls of water. See the Synonyma
in Cornwall.

Rubia ſylreſtris Park. ſylv. aſpera, quæ ſyl-
veſtris Dioſcoridis C. B. ſylveſtris Monſpeſſulana
major J. B. nonnullis Rubia hexaphyllos. Wild

Madder. It grows on the rocks near the bridge at
Bediford, and all along the bedges on bath ſides the
way between Weſtly and Bediford, and in many other
places of this County.

Cs DUR O-

—
—

—— —

N 8 ——— nn. — ITIETyY
— - — — . — » >
7 „„% : —

1 EE PE eee De age
Mi LO ÞBICAI LC Yor D n
1 e S ff
| e Reb,
| N . % , N 9
— 3 e — 3 Ar Tas" 6
| | ILL LRN I

DUROIRIGES

E X T to the Danmonii Eaftward, Ptolemy in bis Geograpbical Tables hat
plac'd the ansehe, as be ſtiles them in Greek, who in Latin Copies are alſo
written Durotriges : The very ſame People, whom the Britains about the
year of our Lord 890. call'd Dwr-Gwyr, according to Aſſerius Mene-
venſis, who liv'd at that time, and was himſelf a Britain by birth. The
Saxons call d them Dop-rectan ; as we at this day call the Tratt, the Coun-
ty of Dorſet, and Dorſetſhire. The name of Durotriges is ancient, and
purely Britiſh, and ſeems very probably to be deriv'd from Dour or Dwr, *
= wbich in Britiſh ſignifies Water, and Trig an Inhabitant; as if ene
PUN = ſhould ſay, Dwellers by the Water or Sea-ſide. Nor is there any other
hel of the names of thoſe places which begin or end in Dur or Dour in
| CODY MAINE DEQ Ancient Gaul (where formerly they ſpoke the ſame language with that of
| | Britain ; ) ſuch are, Durocaſes, Durocottorum, Duranius, Dordonia,
1 Durolorum, Doromellum, Divodurum, Breviodurum, Batavodurum, Ganodurum, Octodurum,
end many others, as well in Gaul as Britain. But the Saxon word Dop- rexca is a compound of Britiſh
1 Serta, wit, and Engliſh ; and is of the ſame import and ſig nificat ion, as Durotriges : for, SecTan among our Saxen
1 Anceſtors as well as ther Germans, ſignified to inhabit or dwell upon. Thaw, we find the dwellers upon
'F mountains, call d in their language, Dun-fecran ; thoſe who dwell upon the Chiltern-hills, Cylcepn-
reggan; and thoſe who border upon the river Arow, Apow-regran; as the Germans call d the People
ho dwelt among the woods, Holt-ſatten, from inhabiting the Holis er Woods. Nor did the Britains
| deviate from the ſenſe of the ancient name, when they call d theſe Durotriges, Dwr-Gweir, that i,
{ Dwellers on the ſea-coaſt; ſince their Country, for about 50 miles together, fronts the Britiſh Ocean; be-
| ing ſtretch'd-out in length from Eaſt to Weſt, with an uneven ſhore, full of turnings and windings.

Pl

DORSETSHAHTRE.

HE County of Dorſet is boun- | nature and largeneſs of it, being one of the beſt
ded on the North by Somerſer-|in England, tho' very chargeable. It is alſo 2
ſhire and Wiltſhire, on the Weſt | Burrough, conſiſting of 16 Capital Burgeſſes
by Devonſhire, on the Eaſt by [and a Recorder; whereof, there is a Mayor,
| Zn Hantſhire 3 and Southward (on | and two Juſtices. The Mayor, the next year
| <4 which fide it is of the largeſt|afcer his Mayoralty, is a Juſtice of the Peace,
| © Extent) it is all Sea-coaſt, ly-| and the year following, Juſtice and Coroner. |
ö ing (as I juſt now obſerv'd) ſome 50 miles] We ſcarce meet with the name in ancient books;
| together upon the Briciſh Ocean, which ſup-|only I have read, that King Kinwulf, in the
|

|

|

lies it with great plenty of the beſt Fiſh, year of our Lord 774, gave the land of one man-
and gives it an opportunity to improve it ſelf /ion to the Church of Scireburn, near the weſtern banks
by Trade. The Inhabitants reckon it much for | of the river Lim, not far from the place where it
their honour, what they affirm King Charles 2.|falls into the ſea ; that ſalt might be boil'd there to
to have declared, That he never ſaw a finer | ſupply rhe neceſſities of that Church, | But, in our
4 © Country, eicher in England, or out of it.! The | time, it is made more remarkable, for being the |
| Soil is fruittul, and in the North part it has|landing-place of the unfortunate Duke of Mon- Jun
| woods and foreſts ſcatter'd here and there; mouth, when he aſſerted his pretended right
whence, with ſeveral green hills that feed great| co the Crown. He brought with him but one
flocks ot ſheep, and with pleaſant paſtures, and | Man of War of about 30 guns, and two other
fruitful Vales, it comes down to the ſea-ſhore ; | {mall Veſſels, with Arms Be about 4000 men;
| which I ſhall follow in my deſcription, know- not above 100 coming over with him. But,
ing no better method or guide, | notwithſtanding the great increaſe of his For-
Ac the very entrance into this County from |ces, in a very ſhort time he was routed in 2
| Devonſhire, the firſt place that appears upon the | pirch'd batrel, and his attempt prov'd fatal to
| Lyme, fea-coaſt, is Lyme, a little town ſtanding upon | him and his followers. | :
| a ſteep hill, and ſo call'd from a rivulet of that] Hard by, the river Carr empties it ſelf into 3
1 + Can, C. name gliding by it. This { formerly J * could] ſea; where ſtands Carmouth commonly Char- Cin
1 + Is, C. ſcarce be call'd a ſea-port town, tho' it +. was mouth,1 a little village, at which the pirating
frequented by fiſhermen, and hath a kind of har- | Danes had the fortune to beat the Engliſh in two
| bour below ir, which they call the Cobbe ; well | Engagements; firſt, conquering King Egbert
| | ſecur'd againſt Storms, by rocks and lefty trees. in the year of our Lord 831; and then King
1 But ſince, it is much improv'd; having very | Ethelwulf, eight years after. Next, is Burtport, But"

1 conſiderable Merchants; and the Peer, ſor the [or rather Birtport, ſ and Bridport, and of ogy —
| | are”:

— —— —— -

— —
*
— = —
— 2 K — *
—— — — !— — —4 . —

—
——

—

— — ͤ — ——
*

— * W

—

10

'D\

WWMIVWEUEDEDVWWVWMEWWAARWAAWWWWWWT

0 tockl, mad

WAA AAA

7
” . P —_ „ K VCD. — - — ww _ —
, I Auuwuts of Time N .
Uu eee TT rn fn 1 = Os:
— — — — — —— ——— —

SEL#

& Sr en
C Oman.”

L

3

-

4

art of” ch-/Mh

0 n 5 2 er

e
Wermutage

2 22
"© fam 417; u

22 & Stoke

4 Charde

- Ford

Fambrok
Wal T WAY

Lon

36e

Chit & Sto —

***

1
JDL
i

of

*

; | "—_ Nit 0» a
& 4 ho 7 a — , 77
Datlrood 4 . S : Help 2h
Q # NN : ah {ter e e, ' N
Des — e009” E hn 4 * 1 4g K 1 H On Rk . A 4 0
: 0 A e Art Fd of | md
K Shutle 3 Teen. uro 5 — yo 7 F J&L onolocherd? f 11 ompton þ A F

—

* LY Lak Compion

1 N V. tchurch * 8 4 * 5 |
DF 40-M5 \/ H N (D 11 Ir1dporkty 45 H U_N Bl Nor c 2 ;
dr * W Al ng 4 ELN I ufo
> "I _ lufbury | Char \noutly” IP, > 5 nn r = 8. oy K
Culliton „ : HK e ern N \  Bauntorn "YE » Mo dy re on * * N e W
5 HU N ö — 5 = a. ,
% Sheptorn - > ET am. &- e
S H I | R E Fon — | VU Pom b — * Hs > \ A 2.922%
2 um E — K Hern ner K.
A : wr K. a Wnddon N N ' * * *
— % :
I” 1 [2 Be wants 97 ahmt e a
＋ EY 4 2. , . * F 0 N o 5
' — Sr | 1

Ws r
2 2 45 : en

NEU N DA "Do;
Buckland | Bp. war
lLanyton ? * | *

-
- *
Sold by Abel Swale 4wnſham and lohn Church!
l Fro 2 aaa We n wn = 8 AO OUUUIIUUL oo ; WWW WAWAWAWWWAVTNY
IDES = * — ESSDSSS
Ty: —

5 \\

L on. l.s
Son

; gun
IRE L

Stoke

Nyuecautu
N ng ton

Bugley V
Buckh$n Yoſton Py var k
* 1 |
1 Kmmgaton
Stower Yi
Jour

Vn „ 7. 4

L
xf. Wr.

U
Fhe, fire

Bridocs

4 15 45

1

*
Stalhr 1 7

1

7 .

2%

Can f

* 7. . U 4. 1
* * "rt

N
| Oo „ / V3 2 abel. Zang b
/ en, l 5 M 0 N E #| 5 cuſtle
| outh Haven Point

&

Ee * 2 f ” 74
; 0 p „eon
„abn. # voce f Burton

#

3 e F R 1 TT
As TI ecm
. Es 1 well . Sa,

a
ld A
Eaſt CC
1 by >

Alu * |

wy

| AY

Fr Te:

4 —_ A 37 .
Vis

5 0, *
mmmoton

Rar,

WAA AAAARATDMWTl \ |

4 * Bruanſton
= Blanford

* N
8 ormaton =
4 % Warham 6 —

* ofa 7
1 am rn C HiFe ©
Henley

Tinu Sj —

P N
& yo dcotes ff
| , N

10r 1 4

* 1
3 '

Funtenel AN _— Se Mes acl (;

Stepington. Hips oh

Wonktou
——— |

HAN SHIRE

* YVinDoOGLADT

/1umb or

* 3 *

or _ 4 8.

8 U N D %:
N. * * 22 a —

| L E N
Fr S, « Sherifrd Bridal
WF ime The The Led. le þ | |
NB & © ES” MOSS. YI; |
: |

'Þo 3 4
"th Luton on n

I
Hr ale Ot

alt nr & Kunbredg rern,

; | | comb X

—
* 7 q .
”
by —
2 —
LI

— *. |

In O0 w *
p Niggi. "Hf Hu N

4 A. n

4

/ Fo Addams ; Chayp 4

FFV

Jeale of ile.

— —

\ op |

WWW wa OOO NN Wy

2 —
—————̃ — —

.
4

Iau a *

EY

*
eta

£4 „ „ way
8 = — 4 2.5 2 2 266060606 2 —

ot

aths, 18

| Aubr, Is

* « # „ OO _ 0 a | North-weſt, CO
be l *

Wotland, fa

tO
nz

—

mats

J i.
E us,

\ubr,
Von. Brit.
MS.

land, C.

Cheſil,

Wortland,

>, forden nough to bake bread. The ſame natural heat

14 P 106,

A heap of tuns out into the ſea ; where * a bank of gra-

7
DORSET SERIRXRE:
(aich Leland, written Bruteport ; I ſeated between] foot and unhurt, over nine red-hot plough-Shares
two ſmall rivers meeting there, in a ſoil which (Which was a common way of tryal in thoſe
producss the beſt hemp. In this town, an hun- days, call'd Ordale,) fo as the miracle of her de- Tryal call'd
dred and twenty houſes were computed in Ed-}liverance prov'd the memorial of her chaſtity Cle.
ward che Confeſſor's time; but in William theſ to ſucceeding generations; ſhe, in memory of &i 2
Conqueror's reign (as appears by Domeſday-| ir, gave nine farms to that Church : and her Doe, Seelpt:
book) there were no mote than an hundred. It} ſon Edward, repenting that he had accus'd his
was heretofore ſo famous for making ropes and] mother wrongfully, laid this whole Iſland, with
cables for ſhips, that it was provided by a | ſpe-|other revenues, to it. After which dona-
cial Law which was made to continue for a|tion of Edward, the Iſland continu'd in the
certain time, that ſuch tackle; for the uſe of Church of Wincheſter to the time of Edward 1;
the Engliſh Navy, ſhould be made no where|in whoſe reign Gilbert de Clare Earl of Hertford
elſe, Nor can this Place bear out the name off and Glouceſter (probably looking upon it as an
a Port; tho' at the mouth of the river that runs|impregnable place,) gave other Lands to the
by it, which is enclos'd with hills on both ſides, Church in exchange for it; through whoſe
Nature has projected a very commodious place | heirs it came to the Crown. ] It is ſcarce ſeven
for an harbour, and ſeems to call upon Art and] miles round; | but, faith Leland, if a man ſhould
Induſtry to finiſh it. [And theſe, it was believ'd,| compaſs it by the very roots, and the deepeſt
wou'd have effected it, till the Inhabitants of] ſhore, it would amount to ten.] A ridge of
late years made the attempt, and fail'd in the rocks round it raiſes it higher there, than in the
undertaking : the Tydes perpetually barring it middle, where it is flat and low: it is here and
with Sand, againſt which they could not find|chere inhabited, and affords good plenty of
any remedy. North-eaſt from hence, is Wing-|corn, with commodious paſture for ſheep ; but

ford-Eagle, * near which, in a ground call'd Fern- {o little wood, that they are forc'd to make uſe

down, upon the road to Bridport, is a barrow (a-|of cow-dung dry'd in che Sun, for fewel. [In

* mong many others thereabouts,) which was|the year 1632. it gave the title of Earl, to Ri-

ſearch'd and open'd ſome years ſince. Upon |chard Lord We#ton of Neiland, Lord High Trea-
the firſt removing of the earth, they found it|ſurer of England, who was ſucceeded by ſeve-
full of large flints, and at length came to a|ral of the ſame family. And in the reign of
place perfectly like an Oven, curiouſly clay'd|King William the 3d, William Bentinck was ad-
round; and in the midſt of it a fair Urn full of| vanced to the honour of Earl of Portland, in con-
very firm bones, with a great quantity of black |ſideration of his great and faichful Services to
aſhes under ic. And, what is moſt remarkable ; that Prince; and was ſucceeded therein by Hen-
one of the diggers putting his hand into the [ry his ſon and heir; now advanced to the fur-
Oven when firſt open'd, pull'd it haſtily back, ther dignity of Duke of Portland.
not being able to endure the beat; and ſeveral | The inhabitants are the moſt famous of all the
others doing the like, affirm'd it to be hot e-|Engliſh, for ſlingirig of ſtones. Among the ſea-
weeds they often meet with Iſidis Plocamon, that
is often found by our Mineral-men in their is, Ii hair, which (as Pliny has it from Juba, ) is xgais Ploca-
Mines, ſo as, ſometimes, they are not able to] a ſort of ſhrub produced by the fea, not unlike mon, I6s's
touch them. Digging further, they met with | Coral; it has no leaves, and when cut, it chan- hair.
16 Urns more, but not in Ovens; and in the ges colour, growing black and hard; and the
middle, one with ears: they were all full of] leaſt fall breaks it. To the Eaſt, it has one only

-terborne, found bones and black aſhes. Not far from hence] Church, and a few houſes adjoyning ; (in Le- Itinerar. MS.

is Winterborne ; || in the Pariſh whereof, within an] land's time, the Iſland had about 80 in number, Vol. 3.
incloſure near the great road to London, ſtand} and there had been as many more, as appeared
certain ſtones, nine in number, in a circular] by the ruins :)1 to the North, it has a Caſtle
form. The higheſt is ſeven foot, the next higheſt, built by K. Henry 8, commanding the mouth of
almoſt x ; the reſt are broken, and now not|the port call'd Weymourh. This is a ſmall ton Weymouth.
above a yard high. And upon the ſame road,| at the raouth of the little river Wey ; [which gave
half a mile further, ſtand three ſtones which] the title of Viſcount to the Right Honourable
are four foot high. The ſtones of both theſe] Thomas Thynne of Longlete ; created in the 34
Monuments ſeem to be petrify'd lumps of flint. || year of King Charles the ſecond, Baron Thynne
From Bridport, the ſhore winding very much, of Warminſter, and Viſcount Wey mouth. ] The
2 ſees upon the oppoſite bank, Melcombe,call'd Melcombe.
vel and pebbles thrown up, and call'd Cbefil] Melcombe Regis, that is, King's Melcombe, and par-
(with a narrow Sea running between it and the| ted from Weymouth only by the harbour. The

xen Tel. ſhore) continues for , nine miles together ; privileges of a Port were taken from it by Act

beat. which, when || the ſouth wind riſes, gives, and| of Parliament; but afterwards recover'd. Theſe 11 Hen. 6.
North-wen, COMmonly cleaves aſunder; but the “ north] (ſtanding, formerly, upon their diſtinct Immu-

F

wind binds and conſolidates it. By this ſhelf off nities, and rivalling each other,) are now uni-

ſand, Portland, formerly an Iſland, is now jcyn'd| red by Act of Parliament, (it is to be hop'd to

to the Continent, As for the ety mology of theſ the benefit of both,) and having communicati-

name, I know it not; unleſs it be call'd Port- on, by a Bridge “ lately made, are very much “ So ſaid,
land, becauſe oppoſite to the Port call'd Weymouth ;| enlarg'd in buildings. ann, 1607,
but it ſeems the better conjecture of the two, From thence, the ſhore lies ſtrait, to the Iſle

that it took it's name from one Port, a gallant] of Purbeck, which is full of heath, woods, and fo- purbeck.
Saxon, who about the year of our Lord 523. reſts, f well ſtock'd wich Fallow-deer and ſtags ; + Not ſo
annoy'd this coaſt. This Portland, towards the (but the South parc is very good land,)1 and row.
decline of the Saxon Government (for no men-|under ground, here and there it has veins of

tion is made of it by Writers, before,) ſuffer'd| marble ſand many ſorts of good ſtone ; from

as much by the Danes, as any place wharever.| which (as Tradition informs us) the Cathedral

But, after that war was at an end, it came to] Church of Salisbury was ſupply'd ; and large

. Win-the Church of Wincheſter. For when Emma, quantities thereof are ſtill carried to London,

the mother of King Edward the Confeſſor (ha-|co the great advantage of the Inhabitants.] In

ving been accus'd of incontinency with Alwin] the middle of it there ſtood an old Caſtle call'd

Biſhop of Wincheſter, and her reputation at] Corffe, a very ancient ruin, and at laſt conſum'd corge.
ſtake ) clear'd her ſelf from the guilt in the Ca-[by Age; but ic is a notable memorial of the The ill-will

thedral Church of Wincheſter, by paſſing, bare-!ſpite of Mothers-in-law. For «/£!frith (to make o Step.
| way mothers,

lt the. Ar ht mn —._——___—— _____—_

DUROTRIGES. "oo"

c —

5”

|!

(| |

Tx:

i"

|

$

j

I

14

|

'
Clavil.
Pole.
Ve rham.

way for her own fon Erbeldred to the Throne)
having a Viſit paid her here, by her ſon-in-law
Edward, King of England, as le came from hun-
ting, fer certain Ruthans upon him, who flew
him; while his impious ſtep-mother glutted
her eyes with that bloody Scene. Which Im-
picty ſhe afterwards us'd her utmoſt endeavours
to expiate, by taking the habit of a Nun, and
building of Religious houſes. The firſt toun-
dation of this Caſtle is not diſtinctly clear'd by
any hiſtory ; though there are ſome circumſtan-
ces that ſeem to juſtifie a conjecture, of it's be-
ing built by King Edgar. For by an Inquiſi-
tion taken 54 Henry 3. concerning the Abbets
of Shaftsbury's claim of Wreck in her manour
of Kingfon in Purbeck, it is thus mention'd ;
Furetores dicunt, & c. i. e. The Furors ſay, that be-
fore the building of the Caſtle of Corffe, the Abveſs
and Nuns of St. Edward at Sha#lon had the wreck of
the Sea within their manour of King ſton, without lett
or moleſtation, Now, the Nunnery ot Shaſton was
founded An. 941. by King Edmund; after which
time the caſtle muſt have been built: and it is
probable, this was not done in eicher of the
two ſucceeding Reigns, which were but ſhort ;
till Edgar (the peaceable, the rich, and the great
builder roo, for he founded and repair'd 47 Mo-
naſteries,) came to the Crown. After the
ſtrength and ſafety of the Realm began to con-
ſiſt in Caſtles, this was one of the chief, be-
longing to the Crown ; and in the 42 of Hen. 3.
when Simon Montfort had taken the King pri-
ſoner, it was the third Caſtle requir'd to be
deliver'd up to that party; and was afterwards
by Mortimer look d upon as the fitteſt place,
wherein to ſecure his priſoner Edward 2. It
was repair'd by King Henry 7. and in the late
Civil Wars was a garriſon for the King, and
defended by the owner of it, the Lord Chief
Juſtice Banks: nor did it come into the Enemies
hands, otherwiſe, than by the treachery of one,
who pretending to have brought relief, let in
the beſiegers. The town is one of the nine
burroughs of the County, which ſend Burgeſſes
to Parliament; and, what is remarkable, the
principal members ot it, (eſpecially as many of
them as have born the Office of Mayor) are
call'd Barons; as the Chief citizens of London
anciently were, and the governing part of all
the Cinque- ports {till are. | This Purbeck 15;nall'd
an Iſland, though ic be but a Peninſula ; being
every way waſh'd by the ſea, except weſtward ;
(on which fide alſo, the river Frome, and anc-
ther little river, do almoſt make it an Iſland : )1
To the Eaſt, the bank of the ſea winds very
much inward, and finding a narrow inlet or
paſſage (oppoſite to which, within, is an Iſland
with a block-houſe call'd Brenkſey | now gone to
decay, Dwidens it felt into a bay of great breadth.
In this Iſland, there is one family of the name
of Clavil, recorded in Domeſday -book to have
been here, in the time of the Conqueror.
North of Purbeck, in a peninſula hard by, is
Poole, a ſmall cown turrounded every way with
water, but to the north, where it is joyn'd to
the continent, and has only one gate. It is not
unlikely, that it took the name from a bay be-
low it, which, in a calm, looks like a ſtanding
water, ſuch as we call a Pool. This, in the laſt
age [ſave one, J was improv'd from a Sedge-plat

with a ſew Fiſhermens huts, to a well frequent-

ed market-rown, and grew exceedingly in

wealth, and in tair buildings. | Leland attri-

butes the riſe of this Town to the decay of Mar-
bam ; imagining, that while the Ships could go
up ſo far, and there unlade, ic was in a proſpe-
rous condition; but when tor want of depth of
water they loſt that road, they took up at Poole,

and fo by little and little enriched it. And yet it

ſhould ſeem to have been formerly zlfo a dn
of ſome note, and of good antiquity. For it ap.
pears by Records, that in the 2 of Edward 2, the
Free · Burgeſſes of Poole (Thomas Plantagenet Earl
of Lancaſter being then Lord of it in right of
his wife) paid to the ſaid Lord the ſum of
8 J. 135. (equal to about 80 J. now,) for the
farm of their Liberties; and in 14 Edward »
they ſent Burgeſſes to Parliament. 1 King Heg.

ry 6. by Act of Parliament transferr'd the fran-

chiles of the port of Melcombe, which he had
disfranchis'd, to this place; and gave leave to

the Mayor to encloſe it with walls, which were
afcerwards begun at the harbour by Richard I,

who delervedly bears the character of one of

che worſt of men, and beſt of Kings. But from

that time (by I know not what ill deſtiny, or
rather negligence of the Inhabicants,) it has

been decaying ; fo that now the houſes, tor want

of inhabitants, are dropping down.

Into the weſt-corner of this bay, Frome a fu "Tas
mous river of this County diſcharges it elf ; n.
for ſo it is commonly call'd, tho' the Saxons
(as we learn from Afſerius) nam'd it Fpau; and
becauſe this bay was formerly call'd Fraumouth, pcm...
later ages have probably imagin'd, that the
river was call'd Frome. It has its riſe at Evarſher,
near the weſtern bounds of the ſhire, from
whence it runs Eaſtward by Frompton, to which gn
ic gave the name; and is joyn'd by a rivulet
from the north that flows by Cerne Abby, which ge All
was built by Auſtin the Engliſh Apoſtle, when he Males,”
had daſh'd to pieces the Idol of the Pagan Saxons Gel. Port,
there, call'd Heil, and had deliver'd them from '% 14%
their ſuperſtitious Ignorance. A little beneath
this, Frau or Frome (call it which you pleaſe)
dividing it ſelf, makes a kind of Iſland; and
firſt viſits that ancient town which in the Itine-
rary of Antoninus is call'd Durnovaria, that is, Dorchever:
the paſſage over the river. Ptolemy, according to
different Copies, calls it erroneouſly Durnium,
and Danium. I his has the name of the princi-
pal town of the County ; and yet it is neither
large nor beautiful, the walls having been pull'd
down by the Danes, who have thrown up {eve-
ral Barrows about the town. [| It has very wide
ſtreets, and is delicately ſituated on a rifing
ground, opening at the ſouth and weſt-ends,
into {weer, fields and ſpacious downs: It is a
Corporation, formerly govern'd by two Bai-
liffs and Burgeſſes; but it was, in the 5 Cha. 1,
incorporated a-new by the name of Mayor,
Bailiffs, Aldermen, and Burgeſſes ; with an en-
largement of Privileges, Franchiſes, and Im-
munities. It appears, that in the 29 Henry 8,
it contain'd 349 houſes. | This place daily dit-
covers very viſible tokens of Antiquity ; ſuch
are, the Roman military or conſular way, with
braſs and ſilver coins of the Roman Emperors,
which the common people call King Dorn's pence,
whom they fondly believe from the name to
have been the Founder of the town. Tln the
time of the Romans, it was one of the two win-
ter Stations of their Legions, mention d in thoſe
parts ; Vindegladia (now Winburne,) being the
other. And a mile off, there is a ditch with 4
Bulwark on the top of an hill, pretty large in
circumference, and call'd Maiden-caftle, which alder.
one may eaſily ſee was a Summer-Camp of theft.
Romans. They who have curiouſly view'd the
place, have trac'd-out the particular uſes of
each part: as, that the weſtern part of it, lacing
the Prætorium, was for the foot, and it could
not contain leſs than three Legions, i. e. about
18000 Soldiers: that the eaſt part, behind the
Prætorium, was for the Horſe and Carriages:
and that, between both, on each lide the Præ-
torium, the Tribunes and other Officers were ſeat-
ed. On the ſouth ſide of this work, is a 92 —

ecm-

mpton,

y * Y

e 2m a4

56

*

DORSETSHIRE

7 |

{-emingly the mouth of a hollow cave, which
{/me nice Obſervers will have to be artificial;
but for what uſe it ſhould be contriv'd, is alto-
gether uncertain. ), This Town ſuffer'd moſt,
when the cruel and barbarous Sueno renew'd the
Paniſh Wars; and when Hugh the Norman, a
man of treacherous principles, and Governour
of theſe parts, ſuffer'd the Country to be plun-
der'd and deſtroy'd. But in what condition it
was, about the beginning of the Norman times,
learn, if you pleaſe, from Domeſday-book. In
King Edward's reign, there were 170 bouſes in Dor-
chettcr ; theſe defended themſelves for all the King's
ſerwices, and paid geld for ten bides, but to the work
ac of * Haſcarli one mark of ſilver, excepting thoſe cu-
1.6. Clall pom; which f were for one night's entertainment.
5 Hos. There were in it $20 mint-maſters, There are now
mam only 82 houſes ; and 100 have been totally demoliſh'd,
ſince Hugh was Sheriff. If this language be ob-

þ 185

The rer {cure and unintelligible, as Sextus Czcilius ſaid

Frome, © in a caſe of the like nature, it is not to be im-

puted to want of Skill in the Writer, but to

want of Capacity in the Reader. | From this

Frum place, Henry Lord Pierpoint, Earl of King-

{ton, Viſcount Newark, and Baron of Holme,

was created Marquiſs of Dorcheſter in the 20"

year of King Charles the firſt ; who dying,

Fromptes without iſſue-male ſurviving, this title lay dead ;

: till Queen Anne, in the fifth year of her reign,

ce Mi advanc'd the right Honourable Evelyn, Earl

Male. (and ſince, Duke) of Kingſton, to the title of
_— Marquiſs of Dorcheſter.1

From hence the river Frome runs by Woodford,
where formerly Guido * de Brien, a martial hero,
had a ſmall caſtle; afterwards the habitation
of Humphrey Stafford of Suthwick, by whoſe
Coheir it deſcended (as I have been told) to
[Sir Edmund Cheney, of Brook; and by his
xr2wics, daughter to] T. Strangwaies, a native of Lan-
caſhire, who came to a fair eſtate in this
country ; and whoſe Poſterity built a very
fine Seat at Milbery. From hence it runs by
Byndon, call'd by the Saxons Beandun (which
likewiſe had its monaſtery,) where Kinegilſe
in the year 614, ſas is commonly ſaid] with
great difficulty overcame the Britains. | But, it
is obſervable, that in all the Copies of the an-
cient Saxon Annals, the place of that Victory
is called Beamòune, and not Beandun. AndI
ſee no reaſon why this Action may not very
well be remov'd to Bampton, upon the borders
between Somerſetſhire and Devonſhire, The march
of the Britains, and all other circumſtances, do
no leſs agree to this; and the old name does
much better ſuit it, it being uſual for after-ages
to add the (p) after (m) to ſtrengthen (as
it were) the pronunciation. Unleſs one ſhould
ſuppoſe that Beamdune was the ancient name of
Byndon, and that thoſe works upon a hill ſouth
of it (namely a double-form'd camp) were
done by one of thoſe two People. | + Some time
ſince, it was the ſeat of the Lord of Marney :
and afterwards gave the honorable title of Viſ-
count to Thomas Howard Knight of the Garter,
whoſe father nam'd Thomas (ſecond fon of The-
mas Howard, the ſecond Duke of Norfolk of that
name) Q. Elizabeth created Viſcount Howard of
Bynden, when by marrying [Elizabeth] daugh-
ter and heir of Baron Marney, he came to the
endorouph, prone eſtate of the Newboroughs in theſe parts.

And in the 5 year of Queen Anne, Henry
Howard, Lord Walden, eldeſt Son to the Earl
of Suffolk, was created Baron of Cheſterford
and Earl of Bindon.] The Family juſt now
mention'd, who are called de Novoburgo, com-
monly Newborough, (to whoſe Eſtate the Family
of Marney came by John Lord Marney, father
of the ſaid Elizabeth, marrying the daughter
and heir of Sir Roger Newhorough,)) derive their

Dorchefer;

Brdon,

pedigree from a younger ſon of Henry, the firſt

Earl of Warwick of the Norman race ; and

held here Vinfrott with the whole Hundred,

(the gift of King Henty 1.) by ſervice of Cham-

berlain in chief of our Lord the King, as it is in the

Inquiſition. But I have read, tnat in Edward

the 3 d's reign, it was beld in Sergeanty, by bold-

ing the baſon for the Ring to waſh on his Coronat ion-

day. Ralph Moien likewiſe held the adjoyning

manour of Owres by ſervice of Sergeanty in the

kitchin (the gift alſo of King Henry 1; [(and

lince, the poſſeſſion of the Lord Stourton, as be-

ing deſcended of William de Stourton, who in

the time of Richard 2, married Elizabeth, the

daughter, and afterwards heir, of Sir Jobn

Moigne; )| and R. de Welles held the manour of

Welles adjoyning, ever ſince the conqueſt of England,

by the ſervice of being Baker. But this, by the

way.

Where Frome diſcharges it ſelf into the bay

on which Poole is ſeated, near the mouth of it

ſtands Marbam, by the Saxons call'd Weapebam, Warham,

very ſtrong and ſecure on all ſides but the weſt ;

being every way elſe encompaſſed, by the ri-

ver Trent, the Frome, and the ſea ; [and fortified

on the weſt- ſide, as alſo on the eaſt, with earth-

en walls, both ſtrong and high.1 In Edward

the Confeſſor's time (A it is recorded in Domeſ-

day-book) it had 148 houſes, and two mint-

maſters ; but in William the Conqueror's days,

there were but 70 houſes, Afterwards, it re-

flouriſh'd, and was in great proſperity (fortify'd

with walls quite round, had a mint-office, was

full of inhabitants, and had a very ſtrong caſtle,

built by William the Conqueror,) till the reign

of Henry the ſecond. But from that time, it

ſuffer'd much by the wars and the caſualties of

fire, together with the ſea's robbing them of

their haven, and ſo is well-nigh run to ruin;

and the ground that was in the very heart of

che ancient town, produces great quantities of

garlick. [Ic is probable enough, that this aroſe

out of the ruins of a little poor place call'd

Stowborough, (in the ſame manner, as the pre-

ſent Salisbury has riſen out of the ruins of the

old;) for Stowborougb, tho” but a mean place, Stowborough,

is ſtill govern'd by a Mayor ; which ſhews,

that it has formerly been much more conſidera-

ble: and the natural ſtrength of Marbam, among

other things, might invite them, in thoſe trouble-

ſome times, to remove thither. At preſent,

there are not the leaſt remains of the Caſtle be-

foremention'd ; only, the ground upon which

it was built, is call'd Caſtle bill. An Argument

of it's once flouriſhing condition, is the num-

ber of Churches, which they reckon were in

all 8; but now only three are us d. The eaſt

part alſo of the town, and much of the weſt,

is now turn'd to — ;5 but the principal

ſtreets remain ſtill. |
The little river Trent has likewiſe it's mouth Trent. _

here, named ſo by Aſer, tho' the inhabitants | |

call it now Piddle; from whoſe northern bank, |

ſcarce three miles off, I ſaw the ruinous walls

of an old Abby call'd Middleton, which King Middleton,

Athelſtan founded by way of atonement for

taking away both the life and Crown of his

brother Edwin. For when his ambitious deſire

of government had overcome the principles of

natural juſtice, he put the poor youth who was

heir apparent co the Crown, with his lictle page,

into a“ ſmall skiff without any tackle, that he, aauariola.

might charge the Sea with his own guilt: And

Edwin, helpleſs, and diſtracted with grief,

threw himſelf headlong into the ſea. I The

greateſt part of the Abby is till ſtanding, as

having been the ſeat of the Tregonwells from

the time of the Diſſolution ; from whom it

Winfrott,

anty. f

*
——

came (by the marriage of the daughter and
H heir

* . —— 2 — „„%*Ü—ũè —ͤ . 2 — P

—
— —

— ———
—

— —
— — > <>———_
—

—

—— —— —

— —— —

rr 22

1 *

J UNS TRAIOES © ö

heir of Jahn Tregonwell) to the Luterells of Dun-
„ ſter-caſtle; and from them, by marriage, to the
Ge _ * family of Bank.“ Beneath this Middleton, ano.
Charch. ther little river riſes, which runs by a ſmall
Bere. matket town cali'd Bere, where for a long time
the ancient and famous family De turbida villa,

Turbervill, commonly calld Turber vill, had their ſeat.
But to return to the welt part cf the ſhire.
At the riſe of Frome where the ſoil is exceeding
frui:ful, Blackmore-foreſt ( once well wooded,
now more naked,) affords very good hunting.
Foreſt of It is commonly call'd The foreſt of white-hart,
White-bart. tho? long fince disforeſted.} The Inhabitants
have a tradition, concerning the occaſion of
the name, That King Henry 3. hunting here,
and having run down ſeveral Deer, ſpar'd the
life of a milk-white bart, which afterwards T. de
la Linde, a gentleman of this County, and his
company, took and kill'd ; but they were ſoon
made ſenſible, how dangerous it is to provoke
a Lyon. For the King, being highly incens'd
at it, fin'd them ſeverely, and the very Lands
they held, do to this day pay into the King's
Exchequer annually a pecuniary acknowledg-
White-hart- ment by way of fine, call'd + White-bart-ſilver.
flyer, Shirburn, which is likewiſe call'd Sbirburn-caſt le,
+ This ſeems borders upon this foreſt ; formerly Scipebupn,
ed x frog that is, a ſpring of clear water; [and accordingly,
money. as Leland ſaith, in ſome old Evidences termed
Shirburn. Font Clarus. I It is plac'd on the decline of a
Fons limpi- hill; and is very pleaſant (as Malmsbury writes)
7 by reaſon of the multitude of inhabitants, and a de-
lightful ſituation : It is at preſent the moſt fre-
quented town in this County, their woollen
manufacture turning to great account. | Leland
ſaith, in his time, it was about ewo miles in
compaſs ; and ſubſiſted partly by making of
Cloath, but moſtly by all manner of Trades,
joyntly.] In the year of our Lord 704. an Epi-
ſcopal See was erected here; and Aldelm was

conſecrated the firſt Biſhop. Afterwards, in the
reign of King Etheldred, Herman, Biſhop of DCCCLXXX, and the eighth year of bis reign.

Sunning, being advanc'd to this Biſhoprick, trans-
ferr'd his Epiſcopal See hither, and annext the
Biſhoprick of Sunning to it, which in William
the Conqueror's reign he remov'd to Salisbury,
reſerving Shirburn to his ſucceſſors for a reticing
place ; to whom it belong'd for many ages; and
one of them, nam'd Roger, built a fortify'd caſtle
in the Eaſt part of it, beneath which was a
large marſh, and many fiſh-ponds ; but theſe
being fill'd up, are converted into fruicful mea-
dows, [And as all the old Bifhopricks have
been cruelly lopp'd ; ſo Salisbury has loſt this
(the chief rents only reſerv'd,) to the Crown.
The main uſe it hath ſerv'd, has been to gra-
tifie great Favourites; none of whom having
long enjoy'd it, a remark hath been made, from
this and other like inſtances, That Church-
lands will not ſtick by Lay-owners. |
The Cathedral Church, immediately upon
the tranſlation of the See, was converted into
a monaſtery, and ſeems very ancient ; though
* Not many. * many years ago, in an uproar between the
C townſmen and the monks, it was ſet on fire;
the ſigns of which appear plainly at this day in
+ Aduſtus the | blackneſs of the ſtones. [This quarrel
Wiler. (as Leland tells us) was occaſioned by the Monks
taking the liberty to Baptiſe in the Chapel of
All-hallowes ; the Font-ſtone whereof, one of the
Ivell. iv. Townſmen defaced, | Below this, the river Ivel
(of which we ſhall ſpeak elſewhere,) with ma-
ny turnings and windings, runs weſtward, to
| Maultauch, Clifton, formerly the ſeat of the family of || Mal-
8 banch, from which ic deſcended by Inheritance
Cliiton, to the family of the Horſeies, Knights, [and from
them, by purchaſe, to the Heles ; and now it be-
longs to the Herwies ; ] and here the Ivell enters

61

More to the Eaſt, the famous river Steure wh
(riſing out of ſix Springs in Wiltſhire, and yield. ho\
ing great plenty of Tench and Eel) flows to hat
Stowrton, the ſeat of the Barons of Siaurten 5, Ro
When it firſt enters this County, it runs by = it's
Gillingham-foreſt, where Edmund ſirnam'd [rin- Gita, the
fide deteated the Danes in a memorable battle: anc
and then, viſits Shaftsbury three miles off, ſeated Shaft bee
on the top of a high hill; by the Britains call! ]
Caer Paladur (as the common people falſly ima- weford, pla
gin) and Septonia; by the Saxons Sceafterbypys ET Ste
perhaps from the remarkable Church-ſpire, gre
which they call a Scheaft, A little before the de
Normans came in, it had 104 houſes, and three tha
mint-maſters, as I have read in Domeiday. Book Al.
ſo often cited. It was afterwards more famous for.
for a Nunnery founded by the pious Lady Lo
Elfgiva, wife to Edmund great * Grandſon of* Has Tt
King Alfred; and had in it about ten Pariſh. * mc
Churches. But it is moſt remarkable, for what us
our Hiſtorians ſay of one Aquila, who prophe- Tien pl:
ſy'd concerning the change of the Britiſh go. P Re
vernment. Some think ic was the bird callg © Pa
Aquila, an Eagle; others, that it was a perſon ert Co 11
of that name, who foretold that the govern. ſte
ment of Britain, after having been in Saxon 1 _— W:
and Norman hands, ſhould return at length to Y 10
the ancient Britains: And theſe would have the co
town to be older than time it ſelf; tho' it was Priert. C. tit
undoubtedly built by King Alfred. For Maltas fr
bury the hiſtorian has told us, that there was an i ad dit
ancient ſtone in his time, remov'd out of the — re
ruins of the walls into the Chapter-houſe of the ——
Nuns, which had this Inſcription : nie lil, C. By

ANNO DOMINICAE IN CAR. B:

NATIONIS AELFREDVS REX li)
FECITHANCVRBEM. DCCCLXXX. at
REGNI SVI VIII. |
Prienſton, |
King Alfred built this city in the year of our Lord K
m

I was the more willing to inſert this Inſcrip- 2
tion for clearing of the truth, becauſe it is m
wanting in all the Copies I have ſeen, except in
one which belongs to the Lord Burgbley, Lord re
Treaſurer of England. This place gave the *
title of Earl to Sir Anthony Aſbley Cooper, Lord la
Aſhley of Winburn St. Giles, in the twenty by
fourth year of King Charles the ſecond ; in in
which year he was alſo made Lord Chancellor Blandford, ar
of England.1 uf

From thence the Stoure, running by Marnbill Stour, tell, C. de
(from which Henry Howard had his title of Ba- : re
ron Howard of Marnbill, before he was crea- Baron Hs ©
ted Earl of Northampton [and which is now ard *
the poſſeſſion of the Huſſie, )] makes to Stour- lil. E
minſter, that is, a monaſtery or minſter upon the tt
Stoure, a very mean town, and of a low ſi- ni
tuation ; to which Newton-caſtle is joyn'd by it
a ſtone bridge, where there is a mole of earth 40
rais'd with no ſmall pains, [and cut-off by be
a deep and wide ditch from the high land q
behind it; | but nothing remains of the Caſtle, of
ſave the name. Nor is there any thing of greater T
Antiquity relating to this place, than that King P,
Alfred by Will gave Stourminſter to his younger Stournin: ry
lon ; ſand that 100 years after, King Edgar bes. rdogl:dia, Al

gave it (being 30 Hydes) to the Abby of Glaf- 'b
ſenbury ; as King Edmund Ironſide gave New- * burte. þ
ton-Caſtle (being 17 Hydes) to the ſame Abby: *
both which are now part of the poſſeſſions of ju
the Frekes, 1 In the neighbourhood, at Silleſton, t
are two pretty high hills; one call'd Hameldon, F L
with a * treble rampire; the other, Hodde, ſonly * Bo" 5" Wk... it
with a ſingle rampire ; and it may ſeem to tree, We... a
have been a Camp, where the enemies to the 5
more ſettled garriſon in Hameldon, lodged. By c

whom

Somerſetſhire.
1

— — — — — ED Soo Y
9 — 2 — —-
—— - — — — I aan . r

C de Nichol,) and Alured being an uſual name in
> that family, it was ſometimes nam'd Auckford
; Alured, as in the 9 Edw. 1; and ſometimes Auck-
$ ord Nichol, as in the 10 Edward 1 ; when the
„ Lord thereof procur'd it a Fair and Market.
* Nu The difference and reaſon of the name, is the
— more worthy of obſervation, becauſe it ſecures
t us againſt an error, that theſe might be diſtin
Ide px places. I Afterwards, it was the chief Barony of
* Robert the ſon of Pagan, commonly call'd Fitz-
* Payne : he married the daughter of Guido de
1 ent C. + Brien, who alſo had his Barony in theſe we-
= br. ſtern parts in Edward the zaͤ's reign ; but for
n s. Want of heirs male of the family of Fitz. Payne,
0 . (from whom the common people, to this day,
e corruptly call the place Fipenny Okford,)1 the
s dert. C. titles of Baron Fitz-Payne, and * Brien, coming
- 0 firſt to the Poynings (Barons alſo in that age,)
n „ did by a daughter of their family, in the
8 ' Barons reign of Henry 6, center (together wich the Poy-
e ings. nings) in the Percies Earls of Northumberland.
Ie lu, C. But within the memory of the laſt age ſave

one, by the favour of Henry 8, the dignity of

Baron Poynings reviv'd in Thomas Poynings, a war-
* like- man, who had many illegitimate children;

and, with him, it ſoon expir'd.

Bieren. From hence, the Stoure paſſes by Brienſton, that

is, Brient ius town, the ſear of the ancient and

4 Knightly family of the Rogers, In which fa-
mily it continu'd, till Sir William Portman pur-

chas'd it, who left it to Henry Portman, his adop-

4 ted heir; and he, by buildings and otherwiſe,
I5 much adorn'd and improv'd it. This was held
0 in Grand Sergeanty by a pretty odd jocular
d renure ; viz. By finding a man to go before the King :
0 army for forty days when be ſhould make war in Scot-
d land (ſome Records ſay in Wales, ) bare-beaded and
y bare-footed, in his Shirt and Linnen-drawers, holding
A in one band a bow without a ſtring, in the other an
* Blandford, arrow Without feat bers. ] Next it goes to Blandford, a
Market-town ; which, having been by an acci-
il] Stoure ht, C. dent burnt down in the“ laſt age ſave one, was
* rebuilt, with great advantage, in point of beauty
i= Baron ft and number of inhabitants. | This is an ancient
2 A burrough, which in the 22 Edward 3. and the 33
5p Edward 3. ſent Burgeſſes to Parliament. In
be the 34 Edward 1. Henry Lacy Lord of the ma-
b- nour of Kingſton-Lacy, had divers Burgeſſes in
4 it, belonging to that manour, paying in all
h 40 5. A year, rent; and of late years, it hath
* been honour'd, by giving the Title of Mar-
d quiſs to the Illuſtrious General, John Duke
2 of Marlborough.) From thence, flowing by
1 Tarrens (part of the large poſſeſſions of Henry
= Port man) l where Richard Poor Biſhop of Salisbu-
T Stourmit” ry founded a little Nunnery; it haſtens to that
2 r20g1:4ia, ancient town, call'd Vindogladia, and mention'd
; | by Antoninus; by the Saxons call'd Wynbupn-
A "Vburre, bam, now commonly Winburne, and from its
| Monaſtery, Winburnminſter From hence it is
f juſt 16 miles to Dorcheſter ; the ſame diſtance
5 that Antoninus makes between Vindegladia and
NEW” Durnovaria. 1 ſuppoſe, it took the name from
debt, ( . its ſituation between two rivers ſthe Stoure
ER”. „and Alen; 1 for Windugledy in Britiſh ſignifies
8 between two ſwords; and, that the Britains
call'd their Rivers peculiarly by the name of

DORSET

EZ & & an

Romans, both becauſe of it's irregularity, and
it's being omitted by Antoninus. The place where
theſe hills are, is at preſent call'd Shilling ſton ;
and more anciently Aukford-E killing, as having
been the poſſeſſion of the family of Eskilling-1

Not far off (I cannot be particular in the
nerds, place) was Okeford, | which, in the reign of K.
Stephen or before, was the inheritance of the
great Family de Lincolnia (call'd by the French

[words, is plain from Aberduglediau (the Britiſh

whom it was Caſt up, is hard to determine z name of Milford. baven,) that is, the mouth of two
however, we may more fafcly conclude it to[/words, becauſe two rivers call'd Glediaa, that is,
have been a work of the Danes, than of the wordt, run into it.

The modern name alſo

ſeems to be taken from Rivers ;. for Winburne is

a compound of Vin a piece of the old word, and

the Saxon Burne, ſignifying a river ; by the ad- Burne, what
dition of which word, they were went to among the
expreſs the names of places chat ſtood by the Saxors.
water-ſide. The town is ſeated at the foot of

a hill; being large, and very well inhabited.

lc was of great reputation in the Saxon times;

I believe, upon no other account, but for the
Remains of the Roman magnificence. In the

year 713. when Cutbburg, ſiſter to Ina King of The Saxor.
the Weſt-Saxons, being weary of a marry'd life, Annals,
had procur'd a divorce from her husband the

King of the Northumbrians ; ſhe founded a
Nunnery here, which being conſum'd by Age,

a new Church was erected in the place, with a

fair vault under the Choir, and a very high ſpice

(beſides che ſtceple,) (which is now fai'n, and
nothing remains, but the fine Tower on which

it ſtood.] Into this, Prebendaries were intro-

duc'd, inſtead of Nuns; where, in the memor

of the * laſt age ſave one, Reginald Poole was * The laſt;
Dean, who afterwards was made Cardinal, and C.
Archbiſhop of Canterbury ; adding to the no-

bility of his Birth (for he had royal blood in his

veins) the Ornaments of piety, wiſdom, and
eloquence. He was fon to Margaret Poole,
Counteſs of Salisbury and daughter to George

Duke of Clarence, who was brother to King
Edward the fourth. ] King Etheldred (one of

the beſt of Princes, and brother of Alfred) who

was ſlain in a battel with the Danes at Witting-

bam, lies buried in this Church; upon whole

tomb (T not long ſince repair'd) this Inſcription + So ſaid,
is to be read: ann. 1607.

P R
DANO RVM
CYBVIT,- k.

In this place reſts the body of S. Etheldred King of
the Weſt-Saxons, Martyr, who in the year of our
Lord DCCCLXXII. on tbe XXIII of April, fell
by the bands of the Pagan Danes. |

Near whom, lies buried Gertrude Marchioneſs of
Exeter, and mother of Edward Courtney, the
laſt Earl of Devonſhire of that family; and on
the other fide of the Choir, Jobn de Beaufort
Duke of Somerſet, with his wife ; whoſe daugh-
ter Margaret Counteſs of Richmond, Mother
of Henry 7. a Princeſs of extraordinary piety,
founded a ſchool in this place for the education
of youth; | which hath ſince been conſiderably
improved, by the bounty of Queen Elizabeth.
But to ſhift the ſcene from the Church to the
Town. When the Danes endeavour'd to raiſe
a Civil War among the Engliſh, and had broken
the alliance between King Edward the elder,
and Xchelwald his kinſman; Æthelwald, high-
ly ambitious of Government, and out of an in-
veterate hatred to his Prince, fortified this place
with the ſtrongeſt Works he could contrive.
But aſſoon as Edward approach'd with his At-
my, and had encamp'd at Baddan-bypgz, now
call'd Badbury, he fled to his Confederates the Badbury,
Danes. This Badbury is a hill ſcarce two miles
off, entrench'd with a triple dicch, where, they
ſay, a Caſtle ſtood, formerly the ſear of the
Weſt-ſaxon Kings. But if ever there was ſuch
a one, it is now ſo entirely deſtroy'd, that I
could not diſcover the leaſt footſteps of it. It

13

— a —

A.

_—

"DUROTRIGES.

King on-
Lacy.

Alen.

Aſhleys,
K nigh 85.

NMaltravers.

Canford.

Coperas.
Alum,

Cranborne.
* Aquis ir-
riguum.

Viſcount
Cranborne,

1694.

is probable, that this was a ſummer Station of

a Legion, or part of a Legion, which might
have their winter-Station at Winburne, But,
however this may be; that it belong'd to the
Romans, is evident from their coins found
there; where alſo a Roman Sword, and divers
Urns, have been lately dug-up : and, what puts
it beyond all diſpute, is, a Foſſe-way beginning
there, which leads to Sorbiodunum or old Salis-
bury.) |

In the neighbourhood, I ſaw Kingfon, a little
village, call'd King/ton-Lacy, becauſe it belong'd
to the Lacys Earls of Lincoln, together with Win-
burn ; to whom it came by bargain and fale,
thro' the hands of Quincie Earl of Wincheſter,
from the Earls of Leiceſter ; (for King Henry 1.
ou it to Robert Earl of Mellent and Leice-

er;) and at laſt, both places came to the houſe
of Lancaſter, who (as I have ſaid) had a par-
ticular favour for Vinburn. [It is now called
Kingſton-hall, and the poſſeſſion of the family of
Banks, of whom Sir Ralph Banks built upon it
a ſtately houſe ; and his Grandfather Sir Fob»
Banks bought it of the adopted Son of Charles
Blunt Earl of Devonſhire, to whom it was given
by King James x ; having come to the Crown
by Henry 4, Son to John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaſter.] Ar a little diſtance from Winburn,
the Stoure receives a ſmall river call'd Alen; up-
on which ſtands St. Giles Winburn, the ſeat of
the honourable and ancient Family of Aſhley,
Knights. [It came by deſcent to the Earl of
Shaftsbury, from Sir Anthony Aſbley (who was in
ſeveral publick Employments, in the reign of
Queen Elizabeth ;) he having given his only
daughter and heir in marriage to Sir Jobn Cooper
of Rockbourn in Hampſhire, who had iſſue by
ter, Sir Anthony Aſbley Cooper; who in the year
1661. was made a Peer of this Realm by the
title of Baron Aſhley of Winburn St. Giles; having
choſen that title purſuant to an Article in the
aforeſaid Marriage, Thar if Sir Jobn Cooper or his
Heirs ſhould come co be honoured with the de-
gree of Peerage, they ſhould rake that for their
title.] Upon the ſame river, ſtands Wickbampton,
once the patrimonial eſtate of the Barons of
Maltravers; the laſt of whom, in the reign of
Edward 3. left only two daughters; one, mar-
ry'd to 7.55 de Arundel, the grandfather of Jobn
Earl of Arundel, who left to his heirs the title of
Baron of Maltravers ; the other, to Robert le Rows,
and aſterwards to Jobs Keynes Knight. From
hence the Stoure paſſes by Canford ; below which,
James Baron of Montjoy (a great Virtuoſo, par-
ticularly in Metals,) began to make Coperas and

Alum. It was from this place alſo, that John

Earl of Warren forcibly took away Alice Lacy
the wife of Thomas Earl of Lancaſter, to his
own great ſhame, and no leſs damage to all
England ; as appears at large by our Chroni-
cles. Here, the river Stoure leaves Dorſetſhire,
and running thro' ſome parts of Hantſhire, diſ-
charges it ſelf into the Ocean ; having firſt re-
ceiv'd a little river which runs by Cranborne, a
* Town very well water'd; where in the year
of our Lord 930. «Ailward a nobleman (firnam'd
Meaw from his fair complexion,) founded a little
Monaſtery, which Robert Fitz- Haimon a Norman
(to whom the Eſtate of Ailward deſcended) re-
mov'd to Tewkesbury ; leaving only a Monk or
two here. From «/ilward, it came through the
hands of the Clares Earls of Gloceſter, and
Burhbs Earls of Ulſter, to Lionel Duke of Cla-
rence, and by him to the Crown. Robert Cecil
was Viſcount of Cranborne; whom King James
che 1ſtlin the firſt year of his reign, did, in
conſideration of his great Wiſdom, honour with
the title of Baron Cecil of Eſſendon ; in his ſe-
cond year, with that of Viſcount Cranborne; and
in his third, with the title of Earl of Salisbury.

3 pen Gnrin— WhdSgr nan ng een rn

[On Hambledon-bill, at the end of Cranborn.
chaſe, is an ancient Camp; and another near it
on Hed- bit; in, or near the firſt of which
Roman Coins are ſaid to have been dug-up.] ;

Touching the Earls and Marqueſſes of this
County; William the Conquerour, aſſoon as

Earl of Seez in Normandy, Biſhop of Salisbur
and firſt Earl of Dorſet, and alſo his own Cha

04

Aubr, Mo-
Brit. Mus

Earls and
Marquege
he had got the Crown, made Oſmund, who was of Dj,

u. Pat
4 1 5 at "
cellour ; having a great opinion of his piety, 118, "

wiſdom, and Abilities. A long time after, Ri- See the

chard 2. in the 21ſt year of his reign advanc'd Dukes 9
Jobn de Beaufort, ſon to Fobn of Gaunt and Earl erg,

of Somerſet, to be Marqueſs of Dorſet ; of
which honour he was afterwards deprived by
Henry the 4b, out of ſpite to Richard 2. And
when, in full Parliament, the Houſe of Com-
mons (with whom he was much in favour) did
earneſtly intercede, that his dignity of Mar-
queſ: might be reſtor'd ; he utterly refus'd it,
as an upſtart title, never known in the world
before; and his younger Brother Thomas de
Beaufort was created Earl of Dorſet, who af-
terwards, for his great valour, was honour'd
by Henry F. with the title of Duke of Exeter,

and the Government of the County of Har- Harun,

court, For he gallantly defended Harflew in
Normandy againſt the French, and defeated
the Earl of Armeniac in a pitch'd battel. After
his deceaſe without iſſue, Henry 6. created Ed.
mund, of the ſame houſe of Lancaſter, firſt
Earl, and then Marqueſs, of Dorſet, and at laſt
Duke of Somerſet; whole ſons being all cut-
off in the Civil Wars, and the Houſe of Lan-
caſter quite routed, Edward 4. created Thomas
Grey ot the family of Ruthin, who was his ſon-
in-law (for the King had marry'd Grey's mo-
ther,) Marqueſs of Dorſet, when in right of
his wife he was come to the great eſtate of the

Bonvils in this and the neighbouring Counties.

Thomas his ſon, and Henry his grandſon by the
ſaid Thomas, ſucceeded him ; which laſt was
created Duke of Suffolk by Edward 6, upon
his marriage with Frances, daughter of Charles
Brandon Duke of Suffolk, and Neice to King
Henry 8, by his ſiſter. He ſuffer'd for High-

Treaſon in Queen Mary's reign ; having had

too late Experience, how dangerous a thing it
is to marry into Royal Families, and to en-
courage one's ſelf, or others, in that kind of
Ambition.

From this time, the title of Dorſet was con-
ferr'd on none; till King James ſthe firſt] in
the beginning of his reign, advanc'd Thomas
Sackvil, Baron of Buckhurſt, Lord Treaſurer
of England (a perſon of great Wiſdom and
Application) to the Earldom of Dorſet 3 as a
juſt reward of his extraordinary merit, and emi-
nent ſervices to the Publick. [Who dying of
an Apoplexy, April 19. 1608, was ſucceeded
by Robert his ſon and heir; whoſe: ſecond fon
Richard ſucceeded his father ; Thomas the eldeſt
ſon dying before, and unmarry'd. This Ri-
chard dying without iſſue, his younger brother
Sir Edward Sackvil ſucceeded him in his ho-
nours, who, firſt, was Lord Chamberlain to
Queen Mary, wife of King Charles 1, and at-
terwards Lord Chamberlain to the King. His
ſon Richard was next Earl, and was ſucceeded
by Charles his ſon by the Lady Frances, daughter
to Leonel Earl of Middleſex, and at length heir
to James Earl of Middleſex her brother; upon
which account the ſaid Charles was created Earl
of Middleſex by Letters Patents bearing date
April 14. 27 Car. 2; in which honours, he was
ſucceeded by his only Son Lionel-Cranfield Sack-
vil, the preſent Earl.1

There are in this Ceunty 248 Pariſhes,

More

1555

lubt. Mos
it. Mus

Harcourt,

. 8

89% on

2 6 0

ſere

04

1555

#3 *
JO ,
r 1 —__—_— — 4 PR.” &@ a
» »

65

E 5

- 20 ©

66

_—.

ſweet Cyperus graſs or Engliſh Galingale. Found by

More rare Plants growing wild in Dor- |; Newton in the Iſle of Purbeck, Dorſetſhire.

ſetſhire.

Gale frutex odoratus Septentrionalium, Elæ-
agnus Cordi J. B. Myrtus Brabantica, five El#-
agnus Corti Ger, Rhus myrtifolia Belgica C. B.

Calamogroſtis five Gramen tomentoſum Park. Sylveſtris five Myrtus Brabantica vel Anglica

Gramen tomentoſum, Calamograſtis quorun-|C, B. Gaule, ſweet Willow or Dutch Myrtle. In

dam, & vulgi Gramen plumoſum Leb. Belg. Gr.| , low level marſh-ground near Warebam in this Coun-
arundinaceum panicula molli ſpadicea majus ty N.

C. B. The ſoft or woolly Reed: graf. This groweth in
the borders of dry fields in many Countries of this| Tree-mallow. About the cottages of the Village cala
King dom, eſpecially is Dorſetſhire Park. p. 1182. 1] Chiſſel in Portland Iſland.

am ſuſpicious, there will be no ſuch —

this or any ot ber County of England : neit

alva arborea marina noſtras Park. Engliſh Sea

* in Sedum Portlandicum Ad. Lob. majus marinum
am I Anglicum Park. Portland Sengreen. Lobel writing ſo

atisfied what ſort of Graſs Lobel meant by this| ambiguouſly of this plant, and we having not ſeen nor
eggs bis deſcription of bis own tranſlation out of | bear of it at Port y I ſhould not have thought it

bis Dutch Herbal, in Parkinſon.

worth mentioning, but that 1 find it in ſome Catalogues

Carduus ftellatus luteus foliis Cyani C. B. Sol-| of Gardens.
ſtitialis G. R. Spina Solſtitialis J. B. Cardui ſtel-| VYermicularis frutex minor Ger. fruticoſa al-

Jati varietas, jacea lutea cluſii Lob. S. Barnaby's| tera Park. Sedum minus fructicoſum C. B. An
Thiftle. By the hedges not far from Cirenceſter in] Cali ſpecies ſeu Vermicularis marina arbore-

C. B. paniculi ſpar

GloceFterſhire, Mr. Bobert. |
Cyperus longus Ger, longus odoratus Park.
odoratus radice longa, ſeu Cyperus Officinarum almoſt to Portland Iſland,

ſcens J. B. Shrub-Stonecrop, or rather Glaſſwort. On
the ſtone baich running from the ſhore of Dorſetſhire

ſpecioſa J. B. The ordinary

WK.
bY) 4 "
ny { N | , Hp *
.
* ey : = Wo
: 8 22

WAS 75
CGE 4D

»
o

1 0 -
> GY

[ BEL G @.

— ͤä ͤrneã— L ⁰U —⁰ T Ä * a” *
— PRs n :

' |
| |
: | . A A A RN RL ALLOA RR RE eee Wig 7 a7 NA AN 84284288 *
n N Sw . do tp ” - Mw Mes tots Pry tab Me PATE IO TEE TS TY „ . . 1 EET TELE LEAN TEN TEEN IWR IM 8 8
1 een em pint ol Dupont og tg tg but: 9%
!

Oe IS iS pale

1 VVV
. VVV

i e

*
/ o
PICS

| B E L (E A. >

Wind @nl; I, EXT the Durotriges, to the North and Eaſt, were the Belgz ; who, from
| "A. | " the name and wk good authorities, ſeem to bawde come into Britain 12
; among the Belgæ, a People of Gaule. For the Belgæ (as Ceſar learn d of
” the Rhemi) were deſcended from the Germans, and paſſing over the Rhine,
I were induc d by the fruitfulneſs of the Place to ſettle there, after they had
E: expell'd the Gauls. From whence (as the ſame Author has it) they paſs'd
over into Britain, to plunder and conqper ; and were all call'd by
the names of the Cities where they had been born, and from
whence they came over thither ; and making war upon the Inha-
bitants, they ſettl'd there, and began to cultivate the Land. It does
not preciſely appear, at what time they came over; unleſs poſſibly Divitiacus,
King of the Suefliones, who flouriſh'd before Cæſar, might tranſplant the
| Belgæ hither, For be bad the government of a great part of Britain as well
as of Gaule, Neither is it clear, from whence the name of Belgæ ſhould come. Hubert Thomas f of 4 Lea
Leige, a very learned man, was of opinion, that Belgæ is German word, becauſe the Germans call the
Gauls and Italians Wallen, and ſome of them term them Welgen. John Goropius « Belgian, will have
it to come from the Belgick word Belke, ſignifying Anger, as if they were more prone to anger than other,
But ſince the name of Belgæ does not ſeem to be properly deriv'd from the language us'd at this day by the
Low-Dutch, which is almoſt the ſame with our Engliſh-Saxon (for it was carried thitber by thoſe Saxons,
which Charles the Great tranſplanted into Brabant and Flanders ;) I am inclin'd to favour the opinion of
thoſe, who fetch it from the old Gauliſh tongue (which our Welſh in a great meaſure keep entire,) and who
will have the Belgæ ſo nam d from Pel, i.e. remote. For they were the remoteſt People in Gaule ;
and at the greateſt diſtance from the Roman Province, as well in ſituation, as in breeding and humanity,
And the Poet tells us, that the Morini, à people of Gallia Belgica, were the moſt remote, when be calls
them, Extremi hominum, the remoteſt part of mankind. But now let us come to our Belgæ, whoſe ter-
ritories were very large, viz. Somerſetſhire, Wiltſhire, and the inner part of Hamſhire.

*

ee 9 N ＋ % * 8 . 8 ＋ 74 * SO 3% Ns Wu ST 84 Na WA * SO SOA N 87 N. 7 WA SANE N. 28 8 WA Sor N. 2 2 4 N. 7 8 8 N WEN NC N. 4
1 MODE ORD re
.

yp -— —_—
i — —

SOMERSETSHIRE.

HE County of Somerſet, [call-j which in the year 886. ſuffer'd very much from
0 ed by the Saxons Sumuprere-|the fury of the Danes. ¶ Watcher was again har- Cha
MN rcype ; (as the Inhabitants were raſs'd by them ann. 997. and amongſt the reſt
called Sumuprezrar, Sumop- of the neighbours in thoſe weſterly parts, ſut-
| ræte, and Sumæpræcaf; now1|ter'd whatever fire and ſword could inflict. Por-
f commonly Somerſetſhire,) is a lock was the place where Harold landed from
i large and plentiful country. On] Ireland, (ann. 105 .) who, being oppos'd by the
| | the north, the Severn-ſea beats upon ir, to the] inhabitants and neighbouring people, flew great
| weſt it bounds upon Devonſhire, to the ſouth| numbers of them, and carry'd off a large booty.)
| upon Dorſerſhire, and to the eaſt upon Wiltſhire, Between theſe two, lies Dunſtor-caſtle, in a low Duns
and part of Gloceſterſhire. The ſoil is very | ground, every way ſhut up with hills, except on
rich, and chiefly employ'd in grain and paſtu- | chart fide which faces the fea. It was built by
rage; it is very populous, and tolerably well| the Moions or Mobuns, from whom it came, by Ti: *
furniſh'd wich harbours. Some think, this name | bargain, to the Luterells, This family of 9
was firſt given it, becauſe the air is gentle and | Mobunt was for a long time very famous and glei
as it were a ſummer-air, in thoſe parts; in which | powerful, and flouriſh'd from the days of Wil-
ſenſe the Britains at this day call it Glad-arbaf, | liam the Conqueror (under whom the caſtle
tranſlating the word out of our language. But was built) to the reign of Richard 2. Of the
the truth is, as in ſummer-time it may really | ſame Family, were two Earls of this County,
be term'd a ſummer-country, ſo no leſs may it in| William, and Reginald who was deptiv'd of that
| the winter- ſeaſon be call'd a winter-country : ſoj honour in the Barons wars. From that time,
| wet, moiſt, and marſhy it is for the moſt part; their poſtericy@were in the number of Barons,
BY which makes it very troubleſom to travellers. |the laſt whereof, Jobn, left three daughters, Phi-
F However, I ſhall not ſcruple to affirm that this | /ipps Wife of Edward Duke of York, Elizabeth
9d name was certainly given it from Somerton, for-|marry'd to William de Monte-acuto or Montacute,
'F f merly the chief and moſt celebrated town off ſecond Earl of Salisbury of that name, and
\ Wi the County; ſince Aſer, a very ancient Au-|Mawd to the Lord Leſtrange of Knokyn, The
5 thor, calls it every Where, the County of So- mother cf theſe (as the ſtory goes) obtain'd 0!
mertun. I [her husband, below this town, ſo much ground |
| | Upon the Severn-ſea (where this County bor-|for a * Common to the inhabitants, as ſhe could“ -_
W | ders on the Danmonii) the two firſt places we] go about barefoot in one day. [Near this Ca-“ |
Ri : Portock. meet with, are Porlock, in Saxon Popclocan ;|ſtle, is Minbead, which was, with many other Mi
1 | | Watchet. and Hatchet, formerly Wecedport; two harbours, | Lordſhips, given by William the Conguorer Dh
| if ic

4 _— .
* .
T A es —
_ — —
—— — —— —
— — jU—w TU1PU—E U U U U U U U ꝛ˙̃ — ; — — — — —

tr tn. 1 * = *

p 43
4 "dc? 4 ww" Ay
. —
*
1
a *
1 k oat
wo w# ,
* 0 . | By wack. 55
* —
— „*
| > | >>
W 8 rr
n.
AR — 2
. 7
3 —
» 5
A
b Aa —
r
. 7 6 *
2
.._ >
e
3
co
,
bl
” 4
i
I
|
WO"
p
- *
|
+ Compi >
us iger. 2 :
Minhead
/
t
/

.

ͤ— —— — —
- — —ʒ—uU—äũũ 9d

_— —_ ——
— — — —

—

-

— —

= 27 —

—

—

——

0 ˙— — — —

r —

K—

B MOSS. > OY IO

—

——

Tucken

— p OO TI

um mute, of lime 3

a

— —

—
—

—

Mil

0
OA

ll

* N
wt 0
N MA J

Np; _2 7
bout. of FF oath

T to
W.

10
|

* PorlockÞa -4

k 8 "
3 0
Tao d {north

Nor

AMrneh ad

7 . 1 A

#77 2 GY * 3 n 25 * 4 _— Me Sg : * .lt
clbone if Lnecomb 2 Pax N ow 2 41 uf. ; 7 > 4 r 41 0. *. | l _ WES,
» Ir. | T »Þ . D unkter SP nus ＋ ty 8 ” 5 7 as; " renal 2 bee, preg N an —
3 MON CONNOR 2 — 5 N. 0 D ee 4 * a Tin, Mont | i 2 L
* ND Tauber ¹ . * 42 ton Wa) & 2. { | Hu

p ot, ah lowey mn, ton .

: 0 H VN D” or carhamy 7 POT. © ti 1
ER PE nl, REACTS "4 +4,» Pon In, Blake, 49 | * 1 DN en | 3 TID WON: 1
Fu — 1 » Y 4 . . 6 N. N. b 1 3 a» . , 77. comme 7 7
„ WL 4 KT > ccc mb LuahSronah |; —_— —_ Hire nn "Y 2
run r br . . *

| | TW LS WR H .
1 > P 1 * * we, r — : Mon 27 we * _
OS n p A 0 u. Able -
| _— 8 1 ul. e 42 to rome * Ad
; 1 thu 4 7. 7 2 2 vw

Muni rth

1

1 . * WILLITON 6 n Pf oY Lend fie,
* wh at.
* on 22 FS, „ 1 ho 1 4741 . . . 2 4 / ho ** 7 - -
: : Prupton Nos * = * n „ un rmte bn 2 v. 3 . — * F / + 3 1
A I * 2 * YL roworthi FP.” e N Dns Fl
k «? * wo Ip * L N
. P Inu. 1 Amt. oth 5 {art ..
nk lu hen an 4 Merge, 5 BpsI. Ti 3 2 28 | 4
0 er — * „ 4 Ä B 8 oh 2 TON Ua = {
Molland - | N — N FX FIT rouge MP 2 >
| W Malver "tom 4» Tas «K n 7 N 1. * OD F
n, £4 * eme, 4 M ILVERTON K 4 = Worth dur,
| T or Stowl, £F Nee
Lan, * (ute r, 22 en ERA the nf „ h. 4
Holter Bampyon | Padle War os Fo |
6 Cl 1 Arn, IUNu
Run - Sow nsgor,

"io
P A R "i N . . 0

[ x Ho +77

— few ene

3.7%
A 7 e Hill My N E

oPurlescom

Y *7
Combe $107.

% *
o
*
5
EY ——
— A RIT” CY

* 4 A*. 0

| 4 7 Hafen * Cn George

| | 'Þ Portburn Vincent
Gurren xi

„HA

6 * *.

N 3 |

| el ;
4 Comps Va F e by Ul luv
| nalin ui 9 >
& red 1 © i
e 882

r WIN'TERSTOK

«44

run 0
N Bube
FT Cnrwerga Wilton
of Tann

charter Las
23. 3 *
4 ChotktorRo,

| won”
Hobs Iod, A.
| | * —
— Renter Þ ep.”
er Nu tx

. x

; ND 895

fd. SEG 8 52 Gti
4 A JD >

went Sarih af Urn alu ur -
WS 1h Prices : 'D, . W V. \ 1-22: 5
; Fo Brent mary Hvx3 D - Gu more 2 5 2 4

— f , Goden *

—

| Lookin *

. * 4 1

-
A

„A 7

| Irent

[MERTON -
22 I» - _ V. Mlarinaton

Arelm:«
GL

1 ON

8/4. Tower,

Sutton

2 8 oF moor

OUCH MOT

1
Auel. won |

f 4 | |

1 C
I; .
\ * *

ante, rh
AlN

* * 222

as, Curt Ls ,

th 4 terrt)
ON

Wbot Low * 4
ATM 7:1, {mu 3

22 n
IN DN » , — » p

| 2 * 2 97; e

f 4 . . 2 N * , 5 4. ",

e Wee Js ov % l ts | ao — off FAY;
Anrnrdaten N byes 11148 1 12
8 os CA con 1
e/horniord |
o/,Mngton
Prehagoard

ontombe

— 4
0 3 7 _

FA S n IRE

*
8
2
8
V
8

w |
a "3 1. W 4
uy: < 27 we,

aon
NI
Call

Triewxxagnk

Hons Hun

e 44% D O R S E T |

ad e [i * ©
Ke

A ee ** whonlg,

7

uu en

2 pore Hens "8 4.

L 7 5 2
u, / purſes une
| N

PART o F

: * * « . *

A...

r 1

g f
g
4
Sh,
t N.
1
YU \%
44 -
a ”
* 5
P **
* F
hy,
7 ; 5
þ
8 *
. i
* w
*
*
w
.
2
* N. 4
*
v
' 7
,
— 1
5 2
Sou?
F
7 wy | — *
an? 2 4+ l 4
Es
* 5
*
. * * —
64
wh
»
9
*
%
. 90 .
—_
A, *
* *

aw .
LF
. 4

* 3 *

*

*

—
*.
— =
— 4

e

#*
4

1
*
* 7
.
U
4 5
. 2
*
*
— * 4
PF.
*..
*
o oF
a « Pd
- * »
” *
| w "or.
* * - ”.
_ ba Sas. . I
i
i
.
8
*.
*
%
_ _
- NE 4 A. *
—— . ” =
: þ *.
1 "CY
a oo *
4
. *
*
* 2
"4
8
-
=
—
$ =
* —
4 LA
*
*
— 4
— «& ”
ww
i,
|| ”, as
» * —
mY *
*
N _
» *2 x

9 *

——

9

Sir
cam
freqU
imp.
com
ty Sl
ſent
wich
liam
Cove
this

viga
and

Wa- Cleve. mor
vn Mari- or
her Ma Se

ap. 9.7

ther,
and

ſend
taſte
and

decked Jicit
adam pelo

untocks- plac
; bead
anci
Was
rons
the
of |
Col
Tun
plea
riet)
fuln.
tbur/
whi
but
a he

N
ſma
Cuenton. try»;
Decombes. Care
fron
Wal
Ago!
the:
both
mou
Her
Wot

got
toke-Curcy, mo!

my of the
cies, oy
ar

| But
Nen de Cur- Was
0 Ire
anc
A
lea

fro
Carrington. Ca

r

8

SOMERSETSHIRE ©

Sir William de Mobyn ; from whoſe Family it
came to that of Luterell, It is one of the moſt
frequented paſſages to Ireland, and is of late
improved by the carching of Herrings, which
come up the Severn about Michaelmas, in migh-
ty Shoals, and being caught and cured, are
ſent hence to Markets up the Mediterranean,
wich great advantage. In the 12" year of Wil-
„„ liam the 3% a Statute was made, for the re-
; covering, ſecuring, and keeping .in repair,
this harbour, for the benefit and ſupport of the na-
wigation and trade of this kingdom. On the rocks
and pebbles, where the Severn waſhes them,
Cleve, MOTE eſpecially near Old- Cleve, between Dun-
4 watt ſtor and Watchet, grows the Lichen Marina,
4 (Sea-Liverwort) commonly called Laver, Hi-
ther, when the Tide 1s out, the Inhabitants come
and gather it, and, when cleanſed and pickled,
ſend it to a great diſtance ; being of a pleaſant
taſte, very nouriſhing, a good antiſcorbutick,
and of excellent uſe by way of diet and me-
rebel. dicine. In this vale, lies Orchard-Wyndbam, once
jadham- belonging to the Orchards, who had formerly
great poſſeſſions in this Country. From them
it came to the Sydenbams, and from them by
marriage to the Wyndbams. Near which place,
at Neitlecomb, was a ſeat of the Rawleighs, whoſe
Monuments are ſtill to be ſeen in the Pariſh-
Church; and who were ſucceeded by the Treve-
lyans, of Corniſh extraction, enriched afterwards
by marriages, with great eſtates in Devonſhire
and this County, particularly in and near this
antocks- place. In this neighbourhood, is Quantoc k-
al, bead, for many years one of the Sears of the
ancient family of Luterell ; of whom, Robert
was ſummoned to Parliament among the Ba-
rons of this Realm in the 234 year of Edward
the firſt. From Eaſt-Quantoc lk bead, runs a ridge
of hills (of the ſame name) through a rich
Countrey, ſouthward, as far as the vale of
Taunton-Dean ; affording a proſpect, extremely
pleaſing to the eye, by reaſon of it's great va-
riety of ſea and land, of barrenneſs and fruit-
fulneſs. At the ſouth-end of which hills, is Co-
thurſton, the ancient ſeat of the family of Stawel,
which is of great antiquity in this County;
but the houſe was, in the Civil wars, brought to
a heap of Ruins.) |
Near the caſtle of Dunſtor aforeſaid, are two
ſmall villages, dedicated to two of their Coun»
Cirenton, try- Saints: Carenton is the name of the one, from
D*combes. Carentocus the Britain; the other, S. Decombes,
from Decumanus, who ſetting ſail out of South»
Wales, landed here (as we find it in an ancient
Agonal) in @ horrid deſert full of ſhrubs and briars,
the woods thick and cloſe, ſtretched out a vaſt way
both in length and breadth, ſtrutting up with lofty-
mountains, ſever d wonderfully by the hollow wallies.
Here, having bid farewell to the vanities of the
world, he was ſtab'd by an Aſſaſſin, and fo
got the reputation of a Saint among the com-
Ou, mon people. Stoke-Curcy, a Barony ſo nam'd
4 was from the Lords of it, lies at a little greater di-
ſtance from the ſea ; the ſeat of William de Curcy,
1 Butler to King Henry 1. Of which family,
ere was that Jobn de Curcy who ſubdued Ulſter in

and honourable, endu'd with a brave Spirit and
a majeſty of Soul ; whoſe ſignal valour muſt be
learnt from the Iriſh Hiſtories. More eaſtward
from hence, at ſome diſtance from the ſea, is
Cannington, at or about which place, in the year
loo. we find the Danes practiſing their old
„Chen. methods of burning and plunder. The preſent

Carrington,

and the ſituation of it, with the Marches of
that army. Nor does the mzpſcer (the marſhes}
which is added to ir, leſs confirm the opinion,
it being, as hath been ſaid (eſpecially in the
winter) extreme wet and fenny, This place was

Ireland, a perſon deſign'd by nature to be great

dr. Me. name agrees well with the ancient * Caningan,

given by King Charles the 24, to the Lord
Clifford of Chudleigh.1 From che adjoyning
coaſt to the Stertpoint, the ſhore ſhoots out by
little and little, where two of che largeſt rivers
in the whole County meeting together, empty
themſelves at one mouth, call'd by Prolemy the
eſtuary of Uzella, from the river Ivell, which The rſusty
leaves that name before it comes hither. It ri- of Cc.
ſes in Dorſetſhire, and at it's firſt coming into
Somerſetſhire, gives name to a well-frequented
market- town call'd Evil, and receives a little Evell.
river, upon which is Camalet, a ſteep mountain, ;
of a very difficult: aſcent, on the top whereot zo
are the plain footſteps of an old decay'd Camp, pag. 60.
and a triple rampire of earth caſt up, including Drayt. Po-
20 acres. The inhabitants call it Arthur's palace; Holb. P. 544
but that it was really a work of the Romans, is
plain from the Roman Coins daily dug-up -
there. [+ The hill is a mile in compaſs at the + Leland's
top, four trenches circling it, and between each Itinerar.
of them an earthen wall. On the very top of 4
the hill, as hath been ſaid, is an Area of 20 Notes upon
acres or more, where in ſeveral places, as Le- Polyolb.
land obſerves, might be ſeen the foundations of
walls. And there was much dusky blew ſtone,
which the people of the adjoyning villages had
in his time carry'd away. Beſides the coins,
Stow tells us of a ſilver horſe-ſhoe, there dug-
up, in the memory of that age; and Leland de-
ſcribes it in a kind of extaſie; Good Lord, what
deep ditches, what bigh walls, what precipices are here
In ſhort, I look upon it as a very great wonder both of
Art and Nature.\ What the Romans might call
it, I am altogether ignorant; unleſs it be that
Caer Calemion which we mcet wigh in Ninnius's
Catalogue, by a tranſpoſition of letters for Ca-
melion. Cadbury, the adjoining little village, may Cadbury.
probably enough be thought that Catbbreg ion,
where Arthur (as Ninnius has it) routed the
Saxons in a memorable Battle. Another town
of the ſame name, North-Cadbury, was given by.
King Henry 3, to Nicholas de Moeles, who had Moeles,
marry'd Hawitia one cf the two Co-heirs of
James de Novo mercatu, or New-market, This
man's poſterity liv'd a long time in great ſplen-
dour, till Jebn, in Edward 3d's time, dying,
left only iſſue 2 daughters, Muriela, and Iſabel ;
this marry'd to William Botereaux, and the other
to Thomas Courtney. A funeral [nſcription up-
on the northern wall of St. Margaret's Weſt-
minſter, mentions one Fobn Malys of Halmſton
in Devonſhire, familia oriundum ſui nominis, que
inſignita erat olim titulo de North-Cadbury, i. e. de-
ſcended from a bee of that name, which
was formerly diſtinguiſhed by the title of North-
Cadbury. It continu'd in the family of the Bo-
tereaux, till the death of William the laſt Lord
Botereauæ, who dying 2 Edward 4. without iſſue-
male, this Lordſhip, wich a very great inheri-
tance, deſcended to Margaret his daughter and
ſole heir, marry'd to Robert Lord Hungerford,
from whom it deſcended to Mary Lady Hunger-
ford their great Grand-daughter, who was mar-
ry'd to Edward Lord Haſtings and Hungerford,
father to George the firſt of that ſirname Earl
of Hantingdon ; in which family it continu'd
to the reign of King James 1. that Sir Francis
Haſtings, younger ſon co Francis Earl of Hun-
ting don being poſſeſs'd of the ſame, and having
no children, did alienate it. 05

From hence the river Ivell runs to 1/chalis, Iſchalis.
mention'd by Antoninus, now Ivelceſter, call'd Ivelceſter.
(if I miſtake not) in Ninnius's Catalogue Ponta»
wvel-coit, for Pont-Ivel Coit, i. e. a bridge over
the Ivel in a wood ; and by Florence of Wor-
ceſter, Givelceſter. It is now famous for nothing
but the market, and the antiquity of the place;
for now and then they dig- up Coins of the Ro-

man Emperours, of gold, braſs, and ſilver. That
it was formerly large, and encompaſs'd with a
double

_ 5 .
4
. —
on

— —— —-— ag

— —
— . ——— u Ss —
ny <P
—_ — — _ =
2 > = —_

. £0 of _ . 6

71

 " FELGA.

43 72

—

double wall, is evident from the ruins. Le-
land fays, it is one of the moſt ancient Towns
in all that quarter; and that it had had 4 Pa-
riſh-Churches ; the ruins of two of them were
Nandging in his time, the third was quite demo-
liſhed, and one uſed.) About the coming-in of
the Normans it was 2a populous place, having in
* Fwg-2ſes-jt a hundred and ſeven “ Burghers. And at that
time it was a place of ſtrengch, and well for-
tity'd ; for in the year of Chriſt 1088. when the
Nobilicy of England had form'd a wicked Con-
ſpiracy to depoſe William Rufus, in order to
advance Robert his Brother Duke of Normandy
to the throne, Robert Moubray a warlike man,
after he had burnt Bathe, vigorouſly aſſaulted
this place; but in vain. However, time has
done what he could not do; having at laſt as
it were ftorm'd and taken it,
A little more inward, the confluence of Ivell
Muchelney. and Pedred form a tiver-Iſland call'd Muchelney,
i. e. the large Iſland, wherein are ſome Re-
mains of the walls of an old Monaſtery, which
Hiſtorians tell us was built by King Athelſtan.
Pedred riv. Pedred, commonly Parret, riſes in the very ſouth-
bound of the County, and, with a winding
| chanel runs by Crukerne, in Saxon Cnucepne ;
Chard. [eaſt from whence, lies Chard, which ſtands ſo
high, as to have in it a ſtream of water, that
by being turned (as it eaſily may be) north or
ſouth, will run, as is affirm'd, either into the
Severn, or the South-Sea, Near which, lies
Whitlaking- Whbitlakington, the ſeat of the Spekes, in a rich
ton. and healthy ſoil; who have, for many Centu-
ties, flouriſned in Devonſhire and this County;
there being reckoned, in the genealogy thereof,
from Richard le Eſpec to the preſent heir, no leſs
than zo deſcents. |
Hinton St, Below Crook-horne, is Hinton St. George, on
George, a plain, raiſed higher than the rich feeding
Country adjacent, and much lower than the
neighbouring hills ; from which plain, in a clear
day, there is a vaſt proſpect, extended wide, to
both the Seas. This excellency of the ſituation
by nature, has been greatly improved by new-
modelling of the Park, and adorning it with
Plantations ; and by ſpacious and beautiful Gar-
dens. It is the ſeat of John Earl Poulet; whoſe
family, being of the ancient Gentry of this
County, and of great figure in it, was by King
Charles the 1ſt, made noble, under the title of
Baron Powlet of Hinton; which Q. Anne changed
into that of Baron Hinton St. George, wich
the addition of two other titles, viz. Viſcount
of the ſame place, and Earl Powlet.
Eaſt-Che- Then the Pedred runs near Eaſft-Chenock, where
nock, is a Salt-ſpring, above 20 miles from the Sea ;
5 3 and ſol by Pedderton, to which it gave the name;
8 formerly Pedridan, the palace of King Ina, now
famous only for a Market and Fair, procur'd
of Henry 6. by Henry Daubeney. Then the Parret
runs into the Ivell, and robs it of it's name.
Mentacute, Three miles hence, to the Eaſt, it ſalutes Mon-
5 7 4 tacute, ſo nam'd by the Earl of Moriton brother
gal. by the mother's ſide to William 1. (+ who built
+ Leland A Caſtle on the very top of the hill, and a Re-
ſays, he had liglous houſe at the bottom of it,) becauſe it
_ oy riles by degrees into a ſharp point; whereas,
| Annals of before that time, it was nam'd || Logoresburg or
Glaſſenbu⸗ Logaresburch\ and Biſebopeſton. But the caſtle
ry. has been quite deſtroy d and gone, theſe many
years, and the ſtones carry'd off, to build the
Religious houſe, and other things. Afterwards,
on the very top of the hill, was a Chapel ere-
&ed, and dedicated to S. Michael; the arch and
roof curiouſly built of hard ſtone, and the aſcent
to it round the mount, up ſtone-ſtairs, for near
5 half a mile. Now, that the Monaſtery and Cha-
— pel are both demoliſh'd, the greateſt ornament
it has, is a beautiful houſe, which the worthy Sir
Edward Phelips Knight, Serjeant at Law [{whoſe

3
ſhire,

elſcomÞ+ velſcor
ſelir god. Urn f
141 the

grandſon, Sir Edward Philips, dying ſome year
ſince, left no iſſue-male; )] built at the foot gf
the mountain. [ This is one of the moſt rema;.
kable buildings in the weſt of England, bein

of freeſtone ſquared, very large, with a beau.

tiful and magnificent Front.] The place 3
name to the honourable family of the a an. _
cutes, deſcended from Drogo * the Young. Of this ks fon; |
family, there were four Earls of Salisbury; the = ve =
laſt left iſſue one only daughter, who by Richarg !“ gory
Newil, had the famous Richard Earl of Warwick _
(that + Whirlwind of England,) and Jobn Mar-4 7 =
a 21171 by ham. Jobn
queſs of Montacute ; both kill'd in the battle of _
Barnet, in the year 1472. But the title of Baron : 4's
Montacute was conferr'd upon Henry Poole (Son Chie
of Margaret, daughter of George Duke of Clz. ſtet'e
rence by a daughter of the ſaid Richard Nevil wy
Earl of Warwick) in the time of King Henry s, PU.
who preſently after beheaded him. Queen eac
Mary beſtow'd the title and honour of Viſcount 4 lar
Montacute upon Anthony Brown, whoſe grandmo- ho :
ther was daughter of Fobn Nevil Marqueſs of! figy a Ga
Montacute ; | || and this Honour ſtill continues in lt» by a1
the ſame Family.! * = j
Next to this, is Odcombe, which, tho” but 20, ed)
very ſmall town, muſt not be omitted, becauſe ile
it has had it's Baron, William de Briewer (for ſo Ban —
his father was call'd, as being born * in a beath;) Dran {ome
who having great intereſt at Court, and being whic
a particular Favourite of Richard 1, was re- 'T
ſpected and careſſed by all; and ſo got a very urton tle a
large eſtate, with which, by the marriage of and
his daughters (for his ſon dy'd without iſſue) he cate
made a great acceſſion to the eſtates of the Bree, this
Wakes, Mohuns, La-ferts, and Percys. | And hard ons
by, is Brimpton, the habitation of Sir Philip Sy-Brinya: vell
denbam, -Baronet ; whoſe family hath lived for Ead!
many Centuries in this County, with great who
repute. ] Below Odcombe, at a little diſtance, is Curl
Stoke under Hamden, where the Gornays had their Ste, war
caſtle, and built a College. This family, ſur- day-
nam'd de Gornaico, and commonly Gornay, was bela
very ancient and illuſtrious, deſcended from the bere
ſame ſtock with the Warrens Earls of Surrey, ton;
and the Mortimers. But ſ᷑ in the laſt age ſave one, Il ni fa

it was extinct, and part of that eſtate came by
the Hamptons, to the Knightly family of the

Newtons, who value themſelves upon a Welſh [Le
extraction, and that, not long ago, they were Pete
call'd Caradocks. Nor muſt we forget to men- whi
tion, that Matthew Gornay was bury'd here, 2 reac
ſtout ſoldier in the time of Edward 3. who the
|| dy'd in the 96" year of his age, after he had) S Sce
been (as the Inſcription ſin French] witneſſeth) an. 1# penc
at the ſiege of D'algizer againſt the Saracens, 10*
and at the battles of Benamazin, Scluſe, Creſſe, pal
Ingenos, Poitiers ; and Nazara, in Spain. E Th
Next, the Parret waters Martock, a little mar- Maro. Th
ket-town, Which formerly William of Bologne me
ſon to King Stephen, gave to Faramuſius of Bo- Faramiis an
logne, whoſe only daughter and heir Sibill, was of bat vil
marry'd to Ingelram de Fienes, and from them F the

are deſcended the Fienes Barons of Dacre, Drctard, me

and the Barons of Say and Zele. From hence, of
the Parret cuts it's way into the north through by
a muddy plain, by Langport, a market-town L th
pretty well frequented : and by Aulre, a little Al. Po
village of a few ſmall hutts; which yet ſeems ge
ro have been once a town of better note. 10
For when Alfred had ſhatter'd the Danes, and, lach. Beau · th
ſtraitening them in a ſiege, had forced them to laber ar
ſurrender, and to take an Oath to depart out 0i =
his dominions With all expedition, and“ Godrun + Cel w
their King (as Aſſer tells us) had promis'd to m

embrace Chriſtianity; then Alfred in this place
was his Godfather, and lifted bim out of the ſacres
font of Regeneration, with great Solemnity.

The Parret, running from hence, receives tlie
river Tbone; which, riſing at a great diſtance in Ti

the weſtern part of the County, next nes:
ire,

73

5 O M ERS ETS HI RE.

I
—
£
. ” " .
* * ”
. * - -

hire, paſſes through pleaſant fields, [near Vi-
ſcomb, where was found, not long ſince, an
Urn full of Roman Coins ;] to Wellington, which,
jn the reign of Edward the Elder, was the ground
of ſix Manſion-bouſes ; at which time he gave this,

. 4, together with Lediard, which was of twelve Man-
— ſſon- beuſes, to the Biſhop of Shirbourn, It is now
a little market-rown, receiving it's —
glory from an honourable Inhabitant (for per-
ſons eminent for virtue, and good ſervices
to their countty ought never to be forgotten)
Jobn Popham, memorable, as for the antiquity
It his noble deſcent, ſo for his ſtrict Juſtice,
and unwearied Diligence. This perſon, being
Chief Juſtice of the King's Bench, admini-
ſter'd wich ſo much Evenneſs, and ſuch a tem-
per'd ſevetity, that England, for a long time,
was moſtly indebted to him, for it's domeſtick
peace and ſecurity, He built, in this place,
a large, ſtrong, and beautiful houſe, which in
the time of the great Civil War was turned into

jelinghoÞ*

1 h a Garriſon, and was held againſt the King, not
ay by any of the Founder's name (as hath, with-
oys it out juſt reaſon and contrary to fact, been affirm-
Jos

ed,) but by Bover of Taunton ; who, getting
polleſſion of the Houſe by Stratagem, did (to-
gether with his Accomplices) defend it for
ſome time againſt Sir Kichard Greenvil ; by
which means, it was turned to ruins. I
The Thone going from hence, with a gen-
urton. tle and eaſie courſe, waſhes Thonton or Taunton,
and gives it the name. Ir is a neat town, deli-
cately ſeated, and in ſhore, one of the Eyes of
this County. Here Ins King of the Weſt-Sax-
ons built a caſtle, which Desburgia his wife le-
veli'd wich the ground, after ſhe had driven
Eadbrib King of the Eaſt-Saxons out of it,
who had got poſſeſſion, and made it a kind of
Curb to a conquer'd Country. In the reign of Ed-
ward the Confeſſor, it gelded (fo it is in Domeſ-
day-book) for 54 bides, bad 63 Burgers, and was
beld by the Biſhop of Winchefter, whoſe Pleadings were
bere kept thrice a year. Thoſe Cuſtoms belong to Taun-
ton; Burgheriſte, robbers, breach of the peace, han-
nifare, pence of the bundred, and S. Peters pence, to
bold thrice à year the Biſhops pleadings without ad-
monition, to go into the army with the Biſhops men.
[Let me obſerve here, that what is render'd
Peter-pence, is in the Text Denarii S. Petri circieti;
which the learned Selden thinks, ought to be
read Cireſeti; but I am rather of opinion, that
the true reading is Circſceati, from the Saxon
Scear, Revenues or Riches, © implying Peter-
pence to be the revenues of the Church. In the
10" year of the reign of King William, an Act
paſſed for the making and keeping the river
Thone navigable from Bridgwater to this place.
The country all about is beautify'd wich green
meadows, and abounds in delightful gardens
and orchards, which, with the thickneſs of the
villages, does wonderfully charm the eyes of
the SpeRator. Among the villages, thoſe of
dictard, moſt note, are, Orchard, which had ic's Lords
of the ſame name ; from whom it deſcended,
by Hheritance, to the Portman, Knights. But
that family being extinct in the late Sir William
Portman, he left it to the Seymours, his Couſin-
germans by the mother's fide, who now en-
joy it, and have their reſidence here; taking
lach-Beav- the name of Portman. ] Next, is Hach-Beauchamy,
Wa and then Cory-Mallet; the latter part whereof
: is added from the name of it's Lords. For it
was the Seat of the Mallets, who were of Nor-
man extraction, and from whom it came in a

Barors
Briewen,
nen

%

+ Cin

—

| ſhort time, by an heireſs, to the Pointzies, Of Pointzies.

which family, Hugh, in the time of Edward 3,

was among the Parliamentary-Barons ; and

ſome others of it are * at this day Knights of“ Ann. 1607.

| great figure and ſplendor. But as to the Beau- Barons Beau-

champs, otherwiſe cali'd de Bello campo, they
flouriſh'd in great honour from the time of
Henry 2 ; eſpecially after Cecil de Fortibus, de-
ſcended from the Earls de Ferraris, and from
that famous Mareſchal of England William Earl
of Pembroke, married into this family. But
in the reign of Edward 3, the eſtate came to
be divided by ſiſtets, between Roger de S. Mau-
ro or Seimore, and J. Meriet, both of them de-
ſcended from ancient and honourable Ance-
ſtors. This was the cauſe why Henry 8. af-
ter he had marry'd Jane Seimor, mother of Ed-
ward the ſixth, created Edward Seimor her bro-
ther, Viſcount Beauchamp ; whom Edward 6. Viſcount
afterwards advanc'd to the honour of Duke of Beauchamp»
Somerſet, | On the ſouth of Taunton, is Trull, Trull.
which gave birth to Sir George Bond (Lord May-
or of London in the year 1588;) from whoſe
daughter deſcended the great General of this
age, John Duke of Marlborough.]

Where Thone mixes with the Parret, there is Parret.
made a River-Iſland formerly call'd Atbelia-
gey, i. e. an Iſland of Nobles, now commonly
Atbelney, which to us is no leſs remarkable for Athelney.
King Alfred's abſconding there, when the
Dane over-ran all before him ; than are thoſe
Minturnenſian fenns to the Italians, for being a
hiding-place to Marius. For to that King (as
an ancient Poet writ of him,)

champs.

Gaudia | ſemper F ee ti-
Si _ vittor erat, ad craſtins Bells pave-
Si 2 vickus erat, ad craſt ina Bella para-
Cui weſtes ſudore jugi, cui ſica cruore -

Tincta jugi, quantum fit onus regnare proba-
runs,

Allay'd with grief the cautious joys ap-

pear d, |

And _—_ he hop'd the moſt, the moſt he
ear'd. l 5

Conqu' ring, he expected till the rallying
oe;

O' ercome, he fitted for a ſecond blow.

when 2 hands and garments ſtain'd in

ood,

Shew that a crown is but a noble load.

And truly, this Iſland is very well made for
a Place of Refuge ; for the ſtanding pools and
inundations (which Aſſer call'd by a Latin-
Saxon word Gronnas) make it inacceſſible. It Gronnes.
bad formerly a bridge between two towers, which were
built by King Alfred; alſo, a very large ſet of alders,
full of goats and deer ; but the firm ground not above
two acres broad. Upon this be built a monatter ; the
whole ſtructure whereof (Malmesbury here 4
for me) is ſupported by four poſts faſten d in the
ground, with 2 arch'd chancels round it. Near
Athelney, ſome years ſince, was found a moſt
remarkable curioſity, belonging formerly to
King Alfred, and loſt by him (in all likely hood)
when he abſconded at this place, after he was

defeated by the Danes:

K The

The Inſcription plainly ſhows, that it was
King Alfred, who cauſed this Picture to be made;
the language being Saxon, and thus Engliſh'd,
Alfred commanded me to be made. And it is the o-
+ Dr. Hickes, Pinion of a very f learned perſon, that the oc-

Philoſoph. caſion of it, was the Viſion of St. Cuthbert, which
Tranſat, William of Malmsbury ſpeaks of, appearing to
* Fg him and his mother the ſame night (afrer he
ſaur. Sep- had been beaten by the Danes, and retir'd into'

tentr. p. 142, Athelney) and aſſuring him that he ſhould be a

great King. In memory whereof, we may well
ſuppoſe, that the Image upon it is St. Cuthbert's
(to whoſe merit he was wont to aſcribe his fu-
ture Succeſſes over the Danes;) and not only ſo,
but being plainly made, on purpoſe to hang on
a ſtring, ic is very probable that himſelf con-
ſtantly wore it, in honour to this his tutelar
Saint. |
The Parret, after it has got again into one cha-
nel, does not go far alone, before it is joyn'd
by another river from the Eaſt, which runs by
Somerton, Somerton [(in Saxon, Sumupron)1 formerly the
chief town of the County, as giving name to
the whole, It had a caſtle belonging to the
Weſt-Saxon Kings, which Ethelbald King of
the Mercians polleſs'd himſelf of, by ſtorm
but now it has yielded to Time, ſo that nothing
of it appears: and the Town would ſcarce ſup-
ort that name, were it not for a great Beaſt-
Fair kept there from Palm-Sunday to the middle
of June ; for thoſe parts make Grazing their
great employment. It gives the title of Baron
to the chief of the Family of the Stawels; in
conlideration of whoſe loyalty, King Charles
the ſecond advanced Ralph Stawel to the title
of a Baron of England, by the name of Lord
Stawel Baron of Somerton. North of the ſame
Sedgemoor, river, lies Sedgemoor, where the forces of King
James 2, engaged and defeated the Duke of
Monmouth and his parcy ; and, With the loſs
of eighteen Men (for no more were killed on
the King's ſide) put a timely end to an Inſur-
retion, which might otherwiſe have drawn on
a Civit War. In the 10 year of William the
third, it was provided by a Statute then made,
that the ancient water-courſes of this moor
ſhou'd be open'd, and new ones made, for ren-
dring it more healthful and profitable co the In-
habicants. |

After the Parret has receiv'd this river, it

Enmore. Truns at ſome diſtance from Enmere, a ſeat of
the Mallets: the laſt Gentleman of which name,

owner of this ſear, having no iſſue-male, letr

one only daughter Elizabeth; by whoſe mar-

riage with John Wilmot Earl of Rocheſter, this

great Eſtate was carried into that Family, and

-
-

Fc!

Ptolæ

but |

[and

where

847.

the d

Xu:

{ome

in th

W. Brita

J. Flor. Aſſer

gor p. Pen, s

317. of *

of th

the L

the 1

| | that
afterwards, for want of an heir male, was divided the 5
among her three daughters and co-heirs. Buck- Buca plac:
land Sororum, in theſe parts, was anciently a ry 0\
Nunnery, but of late years hath been the ſeat Dan
of the Lords Hawley of Dunamore in Ireland. dam
Somewhat lower, the Parret] viſits a large and wher
populous town, commonly call'd Bridge-water, g,;z,.. e. aun.
as tis thought from the bridge and the water; wt {till 1
but the ancient Charters refute that conjecture, ly, fc
which always call it expreſly Burgb-Malteri; and ving
it is highly probable, that it took the name ion Dan
from Walter de Doway, who was a ſoldier under and
William the Conqueror, and had many Lands tom!
be ſtow'd on him in this County. Nor is it ther
otherwiſe call'd in that Charter, wherein Full bard
Paynel Lord of Bampton gave poſſeſſion of this v. on- Ber!
place to William de Briewer, to ingratiate him- Miigrave. prat
ſelf wich that Gentleman, who was a particu- Vera
lac favourite of King Richard the firſt. The mily
ſon of this William, of the ſame name with mai
the father, having Licence granted him by plac
King Joha to fortifie a caſtle, built one here, Wil
which now time has deſtroy'd ; and began a yea!
bridge, which was finiſh'd at great expence by Joh
Trivet a noble-man of Cornwall. But whens Vobis the
William de Briewer the younger dy'd without iſſue, Cora. mil
this by partition fell to Margaret his ſiſter; by Co
whole daughter which ſhe' bore to William de la at |
Fert, it came to the family of the Chaworths or Alord, Ty.
de Cadurcis, and from them by inheritance to h
the Dukes of Lancaſter. But the greateſt ho- tur,
nour it ever had, was, it's being made a Coun- the
ty by King Henry 8, upon his creating Henry Ve
Daubeney, Earl of Bridgewater ; | which Henry dy- acdc to
ing wichout iſſue- male, this title lay dead till the Bridge nin
i5® of Jac. 1. when ic was conferr'd upon Jobs Re:
Egerton, Baron of Elleſmere, Viſcount Brackley, and ma
ſon to the Lord Chancellor Egerton. He was {oi
{ucceeded by his fon Fobn ; and this Jobn by a 10.
ſon of the ſame name; who is alſo ſince ſuc- the
ceeded by the Right Honourable Scroop Earl pl:
of Bridgewater, his Son. Near this place, is a

Chidley-mount, where Roman Coins have beency;4lsr-
found; and out of the ruins of which, as ſome mourt.
think, the town of Bridgewater ſprang. Weſt- auir. 8
ward from the ſame river, near Stogurly, is
Fair-field, which formerly belong'd to a branch Fir
of the Verneys, but came by marriage to the
Suſſex-family of Palmer, in which having con-
tinued near two Centuries, it has produc'd great
Ornaments to this County. And, on the eaſt-

fide of the river, a little lower, is Pawlet, à Pane
Lordſhip,from which two great and ancient F#-
milies took their ſirname, For Sir John Pawlet
dying in the ſecond year of Richard 2, left iſſus

two fons, Sir Thomas Pawlet, his ſon and
| rom

14

. (as Wi

uckland,

ridge.
iter.

Nobil:s?

ornudile

arl cf
rid gets

awkts

Uielh.

lx ol.
J. Flor.

corn,

317.

uton

ton.
i 50 *
Muigray — 0

Ard.

SOMERSETSHIRE. 78

{rom whom is deſcended the preſent Earl Paw.
jet; and William, from whom is deſcended the
-»{enc Duke of Bolton.“

Below, at a few miles diſtance, the Parret rolls
into the devern-Sca out of a wide mouth; call d
(as we obſerv'd before) the REltuarie Uzells by
Prcl:my, and by ſome at this day Evelmonth,
hut by che ancient Engliſh, PeSpedan-mus :
ſand by the Saxon-Annals PeSmSdan-mus ; |
where (as Marianus tells us) about the year
$45. Ealſtan Biſhop of Shirburn utterly routed
the diſperſed army of the Danes. At the ſame
Eſtuatie, we meet with another river, which
{ome call Brizs, riſing cu: of that ſpacious wood
in the eaſt part of this County (call'd by the
Britains Coitmaur, by the Saxons Selwood, i. e. as
Aer interprets it, @ great wood) not far from
Pen, an inconſiderable village, where the God
of war ſeems to have conſpir'd the extirpation
of the Britiſh name, and alſo the utter ruin of
the Danes. For Keniwalch, the Weſt-Saxon, gave
the Britains ſuch an entire defeat in this place,
that they were never able to make head againſt
the Saxons: and many ages after, in the fame
place, Edmund Ironſide gain'd a memorable victo-
ry over the Danes, whilſt he purlu'd Knute the
Dane, who had poſſeſs'd himſelf of the king-
dom; Tcho' they were too hard for Echeldred,
when he encounter'd them in this very place,
ann, 1001. In the adjoyning Pariſh of Mere are
ſtill the Remains of theſe Engagements, name
ly, four Camps; one whereof, particularly, ha-
ving a double ditch, appears to have been a
Daniſh work.] This river firſt viſits Bruiton,
and gives it that name; a place famous for the
tombs of the Moions, who built a Monaſtery
there : [and for being the ſeat of the Lord Firz-
barding, a younger branch of the family of
Berkley. Not far from which, is Charlton- Muſ-
grave ; fo called (to diſtinguiſh it from the ſe-
veral other Charltons in this County) from a Fa-
mily of that name, in whole poſſeſſion ir re-
main'd for many years. Jobn Muſgrave, of this
place, was by virtue of the Eſtate he had in
Wiltſhire, Sheriff of that County, in the ſecond
year of Richard the 34, from whoſe ſecond ſon
John (the eldeſt dying without iſſue-male, and
the Eſtate going wich daughters into other Fa-
milies) are deſcended all of this ſirname, in this
County, and Devonſhire : The chief of whom
at preſent is Muſgrave of Nettlecemb in this Coun-
ty. Lower, upon the foreſaid river, lies Alford;
where ariſes a mineral water, of a purging na-
ture, no way inferior to Epſom, or any other of

the purging kind; and is of great benefit to theſe
Weſtern parts of England, being carried hence

to places very remore.] Then che river, run
ning a long way thro' nothing but ſmall villa-
ges, with the encreaſe of a few rivulets, waters
many fruitful fields; till, meeting wich a ſofter
foil, it in a manner ſtagnates, and makes an

Iſland, call'd formerly Avalon, in Britiſh, from

the apples there ; afterwards Inis-Witrin, i. e. a
glaſſy iſland, and in the ſame ſenſe Glapen-ey,
in Latin Glaſconia, A Poet of pretty good an
tiquity has theſe verſes concerning it,

Inſula pomorum que fortunata vocatur,
Ex re nomen habet, quia per fe ſingula profert.
Non opus eſt illi ſulcant ibus arva colonis,

Omnis abeſt cultus, niſi quem natura miniſtrat,

Ultro fecundas ſegetes producit, & herbas,
Nataque poma ſuis prætonſo germine ſylvis.

The iſle of Apples, truly fortunate,

Where unforc'd goods and willing comforts

"meet.

Net there the fields require the ruſtick's
hand,

Bur nature only cultivates the land.

|

The fertile plains wich corn and herbs are
proud,

And golden apples ſmile in ev'ry wood.

[King Charles the 24 conferr'd upon John
Mordaunt, ſecond fon of John Earl of Peterbo-
rough, the title of Lord Mordaunt of Rygate,
and Viſcount- Avalon; who marrying Elizabeth,
daughter of Thomas Cary, ſecond ſon to Ro-
bert Earl of Monmouth, had by her the preſent
Earl of Peterborough and Monmouth.

In this Iſland ſtood the monaſtery of Glaſten- William of
bury, which is very ancient; deriving its origi- NMelmesbu-
nal from Foſeph of Arimatbea, the ſame who bu-77 5AM.
ry d Chriſt's body, and whom Philip the Apu- Blafſenbur#,
{tle of the Gauls ſent into Bricain to preach the Ufer. Ant.
Goſpel. For this is atteſted by the moſt ancient P- 53. fol.
Hiſtories of this Monaſtery, and alſo by an ne _
Epiſtle of S. Patrick the Iriſh Apoſtle, who led Brian.
a monaſtick life here for 30 years together; (if
it be indeed true that he wrote the account of
Avalonia aſcrib'd to him, which Dr. Ryves, in
his diſcourſe relating to that Saint, denies.)1
From hence, this place was by our Anceſtors
call'd, Tbe firſt ground of God, The firſt ground of the
Saints in England, The viſe and fountain of all Reli-
gion in England, The burying-place of the Saints, The
mother of the Saints; and they ſaid of it, that it was
built by the very Diſciples of our Lord, Nor is there
any reaſon why we ſhould call this in queſtion,
ſince I have before ſhewn, that the Chriſtian
Religion, in the very infancy of the Church,
was preach'd in this Iſland; and ſince Freculphus
Lexovienſis has told us, that this Philip brought
barbarous nations, bordering upon darkneſs, and living
upon the Ocean, to the light of knowledge, and baven
of faith. But let us return to the Monaſtery,
and deſcribe it out of Malmesbury's little treatiſe
upon that ſubjet. When that ſmall ancient
Church founded by Joſeph was waſted with age,

Devi Biſhop of S. David's built a new one in

the place. And when time had worn out that

too, twelve men coming from the north of Bri-

tain repair'd it; but at length King Ina (who
founded a ſchool at Rome for the education of

che Engliſh youth, and to maintain thar, as alſo

for the diſtribution of alms at Rome, tax'd every
ſingle houſe in the kingdom at one penny) pull'd

this down, and built a ſtately Church dedicated An. 5%.
to Chriſt, S. Peter, and S. Paul, [afterwards

the See ot Sa varicus Biſhop of Bathe. ] Juſt un-

der the roof whereof, round it, he order'd theſe
verſes to be written:

Syderei montes, ſpecioſa cacumina Sion,

A Libano geminæ flore comante cedri ;
Cxlorum port lati duo lumina mundi,

Ore tonat Paulus, fulgurat arce Petrus
Inter Apoſtolicas radianti luce coronas,

Dodd ior bic monitis, celſior ille gradu, Forturatus
Corda per bunc bominum reſerantur, & aſtra per = rene

illum : r
Quos docet iſte ſtylo, ſuſcipit ille polo. Saab *
Pandit iter cæli bie dog mate, clavibus alter, Paris, and

Eſt via cui Paulus, janua fida Petrus. partly of chat
Hic Petra firma manens, ille Arcbitectus ha- en.

Hbetur,

Surgit in his templum quo placet ara Deo.

Anglia plaude lubens, mittit tibi Roma ſalutem,

Fulgor Apoſtolicus Glaſconiam irradiat.

A facte boſtili duo propugnacula ſurgunt,

Quod fidei turreis urbs caput orbis habet.
Hæc pius egregio Rex Ina refertus amore,

Dona ſuo populo non moritura dedit.

Totus in affectu dive pietatis inberens,
Eceleſiæque juges amplificavit opes.
Melchiſedech noſter merito Rex, atque Sacerdos,

Complevit veræ relligionis opus.

Publica jura regens, 2 celſa palatia ſervans,

Unica Pontificum gloria, nerma fuit.

Theſe verſes,
with a very
little altera-
tion, are in
the 4th book
of Venantius

Hin:

"Y _
11 1
noni —— ä H—w —tᷣ„-¾—ę„⸗ʒy— ͤä HD

—
—

—— x —

79 : BE LOX

Hinc abiens, illine meritorum fulget honore,
Hic quoque geſtorum laude ptrennis erit.

The two fair tops that lofty Sion grace,

Cedars of Libanus that all ſurpaſs!

The world's great lights, and the two gates
of heav'n,

Thunder from one, from one is lightning

iv'n.

1 the bleſt Apoſtles they excel,

Peter in honour, and in learning Paul.

One ope's mens hearts, and one the ſtarry
ſphere,

One guidcs to heav'n, and one receives us
there :

One's doctrine ſhews our journey, and one's
keys;

One is wha way, and one the gate of bliſs.

The builder one, one the foundation laid ;

By both a temple for kind heav'n is made.

England be glad, and pay juſt thanks to
Rome, |

Eternal health to Glaſtenbury's come:

Againſt our foes two fortreſſes are ſhown,

That all the world the Faith's great tow'rs

ſhall own.

Bleſt Ina, faichful ſervant of his God,

Theſe laſting gifts upon his realm beſtow'd.

Yup -—_ goodneſs all his thoughts poſ-
cit,

The Church's old revenues he encreaſt,

Our great Melchiſedech, our prince and
prieſt,

His equal care of piety and ſtate,

To Crowns and Mitres an example ſet.

In heav'n his works their bleſt reward receive,

And here his worthy praiſe ſhall ever live.

In thoſe early times, Religious perſons devo-
ted themſelves here to the ſervice of God ; and
eſpecially the Iriſh: who were maintain'd at the
King's charge, and inſtructed the youth in Re-
ligion and the liberal ſciences, For they made
choice of a ſolitary life, that they might attend
divine ſtudies with greater quiet and retirement,
and inure themſelves to a ſevere courſe of life
to prepare them for the Croſs, But at length,
Dunſtan, a man of excellent wit and judgment,
aſter his reputation of ſanity and learning had
given him free acceſs to the converſation of
Princes, inſtead of theſe brought in Monks of
a newer Order, namely, Benedictines, and was
himſelf firſt made Abbot over that large body
ſettl'd there: and theſe, by the bounty of good
and pious Princes, got ſo much wealth as even
exceeded that of Kings. After they had, for
about 600 years together, reign'd as it were in
great abundance (for all their neighbours were
at their beck,) they were driven out by Hen-
ry 8 ; and the Monaſtery, which by degrees had
grown into a lictle city, was demoliſh'd, and laid
level with the ground: how large and how ſtate-
ly it has been, may be learnt from the ruins,

I ſhall be reckon'd among the Credulous of

our age, if I ſpeak any thing of the Wallnut-

* Buds, C. tree here, which never * budded before the feaſt
of S. Barnabas, and on that very feaſt-day ſhot
'{Cornus, C. out leaves in great abundance : or the F Haw-
Buds. C. thorn-tree, which || budded on Chriſtmas-day as if
Oxyacantha. it were in May: And yet (if men may be truſted)
theſe things are affirm'd by ſeveral credible per-

ſons. The Hawthorn-tree has been cut down theſe

many years ; yet there are ſome ſtill growing

in the County from branches of that ; as parti-

W. Stroud, cularly, one in the garden * of the poſſeſſor of
the ground, where the other ſtood ; and ano-

ther in a garden now belonging to an Inn there.

Hiſt, Plant, Mr. Ray thinks, the former of theſe is what is
L. 25. c. 1. commonly called Nux Sancti Fobannis, which
& 1. 26. c. ſhoots out about Midſummer or the Nativity
of St. Fobn, but 12 days alter the feaſt of St.

Barnabas ; and that the Haw-tborn, ſo much talk'q
of here, differs but accidentally from the Fa.
tex commonly ſo called; aſcribing this ſingular
effect, either to Chance or Arc.1 Before I leave
this head, take in ſhort what Giraldus Cam-

brenſis, an eye-witneſs, has deliver'd at large
concerning Arthur's Grave in this Church-yard,

When Henry 2. King of England had learn'dx,,
from the ſongs of the Britiſh Bards, that Arthur An

the moſt noble heroe of the Britains, whoſe Va-
lour had ſo often diſcomfited the Saxon forces,
was bury'd at Glaſſenbury between two Pyra-
mids, he order'd ſearch to be made for the bo-
dy ; and they had ſcarce dug ſeven foot deep,
when they light upon a * cro/s'd-ſtone, or a ſtone ,
in the back-part whereof was faſten'd a rude
leaden Croſs, of good breadth. This being drawn
out, appear'd to have an Inſcription upon it;
and under it, almoſt nine foot deep, they found
a Coffin made of hollow'd oak, wherein were
depoſited the bones of the famous Arthur. As to
the Inſcription, which was taken from the origi.
nal, and was formerly written and preſerv'd in
the monaſtery of Glaſſenbury, I thought it pro-
per to ſubjoyn a draught of it, becauſe of the
Antiquity of the letters. They have a ſort of bar.
barous and Gothick appearance ; and are a plain
evidence of the barbarity of that age, which
was overſpread with an Ignorance ſo groſs and
fatal, that ic afforded not one Pen to celebrate
the name of King Arthur. A ſubject, without
all diſpute, worthy the Parts and Invention of
the moſt learned; who by praiſing ſo great a
Prince, might have alſo procur'd to themſelves
an immortal Name. That mighty Bulwark of
the Britiſh Government may juſtly reckon this
among his greateſt misfortunes, that the age did
not afford a f Panegyriſt equal to his Virtues. 4
But now take a view of the Croſs and Inſcrip-
tion.

HE
EK
TH

RIVER

e SELL: Wh
; | 2

aun, TCA

SNN NN dd

JO

Nor

Cippu,

]
]
]
|

—_— © ©.

2260 HATY

if

SOMERSETSHIRE. ©

— V D.. cow.

82

Nor will it be improper to ſubjoyn what 5
Country man Foſephus Iſcanut, no mean or ordi-
nary poet, has ſaid of Arthur, in his Antiocbeis.

Hinc celebri fato falici claruit ortu

Flos Regum Artburus, cujus cum facta ſtupori,

Non micuere minis, totus quod in aure voluptas,

Er populo plaudente fa vt. Quemcunque prio-
rum KLE" .

Inſpict, Pelcum commentat ama tyrannum,

Pagina Cæſareos loquitur Romana triumpbos,

Alcidem domitis attollit gloria monſtris.

Sed nec pinetum coryli, nec ſydera ſolem

«Aquant : Annales Latior, Graioſque re volve,

Priſca parem neſcit, æqualem poſt era nullum

Exbibitura dies, Reges ſupereminet omnes,

Solus preteritis melior, majorque futuris.

From this bleſt place immortal Arthur 14
ſprung,

Whoſe wondrous deeds
ſong ;

Sweet muſick to the ear,
rongue. , ' *

Look back, turn o're the great records of
fame,

Proud Alexander boaſts a mighty name.

The Roman Annals Cæſar's actions load,

And 49 monſters rais'd Alcides to a

od

ſhall be for ever |

ſweet honey to the |

:
*

VS. .

But neither ſhrubs above tall pines appear,
Nor Phœbus ever fears a rival ſtar ; ;
So would our Arthur in conteſt o'recome

The mightieſt heroes bred in Greece or
Rome.

To give a liſt of the Weſt-Saxons Kings bu-
ry'd here, would be beſide my buſineſs. Let!
cannot but mention Edgar the Peaceful (if it Edgar the
were upon no other account, but that he al- Peaceful,
ways labour'd after Peace,) and ſubjoyn his E-
pitaph; penn'd very well for that age:

Autor opum , vindex ſceltrum, largitor honorum,
1 thy of Edgarus regna ſuperna petit.

Hic alter Salomon, legum pater, orbita pacis,
Luod caruit bellis, claruit inde magis. |

Templa Deo, templis monachos, monachis dedit

agros © _ |

Nequitiæ lapſum, Juftitizeque locum.

Novit enim regno verum perquirere falſo,
Inmenſum mod ico, perpetuimque bre vi.

He that good àctidns did with honours \
crown, * ce d ,
r hs realm, the daring vice put %
lown, CET = Rs,
Edgat to heaven, which he deſery'd, is
one. 3 re
Our Solomon in laws and laſting peace,
Yer ">> hy more than With a conqueror's
praiſe, 05 1
While bold oppteſſion fell, and juſtice kept
"her places” GETLY |
Churches to God, to Churches Monks he
weer | Bp. i
To Monks poſſeſſions they ſhould never leave.
Thus for a ſhort, a falſe, a bounded reign,

He * a vaſt, a true, an endleſs one to
82 fl. | f

The only Prince that hears this juſt applauſe,
Greateſt that e're ſhall be, and beſt that ever
Was. | |

This Heroe (to obſerve it by the way out of
Ninnius, if it be worth our notice) was call'd
Mab-Uter, i. e. a horrible ſon, becauſe from bis
childbood be was of a cruel temper ; and Arthur,
which ſignifies in Britiſh a horrible bear, or an iron
+ ir. hammer to break the f grinders of Lyons.

Take allo, if you pleaſe, ſome other monu-
ments of this place, tho' not altogether ſo an-
cient, out of William of Malmsbury. What is
a myſtery to all mankind, I would willingly ſet down,
if the truth might poſſibly be ſifted out; i. e. what

vids at thoſe Pyramids mean, ſome feet diſtant from the old
+£bury. Church, and facing the Monks Church-yard, The!
big ber, and that nearer the Church, bas five ſtories,
and is 26 foot bigh. This, tho' it is ready to fall for
oge, bas yet ſome monuments of antiquity plainly legi-
ble, but not ſo plainly intelligible. For in the uppermoſt
ſtories, there is an image of an Epiſcopal figure. In
the ſecond, an image ſhowing ſomething of a King-like
pomp, and theſe letters, HER. SEXI. and BLIS-
WERH. In the third too are theſe names, WEM-
CHESTE. BANTOMP. WINE WEGN. Is the
fwrth, HATE. WVLFREDE. and EAN-
FLEDE. In the fifth (which is the lowermoſt,) an
Image, and this writing, LOGWOR. WESLIE-
LAS, and BREGDENE. SWELWES. HWIN-
GENDES. BERNE. The other Pyramid is 18
foot bigh, and bas four ſtories, in which are written
HEDDE biſhop, and BREGORRED, and BE-
OR WAL DE.

What theſe may ſienifie, I dare not raſhly determin ;
but only make a probable cenjecture, that the bones of
thoſe men whoſe names are written on the out ſide, may
be laid in bollow {tones within. As for LOGWOR,
be is poſitively affirm'd to be the perſon from whom the
Place now call'd Montacute was formerly nam d
LOGWERESBEORH. [From BREGDEN, i:
BRENTAKNOLLE, now called Brentemers : }

' Mons act.

Below Glaſſenbury, the three rivers meeting

there, make a fenn; and afterwards diſchar-

ging chemſelves together at one little mouth,

run Weſtward in one chanel to the Æſtuary of

Uzella, by Gedney-moore ; or (as others will have Gedney-

it call'd) Godnez-moore, affirming it co import as moore.

much as God's Iſland, and that it was granted to

Joſeph of Arimathea: Then, paſt Weadmore a Weadmore.

Village of King Alfred's, which he gave by his |

laſt Will to his fon Edward: ſand, at the like Aubr. Ms.

diſtance on the other fide, by Edington, where, Edington.

abour fifty years ſince, were found ſeveral hun-

dreds of moulds of fine clay, for Coining ; and

near them, a floor of Chequer-work:; l and then

through that fenny ſpacious tract, Brentmerſh, Brentmerſh.

which the Monks of Glaſſenbury have inter-

preted a country of fenn-frogs, and it's little town « See Glaſſen-

* Brentknol, a little hill of a, = bury,
From hence to the Eaſt, Mendippe-bills run out Mendippe-

a great way both in length and breadth, Le- hill.

land calls them Minerary- hills, and, I think, nor

amiſs, ſince in old Records they are nam'd Mu-

neduppe ; abounding wich lead-mines, and afford-

ing very good paſture. [In theſe, it is free for

any Engliſh-man to work, except he has for-

feited his right by ſtealing any of the oar, or

tools, of others. And their law or cuſtom in

that caſe, is very remarkable. The Groviers (for

ſo the Miners are call'd, as the pits they fink

are call'd Groves) living at ſome diſtance, leave

cheir tools, and the oar they have got, ſome-

times open upon the hill, or at moſt only ſnut-

up in a ſlight hutt. Whoever among them ſteals

any thing, and is found guilty, is thus puniſh'd :

He is ſnut up in a hutt, and then dry fearn, fur-

zes, and ſuch other combuſtible matter, is put

round it, and fire ſet to it. When it is on fire,

the Criminal who has his hands and feet at li-

berty, may with them (if he can) break down

his hutt, and, making himſelf a paſſage out of

it, get free and be gone; but he mult ne-

ver come to work, nor have to do any more, on

the hill. This they call Burning of the bill, There

Ard EEORWALDE too was Abbot after HEM-
GISELUS,

is lead alſo dug on Breadwell-down, and other Broad-well,
parts thereabouts, lying between Frinton and
8 Blackwell.

n _ AS.
— —— PR”. - *

LA * — e 2422 *

_ : We"

83

#7
* A.

wg oy}; n
b
. * % .

4 *
— 9 WEFTERG 2

Blackwell, About the weſt-end of Mendippe-Bill.
Philoſ. is found plenty of f Lapis n near
ranſ. the ſurface of the earth. This, calcin'd, and
N. 193 mix'd with copper, makes braſs. Here are allo
ſome veins of Magneſia or Mangoneſſe, and of

Yellow Oker,) In theſe Hills, there is 4 cave of

a vaſt winding length, wherein are diſcover'd

Ochie- hole. ſome wells and rivulets. Ochiebole is the name
of it; and the inhabitants thereabouts have
broach'd as many. wild fanciful Stories concer-
ning it, as the Italians have of their, Sihl cave
in the Apennine Alps. But without doubt it had
the name from Ogo, a Britiſh word ſignifying a
cave; as the Iſland Eubza, from a cave of the
ſame nature, was call'd by a name like this,
OCHA. [By others it is Eall'd Wockey-bole ;
and deriv'd from poc, which ſignifies crooked; or
creeky ; from whence the Britiſh Ogo might alſo
come. From a very narrow entrance, it opens
into a large vault, the roof whereof (either by
reaſon of it's height; or the thickneſs of the
air) they who go in, cannot diſcover by the
light of the candles which they carry with them.
After having clamber'd over ſevera rok and

Strabo,

unequal paſſages among the moiſt, rocks, you
come at laſttoa ſtream of very clear cold water;
which did, in all likelyhobd, heretofore diſ-
charge it ſelf by the mouth of the Cave that
now is; but, changing its courle, and breaking
out by an under- current, was the cauſe that the
Cave, of conſequence, came to be as we now
ſee it. In ſeveral places of this Cave, one may
perceive that the droppings of water encreaſe
the rock, and are turn'd into ſtone; in ſome pla-
ces hanging down like icicles.] Not far from
this Cave, in the reign of Henry 8, in plowing
they caſt up an oblong plate of lead, which
had been erected for a Trophy, with this In-
ſcription :

TI. CLAVDIVS CAESAR AVG. P.M.
RES P. VIII. IMP. XVI. DE. BRI-

This ninth Tribuneſhip of Claudius, fell-in

with the year 802. from the building of Rome,

and with the Conſulſhip of Antiſtins and M.

Suillius ; at which time great diſturbances hap-

pen'd under P. Oſtorius Proptætor of Britain.

From the circumſtances of this time, give me

leave to infer ſome Conjectures. That, this ſame

year, Claudius had two ſignal victories over the

Britains, is atteſted by an ancient Coin of that

Emperour, the beſt evidence that can be. On

one ſide of it is this Inſcription, TI. CLAVD.

CAESAR AVG. P. M. TR. P. VIIIL IMP.

XVL PP. On the reverſe, DE BRITAN.

with a triumphal arch, the figure of an horſeman at

full ſpeed, and two trophies, Now, who theſe

Britains were that he conquer'd, Tacitus informs

us; for he ſays, that Claudius, by the conduct

Cargi, a peo. Of Oſtorius, ſubdu'd two of the Britiſh People this
ple of Bri- year, namely, the Iceni and the Cangi.

tain, Bur ſeeing the Iceni are at a great diſtance,

| and as it were in another Hemiſphere ; what it

we ſhould ſay, that this Trophy was erected in

memory of a victory over the Cangi, a ſmall

people comprehended under our Belge, and that

thoſe Cangi were ſeated here? For not far from

Annal, 1. 12. hence is the Iriſh-ſea, near which he places the

Co 32. Cangi ; and there ſeem to be remains of the

name Cangi in ſome places hereabouts, as in the

hundreds of Canningten und Canings, in Wincaun-

ton, which is ſometimes call'l Cangton ; and

1 Kaingſbam, as much as to ſay, the manſion of the

En gy Cangi. But let the reader judge of theſe mar-

26; ters; for my own part (as | ſaid) I do not go

Still Orig. beyond conjecture, but only endeavour to trace

Pp. 170 4 Om the Cangi, which I till hope to meet with

2 gerd. in another place. And yet (if we conſider two

to ſtrengthen the foregoing) we may poſſibly
lee ſufficient Inducements to reſt here, without
ſearching further. For, 1. The whole courſe of
Oſtoriuss march ſeems to convince us, that the

North-Wales ; into which they would firſt have
bent their courſe, if Camulodunum had been

opinion; for it that be allow'd, then from Cæ-
ſar's own words thoſe Iceni and Cangi, muſt be
plac'd in the ſouth parts of Britain, near the
Bibroci (in Barkſhire,) and the Segontiaci (in Ham-
ſhice ; ) ſo that the ſſtuation of the Cangi' will
in all probability fall in North-Wiltſbire and So-
merſetſhire. 3. The memory of theſe people, pre-
ſerv'd in ſeveral names of places beſides thoſe
already mention'd : Such are, Caninzan-mep-
rcer in the Saxon Chronicle; which are un-
doubtedly the 1 in Somerſetſhire. In Wilt-
ſhire, there is the Hundred of Canings ; and in it
a town of the ſame name, call'd in old Writings
Caningas ; as in another Hundred is Alcannings
(as much, poſſibly, as old, or old Cannings.) And
that ancient town of Caln (eſpecially if ſpell'd
as we find it in Domeſday, Cawns, or, as at this
day, Caun) ſeems to retain ſomething of the
name. 4. Why may not the Severn-ſea be that
which Tacitus ſays looks towards Ireland, near
which the Cangi liv'd ; and Avon in thoſe parts,
the Antona of Tacitus, on the banks whereot
Oſtorius, before the rebellion broke out, had made
ſeveral garriſons ? But this, by the way.!

ſtake not) of William Bonvill, whom Henry 6.

him Knight of che Garter, and enrich'd his ſon by
marriage with Baron Harrington's only daughter,
who was then but young. But when he, very
ungratefully, ſided with the houſe. of York in
the Civil wars; as if ſome Fury had haunted
him for revenge, he was an eye-witneſs of the
untimely death of that his only ſon, and of
Baron Harrington his grandchild by him, ſlain in
the battle of Wakefield. And preſently after, to
make his old age as miſerable as ic could be,
whilſt he was in ſome hope and expectation of
better Days, himſelf was taken in the ſecond
battle at S. Albans,and, when his glaſs had well-
nigh run out, was beheaded, leaving behind
him Cecilia his grand-daughter and heir, then
very young, but afrerwacd marcy'd to Thomas

Grey Marqueſs of Dorſer, ro whom ſke brought
4

or three reaſons more, that may ſtill be added

parts where the Ikenild-ftreet paſs d. After he had Bros

quell'd the ſceni, he immediately niarch'd againſt fore, n,
the Cangi ; but before he had finiſh'd his Con. ed.

lo near it, as “ ſome endeavour to prove? Fh,
2. Lipſius's conjecture, of reading (inſtead of 2,
the C:nimagni of Czar) Iceni, Cangi, confirms this”

Amongſt the hills, is Cbaton, the ſeat (if I mi- Chuter:

by the name of William de Bonvill and Chuton, ſum- Baron BY
mon'd to Parliament among the Barons, and made vi.

A large 0
man's
nd him, by
innocen
intert'd
is noW
Waldgra
Magna created
es the NOT
dug-up
Reding,
land de
uſes: 1
ſtead o
ſide of
ſpring:
from t
the th
ton) C
ſource
place
fifty Y
4 man
. Locke's with
rr bank,
2 it's {tt
9 Ur
genbut). villag
perſo
was t
zrpetre. who
a cal
whic
and |
dentors. read
pref:
(Chil. weſt
ſirna
the
Wroxhall, Mari
Wrol
the
Gorg
Gov
rer,
the
late
rurt
at
(bu
Lel

: tha
Welles, nat

This, ra- wh
t from ox ·
epharus in dot
Book De fro
"mus; and
8
ne!

an

B AMEFRE te

a large eſtate. Notwithſtanding, chis.Gentle- [curiouſly wrought out of None, and of great
man's r 5 ro Ko noo 2 18 W 1 5
11d: him, by an or Parliament declafing mm e Biſhop's palace is very ſplendid, and to-
$ innocent. [The ſaid William, and his Wife, lie wards the ford looks like a Caſtle, as i is for.
incterr'd in the Chancel of the Church : and it city'd with walls and a ditch ; and the Preben-
is now the Manour, as well as title, of the Lord|daries houſes on the other fide, are exceeding
Waldgrave, which Family, by K. James 2, were| neat. For there are 27 Prebends, with 19 pet-
created Barons Waldgrave of Chuten. Towards ty-Canons, be ſides a Dean, a Precentor, ſa
the north is Chue Magna or Bifhops-Chze, where is Treaſurer, | a Chancellor, and Arch-deacons,
dug-up a red bolus, call'd by the country-people | that belong to this Church. rin the 340 year
Reding, from thence diſtributed all over Eng- of Henry the 8, an Act of Parliament paſſed Cap. 14,
land for the marking of ſheep, and ſuch other] for the Dean and Chapter of Wells to be one ſole
aſes : it is alfo often us'd by Apothecaries in- Chapter of it ſelf. I A Biſhop's See was ſettl'd
. ſtead of Bolus Armenus. And at Stowey, on the here in the time of Edward the Elder. For when
fide of a hill above the Church, riſes a large|cthe Pope had Excommunicated this Edward,
ſpring, that is never dry. The water coming | upon pretence that the diſcipline of the Church
from thence as it runs through Stowey, covers] was quite neglected in this weſterly part of his
the things that it meets in it's courſe, with a kingdom; he, knowing himſelf notwithſtand-
fox cruſt, This effect it has not, in the very ing to be a nurſing father of the Church, ere-
ſource, nor Within 20 yards where it riſes: the ed three new Biſhopricks, Rirtun, Cornwall, and 906.
place where it works moſt, is about forty orf this of Welli, where he made Eadulph firſt Bi-
See the @ fifty yards from the rifing, at a fall higher than |ſhop. Not many years after, Giſo was ſet over Hiſtory of
iptiaao g a man's length. There it ſheaths every thing this Dioceſe, whom Harold Earl of the Weſt- Bath.
on, Locke wWith ſtony Caſes, and makes the ſides of the | Saxons and of Kent (gaping after the revenues
i”... bank, a hard rock; and from thence er of the Church) did ſo perſecute, that this See
5. ic's ſtream, it covers ſticks, & cc. with a cruſt.1] was almoſt quite deftroy'd. But William the
* Under Mendippe-bills to the north, is the little firſt, after he had conquer'd Harold, lent a
gerbut). village N ſo call'd from one Congarss a helpin hand to Giſo, then in exile, and to this
perſon of great ſanity (Capgrave tells us, he |diſtrefled Church: at which time (as is evident

was the fon of an Emperour of Conſtantinople,) from Domeſday-book) the Biſhop held rhe town it
anette. who here liv'd a hermit; and Harpetre, formerly |/elf, wbich gelded for go bides. Afterwards, in the
a caſtle belonging to a family of the ſame name, |reign of Henry r. Fobn de Villula a French-man
which deſcended hereditarily to the Gornaies,| of Tours was elected Biſhop, and tranſlated the
and from them to the 4b-Adams, who (as I have|See to Bath, by which means theſe two grew
dentons. read) reſtor'd it to the Gornaies, | ro whom || the into one, and the Biſhop has his title from both;
preſent Poſſeſſors are related. To the north-|ſo that the ſame perſon is ſtyl'd Biſhop of Bath
(:il, weſt from theſe Hills, lies Cburcbil; which gave | and Wells Which occaſion'd ſome Hot diſpures See in the
| firname to the family, that happily produced | between the Monks of Bath and the Canons of Decretah,
the celebrated Heroe of this age, obs Duke of Wells, about the election of the Biſkops. [But 2 ne.
Marlborougb. Wroxhall (in ſome old writings call'd | yet it is obſervable, that almoſt 200 years after on ef the
WVrokeſhale) hath been for a long time the ſear of | Jobs, the Biſhops were called Biſhops of Bath See is vacant.
the Gorges; of which ancient Family, Raiph de| only, and ſometimes of Glaffon, but not of
Gorges was in the 47 year of Henry 3, made Wells. For, I in the mean time + Savaricus Biſhop + Savanari-
Governour of Shirburn-Caſtle, and, a little af-|of Bath, being alſo Abbot of Glaſſenbury, tran- cus, C.
ter, of the Caſtle of Exeter; from whoſe time, ſlated his See thither, and was ſtyl'd Biſhop of
the Family hath been continued here, and is|Glaſſenbury, but that title dy'd with him: and
lately reduced to an iſſue-female.1 But to re-|the difference between the Monks and the Ca-
turn. Southward, not far from the famous Cave, nons was at laſt compos'd by that Robert who 1193.
at the bottom of Mendippe-bills, is a little city |divided the revenues of his Church into ſo many
(built upon a rocky ſoil) and an Epiſcopal See. Prebends, and ſettl'd a Dean, a Sub-dean, &c.
Leland tells us (upon what grounds I know not) Biſhop Jocelin alſo, about the ſame time aug-
that it was formerly call'd Theodorodunum 3 the| mented the Church with new buildings ; and
Nell. name of it now is Welles, ſo call'd from the Wel in the memory of + our Grandfathers, Ralpb So aid,
* which ſpring up in all parts of it; ſo * Saſa in| de Sbrowibery (as ſome call him) built a very ann. 167.
'1 14, Perſia, Croia in Dalmatia, and Pagaſe in Mace-| neat College for the Vicars and finging-men ad-
zhanus in donia, had their names from wells or fountains: joy ning to the north part of the Church; and
* Book De from whence alſo this Church is call'd The Church|alſo ſ as is ſaid by ſome] enclos'd the Biſhop's
rae, ind of ell. It may juſtly challenge the pre-emi- | palace with a wall. [But that was certainly

* nence in this County, both for populouſneſs, done by Ralph Ergbum (che fourth Biſhop after
and ſtatelineſs of buildings. It has a Church|Sbrowsbery) who hiniſh'd this work and his life
and a College built by King Ina to the honour | together, 10 Apr. A. D. 1400. whereas Shrows-
of St. Andrew ; which was preſently endow'd | bery dy d 14 Aug. An. 1336. The truth of this
with large revenues by ſeveral great men. A- is evident from a Record made by a Monk of
mong the reſt, King Kinewulph gave to| Bath who liv'd ar the ſame time, and not long
it a great many neighbouring places, in the after in a Menology to the 10" of April, wrote as
year 766, For thus his Charter runs: I Kine- | follows: Obiir Dominus Radulpbus Epiſcopus Batbon.
wulph King of the Weſt-Saxons, for the love of God, &- Well, iſto die Sabbati ; qui vallavit muris & 4
and (which ſhall not be bere particularly mention d) foſſss palatiam Epiſcopi apud Wells, & jacet ibidem, 1
ſome wexations of our Corniſh enemies, do by the conſent | Anno Dom. MCCCC. litera Dominicali C. i. e. On Ny
of my Biſhops and Noble- men, bumbiy make-over by gift | that Sabbath, dy'd Ralph Biſhop of Bath and 14
a certain parcel of ground to the Apoſtle and ſervant of Wells, who made a wall and a trench about the 4
God, S. Andrew, i. e. xi Manſions near the ri ver Biſhop's Palace at Wells, where he lies bury'd, | ll
call'd Welwe, towards the increaſe of the Monaſtery, A. D. MCCCC. the Dominical Letter C. This | ö
ſituate near the great fountain call d Wielea. Which | Book was writ by the Monk, An. 1428.1 In 1
I ſet down here, both on account of it's Anti- |che way from the palace to the market, Thomas L i
quity, and becauſe ſome are of opinion that | Bekington, Biſhop, built a very beautiful gate, i|
the place took it's name from this river. The | and 12 ſtately ſtone houſes of the ſame heighc 1
Church indeed is exceeding beautiful, and no-|hard-by in the market-place : In the middle 4
thing can be finer than it's frontiſpiece towards whereof is a market-houſe ſupported by ſeven 1

the Weſt, which is one entire pile of ſtatues outer pillars and à curious arch, built 3 1
ziim 7;

A }

Magna
tops

Wroxhall,

8 — — ——
— -- „ 4 — —

= "DEALOCA

William Knighte and Dean Woollman for the uſe
of the market-people. Tt is commonly call'd
The Croſs ; and beſide that, there has been built
a fair market-houſe of late years between the
ſaid Croſs, and the gate which leads to the pa-
lace.] All theſe are in the eaſt part of the
town. In the weſt is a Pariſh-Church dedica-
ted to S. Cuthbert; and near it, an Hoſpital
built by Nicholas Bubwith Biſhop, for 24 poor
people. [Weſt of Wells, juſt under Mendippe-
Cheddar. hills, lies Cheddar, famous for the excellent and
prodigious great Cheeſes made there, ſome of
which require more than one man's ſtrength to
ſet them on the table, and are of a delicate
taſte; equalling, if not exceeding that of the
Parmeſan. Above this place, is a gap as it were
cut into the hill, which affords a narrow paſ-
ſage for travellers between, and has ſtupendous
high rocks on both ſides, famous in this Coun-
Cheddar- try, under the name of Cheddar-Cliffs. At the
Cliffs. foot of theſe rocks, riſes a great and clear ſpring,
which, within a quarter of a mile of the ſource,
drives 12 mills.
Out of the Mineral-mountains before-mention'd,
Frome. ariſes the river Frome, which [ (ſpringing at
ſome diſtance from Stratton, from whence Sir
Fobn Berkley, was, for his eminent Services to the
Crown, created by King Charles 2, Lord Berk-
ley of Stratton,)| haſtens eaſtward by thoſe pits
of coal, that are made uſe of by ſmiths as moſt
proper to ſoften iron ; and before it has run any
great way, wheeling towards the north, it is the
boundary between this County and Glouceſter-
Farley, ſhire; and waſhes Farley, [once] a caſtle on a hill
(but now pulled down, )] belonging not many
years ſince to the Hungerfords, where formerly
; Humphrey Bobun built a monaſtery ; at a little
Philips-Nor- gjſtance from Philips-Norton, a famous market-
8 town, taking it's name from the Church, dedi-
Wellow, cated to St. Philip; [and not far from Wellow,
Aubr. MS. in which manour, was diſcovered, ann. 1685. a
Gale, p. 88, Roman chequer'd pavement; as was alſo ano-
. ther at Batbford, in a room which was found
under-ground in digging; the Pavement where-
of was chequer'd-work of white, blue, and red;
Kroll-hill. and a third, near Knoll-bill in this County.)
Selwood. Lower down, is Selwood before-mention'd, a
wood that ſpreads it ſelf a long way both in
length and breadth, and is thick ſet with trees.
From this (as Ethelwerd cells us) the neigh-
Lib, 2. c. 11. bouring Country was calld Selwoodſbire, I(his
words are, Sealwudſcire, «$45 Scireburnenſis,
the Biſhoprick of Shicburn ;)] and a cown near
it is to this day call'd Frome-Selwood, ſupported
moſtly by the woollen manufacture. Scarce
two miles from hence to the weſt, is a ſmall
but pretty neat caſtle, built by the De la Mares,
Nonney de and thence call'd Nonney de la Mare, which by
la Mare. inheritance deſcended from them to the Pow-
Witham. Jetta. Not far from whence is Witham, where
King Henry 3 built a Nunnery. FAtcer the
Diſſolution of Religious Houſes, it came into
the Family of Hopton, and was the poſſeſſion of
the famous Lord Hopton, whole fidelity and Ser-
vices to the Crown, in che moſt perilous times,
deſervedly raiſed him to that honour, }
And now Frome, encreas'd by ſome little ri-
vers out of this wood, at laſt throws it ſelf into
Avon. the noble river Avon, which with a winding
courſe preſently runs to that ancient City, call'd
by Ptolemy, from the Baths,” Tels Sipun, i. e. Hot
Aque ſolis. Waters; and by Antoninus, Waters of the Sun; by
the Britains, Tr ennaint Twymin, as alſo Caer Badon
by the Saxons, Ba bancercep, hat Baban, and
(from the concourſe of ſick people) [ Accman-
nerceartep, ] Ackmanchbeſter, as much as a City of
Valetudinarians ; | and by Florence of Worceſter,
De urbibus. Acamanni Civitas. I * Stephanus calls it Badixa;
Bathe, We at this day Bathe ; and the modern Latin Ba-
tbenia. It lies low ia à plain not very large,

Stratton.

|

50009

and is as it were fortify'd on every ide with let tetmin
hills of an equal height, which lend down ma. © inArt- Magic)
ny ſprings into the City, to the great advar. wick: the BY
tage of the citizens, In the city it ſelf, ariſe + have C
three hot ſprings, of a blewiſn and ſea-coloyr, © *% ] date
which exhale a thig ſort of miſt, and ſomething Some
of fan ill ſavour, proceeding from corrupt Wa- Nen that |
ter mix'd wich earth and brimſtone ; (tor the cannc
water it ſelf has a ſulphur, and bituminous mat- Rom:
ter, incorporated with it.) They are an cffe. the fi

tual remedy to ſuch bodies, as by reaſon of ill

n, SAXOT
humours are dull and heavy; tor by virtue of

le", 5 0
| { more 1and1!

their heat they cauſe ſweating, and by that 14% newbl
meansthe ſtrength of the humour is abated. Bucic ing fi
is not at all hours that they are wholſom; far from Wos hil. them
eight in the morning till three in the afternoon, perat
they are extream hot, and boyl up violencly, by and \
which they are mudded, and throw up a filth be th
fort of ſtuff from the bottom: ſo that at theſe down
times they [| || uſed formerly to be! ſhut up; N p.chfone. nam
nor“ did any go into them, till by their fluicess * wark
they had eas'd themſelves ot that ſtuff, and were who
purg'd. But now the Bath may be enter'd him
wichout danger at any time; and in the hot wea. Man
ther when the ſcum ariſes, the guides of the brid.
bath take ſome time to cleanſe the water, cor.
(which they generally do at their coming: in; your

and many bathers are in the morning in bath mou!
cill dinner-time, wichout any prejudice from the ther
(cum.] Of theſe three, that which is call'd joy
The Croß-bath, from a Croſs formerly erected in gre:
the middle of it, is very gentle, and moderate- - don,
ly warm. Upon the fide of it are * 16 ſtone- Bad
leats; and it is enclos'd with a wall. The e- Ss For
cond, f 58 foot and a half diſtant, is muchy Same: ged
hotter, whereupon it is called Mbot-batb, or Hot. C. Cit
bath, Near theſe, is an Hoſpital built by Regi- yea
nald Biſhop of Bathe, to relieve the neceſlities We
of the ſick; and thole two are in the midſt of ban
a ſtreer on the weſt- ſide of the City. The third, vun tin . furl
which is largeſt, is in the very heart of the Ci- ?, as yes
ty, and is call'd, the King's or Royal bath ; it is 1j Al.
near the Cathedral Church, and enclos'd alſo pl:
with a wall. Ic is accommodated with || 28 ſeats} ;2, C pet
arch'd over, [and wich other ſtone- benches, l on a |
which the men and women fit apart; and both int
of them, when they go into the water, put on an
linnen drawers, Where the Cathedral Church D.
now ſtands, a Temple is ſaid to have been for- gr
merly dedicated to Minerva. It is out of all Temple d ter
doubt, that Solinus Polybiſtor means theſe baths, Mineria ca
when he ſays, In Britain there are hot ſprings, ral
richly accommodated with all conveniences for the ſer- ha

vice of mankind ; their tutelar Deity is Minerva, in ip
whoſe Temple thoſe perpetual fires never turn to embers, a0

but when ibey go out, are converted into round pieces th,
of bard ſtone, Notwithſtanding which, Athe- *
næus affirms, that all hot baths naturally ſpring- fte
ing out of the earth, are ſacred to * Hercules ;* Hi tu

and indeed, amongſt other old monuments al- 2b 1

moſt quite defac'd by age, there is here upon EM. fo

the walls ſomething of an ancient image of © 8

Hercules, holding a Serpent in his hand. But ra- Se

ther than any difference ſhould ariſe upon this —

head, we are willing to grant, that Baths were B

dedicated both to Hercules and Minerva. For 10

the Greeks have told us, that Minerva was the be

firſt who furniſh'd Hercules with a bath after .

he had finiſh'd his labours. It is enough, it 1 H

am allow'd to conclude, upon Solinus's autho- -

rity, that ſince (as he lays) Minerva was the 7

tutelar Goddels of thoſe ſprings, this muſt be K

che ſame city which che Britains call'd Caer oa | Marks, C. f.
laddur, that is in latin Urbs Palladiæ aquæ, or, the dur.

city of Pallas's water. For the thing, name,

and meaning do exactly anſwer.

The finding of theſe ſprings, is by our fabu-

lous traditions tefert'd ro a Britiſh King call'd br. G.
Bleyden I Doyth, i. e. Bleyden the ſooth-ſayer; 1 CHC Auldet.

r 0 9 AO Wn

wich what ſhow of truth, 1 leave others to de-
cermin,

32, C

"emp!e of
liner.

Heztust

, we 1
, 10 D*
eniano,
ent. 5.

*
"zer-Pallas
ur.

Clorti, 0

09

J M ERS ETF HTR E

90

termi. However, Pliny aſſures us, that this Art-
7 drt. Magick was in ſuch wonderful eſteem among
# pi derived it from hence; but as to theſe baths,
1 dare not attribute their original to that art.
Some of our own nation, too ſupinely, affirm
that Julius Ceſar firſt fourtd chem opr. But 1
cannot but think, that it was lete before the
Romans came to Know them, ſince Solinus is

the firſt that makes any mention of them. The

© Saxons indeed about the“ 44 year after their
Ft — landing in Britain, by a breach of Articles re-
+11. newing the war, laid fiege to this city, but be-
ing ſurpriz'd by the warlike Arthur, chey berook

10n-hill, themſelves to Badon-bill, where (tho in a deſ-
2 petate condition,) they fought it out to the laſt,
and were ſlain in great numbers. This ſeems to
be the ſame hill with that we now call Lanneſ-
dun, hanging over alittle village near the city,
vcore. nam'd Hat bſtone, and ſhowing at this day it's bul-
warks, and a rampite. I know there are ſome
who leck for it in Yorkſhire ; but let Gildas
himſelf reſtore it to this place. For in an old
Manuſcript-Copy of his Hiſtory, in the Cam-
bridge-Library, where he treats of the vi-
aory of Aurelius Ambrofius, he ſays ; To the
gear of Badon-hill ſiege, which is nat far from the
mouth of Severn, Bur if this will not convince
them, let chem underſtand farther, that the ad-
joyning vale lying along the river Avon for a
great way together, is call'd in Britiſh Nant-Ba-
don, i. e. the vale of Badon ; and where to ſeek
Badon-bill but near Badon-wvalley, 1 cannot tell.
For a long time after this, the Saxons, diſcoura-
ged from making any more attempts upon this
City, left it quiet to the Britains. But in the
year of Chriſt 577. after Ceawlin King of the
Weſt-Saxons had defeated the Britains at Deor-

«cn. firtt ſutrender'd to the Saxons ; and t in a few

gs 1).

{plendor. For Osbrich, (or rather Oſrick, a

a Nunnery ; and preſently after, when it came
into the hands of the Mercians, King Offa built
another Church; but both werg deſtroy'd in the
Dauiſh Wars. Out of the ruins of theſe, there
grew up another Church dedicated to S. Pe-
ter, to which Edgar (ſirnam'd the Peaceful) be-
cauſe he was here Inaugurated, granted ſeve-
ral Immunities ; the memory whereof the in-
habicants ſtill keep up by certain anniverſary
ſports. [Bur yet it is ſaid to be found, upon an
accurate ſearch into the records of the place,

was the very building rais'd by Offa, which
Rood ſome years after; and that after Offa's
time there was no new Church built till the year
1010. when Elpbege, Archbiſhop of Canterbury,
founded one.] In the time of Edward the
Confeſſor (as we read in Domeſday-book) it
gelded for 20 Hides, when the Shire gelded. There
were 64 Burgeſſes of the King's, and 30 of others,
But this flouriſhing condition laſted not long;
lor preſently after the Norman Conqueſt, Ro.
bert Mowbray nephew to the Biſhop of Con-
ſtance, who rais'd a warm rebellion againſt
William Rufus, plunder'd and burnt ir. But it
recover'd in a ſhort time, by the aſſiſtance of
Jobn de Villula born at Tours in France, who be-
ing Biſhop of Weils, did (as Malmesbury in-
Matte, C. forms us) for five hundred || pounds purchaſe
the city of Henry 1. whither he tranſlated his
See, tho' (as ſome ſay l ſtill retaining the name
of Biſhop of Wells, and built him here a new
Cathedral. [But as to the retaining of the
name, it muſt be obſerv'd, that Biſhop Godwin
Gr. Cuiace, affirms the contrary ; and a curious perſon, who
examin'd the Records, affirms, in his Hiſtory

Britains, that even the Perſians ſeem'd to being ready to dro

bam, this city being both beſieg'd and ſtorm'd,

it 515, as Years, recovering it ſelf, took the new name of
Hkmanceſter, and grew up to a good degree of

petty King of the Wiccii,)1 in the year 676. built

that the Church wherein Edgar was crown'd,

of Bathe, that he ſubſcribed himſelf only Foannes
Bathon,) The ſaid Cathedral, not long ago,

p down, Oliver King, Biſhop
of Bath, 14id the foundation of another near it,
exceeding large and ſtately ; which he well-
nigh finiſh d. And if he had quite finiſh'd it,
without all doubt it had exceeded moſt Cathe-
drals in England, But the too early death of
that great Biſhop, wih the publick diſtucban-
ces, and the avarice of ſome perſons, who (as
ie is ſaid) converted the money gather'd thro”
England for that end, to other uſes, envy'd the
place this glory. IIt is probable, that in me-
mory of him, were engraven theſe two verſes,

which are ſtill to be ſcen on the weſt-end of
this Church.

The trees goeing to cheeſe a King,
Said, be to us thou, Oliver, King.

However, from that time forward, Bath has
been a flouriſhing place, both for the woollen
manufacture, and the great reſort of ſtrangers;
and it is encompals'd with walls, wherein they
have fix'd ſome ancient Images and Roman In-
ſcriptions, to evidence the Antiquity of the
place: but age has ſo worn the Letters, that
they are ſcarce legible. And leſt any thing

has honour'd divers of our Nobility with the
title of Earl. For we read that Pbilebert de
Chandew, born in Bretagne in France, had that
title conferr'd upon him by King Henry 7. Af-
terward, King Henry 8. in the 28" year of his
reign, created Fobn Bourchier Lord Fitz-Warin, Inquil.
Earl of Bath; who dying in the 31ſt year ot 31 Hen. g.
the ſame King, was ſucceeded by Jobn his ſon,
who dy'd in the third year of Queen Elizabeth.
He, before the death cf his father, had a Son,
Jobn Lord Fitz-Warin, from whom deſcended
* William, who greatly improv'd the nobility * The pre-

liam, dying 12 July 1623. left this honour to
Edward his only ſon then living, who having
no ifſuc-male that ſurvivd him, the title, upon
his death, came to Sir Henry Bourchier, as fon to
Sir George Bourchier (who was third ſon to John,
the ſecond of that name, Earl of Bathe.) This
Henry dying without iſſue, An. 1654. the title
lay vacant till King Charles the 24's Reſto-
ration, When, among other honours, it was
conferr'd (together with the titles of Baron of
Kilkbampton and Biddiford, and Viſcount Grenevil
of Lan{down) upon Jobn Grenevil, for his emi-
nent Services to that Prince, and his being par-
ticularly inſtrumental in bringing about that
happy change.] Geographers make the Lon-
gitude of this City to be 20 degrees, and 56
minutes; the Latitude, 51 degrees and 21 mi-
nutes. For a concluſion, take, if you pleaſe,
choſe Verſes, ſuch as they are, concerning Bathe ;
made by Neabam, who flouriſh'd F 400 years + So ſaid,
ago.

Bat boniæ thermas vix prafero Virgilianas,
Confecto proſunt balnea noſt ra ſeni.
Proſunt attritis, colliſis, invalidiſque,
Et quorum morbis frigida cauſa ſubeſt.
Prævenit bumanum ſtabilis natura laborem;
Ser vit nature ligibus artis opus,
Igne ſuo ſuccenſa quibus data bainea fervent,
Mnea ſubter aqua vaſe latere putant.
Errorem fig menta ſolent inducere paſſim.
Sed quid? ſulpbureum novimus efſe locum.

Scarce ours to Virgil's Baths the preference
give d
Here old decrepit wretches find relief.
To bruiſes, ſores, and ev'ry cold diſgaſe,
Apply'd, they never fail of quick *
us

*

ſhould be wanting to the Dignity of Bath, it Earls of Bath.

of his birth by the ornaments of learning. (ili ſent Earl, C.

ann, 1607.

. — * a .

2

r

Adjutricis,
pix, felicis,

Hic fitus
eſt,

+Vid. Muſ-
grav. Belg,

212.

Decuriopi.
Glevi, i. e.
Gloceſter,

Menſes.
Dies
Filix Ka-

riſimz tece-

runt.

Thus human ills kind nature does remove;
Thus nature's kindneſs human arts improve.
They're apt to fanſy brazen ſtoves below,
To which their conſtant heat the waters

owe,

Thus idle tales deluded minds poſſeſs ;
But what? we know that tis a ſulph'ry

place.

— *

Take alſo (if you think them worth your

reading) two ancient Inſcriptions lately dug-

up near the high- way below the city in Waldcot-
field ; and remov'd by Robert Chambers a great
admirer of Antiquities, into his gardens ; where

I cranſcrib'd them.

DISMANIBV'S
MVALERIV SM

I ſaw likewiſe theſe 4 Antiquities faſten'd on
] the inner ſide of the wall, berween the north
Brit.p.70, and weſt gates : Hercules holding up his left

hand, with his Club in the right: In a broken

piece of ſtone, is this writing in large and beau-

tiſul letters, |

FC-COLoWE any
N

Next, leaves folded in, Hercules bending two
ſnakes; and in a ſepulchral table between two

little images, one whereof holds an Amaltbæan
horn, there is written in a worſe character,

and ſcarce legible,

MVIVS
112 KAR FEC

—— — ˖——

and large letters, is

en" —

curl'd locks, within the copings of

ſtone, in letters a-croſs,

11d]

ſtone.

A little below, in a broken piece of ſtone,

Between the weſt and ſouth gates, Ophj
entolded by a ſerpent : two men's bead wich

the walls:

a hare running, and joyn'd to this, in a great

.

A naked man as it were laying hands upon
a ſoldier ; alſo, between the battlements of the
walls, leaves, two lying kiſſing and embracing
each other; a footman brandiſhing his ſword,
and holding forth his ſhield ; another footman
with a ſpear; and theſe letters a- croſs on a great

And Meduſa's head with her ſnaky hairs.

[To theſe, we will add another Monument,
which was tound, a mile from this place in the
year 1708, in repairing the Foſſc-way.

29 N

— 2 — ——
22

publiſhed, not many years ſince.

from a ſimilitude that he hath obſerv

pitch'd Cauſeys to walk on, than for

To be read thus: Julius Vitalis, Fabricienſis Le-
gionis Viceſimæ Valeriane Vittricis, Stipendiorum no-
vem, Annorum wiginti novem, Natione Belga, ex
Collegio Fabricienſium elatus, bic fitus eff, Upon Dodeelli
which Inſcription, ſome Critical Notes and Ex- Not. C
plications, together with a Commentary,

d between

a plough'd

land to ſow corn in; ſo little cf earth is to be

ſeen

were Magi)

Comment

As alſo upon pjjucTm
the fragment of an Equeſtrian Statue, with a Ha- p. 285
a Pura in the right hand, and a Parma in the 1711
left; which was found near this City, and is to
be ſeen there; and which the Learned Anno- yur,
rator is willing to determin to Geta, as well Ge Th
lol. Ti
the face of this Statue and the Coins of Gets jf. on
as from the particular fondneſs which that Em-
peror is known to have had for Horſes.
The ſoil, for ſome miles about Bathe, eſpecial
ly to the weſtward, as at Coſton and thereabouts,
is ſo very ſtony, that when it is newly plough d,
one would rather take the ridges for ſo many

Coſton.

.

ANT

ſeen +
ſnare

heat

as in

their
thoſe

hard 1

cover

would

Bet

into

1

* „ MS. nut if
Drew

weſte

the

ure.

tradii

ple, 7

the ri

They

and «

benge

no a

hill t

ton bury s callz

and

thre!

U
here

and
ſaid,
gin,
thou

eln, C. of ch

eats of dulo
jut

ther.

of Þ

from

head

it fe:

of tl

wan
liſts

Nau

long

roug

then

end

tho

they

all f

dian

ries.
Fercepier, plac
| peculiar tura
d Ergland, hatt

Br illeton, tel,

Werk.

SOMERSEFSHIAE.
{zen among thoſe ſtones which the plough-
ſhare turns up. Yet here, they have excellent
wheat ; tho', perhaps, not altogether ſo much
as in deeper land. The Councrymen attribute
their good crops, moſtly, to the ſtones; and if
thoſe were carry 'd off, the earth left upon the
hard rock would be ſo little, chat it would not
cover their corn; and ſo light, that the wind
would blow it away.

Between Bath and Briſtol, a little river runs

into the Avon, upon which is Stanton-drew,
the latter part whereof might ſeem to point

94.

as an exact mould or caſe, receives the protu-
berant figure of che like leaf ſtanding out on
the other ſide. 1

Scarce five miles from hence, the river Avon
parts Briſtol in the middle, call'd by the Britains Briſo!,
Caer Oder Nant Badon, i. e. the City Odera in
Badon-valley. In the Catalogue of Anci-
ent Cities it is nam'd Caer Brito, and in Saxon
BnizÞcrcop, i. e. a famous place. But they
who have“ affirm'd it to be the Venta Belgarum, * Leland.
have impos'd both upon themſelves and the Comm. in
world. This City is plac'd partly in Somerſet. OY Sn. Can.

Jodwelli

Not, Crit
Mu graf,
Zomment.
hiloCTi

„ 283.

ents of
ws,

Percepier,

it, Plant,

+ G14.

| "WV.
. MS.

tin DUTY»

te lat, C.

- xliarturally all the year round. Ir is a plant * which
rgland,

gut ſome relation to the old Druids (but that
Drew is the name of an ancient family in the
weſtern parts ; ) and the monument there, call'd
the Wedding, would ſtrengthen ſuch a conje-
Aute. The occaſion of the name Wedding, is a
tradition which paſſes among the common peo-
ple, That as @ Bride was going to be married, ſhe and
the reſt of the company were chang d into theſe ſtones,
They are in a circular form, 5 or 6 foot high;
and the whole monument is bigger than Stone-
benge, the Diameter here being 90 paces z tho
no appearance of a ditch. On the top of a
hill between Bath and Cainſham, is a great Camp
called Stanton bury; the works whereof are large
and double, and they are eſtimated at about
thirty Acres. |

Upon the river Avon (which is the bound
here between this County and Gloceſterſhire,)
and on the weſtern bank of it, is Cainſham atore-
ſaid, ſo nam'd from Keina a devour Britiſh Vir-
gin, [from whom the Keines of this County have
thought themſelves deſcended ;and] whom many
of the || laſt age ſave one, through an over-cre-
dulous temper; believ'd to have chang'd ſerpents
into ſtones, becauſe they found in the quarries
thereabouts, ſome ſuch little ſporting miracles
of Nature. And I have ſeen a ſtone brought
from thence, like a ſerpent, in a round, the
head whereof, tho* but imperfect, jetted out [as
it ſcemedi] in the circumference, and the end
of the tail was in the center; but moſt of them
want the head. [And indeed all our Natura-
liſts now agree, that ſuch ſtones are form'd in
Nautili ſhells, and that there are no heads be-
longing to them. Indeed, many of them have
rough and broken pieces of ſtone ifluing from
them beyond the moulded wreath at the broad
end; which may lead one to imagine, that
thoſe pieces were imperfect heads; but really
they are not ſo. Such kind of ſnake-ſtones of
all ſizes, from above a foot to an inch or two
diameter, are found frequently in their quar-
ries.} In the neighbouring fields, and other
places hereabouts, the herb Percepier grows na-

hath been ſuppoſed peculiar to England; T bur;
Mr. Ray affirms, that the ſame is often met with
in foreign Countries : | one taſtes in it a fort of
tartneſs and bitterneſs ; it is never higher than
a ſpan, and grows in buſhy flowers without a
ſtalk. It provokes urine ſtrongly and quickly;
and there is a water diſtill'd from it, of great
ule; as P. Pæna in his Miſcellanies upon Plants

ſhire and partly in Gloceſt erſhire, but does not be-
long to either, having diſtinct Magiſtrates of
it's own, and being a county incorporate by it ſelf. It
ſtands upon a pretty high ground, between the
Avon and the little river Frome ; and what with
walls and rivers, is guarded very well : for ic
was formerly enclos'd with a double wall. It
makes ſuch a beautiful ſhow, both of publick and
private buildings, that it anſwers it's name;
and there are what they call Goutes (in Latin
Cloacæ) built in the ſubterraneous caverns of the
earth, to carry off and waſh away the filth ; ſo
that nothing is wanting here, either for neat-
neſs or health. But by reaſon of theſe, Carts
are not us d here, but only Sledges, [which do not
endanger the arches of the Goutes.] It is alſo fo
well furniſh'd with the neceſlaries of life, and
is ſo populous, that next to London and York,
it may juſtly claim the pre-eminence over all
the cities in Britain. For the trade of many
nations is drawn hither by the convenience of
Commerce, and of the harbour, which receives
veſſels under (ail into the very heart of the city.
And the Avon ſwells fo high by the coming-in
of the tide, that ſhips upon the ſhallows are
born up 11 or 12 fathoms. The citizens drive
à rich trade throughout Europe, and make voy-
ages to the remoteſt parts of America, At what
time, and. by whom, it was built, is hard to
ſay : but it ſeems to be of a late date, ſince in
all the Daniſh Wars, it is not ſo much as men-
tion'd in our Hiſtories. For my parc, I am of
opinion it roſe in the declenſion of the Saxon
government, ſince it is not any where taken
notice of before the year of our Lord 1063;
when Harold (as Florence of Worceſter has it)
ſer ſail from Bry:fow to invade Wales. In the

beginning of the Norman times, Berton an ad- Berton.
joyning f farm, and this Briſtow, paid tothe King | Prædium.

(as it is in Domeſday-book) 110 marks of ſilver ;
and the Burgeſſes return d, that Biſhop G. bad 33
marks, and 1 mark of gold. [Who this Biſhop
was, is not expreſs'd in Domeſday, nor have
we any more than the bare initials, either of his
name or See. If we durſt ſay that G. were in-
ſtead of S. (for thoſe two letters are not unlike)
Sberborn or Salisbury (under whoſe juriſdiction it
ſeems to have formerly been) would ſolve the
difficulty; but if that will not do, I find none
of the Biſhop's names about that time begin-
ning with G. If we preſerve the reading, Gle-
vum or Gloceſter offers it ſelf faireſt ; which tho
annex'd at times to Litchfield, and Worceſter, ſeems,

has obſerv'd. Between this placs and Bri- notwithſtanding, to have had the title of a Bi-
brileton, fol, upon the Avon, is Briftleton, abounding in ſhop's See.] Bur this by the way. Aſterwards,
the ſame ſort cf Cole that is brought from; || Geoffry Biſhop of Conſtance, raiſing a Rebel-URbert, C.

New-caſtle. From Briſtleton in ſeveral places ofj lion againſt William Rufus, choſe this for the william of
the adjacent Country, as far as Stratton and Men- ſeat of war, and fortify'd the little city with Wirceſter.
dippe- hills, as alſo Northward in Gloceſt erſhire, are] that inner wall (I ſuppoſe,) part of which re-
tound veins of this cole, which afford a ſtrong] mains to this day. But a tew years after, the

and cheap firing to all thoſe parts. Theſe veins| Suburbs began to enlarge on every fide ; for on

are cover'd with a ſhell of a black hard ſtony j the ſouth, Radcliff (where were ſome little hou- Radcliff,
ſubſtance, call'd Wark, which will ſplit like] ſes belonging to the ſuburbs) is joyn'd to the
blue ſlate, but is much more brittle, and not] reſt of the city by a ſtone-bridge, which is ſo
near ſo hard. Upon dividing this Wark, there} thick-ſer with houſes, that you would not think it

is often found, upon one of the ſeparated ſur-| a bridge, but a ſtreet. This part is included with-

aces, the perfect ſhape of a fearn-leaf, as if it} in the walls, and the inhabitants have the pri-

There are hoſpitals built
in

71¹.

Hulgtate,
zeta H.
hiloſ. T1
L 335. N. F

Wak,
Dolton.

had, by a $kilful hand, been engraven; which, vileges of citizens,

2 4

* fy 2

: B E ＋ G

c bury.

The Marlh,

Gaur ts.

in all parts for the poor, and elegant Churches
to the honour of God. Among the reſt, the
moſt beautiful by far is S. Mary's of Radcliffe with.
out the walls, into which is a noble aſcent by a
great muy {teps. So large is it, and the work-
manſhip ſo exquiſite ; the roof ſo artificially
vaulted with ſtone, and the tower ſo high; that
in my opinion ic far ſurpaſſes all the Pariſh-
Churches in England, that I have yet ſeen. In
it, the founder William Canninges has two hono-
rary monuments ; one in the habit of a Magi-
ſtrate, for he was five times Mayor of this City ;
the other in the habit of a Clergy-man, for in

his latter days he took Orders, and was Dean of

the College which himſelf founded at Weſtbury.
Hard by it is alſo another Church call'd Temple,
the tower whereof as often as the bell rings,
moves to and again, ſo as to be quire parted

from the reſt of the building ; and there is ſuch
a chink from top to bottom, that the gaping is

three fingers, wide when the bell rings, grow-

ing firſt narrower and then again broader. Nor
muſt we omit S. Stephen's Church ; the ſtately
* So ſaid, tower whereof was in the memory of * our
ann. 1607. Grandfathers built by one Shipward, a citizen
and merchant, with great charge and curious
. workmanſhip. On the eaſt and north parts alſo,

it was enlarg'd with very many buildings, and
thoſe included within the walls, being likewiſe
defended by the river Frome ; which, after it
has paſs'd by theſe walls, runs calmly into the
Avon, making a ſafe harbour for ſhips, and a
creek convenient to load and unload wares
which they call the Kay, Below this, between
the confluence of Avon and Frome, is a cham-
pain ground, which is ſet round with trees,
and affords the Citizens a pleaſant walk. Upon
the ſouth-eaſt, where the rivers do not encom-
paſs it, Robert, natural ſon to King Henry 1.
(commonly call'd Robert Rufus Conſul of Glo-
ceſter, becauſe he was Earl of Gloceſter)
buile a large and ſtrong Caſtle for the de-
fence of his city ; [(which is now quite de-
moliſhed and built into a ſtreet ;) land out of a

pious principle, ſer aſide every tenth ſtone for

the building of a Chapel near the Priory of S.
James, which he had alſo erected juſt under the
City. He took to wife Mabil, daughter and
ſole heir of Robert Fitz-Hamon, who held this
City in fealty of William the Conqueror. This
caſtle, being yet ſcarce finiſh'd, was beſieg'd
by King Stephen ; but he was forc'd to draw-
off his forces without effecting any thing; and
the ſame perſon, not many years after, being
a priſoner therein, was a fair inſtance how un-
certain the Events of War are. Beyond the ri-
ver Frome, over which at Frome-gate is a biidge,
one goes obliquely up a high hill of a ſteep and
difficult aſcent, from whence there is a plea-
ſant proſpe& of the City, and of the haven
below ir. This, on the top, ſpreads into a large
and green plain, ſhaded all along the middle
with a double row of trees ; among which is a
pulpit of ſtone, and a Chapel, wherein they
lay, that Jordan, Companion to St. Auſtin the
Engliſh Apoſtle, was bury'd ; but it is now a
free-ſchool. This place, not to mention the
private houſes, is beautify'd on all ſides with
publick and ſtately buildings: On one ſide with
a Collegiate Church call'd Gaunts, from its foun-
der Sir Henry Gaunt Knight, who quicting the
world, did here dedicate himſelf to the ſervice

Bot now—. of God; Þ but by the munificence of J. Carre, a

wealthy citizen, it was converted into a Hoſpital
for Orphans. On the other ſide over-againtt it,
are two Churches dedicated to St. Auſtin ; the
one but ſmall and a Pariſh-Church ; the other
larger, and the Biſhop's Cathedral, adorn'd by
King Henry 8. with fix Prebendaries. Now,

the greateſt part of it is pull'd down, and the

College-gate, which indeed is curiouſly built
has this Inſcription, ;

REX HENRICVS II. ET DOMIN V«
ROBERTVS FILLVS HARDINGI FI
REGIS DACIAE, HVIVS MONASTE.

RII PRIMI FVNDATORES E :
DOT X I1TE-

That is;

King Henry 2. and Lord Robert, the ſon of Har-
ding, ſon to the King of Denmark, were the fir
founders of this Monaſtery.

This Robert, Harding's ſon, of the blood.
royal of Denmark, was a Principal man in Bri-
ſto], and ſo much belov'd by King Henry, that
(by his favour) Maurice his ſon marry'd the
daughter of the Lord de Barkley : from whence

Sbirburn, created 20 Jac. 1. to whom ſucceeded
in the ſame honour George his ſon, and Jobs his
grandſon, who died without Iſſue; and the ſame
title hath been conferr'd upon the Right Ho-
nourable Jobn Harvey, who had before been
created Baron Harvey of Ickworth.!

Where the Aven paſſes from hence, are high
rocks on both ſides the river, as if Nature had
induſtriouſly contriv'd them. One of theſe,
which hangs over the river on the eaſt-ſide, is

them. Nothing but the great plenty leſſens
their value among us: for beſides that in tran-
ſparency they even vie with thoſe from the In-
dies, they do not yield to them in any other
reſpect, ſave hardneſs: but their being ſmooth d
and fil'd by nature into fix or four corners, does,
in my mind, render them more admirable :
however, if we may truſt our Naturaliſts, they
aſſure us, that very often Cryſtals, and Berilli,
and even ſometimes the common Sparrs,in many
parts of England as well as elſewhere, ate ot
that figure. | The other rock on the weſtern
bank is likewiſe full of Diamonds, which by a
wonderful contrivance of nature are contain'd

red,) as if theſe were big with young. The
Avon, after it has paſs'd by theſe rocks, is at laſt
with a full chanel diſcharg'd into the Severn-
Sea; | furniſhing Briſtol (at the vernal equinox
or then-abours) with a diſh perhaps not co be
met with but in this County ; which they call
El vers.
bout Cainſham is yearly cover'd over and colour d
black with millions of little Eels ſcarce fo big
as a gooſe-quill, tho' ſome would have them a
particular ſpecies. Theſe, with ſmall nets, they
Skim up in great numbers, and by a peculiar
way of ordering them, maks them ſcowre off
their skins. Being thus ſtripp'd, and looking
very white, they make them up into little Cakes,
which they fry, and ſo eat them.]

It remains now, that I give a Catalogue 0

The firſt Earl of Somerſet is ſaid to have been
William de Moban or Moion, the ſame probibly

(ex) makes uſe of as a witneſs, under the name
of Comes I. de Moien, i. e. Earl W. de Moion.
From this time we meet with no diſtinct mer-
tion of the Earls of Somerſet, unleſs it be in this

(0

his poſtericy, who have flouriſh'd in great ſtate, — 0
are to this day ſtil'd“ Barons of Barkley; ſome TI
whereof were bury'd in this Church. (The Regiir
honour of this place hath been encreas'd, by te Mou

giving the title of Earl to Fobn Lord Dighy of

call'd S. Vincent's, and is ſo ſtock'd with Dia- Bang
monds, that one may gather whole buſhels of mn;

in hollow reddiſh flints (for the ground here is

Some time in the ſpring, the river @ Flyer,

Reſcript of King Henry 3. to Peter de Maw), Pte:

which I will ſet down, in order to invite ochers 1

| tl,

et.

C Earl 10
1 s . Dukes «
the Earls and Dukes of this County of Smet. gonerſs

that * Maud the Emprels in her Charter (where M. pu.
by ſhe created William de Mandevil Earl of El- wii, Mit

in Lc

\pofoli- {tri

Earl ;
were
the ]
ving
maki
certa

be Earls Fobn

uk
with
King
was
and
but
Hen
mait
mer
Kin
had
Her

— OS ORs a äc9Bũ——ä— ——6 ̃ ̃ — — ä —

<< —

*
1

7

SOMERSETSHIRE. 1

and Jarſey, &c.) was, as if he had been fortune's
foot-ball all on a ſudden kick'd down; for a very
ſlight crime, and that too contriv'd by the trea -
chery of his enemies ; and depriv'd of his ho-

nours and life together. [By the attainder of
hamage and ſervice, reſerving ſtill to our ſelves the] Edward Duke of Somerſet, this ticle lay vacant
Royalty 5 and therefore we command you, that you for a long time; only Sir Robert Cerr, Knight
grant bim fall ſeiſin of the ſaid County with all it's] of the Bath, was by the favour of King James t.
"\ppurtenances, and for the future not to intermeddle created Earl of Semerſet; who falling under
with any thing belonging to the ſaid County, &c. diſgrace upon the account of Sir Thomas Over--
nd we charge all our Earls, Barons, Knights, and

bury's death, and having only a daughter, that
Free-tenants of the _ Somerſet, that they do Honour was again extinct. Don the reſto-
Fealty and Homage to the ſaid Earl, with u reſerve\ ration of King Charles 2, William Seymour, Mar-

ly of fidelity to the King; and that for the future] queſs of Hertford, was for his eminent ſervices

as 22 and anſwerable to bim as their Lord. teſtor d to the title of Duke of Somerſet, and

Whether one may from hence conclude, that was ſucceeded by William, grand- child by Henry

he was Earl of Somerſet, as alſo of Devonſhire] his third ſon (William and Robert the two elder

(for the King wrote in the ſame words to Ro- brothers dying unmarry d: ) William alſo dy d

bert Courtney alſo concerning this William,) I leave|unmarry'd, and had for his ſucceſſor Jobs Lord

to the judgment of others. Under the ſame|Seymour his Uncle, who dy'd without iſſue.

Henry 3. (as we read in a Book in French be-|Whereupon, this title devoly'd upon the heirs

longing to the family of the Mobuns Knights) itfof Sir Francis Seymour (third ſon to Edward

js laid that Pope Innocent on a ſolemn feſtival|Lord Beauchamp, ſon and heir to Edward Earl

made Reginald Mobun, Earl of Effe, i.e. (as ourof Hertford ;) deſcending firſt to Francis, grand-

Author interprets it) of Somerſet, by the deli-|ſon of the ſaid Francis ; who being baſely mur-

very of a golden Roſe, with the grant of an|dered in Italy, the title deſcended to Charles his
annual penſion to be paid at the altar of S. Paul's brother, the preſent Duke of Somerſet.1

in London. So that he ſeems not to have been

1pofoli- ſtrictiy and properly an Earl, but an Apoſtolical

El. Earl; for ſo ſuch were term'd in that age, who

were created by the Pope (as thoſe created by

the Emperor, were call'd Imperial Earls,) ha-

ving a power of licenſing Notaries and Scribes,

making Baſtards legitimate, &. under ſome

certain conditions. A conſiderable time after,

% kerl Fob de Beaufort, natural ſon to John of Gaunt

ct. Duke of Lancaſter by Catharine Swinford, (being, li

with his brothers and ſiſter, made legitimate by

ſpend their judgment upon it, Know ye, that
8 * receiv d the homage of our beloved Uncle,
William Earl of Sarum, for all the lands which be
bolds of us, eſpecially for the County of Somerſet, which

ave have given to bim with all the Appurtenances, for

There are in this County 385 Pariſhes.

PCI

More rare Plants growing wild in Somer-
ſetſhire.

Brizh 0

mon,

Aria Theophraſti Ger. Alni effigie lanato fo-
o major C. B. Sorbus Alpina J. B. Sorbus ſyl-

. L veſtris, Aria Theophraſti dicta. Park. White-
King Richard 2, with the aſſent of Parliament, )] geam-tree. On the rocks over-againſt St. Vincent's

was advanc'd to the honour of Earl of Somerſet, rock near Briſtol, and in many other places on billy
and afterwards created Marqueſs of Dorſet; and rocky grounds among other ſhrubs and trees.
but was preſently depriv'd of that honour by] Afplenium five Ceterach J. B. Ger. Park. As-
W Henry 4, and had only the title of Somerſet re- plenium ſive ſcolopendra, Ceterach Officina-
maining. He had three ſons, Henry Earl of So- rum C. B. Ceterach, Spleenwort, Miltwaſt. On the
merſet, who dy'd young; Fob, created by | tone walls about Briſtol, plentifully.
King Henry 5, firſt Duke of Somerſet, who] Carduus tomencoſus Anglicus Lob. Ad. Park.
had an only daughter Margaret, mother to King | Engliſh woody-beaded Thiſtle. Obſery/d by Lobel in
Henry 7; and Edmund, who ſucceeded his bro- any barren fields 7 this County, particularly near one
ther in the Dukedom, and was for ſome time Air. Saintloo's bouſe. This plant is without doubt the
Regent of France. But being recall'd, he was| ſame with Carduus tomentoſus, Corona fratrum
accus d of having loſt Normandy, on which|qj&us of Parkinſon. Carduus capite tomentoſo
account he ſuffer'd many indignities from the ff J. B. eriocephalus Ger. emac. capite rotundo
people; and in that lamentable war between tomentoſo C. B. And ſo C. Baubine and Parkinſon
the houſes of Lancaſter and York, he Was] deceived by Lobel, who in bis Icons gives two figures
ſlain in the firſt battle of S. Albans. Henry his of the ſame Thiſtle, make two ſpecies of one. This is
ſon ſucceeded him, who being a Time-lerver|found in ſeveral other Counties of England, but not
(one while ſiding with the houſe of York, and ſvery frequent.
another with the houſe of Lancaſter) was by the] Ciſtus humilis Alpinus durior, Polii noſtratis
Elves, York-party taken priſoner in the battle of Hex-| folio candicante Plukenet. Phytograph. Tab. 22.
am, and was puniſh'd for his Inconſtancy with | Dwarf Ciftus or Sunflower with Poley-mountain lea ves.
the loſs of his head. And his brother Edmund] Found by Dr. Plubenet on Brent-downs in this County,
who ſucceeded him in this honour, the laſt|year the Severn-ſea.
Duke of Somerſet of this family, after the defeat Colchicum commune C. B. Anglicum purpu-
of the Lancaſtrian party at Tewksbury, was reum Park. Ger. Colchicum J. B. Meadow-Saf-
dragg'd (being all over blood) out of the Church | fron. In ſome meadows about Bath. It is alſo found
wherein he had taken Sanctuary, and behead-|in many meadows in Gloceſter and Worceſter ſhires,
ed. The legitimate heirs male of this family | and elſewbere in the Weſt of England.
being thus extinct, firſt Henry 7. honour'd Ed-| Equiſetum ſive Hippuris lacuſtris foliis manſu
Earls and mund his young ſon with this title, who ſoon[arenoſis. On 4 bog by Smochall a wood nigh Bath.
— after dy d: and next, Henry 8. his natural ſon|Phyt. Brit. See the Synonyma in the Kentiſh Cata-
1 Henry Fitz- Roy. He dying without iſſue, Ed-|logue.
ward 6. inveſted Edward de Sancto Mauro, com- Ferrum equinum Germanicum ſiliquis in ſum-
1 monly call'd Seimer, with the ſame; who being] mitate C. B. Ger. emac. equinum comoſum Park.
Hit. Mit full of Honours, and as it were loaded with Ornithepodio affinis, vel potius Solez aut Ferro
Ticles (for he was Duke of Somerſet, Earl of Hert-|equino herba. J. B. Tufted Horſeſhoe- veteh. On
ford, Viſcount Beauchamp, Baron of S. Maur, Uncle|the hills about Bath, and between Bath and Marle-
to the King, Governour to the King, Protector of bis| borough. Phyt. Brit. 7
Kingdoms, Dominions, and Subjedi, Lieutenant of | Hederaterreftris ſaxatilis Lobelii Park. p. 677.
bis forces by ſea and land, Treaſurer and Earl Mar- Saxatilis Ger. emac. ſaxat. magno flore C. B. A-
ſeal of England, Governour of the Iſlands of Guernſey] ſarina aut Hederula I Lob, irem 1
eri

Patents 4

* Het. 7
|

=
— -- a 4,_
-- —

*
- —— —yʒ́̃ ——Zñũñ5 2
— — — —

99

"BEL 6 A.

id. Somer- =

ſetſhire, in
ini.

+ Wilfetta,
C.

Lib. 6. c. 18. France, | tells us in his Polycraticon) together

Appendix
to the 2d

Tome of the
Fngliſh Hi-

1rorians,

* —

ſterilis Savenæ & Narbonenſis agri ejaſdem. Stone
Aleboof, In ſome places of Somerſetſhire, as Parkin-
ſon ſaith, he found it quoted among Lobel's papers
which came to bis bands, I ds not much rely upon
Lobel's memory as to the places of plants, and fear there
will be no ſuch herb found in this Country; yet for
the authority of ſo great @ Botaniſt, I would not omit
it.

Lunaria minor Ger. Park. botrytis J. B. race-
moſa minor vel vulgaris C. B. Moonwort. About the
Bath, eſpecially at a place call'd Carey, two miles
from Bruiton, in the next cloſe to the Church-yard.
Ger. p. 406. Scarce a County in England but this
plant may ſomewhere or ot ber be found in it; yet be-
cauſe it is not common, and the knowledge of it deſi
red by many, I thought fit to mention a particular place
for it, but upon Gerard's authority, not my own know-
ledge.

Ba anguſtifolium majus, floribus
ex albo vireſcentibus C. B. Aſphodelus bulboſus
Ger. bulboſus Galeni, ſeu Ornithog. majus flore
ſubvireſcente Park, Aſphodelus bulboſus Dodo-
næi, ſeu Ornithogalum ſpicatum flore virente
J. B. Spiked Star of Betblebem with a greeniſh flower.
Obſerved by Thomas Williſel on a bill three miles on
this fide Briſtol in the way to Bath. It may be the
Same place ment ion d with that in Phyt. Brit. viz. in
the way between Bath and Bradford, not far from
little Aſhley,

Polygonum maritimum longius radicatum no-
ſtras, Serpylli folio circinato craſſo nitente,
forte Polygonum lentifolium C. B. 282. & Prod,
131. Polygonum minus Monſpeiienſe Park 446.
Found by Dr. Plukenet on the Severn-ſhore near Weſton
ſuper mare.

| EY

Polygonatum Hellebori abi folio, caule pur.
puraſcente D. Bobert. Solomon's ſeal with white
Hellebore- leaves and a purpliſh ſtalk. In the woods
the north-ſide of Mendippe-hills.

Rapunculus Corniculatus montanus Ger. flore
globoſo purpureo F. B. folio oblongo, ſpica or-
biculari C. B. Alopecuroides orbiculatus Park.
Horned Rampions. Between Selbury-bill and Beacon.
bill in the way to Bath. Phyt. Brit. Upon the credit of
which book I do not at all rely : only becauſe the place
makes it probable, I have put it down.

Scorodopraſium primum Clufii Ger. emac, Al.
lium Sphæriceo capite, folio latiore, ſive Scoro.
dopraſſum alterum C. B. Great round-headed Gar.
lick of the Holms Jſland. Found growing plentiſully
there by Mr. Newton.

Vermicularis frutex minor Ger. fruticoſa al-
tera Park, Sedum minus fruticoſum C. B. An
Cali ſpecies ſeu vermicularis marina arboreſcens
J. B. Shrub-ſtone-crop or Glaſi-wort. Found on thy
fg. Iſland in the Se vern-ſea by Lobel plenti-

ully.

Vicia ſylvatica multiflora maxima P. B. pe-
rennis mulciflora ſpicata major Mori/. hift. Greu.
tufted wood-wetch, In 4 wood nigh Bath, Phyt.
Brit. This is alſo found in many places in the North
and Weſt parts of England.

Virga aurea maxima radice repente D. Bobert,
aurea ſerrata latifolia C. B. aurea ſerratis foliis
Park. aurea Arnoldi Villa-novani Ger. emac. au-
rea ſive ſolidago Saracenica latifolia ſerrata J. B.
Broad lea ved indented Golden- rod. Found plentifully
by the ſide of a ſmall river between Wells and Gla-

ſtenbury, by Mr. Bobert,

W ILTSHIRE.

1LTSHIRE, (* which was
likewiſe inhabiced by the Bel-
I - ge) is a mid-land County;
5=\V FD call'd by the Saxons [ Fi-
98) WAYS cunyeoype (as the Inhabitants
were called Filrætar and Pil-
ræce,) l and by the modern Latin Hiſtorians
Wiltonia, from it's once chief Town Wilton,
which alſo took it's name from the river Willy :
[We find it alſo called by Latin-Writers, Pro-
vincia Semerana and Severnia, or Provincia Seve-
rerum. It is bounded on the Weſt with So-
merſetſhire and Gloceſterſhire ; ] on the Eaſt with
the Counties of Berks and Southampton ; on the
North with Gloceſterſhire, on the South with
Dorſetſhire and part of Hamſhire. A Country,
renown'd not only for the valour of it's Natives,
who (as Joannes Sarisburienſis [one of the beſt
Scholars of his age, and Biſhop of Chartres in

W 3775 Fil
. * K 2

.
>

with thoſe of Cornwall and Devonſhire, did on ac-
count of their bravery, challenge the honour
of being the Reſerve in our Engliſh Expediti-
ons ; but alſo for the extraordinary fertility of
the ſoil in all kinds, and for it's delightful va-
riety, which affords a very pleaſant proſpect.
This is the largeſt mid-land County in England,
as may be eaſily obſerved by the |] ancient com.
putation of it's Hides, For we find that in Mili.
fire (as it is there term'd) were 4800 hides, which
is more by 20co, than any Shire mention'd
by that Author. The 39 miles in length, and
29 in breadth, which Spede afligns it, will be
found too little both ways, upon an accurate
ſurvey.1

The Northern part, once over-ſpread with
woods, which are now almoſt deſtroy'd; is full

ſtreams. For Iſs, which is“ called Tamiſis, and Am
is the chief of the Britiſh Rivers, (with others*%*4 <
ot leſs note, of which I ſhall make mention in
their proper places,) while it is yet but ſmall,
glides thro' it. But, upon this firſt mention

of the river Thames, it will not be improper to

obſerve, that tho the current opinion is, that it

had that name from the conjunction of ThameThini
and J/is, ir plainly appears that that river was en «
always call'd Thames, or Tems, before it came f
near the Thame. For inſtance ; in an ancient 3
Charter granted to Abbot Aldbelm, there is pat-
ticular mention made of certain lands upon the
eaſt part of the river, cujus vocabulum Temis,
juxta vadum qui appellatur Summerford; and this
ford is in Wiltſhire. The ſame thing appears
from ſeveral other Charters granted to the Ab-
by of Malmibury, as well as that of Eneſham ; Enlit
and from the old Deeds relating to Cricklad:.
And perhaps, it may with ſafety be affirn'd,
chat, in any Charter or authentick Hiſtory, it
does not ever occur under the name of I;
which indeed is not ſo much as heard of, but
among ſcholars : the common people, all along
rom the head of it to Oxford, calling it by

no other name, but that of Thames. So allo, the

the Saxon Temere (from whence our Tems im-
mediately comes) is a plain evidence, that that
people never dreamt of any ſuch conjunction.

But further; all our Hiſtorians who mention

the Incurſions of Frhelwold into Wilſhire,

A. D. 905. or of Canute, A. D. 1016. tell us,
that they paſs'd-over the Thames at Cricklade.

As for the original of the word; it ſeems plain-

ly to be Britiſh, becauſe there are ſeveral rivers,

in ſeveral parts of England, of almoſt the ſame
name With it; as Tame in Staffordſhire, Teme in

of pleaſant riſings, and water'd with clear

Herefordſhire, Tamar in Cornwall, &c. And
2

me Themis
s from a (0
1e junction
it Thame: ut
e.

[*

E
Ss,
15
rs
d

; Enelſath

—

1

Ps

2 —— am 8

——

5
223 ——

1

14 i. i]
oy |
171
1
| Jy ;
- 1 A |
* : 0
1
Fi

—_ .—

— — - — — =
— yy
—— — —— - — — — — — — —— —

J | Cuck ercon

„
7 Kemble *. s . :
Am, Some 2 |, Sharncote '
ou.

- —
—

2 p

FG — 8

Jeitburve 87 „ ,
*

"my 7 rn
/ 4 A thorough (7 | Hharleton
2 ee 4 . 4 dom?

[TE * Ee, Newer
1 91 = 1 2

44 N.. mbre

Acer

lo},

— L 15

Rod * ion
5

| Ol dburr __ | A  Plalmetburr: 'e (I uf -v
* l 4 4 475 471 A
Le by * an „ eee Tho 2. Brenk wor Sw1 n
| 2 * WW SHER.
* r ce N= Bur,
Badmanton L * 8 3 «41 Hon 2 ' 2•
_ *. 1 ts i , 2 i | "

Lund " 7 .

Radmanton Cnet * * 4 *
Md. 1. n
| Ti urſll 15

2 /
own
Lenco ih

* N
* 2 .

5
*

37

[Locks TER SHIRE

Ac.
uruwick Bai), a

; Dr. þ -
L uttlecote 297 1 A
| Marsfeld 4.
' 30] au. | |

Cator ne

Cul ton

r K
k 9

Bancaiton

4 **
j Ba * T67 of. H ruxhall

THE g unk ton Ne Curt
| 8 = BRA chal DA ** Pr H

Nenne

222 wil
+ 8 "WY he NDevvses

WW - 1 |
South Py. A+
Anse
IPA] or .in
1 re” —
_ a "I LES = N Cell lington
Phillips Norton Huh ore 7 |
| | | N 85 2 e. l. avington
4 » Ty 2 e 8 Tx ci 7 Y Is *W EL 40 a0, Mon +
Laverton | . Lg '” \© BR. V Cnr AN D048 a"
a S VM. ute Ihle. ( ma

2. be * 5 Lrg, —

225

An N 4 VESTS. UR * .
* =

Salad

* IL

22222

Wege
An
*
*
14
37 4
2

rack log + * nk

« 72 Ge VN
— - Elton

Froom

4 -

| SOMERSET

tribes dk s
S ILameosBerwnck *

Deverell ongbrels
Hull Pos 8 1

. 7 >
The Frarve # *s ” un Deverell e
2 2 'n Bradlev Ky |
: Elm um to Da E R HA UN. 4 Le 1 ;
. * aan Dererell (e Rudge POL as
Bruham £ | - — 82 WAY 4 . BY +: A 4
= 4 Pd ee 1 at _—
II» nowute B Bg. E 3 2 bn
2 Hvndon ® a Nee a
| S H # E * aal, MZ WR E n 3
enn IM - Cart Knoyle ö ts bury % .
; — cant Alatch Por
| Stoke . ling 7 , : i
Cuck lington . | | |
| a N K. Vorrunton
! iS? £ Lhe
> stel Syale eule as * Cera
7 Sold by Awnſham G 2 24 n . Fo

Tohn Churchil

8. 75 0 85

w
—

De
5 atltard as

1 edge : —
Hurdorp.) HU N * Bavdon
IRS * 2 * 9 *

1 Aadburv Hill .

Huburne

5 L. en Ce
= RAMSBURY

uruwick Baiſet
. 2

Ade * 8.

7 Sha

enham !

Ar Cruſton

Wn.

+ Kenton
C

ra JF wer *
e Hen
*

7

—

pl avne þ rod dington

©. Orchearon Ma a

ihr ton ire

LA en

UN. f

ton ont
*

* 8 " #
829 * *

low

72

* . da

Nit Deane

aleſburve Playne
CAWDEN ANU CADWOR TH

3 5 |
5 e hall ee!

A. 8,
Ka boy 7 a Reco lon bb . 3 Hus 5
K NWA b ＋ 82 1

Zur. Hie. 3 1

r Som d 22 7
> wrt

A % Shad des: 2
K ( ———

per wallop

(=
\ 2

Aam

*

Buttermere

A

4

7 P A
otppels hare

Bey Arux ton

Forest

7 Fotherls ev

Dr |
— 1 LH
Catcomb RY P. — nan -3 1
*

VVV

410

l

— —ͤ—

LS. At n
— —

1 — —
— — a

— — —

— —— — —

2
£5,

101
—
Un Lheyd.

VVV Mo —

i n{dike.

ſe

5 l:
: | Morag, f *
. Arg, 3

80 A I

— *

WILTSHIRE.

N

PLS

101

VL yd.

a learned 4 perſon of that Nation, affirms of

to be the ſame with their Taf, which is the
name of many rivers in Wales ; the Romans
changing the pronunciation of the Britiſh (kt)
into (m,) as the Latin word Demetia, is in Welſh
Dyfed \ Bur this by the way, ORs
The ſouth part, being a large champain
ſruitſul Country, feeds innumerable flocks of
ſheep, and is watered with other Rivers, Land-
floods, and running Springs. The middle of
this ſhire is for the moſt part plain and level;
a-crols which, from Eaſt to Weſt, a wonderful
ditch is thrown up for many miles together: it
is called by the neighbouring Inhabitants Wanſ-
dike, and they have a groundleſs tradition, that
it was made by the Devil on a Wedneſday. The
Saxons indeed term'd it Wodenepoic, that is,
Woden's or Mercury's ditch, probably from Woden
the falſe God and Father of the Heathen Saxons,
| have always thought, that it was caſt up by the
Saxons for a Boundary between the Dominions
of the Weſt-Saxons and the Mercians ; for this
Country was the ſeat of war, during the con-
tentions between theſe two Kingdoms for the
enlarging of their Territories, But others are
of opinion, that it was made long before the
ſettlement of the Mercian Kingdom, wiz. by
Cerdic the firſt King of the Weſt-Saxons, or by
Kenric his ſon, againſt the incurſions of the Bri-
rains, who even in King Ceawlin's time (as
Malmsbury tells us) made frequent inroads into
this County from their garriſons at Bath, Gloce-
ſter, and Cirenceſter.| And the village Wodens-
burge | which Brompton, by miſtake, calls Bone-
bury, is near this ditch ; where Ceawlin the moſt
valiant King of the Weſt-Saxons, A. D. 590. en-
deavouring to defend the frontiers of his king-
dom, was routed in a bloody battle by the Bri-
tains and [ſome malecontent] Saxons, to that
degree, that he was forced to flie his Country,
and, being the pity of his very enemies, dy'd
miſerably in exile. But Woodborow, three miles
ſouth of the Dike, being the only village that
has any remains of Wodensburge in the name, and
there being not the leaſt ſign or tradition of a
battle fought there ; others gueſs, that Wanborow,
on the borders of Wilcſhire and Barkſhire, is
the town mention'd by our Hiſtorians. For (ſay
they) as Wodenſdic pals'd into Wanſdic, fo might
Wodensburgh by che ſame reaſon be chang'd into
Wanburgh, or Wanborow. And without doubt this
has been formerly a town of great note, as ap-
pears by the quantities of Roman Coins that
have been frequently found at it ; and the
neighbourhood of a Saxon Camp on Badbury-
bill, ſhews that the battle muſt have been tought
hereabouts.] But, that I may omit other Acti-
ons, [ it is certain | that Is the Weſt-Saxon, and
Ceolred the Mercian, fought here, with equal
ſucceſs. This Ditch is much like that, which
Offa made to ſeparate the Britains from his Mer-
cians, call'd Offa-dike to this day : there are
others of the like nature to be ſeen in the King-
dom of the Eaft- Angles, whereby they fortified
themſelves againſt the incurſions of the Merci-
ante (of Which I ſhall treat more largely in
their proper places.) I The rampire and graff
of this, are very large; and the rampire is on
the ſouth- ſide. And belides this ditch, there are
ſeveral others of leſs note ſtill viſible upon the
plains, eſpecially about Stonc-benge ; and in the
| Saxon-Charter of lands belonging to Wilton-
Abby, mention is made of no leſs than 13 di-
itin& Pikes; ſo that, probably, the Saxons might
draw them, to divide the great Lordſhips, or
for ſome ſuch purpoſe.)

In North Wiltſhire,che Thames ſ before it comes
to Crecklade, receives from the north a little ri-
ver call'd Cburn; not far from which, is Pulton, a
town that is within the bounds of Gloceſterſhire,

yer belongs to and is reckon'd part of Wiltſhire;
where was a Priory of the Order of S. Gilbert,
founded in the time of Edward 1.1] Then the
Thames runs by the town call'd Crecklade ; and by Crecklade;
others, Grekelade, from the Greek Philoſophers,

as ſome credulouſly think ; by -whom, as it is

recorded in the Hiſtory of Oxford, an Univer-

ſity was here founded, which was afcerwards

tranſlated to Oxford. ir is call'd Creckanford,

Cricgelada, &c. and by the Saxon-Annals Cnec-

cagelade and Cpæccilade. And here (if the

Monkiſh Writers could always be rely'd on) we

might ſafely ſettle a Greek ſchool, which they

in a manner unanimouſiy affirm to have been foun-

ded, or rather reſtored, by that learned Arche

biſhop of Canterbury Theodorus. But thoſe
over-credulous Authors ſeem to have no other

grounds beſides the bare affinity of names; and

to make that a good argument, * they are * Decem
willing to have it call'd Grekelade ; which makes Scriptores,
their opinion the more plauſible. How true the P. $14 J. 59+
matter of fact may be, I ſhall not undertake to

determine; ſince 7 that point has been already + Vita Regi-
manag'd pretty warmly on both ſides. It is Alfredi.
certain, however, that Cricklade has formerly

been a ton of great repute ; for it appears by

the Red Book in the Exchequer, that there once

belong'd to it x300Hide-lands,and it gave name

to the Hundred of Cricklade, which is now uni-

ted to that of Higb-worth. Bur if it's Greek-

{chool have nothing to ſupport it, beſides the

ſimilitude of names; it may with more reaſon

be deriv'd either from the Britiſh Cerigwlad, i. e.

a ſtony country (to which the nature of the

ſoil does very well agree ;) or from the Saxon

CPzCca A brook, and labian to empty; for here,

the Cburn and Rey empty themſelves into the

Thames, It has now a Free-ſchool, founded

by Robert Fenner, Eſq; and || well endow'd by || 491: ann.
him.] Below this place, is Lediard Tregoze, the Lediard Tre»
ſeat of the Knightly Family of Sr. Jobns, which Bote.
Margaret de Bello Campo or Beauchamp, afterwards

Dutcheſs of Somerſet, gave to Oliver St, Jobn

her ſecond ſon. To her it came as heireſs to

choſe great names of Patiſhull, Grandiſon, Tregoze,

[and Ei; from whence it is alſo called in

ſome Records Lediard Ewias.) Near this, is
Wetton-Baſſet, whoſe additional name ſhews that Wotton-Baſ-
it ſometime belong'd to the noble family of the ſet.

Baſſets. ¶ From them it came to Hugh Diſpenſer,

and upon his Attainder, to the Crown. King

Edward 34 gave it to his ſon Edmund de Langele

Duke of York ; and! in the + laſt Century bur + The laſt,
one (as I have been inform'd) it was the ſeat C.

of the Duke of York, probably the ſame? who

here encloſed a very large park for deer. All

the Country hereabouts (once cover'd with,
Breden-wooed, now call'd Breden-foreſt) was miſe- Breden-foreſl,
rably waſted by Ethelwald Clito and his auxiliary
Danes, A. D. 90%. On the Weſt-ſide of this
Foreſt, the forementioned river Avon glides on
ſmoothly ; which, ariſing almoſt in the very
North limit of this County, runs toward the
ſouth, and was (as Ethelwerd obſerves) for ſome .
time the boundary of the Vet- Saxon and Mer
cian Kingdoms ; at Which there were ſeveral
great battles ſought. [lr is called, for diſtincti-
on's ſake, Lower Avon (probably, the Antona of Lower Avon,
Tacitus, and the Bladon of William of Malmes-

bury;) which, at it's firſt entrance into Wilt-

ſhire, croſſes the F- a , that is ſtill very plain Foſe. way.

in this part of the country. From Cirenceſter it

comes into this county near Kemble, and ſo Kemble,
runs on weſt of Crudwell (which gave the title Crudwell,

of Baroneſs to Lady Mary Lucas of Cradwell,
whoſe Father Fobn Lord Lucas || built here a A
Free-ſchool, with a * competent Endowment) ile. 3 {1
by Aſbley, to Long Newnton ; then weſt of Broken- *% n b
bridge to Eaften-Grey ; and ſo not far from Sher- Sherſton, |

4. e. 4

Aubr. MS, 1 |

ſton, which appears to have been a Roman ſta- |
tlon, i

"ol

— „ n

— — *

tion, as well by it's ſituation near this Conſular
Way, as by the Roman Coins frequently found
at it. Some of the ſilver ones, viz. of Antoni-
was, Fauſtina, Gordianus, and Fl. Julianus are de-
poſited in Aſhmole's Muſeum in Oxford. What
it's name was in the Roman times, we have no

great Scholar,and eminent for his devotion and
ſtrictneſs of life, being delighted with the plea-
ſantneſs of the Wood under this hill, li- d here
an Hermit : but afterwards, inſtituting a ſchool,
and. with his ſcholars devoting himſelf to a
monaſtick life, he built a little monaſtery. From

light from Hiſtory ; but this, in all probability, this Aa ildulpbas, the town of Ingelborn began to

was the place of battle between King Ed-

be call'd Maildulfesburg, and by Bede Maildalf

mund and the Danes, A. D. 1016. call'd by the |urbs, Maildulf's City, which in proceſs of time
Saxon Chronicle Sceoprran. For as the agree - Was conttacted into Malmesbury. In ſome Hi-
ment of the names juſtifies the copjecture, ſo. do ſtorians agd ancient Charters granted to this

the particular circumſtances, both of the place

and action. The ſeveral barrows hereabouts, put
it beyond diſpute, that here has been a battle;
and the Inhabitants have to this day a tradition,
that ic was againſt the Danes. Now, this
King Edmund's lays the beſt elaim to it ;.both
Pen, becauſe Sher#ton is nearer to Pen (where the laſt
battle before this was fought,) than any town
yet aſſign'd to be the place; and alſo becauſe

the account, that Florence of Worceſter has left

us of that matter, agrees very well to it. He

expreſly ſays, that his Sceorſtan was in Miceja; near this place,“ is called St. Aldbelm's mead: * Aubr, vg
within the borders whereof this Söerſton is; For

there is no doubt, but Miccia extended on both
ſides the Severn, as far as the Kingdom of-Mer-

cia did: now, it hath been obſerved out ofjin the Abby-Steeple, called St. Aldbelm's bell,

Ethelwerd, that the Avon was the limit between

Mercia and the Kingdom of the Weſt-Saxons ;

* Concil, and the learned * Sir Henry Spelman tells us, that

Tom. 1. A}dbelm Abbot of Malmsbury was preſent at a

Mercian Synod ; ſo that, without doubt, this

part of Wiltſhire belong'd to Mercia, and conſe-

quently this Sberſton might be in Wiecia. And

this is confirm'd by that paſſage in Brompton,

where he ſays, that the cities of Cirenceſter and

Chippenham were in the ſouth part of the Country
of the Wiccians. |

From Sherfton, the Foſſe paſſes by Alderton,

W. Kington. and Littleton-Drew ; and ſo, caſt of Weſt-Kington,

+ Aubr. MS. T in which pariſh, on a Down call d Ebdown,

Ebdown. is a ſingle-ditch'd Camp, ſuppos'd to be Ro-

man. Hence it goes to Caſtle-comb, and ſo weſt

Slaughten- Of Slaug btenford; the very name of which de-

ford, notes what the conſtant tradition of the Inha-

bitants has handed down, concerning a great

| ſlaughter of the Danes in this place. Their

| Ibid, Camp might probably be |} that double En-

trenchment in Bury-woed, between Colern and

North- North-Mraxall; not far from which, the Foſſe

Wraxall. enters Somerſetſhire, at the Shire-Fones,]1. But to

return to the Avon. While it is yet ſhallow, it

runs at the bottom of the hill upon which

Malmsbury, Malmsbury is built; and, having receiv'd ano-

ther brook, it almoſt encompaſſeth it. This

(called by the Saxon Annals Meal$Selmerby-

pig) is a neat town, and in good repute on

account of the Cloathing-trade : and was, as

the Eulogium Hiſtoriarum reports, together with

the caſtles of Lacock and Tetbury, built by Dun-

allo Mul mut ius King of the Britains, and by him

Caer Bladen, call'd Caer Bladon. (Geoffrey of Monmouth alſo,

without any warrant from authentick Hiſtory,

affirms it to have been a town in the Roman

times, and built ſome hundreds of years before

their coming into this Iſland.)]! When it had

been deſtroy'd by the wars, there aroſe out of

it's ruins (as Hiſtorians have it upon record) a

Caſtle, which our Anceſtors in their language

I-zelborne, nam'd Ingelbopne, at the ſame time that the

Saxon petty Kings had their Palace at Caerdur-

Broken- burge, now Brokenbridge, a village ſcarce a mile

bridge. from hence. This Caſtle belong'd. to the Bi-

ſhops of the Weſt-Saxons, and, in all probabi-

lity, is the place from whence the Charters from

Eleutherius to Aldbelm are thus dated, Actum pub-

lice juxta flumen Badon, i. e. dated publickly upon

the river Badon.] It was known by no other

name, but that of Ingelborn, for a long time

Maildulphus, after; till one Maildulphus, an Iriſh Scot, and a

place, it written Meldunum, Maldubury, and
Malduniburg. Among Maildulf's ſcholars, Ald- Aldirly,
belm was the moſt eminent; who, being deſign'd
his ſucceſſor, did by the help of Eleutberixs Bi-

right belong'd) build here a ſtately Monaſtery, «=
of which himſelf was the firſt Abbot ; and from
him this town in a certain MS. is called 4.
delmesbyrig. But this name ſoon grew out of
uſe ; tho the memory of that holy man (as be-
ing Canoniz'd) ſtill remains. [A meadow alſo

and before the Reformation they had ſeveral
other Memorials of him, as his Pſalter, the
Robe wherein he ſaid Maſs, and a great Bell

The Village alſo about 6 or 7 miles ſouth-eaſt
from Malmsbury, called Hilmarton, is probably Hilmuw,
denominated from this Saint; for in Domeſday-
book, it is written Aldbelmertone.! Upon his
Feaſt-day, here is a great Fair, at which time
a Company of ſoldiers were uſually liſted to
prevent diſorders amidſt ſuch a concourſe of
People, but I think that is diſuſed at preſent.)
And truly his memory deſerves immortal ho-
nour, not only for the ſanity of his life, but
alſo for his Learning ; due allowances being
made for the ignorance of the times heliv'd in.
He was the firſt Saxon that ever wrote in La-
tin, and the firſt that taught the Saxons the
way of compoſing Latin verſe ; and fo, per-
__ what he promis'd of himſelf, in theſe
yerſes :

Primus ego in patriam mecum, modo vita ſu-
fit,
Aonio rediens deducam wertice muſ as.

I to my Country firſt, if fates permit,
Will Sing the Muſes from their native
eat.

The great Xthelſtan made this Aldhelm his
tutelar Saint, and for his ſake granted the Town
large immunities, and enriched the Monaſtery
wich ample Donations ; he choſe this for the
place of his Burial, and the inhabitants ſhew
his monument to this day. Which monument,
notwirhſtanding, is ſo far from having been
erected immediately after his death, that it ſeems
to have been ſet up long ſince the Conqueſt,
and poſſibly ſince the Reformation. For Wil-
liam of Malmbury tells us, that this King was
interr'd under the High-Altar, whereas the
monument is in the Nave of the Church ; and
graſs now grows where the Choir was. A. D.
956. after the Monks had had poſſeſſion of this
Monaſtery.for the {pace of 270 years, they were
rurn'd out hy the command of King Eadwy, and
ſecular, Prieſts were put in their room; but the
Monks were reſtor'd by King Edgar. Biſhop
Herman would willingly have cranſlated the
Biſhop's:See. hither,” but was prevented in his
deſign by the diligence af the Monks. So that,
the + Abingdon Hiſtoriograpner is under a mir 4 Mon
ſtake, when | he: cells us, that the ſear of the Any. L..
Biſhop of Barkſhire and Wiltſhire was at Malm b. N.
bury ; as is alſo Radulphus de Diceto, when he calls
Ode, who was Biſhop of Ramesbury, 2

: 0

ſhop of || Winchefer (to whom the ground of || Welt

tak

—

Aldleln,

| Wel-Sun

num.

* Aubr, ug

SOS - on

EHE =

of Malmebury ; and Gervaſus Tulburienſic, when
he ſays that S. Aldbelm bad the city of Maidulf, that
;; Scireburn. | From the time of Æthelſtan, the
Abbey was famous for it's wealth ; and here
was educated (beſides many other learned men)
dam of William, from this town called Malmiburienſis,
'nebs- ro whoſe learned Pains the civil and eccleſia-
{tical Hiſtory of England are greatly indebted.
The town (entirely ſupported by the Abbey)
was fortify'd by Roger Biſhop of Salisbury;
who, when the War broke out between Henry
of Anjou and King Stephen, ſecur'd it with
walls, and a Caſtle, which was once beſieg'd

ii rain, by King Henry 2, * and (after a brave defence)

taken. This magnificent Biſhop erected buil-
dings, here and at Salisbury, for ſpace very large,
for ceſt ver chargeable, for ſhew very beautiful. I be
#ones are jet in ſuch exact order, that the joynts can-
wt be ſeen, and the whole ſtructure ſeems to be but
one ſtone. But the caſtle, not many years after,
by the permiſſion of King John, was raſed for
the convenience of the Monks, that ſo the Ab-
bey might be enlarged; which daily increas'd
in buildings and revenues, [ and exceeded all the
reſt in Wiltſhire, both in riches and honour
(che Lord Abbot ſitting in Parliament as Peer
of the Realm) !] till the fatal diſſolution of
Mo naſteries. Then the lands, and riches which
had been ſo many years in gathering, were
diſſipated; tho' in ancient times accounted the
nil, A. Offerings of pious Chriftians, and penances for fins,
nr. and the patrimony of the poor. And the Church ir
ſelf had ſuffered the common fate, had not one
Stump, à rich clothier, by a great deal of in-
terceſſion and more money, redeem'd it for the
uſe of the Town's-folks, who turn'd it into a
Pariſh-Church ; and a great part of it is yet re-
Cir,1- maining. Robert Jenner, Goldſmith of Lon-
don, built an Alms-houſe here for 8 perſons,
and endow'd it with 40 J. a year.]

hte. From Malmsbury, the Avon runs to Danteſey,

which gave name to the Lords of it, a Knightly
Family, once very eminent in theſe parts ; from
whom it deſcended to the Eaſterlings, common:
ly known by the name of Stradlings ; and from
thera to the family of Danvers. Of which, Henry
Danvers was dignified, by the favour of King
James [the 1ſt] with the title and honour of Ba-

ron Dan» ron Danvers of Danteſey, | and by K. Charles 1.

with that of Earl of Danby. He ic was, who
built the Phy ſick-garden in the Univerſity of
Oxſord ; and, among many other acts of cha-
rity, he founded here an Alms-houſe and Free-
ſchool, Upon the attainder of his brother and
heir Sir Jobn Danvers, the town was given by
King Charles 2, to James then Duke of York,
whoſe ſecond ſon James was created Baron of
Danteſey ; it was afterwards part of the dowry
of Queen Mary, and, ſince the Revolution,
hath belong'd to the Earl of Peterborough and
Monmouth.

The Avon, bending it's courſe ſouthward from

Kenſoke, hence, runs near Bradenſtoke ; the ſame Place,

without doubt, to which Achelwold carry'd his
devaſtations, in the year gog. At which time,
Brompton ſays, he put to military execution all
Brithendune, (i. e. all in Bradon-foreſt) as far as
Brandeſtok, or, as Higden more rightly calls it,
Bradeneftoke ; ſo that Polydore Virgil, Holinſhed,
Speed, and our late Hiſtorians, are much mi-

aken, in aſſerting this to be Baſingſtoke in
Hamſhice.1 Six miles from Danteſey, the Avon

dburg.hzy receives, from the eaſt, a rivulet, which [riſes
abr. MS. at the bottom of Oldbury-bill, whereon is a large

ca Oval Camp, with double trenches, poſſibly Da.

"% niſh ; and] runs through Calne, an ancient little
„ ſtony Soil, adorned with a neat
4 8 Church : where, during the contentions be-

0 of ch, Ween the Monks and [ſecular] Priefts, about
$48

the Calibacy of the Clergy, a great Synod

was conven'd A. D. 977. But in the midſt of
the diſpute, the Houſe, in which the States of
che Kingdom were aſſembled (the beams break-
ing, and the timber-frame burſting aſunder)
ſuddenly fell to the ground, together wich the
Biſhops and Nobility of the Kingdom; by which
fall moſt were bruis'd, and ſome kill'd : Dunſtan
alone, who preſided in the Synod, and of the
Monks-party, eſcaped unhurt. By which mi-
racle (for ſo it was accounted in thoſe times )
the Monaſtick Inſtitution was
much confirmed, tho ſome Hiſtorians
this a judgment upon the Nobility, for betray- don, and
ing and murdering their late King Edward, Brompton.
As for the town of Calne, it probably aroſe ouc

of the ruins of the old Roman Colony on the
other-ſide of the water, near Studley, where Studley.
Roman Coins are frequently found. It was one

of the Palaces of the Weſt-Saxon Kings ; and,

at the time of the Conqueſt, enjoy'd great pri-

vileges, one whereof was, that it never gelded.

For ſays Domeſday, Caune never gelded, and there-

fore it is not known bow many Hides are therein,

The name of Caſtle-field

lies Coſham,
che Country-p
retiring-houle

probably very
make || Hunting-

given to the Common- C:fte-Geld,

field adjoyning to it, and of Caſtle-ſtreet, given
to the ſtreet which leads to that field, ſhow that
here hath formerly been a Caſtle, but no foot-
ſteps of it are now to be ſeen.
Not far from Calne is Cummer ford, probably the Cummerford,
Cynemæperporò of the Saxon Chronicle, call'd
by Florence of Worceſter Kimeresford ; where
ÆEthelmund, Earl of Mercia, making an inroad
into the country of the Weſt-Saxons, was met
by Werſtan Earl of Wiltſhire ; between whom
was a bloody battle, wherein both Comman-
ders loſt their lives; but the victory fell to the
Wiltſhire-men. Upon * ſecond thoughts, the = Glofar. ad
circumſtances of that action ſeem to agree more Chron, Sax.
exactly to this place, than to Kempsford in Gloce-
ſterſhire ; for ſetting aſide, that the Saxon name
is more eaſily melted into Cummerſord, Higden
tells us it was out of the bounds of Mercia ;
Ethelmund ( ſays he) leaving bis own Territories,
marched out as far as the ford, Chimeresford ; and
if ſo, it cannot be in Gloceſterſhire. There
are alſo the remains of a large entrenchment,
near this Cummerford, which ſets this matter ſo
much the more beyond diſpure. |

From Calne, the Avon, now grown bigger,
runs to Chippenbam, by the Saxons call'd Cyp- Chippenham
panham, [by Brompton Urbs Cbipenbam; one of
the chief Towns in the Kingdom of the Weſt-
Saxons, and ſo, very often mention'd in the
Hiſtories of thoſe times. 1 Now, it is only fa-
mous for its market, from whence ic had the
name: for Cyppan in the Saxon language ſig- Gppan, what
nifies to traffick, and Cypman 4 Merchant ; and it.
we yet retain Cbeppen and Chappman, or, as the
Germans ſpeak, Coppman; (and of the ſame ori-
ginal alſo is Cbeapſide in London.) In thoſe times,
it was the Country-houſe of the Saxon-Kings,
which King Alfred by Will bequeathed to his
younger daughter. Now, there is nothing worth
ſeeing , but the Church ; built, as appears from
the Coats of Arms on the Walls, by the Lords
Hungerford, But whether the Church was
founded by the Hungerfords, or not, (which ſome
diſpute,) it is more than probable, that the
Chapel, ſtill call
ded by Walter Lord Hungerford ; for 21 Henry ay „Cha-
6, he obtain d Licence for the founding of a fe.
Chantry in the Chapel of our Lady, within
che Pariſu- Church of this place. Queen Mary,
in the beginning of her reign, granted her
Charter to this Corporation, which conliſts of
a Bailiff and 12 Burgeſſes.] Over-againſt this
Town, tho' at ſome diſtance from the river,
now a ſmall village, but heretofore Coſhame
alace of King Etheldred, and the
of the Earls of Cornwall ; Tof

O

d Hungerford's Chapel, was foun- Hunger»

whom,

_—
_

> X
DX.
——

1

—
—— =

—
— — — —

— —

IO =D
. — V I

— — —

=
ED... hy

2 — -- x.

+

'BELG A.

Ca ſtlecomb.

whom, Richard granted them ſeveral Privileges,
which they ſtill enjoy; and Edmund obtain'd
for them a Charter for a weekly market. Since
the Reſtoration of K. Charles the ſecond, Mar-

aret Hungerford built here an Alms-houſe and a

ree-School. | From Chippenham,you ſee Caſtlecomb,
an ancient caſtle, famous on account of the
Walters of Dunftavill, Lords of it; from whom
the Wriotbeſleys, Earls of Southampton, derive
their pedigree. For Petronilla, daughter and
heir of the laſt Walter, was married to Robert
de Montford, and had a ſon named William,
who ſold this caſtle and the reſt of his lands to
Bartholomew Badilſmer; from whom it came
(as I have heard) to the Scroops, who have held
it ever ſince. But let us now return to the

Leckham. courſe of the river; on which lieth Leckbam,
* Now (by the eſtate of the noted family “ of the Bainards,

marriage) of
Mountag ue.
Lacock.

where Roman coins are very often found; and
Lacock, | where alſo, in a field hard by, (as Le-
land ſaith) much Roman money uſed to be found;

Silyerfield, from which the Place was called Silverfield; and |

Henton,

where that pious matron Ela, Counteſs of Sa-
lisbury, in her widowhood, built (as ſhe did
likewiſe at Henton [in Somerſetſhire, )) a Mona-
ſtery, A. D. 1232. to the honour of the Bleſſed
Virgin and St. Bernard, in which ſhe devo-
8 ſelf, ſoul and body, to the ſervice of
God.

The Avon, with banks thick-ſet with trees,

Brumham. hath not run far beyond Brumbam, once the ſeat

De FS,
Amando.

of the Lord * Samond ; before it receives a ri-
vulet from the eaſt, which riſes near the caſtle

The Vies, De Vies, Deviſes, or the Vies ; the Diviſio of Flo-
Devizes. rentius Wigornienſis, the Diviſe of Neubrigen-

Rund-way-

hill,

Phil. Tranſ.
N. 268.

ſis, the Viſæ of Matthew Weſtminſter, and the
Wyſe of Walter Hemingford. That this town
was built by Dunwallo King of the Britains,
is ſcarce probable : neither is it eaſie to imagin
that it could be inhabited by the Romans; tho'
on the utmoſt part of Rund-way-bill which over-
looks the town, there is a ſquare ſingle-trench'd
Camp, that ſeems to point out to us the pre»
ſence of the Romans in thoſe parts; and there
have been diſcovered in the neighbourhood of
this place ſeveral hundred pieces of ancient Ro-
man Coin of different Emperors ; and, within
a few yards, ſeveral Pots, without Coins, but
ſuppoſed to be of the ſame Antiquity. Very
lately alſo, there hath been dug-up a large
Urn, full of Roman Coins ; and a number of

+ Vid, Maſ- little braſs Statues of ſeveral of the Heathen

132 Bel
rit. p. 12

CG,

& Gods and Goddeſles, crowded betwixt three
+Þ flat Stones, and covered with a Roman brick.)

It was once a noble caſtle, ſtrongly fortify'd by
art and nature, but ir is now ruin'd by Time.
[The Annotator upon the Life of King Alfred,
hath told us, upon the authority of Tradition,
that the caſtle here was built by that King; but
Hiſtorians tell us] it was built at the vaſt ex-
pence of Roger Biſhop of Sarum (that it might
excell all the caſtles in England:) ſand, at
leaſt, it was repaired by him.] This man's For-
tune had advanc'd him from a poor Maſs-prieſt
to be the ſecond man in the kingdom. But
Fortune (as one ſaith) favours no man ſo far,
as to exempt him from the fear of loſing what
ſhe gave. For King Stephen, conceiving ſome
diſpleaſure againſt him, took from him this
— * and that of Shirburn, together with his
great wealth, and ſo harraſs'd the poor old man
in priſon, with hunger and other vexations,
that between the fear of death and the torments
of life, he was unwilling to live, and knew
not how to die. About this time it was very
much controverted, whether it be lawful for
Biſhops by the Canon-law, to hold Caſtles ? or,
if this by ſpecial permiſſion was indulg'd, whe-
ther in troubleſome times they ought not to be
at the King's diſpoſal ? [Speed ſays, This was

one of the goodlieſk Caſtles in Europe; and

linſhed, That it was the ſtrongeſt bla * 3
Which made Ralph Fitz-Stepben, in the war
between King Stephen and Maud the Empreſs
after he had poſſeſs'd himſelf of it, boaſt, that
by the aſſiſtance of it he would ſubdue all the
Country between London and Wincheſter, The
government of this Caſtle was formerly lock d
upon to be ſuch an honourable poſt, that it has
been aęcepted by the greateſt among the Nobi-
lity. It was not ſo entirely demoliſh'?, but
that ſome ſhew of fortifications were lefc, till
the Civil Wars; when it was beſieg'd more
than once. And Sir Ralph Hopton's being en-
clos'd herein by Sir William Waller, occafion'd

that memorable battle, call'd * Rund way- Ry
fight, from the Down upon which it was fight, uy
tought. Now, all the Fortifications are dif. lt.

mantled, and the very top of the Keep (which
Leland calls a work of incredible coſt) is dug-up
by Gardeners. The town is a very populous
Corporation, conſiſting of two great Pariſh-
2 „and is govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder,
C.
The Avon, joyn'd by this rivulet, bends it's
courſe toward the weſt, and preſently another
brook from the ſouth runs into it, which gives
name to the houſe called Broke, ſituate upon it,
This houſe was heretofore the ſeat of Fobn
Pavely Lord of the Hundred of Weſtbury, and

afterward gave the title of Baron to Robert Barons
Willoughby (becauſe by the Cheneys he was def.

cended from the family of Paveh) when King
Henry 7. advanc'd him to that Honour ; of
which King he was a great favourite, and by
him, as it is reported, was made for ſome time
Lord High Admiral. For which reaſon, he gave
the rudder of a ſhip for his Cognizance, (painted
alſo in ſeveral windows of his houſe ;)1 as Pom-
pey, the Admiral of the Roman Navy, ſtamp'd
the ſtern on his medals. But this family was
ſoon extinct; for he left but one ſon, Roben
Baron Brooke, who had by his firſt wife a ſon
call'd Edward, who dy'd in his father's life-time,
and left one daughter, afterwards married to
Sir Fulk Grevile ; by his ſecond wife, he bad
two daughters, by whom this large eſtate came

to the Marqueſs of Wincheſter, and the Lord
Montjoy.

Not far from hence, to the eaſt, lies Edindu, E4i

heretofore Eatbandune, [without doubt, a Ro-
man town, as is evident from the foundations of
houſes that have been dug-up here for a mile
together, and the finding of ſilver and copper
Coins of ſeveral Roman Emperors ; ſome of
which have been given to the Royal Society,
and to Aſhmole's Muſæum in Oxford. Theſe
circumſtances, and the ſituation of this Hedding-
ton exactly on the road between Bath and Mar
borough, made the learned Commentator on
King Alfred's life conclude it to be the Verlucio
of Antoninus, plac'd by him 15 miles from
Aque Solis, and 20 from Cunetio. But Hedding-
ton not being above 12 from Bath, and but 10

from Marlborough, we muſt + look for Verlucioin+ Ste
ſome other place.! Here King Alfred won the"

moſt glorious victory that ever was obtained
over the ravaging Danes ; and drove them to
that extremity, that they took a ſolemn Oath,
immediately to depart the land. In this plac?
alſo, William de Edindon, Biſhop of Wincheſter
(a great favourite of King Edward 3.) who
was born here, and from hence took his ſit-
name, founded a College of Canons call'd

Bonbommes. South from hence, is Steeple-La- Bobs
vington or Eaſt-Lavington, commonly call'd Mar- Laving?"
ket- Lavington, from the great Corn-market week -K

ly kept here on Wedneſdays. How long it has
been a market, does not preciſely appear; but
in the 35 Henry 6, William de Beauchamp Lord

St.

Lving⸗

13%

St. Ar
the C
ac his
he W.
in Wi
before, ſame
em. been

manc
Mont.
next
Epiſc:
ſant

garde
ence:
Fath'
comp
rers
it de
teſeys
man)

E.
gt. Amond bequeath'd his body to be bury'd in | long, probably the burying-place of ſome of
the Chapel of the Chantry of this place; and, | the Daniſh Nobility lain here. Within this vaſt
at his death, which happen'd in the ſame year, | Entrenchment; there have been ſeveral pieces
he was ſeiz d, among ſeveral other Lordſhips| of old Iron-armour plough'd-up. It hath but

in Wil:ſhire, of Cheping-Lavington ; which is the | rwo entrances, ſortifyd with out-works; one
wore, fame with Market-Lavington ; and if ſo, it has| coward the ſouth-eaſt, opening to the plain;

4. 4 guy +
erer 1 2
E . 24

un. been a market above 200 years at leaſt. The ſ the other toward the north-eaſt, leading directly

Laving

manour belongs now to the Right honourable | down to Eddington.] Upon a hill ſomewhat
Montague Earl of Abingdon ; as doth alſo the lower, on the ſame little river Were, ſtands 7r#- Trubridgę.
next village call'd Weſt-Lavington, or Lavington-| bridge, in old time Tpubabpig, that is, a ſtrong
Epiſcopi, where his Lordſhip hath a very plea- or true bridge. But for what reaſon it had this
(anc ſear, finely accommodated with a park, | name, does not appear. IIt is much more pro-
gardens, 2 grotto, and ſeveral other conveni- | bable, that the right name is Trolbridge ; for,
ences, It came to him by deſcent from his | beſide the natural melting of ! into u, there is
Father, who had it by marriage with the in-|a Tithing in the Liberty and Pariſh call'd Tro,

+ Runs comparable Lady Eleonora, one of the daugh-|and a large Common near it of the ſame name.
fight, ters of Sir Henry Lee by Ann his wife, to whom | Alſo in a Manuſcript Hiſtory of Britain (which
1640, it deſcended as heireſs to the Danvers's and Dan-|is a Compendium of Geffrey of Monmouth)
1e/ey's, who had been Lords of this manour for the place is written Trolbridge ; where it is ſaid Trolbridge,
) many generations; two of whom founded and to have been built by Molmutius.] Now it is
$ liberally endow'd the Free-ſchool and Alms-|very noted for the Clothing-trade, and ſhews
. ls houſes in this town. In this Pariſh is Littleton-|the ruins of a Caſtle, which belongs to the
: Painell, now an obſcure village, tho” heretofore | Dutchy of Lancaſter. [Leland ſaich, in his
a market-town; which privilege was obtain'd |time, that it was clean down, and that there were
$ for it, 12 Edward 2, by John Lord Paganel or | in it ſeven great Towers, two of which were
r Painel. ſtanding. He adds, that the Earls of Sarum
$ The next river that the Avon receives, is the | were Lords of this Place, then the Dukes of
A . Were, which runs not far from Weftbury, a ſmall | Lancaſter, and in his time the Earl of Hertford.
5 Mayor-town that probably aroſe out of the] Now, the Court of the Dutchy of Lancaſter
d ruins of the old Roman one, about half a mile for the County, is annually held in this Town
U Baron tothe north; which, without doubt, was once about Michaelmaſs.1 The Avon, encreas'd by
1 very famous, as appears by the great quantities | this rivulet; waters Bradford, in old time Bradan- Bradford,
g of Roman coins that have been here found. If | ford, (ſo call'd from the Broad ford,) which ſtands
f the Verlucio of Antoninus were ſettl'd here, the | on the ſide of a hill, and is built all of ſtone ;
y diſtances from Aque Solis and Cunetio, which | where a bloody battle was fought in the Civil
6 agree better in this town than in any other, wars between Kenilwachius King of the Weſt- Ann. 652.
0 would juſtific ſuch a conjecture. And Holinſhed | Saxons, and Cuthred his Kinſman, \ It was like-
d ere, calls the rivuler that runs near it, Were; which | wiſe famous in the Saxon times, for the Mona-
, might give name to the town ſeated upon it, |ſtery built here by Aldhelm, and deſtroy'd in
d 34. Verlucio. Alſo, the late learned Annotator up- the Daniſh wars; as alſo on the account of a
5 on Antoninus chuſes to ſettle it in this place.|Synod probably held here, A. D. 964. in which
rt The new name Weſtbury is purely Saxon ; and it|S. Dunſtan was eleted Biſhop of Worceſter.1
n was natural enough for them to give this name Here, the Avon leaves Wiltſhire, and enters in-
b to a town which they found to be the moſt | to Somerſetſhire, running toward the Bath.
0 conſiderable in theſe weſtern parts; calling it] From hence, the weſtern limits of this Shire |
d by way of eminency percanbypig; in the] go directly ſouthward [by Farley-Caſtle, which Farley- Ca:
1e {ame manner as they did the great neighbour- | tho* in Somerſetſhire, yet part of the Park be- 8
d ing wood known by the name of Selwood : for |longing to it lies in Wiltſhire : and in this part,
ſome Copies of the Saxon Annals read it ſimply not many years ago; was dug- up a Roman pave-
, Edinder, Fexcanpuda, others PFercan-dSele-puda. Near|ment of Chequer-work ; a piece whereof was
- Ley, Weſtbury, is a village call'd Leigh, or Ley, given to Aſhmole's Muſæum in Oxford ; and!
of which is moſt probably the place where King | by Longleat, the curious and ſplendid houſe (tho Longicats
le Alfred encamp'd, the night before he attack'd | more than once damnified by fire) of the Knight-
er the Danes at Eddington, For the name comes ly family of the Thynnes, deſcended from the
of very near it, it being an eaſie miſtake for the | Boteviles; [and ennobled in the perſon of Thomas
7 Saxon Scribe to write Eglea for æc-Lea: here | Thynne, who was created Viſcount Weymouch b7
le nell. is alſo a field call'd Courtfield, and a garden ad- K. Charles the ſecond ; I to Maiden- Bradley, fo Maiden-
g joy ning, encompaſs'd with a mote ; and a tra- named becauſe one of the daughters and heirs of Bradley.

dition goes, that here was a Palace of one of Manaſſer Biſſet a famous man in his time, being

n — the Saxon Kings. Clay-bill, by the ſound, might] her ſelf a Leper, built a Hoſpital here for le-
io * ſtand fair to be this e£glea ; but then it would | prous maids, and endowed it witch her own in- x
m have been very ill conduct in King Alfred, to|heritance ; (tho others account this a vulgar Vid. Wore:
. have pitch'd his tent upon ſuch a high place, | Fable, and affirm that the Hoſpital was built Heeger.
0 viſible from all parts of the Country, when he long before the diviſion of that Eſtate among ;
in f Ser intended to ſurprize the enemy. So that it is daughters: ) ] her father had founded a Priory
de wat more likely, he march'd along this vale, which] here before, in the reign of King Stephen.)

was then over-ſpread with woods, being part | Stourton, the ſeat of the Barons of Steurton, who 3 *
of Selwood-foreſt. Beſides, Clay-bill ſne ws no marks | were dignify'd with this title by Henry 6, after 2 Hen.

n. C.

h, of any trenches, or the like ; and is too far ſa very great eſtate had fal'n to them by mar-

de from Eddington, where the fight was, namely, | riage with the heireſs of the family of Le Moign Pugd. Barone
er in the fields, between the town and Bratton- or Monk (not Mobur as ſome have erroneoully

10 caſtle ; which, without doubt, was the fortifi- |imagin'd ; ) and from thence their Creſt is, 4

cation, whither the Danes fled after their rout, | Demi-Monk with a [ penitential] whip in bis hand.

4 and held out a ſiege of 14 days. For it is ſeated This honour ſtill continues in the ſame fa-

4- Bonbon upon the extremity of a high hill, which com- mily.] The town took its name from the river

1 Ln mands all the country; being encompalſs'd with | Stour, riſing here cut of fix fountains, between

* * two deep ditches, and rampires proportionable. |which [proper] the Steurtons Lords of this place

he form of it is oval, in length 350 paces, bear for their Arms, 4 Bend Or in 4 field ſable.

and almoſt 200 broad in the wideſt part. Near I From hence, the ſouthern Limit goes to Mere, Mere.
the middle, is a large oblong barrow, 60 paces | ſo call'd, probably, from being a Meape or .
| mark ;

* p * .
— 4 2 —— . — ñ — —

_—  — C—_—_———_——_—

— AM

111

"BEL GA

8

mark ; for it is near the borders of Wiliſbire, So-
merſetſhire, and Dorſetſbire. In the neighbourhood
of this town and Stourton, are 4 Entrenchments ;
one of which, in Stourton-park, is double-ditch'd,
Whiteſhole. and is call'd by Leland Whiteſbole-hill, probably
hill. the POE of the Danes in one of the battles at

Pen.
By the foreſaid Maiden-Bradley, glides a little
Dever-ril. river call'd Dewer-ril, becauſe like Anas in Spain,
and the Mole in Surry, which took their names
* Nothing is from thence, it * dives under the earth, and, ri-
to be heard of ſing up again a mile from hence, haſtens to
but. bee. Verlucio, à very ancient town, mention'd by An-
Verlucio, toninus the Emperor in his 1 which
name it has not yet quite loſt, being [as is ſup
werminſier. poſed] call'd Nerminſter, a compound of that old
name and the Saxon word Minrrep, which
ſignifietha Monaſtery. | But thoꝰ this is the com-
mon opinion, it is not back'd with Coins or
other remains of the Romans that have been
diſcover'd there ; and it is therefore referr'd to
the judgment of the Reader, upon what is of-
fered before, whether Weftbury is not a more
probable place for it. Concerning it's ſtate in
the Saxon times, I think our Hiſtorians are ſi-
lent ; only, we may obſerve, that upon the
Downs on the eaſt-ſide — the 3 there are
burv. two Camps ; one call'd Battle-bury, having
e double-works, and ſo probably Daniſh; the
scratchbury. other Scratchbury, a ſquare ſingle-trench'd forti-
fication. 1 Herecofore, it had peculiar privi-
leges; for it is recorded in the book of William
the Conqueror, that nec geldavit nec bidata fuit ;
that is, it paid no tribute, Now, it is only famous
for a great Corn-market [on Saturdays ; | and
it is ſcarce credible, what quantities of Corn
_ every week carried hither, and preſently

old.
From this place, toward the ſouth, north, and
eaſt, all along the middle of the Shire, the
Downs are ſo wide, that ſcarce any bounds can
be diſcover'd ; from whence they are call'd the
Salisbury- Plains ; but thinly inhabited, and infamous here-
Plains. tofore for frequent robberies. The ſouth part
of them is water'd by ewo pleaſant rivers, the
Willey-bourn, the Guilou of Aſſerius ; and the Nad
der, commonly called Adder-bowrn, Willey-bourn,
: haviog its riſe at Werminſter, runs by Heitesbury
Heitesbury. or Hegedsbury, the ſeat of the Barons of Hun-
. gerford, [where Wa .r Lord Hungerford, Lord
High Treaſurer of England, founded an Hoſ-
pital for 12 poor men and one woman ; with
an allowance for a Chaplain, who was like-
wiſe to be Warden, and to teach a Free-
ſchool. But this being not fully perform'd in
his life-time, Margaret, widow of his ſon Ro-
bert Lord Hungerford, effected it; and it re-
mains to this day.] From hence, it runs to a
Willey, village called Wiley, Oppoſite to which, there
is a very large Camp fortify'd with a deep
double ditch, and called by the neighbouring
Yanesbury- inhabitants Yanesbury-Caſtle. From it's figure,
Ae: + it has been thought by ſome, to be a Roman
ballly ca Camp. Some think, it was Veſpaſian's, when,
clude it to being Lieutenant of the zac Legion under Clau-
have been, C. dius, he ſubdued two Nations in this part Tof
England, I to the Roman Empire; and ſome
remains of Veſpaſian's name are thought to be
in Yanesbury. { But, on the other hand, it is
alledged, that the Roman Camps were for the
moſt part ſquare, and had only a ſingle vallum,
whereas this has a double ditch. It's being fo
very like Bratton-caſtle, only ſomething bigger,
and of an oval form, induces one to think it
Daniſh. The length of ic is 360 paces, and it
has three entrances, one toward the north, a-
nother toward the ſouth, and a third (which
is the principal, and fortify'd wich out-works
after the Daniſh faſhion,) toward the eaſt,] The
Nadder. Nadder, riſing in the ſouth border of this County,

———

with a winding ſtream creeps like an adder (from cxpce
whence it ſeems to have it's name, [nz55pe in nour
Saxon ſignifying an Adder, which is corrupt! now,
written, for a nadder or nedder, as it is ſtill called lingden
in the northern parts of England,)1 not far the
from Wardour, a beautiful Caſtle, which once be- w to the
long'd to the ancient family of S. Martin. To -C Here
mit ſeveral of it's intermediate owners ſ(amongſt fightiT
whom were the Lords Level, and J. Tutchet at the
Lord Audley,)1 it came into the poſſeſſion of chang
John Arundel, created by K. James [the 1ſt l Lord the ©
Arundel of Wardour, of whom very honourable Ba Jous F
mention ought here to be made, becauſe in d. nery
his youth he piouſly went to ſerve in the wars daugt
againſt the ſworn enemies of Chriſtendom, the WY
Turks; and there, for his valiant Behaviour at A. D.
the ſtorming of Gran, had the honour to be for it
made a Count of the Empire, by Patent from 1% which
the Emperor Rodolph 2. in theſe words; Foraſ- Coun *
much as be bath behaved himſelf couragiouſly in the field, Enyir, And
and at the ſiege of ſeveral Cities and Caſtles ; and feſſor
eſpecially hath given eminent proof of bis walour at S. Pe
the 77 made upon the Water-town near Gray the re
taking the Flag from the Turks with bis own bands; of # ,
e bave created, made, and nominated him, and all and Cure
every cne of bis children, his heirs and lawful iſſue of cowl
both ſexes for ever, true Counts and Counteſſes of the der'd
ſacred Empire ; and have dignified them with the of >!
Title and Honour of a County Imperial, &c. No Cou
leſs valiant was the Lady Arundel, who in the Lela
year 1643, With only 25 men, made good this are 1
Caſtle for a week, againit 1300 of the Par- has
liament-forces, from whom ( contrary to the villa
Articles of Surrender) the Caſtle and Parks re- for i
ceived great damage.] On the other fide of hou!
the river is Hacbe, of little note at preſent, but He, ſup}
famous in the reign of King Edward 1, for it's bn dunk
Baron Euſtace de Hache, who was then ſum- Bam d of 1
mond to Parliament among the reſt of che No- Hut, MA
bility. Sorb
At the conflux of theſe rivers, Willey waters dea
a place denominated from it, Wilton, once the Wita, Garizbu- Tn
chief town of the County, to which allo it Aer.
gave name. It was anciencly call'd Ellandunum; Elldu ſhe,
as appears from ſome old Charters, which ex- u . 1646
preſly make mention of Weolſt ban Earl of A- bred) Sort
landunum, that is, of Wilton ; and again, that be den
built 4 little Monaſtery at Ellandunum, that is, «t „ Dw
Wilton; land alſo from the || Monaſticon Angli- T. 2g . all)
canum, and from Mr. Brian Twine's Collecti- bang
ons, where we find Ellendinia or Ellenduna, that by.” 8
is, Ellenge donne, or a place naked, deſolate cr will; "=
from bence is Wyldton or Wylddoun ; and he ſays WU bal
immediately after, that he takes Ellendune to . cl
be Salisbury-plain. But he tells us nor, in 1
what language it is, that Ellan or Ellenge ſigni- ot]
fies wild; or in what age Milton was called th
Wyldton or Wylddoun.\ From the name Ellan, | n
am induc'd co think this river the Alanus which Ant au
Prolemy places in this Tract. At this place, i
Egbert King of the Weſt Saxons fought ſucceſs 4
fully wich Beorwulf the Mercian A. D. 821. but lit
the battle was ſo bloody on both ſides, that the ſy
river ran plentifully with the blood of near b
relations. However, it is thought by ſome, that U
this Battle was fought elſewhere, and that the *
circumſtances of it make the foregoing opini- b
on, that this is the old Ellandune, ſomewhat *

ſuſpicious : For it is not probable (ſay they)
that Egbert, the moſt powerful Prince in the l
Iſland, ſhould let an enemy make an inroal
into the very heart of his kingdom, without op-
poſition. And it is as unaccountable, why none

of our Hiſtorians ſhould cell us that the battle T
was fought at Wilton, when it is plain the town C
was known by that name long before. 'There-
fore, to place Ellendune here, ſeems to them as
unreaſonable, as Brompton ſettling it in Middlc-+ Meal. :
lex. But if che authority of the * Wincheſter dg. . :

Annals may be allow'd in this caſe, che con-?“
rroverly

Mm 15%,
aſ- Count

1d, Eayir,
nd

dir

as UN»

croveriie
expcelly, (
nour be
now, th

| dunum Was, (as New-Sarum, which aroſe out

ba rum and Sarizburia, For the courſe of the Iti-

edly Sorbiodunum, the Saxon word ByVp VS ( which

. . 114

nat chis fight was at Ellendune, a ma-

is clearly decided. For they tell 2 thing at it, might derive to it that

name, which occaſion'd the calling of this Coun-
longing to che Prior of Wincheſter : ty Severnia, and Provincia Severorum, However,
is ſeems to be no other place than E- in general, that it was much frequented in the
lingdon Near Highworth (upon the borders of times of the later Emperors, appears by the
4 Mercian kingdom,) which once belong'd | Coins of Conſtans, Magnentius Conſtantine, and Criſ-
yon he Monaſtery of S. Swithin, But co return. II, found here. Agreeably to the other branch
ers alſo, at Wilton, A. D. 871. King Flfred of the name Danum, | it was built on a high
fighting againſt the Danes, had the advantage hill, and, as Malmsbury faith, The rown was more

inning: but, the fortune of the battle | like a Caſtile than a City, being environ d with a bigh
a ke was driven out of the field. In|wall ; and notwithſtanding it was very well .
C 1 the Saxons, it was à very popu- modated with all other conveniences, yet ſuch was
the 1ce. King Edgar founded here a Nun- the want of water, that it was ſold there at a great
Jous 5 1s the Hiſtorians relate) and made his rate. This gave occaſion to the diſtich, which
alder Edith Abbeſs. But it is evident from | Was made upon Old Sarum by one that lived in
an ancient Charter of Edgar himſelf, dated thoſe times:

' 974. that the Nunnery was much older :
3 theſe words; The Religious Houſe
which was built by my great grandfather K. Edw ard,
in 4 noted place, by the Inhabitants called Wilcon.
And we read in the life of Edward the Con-
fellor; Whilſt S. Edward was building the Abbey of
S. Peter at Weſtminſter, Editba bis wife, imitating
the royal charity of ber Husband, laid the foundation
of @ ſtately Monattery of ftone, injtead of the wooden
Church at Wilton, where ſhe was educated. The
rown did not much decay (tho' miſerably plun-
derd by Swain the Dane) until che Biſhops

Eſt tibi defectus lympbæ, ſed copia cret a,
Sævit ibi ventus, ſed Philomela filet,

Water's there ſcarce, but chalk in plenty

lies,
And thoſe ſweet notes that Philomel de-
nies, | 8
The harſher muſick of the wind ſup-
plies.

By the great pieces of Walls and Bulwarks

of Salisbury turn'd the Road into the weſtern yet co be leen, it ſcems ro have been A very

Counties another way, [before which time (as
Leland ſaith) it had 12 Pariſh-Churches, that

ſtrong place, and about half a mile in circum-

ference. Kenric the Saxon, after he had fought

are now reduced to one.] Since that time, it the Britains with ſucceſs, A. D. 553. was che

has dwindled, by little and little, into a ſmall
village; only, it hath the honour of a Mayor
for its chief Magiſtrate, and the moſt beautiful
houſe of the Earls of Pembroke, built out of the
ſuppreſs'd Abbey. But in old time, Sorbio-

of its ruins, is,) a mighty injury and detriment
to it, Anconinus's Itinerary calls that town
Sorbiodunum, which the Saxons afterward named
deapyrby pig, and the modern Latin-writers Sa-

nerary, and the remains of the name, evidently
ſhew this without my remarking it. And Sea-
rebirig * may ſeem to have been derived from

firſt of the Saxons who won it; [and between jrs Conditt-
his taking it, and King Egbert's age, we meet on in the Sax-
with no mention of it: but this Prince very on times.
often reſided at it; and King Edgar call'd here

a Parliament or Great Council, A. D. 960; |

but | Swain the Dane damnify'd ic very much + Canute, C.
by fire, about A. D. 1003. It recover'd it's an-

cient ſplendour, when by the authority of a

Synod I Ann, 1076. (decreeing that all Biſhops-

Sees ſhould be removed into great Towns, out

of Villages, )] and, by the munificence of Wil-

liam the Conqueror, Herman Biſhop of Shirburn

and Sunning, tranſlated his See hither ; and his
immediate ducceſſor Olmund built the Cathe-

dral Church. I After the Conqueſt, it flouriſh»

ed mightily ; the Norman Kings very frequent-

ly living, and ſometimes holding their Parlia-

ments, here. 1 And che ſaid William the 1ſt, after

ſeveral Rivers. | For the Caſtle, which former]

belong'd to the Biſhop, had, upon the *. — _ *
between King Stepben and Biſhop Roger, been

leiz'd by the King, who plac'd a Governour

and a Garriſon in it. But that was look'd upon

as a violation of the Liberties of the Church,

and gave occaſion for frequent differences ; by

which the Biſhop and Canons were induced to

think of removing into a place where they

Herebertus Pauper (brother and immediate prede-

„effected, and the turbulent reign of King John

be ed, C. denoteth a town) being put in the place of
it „ Dunum, which word the Britains and Gauls uſu-
li-. 2 g. ally added to places of a high ſituation, as this
1. ang Sorbiodunum is. So that (as one very well skill d
bat „ inthe Welſh language informed me) Sorviodu-
1; num ſignifieth a dry bil; which is a more pro-
ys Wild bable conjecture, than the far-ferch'd derivation
20 of it from Saron in Beroſus, or from Severus the
in Emperor, from whom they call it Severia. [ Yet
i- others there are, who, tho' complete Maſters of
ed the Welſh Tongue, cannor diſcover any thing
[ in it, which both anſwers the ſound of Sorbio-
ch Ala,ri dunum, and at the ſame time can poſſibly be
e, wreſted to that ſenſe, The Saxons indeed ſeem
1 to have drawn their deapyfbyj pig from this qua-
Jut lity of the ſoil, reapan in that language ſigni-
he ſying to dry ; which I take to be a more proba-
ar ble original of the Saxon name, than either
lat Hollinſhed's derivation from Salisbury in Ger-
he many, or John Roſs's, from a tower built here
ni by Julius Cæſar, which he ſays might be call'd
lat Cæſaris burgus, and ſo corrupted into Særisburge;
y) 2S Ceſar Auguſta in Spain into Saragoſa, Bur
he letting aſide, that Julius Cæſar did not purſue
ad his victories thus far; that denomination is not
p- warranted by any Author; and to be ſure, An-
ne toninus would have us'd the true genuin Roman might be leſs diſturb'd. This was projected by
le name, it there had been any ſuch. How ut
5 came by the name Sewveria, | cannot Certainly | ceſſor of Richard Poor,) in the reign of Richard 1.
7 tell; but it is peſlibie enough, chat Severus the] But that King dying before the deſign could be
as Emperor, living meſt of his time in Britain
le- Moral, mighe Mme imes refide here and, either by enſuing, they were forced to lay alide the
er Ang. bon. te-eqif, ing the town, or doing ſome other me choughts of it till Henry the 34 reign, when
n- p. 31. :

ſy

id _ r= 24, 44 an L —— 1 It — or ee r

1*

ä ”. ⁊ĩͥ —33

— 11

.
r

—

fo, ASE u

1

— yams ; — U FO 7 a.
—_ 8 2 ——— — — — :

„

—

=
— — 20 a — —
———

* . - AP „

115 ws: B E L GA

2 | * , ee []
| 117
it was reviv'd and completed by Richard Poor. Totque patent port, quot 5
Not but the Citizens, for the cauſes above- Farwy CO I IPRS as t
mentioned, began by degrees to remove from Old Res mira, at vera res celebrata fide. Due
Sarum in 1 of 7 op x ; which ſerves * pon
to correct the error of thoſe, who think that ow many days in ons whol | an
the Biſhop and Clergy remov'd firſt, and that be, Swe ole year there 49, not
the Citizens follow'd ; or, at leaſt, that they| So many windows in our Church we ſee his 1
3 remov'd about the ſame time.] Of this remo-| So many marble pillars there appear mat
— aris- val, Petrus Bleſenſis makes mention in his Epi-“ As there are hours thro'out the flecting yeer rigt
Epil. 103. ſtles 5 for 927 he SE AN * 3 22 So many gates as moons one year docs ceſſ
a place expoſed to the wind, barren, dry, and ſoli. view, Ma
tary ; a Tower was there, as in Siloam by which| Strange tales to tell, yet n [
or inbabitonts were 1 ing 3 enſlaved. Bw * e ſtrange as 2
afterward ; The Church of Salisbury was 4 Cap- Ch:
tive on that bill : let us therefore 17 > God's name 7 For they ſay, this Church hath as many win ſtai
down into the level : there the wallies will yield plenty dows as there are days in the year, as many dle
of A*. and the champain fields are of a rich ſoil.| pillars and pillaſters as there are hours, and as Bin
And of the ſame place, the foremention d Poet many gates as months. On the ſouth-ſide of f
writes thus: | the Church, is the Cloyſter, as great and of 1; wrham, Ha!
| tine workmanſhip as any [in England, Ito which, —_
Quid domini domus in caſtro ? niſi federis area |S adjoyn'd the Biſhop's ſtately Palace ; and on 1 pla
In templo Baalim; carcer uterque locus. the north- ſide ſtands, apart from the Cathedral, of
; a very ſtrong-buile and high Bell-tower. This u
A Church within a Camp looks juſt as Church, in a ſhort time, ſo increas'd in wealth the
well, : : 7 and revenues, that it maintains a Dean, a Chan- WY
As ch ark of God in the vile houſe of Baal. ter, a Chancellor, a Treaſurer, and * 41 Preben-+ ,, « 3k
daries,all very well endow'd ; ſome of whom(viz, I on
And he thus deſcribes the place to which they — they call Canons Reſident,) have very good -
deſcended : ouſes near the Church : and all theſe are inclo- L
ſed with a wall, apart from the town. [ Beſides þ
Eft in valle locus nemori venatibus apto the 4.1 ſingle Prebends, there are 4 annex d to Ft
Contiguus, celeber fructibus, uber aquis, the Dignities of che Biſhop, Dean, Chancellor, S.
Tale creatoris matri natura creata and Treaſurer. When the Church of New- _..
De ba
Hoſpitium toto queſiit orbe din. Sarum was built, it had 50, beſides thoſe an- 25
— — 8 282 ; but by — ſuppreſſion of 5, *
a iflolution of 2, and alienation of 2 mo
* * chaſe a happy vale there they 1 to this number. There — 4
Where early fruit the burden'd trees ſur- Ara * 8 8 3 oy =—_ ſee
prize, | of Ilfarcomb above "Yea OPAL In
8 comb, above 30 years. ] :
And — 888 ſprings with gentle murmurs 1 the oP was building the Church, —
Not careful Nature o're the world could meet if e
- k ounded the City, ſettled the Civil -_
With ſuch another for our Lady's ſear. r- and ſupplied every _ >. _ y
et; and, having obtained licence from Si |
As ſoon as they were removed ; that the Biſho fie N 1.5. 200, d
4 l ; y|the Biſhop co fortiſie it, they threw up a dicch —
might begin ar the houſe of God, Richard Poor| on tha de which is + Gebaded by dio rhe. r.. i
| Merifeld. Meri Feld 14 F pr 2 ny ery uw ro ſuch ſplendour did New-Salichury riſe by * 75 b
21.8 Mew: Cake. „Laie dation of the great Church, degrees, out of the rui f Old-Sorbiod *
ih. 2 ache 8 — pile of building, lon the 4 of che that (preſently afrer he High-road — .. 8
*-1 1 "IR r of May, A. D. 1220 ; for the more Weſt, was by Royal Authority turn'd thro' this 1 2
— 1 effectual carry ing- on of which, we find that the town) it became the ſecond City in thoſe parts; Fo
Li | ſame Biſhop in his Conſtitutions, recommended being very populous, abounding in all neceſſs- E
12118 8 lere to por dying por. ney A fiſh; and adorn'd with a very l
118 - . ritable contribution to this|fine Council-houſe of wood, which ſtands in a
W A yr 11 NN (with it's high ſteeple ſpacious Market-place. But it hath nothing of wv
| 410 foot from the ground, 1 and double which it may ſo juſtly boaſt, as of Jobn Fewe Y
4 croſs-iſles,) by a venerable kind of grandeur [| Biſhop of this place, the wonder of his age Lb ;
f ſtrikes the ſpectators with a ſacred joy and ad- for his knowledge in Divinity, and a moſt ſtre- 10 i
41 ani x — in the ſpace of 43 years, nuous Defender of the Reformed Religion. Af 1
14 niſh'd at vaſt expence, and dedicated A. D. ter this, Old Sarum, ſtill declining, was, in the a b
14 1258. in the preſence of King Henry 3; con- reign of Henry 7, wholl deſer dad i { that l
cerning which that ancient Poetaſter hath theſe now there ſcarce remai 4 497 F Sep {tle ; :
i er ee + | ins a turret of the caſtſe;
| : —_— for a long _ after the iohabicans 1
1 3 2 t the town, was Is
KY 9 2222 templo ſpedtabiter, iſto, Salisbury ; and in the reign of Edward 1, cher 29 157 :
| reſulis affectus, artificumque fides. _ . my coutroverts about it. For Robert Term ;
ES iſhop of Sarum by vertue of a Writ which
The Prince's piety, the Workman's ski , |
The Bi 11 oy inc : ay 950 Abe Breve de Recto, brought in que- |
7 | tell. 0 rs c of William Montacute Earl of da- f
49 _ Two gh The Earl anſwered, that |
4 h ould defend his right by Combat. So, on ADs
Lal Mod pen yank = thoſe of the famous and — day appointed, the Biſhop brought to the te Ol |
[| Doo
| f . d 1 A . 3 gr aur
| |! ay canam, ſoles quot continet annus, in una the Biſhop's Coat of Arms: there follow d him |
$i * am numeroſa, ferunt, æde, feneſtra micat. a Knight carrying the ſpear, and a Page the
| j 2 capit fuſas tot ab arte colum- Ro nne 3 — Earl led- in his Cham- Rap
1 ion arrayed after the ſame manner, accomp
| | Comprenſas horas quot vagus annus habet, nied by two Knights bearing white ſtaves. Jul :
Bir 45

—
2 =
ws -
*

/—C——— ——ͤ U
— — = ;

—
— = —

„ —

—
——

—

- — -— — —
—
—— — —  — CC
| — -

—

*
FS .
—
1 | = ee |
{1 r „„ — — -
1

60

—

. z %
*

117

WILTSHIRE.

as the Champions were about to begin the
Duel, whilſt they withdrew to have their wea-

ons view'd and examin'd, unexpeRedly came
an Order from the King, that the cauſe ſhould
not be decided then, leſt the King ſhould loſe
his right. In the mean time they compounded the
matter ; the Earl agreeing to ſurrender all his
right in the caſtle to the Biſhop and his ſuc-
cefſors for ever, upon the receipt of 2500

ks. |
Mr The other ornaments of this place, in ſhort,

$46
William Longſpee, from whom Henry 3. (being
offended, becauſe he /ign'd bimſelf with the Croſ?

and went to the Holy Wars, without his leave.)

took the title of Earl, and the caſtle of Sa-

rum. He, notwichſtanding, perſiſted in his
deſign, and went into Egypt with S. Lewis Matt. Paril,
King of France, and, fighting valiantly in the P. 973: &
midſt of his enemies near Damiata, which

the Chriſtians had taken, died in the bed of

honour, a little before that holy King was un-
fortunately taken priſoner. He had a ſon, call'd

are, the Library, built by Biſhop Jewel, and the] alſo William, who did not enjoy the title of
Chapter-houſe of a large octagonal figure, ſu-| Earl; and had only one daughter named Mar- Walſingham,
ſtain'd only by a ſmall marble pillar in the mid-¶garet, who was, notwithſtanding, call'd Coun- p. 74.

n- dle; as alſo the College, built and endow'd by] teſs of Salisbury, and married to Henry Lacy
1 Biſhop Ward for 10 Miniſter's widows. Earl of Lincoln, by whom ſhe had one only

1 In that part of the Suburbs of Salisbury call'd] daughter, wiz. Alice the wife of Thomas Earl of

0

Harnbam, ſtood the College de Vaulx, which
was built by Giles de Bridport, Biſhop of this
place, An. Dom. 1260. for the entertainment
of ſeveral Scholars who retir'd hither upon ac-
count of ſome diſturbances at Oxford. Here,

Lancaſter ; who being outlawed, King Ed-
Jarrham. ward 2, ſeized the lands that ſhe had — of over
to her husband: ſome of which, viz. Trou-
bridge, Winterbourn, Ambre:bury; and other ma-

nours, King Edward 3. gave to William de Mon» Words of the

his they ſtudy'd Univerſity-Learning ; and, having | tacute in as full and ample manner as ever the Pro- Patent.
(ch a teſtimonial from their Chancellour of their| genitors of Margaret Counteſs of Sarum beld them.

in- progreſs in Learning, frequently went to Ox-| And, at the ſame time, he made the ſaid William

n- 23.( tord and took their Degrees. And ſo they con- de Montacute, Earl of Sarum; and by the Girding-

iz. tinu'd even till Leland's time, who, ſpeaking | en of 4 ſword the ſaid Eatldom was veſted in bim

od | of it, has theſe words : That part of theſe Scho- and his beirs for ever. This William was King

lo- lars remain in the College in Saresby ri, and bave of the Ifle of Man; and had two ſons, William,

des to Chaplains to ſerve the Church there dedicated to who ſucceeded his father in his honours, and

to S. Nicholas : the reſidue ſtudy at Oxford, &c. died without iſſue ; and Fobn, a Knight, who

or, urcham. Beyond this, is the great Bridge call'd Harn- died before his brother, leaving by Margaret his

* idge, bam-bridge ;, built by virtue of a privilege which wife, daughter and heir of Thomas * de Mon- De ate
an- Richard Poor obtain'd of Henry 3, when New-|thermer, Jobs Earl of Salisbury, who being a Hermeris.
Fo Sarum was incorporated, viz. That for the benefit |time-ſerver, and conſpiring againſt King Hen- 3
te, of the ſaid City, they change and remove the ways and ry 4, was lain at f Cirenceſter, A. D. 1400, and d Chicheſter,
eke bridges leading to it, and do therein what to them ſhall| afterwards attainted of High Treaſon. Notwith-

Jin ſeem meet, provided it be without injury to any perſon.| ſtanding which, his ſon Thomas was reſtored in

hat In purſuance of thoſe Powers, Robert Bingham,| blood and eſtate; being one ofthe greateſt Ge-

his next ſucceſſor, built this ſtately Bridge, An.] nerals of his age, whether we conſider his extra-

ch, 1245 ; Which I the rather take notice of, be- ordinary Diligence in whatever he undertook ;

ical caule it made ſuch a conſiderable alteration in| his unwearied conſtancy in purſuing; or his

ent Wilton, and this place; for by bringing the] quickneſs in executing, all his Deſigns. Whilſt

wu- great Weſtern road this way, the firſt preſently | he beſieged Orleans in France, he was wou
mon i p.200, decay'd, and the latter (which by the bye,| ded by a Dart from al Baliſt, of which he died, : —
itch Nora. Matt ben / Weſtminſter reckons a County of it ſelf A. D. 1428. Alice his only daughter was mar- *
"es diſtinct from Wiliſbire) daily improv'd. 1 ried to Richard Nevil, to whom ſhe brought Pat. 20
; by of . Salichury had Earls very early, whoſe pedi-| the title of Earl of Sarum, who following the Hen. 6.
ww, bury, gree I will draw very fully and faichfully, out] York-party, was taken Priſoner in the battle

che itoryot of the Hiſtory of Lacock. [Not to mention] of Wakefield, and beheaded : He was ſucceeded 14614
this = Edrick, Duke of Mercia, whom Knighton ſtiles| by Richard his ſon, Earl of Warwick and Salis-

arts; Earl of Salisbury; 1 Walter de Evereux Earl off bury ; who, taking delight in deſperate Enter-

fla. Roſmar in Normandy had by the munificence] priſes, engaged his Country in a freſh Civil

ery of William the Conqueror very large poſſeſſi-] War, in which he loſt his own life. 1/abella one

ms ons in this ſhire, which he bequeathed to his| of his daughters was married to George Duke of

8 ot younger ſon Edward, ſirnamed of Saliszbury, who] Clarence, brother to King Edward 4, by whom

well, was born in England; leaving his other lands] he had a ſon call'd Edward, who was unjuſt-

wil ay” in Normandy, with the ticle of Earl of Roſ-|ly beheaded in his childhood and innocence

ſtre- op bal, mar, to 1 Walter his eldeſt ſon, whoſe line not|by King Henry 7; and his ſiſter Margaret (to

At- of Bar, long after was extint. This Edward of Salis-| whom the title of Counteſs of Salis Was re-

| che . bury flouriſh'd in the twentieth year of William | ſtor'd ) ſuffer'd the ſame fate from Henry 8,

chat the Conqueror, and is often mention'd in Do-| when ſhe was 70 years of age: according to

ſtle; meſday-book, but without the title of Earl. the uſual practice among Princes, to put to

tants His ſon Walter founded a ſmall monaſtery at Bra-] death or perpetually impriſon their kindred, up-

ls of denſtoke, and there, in his old age, after he had |on light ſurmizes, which at all times are eaſily

here 2g Ein. had a fon call'd Patric, who was the firſt Earl|rais'd ; that they and their poſterity may be
e of Salisbury, by Sibilla de Cadurcis or Chaworth ; | eſtabliſhed in the Throne. Ann, the other daugh-

hich he aſſum'd the habit of a (black) Canon. Thisſter of Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick and Sa-

que- Patric, the firſt Earl, was ſlain by Guy of Lu- lisbury, was wife to Richard 3, and, after ſhe

f Sa- lignian, A. D. 1169. in his return from a pil-I had born him Edward Prince of Wales (who

that | rimage to S. James of Compoſtella, and was|dy'd young, and whom Edward 4. made Earl

, ON 1505 ucceeded by his ſon William, who died at Pa- of Salisbury,) ſhe her ſelf dy'd, not without
the en ris in the reign of Richard i. Ela his only] ſuſpicion of poy ſon. From that time, this ho-
at decoder l daughter (by the favour of the ſaid King Ri-[|norary title ceaſed, until, A. D. 1605. the moſt
at Of gun chard) was married to William Long ſpee, ſo ſir-| potent Prince K. James the 1ſt Idignify'd there-
| ham named from the long ſword which he uſually | with Robert Cecil (ſecond ſon of the Neſtor of
e the wore, a natural ſon of King Henry 2; toſour age and nation, William Cecil,) for his great
ham- mo\ the Whom, upon this marriage with Ela, accrued|Wiſdom, and the eminent Services done there-
mpa 1 of Sz. the titie of Earl, and her Coat of Arms, viz.] by to his King and Country,; whom (as I have
. * * Ax ſix Lioncells Rampant Or. His ſon was alſo call'd|{aid) he had before honour'd with the titles of

Baron

1
:

p
1
o

119 B E IL

x
*
.
* 4 2 > 2 4 8 *
1

-

Baron Cecil of Eſſenden, and Viſcount Cranburn,
for his extraordinary Diligence and Merit, in
promoting the publick Welfare of the King-
dom. [ Which honourable Titles deſcended to
William his Son and heir; whoſe eldeſt Son
Charles dying in the life time of his Father, the
honour was next enjoyed by James his grand-
ſon, who was father of James, the preſent Earl. |
So much, concerning the Earls of Salisbury.
Weſt-Dean. [Not far from this place, is Weſt-Dean, the ſeat
of Sir Jobs Evelyn Knight, of the Surrey-fa-
mily ; and now, being devolved to a daughter,
is the poſſcflion of the Right Honourable Eve-
hun, Duke of Kingſton.1
Below Salisbury, upon the Avon, is ſeated
Duncton. Duncton or Donketon, which is reported to be a
very ancient Burgh, and famous for the ſeat of
Bea voi of Southampton, who, being much cele-
brated by the Bards for his Valour, is reckon'd
by the common People among our great He-
Langford. res. [Not far from whence, is Langford, the
ſtately ſeat of the Honourable the Hares, Viſ-
counts Colrain in Ireland. 1
Salisbury is every way encompaſs'd with an
open Plain, except toward the eaſt, on which
fide it hath the neighbourhood of the large Park
Clarendon. of Clarendon, very commodious for keeping
and breeding of Deer, and once beautified with
a royal palace. Of this Park, and the twenty
groves therein, Michael Maſchertus L. L. D. made
the following Verſes :

Bogo, com-
monly Bea-
vois.

* This name
was made by
his own fan-

cy, as a Poet.

Nobilis eft lucus, cervis cluſura, * Saronam
Propter, & a claro vertice nomen habet.
Viginti binc nemorum, partito limite, boſcis

Ambitus eſt paſſus, mille cuique ſuus.

A noble Park near Sarum's ſtately Town,

In form a mount's clear top call'd Claren-

Here twenty groves, and each a mile .in

ſpace,
With grateful ſhades, at once protect the
place.

Kino In the Park at Clarendon, are the footſteps

ROM 2 of two Royal Palaces, King-manour and Qucen-

Queen-ma- manour. And, beſides the famous Parliament

nour, held here, inthe time of Henry 2, another was
ſummon'd to meer here by King Edward 2,
A. 1317; but the Differences at that time be-
tween the King and the Barons were ſo high,
that nothing of moment was tranſacted. This
place was honour'd in the time of King Charles
2, by giving the title of Earl to Edward Hide,
Baron of Hindon, Viſcount Cernbury, and Lord
Chancellor of England ; who, dying at Roan
in Normandy, was ſucceeded by his eldeſt fon
Henry ; by whoſe death, the Titles are now en-

Stephen Fox, out of reſpe& to this his native
place, founded an Hoſpital for 6 old men and as
many old women ; with a Maſter who is to
teach a Free-ſchool, and to officiate in the
Church ; which he alſo built from the ground a-
new (in the room of an old ruin'd Chapel,) and
procur'd it to be made Parochial. North of

of a rude circular form ; it's Diameter contain-
ing zoo large paces ; it is ſingle-trench'd, but
the ditch is deep, and the rampire high. Only,
about 80 paces within the outer circumvalla-
tion, is a deep trench without a rampire. It
has but two entrances, one by che eaſt, and the
other on the weſt ; and there is a probability
of it's being Saxon. 1

About ſix miles north of Salisbury, on the

words) that is, a wild kind of ſtructure. For with-
in a trench, are plac'd huge unhewn ſtones in
three circles, one within another, in the figure
of a Crown, ſome whereof are 28 foot in
height, and ſeven in breadth, on which others,
like Architraves, are born-up, ſo that it ſeems
to be a hanging pile; from. whence we call
ic Stone-benge, as the ancient Hiſtorians, from
it's greatneſs, call'd it Gigantum Chorea, the Gi-

environ'd wich a deep trench, ſtill appearing,
and about 3o foot broad. From the Yig, ic
has had three entrances, the moſt conſiderable
of them lying north-eaſt ; at each of which
were rais'd, on the out- ſide of the trench, two
huge ſtones gate-wiſe; parallel whereunto, on
the inſide, were two others of leſs proportion.
After one has paſs'd this ditch, he aſcends 35
yards before he comes at the Work it felf,
which conſiſts of 4 Circles of Stones. The out-
ward Circle is about 1co foot diameter, the
{tones whereof are very large; 4 yards in height,
two in breadth, and one in thickneſs. Two
yards and a half within this great Circle, is 2
range of leſſer ſtones. Three yards furcher is
the principal part of the Work, call'd by Mr.
Inigo Jones, The Cell, of an irregular figure made
up of two rows of Stones; the outer of which
conſiſts of great upright ſtones, in height 20
foot, in breadth 2 yards, and in thickneſs one
yard, Theſe are coupled at the top, by large
tranſome ſtones like Architraves, which are 7
foot long, and about three and a half thick.
Within this, was alſo another range of leſſer
Pyramidal ſtones, of about 6 foot in height.
In the inmoſt part of the Cell, Mr. Jones ob-
ſerv'd a ſtone (which is now gone) appear-
ing not much above the ſurface of the earth,
and lying toward the eaſt, 4 foot broad and
ſixteen foot long; which was his ſuppos'd 4l-
tar-ſtone. | But ſeeing it cannot fully be de-
(cribed by words, I have here ſubjoyn'd the Scul-

joyed by Edward his eldeſt ſon.
Farle. Not far from Clarendon is Farle, where Sir

pture of it.

this, is Frippsbury, a very great entrenchment Fri

Plus, is to be ſeen inſane ſubſtructio (to uſe Ciceros Stops le

ants dance. [Ir is ficuated on a riſing ground, Stone-lay
deſcribi

Artibeial
Rocks,

3

2 as pot &

. -

' os F
* MC .

, L p " 4 # p MIT; 1 - -

* 2 2 wt Wy If ;"- 2 ; = þ 1

s * 8. — 2 9e. *
333
St... * n
> 4 pr

= -

OY

71 —

a!

—
— —

2 .
3. 2127. o
' * , o
1.11: „1 .
. 34. I wi x *
1 +> vw
| Wi | N 0
7 vn
HOLT 1444

|

Fo = e

wonders of the Nation. For it is unaccounta-
ble, how ſuch ſtones ſhould come there (ſeein
all that country wants ordinary ſtones for build-

ing ;) and by what means they were raiſed. Of
theſe things I ſhall not attempt any exact ac-

this noble Monument cannot be traced out.
Yet it is the opinion of ſome, that theſe ſtones
Articiay Are not natural or ſuch as are dug out of the
Rocks, Quarries, but artificial, of fine ſand cemented
together by a glewy ſort of matter; like choſe
monuments which I have ſeen in Yorkſhire.
And this is no new thing: For do we not read
in Pliny, that the ſand of Puteoli, if cover'd
with water, is preſently turn'd into ſtone ? and
that the Ciſterns at Rome being made of ſand
and ſtrong lime, are fo tempered, that they
ſeem to be real ſtone? and that ſmall pieces of
marble have been ſo cemented, that ſtatues
made of it have been taken for one entire piece
of marble ? However, others who have view-
ed them ( and particularly Mr. Inigo Fones,
who hath written an entire Diſcourſe concern-

Our

— — .4a
umme tw 6066610
4

Our country-men reckon this among the

ing them) affirm, that they are purely natu-|

282
l - — — —
- _——_— T 0

— web

* b * * 7 NY *
* 97 56 . * — 4 y a 1
- Ll 4 - F TY 7 3 we F 1
by K . '%. * „ U S . 1 \& © . A 1
f we y N s ' we
\ A f l - 1 7 3 F
0 1 y . f * *
— 4 - 1 = 7 / # 4 4 2 . —
_ * o R ;* 5 * 5 4 4
. . W
* 4 1 | W N 3 :
5 ** # J Cf ,, 2 - "1 p *
h
* \ - . v * 1 1 7
od . . 1 X 4 - - 4
pa 9 7 * d + * 7 F
. * 1 N 4 9 . 1 : ö
7 1 % } . 111
. . ty > 12 "y f 8 y
\ * & 7 * l : is / h
N 1 1 . 3 - „ 5 1
\ A 4 .T , LC * 1 '1\ ;
_ 2 X * 1
-. K 4 N 4 4 , 1
\ . — N FE; a
ho — IJ = = ! ” C 4 4 l \ N *
S had _ - oY C G * 1
5 iv = 1 "= b + - 9
w » —
d . , p . 4 4 — 1
4 4 1 * iv. 91
- l 19k
\ : . , wo Fr v 2
[4 0:47 | * 4 1 2 Ad \ e 1. * 5
N * * A os
* 1 — a f a * i 4 : F, & 4 1 U 4
- L R : i ' * y 5
' 1 \& As. | LT 1 +454 3 | * 1 "# 2 9 .
W "4 \ : : * . . — * 1 2* Py * .-
% NR NA (1 0 h 4 . * 2 J y 1 2 * F 4
h a >< i 1 1%, of 3 :
' . , » 4 i .

A
\

„

4

I oe or if .

- a So © =

. * r
„e 2
= — N
1 4 2 S

--

— —— — — ö
— at <7. ©

ral.] The Tradition is, that Ambroſius Aurelia-
nus, or Uther his brother, erected it by the
help of Merlin the Mathematician, in memo-
ry of the Britains there lain by treachery, in a
conference with the Saxons. From whence A-

'lexander Necham, a Poet of the middle age,
count, but only lament, that the founders of

in a poetical way, but without any great fancy,
made the following verſes ; grounding them on
the Britiſh Hiſtory of Geoffrey,

Nobilis eſt lapidum ſtructura, Chorea Gigantum,
Ars experta ſuum poſſe, peregit opus.
uod ne prodiret in lucem ſegnius, artem
Se, vireſque ſuas conſuluiſſe reor.
Hoc opus Aridi, Merlino garrula fama,
Filia figmenti fabula wana refert.
Illa congerie fertur decorata fuiſſe
Tellus, que mittit tot Palamedis aves.
Hinc tantum munus It uſcepit Hibernia gaudens,
Nam virtus lapidi cuilibet ampla ſatis. 4
Nam reſperſus aquis magnam transfundit in illa
Vim, queis curari ſæpius æger eget.
Uther Pendragon molem tranſvexit ad Ambr; 8
Fines, devitto victor ab boſte meant.

2 O quot

e

” * .
a 93

4 * a. * * _— wat 2 3
— — — — —— — — — — 2 — *
I = = ol 7 * 1 % WW
-” 12 k : ”

O quot nobilium, quot corpora ſacra virorum, any other nation had ſo much footing in th;
2 Heng iſti 8 jacent kingdom, as to be Authors of ſuch a * — =
Intercepta fuit gens inclyta, gens generoſa magnificent pile. For, to paſs by the Pho. ſc
Intercepta, nimis credula, cauta minus. nicians; that it could not be built by the Ro. a,
Sed tunc enituit praclari Conſulis Eldol mans, is evident from the rudeneſs of the Whole 0
Virtus, qui letbo ſeptuag inta dedit. work. So then (as + Mr. Aubrey has very well a ir
obſerv'd) hilft Mr. Jones pleaſes bimſelf with 1. * p
The Giant's Dance, the ever famous pile, trieving a piece of Arcbitect ure out of Vitruvius, he ir
Where painful Art hath ſhew'd her deepeſt | abuſes his reader by a falſe ſcheme of the whole work, C
skill. For the Cell is not of an exact Hexagonal figure is of
| Old ſtories this aſcribe to Merlin's ſpells, bur very irregular, and comes nearer a Heptagon ; —
{ And prating Fame the mighty wonder rells. | ſo that the whole work cannot be form'd upon

At firſt the monſtrous work in Sqtbia ſtood, the baſis of four equilateral triangles, as Mr.
Thence joyful Ireland took the happy load. Jones ſuppos'd. Neither are the entrances into
For all the Stones ſome uſciul ſecrers have, the trench ſo regular and fo equidiſtant, as that
And ſtecp'd in waters, healing virtues leave. | Author would make them. Till theſe and ſome

i | Renown'd Pendragon from the conquer'd Iſle [other doubts (which may be rais'd from the 4 Tom. 1.
ö Remov'd to Amber's plains his wondrous ſpoil. | Order of the building) be reſolv'd, and till we 1 97+
\ Of what brave ſouls are there the reliques | are aſſur'd from good authority, that the Ro-
1 laid, | mans us'd to build ſuch ſtupendous piles, 6 or
i By wicked Hengi#'s treacherous arts betray'd !|7 miles from any of their Stations (no Inſcrip-
\ Scout hearts they had, and ſtrength unmatch'd|tion nor Roman coin being found near this ;)
| in war, | it cannot be ſafe to cloſe with Mr. Jones, tho
131 But too much credit, and too little care. his Book otherwiſe is a learned and ingenious
Yet furious Eldor here his valour ſhow'd, piece.
And clear'd his way with ſev'nty Traytors Nor could it be built by the Danes; as for Na 5,
blood. many other reafons, ſo particularly becauſe ir

is mention'd in ſome Manuſcripts of Ninniu: ;
Others relate, that the Britains built this as] who, as every body knows, wrote almoſt 200
a magnificent monument for the ſame Ambroſi- years before the Danes were Maſters of any
ws, in the place where he was flain by the Ene-|conſiderable part of this Iſland. Other argu-
my; that this Pile might be as it were an Altar|ments which make againſt this, may be found
erected at the publick charge, to the eternal ſin Mr. Webb's Vindication of Stonehenge reſtor d,
memory of his Valour. wherein he hath endeavour'd, with great Lear-
[This celebrated piece of Antiquity hath ning, to defend his father-in-law, Mr. Fone!'s
engaged the Pens of ſeveral curious and lear- Scheme; tho' that is in it ſelf falſe.
ned Perſons ; and almoſt as many as have] One great argument by which Mr. Jones
written, have fallen into ſeveral and diſtin [eſtabliſhes his own opinion, is, that it is a thing
Opinions con- Opinions concerning the Occaſion and Antiqui-| altogether improbable, that the Britains could
cerning Stone-ty of it. Which Opinions, with ſome few build ſuch a Monument. But the contrary is evi-
benge. remarks upon them, it may not be improper dent from the fortifications of Caratacus's Cam ;
to ſubjoin ; and ſuch a ſhort view, is all that] from the vaſt ſtones mention'd by Dr. Platt to
the nature of our preſent deſign will admit. be in or near the Britiſh city or fortification
The opinions about it may be reduc'd to theſe hard by Wrotteſley in Staffordſhire ; and from FRAY
7 heads; 1. That it is a work of the Phcenici-|the parcels of ſtones (not unlike Stonehenge ) vo.
ans, as Mr. Sammes in his Britannia conceits 3 aſ that are in ſome parts of Scorland and Wales,
conjecture, that has met with ſo little approba-| whither the Romans and Danes never came.
tion, that all not ſtay to conſute it. 2. That It is true, thoſe monuments have not their Ar-
it was a Temple of the Druids long before the chitraves (which Stonebenge has, not only in the
coming-in of the Romans; which Mr. Jobn Au-|{tones round the Cell, but alſo on the great ſtones
brey, Fellow of the Royal Society, endeavours of the utmoſt circle ;) and this makes it pro-
to prove in his Manuſcript Treatiſe, entitled] bable, that Stonebenge was built after the Ro-
Monumenta Britannica. 3. That it was an old mans came in, and in imitation of ſome of
Triumphal Britiſh Monument, erected to Ana- their ſtructures; tho?, as to the general part of
rauh the Goddeſs of Victory, after a bloody] che work, it appears to have been unarcificial,
battle won by the illuſtrious Stanings and his] and ſavours of their primitive rudeneſs. For |
Cangick Giants, againſt Divitiacus and his Bel-| that the Britains, among other parts of Huma-
gæ; and that the Captives and Spoils were ſa-Inity and Elegance, learn'd ſomething of 4r- |
Crificed to the ſaid Idol in this Temple. An|chireFure from the Romans, is plain from the
opinion advanced (upon what grounds I know I life of Agricola. ;
Peres Dom. not) in an anonymous MS, written about the] in that other point, namely, the Occaſion up- Stack
Paſchal. year 1666. 4. That it was a monument raisd|on which it was built; it is eaſier to confute b.
by the Britains in memory of Queen Boadicis ;| thoſe Opinions that have already appear'd, than
which is advanced by the Author of Nero-Cſar.|to deliver a true one. There is no authority to
5. That it was a Temple, built by the Romans] convince us of the truth of what Nero-Cæſar, or
to the God Cælum or Terminus, of the Tuſcan] Mr. Paſchal's MS. have laid down; and it is
order; which is Mr. Jones's opinion in his in-] not eaſy to aſſent to the later Britiſh Writers,
genious Conjectures upon this ſubject. 6. That] who tell us it was the ſepulchre of the Britiſh
it was the burial-place of Uther Pendragon, Con- Kings, or elſe rais'd in memory of the Britains
ftantine, Ambroſius, and other Britiſh Kings; or, here maſſacred by the Saxons. For, not to men-
as others would have it, a monument ſet-up by|cion the improbability of what thoſe Authors
Ambroſius in memory of the Britains {lain here.] have deliver'd, they tell us further, that the
7. That it was a Daniſh monument, ereted|Kings bury'd, or Britains martyr'd, in this place,
either for a burial-place, or as a trophy for ſome were Chriſtians. Now, if ſo, it is ſtrange,
victory, or for the election and coronation off that there ſhould be no Croſs, nor any other
their Kings. | token of the Chriſtian Faith, about this monu-
Stenelenge Thele are all the Opinions, that have been] ment. What reaſon can be given, why the
Britiſh, advanc'd about it. And in general, I think, | ſurviving friends of theſe Princes and Noble-
we need not ſcruple to affirm, that ic is a Bri-|men, ſhould not be ſo careful of their memory,
ciſh monument, ſince it does not appear that ſas they of che ſame age were of King ras
i

TY . . . SRP *'S 1 pe

WILTSHIRE.

Name of
Hienebenge

+ Tom. Is
5. 97+

mbresbury.,

jn whoſe monument at Glaſſenbury was found
ſo diſtin an Inſcription ? But what makes more
againſt this opinion, are the aſhes and pieces
of burnt bones frequently found here ; by which
it is plain, that it could be no Cbriſtian burial-
place; ſince ſacrifices, and the cuſtom of burn-
ing the dead, grew out of uſe, upon the re-
ceiving of the Chriſtian Faith. |

For the Name; Leland's opinion that the Bri-
tiſh one, Choir gqure, ſhould not be tranſlated
Chorea gigantum, a Choir of Giants, but Chores
nobilis, a noble Choir; or elſe that gaure is put
for vaure, which makes it Chorea magna, a great
Choir; is probable enough. But the true Sax-
on name ſeems to be Stanbengeſt (and ſo it is
written in the F Monaſticon, out of a Manu-
ſcript of good authority;) from the memorable
laughter which Hengiſt the Saxon here made
of the Britains. For tho” it is not very proba-
ble, that they were erected by Ambroſius in me-
mory of the Britains ; yet without doubt that
treacherous ſlaughter was made at or near this
place. If this Etymology may be allow'd,
then that other receiv'd derivation from the
banging of the ſtones, may be as far from the
truth, as that of the vulgar, Stone-edge, from
Stones ſet on edge. However, it is not likely, that
by the Heeþanne Bypgelre mention'd in the
Saxon Chartulary of Wilton-Abbey, Stone-
henge is to be meant, as the Editors of the Mo-
naſt icon would have it. For, not only the words
may be well attributed to any Barrow rais'd by
the Romans or Danes (by the latter eſpecially;
who are often call'd in the Saxon Annals Hæ-
pene-men, and accordingly by Latin Writers,
Pagani ; ) but the bounds alſo of thoſe places,
where this Paganorum ſepulchreturn is noted for a
Land-mark, could never extend ſo far by a

reat many miles, as to Stone-benge. But, which
oever of theſe Opinions is true; theſe two
things are certain; J That, [as we obſerved be-
fore, | men's bones are frequently dug-up here ;
and that a village hard by which lies upon the
Avon, is called Ambresbury, that is, Ambroſe's
Town, | by Matthew Weſtminſter Pagus Ambri;
where, as the Britiſh Hiſtory tells vs, ſome anci-
ent Kings lie buried: and the Exlogium relates,
that here was a Monaſtery of 300 Monks, [to
pray for the ſouls of thoſe who were lain by
the treachery of Hengiſt ; | which Monaſtery
was deſtroy'd by a barbarous villain, one Gur-
mundus, [whom no body elſe ever heard of, It
is alſo ſaid to have been the burial-place of
Luinever, wife to the viRorious King Arthur,
whoſe tomb was found here within the laft
Century, and this Inſcription on the wall in
maſly-gold letters R. G. A.C. 600. The an-
tiquity of which is very ſuſpicious, not only
becauſe, by this computation, ſhe muſt have
liv'd almoſt 50 years after King Arthur; but
alſo becauſe ſeveral Hiſtorians of good credit
affirm that ſhe was bury'd at Glaſſenbury.! Al-

fritha wife co King Edgar (to expiate her crime, King of the Weſt-Saxons. This Ciſſa

ter, it came to be in great repute, and Mary,
daughter of K. Edward 1, and 13 Noblemen's
daughters, were veil'd here on Aſſumption-
day, A. D. 1285 ;] as afterwards alſo, Queen
Eleanor Widow of King Henry the. third, re-
nouncing all Royal Pomp, devoted her ſelf to
God here among the Nuns. Ambroſius Aureli- Ambroſius
anus (who gave name to the place) in the de- Aureliarus.
cay of the Roman Empire took upon him the
Government of Britain, as P. Diaconus reports,
and ſuccoucr'd his ſinking Country, and by the
aſſiſtance of the valiant Arthur repell'd the aſ-
ſaults of the Enemy : conquering great ar-
mies compoſed of the moſt warlike nations of
Germany: and, at length, in a ſet battle upon
theſe plains, he loſt his life in the ſervice of his
Country. But Gildas and Bede write, that his
t Anceſtors were * Emperors, and ſlain here; + Parentes.
and if ſo, why may not I poſitively affirm that * T
he was deſcended from that Conſtantine, who .
(in the fourth Conſulſhip of Theodoſius the
younger, from the hope they had that good for-
tune would attend the name,) was choſen Em-
peror in Britain, and afcerwards mtirder'd at
Arles? | | 1 |

About four miles from Ambrezbury, on this
ſide the Avon, is a warren commonly called E-
verly-Warren ; where is a great breed of hates, Everly-War«
which afford the recreation of Hunting to the ren.
neighbouring Gentry. But the number is not
ſo great, as that the adjacent inhabitants are
forced to demand a guard of ſoldiers againſt
them ; as Pliny reports that the inhabitants of
the Baleares did; altho' they are alike miſchie-
vous to the Harveſts, [This was the country-
ſeat of King Ina; above which; in the way to
Lurgeſhall, on the higheſt hill in Wiltſhire, call'd :
Sutbbury-bill, is a vaſt fortification, encompaſs'd — :
with two deep ditches, and of an oval figure.
All along the declivity of the hill, there runs a
deep trench ditch'd on both ſides ; made, pro-
bably, toſecure their communication with ſome
watering-place in the neighbouring Bourn. It
plainly appears to have been a Daniſh Camp,
whereby they ſeem to have commanded all this
part of the Country ; and fix or ſeven barrows
in the plain beneath, may be thought to pre-
ſerve the memory of a battle here.) Near this
is Lutgerſhall, heretofore the Caſtle of Geoffrey Lutgerſhall.
Fitz-Peters the rich Earl of Eſſex, and Lord
Chief Juſtice of England. Nigh to which, is
Eſcourt, where (not far from a great Cauley Eſcourt.
ſuppos'd to be a Roman Vicinal way) there
was dug-up, in the year 1693, a large earthen
veſſel with two leſſer pots in it; one of which
was full of aſhes, or bones. The largeſt of  _ _
theſe might probably be an || Obruendarium of | Rigalin ob-
the Romans, wherein they inclos'd their Vaſcu- Aue,
la Cineraria, & c. About four miles north of this Agrarios.
place, is Great Bedwyn, which in the Saxon-
times * was the Metropolis of the Bounds of Cifſa,* Monaſlt.
a Viceroy of Wiltſhire and Berkſhire, under the Arg Hin;
built a P57

_—

A Abend.
in killing her ſon-in-law King Edward, by pe- Caſtle in che ſouth part of that city, and call'd .

nance and good works) built and endow'd a

it Ciſſe; the ditches of which are yet to be feen.

ſtately Nunnery in this place: Here, alſo, Here it was, that Wulfere and Eſcwin fought a
2 a Synod held in King Edgar's reign; and] bloody battle, An. 675; and the place has been

ere, A. D. 995. Elfric was elected Archbiſhop
of Canterbury. It enjoy'd great Privileges at

honour'd in our age, by giving to the world the
moſt famous Phyſician of his time Dr. Tom

the time of the Conqueſt ; for in Domeſday-|Willis. Not far from hence, is Tolenbam, a feat Fgkenham,
book we find, Amblezbury nunquam geldavit, nec| of the Duke of Somerſet ; 1 and Wolf-ball, the wolf hall.
bidata fuit. In the year 1177. the Abbeis and] ſeat of the noble family of the Seimours of de

39 Nuns were, for their incontinence and looſe| Sano Mauro, who became Lords of great poſ-

lives, expell'd, and diſpers'd into other Religi-| ſeſſions in this County by marriage with an

ous Houles, to be kept under ſtricter diſcipline ;| heireſs of the EHurmies, who bore Argent, three ꝑgurmy or

whereupon King Henry gave this

Monaſtery | Demi-Lion, Gul. and had been, ever ſincs the Sturmy.

to the Abbey of Fentewralt, and a Convent of|time of Henry 2, hereditary Bailiffs and Keep-

thoſe Nuns were ſent over the ſame year, and|ers of the neighbouring Foreſt of Savernac (fa. Savernacs

of game; and for a "oh of foren.
Weet-

admitted into ſull poſſeſſion of this Abbey. Af-jmous for plenty

—— >

_— —
er —
—ͤ Ü —

Po

:

11 0
1
'F
*

2
1

1
:,

© ©

7

— — — — -
—"—_—

* ,
—— — _— — —
— * 9 * * w
— L == * -
”
o_

ä

I

A.

27

ETG

1 -
 % Fat A...

ſweet-ſmelling Fern.) In memory whereof, their
great Hunting-horn, tip'd with ſilver, is till
preſerv'd by the Seimours,
Being now return'd to the banks of the Avon,
Uphaven. ye meet with Uphaven, for which Peter de Man-
ly procur'd a weekly market of Henry 3, by
preſenting to him a Palfrey. About a mile to
Caſterly, the weſt is a large irregular Camp call'd Caſter-
ly : it has but a ſingle trench; and the name
eems to point-out to us ſomething of Roman.
Merdon, About two miles north-weſt, is Merdon, which
might probably enough be the Mepecune or
e pedune in the Saxon Annals; famous for the
battle between King Etheldred and the Danes.
For here remain to this day the marks of en-
trenchments, and the largeſt barrow in theſe
parts, except Silbury ; together with the Tradi-
tion of a fight, and of ſome great man's being
bury'd under the barrow. 1
A little more f weſtward, the river Cunetzo,
by the Saxons called Cynecan, but vulgarly
Kennet, riv. Kennet, riſes near a village of the ſame name;
which ſome would have to be the Cunetio men-
tion'd by Antoninus : but the Diſtances on both
ſides contradict that aſſertion. Here Selbury, a
round hill, juſt now mention'd, riſes to a conſide-
rable height, and ſeems by the faſhion of it, and
by the ſliding down of the earth about it, to have
been caſt-up by men's hands. Of this ſort there are
many in this County, round and copped, which
Burrows, or Are call'd Burrows or Barrows ; perhaps raiſed
Barrows, in memory of the Soldiers {lain there. For bones
are found in them; and I have read, that it
was a cuſtom among the Northern People, that
every ſoldier who ſurviv'd a Battle, ſhould
bring a Helmet full of Earth toward the raiſing
of Monuments for their ſlain Fellows. Tho'
I rather think this Selbury-hill to have been
made for a Boundary, if not by the Romans,
yet by the Saxons, as well as the ditch call'd
Wodenſdike ; ſeeing there were frequent battles
in this country berween the Mercians and Weſt-
In his Geo» Saxons about their limits; and Boetius, and the
metry. Writers who treat of Surveying, tell us, that
ſuch heaps were often raiſed for Land-marks.
[This is the largeſt, and moſt uniform barrow
in the County, and perhaps in all England.
Upon what account it was rais'd, we have no
light from antiquity ; the tradition is, that King
Sill or King Silber was bury'd here, which, if
compared with Hiſtory, comes neareſt to Ceol
King of the Weſt-Saxons, who might poſlibly
be lain hereabouts, as his Uncle and Predecel-
ſor Ceaulin was ſlain at Wodenſdike ; unleſs one
ſhould ſay that it comes from fel great and
Several ſorts beopg à Hill or barrow. Upon thele Downs, are
of barrows. ſeveral ſorts of Barrows, 1. Small circular trench-
es with very lictle elevation in the middle.
2. Ordinary barrows. 3. Barrows with ditches
round them. 4. Large oblong barrows, ſome
with trenches round them, others without. 5, Ob-
long barrows with ſtones ſet-up all round them.
It is very probable, chat few, or none, of theſe
are land-marks.
Abour half a mile from Silbury, is Aubury, || a

+} Eaſtward,

Selbury.

Aubury.

Aubr. Mon. monument more conſiderable in it ſelf, than
Brit, MS.

known to the world. For a village of the ſame
name being built within the circumference of it,
and (by the way) out of it's ſtones too; what
by gardens, orchards, incloſures, and the like,
the proſpect is ſo interrupred, that it is very
hard to diſcover the form of it. It is environed
with an extraordinary Valluam or Rampire, as
great and as high as that at Wincheſter ; and,
within it, is a graff of a depth and breadch
proportionable ; from which we may infer, that
it could not be deſign'd for a fortification, be-
cauſe then the Graff would have been on the
outſide. From the north to the ſouth port are
60 paces, and as many from the weſt port to

the eaſt. The breadth of the rampire is four
perches, and that of the graft the ſame. The
graff hath been ſurrounded, all along the edge
of it, with large ſtones pitch'd on end, moſt
of which are now taken away; but ſome macks
remaining, give liberty for a Conjecture, that
they ſtood quite round.

From this place to Weſt-Kennet, f is a walk + Ay, :.
that has been enclos'd on each fide with large Wet ke.
ſtones; one ſide, at preſent, wants a great many, e.
but the other is almoſt, if not wholly, entite;
above which place, on the brow of the hill, is
another Monument, encompaſs'd with a circu-
lar trench, and a double circle of ſtones, four
or five foot high, tho' moſt of them are now
fallen down ; the diameter of the outer circle
is 40 yards, and of the inner, 15. Between
Weſt- Kennet and this place, is a walk much like
that from Aubury thither, at leaſt a quarter of a
mile in length. About 80 yards from this mo-
nument, in an exact Plain round it, there were
lome years ago great quantities of human bones
and skeletons dug-up ; which probably were
the bones of the Saxons and Danes ſlain at the
battle of Kenner, A. D. 1006. In the plough'd
field near Kennet, ſtand three huge upright
ſtones, call'd the Devil's coits,; which (if * Dr. The Dy
Plot's opinion be true) may be Britiſh Deities, Sid,
Upon the ſouth-ſide of the Kennet, on the eaſt —
part of the Martenſall-hill, is a fingle-trench'd c. 1c. f,
quadrangular Camp; the form whereof argues Manenil,
it to be Roman; and a braſs Coin of Conftan-
tine which was found near this hill, ſtrengthens
that Conjecture.

On the north fide of the Avon, are barrows,
e. ſcatter'd all over the Downs. That large
oblong barrow in Munkton-field, call'd Milbar- Milbarrn,
row, is more eſpecially remarkable, as being
environ'd with great ſtones about 6 or 7 foot
high. And, in this, as well as in all other cit-
cumſtances, it is ſo like thoſe which || Wormius|| Lib. 1.6
deſcribes, that there is no doubt, but it was the
Sepulchre of ſome Daniſh Commander. About
four miles north from hence, is Barbury-caſtle, Barbur.
ſeated on the top of a high hill, and encom- .
paſs'd with a double ditch ; the vaſt fortifica-
tion whereof, the barrows on the adjacent
plain, the ſimilitude of names, the courſe and
time of the Saxon Victories, with all other cir-
cumſtances, ſeem to point out this as the Be-
panbypg, where Kenrick King of the Weſt-
Saxons and his ſon Ceaulin fought againſt che
Britains, in the year 556. Beſides, the modern
name of this place comes much nearer to Be-
nanby pig, than Banbury doth, where this Bat- v. Orin
tle hath been fixed. For it is obſervable, that hire,
(an) when it is in the ſecond ſyllable of the
Saxon name of a place, is generally left out,
in our modern pronunciation. So Babdanby-
hig is now Badbury, Menanzune now Merton,
Orzanrops now Orford, Exancearcep now Ex-
ceſter, Nor is it at all probable, that the Saxons
could carry their Conqueſts fo far as the bor-
ders of Northamptonſhire, by that year, Add
to this, that the name of Banerbypig is not
to be found in any Copy of the Saxon Chro-
nicle ; ſo that an argument drawn from thence,
is of no force. Bur now let us follow the
courſe of the Kennet, 1 At firſt it runs through
fields, wherein are abundance of rocky ſtones
ſtanding-up (from whence there is a village
call'd Rockley.) Among theſe ſtones there now Rec
and then breaks out water on a ſudden like 3
* Land-flood, which the Country-people call: Tu,
Hungerborn ; believing it a Prognoſtick of great 2
ſcarcity. From thence the Kennet runs co 4% Hag
town of it's own name, call'd Cunetio by Ano
ninus, and placed 20 miles from Verlucio. t
which diſtance, the old row::, called by the Curt

Margas

#Vit, Elfre-
U, T.3. 1.30»

5 Hen, 3,

Ann. 1607.

|| Lapis obſi-

dranus,

t Gives, C,

Earls,

Tri.

——— — — a — — 2 _ —

new name of + Marleborvugh \ heretofore _ Ker,
erge, 3, 1* -

128

—

> Aubr, 5
Welt-Kes,
det.

Tbe Devi
coits,

'* Hiſtory

Oxfordh,

| ch, 10, \t

; Martenid,

W Rockies

Ac
the n Curtth
rite Kerbe, |
ge, Oak ins

129

Margie

4 52 Hen, 3-great I Parliament here aſſembled, which u-|(tho* of divers Families,) beſides thoſe of Sa- if

Arn. 1607. oro. This Caſtle is * now, by the injury of queſt, ſand Ethelhelm, about the year 886, 1

| Lazic olſ- more, than of the Font (probably of || Touch-

dianus,

t C; .
Gives, C. every Free-man, by ancient cuſtom, * gave

Greyhounds, two white Capons, and a white younger ſon of Humphrey Duke of Bucking-

Earls,

it. Elſre · * Saxon Coin, on which is engraven CVH|Filrs ; which, as it is in Domeſday-book (for
6, 1.3.1.30 : NET : II.; and the learned Anno-|I do not think it improper to note this) paid

"WIL TONER is

berge, [and in the Saxon Annals Mzplbeopge,) || dridge) was advanced by King William and
is ſeated along the ſide of a hill from eaſt to] Queen Mary to the Dignity of Earl of Marl
welt, upon the banks of the river Cunetio. 1|borough ; and by Queen Anne, in the year |
ſhall not pretend to determine, whether this| 1702, was honoured with the title of Marquiſs See Bles- :
new name came from Marga, which in our |of Blandford and Duke of Marlborough, and with hei, in Ox+ ,
language we call Marle, and uſe it for the|other ſignal Favours ſince ; which he had {ordhire |
improvement of our Lands. But this is cer-|highly merited by a long courſe of the greateſt
tain, that it lies at the foot of a hill of white] and moſt important Services that a Subject
ſtone, which our Forefathers called Marle,|could perform to his Prince and Country.
before they had borrowed the word Chalk| Which Honours, in default of iſſue-male, have,
from the Latin Calx. The derivation of this] ſince the death of his only Son, Joby, ſtiled
place from Merlin's Tomb, which Alexander |Marquiſs of Blandford (a youth of very great
Necham, in his book of Divine Wiſdom, ham-| hopes) been ſettled, ſucceſſively, upon the ſe-
mer'd out in this Diſtich, is cidiculous :; veral daughters of the ſaid Duke, and their
iſſue ; according to the tenor of a particular
Merlini tumulus tibi Merlebrigia nomen Statute, made for that purpoſe,
Fecit, teflis erit Anglica lingua mibi. On the ſame ſide of this river, lies Rames- Ramesbury.
bury, a ſmall village, now only famous for
Great Merlin's grave it's pleaſant meadows ; tho' once honoured
The name to Marlborough in Saxon | with the See of a Biſhop, who was Dioceſan
gave. of this County: but the See being joyn'd to
| Shirburn by Herman the eighth Biſhop, was Wil. Mal-
The Caſtle here ſeems to have been a Ro- fat laſt (as I have ſaid before) tranſlared to wesbury of
man work, by the braſs Roman Coins that] Salisbury, and carried with it all the Glory *
were found in ſhaping the Mount, now be- from this place; becauſe at Ramesbery there
longing to the Duke of Somerſet ; which was | was neither a Chapter of the Clergy, nor any thing
contrived out of the Keep of the Caſtle. II fer their maintenance. On the other ſide the
The Hiſtory of the Fortune, as well as the|river, more to the Eaſt, is Littlecor, to be Littlecor;
Name and Antiquity, of this Cunetio, were all mention'd on account of Jobn Popham Lord
bury'd in oblivion, from the coming-in of the| of it, who, being Chief juſtice of the King's
Saxons, to the Norman Conqueſt ; for in that] Bench, diſcharged that Office with the great-
interval, not ſo much as it's name occurs in|eſt applauſe ; as I have ſaid before.
any of our Annals, [except the reverſe of a| Hitherto, we have ſurveyed the County of

tator's obſervation, is, that it is to be meant|the King 10 l. for an Hawk, 20 s. for a Sum

of Cunetium,) In the next Age, we read, that] ter- borſe, one bundred ſhillings and five f Ores or | Vid. Præ-
Fobn, ſirnamed Sine terra or Lack-land, who| Hay. I am wholly ignorant what ſort of Mo- 3 wm
was afterwards King of England, had a Ca-|ney theſe Ores were; only, thus much I g,, What,
ſtle here, which in his rebellion againſt his|have obſerved out of the Regiſter of Bur-
brother King Richard I. was taken by Habert|ton-Abbey, that 20 Ores were worth 2 marks
Archbiſhop of Canterbury. The thing that] of filver.
it was afterwards moſt famous for, was, the] The Earls of this Shire have been but few — 2 Wilt-

nanimouſly made a Law for the ſupprefling|l;sbury, which I have mention'd before. For,
of Riots, commonly call'd Statutum de Marle- excepting Weolſtban before the Norman Con-

time, nothing but ruins; there are only, with- it had none, that I know of, till Richard the
in the Ditch, ſome few remains of the Walls, 25 time; who advanc'd William le Scrope to
and near it, an Ale-houſe, with a Caſtle for that honour : but this man's grandeur ſtood
the ſign. But the inhabitants boaſt of nothing] and fell with his Prince: for when that King

h-| was dethron'd, this Earl was beheaded. Not
ſtone) in the neighbouring Church of Pre- many years after, he was ſucceeded by James
ſhut ; in which, as the tradition goes among Butler Earl of Ormond, who was raiſed to
them, ſeveral Princes were baptiſed. And IIthis dignity by King Henry 6. But when
cannot omit what I have read, namely, that the Houſe of Lancaſter was in a declining
condition, he was attainted ; and King Ec-
to the Mayor, at his admiſſion, a couple of| ward 4. conferr'd this title on Fobn Stafford,

Bull. Now, they only pay ſomething in ham, to whom ſucceeded his ſon Edward,
money, in lieu of it; but the Arms of the|who died without iſſue. King Henry 8. at-
Town plainly point to this cuſtom, being |terwards beſtow'd this honour upon Heury
blazon'd thus: Party per ſaltier Gules and A- Stafford, deſcended from the Buckingham-fa-
ure, on the firſt quarter Gules @ Bull Arg. on the| mily, who, having for ſome time enjoy'd this
ſecond Azure a Cock or Capon Arg. the third as the\ title, died without iſſue. At laſt, it came
ſecond, and on the baſe Gules are three Grey-hounds|to the family of the Bollens, by the favour of
currant Arg, between two Roſes Gules. This|the ſame King; who made Thomas Bollen Viſ-
place afforded the title of Earl to James Lord| count Rochford (deſcended from one of the
Ley, Lord High Treaſurer of England, crea-|ewo Coheirs of Thomas Butler Earl of Ormond,)
ted Feb. 5. 1 Car. 1; to whom ſucceeded his Earl of Wilſhire ; whoſe daughter Ann the
ſon, and grandſon ; but the laſt being ſlain King married; a match, unfortunate to her
in the ſea-fight againſt the Dutch, 1665,|ſelf, her Brother, and her Parents; bur very
without iſſue ; the honour came to William fortunate to England; becauſe ſhe it was
his Uncle, who alſo dy'd without iſſue. In|that gave birth to that excellent Princeſs
the year 1689, John Lord Churchil (who had, Queen Elizabeth, who deſerves immortal Ho- Queen Eliza-

fore, been created by King Charles the ſe-|nour, for her moſt prudent Adminiſtration ,beth.
cond Baron of Aymouthb in Scotland, and by|and tor her own perſonal Vircues ; great, and
King James the ſecond, Lord Churchil of San- heroical, beyond OI Buc _— this
m at

BE I

*

131

5 —

Thomas Bollen died, without iſſue-male, of
grief, occaſion'd by the unhappy fate of his
Children ; this cicle lay dormant, till King
Edward 6. dignify'd therewith William Pow-

See Paſng in let Lord S. John of Baſing, whom afterwards

Hamſlicss he raiſed to be Marquils of Wincheſter, and
Lord High Treaſurer of England ; and in
whoſe Family it till remains. For, to Wil-
liam, ſucceeded John his fon and heir; to
whom ſucceeded in theſe Honours his only]
ſon, William; and to him, Fobn his fon ; the
father of Charles, who, in the firſt year of
K. Willi:m and Q. Mary, was alſo created
Duke of Bolton ; and to whom ſucceeded, in
his honours and eſtate, Charles, the preſent
Earl of Wiltſhire, Marquiſs ot Wincheſter,
and Duke of Bolcon. |

There are in this County 304 Pariſhes.

More rare Plants growing wild in Wilt-
ſhire.

Agrifolium baccis luteis nondum deſcrip-
tum Phyt. Brit. Tellow- berried Holly. By War-
der-caſtle belonging to the Lord Arundel, This I
take to be rather an accidental wariety of Holly,
than a diſtintt ſpecies. It bath alſo been found elſe-
where, as at Wiſton in Suffolk.

Filix foemina odorata Phyt. Brit. Sweet-ſcent-
ed Female Fern. Somewhere about the Marqueſs of
Hartford's foreſt of Savernake, which I remem-
ber the old Earl took ſo much notice of, that he cau-
ſed a fair inſcription to be made in his garden-pond,
at bis bouſe of Totnam near it, to direct to it. Mr.
Stonehouſe. This may be enquired into by thoſe Her-
bariſts that live bereabouts,

Gramen caninum ſupinum. longiſſimum
nondum deſcrjptum Phyr. Błit. Long trailing

nine miles from Salisbary, with which they fat þ

—

ogs,
and which is four and twenty foot long. IWe —

not yet ſatisfied what ſort of graſs this might be;
and recommend the inquiſition thereof to the indu-

ſftrious and skilful Herbariſts of this Country,

Gramen geniculatum aquaticum majus &
minus Park. who blames Caſp. Bauhine for re-
ferring this to the Iſchzmon, calling it Gramen
dactylon aquaticum. He tells us, they both grow
in ſundry places of England, but ba ve been eſpeci-
ally obſerv'd, the greater to grow about Wilton, and
a great meadow lying among the bridges at the
town's end; and the other at Warminſter, both in
this County, I fear they were neither of them well
known to Parkinſon, and wiſh they do not loſe
their labour that 1 for them in thoſe places.

Naſturtium ſylveſtre Erucz affine C. B. ſylv.
Valentinum Cluſio F. B. Park. Eruca Na-
ſturtio cognata tenuifolia Ger. Creſſe-Rocket,
Found by Mr. Lawſon on Salisbury-plain not far
from Stone- benge. |

Onobrychis ſeu caput gallinaceum Ger. vul-
garis Park. foliis viciz, fructu echinato major
C. B. Polygalon Geſneri F. B. Medic Vetchlin
or Cocksbead, commonly but falſly call d Saint-foin.
It is ſaid to grow on the further end of Salisbury-
plain : and likely enough it may, though I never
happen'd to ſee it there, becauſe the ſoil ſeems to be of
the ſame nature with Gogmagog bills and Neu-
market beath, on the borders whereof it grows plen-
tifully.

Poly gonatum vulgare Park. Solomon's Seal.
See the Synonymes in the Kent. Cat. In a buſhy
cloſe belonging to the Parſonage of Alderbury near
Clarendon, two miles from Salizbury. Park. pag.
S

Polygonatum humile Anglicum D. Bobert.
Dwarf-Engliſh Solomon's Seal. Found by Mr. Phi-
lip More, Gardener of Grays-Inn, in the Woods of

Dog's graſs. By Mr. Tucker's at Madington ſome

Wiltſhire.

H AMSHIRE.

Countrey, which by the Sax-
ons was call'dfHamcunrcynpe, |
[and by later Writers Hamte-
ſchyre, and Hamteſhire ; | now
commonly Hamſbire, [Flo-
rence of Worceſter calls it
Hantunſcyre (a miſtake of the Librarian, for
Hamtunſcyre ; ſince the Saxon-Annals call it
ſo, and he tranſcrib'd from them) from whence
however, and from the names Hantſcyre and
Hentſcyre in Domeſday-book, our modern
Hants and Hantſhire (generally us'd as the true
names,) do plainly proceed. l The inner
part of this County, without doubt, belong'd
to the Belge ; and that which lies along the
ſea-coaſt, co the Regni, an ancient people of
Britain. It is bounded, on the Weſt by Dor- }
ſerſhire and Wiltſhire ; on the South, by the |
Ocean; on the Eaſt, by Suſſex and Surrey; on
the North, by Barkſhire. It is a ſmall Coun-
ty, very fruictul in Corn, and in many places |
well wooded ; it is rich in herbage, and has
{ea-commodities in great plenty; being well
contriv'd, by it's many creeks and harbours, }
for all forts of traffick. It is thought to have |
been one of the firſt, that was reduc'd to the
power of the Romans; ſince our Hiſtories
ve pafan. report, that it was conquer'd by Veſpaſian ; and
there are tutficient grounds to believe it. For

IN

F
. N }

|

EXT to Wiltſhire, is that

Dio cells us, that Plautius and Veſpaſian, |
1

when they were ſent by the Emperor Claudi-
us againſt the Britains, divided their forces
into three Parties for the greater convenience
of landing; leſt they ſhould be repuls'd ſonce
for all] if they attempted a Deſcent, all ac
one place. And from Suetonius we learn,
that Veſpaſian in this expedition engag'd the
enemy 3o times, and brought under the Ro-
man yoke the I/le of Wight (which lies oppo-
ſite to this County) and two other valiant
people; for which victories by land, and his
fortunate voyages at ſea, Valerius Flaccus
complements him, and makes him more
proſperous than Julius Cæſar:

O tu Pelagi cui major aperti
Fama, Caledonius poſtquam tua Carbaſa

vexit
Oceanus, Phryg ios prius indignatus Lilos.

O you, whoſe glorious reign

Can boaſt new triumphs o're the conquer'd
main,

Since your bold Navy paſs'd the Britiſh

ſea
That ſcorn'd the Cæſars and the Roman
ſway.

And \pollonius Collatius Novarienſis writes
thus of him:

* Ile

— — - = Sw - - . —
2 K ————_ „„  — N *
<<

#

7 = &7 w_
4 Bs ——_- *

- — —_ ———— 2

*
+ * * „ Oe REES *

—
2

* ” 4 4
.. *
*
1 4 ;
* a\
= *
=
ad” *
* 51
iS | 1
iu? * _— 6
ö —
*
We *
. i
U

-
4 *
' :
—
* — *
LEY —
1 --
by '
=
- ”
* *
-
-
.
, —- Ss
N -
- i
.
- * — 4 * *
7 . > * —
a F
— =o! PTA, .
-- 5 9 o — A 0
ys = „ - 7
_- .
« - %. - &
od * *
„ m w 4 *
* 8
* 4 5
W *
: a * * * — . =
_ = * -. ” > 4 *
— PS 8
-* 5
” # 0 - 4
*
*
—
3 8 p
LOL -
- * ,
* 4 - * — „ *
ys * | -
. 1 TY
# »
4 * _ * —
- . * - s
0 * cat Je
. _ — 1
-- —
— —
ict I
-
* % 4 =
| — e % : 5 * -
2 * + >
* - 8 — ww
OY S *
* 92 ü
8 5 —
— 22 2 27 — ,- b.. — -

EPa-rxow * d
L

Er Joy D SHOROW
4

i 3» 11 'ND

4 2 ,

i
For. wb ve
5

Hit © Vous G
beak eſter
S. ©)

16h "ay od

1424
It za

2 5
Res ay 5 Ni = bop.

24.
®

Lale 1 Hd *

u“ Hatham

; Fre 5 =

W 2
* *

*
ad — —U— —ääĩ— Ul —

..
7.

uon

- „„ „„ EE

—— 933 _
*
*
F
24
5
=
*
o
[1 *
* ”
o *
7
—
— — —— . —ͤ ů D— = ,
— —_— — 2

PLS

7 4
= -
= * - —— — 2 —
1 8
.
S 1
* ;
g %
%
£ . EY
. *
* % , C
* o

1 Fn, 2 2 133
| *% » „„

. 45 1
ox
YL \Y 0
. .
«3 . :
5 4
*
1 ; :
* ar. ©
** 147 111
* 1 1 ;
15401 5 \ 1
728
x =” bt
r 1990 1
-

Natan!
5 or Naz;
. /
. ä
se . _ = -

6 >, Wheth
tanlecd
Aurel;
Ambre
Was thi
perſon,

VS

OB as. F

133.

H A M

SATRE.

134

River Avena,

or Arona.

Cerdicks-
ſord.

Natarleod,

or Nazaleod.

Whether Na-

tanlecd and
Aurelius
Ambreſiu s

was the ſame

perſon,

Regnum

Ringwood,

Ille quidem nuper felici Marte Britannos
Fuderat, ——

The Britains he of late o'recame
In proſp'rous war.

How, in the courſe of this war, Titus reſ-
cu'd his father Veſpaſian from imminent
danger, when he was cloſely beſieg'd by the
Britains; and how a ſnake twiſted round him
at that time, without doing him any harm,
which he interpreted an omen of being at-
terwards Emperor; theſe things you may
learn from Dio and Forcatulus.

I, confining my ſelf to my own Province,
ſhall begin with the weſt-ſide of this Coun-
ty; and, having firſt ſurvey'd the ſea-coaſts,
and the rivers that fall into the Ocean ;
{hall then paſs to the inland parts.

Near the weſtern bounds of the County,
runs the gentle ſtream of the Avon; which,
as ſoon as it enters Hamſhire, comes to the
ford of Cerdick, call'd formerly Cerdicks-ford,
(from the Saxon Cenoicery-rops,)1 afrerwards
Cerdeford, and now by contraction Chardford ;
all from Cerdick, a valiant Saxon. For, in this
place, the famous Cerdick engaged the Britains,
and gave them fo terrible a defeat, that he
not only enlarg'd the limits of his own gc-
vernment; bur left it eaſie for poſterity to
maintain his conqueſts. Before this, in the
year cf our Lord 508. he had, in a very ſharp
engagement, conquer'd Natanleod | (call'd by
others Nazaleod,)1 a potent King of the Bri-
tains, together with great numbers of that
People ; and from his name a tra& of land
reaching to this place was call'd Natanleod,
as we read in the Saxon Annals; in the ſearch
of which tract I have been very curious, but
cannot yet find the leaſt footſteps of the name.
[It is indeed more than probable that this
King's name was not Naranleod, but rather
Nacan or Naga, which, by the addition of
leb, i. e. 4 country, ſignifies the tract or country
of Natan: and one of the Copies of the Saxon
Annals calls it Naganleag, that is, the field of
Natan ; which ſuggeſts what cannot be fo
well inferr'd from the other, viz. ſome re-
mains of the old name ; as in Netley and Nut-
ley, in this County.] Who this Natanleod | or
Natan,1 was, I cannot imagin : yet, it is
moſt certain, that at the ſame time Aurelius
Ambroſius had many conflicts with the Saxons
in theſe parts, with various ſucceſs : not-
withſtanding which, this great man is never
mention'd in the Annals of our Saxon Ance-
ſtors; who, as I obſerve, have been forward
enough in reciting thoſe battles, wherein
they had the advantage, but mention none
of thoſe wherein they were worſted ; therein
betraying too great partiality to their own
cauſe. Hence, the river runs by Regnewood,
or Ringwoed, in Domeſday-book Rincewed,
which was that Regnum (a town of the Regni)
mention'd by Antoninus; as is plain from the
courſe of the Itinerary, the remainder of the
old name, and the ſignification of the pre-
ſent. For Ring wood, with the Saxon addition,
ſeems to ſigniſie The wood of the Regni, That
this was formerly a place of Note and Di-
ſtinction, is probable from the adjacent Hun-

in Italy. It was formerly defended by a Ca-
{tie, and adorn'd wich an ancient Church of
Prebendaries; which, being built in the Saxon

pair'd by Ralph Flammard Biſhop of Durham
(who had been Dean there) and plentifully
endow'd by Richard de Rivers Earl of Devon-
ſhire, to whom King Henry 1. gave this
place in fee; and it continu'd in great repute
to the time of Henry 8, and the fatal Period
of Monaſteries. Below this town, the Stour
and the Avon joyning, empty themſelves into
the ſea at one mouth, which Ptolemy call'd

age call'd Nene, we at this day New-Poreſt

treſpaſs on his game.

Duke of Bolton.

Malwood, || the ares whereof contains
acres.

dred which derives the name from it; but it fare ſingle, and not very great) there grow

is now only famous for a good market. The
Avon running from hence, takes-in the river
Stour, Which comes our ot Dorſetſhire ; and
at the confluence of theſe two, there ſtands
2 ſmall, but well-frequented, market-town,

Oaks. On the north-ſide hard by it, is the
Oak that buds on Chriſtmas-day, and withers
again before night; which was order d by
King Charles the ſecond to be pald round.
The Tradition is, that William Rufus was kill d

near?

now called Cbriſ-ebureb, from the Church de- Chriſ-
dicated to Chriſt ; and heretofore, from it's Church.
ſituation between two rivers, called Twinam- Twinam-
burne ; on the ſame account, as the Interamna burne,

age, was in the reign of William Rufus * re- *

Reſtaurata.

the mouth of the river Alaun ; and very truly. The river
For I can ſcarce believe, that Avon was the Alaun.
proper name of this river, ſince that word is an
appellative, and the name by which the Bri-
tains call'd rivers in general. I rather think it
was call'd Alaun, becauſe there ſtill remain ſome
footſteps of that word inthe villages which ſtand
upon it, as Allinten, Allingham, 8&c. On the
eaſt-ſide of this river, William the Conqueror
deſtroy'd all the towns, villages, and Church-
es ; and, turning-out the poor inhabitants,
made a foreſt for wild beaſts about thirty
miles in circuit, which the Engliſh in that

3 New-Foreſt,
of which, Walter Mapes, who liv'd in the
next age, Writes thus : The Conqueror took away
much land from God and men, and made a Sacri-
fice of it to the wild-beafts, and bis bunting-dogs ;
by which be demoliſhed thirty ſix Motber-Churches,
and drove away the poor inbabitants belonging to
them. This he did, either to make a more eaſie
Paſſage for his Normans to come into Eng-
land (for it lies oppoſite to Normandy,) in
caſe of a new inſurrection in the Iſland, after
his ſuppos'd Conqueſt ; or to indulge himſelf
in hunting ; or to raiſe money by any me-
thods, how unjuſt ſoever. For he, more mer-
ciful ro beaſts than to men, appointed a moſt
grievous pecuniary mula, and other ſevere
penalties, to be inflited on thoſe who ſhould
But divine vengeance Example of
cloſely purſued this impious project of the Divine Ven-
King: for Richard his ſecond ſon, and Wil- Seance.
liam Rufus King of England another of his
ſons, both loſt their lives in this Foreſt ; the
latter caſually ſhot with an arrow by Walter
Tirrel ; the other ſtruck dead by a peſtilen-
tial blaſt, [(The place where William Ru-
fus was kill'd, is call'd (faith Leland) Throug- Througham,
ham, where there yet ſtandetb a Chapel.) And
alſo Henry his grand-child by Robert his eldeſt
ſon, while he was here eagerly purſuing his
Sport, was caught by the head in the boughs,
and there ended his life; to teach us, that the
crimes of parents are often puniſh'd upon their
childrens children. In this Foreſt, are 9 Walks,
and to every one a Keeper. It has two Raun-
gers, a Bow-bearer, and a Lord-Warden ; which
office (as | Leland ſays) formerly belong'd, F Itinerar-
by right of inhericance, to the Earls of Arun-
del; but it is at preſent in the hands of the
In it alſo is the Ca#tl of
many Malwood-
The form of it inclines towards a pc MS.
ſquare ; and on it's banks or works (which!

*

MS, Vol, 6,

135

FE LGA

a.

near this Caſtle ; and that this is the Tree up-
on which Tirrel's arrow glanced. In the ſame
foreſt, at Godshill near Fordingbridge, * is a Camp,
upon the hill, which is overgrown with Oaks:
one ide is a ſteep cliff, and the other double-
trench'd.]1 Of this Foreſt, there are extant ſome
Verſes of John White Biſhop of Wincheſter ;

- which falſly attribute the making of it to Wil-
liam Rufus: however, becauſe many readers
are pleas d with them, it may not be amiſs to
inſert them in this place.

Gods hill.
* I bid.

Templa adimit Divis, fora civibus, arva co-
lonis

Rufus, & inſtituit Beaulenſi in rure foreſtam :

Rex cervum inſequitur, Regem vindic ta, Ti-
rellus

Non bene proviſum transfixit acumine ferri.

Towns, Fields, and Churches, took from God
and Men, |

A ſpatious toreſt made in Beaulieu-plain :

The King a Hart, Vengeance the King
purſu d,

*

And Tirrel's arrow drunk his guilty blood.

He calls it Rus Beaulenſe ; becauſe nigh this

place King John founded a ſmall Monaſtery

Beaulieu. called Beaulieu, from it's pleaſant ſituation ;
which continu'd very famous, till within the
memory of the | laſt age ſave one: for here was
an inviolable ſanctuary, and a ſafe refuge for
Sanctuary. criminals; and our forefathers thought it an
unpardonable ſin, to take from hence the moſt

J Laſt age,
C. .

Amputat enſe caput, nomen tenet inde perempti
Hammonis Portus, longumque tenebit in æ-
vum.

As to the bank he fled,

Enrag'd Arviragus with happier ſpeed

Aim'd a fierce blow, and fell'd his trem-
bling head.

And thus great Hammon's death proclaim'd
by tame |

To Hamton gave an everlaſting name.

This was, poſſibly, the Cenaiceropa of the
Saxons ; Which ſeems to have been in the we-
ſtern parts of England. For the ſame perſons
that Matthew Weitminſter affirms to have land-
ed in Occidentali parte Britamiæ, (in the weſt
part of Britain,) are ſaid by the Saxon-Annals
to have come aſhore at Cenaiceprona. It, upon
ſuch a conjecture, we might remove it from
Yarmouth into theſe parts, I know no place can
lay better claim to it than this, whether we
conſider the ſituation, or the other circum-
ſtances. |

At this Port is ſituated! the town of South-+ U gende
hanton ; near which, to the north-eaſt, ſtood Southanton,
once another town of the ſame name, which
was the Clauſentum of Antoninus; as is proba- Chaufentam.
ble by the diſtance trom Regnum on one fide,
and Venta on the other: and as Triſanton ſigni-
fies the Bay of Anton, ſo Clauſentum ſignifies in
Britiſh the Port Entum ; for I have learnt, that
Claudh implies the ſame among the Britains as
xe ale did among the Greeks, that is, f a f Portus ef.
Haven made by caſting-up Banks. That this place foſs4 tei er

bloody murderers or traitors, But ſure, when our

anceſtors did in ſeveral parts of England erect '

theſe Sanctuaries or Temples of Mercy (as they

call'd them,) they ſeem rather to have follow'd

Exodus xxi. the example of Romulus, than of Moſes, who
oſeph. commanded that they who were guilty of wil-
hy Antiq.4. ful murder ſhould be taken from the altar, and

put to death; and appointed a city of refuge

only for them who ſhould ſlay a man by chance, |
without laying in wait for him.
But that ſo great a tract of ground as this
Foreſt, on the 2 might not lie defenceleſs
and expos d to the enemy; Henry 8. began to
{ecure it with Caſtles : tor in that neck of land
that runs into the ſea, from whence is the ſhort-
Hurf-Caftle, eſt paſlage to the Je of H/ight, he built Hurſi-
Caſtle, which commands the ſea on all fides.
And more to the weſt, he built another ſtrong
Calſhot- Ca- Fort, called Calſhot inſtead of Caldſhore, to ſe-
fle. cure the Entrance of South-hamton-Bay. For
here, by the great diſtance of the, two ſhores,
and the oppoſite ſituation of the e of Wight,
is a very —_—  _— Prolemy
calls the mouth of the river Triſanton; in m
1 cpinion, tor Traith Anton, that is, the Bay of 2
ton. ton (tor Nimius, an ancient Author, calls it al-
moſt by the ſame name, the mouth of the Trahan-
non :) [if Traith do indeed ſignify a Bay; which,
according to Dr. Davis, implies only a * Treaty,
or Treatiſe. \ The river that runs into this bay,
which we now call 7%, was in former times
(as we learn from the Lives of the Saints) nam'd
Terfan ; and that it was before call'd Ant or
Anton, is probable from the towns upon it, Ant-
port, Andover, and Hanton. So far am I from
thinking that it was ſo call'd from one Hammon
a Roman kill'd here; which yet Geoftry of
Monmouth delivers in his romancing way, and
is follow'd by a Poet, who has this paſſage con-
cerning that Hammon :

Welſh Di&.
Tractatus.

Ant.

Ruit uc, illucque ruentem

was called Hanton and Henton, no one need .
yo becauſe in Domeſday-book, the whole

ounty is expreſly call'd Hantſcyre, and in ano-
ther place Hentſcyre; and the town it ſelf, from
its Southern ſituation, Southanton. However, it
muſt be confeſs'd, that in the Saxon-Annals,
which are of greater Antiquity, the County is
called hamcunrcype, and this town hamcun;
which are of a pure Saxon original, and can
have no relation to Anton, the ſuppoſed name of
the river Te. What the condition of the an-
Client town was, is difficult to determine; but
it was ſituated in that place where is now the
Field of St. Maries, 4 reach'd as far as the
harbour; and ſeems to have extended to the
other ſide of the river alſo. For a little high-
er at Bittern (a place juſt oppoſite) Francis. Mills, B
a worthy Gentleman, who || liv'd there, ſhew'd | Lites
me {ome rubbiſh, and pieces of old walls, and the
trenches of an ancient Caſtle half a mile in
compaſs ; which at full tide is three parts ſur-
rounded with water. The Antiquity of it is ſo
ſufficiently atteſted by the Roman Coins which
have been dug-up here, that if it was not the
Caſtle of the ancient Clauſentum, you may well
judge it to have been one of thoſe forts which
the Romans erected on the ſouthern coaſt (as
Gildas tells us,) to prevent the Saxon piracies
and inroads. [It is not long ſince, that a Golden
Coin was found here; but the place where Coins
were formerly dug-up, is now a Dock for the
building of Men of War.]

When all parts were miſerably harraſs'd
with the .Daniſh Wars, O14 Hanton tell a
prey to that People in the year 980 ; and in
the time of William the Conqueror (to uſe
the expreſſion of his own Book) the King had
in that town only So men or tenents in Demeſue.
But about 400 years ago, when'King Edward * 302, C.
3, and Philip of Valois contended for the King-
dom of France, it was burnt by the French.
Our of the aſhes whereof, there ſprang up ano-

Andover
1994. C
dax.

Anlaf ad
ted by K
Ethelred

ittern.
G

Ocenpat Arviragus, ejuſque in margine ripæ

cher, more conveniently ſituated, between two
rivers;

becula.
hanton,

ſentum.

tus ef-

4 terra ex.

tus,

Bittern,
Lives, C.

t 209, CG

COOGEE ——— 0s wr ern one ͤ—

HIRE

=]

rirers, the ſame that we ſee at this day; ſonce
tamous for the number and neatneſs of it's
buildings, the wealth of the inhabitants, and
reſort of merchants, But now, it is not in
the ſame flouriſhing condition, as formerly it
was ; for, having lo a great part of it's Trade,
it has loſt moſt of it's inhabitants too, and the
great houſes of merchants are now dropping to
the ground, and only ſhew it's ancient magnifi-
cence.l It hath a double ditch, and ſtrong
walls, with ſeveral battlements; and, for the
ſecurity of the harbour, a ſtrong Caſlle of ſquare
ſtone was built, upon a high-rais'd mount, by
Richard 2. That action ot Canute the moſt po-
tent King of England and Denmark (reproving
the baſeneſs of a flattering Courtier, who pre-
tended that all things would obey his royal will
and pleaſure ) was in this place, and is well
He us of Worth the mentioning. Iden be came (ſays Hen-
Cinizz, ry of Huntingdon) zo ſhore, he commanded a chair
to be ſet for him, and ſaid to the ſea flowing up to
him, Dou art under my dominion, and the ground
on which I fit is mine, nor did ever any man diſo-
bey my commands with Impunity : Therefore, I com-
mand thee, not to come upon my ground, nor to wet
the cloaths or the feet of me thy Lord and Maſter.
But the rude Waves preſently came up, and wet his
royal feet: upon which he ſtep'd back, and ſaid, Let
all the inhabitants of the world know, That the
power of Monarchs is a vain and empty thing, and
that none deſerves the name of a King, but he whoſe
will, by an eternal decree, the Heaven, Earth, and
Sea do all obey. Nor would he ever aſter ſuffer the
Crown to be put on his head, &c.
Of the two rivers between which this town
rel. is plac'd, the weſtern one (now call'd Teſt, but
formerly, I think, Anton,) riſing out of the Fo-
Andover. reſt of Chute, runs firſt to Andover, in Saxon
Andeapapan, ſand Andepepan, | that is, the Fer-
ry or paſſage of the river Ande ; where, in the
! 934. Chr. year f 893. Ethelred King of England (when
_ the Danes were plundering his kingdom) that
he might bleſs his harraſs'd nation with a ſafe
Anlaf adop- and OR, peace, did adopt Aulaf the Dane:
td by King tho” this league of friendſhip was ſoon broken;
Ecbelred. for ſo great an honour could not reſtrain that
barbarous foreigner from his uſual rapines. [Tr
is now a populous Corporation ; where 1s a
Free- ſchool founded by John Hanſon, A. D. 1569.
and an Hoſpital for the maintenance of ſix men,
Aubr. Mon. built and endow'd by John Pollen. About a
MS, mile from this Town, is a Roman Camp called
Bere-hill; and half a mile hence, is another large
Camp, with double works; and there is a third,
ſome miles to the north, near a village called
Egbury. At Ouarley- hill, alſo, is a great fortifi-
catior, with quadruple works on one fide. The
two cutward trenches are diſtant farther than
ordinary, one from the other : from the cuter
to the ſecond, are 60 paces ; from the ſecond
to the third, 36 paces. This is anſwered by
another great Camp, called Dunbury, near Grate-
ly; and about ſix miles hence is Okebury, ano-
ther large Roman Camp, which ſeems to be an-
ſwer d by Frippesbury, about five miles diſtant
trom it. | From Andover, this river runs near
Whorwel, F/horwel, where Queen ZE/frith built a Mona-
ſtery, to expiate her heinous crime of murthe-
ring King Edward her ſon-in-law, and alſo to
atone for-the murder of her former Husband,
the noble Earl Atheluold, whom King Edgar,
upon an invitation to go a hunting, flew in this
place, becauſe he had put a trick upon him in
a love- intriegue, and had by indirect arts got
from him this Lady ZElfrith, the greateſt beau-
ty of her age. After this, the 7% takes-in
Wallop, another ſmall river, call'd Walop, or rather J/el-
lop, that is (if we interpret it from our own

Egbury.
(uar ley-hill,

ancient language) a little fountain on the ide of a
hill ; which gives name to the ancient and
Knightly family of the J/alops, who live near
it, Hence, the river runs in ſearch of Brige or Brige,
Brage, an ancient town plac'd by Antoninus 9

miles from the old Sorbiodunum ; at which di-

ſtance, it finds, between Salisbury and Winche-

ſter, and not tar from its banks, a ſmall coun-
try-village call'd Broughton; and if the old Brage Broughton.
was not at this place, I am of opinion it was

entirely demoliſh'd, when William the Conque-

ror converted theſe parts into the Foreſt we

juſt now mention'd. Next, Rumſey, in Saxon Rumſey.
Rumreg (where King Edgar built a Nunnery,
the Church whereof is till ſtanding,) is viſited
by this river ; which preſently falls into Sourh-
hampton-bay at the Vadum Arundinis, as Bede
calls it, which he interprets Redford; but now,
from the bridge where the ford was, inſtead of
Redford it 1s call'd Redbridge ; where, in the in-
tancy of the Saxon-Church, ſtcod a Monaſtery.
Of this one Cymberth was Abbot, who baptis d
(as Bede tells us) two young Brothers of Ar-
vand»4, petty King of the Ie of Wight, juſt as
they were about to be murder'd. For, when
Cedwalla the Saxon invaded that Iſland, theſe
two boys made their eſcape, and hid themſelves
at a little town called ad Lapidem ; till, being ad Lapidem.
betray'd, they were kill'd at the command of

Cedwalla. It you ask where this little tcwn ad

Lapidem ſtood, I ſhould gueſs at Stoneham, a Stoneham.
{mall village next to Redbridge, as the name it

ſelf very plainly directs me. The other river

which runs on the eaſt-ſide of South-hampton,

(now called [chin, from a town of that name Itchin.
near its head, )] ſeems to have been formerly

call'd Alre ; tor a market-town on the bank of Alre.

it, not far from the lake out of which it riſes,

is now call'd Alregord, i. e. the ford of Alre. Alresſord.
Which place (in the words ot an old Regiſter

of the Church of Wincheſter) the religious King

Kinewalc, out of a moſt pious Diſpoſition, gave to the

Church of Wincheſter, after he had receiv'd the Chri-

Redbridge,

ſtian Sacraments from Biſhop Birinns, at the begin-

ning of Chriſtianity in thoſe parts. In the year a book of
1220. Godfrey Lucy, Biſhop of Wincheſter * re- Waverly Mo-
ſtored the N e here, and call'd the place 8
New-market, perhaps in reſpect of the old Al- Ae.
regord that lies . it. But this new name did racy
not laſt long with the people, who have the
ſole Prerogative itn Words and Names. , [The
Town, on May-day 1690, was deſtroy'd by a
fire, which began in ſeveral parts of it, al-
moſt at the ſame time; and burnt down alſo
their Market-houſe and Church: but the Hou-
ſes, and the Market-hcuſfe, are rebuilt. Be-
fore this fire, the place was in ſo good a con-
dition, that there was not one inhabitant who
receiv'd aſſiſtance out of the Collections for the
r. From this place to Aulton, goes all-alon
a Roman High-way ; and nearer the river's
head, are three noted ſeats : Chilton-Candover, Chiteon-C
built by the late Sir Robert Worſley ; the ger. *
Graunge, by the late Sir Robert Henley ; and Graurge.
Abbotſton, by the late Duke of Bolton.| Nigh Abbotſton.
Alresford, lies Tickbora, which I muſt not omit, Tichborn.
becauſe it has given name to an eminent and
ancient family.

On the weſtern bank of this river lies the
famous city of the Britith Belge, which Ptole-
my and Antoninus call Venta Belgarum, the Bri- Venta Belga-
tains to this day Caer Gwent, the Saxons Pin- rum.
cancertep, [Jinteceartep, Fincearcep, Pmcer-
cep, the Latin-Writers commonly H/intonia,
and we at this day Winicheſter. Yet there are wintcheſler.
ſome Writers, who would have this to be the
Venta Simengrum, and give Bris?ol the honcur of

being the Venta . but that there was

*

P ” *
—_ —

1333 "FEELCCA”

— .

no ſuch People as the Sment in this Iſland, a
(hall prove when I come to the Zeni. In the
mean time, be they ever fo deſirous to con-
firm that conjecture, by ſeeking any where elſe
for the towns which Antoninus places near
Venta; they may depend upon it, they will find
nothing to their purpoſe. =
The original of Venta (from which, the Bi-
ſhop of Wincheſter is often call'd in our Hi-
ſtories, Epiſcoprs Ventanus and WWentanns,)\ is by
{ome fetch'd from Vemus (wind; ) by others trom
Vinum (Wine,) and again, by others from ina
Cui bone a Biſhop ; || who all of them might be aſham'd |
ments lita- of fuch trifling derivations. ſhould rather
OY ſubſcribe to the Opinion of our country-man
Leland, who derives the word from the Bri-
tiſh Guin or Guen, that is, white, as it it were
Caer Gwin, the White City. And why ſhould it
not ? ſince from this Colour the old Latins
gave name to the cities Alba Longa and Alba Re-
gia; and the Greeks to Leuca, Leucus, and other
places. For this Venta ( as alſo two other
towns of the ſame name, Venta Silurum, and
Venta kenorum) is ſituate in a ſoil of Chalk and

whitiſh Clay.
This city, without doubt, was very famous
in the Roman times ; for it was here, that the
+ T-xtrins Roman Emperors ſeem to have had their f Im-
ſue ſacra. perial Weaving-ſhops ; this being the chief of
all the Britiſh Vemæ, and lying neareſt Ita-
ly. For, in the Notitia, there is mention made
of a Procurator or Governour of the Cynegium
| Ventenſe or Bentenſe in Britain; which Jaco-
The Nene bes Cujacins, the eminent Civilian, reads Gy-
pede - 1 nacium, and interprets the Royal Heavery, in
erors in his || Paratitles to the Codes. Guidus Pancirollus is
Brit. Gyne- of the ſame opinion; and writes, that theſe
cram Gynacia were appointed for weaving the cloaths
r Emperor and Army, and for the making
* Stragula. f ſails, linnen, * ſhrouds, and other neceſſaries
for the furniture of their houſes, or quarters.
Yet Molphgangus Lazius thinks, that this Procura-

* FA

The ancient Greeks alſo were acquainted
with, and highly eſteem'd, that kind of Dogs
among us, which was called Agafaus, and we
yet term a Gaze-hound ; as Oppran will tell you
in the firſt Book of his Cynegeticks :

Es1 Id Tt ou Kay worT» & axipeor IxreuThENDL,
Boudr, d rd preydinng d Hg de. de.
Tes rege «yen plaa Berrarory cανẽõ‘ [wy,
"Avrdp zw ogds *Ayaoates vd uh
Tor iro pipthos pw opuortor 8T1S ava

AN voi dixid io TegreCyrar x1

Which Bodinus renders thus in Latin:

Eft etiam catuli ſpecies indagine clara,

Corpus huic breve, magnifico ſed corpore digna ;
Pitta Britannorum gens illos effera bello
Nutrit, Agaſædſque vocat viliſſima forma
Corporis, ut credas paraſitos eſſe Iatrantes.

Another ſort of dogs for lurching known,

Tho' fmall in bulk, in value yield to none.

In Britain bred, they thence the name r
ceive :

Of Gaze-hounds ; by their bigneſs you'd
believe

They're mungril Curs that under tables
live.

Claudian likewiſe ſpeaks thus of our Maſtiff-
dogs:

Magna que taurorum frafturi colla Britanni.
And Engliſh Maſtiffs us d to bend the

necks

Of furious bulls.

But this by way of J only.
In this City (as our Hiſtorians tell you) in

140
—.

Agaſeus,
Gaze-bouny, N
Britiſh Da,

Maſtifs,

Us

The St.

{19 Þ Onegium. tor had the care of the Emperor's | dogs in this the time of the Romans, liv'd that Conſtans the
Ih! place. And thus much is certain, that Bri- Monk, who was firſt made Ceſar and afterwards gom a Mai
Britiſh dogs, tiſh Dogs have been thought preferable to all | Emperor by his father ConfZantine; and who uſur- made Crit

—
—

—

. | — —
1 — — 7
j — 2 ——⁵*²—4jh

.
1

—
- — —

„ „

"we

©: Attn os

2 ——— —
=

s —

—

= ——

„

2 *

others in Europe; inſomuch, that Strabo ſays,
they have ſerved as ſoldiers; and the ancient
Gauls us'd them in their wars ; and they were
bought-up by the Romans for their ſports in
the Amphitheatre, and the pleaſures of hunt-
ing: for they were (as Strabo ſays) wquas Teggs
rde xwyytoias, that is, naturally made fer excellent
hunters. Hence Nemeſianus,

——— Diviſa Britannia mittit
Veloces, noſtrique orbis venatibus aptos.

The Britains from this world diſ-
joyn'd,

An dogs, and uſeful for our hunting,
end.

And Gratius, of their goodneſs and value:

Quod freta fi Morinùm dubio refluentia ponto

Veneris, atque ipſos libeat penetrare Bri-
tannos,

O quanta eſt merces, & quantum impendia
ſupra !

But if at fartheſt Calais you arrive,

Where doubtful tides the paſſive ſhore de-
ceive;

And thence your dang'rous courſe to Britain
ſteer,

What ſtore you'll find, and how exceffive

ped the Government in oppoſition to Honori-
us, out of a conceit that Succeſs would attend
the name. For long before this (as Zoſimus, ſpeak-
ing of that time, delivers it) there were, as well
in Cities as Villages, large Colleges of Monks, who
before had led a ſolitary life in mountains, woods,
and dens, from whence they derive their f name.
That old piece of wall of great ſtrength and
thickneſs, ſtill to be ſeen towards the weſt-
gate of the Cathedral Church, ſeems to be the
remains of this ancient College. But the Monk
who was here declar'd Cæſar, after he left this
place, ſoon met with Death, as a juſt judgment
upon his father's ambition, and his own Con-
tempt of Religion. During the Saxon Heptar-
chy, tho' this place was once or twice ſack'd,
yet it recover'd, and was the Palace of the Weſt-
Saxon Kings, and adorn'd with magnificent
Churches, and was honour'd with an Epiſco-
pal See; and had from King Ethelſtan the pri-
vilege of fix Money-mints. In the Norman
times alſo, it flouriſh'd very much, and the
Archives ( or Repoſitory of publick Records)
were in it. Thus it continu'd long in a proſ-
perous condition ; excepting one or two acci-
dents of fire, and that it was plunder'd by the
ſoldiers in the Civil War between King Ste-
phen and Maud the Empreſs. Hence, our Poct
Necham, who liv'd in that age :

Guintoniam titulis claram, gaziſque reple-
tam

dear!

Noverunt veterum tempora priſca patrum.

Monafeeries
in Cities,

t Mas

cular i
erbicu
Murus
Lourna

Lib. 4.
roſophi

laſtiffs

:onſtans
rom a Mn

nade Czar,

fonafteries
n Cities,

Me-

A MS HI R E. $:

Sed jam ſacra fames auri, jam cacus habendi
Urbibus egregiis parcere neſcit amor.

For wealth and ſtate, for honour and renown,
In good old times fair Wincheſter was
known: |
But in our age, in our degenerate days,
When all the World ryrannick Gold o-

beys, :
The richeſt Cities are the ſureſt preys.

In the beginning of the late Civil Wars (to
obſerve this by the Way,) the Soldiers, opening
the Marbl of William Rufus, which
lies in the Choir, found on his thumb a golden
Ring with a Ruby ſet in it.]

But to return: All the ſoremention'd loſſes
were ſufficiently repair d by King Edward 3.

The Staple. when he ſettled here the Staple for Cloth and
Wool. What figure this City made in former
ages, is not now to be known ; which (as the
{ame Necham writes)

Plammis toties gens alienn dedit.
Hine facies urbis toties mutata, dolorem
Pratendit; caſus nuntia vera ſui.

o oft the hapleſs town
The rage of foreign flames hath undergone;
She ſhow'd her ſad misfortunes in her face,
And diſmal looks her ancient griets expreſs.

At this day, the City is por populous, and
well water'd by the divided ſtreams of the ri-
ver ; extended length-ways from Eaſt ro Weſt,
and about a mile and half in compaſs within
the walls, which have fix gates; the paſſage alſo
to each, for a conſiderable way, being Suburbs.

At the ſouth- ſide of the weſt- gate, ſtands an
ancient Caſtle, which has been often beſieged;
but never ſo ſtraitly, as when Maud the Em-
preſs maintain'd it againſt King Stephen. At
laſt the Empreſs cauſed a report to be ſpread
of her death, and was put in a Coffin to deceive
the enemy, and ſo was carry d off as one dead.
In the place where this Caſtle ſtood, is now a

King's Pa- Royal Palace, begun by King Charles 2. The

lace, foundation was laid the 23 cf March, 1683,

— (in the digging for which, they found a Pave-
on. M9. ment of Brick, and Coins of Conſtantine the
Great, and others ; )' but, being not finiſh'd
before the death of that Prince, 1t remains only

the model of a ncble Defign. There was par-
ricularly intended a large Cupola, 30 foot above

the roof, which would have been ſeen a great

way to the ſea ; and allo a fair ſtreet leading

to the Cathedral-gate in a direct line from the

tront of the houſe ; for which, and for the Parks,

the ground was procured. The South-ſide is

216 foot, and the Weſt 326 ; and the Shell, as it
remains, is ſaid to have coſt 25000 pounds. ] Of

N. Arthur's the * Round Table which now hangs up, and

1 eb. which the common people take for Xing Arthur s

culari; Peel Table, I ſhall obſcrve no more than this, that it
erbicularis plainly appears to be of a much later date. For
 Murus, in former ages, When thoſe military exerciſes
L ournaments, calłd Tournaments ( inſtituted for the trial and
improvement of warlike Spirits, ) were much

in vogue ; they had this kind of round tables,

that there might be no diſpute for precedency

I Al Among the Nobility. And this ſeems to be a
wy © Pop: very ancient cuſtom. For Athenæus tells us,
Pt. that the old Gauls fat at round Tables, and that
their Armour-bearers ſtood at their backs with
their ſhields. Almoſt in the middle of the city,
only a little more to the ſouth, Kenelwalch
King of the Weſt-Saxons (after that College
of Monks, of the Roman age, was deftroy'd)

142

.

built here a Church, as Malmesbury writes, very

Splendid for theſe times; on the fite whereof was 4
terwards eretted a Cathedral of the fame model, tio
more ſtately. . 8 | | Biſhops of
neltualeh made firſt Biſhop, there has been a long Wincheſter,
ſeries of ſucceſſors no leſs eminent for dealt
and honour, than for piety and devotion ; and

In this See; from Mina whom Ke-

by a peculiar privilege they are Chancellors to
the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, and Prelates of
the Garter. Some of theſe at great expence
ave from time to time heauti 4 and enlarged
this Church ; particularly, Edington and al-
lelin but above aff Widham, who at a prodt-
grous charge built the Weſt part of the Church
from the Choir: x near and curious piece of
work in the middle of which, between two
pillars, is his own monument. The Church has
been accordingly dedicated to ſeveral Patrons,
Amphibalus, S. Peter, S-Swithin, and laſtly to the
Holy Trinity; by which name it is call d at pre-
ſent. Among the Saxons; it was in great repure,
for its being honour'd with the Sepulture of
fome of their Kings ; whoſe bones were gathe-
3 Richard Fox, Biſhop, and put into little
gi Coftins, which, with their ſeveral In-
criptions, he placed upon a will that runs a-
long the upper part of rhe Quire. It was for-
merly call d || Ealven-mynrcep, 1. e. the old | Eal5an-
Monaftery or Miner, to diſtinguiſh it from the" Ss

more modern one, * Nepan-mynrce 12 New & way
Minfer ; which King Ife l 8
for a place on Which % build the Offices belonging m *
to it, bought of the Biſhsp a certain piece of ground, Chron, Sax,
or every foot whereof he paid one Mark, according
to the publick Standard. This neu College, as well
as the old one, was firſt founded for marry'd
Prieſts; who were afterwards expelled by Dun-
ſtan Archbiſhop of Canterbury, upon the mi-
racle of a Crots ſpeaking, ard condemning the
Order: and fo, Monks were brought into their
room. Theſe two Monaſterics had their walls
ſo near one another, that when they were ſing-
ing in one, the noiſe was a diſturbance to the
other; upon which, there aroſe ſome quarrels
between the two Societies, and theſe afterwards
broke out into open feuds. This reaſon, and
another inconvenience of a great flow of Wa-
ter (which ran down the ftreets from the Weſt-
gate, and, ſtagnating at this new Monaſtery,
infected the air) caus'd the Church, 200 years
after it's firſt building, to be remov'd into the
northern ſuburbs, to a place call'd Hide; where, Hide-Abbey.
by the licence of Henry 1, the Monks built a

large and beautiful Monaſtery, which within a

few years was burnt down by the treachery and
contrivance of Henry of Blois Biſhop of Win-

cheſter; as a private Hiſtory of that place tells

us. By this fire, was conſum d that famous Croſs,

the gift of Canute the Dane, which (as ſome

old Records deliver it) coſt him one year's Re-

venue of the whole kingdom. But the Mona-

ſtery roſe again in a noble fabrick (as the ru-

ins teſtify,) growing by degrees, till the fatal

period for the deſtruction of Monks. For then,

this was demoliſh'd ; and that other of the Holy

Trinity; which is the Cathedral Church, up-

on the ejection of the Monks, had a new toun-

dation of a Dean and 12 Prebendaries. On the

Eaſt- ſide of the Cathedral, ſtood a ſpacious pa-

lace of the Biſhop's, call'd J/olveſey built aun. Wolve ſey.
Dom. 1137. by Henry Biſhop of Wincheſter, Leigey-book
and] fortity'd with ſeveral turrets, and almoſt of S. Croſs,
ſurrounded by the river, and reaching to the
City-walls. [This was ſeiz d in the late Civil

Wars, and pull'd down, to make money of the

Lead and other materials; but, ſince the Re-
ſtoration, Biſhop Morley laid out f a great Sum 4 2300. 1,
on a handſome ſtructure for that ufe, and, dy-

mg

iS. FB

G A.
AR FO. >.

* F 4

nem.

A College
built by |
William of Learning that England had, and whoſe memo-
Wickham. ry „ill by that means be convey'd to all Poſte-

College.

Typhœus.

terwards was the Chapel of St. Giles; and of

Earls of Win-
cheler,

* Avito, ,
The Quincy's nour ; King John made Saer Quincy, Earl of
Arms.
+ Baltheus || Jabel of ſeven, as I learn'd from his ſeal. To
militaris.
Lemniſcus.
KRhombos.

ing before it vas fiviſh'd, left 500 pounds more
to complete it, Over the door is this Inſcripti-
on: Geoigius Morley Epiſcopus has ædes propriis
impenſis de nouo ſtruxit, A. D. 1684. 1. e. George
Morley, e built this houſe a-new at his
own charge, A. D. 1684.] In the South-ſu-
burbs, there is a neat College within it's view,
which Wiliam of Wickham Biſhop of this Sce
(one of the greateſt patrons and encouragers of

rity,) built for a publick ſchool, and which
ſends out great numbers of karned men, into
Church and State. In this, there is a plentitul
maintenance for a Warden, ten Fellows, two

| With ſome Maſters, ſeventy Scholars, [||three Chaplains, three
others, C. Clerks, an Organiſt, ſixteen Choriſters, and the

ſtatutable Servants.| There were alſo other
noble buildings in this City (moſtly conſecra-
ted to religious uſes) which I ſhall not menti-
on, becauſe Time has deſtroy'd them; tho' I

17 * —
+ Partheno. cannot but take notice of the * Nunnery, foun

ded by ZEifwide, wife to King Alfred; it ha-

rr wan da ving been ſo noble a Pile (as the ruins of it
Abby.
Maud wife took his wite Maud, daughter of Malcolm King
to Henry 1. of Scots, by whom the Royal families of the

ſtill ſhew,) and the place out of which Henry 1.

Saxons and Normans were united; whereby that
Prince gain'd much on the affections of the

1 Proneptis, Engliſh, For ſhe was + grand- daughter to Ed-

mund Ironfide, by his ſon Edward, The baniſhed ;
and a Lady endow'd with all the vertues be-
coming a Queen, but mcre eſpecially eminent
for piety and devotion. Whereupon, this old
Tetraſtick was made in her commendation :

Proſpera uon lætam fecere, nec aſpera tri-
ſtem :
Ajpera riſus ei, proſpera terror erant.
Non decor effecit fragilem, non ſceptra ſu-
perbum 3

Sola potens humilis, ſola pudica decays.

Nor bleſs'd, rejoyc'd; nor when unhappy,
mcurn'd ;

To laughter, grief ; and joy to fear ſhe
turn'd.

Nor beauty made her frail ; nor ſceptres,
proud ;

Humble, tho' great; and ſcarce more fair
than good.

There have been in this City (as appears by

ing without Iflue-male, the honour was extinct
in him : for he marry'd the eldeſt daughter and
co-heir by a former wite, of Alan Lord of
Galloway in Scotland, in whoſe right he was
Conſtable of Scotland. But he had only three
daughters by her; the eldeſt, marry'd to Mili-
am de Ferrariis Earl of Derby, the ſecond, to
Alan de la Zouche, the youngeſt, to Comine Earl
of Buchan in Scotland. A long time after,
Hugh le Deſpencer was honour'd with the title,
during lite, by K. Edward 2, who doted much
on him ; but he and his ſon had too late Expe-
rience, how fatal it often proves to be the ta-
vourites of a Prince : for both were put to
death by the tury of the People. A good while
after, by the bounty of King Edward 4, Lewis
de Bruges a Belgian, Lord of Gruthuſe, and Prince
of Steinhuſe (who had entertain'd that Prince in
Flanders when he fled thither for refuge, ) ob-
tain'd this title, with Arms not much diftering
trom thoſe of Koger de Quincy; but, after the
death of King Edward, he ſurrender'd it to

was honour'd by Edward 6, with a new title of
Marqueſs of Wincheſter, which his Poſterity

of Bolton in Yorkſhire.] Wincheſter ſtands in
the longitude of 22, and the latitude of 51;
according to the Obſervations of later ages.
On St. Katharine's-hill near Wincheſter, * there

to the ground of the hill. } Eaſt from Win-

of a large mouth into the ſea : Bede calls it
Homelea, and ſays it runs through the country
of the Jutes, and falls into the Solente ; for o
he calls the chanel between Britain and the Ve
of Wight, into which the rwo oppoſite tides
come-up at certain hours from the Ocean,
and meet here with great violence, and were ſo
aſtoniſhing a ſight to thoſe ancient Inhabitants,
Britain. Of which, take Bede's own words:
the vaſt northern Ocean, do daily meet together and
encounter each other beyond the mouth of the river Ho-
melea, and, the conflict ended, the waves retire into
the ſea from whence they came. Into this chanel,
another ſmall river empties it ſelf, which, ri-
ſing near Harnford, runs between the foreſt of
Waltham (where | was a ſtately ſeat of the Bi-

Biſhop Ardrews's Regiſtry) 32 Pariſh-Churches, [ſhops of Winchelter, ſruin'd in the late Civil

which are now all demoliſh'd, fave eight. In

Wars)] and the foreſt of Bere, by Tichfield,

the Cathedral Church-yard, is a College ere-|where was formerly a ſmall Monaſtery, built by
cted by the late Biſhop Morley, An. 1672. for Peter de Rupibus Bilhop of Wincheſter, and ſince,
10 Miniſters Widows, and by him very wellſthe chief ſeat of the Mriotheſiys Earls of South-

endow'd with a yearly Revenue. ]

ampton ; [the laſt of whom dying withourt iſſue-

Of Guy Earl of Warwick ſo famous in ſtory, male, this Eſtate came to Edward, firſt Earl of

(who here in ſingle combat overcame Colbrand
the Daniſh j] Giant; ) and of J/altheof Earl of
Huntingdon, beheaded in this place, where at-

the famous adjoyning Hoſpital of St. Croſs, foun-
ded by Henry de Blois, Brother of King Stephen
and Biſhop of this City, and farther e jd
by Henry de Beaufort Cardinal: Of theſe I pal
{ay nothing, becauſe they are related at large
in our common Hiſtories.

As to the Earls ot Vincheſter; to paſs by
Clito a Saxon, who, at the coming-1n of the Nor-
mans, was 3 of this * hereditary ho-

Wincheſter ; whoſe Arms were f Nie with a

him ſucceeded Roger his fon, who bore in a

King Henry the 7h. In the“ laſt Age ſave one,,
William Poulet, Lord Treaſurer ot England, memery, C.

now enjoys, [ with the additional title of Dukel

Gainsborough, by marriage with Elizabeth,
daughter and co-heir of the ſaid Earl ; whoſe
ſon dying without iſſue-male, it deſcended to
two daughters, co-heirs. |

Hence, the ſhore winds inwards, and, together

at the upper-part of which flouriſhed formerly
Port-peris, Where tradition ſays that Veſpaſian
landed. Our Anceſtors gave it the new name
of Portcheſter, not from Port, the Saxon, but
from portus a harbour. For Ptolemy, from it's
largeneſs, calls it Mizas xl, i. e. the ſpacious

large Caſtle ſtill remaining, which commands a
tree and full proſpe& to the harbour below.
But when the ſea, retiring from this ſhore,

field Gules ſeven * Majcles voided Or. But he dy-

made the harbour by degrees leſs commodious,
they

44

Wiltſhire,

St. Kathz-

is a Camp with a ſingle work, and ſingle graft, rine's hill.
neither exactly round nor ſquare ; but according * Aubr, Ms.

cheſter, the river Hamble diſcharges it ſelf out Hamble,

Solente;

that they reckon'd it one of the wonders of

Tuo tides: which flow round the Britiſh INand out of

Waltham.
$ . C.

Bere.
Titchfeld.

with the Ifland call'd Porteſey, makes a creek porteſej .

Port; and fo, a place in Africa was call'd Por- portus mit-
tus magnus, as we learn from Pliny. There is a nus.

W ithin Ou?

See Earls of

Port T

God's

tihcat!
be ade
Stat. 7
t. 26.

* Off

vexil

Aug,
Hay:

Warbli

+ Kn.
©

Halit
Thor

Britiſſ

exam
lid, 4. c;

iitham,
s, C.

te.
tchheld,

rele)

ortus mag
15.

pe eee

145

HAMSHIRE.

—

=”

7 they remov'd hence to Portſey, an adjoyning

Liland, about 14 miles round. At high tide it

is encompaſs d with ſea-water, of which they

make ſalt; and is joyn'd to the continent by a
bridge, which had a Fort to defend it. Athel-

fled, wife of King Edgar, gave this Iſland to
Neu=-MinFer in Wincheſter ; and, at the en-
trance or mouth of the creek, our Anceſtors

built a town, which from thence they call'd
Portſmouth. Portſmouth, i. e. the mouth of the Port. This, in
time of war, is very populous, but not ſo in

time of peace ; and they apply themſelves more

to War and Navigation, than to the politer
Studies. It has a Church, of ancient work ;

Cod houſe, and an Hoſpital (which they call God's-kouſe)
founded by Peter de Rupibrs Biſhop of Winche-

ſter. It was fortity'd with a wall of timber

lin'd with mud, and a high mount to the north-

eaſt, near the gate, and two forts of free- ſtone

at the entrance of the harbour, which the in-
habitanrs ſay were begun by King Edward 4,

and finiſh'd by Henry 7, who, they add, ſettl'd

a garriſon in this town. But Queen Elizabeth,

at vaſt expence, ſo fortity'd it by new Works,

+ Is, C. that it“ was hard to ſay how a Place f could

+ Can, C. poſſibly be made ſtronger. And the garriſon
14 keep guard night and day, ſome at the Town-

te added, gates, and others upon the top of the Church-
Stat. 7, Ann. tower, Where, by the tolling of a Bell, they give
e. 26, notice what numbers of Horſe and Foot are
at any time coming toward the Town, and,
* Oftenſo * by hanging out the Colours, ſhew from what
vex/ lo. quarter they come. The appearance of this
place (as to the extent, ſtrength and magniti-
cence of the land-fortifications, as well as things
belonging to marine affairs) is very much im-
proved of late years. For through the growth
of Naval Attion in England, it is now reckon'd
amongſt the principal Chambers of the King-
dom, for the laying-up of it's Royal Navy; as
being furniſh'd on ſhore with Docks wet and

dry, Store-bouſes, Rope-yards, materials and re-|

quilites of all kinds for the building, repairing,
rigging, arming, victualling, and compleat fit-
ting to ſea, ſhips of the higheſt rates. It has
alſo Dwelling-houſes and ample Accommoda-
tions for a Commiſſioner, and all the ſubordi-
nate Officers and Maſter-Artizans, needful for
the conſtant attending and executing the day
and night-ſervices of the Navy in this Port,
both in Peace and War. It hath given the title
of Dutcheſs, to Loviſe de Queronalle, created by
1 King Charles the 24, in the year 1673.
g· 19. b .
Hence, from Portes-bridge, upon a little turn-
Havant, ing of the ſhore, I ſaw Havant, a ſmall market-
Warblington, town; and near it arlington, formerly a beau-
tiful ſeat of the Earls of Salisbury, now of the
+ Knights, family of the Cottons f. Before theſe, there lie
C. two Iflands ; the larger, calbd Haling, the leſs,
Thors, T horney, from the thorns ; and each has it's Pa-
| ”* riſh-Church. In ſeveral places along this ſhore,
out of the ſea- Water that comes up, they make
ſalt ; which at firſt is of a ſort of pale green
colour, but by an art they have, it is after-
wards boil'd into a pure white. And it is of
this ſea-ſalt, not of the other which is made in
Britih Salt, our Engliſh pits, that St. Ambroſe is to be un-

li, meron, derſtood : Let us look upon thoſe things which are

cap. ii · mon, and withal full of kindneſs to man; how

water is turn d into ſuch firm and ſolid ſalt, that it
is often cut with inſtruments of iron; which is uſu-
ally ſeen in the Britiſh ſalts, that are cruſted into a
* as hard and white as marble, and are very
wholſom, &c.
At a greater diſtance from the ſea, * liv'd the
wart. Meanvari, whoſe Country (together with the
Ille of Wight) Edikvakh King of the South-
Saxons receiv'd from Mulpher King of the Mer-

Live, C.

Clans, who was his God- father, and at his Bap- See Bede,
tiſm gave him this as a token of Adoption. lib. 4. c. 12.
Their Country is -now divided into three Hun-

dreds, with a very little change from the an-

cient name, viz. Meansborow, EafFmean, Weaſt-

mean, | (this laſt has the name of a Tything ; )1

within which, is a high hill fortify'd at the top

with a large trench, and call'd Oli Wincheſter, Old Winche-
where tradition tells us there was an ancient ficr.

City ; but now there is not the leaſt mark or

ſign of it; ſo that it ſeems to have been only

a Roman Summer-Camp. [In theſe parts, the

learned Annotator upon the Itinerary, places a Gale, p. 109.
People of the Leni (diſtin from thoſe that

are commonly known by that name) about the

river Thing; and indeed Cæſar himſelf ſpeaks of

the Lenimagui or Cenimagni (deſcended probably Bell. Gall,
from the Cenimaniti in Gaule) as neighbours to 5:

the Segontiaci, and the names of MeanfFoke, Me-
ansburrow, and Mean, are ſuppoſed by him to

be the Remains of the ancient name Cenimag-

ni; how truly, I dare not ſay.

Below the forementioned Fort, lies Warn- Warnwrd.!
ford, where Adam de Portu, a man of great :
wealth and figure in thoſe parts, under William
the Conqueror, rebuilt the Church, as we learn
from this rude Diſtich in the wall:

Addæ hic portu, benedicat ſolis ab ortu,

Gens Deo dicata, per quem fic ſum reno-
vata.

Good folks, in your devotions ev'ry day,

For Adam Port, who thus repair'd me,
ray.

Nov, the Inſcription is thus;

oe i

Ade hic de Portu Solis benedicat ab ortn,

Gens cruce ſignata, per quem fic ſum re-
novald.

And, as by theſe the Revairer is diſcover'd,
ſo is the Founder of it by three others upon the
South-ſide :

Fratres orate, prece deſt ra ſauctiſicate,
Templi fattores, ſeniores & juniores,
Wilfrid fundavit, lonus Adam fic reno-

Vavit.

All you that come here,
Beſtow a kind prayer

On the Church's builders,
Both youngers and elders;
What pious H/rid rais'd
Good Adam increas'd.]

More inward, there border upon theſe, the
Segontiaci ; who ſubmitted themſelves ro Cæſar, Segontiaci.
and inhabited the Northern limits of this Coun-
ty, in the Hundred of Holeſbot in which we
meet with Aulton, a Market-town that King Aulton.
Alfred left by will to the Keeper of Leodre; and
Baſingſtoke,a well- frequented market, which ſhows Baſingſtoke,
a very neat Chapel, dedicated to the Holy
Ghoſt, built by William the firſt Lord Sands,
who lies bury'd there. Upon the roof, the Hi-
ſtory of the Prophets, Apoſtles, and Diſciples
of Chriſt, is very curioully deſcrib'd with their
ſeveral pictures. Below this place to the Eaſt,
lies Bafing [memorable of old for a Battle of Baſing,
Etheldred and Alfred againſt the Danes, where-
in the latter were Conquerors; and ſince, fa-
mous for it's Lords of that Sirname, and the St. Johns,
St. Johns, Pojnings and Poulets. For when A-
dam de Portu, Lord of Baſing, marry'd the
daughter and heir of Roger de Aurevall, whoſe

wife was daughter and heir of the noble fa-
a mily

*

147 B E L G A. 148 Wo
3 l 6
Out of an old mily ot the St. Johns 3 William, ſon of the ſaid Ou the ground whereon this City was built (I ſpeak [lian enti-

miſſal of this Adam, in great reſpect, took the name of St. John,

nit! in Ninnius's words) the Emperor ConfFantins ſou d
family. which was derived to his poſterity, in a lineal

the mo
Noble.

Succeſſion. But when Edmund de St. John, in
the time of Edward 3, died without iſſue, Mar-
garet his ſiſter brought to her husband, John de
St. Philibert, the Eſtate of the Lords St. John.
She likewiſe dying without iſſue, Jabel her
other ſiſter, wite of Luke Poynings, had by him
Thomas Lord of Baſing, v. hoſe grand- child Con-
ſtantia, by his ſon Hugh, was heir to this part
of the eſtate ; and marrying into the family of
the Powlets, was the great grandmother of that
Hailium Poulet, who by King Henry 8. was
made Baron Sr. John of Baſing ; and by King
Edward 6. Earl of Hilfhire, and Marqueſs ot
Winchef#cr. He was Lord High Treaſurer of
England, and, aiter he had in the moſt trouble-
ſome times patled through a courſe of the
He lived 97 higheſt honours, he dy'd in a good old age : a

Po ** le t.

three grains of Corn, that no perſon inhabiting there,
might ever be poor. So Dinccrates, at the build-
ing of Alexandria in Egypt (as Marcellinus has

which Omen he foretold, that that Ciry ſhould
always be ſupply'd with plenty of proviſions.
The ſame Author reports, that Conſtantius dy d
here, and that his Tomb was to be ſeen at the
gate of the City, as appear'd by the inſcripti-
on. Bur in theſe matters let Ninnius vindicate
his own credit; who, indeed, has ſtuff'd that
little hiſtory with many trifling lies. But thus
much I dare affirm, that this was a flouriſhing
City in that age; and I my ſelf have found
there ſeveral coins of Conftantine Junior, ſon of
Conftantine the Great, which on the reverſe have
the figure of a building, with this inſcription,
PRO VIDENTIAE CAESS. Bur all Writers

it) ſtrewed all the out-lines with f Wheat, by T Farina.

+ Angipor-

3 happineſs, that Courtiers ſeldom find. He built | agree, that Count t untius, whom Ninnius makes un.
here a ſeat, both for largeneſs and beauty ex- the builder of this city, dy'd at Aſapſueſtia, or Drior's- hole
ceeding magnificent; but ſo overcharg'd with | M:bſete, in Cilicia, and was thence carry'd to
it's own weight, that his poſterity were forc'd |Conſtantinople to be interr'd among his Ance-
to pull down part of it. ſtors. I deny not, but that a Cenotaphium or

Vines firſt Nigh this place we ſee The Vine, a beauti- | honorary Tomb might be ſet-up here for the

12 ful houſe of the + Barons Sandes, and ſo call'd Emperor; for ſuch like || Barrows of earth were || Tumak.

+ Now ex- from Vines, which we have had in Britain, more

often made in memory of the dead ; round which, Honorary

tin&. tor ſhade than fruit, ever ſince the time of the ſoldiers had yearly ſolemn Courſes or Ex- 1, *
Vopiſeus. Probzzs the Emperor. For it was he, who gave |erciſes, in honour of the deceas'd party. 128885
liberty to the Britains and others, to have] When the Roman Empire began to decline,
Vines. The firſt Baron of this family, was and the barbarous nations made incurſions on
2 de Miliam Sandes, whom King Henry 8. advanc u all ſides into the Provinces ; the Britiſh armies, &), what,
nNacs.,

to that honour, when, being his Chamberlain,
he had encreas'd his eſtate by marriage with
Margery Bray, daughter and heir ot John Bray,
and Coulin of Rina Bray Knight of the
Garter, and a Knight-Banneret of great name.
*Grandfa- To him was born Thomas Lord Sandes, { * who
_ 4 was ſuccecded by three of the ſame family, and

of the name of Miliam; the laſt of whom,

tearing that they might be involv'd in the ca-
lamity of their Neighbours, choſe themſelves
Emperors, firſt Marcus, and then Gratinn; and
preſently murder'd both. And laſt of all, in

* choſe one Conſt autine, purely for the ſake
his name and againſt his own- will; as Ninn

the year 407, and in this City Caer Segont, they * Purpura
of Aurum.
. Conſtantine
I- Aug. choſe
us and Gervaſius Dorobernenſis tell us. He, Emperor for

living, C. k
Y was ſucceeded by Henry, Lord Sandes or San-
dys.| Nigh this place, to the ſouth-eaſt, lies
+ Ann. 1607. Odiam, + adorn'd with a Palace of the Kings;

ſetting ſail from Britain, arriv'd at Bologne in the fake of h
France, and got all the Roman forges, as far ame.
as the Alps, to joyn him. He dtrended Va-

Oclam.. and once the priſon of David 2, King of Scots. lence, a city of Gaul, with great reſolution, a- ms of the
It was formerly a free burrough of the Biſhops| gainſt the forces of Honorius the Emperor, and | 8
Matth. Paris, of Wincheſter ; the Caſtle whereof in the reign | placed Garriſons upon the + Rhine, which had + Nbenum. * Glen.

of King John was defended by 13 Engliſh-men,
tor 15 days together, againſt Lewis Dauphin
ot France, who attack'd it vigorouſly on all

ſides.
Higher up, among theſe Segontiaci, upon the
North-border of the County, lay the City of the
Vindonum, Segontiaci, Called Vindenum; | and in Manuſcripts
Comment. in ({aith Dr. Gale) Vindiui, from Vindinum in Gaule,
Itinerar. p. the chick city of the Aulerci Cenimagni; who
159 ſettled here. i This Pindonum, leaving it's old
14me, tock that of the Inhabitants ; as Lute-
tia in France borrow'd it's new name from the
Parifians. For this place was call'd by the Bri-
tains Caer Segonte, that is, the City of the Son-
tiaci, (and ſo Ninnius terms it in his Catalogue
Silceller. ct Cities; ) we at this day call it Silceſter; and
Higden ſeems to give it the name of Britenden,
from the Britains. 1 am induc'd to call this
the antient Vindonum, becauſe it agrees with
the diſtances of Vindenum, from Gallena or Gual-
lenſord, and from Vinta or Wincheſter, in the
Itinerary of Antoninus; and further, becauſe
2 military way is ſtill viſible between this Sil-
cfter and Winchester. Ninnius tells us, that
this City was built by CoufZantius fon of Con-
fantine the Great, and that it was once call'd
Murimirtum. Aurimintu, perhaps for Muri-vindun, that is,
the Nals of Vindenum: for the Britains retain
the word Mie, which they borrow'd from the
Roman language ; and as to the V conſonant,
they often, in pretunciation, change it into M.

been a long time neglected. , He alſo built for-
treſies at the ſeveral Paſſes of the Alps. In
Spain, by the aſſiſtance of Conſt aus his ſon,
whom from a Monk he had rais'd to the title
of Auguſtus, he was very ſucceſsful ; and then
ſending letters to Honorius to beg pardon for
ſuffering the ſoldiers to caſt the Purple upon
him, he receiv'd an Imperial Robe trom the
Emperor. Buoy'd up with this, he paſs'd the
Alps with deſign to march to Rome; but hear-
ing of the death of Alaric the Goth, who had
been a friend to his cauſe, he retreated to Arles,
where he fixed the Imperial feat, and com-

name, and ſummon'd thither a ſolemn meeting
ot ſeven Provinces. In the mean time, Geronti::s
rais'd a faction againſt his Maſter ; and, after
he had traiterouſly ſlain Conſtans his ſon at Vi-
enue in Gaul, beſieged Conſtantine the Father,
in Arles: but when one, whom the Hiſtorians
call Con#tantizs (ſent by the Emperor Honori-
us,) was marching againſt him with an army;
Gerontius laid violent hands upon himſelf. In
the mean time, Conſtantine, being reduc'd to
great ſtraits, and by ſome unſucceſsful ſallies
brought to deſpair, quitted his burthenſome
Honour, and, entring into the Church, took

the city was preſently ſurrender'd, and he led
priſoner into Italy, where he was beheaded,

with Julian his fon (whom he had entitled =
mo

4.

manded the city to be call'd || after his own || Cnft:tins

on him the Order of a * Prieſt : upon which, * Preite

"aring,

mult.
norary
abs, or
rows.

urpura
ue runt.
nſtantins
g. choſe
1peror for
ſake of bi;
ne,

onſtantind
6.

Presbyt?! f

b

149

*

HA MHS HI X E.

lan enti-

\ - bie.

* Ancipor 6

a.
Drion'· hole ·

&, what,

rms of the
ener: 1
emards,

Ard Gant.

moſt Noble, ) and Sebaſtian his brother. The

4 the mo? Hiſtory of theſe affairs, which is before deli-

ver'd more at large, I have here abridged from
Zofimus, Zoſomen, Nicephorus, Oroſius, and Olym-
piodorus ; that Truth may triumph over the
vanity ot thoſe, who by the help of their own
invention have adulterated this Hiſtory with
idle and ridiculous Fables.

Our Hiſtorians report, that in this city was
the Inauguration of our Valiant King Arthur ;
and ſoon after, the place was demoliſhed, ei-
ther in the Saxon Wars, or when Athelwolf (in
rebellion againſt K. Edward his brother, and aſſi-
ſted by that crew of Daniſh Robbers) deſtroy'd
all this country as far as Baſingſtoke. Nothing now
remains, but the walls, which (though they
have loſt their coping and battlements) ſeem to
have been exceeding high. For, by the rub-
biſh and ruins, the earth is grown ſo high, that
I could ſcarce thruſt my ſelt through a * paſ-
ſage which they call Onion hole; though J
ſtoop'd very low. The walls remain in good
meaſure entire ; only, with ſome few gaps in
thoſe places, where the gates have been ; and
out ot theſe walls, there grow Oaks of ſuch a
vaſt bigneſs, incorporated as it were with the
ſtones, and their roots and boughs are ſpread
{o far round ; that they raiſe admiration 1n all
that behold them. The walls are about two
Italian miles in compaſs ; ſo that, perhaps, it
was from the largeneſs of the place, that the
Saxons call'd it Seleſter, that is, the great City.
For Sel ſeems in their language to have ſignified
great; ſince Aſſerius Menevenlis interprets the
Saxon word Selwood, by Sylva magna, i. e. a great
wood, On the welt-tide of the walls, where
it is level, there runs a long ridge, caſt-up for
a Defence to the place. It contains about 80
acres, being a very good ſoil, now divided into
ſeparate fields, with a little grove to the welt ;
and eaſtward, near the gate, a farm-houſe, with
a {mall Church of modern building ; in which,
I ſearch'd for ancient Inſcriptions, but found
only ſome Coats of Arms in the windows, viz.
in a field ſable ſeven Fufils argent Bendwiſe ; as
alſo, in a field ſable a Feſſe berween two chevrons
Or, and in a ſhield Or an eagle diſplay'd with two
heads, gules. I find theſe laſt to be the Arms
of the Blewets, to whom this eſtate came, after
the time of William the Conqueror ; the ſecond,
are the Arms of the noble family of Bainard of
Leckham ; and the firſt is the Coat of the family
of the Crſauz, through whom the eſtate paſs d
by Inheritance from the Blewets to the Bainards.
But in the reign of William the Conqueror,
this was the Eſtate of William de Ow the Nor-
man, who, being accus'd of high Treaſon, choſe
to maintain his Innocence by Duel ; but, be-
ing conquered, he was by command of William
Rufus puniſh'd with the loſs of his eyes and
teſticles. The inhabitants of the place told
rhe, it had been a conſtant obſervation among
them, that tho” the ſoil here is fat and fertile,
yet in a ſort of baulks that croſs one another,
the corn never grows ſo thick as in other parts
cf the field; and along theſe they believe the
ſtreets of the old City to have run. They very
22 dig- up Britiſh tiles, and great plenty
of Roman Coins, which they call Onion-pennies,
from one Onion whom they fooliſhly fanſy to
have been a Giant, and an inhabitant of this
city. They alſo often find Inſcriptions; which
the Ignorance of the Country-people has de-
ſtroyed, and rendered uſeleſs to the World.
There is only one remaining, which was broughr
up to London, and plac'd in the garden of the
honourable William Cecil Baron of Burghley, and
Lord High Treaſurer of England:

-

|

MEMORIMA#A

FL VICTORI

NA. T. TAM:

VICTOR CONIUX
POSVIT.

I ſhall not be poſitive, as ſome are, that this
was a monument in memory of Victorina, who
was called Mater Caſtrorum, i. e. Mother of the
Camps; and who ſet up the Vclorini, ſon and
grandſon, and Poſthumus, Lollianis, Marizs, and
Tetricus, in Gaul and Britain, againſt Galie-
mis the Emperor. But I have ſomewhere read,
that there were two 7jfors in Britain; and thoſe
at the ſame time ; one, ſon of Maximus the

Emperor; the other, Captain of the Guards * prerori
to the ſame Emperor, and mention'd by St. Prafe@u.

Ambroſe in his Epiſtles. However, I dare af-
firm, that neither of theſe was the Vifor,
who ſet up this monument in memory of his
wite. |

As there is one Roman military way that
runs ſouth from hence, directly to Wincheſter ;
ſo is there another that goes weſtward, thro'

by ſome places now uninhabited, near Litchfield,
that is, the field of carcaſſes ; and ſo to the foreſt

trees, and the diverſions of hunting ; where
the Huntſmen and Foreſters admire the paved
Ridge, which is plainly viſible, tho' here and
there interrupted.

More to the North, almoſt on the limits

ly a feat of the Saxon Kings, now a well-
trequented market; within a mile of which
is an ancient ſquare Camp, and ſome obſcure
Remains of a large Building, that is ſaid to

Knightly family of Kingſmils ; (within half a

hill, on the top of which is a military camp
(ſuch as our anceſtors call'd Burgh,) ſurrounded
with a large trench: and there being a proſpect
from hence all the country round, a Beacon

an enemy. [And & very proper place this was,

for ſuch a purpoſe; there being from hence a clear
proſpect northward to Cuckhamſley-hill (where a-
nother Beacon was uſed to be kept) and Eaſt-
ward almoſt as far as Reading, and Southward
all over Hamſhire, as far as the Ifle of Wight.
This kind of watch-towers have the name of
Beacons, from the old word Beacnian, i. e. to
beckon : They have been in uſe, here in Eng-
land, for ſeveral ages ; in ſome places made of
a high pile of wood, and in others, of little
barrels fill'd with pitch, ſer on the top of a high
pole in places moſt expos'd to view, where
{ome always keep watch 1n the night; and for-
merly the horſemen, call'd by our Anceſtors
Hobelers, were ſettl'd in ſeveral places, to ſigni-
fy the approach of an enemy by day. [North-
weſt from hence, on the edge of Barkſhire, is

call'd Wallborough ; which, without doubt, took
the name from the Fortifications.]

This County (as well as all the reſt which we
have been hirherto en yon, belong'd to the
Weſt-Saxon Kings ; and (as Marianus tells us,)
when Sigebert was depos'd for tyrannical op-
preſſions of his Subjects, he had this County aſ-
ſign'd him, that he might not ſeem intirely
diveſted of Government. But, for his re-

[Peated crimes, they afterwards expell'd him _
0

= EC" ESL TURES. RRC 27

of this County, I W Kings-cleare; former- Kings-cleare.

+ was built upon it, which by fire * gave norice+ Is, C.
to the neighbouring parts, of the approach of Gives, C.

a ſquare Camp, nigh weſt J/oodbay, in a place Woodhay.

Pamber (a thick and woody foreſt ; ) thence, Pamber,

of Chute, very pleaſant by reaſon of its ſhady Chute. ſoreſt.

have been a Caſtle: 1 Sidmanton, the ſeat of the Sidmantori;

mile of which, on Ladle-hill, is another ancient Ladle-hitl,
Encampment ; )| and Burgh-cleare, under a high Burgh-cleare,

—

Anderida.

* Beavoſius.

* Cap. 35*

Guti.

+ Gloſſar. in

of thoſe parts too; and the miſerable condition
of this depos'd Prince was ſo far from moving
pity, that, concealing himſelf in the wood Au-
derida, he was there kill'd by a Swine-herd.
This County has had very few Earls, beſides
thoſe of V incheſter, which I have mention'd be-
fore. [In the Saxon times, particularly in the
year 860 (in the time of King Ethelbert) Oſric
{eems to have had this honour, ——_ leading
up the Hamſhire-men againſt the Danes, toge-
ther with Ethelwulf and his Berkſhire-men ;
tho' by the Saxon-Annals they are both ſtyl'd
Ealzopmen. Whether, in K. Edgar's time, Ælfhere,
and afterwards ZE/fhelm, had the ſame Honour, I
dare not be poſitive. ] About the coming-in of the
Normans, one Bogo, or * Beavoyſe, a Saxon, had
this title ; who, in the battle at Cardiff in Wales,
engaged the Normans. He was a man might1-
ly tam'd for his valour and conduct; but while
the Monks endeavour'd to extol him by legen-
dary tales, they have obſcured and drowned
his truly noble Exploits. From that time, we
read of no Earl of this County, till the reign
of Henry the 8b, who advanced William Fitz-
Williams (deſcended trom the daughter of the
Marqueſs Montacute, and then very old,) to

year of his reign, confer'd that honour

151 B E LGA. 152
_— þ 0c +. 17.

the honours of Earl of Southampton, and Lord
High Admiral of England. But he ſoon dying
without iſſue, King Edward 6. in the fir(+
upon
Thomas Whriotheſley Lord Chancellor of England;
and his grandſon Henry, by Henry his ſon,
t enjoy'd the ſame title; who in his youn i
years improv'd the nobility of his birth with C. werpn
the additional ornaments of Learning and mi-
litary arts; that in his riper age he might em-

ploy them in the ſervice of his King and Coun-

try. [After his death, this Honour deſcended

to Thomas his ſon, who, upon the Reſtoration

of King Charles 2, was created Knight of the
Garter, and made Lord High Treaſurer of
England. He was thrice marry'd, but left no
illue-male, nor any other to inherit his Title;

ſo that Charles Fitz-Roy, eldeſt ſon to the
Dutcheſs of Cleaveland, had the honour of
Duke of Southampton confer d upon him by
King Charles the ſecond, in the 27h year of

his reign ; being alſo created, at the ſame time,

Baron of Newberry and Earl of Chicheſter.]

There are in this County 253 Pariſhes, and 18
Market-Towns.

ISLE of

O this County of Southamton,
there belongs an Iſland which

AN is ſtretch'd out, over-againſt it,
WJ to the South; by the Romans
call'd Vetta, Vettis, and Vitte-
MI /is ; by Prolemy, *Ovix\yors 3 by
the Britains, Guith 3 by the
Saxons, [Fibc and Fibcland, ! Fuclans and
Ficþ-ea (tor they call'd an Iſland, Ea,) and by
us at this day, The Je of Wight, and Whight.
It is ſeparated from the Continent of Britain
by ſuch a ſmall rapid Chanel (formerly call d
Solent,) that it ſeems to have been joyn d to it;
whence (as Ninnius obſerves) the Britains call d
it Guith, which ſignifies a Separation : As Sicily,
in the opinion of Julius Scaliger, had it's name
from the Latin Seco; becauſe it was broken oft,
and as it were diſſected from Italy. Whence
(with ſubmiſſion always to the Criticks) I would
read that paſlage in the ſixth of Seneca's Na-
tural Queſtions, Ab Talia Sicilia reſecta; and not
rejecta, as it is commonly read. | But this opi-
nion concerning the original of the name,
however plauſible, is not univerſally agreed-to.
For tho* Ninnius, a Britain, has call'd it Guith;
yet it was after the coming-in of that people
which our Hiſtorians term Jutæ, and the Saxons
Jocar and Jucna cynn ; and, at the ſame time,
all agree that this Iſland fell ro their ſhare,
upon the expulſion of the Britains. Now,
Bede expreſly names them Vita, which the
Saxon Idiom, of courſe, would make MWitæ, as
it changed Vir into Wen. And the Interpreter
of Bede calls the Jutes who came over, Gearar,
or Getes, which points out to us their firſt
original from the Gothe, once ſo conſidera-
ble a People in Germany. In the * Laws of
Edward the Conteſſor, they are named Guti,
which (as f Sir Henry Spelman obſerves) by a
cuſtom of changing Gu into V) or Vi, becomes
the ſame with ti or W/iti ; and the Saxon
Aſpiration, us'd in hundreds of the like inſtan-

WIGHT,

ces, brings it to the true writing pihe and
Fihcland. If the names may be thus recon-
ciled without ſtraining, the reaſon of the thing
makes the conjecture probable enough. For
what can we imagin more natural, than that
this People ſhould call their Diviſion after their
own name; in the ſame manner as the Saxons
and Angles (the two other ſharers) fix'd their
names upon their reſpective bounds; as any one
may obſerve by the ancient Diviſion of Eng-
land ? But of theſe two Opinions, every one
is at liberty to chuſe which he pleaſes. | From
the nearneſs of ſituation, and likeneſs of the
name, we may gueſs this Feta to be that Ia
which (as Diodorus Siculus has it) at every
tide ſeem'd to be an Ifland ; but, at the time
of the ebb, the ground between this Iſland and
the Continent was ſo dry, that the old Bri-
rains us'd to carry over their tinn in Carts, in
order to tranſport it into France. But I can-
not think this to be Pliny's Mictis, tho' ſo like Midi,
the name Yea : for in that Ifland there was
white lead, whereas in this there is not any
one vein of metal, that I know of.

This Ifland, from eaſt to weſt, is of a Lentil
or oval form; in length, 20 miles, and in the
middle, where it is broadeſt, 12 miles over;
the ſides lying north and ſouth. To ſay no-
thing of the abundance of Fiſh in this ſea;
the ſoil is very fruitful, and enables the Inha-
bitants to export Corn to other parts. There
is every where plenty of rabbits, hares, par-
tridge, and pheaſants ; and it has, beſides, a
foreſt and two parks, which are well ſtock'd
with deer, for the diverſion of hunting. Through
the middle of the Iſland, there runs a long
ridge of hills, where is plenty of paſture for
ſheep ; whoſe wool, next to that of Lemſter and
Corteſwold, is reckon'd the beſt, and is in ſuch
requeſt with the Clothiers, that the Inhabi-
tants make great advantage of it. In the north

part, there is very good meadow-ground, pa-
ſture,

preſ · wat
Ille.
piabridg
Ille.
+ 1607.

+ Cucu[at
monacbos.

Newpor

Fif-Mede
VWelt-Med:

Cꝛeres br

*Lately,

Bradi
—
Yarmou

Hurſt- caſt
A Nunn
C.

V.Mon, At

Godſhil
Welt.Co

Eif-Coy

Sindha

H I MI HTN E

152
—

—

:: we WW. CT WW

25

llt

(5 wo WW

Pr) .

-

153

154

ſture, and wood ; the ſouth part is all, in a
manner, a Corn-Country, enclos'd with ditches
and hedges. At each end, the ſea from the
north, edges-1n to ſuch a degree, that it makes
almoſt two Iſlands ; which indeed are call'd
ſo by the inhabitants, viz. that at the welt-
reell · water · end, Fre zater-Jſe, the other at the eaſt-end,
Ile. Binbridge- Ile. In Bede's time, there were in
biabridge- jr 1200 fl families; now, it has 36 towns, vil-
lle. lages, and caſlles. As to Ecclſiaſt ical Govern-
711607. ment, it is under the juriſdiction of the Biſhop
of Wincheſter; as to Civil, under the County
of South-hamton. The inhabitants tacetiouſly
boaſt, how much happier they are than their
Neighbours, ſince they never had either“ Monks,
or Lawyers, or Foxes : | But as to Monks, it is
certain that St. Mary's in Carisbrooke, was a
Cell of Black Monks, belonging firſt ro Lyra in
Normandy, and afterwards to the Abbey of
Montgrace in Yorkſhire, and then to the Ciſter-
cians of Sheen. Beſides which, there were in
the Ifland three Priories. |

The places of greateſt note, are theſe : New-
port, the beſt market in the Iſland, formerly
call'd Medena, and Novus Burgis de Meden, i. e.
the new Burrough of Meden, whence the country
bal Meden. (as it lies ealt or welt) is divided into Eaſt-
Welt-Meden, Meden and Heſt-Meden. | This place hath given
the title ot Earl to Mont joy Blount, created Aug.
3. 3 Car. 1. who was ſucceeded in the ſame
honour by his ſon and heir George Blount ; and
he, by Henry his brother. In the year 1711.
Thomas Windſor (ſon of Thomas Lord Windſor,
Earl of Plimouth,) who had been created Viſ-
count Windſor of the Kingdom of Ireland by
King William the third, was by Queen Anne

created Baron Montjoy, from this place.
Dnbenk Next, is Caeresbrok, an old caſtle in the
very middle of the Iſland, ſeminent in the
Saxon-times ; 1 and ſo calld by a ſtrange
angling of the name for [Pihczapabuph, or!
Whitgaresburg, from one Whitgar a Saxon; of
Lately, C. whom more hereafter. It was, in the laſt Age,
magnificently rebuilt by the Governour. To
this caſtle belong'd very many Kights Fees; and
for antiquity, it exceeds all others in the Iſland ;
[being alſo trequently mention'd in our modern
Hiſtories, ſince the Impriſonment of that Pi-
Fading, Ous and Religious Prince, King Charles the firſt,
— in this Caſtle. ] Brading, another market-town.
Yarmouth, Newton and Yarmouth 8 which alſo
ſend Burgeſſes to Parliament. This Tarmouth
and Sharpnore have their caſtles, which with

* Cucu[ſatos
mona. bos.

Newport,

Worſleys-tower ſecure the north-weſt ſhore. Op- | /elf.

1 poſite to theſe, and not above two miles di-
alt callle. ſtant, is Hurſt-caſtle, built upon a little tongue
3 Nunnery, of land in Hamſhire. Quarre, Where a || Mo-
V.Mor. Angi, Paſtery was founded Anno Dom. 1132. [by
Baldwin Earl of Devonſhire, and conſecrated to
Wau. the Virgin Mary.1 Godſbill, where J. Horſley
Eil. Cow. erected a Free- ſchool: H/eſt-Cow and Eaſt-Cou,
now both in ruins, were built at the Entrance
into Newport by Henry 8; of which Leland,

Couæ fulmineæ dua coruſcant
Hac caſum colit, ille Solis ortum
Vectam qua Neuportus intrat altam.

The two great Cows that in loud Thunder

roar,

This on the Eaſtern, that the Weſtern

ſhore,

Where Newport enters ſtately Wight. —
ddham. On the North-eaſt fide, ſtands Sandham-ca-
ſtle, tortity'd, like the reſt, with great pieces of
Cannon,

—

The Itland is alſo well fortity'd by Nature;

being encompaſs'd with a continu'd ridge of
rocks; and ſome lic under water all along be-

tore the Illand, to the great hazard and danger

of Sailors, Burt the moſt dangerous are, the
Needles, ſo call'd becauſe they are very ſparp, and
pointed; and the Shingles, which lie before the

weſt- corner of the Iſland: as on the eaſt- ſide, are

the Owers and the Mixen; and on the North- Owers,
coaſt, the Brambles ; ſhelves, which often deceive Mixon.
the Seamen. And if there be any place where Brambles,
an Enemy may conveniently land, that, accor-

ding to the old way, is fenced with ſtakes fa-

ſtened in the ground. |

| Bur for all this, it is not ſo well fortify'd by

its rocks or caſtles, as by it's Inhabitants; who

are naturally warlike and couragious ; and, by the

daily diligence and care of the Governour, have Ann. 1607. :
the methods of Exerciſe ſo perfe&, that, be the
ſervice they are 2 upon what it will, they are
maſters of it : tor they ſhoot at a mark admira-
bly, keep their ranks, march orderly ; as occa-
ſion requires, they can cloſe into a round, or
looſen their Ranks : they can endure long march-
es, and the fatigues of hot and duſty weather ;
in ſhort, they are Maſters of whatever is requi-
lite in a good ſoldier. The Ifland, of it (elf, can
raiſe 4000 ſuch men in times of war; beſides,
there are 3000 of the Hamſhire Militia, and |
2000 of the Wiltſhire, appointed for the de- |
fence of the Iſland, upon all Emergencies. And,

that they may with greater eaſe make head a-

gainſt an Enemy, it is divided into eleven parts,

every one of which has it's Centoner, or Centu-

rion; and it's Vintons, or Vicenarii, i. e. Leaders

of Twenty ; not to mention the + great Cannon, + Tyrmenta

and the Centinels who keep watch on the high majora.

hills where the Beacons ſtand ; and their Poſts

and Couriers, ( by an obſolete name call'd

Hoblers,) who are to give intelligence of all

occurrences to the Governour.

Veſpaſian was the firſt who reduced this

Iſland to the power of the Romans, while he

ſerv'd as a private Officer under Claudius. For x, the life of

thus Suetonius writes of him: In the reign of T. Veſpaſian,

Claudius, by the favour of Narciſſus, he was ſent c. 4.

Lieutenant of a Legion into Germany : being thence

removed into Britain, he fought 30 pitch'd Battels

with the Enemy, ſubdu d 2 powerful nations, took a-

bove 20 towns, together with the Ile of Wight which

lies upon the Coaſt of Britain ; partly under the com-

mand of Aulus Plautins a Conſular Lieutenant, part-

ly under the conduct of the Emperor Claudius him-

For which he was honour'd with Triumphal

ornaments ; and, in a ſhort time after, with * tuo * Duplex Sa-

Sacerdotal Diexities. It was at this Iſland, that cerdorium.

Alectus, when he had uſurp'd the Government

of Britain, t lay in wait for the Romans with ; In ſpeculis

his Fleet; who yet by the help of a favourable & nſidiis col-

fogg, got to ſhore undiſcover d by the Enemy, lecata.

and ſer fire to their own ſhips, that there might

be no temptation to run away. The firſt of the

Saxons that ſubdu'd it, was Cerdicus; and he

gave it to Stuffa and H/hbitgar, who put the grea-

teſt part of the Britiſh Inhabitants to the {word An. Dom, |
in Hhitgaraburgh, call'd ſo from him, and now 530.
by contraction Caeresbrok. Alter that, H/olpher |
King of the Mercians ſubdu'd this Ifland, and

gave it, together with the country of the Me- Bede l. 4.

anvari, to Edelwalch King of the South-Sax- © 13.

ons, when he ſtood Godfather to him. Cead-

walla King of the Weſt-Saxons (after Edel-

walch was kill'd, and Arvandus, a petty Prince

of the Iſland, was made away) joyn'd it to his

own Dominions, and cruelly mailacred almoſt

all the Natives of the Illand. He gave 300

— n

Hides, the fourth part thereof, to Biſhop Hil-
U fred,

» —
— - 5 =
= =
—_—— ETD -
"EY ON —
* * — * -

—_——

—_—
— — —„-V—

Ex — 2

— —— —— ww — — — — —

— 5 p he I

a ———— ——ẽ —

B E IL GZ.

Forte de gen-
te ſua ſuper-

Ventens.
+ Familia-
rum,

Jutarum.

See p. 192.

Reod ſord.

Florence of

Worceſter.

* So ſaid,

fred, who firſt inſtructed the Inhabitants in the
Chriſtian Religion. But let Bede ſpeak in his
own words.

After Ceadwalla had got the Kingdom of the
Geuiſſi, he took alſo the Ie of Wight, which till
then was wholly given to Idolatry; and by a bloody
Maſſacre endeavour d to extirpate the natives and
in their ſtead to people it with his own Country-
men ; obliging limſelf, as they ſay, by vow (tho
he was rot as yet become Chriſtian) that if he con-
quer'd the Hand, he would devote the fourth part
both of it and of his ſpoil, to God ; which he ac-
cordingly did, by giving it to Biſhop Wilfrid for the

ſervice of Cod; jor ” he being of that country hap-

pen d to be there. The Hand is judg'd by the Eng-
liſh to include twelve hundred | hides : whereupon

three hundred of them were given to the Biſhop. But

he committed that part which he receiv'd, to one 0
his Clerks, by name Bernwin, who was his 7 ork
ſon ; giving him a Prieſt, whoſe name was Hildi-
la, with order to baptize, and preach the word to
all who were defirons of Salvation. Where I think
my ſelf bound to objerve, that among the firſt-
fruits of thoſe who were converted in that Iland,
two young boys of the blood-royal, brothers to Ar-
vandus King of the Hand, were by the ſpecial
grace of God, crowned with martyrdom. For when
the Enemy was ready to invade the Me, theſe
young brothers made their eſcape, to the next Pro-
wince 3 where, coming to a place that is call d Ad
Lapidem, and thinking to ſecure themſelves there
ſrom the fury of the conqueriag Prince, they were
betray'd, and order d to be put to death. Which co-
ming to the ears of a certain Abbot and Prieſt call d
Cynbreth, who at a ſmall diſtance from thence
had a MonaFery in a place call d Reodford,
i. e. the ford of reeds; he came to the King, who
was then privately in thoſe parts for the cure of the
wounds he had receiv'd in the Iſle of Wight, and
defir'd of him, that if thoſe young brothers muſt
be kil*d, he would pleaſe firſt to permit them to be
baptisd. This requeſt the King granted; upon
which the Abbot having instrutted them in the word
of truth, and baptix d them, he gave them a ſure
title to the Kingdom of Heaven. And immediate-
ly after, the Executioner coming to them, they joy-
fully ſubmitted to a temporal death, as a certain
paſſage to eternal life. And in this order, after all
the Provinces of Britain had receiv'd the Chriſtian
faith, the Iſle of Wight was alſo converted; in
which, notwithſtanding, becauſe of the miſeries of a
foreign yoke, none had the dignity of a Miniſter or
Biſhop, before Daniel, who is now Biſhop of the Weſt-
Saxons and the Geuiſſi.

From which time, Authors ſay nothing of
this Iſland, till the year 1066. when To#ins,
brother to King Harold, invaded it with ſome
Pirate-ſhips trom Flanders, out of ſpite to his
brother ; and when he had compell'd the inhabi-
tauts to pay him a certain Tribute, he ſail d off. A
few years after (as I find in an ancient book
belonging to the Priory of Caeresbrok, which
was ſhewn me by Robert Glover Somerſet-herald,
our great oracle in Genealogical Antiquities,)
as William the Baſtard conquer'd England, ſo Wil-
liam Fitz-Osborne (who was his Mareſchal, and Earl
of Hereford) conquer d the Ie of Wight, and was
firſt Lord of it. A long time after, the French
in the year 1377. ſurpris d and plunder'd the
Iſle. They made another unſucceſsful attempt
A. D. 1403. being bravely repuls'd ; as they
were again, in the reign of Henry the 8h, when
the French Gallics ſet fire to one or two ſmall
Cottages, within the memory of our * Fa-

ann. 1807. thers.

Lords of the
Ille of Wight,

As to the Lords of this Iſle : William Fitz-
Osborne being preſently after {lain in the wars of

Flanders, and his ſon Roger attainted and ba. —

niſh'd ; it came into the King's hands, and
Henry 1. King of England gave it to Richard
de Ridvers (otherwiſe cali'd Redvers and de Ri-
fariis,) Earl of Devonſhire, and with it the Re
ot the village of Chriſt-Church Where this
Richard built a Caſtle, as likewiſe another at
Caeresbrok ; but his ſon Balduin (in the trouble-
{ome reign of King Stephen, when there were
as many Tyrants in England as Lords of Ca-
tles, who all uſurp'd a power of coining mo-
ney, with other branches of Soveraign Autho-
rity) was depriv'd of this caſtle by King Ste-
phen. Yer his poſterity recover'd their ancient
right ; whoſe pedigree I have already drawn,
where I treated at large of the Earls of Deyon-
ſhire. Ar length, Zabela, widow of William

of de Fortibus, Earl of Albemarle and Holderneſs,

ſiſter and heir of Baldwin the laſt Earl of De-
vonſhire of this Family, was very hardly pre-
vail'd with to ſurrender all her right and title,

by Deed, to King Edward 1. + Per Chu.

—

156

Since that time, the Kings of England have tam.

held this Ifle ; and Henry de Beauchamp Earl of
Warwick was by King Henry 6. (of whom he
was a mighty Favourite) cround King of the
Ne of Wight, and afterwards entitPd Firſt Earl of
all England. But this new and extraordinary
Title dy'd with him. Afterwards, Richard
Widevile Earl of Rivers, was made Lord of the
Ille ot Wight by Edward 4. and Reginald Bray

farm d it of King Henry 7. (whoſe Darling he * In fm

was) at the yearly rent of 300 Marks. Belides api.

theſe Lords, it has had a noble Family call'd
de Inſula or Liſle; one of whom in the reign of
Edward 2. was ſummon'd to Parliament by the
name of John de Iuſula Vecta, i. e. of the Iſle
of Wight.

More rare Plants growing wild in Ham-
ſhire.

Aſcyrum ſupinum villoſum paluſtre C. B.
Park. Marſh S. Peter's wort with woolly leaves. On
a rotten mooriſh ground not far from Southampton a-
bundantly. It grows on the like grounds in many pla-
ces, eſpecially of the Weſt-Country.

Alopecuros maxima Anglica Park. altera maxi-
ma Anglica paludoſa Ger. emac. altera maxima
Anglica paludoſa, ſeu Gramen Alopecuroides
maximum J. B. Lob. Ad. part. alt. The great
Engliſh marſh-Fox-tail-graſs. In the moiſt paſtures
of this County, near the Salt-works, and an ancient
houſe call d Drayton, about two miles from Ports-
mouth, over-againſt the Iſle of Wight, plentifully.
Lobel.

Aſphodelus luteus Acorifolius paluſtris An-
glicus Lobelii J. B. Lancaſtriæ verus Ger. emac.
deſcr. Pſeudo- aſphodelus paluſtris Anglicus C. B.
Lancaſhire. Aſphodel or Bat ard-Aſobodel. On a
bog in a heath in the mid-way between Sarisbury and
Southampton. T his is very common in bogs and wa-
tery places both in the Weſt and North parts of Em-
land.

Bardana minor, Ger. Nanthium ſeu lappa
minor J. B. Park. Lappa minor, Xanthium
Dioſcoridis C. B. The leſſer Burdock. I once found
it in the road from Portſmouth to London, about
three miles from Portſmouth. But, it being an annual
Plant, may be loſt again there.

Ciſſampelos altera Anglica minima Park. p.
173. The leaſt Engliſh Black Bindweed. This
grows about Drayton near Portſinouth. It differs
little from the common black Bindweed but ia the

|

ſmall

Fr
157
2

I
—

Per Chas.

* In fenen
accepit,

157

—” ſmalneſs of it's parts :

"HAM S

— * —— 4 4

H1RE.

ſhire. This is found in many wet and boggy

which may be owing to the
arrenneſs of the ſoil.

, _— Penz & Lobelii Ger. emac. p. 1135.
True Oak-Fern. This My. Goodyer found in a
very wet moor or bog, call d White-row-moor, where
Peat is now dug a mile from Petersfield in Ham-
grounds
in divers Counties of England. It is called by Jo.
Bauhine Filix minor non ramoſa ; and by us Fil.
minor paluſtris repens.

Erica maritima Anglica ſupina Park. Engliſh
low Sea-heath. Found by Lobel about Portſmouth.
Park. p. 1485. This we have found in many places
on the Sea-coaſts both in Efſex and Suffolk.

Malva arborea marina noſtras Park. Engliſh
Sea-Tree-Mallow. About Hurſt-caſtle near the Iſle
of Wight : where alſo grows Crithmum chryſan-
themum in great plenty on the miry mar nd.

Mercurialis mas & fœmina J. B. vulgaris
mas & fœmina Park. Ger. Merk. teſticulata ſi-
ve mas Dioſcoridis & Plinii : & ſpicata five
foemitia eorundem C. B. French Mercury the male
and female. On the baich near Ryde in the Iſle of
Wight plentifully.

Nidus avis flore & caule violaceo-purpureo

colore, an Pſeudo-limodoron Cluſ. hiſt. p. 270. |

Ger. emac. p. 228. Found inthe border of a Field

call'd Marborn, near Habridge in Haliborn a mile
from Alton. Mr. Goodyer.

Pulmonaria foliis Echii Ger. rubro flore, fo-
liis Echii J. B. anguſtifolia cœruleo rubente

flore C. B. Bugloſs Cowſtips, or long-leaved Sage of

Jeruſalem. Found by Mr. Goodyer flowering, Ma
25. in a wood by Holbury-Houſe in the — fireſe,
Hamſbire.

Rapunculus corniculatus montanus Ger. flore
globoſo purpureo J. B. folio oblongo, ſpica
orbiculari C. B. Alopecuroides orbiculatus Park.
Horned Rampions with a round head of flowers.
Found 3 in the encloſed chalky hilly grounds
by Maple-Durham, near Petersfield in Hamſbire. It
grows in —_— of the Downs in Suſſex.

As for the Geniſtella Anglica ſpinoſa ſupina,
ſive Chamæſpartum ſupinum, which Lobel is ſaid
to have obſerved growing not far from Southſea-ca-
ſtle, where it flower d July and Auguſt, with ſlen-
der trailing branches of a ſpan long.

And the Geniſtella five Chamæſpartum re-
Gum, flore & acutis ſpinis ſparto ſupino pa-
ribus & ſimilibus, found by the ſame I flower-
ing in July near Portſmouth, both which he is ſaid
to have deſcrib'd in the Margin of his Dutch Her-
bal P. B. We could not find any ſuch Plants in thoſe

places, neither heard we of them.

ATTRE-

159

Berroc.

rue r c (ß / ((((
De FCC

ee
e

—

2
Je
Bb
I
7

8
IT
=

LL ˙⁵

Mes NY TTY N J CARD o ta No try Ra io r RR ARC
LN LS INRA AN AN BN Neg FCC

ATTREBAT II.

HE Attrebatii, 4s in France, ſo likewiſe in Britain, border upon the Belgæ.
Now that name is wholly diſus'd, and the countrey they inhabited is commonly call d
Barkſhire. But it ought to be taken for granted ( ſince Caſar informs us that the
Foreigners which came out of Gallia Belgica inhabited the ſea-coaſts of Britain,
and ſtill retain'd the names of their own Countries) that our Attrebatii remov'd
hither from among the Attrebates in Gaule ; who, according to Ptolemy, poſſeſs'4
the maritim parts of Gaule, upon the Sein, to wit, that very countrey, which may
be ſaid, in a manner, to lie oppoſite to our Attrebatii. Therefore Ceſar ſaid, not
without great probability, that Comius Attrebatenſis was a perſon of conſiderable
authority in theſe parts, that is, amongſt his own countrey-men ; and that after his being conquer d by Caſar, he
fled hither 5 when, as we have it in Frontinus, his ſhips being run a-ground, he commanded his ſails to
be hoiſted up, and by that means hinder'd Caſar's purſuit 3 who, ſeeing his full ſails afar off, and ſuppoſing
he made away with a freſh gale, deſiſted from following him further. Whence they had this name of At-
trebatii, is a matter ſtill in diſpute ; as for thoſe that derive it from Attrech, which they would have to
fignity a land of bread in the old Gauliſh Tongue, I am afraid they are miſtaken. Let it be ſufficient

for me, that I have ſhewa, from whence they came into Britain: As for the Etymology of their name, 1
leave it to the ſearch of others.

SARAKSHIERE

HAT County which we call |phen ; who nevertheleſs took it at the expence
MM Barkſbire, was term'd by the | of much blood and labour, and laid it ſo level
Latin writers Bercheria, and with the ground, that nothing of it is now to
A anciently by the Engliſh-Saxons| be ſeen. But (as we find in the Chronicle of Wa-
MN Beppocrcyne. Which name; | verley-Abbey) King John, in the year MCCIL
EE Aflerius Menevenſis derives | mov'd by divine Inſpiration, granted the Site, with
from Berroc, a certain Wood] all it's appurtenances, for the building of an Abbey,
where Box grew in great abundance; others | for the Ciſtercian Order.
from an Oak disbark'd (fo the word Beroke ſigni-] From hence the Ouſe, fetching a great com-
fies) to which, when the State was in more] paſs, and making it's way toward the North,
than ordinary danger, the inhabitants were wont | waters ſeveral villages of little note ; till wind-
in antient times to reſort, and conſult about|ing inwards again, and dividing it's ſtream, it

publick Affairs. However, it is certain, that arrives at Allendon, a handſom town, well fre- abhendo,

in the moſt ancient Saxon Annals, the name quented; call'd firſt by the Engliſh-Saxons

is Beappucycype, melted by degrees into] dÞeoverÞþam, then Abbandune; no doubt from Attandu,

Beappucxcype and Bappucycine, from whence|the Abbey, rather than from Abbenus, I know
the preſent name of Berkſhire is immediate-[not what Iriſh Hermit, as ſome have written.
ly derived. | The north-ſide of this Coun-|I: was a place (as we have it in the old book of
ty is waſh'd by the winding, but pleaſant and|Abbendon) por the plain of a hill, extreamly plea-

4 See this no- gentle ſtreams of the Iſis or Ouſe (+which af-|ſant to the eye, a little beyond the village which is
tion conſuted, terwards takes the name of Thamiſi the Thames, )| now cal'd Suniggewelle, berween tuo very fine rivu-
in Wileſhire. nd firſt ſeparates it from Oxfordſhire, and|/ets, which enclofing within them the place it ſelf (as

Tatendon.

Guil. Neu-
brigenſ.

then from Buckinghamſhire. The ſouth-ſide, it were a ſort of bay) yield a delightful proſpect to
towards Hamſhire, is water d by the river Kennet, the bebolders, and a convenient ſubfiſtence to the Iu-
till it runs into the Thames. Weſtward, where] habitants. It was in ancient times call d Sheove-
it touches upon Wiltſhire, and is broader, as|ſham, a famous City, goodly to behold, full of riches,
likewiſe in the middle parts, it is rich and fruit - encompaſs d with very fruitful fields, green meadows,
ful, eſpecially where it falls into a Valley, which ¶pacious paſtures, and flocks of cattel abounding with
they call the Yale of White Horſe, from I know | milk. Here, the King kept his Court; hither the
not what ſhape of a J/hite Horſe, fanſy'd on the I people reſorted, while Galeries, were depending
ſide of a whitiſh hill. But the eaſt-ſide, which about the greateſt and moſt weighty affairs of the
borders upon Surrey, is downright barren, or | kingdom. | For which reaſon, and its ancient name
at beſt bears bur little ; and is very much taken | Sheovgſham (written by Leland, whether from
up with wocds and foreſts. | Record, or by miſtake, I know not, Seukeſham,)

To the weſt, near the Ouſe, ſtands Farendon, it is not unreaſonable to think this the ve-
on a high ground ; now noted for it's Market, | ry place wherein two Synods were held, one
but formerly for a certain Fortification built by | in the year 742. and the other in 822. both
Robert Earl of Gloceſter, againſt King Ste- ſaid to be at Cloper-hoo. For tho' it hath been

ſettled

W

2 . . „%% — — ——— —
= — — — — oo — — 3 — — —
— . N ps” ' gs. — — - ly . 2 — E _ — s
— — — . —————_— — — — — — o——_——_— RP I _— —
— oF. — — = — tb — — — — — — — — — - d —— 1
. — — —ů— oe; — 2 n =” - — ——— — - 23
— . — —ö — — - ———— — — —— — In on
— — — . - __ 2 Lm — —

4-4
1

pee 7 Time. M : hes Joy WW Vas —

7 2 *
CO. -

| : |
a 6 * 1
Lau. ZN ” en. IN — 4 Cc — 9 IR ;
— % 5 + Er Bri . 9 6 *
Fart of Y F>x | 7 © Wo 3 | „ 8
\Bark Shire. 4 =. | R 4 4 N *
5 ”.. g ton \ OY ,
a — C y 7 ? 4
„ . x7 ; iz

þ Lechlade t 7 L.
5 Johns Bad |... nfs GANFELD

ee,
Buckland .
—

e

f amb Wood Lands"; >. 50 . favs wy
ELL A\MBOURN-<.
7 Lamborn

.
Lam born

Wordles nd.
ROSS

HC
FAIR/CR

=> 8 = _ —— Id PAKT OF Haaf
ö?! ] |
487i

— r —— mom

P, 2 for Abel Sa all ai . wats & John Churchill

= m—_ mY  —_— m—_ —

32 : 20 RENE 1 7

0 0 nien 0
A | j [1
| 238 "O50 | 11 Ih

$14 ir
nh
1 4

[

25 }

Colnbrook

Windsor Kk Caſtle
PPLEEMOOR Old. 7

ranhort —
"i * ®

3 *

Munb.

Coo Kkeameth am

Brack nel Street 2 , .

7 Degree from Tondon- US o 7 a

„

2
. 1

— — 8 RE .
— —

»„— abt tha

—

— — — ——— ä‚—— — ͤ— —

—

—— 27 ˙— 227

—

oy

PX. »
ww „
— —

= ©

| Clofeſhoh, ca

g it
Henricus Y«
Win tus quar- by
WW jundaverat Cj
Hex pon.

Irn Burſerd

Wor wndas

e Cul. re
umſcrd, '$
E in
8 Mault, V

a2 Da ncJ oor eres D207 mHUYU £

0
Now Aff

ry near 1

4 In 4
n

N t

| 0
br. Mon.
Brit,
1

x
7
e

N s ”

—— 8

* — * p * —
1
TIRE

161

ARKRSHIRE

I 62

ſettled in Kent, at a place called Cliff at hoo,
yet that conjecture is wholly founded upon the
limilitude ot names, and doth by no means a-
gree with what is ſuppoſed, that Cloveſoco was
probably in Mercia And Zthelbald King of
the Mercians, had the greateſt hand in it, be-
cauſe the Saxon Annals mention him parti-
cularly, as preſent ; and Cliffathoo in Kent is
too much in a corner, to anſwer the character
of Cloveſhoo, which is mention'd but twice in
the Annals, and both times expreſly ſaid to be
the place of a Synod. And in a Council at
Hertjord, in 672. we find it decreed, that there
uld be two Synods yearly ; but becauſe there were
ſeveral incidental cauſes which might prevent them,
it 1cas unanimouſly agreed, however, that there ſhould
| ene meet yearly the firſt day of Auguſt, at the place
| Cloeſhoh, cal'd Clofeſnoh. Which cannot be ſuppos d,
| unreaſonably, to point out a place ſo little for
the convenience of moſt of the members ; bur
may very rationally be meant of this place; a
place, perhaps, by reaſon of its ſituation, as
eligible by all parties, as could well be thought
ot. But to return. As ſoon as Ciſſa, King
of the Weſt-Saxons, had built the Abbey here,
it began by degrees to lay aſide it's old name,
and to be called Abbandun, and Abbington, that
is, the Abbey's Town. This Abbey had not
flouriſh'd long, e're it was thrown down, as it
were in an inſtant, by the violent fury of the
Danes. Let it ſoon atter recover'd it ſelf, thro'
the liberality of King Edgar $ and afterwards,
by the induſtry of the Norman Abbots, it
you to that magnificence by degrees, as to
and in competition almoſt with any Abbey in
Britain, for riches and grandeur, as it's preſent
ruins ſtill declare. But the town, tho' it had
it's dependance for a long time on the Abbey,
| mics yet fince the year 1416. when King Henry 5.
p-intus quar- built Bridges over the Ouſe (as appears by a
W j-ndeverat diſtich in a window of S. Helen's Church there)
. and turned the high-road hither for a ſhorter
„ala cut; it became ſo much frequented, as to be
e cal. reckon'd among the principal towns of this
* i. County; having a Mayor, and much enrich-
ing it ſelf by * barley ſprouting and chit-
© 2;re, ting again, which the Greeks call Byne, and
Malt. We Mault. It hath beſides, a Croſs of excellent
workmanſhip in the middle of the Market-
proce ; erected, as they report, in the reign of

.
Clif at hoo.

eſtate in a skirmiſh

*

| Robert Doiley, in the time of William the Con-

queror. |

Near Abingdon, to the north-weſt, lies Lee,
which, by the daughter of a certain Knight ſir-
nam d de Ice, came to the family of the Beſiles,
and thence was call'd Befiles-Lee; and from that Beſltes-Lec,
tamily, in right of marriage, to Richard Feti- Fetiplace.
place ; whole progenitor, Thomas, brought ſome
honour to his poiterity, b matching with Bea-
trix, natural daughter of John 1. King of Por-
tugal, from whom they are deſcended. But
now let us return. Hard by Abingdon, the lit-
tle River Ock, which waſhes the ſouth-ſide of
the town, and over which Sir John Sr. Helens
Knight did formerly build a bridge, falls gently
into the Ouſe. It hath it's riſe in the vale of
White-horſe, a mile or two from Rinęfton-Liſte, K ingſton-
anciently the poſleſſion of Warin de Inſula or Line |
L iſle, a renown d Baron. John Talbot, a ounger Viſcounts
ſon of that famous Warriour John Earl ot Liſle,
Shrewsbury, being by the mother's ſide deſcen-
ded from that Baron, was firſt created Baron
L'ifle (as Warin de Inſula was before, in regard
of his being poſſeſs d of this place; as if that
honour were annex'd to it) and afterwards Vi-
ſcount L'iſle. This title, by the favour of our
Kings, in a continu'd ſeries remain'd in his
poſterity. For (to ſum up all in ſhort) when
Thomas Talbot, ſon of John before-mention'd,
dy'd without iſſue, being ſhot through the
mouth with an arrow, as he was defending his
againſt Baron Barkley ;
Edward Grey, who had marry'd his ſiſter, re-
ceiv'd the ſame honour from King Richard 3,
and had a ſon nam'd John, whoſe only daugh-
ter and heir being an infant, was contracted to
Charles Brandon by K. Henry 8, and thereupon he
became Viſcount Lie: but ſhe dying before
the ſolemnization ot the marriage, this his ti-
tle dy'd with her. Afterwards, the ſame King
Henry confer d this honour upon Arthur? Plan-
tagenet, a natural ſon of King Edward 4, who
had marry'd Elizabeth the ſiſter of John Grey
Viſcount Liſte, widow of Edmund Dudley. And

upon his dying without iſſue-male, John Dud-

ley fon of Edmund Dudley by the ſame Eliza-

beth Grey, afterwards Duke of Northumber-

land, was honour'd by the ſame King with this

title, Burt he being attainted, Queen Elizabeth
reſtor'd in blood his ſon Ambroſe ; and, before

ing Henry 6, by the fraternity of St. Croſs,
which was inſtituted by him. [Art preſent,

ſhe created him Earl of Warwick, did the ſame
day create him Baron L'ifle ; and Robert Sidney

this is one of the Towns for the publick Bu- his ſiſter's ſon, a perſon illuſtrious for his noble

ſineſs of the County, and is particularly ho-

noured by affording to the Right Honourable
Mountague Bertie the title of Earl ; which was

firſt conter'd upon his Father, James Lord

Noris of Rycor, in the 34" year of King
Charles the ſecond.1 |

As Ciſſa was the founder of the foreſaid Ab-

bey, ſo Cilla fſter of King Cedwalla (as I have it

out of an old book) built a Nunnery at Hel-

neſlow near the Thames, where her ſelf preſided

(ver the Virgins, who were afterwards tranſlated to
Witham. In the heat of the war between Offa

and Kinuiph, the Nuns, upon the building of a caſtle

there, retired from thence. For after that Kinulph

was overthrown, whatſoever lay under bis juriſditti-

©, from the town of Wallingford in the ſouth part

New A .Jrem Ichenilde-ſtreet as far as Efſebury, and in the
| 82 near nerth part as far as the River Thames, King Offa
Eu e Jei/d. [At the ſouth part of Oxford, there
| begins a great Cauſey, going from Fryar-Ba-

N cen's Study, for near two miles, towards A-
'% ubr.Mon, birgdon ; + which one would iwagin, at firſt
ſight, to have been a werk of the Romans; but

deſcent, and his own virtues, was honour'd
with the title of Viſcount Lie, in the year
1605. by King James [the firſt ;] who had before
created him Baron Sidney of Penſberſt, and made
him Chamberlain to his Royal Conſort Queen
Am. [The fame perſon was alſo advanced to
the honour of Earl of Leiceſter in the 14˙
year of the ſame King ; all which Honours
have been continued down, and do {till remain,
in the ſame name and family.
Above the head of the river Ock, by Aſbbury-
park, is a Camp, of a figure as near round as, , ,_
ſquare, the diameter above an hundred paces, Monum.
and the works ſingle ; which ſeems to prove MS.
it Daniſh. But the works are now almoſt quite
ſpcil'd and defac'd, by digging for the Sarſden- Sar ſden-
ſtones (as they call them, ) to build a Houſe in ſtones.
the Park, belonging to the Lord Craven.

Above the ſame hill, is another Camp with
ſingle works, but very large; and at about two
furlongs diſtance, is a barrow call'd Dragon-hill :Dragon-hill,
but whether from hence one may conclude this
to be the tumulus of Uther Pendragon, ſince the

it :ppcars by Records to have been made by

conjecture is nct warranted by any direct teſti-
X mony

—

—— —— — — —

r

163 TON TT R E

—

BATIT

tid...

mony from hiſtory, I leave others to determine.

As alſo, whether the White horſe, on the ſide

of the hill, was made by Hengiſt, ſince the

Horſe was the Arms or figure in his ſtan-

dard. About a mile from the hill, are a great

many large ſtones, which, tho very confus d,

mult have been laid there with deſign ; ſome of

them being plac'd edge-wiſe ; but the reſt in-

deed appear ſo diſorderly, that one would ima-

gine they had only been emptied ont of Carts. |

From Kingſton-Liſle, the river Ock, juſt now

Denchworth. mention'd, runs between Denchworth, and Pu-
Puſey. fey (the poſſeſſion of a Family of that Sir-
* Now the, name, and held by a Horn given to their ance-
125 ſtors by King Canutus the Dane. Thus much
the Inſcription implies; but both the character

and ſtile thereof are modern, many hundreds

of years after the Conqueſt ; ſo that of what
antiquity ſoever the Horn it ſelf may be, the
Inſcription muſt have been added long after the

age of Canutus. Not but the tradition of Ca-

nutus's giving it, may probably be very true,

ſince there are ſo many inſtances of this kind,

in many parts of England; and Ingulphr has

expreſly told us, that in thoſe days it was com-

mon to make Grants of Lands by Horns, among

other things.] The two Denchworths are hard-

by, where two noble and ancient Families did

long flouriſh, Hide at South-Denchworth, and

Fetiplace at North-Denchworth ; both which

ſeem to have ſprung from the ſame ſtock, ſince

they give the ſame Coat of Arms; ſand are

now ſeated, the firſt at Kingſton, and the ſe-

cond at Swinbrock.l After this, the Och re-

ceives 2 nameleſs rivulet ; which flows out of

Wantage, the ſame Vale to Wantage, call'd in Saxon Wa-
nating, anciently a Royal Vill, and the birth-

place of the famous King Alfred, which he
1 at his death to Alfrith. It was made

a Market-town, a long time after, by the in-

tereſt of that valiant Soldier Foulk Fitzwarin,

upon whom Roger Bigod, Earl Marſhal of Eng-

land, had: beſtow'd it, for his ſingular courage

+Ttnow and conduct in War, and ſ afterwards it ow nd

owns, C. for it's Lords the Bourchiers Earls of Bath,
deſcended from the race of the Fitzwarins ; of
which family ſome are bury'd here. [A mile
Aubr. MS. above H/antage, eaſt from Aſþbury, there is a
very large Camp on the brow of a hill, of a
quadrangular form, and ſingle-work d; from
which it appears to be Roman. Eaſt from
Cuckamſley- hence is Cuckamſtey- hill, call'd in Saxon Cpichel-
hill, mer-þleape, and by Florence of Worceſter Cuic-
celmeſlawe ; from whence, by degrees, the pre-
ſent name is melted, and the word hill added
by a tzautology, for want of knowing, that hleape
{| Chron. Sax, in the Saxon implies ſo much. || Over this it
An. 1006. Jas, that the Danes paſs'd in their Depredati-
ons, after they had deſtroy'd Wallingford, in the
year of our Lord 1006.1
The Ouſe leaving Abingdon, preſently re-
ceives the Tame out of Oxfordſhire (of which
river, elſewhere.) Now, by a compound word
* See this being call'd * Thamifis (the Thames,) it firſt
contuted in makes a viſit to Sinodun, a high hill, defended
2 with a deep ditch, where it is certain that in
inodun, G : 4

ancient times there was a Roman fortification ;
for, when the ground is broken up with the
Plough, Roman Coins (a certain ſign of anti-
quity) are now and then found by the Plough-

men. |
Brettwell, 4 it, at Brettwel!, there was a Caſtle
if it was not really upon this hill) which
5 Nr Henry 2. took by mh, a little We his ma-
+ Placed by king peace with King Stephen. From hence,
Dr. Gale, at the Thames bends it's courſe to the once chiet
Henley inOx- City of the Attrebatii, which Antoninus calls

— ; + Galleva Attrebatum, and Ptolemy Galeva ; both,

164

through the careleſneſs of Copiers, inſtead of
Gallena ; and theſe likewiſe in the Greek Co- Gallena,
pies obtrude upon us Ndaxve, by a tranſpoſition
of the letters, for Tawina, For I have thought
that it was ſo call'd in the Britiſh tongue, as
it were Guall hen, that is, the Old Fort. Which
name being {till kept, and Ford, from a ſhallow Ford.
place in the river, added to it, the Saxons in
ancient times call'd it Buallengaponꝰ and pal-
lengapopò; and we now-a-days by contraction,
Wallingford; [as it is alſo call'd in the Saxon An-
nals (according to the ſeveral ages) Fealinga-
fond, Falingepopo, Falingrops. | In Edward the
Conteſlor's time, it was counted a Borough, and
contain'd in it (as we find in Domeſday-book)
276 houſes, yielding nine pound | Tax; and thoſe « Za
that dwelt there, did the King ſervice on horſe-back, 4 l
or elſe || by Sea. Of thoſe houſes, eight were de-\\| Per agu
ſtroy' d jor the caſtle. It was formerly walled a-
bout, and, as may be ſcen by the track [ of the
ditch and wall (beginning from the Caſtle,
faith Leland, ) l was a mile in compaſs, ſor more.]
It hath a caſtle ſeated upon the river, very large,
and ſo well fortify'd in former times, that the
hopes of it's being impregnable hath made ſome
perſons over-reſolute. For when the flames ot
Civil War had ſet all England on fire, we read
that King Stephen did ever now and then at-
tempt it by ſiege, biſt always in vain. We much
wonder'd at it's greatneſs and magnificence,
when we were boys, and retir'd thither from
Oxford (for it“ was a retiring- place for the + Iren 0
Students of ChrifZ-Church at Oxford.) It &
| double-wall'd, and ſurrounded with two ditch-
es Leland ſays, with three dikes, large and deep,
and well-watered.| In the middle ſtands a tower,
mis d upon a very high mount; in the ſteep
aſcent whereof, which you climb by ſtairs, I ſaw
a well of an exceeding great depth. The Inha-
bitants believe it was built by the Danes; but
I ſhould rather judge, that ſomething was here
erected by the Romans, and afterwards demo-
liſh'd by the Saxons and Danes, when Sueno
the Dane harraſs'd the Country, up and down
in theſe parts. At length, it recover'd under
William 1, as plainly appears by Domeſday-
Book, where it makes mention of eight Hou-* Haga,
ſes being pull'd down for the Caſtle, as I ob-
ſerv'd but now. Yet William Gemeticenſis takes
no notice of this Caſtle, when he writes, that
William the Norman, after Harold's defeat, im-
mediately led his army to this city (for ſo he
terms it,) and paſſing the Thames at the ford,
encamp'd here, before he march'd to London.
At which time, J/iged an Engliſhman was Lord Lords &
of Wallingford, who had one only daughter Walling
* in marriage to Robert D'Oily : by whom
e had Maud his ſole heir; married firſt to
Miles Criſpin, and after his death by the favour _
of King Henry 1, to Brient | Fitz-Count ; and f Filo Ce
he being bred a ſoldier, and taking part with Wit.
Maud the Empreſs, ſtoutly defended this Ca-
{tle againſt King Stephen (who had rais'd a
Fort over-againſt it at Craumeſb,) till the peace,
ſo much with'd tor by England in general, was
concluded in this place, and an end put to that
terrible quarrel between King Stephen and King
Henry 2. And then, the love of God did ſo
prevail upon Brient and his wife, that, quitting
the tranſitory vanities of this world, they wholly
devoted themſelves to Chriſt ; and by that
means this Hoxour of Wallingford fell to the
Crown. Which appears by theſe words taken r ge y,
out of an old Inquiſition in the Exchequer, Tour of Wi
his well beloved Lords, our Lords the King's Fuſti-lingford
ces and the Barons of the Exchequer, the Coni ta- Nia * 65
ble of Wallingford, ¶ Greeting. Know ye that 1 —_
have made diligent Inquiſition by the Knights 9 " | Salut:
aily-

Wallingfa,

16!

A terr
Plague

See the
inſtance
Wilton,
Wilts,

Moulesf

Aldwo

The ri

Kennet

Hungerf

BAR RS HI RX E. 2255 166
Bailywicks in purſuance of my Lord the King's pre-| mandy, to hold to him and his heirs males by ho- Prima pars
cept directed to me by the Sheriff ; and this is the] mage and ſervice, to fend the King and his heirs at dupl. Patent,
ſum of the Taquiſition this taken : Wigod of Wal-|the Caſtle of Roan one Lance with a Fox's tail hang- Norman.
lingford held the honour of Wallingford in King Ha-|ing to it: which pleaſant tenure I thought it . 5
yold's time, and afterwards in the reign of King|not amiſs to inſert here, among more ſerious

William 1; and had by his Wife a certain Daughter, matters. The ſame Waker in the reign of

whom he gave in marriage to Robert D 1 This] Henry 6, was Lord High Treaſurer of England,

Robert had by her a Daughter named Maud, which| and created Baron Hungerford ; and, by his pru- Barons Hun:
was his heir. Miles Criſpin eſpous'd her, and had] dent management, and his matching with Ca- gerford. |
with her the aforeſaid honour of Wallingford. Aj=|tharine Peverell (deſcended from the Moels and

ter Miles's deceaſe, our Lord King Henry 1. beſtou d the Courtneys) much augmen : |
"rd the aforeſaid Maud pou Brient Fitz-Count, c. 3 — 2 oh ror water — | | N |
Jet afterwards, in the reign of Henry 3, it be- the Lord Botereaux, enrich'd the family much v8
long'd to the Earls of Cheſter, and then to Ri-|more ; and afterwards Robert his ſon, who had to 1
chard King of the Romans and Earl of Corn- Wife Eleanor, daughter and heir of William Mo- BY
wall, who repaired it; and to his ſon Edmond, | lines (upon which account he was honour'd, a- |
who founded a Collegiate Chapel within the|mong the Barons of the Kingdom, by the name '1
inner Court: but he dying without iſſue, it re-[of Lord Molines, and during the Civil Wars
EY turn'd to the Crown, and was annexed to the] between the Houſes of York and Lancaſter was
Dukedom of Cornwall; fince when, it hath |beheaded at New-caſtle,) made great additions
A terrible fallen much to decay. More eſpecially, about] to it. Thomas his ſon, lain at Salisbury in his
Plaguc- the time when that plague and mortality which |father's life-time, left Mary an only daughter,
follow d the conjunction of Saturn and Mars] married to Edward Lord Haft ing, with whom he
in Capricorn, raged over all Europe, in the] had a great eſtate. But Malter, brother to the
year ot our Lord 1348 ; this Wallingford was ſaid Thomas, begat Edward Hungerford, father
to exhauſted, that whereas before it was very of that Falter whom Henry 8. created Baron
well inhabited, and had twelve Churches in it, Hungerford of Heytesbury, and condemned after-
[(Leland ſays, fourteen, and that in his time |wards for a very heinous crime: nevertheleſs,
leveral were living, who could ſhow the Pla- Queen Mary reſtor'd his children to every thing
ces where they all ſtood ; ) now it has but|but the dignity of Barons. [This Town is
one or two, But the inhabitants rather lay] famous for the beſt Trouts; but tho ſituate
the cauſe of this their decay, upon the bridges|upon a great road, neither its buildings nor
See the like built at Abingdon and Dorcbeſter; by which market are grown conſiderable. The Conſta-
in dance at means the High-road is turn'd from thence. ble (who is annually choſen) is Lord of the
Wilton, in | Notwithſtanding which misfortunes, their |Manour, and holds it immediately of the
TN Mault- trade, and the convenience of ſending|King. They have a Horn, holding about a
corn and other commodities by water to Lon-|quart ; the Inſcription whereof $ it to
don, do ſtill ſupport it; ſo that of late years have been given by John of Gaunt, along with
it is very much encreas d both in buildings] the Rial-fiſhing (ſo it is there expreſs'd,) in a
and number of inhabitants. It is a Corporation | certain part ot the river.] Not far from hence,
govern'd by a Mayor and fix Aldermen, who to the South, lies J/idehay, for a long time the Widehay;
are Juſtices of the Peace within the Burrough ;|ſeat of the Barons of St. Amand, whoſe eſtate Barons of
and they have a Free-ſchool, and a Market-|by marriage came to Gerard Braybrok ; and Eli- St. Amand.
houſe wherein the Mayor and Juſtices keep the |zabeth, his eldeſt grand-daughter by his ſon Ge-
Quarter-Seſſions. | rard, transfer d the eſtate by marriage to Milli-
From hence, Southward, the Thames glides am Beauchamp, who being ſummon'd to Parlia-
gently between very fruitful fields on both ſides, ment by the name of Miliam Beauchamp of St. ea tne
Moulesora, BY Mowlesford, which King Henry 1. gave to] Amand, was a Baron ; as was alſo his ſon Ri- of 85 =
Girald Fita Walter; from whom the noble Fa- chard, who had no iſſue that was legitimate.
mily of the Carews are deſcended. A Family, From thence the river Kennet. (taking it's
that hath receiv d the addition of much honour| courſe between Hemſted Marſhall, anciently held Hemſted
by it's matches with the noble families of Mo-|* by the Rod of the Marſhalſea, and belonging MarÞbal-
hun and Dinham, and others in Ireland, as|to the Marſhals of land, where 'Thomas tar oy
Aldworth, Well as England. Not far from hence is Ald- Parry Treaſurer of the Houſhold to Q. Elizabeth ;
worth, where are certain tombs, and ſtatues up-] built a very beautiful ſeat, [and where now is
on them larger than ordinary, much wonder di the ſeat of the Lord Craven! and Benham
at by the common people, as if they were the Valence, ſo call'd, from it's belonging to Milli-

pourtraictures of Giants; when indeed they|am Valence Earl of Pembroke ; ) comes to Spi- $pine,
are only thoſe of certain Knights of the tamily|ze, an old town mention'd by Antoninus;

of De la Beche, which had a Caſtle here, and is which, retaining it's name to this day, is call'd
ſuppos'd to have been extin& for want of iſſue-¶ Sene: but inſtead. of a town, is now a poor
male in the reign of Edward 3. And now at little village; ſcarce a mile from Newbury,! a
The river length the Thames meets with the Kenner, which, noted town, that had it's riſe out of the ruins
Kennet, as I faid. before, waters the ſouth- ſide of this|of it. For Newbury with us, is as much as the Newbury,
County, and at it's firſt entrance, after it has New Borough, in regard to Spinæ the more anci-
Hurgerſord. left Wiltſhire, runs beneath Hungerford, call d ent place, which is quite decay d, but hath left
in ancient times Ingleſord Charnam-{treet, a mean the name in a part of Newbury, which is ſtill call'd
town, and ſeated in a moiſt place; which yet | $pinham-lands. And if there were nothing elſe, Spinham
gave both name and title to the honourable fa- it were enough to prove Newbury to have had lands,
mily of the Barons of Hungerford, firſt advanc'd |it's original from Spinæ, that the inhabitants
to it's greatneſs by Halter Hungerford [Son of |of Newbury own the little village Spene for their
Sir Thomas, Speaker to the Houſe of Com- mother, tho' Newbury (compar d with Spene) is

2
=>"

wn, C.

Tagas

ards of
allingirl

Filio Cv
Utis.

mons 51 Edward 3, the firſt Parliament where-|in point of building and neatneſs a very conſi-
of the in they had a Speaker,)] who was Steward of |derable town, much enrich'd by cloathing, and
_— the King's Houſhold under Henry 5, and had |[commodiouſly ſeated upon a plain, with the
Teſta de coufer d upon him by that Prince's bounty (in river Kemet running through it. At the Nor-
vil in tte conſideration of his eminent ſervices in theſ man Conqueſt, this towu fell to the ſhare of
cheque"
1 Salut:

tionum,

wars) the Caſtle and Barony of Homet in Nor-|Ernulph de Heſdin Earl of Perch, whoſe great Lib, Inquiſi-
| | and-

o
ww OT WE

b. — *

167 ATTRE

24. 168

grandſen Thomas Earl of Perch being ſlain at

the ſicge ot Lincoln, the Biſhop of Chalons, his

heir, fold it to Hikiam Mai ſpall Earl of Pem-

broke, who likewiſe held the manour of Hemp-

ſted hard-by (and ſpoken of before,) as did his

{ucceflors Marſhals of England, till Roger Bigod

by his obſtinacy loſt his honour of Earl Mar-

{hal and poſleſhons too; which, notwithſtand-

+ Precario, ing, by much f interceſſion he obtain'd again,

| for lite. Of late years, it is better known in

| » our Hiſtories, on account of the Engagements

| there, berween his Majeſty King Charles 1,

| and rhe Parliament-Army, in the late Civil
Wars. |

The Kennet continues it's courſe from hence,

Lamborn, And receives the little river Lamborn, which at

it's rile imparts the name to a {mall market-

| town, that in ancient times belong'd to Ab

| frith King Aljred's Coulin, having been leſt him

| by the ſaid Ring by Will ; and afterwards it

was the Fitzwarin's, Who obtain'd for it the

* Now it be. Privilege of a market from King Henry 3. It

longs, C. alſo belong'd to the Knightly family of Eſſex,

—— re mmm | |
„ r
* .

—— : —
wr My; OO 3 "I P

it was demoliſh'd by King Henry 2. (becauſe
it had been a place ot retuge tor King Stephen's

party) to ſuch a degree, that nothing now re-

mains of it, but the bare name in the next

ſtreet. [Where this Caſtle ſtood, * Leland ſays, * Itinerar;

he could not exactly diſcover ; but imagines MS,
it might ſtand at the weſt-end of Caf7le-ſtreer.
It is probable, that ſome part of the Abbey
was built out of the ruins of it, and it might
perhaps be upon the very ſpot where the Abbey
was. Now, there is not ſo much as a tradition
of any Caſtle, that ever was there : only abour
the precincts of the Abbey, are ſome ſigns of
Fortifications ; but thoſe they affirm to have
been caſt-up no longer ſince, than the laſt Civil
Wars ; and the 3 alſo of the two Baſtions
are according to the modern way of fortifica-
tion. However, the Coins found there are an
evidence of the Antiquity of the place (one
particularly of gold, and another of braſs;)
but of what People, I have not learn'd.] Near
the Caſtle, King Henry 1. having pull'd down
a little Nunnery (founded formerly by Queen

; which || derived it's pedigree from William de
Es Eſſex Under-Treaſurer of England in Edward
the qth's time, and from thoſe of the ſame Sir-

name in E/ex, who have liv'd in great repute and

honour there. From thence this little river runs

Dunnington- beneath Denington, call'd alſo Dunnington, a {mall
caltle, but very neat caſtle, ſeated on the brow of a

ß

woody hill, having a fine proſpect, and win; long

dows on all ſides very lightſome; [ which in the
late Civil Wars was a garriſon for the King.“
They ſay it was built by Sir Richard de Abber-
bury Knight, founder alſo of God's-Houſe be-
neath it, for the relief of the poor. After-
wards, it was the reſidence of Chaucer, then of
the De la Poles ; and, within the memory of
* Our Fa-“ the laſt age ſave one, of Charles Brandon
thers, C. Duke of Suffolk. [Here was an Oak, ſtanding
till within theſe few years, commonly called
Chaucer's Chaucer's Oak ; under which he is ſaid to have
Oak, penn'd many of his famous Poems. In the
37 year of King Henry 8, an Act of Parlia-
ment paſled, to enable the King to erect this

Caſtle into an Honour. |
And now the Kennet rae, Pom a long way,
afles by Aldermaſton, hic enry t. gave to
e Rober e from whoſe poſterity, by the
De la Mares, it came at length by marriage to
the Fofters, a Knightly family. Ar laſt it runs
into the Thames, having firſt, with it's windings,
Reading, encompaſs d a great part of Reading. This lit-
tle city or town of Reading (call'd in Saxon
Rheadyge, from Rhea, that is, the River, or
from the Britiſh word Redin, lignitying Fern,
which grew in great plenty hereabouts; | but by
the Saxon Annals called 3 Ræding,
and Reding) for the neatneſs of it's ſtreets,
and the fineneſs of it's buildings, for it's riches,
and the reputation it * got for making of
cloath ; goes beyond all the other towns of
this County. [But of later years, the conveni-
ence of the river gi ing great encouragement
to the Mault- trade, they apply themſelves eſ-
pecially to that, and find it turn to ſo good ac-
count, that their employment about Cloath is
in great meaſure laid aſide. For whereas they
have had formerly ſevenſcore Clothiers, now
their number is but very ſmall.} And it hath
loſt it's greateſt ornaments, the beautiful Church,
and a very ancient Caſtle. For, Aſſerius tells
us, that the Danes kept poſteſſion of this Caſtle,
when they drew a ditch between the Kennet and
the Thames, and that they retreated hither, af-
Iogicheld, ter King Ethelwolph had routed them at Jngle-

* Hath got-
ten, C.

Alfritha, to expiate certain crimes,) built a
moſt magnificent Abbey for Monks, and en-
rich'd it with great Revenues. Which Prince,
to uſe the very words of his Charter of Foun-
dation, becauſe three Abbeys in the kingdom of Eng-
land were formerly for their fins deſtroy'd, that is,
Reading, Chelſea, and Leonminſtre, and were
in Lay-mens hands ; did by the advice of
the Biſhops, found a new Monaſtery at Reading,
and endow it with Reading, Chelſea, and Leon-
minſtre. In this Abbey, was inter'd the Foun-
der himſelf King Henry, together with his
daughter Maud, as appears by the private Hi- Niaud ,.
ſtory of the place; tho' ſome report that ſhe Empres,
was bury'd at Becc in Normandy. She, as well
as that Lacedæmonian Lady Lampido, men-
tion'd by Pliny, was a King's Daughter, a
King's Wife, and a King's Mother : that is,
Daughter of this Henry 1, King of England,
Wite of Henry 4, Emperor of Germany, and
Mother of Henry 2, King of England. Con-
cerning which, take here a Diſtich inſcrib'd
upon her tomb, in my judgment ingenious e-
nough :

Magna ortu, majorque viro, ſed maxima
7 ,
Hic jacet Henrici filia, ſponſa, parens.

Great born, match'd greater, greateſt brought
to bed,

Here 2 Daughter, Wife, and Mother's

And ſhe might well be counted greateſt and

moſt happy in her iſſue. For Henry 2. her ſon

(as Joannes Sarisburienſis, who liv'd in thoſe De augi cu
times, hath obſerv'd) was the beſt King of Britain, rial. 1.6.
and the moſt fortunate Duke of Normaudy and A 18.
quitain ; and as well in great ations, as conſpicu-

0445 virtues, above all others. How valiant, how magnifi-

cent, how wiſe and modeſt he was, almeſt from his very
infancy, Envy it ſelf can neither conceal nor diſſemble,

ſince his actions are ſtill freſh in our memory, and illu-

ions; fince be hath extendedthe monuments of his Va-

lour from the boundsof Britain to the Marches of Spain.

And in another place, concerning the {ame
Prince : Henry 2. the mightieſt King that ever was in
Britain, thunder d it about Garumna, and befieging
Tholouſe with ſucceſs, did not only ſtrike terror into

the inhabitants of Provence as far as the Rhoſne

and Alpes, but alſo by demoliſbing their ſtrong-holds,

and ſubduing the people, made the Princes of France

and Spain to tremble, as if he threaten'd univerſal

field, a little village in the neighbourhood which
gives name to a noble and ancient family. But

Conqueſt. I will add, if you pleaſe, a word or
* two

gunds,

fail, than they end; for where there is valour and

now, C. was converted into a Royal Scat; adjoyning
c. to which, f ſtood a very fine ſtable, ſtor'd with

BARKS

—
*
©

HIRE.

wo relating to the ſame Prince, out of Giral-
dus Cambrenſis: From the Pyrenæan Mountains to
the weſtern bounds and fartheſt limits of the northern
Ocean, this our Weſtern Alexander hath ſtretched-
orth bis arm. As far therefore as nature in theſe
arts hath enlarged the Land, fo far hath he extend-
'd his wittories. If the bounds of his Expeditions
were ſought for, Jooner won d the globe of the earth

reſolution, Lands may poſſibly be wanting, but victo-
ies can never fail ; matter for triumphs may be
wanting, but triumphs themſelves never. How great
an addition to his glories, titles, and triumphs was
Treland ! With how great, and how laudable Cou-
rages did he pierce thro the very ſecret and unknown
places of the Ocean ! But take here an old verſe
upon his death, which fully expreſſes in ſhort,
both all this, and alſo the glories of his ſon
King Richard 1.

Mira cano, ſol occubuit, nox nulla ſecuta

eſt.

Strange ! the Sun ſet, and yet no Night

enſu'd.

For Richard was ſo far from bringing night
upon this our Nation, that, by his Victories in
C,prus and Syria, he enlighten'd it with brighter
beams of glory. But this by way of digreſſion.
Let us now return from perſons to places. This
Monaſtery, wherein King Henry 1. lies inter'd,

noble horſes of the Kiug's ; [but all theſe are
now demoliſhed, probably in the late Civil
Wars ; the buildings which remain, being very

far from anſwering ſuch a Character.] Concer-
lace, take the Verſes of a Poet,
who, deſcribing the Thames as running by

ning this
it, ſays,
Hinc videt exiguum Chawſey, properatque vi-

dere
Redingum nitidum, texendis nobile pannis.
Hoc docet Elfredi noffri victricia figna,
Begſcegi cadem, calcata cadavera Dani.
Utque Taperfubs maduerunt ſanguine campi.
Principis hic Zephyro Cauroque parentilins
orti
Cornipedes crebris implent hinnitibus auras,
Et de ducunt, greſſus glomerantque ſu-
erbos,
POE pots noſtri Marti ſervire lupatis.
Haccine ſed pietas ? heu dira piacula, pri-
mum
Neuſtrius Henricus ſitus hic, inglorius urna
Nunc jacet ejec tus, tumulum nouns advena
quarit
Fruftra ; nam regi tenues invidit arenas
Auri ſacra fames, Regum metuenda ſepul-
chris.

Thence little Chawſey ſees, and haſtens on
To Reading, fam'd for Cloth, an handſome
Town.

Here Zlfred's troops their happy valour \

ſhow'd,
On e Begſceg and his Pagans
trod,
And drown'd the meadows in a purple
Here too in ſtate the royal courſers ſtand,

Proud to be 2 by our Mars's hand.
Full ſtrerch'

1 round, 4 þ
neighing fill the air, and trampling
ſhake the ground,

for race they take their eager

170

But where, poor baniſh'd Virtue, art thou
gone ?

Here Henry lies without a ſingle ſtone,

Equalld, alas, with common dead too
ſoon,

So fatal avarice to Kings appears,

It ſpares their Crowns more than their Se-

pulchres.

[ From this Town, Sir Jacob Aſtley, for his
eminent Services to King Charles the firſt, was
by that Prince created Lord Aitley of Reading.
And in the year 1716, aliam Cadogan, who
had greatly ſignaliz d his Valour and Conduct,
under our famous General John Duke of Mart-
borough, in the courſe of the French War,
was advanced to the honour of Baron of Read-
ing ; and afterwards, in the year 1718, to the
honour of Baron of Oakley, Viſcount Caverſham,
and Earl Cadogan ; the laſt mentioned Place,
viz. Caverſham or Cauſham, being the Place
of his Lordſkip's Reſidence, and not above two
miles diſtant from Reading. Near which, py,»

; iloſoph.
{ome years ſince, was diſcover'd a large Stratum Trance,
of Oy#ter-ſbells, lying on a bed of green Send, Numb, 261.
and extending to five or fix Acres of ground ;
with a bed of bluiſh Clay immediately above
it. Among theſe, divers have been found, with
both the valves or ſhells lying together ; and
tho', in moving them, one of the valves hath
frequently broke oft from its fellow, it is plain,
by comparing and joyning them, that they ori-
ginally belonged to each other.]
Scarce halt a mile from Reading, among fine
green Meadows, the Kennet joyns the Thames ;
which, by the conflux being now broader,
ſpreads it ſelf towards the north, by Suing, a Sunning,
little village, that one would wonder ſhould
ever have been the See of eight Biſhops, who
had this County and Wiltſhire for their Dio-
ceſe; yet our Hiſtorians tell us it was. The
ſame was atterwards tranſlated by Herman to
Sherburn, and at laſt to Salisbury; to which Bi-
ſhoprick this place ſtill belongs. Not far off,
ſtands Laurence Haltham, where the foundati- Laurence
ons of an old fort are to be ſeen, and Roman Waltham,
coins are often dug-up. Thence the Thames
paſſes by [ Hurley, from which place Sir Richard Hurley.
Lovelace, in the third year of King Charles
the firſt, was advanced to the dignity of a Ba-
ron of this Realm, by the title of Lord Love-
lace of Hurley: then by] Biſtleham, contracted Biſtleham.
now into Biſham, at firſt the Eſtate of the Biſham.
Knights-Templars, then of the Montacutes, who
built a little Monaſtery here ; afterwards, of
that famous and worthy Knight Sir Eduard sir Edward
Hobey, a perſon to whom I owe a very particu- Hobey.
lar reſpect, and whoſe more than ordinary o
ligations are, and always will be, ſo much the
ſubje& of my thoughts, that I can never poſſibly
{forget them. |
he Thames, leaving Biſpam, fetches a com-
paſs, to a little rown call'd in former ages Southe-
alington, now Maidenhead, * from I know not what Maidenhead.
Britiſh Maiden's head ; one of thoſe eleven * A cultu ca-
thouſand Virgins, who, as they returned home ,, &c.
from Rome with Urſula their Leader, ſuffer'd
Martyrdom near Cologne in Germany, from that
ſcourge of God, Attila. Neither is the town
of any great antiquity ; for no longer ago than
t our great grandtathers time, there was a ferry, + So ſaid,
in a place ſomewhat higher, at Babham's-end. ann. 1607.
But, after they had built here a wooden bridge
upon piles, it began to have inns, and to be ſo
frequented, as to outvie its neighbouring mo-
ther Bray; a much more ancient place, as ha-
ving given name to the whole Hundred. I have

long been of opinion, that the Bibroci, Who Bibroct.
ſubmit-

at at. tn. A

— RS, A

I71

ATTR E

B ATI I.

Windſor.

* Perhendi-
nationi.

1350.

ſubmitted themſelves to Czſar's protection, in-
habited theſe parts; and why ſhou'd I not
think ſo ? Here are very clear and plain remains
of the name; alſo, Bibrafte in France, is now
contracted into Bray; and not far from hence
Cæſar croſs'd the Thames with his Army (as 1
ſhall ſhew in its proper place,) when thele parts
ſubmitted to him. Certainly, ſhould one ſeek
for the Bibroci elſewhere, ever ſo diligently, he
wou'd, I believe, hardly find them.

Among theſe Bibroci, flouriſhes Mindeſor, in Sax-
on [Findleropha, Pindleroupe, Fmoleropa, and
ymdlerhopa, perhaps from the winding ſhore;
foppe in that language lignifying a bank or ſhore.
It is term'd Windle-ſbora in King Edward the
Confeſlor's Charter; who in theſe very words
made a Grant of it to Weſtminſter : To the

praiſe of Almighty God, I have granted as an en-

dowment and perpetual inheritance, to the uſe of thoſe
that ſerve the Lord, Windleſhora, with its appur-
tenances. And I have read nothing more ancient
concerning Windſor. But the Monks had not
held it long, when William the Norman, by
exchange, brought it back to the Crown. For
thus his Charter runs: Mith the conſent and fa-
wour of the Venerable the Abbot of Weitmin#ter, 1
have enter d into a compoſition about Windſor's be-
ing in the peſſejſion of the Crown, becauſe that place

ſeems cemmodicuss for the King, by reaſon of the

nearneſs of the river, and the foreſt for hunting, and
many other conveniencies ; being likewiſe a place fit jor
the King's Retirement: in lieu whereof, I have

granted them Wokendune and Ferings. Scarce

any Royal Seat can have a more pleaſant ſitua-
tion. For from an high hill, it hath a moſt
delightful proſpe& all round. Its front over-
looks a long and wide Vale, chequer'd with
corn-fields and green meadows, clothed on each

ſide with groves, and water'd with the calm
and gentle Thames. Behind it, there ariſe hills
every where, neither craggy, nor over-high ;

adorn'd with woods, and, as it were, conſecra-

ted by Nature to the Exerciſe of Hunting. The
pleaſantneſs of it hath drawn many of our
Princes hither, as to a retiring-place ; and
here King Edward 3. (that potent Prince) was

born, to conquer France : who built new from
the ground a Caſtle, in bigneſs equal to a little

City, fortified with ditches, and towers of
ſquare-ſtone ; and, having preſently after ſub-

du'd the French and the Scots, he kept at the
ſame time Jecln King of France, and David
King of Scots, Priſoners here. This Caſtle is
divided into two Courts. The inner, which
looks towards the Eaſt, contains in it the
King's palace ; than which, if you conſider the

contrivance of the buildings, nothing can be
more ſtately and magnificent. On the north-

ſide, where it looks down to the river, Queen
Elizabeth added a moſt pleaſant Terraſs-Walk.

The outer Court hath at it's entrance a ſtately
Chapel, dedicated by King Edward 3, to the
bleſted Virgin Mary and St. George of Cap-

padecia ; but it was; brought to it's preſent

magnificence by King Edward 4. In our
time, the Lodgings, Hall, Chapel, &c. have been,

at vaſt expence, exceedingly adorned, and

beautified with curious Paintings, and other
noble Improvements. |

Here, King Edward 3. (for the adorning
and encouraging of military Virtue, with ho-
nours, rewards, and glory,) inſtituted a moſt
noble ſociety of Knights, which (as ſome re-
port) from his own Garter, given for the Sig-
nal in a battle that prov'd ſucceſsful, he ſtiled

Order of the Knights of the Garter. They wear on their left

Garter,

leg, a little below the knee, a blue Garter, car-
rying this Motto embroider d in letters of gold,

and in French, HONI SOIT QUI Mal
YL PENSE, and faſten the ſame with a buckle
of gold, as a token of Concord and a tye of
the ſtricteſt Amity, to the end there might *
among them a kind of Conſociation and commu-
nity of Virtues. Others refer it to the Gar
ter of the Queen, or rather of Joan Counte(;
of Salisbury (a Lady of incomparable beauty)
that fell from her as fhe was dancing, and wa,
taken-up by the King: at which the Nobles
that ſtood about him, laughing, the King told
them, That the time ſhould ſhortly Ove
when the higheſt honour imaginable ſhould be
paid to that Garter, This is the common re-
port ; neither need it ſeem a mean Original
conſidering that, as one ſaith, Nobilitas Jul i,
more jacet, i. e. Love carries in it a Nobleneſs of
mind. There are ſome too, who make the
Inſtitution of this Order, much more anci-
ent ; aſcribing it to King Richard 1, and per-
ſuading roo, Fae that King Edward only re-
viv'd it; how truly, I know not. Let in the
very book of the firſt Iuſtitution, which 1/1j-
am Dethick Garter Principal King at Arms gave
me a ſight of (a Gentleman very inquilitive af-
ter every thing relating to Honour, and the N-

bility,) we read thus: Mien King Richard lel
bis Army againſt the Turks and * Saracens, Cy-,
prus and Acon, and was weary of ſuch lingring Aion

delays, while the fiege was carried on with a wonder-
ful deal of trouble : at length, upon a divine injyi-
ration ( by the apparition, as it was thought, of &.
George,) it came into his mind, to draw upon the
legs of ſome choſen Knights of his, a certain tach
of leather, ſuch as he had then ready at hand, where-
by being minded of the future glory promiſed them if
they conquer d, they might be incited to behave then-
Jehves with courage and reſolution : in imitation af
the Romans, who had ſuch variety of crowns, where-
with, upon ſeveral accounts, they preſented and lo-
nour d their ſoldiers ; that, by inttigations and al-
lurements of this kind, cowardice might be ſhaken of,
and valour and bravery might ſpring up, and ſua
themſelves with greater vigour and reſolution.
However, the mightieſt Princes of Chriſten-
dom have reckon'd it among their greateſt ho-
nours, to be choſen into this Order; and ſince
it's firſt inſtitution, there have been already ad-
mitted into this Order (which conſiſts of twen-
ty-ſix Knights) * twenty-eight Kings or there-

- *22,.C
abouts, beſides our Kings of England, who are 0
term d Sovereigus thereof; not to mention a great Soperi,

many Dukes, and other perſons of the greateſt
quality. And here, it will not be amiſs, to ſet

ted into this Order, and are commonly call
the Founders of the Order ; for their glory ought
never to be obliterated, who in thoſe days had
"ey tew Equals in point of military Valour
and Bravery, and were upon that account di-
ſtinguiſhed, and advanced to this honour.

Edward the third, King of England.
Edward his eldeſt Son, Prince of Tales.
Henry Duke of Lancaſter.

Thomas Earl of Warwick.

Capdall de Buche.

Ralph Earl of Stafford.

William Montacute Earl of Salishury,
Roger Mortimer Earl of March.
John L'ifle.

Bartholomew Burgwaſh,

John Beauchamp.

John de Mohun.

Hugh Courtney.

Thomas Holland.

John Grey.

Richard

- .  Foundens
down the names of thoſe who were firſt admit-,. On

+ IVillia)
Paynel, 0

Wickbar
Apophtb

. * —

Richard Fitz.-Simon. nd De 2 —
Miles Stapleton. 4 ſmond, are deſcended. And now let it

CC

not be thought troubleſome to run over theſe
2 1 _ verſes _ Windſor, taken out of The Mar-
—4 wer ley. ie o tame and Jſin written ſome years ſince ;
Nie _ in which Father Thames endeavours to cele-
— 7 5 420 e. Qu dignity of the place, and the Majc-
. 0 .
Otho Holland. — nn -> 2: am
Henry Eme. P
| Zanchet Dabridgecourt. Jam Windeſors hu be
t | rgunt in culmina ripe
a * * Walter Paveley. — 4 celſo lambentes vertice n
, 3 Has ö ö 1
* rere C. On the left-ſide of the Chapel, are the hou- Que fait — — renal, Able - —＋ + Thamiſis.
_ ſes of the Warden or Dean, and the twelve Caruleum caput ille levans a 1 Pee
ll, Prebendaries. On the right- ſide, is a building, Aerias moles, gradibus fu * ape} ini.
a | much of the nature of the Grecian Prytancum, Ferratos poſtes, pinnas — * -y
ot in which twelve aged ſoldiers, Gentlemen born, Perpetuo latos campos, "Zephyr * -: ON
te are maintained. Theſe wear conſtantly a ſcar- Florentes hortos, regum ES 3
i- let gown, reaching down to their ankles, with Auratos thalamos, regum preclara .
r- a purple mantle over it; and are bound to be Et quæcunque refers ; nunc Windeſora, r
= at Divine Service, ard to ofter up their prayers ferre : 18
Ie

to God daily for the Knights of the Order. Define, Cappadecis q ;
55 , uanquam fis clara Georgi

3 Between the two Courts, there riſes a high Militia, procery *

e mount, on _ the Round _ ſtands ; and ww oy nme

| hard by it, ſtands another lofty Tower, called Cin{ta periſcelidi ſuras, te lumi

Winchefter-Tower, from William of Wickham Bi- Wuſtret, — —— — * OW

ſhop of Wincheſter, whom King Edward 3. Ut jam Phryxzum ſpernat Burgundia velins,

made overſeer of the work. Some report, that Contemnat cochleis variatos Gallia torques

Wickham, after he had built the Tower, cut Et cruce conſpicuas Pallas, Rhodos 1 &

theſe words (which eng to be expreſs d with Elba ; -

the ſame turn in Latin) on a certain inner wall, Solaque militiæ fit ſplendida gloria v

. Wickham's This made Wickham. Which ſentence, in the Define mirari, fi Jp deſine 1

Apophthegm. Engliſh tongue, that ſeldom makes any diſtin-

, Omnia concedunt uni, ſuperatur in uno
ction of caſes, bears ſuch a doubtful conſtructi- Quicquid habes, tibi a honos, tibi gloria

8 | on, as renders it uncertain, whether he made major,
if | the Caſtle, or the Caſtle made him. This was Accola quod noſtre ripe ſiet incola wobis
j- carried to the King by ſome ſecret Backbi- Elizabetha. ( Simulque ſuo quaſi poplite ME
f ters, and ſo —— 3 his 3 - it flexo h Queen Eliza-
; TVickham did arrogantly challenge to himſelf all Tumiſis en I placide ſub/idet 7 - :
the honour of the building Which when the mw 4 fp mu ib proſe
. : King took ill, and ſharply chid him for ; he | Elizabetha ſuis Diva & Dea ſola Britanuis,
F made this anſwer, that he had not arrogated to Cujus inexhauſtas laudes fi carmine noſtro
F | himſelf the honour of ſo magnificent and royal Completti cuperem, Melibocco prompting Alpes
a Palace, but only accounted this piece of work Imponam, numeremque meas numeroſus a-
: the foundation of all his Preferments. Neither YeNas. :
: have 1(continued he) made this Cafile, but this Ca- Si quaſdam tacuiſſe velim, quamcunque ta-
le hath made me, and, from a mean condition, hath cebo, |
advancd me to the King's favour, and to riches, and Major erit ; primos actus, vetereſque labores
honours. Under the caſtle towards the Weſt and Proſequar ? ad ſeſe revocant praſentia mentem.
*22.C, | South, lies the town, indifterent large and po- Juſtitiam dicam ? magis at clementia ſplendet.
| | ulous : ſince King Edward the 3 time this Vittrices referam vires ? plus vicit inermis.
Sovercis th been growing into repute ; and the other, Quod pietas floret, quod non timet Anglia
Old- wind- which ſtands further off, now call'd Old Wind- Martem,
Pounlene ſor. for, hath by little and little fallen to decay: in Quod legi nemo, quod lex dominatur &
the Ora which (in the reign of William 1, as we read omni,
* Hagz, in his book) there were an hundred houſes, where- Ouod vicina truci non ſervit Scotia Gallo,
+ De Gablo. of two and twenty were exempt from tax f; out of Exuit atque ſuos ſylveſtris Hibernia mores,
the reſt there went thirty ſhillings. Here 1s nothing Criniger Ultonius quod jam miteſcere diſcit,
elſe, worth the mentioning, except ſ the beauti- Laus fibi ſola cadit, nil non debetur & illi;
L Eaton, ful ſeat of the Duke of St. Albans; and] Eaton, Crimina que pellunt, tantz que principe
, which lies over-againſt Windſor on the other igns
b fide of the Thames, and is joyn'd to it by a Ones templa ſacro poſuerunt pettore Dive ;
wooden bridge. It hath a fine College, and a Relligio ſuperos ſancte monet eſſe colendos,
noted School for Humanity-learning, founded Juſtitia utilibus ſemper præponere juſtum
by King Henry 6; wherein, beſides the Provoſt, Eadocet ; ut praceps nil fit, prudentia ſuadet 3
eight Fellows, and the Choir, ſixty Scholars Temperies ut caſta velit, cupiatque pudica
are maintain'd, and taught Grammar, and in Inſtruit; immotam mentem conſtantia fir mat.
due time are prefer d to the Univerſity of Hine EADEM SEMPER, reciè fibi vindi- Queen Eliza-
Cambridge. Bur this 1s reckon'd in Bucking- cat illa. | berths Motto.
hamſhire. There remains nothing more to be Proferat undoſo quis tantas carmine laudes ?
ſaid of Windſor, but that there is an honoura- Sola tenet laudum quicquid numerabitis omnes.
Barons of ble family of Barons, ſirnam'd de Windſor, who Sit felix, valeat, vivat, laudetur, ametur ;
Windſor, derive their original from Walter ſon of Other, Dum mihi ſunt ſluctus, dum curſns, dum mihi
Caſtellane of Windſor in the reign of King ripa,
William 1; from whom likewiſe, Robert e Anglisceuùm fælix Princeps moderetur ha-
merſet-Herald (a perſon very induſtrious an beuas,
— in the 1 80 Heraldry) hath prov'd, Hat una dies mihi curſus, & fibi vi-
that the Fitzgeralds in Ireland, Earls of Kildare tam. ws

125

ATT NE

BAT I.

—

Now on the bank fam'd Windſor's towers
appear,

Mount their high tops, and pierce the ut-
moſt air.

At this (but firſt does Eaton's walls ſalute,

Where ſtern Orbilius governs abſolute,

And in proud ſtate his birchen ſcepter
ſhakes)

Thames lifts it's azure head, and thus he
ſpeaks:

IWindſor, no more thy ancient glories tell,

No more relate the wonders of thy hill;

Thy 5 thy Fenns, thy Chapel's ſtate-
ly pile:

Thy Sade, thy ſmiling Fields, thy happy
Springs;

Thy 8 Marriage- beds, or Tombs of

ings.

Forget ths Knights thy noble ſtalls adorn,

The Garter too by them in honour worn:

'Tho' that great Order found the firſt in

fame,
And ſwells ſo high with mighty George's
name,

That Burgundy contemns her golden Fleece,

And Far light French their {callop'd chains
deſpiſe.

Rhodes, Alcala and Elbe with ſhame diſown

The painted Crofles on their mantles
ſown.

Theſe gleries now are all eclips'd by one,

One honour vies wfth all thy old renown.

When on thy courts, and on my bank we

ee
Elizabeth (then Thames with bended knee
Stoops low to pay obeyſance to her name;
And ti.us goes on, pleas'd with his mighty
the me.)
Elizabeth, whom we with wonder {tile
Tuc Queen, the Saint, the Goddeſs of our
lile :
Whoſe praiſe ſhould I endeavour to rehearſe
Wirhin the narrow bounds of feeble verſe;
As ſoon huge Athos might on Atlas ſtand ?
Rais'd by my ſtrength ; as ſoon my weary
hand þ
Might count the endleſs globules of my
ſand. }
If any grace on purpoſe I'd conceal,
What I paſs by will prove the greateſt ſtill.
If her paſt deeds inſpire my joytul tongue,
Her preſent actions {top th' imperfect ſong.
Should her ſtrict juſtice fill my riſing
thought,
Her mercy comes between and drives it out.
Or was my ſubject her triumphant Arms,
Alas! more trophies grace her conqu'ring
charms.
That virtues flouriſh, and the peaceful
own ;
That all to laws are ſubjeR, laws to none:
That Scotland bath retus'd the Gallick yoak,
And heland all her ſavage arts forſook :
That UlFer's ſons at ul reform'd appear,
To * they owe; the fame belongs to
er.
Virtues, that ſingle make us thro ly bleſt,
United, all adorn her princely breaſt.
To heaven her Godlike mind Religion
bears,
Juſtice to profit honeſty prefers.
n prudence cautious thoughts in-
pires,
And temp'rance guides her innocent de-
ſires. |
Her ſettled conſtancy's unſhaken frame
Deſerves the noble Motto, STILL THE
SAME. |

But ah ! my numbers all are ſpent in
vain,

And graſp at that they never can con-
tain,

Should ſome wild fancy all th' encomiums)

joyn

That 3 could e're deſerve, or poet
eign,

The Panegyrick would be ſtill too
mean. 1

O may her years increaſe with her re- 7

nown,
May conſtant joys attend her peaceful
J
)

Crown,
While I my ſtreams or banks can call my
oon!
And when ſhe dies (if Goddeſſes can die
May I ſtraight fail, and be for ever dry!

Not far from Windſor, on a hill call'd St.
Leonard's-hill, have been diſcover'd great num- St x... ,.
bers of Antiquities, ſuch as Coins, Inſtruments hill. ;
of War, and an ancient Lamp. |

The reſt ot Barkſbire, ſouthward from Miud-

for, and ſhadow'd with woods and groves, is
commonly call'd Windſor-Foreſt, and is but wing chr
thinly planted with villages (of which Oking- Forel.
ham is the moſt noted, for bigneſs, and it's Okingham,
cloathing-trade ; ) but is well-ſtock'd every

where with game. Nor is there any other ,,,, Mo
thing remarkable in this part, except a large Brit.
Camp at Eaſi-hamſtcad, commonly called Czſar's Eait-ham-
Camp.! Now (ſince we have often ſpoke of 29.
Forciis already, and ſhall hereafter have occaſi- A Poreſt
on to ſpeak ot them ;) it you deſire to know what what it is,
a Foreſt is, and whence the name comes, take it and whence
here out of the Black Book of the Exchequer. A —
Foreſt, is a ſafe harbour for beaſt, ; not of every ſort,

but jor ſuch only as are wild : not in every place, but

in ſome certain places fit for that purpoſe : whence it

is cal d Foreſta, quali Fereſta, that is, Ferarum

ſtatio. And it is incredible, how much ground

the Kings of England have ſuſfer'd every where

to lie waſte, and have ſet apart and enclos'd

for Deer; or, as our writers term it, have affo-

reſted. Nor can I believe, that any thing was

the cauſe, but an immoderate delight in * hunt- Or for fad.
ing (tho ſome attribute it to want of people;) for ing the Court
lince the Danith times, they have continually affo-12 Venivn,
reſted more and more places, and, tor the pre-
ſervation of the Game there, have impoſed very

ſtrict laws, and appointed a Chief-Ranger or Fo- Chicſ ringt
reſter, to take cognizance of all cauſes relating :
to the Foreſts ; who might puniſh, with loſs of
lite or limb, any one that ſhould kill the Deer
in any Chaſe or Foreſt. But Joannes Sarisburi-
enfis ſhall briefly relate theſe things, in his own
words, out of his Polycraticon : That which will
make you more admire ; to lay zins jor birds, to lay
ſnares, to allure them with ſprings or Pipe, 07 to en-
trap them any manner of way, is by proclamation
often made a crime, puniſhable with forfeiture of
goods, or loſs of limb and life. Du have heard,
that the fowls of the air and fiſhes of the ſea, are
common. But theſe are the King's, and are claimed,
by the Foreſt-Law, where-e're they fly. With-hold
thine hand, and jorbear, leſt thou fall into the Huntſ-
man's hands, and be puniſh'd for Treaſon. The Huſ-
bandmen are debarr'd their Fullows, whilſt the Deer
have liberty to ſtray abroad ; and, that their feedings
may be enlarg'd, the Farmer is cut ſhort of the uſe of
his own grounds. What is ſown or planted they keep
from the Country-man, and paſturage from the Gra-
noch 3 and throw the Bee-hives out of the Flowry
Plots; nay, even the Bees themſelves are ſcarce ſuf-
er d to enjoy their natural liberty. Which courſes,
ſeeming too inhuman, had often been the occa-

ſion of great diſturbances, till, by the Barons

revolt,

huſices in
A Eyre,

ird':.

r find.
Court
ion,

ranger,

þ ſaſtices in

| Ly re.

BARKSHIRE ©

gorous laws, he granted others more equitable,

revolt, the Charta de Foreſta was extorted from
Henry 33 wherein, having abrogated thoſe ri-

to which they who live within the limits of the
Foreſts, are at this day bound to be conforma-
ble. Afterwards, two Juſtices were appointed
for theſe Cauſes, whereof one preſides over all
the Foreſts on this ſide the river Trent, the
other oyer thoſe beyond it as far as Scotland ;
and both, with great authority. Throughout
all this County ( as we find in the Survey-
book of England) The Taine or King's Knight
holding of him as Lord, whenſoever he died, left to
the King for a Relief, all his Armour, one Horſe
with a Saddle, and another without a Saddle. And
if he had either Hounds or Hawks, they were tendred

When Geld was given in King + Edward's time

throughout all Barkſhire, an hide yielded 3 d. ob. be-
fore Chriſtmas, and as much at Whitſuntide.

[ Barkſhire gave the title of Earl, firſt to Francis
Norris, created Jan. 28. 1620 ; but he dying
without ifſue-male, it was beſtow'd upon Thomas
Howard, Lord Howard of Charlton, and Viſcount
Andover ; who was ſucceeded in this Honour
by Charles his Son and heir ; and Charles, by
thomas Howard his brother: Which Thomas dy-
ing without iſſue-male, the title of Earl of
Barkſhire deſcended to Henry-Bowes Howard,
grandſon of William, who was fourth ſon of Tho-
mas the firſt Earl of Barkſhire, of this Family.!

There are in this County 140 Pariſpes.

to the King; that if he pleas d, he might take them.

HE Countries we have been travelling over, that is, thoſe of the Danmonii, Durotrig
and Attrebatii, while the Saxons had the Sovereignty here in Britain, belong d to the K

Weſt-Saxons, which they in their language call'd * Pearc-Oeaxan-pic, as they called themſelves Ge-
Cerdic's grandfather, who laid the foundation of this Kingdom : whence ſome call

guy rij from

es, Belgæ,
ingdom of the

them

1

* Weſt-Seax-

yo
Geuiſſi, others Viſi-Saxones, from their weſtern fituation ; as the Weſtern Goths are nam d Viſi- —1 2
Gothi. Theſe at length, when the Engliſh Empire was grown to maturity, reduc d the Saxon Heptarchy name.

into a Monarchy, which nevertheleſs, afterwards, thro" the lazineſs of their Kings, quickly grew as it were

decrepit, and vaniſb d. So that herein we daily ſee it confirm'd, that the race of the moſt valiant, and

nobleſt Families, as the Shoots 0

F Plants, have their firſt ſprouting-up, their time of flowering, and matu-
di

rity ; and in the end, by little and little, fade and die.

More rare Plants growing wild in Bark-
ſhire,

Myrtus Brabantica five Elæagnus Cordi Ger.

Gaule or Dutch Myrtle. See the Hnonymes in Dor-
ſerſhire. By old Windſor -park corner. Park. p.
1451. 2 5
Orchis galei & alis ferè cinercis J. B. Cy-
nos orchis latifolia hiante cucullo minor C. B.
latifolia minor Park. major altera Ger. The man

Polygonatum Ger. vulgare Park. latifolium vul-
gare C. B. Polygonatum, vulgò ſigillum Solo-
monis J. B. Solomon's Seal. In a fell adjoyning to
the Waſh at Newberry, and in divers other places
of Barkſhire. Obſerved by my worthy friend Mr.
George Horſnell Chirurgeon in London.

Hieracium Pulmonaria dictum anguſtifolium.
Pulmonaria Gallica ſeu aurea anguſtifolia Ger.
emac. Narrow-leaved golden Lung-wort. Found in

an old Roman camp at Sidmonton near Newberry.
Ger. emac. p. 305.

Orchies. On Cauſbam hills by the Thames-fide, not
far from Reading.

REGNL

4 ſhire, on the South to Suſſex, on. the Eaſt to[ming on, hinder'd his further progreſs.]
|

— *
— — —— —-ꝝ —

* — *
„ — Wh
/

| | digging the graves ; and, between that place|as if the honour had not been pay'd, ſo much

| (AB | ai the Pic to be ſo called from their being a Regnum or Kingdom, to which

| ſlight and coarſe make, with a green border ;|themſelves ſecure of the Crown, and bury'd

|

179

28 282

PI

ELL LLCL LIL LLLD

R E G N [I

EXT the Attrebatii to the Eaſt, the Regni (call'd by Ptolemy P3wa,) inhabi-
FRE ted thoſe Counties which we now call Surrey and Southlex ; with the ſea-coaſt of
73 . * 211 Hamſhire. As to the Etymology of the name, I am inclin'd to conceal my preſent
FLAT || opinion 3 becauſe it is poſſible it may be as much out of the way, as if I ſhould

N

the Romans granted the Privilege of continuing under Kingly government. For;
as Tacitus tells xs, Cogidunus King of the Britains had certain Cities put un-
der his Juriſdittion, according to an ancient cuſtom of the Romans; with no other
defign but that they might have Kings their ſlaves. But this comjetture, to my ſelf
does not appear probable, and to others will ſeem abſurd ; and ſo I give it up. As for the Etymology of
q the Saxon names (which are of a later date) I readily cloſe with them, fince they have ſuch a clear ap-
| pearance of truth: Namely, South-ſex from the South-Saxons ; and Surrey from the Southerly fituation
| with regard to the river. For that this is the meaning of Suth-rey, no one can deny, who conſiders that f O- Ofre, in
ver-rhey in the cid Saxon ſignifies Over the river. Saxon, b
Bank, Vil,
Sourhmwn,

| SUTH-RE F.

UR REV, calld by Bede Suth- of Okeley (which in winter is extreamly wet)
ED) 10a, commonly Suthrey and|it is very plainly trac'd. Had not the civil
Surrey, by the Saxons, from wars prevented, we might before this time
it's ſituation on the South- have had a more diſtinct account of it: for
ſide of the river, GuSpea (for Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surrey, had made
duß with them ſignifies the] ſome attempts towards the exact diſcovery of

| South, and Ca a river: Ylits remains, tracing it from Arundel through all
joyns, on the Weſt, to Barkſhire and Ham- the deep country of Suſſex ; but the wars co-

Okeley,

9 N
W 7 8 7
8
% A
SY FIC

Kent; and on the North it is wafh'd, and] The Thames (to go along with the ſtream of
parted from Middleſex, by the river Thames. it) as ſoon as it has left Barkſhire, glides to
The County is not very large, but pretty rich, Chertſey, call'd [in Saxon Ceoptenge and! by Chertfr,
where it lies upon the Thames; and where it Bede Ceroti Inſula, i. e. the Iſland of Cerotus :
is an open champain, it is tolerably fruitful in but now it ſcarce makes a Peninſula, except in
corn, and more ſo in hay, eſpecially to the|winter-time. In this, as a place moſt retir'd
South, where a continu'd low vale runs along|from the commerce of the world, Frithwald,
Holmſdale, ( call'd formerly from the woods, Hhimſlale, a petty King of Surrey under Mulpher King of the

which a mixture of woods, fields, and mea-| Mercians (tor ſo he ſtiles himſelf in the Foun-

dows, renders exceeding pleaſant. Here and|dation-Charter, ) and Erchenwald Biſhop of

there, are long ridges of hills; the parks are London, built a little Monaſtery in the in-

every where ſtor'd with Deer, and the rivers|fancy of the Engliſh Church, which was for
| with fiſh ; which two afford the agreeable plea-|ſome time the Burying-place of that moſt Re-
| ſures of hunting and fiſhing. It is by ſome ligious King, Henry 6; whom the York-family, Henrys.
| compared to a coarſe garment, or cloth of aſ after they had dethron'd him, cut off, to make

the inner part of the County being barren, him here without the leaſt mark of honour.
| but the outer, or as it were the Hem, more] But King Henry 7. removing him to Windſor,
| fruitful. In the ſurvey of it, I will make the[bury'd him in a New Tomb with the ſolem-
Thames, and the rivers that flow into it, my[nity becoming a King, and was ſuch an admi-

guides (by which means I ſhall omit nothing rer of his Religion and Virtues (for he was an
memorable ; becauſe all the places of any note|exa&t pattern of Chriſtian piety and patience, )

for antiquity, lie upon the rivers: ) [having firſt|that he apply'd himſelf to Pope Julius, to have

premiſed in general, that the moſt conſiderable[him put in the kalendar of the Saints. Andyifory o

iece of Antiquity that this County affords us, this had certainly been done, if the Pope's ava- Canter

Stone · ſtreet. js the famous Roman way call'd Stone-ſtreet, viſi-[rice had not ſtood in the way, who demanded
ble in ſeveral parts of it. It goes through|too large a ſum for the King's a or Ca-

| Darking-Church-yard ; as they plainly find by] nonization; which would have made it look,

and Stanſted, it is diſcover'd upon the hills, by[to the ſanctity of the Prince, as to the gold.
making of ditches. Afterwards, in the Pariſh |

Below

n 3

—

— - — —— I”
— —ů — —

— —— —
—— 2 * — -

* * L 4
Ts oj *

ia

--

ww
—

8

—
—

S

> — ©2d: ra po

Ren
—
— =

— — — 4 =

ther,

*

mY

-* +” -——-
.

56.
ry 6.

— —

1

1 4

Elng
* * * i; . - % rw
R A414 74. 27 . CF Branko ra 4 * 7.
4 42 * y my - bas © « % /
Oral” IE,

222
— Y—_—— Sov. il

R 9

AK, 3 5
« _

* „
1a)! „
7 Wi 77 its; 4

% |
£7. He h "4

Thethew rr

—

2

' > tan es Erickonh umb

a >

Bp: han:

*
a

& 2

e he P orp lo 6 Sedmaton N nt 2 ?
ohh an lane ; ape RY .
* BaUham hors e 77 . th | 4

* unbur” ;

0
Ty k, 7 ® 11e 2

Y 2 - cher N

Y wow Wood 8 Togir orth © «
* 99 2 8 0
4 * 4 0 'E Boules

= % B\ v #
1, . Fs N k
4 \

LN 7 er 8

P
DA K
1 8

* 7 „ BY
y rarer. Ln

1
4 3 P 4 Addlerton 4 1 1 I M 1 F ** 1
f Witham . M, 145 5 5 A

Gruen OE” * » 2 en
Jen.

\ —_—
V, * 44 2 7 „

5 20e“ N
£ | Jill | WertEndt 0 »
Tau BP WA 0

# Bainnirke

” | I 1 D

0 > 2
* * * Cobham J. une“ | * 3
\ ff 4 | 2 — * 5 4
2 . N 1 11 * „„ AA N D Wijtey & 2 T „. . , A 2 "1
- ” I. « * * A 0. *7 «ef 2 YO 1 : * s
Blackwater Vn. nt M. oY 5, Us | a = Juri rum db hamtrect ” >, of
* I a on * 7 -
/ n Clap "779 WP Eurjord * | . 8 obham 14, 725 . ad
» —— 3 3 wt /
I'll, 5 = » el,, 5 0 ond Jegth o . In — 2 1 Croke, if, ” RA. .
«Lt el 4 ; + + . 17 3 ; 1 Cube, Le |
drerthas . * 2 0.43% Aru 3 RL 4 Wi. Will 37 = . 2
Pp A N T5 „ 9521 ob-, 9 2 ; - * bn =_ 4 Able 1. gal. *
, 2 K fltlewell d Worth Mt roll — Ya ® > 0 2 7.7 C
! ——— Hull #3 87 l © a Riplerr = 4 wy 8 4
Bn had ; 1 N end M F Nr 2 Fetcham g, #,—
Tui Purbriaht 45 | < / Ock ham B+ 2 JW” PR k. Ty . 3
— 2 ö i „ 9 . y oN 3 4 |
WW 9 K * Lich. 15 v4 * A * * nd : reſto ut, mh» N 1 "uy 1 Nies
By en 75 1 unmſi @ 4 4 N 1 Zul. ” Bb FY "FP r
; * Wy / Witc land 1 , o- Michiel re
1,7 Worgly: Aon 7 / - * F — © — 72 .
Lende m rphan crop 1 * 22
3 45 Wtepree 0 | LE" N
n *. 7 a: * / ® Litth yield 6 & : Eat, a . 9.- —
& hh * ! Stool. ” OR k
7 roadjtrecl” : 2 N 7
4 H U N = OrafpnoeMll . 2 _ ' Fam --
v. 17A. | | & toke | Pf Meroe dz. A Nee

, tr : ” _— CE |
ifs l= nau. 421 . _ * . |

N. , 2 prim. Huli 11 Me "ITY — by. |
Saad — roma — 3 % hes PEN 2 Ss -
et Lilllrton Me. wy ls, > * Lilo * "3 Of — / 1 d here «
Kanten * 2 ee r ” {6 pr, . . @
Comm F _-
 PolteaYg » Wioeton's f * 4 8 du 25
Compton 11 * N . N — 5 N T. 5 e Je]. Fr" e f &_ = 1 7575 „at. * W
„„, Dunne, e eee * L ACK R | 7 *
ſ 1 . 1 6 0 * Lune . Man . — 1 le 1 ' ay
| - 2 hamley | 4 Ks 1” Dp. Sutton tra T5” No a * i Four wn
9% e _ ed * 3» Redl 2.5 tre K K 8 1 WI
"renfort oRycpbridochill Mol hun * 0 % Ry RES ron! ©
Aljord- eee. 4 © * Fa * þ 2 — a D bY of LY
2 fir bras OM W- O , «SUS 1 + hs
A. 3, M- Za heryP! e 1 f P Breachino © — 2 * 2 22
4 Whe, leg, freeto © IF, / & & Cranle * 5 — ;
Mut ton, > 71 a ot
Ur 9 „ W. le * ; Rune worth fr Fee Nui, Wwhurt & 01. oy
wk V N 15 4 P / 25 4 2
Moot pins 4 9 ebeck wh WE. Py Sn 4 "4 uchory a
Pall f / © Fann Z. aulas 0 1 * 0 N DB | 1
9 7. mans *
a : : 2 2 Ds, 2
og hole Punt © Arold 1 2 5 REI a * mm

Carecn 17

? ia X i LETT” *
"IP / n.
8 *

1 alilmere

&
1313 a Ain
Fs oft ware ot Chidingfolg?
—
q —

8
=

©
uy

—

Alinutes of {time

Hom Lon

\

*

Vin

A 5 19. 1 12 \
\ . b a %
% ew Ann

— Brauto oo ( 0. "M N
SY "my; 0.
* Che * 2 Lino . 1 * *. 15
- Chelerr - — nt ene 4,
fewer e 14. 22222 _ den * 2m
5 % „1 IS tam eren.
74 7 47 yh. wm L 8982 FL, allen \ Tie. 3s,
"8 rt. >, _— „
N OR”: 1 X eSrokwel =. N
LS Pubrich

Anu Bill 1 Drall. An N.
25 > Ar ON
e 5 N 20 Lf 2

” ,
} 67, e ham

ons Grd

2 "wing

F 2d

N D 2 —

« yer Green

P AA T

0 KE

2453 15 cha Sh . She ecke (nham
* : E lmores Gre 1 S
| 12 f ,
Broa. 7 rv en 9 w. jd Br oml ry

V3
2)

a
Croydon
bs tows * TIM. N oy 2 E. N
* wt, T | HReanme Sutto 70 7 e, Wd
Park C R Mi tun bs 5 | 5
Þ— Aorta N {! O 851 anal ”> — 1) 0 N : ©
2 | & Rhoda 3 &- WeatWickha &
3 e 1 .,, £00; Autun __ &
" dah, Br = NI :
_ "I's: Woodmanyton N. * 5 n 1
2% 4 2 Cheb
g 6 *YWoriingham
EI de- Pm
Ly 3 1 Ing * | OS treet
N orbu "of 1; po 7 l "Dow es | a Hruen Dare : \*
2 oe tic A h 4 8 , ZR "I Tad A N NN T D G | !
"#6 : * D * on 2 Titfer Fl 6. |
; „ 5 |
PD 3 MX ” * 2 2 my * * D SF |

e. 2 22

7 22 Gant Sons

IS WV) 2 Hreay 2

2 allow * 1 \ 1 — * e 1
ö 19 * ; Bucs, FEY! a Nan y In 20 u army
we” : 2 2255 1 t « "how \ io 92 2 125
0 2 N 7 "34 * 7
— YL : 0 ag N 15 1 722 Ira
* 7775 vt * * „ 1 Wo#dhat, v/ £ t 11 Hat
1 il uy * * * T Is Mun * 9.1 ſinood
Malus 7 59299 | 2 D 1 * MN 1»
7 % 3 < WIE,
K » 8 5 4 ; Ba „ 44 N
Molin oA wow © ð S Leigh WV £ \ "io \ Tut
f — neil ne b. %, rg, Ul
* * 2 2 ' AM | Du How SIR Wor atoh” - W
* =O 8 Fn. - Ju A 3 Ne e
en 2 a, 1 b,
N 7 — ; * * * r 9 ” Vew —
. con

q
'"
'
'
'

a ,

Newdinate Korle
% Wood(eet wo / | or- adi. ore

_—— —_—— —

kN 14 f 1 4
0 U 1 |
ie 1
0 * V * * E . ;
.
— * — . | . P

Futsal Brito

*

*.

Bn 4j \ e & : 0 L;

A, rect

*
—

A
Slarb = colitis

_ Ar. mgſiel. {

WoodstockBruzg - . « *

E=XxGrinſted

Blodkyi ad 2 ;

=
FLY

. — en —

52

?
Fe

20

« *..

_—_—_
*
5
W's
\
I.
*
*
1
C9
—
se ;
* P *
1 8 .
2 %
X > -
; 55 WJ”
- "ag
E ,
r
0
| /
\
OY þ
* ö
} 4
"4 *
» WW
lv *
— —
1
* \
— rr : Tape we

Clover.
Sainttoi ne.
Farnham.

Waverley.
|

orenſord.

ü Godelminge, |

|

Catteſkull,

{
1
[
Haſcomb. |

| Aubr, MS,
Chapel-hill,
$ Loſeley,
| ]
.
Guilford, «
|
|
|| Is, 1

do ſaid, |
ann, 1607.1
1

1

f Hager, |

| Military De.
| ciation,

£

£ i SUTFTH-RET. 182

4
A
A

x
4
#

7
3

| Clover-

— Below this place, the little river ey empties
Mey 0 4 r : . ,

itt {elf into the Thames ; [and brings-in great
profirs to this part of the County ; having
been made navigable by the induſtry (among
others) of a worthy Knight, Sir Richard We-
flon late of Sutton-place ; to whom the whole
Shire is oblig'd, as for this, ſo for ſeveral other
improvements, particularly Clover and Saintfoine. |

* Siintfoine, II, running out of Hamfhire, doth at it's firſt

coming into Surrey viſit Feornham, commonly

| Firrham. Faruham, ſo nam'd as being a bed of ferns ; given

by ZEthelbald King of the Weſt-Saxons, to the
Biſhop aud Congregation of the Church of Wincheſter.
In this place it was, that about the year 893,
King Altred worſted the plundering Danes
with a handtul of men; and afterwards, when
King Stephen had granted licence to all who
ſided with him, to build Caſtles, Henry of
Blois, his brother and Biſhop of Wincheſter,
built a caſtle upon the hill that hangs over the
town ; which, becauſe it was a harbour for ſe-
dition, King Henry 3. demoliſh'd ; bur after a
long time, the Biſhops of Wincheſter, whoſe
it is to this day, rebuilt it. Not far from hence,

; Waverley. At WWaverley, Wiliiam Gifford Biſhop of Win-

*
*

cheſter built a little monaſtery for Ciſtercian
Monks. From thence the Vi [receiving a

| Oxenford, little river, on which ſtands Oxenford, where, in

digging, hath been found old Engliſh money,

ö Godelminge, and allo Rings; and then] running by Godel-

4
3

L

J
-B

minge, which King Alfred gave by Will to -
thelwald, his brother's ſon ; and not far from
Cutteſkull, Catteſhull-manour, which Hamo de Catton held,
to be Marſhal of the whores when the King ſhould
come into thoſe parts; and at a little diſtance from

. 2 Haſcomb, in which Pariſh, on a place called
| Ganahl Chapel-hill, are the Remains of an old Roman

Loteley, Camp; and from Loſeley, where, within a Park,
I ſaw a delicate ſeat of the Knightly family of
the Mores : By theſe Places (I ſay) the Wey

Guilford, comes to Guilford, in Saxon Guloe- op, and

in ſome Copies Geg/dford. It is now a mark-t-
town of great reſort, and well ſtor'd with good
Inns ; but was formerly a Vill of the Engliſh-
Saxon Kings, and was by Will given to Athel-

II, C. wald, by his Uncle. There || was a houſe of
E *Sofzid, the King's, (tho'* gone much to decay ; ) and,
* am, 1605. not far trom the river, the ruinous walls of an

old caſtle, which has been pretty large. In the
middle of the town is a Church, the eaſt end
whereof, being arch'd with ſtone, ſeems to be
very ancient. Here (as we learn by Domeſ-

ö tHage, day-book ) the King had ſeventy five | bouſes,

wherein one hundred ſeventy five men dwelt. But it is
famous for nothing ſo much as the treachery
and inhumanity of Godwin Earl of Kent, who
in the year of our Lord 1036, when Altred,

King Ethelred's ſon, and heir to the Crown of |Pyriford, where, f in our memory,

England, came out of Normandy to demand

W

Robert Abbot the one Archbiſhop of Canter-

bury; who founded here a very fine Hoſpital,

and lies bury d in Trinity-Church ; the other,

that learned Biſhop of Salisbury, his brother.

They were both ſons of a Clothier ; and had a

brother Sir Maurice Abbot, who was Lord May-

or of London, at the ſame time when the

were Biſhops. Upon which trade this Obſer-

vation hath been made, That ſeveral of the moſt

eminent families among the Nobility in this

nation, have had their riſe from it. Here is a

curious Free- ſchool founded by King Edward

the ot; to which (as alſo to Baliol-College in

Oxford) one Hammond was a great Benefactor.

This place gave the title of Counteſs, to Elixa-

beth Viſcounteſs of Keymelmeaky in Ireland, and

that of Earl to John Maitland, Duke and Earl

of Lauderdale. And, in the year 1683, Sir

Francis North, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal

of England, was advanced to the honour of

Baron of Guilford. Near Guilford, upon the river

Wey, 1s the Friery, lately the ſeat of Daniel

Cotwall Eſquire, adjoyning to which is a delight-

ful Park; both, at preſent, the poſſeſſion of the

Lord Onſlow, who, by marriage, hath made great

acceſſions to the ancient Eſtate of that honou-

ble Family. Something nearer the Thames, is

Staughton, the ſeat of a family of that name, Stauglton,

whoſe Pedigree is probably as ancient as any in

this County. But it is now at laſt out of that

line, by the death of Sir Lawrence Staughton, Ba-

ronet, a young Gentleman of great hopes. About

two miles from Guilford is Clandon-place, thc Clandon,

Seat of the Lord Onſlow, deſcended from Onſlow

of Onſlow-hall in Shropſhire, an ancient Gentle-

man's family. Their firſt ſettlement in this Coun-

ty was at Knowle in Crandley ; thence they remo-

ved to Clandon-place, being pleaſantly ſituate on

the edge of Clandon-downe ; from whence is a

goodly proſpect into ten ſeveral Counties. It

is well ſhaded with wood, and ſupply'd with

good water, and hath been much improv'd by the

late poſleſlor, Sir Richard Onſlow, who was Speaker

of the Honourable Houſe of Commons, in the

eighth year of the reign of Queen Aune, as his

Anceſtor of both the names was, in the eighth

ear of Queen Elizabeth ; and who, as an Ac-

nowledgment of his ſignal Services to his

Country, and particularly of his firm Adherence

to the Proteſtant Succeſſion in the Houſe of Ha-

nover, was advanced by his Majeſty King George,

to the honour of Baron of this Realm, by the

title of Lord Onſlow of Onſlow, and Clandon.1

From Guilford, the Whey runs towards the

north for a long way together, and meets with

nothing memorable ; except Sutton, the ſeat of Sutton,

the MWeſtons Knights; Woking, a royal ſeat ; and Ann. 1607,
Edward Earl Voting,

of Lincoln and Baron Clinton, built a houſe | en- ; 4h fad.

his right, receiv'd him with ſolemn Aflurances|cloſed with a pleaſant Park, well wooded ; to ann. 1607.

of ſatety, but preſently treated him in ſuch a

which belong large Royalties, Fiſh-ponds, and

manner, as was very inconſiſtent with that Pro- a delightful Decoy; now the ſeat of Denxill On-

miſe. For, in the dead of the night, ſurpri-
zing the fix hundred Normans which were
the retinue of the Royal youth, he puniſh'd

| Military De. them (as our Writers word it) by a Decimation:
dination. not, according to the ancient Rules of War, by

wing out every tenth man by lot, and then

flow Eſq; youngeſt ſon of Sir Richard Onflow, of
Clandon-place : and in the neighbourhood is Ock-

ham, where William de Ockham, that great Philo-winiamde
ſopher and Founder of the Nominals, was born, Ockham.
and had his name from the place; [now the ſeat

of Sir Peter King, Lord Chiet Juſtice of the Com-

— x
o *

—

4
| |
. : ;

{

— ——— — — —h—ñSũ—.;
— - Þ "het _ : a — — £
- 4 \ p - -- —
— N 6 © - 2 - * . * _—_— D —
ond x — 2 — == 0 - wu id - — — 4
4 o — = — — 2 — — — -

killing him : but killing nine, he diſmiſſed eve-|mon Pleas, a perſon of great Learningand Know-
ry tenth man; and afterwards, with the ex- ledge. But where it comes to empty it ſelf out of a
I Redecima. treameſt cruelty f retith'd thoſe tenths which |double mouth into the Thames, we ſee Otelandes Otelandes.
* he had ſavd. And as to Elfred himſelf, he [ oncel a handſome ſeat of the King s, within a
| deliver'd him to Harold the Dane, who firſt put|park ; [but now ſo decayed, that it hardly bears
out his eyes, and then clapt him in chains, and |the figure of a good Farm-houſe ; having been
kept him in priſon to his dying day. [This Place |demoliſhed in the late Civil Wars. | Near this,
(noted heretofore for Clothing and Clothiers) Cæſar paſs'd the Thames, and enter d the ter-Where Cr.
hath given the Church of England ſince theſrirories of Caſſvelan. For this was the only fur pals d tho

Reformation two famous Prelates, George and place in the Thames formerly fordable, -
ro l — — — a

—
22 r

— — —— _
— ome.
- —

R E

that too not without great difficulty; which
the Britains themſelves in a manner pointed out
to him. For on the other ſide of the river, a
ſtrong body of the Britiſh had planted them-
ſelves ; and the bank it ſelf was fenced with
ſharp ſtakes driven into the ground, and ſome of
the ſame ſort were faſten'd under water. The
foorſteps whereof (ſays Bede) are ſeen to this day;
and it appears upon the view, that each of them is
as thick as a man's thigh, and that being ſoder d
with lead, they ſtick in the bottom of the river, im-
moveable, But the Romans enter'd the river
with ſo much vigour and reſolution, that tho
they had only their heads above water, the Bri-
tains were not able to bear-up againſt them,
but were forc'd to quit the bank, and flie. It
is impoſlible, I ſhould be miſtaken in the place,
becauſe here the river is ſcarce ſix foot deep;
and the place at this day, from thoſe ſtakes, 15

Comay-ſtakes,call'd Coway-ftakes ; to which we may add, that

Walton.

Czſar makes the bounds of Caſſivelan, where
he fixes this his paſſage, to be about 80 miles
diſtant from that ſea which waſhes the eaſt part
of Kent, where he landed: Now, this ford we
ſpeak of, is at the ſame diſtance from the ſea;
and I am the firſt that I know of, who has men-
tion'd, and ſettled it in it's proper place.
[Not far from hence, upon the Thames, is Wat
ton, * in which Pariſh is a great Camp of about

* Aubr, MS. twelve Acres, ſingle work, and oblong. There is

a road lies thro? it, and it is probable, that Wal-
ton takes its name from this remarkable Valum.
Some few miles from Otelandes, towards the

Mole, riy, eaſt, the little river Mole haſtens into the Thames,

after it has croſs d the County from the ſou-
thern bound; but, being ſtop'd at laſt in it's

Anas, a river way, by the oppoſition ot hills, this, f like that
in Spain. ' ,

See more in-

ſtances, in -
Seld. Polyolb. whence it has the name. But there is nothing

p. 267.

Stanyſtreat.

Ockley.

noble river ot Spain Anas, forces open a paſ-
ſage under ground, as if it were a Mole; from

famous upon this river ; only, at ſome diſtance
from it's head (near the old military way of the
Romans call'd Stany#reat) is the town Aclea,
commonly called Ockley, trom the Oaks. Here,
Zthelwolph ſon of Egbert (who, notwithſtand-
ing he had enter'd into Holy Orders, did by
ditpenſation from the Pope ſucceed his father
in the kingdom) engag'd the Daniſh army, with
ſucceſs (for he kill'd molt of their braveſt men; )
tho' with no great advantage to his country;
that Daniſh Hẽdra {till ſprouting-up a-new.
[Here alſo, is a certain cuſtom, obſerv'd time
out of mind, of planting Roſe-trees upon ho

ves, eſpecially by the young men and maids,
rot bare loſt - $44 Fad, os 2 this Church-
yard is now full of them. It is the more re-
markable, becauſe we may obſerve it to have
been anciently us'd, both among the Greeks
and Romans ; who were ſo very religious in it,
that we find it often annex'd as a Codicil to
their Wills; (as appears by an old Inſcrip-
tion at Ravenna, and another at Milan, ) by
which they order'd Roſes to be yearly ſtrew'd
and planted upon their graves. Hence, that

* L. 1. Eleg. of Propertius, implying the uſage of buryin

2.

Oke wood.

ſex, built by Edward de la Hale, as appears b

amidſt Roſes (Et tenerà poneret oſſa roſa : ) an
old Anacreon ſpeaking of it, ſays, that it does
rx ęg ic & He,, protect the dead.

Upon the edge of Suſſex is Okewood (all that
part being formerly one continu'd wood of Oaks,)
where ſtands a deſolate Chapel of Eaſe to five
large Pariſhes ; three in Surrey, and two in Suſ-

a monument of the pious Donor, who dy'd
1431. and lies buried here. The revenues that
of right belong to it, are above 200 J. per Ann.
out of which there is not allowed above twenty
Nobles to one who now and then reads Pray-

G N I. 7

ers to them. It is ſo much the more deplora-
ble, becauſe the alienation long ſince appears
to have been made, through a miſtake ; tor it
was made in Queen Elizabeth's time, by vir-
tue of an Inquitition unjuſtly taken, upon pre-
tence of its being a Chantry far the mainte-
nance of a Maſs-prieſt to pray for the ſoul of
the Founder. Whereas, really, it was built
and endow'd for no other uſe, but a Chapel of
Eaſe, to inſtruct the people of the adjoyning
Pariſhes, who were at too great a diſtance from
their own Pariſh-Churches. Near this place,
are certain Pitts, out of which Jett has been
ſometimes dug.

Bur to return towards the north ; at the
head of a river which runs into the My, not
tar from Guilford, is Abinger ; near the Church-Abinge:,
yard whereot is a heap or mount caſt up, which
ſome imagine to have been a ſmall fortreſs rais'd
by the Danes or Saxons. But it is plain, it was
done by neither ; but by the neighbouring peo-
ple, whom the high grounds on which they
live, put under a neceſſity of contriving a pond
to water their cattle ; and this rubbiſh was
thrown our of that place. The foremention'd
river, riſing out of a hill hereabouts, runs to
Albury, which (when but a mean 2 was Albury,
yet the delight of that excellent perſon Thomas
Earl of Arundel, a great lover of Antiquities ;
who, purchaſing this place of the Randylls, made
it his darling. Henry his grandſon, Duke of
Nortolk, had no leſs affection for it : he began
there a magnificent Pile, cut a Canal, planted
ſpacious Gardens and Vineyards, adorn'd with
Fountains, Grots, &c. But what is above all
ſingular and remarkable, is, the Deſign of an
Hypogaum, or Perforation, through a mighty hill,
and large enough at one end tor a Coach to
paſs ; about a turlong or more in length, and
leading over, into an agreeable and pleaſant
valley. It was at firſt intended for a way to the
houſe, but a rock at the ſouth-end hinder'd
that deſign. This noble ſeat is enclos'd with
a Park, and much improv'd by the Right ho-
nourable Heneage Finch, now Earl of Ailesford,

a perſon of great knowledge in the Laws and
Conſtitution of this Realm ; who having pur-
chas'd it of the father of the preſent Duke of
Nortolk, is daily adding to its beauty. Nor is

this place leſs celebrated for that famous Ma-
thematician Milliam Oughtred, who liv'd and

dy'd Rector of this Pariſh ; wherein are alſo

the Remains of an ancient ſquare Roman gubr. M
Building, and a Circle within it, ſuppos'd to be

a Temple ; the ground-pinnings of both which,

and alſo ſome of the baſes of the Pillars, were
plainly viſible in the laſt age, but have been

ſince dug-up for the ſake of the Stones and
Bricks; as in the preſent age, pieces of Ro-

man tiles and bricks have been found on the
heath, where hath been a great deal of building

in old time. |

At a little diſtance from hence, is St. Mar-$, Marth"
tha's Chapel, ſeated conſpicuouſly on a copp'd Cha.
mountain. This ſeems to have been thrown-up

by ſome fiery Eruption or Vulcano, as ſeveral
other ſuch Elevations towards the edge of Suſ-

ſex confirm. Beneath this hill, is Chifworth, the Chilwt
ſeat of Morgan Randyll Eſq; owner of the moſt
conſiderable Powder-works (brought firſt into
England by George Evelyn Eſq;) and beſt Hop- 1
gardens in England. And, not far off, is Tou- Toner.

Yer bil, the ſeat of the Brays, a very ancient

and honourable family. But to return to the
Mole; | a little way from the head of this ri-
ver, ſtands Gatton, now hardly a village, tho Gitte“
formerly a famous town. For an argument ot
it's antiquity, it ſnews Roman Coins 1
there,

—

105

„

cle gate.

Helme ſdal.

t Has, G

Holmes-
cattle.

h Bar oni.
ſua de Con
queſtu An
{liz

Bechwort
Caltle,

Browns,
* laid,
ann, 1607

Deepden

White-do

inger.

, Martha"

hapel,

hilworth

| 7
ower b.

jatto!-

159

— I — — —{ ..

TSUTHRET

OE CU

ſie gate.

Helme ſdale.

4 Has, Go

Holmes-
caitle.

I Paronia
ſua de Con-
queſtu An-
{liz

Bechworth-
Calile,

Browns,
1 §o laid,
ann, 1607.

Deepden.

White-down

there, and ſends two Burgefles to Parliament.
Lower, is Rhie-gate, (i. e. according to our an-
cient language, the courſe or chanel of a ſmall ri-
ver) ſtanding in a vale, which runs a great way
eaſtward, and is call'd Holmeſdale | probably

from Holm-trees, which abound very much

through all this tract ; )| the inhabitants where-
of, becauſe once or twice they deteated the plun-
dering Danes, have this rhime in their own
commendation:

The vale of Holmeſdall
Never wonne, ne never ſhall.

This Rhie-gate is more conſiderable for it's
largeneſs, than buildings; on the ſouth-ſide of
it, is a park full of little groves ; wherein the
moſt noble Charles Earl ot Nottingham, Baron
of Effingham, and Lord High Admiral of Eng-
land, f had his ſeat; and where formerly the
Earls of Warren and Surrey built a ſmall Mo-
naſtery. On the eaſt-ſide is a Caſtle ſtanding
upon a high-ground, now neglected, and de-
cay d with age; it was built by the {ame Earls,
and is commonly call'd Holmes-caftle, from the
vale in which it ſtands. Under this, there is a
wonderful Vault, ot arched work niade of free-
None, the fame with that of the hill it ſelt, and
hollow'd with great labour. The Earls of War-
ren (as it is in the book of Inquiſitions) held it
in chief of the King in his Barony, from the Con-

weſt of England. In the 11 year ot King
8 the ſecond, Charles Mordaunt, ſecond fon
of John Earl of Peterborough, was advanced
to the dignity of a Baron ot this Realm, by
the title ot Lord Mordaunt of Rhie-gate. | From
thence the Mole runs by Bechworth-caſtle, for
which Thomas Brown procurd the privilege of a
Fair, of Henry the 6, For it was the ſeat ot
the Knightly family of the Browns (of which,
in the memory of our Grandfathers, after An-
thony Brown had marry'd Luc) fourth daughter
of John Nevil Marqueſs of Montacute, with
whom he had a contiderable fortune; Queen
Mary honour'd his grandchild by his ſon with
the title of Viſcount Montacute; ) | But now
chat name, after a long ſeries of Knights, 1s at
laſt extinguiſh'd in a daughter. Between Bech-
worth and Darking ſtands Deepden, the ſituation
whereof is ſomewhat ſurpriſing, by reaſon ot
the riſings and uniform acclivities about it;
which naturally reſembl- a Roman Amphithea-
tre, or rather indeed a Theatre : it 1s open at
the north-end, and is of an oval form. Now
it is moſt ingeniouſly caſt, and improv'd into
gardens, vineyards, and other plantations, both
on the Area below, and on the ſides of the en-

vironing hills: with frequent grotts here and

there beneath the terraces, leading to the top;
from whence one has a fair proſpect of that
part of Surrey, and of Suſſex, as far as the South-
downs, for near 30 miles out-right. The ho-
nourable Charles Howard (Lord of half the ma-
nour of Darking) is ſolely entitled to this inge-
nious contrivance.

Going along Holmeſdale ( which extends it
ſelf to the foot of that ledge of Mountains
which ſtretch and link themſelves from the ut-
moſt promentory of Kent to the Lands-end, )

we have on the right hand J/kite-down, where is

a vaſt Delf of chalk, which. in ſummer-time
they carry with great labour as far as the mid-
dle of Suflex ; as they bring of the ſame mate-
rial, from the oppoſite hills by the ſea-coaſt of
that County: and theſe two being mingled to-
ther, are burnt into lime for the enriching of
their grounds. Here are likewiſe dug-up cockle-
ſhells, and other Laſis nature, with pyrites, bed-

ded an incredible depth within the bowels of
the mountains ; upon which many Yew-trees
grow ſpontaneouſly, tho? of late they are much
diminiſh'd, and their places taken up with corn.
Not far from the bottom of this hill, ſtands an

ſeveral ſtreams gliding thro' the meadows, a-
dorn d with gentle rilings, and woods which
as 1t were encompaſs it. And theſe, together
with the gardens, tountains, and other Vortu-
laue ornaments, have given it a place and name
amonglt the moſt agreeable ſeats. In opening
. OS
the ground of the Church-yard of Jetton, to
enlarge a Vault belonging to this family, they
met with a Skeleton which was nine fot and
three inches long, as the worthy and famous
Mr. John Evelyn had it atteſted by an ancient
and underſtanding Man then preſent (who ac-
curately meaſur'd it, and mark'd the length on
a pole,) with other workmen, who affirm'd the
ſame. They found it lying in full length be-
tween two boards of the coffin ; and meaſur'd
it, before they had diſcompos'd the bones. But
trying to take it out, it fell all to pieces; for
which reaſon they flung it amongſt the reſt of
the rubbiſh, after they had ſeparately meaſurd
ſeveral of the more ſolid bones.
Hereabours, is a thing remarkable, tho' but
little taken notice of; ] mean, that curious

Wotton riſes almoit inſenſibly for two or three
miles ſouth ; bur then has a declivity almoſt as
tar as Horſham in Sufſex, eight miles diſtant.
From hence, one ſees, in a clear day, the goodly
Vale, and conſequently the whole County, of
Suſſex, as far as the South-downs, and even be-
yond them to the ſea ; the entire County of
Surrey; part of Hamſhire, Barkſhire, Oxfordfhire,
Buckinghamſhire, and Hertfordſhire ; as allo of
Middleſex, Kent, and Eſſex ; and farther yet (as
is believ'd) into ¶iliſbire, &c. could one well
diſtinguiſh them withour the aid of a Teleſcope.
The whole circumterence cannot be leſs than
two hundred miles, tar exceeding that of the
Keep at Windſor, over which ( as alſo over the
City of London twenty tive miles diſtant) one
ſees as far as the eye, unarm'd with the glaſs,
is able to diſtirguiſh land from sky. The like,
I think, is not to be found in any part of Eng-
land, or perhaps Europe, beſides : and the rea-
ſon why it is not more obſerv'd, is, partly its
lying quite out of any road, and partly its ri-
ling ſo gently, and making fo little ſhow till
one is got to the very top of it. From the fide
thereof, a great part of the brow is ſlidden
down into the grounds below, caus'd by a delt
of ſtones dug out of the ſides of the mountain;
and the bare places (from whence the earth 1s
parted) being of a reddiſh colour, plainly ap-
pear above forty miles off. Here, we muſt not

rundel. It is double trench'd and deep, con-
raining by eſtimation ten acres at leaſt.] A

formerly the poſſeſſion of William Howard (that
Conqueror ot the Scots, fon to Thomas Duke
of Norfolk,) who was created Baron Howard of
Effiagham by Queen Mary; and being made
Lord High Admiral of England, was firſt,
Chamberlain ro Queen Elizabeth, and after-
wards Keeper of the Privy-Seal.. His ſon Charles

England; whom the ſame Elizabeth, in the

year 1597, for his valour and great ſervices, ad-
vanced to the dignity of Earl of Nottingham.
A a The

186

ancient feat of the Evelyus of Wotton, among Wotton,

proſpect from the top of Lith-hill, which from x jth-hin,

torget Darking, memorable for a very large Darking.
Camp in that Pariſh, near Homebury-hill, and Homebury-
not far from the road between Darking and A- hill.

few miles to the north-weſt, we ſee Effingham, Effingham.

ſucceeded him, in “ a flouriſhing coneition,* And is
and + was allo made Lord High Admiral of now, S.

＋ 15,

« *

LY
wm * . * ths -
F —_— — —_ ̃r' ,’ — —
— * 8 2 En na... * _ a,
"wr * ” P
— — pe - wn £5 a 4 * = «
= \ — * - * - — -

wy - — * 8 — — on m

1.
_—
— —

— - — >: 4 — Io
— — — — —

—
—

_187

a.

XE GCN I

White-hill,

Hill, C.

[The honour of this place {till remains in the
ſame Family, being now enjoyed by Thomaz,
the preſent Lord Howard of Effingham. ] But
to return to the River,

The Mole, coming to Hhitehill, upon which
box-tree grows in great abundance, hides it
ſelf, or is rather (a) ſwallow'd-up at the foot
of the f Caſtle there; and for that reaſon, the

The Swallow. Place is call'd Swallow : but about two miles

below, it bubbles up and riſes again; fo that

A bridge up- the Inhabitants of this tract, no leſs than the

on which

Moſeley.
Letherhead.

Aubr . MS,

Kingſtone,
Matth. Pa-

ris,

Aubr, MS.

Combe · Ne.
vil.

Richmond,

the place and

+ ws. 11 of the wholſomneſs of the Air, became the

Henry 7,

*

Spaniards, may boaſt of having a bridge that

2 of ſheep feeds ſeveral flocks of ſheep. For the Spaniard

has made this a common proverb, in relation
to the place where the river Auds (now call'd
Guadiana) runs under-ground tor ten miles to-
gether. Our river Mole appearing again, [ipreads
it ſelf fo very wide, as to require a bridge of
many arches (a ſtately fabrick, ot ſtone, and tyles
laid flat upon one another; )| and goes with a
flow current to the Thames, and enters it hard
by Moſeley, to which it communicates the name;
[having in its courſe ſeen Letherhead, on which
Down is a perfect Roman way, in the road
from London to Darking : between Guilford
and Ripley, and between Richmond and Putney
in this County, the Roman High-way doth allo
appear in ſeveral Places. |

After our Thames has receiv'd the Mole, it
runs directly to the North; by Kingſtone (tor-
merly call'd Moreford, as ſome would have it, ) a
market-rown of very great reſort, and once fa-
mous for the caſtle of the Clares Earls of Glo-
ceſter ; having had it's riſe out of the ruins of
a more ancient little town ot the ſame name,
ſituate in a level ground, and much expos'd to
inundations. In this town, when the Daniſh
wars had almoſt deſtroy'd England, Athelſtan,
Edwin, and Ethelred, Kings, were inaugura-
ted; whereupon, from the Aings, it came to
be call'd Kingf?on, i. e. a Royal Town. | Eaſt
from hence, upon a gravelly hill, near the road,
was a burying-place of the Romans. Here are
often found Urns, and pieces of Urns, which
lie about two foot deep. One particularly was
diſcover'd about the year 1670. of a kind of
amber-colour, fill'd-up halt way with black
aſhes, and at the bottom ſomething like coarſe
hair, as if it had been laid there before. Ar a
little diſtance from the Thames, we {ce Combe-
Nevil, a ſeat of the Harveys, where have been
found Medals and Coins ot ſeveral of the Ro-
man Emperors, eſpecially of Diocleſfan, the Maxi-
minians, Maxim, Conftantine the Great, &c. and
between this place and Wimbledon, is a round
Camp; ſuppoſed therefore to be a work of the

Danes. -

In the neighbourheed cf Xingf7en, the Kings
of England choſe them a ſeat, which from its
ſhining or ſplendor they calld Shene, but now it
has the name of Richmond. This, on account

uſual Nurſery of our late Princes and Princeſſes,
when Children.1 Here it was, that the moſt

Edward 3. Potent Prince, King Edward 3. after he had

liv d enough both to glory and nature, dy'd of
grief for the loſs of his warlike ſon ; whoſe
death was ſuch an affliction to him, and to all

it ever England had a juſt occaſion for ſorrow,

then it was. For in the ſpace of one year, it was
entirely bereav'd of it's two great Ornaments
in military diſcipline and untainted Valour,
Both theſe carry'd their conquering ſwords
through France; and put ſuch a terror into
that Kingdom, as might deſervedly give the fa-
ther, with Antioch, the name of a Thunderbolt,
and the ſon, with Pyrrhus, that of an Eagle.
Here alſo dy'd Anne, Wite of King Richard 2,
Siſter to Y/erelans the Emperor, and Daugh-
ter to the Emperor Charles 4. She firſt taught
the Engliſh-women that way of riding on horſe-
back which is now in uſe; whereas formerly
their cuſtom was (tho' a very unbecoming one)
to ride aſtride like the men. Her husband
laid her death ſo much to heart, and mourn'd
io immoderately, that he neglected and even
abhorr'd the very houſe. But King Henry 5.

beautity'd it with new buildings; and in She, g

an adjoyning little village, he founded a Mona-

ſtery ot Carthuſians, 'which he call'd Bethl-hem. Bethlchen,

In Henry the 7ch' time, this royal ſeat was
quite burnt down by a molt lamentable fire ;
but, like a Phoenix, ſprung again out ot it's
own aſhes with greater beauty, by the aili-
ſtance of the ſame Henry, and took the new
name of Richmond, rom that Country wi rcof
he had been Earl, whillt a private perſon. Iuis
Henry had ſcarce put the laſt hand to his new
ſtructure, but he ended his days here; by
whoſe care, induſtry, couniel, prudence, and
toreſight, the Kingdom of England has ſtocd
hitherto unſhaken. From hence it was allo,

f a - teen EH
that ninety years after, his Grandchild the beths den,

moſt Serene Queen Elizabeth, after ſhe had as 1603.

it were glutted nature with length of days upon
Earth (tor ſhe was about ſeventy years of age,)
was receiv d by Almighty God into the hea-
venly Quire. A Princeſs, far exceeding her
ſex, both in courage and conduct; as in tace,
ſo in diſpoſition, the true picture of her grand-
father; the love of the world, and the delight
of Britain. And ſo far was ſhe, tho' but a wo-
man, from coming ſhort of the laſting and re-
nown'd Virtues of her Anceſtors, that, it ſhe
did not exceed, ſhe did at leaſt fully equal
them. Let poſterity believe this, without che
leaſt doubt or ſcruple, (for I do not corrupt Truth
with flattery,) That a Virgin for 44 years to-
gether, did govern the Nation with that Pru-
dence, as to be belov'd by her ſubjects, fear'd
by her enemies, and admir'd by all ; a pattern,
ſuch as no Age hitherto can produce the like.
Her death pur England under ſuch a general
grief, that it muſt have lain in deſpair and de-
ſolation, without the leaſt proſpect of comfort;
but that immediately upon her departure, the
moſt Serene James, the true and undoubted
heir, mark'd-out by all hearts and eyes for her
ſucceſſor, ſhed forth his beams of Comfort, and
poſſeſſed all his Subjects with the hopes of a
laſting Happineſs. When they look'd upon
him, they could ſcarce believe her dead. Tho,
why ſhould we talk of her dying, whoſe im-
mortal virtues ſtill live, and whcle ſacred me-
mory will ever be preſerv'd, both in the minds
of Men, and the Annals of Time ?

England, as was not to be conquer'd by the] As far as this place, the Thames receives the Hos tr the

ordinary methods of Conſolation. And indeed, | Tide, about 60 Italian miles from the mouth. mages

—

(a) Notwithſtanding this, there is now an open Chanel above-ground, which winds round, in the Valleys, as
other Rivers do, all the way from Darking to Letherbeal; with a conſtant ſtream of Water, for the greateſt part
of the year. Nor can it be certain, that that part of the Water which ſinks here into the earth, directs its courſe
under-ground, the very ſame way that the Chanel runs above-ground ; nor, by conſequence, that the Bubblings-up
near Tetberbead, are the waters of the old River; but they may as well be Springs which ariſe in that place;
and the waters of the Mole, for ought we can tell, may run a quite contrary way. p

An

13
—

| Why it goes

REY. 9 190

— And there is no other river in Europe that I

know of, where the tide comes up ſo many
miles; to the great advantage of thoſe who
live near It. hether it be, that from this
place there are hardly any windings, but the
river is carry d eaſtward in a chanel more direct,
and is generally fenc'd with higher banks, and
opens a wider mouth than other rivers, to let
ge in the Sea (which, as I have long thought, by

ſo fats

v. Scalig.

Ji. Exerc, the rapid circulation of the orbs from eaſt to

hleken,

een Elin
h's deat,
23,

ow far tf
ide goes VP
e Thames,

(2, Seld, in weſt, is carry d the ſame way ; ) this I leave to the

Polyold. Pag · enquiry of Philoſophers, ro whoſe judgments I

298, willingly ſubmit, in this and the like matters.
However, concerning theſe places, and this
ſubject, take ſome few verſes (if you can re-
liſh them ) out of The wedding of Tame and
This.

A dextra, nobis Richmondia, Shena vetuſtis
Celſa nitet, ſapiens namque hanc Richmondia
dici
Henricus voluit, fibi quod retuliſſet honorem
Et titulos Comitis Richmondia jure paterno :
Hettoris Edwardi ſed deflet funera noſtri;
Proh dolor! hic illi regi mens libera ceſſit
Corpore contempto, ſedes habitura ſupernas.
Quem fi non * rapuiſſent ferrea fata,
Aut te Valefiis rapuiſſet Gallia viclor,
Aut tibi Valefios.

ſeen,

Richmond, whoſe name, wiſe Henry
chang'd from Sheen,

Who EE Earl had by his father

n.

Long this our Hector Edward's fate hath)
mourn'd,

Who's godlike ſoul from hence to heav'n
return'd,

And left the mortal fetters that it
ſcorn'd.

Ah ! had not the bleſt powers Thee call'd too
ſoon, *

Or Valois had reſign'd the Gallick crown,

Or that had Valois loſt. _———

And a few Verſes after;

Now ſtately Richmond to the right is |

Tamifis altermum ſentit reditumque fugamque
Huc refiui pelagi, quoties vaga Cynthia

s
Oglaud rar cali ſtatione Jugates.
Aut tenet op varianti lumine plagam,
Plenior increſcit celeremque recurrit in aſtum :
W ſuperbus ait, Concedant flumina no-
is, |
Nulla per Europe dotatas nomine terras
Flumina tam longe fic certis legibus undas
Alternas renovant, nifi fratres Scaldis, &
Albis.

Here Thame's great current with alternate

courſe |
Maintains it's riſe and fall at conſtant
hours.
When Phœbe reſts at our Meridian line,
Or i'th* Horizon-point does faintly ſhine, 8
In haſty waves the ruſhing waters joyn.
While the proud river thus his worth pro-
claims;
© Great you that Europe boaſts her nobleſt

ſtreams,

© Yield all to me : for ſuch an ebb and
flow

© No rival flood but & held and Elb can
ſhow.

Ke —

.

[In this neighbourhood, is a delightful Park
belonging to the Kings, and encloſed for the
diverſion of hunting ; adjoyning to which, are
two pleaſant Seats, Ham, the Seat of the Lord Ham.
Dyſert, and Peterſbam, a Seat of the Earl of Peterſham,
Rocheſter. 1 |

More inward, at about four miles diſtance
from the Thames, None-ſuch, a retiring ſeat of None · ſuch.
our Kings, * eclips'd all the neighbouring build- * Eelipſes,
ings. It was erected by that magnificent Prince, C.
King Henry the 8*b, in a very wholſom air;
( being called before, Cuddington,) and was de-Cuddington,
lign'd by him for a place of pleaſure and diver-
ſion. It f was ſo magnificent, and withal ſo+ Is, C.
beautitul, as to arrive at the higheſt pitch of
oſtentation; and one would think, that the
whole art of Archite&ure had been crowded
into this ſingle work. So many images to the
lite || were upon all ſides of it, ſo many won-1| Are, C.
ders of workmanſhip, as * might even vie with“ May, C.
the remains of Roman Antiquity ; ſo that it
might lay juſt claim to the name, and || was 4 May, C.
very able to ſupport it ; None-ſuch being in le, C.
Latin Nula ejuſmodi, or, as Leland expreſſes
it in verſe,

Hanc, quia non habeant ſimilem, laudare Bri-

tanim

Spe ſolent, Nullique parem, cognomine

dicunt.

Beyond the reſt the Engliſh this extol,
And None-ſuch do by eminency call.

The houſe + was ſo ſurrounded with parks Is, C.

full of deer, delicate orchards and gardens,
| groves adorn'd with arbours, little garden- beds,
and walks ſhaded with trees; that“ Pleaſure* Amt

and Health might ſeem to have made choice of cum Salubri-
this place, wherein to live together. But Queen te.
Mary exchang'd it with Henry Fitz-Alan Earl
of Arundel, for other Lands ; and he, after
he had inlarg'd it with a well-turniſh'd Library,
and ſome new works, left it at his death to the
Baron Lumley, a perſon whoſe whole courſe of
life was truly anſwerable to his high character:
from him, by bargain, it return'd to the Crown.
[But now there is nothing left of all this noble
and curious Structure, ſcarce one ſtone remaining
upon another ; which havock 1s owing to the
late Civil Wars.| Near this place (tor I can-
not think it unworthy the mentioning) is a vein
of potter's earth, out of which tho: little veſ-
ſels, that the goldſmiths uſe to melt their gold
in, are made; and upon that account it car-
ries a good price.
The ſmall and clear river Vandal, abounding The Vandal
with the beſt trouts, riſes at Caſbalton, a little“

| diſtant from hence, and, running by Morden,

waſhes a town upon it's weſtern bank, ſituate
in a moſt fruitful place, call'd Merton, in Sax- Merton.
on Me edune, formerly famous for the death of
Kenulph King of the Weſt-Saxons, who was
{lain in the cottage of a certain harlot here (his
Miſtreſs) by | Prince Kinehard; and the Prince Co.
himſelf, being preſently kill'd upon the ſpot by
the friends of Kenulph, was puniſh'd as his trea-
chery deſerv'd. Now, it ſhews nothing but
the ruins of a monaſtery built by Henry 1, at
the inſtance of Gilbert Yiſcount of Surrey, which
was famous for a Parliament held in it under 1235.
Henry 3.

Afterwards, the Vandal is augmented by a
ſmall river from the eaſt, which riſes at Croy- Croydon.
don, formerly Cradiden, lying under the hills,
and particularly famous for a Palace of the Arch-

biſhops of Canterbury (whoſe it has been now
A

” — —

un

= >
2 Ny.

—

—

— — — —
— —

n —
pe — 2 —_— *
—_— A. — -

Sm —— —W

*

—

'
7

—

191

. =

„„
192

A OA AA ͤÄ

Ann. 1607.4 long time) f and for Coals, which the inhabi-

T he bourn,

Beddirgton.

Dottle-hi dl.

W imbledon.

tamts trade withal. They tell you that a Roy-
al palace ſtood formerly on the weſt part of the
town, near Haling, where the rubbiſh of build-
ings is now and then dug-up by the husband-
men; and that the Archbiſhops, after it was
beſtow, d on them by the King, added it to their
own palace, nigher the river. Near which,
the moſt Reverend father in God John Whitgift,
Archbiſhop of Canterbury, of bletled memory,
eur of a moſt pious diſpoſition, built and en-
dow'd a beautitul Hoſpital for the relief of the
poor, and a Schoel for the promotion of Learn-
ing. As to the torrent which the vulgar afhrm
to riſe here ſometimes, as a preſage of dearth
and peſtilence ; ic ſcems hardly worth the men-
tioning, tho' perhaps it may have ſomething of
truth in it, Near this place is Beddington, where
is a molt neat and curious houſe, adorn'd with
pleaſant orchards and gardens, [ tirſt | built by Sir
Francis Carew Knight. For it is an ancient feat
of the Carews, who are deſcended from Nicho-

las Baron Carew of Moulesford (the Carews of

Devonſhire have the {ame original too) and
have flouriſh'd a long time in this County; eſ-
pecially, ſince J. Carew marry'd the daughter
and one ot the two coheirs ot the noble Baron
Ho. But as the Orchards and Gardens in ge-
ncral, ſo particularly its Oraree-trees, deſerve our
mention. They have now been growing there
more than a hundred years, and are planted in
the open ground, under a moveable Covert du-
ring the winter-months. They were the firſt
that were brought into England, by a Knight
of that noble family; who deſerves no leſs
con mendation than Lucullus met-with, for
bringing cherry and filbert- trees out of Pontus
into Jtaly : for which we find him celebrated
by Pliny and others. At ſome diſtance from

hence, is Bottled, on the top of which is a

Reman camp, with a ſingle rampart, and ſquare;
ard another, on the top of a neighbouring hill,
near Katheranm. |

WWibbandime, now commonly Wimbledon, is
ſeated upon che other bank of the Vandal, where

The firſt civil (after the Britiſh war was ended, and too much

wars amorg
the Saxors,

Bensbury.

W oodcote,

happineſs began to breed civil diſſentions among
the Saxons) Zrhelbert King of Kent firſt rais'd
a civil war ag.inlt his own Countrymen, But
Ceaulin, King of the Weſt-Saxons, happily de-
feated him in this pl:ce, with a very great
laughter cn Æthelbert's fide ; particularly the
two Captains an and Gicben were {lain ; from
the latter whereof, it is poſſible that the mili-
tary fortification 1 ſaw here, ot a circular form,
call'd Bensbury, for Cnebensbury, might take it's
name. Now, it's greateſt ornament 1s a houſe,
as ſtately in it's ſtructure, ſo made exceeding
pleaſant by it's proſpect and gardens ; it was
built by Sir Thomas Cecil Kr. ſon of that moſt
wiſe and prudent Stateſman the Lord Burghley,
in the year 1588, when the Spaniſh Armada was
upon cur coaſts.

J'wo miles from hence to the ſouth, on the
very top of a hill, is a little wood call'd at this
day Weedcote, where are the plain remains of a
{mall Town, and ſeveral Wells built of little
pieces of flints; | befides other certain marks of
Antiquity : | the neighbourhood talk much of it's
ancient populcuſneſs and wealth, and number

+ Patricio- of it's F Senators. [It is ndw a pleaſant ſeat

rum,

among groves, much adorn'd of late years ; to

Fpſum-Wells. x hich belong theſe medicinal Wells, that riſe

in the adjoyning Common. They are tinctur'd
with Allom, and are in ſo much repute, as to
eccalion a very great increaſe of buildings in the
pariſh of Epſom, for the reception and enter-

193
of the Spaws, with the diverſion of the Downs Ws":
hard by. | This ¶Hoodeote I take to be the City
which Ptolemy calls Nojomagns, Antoninus No-
viomag 3 nor need I inſiſt upon any other ar-
guments for it, beſides that of diſtance. For
it is ten miles from London, and eighteen from
Vagniacæ or Maid#ton ; the diſtance that is noted
by the old Itinerary. They therefore are very
much our of the way, who have plac'd this
Noviomagus either at Buckingham, or Guilford, * * Perbap a
It was the chief City of the RE G N, and f Ne.
is taken notice of by Marin Tyrins, a very .
ancient Geographer, whom Prolemy thought
tir to cenſure, becauſe he had put Novi,
in Britain in a more northerly Climate than
London, and yet, in the method of his Finerary
had made it more ſoutherly. [To the welt, is
Aſhſted, where the honourable Sir Robert Hou- Athtea
ard (brother to the Earl of Barkſhire) enclos'd |
a fair new houſe within a park, and laid out and
planted the fields, paſtures, and arables abour
it in ſuch order and with ſo great improve-
ments, as to make it vye with the moſt conli-
derable dry-feats in this County. There was
near it, formerly, a mean decay'd farm-houle ;
yet for the wholſom air breathing from the hills,
it was often reſorted to by Thomas Earl of A-
rundel and Surrey, of whoſe grandſon Sir Ro-
bert purchas'd it.

Upon the Thames, next to the mouth of the

Vandal ( where is a little town call'd from it
Wandlefworth,) ſtands the ſmall village Baterſey, wana.
in old Saxon Pachykyea, and in latin Patricii worth.
inſula, i. e. Patrick's Iſle; [which gives the ti- Baterſey,
tle of Baron to Henry St. John (created allo, at the
ſame time, Viſcount Sr. John) who hath his
{eat here. Not far from which lies Dulwich ;
where H/7liam Allen ( ſometime a famous Co-
median) did in the reign of King James 1. ere&
and endow a pretty College and a tair Chapel,
tor {1x poor men, and as wany poor women;
with a ſchool for the education cf twelve cuil-
dren. Here are aho Medicinal Springs call'd
Siduam-wells, as there are lik-wiſ- at Streeteham ; $;45m.w:%
both trequented in their proper ſeaſons. | Near
theſe, wasthe Royal ſeat call d Kennington, whirher Kenninge
the Kings of England us'd to retire ; tne diſcove-
ry ot which it is in vain to aim at or endeavour,
there appearing neither name nor ruins to direct
us. Next is Lambith or Lomebith, that is, a x ,mbith
dirty ſtation or harbour; formerly made fa-
mous by the death of Cauutus the valiant King
of England, who there breath'd-out his laſt, in
the middle of his Cups. For he, giving him-
ſelf over to eating and drinking, ordered (as nork or
Henry of Huntingdon has it) that a Royal meal Burgh,
ſhould be ſerv d up to his whole Court four times a
day ; choſing rather that diſhes ſhould be ſent off his
Table untouch'd by thoſe whom he had invited, thai
that other diſhes ſhould be call d for by thoſe who came
uninvited. But now, it is more famous for the
Palace of the Archbiſhops of Canterbury. For
about the year of Chriſt 1183, Baldwin Arch-
biſhop of Canterbury, by exchange with the
Church of Rocheſter, became poſleſs'd of a Biſhop, C.
manour in this place, wherein he began a Pa-
lace for him and his ſucceſſors; and this, by
little and little, was enlarged by them. But
when the Archbiſhops began to have thoughts .
of building a ſmall Collegiate Church here; Tons,
Good God ! what numbers of Appeals were
pack d to Rome by the Monks of Canterbury?
and what thundrings, threatnings, and cenſures,
were level'd by the Pope againſt the Archbi-
ſhops ? For the Monks were jealous, that this
might prove an encroachment upon their Pri-
vileges, and deprive them of their right to elect

goutbwark.

so ſaid,
ann, 1607.

rr, a. aa K£aAS act oo mms coo.

aa

m+_ tek coo God was A. a Gow a

|

Barons 1
S. John de
Ligham,

|
;
(

Sterborrow,

Gas a a a

tainment of ſuch as reſort hither tor the ſake

the Archbiſhop. Nor could theſe —
e

laps at
01.
e Ken,

im. ne.

ningeo

bith,

hop, C-

7”.

193

FT H.

RET.

1

8

gouthwark.

+ © ſaid,

ann, 1607.

be quieted, till the little Church which they
had begun, was, at the inſtance of the Monks,
laid level with the ground. Near this [(over
the fields called St. George's fields, in which a
Roman High-way is {till viſible,) is the moſt
famous mart-town of all the County, call'd at
this ge the Burrough of Southwark, in Saxon
duppepke, i. e. a work or building to the ſouth,
ſituated fo to the ſouth over-againſt London, as
that it ſeems to be a ſort of ſuburbs to it; but
yet ſo large and populous, that it may vie with
moſt Cities in England, being as it were a di-
ſtinct Corporation of it ſelf. For within the
memory of * our Fathers, it had it's own Bai-
lifs, but in the reign of Edward 6, it was an-
nex'd to the City of London, and is at this
day reckon'd a Member of it. For which rea-
ſon we will deter the Account of this place,
till we come to London. Only, one thing we
will take notice of here, which bears no rela-
tion to the ſaid City; viz. the Grant of St.
Mary Overey's Church to the Church-wardens
and their Succeſſors for ever, together with
the Tithes, to provide two Chaplains at their
leaſure, who are neither preſented nor en-
dowed ; and thus it difters from all other Church-
es in England. In this Church, lie bury'd the
learned Biſhop Andrews, and our famous Eng-
liſh Poet Gower. Bur a very ample and ancient
palace, with fair gardens, belonging to the Bi-
ſhops of Wincheſter, is now converted into Te-
nements. | 7
Beneath this, the Thames leaves Surrey; the

eaſt-bound whereot runs in a direct line to the

Barons
S. John de
Ligham,

Sterborrow,

Barons Bo-
rough or
B urgh,

Da- Smith.

ſouth, near Lagham, which in the reign of Ed-
ward 1, had it's Parliamentary Barons, call'd
S. John de Lagham, whoſe eſtate came at laſt
by a daughter and heir to J. Leodiard. Some-
what lower, almoſt in the very corner where it
borders both upon Suſſex and Kent, is Sterbor-
row-caftle, formerly the ſeat of the Lords de
Cobham, who from this place were nam'd de
Sterborrow ; and being deſcended from John de
Cobham Lord of Cobham and Couling, and from
the daughter of Hugh Nevil, flouriſh'd for a
long time in great ſplendour and reputation.
For Reginald, in the reign of Edward 3, was
made Knight of the Garter, and Admiral of
the Coaſt from the Thames-mouth weſtward.
But Thomas the laſt of them, marrying Anne
daughter of the Duke of Buckingham, had by
her one only daughter Anne, marry'd to Ed-
ward Burgh,deſcended from the Percies and Earls
of Athol, His ſon Thomas was created Baron
Burgh by King Henry 8, and left a ſon William,
father to Thomas, who was a great encourager
of Learning, and Governour of Briel, and was
made by Queen Elizabeth Knight of the Gar-
ter and Lord Deputy of Ireland, where he
dy'd [in defence of his country.] As to the
account of Eleanor Cobham of this family, wife
to Humphrey Duke of Gloceſter, whole reputa-
tion was ſomewhat tainted ; I refer you to the
Engliſh Hiſtories. Here, in the cloſe, we muſt
not omit the mention of one, who was a gene-
ral Benefa&or to the whole County. His name
was Smith, once a Silver- ſmith in London; but
he did not follow that trade long. He after-
wards went a begging for many years, and Was
commonly call'd Dog-Smith, becauſe he had a
Dog which always follow'd him. When be dy'd,

he left a very great Eſtate in the hands of
Truſtees upon a peneral account of Charity,
and more particularly for Surrey. (a) But this
Charity was not limited to Surrey, but left to
the Truſtees to extend to other places of the
kingdom, as they found occaſion ; and fo, the

revenue is greater out of this County, than
what is paid in it.]

of Earl ; whoſe Arms were Checky, Or and a-

ry of Lewis, we read thus
for the good of my maſter King William, <vl0 brought
me over into England, and for the good of my Lady
Queen Maud, my wife's mother, and for the good of
my maſter King Wiliam his ſon, after whoſe coming
into England I made this Charter, and who created
me Earl of Surrey, &. To him ſacceeded his
ſon, and his grandchild by him, of the ſame
name. But this laſt had only a daughter, who
brought the ſame title, by marriage, firſt to
William, ſon of King Stephen, and afterwards
to Hamelin baſe ſon of Geoffrey Plantagenet, Earl
of Anjou. But the firſt husband dying with-
out iſſue, Hamelin had by her Miliam Earl of
Surrey; whoſe poſterity, caking the name of
IWarrens, bore the ſame title. This William
marry d the eldeſt daughter and coheir of -
liam Marſhal Earl of Pembroke, widow of Hugh
Bigod ; and had by her, John and John, by

ughter of the Earl of Oxford, John,
who was born after the death of his father, and
was the laſt Earl ct this family. He was (as
I learn'd from his ſeal) Earl of Warren, Surrey,
and Strathern in Scotland ; Lord of Bromfeld and

ſiſter and heir Alice was marry'd to Edmund
Earl of Arundel, and by that marriage brought
this honour into the family of the Arundels ;
from which it came at laſt by the Mowbrays to
the Howard. For Thomas Mowbray marry'd the
eldeſt ſiſter and coheir of Thomas Fitz-Alan, Earl
of Arundel and Surrey. In the mean time,
Richard 2. conferr'd the title of Duke of Sur-
rey upon Thomas Holland Earl of Kent, who
did not enjoy that honour long. For, while he
was ſecretly endeavouring to reſcue the ſame
Richard then taken priſoner, and to reſtore him
to his Crown, his plot was diſcover'd, and him-
ſelf, making his eſcape, was ſeiz d by the town
of Cirenceſter, and beheaded. Next, T homas de
Beanfort, who was the King's Chancellor, was

fleſs'd of this honour ; if we may believe
Thomas Wallingham : For he tells us, that in
the year 1410, The Lord Thomas Beaufort Earl
of Surrey, dy d. But let Walſingham make good
his aflertion ; for no ſuch thing appears in the
Records ; but only that Thomas de Beaufort was
about that time made Chancellor. It is evident
however from the publick Records of the King-
dom, that King Henry 6. in the 29˙ year of
his reign, created John Mowbray, ſon of John
Duke of Norfolk, Earl of Warren and Surrey;
and at length, King Richard 3. after he had

villanouſly poſſeſs d himſelf of the Crown, did,

(a) After the Truſtees had made a conſiderable improvement of the eſtate, and purchas'd ſeveral Farms, they
ſettled Fifty Pounds per Ann. or thereabouts upon every market-town in Surrey, or gave one Thouſand Pounds in
money. Upon every Pariſh, except one or two, they ſettled a yearly revenue; upon ſome ſix Pounds, others eight

convenient.

Pounds; and upon the reſt more or leſs, as they thought

in

We muſt how reckon up the Earls. William Earls of Sur-
Rufus, King of England, firſt made 1ibiam rey, who were

de Harren Governour of * = i alſo call'd
ot Surrey, under the title Earls of Wars

- * g : ren.
zure. For in his Foundation-Charter of the Prio- of the Earls

I have given, &c. of Warren,

Arms

Alice daughter of High le Brune, liſter by the « parts of

mother's ſide to King Henry 3, had William, March in

— p . before his father, and had by Joanna France.
ere,

Tale, and f Count Palatine. But he dying with-+ Comes Pala-
out lawful iflue in the 21ſt of Edward 3, his u.

—— = hk —
22 „„ „ — p—ç—c(’ ad
* * _— * - "PA a

—— — — — —

*

195 R E

*

GNI.

—_— * | WR

in order to win the family of the Howards (de-
ſcended from the Mowbrays) to his own party,
create on the ſame day John Baron Howard,
Duke of Norfolk, and Thomas his ſon, Earl
of Surrey; in whoſe poſterity this honour con-
tinu'd, and doth ſtill remain. [For from this
Thomas, whom Richard 3. made Earl of Sur-
rey, three of the ſame name and family ſucceſ-
ſively enjoy'd the Honour; the laſt whercot
dying 1646, was ſucceeded by Henry his fon,
and Henry by his ſon Thomas; who dying with-
out iſſue, the title deſcended to Henry his bro-
ther, who was ſucceeded by a ſon of the ſame
name : but he leaving no iſſue, was ſucceeded
by Thomas the preſent Earl, ſon of Thomas
Lord Howard, his younger brother.

This County hath 140 Pariſh-Churches.

1 *

More rare Plants growing wild in Surrey.

Aria Theophraſti Ger. See the Synonymes in
Somerſetſhire. The white Beam-tree, or mountain
Service-tree. About Croydon. Park. 1421. Com-

LAS

Acorus verus ſive Calamus Officinarum Park.
Verus, five Calamus aromaticus Officinarum
C. B. Verus, Officinis falso Calamus Ger. Cala-
mus aromaticus vulgaris, multis Acorum F. B.
The fweet-ſmelling Flag or Calamus. Found by
Dr. Brown of Magdalen Coll. Oxon. about Hedley
in this County. |

Buxus arbor. The Box-tree. On Box-hill near
Darking, thence denominated, plentifully.

Dentaria major Matthiolo Ger. Orobanche
radice dentata mayor C. B. radice dentata, ſeu
Dentaria major Matthiolo Park. Anblatum
Cordi five Aphyllon J. B. The greater Tooth-
wort. Thomas Williſell ſhew'd it me in a ſhady
lane not far from Darking in this County grow-
ing plentifully.

Rapunculus corniculatus montanus. See the
Synonymes in Hampſhire Cat. Horned mountain-
Rampion with a round head of flowers. On many
places of the Downs.

Vicia Lathyroides noſtras, ſeu Lathyrus Vi-
ciæformis. Chichling Vetch. Found by Thomas Mil-
liſell in Peckham-field on the lad of Soutlrwark, iu

mon in the Copſes near the Downs.

F ſqualid watery place.

SUT H-SE X.

EXT to Suth-rey, lies Suth-ſex,
in a long tract on the ſouth-
lide of that County. It was
anciently the ſeat of the Regni,
and call'd in Saxon Suð- rex,
now Sex, as much as to ſay,
the Country of the South-Saxons.

A word, compounded of the Southerly ſituati-
on, and of the Saxons, who, in the Heptarchy,
plac'd the ſecond Kingdom here. It lies all to
the ſouth, upon the Britiſh Ocean, with a
ſtreight ſhore, and in an oblong tigure ; bur it
has but few good] Ports, the ſea being very
dangerous by reaſon of Shelves and Sands, which
make it rough; and the ſhore alſo is full of
Rocks. The ſea-coaſt of this County [abcut
the middle, I has very high green hills, call'd
Downs, the Downs, which," conſiſting of a fat chalky
| ſoil, are very fruittul. The middle-part, che-
quer'd with meadows, paſtures, corn-fields, and
groves, makes a very fine ſhow. The hither-
moſt and north-ſide, is ſhaded pleaſantly with
woods, as anciently the whole Country was,
Anderida ſyl- Which made it unpaſſable. For the wood An-
va. dradſwald, in Britiſh Coid Andred, ſo nam'd from
Anderida an adjoyning city, ſand now common-
ly called the Weild or Wild, ] took up in theſe
parts 120 miles in length, and 30 in breadth,

and Proprietor of it) in Mſinours, but in ſo ma-
ny Dens, which imply'd only a woody place
yieldingcovert and feeding for cattle ; and there
is no other uſe of them expreſs'd, but only
Pannage for hogs ; by. one of the Keepers where-
of, Sigebert (as we juſt now obſerved ) was
flain. | |

This County has many little rivers ; but
thoſe that come from the north-ſide, preſently
bend their courſe to the ſea, and ſo do not car-

ry veſlels of burden. It is full of Iron-mines ror,

all over ; for the caſting of which, there are
Furnaces up and down the Country, and abun-
dance of wood is yearly ſpent ; many ſtreams
are drawn into one chanel, and a great deal of
meadow-ground is turned into Ponds and Pools,

tor the driving of Mills by the t flaſhes; which, + 5 in

beating with hammers upon the iron, fill the
neighbourhood round about, night and day,
with continual noiſe. But the iron wrought
here, 1s not every where of the ſame goodneſs,
yet generally more brittle than the Spaniſh ;
whether it be from it's nature, or tincture and
temper. Nevertheleſs, the Proprietors of the
mines, by caſting of Cannon and other things,
make them turn to good account. But whe-
ther the nation is any way advantag'd by them,

| is a doubt || which the next age will be better 59 id,
4 | (memorable for the death of Sigebert King off able to reſolve. Neither “ did this County ann. 1887.

the Weſt-Saxons ; who being depos'd, was [in| want Glaſs-houſes ; but the glaſs (by reaſon of” Debs,

© | Ethelw, I. 2. a Place called Pryfetesflodan,\ ſtabb'd to death by] the matter, or making, I know not which) 4 was _ *
'S 6.1% a Swine-herd.) [By conſequence, Andradſwald] not ſo clear and tranſparent ; and therefore was
F mult, in its way to Huamſbire, take up a conſide-| only us'd by the ordinary ſort of people. [So
1 rable tract of this Shire; from whence we may | that now (whether it was, that it turn'd to lit-
h | infer, that the Inhabitants (as to that part )|tle account, or that they found themſelves out-
f | were very few, and thin-plac'd, for a long time. | vy'd by other places) there are no Glaſs-houſes

* Lambara Which is plain from the two“ Kentiſh Anti-] in the whole County. At preſent (as formerly,)
j Perambulat, Quaries ; affirming, that, for a great while, the | they continue moſt famous for the Iron-works,
| P- 224. Som- whole Weald was ſcarce any thing elſe, beſides | which are till in ſeveral places of the County;
'F — * a deſert and vaſt wilderneſs 3 not planted with | ſome whereof have both a Furnace and Forge,
8; | 2 7. 1% towns, nor peopled with men, but ſtuffd with | others a Forge only, and others only a Furnace. _
15 8 herds of deer, and droves. of hogs only. For] Near Haffings alſo are two powder-mills, where Haſtings
b- | no part of the Weald appears by the Grants to| is made very good Gun-powder ; and in that
ö have been ts by the King (the only Lord [end of the County, where the Iron-works

arcs,

—— ů2kᷣ —

—— — —

'#

.

—

a, ® Aa
——ä——ĩ—EƷ⸗ñ.ĩ———7 — — — — 7. —

1

* —
4 —y *

— —

5 Al inut;, of

rey

Vl Ss Al

1

wu
— — 1
— —„e

to | P A: 1
| QF b

Tate
N < 781

helbre
Firnhul
2

7; S Lukes 5 *
114 £
5 UGNKE Chithut) T ER

rob. "5 mo
1 .S. n 4% N * / 3
- / —
a : | 2552 15 of 5 2 17 C Kat nz q .
1 Sou a tl 8 -Þ  _ 3 ar Au. een 5
* 1 Hays
; | . a Horth erin > Nos e a Su 2 8 . 23 92
. * p - Do * * 250 S * 4. — nz, Bury 7 = * . . Won”
: "bh Ext lr {on n North 2 — - Cuts „A pore
Compton \: * 4 — Hinghtn I” > - Þ 9 'k ren. 1am
e — l I Sl. by 972 £ 2 *. age, © Bu. Ray 1 0
2 3 Ne ne

, "oe ne JIE 3 .uly,
Si a # Z . 4
| KO = p, Stoke 1

. . E

mſnorth

n ' * =

AD Ur uae 1.4
7/5 run. 25

& Wks

orth lin Alux.

Wel 27 055 5 .

4 4 * Zu uu

* Selley

Peninfi oof

15 Us

£7 1 11.111

ON :
Ss 1 un

7 BDuningtn 1 1050 5 *

A 70 . N

Slal,

Retertrih

Sling

VT

A,
Dr
LY 3

2 — * 2

Lav thorn

Nth B. led
South Punt: 1
A;

9

WY - -
22 *

27d. ＋
ne Len 4

W N A 2 7 wy a
«.

Jax

"ul;

ham
upunde Forett ar 1 n

9., > mr * ü E. l. in. —
ö * 145 Bus. 4 4 *

* Tor 8
. 710 8 *

Te

* e

nnen
: Aſhu

47 nie

—

ng r A,»

.

Kin. ut ** 0
. "Nt

a 4; * why E — 9
4
*

—

7115
Ru wer i Tt a

Au, N

80 8

nens M L.
1

=
i A
* 4 .

1 e

u rt-®

C WO
8 or Ta mL...

. 7 ein W nn, +4
N IM POURS: « >» U
Bu. Junoton oMithdeant 3
35 Prighthem Zune >

O
1

"».
bt * un. nr

" tbr
- — .
CI
"of ah wer. i'd —
Von << N\ i

- 5 - 7 1
Kult. UM r

2 ;
"\ Ss Forelt
| Wir enter. S *

O Hen

- 9. emf . 1.0 7
KP. 70 Ir
8 Ci a\

1s: ut 7 -»Q e 4.

A5

4.7 8 JL „A. Y

*
7

e

4 Degree | 0 40 30 20 1 N
7 ——

-
4 teh CAA A ů

Vimg 1 e W "7 f II * _

4 ale of Alt 4.

22 > —_—_
*

* a 1 ”o 00 On ꝛ 7 — — —ͤ. — —
— 2 .
- _ .
. ye Ws 2 2
—ůů — —
* 1 2 2 —_— « LIE - «
7 4 ba

E
.
*

ö 4. | 1
2 Sore ke of + A a F BY
A * > OJ) * 1450 1
1 9 21 J | |
D —=: Winner Jo £908 Hifi

Lau. il | 2
7. 11 1 bY — 4 *
Burri & n — r 6

b 7 PS

l 7
| * 1

ie * I
— Be — * 3 8

3 on # | ?
P.

8 11

- 1 KA i
1 4 | Breeklin{®

}
ar 44. .
* cM ws

2" Þ: 1 4 A proto J
l

— tim ap”
= - , 4a Honor
—

Staph B. TED)? © A
HASTINGS *

comme Por DT

*

% 1
— R A P E "AX "i
: — * * 1 N S. leib & Anu o Trig fl
go FF Bla: 4 M. 2 92 e * | — | — nul z. — bn 7 wo |
Y % -=_ K — = þ rom.” 7 ur
oCrechtd Nn Ba 750 85 11 559 Lu
3 £7 * * 7 "x with 11 WW 24
r er, Drown
ilburnha "PV we þ * 4 ag 1 Ä 23 ky ton. wins | 4 50
AL. Hall , 8 err 3 ;

Catt: . N 2 > 2 nlagt Of * are 21 .
15111 WOE -
Hoo Lach, S - = on hugs, 4

* Sully g þ Woryham 0 =
4 1
Kae,

I Haviithai
* * NI. £

SN

* . 1 i
eventcy Maring 5 +44 hill e
| 2 %% ThePl0

i
4 than -
d 2 ewe eee

.
* - ut x
CES Ne een * *. * * hy Bud
» inen ©
N 9 © 3 lth E

a BED
*
-

2
©
| Is *
2 — —
— 5 — Pax”;
w_— . 6 * - "=
-- — 0
—
—_ — —

— —
- ER — — — 2

ui pore |
4 * . 6 fin wat Demo gauge: ; i
J ut. Phe: 71 . oa ton 17

£4 W220 Y 54 a os, utton ( 1 4 2 2% iv

3 2
1 , . S-

— ©,

. *. 2 : * ' 5 |

NES e CE —

*

——

— _ 2 v1 4
* * —
IF, * > & —
2 *
r —

nm
—

r $

OY 11 br Abel Swat: Ann lham |
4 hn PS VF . "

9 | Ic

\

197
an?
— J. are
Char cod abt
eil Dlviſ- :
R 180

. They are ral
pow duly di- the
[aps-

Boſerham. Cc

a Fer God- la

vin 's double
meaning. b

2

I Alluding 7
© perhaps to

| Beſum,a A
Kis, in 4
© times paſt |,
4 ud in do- a

irg homage. 7

„„ eas a. ot 6. to. Wong

| Chicheſter,

| {
$ || Upon, C.

+ Hagz,
De Monte
© Merico, i. e.
| Montgomery,
2 tin tiſdem
| Manſur;y,

** *

*

are, — the Eaſt, Charcoal is made in great . e with the Biſhop's reſidence (Which was 282
abundance. | 3 . ctore at Selſey) it began t iſh.
peil This whole County, as to it's Civil Partition, Not many — A ro mY 2
5 is divided into ſix parts, which by a peculiar |thedral Church, which (befo
term they 8 _ — of r A-|niſh'd ) was by
rundell, Brembre, Lewes, Pevenſey, an Haſtings : | down. Notwithſtanding, b ; k
every one of which, beſides their Hundreds, | and King Henry the alls Liberal 22
has a Caſtle, River, and Foreſt of it's own. But | ſed-up again; and now, beſides the Biſhop
| becauſe I have little knowledge of their feve-|has a Dean, a Chaunter, a Chancellor, a 8
her are ral Limits *, I deſign to ſteer my courſe along | ſurer, two Archdeacons, and thirty Prebenda-
x duly di- the ſhore, from weſt to caſt : for the inner |ries. At the ſame time, the City alſo began to
Led in the parts have only a Village here and there, and |flouriſh ; and had certainly flouriſh'd apace
TR ſcarce any thing worth the mentioning. | | had not the haven been a litile too far off and
In the very confines of Hamſhire and this leſs commodious ; but + now the citizens are + So ſaid
Boſerbam. County, ſtands Boſenham, commonly call'd Boſe-| about making it more convenient by a new ann. 1607.
han, environ d with woods and the ſea toge- Chanel. It is wall'd about in a circular form
ther, where, as Bede faith, Dicul a Scotch Monk|and is waſh'd on every ſide, except the north,
had a very ſmall Cell, and five or fix Brothers, living by the little river Lavant ; [the courſe of which Lavant,
poorly, and ſerving God ; which was, a long time | ſtream is very unaccountable, being ſometimes
after, converted into a private retreat of King quite dry, but at other times (and that very
Harold. From which place, as he once in a|often in the midſt of Summer) ſo full, as to run
little Pinnace made to ſea for his pleaſure, he with ſome violence.]1 It hath four gates open-
was by a ſudden turn of the wind driven upon|ing to the four quarters of the world, trom
the coaſt of France, and there derain'd, till he whence the ſtreets lead directly, and ſo croſs
had upon oath aſfur d the Kingdom of England| in the middle; where the market is kept, and
to William of Normandy after the death off where Biſhop Robert Read built a fine ſtone Pi-
King Edward the Confeſſor by which means az xa. As for the caſtle, which ſtood not far
he drew upon himſelf his own ruin, and the from the north gate, it was anciently the ſeat
kingdom's overthrow. But how by ſubtilty|of the Earls of Arundel, who from hence wrote

and double-dealing that cunning catcher of ſyl-|themſclves Earls of Chicheſter ; but it was af- Earts of Chi-
kl God- lables, Godwin Earl of Kent, and Father of|terwards converted to a Convent of Francis cheſter.

vin's double Harold, got this place, and deluded the Arch-|cans. All the ſpace between the weſt and ſouth
n. biſhop by a captious change of letters, Malter gates, is taken up with the Cathedral Church,

Mapes, who liv'd not many years after, ſhall in-|Biſhop's palace, and the Dean and Prebenda-
form you in his own words, out of his book |ries houſes : which, about King Richard the
de Nugis Curialium. This Boſeham below Chiche-| 1{'s time, were again burnt down ; and Sef-
er (ſays he) Godwin ſaw, and had a mind to; and frid, ſecond Biſhop of that name, re-edify'd 1
being accompanied with a great train of Lords, came them. The Church it ſelf is not great, but very 1
ſmiling and jeſting to the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, |neat, with a high ſtone ſpire; and on part of the
whoſe town it then whs ; My Lord, ſays he, give] ſouth- ſide of the Church, the hiſtory of it's
| + Altuding me | Boſeam. The Archbiſhop wondering what he foundation is curiouſly painted, as alſo the pi-
| rechaps to deſir d by that Requeſt, I give you, ſays le, Boſe-| &ures of the Kings of Englind; on the other part
lum, a am. He preſently, with his company of Knights] are the pictures ot all the Biſhops as well of Selſey
Nit, in a and Soldiers, fell down (as he had before defign'd) at |as of Chicheſter; all done at the charge of Biſhop
E 1 his feet, and kiſſing them, with a world of thanks, Robert Shirburne, who beautify'd this Church very
urg homage, retired to Boſeham, and by force of arms kept poſ-| much, and has his Motto ſet- up every where,

Char-coal.

re it was fully fi-
a caſual fire ſuddenly burnt

—L

—

— — _
— m_
—
— 4
—ͤ—ũ—— —
— — — ——
— —
——

—

— 2 221 *
— te — —
= _ * — FR” 4 | = a 0
S © —— — ys -
—— . ꝗ——ͤ—:,—I—

ſeſſion as Lord of it; and, having his followers as Credite operibus, and Dilexi decorem domus tuæ, ts
Witneſſes to back him, gave the Archbiſhop in the] Domine. But that great tower which ſtands 75
King's preſence a great many commendations as the] near the weſt-ſide of the Church, was built by 13

Donor ; and ſo held it peaceably. Afterwards, as] R. Riman, and, as is reported (upon his being
we read in Teſta de Nevil (which was an Inqut-|prohibited the building a Caſtle at Aplederham
ſition of lands made in King John's time) & ing hard by, where he liv'd) with thoſe very ſtones
William who conquer d England, gave this to Milli- which he had provided for the Caſtle. | Belides
am Fitz-Aucher and his heirs, iu fee-farm, paying|the Cathedral, there are, within the Walls of
out of it yearly into the Exchequer forty pounds of [the City, five ſmall Churches. Chicheſter hath
filver try d and weigh'd ; and afterwards William given the title of Earl, to Francis Leigh Lord
Marſhall held it as his Inheritance. Dunſmore, and after him, to Charles Fitz-Roy
| Chicheſter, Chicheſter, in Britiſh Caercei, in Saxon Cirran- natural ſon to King Charles 2.

cearcep, in Latin Ciceſtria, ſtands in a Plain] Near this place to the north, is St. Rook g- St. Rook's-
| || Upon, C. farther inwards, || near the ſame arm of the ſea hill ; || and upon it is ſtill to be ſeen an old bill.
with Boſeham ; a pretty large city, and wall'd|camp, the diameter whereof is two furlongs, 23
about. It was built by Ciſſa the Saxon, theſ and better. The form is circular; from which 4
ſecond King of this Province, and took it's name ſ it may be gather d, that it is not Roman, but 3
from him. For Ciſſan-ceaFter is nothing elſe but |probably Daniſh. The true name of it ſeems to
the City of Ciſſa; whoſe father Ælla was the be St. Roch's hill; for he was patron of the Pil-
firſt Saxon that erected a kingdom here. Let, grims; and here was formerly a Chapel, which
before the Norman conqueſt it was of ſmall|might poſſibly be dedicated to him. A mile and
reputation; noted only for St. Peter's Mona- half from this place to the weſt, is a Camp call'd
ſtery, and a little Nunnery. But in the reign |Goxſþil, which being of a different form, mult pro- Gonſhih.
of William 1. (as appears by Domeſday-book)]|bably have been the work of ſome other People.
Hege. there were in it an hundred { houſes, and it was in The figure of it is an oblong ſquare, which comes |
g - De Monte the hands of Earl Roger ; and there are | in the neareſt to the Roman way ot encamping. Hard |
. i. e. ſaid place ſixty houſes more than there were before : by Chicheſter to the welt, there has been allo |
e paid fiſteen pounds to the King, and ten to the another large Roman Camp call'd the Brile, of The Brite. 1
8 moſuris, Earl. Afterwards, when in the reign of Wil- an oblong form; four furlongs and two perch- rl
liam 1, it was ordain'd, that Biſhops Sees ſhould es in length, and two turlongs in breadth. Ir 14
be tranſlated out of little towns, to places of [lies in a flat low ground, with a great ram- {||
greater note and reſort, and this city was ho- pire and ſingle gratf; and in ſuch a place, Las
makes

* was
— 3 282382
5 n 2 r '
: * — — — — * . *
0 . — — - = _ —_
— . — — . — ———— 7˙ — —

12 A. -
CRY K
gw yoga. 5 ww

— —— —

—

—

- — 2 ay HU.
= "
2
> — —_

1 * — — 832 Pre l — pr
_ ” —
— — * 15 b *

— ——— ._l i CASES — — ett

—

— —

199

RE G NT

Selſey.

| | Sen les.

| * Talus fun.
| az.

Slaves,

Foreimt,

NM u lle ts,

Arun.

- py
—_  — — — —
0
— —

—

— —

—U — — — — —

3 K —B — ↄ

N

—— — —

*

2 ya — _ _ J
1
— — ͥ — yu ͤĩ˙ — — — —
. W 2 5 .

—
- q

Stanſted,
Up-Park.

Goodwood,
Halnaker,

Leonard's.

Amberley.

Arundel,

Stanes-(trcet,

; Pelinghurſt.

me kes it probable enough that it was that of
Veſpaſian, after his landing. In the neighbour-
hood of Chicheſter, are alſo ſeveral Houſes cf
the Nobility, ſo advantageouſly ſituated, as to
attord a moſt delight ful and entertaining proſ-
pect to the Sea : At ſome diſtance, Stanſted,
the ſeat of the Earl of Scarborough ; and Up-
Park (fo called trom the high ground, and the
Park encloſing it) belonging lately to Ford
Lord Grey Earl of Tankervil, 0 now, by
marriage, to the preſent Earl: And, nearer the
City, Goodwood, the ſeat ot his Grace the Duke
ot Richmond; and Halnaker, lately come to
the Earl of Derby, by marriage with the daugh-
ter and ſole heir of Sir H/illiam Morley. |

Selſey before mentior'd, in Saxon Sealyrey,
that is, as Bede interprets it, the Ille of Sea-
Calves (which we in our language call Seales, a
creature that always makes to iſlands and ſhores,
to bring torth it's young) ſtands a little lower.
A place (as Bede ſays) encompaſs'd with the ſea,
unleſs on the weſt-fide, where it has an entry into it
of about a * ſtone's-caſt over. | The Street of Sel-
ſey ſtands on a dry gravelly foil, and is not un-
healthful to ſuch a degree, as places ſituated ſo
low, and ſo near the Sea, uſually are. It is
tamous tor it's excellent Cockles, and for pro-
ducing the beſt Wheat. It contained cighty
{even families, when Edinwalch King of this
Province, gave it to Wiltrid Biſhop of York,
then in exile ; who firſt preached the Goſpel
here, and, as he writes, not only ſav'd jrom the
bondage of the Devil two hundred and fifty bondmen,
by baptiſm ; but alſo by giving freedom, deliver d
them from being ſlaves to men. Afterward, King
Cedwalla, who conquer'd Edinwalch, founded
a Monaſtery here, and honour'd it with an E-
piſcopal See ; which Stigand, the 224 Biſhop,
tranſlated to Chicheſter, where it now flouriſh-
es, and owns Cedwalla tor it's Founder. In this
Ifle there are ſome obſcure remains of that an-
cient little city, in which thoſe Biſhops reſided ;
cover'd at high water, but plainly viſible at
low water.

Beyond Se!ſey, the ſhore opens to make way
for a river, that runs out of St. Leonard's Foreſt;
firſt by Amberley, where William Read Biſhop
ot ChichefZer, in the reign ot Edward 3, built
a caſtle tor his ſucceſſors: and then by, Arundel,
ſeatcd on the ſide ot a hill; a place of great
name, but ef it ſelf not very conſiderable, nor
very ancient ; tor I have not ſo much as read
it's name betore King Altred's time, who gave
it in his Will to Athelm his brother's ſon. Un-
leſs, we ſhould believe Portus Adurni to be cor-
ruptly written, by a tranſpoſition of letters, for
Portus Arundi. It is now a market-town, and
a borough ſending two Purgefles to Parliament;
and is tamous tor the beſt Mullets, which come
up, in great plenty, into this river. The no-
ted high-way, viz. Staxes-$7reet cauſeway, which
is in {ome places ten yards broad, but in moſt
leven, comes to this town out ot Surrey by Be-
linghurſt. It is a yard and halt deep in ſtones
(which they diſcover by cutting paſlages to let
in the water,) and runs in a ſtreight line; and
is made of flints and pebbles, tho no flints are
found within ſeven miles of it.] The etymo-
logy of Arundel, is neither from Bevoſinss Ro-
mantick horſe, nor from Charudum a pro-
montory in Denmark, as Goropius Becanus
dream'd ; but from a vale lying along the Ri-
ver Arun; in caſe Arun be the name of the ri-
ver, as ſome have told us, and upon that ac-
count have nam'd it Aruntina vallis. | Howe-
ver, there are thoſe, who on one hand contend
tor the Story of Bevis's horſe ; and on the other
hard, will by no means admit this derivation

from Arun ; and they offer their reaſons for

both. That Bevis was founder of the Caſtle
(ſay they) 1s a current opinion handed down by
tradition; and there is a tower in it ſtill known

you was his own apartment. Beſides, they
think it natural enough to imagin, that the
name of a horſe might be Arundel, from his
ſwiftneſs ; ſince that word in French ſignifies
a Swallow, and the preſent Arms of the town
(which is corporate by Preſcription) are a Swa!-

low. Now why (ſay they) might not Bevis's

Arundel, as well have the honour ot naming x
town wherein his maſter had a particular In-
tereſt ; as Alexander's Bucephalrs had, of a city?
Then, agzinſt the derivation from Arun, they

urge, that that river is call'd High ream, to di-Higb den

ſtinguiſh it trom the other {mall rivulets or
ftreams ; and ſeems to have born the ſame
name (as to the ſenſe at leaſt) all along. The
Norman Englhſh call'd it Hault-rey ; and an-
ſwerably, the middle-aged Latin writers, Alta

in Latin Ripa ; and ſeveral branches breakin

out of the High-ſtream, are at this day call'd
Ripes or Rijes.) There was allo an ancient fa-
mily of Knights, owners of much land in theſe
parts (even in the boſom of this great river, in

the pariſh of Hardham, otherwite Feringham) Feritglan

call'd from it de Hault Rey; and their poſterity
remains in theſe parts to this day, under the
name of D' Awtrey, in Latin De alta Ripa. Much
leſs, add they, will the interpretation, Aruntina
vallis, ſuit cither the name ot the place, or the
circumſtances of it. For tho' it be written ſe-
veral ways, yet no one makes it end in dale;
nor is a low tract of ground ever expreſs'd by
that word in this County (as it 1s in other parts
of England,) but by 2 Level; as Pevenſey-Level,
Lewes-Level, Brambre-Level, Arundel-Level, with
many others. And the Commiſſioners of Su-
ers call the Impoſition laid upon Land for re-
pair of publick banks and fluices, a Level-tax.
Ot theſe Opinions, every one is at liberty to
take which he pleaſes; and we will now return
to the account of the Town it ſelt.] All the fame

whereot is owing to the Caſtle, which flouriſh'd.

under the Saxon Government, and was, as we
read, preſently after the coming-in of the Nor-
mans, repair'd by Roger Montgomery, who was
thereupon ſtil'd Earl of Arundel. For, it is large,
and well fortifty'd with Works. But his ton
Robert Beleſme, who ſucceeded his brother
Hugh, was outlaw'd by King Henry 1, and loſt
that and all his other honours. For breaking
into Rebellion againſt the King, he choſe this
caſtle tor the ſeat of war, and fortify'd it
very ſtrongly ; but had no better ſucceſs, than
what generally attends Treaſon : For the King's
forces ſurrounding it, at length took it. Upon
this Robert's outlawry and baniſhment, the
King gave the caſtle, and the reſt of his eſtate,

to Adelixa daughter of Godfrey (ſirnam'd + Bar-+ Long:
batus, of Lovaine, and Duke of Lorrain and Bra- best

bant) his ſecond Queen, for her. Dower. In

whoſe commendation a certain * Engliſh-man* . Kerry
wrote theſe verſes, very ingenious for that un- Hunt, lf
learned age: p. 21

Anglorum Regina, tuos, Adeliza, decores
Ipſa referre parans Muſa, ſtupore riget.
Quid Diadema tibi pulcherrima ? Quid tibi

Gemma?
Pallet Gemma tibi, nec Diadema nitet.
Deme tibi cultus, cultum natura miniſtrat :
Non f exornari forma beata poteſt.

Accipis, illa micaut lumine clara tuo.

by the name of Bevis's tower, Which they tell Beyiy,

ripa (tor Rhie, a town in this County, is call'd gi,

* In otbet

4 . . . ** by
Ornamenta cave, nec quicquam luminis inde Copied ik

Non

ge Albene ic
or, as other:
4. Albine to,
and de Albi.
niaco, Now
Dawney.

| + Anglorum

Domina.

Earls of A
rundel and
Suſſex.

| See the Ear
4 0: Suſſex,

ll Pronepos,

© Chartz Ant
gur 10. m. 2

Parl. 11.
Hen, 6.

1 Ard, 117
2

J So ſaid
ann. 160.

h- trewm,

e.

inghan.

SUTH-SE X Ps

Non puduit modicas de magnis dicere laudes,
Nec pudeat Dominam, te, precor, eſſe
meam.

Who. Adeliza's name ſhould grace my

ong,

A ſudden wonder ſtops the Muſe's tongue.

Your Crown and Jewels, it compar'd to
you,

How poor your Crown, how pale your Jew-
els ſhow !

Take off your robes, your rich attire remove;

Such pomps will load you, but can ne'er
improve.

In vain your coſtly Ornaments are worn,

You they obſcure, while others they adorn,

Ah! what new luſtre can theſe trifles give,

Which all their beauty from your charms
receive ?

Thus I your lofty praiſe, your vaſt re- 7
nown

In humble ſtrains am not aſham'd t' have
ſhown :

Oh! be not you aſham'd my ſervices to
own.

She, after the King's death, match'd with

*De Alleseis, Wiliam D' Aubeney, who taking part with Maud

or, as others, the Empreſs againſt King Stephen, and defend-

4. Albineto, ing this Caſtle 3 was by the ſaid Maud f Lady
and de Albi= of the Engliſh (for that was the title ſhe us'd,)
2 Now created Earl of Arundel, in recompence for his
1 3 good Services. And her ſon King Henry 2.

| Domina, gave the ſame Jilliam the whole _ of Arun-
0

del, to hold of him by the ſervice of eighty four
Knights fees and an half : and to his fon William,
King Richard 1. granted (in words to this et-
Earls of A- fect) Arundel Caſtle, together with the whole Ho-
rundel and your of Arundel, and the third penny of the Pleas
Suſſex, out of Suſſex, whereof be is Earl. And when, at-

dee the Earls ter the fifth Earl of this Sirname, the iflne-
© of Suſſex, male failed; one of the ſiſters and heirs of Hugh

the fifth Earl, was marry'd to John Fitz-Alan
| Pronep-s, Lord of Clun, whoſe || great grandſon Richard,

| Chartz Anti- on account of his being ſeized of the Caſtle, Honour
| 4.21029» aud Lordſhip of Arundel in his own demeſu as of

Fee, and in regard of this his peſſeſſion of the ſame
Caſtle, Honour and Lordſhip, and without any other
Parl, 11. conſideration, or Creation, was Earl of Arundel, and

| Hen, 6. the Name, State and Honour of the Earl of A-

rundel, &c. peaceably enjoy d; as appears by a de-

finitive Judgment in Parliament in favour of

John Fitz-Alan, challenging the Caſtle and Title

of Arundel, againſt John Mowbray, Duke of

* % Norfolk, the right heir by his mother, in the neareſt

gradu, degree. From whence it is infer'd, That the

Name, State, and Dignity of Earl, was annex d to

the Caſtle, Honour and Lordſhip of Arundel, as may

be ſeen in the Parliament-Rolls, An. 27 Hen. 6;

out of which I have copy'd theſe notes, word

for word. Of theſe Fitz-Alans, the eleventh

So ſaid, Earl liv'd in + our time, and dying without iſ-

an. 1607. ſue-male, was ſucceeded by Philip Howard his

grandſon by a daughter ; who, not being able

to digeſt the Injuries and hard meaſure put

upon him by the cunning of ſome envious men,

fell into the ſnare which they had laid for him;

and being brought into the utmoſt danger of

his life, dy'd. But his ſon Thomas, a moſt ho-

nourable young Gentleman, ennobled with an

eager purſuit after virtue and glory worthy

his great birth ; and alſo of an aftable obliging
temper, was reſtor'd by King James [the 1ſt,

and had all his father's honours return'd to him,

by AS of Parliament. [This Thomas dying
An. 1646, was ſucceeded in his honours by his
ſon Hun, who in the life-time of his father
was ſummon'd to Parliament by the titles of

Lord Mowbray and Maltravers. By whoſe death
An. 165 2, this title came to Thomas his eldeſt
ſon, reſtor'd alſo, 1 3 Car. 2, to the title of
Duke of Norfolk, which had been forfeited
by the Attainder of Thomas the laſt Duke.
By which means, the title of Duke of Nor-
folk came to Henry his brother, with the
Earldoms of Arundel and Surrey, which he left
to Henry his ſon ; who dying, without iſſue, in
the year 1701, this, and the other high and
honourable Titles belonging to this noble Fa-
mily, deſcended to Thomas, the preſent Duke
of Norfolk, ſon of Thomas Lord Howard,
younger brother of Henry the laſt Duke.)
Except the Caſtle and it's Earls, Arundel
hath nothing memorable; for the College foun-
ded there by the Earls, having loſt it's Reve-
nues, 1s now ſunk. There arc ſome monuments
of the Earls in the Church ; and amongſt them,
one of Alabaſter more noble than the reſt ; in
which (in the middle of the Quire ) lie Earl
Thomas, and Beatrix his Wife, Daughter of John
King of Portugal. Neither muſt I paſs by an
Inſcription, very beautifully gilt, and ſet-up

here, to the honour of Henry Firz-Alan the

laſt Earl of this Line; fince ſome Perſons will
be pleaſed, to ſee it,

VIRTUTI ET HONORI SACRUM.

MAGNANIMUS HEROS, CUJUS HIC
CERNITUR EPFFIGIES, CUJUSQUE HIC
SUBTER SITA SUNT OSSA, HUJUS
TERRITORY COMES FUIT : SUI GE-
NERIS AB ALANI FILIO COGNOMI-
NATUS, A MALATRAVERSO, CLU-
NENSI, ET OSWALDESTRENSI HO-
NORIBUS EXIMIIS DOMINUS INSU-
PER AC BARO NUNCUPATUS : GAR-
TERIANI ORDINIS EQUESTRIS SANE
NOBILISSIMI SODALIS DUM VIXIT,
ANTIQUISSIMUS : ARUNDELLE CO-
MITIS GUILIELMI FILIUS UNICUS ET

SUCCESSOR, OMNIUMQUE VIRTU-
TUM PARTICE FES: Q U1 HENRICO

VIII. EDWARDO VI. MARIE ET ELI-
ZABETHE ANGLIE REGIBUS, A SE-
CRETIS CONSILIIS, VILLE QUOQUE
CALESLE PREFECTURAM GESSIT,
ET CUM HENRICUS REX BOLONI-
AM IN MORINIS OBSIDIONE CIN-
XERAT, EXERCITUS SUI MARESCAL-
LUS PRIMARIUS, DEINDE REGIS FU-
IT CAMERARIUS : EJUSQUE FILIO
EDWARDO DUM CORONARETUR
MARESCALLI REGNI OFFICIUM GE-
REBAT : EIQUE SICUT ANTEA PA-
TRI CAMERARIUS FACTUS. REG-
NANTE VERO MARIA REGINA CO-
RONATIONIS SOLENNI TEMPORE
SUMMUS CONSTITUITUR CONSTA-
BULARIUS, DOMUSQUE REGIE
POSTMODUM PRAFECTUS, AC CON-
SILIL PRASES, SICUT ET ELIZABE-
THE REGINA, CUJUS SIMILITER
HOSPITIL SENESCALLUS FUIT.

ITA VIR ISTE GENERE CLARUS,

PUBLICIS BENE FUNCTIS MAGISTRA-
TIBUS CLARIOR, DOMI AC FORIS

CLARISSIMUS, HONORE FLORENS,
Cie LABO-

2 *
—— —

— —
——

— oe
— 0
LI

—_— _— —

—— IR 33 x

TU — —ͤ—

r

Cuts
<< OA PUBL io. ns r

— — -

<——> -»
— —öäZGuʒ ha
— — OT r

— — 1——v—̃—̃—— — 3
———ͤ—mm— — 4a wa

2 __—_— ot w
" 2

— —

402 REG

N T. "=

LABORE FRACTUS, ZTATE CONFEC-| County; it is enlarg'd by the influx of man
Tus, POSTQUAM ZATATIS SUZ AN- |Rivulers on both lides : the moſt noted of
NUM LXVIL ATTIGISSET, LONDI- which, waſhes Cowdrey, a noble ſear of Viſcount Condrey,

NI XXV. DIE FEBRUARII, ANNO NO-

PIE ET SUAVITER IN DOMINO OB-
DORMIVIT.

JOANNES LUMLEY, BARO DE
LUMLEY, GENER PIENTISSIMUS,
SUPREME VOLUNTATIS SU VIN-
DEX, SOCERO SUAVISSIMO, ET PA-
TRONO OPTIMO MAGNIFICEN-
TISSIME FUNERATO, NON MEMO-
RLE, QUAM IMMORTALEM S1BI
MULTIFARIIS VIRTUTIBUS COM-
PARAVIT, SED CORPORIS MORTA-
LIS ERGO, IN SPEM FELICIS RE-
SURRECTIONIS RECONDITI: HANC
ILLI EX PROPRIIS ARMATURIS
STATUAM EQUESTREM PRO MU.
NERE EXTREMO UBERIBUS CUM
LACHRYMIS DEVOTISSIME CONSE-
CRAVIT.

That is,
Sacred to Virtue and Honour.
The Valiant Heroe, whoſe Effigies you here ſee,

Montacute ; and has on it's other fide Midberſt, Midters,

| proud of its Lords the Bohuns, who bear tor
SRE SALUTIS A CHRISTO MDLXXIX. their Arms A Croſs Azure in a Field Or; and

Bol
who, from Tugelricus de Bohun under King Hen- Midberj.

ry 1, flouriſhd till Henry the 7**s days, who Their Arn,

gave the Daughter and heir of John Bohun in

marriage to Sir David Owen Knight, natural
Son of Owen Theodore [or Tudor,] with a large
Inheritance. Theſe Bohuns (to note, by the
way, the antiquity of a word now grown out of
uſe) were for ſome time the Kings Spigurnels by Spigurre,
inheritance, that is, the Sealers of his Writs ; What it ig
which Office, together with the Serjeanty ot“
the King's Chapel, was reſigned to King Ed-
ward 1, by John de Bohun the Son ot Franco;
as we read in an old Charter concerning that
particular matter.

Next we have a ſight of Petrworth, which 1/:!-Petworth,
liam D' Aubeney Earl of Arundel gave, together
with a large eſtate, to Joſceline of Lovain (a Bra-
bander, Queen Adeliza's brother, and a younger
{on of Godfrey Duke of Brabant, deſcended
from the ſtock of Charlemain,) upon his marri-
age with Agnes the only daughter and heir of
the Percies. Since which time, the poſterity The Percis,
of that Joſceline (having aſſumed the name of
Percy, as we ſhall elſewhere tell you) have held
and enjoyed it. A family, certainly very an- See Nor-

from Charlemain, by a ſeries of Anceſtors much? the end,
leſs interrupted, than either the Dukes of Lor-

and whoſe Bones are buried underneath, was Earl of
this Territory : he had his Sirname, from being the
ſon of Alan; and moreover took the honourable titles
of Lord and Baron of Maltravers, Clun, and Oſ-
waldeſtre : he was Knight of the Garter, aud liv'd
to be the Senior of that Noble Order only Son to
William Earl of Arundel, and heir both of lis E-
ſtate and Virtues. He was Privy Counſellor to Heu-
ry 8, Edward 6, Queen Mary, and Queen Eliza-
beth, Kings | and Queens] of England; alſo Gover-
nour of Calais ; and, when Bologne (a town of the
old Morini) was beſieg d by the ſame King Henry,
he was General of the Army. He was afterwards
Lord Chamberlain to the ſaid King, and at the Coro-
nation of his ſon Edward, executed the Office of Mar-
ſhal of England; to which King he was Lord Cham-
berlain, as he had been to his Father. Upon Queen

Mary's coming to the Crown, he was made High-!
Conſtable of England for the Coronation, afterwards

Steward of her Houſhold, and Preſident of the Coun-
cil ; which honour he had under Queen Elizabeth,
to whom he was likewiſe Steward of the Houſhold.

Thus, this perſ, on, noble by birth, by the honoura-
ble diſcharge of Offices yet more noble, and moſt of
all ſo by his great Exploits at home and abroad; with
his houour untainted, his body broken with labour,
and worn out with age, in the ſixty eighth year of his
life dy'd in the Lord, devoutly and peaceably at Lon-
don, on the 25" of February, in the year of our
Lord 1579.

John Lumley, Baron of Lumley, his moſt duti-
ful and diſconſelate Son-in- Law, and Executor, with
the utmoſt reſpect put up this Statue with his Ar-
mour (after he had been buried in great pomp) for
the kindeſt of Fathers-in-Law and the beſt of Pa-
trons, as the laſt Office he was able to pay him : not
to preſerve his memory ( for that his many Virtues
had made immortal) but his Body, which was com-
mitted to the ground in hopes of a joyful Reſurre-
Eton.

As for the River, which runs by this place,
and has its Spring in the North part of the

—— — — .

rain or Guiſe ; who value themſelves ſo highly
upon that account. This Joſceline, as I have
ſeen in a donation of his, us'd the following
Title: Joſceline of Lovain, Brether of Queen A-
delixa, Caſtellane of Arundel. But the iſſue-
male of that noble Family failing in Joſceline
the cleventh and laſt Earl of Northumberland,
this, together with other large Eſtates in di-
vers parts of England, came by marriage with
Elizabeth ſole daughter and heir of the {aid Jo-
ſceline, to Charles Duke of Somerſet, whoſe
Courage, and Zeal for the Proteſtant Religion,
in refuſing to introduce the Pope's Nuncio, will
ever be recorded to his honour, in the Hiſto-
ries of the reign of King James the ſecond ;
and ro whom this ancient ſeat owes the noble
Improvements which it hath receiv'd, as well in
the Buildings, as in other Orzaments and Ac-
commodations ſuitable thereunto.)

As the ſhore goes back from the mouth ofg
Arun, near Tering, lies Offiagtons, f the ſeat of+ Ann. 100
Wiliam Weſt Baron De-la- M are. This of the Ibe uw
eis is a noble and ancient family, who ha- ©
ving much advanced themſelves by matching
with the heirs of Cantelupe of Hempſton, and
of Fitz-Reginald Fitz-Herbert, were adorn'd allo
with the title of Baron, by the heir general of
the Lord De-la-ware. Hard by, is a military Barons Delt
fort compaſs d about with a bank rudely caſt- wat.
up, where the inhabitants believe that Cæſar
intrench'd and fortify d his Camp. But Ciſsbury, Ciba
the name of the place, plainly ſhews it was the
work of Ciſſa; who was the ſecond King of
this Kingdom, of the Saxon race, ſucceeding
Alla his father; and who, with his brother Ci-
men and a conſiderable Body of Saxons, landed
on this coaſt at Cimen- ſbore, ſo called from the Cimer a
ſaid Cimen : a place, which now hath loſt it's
name; but that it was near Mittering, King
Cedwalla's Charter of Donation made to the
Church of Selſey, is a convincing proof. There
is another Fort likewiſe, two miles from Ciſ-
bury, which they commonly call Chenkbary. Chenkbur!

Thence,

cient and noble, which derive their deſcent thumberlanl

—
205
—
Brood wate r
C amois-

1 80 ſaid, f
F aff, 1607»

4 Wiſe giver
| and grant
to anothers
F Parl. 30
1 Edw. 1.

© Brember-C:
E

ö Cxſar's-hi

I Portus Ad.

205

= Oe

SUTH-

SEX.

206

rey, Camois,
1 50 ſaid, ;
ert, and. 1607»
Ing of
herf,
ir Army,
| x Wiſe given
id granted
to anothers
$ Parl. 30
Ed. 1.
urtel, |
t it lignis
worth,
e Percies
e Nor-
umberland,
the end.
© Shoreham.
b Brember-Ca-
| file
. 6 Stening
Ang. 19% i
he family
f the Weuk
Findon,
zarons Delt
vate.
dißßbuty.
di. Notitia
3 Provincia.
Dimen- er
Portſlade.
Chenkburſe

1 Thence, near the ſea, lies Broodwater, the
Brooiwitt'* Barony of the Lords de Camois, who flouriſh'd

Cars bill, miles diſtant from the ſea. It is call d Caſar's-

erington. perſuade us to think, that this was Ederington,

-

from the time of Edward t, till“ our Grand-
fathers remembrance, when by female-heirs the
eſtate came to the Lewkenors and Radmilds. Of
this family, John Camois ſon of Lord Ralph Ca-
mois (a precedent not to be parallel'd in that,
or our own age) out of his own free will (I ſpeak
from the Parliament-Rolls themſelves) gave and
demiſed his own wife Margaret, hter and heir
of John de Gaideſden, 10 Sir William Painel
Knight; and to the ſame | William voluntarily
gave, granted, releaſed, quit-claimed all the
goods and chattels which ſhe had, or otherwiſe bere-
after might have, and alſo whatever was in his
hands of the aforeſaid Margaret's goods and chattels
with their appurtenances. So as neither himſelf, nor
any other in his name, might, nor for ever ought t0
claim or challenge any intereſt in the aforeſaid Mar-
garet from henceforth, or in the goods or chattels of
the ſaid Margaret. Which is, what the Anci-
ents ſaid in one word, Ut omnia ſua ſecum habe-
ret, that ſhe ſhould take away with her all that
was her's. By occaſion of which grant, when
ſhe 38 her dower in the manour of
Torpull, an eſtate of John Camois her firſt hus-
band, there commenced a memorable ſuit. But
ſhe was caſt in it, and ſentence paſs'd, That ſbe
ought to have no dower from thence. This I men-
tion with Indignation ; but I perceive Pope
Gregory might have good ground to write to
Archbiſhop Lanfrank, that he heard, there
were {ome among the Scots who not only tor-
ſook their Wives, but fold them too ; ſince
even in England they gave and demis'd them in
this manner.

Upon the ſhore, a little lower, appears Shore-
ham, anciently 6cone-ham, which by little and
little has dwindled into a poor village, now
call'd Sd Shoreham ; having given riſe to ano-
ther Town of the ſame name, the greateſt part
whereof is alſo ruin'd and under water, and the
Advantage of it's Port, by reaſon of the banks
of ſand caſt-up at the mouth of the river, 1s
wholly taken away : whereas in former ages it

a little village which the ſaid Ælfred granted
to his younger ſon : not to obſerve, how eaſily
they might land here, the ſhore being ſo open
and plain. And for that very reaſon, our men,
in the reign of Henry 8, chiefly reckon'd up-
on the French Gallies landing here, and waited
their coming ; while they 'hover'd upon our
Coaſts, and ſet one or two cottages on fire, by
ſurpriſe, at Bright helmſted, which our anceſtors Brighthelme
term d Byighcealmer- cun, the very next Station fied.
to It.
Some few miles from hence, a certain ano-
nymous river diſcharges it ſelf into the ſea,
which riſes out of St. Leonard's Foreſt* near
Slaugham, the ſeat of the Coverts ; who in Slaugham,
King Henry the third's time flouriſh'd in this
tract, with the honour of Knighthood.
In theſe parts, but at ſome diſtance from
the ſea, ſtands Lewes, upon a riſing ground Lewes,
(taking its name perhaps from Paffures, call'd
by the Saxons Lerpa,) which is, for largeneſs
and 2 one of the chief Towns of
the County. In the reign of Edward the Con-
teſſor, It paid fix pounds and four ſhillings * for * De Gable
Tax and Toll. The King had there one hundred® Theloneo.
twenty ſeven Burgeſſes. It was their cuſtom, if the 1 ?
King had a mind to ſeud his ſoldiers to ſea with-
out them; that of all of them, whoſeſoever the lands
were, there ſhould be collected twenty ſhillings, and
they kad it f who ſerv'd in the ſhips. Whoſo ſells an + In navibus
korſe within the Borough, gives the Prevoſt || one arma cuſtodie-
tenm, and the buyer gives another; for an ox or baut.
cow, a halſpenny; for a man four pence ; where ſo- l Nummum.
ever within the Rape Je buys. He that ſheds blood,
* pays ſeven ſhillings. He that commits Adultery or * Emendas
a Rape, eigli Shillings and four pence, and the wo- pro, &c.
man as much. The King hath the Adulterer, and
the Archbiſhop the woman. When the money is new
made, every Mint-ma$er gives twenty ſhillings. Of
all theſe payments, two parts went to the King, and
a third to the Earl. William de Warren, the
firſt Earl of Surrey, built a Caſtle here, at the
foot whereof he dedicated a Priory to St. Pan-
craſe, and fili'd it with Cluniack Monks, in re-
gard of the Lolineſs, religion, and charity, which be

was wont to carry ſhips under fail as high as |found in the Mona#tery of Clugny in Burgundy,

Brember, a pretty good diſtance from the ſea.
This was formerly a Caſtle of the Breoſes ; for
King William 1. gave it to Wiliam de Breoſe,
from whom the Breoſes, Lords of Gower and
Brechnock, are deſcended ; and from them alſo
are deſcended the Knightly Families of the
Shirleys in this County and Leiceſterſhire. Bur
now, inſtead of a caſtle, there is nothing but
a heap of ruins ; beneath which lies Stening,
a well-frequented market; and in AZlfred's
Will, if I miſtake not, it is called Steningham.
Not far from Stening, lies Findon ; within a
mile of which is an ancient Camp, about two

bil, becauſe the people imagine it was Caſar's
Camp ; and they pretend to ſhew the place
where Caeſars tent was. Notwithſtanding
which, the form of it ſhows that opinion to be
ill grounded ; for, being roundiſh, it ſeems
rather to have been a Britiſh work. Farther
Eaſtward, alſo, near Lewes, is another Camp.“

J Portus Adur. That ancient port, call'd Portus Adurni, is,

as it ſhould ſeem, ſcarce three miles from the
mouth of this river ; where, when the Saxons
firſt infeſted our ſeas, the band of Exploratores
under the Roman Emperors had their Station ;
bur it is now choaked up with heaps of ſand
driven-in. For both the name, ſtill remaining
almoſt entire, and alſo ſome adjacent cottages

(I cite this our of the original Inſtrument of
Foundation,) whilſt going in pilgrimage, toge-
ther with his wife, he lodg'd there. But this

+ was converted into a houſe of the Earls of Is now con-

Dorſet. Let there are ſix Churches {till re- verted, C.
maining in the town ; of which, not far from
the Caſtle, and beneath it, there ſtands a little
one, deſolate, and over-grown with brambles ;
in the walls whereof are engraven, arch-wiſe,
certain rude verſes in an obſolete Character;
which imply, that one Magus, deſcended of
the Blood Royal of the Danes, and devoted to
a ſolitary lite, was buried there. But here,
take the verſes themſelves, tho' imperfect, and
gaping, if I may ſo ſay, by reaſon of the Stones
being disjointed :

—___

Which

call'd Portſlade, that is, the Way to the e

207 R E

—

#, # I

AE

Pens:
GO

RN UI PRO. x
JVI'CIA. G 4
Z
= -
N= 25

as]

— —
5
8 98
2 8
8 2
Q 38
* 22

Which perhaps are to be read thus:

Clauditur hic miles Danorum regia proles,

Magnus nomen ei, magnæ nota progeniei,

Deponens Magnum, prudentior induit ag-
num :

Prapete pro vita fit parvulzs Anachorita.

Here lies a Knight of Denmark's royal
blood, |

Magnus his name, whence his great race is
ſhow'd.

Reſigning all his grandeur he became

Hermit trom ſoldier, and from wolf a
lamb.

During the reign of the Saxons, upon E-
thelſtan's making a law that no money ſhou'd
be coin'd but in Towns only ; he appointed
two Minters here. But afterwards, in the time
of the Normans, it became famous for a bloody
battle between King Henry 3, and the Barons;

1263. in which the hopeful on- ſet of the King's Party
The Battle at firſt, prov'd their overthrow at laſt. For
of Lewes. vhile Prince Edward the King's ſon, breaking
thro* ſome of the Barons troops, careleſly pur-
ſu'd the enemy too far, as making ſure of the
M. Paris, victory ; the Barons rallying their forces, gave
p. 1350. a freſh charge, and fo routed the King's army,
that they compelV'd him to offer conditions of
peace which were very unreaſonable, and to
deliver his ſon Prince Edward, with others, in-
to their hands. [Not far from this place, is
Laughton. Lawghton, Where, the Pelhams have flouriſhed for
many ages; of whom, Thomas, the late poſſeſ-
* Vid. New-ſor, was created a Baron of this Realm, by the
caſtle, in title of Lord Pelham of Laughton, in the 5. year
Northumber- of Queen Anne.“
land
3 From Lewes, paſſing by a large lake well-ſtor'd
Furle. with fiſh, near Furle, the ſeat of the Gages (who,
advancing their eſtate by marriage with one of
the heirs of the houſe of St. Clare, became a Fa-
Cuckmer, mily of good note ; ) we come to Cuckmer, a
pretty good Harbour. Then, having paſs'd the
Beachy, promontory, call'd from the Beach, Beachy ;
a ys the next place that comes in our way is Peven-
Wigorn. * fey, anciently Peopenrea, by the Normans Pe-
452. venſel, commonly Pemſey; a caſtle, in former
ob, de times belonging to Robert Earl Moreton, half-
Monte, 1158. brother (by the mother's fide) to William the
Treaty be- Conqueror ; afterwards, to William ſon of King
tween King Stephen, who ſurrender'd it again to Henry 2.
Henry and (from whom he had receiv'd it as a free gift,)
King Ste- together with the lands formerly belonging to
hen 0g Sing
*he honour Richer de Aquila, or, of the Eagle, from whom
of theEagle, they had the name of the Honour of the Eagle.

of the laid Margaret were Lords Dacre, and

It remain'd a long time in the Crown ; till
King Henry 3. granted it to the Earls of Rich-
mond t of Bretagne, from whom ir paſſed to the + p,:
Crown again. Bur now there are no remains...
of the caſtle, but the old walls. Some part of
this Honour of the Eagle, Henry 4. gave after-
wards to the family of the Pelhams, for their
loyalty and valour. This,“ Mr. Somner (dif-* For, ,.;
allowing the common conjecture of Newenden in Ports n
Kent,) was inclined to think the ancient 4;-***
derida, where was the band of the 4bulz;
grounding upon Gildas's words, which expreſs
the ſituation of theſe garriſons, In littore Oceani Vide ins
ad meridiem, on the ſea-ſhore to the ſouth ; and Ae,
alſo upon the defign of them, which was
to ken and ſpy-out the invading enemy: and
laſtly, upon the antiquity of the place, which
Archbiſhop Uſher makes the old Caer Penſave!-
coit of the Britains ; the coit, i. e. wood, im-
plying the ancient ſtate and condition of this
County.] Hard by, ſtands Herſt, amongſt the ep, iy
woods, and has it's name from it's woody ſitua- it gg
tion; for the Saxons call'd a wood, Hype.
This, immediately after the firſt coming-in cf
the Normans, was the ſeat of certain Gentle-
men, who from the place were for ſome time
named De Herſt ; till William ſon of Waleran Regiter
de Herſt took the name of Monceaux, perhaps the Mor,
from the place of his birth (a thing uſual in 5 der
that age;) whereupon, that name was annex'd ©
to the place, call'd ever ſince from it's Lord,
Herſt Monceaux. From whoſe poſterity it de- Her M..
ſcended hereditarily to the Fiennes. Theſe F- F
ennes, call'd likewiſe Fenis and Fienles, are del- Spain
cended from Ingelram de Fieues, who marry'd the Pat. 37,84
heir of Pharamuſe of Boloigne; of whom, King
Henry 6. accepted, declared, and reputed Richard
Fenis to be Baron of Dacre. And King Ed- An. 1; Els
ward 4. who was choſen honorary Arbitrator 4
. » 3 „ „Lord Die
between him and Humphrey Dacre, confirm'd it to f 11, l.
the ſaid Richard Fenis, and to his heirs lawfully bego t-
ten; becauſe he had married Joan the Couſiu and
next heir of Thomas Baron Dacre ; ſince which
time his poſterity have flouriſh'd under the Ti-
tle of Barons Dacre, till George Fiennes Lord
Dacre t died without iſſue. Whoſe only ſiſter
and heir, Margaret, was married to Sampſon
Lennard Eſquire, a perſon of extraordinary vir-
tue and civility, [and their deſcendants in right

afterwards advanced to the dignity of Earls of
Suſlex. |

Bur to return: at this Pevenſey (to give you 1%
a ſhort account, becauſe the place requires it,

of that which I have related more fully elſe-
where ) William the Norman arriv'd with his
whole navy upon the coaſt of Britain, and land-

ed his army, and, having ſtrongly entrench'd

his camp, ſer his ſhips on fire, that their only
hope might lie in their courage, and their only
ſatety in victory. Quickly atter, he march'd to

a Plain near Ha#7ings, where the Diſpute for

the Crown of England was finally derermin'd,

and the Saxon Government came to an end.

For there, our Harold ( notwithſtanding his
forces were much diminiſh'd by a former tight
with the Danes, and fatigued by a long march)
gave him battle, in a place call'd Epitou, on the x, Hari
14h of October 1066. When the Normans fight vi
had given the ſignal, the Encounter began with * —m
flights of arrows from both armies, which held 3
for ſome time; then, coming to a cloſe Engage-
ment, they maintain'd the battle a long while:

But when the Engliſh, with admirable courage

and bravery, had receiv'd the firſt attack, they

were furiouſly charg'd by the Norman horſe.

And when theſe cou'd not make their way,

they, as they had betore agreed, retreated, but
kept

a
4
Y
A
4
44
£
3
1
B
'Y
-Y
"4
|
18
a
4
L
i
Be.
2
=
ij
42
*
=
4
1
4%
*
4
1
.
B
2
_

W

eee

{
]
(
1k
<
1
1

dangue · lac.

\Preede

—

Brita,
i,

Fort; ard
| 125
Orts ih
Lent,

ide Kenn
ple ln ;

erſt ' Wy
; bgnits,

Lepiller 0
he Mori
„or

y of Reben

ridge.

Ter? Mer.
eaux.
'amily ct
'(enNes,

in. 13 El,

ord Dice
F the forth

Þ 10%,

1065,

. Hart
ght with

Villiam ts
>onquerds

bh.

I

2 * oy 5 * * 4 * 4 YT ä a 2» the 8 * . f 44 . *
I 2 "SY, PRONE YA g * d SD ns rr ä * *
„ es ne GWG

8

209

SUTH-SEX.

Battle-
Abbey.

aac, (
— blood there ſhed) which after a ſhower of rain,

from the nature of the ſoil, ſeems to look red- fied, well arm d, and well furniſb d for
diſh; and thereupon Guilielmus Neubrigenfis wrote
thus, but with little truth, The place in which King's behalf forty days beſore. And when the afore-
there was a very great flaughter of the Engliſh figh-| ſaid ſhips and men are come
ting for their Country, if it happen to be wet with a| they were ſummon'd,
mall
— 3 as if intended for a teſtimony,
of ſo much Chriſtian blood doth ſtill cry from the] ther need of their ſervice after the fifteen days ajore-
earth to the Lord. But William the Conqueror] ſaid, or will have them ſtay there any longer ; thoſe
granted many and great privileges to this Ab-
bey. Amongſt others, to
ot the Charter, 1f any thief, or murderer, or per- charges, ſo long
Jon guilty of other crime, fly for fear of death, of each ſhip]
and come to this Church; let him have no harm, but | Conſtable fixpence a day, and every one of the reſt three
be freely diſmiſſed. Be it lawful alſo for the Abbot pence a day.
of the ſame Church to deliver from the Gallows any
thief or robber whereſoever, if he chance to come-by,|the Honour, was held by the Earls of Ew in 4
Normandy (deſcended from a natural ſon of Ri- Earls G Ew.

| *So ſaid,
© ann, 1607,

AY

=.

4

Aſtturrbam
1 kd

t their ranks. The liſh, thinking the
— broke their ranks, = without — Hr Ha
purſu'd the enemy ; who rallying their forces,
charg d afreſh on every (ide; and, encompaſſing
them round, repuls'd them with a mighty
ſlaughter : yet the Engliſh, having
er ground, ſtood it out a long time, till Ha-
rold himſelf Rar ſhot thro' wi
fell down ; upon which they preſently who, where he land
turn'd their backs, and betook . x. times little alley
flight.

cted an 71 4 memo
dedicated it to St. Martin (which he call d Bat-|ſtan, was a Mint. It i

tle-Abbey,) in that very place where Harold, af- 5 the Ciet of the
ter many wounds, died in the midſt of his ene-
mies ; that it might be an eternal monument ny
of the Norman victory. About this Abbey,
there grew-up afterwards a town of the ſame
name; or, to uſe the words of the private Hi-|ſea,
ſtory, As the Abbey encreas'd, there were built a- joy; take
bout it one hundred and fifteen houſes, of which the| anciently
town of Battle confiſted. Wherein there is a place, | Haſtings,

at the execution.

rcinga-cearten, lies ſomewhat higher, upon
the ſame ſhore. ie there are who ridicu-
louſly derive it from Hafe, in our tongue; be-
cauſe, as Matthew Paris writes, At Haff ings,
William the Conqueror haſtily ſet up a fortreſs

timber, But it rather ſeems to have taken this
an arrow, and new name from Hafi

got the high-

or booty,

of as ou 2 in Aſerius
o = * 55 am
The Norman, exalted with this victory, ere-|Eflex, and of — = Apledore „

of the Battle andi in Kent. Here, in the reign of King Athel-

&c. was bound to find twenty one ſhips for a-

naval Expedition. If you have a mind to
know in what form, both this and the reſt
were bound to ſerve the King in his wars at

for thoſe ample immunities which they en-

it in the very words, wherein it was
recorded in the King's Exchequer.
with it's members, ought to find twenty
one ſhips at the King's ſummons. And there ought
to be in every ſhip twenty one men, able, fitly quali-
the King's
ſervice. Ter ſo, that the ſummons be made on to

call'd by a French name Sangue-lac, from the

= * the place whereunto
t all abide there in th
ſhower, ſweats out real, and as it were freſb| King's ſervice for fifteen days at their own proper

that the voice] cofts and charges. And if the King ſhall have fur-

hips, with the men, while they remain there, ſball
uſe the very words| be in the King's ſervice, at the King's coſts and
as the King pleaſes. The Maſter
ſhall have fixpence a day, and the

Henry the 1ſt likewiſe (to give you the very|chard 1, Duke of Normandy, ) till Henry

A market on Words of his Charter) granted a market to be kept the third's time, when Ralph de Iſſodun in
| Sunday,

there on the Lord's a vo from all Duty uhatſo- France, marry'd Alice, whoſe poſterity loſt a
ever. But Anthony Viſcount Mountague, who|noble eſtate in England, becauſe ( as the
* not long ſince built a — | houſe] Lawyers then deliver d it) they were under the
there, did 3 by authority of Parliament, Xing of France's Allegiance. Furthermore, as
obtain to have the market chang'd to ano-| there were certain Gentlemen in this Coun-
ther day. And as for the privilege of San-|ty, at the beginning of the Norman times,
ctuary for thoſe more heinous and grievous |{irnam'd de Haft ing, one of whom Matthew
crimes ; they are here, and every where de Haft ings held the manour of Grenocle, by this
elſe, aboliſhd by Act of Parliament.  For|tenure, That he ſhould find at this haven an Oar,

and deſperate in|ble family of the Hafings, now Earls of Hun-
of impunity was|tingdon, do enjoy this title of Haftings. For
either here, nor in] King Edward 4. beſtow'd it, with certain Roy-

once remov d, men grew bol
wickedneſs; and that the h
the greateſt motive to it.

in this tract. [Of this place and family, John the French King, he could not upon any terms
Aſvpburnham built here a handſom Church with |be prevailed with, to give him an Acquittance
three Chancels; whoſe ſon of the ſame name under his hand. I will in no caſe, ſaid he, that
was created Baron Aſhburnham of Aſhburn-|my hand be 75 among the accounts of the French
ham, in the year 1689. Here alſo is a noble King Treaſury. But this man, by ſinking
houſe of the 3 which, for ſtately too deep into the friendſhip of Kings, over-
buildings and convenient gardens, is ſaid to be|whelmed himſelf. For, whilſt he deliver d his
one of the beſt in this County. North-eaſt mind too freely in a private Conference with
from hence, lies Breede, the Court whereof is a the Uſurper Richard 3, he was unexpectedly
branch of that at Battle, and hath the ſame hurried away, and without tryal beheaded im-
privilege and proceſs. The Lands in the ma- mediately. [He had, notwithſtanding, an ho-
nour of Breede, tho in Suſſex, deſcend accord-|nourable Burial in St. George's Chapel at Wind-
ing to the cuſtom of Gavel- kind. Here is a|ſor ; leaving iſſue Edward Lord . his
kind of Court kept every three weeks, where ſon and heir.] Nor muſt we forget to take no-

| re try'd ; and tice, that King Henry 6. ennobled Thomas Hoo
nn a worthy — (whom he had made Knight 4. 7
Heco and Haſtings»

the Officers are exempt from attending the Aſ-

ſizes or Seſſions.] of the Garter) with he Ja of Baron

and

Haft ings before mentioned, call'd in Saxon Haſtings, =

the Daniſh Pirate, Henry Hunt.
built ſome- Hill, 7. f.211,

Cinque- Cinque-

ports, which with it's members Minchelſca, Rye, Ports,

The whole Rape of Ha#Zings, together with Comites Au-

- : Inquiſitio 5
they found, that the fear of reep being | whenever the King would croſs the ſeas ; ſo the no- Edw. 1.

the neighbourhood, ſaw I any thing worth the|alties, upon William Haſtings his Chamberlain ;w;n;am
notice, but only Aſbburnham, which has given|who is commended by Cominæus, tor that, ha- Lord Ha-
name to a family of as great antiquity as any|ving receiv'd a yearly penſion from Lewis xi, ings.

211

REGN I.

—

212

and Ha#ings ; whoſe daughters and heirs were
marry'd to Geoffrey Bolen (from whom by the
mother's ſide Queen Elizabeth was defcended,)
to Roger Copeley, John Carew, and John Deveniſh.
'Thence the ſhore retires, into a winding
Winchelſea, creek, within which ſtands Minchelſea, [not call-
ed Windchelſeum, as being expoſed to the winds,
according to Twine's opinion; but more truly
interpreted by Mr. Somner, a wateriſh place ſeated
in a corner; Which exactly anſwers the ſituation
of the place, lying at the corner of Kent and Suſ-
ſex.] It was built in the time of King Ed-
ward 1, when a more ancient town of the fame
name, in Saxon Wincelp-ea, was ſwallow'd-up
by the Sea, in a terrible tempeſt, ann. 1250.
(at which time, the face of the earth both here,
and in the adjoyning coaſt of Kent, was much
alter'd.) It's fituation 1 will ſet before you in
the very words of Thomas Walſingham. Situate
it is upon a very high hill, very ſteep on that fide,
which looks towards the ſea, or overlooks the. Road
where the Ships lie at Anchor. Whence it is that
the way leading from that part to the haven, goes not
ftreight forward, leſt it ſhould by a ſteep deſcent
force thoſe that go down to fall head-long, or them
that go up to creep ou their hands, rather than walk : but
lying fide-ways, it winds with many crooked turnings,
10 one fide and the other. At firſt it was inelos d
with a rampart; and after, with a very ſtrong
wall: but as it began to flouriſh, it was ſack'd
by the French and Spaniards ; and by the re-
tirement of the ſea, fell to decay all on a ſud-
den. [The new town was dowd with the
{ame privileges that the old one had, namely,
thoſe of the Cinque-ports, to which it belongs
as one of the ancient towns ; but the ſea, which
before had ſtallowed-up the old Town, leſt the
new, before it was quite finiſhed. Ir ſtill re-
tains that of ſending two Burgeſſes to Parlia-
ment, tho' the Electors are very few; the town
being moſt miſerably decay'd by the loſs of it's
market and trade. An argument whereof is,
that the graſs grows in the very ſtreets (tho'
they are all pav'd) to that degree, as makes
+41, per Ann. the very herbage ſometimes fconſiderable. The
town abounded every where with fine ſtone-
arch'd Vaults, for beſtowing of Merchants
Gocds, during its flouriſhing ſtate. It ſeems
at firſt to have been built with admirable
regularity, the ſtreets ſtanding all at right
angles, and divided into thirty two ſquares,
or quarters, as they are now call'd., The ſtone-
work of the three gates, is yet ſtanding. There
were anciently in it three Pariſh-Churches, tho
now there is only the chancel of the largeſt re-
maining, Which is the preſent Pariſh-Church ;
and in which are the monuments of three
Knights Templars (as it ſeems, by their lying
croſs- legg'd in armour ; ) one of which appears,
by the Arms, to have been of the family of Ox-
enbridge, who were formerly of great note in
theſe parts.

This place hath afforded the title of Coun-
teſs to Elizabeth wite to Sir Moyle Finch, and
daughter and heir to Sir Thomas Heneage Knight ;
who was before created Viſcounteſs of Maid-
ſtone by King James the firſt, Which titles
have 3 to 7 Poſterity.

Ar ſome diſtance from Minchelſea is Selſcombe

wanne where (as alſo in ſeveral places a this 2
ty) are mineral-waters of the ſame nature
with thoſe at Tunbridge, and altogether as
ſtrongly impregnated.] By the foreſaid accident
at Winchelſea, and the benefit of the ſea, it's
neighbour Rye began to flouriſh, or rather to
reſſouriſh; tor that it louriſh'd in ancient times,
and that William of Ipres Earl of Kent forti-
Ipres Towerefy'd it, Ipres Tower and the immunities and pri-

Rye,

|

,

Ports, do ſufficiently ſhew. But either by rea-

ſon of the Vicinity of Mincbelſea, or the receſs

of the Sea; it was inconſiderable for a long
time, But when Winchelfea decay d, and King
Edward 3. wall'd it about, it began to reco-
ver; and within the memory of the laſt age, :
the Ocean, to make full amends for the injury ann.
it had done (being ſwelb'd with an extraordi-
nary tempeſt,) broke-in ſo violently, and with
ſuch advantage, that it made a very convenient
Port, which another Tempeſt in our own age
did not a little improve. Since when, it has
greatly flouriſh'd, in Inhabitants, buildings,
tiſhing and navigation; and is now the uſual
paſſage from hence to Normandy. Bur as to
it's name, whether it took it from Rive, a Nor-
man word, which ſignifies a Bank, I cannot ſay.
Yer fince in the Records it is very often call'd
in Latin Ripa, and they who bring fiſh from
thence are termed Ripiers, I rather incline to
this original, and ſhou'd incline yet more, if the
French us'd this word for a ſhore, as Pliny does
Ripa. | Near Rye, in the parifh of Eaft-Guildford,
(which is the utmoſt bounds of Suſſex eaſtward) *
is a peculiar way of Tithing their marſh-lands,
whereby they pay only 3 d. per Acre to the Re-

ctor, while in paſture ; but if plough'd, 5 s.]

Into Ryc-haven, the river Rother or Rither River g
empties it ſelf ; which ſpringing at Ritheram-ther, ©
feld (for ſo the old Engliſh call the town, which
we call Rotherfeld,) runs by Burgwaſh, formerly
Burgh, which had it's Lords of that firname; |
amonglt whom, was Bartholomew de Burgwaſh, a _ my
mighty man in his time, who having approv'd
himſelf, in the moſt ſolemn Embaſſies, and in the
wars in Aquitain, to be a perſon of great
prudence and undaunted yalour, was created a
Baron of England, and admitted into the Or-
der of the Garter at the very firſt Inſtitution
amongſt the Founders, and was made Conſtable
of Dover-Caltle and Warden of the Cinque-

Ports. And his ſon of the ſame Chriſtian name,

no way degenerating from his father's Virtues,

liv'd in great ſplendor and honour, bur left only

one daughter, who was marry'd into the fami-

ly of Le Deſpencer ; from whom are deſcended

many noble Families, which remain to + this So fil,
day. Echingham, next adjoyning, had alſo a Ba- un. 167:
ron in the time of King Edward 2, namely,
William de Echingham ; whoſe anceſtors were Baron E.
* Stewards of this Rape. But the Inheritance chinghan,
by heirs females came at laſt to the Barons of * Sne\tul.
Windſor, and the Tirubitts. Then the Rother,
dividing it's waters into three chanels, paſles

under Robertsbridge, where, in the reign of Hen- Roberts
ry 2, Alured de St. Martin founded a Monaſte- — OS
ry; ſcalled St. Mary's of Robert- bridge, and of K. Aland
the Ciſtercian Order. That part of it which is

now ſtanding, is a farm-houſe belonging to the

Earls of Leiceſter.] And ſo the Rother running

by Bodiam, a Caſtle belonging to the ancient Bodiam.

160.

Ripiers,

and noted family of the Lewkeers, and built by Ann. 157
the Dalegrigs, falls into the ſea.

I have done with the ſea-coaſt of Suſſex. As

for the inner-parts, there is nothing worth the

notice, unleſs I ſhou'd reckon up the Woods and
Foreſts ſpread far and near over this tract, being

the remains of the famous wood Anderida. Among

which, to begin at the weſt, the moſt noted e
are theſe ; the Fbreſt of Arundel, S. Leonard's Fo- Arundel Fr
reſt, [(not far from whence, to the north, is re, .

Tfield, from which Denzil Holes, ſecond ſon of ra ;
ohn Earl of Clare, was created a Baron of this

Realm, by the title of Lord Holes of Ifield)] Nord word.

Foreſt, Aſhdown Foreſt (under which lies Buck- Aſhdown.

hurſt, the ſeat of the ancient family of the Sack- Barn a
vils; of which, Queen Elizabeth advanced Tho- bus
M46

vileges that it had in common with the Cinque-

Farls of Suſ
ſex. dee the
Farls of As
qundel,

4 S-des prect-
fal.

Arn. 1607.

8 * *

YT -RET. :

21 2
— mas Sackvil, a Gentleman of great wiſdom, to
be Baron of Buckhurſt, took him into her Pri-
Council, and made him Knight of the Garter,
and Lord Treaſurer ot England; whom alſo
King James [the 1ſt, l created Earl of Dorſet;)
then Waterdows-Foreſt, and that of Dallington,
which is the leaſt of all. 120
rarls of Suſ- Sullex had five Earls of the family of D' Au-
x, See the Jeney, Who were likewiſe called Earls of Arun-
Earls of A» del; the firſt of them was William D' Aubeney,
qurael, ſon of William, Butler to King Henry 1, and
Lord of Buckenham in Nortolk, who gave tor his

ſometimes Earl of Arundel, and ſometimes Earl
+5les preci- of Chicheſter, becauſe in thoſe places he kept his
1. chief reſidence. He had by Adeliza (daughter
of Godfrey Barbatus Duke of Lorrain and Bra-
bant, Queen Dowager to King Henry 1.) Mil-
liam the ſecond Earl of Suſſex and Arundel, Fa-
ther of H/iliam the third Earl; to whom Ma-
bil, filter and one of the heirs of the laſt Ra-
nulph Earl of Cheſter, bore J/illiam the 4*
Earl, and Hugh the 5** Earl, who both died
without iflue ; and alſo four Daughters, mar-
ried to Robert Lord of Tateſhal, John Fitz- A-
lan, Roger de Somery, and Robert de Mount-
hault. Afterwards, the title of Arundel was
reviv'd, as I ſaid before, in the Fitz-Alans. But
that of Suſſex lay, as it were forgotten and loſt,
n. 1607-to our * age; which hath ſeen five Ratcliffs,
deſcended from the moſt noble houſe of the Fitz-

ba

Arms Gules, a Lien rampant Or, and was call'd|]

4 The =
in

dom of t

Ons.

his Godfather, who gave him in token
the Meanvari.

More rare Plants growing wild in Suſſex.

Alyſſon Germanicum echioides Lob. Bugloſ-
ſum ſylveſtre caulibus procumbentibus C. B. Bo-
rago minor ſylveſtris Park. Cynogloſſa forte to-
piaria Plinii & Echium lappulatum quibuſdam
J. B. Aparine major Plinii Ger. Small wild
Bugloſs, by ſome great Gooſe-graſs and German Mud-
wort. Foand by Boxley in this County.
Chamædrys ſpuria foliis pediculis oblongis
inſidentibus. An chamædryi ſpuriæ afhnis ro-
tundifolia ſcutellata C. B? Alyſſon Dioſcoridis
montanum. Col. Wild or baſtard Germander with
leaves ſtanding on long foot-ſtalks. In moiſt woods and
bedges. I obſerved it firſt at Cock field in Suſſex.

Filix ſaxatilis ramoſa maritima noſtras. Fi-
lix ſaxatilis criſpa Parkinſoni D. Merret Pin.
Small-branched Stone-fern. I obſerved this firſt grow-
ing on the rocks by the ſea-ſide in this County, where
it was ſometimes daſhed with the ſea-water.

A as 424

Walters (who derive their pedigree from the
Clares) bearing that honour ; viz. Robert created

214 ©
— ä

Earl of Suſſex by King Henry 8; who married 21 Henry 8.

Elizabeth daughter of Henry Stafford, Duke of

Buckingham, by who he had Henry; the ſęcond
Earl; to whom Elizabeth danghter of Tante
Howard Duke of Norfolk bore Thomas; who
was Lord Chamberlain to Queen Elizabeth,
and dy d without iflue ; a Heroe of great worth
and honour, in whom were joyn'd the wiſdom
of a Stateſman, and the courage of a Soldier,
oe England and Ireland had reaſon to ac-

1 Henry his brother ſucceeded him;
and after Henry, Robert his only ſon, an honour-
able young Gentleman; who dying 5 Car. 1.
left the title of Earl of Sex to his ſon Eduard;
but he having no iflue, the family of the Rat-
cliffs Earls of Suſſex ended in him, and that ti-
tle was.confer'd on the 25% of May 1644, up-
on Thomas Lord Savil of Pontfract, ind was af-
terwards enjoy'd by James his ſon, who dy'd

without iſſue. Upon which, Thomas Leonard,
Lord Dacres of Gilliland, An. 1674, had this ho-

nour confer d upon him. By whoſe death the
Honour being again extinct, hath been confer'd
by King George upon Talbot Telverton, Who was
before dignified with the Honourable Titles of
0 f * Longueville, and Baron Grey of Ru-

en. |

This County contains 3 12 Pariſhes, ©

O much for Suſſex ; which, together with Surrey, was the ſeat of the Regni ; and afterwards, the King-

dom of the South-Saxons, called in Saxon f 6uS-reaxan-pic, which in the 3 1 years after the coming- + The true
of the Saxons, was begun by Alla, who, according to Bede, Firſt among the Kings of the Engliſh
South-Sax- ce Nation, ruled all the ſouthern Provinces, which are ſever d by the River Humber, and the adjacent li-
« mits. The firſt Chriſtian King was Edilwalch, baptiz' d in the preſence of Wulpher, King of Mercia,
of adoption two Provinces, namely, the Iſle of Wight, and the Province
But in the 306 year from the beginning of this Kingdom, upon Aldinius the laſt
King's being ſlain by Ina, it came wholly under the Dominion of the Weſt=Saxons. |

Feeniculum vulgare. Common Fennel or Finckle.
Obſerved by Mr. Thomas Milliſell to grow plentifully

at the weſt-end of 3

Lathyri majoris ſpecies flore rubente & albi-
do minore dumetorum, ſive Germanicus J. B.
ſylveſtris Dod. anguſtifolius Cluſii ex ſententia
J. B. ſylv. major C. B. ſylv. Dodonæi Park. The
other great wild Lathyrus or Peaſe-everlaſting. 1

found this firſt near Poynings a village on the Downs

of Suſſex. Since, Mr. Dale hath found is. in
Eſſex. |
«OY Cicutz facie Lobelii Park. Chære-
hylli foliis C. B. Succo viroſo, Cicutz- facie
Lobelio J. B. Filipendula Cicutz facie: Ger.
Hemlock Drop-wort. Frequent in watery. ditches aud
rivulets in his Country. oo
Peucedanum Ger. vulgare Park. Germanicum
q B. Minus Germanicum J. B. Hogs-Fenuel,
Sulphur-wort, Hare-ſtrong. In the marſy ditches

about Shoreham,

CANTIUM.

reading is
Suth-ſcaxnas
ric,

*
ih
4
3
|f
:

marſh.

c. 25, Vith cherries, which were brought out of Pox-|Citizens in Kent, retain the ſpirit of that ancient
Cherries tis into . 680 years after the building of nobility, above the reſt of the Engliſh ; being more
— Bicain, Rome; and 120 years afterwards, into Bri-|ready to afford reſpect and kind entertainment to others,

about the
Chriſt 48.

+ In quincun-
cem reſtæ.

3 =:

RP ergo

N

en

N

ANT IV A.

= 4 M now come to Kent ; a _— which William Lambard, a perſon emi-
Ell nent for Learning and piety, has deſcrib'd ſo much to the life in a complete Volume,
and who has withal been ſo happy in his ſearches ; that he has left very little
for thoſe that come after him. Tet in purſuance of my intended method, I will ſur-
df vey this among the reſt ; and leſt (as the Comedian ſays) any one ſhould ſuſpett
me of Plagiariſm, or Infincerity, I here gratefully acknowledge, that his Work
is my Foundation.
dll Time has not yet depriv'd this Country of it's ancient name ; but as Caſar, Caim, cn
Strabo, Diodorus Siculus, Ptolemy, and others, call it Cantium; ſo the Saxons ruptly rel
(as Ninnius tells us) nam d it Canc-guap-lanco, i. e. the country of Men inhabiting Kent; and 8 Diodory
we now, Kent. Lambard derives this name from Cainc, fignifying in Britiſh a green leaf, becanſe *
it was formerly much ſhaded with woods. But for my part (if I may be allou d the liberty of a conje-
ure, when I obſerve that, here, Britain ſhoots out into a large corner eaſtward, and do further take
notice, that ſuch a corner in Scotland is call d Cantir, that the inhabitants alſo of another corner in tlat
part of the Mand are by Ptolemy call d Cantz, and that the Cangani were poſſeſs'd of another corner in

Wales, (not to mention the Cantabri, inhabiting a corner among the Celtiberians, who as they had the From

ſame original, ſo did they ſpeak the ſame language with our Britains ; ) upon theſe grounds, I ſhould gueſs whence in

it to have had that name from the ſituation. And the rather, becauſe our French have us'd || Canton Hg,
for a corner, borrowing it, probably, from the ancient language of the Gaules ( for it is neither from the
German nor Latin; which two, together with that ancient one, are the only ingredients of our modern French ; ) and the
as alſo becauſe this County is call d Angulus, or a corner, by all the old Geographers. For it faces France tt oft
with a large corner, ſurrounded on every fide by the AEſtuary of Thames and the Ocean, except to the weſt, pe
where it borders upon Surrey; and upon part of Suſſex, to the ſouth. | Whether the Kula of Herodotms, French, d
are the mn of Caſar and our Kentiſh-men, as ſome have thought, I ſhall not take upon me to de- tones, «ii

Canton is put
for a corre

by the

one ſtould
ſay, Cong

ruation, from the Thames ſouthward, diſtin-[look'd upon to belong properly to them, as to
guiſh it into three plots or portions ( they call}ſo many Triarii ; [who, among the Romans,“ Tbes re
them Degrees ;) the upper, lying upon the Thames, [were always the ſtrongeſt men, and upon whom me
they look upon to be healthy, but not altoge- the ſtreſs of the Battle lay.] - This is confirm'd Ant. f.
ther ſo rich; the middle, to be both healthy and by John of Salisbury in his Polycraticon. As a
rich; the lower, to be rich, but withal un-|reward (ſays he) of that fignal courage which our
* Rumney healthy, * becauſe of the wet marſhy Soil in] Kent, with great might and ſteadineſs, ſhew'd againſt
moſt parts of it: it is, however, very fruitful|the Danes, they do to this day lay claim to the ho-
in graſs. As for good meadows, paſtures, and nour of the firſt Ranks, and the firſt Charge in all
corn-fields, it has theſe in moſt places, and a-| Engagements. And Malmesbury too has written
Plin, I. 15. bounds with apples beyond meaſure ; as alſoſ thus in their praiſe. The country people and the

15 & of an eaſie aſcent. The In- men, that in their engagements among the reſt courage dit

rain. They thrive exceeding well in thoſe parts, and leſs inclinable to revenge injuries. Wb

year of and take up great quantities of ground, making] Caſar (to ſpeak ſomething by way of Pre- Ju» 0
a very pleaſant ſhow by reaſon f they are plant-¶ face, before I come to the places themſelves) in

ed ſquare, and ſtand one againſt another, |his firſt attempt upon our. Iſland, arriv'd on this

which way ſoever you look. It is very thick-|coaſt ; and, the K

ſet with villages and towns, and has pretty ſafe|landing, there was a hot diſpute, before he got

harbours, with ſome veins of iron: but the to ſhore. In his ſecond Expedition alſo, he

air is a little thick and foggy, becauſe of the] landed his army here; and the Britains, with

vapours riſing out of the waters. The Inha-|their horſe —

X E NT.

HIS Country, which we nor bitants at this day may juſtly claim that com-
call Kent, is not altogether u-] mendation for humanity, which Cæſar beſtow d
niform: to the welt it is more ſ upon thoſe in his time; not to mention their
plain, and ſhaded with woods ;|bravery in war, which a certain Monk has ob-

JN but to the eaſt, riſes with hills ſervd to be ſo very eminent in the Kentiſh- The aut

habitants, according to it's {i-|of the Engliſh, the front of the battle was Kentiſh.

rear, Roi

entiſh Britains oppoſing his

their + chariots, receiv'd him 4 Ele
i Wt warmly

216

arion, cor-
uptly rea
n Diodory
iculus,

| From
# hence in
Heraldry,
Canon i5 put
or a correr
ind the co
try of the#4
ve tii, is al
by the
French,
tones, 45 it
one ſtould
ſay, Conte

7
7

*
.
*
F

q

The wu
courage d
| Kentiſh

=

—

4

> ;
p =

.

K

*

0 ĩ

; Julius Cai

n

5 8

— ww 9 OY > > _

1 Els

—

38 An E —

D AM iuwtles of Lime | — I | Ll | — — —
—— 1 —

1 1 r or

Miu AMS NX

Coringhpm t.

af tanjord v. [A

H. un 3

Me, .
— > LD. Bao of
, ; * .
4 9. 4 i
2

rock F. at Blbury
i We /ilbury* b

4 Fx
1
„ a *Foolrnck

e- =
. * * p
1 fin 4 Amt hap pl 1
| a r
— :
9
<a F. |
bs Wen br
Ps om 'C x
43 er

.
M o**
PRs

*
* *. 45
3 8

Lees ede 8 in,

FO 4
* e ** * . f 1
** 22 1 5
: r * * —

4 br
ad =

wet nt

Von

8

Au AX

a K 4
4
Li frwte |

4 4 ts
a? 22

% id he P way
Cow lon, * —
| — 11 NN 2 N C <P Cable Gat
A {CE ou S MONDE
e rA L a . f 7
1 4 apo tell

| "FA N D

5

1

VW

AL
5 Aarne n, 1
| | | : rA ee on XY
.
\ Zn b
| PE RAN
5 P £ + Combe, | * 4 \
- = of .. an —
| Jo VE THY WE: - ROLVEND F.
; ora

Safe 7 Wiles

—
n * BA D

%

110 45 210

7
en,

N x 4. *

\ C2 —

.

BW awe
4 2 —

3 *

roland Cantimm
0” * Pto ln,

Cant

Sint. * "$A.

=] 4
N
f by Horibon rout
a Ven YI + -

%

Bund bogs
DOW NE S

0 the Gull
Peale N. }

al Bmer .

$4$+ 45.

hee
Kanin- * * 7-o SO Sand, lond

$22% +
a LEET

31

* a

Brom en ©

* lar Gut
2 f > , mean
gal gu.

WPI

« <

2 WANG 5

r — — —

30

217
„

dee the gene ·
ral part, un-
der the title
Romans in
Britain,

a WC

x Reguli.

r r e ße aus ' am 4

Count of the
Saxon ſhore,
Nina,

Calr. Lex.

= eee 9» wg e ee e = trae...c

ASL {* Dj tt Av

| Britain,

1

=. KE

217

N T. 218

warmly at the river Stour ; but being quickly
repuls'd by the Romans, they retir'd into the
woods. Afterwards, they had ſome hot skir-
miſhes with the Roman Cavalry in their march;
but {till the Romans were upon all accounts
too hard for them. Some time after, they at-

tackd the Romans again, broke through the |aft

midſt of them, and, having flain Laberius Du-

us a Tribune, made a fate retreat, and next

ge the gene- day ſurpris d the forragers, c. all which I have

7al part, un- before related out of Cæſar. At this time, Cyn-

der the title 0,107; Carviling, Taximagulus, and Segonax, were

_ Governours of Kent, whom he therefore calls

Kings, becauſe he would be thought to have

conquer'd Kings ; whereas they were really no

more than Lords of the Country, or Noble-

men of the better ſort. After the Roman go-

vernment was eſtabliſh'd here, Kent was under

the Governour of Britannia Prima. But the

ſea-coaſt, which they term'd Littus Saxonicum,

or the Saxon ſhore, had (like the oppoſite ſhore,

from the Rhine to Xantoigne ) a peculiar Go-

vernour from the time of Diocleſian, call'd by

Count of the Marcellinus, Count of the Sea-coaſt, and by the

Saxon ſhore. Notitia, The honourable, the Count of the Saxon-ſhore

3 in Britain; whoſe particular bulineſs it was, to

fix garriſons upon the ſea-coaſt in places conve-

nient, to prevent the plunders of the Barbari-

ans, eſpecially the Saxons, who . infe-

ſted Britain; ſto which end, he had under him

two thouſand two hundred foot and horſe. ] He

was under the command of the [lufZrious, the

Mafter of the foot, whom they ſtild Praſentalis,

City, Lex, (from his conſtant Preſence in the Army,)!

and who, beſides the particular garriſons for the

ports, did put under him the Viclores Juniores

Britanniciant, the Primani Juniores, and the Secun-

dani Juniores (theſe are the names of ſo many

Companies,) to be in readineſs upon all occaſi-

ons. His Office or Court he had in this man-

ner; Principem ex officio Magiſtri praſentalium 4

parte peditum, Numerarios duos, Commentarienſem,

Cornicularium, Adjutorem, Subadjuvam, Regenda-

rium, Exceptores, Singulares, &c. 1. e. A Principal

or Maſter out of the Maſters or Generals rela-

ting to the foot, two Accountants, [(one for the

Emperor's Gifts, another of his Privy purſe; )|

a Gaoler, a Judge-Adoocate [who wrote and pub-

liſhed the Sentences of the Magiſtrates, and

was called Cornicularius, from a Horn, by the

winding of which he commanded Silence in the

* Brady, Court, | an Aſſitam [to * officiate in caſe of the

Pref, & abſence or infirmity of the proper Officer, I an

5.41. Under-A(ſifZant, a Regifter, the particular Re-

ceivers, [ſuch as kept the Accounts of the Ar-

my, belonging to the Pay-Office; from which

the Singulares ſeem to be different, and to ſig-

nify ſome particular and ſingular Employments,

as Informer, &c. To which, the Notitia adds, &

reliquos Officiales, i. e. all the Under- Officers, Cc.

And I no way doubt, but it was in imitation

of this method of the Romans, that our Ance-

ſtors ſet over this coaſt a Governour or Portreve,

Warden of commonly call'd. J/arden of the Cinque-Ports, be-

the Cinque · cauſe, as the Count of the Saxon-ſhore preſi-
* ded over nine, ſo does he over five ports.

Kent deli- But after the Romans had quitted Britain,

rer' to the Vortigern who had the Government of the

rom. greateſt part of it, ſet over Kent a Guorong, i. e.

a Vice-Roy or Free-man ; without whoſe know-

ledge, he frankly beſtow'd this Country ( as

Ninnius, and Malmesbury have 1t) upon Hen-

giſt the Saxon, on the account of his daughter

Rowenna [as is generally ſaid] with whom he

was paſſionately in love. [But the Saxon Chro-

nicle(which ſays nothing of that Rowenna) ſhews

us, that Hengiſt rather got it by force of arms,

having worſted Yortigern in two pitch'd bat-

1 Reguli.

8 4

tles: one, at Aylesford ; and the other at Cray-
ford, where he kill'd four thouſand Britains,
and put the reſt to flight. ] Thus was the firſt
kingdom of the Saxons ſettled in Britain, in
the year of Chriſt 456, call'd by them Canrpa-
Pa-NyC, i. e. the kingdom of the Rentiſb- men; which,

er three hundred and twenty years, upon
Baldred the laſt King's being conquer'd, came
under the juriſdiction of the Weſt-Saxons, and

continu'd ſo till the Norman Conqueſt : [(al- Chron. Sax,

though indeed Baldred's leaving that kingdom ann. 830.

to his ſon Æthelſtan, ſeems to imply that he Chron, Mail-
was not ſo entirely conquer'd, as to be the very ros, p. 142.

laſt King of this Country.)!

At the Norman Conqueſt (if we may believe
Thomas Spot the Monk, no ancient Writer ſaying
any thing of it,) the Kentiſh-men, carrying
boughs before them, ſurrender'd themſelves to
William the Conqueror at Swaneſcombe (a ſmall
village, where they tell us that Suene the Dane
had formerly encamp'd,) upon condition, that
they might have the Cuſtoms of their Country
preſerv'd entire ; that eſpecially, which they

call Gavel- kind. By which, all lands of that Gavel-kind.

nature, are divided among the males by equal
portions ; or, in default of ifſue-male, among
the females. By this, they enter upon the e-
ſtate at fifteen years of age, and have power to
make 1t over to any one, either by gift or fale,
without conſent of the Lord. By the ſame,
the ſons ſucceed to this ſort of lands, though
their parents be ſentenced for theft, &c. So
that what we find in an ancient Book, is very
true, thoꝰ not elegantly written: The County of
Kent urges, that that County ought of right to be ex-
empt from any ſuch burthen, becauſe it affirms that
their County was never Conquer'd as was the reſt
of England, but ſurrender'd it ſelf to the Conqueror's
power upon Articles of agreement, by which it was
provided that they ſhould enjoy all their liberties and
ree cuſtoms which they then had, and ufd. [The
foregoing relation is oppos'd by f Mr. Sommer + Somner
and others, and yet it muſt be confeſs'd to have Gavelkind,

ſome remains in their preſent Conſtitution. Præf. & p.63.

And whoever oppoſes it, will be obliged to find
ſome other fair account, how they in particular
come to retain that cuſtom of Gavelkind, which
once prevail'd all over Britain, as it does ſtill
in ſome parts of Wales ? and why the Heirs
particularly in Kent, ſucceed to the Inheritance,
though their Father ſufter for felony or mur-
der ? |
William the Conqueror afterwards, to ſe-
cure Kent, which is look'd upon to be the Key
of England, ſet a ConfZable over Dover-caſtle ;
and conſtituted the ſame Perſon (in imitation
of the ancient Roman cuſtom) Governour of
five ports, {tiling him Wurden of the Cinque-ports. Lord War-
Thoſe are Haſtings, Dover, Hith, Rumney and den of the
Sandwich; to which Winchelſey and Rie are ad- 5 Ports.
ded as Principals, and ſome other little towns as
members only. And becauſe they are oblig'd to
ſerve in the wars by ſea, they enjoy many and
large immunities : For inſtance, trom payment

of Subſidies, and from Wardſhip of their chil- See in Suſſex,

dren as to body [(while that continu'd a Law
in England;) as alſo not to be ſu'd in any
Courts but within their own town. And + ſuch + Ex incvlis

of their inhabitants as have the name of Ba- 4% Barone
nomine g au-

rons, do, at the Coronation of the Kings and
Queens of England, ſupport the Canopy, and
for that day have their table ſpread and fur-
niſh'd upon the King's right hand, &c. And the
Lord Warden himſelf, who is always ſome one
of the Nobility of approv'd loyalty, has with-
in his juriſdiction, in Ever caſes, the authority
of Admiral, and other privileges. But now let

dent.

us come to the Places.
E e The

n

219

C ANT IU M.

The Thames, the chief of all the Britiſh ri-
vers, runs (as I obſerv d juſt now) along the
north part of this County; which, leaving Sur-
rey, and by a winding courſe almoſt returning
to the Chanel above, [receives the river Ra-

Ravensbourn, vensbourn. Upon this river, there yet remains a
riv. large fortification, the area whereof is enclos'd
with treble rampires and ditches of a vaſt height

and depth, near two miles in circuit ; wiuch

muſt certainly have been the work of many

+ Philpot's hands, but of whoſe, is uncertain, * Some
Villaxe would have it to be the Camp which Cæſar made,
Cant. p. 203. when the Britains gave him the laſt battle, with
their united forces, juſt before he paſt the

Thames in purſuit of Caſſivelaun. But it is not

probable, either that Cæſar had time to caſt- up

{uch a work, or that he would not have men-

tion'd a thing ſo conſiderable, in his Commen--

taries. Much more likely is it (if at all the

work of the Romans) to have been done ſome

time after, when they had reduc'd the Nation

into a Province, and made them {tations at cer-

tain diſtances for the better quartering their

Armies; and (to offer a Conjecture) this poſ-

ſibly is what remains of the old Noviomagrs,

which ſecms to be hereabouts, betwixt London

and Maidi7one. It is indeed a little too far di-

ſtant from London, and ſo likewiſe from Maid-

ſtone, the old Vaguiacæ (the ſtations on each hand

of it;) being about twelve miles from London

in a ſtraight line, and twenty at leaſt from Maid-

ſtone ; whereas in the Einerary it is but ten, and

Woodcot, eighteen, But ſo alſo is J/odcot in Surrey,
I See Cam- M where Noviomagrus hath been placed ; for tho
den in Sur- that be but ten miles from London, as the 7tine-
rey. rary ſets it, it is at leaſt thirty from Maidſtone.
And this opinion of it's being here, is favour'd
FAntiq.Cant. both by 4 Mr. Sommer, and our * learned Biſhop

LOG Brit Stillizgfleet 3 who conclude from the courſe ot
p. 2 the Itincrary, that it muſt neceſſarily be ſome-

where in Kent. But yet Dr. Gale, in his late
Learned Comment on the [tinerary, continues
it at Moodcot; upon that exact diſtance ot ten
miles from London.
Somewhat lower, near the ſame River, lies
Bromley. Bromley, remarkable not only for the Biſhop of
Rochetter s Palace, but for a College or Hoſpital
Stat. 22 Car, erected there, in the reign of King Charles 2,
2. n. 15. by Dr. John Warner, Biſhop of Rocheſter, for the
maintenance of twenty poor Miniſters widows,
with the allowance of twenty pounds per Ann.
to each, and fifty to their Chaplain ; which 1s
the firſt of this kind that was ever erected in
England ; and was the Pattern whereby George
Morley Biſhop of Winchester, and Seth Ward Bi-
ſhop of Salisbury, did both proceed, in the like
Endowment at their reſpective Sees. Near the
place where Ravensbourn falls into the Thames,
it ſees Depford, a mcit noted Dock, where the
Royal Navy is built, and repair'd : There is
alſo fettled a famous Store-houſe ; ſand the
whole area of the Yard, is now widened to
more than double what it formerly was, with a
wet dock, of two Acres, for Ships, and ano-
ther of an Acre and halt for Maſts ; beſides

Depford.

an Enlargement of it's Store-houſes, Dwel-

ling-houſes, Launches, Cc. ſuitable thereto,
and to the greatneis of the preſent Ser-
vice. | Here is a ſettled Corporation, ſomething
* Holy Tri-like a * College, for the purpoſes of the Navy,
rity houſe. [as ſome have faid ; but more truly, for the

22 l

which, as the body Corporate of the Seamen
of England, ſtill continues (and this the Scat
of it,) under the ſtile of the Tyinity-honſe of
Depford Son]; but without the leaſt ſhare,
either of Truſt or Authority, in the N)] Royal.

It was formerly call'd Jet He¹eç, and up-
on the Conqueſt of England feli to the ſhare of
Giflebert de Mamignot, a Norman ¶ Baron; IMA
whoſe grandchild by 2 ſon, Walkelin by name, wy
(and Lord Warden of the Cinque-Ports)! de-
tended Dover-caſtle againſt King Stephen;
or (as Mr. Lambard reporteth it) delivered it to
him, and for that reaſon, after the King's death, Peram),
abandoned the charge, and fled into Norman-p. 25.
dy.] He left behind him one only ſiſter, who,
upon the death of her brother, brought by
marriage a large eſtate, call'd the Honour of
Mamignot, into the family of the Says ; \trom
whom ic receiv'd the name of Suyes-Conrt,
which it ſtill rerains, tho' now enjoy'd by the
ancient family of the Evelyus.]

From hence the Thames goes to Grenovicum,

commonly Greenwich, i. e. the green creak (for g,q,,q.1

the creak of a river is call'd in German Me;)
formerly noted for being the harbour of the
Daniſh fleet, and tor the cruelty that that peo-
ple excrcis'd upon Ealpheg Archbiſhop of Can-
terbury (whom they put to death, by moſt ex-
quiſite torments, in the year 1012.) His death,
and the occaſion of it, Ditmarus Merſepurgin,
who liv'd about that time, has thus deſcrib'd,
in the eighth book of his Chronicle. By the rela-
tion of Sewald, I came to know a very tragical, and
therejore memorable att: How a treacherous conan

of f Northern-men, whoſe Captain Thurkil uo 755 4 Northmar.
ſeized upon that excellent Archbiſhop of Cante: bury, ni, fr ing

Ealpheg, with others; and, according to therr bar-the Darcs,
barous treatment, fetter'd him, and put him to the
extremities of famine, and other unſpeakable pains.
He, overpower d by human frailty, promites them
money, fixing a time againſt which he would procure
it ; that, if within that time no acceptable ranſom
offer d it ſelf whereby he might eſcape a momentary
death, he might however purge himſelf by frequent
groans, to le offer d a lively ſacrifice to the Lord.
When the time appoiuted was come, this greedy gulf of
Pirates call jorth the ſervant of the Lord, and with
many threatenings preſently demand ihe tribute which
he had promisd. His anſwer was, Here am I like
a meek lamb, ready to undergo all thiags, for the
love of Chriſt, which you ſhall preſume to inflict up-
on me ; that I may be thought worthy of being an
example to his ſervants. This day, I am no way di-
ſturbd. As to my ſeeming to deceive you, it was
not my own will, but the extremity of want that ford
me to it. This body of mine, which in this * Pil-+ Exil.
grimage I have lov'd but too much, I ſurrender t9
you as a criminal; and I know it is in jour power
to do with it what you pleaſe : but my finjul out,
over which you have no power, I humbly commend to
the Creator of all things. While he jpake theſe ti.:ags,
a troop of profane villains encompaſs d him, aid gut
together ſeveral ſorts of weapons to diſpatch him.
Which when their Captain Thurkil perceis d at
ſome diſtance, he ran to them in all Laſt, crying, 1
defire you will not by aiiy means do this; LH di-
wide among you my gold, filucr, au whatever I have
or can procure (except the ſþip only,) on condition you!
do not offend againſt the Lord's || Anointed. But ibis Chriv*”
fair language did not ſoften the unbridled anger of his
ellows ; harder than iron and rocks, and not to be

ule of the Seamen. For by a Grant, 4 Hen-|appeas'd but by the effuſion of innocent blood, which
ry 8, made to the Ship-men and Mariners of; they preſently and unanimouſly fpilt, by pouring upoi

this Realm, they were enabled to begin (to the
honour ot the Bletlca Trinity and 8. Clement)
a Guild or Brotherhood Purperual concerning the

Crajr or Cunitize of Mariners, and for the in-
create and augmentation of the Ships thereof;

him Ox-hkcads, and ſhowers of ftones aud ſticks. This
place was famous for a Royal fear, which “ I., C.
was built by Humtrey Duke ot Gloceſter, and
call'd by him Placentia. Ring Henry 7. very Placentzt
much enlarg'd it, added a imall houſe of Fri-

ars

Sayes. Court,

1
3 = tz

Mn.

K E NT.

by Duke Humfrey on the top of a high hill,
from which there is a moſt pleaſant proſpect
down to the winding river, and the green mea-
dows. It was [ finiſh'd by King Henry the 8";
and afterwards] much enlarg'd and beautify'd ;
for which it was indebted to it's new inhabi-
tant Henry Howard Earl of Northampton. [ But
that houſe now is in a manner quite demoliſh'd,
and another was begun in the place by King
Charles the ſecond, which ſtands imperfect. The
Caſtle alſo, or Tower, is now quite ras'd, and
a Royal Obſervatory ſet in the place by the ſame
King Charles the ſecond, furniſh'd with all ſorts
of Mathematical Inſtruments fit for Aſtronomical
Obſervations ; ſuch as Clocks, Teleſcopes, Quadrants,
and a deep dry well for obſervation of the Stars
in the day time : all which have been for many
years moſt diligently and skiltully us'd by the
learned Mr. Hamed, the King's Mathematici-
an. The ſame Earl of Northampton built alſo an

. Hoſpital here; endowing it with lands for the

maintenance of a Governour and twenty poor
men : he built likewiſe two others in Shrop-
ſpire and Norfolk, as appears by the Etitaph on
his magnificent tomb in the ſouth iſle of the
Church in Dover-Caftle ; where he lies, not in-
terr'd, but in a marble coffin, which is ſup-
ported above the marble table of his tomb, a-
bout five foot from the ground. The Epitaph
is this :

Henricus Howardus, Henrici Comitis Surriæ fi-
lius ; Thomæ, ſecundi Norfolciæ Ducis, Nepos ;
& Thome tertii frater; Comes Northamptoniz ;
Baro Howard de Marnhill ; privati Sigilli Cu-
ſtos ; Caſtri Durovernenſis Conſtabularius ; quin-
que Portuum Cuſtos, Cancellarius, & Conſtabula-
ius; Jacobo magnæ Britanniæ Regs ab intimis
Confiliis ; Ordinis Periſcelidis Eques auratus, &
Academia Cantabrigienſis Cancellarius ; inter No-
biles literatiſſimus; in ſpem reſurgendi in Chriſto hic
conditur.

Obiit 15 die Junii MDCXIV.
tTuclytus hic Comes tria Hoſpitalia fundavit &

latifundiis ditavit, unum Greenwici in Cantio,
in quo xx egeni & Prafettus ; Alterum Cluni in
Comitatu Salopiæ, in quo xii egeni cum Prafetto ;
Tertium ad Caſtrum Riſing in Com. Nortolciz,
in quo xii paupertulæ cum Gubernatrice, in perpetuum
aluntur.

'The latter part whereof, in relation to the
foreſaid Charities, runs thus in Engliſh :

This renowned Earl founded three Hoſpitals, and

endow'd them with Lands; one at Greenwich in
Kent, in which a Governour and twenty poor men;
another at Clun, in Shropſhire, in which 2 Go-
vernour and twelve poor men; a third at the Caſtle
of Riſing in Norfolk, in which 'a Governeſs
with twelve poor women ; are maintained for e-
Ver.

Here Queen Mary was born, and here Ed-
ward the ſixth died.

But the greateſt ornament by far that Green-
wich has had, is our Elizabeth, who, being born
here, by the goodneſs of Providence, did ſo
enlighten Britain, nay, and even the whole
world, with the rays of her royal virtues, that
no praiſe can equal her merit. But as to what
concerns Greenwich, take alſo the verſes of our
Antiquary Leland,

ars Mendicants, and finiſh'd that tower, begun

Ecce ut jam niteat locus petitns,
Tanquam ſyderes domus cathedra.
Qua faſtigia pitta ? qua feneftre ?
Qua turres vel ad aſtra ſe efferentes ?
Qua porro viridaria, ac perennes
Fontes ? Flora finum occupat venuſta
Fundens delicias nitentis horti.

Rerum commodns eſtimator ille,

Ripe qui variis modis amen,
Nomen contulit eleganter aptum.

How bright the lofty ſeat *

Like Jove's great palace pav d with ſtars.

What * what windows charm the
eye |

What turrets, rivals of the sky?

What — 4 ſprings ? what ſmiling
?

mea

Here Flora's ſelf in ſtate reſides,

And all around her does diſpence

Her gitts and pleaſing influence.

Happy the man, who'ere he was, ö
Whoſe lucky wit ſo nam'd the place,

As all it's beauties to expreſs.

I have nothing further to obſerve in this place,
unleſs it be (not to ſuffer the memory of de-
ſerving and worthy perſons to periſh) that Mil-
liam Lambard, a perſon of great learning and
ſingular piety, built a hoſpital here for relief
ot the poor, which he call'd Queen Elizabeth's

College for the poor; ſ and that John Duke of Ar- be
gyle, a perſon of diſtinguiſh'd Figure and Abi- lege.

lities, was created a Peer of Great Britain in
the fourth year of Queen Anne, by the tirles
of Baron of Chatham, and Earl of Greenwich.

Queen Fliza-
th's Col-

Near Greenwich, is Leuſbam, for the erecting Leuſham,

in which place, two Free-ſchools and an Alms- Stat. 15 Car,

houſe, by Abraham Rolfe, Clerk, an AG of Par- 2. n. 14.

liament was made in the 16" year of King
Charles the ſecond.)

Behind Greenwich, ſcarce three miles di-

place of the Kings; built by Arthoay Bec Bi-
ſhop of Durham and Patriarch of Jeruſalem,
and beſtow'd by him upon Eleanor wite to King
Edward 1, after he had craftily got the eſtate
of the Veſcies, to whom it formerly belong'd.
For it is laid, that this Biſhop, whom the laſt
Baron of Yeſcy made his Feoſtee in truſt

ſtant, lies Eltham, which was alſo a retiring Elthani;

(that Book of Dur-

he might keep the eſtate for J/illiam de Ve{cy ham.

his young ſon, bur illegitimate ) did nor deal

ſo fairly by this Orphan, as he ought to have
done.

it's banks has laid ſeveral acres of ground un-
der water : and ſome perſons having tor many
years endeavour'd to keep it out at vaſt expence,
ſcarce find their works and walls able to de-
fend the neighbouring fields againſt the Vio-
lence of the Stream. There is great plenty of

Below Greenwich, the Thames throwing down The Breach;

Cochlearia or Scurvygraſs growing here, which Seurvygraſs;

ſome Phyſicians will have to be Pliny's Britanni-
ca; and upon that account I mention it in this
place. [But Mr. Ray the great Botaniſt of this
age, affirmed, that this was not Cochlearia ro-
tundifolia five Batavorum, which we call Garden-
Scurvygraſs (tho" that alſo be found in many
places on our coaſts, and on ſome mountains in
the midland; ) but Cochlearia Britannica, or Sea-
Scurvygraſs ; and ſo cannot be the Britannica
of Pliny, tho' it may have the ſame virtues.
What the true Britannica of Pliny and the An-
cients is, Abraham Muntingius thinks he hag
found out. He makes it to be the great water-
dock, Hydrolapathum maximum, Ger. Park.] But,

In

„

— —

22 — p

—

—

- a—_ —

— . — —

— —
7 — —

223 CANTIUM.

*

in relation to this Britannica take Pliny's own

words: In Germany, when Germanicus Cæſar

remoꝛꝰ d his Camp forward beyond the Rhine; in the

maritime tract, there was one fountain (and ns

more) of freſh vate, which if one drank of, his teeth

would drop out in two years time, and the joints of

his knees become looſe and feeble. Thoſe Evils the

The herb Phyſicians term'd Stomacace, and Sceletyrbe: For

Britannica. yomedy hereof, the herb call d Britannica was found

out, as not only good for the finews and mouth, but

alſo againſt the Sguinſie, and ſtinging of ſerpents, &c.

The Friſians, where our Camp was, ſhow'd it to our

ſoldiers : and 1 wonder for what reaſon it ſhould be

ſo called, unleſs the Inhabitants of the ſea-coaſts gave

it the name of Britannica, as lying ſo near Britain.

See in theBri- But the learned Hadrianus Junius, in his No-

tiſh Iles con- „tenclator, gives another, and indeed more pro-

— e bable, 4 of the name; hom for your ſa-

— tisfaction pleaſe to conſult ; for this word Bri-

nicum. tannica has drawn me too far out of my road
already. |

[From Greenwich the Thames goes on to

Woolwich. oolwich; which, how it came to be overlook'd

by the Hiſtorians of this County, is much to

be wonder'd ; and the more, for it's having con-

tributed to the number of our Ships-Royal

equally with any other two: beſides it's Right,

by ſeniority, to the title of Mother-Dock to them

. ann. all. Witneſs her * having given birth to
1095, .

Harry Grace de Dieu. 3 Hen. 8.

[Prin Royal. 8 Jac. 1.

& } Soveraign Royal. 13 Car. 1.
81 Naxeby, atterwards the Charles. 7

Richard, atterwards the James. dc. 2.
Ct. Andrew. 22

But, whatever that Omiſſion was owing to,
Woolwich muſt be owned to ſerve the Crown,
among thoſe of the greateſt Importance, at this
day.] :

The Thames growing narrower, is met by the
river Darent; Which, coming out of Surrey,
flows with a gentle chanel [by 1/:ſtram, where
is a ſeat of the Earl of Jerley, and] not far

Seyen-oke, from Seven-oke, ſo call'd (as they ſay) from ſe-
ven Oaks of an exceeding height; [and only re-

markable for a Lord Mayor ot that name, who

gratetully built an Hoſpital and School there; and

See Stat. 39 for the defeat given by Jack Cade and his fol-
Eliz. lowers to Sir Humphrey Stafford, whom the King
ſent againſt them. Adjoining to which, 1s

Knol. Knoll, the ſeat of the Earls of Dorſet, ] Then

Chevening, it runs to [Chevening, not long ſince the ſcat of
Vid. Shelford, Thomas Lennard, Earl of Suflex ; now, the
= Oy ſeat of James Stanhope, Earl Stanhope, Viſcount
SENT Mahone, and Baron Elvaſton; which Honours
have been moſt deſervedly confer d upon him
by King George, in conſideration of the ſignal
Services perform'd by him to his Country, as
well in the Camp, as in the Court and the Se-
nate; and particularly that of Viſcount Ma-
hone, in teſtimony of his gallant Behaviour
in the Spaniſh far = 200 or apr

ono, now Otford, | where Offa, King of the

"__ 3 ſo compleatly ſubdu'd Eallmund King
of Kent, and his whole Country, Ann. 773,

that he endeavour'd to transfer (as it were in
triumph) the Archiepiſcopal Chair into his own
dominions; which he effected ſo far, that he

got Lichfield exempted from the juriſdiction of
Canterbury, obtaining a Pall for it of Pope Adri-

an 1. Ann. 766: the Sees of Worceſter, Legeceſter,
Siduaceſter, Hereford, Helmham, and Dunwich, be-

| ing alſo erected into a Province for it; in which
Ann. 766. {tate it continu'd from the year 766, to 797, in

794, 795* all thirty one years. And in that time (as Mat-

i

Darent, riv.

[thew of Weſtminſter tells us) there fat three

Archbiſhops at Lichfield, viz. Ealdulphus, Hum-
bertus, and laſtly Higbertzis ; in whole time the
See of Canterbury was reſtor'd to it's former dig-
nity, by Kinulf or Kemvolf who was likewiſe
King of the Mercians. It was further] famous
tor a bloody defeat of the Danes in the year
1016 and proud of it's noble Palace, built by
Warham Archbiſhop of Canterbury for him aud
his ſuccellors, with ſuch ſplendour and magni&-
cence, that Cranmer his immediate ſucceſlor, to
avoid envy, was forc'd to exchange it with
Henry 8. Lullingſton, where was formerly a ca-
{tle, the ſeat ot a noble family of the ſame
name, lies lower down upon the Darent, [which
runs next, to Derwent, otherwiſe Darent, giving
it's name to the place; where Yortimer the ſon
of Vortiger (who was depos'd, as Nennius tells

ot them and at it's mouth gives name to Da-
rentford, commonly Dartford, a large and throng
market, infamous for the rebellion of Hat Ty-
lar and Jack Straw, which began here. Bur
now of late re-ennobled by giving title to Sir
Edward Villiers, who, March 20. 1690, was cre-
ated Baron Viliers of Hoo in this County, and

Hengiſt the Saxon, eight years after the co-
ming-in of the Saxons, engag'd the Britains ;
where he cut oft their Commanders, and gave
them ſuch a bloody defeat, that afterwards he
quietly eſtabliſh'd his kingdom in Kent, withour
tear of diſturbance from that quarter.

From Darent to the mouth of Medway, the
Thames ſees nothing but ſome ſmall towns; the
omiſſion whereot would be no damage either
to their reputation, or any thing elſe. How-
ever, the moſt ſ noted and] molt conſiderable

ed and encamp'd himſelf : but it ſeems rather
to have been higher up in the Country, at the

mains of any ſuch fortification now at Green-
hithe, nor any tradition of it; whereas Swanſ-
combe ſeems to have taken it's name from ſome

towns in England, for being a ſort of ſtation
between Kent and London ; where King Hen-
ry 8. fortify d both ſides of the river. On the
back of this, a little more within land, ſtands

Joan, marry'd to ſeveral husbands. But ſhe
had iflue only by Reginald Braybrooke. Her third
husband John de Oldeaſtle, was hang'd, and burnt,
tor endeavouring Innovations, [or more truly
Reformations, ] in Religion. But the only
daughter of Reginald Braybrooke, nam'd Joan,
was marry'd to Thomas Breok of the County ot
Somerſet ; from him, the ſixth in a lincal de-
{cent was Henry Brook Baron Cobham, who, be-
cauſe fortune did not humour him in every
thing, was driven by his ungovernable Paſſions
to throw off his Allegiance to the moſt graci-
ous of Kings : for which he had the ſentence
of death paſs'd upon him; but his life was
ſpared, for a monument of the Clemency of his
Prince. f

Wa) ;

Lullingſtor,

us, not for * marrying Hengiſt's, but his own * See to,
daughter) ſet upon the Saxons, and kill'd many a the be.
3 inning of
this County,
Dartford,

t Viſcount Villiers of Dartjord.\ Below this place, + See Jy,
Darent receives the little river Cecce. At Crec- Crecce, ris,
canford, now Creyford, a tord over this river, Creyford,

of them are theſe. [Green-hithe, where, as Mr. Green-hithe,

Lambard tells us, Swane King of Denmark land- Mr. Lam
bard's Per-
amb, p. 4%

town call'd Swazſcombe ; there appearing no re- $wanſomte,

ſuch occaſion.] Graves-end, as noted as moſt Graves-end,

Cobham, for a long time the ſeat of the Barons Cobham.
of Cobham, the laſt whereof Jom Cobham built Barons of
a College here, and a Caſtle at Couling, leaving Cobham.
one only daughter, wife of Jo de la Pole, *
Knight: who had by her one only daughter?”

Eliz.

+ See Stow, i
Buckingham
From Graves-end, a {mall tract, like a Cher- ire,
ſoneſe, call'd Ho, ſhoots it ſelf out a long way Ho.

to the caſt, berween the Thames and the Ad- 18653.

122 5
„
way
cuſe. it 1S
the
this
in
not
cau!
Syn
ſeen
[As
mai
ries
pla
Ca
Ki
Ke
thi
do
ra
ell
th
ba
th
N
of
uy
H
h
p
C
Nom. Loco- tl
ram Expli- n
cat in verbo
Cl, fc ſhoo 2
Fomder's Sax- T
On Dict. \
0
t
1
1
|
Medway.
Wealde.
Pens- her ſt
Sidney.
1 Viceco-
mes inſulz
See in Bar
ſhire,
Sir Philiz
Sidney.

3 2 | * + 5 8

CC

E „ - the ſituation of it not very wholſom. In

. it is Clife, a pretty large town, ſo nam'd from
25 the on? which * ſtands. But whether
this be that Clives at Ho, famous tor a Synod

in the infancy of the Engliſh Church, I dare

not (as {ome others are) be poſitive ; partly be-

cauſe the ſituation is not very convenient tor a
Synod, and partly becauſe the old Clives at Ho

ſcems to have been in the Kingdom of Mercia.
According to the opinions of Sir Henry Spel-

man, and Mr. Talbot, botlr eminent Antiqua-

ries, three ſeveral Councils were held in this
glb, place ; the firſt call d by Cuthbert Archbiſhop of
Canterbury, at which was preſent AEthelbald
King of Mercia, An. 742 ; the ſecond under
Kenulph, alſo King of Mercia, An. 803; and
the third under Ceokunlf his ſucceſſor, An.
$22 : upon Which account Mr. Lambard alſo

to. doubts whether Cloveſhoo were not in Mercia
te bs rather than in Kent, the Kings of Mercia being
* either preſent at them, or the Councils call'd by
K their Authority; neither ot which would pro-

bably have been at a place ſo remote from

them, or ſo incommodious tor ſuch a purpoſe.

Nevertheleſs Mr. Lambard, upon the authority

of Talbot (yet reſerving a power of revoking

upon better information) agrees that Cliff at

22 Hoo muſt be the place; and the rather, becauſe
tir. he finds no ſuch place as Cloveſhoo within the
d, precincts of Mercia, altho' there be divers pla-
| ces chere, that bear the name of CF as well as

Nom. Loco- this. But a later conjecture ſeenis to come

rum Expli- nearer the truth, placing it at Abbandun, now

e: o Abbington, in the Kingdom of Mercia, near the
Somrer'sSax. middle of the Nation; and therefore moſt con-

on Dit. venient for ſuch an Aitlembly. This place an-

ciently, before the foundation of the Abbey

there, was call'd Sheoveſham, which might ei-

ther by corruption of Speech, or careleſsneſs of

the Scribes, be eaſily ſubſtituted inſtead of Clo-

veſham or Cloveſhoo, as any one, moderately skill'd

the, in theſe affairs, will eaſily grant.
. Medway, The river Medwege, now Medway (in Britiſh,
oh if I miſtake not, Yaga, whereunto the Saxons

1 added Med; [for the making of which naviga-
abe. ble in Kent and Suſſex, a Statute paſſed in the
16* year of King Charles the ſecond ;)! riſes
Wealde, in the wood Anderida, calld Mealde (i. e. a

woody country,) which for a long way toge-

d, ther covers the ſouth part of this County. At
Pens-herſt, firſt, being yet but ſmall, it runs by Pens-hurſt,

the ſeat of the ancient family of the Sidneys,

Sidney, deſcended from William de Sidney, Chamberlain

; to Henry 2. Of which family was Henry Sid-

ney, the famous Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,

who, by the daughter of John Dudley Duke of

Northumberland and Earl of Warwick, had

Philip and Robert. Robert was honour'd, firſt

with the title of Baron Sidney of Pens-hurſt, and

* Viceco- then with that of Viſcount Life by King

mes inſule, James [the 1ſt, to which the title of Earl of

* Bark. Leicefter was alſo added by the ſame Prince. |

Sir Philip But Philip (not to be omitted here without an
Sidiey,  unpardonable crime, the great glory of that
family, the great hopes of mankind, the moſt

lively pattern of virtue, and the darling of the

learned world) hotly engaging the enemy at
Zutphen in Gelderland, loſt his life bravely

and valiantly. This 1s that Sidzey, whom as
Providence ſeems to have ſent into the world,

to give the preſent age a ſpecimen of the Anci-

ents ; ſo did it on a ſudden recall him, and

ſnatch him from us, as more worthy of heaven

than of earth. Thus, whcn Virtue is come to
perfection, it preſently leaves us; and the beſt

things are ſeldom laſting. Reſt then in peace,

O Sidney! (if I may be allow'd this addreſs ; )

we will not celebrate thy memory with tears,

—

but with admiration. Whatever we lov'd in Tacitus of
thee (as the beſt of Authors ſpeaks of that beſt Agricola.
Governour ot Britain,) whatever we admir'd

in thee, continues, and will continue in the
memories ot men, the revolutions of ages, and

the annals of time. Many, as inglorious and

1gnoble, are bury'd in oblivion ; but Sidney ſhall

live to all poſterity. For, as the Greek Poet

has it, Virtue's beyond the reach of fate.

From hence the river Medway goes on to
Tunbridge, where is an old Caſtle built by Ri- Tunbridge.
chard de Clare, who had it by exchange for
Briony in Normandy ; his grandtather Godfrey,
natural ſon to Richard i, Duke of Normandy,
being Earl of Ewe and Briozy. For after a long
conteſt about Briony, Richard (as we are told
by Gulielmus Gemeticenſis) in recompence for the
Jame caſtle, took the town Tunbridge in England.

For they affirm that the * Lowy of Briouy Was Mea-* The Lowy
fur d about with a line, and that he receiv'd anof Tunbridge,
equal quantity of ground at Tunbridge, meaſur d by Leuca.

the Jame line, wiich was brought over into Euglaud.

But his ſucceflors, Earls ot Gloceſter, f held + Clientelari
the manour of Tunbridge, of the Archbiſhops of jure.
Canterbury ; upon condition, that they ſhould

be Stewards at the Inſtalment ot the Archbi-

ſhops, and ſhould grant them the Wardſhip of

their children, | For the better maintenance of

a Fruce-School here, we find || two Statutes, ex-l] 14 Eliz.
preſsly atluring certain Lands and Tenements 31 Eliz.
tor that purpole, This place hath given the

title ot Viſcount, to Wiliam Henry ot Nuſſas,

nearly ally's to his Mzjeily King William

the third, and created by him, in the ſeventh

year ot his reign, Baron of Enfield, Viſcount
Tunbridge, and Earl of Rochford ; to whom
lucceeded William his eldeſt fon, the preſent

potieſlor of the Honours toreſꝭ id. South from

hence, at about four or five mil:s dittance, lie

the tamous Chalybiat ſprings cali'd Tuabridge-Tunbridge-
wells, ſo happily temper'd with martial ſalt, and wells.

{o uſeful in carry ing oft many radicated diſtem-

pers, and procuring impregnation ; that they

have been trequented of late to that degree, as

to cauſe the building of a great number of

houſes all about the place, together with a fair

Chapel, wherein there are prayers read twice a

day during the ſeaſon; moſt ot which Houſes be-

ing ſituate in the pariſh of Tunbridge, the whole

are {tiled Tunbridge-wells, tho' the Wells them-

ſelves are in Spelhurſt, the neighbouring pariſh.

Then, Medway glides forward, [near Hunton, Hunton.
where, in the year 1683, was found in digging, py, py,
about ſix yards deep, a hard floor or pavement, Trani, N.
compoſed of Shells or ſhell- like ſtones, about an 155.
inch deep, and ſeveral yards over. They are
of the ſort called Conchites, and reſemble Sea-
fiſh of the teſtaceous kind; but yer it appears
not, upon enquiry, that in the memory ot man,
any floods from the river have reached fo far as
this place. Then the Medway runs on, not far
from Fair-lane, the ſeat of the Lord Bernard; I Fair-lare,
nor far from Mereworth, where is a houſe like Mercworth,
a little Caſtle, which from the Earls of Arun-
del came to the Nevils Lords of Abergevenny,
and to Le Deſpenſer; whole heir, in a right
line“ was Mary Fane, to whom and her heirs, « x. C.
King James [the 1ſt, ] in his firſt Parliament,
reſtor d, gave, granted, &c. the name, ſtile, title,
honour, and dignity of Baroneſs le Deſpenſer;
and that her heirs ſucceſſively he Barons le Deſpen-
ſer Jor ever. The Medway haſtens next to
Maidſtone, which (becauſe the Saxons call'd it g,,oney; le
Medwegiton and Medpeazercon) I am inclin'd Deſperier,
to believe was the Vagniacæ mention'd by An- Our ot the
toninus, and to be called by Ninnius in his Cata- Letters Pa.

logue of Cities Caer Megwad, corruptly for Med- .
wag. Nor do the Diſtances gainſay it, on one Niaidllone.
FF |

hand

. —

227 e 225

hand from Noviomagis, and on the other from [them till after three aſſaults by ſtorm, which it

——

Durobrevis ; of which by and by: And this [endured with ſuch obſtin.cy, that the veteran
perhaps is as near the mark, or nearer (if fimi- [{oldiers confeſs'd, that whatever they got was
litude of ſound be of any importance) as the|by inches and dearly bought, and that they had
conjecure of Archbiſhop Uſher, who weuld have never met with the like deſperate ſervice du-

the Caer Megraid or Meguad of Ninnius, rathe

ring all the war. |

to be Meived in Mentgomeryſhire ; which alſo hel Here, * at Maiditone, the Medway is Joyn'd * Belo C.
would have to be the Mediolanum of Autoninis, by a ſmall river from the eaſt, which riſes, [ {aith

and not our Yagziace. This, doubtleſs, was lo Lambard, at Bygon, others at Exel, in a lit-

nam'd from the River Jaga, and that fo ſtil d tle wood leſs than a mile | weſt of Lenham ; At Les.
from it's extravagant ftragling and winding, as it|very probably the Duroleaum of Antoninus, bam, C.

does hereabout. Under the later Emperors (as writ talily in ſome Copies Durolevum. For Du-
we learn from the Peutegerian Table publith d rolenum in Britith, 1s, the water Lenum ; and, be-
„So ſaid, * lately by M. Velſerus) it is call'd Mad. And ſſides the remains of the name, the diſtance

Durolerun,
Lene liam,

ann. 1607. thus we ſee the change of Ages, is the change trom Durovernum and Durobrovis confirms this

Madus.

of Names. This is a neat and populous town, to be the Durolenum; not to mention it's ſitua-

ſiretch'd cut into a great length; and, ever|tion upon a Conſular way of the Romans,
ſince the Roman times, it hath been eſteem d which formerly (as Higden of Cheſter affirms)

conſiderable in all ages, having had the favour
and protection of the Archbiſhops of Canterbury:

r| went from Dover, through the middle of Kent.
But others will not allow this to be the

In the middle, is their Palace, begun ſas is Aqua-Lena; thinking rather that that is the
laid] by John Ufford, ænd finiſhed by Simon] ſpring, in the town call'd Street-well, perhaps
Iſlip. | But if Archbiſhop Uftord begun it, heſtrom the Srata of the Romans that led hi-
+ Arglia Sacr. Muſt certainly be very early in it, f not living ther heretofore; which ( as it is plesded)
vol. 1. p. 42. after his Election much above ſix months, and might give name to the Station here, call'd Du-

X 115, 119. Never receiving either his Pall or Conſecration

5 lrolenzum, || it having the true diſtance in the Iti- || Burtor's

inſomuch, that he is ſeldom number'd among the|nerary from Durobrovis or Rocheſter according to Comment,
Archbiſhops. Archbiſhop Courtney was allo a] Aldus's copy, which is ſixteen miles; but not on the itin,
great friend to this town ; who built the Col-|ſo from Durovernum or Canterbury; Which in all heat 4
lege here, where he ordered his Eſquire, Jolnſthe copies I have yet ſeen is but twelve from
Boteler, to bury him, in the Cemitery ot this] Durolevum, whereas it is diſtant from Leuham at

his Collegiate Church, and not in the Church [leaſt ſixteen. It is pleaded further, that no Ro-

it {elf ; where yet he has a tomb, and had an ] Antiquities were ever found about Lenham,

| Fun, Mon. Epitaph tco, which is ſet down in Weaver

to confirm that opinion. The diſtances then

p. 285. but this ſeems rather to have been his Ceno-|diſagreeing ſo much, and no Antiquities ap-
taph, than his real place of burial ; it having ſpearing, it is plain there is little elſe left be-
been cuſtomary in old time for perſons of mi- ſſide the ſimilitude of names to ſupport it. What
nent rank and quality, to have tombs crected|then if we Mould pitch upon Bapchild, a place
in more places than one. For Mr. Somner tells lying between Sittingbourn and Ofpringe, the an-
us, that he fcurd in a Lieger-book cf Chriſt-[cicnt name whereot is Baccancels, afterwards
Church, that King Richard the ſecond, hap-jcontra&ed into Beck-child, and now corruptly

pening to be at Canterbury when he was to bejcall'd Bap-child. For as Dur denotes vater,
- bury'd, commanded his body (notwithſtanding Bec in the Saxon anſwers that; or at leaſt the

0 Bap-child,

+ Somner's his own order) to be there interr'd, * whereſtermination celd, implying a pool, will in ſome
Hit. of he till lies at the feet of the Black Prince in aſmeaſure ſuit the old name. But what is of more
Cant. pag. gocdly tomb cf Alabaſter yet remaining.] Here ſconſequence in this matter, is, it's being in the

265, 266.

is likewiſe one of the two common Gaols of

Saxon- times a place of very great note; inſo-

this County; and it is beholden for a great many much that Archbilhop Brig/twald, An. 700,
Immunities to Qucen Elizabeth, who madeſheld a Synod at ir. Now, it is a general re-
their chief Magiſtrate a Mayor inſtead cf aſmark made by Antiquaries, that the Saxons
Portgreve,: Portgreve, Which they had till that time; ajparticularly fix d upon thoſe places, where the

3

thing I the rather take notice of, been this Romans had left their Stations ; from whence

is an arcient Saxon werd, and to this

ay, a- at preſent ſo many of our towns end in Cheſter.

meng the Germans, ſignifies a Governour, as] And even at this day, here are the ruins of
Marlgrute, Reingrave, Landtgrave, &c. | Norjtwo old Churches or Chapels, belides the Pariſh-
has it yet much fallen from it's ancient dignity, Church. Moreover, it the Roman-road be-
it remaining to this day the Shire-town (as|twixt the Kentiſh cities was the ſame with the
they, call it,) where the Aſſizes for the County]preſent, then Durolevum (which, by the by, is
are uſually kept. It is alſo a Burrough, ſerd-Jonly read Durolenum to reconcile it to Lenham)
ing two Burg: ſles to Parliament. In ſhort, it[muſt be ſomewhere about this Pariſh ; becauſe
is a large, ſweet, and pepulous town, and is otſ no other place in the preſent road is of ſo agree-
later years rerder'd more remarkable, by giving|able a diſtance, between the ſaid Citics. Now,
the title cf Viſcount AMaidf7cize to the hencu- there cannot be a ſhorter cut between Reclie-
rable fam ily of the Face, Earls of M inclelſcaſ ſter and Canterbury, than the preſent, unleſs

(Elixaletl, wite of Sir Mahle Finch, ſole daugh-
ter and heir of Sir TI mas Heneage, being hrfl

one ſhould level hills, or travel through bogs;
and yet by this, the diſtance between 1s about

edvancd to the dignity cf Viſcounteſs Maid-|twenty five miles, the ſame with the * Itinera- + per, 2,44
ſtene, July 8. 21 Jac. 1. with remainder to theſry; as alſo where Darolevum cones between,
heirs males of her bedy;) and for a fight which|thirteen to it from Rocheſter, and twelve from
happen'd here June 2. 1648, between Sir T/o-|it to Canterbury, make exactly the ſame num-

mas Fairjax General fer the Parliament, and] ber. That there are no viſible remains cf the
one Kentiſh Gentlemen, who had taken Arms] old Road, may be very well attributed to this,

—

in defence of King Charles x, and poſted them- I that having been all along cne of the molt fre-
ſelves in this town. Which they ſo well de- quented Roads in England, and us'd probably
ten ded, tho' unequal in number (the ſtreets be- ever ſince the Roman works were made, it is now
ing well man'd, and the kouſcs welt lin'd with-[levell'd with the adjacent earth, and only ſerves

in,) that General Fairfax, with an army cf
ncar ten thouſand men, could not gain it trom!rween Canterbiry and Lemanis does {till in part

. A mm ̃ ͤ—— ng an

tor a good bottom. Ihe old Cauſey indeed be-

remain,

8

229

gote · ire t. 2
4 comTr

for tl
and

avd

that
of n
ing |
{ting
Can
der,

ſupp
A
be ti

4 116 bete
1 Wheel, Out
ty 1

not
Was
rece
4 Poems, B01
* * ==
Bos

|

ma

+ Hillory of han
Carterbury, at
b. 28. tin. ma

d 3 159) yet

lev
ot

Button Mal-
herb,

* Has dwelt,
C

18 ſaid, l
ann. 1607, K
r

nd wt > tw 1 a, ©z —

Baron Wot-
bon,

Leeds-calile,
Family of the
revequers,

o ſaid,

8

ry K ENT. 230 l

ſelreet. re main, and is call'd Stone iu reet, being the year 1321, came Queen Jabel to the caſtle of Leeds
common way into thoſe quarters. But then | about Michaelmas, where ſhe had deſign'd to lodge all |
for theſe thouſand years, that has been private |night, but was not ſuffer d to enter. The King highly
and inconſiderable with reſpect to this other ;]reſentimg this, as done in contempt of him, call d toge-
avd the foil alſo may make a difference. For [ther ſome neighbouring inhabitants out of Eſſex and
that which goes to Lemanis has a foundation all | London, and gave them orders to befiege the Caſtle.
c of natural rock and hard chalk, and the adjoyn- Bartholomew de Badilſmer was he who own'd
ing fields afford ſufficient quantity of molt la-|it ; and having left his wife and ſons in it, was goue
{ting materials. Whereas from Rocheſter to|with the reſt of the Barons to ſpoil the eſtate of Huzh

Ko

7 Canterbury, the ſoil is of it ſelf ſott and ten- De Spenſer. The beſſeg d in the mean time deſpair-
| der, and the neighbouring parts yield no ſuch ſing of ſuccour, the Barons with their Aſſociates came
os ſupply of durable materials. : as far as Kingſton, and, with the mediation of the
a As to it's having been a conſtant road, it may | Biſhops of Canterbury and London, and the Earl of

be thus made probable. In Bede's time the diſtance | Pembroke, petition'd the King to raiſe the Siege, pro-
between Rochefter and Canterbury was * twenty | miſing to ſurrender the Caſtle into his hands, after the 4
l four miles (and ſo ſome call it at this day twen-| next Parliament. But the King, confidering that the j 1
wy ty four, others twenty five, ) ſo that it could beg d could not hold. out long, and moreover, incens'd |
not be alter'd then. In the 12 Century, there ſat this their contumacy, would not liſten to the peti-
was a Maiſon Dieu erected at Oſpringe, for the|tion of the Barons. After they had diſperſed them-
receiving Knights Templars coming into and|ſelves to other parts, ke gain d the Caſtle, tho with
4 Poems, going out of the — And f Chaucer, no ſmall difficulty ; and ſending his wife and ſons te
„ 4 going in Pilgrimage to St. Thomas, paſs'd thro'|the Tower of London, hang d the reſt that were in
Boughton to Canterbury; as they {till do. it.
However, it muſt be owned, that Durolenum| Thus the Medway, after it has receiv'd the
may be placed with = probability at Len- little river Len, paſſes through fruitful Corn- Len.

1 „toy of Lam, than, with * Mr. Somner or Mr. Burton, fields; and by Alliagton-Caſtle (where Tho. WWiat Alington.

t. Carterbury, at Newington near Sittingbourn ; Where it is true ſenior, a learned * built a fair houſe). Reſtauravit

in, p 25-Itiv. many Roman Antiquities have been found: runs to Ailesford, in Saxon Eagleppons, call'd Aire.
| £179: 1305 yet being but eight miles from Rocheſtter, and by Henry Huntingdon Eiſtre, and by Ninnius 7

{eventeen from Canterbury, it is altogether out Epifford; who has alſo told us, that it was call'd
of diſtance on both ſides. But though no Anti- Saiſſenaeg-haibail by the Britains, becauſe of the
quities (as hath been ſaid) do appear at Lenham, Saxons being conquer'd there; as others have
there is a thing exceeding remarkable, men- in the ſame ſenſe call'd ir Anglesford. For
tion'd on the Tomb of Robert Thompſon Eſq; in| Guortimer the Britain, ſon of Guortigern, fell |

the Church there, who was grandchild to that| upon Hengiſt and the Engliſh Saxons here; and, 1
truly religious matron Mary Honyucod wife of| having diſorder'd them ſo at the firſt onſet, that |

Robert Honyuood of Charing Eſq;, © She had at they were not able to ſtand a ſecond charge, he | | 1
« her deceaſe, lawfully deſcended from her, put them to flight; and they had been routed 1
« three hundred ſixty ſeven children ; ſixteen once for all, had not Hengiſt, by a ſingular art l
« of her own body, one hundred and tourteen of preventing dangers, betaken himſelt to the 01
« grand-children, two hundred twenty eight Ifle of Thanet, till that reſolute fierceneſs of li
« in the third generiticn, and nine in the|the Britains was a little allay d, and ireſh forces | |
« fourth: her renown liveth with her poſteri- came out of Germany. In this battle, the two | |
« ty; ker body lieth in this Church, and her Generals were lain, Catigeru the Britain, and |
« monument may be ſeen in Marks-Hall in E. Horſa the Saxon; the latter was buried at Hor-MHorſed.

« ſex, where ſhe died.“ ſted, a little way from hence, and left his name 4
Button Mal- Hard by Lenham, at Bocton Malherbe, the Ren) to the place; the former was bury'd in great ere,
herb, ble femily of the Mottons * dwelt a long time; ſtate, as it is thought, near Ailesford, where re

* > »: þ'@ ey 8 . « 5 grave.
2 dwelt, cf which + within our memory flouriſh'd Nicho- thoſe tour vaſt ſtones are pitch'd on end, wick

1 $0 gid. las Wotton Doctor of Laws, Privy-Counſellor|others lying croſs-ways upon them; much of
ann. 1607, to King Henry 8, Edward 6, Qucen Ma- the ſame form with that Britiſh monument call'd
ry, and Queen Elizaberh ; Embaſlador to fo-| Stone-henge. And this the common people do itill,
reign Courts nine times, and employ'd thrice in|from Catigern, call Keith-coty-houſe. | Hither allo, Keich-coty-
a Treaty of Peace between the Engliſh, French, King Edmund IJ onfide purſu'd the Danes, and houle.
and Scots; and ſo he run through the courſe of |{lew many of them, and from hence drove them
a long life, with great commendation both for into Shepey, where, had he not been ſtop'd by the
piety and prudence : as alſo, Edward Wotton treachery of Duke Eadric, he had tinally de-
the ſon of his nephew by a brother, whom, tor|{troy'd them. Here alſo Radulphus Frizburn,
his great experience ard knowledge, Queen E-|under the patronage of Richard rd Grey of
lizabeth made Lord Controller, and King |Codzor, with whom he return'd from the wars
_; Wot- James ſ the firſt] created Baron Morton of : Mer-|of the Holy Land, founded a houſe tor Carme-
lay. [Afterwards, this Eſtate came by marriage|/ites in Aylegjord-wood, An. 1240, in imitation of
to the Family of the Stanhopes, Earls ot Cheſter-thoſe, whoſe lives he had obſerved in the wil-
field. In the ſecond year of King Charles the|derneſs of Paleſtine ; and they throve ſo well, « pitſ. de
ſecond, Charles Henry Kirkhoven was created|that quickly atter in the year 1245, there was a Script. p.
Lord Wotton of Botton Malherbe. general Chapter of the order held here, in which 345, 354.
þ | Nor hath this river any other thing memo-| John Stock (fo call'd from his living in a hollow
— clile. rable upon it, beſides Leeds-cas?le, built by the tree) was choſen General of the Order, through-
— noble Crevequers, call'd in ancient Charters deſout the world. We will only add, that this
* Creuecuer, and de Crepito Corde. Afterwards, it] Place gives the title of Earl ro Heneage Finch
was the unfortunate ſeat of Bartholomew Baron] (ſecond ſon of Heneage Earl of Nottingham,)
of Badilſmer, who treacherouſly tortify'd it a- Who hath been ſucceſſively honour'd with the
gainſt King Edward the ſecond, who had given] Titles of Baron of Guernſey, and Earl of
it him; but afterwards he found the rewards| Ailestord, in conſideration as well of his noble
of his treachery, upon the gallows. Take, if you Deſcent, as his great knowledge in the Laws
pleaſe, the whole relation, out of a little hiſtoryſ and Conſtitution of this Kingdom.]
So ud. Of Thomas De-la-More, a Noble Perſon who livd| Nor muſt we forget Boxley, hard by, where Boxley.
nn, 1607, in the ſame age, which I * lately publiſh' d. Ir the |JY/illiam de Ipre, a Fleming, Earl of Kent, built
2

—

—— 5
— 7

2 ͤÄ—— ——— A

rer
14 . 5

po —

—

.

— .
231 CANTIU M. 2
3: WW 23> —
a monaſtery in the year 1145, ſupplying it with | Rocheſter, would give the King f one hundred poundsy. 0 2 Cha
Monks from Clarevale in Burgundy. And not |of Deniers : At laſt, by the interceſſion of Robertbras 0,0 oull
tar from the oppoſite bank, juſt over-againſt | Firzz-Hammon, and Henry Earl of Warwick, tien. Cal
Birling, this, is Birling, formerly the Barony ot the] King yielded, that infFead of the money which Je de- the!
Maminots, and then of the. Saies, whoſe eſtate | manded in conſideration of the Grant of the mannour, is n
at laſt came by females to the families ot | Biſhop Gundulph (becauſe he was well vert d in Ar- f
Clinton, Fienes, and Aulton. clitecture and Maſonry) ſhould build for him the onl'
On the eaſt-ſide of Medway (after it has | Caſtle of Rocheſter, all of ſtone, and at his own pro- reli
Halling. pa {Sd by Halling, where Hamo de Heath, Biſhop her charge. At length, when the Biſhops, tio with Cro
of Recheſter, built a ſeat for his Succeſſors, | ſome difficulty, were brought to a compliance in the inſt
ſand where Mr. Lambard, the firſt Hiſtoriogra- | preſence of the King, Biſhop Gundulph built the ca- Fri
pher of this County, ſometime livd in the Bi- /e entirely at Lis own coſt. And a little while at- Se:
ſhop's houſe; )| a little higher up, is an anci- ter, King Henry 1. (as Florence of Worceſter rily
ent City, call'd by Antoninus Duro-bris, Duro-| his it) granted to the Church of Canterbury ſuc
briva, and in ſome other places more truly, | and the Archbiſhops, the Cuſtedy and Conſia- wh
Durobrevis. Diro-prove, or Durobrevæ. Bede has it Duro-] ble ſhip ot it tor ever ; and liberty to build « D
In an ancient Veit; and in the decline of the Roman Em-] tower in it for themſelves. Since which time, cot
table pub. pire, time had ſo contracted this name, that it it has undergone one or two ſieges; but then
= 1 88 was call d Roibis; whence, with the addition | eſpecially, when the Barons wars allarm'd al!
Crofter, wbt, 0. Cearcen ( which, being deriv'd from the] England, and Simon de Monteſort vigorouſly af- -
; Latin caftrum, was us'd by our Anceſtors to ſaulted it, though in vain, and cut down the
ſignity a city, town, or caftle,) they call'd it Wooden bridge. Inſtead of which, a curious
Rocheſter, hpoucceaxTep, ard by contraction Roche$fer ; as .rchd ſtone- bridge [ (one of the fineſt, it not
the Latins call'd it R, from one Rhefſus as the very beſt in England)] was atterwards builr
Bede imzgines, though to me there ſeems to be | with money rais'd cut ot the French ſpoils, by
ſome remains ot R in the old Duro-brovis.| John CobLam, and Robert * Kuowles ; the latter + Cyy4 05
And as to the name, there is no reaſon to doubt whereot rais d uin felt by his wariike courage, nlius by the
of that; ſince (beſides the courſe of the Itine- from nothing, to the hight pitch of honour, French.
rary and Bede's authority) in the Foundation-] Ot late years, it gave an additional title to
Charter of the Cathedral Church it is expreliy |the Lora H/ilmot ot Adderbury in Com. Ox.
call'd Durobrovis. Only, this I would have to be who,in conſideration of his great and many ſig- -
obſerv'd, that the printed Copies of Bede read | nal ſervices done to the Crown at home and
Darueruum, Where the Manuſcripts have Duro-|abroad, was created Earl of Rocleſter by Let-
brovis. It is plac'd in a Vale, and on ſome] ters Patents, bearing date at Paris, Dec. 13.
ſides encompaſs'd with walls, but not very | 1652. 4 Car. 2. Who dying An. 1659, was ſuc- m
ſtrorg ; and (as Malmesbury ſays ) is pent|cceded in his Honour by his only fon John, a a
within too narrow a compals : ſo that it was|perſon of extraordinary wit and learning. He b
forn erly look'd upon às a Caſile, rather than a] dying without iflue July 26. 1680; Lawrence P
City; tor Bede calls it Caſſelum Cantuariorum, Hyde, ſecond ſon to Edward Earl of Clarendon, v
i, e. the Caſile of the Kentiſh-men. But now it] Viſcount Hyde of Kenelworth, and Baron of Westende. ©
runs out with large ſuburbs, towards welt, ealt, | MWottun Baſſet, was created Earl of Rocheſfer — e
and ſouth. It has had a great many misfor-] Nov. 29. 1682. 34 Car. 2.1 Fal Wwale. fi
tunes. In the year of our Lord 676, it was | The Medway poſts thro' the foreſaid bridge 0
deſtroy' d by Æthelred the Mercian; and after | with a violent courſe like a torrent; but pre- (
that, was more than once plunder'd by the] fently growing more calm, affords a Dock to Chatham 0
Danes. [It was ſacked by them in the days] the beſt appointed Fleęt that ever the Sun ſaw, Th: K i
of King Etheired, An. 839, and beſieg'd by ready for Action upon all occaſions, and built Nax. ,
them again in An. 885, when they caſt-up fat great expence by the molt ſerene Queen Eli- l
works round it, but it was reliev'd by King |zabeth for the ſafety of her Kingdoms, and Minſter, «
Alfred ; and all the lands of the Biſhoprick |the terror of her enemjes ; who alſo, for the
were laid waſte by King Etlelred, An. 986. ſecurity of it, raisd_ a fort upon the bank. 4 So ſaid, ann.
For Æthelbert, King ot Kent, had built a [This Yard was at firſt confin'd to a narrow 1697, |
ſtately Church in it, and honour'd it with an |{lip on the edge of the river, beneath the |
Epiſcopal See, making Juſtis the firſt Biſhop ; Church; and turniſh'd only with one ſmal * Hath, C.
but when that Church was decay'd with age, | Dock, Which, becoming too ſtreight for the |
Gundulphus repair'd it about the year 1080, then growing Service, uus aflign'd to the uſe ot |
and tuning out the Prieſts, put Monks in the Ofjice of the Orduaice (where it ſtill remains,) j
their ſtead; who are them ſelves now ejected, and | while that for the Navy was, about the year |
* Stbolaſtici, a Dean, With ſix Prebendaries, and * Scholars] 1622, remoy'd to the place where it now is,
fill their places. Near the Church, there hangs j accommodated with all the | Requifites of a Roy- Qeeenbo.
8 . 2 3 . ugh
over the river, a Caſtle, fortify'd very well both | al Arſenal, and thoſe ſince augmented by addi- | The prefane

+ De grads
dejelus,

by art and nature ; which, according to the
common Tradition, was built by Odo, Biſhop
of Bayeix and Earl of Kent. But withour all
doubr, William 1. was Founder of it. For
we read in Domeſday, The Biſhop of Roveceſter
holds in Eltsforde, ſor exchange of the ground upon
which the caſile ſtands. It is certain however,
that Biſhop Odo, depending upon an uncertain
Revolution, held this againſt William Rufus ;
and that at laſt, for want of proviſions, he did
not cnly ſurrender it, but was + degraded alſo,
and quitted the Kingdom. As to the repair-
ing of the Caſtle, take this out of the Texts

Textus Rofſen- Reffenſis. When Miliam 2. would . uot confirm
ſis: an ancient Lanjranck's Gift of the mannour of Hedenham in
MS. bock ofhe County of Buckingham, to the Church of Roche-

that Church.

tions of Docks, Launches, Store-houſes ( one, no
leſs than fix hundred ſixty foot long) Maſt-hou-
ſes, Boat-houſes, &c. all ot late erection, exceed-
ing what had ever been before known in the
Navy ot Eugland, All which being ſo well fen-
ced with new. Forts, ſuch as thoſe at Gillingham,
Ceckham-weed, the Swomp, &c. and order d to 7
be turt lier fort ified by an expxeſs Law to that
purpoſe ; perhaps there may not be a more
compleat Arſenal than this, in the whole world.
To theſe, add the Royal Fort of Hhireneſs in
the Iſle of Mete) (Where, by the way, there
hath been alſo eſtabliſhed a Yard, as an Ap-
pendix to Chatham, furniſhed for anſwering
all occaſions of Ships of lower rates, reſort-
ing thither in time of Action:) which fort was

ſter ; unleſs Lanfranck, and Guudulph Biſhop of
i

built at the mouth of this river by RE
Char v2

8 — is,

Shurland,
* Now, C.

Ann, c. 2G

Shirere!s

2

K E NT.

& 2

Charles the ſecond, and ſtands more commodi-
ouſly for the ſecurity of the River, than the
Caſtle of Queenborough did, which was built
there for that purpoſe by King Edward 3, but
is now demoliſh'd.

At Chatham alſo is peg that ſolemn and
only yet eſtabliſh'd Fond of Naval Charity for the
relief of Perſons hurt at Sea in the ſervice of the
Crown, under the name of The Cheſt at Chatham,
inſtituted An. 1588. When, with the advice of Sir
Francis Drake, Sir John Hawkins, and others, the
Sea-men ſerving the then Queen, did volunta-
rily aſſign a portion of cach man's Pay to the
ſuccour of their then wounded Fellows :
which method, receiving Confirmation from the
Queen, has been ever ſince maintain'd, and yet

continues. Here alſo was erected an Hoſpital

for the like pious uſe, at the private Coſts of
Sir Jobn Hawkins, in the 36th af Ah ſame Queen.

And now, having touched upon all the Yards
and Docks in this County, in ſuch order as their
ſituation required; and this one County having
contributed more than the whole number be-
fide, to the Building, Repairing, Safe-harbouring,
and Equipping of the Navy of England ; we
will here give the Reader a ſhort view of the
vaſt Growth and Improvement of the ſaid Na-
vy in this and the laſt age, according to the

Calculation made f ſome years ſince by Samuel + 1695.

Pepys Eſq; a Perſon of great skill and experi-
ence in Naval Affairs; and to whoſe Informa-
tions the Reader is alſo indebted for the fore-
mentioned Accounts. |

The different States of the Royar Navy.

| In Mr. Camden s time.“ At this day. |

1. The number of Ships and Veſſels, from 50

but

40 Ships | above — 200 Ships.

Tons and upwards ——
2. The general Tonnage of the whole

3. The number of Men requir'd for manning

under 23600 Tons | above 112400 Tons.
under 7800 Men | above 45000 Men.

the fame ———

4. The medium of it's annual charge e

the laſt x -

5 years of 4 wan

under 15500 J. above 400000 J.
| under 96400 J. above 1620000 J.

Now Medway, grown fuller and broader,
makes a pleaſant ſhow with it's curling Waves;
and paſſes through fruittul fields, till, divided
by Shepey-Mand (which I fanſy is the ſame that
Ptolemy calls Toliatis) it is carry'd into the Ri-
ver of Thames by two mouths ; the one where-

Wel-ſxats, Of, weſtward, is call'd Weſt-ſuwale; and the

dhepey.
Falt-lwale,

Minſter,

eaſtern one, which ſeems to have cut Shepey
from the Continent, EafZ-fwale ; but by Bede
Genlad and Tenlett. This Iſland, from the Sheep
(a multitude whereof it feeds, ) was call'd by
our Anceſtors Shepey, i. e. an land of ſheep : it
is exceeding fruittul in corn, but wants wood ;
and is twenty one miles in compaſs. Upon the
northern ſhore, it had a ſmall Monaſtery, now
calbd Minter, built by Sexburga, wife to Er-
combert King of Kent, in the year 7 10. Below

do ſaid, ann, which, a certain Brabander f lately undertook

1697,

to make brimſtone and coperas, of ſtones found
upon the ſhore, by boyling them in a furnace.

* Hath, C. Upon the weſt fide, it“ had a very beautiful

and ſtrong caſtle, built by King Edward the
third, and was (as he himſelf expreſſes it) plea-
fant in ſituation, the terror of his enemies, and the
comfort of his ſubjefts. To this he added a Burgh,
and in honour of Philippa of Hainault his Queen,

Qeenbo. call'd it Oueenborough, i. e. the burgh of the Queen.

rough,

d || The preſgnt

One ot the Conſtables of it, was Edward Ho-

Canlable is, by, a perſon highly deſerving honour and re-

Shurland,
* Now, C,

ſpect, as having very much improv'd his own
excellent Wit, with the ornaments of Learning.
To the eaſt is Shurland, formerly belonging to
the Cheineys, * afterwards to Philip Herbert (ſe-
cond ſon to Henry Earl of Pembroke) whom
King James [the firſt,] the ſame day, created
Baron Herbert of Shurland, and Earl of Montgo-
mery ; [which ſtill remains in the ſame Fa-
mily.

The right honourable Elizabeth Lady Dacres,
mother to Thomas Earl of Suſſex, was enobled
With the title of Counteſs of Shepey during lite,
Sept. 6. 1680, the 324 of Car. 2. Since whoſe
death, in conſideration of many eminent ſer-

vices done the Crown by the honourable Henry
Sidney Eſq; fourth ſon of Robert Earl of Leiceſter,
the titles of Viſcount Shepey and Baron of Mil-
ton, near Sittingbourn, were both confer'd on
him by King Miliam the third, April 9. 1689,
who was alſo afterwards created Earl of Rom-
ney, and made Lord Warden of the Cinque-
Ports, Lord Lieutenant of Heland, and Maſter
of the Ordnance.

This Ifland belongs to the Hundred of M-
dleton, ſo called from the town of Midleton, now

Milton ; | and (as we juſt now obſcrved) erected Milton,

into a Barony.| It was formerly a Royal Vill,
and of much more note, than ar preſent ; tho
Haſting the Daniſh pyrate fortity'd a Caſtle
hard by, in the year 893, with a deſign to do
it all the miſchief he could; ſthe footſteps
whereof do yet remain at Kemſtey-downs, be-
yond the Church. This they now call (as be-

ing overgrown with buſhes ) the Ca#Zle-ruff, Caltle-ruf,

whither King Alfred coming againſt him, for-
tified himſelf on the other ſide of the water
the ditches of which fortification, and ſome
{mall part of the ſtone-work alſo, ſtill remain

by the name of Bavord-Caſtle, ſects fontes Can- * Flfredi vi-

tianos, near unto Sittingbourn. But the Dane ne- te, p. 44, 45,

ver did the town of Milton ſo much real miſ- 46.

chief, as did Godwin Earl of Kent ; who being
in rebellion againſt Edward the Confeſſor, in the
year 1052, enter'd the King's Town of Midle-

ton, and burnt it to the ground f; which, in all + Chron. Sax.
probability, ſtood in thoſe days near the Church, An. 1052.

and near a mile trom the preſent town, and was,
upon the rebuilding, remov'd to the head of
the Creek, where it now ſtands.] Near this,

is Sittingbourn, a town well ſtor d with Inns; [once Sittingbourn,

both a Mayor and Market-Town, but now,
through diſuſe, enjoying neither: ] and the re-

mains of Tong-caſtle, do alſo appear in the Tong.

neighbourhood : This laſt was the ancient Seat

of Guncellin de Badilſmer, a perſon who enjoy'd The Family
eat Honours; whoſe ſon Bartholomew was the of Badilſmer.

ather of that Guncellin, who by the heireſs of

Gg Ralph

—_
= — a _
— 2 3 *

—

—— — —— — — 60Ww

235

C ANT TU M.

—

F Ralph Fiz-Bernard, Lord of Kinoſuowne, had that
| ſeditious Bartholomew mention'd before. He a-
gain, by Margaret Clare, had Giles, who dy'>
without iſſue; Margery, wife of William Roos
of Hamlak; Mawd, ot John Vere Earl of Ox-
ford ; Elizabeth, of William Bohun, Earl of
| Northampton, and afterwards of Edmund Morti-
| mer; and Margaret, of John 'Tiptott : from
; whence deſcended a ſplendid race of Prin-

ces and Noblemen. Not far from Sittinglourn,
Tenham. js Tenham, from which place Sir 7% Roper, in
the time of King James the firſt, was crea-
ted a Baron of this Realm, by the title of Lord
Tenham ; which is ſtill enjoyed by the ſame fa-
mily.

Next, I ſaw Feverſham, which is very com-
modiouſly ſituated : tor the moſt pl-nritul part
of this Country lies round it, and it has a bay
very convenient for importation and exportati-
on; by which means it flouriſhes at this day
above it's neighbours. And it ſeems formerly alſo
to have made a good figure; ſeeing King E-

* Priedentum thelſtan held a“ Meeting here of the Wiſe men

Conventus. of the Kingdom, and made ſeveral Laws, in

the year ot our Lord 903.; and that Stephen

who uſurp'd the Crown of England, built a

Monaſtery for Cluniacs; wherein himſelf, his

wife Maud, and his ſon Euſtace were all bury'd.
[And that this was founded for the Monks ot

Clugny, appears to be true by his foundation-

+ Vol. 1. Charter printed in the f Monaſticon ; he taking
p. 688. his firſt Abbot and Monks out of the Abbey
of Bermondſey of the ſame Order: Bur yer

Hig. of || Mr. Somner, and * Mr. Southouſe, from the ab-
Cart p.244. ſolutory Letters of Peter Abbot of Bermondſey,
* Monaſticon and of the Prior and Monks of S. Mary de Ca-
Feverſhami- vitate, finding Clarembaldus the firſt Abbot of
— Frverſham, and his Monks, releas'd from all o-
bedience and ſubjectiom to the Church of Clug-
ny, and to the Abbot and Prior aforeſaid t, are

Feverſham.

Monaſt. ;
* 6 689. inclin'd to believe that the Abbot and Monks

of Feverſham (purſuant to their abſolution) pre-
t . -
. ſently took upon them the rule and habit of

S. Bennet. Notwithſtanding, it is clear they

were {till eſteem'd of the Order of Clugny for

ſeveral years after ; as farther appears by the

Confirmation-Charters of King Henry 2, King

; Ibid, p.58, John, and Henry 3, all printed in the || Monaſti-

688, 68g. con; and by the Bulls of Pope Ianocent 3, Gre-

* MS. inter gory 10, and Bonijace 9, all in a * MS. book in

Munimenta Chriſt-Church Canterbury. So that J gueſs, the

N ee miſtake muſt lie on Mr. Somners and Mr. Son-

antuar. houſe's ſide ; the abſolutory Letters in all pro-

bability tending only to their abſolution from
thoſe particular Houſes making any claim up-
on them, and not from the Order it ſelf: tho
it cannot be deny'd t, but that the Abbot and
Monks of Reading were at firſt Cluniacs, and
after became Benedictines as perhaps theſe might
do ſome years after their firſt foundation. And
thus much for the Ecclefiaſtical ſtate of this
Town. As for Secular matters, it has of late

days been honour'd by giving title to Sir George

+ Monaſt.
Angl. vol. 1.
p. 417.

2%

An. 1665, ſucceeded his Father-in-law in all —

his titles f; by whoſe death, that of Earl of

Feverſhim is now extinct; and Lees-Corrt afore-
ſaid is become a ſeat of the Earl of Rocking-
ham, by marriage with Catharin the ſiſter of
Mary, and (ſince the death of the Earl of Fe-
verſnam) ſole heir of that Eſtate. ]

Near this place (as alſo in other parts of the
County) they diſcover here and there pits of
great depth ; which tho' narrow at the top,
yet more inward are very capacious, having as
it were diſtinct chambers, with pillars of Chalk.

ot which the Britains dug Chalk to manure
cheir ground, as they are {aid to have done by
Pliny. For (ſays he) they usd to fink pits a hun-

great compaſs : and juſt ſuch, are thoſe pits we
deſcribe ; nor are they met-with any where, but
in chalky grounds. Unleſs {ome will imagine,
that the Engliſh-Saxons might dig ſuch holes
lor the ſame uſes the Germans did, from hom
they were deſcended. They were wont (ſays Ta-
citus) to dig holes under-ground, and to cover them
with great quantities of dung; thus, they prov'd a
refuge againſt winter, aud a garner for their corn;
jor the bitterneſs of the celd is allay'd by ſuch places.
And if at any time the enemy ſurpriſe them, he
plunders only what's open and expos d; the ſecret cor-
ners and pits being either altogether uni noum, or ſaje
upon this account, that they are to be ſought for.
From thence, upon an open ſhore abounding
with ſhell-fiſh, and particularly OyFers (the pits

in Saxon Reaculp, but formerly by the Romans

Notitia ; which tells us, that the Tribune of
the firſt Cohort of the Yerafians lay here in gar-
riſon, under the Count of the Saxon ſhore (tor
ſo in thoſe times were the ſea- coaſts here-abouts,
ſtil'd.) And it juſtifies this it's Antiquity, by
the coins of Roman Empercrs dug-up in it.
This is the fhrſt Roman Watch-tower, that
comes in our way: And theſe Caſtles or Harch-
tocrers being uſually built upon the higheſt
ground that was near the place, where it was
thought convenient they ſhould be fet ; we may
conclude, that this ſtood in that ſquare- plot of
riſing ground, within which, afterwards, King
Ethelbert's Palace, and after that, the Munaſtery,
ſtood, and now the Minſter or Church only
ſands ; encompaſod with the foundations of a
very thick wall: Which may poſſibly be the re-
mains of this ancient Roman Fort ; it being of
the ſame figure with the reſt, that are ſtill more
perfect. However, that it was ſomewhere here-

: bouts, the great number of Ciſterus, Cellars,
&c. daily diſcover'd by the fall of the clitt, am-
ply teſtify; together with the great quantities
of Roman brick or tile, Opus Mufiroum, Coins,

i : | Fibulz, Gold-wire, Ear-rings, Bracelets, &c. dai-
Sands of Lees Court in this County, Knight of!

y found in the ſands. Which yet do all come

the Bath, who, in conſideration of his faithful from the land-ward, upon the fall of the clifts;

ſervices to King Charles 1, was, by King Charles
2, advanced to the degree and digniry of a Ba-
ron of this Realm, by the title of Baron of
Throwley, as alſo of Viſcount Sands of Lees
Court, and Earl of Feverſham, by Letters Patents
bearing date at Weſtminſter April 8. 28 Car. 2,
which he was only to enjoy tor term of life ;
with remainder to Lewis Lord Duras Marqueſs
of Blanqueſort in France, and Baron of Holdenly \

rhe earthen parts whereof being waſh'd away
by the Sea, theſe metalline ſabitances remain
likewiſe behind in the ſands, whence they arc
conſtantly pick d out by the poor people of the
place.

nd theſe they find here in ſuch great
quantities, that we muſt needs concluds it co
have been a place heretofore of great extent,

and very populous; and that it has one time or
other underwent ſome great devaſtation either

in England; who marrying the Lady Mary, el- by war or fire, or both. I think 1 may be
deſt daughter of the ſaid George Earl of Fever-| confident of the latter, there being many pat-
ſham, who dy'd Apr. 16. 1677, the ſaid Lord terns tound ot metals run together, whereo:
Duras, being naturalized by Act of Parliament, the Reverend Dr. Batteley, late Arch-Deacen Of

Canter-

dred foot deep, narrow at the mouth, beit within, of

udg. hy.
vol. 2. - . \

Several opinions have been broach'd about them. To wigs,
For my part, I have nothing to offer as my own the pits i

conjecture; unleſs they were thoſe pits out Kert g
m

of which are very common, ) we ſce Reculver, Reculye,

and Britains Regulbium, as it is call'd in the Regulbiun

3

* 7
4 2 5

3

Br th FY

Haun
Junizs. Hol. his
in ma 1

Cantei
ſuch
Ot 4
the 1
halt
| ppiloſoph. Strat
T rat ſact.
N. 268.

gre Y
beac
gave
a Pa
wit!
the

ing

rive

Hothkeld, O
1

Aſlford,

W y.

rt

r
c
i
:
|
|

|

Pag. 457»

Eal- well.

Olanige,
Chilham,

Fulbert of

Dover,

.13c6,

K E NT. 238

Conterbury Ca curious and skilſul Collector ot | dead and beheaded ; and the trunk of his body ?

ſuch like Antiquities) had a cogent proof, viz. | thrown into the fire: a puniſhment too inhu-

of a piece of Copper and Gold thus joyned in] man, and very rarely practis'd in this kingdom. 1

the melting, which he had from thence. About] Hereupon, his goods being confiſcate, King 1

| half a mile off, there appears in the Cliff, a Edward the firſt gave this Caſtle with the Hun- '1 |

N pyitoſoph. Stratum of ſhells of the white Conchites, in a dred of Felebergh to Bartholomew de Badilſmer ;

© Trarlatt. greeniſh Sand, not above two foot from the| but he alſo, within a ſhort time, forteitea both if
N. 260. beach.] ZErhelbert King of Kent, when he] for Treaſon ; as I obſerv'd but juſt now.

gave Canterbury to Auſtin the Monk, built here It is a current Opinion among the Inhabi-
a palace for himſelf; Baſſo a Saxon adorn'd it] tants, that Julius Cæſar encamp'd here in his
with a Monaſtery, out of which Brightwald,| ſecond expedition againſt the Britains, and that
the eighth in the See of Canterbury, was call'd|rhence it was call'd Fulham, as if one ſhould 1
ten to be Archbiſhop. Whereupon, it was from] ſay, Julius's ſtation, or houſe ; and, it I miſtake |
| gzculf-min- the Monaſtery call'd alſo Raculj-minſter, When] not, they have truth on their ſide. For Cæſar
rer. Edred, brother to Edmund the Elder, gave it to] himſelf tells us, that after he had march'd by
Chriſt-Church in Canterbury. At this day, it] night twelve miles from the ſhore, he firſt en- 1
is nothing but a little Country-village, and theſ counter'd the Britains upon a River; and, at- |
{mall reputation it has, is deriv'd from that] ter he had beat them into the woods, that he
Monaſtery, the towers whereof in the form of | encamp'd there ; where the Britains, having
Pyramids, are of uſe to ſea- men for the avoid-| cut down a great number of trees, were poſted
ing of ſands and ſhelves in the mouth of the in a place wonderfully tortity'd both by nature, |
allen: river Thames. For as a certain Poet has it in] and art. Now, this place is exa&ly * twelve It is ſaid to |
Tunis. Hol. his Philippets : miles from the ſea-coaſt ; nor is there a river be more,
| in margs between: ſo that of neceſſity his firſt march
Cernit oloriſerum Tamiſim ſua Doridi a- muſt have been hither ; where he kept his men
mar encamp'd tor ten days, till he had retitted his
Flumina miſcentem. Fleet (which had been ſhatter'd very much by a
Storm,) and got it to ſhore. Below this cown,
is a green barrow, ſaid to be the burying-place
of one Jul-Laber many ages ſince ; who, {ome
will tell you, was a Gian, others a Hitch. For
my own part, imagining all along that there
[The Sea hath got all the Town, except af might be ſomething of real Antiquity couch'd
very few houſes, and the Church it felt is in 8 that name, I am almoſt perſwaded that
great danger to be loſt ; for the preſerving of] Laberius Durus the Tribune, ſlain by the Bri-TLaberius Dy.
which, there are men almoſt continually em-] tains in their march from the Camp we ſpoke rus the Tri-
ploy'd to make good the Malls or Banks. of, was buried here; and that from him the bune.
Now we are come to the Ifle of Thanet ;| Barrow was call'd Jul-Laber.
which is divided from the Continent by the | [Below Chilham is Chartham, where, in the year Chartham.
wor {mall chanel of the river Stour, called by Bede 1668, in the linking of a Well, was found, about
Wantfum. Wamſum, and made up ot two different rivers | ſeventeen foot deep, a parcel of ſtrange and mon-
Weald. in that waody tract nam'd the Weald ; (near] ſtrous Bones, together with four teeth, pertect and
Hothfield, one of which, ſtands Hothfield, a Scat of the] ſound, but in a manner petrificd and turned
Earl of Thanet.] Aſſoon as the Stour gets in-] into Stone: each almoſt as big as the hand of
Alford. to one chanel, it viſits Afford and Jy, noted | a man. They are ſuppoſed by) learned and ju- M
Wi, market-rowns, but ſmall. Both of them had} dicious Perſons, who have ſeen and conſidered ng 57 Was.
their College of Prieſts ; that at the latter was] them, to be the bones of ſome large Marine A- is, Philoſ.
built by John Kemp Archbiſhop of Canterbury, | nimal which had periſhed there, and that the Tranſ. N.
a native of the place; / had a lotty Steeple long Vole of twenty miles or more, through 272,275,275.
in the middle, the Spire whereot was formerly] which the river Sour runs, was formerly an
fired by lightning, and burnt down to the] Arm of the Sea (the river, as they conceive,
Stone-work or Tower; which too, of late, for] being named Stour from ZEſtuarium ; ) and laſt-
want of timely repair, fell down of it ſelf, and] ly, that the Sea, having by degrees filled up
beat down the greateſt part of the Church ;| this Vale with Earth, Sand, Ouſe, and other
where it now lies in it's ruins.] It had alſo] matter, did then ceaſe to diſcharge it ſelf this
a peculiar Well, into which God was moved to] way, when it broke through the VH, between
intuſe a wonderful virtue by the Prayers of aj Dover and Calais. Another opinion is, that
certain Norman Monk; if we may believe Ro-| they are the bones of Elephants ; abundance of
Pag. 457» ger Hoveden, whom I would by all means re- which were brought over into Britain by the
commend to you, if you are an admirer of Mi- Emperor Claudius, who landed near Sandwich,
racles. Next, the Stour [leaving Eaſt-well, the | and who therefore might probably come this
Olanige Seat of the Earl of Winchelſea, and paſling | way in his march to the Thames - the hape
Chil; by Olanige or Olantigh, i. e. an Eight or Iſland, || and bigneſs of theſe teeth agreeing alſo with a
comes to Chitham, or as others call it Julbam, | + late deſcription of the Grinders of an Elephant;
| ; . ; x ; . + Dr. Mul-
Futhert a where are the Ruins of an ancient Caſtle, that } and their depth under-ground, being (as 151j,v, Ana-
Dover, one Fulbert of Dover is ſaid to have built ;} conceived ) probably accounted-tor, by the tom. Account.
Which family ſoon ended in an heir female, mar- continual waſhings-down of carth from the
ry'd to Richard, natural ſon of King John, to | Hills.
whom ſhe brought this Caſtle and very large | At five miles diſtance from Chillam aforeſaid,
poſſeſſions. He had two daughters by her, Lora, the Stour (dividing it's chanel) runs with a
wife of William Marmion ; and Iſabel, wife of | ſwift current to Daurovernum, the chief City of pycoyernum,
David de Strathbolgy Earl of Athole in Scot-| this County, to which City it gives the
land, and mother to that John Earl of Athole, | name ; for Durwhern ſignifies in Britiſh a rapid
who, having been ſentenc'd for repeated trea-| river. It is call'd by Prolemy, inſtead of Duro-
ſons (to make his puniſhment Exemplary and | vernum, Darvernum ; by Bede and others, Do-
publick, in proportion to the greatneſs of his | robernia; by the Saxons Cant-papa-byms, i. e.
birth) was hang'd at London upon a gallows |the City of the people of Rent; by Ninnius and
fifty foot high, and taken down when half- the Britains Caer Kent, 1. e. the City of Kent; by
us,

I

**

Sees Thames renown'd for Swans, with brack-
iſh waves
Mix her pure ſtream.

Eafl- well.

Izes.

—

"CA4NTIUM

240

i Carterbary. us, Canterbury, and by the Latins, Cantuaria. A
9 very ancient City it is, and no doubt was fa-
mous in the times of the Romans. Not very

large (as Malmesbury ſays) nor very little; Ja-

mois for it's good ſituation, for the richneſs of the

ö neighbouring ſoil, for the entireneſs of the wal's enclo-
| Ang it, for it's conveniences of water aud wood : and
| befides all this, by reaſon of the nearneſs of the Sea, it
| has fiſh in abundazce. While the Saxon Heptar-
chy Kouriſh'd, it was the Capital city of the
Kingdom of Kent, and the ſear of their Kings;
till King Ethelbert gave it with the Royalties to
Auſtin, when conſecrated Archbiſhop of the En-
liſh nation; Who here fix'd a See for himſelt and
Succeſlors. And though the Metropolitan-dig-
nity, together with the honour of the Pali (this
was a Biſhop's veſtment, going over the ſhoul-

| Auſtin the
1 Englith A-
| poſtle.

What a Pall

is.

ders, made of a ſheep's skin, in memory of

him who ſought the Loft ſheep, and when he
had found it, lay'd it on his ſhoulders ; and
was embroider'd with Crofles, and taken oft
the body or coffin of St. Peter) were ſettled
at London by St. Gregory, Pope, for the ho-
nour of S. Auguſtine ; it was remov'd hither.
For Kenulfus King of the Mercians writes thus
to Pope Leo. Becauſe Auguſtine of bleſſed me-
mory (who firſt preach'd the word of God to the
Engliſh nation, and gloriouſly preſided over the Church-
es of Saxony in the city of Canterbury) is now dead,
and his body bury'd in the Church of St. Peter Prince
of the Apoſtles (which his Succeſſor Laurentius con-
fecrated; ) it ſeemeth good to all Wiſe- men of our
ration, that that City ſhould have the Metropolitan
honour, where his body is bury'd who planted the true
faith ia thoſe parts. But whether or no the Archi-
epiſcopal See and Metropolitical Dignity of this
Nation, were ſettled here by authority of the
IViſe-men, i. e. (to ſpeak 8 to our pre-
ſent times) by authority of Parliament; or by
Auſtin himſelf, in his life-time, as others
would have it: it is certain, that the Popes
immediately ſucceeding, fix d it ſo firm to this
place, that they decreed an Anathema, and hell-
fire, to any one that ſhould preſume to remove
ir, From that time, it is incredible how the
Place flouriſh'd, both by the Archiepiſco-
pal Dignity, and alſo a School which Theo-
dore the ſeventh Archbiſhop founded there. And
though it was much ſhatterd in the Daniſh
wars, and has been ſeveral times almoſt quite
deftroy'd by the caſualties of fire ; yet it has
always riſen again with greater beauty.

After the coming-in of the Normans, when
William Rufus (as it is in the Regiſter of S.
Augu$tine's Abby) had given the City of Canter-
bury entirely to the Biſhops, which they had former-
ly held only by courtefie ; by the relation which it
bore to Religion, and by the bounty of it's
Prelates («ſpecially of Simon Sudbury, who re-
pair'd the walls,) it did not only recruit, bur
on a ſudden grew up to ſuch ſplendour, as even

for the beauty of it's private buildings to be

equal to oy City in Britain; but for the mag-
nificence of it's Churches, and their number, to

exceed the beſt of them. Amongſt theſe, there

+ Are, C. +wererwo peculiarly eminent, Chri'sand S. Au-
ſtin's; both inſtitured for Benedictine Monks.

As tor Chriſt-Church, it is in the very heart of

the City, and riſes with ſo much Majeſty, that,

even at a diſtance, it imprints upon the mind

a ſort of Religious veneration. The (ame Au-

{tin that 1 ſpoke of before, repair'd this

Church, which (as Bede tells us) had formerly

been built by the Romans that were Chriſti-

ans: he dedicated ir to Chriſt, and it became a

* 72, C. See for his Succeſſors, which * 80 Archbiſhops
have now in a continu'd Succeſſion been poſ-

ſeſos'd of, Of whom, Lanſrank and William Cor-

An. 793.

* . ps.
boyl, when that more ancient fabrick was burnt

down, rais'd the per part of the Church to

that Majeſty wherein it now appears; as their
Succeflors did the lower part: both done at

great charges, to Which the pious ſuperſtition

ot tormer ages, very liberally contributed. For
numbers of all ſorts (of the higheſt, middle,

and loweſt ranks,) flock'd hither with large of-
ferings, to viſit the Tomb of Thomas Becket
Archbiſhop. He was ſlain in this Church

by the Courtiers, tor oppoſing the King too
reſolutely and warmly in Defence of the Liber-

ties of the Church; and was regiſter'd on that
account by the Pope in the Kalendar of Mar-

tyrs, and had divine honcurs pay'd him, and

was ſo loaded with rich offerings, that gold

was one of the meaneſt Treaſures of his Shrine.

All (ſays Eraſmus, who was an eye-witneſs )
ſbin d, ſparkd, glitter d with rare and very large
jervels ; and even in the whole Church appear d a
profuſeneſs above that of Kings. And, at the diſ-
ſolution, f the Plate and Jewels filled two great + M
Cheſts, each whereof required eight men Argl va,
to carry them out of the Church. So that the P. 15
name of Chriſt [to whom it was dedicated] was
almoſt laid aſide, for that of S. Thomas. Nor

was it ſo much fam'd for any other thing, as

the memory and burial of this Man; tho' it

has ſome other T'ombs that might deſervedlu

be boaſted of, particularly that of Edward Prince

of Wales, firnam'd the Black (a hero, for his
warlike Valour, almoſt a miracle,) and of that
potent Prince, King Henry the fourth. Bur

King Henry 8. diſpers'd all this wealth which

had been ſo long in gathering, and drove out

the Monks; in lieu whereot, Chriſt-Church

has a Dean, Archdeacon, twelve Prebendaries,

and fix Preachers, whoſe buſineſs it is to plant

the word of God in the neighbouring Places. It

had another Church below the City to the Eaſt,

which diſputed pre-eminence with this, known

by the name ot St. AuSin's, becauſe St. Au-St-Auzfin'
fin himſelt, and King Ethelbert by his advice, 29m,
founded it to the honour of St. Peter and St. ©
Paul, tor a burying-place both of the Kings of

Kent and the Archbiſhops (tor it was not then

law ful to bury in Cities: ) It was richly en-
dow'd by them ; and the Abbot there had a

Mint granted him, and the Privilege of Coyn-

ing. After the Diſſolution, j tho* the greateſt * Now, c.
part of it f lay in ruins, and the reſt * was turn'd + Lies C.
into a houſe for the King, yet any one that*ls, C.
|| beheld it, might from thence eaſily apprehend _— b
what it f had been. Auſtiz himſelf was bury'd in F HC
the Porch of it, and (as Thomas Spot has told
us) with this Epitaph :

Jadlytus Anglorum praſul pius, & decus
altum,

Hic Auguſtinus requieſcit corpore ſanct us.
The Kingdom's honour, and the Church's

grace, |

Here Austin, England's bleſt Apoſtle, lays,

Bur Bede, whois a better Authority, aſlures
us, that he had over him this much more an-
cient Inſcription,

HIC REQVIESCIT DOMINVS AV-
GVSTINVS DOROVERNENSIS AR-
CHIEPISCOPVS PRIMVS, QVI OLIM
HVC A BEATO GREGORIO ROMA-
NAE VRBIS PONTIFICE DIRECT Vs,
ET A DEO OPERATIONE MIRACV-
LORVM SVFFVLTVS, ET ETHELBER-
THVM

4

© p. 21, 22.

day
Jus

[

anc

it 1
| Still, Orig. CO!
no!

(ac
the

1 k

1 -

J Rather t

_—

"RENT.

+ lt. 4 a4. :
am

—

242

THVM REGEM AC GENTEM ILLIVS
AB IDOLORVM CVLTV AD FIDEM
CHRISTI PERDVXIT, ET COMPLETES
IN PACE DIEBVS OFFICII SVI DE-
FVNCTVS EST SEPTIMO KALEN-
DAS IVNIAS, EODEM REGE REG-
NANTE.

That iy *

Here reſteth S. Auguſtine the firſt Archbiſhop of
Canterbury, who being formerly ſent hither by the
Bleſſed Gregory, Biſhop of Rome, and ſupported of
God by the working of miracles ; both converted
Ethelbert with his kingdom from the worſhip of Idols
to the faith of Chriſt ; and alſo, having fulfilled the
days of his Office, dy d on the 7 of the Kalends of
June, in the ſame King's reign.

[Againſt the Authority of this Inſcription,
and the pretence thereof to ſo great Antiquity,
it is juſtly obje&ed, that the ſtile Archiepiſcopus
could not then be in the Weſtern Church ; as
not being commonly allowed to Metropolitans
(according to Mabillon and others) till about
the ninth Century. |

With him, there were bury'd in the ſame

rch the ſix Archbiſhops who immediately

ucceeded ; and, in honour of the whole ſeven,
namely, Auſtin, Laurentius, Mellitus, Juſtus, Ho-
norius, Dens-dedit, and Theodofius, were theſe
verſes engraven in marble,

SEPTEM SUNT ANGLI PRIMATES
ET PROTOPATRES,

SEPTEM RECTORES, SEPTEM COE-
LOQVE TRIONES ;

SEPTEM CISTERNAE VITAE,
SEPTEMQVE LVCERNAE ;

ET SEPTEM PALMAE REGNI, SEP-
TEMQVE CORONAE,

SEPTEM SVNT STELLAE, QVAS
HAEC TENET AREA CELLAE.

Seven Patriarchs of England, Primates

ſeven,
Seven Rectors, and ſeven Labourers in

heaven,

Seven Ciſterns pure of life, ſeven Lamps
of light,

Seven Palms, and of this Realm ſeven
Crowns full bright,

Seven Stars are here beſtow'd in vault
below.

It will not be material, to take notice of a-
nother Church near this ; which (as Bede has
it) was built by the Romans, and dedicated
to S. Martin; and in which (before the coming
of Auſtin) Bertha, of the blood Royal of the
Franks, and wife of Ethelbert, was us d to have
divine Service celebrated in the Chriſtian way.
As to the Caſtle, which appears on the ſouth-
ſide of the City, with it's decay d bulwarks ;
ſince it does not ſeem to be of any great Anti-
quity, I have nothing memorable to ſay of it;

Racker by but only, that it was built by the f Normans,
the Sn. Of the dignity of the See of Canterbury, which
was formerly exceeding great, I ſhall only ſay

thus much; that as in former ages, under the
Hierarchy of the Church of Rome, the Arch-
biſhops of Canterbury were Primates of all
England, Legates of the Pope, and (fo Pope Ur-

ban 2. expreſs d it) as it were Patriarchs of the

other world ; ſo when the Pope's Authority 1
was thrown off, it was decreed by a Synod 1
held in the year 1534, that, laying aſide that
title, they ſhould be ſtill Primates and Metropo- Primate and | |
litans of all England. This dignity was * lately Metropolitan 1
poſſeſs d by the moſt reverend Father in God, of all Eng-
John Whitgift ; who, having conſecrated his 25 aid
whole life to God, and all his labours to the ann. 1609.
ſervice of the Church, dy'd in the year 1604,
extremely lamented by all good men. He was
ſucceeded by Richard Bancroft, a perſon of ſin-
gular "—_ and prudence in all matters rela-
ting to the Diſcipline and Eſtabliſhment of the
Church. [As to it's preſent State, it is a City
of great trade; to which the Foreigners in it |
ſeem to have contributed very much. The 4
are partly Walloons, and partly French; the firl
(being driven out of Artois, and other Provin-
ces of the Spaniſh Netherlands, in the reign of
Queen Elizabeth, for adhering to the Reformed i{
Religion) came and ſettled here, and brought 1
along with them the Art of weaving Silk, into
this Kingdom. And this is now improv'd to
ſuch perfection, that the ſilks woven at Canter- |
bury, equal, it not exceed, any foreign ſilk 4
whatſoever ; great quantities being ſent to Lon-
don, where it is very much eſteem'd by the
Merchants. 'The ſettlement of the French is
but of late date, only ſince the laſt perſecuti-
on under Lewis the 14", but they are nume-
rous, and very induſtrious, maintaining their
own poor, and living frugally. In the Publick
Service, they joyn with the H/aloons, who have
a large place allow'd them near the Cathedral ;
and theſe, together, make a very great Congre-
tion.] Canterbury is fifty one degrees, ſixteen
minutes in Latitude; and twenty four degrees,
fifty one minutes in Longitude.

The Stour, having gather'd it's waters into
one chanel, runs by Hackington, where Lora Coun- Hacking
teſs of LeicefFer, a very honourable Lady in her ton.
time, quitting the pleaſures of the world, ſe-
queſter d her ſelf from all commerce with it,
and devoted her Whole life to the ſervice of
God. At which time, Baldwin, Archbiſhop
of Canterbury, begun a Church in this place
to the honour of S. Stephen, and of Thomas
of Canterbury; but, the Authority of the
Pope prohibiting it, for fear it ſhould tend
to the prejudice of the Monks of Canter-
bury, he let the deſign fall. However, from
that time the place has kept the name of
S. Stephen s; and Sir Roger Manwood Knight, S. Stephens.
Chief Baron of the Exchequer, a perſon of great
knowledge in our Common Law (to whoſe
munificence the poor inhabitants are very much
indebred,) was f lately it's greateſt ornament ; + So ſaid,
nor * was his ſon, Sir Peter Manwood (Knight ann. 1607.
of the Bath) a leſs honour to it, whom I could“ J., C.
not but mention with this reſpect, ſince he f was x Is, C.
ſo eminent an Encourager of virtue, learning,
and learned men. From hence, the Stour, by
Fordich (which in Domeſday-book is call'd the Fordich
little burrough of Forewich) tamous for it's excel-
lent trouts ; paſſes on to Sturemouth, where it Sturemouth,
divides it's waters into two chanels ; and, lea-
ving that name, is call'd J/antſume, and makes
the Iſle of Thanet on the weſt and ſouth- ſides, Ile of Tha-
which on other parts is waſh'd by the ſea. So- net.
linus call'd this Athanaton, and in ſome Co-
pies Thaxaton ; the Britains Inis Rubin (as Aſ-
ſer witneſles,) poſſibly for Rhutupin, from the
City Rhutupium bard by; the Saxons, Taner |
and Tanecland ; and we, Tenet. The foil is a Tenet. |
white chalk, and very truittul in corn and graſs;
it is eight miles in length, and four in breadth; 5

and was reckon'd formerly to have ſome fix hun-, Engliſh
dred * families in it; upon which, it is corruptlyca1rd a
H h read Side, and

——— 228
*

*«

3

— . Ow
—— —
* 6 —
5 R Y

CANT

8

TU M

243

Ll bs

conſiſted (as read in Bede, miliarium ſexcentorum, i. e. ſix| Saints. The Kings of Kent were very liberal 5 110
'ris thought) hundred miles, inſtead of familiarum ſexcenta-|to it; eſpecially Miihred, who (to ſhow the Leith
33 Teig rum, ſix hundred families. As to what So- Cuſtom of that age, from this particular Do- | Topſh
formerly Fa- linus obſerves, that there are no ſnakes in this|nation) in order to complete his Grant, laid a turſ Iiunderwic. Was
milia. Manſa, Illand, and that Earth carry'd from hence kills ef the ground he gave, upon the holy Altar. After- l WhIC
3 them; Experience has diſcover'd it to be an Wards, this Ifland wrs fo harr.{s'd by the plum- f
os dg error. So that that Etymology «3 dd ru, {ering Danes (who by all kinds of cruelty polluted ha
from the death of ſerpents, falls to the ground. this Mozaſtrry of Ponincua) that ic did not re- —
Here was the firſt landing of the Saxons ; here cover, before the ſettlement of the Norman ſince
they firſt ſettled, by the permiſſion of Vorti- Government. ((it
gern; here was their place of refuge; and here] Nor muſt I here omit the mention of ar Sand
it was, that Guortimer the Britain gave themſ thing very much to the honour of the Inhabi- duft 215
Layis tituli. that bloody defeat, when at the Lapis Tituli (tor| tants, thoſe eſpecially who live ncar the roads these pit Tic
ſo Ninnius calls it, as we, almoſt in the ſame or harbours of Margat, Ramſgate, and Brodſtear : of a
ſenſe, Stonar ; and it appears to have been af namely, That they are exceeding induſtrious, and nd
harbour,) he oblig'd them to make a haſty and ſ are as it were Amphibieus creatures, and get their the
diſorderly retreat to their Pinnaces, or little living both by ſea and land: they deal in both ſcar
boats. [The only Objection againſt this Ana- elements, are both fiſhers and ploughmen, both der
logy between Lapis Tituli and Stonar, is, that|husbandmen and mariners ; and the ſelf ſame Oo
in the ſame ancient Records it is written, not hand that holds the plough, ſteers the ſhip, ly 1
Sonar, but Eſtanore; which writing, however, According to the ſeveral ſeaſons, they make her.
ſhews it to have been a landing- place, as the|nets, fiſh for“ Cod, Herring, Mackarel, &c.+ Ache Was
ſame termination doth in Cerdiceſore, mene- go to ſea themſelves, and export their own ſto]
ſore, and other harbours. | In this place (as the|commodittes. And thoſe very men alſo dung | ed
ſame Author tells us) Guortimer commanded |rcheir ground, plough, ſow, harrow, reap, inne; + Numeror, Mo
them to bury him, as a means to curb the inſo- being quick and active in both employments: | of
lence of the Saxons : like Scipio Africanus, hof and to, the courſe of their Labours runs round. =
order d his Tomb to be ſo contriv'd, as to look. And when there happen any ſhipwracks, as ang
towards Africa; thinking, that even the ſight there do here now and then (tor thoſe ſhallows *
of it would caſt a terror upon the Cartha- and + ſhelves ſo much dreaded by ſea-men, lie + Pulyiai, Ei.
+ Forts and ginians. f Mr. Sommer, and after him * the fover-againſt it; namely, the Godwin, of which Re
Ports, p. 94, Lord Biſhop of Worceſter, ſeem rather inclin'd, in its proper place among the Iflands, rhe "__
h 2525 8115 trom ſome reſen blance of the name, and the Brakes, the Four-foot, the Muitdick, &c.) they are I.
p. 2 "reaſons follow ing, to place this at Folkſtone or extremely induſtrious to ſave the Lading. [Of 0
Lapis populi ; the preſent Sonar not being ſupra f late years, this Iſland hath been advanced to —
ripam Gallici maris (upon the bank of the French- the Honour of an Earldom ; the title of Earl *
ſea,) as Ninnius deſcribes his /apis tituli to be; of Thanet being deſervedly given to Sir Nicholas a
nor ſtanding high, but in a low place, apt to] Tuſion, Baron Tien of To ton in Com. Suſſex, + Prepoitus, |
be overflow'd, and therefore unfit for erecting | (4 Car. 1.) who, dying the 3o®® of June, An. th
a conſpicuous Monument, that was deſign'd to 1632, was ſucceeded by his eldeſt ſurviving ſon be
ſtrike a terror at a diſtance ; both which are Jo/z, who, by his wife Margaret, eldeſt daugh- T
more agrecable to Folkſtone : and laſtly, becauſe |rer and coheir of Richard Earl of Dorſet, having -
Ninins is not expreſs, that Lapis tituli was in ſix ſons, Nicholas, John, Richard, Thomas, Sack- *
+ Cap. 45, Thanet, f as he is concerning three other bat- vi, and George ; and dying May the 7b 1664,
46. tles before : whence they conclude (and per- hath been already ſucceeded by four of them; || Dudg. I 8
haps rightly) that had it been in Thaxet, he] his fourth ſon Thomas, a perſon of great ho- vol. 2. f. A0
would have told us ſo, as he did in the reſt ;|nour and vertue, and of moſt exemplary Cha-
which yet, being a queſtion too intricate to be |rity, being now Earl of Thanet.]
debated here, is wholly left to the deciſion ot On the ſouth-lide of the mouth of PPantſum, :
the Reader. It was alſo in this Ifland, at Tip- (Which they imagine has chang'd it's chanel)
Wippedfleete, pedfieete (ſo call'd from Wipped a Saxon flain|and over-againſt the Ifland, was a City, call'd
there,) that Hengiſt routed the Britains, after|by Ptolemy Rhutupic ; by Tacitus Portrs Tiutu- Raute
they were almoſt worn out with a long courſe leuſis tor Rhutupeiifis, it B. Rhenanus's con- Portus True
ot Engagements; [and yet a defeat here jecture hold good; by Antoninus Rhitupis par- lent,
(unleſs it may be an objection againſt fixing |:us ; by Ammianus Rhutupiæ ſtatio; by O-
Wippedſlecte in this place,) makes it look, as it |roſius the port and city of Rhutubus ; by the Sax-
the Saxons had been almoſt driven out of the| ons (according to Bede) Repraceſter, and by
Nation again: whereas they had defeated the | others Ruptimuth ; by Altred of Beverley Rich-
Britains in many battles juſt before, and dri- berge; and at this day Rickborrow : Thus has Richborron,
| ven them out of Kent, as is evident from the [time ſported in varying one and the ſame name.
Ants 5599 Saxon Chronicle. Many years after, Auſtin But whether Rhutupia was the ſame with the
457 #25» landed in this Iſland, to whoſe bleſſing the cre-| Portus Rutupenſis, Rrinpia ftatio, or the old Rup- I
dulous Prieſts afcrib'd the fruitfulneſs of it; mut, is (1 contels) a queſtion among the 1
and Gotcelin, a Monk, crics out, Tanet, a learned. Mr. Sonner, it is plain, would have Ports" er
land happy in fruitſulneſe, but moſt of all happy for them to be two places, contrary to the opinion Forts, P4315 this place fig
its affording reception to ſo many gueſts who brought | of Leland, Lambard, and others ; wherein, in tne "ay all Bri-
God along with them, or rather, to ſo many citizens | general he may be right; but it is by no means 1
Third, C. of heaven. Egbert, || the eighth King of Kent, | probable, that our Portus Rautupenſis was Sand-
to appeaſe the Lady Domneua, whom he had ui, but rather Stonat, which he himſelf al-
596. formerly very much injur'd, granted her a fair lous to have been an ancient Port. Sandwich
eſtate here, (as much as a Hind ſhould run indecd lies well-nigh as near to the old Rutupi-
over at one courſe, which amcunted to no leſsſ um, as Stonar docs, and conſequently might as
than forty eight plough-lands, about a third deſervedly h. ve aitum'd the name of Portus Ru-
a part of the Itiand; as appears by the Map in[:upafis, as Stondr could, had it had the ſame
Y 34 the Monaſticon, and the Courſe delineated injconveniencies in point of ſituation for ſuch a
Miner. it;) upon which ſhe built a Nunnery for ſe- I purpoſe, that Sonar once had; for this, evident-
venty Virgins: Mildred was Prioreſs there; whojly, was the road v.here the ſhips lay, that came
tor hcr lancuty was kalender'd among the lad url em Rutupia, as Plolemy calls it, Which was

a littd:

under wic.

e prov
ry 6
© n

ſellay

t Numeros.

Iviei,

ir.
Tru-

dome are of ' Prafide Iatatus quo Rhutupinus ager.
4 Pinion, that
utup; ; . . . .
54 En pe ge. Auſonius likewiſe beſtows an Elegy upon his

tain.

„„

2 _

: Prepoſitus, F Commander of it's own under the Count of

thus of him;

nifes al Bri. uncle Claudius Contents, who had a great ſtock
of money at uſury among the Britains, and
mightily encreas'd the principal by intereſt ;

K E NT.

a little mile higher in the Country : juſt as
Leith in Scotland is the Port to Edenburgb, and
Topſham in England to Exeter. And this too
was afterwards the Lundenuic, or the Port to
which all ſuch as traded either to London from
foreign parts, or from London into foreign parts,
had their chief refort. | What the original of the
name might be, 1s not certainly agreed on. Bur
ſince Sandwich and Sandibay, places near this,
(it there was the port, )] haxe their name from
Sand, and Rhyd Tufith in Britiſh ſignifies a ſan-
dy ford; I weuld willingly derive it from thence.
The City was ſtretch'd out along the deſcent
of a hill; and there was a tower upon a high
ground, that over-lcok'd the Sea : which now
the ſands have ſo entirely excluded, that it
ſcarce comes within a mile of the place. Un-
der the Government of the Romans, it was
exceeding famous. From hence they common-
ly ſer fail out of Britain for the Continent, and
here the Roman fleets arriv'd. Lupicinus, who
was ſent over into Britain by Conſtantius, to
ſtop the excurſions of the Scots and Picts, land-
ed here the Herulian, the Batavian, and the
Mefian * Regiments. And Theodoſius, father
of Theodoſius the Emperor (to whom, as Sym-
machus tells us, the Senate decreed ſtatues
on horſe-back for having quieted Britain) came
to land here with his Herculii, Jovii, Victores,
Fidentes (which were ſo many Cohorts of the
Romans.) Afterwards, when the Saxon pi-
rates ſtop'd up all trade by ſea, and infeſted
our coaſts with frequent robberies ; the ſecond
Legion, call'd Augu#7a, which had been brought
out of Germrny by the Emperor Claudius, and
reſided for many years at the IJca Silurum in
Wales, was remov'd hither, and had here a

the Saxon ſhore. Which office was poſſibly
born by that Clemens Maximus, who, after he
was ſaluted Emperor by the ſoldiery in Britain,
flew Gratian, and was himſelf afterwards lain
by Theodofirs at Aquileia, For Auſonius, in his
Verles concerning Aquileia, calls him Rhutupi-
mm Latronem, 1. e. the Rhutupian Robber:

Maximus armigeri quondam ſub nomine
lixæ. |

Felix que tanti ſpeftatrix lata triumphi,

Fudiſti Auſonio Rhutupinum Marte latronem.

Vile Maximns, at firſt a knapſack rogue.

O happy you who all the triumph view'd,

And the Rhutupian thief with Roman arms
ſubdu'd !

There was alſo another Preſident of Rhutu-

pia, Flavius Sanctus, whole memory the ſame
Poet has preſerv'd in his Parentalia, ſpeaking

Militiam nullo qui turbine ſedulus egit,

This Rhntupiæ flouriſh'd likewiſe after the
coming-in of the Saxons. For Authors teli
us, 1t was the Palace of Ethelbert King of
Kent ; and Bede honours it with the name of a
City. But trom that time forward, it decay'd ;
nor is it ſo much as mention'd by any writer,
except Alfred of Beverley, who has told us how
Alcher with his Kentiſh-men routed the Danes,
then encumber'd with the ſpoil, about this
place ; call'd at that time Richberge. But now,
age has eras'd the very tracks of it ; and to
teach us that Cities die as well as Men, it is
at this day a corn-field, wherein, when the
corn is grown up, one may obſerve the draughts
of Streets croſſing one another, (for where they
have gone, the corn is thinner,) and ſuch croſ-

of a ſquare tower, cemented with a ſort of ſand,
extremely binding. One would imagin this
had been the Acropolis ; it looks down from ſo
great a height upon the wet plains of Tuner,
which the Ocean, withdrawing it ſelf by little
and little, has quite forſaken. But the plot ot
the City, now plow'd, has often caſt-up the
marks ot it's Antiquity, gold and tilver coins
of the Romans; and ſhews its daughter a little
below, call'd, from the Sand, by the Suxons

ee ated tenc'd on the north and welt-ſides
with walls : on the reſt, with a rampire, a ri-
ver, and a ditch. [Ir is an ancient Town ; be-

that above a hundred years before, ZAEthelfZan
King of Kent, and a certain Duke call'd Eal-
cher, overthrew the Daxes in a Sea-fight at Hong-
pic in Kent; from which time it grew greater
and greater, upon the decay of Richborough and
Stonar, till the days of Edward the Conteſſor;
when, at the firſt inſtitution of the Cinque-
Ports which now are, it was thought fitter to
be eſteem'd one of the five, than Stonar then
was. Since when, it has ſtill retain'd tliat title,
being the ſccond port in order, and has always
been eſteem'd a Town of trade and repute.
As it formerly felt the fury of the Danes, ſo
did it in the laſt age the fire of the French. Now,
it is pretty populous ; though the haven (by
reaſon of the ſands heap'd in, and of that
great ſhip of Pope Paul the fourth's, ſunk in the
very chanel) has not depth enough to carry veſ-
ſels of the larger ſort. Eduard Morntague,
having gotten the ſole Command of the Engliſh
Fleet in the late Uſurpation, with ſingular pru-
dence ſo wrought upon the Seamen, that they
peaceably deliver'd up the whole Fleet to King
Charles the ſecond ; for which ſignal ſervice he
was (July 12. 12 Car. 2.) advanc'd to the ho-
nours of Lord Mowntague of S. Neots, Viſcount
Hinchingbrook, and Earl of Sandwich; who, dy-
ing at Sea the 28. of May 1672, was ſucceeded
in his honours by his eldeſt fon Edward, who 1s
now Earl of Sandwich. Not far from hence, is

Wingham, which hath lately been honoured, by
[giving the title of Baron to the Right Honou-

but, being cut off by death, left it all to fo-|rable the Lord Couper, who, for his great Elo-

reigners, and was bury'd here.

Et patruos Elegeia meos reminiſcere cantus,
Contentum, tellus quem Rhutupina tegit.

And let my Uncle grace the mournful
ſound,
Contents, buried in Rhutupian ground.

quence, Wiſdom, and knowledge in the Laws,
was alſo advanced to the honour of Lord Chan-
cellor of Great Britain ( being the firſt, who

the two Kingdoms ; ) and who hath fince been
advanced by King George to the higher titles
of Viſcount Fordwiche, and Earl Cowper.|

|

Below

fings they commonly call there, S. Auguſtine's Croſs.S, Auguſtine's
Nothing now remains, but ſome ruinous walls Crols,

Sonopic, and by us Sandwich. This is one of the Sandwich,

ing mention'd ( ſays Sommer) in one of the 4 Ports and
Chartularies ot the Church of Canterbury in the Forts, p. 15.

year 979. But the * Saxon Chronicle tells us, *Chron, Sax.

* So ſaid,
ann. 1607.

Wingham,

bore that high Office, atter the happy Union of

= _ of

CANTIUM..

24%

Below Rhutupia, Ptolemy places the Promon- land Suetonius witneſs, The day of his Land- harb
Cantium tory Cantium, as the utmoſt cape of this Corner: ing, was the 26 of Auguſt, in the afternoon ; came
Prom. read corruptly in ſome Copies, Nucantium, and [as hath been demonſtrated by an ingenious per- jm anch
Acantium ; and calbd by Diodorus Carion, and |{on, from all the circumſtances of the Story, Pie celeb
by us at this day, the Fore-land. Notwith-|and the ebbing and flowing of the tides.] What Tran, * (cho
ſtanding which, the whole ſhore here-abouts he did here, himſelf has given us a pretty large 193, the
is called by the Poets the Rhutupian ſhore, from f account of, and I already out of him, and out ther
Rhutupie. Agreeable to which, is that of Juvenal of the loſt monuments of Suetonius concerni «8, paſl
(where he Satyrically inveighs againſt Curtius] Scæva, who particularly ſignaliz d his valour at * — 3. 8. Lav
Mont anus, a nice delicate Epicure, ) concern-|Dyrrachium, in the Civil wars; and whom our El. cc · don
ing the oyſters carry'd to Rome from this Country- man Yoſeph, the Poet, in thoſe verſes : ny
ſhore. of his Antiocheis relating to Britain, will have Por
to be of Britiſh extraction; tho? I think it is one
ulli major fuit uſus edendi not true. and
Tempeſtate mea, Circais nata forent, an ker
Lucrinum ad ſaxum, Rhutupinove edita Hine & Scava ſatus, pars non obſcura tu- (
fundo multus Na
Oſtrea, callebat primo deprendere morſu. Civilis, Magnum ſolus qui mole ſolutà ma
Obſedit, meliorque ſtetit pro Caſare murs, I.
The exquiſiteſt palate in my time. : 8 an
He, whether Circe's rocks his Oyſters bore, Hence mighty Scæva too derives his ſtem, wh
Or Lucrine Lake, or the Rhutupian ſhore, Scava in Roman wars no vulgar name. : to
Knew at firſt Taſte : nay, at firſt look could] He, = he ſaw the batter'd turret Archbiſhop of WI
tell _... g ; P
A crab or lobſter's country by the ſhell. Back d with its ruins, ſtood himſelf « Wm.” - fo
ail? | |
And Lucan : Unmov'd the vain aſſaults of Pompey bore, -
A ſtronger fortreſs than had been before. is
Aut vaga cum Thetis, Rhutupinaque littora 2 to
fervent. But as toCzſar's Actions in this Country, learn "JS? as
Or when Rhutupian billows beat the them from himſelf, and from what we have Britain, hi
ſhore. {aid concerning them before. For it has not th
| been my good fortune to converſe with that old te
From the Promontory Cantium, the ſhore, run- Britain, whom M. Aper (as Quintilian ſays) N
ning ſouthward for ſome miles, is indented with [ſaw in this Ifland, and who confeſſed that he gl
the riſings of ſeveral hills. But when it comes was in the battle againſt Cæſar when the Bri- 11
Sandon. to Sandon (i. e. a ſandy hill) and Deale, two|tains endeavoured to keep him from landing; i
neighbouring caſtles built by K. Henry 8, within and beſides, it is not my preſent deſign to write t
„So ſaid, the memory of the laſt age, it falls, and lies a Hiſtory. L
ann. 1607. plain and open to the ſea, That Cæſar landed] Juſt upon this ſhore, are ridges, for a long 1
at this Deale, call'd by Ninnius Dole (and in way together, like ſo many rampires, which Numerus 3
my Judgment, "ny right ; for ſo our Britains|ſome ſuppoſe that the wind has ſwept up toge- Tungticaro-
at this day call a low open plain upon the ſeaſ ther. But I fanſy, it was that fence (or rather rum. 6
+ Philosoph. or upon a river,) is the current opinion f; and Station, or a ſort of Ship-camp,) which Cæſar C -A f
Tranſ. N. Ninnius confirms it, when he tells us (in his [was ten days and as many nights in making, camps. 4 Ballliſcis, ,
| Ceſar ad barbarous ſtile, ) that || Cæſar fought a war at|to draw into it his ſhatter'd ſhips, and ſo ſe- || Are ſhown,
Dole bellum Dole. A Table alſo, hung up in Dover-caſtle,|cure them both againſt Storms, and alſo againſt |
pugnavit. ſays the ſame thing; and Cæſar adds ſtrength|rhe Britains; who made ſome attempts upon
to the opinion, when he ſays that he landed|them, but without ſucceſs. For I am told,
upon an open and plain ſhore, and that heſthat the Inhabitants call this Rampire Romes- Romer val.
was very warmly received by the Britains.|work, that is, The work of the Romans. And
Whereupon, our Country-man Leland in his Cyg-[I am the rather inclin'd to believe that Cæſar
naa Cant io, landed here, becauſe himſelf tells us, that ſever
miles from thence (for ſo an ancient Copy cor-
Jattat Dela novas celebris arces, rected by Fl. Conſtantinus, a perſon of Con-
Notrs Caſareis locus trophais. ſular dignity, reads it) the Sea was ſo narrow-
ly pent up between mountains, that one might
And lofty Dele's proud towers are ſhown, [fling a dart from the hills to the ſhore. And
Where Cæſar's trophies grace the town. all along from Deale, a ridge of high rocks
(call'd by Cicero Moles magnifice, ſtately cliffs)
Czſar's at- For he (to take the liberty of a ſhort digreſ-|abounding with Samphire, in Latin Crythmu and $ampetts
tempt upon ſion) having, as Pomponius Sabinus tells us out of Sampetra, runs for about ſeven miles to Dover;
Britain, Seneca, ſubdu'd all by Sea and Land; caſt his eye where it gapes, and opens it ſelf to paſſengers.
ho aan towards the Ocean : and, as it the Roman And the nature of the place anſwers Czfar's
in Britain, World were not ſufficient for him, he began to|charaer of it; as receiving and encloſing the
think of another; and with a thouſand {ail of ſea between two hills. In this break of that
Ships (for ſo Athenzus has it out of Cota) en-]ridge of rocks, lies Dubris, mention'd by An- putris
ter'd Britain, 2 four years before Chriſt; and|roninus ; called in Saxon Dopna, and by us
the next year after, a ſecond time: either to Dover. Darellus tells us out of Eadmer, that porer
revenge himſelf upon the Britains, for having|the name was given it, from being ſhut up and
aſſiſted the Gauls, as Strabo will have it; orf hard to come to. For (ſays he) becauſe in old
in hopes to find Britiſh Pearls, as Suetonius| time, the ſea, making a large harbour in that place,
ſays zor inflam'd with a deſire of glory, as others|ſpread it ſelf very wide, they were put under a ne-
tell us. He had before-hand inform'd him-[ceſſity of ſbutting it up within cloſer bounds. But
ſelf of the harbours and the paſſage, not, as] William Lambard, with a greater ſhow of pro- Caſtlegar
* In his Book Roger Bacon romances, by the help of mag-| bability, fetches the name from Dufyrrha, which chang'd,
of Art and Nitying glaſſes from the coaſt of France, and byſin Britiſh ſignifies a ſteep place. The Town,
Nature. Art Perſpective; but by Spies, as both himſelf

which is ſeated among the rocks (where the
harbour

un 4

rs ip
5

not.

KENT

250

8+, Ed. 3

7

| dufſtagan.

Numerus a Company of the
Tungricano- kon'd among the Aids Palatine, were plac'd by

rum,

Caſtlega
dung od

„ kd. 3. e. 8. Law,

| Archbiſhop o

harbour it ſelf formerly was, while the ſea
came up farther ; as may be gathered from the
anchors and planks of ſhips dug-up) is more
celebrated for the convenience of its harbour
(though it has now bur little of thar left,) and
the paſſage from thence into France; than ei-
ther neatneſs, or populouſneſs. For it is a famous

«<8. paſſage ; and it was formerly * provided by

that no perſon going out of the King-

I Ed. 4. c. io. dom in Pilgrimage, ſhould take ſhipping at a-

ny other Place. It is alſo one of the Cinque-
Ports, and was formerly bound to find twenty
one Ships for the Wars, in the ſame manner
and form as Haſtings ; of which we have ſpo-
ken before, On that part lying towards the Sea,
(which is now excluded by the beach,) there
was a wall, of which there is ſome part {till re-
maining. It had a Church dedicated to St.
Martin, founded by Wihtred King of Kent ;
and a houſe of Knights-Templars ; nothing ot
which is now to be ſeen: it alſo aftords a See
to the Archbiſhop of Canterbury's Suffragan,

ewho, when the Archbiſhop is taken up with
Canterbury's more weighty affairs, has (as often as any Sut-

fragan is appointed)] the Adminiſtration ot ſuch
things as concern Orders, but does not meddle
in tae buſineſs of Epiſcopal Juriſdiction. There
is a large caſtle like a little city, with ſtrong
fortifications and a great many towers, which,
as it were, threatens the ſea under it, from a
hill, or rather a rock upon the right hand;
this Rock is on every ſide rugged and ſteep, but
towards the ſea it riſes to a wonderful height.
Matthew Paris calls it, The Key and Bar of En-

gland. The common people dream of it's be-

ing built by Julius Czſar: and I conclude, that
it was really firſt built by the Romans, from
thoſe Britiſh bricks in the Chapel, which they
us'd in their larger ſort of buildings. When
the Roman Empire began to haſten to it's end,
ungricans, Who were rec-

them here in garriſon ; part of whoſe armour
thoſe great arrows ſeem to have been, which

+ Ballliſcis. they us'd to ſhoot out of f Engines like large
(Ce loan, Croſs-bows, and which || were formerly ſhown

in the Caſtle as miracles ; [but now, no ſuch
thing is to be ſeen. ] Between the firſt coming-
in of the Saxons and the laſt Period of their
government, I have not met with ſo much as
the mention either of this Caſtle or the Town,
unleſs it be in ſome looſe papers tranſcrib'd
from a Table hung up and kept here ; which
tell us, that Cæſar, after he had landed at
Deale, and had beaten the Britains at Baram-
downe (a Plain hard by, very fit to draw up an
Army in,) began to build Dover-caſtle ; and
that Arviragus afterwards fortify'd it againſt
the Romans, and ſhut up the harbour : and
next, that Arthur and his men defeated here I
know not what Rebels. However, a little be-
fore. the coming-in of the Normans, it was
look'd on as the great Strength of England;
and upon that account, William the Norman,
when he had an eye upon the kingdom, took
an oath of Harold, that he ſhould deliver into
his hands this Caſtle, with the Well. And, at-
ter he had ſettled matters in London, he thought
nothing of greater conſequence, than to fortity
it, and to aſſign to his Nobles large poſſeſſions
in Kent, on condition that they ſhould be in

readineſs at all times with a certain number of

Soldiers for the defence of it; but that ſervice is
now redeem'd with certain Sums of money year-

ly. For when Hubert de Burgo was made Conſtable of

this Caſtle (theſe are the words of an ancient
writer) he, confidering that it was not for the ſafety
of the Caſtle to have new Guards every month, pro-

cur d, by the aſſent of the King, and of all that held
of the Caſtles that every Tenant for one month's
Guard ſhould ſend ten ſhillings ; out of which, cer-
tain perſons eletted and ſworn, as well horſe as foot,
ſhould be maintain d, for guarding the Caſtle. It is
reported, that Philip firnam'd Auguſtus, King of
France (when his ſon Lewis made his attempts
upon England, and had taken ſome Cities)
ſhould ſay, My ſon has not yet ſo much as footing
in England, if he have not got into his hands the
Caſtle of Dover ; looking upon it to be the
ſtrongeſt place in England, and to lie moſt con-
venient for France. Upon another rock over-
againſt this, and almoſt of equal height, there
are the remains of ſome very ancient building.
One Author, upon what grounds 1 know not,
has call'd it Cæſur's Altar ; but John Twine of
Canterbury, a learned old man, who in his
youth had ſeen it almoſt entire, affirm'd to me
that it was a Watch-tower, to direct Sailors by
night-lights; [ſome part whereof is yet remain-

ing, now vulgarly called Bredenſtone.| Such a-Bredenſtone.

nother there was over-againſt it at Bologne 1n
France, built by the Romans, and repair'd a
long time after by Charles the Great (as Regino
tells us, who writes it corruptly Phanum tor
Pharum,) now call'd by the French Tour d Order,
and by the Engliſh, The old man of Bullen. Be-

neath this rock, within the memory of + thet So ſaid,
laſt age, the moſt potent Prince King Henry n. 1607.
the 8 built a mole or pile (we call it the Peere) Dover. Peere.
wherein Ships might“ ride with greater ſafery,* teres.

It was done with much labour, and at infinite
charge, by faſtening large beams in the ſea, then
binding them together with iron, and heaping
on it great quantities of wood and ſtone. But
the fury and violence of the ſea was quickly
too hard for the contrivance of that good Prince;
and the frame of the work, by the continual
beating of the waves, began to disjoint. For
the repair whereot, Queen Elizabeth expended

great ſums of money, and, by f Act of Parliament, + Alſo, Stat.

lay'd a Cuſtom for ſeven years upon every Eng-11

W. 3.

liſh Veſlel that either exported or imported? Ann,

Commodities. Here, the Lord Wardens of the
Cinque Ports ( ſince Shipway was antiquated)
have been of late ſworn ; and indeed moſt of
the other buſineſs, relating to the Ports in ge-
neral, is done here. Here are all the Courts
kept, and from hence is the moſt frequent paſ-
ſage out of England into France, which has ren-
der'd it famous throughout the world. It hath
been the more ſo, by having given the title of
Earl to the right honourable Henry Lord Hunſ-

don Viſcount Rochfort, t who on the 8h of March, + Dugd. Bar.
3 Car. 1. was advanced to the title of Earl of vol. 2. p. 398.

Dover. He, dying about the year 1666, was
{ſucceeded by his Ba John : who dying the year
following without iflue-male, this title lay ex-
tinct, till it was revived by King James 2,
in the perſon of the honourable Henry Jermin
Eſq; Nephew to the right honourable Henry
Earl of St. Albans, who was created Baron of
Dover May 13. 1685. 2 Fac. 2. And being a-
gain extinct, Queen Anne conterr'd the title of
Duke of Dover (together with thoſe of Mar-
quiſs of Beverley and Baron of Rippon ) upon
his Grace James Duke of CQueensberry ; in
conſideration of his great and eminent Ser-
vices. | F

This Coaſt is parted from the Continent of
Europe by a narrow ſea ; where, ſome are of
opinion, it wrought it ſelf a paſlage through.
Solinus calls it Fretum Gallicum, or The French
ftrait ; Tacitus and Ammianus, Fretum Oceani
and Oceauum fretalem, the ſtrait of the Ocean, and,
the Ocean-ſtrait. Gratius the Poet terms it,

Freta

Ii

—

251

"CANT

—

IU M. 7

The ſtrait

of Calais, or

Epiſt. 2. ad
Victricium.

Whether Bri- Give me leave to ſtart a queſtion here, not

tain was ever

joyn'd to the

Continent.

Nat. Quxſt. S. again. You fee (ſays Seneca) that whole countries

Freta Morinim dubio reftuentia fonto.

The narrow ſeas on Bullen-coaſt that keep
uncertain tides :

a Poet of our own time has it,

gemini qua janua ponti

Fuucibus anguſtis, late que frementibus undis

Gallorum ;. Anglorumque vetat concurrere
terras.

Where the two foaming mouths of boiſt'rous
{eas

Preſerve a narrow, but a dreadful ſpace,

And Britain part trom Gaul.

This narrow Sea (as Marcellinus hath truly ob-
ſerv'd) at every tide ſwells with terrible warves, and
again (in the ebb] is as plain as a field: Between
two rifings of the moon, it flows twice, and ebbs as

often. For, at the two times, when the moon |

mounts to our meridian, and, when it is at the
point oppoſite to it; the fea ſwells here ex-
ceedingly, and a vaſt body of waters ruſhes a-
gainſt the ſhore with ſuch a hideous noiſe, that
the Poct had reaſon enough to ſay,

Rhutupinaque littora fervent.
And Rhutup's ſhore doth boil and bellow.

And D. Paulinus, where he ſpeaks of the tract
of the Morini, which he calls the utmoſt bound
of the world, ſtiles this, an Ocean raging with bar-
barous waves.

unworthy the ſearch of any learned perſon, that
has a genius, and leiſure ; Whether in the place
where this narrow ſea parts Gaul and Britain,
there ever was an Iſthmus or neck of land that
joyn'd them, which being afterwards ſplit by
ehe general deluge, or by the breaking- in of the
waves, or ſome earth-quake, let the Sea through?
For certainly, no one ought to doubt, but that
the face of the earth has been chang'd, as well
by the deluge, as by a long ſucceſſion of Ages,
and other cauſes ; and that Iſlands, either by
carth-quakes, or the retreat of the waters, have
been joyn'd to the Continent. That they have
likewiſe, by earth-quakes and the ruſhing-in of
waters, been broke oft from the Continent, is
4 point evident beyond diſpute from Authors
of the beſt credit. Upon which Pythagoras in
Ovid,

Vidi ego quod quondam fnerat ſolidiſſima
tellus
Eſſe fretum; vidi factas ex aquore terras.

I've ſeen the Ocean flow where Lands once
itood ;

I've ſeen firm Land where once the Ocean
flow'd.

k

For Strabo, inferring things to come from
things paſt, concludes that 1/Zhmus's or necks ot
land have been wrought thorough, and will be

are torn from their places; and what lay hard by, is
now beyond ſea. Jon ſee a ſeparation of cities and
nations, as often as part of Nature either moves it

the Hollanders call it Dehofden, from the two|[ot Virgil:
N or Promontories ; we, The ſtrait of Calleis ; the
arrow-1eas. French, Pas de Callais. For this is the place, as

whereof, as drawn from the whole, is wonderful. Fir
though it rage but in ſome part, yet it is of the uni-

verſal power that it ſo rages. Thus has the ſea rent

Spain from the Continent of Africa. Aud by t hat
inundation ſo much ralk'd of by the beſt Poets, Si-

cily was cut off from Italy. From whence that + pz, F
Re je da. ;

Hic loca vi quondam, & waa convulſa
Y111 .

(Tantum avi longinqua valet mutare ve-
tuſtas)

Diſſiluiſſe ſerunt, cum protinus utraque tellus

Una foret, venit medio vi pontus & undis,

Heſperium Siculo latus abſcidit, arvaque &
urbes

| Littore diduttas anguſto interluit æſtu.

Long =" long ſince, as old traditions

peak,

(Such ſtrange diſorders powerful time can
make) |

With violent fury did aſunder break.

When battering waves collecting all their
force,

Thro' ſolid land urg'd their impetuous
courle, |

While towns and fields on either fide gave
way,

And Vo paſſage for a narrow ſea.

Pliny alſo has taught us, that Cyprus was
broke ott from Syria, Eulæa from Bœotia, Bes-
bicus from Bythinia ; which before were parts
of the Continent. But that Britain was fo
rent from the Continent, no one of the Anci-
ents has told us ; only thoſe verſes of Virgil
and Claudian (which I have quoted in the ve-
ry beginning of this work) together with Ser-
vius's conjecture, ſeem to hint ſo much. Not-
withſtanding, there are thoſe who think this to
be affirm'd by the Ancients ; as, Dominicus Ma-
rius Niger, Jolm Tine a very learned man, and
who ever he was that wreſted theſe verſes con-
cerning Sicily, to Britain :

Page 14

Britannia quondam
Gallorum pars una fuit, ſed poutus & aſtus
Mutarvere fitum, rupit confinia Nereus
Victor & abſcifſos interluit aquore montes

Once did the Britiſh touch the Gallick
ſhore,

Till furious waves the cliffs in ſunder
rore ;

Thus broke, they yielded tothe conqu'ring
main, i

And Neptune ſtill in triumph rides be-

rween.

[Of the ſame Opinion, were Mr. Somner, and Philoſoph.
Dr. Wallis. | Tranſ, Pig.

Since therefore the Authority of Writers has 27 0 .
ar ,

left us no certain grounds in this matter; learned
men, comparing ſuch narrow ſeas one with a-
nother in order to diſcover the truth, propoſe
theſe and the like heads to be obſery'd and ex-

amin'd.

Whether the nature of the ſoil be the ſame
upon both ſhores? Which, indeed, holds good
here; for where the ſea is narroweſt, both
coaſts riſe with high rocks, almoſt of the ſame
matter and colour ; which ſhould imply that
they have been broken through.

How broad the narrow Sea may be ? And

felj; or the winds drive the fea jorward ; the force] the Straits here are not much broader, than thoſe

0

dammes,
Britan.

LO Oo ˙ m To wry Wy *

De Civitat,
Dei, J. 16.

c. 7,

Propter Ee
cleſiæ ſacra-
mentum,

252

wel,
On
4.

.

1g.
27%
Jams

4

2"
A
£4
4

| * Suiſediſſe-

4} Frowen
Shoal,

dzmmes,
Britan.

—

r 254

of Gibraltar or Sicily, to wit, twenty four miles:
ſo that one would imagine at firſt fight, that
thoſe two tracts were ſever'd by the waves that
now beat violently, firſt on one fide, then on
the other. For that it * was hollowed by
Earth-quakes, I dare not once imagin or ſuſ-
pect, ſince this northern part of the world is
very ſeldom ſhaken with Earth-quakes, and
thoſe but inconſiderable.

How deep ſuch Straits may be? As that of
Sicily does not exceed eighty paces, ſo this
of our's ſcarce exceeds twenty five fathom ;
and yet the ſea on both ſides of it, is much
deeper.

How the bottom is, ſandy, hilly, or muddy ;
and whether in ſeveral parts ot ſuch narrow
ſeas there lie ſhelves of ſand ? As for our's, 1
could not learn trom the Seamen that there are
any ſuch, f except one in the middle of the
chanel, which, at low water, lay hardly three
fathoms deep; ſand now, no ſuch is either to
be heard of, or ſeen in the Sea-Charts. |

Laſtly, whether there be any place upon ei-
ther ſhore, that has it's name in the ancient
language of the place, from a breach, rent, ſe-
paration, or the like ? as Rhegium, upon the
Straits of Sicily, is ſo call'd trom the Greek
6-3, that is, to break, becauſe at that place
Sicily was broken off from Italy, by the violence
of the waters. But I can think of none here,
unleſs we may imagin, that Vitſan, upon the coaſt
of France, took that name from Gwith, ſigni-
fying in Britiſh a divorce or ſeparation. | Againſt
which, however, two Arguments are plauſibly
alledged ; the firſt, that the Saxons call this
place alſo hpicrano, which ſignifies no more
than a white ſand, diſcerned, as we may ſup-
poſe, from the Coaſt of Kent: the ſecond,
that the name, implying a Breach, ought in
reaſon to be ſought- for in the leſſer part of the
Diviſion, which is ſaid properly to be rent from
the greater, and not the greater from that ; as,
the name of Sicily was given to Trinacria, and
not to Talh. !

They who contend, that Britain remained
one Continent with France after the general
Deluge, argue from the Wolves, which were
formerly common in England, as they are ſtill

in Scotland and Ireland. How is it poſſible,

ſay they, that they ſhould be in Iſlands (ſince
all living creatures that were not in the ark,
were deſtroy'd, ) unleſs for a long time after,
the whole earth had been one tree continu'd
paſlage, without any Iſlands ? St. Auguſtine

De Civitar, MPploy'd his thoughts about this queſtion, and
Dei, 1, 16, ſolv'd it thus: Molves and other animals may be

c. 7,

, P ropter Ec.
Getz ſacra-
me mum.

thought to have got into the INlands by ſwimming;
but they muſt be ſuch as are near (ſo Stags every
year {wim out of Italy into Sicily for paſture.)
But then there are ' ſome at ſuch diſtance from the
Continent, that it does not ſeem poſſible for any beaſt
to ſwim to them. If we ſuppoſe that men may have
caught them, and carry d them over, it ſuits well
enough with the delight which they took in hunting 3
though it cannot be deny'd, but they might be carry d
over by Angels, at the expreſs command of God, or
at leaſt by his permiſſion. But if they ſprang out
of the earth, according to their firſt original, when
God ſaid, Let the Earth bring forth a Living Soul;
it is far more evident, that all kinds were in the
ark, not ſo much for the reparation of the ſpecies,
as to be a type of the ſeveral nations, * becauſe of
the Sacrament of the Church; if the earth produc d
many animals in the Iſlands whither they could not
paſs. Thus he. Nor can any thing be ſaid
upon this ſubject, more perfect or more nice.
Let it be enough for me to have propos'd it :

and he that ſees fartheſt into the truth of this

matter, ſhall have my vote for a perſon of true

Quickneſs and Sagacity. |
Over-againſt this place, in the Continent, Morin:

were the Morini ſeated, ſo called in the ancient

language ot the Celtæ, as if one ſhould ſay, Ma-

ritime people, or, dwellers upon the ſea-coaf?. Their

Country is now call'd Conte de CGuines, and Conte

de Boloncis; and had formerly two molt noted

places, Geforiacum, and Tium, from which laſt Itius portus,

was the molt convenient paſlage out of Gaule in-

to Britain; as Cæſar tells us. Moſt are of opi-

nion, that it is the ſame with Calais ; but Ho-

ſpitalins, the great and learned Chancellour of

France, a very exccllent Antiquary, affirms

Calais not to be an ancient town ; and that it

was only a {mall village, ſuch as the French call

Burgado s, till Philip Earl of Bolegne wall'd it

round, not many years before it was taken by

the Engliſh. Nor do we read, that before

thoſe times any one ſet ſail from thence into

Britain. For which reaſon, I think Hum is to

be ſought for in another place, namely, à little

lower near Blackneſs, at Vitſan, by us call'd

Whitſan, a word which ſeems to carry in it

ſomething of Fium. For, that this was the

common port from our Iſland, and the uſual place

alſo of ſetring fail hither trom that Kingdom,

may be eaſily obſerv'd from our Hiſtories, In-

ſomuch that Ludovicus Junior, King of France,

when he came in pilgrimage tro Thomas of

Canterbury, humbly requeſted of that Saint,

by way of interceſſion, that none might be

ſhipwrack'd between Vitſau and Dover; imply-

ing, that, then, this was the moſt commodious

patlage to and again: and indeed, this Hatt is The ſhorteſt

not any where more contracted. Tho' at the paſſage be-

ſame time we mult imagin, that the ſea- men did tWeen Eng-

not ſteer their courſe only by the ſhorteſt roads, eg

but that they had an eye to the commodiouſ- x

neſs of the harbours on both coaſts. So, tho”

the ſea be narrowelt between Blackneſs in France

and the Nee in England, yet the paſſage now

is between Dover and Ca/ais ; as in former ages,

before Vitſau was ſtopp'd up, it was between

that and Dover; and before, between Rhutipiæ

and Gefforiacum, from whence Claudius the Em- Geſſortacum.

perour, and other Generals whom I have elſe-

where mention'd, ſet fail into Britain, Pliny

ſeems to call G ſſoriacum, the Britiſh haven of the

Morini, poſſibly from their ſetting fail thence

for Britain; and Ptolemy (in whom it * is“ Hathcrept,

thought by ſome to have crept into the place C.

of Ttium) Geſſoriacum Navale, the harbour or

dock, Geſſoriacum; in which ſenſe alſo, the

Britains call it Bowling long and a late ||Jearned 1 Somner, de

Author douvts not to affirm, (nay, ſcems to Porte Jecio.

have abundantly proved) that Gefforiacum or Bo-

logne, was the very place from whence Czfar ſet

ſail.] For, that Geforiacum was the ſea-yort-

town call'd by Ammianus Bononia, by the

French Bolagne, by the Dutch Beunen, and by gononia in

us Bolen, I dare poſitively affirm againſt Boeti- Gaul.

24 the Scotch Writer, and Turnebis; depending

upon the authority of Rhenanus, who had the

ſight of an old military + Table, wherein it + The Peute-

was Written Gefſoriacum quod nunc Bononia, i. e. Berian Table

Geſſoriacum, which is now Bononia; as alſo up- MM gore

on the courſe of the Itinerary, which exactly 7 ** ;

anſwers the Diſtance that Antoninus has made

between the Ambiazi or Amiens and Gefſoriacum.

But what convinces me beyend all the reſt, is,

that the Pirates in the faction of Carauſius,

which, by one Panegyrick (ſpoken to Conſtan-

tins the Emperor) are ſaid to be taken and ſnut

up within the walls of * Geforiacum ; are, in + pag, 271,

another (ſpoken to Conſtantine the Great, his of the Ball

the conſideration of it I leave to the Reader ;

ſon) affirm'd to have been routed at + Bonenia : Edition.
{0 + Pag. 251.

5
_ Tok a * -_—
Y —— ror

— —

255 CANTIU M.

—

256

ſo that Bononia and G:/ſoriacum mult of neceſſity [cemented with a mortar of lime, ſand, and pe-

be one and the ſame town ; and the older
name of theſe two ſeems to have grown into
diſuſe about that time. For we mult not ſup-
poſe, that Authors of that note could poſlibly
make a miſtake about the place, before 1o great
Princes, and when the matter was ſo treſh in
memory. But what have I to do with France?
Thoſe places, I conteſs, I mention'd the more
willingly, becauſe the Valour of our Anceſtors
has been often ſignaliz d upon that coaſt ; par-
ticularly, in their taking of Calais and Holen
from the French; the latter whereof they ſur-
render'd, after eight years, for a certain ſum
of money, at the requeſt of that Prince ; but
held the firſt, in ſpight of them, for the ſpace
of two hundred and twelve years. Now, let
us return to Britain.
From Dover, the chalky rocks as it were
hanging one by another, run in a continu'd
Folkſlone, ridge tor five miles together, as far as Folkſtone ;
which appears to have been an ancient town,
from the Roman Coins daily found in it; but
what name it had in thoſe times, is uncertain.
It was probably one of thoſe Towers, which
the Romans (under Theodoſius the younger,)
as Gildas tells us, built upon the ſouth-coaſt of Bri-
tain at certain diſtances, to guard it againſt the
Saxons. In the time of the Saxons, it was fa-
mous on the account of Religion, trom a Nun-
nery built there by Eanſwida, daughter of Ead-

diſtance ava

bles, that they ſtill bear up againſt Time. This,
Mr. Somner allows to have been a Roman Fort
but not the old Portus Lemanis ; ſince that lie
according to all the Copies of the [inerary, ſix-
teen miles from Canterbury ; whereas Hu is
but fourteen, about the {ame diſtance (ſays he)
that Dover is trom it : Wherefore, he rather
ſuppoſes, that there was a miſtake of the Libra-
rians in ſetting a V for an X, and that the di-
ſtance indeed ſhould have been XXI, which
{ets it about Romney, the place that he would
have to be the true Portus Lemanis.
conjecture puts it more out of diſtance than
before; and it is a much eaſier miſtake in the
Librarians to tranſpoſe a V and an I; which be-
ing ſuppoſed, ſets it in a true
according to Mr. Sommer himſelf, v.
and no more.

5 Port; 15

85 Forts, p. "

Bur this

in,
IV
Or (to admit of no miſtake in
the Librarians at all,) it we ſet Lyme at the ſame
diſtance from Canterbury that Dover is, Which is
htteen miles, and the lower {ide of Sturfall Ca-
ſtle, where the port muſt be, near a mile be-
low Lyme, as really it is (allowing too, that
the Roman miles are ſomewhat leis than the
Engliſh ; ) we ſhall bring it again in true di-
{tance at X VI miles, without carrying it to
Romney; which, in all probability, in thoſe days
lay under water, at leaſt in Spring-tides : or it
not ſo, the Marſh certainly did, betwixt S-
fall and Romney, which they could never paſs,

See Suſſex un (uu
der the title to

bald King of Kent. Now, it is nothing but a

little village, the ſea having worn away the

greateſt part of it. It was, notwithſtanding, a

Barons of Barony of the family de Abrincis, from whom it
Folkſtone. came to Hamon de Crevequer, and by his daugh-
ter to John of Sandwich, whoſe grandchild Ju-

liaza, by his ſon John, brought the ſame, as a

portion, to J de Segrave. | It hath been ob-

Philoſoph. ſerv'd of ſome Hills in this neighbourhood of

Tranſat, Fylkſtone, that they have vilibly ſunk and grown
N. 349. lower, within the memory of man. |

From hence, the ſhore turning weſtward, has

Saltwood, SFaltuocd near it, once] a Calle of the Archbi-[ Ports.

ſhops of Canterbury, cnlarg'd by William Courtney
Archbiſhop ot that See ; and Oſtenbanger, Where

Edward Baron Poinings, who had many Baſtard-
Children, began a ſtately houſe. Ar tour miles

Hith, or, diſtance, is Hu, one ot the Cinque-Ports,
ide. {rom whence it had that name; Þþ1S in Saxon
lignitying a Port or Static: though at preſent

it can hardly anſwer the name, by reaſon of

the ſands heap'd in there, which have ſhur out

the ſca to a great diſtance from it. Nor is it

very long ſince it's firſt riſe, dating it from the
Weſt-hythe, decay ot Wef?-hythe ; which is a little town
hard by to the weit, and was a harbour, till

* So ſaid, in the memory of“ our grandfathers the ſea re-|not) that the river Rother, which runs into the Rother, tir.

ann. 1607. tir d from it. But both Hythe and Mieſt-hytbe
Lime. oe their original to Line, a little village ad-

joyning, and tormerly a very famous port, be- pain tract, Rumney-marſh, grew into firm land. Rumtey-
tore it was ſhut up with ſands caſt in by the For this plain Level (which from Lemanis con- marlh.

Portus Le- ſea. Antoninus and the Notitia call it Portzs
mans. Lemanis; Ptolemy Awad, which being what we
call a ſignificatibe word, in Greek, the Librarians,

to ſupply a ſeeming defect, writ it Kauns alu,

and ſo the Latin Interpreters have tranſla-

ted it Now Portus i. e. the new haven ; where-

as the name ot the place was Limen or Leman, as

it is at this day Lime, Here the Captain of the
Company of 7urnacenſes had his Station, under

the Count of the Saxon ſhore : and from hence

Stony. ſtreet. ro Canterbury there is a pav'd military way,
which you may caſily diſcern to be a work of

the Romans; as is allo a Caſtle hard by call'd

otutfall, Stutfall, which included ten acres upon the de-
{cent of a hill ; and the remains of the walls,

built of Britiſh bricks and flints, are ſo cloſely

where the Daniſh fleet arriv'd in the year ot
our Lord 892. But ] believe they are miſtaken
in the deſcription of the place, both becauſe
here is no ſuch thing as a river, ſave a little
one that preſently dies; and alſo becauſe .[ Hen-
ry | Archdeacon of Huntingdon, an Author of great
credit tells us, that this fleet arriv'd at the Por-
tus Lemanis ; without one word ot the River.
Unleſs any one think (as, tor my parr, I can-

*

Sea below RH, had it's chanel this way, and
chang'd it by little and little, when that cham-

tains fourteen miles in length, and eight in
breadth, and has two Towns, nineteen Pariſh-
es, and about forty tour thouſand two hun-
dred acres of land, very truittul, and exceeding
good for the fatting of Cattle) has by degrees
been joyn'd by the ſea to the land. Upon
which, I may as well call it the gift of the ſea, as
Herodotus has call'd Ægypt the gift of the river

and the Rhine. For the ſea, to make amends tor
what it has ſwallow'd up in other parts of this
coaſt, has reſtor d it here ; either by retiring,
or by bringing in a muddy ſort of ſubſtance
from time to time; by which it comes to pals,
that ſome places which f within the memory ot
aur

nor did they ever attempt it ; for we find the
Roman way ends here, as it was necellary it
ſhould, ſince it could not be carry'd further,
through a Marſh, or rather ſea, eight miles to-
gether ; for ſo far it is from hence to the town
of Romney. | Tho' Hythe is not a Port at this
day, it t retains a conſiderable badge of it's an-
cient glory; for here, at a place call'd Shipway, longs now
the Warden of the Cinque-Ports takes a ſolemn Per; wich
oath, when he enters upon his office ; and here
alſo, on certain days, Controverſies were uſed
to be decided between the Inhabitants of the

Some have been of opinion, that a large ri-
ver did once empty it {elf into the ſea at this
place, becauſe a Writer or two has mention'd
the river Lemanus, and the mouth of Lemaiis,

+ So F id

ann, E :

a
+ This le- 1
(
ee beiore, (
Shipway, {
Prom · hill. {

Neſſe.

Lid.

Dergerelf

+ Nlices,

Stone-en

Nile, and as a very learned perſon has ſtil'd the Peter Nan
paſtures of Holland, the gifts of the north wind ids.

*

rl Vs

K E

N T.

195

© Romney+

dee Suſſex un-
Eder the title
Cinque- Ports»

An, 1287.

Prom · hill.

Neſſe.
Lid.

Dengereſſe.
+ llices,

Stone-end,

our grandfathers ſtood upon the ſea-ſhore, are
now a mile or two from it. How fruitful the
ſoil is, what herds of cattle it feeds that are
(ont hither from the remoteſt parts of England
to be fatted, and with what art they raiſe walls
to fence it againſt the incurſions of the ſea ; are
things which one can hardly believe, that has
not ſeen them. For the better government of
it, King Edward 4. made it a Corporation, con-
fiſting of a Bailiff, Jurates, and a Common-
council. In the Saxon times, the inhabitants

Fhe courſe of this river, as to the Suſte x-
fide, we have briefly ſpoken- to before. On tae

Kent: ſide, it has Newenden, which, I am almoſt Newenden.

perſwaded, was the haven ſo long ſought for,
call d by the Notitia, Anderida, by the Britains

Caer Andred, and by the Saxons Andopebrcear- Anderida,
den. Firſt, becauſe the Innabitants * — it 1
to have been a town and harbour of very great OTIS

Antiquity ; next, from its fituation by the wood
Andredſwald, to which it gave the name; and
laſtly, becauſe the Saxons ſcem to have call'd

of it were call'd Meprec-pape, i. e. Marſh or
Fen-men ; the ſignification of which name a-

es exactly to the nature of the Soil. And,
tor my part, I do not underſtand ÆEthel-
werd (that ancient Writer) when he tells us,
that Kinulph, King of the Mercians, deſtroy'd Kent,
and the country call d Merſc-warum; and, in ano-
ther place, that Herbythus, a Captain, was ſlain by
the Danes in a place call'd Merſc-warum ; unleſs
he means this marſhy little tract. Rumney, or
Romeney, and formerly Romenal (which ſome
conclude from the name to have been a work
of the Romans, ) is the chief town of theſe
parts, and one of the Cinque-Ports, having
Old-Romney and Lid as members of it ; which
(in the form above-mention'd) are bound jointly
to fit out five Ships for the wars. It is ſeated
upon a high kill of gravel and ſand, and on
the welt ſide of it had a pretty large harbour
(guarded againſt moſt of the winds) before the
{ea retir'd from it. The inhabitants (as Domeſ-
day-book has it) on account of their Sea-ſervice,
were exempt from all cuſtoms ; except robbery, breach
of the peace, and Foriſtell. And about that time,
it was at it's height ; for it was divided into
twelve Wards; and had five Pariſh-Churches,
and a Priory, and an Hoſpital for the fick. But
in the reign of Edward the firſt, when the ſea
(driven forward by the violence of the winds,)
overflow'd this tract, and for a great way to-
gether deſtroy'd men, cattle, and houſes, threw
down Prom-hill a little populous village, and
remov'd the Rother (which formerly empry'd it
ſelf here into the ſea) out of it's chanel, ſtop-
ping up it's mouth, and opening it a nearer
paſlage into the ſea by Rhie ; then it began by
little and little to forſake this rown, which has
been decaying ever ſince, and has fal'n much
from it's ancient Populouſneſs and Figure.
But it hath afforded the title of Earl to Henry
Sidney, youngeſt ſon of Robert Earl of Leiceſter ;
who Sing unmarried, the title of Baron of
Romney hath been lately conferr d upon Sir
Robert Marſham Baronet. |

Below this, the land ſhoots forth a long way
to the eaſt (we call it Neſſe, as reſembling a
noſe ; ) upon which ſtands Lid, a pretty popu-
lous town, whither the Inhabitants of Prom-
hill betook themſelves after that Inundation.
And in the very utmoſt Promontory, call'd
Denge-neſſe, where is nothing but beech and
pebbles, there grow + Holme-trees with ſharp
pricky leaves, and always green, like a little
low wood, for a mile together and more. A-
mong thoſe pebbles, near Stone-end, is a heap
of large Stones, which the neighbouring people
call the monument of S. Criſpin and S. Criſpini-
an, who, they ſay, were caſt upon this ſhore by
ſhipwrack, and call'd from hence into their hea-
venly Country. From hence, the ſhore turn-
ing it's courſe, goes directly weſtward ; and
has a ſort of peaſe which grow in great plenty
and naturally, amongſt the pebbles, in large
bunches like grapes, in taſte differing very lit-
tle from field-peaſe; and ſo it runs forward to
the mouth of the Rother, which for ſome ſpace

it Brittenden, i. e. a valley of the Britains (as
they alſo calld Segontium, of which before,)
from whence Selbrittenden is the name of the

whole Hundred adjoyning. The Romans, to
detend this coaſt againſt the Saxon Pirates,

plac'd here“ a band of the Abuli, with their * Numerum:

Captain, Afterwards, it was quite deſtroy'd
by the Fury of the Saxons, For Hengiſt ha-
ving a deſign to drive the Britains entirely out
ot Kent, and finding it expedient to ſtrengthen
his party by freſh ſupplies, ſent for Ælla out

of Germany with great numbers of Saxons.

Then, making a vigorous aſſault upon this Au-
derida, the Britains who lay in ambuſcade in
the next wood, diſturb'd him to ſuch a degree,
that when, at laſt (atter much blood-ſh-d on
both ſides) he by dividing his torces had de-
feated the Britains in the woods, and at the
ſame time had taken the town; his barbarous
heart was ſo inflam'd with revenge, that he
put the Inhabitants to the ſword, and demo-
liſh'd the place. For many ages after (as Hun-
tingdon tells us) there appear d nothing but ru-
ins; till under Edward the firſt, the Friars
Carmelites, juſt come trom Mount Carmel in
Paleſtine, and, deſiring ſolitary places above all
others, had a little Monaſtery built here ar
the charge of Thomas Albuger Knight ; up-
on which a Town preſently ſprung-up, and,
with reſpect to the old one that had been de-
moliſh'd, began to be call'd Newenden, i. e. a
new town in a valley. Lower down, the river

Rother divides it's waters, and ſurrounds Ox-Oxney.

ney, an Ifland abounding with graſs: and near

its mouth has Apuldore, where that 5 Apuldore.
t

rout of Daniſh and Norman Pirates, after they
had been preying upon the French-coaſts un-
der Hafling their Commander, landed with
large ſpoils, and built a Caſtle; but King
Altred, by his great courage, forced them to
accept conditions of peace. This, in the time
of the Saxons, An. 894, ſtood at the mouth

of the river Limene, as their * Chronicle tells Ann. 894.

us; whence, it is plain, that Romney, or at
leaſt Walland-Marſh, was then all a fea ; for
we never fix the mouth of a river, but art it's
entrance into the ſea : now it the fea came
ſo lately as An. 894, to the town of Apledore; in
all probability five hundred years before, in the
Romans time, it might come as tar as Newenden,
the place of the City and Caſtle of Anderida,
erected here by the Romans to repel the Sax-
on rovers; the fea here, in all ages, having
retired by degrees. Here alſo, Mr. Selden ſet-

tles it; but || Mr. Sommer rather inciines to Ports and

believe, that either Haf7ings or Pemſey, on the coall |

of Suſſex, muſt have been the old Anderida ; *

tounding his opinion upon what Gildas iays
concerning theſe Ports and Forts, viz. tht they
were placed in littore oceani ad meridiem. But
I ſuppoſe, this ought to be underſtood in a
large ſenſe, every thing being to be taken tor
ſea, whither ſuch veſſels could come as they
had in thoſe days ; in which ſenſe, no doubr,
Newenden might be accounted a ſea-town, and
liable to ſuch Pirates as the Saxons were, as

is the boundary between Kent and Suſſex.

well as either Pemſey or Haſtings. \ |
We Ho Near,

—

05.

N b
1 —— Ss

—
*

3

269 C ANT TU

Cranbroke, Near, in a woody tract, are Cranbroke, Ten-
Tenderden. derden, Benenden, and other neighbouring towns,

being extinct, and the eſtate divided 3
ſiſters; King Edward the fourth honour'd with

Benenden. herein the cloath-trade very much flouriſh'd the title of Earl of Kent, firſt Mliam Nui!
ſince the time of Edward the third, ho, Lord of Fuuconberg; and after his death Eq-
in the tenth year of his reign, invited ſome mund Grey Lord of Hafings, Weisford, and Ru-
of the Flemings into England, by promiſes of|:hyn, who was ſucceeded by his fon George. He,
large rewards, and grants of ſeveral immunities, by his firſt wite Aune Widevile, had Richard

The Cloath- to teach the Engliſh the cloath- manufacture, | Earl of Kent, who, after he had ſquander'd a-

ManufaQure which is now become one of the pillars of the| way his eſtate, dy'd without iſſue. But b

firkk in En

land & kingdom. [But the Cloathing-Trade in Kent, his ſecond wife Catharine, daughter of William

is very much decayed. |

Herbert Earl of Pembroke, he hid Henry Grey,

Earls of To reckon up the Earls of Kent in their] Knight, whoſe grandchild Reginald by his ſon
Kent. order (omitting Godwin and others, under the Henry, was made Earl of Kent by Queen E-
Saxons, who were not hereditary, but only ot-|lizabeth, in the year 1572. He dying with-
ficiary Earls; ) Odo, brother by the mother's out itlue, was ſucceeded by his brocher Henry;
ſide to William the Conqueror, is the firſt Earl |a perſon plentifully endow'd with all the Or-
of Kent that we meet with, of Norman extra-jnaments of true Nobility # [Who alſo dying
ction. He was at the ſame time Biſhop of] without iſſue, An. 1625, was ſacceeded by his
Baieux; and was a perſon of a wicked and brother Charles; who by his wite Sujaz daugh-
factious temper, always bent upon Innovatious ter of Sir Richard Cotton of Hampſpire, had iſiue
in the State. Whereupon, after a great rebel-] Heury ; who dying without iſſue, An. 1639,
lion that he had rais'd, his Nephew William the honour (by reaſon of the entail upon the
Ruſis depriv'd him of his whole eſtate and heir male) deſcended to Anthony Grey Rector of
dignity, in England. Afterwards, when Ste-| Burbach in the County of Leiteſter, 1on ot George,
phen had uſurp'd the Crown, and endea-|ſon of Anthony Grey of Baraſpeth, third fon to
vour'd to win over perſons of courage and] George Grey the ſecond Earl of Kent of this fa-
conduct to his party, he confer'd that honour] mily : which Anthem, by Magdalen his wite,
upon William ot Jpres, a Fleming; who, being | daughter of Miliam Purefoy ot Caldicor in Com.
* Violentus (as Fitz-Stephen calls him) * an inſupportable| Warwick Eſq; had five ſons and four daugh-
Cantii in- hurthen to Kent, Was torc'd by King Henry the] ters, whereot Henry the eldeſt ſon ſucceeded in

cubator.

ſecond, to march oft, with tears in his eyes.] the Honour, and had itlue Henry (who dy'd

Henry the ſecond's ſon likewiſe (whom his fa- young) and Autlony Earl of Kent; to whom
ther had crown'd King) having a deſign to] ſucceeded Henry his ſon, who hath been ho-
raiſe a rebellion againſt his father, did, upon|noured by divers great offices in the Court,
the ſame account, give the title of Kent, roj and advanced to the title of Viſcount Goode-
Philip Earl of Flanders; but he was Earl of|rick, Earl of Harold, and Marquiſs of Kent;
Kent no further, than by bare title, and pro-[and afterwards to the more Honourable Title
miſe. For, as Gervaſius Dorobernenſis has it, of Duke of Kent.]

Philip Earl of Flanders promis'd his utmoſt alſi-

ſtance to the young King, binding himſelf to homage, This County hath 398 Pariſþ-Churches.

by oath. In return for his ſervices, the King pro-

mis d him revenues of a thouſand pound, with all

Kent ; as alſo the Caſtle of Rocheſter, with the Ca- More rare Plants growing wild in Kent.

ſtle of Dover. Not long atter, Hubert de Bur-

5 who had deſerw'd ſingularly well of this

Acinos Anglicum Claſ. pan. Acinos Dioſcori-

ingdom, was for his good ſervices advanc'd|qis forte ejuſdem in Hiſt. Acin Anglica Clulii

to the ſame honour by King Henry the third.
He was an entire Lover ot his Country, and,
amidſt rhe ſtorms of adverſity, diſcharg'd all
the duties that it could demand from the beſt
of ſubjects. But he dy'd, diveſted of his ho-
nour ; and this title {lepr, till the reign ot
Edward the ſecond. Edward beſtow'd it up-
An. 15 Ed,2, on his younger brother Edmund of Woodſtock,
who, being tutor to his nephew King Edward
the third, fell undeſervedly under the laſh ot
Envy, and loſt his head. The crime was, that
he openly profeſs d his affection to his depos'd
brother, and after he was murther'd ( know-
ing nothing of it) endeavour'd to reſcue him
out of priſon ; but his two ſons Edmund and
John, enjoy'd the honour ſucceſſively : and both
dying without iflue, it was carry d by their
ſiſter (for her beauty, call'd The fair Maid of
Kent) to the family of the Holland Knights.
For, Thomas Holland her husband was ſtil'd
Earl of Kent, and was ſucceeded in that ho-
nour by Thomas his ſon, who dy'd in the
twentieth year of Richard the ſecond. His two
ſons were ſucceſſively Earls of this place; Tho-

Park. Clinopodium 3. ſeu Ocimi facie alte-
rum C. B. Clinopodium 4. Ger. emac. Engliſh
wild Baſil. This grows in chally mountainous, bar-
ren, and gravelly grounds, not only in Kent (where
Cluſius found it) but in many other Counties of
England. Þ take it to be only a variety of the com-
mon Acinos or Stone-Baſil, differing in having a
thicker, even-edged, or not-indented leaf. The Herb-
Women were wont formerly to ſell this Plant for
Poley-mountain at London. I ſuppoſe now they are
better informed.

Adiantum album Offc. Tab. Cam. Ruta mu-
raria Ger. J. B. C. B. Ruta muraria five Salvia
vitz Park. White Maiden-hair, Mall- Rue, Ten-
wort. This grows in many places on old ſtone-walls,
and in the chinks of rocks : as in this County on
Rocheſter bridge, en the walls of Sir Robert Barn-
ham's houſe at Bocton Munchelſey : at Cobham,
where all the houſes are coder d with it. P. B. on
Aſbjord-bridge and at Dartjord. Park.

Alcea minor Park. The leſſer Pervain-mal-
low. Parkinſon for Snomma of this gives Al-
cea Matthioli & Tragi, which others make H-
uonymes of the common gi eater Vervain-mallow. He

mas, who was created Duke of Surrey, and tells us alſo, that it grows in ſome places of Kent,

2 after, rene a rebellion againſt King

but names no particular ones : Now Kent is a large

enry 4, was beheaded ; and after him, Ed-| ſpot of ground to ſeck on: a plaut in.

mund, who was High Admiral of England,

Alchimilla Ger. vulgaris C. B. major vulga-

+ Farum and, in the ſiege of f S. Brieu in Little Bri-|ris Park. Pes leon's iive Alchimilla TR. 44

Brioci. tain, dy'd of a wound in the year 1408. This] dies mantle.

Tho, Wal-

Tis is found frequently growing

fingham, dignity, for want of iſſue-male in the family, in mountainous meadows and paitures, eſpecially

FI

A

261

KENT

262

in the North of England, where by the common
people it is called Bears-toot. It grows alſo in
the ſouthern parts, but more rarely. I have found
it in ſome paſtures near my own dwelling in E(-
ſex ; and therefore can eafily believe Parkinſon, that
it may be found at Kinſwood nigh Feverſham, and
elſewhere in Kent.

Alga fontalis trichodes C. B. Alga five Con-
ſerva fontalis trichodes Park. Trichomanes a-
quaticum Dalechampii J. B. Water Maiden-
hair. I happened to find this plant in the ciſtern
or conduit-houſe at Leeds- Abbey in Kent belonging
then to Sir William Meredith: howbeit I do not
think it peculiar to Kent, but common to the like
places all England over ; though it hath not yet
been my hap to meet with it elſewhere.

Alopecuros altera maxima Anglica paludo-
ſa Ger. emac. altera maxima Anglica paludo-
ſo, ſive Gramen Alopecuroides maximum F. B.
Lob. Adv. part. alt. Alopec. maxima Anglica Park.
Great Engliſh Marſh Fox-tail graſs. In the ſalt
marſh by Erifte Church. P. B.

+ Alſine Cochleariz longz facie nondum de-
ſcripta P. B. Chick-weed reſembling the loag-leaved
Seurvy-graſs. Between the two Parks at Eltham
on the mud. What Plant the Authors of Phy-
tologia Britannica meant by this name, I cannot
eafily divine. Some have thought that they in-
tended Alſine longifolia uliginoſis proveniens
locis J. B. However, no man that I have heard
of hath as yet been able to diſcover any non-deſcript
plant thereabout.

f Alline corniculata Cluſii Ger. J. B. Park.
Lychnis ſegetum minor C. B. - Horned Chick-
weed. This is a fort of Mouſe-ear Chick-weed, and no
Campion, as C. Bauhine would have it. In Weſt-
gate Bay in the Iſle of Thanet P. B. I do not
believe that ever it grew there, unleſs in ſome garden,
or of ſeed accidentally ſhed. It's natural place is in
Spain among corn.

The ſame Authors of Phyt. Brit. tell us, that

Anchuſa lutea is alſo to be found in the ſame Iſle :
I believe as much as the former.
Anagallis aquatica rotundifolia Ger. aquat.
rotundifolia non crenata C. B. aquat. 3. Lobe-
lii, folio ſubrotundo non crenato Park. Sa-
molus valerandi 7. B. Round-leaved Water-
Pimpernell. This herb, growing in many watery and
dar ſ- grounds, and about little rivulets and ſprings
in moſt Connties of England, I ſhould not have
mentioned as a peculiar of Rent, but that it is no
very common plant, and others have aſſigned places
to it in this County. In the Salt marſhes two
miles below Graveſend. P. B.

Anagallis fœmina Ger. cærulea fœmina, J. B.
terreſtris cæruleo flore. C. B. Park. Female or
blue-flower'd Pimpernell. This may likely enough
be found in Rumney-marſh, as Parkinſon tells us.
We have obſerved it among the corn in other pla-
ces of England, but more ſparingly : beyond ſeas
it is more plentiful in ſome Countries than the red.
However, I take it to be, not a diſtintt ſpecies, but
an accidental variety of Pimpernell, differing only in
the colour of the flower. wh

Armeria ſylveſtris altera calyculo foliolis fa-
ſtigiatis cin&o Lob. Caryophyllus pratenſis Ger.
pratenſis noſter major & minor Park. barbatus
ſylveſtris C. B. Viola barbata anguſtifolia Da-
lechampii J. B. Deptford- pink. This is ſo called,
either becauſe it grows plentifully in the paſtures a-

bout Deptford, or becauſe it was there firſt taken no-
tice of by our Herbariſts. It is not peculiar to Kent,
but common to many other Counties in meadows and
. eſpecially where the ground is ſandy or gra-
velly.

Atriplex maritima laciniata C. B. maritima

| Jagged Sea-Orrache. At Queenborongh and Mar-

gate in the f of Thanet, and in many other pla-
ces on the ſandy ſhores Ger. Though ] have not ob-
ſerved it in theſe plates, yet I believe it may there
be found as well as on the coaſts of Eſſex.

Braſſica arborea ſeu procerior ramoſa mariti-
ma Moriſon. An Braſſica rubra vulgaris J. B?
Perennial tree-Colewort or Cabbage. On the chalky
cliffs at Dover, plentifully.

Braſſica marina monoſpermos Park. marina
multiflora, alba monoſpermos Lob. monoſper-
mos Anglica J. B. marina Anglica Ger. ma-
ritima C. B. Engliſh Sea-Colewort. This is com-
mon on Jandy ſhores and ſtone-baiches not only in
Kent, but all England over. The tender leaves of
it are by the country-people eaten cis other Coleworts,
yea accounted more delicate than they.

Buxus J. B. Ger. arboreſcens C. B. arbor
vulgaris. Park. The Box-tree. I find in the
notes of my learned friend Mr. John Aubrey,
that at Boxley in this County there be woods of
them : as likewiſe at Boxwell in Coteſwold, Gloce-
ſterſhire : which places took their denomination
trom them.

Caſtanea J. B. Ger. vulgaris Park. ſylveſtris,
quæ peculiariter Caſtanea C. B. The Cheſnut-
tree. This I obſerved in ſome woods near Sitting-
burn, whether ſpontaneous or formerly planted there,
I cannot determine I rather think ſpontaneous ; it
growing ſo frequent.

Centaurium minus luteum Park. Small yel-
low Centory. This differs little from the common
purple Centory, ſave in the colour of the flower.
Parkinſon, who alone, ſo far as I yet know, men-
tions this kind, tells us it grows in a field next unto
Sir Francis Carew's houſe at Beddingion near Croy-
don, and in a field next beyond Southflete-Church to-
wards Graveſend. I never yet met with it in En-
gland; but in Italy I have found about Baiæ a
ſmall yellow Centory, differing from the Centau-
rium luteum minimum of Columna, and agree-
ing in all points with the common ſmall purple Cen-
tory, ſave in the colour of the flower. Vide Park.
P. 273

Chamæpitys vulgaris Park. vulgaris odorata
flore luteo J. B. lutea vulgaris ſeu folio tri-
fido C. B. mas Ger. Common Ground-pine. From
Dartford along to Southflete, Cobham, and Rocheſter ;
and upon Chatham-Down hard by the Beacon, &c.
Park. p. 283.

Crithmum chryſanthemum Ger. Park. mari-
timum flore Aſteris Attici C. B. marinum terti-
um Matthiolo, flore luteo Buphthalmi J. B.
Golden-flower'd Sampire. In the miry marſh in the
iſle of Shepey, as you go from the King's ferry to
Sherland-houſe. Ger. p. 534-

ſum C. B. maritimum ſpinoſum ſeu Paſtinaca
marina Park. Paſtinaca marina, quibuſdam Se-

pire or Sea-Parſenip. Near the ſea, upon the ſands
and baich, between Whitſtable and the Iſle of Tha-
net by Sandwich. Ger. p. 534. That it groweth
here I will not warrant, having no better authority
than Gerard's. h
Cyperus rotundus litoreus inodorus Anglicus
C. B. Park. rotundus litoreus inodorus Lob.
J. B. rotundus litoreus Ger. Round-rooted ba-
ſtard Cyperus. In divers places of Shepey and Tha-
net. Park. p. 1265.

Equiſetum ſeu Hippuris corolloides Ger. e-
mac. An Hippuris lacuſtris quædam foliis
manſu arenoſis Geſin. Coralline Horſe-tail- Found
by Dr. Bowles on a bogg near Chiſſelhurſt in this

F agus C. B. Ger. Park. Fagus Latinorum,
Oxya Græcorum J. B. The Beech-tree. It is
common

J. B. marina Ger. marina repens. Lob. Park.

Crithmum ſpinoſum Ger. maritimum ſpino-

cacul & Crithmum ſpinoſum J. B. Prickly Sam-

——

—— ———— —— __—_——

*

263

F

common in this Country, as alſo in Suſſex, Surrey,
Hampſhire, Hartfordſhire, &c. Whence we cant

4 Comm, de but wonder, that Cæſur ſhould t write that there
Bello Gallico, were in Britain all ſorts of trees for timber, ex-

cepting Firr and Beech. We may alſo take notice
that the Horu-beam-tree is in this Country called the
Hor ſe- leech, hence ſome learned men have been de-
ceived, and induced to believe, that there grew two
ſorts of Beech here.

Fungus pernicioſus 25 ſive Cinarzformis
Park. pag. 13 24. Artichoke Miſhrome. At Rip-
ton near Aſhford, alſo on Bromley-green, and at a
place in Rumney-marſh called Warborn. Park. loco
præmiſſo.

Geranium columbinum diſſectis foliis, flo-
rum pediculis longiſſimis. Doves-foot with jag-
ged leaves, and flowers ſtanding on long ſtalks. In
the layes about Swanley near Dartford ; and doubtleſs
in many the like places.

Gentianella fugax quarta Cluſ. fugax mi-
nor Ger. brevi folio C. B. fugax 4. Clutii, flore
dilute purpuraſcente & czruleo elegantiſſimo
J. B. Autumnalis Centaureæ minoris foliis
Park. Autumnal Gentian with ſmall Ceatory leaves.
Clufius in his Engliſh Voyage obſerved this not far
from Dover. I was once ſuſpicious that it might
be no other than our common dwarf Autumnal Gen-
tian, but I am fince aſſured by credible perſons, that
there is a ſort of Autumnal Geutian growing in
England, which is ſpecifically different from the moſt
common kind, and probably the ſame with that which
Clufias found near Dover.

Gentiana paluſtris anguſtifolia C. B. Pneu-
monanthe Ger. Gentianella autumnalis Pneu-
monanthe dicta Park, Gentianz ſpecies, Cala-
thiana quibuſdam, radice perpetud, five pa-
luſtris J. B. Marſb Gentian or Calathian Violet.
Near Long field by Graveſend, as alſo Green-hithe

| haven. Parkiiiſon tells us ii $10ws wild en Rocheſter

——

Common. pag. 856. |

Lychnis major nofiflora Dubrenſis peren-
nis Hiſt. noſt. pag. 995. Great Night-flowering
Campion. Found oa Dover Cliffs by Mr. Newton,
who affirms it to be ſpecifically different jrom the
L. ſylveſtris alba 9 Clutii : and am inclined
to believe it may, though the deſcription of Cluſius
agrees in moſt particulars to this.

 Mercurialis mas & fœmina J. B. Ger. vulga-
ris mas & fœmina Parl. teſticulata ſeu mas
Dioſcoridis & Plinii, & ſpicata ſcu temina
eorundem C. B. French-Merairy the male aud
female. It grows very plentijully Ly a village called
Brookland in Rumney-maiſh. Park. p. 297.

Park. Marſh Tway-blade. In divers places of Rum-
ney-marſh. Park. p. 505.

Orchis myodes flore coccineo elegans P. B,
In Swanſcombe Wood. Ti.ough I know not what
ſort of Orchis the Authors of Phy:. Bric. mean by
this name : yet becauſe I remember, my very good
Friend Mr. George Horinell S geen in Lon Ain,
told me, That ſome of bis Acquaintance did for-
merly ſbeu him ſuch a kird of elegant Fiy-Orchis ;
I have given it a place in this Catalogue.

Orchis barbata fœtida J. B barb ta odore
hirci breviore latiorèque toiio C. B. Tr: gorchis
maximus & Trag. mas. Ger. 'I'rag. maxima &
Trag. vulgaris Park. The Lizard-flower or great
Goats-ſtones. Obſerved by Dr. Bowles nigh the high-
way between Crayford and Dartjord. Mr. Watts
hath fince found it alſo in Kent. It hath not been ye
my hap to meet with it.

Orobanche affinis Nidus avis J. B. Orchis
abortiva rufla, ſive Nidus avis Part. Orch.
abort. fuſca C. B. Satyrion abortivum ſive Ni-
dus avis Ger. Miſbapen Orchis, or Birds-neſt. 1

and Cebham; about Sir Percival Hart's Houſe at|jound it in ſome thickets at Botton Muncheljey near

Lellingſton, and in a chalky pit, not far from Dart-
ford, by a Paper-mill. Park. pag. 407. I never
yet ſound it but on boggy and heathy grounds aud moiſt
places in Lincolnſhire and Yorkſhire.

Herba Paris Ger. F. B. Park. Solanum qua-
drifolium bacciterum C. B. Herb Paris, True-
love, or One-berry. In ſhady woods and copſes in
many places ; as in Hinbury-wood three miles from
Maidſtone, alſo in a wood called Harwarſh near to
Piuneden-heath, one mile from the ſaid Maidſtone :
in a wood by Chiſſelhurſt called Longuood, and in
the next wood thereto, called 1ſeets-ood, eſpecially a-
bout the skirts of a hop-garden adjoyning : in a wood
alſo cver-againſt Boxley- Abbey, a mile from Maid-
ſtone, in great abundance, not far from the hedge-
fide of that meadow through which runs a rivulet.
Park. p. 390. This is to be found in the like pla-
ces all England over, but not commonly.

Hieracium montanum aſperum Chondrillæ
folio. C. B. Rough mountainous Hawk-weed with
Gum-ſuccory leaves. This was found in Kent by
Mr. Newton, but I remember not the place where.

Horminum pratenſe Lavendulz flore C. B.
Park. Wild Clary with Lavender-like flowers. Found
by Cluftus nigh the riding-place at Greenwich. This
is, without doubt, our common Engliſh wild Clary.
For the Horminum pratenſe foliis ſerratis C. B.
which Parkinſon miſtakes for our common wild Cla-
ry, grows not ſpontaneouſly with us in England, ſo
far as I have yet ſeen or heard.

Hali geniculatum perenne fruticoſius pro-
cumbens. Perennial procumbent Shrub-Glaſs-xort.
Found near Shepey-Iſland by my learned friend Dr.
Hans Sloane.

Lepidium latifolium C. B. Pauli J. B. Pipe-
ritis ſeu Lepidium vulgare Park. Rhaphanus
ſylveſtris Officinarum, Lepidium Æginetæ Lo-
belio J. B. Dittander, Pepper wort, Poor-mans Pep-
per, On à bank between Feverſham town and the

Maidſton. I never obſerved many of them together in
one place.

Piſum marinum Ger. aliud maritimum Bri-
tannicum Park. Engliſh Sea-Peaſe. At Gil/ord
in Kent over-againſt the Comber. Park. 1060.
On the Sea-coaſt among the fliuts and peb-
bles near new Romney. Upon the beach run-
ring _ the Pore jrom Denge-uefſe weſtward.
Camden Brit. pag. 257. See more of this ſort
of Peaſe in Suffolk Catalogue. Parkinſon makes
two ſorts ot Enghſh Sea-Peaſe : The firſt he
calls Piſum ſpontaneum maritimum Anglicum, and
the ſecond Piſ. alind marit. Brit. No man that
I have heard of beſides him hath been as yet
able to diſcover more than one,

Plantago major panicuid ſparſs J. B. latifo-
lia ſpica multiplici C. B. paniculis ſparſis Ger.
emac. latifolia ſpiralis Park. Beſome-Plantain, or
Plantain with ſpoky tits. Found by Dr. Joi «ſon
at Margate in the Iie of Thanet ; and by Tomas
Wiliſeh at Reculver there.

Polygonatum Ger. vulgare Park. latifolium
vulgare C. B. Polygonatum, vulgo Sigillum So-
lomonis J. B. Solomon Seal. At Crayſos d, Ger.
In a wood two miles jrom Canterbury by Fſb-
pool-hill ; and in Ciefſou-wood on Cheſſon- hill, be-
tween Newington and Sittingbourn. Park. pag.
699.

Rhamnus Salicis folio anguſto, fructu fla-
veſcente C. B. ſecundus Cluſii Ger. emac. pri-
mus Dioſcoridis Lobelio, five litoralis Park.
Rhamnus vel Ol-aſter Germanicus J. B. Sal-
low-thorn or Sea-Buck-thorn. On the Sandy grounds
about Sandwich aud Deal, as alſo about Folkſton oi
the other fide of Dover.

Rubus ſaxatilis Alpinos Park. Chamærubus
ſaxatilis C. B. Rubus Alf ius humilis J. B.
Saxatilis Ger. Stone-Bramble or Raſp. Parkinſon
tells us, it grows in the Iſle of Thanet and other pla-

(65

Ophris bifolia paluſtris. Bitolium paluſtre

55

K E NT.

266

«s in Kent. I never found it but among ther Mon-
rains in the North). a
Salix pumila folio ſubrotundo, utrinque la-
uuginoſo & argenteo. Drwarſ-willow with round
leaves, and a filver down on both fides. On the ſan-
dy grounds near Sandwich. | |
Satyrion abortivum v. Orobanche affinis. In
the middle of a Wood near Graueſen.
Serpyllum citratum Ger. Park. Citrii odo-
re J. B. foliis Citri odore C. B. Lemon-Thyme.
Between South-fleet and Longfield-Downs, and be-
tween Rocheſter and Sittingbourn in the high-way.
ark. pag. 9.
g EEE Veneris majus Park. Veneris Ger.
Onobrychis arvenſis, vel Campanula arvenſis
erecta C. B. Avicularia Sylvii quibuſdam J. B.
The greater Venus's Looking-glaſs. Parkinſon tells
us it grows among the corn at Greemuich and Dart-
ford. I was never yet ſo happy as to eſpy it among
corn. Poſſibly it might ſpring of ſeed, caſt out among
the weedings of gardens, and carried into corn-lands.
Spongia ramoſa altera Anglica, S. Sp. mari-
na Anglica planta nodoſa Park. Fucus ſpongio-
ſus nodoſus Ger. emac. Sea-ragged 2 Near
Margate in the Iſle of Thanet. a
Verbaſcum flore albo parvo 7. B. Lychnites
flore albo parvo C. B. Lychnites Matthioli Ger.
mas foliis longioribus Park. White-flower'd Mul-
lein. It is common in this Country by the way-fides.
Urtica Romana Ger. Park. Romana ſeu mas
cum globulis J. B. urens, pilulas ferens, pri-

ma Dioſcoridis, ſemine Lini C. B. Common Ro-
man Nettle. Parkinſon ſaith it hath been found
growing of old at Lidde by Romney, and in the
ſtreets of Romney. Of the original whereof he
tells us a very pleaſant ſtory. It is recorded
(ſaith he) that at Romney, Julius Cæſar landed
with his Soldiers, and there abode for a cer-
tain time, whence the place (it is likely) was
by them called Romania, and corruptly there-
trom Romeney or Romney. But for the growing
of this Nettle in that place, it is reported, That
the Soldiers brought ſome of the Seed with
them, and ſowed it there for their uſe, to rub
and chafe their Limbs, when through extreme
cold they ſhould be {tiff and benumned; being
told before they came from home, that the Cli-
mate of Britain was ſo extreme cold, that it
was not to be endured without ſome friction or
rubbing to warm their blood, and to {tir up
their natural heat: ſince which time, it is
thought, it hath continued there, riſing yearly
of its own ſowing.

This Story hath nothing of lilelyhood in it, le-
cauſe the Roman Nettle is found not only here, but
in divers other places on the Sea-coaſt ; nor, had it
been a ſtranger or exotick, would it likely have con-
tinued ſo long, coming up yearly of its own ſowing.
Outlandiſh Plants uſually failing, and being loſt, if
aot cultivated in gardens. Add hereto that Julius
Caſar landed not hereabouts,

DOB UNI.

2

267

* Bodo, what

it meant a-

DIARIES RIES IIA:

LL LL LL LL LL LECL LICL IL LL LI III

DOB

U NI.

E have gone through all thoſe Counties, which are bounded by the Britiſh Ocean,
the Severn Sea, and the river Thames. Let us now take a ſurvey of the reſt,
in their order; and, croſſing the river, and returning back to the 'Thames-head
and to the ZEſtuary of Severn, let us wiew the Territories of the Nobuni who
inhabited Gloceſterſhire and Oxtordſhire.

. The Name ſeems to be deriv'd from f Duften a Britiſh word; becauſe of their Duſen, u
living in a Country which conſiſts for the moſt part of Plains and Valleys. H/here- S*itith ben
upon, the whole People took their Denomination from thence ; and, from ſuch a fi- 5

tuation, Bathieia in Troas, Catabathmos in Africa, Deepdale in Britain, re-
ceiv d their ſeveral Names. And I am the more eaſily induc d to this Opinion, becauſe 1 find that Dion

calls theſe People by a name of the ſame fignification, Bodunni, if there is not a tranſpoſition of the Ler-
ters. For Bodo or Bodun in the ancient language of the Gauls, as Pliny informs us, fignifies Deep,

mong theBrz. which language ¶ have bejore demonſtrated to be the Jame with the Britiſh ; from whence, as he ſuppoſes,
is the name of the City Bodincomagus, plac'd upon the deepeſt berg of the river Poe ; and that of the

tains and
Cant.

Cotto ſwold. vd The middle part is a large fruitful Plain,

Bodiontii, a People that inhabited the deep Valley now call d

al de Fontenay, near the lake Lema-

ne ; not to mention Bodotria, the deepeſt Frith in all Britain.

I have met with nothing in ancient Authors concerning theſe Boduni, but that Aulus Plautius, who
was ſent by Claudius to be Proprætor in Britain, took part of them into his protection, who before were
ſubject to the Catuellani (their next neighbours,) and placed a Garriſan among them about the 45 year

of our Lord ; and this I have from Dio.

But aſſoon as the Saxons had conquer d Britain, the Name of Dobuni was loſt, and part of them, with
other Inhabitants bordering upon them, were by a new German name call'd Wiccii ; but from whence,
without the Reader's leave, I ſhould ſcarce preſume to conjetture : Tet if Wie in Saxon fignifie the Creek

of a River, and the Vignones a German People

are ſo call'd, becauſe they dwell upon the Creeks of

Rivers and the Sea (as is affrrm'd by B. Rhenanus ; ) it cannot be abſurd to derive the name of Wie-
cii from Wic ; fince their habitation was about the mouth of the Severn, which is full of windings

and turnings.

GLOCESTERSHIRE,

DW, Loceſierſbire, in Saxon [Tileap-
yy? Ceaycne-ſcyne, Eleapce rcpe-

rey pe and IEleaucerceprchype,
vas the chief Territory of the
ſ{} Dobuni. It is bounded on the

7 W weſt by Monmouthſbire and He-

refordſbire, on the north by

Worce#terſhire, on the eaſt by Oxfordſhire and

Warwickſhire, and on the ſouth by Wilfhire
and part of Somerſeiſpire. A. pleaſant and fer-
tile N mats extending from north-eaſt to ſouth-
weſt ; [ſand ſaid to be ſixty miles in length,
twenty fix in breadth, and one hundred and
bxty in circumference. | The moſt eaſterly part,
which ſwells into riſing Hills, is call'd Corteſ-

water'd by the moſt noble river Sever, that

others, by the diligence of the Country-man ; ) enough
to excite the idleſt perſon to take pains, when it re-
pays his labour with the increaſe of an hundred>
fold. Here you may behold high-ways and pub-
lick roads full of Fruit-trees, not planted, but
growing naturally. The Earth bears truit of its ows
accord, much exceeding others both in taſte and becuty,
many ſorts of which continue freſh the year round,
and ſerve the owner till he is ſupply'd by a new Iu-
creaſe. No County in England has ſo many or ſo

2
NI

Lon,

good Vineyards as this; either for fertility, or ſwect- Vineyards

neſs of the Grape. The wine has in it no unplea-
fant tartneſs or eagerneſs ; and is little inſcriour to the
| French in ſweetneſs. The Villages are very thick,
the Churches handſome, and the Towns popul»us and
many.

Jo all which may be added, in honour of this

gives as it were life and ſpirit to the Soil. The County, the river Severne ; than which there is not Seyerne.

more welterly part, lying on the other ſide S

zern, is all ſhaded with Woods. But enough
ot this: William of Malmesbury eaſes me of
the labour ; who fully deſcribes this County,
and ſets forth the Excellencies of it. Take
what he writes in his Book De Pontificibus.

The Vale of Gloceſter is ſo call'd from its chief
City ; the foil yields plenty of Corn and Fruit ( in
Jome places, by the natural rickneſs of the ground, in

any in the Land, that has a broader Chanel, ſwifter
| ſtream, or greater plenty of Fiſh. There is in it as
it were a daily rage aud fury of Waters; which I
know not whether I may call a Gulph or Whirl-
pool, caſtiug up the Sauds jrom the bottom, and
rowling them into heaps ; it comes with a great tor-
reut, but loſes its ſorce at a Bridge. Sometimes it
overflows its bauks, aud, marching a great way into
| the neighbouring Plains, returns back as Conqueror o

the

af

b

== hk 1 =
&

39 92 =

. —
, by — ETSY
. / a, *, = om were 29 £0 ame, Sues
” 9” "GT Uwe SS bebe
4+ 9 *

3 7 Rob: Morden

A ————_

6 jan/ols hope N 73 2

Ne oy” 2

Fryaalwic!

2 Breauel *
* Aewelrfel,

SI uren |
Y Hy 2

4 ovtortoi
- ter

Werfonbr

wickwarr =

Horton . ö . ,
— OLDg. 1 a X
ac ld Sodburs A * : the

cia Pill fb 4 * A EXT . LOGON :

x
WE

* Redu * Laurence 4245

4 * Kunges rode . S*BLs
8 * Por: hut Pount; , —

S
HENDB URY Hr
Charleton

*

A
*
=

PO SOMERS 7
l Zet ge OUTH
N — — — — Tos 42
[
b -

2 I TS.
r=

PR
<

3 —_—
*

_—_—

2 > m—_——— —
— w— — —

—

CSBARTON ?
| She

Maiwie

/1».% = Cotes Wou lde
»  _ .

V 5 7
£0 14

e

4

7

— "

*

2 2 Welfonbryt

Ol, | 7
— e
3 8 *. 7 :
— Wa | 11. L uck inton
nanten Magna
8 WH ” *. Ilderton
Tf UA 55 . vitletondrue
Vertleton 1
raxhall

KILEY Hex.

| 4
2. 4
Prnbury Park
14d >

LE
L” Lo Va
non &

%

ſalmesbury

5

* ſ y 1
oweshill \ yy 7

44 an

4 000 „% —

= 22 *
-

LS

S&I\1 KL:

A Scale of Mile:
Great |——m_— — —
.. U Il. — — 54 ro
Small — — 7 | 10
Abel Sal, FE

inizſſia ni &
Tohn Churchill |

Sold by

30

—
*

beth head *

Oversbridge

* See 17

Ed. 2. 16,
4 Has now,
C.

Foreſt of
Dean,

"GLO

CESTERSHIRE. ©

| Oversbridge.

the Land. That Veſſel is in great danger which is
ftricken by it on the fide ; the Water-men are d to
it, aud when they ſee this Hygre coming ( for ſo
they call it) they turn the Veſſel, and, cutting through
the midſt of it, avoid it's force. |

What he ſays concerning the hundred-told
increaſe, doth not at all hold true ; neither do
believe, with thoſe idle and diſcontented
Husband-men, whom Columel/a reprehends, that
the ſoil, worn out by exceſſive fruitfulneſs in
former Ages, is now become barren. But from
hence (to paſs by other Arguments) we are not
to wonder, that ſo many places in this Coun-
ty from their Vines are called Vineyards, be-
cauſe they formerly afforded plenty of Wine;
and that they yield none now, is rather to be
imputed to the floth of the Inhabitants, than
the indiſpoſition of the Climate. [For now,
theſe Vineyards have nothing left in this Coun-
ty, but the places nam'd from them; viz. one
near Tewkesbury, at preſent call'd the Vineyard,
and another on a riſing hill by Oversbridge near
GlocefFer 3 where was a large houſe moted
round, belonging to the Biſhop of Gloceſter,
built, about the year 1351, by the Abbot of
Gloceſter ; but it was totally ruin'd in the late
Civil Wars.] Why, in ſome parts of this Coun-
ty (fas we read in our Statutes) The Lands
and Tenements of condemned perſons ( by a
private Cuſtom, which t had the force of a Sta-
tte, ) are forfeited to the King, only for a
year and a day, and after that term expir d,
contrary to the cuſtom of all England beſide,
do return to the next heirs, let the Lawyers
enquire, ſince it is not to my purpoſe ; [and the
Cuſtom or Privilege it ſelf is now loſt by de-
ſuetude ; for upon the ſtricteſt enquiries among
underſtanding men, it does not appear that it
is usd or claim'd in any part of this County.]
And now let us ſurvey, in order, thoſe three
Parts, which I, mention'd before.

The more weſterly part beyond Severne
(which was formerly poſſeſs'd by the Silures)
as far as the river Vaga or Wye which divides
England and Wales ; is all cover'd with thick
Woods, and at this day is call'd Dean-Foreſt:
Some of the Latin writers call it Sylva Danica,
from the Danes; others with Giraldus, Danu-
biz Sylva. But unleſs it take the name from a
{mall neighbouring Town call'd Deane ; 1
ſhould fanſy that by cutting off a ſyllable, it
is deriv'd from Arden; which word the Gauls
and Britains heretofore ſeem to have uſed for a
od, ſince two very great Foreſts, the one in
Gallia Belgica, the other amongſt us in War-
wickſhire, are call'd by one and the ſame name,
Arden. This formerly was ſo thick with Trees,
ſo very dark and terrible by reaſon of its ſhades
and croſs-ways ; that it rendred the Inhabi-
tants barbarous, and embolden'd them to com-
mit many outrages. For, in the reign of Hen-
) the ſixth, they ſo annoy'd the banks of the
Severne with their Robberies, that there was

Hen. 6. an Act of Parliament made on purpoſe to

Iron,

LT. Phil

ranſ. N
137.

curb and reſtrain them. But, ſince ſo many
rich veins of Iron have been diſcover'd here-
abouts, thoſe thick Woods by degrees are be-
come much thinner. [The preſent Foreſt of
Dean contains about thirty thouſand Acres;
the ſoil isa deep clay, fit for the growth of Oak.
The hills, full of Jron-ore, colour the ſeveral
Springs that have their paſlage through them.

of.|| Here are ſeveral Furnaces for the making of

Iron, which by the violence of the fire be-
comes fluid, and, being brought ro their forges,
is beat out into Bars of various ſhapes. The
workmen are very induſtrious in ſeeking out

tully exhauſted, are burnt again in the furna-
ces, and make the beſt Tron, The Oak of the
foreſt was ſo very conſiderable, that it is ſaid
to have been part of the Inſtructions of the
Spaniſh Armada, to deſtroy the timber of this
place. But what a foreign power could not
ettect, our own Civil Diflentions did; for it
went miſerably to wrack in the Civil wars.) In
this Foreſt, upon the river, ſtood two Towns

bert de Clare, about the year 1160, took from

Sir William Winter, Vice-admiral of England,
a moſt worthy Knight, built a fair houſe.
[This Family ſuſter'd much for their Loyalty
to King Charles the firſt. But moſt noted for

is not yet wholly deprived of its old name,

ſide, and diſtant exacily nine miles, as he alſo
makes it, from Venta Silurum, or Caer Went.

heth a River, it is not improbable that it took
its name from the river. In the ſame ſenſe,
among us (to omit many others) we have Va-
terton, Bourne, Riverton ; and the Romans had
their Aquinum and Fluentinm. And I am the
more inclin'd to believe, that the town
took it's name from the river, becauſe at this
place they us'd to ferry over ; from whence

Antoninus: but without doubt there is an
error in the computation of the diſtances,
ſince he makes it nine miles betwixt Trajettus
and Alone; whereas, the river is ſcarce two
miles over.

But I ſuppoſe it may have loſt it's name, or
rather dwindled into a village, when paſſengers

expell'd the Welſh thence. For he was the
firſt, according to William of Malmesbury,
who drove the Welſh beyond the river Wye ;
and whereas, in former times, Severn divided
the Welſh (or the Cambri) and the Engliſh ;
he made the Wye their Boundary : whence our
Country-man Necham,

Inde Vagos Vaga Cambrenſes, hinc reſpicit
Anglos.

On this ſide, Wye the Engliſh views,
On that, the winding Welſh purſues.

In the late Commentary upon Antoninus,
Abone is placed elſewhere, upon the river Avon,

dingly interprets, either as a contraction of A-
vonham, a ham or manſion at Abone, or elle a
contraction of Henham, an ancient ham or ſta-
tion.

Not far from Wye, ſtands, amongſt tufts of

moliſhed; famous for the death of Mabel youn-
geſt ſon of Miles Earl of Hereford: tor there,
the Judgments of God overtook him for his
rapacious ways, inhuman Cruelties, and bound-
leſs Avarice, always uſurping on other men's
rights; (with all theſe vices he is taxed by the
writers of that age.) For, as G.raldus tells
us, being courteouſly entertained here by Wal-
ter de Clittord, and the Caſtle taking fire, he
loſt his life by the fall of a ſtone on nis head,
from the higheſt tower. [This Caltle (now

the Beds of old Cinders ; which, not being

Foreſt. The Government of it has been always
eſteem'd

ruin'd) ſerves as a Priſon for Ottenders in the

of good Antiquity, Tidenham and Wollafton, Tudenham,
which Walter and Roger, the brothers of Giſle- Wollaſton.

the Welſh : and hard by theſe, is Lydney, where Lydney.

Antiquity, is Antoninus's Alone or Avone, which Abone.

being now called“ Aventon a Chapel of Eaſe * Alvington,
to Mollaſton, the Eſtate of Henry Duke of Beau- is the com-
fort; | a ſmall village indeed, but by Severn- 727 P9m%.

And ſince Avon in the Britiſh Language ſigni- Avon.

the town oppoſite to it was called Trajectus by Trajectus.

began to * my lower, or when Athelſtan The Ferry.

namely at Hanham ; which the Author accor- Hanham.

trees, St. Breulais Caſtle, more than half de- St. Breulais,

— —— — —

— —

271

DOB UNI.

— .

272

eſteem'd a place of honour, and ſeveral Noble-

men have been Governours. Here it is, that

Mine-Court. the Mine-Court, Swain-Mote, and Speech-Court

Swain-Mote. are kept, wherein are ſeveral old Cuſtoms of

Speech-Court. Pleading. By the river IIe, lieth Newland, a

n : large Pariſh, landing in a pleaſant plain, where

are vaſt Mine-pits of fixty or ſeventy foot deep,

and as large as a conſiderable Church. Mr.

Jones, a Hamborough-Merchant, erected here an

Alms-houſe for ſixteen poor men and women,

and gave a very good houſe and ſtipend to a

Lecturer; of which the Company of Haber-

daſhers in London are Truſtees. North-weſt

Weſtbury. trom hence, is I/eftbury, a very large Pariſh,
reputed about twenty miles in compaſs. |

Nothing more is remarkable in this woody

tract, but that H:rbert, who marry'd the daugh-

ter of the foreſaid Mabel Earl of Hereford, was

in right of his wite call'd Lord of Deane; from

whom the noble tamily of the Herberts deduce

their original, who gave riſe to the Lords of

Blanleveny, and more lately, to the Herberts,

See in Derby- Earls of Huntingdon, and Pembroke, and others.

ſhire, From which family (if we nay credit D. Pouel in
8 t his Welſh Hiſtory,) was deſcended Anthony Fitz-
ITZNECOCTTE,

Herbert, whom the Court of Common Pleas, of
which he was ſometime chief Juſtice, and his
own moſt elaborate treatiſes of the Common
Law, do maniteſt to have been exceeding emi-
nent in his Proteſſion. But others aftirm, that
he was deſcehded from the Firz-Herberts, a
Knightly family in the County of Derby ; and
indeed, in my opinion, more truly,

The river Severn, call'd by the Britains Haf-
fren [runs in this County above forty miles, by
land: it is in ſome places two or three miles
over, and yet the tide floweth the whole length
of the current as high as Tewkesbury, It is re-
markable, that the tides one year are largeſt
at full Moon, the next at the change; and
that one year the night-tides are largeſt, the
other, the day-tides.| After it hath run a long
way in a narrow chanel, at it's firſt entrance
into this Shire it receives the Avon, [(near

Atk. p. 791. which, on the top of a Hill call'd Towbery-
Towbery- % there is an Incampment ; )1 and another
lun (mall river that runs into it from the Eaſt ; be-
Tewkesbury, tween Which, is ſeated Tewkesbury, in the Sax-
on tongue Theocrbupy, by others nam'd Theoci
Curia, and fo call'd from Theocus, who there led
the life of an hermit : a large and fair town,
having three bridges leading to it over three
rivers; famous tor the making of woollen-cloth,
Biting-Mu- and ſmart-biting Muftard ; but formerly moſt
itard, noted for an ancient Monaſtery founded by
Odo and Dodo, two brothers, in the year of our
Lord 715 ; where their Palace formerly ſtood,
as they teſtify'd by the following Inſcrip-

tion:

H ANC AULAM REGIAM DODO
DUX CONSECRARI FECIT IN
ECCLESIAM.

Which, being almoſt ruin'd by Age and War,
was repair'd by Robert Fitz-hamon a Norman,
out ot a pious deſign to make ſatistaction on
his part, tor the loſs that the Church of Ba-
jeux in Normandy ſuſtain'd, which Henry 1. had
conſumed with fire to free him from priſon, but
afterwards, repenting of the fact, rebuilt. It
* cannot (faith William of Malmesbury ) be
ealily conceived, how much Robert Fitz-ha-
mon adorned and beauritied this Monaſtery,
where the ſtatelineſs ot the buildings raviſh'd
the eyes, and the pious charity of the Monks
the aftections, of all Perſons, that came thi-
© ther“. In this Monaſtery, he and his ſuc-

Fitz-hamon.

vc

ceſſors Earls of Gloceſter, were interr'd, who
had a caſtle hard-by call'd Holmes, that is now
ruin'd. [Little of the Abbey remains, ſave
only the Church, which is Parochial, and had
once a fair Spire upon it. Mr. Fuller, in his
Church-Hiſtory, makes it a controverted point,
whether the Abbot of Tewkesbury had a Voice in
Parliament; but by Biſhop Goduin's Annals it
appears he had one, An. 1539. So that this
County had four mitred Abbies, Glocefter, Ci-
rencefFer, Tewkesbury, and JWWinchcombe.\ Nor
was Tewkesbury leſs tamous tor the bloody over-
throw that the Lancaftrians receiv'd in this
place in the year 1471; in which battle ma-
ny of them were {lain, and more taken and be-
headed, and their power ſo weaken'd, and their
hopes ſo ſunk by the death of Edward the on-
ly fon of King Henry the ſixth; while very
young (his brains being barbarouſly beaten
out here ; ) that they were never after able to
make head againſt King Edward 4. Whence
J. Leland writes thus of this Town,

Ampla foro, & partis ſpoliis pralara Theos

Curia, Sabrinæ qua fe committit Avona,

Fulget ; nobilium facriſque recondit in an-
tris

Multorum cineres, quondam inclyta corpora

bello.

Where Avon's friendly ſtreams with Severn
joyn,

Great Tewkesbury's Walls, renown'd
Trophies, ſhine,

And keep the ſad remains, with pious
care,

Of noble ſouls, the honour of the War.

for

[This Corporation was diflolv'd, in the year
1688, by the Proclamation of King James the
ſecond. |

Holmes GC

tle,

From hence we go down the ſtream to Deor- Deorhict.

hirſt, which is mention'd by Bede : it lies very
low upon the Severn, whereby it ſuſtains great
damage, when the river overflows. It had for-
merly a ſmall Monaſtery, which was ruin'd by
the Danes, but flouriſhed again under Edward
the Confeſſor, who, as we read in his Will,
aſſigned it, with the government thereof, to the
Monaſtery of St. Denis near Paris. But a lit-

tle atter, as Malmesbury ſaith, it was only an

empty monument of antiquity. Here, a Gen- * Mr. Per:

tleman ot this place, in the year 1675, dug- up
in his Orchard an old ſtone with this Inſcrip-
tion: Odda Dux juſſit hanc Regiam Aulam conſtr ui
atque dedicari in honorem S. Trinitatis, pro anima
germani ſui Elfrici, qua de hoc loco aſſumpta. Eal-

dredus vero Epiſcopus, qui eandem dedicavit 2 Idi-

bus April. 14 autem anno Regni S. Eadwardi Re-
gis Anglorum : i. e. Duke Odda commanded
this Royal Palace to be built, and to be dedi-
cated to the Holy Trinity, for the ſoul of his
Coutin Elfrick, which was parted from his bo-
dy in this place. But Ealdred was the Biſhop
who conſecrated it, on the ſecond of the Ides
of April, and the 14 year of the reign ot
the Holy King Edward.| Over-againſt this,
in the middle of the river, lies a place call d

Oleneag and Alney by the Saxons (and in Oleg
their ancient Annals more truly Olamige)1 now Alle,.
the Eight, i. e. an Hand: Famous upon this Eig%t-

account, that when the Engliſh and Danes had
much weaken'd themſelves by frequent encoun-
ters, in order to ſhorten the War, it was agre-
ed, that the fate of both nations ſhould be
determin'd here, by the valour of Edmund

King of the Engliſh and Canutus King of the
Danes, in ſingle combat; who, after a long
and

£
4
4

*
—
*

-

4
V7
2 —_—
*

273

—

Ile of Alne

Gloceſte1

* Briſton
written!
flow, fro
brilge,

Dec

272 ; 273

mes C.

arhick,

lr. Pere.

nea5

3

7

GLOCESTERSHOTIRE

274

— =

Iſle of Alney.

Gloceſter,

and doubtful Encounter, agreed upon a Peace,
and the Kingdom was divided between them :
but Edmund being quickly taken out of the
world, not without ſuſpicion of poyſon, the
Dane ſeized upon the whole. However, it
muſt be confeſs'd, that general tradition wall
not allow this to be the place; neither is it
juſtify'd by any analogy between the old and
new names. Near Glocefter, betwixt Overs-
bridge and Mayſemore, thexe is an Ifland calbd
to this day the Ie of Alney, which perhaps
may rather ſeem to be, as ſome are clear and
politive. that it was, the very place of that
action.

From Deorhirſt the river Severn, after many
windings, parts it ſelf, to make the foreſaid Iſle
of Alney (which is rich, and beautiful, with fruittul
green meadoWs ; ) and then haſtens to the chief
City of the County, which Antoninus calls
Clevum or Glevum, the Britains Caer Gloui, the
Saxons ¶ Bleapancearcen and] Eleaucercep, we
Gloceſter, the modern Latins Glovernia, others
Claudiocetria from the Emperor Claudius, who,
as is reported, gave it that name when he here
married his daughter Geniſſa to Arviragus the
Britiſh King, whom Juvenal mentions :

Regem aliquem capes, vel de temone Bri-
tanno
Excidet Arvirag .

Some captive King thee his new Lord
ſhall own,
Or from his Britiſþ Chariot headlong +
thrown :
The proud Arviragus comes tumbling
| *

as if Claudius s three wives had brought him
any daughters beſides Claudia, Antonia, and
Oclavia; or as if Arviragus was known in that
age, when his name was ſcarce heard of in Do-
mitian's reign. But, leaving thoſe who cor-
rupt Antiquity by their own Fancies, I ra-
ther adhere to Ninnius his Opinion, who de-
rives this name from Glouus, great grand-tather
of King Vortigern; only, I find Glevum men-
tion'd long before by Antoninus (which the
diſtance from Corinium, together with its name,
ſhews to be the ſame place: ) But as the Sax-
on name Gleauceſter, came from Glevum, ſo Gle-
vum by analogy came from the Britiſh name
Caer Glowi, and that, I believe, from the Bri-
tiſh word Glow, which in their language ſig-
nifies fair and ſplendid ; ſo that Caer Glow 1s
the ſame as a fair City. Upon the like ac-

count, among the Greeks, were the names of

* Briſtow is

Callipolis, Callidromos, and Caliiſtratia 3 and a-
mongſt the Engliſh * Brightſtow ; and in this

Nr County Fair-ford. This City was built by the

ow, from
ge,

Decurio,

Romans, on purpoſe to be a curb to the Si-
lures : and a Colony was placd here call d Co-

a ſtrong wall; being beautify'd with many fair
Churches, and handſome well-built Streets. On

ſquare ſtone, but now almoſt quite ruin'd ; ſbe-
ing only the common Gaol for debtors and fe-
lons.| It was firſt erected in the time of Milli-
am the Conqueror, and fixteen houſes were
demoliſhed in that place (as Domeſday-book
mentions it) to make room for this edifice.
About which (as Roger de Monte writes) Roger,
the ſon of Myles Conſtable of Gloceſter, com-
menced an Action at Law againſt King Henry
the ſecond ; and Malter his brother loſt the
right he had, both to the City and Caſtle. Ceau-
lin, King of the Weſt-Saxons, firſt took this
City by torce of arms from the Britains in the
year 570; then it came under the Juriſdiction
of the Mercians, under whom it flouriſh'd a
long time in great repute. Here Ofrick King
of the Northumbrians, by the . permiſſion of
Ethelred King of the Mercians, founded a large
and ſtately Nunnery ; over which Xineburga,
Eadburga, and Eva, all Mercian Queens, ſuc-
ceſſively preſided. Edelſleda likewiſe, the fa-
mous Lady of the Mercians, adorned it with a
noble Church, in which her ſelf lies intomb'd.
This Nunnery, being ruin'd and decay'd, was
repair d by Beornulph King of the Mercians, in
the year 821, who chang'd the former inſtitu-
tion into Secular Prieſts ; and they continu'd till
Wulſtan Biſhop of Worceſter plac'd Regulars
there, of the Order of St. Benedict, in the
year 1022. ]

Not long after [the Erection, ] when the
whole County was ravaged by the Danes, thoſe
ſacred Virgins were forc'd to depart, and the

Danes, as Athelwerd that ancient Author writes,

after many turns and changes of War, ſet up their
tents at Gleuu-ceſter. And, thoſe more ancienr
Churches having been ruin'd in theſe times of
Calamity, Aldred Archbiſhop of York and Bi-
ſhop of Worceſter, ere&ed a new one for Monks,
which 1s the preſent Cathedral, and hath a Dean
and fix Prebendaries belonging to it. Which
Church, in former ages, receiv'd great additi-
ons and ornaments from ſeveral Benefactors:
for J. Hanly and T. Farley, Abbots, ſare ſaid
to have] added the Virgin Mary's Chapel;
[or rather Ralph Wikingtoa (as hath been diſ-
covered by ſome ancient Records) who alſo
gave Lands to find two Prieſts for ever. | Ni-
cholas Morwent built the weſtern front from the

bot joyned to it the northern croſs Iſle ; Ab-

Tower. | This is fo neat and and curious, that
Travellers have affirm'd it to be one of the beſt
pieces of Architecture in England. Abbot Sea-
broke, the firſt defigner of it, dying, left it to
the care of Robert Tully a Monk of this place ;
which 1s intimated in thoſe verſes written in

Jonia Glevum ; for I have ſeen the remains of |black Letters, under the arch of the Tower in

an ancient Stone in the walls of Bath near the

North-gate, with the following Inſcription,

[ſtill remaining there: |

ore e 1

This City lies extended upon the river Se-

the Quire :
Hoc quod digeſtum ſpecularis, opuſque po-

litum,

Tullii hac ex onere, Seabroke Abbate ju-
bente.

This Fabrick which you ſee, exact and
neat, R

The Abbot charg'd the Monk to make
compleat.

The South Iſle was rebuilt with the offerings

vern; and, on that fide where it is not waſh'd [that devout People made at the Shrine of King

with the river, it is ſecured in ſome places with

Edward the ſecond, who lies here interr'd in an
M m Alaba+»

the ſouth part, was once a Caſtle, built of

ground, very beautifully. f Thomas Horton Ab- 4 G, Cam.

bot || FrowcefZer built the curious neat Cloy-|| Trowcelter,
ſters, and Abbot Seabroke the great and ſtately C.

* ; :
,
{

_
„

275

DOBUNTI. 7

276

Alabaſter tomb. And not far from him les
in the middle of the Quire, the unfortunate
Robert Curt-hoſe, eldeſt ſon of William the
Conqueror Duke of Normandy, in a wooden
monument. Ihe foreſaid Offerings at King
Edward's tomb, were very large ; tor preſently
after his death, ſo great a reſpect was paid to
the memory of their injur'd Prince, that the
Town was ſcarce able to receive the Votaries
that flock'd thither. And the Regiſter of the
Abbey affirms, that if all the Oblations had
been expended upon the Church, they might
have built an entire new one from the very
foundation. ] Beyond the Quire, in an Arch
of the Church, there is a wall built with ſo

+ Anguloſum, great artifice, in the form of a ſemicircle, t with

corners, that if any one whiſper very low at
one end, and another lay his ear to the other
end, he may caſily hear every Syllable diſtinct.
This, however, may poſſibly be accidental;
for it one ſurvey the out- ſide of the Church,
he will ſee, that two parts of it were tack'd-
on, only as paſlages into a Chapel erected
there.] In the reign of William the Conque-
ror and betore, the chief trade of the Gity
ſeems to have been forging of Iron ; for as it is
mention'd in Domeſday-book, there was ſcarce
any other tribute requir'd by the King, except

* An fee is certain * [tres of Tron, and Iron-bars, for the

ten Bars.

Edward's
Gate.

1 So ſaid,
ann. 1807.

2 Cluvienſis.

uſe of the Royal Navy ; and a few pints of
Honey. After the coming-1n of the Normans,
it ſufler'd ſome Calamities, when England was
in a lame, by the Barons wars; being plun-
der'd by Edward the fon of Henry the third,
and, aſter, almoſt laid in aſhes by a caſual fire.

But, by the bleſſing of a continued peace it
flouriſh'd again. [King John made it a Bur-
rough, to be govern'd by two Bailifts; and King
Heary the third (who was crown'd here) made
it a Corporation. On the ſouth- ſide of the Ab-
bey, King Eduard the firſt ereted a noble
Free-ſtone-gare, which is ſtill call'd Edward's
Gate ; and was tepaird by the laſt Abbot,
but almoſt demoliſh'd in the late Civil wars. |
Aſterwards, having the two adjacent Hun-
dreds added to it [by King Richard the
third (who alſo gave it his Sword and cap of
Maintenance) it was made a County of it ſelf,
and call'd The County of the City of Gloceſter. But
after the Reſtoration of King Charles the ſe-
cond, the ſaid Hundreds were taken away by
Act of Parliament, and the walls pull'd down,
becauſe they had ſhut the gates againſt King
Charles the firſt, when he laid ſiege to the
place, in the year 1643. Before that ſiege, the
City was adorn'd with eleven Pariſh- Churches;
bur five of them were then demoliſh'd.] Hen-
ry the eighth, in the memory of f our fa-
thers, adorn'd it with an Epiſcopal See, with
which dignity (as Geoffry of Monmouth
ſaith) it was anciently honour'd ; and I have
reaſon, not to queſtion the truth of that aſſer-

tion, ſince the Biſhop of * Cluve is reckon'd

1

among the Britiſh Prelates (which name be-
ing deriv'd from Clevum or Glow, doth in part
confirm my conjecture, that this is the Glevnm
mention'd by Antoninus.) ſAlſo, in the Hall
of the Biſhop's Palace, is written Eldædus Epiſ-
copus GlocesFrenuſis ; and Biſhop Godwin ſays,
that Theonus was tranſlated trom Gloceſter to
London in the year 553. Here is great pro-
viſion for the poor, by Hoſpitals ; particularly
Bartlolomew's Hoſpital maintains fifty four poor
men and women, to whom belong a Miniſter,
Phytician, and Chirurgeon. And Sir Thomas
Rich Baronet, a native of this place, gave ſix
thouſand Pounds by Will for a Blew-cat Hoſ-
pital, wherein are educated twenty Boys; and

ten poor Men, and as many Women, are
maintain'd, and all cloath'd annually. Beſides theſe
(and three more) there are many other Bene-
tactions to encourage young a and
to place out Boys Apprentices.

Juſt beyond Gloceſter, the Severn paſſeth by
Hempſtead, the Church whereof, till that time Hemptey,
Impropriate, was changed into a ReGory, up-
on a tree gitt of the Impropriation made to it
by John Lord Scudamore, Viſcount Slego in
Ireland ; which ſaid Gift was confirmed to
the Church by a ſpecial f Act of Parliament pro- ,, Cu
cured by him for that end. Then it paſleth by 9
Lanthony, a ruinated Priory built in the year
1136, as a Coll to that of St. John Baptiſt, in
Wales. Above this, on a little hill, ſtood
Newark-houſe, which belong'd to the Prior, and yg...
was rebuilt by the Lord Scudamore, the owner houſe,
chereof.

Below this, the river Stroud runs into the Stroud, riy,
Severn ; upon Which ſtands a town of the ſame
name, tamous for cloathing; the water where-
of is ſaid to have a peculiar quality for dying
Reds. It is a Market-town, ſtanding on the
aſcent of a hill, and is the chief reſidence of
the Clothiers in theſe parts, whoſe trade in
this County amounts to five hundred thouſand
Pounds per Anmm ; ſome making a thouſand
Cloaths a year, for their own ſhare. Not tar, , $
from hence, in the Pariſh of Biſſey, was born <A f
the famous Friar Bacon, and educated at St.
Mary's Chapel (now St. Bury-mill on Stroud-
river) wherein is a Room call'd at this day
Friar Bacon's Study. Between Stroud andy...
Gloceſter, ſtandeth Paynſuick, a Market-town, Study.
ſaid to have the beſt and moſt wholſom airPayaſnick,
in the whole County : and near it, on the

Lanthory,

hill, was Kembborow-Caitle, the fortifications, 4...,4.

and trenches whereof are ſtill viſible. ThisCatte,
is exceeding high ; having on the north-ſide

a vaſt precipice, and on the other ſides ſtu-
pendous works. From hence is a moſt lovely
proſpect over the Vale, to Malvern-hills, Shrop- Malvern-
ſhire, Worceſterſhire, Herefordſhire, and Mon- hills.
mouthſhire. Beyond which, lieth Prinknerſþ, Prinknerl,
once the manſion of the Abbot of Gloceſter, a
pleaſant ſeat on the fide of a hill : now

the inhcritance of the Bridemans, deſcended

from Sir John Bridgman, Chief Juſtice of Che-

ſter.

South of the river Stroud, and not far from
Mizchin-hampton ( a neat Market-town, once Mirchin-
belonging to the Nuns of Sion,) is H/ood-cheſter, hampton.
famous for it's teſſeraick work of painted beaſts Wood.

a cheſter.

and flowers, which appears in the Church-

yard, two or three foot deep, in making the
graves. If we may believe tradition, Earl God-

win's wite (to make reſtitution for her hus-

band's fraud at Barkley) built a Religious-houſe

here, with thoſe pretty Ornaments that are

yet to be ſeen, Here, anciently ſtood a Cha- Ack. p. 41+
pel dedicated to St. Blaiſe ; and in digging-up

the Foundations of it, there were found ma-

ny modern Coins, as alſo ancient Roman Coins,

and other Roman Anriquities. In a Vault al-

ſo, many human Bodies were diſcover'd, whoſe

Skulls and teeth were entire, white, and

firm. |

But now, to return to the river Se,. Ha-

ving left Gloceſter, and united its divided ſtreams,

it waxes broader and deeper by the tide, and this

makes it rage and foam like the Sca; towards

which it runs with frequent turnings and
windings. But in its courſe, it touchech won
nothing memorable ſaſter Lantlony already raen- as
tion'd, | except Cambridge, a ſmall Country-ham-Cambeids
let ſof five or ſix aoutes| (where Cam a little

river runs into it,) at which bridge, as /Echiel-
7 werd

3 | j }
z

| Perklex. 10

Farl God-
1 wyn's de-
WY?

10, C.

Domeſda N
book

npſtead.

merlb.

. $76

A

ite.

| Perklex.

u) n's de-

ceit.

0, C.

| Domeſda =
| book, J

"GLOCESTERSHIRE.

278

werd writeth, when the Danes, laden with rich
Soils, paſſed over, by filing off ; the Weſt-Saxons
aud Merciaiis receiv'd them with a bloody encounter
ia Ioodnesfield : in which Healtden, Cinuil and
Inguar, three of their * Princes, were ſlain; [which

brop- yet 1S ſaid by others, to have been at f Bridge-

4077 b.

Mr On the ſame fide of the river, not much
lower, ſtardeth Berkley, in the Saxon tongue
Beopkenlau the largelt Pariſh in the County,
which alſo gives name to the largeſt Diviſion. |
It is eminent for a ſtrong Caſtle, and Mayor
(the chief Magiſtrate, [tho* now only titular;) |
as alſo tor the Lords thereof the Barons of
Barkley, of an ancient and noble family; of
which was Hilliam Baron of Barkley, who in
the reign of Henry the ſeventh was made Viſ-
count and Marqueſs Barkley, Earl of Notting-
hom, and Marſhal of England; but he dying
without itiuve, thoſe titles dy'd with him. [It

is now honoured, by giving title to the Earls

of Baikley, who have a fair Caſtle here; though
not ſo large as formerly: Of whom, James the
preſent Earl, in conſideration of his early Va-
tour and ſignal Services at Sea, was ſummoned
to Parliament in the life-time of his Father. |

fee God-1f you would know by what ſtratagem Godwyn

Larl of Kent (a man exceeding fit for the ex-
eculion of any wicked deſign,) got poſlefſion
of tliis place; take this ſhort account from
Ii/alier Mapes who lived * tive hundred years
ſince, for it is not unworthy the Reader's
peruſal. Berkley is a Village near Severne, of the
early value of five hundred pounds, in which was a
Nunnery govern'd by an Abbeſs, that was both noble
and beautiful. Earl Godwyn a notable ſubtle main,
not defiring her but her's, as be paſs'd by, left his
Nephew, a young proper handſome Spark (under pre-
teuce of being ſeized with ſfickneſs,) till he ſhould re-
turn back thither, and inſtrutted him to counterfeit
an Iudiſpofiticn, till he had got all who came to vi-
fit him, both Lady Abbeſs, and as many of the Nuns
as he could, with child. And to carry en the in-
triegue more plauſibly, and more effe:tually to obtain
the javour of their viſits, the Earl. furniſh d him
with rings and girdles, that by thoſe preſents he might
the more eaſily corrupt and gain their inclinations.
There necded no great intreaty to perſwade this young
Gallant, to undertake an employment ſo amorous and
pleaſing. The way to deſtruction is eafie, and quick-
ly learnt ; he ſeem'd wonderful cunning, to himſelf 3
but all his cunning was but folly. In him were
concentred all thoſe accompliſhments that might capti-
vate fooliſh aud unthinking Virgins ; beauty, vit,
riches, and obliging mein: and he was mighty ſolici-
tous to have a private apartment to himſelf. The
Devil therefore expelled Pallas and brought in Ve-
nus; and converted the Cburch of our Saviour and
his Saints into an accurſed Pantheon, the Temple in-
to a Stew, and the Lambs into Wolves. When many
of them proved with child, and the youth began to
languiſh, being overcome with the exceſs and variety
of pleaſure, he haſten d home with the reports of his
conqueſts (worthy to have the reward of iniquity,) to
his expecting Lord. The Earl immediately addreſſes
the King, and acquaints him, That the Abbeſs and
the Nuns were gotten with child, and had render d
themſelves proſtitutes to all comers ; all which upon

inquiſition was found true. Upon the expulſion of

the Nuns, he begs Berkley, and had it granted him
by the King, and ſettled it upon his wife Gueda ;
but (as Domeſday-book hath it) ſhe refuſed to
eat an) thing that came out of this Manour, be-
cauſe of the deſtruttion of the Abbey: Aud there-
fore be bought Udeceſter for her maintenance,
whilſt ſhe lived at Berkley : Thus, a conſcien-

tious mind can never reliſh ill-gotten poſſeſſi-
ons.

I had rather you ſhould be informed from
Hiſtorians than from me, how King Edward
the ſecond, being deprived of his Kingdom by
the artifice of his wife, was afterwards mur-

der'd in this Caſtle, by the damnable ſubtilt
ot Adam Biſhop of

points :

Edvardum occidere nolite timere bonum

eſt.

To ſeck to ſhed Ki

Edward's blood
Retuſe to fear I thi

it good.

commit the murther, and he plauſibly vindi-
cate himſelf from giving any directions in it.
The little room, where this unhappy Prince
was murther'd, is {till to be ſeen. The Ma-

dred ; and was (as appears by Domeſday) at
and before the Crack parcel of 8
of Barkley. In the year 1678 it was purchas'd
by Sir Robert Southwell, being a pleaſant Seat,
between the Avon and the Severn. It hath a
proſpect into ſeveral Counties, and the Ships in
Kiags-road are at an eaſie diſtance. The Southwells
were formerly conſiderable in Nottingham-
ſhire, at the town of the ſame name, from
whence they removed into Norfolk, In King
James the iſt's time, the eldeſt branch went
into Irelaud, where the ſaid Sir Robert did enjoy
a fair eſtate on the oppoſite ſhore to King-
weſton, at King-ſale, and thereabouts ; which
at prelent is enjoy'd by his ſon and heir. | Be-
low Barkley, the little river Avon runs into the
ſea ; at the head of which, ſcarce eight miles

mals, or the ludicrous fancies of nature, let the
natural Philoſophers enquire. But Fracaſtorius,

dred in the fea, and carried by the waters to
the tops of mountains : for he affirms Hills to
have been caſt-up by the ſea, and that they
were at firſt only heaps of ſand tumbled toge-
ther; alſo, that the ſea overflow'd, where high
hills now are : upon the return of which into
its wonted courſe, Iſlands and Hills did firſt
appear. But theſe things are beſide my pur-
poſe. [ Alderley is of late famous tor being the
birth-place of Sir Matthew Hale Lord Chief
Juſtice of England; who, dying in the year
1676, lyeth buried in this Church-yard under
a tomb of black marble.]

be oppoſite to Alone, where they uſed to pals
the Severn, Was, as I imagine by the name, at

which, as in both parts of the name it carries
ſomething of Antiquity ; ſo has it that title
confirm'd to it by a large Campus major of the
Roman Fortifications: and, where the Church
now ſtands, was the Campus minor : there are
in this County ſeveral more of the ſame

Clive, for it is ſituate upon a very high craggy
cliff, What the aforementioned Mapes has told
us as done in this place, is worth your know-
ledge. Edward the elder, faith he, lying at Auſt

Clive, and Leolin Prince of Wales at B-rhefley,

V..hen the latter would neither come down to a Con-

ference

1 —

: a ereford, who ſent theſe The ſlyneſs of
enigmatical words to his keepers, without any a Bilhop.

ſo as, by the double ſence and conſtruction Murder of
of the words, they might be encouraged to Edward 2.

nour of Kings-Wefon, though at twelve miles Kings We-
diſtance from Barkley, is yet in the ſame Hun- ſton.

from the ſhore, on the hills near A/derley a ſmall Alderley.
town, are ſtones reſembling Cockles and Oy- Stones like
ſters ; which, whether they were living ani-Cockles.

the Prince of Philoſophers * in our age, makes. So fid
no queſtion but that they were animals engen- ann. 160).

The Trajectus which Antoninus mentions to TrajeQus,

Oldbury, i. e. an ancient Burrough ( as now we Oldbury.
terry over at Auſt a village ſomewhat lower ; ) Ault- Village,

kind.] Auſt aforeſaid was formerly call'd Auſt- Auſl- Clive.

279 DOBUNT 5

2%

feraice, nor croſs the Severn, Edward paſſed over
Pride con- to Leolin; who ſeeing the King, and knowing who
quer'd by ye aud, threw bis royal Robes upon the ground (which
humility. e had prepared to fit in judgment with) and leaped
into the water breaſt high, and embracing the boat,
ſaid, Moſt wiſe King, your humility has conquer d
my pride, aud your wiſdom triumphed over my folly ;
mount upon that neck which I have fooliſhly exalted
againſt you, ſo ſhall you enter into that Country which
your geodneſs hath this day made your ou. And
ſo, taking him upon his ſhoulders, he made him fit
* Heminium, upon I is Robes, aud joyning hands did“ homage to
him.

Alveſton, {Not far from Auſt, is Alveſton, in which
Ark, p. 217. Pariſh is a large round Camp, on the edge of
an hill, from whence is a pleaſant proſpect of
the Severn ; and near the Camp, 1s a large Bar-
row, in which were found, upon digging, the
Bones of divers men laid in diſtinct Tombs of
Stone. (Another Camp alſo, which is an ob-
long ſquare, with a ſingle ditch, is to be ſeen
not tar from hence, at a place call'd Ca#zle-
Hill.)

On the ſame ſhore, lies Thornbury [( a titular
Mayor-town)| where are to be ſeen the foun-
dat ions of a magnificent Caſtle, which Edward
+ The laſt + Duke of Buckizgham deſigned to erect in the
Duke, C. year 1511, as the inſcription teſtifies, | Viz.

This Gate was begun 1511. 2 Hen. 8. by me Ed-
ward Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Hereford, Staf-
ford, and Northampton. He was beheaded be-
tore he perfected his deſign ; for he had intend-
ed to make the Church at Thornbury, Collegiate,
with Dean and Prebendaries. They have here
four ſmall Alms-houſes, a Free-{chvol, and
weekly market. The moſt conſiderable Gen-
try, heretofore, paid an annual attendance at
Men Court, where the Abbot of Tewkeſ-
bury was oblig'd perſonally to ſay Maſs, | Se-
en miles from hence, the river Avon running
into Severn, divides GlocefFerſhire and Somerſet-
ſhire and not far from the fide of the river,
Puckle. is Puckle-Church, anciently a royal Vill call'd
Church Puckle-kerks, where Edmund King of England
was kill'd with a dagger, as he interpoſed be-
tween his Sewer, and one Leof a profligate Fel-
low, who were quarrelling. [Now, it is only
a ſmall Village, the ſeat of Sir Alexander Co-

I hornbury.

in length, and forty one in breadth, with a
large Pool of water at the bottom of it.

On the top of St. Vincent's Rocks near Bri- 5. y.
ſtol, is a roundiſh fortification or Camp ; the Rods,
rampire and graffe thereof not great: for by * Ar
reaſon of the nearneſs of the rock, which is
as hard as marble, the ground is not eaſily
dug. Whether thoſe rocks towards the top,
conſiſt moſtly of petrify'd pieces of wood (as
{ome are inclin'd to think) let the Naturaliſts
examine. 'The precipice of the Rock over the
river Avon, has made all Works on the weſi-
ide needleſs. In the ſame Pariſh, is the Hu "TIP"
Hell, famous for curing ſeveral Diſtempers, ar:d Hot wa,
eſpecially the Diabetes ; and a very cold ſtream Die:
at Jacob's Well, which is much eſteem'd for Jacob's we,
it's wholſom Waters. About two miles from
St. Vincent's Rocks, is Henbury, f where is aHenbur,
Camp with three rampires and trenches ; fromÞ Aubr, M
which we may conclude it to have been the
work, rather of the Britains, than of any other
People. But now to return. | -

Near Puckle-Church, lieth Hinterbourne, of Winters,
which the Bradſtones were Lords [ (ſo named from Bradtores
Bradſtone in the Pariſh of Berkley, where they
erected a Chantry ; )] from whom the Vit-
counts Montacute Barons of Wentworth, &c. are
deſcended ; as alſo Acton, which gave name to Adr Inte,
a Knightly tamily, whoſe heireſs being marri-
ed to Sir Nicholas Pointz in the time ot Eduard Poirt:,
the ſecond, left it to her Poſterity : Derham, a Decham.
{mall Village, in Saxon Deopham, where Ceau-Mirians
lin the Saxon in a bloody engagement ſlew three
of the Britiſh Princes, Commeail, Condidan, Fi-
riemeiol, with divers others, and ſo diſpoſſeſſed
the Britains of that part of their Country, for
ever. There are yet to be ſcen in the place,
huge Rampires and Trenches (the Fortificati-
ons of their Camps) and other evident ſigns of
that memorable Battle. Theſe are (I ſuppoſc)
the ſame with thoſe which f Mr. Aubrey takes t Mon. B.
notice of, upon Henton-hill in that pariſh. It is us.
call'd Burrill, is ſingle-trench'd, and ſeems to Herta
have been ruin'd before fully finiſh'd. Wirh-5"
in the bank it contains twenty acres of arable
land; but on the weſt and ſouth {ſides there is
no bank nor trench ; which probably was oc-
caſion'd by the ſteep Meres that would not give

ming, by marriage with one of the Coheirs of leave to draw them.] This was the Barony ot

the Deimiss, whoſe Family have been eighteen
times High-Sherifis of this County. Beyond
this, near Briſtol, lieth Kineſwood-foreſt, former-
ly of a much larger extent, but now drawn
within the bounds of five thouſand acres. It
conſiſts chiefly of Coal- mines; ſeveral Gentry
being poſſeſſors of it by Patent from the Crown.
It is a controverted point, whether it be a Fo-
reſt or Chaſe ; for it is ſaid to have been de-
pendant upon Micklewood, that is now deſtroy'd.
Within it, are two fine ſeats, Barrs-Court in
Bitton-Pariſh, belonging to the Newtozs Baronets;

Siſton · houſe. and * to * Trotmans.
Not far from Briſtol lieth Meſtbury, upon
* Trin; Which river is now dvindled ine a lit-
tle brook. Here was a famous College, en-
compaſs'd with a ſtrong wall, built by John Car-
penter Biſhop of Worceſter about the year 1443,
who deſign'd to have been ſtil'd Biſhop of Wor-
ceſter and Weſtbury, This, with the adjacent
Pariſhes in Gloceſterſhire that lie round Bri-
ſtol, are under the Juriſdiction of the Biſhop of

Briſtol.

About three miles from Briſtol, and three
Pen-park- from Severn, is Pen-park-hole, the paſlage into
hole. which is down a ragged and rocky Tunnel for
Philotoph. thirty nine yards; after which, the hole ſpreads

TYranſa&, N. . , ,
1a” into an irregular oblong figure ſeventy five yards

K ing _—

tore

Barrs-Court.

James de novo Mercatu, Who having two Three. C
daughters, | Hawys and Jſabel,) married one, firſt Jabs r
to John de Botereaux, and then to Nicholas 9
Moils ; and the other to Ralph Ruſſel ; whoſe®
Poſterity, being enrich'd by marriage with an
heir of the honourable Family of the Gorges,
aſſumed that name. [From Ralph Ruſſel it
deſcended to Sir Gilbert Dennys, who marry'd
the heireſs of that family; thence to the Min-
ters, Whoſe heireſs was marry'd to Millian
Blatlrzayt, who built here a ſtately fabrick, in
the room of the old one. Nor far from hence
lieth Great Badminton, a {eat belonging to the great Bi
Dukes of Beautort ; which having been made minton.
their Country-relidence ſince the demoliſhment
of Rayland-Caftle, is ſo adorn'd with ſtately ad-
ditions to the houſe, large parks, neat and ſpa-
cious gardens, variety of fountains, walks, ave-
nues, Paddocks, and other contrivances for re-
creation and pleaſure ; as to make it jultly
eſteem'd one of rhe moſt compleat cats in the _
kingdom. Here, we muſt net omit Chipping- Chips
Sodbury, a market-town below the hills, which Sodburye
hath a Free-ſchool, and was govern'd by a Bai-
lift : but about 1681 it was made a Corpora-
tion, with a Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgeſles;
which was ſuppreſs'd by the Proclamation of
King James the ſecond, in the year 1688, Next

18

Tormarton.
Ack. p. 784

qt wh -, SS 4+ © wu

Dureſey.

K'rgh wood-
Abbey.

ng , , ww YG

Kingſcot,
Aubr, Mon
Brit, MS.
Cheſle-Mo»
Ley.

Bury. hill.
Atk, p. 29;

Cotſwold

Would, wh
in Engliſh,

Campde

7 Vince
Looks

Aubr, ys

lik. p, 0
Tot Well,
Diabetes.
acob's We

lendury,
* Aubr, M.

V interhoun,
radfiones

\Qon [reter,

ointz,
Jerham,
larianus,

Mon. Bt,
8.
lenton-hill
urrill,

eat Bid
nton,

ipping
bur).

* ———

281

i  _CGLOCESTERSHIRE

.
* - n
+4 the _ 5 R * v*\ "
* r — — 4.
_ —

282

„ is H/ctton-under-edge, famous for Cloathing; where War jointly againſt the Britains: which town,
O

detadge ·

IId. p. 230.
Alton.

*

is a noble Free-ſchool erected by Catharine, relictſ in William the Conqueror's time, was in the Inq, 2 Ed, 2;
of Thomas Lord Berkley, in the year 1385; and [poſſeſſion of Hugh Earl of Cheſter, and' from ;
an Alms-houſe by Hugh Perry Alderman of Lon- his ſterity deſcended by Nicholas de Albeniaco,
don, in 1632, which coſt one thouſand Pounds;|to Roger de Somery. [It is a market-town,
and the like ſum was given by Sir Jonathan famous for Stockings. It gave the title of Viſ-
Daus, Sheriff of London, for the relief of the count to Sir Bapriſt Hicks, 4 Car. 1. who was
poor. Near Derham, in the Pariſh of Cold A-|a great Benefactor to this place, by erecting an
ſton, was diſcover'd in Plowing, a Hole like the | Alms-houſe, rebuilding the market-place, and
Tun of a Chimney ; through which ſeveral ſannexing the Impropriation of Winfryth in Dor-
perlons were let down, and found a Cavity, [ſetſhire, for the augmentation of the Vicaridge.
wherein one might walk about half a mile one He built here a curious Houſe near the Church
way, and it is not known how far the other; (Which was burnt in the late Civil Wars, leſt it
and, in walking, they obſerv'd ſeveral ſuch {ſhould be a garriſon for the Parliament ; ) and
Tunnels aſcending towards the Surface of the lies bury'd in the ſouth Ile of the Church, which

parted, Earth. Alſo, at Tirmarton, tibt far from Der-|is adorn'd with ſuch noble monuments of mar-

Alb. p. 784+ am, to the north, are found in the Fields, ble, as equal, if not exceed, moſt in England.

Dureſey.

K'rg ſwood-

A X's

le,

| Tetbury,

Kingſcot,

Scones about the bigneſs of Bullets, which be-|He gave 1n his lite-time ten thouſand Pounds
ing broken, look ruſty like Iron-Ore. There ſto charitable uſes, as his Epitaph mentions ;
are alſo many Cockle-ſhells incorporated intoſand leaving only two daughters, the honour
large Stones; and a Spring, which has the pe-|deſcended to the Lord Noel, by marrying the
tritying quality of turning wood into ſtone. | [eldeſt of them: whoſe poſterity were after-

More northward is Dureſtey, the ancient poſ-|wards created Earls of Gainsborough. Beyond
ſeſſion of the Berkleys, hence call'd Berkleys of Camden, on a riſing ground, is Elburton, where Ebburton,
Dureſley (Founders of the adjacent Abbey of|the Lord Chancellour Forteſcue lies buried; but
Kingſwood of the Ciltercian order.) [It is aſhis Monument Vas not erected till the year
market-town, famous for Cloathing ; and as to 1677. Adjoyning to Camden, is Weſton, of no
Kingfwood-Abbey, it is by all writers plac'd in great Antiquity. * Hales, heretofore a moſt flou- * Mr. Cam-
Gloceſterſhire 3 whereas the whole Pariſh is really|riſhing Abbey, built by Richard Earl of Corn- den places
in the County of Mali, under the power of wal and King of the Romans, and famous tor hofft the boſe
their Sheriffs and Juſtices, but within the Dio-ſits ſcholar Alexander de Hales, a great maſter Sheldon ,
ceſe of Gloceſter. It was founded by William|of the knotty and more ſubtile ſort of School- miſtake for
Berkley 1139, thence remov'd to Tetbury, and|divinity ; [unleſs it be true, what we find in Keſtes in
at laſt fix d here, till the Diſſolution. From|his Epitaph, in the Cordeliers Church in Pa- 1 h
this Durſley, the Earl of Berkley, at the ſameſris, that he dy'd 1245, a year before this Abbey gg
time that he was advanced to that Honour, was|wasbegun. For the foundation was laid in the year + Not long
created alſo Viſcount Durſley.| Not far eaſt- 1246; and when it was dedicated, the King; lince, C.

E rererfon Ca- Ward, we behold Beverſtone-caſtle, formerly be- Queen, and Court, were all preſent at the So-

longing to the Gournys and Ab-Adams, who|lemnity. There are now but ſmall remains

Ab-Adams. louriſh'd under Edward the 1ſt; and afterwards,[of it, only a neat cloyſter; the reſt being turn'd

to the Knightly family of the Berkleys : [but is|into a fair houſe, now in the poſſeſſion of Wil-

now in the poſleſſion of the Hicks's Baronets. Be-[liam Lord Tracy of || Toddington two miles, "9" FO
yond which lieth Tetbury, where is a great mar- off, where alſo he has a ſtately houſe, the ſear =
E for Yarn ; and a Free- ſchool and Alms- of his Anceſtors.]

houſe, both owing to the bounty of Sir William] Sudley, formerly Sudleagh, a beautiful caſtle, Sudley.
Romney a native of the place. It belong'd to]“ heretofore the ſeat of Giles Bruges Baron of * Lately, C.
the Berkleys, but they {old their right to the Chandos, whoſe grandfather John Was honour'd Barons of
Inhabitants, who now enjoy the tolls and pro-[by Queen Mary with that title, ſand whoſe Chandos.
fits of the Markets and Fairs. In this neigh-[noble and generous Deſcendant, James Brid-
bourhood, at Kingſcot, Roman Coins have been|ges, hath been lately advanced to the ho-

Aubr, Mon. frequently found in the fields, after ſhowers ot|nour of Duke of Chandois; becauſe + they de-, Ie derived

Brit, MS,

Cbeſle. Mo-

rey.

Bury. hill

. Camp, calld Bury-bill.\

Rain, which they call Cheſle-money, perhaps for rive their pedigree from the ancient family of his, C.

Caftle or Chefter-money : and alſo in the year|Chandos : Of which, there flouriſh'd, in the

1691, was found a Roman Fibula, of the ſame|reign of King Edward the third, John Chandos,

ſhape and figure with that which is repreſented] Viſcount St. Saviours in France, eminent for

in the Table annex'd to the deſcription of|his ſervices, and great ſucceſs, in war. The

Wales. ; and not far from hence, is a large|former Lords and Inhabitants, hence called Ba-

rons of Sudley, were of an ancient Engliſh Race, garons of
Hitherto I have made curſory remarks upon|deducing their original from Goda the daughter Sudley.

the places in this County which are ſituate be-|of King Æthelred, whoſe ſon Ralph Medantinus

yond or upon the Severn ; now I will paſs to] Earl of Hereford, was the father of Harold

the eaſterly parts, which I obſerv'd to be hilly ;|Lord of Sudley. His Poſteriry continued here

Cotſwold, to Wit, Cotſwold, which takes it's name from|a long time, till, the iſſue-male being extinct,

the hills and ſheep-cores, (for, mountains and|the heireſs married William Butler of the fa-

Weld, what Bills, the Engliſh formerly called H/oulds ; on|mily of Wem, and brought him a fon named
in Engliſh, which account an ancient Gloſſary interprets the Thomas. He was father of Ralph, Lord High

Alps of Italy, the J/oulds of Italy.) Upon theſe| Treaſurer of * whom Henry the ſixth
hills, are fed large flocks of Sheep, with the whi- created Baron of Sudley, and who new-built
teſt Wool;having long necksand ſquare bodies, by[this caſtle ; ſthe beſt part of which is now
reaſon, as is ſuppoſed, of their hilly and ſhort pa- pulled down; as the neat Church here was rut-
ſture; whoſe fas Wool is much valued in foreign|ned in the Civil Wars.] His ſiſters were mar-
Parts. Under the fide of theſe hills, as it were|ried into the families of Northbury and Belknape
in a neighbourhood, together, lie the following|by which the Eſtate Was in a little time divi-
places, remarkable for their Antiquity. ded into ſeveral Families.

Camplen, Campden, commonly call d Camden, a noted Hard by this, is Toddington, where the Tracies, Toddington.
market-town, where (as John Caſtor avers) all of a worſhipful and ancient family, have long
the Kings of the Saxon Race had a Congreſs in] flouriſhed, and formerly received many favours

the year 689, to conſult how to carry on the|from the Barons of Re: But how, in =
n

I 2 oy 2

— ęſ2—B—nꝛ 4 Ayo” <— DAME We a aq +

.
RN 4 * *
I Y

—

203

"DOBUNI.

f

firſt Reformation of Religion, William Tracy
Lord of this place, was cenſured after his
death, his body being dug-up and burn d
ublickly, for ſome flight words in his laſt
Win, which thoſe times call'd heretical; or
how, in preceding times, another William Tra-
cy imbrued his hands in the blood of Thomas
Archbiſhop of Canterbury ; Eccleſiaſtical Wri-
ters have told us at large, and it is no part of
Winchc my bufineſs to relate. Winchelcomb is alſo ſeat-
eomb. ed here, a populous town, where Kenulph the
Mercian King erected a Monaſtery, and, on
the day of it's conſecration, freely ſet at liberty
Edbri&h King of Kent, then his priſoner, with-
out ranſom. |
It is ſcarce credible, in what | gp repute
this Monaſtery was, for the ſake of the reliques
of King Kenelm, a child of ſeven years old,
whom his ſiſter privately murder'd to gain the
inheritance ; and who by that Age was put into
the Catalogue of Martyrs. | There are ſcarce any
ruins viſible, cither of the Abbey, or ot that which
Ivy-Cafile, was call'd fvy-Caftle, or of St. Nicholas Church
| that ſtood in the eaſt part of the rown. The
Inhabitants made planting of Tobacco their chict
buſineſs, which turn'd to good account; till,
reſtrain'd by the 12 Car. 2, they decayd by
little and little, and are now generaliy poor. |
The neighbourhood of this place was formerly
reckon'd as a County or Sherifidom by it ſelf ;
for we find in an ancient manuſcript belonging
to the Church of Worceſter, theſe words, Ed-
* Adquilitor. vic firnamed Streona, that is, the * Acquirer, who
under Ethelred, and for ſome time after under Cnute
er Canute, preſided and reigned as Viceroy over all
England, joyned the Sheriffdom of Winchelcombe,
which was then entire within it ſelf, to the County
of Gloceſter.
Brimesfield, Lower in the County lieth Brimesfie/d, where
Giffords Be- che Grffords were formerly Lords; [| (of which
Wr Family, John Gifford Lord of this place, founded
Glocefter-ball in Oxford, for the Monks of Glo-
ceſter.) ] To them; by marriage with the Clit-
fords, came a plentitul Eſtate 3 bur ſoon after,
it was carry'd by daughters to the Lords Le
Strange of Blackmer, the Audleys, and others.
[This was formerly a place of ſome repute 3
for we find, that Lionel Duke of Clarence had
a Charter tor a weekly Market here on Tueſ-
days, and a Fair on the Eve of Corpus Chrifi :
here was alſo a Priory and a Caſtle ; but both
are vaniſh'd. 1
Theſe places are ſituate among the hills: but
under the hills, upon the Eaſt-confines of the
County, I ſa that tamous Roman High-way call-
Foſſe· way. ed the H. Out of Warwickſhire it comes down
Lemington. by Lemington, Where there ſeems to have been a
Station ot the Romans, from the coins which
are often plow'd up there; ſome of which, Ed-
ward Palmer, an induſtrious Antiquary, whoſe
Anceſtors lived long here, very courteouſly be-
ſtow'd upon me. ['The place belongeth now
to the Family of Juxon; the ſame with that
of Dr. Wiliam Juxon, Archbiſhop of Canter-
Stow on the bury.l Thence it goes by Stow on the Would,
Would, which, by it's high ſituation, is too much expo-
ſed to the winds. [It is now a great Market;
where (as the common Obſervation goes) they
have but one element, viz. Air ; there being
neither wood, common field, nor water, be-
longing to the town. It hath an Alms-houſe,
a Free-{chool, and a multitude of poor. Here,
in the year 1645, March 21, the 2 of King
Charles the firſt, being over-power'd, were rou-
ted by the Parliament-Army. Next, the Foſſe
goes by Burton, in ancient Grants Burgtone; Which
ſeems to have been a place of ſome note, as well
by the name, as by the tracks of Houſes which

Burton,

abc _ WY

1
Wy

are diſcover d here, after great Rains. Here
alſo, the marks of a Camp of large Extent, are

{till to be ſeen. ] Then, by North-leach, ſo call'd N
from the rivulet running by it, [a market-town, "hg
with a neat Church, Here is alſo a good Gram-
mar- ſchool founded by Hugh Wef#wood, Eſq;
who (as it is commonly reported) came after-
wards to be low in the world, and deſiring to
be Maſter of his own ſchool, was deny'd that
tavour by the Traſtees. By a Statute made in
the * fourth year of King F ks the firſt, it : Cy,
was ſettled upon Queen's College in Oxford. F
Near which, at Farmington, is an exceeding Farm;
large Roman Camp, called Norbury, eight rMingtn,
hundred and fifty paces long, and four hundred
ſeventy three broad: The works are ſingle,
and not very high : it is now a Corn-field ; and
not far from it, weſtward, there is a Barrow
From North-leach, the Folle-way goes to Cirm- Cn.
ceſter 5 tO which town the river Churn, runnins a
ſouthward among the hills, and very commodinus
tor mills, gave that name. This was a famous
City, of great Antiquity, call'd by Ptolemy Co-
rinium, and by Antoninus Durocornovium, i. e.
the water Cornovium; juſt fifteen miles (as he
alſo obſerves it to be) from Glevum, or Glo-
ceſter, The Britains call'd it Caer-cori and Caer-
ceri, the Saxons Cypen-ceartcep, and at this
day it is call'd CircefFer and Circiter. The rui-
nated walls plainly ſhew that jt hath been very
large, for they are ſaid to have been two miles
about. That this was a conſiderable place, is
evident from the Roman coins, chequer'd pave-
ments, and inſcriptions in marble, dug-up here ;
( which coming into the hands ot ignorant
and illiterate perſons, have been ſlighted and
loſt, ro the great prejudice of Anriquiries ; )
[ alſo from the large Vaults of Brick, more late- Atk. p34
ly dug-up, ſuch as were in ancient times made

by the Romans for Baths; land from thoſe Con- Military uy
ſular ways of the ſame People, which here of the l.
croſs'd each other: Eſpecially, that which mans
leadeth to Glevwum or Gloceſter, is ſtill viſible

with a high ridge, as far as Bird-lip-hil/ ; and Bird. ir
to a curious obſerver, it ſeems to have been pa-
ved with ſtone. [From this place alſo a Ro-
man High-way runs to Cricklade, Stratton-St.
Margaret, and ſo to Badon and Newbury.
The Britiſh Annals tell us, that this Ciry was
ſet on fire by one Gurmundus, I know not
what African tyrant ; and that he made uſe of
ſparrows to effect it: whence Giraldus calls it

the City of Sparrows : And from theſe Memoirs,
Necham writes thus ;

Cor tun

Urbs vires experta tuas, Gurmunde, per aunos
Septem. —

A City that defy'd proud Gurmund's
{ſtrength
For ſeven long years.

Who this Gurmund was, 1 confeſs I am ig-
norant : [(the Author of the Welſh Hiſtory
makes mention of one Gurmundus an Arch-
pirate, Captain of the Norwegians, who aſſiſted
the Saxons: ) The Inhabitants ſhew a mount
of earth near the rown which they ſay Gur-
mund caſt-up ; but they call it Griſmuud” 5
Tower; ſ which is to be ſeen on the weſt-lide,
and is a ſteep round berry, like a windmill-hill,
where Men's bones of an unuſual ſize have been
found, with a round veſſel of Lead, and So-
pulchres, with Aſhes and pieces of bones,
as Leland informs us. | Marianus, an ancient
hiſtorian of good credit, ſays, that Ceaulin
took this City from the Britains, after he had

vanquiſh'd their forces at Deorham, and mo
*

-
——
—
—— -

1 —— — —
— — ——— — r: _

205

ne.

ORE

E ‚— et toes m eld REES

* Multtas.

Sappertor

+ Itin, 1

Fai

Atk,

—

9 =

GLOCESTERSHIRE

ced Gloceſter. For a long time after, it was
ſubje& to the Weſt-Saxons : for we read, how
Penda the Mercian was defeated by Cinegliſe
King of the Weſt-Saxons, when he laid ſiege to
it with a mighty army. But at laſt it came,
with the whole County, under the power of
the Mercians, and ſo continued till the Engliſh
Monarchy began: under which, it was grievouſſy
harraſſed by the incurſions of the Danes, poſſi-
bly by that Gurmon the Nane whom hiſtorians
call Guthrus and Gurmundss. Now, ſcarce the
fourth part within the walls is inhabited ; the
reſt being 1 qa and the ruins of
an Abbey, firſt built by the Saxons as is re-
ported, and repair'd by _ 23 in which, asI
am informed, many of the family of the Barons
of St. Amand are interred.

The Caſtle that ſtood there, was razed by
command of Henry the third, in the firſt year
of his reign. The chief trade of the inhabi-
tants is in the Woollen Manufacture; and they
talk much of the great bounty of Richard the
firſt, who enriched the Abbey, and (as they
affirm) made them Lords of the ſeven adja-
cent Hundreds, to hold the ſame in He- Furm,
to have tryal of Cauſes, and to have the * for-
* feitures, amercements, and other profits ari-
ſing thence, to their own uſe. [Which Hun-
dreds have been fince veſted in Sir Robert Atkyns
Knight of the Bath, Lord chief Baron of the
Exchequer, whoſe Deſcendants have a fair ſeat
and eſtate at Sapperton near this place ; and whoſe
Family hath been very eminent in the Law;
the father, and two ſons, having fat Judges in
Weſtminſer-hall, ſince the year 1660. | More-
over, ſas to the Town, | King Henry the
fourth granted them certain privileges, for their

Ark. 5.8 ood ſervices againſt Thomas Holland Earl of

Ker, John Holland Earl of Huntingdon, John

Military ay Montacute Earl of Salisbury, Thomas de Spen-

ab cer Earl of Gloceſter, and others, who, being
8.

deprived of their honours, conſpired againſt
him; and being here ſecured by the Tovnſ-
Bird-lipul men, ſome of them were inſtantly (lain, and
| the reſt beheaded. ¶ Here was a Church of Pre-
bendaries before the Conqueſt ; but of whoſe
lin. MS, foundation, is unknown. Rumbald (as f Leland
affirms) Chancellour to Edward the Confeſſor,
was Dean of this place, and bury'd here. They
have had three Parochial-Churches, St. Cecili-

Rome, and brought over into England. The
Windows are twenty eight in number, and the
Paintings (which were delign'd by Albert Du-
rel, an eminent Italian Maſter) repreſent the
Hiſtories of the Old and New Teſtament ;
together with the Fathers, Martyrs, and Per-
ſecutors of the Church. (The ſame perſon is

Baronet, where he hath made him a pleaſant
ſeat.) The Tames were poſſeſſed of this place
by the Attainder of Neil Earl of Warwick,
and here was a houſe on the north-ſide of the

turn'd by the Monkiſh Writers into Latinlade,
to ſupport their forged notion of it's being a
Latin Univerſity. Whereas, || if they had un-

place, Lawrence Bathurſt Eſq; the mpropria-
tor, gave the whole Rectory Impropriate, to the
value of two hundred and forty Pounds per ann.
by Will bearing date September 16. 1670 ; to
the end, the ſame may be reſtored, and enjoyed, as I
conceve in right the ſame ought to be, by the Vicars,
Rec tors, or Incumbents, of the ſaid Church of Letch-
lade and their Succeſſors for ever; as tho words
ot the Will are. Out of the ſaid Eſtate of the
Bathurſts, there are alſo other Charities annu-
ally paid.)

The river Churne, having left Cyrenceſter a-

bout the yur 1670, was found, in a plough'd-

held, a

it might be originally of Gloceſterſhire) riſeth
near the ſouth-border of this County, not far
trom Torleton, a ſmall Village, hard by the fa-
mous Fifſe-wvay. This is that Iſis which after-

out of the Marriage of Tame and Tis, 1 have here

as's, St. Lawrence's, and St. Johns; which laſt is added; which you may read or omit, as you
a very fair one, and the preſent Pariſh-Church. |pleaſe. |

It hath in it five Chapels : that of St. Mary's was
very conſiderable z and of the Perquiſites of it, Lanigeros qua lata greges Cotſwaldia paſcit,
there is a large account in the SS. of Sir Creſcit & in colles faciles, viſura Dobunos,

William Dugdale in Oxford. The body of the Haud procul a f Foſla longo ſpelunca receſſu
Church is new work, ſaid to be built by Tho-| Cernitur, abrupti ſurgente crepidine clivi :
mas Ruthall Biſhop of Durham, a native o Cujus inauratis reſplendent limina tophis,
this place, whoſe Arms impal'd with thoſe of Atria tegit ebur, tectumque Gagate Bri-
the Biſhoprick of Durham, are to be ſeen in tanno
it. But notwithſtanding that, he could not Emicat, alterno ſolidantur pumice poſtes.
be the under; for there is a Tomb for Sir Materiam ſed vincit opus, ceduntque Ialori
William Nottingham 1427 ; whereas the Biſhop Artifici tophus, pumex ebur, atque Gagates.
dy'd not till 1524, and the Regiſter of St. Ma- Pingitur hinc vitrei moderatrix Cynthia
ry's Chapel was made 1460. Leland indeed regni
has told us, that Aveling, the Biſhop's Aunt, Paſſibug obliquis volventia ſydera luſtrans :
gave one hundred Pounds to the building of the Oceano rellus conjuntta marita marito
goodly porch there; and his other relations Linc cælatur, fraternaque flumina Ganges,
contributed to the finiſhing of it. In this town Nilus, Amaxonius, trattuſque binominis
are two fine Seats, the one belonging to Allen Ilri,
Lord Bathurſt, and the other (which was the Vicini & Rheni, ſed & his intermicat auro
lite of the Abbey) to Thomas Mafers Eſq;. Vellere Phryxao dives, redimitaque ſpicis
Fairford, Beyond Cirenceſter, lieth Fairford, where the Clara triumphatis erecta Britannia Gal-
fine Church was built by John Tame Eſq, He lis, &c.
dy'd the 8h of May 1500, and lies bury d here. Undeſo hic ſolio refidet reguator aquarum
Alk. p. 433, The Church is particularly remarkable, on ac- Iſis, fuminea qui majeſtate verendas
count of the painted Glaſs, which the Founder Caruleo gremio reſupinat prodigus urnam,
(a Merchant) took in a Prize-ſhip bound for Intonſos crines ulvis & arundine c _.

5

286

ſaid alſo to have built Rendcombe-Church, which Rendcombe:
place is now the habitation of Sir John Guyſe Church.

Church call'd Warwick-Court ; but ſince, there Warwick:
hath been built a neat houſe, more remote Court,
from the Church. Near which, is Lechlade, Lechlade,

derſtood their own original language, they would — Glo,

eaſily have perceiv'd that the name implies no to the X
more than the River Lech's unlading it ſelt there, ee, L

into the Thames. To the 1 of this —

bout ſix miles, [and run by Latton, where, a-.

avement of Chequer-work ; 1 joyns Aubr. Mon;
the Jjs : for Iſis, commonly call'd Ouſe (that MS. m”

wards joyning with Tame, * by adding thc + gee this
names together is called Tamifis, chief of the confuted in
Britiſh rivers ; of which we may truly ſay, as #7ſbire.
the ancients did of Euphrates in the Eaſt, that gf ang
it both plants and waters Britain, The poeti- — Tami-
cal deſcription of it's head or fountain, taken fs, *

+ Faſſe · way.

—_

DOBUNTL.

. o
*

Cornua cana liquent, fluitantia lumina lym-
his

Diſpergunt lucem, propexa in peftore barba

Tota madet, toto diſtillant corpore gutte :
Et ſalientis aqua prorumpunt undique vena.

Piſciculi liquidis penetralibus undique lu-

dunt,
Plurimns & cygnus niveis argentens alis
Pervolitat circum, &c.

Where Cotſwold's hillocks fam'd for weighty
Sheep,

Their eager courſe to the Dobunians keep;

Near the great Foſſe, a ſpacious plain there
lies,

Where broken cliffs the ſecret top diſguiſe.

Huge free-ſtones neatly carv'd adorn the

ate,

The — with ivory ſhines, the roof
with jeat,

And rows of pumice in the poſts are
ſer.

But nature yields to art : the workman's
Skill

Does free-ſtone, ivory, pumiee, jeat excell.

Here wand'ring Cynthia, arbitreſs o'th*

main,

Guides the dark ſtars with her refulgent
train.

There Earth and Ocean their Embraces |
joyn,

Here Ganges, Danube, Thermadon, and
Rhine,

And fruitful Nile in coſtly ſculpture
ſhine.

Above the reſt great Britain fits in
ſtate

With golden fleeces cloath'd and crown'd
with wheat,

And Gallick ſpoils lie trampled at her
feet, Cc.

Here awful fs fills his liquid throne ;

1is whom Britiſh ſtreams their Monarch,
own.

His never-wearied hands a ſpacious urn

Down on his azure boſom gravely turn,

And flaggs and reeds his unpoll'd locks
adorn. |

Each waving horn the ſubje& ſtream ſup-

lies,
And grarcful light darts from his ſhining
yes.

His grizzly beard all wet hangs dropping
down,

And guſhing veins in wat'ry chanels run.

The little fiſh in joyful numbers crowd,

And ſilver ſwans fly o'er the cryſtal flood,

And clap their ſnowy wings, Cc.

Earls of Glo- AS to the Earls of Gloceſter ; ſome have ob-
ceſter. truded upon us William Fitz-Euſtace for the
firſt Earl, Who he was, I have not yet found
in my reading ; and I believe there never was
ſuch a man: but what I have obſerv'd, I will
not conceal from the Reader. [ Eldol the Bri-
+ Dugd. Ba- tain is f ſaid to have had the title of Earl of
ron. p. 1. Oloceſter in the year 461 3; and Swayne, eldeſt
{on to Godwin Earl of Kent, to have had the
ſame honour. ] It is ſaid [alſo] that about the
Norman Invaſion, one Bithrick a Saxon was Lord
Hiſt. Monaſt. of Gloceſter, againſt whom Maud the wife of
Tewkesbury, William the Norman was highly exaſperated,
for his contempt of her beauty (tor he had be-
tore refus'd to marry her,) and ſo, maliciouſly
contrived his ruin; and when he was caſt into
priſon, his eſtate was granted by the Conque-
ror, to Robert the ſon of Haimon of Curboyle

Fitz-Hai- in Normandy, commonly called Fitz-Haimon ;
Ron,

who receiving a blow on the head with a pole, lived
a great while diftrafted. His daughter Mabel
(by others called Sybil) was married to Robert
natural ſon of King Henry the firſt, who was
made firſt Earl of Gloceſter, and by the com-
mon writers of that age is called Conſul of Glo-
ceſter, a perſon, above all others in thoſe times,
of a great and undaunted ſpirit, who was ne-
ver diſmayed by misfortunes ; and who per-
formed many heroick and difficult Exploits,
with mighty honour, in the cauſe of his Siſter
Maud againſt Stephen the Uſurper of the
Crown ot England. His ſon William ſucceeded
in the honour, whoſe three daughters convey'd
it to ſo many families. The eldeſt, Jabella,
brought this title to John the ſon of King Hen-
ry the ſecond ; but when he had poſſeſs d him-
ſelf of the throne, he procured a divorce from
her, and ſold her for twenty thouſand marks to

Gloceſter. He being dead without iſſue, A-
nour conferred upon him, as being born of Ma-

bel the youngeſt daughter of Earl William afore-
ſaid. But Almaric dying alſo without iſſue, the

grandſon Gilbert 2, and great grandſon Gil-

bert 3 (Who was kilVd in the Battle of Ster-

ling in Scotland) ſucceſſively inherited this ti-
de Monthermer, who had clandeſtinely marry d

Edward the firſt, did for ſome time enjoy the ti-
tle of Earl of Gloceſter.

one years, he claimed the title, and was ſum-
moned to ſerve in Parliament among the Ba-
rons. After Gilbert 3, who died without iſſue,

being hanged by the Queen and her Lords in
ſpight to Edward 2, whoſe favourite he was,
Hugh de Audley, who had married the other
ſiſter, by the favour of Edward 3, obtained this
honour. After whoſe death King Richard 2.
erected this title into a Dukedom, of which
there were three Dukes, with one Earl between,
_ to all of them it was unfortunate and
atal.

Thomas of Woodſtock Earl of Buckingham, the

Duke, but preſently depriv'd of it, by King
Richard the ſecond. For being an ambitious
man, and of an unquiet Spirit, he was, by or-
der of the King, ſurpriſed and ſent to Calais,
and there ſmothered with a Feather-bed ; ha-
ving before made a confeſſion under his hand
(as appears in the Parliament-Rolls) that, by
virtue of a Patent which he had extorted from
the King, he had arrogated to himſelf Regal
Authority, appeared armed in the King's pre-
ſence, contumeliouſly revil'd him, conſulted
with learned men how he might renounce his
Allegiance, and entertain'd a deſign ro depoſe
him. For which, after he was dead, he was
attainted of High Treaſon by A& of Parlia-
ment. He being thus taken off, the ſame King
gave the title of Earl of Gloceſter, ro Thomas de
Spencer, Who, a little after, met with no better
tate than his great Grandfather Hugh had done;

Hein)

honour came to Amicia the ſecond daughter,
who being married to Richard de Clare Earl of
Hartford, was mother to Gilbert de Clare Earl Eam & d

of Gloceſter ; whoſe ſon Richard, and his ceter art
Herttuia

tle. But, in the minority of Gilbert 3, Ralph

But when Gilbert arrived at the age of twenty A

288

—
Guil, May

Geoffry de Mandeville ſon of Geoffry, ſon of pit. 16.
Peter Earl of Eſſex, and created him Earl of Joan. K.

maric * ſon to the Earl of Eureux had this ho- Ebroicess,

the widow of Gilbert 2, and || daughter of || Cale x.
anna D Ares,
becauſe born
Acon.

Hugh de Spencer or Spencer jun. is by writers Tho, d: ls
ſtiled Earl of Gloceſter in right of his wife, Mare, in tie
who was the eldeſt ſiſter of Gilbert 3. But he life of EA.

youngeſt ſon of King Edward the third, was Dukes a
the firſt who was dignify'd with the title of Glocelet-

tor he was t proſecuted by Henry the fourth, and 4 Exturbs”
ignominiouſſy degraded, and beheaded at Briſtol. tus

209

+ Third and
lk, C.

Richard 3.

4 Philtris |
kius,

GLOCESTERSHIRE ©

290

Henry the fifth created his brother Humphrey
the ſecond Duke of Gloceſler, who us'd to {tile
himſelf, Son, Brother, and Uncle of Kings, Duke
of Gloceſter, Earl of Pembroke, and Lord High
Chamberlain of England. He was a great Friend
and Patron of his Country, and of Learning;
but by the contrivance of a woman, he was

„ Third and taken off at St. Edmunds-bury. The third

U, C. Duke was Richard the third, brother of King
1 Eduard the fourth, Who, having inhumanly mur-
ther'd his Nephews, uſurp'd the Throne,
which within the ſpace of two years he loſt
with his life in a pitch'd battle, and found by
{.d experience, That uſurped Power is never
laſting.

9 this laſt Duke of Gloceſter, and his
firſt acceſſion to the Crown, give me leave to
a& the part of an Hiſtorian for a while, which
I ſhall preſently lay aſide again, as not being
ſufficiently qualified for ſuch an Undertaking.
When he was declared Protector of the King-
dom, and had his two young Nephews, Ed-
ward the fifth King of England, and Richard
Duke of Jork, in his power, he began to aim at
the Crown ; and by a profuſe liberality, great
gravity mixed with ſingular affability, profound
wiſdom, and impartial Juſtice to all people,
joyn'd with many ſubtle devices, he procured
the affections of all, and particularly um the
Lawyers to his fide ; and ſo managed the mat-
ter, that an humble Petition was preſented to
him in the name of the Eſtates of the Realm,
in which they _— That, for the
publick good of the Kingdom, and ſafety of
the People, he would accept the Crown, and
thereby ſupport his tottering Country, and not
ſuffer it to fall into utter ruin; which, with-
out reſpect to the laws of Nature, and thoſe of
the eſtabliſh'd Government, had been harrafled
and perplexed with civil wars, rapines, mur-
ders, and all other ſorts of miſeries, ever ſince
lin pet- Edward the fourth, his brother, f being en-
letus, chanted with love-portions, had contracted
that unhappy match with Elizabeth Grey wi-
dow, without the conſent of Nobles, or pub-
lication of Banns, in a clandeſtine manner, and
not in the face of the Congregation, contrary
to the laudable cuſtom of the Church of Eng-
land; and what was worſe, after he had
contracted himſelf to the Lady Eleanor Butler,
daughter to the Earl of Shrewsbury ; from
whence it was apparent, that his marriage was
unlawful, and that the iſſue proceeding thence
muſt be illegitimate, and not capable of inhe-
riting the Crown. Moreover, ſince George Duke
of Clarence, ſecond brother of Edward the fourth,
was by Act of Parliament attainted of High
Treaſon, and his children excluded from all
right of ſucceſſion, none could be ignorant that
Richard remained the ſole and undoubted heir
of the Crown; who, being born in England,
they knew would heartily conſult the good of
his native Country ; _ of whoſe birth and
legitimacy there was not the leaſt queſtion or
diſpute ; whoſe wiſdom alſo, juſtice, gallantry
of mind, and warlike exploits valiantly per-
formed for the good of the Nation, together with
his noble Extraction (as deſcended from the royal
race of England, France, and Spain) they were
very well acquainted with, and fully underſtood.
Wherefore having ſeriouſly weigh'd and conſi-
der'd theſe and many other reaſons, they did
freely, voluntarily, and unanimouſly, according
to their Petition, ele& him to be their King,
and with prayers and tears, did, out of the great
confidence they had in him, humbly beſeech
him to accept of the Kingdoms of England,
Fraice, and Jreland, which were doubly his,

both by right of inheritance and of election;
and that, for the love which he bore to his na-
tive 3 he would lend his helping hand,
to ſave and protect it from imminent ruin.
Which if he performed, they promis'd him all
taith, duty, and aſſiſtance ; otherwiſe, they were
reſolv'd to endure the utmoſt extremity, rather
than ſufter themſelves to be brought into the
bonds of a diſhonourable ſlavery, from which
at preſent they were freed. This humble Peti-
tion was preſented. to him, before he accepted
the Crown; afterwards it was alſo offered in
the great Council of the Nation, and approved
of, and by their authority it was enacted and
declared (ih a multitude of words, as the cu-
{tom is) That by the Laws of God, Nature,
and of England, and by a moſt laudable Cu-
ſtom, Richard, after a lawful Election, Inaugu-
ration and Coronation, was, and is the true
and undoubted King of England, &c. and that
the inheritance of theſe Kingdoms rightfully
belongs to the heirs of his body lawfully be-
gotten : and, to uſe the very words of the ori-
ginal Record, It was enafted, decreed and declar d,
by authority of Parliament, that all and fingular the
Contents of the aforeſaid Bill, are true and undoubt-
ed ; and the ſame our Lord the King, with the aſ-
ſent of the three Eſtates of the Realm, and the au-
thority aforeſaid, doth pronounce, decree, and declare
to be true and undoubted.

I have explained theſe matters ſomewhat
more largely, that it may be underſtood how
far the power of a Prince, pretended godlineſs,
ſubtle arguings of Lawyers, hope, fear, deſire
of changes, and fair and ſpecious pretences, may
prevail againſt all right and juſtice, even in the
great wiſe aſſembly of the Nation. But
the ſame cannot be ſaid of this Richard, as was of
Gglba, That he had been thought fit for Em-
pire, had he not reigned ; for Galba, after he
was ſettled in the Empire, deceived all Mens
pens ; but this had been moſt worthy of
a Kingdom, had he not aſpired to it by wicked
ways: ſo that in the opinion of the wiſe, he is
to be reckoned in the number of bad Mien, but
of good Princes. But I muſt not forget that I am
a Chorographer, and ought therefore to lay a-
{fide the Hiſtorian. 1

[ Henry, third ſon to King Charles the firſt,
born 1639, was Duke of Gloceſter, and dy'd
unmarry'd the 13 of September 1660. Since
which time, this title lay vacant, till Milliam,
ſon of George Prince of 3 was created
Duke of this place; a Royal Youth, who was
adorned with extraordinary Endowments of Na-
ture, and had arrived to a variety of Know-
ledge and Learning, rarely, if ever ſeen in ſuch
tender years. |

There are in this County 280 Pariſhes.

——

More rare Plants growing wild in Gloce-
ſerſhire,

Androſzxmum Campoclarenſe Col. Matthioli
Park. quoad deſcr. Hypericon elegantiſſimum
non famoſum, folio lato J. B. Aſcyron ſeu Hy-
pericum bifolium glabrum non pertoratum C. B.
Elegant broad-leav d imperforate S. John wort. On
St. Vincent rock near Briſtol.

Sperage, torruptly cal d Sparrow-graſs. See the other
Synonymes in Cormuall Cat. In Appleton-meadow a-
bout two miles from Briſtol : where the Country-peo-
ple do gather the buds or young ſhoots, and ſell them
in the markets at Briſtol, much cheaper than our
Garden-kind is fold in London. Park. p. 455. This

Oo ſhould

Aſparagus paluſtris Ger. Marſþ-Aſparagus or

"_ ad. Ms. a... SE
_—}

* 2

291

DOFUNT

* Are, C.

ſhould ſeem rather to be the common or manured 4
Paragrs growing wild, than the maritime; which dij-
ters from it, though growing in the ſame place, in
having thicker leaves aud a better taſte, Mag-
nol.

Buxus arboreſcens Park. Buxus Ger. J. B. The
Bex-tree. At Boxwell in Coteſwold. As I find in
ſome notes communicated to me by my honoured friend
Mr. John Artubrez.

Cardamine pumila Bellidis folio Alpina Ger.
emac. Plantula Cardamines alterius æmula Park.
Naſturtium Alpinum Bellidis folio minus C. B.
Sinapi pumilum Bellidis folio Cluſio J. B. Dai-
fie-leav'd Ladies-ſjmock. Found by Mr. Newton on
St. Vincent rock near Briſtol.

Ceterach, five Aſplenium & Scolopendria.
Syleenwort or Miltwaſt. About St. Vincent roc
among the heaps of ſtones plentifully : and on many
walls about Briſtol.

Hyacinthus Autumnalis minor. Small Au-
tumnal Hyacinth. On the ſame St. Vincent s-rock.

Sedum minus è rupe S. Vincentii. Small
Sengrene of St. Vincent rock. The title direcis to
the place.

To theſe I ſhall add,

Anemone tuberoſa radice Phyt. Brit. Knobby-
rooted Anemony or Wind-flower, ſaid to grow on
Coteſwold-hills near Black-Burton, and to be a great
ornament to thoſe barren hills ; by My. Heaton. My
learned and inquiſitive friend Mr. Edward Lloyd
ſought it there in vain.

Hippoſelinum Ger. emac. Hippoſelinum ſeu
Smyrnium vulgare, Park. Macerone, quibuſdam
Smyrnium ; ſemine magno nigro F. B. Hippo-
ſelinum Theophraſti, vel Smyrnium Dioſcori-
dis C. B. Alexanders. On the rocks at Bechley go-
ing down to Aſt-ferry.

Naſturtium montanum annuum tenuiſſimè
diviſum. Finely-cut aunual MVuntain-Creſſe. Brought
to Mr. Bobert from St. Vincent's-rock, near Goram 5-
Chair in the pariſh of Henbury, three miles from

See the Synonymes in Cat. Cornu.

Malva arborea marina noſtras, Park. Engliſh
Sea-tree-mallow. On an Iſland call d Dinney, three
miles from Kings-read, and five miles from Briſtol.
Park. p. 306.

Peucedanum minus Park. C. B. Phytop. pumi-
lum Ger. Peucedani facie puſilla planta Lob. Se-
linum montanum pumilum Cluſii, foliis Fœni-
culi aut Peucedani, flore albo, ſemine Selini
J. B. Rock-Parſtey. On St. Vincent rock, near
Briſtol.

Rubia Sylveſtris Park. See the other Syno-
aymes in Devon. Cat. Wild-madder. On St. Vin-
cent roch. This hath been miſtaken for the common
manured Madder, from which it is ſpecifically di- |
flint.

Briſtol. It is ſomething agreeable to the Na-
ſturtium Alpinum tenuiſſime diviſum ſeptimum
C. B

Allium Holmenſe ſphæriceo capite, Scorodo-
praſſum primum Cluſii Ger. emac. Allium ſphæ-
riceo capite, folio latiore, ſive Scorodopraſſum
alterum C. B. Great round-headed Garlick of the
Holms-Iland. Found plentitully growing in the ſaid
Ifland in the Severn-Sea by Mr. Newton.

Sedum minus fruticoſum C. B. Vermicula-
ris frutex minor Ger. fruticoſa altera Park. An
Culi ſpecies, ſeu Vermicularis marina arbo-
reſcens J. B. Shrub-$tone-crop or Glaſs-wort :
found by Lobel growing plentifully in the Holms+
and.

9

OXFORDSHIRE.

IHE County of Oxford, call'd
by ͤ the Saxons [Oxnapopo-
rey pe, Oxenfoporcype, and!
Oxenroporchyne, commonly
WEN Ox/jordſhire ; did, as I obſerv'd
AR Ez bctore, belong to the Dobuni,
and by its ſituation (particu-
larly to the north-eaſt, at Ot more and the adja-
cent places) exactly anſwers the original of the
name Dobuni, as being lou and level.] On the
weſt, it borders upon Gloceſterſbire; on the
ſouth, where it is broadeſt, the river n di-
vides it from Barkſhire; on the eaſt it is bound-
ed by Bucs; and upon the north, where it
ends as it were in a cone, on the one fide it
has Norihamptouſhire, and on the other H/arwick-
ſhire. It is a rich and fertile Country; the
lower parts are cultivated into pleaſant fields
and meadows, and the hills“ were cover'd
with great ſtore of woods, [till the late Civil
Wars, in which it was deſtroyed to ſuch a de-
gree, that few places (except the Chilteru-coun-
try) can anſwer that character at preſent ;
Fuel in thoſe parts being ſo ſcarce, that it is
commonly fold by weight, not only in Oxford,
but other Towns in the northern parts of the
Shire.] Nor is it only fruitful in graſs and
corn, but abounds with all ſorts of game both
tor hunting and hawking, and rivers well ſtock'd
with fiſh. [But though moſt parts of it bear
corn very well, its greateſt glory is the abun-
dance of mendows and paſtures, to which the

beſides the five more conſiderable ones, the
Thames, Ifis, Cherwell, Evenlode, and Mindruſb,

riour rank, without including the ſmaller

tiſh, after it has divided this ſhire for ſome
{pace from that of Northampton, flows gently
through the middle of the County, and di-
vides it as it were into two equal Parts. The
river Tame Waters and fructifies the eaſtern
parts; till at laſt both theſe rivers, with ſeve-
5 other little ſtreams, are receiv'd into the
Vis.

The Jie, when it has juſt touch'd upon Mil-

ſhire, is, at its firſt entrance into this County,

treland; who, being highly in favour and au-
thority with King Richard the ſecond, and for
that reaſon no leſs envied and hated by his
Fellow-Barons, has taught us this leſſon, That
no power has force enough to ſecure thoſe
who enjoy it. For he, being here defeated in
a Skirmiſh with the Nobles, was conſtrain'd to
take the river, and ſwim for his life, which
was the ſad cataſtrophe of all his greatneſs and
glory : for he preſently fled the Realm, and
died in baniſhment ; [being ſtruck by a wild
Boar in hunting, of which wound he expired at

Rivers add both pleaſure and convenience. For

i

Lovain An. 1392. Three years after, his bo-

dy

t it has at leaſt threeſcore and ten of an inte- Plot, p. il

brooks.! The is (* afterwards call'd Tamiſis)+ See this
in a long courſe waſheth the ſouth-ſide of thisconfuted in
County. Cherwell, a ſmall river abounding with Hi

ſtraiten'd by Rodcor-bridge ; whence it paſſes by Rodcots
Bablac, famous for Robert de Vere the great Earl gfk.
of Oxford, Marqueſs of Dublin, and Duke of

1337

„

this
ed in

ye.

2

r
eee ee

7 =
N $55. 1s LAT

OF dr Lai
1
© \ Ro —

”—_ — 109 LACIE” 8 | re., O0
= F
nein, worde N,

7 ; N agg *

no

„ oo 0 L9-”19<

tur i 2

7

I I | . | N _ 1 2709 ö 7
Troy, * uojougg {Ta F F 7 T e * ; 7 g * «\ 22 9
: Fugs aner wy EL
7 bo rogues)” o If 5 17 E |
tri appr yy” | hs A |

„ 443, 2
wy ney ne 2 If,
J

pagga ng FX Alla

—
—

3 — Seem

OO

—— | (2/09 047. ay

lor? \ 2

2 & 1„ͤ 1 |
F. of a cdl; —
Poodiyer

| agel — 15 : 0 T
22 Yanounuton -v 3

tO, Lap 2 oo. FE
A : f Ws os 2
* * Fo 4 op9] des
2 2 A > (

2 ADA r

,

* mae,

5 <4

I 924404 I, .Yogadry go

yn 104014, AY” a S p
— 1 — x

Py A” LE vy N 20111 * 429020 * 5
nn . eme. " Fey F

| . : ©. 5 [ eee

Kur

F, 1 1
990-49 2 14 * o

77 - \ NV
,,,? 3 N 2 ww,
h; er PK Funny o el 22
n 170 1 > ado fg F roi

5 uglug-

Fa
5055 wg?

weir Wea

HUMAN II

? none
, Jo. A 7

*

*

* | ms: _ = ex
110140 cx P-410/av gry

"RA | | :
| ES: d mn

4 ng

*
gull

go. ui p *

7 1 2-04 | ay * * 27 A
2 47 * An Joup A
7 } 7, We F 2 1 5
8 Gps | 7 7. Cod 164 ec Derne. * 99 mY | g- ape,

1 | : * A 1 / n I —— WE Lee. ; 4 *
* 7 | AER "of | c- l 1 i 2
Ro E106 Pad 5 4 | 01.447 4007 FF 5 e 45 | nr 78 AMnog
ger * po - 2 . "DB ans 2
bunch. eee 1 Zr
* w/ . ;

"+ m *

eim 7 22 1 5

＋ ag 1 H 8 , 7

2
by quo” ©

T7 A1 IH Sg

—— 5c;

af * 709.4914, pr 2 8 2
| 2 „ #109 |»
Fg . W 1 2 5 — u :
8 | N | 7 ;
5 d NV HI AO Nhe 3
5 N O ＋ . 1 101 WF
| vu fat T omg 7 , 4

Ch 0 232222822
tops nurn. 7

1e 4 . Z 2
2071407 F D
1 „ qd 5 :
A 1s. 22 a e * :
2 4 :
gg 4 of 225 E
* | -
JA 21mg /o cnmuy/”
SOHO? - y amy» # oy 1 3
— — — — = A — — TD — wi
„ _ mp no ng TT TER —_xc_C____—_—_ -_ - — — = === — —__ <p

—

oe. . - - y — 1 2 _— K
— - : * of < »

—

- —

4 _ — 88 > i
—— — bY — * 32 _ - ——

7 2822 ö 1 7

8 | 8 k
Angeg o ee
Fd xn A H
r . qnyg

TY r
N Lang | "3 (

COIN

| >» paogBunge ay

* "upon; Fg
F wogg/us g
N 72 aue Sw
22 8 Ca — 210gpngy
> Dee i „
r re
N "Sz A 5 A ; ; | | — ; 1 \ Y 112971, 5

yo 048g rt

ppg gr

P1424 'J 21207 & 1 nay” 7. * 7 * ag n E

8 0 L

. *
| 9 0 LTL
1 2 ” * ö 0
165115 \
| — — un % r 3 | 2 >
. "eg | |, nozl
þ/ ppp» net - F # þ = . 2.2 a4
| ESSF 5 e Nr, weg
4 . a 1e . 4 A A * 0-
| 2 , — 8
ue. Du
N * 1 ö * = "7 ie
i 20 N 427 J
|; meyer . * A 483
' — I ERIE ; ; * ag 4 7 * 1 Any

bas

 &

F
i
og. uro

Tro Icrr rar 'T gouytor; er

0 We .
hh. a.

.
2
*.
1

29414]
* * T7 240. 49 9.
1783 — 5 .
$7 nug 7,
" HUPUys* +»

he
the
Family of

A Roart
| ere.

Cre? of

Battle-edge

+ Plot, p.
349+

-
» ©;
* 2 2.
Ys "le * 7
Sn. N
5 98
*

7 — _ egg.
” yo 2

323 _ — 43 -
s as "th - -
* 1 Hs.

De Po!
lib, 5.
Minſter-
vel.

Lovel ;

*

49 _ OX FORPERTER 77
_ was brought over into England, and, by | wide was grandmother to Henry, the firſt Lord
the care and expence of the King, ſolemnly Norris. Paſſing hence, the Mindruſb viſits
inter'd at Colne in Eſſex.] In the Poem of the |7/hitney an ancient town, which before the con- Whitney.
marriage of Tame and Jis we have theſe verſes |queſt belonged to the Biſhop of Mincheſter;
of him : being given by Alwin, Biſhop thereof (among vid. pore;
 |rheother Manours, beſtowed upon that Church) ſhire. |

Hic Verus notiſſimus apro, on account of Emma's being cleared, by Fire-
Dum dare terga negat virtus, & tendere |Ordeal, of the charge of Adultery with him.

contra In the year 1171, it was given by Henry Bi- Lieger · book
Non ſinit inuictæ rectrix prudentia mentis; ſhop of that See, to his new-founded Hoſpital of $8. Croſs.
Undique dum reſonat repetitis ittibus umbo, of dr Croſs. For the ſettling of a Free- ſchool
Tinnitique ſtrepit circum ſua tempora caſſis, |at this place, erested and endowed by Henry |
Se dedit in fluvium, fluvins lætatus & illo Box, Citizen of London, a particular Statute | 14
Hoſpite, ſuſcepit ſalvum, ſalvumque remiſit. paſſed in the 15h year of King Charles the 24. L

Near adjoyning, is Coges, the head of the Coges; .
Ibs Here Oxſord's Hero famous for his Boar, barony of Arſic, the Lords of which, deſcended 2 PR |

Gerd of the While Valour prompts behind, and Pru- |from the Earls of Oxford, have been long ſince Arſe.

8

y
. * : y | |

© Family of dence calls before; : extinct. Hard by, Wichwood-Foreſt is of a large wichwood- =
2 While claſhing ſwords upon his target extent, and yet the bounds of it were once Foreſt. 1

ſound, ö much wider: For King Richard the third disſ0- 17
And ſhowers of arrows from his breaſt re- reſted a great part of Wichwood between H/00d- 14

bound, ſtock and Brightſtow, which King Edward the fourth
Preparts We worſt of fates, undaunted had taken into the limits of that Foreſt, as we are
1 ;

, : inform'd by John Rous of Warwick. The Ri-
And urg'd his Beaſt into the rapid flood :

Is Be a ver Iſis, when it has received the Windruſh,
The waves in triumph bore him, and were |pafles [to Stanton Harcourt, the ancient ſeat of Stanton Har-

proud the Harcourts, who are deſcended from the court.
To ſink beneath their honourable load. Harcourts in Normandy ; and of whom, in
our time, Sir Simon Harcourt hath been advan-
After this, the Ve, frequently overflowing | ced to the Honour of Baron Harcourt of Stanton
the lower grounds, receives its firſt addition | Harcourt, and alſo to the Office of Lord High
windruth, from Windruſh, a {mail brook, which flows out | Chancellor of Great Britain, on account of his
Burford, Of the Coteſwold, and ſalutes Burford ſtanding | extraordinary Abilities ; more eſpecially, of his
on the banks of it, in Saxon | Beopgrops, and||great Knowledge in the Laws and Conſtituti-
Beopropo, Where Cuthred King of the Weſt- on of this Realm. Next, the River goes] to
Saxons, then tributary to the Mercians, not Einſbam, in Saxon Eigonerham and] Eigne- Einſham.
being able to endure any longer the cruelty and | bam, formerly a Royal Vill, ſeated among moſt
intolerable Exactions of King ÆEthelbald, met [delightful meadows. This place [among other Chron. Sax.
him in the open field with an army [ 2 Garriſons in thoſe parts, Cuthwulph the Saxon ann. 571.
Butle-edge, on the place ſtill call'd Battle-edge, welt of the |firſt took from the conquer'd Britains: Athel-
town, ) and beat him; taking his Standard, in | mar a nobleman adorn'd it with a Monaſtery,
which, we read, was the pourtraicture of a golden | which Ethelred King of England in the year
Dragon. [Concerning this, Dr. Plot ſays, that 1005 confirmed, [ calling this in the Charter a
there has been a Cuſtom in the town, f of ma- ſamous place, and fign'd the priviledge of Liberty
4 Plot, p. ©! 2 8 .
349. king a Dragon yearly, and carrying it up and] (to keep to the words of the Charter) with the
down the ſtreets in great jollity on Midſummer- fn of the holy Croſs. But this houſe of Religi-
eve; Which ſeems to bear ſome relation to ſon * was turn'd into a private Seat, which f be- xs, C.
what is here ſaid, of Cuthred's taking from |long'd to the Earl of Derby. Here it was alſo, + Belongs, C.
the enemy a banner whereon was painted a that, in the year 1009, the ſame King Æthel-
golden Dragon : only, to the Towns-men's Dra-|red (by the advice of Alphege Archbiſhop of
gon, there is a Giant added; but for what rea- Canterbury, and Wulſtan Arch-biſhop of York)
{on, it is not known. This place is alſo famous held a general Council, wherein many Decrees
for a Council convened here by the Kings E-|were eſtabliſhed, relating to the government of
theldred and Berthwald, An. 685, at which, Church and State: it is call'd by || Sir Heury\ Concil.
Aldbelm Abbot of Malmsbury, afterwards Bi- Spelman, AEnham.\ Below Einſham, the Even- T. 1. p. 510,
ſhop of Shirburne, being preſent, among many | lode a ſmall rivulet, runs into the Iſis; which,
others, was commanded by the Synod to write [flowing from the Coteſwold, [firſt ſees Chaſtle- Chaſtleton.
a Book againſt the error of the Britiſh Church- ton, near which is a Fortification, that the lear-
es in the obſervation of Eaſter. Which I the [ned Dr. Plot imagines might be caſt-up about
rather take notice of here, becauſe Sir Henry |the year 1016, when Edmund Tronfide met Ca-
Selman calls it only Synodus Merciana, An. 705, nute the Dane; but if that conjecture be built
without fixing any certain place, or the exact purely upon its being near the Four-ſhire-ſtone, Four-ſhire-
* De Pontif. time : whereas both are crblent from Malms-|(which generally goes for the old 5ceoprran ſtone.
lid, 5, bury, and the Leiger-book of that Abbey.1 From where the battle was fought) the place of the
Minſter· Lo- hence, the Windruſh runs to Minſter-Lovel, here- battle being (* as it probably , ought) remov'd «See Sherſton,
vel, tofore the ſeat of the Lords Lovel of Tichemerſh,| from this place, that Opinion is deſtroy'd. | It in Wilthire.
who, being deſcended from one Lupe a noble leaves, in the utmoſt borders of this Coun-
Norman, did long bear a conſiderable figure in ty, a little further from irs banks, a great
theſe parts, and receiv'd great additions to their monument of Antiquity ; a number of vaſtly
Fortune, by matches with the heirs-female of large Stones plac'd in a circular figure, which
Tichemerſh, of the Lords Holland, of D'eyncourt,|the Country-people call Rolle-rich-ſtones, and haveRolle-rich-
and of the Viſcounts Beaumont. But this fa-|a fond tradition, that they were once Men, and ſtones.
mily was extin& in Francis Viſcount Lovel, Lord | were turn'd into Stones. The figure of them,
Lorel a Ba. Chamberlain to King Richard the third, who|as rudely drawn a long time ago, I ſhall here
_— was baniſh'd by Henry the ſeventh, and at laſt |repreſent to the Reader's eye. They are irre-
ſlain in the battle of Hole, taking with|gular and of unequal height, and by the de-
4 Lambert the impoſtor Prince. His ſiſter Fridiſ- cays of time are grown ragged and very —
| mPailr d.

—

> 1 5 ** - 1
—— * — 72 — l

—

- — ©. Re ers Ee DD -—— —Åᷣ
* J 7

295

DOBUNT.

+ Exeſa.

— — —

t impair'd. The higheſt of them, which lies

out of the ring toward the eaſt, they call The

Ring; becauſe they fanſy he ſhould have been

King of England, if he could have ſeen Long-
Compton, a Village which is within view at

P
— — — —

which on one fide of the circle are contigu-
ous to one another, they pretend were Knights

or Horſemen, and the other common Soldiers,
But ſee the Draught.

_— wr Sete — ,
— = — E

7
nne.

— 4s 16 gr Pr UE... it
7% — Y * : * am . ue

* Plot. p.339. (It is a ſingle Circle of Stones without Epi-

ſtyles or Architraves, and of no very regular fi-

+ Aubr, Ms, Bure. Except one or two, the reſt of them

are not above four foot and a half high. What
the occaſion of this Monument might be, is not
hinted by any Inſcription upon the Stones, nor
by any other marks about them : which ſeems
to make it probable at leaſt, that it was not
erected in memory of any perſons that were
bury'd there. For, it ſo, we might expect

See Corn-( || as in other places of this kingdom) to meet

wall,

with a Croſs or ſomething of that kind im-
plying the deſign, if Chriſtian. ; or, if Pagan,
we might expect to find barrows at ſome ſmall

* Ralph Shel- diſtance. Beſides, a * curious Antiquary in

don, Eſq;.

* See Wilts,

theſe parts, making a diligent ſearch, in the
middle, for ſome 13 which might lead
us to the firſt deſign, and particularly for bones ;
tound himſelf diſappointed. Tho', if we may
take an eſtimate of this, from another of the!
like nature, the bones (if there are any) may
more probably be met with, without the cir-
cle V as they were found ſome years ago at a lit-

under Xynet. tle diſtance from that at Kynet in Wiltſhire, and

+1 ſhould
think, C,

At Sherſton
in W ilts, V.
Wilſhire.

. at. ee er na

— — — N

have been formerly found at the famous Stone-
henge. \

One may then imagin this Monument to
have been rais'd in memory of ſome victory ob-
tained here, perhaps by Rollo the Dane, who
afterward poſſeſs'd himſelf of Normandy. For,
at the ſame time that he with his Danes and
Normans infeſted England with depredations,
we read that the Danes and Saxons had an En-
gagement at Hokenorton, and another at || Scier-
ſtane in Huiccia, which I ſhould take for that
great boundary Stone that ſtands hard by, and
divides four Counties or Shires, for ſo the Sax-
on word Scierſtane plainly intimates. [But o-
thers alledge, that how true ſoever this opinion
ot its being erected in memory of ſome victo-
ry, may be in the main ; yet the relation it
has to Rollo the Dane, will not agree with the
engagement either at Hokenortan or Sceorſtan.
For the Saxon-Annals tell us, it was in $76
that this Rol made inroads into Normandy, and
that was after he had been in England ; where-
as the battle of Hokenorton was in 917, and that

that paſſage of Walſingham, which tells us of
the aſſiſtance which Rollo ſent to King Athel-

ſtan, and which is inſiſted on by a later Au-

thor, clearly take away the difficulty : unleſs
we can ſuppoſe (what 1s hardly to be imagin'd)
that Rollo could be of age to plunder England
in the year 875, and to make incurſions into
Normandy, in 876 ; and that the ſame Rollo
ſhould live to aſſiſt King Athelſt an, who came
not to the Crown till the year 925. But tho'
this difficulty did not lie in the way, and the
matter of fa& were ſuppos'd to be true ; yet
unleſs it appear'd, at the ſame time, that the
ſuppos'd deteat was in thoſe parts, there is no-
thing to ſupport the conjecture, befides the bare
affinity of names.

The common Story before-mentioned, which
goes current among the People, though it
be upon the whole ridiculous enough, yet
may it (as we very often find in ſuch traditio-
nal tales) have ſomething of truth at the bot-
tom. For why may not that large Stone at a
little diſtance, which they call the King, be the
Kongſtolen, belonging to the Circle of Stones
rais d uſually for the Coronation of the Nor-
thern Kings (as Wormius informs us:) eſpeci-

ally ſince the learned“ Dr. Plot has obſeryd* See Niv

, . Hiſt. Oxon,
from the ſame Wormings, that this Kongſtolen, 30.

times at a diſtance from the Circle? Not far Aubr. Ms.

though ordinarily” in the middle, was ſome-

from hence, in the fields of Stanton Harcourt,
ſtood two great Stones, called the Devils-Coits;
lixty five paces diſtant from one another ; but
one of them was taken down, ſeveral years
ſince, to make a bridge.

As to Hokenorton, the Inhabitants were former- Hokerortoa

ly ſuch clowns and churls, that it paſs'd into a
Proverb, for a rude and ill-bred fellow, to be
born at Hogs-Norton. But this place is chiefly
memorable for the fatal laughter of the En-
gliſh in a fight with the Danes, under Edmund
the elder. | Florence of Worceſter calls it Villa
Regia, i. e. a Royal Village; and makes the bat-
tle to be in the year 914, contrary to Bromp-
ton and Huntingdon, who tell us it was An.
911, and to the Saxon Chronicle, which has it in

917. The barrows of Tadmerton and Hokenor- Nat. Hit

of Keorſt an a hundred years after. Nor does

. —

ton, the former, large and round; the other Oxon: p. 357

ſmaller

| very few ſteps farther : five larger Stones,

W alery. :

re
I t
© Great-Tew: [|
Nat. Hiſt.
Oxon, p. n
327.

1 burp Alon.

{
!
(
Stunsfield. «
| |
1
!
|

& *After a long
E courſe, C.

Woodſtock,

Hit.
p. 3%

3

OXFORD

SHIRE. 298

297

ſmaller, and rather a quinquangle than a ſquare;
were probably caſt-up on this occaſion ; the
round one by the Danes, and the one one by
the Saxons. | It was afterward a Barony 4 the
| - D'oilys, an honourable and ancient Family of
| om "OT Normandy. The firſt of that name who came
into England, was Robert de Oily, who, for his
Dvily- great ſervice in that expedition, was rewarded
by William the Conqueror with this village and
many other lands, fome of which he gave to
2 or his {worn brother Roger very, (and not John de
N51, Eiverio, as Leland, and after him Dugdale, name
. him; )1 and this part was afterwards the Ba-
rony of St. Walery. But this Robert dying
without itlue-male, his Brother Nigel ſucceeded
in his eſtate, whoſe ſon, Robert the ſecond, was
Founder of the Monaſtery of Oſney. . At length,
Regitiry of an heir female of this family of D'oily was
"a married to Henry Earl of Warwick, by whom
ſhe had Thomas Earl of /arwick, who dy'd
without iſſue in the reign of Henry the third,
and Margaret who dicd likewiſe without iſſue,
though ſhe had two husbands, John Mareſchal
and John de Pleſſets, both Earls of Warwick.
Upon this (as the Charter of Donation runs)
King Henry the third granted Hochnorton and
Cudlington to John de Pleſſets or Pleſſy, which
were the inheritance of Henry D'oily, and fell into
the King's hands upon the death of Margaret Coun-
tet of Warwick, wife of the aforeſaid Johi, as an
eſcheat of the Lands of the Normans, to have and to
hold till ſuch time as the Lands of England and
Nermaudy ſhould be made common. But ot this an-
cient and honourable Family of D'oily, there
remains {till a branch in this County, who have
1 the honour of being Knights, and Baroners. |
Oben · Tew. South from hence, is Great-Tew ; near which
& *Nat Hiſt. was plough'd- up an Opus Teſſellatum, or pave-
| on ment cut into ſquares, ſomewhat bigger than
180 Dice, and of four different colours, blew, white,
: yellow, and red, all poliſh'd and orderly diſ-
eff. Allon. pers d into works. As was another at Steeple-
q Afton hard by, which conſiſted likewiſe of
ſquares of divers colours, and ſet in curious fi-
gures ; though not cubick, like the former, but
oblong ſquares. And (to return to the courſe
Ftursfeld. of the river Evenlode) at Stunsfield, a ſmall Vil-
| lage two miles from H/ood#tock, was found, in
the year 1713. a large and entire teſſellated Ro-
man Pavement, thirty five foot in length, and
twenty in breadth, and not above two foot un-
der ground. The Superficies of it is all ſmooth
and level, and it is compoſed of little ſquare
pieces of Brick and Stone, of ſix different Co-
lours, orderly diſpoſed into works, and ſtrongly
cemented together upon a bed of Mortar, ſup-

ported by ribb'd Arch-work underneath. |
| Evenlode runs by no other place, remarkable;
| 1 * a little lower takes in a ſmall brook, up-
| Woolley on Which is ſeated Moodſtock, in Saxon Wuge-
1 * pe0C, i. e. a woody place, where King Etheldred
heretofore held an aſſembly of the States, and
enacted ſeveral Laws. Here is a magnificent Palace
built by King Henry the firſt. [And (not to inſiſt
upon the evidence of King Etheldred's calling a
Council here,) it muſt have been a Royal Seat
long before King Henry's time; ſince it was
here, that King Zlfred tranſlated Boëtius de
Conſolatione Philbſophiæ, as Dr. Plot has obſerv'd
our of a MS. in the Cottonian Library. Henry
the firſt alſo adjoin'd to the Palace] a large
Park enclos'd with a wall of Stone ; which John
Rous affirms to have been the firſt Park in
England, though we meet with theſe words,
Parca ſylveſtris beftiarum, more than once in
Domeſday-book. But afterwards, they encreas'd

Barony of St.

27 Hen. Jo

: Firt Park in
| England,

world beſides ; ſo great delight did our ance-
ſtors take, in this noble ſport of Hunting,
(Through this Park, runs the Conſular way
called Akemanſtreet,in a raiſed bank ; entring it at
Morton gate, and going out of it at Mapleton-wel..))
Our Hiſtories report, that King Henry the
ſecond, being deeply enamour'd with Roſamund
Clifford (whoſe extraordinary beauty, and other
accompliſhments, drove the thoughts of all o-
ther women from his heart, and made her com-
monly called Roſa Mundi, the Roſe of the
World ;) to ſecure. her from the reſtleſs jea-
louſie of his Juno Queen, built in this place a
Labyrinth, where the many windings and Labyrinth.
turnings made an inextricable maze ; yer, at
preſent we ſee no remains of it.
Thus, the Park and Manour of }/50dftock con-
tinued in the Crown, till the fourth year of Q.
Anne; in which her Majelty (enabled thereunto
by Act of Parliament) granted the Intereſt of the
Crown in the Honour and Manour of Hod
ſtock and Hundred of Morton, to John Duke of Duke of
Marlborough and his heirs, as a reward of his Marlborough,
eminent and unparallel'd Services (as they are de-
ſervedly ſtiled by the Voice ot the Nation, in
Parliament,) and for perpetuating the Memory
thereof. For, being conſtituted Captain-Gene-Stat. 3 Ann,
ral of her Majeſty's Forces, and having in the
firſt year of her reign ſecured and extended the
frontier of Holland, by the taking of ſeveral
Towns from the French, and obliging them to
ſeek ſhelter behind their Lines ; and alſo, the
next Campaign, having added all the Country
between the Rhine and the Maes to the Con-
queſts of the preceding year; He did, in the
year 1704. (atter a long and difficult march to
the Banks of the Danube, made with the ut-
moſt diligence, ſecrecy, and good conduct) at-
tack and force the Bavarians, aſſiſted by the
French, in their ſtrong Intrenchments at Schel-
lenberg : After which, he tought the Enemy a
ſecond time, and, although they had been re-
inforced by a Royal Army of the French
King's beſt troops, and were commanded by a
Marſhal of France, and had the advantages
borli of number and ſituation, he did (to uſe
the Language of the Great Council of the
Land) gain as abſolnte and glorious a Victory, as
is recorded in the Hiſtory of any Age. The Empire
being thus reſcued, chiefly by his conduct and
bravery, from the immediate ruin to which the
defection of the Duke of Bavaria had expoſed
it ; he was made a Prince thereof by the Em-
peror, from whom he atterwards received a
Grant of the Lordſhip of Mindelheim, and is prince of
diſtinguiſhed throughout the Empire by the Mindelheim.
ſtile and title of Prince of Mindelheim. And the
field of this glorious Victory being at'or near
Blenheim, and the battle from thence called the
Battle of Blenheim ; accordingly, that noble and
magnificent Houſe erected within this Manour
of Woodſtock as a Monument of his glorious Acti-
ons (for ſo the Parliament expreſſes it,) is called
The Houſe, or Caftle of Blenheim ; adorned with Blenheim-
ſpacious and beautiful Gardens, and all the Cattle.
other Accommodations and Ornaments, ſuita-
ble to ſo ſtately a Fabrick.
The ſucceeding Victories of Ramellies, Au-
denarde, Blarignies, &c. whereby this great Ge-
neral did exceedingly increaſe his former Glo-
ries, and for which he received the Solermin
Thanks of the Nation in Parliament; fall not
within the compaſs ot this Deſign, but make the
far brighteſt part of the Hiſtory of that Reign.
As to the Town of l bodſtoc; it was
chiefly ſupported by the reſort of our Kings

to ſo great a number, that there were compu-
ted more in England, than in all the Chriſtian

and Queens thither ; but that Reſort veing
diſuſed, it fell to decay; in conſideration
P p whereof,

299

DOBUNT.

Jeffery

Chaucer,

Godſtow.

whereof, and for the recovery of it, a Starute
paſſed in Parliament, in the eighteenth year of
Queen Elizabeth, to make it a Staple of HD volt.

„Ann. 1607. Having * now nothing elſe to be proud of, it

+ Alum-
nus ſuus.

boaſts of the honour of being the + birth-place
of our Engliſh Homer, Jeffrey Chaucer : To
whom, and ſome other of our Engliſh Poets, 1
may apply what the learned Italian ſung of Ho-
mer and other Greeks,

As ille eſt, cujus de gurgite ſacro
Combibit arcanos vatum omnis turba furores.

This he, to whoſe immortal ſpring of
wit
Each water Poet owes his rivulet.

For he, defying every rival in wit, and leaving
all our Poetaſters at a long diſtance behind him,

jam monte potitins,

Ridet anhelantem dura ad jaſtigia turbum.

Sits down in triumph on the conquer'd
height,
And ſmiles to ſee unequal Rivals ſwear.

[Of late years alſo, this Town hath given
the title of Viſcount to Milliam Bentinck, who
was created, at the ſame time, Earl ot Port-
land. |

The V½s, when it has taken-in the Evenlode,
divides its Chanel, and cuts out many plea-
{ant Iflands, among which ſtood Godſtow, i. e.
The place of God, a Nunnery | ſaid to bel
founded by one Ida, a rich widow, and to have
been improv'd and endew'd by King John, to
the intent thoſe holy Virgins might (according
to the devotion of that age) pray for the Souls
of King Henry the ſecond, his Father, and Ro-
ſamund : for ſhe was buried here with this rhy-
ming Epitaph:

Hac jacet in tumba Roſa mundi, non Roſa
munda,

Non redolet, ſed olet, que redolere ſolet.

Roſe of the world, not Roſe the freſh pure
| flow'r, |
Within this Tomb hath taken up her
bow'r ; |
She ſenteth now and nothing ſweet doth
ſmell,
Which earſt was wont to ſavour paſſing
well.

But the name of the Foundreſs was really
Editha, an eminent and devout matron, who,
upon a plot of ground given by John de St.
John, erected it at her own charge; and at the
latter end of December An. 1138. it was de-
dicated by Alexander Biſhop of Lincoln, to the
honour of the Virgin Mary and St. John Bap-
tiſt. The additional endowment, by Kin
John, before-mentioned, may alſo probably be a
miſtake for Richard the firſt, who, we find, in
the firſt year of his reign, gave a large Charter
to this Abbey. If it be an error, it is likely

he
2 ot building it, to a prophecy of Me-
lin.

The Ifis, before its ſtreams are again united,
meets with Cherwell, which, coming out of
Northamptonſhire, flows almoſt through the
middle of this County. Ir firſt waters Banbury,
formerly Banerbypig, where Kynric the Welt-

the whole foundation to King John, and the

berties,) in a memorable battle. But yet it
may be queſtioned, whether this place can juſtly
lay claim to the Battle ; which the Saxon-An-
nals expreſly ſay, was at Bepanbypig; and this

Wiltſhire. But wherever it was tought ; the
ſucceſs of it does not ſeem to belong entirely to
the Saxons. Ir is true, before that, they had
been too hard for the Britains in ſeveral en-
gagements : but here, the whole ſtrength of
this people in the mid-land parts, was united,
and they were ſo numerous as to divide their
army into nine battalions ; ſo that by the aſſi-

ance of their numbers and reſolution, our Hi-
ſtorians conteſs they bore up ſo well, that when
night came, the battie was depending. And it
is more than probable, if our Writers would
but ſpeak out, that they had the better of the
Saxons at this turn. For whereas this happen'd
in 556, we find they held their garriſons in this
County till the year 571, or, as ſome Writers
ſay, 580; which they could hardly be ſuppos'd
to do, had the Victory been ſo compleat. Bur
what ſeems of greateſt moment in this matter,
is the manner in which the Saxon Chronicle re-
lates this Engagement. 'The only objection
perhaps that lies againſt the authority of that
Book, is, partiality to the Saxons againſt the
poor Britains, in the courſe of thoſe wars; and
yet upon this occaſion it is content barely to

—

Jo

Banbury,

Saxon ſ is ſaid to have overcome the poor Bri-,

rains (fighting ſtoutly for their Lives and Li- 8

is proved betore, to be moſt probably in * See p. 12h,

1 gol

tell us, || that Cynric and Ceawlin fought with the 1 Chron.

Britains at Beranbyrig ; which (as we may ga- Sax. {ub
ther from other Inſtances) had not likely been Ann. 556.

let paſs without expreſs mention of the Victo-
ry, if it had fallen to the ſhare of the Saxons.1
In the laſt age [ſave one] Richard Nevil Earl
of Warwick, fighting for the Lancaſtrian Inte-
reſt, gave ſuch an abfolute defeat to the York
party [near this place, i that he ſoon after took
the diſtreſs'd King Edward 4, and carry'd him
oft priſoner. | This battle was fought on a

of Banbury. And ſome of our Hiſtorians give
a more favourable account of it on the York-
ſide ; namely, that the fortune of the day was
not deciſive; but that the Earl of Pembroke and
Lord Stafford taking up their quarters at Ban-
bury, quarreF'd for an Inn; which gave the Earl
oft Warwick an opportunity to ſet upon them,
and to take the Earl of Pembroke and Sir Ri-
chard Herbert, priſoners ; who were barba-
rouſly beheaded. After which, upon a treache-
rous overture of peace, the Earl of Warwick
ſurpris'd the King at J/olvey, and carried him

g| Priſoner to Warwick.) The Town, at preſent,

is moſt famous for making good Cheeſe. (a) It
has a Caſtle, built by Alexander Biſhop of
Lincoln (tor this manour belong'd to that See)
who in his way of living conſulted ſtate and

it aroſe from Thomas Ialfingham's attributing

grandeur, more than eaſe and ſafety, and brought

(a) There is a credible Story, that while Philemon Holland was carr
tannia, Mr. Camden came accidentally to the Preſs, when this ſheet

—

ying on his Engliſh edition of the Bri-
was working off; and looking on, he found,

that to his own obſervation of Banbury being, famous tor Cheeſe, the Tranſlator had added Cakes and Ale, But

Mr. Camden thinking it too light an expreſſion, chang'd the word Ale into Zeal ;
indignation of the Puritans, who abounded in this Town.

and ſo it pa ſs'd, to the great

very

fair plain call'd Daxes-more nigh Eqdgcot in the prese
County of Northampton, within three miles 6ght,

Ve
CN
re
to
ta
[]
(
re
ughton.

: Bro Oo R
h
tl
tl
/
U
}
r
1
1

. .
Ilip.
|
|
|
|
+ Artiq, of
Ambrolden,
P 505
Kirg's Cha
fel.
Hedindo
Purcel

8

301

OXFORDSHIRE

302

very many miſchiets on himſelt by his vain and
expenſive buildings. Give me leave to add one
remark ; that the Coins ot Roman Emperors,
found here and in the fields adjoyning, are a
fair argument for the antiquity of this place.
[In the year 1626. Wiliam Lord Knollys of
Grays-Court, Viſcount Walingtord, was crea-
ted Earl of Banbury. |

I muſt not here paſs by Broughton, the ſeat of
Richard Fienes or Fenis, to whom and to the
heirs of his body, King James [the firſt,1 in
the firſt year of his reign, granted and confirmed
the name, ſtile, title, degree, dignity, and honour of
Baron Say and Sele; he being deſcended in a right
line from James Fienes Lord Say and Sele, who was
High Treaſurer of England in the reign of Hen-
ry the ſixth. The Chervel, for many miles after
it has left Banbury, ſees nothing but well cul-
tivated Fields, and delighttul Meadows ; among
which ſtands ip, formerly Ghiſtlipe, the birth-
place of King Edward (whom, tor his piety
and chaſtity, our anceſtors honour'd with the
title of Confefſor; ) as he himſelf witneſſes in
his original Charter, whereby he gives this his
manour to the Church of Weſtminſter : ſ the
greateſt part of which Charter, being lately
diſcovered, is now printed in the original Sax-
on. This place is called in the Pipe-rolls of
Henry the ſecond, Hiltefleape; in a Charter of
Henry the ſecond, Heſtepe; and in a Preſentati-

on of the Abbey of Weſtminſter, 6 Henry 3.

Artig. of Tehteſlep. But in the ſaid * original Charter, it
Ambrolden, is call'd InSplepe, which is eaſily melted into
5. 5 Iep or Iſlip, by caſting away the initial G; in
the ſame manner that Irypexpic is changed in-

to Ipſwich, and Gifteley near Oxford into Ie. In

King's Cha- the Chapel here, which 1s call'd the King s Cha-
Fel, pel, there ſtood, not many years ſince, a Font;
the very fame (as Tradition has conſtantly de-

liver'd it down) wherein Edward the Confeſſor

was baptiz'd. But this, being put to an inde-

cent uſe, as well as the Chapel, was at laſt pi-

ouſly reſcu'd from it, and remov'd to the gar-

den of Sir Henry Brown Baronet, of Nether Rid-

dington in this County. The Church continues

in the patronage of the Dean and Chapter o
Weitminser : the late Rector, Dr. Robert South,

at his own expence built a new decent Chancel,

and a beautitul Parſonage-houſe, with other
Accommodations belonging thereunto. | Near

Heaindon, this, is Hedimdon, which King John gave for a
' Barony to Thomas Baſſet. Tradition ſays, it
was in the Saxon times a nurſery of the King's
children : and it ſeems likewife to have had a
Royal ſeat, where King Ethelred reſided; par-
ticularly, when he granted a Charter to the
Monaſtery of St. Frideſwide, wherein the date
is thus mention'd ( This privilege was idith in
Heddington ;) and afterward in Latin (Scripta fuit
hac cedula juſſu prefati Regis in villa Regia, &c.)
i. e. This Schedule was written, at the com-

pee p. 12h,

I!ip.

ron.
ſub

550.

es-more*

mand of the fore-mentioned King, in the Royal

Vill, &. Another Argument of a Royal Seat
here, was a Free-Chapel, exempt from all Cu-

confirm'd to the Church of St. Fridefwide. |

haps, as much as to ſay Birini caſtrum; i
ing it to be a frontier-garriſon of the

ſtoms due to the Biſhop of Lincoln and Arch-
deacon of Oxford ; which Maud the Empreſs

At Iflip, the Cherwel is joyned from the eaſt

Purceller. With a ſmall brook which runs by Burceſter, in
Saxon Bunpencearcep and Bepnacearcep, ſper-

imply-

elt-

Saxons againſt the Mercians, and raiſed out of

| wite, in the reign of Henry the ſecond, built
here a little Monaſtery in honour of St. Mary
and | Edburg ; ¶ (the memory of the latter being
{till preſerved in 8. Edburg's Well, and Tadbury- St. E
walk, corruptly for The Edbury-walk :) J and, Well
that the Barons Le Stra
lately Lords of this pl *
and ſpacious Church; and, in the diviſion of — —
Kings-end, ſtands a pleaſant and convenient Kings-end,
ſeat of Mr. 7o/n Coker Lord of that manour.
Moſt of the Lands in Market-end are part of the Market-end,
eſtate of Sir William Glyane Baronet, whoſe
beautiful ſeat is within two miles, at Ambroſ- Ambroſden
den ; where the Pariſh-Church is neat and well- 9 55
adorn'd, and the Vicarage-houſe adjoyning, of
great ſtrength and good proſpect, built in the
year 1638. at the ſole charge of Dr. Joh Stub-
bing, the then worthy Vicar,] Towards the
welt, are ſome few remains of an old deſerted
Station, which they call Aliheſter, perhaps in- Allchefer,
ſtead of Aldcheſter, or the old Caffrum. The
bounds of this quadrangular Camp or Garriſon,
are ſtill vifible ; though the area or ſite of it
has been, for a long time, part of the common
field of Mendlebury. The reaſon of the name Wendlebury:
is an evidence of it's Antiquity, whether we
make it Aldebeſter; or Alle caffrum, from the
Roman Allectus, an Opinion ingeniouſly deli-
verd, and maintain'd with much ſhew of truth
in a ſhort Hiſtory of Alcheſter, the original MS.
whereof was preſented to Sir }/illiam Glynne
by the learned and pious Mr. Samuel Blackwell,
B. D. late Vicar of Burceſter, and now Rector
of Brampton in the County of Northampton.
Through this Camp is a military way, from Wal-
lingtord, as the neighbours believe, to Banbury.
They call this Akeman-ſtreet-way, a ridge where-
of [1s ſaid to] appear for ſome miles together
on the deep plains of Otmore, often overflow'd
in winter. |Bur upon a nearer view of the
courſe of Akeman-ſtreet, the Conſular way; it atemr,
does not paſs thither through Otmore; but co- ſtreet,
ming down from Tuchwic-grounds in the com-
mon road from Ailibur) to Biſiter, and paſſing
over that marſhy vale, which gave name to the
neighbouring town of Merſh, it leaves there Merſh,
ſome tracks of a ſtony ridge yer viſible and uſe-
ful, and croſſes the rivulet at J/orden-pool or
Steanford ; where it enters the County of Ox-
ford and pariſh of Ambroſden ; whence it aſ-
cends to Black-thorn-hill, and, paſſing croſs Mrech-
wic-green, extends on the north- ſide of Graven-
hull wood, over the brook at Lang ford, and ſo
leads cloſe by the north-bounds of Alcheſter, as
far as Cheſterton : f whence it goes to Kirt-x plot. p.
lington town's end, and ſo over Cherwell near 319.
Tackley to Woodſtock-park, whach it enters near
WWooton-gate, and paſſes out again at Mapleton-
well near Stunsfield-ſtile, whence it holds on a-
gain as far as Stunsfield ; and all this way in a
rais'd bank. But here breaking oft (though
ſtill keeping it's name) it goes over the Even-
lode to MWilcot, and ſo to Ramſden : a little be-
yond which village, at a place call d J/itty-green, witty-green.
it may be ſeen again for a little way; bur from
thence to AFﬀally, over Aſtal-bridge ; and ſo
through the fields till it comes to Brodwell-grove,
it is {carce viſible ; but there it is as plain a-
ain as any where elſe, holding a ſtrait courſe
into Gloceſterſhire, and ſo towards Bathe, the
old Akeman-ceaſter.

There is indeed, an old way which ſeems to
have led from AlchefFer to Wallingford, part

dburg's
nge of Knocking, were Tadbury-

” * * . walk

ace. [Here is a fair?

unn.

whereof is to be ſeen at this day, running
quite croſs Otmore ; but it is not by any means
the Akeman-ſtreet, though the people hereabouts
call it by that name. There are in this County
ſeveral branches running from this great —
whic

the ruins of AlchefZer, by the advice and aſſi-
ſtance of Birinus Biſhop of Dorcheſter. A
Town of ancient name, but where I have ob-
ſerv'd nothing of ſEngliſh1 Antiquity ; only,
that Gilbert Baſſet, and Egeline de Courtney his

q — cn > ͤ—Ü——ͤ—B——

rr . ]˙ ˙wAůüX . ES .

303 DOBUNI

which are deſcrib'd at large by the curious Dr. | But afterwards the penitent King cleaus d the $an-
Plot in his natural Hiſtory of this County; to [etuary, rebuilt the Monaſtery, reſtor d the old endow-
whom the Reader is reter'd for a more diſtinct |ment, and added now poſejſions : and at laſt Roger
Information concerning them. Biſhop of Salisbury gave the place to one Wimund,
Weſton, At a little diſtance is Jeon on the green, ſa very learned Canon Regular, who there ſettled a
the ſeat of a branch of the Family of Noris; [perpetual Society of ſuch Regular Canons for the ſer-
Merton, and Merton, where was found a Daniſh Spur, vice of God ; | and became the firſt Prior of them.
+ Mon, Dar, anſwering the figure of that in f Olaus Wormi- | But, leaving theſe matters, let us return to the
I. 1. c. 7. „; Which, together with the meeting of two Univerſity. 'The Daniſh ſtorms being pretty
p. 50. Fig: E. military ways near it, induc'd a late Author to well blown over, that pious Prince King l-
believe that this is the very place where A fred reſtor d the Muſes (who had ſuffer'd a
thelred and ZElfred tought with the Danes, in long exile) to their former habitation, and
the year 871. : built three Colleges, one for Grammarians, ano-
But where the Cherwel flows along with the ther tor Philoſophers, and a third for Divinity.
Ifis, and meets it; and where their divided || Of which, John Rouſe of Warwick gives this
ſtreams make ſeveral little ſweet and pleaſant account ; that the firſt was founded at the Eaſt-
Iſlands ; is ſeated on a riſing Vale the moſt fa- lend of High-ſtreet, endow'd with competent Sa-
OxroRD. mous Univerlity of Oxford, in Saxon Oxen- [laries for twenty fix Grammarians, and call'd
pop; our molt noble Athens, the ſeat of our | L.ittle-Univerſity-Hall : the ſecond in School-ſtreet,
Engliſh Muſes, the Prop and the Pillar, nay tor the maintenance of twenty fix Students in
the Sun, the Eye, the very Soul, of the Nati-[Logick and Philoſophy, and call'd the Leſs-Uni-
on: The moſt celebrated Fountain of Wiſdom [werjry-Hall : and the third in High-ſtreet, near
and Learning, from whence Religion, Letters, to the firſt, but higher to the Weſt, with en-
and good Manners, are plentifully diffuſed thro'|dowment for twenty fix Divines, and call'd
the whole Kingdom. A delicate and moſt beau-]Great-Univer/itz-Hall, now Univerſity-College.]
titul City, whether we reſpect the neatneſs of But you have a yet larger account of this, in the
private buildings, or the ſtatelineſs of publickold Annals of the Monaſtery of Wincheſter :
ſtructurcs, or the healthy and pleaſant ſituati-¶ In the year of our Lord DCCCVI, in the ſecond
on. For the plain on which it ſtands, is walled in, year of St. Grimbald's coming over into England, He dv
dee beſore, as it Were, with hills of * word ; hich keeping the Univerſity of Oxford was Jounded ; the firſt Re- 89, Chet
p. 291. out on one fide the peſtilential ſouth-] ind, and ſgents there, and Readers in Divinity, were St. Neo Sax.
on the other, the tempeſtuous weſt, admit on-ſan Abbot and eminent Proſeſſor of Theology, and S.
ly the purifying eaſt, and the north, which dil-|Grimbald an eloquent and moſt excellent Interpreter
perſes all una holſom vapours. From which de- ff the holy Scriptures : Grammar and Rhetorick were
lightful ſituation, Authors tell us, it was hereto-|raught by Aſerius a Monk, a man of extraordinary
fore call'd Bellofitum. Some writers fanſy that learning: Logick, Mufick, and Arithmetick, were
this City, in the Britiſh times, had the name oflread by John, Monk of St. Davids : Geometry and
Caer-Vortigern and Caer-Vember, and that it was Aſtronomy were profeſs'd by John a Monk and Col-
built by God knows what Fortigerzs or Mem-|legue of St. Grimbald, a man of a ſharp wit and
prics. Whatever it's name was under the Bri-]inmenſe knowledge. Theſe . Leftures were often ho-
tains, it is certain the Saxons call'd it Oxen-|zour'd with the preſence of the moſt illuſtrious and
ons ; in the ſame ſenſe, no doubt, as the Grect-iwoincible Monarch King ZElfred, whoſe memory to
ans had their Boſphorzs, and the Germans their every judicious taſte ſhall be aluays ſweeter than ho-
Ochenfurt upon the river Oder; that is, a ford of [zey. Soon after this (as we read in a very fair
Oxen. In which ſenſe, it is {till .call'd by the] MS. copy of that Aſſerius, who was himſelf
Welſh, Rhid-Tchen. Yet Leland, with ſomeſat the ſame time a Profeſſor in this place;
ſhew of probability, derives the name from the or of ſome other Writer who has added 1 Uſer, Pri
river Ons, in Latin %, and believes it to have|the relation to the hiſtory of Adlerius,)1 there mord. p. 1%
been heretofore call'd Oz:5jord ; ſince the little |aroſe a ſharp and grievous diſſention between Grym-
Iilands which the river here makes, are call'd |bold and thoſe learned men whom he brought hither
Onuſney. with him, and the old ſcholars whom he found here
Wiſe Antiquity (as we read in our Chroni- at his coming : for thele abſolutely refus'd to comply
cles) did even in the Britiſh age conſecrateſ with the Statutes, Inſtitutions, and Forms. of reading,
this place to the Mules ; whom they tranſplant-|preſerib'd by Grymbold. The difference proceeded to
ed hither, as to a more fertile nurſery, from| xo great height for the ſpace of three years, yet there
V. Wiltſhire, Greek-lade, now a {mall town in Wiltſhire. A-| was always a private grudge and enmity between them,
and Gloceſter-lexander Necham writes thus, Italy challenges which Joon after broke out with the greateſt violence
8 eee the glery of Civil Law; Divinity and the Liberal| imaginable. To appeaſe theſe tumults, the moſt in-
Gre 7 de. Arts make Paris preferable to all other Cities; Wiſ-|vincible King ZElfred, being inform'd of the Fuction
Lit 2. de na. dom alſo, and Learning, have long flouriſh'd at Ox-|by a meſſage aud complaint from Grymbold, came to
tura rerum. ford; and according to the prophecy of Merlin, ſball Oxford with defign to accommodate matters, and ſub-
in due time paſs from thence to Ireland. But in the|mitted to a great deal of pains and patience to hear
Saxon age (remarkable for the continual ruin ſthe cauſe and complaint of both parties. The con-
and ſubverſion of rowns and cities,) this place |troverſie depended upon this; The old Scholars main-
underwent the common tate; and, during many ſtain d, that before the coming of Grymbold to Ox-
years, was famous for nothing but the reliques|ford, learning did here flouriſh, though the Students
Frideſwide. of St. Frideſwide, a Virgin of great eſteem for|were then leſs in number than they had formerly
the ſanctity of her life, and firſt reputed a Saint been, by reaſon that very many of them had been ex-
on this occaſion : When by a ſolemn vow ſhe[pell'd by the cruel tyranny of Pagans. They further
had devoted her felt to the ſervice of God and|declar'd and prov'd, and this by the undoubted te-
: ſingle lite, Earl Agar courted her for a wite, |/timony of their ancient Annals, that good orders and
and purſuing her, was miraculouſly (as the Sto- | conſtitutions for the government of that place had been
ry goes) ſtruck blind. This Lady (as we read|made before by men of great piety and learning,
in William of Malmesbury) built here a Religi-|ſuch as Gildas, Mellin, Ninnius, Kentigern, and
ous Louſe as a trophy of her prejerv'd Virginity 3 in-|others, who had there proſecuted their ſtudies even
to which Monaſtery, when, in the time of Ethelred, Ito old age, aud manag'd all things happily with
ſeveral Danes ſentenc'd to death were fled for refuge ; [peace and quiet: and that St. German coming to Ox-
the enraged Saxons but them and the houſe together. Jord, and refiding there half a year, what time he
went

dds.

eee

.—

-
42
2

4
*

gr

Ap. 16

OXFORDSHIRE. 306

went through all England to preach down the Pelagi-|tortitied with large trenches and rampires ;
an Hereſy, did exceedingly approve of their rules aud| and in it * a Pariſh-Church dedicated to St. * A Church
orders. The King, with incredible humility, and George ; to which the Pariſhioners not having for Canons

great attention, heard ont both parties, earneſtly ex-|tree acceſs, when the Empreſs Maud was cloſe- Secular of the
horting them with piozs and healing Entreaties, to[ly beſieg'd in this caſtle by King Stephen —_ — Lag
preſerve love and amity with one another. Upon this,|the Chapel of St. Thomas hard by [ (weſt- fem, ub

he left them, in hopes that both parties would follow| ward from the Caſtle,) was built for that pur- ſays, that Rog.
his advice, and obey his inſtructions. But Grymbold|poſe. He is ſuppoſed likewiſe to have ſurroun- © #77 was

© + Levipes,

reſenting theſe proceedings, retir'd immediately to the
Monaſtery at Wincheſter, which King Alfred had
lately founded and ſoon . after, he got his tomb to
be remov'd thither to him; in which he had defign'd
his bones ſhould be put after his deceaſe. This was in
a vault under the chancel of the Church of St. Peters in
Oxford 3 which Church the ſaid Grymbold had raiſed

from the ground, of ſtones hewn and carv'd with
great art and beau

ty.

This happy Reftauration of Learning re-
ceiv'd two or three interruptions in the ſpace of
a few years. For in the reign of King Ethel-
dred, the Danes ſack d and burn'd the City;
(probably, out of revenge for the injuries which
they had done them in the year 1002, when,
upon the King's Commiſſion to kill all the
Danes in England, the Execution at Oxford
was more particularly ſevere : )] And ſoon at-
ter, Harold firnam'd * Haretoot, was ſo in-
cens'd againſt the place for the death of ſome
of his friends in a tumult, and proſecuted his

now wearing away apace. Robert his Nephew,
ſon of his brother Nigel, Chamberlain to King
Henry the firſt, by perſuaſion of his wite Edith,
daughter of Furn, who had formerly been Con-
cubine to that Prince, did, in the iſland-mea-

very large. [Hereby ſhe deſigned to expiate
the ſins of her former unchaſt life; and, to pre-
vail with her husband, told him a ſtory of the
chattering of Birds, and the Interpretation of
a Friar ; which Legendary tale, Leland tells
us,was painted near her 'Tomb in that Abbey.?

lein began to read the holy Scriptures at Oxford,
which were before grown almoſt out of uſe in En-

gland. This perſon, after he had much profited the

Engliſh and French Churches by his good doctrine, was

Te dy} : invited to Rome by Pope Lucius 2, and promoted to
* revenge in ſo barbarous a manner, that the ehe dignity of Chancellour of that See. To the ſame
A Scholars were miſerably driven from their | purpoſe, John Rows of Warwick writes thus. By

er, Pri-
I. p. 10

An. 1684,

ſtudies; and the Univerſity, a ſad ſpectacle, lay
as it were expiring, till the time of the Con-
querour; when 12 ſome ſay) he alſo beſieg d
and took this City: but thoſe who write ſo,
[may poſſibly] have been impos'd on, by read-
ing in faulty copies Oxonia inſtead of Exonia.
ſHowever, all the Copies of Matthew Paris and
Roger Wendover call it Oxonia ; which is con-
firm'd as well by other Authorities, as an old
Tradition, that while the Conqueror was in his
march to the north, for the quiet of rheſe parts,
he came to Oxford ; which refuſing to yield to
him, and a ſoldier from the wall highly affron-
ting him, he ſtorm'd it on the north- ſide; and
getting poſſeſſion, gave the greateſt part of the
City to Robert de Oily ; who, in the Survey, had,
within the walls and without, forty two hou-
ſes inhabired, and eight lying waſte. | And that
it was even then a place of ſtudy, we may
learn from the expreſs words of Ingulphus who
flouriſh'd in that age: I Ingulph being firſt placed
at Weſtminſter, was afterward remov d to the Study
of Oxford, where, in the learning of Ariſtotle, I im-
prov'd beyond moſt of thoſe who were of equal years
with me, Cc. For what we now call Univerſi-
ties they call'd Studies, as I ſhall by and by ob-
ſerve ; Soy tho' ſome have doubted, whether
this paſlage was genuine, the f Editors of In-
gulphuis found it in all the Copies. | However,
about this time the City was ſo impoveriſh'd,
that whereas (according to the General Survey)
there were reckon'd within and without the
walls ſeven hundred and fifty houſes, beſides
twenty four manſions upon the walls ; five
hundred of them were not able to pay the
geld or tax : When (to ſpeak from the aurho-
rity of the ſame Domeſday-book) this City paid
for toll and gable and other cuſtoms, yearly to the
King, twenty pounds and fix ſextaries of honey, and
to Earl Algar ten pounds. A little while after,
Robert de Oily, a noble Norman before-menti-
on'd, when tor the reward of his ſervices he
had received from the Conqueror a large por-
tion of lands in this county ; he did [(by
order of the King, who doubted of the
Fidelity of thoſe Parts,)| build a caſtle on
the weſt-fide of the City [Anno 1071,

the care of King Henry the firſt, the Lefture of Di-
vinity, which had been long intermitted, began again
to flouriſh, and this Prince built there a new Palace,
which was afterward converted, by King Edward
the ſecond, into a Convent for Carmelite Friers. But
long before this converſion, there was born in
that Palace the truly Lion-hearted Prince, King

for the glory of England. and protection of the
Chriſtian World, and for the terror and con-
fuſion of Pagans and Infidels Upon whoſe
_ a Poet of that age has theſe tolerable
verſes :

Viſcera Carleolum, corpus Fons ſervat Ebrardi,
Et cor Rothomagum, magne Richarde, tuum.
In tria dividitur unns, qui plus fuit uno,
Nec ſupereſt uno gloria tanta viro.

Hic Richarde jaces, ſed mors fi cederet armis,
Victa timore tui, cederet ipſa tuis.

Great Richard's body's at Fontevrault
ſhown,

His bowels at Carliſle, his head at Roan,

He now makes three, becauſe too great
for one.

m—_—

6

Richard lies dead; but death had fear d
his 20wer,
Could this proud Tyrant own a Conquerour.

[Upon the ground of the Chamber wherein
this Prince was born, the Carmelites built a
Belfrey and Tower, of which they uſed to
boaſt, as the place of his Nativity.]

The City being thus adorn'd with build-
ings, many Students began to flock hither as
to the common Mart of Learning and Virtue.
So that learning here quickly reviv'd, chietly
through the care of the foreſaid Robert Pulein, a
Man born to promote the Intereſt of the lear-
ned World, who ſpar'd no trouble nor pains to

cleanſe and open the fountains of the Muſes
Q q (which

—5—E— —— Oe — 2
So — o— or A CE ee a — EIS

ded the City with new Walls, which Age is ler.

1074.

dows nigh the Caſtle, build Oſezey Abbey, which Oſeney Ab-
the ruins of the walls ſtill ſhew to have been bey.

1129.

At the ſame time (as we read in the Regi- Divinity-
ſter of the ſaid Abbey of Oſeney) Robert Pu- LeRures,

Richard the firſt, commonly call'd Ceur de Lion, Richard
a Monarch of a great and elevated Soul, born 3 25

—

— — —

—

— —— — — — d _
—

— Fas 5” E
33332 —
w—_

mY " —

DOBUNI ©

3F

——

ms ——

mo n 8
_—_—— ——ͤ— ——— . 3 2%; IE

ä

Eſtabliſhment

—
- —_ - -
—— — -
- =

r

— x
— — -
-
a 4X amy
— — tou TIS —— —— ha
8 9 —

— ——

5 *

?
F

(which had been ſo miſerably dried and obſtru-
cted) under the favour and protection of King
Henry the firſt, King Henry thee ſecond, and Ri-
chard his fon, whom I mention'd juſt now.
And he met with ſuch ſucceſs in his endea-
vours, that in the reign of King John, there
were three thouſand Students in this place,
who went away all together, ſome to Reading, and
ſome to Cambridge, | Maidſtone, Salisbury, and o-
ther places, | when they could no longer bear

be hereby propagated and encouraged : and that out

—

2 —

men of the Catholick Communion, furniſhed with ſuſ-
ficient abilities, two ſhould be choſen for the profeſſion
of each Tongue. For the maintenance of which Pro-
fefſors in Oxford, all the Prelates in England, Set-
land, Ireland and Wales, and all Monaſteries, Chap-
ters, Convents, Colleges, exempt and not exempt, and
all Rectors of Pariſh-Churches, ſhould make a yearly
contribution. In which words one may eaſily ob-
ſerve, that Oxford was the chief School in En-

the abuſes of the rude and inſolent Citizens ;|gland, Scotland, Wales and Ireland; and that

but when theſe tumults were appeas'd, they
ſoon after return'd. This happen d An. 1209,
the 10" of King John, upon a Clerk in Ox-

thoſe places which we now call Academies and Us:
Univerſities, were in former ages fitly call'd niverſitie

: call'd Stud
Studies : as St. Hierom ſpeaks of the flouriſhing Eil. t.

ford accidentally killing a woman ; and com- Studies of France. For the name of Univerfity, ſticum Man.
plaint being made to the King then at NMood- for publick Schools of Learning, obtain'd fir} hum.
ſtock, he commanded two of the Scholars (who, ſabout the reign of King Henry the third, and,

upon ſuſpicion of that fact, had been impri-[if I am not miſtaken, this word did not at firſt

ſon'd by the Towns-men) to be immediately|ſo much ſignifie the Place of ſtudy, as the So-
hang'd without the City-walls. This ſo much|ciety of Students. But perhaps this may ſeem
offended and frighted the poor Scholars, that out of my road.

they all deſerted the Town. But the Inhabi-| Now, the worthy Patrons and Favourers of Col ;
tants, being ſcon ſenſible of the deſolation and Learning began to furniſh the City and Suburbs Hall, d
poverty which they had brought upon them-|with ſtately Colleges, Halls, and Schools, and *
ſelves, did upon their knees deprecate the fault, to endow them with ample Revenues; (for be-

at N eſtminſier, before Nicholas the Pope's Le- fore this time, the greateſt part of the Univer-

gate, and ſubmitted to publick Penance. Upon ſity ſtood without North-gate:) In the rei
which, the diſperſed Scholars, after five years of King Henry the third, John Baliol of Berna

rd- ros.

abſence, return d to Oxford, and obtain d new|caſtle, who died in the year 1269, Father of Ball

Privileges, for their more effeftual protection. ]

John Baliol King of Scots, founded Baliol-Col- ls.

Then, and in the times following, as Di- lege, and gave name to it. During his life, he ſet-
of the Uni- vine Providence ſeem'd to ſet apart this Ci-|tled yearly Exhibitions upon ſome Scholars, till

ty for a ſeat of the Muſes, ſo did the ſameſ he ſhould provide them a fit houſe and other ac-
Providence raiſe up a great number of exccl-[commodations. And at his death, a little before
lent Princes and Prelates, who exercis'd their| Whitiuntide, An. 1269, he recommended to his
picty and bounty in this place for the promo- Wife and Executors this pious project. Upon
ting and encouraging of Arts and good Litera-|which, his Relict Dervorguill ſettld thoſe Ex-
ture. And when King Henry the third came|hibitioners in a Tenement which ſhe hir'd of
hither and viſited the Shrine of S. Fridefwide, the Univerſity in Horſmunger-freet now Can- Canditch
which was before thought a dangerous crime|ditch, and preſerib'd Statutes for their govern-

in any Prince, and ſo took away that ſuper-

ment, An. 1282, Afterwards in the year 1284. Mary'sKil

ſtitious ſcruple, which had before hindred ſeve-|ſhe purchas'd another tenement near the ſame
ral Kings from entring within the walls of Ox-|place, call'd Mary's-Hall ; and when ſhe had re-
ford: He here cenven d a Parliament to adjuſt |pair'd it, the Society were here ſettled by her
the difterences between him and the Barons, Charter; confirm'd by her ſon Sir John de Ba-

and at that time confirm'd the privileges granted

liol, afterwards King of Scots, and by Oliver

to the Univerſity by his Predeceſtors, and ad-|Biſhop of Lincoln.1 Soon after, Malter Mer- Merton. Ca
ded ſome new ones of his own. After which, ton, Biſhop of RocheFer, transferr'd the College lege.

the number of learned men fo far increas'd, as

which he had built [at Maldam in Surrey, in the

to afford a conſtant ſupply of perſons qualified|year * 1264, to Oxford, [ (viz. to St. Joh Bapti fi- 1274, C
with divine and human knowledge, tor the ſtreet,) ann. 1267; | which he endowed, and call'd St. John bi

diſcharge of Offices in Church and State. So
that Matthew Paris expreſly calls Oxford, The ſe-|of the wiſe Founder, in the year 1274.] Then

cond School of the Church after Paris, nay the very
foundation of the Church. The occation upon

Merton-College, and it received the laſt Statutes oO.
lege.
William Archdeacon of Durham repair'd and Sia Co 85

ſtor'd the Foundation of King Alfred; now call'd

which he gave the Univerſity ſuch an honou-|Univerfity-College. [Which reſtoration is by

rable title, An. 1256, was the Biſhop of Lin-

Stow and Holinſhed aſcrib'd to Milliam Caer-

coln's encroaching upon the Liberties of the|/iph Biſhop of Durham, in the reign of Willi-
Univerſity. Whereupon they ſent Delegates toſam the Conquerour : and by Leland, as falſly,

the King at St. Albans ; to whom he made this

to William Shirwood Chancellor of Lincoln. But

remarkable Addreſs in behalf of them: O our undoubtedly it belongs to Milliam Archdeacon

Lord ( for the Lord's ſake) take care of the Church,
which is now in a tottering ſtate. . The Univerſity of
Paris, the mother and miſtreſs of ſo many holy Pre-

o

of Durham, who, oyng in the year 1249, left
three hundred and ten Marks to the Chancel-
lour and Maſters of the Univerſity for the main-

lates, is greatly diſturbed. And if the Univerſity of| tenance of ten, eleven, or twelve, Maſters ;

Oxford (which is the ſecond School of the Church,

with which money, about thirty years after

yea the very foundation of the Church) be diſturbed|the Donor's death, a Society was here eſta-
at the ſame time, it is much to be feared, that the bliſn'd An. 1280, and their Statutes preſcrib'd

whole Church will be ruined and undone.| For the
Popes of Rome had before honour'd this place
with the title of an Univerſity ; which, at that
time, in their Decretals, they allow'd only to
Paris, Oxford, Bononia, and Salamanca. And
in the Council of Vienna, it was determin'd,
That Schools for the Hebrew, Arabic, and Chaldee
tongues ſhould be erefted in the Studies of Paris, Ox-
ford, Bononia, and Salamanca (as the moſt emi-
nent,) that the knowledge of thoſe Languages might

by the Univerſity in the year 1292. This
College hath been lately much enlarged by the
generous Benefaction of Dr. John Radcliff ; who
gave by Will the Sum of five thouſand pounds,
or new building of the Maſter's Lodgings, to-
gether with Chambers for two new Fellows,
by him inſtituted for the ſtudy of Phyſick ;
tor whoſe maintenance an honourable Salary
is alſo appointed, for ten years ; the half of
| which time at leaſt (as the words of the 5
are

e.
5; Mary-
E Hall.

Su Book of Ma

Orial-Col-

1
|
|
|
|
|

1318.

© Regilt, Mon.
&. Hide,

© Queens-Col-
is

? Canterbury
© College, |

Northern
Southern |

niyerſtiez
Id Studia,
17, ad fu.
um Mog.

In.

lege,
alls, and
hools,

ok of Ma
.
liol-Cab

e.

nditch,

y Hal.

rton · Ca.

4
1

270
John Bip
ſtreet,
verſty ·

lege.

Mt

OXFORDSHIRE.

310

are) they are to travel in parts beyond Sea, for
their better Improvement. |

About the time of the ſaid Reſtoration, the
Scholars having been ſomewhat rude to Otto the
Pope's Legate (or rather his Horſe-leach, ſent hi-
ther to ſuck the blood: of the poor people,) they
were Excommunicated, and treated with great
ſeverity. At which time, as Richard of Armagh
tells us, there were reckon'd in this Univerſity
no leſs than thirty thouſand Students.
Under Edward 2. Walter  Stapledon Biſhop of

retet · Col · Exeter built Exeter-College and Hart-Hall. | Up-

lege.

Hart-Hall.
| Arthor-Hall

Orial-Col-
lege.

St. Mary-
& Hall.

1318.

© Regitt, Mon.

; veens-Col-
*

*

on his firſt deſign of a Foundation tor Scho-
lars, he purchas d Hart-Hall, and Arthur-Hal,,
in the year 13 14, and there inſtituted a Society
for a Rector and twelve Scholars. But finding
the place too narrow for his defign, he bought
ground for a new fite in the Pariſh ot S. Mildred;
and, baving built convenient Lodgings, he
tranſlated his Society to this houſe, call'd at
firſt Sapledon In, and then Exeter-College. |

The ſame King Edward the ſecond, af-
ter his example, built a Royal College, com-
monly call'd Orial and St. Mary-Hall. [For
the honour of the Foundation of this College
is attributed to King Edward the ſecond, tho
he did little more than grant Licence to Adam
de Brom his Almoner (Apr. 20. 1324.) to build
and endow a College to be call'd by the name
of St. Mary's Houſe. To this Society King Ed-
ward the third, in the firſt year ot his reign,
gave a Tenement call'd Le Oriele ; on which

round ſtands the College ſo called. The pre-
[oc St. Mary-Hall was a long time the Parſo-
nage-houſe to the Rectors of St. Mary's; which
Church, with it's appurtenances, being appro-
priated by K. Edward 2, An. 1325. to the Col-
lege then founded by Adam de Brom, the houſe
came alſo into their poſleſſion, and was ſoon at-
ter appropriated to the reſidence of Students. ]

About this time, the Hebrew tongue be-
gan to be read by a Jewiſh Convert, for whoſe ſti-
pend every Clerk in Oxford contributed one penny for
every mark of his Eclefiaftical Revenue.

After this, Q. Philippa wife of K. Edward 3.
built Queens-College. [For to her it owes it's
name, but it's Foundation to her Chaplain Ro-
bert de Eglesfield, Rector of Burgh under Han-
more in Weltmoreland ; who, by the Queen's
favour, in the year 1340, purchas'd the ground
and erected a Collegiate-Hall to be call'd Aula

Scholarium Reginæ de Oxon. The Revenues of

it have been much improved by ſeveral Benefa-
Gors ; and, under the government of the late
Dr. Timothy Halton, was built a very fair Li-
brary. It was begun upon occaſion of the Le-
gacy of Dr. Thomas Barlow, the learned Biſhop
of Lincoln, and formerly Provoſt of this Col-
lege, who by Will beſtow'd upon it the greateſt

rt of his Books ; giving the reſt ro Bodley's

ibrary, whereof he had been Keeper. A
later Benefactor, Sir Joſeph Williamſon, Prin-
cipal Secretary of State to King Charles the
ſecond, beſides many other teſtimonies of his
regard to this College (as the place of his edu-
cation,) bequeathed to it by Will the Sum of
ſix thouſand Pounds ; and this encouraged the
then Provoſt Dr. William LancaFer, to lay the
foundation of a new College, which (by the
addition of his own large Bounty, and of other
Benefa&ions) was a good way advanced before
his death, and, when finiſhed, will be a very
ſtately, curious, and complete Fabrick.] Al-
lo, Simon Iſtip, Arch-biſhop of Canterbury, built

_ TY

carrying-on the _—_ with open arms and
all manner of hoſtility ; upon which the Nor-
thern-men retir'd to Stanford, and begun to

—

—

ſet-up publick Schools there. But after a few

'y

years, when the ſtorm was blown over, and the
teuds forgot, they all return'd hither, and Sta-
tutes were enacted to prohibit all perſons from
ny at Stanford; to the prejudice of Ox-
or

About that time;
ſhop of Winche&er, built a magnificent Stru-
cture, call'd New-College, (into which the ri-
peſt Lads are every year tranſplanted from his
other College at J/inthefer.) [The deſign of
this College was laid in the year 1369; and
the ſaid Prelate, having at ſeveral times pur-
chas'd ground ſufficient for it, obtain'd the
King's Licence, (June 3o. An. 1379. 3 Ri-
chard the 24;) and on the 5*) of March follow-
ing, did himſelf lay the firſt Stone. It was
tinifſh'd An. 1386, and on April the 14 the
Warden and Fellows were admitted with ſo-
lemn Proceſſion.] Then, Richard Angervil, Bi-
ſhop of Durham, call'd Philobiblos, or, The Lo-
ver of Books, began a publick Library. [At
his death, An. 1345, he left his voluminous
Library to Durham-College, with liberty of ac-
ceſs, upon certain conditions, to all Scholars.
At the diflolution of which houſe, in the reign
of Henry the eighth, ſome of the Books of this
admirable collection were remov'd to the Pub-
lick Library, ſome to Baliol-College, and ſome
came into the hands of Dr. George Owen, a Phy-
ſician of Godſtow, who bought the ſaid College
of Edward the ſixth.] His Succeſſor Thomas de
Hatfield built Durham-College for the benefit of
the Monks at Durham, [ which was furniſhed
and endowed by that great and generous Pre-
late, Richard de Bury. Richard Fleming, Biſhop
of Lincoln, founded Lincolu-College. This was
begun An. 1427. (6 of Henry the ſixth,) for a
Seminary of Divines to contute the Doctrines
of Miclif; and lightly endow'd with the Ap-
propriation of three Pariſh-Churches in Oxford :
and therefore wanted another Founder, Thomas
Rotheram, Bifhop of Lincoln, who in the year
1475. finiſh'd the building of the College, en-
creas'd their Revenues, and gave them Starutes,
An. 1479. And, lately, they have 1 a
very conſiderable Augmentation of Revue,
from the generous Bounty of the Lord Crew,
the preſent Biſhop of Durham ; by which, the
Head, and every Fellow and Scholar, is in ac-
tual poſſeſſion, for himſelf and Succeſſors, of a
comfortable * addition to his former Support.

About the ſame time, the Benedictine

William Wickham, Bi- New-College

Durham - Cola
lege.

Lincoln - Col-
lege.

* Head, 20 I.

per Ann.

Monks [as is commonly ſaid | built Glocefer- Every Fel-
College at their own proper coſt and char-lew, 10 h.

ges, where were conſtantly maintain'd two or

veryScholar

and theBible-

three Monks of every Houſe of that Order, Clark, 102.
who afterwards were to be Readers or Profeſ- belides other
ſors in their reſpective Convents. [Bur it ap- Benefactions.

pears by other accounts, that it was built by
John Giffard Baron of Brimsfield ; who, in the
11 of Edward the iſt, for the good of his
ſoul and that of Maud de Longſpe his wife,
founded this Cell for the maintenance of thir-
teen Monks, from the Benedictine Convent of
Gloceſter. At the ſuppreſſion of Religious-
houſes, it was given by Henry the eighth for a
Palace to the Biſhops of Oxford; but, return-
ing to the Crown, was at laſt purchas d by Sir
Thomas I bite, Founder of St. John's-College ;
and being conveyed to the uſe of Principal and

0 terdury. Canterbury-College. KEE:

KF = a, The Scholars now abounding in peace and
| Southern, Plenty, grew inſolent, and divided into the
| bolars, tons of the Northern and Southern men,

Scholars, was call'd Gloceſter-hall. But it hath Gloceſler⸗

been ſince erected into à College, under the Hall.

name of M vrceſter-College; being endow d by Sir yorceſter-

Thomas Coke, a Gentleman of that County. = College.
0

rr

DOBUNT

—

zu

To ſay nothing of the Canons of St. Fideſ-
wide; there were erected no leſs than four beauti-
ful Cells of Friars in the Suburbs, wherein there
often flouriſh'd Men of conſiderable learning
In the next age, during the reign of King
Henry 5, Henry Chichley Arch-biſhop of Can-
terbury, founded two eminent Colleges; one ol
which he dedicated to the memory of All-Souls.
[This College was begun by the ſaid Arch-
biſhop (after the Foundation of a College and
Hoſpital at Higham-PFerrers, the place of his na
tivity) in the year 1437. He endow'd it for a
Warden and torty Fellows, chiefly with the
lands of Priories-Alien diſſolv'd in the ſecond
year of Henry the fifth. And, of late years, it
hath been greatly adorn'd with a noble Libra-
ry; owing to the large and generous Benefa-
ction of Colonel William Codrington, a Member
of this Society ; who gave by Will fix thouſand
Pounds for the building thereof, and (beſides his
own excellent Library) tour thouſand Pounds
to be laid out 1n Books, for furniſhing it.

Not long after, William Wainflet, Biſhop
of Winchester, erected Magdalen-College, remar-
kable for the building, and fine ſituation, and
pleaſure of the adjoyning groves and walks. This
College was founded An. 1458. on the ſite and
lands of the diflolvd Hoſpital of St. John's,
with ſo large endowments, and ſuch conveni-
ences of all kinds, that it is eſteem'd one of the
moſt noble Foundations in the Chriſtian World. |

At the ſame time, the Divinity-School was
erected ; a Work of ſuch admirable Contri-
vance and Beauty, that the ſaying of Xeuxis
may juſtly be inſcrib'd upon it, I is more eaſie to
envy than to imitate this work. | The ground on
which it is built, was purchaſed by the Uni-
verſity am. 1427, and, upon ſeveral Contri-
butions, the Structure was ſoon after begun ;
but was intermitted, till by the piety and boun-
ty of Humfrey the Good Duke of Gloceſter, it
was carried on, tho' not completed till x 480. |

Over this School was a Library, fur-
niſh'd with one hundred twenty nine choice
Volumes, procur'd from Htaly at the great ex-
pence of the ſame Humphrey Duke of Gloce-
ſter, a chief Patron and admirer of Learning.
[ Beſides which number (valued at above a thou-

313
.
THESAURARIUS, ET HUJUS ACADE- © |
MLE CANCELLARIUS,
THOME. BODLEIO EQUITI AURA-

TO, QUI BIBLIOTHECAM HANC
INSTITUIT, HONORIS CAUSSA PIE
PFUSUET. Cardinal
| Colieges
That is, |

THOMAS SACK VIL EARL OF DOR-
SET, LORD HIGH TREASURER OF
ENGLAND, AND CHANCELLOR OF

THIS UNIVERSITY,

PIOUSLY ERECTED THIS MONU-
MENT, TO THE HONOUR OF SIR
THOMAS BODLEY KNIGHT, WHO

INSTITUTED THIS LIBRARY.

[The deſign of this Library was firſt laid, in
the year 1597. By the pious Founder, the old
Library ot Duke Humphrey was repair'd, and
ntted tor the reception of Books, 1599, and
an additional Ealt-Gallery begun in the year
1610. Another Gallery on the Weſt, projected
by him, was raisd, with a Houſe * Convo-
cation under it, An. 1638. But all theſe being
too narrow to contain the vaſt acceſſion of Books,
there have been new Galleries erected over each
lide of the middle Iſle, chiefly to receive the
generous Legacy of Thomas Barlow Lord Bi-
ſhop of Lincoln, who had been elected Keeper
ot this Library, An. 1652. And even before
theſe, when one views the Catalogue of printed
Books by Dr. Hyde, and the other of Manuſcripts
by Dr. Bernard, he muſt admire the prodigious
treaſure, and neither envy Rome her Vatican,
nor Jadia her Gold. Very lately, Dr. FohnRuif;
Radcliffe, a Phyſician of great Eminence, hath Library,
by Will left the Sum of forty thouſand Pounds
tor the building of another Publick Library, be-
tween the Univerſity-Church, and the Publick
Schools; together with an honourable Salary of
one hundred and fifty Pounds a year to a Keep-
er of the ſaid Library, and one hundred Pounds
a year for ever, to buy Books for the ſame.

In the Reign of Henry the“ eighth (ann. 3.)|* Seventh, C
for the further advancement of Learning, Mil- Brauen Nos

r e 2 2 as

*
2 6 ˙ mw Or * SS. m

| | Trinity-Col-

= | Le,

liam Smith Biſhop of Lincola, [and William Sut- Calle
ton, Eſq;] built Braxen-Nyſe-College [(fo called
from a Hall, diſtinguiſhed by that name; I
which, ann. 1572. was endow d by that pious
and good old man Alexander Nowell, Dean of
St. Pauls, | with Exhibitions for thirteen Scho-
lars. Of late years, it hath been adorn'd with
a beautiful Chapel, Library, and Cloyſters ; the

ſand pounds,) he gave one hundred twenty fix
Voſttmes more in the year 1440, and in 1443
a much greater number, beſides conſiderable ad-
ditions at his death, three years after. |
However, moſt of theſe Books are long ſince
embezell'd and converted to private uſes. Burt
ſince (may all happineſs attend it) the worthy
Thomas Boa. Sir Thomas Bodley Kt. formerly a Member of this

. — * — — . —
= * I
— — - ad. 44 o - a” —
* a» 1 * 2 * cud
- - : Ww 0 ,
—— * a 0 + 448 233
W _ , — — — —

——— —— ñj— — —
— * * 2 * —— * „ *

Publick
Schools.

— ome 9
rr 4

wt #
2 Ee Eon
4

ley. Univerſity, with extraordinary charge, and in-| elegant ſtructure whereot was begun in the year
.  * Is ſurniſh. defatigable pains, * turniſh'd a new Library in 1656, and the Chapel conſecrated by the Bi- = Mat
p ing, C. the ſame place, with the beſt Books procur'd | ſhop of Oxford An. 1666.1 About the ſame Corpus C.

time, Richard Fox, Biſhop of Wincheſter, _ ſti-Colleg'+
| Jeſus-Colle

from all parts of the World: that the Univer-
ſity might enjoy a publick Arſenal of Wiſdom ;
and himſelf, immortal Honour. And ſince it was à
Plin. lib. 35. good cuſtom of the Ancients, in all their Libra-
cap. 2.

ded Corpus-Christi-College, | which was deſign
for a Seminary of Monks to the Priory of St.
Swithin in Wincheſter, An. 15 13. But the Foun-
der, diverted from that deſign, and aſſiſted by
Hugh Oldham Biſhop of Exeter, eſtabliſh'd it
for a Society of Students, An. 1516, with En-

ries to erect Statues of Gold, Silver, or Braſs,
both to thoſe who had inſtituted them, and thoſe
who had adorn'd them with excellent Writings,

_ _—
— -
_ — —
0 —
c - * pam

— — —
. 4 — —
8 —

=_ . — -—

” —

* 2 OT
—

that Time and Age might not triumph over
their Memories, and that the Curioſity of Man-
kind might be ſatisfied, while they enquired
after them and their Characters: For this rea-
ſon, the Chancellor of the Univerſity, at the ſame
time providing for the memorial of himſelf,
did in this Library erect a Statue of Sir Thomas
Bodley, that great friend and patron of Lear-
ning, with this Inſcription :

THO MAS SACK VILL.US DORSET-
TIE COMES, SUMMUS ANGLIA

dowments ſo ample, and Statutes ſo admira-
ble, as have made very many of it's members
men of ſingular piety and learning.)

After theſe, Cardinal ey Arch-biſhop of Chi, 05
Jork, on the ſite of the Monaſtery of St. Frideſwide, —
began the moſt noble and ample Foundation of *"
all others, which King Henry the eighth, with
the addition of Canterbury-College, did richly
endow, and gave it the name of Chriſt-Church.
[ For after the ſaid Cardinal had procur'd from
Pope Clement the ſeventh a Bull for diſſolving

Wadhat
College
Ann. 161

Pembrok
College,

two and twenty Religious-Houſes, and for con-
verting

adclif';
ibrary,

eventh, C.
Men- Noe.

leg.

pus · Chr.

t-
ch. Coil

v
.

Cardinal
College.

Turity- Col-

= | de.

St. John's.

Publick
Schools,

Ann, 161 3.

Wadham-
College.
un. 1612,

—

OXFORD

—_—

SHIRE.

8 kat ths Wa

e

verting them to the uſe of two Colleges (one
to be founded at Ipſwich the place of his nati-
vity ; the other at Oxford, to which he ow d
his education, ) he obtain'd the King's Licence
to inſtitute a College on the ſite of the Priory
of St. Frideſwide, to be call'd Cardinal- College,
which he firſt delign'd for a Dean and eighteen
Canons, and projected much greater things.
But, before any ſettlement, came his fatal ruin
An. 1529, When, among his other vaſt poſſeſ-
lions, this College fell into the King's hands.
Who, in the year 1532. reſtor'd moſt of the al-
lotted Revenues, and had it call'd Henry the

_ Eighth's College. Bur this he diſlolv'd in 1545,

and the year following erected it into a Cathe-
dral Church for a Biſhop, a Dean, and eight
Canons. The beauty and honour of this Col-
lege were much advanc'd by the induſtry, piety,
and bounty of Dr. John Fell, Dean, and Lord
Biſhop of Oxford; and it hath lately been a-
dorn'd with a pile of Building, entirely new,
which is very ſtately, and beauriful.] The ſame
mighty Prince Henry the eighth, at the expence
of his own Exchequer, honoured the Cit
with an Epiſcopal See, [as hath been obſerv'd ;
and the Univerſity with publick Profeſſors. And,
that the Muſes might fill be courted with
greater favours, Sir Thomas Pope Kr. repair'd
Durham-College, and Sir Thomas White, Kt.
Citizen and Alderman of London, Bernard-
Colicge (both which lay almoſt buried in their
own auſt ; ) and enlarg'd the buildings, and en-
dow'd them with lands, and gave them new
names, dedicating the former to the Holy Tri-
nity, the latter to St. John Baptiſt.

[The firſt of thele (Durham-College,) was
granted by K. Edward 6. to his Phyſician George
Owen of Godſtow ; of whom, in the year 1554,
it was purchas'd by Sir Thomas Pope Kt. and re-
pair'd and endow'd the year following. Undkkr
the government of Dr. Ralph Bathurſt, it was
adorn'd with fair additional buildings, and a
Chapel of exquiſite beauty, conſecrated Apr. 1 2.
1694; and he was ſo great a Benefactor to the
College, as to be ſpecially mentioned, on all
cccaſions, among their Publick Benefattors.

The ſite of the ſecond (Bernard-College,) was
in the year 1555. obtain'd from the Crown by
Thomas White Alderman of London: this he
enlarged, and endow'd An. 1557. by the title
of St. John Baptiſt's-College ; which, in build-
ings and revenues, has receiv'd great augmen-
tation from the liberal piety of Archbiſhop
Laud, and Archbiſhop Juxon. |

Q. Mary built from the ground the Publick
Schools. [ But the preſent Fabrick, which makes a
ſtately Quadrangle, was raiſed by the Contribu-
tion of dir Thomas Bodley and other Benefactors.

Hugh Price Dr. of Laws, [ Treaſurer of the
Church of St. David's, | happily laid a new
foundation, call'd, in honour of our Saviour,

| lelas. College. Jeſis- College. [He began to build, and com-

petently endow'd it An. 1571. But the So-
ciety claim alſo the honour of a Royal Founder,
viz, Queen Elizabeth; who furniſh'd them with
Timber out of two adjoyning Foreſts. The
wiſe and pious Sir Leoline Jenkins, Secretary of
State to King Charles the ſecond, was ſo great
a Benefactor, as to be, in a manner, juſtly
elteem'd another Founder. Wadbam-College,
deſign'd by Nicholas Wadham, was completed by
Dorothy his Reli& : And Broad-gate-Hall was

Pembroke. converted into Pembroke-College 3 whoſe Foun-
0 lege,

dation is owing to the charity of Thomas TI
dal, and the induſtry of Richard Wightwicke. |

| *Sixteen, C. Theſe Colleges, in number“ nineteen, beſides
1 Eight, C. f ſix Halls, all fairly built, and well endow'd,

together with their excellent and uſeful Libra-

ries, do ſo raiſe the credit and eſteem of Ox-

ford, that it may be juſtly thought to exceed

of Sheldon's Theater, a work of admirable con-
trivance, and exceeding magnificence, built b
the moſt Reverend Father in God Gilbert Shel-
don Archbiſhop of Canterbury and Chancellour
ot this Univerſity, An. 1668. Who, beſides
an infinite expence upon the Structure, gave
two thouſand Pounds to purchaſe Lands for the
perpetual repair of it. The Area, within which
it ſtands, was, round the walls of it, adorn'd
with ineſtimable reliques of Grecian and Ro-
man Antiquities ( ot which the greateſt part is
owing to the bounty of Henry Howard Earl of
Arundel ; ſome alſo to the Executors of Mr.
Sheldon ; others, to Sir George Wheeler, &c ;)
which have been lately remov'd from thence,
into more convenient Places, for the better pre-
ſervation of them.

Aſhmole's Muſaum, a neat and curious Edifice,
of which the lower part is a Chymical Elabo-
ratory, and the firſt floor on a noble aſcent a
ſpacious Hall, and the upper-chamber a Repo-
ſitory of Natural and Artificial Curioſities. The
greateſt part of theſe are owing to the genero-
lity of Elias Aſpmole Eſq; who has preſcrib'd
Statutes for the Cuſtody of them ; and has re-
poſited in this place the excellent Collection of
MSS. made by himſelf and by his Father-in-

ly Printing-Houſe, furniſh'd with all Accommo-
dations ſuitable ro the Deſign,

And when we are recounting the noble Con-
veniencies for Learning, with which this Uni-

Danby, in the year 1632, and by him endowed
with an annual Revenue, for the Maintenance
and Keeping thereof, This contains a vaſt Va-
riety of Plants ; and is of great uſe to all Per-
ſons, who deſire to improve themſelves in Bo-
tanical Knowledge. |

Nor does Oxtord yield the precedence to any
other Univerſity in Living Libraries (for ſo
with Eunapius I may term Perſons of profound
learning, ) nor in the admirable method of
teaching all Arts and Sciences, nor in excellent
diſcipline, and a moſt regular government of
the whole body. But why this digreſſion ?
Oxford is very far from ſtanding in need of a
Panegyric, having already gain'd the univerſal
eſteem and admiration ot the World. Nor
would I by any means ſeem extravagant in the
commendation of my mother-Univerſlity. Let
it ſuffice to ſay of Ox

of Athens, is ſo eminent, that there needs no
pointing at it. But by way of concluſion, take
this paſſage (which begins the Hiſtory of Ox-
ford) from the Proctor's book. Chronicles and
Hiſtories do aſſure us, that ſeveral places in different
parts of the world and at different times, have been
ſamorns for the ſtudies of Arts and Sciences. But of
all ſuch places of ſtudy among the Latins, Oxtord
appears to be the moſt ancient, to profeſs a greater
variety of knowledge, to be more firm in adhering to
the Catholick Religion, and to enjoy more good cu-
toms and privileges, than any other. The Oxford-
Aſtronomers obſerve this City to be in twenty
two degrees of longitude, or diſtance trom the
Fortunate Iſlands ; and in the northern la-

titude of fifty one degrees and fifty mi-
nutes. 2 N
Aſſoon as Iſis and Cherwell have joyn'd their
ſtreams below Oxford, the Iſis with a f m_
| | 1 an

ford, what Pomponius ſaid

314

all the Univerſities in the world. [But above Sheldor's
all other buildings, this Univerſity juſtly boaſts Theater.

On the weſt-ſide of the Theater, ſtands Aſhmole's
Muſzum,

law Sir William Dugdale. Nigh to which pub- Printing-
lick Buildings, is lately added a large and ſtate- houſe.

verſity is adorn'd ; we muſt not omit the Phy- Phyſick-Gars
fick-Garden, founded by Henry Danvers, Earl of den.

. - * FY
r

. % 4 .
S— *

315

"DOBUNI.

—

and deeper current paſſes on to the ſouth, to
find out the Tame, which it ſeems long to have

ſought for. Nor does it run many miles, be-

Tame river. fore the ſaid Tame, riſing in the County of
Bud:s, comes and joyns it; which river, at the

entrance into this County, gives its own name

Tame, to a Market-town of pleaſant ſituation among
rivers : for the river Tame waſhes the north

part of the town, and two little brooks ſhut

it in on the eaſt and weſt ſides. This place

[ſeems to have been of ſome note in the Saxon

times; for we find that in the year 970. Arch-

biſhop Oskytel ended his days in it; and before

that, Wulfere King of Mercia granted a Charter

in the Vill which is called Thama. But it] has

been in a flouriſhing condition, ever ſince Henry

Clauſ, Biſhop of Lincoln, in the reign of Henry the third,
3 Hen. 3. brought the great road, which lay below the
town, through the middle of it. Alexander,

that munificent Biſhop of Lincoln, Lord of this

Manour, to alleviate the general odium he had

| contracted by his extravagant expences in build-
Founded, ing of Caſtles, * refounded here a ſmall Mona-
C. ſtery ſof the Ciſtercian Order, or rather tran-
ſlated it hither. For it vas firſt founded at the

Village of Ottendun (and, as Leland ſays, upon

Otmore) by Sir Robert Gait Knight ; who en-

dowing it with five virgates of land in Otten-

dum, call'd it, from an adjacent wood, Ottelei. But,

the low ſite making it altogether unfit for

a Monaſtery, it was remov'd to Tame, and the

Church there dedicated to St. Mary, on July 21,

1138. the 3d of King Stephen. Of which the

Biſhop was afterwards reputed the founder

(though he only tranſlated it,) and gave part

of his Park at Tame for the ſite of it, with ſome

other lands which had belong'd to Nigel Kyre.|

And many years after, the Quatermans, a Fa-

mily in former times of great repute in theſe

parts, built here an Hoſpital for the mainte-

nance of poor people. But neither of theſe
foundations are at preſent to be ſeen ; however,

Lord Willi. inſtead of them, Sir John Williams Kt. (advan-

ams of ced to the dignity of a Peer of this Realm by
Tame, Queen Mary, under the title of Baron Williams
ot Tame) founded here a beautiful School, and

a ſmall Alms-houſe. :
Ricot. From hence the Tame runs near Ricot, a neat

ſeat, which belong'd formerly to the Quatermans,
upon whoſe failure of iflue-male, it was ſold a-
way by the Fowlers and Hernes, till it came at
| laſt into the hands of the Lord Milliams before-
mention'd, and by his daughter to the Lord
Lord Norris, Henry Norris, whom Queen Elizabeth advanc'd
to the dignity of a Peer, by the title of Baron
Norris of Ricot ; a perſon eminent for his ho-
nourable deſcent (being deriv'd from the Lo-
vels, who were allied to moſt of the great fa-
milies in England, [by the marriage of Sir Ed-
ward Norris Knight, with Trideſaide younger
daughter of Francis Viſcount Lovel,)1 and much
more eminent tor his ſtout and martial ſons,
whoſe valour and conduct are ſufficiently known
in Holland, Portugal, Bretagne, and Ireland.
This place {till continues in the family of the
Norris's, and was part of the poſſeſſion of James
Earl of Abingdon, who had this honour con-
ter'd upon him, Novemb. 29. 1682 ; and having
marry'd Eleanora, one of the daughters and co-
heirs of Sir Henry Lee Baronet, by her had iſſue
his eldeſt ſon and heir Mowntague, the preſent
Earl, who marry'd the heireſs of the family and
eſtate of the ancient and honourable Venables,
Barons of Kenderton.]

'The next place viſited by the Tame is Dor-
cheer, calbd [by Ninius and Huntingdon in
the Catalogue of Britiſh Cities, Caer Dauri, by
Alfred of Beverley Caer Dorin, ] by Bede Civitas

Dorcheſter,

Dorcinia, and by Leland Hydropolis, which is a
name of his own invention, but well adapted
to the nature of the place, Dour ſignifying wa-
ter in the Britiſh tongue. That this was fo
merly a ſtation of the Romans, ſeveral of their
Coins, found frequently in this place, do ſuffi-
ciently atteſt ; [(and, of late, they have alſo
met with ſome Britiſh Coins, one particular!
of Cunobeline, with this Inſcription, Cuno Ta-
ſcia.) Afterwards, ] our Hiſtories tell us, it was
long famous for a Biſhop's See, founded by Bi-
rinm the Apoſtle of the Weſt-Saxons ; who ha-
ving baptiz'd Cinigilſe a petty King of the Weſt-
Saxons (to whom Ofwald King of Northum-
berland was Godfather,) the two Kings (as Bede
tells us) gave the Biſhop this City, to conſtitute here
his Epiſcopal See. This Birinus (as we learn
from the ſaid Bede) was eſteem'd in that age a
miracle for piety and ſtrictneſs of life: whence
a Poet of ſome antiquity, who wrote his lite in
verſe, does thus extol him ;

Dignior attolli quam fit Tyrinthins heros,
Quam fit Alexander Macedo ; Tyrinthins

hoſtes
Vicit, Alexander muidum, Birinus utrun-
8
Nec tantum vicit mundum Birinis, &
hoſtem,

Sed ſeſe bello vincens, & wviftns codem.
Alcides leſs than thee ſhall Men pro-

claim,
And Alexander own thy greater fame,
Tho' that his foes, and this the world
o'recame.
With foes and world Birinus did ſubdue
Himſelf, the vanquiſh'd and the victor too.

[And the Hiſtory of Alcheſter relates this
inſtance of the Veneration paid to Birinus by
the common People, A round hill there ftill ap-
pears, where the ſuperſtitions enſuing Ages built Bi-
rin a Shrine, teaching them that had any Cattle
amiſs, to creep to that Shrine.

This See, after four hundred and ſixty years
continuance ( leſt the name and authority of a
Biſhop might grow contemprible from ſo mean
and inconſiderable a place; againſt which mi{-
chief a Canon had then been newly made)
was tranſlated to Lincoln by Remigius, in the
time of William the Conquerour. At which time
(ſays William of Malmsbury who flouriſh'd in
that age) Dorcheſter was a ſmall and unfrequent-
ed Village, yet the beauty and ſtate of its Churches
was very remarkable, as well for the ancient work,
as the preſent care taken of them. From that time,
it began ſenſibly to decay ; and the great road
to London which lay through the town, being
turn'd another way, it is ſo weaken'd and im-
poveriſh'd, that though it was formerly a Ci-
ty, it now ſcarce deſerves the name of a town.

Nor has it any thing to boaſt of but the ruins

of its former greatneſs, of which we find ſome

ſigns and tokens in the adjacent fields. [ For gtat. 21 f.
the making of the river Thames navigable from 1. . 32
Bircot (a place not far from hence) to Oxford,

a particular Statute paſſed in Parliament, in

the 21ſt year of King James the xſt. South

and by Weſt of Dorche ter, are two banks witn
a trench between them (therefore call'd Dike- Dike h,
hills,) which, in the opinion of Dr. Plot, can-

not be part of any Roman way, becauſe ex-
tended only as a ſtring to the great bow of the

river Thames ; but rather a tortification, ſuch as

P. Oftorirs is ſaid by Tacitus tb have rais'd on

the rivers Antona and Sabrina : or elſe ſome of

the out-works of the fortifications on Long Ar-
ten-

3

long Witen- ten

vam-bille

| Tame and m
a Jhs 1w0vNs

per
tai
mi

wy

+ This con- lik

q ted. in

ilſſbire.

fr

* Tame

—

8

ll 7 — © OXFORDSHIRE.

= — —
| 1 8
— ä — — TY

Long ien
vm-bills

F Tame ard

tenham-hill, on the other fide the water, which
perhaps was the Sinnodunum of the ancient Bri-
tains. | Near Dorcheſter, Tame and Iſis with

mutual conſent joyn as it were in wedlock, and
mix their names as well as their waters; being

* henceforth call'd Tham-Iit or the Thames, in

+ This cor- like manner as the rivers For and Dan in the

0 ted. in

| Wileſpire»

Holy Land, and Dor and Dan in France;
from which compoſitions are Jordan and
Dordan. This ſeems to have been firſt ob-
{crv'd by the Author of the Eulogiunm Hiſtoria-
rum. Concerning the Marriage of Tame and Iſis,
1 preſent you here with ſome verſes from a

Perſonat & cythara quicquid vidre priores
— victura 9 . Briten. .
Hic canit, ut toto diducta Britannia
mundo, |
Cum vittor rupes divulſerit æquore Nerers,
Et cur Neptuni lapidoſa grandine natum
Albionem vicit noſtras delatus in oras
Hercules illimes libatus Thamifis undas :
Quas huc adveniens aras ſacravit U!'yſſes :
Utque Corinao Brutus comitatus Achate
Occiduos adiit tracts : ut Ceſar anbelus
Territa "_— oftendit terga Britan-
nis.

Poem of that title, which you may read or paſs

ovcr as you pleaſe. And after a few other Verſes :

Hic veſtit Zephyrus florentes gramine ripas, Dixerat : unito conſurgit & unus amore

Floraque nettareis redimit caput Ihdis Letior exultans nunc nomine Tamiſis
herbis uno

Seligit ambrofios pulcherrima Gratia flores, Oteanumgue patrem querens jactantior undas

Contexit geminas Concordia læta corollas, Promovet. mm

Extollitque ſuas tadas Hymenens in altum.

Naiades ædificant thalamumque thorumque

Here, with ſoft blaſts, obliging Zephyrs

profundo paſs,
Stamine gemmato textum, piftiſque columnis | And cloath the flowry banks with long-liv'd
Undique fulgentem. Qualem nec Lydia Regi ls. |

Extruxit Pelopi, nec tu, Cleopatra, marito. The fragrant Crown, that her glad hands

lic manubias cumulant, quas Brutus Achi- have made,
vis, Officious Flora puts on Js head.
Quas Brems Gracis, rigidus Gurmundyns The beauteous Graces have their buſineſs
Hi bernis 3 too,
Bunduica Romanis, claris Arthurins An- They bruſh the weeping flowers from their
glis ambroſial dew :
Eripuit, quicquid Scotis viftricibus armis Which joytul Concord does with pleaſing 5
Ab$tulit Edvardus, virtuſque Britannica care
Gallis. Weave into Chaplets for the God-like

Hauſerat interea ſperati conjugis ignes pair : |
Tama Cateuchlaniom delabens montibys, illa While Hymen's mounted Taper lights the
Impatiens neſcire thorum, nupturaque greſſus air.
Accelerat, longique dies fibi ſtare viden- In a fair Vault beneath the ſwelling ſtream,
tur, The Marriage-bed the buſie Naiads frame:
Ambitioſa ſuum donec præponere nomen Where brighteſt gems the painted columns

Poſſit amatori. Quid non mortalia cogit yy
* Tame, Ambitio ? notamque ſud jam nomine vil- And doubly ſhine with their reflected
lam rays.

No ſuch great Pelops kingdom could afford,
Nor laviſh Cleopatra for her Lord.

On this the Virgins in vaſt numbers
Ait pile 5
Nexa comam ſpicis, trabea ſuccinfta virenti, Proud ſpoils and trophies of the conqu' ring

Auroræ ſuperans digitos, vultumque Diones : Iſe |
Peftane non labra roſe, non lumina gemmæ,
Lilia non aquant crines, non colla pruing : brought home, |
Urque fluit, crines madidos in terga re- From Greece, from Gaul, from Ireland, and |
pellit, from Rome: | . .
Reddit & undanti legem we capillo. What mighty Arthur from the Saxons
En ſubito frontem placidis e flactibus Iſis won, 5
Effert, & totis radios ſpargentia campis What Edward from the Scots, and from the 8!
Aurea ſtillanti reſplendent lumina vultu, French his ſon. 1
Jungit & optatæ nunc oſcula plurima Tame, Now had fair Tame ſigh d for her promis'd

|

—— —

Linquit, Norriſiis geminans ſalvete, valete.
Cernitur & tandem Dorceſtria priſca periti
Augurium latura thori, nunc Tama teſur-

_—
%

What Bunduic, Gurmund, Brennus, Brute

Mutuaque explicitis innettunt colla lacertis, ſpouſe, 4552 1
Oſcula mille ſonam, comexu brachia pal- While down the Cateuchlanian hills ſhe 1
lent os, 5 |

Labra ligant animos : tandem deſcenditur And ſcarce ſaluting her old banks runs

21 l. una | by, | |
32 In thalamum juncta Fide Concordia Bearing no load, but long virginity: 1
ſanta, 2 | And this ſhe ſeems ambitious to lay down, , Fl
Splendida conceptis ſancit commbia verbis. And ſee her lover's ſtream augmented by
Undique multifori ſtrepitat nunc tibia buxi, [EE OW | 1
Hlatliable Nymphæ, Dryades, Satyrique pe- With a faint kiſs ſhe mocks the walls of 1
hilt, tulci . ame, | #: 1568 Mn
In numeros circum ludunt, ducuntque choreas, And 3 behind her nothing but her | 1
Dum pede concutiunt alterno gramina læti, name. | ii

Yer tho impatient ths arms to fill, 15
She ſtops to bid the Norriſes fare wel. #
Old Dorcheſter ſtands wondring at her Hl

ſpeed, | | ji
And gladly bids the happy match ſucceed. 1
| |

Permulcent volucres ſylvas modulamine paſſim,
Certatimque ſonat lætum reparabilis Echo.
Omnia nunc rident, campi lætantur, A-
mores 5

Franatis plaudunt avibim per inania vetti :

Now

— 8 r 2

319

DOBUNT. i

320

Now does the joyful Bride new dreſt
appear,
r of Corn tye up her golden
air,
Her ſhining gown plays with the purled
air. J
Bluſhing Aurora to her hand gives place,
Nor proud Dione boaſts ſo fair a face.
Ker lips the roſe, her eyes bright gems
outdo,
Her hair the lilies, and her skin the
ſnow,
In ſtate = ſwims, her careful hand throws
bac
Her floating treſſes on her ſilver neck.
Proud Jie now his comely head diſplays,
And cheers the drooping fields with golden
rays.
Nor ſtays he to admire his Tama's charms,
But throws himſelf ( ſweet load!) betwixt
her arms.
Ten thouſand kiſſes do ten thouſand
meet,
And with their breath. the Lovers ſouls
unite. ,
Hence to their bed the happy pair go
down, |
Where Faith and Concord ſpeak them into
one.
The Pipes and Cornets echo all around,
While the pleas'd ſtream returns the grate-
tul ſound.
In joytul rings the merry Nymphs ad-
vance,
And ſportive Satyrs drive the wanton
dance.
While Quires of winged Songſters of the
air,
The woods and groves with tuneful numbers
cheer.
Echo, contented now that ſhe's all
tongue,
w—_ quick replies to their delightful
ong.
All things rejoyce, and Nature's ſelf is
ad,
The painted flowers o'er ſmiling meadows
{ſpread |
To th' univerſal joy conſent, and nod their
head. - WS 2
The wanton Loves their harneſs'd birds

drive on,
And clap to ſee their winged chariot
run.

Auſpicious Juno with a graceful ſmile

Begins the ancient glories of the Iſle;

On her fair brows unwither'd bays ap-
pear . |

And thus ſhe ſings, and tunes her trembling
Lyre. 2

How Neptune's ſpear the wondring Iſthmus

ook, .

When their long hold the parted cliffs for-
ſook. _ |

What crimes, what vengeance, brought
Alcides O re, bt |

To die the cryſtal Thames with Albion's

ore, *

And ſpread his monſtrous carcaſs on the
ſhore. WI =

How hither his wild courſe Ulyſles
ſteer d, |

What altars to the angry gods he rear'd !

How Brute with Corinzus came to
land,

And made the ſavage nations own their new
command |

ö

| Treaſurer of his Majeſty's houſhold, whom

321

How Cæſar's drooping Legions home warf —

— —

Glad ro eſcape from thoſe the 4 but + By Mr.
thought ſubdu'd, c. F 7 Rowney-

—

And after ſome Verſes interpos'd, the Poet uy

proceeds ;

Thus ſang the Goddeſs | ſtrait the joyful
ſtream
Proud of the late addition to it's name,
Flows briskly on, ambitious now to
x |
A larger tribute to the ſovereign ſea. 4 ſtirerar,
Ef. 106.

Hence, the Thames paſſes on to Benſon, for- Benſon
merly Benfington, which Marianus calls a royal
Vill; and reports that it was taken from the Bri-
tains by Ceaulin in the year 572, and poileſs d
by the Weſt-Saxons for two hundred years at-
ter, But then, Offa King of Mercia, think-
ing both his intereſt and honour concern'd that
they ſhould hold nothing on this fide the ri-
ver, took this town by force ſann. 778, or
779,| and joyn'd it to his own kingdom. [ Ly-
ing near the Frontiers, in the Conteſt between
the Weſt-Saxon and Mercian Kings it often
changed its Maſters. | At preſent, it is a ſmall
village, and ſhews at à little diſtance a“ houſe * & 5:4
of our Kings, which has been formerly a beau- ann. 16:7
tiful ſtructure, but is now much decay'd by
reaſon of the unhealthy ſituation ncar low and
wet ground. This fear, call'd Ewelme, com- Exel.
monly New Elme, from the Elms growing here,
was built by William de la Pole Duke ot Sut-
folk, who, by marriage with Alice only daugh-
ter of Thomas Chaucer, obtain'd a large eſtate
in theſe parts; and beſides this houſe, built a
neat Church (in which the ſaid Alice lies in-
ter d) and a fair Hoſpital, | called Gods-hoxſe, Gods bout,
and conſiſting of two Prieſts and thirteen poor
men. | But John Earl of Lincoln, his grandchild
by John his (ſon, almoſt utterly ruin'd this fami-
K. For, being engag'd in a conſpiracy againſt

ing Henry the ſeventh, his honours were
loſt by attainder, and his eſtate confiſcated to
the King, and he himſelt ſoon after ſlain in
battle. After this, King Henry the eighth, Stat. 3284
with the addition of ſome neighbouring ma-. .
nours, made an Honour of this eſtate : and among
thoſe manours was Walingford, which had a long
time appertained to the Dukes of Cornwall.
[The Rectory of this place (with a Canonry
of Chriſt-Church) was by King James the firſt,
in the third year of his reign, annex'd to the
office of Regins-Proteflor * Divinity in Ox-
ford ; as he annex'd alſo, at the ſame time, the
government - of the Hoſpital. here, to that ot
Profeſſor in Phyſick. Which Prince was one
of the higheſt Patrons to learning, and a great
Benefactor to the two Univerſities. 1
From hence, the Thames fetches a large and
winding compaſs, round the Hundred of Heulen,
which is hilly, and woody, and which ſome _
think to have been the country of the Ancalites, Arca
who ſubmitted to Cæſar. In this Hundred,
ſtands Greys Rotherfield, a feat which was Grey © of
given by Walter Grey Archbiſhop of York, tothe
his Nephew William Grey, whole eſtate fell to
the Lovels by the Lord D'eincourt. After- It i 0,

wards, it became the ſeat of William Knolles Ca Kea

| Arcaſile,

© Xiphiline,

ee py ny „ „ „„ . =n jj pw. 9 Gt „ 4A „ „ = Wl wy

© ww

8 Watlington,

| Plot. p.33 2.

— es. a—_ a ood au ——— Fu ww

: Shirburne,
E 7 Now, =

K. James the Iſt, l in conſideration of his faithful
ſervices to Queen Elizabeth, and his readine1s
to perform the like to him, advanc'd to the

honour and title of Knolle Baron of .
| 9

.

1 "ob COP) 2 8 ; | 2
OXFORDSHIRE. | 322
[The perpetual Advowſon of this Church was| The title of Earl of Oxford * did Aouriſh Earls of w_

lately * purchaſed and given for ever, to Tri-[long in the family of Vere, who derive their ford.
nity-College. |

220

nſon.

$0 (aid,
n. 1607.

velme.

ods- bone.

at, 328.4

ncalites.

rey de Rv
\ertelde

It is tos

4 [tinerars
6.
1 F. :

© Xiphiline,

1 Shirburne,

| Non, C

dee Maccles-

Near this place, upon the Thames, in the
utmoſt limits of the County, ſtands Henley, for-
merly Hanleganz,, where the greateſt part of the
Inhabitants are Barge- men, and get their live-
ly hood by carry ing wood and corn to London
by water. [ This, Dr. Plot takes to be the moſt
ancient town in the whole County ; ſo call'd
(ays he) from the Britiſh Hen, which ſignifles
old, and Lley a place ; and perhaps it might be
the head-rown of the People call'd Ancalites,
who revolted to Cæſar. But + Dr. Gale will
have it to be the Galleva Atrebatum of Anto-
ninus; oh account of a military way running di-
rectly from Spinæ to this place, and the Roman
Coins tound hereabouts ; whereas, at Waling-

ford, where that ſtation hath been uſually ſet-

tled, there is no ancient Way, nor any other
Remains of Antiquity. And as to the difficulty,
of its lying within the bounds of the Dobuni,
and not the Atrebates ; he obſerves, that both
ſides of the River do {till belong to the Town,
that there are many inſtances of ſlips of one
County within another, and that the greater

and more ancient part of Walingſord it ſelf lay

in the Country of the Dobuni ; and yet hath
been long thought the City of the Atrebates.
Beſides the Coins before-mentioned, and the
name of Anucaftle ( poſſibly from Ancalites, )
which remains in one part of the Town ; |
it has nothing more ancient that it can
certainly] boaſt of, than that it belong'd
formerly to the Molins; from whom, by
the Hungerfords (who obtain'd from King Henry
the ſixth, a licence for two Fairs yearly) it de-
ſcended to the illuſtrious family of the Haſtings.
The bridge over the Thames, which is now of
timber, they report to have been heretofore of
ſtone, and arched. But whether this was the
bridge which Dio makes the Romans to have
paſs d over in purſuit of the Britains in theſe
parts, who had torded the river a little lower;
is not ſo eaſie to determin.

From Henley, the Chiltern-hills run in a conti- | was great Grandfather to f Earl Henry, the eigh-+ The pre-
nued ridge to the north, and ſeparate this Coun-|teenth Earl of this family, and Grandfather to ſent Ear, C.

ty of Oxon from that of Bucks : at the foot where-
of are ſeated many little towns, of which the

ö Watlington, Moſt remarkable, are, Watlington, a {mall mar-

ket-town, belonging formerly to Robert D'oily.
This, by the name, one would imagin to be
of no leſs than Britiſh Antiquity, as ſeeming to

Pu pg gz. point out to us * the old way of making their

towns or cities; an account whereof Strabo has
left us, viz. Groves fenc d about with trees cut
down, and laid croſs one another, within which
they built them ſheds, both for themſelves and Cattle.
The ſame way of fencing, the Saxons call'd
Fadelar, hurdles or wattles, from whence the
town probably might have its name.] Then,
at the foot of the ſame hills, is Shirburne, here-
tofore a ſmall Caſtle of the Quatermans; fafter-
wards, a ſeat of the Chamberlains, deſcended
from the Earls of Tankervil, who bearing the
office of Chamberlain to the Dukes of Norman-
dy, their poſterity, laying aſide the old name
oft Tankervil, call'd themſelves Chamberlains,
from the ſaid office which their Anceſtors en-
joy'd. [Art preſent, it is the ſeat of Thomas

name from the town of Vere in Zealand. They
owe the beginning of their greatneſs in En-
gland to King Henry the 2 who advanced
Alberic de Vere, tor his great Wiſdom and Con-
duct, to ſeveral places of honour and profit ;
as, to be Chamberlain of England, and Por-
treve of the City of London: and to his ſon
Henry Duke of Normandy ( ſou of the daughter
of King Henry, and right heir to England and Nor-
mandy, this was the title he uſed before his eſta-
bliſhmenrt in this kingdom) in order to draw
him from King Stephen, who had uſurp'd the
Crown, and to oblige him to his own party, he
granted and reſtor'd the office of Chamberlain
which he had loſt in thoſe civil wars, and of-
ter'd him the choice of theſe four Earldoms,
Dorſet, Wilts, Berks, and Oxon. And after this,
Maud the Empreſs, and her ſon Henry, then in
poſſeſſion of the Throne, did, by their ſeveral
Charters create him Earl of Oxford. Of his
poſterity, not to mention every particular per-
ſon, the moſt eminent were theſe that follow:
Robert de Vere, who being highly in favour with
K. Richard the 2d, was by him advanc'd to the
new and unheard of honours of Marqueſs of
Dublin, and Duke of Ireland, of which he left
(as one well obſerves) nothing but ſome gaudy
titles to be inſcribed upon his tomb, and mat-
ter of diſcourſe and cenſure to the world. For
ſoon after, through the envy of the other Cour-
tiers, he was degraded, and miſerably ended
his lite in baniſhment : John de Vere, a perſon
of great knowledge and experience in war, and
eminent for his conſtant fidelity to the Lanca-
ſtrian party, fought often in the field againſt
K. Edward the fourth, and for ſome time defen-
ded St. Michael's mount, and was the chief aſ-
ſiſtant to King Henry the ſeventh in obtaining
the Crown : Another John, in the reign of Hen-

the eighth ; who was in all parts of his life
2 temperate, devout, and good, that he was
diſtinguiſh'd by the name ot John the Good. He

the two noble Brothers Francis and Horatio Vere,
who, by their admirable conduct, and their
many brave and ſucceistul Exploits in the Low-
Countries, added no ſmall luſtre to their
ancient and honourable family. ['The ſaid Henry
marry*d Diana, ſecond daughter to H/illiam Ce-
cil Earl of Exeter, and dy'd at the ſiege of Bre-
da, An. 1625. without iflue. Upon which, Ro-

bert Vere, ſon and heir of Hugh, ſon and heir of

Aubrey de Vere, ſecond ſon of Earl John the
fifth, was in the Parliament held at Weſtmin-
ſter, An. 2 Car. 1. reſtor'd to this title of Earl
of Oxford; who taking to wite Beatrix van Hem
mema of Friezland, had iſſue by her Aubrey,
Knight of the moſt noble Order of the Gar-
ter; who marry'd Diana daughter to George
Kirk Eſq;. But he being deceas'd without iſſue-
male, this title lay extinct; until her Majeſty
Queen Anne, in the tenth year of her reign,
beſtow d it (together with that of Earl Morti-
mer) upon Robert _ Eſq; whom ſhe after-
wards advanced to the Dignity of Lord High-
Treaſurer of Great Britain. |

pedigree from the Earls of Guiſuet, and their, Hath flou-

— - 2
— — — - —
— | - 9 2
N K =

Fel e- Lord Parker; who, in conſideration of his great ä *
| raky Che- Eloquence, and : xa& knowledge of the Laws This County contains 280 Parifh-Churches.

and Conſtitution of this Realm, hath been ſuc- 5 :
ceſſively advanced to the high and important! More rare Plants growing wild in Oxfordſhire.
Stations, of Lord Chief Juſtice of the King's] Anagallis fœmina flore cœruleo. Female or
Bench, and of Lord High Chancellor of Great | Blew-flower'd Pimpernel. At Battle near Oxford.

Britain.1 Park. pag.
| * Sf Arundo

ord Kool

ET ”
— are —_— 2

— —

"DOBUNI © "=

*
— K.
< *
2 2 =
FR — —E— DD
——— —

Arundo vallatoria foliis ex luteo variegatis. the bottoms of trees in the woods near Stoken-
Painted or gilded Reed. Found by Mr. Bobert in | church.
the river Thames not far from Oxford. Though it
be but an accidental variety it deſerves to be men-

tion'd, being very ornamental in gardens.

Atriplex vulgaris ſinuata ſpicata, D. Plot.

— | — . IN

Saxifraga Anglica annua Alſines folio D. Plot.
Hiſt. nat. Oxon. Annual Pearl-wort. In the walks
of Baliol-College gardens, and on the fallow-fields a-
bout Hedington and Cowley, plentifully ; and in many

Hiſt. nat. Oxon. It is found commonly on Dunghils, other places.

growing together with Gooſe-foot Orache.

Geranium Columbinum maximum foliis diſ-
ſectis D. Plot. Hiſt. nat. Oxon. columbinum ma-
jus, foliis imis longis, uſque ad pediculum di-

Stachys Fuchſii J. B. Ger. major Germanic
C. B. Park. Baſe Hore-hound. Nigh Witney-park
in Oxfordſhire and thereabouts, plentifully.

: 1 Tilia foliis molliter hirſutis, viminibus ru-

Rs el han hedges alin Nagl, bei,, fructu rerragono, Þ is known by the name of
with diſſette L A .

and on that of Botley-cauſey next Oxford in great the red Lime, and grows naturally in Stoken-Church

plenty.

woods. Mr. Bobert.

Gramen caninum ariſtatum, radice non re- Tormentilla reptans alata, foliis profundius

pente ſylvaticum. Dogs-graſs with awns. Found ſerratis. Pentaphyllum minus viride, flore au-
plentifully growing in Stoken-Church woods. Mr. Bo- "©? tetrapetalo, radiculas in terram è geniculis
=

bert.

demittens. Moriſ. Hiſt. Creeping Tormentil with deep-

Gramen Secalinum majus Sylvaticum. Gr. ly indented leaves. In the borders of the corn-fields
ſecalinum majus Park. an Gr. hordeaceum mon- * Hockley Fram Shotover-woods, and elſewhere.
tanum five majus C. B. Wild Rye-graſs of the riticum ſpica multiplici C. B. Ger. Park:

woods. In Stoken-Church woods alſo. Idem.

Many-eared wheat. It hath been ſown about Biceter,

Gramen cyperoides minimum, Ranunculi ca- and Weſton 8 the "OW
pitulo rotundo. Cypermn-graſs with a round Crow- Viola Martia hirſuta major inodora D. Plot.
foot-head. Frequently found on the bogs on the weſt- | Hiſt. nat. Oxon. & Moriſ. hiſt. Trachelii tolio

fide of Oxford. Idem.

D. Merret. Violet with Throatwort-leaves. In Mag-

Gramen bromoides maximum hirtum Park. | dalen-college-Cops, Shotover-hills, Stow-wood, and
Feſtuca graminea perennis hirſuta, gluma lon- | many other places plentiſully. It is found in moſt
giore dumetorum, ſpicd divisd. In Godſtow copſe | Countries.

near Oxford. Idem.

Viola paluſtris rotundifolia D. Plot. Hiſt. nat.

Helleborine flore albo vel Damaſonium mon- | Oxon. Round-leaved Marſh-violet. In the bogs a-
tanum latifolium C. B. Ger. Damaſonium Alpi- | bout S ow-wood, and on the banks of Cherwell between
num ſeu Elleborine floribus albis J. B. Ellebo- |Oxford and Water-Eyton, but ſparingly.
rine minor flore albo Park. White-flower'd Ba- Clematis Daphnoides major C. B. Daphnoid.
ftard-Hellebore. In the woods near — latifolia ſeu Vinca pervinca major Park. The

not far from the way leading from Oxford to Lond.

greater Periwinkle. In the high-ways between Mol-

Hordeum nudum ſeu Gymnocrithon J. B. verton and Yarnton, and in ſeveral hedges thereabout.
Zeopyron ſive Tritico- ſpeltum C. B. Park. Hor-| I am not yet fully ſatisfied, that this is a native of
deum nudum Ger. cujus figura huic plantz mi- England, though it be found in the places mentioned,

nime reſpondet. Naked Barley. It is ſown in

becauſe poſſibly it might owe its original to rots

the fields about Iſlip in Oxfordſhire and other places. | thrown out of gardens.
It is really a ſpecies of wheat, and no Barley: only] Sambucus tructu albo Ger. Park. WWhite-ber-

its ear reſembles the Hordeum dyſtichum.

Orobanche Verbaſculi odore D. Plot. Hiſt. nat. | near Matlington.
Oxon. Birds-neſt ſmelling like Primroſe-roots. At

ried Elder. Obſerved by Mr. Bobert in the hedge:

*

*
TR

ff runy . 3 2 2 OP

- =

.

—

£

yy"

*

_— .

2
2 ä

2

Oy 10 |

22 he T7

*

9 _

» A&C407?
% Fee

,
F 140
5

f

&.

10
au *

4 —
1

7 "Io — ' eee,

rn

9
Def HA

e
£60
- „ Main p41). * \ | LE
— / 0 2 WA \ = 4 pai
3 eee

bro M
; -o *

FO
ö 'OLN 114911

To C. 77 7 X IN
- i þe Þ Je4# nh |

440g,

FIR

'T Ms a .

ee as: Aug $

2
Pt 2 muy

WATT

IM

3 *

Ve,

ky 004189"
e

2 g

775

"I N ay
2649044 9414 49799 I. Rs

f 1109 0391491444 A J

. '

8. |

*

7 Wh .
v nao 10 —

Es |
FE U

4 N.

7
SHALL

* ; Vin
N g

NOLXVHTLAUON

1 {= 922
| NA

10

#4

4 Jure 7 8 »

: A

wp —

Ss — — 1" — — xn — —— "on
— ——————— — II—y — — — = ED POW.

— —Aͥn Hs . ˙ — —
— — — —ê —

Ld 6. Sad I N ds — *
SS 2 ſa ak — 2 . r — — —

—ͤmg—— —öjE —— — — —

rr _ - — — — _= _—_ — — — e EDS * x —— — 2 3 oy — — _ — — —
= — — 1 3 =”
Meri Dia Fy 17 * —
| ung/punchy x — 1 .
8 5 8 : —
| 14249912 nel O ry feng” ea pr. —— /
” — N e
Jooaqu . ——— F r . = 2——:—22
oF a 2, | 4 A = TE, Ln = /
- FR ay x 2 r 1 H 8 . 1 n — =
XJS ren r
| 4 wth | bo "A = DV
27 3 ö | ' Z [
£34 JE by POR ST g
Sp1aq 1 4. . Sie: 4 XN V 4 5 Cl 0 #3 / ll . e
TNA 4 4  TIHS |
* 2775 | *
c 2 * RE + : 7 "19. 1/17 | Apes 3 Co o N " ' Fa "Ul Vid ny | , | :
. * - "+—m/. MY HOND)/1%
2 22 ae LYVd \ |
"7: | K n 1 See \ e 3 2 1 Lee
Cl O a 6 =, 2 . a 4 1 2 ge, 1 — * RL | y „ R 5 J , = | 455 i |
W | Wii ml JF! ov TG Na N 9 . 5 5. j
D. auge = — 9 — So 1 2 . Loon ung — . ; 6 : ' | | \ — * ö 1411448171
, 2 3 n — - | NTT
n AS 07 Honowo ao tg» mg "—— Ag A
Tan W mojo WW e g UK 25% wo | 8 .
| * „ Wei 33 ae 8 8 | . I
| aN 1 Wy * 4 N
05 bur M | e 11 .) w2rnoy wa 7 a WM. fl N
| ure ah » © 799.4512] | ;
FR x SIO " "I SE
Yo Muay) LENS ( |
: ” EET we, b ;
4 — 24oub oy) "y f
—HOpUP, na . 5 7
| Suff 7 our .
- | 24 *
: — 8 oo —Y Joao reryas”
TIIHS- 1 7 > *
Lo : 4 F_—
4 0 2 apa
16 Kuen TUTH 0 -- ry
| paywayas 0 =, . Fuͥt. , H
aAOAT 1. A4 8
— H 2 iu
r ba,
| * N * Sun
fa | * 15 . * IS. FA _— J
* » | wage, 40 9. [ 4 85 — f
2 I. A V OT - SJ W 9 1 VA * To - by *. Wed | 1 - 8

—— 1 1 1 i. — ̃ — — — — on nnen
_

ti e ln — 1 8 LH 4"
a ̃ oe

I) r AK \ ＋* 4 Lo 4
SY — — n 5

7
e
e N

aL

my i * * * K W of
N * * 3 C 2 5 * e. 2 1 4 Y * n y \
W . * *** * -

TROP Oy Tn PR Ems vc

EF

+, > RY” A —

AA N\I3-

* - , * * Q — 4 —
e 3 $4 O rr TN
Rr OA A — ADR A— IX __ | £ * —_ PA * * 1 5 P AN CON ae
— - . NC 0 Seer 22 reren

CATTIEUCUHLANTI.

| N the Eaſt of the Dobuni,

border thoſe People whom Ptolemy, according to dif-

| ferent Copies, calls Cattieuchlani, Cattidudani, Cathicludani ; ] -

tuellani. J/hbich of theſe is the true name, I cannot eafily * 422
beg leave to be deliver d of an abortive conjefture, which ] long fince conceived. I
ſhould think then, that theſe people were the ancient Caſſii; that from them their
Prince Caſſivellaunus, or Caſſibelinus, took his name; and that they again, from

// — 18 their Prince Caſſivellaunus, were by the Grecians call d Cattuellani, Cathueilani,

r

— ———— ¶ . ꝗͤñꝗæᷓü ̃ ’ . ˙ ö—¾ p ˙ ——ö.ͤ—ͤ——

and Cattieuchlani. Now the Caſſii, mention d by Cæſar among the Britiſh Na-

tions, did moſt certainly iahabit theſe parts; from whom a pretty large tract i
this County, ſtill retains the name of Caiſhow. And ſince Caſſivellaunus porn; 54 5 5 e

Cacti. from Cæſar; and in his name that of the Caſſii doth manifeſtly appear 3 it ſeems very probable, t/
Caſſivellaunus denotes as much as the Prince of the Caſſii. J on" 4 ry probable, that

why ſhould Dio call this Caſſi-

vellaunus, Suellan inſtead of Vellan ; aud Ninnius the Britiſh writer, not Caſſibellinus, but Belli-
nus, as if that were the proper name either of his perſon or dignity ? Nor ought it to ſeem ſtrange, that
Princes heretofore took their names from the people whom they govern'd : for thus the Catti in Germany
had their Cattimarus ; the Teutones their Teutomarus and Teutobochus ; the Daci their Deceba-

lus ; the Goths their Gotriſo.

| And why might not our Caſſii in like manner have their Caſſibelinus ?
Eſpecially, when Belinus was a common name in this Mand; and ſome have thought, that the name of

Cunobellinus, King of the Iceni, imported no more than the Belinus of the Iceni. So that if the Gre- Bellin;

cian writers did not from this Caſſivellaunus extort the names Cattuellani, Cattieuchlani, Cc. I

muſt, as to this matter, freely confeſs my ſelf in the dark.
But whence theſe people had the name of Caſſii, I have not diſcover d; unleſs it was from their war-

like Valour. For Servius Honoratus inſorms is, that the ſtoute

ancient Gauls (who ſpoke the ſame language with the

the Britiſh word Cethilou, The Seed ot Warriors. Now, that the Caſſii were renown'd for Martial

ft and moſt vigorous Soldiers were by the
Britains) call d Geſſi. Whence Ninnius interprets

proweſs, is moſt certain: for, before the arrival of Czlar, they had wag'd continual war againſt their
neighbours, and had reduced part of the Dobuni under their ſubjeftion. And then, upon Czlar's Irva- Dio.
fron, the Britains conſtituted the Prince of this Country, Commander in chief of the forces of the whole Hand.
They had too, by this time, extended their name and dominion to a confiderable diſtance. For under the
general name of Caſſii or Cattieuchlani, were comprehended all thoſe people who inhabit three Counties
in the preſeut diviſion, viz. Buckinghamſhire, Bedfordſhire, and Herttordſhire ; of which I ſpall now
Jpeak briefly in their order, having not much to ſay of any of them. |

BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.

g Uckinghamſhire abounds exceed-
Ap ingly in Beech-trees, which the
Saxons call Bucken ; and it is
5&2 probable, that from them the
chief town Buckingham had its
name; and from that, the

F whole County. For ſo in Ger-
many, a Country fam'd for plenty of Beeches,
is call'd Buchonia ; and with us the town of
Buckenham in Norfolk is ſaid to be ſurrounded
by that ſort of trees. [Bur againſt this origi-
nal, it is alledged, that the Saxons did not call
thoſe trees bucken, but (as appears by AElfricks
Gloſſary) bocar, and ſuch things as were made
of them, becen: That our moſt ancient records
ſhowing neither Bockingham nor Beckingham, but
conſtantly retaining the ſecond Letter (u), it
may be more natural to derive it from the Sax-
on buc, which the ſame Alfrie interprets cer-
dus (a buck or hart ; ) it being very probable
that thoſe woody parts * with Deer;
and that, as to the Buckenham in Norfolk, we

have the authority of Sir Henry Spelman, that * Trent.

no ſuch trees grow thereabouts: which enclin'd
him alſo, rather to chuſe the Saxon buc, cervus,
for its original. |

This Shire, being of no conſiderable breadth,
(no more than eighteen miles, )] is in length
extended [thirty nine miles] from the Thames
northward ; [the whole circumference being a-
bout one hundred thirty eight. | On the South,
it hath Barkſhire (divided from it by the
Thames; ) on the Weſt, Oxfordſhire ; on the
North, Northamptonſhire ; on the Eaſt, firſt Bed-
fordſbire, then Hartfordfhire, and afterwards Mid-
dleſex. The Soil is generally very fruitful, and
the Inhabitants thick-ſet and numerous, who
generally follow grazing. The County is divi-
ded into two parts ; one, a mountainous, Or
rather hilly country, toward the ſouth and eaſt,
call'd Chiltern, in Saxon Cylcenn; the other,
below this to the north, call'd the Yale.

The Vale:

Chiltern hath its name from the nature of the Chiltern,

Soil; Cyl: or Chilt in Saxon ſignifying Chalk.

or

CATTIEUCHLANT

3

Clitern Fe- wood or foreſt which is called Clitern.)

re ſt

For it riſeth, for the moſt part, into Chalky
hills, cover'd with woods and groves of Beech-
es. But neither is this derivation admitted
without exception; inaſmuch as in the lan-

uage of the Saxons, Chalk is generally expreſ-
2 by Cealc. Mr. Somner interprets it locus ge-
lidus, i. e. a cold place; upon what grounds I
know not, unleſs he have reſpect to our preſent
Chil. In the year 1009. the Danes paſs d over
theſe hills in their journey out of Kent into Ox-
fordſhire 3 upon the mention whereof, Florence of
Worceſter ſays, Saltus qui dicitur Clitern, i. e. the
or,
heretofore, it was ſo thick with trees, that they
render'd it impaſlable ; till they were in good
meaſure clear'd by LeffZan Abbot of St. Albans,
as a common receptacle and harbour for thieves.

In this part, where the Thames winds it ſelf
Marlow. round the bottom of the hills, is ſeated Marlow,

a pretty conſiderable town, which has its name
from a ſort of chalky clay which we call Marle :
This being ſpread upon the fields, fo fattens and
enriches the ſoil when it is worn out, that after
one year's lying fallow, they are always fit for
tillage ; and what they receive of the husband-
man, they repay with wonderful increaſe.
Nigh this town, a little river cuts its way
throꝰ low grounds into the Thames; on the turn-

High-Wick-ing of which, is ſeated High-Wickham, or rather

ham,

Wicomb ; and perhaps it may have receiv'd its
name from thence.
call the winding of a ſea or river Mick; and in
England there are abundance of places of like
denomination 3 [fo called, as being either on
the windings of rivers, or having been the fires
of Cattle; the Saxon pic ſignifying both a bay
and a caftle. This town, for largeneſs and beau-
ty, compares with the beſt in the County ; and,
as it is govern'd by a Mayor, is juſtly prefer'd
to moſt of the reſt. About the time of the
conqueſt, Higod de Wallengford was Lord of the

Vina Fo- Borough of ¶ comb, and of the * out-village

rinſeca.

belonging to it, as an old Inquiſition expreſles
it. After whoſe death, Henry the firſt appro-
priated it to the Crown. But afterwards, King

* De veteri John divided the out- village between f Robert de

ponte,

Vipont and Alan Baſſet. Here, was an Hoſpital
of St. John Baptiſt ; the revenue whereof, upon
the general diflolution of Religious houſes, came
to the Crown ; as alſo certain rents there, be-
longing to a brotherhood of the Bleſſed Virgin,

Lady's Rents. call'd our Lady's Rents ; all which wereby Queen

Elizabeth, in the fourth year of her reign,
granted to the Mayor, Baylifts, and Burgeſſes
of Jicomb, for the maintenance of a free Gram-
mar-School and certain Alms-people there. Since
which time, the Rents being improv'd, more
Alms-people have been maintain'd, and, in
the year 1684, new Alms-houſes were erected. 1

Hujus regi- North of Micomb is the higheſt Eminence || of

GNnis,

theſe parts, whence it ſtill keeps the Britiſh
name Pen (for they call the head or top of any
thing Pen: Whence the Pennine Alps, and the A-
pennine, and ſeveral mountains among us, ſeem
to be derived ; ) ſtho' ſome of the Inhabitants
hereabouts tell you, that this character belongs
more truly to Coleſhil, as being equal in height
to the windows of Pen-Steeple.| Near Pen, lies

Pen.

Bradenham. B;adeaham, of a commodious and healthy ſitua-

tion, formerly] the chief reſidence of the Ba-
rons of Windſor (of whom we have ſpoken in
Barkſhire; ) from the time that Milliam Lord

So ſaid, JJ/jndſor, in the memory of * our Fathers, built
ann. 1507. here a ſeat for his Family.

Cliſton.

The Thames, having receiv'd that rivulet,
keeps on its courſe [near Clifton, where a noble
Houſe, with a proſpect remarkably fine, was
built by George Villers, Duke of Buckingham, in

For the German-Saxons

the reign of King Charles the ſecond ; which
is now the delighttul Seat of the Earl of Ork-
ney ; by whom 1t hath been much improved and
beautified. Not far from this place, hath late- Tah
ly been diſcover'd, on the ſide of a chalky hill
adjoyning to the Thames, a round Cave, nine-
teen foot high, and about ten foot diameter;
cut out of the ſolid Rock towards the founda-
tion ; and conſiſting upwards of an artificial
Arch of hewn Chalk : but nothing remains,
which may direct to the time or occaſion of this
Work. From hence, the Thames runs on] to
Eaton, famous for its Seminary of learning ; Eaton,
founded (as I have ſaid before) by that pious See in Br,
and good Prince Henry the ſixth, | in the nine- fbire,
teenth year of his reign, by Charter bearing
date at Windſor, Sept. 12. Near which, is Bul- Bulls
ſtrode, the Seat of the Duke of Portland! A
tew miles from hence, Thames is augmented
by the tiver Cole, | upon which is Denham, for- Cole tir,
merly the Seat of the Peckhams, but now of Sir Pentun,
Roger Hill, who hath built here a very fine
Seat ; | which river, dividing Buckinghamſhire
and Middleſex, gives name to Colebrock. This, Colebrack,
the exact diſtance on both ſides from Mallim-
ford and London, ſufficiently prove to be the Pon-
tes of Antoninus; [where it is alſo fix'd by Mr. pontes
Burton (however, by Leland and divers others,
remov'd to Reading; )] Nor is there any other
town between thoſe two places, to which the
name of Pontes, or Bridges, doth more properly
agree. For here Cole is divided into tour cha-
nels, which for the convenience of travellers
have ſo many bridges over them; and that this
name is derived from them, is plain from the
very word: In the ſame manner, as Gephyrz a
Town of Bœotia had it's name from Bridges;
and alſo Pontes in Gaul, whence the County of
Ponthieu was ſo call'd ; which (by the by) came
to the Engliſh Crown in right of Eleanor Queen
to Edward the firſt, who was ſole heir of it in
right of her mother, Joan, ſecond wite to r
dinand, third King of Ca#file, daughter and“
heir to Simon Earl of Ponthieu.

With theſe diviſions of its ſtreams, the Cole
makes here ſome pleaſant Iſlands, into which
in the year 894. the Danes fled from King Al-
tred, who cloſely purſu'd them ; and were pro-
tected by the natural ſtrength of the place, till
the King for want of forrage was oblig'd to
draw oft his army. On this turning of the
river ſtands Eure or Euer, | (fo called from Ro- Eure.
ger de Ivery ; who came in with the Conqueror,
and had this among other poſſeſſions beſtowed
upon him; )]1 a little village, which [* King # Ann. g.
Richard having given to Robert, and] King Jobs
t confirm'd to John Fitz-Robert his ſon, Lord of + Cite c
Clavering ; his younger ſons Hugh and Robert
took from thence their name: from the former
of whom, the Lords of Eure ; and from the
latter, the Family of Eure in Axholm, is de-
ſcended. More inward, are two places which :
we muſt by no means paſs by. Stoke-pogeis, call'd Stoke pig
ſo from the Pogeis formerly Lords of it, from
whom it devolv'd by right of inheritance to
the Haft ings, {having firſt deſcended by marri-
age to the Molins, from them to the Hungerjords,

ſtings and Hungerford, to the HaStings. "hich
Pariſh-Church, George and Aum the firſt Earl? 2
and Counteſs of Huntingdon lie interr'd ;, ent
t which probably might induce Edward Lord gain
Hal ings of Loughborough their third ſon, greatly Taugt bee
tavour d and advanced by Queen Mary, to b,
found an Hoſpital here, whither he himſelt, up- 6
pit he C.

on the death ot that Qucen, retir d, to 1 houſe Stat. 4 5
adjoyning, and there dy'd. He is bury'd in a Mars 5.10

Chapel

N Roya l,

8

＋

(
t
]
|
|

£4 IS "Y iii. MC. 2 11 mne

Amerſham.

Cheyneis.

Latimers,

+ Has, C

ton,

ee in Barks
nre,

ulProte,

* o
ole fir,
Denham,

Zulebrack,

antes,

u Tillet

ecueil,

Are.

\nn, reg.th

Giyer, G

oke-prgts

| Princes-Rif-

© Belinug's Cz.
0

—

ys BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.

heirs for ever.

ing-place for their Family in this Church. |

Chapel built by him for the uſe of the Hoſpi-| (together with ſeveral Trenches and Fortificariu
AF Allo, ves Earl of Huntingdon, his 2 (rog ee ee
phew by the brother, built here a ſplendidſ this County was the Seat of the Action where-
| houſe. The other place is Feraham, theſ in the two ſons of Cunobeline were lain ; and
| Ferrbam- ſame (as I take it) which is call'd Frnham- from hence they might
| Royal, Royal. This the Barons Fernival heretofore|battle to Aulus Plautius.
| held by Service, That on the Coronation-day they! On the eaſtern angle of the hills, upon a
ſhould be oblig d to find a Glove for the King's right| deſcent, ſtands Aſberidge, formerly a houſe of Aſteridge.
hand, and to ſupport his left arm that day, while] pleaſure of the Kings, where Edmund Earl of
he held the royal Sceptre. From the Furnivals, it] Cornwal, ſon to Richard King of the Romans,
deſcended by the daughter of Thomas Nevil to founded a Monaſtery for an Order of Religi-
the Talbots Earls of Shrewsbury; who, though|ous, then lately inſtituted and by him firſt

by way of exchange they ſurrender'd this Ma-|brought into England, call'd * 1
nour to Henry the eighth, yet did they reſerve Bon-

that honourable Office to themſelves and their the manner of the Hermits. [The place is ſo

The Cole, being joyn'd higher by another ri-|ſeat of the Earls of Bri

ons in theſe parts) confirms the notion, that

* retire, to give

they wore a ſort of sky-colour'd habit, after nes.

called, from a ridge or hill of aſhes, and is the
dgewater, and hath a

rulet from the welt, carries it along: and upon great part of the Religious ſtructure ſtill ſtand-
© WMiſenden. this, the firſt place obſervable is Miſſenden, where
a Monaſtery was founded by the D'oilys, and|clear and full proſpect of the large Vale, which
: augmented by the noble family firnam'd de Miſ-[1 ſaid was the other part of the County. It is

Amerſham. ſenden. Next, in the Vale, ſtands Amerſham, in
Saxon Agmunderbham (and fo called, all a-|and fruitful. The rich meadows feed an in-
long, as low as the time of King Henry the ſcredible number of Sheep, whoſe ſoft and + fine + Tenuiſſima,
ſeventh ; )} which can neither boaſt of build-[fleeces are ſought after, even from Alia it ſelt.
ings nor populouſneſs, but may juſtly be proud ¶ In this moſt fruitful Vale, one (lately) entire
of its [ancient] Lord Francis Ruſſel Earl of Bed-|paſture called Beryfield (part of the inheritance Beryfeld.
ford, who liv'd an exact pattern of vertue and of Sir Robert Lee Baronet) in the manour of
true honour, entirely belov'd by all good men. Quarendon, lets yearly for eight hundred pounds; Ann. 1695.

[But for the laſt hundred years, the Drales and the Lordſhip of Creflow is no leſs remarka-
have been Lords of this place, and have a neat] ble, which, —

ſeat here call'd Shardelois.1 The chief ſeat of] Acres, hath yielded a rent of eight hundred
Cheyneis. the Earls of Bedford, is Cheyneis, more to the pounds a year and upwards. ] This Vale has no
Eaſt, where John the firſt Earl of this family] woods but on the weſt-lide ; where among o-
and his ſon, the fore-mention'd Francis, lie en-|thers is Bernwood, about which in the year
tomb'd together. [This was formerly the poſ- o 14. the || Danes committed great outrages ; || See below,
ſeſſion of the Cheynes, who are very ancient in this
County, and have ſeats at Cheſham-Boies, hard by, Burgh (for ſo the Roman Coins found there,
and at Draiton-Beauchamp.\ To Cheyneis adjoynethſ witneſs it to be) which was afterwards a Roy-
Latimers. Latimers, call'd heretofore Jſel-hamFead, but it] al Vill of Edward the Contellor, though it be
had the preſent name from the Lords of it, the
ancient Barons Latimer. Here, Sir Edwyn Sandys| ry-hill, is by contraction call'd Bri. However, Brill,
Kr. who married the only daughter of Baron there being no expreſs authority, that this Town
+ Has, C. Sandys, f had a fine ſeat. [It anciently belonged| was ever called Burgus, or ſack d by the Danes;
to the Nevils ; but is now the ſeat of the Caven- others derive it from Bruel a thorny place, « Rents: We,
diſhes Dukes of Devonſhire, who have a bury-|and Bruer a thorn.] In this low part of the roch. Antiq.

ing.! From the top of theſe hills, we have a

almoſt all champain ; the ſoil is chalky, ſtitt,

ing not of abore five hundred

and then perhaps, was ruin'd that ancient ** Ales.

now a {mall Country-town, and inſtead of Bu-

County, though ſtor'd ſufficiently with rowns p. 41+

Paſſing hence, ſcarce three miles northward, and villages, we meet with few worth our ob-

we come to the ridge of the Chiltern hills, which | ſervation, and thoſe ſeated by the Tame, or by

divides the whole Shire from ſouth-weſt to the Is or Ouſe. | Upon the river Tame ſtands Ick-

north-eaſt, along many little villages ; of] ford, thought to be the place of Treaty between Ickſord.
Hamden, which, the moſt conſiderable is Hamden, whence K. Edward and the Danes, An. 907, and call'd

an ancient and numerous Family in this Coun-
ty took their name. ¶ Not far from hence, is] that ſome remains of that name might {till be
ma Princes-Risborough, near which, on the top of a
Aubs Mon, hill, is a Camp; and the Way which goes by|merly call'd ) or in /ford near Chriſt-Church in
Brit, it, is called by the vulgar Acknel-way. At the] Hamſhire ; but Brompron's writing the place
© Ackrel-way, foot of this hill, was — a Coin of the Em- ¶ Ehingford, ſeems to favour the firſt conjecture.
. peror Veſpaſian; and from the top of it, is ſaid] A little farther north is Borfntal, famous in Borſtal,
: to be a proſpe& of thirteen Counties: Near] theſe parts for the garriſon there in the time
| — this is Monks-Risborough, which Æſcwin Biſhop
| 8%. of Dorcheſter gave to the Church of Canterbu-|ther with the Rangerſhip of the foreſt of Bern-
ry and to Kiri Archbiſhop, about the year wood, by one of the Williams, to Nigel of Bor-
995. It was afterwards aſſigned for a portion] ſtal, by the 21 of a horn, which is ſtill
to the Monks of Canterbury, whence it re- preſerv'd. This feat, through ſeveral heirs-
ceived the preſent name. In theſe parts, are temales of divers names, came to the Denhams,
3 two places which ſeem to be of great Antiqui-|and from them, by one of the daughters of Den-
| Eleborough, ty ; the firſt, Ellesborough, near the Church] ham, to the family of Lewis of Wales.
| whereof, on a round hill, is an ancient Forti- re
fication called Belinus's Caſtle, where the Inha- the ſouth part of the Vale, ſtands on a riſing
bitants tell you, by tradition, that King Beli-|ground a very fair Market-town, large, and
1 nus reſided; above which is alſo an high Hill, pretty populous, ſurrounded with a great num -
3 pelinesbury. that ſtill retains the name of Belinesbury-hill :| ber of pleaſant meadows and paſtures, and now
Fade the ſecond, is Kymbel (great, and little) which] call'd Aileslun; whence the whole Vale is Ailesbury.

are ſuppoſed to take the name from Cunobeline nam'd The Vale of Ailedbury. The Saxons call d The Vale,

King of the Britains; the plares being alſo, it SEglerbunge | otherwiſe, according to diffe-

in ancient Records, written Cunebel. Aud this rent Copies, KglerbyPs, Eglerbupch, ge-

8 4

by the Saxons Yttingapons. I had once thought,

in Lene (for ſo New-foreſt in Hamſhire was for-

of King Charles the firſt, It was given, toge-

* Now, Aw-
Not far from the ſaid river, which watereth bries.

le rbuxh,)!

|

* 8 . - — * — —
* 1 a on” r - of | .
* 7 4 * 4 _
5 4 * —
A
207 Ion —-t. + *
——_— *

—

-
— —
— —

— —œ— ;
— — — . og To — —
0 * * ——

*

—

3

— 2 „ -
2 -

_—
.

* —
— Ae Fo. — Ip 4
_ _ — * =
W .
* pay
1 — 2 1
E 4 4

RI.

— — -
A —— 5 1
—

33

CATTITEUCHLANT.

—

lerburb, )] when Cuthwolph the Saxon took it
by force in the year * 571. As tor its old Bri-
and others, tiſh name, that, through the injury of time,
88 is quite loſt. This town was heretotore chiefly
St. Kdich. famous for St. ZEdith, a native of it; who,
when ſhe had prevail'd with her father Frewald

to give her this for her portion, preſently, upon

the perſwaſion of ſome Religious perſons, left

the world and her husband, and taking on

her the habit of a Nun, grew ſo celebrated

for Sanctiry, even in that fruitful age of Saints,

that ſhe 1s reported to have done ſeveral mi-

racles ; together with her ſiſter Edburg, from

Edburton. whom Edburton, a little village among the hills,
takes its name. [The Saxon Annals tell us,

that in the year 921, the Danes leaving the

ſiege of Tuceſter, and coming upon the unarm'd

people, took a great booty of men and cattle
hereabours ; that is, between Bernwood and Aileſ-

bzry.\ In the time of the Conqueror, this was

* 572, C.

a Manour-Royal, and ſeveral yard-lands were

here given by the King, on condition that the
kolders of them ſhould find Litter (i. e. Straw) for
the King's bed (1 hope the nice part of the
world will obſerve this,) whenever he ſhould come
+ Placit, Co- thither. | It was fo held by William of Aileſ-
ron. de Anno bury 3 and, beſides that ſervice, he was like-
14 Ed. 1. wile to ſtraw his chamber, and to provide him
three Eeles whenever he ſhould come in winter.
If he came in ſummer, belides ſtrau for the
bed, he was to provide ſweet herbs for the

King's chamber, and two green-geeſe. All
which he was to do thrice every year, if the

King came ſo often thither.] In the reign of
Edward the firſt, certain Knights ſirnam'd

de Ailecbury, who bore for arms a Croſs argent

in a field azure, are reported (how * know
not) to have been Lords of this place.

an heireſs of the Cahaignes (formerly Lords of

Migddleton-Cahaignes, [now commonly Middleton-

et thus
much is certain, that theſe Knights were emi-
nent in thoſe times; and that by marriage with

33
By the Tame, lower down, we meet with no-
thing memorable, unleſs Cherdfley be (as many Cher
think it is) the Cerdic-flega of the Saxons [ writ- *
ren more truly Lenoicep-leaz, and] fo calrd
from Cerdicius who had here a ſharp engagement
with the Britains. Near this place, is Creden-
don, now Crendon, which was the ſeat of the Crendo
Honour of Gifford ; for by that name the vaſt a
Eſtate was call'd, that fell to the ſhare of al-
ter Gifford, at the Conqueſt ; who, being me de
Earl of Buckingham, tounded (as ir is thought)
the Monaſtery of NVoteſſey: and his Coulin Fuel Noteſs,
de Bolebec, trom whom by a female the Earis of naler *
Oxford are deſcended, held here ſeveral Eſtates Boltec.c,
of him. The ruins of * Bolebec-caſtle appear i
hard by, in the Pariſh of H/hitchurch. ; vi Nor.
Uſa or Ouſe (formerly Ja, and the ſecond Bere f
Ifis, which flows gently through the north part Baca.
of this Shire,) riſing in Northamptonſhire, and
preſently entring this County while it's current
is yet ſmall ; paſſes by Bitleſden, which Robert g;,..
de Maperiſhal Lord of the place gave to + Jeffrey t Often, .
de Clinton Chamberlain to King Henry the tirit |
(a powerful Man at Court,) to fave himſelf
from being puniſh'd as a Felon, for ſtealing one
of the King's hounds. But he receiv'd it back
again from the Chamberlain, with a Kinſwo-
man of his in marriage. Yet, in the Civil
Wars in King Stephen's time, he loſt it again,

and Ernald de Boſco, by the tavour of Robert

Earl of Leiceſter, got it, and in the year 1 127.
founded here a little Monaſtery for Ciſtertian
Monks. [Then, the river paſles, at ſome di-
ſtance, by How, belonging to the Temples, who Stor,
ſettled here in the reign of Queen Elizabeth,
and have built in this place a noble and beau-
titul Seat; and who have been ſucceſſively ad-
vanced, in the perſon of Sir Richard Temple,
Baronet, to the honour, firſt of Baron, and
then of Viſcount Cobham, in the County of
Kent. | The next place that the Ouſe viſits,

is Buckingham, the chiet town of the County, Buckingian

Cheney,) | they came to a plentiful Eſtate, which Which Edward the elder (in the year 915. as
tell atterwards by marriage to the Chaworths or | Marianus hath it, but, according to the Sax-

de Caduras, and Staffords. The greateſt repute

it hath, is for Cattle; [ſaving that it hath the

honour of giving the title of Earl to Robert Bruce,

created Baron of Skelton, Viſcount Bruce ot

Ampthil, and Earl of Ailesbury, by King Charles

the ſecond, in the year 1664. And, by rea-

ſon of it's ſtanding in the middle of the

County, it is the uſual place of Aſſizes and

Seſſions, which have added greatly to its wealth

and populouſneſs.] It owes much to the mu-

* Tulticiario, nificence of Balduin Chief Juſtice, who not

only adorn'd it with publick Edifices, but rais'd

an excellent Cauſey about three miles in length,

where the road is deep and troubleſome : | By

marriage with whoſe daughter and coheir in

the time of King Henry the eighth, the Manour

came to the Packingtous.| All about, vaſt num-

bers of well-fleec'd Sheep are plentifully fed,

to the great profit and advantage of their

Querendon, Owners 3; eſpecially at Querendon ( belonging

[tormerly] to the very eminent Sir Henry Lee

Knight of the Garter, [and now- to his De-

Eythorp, {cendants ; | at Eythorp, once belonging to the

Dinhams, now to the Dormers Knights ; and at

OLE inch indon, | heretofore | belonging to the God-
Winchindon.

+ Dudg. Bar. WINS Knights, &c. ,

T. 3. p. 300. the Duke of Wharton; f which came to that

tamily by Philip Lord Wharton marrying Jane

the daughter and heir of Arthur Godwin Eſq; and

hath been of late years greatly improved and

Waddeſden, adorned. It's neighbour Waddeſden, is remark-

able, for having three diſtinct Rectories, of which

each Miniſter or Rector hath his 2

turn of officiating, and portion of the Revenue. ]

This laſt is now the Seat of

on Annals, 918,)] fortified with a rampire and
turrets on both ſides ct the bank, againſt the
incurſions of the Danes. Let it ſeems to have

been no conſiderable place at the Conquett ;

ſince, in the reign of the Contetlor (as Domeſ-
d:y-book informs us) t paid only for one hide,

and had twenty fix Burgeſſes. Tue town is ſcated

on a low ground. 'The Ouſe, very comm odious

tor the mills, ſurrounds it on all ſides, but the

north. The Caſtle, ſeated in the middle of

the town upon a great mount, of the very ru-

ins of which ſcarce any thing now remains,

as it were divides the town into two parts;

the greater part, to the north, where itands

the Town-hall; the lefier to the weſt, in which

there Is a Church (though not very anclent)

where was the Shrine of St. Rambla, born at 8, Rumbill,
King's Sutton a neighbouring village, and by V. Nor
our «anceſtors eſteem's a Saint. {He was Pa- mp
tron of the Fiſhermen, and his Feaſt is (ti! _ _
annually obſerved in December, at Folkfon in 7
Kent. Near the Church, was once a ſtately Pre-
bendal-houſe belonging to the Church of Lin-

coln, which was endow'd with Lands of one
thouſand pounds per An. Hero was alſo a Cha-

pel, call'd St. John Baptiſi's, founded by Bat St. ohn By
thew Stratton, and now converted into a Free- tilts Cf,
ichool. In this hundred alſo, is Caversfi-14; Cavettell.
but whether fo call'd from Cara ſius, as it one

ſhould ſay Caraufirs's-field, T dare not be pott-

tive. ft However, it is very probable from the , paroch.
circumſtances, that this is the very place Where Art. f.
Altetus flew Caraufiis in battle. This part of & Hias

App.

the Country ſeems allo to have been the feat
ct

Thorntor.

vid. Eſſen
Winllow,

Whaddon

* [s now, (
Barons Gre
of Wilton,

+ Bears, (

Saulden,

Leckhamſtt
Lillingſtor;

Luffel

Stony-St
fied?

x Stands

ee eee

+ JD

BUCKINGHAMSHIRE

Sh... ee ten
* * *
1

of Action, when Aulus Plautius made the ſecond!
Expedition of the Romans into Britain under
Claudins the Emperor. He obtain'd a Victory
over Cataratacus and Togodumnzs, Sons of Cuno-
lelin, among the Boduni, or Oxfordſbire-men ( ſub-
ject to theſe Caruelani or Inhabitants of Bucks,)
and purſued them to the river Ouſe near Buc-
kingham.

Upon the ſouth-bank of the Ouſe lies Thorn-
ton, anciently the ſeat of, the Norman tamil
of Chatylicu 3 which, paſſing through the fami-
lies of Barton and Jagleton, became the poflefſion
of the Tyrrels, deſcended from an heir-general of
Robert Iugleten, the laſt of that name in the be-
ginning of Henry the eighth. From whom
are allo deſcended both the other families ot
the Tyrrels in this County, of Caſtlethomp ard
Okeley : and they all deſcended from one com-
mon Anceſtor, Humphrey Tyrrel, nephew of
Charles Brandon, Duke of Suftolk ; who was al-
ſo one of the coheirs of Sir Humphrey le Bruin,
vid. Eſex.as well as the laid Tyrrel. South-ealt trom
Winllow, Buckingham, is Winſlow, a (mall market- town,
which King Offa gave to the Monaſtery ot
St. Alban, in a Council held at Perulam, ann.

: Kennet, Par.
1] Act. p. 6

=
-w render,

Thornton.

oteſle; y,
d'tery,
0 i c dec. Ch

itleſdn,
Oſben, C.

4
1 Buckingham, and Thornton, the Ouſc
moves, with a gentle current, to the north-
eaſt. More eaſterly from the river, toward
Whaddon, the woods, is I/haddon, formerly the Scat of
the Gifords, who were hereditary Keepers ct
I\/haddon-Chaſe under the Earl of Ulſter ; from
| whom that office deſcended to the Pigors, who fold
+I; row, C. it into another family. Here * was the feat ot
© Barons Grey the warlike family of the Barons Grey of Mil-
of Wilton. ton, who held the adjoyning manour of Eaten
by the ſervice of keeping one Gerfalcon of the
+ Bears, C. King's; whence that family f bore for their
'  crelt a Falcon fitting on a glove. | But, upon the
attainder of William Lord Grey of Wilton, it
came to the Yilars Dukes of Buckingham; ſince
the death of the laſt of whom, it paſſed by
ſale to James Selby, and 'Thomas Willis (the
famous Phyſician of that name) who have al-
moſt entirely pulled down the fore-mentioned
ſear, built by the Barons Grey of Wilton. ] Not
far from hence lies Saulden, where is a neat
houſe built by the honourable and learned
Knight Sir John Forteſcue, for himſelf and his
family; who for his great Wiſdom and Pru-
dence was made Chancellor of the Exchequer,
and privy Counſellor to Queen Elizabeth and
5 King james the firſt. | On the other ſide of the
bamſted. river, not far from the bank, are LeckhamFed,
Lillirgtore, the ſeat of the Tyrrels ; Lillingtone, the ſeat of
the ancient family of the De-hairel, commonly
Luſſeld. Dairell ; and Luffeld, where was formerly a Mo-
naſtery founded by Robert Earl of Leiceſter ;
but, the Monks dying of the plague, ir was de-
ſerted. Higher on the ſouth-bank of the ri-
t-ver, the moſt conſiderable place is Stouy-Strat-
ford, ſo called from the Stones, the publick Street,
and the Ford ; becauſe the buildings are of
Free-ſtone ; which is dug plentifully at Calver-
ton, hard by ; and it is ſeated on the publick
ſtreet or high-way, commonly called Matling-
ſtreet, which was a military way of the Ro-
mans; and ſome remains of it are plainly to
be ſeen beyond the town : There was allo a
Jord; though now it is ſcarce paſſable. The
town is ot conſiderable largeneſs and has two
, Churches (which no other Town in this Coun-
© *Stands, C. ty can boaſt of.]! In the middle * ſtood a Gf
4 (though not very ſplendid) erected in memory
ot Queen Eleanor of Spain, wite to Edward
the hrſt, and adorn'd with the Arms of En-
gland, Caſtile, and Leon, and of the County of
Ponthieu, to which ſhe was heireſs. She dy'd

uckingian

Saulden,

Stony. Stra
R 5 <p ford:
imp N
re, Bral-

!

i

John bp

5 Ch fel.

versteld.

aroct

t. p. 7. 10
1h

Hil, 4d

p.

at Hareby in Lincolnſhire; and ſuch crofles were

erected between that and Weſtminſter in all

places where the corps reſted ; but that which

was erected in this place, was pulled down in

the Civil Wars, and no works of it are now
remaining. | Where the Ford was formerly, there

is now a Stone- bridge over the Ouſe ; which

uſes, in the winter-floods, to break cut into

the neighbouring fields, with great violence.

The other fide of the bank is ſomething higher,

and there ſat old Stratford} the Inhabitants re-

port the town to have heretofore ſtood. Near

which, is Paſham, ſo call'd from paſſing the ri- Paſham.
ver; ſo that it may probably be that Paſs which

Edward the Elder maintain'd againſt the plun-

dering Danes, while he was fortifying Torce-

iter. But, after the building of the bridge at
Y:0ay-Stratford, this Paſs was wholly neglected.

It 1 ſhould gueſs this town to have been the
La:torodum ot Antoninus; not only it's ſitua-

tion on a military way, and the exact diſtan- Zeach in Bris
ces, would favour my conjecture, but the ſig- oo *
niſication too of Lac forodum (terch'd from the and 204 1
Britiſh tongue,) which agrees exactly with Ford.

this modern name: for the words in both lan-

guages are deriv'd from Stones and a Ford. (It

is alſo called Lactadorum, and ſometimes Laſto- Lagodrodum.
drodum and Lattorudum. * The old town in * Burton's
Gaul, call'd Lactorate, perhaps might give it Itinsrar.
the name; ſince f Cæſar has obſerv'd, that the ＋ De Bel
Gauls, coming over hither, gave the ſame names Gal. 1. 5.
to towns, as thoſe had, which they left behind them. |

Paſſing hence, the Ouſe runs by H/olverton, the Wolverton.
eat of the ancient Family of the Longvils, | of

which tamily, Henry, Lord Grey of Ruthin, was
advanced to the dignity of Viicount Longueville,

in the ſecond year of King William and Queen

Mary. Haverſham, from which place 80 Wee Haverſnam.
Tompſon was created a Baron of this Realm, in

the eighth year ot William the third, by the

title of Baron Haverſham of Haverſham ; | and

' Newport-Paynel, ſo cail'd from the Lord of it, Newport
Full Paganel. From whom it deſcended to the Pay nel.

Barons Someries of Dudley, who lad their caſtle
!here. [At Newport, a river falls into the
Ouſe from the ſouth; which runs near Wing, Wing.
the ſeat of the late Earl of Caernarron; by
whoſe death, the honour of Baron Dormer of
Ving deſcended to a younger branch of the ſame
family; the titles of Viſcount and Earl being
extinct in him: And Blecheley, the Church where- Blecheley.
of hath been much beaurihed, at great expence,
by Brown Willis, Eſq; Patron thereof. | From
Newport, the Ouſe runs by Terringham, gi- Terringlam.
ving name and habitation to a famous and au-
cient family, ſa younger branch whereof {till
flouriſhes at Nether-H/inchingten ; but this place Nether- Win-
'hath ſince come to the Bacl wells, by marriage chington.
!with the only daughter and heir of Sir Melliam
'Terringham.| Then it goes to Oulney, a {mall Oulney.
| market-rown, [but remarkable tor it's goodly
Church, with a beautitul Spire-Steeple, the only
one (except Hanſlap ) that is in the whole
County; as I have been informed. | Thus far,
and a little farther, reaches the County of Buc-
kingham, along it's Boundary the O/e.
| The firſt Earl of Buckingham (as far as I can Fart; and
yet find) was Malter firnam'd Gifford, fon to Dukes of
Oſbern de Bolebec, a famous Man among the Nor- Buckingham.
mans; whom, in a Charter of Henry the firſt,
we find among the witneſles, by the name of
Earl of Buckingham. He was ſuccceded in this
honour by a ſon of the fame name, who in the
book of Abingdon-Monaſtery is ſtil d Eart
Malter the younger, and is {aid to have dy'd in
the year 1164. In the reign of Henry the ſe-
cond, the famous Richard Strang-bow Earl of
Pembroke (deſcended from the ſiſter and _ of

'altes

*
— _ _ &.3" 7 _ _ _
* — 2
—_ — . WW — — — 2 —
— I o — =
232 — - = = -
.

„

— — — ="

335 CATTIEUCHLAVNVI Is

Walter Giftord the ſecond) did, in ſome pub-
lick Inſtruments, make uſe of the ſame title.
But it atterwards lay vacant for a long time,
till it was conterr'd by Richard the ſecond, in
the year 1377, on his Uncle Thomas of H/o0d-
ſtock (of whom we have ſpoken before among
the Dukes of Gloceſter.) Of his daughter,
married to Edmund Earl ot Stafford, was
born Humphrey Earl of Stafford, created Duke
of Buckingham by Henry the ſixth ; for whom
fighting valiantly, he was ſlain at the battle of
Northampton. To him ſucceeded Henry his
grandchild by his ſon Humphrey [(flain in the
lite-time oft his Father the Duke, at the bat-
tle of St. Albans, 34 Henry 6;)] which Henry
was the chiet means of bringing that tyrant
Richard the 3d to the Crown; and preſently at-
ter endeavour d to depoſe him, becauſe ſas it is
ſaid] he would not reſtore to him the eſtate of
the Bohuns, to which he was lawful heir. But this
+ Dudg, Bar. could not be the cauſe ; f for, after that Tyrant's
T.1. P. 168. advancement, he ſign'd a bill for Livery of all
thoſe Lands unto him, whereto he pretended
a right by deſcent from Humphrey de Bohun,
ſometime Earl of Hereford, and Conſtable of
England. Dugdale hath given us an abſtra& of
it ; and is of opinion, that the cauſe of this his
carriage, Was, either remorſe of conſcience
for raiſing that King to the throne by the bar-
barous murther of his nephews, or elſe his
obſerving himſelf to be neglected by him. Be-
ing intercepted, he loſt his head, and found
too late, that T'yrants commonly pull down
thoſe Scaffolds by which they aſcended to their
Throne. His ſon Edward being reſtor'd to all,
by the favour of Henry the ſeventh ; through
the wicked practices of Cardinal Wolſey loſt
the favour of Henry the eighth, and was at
laſt beheaded for treaſon, for that, among other
things, he had conſulted a Wizzard about the

Succeſſion to the Crown. He dy'd much la-.
mented by all good men. When the Emperor
Charles the fifth heard of his death, he is re-

ported to have ſaid, that a Butcher's Dog had run

down the fineſt Buck in England ; alluding to Car-

dinal Wolſey's being the ſon of a Butcher,

From that time, the ſplendour of this family

ſo decay'd, that his Poſterity enjoy'd only the

bare title of Earls of Stafford. [Atter the at-
tainder and execution of Edward, the title of
Buckingham lay vacant, till the 14˙ of Fac. 1.

when George Viſcount Villars, was created

Earl of Buckingham ; and the next year, Mar-

queſs of Buckingham ; and, by a Patent bearing

date 18 Maii, 21 Fac. 1. Duke of Buckingham,

This George, being barbarouſly murther'4 oy one

Felton at Portſmouth, Aug. 23. An. 1628, was
ſucceeded by George his ſon, who dying April

16. 1687, without iſſue, left the title vacant ;

and fo it remained, till the ſecond year of Queen

Anne, when her Majeſty created the right See My.
Honourable John Sheffield, Duke of the County gtave, in
of Buckingham, and Normanby. 1 Yorkllire

There are in this County 185 Pariſhes.

More rare Plants growing wild in Bucking-
hamſhire.

I have not had opportunity of ſearching this Coun-
ty for Plants, neither have any fingular, local, or
uncommon ſpecies growing there, as yet come to my
knowledge, ſave only

Sphondylium montanum minus anguſtifoli-
um, tenuiter laciniatum, obJerv'd by Dr. Pluke-
net near St. Giles Chaltout in the mountainos
meadows.

BEDFOR

EE County of Bedford, com-
MW monly call'd Bedfordſbire, is one
Not the three, which we ob-
SA (erv'd before to have been in-
PATON habited by the Cattieuchlani.
On the ealt and ſouth, it joyns
to Cambridgſhire and Hert-
fordſhire; on the weſt to Buckinghamſhire ;
and on the north to Northamptonſhire and
Huntingdonſhire : and it is divided into two
parts, by the Ouſe running through it. In the
north part, it is fruitful, and woody ; in the
ſouth (where it is much larger) the ſoil is more
poor, but yet tolerable. For it abounds with
Barley which is plump, white, and ſtrong. In
the middle, it is pretty thick-ſet with woods;

but eaſtward it is more dry, and wants wood.
The Ouſe, at its entrance into this County,
Turvy, firſt viſits Turvy ſheretofore] the ſeat of Baron
Barons Mor. Mordant ; which family ſnow Earls of Mon-
dant, mouth and Peterborough, | is indebted to Hen-
ry the eighth for that dignity ; (for he it was,
that created John Mordant, Baron Mordant ; a
perſon of great Wiſdom, who had married the
daughter and coheir of H. Vere of Addington ;)
ſas it is to King Charles the firſt, for being ad-
Nb as we ſaid, to the higher dignity of
Earl. | Next, it glides by Hare-wood, a lit-
ö tle village call'd — Hareles-wood, where

DSHIRE.

and where, in the year of our Lord 1399, 4

little before the breaking out of thoſe Commo- cee the Hr
tions and Civil Wars wherewith Englund was digma, py
a long time embroil'd, this river ſtood ſtill, and 153.
the water retiring both ways, left a paſſage on

toor along the chanel, tor three miles together,

to the aſtoniſhment of the Beholders. The

ſame thing happen'd again (as I have been in-
form'd) the 18˙ (or elſe the 28") of Fanua-

ry, in the year 1648. And as the firſt was
look'd upon to be a Prognoſtick of the Civil

Wars that enſu'd ; ſo may this be as well
thought a prognoſtick of the death of King
Charles the firſt. ] Afterwards, it runs under

Odil or Woodbill, formerly Wabull, which had oil or
alſo its Barons of Wahull, eminent for their Woodbil,
ancient Nobility ; where was a Caſtle, * which, Non an,
came by inheritance to the Cherwoods. [ Leland c.

tells us, that the Caſtle in his time (then be-
longing to the Lord Bray) was nothing but
ſtrange ruins. This place 1s now the ſeat of the
Alfons.\ From hence, the Oe, no leſs wind-

ing than the Meander, is carry'd through Bla-

neſbo, commonly Bletſo, tormerly the ſeat of the Bletlo,
Pateſbuls, afterwards of the Beauchamps ; and

now of the famous family of Sr. John, who for- Baro d.
merly, by their Valour, became Maſters of a ſohn of Bite
great eſtate in Wales, and having had the ho- 1ſt
aour of Barons confer'd upon them by Queen

Sampſon ſirnamd The Strong built a Nunnery ;

Elizabeth of bleſſed memory, were advanced

by

bu
4
*
*
*
N
9 2 **
* o
*
3 e
PLN 2
3 — : =
2 2. —
-
N 2 0 H

ee the yr
gn, Phy
53 A

Jail or
N ood bill,

No (Tr

*

gletſo.

Barons d.
ohn of B

[19+ |

WL -e, of Ine

P N
OF

| NORTHAMPTON

15
| S HIRE LordSTohuy

| Oulney

40

des

N port
Paguell

**

PANT

OF

BUCKINGHA M

SHIRE

« 1bel RY7T 1
53 | Sold bis An [lieu 8
70 0177 Churclul

. & Pudadington

Aargrave

"

4

o

e
*

1 nchlad
7

Gro

| Soul:troppe
Hamidi Le, vebr 0.
ub“
© Odchall 155

Felmeryham
Chellinton._

WALLY

Paterhan
Stufforil I.

| A
HuN pb.

JS 7 on
/

4 7” 22

A ut uſbettn ls

" E
%

e —

«; Bullyzgton (5 | |
bun

4 g. 1e

@A Ben. :HE AD.
ir Bavrlo/Hon | HUN D.

Pans Ro Te le, th Chator,

Slapton

bee.

&. C ——

In 22 2 5 Nun hilt

ue

n. *

Peckerigg I
&
Auen
\ MAN CET”

N obe of 1

|
Vi 4
Woburn . {bber Aare a 2 | 4
. : Stretl;
a : Wood: : 5. 2 Oy

ten Brean

Ninot Kimbolton

*
"IP
2 *

" SJ a

| Pm or
4 5

1FORD

-
Caen

.

Blunke

9 Ting ton

* ham .

1 Aeon
7 *

WIXMT XK

puto
: Ol Tar

We

Wotton 1 ; 6 |
REDBORNSTOKE 3
| :
th p 1 Houta conge f | . : n þ
Fund "i l Jwitoit Bark ; + Che, i

Horton 1

A +
2

I 14
\ D. of h, 2
1 Ove

C. n- V
HuN p. |
185

tf 2 5M

n

ed.
1 nn

Au

yer}, 0

A adding 1 —

3 |
| Chaulton BD

2% 2 rus
wr . 0 a
A ** 4 ure
* Di Web Ao e
ton |:
erg H U N 2 -

= *

Edfleſboro

BEDFORD

= SHIRE
U el, Rob* 4 -12.

2
28
XIE:
oo ©
% >
FRAN
i,

9
*

ae,

(

16
(lg

l 77

I

,
-

Fotuort

22 8. :
on

IGL SW Strat? - hi |
8 * = FART 8

* 407 9 Colin

N * Cymorth
n ADN
9 Wt. =

C . Cher Calnt
83 :.2leſwade

V tratton Diner
HuN Dp.
: * 22 "th 4
[2 4
PY * 7
* N hall

CA db s Sum

WIXXI T. TR T7 :

of Varden

A

fl. N :

fie Mop/irll |
o OP, 4 ＋

wt

hi- Standon. adr *

Helewolt) þ MN

„ HBaldocld

ren

a»
„ i e
k cr He

-
4

alli, ror o OF \

8

| a Hitchin

3 HERTFORD
| 4 * Loullilly ;

*. Walden

0 SHIRE

Lygrave

Scales of A. Is

for |
Swunumn.

Ne *
OY 7
2 4 - IG z

Alarket Street

1 — 2
25 Hun of 120 @ Degree 25

\

—

Bedſord.
* [tinerar,

Brumbam.

ns te er
, n ä

: *
— N *
. * *
4
* $$ N
* + . k
* .
* * 8
5 1
b
*
7
' *
. *
* **
o 12 0
„ l .
- 8 ns "2 2 o
£ a ©. hy - g * 9 5
- - # 4.
f 7
5 # © LL
* * 8
« 2
* |
S *
*
* * *

7 ——
4 9
* 4 * — — *
*
PF.
* 4 cls
* # * * 4 1 * Wn, 0
' 5 175 0 "ww £4
, „ * * 2
- * 1 2 ' 5
. *. 1. ee
= . e
$ 5 „„ * . 20 2
as ET |
— *
0
| '
* —
2
X
ov ,
% 1 o i dd % 7
„
a © * * 1 *
” 6 ; 4
-'1 „ * 8
' 5 6
%
: 4 *
4 1. 4 |
bs Ln
- F. > 4 . *
£ a |
1 - |
#4 at
. „ (
i
i
*
1 ”

.
k
:
*
*
7.

8

5 ö

*
*

Brumbam.

Bedſord.

* [tinerar,

goes to] Bedford, in Saxon Bebanpond, the|third, and pull'd down the

by King James the firſt ro the more 1 King did likewiſe add a little "rown on the
ble

title of Earls of Bolingbroke. Of whom, ſouth- ſide of the river, call'd by that age (to

Pawlet St. John dying unmarried in the year follow the beſt Copy of Hoveden) Mikeſgate, Mikeſgate,

1711, the Earldom became extin&, and this In the time of Edward the Confeſſor (as we find
Barony devolved upon Sir St. Andrew St. Joln, in Domeſday-book) it defended it ſelf for the half
one of the deſcendants of Sir Rowland St. Johm | of an Hundred, in expedition and ſhips. The land
fifth ſon of Oliver, the ſecond Baron of Blerſhoe. || of this village never hided. But under the Nor-
To the St. Johns it came by Margaret de Beau- mans, it was a much greater ſufferer ; for after
champ, an heireſs, marry'd, firſt to Oliver de] Pagan de Beauchamp, the third who was call'd
St. John, from whom thoſe Barons are deſcen- Baron of Bedford, had built a Caſtle there,
ded ; and afterward, to John Duke of Somer-|not one civil commotion aroſe in the Kingdom,
ſer, by whom ſhe had the famous Margaret| but what had a blow at it, while it was ſtand-
Counteſs of Richmond, a Woman whoſe merit|ing. Stephen, in the firſt place, when he had

exceeds the g £125 Commendations that can poſſeſs d himſelf of the Kingdom of England

be given, and from whom the Royal Family of againſt his ſolemn oath, took this Caſtle, with
England is deſcended. great loſs on both ſides : afterwards, when the
From hence the Ouſe haſtens to | Brumbam,| Barons took up arms againſt King John, Wil-
the ſeat of the Lord Trevor, who being a per-[liam de Beauchamp Lord of it, and one of the
ſon of great Accompliſhments, and particular-|Leaders in that Faction, put it into their
ly knowing in the Municipal Laws of this|hands ; but about two years after, Falco de Bre-
ealm, was for many years Chief Juſtice of] aut laid ſiege to it, ind had it preſently ſurren-
the Common Pleas, and was advanced to the|der'd to him by the Barons, and beſtow'd upon
dignity of a Peer of this Realm, by the Title|him by the King. ny this ungrateful man
of Baron Trevor of Brumbam. Next, the Ouſe] afterwards renew'd the war againſt Henry the
a eligious houſes
County-town and which gives name to the to fortify his Caſtle, and very much damni-
whole ; and is ſo cut by the river, that one[ty'd the Country all round; till at laſt the
would imagin it two towns, but that it is] King laid ſiege to it, and after ſixty days, ha-
joyn'd by a Stone-bridge. It is more eminent ving tam'd the inſolence of the Robe, poſ-
for the pleaſantneſs of its ſituation, and its] ſeſs d himſelf of that Nurſery of Sedition.
antiquity, than for either beauty or largeneſs; I hope it may not be unacceptable to the
and yet it has five Churches, [and hath, of late Reader, if I recite the methods by which this
years, been much improved by new Buildings, | Caſtle was taken, out of an old contemporary
and a fair Market-houſe ; and the river alſo| Writer, who was an eye-witneſs of it: to let
hath been made navigable. Although both us underſtand, how that age was little inferi-
ſides of this river are govern'd by the ſame our to ours in the contrivances of Works and

Magiſtrates, viz. a Mayor, two Bailifts, c. Engines for the deſtruction of mankind. On Warlike En-

yet thus far they make their particular claims, the eaſt-fide (ſays he) was one Petrary and two gines.
that, whereas they have two weekly markets; Mangonels daily playing upon the tower; and on V. Leo. Ta-

the ſouth-ſide has the Tueſday-one, conſidera- the weſt, two Mangonels battering the old tower , Conſtit,

ble for all live-cattle ; and the north-ſide, the] as alſo one upon the ſouth, and another on the nort þ 5. $7. de

Saturday-one, for all ſorts of Corn. Of the part, which beat down two paſſages through the walls
five Churches alſo, Mo are ſeated on the ſouth, | that were next them. Beſides theſe, there were two
and three on the north-ſide. St. Pauls (as Le-| machines contriv'd of wood, ſo as to be higher than
land tells us) is the principal Church of the| the caftle and tower, eretted on purpoſe for the

onis,

town, and was before the Conqueſt a College|* Gunners and Watchmen. They had alſo ſeveral * Balifarii,

of Prebendaries ; and ſo it was after too, till | machines, wherein the Gunners and Slingers lay in
the Foundation of Newenham-Priory. They| ambuſh. There was moreover another machine, call d
had their houſes round the Church; till they|Cattus, under which, the diggers who were employ'd
were tranſlated to Newenham, by * and her ſ to undermine the walls of the tower and caſtle, came
ſon Simon de Beauchamp. In this Town, ann. in and out. The Caftle was taken by four aſſaults.
1561, Was built and endow'd a Free-{chool by] In the firſt, was takes the Barbican ; in the ſecond,
Sir William Harper, a native hereof, bred a|the outer Ballia; at the third attack, the wall by
Merchant-Taylor in the City of London, and ſthe old tower was thrown down by the Miners, where,
afterwards Lord Mayor. ] I dare not aſſent toſ with great danger, they poſſeſs d themſelves of the in-
thoſe who think Bedford the Lactodorum of An-|ner Ballia through a chink. At the fourth aſſault,
toninxs : for neither is it ſituate upon a military |the miners ſet fire to the tower, ſo that the ſmoak
way (which is the ſureſt guide in our ſearch |burſt out, and the tower it ſelf was cloven to that
after the ſtations and manſions mention'd by An-| degree, as to ſhew viſibly ſome broad chinks : where-
toninus,) nor were there ever any Roman Coins ſupon, the enemy ſurrender'd.

dug-up here. I have read, that it was calld| Concerning theſe Mangonells, Petraries, Trabuc-
in Britiſh Liſwider or Lettidur ; but this ſeems ſces, Bricoles, Eſpringolds, and what our Anceſtors
to be tranſlated from the Engliſh name. For |call'd the H/arrwolf, out of which, before the
Lettuy ſignifies in Britiſh publick Inns, and Letti- invention of Bombs, they threw great Stones,
dur, inns upon a river ; and our Engliſh Bed-|with ſo much force as to break open ſtrong
ford implies Beds and Ims at a Ford. Below this gates: concerning theſe (I ſay) I have ſeveral
Town, about the year 572. Cuthwulph the Sax-|rhings to add, if they were not foreign to my
on did ſo ſhatter the Britains in a ſet-bartle, purpoſe. But my Author goes on. Falco con-
that he was ever after too hard for them, and ſtinu d Excommunicate, till he had reſtored to the
had ſeveral towns ſurrender d to him. Nor| King rhe caſtles of Plumton and Stoke-Curcy, as
does it ſeem to have been negle&ed by the |alſo the gold and filver-veſſels, with what mioney he
Saxons ; ſince Offa, that powerful prince of the (had; and then he was carry d to London. Orders were
Mercians, made choice of this place (as Flori- given in the mean time to the Sheriff, to demoliſh the
legus tells us) for his Burial ; but the Ouſe, be- |Tower, and the outer Ballia. But the inner Ballia, after
ing once very rapid, and riſing higher than or- the Morłs were thrown down, and the ditches fill d-up,
dinary, ſwept away his Sepulchre. The town ſuas granted to William de Beauchamp to live in.
was repair'd by Edward the elder, after it had The Stones were given to the Canons of Newenham
been deſtroy'd in the Daniſh wars; which land Chadwell, and to the Church of St. Paul in

Uu Bedford.

1
: "1
j
4
4
0
|
10
x
\|

—

339

CATTIEUCHLANI

—

Wo

. —

Bedſord. Nothing is now to be ſeen of it, beſides
the bare tracks, as they hang over the river, up-
on the eaſt-ſide of the town; ſand on the ſite
of it, is a ſpacious and pleaſant Bowling-green. |
Below Bedford, on both ſides, were two —
neat, but little, Religious-houſes ; to the ſout
Helenſtou, now Elffow, a Nunnery built by

Juditha, wife to Waltheof Earl of Huntingdon,

and dedicated to Helena mother of Conſtantine

Newenham. the Great: to the eaſt, Næwenham, which Roi-

fra, wife to Pagan de Beauchamp, tranſlated hi-

ther from the Church of St. Paul in Bedford.

+ Lel. Itin. [4 Yet her ſon, Simon de Bello-Campo or Beau-

Ms. champ, confirming and completing the act &f
his mother, was look'd upon as the Founder ;

and accordingly, in his Epitaph, which was
before the high Altar of this Church, he 1s

call'd Fundator de Neweham. * Within two miles

of Bedford, was an old Caſtle, call'd by Leland

Riſngho- Rifingho-Caftle, which he ſays was a little by

Caſtle, weſt from Cafle-mill. In his time, the building
was ſo entirely deſtroy'd, that no or of it

was viſible ; but the Area of the e was

eaſie to be trac'd, and the great round hill

where the Keep or Dungeon ſtood, complete. |

The Ouſe does not go far from hence, till ir

comes to the footſteps of a ruinous Caſtle at

Eaton, which was another ſeat of the Beau-

champs ; (the place, in Leland's time, belong'd

to the Lord Vaulx :)] and fo it bids fare-

Biſſemed, well to Bedfordſhire, hard by Biſſemed, where

Hugh de Beauchamp, and Roger his brother,

built a ſmall Monaſtery for Canons of St. Au-

guſtin, as appears by the Pope's Bull. Theſe

lie beyond the Ouſe; which, before it comes ſo

* Calld by far, is encreas'd by a little“ anonymous river

—_— p from the ſouth ; and at the conflux, ſtands Te-

+ — mesford, noted for a f Camp of the Danes; with

a Caſtle, built at the time when they burthen'd

thoſe parts with winter-quarters, and demo-

liſh'd (as it is thought) that Britiſh Fort, the

place whereof is now call'd Chefterfield and Saln-

dy, which gives frequent proofs of it's antiqui-

Aubr. MS. ty, by throwing-up Roman money. I Beſides,

ere have been diſcover'd at Sandhe, ſome fur-

ther evidences ; namely, glaſs-urns, and one

red urn like Coral, with 9 They

have aſhes in them, and are now, or lately

were, in the hands of a Gentleman in Bedford.

At Cheiterfield alſo, there is a Roman Camp,

where Coins and Urns were dug-up, about the

* By Mr. year 1670 ; ſome of which * were beſtow'd up-

The. Gyſty. on the Univerſity of Oxford.1 I am convinc'd

from the ſituation, that this is the very Salenæ

Elſtow.

* Thid,

Eaton,

lenz. , ,
es: which Ptolemy ſettles among the Cattieuchlani; it
Saldny be the true name, as ſome have affirm'd

Potton. to me. I paſs by Potton, a little market-town,

having met with nothing relating to it, but on-
ly, that J. Kinaſton beltow'd it upon Thomas
Earl of Lancaſter, with the lands belonging it.
Nor is there much to be ſaid of thoſe towns
Chickſand, Which lie upon this little river; namely Chick-
ſand, where Pagan de Beauchamp built a little
Shelford. Religious-houſe ; Shelford a market-town ; Bi-
Bigleſwade. / ſwade, famous for it's horſe-fair, and ſtone-
2 At a little diſtance from whence, is
Stratton, Stratton, which was tormerly the ſeat of the Ba-
rons Latimer, and x anime of the Enderbies, and
from them came by Inheritance to the Pigorts.
Five miles trom the head of this river, almoſt
Ampthill. in the heart of the County, ſtands Ampthill,
placed upon a hill; a ſtately, royal ſeat, that
may vie with a Caſtle ; and ſurrounded with
Parks. It was built in the reign of King Hen-
ry the ſixth, by John Cornwale Baron of Fun-
hop, out of the French ſpoils 53 whoſe goods
(as I have read) when Edward the fourth con-
fiſcated for his ſiding with the Houſe of Lan-

caſter, and had attainted him, or rather ( PR.

Fanhop himſelf ſays) the houſe ; he forthwith

gave it to Edmund Grey Lord of Ruthin, after-

wards Earl of Kent: From whoſe * Grandchild ,

Richard, it came to King Henry the eighth, and

he ( as the Civilians ſpeak) added it to the

Sacred patrimony, or (as our Common Lawyers) 4 [8

to the Crown ; calling the large Eſtate belonging may, ***

to it, the Honour of An hill ; [into which it

was erected by Act of Parliament, in the 334 Uf.

year of his reign. Here, in a Palace belonging . I |

to that Prince, dwelt Queen Katharine du-

ring the progreſs of the Divorce, and from

hence ſhe was cited to appear before the Com-

miſſioners at Dunſtaple. The Town is much

improved in Buildings, eſpecially by its beauti-

ful and convenient Market-houſe and Seſſions-

houſe, Where the Aſſizes have been frequently

held. Here, in the middle of a moſt pleaſant

Park, is a delightful Seat belonging to the Earl

of Ailesbury, and built by . Counteſs of
Pembroke; the model whereof was deviſed by

the incomparable Sir Philip Sidney, in his Arce-

dia. Here is alſo another Seat of the Lord

Aſbburnham ; and at ſome diſtance, namely at

Wreſt, a third, the ancient Seat of the Grays,

and now the Reſidence of his Grace the Duke

of Kent. Three miles from Ampthill, a Gold- See x,

Mine was diſcovered, not many years ſince.] ;

More to the north, lies Hawughton-Congueſt, ſo flags

call'd from a famous and ancient family that Conque;

was long poſleſs'd of it. [Here, in two Com-

mon-fields, one call d Great-Danes-field, aud the g,,,, ..,

other Little-Danes-field, * are a great many Pits, Linie 9...

fifteen foot diameter, or thereabouts. In which fel.

Pariſh is alſo a Houſe and a conſiderable Eſtate, * *. W.

of the Lord Haverſham. Near this place, is Hawnes, "OW?

the ſeat of the Lord Carteret ; from which,

Sir George Carteret, was, for his loyalty, creared

by King Charles the ſecond a Baron ot this

Realm, by the Title of Baron Carteret of

Hawnes ; and, upon his death, the title deſcen-

ded to John his fon and heir, a perſon of cacly

and great Accompliſhments, and every way
ualified to do Honour and Service to his
ountry ; to whom alſo are to deſcend the

Titles of Viſcount Carteret and Earl Grzn-

ville, in right of his mother, who was younguit

daughter ot John Earl of Bath, and on wiom

the ſaid Titles have been confer'd ſince the

acceſſion of King George to the Throne. ] To

the [ſouth] weſt is H/oburn, where is a little worn,

School built by Fraxcis Earl of Bedford; and

here was formerly a famous Monaſtery, built

by H. de Bolebec. (Not far from whence, there

is dug-up great ſtore of Fullers-earth, commonly

call'd from the place H/oburn-earth ; a thing ſo

very uſeful in Cloathing, that the tranſportati-

on of it has been ſtrictly forbidden. ] Below

Woburn (alſo, ] at Aſpely Gowiz, they ſay there Aſply Guile

is a fort of Earth that turns wood into ſtone ; Earth wr

for an evidence whereof, I have heard that a ing wood int

wooden f Ladder was to be ſeen in that Mo- 4% %

naſtery, which had been for ſome time buried „

under-ground, and was dug-up a perfect ſtone.

More to the Eaſt, Tuddington ſhews its beauti- Tuddirg-

ful houſe, built by H. Lord Cheney ; where

alſo formerly Paulinus Pever, a Courtier, and

Sewer to King Henry the third, did (as Mat-

thew Paris tells us) build a ſeat with ſuch Palace-

like grandeur, ſuch a Chapel, ſuch Lodgiugs, with

other houſes F-4 ſtone cover d with lead; and ſurroun-

ded it with ſuch * avenues and parks ; that it rais'd « pom ti

Aſtoniſhment in the beholders. We had not gone

far from this place (by Heckley in the hole, a

dirty road, extreme troubleſome to travellers

in winter-time ; and through fields of excellent

ode i RL nnn

a

| Magiovi-
dium.
&+ In the 2d
Jos edition,
it was ſettle
at Aſhwell, |
Hertford-
© ſhire,

| * Are
© 4 Primitu
ſertabatur
Is the 2d
Edition,
mitm ſuce
4 W.

Leyto
J Fulle
Worthi
Þ 119,

Beans, yielding a pleaſant ſmell, but by their
fragrancy

ee Ken,

[aughton
Oe

Ireat and
ittie Dany
la,

Aubr, M$,

[awnes,

oburn.

ply Guile,
rth turn-

oo icto
ne.

Sala gie
ia.

1ddingto*-

dom rtl

1 AS © +
: =

341

* „
— — S - 4 td GT | rs Mn wn 4 —
4

BEDFORDSHIR?

1232

_342

3
4
C

1
4
4
4
2
4
3

5

Lacuna.

"oa, p p 4 wn
9 e

3 Magiovi-

ium.

each quarter has a * publick Pond ; which, tho
ſupply d only with rain-water, is never dry. that r confirm'd by numbers of inſtan-

fragrancy {ſpoiling the ſcent of dogs, to the Conqueſts of Cuthwulph, in the year 571;

at regret of the Hunters; ) till we aſcended | wherein, among others, he is ſaid by the Sax-

a white hill, into Chiltern, and preſently came[on-Annals to have taken Lyzeanbuph, which
Dunſtable. ro DunfZable, ſeated in a chalky ground; pret-|{eetns more properly to belong to this Leyton;
ty well inhabited, and full of Inns. It has four] than to Loughborough in Leiceſterſhire, where it
Streets, anſwering the four quarters of the] has been formerly placed. For, ſetting aſide,

World; and, becaule of the dryneſs of the ſoil that the Saxons generally fix d in ſuch places
as the Romans had been in (an Obſervation,

As for Springs, they can come at none without ces ; ) old name and new do very well

digging twenty four fathom deep. In the agree. The termination bunb has particular

middle of the town, there is a Croſs, or rather | reference only to the fortification that was
Pillar, which has engraven upon it the Arms of then there; and why might not the Lygean be
England, Caſtile, and Pontieu, and is adorn'd with] as well melted into Lay or Leigh, as the rivet
Statues : it was built by King Edward the] Lygea is now into Le or Ley? Beſides, the
firſt, in memory of his Queen, Eleanor; as|courſe of his Victories doth beſt ſuit this; for
ſome others were, in places through which ſhe] he went from Lygeanbuph to Ailesbury, and then
was carry'd in Funeral-pomp to Weſtminſter.|ro Be in Oxfordſhire ; which lie almoſt

There is no manner of doubt, but this was the in a direct line: whereas Loughborough lies quite

Station which Antoninus the Emperor, in his] out of the road. Nigh to Leighton, is Battleſ-Battleſderi.

Itinerary, mentions under the name of Magioni- den; from which place, Alen Bathurſt (eldeſt
nium, Magiovinium, and Magintum ; f nor need Son of Sir Benjamin Bathurſt, who for many

4 In the 2d it be ſought in any other place. For, ſetting] years enjoy'd the Office of Cofferer under her

Fos edition,

ir was ſettled aſide that it ſtands upon a Roman Military] late Majeſty Queen Anne,) was by her ſaid
— el, in way ; the Swine-herds now and then, in the] Majeſty created a Peer of this Realm, by the

© Hertford-
& ſhire,

neighbouring fields, find Coins of the Empe- title of Baron Bathurſt of Battleſden.]

rors, which they call to this day Madning-money ;] Now, of the Lords, Dukes, and Earls of Dukes, Earls,

and at a little diſtance, on the very deſcent of| Bedford. Firſt, there were Barons of Bedford and Barons of

Chiltern-bills, there is a round military fortifica- of the family of Beauchamp, who, by right Be4ford-

tion, ſuch as Strabo tells us the Britiſh rowns| of inheritance, were Almoners to the Kings
were. It contains nine acres, and is call'd Madning-| of land on their Coronation-day. But the
bowre and Madin-bowre ; a name, wherein (with|eſtate being divided by daughters among the
little variation)oneeaſily diſcovers Magintum. But. Mowbrays, Wakes, and Fitz-Otes ; King Edward
after that Magintum, either by the ſtorms of|the third made Engelram de Coucy (Earl of Soiſ-
war or time, was deſtroy'd, Henry the firſt built] ſons in France, to whom he had marry'd his
another 'Town here with a 5 ſeat at King daughter, ) firſt Earl of Bedford. Afterwards,
bury, and planted a Colony to be a curb to the Henry the fifth erected Bedford into a Duke-
inſolence of Robbers (as the private Hiſtory] dom, and it had three Dukes; the firſt, John,
of the little Monaſtery, which he founded for] third ſon of Henry the fourth, who beat the
an ornament to his Colony, plainly teſtifies.)] French in a ſea- fight, at the mouth of the Seine;
But take the very words of that private Hi- and again, being Regent of France, in a land-
ſtory, tho they ſavour ſomething of the bar-|fight at Vernoil. He was bury'd at Roan , and
barity of that age. I is to be obſerv'd, that that the Fortune of England, as to the French

* Area, ſtructure at the meeting of the way of Watling and] wars, was bury'd with him. Whoſe monu-

© 4 Primitus

| pots _Ikening, f was fir contriv'd by Henry the Elder of | ment while Charles the eighth King of France
| pn d de that name King of England, to prevent the mifchiefs| was viewing, and a Nobleman ſtood by who
© Edition, Pri-of one Dun a famous Robber , and his Gang : and] advis'd him to pull it down; No, ſaid he, let
N — ſuccide- that, from this Dun, the place was call d᷑ Dunſtable. him reſt in peace, now he is dead; whom France
1 W.

Our Lord the King built a burrough there, and a] dreaded in the field, while living. The ſecond
Royal ſeat for himſelf near it. The Burgeſſes were| Duke of Bedford, was George Nevil, very young,
free in every things as the other Burgeſs of the and the ſon of John Marqueſs of Montacute ;
King's Realm. King bad in the ſame village bath whom, Ring Edward the fourth did,
a Fair and Market ; and afterwards built a Church, f by Act of Parliament, deprive of their ho-
wherein by the authority of Pope Eugenius 3. he|nours, almoſt as ſoon as he had rais'd them
plac d Canons Regular, enfeoffing the ſaid Religious in the Father, for treachery in deſerting his par-
the whole Burrough, by Charter, and 17 them Ti and the Son, out of revenge to the Fa-
ſeveral immunities. But we muſt not believe, ther: tho' it was, indeed, 'd for a pretence,
upon the authority of a Monkiſh writer, that|that he had not Eſtate m—_ to ſupport the
it is denominated from a robber (who ſeems|grandeur of a Duke; and that great men, when
to have the name of Dun given him, for theſ they want anſwerable Fortunes, are always a
purpoſe; ) when the Saxon Dun, and the old|grievance and burthen to theirneighbours. The
Gauliſh or Britiſh Dunum do ſo well anſwer|third was Jaſper de Hatfeld, Earl of Pembroke,

the ſituation of the place, which is hilly and honour d with this title by his f nephew, King + Nepote.
in

mountainous; and when we know alſo, that it is Henry the ſeventh, whom he had ſav'd

very ancient (a). More to the weſt, is Leigh-|very great Dangers : bur he, tho he liv'd to a
ton or Leyton, f call'd alſo Layton-buzzard, cor-|great age, dy d unmarry d.

Py ruptly from Beaudeſert ; about half a mile from However, in the memory of * the laſt age, its 5, ſaid,

Which, is a Roman-Camp. And as this ſhews|return'd to the title of an Earldom ; when King ann, 1607-

the preſence of that people there; ſo the Emi-|Edward the ſixth created John Rel, Earl of
nence of this town, even in the beginning of Bedford; who was ſucceeded by his ſon Fran-
the Saxon times, ſeems to be prov'd from thoſe|cis, a perſon of that piety, and genteel temper,

mm

8
— nd : th.

(a) A Woman who liv'd, dy'd, and was ont Sp in this Town, had (as ex by her Epitaph) nineteen Chil-
dren at five births. Five at two ſeveral births, and three together, at three others. And, after the Corona-
tion of King Charles the ſecond, the Wives of two Blackſmiths, were at the ſame time deliver'd of three
Children each; one, of three boys, and the other, of three girls,

_ 2
Y *

— K

that

— —-—-—

—

343 CATTIEUCHLANT

—

that whatever can poſſibly be ſaid in his com-
mendation, will fall infinitely ſhort of his Vir-
tues. His ſucceflor was Edward; his grandchild
+ Is growing, by Francis his ſon, who f roy up to the
C. honour of his Anceſtors, [aka 'd the daugh-
ter of Joha Lord Harington, and dy'd in 1627.
without iſſue. Upon which, this title came
to Francis Lord Ruſſel of Thornhaw, ſon of
William, fourth ſon to the laſt Francis Earl of
Bedtord. Which Francis was father of William
Earl of Bedford, who, in the ſixth year of
King William and Queen Mary, was created
Marqueſs of Taviſtock and Duke of Bedford ;
in which honourable titles he was ſucceeded
by I/riothefley his Grandſon ; who having mar-
ry'd Elizabeth, only daughter and heir of John
Howland of Stretham in the County of Surrey
( trom whence he had the title of Baron How-
land of Stretham,) died in the year 1711, and

left, among other iſſue, H/riotheſtey, the preſent
Duke of Bedford.

This little County has 116 Pariſhes.

—_ —

More rare Plants growing wild in Bedford-
ſhire.

Caryophyllus minor repens noſtras. An Be-
tonica coronaria, five Caryophyllata repens ru-
bra J. B. Creeping wild-Pink. On Sandy-hills, not
far from an ancient Roman Camp. |

Gentianella fugax Autumnalis elatior, Cen-
taureæ minoris foliis. An Gentianella fugax
quarta Clus ? The taller Autumnal Gentian with
Centory-like leaves. On Barton-hills upon a waſte
chalky ground, as you go out of Dunſtable-way to-
wards Gorckambury, Park. p. 407.

Glaſtum ſativum Ger. Park. Iſatis ſativa vel
latifolia C. B. Iſatis ſeu Glaſtum ſarivum J. B.
Mad. This Plant is cultivated in this County, in
this manner. They every year ſow the ſeed (it is
never ſown above two years together,) and pluck up
the old Woad, unleſs it be ſaved for ſeed.

It is ſown about the beginning of March, and
cropt about the midſt of May, thereafter as the
leaf comes up. 5

It is beſt in a fair and dry Summer, but ——M
a moiſt ; then they crop it four or five times accor-
ding as it comes. The firſt crop is beſt, every crop
after worſe in order, and the laſt worſt of all.

As ſoon as it is cropt, it is carried to the Woad-mill,
and ground as ſmall as it can be, until it be-
comes fit to ball.

When it is lall d, they lay the balls on hurdles 20
dry : and when it is perfectly dry, they grind the ball;
to powder in the Mill as ſmall as is poſſible.

Thus ground, they throw it upon a floor, and wa-
ter it, which they call couching, and let it ſmoke and
heat, turning it every day till it be perfettly dry and
mouldy, which they call ſiluvering.

When it is filvered, they weigh it by the hundred
and bag it, putting two hundred weight in a lag;
and ſo ſend it to the Dier as fit for ſale, who tries
how it will die, and they ſet the price accordingly.

The beſt Woad is uſually worth eighteen Pounds
per Tonn.

With the tincture of this Plant the ancient Bri-
tains were wont to die their bodies, that they might
appear more terrible to their enemies. The Romans
calFd this herb in Latin Vitrum, witneſs Czſar,
Vitruvius, Mela, and Marcellus Empyricus ;
which word being manifeſtly an interpretation of
Glaſtum, it appears thence that Glaſſa or Glaſk:
ſignified the ſame thing to the ancient Britains that
it doth to us and not to a blue colour, as Mr.
Camden tells us it now doth to the Welſh. Why
the Britains ſhould call this herb Glaſle, I know
no better reaſon than becauſe it reſembles ſome kind
of Glaſs in colour, which we know hath often a
tincture of blue in it, whence alſo a dilute blue is
call'd color hyalinus.

Glaux Dioſcoridis. Dioſcorides his Milk-tare,
Upon Barton-hills four miles from Lewton, Ger.
pag. 1242. This hath been already mentioned in

ſeveral Counties.

Melampyrum cryſtatum. Crefled Cow-wheat :
See the Synonymes in Cambridgeſhire. It is no leſs
plentiful here than there about Blunham and other
Places. : | |

Ribes nigrum. Black Currans, Squinancy-ber-
ries. By the river-fide at Blunham and elſe-

E.

HERTFORDSHIRE.

PO N the Confines of Bed-
fordſhire, toward the Eaſt and
7 partly toward the South, lieth
2 Hertfordſhire, the third of thoſe
Wy = (as I _ 2 )
A which were poſle y the
VIXFZLEEES Cattieuchlani. fs Weſt- ſide bor-
dereth upon Bedfordſhire and Buckinghamſbire;
the South- ſide upon Middleſex ; the Eaſt upon

Eſſex, and the North upon Cambridgeſhire. It

is is well furniſh'd with corn-fields, paſture-

ounds, meadows, and little woods ; and

Norden, Hiſt. with ſmall, but very clear, ſtreams : | but Pa-
- Hertford» ſfure is the leaſt in proportion; and their mea-
al dows, here and there diſperſed, are many of
them ſaid to be cold and moſly ; and the ſoil

in general, to be, in reſpe& of ſome other
Counties, but barren of it ſelf, without the

eat toil and charge of the husbandman. ] But

10 eminent is it for famous ancient places;

that, as to that point, it may juſtly diſpute pre-

eminence with all its neighbours. For ſcarce

d

is there any one Shire in England, that can
ſhew more footſteps of Antiquity. [As to Vi-
countile Juriſdiction, both before and long af-

ter the time of Edward the third, it was an-
nex'd to Eflex ; and one Sheriff ſupply'd both
Counties, as did alſo one Eſcheator. Thc# Norl f.)
Juſtices, for the greater eaſe both of them-
ſelves and the common people, did by conſent
divide the whole Shire into three parts or Di-
viſions, and accordingly have three ſeveral
Courts for determination of leſſer matters;
the more conſiderable being referr'd to the ge-
neral meeting at Hertford. Thoſe who have
made Enquiries into the affairs of this County,
refer it's flouriſhing condition, partly to the
many thorow-fares to and from London, which

has been the cauſe of the improvement ©
their towns ; and partly to the healthful-
neſs of the air, which has induc'd ſeveral

of the Gentry to ſettle in it, and given occaſion | u
to this ſaying, + That they who buy a houſe in - ,

Hertfordſhire, pay two years purchaſe for the air.
Upen

:
” *
ES. > | - ——ů f
nne —— — 1 Fe ? 4.4 g 5
, 5 LS . e — .
rad hfoon-o oo co LE, * * . „„ A * oO " |
* a |
* -+
dF > K.
—
* — 2
# 0 Pd :
' . >
+ :
© 2 -
. +
* #4 hy $7*. p AI, * *
* he 21 an 1 4
* £ 4 * a 85 1 *
z : 5 Va * — 5 g's /
* 2 && ® * # :
£ - — S - . x -
- , & „ Fr * *
. > > - K 1 84 * , I 8 * * a
| „5. 2 7 69 1 0 *
4 - . I » . © N i —
* * 3 — 1 1 . con
. ge - - \ 4 — - :
. * 5 1 "- ** * *
2 my 1 * * *
” - *
2
-
- - |; 7

%
*
. * P
4%. ll.
—

*
*
—

Fl
4

.
"Y
oy

2 * 2 1 P : |
oy — 2 4 7
— . 9 K
- . F
» - - =
* 1 :
1 — a
by * 1 | 4
* * 0 5 II 1 4 +
- * ” p » — 922 * & 1 f
6 2 5 - :
4 Y x — ; |
w : —
© *% 1 2
. a 4 >< -
4 1
pn 4 & © ; 1 $4 —
- * ;
| *
. * WY *
0 7 *
" * w ww —tk * 7 I
R g 4 — — + *
«a - 8 BE ns (
+. K 24 - - - 1 4 8 9 1 1
o , - — >
a 0 : — 2 |
* © bo, 0 p
3 : a
. UH * * 4 — | /
* - ö y
——_ ow —_ 4 [ * by : . 4
< o n
# % = * — : :
= - * *. 2» 4 * = . ?
CY S # — %
* ” —
: o — EY :
5 %,
- * b g
- 1 ; *
8 > uf 2 * 7 —
1 5 * j — 0
b 2 \ - = — —_— ＋ * 4
8 - - af \
- £ p I g \ 1 R
» x * * %
- . . - % 1 *
F x d * A . * 4. *
be - » © - " * - .
* " 9 - 4 * * 7 © gt” :
* ow * - — „ 4 7 "Y * — —— % 4
. IF 4
* 1 7 1
* - * - 25 4
4 *
* 131 AM .
. 5 ; — 2
— % Y * - .: 5 1
8 $ * - © as q j „
„ a * , a 75 * , 4 6.4
CS 0 * 6 gf = a « f : 75 . „
* 8 : _ p |
2088 oo” 2 ; 43;
- . we 2 24 4 ö a |
LE 1 » |

*
-
* . * #
— — 6 : - K * * © * g 14
1 1 .
* * - % * * g
* * pe o 7
o ” 0 |
. *
- © * *
. *
« =
7 ;
— *
N : ö
by .
- 1 i A
*
- , : ;
- -w * ;
£ — - ” - * 4
. — F 1 2 . :
ö Is. . : 13
: ' = | 1
a 1 j4 - . 14
” * * * 1
8 3
7 8 L . |
\ - * :
„ * .
””
* » * ** g L 3
. "Ei -
4 3 » -
„ - * 4
+ * fl ” |
. :
= 0 *
- —_
.
*
Þ

-
bd .
* % 4 x i * + NG

- *

: a 2 i # - : :

.v- _ 14

%
. i A

- r e 1 5 n #.- *

1 OED Com r 2 . N e

1 x 2 3 Be Te os 3 I 26. Bey 3 8 nk * 0 8 enn
8 r 9 > E , q .

2881 5

* A

3

E ˙ LE SS om

1
i
EF

_ - <0
— —
— — — — —ä—ääů m — —  —  —

*

TI MAnuit of Time

O F Cy 4 p : by
PAR T {
1 e Thomas hapel orten

23, Ramermnh

ann,

= 5 es, it 7 /
*
5 Peruton

,
e Oughton head / 8
£ re . a po ge |
Ofles OF 2 a | 1 Grave «
Lilly MY IR
F4 1 224 Golinore y Ws Lt us hd 4
SEG HH a th 1 N.& 1 1 Ns.
Aether tutor 8 I
P =) | S 2 — 1 {hot
Þ Upper Sun fon ſ Humer K a+ 8 fe. bay 4 =
: > . N 2 as
O L eqrave. Mllarſh / | . * 3 271 } *
* 2 5 gee? . 5 | + Kings 2 Df 21 by 2 Y
4 Lewſey 1 Buecot ra 28 1 5 s Iu} : Dei. B,
a av 0 T ä _
— *** 22 / Broack
535 Þ AX 4 TheBurv 9 _Knebworth
| a Luton 1 ASS |
my” Nucl rer
* Duuiſtable - Memes © ED h Place | Dl 0
O 4 opt a ”
we Ya et A \ at 1238 0 mv" 2hE £96:
T % N Alter Green 89
* | "od uu. by 2 . . I Potters 0 ,
 <doborow r 2 8 wa N | „
ene e
Y : „ / 4 -- hey o Q 2. 6 , Ten t | ** 1
9 N * Fe | * 20 3 — |
f/ 2 oF Kenj/wort + "- al A. le Kate? 27025
Pg 2 7 0 2222 Nun
. — N#>- — \ FG , 2
EE DER. Y YC ECT

-

a *

Ivingo g ene D P*
15 Heer (worth 5 —* A. Row end |

n uſowel
wor ds

"=. | | TY
9 | Arnold ; 2 8 89 Der, Top ©

\Þ well ' ; 4
r 1 —

Golden Parſonag -
n *

*

A
rde. = "op — ” \ EE.
” RJ 0 L "Yi _ 2 22 p 2 —
- 10

FL end AS,
” . Shawford & N |
e end. A Gorambury &5
7570 7 2 r
** High SFeet 2:11 end

Gre 2 . e AY
2 Y 5. 4
Gate 22 0

9. 1 7 5 22 * : E Sunb orow ret
_ en N F; F-79200 oth 1 wo

Trac

a 8 DS.
2 A
ur khamſtecl

——

— G. ©:
a North end = A g *
| . — alt o Nor Fee Tittenkan ON | Las
. | 2 EN 1 _ . 7
1 is 0 F a 222 — 2 Ne
P A R e 9 22 — pte

ie eng NS

a a tet 2- Lhnearndle

25 P
- Gy ©. ca Ahn 2 — ]
. |
oe? of N. Hall 5 \ 2 2 .
Coles & hul * . 1 C N " | d 272 nal Bury * 2 Zufdlen |
Herttorc | | | N 4 Al, enham \
- > Shire | 0 1 mrrer A 22 1 2. v LO 0 R '
| ; rando FA | A
7 e Lea Radley
AM ell 4 Coba

Grove a Bigge.

bury
* 2

&,

,

ck man Forth

Sparrow "A

o
Bucher” 4
— * Oxey hall | f

7 e

A
b 222 —

* Cnmmberlow green
% 5 5

\

a &
3 Darnmel
/ : —— 8 \
. 22 |

7” end Y

Þ A. aun 11 2 218
No E-1 E” my”
eu, be % 4 Ke # hy 25 % 1 „ a 2-4
Bro ah, water 2 T N 1 J. Þ i ye 7. reef ;
S buten
7 _ *. — Fo = of % A E \ R 6 ” =y A. .
: 5 Fare. * N e Hide.
D 8 72 * 8 * * 3 4
a Ie
"EW 5 0 3 4. 7 7 Ws d 9 _ A A .

-

K

Anale

8 22

1 A e — * en 159. by
wot 5 ure 2 Wotton

„ 25

„ IC 9 7 BOP Ne
8 . wo p *

Y
%.

FO 2 2 N

Wo Twin
carer W

2
Water 755 ww
OOTY Broad 4
\ a T9 enden.
| DD @Pnſhanger

C. olegreen —
r * 2 if
* *. ki N u 17

: Sunb orow rear Weedhall EEE
mY 0 ö p - 2 3 2
| . e Taungigg bus 75 22 0 7 5
„ Au + Pot: * — If A /
*, . * —_— tt 871 . den
1 gemalen A He.

1
old wood gate

0 Weld Ml ©

>

o Punjburun

—

Ge % SS) .

N.
8 % .

0
Steple Alo, e

id tt Fred ond!
0 a *
ſtern 2 a

Hike [Oy

a PTR

tamond Strict
E

A PTY

OY ood geren j# * h
4 Th. 1 od. —
FT. þ th

Laonowtude aft from London
gin Alimunts of Time

o Buſs moborn

þ Radrell A, f 1 Anal ad „ -
. A Odo 77. Sw” : * — 2
Brgraus Grange 9 7 ;
? Pac * af . 1 * 8 2: Thor, tc r
PPT... ack — H U N 0 N. E. 2 |
"on 42 e .
.
. A vi nuten F % 7 22
* £4 * Sandor
; Phan
aid me

* „7,7. 77

Ys N

F Pe * -& Viale — are, "ne
p 1 ond

Sacomb YEE

\
Aue B 1

89 2 N, le ,

The Baſs ® 2
Wormley '

a-
2
5 ;

/
{3 re

$9

Were

cl

7-24
5 7 D G | 8 * ——
WR BE —

2 1
. p

D\./

9
cy = HodCGio7i
2

* — Be,

Great (hefil
Ky, ule Chegil

* Ab olrbury

[1

WIN STREE

nba
Horm head 8

ar...
Weyl |
4

0 . are
if 0 =) IS yp Ching rere a * FR... En.
Brad: 0 n 2 a: 1B ; SH mea "of
p | 3 * Ann
* [1 2 2 Gs — © o ia 525 7 = ns ooh
* «TH, or
22 0 115 vc Ari
Walkern |, hy Aller 3
Aste wen _ Ce. 3 223. 5 . © A — & 4
0 5 9X —

*

Ok wh
N

/

4 Z os fo ert

„
* * Rowdon
Y

Abel Swale
Sold bu Anſham &
Tohn Churchil

Waltham
A Scale of Abies

Longitude Ve. == ZLondoa ſo
in Degrees an, Ain

0 ©.
=;

—
—

7 Muftot | Mag *
"IF + Langley
. 3 a Aalen "WM D N
2 "th
uckland i, ml Pelhoun

ha

er.

i Foul: Green

ok ”Y

?F
a

A

„Lacan le, /

» Aa 9 /
ar, H

©

; Robury

en

72

4

1

77

Fo |

—

T3

1

kronicle 0

4 C'

Portable.

Royſton.

Others ſay

*
„
*

ſc was the
iſe of Ri-
Eehard de
Clare.

*
—

1
TS : |

2

of
Ro

Nucelles.
Roſſes or
cheſters.

Family

— — 5 wa
MI.
- ” — ,
— — 0

Barons de
Scales,

hs
——-— ow „ POT

——

*
48.
*
-
*
*
i BT. cs
- * 1
— — 2 —
32K

—
— — —
— was
— — —
.

N —2 — —
- _

ww -

* ” * —

,
3” m—_— „„
* 40 62

-
hd — — —
* «

h — Me - . bes 8 * 8
„ a =
4 4 7 5 k
— * _ — ä — a> en * ——
— IGTEY * OO 2 . 8 *
— Z —＋ "IT 8 FRY = 5

—
— - P
. 4+ % \ 1

— 2.9 2 —

”
F — — 2
a A. h, HS de tit... Mt... A 2 ht ſl "IO |
F
4 —

7 HERTFORDSHOIRE

1.

346

— Upon the very edge of the County to the [name of Aſpwell, ſo I was formerly of opinion,

Þ.oiable- North, where it touches upon Cambridgeſhire, that the ancient Britains, who were wont to
© royſion- ſtands Roys?on, a town of good note, but not [give divine honours to mountains, rivers, foun-
I ancient; as having riſen ſince the Norman |tains, and groves, as Gildas hath obſerved,
: Conqueſt. For in thoſe days, there was a fa- had accordingly, on the ſame account, and in
buen ſay mous Lady named Roy/ia (by ſome ſuppoſed to ſthe very ſame ſenſe, given to this place the
be was the have been Count eſs of Norfolk,) who erected name of Magioninium, and that it was the old

wife of Ri- , Croſs upon the Road- ſide, in this place, from

Magioninium of Antoninus. But + time hath+ Now placed

ghard de thence for many years call'd Royſe's Croſs ; till [now informed me better; and I am not aſham'd at Punſtaple
th Euftachius de Marc founded a ſmall Monaſtery |to change my opinion in this point: it is 1
hard by, to the honour of St. Thomas. Upon my humour to be fond of my own miſtakes.
this occaſion, Inns began to be built, and by And yet this place has its Antiquity evidenced,
degrees it came to be a town, which, inſtead of [by a large ſquare fortification hard by; which,
Royſe's Croſs, took the name of Roy#?on, i. e.|by the Roman coins frequently found there,

Royſe's town. Richard the firſt granted it a Fair,
as-alſo a Market, which is now very famous and

ſhows whoſe work it was. Alſo in Domeſday-
book (which contains the Survey of all En-

much frequented upon account of the Malt- gland, taken by William the Conqueror above

trade. For it 1s almoſt incredible, what a mul-
titude of Corn-merchants, Maltſters, and the|Boyrough.

ſix hundred years ago) it isexpreſly termed a * 500, C.

like dealers in Grain, do weekly reſort to this | More to the South, I ſaw Baldoc, a Market- Balder.
Market; and What a vaſt number of horſes|town, ſeated upon a whitiſh ſoil ; concerning

laden with Corn, do on thoſe days fill all the

which place Antiquity is wholly filent, as

gut. 32 H. 8. roads about it. [In the 32d year of King Hen-|well as concerning its neighbour Hitching, [or Hitching
c. 44+ ry the eighth, a Statute paſſed for the redu-| Hichrend, ſo called from lying at the end of Norden,

cing of this Town into one new Pariſh.] a Wood call'd Hitch, which former
From hence ſouthward, Tharfield, amongſt|to it : The main buſineſs of the

came up
nhabitants

Tharkeld. the w of ſome ſmall hills, hangs over Roy-|is Maulting, and their Market chiefly noted for

on. Here was the ſeat of the ancient Family|Corn.]

Berrers, of the Berners, deſcended from Hugh de Ber-] From thence; we come to Vimondley, ſeated wimondley:
ners; upon whom, as a reward for the valourſin a well-cultivated and rich ſoil ; an anci-

he had ſhown in the Norman Conqueſt, Milli-

ent and famous Manour, which is held by the

am the Conqueror beſtow'd a fair eſtate in E- moſt honourable tenure in this Kingdom (the

verſdon in Cambridgeſhire. And to that degree

Lawyers call it Grand Serjeanty,) by which the und Set-

of reputation did his poſterity arrive, that John|Lord thereof is bound, on the Inauguration- jeanty.
Bourchier, who married the ſole heireſs of this day, to preſent the firſt Cup to the King of

family, received the title of Lord Berners, upon

England, and for that time to be, as it were,

his being created a Baron, by King Edward|the Royal-Cup-bearer. This Honour was en-
the fourth. joyed, in virtue of the Lordſhip, towards the
._-elles Nor far from hence lieth Nucelles, a place for- beginning of the Norman times, by a noble
Family of merly belonging to the Roffes or Rocheftters. But family who. had the name of Fitz-Tecs ; from Fitz-Tees,

Rofles or Ro- all its reputation was deriv'd afterwards from

whom it came by a daughter to the Argentons.

© cheſter. the Barons de Scales, who were _— of Theſe derived both their name and pedigree

Norfolk, but heirs to the Roffes. For

ing from David de Argenton, a Norman Soldier, Argentons.

Edward the firſt, for the great ſervices per-|who ſerved in the wars under William the
formed in the Scotch wars, granted to Robert |Conqueror ; in memory of which Office, they

de Scales certain Lands then worth three hun-

t all along gave for their Arms Three Cups Ar- 4 They have

© Barons de dred marks per annum, and ſummoned him gen in a field Gules. But at length, upon failure jong given, C.
| Sales, amongſt his Barons to Parliament. The Arms ſof iſſue-male in the reign of Henry the ſixth,

of this family were Gules with fix Eſcallops Argent,| Elizabeth Argenton, who was ſole Heir, brought

which I have ſeen in ſeveral places. They

to her husband Sir William Allington, Kr. a

flouriſh'd till the reign of Edward the fourth, very fair eſtate together with this honour ;
| when the only daughter and heir thereof was|from whom the ſeventh in the lineal deſcent,
be Ripa- married to Anthony Widevile Earl Rivers. is Giles Allington, a young Gentleman of an + So aid,
KL Whom, as his own moſt ſignal Valour and his|obliging and truly generous temper, who (1 Ann. 1687.
ſiſter's marriage with the King had raiſed ; ſo] hope) by his own Virtue will add a new luſtre
the malice of his enemies never left purſuing] to the ancient reputation of this family. [Of
him, till they brought him to his end. For|the ſame family, William Allington, Baron of Kil-
Richard the third beheaded him, though he|/ard, was created Baron Allington of Wimondley,
had no way deſerved it. After the death of|in the 35 year of King Charles the ſecond ;
this Earl's Lady without iflue, the inheritance which title expired in Giles his ſon, for want
was divided in the time of Henry the ſeventh, of heir-male ; and the Manour was ſince pur-
between John Earl of Oxford and Sir William | chaſed by the Widow of James Hambleton.
Tindale Kt. who were found to be next in| Not far from hence is Offley, ſo called from Offley,
blood and coheirs ; the former by the Howards, | King Offa, who frequently reſided, and at laſt
the latter by the Bigods of Felbridge. dy'd, here: and, Hexton (near the military Hexton,
Awell. Lower, eaſtward, is Aſbwell, that is, the way) where, on a high hill, is an oval Camp
Fountain among Aſhes, a good large my- of great ſtrength and ancient Works ; and near
the

Village, and well peopled. It ſtands upon

it, on the top of another hill, is a hillock, ſuch

northern border of the County in a low ground, as the Romans were wont to rear for Soldiers
and is famous for Springs which here break ſlain, wherein many Bones have been found. A
forth out of the {ide of a ſtony bank or creek, |parcel of Ground near the foreſaid Camp, is

cover d over and ſhaded with tall Aſhes. Hence | called Dane-furlong to this day.

the water flows continually in ſo large a quan-] South from Wimondley atoreſaid,] near the
tity, that it's current being at a ſmall diſtance high-road between Stevenhaugh, and Knebworth
gathered into one chanel, ſerves to drive a Mill, |the ſeat of the famous family of the Littons, I
and quickly after becomes a river. From theſe |ſaw certain hills caſt-up, of a conſiderable big-
Wells and Aſhes together, as it is moſt certain neſs; ſuch as the old Romans were wont to
that the Engliſh-Saxons gave it the modern] raiſe for Soldiers _=_ in battle, where the

| X

Dane · furlong.

firſt

— — ag — — —

= — ro eee road -
—
= — 5 —
* = * LY _
— — — * a *

_ -
—

4 —
1 * 4 = 2, - = i — _ wy *
4 — - — - 7 Q = * — 7
* : — => b 2
a. rd
— — — — Þ S — -- ” „ - — — -
\ i + & nf 7 N 4 98 - -- — 7 td =
= .
w a * — - — 8 >. A. *
. TY A. $ —
1 0 4 — — —
—_ - — — — = — * af 2 — *
r — . — 3 — v
g = : * , -
— . C — 4 . 2 py
* — — 1 2
* 4 — 4 * —
:
* f ü 1

Wy
*
—23³ N »

— py — on; 4
r * 8 —
K
—
— —

— nm ne
-.* wy

——
— —

22
— — ͤ
"ge
—

We.
—
＋
" —
_ DS

2 — "ny — * "ST. p e on
ä — —

|
£
1

” ,
4
1
3
1
1

r 9

— — —_—

347

CATTIEU

CHLANI 50

firſt turf was laid by the General. Unleſs one
ſhould rather ſuppoſe them to have been pla-
ced as limits: 107 it was an ancient cuſtom to
raiſe ſuch little hills to mark out the bounds
of places, and underneath them to lay aſhes,

In the Coun. coals, lime, broken potſherds, c. as I ſhall ſhew

ty of Nor-
mpton,

more at large in another place. [Bur if they
were either Rockin burying-places nor bounds,
I am apt to think they had ſome relation to the
Danes. For the hundred at a little diſtance,

Dacorum- call'd Dacorum-Hundred, and the place within it

Hundred,

Dane-end, ſeem to be an evidence of ſome re-

Dane-end. markable thing or other, that the Danes either

Whetham-
ſed.

* De Loco
frumentario.

Brocket- hall.

Wood-hall.

did or ſuffer'd, in this place. And Norden, in his
deſcription of this County, tells us (but upon
what grounds, I know not, ) that the incurſi-
ons of the Danes were ſtop'd in this place,
where they receiv'd a ſignal overthrow : which,
if true, and built upon a good authoriry, makes
this conjecture the more probable. |

Lower, and more to the South, lies the head
of the river Lea, by our Anceſtors call'd Li-

ean; which with a very gentle ſtream paſſeth
tirſt by M het hamſted, a place very fruittul in
wheat, from whence alſo it took its name. John
of * IWhetham#ed, there born and thence na-
med, was by his Learning and Fame a great
ornament to it, in the days of Henry the
ſixth. From thence it runs to Brocket-hall, the
ſeat of the Knightly family of the Brockets,
from whom it paſſed by marriage to the Reads ; |
and Moodhall, Nee the ſeat of the But-
lern, who being deſcended from a Baron of
Wem, by marriage came to the eſtate of the
Gobions ; [as this eſtate, by the ſame way, paſſed
to Francis Shalkcroſs of Digginſworth.] Thence

Biſhops Hat- it comes near Biſhops-Hatfield,a town ſeated up-

field.

+ Now, C.

on the fide of a hill ; on the upper part where-
of ſtandeth a very fair houſe, f once belonging
to the King, as it did before to the Biſhops of
Ely; which was re-built and beautified by
John Morton Biſhop of Ely : for King Ed-

ar gave forty hides in this place to the

hurch of Ely. {But now eit is neither a
Royal, nor Biſhop's ſeat ; but belongs to
the Earls of Salisbury, being a place of great
pleaſure upon the account of it's Parks and
other conveniences. For fituation, contri-
vance, building, proſpe&, and other neceſſaries
to make a compleat ſeat, it gives way to few
in England. In this Pariſh, 1s alſo a ſeat of
the Earl of Angleſey, with a Park belonging to
Ic.

From this Hatfield, moſt of our Hiſtorians

- affirm that William de Hatfeld, fon of King Ed-

ward the third, took his name ; though it was
really from Hatfield in Yorkſhire : where, to
the neighbouring Abbot of Roch, Queen Philip-
pa gave five marks, and five nobles per Ammum
to the Monks, to pray for the ſoul of this her
ſon ; and the ſums, being transferr'd to the

v. Dylſpire. Church of York, are now paid by the Earl of

Hertford,

Devonſhire.] From Hatfield, the Lea paſſes on
to Hertford, which in ſome copies of Bede is
written Herudford, in that paſlage where he
treats of a Synod holden there A. D. 670.
Which name ſome will have to ſignifie the

Red-Ford, Red Ford, (a name, that would agree well

enough to the South and Meſt parts of the Coun-
ty, where the Soil is a red earth mix'd with
gravel ;) and] others the Ford of Harts. [It is
called in Saxon Heoptcropò; a name, no doubt,
taken from a Hart, with which ſort one may
eaſily imagine ſuch a woody Country to have

Hartingford, formerly abounded. Hartingford adjoyning makes

—— 2 n
7 yy cre ern 22 ee — * —— —— . æ ꝰ—

alſo for that Opinion ; and the Arms of the
Town, which (if rightly repreſented by Spede)
are a Hart couchant in the water, ſhould ſeem to

put it beyond diſpute, that this at leaſt ws
the tradition ; and yet two late Writers (con- Gi.
_— to the plain import of the Saxon name) Cha,
do ſtill chuſe, rather to interpret it a red Ford ; 23
contending at the ſame time ( partly, from

that Analogy of the names,) that it was the
Durocobriuæ of Antoninus, which they ſay, in
* implies as much as a red-water-paſ-

age.

This Town, in the time of William the
Conqueror, as we find in Domeſday-book, giſ-
charg'd it ſelf for ten hides, and there were in it
twenty fix Burgeſſes. But in our days it is but
thinly inhabited ; being chiefly conſiderable for
its Antiquity : for the whole County took its
name from it, and it ſtill continues the Shire-
town, It hath a Caſtle ſeated upon the river
Lea, which is thought to have been built
Edward the elder ; and was enlarged firſt by
the family of Clare, to whom it belong'd. For
Giſlebert de Clare, about the time of Henry
the ſecond, had the title of Earl from this
Herudford ; and Robert Fitz-walter, who was
of the ſame houſe of Clare, when King Se-
phen ſeized into his hands all the Caſtles
of England, directly told the King himſelf
(as we read in Matthew Paris) that by
ancient right the cuſtody of that Caſtle be-
long'd to him. After that, it came to the :
Crown, and King Edward the third grant- ö
ed to his fon John of Gaunt, then Earl of
Richmond, afterward Duke of Lancaſter, this $
Caſtle, together with the Town and Honour of Hert- N
ford; that there (as the words run in the Grant) J
he might keep a honſe ſuitable to his quality, and Vun. Sa2
have a decent habitation. Here is a very fair & 1016,
School, founded by Richard Hale, a native of 1
this County, who endowed it with forty pounds
per Annum.

From hence the river Lea quickly reacheth
Ware, ſo named from a ſort of dam anciently Ware;
made there to ſtop the current ; commonly
called a Veare or a Ware. Which, as it is con- :
firm'd by an abundance of waters thereabouts, = Burnt-Pe
that might put them under a neceſſity of ſuch um.
contrivances ; fo particularly, from the inunda- Nord. p.
tion in the year 1408, when it was almoſt all |
drown'd ; fince which time ( ſays Norden) and
before, there was great proviſion made by wayres
and ſtuces for the better preſervation of the town, Wan
and the grounds belonging to the ſame. The plenty Vun. f.
of waters hereabouts, gave occaſion to that in- |
genious and uſeful project of cutting the cha-
nel from hence to London, and conveying thi-
ther the New-river ; to the great convenience Neu. tes
and advantage of that City. Which river was
at firſt called alſo Middleton's Waters, from
Sir Hugh Middleton, a great Undertaker in that
Work. For the better effecting of this, two
ſeveral Acts of Parliament were granted to, Tac, 1;
the City of London; who finding it too char-c. 18.
geable, and thereupon deſiſting, Sir Hugh Mid-4 J< i.

Y 349

rertunium.

1241»

Tourna*
ments.

— „ VII "> : =
_ F r 7
14S” WY AY ** 2

Neubrigenſ

I, 5. c 4

Matth. Par
© An, 1248.

dleton himſelf ( affiſted by divers Gentlemen)“ ** | Lennin
brought the river near the City ; and for the
compleating of this defign, and preſerving of Puker

the River, a Corporation was erected 17 Jac.
1. by the name of the Governors and Company
of the New River, &c.| This Town was
rſt very prejudicial to Hertford ; and now by Furni
its populouſneſs hath quite eclips'd it. For in
the time of the Barons Wars with King John,
under the countenance and protection of it's
Lord the Baron of Wake, it preſum'd to turn
the high-road hither ; whereas before that time
it was a ſmall Village, and no Wagons could
paſs hither over the river, by reaſon of a chain Jnſperinw
drawn croſs the bridge, the key whereof waSH. 8.
always in the cuſtody of the Bailiff of 7
ord.

Vare;

en- tires.

ac, Is
11
ſac. lo
12.

ſpeximus
1

E

HERTFORDSHIRE.

350

1241»

=_—O_— by Noblemen and Gentlemen ; and were more
than meer ſports or diverſions. They were
frſt inſtituted (if we may believe Munſter) in
the year of our Lord 934, and were managed
by their own particular Laws, which may be

practice was continued in all parts, to that de-

of perſons of the belt 2 eſpecially here
=. 6 in England, from the time

| Neubrigen'ts brought it in; that the Church was forced b
| Hy bar. ſeveral Canons expreſly to forbid them, wit

© An. 1248. this Penalt annexed, That whoever ſhould
Chriſtian Burial, And under King Henry the
third, by advice of Parliament, it was enacted,
that the Offenders eſtates ſhould be forfeited,
and their children diſinherited. And yet in
nicious Cuſtom prevail'd long after, and was
not wholly laid aſide till the reign of King
ing indo Appan, when they had a deſign up-

is not yet — and ſettled, there is room

But this, by the by.

Nord. p.21. There were ſome fragments an
have been con

: Weaver,
| Mon. f. 549,

ford. Much about the ſame time, Gilbert Mar- [force, he dug three new Chanels, and did fo

al Earl of Pembroke, then the principal Peet [turn the waters of the Zea out of their old
of England, proclaimed a Tournament on horſe-

gree of madneſs, and with ſo great a ſlaughter
ing Stephen had the Conqueror gave to the Biſhops of London;

contempt of that good Law, this evil and per-I dare not (with a late Author) a

un Sax, Edward the third. The ancient Saxon-An-
d. nals, in the year 1016, ſpeak of the Danes ſail- vic. In one of the windows of the Church,

courſe to hinder the return of their Fleet, that

Y back at this place, under the name of a Fur. from that time the river was of very little uſe
Feranum. , defigning thereby to elade the force of to the neighbourhood ; till it was long ſince
E the King's Proclamation, by which Tournaments reſtored to it's ancient Chanel, and made more
had been prohibited. This drew. hither a ve-|commodious for the conveyance of wares, corn,
ry great concourſe of Nobility and Gentry 5|&c. The Lea, ſoon after it hath left Ware,
and when he came himfelf ro make his Ca-|[and paſsd by Stanſted (where Sir Edward Baſh Stanſted,
reer, his horſe unfortunately broke the bridle endowed a fair Almſhouſe, and a Grammar-
and threw him, and he was, in a miſerable School; beſides a conſiderable benefaction given
manner, trampled to death. Theſe Tourna- to the Church ;)] receives from the eaſt a ſmall
Tourna ments were publick exerciſes of Arms, practis driver named Sort, which firſt runneth by Bi- Biſhops Stort-

ſhops Stortford, | formerly) a little town, [but now ford.
grown into a conſiderable place, well ſtock'd
With Inns, and a good Market. It is built in
the form of a Crofs, having four Sheets poin-
ting to the four quarters; in the four Roads

ſcen in the ſame Author. For a long time, this anſwering to which, were anciently four

Croſſes. It was formerly] fortified with a
{mall Caſtle ſtanding upon an hill, raiſed by art C gie of
within a little Ifland. Which Caſtle, William Waymore.
whence it came to be called Biſhops Stortford.
But King John, out of hatred to Biſhop William
[de S. Maria, made Biſhop ann. 1 199, the ſame

happen to be lain therein, ſhould be denied|year he came to the Crown, )] demoliſhed it.

Ir ſeems to have been of great ſtrength, having

within it a dark and deep Dungeon, call'd the

ConviftF's Priſon ; but that this name denotes Convia's

ſome great privileges formerly r to It, Priſon.
rm; be-

lieving it to be no other, than the priſon which

the Biſhop of London might probably have in

that place, for the ſafe-keeping of Clerks Con-

are the names of King Atbelſtan, St. Edward,

on the Kingdom of Mercia; and as that place and King Edward; but of no other later Kings.1

From thence the Lea paſſeth on to Hunſdon, Hunſdon.

for a Conjecture, that the true reading may|which place, by the favour of Queen Eliza-
be, co papan, and, that, on that ſuppoſition, beth, gave the title of Baron to Sir Henry Ca- Baron of
they came to this place along the river Lea. ry, then Lord Chamberlain. For, beſides that Hunſdon.

he was deſcended from that family of the

© Burnt-pe. North from Ware, is Burnt-Pelham, ſo call'd, [Dukes of Somerſet which was of the Blood
= tam, from ſome great fire that hath g vr here. Royal, he alſo was by his mother Mary Bolen,
: oundations|Coufin-German to Queen Elizabeth. 1

of old — which appear'd plainly toſ having receiv'd this ſmall river, haſteneth with

um'd by fire, and ſo to haveſa more full and brisk current toward the
hy" name to the place; and in the walls of| Thames ; and in it's paſlage thither, ſalutes
the Church, a very ancient monument, namely, Theobald-houſe, commonly called Tibauld's, a place, Theobald-
a man figur'd in ſtone, and about him an eagle, than which, as to the Fabrick, nothing t could houſe,
a lion, and a bull, all winged, and a fourthſbe more elegant; and as to the Gardens, + Can, C.
of the ſhape of an angel; poſſibly, contrivd Walks, and 15

he Lea,

ilderneſſes, nothing more plea-

to repreſent the four Evangeliſts. Under theſſant. This Houſe was built by that Neſtor
feet of the man, a Croſs-flowry, and under the ſof Britain, the right honourable Baron Bur-

Croſs a ſerpent. |

leigh' Lord Treaſurer of England (to whom

Betwixt the two Towns, Ware and Hertford, more particularly this river is obliged for the
which are ſcarce two miles aſunder, Lea is en- recovery of it's ancient Chanel,) [and was very
creas'd by two ſmall rivers from the North.] much improv'd by his fon Robert, who ex-* Stat, 4 J. i.
Aſſer names them Mimera and Beneficia ; | and|chang'd it with King James the firſt for Hat-
the Saxon-Annals, Memepa and Benepica.] I|feld-houſe. f In the year 1651, during the , py, wor,
| ſhould gueſs that to be the Beneficia, upon which Civil Wars, it was quite defac'd, and the plun- p. 17.
Pennington, Bennington ſtands, where the Henſtedi, a noted] der of it ſhar'd among the Soldiers. |
family, had formerly a ſmall Caſtle : And that But now let us return to the heart of the
Pukerich, to be the Mimera which paſſeth by Pukerich, a|County, where are places more ancient. Twelve
place that obtain'd the privilege of a Marker|miles weſt from Hertford, ſtood: Verolamium, Verolamiumy
and Fair by the Grant of Edward the firſt, in old time a very famous City. Tacitus calls
which was procured by the Intereſt of William|it Perulamium ; and Ptolemy, Urolanium, and

Furniyan, le Bland. Behind Puckerich, is Munden Furni
vall ; which deſerves to be mention'd on thi

Verolamium. The ſituation of this place is well
known to have been cloſe by the town of St.

account, that it had for its Lord, Gerard de| Albans in Caiſho Hundred (which Hundred St. Albans,
Furnivall (from whom alſo it took it's name )| was, without doubt, inhabited by thoſe Caſii,
a younger ſon of Gerard Furnivall of Sheffield.| of whom Czſar makes mention.) The Saxons
But now let us return to the river Lea and the] call'd it Vaclinga-cercen, from the famous
town of Ware; as far as which place theſhigh-way named Watlingſtreat ; and Peplam-

ces, as Aſſer relates it, and there built a Fort

Danes came up the river in their light Pinna4 cearcen. Nor hath it yet loſt it's ancient name;

for it is ſtill commonly call'd Verulam, altho*

which when King Alfred could not take by nothing of that remains, beſides ruins of walls,

chequer'd

1

ae — - FIR - Se. * Pa — 8 4 4 7 * N . i * _ = - —_
n . . 5 * — % 4
«ac ws Y 8 — 1 _ * 3
— " = - — 28 3 I SIT . - un — *
" — *> «4%

CATTIEUCHLANI,

chequer'd pavements, and Roman Coins which
they now and then dig- up. [Some of the Ro-
man bricks do alſo ſtill appear ; and the great
Church here was built out of the ruins of Old
Verulam ; for altho* Time and Weather have
made the outſide look like Stone, yet if you
break them, or go up to the Tower, the red-
neſs of the brick preſently appears. About
the year 1666, here was found a Copper Coin,
which had on one ſide Romulus and Remus ſuck-
ing the Wolf, and on the other Rome; but
was much defaced. } |

The Town was ſeated on the fide of a
gentle hill, to the eaſt ; and was fortified with
very {trong walls, a double rampire, and deep
trenches to the ſouth. And on the eaſt, it
had a ſmall rivulet, which formerly made on
that ſide a large Mere or ſtanding water:

whereupon, it has been conjectur'd, that this

Caſſibelinus was the town of Caſſibelinus ({o well defended

his town.

by woods and marſhes,) which was taken by
Czſar. For there is not, that I know of, any
other Mere hereabouts. In Nero's time, it
was eſteem'd a Municipium ; which gave occa-
ſion to Ninius, in his Catalogue of Cities, to
call it Caer-Municip. So that, there is no doubt,
but this was that Caer Municipium, which Hu-
bert Goltzius found in an old Inſcription, Theſe

Municipia, Municipia, were Towns, whoſe Inhabitants en-

joyed the rights and privileges of Roman Ci-
tizens. And the name aroſe 4 muneribus ca-
piendis, i. e. from their capacity to bear pub-
lick Offices in the Common-wealth. As to
Orders and Degrees, they had their Decuriones
(Senators or Maſters,) their Equites ( or Gen-
tlemen; ) and their Commons: As to their
publick Council, they had a Senate and Peo-
ple ; As to their Magiſtrates and Prieſts, they
had their Duumviri and Triumviri to admini-
ſter Juſtice ; and alſo their Cenſors, Ædiles,
Quæſtors, and Flamins. But whether this our
Verulam was a Municipium, with Suffrages, or
without, is not eaſie to determine. A Muni-
cipium with Suffrages they call'd that, which
was capable of publick honours ; as they call-
ed the other which was uncapable, a Muni-
cipium without Suffrages. In the reign of the
ſame Nero, when Bunduica or Boadicia, Queen
of the [ceni, out of an inveterate hatred of
the Romans, had raiſed a bloody War againſt
them, this town (as Tacitus writes) was by
the Britains entirely ruin d. Of which Sue-
tonius makes mention in theſe words : Theſe
miſeries, which were the effetts of that Prince's in-
humanity, were attended with great ſlaughter in Bri-

* Verulam tain, where * tuo of the chief towns in that Mand

and Mal-
don,

ſignifies.

were ſack d, with a dreadful laughter both of Ro-
man Citizens and their Allies. Yet afterward,
this City flouriſhed again, and grew up to a
great degree of eminency. And I have ſeen ſe-
veral pieces of ancient money, which in all
probability were coin'd here, with this Inſcri

tion, TASCIA ; and on the reverſe VER.
which the moſt inquiſitive and learned Anti-

quary David Powel S. T. P. interprets, The
Taſec, what it Tribute of Verulam. For Taſe (as he ſays,) in
the Britiſh ſignifies Tribute, Taſcia a Tri-

Some will have it, that theſe pieces were
coyn'd before the coming-in of the Romans :
But I am not of their mind. For I have al-
ways thought them to be the Tribute-money
which the Romans (as I obſerv'd before) were
wont every year to raiſe by Poll, and by a
Land-tax. For before the coming of the Ro-
mans, I can ſcarce think that the Beirhins coyn'd
money. And yet I am not unmindful of what g. th
Cæſar writes of them: They uſe, ſaith he, braſs- "a *
Money, or rings of Iron made to a certain weight ;
where ancient Copies have Lanceis ferreis, tor Other: 4
which the Criticks have ſubſtituted Laminis nul,
ferreis, 1. e. Plates of . But = 8 worn be
impertinent to repeat my former Diſcourſe u
on this Subject: Net us As al return to the Ah On
buſineſs in hand. As to Verulam ; no one
thing was ſo great an honour to it, as that it
brought forth St. Alban, a Perſon deſervedly
eminent for his piety, and ſteadineſs in the
Chriſtian Faith: who, when Diocleſian, by all
ſorts of torments, endeayour'd the utter extir-
pation of the Chriſtian Religion, did with an
invincible conſtancy of mind ſuffer Martyr-
dom, the firſt Man in Britain. For which rea- ,, de
ſon he is called Our Stephen, and the Protomar- Many.
tyr of Britain; and Fortunatus Presbyter men-
tions him thus : |

— egregium ſœcunda Britannia pro-
ert.

And fruitful Britain holy Alban ſhews.

Alſo Hiericus a Frenchman, who flouriſh'd :
+ eight hundred years ſince, gives an account in t S
Verſe of St. Alban's Martyrdom ; and how, ,. Lie
his Executioner was, by a miracle, ſtruck of 5s: Cer
blind. man.

Millia pænarum Chriſti pro nomine paſſus,

Quem tandem rapuit capitis ſententia caſi.

Sed non lictori ceſſit res tuta ſuperbo,

Utque caput Santto, ceciderunt lumina
ævo.

After a thouſand ſufferings for the Faith,
When judg'd at laſt to end them all with.
death;
The 0 Lictor did juſt Heav'n ſur-
riſe,
And Ls the Saint his head, the Villain loſt
his eyes.

In an old Agonal, or Hiſtory of his Paſſion,
we are told that the Citizens of Verulam caus'd

bute-penny, and Taſcyd the chief Collector of an account of his ſuffering to be expreſſed on

Tribute. Burt, if you pleaſe, view the Coyn

once more ; for I have given you a ſight of it

before,

a Marble ; which they plac'd in their rown-
walls, as a publick diſgrace to him, and a ter-
ror to all Chriſtians. Bur afterwards, when the
blood of Martyrs had overcome the cruelty of
Tyrants, the Chriſtians built a Church here to
his memory; which, as Bede tells us, was 2
piece of moſt admirable workmanſhip. And
now Ferulam came to be ſo much reverenced for
it's ſanctity, that An. Dom. 429. a Synod was
held here upon occaſion of the Pelagian m_—

7.

| Holmehurl

St. Albar

per Circuit.

* That is
every hou!
Penny,

Iban the
arty .

oy

TW — —

—_— —

HERTFORDSHIRE 357

ſy, which was ſpread arnew over the Iſland magnificent Prince Offa made a gift to the Pope of the
by Agion ſon to Severianus a Biſhop ; and | Peter-pence of his Kingdom; he obtain d this par-
had ſo generally infected the Britiſh Churches, [ticular privilege for the Church of St. Alban the
chat, to maintain the true Faith, they were | Protomartyy of England, that that Church might
forc'd to ſend into France tor Germanus Biſhop ſ collect and retain to it's. own uſe, all the Romeſcot
of Auxerre, and Lupus Biſhop of 'Tyoies-; who, [or Peter-pence throughout Hertfordſhire, in which
confuting the hereſie, render'd themſelves thert- | County that Church ſtands. Wherefore, as the Church
by very venerable to the Britains ; eſpecially it ſelf by the King's grant enjoys all manner of Roy-
St. German, as appears by the many Churches |alties, ſo the Abbot of the place for the time being
dedicated to him in this Iſland. Particularly, [hath all Epiſcopal Ornaments. Alſo, Pope Ha-
there is ſtill remaining near the walls of this|drian 4. who was born near Verulam, granted

. German's ruin'd City, a ſmall Chapel, which bears that|to the Abbots of this Monaſtery ( theſe are
I hapel.

Saint's name ; tho' otherwiſe profanely em-|the words of the Privilege) That as St. Alban is

ployed. Ir ſtands in the very place where St. well known to be the Protomartyr of the Engliſh

German preached to the people; for which] Nation, ſo the Abbot of his MonaFery ſhould in al

we have the authority of ſome ancient Records times be reputed the firſt, in dignity, of all the Al-

of St. Alban's Church. We are told farther|bors in England. Neither did the Abbots neg-

by Conſtantius (who livd at the ſame time)|[le& any Improvements that might be uſeſul or

in the life of St. German, that he cauſed the Se- ornamental to it; fillin up with earth a large

pulcher of St. Alban to be opened, and plac'd|Pool or Mere which > under the town of

therein the Reliques of certain Saints, that they| Verulam. The memory of this Pool remains

whom one Heaven had received, might alſo reſt toge-|in a certain ſtreer of the town call'd Fiſhpool-

ther in one Sepulchre. I take notice of this by the] ſtreet. Near which, when Anchors happen'd anchors dug.
way, that we may hence collect what was theſ in our memory to be dug-up, ſome (led into a up.

calls of that Age. Not long after, Yerulam| miſtake by a corrupt place in Gildas) preſently
fell into the hands of the Saxons. But Uther |concluded, that the Thames had formerly had
the Britain, for his ſerpentine ſubtilty ſirnam'd| it's courſe this way. But concerning this Mere
Pendragon, recover'd it, with much difficulty or Fiſhpool, an ancient hiſtorian writes thus:
and after a very tedioiis lege. After whole| Alfric the Abbot purchas'd for a great ſum of mo-
death, it fell again into the ſame hands. For|xey a large and deep Pond cal d Fiſhpool, which by
Gildas's words plainly enough intimate, that its vicinity was very prejudicial to the Church of St.
the Saxons in his days were poſleſs'd of this| Alban. For the Fiſhery belonged to the Crown, and
City. God, ſaith he, hath lighted up unto us the the King's Officers and others that came to fiſh,
moſt clear Lamps of his Saints ; whoſe burial-pla-| were troubleſome and chargeable to the Monattery
ces, as well as the places of their paſſion, might excite| and the Monks. The ſaid Abbot therefore drein'd the
in our ſouls a great fervour of divine love every time] water out of the Pool, and turn d it into dry land.
we caſt our eyes upon them, if (as a puniſhment to] It I ſhould lay ſtreſs upon the Stories com-
our great wickedneſs,) the Barbarians had not been mon among the People; viz. how great plenty
ſuffer'd to rob us of them : I mean, St. Alban at of Roman Coins, how many Images of gold
Verulam, &c. Perulam was now quite ruin'd by | and ſilver, how many veſſels, how many marble
theſe Wars, when about the year of our Lord| Pillars, how many capitals ; in fine, how many
795. Offa, the moſt potent King of the Mer-| wonderful pieces of ancient work, have been
cians, founded over-againſt it in a place they fetch'd out of the earth; I could not, in reaſon,ex-

| Holmehurſt, called Folmehurſt, a very large and ſtately Mo- pect to be credited. However, take this ſhort ac-

naſtery to the memory of St. Alban, or as his count, upon the eredit of an ancient Hiſtorian,
Charter expreſſes it, #nto our Lord Jeſus Chriſt,| Ealred the Abbot, in the reign of K. Edgar, ſearch- Ae chi
and to St. Alban the Martyr, whoſe Reliques the ing the old ſubterraneons Vaults of Verulam, broke year 960.
divine Grace hath diſcover d, as a hopeful pledge both| them all down, and ſtop'd up the ways and paſſa-
of our preſent proſperity, and of our future happi- ges under-ground which were arch'd over very artifi-
neſs. Together with the Monaſtery, there pre- cially, and very firmly built; ſome whereof were
ſently grew up a Town, which from the Saint|carried under that water, which in old time almoſt

dr. Albans. took the name of St. Allan s. The ſame King | encompaſſed the whole City. This he did, becauſe

Offa, and ſeveral other Kings of England his|they were ordinary lurking-places of thieves and
Succeſlors, did beſtow on this Monaſtery very | whores. He fill d up the ditches of the City, and
large poſſeſſions, and obtain for it from divers | ſtop d up certain Caves thereabouts, whither Malefa-
Popes very ample privileges. I will here recite ſctors us'd to fly for Refuge. But he laid afide all
a paſlage to that purpoſe out of Horilegus, that | the tiles, and ſuch Stones as he found fit for build-
you may obſerve the extraordinary liberality off ing. Hard by the bank, they happen d upon oaken
our Princes to the Church. Thus therefore he. |planks, with nails ſticking in them, cover d with
The moſt mighty King Offa gave to S. Alban the] pitch, as alſo ſome other ſhipping-tackle, particularly,
Protomartyr a town of the Royal Demeſne, which is| Anchors half eaten with ruſt, and Oars of fir. And
diſtant about twenty miles from Verulam, and is|a little after, Eadmer his Succeſſor went forward

" Perhaps called“ Uneſlaw, and + many other lands round a-|with the work which Ealdred had begun, and his

Ia „ bout, as may be ſeen in that King's Charter, kept to diggers met with the foundation
er Cireuitum this day in the ſaid Monaſtery.

- of a Palace in the

immunities middle of the old City; and in a hollow place in the

privileges whereof are ſo large and peculiar, that wall, contriv'd like a ſmall cloſet, they happen d up-
„That . ft is exempt from paying the Apoſtolical duty to the|on Books having covers of oak and filk ſtrings ; one
at 15, Ot Pope, called

every houſe a
enny.

Romeſcot; whereas neither the King, whereof contain d the life of St. Alban in the Bri-
nor Archbiſhop, nor any other Biſhop, Abbot, or |tiſh language; the reſt contained certain Pagan Cere-
Prior, nor any other perſon whatſoever in the whole |monies. When they had open d the Earth to a greater
Kingdom, is exempted from this payment : this place depth, they met with old ſtone- tables, tiles alſo and
alone is exempt. Furthermore, the Abbot, or a Monk |pillars, pots, and great earthen veſſels neatly wrought,
acting as Archdeacon under him, exerciſes Epiſcopal |and others of glaſs containing the aſhes of the dead,
Juriſdiftion over all the Clergy and Laity refiding |8c. And at laſt, out of theſe remains of old Ve-
on any of the lands appertaining to the Monaſtery ; |rulam, Eadmer built a new Monaſtery to St. Al-
Jo that the Abbot hereof is not ſubjef# to any Arch- ban. Thus much of the Antiquity and Dig-
biſhop, Biſhop, or Legate, but to the Pope alone. nity of Verulam. For the honour of it, give
This alſo deſerves ons Obſervation, that when the me leave, by way a Corollary, to _ 12

* exaſtic

- _ —— ww _——

— —

2E ME Dude en Dots. _

mm

N

R l 20 eo U

1 ICI _ by

— _—_— ————
© -

— — . x” FLA

* —
* —
= F
1 Om

_ A.

—
ä—ytyt— — 2

—
r
- * 1 - ”_

© —_—_ — 7
— = *

—

—
— —

* — - — —

—
r = a” — *
* —
_

— 22 — 3
39— 2

« — — - n— — — —
VB 2 - Ju

at y A,

K 8 — — : — —

— —
—

— — j
. * 9 *s - = bl
—

8 — = "a >

CATTIEUCHLANI.,.

35

Hexaſtic of Alexander Netham, who was born ETIAM INFIMIS ANGLORUM LIBEN

* So ſaid, there 400 years ago.

ann. 1807.

St. Alban's,

+ Hath, C.

A Font taken
out of the
Scotch ſpoils,
it Prefetus
Cuniculario-
rum.

Urbs infignis erat Verolamia, plus operoſa
Arti, nature debuit illa minus.
Pendragon Arthuri Patris hac obſeſſa la-
borem 7
Septennem ſprevit cive ſuperba ſuo.
Hic eſt Martyrii roſeo decoratus honore
Albanus tivis, inclyta Roma, tuus.

To ancient Verulam a famous town

Much kindneſs Art hath ſhow'd, but Na-
ture none. |

Great Arthur's fire Pendragon's utmoſt

wer

For ſeven long years did the proud walls
endure.

Here holy Alban Citizen of Rome,

Obrain'd the happy Crown of Martyrdom.
And in another place ;

Flic locus atatis noſtræ primordia novit
Amos felices, latitizque dies:

Hic locus ingenuus pueriles imbuit anuos
Artibus, & noftre laudis origo fuis.

Hic locus infignis, magndſque creavit alum-

nos,

Felix eximio Martyre, gente, ſitu.

Militat hic Chriſto, nott&que dieque labors
ruigilat ſantto Religioſa cohors.

Here my firſt breath with happy ſtars was
drawn, | |

Here my glad years and all my joys

began.

In gradual knowledge here my mind in-
creaſt,

Here the firſt ſparks of glory fir d my
breaſt.

Hail noble Town ! where fame ſhall ne're
torget

The Saint, the Citizens, and happy ſeat.

Here heaven's true Soldiers with unwearied
care

And pious labour wage the Chriſtian war.

But now, old Ferulam is turned into Corn-
fields, and St. Albans flouriſhes; which roſe out of
the ruins of it, and is a neat and large town.
The Church of the Monaſtery 1s ſtill in being ;
a pile of building, very much admir'd for its
largeneſs, beauty, and antiquity. When the
Monks were turned our, it was by the towns-
men purchaſed for tour hundred pounds (other-
wiſe it had been laid even with the ground; )
and converted into a Parochial Church. It + had
in it a very noble Font of ſolid Braſs, where-
in the Children of the Kings of Scotland were

wont to be baptized. Which Font Sir Richard}

Lea, * Commander of the Pioneers, brought
hither among the reſt of the Spoils taken in
the Scotch Wars, and plac'd it here with this
proud Inſcription :

CUM LETHIA OPIDUM APUD
SCOTOS NON INCELEBRE, ET EDIN-
BURGUS PRIMARIA APUD EOS CI
VITAS INCENDIO CONFLAGRA-
RENT, RICHARDUS LEUS EQUES
AURATUS ME FLAMMIS EREPTUM
AD ANGLOS PERDUXIT. HUJUS
EGO TAN TI BENEFICH MEMOR,
NON NISI REGUM LIBEROS LAVARE
SOLITUS, NUNC MEAM OPERAM

TER CONDIXE LE US VICTOR SI
VOLUIT. VALE. ANNO DOMINL
D. XLII. ET ANNO REGNI HEN.

OCTAVI XXXVIL

—

Men Leith, a Town &. good account in Scot-
and, and Edinburgh the Pow City of that
Nation, were on fire, Sir Richard Lea Knight ſa-
ved me ont of the flames, and ht me into

gland. In gratitude for this his deliverance, I who
heretofore ſerved only at the baptiſm of the Chil-
dren of Kings, do now moſt willingly offer the ſame
ſervice even to the meaneft of the Engliſh Nation.
Lea the hath ſo commanded. Adieu.
ook 1543. in the 36 year of King Henry the

ſuffer d nothing (how ſacred ſoever) to ſtand,
that could be converted to money.]

But to return. As Antiquity hath conſe-
crated this ur to Religion, ſo Mars ſeems
to have made it a ſeat of war. To paſs by other

inſtances; when our Nation had almoſt ſpenc

its vital ſpirits in the Civil wars between the
two Houſes of Tk and LancaFer ; there were
two battles fought within this very Town, by the
heads of the two Parties; with different ſucceſs,
In the firſt fight, Richard Duke of York defeated
the Lancaſtrian Party, took King Henry the
ſixth priſoner, and ſlew a great many Perſons
of the beſt quality. But four years after, the
Lancaſtrians had the advantage under the con-
duct of Queen aret, routed the Lorkiſts,

and Church-yard of St. Peter's were filled.

In the middle of this Town, King Edward
the firſt erected a yery ſtately Croſs, about the
year 1290. in memory of Queen Eleanor, who
dying in Lincolnſhire, was from thence car-
ry'd to Weſtminſter. The ſame he did, in
ſeveral other places through which they paſs'd.

ſons of Honour ;

3

Fxnis Font is now taken away; in the late p
Civil Wars, as it ſeems, by thoſe hands which nn

and recovered their King. [With the bodies 4 Hert
of the ſlain in thoſe two Battles, the Church p. 32.

This place hath given Title to ſeveral Per- yifuaunt,
2 of Viſcount to the fa- Eack, ard

mous Francis Bacon, Lord Verulam, and Lord Marg

Chancellor of England, created Viſcount of
this place Jan. 18. 1620. Afterwards, Richard
de Burgh, Earl of Clanrikard in the kingdom of
Ireland, was created Earl of St. Albans by
King Charles the firſt, and was ſucceeded in
that honour by Ulick his ſon, with whom that
title dy'd for want of iſſue-male. A little be-
fore the my, i this 1 2 was confer d
upon Henry Jermin n t. Edmundsbury,
bb en Services to King Charles =
ſecond ; and afterwards, by the ſame King, it
was erected into a Dukedom, in the perſon of
Charles Beauclair, who having, in the 28*
ear of the ſaid King's reign, been created
n of Hedington Earl of Burſord, was,
in the 35% year, advanced to the further dig-
nity of Duke of St. Albans.] x

About this Town (to omit a certain Fort in
the neighbourhood, which the vulgar call the

Camp of Oforius the Proprætor) the Abbots
piouſly erected a little Nunnery at Sopwell,
and St. Julians Hoſpital for Lepers ; with a-

nother, named St. Mary + de Pree, for infirm 4

OifFer-hills, but which I am apt to think was the g;qe-hilb

Of the

women. Near which they had a great Ma- Meadow.
nour named Gorambery, where Nicholas Bacon,
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England,
[| exected a Structure worthy ſo great a Perſon 3 Hah e,

[which &ed, C.

357

Briva, w

% 1

=

TFORDSHIRE.

__ Y K* . _

tb alſo for
al'd - which

Markat. this river,

(wn
ms tons,
am Perſon of
and Maſter of rhe
ty ſix years. |

nifieth a Red-water: And yet the water that run-
neth by this place is no more red, than that
of the Red-Sea. It was very famous in old
time for the Reliques of, Amphibalus the Mar-
tyr, found here ; who was the Perſon that
inſtructed St. Alban in the Chriſtian Faith;
for which Faith he alſo ſuffer d under Dio-
cleſian. At preſent, it is remarkable for the
old military. high-way, commonly call'd Wur-
lingFreet, upon which it is ſeated ; and alſo
a certain brook near it, call'd * Wenmer,
(as the common People believe) when
ever it breaks out and ſwells high, always
portends dearth or troubleſome times. This
Edward the fourth, and to have run from the
19% of F till the 14 of June follow-
ing. From which Eruptions, a Place upon
commonly called Markat, but more
truly Meregate, i. e. (faith Norden) an iſſue or
out-gate of water, ſeems to have taken its
name.

Near this, we have reaſon to look for Duro-
co-brivæ, a Nation, of which Antoninus makes
mention (though, indeed, the diſtance would

rſwade us otherwiſe:) For Redborne in our
—— and Dur-ch in the Britiſh or Welch
tongue, ſigniſie one and the ſame thing, to
wit, Red-water. Now, to ſearch after the ſitua-
tion of ancient Places, we have no better guides

Manour is now the poſſeſſion of the|bour
deſcended from Sir Harbotle Grim-
great worth and eminence, |to Roger de

olls in Chancery for twen-

Near this place, lyeth Redborne, which ſig- Earls of Warwick.
Hence I paſſed ſouthward to Hemf?ed, a ſmall Hemſted.

ing country from robberies. But William
the Con r took it from them, and gave it
Todeney or Tony, an eminent Nor-
man, whoſe Barony 'alſo it was; but in time
transfer d by a daughter to the Beauchamps,

Market-town ; call'd Hehan-ham#ed, when Kin
Offa made a Brant of it to the Monaſtery —
St. Albans. It is ſeated among hills by the
ſide of a ſmall river, which, a little lower,
runs into another that
ted. In this 15 yr obles of
NN » When by the perſwaſion

Abbor of St. Albans, they were conſpiring to
throw off the new Norman Government.
* 'Thither came William the Con in per-
* ſon (as we read in the life of this Fretheric)
* much concern'd, for fear he ſhould, to his

great diſgrace, loſe that Kingdom which he

land had
Fretheric

ſaid to have broken out in the reign of gain d with ſo much blood. And after

© many debates in the preſence of Lanfranc the

* Archbiſhop ; the King, to ſettle a firm peace,
took an Oath upon all the Reli X the
Church of St. Alban, and upon holy E-

* vangelifts, which the Abbot Fretheric admi-
* niſter'd, That he would inviolably obſerve all
© the good, approv'd, and ancient Laws of the
* Kingdom, which the holy and pious Kings of
England his Predeceſſors, and eſpecially Ki

© Edward, had eſtabliſhed” But moſt of thets
Noblemens eſtates were ſoon after ſeized and
confiſcated by him, and he beſtow d this town
upon Robert Earl of Moriton and Cornwal,
who, according to common tradition, built here
a Caſtle with a double ditch and rampart. In

oes th h Berkham- Berkhamſted;

than ancient Inſcriptions, the courſe of the | which Caſtle, Richard, King of the Romans

t roads, the reaſon. and ſimilitude of [and Earl of Cornwal, dy'd, full of days and
* and the rivers, and lakes adjo 3] Honours. Upon default of iſſue of that Earl,
although they do not exactly correſpond to the King Edward the third gave this town and ca-
ſeveral diſtances afſign'd in the Zinerarie: which | ſtle to Edward his eldeſt ſon, that moſt renown'd
may very welt be corrupted, and the paſſage and warlike Prince, whom he created Duke of
from one place to another may be cut ſhorter. |Cornwal ; from whence, to this day, it con-
And certainly the old Duyo-co-brive mult have ſ tinues part of the poſſeſſions of the Dutchy of
been ſeated in the ſame place, where that Ro-|Cornwal. The Caſtle is now nothing but
man high-way croſſed this water, to wit, below | rnin'd walls, and one rude heap of ſtones ; a-
Flamfed. For juſt at this place, near the|boye which, upon a ſmall hill, Sir Edward Cary
Way, at ſeven miles diſtance from Verulamium] Knight, Maſter of the
ng now, through the — of tran- King (deſcended from the houſe of the Carys
cribers, the number is chang d to twelve,) aſ in Devonſhire) * built a noble and exceeding 4 Heath lateiy
jou! large ſpring riſes, and croſſes it with a|pleaſant Seat. Within the Town it ſelf, there built, C.

all

ſtream ; which, th here it has noſ is nothing worth ſeeing, except a School foun- Stat. 2 E.6.

Jewel-Houſe to the

Col. name, below St. Albans is call d Col. And as to] ded by J. Incent, Dean of St. Pauls in Lon- “ 59.
% what the termination Briva, which is added to the] don, who was a native of this Town. More

names of very many places, it might ſignifie|to the South, lyeth Kings-Lanpley, heretofore a Kings Lang-
(as 1 fappole) among the ancient Britains and Seat of the Kings, where Edmund of ey, ley.
Gauls, a Bridge, or over a River; ſince] ſon to Edward the third, and Duke of York,
we find it no where us d, but at rivers. In this was born, and thence alſo named. Here was
Hand there were one or two Durobrive, that is|a ſmall Cell of Friars Prædicants, in which that
(unleſs I am much deceiv'd) paſſages over the[unhappy Prince Richard the ſecond was firſt
water. In Gaul there was Briva {faria, now] buried, after he had been barbarouſly depriv'd
Pontoiſe, where was the paſſage over the Jara or] both of his Kingdom and his Life ; but not
Lore: Briva Odere, over the Odera : and Sama- long after, his 95 was remov'd to Weſtmin-
robriua (for that is the right name) over the] ſter, and had a Monument of Braſs beſtow'd
Same. The late Commentator upon the Iti- upon it, to make amends for his Kingdom.
nerary, deriving the Latin name from the Bri-} Almoſt oppoſite to this, is another Laxgley,
tiſh dour water, and cyfre to flow together, which (becauſe it belong'd to the Abbots of

thinks it ought to be ſought near a concourſe or] St. Albans) is call'd Abbors-Langley ; the place Abbots-
meeting of Rivers; and obſerving. that Hert-|where Nicholas Breakſpeare was born, who was Langley.

ford doth better anſwer the diſtances than Red-[afterwards Pope by the name of Hadrian the pope Hadti-
born, and that there the rivers Bean and Arran fourth; the ſame who firſt preach d the Chriſti- an 4.
empty themſelves into the Lea, he removes the lan faith to the people of Norway, and alſo
Durocobriya of Antoninus to that place. uieted the tumults of the people of Rome, at

Some what higher, upon a ſmall hill, ſtands Jar time endeavouring to recover their ancient
* Flamfed, which, in the time of Edward the I liherties. Frederic the firſt, Emperor of the
Confeſſor, LeoffZan Abbot of St. Albans gave Romans, held this Pope's ſtirrup as he alighted
to three Knights, Turnot, Haldef, and Turman, from his horſe ; and at laſt he loſt his life by a
on condition that they ſhould ſecure the neigh-| Fly, that flew into his mouth and choaked him.

N \

Lower,

— — - =

r *

= N — ' —
— - a>» 2 P — ma, 4 . p EO, 7 — 2
— * — a 7 —
2 — — CASES — — " e —
*
— 7 — ——— o —
— I + ' EF 17 =
= 4 — 3 80 A 1
— — 4
= — - -— A * dw
. — ns 7 . 11 on
— — 4 2 -_ — — — —

359

CATTIEUCHLANI.

—

Watford,
Rickmans-
worth.

Lower, I ſaw Watford (to which the Mori-
ſons have been great Benefactors,)] and Ricke-
maneſworth ; two Market-rowns; touching which
we have nothing more ancient, than that Ki
Offa beſtowed them upon St. Alban, as he alſo

Caiſhobery. did Caiſbobery that lies next to Watford. At

More-Pa rk.

Sullonĩacæ.

which place, a houſe was begun by Sir Richard
Moriſon, a Perſon of great learning, and em-
ployed by Henry the eighth and Edward the
ſixth in ſeveral Embaſſies to the greateſt Prin-
ces in Europe; but he left it to his ſon Charles
to finiſh, who made it a beautiful ſeat ; [and
it is now, by Inheritance, the poſſeſſion of the
Earl of Eſſex, by the marriage of Arthur Lord
Capel with the daughter and heir of Sir Ri-
chard Moriſon. Near the foreſaid Rickmanſworth,
is More-Park ; which place, belonging tormer-
ly to the Duke of Ormond, Thomas his eldeſt
fon was ſummoned to Parliament in the life-
time of his father, by the title of Lord Butler
of More-Park ; but it was afterwards ſold to
James Duke of Monmouth. |

More to the eaſt, the Roman military way
paſs'd in a direct line from London to Veru-
lam over Hamfed-heath, and ſo by Edguorth and
ſnot far from] ElefFre : nigh which place, at
the very ſame diſtance that Antoninus in his
Itinerary places the Sulloniace (to wit, twelve
miles from London, and nine trom Verulam)
ſon the edge of Middleſex,| there remain the
marks of an ancient ſtation ; and much rub-
biſh is dug-up on a hill which is now call'd

Brockley- hill. Brockley-hill. (Mr. Burton and Mr. Norden
* Itin. p.153 · ſeem inclin'd to think Eleftre the old Sulloni-

Shenley,

+ Ciltria,

1 Three, TH

Fo ſaid,

acæ; yet it does not appear that any thing of
Antiquity has been diſcover'd there, nor does
the old Roman way run through it ; that place
lying near a mile to the right hand. Thro'
Edgware indeed, a mile ſouth of Brockley, the
way paſſes towards London; ſo that Mr. Tal-
bot when he ſettled the Sulloniacæ there, had at
leaſt ſome ſhew of probability on his ſide. Burt,
no remains of Antiquity appearing, there is, in
truth, no reaſon why it ſhould be remov'd from
Brockley-bill ; eſpecially, ſince of late, Coins,
Urns, Roman Bricks, &c. have been dug-up
there (in the place where Mr. Napier built a
fair new ſeat,) as well in laying the foundati-
on of the houſe, as in levelling the gardens.
Rarities of this kind have been alſo turn'd up

ry, and Richard Nevi
lain; a Man, whom the ſmiles of Fortune

nent for a Battle fought there in the W
between York and Lancaſter : in which En- ver.

300

—

Battle of dg.

gland inflited upon it ſelf whatever Miſchief

Ambition and Treachery could effect. For at
Gledſniore, hard by, the two Parties, on an
Eaſter-day, had a ſharp encounter, and for
a long time, by reaſon of a thick Fog, the E-
vent was doubtful. But at laſt, King Ed-
icto-
rl of Warwick was

ward the fourth Sy the
J

Glediner

had made ſtrangely inſolent and a particular
enemy to crown'd heads ; and who by his death
freed England from thoſe „ Aerxe of a

continu'd Civil War, which t

ey had long la-
bour'd under. Here, at Barnet, * was diſco- p,y, Wo

ver'd a medicinal ſpring, ſuppos'd by the taſte p. 18,

to run through veins of Alom.

It coagulates

with milk, the curd whereof has been found to

be an excellent plaiſter for green wounds. |
This County of Hertford had Earls that Earl oe

were of the family of Clare, who therefore were
more commonly call'd Earls of Clare, from Clare

The

their Pages ſeat in the County of Suffolk.
rſt that I have met with, was Gilbert,

who is a witneſs to a Charter of K. Stephen, un-
der the title of Earl of Hertford. Likewiſe Ruger
de Clare, in the Red-book in the Exchequer, bears
the title of Earl of Hertford in the reign of

Henry the ſecond ; as alſo his ſucceſſors, whom See the Ext

you may ſee in their proper place. But when f Glare,

this family, by

ht of inheritance as well as folk, Wu

by their Prince's favour, came to be alſo Earls
ot Gloceſter, they bore the two titles jointly,
and were ſummoned to Parliament by the name
of Earls of Gloceſter and Hertford. And ac-
cordingly, Richard de Clare, who died An. Dom.
1262, is by Matthew of Weſtminſter expreſly
called Earl of Gloceſter and Hertford, in the

place where he recites his Epitaph :

Hic pudor Hippoliti,” Paridis gena, ſenſus

Ulyſſis,
ZEnee pietas, Hectoris ira jacet.

Here Heftor's rage, Ulyſſes wiſdom lays,

Hippolitus his bluſh, and Paris face,

But within the memory of our * fathers, * $o fl,

with the Plough, for about ſeven or eight acres
round. The late Annotator upon Antoninus,

St. Maur or Seymor, with the title of Earl of

ſuppoſes there may be ſome remains of Sullo- Hertford, who was afterward created alſo Duke

niacæ in Shenley, a place at ſome ſmall diſtance,
which he ſays was formerly written Shellenay,
and might as well be changed from Sulloniace ;
as Tournay from Tornacum, Douay from Duacum,

of Somerſet ; to whom ſucceeded in this Earl-
dom his ſon of the ſame name, a Perſon of

= honour, and a true lover of learning.

King Henry the eighth honoured Edward de ann. 197

and Eſpernay from Sparnacum.

Bur to return. When the Roman Government
was at an end, and Barbarity was introduc'd
by the Deſolations of the Saxon Wars; this
great road, as all other things, lay quite neg-
lected for a long time ; till, a little before *
Norman Conqueſt, Leofan Abbot of St. Al-
bans repaired-and reſtor'd it. Foy he (as we
read in his life ) cauſed the great woods all
along, from the edge of the F Chiltern as far as
London, to be cut down, eſpecially upon the King's
high-way, commonly call d . alſo, all
high and broken grounds to be levell'd, bridges to be
built, and the ways made even for the convenience of
paſſengers. But above“ four hundred years ago,
this road was well-nigh deſerted again, upon
the opening of another through Highgate and
Barnet, by licence from the Biſhop of London.
Barnet begins * now a-days to be an eminent

ann. 1807. Market for Cattle; but was much more emi-

o, being diſpoſſeſs d of all by the attainder
of his Father, was reſtor d, in the firſt year

of Queen Elizabeth, by Letters Patents beari

rd

date the 13* of January, to the titles of Lor

Beauchamp, and Earl of Hertford. Edward the
ſon dy'd in the life-time of his father, and ſo
did his eldeſt ſon of the ſame name. Where-

upon he was ſucceeded by William his

nd-

child, who by King Charles the firſt, for his
eminent ſervices, was advanc'd to the title of
Marqueſs of Hertford, and afterwards, upon
the reſtoration of King Charles the ſecond,
to that of Duke of Somerſet. Since which

time the ſame perſons have ſucceſſively en-

joyed both thoſe honourable Titles f.

This County hath in it 120 Pariſhes.

See Sour
faire

1361

HERTFORDSHIRE.

4

More rare Plants growing wild in Hertford-

Alfine montana minima Acini facie rotundi-
folia. An Alſines minoris alia Thal. Harcyn ?
Small mountainous round-leaved Chick-weed, reſem-
bling Stone-Bafil. In the mountainous parts of this

on the borders of Buckinghamſhire near Chal-
font S. Peter. Found by Dr, Plukenet.

Gentianella Autumnalis Centaurii minoris
foliis Park. Not far from the ruins of old Verulam.
Park, p 497 . "ets

Hieracii ſeu Piloſellz majoris ſpecies hu-

 Militaris aizoides Ger. See the other Synonymes
in Cambridgeſhire. Freſh-water-Soldier, or Water-
Aloe. In the new ditches of Hatfield P. D.

Ophris ſive Bifolium paluſtre. Park. Marſþ
Tway-blade. On the wet grounds berween Hatfield
and S. Albans. Park. p. 505.

Orchis myodes major Park. major flore
grandiuſculo J. g. muſcam referens major C. B.
The greater Fly-orchis. Found by Dr. Eales near
Welling in Hertfordſbire. |

Helleborine latifolio flore albo dlauſo. Broad-
leav d Baſtard-Hellebore with a white cloſe flow-
er. Found by Dr. Eales, near Diggeſwell in this

milis, foliis longioribus, rariùs dentatis, plu- |Cownty

ribus ſimul, flore ſingulari noſtras. On a dry
bank at the edge of a wood in a lane leading from
Hornbhill to Reickmeerſworth. Dr. Plukenet.
bg _ flore — 7 Park.
Tellow Looſeſtriſe with a globular flowers :
= to be found near Kings-Langley by Phyt.

i a
Mentha piperata. Pepper-mint, or Mint ha-

wing the taſte of Pepper. Found in this County by
Dr. Eales.

Sphondylium montanum minus anguſtifol;-
um tenuiter laciniatum. TFagged Cow-Parſnep«
Obſerved by Mr. Doody near Tring in this Coun-
fy.

Campanula Alpina minor rotundifolia
C. B. About Reickmeerſworth in Hertfordſhire, in
an old Gravel-pit there, obſerved by Dr. Pluke-
net,

ED —

„% AA

— — . — — — 4
[0
I. — CO —

PI — 4
— —ũ—h— + wo wes —— 2.28" 2 —

|
|
|

eb

IRINOBANT ES.
EXIT the Cattieuchlani; did the People cal d by Caſar Trinobantes, by Pu-
een, and Tacitus Trinoantes, inhabit thoſe parts which have now chung d their
names and are cal d Middleſex and Eſſex. From whence that old name was
deriv'd, I cannot ſo much as gueſs, unleſs it came from the Britiſh Tre-nant,
implying Towns in a Valley: for this whole Country in a manner, lies in a
level al} along the Thames. But this is a conjetture which I am not very fond
A of: Tho' thoſe People which inhabited Gallovidia in Scotland, lying all low and
| in a vale, were call'd in Britiſh Noantes and Novantes ; and the ancient per-
pile nam d Nantuates, liv'd about * Le Vault, or the Vale of the Rhine, “ Nben ri.
and had their name thence. So that this comjecture is at of as probable as that""*
of others, who out of a ſpirit of ambition have deriv'd theſe Trinobantes from Troy, as if one ſhould
Jay Troja nova, or new Troy. And let them enjoy their own Fancies for me. In Caſar's time, this
was one of the ſtrongeſt Cities in the whole Kingdom ( for ſuch a body of People as liv'd under the ſame
common Laws and Government, he always calls Civitas, or a City,) and was govern d by Imanuentius,
„ ' who was ſlain by Caſſibelin. Upon this, Mandubratius his ſon fled for his life, went over into Gaul to

F
Wee

As

- -
- — *
2 — : — — —. —

1 Caſar, put himſelf under his protection, and return d with him into Britain. At which time, theſe our

1 x | Trinobantes der d Caſar by their Ambaſſadors to eſpouſe the cauſe of Mandubratius againſt Caſſibe-
Wen | lin, and to ſend him into the City, as Deputy-Governour. This was granted them ; = which they
| gave forty hoſtages, and, the firſt of all the Britains, ſubmitted themſelves to Caſar. % Mandubra-

tius (to obſerve it by the way) is by Eutropius, Bede, and the more modern Writers, call d always
Androgeus. But how this difference of the name ſhould come, is a myſtery to me; unleſs it be true,
what I was told by one very well Skill d both in the Hiſtory and Language of the Britains, that the name
of Androgeus was fix'd upon him on account of his villany and treachery. For the word plainly carries
in its meaning ſomething of Villany ; and he (in the book call d Triades) is reckon'd the moſt villanous
of thoſe three traitors to Britain, becauſe he was the firſt that call d- in the Romans, and betray'd his
Country. After Mandubratius (when civil wars at home drew the Romans from the care of Britain,
1 and ſo the Kingdom was left to its own Kings and Laws; ) it plainly appears, that Cunobilin had the
I government of theſe parts. Take here a view of one or two of his Coins, though I have given you both
0 theſe, and others of his, before. n

a. lem

—

r

Adminius his Son, when baniſb d by his Father, went over with a ſmall body of Men to C. Caligula;
to whom he ſurrender'd himſelf. This ſo buoy'd up the young Emperor, that, as if he had conquer d the
whole Mand, he ſent boa ing Letters to Rome; ordering the Meſſengers over and over, that they
not be deliver d to the Conſuls but in the Temple of Mars, or in a full Senate. After the death of Cu-
nobilin, Aulus Plautius by 4 from the Emperor Claudius, made an attempt upon this Country-
Togodumnus, one of Cunobilins ſons, he ſlew ; the other, Caratacus, he conquer d; and (as it is in

+ Ovans tri. the Faſti Capitolini ) f had a Triumph decreed upon it, with ſo much ſplendor and greatneſs, that ( as
umphavit. Suetonius tells us) Claudius himſelf walk d fide by fide with him, both as he went into the Capitol and
came out of it. Then the Emperor in perſon preſently tranſports his forces, and in a few months reduces it

into the ſorm of a Province. From that time, the Trinobantes had no more wars; only, under Nero

they emer d into a combination with the Iceni to ſhake off the Roman yoke : but this Inſurreftion was quickly

Juppreſs'd by Suetonius Paulinus, and (as Tacitus has deliver'd it) not without great ſlaughter on the fide of

the Britains.” When the Roman Government in this land came to an end, Vortigern the Britain (as Ninni-

us

FIR »- — ” 44
a 2 - — — —— —
— . - — 2 — = 595 8
— — D a - — __—
* - th, * Gu n
> 4 = 3 —
— _ _ et. aca 4 way — —•— — — — 2 2
— "4 ' — ITY © » al
-
a 4 .
0 — — — 3x”
my —— * * *
0 ” x 5 * . 2 \
44 w — * _—
2 A —
— — _

«7

c

_

VS *
7 .
Ye

2
* %

4

LY

—___— * —————ů——————ĩ—ꝙ ——— — — 6ä6ꝗGͤg — —— — — — — —

ro

Rick manſworth

Froomotne

*
a IX

577 e as”

N
Denham *

*#1thall
22 todo
[35 ;
| xbricdlo
8 _
*
Y U +
Q C ouley
Y —
— O

D1 ay ton

* 82

=

Ze 274
wort,

Stanwol/

P, l, are 4

« ih Ee eon!“

tr

E .
*Y Welt Bedjont
T

Knowle Green

2

Run
& $1374 id

N D

»
' 222 bete, e

k Sheprerton

Croller .

ard, Str woe

Hr. ele
an.

"<0;

4 * Feltham

© Aſhiford Ford

/ @ ban

aCharlton Sunbury 9
lipper . ufo,

| |; | —— 277011 of- Tung

o

Caſhoo lod

boy ould N. mos py
Croſler

Great Nv welt

a Car/hoe how:

vv. hou /

Little Idle *

.
ug hall

VVT

4a
Buſhy hall

Wattord

/ bY Buſhey

þ Clay hull Eljtre a
1 .

(r Ae.
Sparrow Ha |

Aw... B

* 1

4 Murry lull YU

9 as 1 wy
2 i 2 5
? 2

145
Nee 8

R ye

hulls Ty 5
* —

/ 0 70 1 . SITE 9 Stanmore. \ | an” 4 Ti 0

1. Fheſes hole j 2 Round houe Stanmore h

. >». - T- C o H. nil, Nr Jocome

00 : | «
* Brooks hull P enge
. > i Gm ot el eee 2495
/ ” 4 "IH 8 3 7” Wrnld PAD 0 Hl hull tha”
> -A | 1% ha * ure

Wy

| Nine end
T7: <5 4
AEv1. I

© D owne Barnes

© Rune Fills

0 .
Lutle thn, lou

great. All,. 5 01

© Baulane

3%

| of ” *
Collon S 6V
| F-

by Doo ies

W
* into
#1 Bu

= |

Cranfſon' wi 7 =

1 271
Lonofor/ — 5
Wo Herherow
a

Kounſlo# Meath 3 ba
Poudor mills II VN fü
| RED- z

4 e.

—

ca Bedfort

OR N EF

Feltham hill

R E D

Kenton

2 Per” e WW

. 71

7. es end O%

ict

,
RN ©
Were ein

> . : 0

inne

IN
on the Chames O F |

—

©)
Borromwpont Gl —

Gt; 1 Wodlon

5 2 nn
— V5 *

(enn hilt g
3
*
er the

All l

"Y 1,

tete

[

” Sudbruy vw Green
0 Wombly hull A * unbly « A

or e

een

.
C
—

: ” to R ty

2 Teenford 2
als
ve :

Net

9 - ' &
Heading Greenford

| Nee, 2

Hu

un
o heath

Norcoat 5 — { 0 Draton

/ — 0

2 n
„ er

o — gel l Brian 2 Ha nwecl

NMormo . Commuont

ee.

. _ * — F.1 =
e

ad © = Ser te

BY

Elmo
unte, ö
". "

**

Kan

1 —

Bolton 5

3 rentfor 5
A

* Wc „ ho uſe * k Strand 3! *
af ampton
STDEWOR _
Hank. * Smatb un, 7 © aree "7, uo Forry
7, oA

Hotte. mulls > © ute

3. M

T. fe, fen

aim hot.

'
in

D tor

2
Hen Deep
+ 7. \ \

n %g

K mgeh .

*.

-
1

% But / WEN L

J 2 « WAIT;

Dol.

E 7

Pm;

Aon 3»

of 1

Erl 8

v7

vb
A

2.42
Wh 1: 0 Groen,
77

Dean wood

*.

27 7 N 1 1
— E.
9

Vu Green

DN E.

* I Onke Mu.

0 Nor ih * ,, rf,
* |
Teton
P. rl noir

/
o 2
Brim ©

; IM.
en

nan

» Tum 1

Chennck Part. DA
8:

tee
. ? :

8
*

17 * ALS

1 NEE
— * 8 — *
10 | Q 08. 4}
unte all N 2 | | ö *
nth. Ils, Fy — b S H 4 R E | |
WE ably — lie He at cat 2 . | g
5 NY 0 Fane Wa * Mamonda Street , Cheithorr 1 - (
* of 4 Heute . ih Pr 4 oy Foot barr . >» — treet ing Jun |
CT Freon o Pub t:l/ 2 * 131 Nc Ann in ho * A * 2
4 a Dancers Hull Li, FEE ws A " 4 (ann x * * *
Keontley of * 4 . o , 75 ers hull
> .@ o heat * Coopers on * nail / : \
rigor Drago" ond  % 0 _ Theobaf oe Park gate |
Potters Barr Sr Ges I[hoohald) how? Croſbr a
. G 9 Fd A o wot ,
Kicks — — | K Jn n
7 5 4 \ a Wal, 2 75 * Al
925 „ Tie For „ os one — 8. 2 e ao bby
* Troy "1mm * 9 Nadler 4 1 , Hu. Street
. — # :
[3 2 50 17 2 B Ar1 le | 22 * 0 a * 5 2 Food, /ade Pom tes
- 2 Blow 7 2 OG 5 « — 'f. « y _
Y TY ' . 1 1 k /s * ee |
CEE — Fa \ hich Lock |
A 5 7 AN Buckfſ&im 2 fag oy *
| * 9 . : Pun A 1101 *
, * 2 7 "i . X * 2 ü
; P. 4 o & anct wells a 2 — full le * K 82 13 ne Green Poul. '
its *. ved 2 Wr | UP e 0 |
441 hills _ Pres {ll o lull S 4* Stock mg lanes 4

* A 7.17 A <

22

« jt Barnet

» ig, uns
/ "i 2 1 #H South Strat a
- hit "2s Alf only... dt 7
Aocome Nt | . |
r # /X. "od fi 2 Cook A —
a 3 Laurence See = 42 75. O N *
44 Ones «< Cl I! "ue 12 — 4 (fora o L ow
2 @ Rrgwau Koo TE hom: Jever 2
Ih H hull f ro 2 At ond — moto N
y imo .
4 8 11 are. re hull 94. 5 . * —— 11 Ire, 4 5
Dot 3 Follo = eres: ET) 8 en“ Edmonton © Wh
ole © SI 5 Common _ 7 vÞ 72 2 11
i ron 1 4 f
0 E Tandem l lor . 8 7 7 1 7 Bleek A 7 moford
ſon Doep * « Omea 1 . . [<A]
Fam Cuckolls ,t 11 IN DRE D — Kell
n An So by Chapmans Green 5
* * Faonhkam Street
* EY Parks is.
ACT) brig, org * tub off hilt
M "A H
. 3 ate orgs F * E' - ON ham Bred,
. E&A \ KAR Afr {nn - *
* 0 OD We RE Te
6 ar v0! Outs ne hop 2 iBudy ns 1 75% oa * * | mg lam he

My o Gon

I 1
7: TH ' .
* . % - hou?
Gs * a

4

n + Molloway Milli, "oo 54 |
Tz Nr Wt Croft " = N D 5 Mellon WS © 47 Walth rm Stow © 3 5
. y 4 0 22222 tall a, Fs. / 2 * way | Alarſh Stroet f
3 T A... ny o Green Street TE. — e Swwat
DN. 0 Gr vor * lampytor, 7 * *
Sutery Ain, 0 Ar Hagen Lere Alt
Wh End Ponds, treet — — —

W NI AX AA

Vun. Ie

; ” *

PU os
8

ö A Scale of Hiller

yo broad 2.

\ MIDLESEX

8 x Pr Noll Mondon. Si,

(

Pave .
* : k
— Clo Street Wood Street
2 5

-

4 Uper Chalcot s Kerri. 88
» e. Dee oOntfpntonn
| Dean wood "anc P A 0 As 7. . rw
*. Kilturnec * antlers "| 2 voy hag 0
* SJ 77rloyt or 7. „1 + Lon < | WR 0 . * 11d, O my IT S _— 0 N Buckolls 8
mee
by - 8 * :
A ( ate 1771.71 —_ ny ON — 4 * a 0 Writ — 2
Moliton Groen . Marib , o Comte Ar Ne- UN DR RE D * 2
DR E D 4 % een, ee \ f 8
it . Hun e ler A 8
en 9 . toe 4 0 Grove LET 8
9 ate Wells Wahborn ooon . = 1 * O 1 * Combi ol ” o oa. 7 . N N
A* gin, ye 71 Lune Groen Wee 5 INS F-.! Nen &. yo Older RS —
eros Grard pitts * = = . „ Row ] a
, 8 North fh — 1 1 : b 5 8 . Tg j Y
0 ; : g » 1140 ; b. 6 5
6 A F114 2. . if Bow
2 2\ Park x 5 Eprcy
Km ige A ö — 3 | = Brom.
o butt Canin * 1. „ 4 | R:005 ® welt 0
ee Aa 11,4 E . ** 3 ö m— | Bromley halt Ar, Q
Bron 0 7 Ws bs Am N * , 5 >, g
. - Wo o Brompton 2 Popter
* I . . . o \ Eartes Court 14 4 e
_— 4 1 >; 2 11.1 0 e Cheljer 7 ac _-
wv EF &C NY 1 Zur. ol” - * — T2
. a "hrelſow Coll ark 0
| 8, » * ä . Rotheret/: ;
1 : $ a Holger * — N % =
4 | |
at if e. I Grove 4 Wh Ile 7.
wy p : 2 * Senn f ＋ Doo
2 0 As. Coe 4 *
eee 1 7 i urfdus Lal Batter ton | | &
. _ —_—_ an wall” 25 Py * 7 4
: ao go”
22 « WIR * 2 .
| Rs of. Worke hou oreenwch
3 Dec, K
Prtnece p 8 the Aimar wy 71. a 0h; erratpry
A 9 s ' pu *
Row ton 9 N

J

OR FP . 7} oF.

KEN T

| — 1bel Swal, "x
of Sold bu Aunzſliam G
0 Tolm \Churchil 25

"Durvnce — 40 |

. —__—_—_— — — —

”
ä ͤ —tTt

Cole, riv

Breakſpea
Pope Hadr

an 4.

Cannons

Haresfel

1 do ſai

ann. 16

Uxbridy

Aubr. !
Hedgerlk

*

Draitor

Colhan

Starwe
* Fo ſa
ann, 1

e
*

g. For 2,

* .

bh 9s. JÞv lf Mr

COSTA

* A \ 'E

*
So. _— — 2 „ „ ts Za LD =
- _— — pr rn . — — — * 155
Lack — — — — > 2 — — =®#. «+ wa” ER egos wt earns —

— — —— r 1

3 ty : ðᷣ ot ww Wb —

— —5 — *

— — — —U—ð

—
3

—
4
=
i
>

5
4
El
—
Lu
1
”
+
a,

© Breakſpear,

Pope Hadri-
= an 4.

Y

—

205

"MIDDLESEX.

306

us tells us) being taken priſoner by the Saxons, gave this Country for his ranſom ; which, for a long while

after, had its Kings, but they were ſuch only as held under the Kings of Kent, or Mercia. Of theſe,
Seberht was the firſt that embrac'd Chriſtianity in the year 603. And Cuthred was the laſt of them,
who being conquer d by Egbert in the year 804. left the Kingdom to the Weſt-Saxons. But of theſe

things, 1 have ſpoken more largely in another place :

Now let ns ſurvey the Country it ſelf.

MIDDLE S E x.

\ IDDLESEX has its name
from the middle-Saxons, be-
G cauſe the Inhabitants of it
liv'd in the midſt of the
8 Eaſt, Weſt, and South-Sax-
ons, and of thoſe whom in
that age they call'd Mercians.
It is divided from Buckinghamſhire Weſtward
Cele, riv. by the little river Cole, trom Hertfordſhire
Northward by a certain known limit, from
Eflex Eaſtward by the river Lee, and South-
ward from Surrey and Kent by the Thames.
The County is very ſmall ; being at longeſt
but twenty miles, and where narroweſt, only
twelve. The air is exceeding healthful, and
the ſoil fertile, the Houſes and Villages every
where neat and ſtately, and there is no part of
it but affords a great many remarkables. _
Upon the river Cole, at its firſt entrance into
this County, I met with Breakſpear, the ancient
ſeat of a family of that name, of which was de-
ſcended Pope Hadrian the fourth, mention'd a
little before. [Some miles to the welt, is Can-
nont, the beautiful ſeat of the Duke of Chan-
dois. Nigh to Breakſpear, and on the ſame
Haresfeld, river, is]! Haresfeld, formerly Herefelle, the poſ-
ſeſſion of Richard ſon of Giſtebert, in the time
of William the Conqueror. More to the South,
So ſaid, Uxbridge, a modern Town, and full of Inns, is
ann. 1607+ ſtretch d out into a great length; [made fa-
Uxbridge, nous in the laſt age, by a en; Hae held
January 30. 1644. in the time of King Charles
the firſt, between the King, and Parliament
then ſitting at WeftminFer ; the particulars of
which are largely related by our Hiſtorians.
gubr. MS, Near Uxbridge, in the Pariſh of Hedgerley,
Hedgerley. is an ancient Camp, which ſeems to be Britiſh. |
Draiton, Below it, is Draiton, built by the Barons Pa-
get; [now advanced to the honour of Earls of
Uxbridge, in the perſon of Henry Paget; who

Cannons,

(beſides the ſaid hereditary Title of Baron,)

did, before, enjoy alſo the Title of Lord Pa-
get of Burton; having been created a Peer of
this Realm, by that Stile, in the life-time of
his Father. Hard by, is] Cham, which came
from the Barons Le Strange to the Earls of Der-
by; and Stanwell, the feat of the family of
Windeſore, from the coming-in of the Con
* So ſaid, queror, till within the memory of * our Fa-
an. 1607, thers. Not far from hence, the Cole, after it
has made ſome Iſlands, ſlides through a double
mouth into the Thames ; upon which, as a
German Poet of our age, deſcribes it,

Colham.

Starwell.

Tot campos, ſylvas, tot regia tefla, tot
0s

Artifici dextra excultos, tot vidimus arces,

Ut nunc Auſonio Tamiſis cum Tybride certet.

Such Fields, ſuch Woods, ſuch ſtately 1

Piles appear,

Such Gardens grace the Earth, ſuch Tow'rs >
the Air;

That Thames with Roman Tiber may |
compare,

Stanes, in Saxon &rana, offers it ſelf firſt, in Stanes.
the very Weſtern limit, where is a f wooden f Sublicius.
bridge over the Thames. As to the name, it
had it from a boundary-ſtone formerly ſet up
here, to mark out the extent of the City of
London's Juriſdi&ion in the river; [and not (as
ſome wou d have it) from a Roman Milliarium
here placed. For Hanes doth not lie upon the
Roman way betwixt London and Pontes, or any
other of that kind ; upon which the Milliaria
or mile-ſtones were only ſet. An Army of
Danes in the year 1009. after they had burnt
Oxford, returning along the Thames ſide, and
hearing that an Army from London was coming
againſt them, paſt the River at this Town, as
the Saxon Chronicle tells us ; and ſo went in-
to Kent, to repair their Ships.] Near the fore-
mentioned Stone, there is a famous Meadow
call'd Runing-mead, and commonly Renimed, Runing-
wherein was a great Meeting of the Nobility mead.
in the year 1215. to demand their Liberties
of King John. Upon the Thames's running by
that place, the Author of the Marriage of Tame
and Ifis has theſe Lines:

Subluit hic pratum, quod dixit Renimed
Anglus,
Quo ſedere duces armis anniſque Verendi,
Regis Joannis cuperent qui vertere ſceptrum,
Edwardi Sancti dum leges jurdque vellent ,
Principe contempto tenebroſo è carcere duci :
Hinc ſonuere tube pluſquam civilia bella,
Venit & hinc reſugus noſtras Lodovicus in
oras.

Now Renimed upon the bank appears,

Where Men renown'd for honour, arms, and
years

Met to reform the State, controul the

King,

And Edward's Laws from long oblivion
bring. ;

Hence 8 than civil wars the land op-
pre |

And Lewis with his French the Rebels
ſtrengrh increaſt.

Then it paſſes by Coway-ſtakes near Lalam, g .
where (as we have  bſery'd) Czſar paſs d the NN
Thames, and the Britains, to prevent him, ob- ain. :
ſtructed the bank and ford with fakes ; from Coway-ſtakes.
whence it has its name. [At Sheparton, hard Aubr. Ms.
by, is an encloſed ground called J/arre-Cloſe, in Sheparton.
which have been dug-up Spurs, Swords, Cc. Warre-Cloſe.
with great numbers of Men's bones ; and at a
little diſtance, to the weſt, part of a Roman
Camp is ſtill viſible. ] Gliding from hence, the
Thames takes a view of Harrow, the higheſt hill Harrow-hill.
in this County, which on the South has very
fruitful Fields for a long way together; eſpe-
cially about the little Village of Hefton, the Heſton.
Wheat-flowre whereof has n particularly
made choice of by our Kings, for their own
bread. [By reaſon of its great heighth, it was
alſo choſen by William Bolton, the laſt Prior of

great

— rer

— - - 4
2 -

367 TRINO

—

BAN T ES. a

great St. Bartholomew's in Smithfield, on which
to build him a houſe, to canary him from a
Deluge that was prognoſticated from certain
Eclipſes in watery ſigns, and was to happen 1n
the year 1524. With this, not only the vul-
ar, but alſo learned men, were ſo unreaſona-
ly infatuated, that they victuall'd themſelves
(as both Hall and * Speed confidently report)
and went to high grounds, for fear of being
drown'd. Amongſt whom, was this Prior, who
not only provided himſelf with a houſe here at
Harrow, but carried all ſorts of proviſions with
him thither, to ſerve for the ſpace of two
+ Survey, p. months. Mr. + Stow, I acknowledge, would
417, 419. have all this to be a fable, and that Prior Bol-
ton being alſo Parſon of Harrow, did *

pair his Parſonage-houſe, and build a Dove-
coat to ſerve him with that ſort of fowl, after
he was ſpoiled of his Priory ; but the date of
this Deluge, and the diſlolution of the Priory
(which was not till Azno 1539. 30 Henry 8.) do
not agree ; and therefore thoſe Hiſtorians are
not to be reconciled.) At a little diſtance from
thence is Hanworth, where * was a Royal, tho
but ſmall houſe ; much admir'd by King Hen-
ry the eighth, as being his chief Pleaſure-ſeat.
Hampton- Afterwards, it glides by Hampton-Court, a Roy-
rt. al Palace, and a very magnificent Structure,

* Chron. p.
1014»

Hanworth.
* Is, C.

built by Cardinal Thomas Molſey purely out of

oſtentation, to ſhow his great Wealth; a Per-

ſon upon all other accounts exceeding prudent,
but that Pride and Inſolence carry'd him be-
yond himſelf, It was enlarg'd and finiſh'd by
King Henry the eighth, and has five large

[This being inviron'd, both Houſe and Parks,
on three ſides with the River Thames, and
conſequently enjoying as pleaſant a ſituation, as
the prudence of its firſt founder, Cardinal 7/o/-
ſey, could ſele& for it; was indeed a piece of
work of great Beauty and Magnificence, for
the age it was built in. But the additions
made to it by King William and Queen Mary
do ſo far excel what it was before, that the ,
evidently ſhew What vaſt advancements Archi-
tecture has receiv'd fince that time. The gar-
dens are alſo improv'd to a wonderful degree,
not only in the walks both open and cloſe, and
the great variety of Topiary-works ; but with
Green-houſes, having ſtoves under them ſo
artificially contriv'd, that all foreign Plants are
there preſerved in gradual heats, ſuitable to
the Climes of their reſpective Countries, where-
of they are natives. The whole is contrived
with ſo much magnificence, as equals, if not
exceeds, the moſt noble Palaces.

From hence rhe river fetches a large wind-
ing toward the north by Gif7leworth (for ſo
our Thiftleworth was formerly call'd ) where
was once a Palace of Richard, King of the
Romans and Earl of Cornwal, which was burnt
by the Londoners in an Inſurrection.

Next we fee Sion, a {mall Religions houſe, Sic
(fo call'd from the holy Mount of that name,)
which Henry the fifth, after he had driven out
the Monks Aliens, built for Nuns of St. Bri-
get; as he erected another at the ſame time,
call'd Bethelem, oppoſite to this, on the other Ster,
fide of the river, for the Carthuſians. In this

Tiida

Courts ſet round with neat 1 the work Sion, to the Glory of God, he plac'd as many
t

whereof is exceeding curious.

was alſo

Virgins, Prieſts, and Lay-brethren, within ſeve-

erected into an Honour, in the 31ſt year of|ral partitions, as amounted to the number of

that Prince. |
it:

Eft locus inſolito rerum ſplendore ſuperbus,

Aluiturque vaga Tamiſini fluminis unda,

Nomine ab antiquo jam tempore dictus A-
vona.

Hic Rex Henricus taleis Odtavius ades

Erexit, qualeis toto Sol aureus orbe

Non vidit.

A place, which Nature's choiceſt gifts
adorn,

Where Thame's kind ſtreams in gentle cur-
rents turn,

The name of Hampton hath for ages 1
born,

Here ſuch a Palace ſhows great Henry's
care,

As Sol ne're views from his exalted ſphere

In all his tedious ſtage. —

And the Marriage of Tame and Ijs, this:

Alluit nam celebrem que laxior urbis

Mentitur formam ſpatiis ; hanc condidit
aulam

Puypureus pater ille gravis, gravis ille ſa-
cerdos :

Wolſeus, fortuna faves cui felle repletos

Obtulit, heu tandem fortune dona, dolores.

To Hampton runs, whoſe ſtate and beauty
ſhows

A City here contracted in a Houſe.

This the grave Prelate J/olſey's care begun,

To whom blind Fortune's arts were fully
known,

And all her ſmiles daſh'd with one fatal
frown,

Leland has this ſtroke upon

the Apoſtles and Diſciples of Chriſt : and ha-

ving given them very ample revenues, even be-
yond what was neceſlary, he made a ſpecial 11x;
Order that they ſhould be content with that,

and not receive any thing from other hands ;

but that ſo much of the yearly revenue, as was

over and above their maintenance, they ſhould

give to the poor. But upon the general expul-

ſion of the Religious within the memory of

t our Fathers, it was turned into a Country-: S ,
houſe of the Duke of Somerſet, who pull d ant 15.
down the Church, and begun a new houſe.
Hard by, is Brentford (which receiv'd that name Brent
from the little river Brent,) where Edmund Iron-

fide, after he had oblig'd the Danes to draw off
from the fiege of London, attack d them ſo
ſucceſsfully, that he forc'd them to a diſorderly
flight, wherein he kill'd great numbers ot
them. Here the Thames was anciently ſo ea-

ſily forded, and is ſo ſtill (I mean at old Brent-

ord, there being now at low ebb not a-
bove three foot water) that, beſide the forego-

ing inſtance, * King Edmund paſt the Thames + Ch d.
again, at the ſame place, and went thence into in Av. 1%
Kent after the Enemy, where he prev: d ſo
againſt them, that he drove them into Shepey.
Since which time, we do not find any thing [bite
of moment that hath happen d here; till 1642.
when King Charles the firſt (coming after his
Victory at Edghill with his forces from Ox-

ford towards London) with the loſs of but ten

men beat two of the beſt Regiments of the
Parliament-forces out of this town, kill'd their
Commander in chief, took five hundred Priſo-
ners, as many Arms, eleven Colours, and fifteen
pieces of Canon, and then march'd to Oatlands,
Reading, and ſo back again to Oxford. In which
action, Patric Ruthen Earl of Forth in Scotland,
performing the part of an expert and valiant
Commander, was firſt made General of the

King's

E v .
9 * -
. 2 7 bo if Ss *
„ g % +> b, - » R * * = A f * F Q
RT n „ N

© thufana :
| 58, P. ve

69

King
his {1
date

to the
Brent
| lar ſe
Arlington. Þ
thro\
towa
lias !
ſeat
ry Be
of tl
cond
mark
ces |
red |
quic
in &
hold
Abr. s. war

gle

mile
F

bet

Warren of Tha
Stanes, Stan

Cha
Che (wick, ſee

Fulham. vert

>
4

yea
Kenſingtone1s |
Pla

Chelſe „ as if and
one ſhould bed

= +5. Hern's pe

Domus Car- F.

F

Fa MIDDLESEX 370

King's Army; and in further conſideration of
his ſervices, was by Letters Patents bearing
date at Oxford, May 27. 20 Car. 1. advanced
to the dignity of an Earl, by the title of Earl of
Brentford ; on account (no doubt) of the parti-
| lar ſervice he did here.
Arlington. Near the Roman high-way which paſles
b through this town, and ſo over Hounſtou heath
towards Pontes, lies the Village of Arlington, a-
lias Harlington, which having been the ancient
ſeat of the Bennets, and particularly of Sir Hen-
ry Bennet, principal Secretary of State, and one
of the Privy Council to King Charles the ſe-
cond ; when his Majeſty thought fit to ſet a
mark of Honour on him, for the many Servi-
ces he had done the Crown, he was firſt crea-
ted Baron, and afterwards Earl of Arlington, and
quickly after made Knight of the Garter, and
in Sept. 1674- Lord Chamberlain of the Houſe-
hold. On the north-end of this Heath, to-
wards Kings-arbour, is a Roman Camp; a ſin-
| gle work, and not large; and another about a
$ mile diſtant from it.
| From Stanes to Brentford, all that which lies
between the high-road along Hounſlow and the
FO of T hames, was call'd the Fbreſt or Warren of
Stanes, Stanes ; till Henry the third (as we read in his
Charter) deforemted and dewarren'd it. Next, we
Cheſwick. ſee [Cheſwick, a neat Village, adorned with ſe-
Fulham. yeral beautiful Seats ; and | Fulham, in Saxon
ſrullan-hamme, fullan- homme, and] fullon-
ham, i. e. a houſe of Fowle, which receives its
greateſt honour trom the Biſhop of London's
Country-ſeat, and [was anciently remarkable
(as the Saxon Chronicle and that of Mailros
do both tell us) tor an Army of the Danes win-
tering there Auno Dom. 879. whence they de-
camp d the ſame year, and went into Flanders,
then call'd Fnonc- land, and encamp'd them-
ſelves at Gaunt, where they remain'd another
| year. Alſo, at a little diſtance from the river,
Kenſington+1S Kenſington 3 Which hath been of late years a
Place of Retirement for the Kings and Queens;
Celſey, as if and, upon the river, ] Chelſey, ſo call'd from a
| * elf bed ot Sands in the river Thames ; adorn'd
e with ſtately buildings by Henry the eighth,
William Powlett Marqueſs of Wincheſter, and
others. [Here, a College was once deſign'd for
Students in Divinity, and others, who were to
make it their whole buſineſs to oppoſe the
Church of Rome ; as appears by an A& of
Parliament 7 Fac. 1. and a Declaration ſet forth
by the ſame King An. 1616. ſpecifying what
mov'd the King and State to no this Col-
lege, and why here rather than at either of the
. niverſities ; for an account whereof, I refer
P.57, Cc. the Reader to Mr. * Stow's Survey. For the
1 furtherance of this deſign, the King ſent his
Letters to the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, to
move all the Biſhops and whole Clergy of his
Province, to put-to their helping hands; which
| though actually done, and in a time of deep
JS. Hern's peace, and f though eagerly ſollicited by Dr.
Z * Car · Sutcliff Dean of Exeter, the firſt deſign d Pro-
. e voſt, and Mr. Camden, who was one of the
Fellows of it; yet the building it ſelf (not to
mention the want of endowments) could ne-
ver be further advanced, than the outward
ſhell of a College. In which condition it ſtood,
till the Reſtoration of King Charles the ſecond ;
who quickly after, erecting another Royal So-
cety at London for promoting natural know-
ledge, gave thisto them : but they never attemp-
ting any thing toward finiſhing or uſing it,
conveyed it back to the ſame King, to build
an Hoſpital in the place of it, for the mainte-
nance of wounded and ſuperannuated Soldiers.

Which being begun by him, was carried on by
i

4
%
5
J
*
ow
4

7
'
3

Aubr. MS.

4”

his Succeſſor King James the ſecond, and fi-
niſh'd and furniſh'd with all ſorts of Neceſſa-
ries and Conveniencies by King H/illiam and
Queen Mary. It is indeed a Structure well
ſuiting the munificence of its Royal Founders ;
being nobly accommodated witih- all ſorts of
Offices, and adorn'd with ſpacious walks and
gardens. |
But amongſt theſe, LONDON (which is, Loxpox.
as it were, the Epitome of all Britain, the Scat
of the Britiſh Empire, and the“ Refidence of * Camera.
the Kings of England) is, to uſe the Poet's
compariſon, as much above the reſt, as
the Cypreſs is above the little ſprig. Taci-
tus, Ptolemy, and Antoninus call it Londi-
nium, and Longidinium; Ammianus, Lundinum
and Auguſta ; Stephanus in his book of Cities,
AnJonorz our Britains Lundayn ; | Ninnius in his
Catalogue of the Britiſh Cities, Cair Lundein ; 1 Uſer Pri-
the Saxons, Lundone, Lundune, ] Londen-ce- mord. P. 34
arten, Londenby pig, Londen-pyc; Foreigners,
Londra, and Londres; our own Nation, Lon-
don ; the fabulous Writers, Troja Nova, Dinas
Belin, i. e. the City of Belin, and Caer Lud,
from one King Luddus, whom they affirm to
have given it both Being and Name. But as
for thoſe new-broach'd names and originals, as
alſo Eraſmus's conjecture that it came from
Lindum a City of Rhodes; I leave them to
thoſe, that are inclin'd to admire them.
For my own part, ſince Czſar and Strabo have Britiſh
told me, that the ancient Britains call'd ſuch Towns,
woods or groves as they ftenc'd with trees that
they had cut down, Cities or Towns, and fince
I have been inform'd, that in Britiſh they call
ſuch Groves Llhwn ; I am almoſt of the opinion,
that London was by way of eminence ſimply
call'd the City, or the City in a Wood. But if
that do not ſatisfy, give me leave, without the
charge of inconſtancy, to gueſs once more, name-
ly, that it might have it's name from that which
was the original both of it's growth and glory; I
mean Ships, call'd by the Britiſh Lhong; ſo that
London, 1s as much as a Harbour or City of Ships.
For the Britains term a City Dinas, which the Dinas;
Latins turn'd into Dinum. Upon this account,
it is call'd in one place Longidinium ; and in a
Song of an ancient Britiſh Bard, Lhungfporth, 4 Nænia.
i.e. a Port or Harbour tor Ships. And by the
ſame word, Bologne in France (in Ptolemy Geſ-
ſoriacum Navale,) is interpreted in the Britiſh
Gloſſary Bolung Long. For ſeveral Cities have 8
had their names from ſhipping, as Naupattus,
Nauſtathmos, Nauplia, Navalia Auguſti, &c.
None of which can lay better claim to the
name of f a harbour, than our London. For it 4 Navalis,
is admirably accommodated from both Ele- |
ments : ſtanding in a fruitful ſoil, aboundi
with every thing, and ſeated upon a gentle aſ-
cent, and upon the river Thames, which, without
trouble or difficulty, brings it in the riches of
the World. For by the convenience of the
tide coming in at ſet hours, with the ſafety and
depth of the river, which brings up the largeſt
Veſlels, it daily heaps in ſo much wealth both
from Eaſt and Weſt, that it may at this day diſ-
pure Pre-eminence with all the Mart-towns in
Chriſtendom. Moreover, it is ſuch a ſure, no-
ble, and complete ſtation for Ships, that one
may term it a grov'd wood 3 ſo ſhaded is it with
Maſts and Sails. [Another Etymology is alſo
iven us of it's Latin name, by the judicious
Mr. Somner, | who derives it from the Britiſh
Llawn, plenus, frequens, and dyn, homo; or din 4 Gloſſar. ad
(the ſame with dinas) urbs, civitus; either of X. Script.
which joyned with Llawn, will ſignify a populous
place, as London has always been.

Aaa Before

—

37 1

TRINOBANTES

—

2.

Before we go further, it is to be ob-
ſerved, that both Prolemy and Ravennas ſpeak
of Londinium, as in Cantium, and on the ſouth-
ſide of the Thames; which the late learned
Commentator upon Antoninus, ſolves thus;
that probably a ſtation of that name might be
placed on the ſouth-ſide of the Thames
by the Romans, for the protection and ſe-
curity of the Conqueſts which they had
made, before they attacked and overcame
the Trinobantes; and the place pitched upon tor
it, is, that large ſpace between Lambeth and
St, George's- Southwark, called St. George's fields, where have
helds, been found many Roman Coins, chequer'd Pave-
ments, and Bricks; and not long ſince, an Urn
tull of Bones ; where alſo three Roman ways
centered (out of Kent, Surrey, and Middleſex ; )
and nigh to which, Kenington, on one hand, is
well-known to have been an ancient Town,
belonging to the Kings of England (and fo,
probably, before that, a Roman Station, accor-
ding to the cuſtom of the Saxons, in ſettling
where the Romans had been ; ) and Southwark,
on the other hand, hath always been reputed
a Burrough or place of Strength. This then is
ſuppoſed to be the Londinium meant by Ptolemy
and Ravennas, on the ſouth-ſide of the River;
which became neglected, after the Romans had
ſubdued the Trinobantes, and driven the Bri-
tains turther north, and ſettled themſelves on the
other ſide of the Thames. But this by the way.

Antiquity has told us nothing of the firſt
Founder of this City ; as indeed Cities, grow-
ing up by little and little, do ſeldom know their
original. Notwithſtanding, this among others,
has fabulouſly deriv'd it ſelf from the Tro-
jans, and is perſuaded that Brute, ſecond
Nephew to the famous Eneas, was it's Foun-
der. [It not being clear, that there was any
ſuch place in Caſars time, and yet clear that
it was a Town of great trade in Nero's, as Ta-
citus Witnefles ; doubtleſs it muſt be founded
within that little compaſs, between the times
of thoſe Emperors; and in all probability (as
* Orig. Brit, the learned * Biſhop of Worceſter thinks) about
p. 43. the time of Claudius; and, likely, was inhabi-

ted by the Romans and Britains together, be-
ing a trading, though not a military Colony
(as Camulodunum was) from the very begin-
ning.
But whoever built it, the growth of it
Vitali ge- may evince, that it was begun with a || lucky
nio. omen; and Ammianus Marcellinus has taught
us to pay it a veneration upon account of it's
Antiquity, when even in his time (Which is
f Twelve, C. f thirteen hundred years ago) he calls it an ancient
Town. And agreeably Cornelius Tacitus, who
flouriſh'd under Nero, has told us, that then it
was a place exceeding famous for the number of mer-
chants, and it's trade. Even then, nothing was
wanting to complete it's glory, but that it was

* Munici- neither a Free-borough, nor a Colony. Nor

pium. indeed would it have been the intereſt of the

Romans, that a City of ſuch vaſt trade ſhould

enjoy the privileges of a Colony, or Free-bo-

rough ; for which reaſon, I believe, they made
Præſecturx. it a ¶ Praſecture; for ſo they call'd the Towns
+ Nundinz. Wherein there were f Fairs and Courts kept.
Not that ſuch Places had Magiſtrates of their

own, but had Præfects ſent them yearly to do

juſtice, who were to act in all publick Affairs,

* Militiz, ſuch as Taxes, Tributes, Impoſts, “ the buſi-

: neſs of the Army, Cc. according to the Inſtru-

ctions of the Roman Senate. Upon which ac-
count it is, that London is only term'd Opi-
dum (a Town) by Tacitus, and by the Pane-
gyriſt, and by Marcellinus. But although it
had not a more honourable title, yet it has

Gale, Itine-
rar, p. 64.

Kenington,

Southwark,

* Abnepos.

City built,

been as powerful, wealthy, and proſperous as =
any; and that almoſt without interruption un-

der the Roman, Saxon, and Norman Govern-
ments; ſcarce ever falling under any remarka-

ble Calamity.

In Nero's reign, when the Britains under the
conduct of Boadicia, had reſolv'd to recover their
ancient liberty, the Londoners could not pre-
vail with Suetonius Paulinus either by cries or
tears, but that, after he had got together the
Citizens to his aſſiſtance, he would march, and
leave the City defenceleſs to the mercy of the
Enemy ; who immediately diſpatch'd thoſe few,
that either by reaſon of their ſex, their age, or
their natural inclination to the place, had ſtay'd
behind. Nor mult it have ſufter'd a leſs diſmal
Maſflacre from the Franks, had not the Divine
Providence unexpectedly interpos'd. For when
C. Allectus had treacherouſly cut off C. Ca- C. C
rauſius a Citizen of Menapia, who (depending & Pry.
upon the boiſterouſneſs of our Sea, upon the diffi- 0
culties of the War wherein Diocleſian was en- tin: Cu.
gag'd in the Eaſt, and upon the Franks, with and fe
that bold crew of his ſea-allies) had kept back tit
the Revenues of Britain and Batavia, and en-
joy'd the title of Emperor (as we learn from
ſeveral of his Coins that are dug-up) for fix
years together; when alſo M. Aurelius Aſcle-
piodatus had cut off and defeated Allectus in a
ſer battle, who for three years together had
uſurp'd the government of Britain: Then the Tbe ri
Franks, that eſcap'd alive out of the engage-llin,
ment, poſted to London, and were juſt ready
to plunder the City, when the Thames (which
always ſtood the Londoners a true friend)
brought up ſome Roman Soldiers, who had
very ſeaſonably been parted from the main
Fleet by a fog. Theſe fell-upon and deſtroy'd
the Barbarians, in all parts of the City; by
which means the Citizens were not only ſe—
cure themſelves, but had the ſatisfaction of ſee-
ing their Enemies deſtroy'd. Then it was, as
our Annals tell us, that L. Gallus was lain
near a little river, which run almoſt through
the midſt of the City, and was call'd from him
Nantgall in Britiſh, and in Evgliſh }/albroke. wal.
A name, that {till remains in a Street there ;
under which, I have heard, there goes a ditch
or fink to carry off the filth of the Town. It
is not far from that great Stone call'd London- Lond
ſtone + This I take to have been a Mzle-ſtone Store,
(ſuch a one as they had in the rum at Rome)
from which the dimenſions of all the Roads or
Journeys were begun; ſince it ſtood in the mid-
dle of the City as it run out in length. This Cu, k.
is confirm d by the diſcovery made of the Ro- rer .
man way at Holborn-bridge, after the fire ot
London; from whence it went through J/atling-
ſtreet, directly to this London-Añoue. |

And hitherto, I do not think that London
was walled round. Bur our Hiſtorians tell us,
that a little after, Conftantize the Great, at the

containing in compaſs about three miles :
whereby the City was made a ſquare but not
equilateral ; being longer from weſt to eaſt ;
and, from ſouth to north, narrower. That
part of theſe Walls which run along by the Tt:
Thames, is quite waſh'd away by the continual
beating of the river; though Firz-Stephens
(who liv'd in Henry the ſecond's time) tells us,

there were {ome pieces of jt then to be ſcen.

The reſt remains to this day, and that part to-
ward the north, very firm ; for having f not f 147
many years ſince been repair d by one Jotcelia

who was Mayor, it put on, as it were, a new
face and freſhneſs. But that toward the _
| | | an

| * Black-Friers, ni

and v
Wars

48 faid, JeWS,

ann, 1607. For t
: old, «
but
own.
Stone
Gates. Theſ
them
hic!
new 1
ate,
lan
the {
4 1686. ta Fl
{Newgat® from
i moſt
i the n
l berla
© Alderſgate. the 1
\ called
Tripplegate: woul
l plegai
Moregate. peop
or te

Wall
Biſhopſgate. May
Biſh

Eaſterlings. Ger:
tow
pair,
the
oldne
The
mor
|| Cothon, brid
rece!

call”

A

the

the

The Tower, the
hi

Ladgste.

Aldgate.

tra

in

} The old ru
urch,

*

7 P

— 1 9 tt dh

and weſt, though the Barons repair'd it in their
5 Wars out of the demoliſh'd houſes of the
bi & (aid, Jews, f is all ruinous, and going to decay,
Js. 1607- For the Londoners, like the Lacedzmonians of
old, do {light fenced Cities, as fit for nothing
but women to live in, and look upon their
own City to be ſafe, not by the aſſiſtance of
Stones, but by the courage of it's Inhabitants.
Gates. Theſe Walls have ſeven principal Gates in
them (for thoſe leſſer I induſtriouſly omit,)
which, as they have been repair d, have taken
 Ladgate- new names. To the weſt there are two ; Lud-
? ate, ſo call'd, either from King Luddus, or, as
Leland thinks, from Fludgate, with reference to
| the ſmall river below it (as there was the Por-
+ 1586. ta Fluentana at Rome ;) this was f lately built
Newgate» from the very foundation: and Newgate, the
: moſt beautiful of them all; ſo nam'd from
; the newneſs of it (tor before they call'd it Cham-
berlan-gate) which is the FIR Gaol. On
© Alderſyate. the north-lide there are four; Alderſgate, ſo
1 called, either from it's Antiquity, or (as others
Tripplegate. would have it) from Aldrick the Saxon : Crip-
| plegate, from the adjoyning Hoſpital for lame
Moregate. people: Moregate, from a neighbouring bog
| or ten (now turn'd into a Field and a pleaſant
Walk; ) ap built by one yo whe bs
Biſopſgate. Mayor, in the year 1414 : Biſbopſgate, from the
228 Biſhop ; and this (as I —4 — told) the
Eaferlings. German Merchants of the Society of the Hanſe-
towns, were bound by Article to keep in re-
pair, and, in caſe of a ſiege, to defend it. To
Aldgate, the eaſt there is but one, Aldgate (from it's
oldneſs) or as others will have it call'd, Elbegate.
The common Opinion is, that there were two
more towards the Thames, beſides that at the
|| Cothon, bridge, namely, Beling gate, now a || Wharf to
receive Ships; and Dourgate, 1. e. the water-gate,

call'd commonly Dow-gate.

At each end of the wall that runs along by
the river, were ſtrong Forts; the one, toward
the eaſt, remains to this day, call'd commonl

The Tower, the Tower of London, and in Britiſh, from it's
whiteneſs, Bringwin, and Tour-gwin. Which is in-
deed a ſtately 2 ſurrounded with walls of
great compaſs, mounting up with turrets, and
guarded with a rampire and broad ditches, to-
gether with the accommodation of a noble
Armory, and other houſes ; ſo that it ſelf looks
like a Town : and a conjecture, That the two
Caſtles, which Fitz-Stephens has told us were
at the eaſt end of the City, may have been
turn'd into this one, would be plauſible enough.

At the weſt-end of the City, was another Fort,

Fleet, riv. where the little river Fleet (from whence is our

Nou, C. Fleerſtreet) * in the laſt age of ſmall uſe, but for-
merly, as I have read in the Parliament-Re-
cords, navigable [and of late years made ſo
again, | empties it ſelf into the Thames. Fitz-
Stephens call'd this Fort the Palatine Tower, and
tradition affirms it to have been burnt down

in William the Conqueror's time. Out of the

. old ruins whereof was built a great part f of St.
1 ' Paul's Church; as alſo a Monaſtery for Domi-
Duck. Frier. nican Friers (from whom we call the place Black-
3 Friers) founded in the very area or plot of it,
by Robert Kiluarby Archbiſhop of Canterbury:

l

from whence you may eaſily take an eſtimate of

it's largeneſs. And yet in Henry the ſecond's
time, there were in the ſame place (as Gerva-
ſius Tilburienſis, in his Otia Inperialia, affirms)
two Pergama, or Caſtles with walls and rampires ;
one whereof belong d to Bainard, the other to the Ba-
rons of Montfitchett by Inheritance. But there
1 1s nothing now to be ſeen of them; though
© Bainarg's.cz. ſome are inclin d to think that Pembroch-bouſe

Was part of them; which we call Bainard's-

a ws... a. i. — . * —

caſtle, from a Nobleman, one Milliam Bainard,

Lord of Dunmow, formerly owner of it ; whoſe

ſucceſſors, the Fitz-Walters, were hereditary

* Standard-bearers of London. * Anteſigna-
Nor was London only wall'd round at that ni.

time; but alſo, upon the confirmation which The Bithe-

Chriſtianity receiv'd from that beſt of Empe-f ——

rors, the Hamin was remov'd, and a Biſhop

[put in his place. For it is certain that the

Biſhop of London was at the Council of Arles,

held in the year 314. under Conſtantine the

Great ; ſince we find it {aid in the firſt Tome of

e ſtitutus Biſhop of the City of London; whom concerning

his reſidence at St. Peter's in Cornhill.
[From that time, London flouriſh'd ſo exceed-

ingly, that by degrees it was call'd Augufta, and x ,ngon cad

had that honourable title under Valentinian the Augulta.
Emperor. For thus ſays Ammianus Marcelli-

nus, in his 27h] Book; And going to London an

ancient Town, which PofFerity named Auguſta. And

in his 28* Book; Going from Augulta, which

the Ancients calf'd London. Upon which ac-

count, when a Mint was ſetrled here in Con- The Mint.
ſtantine the Great's time (for we read on thoſe

Medals which he made in memory of Con-

ſtantius his father, as well as on others, P.

LON. S. i. e. Pecunia Londini ſignata, or, Mo-

ney coin'd at London,) then, he who was Go-

vernour here under the Count of the“ Dmperial * Sacrarum
Largeſſes, is call'd by the Notitia, Provoſt of the largitionum,
Treaſures of the Auguſtenſes ia Britain. This _— **
Augufta was a name of the greateſt Honour able name.
and Majeſty. For the Builders or Reſtorers of
Cities, out of hopes or wiſhes at l-aſt that they

might be powerful, flouriſhing, and great, us'd

to give them auſpicious names. But among all

the reſt, there was none ſo magnificent, none ſo
auſpicious, as Auguſta. For that beſt and greateſt

of Emperors Ofavianus, took the name of Au-
guſtus, not without rhe judgment and advice

ot the moſt learned Men of the Age. He was
ſurnam d Auguſtus ( ſays Dio, ) to imply that he Lib. 54
was above the common reach of mankiad. For thoſe ©
things which beſt deſerve honour and are moſt ſacred,

are call d Auguſta, Nor had London this name,

and this particular mark of honour, without

the conſent of the Roman, Emperors. Which
cuſtom of taking no name without particular
Licence, Virgil hints in that Verſe of his;

Urbem appellabant, permiſſo nomine, Ace-
ſtam. |

The City they, with leave, Aceſta call'd.

[Whether this Place had the name AAg)2
from Helena Auguſta mother of Conſtantine the
Great, or from the Legio Secunda Auguſta reſi-
ding here, we have no account in Hiſtory ;
but that the ſaid Legion was here, ſeems to
be plain from the following Sepulchral In-
ſcription, dug- up near Ludgate, ann. 1669, and
now preſerved at Oxford.

But

the Councils, © Out of the Province of Britain, Re- See Baronias,

(with his ſucceſſors) ſome affirm to have had this Council.

—— —

—_—

375

TRINOBANTES

.
VIVIIO MARE
No. ML. LEGI
G. TANVARIA
MARINA GNMVNX
PIENTISSIMA POSV|

|
IT ME MORAM{|]

Burt as time has deſtroy'd this moſt honoura-
ble name, ſo has it confirm'd that more ancient
one of London. While it had that other name,
it was very near being ſack'd by a ſeditious

ang of Robbers ; but Theodoſius, father to

heodoſius the Emperor, falling upon them

while they were laden with the ſpoils, routed

and ſlew them, and (as Marcellinus has it) with

great joy and in a triumphant manner enter d the

City, which had juſt before been overwhelm'd with

miſeries. Marching from thence, he ſo effectu-

ally freed Britain, by his great Valour, from

the Calamities wherein it was involv'd, __

*Conſec as Symmachus tells us) * the Romans honour”
—— 2 Britiſh General with a Statue on horſe-back, a-
Ducem =—= mong their ancient heroes. Not long after, when
znter priſcs the Roman Government in Britain expir'd,
22 in this, according to the unhappy Fate of the
the Saxons Whole Iſland, fell under the power of the Sax-
hands, ons ; but by what methods, does not appear
from Hiſtory. I fanſy, that Vortigern, when

a captive, gave it to Hengiſt the Saxon for his

ranſom ; for it belong'd to the Eaſt-Saxons,

and Authors tell us, that Vortigern gave Hen-

giſt that Country upon this account. At which

time, the Church ſuffer'd the greateſt Cala-

mities ; it's Paſtors were martyr'd or baniſh'd,

and their flocks driven away ; and when all

the wealth, ſacred and profane, was ſwallow'd-

up in plunder and rapine, Theonus, the laſt Bi-

ſhop of London that was a Britain, hid the

Reliques hid Reliques of the Saints (as my Author ſays,) to
to preſerve preſerve their memory, and not out of any ſuperſtition.
the memory But though the Confuſions of the Saxon age
of perſons. ere ſuch, that the God of War ſeem'd to head
them in perſon ; yet was London (as Bede tells

us) a Mart-town of great traffick and commerce

both by ſea and land. And afterwards, when a

gentle gale of peace began to fan and revive

this weary Iſland, and the Saxons were turn'd

Chyſtian ; it roſe again with a new and greater

610. luſtre. For Ethelbert King of Kent (under

* Quaſi bene- Whom Sebert was a * ſort of petty Prince in
ficiarius thoſe parts) built here a Church dedicated to
St. Paul's. St. Paul; which, by improvements at ſeveral
+ 1 grown, times, f w_ to an exceeding large and mag-
. nificent Structure; and the. revenues of it are
ſo conſiderable, as to maintain a Biſhop, Dean,

Præcentor, Chancellor, Treaſurer, five Arch-

deacons, thirty Prebendaries, and others. [ While

* From ann. this ancient Church was * in building, the ſuc-
1225, ceſſive Biſhops deſpairing to finiſh it by pri-
vate hands, were forced to apply themſelves to

the bounty of all good people throughout the

Realms both of England and Ireland, as ap-

pears by the hortatory Letters of ſeveral Bi-

ſhops of both Nations, to the Clergy under

their charge, for recommendation of the buſi-

neſs to their particular Congregations. By

for releaſe of Penance enjoined, extending to
certain numbers of days, to all ſuch as bein
truly penitent, ſhould afford their aſſiſtance to-
ward this great work; which Indulgences were
not only granted to the Contributors toward
it, but alſo to the Sollicitors for Contributi-

ons, and to the very Mechanicks who labour'd
* 0

Church, was ſo very large, that it would contain
in it ten buſhels of Corn, and the length of the
Croſs above the ſaid Ball or Pommel, fifteen
foot, and the traverſe fix. In which Croſs, the
reliques of divers Saints were put by Gilbert de
Segrave then Biſhop of London, to the intent,
that (according to the Superſtitions of thoſe
Times) God, by the glorious merits of his
Saints, whoſe reliques were therein contained,
would vouchſafe to preſerve the Steeple from
all danger of tempeſts. But how ineffectual
they were for that purpoſe, after-ages ſhew-
ed ; for, within 132 1 viz. Anno 1444.
22 Henry 6. the Shatt or Spire was fired by
Lightning, which though happily quenched
by the labour of many well-diſpoſed People,
yet did ſo much harm, that it was not ſuffi-
ciently repaired till the year 1462. (2 Edward
the 4, when a coſtly Weathercock of Copper
gilt ( the length whereof from head to tail
was four foot, the breadth over the wings three
foot and a half; of forty pounds weight) was
added to it; the Cob whereon it ſtood
(which from the Ball upwards was fifteen foot
fix inches long; and the traverſe five foot ten
inches) being made, within, of firm Oak, and
cover'd firſt with Lead, which was plated over
again with Copper varniſh'd red, the Ball be-
ing alſo of Copper gilt, in compaſs nine foot
and one inch, as appear'd by meaſure at the
taking of it down for it's better repair An.
1553. 1 Mariz.

And thus, the Spire being brought once more
to perfection, it ſtood not much above an hun-
dred years ; but a more deplorable miſchance
befell it again by Lightning, July 4. An. 1561.
3 Eliz. whereby the Shaft was firſt ſer on fire
about three yards from the top; which being
wholly conſumed, it next ſeized the roof of
the Church and Iles, burning down all the
rafters, and whatever elſe was liable to it, in
four hours time. The repair hereof was proſecu-
ted with that zeal and diligence by the Queen,
Clergy, and Laity, that in April 1566. all
the roofs of timber were perfectly finiſh'd,
and cover'd with lead : only the Steeple (tho'
divers Models were then made of it) was left
imperfect, which continued ſo, notwithſtanding
the attempts made towards it's farther repara-
tion in the time of James 1, and by Archb. Laud
in the time of his fon, till it was again wholly con-
ſumed juſt a hundred years after, in that dread-
ful Conflagration, which happen'd in the year
1666. and which we ſhall mention more par-
ticularly, by and by. In the account of this
Church we have been thus diſtin&, becauſe
even What the Fire it ſelf left, was afterwards
demoliſh'd to the very foundation, in order
to the erecting of that noble, beautiful, and
ſtupendous Pile, now finiſhed ; the charge where-
of hath been chiefly ſupported by an impoſt on
Sea-coal (a much better Fund, than that of Be-
nevolence, whereby the former Church was

— — ——

built.)

—

| By this means, it ſeems to have been finiſh ak
about the year 1312. being paved that year
with good + firm marble. 1

The Ball above the head of the Spire of this?” *

l
zul.

Ill

which Letters, there were Indulgences granted

9.0 K

3

.

3 —

8

built.)

follow

This, 21 ving
4 Seems, C. ſo St

— 5, *

2
3
1

| TD Campanile, Lei

= Diana's

Temple,

Mar
Pala

beſt

I Tranſep- wel

C101

1361. .
very late · It
ly, when we on
were boys, C. thi
And is not
et we edift- P
e, C.
I 720, Stow» || ©
4 | in anno 1599+ WE

re
ale
roc

thy
bel

ä MIDDL ES EN

built.) The Dimenſions of this New Churth, are as

follow Her. Inch.
Ti From the Eaſt end to the Weſt, TY 463 oo
fry : rween the Walls, .
1 From North to South in the Croſs Ile by: ,00

between the Walls,

From North to South in the Nave, be- 1 o$
tween the Walls,

From the Pavement to the top of the $16
Cupola, J

5 ts Pavement to the top of the j 8
Croſs, 44

the Pavement to the higheſt part
. arch'd Roofing, in the * 9
and Choir,

, The ſaid Cupola is exceeding large, and, on the

ö inſide, is adorn d with curious Paintings; hich are
5 a Repreſentation of the Life and Acts of St. Paul.
: In the Church alſo, 1s a Library, well ſtored with
valuable and curious Books, | ;

„ c The eaſt-partof * the old Church which f ſeem-
Pal ed to be newer, and t was curiouſly wrought, ha-

bis, C. ving a vault and a moſt beautiful porch (call'd al-
4 Seems, C. h St. Faith's Churchz) was re-edity'd by Biſhop
E-» Maurice about 1086. out of the ruins of that
Palatine Tower above-mentioned ; having before
that been burnt down, Of which Malmesbury
writes thus: I has ſuch a majeſtick beauty, as to de-
ſerve a name among the buildings of greateſt note.
Fo wide is the vault, ſo capacious the body of the
Church, that one would think it might contain the great-
| eſt Congregaticn imaginable. And thus Maurice, by
I latisfying bis extravagant humour, entail'd the charge
of this great work upon poſterity. And afterward, when
Richard his ſucceſſor had allow d the entire revenues of
his Biſhoprick to the building of this Cathedral, finding
other ways to maintain himſelf and his family ; be
ſeem'd to kave done nothing towards it : Thus did be
beſtow all be had upon it, and yet to little purpoſe. The
3 | Tranſep- Weſt-part of it, as alſo || the Croſ- lle, F was ſpa-
tum. cious, with lofty large pillars and a moſt beautiful
* +1s, C. roof of Stone. Where theſe four parts * met, there
leer, Cf aroſe a large and lofty tower; upon which ſtoed
A Hiiſes,C. ſpire cover d over with lead, and of a prodigious
height (for from the ground it was 534 foot ;) but
in the year 1087. it was burnt with lightning, nor
without great damage to the whole City: and tho'
very late- it was built again; yet & it ſufter'd the ſame fate
h, when we once more f. I will ſubjoyn the Dimenſions of
vere boys, C. this magnificent ſtruct ure out of an Author of
| 33 pretty good Antiquity, which you may read or let
e, C. alone, as you pleale: The length of Paul's Church is
720, Stow, || 690 foot ; the breadth 130 fJoot ; the height of the
in arro 159 · weſtern-roof from the area, 102 foot; the height of the
4 roof of a new building from the area, 88 foot; the
Campanile. height of the ſtone-work belonging to the Belfrey from
4 the ground, 260 foot ; the keight of the wooden part
belonging to the ſame Belfrey, 274 foot, &c. (a)
Diana's Some have fanſy'd that the Temple of Diana
Temple, formerly ſtood here ; and there are circumſtances
that ſtrengthen their conjecture : as, the old ad-
jacent buildings being called in their Records

Superior
es,

_—

370

dible number of Ox-heads ; which the comnooti

people at that time, not without great admiration,
look'd upon to have been Gentile-ſacrifites ; and

the Learned know that the Tauropolia were cet.-

brated in honour of Diana. And when I wis 4

boy, I have ſeen a ſtag's-head fix d upon a ſpeat᷑
[Cagreeable enough to the Sacrifices of Diana) and
carry d- about in the very Church, with great ſo-
emnity and ſounding of Horns. And I have
head that the Stag which the family of Baud in
Efſex Were bound to pay for certain lands, was
us d to be Fecclv 5 the ſteps of the Quire by
the Members of this Church, in their Sacerdotal
robes, and with” garlands of flowers about their
heads. Whether Chis was a cuſtom, before the
Bauds were obliged to the payment of that Stag,
I know not; but certain it is, this ceremony fr
vours more of the worſhip of Diana and tit Gen-
tile-errors, than of the Chriſtian Religion. And
it is beyond all doubt, that ſome of theſe ſtrange
Rires did creep into the Chriſtian Religion ;
which the primitive Chriſtians either clos'd with,
out of that natural inclination mankind has to
Superſtition, or bore with them iii the beginning,
with deſign to draw over the Gentiles by little
and little to the worſhip of the true God. [But
much rather ſhould 1 found ſuch an opinion (of a
Temple of Diana) upon the witty conceit of Mr.
Selden; who (upon occaſion of ſome Ox-heads,
ſacred alſo to Diana) that were diſcover'd in dig-

ing the foundations of a new Chapel on the
Purh-fide of St. Paul's, would inſinuate that the Anno 1316.
name of London imported no more than Llan Diem,
i. e. Templum Diane, And againſt the foregoing
Conjectures it is urged, That, as for the T ene-
ments call'd Camera Dianæ, they ſtood not ſo near
the Church as ſome would have us think, but on
St. Paul's-wharf-hill near Dofors-Commons, and

ſeem to have taken their denomination from a
ſpacious Building full of intricate Turnings,
wherein King Henry the ſecond (as he did at
Woodſtock) kept his heart's delight; whom he

there call'd Fair Roſamund, and here Diana. Of
which winding vaults there remain'd ſome parts in

Mr. Stow's time, as alſo of a paſſage under-ground Survey;
from Baynard's Caſtle to it; which poſſibly might P- 781+
be the King's way to his Camera Diana, or ſe-

cret apartment of his beautiful Miſtreſs : And
that, as to the donation of a Buck annually to
the Dean and Chapter on the feaſt of the Com-
memoration of St. Paul, and the carrying the
head in proceſſion before the Croſs ; it is ſaid to

have been a plain compoſition betwixt the Church

and the Family of Baud, of no older date than

the third of Edward the firſt, in lieu of twenty- -

two Acres of Land, parcel of their Manour of
Weſtley, granted to Sir Milliam Baud, to be taken

into his Park at Coringham in Eſſex. Which be-
ing an acknowledgment ſo naturally ariſing from
the uſe and application of the Grant; it is not
probable that any thing more is ſignify'd by it. Ibid;

But though this do not countenance the Con- P. 368.

jecture, yet ought not the Opinion to be alto- |

Diane Camera, 1. e, the Chamber of Diana ; the
digging up in the Church-yard, in Edward the
hrit's reign (as we find by our Annals) an incre-

gether rejected, ſince it receives confirmation from
thoſe pieces of Antiquity dug-up hereabouts ; not
only in ancient times, but alſo of later years. For

of the ſpire above it 274, as he ſays ; yet the whole,

—

(a) An exact Meaſure was taken of that Church about 1312. being the year wherein it was finiſh'd ; which was
written in a Tablet in large Characters, heretofore hung on the north- part of the Quire. From whence Dugadale
ſeems to have ta ken the dimenfions ; for he differs in nothing from what was expreſs'd in the Table, but in the
height of the ſteeple. Tho' the height of the tower from the level of the ground was 260 foot; and the height

viz, both of tower and ſpire, did not exceed 520 foot,

as is teſtify'd by the Tablet (whereot there is a MS. Copy in the publick Library in Cambridge ) and this is14
foot ſhort of the height mention'd by that Author, who makes it 534 foot high, agreeable to the two dimenſions
of the tower and ſpire added together. Which muſt indeed have been true, had the ſpire riſen from the ſummit
of the battlements : whereas I ſuppoſe it roſe (as the ſpires of moſt ſteeples do) much below them ; the bat-
tlements here riſing 14 foot above the baſe of the ſpire, which muſt occafion the difference, |

Bbb in

—
- — > * — — —— — — —

—— — — ——
- - „——

* — 7
* —— ́ꝗ— — —
. 4 . *

—
—

"URL ů ·—·
—
* %

8 — ——— > my . 1
— . ̃—

—

n — — —
M * . — — —_—_— -
- 1 a |

—
—

. — — 7

128
—
E — N —·rÜÄ 1e 8 —
it — o —— — - . 0
— 54 7 I

—

.. —˙—ͤ»¹ö N
— —
—— =

_ —— ̃Fw—'— — 8 * —— — —

— —
- — —o——— —

—

5/9

TRINOBANTES.

+ Mr. or-

ey.

* Iyſignia.

+ Are, C.
Perſons bu»
ry'd in the
old Paul's.

About 680.
1016.
Guil. Mal-
mesb.

+ Nepos.

Stirpem.

Dugd. Hiſt,
of dt. Paul's.

* Survey,
p. 227,

* Belides the
ancient
Church of St.
Paul, C.

in making the foundation of this new Fabrick,

among other things they caſt- up the teeth of

Boars and of other Beaſts, and a piece of a Buck's
horn, with ſeveral fragments of Yeſſels, which by
the figure one would imagine to have been us'd in
their Sacrifices. A great number of theſe (with
an entire Lyn, 2a Lamp, and other things belong-
ing to the Roman Funerals, and dug-up in Good-
man's-fields,) came into the hands of a t very know-
ing and ingenious Gentleman. |

Ever ſince that [ancient | Church was built, it
has been the See of the Biſhops of London ; and
under the Saxons (fifty years after the expulſion
of Theonus the Britain) the firſt Biſhop that ir
had was Melitus a Roman, conſecrated by Au-
guſtine Archbiſhop of Canterbury. It was in ho-
nour to this Auguſtine, that the Archiepiſcopal
* Dignity, and the Metropolitical See, were tran-
lated from London to Canterbury, againſt the
expreſs order of Pope Gregory.

There f were bury'd in this Church (to ſay
nothing of St. Erkenwald, and the Biſhops) Sebba
King of the Eaſt-Saxons, who quitted his Crown
for the ſake of Chriſt and Religion; Ethelred or
Egelred (who was rather an oppreſſor than governour
ot this kingdom : the beginning of his reign was bar-
barous, the middle miſerable, and the end ſhameful :
he made himſelf inhuman, by conniving at Parricide :
infamous, by his cowardiſe and effeminacy : and by his
death, miſerable : ) Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln,
John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaſter, Simon de Burley
a famous Knight, J. de Beauchamp Warden of the
Cinque-Ports, J. Lord Latimer, Sir Johm Maſon,

IWiliam Herbert Earl of Pembroke, Nicholas Bacon

Lord Keeper, a perſon of great Wiſdom and pro-
found judgment, Sir Philip Siduey and Sir Francis
Walfingham moſt famous Knights, Cc. and Chri-
ſtopher Hatton Lord High Chancellour of England,
to whole ſacred and laſting memory his f nephew
Wiliam Hatton of the ancient family of the Neu-
ports (but by him adopted into the name and |] fa-
mily of the Hattozs,) dutitully erected a magnifi-
cent monument, becoming the dignity and high

character of ſo great a Perſon. But here, we muſt; then [till the year 1666.) it f had not felt any + Hy, C

—

not long that they had enjoy d a ſertled peace,
when the Weſt-Saxons ſubdu'd the Eaſt-Saxons
and London fell into the hands of the Mercians.
And theſe civil wars were ſcarce ended, when pre-
ſently a new northern ſtorm broke out, namel

that Daniſh one, which miſerably harraſs'd all
theſe parts, and gave a terrible blow to this City.
For the Danes got poſſeſſion of it, but Ælfred re-
took it; and, atter he had repair'd it, committed
it to the government of his ſon-in-law Zthelred,
Earl of the Mercians. Notwithſtanding, after
this, thoſe Plunderers did often beſiege it; eſpe-
cially Canutus, who dug a new chanel with de-

loſt their labour, the citizens ſtoutly defending
it againſt the aſſaults of the Enemy. [Indeed,
in the year 839, in the reign of King Ethelwol/,
it was ſurpriz'd by the Danes, and the Citizens
inhumanly butcher'd, Quickly after, in the
year 851. it was again ſack'd by the Danes; the
army of Beorhtwulf King of Mercia, who came
to it's defence, being totally routed, Again, in
the year 872. in the days of King Erthelred, the
Danes took it, and winter'd in ir. And ſo again
in the year 1013. after a great fight with Swae
King of Denmark who beſieg'd it, the Citizens
were at laſt forced to admit him and his army to
winter in it, and to pay him ſuch tribute as he
demanded. Laſtly, in the year 1016. it was
twice beſieged, and ſo much {treighten'd by Ca-
nutus, that they were neceſſitated in fine to re-
ceive him into the City, and to give him winter-
quarters, and to buy their peace with a ſum of

was much waſted by fire, as Ranulph Higden, in

But [notwithſtanding they held out, under all
theſe Calamities | they were under continual ap-

prebentions, till they joyfully receiv*'d William the

orman, whom Providence had deſign'd for the
Crown of England; and ſaluted him King. From

that time, the winds ceas'd, the clouds ſcatter'd, and
the true golden age began to ſhine forth. Since

not omit the particular mention of Robert Bray-|ſignal calamity ; but by the bounty of our

brook Biſhop ot London, and ſometime Lord High
Chancellor of England, who dy'd Auguſt 27. An-
uo 1404. fifth ct Henry the fourth, above two

hundred and fixty years before the ruin of this

Princes it obtain'd ſeveral immunities, and began

to be called the || Chamber of the Kings, and grew ſo] Cm,

in Trade, that William of Malmesbury, who
liv'd near that time, calls it a City, noble, wealthy,

Church in 1666. Notwithſtanding which diſtance in every part adorn d by the riches of the citizens, and
of time, upon pulling down the {tone-work, and | frequented by merchants from all parts of the world.

removal of the rubbiſh, his body was found en-
tire, the skin {till ineloſing the bones and fleſhy
parts; only in the breaſt there was a hole (made

1 ſuppoſe by accident) thro which one might view

and handle his lungs. The skin was ot a deep
tawny colour, and the body very light; as ap-
pear'd to all who came to view and touch it, it be-
ing expoſed in a Coffin for ſome time without any
offenſive ſmell; and then re-inter'd. To which
Mr, * Stow gives us a parallel Hiſtory in this very
City, in the corps of Alice Hackney, wife of Robert
Haclue), Sheriff of London 15 of Edward the
ſecond, Anno 1321. whole body, being dug-up
by the Labourers in April Anne 1497. (as they
were working the foundations of a Wall in the
Pariſh-Church of St. Mary-hill) was found with
her skin whole, her bones all in their natural
roſture, and the joynts of her arms pliable ; but
yielding an ill ſmell, after it had been kept four
days above-ground. In which two laſt points,
this (though equally entire) differ'd from the for-
mer: whence it is very evident that they had, in
ancient times, more ways than one, of preſerving
the dead from corruption, as well as now.

There is * nothing of the Saxon Work that 1
know of now remaining in London ; for it was

And Fitz-Stephens, who liv'd in that age, has told
us, that then London had one hundred and twen-
ty-two Pariſh-Churches, and thirteen belonging

to * Convents; and that upon a muſter made of all? C
that were able to bear Arms, it ſent into the field *

forty thouſand foot, and twenty thouſand horſe.

But yet, ever ſince the Conqueſt, it hath had

mixtures of divers remarkable Diſaſters, in ſeve-
ral ages. For, not to mention the grievous Inſults
made upon it of later years, by Wat Tyler and
Jack Straw in the time of Richard the ſecond,
anno 1381 ; by Jack Cade (otherwiſe call'd by his
Followers John Mendall) anno 1450, in the time
of Henry the ſixth ; and by the baſtard Falconbridge,
in 1481, in the reign of Edward the fourth:
not (I ſay) to mention theſe Inſults : In the year
1077, in the days of William the Conqueror, it
was conſumed by ſo great a fire, as had not
happen'd to it (as the Saxon Chronicle expreſſes

it) ſince it's foundation. f Quickly after again, f Chron.
in the ſame King's reign, anno 1086. the Church p. 188

of St. Paul was quite burnt down, with the
greateſt and moſt ſplendid part of the City.

| Again in the year 1135. the firſt of Kingy Sen“
Stephen, by a fire which began in Cannon-ſtreetvey, f.

near London-ſtone, the City was conſumed
from

ſign to divert the Thames: but they f oft-times+ Amo

money. Alſo before the Conqueſt, anno 983. it“ Chu u

his Polychronicon, tells us.] Lib. 6.

that
4 Gualt, Co- dro-

ent. & Lib.
Dune MS. —
| Stow's Sur» aun
vey, p. 782. 11
Fire of Lon- E
don. ore:

political ( as
Ela).

„

81

Jar.

381

MIDDLESEX.

302 |

4 Gualt. Co-

vent. & Lid.
Dunmow
| Stow's Sure
vey, p- 732»
Fire of Lon-
don.

political
Ela).

the gradual Imp

from thence, to the Eaſtward as far as Aldgate; to
St. Paul's Church Weſtward; and to the South
as far as Southwark ; the bridge (then of tim-
ber) being quite burnt down. This bridge was
afterwards rebuilt of ſtone, and houſes ſet upon
ir, but within four years after it was finiſh'd
(anno 1212.) upon occaſion of a fire in South-
wark (whilſt a multitude of people were paſ-
ſing the bridge, either to extinguiſh, or to
gaze at it,) on a ſudden the houſes on the
North-end of the bridge, by a ſtrong South
wind, were ſet on fire. So that the people
thronging betwixt two fires, could now expect
no help but from the veſſels in the river, which
came in great numbers to their aſſiſtance ; but
the multitude ſo unadviſedly ruſh'd into them,
that they were quickly overſet, and the people
drown'd ; and betwixt fire and water, there
periſh'd above 3000 perſons f. Alſo Feb. 13.
anno 1033. a third part at leaſt of the ſame
bridge was again burnt down ||.

But the moſt dreadful fire that ever befel this
great City, was that which happen'd within
our own memory, viz. on Sunday Sept. 2.
anno 1666. which beginning in Pudding-lane,
in three days time (being driven by a freſh
eaſterly wind) conſumed no leſs than eighty-nine
Churches, the Guild-hall, Hoſpitals, Schools and
Libraries, with fifteen entire Wards of the twen-
ty-ſix, leaving eight of the reſt half burnt and
miſerably ſhatter'd. In this compaſs, were four
hundred ſtreets, and in them thirteen thouſand
two hundred houſes, which cover'd no leſs than
four hundred thirty-ſix acres of ground : Ir
deſtroy'd all on the Thames-fide, from Al-
hallows Barkin to the Temple Church, and all
along from the North-eaſt walls of the City to
Holburn-bridge : and when all artificial helps
fail'd, it languiſh'd and went out of it ſelf,
though amongſt as combuſtible buildings as
any it had burnt before. In memory whereof,
near the place where the fire began, is erected
a magnificent Pillar (ſomewhat reſembling, ex-
cept the Imagery, thoſe of Trajan and Antonine
at Rome) of two hundred and two foot high,
which equals exactly the diſtance of the Pillar
from the place where the fire firſt began. Out
of theſe ſtupendous Ruins, it recover'd it ſelf,
and in few years roſe again with ſurprizing

went to the Knights-Hoſpitalers of St. John

|

cial-Courts ; the reſt to Chancery. In theſe, Common
ſuch numbers of young Gentlemen apply them- Law's - Inns

Ad Forum

which they 41414
Holborn.

our Saviour's Sepulchre at Jeruſalem. Templars.

there they liv'd in that part of the Temple
next the Sepulchre, and from it had their

name ; being under a vow to prote& the Chri-

{tian Religion, and all ſuch as came in pilgri-

mage to the Sepulchre of our Lord, againſt the
Mahometans. By which means, they gain'd

great eſteem and reſpect from all hands; and by

the bounty of Princes had large Poſſeſſions and

much wealth in all parts; and were in great

reputation for their exemplary piety. Man

Noblemen were bury'd among them; whoſe, P99 Jo
Images are to be ſeen in this Temple with their mant, the *
legs acroſs (for ſo all thoſe in that age were characters
bury'd, who had devoted themſelves to the ſer- whereof are
vice of the Holy War, or, at thoſe times word- —_—
ed it, had taken up the Croſs.) Among the reſt, Pemivickies
were William the father, William and Gilbert and on the
the ſons, all, Marſhals of England, and Earls fide, Miles e-
of Pembroke. But in the year of our Lord % Herts,

l ; : Mars multos
1312. this Order was condemn'd for WR

and by authority of the Pope utterly aboliſh'd. The Statute
However, their revenues by act of Parliament concerning
of the Tem-
plars lands,
17 Edw. 2.

Upon one of

Jeruſalem ; leſt what was given upon a Reli-
gious deſign, ſhould, contrary to the Will of
the Donors, be converted to other uſes. Not-
withſtanding, it appears plainly by ancient Re-
cords, that after the were driven
out, this place was the Seat of Thomas Earl of

beauty and magnificence ; far ſurpaſſing its for-
mer condition, both in ſtatelineſs of Buildings,
and number of Inhabitants. Inſomuch, that!
(as the ingenious Sir Milliam Petty probably
computed it, from the number of Burials and

Houſes in each City,) London in the year 1683,

or thereabouts, was as big as Paris and Rouen
(the two beſt Cities of the French Monarchy)
put together; and now (above ſeven parts of
fitteen having been new built ſince the great
Fire and the number of Inhabitants increaſed
near one half, the total amounting to near
ſeven hundred thouſand) it is become equal to
Paris and Rome put together.

The addditional Buildings, which have run
out a great way into the Fields on every ſide,
conſiſt of noble Squares, and ſumptuous Streets,
in great numbers; and this prodigious Increaſe
of Inhabitants, eſpecially in the Suburbs on the
ſeveral ſides, hath render'd the Out-Pariſhes im-
moderately large : For the Diviſion of which,
and the erecting of ſeveral new Churches and
Pariſhes, within the Bills of Mortality, ſeveral
Acts of Parliament have been made in the reigns
of Queen Anne and King George.

Bur to return to the more ancient State, and
rovements of this great City.
aving recover d it ſelf by the favour of the
Norman Kings; it began to increaſe on every

Lancaſter, and of that Spenſer who was the
great favourite of King Edward the ſecond ;
as afterwards of Audomar de Valentia, Earl of
Pembroke ; and at laſt it was turn'd into two
+ Inns for the education of Lawyers. Concern-
ing the other two, I have met with nothing
upon record; only there is a Tradition, that
one of them was the habitation of the Lords
Grey, the other of the Earls of Lincoln. [All
theſe Inns of Court have been in great mea-
ſure new built, in a moſt ſtately and ſplendid
manner ; together with the Ornaments of
Groves, Walks, Gardens, and all other Accom-
modations for Pleaſure and Retirement. And,
beſides theſe, there are two other Inns, one
in Fleetſtreet and the other in Chancery-lane,
for the reception of thoſe Lawyers who attain
the degree and dignity of Serjeants at Law; and
are therefore call'd by the name of Serjeants-inn.

To theſe we muſt add the College of Civilians, ygaors.
commonly call'd Dottor's-Commons ; where the Commons.
Courts of Civil and Canon Law are held, and
the Profeſlors thereof do live in a Community,
and in a Collegiate way.

Near the forementioned Inns of Court, be-
tween the New and Old Temple, King Henry
the third built a Houſe of Converts, for the main-
tenance of thoſe who turn'd from Judaiſm to

Chriſtianity ; which afterwards King Edward
the

+ Collegiaz

Serjeants-inn,

383 TRINOBANTES

—

the third made a Repoſitory of the Rolls and
Records, whereupon it is at this day call'd the
Rowles. Nowe. [That building, call'd Domus Conver-
ſorum, was erected in the ſeventh year of Henry
the third (in the place of a Jeus houſe, to him
forteited ;) and in it all Jews and Infidels who
were converted to the Chriſtian Faith, had ſut-
ficient maintenance allowed them, were inſtruct-
ed in the Doctrine of Chriſt, and liv'd under a
Chriſtian Governour; till Anno 1290, when all
Jews were baniſh'd out of the realm: by which
means, the number of Converts neceſſarily de-
caying, and the Houſe becoming as it were de-
populated, it was granted to William Burſtall,
Cuſtos Rotulorum, by Letters Patents bearing date
51 Edu. 3. for keeping of the Rolls, which
Grant was ratified in Parliament 1 Rich. 2, and
by other Letters Patents 6 Rich. 2. Not-
withſtanding which Grant and Ratifications, all
converted Jews have ever ſince been allowed
(and will be hereatter, as often as any ſuch
ſhall appear) one penny half-penny per diem to-
ward their maintenance : which allowance was
paid to Peter Samuel and John Maza, two con-
verted Jews, Auno 1685. 2 Fac. 2, as appears
by the Maſter of the Rolls account in the Han-
naper, and a Conſtat out of the Pell-office, both
of the date above-mention'd ; who were the
two laſt I can find that ever enjoy'd this be-
+ MS. in Ca- nefit f.
pel. Rot. This Suburbs ran along in a continu'd range
* Runs, C. of Buildings, and the ſtately houſes of ſome of
the Nobility upon the Thames, as far as Weſt-
+ Are, C. minſter. The moſt conſiderable of them, f were,
|| Bride-well. || St. Bridgid Mel, where King Henry the eighth
built a Palace for the reception of the Empe-
ror Charles the fifth ; but now it is a houſe of
Buckhurſt- Correction: Buckhurſt-houſe, ſometime belong-
houſe. ing to the Biſhops of Salisbury; the houſe of
The Temples. the Carmelites ; the Temples before-mentioned ;
Eher hauf. F/ſex-houſe, built by the Lord Paget; Arundel.
Aruncel- houſe ; Somerſet-houſe, built by Seimor Duke of
Somerſet- Somerſet. Next, to paſs by the reſt, the Savoy
houſe, (fo call'd from Peter Earl of Savoy, who liv'd in
Savoy. it,) which Eleanor wife of Henry the third
* Fratribus. bought of the * Fraternity of f Montjoy, and
1 —_— gave to her ſon Edmund Earl of Lancaſter ;
ve whoſe poſterity for a long time had it for a ſear,
|| Paceperzbus till Henry the ſeventh made it a || Hoſpital.
(4. Durham-houſe, built by Anthony Bec Biſhop of
332 Durham, and Patriarch of Jeruſalem. Tork-
* Hath been houſe (for ſo it“ was call'd,) formerly Bath-
called of late, houſe. | Beſides theſe (which were the moſt re-
C. markable) there were between Temple-Bar and
We$tminffer many other Houſes, as well of the
Spiritual, as Temporal, Nobility. For the
Biſhops of Exeter, Bath and Wells, Salisbury,
Lichfield and Coventry, Morcefter, Norwich, Lan-
dafj, and Carliſle, had all anciently houſes here:
and ſo had the Dukes of Buckingham, and
Beauford ; and the Earls of Exeter, WorceFer,
Bedfort, Salisbury, and Rivers. But why do 1
+ Etolv xs give particular names to theſe, f which belong
„Jene avs not to any one, but as Fortune diſpoſes of
oy them ? ſeſpecially, ſince all of them, except
Somerſet, and Northumberland-houſe, are now
pull'd down, and the Sites and Gardens con-
verted into Streets. |
Weſtminſter, Weftminfer, formerly above a mile diſtant
from London, is now by theſe Suburbs joyn'd fo
cloſe to it, that it ſeems to be part of it ; not-
withſtanding it is a diſtin& City of it ſelf, and
enjoys its own Magiſtrates and Privileges : [be-
ing alſo erected into an Honour by Act of Par-
lament in the 37th of Henry the eighth.1 Once
it was call'd Thoruey, from the Thorns ; now
Weftmin#ter, from its weferly ſituation and the

is deriv'd from the Inauguration, and Burial
of our Kings, in it. Sulcardus affirms, that
there once ſtood in that place a Temple of
Apollo, and that it was thrown down by an
Earth-quake in the time of Antoninus Pius;
out of the ruins whereof, Sebert King of the
Eaſt-Saxons built another to St. Peter ; which
being deſtroy'd by the Danes, was re-edify'q
and granted to a few Monks by Biſhop Duz-
ſtan. But afterwards, King Edward the Con-
feſſor, built it anew out of the tenth penny of
all his revenues, for a burying-place to him-
ſelf, and a Monaſtery to the Benedictine Monks;
endowing it with lands, diſpers'd here and
there, throughout England. But hear a con-
temporary Hiſtorian : The devout and pious Kin
has dedicated that place to God, both for its neigh-
bourhood to the famous and wealthy City, and for it:

uy

minſter. For it is particularly eminent for the "= aid h
Abbey, and for its Hall of Juſtice, and for the The 4 bs —
King's Palace. The Church's greateſt honour and 105 5

os Sur- OF f.
o. 499. 10

4 b had ſ.
had a
Biſhoj
{quan
gave 1
atter,
by Q
by A
convel
may ſ
ſettlec
Soldie
King's
Unive
: Chure
| . 80 ſaid, conſti
ac. 1607. / pot

Zee

plealant fituation among fruitful grounds and green by
fields, and for the nearneſs of the principal river of I worth
England, which from all parts of the world con- | Fic School. both |
veys whatever is neceſſary to the adjoyning City. But | it is
above all, for the love he bore to the Prince of the both
Apoſtles whom he always reverenc'd with a ſingular ticula
zeal and wveneration, did he make choice of that for lation
the place of his Sepulchre. Then he order'd a noble ſter ;
Structure to be begun and built out of the tenths of whoſ:
his whole revenue, ſuch a one as might become the great!
Prince of the Apoſtles ; that, after the tranſitory of th
courſe of this life, he might find a propitions God, oth ſever:
upon account of his piety, and of his free-offering of venie
thoſe lands and ornaments with which he deſigns to he ha
endow it. Whereupon, the work thus nobly begun ſame
at the King's command, is ſucceſsfully carry'd on, new,
without ſparing either preſent or future charges ; ſo with
it may be made worthy of and acceptable to God and ded

| the Bleſſed S. Peter. Be pleaſed allo to take the Gree
Form and Figure of this ancient building out 1 ſhire,
of an old Manuſcript : * The chief Ile of the* p Will,
Church is roof'd with lofty Arches of ſquare work, tis ar. A Libr:
| the joints anſwering one a;:other 3 but on both ſides + Pari co A and
it is enclos d with a double Arch of ſtones firmly ceg midi. 4 he le
mented and knit together. Moreover, the Croſs of the annu
Church ( made to encompaſs the middle Quire of tain
the || Singers, and by its double ſupporter on each Carentiun ratio
fide to bear up the lofty top of the middle tower) firſt Domirs Le&
riſes fingly with a low and ſtrong Arch, then mounts q to tl
higher with ſeveral winding ſtairs artificially contriv'd, 1 piou
and laſt of all with a fingle wall reaches to the wooden 1

roof, which is well cover d with lead. But one hundred
and ſixty years after, K. Henry the third pulled
down this Fabrick of Edward's, and erected a

paid

Yin Weſt- over
_—_— then

3 4 Seber

new one of curious workmanſhip, ſupported by rold
ſeveral rows of marble Pillars, and leaded over; K of E
which was fifty years in building. This, the J witl
Abbots very much enlarg'd on the weſt-ſide ; Hen
and Henry the ſeventh, tor the burial of him- k of S
ſelf and his children, added to the caft part : $wrur- ; his
of it a Chapel of moſt neat and admirable con- | dina
trivance (call'd by Leland the Miracle of the Kin
World; for ell the Art in the world ſeems to naul
be crowdcd into this one Work.) It is erected his
in the place of the Chapel of our Lady (built ry tl
before, with the Church, by King Henry the of (
third,) and of a Tavern near adjoyning; both wife
which being pull'd down, he laid the founda- Ric
tion of this, Jan. 24. 1502, fetching moſt of {eve
the ſtone from Huddleſtone quarrey in Yorkſhire. ther
The whole charge of it amounted to no leſs Edu
than fourteen thouſand pounds Sterling. In to 1
this is to be ſeen his own moſt ſplendid and ano
magnificent Monument, of ſolid Braſs, richly I Hits oft

gilt; made and finiſh'd Anno 1519. by ove 8 ſaid, mes
Peter a Painter of Horence, for which he had un. 160), Tab.

55

"MIDDLESEX

Smear.

8
*

W.. 495

ET ALE II ITS 4

e

bs & ſaid,

ann. 1607.

* rl
4
*

paid him (for materials and workmanſhip) a
thouſand pounds Sterling by the King's Execu-

7X Sur- tors f.

From the expulſion of the Monks, it has
had ſeveral ſorts of Conſtitutions : firſt, it
had a Dean and Prebendaries z next, one ſingle
Biſhop, Thomas Thurlbey, who, after he had
ſquander'd away the revenues of the Church,
gave it up, and left it to the Dean. Preſently
after, the Monks and their Abbot were reſtor d
by Queen Mary ; but they being quickly ejected

by Authority of Parliament, Queen Elizabeth |

converted it into a Collegiate Church, nay, 1
may ſay a Nurſery of the Church. For ſhe
ſettled twelve Prebendaries, and as many old
Soldiers paſt ſervice, and forty Scholars (called
King's Scholars) who are ſent ſucceſſively to the
Univerſities, and thence tranſplanted into
Church and State, Cc. Over all theſe, ſhe
conſtituted a Dean ; which dignity was * late-
ly poſſeſs d and ſupported with great honour
by Dr. Gabriel Goodman, a perſon of ſingular
worth and integrity, and a particular Patron

| ” <hool. both to me and my Studies. [The School, as

Princes bu-
Wninſer-Ab.
by,

E
2
.

| geen Eliza-

F {So ſaid

»

it is famous for the great ſervice it has done
both to Church and State; ſo it is more par-
ticularly memorable in this work, for the re-
lation which Mr. Camden had once to it as Ma-
ſter; and alſo for Dr. Busbey its late Maſter,
whoſe worth and learning for many years did
greatly ſupport its reputation. To the latter
of theſe it is beholden for its Muſeum, and for
ſeveral improvements both in beauty and con-
venience : as is the Maſter's Houſe (wherein
he had all along liv'd) for its enlargement. The
ſame Perſon built his Prebend's houſe there a-
new, pav'd the Quire of Weſtminſter-Abbey
with white and black Marble-ſtone, and ad-
ded a building to the King's Hoſpital of
Green-coats in Turtil-fields. In Buckingham-
ſhire, he rais'd from the ground the Church of
Willen, where his eſtate lies; at Vell he built a
Library; hegalſo repair'd the Church of Lutton;
and at his death, among other Benefactions,
he left a perpetual Fund, to be employed in the
annual Augmentation of the in-come of a cer-
tain number of poor Clergy ; who, in conſide-
ration thereof, are oblig'd to read Catechetical
Lectures in their reſpective Pariſhes, according
to the direction given in the Will of this their
pious and charitable Benefactor.]

There were bury'd in this Church (to run-

Yin Weſt- over thoſe likewiſe in order, and according to

their Dignity, and the time when they dy'd; )
Sebert, the firſt King of the Eaſt-Angles ; Ha-
rold (baſtard-ſon of Canutus the Dane) King
of England; St. Edward King and Confeſſor,
with his Queen Editha; Maud, wife to Ki
Henry the firſt, and daughter to Malcolm King
of Scots ; Henry the third ; Edward the firſt,
his ſon, with Eleanor his wife, daughter to Fer-
dinand the third, King of Caſtile and Leon.
King Edward the third and Philippa of Ha-
lault his wife; Richard the ſecond, and Ame
his wife, ſiſter of the Emperor Wenxelaus; Hen-
ry the fifth, with his wife Catharine, daughter
of Charles the ſixth, King of France; Anne,
wife of Richard the third, and daughter of
Richard Nevil, Earl of Warwick; Henry the
ſeventh, with his wife Elizabeth, and his mo-
ther Margaret Counteſs of Richmond ; King
Edward the ſixth ; Anne of Cleve, fourth wife
to King Henry the eighth; Queen Mary; and
another, not to be mention'd without the high-
elt expreſſions both of reſpe& and forrow ; I
mean our + late moſt ſerene Lady Queen Eli-

nn, 1607, Labeth of bleſſed memory, the darling of En-

gland; a Princeſs endow'd with heroick Ver-
tues, Wiſdom, and 2 greatneſs of Soul, much
beyond her Sex, and incomparably skill'd both
in Affairs of State; and in Languages. Here
ſhe lies bury'd in a ſtately Monument, which
King James | the 1ſt — erected fot her. But,
alas, how inconſiderable is that Monument, in
compariſon of the noble qualities of ſo heroi-
cal a my ! She her ſelf is her own Monu-
ment, and a more ificent and ſumptuous
one than any other. For let thoſe noble A&i-
ons recommend her to the praiſe and admira-
tion of Poſterity ; RELIGION REFORM'D,
PEACE ESTABLISH'D, MONEY RE-
DUCD TOITS TRUE VALUE, A
MOST COMPLEAT FLEE T BUILT,
OUR NAVAL GLORY RESTOR'D,
REBELLION SUPPRESS'D, ENGLAND
FOR XLII. YEARS TOGETHER MOST
PRUDENTLY GOVERN'D, ENRICH'D,
AND STRENGTHEN'D, SCOTLAND
RESCUED FROM THE FRENCH,
FRANCE IT SELF RELIEV'D, THE
NETHERLANDS SUPPORTED, SPAIN
AWD, IRELAND QUIETED, A ND
THE WHOLE WORLD TWICE SAIL'D
ROUND.

[To whom add, King Fames the firſt, Queen
Anne, Queen of Bohemia, and others of their
Children. The Princeſs of Orange, Anne, her
Siſter, and Prince Rupert. King Charles II, and
ſeveral of the Children of him and of King
James II. King William and Queen Mary, the
glorious Reſtorers and Preſervers of our Religi-
on and Liberties ; Henry Duke of Gloce-
ſter, William Duke of Gloceſter, with many
other Children of Prince George of Denmark;
and of the Princeſs (afterwards Queen) Anne ;
who alſo themſelves lie here inter'd; as doth
alſo George William, a young Child of the Prince
and Princeſs of Wales.

To this Catalogue we muſt now add King Ed-
ward the fitth, and his Brother Richard Duke of
York, who were moſt barbarouſly ſmother'd to
death with Pillows in the Tower of London
Anno 1483. by order of their unnatural Uncle
Richard Duke of Gloceſter. Theit bodies (tho'

near the Thames mouth, by Sir Robert Brackenbu-
ry's Prieſt) were found July 17. 1674. by ſome
workmen who were employ'd to take up the
ſteps leading into the Chapel of the white Tow-
er, Which in all probability was the firſt and
only place they were depoſited in. Their bones
(except ſome few of them ſent to the Muſeum

Altar of black and white marble, with the
following Epitaph engraven on the Pedeſtal.

HS &

Religuiæ Edwardi 5. Regis Anglia, & Richar-
di Ducis Eboracenſis. Hos germanos fratres Tur-
ri Londinenſi concluſos, injectiſque culcitris ſuffo-
catos, abdite & inhoneſte tumulari juſſit Patruus Ri-
chardus, perfidus Regni prado. Ofſa defiderato-
rum, diu  multum quaſita, poſt annos 190, &c.
Scalarum in ruderibus ( ſcalæ iſtæ ad ſacelum Tur-
ris albæ nuper ducebant) alte defofſa, indiciis cer-
tiſſimis reperta 17 die Julii, Anno Dom. 1674.

Carolus ſecundus Rex clementiſſimus acerbam

ſertem mi ſeratus, inter avita monumenta, Principi-
Cee "Ha

* ſome have written, that they were put into“ Continuat.
a leaden Coffin and caſt into the black deeps of Harding's

Chron

at Oxford ) were commanded Anno 1678. by? Catalog.

ng | King Charles the ſecond, to be tranſlated. thence, 1

Aſhmoleani

and decently inter d here, under a curious Oxon.

— — — — — —— — — —

|

A - ”
FT Y — * 8 ä _

2 * —

387

— —

TRINOBANTES.

Other Per-
ſons bury'd
here.

bus infœliciſſimis juſta perſolvit Anno Dom. 1678.

Annoque Regni ſui 30.
That is;

Here under lie inter'd the Remains of Ed-
ward 5. King of Exgland, and of Richard Duke
of Tork. Which two Brothers, their Uncle Ri-
chard, who uſurp'd the Crown, ſhut up in the
Towey of London, and ſmother'd them with Pillows,
and order'd them to be diſhonourably and ſe-
cretly buried. Whoſe long-defired, and much
ſought-for Bones, after above an hundred and
ninety years, were found by moſt certain to-
kens, deep inter'd under the rubbiſh of the
Stairs that led up into the Chapel of the ite
Tower, on the 17" of July, in the year of our
Lord 1674.

Charles the ſecond, a moſt merciful Prince,
commiſerating their hard fortune, performed
the funeral Obſequies of theſe unhappy Princes,
amongſt the Tombs of their Anceſtors, Anno Dom.
1678. being the 3zotch of his reign. |

The Dukes and Lords { that have been bury'd
here, l are Edmund Earl of Lancaſter, younger
ſon to King Henry the third, Avelina de Forti-
bus, Counteſs of Albemarle, his wife; William
and Audomar de Valentia, of the family of Lu-

fignia, Earls of Pembroke; Alphonſe, John, and

other Children of King Edward the firſt ; John
de Eltham Earl of Cornwall, Son of King Ed-
ward the ſecond ; Thomas de Woodſtock Duke
of Gloceſter, youngeſt Son of Edward the
third, with others of his children ; Eleanor
daughter and heir of Humfrey Bohun, Earl of
Hereford and Eſſex, wife to Thomas de Wood-
ſtock ; the young daughters of Edward the
fourth, and Henry the ſeventh ; Henry, young
Son of Henry the eighth, who dy'd at two
months old ; Sophia, daughter of King James

* Primo zta-[the firſt, I who dy'd * almoſt as ſoon as born;

tis diluculo,

Philippa, Dutcheſs of York ; Lewis, Viſcount
Robſert of Hanault, in right of his wife ; Lord
Bourchier ; Anne, the _ daughter and heir
of John Moubray Duke ot Nortolk, betroth'd
to Richard Duke of York, younger Son to King
Edward the fourth ; Giles Daubeney, Lord Cham-
berlain to King Henry the ſeventh, and his
wife of the family of the Arundels in Corn-
wal ; Viſcount Welles ; Frances Brandon Dutcheſs
of Suffolk; Mary her daughter; Margaret
Douglas Counteſs of Lenox, grandmother to
James [ the 1ſt] K. of Great Britain, with Charles
her Son; Winefrid Bruges Marchioneſs of Win-
cheſter ; Anne Stanhop Dutcheſs of Somerſet,
and Jaue her daughter; Ame Cecil Counteſs of
Oxford, daughter of Baron Burghley Lord
Treaſurer of England, with her mother Mil-
dred Burghley ; Elizabeth Berkley Counteſs of
Ormond ; Frances Sidney Counteſs of Suflex ;
Thomas Butler Viſcount Thurles, ſon and heir of
the Earl of Ormond. |

Beſides, Humfrey Bourchier Lord Cromwell ;
another Humfrey Bourchier, fon and heir of the
Lord Berners; both ſlain in the Battle of Bar-
net. Nicholas Baron Carew ; the Baroneſs of
Powis ; Thomas Baron Wentworth ; Thomas Ba-
ron Wharton; John Lord Ruſſel ; Thomas Bromley
Lord Chancellor of England, Douglafia How-
ard daughter and heir of Viſcount Bindon,
wife of Arthur Gorge; Elizabeth daughter
and heir of Edward Earl of Rutland, wite of
William Cecil; John Puckering, Keeper of the
Great Seal of England; Frances Howard Coun-
teſs of Hertford 3; Henry and George Cary, fa-
ther and fon, Barons of Hunſdon, and Lord
Chamberlains to Queen Elizabeth; the Heart

ſtopher Harley, Count de umont, Embaſſador
in England from the French King) put in 2
* little Urn upon a Pyramid; Charle,

rl of Devonſhire, Lord Deputy of Ireland.

During the laſt Century, much greater
numbers of the Nobility 4 all degrees have
been inter'd in this Church, than in former
days ; ſome of whom are, Thomas the firſt Lord
Burleigh, Earl of Exeter, Lodowick Duke of Ric).
mond and Lenox, George Duke of Buckingham,
Lionel, Earl of Middleſex, Robert Earl of Eſſex,
ſeveral of the Veres Earls of Oxford, Lord Goring
Earl of Norwich, George Duke of Albemarle,
Eduard Earl of Sandwich, Edward Earl of (la-
rendon, William Duke of Newcaſtle, the Earl
of Roſcommon, James Duke of Ormond, Charles
Earl of Macclesfield, the Marquiſs of Halifax,
William Earl of Portland, Laurence Earl of Ro-
cheſter, Sidney Earl of Godolphin, Charles Earl of
Halifax, Maynard Duke of Schomberg. Beſides
great numbers of the Nobility of the Female
Sex, and many of their Children.

Here| Geoffrey Chaucer, Prince of the Engliſh
Poets, ought not to be paſs'd by ; as neither
Edmund Spencer, who of all the Engliſh Poets
came neareſt him in a happy genius, and a
noble vein of Poetry; [nor the famous Bey.
Johnſon, and the ingenious Mr. Cowley (to
whom I wiſh we could have added Mr. Butler)
who equal, if not exceed the beſt of their Prede-
ceſſors. Totheſe we muſt add two other excellent
Poets, Sir John Denham, and Mr. Dryden; and
a third, viz. Mr. Addiſon, not inferior to any
of the reſt, in livelineſs of Fancy, and exa&-
neſs of Judgment; beſides his many excellent
Performances in Proſe, which are compoſed with
the greateſt accuracy, and are full of beautiful
Thoughts, and (what is the higheſt Commen-
dation of all) are conſtantly dire&ed to the
great and noble Ends of Religion, Humanity,
and the Liberties of his Country.

Beſides theſe, there are alſo ſeveral others
buried here, [not only of the Nobility of
both Sexes, bur alſo] of the Clergy, and Gen-
tlemen of quality. | And, on account of the Bu-
rials, and Monuments of our Princes, and No-

minence, in this Place ; this ancient Church,
and the Care of it, is deſervedly reckon'd a
National Concern ; and, accordingly, the Fabrick
having been much worn and decay'd with
Age, an ample Proviſion was made by Parlia-
ment, to repair thoſe Decays ; whereby this
noble Fabrick, both within and without, 1s
render'd very firm and beautiful.

nons, dedicated to St. Stephen ; which King
Edward the third rais'd to ſuch royal magni-
ficence, and endow'd with ſuch large poſleſſi-
ons after he had carry'd his Victories through
France; that he ſeems rather to have been
Founder, than Repairer ; devoutly conſidering (as
the Foundation-Charter has it) the great bene-
fits of Chriſt, whereby, out of his rich mercy, we
have been prevented upon all occaſions, and delivering
us, although unworthy of it, from divers perils
and by the right hand of his power mightily de-
fending us, and giving us the victory in all aſſaults
of our enemies : as alſo, comforting us with unex-

pefted relief in the other tribulations aud difficulties

lace, the ancient habitation of the Kings ot

England from the time of S. Edward the Con-
feſſor; which in the reign of King Henry the
eighth was burnt down by a caſual fire. This
Palace was very large and magnificent, à build-

ing not to be equald in that age; having alſo a
| * Dawmures

| —

of Anna Sophia (the my daughter of =
ea

ct > 33 ht IIS
—

bles, and of other Perſons of Honour and E-

Hard by, was another College of twelve Ca-St. Stepter's

we have labour d under. Near this, was a Pa- King pr

3
—

8 *
Fu- Steph. 95
ts Antzm«- dis

-
-
4

— RAE
=
—
2

—

—

a)

-

r.. Catesby's UN
Plet. un

Weſminſter- 1
hall I
(

* Prxtorium,
+ Lacunari-
bus,

P. 44. Edit.
Watts.

*

| = Fr,

:
,

;
|

wn,

F 8 Li. [Adjoining to theſe is the Cottonian Library,
rary,

1, wy Act of Parliament ſpecially made for that pur-
1 Is, Go

F — larger than any of the reſt, the Prætorium, and

* Pratorium, King Bench, as tormerly. The * Hall which

/ Lacunari.

.
U

neee

MIDDLESEX:

309

3
Fu- Steph
= Ante ma-

| rale.
4 (Camera.

Catesby's under that Arch-traitor Francis Catesby, did (by

— Lam. the General Court of Juſtice was unſix d, and

P. 44.Edi
1 ws

* vawmure, and 'bukvarks. For the remains of
this, are, the F Chamber wherein the King,
the Nobility, and great . Miniſters of State,
meet in Parliament ; and that next to it, where-
in our Anceſtors us'd to open their Parliaments,
call'd the Painted Chamber of S. Edward.

How bloody, hainous, and horrible, how
odious to God and Man that Deſign was,
whereby certain Brutes in the ſhape of Men,

undermining, and placing a vaſt quantity of
gun-powder in the Vaults of thoſe buildings)
contrive the deſtruction of their Prince, Coun-
try, and the Eſtates of the Realm, out of a
ſpecious colour and pretence of Religion ; my
very heart quakes to conſider : and I cannot
reſlect, without the greateſt horrour and aſto-
niſhment, in what an irrecoverable darkneſs,
and lamentable ruin, this moſt flouriſhing King-
dom had been involvd in a moment, if that
Deſign had ſucceeded. But what an ancient
Poet ſaid in a matter of leſs concern, we may,
mournfully, apply to our caſe :

Excidat illa dies avo, ne poſtera credant

Secula, nos certe taceamus, & obruta multa

Notte tegi proprie patiamur crimina gen-
tis.

May that black day ſcape the record of
ate,

And after- ages never know 't has been,

Or us at leaſt, let us the time forget,

And hide in endleſs night our guilty na-
tion's fin.

conſiſting of many hundred Volumes of curious
Manuſcripts, chiefly relating to the Hiſtory
and Antiquities of this Nation ; which were
collected, at great charge, by Sir Robert Cotton,
and much increaſed by his ſon, and grandſon ;
the laſt of whom, wiz. Sir John Cotton, eſta-
bliſhed the ſaid moſt valuable Library for ever,
for the uſe of the Publick, — to an

poſe.
Near theſe is the White-hall, wherein * was
held the Court of Requeſts : Below which, is a Hall

Hall of Juſtice, for all England. In this the
Courts ot Juſtice are held, namely, King's-Bench,
Common-Pleas, and Chancery; and in places round
it, The Star-Chamber, and Court of Wards, While
in being,] the » the Court of the
Dutchy of Lancaſter, Oc. In theſe are heard
Cauſes, at the ſet ſeaſons or Terms of the year;
whereas before the reign of Henry the third,

tollow'd the King's Court. But he, in his
Magna Charta, made a law in theſe words;
The Common-Pleas ſhall not follow our Court, but be
held in ſome one certain place. Tho' there are
ſome who underſtand by this, only that the
Common-Pleas ſhould from that time forward
be held in a diſtin Court, and not in the

we now fee, was built by King Richard the
ſecond (as we may learn from his Arms in
the ſtone-work, and rhe f beams; ) when he
pull'd down that more ancient Hall built in
the place by William Rufus, [abour the year of
hriſt 1097; wherein, as * Matthew Paris tells
us, upon his return out of Normandy, Ano
logg. he moſt royally kept the Feaſt of }/hit-
ſuntide. The length of it was two hundred
and ſeventy foot, and the breadth ſeventy four ;

too great, he anſwer'd, That it was not big
enough by one halt, and was but a Bed-cham-
ber, in compariſon of what he intended to
make. The toumdations (as we are told) were
to be ſeen in the days of Matthew Paris, ſtretch-
ing themſelves from the river to the common

intended to have pointed in length Eaſt and
Weſt, and not North and South, as it now
does. | The new Hall, Richard the ſecond made
his own habitation. For then the Kings us'd to
hear Cauſes themſelves, as being the Aixd anos

ſpeaks) ſhall not err in judgment. But this Pa-
lace, being burnt down in the year 1512, lay
deſolate ; and a little after, King Henry the
eighth remov'd the Royal Seat to a neighbour-
ing houſe, which had been Cardinal Wolſey's ;
and which is now call'd }/hite-hall. This 4 was
a truly Royal Palace, enclos'd on one fide with

King's, built by King Henry the eighth, and
call'd St. James; and, on the other fide, with
the Thames. A certain Poet, from it's Ihite-
neſs, has term'd it Leucaum.

a Regale ſubintrant
Leuceum Reges (dederant memorabile quon-
dam
Atria, qua niveo candebant marmore, nomen)
Quod Tamiſis prima eft cui gloria paſcere
cygnos |

Ledæos, rauco pronus ſubterluit aſt.

To the Leucaum now the Princes came,
Which to it's own white marble owes it's
name.
Here Thames, whoſe ſilver ſwans are all his
pride, f g N
Runs roaring by with an impetuous tide.

But this Palace (all, except the Bangueting-
houſe, a moſt ſtately and elegant Fabrick) ha-
ving been burnt down, and ſtill remaining in
aſhes; the Royal Reſidence is now at St. James's,
the neighbouring Palace aforeſaid, which is
render'd exceeding pleaſant by the Park, com-
monly call'd, from it, St. James's Park; and
round which, are large and ſhady Walks, with
many fair and beautiful Buildings. |

becauſe it was formerly a place for keeping of

Hawks, but is now a f beautiful ſtable tor the + Ann. 1607.
King's horſes; ) there || ſtood a monument |)
which King Edward the firſt erected in me-

mory of Queen Eleauor, the deareſt husband

all poſterity. She was daughter of Ferainand
the third, King of Caſtile ; and marry'd to Ed-
ward the firſt, King of England, with whom
ſhe went into the Holy Land. When her hus-

a poyſou'd ſword, and rather grew worſe than receiv d
any eaſe by what the Phyſicians apply d. ſhe found out
a remedy, as new and unheard of, as full of love and
endearment. For by reaſon of the malignity of the
poyſon, her husband's wounds could not poſſibly be
closd : but ſhe lick'd them daily with her own tongue,
and ſuck'd out the venomons humour ; to her a moſt
delicious liquor. By the power whereof, or rather by
the virtue of the tenderneſs of a wife, ſhe ſo drew
out the poyſonous matter, that he was entirely cur d
of his wound, and ſhe eſcap'd without catching any
harm. What then can be more rare than this Lady s
expreſſions of love ? or what can be more admirable *
The tongue of a wiſe, anointed (if I may ſo ſay)

of which when he heard ſome ſay, that it was

i

with duty and love te her husband, draws from her
Beloved

high-way ; whence we may gather, that it was

or Judges ; whoſe mouth (as the Royal Pen- man Prov. c. 16;

+ Is, C.

a Park, which reaches to another houſe of the

Hard by White-hall, near the Mues (ſo call'd The Mues.

to the moſt loving wite, whoſe tender affection The tender-
will ſtand upon record, and be an exampie, to 5 of a wile,

h Rodericus
band was treacherouſly wounded by a Moor wit Toletanus,

lib, 1.

Stands, C.
haring-
croſs,

298
a
1 * 4 \ rY - -
— A — oo» % —

=
— * nc It. ee
» n . _— £

on 8 5 a :

— —— ' — —_— — —

TRINO

BANTES. 1

392

St. Martin's
School and
Library.

Holburn,

Beloved thoſe poyſons which could not be drawn out by |

the moſt approv'd Phyfician ; and what many and moſt
exquiſite medicines could not do, is effected purely by
the love of a wife. [At preſent, Charing-croſs
is adorn'd with an elegant Statue of King
Charles the firſt, on horſeback.

Near the Mews aforeſaid, is a publick School,
well endowed ; and, over it, a publick Library,
which is furniſhed with a great variety of ex-
cellent Books. Both theſe were erected, in the
reign of King James the ſecond, by the Reve-
rend Dr. Thomas Teniſon ; at that time, and for
ſome years before, the pious and indefatigable
Paſtor of this Pariſh of St. Martin's in the Fields.
And it deſerves to be particularly noted in this

place, that the ſaid School was erected by him a- o

bout the ſame time, that a Popiſh School was
open'd in the Savoy for the promoting of Popery,
of which he had ever been, and continued to his
dying day, a ſtrenuous Oppoler, and a zealous
Aſſerter of the Proteſtant Cauſe ; and, more
eſpecially, in that critical and dangerous jun-
cture. On account of which merit, together
with great Learning and exemplary Piety;
aſſoon as that Storm was blown over by our
happy Revolution, he was moſt deſervedly ad-
vanced to the Biſhoprick of Lincoln, and, with-
in a few years, to the Metropolitan See of
Canterbury; which he adminiſter'd, for twen-
ty years and upwards, with the greateſt Wis-
dom, Temper, and Stability. During his life,
beſides theſe and other remarkable Charities,
he erected and endowed two Charity-Schools
at his rwo Archiepiſcopal Seats, vix. one at
Lambeth, and the other at Croydon; and at his
death, among a variety of other Bequeſts and
Benefactions, he left one thouſand Pounds, to-
wards the erecting of Sees for two Proteſtant
Biſhops in the Weſt-Indies. |

And thus much of Weſtminſter ; which (tho',
as I obſerv'd, a City of it ſelf, and of diſtin&
Juriſdiftion) I have deſcrib'd along with Lon-
don ; becauſe it is ſo joyn'd to it by conti-
nu'd buildings, that it ſeems to be but one
and the ſame City.

On the weſt-fide of the City, the Suburbs

+ Arn. 1607, runs out in another row of + beautiful build-

ings, namely Holborn, or rather Oldburn ; where-
in are ſome Inns for the ſtudy of the Common

* Anas 1607, Law, and a houſe of the Biſhops of Ely, * be-

coming the State of a Biſhop ; which they
owe to John Hotham Biſhop of that See under
Edward the third. The Suburbs has grown
likewiſe on the north- ſide; where Jordan Bri-
ſet, a pious and wealthy man, built a Houſe for

Hoſpitalers ofthe Knights Hoſpitalers of St. John of Jeruſalem,

St. Joh Ne

Præſectus.

Templars.

which wasafterwards improv d into the ſtatelineſs
of a Palace, and had a very beautiful Church
with a high tower ſo elegantly rais'd, that,
while it ſtood, it was a ſingular Ornament to
the City. At their firſt Inſtitution, they were
ſo humble, while poor ; that their || Governour
was call'd Servant to the poor Servants of the Ho-
ſpital at Jeruſalem ; as was that of the Templars,
who aroſe a little after, The humble Miniſter of
the poor Knights of the Temple. But what by
their piety, and their bravery in War, their
condition came to be ſo much alter'd from this
mean and humble ſtate, by the bounty of good
Princes and private perſons, that they even

abounded in wealth. For about the year 1240.

Matth. Par.

they had nineteen thouſand Lordſhips or Ma-
nours, in Chriſtendom ; as the Templars had
nine thouſand (whoſe revenues here in Eng-
land came alſo afterwards to the Hoſpitalert.)
And this vaſt increaſe of revenues was ſuch
an effectual paſſage to Honours, that their Prior

liv'd in great ſtate and plenty, till Kin Henry ©
the 2 by the inſtigation of evil Counſel-
lors, ſeis'd their lands ; as he did alſo thoſe
belonging to. the Monaſteries : which were pi-
ouſly dedicated to the glory of God, and, by
the Canons of the Church, were to be expend-
ed in the maintenance of Prieſts, relief of the
poor, redemption of Captives, and the repair
of Churches. Near this place, where is now a
ſtately circuit of houſes, was formerly a rich
Houſe of the Carthufians, built by Malter Many
of Hanault, who got himſelf great honour, by
his ſervice in the French War under Edward
the third. And before that time, there was a
7 famous Church-yard, which in the plague
London in the year 1349. had above fifty
thouſand perſons bury'd in it; as appear'd by
an Inſcription in braſs, for the information of
poſterity. This Houſe of Carthuſian Monks
(founded about 1370. 45 of Edward the third)
was, after the diflolution, beſtow'd upon Sir
Thomas Audley, Speaker of the Houſe of Com-
mons, and paſs'd from him with his ſole daugh-
ter Margaret by marriage to Thomas Howard
Duke of Norfolk, and ſo by deſcent to Thomas
Earl of Suffolk. Of him it was purchaſed (un-
der the name of Howard-houſe, otherwiſe call'«
the late diſlolv'd Charter-houſe near Smithfield in
Middleſex) by Thomas Sutton of Camps-caſtle in
the County of Cambridge, for the ſum of thir-
teen thouſand pounds. He erected it into an ge, gin
Hoſpital, by the name of the Hoſpital of King; ſac. 1,
James, tounded in Charter-ſonſe in the County 3 Cir. 1.
ot Middleſex, at the humble petition and only
coſt and charges of Thomas Sutton Eſq;, Endow-
ing it with divers || Manours and other Lands, || 44831
of conſiderable value; for the maintenance of a 19 « 194,
Maſter or Governour, a Preacher, Phyſician, Regi-

Ch Ade,,
bauk,

ſter, Receiver, &c. and 80 poor Brothers or Penſio-
ners, Which are to be either Gentlemen by deſcent,

and in poverty; or Merchants decay'd by piracy
or ſhipwreck ; or ſuperannuated Soldiers, by
ſea or land : and none of theſe are to be under
the age of fifty years at the time of their Ad-
miſſion : Except only Soldiers maim'd in the
wars (and not in private quarrels,) which, in
regard of their misfortune, are capable ten years
ſooner. Befides 61. 6s. 8 d. wages, they are
allow'd meat, drink, lodging, gowns, and other
cloaths.

And ſo are forty poor Scholars, who are only
capable of admiſſion between the years of ten
and fifteen, and not to continue in the School
above eight your at moſt. Before the expira-
tion whereof, they are either tranſplanted to
one of the Univerſities (where, ſince the in-
creaſe of the Revenue, there are no leſs than
rwenty-nine always maintain'd with the allow-
ance of 20/. per Annum each, to be paid quar-
2 for eight years time:) or they are put
forth to be Apprentices; the Houſe now gi-
ving no leſs than 40 J. with them. The go-
vernment is in the hands of the moſt honoura-
ble Grandees of the State, and moſt reverend
Prelates of the Church, beſides the Royal Fa-
mily; who put in both Penſioners and Chil-

dren, in their courſes ; only, the King firſt puts

in two *. # _—_
The Suburbs alſo, which runs out on the __ -
north-welt ſide of London, is large, and Was
tormerly a watch- tower or military || fence, || Pratents®
from whence it was call'd, by an Arabick name,
Barbacan. By the gift of Edward the third it Barbacat.

g-|became a ſeat of the Ufords ; from whom by Galeottas

the H/illoughbies it deſcended to Peregrine Bertie Marti
Lord Willoughby of Eresby, a perſon of a moſt
generous temper, and truly martial Courage.

was reckon d the firſt Baron of England, and

Nor is the Suburbs that ſhoots forth wm
0

F

| . .kelds. the
pitt] dug

*
,
*
1
**

e A

the 1

anto 1807. and
Nero
cartl
Subl
an 0
man

odo!

1
for
obl
wit
mil
and
bel.
{ids
of
t011
lon

+ Survey, WE

p. 177. Tt

bu
|| Ibid,p.121- ke
all

| Borough of

Southwark, 7
dee Surrey,

519 — þ

© The Bridge, 1

f

* Verſatilis, |

*6471.25.
14,

Stow's Sur.
vey, p. 442
443»

N pittle-fields.

2

1
3

7
*

MIDDLESEX

2

394

the north-eaſt, and eaſt, lels conſiderable ; in
the fields whereof | (call'd Spiztle-fields, and
dug for making of Bricks, ) | were found in
ny ſepulchral Veſlels, Seals,
oins in them oft Claudius,
Nero, Veſpafian, &c. glaſs Vials alſo, and ſmall
carthen veſſels, wherein was a ſort of liquid
Subſtance ; which I ſhould imagin to be either
an oblation of wine and milk (us'd by the Ro-
mans at the burning of, their dead,) or of thoſe
odoriferous Liquors mention'd by Statius,

7

$ ſaid, the + laſt age ma
Fro 1407- and Urns, with

—— Phariique liquores
Arſuram lavere comam.

And precious odours ſprinkled on his hair,
Prepar'd it for the flames.

This was a place ſet apart by the Romans
for burning and burying their dead ; they being
oblig'd by the Twelve Tables to carry them
without the Cities, and to bury them by the
military high-ways. [ Divers other Roman coins
and vellels were found (as Mr. Stow tells us)
belonging to their Sacrifices and Burials, be-
ſides thole above-mention'd. Such as the Coins
of Trajaa and Antoninus Pius, Lamps, Lachryma-
tories, Patina, and veſſels of white earth with
long necks and handles, which, we may ſuppoſe,

+ Survey, were the Gutti, uſed in their Sacrifices }.
5. 177 There were many Roman Coins alſo diſcover'd
in the foundations of Aldgate, when it was re-
built in the year 1607, Which were formerly
|| Ibid,p.121. kept in the Guild-hall ||: But many more of
all kinds ſince the late fire, have been found
in the foundations of St. Paul's Church, and
in the making of Fleet-ditch ; which were care-
fully collected by Mr. John Coniers Citizen and
Apothecary of London, and are now, many
of them, in the poſſeſſion of the ingenious Dr.
Woodward, the preſent Profeſſor of Phyſick in
Greſham-College, in London. Many Urns and Coins
have been alſo met with in digging the foun-
dations of the new buildings in Goodmans-fields ;
as there ſtill are, in many other places, upon
the like occaſions ; eſpecially in the Suburbs of
the City.] And thus much of the land-ſide of

the City.

Borough of But to the river, that large Borough of South-

Southwark. wark before-mention'd, on the South-ſide of

dee duttey, the Thames, is joyn' d to the City by a bridge;
5. 193. firſt, built on wooden piles, where formerly,

Tie Bridge. inſtead of a bridge, they paſs'd the river in a

ferry. Afterwards, in the .reign of King John,
they built a new one, of free-ſtone and admi-
rable workmanſhip, with nineteen Arches, be-
* Verſatilis, ſides that which makes the * Draw-bridge ;
and did ſo continue it all along with lines of
handſome buildings like a ſtreet, that it may
claim preheminence over all the bridges in Eu-

rope, whether in largeneſs, or beauty.
This Borough (Apr. 23. 1549. 4 of Ed-
* $471.25, ward the ſixth) * was purchaſed of the King
4 by the Lord Mayor, Commonalty, and Citi-
zens of London, and annex d to their City,
and erected immediately into a new Ward,
call'd the Bridg- ward without, and was thence-
forth eſteemed within the government and
correction of the Lord Mayor, and other Ot-
ficers of London, and their Deputies. The
inhabitants were licenſed to enjoy and uſe all
ſuch Laws and Privileges whatſoever, within
their Borough and Precincts, as the Citizens
ons Sur. of London did within their City. But it was
8 P 442, not thereby remov'd out of Surrey; as appears
by the proviſions of the King's Grant, where-
by care is taken that the Lord Mayor ſhould
do and exccute all ſuch things within the Bo-

i

rough, as other Juſtices might within the
County of Surrey; and that he, as Eſcheator
within the Borough and Precincts, ſhould have

power to direct Precepts to the Sheriff of Sur- 4. See more of

rey for the time being +. |

In this Burrough of Southwark, the things that
have been remarkable, are, a noble Abbey for
Monks of the Benedictine Order, call'd Ber-

Child, Citizen of London ; and a ſtately houſe

built by Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, Suffalk-hou
which was pull'd down again, after it had been

for a very little time the delight of it's Maſter.

There ſtill remains the Hoſpital of St. Thomas, St. Thoma
repair'd or rather founded by the City of Lon- Hoſpital,
don, for the lame and infirm ; and the Church

of the Priory of St. Mary (which, becauſe it

is ſeared over or beyond the Thames, with re-

ſpec to the City of London, is call'd St. Mary
Over-rhe; lor is rather derived“ from oppe, a * Hickes

bank, on which it ſtands:) ] founded for Ca- Sa- Gram:

nons by William Ponte del Arche a Norman: As
alſo the houſe of the Biſhops of Wincheſter,

built by William Gifford Biſhop, about the year

1107. for the uſe of his ſucceſſors; ſand now

turn'd into private Houſes.] From this, along

the Thames-ſide, there runs weſtward a conti-

nued line of houſes, in which compaſs, within

the memory f of our fathers, there were Publick + So ſaid
Stews, call'd by the Latins Lupanaria (wherein ann, 1607.
Women proſtituted and ſet to ſale their mo-

deſty,) becauſe they, like rapacious She-wolves,

hale miſerable filly people into their dens. But

theſe were ſuppreſs d by King Henry the eighth,

at a time when England was at the height of

Luſt and Luxury; though in foreign nations

they are ſtill continu'd for gain, under the ſpe-

cious pretence of making proviſion for human

frailty. But I do not believe that they call'd

this place The Stews, from theſe Bawdy-houſes, Stew,
but from the fiſh-ponds here, for the fatting
of * Pikes and Tench, and taking off their « Lucios.
muddy fenniſh taſte. Here I have ſeen the

bellies of Pikes open'd with a knife to ſhew

their fatneſs, and the 8 ing wounds preſently

clos'd by the touch o 8 and, by their
glutinous ſlime, perfectly heal'd up. Among

theſe buildings, f was a place for Bull-baiting 4 1s, C.
and Bear-bairing, with certain ſeveral Kennels of

Band-dogs,which|| were ſo ſtrong, and bit ſocloſe, Canes cathe-

that three of them * were able to manage a Bear, nai.

and four a Lion. So that, what the Poet ſaid 1 8
formerly of our Dogs, That they could break the 1 Are, C.

. f re
necks of Bulls, is very true; as is alſo, what y

another obſery'd, That they are more - fierce
and eager than thoſe Arcadian ones, ſuppos'd
to be engender'd of Lions.

At what time this Borough was joyn'd to

London by a bridge, the City was not only

enlarg'd, but alſo modell'd into an excellent
form of Government; the Citizens being di-

{tributed into Bodies or Colleges. The City * Corpora five

it ſelf was divided into twenty-ſix Wards, and Collie. |
the management of all publick concerns put T1
into the hands of as many ancient Men (call'd “.
in our language, from their age, Aldermen ;
in Latin, Senatores,) each of whom had the
government of one Ward. And whereas for-
merly they had for their chief Magiſtrate a

Port-reve, i. e. a F Governour of the City, 4 Præſectus.

Richard the firſt inſtituted two Bailiffs ; inſtead Mayor.
of which King John granted them the privilege
of chooſing a Mayor yearly out of their twelve
principal Companies, and of nominating two
Therifh the one call'd the King's, and the other
the City-Sheriff.

After this new form of Government was eſta-

bliſh'd, it is incredible how it grew in publick
D d d and

this in S rrey.

mondſey, dedicated to our Saviour by Aldwin St Saviour.

ſe.

$$

by

3 —

-
—

g ED
—— —
: ð . ð ð⁊2 ĩ — — pe W

—

* _—
* „% WTV CTR
—

— — —

—— — —ꝗ ³O—

3239 — —————— — 2
— N

—— Wwḿ— 2

— —

— —U— o ei oe eos - —

TRINOBANTES.

and private Buildings, and is ſtill growing

(while the reſt of the Cities in England are

rather decaying.) For, to paſs by the Senate-

1411. houſe, call d Guild-hall, ſthe great Court of Ju-
dicature for the City, ] built with exquiſite

1445. beauty by Thomas Knowles, Mayor; and Lea-
den-hall, a large and curious piece of work,

built by Simon Eire, for a common Garner

againſt times of dearth : That circuit of Pillars

alſo (or the middle Janus,) which the common

+ Ann. 16c7. people f call the Burſe, but Queen Elizabeth
F.vſa, nam'd the Royal Exchange, built by Sir Thomas

6. 57;.. Creſbam Knight, for the uſe of Merchants, and
oval Ex- . . .
change, the ornament of the City : (A magnificent
Building it is, whether you conſider the ſtru-
cture it ſelf, or the reſort of Merchants from
all Nations, or the variety of Commodities : )
and the ſame perſon, being a great admirer of
Greſhame Learning, coniccrated a ſpacious houſe that
Culicge, he had in the City, to the improvement there-

of; and ſettled plentiful Salaries upon ſix Pro-

fellors, of Divinity, Law, Phyſick, Aſtronomy,

Geometry and Mufick ; that London might not

only be, as it were, a Mart of all kinds of

Wares, but a Treaſury alſo of Arts and Sci-

ences. [From whence great Advantage hath

likewiſe accrued to Natural Knowledge, Anti-

quities, Cc. ſince the erection of the Royal

Society ; together with a publick Repoſitory of

all the Rarities of Art and Nature : To paſs

by the three other publick Colleges ; namely,

Sion. College. Sion-College, for the uſe of the Corporation of
Ne x ot London-Miniſters; and the Colleges of Phyſi-

yhciens, : :

and Heralds, c{ans, and Heralds, for the uſe and improvement
of the reſpective Sciences, and the Profeſſors of

them; all furniſh'd with their ſeveral Libraries

for the ſeveral ends. The Halls alſo of the

ſeveral Companies or Fraternities ; which are

like the Bouſes of Noblemen ;; having ſtately

Courts, and ſpacious Rooms.] To paſs by

alſo the houſe of the Hanſe-Companay, the con-

veyance of water into all parts of the City by

pipes under-ground, and the neat little Caſt les

| tor the reception of it ; together with the new

* Lately, C. Aquæduct, contriv'd * in the laſt age by Peter
Maurice, a German of great Ingenuity and

Induſtry, which, by the help of a wheel with

little pipes plac'd at a certain depth, brings

water out of the Thames to a great part of

the City: Beſides theſe, I ſay, it is in all parts

ſo beautified with Churches, and other Religi-

ous places, that one would think Religion and

Piety had made choice of it for their reſi-

+ Now, in dence. For it has in it f one hundred twen-
. ha W-ty one Churches (a greater number than
Led het Rome her ſelf can ſhow,) beſides || Hoſpitals
in Weltmin- {of ſeveral kinds ; that of St. Bartholomew, and
er ; and the St. Thomas in Southwark, for the Cure of the

RY Sick, Lame, and Infirm ; and Bethlem, for the
baile. and in cure of Perſons who are Lunatick and Diſtra-
building. Ged : all which are accommodated with able

||Noſocomia & Phyſicians, Surgeons, Nurſes, and with ample
agg 11rd Conveniences of onery kind, for the effecting
mer.. of the ſeveral Cures.] Particularly, in that
St. Thomas. Nurſery of young Boys, call d Chriſt-Church,
Bethlem. this City maintains about one thouſand Or-
Chriſt-Hol- phans, and twelve hundred and forty poor
pital. 2 | ch li 5 & Thi
* 6-0. C. People that live upon Alms, Cc. is
f Hoſpital of Chrifi-Church was founded Anno
1552. by King Edward the ſixth; and, in

this laſt age (the Fund being uncertain, and
depending as well upon the caſual Charity both

of living and dying perſons, as upon its

real Eſtate) the number has been augmented

and diminiſh'd in proportion to the increaſe

and decreaſe of that ſort of Charity. How-

ever, it ſeldom now maintains leſs than one

A

396

they will ever have fewer. Here, having run

through the ſeveral Schools, at fifteen years
they are put forth to a ſeven-year's Appren-
ticeſhip ; except ſome Boys of the beſt parts
who are ſent to the Univerſities, and there alſo
are maintain'd for ſeven years : which is the
preſent ſtate of King Edward's foundation.

To this there has been added another of
late years, ſtiled the New Royal Foundation of
King Charles the ſecond, conſiſting of forty
a all wearing Badges appropriate to their
Inſtitution ; to be filld np ſucceſſively out ot
ſuch of the above-mention'd Children, as have
attain'd to a competency in fair writing and
Latin-learning. Thence- forward they are in-
ſtructed in the Mathematicks and Art of Na-
vigat ion, till they are ſixteen years of age; at
which time they are difpoled of in a ſeven-
year's Apprenticeſhip to the practice of Navi-
gation. Which Inſtitution moſt highly chari-
rable in it ſelf, and tending to the honour and
ſafety of the Kingdom, as well as the ſecurity
and advancement of our Trade, was founded
the 19 of Auguſt, Anno 25 Car. 2.

It would be too tedious to enlarge particu-
larly upon the excellency of the Laws and Con-
ſtitutions of this City; the dignity of its Go-
vernours the Aldermen, it's loyalty and obe-
dience to Princes, the humanity of the Citi-
zens, the ſplendour of its buildings, the ma-
ny choice and excellent Wits it produces ; the
pleaſure of it's * Gardens in the Suburbs, ad-
mirably ſtock'd with foreign Plants ; its nu-
merous and well-appointed Fleet ; that incre-
dible treaſure of all ſorts of Commodities (par-
ticularly it's“ furniſhing Antwerp yearly with
two hundred thouſand f woollen Cloaths, be-
ſides what it ſends to other places ; ) and the
great Abundance of the neceſſities and conve-
niencies of human life. So that what H. Junius
ſays in his Philippets, is very true:

Tectis opibuſque refertum

Londinum, & fi fas, numeroſo cive ſu-
perbum,

Larga ubi fecundo rerum undat copia cornu.

London, where circling riches ſtill return,

Where num'rous tribes the ſtately piles
adorn,

And willing Plenty ſhakes her fruitful

horn.
And J. Scaliger in his Book of Cities:

Urbs animis numeroque potens, & robore
gentis.

For number, ſtrength and courage of her
Men
Great Londons fam'd. ———

Another alſo has theſe Verſes concerning Lon-
don, if you pleaſe to read them :

Londinum gemino procurrit littore long?
LEmula materng tollens ſua Iumina Tooje,
Clementer ſurgente jugo dum tendit in ortum.
Vrbs peramgua fitu, caloque ſoloque beata.
Urbs pietate potens, numeroſo cive ſuperba,
Urbſque Britaunorum gue digna Britannia
dici.
Hac nova doctrinis Lutetia, mercibus Ormus,
Altera Roma viris, Cryſæa ſecunda metallis.

Stretch'd on a riſing hill betwixt the
ſtrands, f

thouſand annually, nor is there reaſon to fear

London, her mother Troy's great rival ſtands.
Where

Matherzy,
cal-Yhey,

* A; ang,
1607,

* This tad,
Anno 167,
+ Pannorun
Laneoram,

Marriage v

Tam: and !jv

r N 8
e 1 2

'

” Fi

An

6

wt.

* * * a |

*
Od. . a th as * OY PO EET + "_ " 20%. ba 4 - ** I TO *
—N * — 2
D ;

_ a. WY —

Where heaven and earth their choiceſt gifts
beſtow,

And tides of Men the ſpatious Streets o' re-
flow.

London ! the mighty Image of our Iſle,

That we Great Britain of it ſelf may ſtile.

Where Chryſe, Paris, Rome, and Ormus

ield,
In Natale, Learning, People, Wealth ex-
celrd. 4

Henry of Huntingdon alſo in the time of King
Stephen, writes thus in commendation of
London :

Ibis & in noſtros dives Londonia werſus,
Quæ nos immemores non ſinis eſſe tui.
Quando tuas arces, tua mænia mente retracto,
Qua vidi, videor cunita videre mihi.
* nata loqui, moritura fi-
ud,

Laudibus erubuit fingere falſa tuis.

And thou, rich London, ſhalt my Verſe

adorn,
Thou in my joyful mind art ever born.

When e're thy lofty Towers, thy ſtately
Wall,

And 8 thy glories my glad thoughts re-

My raviſh'd ſoul ſtill ſwells with full de-

And all v abſent eyes admire the grateful

Fane, ors all tongue, and would, if ſilent,

Of Fw, her greateſt Theme nor dares nor
needs to lie.

And another in a Poetical vein, penn'd this:

Hic Urbs illa potens, cui tres tria dona mini-
ſtrant
— Apollo, Ceres, pocula, carmen,
ador.
Hac Urbs illa potens, quam Juno, Minerva,
Diana |
Mercibius, arce, feris, ditat, adornat, alit.

A place where Ceres, Phabus, Bacchus joyn

Their os great gifts, Corn, Poetry, and
ine.

Which Pallas, Juno, and chaſt hunting Maid,

With buildings, goods, and beaſts, adorn,

enrich, and feed.

But my friend the famous John Jonſdon of
Aberdeen, Profeſſor of Divinity in the Royal
Univerſity of St. Andrew's, has manag'd the
ſubje& more ſoberly : |

Urbs Auguſta, cui cælumque, ſolumque, ſalum-
que, |
— Cuique favent cunctis cunfta elementa bonis.
age” uſquam cœlum eſt, uberrima
ellus

Fundit inexhauſti germina læta ſoli.
Et pater Oceanus Tamiſino gurgite miſtus,
Convehit immenſas totius orbis opes.
Regali cultu ſedes clariſſima Regum,
Gentis prafidium, cor, anima, atque oculus.
Gent antiqua, potens virtute & robore belli,
Artium & omnigenùm nobilitata opibus.
Singula contemplare animo, attentuſque tuere,
Aut Orbem aut Orbis dixeris eſſe caput.

Renown'd Auguſta, that ſea, earth, and

Ys
And all the various elements ſupply :
No peaceful climate breaths a ſofter air,
No _ grounds with happier plenty
Old Ocean with great Thames his eldeſt
on,
Makes all the riches of the World her own.
The ever famous ſeat of Britain's Prince,
The Nation's Eye, Heart, Spirit and De-
fence.
The Men for ancient Valour ever known,
No Arts and Riches gain them leſs renown.
In ſhort, | "gm all her Glories are ſur-
vey'd,
It * Wonder ſtill at laſt be
aid,
She makes a World her ſelf, or is the
World's great head.

But theſe matters, with others of the ſame
kind, are handled more at large, and with greater
accuracy, by John Stow, a Citizen of London

fand a famous Chorographer, in his Survey of

London f lately publiſh'd : [a new Edition of + So ſaid,
which Work being ſpeedily expected, it is need- nn. 1607?
leſs to enlarge further upon the vaſt Inprove-
ments in Buildings, Ornaments, c. all which
will be very particularly ſet forth and enume-
rated in that Work.] And ſo I will take leave
of my dear native place, after I have obſerv'd,
that the Latitude of it is 51 Degrees, 34 * 22, as the
Minutes; and the Longitude 23 Degrees, N moderns ſay:
25 Minutes: || Fidicula, of the nature of Ve- Orpheus's
nu and Mercury, is the Topick Star, which harp.
glances upon the Horizon, but never ſets; and
the Dragon's-head is look d upon by Aſtrologers
as the Vertical. 4
The Thames leaving London, waters Red- Redcliff.
diff, a neat little Town, inhabited by Sea-men, :
and ſo call'd from the red cliff. [In the Fields See ꝙittie-
adjoyning to this Place, were found two Cof-f</4%
fins, one of Stone, another of Lead, in which
was the body of a Woman, with a Cupid of
white ſtone ſtanding at her breaſt ; at the
right and left hand, two ivory Scepters, and
at head and feet two large Urns, with others
of leſs fize. There were alſo many large Veſ-
ſels of Glaſs, all full of white Las Next,
after a great winding, it receives the river Lea,
the Faſſern bound of this County, which yet
has nothing upon it belonging te this Shire,
that is worth the notice ; [(ſave that the Hun-
dred of Oſſulſton, of which it is alſo the bound
to the Eaſt, gives the title of Baron to the
ight Honourable Charles Earl of Tankerville
in Normandy.)] For Adelmton, has nothing Edmonton,
remarkable but the name, being deriv'd from
Nobility : nor Waltham, but a Croſs built by Waltham-
King Edward the firſt for the funeral pomp Cross.
of his wife Queen Eleanor, from which it has
the additional name. Only, there is Enfield, a Rngeld.
Royal Seat, built by Thomas Lovel (Knight of
the Garter, and Privy-Councellor to King Hen-
ry the ſeventh) as one may gather from the
Arms. Near which, is a place, cloath'd with
green trees, and famous for Deer-hunting, Eu- Enfeld-
field-chace 3 formerly the poſſeſſion of the Mag- Chace.
navils Earls of Eflex, then of the Bohuns their
Succeſſors; but now it belongs to the Dutchy
of Lancaſter, ever ſince Henry the fourth, King
of England, marry'd a Daughter and Co-heir
of the laſt Humfrey Bohun. And, almoſt in
the middle of this Chace, f are ſtill * the ruins + Ann. 1607,
of an ancieat houſe, which the common People * Rudera.
from tradition affirm to have belong'd to the

Magnavils Earls of Eſſex. |
Towards

|
|
|
»

55 TRINOBANTES.

Towards the north-bounds of Middleſex, a|tius Raii ſyn. Bitter Creſſes. On the Thames-baitk
Military way of the Romans, commonly called | between Peterborough-houſe and Chelſey.
Watling- Matlingſtreet, enters this County: coming] Conſerva reticulata Raii Hiſt. Plant. append
freer, ſtraight along from the old Yerulam to London, 1852. & ſynopſ. 15. My. Doody's netted Cror-
over Hamf7ed-heath (from which one has a cu- ye. In ſome ditches about Meſtminſter and Houn-
ricus proſpect, of a moſt beautiful City, and a] ſtou- heath.
moſt pleaſant Country": ) Not the Road which] Bardana major Roſea Park. 1222. lappa Ro-
lies now through Highgate, for that (as is be-] ſea C. B. prodr. 102. Roſe-Burdock. This Variety
+ Three, C. fore obſerv'd ) was open'd only about f four | (which Caſpar Bauhine avers to be found frequent-
hundred years ago by permiſſion of the Biſhop | ly about Leipfick) I have obſerved near the Thames,
of London ; but that more ancient way (as] between Weſtminſter and Chelſey.
appears by the old Charters of Edward the] Juncus caule triangulari Merr. Pin. 67. The
Edgeworth, Confeſſor) which run along near Edgeworth, a| three-corner'd Bulruſh. In the Thames, between Pe-
Hendon, place of no great Antiquity ; ſo on to Hendon, | terborough-houſe and the Horſe-ferry, Weſtmin-
which Archbiſhop Dunſtan (a Man born for | ter.
promoting the Intereſt of Monkery) purchas'd| Cyperus rotundus litoreus inodorus J. I.
tor a few Bizantine pieces of Gold, and gave to|rotundus inodorus Anglicus C. B. rotundus li-
the Monks of St. Peter in Weſtminſter. Theſe | torcus Ger. rotundus litorcus inodorus Anglicus
Bizantini aurei were Imperial Money coyn'd| Park. Round-rooted Baſtard Cyperus.
at Bizantium or Conſtantinople by the Grecian| Sagitta aquatica omnium minima Raii þj-
Emperors ; but what the value of them was, | zop/. append. 242. The leaſt Arrow-head. Obſer-
I know not. There is alſo a ſort of Silver-] ved by that moſt curious Botanift Dr. Plukenet 10
money, call'd ſimply Bizantii and Bizantini,| grow with the two laſt.
Birantine which (as I have obſerv'd here and there in] Salix minima fragilis foliis longiſſimis utrin-
Coins, ancient Records) were valu'd at two Shillings. | que viridibus non ſerratis Raii ſynopſ. append.
But leaving thoſe matters to the ſearch of others, | 238. Dr. Sherard's Green Oſier. Amongſt the
I will go forward, on the Journey I have begun. | Milous on the Thames-fide, between Weſtminſter
[Sir Lionel Cranfield Kt. Merchant of London, | and Chelſey.
having for his great Abilities been firſt made Ma-] Salix folio Amygdalino utrinque aurito cor-
ſter ot the Requeſts, then of the great J/ardrobe, and|ticem abjiciens Raii ſynopſ. 216. Almond-leav d
after of the Yards, and at laſt Privy Counſellor ;| Willow that caſts its bark. Found with the
upon the 19" of July 19 Jac. 1. was advan-] /aft.
ced to the degree of a Baron of this Realm, Perſicaria puſilla repens Ger. Park. Small creep-
by the title of Lord yy, of Cranfield in| ing Arſmart.
Bedfordſhire, and to the Office and Dignity] Trifolium pumilum ſupinum floſculis lon-
of Lord High Treaſurer of England: and by|gis albis Phyt. Brit. Raii ſynopſ. 133. Dwarf-
Letters Patents bearing date Sept. 2. 1622.|Trefoil, with long white flowers hiding its ſeed under-
20 Jac. 1. to the Earldom of Middleſex. Who] ground. See Eſſex.
by his ſecond wife Anne, daughter to James] Trifolium filiquis Ornithopodii noſtras Raii
Bret of 1 om the County of Leiceſter Eſq;|/ynopſ. 136. Birds-foot Trefoil.
had iſſue four Sons; James, Edward, Lionel, and Chamæmelum nobile ſeu odoratius C. B.
William ; of whom James and Lionel ſucceeded | Sweet-ſcented creeping Camomile. Theſe four laſt
him in the Honour; but both dying without Plants I have often found in Tuttle-fields, Weſt-
iſſue, this Title deſcended to his eldeſt daugh-| minſter.
ter Frances, married to Richard Earl of Dorſet, Chamæmelum fl. nudo Raii Hnopſ. 57. Na-
and her iflue ; and was accordingly enjoyed by | ked flower'd Camomile. This alſo is 10 to be found
the Right Honourable Charles Earl of Dorſet and | with the other. |
Middleſex, Lord Chamberlain of the Houſhold|] Gramen Dactylon latiore folio C. B. Iſchæ-
to K. Charles the 2d, and Knight of the Garter ;|mon ſylv. latiore folio Park. Cocks-foot graſs.
as it is at preſent, by the Right Honourable] Gramen Paniceum ſpici aſperi C. B. Rough-
Lionel Cranfield Sackville, his ſon and heir. | ear'd Panick-graſs. Both theſe have been found

* Ann, 1607. In this County, without the City, there are upon the Thames-bank about the Neat-houſes ; as

ab ; within the Ci f . alſo the ; :
= FA Ly en en, Bardana ſeu Lappa major capitulis minus to-

Earls of Mid-
dleſex.

+ Now, 112, mentoſis Raii ſynopſ. 245. which Mr. Doody has
cr mac apr: 4 very well obſerved to be far different from that in
in the whole Gardens, for which it has been taken.

County and More rare Plants growing wild in Middleſex,

. e eee Boccon. rarior. plant. deſc. Boccones white flower d
belides thoſe

vewly bulls, Filicula ſaxatilis ramoſa maritima noſtras| biting Fleabane. In many barren places about Lon-
and in build- Rai ſynopſ. & Hiſt. Plant. Small branch'd Stone-feru. don. | | 11
ing. On many old walls in and about London, as the Sa- Argemone laciniato folio capitulo hiſpido
voy, Weſtminster, Royal Garden, &c. longiore. Raii ſyn. 122. Long rough-headed baſtard
Fungus ſpongioſus niger reticulatns, dolio- | Poppey. | | |
lis vinoſis adnaſcens Raii ſynopſ. My. Doody's| Argemone laciniato folio capitulo hiſpido
Jpunge-like Muſhrome. In moſt vaults ſticking to the] rotundiore Raii ſyn. 122. Round rough-headed ba-
Wine-CasRs. ſtard Poppey.
Eruca ſylveſtris Ger. ſylv. vulgatior Park. ma- Argemone capitulo longiore glabra Moviſou.

Conyza annua, acris, alba, Linariz foliis.

jor lutea caule aſpero C. B. tenuifolia peren-
nis fl. luteo J. B. Wild Rocket. On old walls a-
bout this City frequently, as on Londou-wall between
Cripplegate and Biſhopſgate, the Charter-houſe, &c.
plentifully.

Viſcum Ger. vulgare Park. baccis albis C. B.
Quercus & aliarum arborum J. B. Miſſeltoe. On
ſome trees at Clarendon-houſe, St. James's.

Naſturtium aquaticum amarum Park. majus
& amarum C. B. Naſturtium aq. fl. majore ela-

— — <——_—_—_——
— — — — — —

Smooth- headed baſtard Poppey. All theſe Arge-
mones, are found about Chelſey in Coru-fields and
elſewhere, |

Eryſimum latifolium Neapolitanum Park.
Smooth or broad-leav'd hedge-muſtard. After the
great fire in London, in the years 1667, and 1668.
it came up abundantly among the . rubbiſh in ti
ruins, and grows now plentifully on the Lord Chene) *
wall at Chelſey, and in ſeveral other places ned:
London. |

Hieracium

* 0 "I
en

400

convo
(vat. 4
leaves
about
don.
D1
veltri
nor

_ MIDDLESEX

402

for. This Mr. Dobd) (Matter of the Company

found about Chclſey.

Hieracium Caſtorei odore Monſpelienſium , The leaſt water-Parſnep, In ſeveral ponds on Houn-
Raii ſm. 43- Rough hawk-weed ſmelling like Ca-| flow-heath,

Potamogiton aquis immerſum, folio pellu-

of Apothecaries Phyſick-Garden) informs me he hath| cido lato, oblongo acuto Raii ſyn. an Por. fo-

liis anguſt is ſplendentibus C B? longis acutis

Gramen Arundinaceum aquaticum panieula foliis Ger. ? fontalis lucens major J. B? Long-
Avenaced Raii ſyn. Mr. Doody s Water-reed-graſs| leav'd great Pondweed with pellucid leaves, In ma-

with an oat-like panicle, Firſt obſerved by him on] ny places in the Thames between Fulham and Hamp-
the banks of the river Thames between London and | ton-Court.

Chelſey. . a . I
Muſcus trichoides minus, foliis ad caulem

convolutis capitulis ſubrotundis reflexis Raii

Carduus Marie hirſutus non maculatus Phyr.
Brit, Leucographus hirſutus capitulo minore M-
riſon. Ladies-Thi$tle without ſpots, On the bank of

{\t, append. 244. Mr. Doodys Goldilocks, with the New-River between the two roads from London
leaves growing like a bullons roots. On ſome walls | to Iſlington,

about Chelſey, and in ſeveral Gardens about Lon-
do.

Potamogiton perfoliatum Raii hn. 34. foliis
latis ſplendentibus C. B. Pot. 3. Dodonei Ger.

Dipſacus minor ſeu virga paſtoris Ger. ſyl- | Perfoliate Pondweed.
veltris capitulo minore, vel virga paſtoris mi- Potamogiton puſillum, gramineo folio, caule
nor C. B. virga paſtoris Park. paſtori s vulg. |tereti Raii hiſt. Plant. 190. Hu. 35. Small graſs-

J. B. Small wild Teaſel or Shepherd's Rod.

leav'd Pondweed, This, with the laſt, grows plenti-

Gramen paniceum ſpica diviſa C. B. panicum | fully in the New-river-head.
vulgare Ger. ſylveſtre herbariorum Park. Panick-| Potamogiton affinis graminifolia aquatica

graſs with a divided ſpike.

Raii hi, Plant. 190. & ſyn. Water-graſs with

Gramen avenaceum glabrum paniculi è ſpi- | ſmall crooked cods. I found this plentifully in a ſmall
cis raris ſtrigoſis compoſita, ariſtis tenuiflimis | pond on the eaſt fide of Iſlington.

Raii ſyn. Mr. Doody's Oat-graſs with hairy awns.

Gramen panniculatum aquaticum minus Raii

I have obſerved theſe three laſt about the Moat which | ſynopſ. 186. Miliaceum fluitans ſuavis ſaporis

encompaſſes the ſeat of the Right Reverend the Biſhop
of Loudon at Fulham.

Park.

In the aforeſaid moat near the garden-gate.
Cardamine impatiens, vulgo Sium minus im-

patiens Ger. minimum Noli me tangere dictum

N Impatient Ladies-ſmock. On the moat-fides near the
laft.
Acorus verus ſive Calamus officinarum Park.

Ee . * : ! *
live impatiens Naſturtii ſylveſtris folio Park.

D. Merret Pin. caninum ſupinum pannicula-
tum dulce C B. J. B. The leſſer water-graſs with

we oe lutea Ger. J. B. major lutea C. B.] fine pannicles. Or rather (as Mr. Doody ſtiles it) Li-
ve greater Water-lily with a yellow-flower.

quorice-graſs, which taſt it exatHy reſembles, On
the New-river bank behind Iſlington, and in many
muddy ponds about London plentifully.

Adiantum album Tab. Ruta muraria C. B.
J. B. Ger. Muraria, ſeu ſalvia Vitæ Park. Fig.
1050. White Maiden-hair, Wall-Rue, or Tem-
wort. On an old ſtone Conduit between Iſlington and
Jack-Straw's Caſtle.

The ſweet-ſmelling Flag or Calamus. This Mr.] Radix cava minima viridi flore Ger. Ranun-

Doody hath obſerved about the ſaid moat,

culus nemoroſus Moſchatella dictus Park, Tube-

Ranunculus hirſutus annuus flore minimo | rous Moſcatell.
Raii ſyn. 86. Field-Crowfoot with a very ſmall| Vinca pervinca Officinarum minor Ger. vulga-

flower,

ris Park. clematis Dapnoides minor J. B. C. B.

Turritis Ger, vulgatior J. B. Park. Braſſica | Small Periuincle. This, and the laſt, grow on the
ſylveſtris foliis integris & hiſpidis C. B. Tower-| Mote-fide as you enter into Fack-Straw's Caſtle.

Muftard. This, with the foregoing Plant, My. Xyris Ger. ſeu ſpatula tztidi Park. Xyris 1

Doody hath obſerved in a laue near Thiftleworth,

ſeu Gladiolus fætidus C. B. Stinking Gladdon or

Gramen Avenaceum glabrum panniculi pur- Gladwyn. On Fack-Straw's Caſtle, and in a hedge
puro- argenteã ſplendente Raii Hiſt. Plant. 1909. | #47 it.

fynopſ. 192. Mr. Doody's Oat-graſs with purpliſh Cardamine impatiens altera hirſutior Raii

ſhining pannicles. In the paſtures about the Earl of ſyn. 114. Syſymbrium Cardamine hirſutum

Cardigan's at Twittenham,

Armeriz ſpecies flore ſummo caule ſingulari

minus fl. albo J. B. The lefſer hairy impatient
Cuckow-flower or Ladies-ſmock, On the New-river

Raii ſyn. 242. The fingle flow ring Pink. In the Park banks between Canberry-houſe and Newington, in

at Hampton-Court,

NMillefolium aquaricum pennatum ſpicatum

many places, %,
Tormentilla reptans alata foliis profundius

ſerratis D. Plot. Hiſt. nat. Oxon. Creeping Tormen-
| ba B. P ark, pennat. aq. * B. Feathered water 0
Milfoil. This I have found in the Canal ar Hamp- til with deeply indented leaves. In a ditch between

tou-Court, as alſo in a flow running rivulet near

Poplar,

- Millegrana minima Ger. fig. 567. minima ſeu

the Boarded-river and Iſlington road.

C. B. Cyperus ſeu Pſeudo-Cyperus ſpica brevi
pendula Park. Pſeudo-Cyperus Ger. Bastard O-

erniaria minor Park. Polygonum minimum perus with ſhort pendulbus ſpikes. In the ſame place

ſeu millegrana minima C. E. The leaſt Rupture-

wort or Allſeed. On Hounſlow-beath,

Muſcus paluſtris gracilis ſummo ramoſus. ] Lenticula aq. bi
parvus ſtellaris C. B. & Phytographia L. Plu-

with the laſt.
Stellaria puſilla 2 repens tetraſpermos.
olia Neapolitana Park. Fig.
1293. Raii hiſt. Plant, 185 2. Small creeping Marſh-

kenetit Tab. 47. Fig. 6. Small upright Bog-moſs,| $:ar-wwort. This 1 found in ſome moiſt writts in a

With ſtarry tops. In the Bags on Hounflow-heath.
Sium alterum Oluſatri facie Ger. Fig. 256

majus alterum anguſtifolium Park. Fig. 1241
Erucæ folio C. B. Cicuta aquatica Geſneri J.

wood near the Boarded- river. But the firſt diſcovery
Jef it to be a native of England, we owe to that
. | ingenious Phyfician and expert Potaniſt Dr. Hans
Sloan, who found it in a Bog on Putney-Heath,

Long-leav'd water-Hemlock. In a ſhallow pool of Alnus nigra baccitera J. B. C. B. nigra five
water on Hounſtou- heath by the road-fide, near | Frangula Ger. Frangula ſeu Alnus nigra bacct-

the Toun, and in ſome pools of water at Thiſtle-| tera. Park. The black-berry bearing Alder. This,

Worth,

with the following, grows plentifully in a wood againſt

Sium minimum Raii hiſt. Plant, 444. yn. 6 7. the Boarded-river,
i

Eee Gramen

Gramen Cyperoides ſpica pendula breviore

— -

rr x * 9 — —

— — 1 —
—_ - * - __ - rooms wow
K 1 y — — |

TRINO

"AN

BANTES. "I

Gramen arundinaceum panicula ſpadicea mol-
li majus C. B. Gramen tomentoſum arundina-
ceum Ger. Reed-graſs with a pappoſe pannicle.

Gramen Cyperoides polyſtachion flavicans,
ſpicis brevibus, prope ſummitatem caulis Raii
ſyn. 195. Mr. Ray's yellowiſh Cyperus-graſs with
ſhort jpikes; :

Gramen Cyperoides ſylvarum tenuius ſpica-
tum Park, Slender-ear'd wood Cyperus-graſs:

Gramen Cyperoides ſpica è pluribus ſpicis
brevibus mollibus compolita Raii ſyn. Mr. Ray's
round cluſter-headed Cyperus-graſs.

Sambucus aquatilis ſeu paluſtris Ger. aq. fl.
ſimplicis C. B. Water-Elder, In the ſame wood,
but ſparingly,

Myoſurus F. B. cauda maris Ger. Holoſteo
affinis cauda muris C. B. Mouſe-tail. This (with
the next) I found in a ſloughy lane near the Devil s-
houſe going to Hornſey.

Plantaginella paluſtris C. B. Plantago aqua-
tica minima Park, Chickweed with Water-plantain
leaves,

Muſcus muralis platyphyllos Raii ſyn. 237.
Broad-leav'd moſs. This Mr. Bobart, the Botanick
Profeſſor of Oxford, ſhewed me on many walls a-
bout that City, the which I have this year found on
a brick-wall on the right hand afſoon as you enter
into Hornſey town from London.

Bardana minor Ger. lappa minor, Xanthium |

Dioſcoridis C. B. The leſſer Burdock. This I ob-

ſerved in the road-fide near the Bridge at Neu-

ington. : : :
Cynogloſlum minus folio virenti Ger. ſem-

Filix mas non ramoſa pinnulis latis auricu-
latis ſpinoſis Ger. 1130. Prickly auriculate mal,
Fern. This, with the following, is found in
the woods about Highgate and Hampſted.

Filix mas non ramoſa pinnulis anguſtis raris
profunde dentatis Ger. 1130. Male Fern with
thin-ſet deeply indented leaves.

Filix mas ramoſa pinnulis dentatis Ger, 1 129,
Great-branch'd Fern with indented leaves.

Alſine longifolia uliginoſis proveniens locis
J. B. Long-leav'd water Chickweed.

Alſine Plantaginis folio J. B. Plantain-leas//
Chickweed.

1 1 ſylveſtre vulgare Park. Common Tuay-

Cyperus gramineus J. B. gramineus Milia-
ceus Ger. Fig. 30. Millet Cyperus-grafs,
| Equiſetum omnium minimum tenuifolium
Park. Fig. 1201. ſylvaticum Ger. 1114. Lö
| Horſe-tail. Theſe frve laſt are found in the moiſteſt
places in the aboveſaid woods ; the following in the
dryer 2
| Aſtragalus ſylvaticus Ger. J/ood-peaſe.

Androſemum vulgare Park. Tutſan or park-
leaves.

Anagallis latea Ger. Telow Pimpernel.

Gramen Avenaceum rariore gluma ſpicatum
Park. Fig. 1151. Wood Oat-graſs.

Gramen Cyperoides ſpica pendula longiore
Park. Cyperns-graſs with long pendulous heads.

Gramen Cyperoides ſpicatum minimum ſpica
divulſa aculeata Raii ſyn. Tall prickly-beaded
 fpiked Cyperus-graſs.

—__-

per virens C. B. Park. The leſſer green-leavd| Gramen nemoroſum hirſutum latifolium ma-

Hound's tongue. In a hedge facing the road on Stam-

ford-hill between Newington and Tottenham.

Cruciata Ger. vulgaris Park. hirſuta C. B.
Gallium latifolium Cruciata quibuſdam A. lu-
teo J. B. Croſſuort or Mugweed. In Hampſted
Church-yard.

Alſine tetrapetalos Caryophylloides, quibuſ-
dam Holoſteum minimum Raii ſyn. 145. The
leaſt Stich-wort. On Hampſted-heath plentifully.

Filix florida ſeu Oſmunda Regalis Ger. O,
mund Royal or flowering Fern. Towards the north

fide of the heath, and in a ditch near it, the

Lichen petreus cauliculo calceato C. B. Small
Liverwort with crumpled leaves. With the

Gramen Cyperoides ſpicis brevibus congeſtis
folio molli Raii Hiſt. 1910. Mr. Doody's ſhort-
beaded Cyperus-graſs. And

Ros folis tolio rotundo J. B. C. B. Ger.
Park. Round-leav d Ros-ſolis or Sun-dew. In the

F,
Aufcus trichoides medius capitulis ſphæricis
Raii in append. ſyn. 243. Mr. Doody's Goldilocks
with round heads.

Muſcus trichoides foliis capillaceis capitulis
minoribus Raii ſyn. 243. Mr. Doody's fine-leav d
Goldilocks with ſmall heads.

Muſcus trichoides minor capitulis longiſſi-
mis Raii ſyn. 243. Mr. Doody's ſmall Goldilocks
with very long and ſlender heads. Theſe three laſt,
that moſt indefatigable Botaniſt firſt diſcovered on
a ditch-bank leading from Mother Huffs towards
Hampſted.

Muſcus trichoides minor capitulis perexi-
guis per Microſcopium Botro referens. Mr.
Dare cluſter- headed Goldilocks. This is a fingular
Moſs, its rough beads diſtinguiſhing it from any yet
diſcover'd. ¶ found it in the lane going from Mother
Huffs to Highgate, but it was firſt diſcover d by Mr.
Dare in a lane beyond Putney-heath. I have alſo
lately receiv'd it from my ingenious friend Mr. T. Pool
a Mercer at Nottingham, who gather'd it near that
town.

ximum Raii ſyn. Great broad-leav'd hairy Wood-
grafs.

Hieracium fruticoſum latifolium hirſutum
C. B. Park. Bufby Hawkweed with broad rough
leaves.

Hieracium fruticoſum anguſtifolium majus
C. B. Park. Narrow-leav'd buſhy Hawkweed.

Juncellus omnium minimus, Chamæſchœnus
Ad. Lob, The leaſt Ruſh.

Lilium convallium Ger. fl. albo Park. Lily g
the Valley, or May-lily. |

Sorbus ſylveſtris ſeu Fraxinus bubula Ger.
The Ouicken-tree.

Sorbus torminalis Ger. The common wild S-
vice or Sorb.

Vaccinia nigra Ger. Black Whorts, Whortle-
berries, or Bilberries.

Aparine minima Raii ſyn. Mr. Sherard's leaſt
Clivers. Firſt diſcover'd by that compleat Botaniſt
on a wall at Hackney.

Carduus ſtellatus Ger. Star-Thiſtle. In ſome
barren fields near White-chapel.

Carum ſeu Careum Ger. Caraways. This J
have more than once found about London:

Chondrilla viſcoſa humilis C. B. Ger. Park.
The leaſt wild Lettice. In a lane againſt Pancras
Church near London.

Eruca aquatica Ger. Park. Water-Rocket. In
a ditch in the road between White-chapel and Mile-
end.

Lapathum pulchrum Bononienſe ſinuatum
J. B. Fiddle Dock. In Bunhill and More fields plet-
tifully.

Mercurialis mas & ſœmina Ger. French Mer-
cury. This, though a ſcarce Plant wild in England,
yet grows ſpontaneouſly in moſt Gardens in and about
London.

Ulmus folio latiſſimo ſcabro Ger. latiore folio
Park. The Whch-haſe! or broad-leav'd Elin.
have ſeen large trees of this at Hoxton near London.

ESSEX

U

— — —=
— - | ws gg 3 — — 6» Ro——— a — : 4
n - — „„ K ono oo 1 _
— — 2 —— —
. : — —
| — . * 1 158 * |
| | 5 _— 4 i | | ; _— '
* — — 2 4 A * " > 2þ 8 a - OY 1 F 99 8 ve aaa __ J
— : * a 4 3
%%% nas way 2

—

-
| _ " " Q _ -
- — — „ „ 2 ee 2
we * _ i : L Ys Rs '
— hs 4 < * g EY
- P
. j
*; @& 4
- © -
p þ jy o 0
9 * _ 8 . a
-- SD |
= 9 * -
— * . N
— — -« 4 > :
* 9 .
*
oy N *
*
* ,
85 of
.
# * 5
- 4
o
--
- * 4
"0 F af EY
- * 1 F —
o % i
398 . 8 0
- „ -
. S
y 2
*
*
-
2
4 *
* * *
* = s 2 k

—
.

Dy,
1»

# 45

EE
. — — ——
PART OF CAMBRID

SHIRY

HINCKFORD

-
4 — 2 0

4 5

| \ AK CA;
— ani Te wy

— — — —— — — —
— — 2

-— loningfhelt \

4 25 |
1 Al 8
1 | J WY _ ' Bubner®
Welthar ** Hefti 4
I - Cc þ. N |
— ſt | |

U

* .

<
Nin.
7.

\ .
hall 5 7 Tl
:7.7 A Cars”
2 hall .

a0 7
U
© Br,
1

1

4
bor *

=. |; * :
_; Downlam? | |
FI. OUS mn 4 7 V

g on — Id, -25#

NBenfleet
ARSTABLE - = UND n
A - \ od 8

B. Giforc

g en

4
: 1 -
* —
j 5
5 0 4 l

m

RD

C

0 "I — 352

Higham 3
utter Niche! gculy

1
:
!
* BEERS

*
CC — — — —ͤ—— —m — —

—

*

5
:

4!
F
1 ;

|

{

OF ae
| =_” h Waldingfields

U 1
E surf DLK

fk Brundon tk 2 a

Sudbury
' Bulmer® , er Cor uad

ky utle Cornad

* in 25
27

2 e

| - ; " X - e
4 25 5 44 yy <; 7 ee Op- —
/ by 4 ; 1 1 2
Carl, 5 I" | . 1 8338
5 , WAS - C 8 WS. i Colnmon r 4
0 \ © * 7 * *
7 Mi
A 8

„ | WE / 4
Al 3 ler 5 ve5
. LB Fil
"4 141 ) 1 . * — - END RI N G 72
uur Tay E Aldham Yo D * ' | | > Okele *
urn K den 14 5
„ — . 2 Lge
5 2 — *
Bradwe

; ES „ 4 Cnoarvns | *
2 % 222 Gp end IH \\ ot Ep” >
i7o war OY > I cot \ | 8 c * | A : £

Sold, bw — „ & Partner

| Go / 2 07 7 Degreew 210 E277
Pies. þ :

= 2

G
E
,
.
= —
*
. %
6
1. z
. p
i x
—
Mis
USE

OT

1
» \ .
:
;
4
J
1
*

W d *

Wn, ws pd % „ has

$tort iv.

hy © A 4 „ 1 57

—

+ & ſaid, ©
ann, 1607» Aa

Eſſex · Foreſt. c
0
8
Nord, Eſſex. (
MS, 0
Waltham- 1:
Foreſt.
1
1
{t
U
* Stallerus, :
1. e. Vexil.
ifer, a
a
U
tl
Waſtham-
Abbey.
n
h
h
0
tl
5 \
| b
h
el
_— f Is, C. ir

5 Fa
* Varon Deny, I

— EC LTC :

tort iv.

4 So ſaid,
ann, 1607»

Eſex-Foreſt,

MS,

Waltham-
Foreſt,

* Stallerus,

HE other part of the Trino-
Ol EU bantes, call'd from it's Eaſtern
5 SOT ſituation and the Saxons who
7 RSA rolleſs'd it, Eape-Seaxa, and
ZN Earc-5ex-pcine ; ſand (toge-

der with Middleſex and part
f of Hartfordſhire,) Sarc-Oeax-
na- nie ;] by the Normans, Ex ea; and com-
monly, Eſſex ; is a Country of great breadth,
very fruittul, and abounding in Saffron ; well

ſtor'd with wood, and exceeding rich. On
one fide, the Sea, on the other the Rivers
well ſtock' d with Fiſh, do, as it were, encom-
paſs the County, ſand make it a kind of Pen-
inſula, | and plentifully ſerve it wich their
ſeveral accommodations. 'To the North, the
river Stour divides it from Suffolk ; on the
Eaſt the Sea comes up to it; on the South the
river Thames (now enereas d to a vaſt bigneſs)
ſeparates it from Kent ; as on the Weſt, the lit-
tle river Ley ſeparates it from Middleſex ; and
the Stort or lefler Stour {which runs into the
Ley,) from Hartfordſhire. | As to Viſcoun-
tile Juriſdiction, it ſeems formerly to have
been annex'd to Hertfordſhire ; for in the 8%
of Edward the third, John de Cog ſhall was She-
riff of both: about which time alſo, one Eſ-
cheator diſcharg'd the office in both.] In de-
ſcribing this County, I ſhall uſe my former
ni and firſt obſerve what 1s moſt worthy
our notice upon the Ley and the Thames, and
then proceed to the parts that lie inward, and
thoſe that border upon the Sea.

Near the Ley, in Saxon Lygean, is a Chaſe
of vaſt extent, and full of game (the © largeſt
and fatteſt Deer in the Kingdom) call'd here-
tofore, by way of eminence, the Foreſt of Eſ-
ſex, (as reaching through this County to the
Sea, as appears by Edward the Confeſſor's

Nord, Eſſex, Gift to one Randolph Peperkin ; and ſtill thruſting

out it ſelf into a great many Hundreds.) ] It
is now call'd }altham-Foreſt, from the Town
Waltham, in Saxon PFealsham, i. e. a dwelling
in the woods. This Town is ſeated on the
Ley (where the ſtream, being divided, encloſes
ſeveral little Iflands,) and is not very ancient.
For in the later times of the Saxons, one To-
vius, a Man of great wealth and authority, and

; e. Verf.  Standard-bearer to the King (as we read in

lifer,

Wiltham-
Abbey,

a private Hiſtory of the place,) by reaſon of the
abundance of Deer, built the Town, and peopled it
with ſixty fix men. After his death, his fon A-

thelſtan ſoon ſquander'd away the eſtate : and

Edward the Confeſſor beſtow'd this Village on
Harold ſon to Earl Godwin ; who built a Mo-
naſtery here, in which himſelf was inter'd. For
having poſſeſs'd himſelf of the Crown (through
his own ambition, and the inadvertency of
others ; ) he rais'd this Structure in honour of
the Holy Croſs. Here he ſolemnly made his
Vows for ſucceſs againſt the Normans ; and,
being preſently after ſlain by them in battle,
his mother obtain'd his body of the enemy by
the moſt ſubmiſſive intreaties, and depoſited it

tl, C. in the ſame place. + It has been honour'd

3
= Copt.hall, [the

with the title of a Baron in the Lord Edward
Deny, fummon'd to Parliament by King James

firſt. Above this, ſtands Copt-hall, which

being built upon a riſing hill, is ſeen at a

great diſtance ; formerly the ſeat of the Fitz-
Auchers, and + afterwards of Sir Thomas He- Lately, C.
neage Kt, who brought it to great perfection.

On this river, without doubt, was ſeated the

old Durolitum of Antoninus; but it is beyond

my skill to determine the exact place: for (to

ſpeak once for all) the ancient Places of this

County are ſo ſtrangely obſcure and puzling,

that I, who in other parts may pretend to

have made ſome diſcoveries, muſt here freely

own my felf in the dark (a). But were I

to gueſs in this matter, the place I ſhould pitch

upon, is Leiton, Which ſtill retains the ancient Leiton.
appellation, ſignifying « Town upon the Ley, as
Durolitum is in Britiſh the water of Ley. It iSpyroticum;
at preſent a little ſcattering Village ſome v.

miles from London ; for which number, thro?

the negligence of tranſcribers, xv. hath crept
into the Itinerary. [One Ward in Leyton-pa-
riſh is ſtill call'd Leyton-fFone, which anſwers Leyton-ftonez
the old Roman way of expreſſing miles by
Stones, and may be ſome confirmation of the
foregoing conjecture, that for v. lapidem, is falſly
read in the Itinerary xv. lapidem. And the
Roman Antiquities found here, argue it to
have been a Roman ſtation. For of late years
there hath been a large Urn reſembling a great
cream-pot, taken up in the Church-yard here,
with ſome aſhes and coals ſticking to the ſides
of it. And between this Town and Stratford-
near Ruckols. or Ruckholt- hall, the ſeat p uckholt-
of Sir Wiliam Hicks Knight and Baronet, on hall.
the ſouth-ſide of a lane call'd Blind- lane (which Blind- lane.
was the ancient High-way that led out of Eſſex
through Old-ford to London,) abundance ot
theſe Urns of ſeveral ſizes, figures, and moulds,
have been taken up by the Gravel-diggers there,
within two or three foot of the ſurface of
the Earth. In ſome of theſe pots, are aſhes ;
and in ſome, divers {mall pieces and livers of
bones, which have not been quite conſum'd in
the Funeral fires. And within this piece of land,
are not only found the remains of burnt bodies;
but coffins and bones have been met with, as
well as pots ; and among the reſt, a chin-bone
of a very great bigneſs, much exceeding that
of an ordinary man. In the ſame place was
dug-up a {mall brazen figure, reſembling a
man.]! That here was formerly a paſſage over
the river, the forementioned place in the neigh-
bourhood, call'd Ouldſord, or the Old-ford, plain- Ouldford,
ly evinces ; and when Maud wife to Henry the
rſt had very narrowly eſcaped drowning, ſhe -
took care to have a bridge built ſomewhat
lower on the river at Stratford. Where, being
divided into three ſtreams, it waſhes the green
meadows, and makes them look very charm-
ing. In theſe, we meet with the ruins of a
little Monaſtery, built by William Montfichet
a great Norman Lord, in the year 1140.
Then the Ley, preſently uniting it's ſtreams,
runs with a gentle current into the Thames ;
whence the place of the meeting is call'd Ley- Ley mouth.
mouth. |
Near the Thames (now grown very large
the vaſt additions it hath receiv'd,) the moſt

remarkable places, are theſe : Berking, call'd by Berking,

—

(a) N. B. He
aſter the Conqueſt,

—
—

ſought them in the wrong road, ;. e. from Tondon to Burntwood, c. which was not uſed, till

Bede

— ——

— A rr — —
— . ö —
—
— 5 . = * o
— * ＋ 8 G - *

La 3 i — —
— ̃ —— —

by Erkenwald Biſhop of London. Here, the

Roding, riv. Thames receives a little rivulet call'd Roding,
that gives name to ſeveral Villages by which

it runs; as, Heigh- Roding, Eithorp-Roding, Lea-

den- Roding, &c. TWO of which were given to

Book of Ely. the Church of Ely by Leofwin a Nobleman, to
atone for the moſt barbarous murder of his
Cdipping- own mother. Next to this, is Angre : where,
s. upon a very high hill, are the marks of a Ca-
{tle built by Richard Lucy, Chief Juſtice of En-

Liber Inqu, gland under Henry the ſecond. A co-heir of
De Ripariis, which family was marry'd by King John to
Richard de Rivers, who liv'd at Stanford-Rivers,

hard by. [And, before it joins the Thames,
Wanſled. jt runs near H/anfed, where is a noble Houſe,

Of theſe, I have nothing more to ſay, than

what I have mention'd elſewhere. But this

In Kent. Tilbury, which Bede calls Tilaburg, conſiſting at
Tilbury. preſent of a few cottages by the Thames-fide,
was formerly the See of Biſhop Ceada ; when

about the year 630. he converted the Eaſt-

Saxons to the Chriſtian Faith. Afterwards,

paſſing by other places that do alſo lie low, and

are unhealthy ; the Tide ſeparates the Iſland

Convenros Convennos (Which is the Connos mention'd by

Þ Inſ. Ptolemy) from the Continent. This place has
b not quite loſt it's name, but is ſtill call'd Can-
; Canvey. wvey. It runs along the Eſſex-ſhore for five

miles together, from Leegh to Hole-haven ; and

ſome part of it beolngs to the Church of
Weſtminſter. But the ground is ſo extreme

low, that it is very often quite drown'd ; ex-

cept a few of the higheſt hillocks, which ſerve

for a retreat to the ſheep. Of theſe, there

are commonly fed four thouſand in this Iſland ;

the fleſh of which is of a very excellent taſte.

I have obſerv'd the young men, with their

little ſtools, milking them, like women in other

places, and making cheeſe of Ewe's milk in

their little dairy-houſes or huts built for that

Wiches. purpoſe ; which they call Miches.

Over-againſt this Iſland, are ſeated in order,

Beamfleet. p,,,»fleet, fortified with a Caſtle, and with large
deep ditches (ſaith Florilegus) by Haſtingus or

Haſteny the Dane ; which were all forc'd and
Hadleigh. taken by King Alfred. Then Hadleigh, for-
merly the caſtle of Hubert de Burgh, afterwards

of Thomas de Wooditock, now a heap of ruins :

And laſtly, Leegh, a pretty little town, well

fiock'd with luſty ſea-men. Near this, ſtands
Pritlewell. Pritleuel, in which one Swain de Eſſex hereto-

4.07 TRINOBANTES. "of 19
- Bede Berecing ; where was a Nunnery, founded | with elegant and ſpacious Gardens, ths fo ;

of Sir Richard Child, who hath been latel
vanced to the Honour of Lord Ca
in Ireland. |

y ad-
le- mayne,

From the mouth of the Roding, the Thames Ma, *
keeps on its courſe (through a low country, * ſh
in many places frequently laid under water ; Haxering · Jo
the unwholſome vapours whereof do very much er
impair the health of the adjacent Inhabitants,) a
to Tilbury. Near which, are ſeveral ſpacious Tilby *
Caverns in a chalky cliff, built very artificially 5 Ho. .
of Stone to the height of ten fathoms; and Hole ca W Church. fr
ſomewhat ſtraight at the rop. A perſon who © rumford. or
had been down to view them, gave me a de- 4 m
ſcription of them, much like this. 4 jo

| | ö dee the An- 1
5 pal 1467» d.
* 90
, Je
1 in
4 re
4 Brentwood, Nt
W Engeriion, Al
\ to
1

a

| Calaromagns, CL
| call'd in the to

ſeſs'd by a very ancient family of the ſame
name; whoſe = after a long time, came

to Butler Earl of Ormond and Wiltſhire, and

then to Thomas Bollen, created by Henry the
eighth, firſt Viſcount Rochford, and afterwards

Earl of Wiltſhire; from whom the excellent
Queen Elizabeth, and the Barons Hunſdon,

are deſcended. In our time, it hath given

the title of Earl, to Wiliam Henry, Lord of
Zuleſtein in Holland, who, in conſideration of

his eminent Services, as well as affinity in blood,

to King William the third, was created by his
Majeſty Baron of Enfield, Viſcount Tunbridge,

and Earl of Rochford.

In the marſhy grounds adjoyning to the
Thames, about H/eſt-Thurrock, Dagenham, &c.
great numbers of ſubterraneous Trees have been Philolp.
diſcover'd by the Inundations of the Thames; Tran.
which frequently happen in thoſe parts, not- 33”
withſtanding the greateſt diligence to prevent
them. They were found, witli Roots, Boughs,

E Itirerary-
© table Bare ma-
$15,
C
[7
b
Þ
E
n
n
juts out into a nook, call'd Black-tayl-point, and t.
Shoberry-Nefſe, from Shobery, a little village up- Sbobeg. r
on it, formerly the city &ceobipig. For we I
read in the old Saxon Annals, that the Danes An. 993. h
being chaſed from Beamfleot, repair d to a city of 1
the Eaſt-Saxons, call d, in their language, Sceobi- 1 /
rig, and there fortify d themſelves. Here, the © * There are, x
Thames, forſaken of it's banks on both ſides, : N See
empties it ſelf, out of a vaſt mouth, into the 3 \
Ocean. Whence the place is call'd by Pto- | 8
lemy, Tameſæ, and, in ſome copies, corruptly, I
Jameſæ aſtuarium ; by us, the Thames-mouth. I
Further into the main land, lies Rochford, Rochford, I
which gave name to this Hundred; f the Ann. 16. :
Eſtate of the Lords Rich. It was formerly pol-
|

I
W + Burton's
Itinerary,

197.

fore built a Cell for Monks. Here, the land

— nn EI EE Gott rs

and ſome part of the Bark; and have bees ov”
ably

3 IE | :*

bably beaten or blown down by ſome great Deeds, now in the poſleſſion of ſome of the |
Inundations, or by ſome violent Storms; which | neighbours thereabouts, and ſometimes in the | |
bear very ſtrongly upon this Shore. | Regiſters of the Biſhops of London, Dun-
A Within ſight of the Thames, going from mage. Now, this Dunmow appears, even from Dunmow,
. | Weſt to Eaſt, and at ſome diſtance from the|the name, to be a place of great Antiquity, ; "ll
: ſhore, the places of note, are theſe that fol- being deriv'd from two old Gauliſh, or Britiſh | '#]
Haering low, in their order. Firſt, Havering, an anci-|words ; viz. Dunum, a dry gravelly hill, and |
; ent retiring place of the Kings, called ſo from | Magus a town. As for the change of Marwe,
a Ring given there by a certain ſtranger to Ed-| Mauge, or Mage into mow, it is very natural ;
N ward the Conteſlor, ag a preſent from St. John. | whether we conſider the ſound of (a) changed
Hoe, Horn-Church, called formerly Horn-Mona#tery ; commonly, in after-times, into (o), as ham,
bach. from a pair of huge leaden horns ſhooting forth | home; fald, fold; &c. or the melting of (g)
© Rumford. on the eaſt {ide of the Church. Rumford, fa- into (w), than which nothing is more common,
A mous for the Hog-market ; and a houſe ad-|and obvious, to any one who compares the
4 joyning called Giddy-Hall, which belong'd to|more ancient with the more modern words.
© < the Ar- Thomas Coke ſometime Lord Mayor of Lon-|So that no difference now remains, bat the
{ »1457- don; Whole great riches expos'd him to very] ſubſtituting Dun for Ceſaro ; and nothing was
great dangers. For, though he was innocent, | more common with the Saxons, than to take
yet was he accuſed of High Treaſon, and, be-|part of the Roman name, and out of it to
ing, by the integrity of Judge Markham, acquit- frame another by addition of burh, cheſter, dun,
ted in the worſt of times ; he had notwith-|&c. Beſides, the diſtance between this and
3 ſtanding a ſevere fine impoſed on him, very|the next ſtation, adds ſtrength to the conje-
W 3cntwood, near the value of his whole eſtate. Brentwood, | ture, that Dunmow is the old Caſaromagus ;
© trgerion, and Engerſton, formerly Engheaſton, noted only] being diſtant in the Itinerary from Colonia
. tor their Markets and Inns. (Colcheſter) twenty-four miles; which may
Here I am at a ſtand, and in doubt whether| agree well enough with the common computa-
I had beſt take this opportunity to bring forth tion of twenty, ſince (as appears by Domeſday-
: a conjecture which I have ſome time ſince con-|book) our reckoning is according to the Sa-
cu, ceiv'd. Seeing the City Cæſaromagus was cer-|xon or German Leugs, conſiſting of fifteen hun-
© call'd in the tainly ſeated in theſe parts; and was, no doubt, dred paces, and the Italick make only one
b 8 place of great note in the time of the Ro- thouſand. Add to this, that from Dunmo to
25 mans, as the very name imports (ſignifying the] Colcheſter, is a direct road; wherein are ſtill
, City of Caſar, in the ſame manner as Druſoma-|to be ſeen in ſome places, the remains of an
gus, the City of Druſus ;3) Which too ſeems pro-|old Roman way; which, by the Country- people
bably to have been built in honour of Au- who live upon it, is to this day (particularly
guſtus: For Suetonius informs us, that all the at Raine) call'd, The Street: the very word
Princes who were the friends and allies of that |(ftrara,) us'd by our Country-man Bede to ſig-
Emperor, built Cities in his honour ; in the |nify a Roman road. And in an old Perambu-
names of which, the word Cæſar was always a lation of the Forreſt, in the time of King John,
part: What then if I ſhould fix Cæſaromagus it is ſaid to bound on the north ſuper ſtratam
near this Brentwood ? Could the reader forbear| ducentem 4 Dunmow verſus Colceſtriam, upon the
to ſmile at my fancy ? For my Opinion can|ſtreet leading from Dunmow towards Colche-

409

dtn,

9 F , *
ä 3 „ > "SHEN 0
. AE et

*

. receive no ſupport from the diſtances in the ſter; meaning this road: To which it may
Z Itinerary, ſince the numbers are there ſo ſtrange-|be further added, that, hard by, near Little-
þ J ly corrupted : Yet thoſe from Colonia and Ca- — are two ancient Fortifications, both
1 nonium agree well enough. Nor can I draw an defended by deep ditches ; one of which is

Argument from the ſituation of it on a Ro- called at this day the Caſtle-yard : and theſe (to-
man way; * ſince we can find no footſteps of gether with the name, and the diſtances) indu-
any ſuch in this County. Nor do we meet|ced the late learned Commentator upon the
with the leaſt ſhadow of the word Cæſaroma- Itinerary, to ſettle the Canonium of Antoninus,
gus, unleſs it be a very ſmall affinity in the| at Little-Canfield, in the neighbourhood of Dun-
name of the Hundred formerly called Ceasford, | mow. | :
; now 8 And indeed, as the] Below Brentwood, I ſaw Sout - Okindon, here- South -Okin-
l. names of ſome ancient places are very little] tofore the ſeat of the Bruins, a family of very don.
167. alter'd, and others quite changed ; there are|great repute in theſe parts. From which, b
others ſo mangled, that only one ſyllable or] two co-heirs who were ſeveral times marry'd,
two of the former denomination remains. Thus] Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, the Tireli,
Caſar-auguſita in Spain, is now corrupted into] Berniers, Harleſtons, Heveninghams, and others,
Saragoſa; Cæſaromagus in Gaul hath entirely] are deſcended: The iflue male of this fami-
loſt it's old name, and aſſum'd that of Beau- ly are ſtill remaining in Hamſhire. And
vois; and Cæſarea in Normandy hath ſcarce|Thorndon, where Sir John Petre Knight, Baron Thorndon.
one entire ſyllable left it, in the preſent name] Petre of Mrittle, built a fair ſeat. It was Baron Petre.
Cherburg. But why do I dwell on theſe trifles ?| formerly the habitation of the noble family of
It Cæſaromagus be not in this neighbourhood, | Fitz-Lewis ; the laſt of which, if we believe
let others ſeek for it elſewhere. For my part,|common report, was by the caſual burning of
the diſcovery is beyond my reach, though I1| the houſe at the ſolemnity of his wedding,
have uſed all the aſſiſtance that my eyes and|miſerably conſum'd in the flames. Then *
1 * ears could procure. This (+ in the opinion ſted, by contraction Burſted, i. e. the place of a gyrged.
pe 197, of Mr. Talbot) was at Chensford or Chernsford ;| Burgh 3 a denomination given to many places
but that he ſhould wheel about from Leyten,|by our anceſtors. Here, I once thought was
to ſeek for Caſaromagus in thoſe parts, ſeems a] the Ceſaromagus ; but whatever it was former-
little ſtrange. Had he gone from thence, right ly, at preſent it is only a ſmall village inha-
over Epping-Foreſt, about the diſtance from |bited by husbandmen ; near Billiricay, a pretty
London as fer forth in the Itinerary, viz.|large market. Hard by, is Aſodoun, formerly Aſhdown,
twenty-eight miles, he would have met with a | Aſſandun, i. e. as Marianus interprets it, The
town, the firſt ſight whereof might promiſe | Mount of Aſſes ; famous for a deſperate battel,
ſomething great and auguſt. I mean Dunmow, in which Edmund Ironſide at firſt had the
written in Domeſday Dunmaw, and in old better of the Danes, but afterwards, through
f 21 treachery,

7 There are,
t Raine, See

ls A 1 2 - 4 _—_ ä N * ꝗ— Py
es. * a: “ r
—— ,. ad eddie de Oe ads

*

2 * a. oth ES
.

ä

On"
a_ —

MM. .wece - ono waa - 5.

6400 oo mmm

* — — —
— —

— ſ—
— —

1

*

— — _
* „ „
N =

—_ — — — — — —
= 47 Roo - —

7 c CRAM A, TEE moor ere

5

-
PP

TRINOBANTES.

Raleigh.

Arpennies.
Wine.

Ralph de Di-

ceto,

Family of
Eflex,
* Vid. Flint-
ſhire, Coleſhul,

Crouch,
Blackwater.

Wallot.
Foulne ſs.

Dengy-Hun-
dred,

Eſſex-cheeſe,

Tillingham,

Ithanceſter,

otbona.

treachery, loſt the day, together with a great
number of his Nobility. In memory of which,
we read, that Canutus the Dane built a Church
here : when, repenting of all the blood he had
occaſion'd to be ſpilt, he erected ſome kind of
2 ſtructure, wherever he had engaged
in fight.

Nor far from hence, lies Raleigh, a pretty
little Town : it ſeems to be called Rageneia
in Domeſday, which makes mention of a Ca-
ſtle built here by one Sueno. Where alſo we
read thus, There is one Park, and fix Arpennies
of Vineyard, which, if it takes well, yields twenty
Modii of wine which I here take notice of,
both for the French word Arpennis, and for the
mention of the Mine made in this Iſland. This
Sueno was a very eminent and honourable per-
ſon, the ſon of Robert Fitz-Wimaerc, and fa-
ther of Robert de Eſſex, to whom was born
Henry de Eſſex, Standard-bcarer to the King
by right of inheritance : who, in a skirmiſh
with the Welſh, threw away his courage and
ſtandard together ; and being accus'd of 2
treaſon, and overcome in ſingle combat [by
Robert de Montfort, ] and caſt into priſon ;
his vaſt eſtate made a conſiderable addition to
King Henry the ſecond's Exchequer. His Ba-
rony remain'd a long time in the Crown, till
Hubert de Burgh obtain'd a Grant of it from
King John.

Further to the North, the ſhore, retiring by
degrees, gives entrance to the ſea in two pla-
ces; one of which Bays, the Inhabitants call
Crouch, and the other Blackwater, formerly Pant.
In Crouch, there lie four pretty green Iſlands,
but the frequent overflowings make them fenny
and mooriſh.

The moſt conſiderable, are Wallot; and Foul-
neſs, that is, the Promontory of Birds or Fowls,
which hath a Church, that at low water may
be come-at, on horſe-back. Between theſe
Bays, lies Dengy-hundred, formerly Dauncing : the

raſs here is excellent good, and it is well
Rock'd with Cattel ; but the air none of the
healthieſt. The only trade, almoſt, that is
driven here, is in Cheeſe ; and men milk the
ewes, like women in other places. Here are
made thoſe Cheeſes of an extraordinary big-
neſs, which are uſed, as well in foreign parts
as in England, to ſatisfie the coarſe ſtomachs
of husbandmen and labourers. Dengy, the chiet
Town, is thought to have 8 it's name
from the Danes; which it gives to the whole
Hundred. Nigh this, ſtands Tillingham, given
by Ethelbert, the firſt Chriſtian King of the
Saxons, to the Monaſtery of St. Paul in Lon-
don. Higher up, toward the Northern ſhore,
ſtood once a flouriſhing City, called by our ance-
ſtors thancefFer. For thus Ralph Niger tells us
out of Bede, Ceada the Biſhop baptized the Eaſt-Sax-
ons near Maldon in the city of Ithanceſter, which
ſtood upon the bank of the river Pant, that runs
near Maldon in the Province of Dengy ; but that
City hath ſince been ſwallow'd up in the river Pant.
I cannot exactly point out the place; but, that
the river Froſbwell was heretofore called Pant,
I am pretty confident, becauſe one of it's
fprings ſtill keeps the name of Pant Mell, and
the Monks of Coggeſhall ſpeaking of it, uſe the
ſame appellation. Some think this Thanceſter
to have been ſeated in the utmoſt point of Dengy-
Hundred, where ſtands at preſent St. Peter's on
the Wall. For along this ſhore, the Country-
people are hard pur to it, to keep the Sea out
of their Fields, with great banks and walls, I
am enclin'd to believe, that this Thanceſter was
the ſame as Othona, the Station of the Band

clenſion of the Roman Empire; who were
placed here under the Count of the Saxon
ſhore, to ſecure the Coaſt againſt the Pirating
Saxons. For Othona might very eaſily paſs
into ſthana; and the ſituation in a creek at the
mouth of ſeveral rivers, was very convenient
for ſuch a deſign. Here we may add, that
the Confeſſor granted the Cuſtody of this

of Law, may ſee the innocent plainneſs of that
age. Ir ſtands thus in the Records of the Ex.
chequer ; but, by often tranſcribing, ſome
words are made ſmoother than they were in
the Original.

Iche Edward Konin

ing.
Of the Hundred of Chelmer and Dancing

Wilde Fowell with his flocke,
Partrich, Feſant hen, and Feſavr

cock :

With greene and wilde ſtob and
ſtock.

To kepen and to yemen by all her
might,

Both by day and eke by night :

And Hounds tor to holde

Good and ſwitt and bolde:

Fower Grehounds and fix racches,

For Hare and Fox, and wild Cattes.

And therefore ich made him my
booke :

Witneſſe the Biſhop Wolſton

And booke ylered many on,

And Sweyne of E & our Brother

And teken him many other,

And our H iward Hewelin

That by ſought me tor him.

few golden croſſes, ſufficient aſſurances in all
caſes. For before the coming-in of the Normans
(as we read in Ingulphus) Indentures were con-
firm'd by golden Fr 4 and ſuch other marks; but
the Normans us'd to do it, with an impreſſion in
wax, of the particular ſeals of the parties concern d,
and three or four witneſſes. But before, many Te-
nures were granted by a bare word, without writing
or paper, only by the ſword of the Lord, or his hel-
met; by a horn or a cup and ſeveral others by a
ſpur, a curry-comb, a bow, and ſometimes by an
arrow.

of the belt Oyſters, which we eall Mallfleot-
oyſters. [|| They are ſo term'd from the ſhore of 4
that name, where they lie ; along which, the

inhabitants have been forc'd to build a Wal
of earth to detend themſelves againſt the break-
ings-in of the ſea. It was made 5 miles in length;
and upon that ſhore only where this reaches,
are theſe oyſters to be met with.] Into that
Bay, flow two rivers, which waſh the greateſt

Chelmer, coming

of the Fortenſes with their Provoſt, in the de-

412

Hundred to Ranulph * Peperking, by a ſhort
Charter ; which I am willing to ſet down, that 2 Na
we, who examin every thing by the niceties bin kane

mog the

Have geven of my Forreſt the keep- — 4
Hihi r
n 17 Ed. 2 3
To Randolph Peperking and to his yy Cute

l : of the Ty,
kindling : ſurer an4
With heorte and hinde, doe and Chaney
bocke, of the Exc
Hare and Foxe, Cat and Brocke, WY

Such was the honeſt, undeſigning ſimplicity Seals ir!

. 1 Y 5 in uſe amy
of that age ; which thought a tew lines and a the Eng

Blackwater-bay (which, as I ſaid before, bounds Black-
the north- part of this Hundred) affords plenty d-

Yo

Norder
ſſex My

rd
part of the County, Chelmer and Freſþwell. —

from the inner parts that river.

are cloathed with wood, paſſes through Thax- Tharded.
ſted, a little Market-town, ſeated very plea- _
ſantly on a hill; and Tiltey, Where Aauricę T\\*?
Fitz-Gilbert founded a ſmall Monaſtery; to
; E anne,

.

41
1 2
lords of Lo th

= yain. rc

E Dunmow.

3 * 5
|
Vid. Brent- 15
7 ric

© Hatheld. ſta
Broadoake, cr
Phily. lit.

e

ESSEX

PY

413.

1 Lords of Lo
W yain.

| y Dunmow.

Vid. Brent-

a,

© od, p-40g. toninus ;) li a town of a very delightful ſitua-

= *.Plott's
© Stafford.
dire, pag,
© 446

© Hatfeld.
© Broadoake,
Plaiſy,

rd

WBarons Rich,

WEafield.Peve.
W's al. Peper.

Eſtannes by the tower, now Efton ; which was
the ſeat of the Lords of Lovain, deſcended
from Godfrey brother to Henry the ſixth Duke
of Brabant ; who being ſent hither to take
care of the Honour of Eya, were Barons, to the
ſixth generation. But in the time of Edward
the third, for want of iſſue-male, the eſtate
and honour paſs'd by marriage to Milliam Bourg-
chier ; whoſe Poſterity were for a little while
Earls of Eſſex. | From this place, Sir Milliam
Maynard was, in the third year of King Charles
the firſt, advanced to the honour of Lord May-
nard of Eſtains. |

Then Chelmer runs to Dunmow, anciently
Dunmaug, and in Domeſday Dunmaw (which
is proved before to be the Cæſaromagus of An-

tion, on the top of a gentle aſcent ; where one

uga founded a Monaſtery in the year 1111.
But William Bainard (as we read in the private
Hiſtory of that Monaſtery,) of whom Juga held
the village of Little Dunmow, was for felony de-
priv'd of his Barony, and King Henry the firſt gave
it to Robert Sox of Richard Fitz-Giſlbert Earl
of Clare, and to his heirs, with the Honour of
Bainard-caſtle in London ; which Robert was then
Sewer to King Henry. Theſe are the Author's
own words. Nor do I think it juit for me
to alter them, tho' they contain 2 manifeſt
&/1e9nop3s, or anticipation of time; a failing,
to be met withal in the beſt hiſtorians. For
that family was not as yet honour'd with the
dignity ot Earls of Clare. [* In the Priory
here, Robert Fitz-Walter (a powertul Baron in
the time of Henry the third, ) inſtituted a
cuſtom, that whoever did not repent of his
marriage, nor quarrel'd with his wife within
a year and a day, ſhould go to Dunmow and
have a gamon of Bacon. But the Party was
to ſwear to the truth of it, kneeling upon two
hard-pointed ſtones ſet in the Priory Church-
yard for that purpoſe, before the Prior and
Convent, and the whole Town. Bur this by
the way. |

Now let us retire a little further from the
river on both ſides. On one \ fide, not far off,
ſtands Hatfield Broadoake, in which Church lieth
croſs-leg'd the firſt Earl of Oxford ; | and at a
little diſtance from the river, Plaiſy, ſo call'd
in French from Pleaſing. The former name
was Eſtre ; the ſeat of the Conſtables of *
land in the latter end of the Saxons ; and at-
terwards too, as the Ely-book informs us. To
the ſame place, two very powerful Nobles
(who cul not keep themſelves between the
two extremes of Flattery and Obſtinacy, to
their Prince) do owe their death; Thomas de
Whodſtock Duke of Gloceſter, and Earl of Eſſex;
and John Holland Earl of Huntingdon, brother,
by the mother's fide, to King Richard the ſe-
cond, and once Duke of Exeter; but after-
wards depriv'd of that honour, The former,
for his raſhneſs and contumacy, was hurry'd
from hence to Calais, and ftrangled : the other
was beheaded in this very place, for rebellion,
by command of Henry the fourth. So that he
ſeem'd by his death to have appeas'd the ghoſt

of Moodſtock; of whoſe fall he was accounted

the main procurer. Hence the Chelmer runs near
Leez, a little Monaſtery, built by the Gernors ;
once the ſeat of the Lords Rich, who ow'd their
honour to Richard Rich, a perſon of great Wiſ-
dom, and Chancellour of England under Ed-
ward the ſixth ; ſwhoſe poſterity were advanced
tothe dignity of Earls of Warwick ; bur it
is now a ſeat of the Duke of Mancheſter.)
little lower is Hatfield-Peverel, ſo call'd from

phrey Bobun Earl of Hereford and Eſſex.

wife one of the moſt celebrated beauties of

414

the age, daughter to Igelric a noble Saxon. The Book of

She founded

condition, and lies intomb'd

ere a College, now in a ruinous St. Martin's
* in the window of in London.

the Church ; whereof a little is till remain- In *neitra.

ing. By her, he had Viliam Peverel Gover-
nour of Dover-caſtle, and Pain Peverel Lord of
Brun in Cambridgeſhire. The ſame Lady bore
to William the Conqueror, whoſe Concubine
ſhe was, William Peverel Lord of Nottingham.
But to return to the Chelmer. Next (at a lit-
tle diſtance from Hatffeld-Peverel,) ] it viſits

diſtance from Camalodunum, ſhould be the old

Chelmerford, commonly Chensford, which by the Chensford.

Canoium. | Unleſs, perhaps, that ſtation may Canonium.

be better ſettled at HMiritile, not far from
it ; as by reaſon of the diſtances from Cæſaro-
magus and Camalodunum, ſo alſo upon another
account, which follows. It is an Obſervation
made by Antiquaries, that the Saxon Kings
and Nobles ſeated themſelves upon the forſa-
ken Camps and Stations of the Romans. And
this Town (ſo far as there is any light from
Records to direct us) has always been in the
poſſeſſion of Kings or Noble-men.
King Harold's before the Conqueſt, and King

William's after; and continu'd in the Crown,

* Ir wass

Domeſday,

F till King John paſs'd part of it to Nevil, for + Claus. 6
lite. Afterwards, it was granted [| by Henry Joh, m. 9.
the third to Philip de Atheney, and to William || Rot. 7 Hen.

Earl of Salisbury ; beſides which, another ſhare
paſs'd to Bruce. As for Chelmsford, that indeed
was a Vila belonging to the Biſhop of Lon-
don, when the Conqueror's Survey was made,
and ſo continu'd till Biſhop® Bonner alienated it
to King Henry the eighth. Bur it was of no
great note, till Biſhop Maurice built the bridge
about the time of Henry the firſt ; and
his Succeflor, William Biſhop of London, pro-
cur'd from King John, in the firſt year of
his reign, a Market here, and in his ſecond
year, a Fair. When it grew thus famous, the
road (which is moſt conſiderable, as to our
buſineſs) began to be through this Town, tho
till then it had all along lain through Myitile.
As to Chelmsford, it is a pretty large 'Town,

ſeated almoſt in the middle of the County,

between two rivers which meet here ; Chelmer
from the eaſt ; and another from the ſouth, of
which if the name be Can (as ſome will have

m. 2. Cl. 2

3. m. 4.

it) we may ſtill fanſy this place to yes Conclude;

been the old Canonium.

for a little a pn.
King of Scotland. Ar preſent, it 1s remarka-
ble only for the Aſſizes being kept there. The
place began to recover it ſelt, when Maurice
Biſhop of London (to whom it belong'd) did in
the time of Henry the firſt build a bridge
here, and brought the great road through this
Town. Before (as we have already hinted) |
it lay throu
of the pariſh ; which Ki
gave to Robert Bruce Lord of Anandale in Scot-
land, who had d one of the daughters
and heirs of John laſt Earl of Cheſter ; be-
cauſe he was. unwilling that the County of
ſhould be divided among Women. Bur

the poſterity of Bruce forſaking their Allegiance,
Edward the ſecond granted this place to _
na,
when King James | the firſt, ] at his coming to
the Crown, advanc'd feveral deſerving perſons
to the honourable degree of Barons; he crea-
ted John Petre, a very eminent Knight, Baron
Petre of Writtle, whoſe father William Petre,
was a perſon of extraordinary wiſdom and

the owner of it Ranulph Peverel, who had to

learning; not ſo famous for the great 9

It was famous in the memory of the f laſt
age,

Y So ſaid,
built by Malcolm ann. 1807.

Writtle, famous for the largeneſs ne, ſor-
Henry the third merly Eſte,

a. -< > << an LY —— ——

*. 2 7, ——

r 13

—— —

— 2
Aa CAME in |

* . o d a * — _
- F CY — tm

415 TRINOB

ANTES..

he had born in the kingdom (having been of

the Privy Council to Henry the eighth, Ed-

ward the ſixth, Queen Mary and Queen Eli-

zabeth, and often Embaſlador to foreign States,)

as for his liberal education, and his encou-

ragement to learning at Oxford, and for his

bounty to his poor neighbours at Engerſton.

[This Place, in the Bull of Pope Paul the fourth

(whereby he granted to the aforeſaid William

Petre the ſale of ſeveral Monaſteries belonging

to Religious houſes diflolv'd by King Henry

the eighth) is call'd Ging-Abbatiſſæ, alias Ging

ad Petram, vel Ingerſtone. And in the neigh-

bourhood are ſeveral Villages, whereot Ging or

or inge make part of the name, as, Ging-grave,
Menas-inge, Mavrget-inge, and Frier-inge. |

Froſhwell, call d more truly Pam, and after-

wards Blackwater, rifing out of a little yea

near Radwinter, which belong'd to the Lords

| Cobham ; after it has run a great way and

Finchingfeld. met with nothing conſiderable (except | Finching-

field, which John Compes held of Edward the

third, by the ſervice of turning the ſpit at his

Bocking. Coronation ;] Bocking, a rich Parſonage, (in

the gift of the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, (the

Town, till the diſſolution, belonging to Chriſt-

Cogſbal. Church, Canterbury ; ) | Cogſhal, built by King

Whittam. Stephen for Cluniack Monks; and WWhittam,

by Edward the elder, in the year 914; ſaid

to have been the Honour of Euſtace, Earl of

* Solidus de- Bologn ;) meets with the Chelmer, which * co-

ming down with its whole ſtream from a pret-

Danbury. ty high hill not far from Danbury (for a long

time the habitation of the noble family of the

Woodham- Darcies;) paſſes by Woodham-Walters, the an-

Walters. cent ſeat of the Lords Fitz-Walters, as emi-

— nent for nobility as antiquity; being deſcend-

ed from Robert, younger ſon to Richard Fitz-

+ So ſaid, Giſlbert an Earl; and, in the f laſt age, grafted
ann. 1607. by marriage into the family of the Ratcliffs ; who,
being advanc'd to the honour of Earls of Suſ-

ſex, had a noble ſear not far from hence, call'd

New-hall. Neæw-hall. This belong'd formerly to the But-
lers Earls of Ormond ; then to Thomas Bollen

Leland in Earl of Wiltſhire, of whom King Henry the
guea Cantio. eighth procur'd it by exchange; and, having
been at great charge to enlarge it, gave it the

name of Beanu-licu; tho' this never prevail'd

among the common people. [As to the title

of Lord Fitz-Walter ; upon the death of Ro-

claimed by Sir Henry Mildmay in right of his
wife, only daughter of Henry Radcliff, couſin

and heir of the half blood to Robert before.
mention d. Upon which Claim ſo made (the
unhappy Civil wars coming on) no determina-
tion was given; till, in the year 1669, the ſaid
title was adjudged in Parliament to Benjamin,
ſon of the ſaid Sir Henry, and father of Charles
the preſent Lord. | |

ow the Chelmer with the confluence of the
other Rivers (being divided by a river-Iſland,
and quitring its ancient name for that of Black-
water or Pant) ſalutes the old Colony of the

and by Antoninus Camulodunum and Camoludu-
num : but that the true name is Camalodunum,
we have the authority of Pliny, and Dion,
and of an ancient Marble. How ſtrangely
have ſome perſons loſt themſelves in the ſearch
after this City ! though the very name points
it out to them, be they ever ſo blind. Many
have ſought it in the weſt of England; as did
one, among the reft, who thought himſelf no
mean man in Antiquity; and others in the fur-
theſt part of Scotland; and others have, with
Leland, affirm'd Colcheſter to be the place: when,
all the while, the name is very little alter'd ;
and inſtead of Camalodunum, it is call'd atpreſent

the greateſt part of the word remaining whole

as plain proofs, as any in the world. I dare not
venture to ſay, that this place was ſo call'd

with this Inſcription, CAMVLO DEO
SANCTO ET FORTISSIMO. And, upen
an old Coin of Cunobeline (whoſe chief ſeat
this was, as I have obſerved before,) I have
ſeen a figure, with a helmet and a ſpear, which
probably was that of Mars; with the Letters
CAMV. But becauſe at preſent that piece is
not in my hands, I will preſent you with ſome
others of the ſame Cunobeline, which ſeem to

bet Ratdiff, without iſſue, anno 1629, it was

See in the
Britiſh Coins,

LE

[=1=IE1=I

—

—

He govern'd this Eaſtern part of the Iſland
in the reign of Tiberius, and is ſuppos'd to
have had three ſons, Adminius, Togodumnus,
and Carafacus. Adminius, being baniſh'd the
kingdom by his father, and receiv'd by C. Ca-
ligula, accompany'd him into Batavia on that
ridiculous expeditien, which he made, to put

relate to this Camalgdunum:

3
1
9

1 LI LI 12

eee

a terrour upon Britain. As for Togodummms,
Aulus Plautius overcame and kill'd him in 3
ſet battel; and the ſame perſon having put Ca-

Plautius, who, by the advice of one Caius Beri-
cu

s

Romans, Camalodunum, which has made this Camald.
ſhore famous; call'd by Ptolemy Camudolanum, num.

Maldon, and in Saxon Malebune and Oealoune; Malda,

and entire f. Nor are the plain remains of the: Gi 1
name the only argument for this aſſertion; but 111. fl
the diſtance too from the Mona of Pliny, and bear Va
the ſituation in the ancient Itinerary-table, are"

from the God Camulus ; and yet, that Mars The Old.
was worſhip'd under this name, appears from mul.

an old ſtone at Rome in the houſe of the Col-* Is «lis
loti, and from Altars that have been found Cillniai.

ractacus to the rout, as I have mention'd in Ses *
another place, carry'd him to Rome, to grace 2 |
his Ovation (or Leſſer Triumph.) This is that

E
Zn 2
— 8

p * * e * N y * * * -
0 * 0 p
\ 3 5 3 4 5 4 » 99 * aud >
RN ST ES ON GR ITE

R » — i %. th. "TR PR." OE"

0 1 1 n
* 1 * * 7" "PRIN Bas * * — —
*
1 -

cus a Britiſh exile (pretences for war always|rior ; of which ſince others have given us ac-
offering themſelves) did, firſt after Julius Cz-|counts already, it would be unneceſſary for me
| ſar, make an attempt upon Britain under the|to ſpend time in deſcribing them. In this Ro-
ut in Emperor Claudius whom Claudius himſelfſ man Colony (the firſt in Britain,) was a Tem-
$icain. ſoon follow'd with the whole force of the Em- ple erected to the honour of Claudius; Tacitus
8 pire, and with Elephants; the bones of which calls it, The altar of eternal Dominion. Seneca The Altar
being caſually found, have given riſe to ſeveral|alſo takes notice of it in his ſcoffing Satyr on and Temple
groundleſs ſtories. Paſſing the Thames, he put|the death and deification of that Emperor: © Claudius,
the Britains to flight, who ſtood to receive him I is no great matter (ſaith he) that Claudius hath
on the other ſide ; and eaſily poſſeſs'd himſelf a Temple in Britain, which the barbarous people
of this Camalodunum. For which Atchieve- now worſhip and adore as a deity. For there were
. ments, his ſon was honour'd with the title of Prieſts choſen to his honour, namely the So-
x Britannicus, and himſelf often ſaluted Emperor ;|dales Auguſf ales, who under pretence of Religi-

+ 4:64. 4. Seo.
22 1
˙*

—_—

#- dale ac 4. Ha LT ER
Fs

be 1 and fix months after his ſetting out, he re- on, juggled the poor Britains out of their for-
| rurn'd to Rome. Bur I have ſpoken of theſe| tunes and eſtates. But after ten years ſpace,
f matters more fully in another place, and am the courſe of things turn'd, and this Colony

not willing to trouble the Reader with a repe-|was utterly ruin'd. For when the Veterans,
tition of them here. | Nor will it be veryſthat were brought into this country after it
dimmes material, to add, what a f late Writer has ad- had been ſubdued, exercis'd a cruel tyranny
bo vanc'd, in favour of his own hypotheſis, as to over the * ſubjects; the ſparks of the war,
„ the original of the name Camalodunum, vix- Which had lain conceal'd ſo long, broke out in a
| 4 that it comes from Camol, which in the Pha-|more violent flame than ever. The Britains, un-
1 nician ſignifies a Prince and Governour, and the] der the conduct of Bunduica, or Boodicia, plunder'd
old dun a hill: ſo that this may be call'd the] and burnt this 3 as ſecur d with no fortifi-
King hill; as Mons Capitolinus at Rome, ſigni- cations; and in two days ſpace ſtorm'd the Tem-
fies Jupiter hill. Its being Cunobelin's Regia ple, where the Soldiers had got together to
or Palace, may ſeem to give ſome ſtrength to defend themſelves ; routed the ninth Legion
the conjecture ; but how it will ſuit with the|that was coming to their aſſiſtance; and, in a
old Altar-Inſcription, which mentions Camulus| word, kill'd ſeventy thouſand Romans and Al- Dio ſays
, Deus, and with the coins which confirm it, I|lies. This dreadful laughter was foretold by $9999.
| much doubt; and yet thoſe muſt be look'd|ſeveral Prodigies. The image of Victory in Prodigies.

3

upon as the beſt authorities. | this City, turn'd it ſelf round, and fell to the
| Camalodunum being reduced under the ſub- earth. In the Court, were heard ſtrange cries,
ts 3 jection of the Romans, Claudius placed here a and the Theater ſounded with howlings and
| {tout vand of Veterans for a Colony, and coin- ns : houſes were ſeen under the water of the
ed money in memory of this action, with the hams, and the neighbouring bay overflow'd
| tollowing Inſcription : with blood. (This bay we ſince call Blackwater,

; though I know not for what reaſon, as Pro-
Sori Ca. COL. CAMALOD VN. lemy calls it Idumanus, which ſeems to denote Idumanus.
Wiodurum, the ſame thing; Idu in Britiſh ſignifying black.

. » . . F
Y From whence it appears, that this happen” d in Vet the Romans rais d 1t again Out of ICS aſhes 2

K. F

in with the year of Chriſt 52. In an old In-

* the twelfth year of that Emperor, which falls- for Antoninus makes mention of it a long time

after this.) [In a Garden here at Maldon, was

{cription which follows, it is call'd COL O- found a gold Roman Coin, almoſt as large as a

NIA VICTRICENSIS, from the Ve-
terans of the fourteenth Legion, which had the
Name of Gemina Martia Vittrix, whom Tacitus
calls the Conquerors of Britain.

CN. MUNATIUS. M.F. PAL.
AURELIUS BASSUS
PROC. AUG.

PRAF. FABR. PRAF. COH. III.
SAGITTARIORUM. PRAF. COH. II.
ASTYRUM. CENSITOR. CIVIUM.
ROMANORUM. COLONIEZ.

Guinea; on one ſide Nero, n the reverſe
ppina, very exactly wrought.

* — the Senn Aden. qty we ſcarce find

it nam'd ; only Marianus informs us, that Ed-
ward, ſon to King Alfred, repair'd Malduna, 914.
which had been ruin'd in the Daniſh Wars,

and fortified it with a caſtle. William the
Conqueror (as we read in Domeſday) had in it

one hundred and eighty houſes, held by the Burgers,

and eighteen Manſions laid waſte. At preſent, for
largeneſs and ſtore of Inhabitants, it is juſtly
reckon'd among the chief Towns of this Coun-

ty, and is call'd, in Law-language, the Borough Maldon-Bo-

VICTRICENSIS. of Maldon. It is a tent har!
pretty convenient harbour, rough,
QUE. IP 3 * 5 5 NNIA. and for its bigneſs populous enough ; being

CURATOR. VLE. NOMENTANE.
PATRONUS, EJUSDEM. MUNICIPII.
FLAMEN PERPET UUS. DUUMVIRALL
POTESTATE. EDILIS. DEDI-

CATOR, I
Now a Colony (if the Knowledge of this be

material) is a Body of Men brought into a for-

one long ſtreet, about a mile in length.

Six miles from Camalodunum, Antoninus fix-
eth the place which he calls Ad Anſam. I Ad Anſam.
ſhould gueſs this to have been ſome mark re-
lating to the bounds of that Colony, made in Rounds of the
the ſhape of a handle. For J have read in Si- Colonies.
culus Flaccus ; The fields that lay near the Colo-
nies were determin'd by ſeveral ſorts of bounds : in
the limits, there were placed for marks, ſometimes

tify d Place, and inveſted with the Right of one thing, and ſometimes another. In ſome, a little
Poſſeſſion. Theſe, for the moſt part, were Ve- ſtatue of Mercury; in others a wine-veſſel ; in others
terans ; both, that Proviſion might. be made for | a Spatula ; in others a Rhombus, or figure in ſhape
them, and that they might defend the Place | like a Lozenge ; and in ſome, according to Vitalis
againſt Rebels, and inure the Friends and Al-| and Arcadius, a flagon or a jar. And why might
= of the Romans to the Laws and Cuſtoms|not Auſa be ſuch a mark? eſpecially ſince An-
the Empire. Theſe Colonies were in great | toninus hath Ad Anſam, and not Anſæ, accord-
onour and eſteem, being, as it were, images ing to his uſual Style. What a Religious care

and repreſentations of the City of Rome. They

hid their Magiſtrates too, ſuperior and infe-

they took in ſetting up their land-marks, I
ſhall in a ſhort digreſſion deſcribe out of the

7 RT ſame

n * T dy * .

Pg

419

TRINOBANTES.

+ Vid. Nor-

thampton-
ſhire, Termin
Veterum.

Burton

Itinerar.

* Ibid,

+ Funeral
Monument.

*

ſame Author. f For in ordering and diſpofing
theſe bounds, firſt they brought the ſtones and ſet
them on the firm ground, nigh the place where they
deſgu d to dig holes, to fix them in. Then they
adorn'd them with ointments, coverings, and gar-
land. Having kild and ſacrific d a ſpotleſs victim
on the hole where they were to ſet them, they drop d
down the blood on burning torches that were plac d in
the earth, and ſcatter d incenſe aud fruit upon them.
They added to theſe, wine, honey-combs, and what-
ever elſe was cuſtomary in ſacrifices of this kind;
and when the fire had conſum'd all the proviſion,
they plac'd the ſtone that was for the boundary on
the burning coals, and ſo faſten'd it with all imagi-
nable care, treading-in ſmall fragments of ſtones
rouud about it, to make it the more firm. Where-
ever this ſtation Ad Anſam was, I continue
in my former opinion about the name of it;
That it was either a boundary in that ſhape,
or ſome Station or Inn on the road with this
gn ; and that, from the diſtance, near Cogſhall.
For they were no other than Boundaries or
Inns, which the Romans, after the ſame form
of ſpeech, call'd, Ad Columnam, Ad Fines, Ad
tres Taberaas, Ad Rotam, Ad ſeptem Fratres, Ad
Aquilam minorem, Ad Herculem, &c. and there-
fore a longer enquiry into this matter would
on and pains thrown away to no pur-
pole.
A later writer imagins, that Ad Anſam

Comment, in might be written inſtead of Ad Arcam : which,

if true, favours the foregoing conjecture ; be-
cauſe Arca was a monument allo, ſuch as they
ſet up in the borders of fields, and obſerv'd
for limits. Hence we read in an old Gloſſary,
Arca, àxex Alu v, i. e. the utmoſt extent of poſ-
Jeſſions. And, as for the poſition, ſuppos d be-
tore not to be far from Coggeſhal * ; what has
ſince happen'd in thoſe parts, confirms his opi-
nion. By the road-fide was diſcover'd an H-
pogæum or Grot, with arched work; wherein
was a lamp in a glaſs vial, cover'd with a Ro-
man tile, whoſe diameter was fourteen inches.
There were alſo ſome urns and crocks, where-
in were aſhes and bones. Among the reſt, was
one of a polite and moſt fine ſubſtance, reſem-
bling rather Coral than red Earth, which had
this Inſcription upon the cover, Coccillim, per-
haps for Coccilli. M. that is, Coccilli Manibus. It
this Coccillus was ſome Governour, who, under
Antoninus Pius, had the command of theſe pla-
ces (as | Weaver imagins) it is poſſible that
the preſent name Coggeſhal may have ſtill ſome
remains of that.

Notwithſtanding which, there is this obje-
ction againſt that conjecture. From Dunmow
(the old Caſaromagus) to Colonia or Colcheſter,
there is a direct Port-way which runs thro'
Coggeſhal. Now, if that had been the old Ad
Anſam, it is unaccountable, how the Itinerary
(which often takes a wide circuit to hook in
a town) ſhould, in the fifth Zer, paſs by this,
that lay in its road. What then, if we ſhould
pitch upon Hittham ? The direct road from
Combretonium (or Bretton in Suffolk, ) the next
ſtation before Ad Auſam (Ter 9.) lies thro? it:
and it ſtands at an exact diſtance from Cama-
lodunum (Maldon) which immediately follows
Ad Anſam in the Itinerary, viz. fix Miles.
Beſides, it does not want good evidences of its
Antiquity ; for, between the Church and the
Street, are ſtill viſible the remains of a large
old Camp ; tho' much of the fortifications are
dug-down to make way for the plow, and a
road lies thro' the midſt of it. What Matthew
Weſtminſter has obſerv'd, of a Caſtle built there
by Edward the Elder about the year 912, or
914, and how, in the mean time, he kept his

Court at Maldon ; is a tarther teſtimony of its
Antiquity, ſince (as we obſerv'd before
the Saxon Nobility made choice of the for.
ken Camps of the Romans. If theſe arguments
be convincing, that Ad Anſam was at Wittham,
and that the ruinous Camp there, is the re-
mains of it; then it is probable, that the ſtate-
ly Manour-place here in Fauburn, a mile di-
ſtant from it, was formerly the Villa or Coun-
try-houſe of ſome noble 11 And what
renders the conjecture more plauſible, is a ſil-
ver Coin of Domitian, diſcover'd under the ve-
ry foundation of an old wall (built partly of
Roman brick) by the ſervants of Eduard Bul-
lock, Lord of the Manour. |

After this, the banks give entrance to the
ſalt-water in a large and moſt pleaſant bay, a-
bounding with the beſt ſort of Oyſters which

we call H/allfieot-Oyſters, And leſt the Britiſh Wilkes,

ſhore ſhould be depriv'd of the Glory that be- 0
longs to it, I tanſy thoſe to have been the very
ſame, which, Pliny tells us, ſerv'd the Roman
Kitchins. For Mutian reckons our Britiſh
Oyſters, in the third place after thoſe of Cixicum,
in the following words ; The Cizican are lar-
ger than the Lucrine, and ſweeter than the Bri-
tiſh. Bur neither at that time, nor afterwards

into requeſt, did the Britiſh ſhore (for ſo he words
it) ſerve Rome. So that he ſeems to give pre-
heminence to the Britiſh one.

Theſe are the ſame, I believe, that Auſo-
nius calls mira ( wonderful, ) in that Verſe
of his to Paulinus :

Mira Caledonius nomumquam detegit æſtus.

The Britiſh Tide does ſometimes Wonders.
ſhow.

But to ſpeak of theſe, and of the ſtews or pits
on this ſhore which they are preſery'd in,
would be a more proper ſubje& for thoſe, who,
by their exquiſite palate, are able to decide
Criticiſms in a Kitchin.

Into this Bay, among other rivers, runs the
Coln ; which, growing out of ſeveral ſprings in
the north-part of the County, waſheth Hed-

merly a neat Caſtle, and the ancient ſeat of
the Earls of Oxford. Oppoſite to which, on
the other ſide of the river, lies Sibble-Heningham,
the birth-place (as I have been told) of the
famous John Hawkwood ; call'd corruptly by the
Italians Aucuth : By whom he was ſo highly
admir'd for his military courage and conduct,
that the Senate of Florence, in token of his
extraordinary deſerts, honour'd him with a
Statue on horſeback, and with a noble tomb,
for a perpetual teſtimony of his valour and
fidelity. The Italians talk largely of his no-
ble Exploits, and Paulus Fovius celebrates them
in his Elogies. I ſhall only ſet down theſe
four Verſes of Julius Feroldus, concerning
him. | |

Hawkwood Anglorum decus, & decus addite

genti
alice, Italico prafidiumgque ſolo.

Ut tumuli quondam Florentia, fic fimulachri
Virtutem Jovius donat honore tuam.

Hino od whom England boaſts her ſtouteſt
on,

And glad Italians their preſerver own,

A ſtately tomb as poen Florence gave,
So learned Jovius does thy Picture fave.

Near

420

W wetherficld.

ler

when Sergius Orata brought the Lucrine Oyſters Lid 3. 6 0

ningham, or Hengham, commonly Heningham 3 for- Heringin

? Hawſted. thi

= Vhites-Coln,

:

421

3

30 the poſ- Tc

on of Mr. ſhe
n Nævil, a ,

branch of that {1m
Famil). wl
ch.

lun

re

© + Dr, Gale A

makes them J.
the ſame, and Co
reads Colanea, .
p. ot. in
Colonia. da

Farls Coln, C6
* akes Coln. '
Ccln-Engain. &

Colcheſter.

—

*
$4
\ =

421

ESSEX

—

3

422

3

Wetherfield .

3 11 the poſ-

on of Mr.
n Nævil, a
branch of that

| Family»

? Hawſted,

© + Dr, Gale

makes them
the lame, and
reads Colanea,

p. 1.
Colonia.

Farls Coln,
Wakes Coln.
Ccln-Engain.

D . 5 a * v — 93 L — SET hy * * * 1 K * " 9 * 0 e TI TIEN 4 2 4 **
* 1 * Bb - * Try RX” — 7 ny 1 > . W * * 2 | 6 , * —
n % IS oe ̃ Mp Pi oe . ad REL ITT * 5 . * * :
.. ²ĩ˙ ! ę ̃ 1 abab b

FT 2 ä * OY 5 wh 5 * *

[Near Heningham, is Wetherfield, which in an
old Deed of Hugh Nevil, is written oe" *
This Hugh was with King Richard the firſt in
his Wars in the Holy Land, where he flew a
Lyon, by an arrow-ſhot, and by running him
through with his ſword ; which gave occaſion
to that old Verſe,

. . * . A *
Viribus Hugonis vires periere Leonis.

The Lion's ſtrength couragious Hugh ex-
cels.

To the above-mentioned * Deed ( which is
ſhort and plain, according to the undeſigning
ſimplicity of thoſe ey is affix'd his Seal,
wherein is expreſs'd the manner of this At-
chievement, and about which is written, Sigil-
lum Hugonis Nevil. |

From Heningham, the Coln keeps on its courſe
through Haw#fed, which was the ſeat of the
family of the Bourgchiers ; of whom Robert
Bourgchier was Chancellor of England in the
time of Edward the third, and from him an
honourable ſeries of Earls and Lords are de-
ſcended. From hence, paſſing through Earls-
Colu ( ſo call'd from being the burying-place
of the Earls of Oxford; where Aubrey de Vere

founded a ſmall Convent, and himſelf took a

religious habit; ) it goes on to Colonia, which
Antoninus mentions, and makes a different
place from Colonia Camaloduni. Whether this
Colonia be deriv'd from the ſame word ſignify-
ing a Colony, or from the river Colu, is uncer-
tain. For my part, I am more inclin'd to the
latter, ſince I have ſeen ſeveral little Towns
upon it, which, adding the name of Coln to
that of their reſpective Lords, are call'd Earls-
Coln, Wakes-Coln, Coln-Engain, Whites-Coln. | But
yet it is alſo true, that it was uſual for the

Roman bricks æquilaterally ſquare, like pa- Aubr, Ms.
ving-bricks, but thinner; and tome huge thick

ones, It is likewiſe obſervable, that the Tow-

ers and Churches are built of Roman bricks

and ruins, And at an * Inn in the Market- The @ueens-
place, the ſtable, as alſo the room above it, bead.

is of Roman building. There is likewiſe, in Philoſoph
this Town, an ancient Houſe ( ſome of the Tran, No.
back-part of which, is Roman-building, but the 255. 266.
front more modern,) whereon, in an Eſcutche-

on, are theſe Figures, 1090 ; trom whence it

hath been proved, that Numerals here in En-

gland are of longer ſtanding, than has been

generally ſuppoſed, and longer by forty three ibid. N. 154.
years, than appears from that other Inſcripti-

on, in Numerals alſo, on a mantle- piece at

Helmdox in Northamptonſhire.] The Inhabi-

tants glory that H. Julia Helena, mother to Helena, mo-
Conftantine the Great, was born in this City, ther to Con-
being daughter to King Coelus. And in me-/tantine the
mory of the Croſs which ſhe found, they bear Great.

tor their arms, a Croſs enragled between jour

Crowns. Of her and of this City, thus ſings

Alexander Necham, though with no very lucky
vein :

Effulfit ſydus vitæ, Colceſtria lumen
Septem Climatibus lux radioſa dedit.
Sdus erat Conſtantinus, decus imperiale,

Serviit huic flexo poplite Roma potent.

A ſtar of life in Colcheſter appear d,
Whoſe glorious beams of light ſeven climates

ſhar'd.

Illuſtrious ConfZantine the World's great
Lord,

Whom proſtrate Rome with awful fear
ador'd.

The truth is, ſhe was a woman of a moſt

Saxons to make new names, by adding their
ceartcep, buph, &c. to part of the Roman one;

and ſo, Earls-Colne, Wakes-Colne, &c. which,

|

were probably of much later Being, might be
ſo call'd, immediately from the river, as that
trom the Colony. Why might not this be a Co-
lony of the Londoners (as Londen-derry, of late
years, in Ireland,) eſpecially ſince Tacitus has
particularly obſerv d, that London was a famous
Mart-town, and very populous ? If this be
allow'd, there is no doubt but that Adelphius de
Civitate Colonia Londinenſium (one of the Britiſh
Biſhops at the firſt Council of Arles) had his
Seat here; though it be deny'd by ſome Lear-
ned Men, for no other reaſon but an imagina-

ry ſuppoſition of a miſtake committed by ſome

Colcheſter,

1105,

1 So ſais,
ann, 1607

ignorant Tranſcriber. | This City the Britains
call'd Caer Colin, the Saxons Colecearcep, | and
more anciently Colnecearcen as in the Saxon-
Annals; J and we ColchefZer. It is a beautiful,
populous, and pleaſant place, extended on the
brow of an hill from Weſt to Eaſt, and ſur-
rounded with walls, and adorn'd with fifteen
Churches ; beſides that large Church which
Eudo, Sewer to Henry the firſt, built in ho-
nour of St. John; now turn'd into a private
houſe. In the middle of the City, ſtands a
Caſtle ready to drop with age : Hiſtorians re-
port it to have been built by Edward fon to
AEltred, when he repair'd Colchefter, which had
ſutter'd very much in the wars. Bur that this
City flouriſh'd exceedingly in the time of the
Romans, abundance of their Coins every day
tound here, are a moſt certain argument. Tho'
I have met with none more ancient than Gal-
lienus; viz. thoſe of the Tetrici, Victorini, Poſthu-
ms, C. Caraufius, Conſtantine, and the ſucceeding
Emperors, [ Beſides which, here are alſo found old
J

|

holy life, and of unweary'd Diligence in pro-
pagating the Chriſtian Faith : whence in old
Inſcriptions ſhe is often ſtiled, PIISSIM A,
and VENERABILIS AUGUSTA. In the
reign of King James the firſt, Thomas Lord
Darcie of Chich, was advanced to the honour
of Viſcount Colcheſter, and afterwards, 2 Car. 1,
to that of Earl Rivers ; upon whoſe death,
theſe honourable titles deſcended to Sir John
Savage, Son of Sir Thomas, who had married
the eldeſt daughrer of the ſaid Thomas Lord
Darcie. |

Below this Town, where the Coln empties
it ſelf into the Sea, lies the little Town of St.
Ofith ; the former name was Chic, [in the Saxon
Annals Tice ; | the preſent it receiv'd from
the holy Virgin St. Ofth, who, devoting herg g;,,
ſelf entirely to the Service of God, and being Chic,
ſtabbed here by the Daniſh Pirates, was by
our Anceſtors eſteem'd a Saint. In memory of
her, Richard Biſhop of London about the year
1120. built a Religious houſe, and fill'd it
with Canons Regular. This [was made an
Honour by Act of Parliament in the 37h year
of King Henry the eighth, and] f was the
chief Seat of the Right honourable the Lords
Darcy, ſtiled Lords of Chich, and advanced to garons Darcy
the dignity of Barons by Edward the fixth. of Chich.
At ſome diſtance from the river is Lair-Aſar- Lair -· Marney
ney, * fo call'd from the Lord Marney to whom Norden
it belong'd, and who, with ſome others of that MS. Eſſex.
name, lie inter d in very fair tombs in the
Church there. |
Upon the ſea-coaſt lies Merſeh-Mand, con- xlerſey-
taining eight pariſhes. It is a place of exceed- Illand.
ing great ſtrength; for which reaſon the Parlia-

+ Is now, C.

ment put in a thouſand men to guard it from
being ſeiz d by the Dutch, about the begin-
| ning

- 5
. —
— 8

—

N wa 3

I er EIS > on

— — —

* 2

200 OD

423
ning of the Dutch-wars. Beyond this, to the
Great Clack- eaſt, is Great Clackten, * where was ſometime a
1 een Arey houſe of the Biſhops of London, and
Neon. rk | but the Houſe is now fallen, and the
Park diſpark d. |
From Colcheſter, the ſhore thruſts it ſelf out a
Nefſe, vaſt way, to Ne point, in Saxon Eadulphernerp.
What was once found hereabouts, let Ralph de
+ So ſaid, Coggeſhal tell you, who wrote f 350 years ago. I
ann, 1607. the time of King Richard, on the ſea-ſhore, in a Vil-
lage dul A Edulfineſſe, were found two teeth of a
Giaiit, of ſuch a prodigious bigneſs, that two hun-
dred of ſuch teeth, as men ordinarily have now,
might be cut out of one of them. Theſe 1 ſaw at
Cogſhal, and handled, with great admiration. A-
Giants, mother, I know not what Gigantick relique,
Bones of Gi- Mas dug-up near this place in the beginning
ants, of Queen Elizabeth, by the noble R. Candiſb.
Nor ſhall I deny, that there have been men
of ſuch extraordinary bulk and ſtrength, as
to be accounted Prodigies; whom God (as
St. Auſtin tells us) produc'd in the World, to
ſhew, that comelineſs of body and largeneſs of
ſtature, were not to be eſteem'd among the
good things, becauſe they were common to the
Wicked, with the Virewons and Religious.
Yet we may juſtly ſuſpe&, what Sueronius hath
obſerv'd, that the vaſt joints and members ot
great beaſts, dug-up in other countries, and
in this kingdom too, have been called and re-
puted the bones of Giants. | Thoſe, particularly,
Phil. Trang, Which we have mentioned, and others that
N. 274. have been more ey found near Harwich, at
Wrabneſs, a ſmall Village called J/rabneſs, are ſuppoſed to
See below, be the Bones of Elephants ; not only becauſe
they far ſurpaſs the bigneſs of the largeſt Crea-
tures which we have in our Iſland at this day,
but alſo becauſe ( as hath been alrcady ob-
ſerv'd from the Roman Hiſtories,) the Empe-
ror Claudius brought over abundance of Ele-
phants, in his Wars with the Britains. |
From the Nee point, the ſhore runs back by
little and lirtle to the Stours mouth, famous
tor a Sea-{ight between the Saxons and Danes
in the year 884. [And I know nor, whether
Orwell ha- this, which is call'd Orwel-haven, might not
Ven. Son. be the place which the Danes ſail'd-up in the
8 1016, when they had a deſign upon the
Hartford» kingdom of Mercia. The Saxon Annals call
ſhire, and it Arwan ; and as it may not be unreaſonable
8 to ſuppoſe that the true name of this harbour
3 may be Aruell, ſo do we find, on one fide of
it, Harwich, and on the other ſide, Arwerton.
But this by the by. |
Here ſas I faid| is ſeated, Harewich, a very
ſafe harbour, as the name imports ; tor the Sax-
on Þhape-pic ſignifies as much as a haven or
„Silas Tay- bay where an army lies. | * The Walls of this
lor's Hift. of Town are for the moſt part built, and the
Harwich,MS. Streets generally pitch'd, with a petrify'd ſort
of clay falling from the Cliffs thereabours ;
which tumbling down upon the ſhore, and
being waſh'd by the Sea at high-water, is in

Harewich.

42

divers Shells, as well of the Turbinate, as Bi-
valve kind,

Through the growth of the Marine Action
of England, this Place has been of great im-
rtance to the Crown for fifty years paſt, and
ill is ; from its Conveniences for the read

_y and refitting of Ships of War reſort.
ing hither, and its capacity for New erections,
to the degree of ſecond and third Rates; di-
vers whereof have been built here, to the great
accommodation of the State. Till the begin-
_ of the laſt Century, the uſe generally
made of Colne-water (in the neighbourhood of
this place) was, the harbouring of the Royal
Navy ; but by the forementioned more noble
uſe, this hath been laid aſide and extinguiſh,
In the ſeventh year of the reign of Queen
Anne, a Law was enacted for appointing Com-
miſſioners to treat for ſuch Lands, as ſhould
be judged proper for the better fortifying of
this place, together with Portſmouth and Cha-
tham.

In the year 1689. Meinhardt Schonberg,
together with the title of Duke of Schonberg,
had alſo confer'd on him, by King William the
third, the title of Marquiſs of Harwich,

Over-againſt it at Langerfort ( contracted Langeier,
from Land-guard-fort, which, tho it may ſeem
to be in Suffolk, is notwithſtanding by the
Officers of his Majeſty's Ordnance in the
Tower of London, writ in Eſex, according to
tormer Precedents,) are the Remains of an an-
cient fortification, which ſhew great labour and
antiquity. The line of it runs ſoutherly, from
a little without the town-gate to the Beacon-
hill- field, about the midſt 4 which is a round
artificial hill, caſt up probably either for pla-
cing their Standard on, or elſe for a Tumulus
over {ome one of their Commanders deceas'd ;
for, that we find common in many parts of
England. Another work runs a-croſs from the
firſt, eaſterly ; but they are both broken off by
the encroachings of the Sea.

At Warbneſs, near Harwich, in the year pot Tur
1701. were found bones of an extraordinary N. 1.

1
bigneſs, fifteen or ſixteen foot beneath the Sur-See br.

face of the Earth ; ſuppoſed by thoſe, who
have viewed and conſidered them, to be the
bones of Elephants, as agreeing with * a late * Mullin;
deſcription thereof; and it being alſo certain Anatorial
(as we juſt now obſerv'd ) that Claudius Act.
brought great numbers of them into Britain.

And the depth at which they were found, may

be accounted-for by the continual waſhings

ot the Soil, from the adjacent hills.

South of Harwich, are Thorp, Kirkby, and Wal- Thor,
ton, f included within the ancient Liberty call'd Kirkby,

the Liberty of the Stoke. In theſe, no man may J Noe ,

be arreſted by any kind of Proceſs, but of the þq., vs,

Bailiff of the Liberty ; and not by him, but
with the conſent of the Lord, firſt obtain'd.
The Sherift hath no power within this Liber-
ty, in any cauſe whatſoever ; but the Bailift

a ſhort time turn'd into ſtone. Some that are texecuteth all matters as if he had Viſcountile

new fallen, are as ſoft as the clay in the Cliff;

others that have lain longer, cruſted over and

hard: but it open'd or broken, the clay is {till

ſoft in the middle. Others that have lain

longeſt, are petrify'd to the very heart : And

the like Petrification is made of wood as well

as clay ; a large piece whereof ſent from hence,

is reſerved in the Repoſitory of the Royal So-

Philo Tran, ciety. Tho, after all, it hath been made a
N. 291. ueſtion of late, whether this hardneſs of the
Clay is owing at all to Petrification, and is

not really its natural State. At the bottom of

the Clift, in a Hratum of Stone, are imbedded

Authority. |

The Stour parteth Eſſex and Suffolk; ſand

in the fourth year of the reign of Queen Anne, Cap. 15.
an Act of Parliament paſſed for the making

it navigable from Maningtre in this County to
Sudbury in Suffolk. } On this ſide, it runs by no
Place, except ſome fat paſtures. But nor far

from the ſpring of this river ſtands Bumſted, Bumlted,

which the tamily of the Helions held by Ba-
rony. And in that part of the county which
is oppoſite to Cambridgeſhire, lies Barklow, fa- Barklow.
mous for four great Barrows, ſuch as our an-

ceſtors us d to raiſe to the memory of the Sol-

diers

25

x

%
*

diet
14 non fa- wil

# erant Te the!
;

hns
the!
tha

+ Ebulum. Da
Du

Danes-blood. oth

ple:
Walden. **

3 bank,

© * This is ſup-

By

Commonly
ca1l'd Man- der

deviles, ga

ple!

tud

a i ͤ ,,, ] , 10 3 NS

poſed to be t.
Elmundsbuyy,
in Suffolk,

_

wm

ESSEX

. *

„

þ

42

—
-
P

4 425
q nor,

pics
*.

*
*

diers who were kill'd in battel, and, as ſomeſ the other Verſes of the witty Epigrammatiſt. «
„will have it, * whoſe Remains could not other-

+ non fe wiſe have been preſerved. But when two o- fore, look very
2 tant re chers in the ſame place were ſearch'd by dig-

ging, we are told they found three ſtone Cot-
fins, and abundance of pieces of bones in
them. The Country-people have a tradition,
that they were rais d after a battle with the

_—_ *

The Fields all about, as 1 have ſaid be-

in the month of July every third year, when
the roots have been taken up, and after twen-
ty days put under the turf again, about the
end of September, they ſhoot forth a bluiſh

leaſant with Saffron. For Saffron.

flower; out of the midſt whereof hang three
yellow chives of Saffron, which are gather'd in
the morning before Sun-riſe, and being taken
out of the flower, are dried by a gentle fire.
And ſo wonderful is the increaſe, that from
every acre of ground, they gather eighty or
an hundred pounds of wet Saffron, which
when it 1s dry makes about twenty pounds.
And, what is more to be admir'd, that ground
which hath born Saftron three years together,
will bear Barley very plentifully eighteen years
without dunging, and then will bear Saffron
again. [A mile weſt from Walden, is Sterbury- Sterbury-hill,
hill ; by which == the river Cam, ariſing in
the confines of Eflex ; and to which, by reaſon
of its heighth, the uſual termination of dunum
preſs gave him Newport, a pretty town in the|doth well agree. From theſe two circumſtan-
neighbourhood, in theſe words, tranſcrib'd from |ſtances, joined to the Antiquities found here
the Original Charter; For as much money as he] (vix. a golden Coin of Claudius Cæſar, and a
us'dto pay at the day of my father Henry's death; and ſilver platter of antique work and ſhape, to-
to remove the market of Newport to his caſtle of [gether with its lying upon two military ways,
Walden, with all the cuſtoms which before belong d to [and the remains of Antiquity in the neigh-
the ſaid market, in Toll, Paſſage, and other Cuſtoms : bourhood, as, the Barrows at Barklow ; the
and that the ways of Newport, which lie near the |Stone-Coffins full of burnt bones, in the fields
ſpore, be turn d to Walden according to cuſtom, upon] hard by; abundance of Coins and Pavements ;
the ground forfeited to me; and that the market at land the Forts at Cheſterford, Caſtle-Camps, and
Walden be kept on Sundays and Thurſdays, and that | Shedy-Camps : ) From all theſe, put together,
there be a fair held in Walden, to begin on Whit-|che Learned Annotator upon Antoninus con-

ſun-eve, and laſt all the following week. (From |cludes, that this Place was the ancient Cama-

this Market the place was long call'd Chepping- | lodunum, and by conſequence Colonia, or Colanea,

Walden.) We read alſo in the Regiſter of this as he reads it, which he makes the ſame with
Abbey, as follows: He appointed Walden as the Camalodunum. For the removing whereof to
head of his Honour and of the whole County, and for |this place (viz. Sterbury-hill ; ) beſides the fore-
a ſeat ſor himſelf and his heirs. The place, uhere] mentioned circumſtances, and their agreement
he built the Monaſtery, had great plenty of water, with the deſcription given by Tacitus; he al-
which ran here continually from ſprings that never [ledges one conſideration more, which is, the
dried up. The Sun viſits it very late in the morn- | remarkable fruitfulneſs as well as pleaſantneſs of
ing, and forſakes it very ſoon in the evening, being |this Country; fit, in theſe reſpects, to be cho-
kept off by the hills on each fide. This place is] ſen for the refidence of the Kings of the Tri-
now call'd Arudley-end, from Thomas Audley |nobantes ; as Camalodunum was. |
Chancellor of England, who chang'd the Mo-] More to the South lies Clavering, which Barons of
naſtery into a dwelling-houſe tor himſelf. He] Henry the ſecond gave, with the title of Ba- Clavering.

Baron Aud-was created Baron Audley of Walden by Henry |ron, to Robert Fitz-Roger, from whom the fa-

of Val the eighth, and lett one daughter and heir, |mily of the Euers are deſcended. His poſteri-

> Margaret, ſecond wife to Thomas Howard i ty br a long time having, after the old way,

Duke of Norfolk; who had iſſue by her, Tho-] taken for their ſirname the Chriſtian- name of

mas, William, Elizabeth and Margaret. Tho- their father (as, John Fitz- Robert, Robert Fitz-

mas, famous for his Naval Exploits, was ſum- John, &c ;) at length, upon the command of

mon'd to Parliament by Queen Elizabeth, Ann. Edward the firſt, they took the name of Clavering, See in Nor-

1587, by the name of Lord Howard of Walden. | from this place. But of theſe, when we come thumberland.

And King James ſthe 1ſt] created him Earl of [to Northumberland. Here alſo Stanſted-Montfitchet

| + Ebulum, Danes in that place. And the F Wal-wort or
Dwarf-elder that grows hereabouts in great
plenty, and bears red berries, they call by no
other name but Danes-blood, from the multi-
tude of Danes that were lain there.
Lower, among the Fields ( which make a
pleaſant ſhow with the Saffron,) is ſeated Walden,
Waden. 2 Market-town, call'd thence Saffron-Walden,
[formerly Waldenburg, and afterwards Cheping-
Halden.\ It was heretofore famous for a caſtle
of the Magnavils, of which, little remains at
preſent ; and for a ſmall adjacent Monaſtery,
in which the Magnavils, founders of it, lie in-
ter'd. Jeffrey de Magnaville was the firſt that
gave life to this place, For Maud the Em-

Danes-blood.

commonly
ca1l'd Man-
4 viles.

en!

iS, Suffolk, and made him Lord Chamberlain. [preſents it ſelf to our view; which I mult not
Near whoſe houſe, at Cheſterford, there was a paſs by in ſilence, ſince it was formerly the
much more ancient little city (hard by Taldune, — or Barony of the family of the Montfitchets, Barons Mont-
in the very utmoſt limits of the 8 3 )|who bore for Arms Three Cbe verons Or in afitchet.
b which now, from the old Burrough, the Coun-|ſbield gules, and were reckon'd among the chief Arms 4 che
© Burrow- try-people call Burrow-bank. There are only [of our Nobility. But the male-line continued Momiſitchets.
bark. the marks of ſome ruin'd Place, and the plain Ino farther, than to five Deſcents; and then
track of the walls. I ſhall by no means af- the inheritance fell to three ſiſters ; Margaret,
Fo Hing ſup-firm it to be the * Villa Fauftini which An-|wife to Hugh de Bolebec, Aveline wife to Wil-
3 toninus mentions in theſe parts; for tho? liam de Fortibus Earl of Albermarle, and Phi-
in duell. lippa wife to Hugh Playz. The poſterity of The Playzes.
: Ingrdti haud læti ſpatia detinet campi the laſt, continued till within the memory of
Sed rure vero, barbaroque Iatatur : our f Grandfathers, and ended in a daughter + So ſaid,
b marry'd to Sir John Howard Knight; from ann. 1607+
Of no vaſt tracts of barren Land *tis — daughter, by George Vere, the Lords La-
proud, timer and Wingfield are deſcended. A little
ky But like true Country, innocently rude ; lower ſtands Haſtingbury, the ſeat of the Lords Haſlingbury.

Morley ; of whom more in Norfolk. Adjoyn-
Yet I ſhall not ſo much as dream, that this] ing to this, is an old military Vallum, thence

Vas the Villa Fauftini deſcribed in theſe and|call'd Wallbery; and more to the Eaſt Barring-
H h h ton- Hall,

Barrin gten-
Hall.

Y 33 . DT 4D I w —

— — —

-
4 *

7 TRINOBANTES.

ton-hall, [heretofore] the ſear of that eminent
family of the Barringtons, who, in the time
of King Stephen, were greatly enrich'd with
the eſtate of the Lords Montfitchet ; and in the
* So ſaid, memory of our * fathers, a match with the
ann. 1607. daughter and coheir of Henry Pole Lord Mon-
tacute, ſon and heir to Margaret Counteſs of
Salisbury, render'd them more illuſtrious, by
an alliance with the royal blood.
After the Norman Conqueſt, Maud the Em-
preſs, Lady of the Engliſh, as ſhe uſed to ſtile
Earls of Ef- her ſelf, created Geoffrey de Magnaville or Man-
ſex, devil (ſon of William, by Margaret heireſs to
| Dapiferi, Eudo || the Sewer) firſt Earl of Eflex, that ſhe
might ſecure to her party a perſon of ſo great
power, and experience in war, He, in the
civil wars under King Stephen, put an end
Regiſter of to a troubleſome lite, in the field. I was he
Walden, 40ſo (as ancient writers inform us) who, for his
many villanous prattices, incur d the ſentence of
Excommunication ; under which, at the little town
of Burwell, he receiv'd a mortal wound in the head.
As he was juſt expiring, ſome Templars came in,
who put on him the habit of their Order marked
with a red croſs ; and when he was dead, carry'd
him away with them into their own precintts, the
old Temple at London, where, putting him into a
pipe of lead, they hanged him on a tree. To him
ſucceeded his two ſons Geoffrey and William,
both taken off without iſſue. Afterwards King
Iohn, in conſideration ot a large ſum of mo-
F 12 ier, ney, promoted Geoffrey Fitæ-Pierx of Ludgerſhal
8 (Chief Juſtice, and a very wiſe and grave man,)
to this dignity. He had taken to wite Bea-
trice eldeſt daughter to William de Say, deſcend-
ed from the filter of Geoffrey de Magnavil firſt
Earl of Eſſex. A great mony d man (ſaith an
old Author) and vaſtly rich; who, with a round
ſum of money, and many entreaties, made applica-
tion to the Biſhop of Ely the King's Juſtice, and
laid claim to this Earldom (in right of his wife, daugh-
ter of William brother to Geoffrey de Say the eldeſt
ſon) by title of Inheritance. Who admitted him
into full ſeizin thereof, and demanded the promis'd
ſum ; which he receiv'd within a little time, to put
imo the King's Exchequer. He, being thus admitted,
* Scriptis Re- and confirm d by the King's Letters Patents, held
mT and poſſeſs'd this honour, and receiv'd the Homage
of thoſe that held of him by Knight's ſervice. Geoffrey
and William, two ſons of this Geoffrey Fitz-
Pierz, taking the ſirname of Magnavil or Man-
devil, enjoy'd this honour. The former of
F theſe died young, being kill'd at a publick
2 oa of Tilting. The other took part with Lewis of
Abbey. France againſt King John, and died without
iſſue. Upon which, the honour came to Hum-
frey de Bohun, Earl of Hereford, and Conſtable
- England. For thus writes the Chronologer
of Walton-Abbey : In the year 1228. the fixth
of the Ides of January, William de Mandevil Earl
of Eſſex died, &c. In the ſame year, Humfrey de
Bohun Earl of Hereford, and 9 of Exgland,
eſpouſed Maud, daughter to Geoffrey Earl of Eſſex,
and ſo ſucceeded in that honour. But from the
publick Records it is evident, that Henry de
Bohun, father of this Humfrey, marry'd the
ſaid heireſs. And ſuch a miſtake might eaſily
creep in ; for in the Writers of that age, the
Chriſtian-names are only marked with great
Letters; as, H. for Henry or Humfrey, G. for
Gilbert or Geoffrey, &. Of this family the
Sce the Earls heirs-male ſucceeded in the dignity of Earls of
of Hereford. Hereford and Eflex for a long time; whom I
have reckon'd up among the Earls of Hereford,
becauſe they wrote themſelves Earls of Hereford
and Eſſex. Eleanor eldeſt daughter to the laſt
of the Bohuns, being given in marriage (with
the honour) to Thomas de Woodſtock e of

Gloceſter, had by him Anne, firſt married to
Edmund Earl of Stafford, from whom ſprang
the Dukes of Buckingham; and then to I.
liam Bourgchier, to whom King Henry the fifth
gave the County of Ewe in Normandy, This
laſt had by her Henry Bourgchier ; advanced to
the dignity of Earl of Eſſex by Edward the
fourth. He was ſucceeded by another Henry

|

his ſon's ſon, who died in his old age by a fall

from his horſe, leaving iſſue one only daugh-
ter, Ame; who being laid afide, King Henry
the eighth (that he might make a new additi-
on to the honours of Thomas Cronruell, who
had been his main aſſiſtant in baMing the
Pope's authority ;) made him, at the ſame time,
Earl of Eſſex, High Chamberlain of England,
and Knight of the Garter. Before this, for
his extraordinary prudence and dexterity, he
had made him Maſter of the Rolls, Secretary
of State, Baron Cromwell of Okeham, Vicar-
General to the King in Spiritual Matters, and
Lord Keeper: and all this in five years time.
But after five months enjoyment of his Earl-
dom, he (like moſt great Favourites) conclu-
ded his ſcene very tragically, and loſt his head
for treaſon. The ſame King promoted to the
Earldom of Eſſex Milliam Par, to whom he had
given in marriage Anne the only daughter and
heir of Henry Bourgchier. But he alſo dying with-
out iſſue, Halter Devreux Viſcount Heretord,
whoſe great grandmother was Cicely Bourg-
chier alter to Henry Bourgchier (of whom we
{poke but now,) receiv'd the honour of Earl
ol Effex by the favour of Queen Elizabeth; and
left it to his ſon Robert, who being, on ac-
count of his natural Graces and Endowments,
highly in favour with that Excellent Princeſs,
ſail'd with ſuch a ſmooth and proſperous gale
into Honours and Pretermcnts, as to make it
the common hope and expectation of the King-
dom, that he would equal, it not exceed, the
greateſt Characters of his Anceſtors. But at
laſt, being carried away with ambition and
popularity, and endeavouring to outrun even
his own hopes, he hurried himſelf into de-
ſtruction: thus, many who condemn flow me-
thods, though ſecure, chuſe ſudden and violent
ones to their own ruin. But his young ſon Ro-
bert was reſtor'd to full poſleſſion of his ta-
ther's honour by authority of Parliament, thro

ing twice marry'd, by his ſecond wife had on-
ly iſſue, Robert, who dy'd young. So thar, de-
parting this lite Sept. 14. 1646. without iſſue,
that honour became vacant ; till ſhortly after
the Reſtoration, King Charles the ſecond crea-
ted Arthur Capel (Baron of Hadham and Viſcount
Maldon ) Earl of Eſſex ; whoſe ſon Algernoon
ſucceeded to the ſame Honours; and, dying in
the year 1710, was ſucceeded therein by Wik
liam his Son, the preſent Earl. | |

There are reckon'd in this County 415 Pariſh
Churches.

More rare Plants growing wild in Eſſex.

Allium ſylveſtre bicorne flore ex herbaceo
albicante, cum triplici in ſingulis petalis ſtria
atro- purpurea. An Allium five Moly montanum
tertium Ciaſ.? montanum bicorne, flore exalbi-
do C. B.? Wild Garlick with an herbaceoas ftridle
flower. In a corn- field in Black-Notley call d Weſt”
feld, adjoyning to Leex-lane, plentifully. This plaut

is now almoſt loft in this field.

H. Alo-

the ſpecial favour of f the | rhen] moſt Serene, Om je:
Soveraign King James [the firſt ; and, be-ſent, C.

4
4
1

***

BW: tee. Od Cha m2"
* 4 P * 4 ot 4 o

a0 > orury

—

$

—

-
4
of
07
3
*

* 2 2 * 4 y Me
ig 1 N * % * 5
* lll — - = #* 4 1 1 3 1
B 7 Me SE N 2 * a Ns a * PTS

429

Gr.

neee

th

E F S E X

430

rum minimum Col. Park. ? anguſtiſſimo folio

H. Alopecuros maxima Anglica paludoſa Park.
The greateſt Engliſh Marſh Fox-tail-graſs. Said by
Lobel to grow in the moiſt ditches near the river
Thames. |
Argemone capitulo longiore glabro Moriſon.
D. Plot. in Hiſt. nat. Oxon. Smooth-headed baſtard
Poppy. This was found by Mr. Dale at Bocking.
K. Atriplex maritima laciniata C. B. Jagged
Sea-Orrache. On the ſandy ſhores in Merſey-Iund
near Colcheſter plentifully ; alſo on the ſandy ſhores at
Little- Holland in Tendring- Hundred, and elſewhere.
Atriplex anguſtifolia maritima dentata Hiſt.
moſt. p. 193. An Atriplex anguſtifolia laciniata
minor J. B.? maritima anguſtitolia C. B. prod. ?
At Maldon by the river, aud on the banks of the
marſhes plentifully.
Auricula leporis minima J. B. An Bupleu-

C. B.? The leaſt Hare tear. At Maldon in the
marſhes by the river-fide plentifully.

Clematis Daphnoides major C. B. major flore
cœruleo albo J. B. Daphnoides five pervinca ma-
jor Ger. Daph. latifolia ſive Vinca pervinca ma-
jor Park. The greater Periwinkle. Found near Col-
cheſter by Dr. Richardſon. This plant I have found
out of gardens ; but being native of hot Countries, and
frequent about Montpellier, I ſuſpect it may owe its ori-
ginal to ſome plants weeded up and thrown out thence.

Clematis Daphnoides minor J. B. C. B.
Vinca pervinca Officinarum minor Ger. vulgaris
Park. Periwinkle. I have obſerved it in ſome fields
by the road-fide leading from WWittham to Kelvedon
in the hedges and among buſhes : alſo in a hedge by
the foot-way from Falburn-hall to Wittham, and
elſewhere.

Cochlearia folio ſinuato C. B. vulgaris Park.
Britannica Ger. Engliſh or common Mike rates
It grows ſo plentifully in the marſhes about Maldon,
that the common people gather it, and ſend it about
to the markets above ten miles diſtant, where it is
fold by meaſure.

Crocus J. B. Ger. ſativus C. B. verus ſativus
Autumnalis Park. Saffron. I is planted and cul-
tivated in the fields about Walden, thence deno-
minated Saffron-Walden, plentifully. Of the cul-
ture whereof T ſhall ſay nothing, referring · the Reader
to what is above-written by Camden ; and to the full
deſcription thereof in the Philoſophical Tranſaftions.

Conſerva paluſtris Anglica, ſeu Filum mari-
num Anglicum. Marſb-Thread. In the marſb-
dixches about Maldon and elſewhere.

minus folio virente Ger. ſemper virens C. B.
Park. An Cynogloſſa media altera virente folio,
rubro flore, montana frigidarum regionum Col.?
The leſſer green-leav'd Hounds-tongue. Between
Wittham and Kelvedon, but more plentifully about
Braxted by the way-ſides.

Cyperus gramineus J. B. gramineus milia-
ceus Ger, Pſeudo-cyperus miliaceus Park. Gra-

graſs. By Bocking-river, at the corn-mill below the
town.

Cyperus rotundus litoreus inodorus Lob. J. B.
rotundus inodorus Anglicus C. B. rotundus ino-
dorus Ger. rotundus litoreus inodorus Angli-
cus Park. Round-rooted baſtard Cyperus. Obſerved
by Mr. Dale about Maldon plentijully.

Erica maritima Anglica ſupina Park. Engliſh
Cow Sea-heath. On banks by the way-fide
going from Heybridge to Goldhanger ; alſo on the
like banks in the marſhes about T hurrington in this
County : and elſewhere on the ſea-coaſts.

Gramen Avenaceum montanum, ſpica ſim-
plici, ariſtis recuryis. Mountain Oat-graſs with a
fmgle ſpike and reflected awns. Found by Mr. Dale
upon Bartlow-hills on the edge of Cambridgeſhire.

Cynogloſla folio virenti J. B. Cynogloſſum

men cyperoides miliaceum C. B. Millet Cyperus-

naceum glabrum panicula purpuro-argeatea
ſplendente of Mr. Doody : more ſtrigoſe, and with
a fingle ſpike, by reaſon of the dryneſs and barreneſs
of the place. See Middleſex. |

Gramen caninum maritimum ſpicã foliacea
C. B. caninum maritimum alterum Ger. can.
marit. alterum longius radicatum Park. Long-
rooted Sea-dogs-graſs with a foliaceous ear. Found
by Mr. Dale on the ſhore in Merſey-Iland near
Colcheſter.

Gramen criſtatum quadratum, ſeu quatuor in
ſpica criſtarum ordinibus. Square-eared creſted-
graſs. Found by My. Dale at Notley, among corn.

Herba Paris. Herb-Paris or True-love. In
Chaulkney-wood ſeven miles from Colcheſter, and in
Saffron-Walden Ger. I have obſerv'd it in a lit-
the wood cad d Lampit-grove belonging to Black-
Notley-hall. It is no very rare plant in woods, and
ſometimes alſo in hedges, all England over.

Hieracium caſtorei odore Monſpelienſium. Hi-
eracium Cichorei vel potius Stœles folio hirſu-
tum Cat. Cant. Rough Hawkweed ſmelling like Ca-
ſtor. I found it Anno 1690. plentifully growing in
a field near my dwelling, belonging to the hall, call d
Stanfield, which had lain a-while fince it was plowed.

Juncus acutus maritimus Anglicus Park. Eng-
liſh Sea-hard-ruſh. In the marſhy grounds about
Maldon abundantly.

Lepidium latifolium C. B. Lepid. Pauli J. B.
Piperitis ſeu Lepidium vulgare Park. Rhapha-
nus ſylveſtris Officinarum, Lepidium Æginetæ
Lobelio Ger. Dittander, Pepperwort. On the
cauſſey leading to the Hith-bridge at Colcheſter ;
and at Heybridge near Maldon by the water-
fide plentifully : as alſo at the Lime-kiln near Ful-
bridge.

S'Lathyri majoris ſpecies flore rubente &

albido minor dumetorum, ſive Germanicus
J. B. The other great wild Lathyrus or everlaſting
Peaſe. Found by Mr. Dale near Caſtle-Campes,
in the hedges by the way that leads from thence to
Bartlow.
Lathyrus ſiliqua hirſuta J. B. An Lathyrus
anguſtitolius ſiliqua hirſuta C. B. Rough codded
Chickeling. In the fields about Hockley and Ralegh,
and elſewhere in Rochfor d- Hundred.

Lychnis ſylveſtris annua ſegetum flore dilute
rubente vel albo minimo. Sylv. alba ſpica re-
flexa Bot. Monſp. arvenſis minor Anglica Park.
Little annual Corn-Campion with a ſmall bluſh
flower. In the corn-fields near Colcheſter obſerv'd
by Mr. Dale.

Mentha anguſtifolia ſpicata glabra, folio ru-

goſiore, odore graviore. Spear-mint with a more

rugged leaf and ſtrong ſcent. Found by Mr. Dale

befide Bocking-river, below the Fulling-mill, in two
or three places. | NE
Mentaſtri aquatici genus hirſutum, ſpica la-
tiore J. B. Mentha paluſtris folio oblongo C. B.
Mentaſtrum minus Ger. emac. hirſutum Park.
Muer-mint, with a groſſer ſpike. This alſo was
firſt found and ſhewn to me by Mr. Dale near the
ſame river a little above the Fulling-mill : ſince, 1
obſery'd it my ſelf in a ditch near the Corn-mil,,
below the Fulling-mill plentifully.

Mentaſtrum folio rugoſo rotundiore ſponta-
neum, flore ſpicato, odore gravi J. B. Mentha

| ſylveſtris rotundiore folio C. B. Menthaſtrum

Ger. deſcr. Horſe-mint, or round-leav'd wild mint.
In a moiſt place of a little meadow adjoyning to
Fauburn-hall, the ſeat of my honoured Friend Ed-
ward Bullock Eſquire. Found alſo by Mr. Dale
in a meadow behind the Alms-houſes at Great
Yeldbam plentifully. ; N

Mentaſtrum ſpicatum folio longiore candi-
cante J. B. Mentha ſylveſtris folio longiore
C. B. Long-leaved Horſe-mint. Found by the ſame

c A 1 OY \

his I 15 to be the ſame with the Gramen Ave- |

—— — — — —.

perſon in the ſame meadow with the precedent.
Orchis

EP

„ TRINOBANTES.

Orchis odorata moſchata ſive Monorchis C. B.] Turritis Ger. vulgatior J. B. Park. Braſſica _ LT
puſilla odorata Park, parva autumnalis lutea |ſylveſtris foliis integris & hiſpidis C. B. Tower- |

J. B. The yellow ſweet or must Orchis. In black maſtard. On the banks by the high-way-ſide as you
Notley ou the greens of a field belonging to the hall go up the hill from Lexden towards Colcheſter, and in
call d Wair-field. the fields on each fide the way.

Orchis five Teſticulus ſphegodes hirſuto flore | I is to be noted, that theſe annual Plants may ſome

C. B. tucum reterens, colore rubiginoſo J. B. years, by ſome accident or other, ſpring up of the ſeed,
Sphegodes altera Park. Teſticulus vulpinus ma- and afterwards appear again.
jor ſphegodes Ger. Humble-bee Satyrion with green| To theſe I might add the four ſorts of Male-Fern
wings. Solo ſicco & glareoſo ; with the follow-|deſerib'd by Mr. Goodyer in Dr. Johnſon's emacula-
ing. ted Gerard, which are all common about Black-Notley

Orchis anthropophora oreades Col. anthropo-|and Brain-tree, viz.

phora oreades toemina Park. flore nudi homi- . Filix mas non ramoſa pinnulis dentatis.

nis effigiem repræſentans C. B. Man-Orchis with | Gyeat-branched Male-Fern with indented leaves.

a ferrugineous and ſometimes a green flower, Fund] 2. Filix mas non ramoſa pinnulis latis den-
by Mr. Dale in an old gravel-pit at Balington near |{fis minutim dentatis. The moſt common Male-
| Sudbury, and in the borders of ſome corn-fields at | Foxy,

i 0 Belchamp-S. Paul towards Ovington in this County. 3. Filix mas non ramoſa, pinnulis anguſtis,

| S. Peucedanum vulgare. Common Hogs-Fennel. | raris, profunde dentatis. Male-F, th thi
| | In a wood belonging to Walton at the Naſe in Ten- ſet Fd xj? leaves. CO ES

Sea

| There is a good figure of
| dring-hundred. ; ; a leaf of this in Dr. Plukenet's Phytograph. part 3.
0 Plantago aquatiea minor ſtellata Ger. emac. Tab. 180.

bl aquatica minor muricata Park. Damaſonium 4. Filix mas non ramoſa pinnulis latis au-

| ſtellatum Dalechampii J. B. Plantago aquartica|rjcylatis ſpinoſis. Prickly Male-Fern with anri-
4 0 ſtellata C. B. Star- headed Water-Plantain. In aſculate le —— J WIEN anr1
'L 4

pond at Rumford town'5-end towards London ; and If you look upon theſe plants in their ſeveral

a little on this fide Itford. 5 . | growths and ages, you may (as Mr. Goodyer ſaith

. . Potamogiton puſillum maritimum gramineoſ well) make many more ſorts of them : which I um

W folio. Sea-Pondweed with graſſy leaves. In the| if; 4;4 hath been the occaſion of deſeribing more ſorts

2 | marſh-ditches about Maldon. than indeed there are in nature.

Potamogiton puſillum maritimum alterum,
|

þ

1 ſeminibus ſingulis longis pediculis infidentibus. W 9 2

io Another graſs-leav'd Sea-Pondweed. In the marſh-|, 7 Np ee

. u 5g 8 7 Gola hort. C. B. Sea-Holly or Eringo. This, being a

| 3 efide the way leading Maldon to Gold- plant — 2 88 J ſbould not
ME. 5 , have mentione that Colcheſter is noted for the

| I'hlaſpi Dioſcoridis Ger. Drabæ folio Park. firſt inventing or praftifing the candying or conditing

| of its roots 3 the manner whereof may be ſeen in Ge-

rard's Herbal.

Hieracium latifolium Pannonicum primum

a.

*

4 - &©'V
—— —

cum filiquis latis J. B. Treacle-muſtard, Penny-
creſſe. I have found in plenty growing in the fields
near Worming ford ; as alſo near St. Ofith in Ten-

dring-hundred ; and in other places. Cluſ. Synonyma vide in Catal. Cantab. Broad-

] ih | Thlapſi minus Ger. Naſturtium ſylveſtreſ : 8
I Oßyridis folio C. B. Park. Naſturtium ſylveſtre 2 „ oops, outage

I; J Bauhini, Thlaſpi anguſtifolium Fuchſii J. B.Þ® Kom ee 1 Foo

l Narrow-leav'd Wild-creſſe. In maritimis : "as a Onaphalium parvum ramoſiſſimum, foliis an-
# Heybridge near Maldon copiouſly. guſtiſſimis poly permon. Hiſt. noſt. Small- branch d
vs Tithymalus platyphyllos Fuchſii, J. B. ar- narrow-leav d Cudweed, full of ſeed. Found by Mr.
* venſis latifolius Germanicus C. B. peregrinus Dale among corn in ſandy grounds, about Caſtle-

ww. a. wm . ti. os Yen, fg >

| | Cluſ. hiſt. Broad-leav'd - Surge. Among corn, but] Heveni ham plentifully.

! 6s. — I grows 1 2 a Perfoliata vulgaris Ger. Park. vulgatiſſima

N ql Orchard here at Black-Notly, coming up yearly of ſeu arvenſis C. B. ſimpliciter dicta, vulgaris an-

| its own ſowing ; for it is an annual plant. nua J. B. Common Thorow-wax. Among the Corn

Tilia folio minore J. B. fœmina folio mi- at Notley and elſewhere.

; nore C. B. fœmina minor Park. The ſmall Tormentilla reptans alata D. Plot. Hiſt. nat.

| ſmooth-leav'd Lime or Linden-tree, call d in ſome Oxon. Pentaphyllum minus viride, flore aureo

. Countries Baſt, becauſe they make ropes of the bark tetrapetalo, radiculas è geniculis in terram de-
+ of it. Hereabouts it is call'd Pry. It is frequent mittens Morif. hiſt. Creeping Tormentill with deeply-

} | in the hedges, all this part of the Country over. indented leaves. In ſome paſtures at Braintree.

„“ as aw todd a rig en

Trifolium ſtellatum glabrum Ger. emac.| Salix folio Amygdalino utrinque aurito, cor- 1

Trifol. Dipſaci capitulis, nonnullis, Teaſel-|ticem ſponte exuens. Almond-leav'd Willow, that 1 .
headed Trefoil. I have olſerv d it by the water-|caſts its bark. In an Ofier-holt near my dwelling at | |
fide at Lighe ; and at little Holland in Tendring- Black-Notley.
; hundred plentifully. Sonchus arboreſcens alter Ger. emac. lævis pa-

8 Trifolium pumilum ſupinum floſculis longis |luſtris altiſſimus Cluſ. The greateſt Marſp-tree Sow-

ö albis P. B. parvum album Monſpeſſulanum Ithiſtle. On the banks of the river Thames near

|

— — —

cum paucis floribus J. B. album tricoccum ſub-| Blackwall.
| terraneum reticulatum Moriſon. ſubterraneum, | Viola Martia hirſuta major inodora Moriſon.
| | ſeu folliculos ſub terram condens Magnol. Bot.] Viola Trachelii folio D. Merret. Great rough
| Monſp. Dwarf-Trefoil with long white flowers, hi- |Violet without ſcent.
' ding its ſeed under-ground. In the road between| Ribes nigrum vulgo di&um folio olente J. B.
15 Burntwood and Brookſtreet plentifully. Black Currans or Squinancy-berries. By Braintree |
1 Trifolium ſiliquis Ornithopodii noſtras. Small river ide near the bridge calld the Hoppet- 3
l |; Birdsfoot-Trefoil. On Sandy-banks by the Sea-fide pride: J
vi at Tolesbury plentifuly. 43

| Tha ICENL

Ix La "BD
Es hen bd Te

———

KIIEIAEGIEIEAEILADGIASLIADAIDIDIDGIANIEGG

n SE SY OTE INE RAS NA

POLL LL LL LL LLILIAL LIL LILI PLING
IC ENI.

HE Country next to the Trinobantes, call d afterwards Eaſt-Anglia, aud com-
prehending the Counties of Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge, and Huntingdon ;
was formerly inhabited by the Iceni (miſcall'd in ſome Copies Tigeni, and by
Ptolemy yet more corruptly Simeni.) ¶ Net as if the bounds of theſe, or any other
People of the Britains, could be nicely determin d. For how can we hope exactly
of to diſtinguiſh them, when our ancient Authors only deliver at large in what quar-
ter of the Nation they were ſeated, without deſcending to their particular limits?
K Beſides, moſt of the barbarous Nations ſeem (according to their ſtrength at different
=— cn to have had Dominions larger or narrower : Eſpetially, in Britain (where
| were ſo many Kings) we cannot imagin, but that they were frequently making
encroachments upon one another. All (I think) we can ſafely conclude, is, that there is ſcarce a poſſibility,
that the Britiſh Diviſions ſhould include exattly ſo many Counties, fince the bounds of the Counties were ſet
long after the Britiſh times by Ring Alfred, who no doubt had rather an eye to the convenience of the King-
dom, than the exatt limits of the Britains. | | |
I have been a long time of the Opinion, that by a mangling of the name Iceni, the very ſame people
were call d in Cæſar Cenimagni. To which I was induc'd, as by the affinity of the names Iceni and
Cenimagni, ſo by comparing Cæſar and Tacitus together. For the latter tells us, that the Cenimagni ſur-
render d themſelves to the Romans : now, that the Iceni did ſo, Tacitus informs us in theſe words, On
their own accord, they came over to our fide. But what is of greateſt moment in this matter, is,
that a Manuſcript divides the word Cenimagni, and reads it Ceni, Agni; for which I would willingly
put Iceni, Regni, if it might be done without the imputation of tod great Liberty. Thus much is
certain, that you will never find the Cenimagni in any other part of Britain, if you make them a diftintt
People from the Regni and Iceni. However, of the name Iceni there are ſeveral remains in theſe parts;
ſuch as Ikenſworth, Ikworth, | Tkenthorpe, Ikborrow, Iken, Ikſning, Ichlingham, Eike, &c. and
that Conſular way which led from hence, frequently call'd by the Chorographers of the laſt Age, Ichenild-
ſtreat, as if one ſhould ſay, the ſtreet of the Iceni. Mat the original of the name ſhould be, I dare
not ſo much as gueſs ; unleſs one ſhould derive it from the wedgy figure of the Country, as it lies upon
the Ocean, in form of a wedge. For the Britains in their language call a wedge, Iken ; from which
figure a place in Wales by the lake Lhintegid, is call d Lhan- yken; and in the ſame ſenſe a little tract

Bounds G
the Jen.

Ichenild -

ſtreat.

in Spain, is nam d Sphen, 5. e. a wedge (as Strabo obſerves ; ) which yer does not ſo well anſwer the Sphen,

figure of a wedge, as this of ours.

But others alledge, that Ptolemy's Tables, and modern Obſervations, have repreſented it rather under a
quadrangular form ; and Sir Henry Spelman's Opinion may ſeem more probable, that it comes from
the famous river Iſe; eſpecially if the Britains call that Ichen. For thus (ſays he) in Aſia, the Ja-
diam come from the river Indus; in Greece, the Maæoniant from Maonia; in Scythia, the Alani
from Alanus; in Germany, the Alſatians from Alſa ; in France, the Sequani from Sequana, And
ſo in England, the Derbyſpire- inhabitants from Derwent; the Lancaſtrians from Lan or Lon;
the Northumbrians from Humber; and Wiltſhire from the Willy. And as for the change of (8)
into (c), that may be eaſily juſtify'd, if it be true that in Britiſh, inſtead of the Greek (e they uſe
(ch); fo, Ichen for lolo; goch for ovs; Buch for Bb, Oc.

And as the Iceni may be well deriv'd from Iſe, * ſo this, in all probability, has it's name from that * Spelman's

famous Heathen Goddeſs Iſis. For who knows not, that the Heathens conſecrated rivers, as well as woods
and mountains, to their Deities, and call'd them after their names ? And that Ceres and Proſerpine
(otherwiſe calfd Iſis) two infernal Goddeſſes, were worſhipped by the Britains, we have Strabo's Autho-
rity. Or if we had not, the accounts which we have left us of their cuſtoms, would be ſufficient to in-
form us of their worſhip. Upon this is grounded their preferring nights to days, as alſo their compu-
tations of days by nights; of months, by moons ; and of years, by winters. remains of it
we keep to this day in our ſeven-night, 1. e. ſeven days ; and fortnight, contrafted from fourteen-
night, 7. e. fourteen days. SE FOR | |

After Britain came to be a branch of the Roman Empire, and was divided into five parts, it is not
certain under which branch theſe Iceni were comprehended. They are generally plac d under the Flavia
Cæſarienſis, which ſeems agreeable enough to that divifion 3 but the Noticia of the Weſtern Empire
places the Britannia ſecunda where Ptolemy reckons up the Tribantes and Simeni 3 which laſt are,
no doubt, the ſame with the Iceni.)

This People (as Tacitus ſays) was ſtout and valiant, and after they had caſt themſelves upon the Pro-
teftion of the Romans, ſuffer d nothing by war till the time of Claudius. But then, Oſtorius the Pro-
Pprætor beginning to fortify the Paſſes with Caſtles, and to diſarm the Britains, they got into a body and
made an inſurreftion : the effect whereof was this; The Romans broke thorow the Works, within which
they had fortify'd themſelves, and ſo they were ſuppreſs'd with great ſlaughter. In this engagement, there
happen d many memorable exploits ; and M. Oſtorius, the Lieutenant's fon, had the honour ot ſaving
a citizen. That war being thus ended, ſcarce * years after there aroſe a new Storm, upon —

1 | vccafions

i | 7

An.

———— — —
8 by
—

92 —
—
— — —D —

Ae.

—

— e — ũõ—— et _ .

— 2

— — .

3

ä —-—-ꝛ — 2

— — - — —

— *
3

-

wy 2

—

2 3 — w 2
— —
a

or 2
y "a — —
2

ICE NI. "IM

eccaſion. Praſutagus, King of the Iceni (that he might provide for the Safety of his People, though Pra
with his own private damage) made the Emperor Nero, his heir; taking it tor granted (to expreſs
my ſelf in Tacitus words) that by this teſtimony of ſubmiſſion and reſpect, his kingdom and
tamily would be out of danger. But the iflue was quite contrary 3 for his kingdom was
waſted by the Centurions, and his houſe by flaves ; as if both had been taken by force of
arms.
Upon this, firſt his wiſe Boodicia, otherwiſe call d Bunduica, was whip'd, and her daughters raviſh'4. Bookie,
And, as if they had had that whole Country beſtow'd upon them, there was not a leading man amo
the Iceni, but was turn'd out of the inheritance of his Anceſtors ; and even the Royal Fumily was treated
no better than ſlaves. Upon this ill uſage, and the apprehenſions of worſe ( fence they were now reduced
into the form of a Province,) they take up arms, and inviting the Trinobantes, with ſuch others as
were not yet inur d to ſlavery, to joyn with them, attempt the recovery of their Liberties by this ſecret
combination; urg d on by a mortal hatred againſt the Veterans, From theſe beginnings, there broke out 4
moſt terrible war; and it was farther heighten'd by the avarice of Seneca, who about that time exabied Ges
with the higheſt oppreſſion * three hundred thouſand pounds, which he had crap d zogether by moſt unjuſt in Bring”
aud oppreſſive uſury. In this war, to give you the whole in ſhort, Boodicia (whom Gildas ſeems to“ Gude
term a Treacherous Lioneſs) wife of Praſutagus, ſlew eighty thouſand of the Romans and their Aſie: Sante fe.
ras'd the Colony of Camalodunum and the + free-town of n routed the ninth Legion, and gi
put to flight Catus Decianus the Procurator : but at laſt, being defeated by Paulinus Suetonius in a ſe um. "9
battel, ſhe ended her days with undaunted Courage, by a daſe of poyſon, as Tacitus will have it; bur,
according to Dio, after a fit of fickneſs. When this war was on foot, Xiphilin tells us from Dio, that Dio.
the Britains principally worſhip'd the Goddeſs Victory under the name of Andates (whom a Greek Aula, ar
Copy in another place calls Andraſte,) and that in the grove conſecrated to her, they offer'd Captives, Arb.
with the higheſt inhumanity. But yet the Britains at this day do not expreſs Victory by any ſuch name; Ihe Gali
nor do I know what it ſhould mean, unleſs, as the Latins had their Victoria à vincendo, from con- Nn
quering ; the Sabines, their Vacuna, ab evacuando, from emptying; and the Greeks their Nixu Vn i
n txar, from refuſing to give ground; ſo the Britains might have their Anarhaith jrom overthrowing;
for by that word they expreſs a fatal overthrow. But this by the by. From that time, no Author has
one ſyllable of the Iceni ; nor can we gather any thing about them from Hiſtory, but that the Romans, in
the decline of their Empire, ſet a new Officer to guard their ſea-coaſt, and the coaſts of ſome other parts, In Ken:
againſt 2 piracies of the Saxons, and ſtil'd him Count ot the Saxon-ſhore in Britain, as we ob-
erv'd before.
a [ H/hether this people had another of their own name about Worceſterſhire and Staffordſhire (as Stafer: bin,
Dr. Plot has endeavoured to prove) is not our buſineſs to enquire, in this place. I muſt conjeſs, + d. kd
that action of the Proprator Oſtorius ( which is mention d above, as undertaken againſt thoſe Iceui)
ſeems to have been further weſtward, than their bounds reach d. For the next accounts we hear of
their army, after they had ſettled things there, is among the Cangi, i. e. about Cheſhire and Denby-
ſhire. The Army was led into the Cangi, ſays f Tacitus aud, Now they were marched not far + Ar!
from the Sea which is within ſight of Ireland. L. 12. 6
After the Saxons had ſettled their Heptarchy, this Province fell to the kingdom of the Eaſt- Angles ;
which, from its eaſterly fituation, they call'd in their own language Earcangle-hyc, i. e. the kingdom
of the Eaſt-Angles. The firſt King it had, was Uffa; and from him, his ſucceſſors were for a long Eat. ge
time call d Uff-kines, who ſeem to have ſometimes || held under the Kings of the Mercians, and ſometimes Uf Er.
under thoſe of Kent. That line failing in St. Edmund, the Danes over-ran the Country, and for fijt) neon
years together harraſs'd and afflifted it with all the miſeries of war 3 till at laſt Edward the elder got
the better of them, and added it to his own kingdom of the Weſt-Saxons. From that time, it had its :
* Deputy-Governours ; which honour, about the coming-in of the Normans, was held by dne Ralph, bon * 2
in Little-Britain in France. He was a man of treacherous principles; and, getting together great numbers .
of people, under pretence of celebrating his marriage, enter d into a villanous conſpiracy againſt William tie Ful.
the Conqueror. But where ſo many were privy to it, it was in vain to hope for ſecrecy. So, the whole Angle.
matter was diſcover d, himſelf was depriv'd of his honour and attainted, and others were beheaded.
But a more particular account of thoſe matters belong to Hiſtorians : let us proſecute our d:ſign, aud
proceed to Places. What ſort of Country this was, learn from Abbo Floriacenſis, who flouriſh'd in
the year of Chriſt 970. aud has thus 405104 it : This part, which is call'd Eaſ?-azgle, as upon
other accounts it is very noble, ſo particularly, becauſe of it's being water'd almoſt on all
fides. On the South-eaſt and Eaſt ſides, it is encompaſs'd by the Ocean; on the north, by
large and wet fens, which beginning almoſt in the heart of the Iſland, do, by reaſon of the even-
neſs of the ground, for a hundred miles and more, deſcend in great rivers into the ſea.
On the weſt, the Province is joyn'd to the reſt of the Ifland, and therefore may be enter'd
by, land ; | but leſt ir ſhould be moleſted with frequent incurſions of the enemy, it is for-, ,,
tity'd with an f earthen rampire like a high wall, and with a ditch. The inner parts of it o, Pale
are a pretty rich ſoil, which is made exceeding pleaſant by gardens and groves; and render'd db.
agreeable by it's convenience for hunting ; famous alſo for paſturage, and abounding with
ſheep and all ſorts of cattle. I do not inſiſt upon its Rivers, as affording plenty of Fiſh, con-
ſidering that a tongue of the ſea as it were licks it on one fide; and on the other, the large
fens make a prodigious number of lakes two or three miles over. Theſe fens accommodate
great numbers of Monks with their deſird retirement and ſolitude ; with which being enclos'd,

they have no occaſion for the privacy of a Wilderneſs. Thus far Abbo.

lo the lie
St. Edman

SOUTH:

W IO ERR 2 * |

6ꝗWan 3
—
8 3 =
—̃ 2
c
— 2

Ta” ²˙ 1 — — —
— —

.

nnn I
< * * T

a>, A&A”;

» =
8

—
« <P

A

nau.

g 1 K

471

. oY
* .
3 4 2
N © - F;
- 4 a *
=> 8 —
* 1
—
.* :
*3 -
z —

eh wi U mY

Nb R FF O
IH ee

B.. inabum 2
. Ado

J _ _Seole 7 0
EY o

*

ran de

p ”
4 For wills

| | „ham :
- Hepworth . > þ ;
a I hinahal

7 * \
„ I. — *

AYTE

ele 7

=; erton

Aon ldenh

A 7770 IE. *
Bonmbam ar,.
Lang 2 7 A Cris * . wor
Tarworth ae. ang *

— ham
B Baduel.t:h F HARTESMER
N Y L- * 3 41

nham A ngra-e
Far, .

I.21t tf

| 8 — HED WARDS TRE HU x] Clmerwel
SB. Vow abet Þ

rrom » T K Il
Cram gene 4

STO

xning

en 2
Un SUE 4

— 2
7 Here

* -u

—

Ove An m &r Cohn,g * N 188 RE
: Mag. mud ve ben: be |
2 27 , a>. ley 7 7 Beck

Fer adſhil 2 $4 Enenloia .

= —

} Thirlow Y Par. 1 DO — 2 T C LEYDON f En
\ _ K. | m
RT IS NR RYCE H UNS ted df e
— 85 F Barnadi/ton \ | = .
Thur lou- TY 9K N * — S R 4 Achonkan = . {kenham
- _Þr "Oe. *
wratting Aur. Pol N
tr oflngford \OSFORD 80 \ .
8 Wh . Ne | np - BY geen 1
Clare ca 4 — a | / 3 ar | F. | | n * 5 4 Las. . * Hhitton i

7¹ 79
*

Stoke i

HAunrtlesham
a
2

—
2 —

C5
Burbrock wo

4x
*

. FR 4 4 / ,
* _ am 2. 9 * * 5

22 8 Bossi
ö 7A 2 * Be 1 2 77
\ > x” fiu'enham Far. 2 e

* red vel D

—

a MF ene *

2 7 OA
SE 1

A. 4

E

27700 „

: |
N — —
| | O —
— —
* 4 a

ron
{4 Harksted a

_— r
* e. a
FS

Ss 1 Manin gtree

1 . ——— 6
moo 2977 <0 WE f 7c
—— — — : —

"CS

cer

E LAND A.
CS. merlevton Eun dadon

4 — l a S* Andrews ibs
WAY eroRD ETD

d.
Man

Harles ton
8 al Osmondston

7 2 Ex O N

H / oo Lingo

alt Y

widths ©
Be Agen. A Joutholl

Sulland. <

N
HUN. 2.
rham
Chor don
18
4 abel

\ . y
\Wwefterfield WW...
A
\\ * |
\ MH 2 4H n

* \ |
Arumfond A »
4 L hi. » ' ET | 710
We. QC C aret [8 N 5 po 7 FY

pro 8 * re
; — P
—_ _—_. d .

Tho he vv

* apell

Y wort ron FISH ox

a Rammecholt
hs
= Kirn |

Scale of . Mile s
— —
Small — — — |
: | 52 be 7 Swale 4
Sold b uu han & | k |
85 Church. | 1 }

4 _ 1

. 28

— —

” —
—— " N 2 rn S N . 8 of 2 Ib ES 8 3 *
r ͤ et tr CCP „ 2 af net —< ths
4 4 2 E 8 : 2 Wo IS 3
fy 72 - 82 2 — 1 2 "Sb
8 1 5 n - h 4

—

— —

.
4 — " - —_— —— + om. - _ == gp— 4 oo —— no
. 2 — * * —— amy. —— — * — — — *
—

— — p 4 7. — — 2 er 2

" a . P _ * *

3 3 - . . "A. < Y - :
X 8 1 8 ps 32 3 . * 2 NA 7 - 1 1 * q x . - 8 14 2 „ ©. 6% 4 * a

RE LE — TIRE ET o * e r 0 A 1 4

9 N £ — _ I EET =

- * #3 PR. > vo PS. = * 5

. 8 EY CORES 3s 2 2 n g
222. EE i ˙ .

Diviſion,

Izning,

the fi

lets UFFOLK ( which is firſt to
de deſcrib'd') in Saxon 6u$-
VS role, 1. e. a ſouthern people, with
. Ve” reſpet to Norfolk; has on the
TU REZG) BY} wm Cambridgeſhire; on the
e ſouth, the river Stour, which
e * divides it from Eſſex ; on the
eaſt, the German Ocean ; and on the north,
two little rivers, Ouſe the leaſt, and Warveney.
Theſe two, flowing almoſt out of the ſame
fountain, run contrary ways, and divide it
from Norfolk. It is a country pretty large, and
well ſtor d with harbours ; the foil (except to
the weſt) is very fat, as being a compound of
clay and marle. By this means, the fields are
every- where fruitful, and the paſtures exceed-
ing good for fatting of cattel ; [not to men-
tion the vaſt Im 8 made in the eſtates
of this County, by employing great quantities
of ground, =; Tumipe. They make alſo vaſt
numbers of Cheeſe, which, to the great advan-
tage of the inhabitants, are carried into all
parts of England; nay, into Germany alſo,
with France and Spain, as Pantaleon Medicus has
told us, who ſcruples not to compare them
with thoſe of Placentia, both in colour and taſte :
But he was not one of Apicius's nice-palated
ſcholars. Nor do they want woods, and parks;
of the latter of which, ſeveral are joyn'd to
Noblemen's houſes, and are well ſtock d with
Deer

The County, according to its political Di-
viſion, hath been branch'd into three parts:
the firſt call'd the Geldable, becauſe it pays geld
or tribute ; the ſecond, the Liberty of St. Edmund,
becauſe it belong'd to his Monaſtery ; the third,
the Liberty of St. Ethelred, becauſe it belong'd to
Ely-Monaſtery ; to which our Kings formerly
granted ſeveral parcels of ground with Sach and
Soch (as the Ely-book expreſſes it) without any
reſerve either of ecclefiaſtical or ſecular juriſdiction.

But it is to be obſerv'd, as to Ecclefiaſtical
Juriſdiction, that that was not uſually grant-
ed, in thoſe ancient times, by the Kings, bur
by the Popes ; and, in fa&, there appear not
the leaſt foot-ſteps, nor any pretences, of Exem-
prion from the ordinary Juriſdiction of the Bi-
ſhop of Norwich, in any of the Churches or
Eſtates belonging to the Church of Ely in this
County. The preſent general Diviſion, is, The
Franchiſe or Liberty of St. Edmund, and the Geldable;
containing the weſtern part of theCoun-
95 and the ſecond the eaſtern: And theſe Divi-

ions are the more remarkable, becauſe at the
A each of them furniſhes a diſtin& Grand-
ury. :

But now let us take a ſurvey of the parti-
culars ; and beginning at the weſt, give an ac-
count of the more noted places.

On the weſt, where it joins Cambridgeſhire,
and in the very limits, lies Ining, a place, for-
merly of greater note, than at preſent. For it
was made eminent, firſt by the birth of Ethelred
the Virgin (daughter of King Anna) who was
canoniz'd ; then, by the conſpiracy of Ralph
Earl of the Eaſt-Angles againſt William the
Conqueror; and laſtly, by the Way, which
Harvey firſt Biſhop of Ely, made between this
Place and Ely, But now it goes to decay by

New. market. the nearneſs of New-market, whither all com-

modities are carry'd in great abundance. That

SUFFOLK.

SOUT H-FOLXK or SUFFOLK,

this town of New-market is of late date, the
name it ſelf witneſſes, It is ſo ſituated, that

Inſtitutive; but the former belonging to Ditron
or Dichton, as the Mother-Church. 5 have met
with nothing about it in my reading, but that
under Henry the third Robert de Inſula or L'iſle
gave one half of it to Richard de Argenton (from
whom the Alingtons are deſcended) in Frank-
marriage with his daughter Caſſandra.

[The Town hath not grown up by any manu-
facture, or particular commodity; but by the
convenience for Paſſengers, and the adyantage
of the Court, For it ſtands in a Plain, very
commodious for hunting and horſe-races ;
which diverſions very often draw the Court
thither : and on Cambridge-ſide, there is a
— * on purpoſe for the reception of our

$

All round, as we have hinted, is the large
Plains [jult now mention'd,] call'd from the

dy and barren, but the ſurface . Along
this, runs that wonderful Ditch, which the
vulgar (as if it had been drawn by the Devil)

one of thoſe, wherewith (as Abbo informs us)
the inhabitants guarded themſelves againſt the
incurſions of the enemy. But of this we will
ſpeak more at large, when we come to Cam-
bridgeſhire. Only, here let the Reader note
thus much, that the leaſt of all theſe Foſſes or
Ditches is to be ſeen within two miles of this

place, being drawn between Sraikvel and Moul-
ton

bury, called in the Saxon age

Fauſtini; which is mentioned b
ae mn was the _— of Talbot, a ny
ntiquary, and particular| aint
with this part of England ; ſas bel *
dary of the Church of Norwich. ! The diſtan-
ces too in Antoninus, both from [iani and
Colonia, anſwer well enough ; and as Vila
among the Latins imply'd the houſe of a No-
bleman within his own grounds, ſo did

Abbo interprets Bederici-gueord by Bederici cor-
farm. Beſides, the Saxons ſeem to have ex-

reſs'd the ſenſe and meaning of the word
In their own language: for as Fauſtinus in La-

| tin implies Proſperity, ſo does Bederick in Ger-

man; as the learned Hadrianus Junius has ob-
ſerved, where he interprets the name of Beto-
rix (who, N to Strabo, was the ſon of
Melo Sicamber) as it one ſhould ſay, Full of hap-
pineſs and favour. But if theſe two be different,

frankly confefs my ſelf ignorant, either who
that Fauſtinus, or this Bedericus, was. One
thing I am ſure of, that this was not the
Fauſtini Villa deſcrib'd by Martial in the third
book of his Epigrams. And if IT ſhould ſay,

perſuaded Claudius the Emperor to make war

upon the inhabitants; I ſhould not believe

my ſelf. But whether this place was the Villa
FE Fauſtin!

the ſouth- part belongs to Cambridgeſhire, and
the north to Suffolk; each whereof has * a ſmall * Zccleſiolam.
Church of its own, the latter Parochial and 1

tis, or villa, 1. e. Bederick's court, or his ville or

town New-market-heath, the ſoil whereof is ſan- Ne · market
heath,

call Devil s- dike; whereas, it is plain, it was Devil's-dike,

More inward, is the famous St. Edmund. St. Edmund's-
Bevenicy-zueond, bury,

and in the Britiſh (as it ſhould ſeem ) Villa Villa Fau-
Antoninus. ſtini.

ZUeoNd Gueerd or
among the Saxons. For the above-mention'd weorth.

that it was the Vile of that Bericus, who (as Bericus the
Dio obſerves) was driven out of Britain, and Brltais.

—
8 An

nent; ſince at the firſt planting of Chriſtianity
in thoſe parts, King Sigebert built a Reli-
gious houſe here; and Allo calls it a Royal
Ville. But when the body of the moſt Chri-
ſtian King Edmund (whom the Danes had bar-
| | barouſly rack'd and tortur'd to death) was
{ | tranſlated hither, and a large Church with a uon

derful cover of wood was built in honour of him;
then ir began to be call'd St. Edmundsbury, and,
for ſhortneſs, Bury ; and flouriſh'd exceedingly.
But moſt of all, after King Canutus (to expiate
the ſacrilegious violence done to this Church
by his father Sueno) built it anew, very much
enrich'd it, offer'd his own Crown to the Ho-
ly Martyr, brought-in the Monks with their
Abbot, and beſtow'd upon it many fair Eſtates,
and, among others, this town entire. Whereupon,
the Monks governed here and adminiſter'd
Juſtice by their Steward. For this reaſon, Jeſcelin
* Bankond, 4 * Brakeland, Monk of the place, ſays: The
C, men, as well without the burrough as within, are
ours, &c. and all within the Banna Leuca enjoy
the ſame liberty. Afterwards, Hervey an Abbot
of Norman deſcent {is ſaid to have] encom-
ſs'd it with a wall, ſome ſmall remains
whereof are ſtill to be ſeen; [but a perſon
well verſed in the Antiquities of this place,
affirms that there never was any ſuch Abbor,
as Hervey. Indeed, in Abbot Anſelm's time,
Monaft. Vol. there was a Sacriſt of that name in this Mo-
1. p. 300. naſtery.] The Popes granted it very _ Im-
1 munities; and among other things, That this
I place ſhould not be in any thing ſubjet# to the Bi-
+ Which is ſhop, but in lawful caſes ſhould obey the Archbiſhop f.
obſery'd to But, ever ſince the Reformation, it hath been un-
this day, C, der the Juriſdiction of the Biſhop of Norwich;
and it may be queſtion'd, whether the Juriſdicti-
on of the Archbiſhop was provided for, in that
manner, when the Biſhop's was given away,
ſo long before the Reformation ; ſeeing the
Bulls of Exemption belonging to this Abbey
are as much againſt the Juriſdiction of the
Archbiſhop, as the Biſhop; and it appears,
that when ſome of the Archbiſhops, as Le-
ates, made attempts upon their privileges, the
Monks obtain'd other Reſcripts, reſtraining the
Archbiſhops even under that character, and
ſubjecting the Abbey immediately to the Court
of Rome.]

And now the Monks abounding with wealth,
built a ſtately new Church, which they were
continually enlarging. In the reign of Edward
the firſt, in laying the foundation of a new

Everſden, Chapel, there were found (as Everſden, Monk of
the place, has told us) the walls of an old round

Church ; ſo built, that the Altar had been about

the middle; and we are of opinion (ſo he adds)

Ad opus, that it is the very ſame which was built at firſt || to
the ſervice of St. Edmund. But what ſort of

rown this 1s, and how large the Monaſtery

was while it ſtood, learn of Leland, an eye-

witneſs, A City more neatly ſeated the Sun never

ſaw, ſo curiouſly doth it hang upon a gentle deſcent,

with a little river on the eaſt-fide ; nor a Monaſtery

more noble, whether one confiders the endowments,

largeneſs, or unparallel d magnificence. One might

think even the Monaſtery alone, a City ; ſo many

1 gates it has ( ſome whereof are braſs,) ſo many
15 Touers, and a Church, than which nothing can be
more magnificent as appendages to which, there are
| three more, of admirable beauty and workmanſhip,
| in the ſame Church-yard. | Now, there are but
1 two Churches entire, St. Mary's and St. James's ;
and the vaſt ruins of a third, which was the
great Church in the Monaſtery. ]J _._

| If you enquire after the extent of its wealth,
| it will be hard to give an account of the value

TT, ITT
429 ICENT. 0
— Fauſtini or not, it ſeems to have been very emi- | of thoſe Gifts which were offer'd at the ſingle

tomb of St. Edmund; beſides the Rents and
Eſtates, to the yearly value of one thouſand
five hundred and ſixty pounds. If I ſhould par-
ticularly reckon up the quarrels that roſe now
and then between the Inhabitants and Monks
(who by their Steward govern'd the Town,) and
with what virulence they ſought the deſtructi-
on of each other, the ſtrangeneſs of the relati-
on would deſtroy its credit. But all this
Work, which had been ſo long in growing, and
all that Wealth, which had been ſo many years
in getting, was deſtroy'd and diſpers d, upon
the diſſolution of Monaſteries by King Henry
the eighth; who was mov'd to that Diſſoluti-
on by a ſet of Men, that (under the ſpecious
pretence of retorming Religion,) prefer'd their
own private intereſt and profit, before that of
their Prince and Country, yea, and even before
the glory of God. Let the very carcaſs of it's
ancient greatneſs hath ſomething of beauty,
and the very ruins are ſplendid; which, when
you ſee, you cannot but both admire and com-
miſerate. And (to take notice of this by the
way,) it England ever ſuffer d by the loſs of
any man, it was in this place. For that true
Father of his Country, Humfrey Duke of Glo- 4
ceſter (a ſtrict patron of Juſtice, and one who Duk, 2
had improv'd his excellent natural Endowmentsceft:,
by 2 courſe of ſevere ſtudies,) after he had go-
vern'd the Kingdom under Henry the ſixth,
for twenty five years together, with ſo great
applauſe and commendation, that neither the
good could find reaſon for complaints, nor the
bad for calumnies ; was cut off in this place
by the malice of Margaret of Lorain : who,
obſerving her husband King Henry the ſixth
to be of a low and narrow Spirit, ſet abour
this villanous contrivance, to get the manage-
ment of the government into her own hands.
But in the iſſue, it was the greateſt misfortune
that could have befallen either her or the King-
dom. For Normandy and Aquitain were pre-
ſently loſt upon it, and a moſt lamentable Ci-
vil war rais'd in England.

[The Town is pleaſantly ſituated, and is much
reſorted to by the Gentry of theſe parts ; and
(ro the great advantage and convenience of the

nhabitants) an A& of Parliament paſs'd in
the river Lark navigable, as far as this. 2%
place.]

Near St. Edmundibury, we ſee [Great Welne- Great Vi
tham, where, a few years ſince, where found, in**
digging, abundance of Potſherds and Platters
of Ro Earth, ſome of which had Inſcrip-
tions upon them ; as alſo Coals, Bones of
Sheep, Oxen, Cc. with many horns, a ſacri-
ficing Knife, and Aſhes and Urns : And alſo]
Ruſhbrok, the ſeat of the famous and Knighrly Ruſibr%
Family of the Fermins [ (advanced in the reign
of King Charles the firſt to the title of Barons,
and in that of King Charles the ſecond to the
higher Honour of Earls; ) and now the Seat
of Sir Robert Davers Baronet, by marriage with
one of the daughters of that Family.] At a
little diſtance from thence, is Jkeſworth, where [keſwortl,
was an old Priory founded by Gilbert Blund, a Blund-
perſon of great Honour, and Lord of Jkefworth :
his iſſue-male in the right line fail'd in Mil-
liam, ſlain in Henry the third's time at the
battle of Leues; who left his two ſiſters, Ag-
nes wife of William de Creketot, and Roiſia V ite
of Robert de Valoniis, his heirs. [The other Ie
worth or Ickworth, north-eaſt from hence, is the
Sear of the Hervies, and gives title to John Lord
Hervey, created a Baron of this Realm, by the

title of Lord Hervey of kwerth, and afterwardsad-
| vanced

the reign of King William the third, to make ry, 12 V.;

|

eG ea ek an” eas aca ca. ao acc _—= as

pertham.

1173.

Hengrave.

Culſurth.
N. Bacon.

+ Altera #
deftinis.
Lidgate .

john Lidgate

| Stourmere.

Sideke-Clate

o
—_—C

a hal * * 7 as s
* 2 1 4 =" © b+ 4 .
Tc a

+ Alba Pon

Earls of
Clare,

* Aucenſis
Augy.

Cuil. Gen
tic. 1.7. Cc :

441
1

"SUFFOLK

% . & %
— -

%,

* a' es |

442

8

1
4

Or. Battley-

pernbam.

1173.

Hengrave.

Culſurth.
N. Bacon.

+ Altera #
deftinis.
Lidgate .

vanced to the more honourable title of Earl Walter. Richard the eldeſt being ſlain by the

*

Rob. Mon-

of Briſtol. This is retkon'd before, among the] Welſh, left two ſons, Gilbert and Roger. Gil- f*nks,

places, which ſtill retain ſomewhat of the bert, under King Stephen, was Earl of Hert-

name of the [ceni. And what the late learned ford; norwithſtanding which, both he and his

* Archdeacon of Canterbury obſery'd, confirms] ſucceſſors, from this their chief ſeat, were com-

the Antiquity of the place, namely, that in his _ ſtil'd, and wrote themſelves, de Clare.
e dy

memory a large pot of Roman money had ing without iſſue, was ſucceeded by his
been found there. About Iłlingbam alſo, much of | brother Royer, whoſe ſon Richard marry'd A.

the ſame ſort is diſeover'd ; and it is ſaid, that|micia daughter and coheir of William Earl of
in digging through the Devil i ditch on New-|Gloceſter ; and, in her right, his poſte-
market-beath, near ning, yy met with ſome|rity were Earls of Gloceſter ; whom you may
ancient pieces. If they are ſtill preſery'd, they [find in their proper place. But at laſt, upon
might probably afford us ſome light, who were | default of heir-male, Leonel third ſon of Ed-
the Authors of that vaſt work. A late Writer|ward the third (who had marry'd Elizabeth,
affirms, that they bore the Inſcriptions of di-|daughter and ſole heir of William de Burgo Earl
ders Roman Emperors ; but upon what autho- of Ulſter by Elizabeth Clare) was honour'd by
rity, I know not. | his father with the new title of Duke of Cla-

* to the north, is Fernham S Genovef ;|rence. But he having one only daughter call'd
memorable upon this account, that Richard Lu- Philippa, wife of Edmund Mortimer Earl of
cy Chief Juſtice of England, did here engage] March, and no iſſue-male; King Henry the

Robert Earl of Leiceſter in a pitch'd battle, and | fourth created his younger ſon Thomas Duke
flew above ten thouſand Flemings, whom he

had invited over for the deſtruction of his

Country. In this neighbourhood, I obſerv'd| French, was ſlain in Anjou, leaving no iſſue
two very neat ſeats : one built by the Kitſon behind him. A conſiderable time after, Ed-
Knights, at Hengrave, formerly the poſſeſſion] ward the fourth conferr'd this honour upon
of Edmund de Hengrave a famous Lawyer un-|George his brother, whom, after bitter quarrels
der Edward the firſt ; and the other at Culfurth, | and a moſt inveterate hatred, he had receiv'd
built by Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight, fon of that | into favour + yet for all that, he at length diſ-
Nicholas Bacon Keeper of the Great Seal of|patch'd him in priſon, orderitig him to be

of Clarence, who was Governour of Norman- Dukes of Clas
dy, and, in an Engagement of the Scots and "*®c*-

1421,

England, who for his ſingular Wiſdom, and|drown'd ( as the report commonly goes) f in In dolio

Judgment, was, whilſt he liv'd, deſervedly ac- la butt o
counted t one of the two Supports of this [of man, to hate for ever thoſe they fear and
Kingdom; I but it is now the Seat of the Lord thoſe they contend with to ſuch degrees of
Cornwallis.] Not far from hence is Lidgate, a] Violence; even though they be Brethren.
ſmall Village, but not to be omitted, becauſe This place hath of later days given the title

ſohn Lidgate. it gave birth to John Lidgate the Monk, whoſe of Earl to Sir John Holes Lord Houghton of

$ Stourmere.

a noble Village, which, beſides it's Caſtle, now

Wit ſeems to have been form'd and model'd Houghton, advanc'd to this dignity Novem. 2.
by the very Muſes ; the Beauties and Elegancies| 22 Jac. 1. He was ſucceeded by John his ſon,
of all kinds are ſo lively expreſs'd in his En-|and Gilbert his grandſon, whoſe eldeſt ſon John,
gliſh Poetry. And thele are the places of note] by the favour of King William the third, en-
on the weſt-ſide of Suffolk. joy'd this dignity under the title of Marqueſs

To the ſouth, the river Stour, immediately ot Clare. Not far from Clare, is Honedon, where,
after it's riſe, enlarges it ſelf into a great Fen

Malmeſey. Thus is it in the nature viai Cretici.

Philoſoph,
- : n : Tranſ. No.
in the year 1687, the Sexton (digging a Grave 189. 203.

call'd Stourmere : but preſently gathering it's|in the Church-yard) met with a great quan- Honedon.

waters within the banks, it runs firſt by Clare, |tity of Saxon Coins.

3 From Clare, the Stour runs by Long-Melford, Long-Mel-
Stoke - Clate. demoliſh'd, gave the name of Clare to a very ho-|a beautiful Hoſpital “ lately built by that ex- ford.

nourable family, deſcended from Giſlebert a|cellent perſon Sir Milliam Cordall Knight, Ma-“ 80 —
Norman Earl; and the title of Duke to Leonel] ſter of the Rolls; to Sudbury, i. e. the Sou- vu 1 2
ſon of Edward the third, who, having taken a thern burrough, which it almoſt encompaſſes.

wife 'out of this family, had the title of Duke| The common opinion is, that this was once
of Clarence beſtow d upon him by his father. | the chief town of the County, and that it had
For trom this place he was call'd Duke of Cla-|the name given it with reſpe& ro Norwich, i. e.
rence (as, before, the poſterity of Giſlebert were| the northern Village, And indeed, at this day it has

+ Alba Pom- ſtil'd Earls of Clare) and dying at f Longuevil|no reaſon to give place to any of it's neigh-

in Italy, after he had taken for his ſecond|bours. For it [has not only the pre-eminence
wife the daughter of Galeacius Viſcount of| of giving title to one of the two Archdeaconries
Milan, lies bury'd here in the Collegiate Church ;| of the County, and is the firſt in place; but]
as doth alſo Joanna de Acres daughter of Ed-| is populous, and thrives exceedingly by the
ward the firſt, wife to Gilbert the ſecond de] Cloathing-trade : it's chief Magiſtrate alſo is
Clare who was Earl of Gloceſter. It is poſſi-|a Mayor, who is annually choſen out of the

ble, the Reader may expect, that I ſhould here] ſeven Aldermen. [In the fourth year of Queen Stat. 4 Ann:

daughter of the Earl of Clermout had Richard,| the family of Lufigny in France, the title of

Earls of give an account of the Earls of Clare and Dukes] Anne, a Statute paſs'd in Parliament, to make c. 15.
Clare, of Clarence, conſidering they have always made| the river navigable from the Town of Ma-
an honourable figure in this Kingdom; and II ningtre to this place.! Not far from hence is
will do it in ſhort, for fear any ſhould ſeek it Edwardeſton, a place of no great note at pre- Edwardeſlon.
7 in vain. Richard, ſon of Giſlebert Earl oll ſent, but, formerly, it had Lords of great honout
A 2 y Ewe in Normandy, was a ſoldier under Wil-| its Inhabitants, call'd de Monte Caniſio, and com- |
4 5 liam the Conqueror, when he came over into| monly Mont-chenſy. Of which family, Guarin garons de
England, from whom he had the villages off marry'd the doughter and co-heir of that moſt Montchenſy.
Clare and Tunbridge. He had four ſons, Gifte-| powerful Earl of Pembroke, William Marſbal,
FB bert, Roger, Walter, and Robert from whom the] and had by her a daughter, Joanna, who
E: I Fitz-Walters are deſcended. Giſiebert, by the] brought to her husband William de Valentia, of

who ſucceeded him, and Giſtebert, from whom] Earl of Pembroke. This Guarin Mont-chenſy, Minor. Hiſt.

was deſcended the famous Richard Earl] as he had

at honours, ſo likewiſe had he a Matth. Par,
of Pembroke, Conqueror of Ireland; and] very plentiful fortune ; inſomuch that in thoſe

K kk times

WIE. : "£3 Eat

——— 2 — . OI -
*
N 7 K EF

e
8 * ”
,

—

NI.

443 ICE

times he was call'd the Craſſus of England, his
Will amounting to above two hundred thouſand marks.
Not far from hence, upon the river Stour, is Bu-
ers, the place where King Edmund was crown d,
II MS. in Bibl. as || Galfridus de Fontibus tells us: His words are
publ, Cant, theſe : Being unanimouſly approved, they brought
him to Suffolk, and, in the Village called Burum,
made him King; the Venerable Prelate Hunibert
aſſiſting, and anointing and Conſecrating Edmund 10
be King. Now, Burum is an ancient Royal Vill,
the known bound between Eaſt-Sexe and Suftolk,
and ſituate upon the Stour, a river moſt rapid both
in ſummer and winter. Which pailage is the
more obſervable, becauſe it ſhews what we
are to underſtand by Burva in Aſſerius's life
of Alfred: that it is not Bury, as the Chroni-
cle under Bromton's name ſuppoſes ; nor yet
Burne in Lincolnſhire, as hath been aſſerted ;
but this Bures, or Buers, as Matthew Weſtmin-
ſter calls it. This Galfrid to whom we owe
the diſcovery, wrote before the year 1156.
A few miles from hence, the Stour 1s en-
creas'd by the little river Breton, which within
a ſmall ſpace runs by two Towns of Antiqui-
ty. At the head ot it, we ſee Bretenham, a
little inconſiderable Town, without any appear-
* Urbis, ance almoſt * of a City: and yet that it is the
Combretoni- Combretonium, mention d by Antoninus in thoſe
3 parts, is evident, both from the ſound and ſigni-
Bretenham, fication of the name. For as Bretenham in Engliſh
implies a town or manſion upon the Breton ; ſo

another world (i. e. from the Antipodes, a
Land of St. Martin) at laſt came up here. If

you would have the particulars of the ſtory

I refer you to the Author himſelf, * who will

tell you a ſet of the moſt ridiculous Stories rie
you ever heard or read. [From the foreſaid — .

ſignifying alſo a den of Wolves, the late + learn-
ed Annotator chooſes rather to place the 3
cient Sitomagus here, than at Thetford ; alledging
moreover, that the numbers are better recon.

cil'd to this place, than to Thetford; and that

here are large and deep * ditches, which he +
conjectures to have been the work of the Ro- "Te
mans.] I know not whether I ſhould here

take notice, into what vain and groundleſs
hopes of finding gold at Norton hard by, King
Henry the eighth was drawn, by a credulous

kind of Avarice. But the diggings there ſpeak

tor me. Between the Gipping and Mulpett, on

a high hill, are the remains of an old Caſtle
call'd Hawghlee, in compaſs about two acres.
Some will have this to have been call'd Ha-
goneth-Caſtle, which belong'd to Ralph de Broc, Hz
and was in the year 1173. taken and demo- Ca-
liſh'd by Robert Earl of Leiceſter.

Upon the ſame river, are ſeen Stow and NMed-

ham, {mall Market-towns ; and not far from

the bank, Hemingſton, wherein Baldwin le Pettour
(obſerve the name) held Lands by Serjeanty (thus

nure,

upon the Breton. But this, in the Peutegerian| Lord the King of England, one Saltus, one Suffla-
Tables, is falſly call'd Comvetronum and Ad Co-] tus, and one Bumbulus ; or, as it is read in
vecin. A little way from hence to the eaſt, another place, he held it by a Saltus, a Suf-
Barons Went · is NettlefZed, from whence came the H/entworths,] flus, and Pettus: that is (it I apprehend ir
worth, whom King Henry the eighth honour'd with|aright) he was to dance, make a noiſe with his

See York-
ſhi re.

the dignity of Barons: and neighbour to it
is Offton, 1. e. the towa of Offa King of the

| cheeks, and to let a fart. Such was the plain

jolly mirth of thoſe days. It is alſo obſerv'd,

Mercians ; where, upon a chalky hill, lie theſ that the Mazour of Langhall belong'd to this

ruins of an old Calile, which they tell you
was built by King Offa, after he had villa-|merly Gippewich, [in Saxon Byperpic, I a little

Fee. Nearer the mouth, I ſaw Jpſwich, for- lola.

noufly cut off Ethelbert King of the Eaſt- City, and of a low ſituation; but as it were
Angles, and ſeiz'd his Kingdom. Below this, | the eye of this County. It has a pretty com-
Hadley, is Hadley, in Saxon Þeadlege, famous at this|modious harbour, has been fortify'd with a

day for making of woollen Cloaths, but men-
tion'd by our ancient Hiſtorians on account off very populous; having been adorn'd with
Guthrum, or Guthrum or Gormo, the Dane's, being buried | fourteen Churches, [twelve whereot do {till
Gormo the here. For when Alfred had brought him to|remain, with St. George's Chapel, and the,
Dane. ſuch terms, that he embrac'd Chriſtianity, and |ruins of a Pariſh-Church now decay'd, ) l and

was baptiz'd, he aſſign'd him this tract of the|alſo with tongs ſtately private buildings. I paſs

Eaſt- Angles, that he might (to uſe the words of|by the four

eligious houſes, now demoliſh'd :

Malms>.faith my Author) by à due Allegiance to the King, pro-|\ It is ſaid, they ſhew the ruins of fix or ſeven ;
Seld. MS. tett thoſe Countries as his own Inheritance, which| one whereof, viz. Chriſt-Church, is converted

det

he had before over-run with ravage and plun- into a manſion-houſe; another is employ'd for

a place of Judicature, with a Gaol, where the

From hence, the Breton runs into the Stour ;| Quarter-Seſſions are held for 7ſwich-Divilion ;

whoſe united ſtreams flowing not far from | and another is made a Free-{chool (with an

Bentley, Bentley, where the Talmaches, a famous and an- Hoſpital,) having alſo the conveniency of a
cient family, flouriſh'd a long time; do in a|very good Library.] I alſo paſs by the mag-

Arwerton, few miles run near Arwerton, formerly the ſeat |nificent College begun by Cardinal J#/olſey, a
of the famous family of the Bacons ; now ot|butcher's ſon, and born in this place; whoſe

the Parkers, who by the father are deſcended |vailt Thoughts were always fill'd with extrava-

from the Barons Morley, and by the mother|gant Projects and Deſigns. The Body Politick

from the Calthrops, a very eminent family. Then|of it (as I have been told) conſiſts of twelve

they flow into the Ocean; and the river Or-|Burgeſles (whom they call Portmen; ) and out

well or Gipping, joyning them juſt at the|of them two Bailiffs are annually choſen for

mouth, diſcharges it ſelf along with them. the chief Magiſtrates, and as many Juſtices out

This riſes in the very middle of the Coun-|of twenty-four more. As to it's Antiquity ; as

Wulpett, ty, out of two Springs, one near Wulpett, the far as my obſervation has carry'd me, we hear
other at a little Village call'd Gipping. Hulpett| nothing of the name, before the Daniſh Inva-

is a Market-town, and ſignifies in Latin Lu- ſion, which it ſufficiently felt. In the year of

porum foſſa, i. e. a den of Wolves, if we believe our Lord 991. the Danes plunder'd this place,
Neubrigenſis, who has patch'd up as formal af and the whole coaſt, with ſuch cruelty and

+ Vera nar. {tory about this place, as is the“ True Narration barbarity, that Siricius Archbiſhop of Canter-
ratio. of Lucian: Namely, how. two little green boys, bury, and the Nobility of England, thought
+ Ex Satyro-4 of the Satyr-kind, after a long and tedious|it moſt adviſable to purchaſe a Peace of them

rum genere,

wandering through ſubterraneous Caverns from with ten thouſand pounds. But for all that,

before

derivation of Mulpett, and the Britiſh Cidum dab.

an ancient Book expreſſes it,) for which he uus A meriy To
does Combretonium, in Welſh, a valley or low place|oblig'd every Chriſtmas-day to perform before our

' Largerſton,

ditch and rampire, has a f great trade, and is + See

* Being, C.
So ſaid,
nn, 1827.

OE WE RET ET cc

an 6
% \

nd 8 1 2 .
L991 es Are, 4 * *

145—

ot |

Waleton.

7 W ů W (is eat ft foo ww a dS 16 oo at © 21h

Orwell-har-
buur,

ober call
; it Ibredling,

14 Sculptoris
cureorum.

W Boutetort,

Debenham,

N Lethering-
* ham.

ale

5 T6

"SUFFOLK.

446

— OaTINS

Waleton.

Largerſton,

Orvwell-har-
= bur,

© * Others call

before nine years were at an end, they plun-
der'd this town a ſecond time: whereupon,
the Engliſh preſently engag'd them with great
reſolution ; but (as Henry of Huntingdon has
ir) by the cowardice of one fingle perſon, Turłil
by name, our men were put to flight, and the
victory as it were dropd out of our hands.
'Thus, do very ſmall Accidents give ſtrange
turns to the Events of war. In Edward the
Confeſſor's reign (as we find in Domeſday-
book) Queen Edeva had two parts of this town,
and Earl Guert a third; and there were in it
eight hundred Burgeſſes who paid Cuſtom to the King.
But when the Normans had poſleſs'd them-
ſelves of England, they built a Caſtle here ;
which Hugh Bigod held, for ſome time, againſt
Stephen the uſurping-King of England ; but at
laſt ſurrender'd it. Now it is ſo entirely gone,
that there is not left ſo much as the rubbiſh
of it. Some are of opinion, that it ſtood in
the adjoyning pariſh of Meſterſeld, where ap-
pear the remains of a Caſtle ; and tell you,
that this was alſo the ſite of old Gippwic. 1
fanſy, it was demoliſh'd, when Henry the ſe-
cond levell'd Waleton, a neighbouring Caſtle,
with the ground. For this was a harbour for
the Rebels; and here the three thouſand He-
mings landed, who were invited over by the
Nobility to aſſiſt againſt him, when he fell
into that unlucky deſign of making his ſon
Henry an equal ſharer with him in the Go-
vernment ; and when the young man (who
knew not how to ſtand ſo high without run-
ning headlong,) out of a furious defire of
reigning, declar'd a moſt unnatural war againſt
his own tather. Though theſe Caſtles are now
quite gone, the ſhore is very well defended
by a vaſt ridge (they call it Langerſton) which,
for about two miles, lies on the ſurface of the
ſea (as one words it,) not without great dan-
ger and terrour to Sailors. It is however of
uſe to the Fiſhermen, tor drying of their fiſh ;
and does alſo, in ſome meaſure, guard the ſpa-
cious harbour of Orwell. But as to Ipſwich it
ſelf, its trade, dependiag upon the ſea, hath
in this and the laſt age receiv'd ſo much da-
mage, that the number of their Ships is very
conſiderably diminiſh'd.l And thus much of
the ſouth-part of this County.

From hence a crooked ſhore (tor all this
caſtern-part lies upon the Sea) running north-
ward, preſently opens it ſelt to the little river
* Deben. It riſes near Rendleſbam, to which

# itTbredling, the Lord of the place H. Fitz-Otho, or the ſon

3
4
4

Boutetort.

4 Debenham,

© + Sculptoris of Otho F the Mint-maſter, procur'd the privi-
: cuncorum,

lege of a Market and Fair of Edward the firſt.
By his heirs, a conſiderable Eſtate came to
the Bouterorts, Lords of Wily in Worceſterſhire ;
and from them afterwards, in the reign of
Richard the 2d, to Frevil, Burnel, and others.
It is ſaid, that in digging here, about thirty
years ſince, there was found an ancient ſilver
Crown, weighing about ſixty ounces, which
was thought to belong to Redwald, or ſome
other King of the Eaſt-Angles ; but it was
ſold, and melted down.] From hence the river
Deben continues its courſe, and gives name to
Delenham a ſmall Market-town, which others
will have to be more rightly call'd Depenham ;
becauſe, the ſoil being moiſt and clayey, the
roads all round it are deep and troubleſom ;
tho the burrough it ſelf is clean. In this
Town, was the ſeat of the Gawdies, an ancient

and Knightly Family, from whom it hath

 [-thering.
= ham,

lately paſted by ſale, and is now the ſeat of
the Pitts. From thence, the river paſſeth, thro?
Letheringham, by a Priory founded there by

\ Nauntons, which Family came over with the
ave name to a manour in
, call'd to this day Naunton- Naunton-hall,

Conqueror, and
the neighbourh

»

ball. And in this Priory-Church (now uſed
tor the Parochial) are {ſeveral ſtately Monu-
ments erected to perpetuate the memory of the

Nauntons, Boviles, and Wingfields, &c. Then

the ſtream directs its courſe to MHickham, Wickham.

where was anciently a market, but it is now
loſt. The Town however is ſtill as big, as
_ Markets, and in it the Spiritual Courts
are holden for the Archdeacoury of Suffolk.
From thence it runs by Uford, formerly the
ſeat of Robert de Lord Earl of Suffolk ; and on
the oppoſite bank is Rendilis-ham, i. e. as Bede
interprets it, the home or manſion of Rendilus,
where Redwald King of the Eaſt-Angles com-
monly kept his Court. He was the firſt of
all that People, who was baptiz'd and receiv'd
Chriſtianiry ; but afterwards, being ſeduc'd by
his wife, he had (as Bede expreſſes it) in the
Jelf-ſame Church, one Altar 72

Chriſt, and another little Altar for the Sacrifices to
Devils. Suidhelmus alſo, King of the Eaſt-
Angles, was afterwards baptiz'd in this place
by Cedda the Biſhop.

From hence, the river Deben runs to H/o0d-
bridge, a little rown beautify'd with neat
buildings, where at certain ſet-times is the
Meeting for the Liberty of St. Etheldred ; and,
after a courſe of few miles, the River is re-
ceiv'd by the Sea at Bawdſey-haven,

Then the ſhore by little and little goes more
eaſterly, to the mouth of the river Ore ; which

the Religion of

Uford,

Rendilis-
ham,

Woedbridge,

B
runs by Framlingham, formerly a Caſtle of the Co.

Bigods (being given by King Henry the firſt Framling-

to Roger 12 ; | and preſently on the weſt- ſide ham.

it ſelf into a ſort of Lake.
beautiful Caſtle [of

with a rampire and

thereot it ſpreads
This hath been a 9-4
Saxon Work,] fortify'

two large ditches, and a wall of great thick- 4 A Ditch, C.
neſs with thirteen towers: within, it has Hath, C.

had very convenient Lodgings ; | moſt of which
are now pulled down ; and yet ſtill the |
looks more like a Caſtle, than the Ruins of one. |
From hence it was, that, in the year of our
Lord 1173. when the rebellious ſon of King
Henry the ſecond took up Arms againſt his
father, Robert Earl of Leiceſter with his Stipen-
diaries from Flanders, harraſs'd the Country all
round; [being invited thither by Hugh Bigod.
But Roger Bigod, the laſt of this Area & and
a man more turbulent than any of his Prede-
ceſſors, was forced to reſign the Caſtle to King
Edward the firſt ; and King Edward the ſe-
cond gave it to his half-brother Thomas of

Brotherton, from whom it deſcended to the

Mowbrays, and from them to the Howards Dukes
of Norfolk, who generally reſided here. | From
whence alſo it was, that in the year 1553.
Queen Mary enter'd upon the government,
notwithſtanding the violent oppoſition of Dud-
ley Earl of Northumberland againſt the daugh-
ters of King Henry the eighth. [But King
James the 1ſt granted this Caſtle to Thomas
Howard Earl of Suffolk, and then (Audley-1mn
being made his Seat) the glory of this place
was thereby eclipſed, and his Son Theophilus
Earl of Suffolk ſold it to Sir Robert Hitcham
Knight, who deviſed the ſame, with a con-
fiderable Eſtate in Framlingham, and Saxted,
to the Maſter and Fellows of Pembroke-hal/ in
Cambridge, for Charitable Uſes. But the chiefeſt
Ornament of this Town, is the Church, built
by the Mowbrays, and the Chancel, by the
Howards, wherein are ſeveral ſtately Monu-
ments of this noble Family. And adjoyning

Sir John Boynet Knight, now the ſeat of the

to it, are two Alms-houſes, one built by the
Maſter

” | -

3 - —

G6ã—'l „
22 —

2 9

vr K. COP

—ä————w‚5§ö»— > —
py ,
b * 3 *

Dr

— ˖ —̃ — —

1

. „1
% «.*4 «

_ i 2 FS ; —

— gal, and the Sea-man in the Straits of Gibral- when the Peace of England was diſturb'd with

Maſter and Fellows of Pembroke-hall, the other | moſt early note, of any town in this County.

ty;
by Thomas Milles, and both well endowed. | The | Bury (tho more conſiderable) having not its
Parrham. river goes next to Parrham, a little town, whoſe |reputation, till a long time after. * Fine

Barors Wil- Lord, William Hilloughby; had the dignity of lix the Burgundian, who reduced the Eaſt-
Joughby of 2 Baron confer'd on him by King Edward the] Angles (then about to fall from the Fai

Parrham.

th,
fixth ; and from thence, running by Glemham;|fix'd an Epiſcopal See in the year 630; —

which gave name to an ancient and noted fa- | his Succeſlors for many years preſided over the
Oreford; mily ; to Oreford, which takes its name from] whole kingdom of the Eaſt-Angles. But Biſus
it; it falls into the ſea, This was once a] the fourth from Felix, when by reaſon of old
large and populous town, fortify'd with a Ca-|age and a broken conſtitution, he found him-
{tle of reddiſh ſtone, which formerly belong'd | {elf unable to manage ſo large a Province, di-
to the Valcinies, and afterward to the Wik|vided it into two . One he kept in this
loughbies. But now it has reaſon to complain place, and fix'd the other at a little town
of the ingratitude of the Sea, which withdraws|call'd North-Elmham. [This Dunwich, Jam ſa-

+ So id, it ſelf by little and little, and ſ begins to envyſ tisfy d, is the ſame that the Saxon Annals call
ann. 1607, ir the advantage of a harbour. [It hath been | Domuc, and Bede Dommoc ; anſwerable to whi N

honour'd, of late, by giving the title of Earl, in King Alfred's tranſlation it is Dommoc-
to Edward Ruſlel (fon of Edward Ruſſel, cearren. The circumſtances make the conje-
fourth ſon of Francis Earl of Bedford,) who, in cture very probable ; for Alfhun, who is ſaid
conſideration of his moſt ſignal Services by Sea to have been bury'd there Anno 799, is like-
(particularly in the year 1692, when the Eng-|wiſe ſaid to have died at 6uSbemi, that is, Sud-
liſh Fleet, under his command, gave a total bury in this County. And where can we ima-
overthrow to that of the French ; ) was created |gin, the Biſhop ſhould be bury'd, but at his
by King William, Baron of Shingey, Viſcount own See, and in his own Church ? In another
Barfleur, and Earl of Orford.1 And this is allſ place of Bede, we meet with Dunmoc, which,
I have to ſay of Oreford, unleſs you pleaſe toſ as it is undoubtedly Dunwich, ſo it differs not
run over this ſhort paſſage of Ralph de Coggeſhal,|much from Domuc or Dommoc. And it is pro-
an ancient Writer. Jn the time of Henry the firſt, bable, that this place is yet more ancient;
when Bartholomew de Glanvile was Governor the inaſmuch as Roman Coins, among others, are
Caſtle of Oreford, ſome fiſhermen happen d to catch] ſometimes found here; from whence we may
a wild man in their nets. All the parts of his|probably infer, that it was a ſtation of that
* body reſembled thoſe of a man; he had hair on his People.] In the © reign of William the firſt, it
+ Pineatam, Veud, and a long picked beard; and, about the had two hundred and thirty-ſix Burgeſſes and one
breaſt, was exceeding hairy and rough. But at length hundred Poor : it was valued at fifty pounds, and

he made his eſcape 22 into the Sea, and was fixty thouſand | herrings by gift: So we read in T- Hl

that the common Aſſer- Domeſday- book. In the i laſt age, it was very 7 *

duc d in any part of nature, is alſo in the ſea ; and reign of Henry the ſecond, it was (as William 1697,

never ſeen more.
tion may be very true, that Whatever is pro-|populous, and fam'd for its Mint; and in the

that not at all fabulous, which Pliny has writ- of Newburrow has told us) a famous village, well
ten about the Triton on the coaſts of Portu-|ſtor'd with riches of all forts. At which time,

ter. freſh commotions, it was fortify'd, on purpoſe
[Oppoſite to Oreford, on the weſt-ſide of ajto awe Robert Earl of Leiceſter, who inſulted
Butley, ſmall river, ſtands Butley, where a Priory was and over-ran all thoſe parts; ſand there is
founded by Ralph Glanvile Chief Juſtice ot Eng- ſtill a ſquare ditch-bank, or town-wall.] But
land; and in the Church belonging thereto, now by a private pique of Nature (which has
was inter'd Michael de la Pole the third of|ſet no fix'd bounds to the incurſions of the
that name who was Lord Mingfield and Earl of Sea) the greateſt part of it is ſwept away by
Suffolk, and was {lain in the battel at. Agin- Court. ¶ the violence of the waves; and, the Biſhops
Not much higher, in a ſafe and pleaſant having many years ago transfer'd their See to
ſituation, within the Vale of Slaughden, where|another place, it lies in ſolitude. and deſolation.
the Sea beats upon it on the eaſt, and the Upon enquiry after the ſtate of this place,
Aldburgh, River on the welt, lies Alaburgh, which figni-|Sir Henry Spelman (as we find by a poſthumous
fies an ancient Burrough, or, as others will have] Paper) was inform'd by one of the inhabi-
it, a burrough upon the river Ald. It is a har-|tants, that by report there had been fifty
bour pretty commodious for ſailors and fiſher-|Churches in Durwich, and that the foundations
men ; by which means the 2 is populous, and Church-yards of St. Michael, St. Mary, St.
and much favour'd by the Sea, which is a] Martin, and St. John's were then to be ſeen,
little unkind to other towns upon this coaſt. beſides St. Peter and St. Nicholas, with a Chapel.
Hard by, when in the year 1555. all the corn] But what number ſoever they formerly had,
+ Suffocate. throughout England was f blaſted, the Inha-|the Sea hath gained ſo much hereabouts, that
bitants tell you, that in the beginning of Au- all the Churches are now ſwallow'd up, ex-
tumn there grew Peaſe, miraculouſly, among cept AlL Saint,; one, particularly, having fallen
Peaſe grow- 4 . ® 4 © * 8
ing out of the the rocks, without any earth about them, andſ into the Sea, within theſe fey years. |:
. BY that they relievd the dearth in thoſe parts.] A little higher, the river BI diſcharges it
But the more thinking people affirm, that] ſelf into the Sea; upon whoſe bank I {aw a

Pulſe caſt upon the ſhore by ſhipwreck, us'd | ſmall town call'd Blithborow, memorable only py;cyhors

to grow there now and then; and ſo the mi-|for the burying-place of the Chriſtian King
racle is loſt. But that ſuch as theſe grew| Auna, whom Penda the Mercian ſlew in a
every year among the pebbles on the coaſt of pitch'd battle. ¶ For this place, how mean ſo-
Kent, we have obſerv'd before; [and a later|ever at preſent, ſeems to have been very an-
Writer ſaith, that at the ſouth-part of the|cient; as a teſtimony of which, not many
Meer-Shingle, there ſtill come-up yearly certain| years ago there were ſeveral Roman Urns dug-
coarſe grey Peaſe, and very good Coleworts, up among old buildings; and (beſides the ter-
out of the ſtony heaps. | | mination burh, which is one mark of antiquity)

From hence, keeping along the ſhore, at] in the Saxon and following ages, it was of
Dunwich, ten miles diſtance we meet with Durwich, in] good note, as were moſt other places that the
Fo Saxon Dunmoc, mention'd by Bede, [and of Romans had left. Which appears, in part,

trom

1 8 "Wir . *
TRY. oe DET iISS
_

*
$5. EI wn

8 9 9 * — * «oath . a, MN V * — : 5 x et
oa " | , Nen P 9
rr —

a da
4 - 2M, * wy — * * 2 * ** 1 FY
5 * * 1 1 1 1 * L

{
f
|
|
{
|

Regilt, Mo-
1 de Sib-

: N tuls

1 FExtenſo Pro-
, mort.

| ' Eaſtonneſle.

Lib. 3. De
Nat, Deor.

Wingheld

Phelipps.

Huntingkel

Hexenin;
bam.

Haleſwort

a,

WW

Little Ou
and Wave
ey, riy,

Euſton,

eee eee

449

SUFFOLK.

from its having the Gaol for the diviſion of
Beckles ; an evidence that the Seſſions have been
formerly kept here. | The Church became
eminent for a College of Prebendaries founded
by Henry the firſt, who granted it to the
Canons of St. Ofith. It has a market by the
favour of John Lord C/avering ; to whom King
. Edward the ſecond granted that Privilege,
Well, MY Kith a Fair. He was poſleſs'd of a very |
nalt. de Sib- WIT a lr. C was poets Ot a very large
ton. eſtate in thoſe parts; as deſcended from the
daughter and heir of William de Caſſineto or
Cheney, Who held the Barony of Horsford in the
County of Norfolk, and built a ſmall Mona-
ſtery at Sibton.
Here, the 3 Eafton-neſs ſhoots a
great way into the Sea Eaſtward, ſo that it is
look'd upon [by ſome] to be further eaſt, than
any other part oft Britain ; [ but the Scamen
tell you, that the moſt Eaſterly-part is at
Loweſtoft. By Ptolemy, Eafton-neſs is call'd
EBN, or Extenſion: and, to put it beyond all
doubt, that this is the ſame with our Eaſton,
Eyſteney is the ſame in. Britiſh, that *Box is
in Greek, and Extenſio in Latin; tho”, indeed,
the name might as probably be deriv'd from
our own language, with regard to the eaſterly
ſituation of the place. On the ſouth-part of
this Promontory, Southwold lies in a plain, low
and open, and expos'd to the Sea ; which the
convenience of the harbour, made by the river
Blith's emptying it ſelf there, has render'd a
pretty populous town. At high-water, it is
lo encompaſs'd with the Sea, that you would
take it tor an Ifland, and wonder that it is
not all overflow'd. Which brings to my mind
Lib. z. De that paſſage of Cicero; What ſhall we ſay of
Nat, Deor. the Tides in Spain and Britain, and their ebbing
and flowing at ſet-times ? without a God they can-
not be; a God, who hath ſet bounds to the ſea.
More inward, we fee H/ingfield (with its half-
ruinated Caſtle) which gave both name and

0 Ken
. „ 188
al
ha ad

1

{ Fxterſo Pro-
E mort.
be Eaſtonneſſe.

err n 989 ** :

OR RS hv

OR TI OE

” 5
A

Wingheld,

1

[great quantities of Fruit-trees of ſeveral ſorts,
with artificial fountains, a Canal, a pleaſant '
Grove, a large Warren, Cc. It gave the title
of Earl to Henry Fitz-Roy, created Auguſt 16.
1672. Baron of Sudbury, Viſcount Ipſwich, and
Earl of Euſton, upon his marriage with the
only daughter of the Earl of Arlington ; and
the ſame perſon was afterwards, Sept. 1 1. 1675.
created Duke of Grafton.
Upon Ouſe alſo, another town is Downham, Downham.
which, with the neighbourhood, hath ſuffer'd
greatly, and had vaſt quantities of Land cover'd, Philoſ. Tran ſ.
by the blowing-in of ſands, in an incredi- N. 37.
ble manner, and by their reſting there. And
near it, is Brandon, from which place the Dukes Brandon.
of Hamilton take alſo the title of Duke of
Brandon, which was confet'd on James, the
late Duke, by her Majeſty Queen Anne.
Upon Waveney, which runs eaſtward, we firſt
meet with Hoxon, formerly Hegilſdon, made fa-
mous by the martyrdom of King Edmund. „f Kide Ed.
For there, this moſt Chriſtian King, becauſe mand.”
he would not renounce Chriſt, was by the moſt
inhuman Danes (to uſe the words of Abbo)
bound to a tree, and had his body all over mangled
with arrows. And they, to polls the pain and tor-
ture, did, with ſhowers of arrows, make wound upon
wound, till the darts gave place to one another. And
as a middle-ag'd Poet has ſung of him:

Hoxon.
Martyrdom

Jam loca vulneribus deſunt, nec dum furioſis
Tela, ſed hyberna grandine plura volant.

Now wounds repeated left no room for
new,
Yet impious foes ſtill more relentleſs
rew,.
And ſtill like winter-hail their pointed
arrows flew.

In which place was afterwards a very beau-

ſeat to a numerous family in thoſe parts, fa-
mous for their Knighthood and Antiquity.
And Dunningten, which boaſts of its Lord,
John Phelipps, tather of that William, who mar-
ry'd the daughter and heir of Baron Bardolph,
and whole daughter and heir was marry'd to
John Viſcount Beaumont. But now, it is the
E leat of the ancient family of the Royſes. Not
= Huntingheld: far from hence, is Huntingfield, which, in the
reign of Edward the third, had a noted Baron
of that name: and near this, Heveningham,
the ſeat of the knightly family de Heveningham,
which is exceeding ancient, [but never pro-
ſper'd (as the obſervation hath run) ſince one
of them was upon the Jury of King Charles
the firſt. The family is now extinct, and the
Eſtate paſs'd, by fale, to another hand.] Ar
a little diſtance from thence, is Haleſworth, for-
merly Healſworda, an ancient town of the Ar-
gentons, and afterwards of the Alingtons, [by
whom it hath been lately ſold ; l and tor whic

Richard Argenton procur'd the Privilege of a
Market, ot King Henry the third.

On the north-part (as hath been already
ſaid) two little rivers, namely, Ouſe the leſs,
and Waveney, divide this County from Norfolk.
They both riſe out of a marſhy ground about
Lophamford, very near one to the other ; and
run quite contrary Ways, With creeks full of
ſhallow fords. On this ſide of the Ouſe (which
goes weſtward) there is nothing memorable,
but Euſton, formerly belonging to a family of
that name. It is ſeated on a flat, and in a
fair pleaſant Champian Country ; which indu-
ced the Earl of Arlington to raiſe a noble
Structure there, call'd by the name of Euſton-

Phelipps.

„ a * ace * 9 ä * ; N 2 —_—
rr „ W

Hevening-
bam.

Haleſworth.

Little Ouſe,
and Waven-
ey, riy,

; WWWWWWWGWWGGGGG RI TIT Ive „„ 6— . ng
E - 1 = LES 42 b "oy A N þ K * A 9 k * 2 2 9 * 0
x l N 17 * 8 — bf — th. + 4 9 1 ix * +. "Er 24 Fe 7

tiful ſeat of the Biſhops of Norwich, till they
exchang'd it for the Monaſtery of St. BenediZ2.

In the neighbourhood, at Brome, the Knightly

family of Cornwalleys f dwelt a long time; of Cornwalleys,
which, John was Steward of the Houſhold tof _
King Edward the ſixth : and Thomas his ſon,
for his great wiſdom and fidelity, was made
Privy-Councellor to Queen Mary, and Con-

troller of her Houſhold ; [and Frederick his
grandſon, for his ſignal ſervices to King Charles

the firſt, was advanced to the dignity of a

Baron, by the title of Lord Cornwallis of Eye.

For, | below Brome is Eay, [or Eye,] that is, Eay,

the Mand, becauſe it is water'd on all ſides ;

where are ſeen the rubbiſh, ruins, and the
decaying walls of a Monaſtery dedicated to Book of I-
St. Peter, and of an old Caſtle which belong'd quifitions,
to Robert Mallet a Norman Baron. But when |
he was depriv'd of his dignity under Henry

the firſt, for ſiding with Robert Duke of Nor-

mandy againſt that King, this Honour was
beſtow'd upon Stephen, Count of Bologne ; who
(afterwards uſurping the Crown of England,)

left it to his ſon William Earl of Muren. But

after he had loſt his life in the Expedition of

Tholoſe, the Kings kept it in their own hands,

till Richard the firſt gave it to Henry the fifth

of that name, Duke of Brabant and Lorain,

with the grandchild of King Stephen by a
daughter (who had been a Nun.) A long

time after, when it return'd to the Kings

of England, Edward the third (as I have heard)

gave it to Robert de Uford Earl of Suffolk. Nor

muſt we paſs by Bedingfield in the neighbour-Bedingfeld.

hood, which gave name to a famous and an-
cient family, that receiv'd much honour by the

ball; adorn'd with a large Nurſery containing

heir of the Family of Tudenham. From thence,
41 along

„ 88 * Ah ä ä

451

—

TCENI

along by Flixton, for Felixton (lo nam'd, among

Flixton, 1
many other places in this County, from Felix
the firſt Biſhop) the river H/aveney runs to
Bungey. Bunge), and almoſt encompaſſes it. Here Hugh

Bigod, when the ſeditious Barons ſet all Eng-
land in a Flame, fortify'd a Caſtle; to the
ſtrength whereof Nature very much contribu-
ted. Ot which he was wont to boaſt, as if
it were impregnable,

Were I in my Caſtle of Bungey
Upon the River of Waveney,
I would ne care for the King of Cotkeney.

Notwithſtanding which, he was afterwards
forced to compound with Henry the ſecond,
by a great ſum of money and hoſtages, to ſave

| it from being demoliſh'd. Next, not far
Mettingham. from the banks, we meet with Mettingham,
where, on a plain, a ſquare Caſtle with a Col-
lege in it was built by the Lord of the place,
John, ſirnam'd de Norwich; whoſe daughter,
afterwards heir of the family, was marry d to
Robert de Ufford Earl of Suffolk, to whom ſhe

brought a fair eſtate.

Now the H/aveney drawing nearer the Ocean,
while it tries in vain to break a double paſlage
into it ( one, with the river Tare, the other
through the lake Luthing,) makes a pretty large
Peninſula, call'd by ſome Lovingland, but by

Luthingland. others more truly Luthingland; from that long
and ſpacious lake Luthing; which, beginning
at the Sea- ſide, empties it ſelf into the river
Tare. At the entrance into this, Leſtoffe, a lit-
tle town, hangs (as it were) over the Sea
and, at the other end of it, is Gorlſton, where
I ſaw the Tower of a ſmall ruinated religious
Houſe, which is of ſome uſe to the Sea-men.
Somerley, More inward, upon the Tare, there is Somerley,
formerly (as I was told) the ſeat of the Fitz-

Osberts, trom whom it came to the knightly and

famous family of the Jerneganes, [then to the

Garniſhes, and from them to the Allen.] Higher

up, where the Tare and WVaveney joyn, ſtood
Crobergburg, i. e. (as Bede interprets it) the City

Cnoberi urbs. of Cnoberus: we call it at this day Burghcaftell.
Hhich (as Bede has it) by the vicinity of woods

and ſea, was a very pleaſant Caſtle, wherein a Mo-

naſtery was built by Furſzus the Scot. By his
perſwaſions, Sigebert King of the Eaſt-Saxons,

was induced to quit the Throne, and betake

himſelf to a Monaſtick life ; and afterwards,

being drawn againſt his will out of this Mo-

naſtery [as is ſaid, to head his own men in

battel againſt the Mercians, he was cut off

Una cum || with all his company. [But Thomas Elienfis
mw Bened. names Bury or Betricheſuorde, as the place, in
3 * which Sigebert betook himſelf to a Monaſtick
lite. And the ſame appears, not only by the

* Vol. 1. p. * Monaſticon, and Caius's f Antiquities of Cam-
17. 24 bridge, but alſo by ſeveral Manuſcript teſtimo-
T nies collected by the learned Dr. Battley. They
have a tradition, that the Monaſtery there was

afterwards inhabited by Jews ; and an old way

Jews way. leading to the entrance, call'd the Jews-way,
may ſeem to give it ſome colour of Truth.)

Now there is nothing in the place but broken

walls, almoſt ſquare, built of flints and Bri-

tiſh brick (a). Ir is quite overgrown with

Le ſtoſſe.

— ———

briars and thorns; amongſt which the eee,
and then dig-up Roman Coins: ſo 1. it
ſeems to have been one of thoſe Forts which
the Romans built upon the river Garienis
againſt the Saxon-Piracies ; or rather indeed,
the very Garianonuum, where the Stablefian horſe
had their ſtation ; {if the rivers and marſhy
pay round it may be ſuppos'd fo fit to

x a ſtation in. Ralph, the ſon of Roger de
Burgh, held this caſtle by Sergeanty, and after
him Gilbert de Weſeham ; but at laſt, when it
was ſurrender'd into the hands of Henry the
third, he (April 20. in the 2oth year of his
reign) gave it, with all the appurtenances, to
the Monaſtery of 1 i

Suffolk hath had Earls and Dukes, of ſeve- Bak ui
ral Families. There are ſome modern Authors, H.
who tell us that the Glanvils were formerly
honour'd with that title: but ſince they build
upon no ſure authority, f and the miſtake is+ Quiz ey
alſo obvious, nor does any thing like it ap- Obi.
pear in the publick Records; they muſt ex-
cuſe me if I ſuſpend my aſſent, till they offer
ſome better Arguments for my Conviction. Not
but I own, the family of the Glanvils made
a "y great figure in theſe parts. Burt be-
fore Edward the third's time, I could never
yet find it vouch'd by good authority, that any
one was honour'd wh the title of Earl of this
County. Thar King made Robert de Uford (a
perſon fam'd for great Exploits both at home and
abroad, and ſon of Robert, Steward of the King's
houſe under Edward the 2d, by Cecilia de Valoniis
Lady of Orford) Earl of Suffolk. To him ſuc-
ceeded his ſon Milliam, whoſe four ſons were
ſnarch'd away by untimely deaths during his
life ; and himſelf, as he was going to report
a Reſolution of the Commons in Parliament, I Sententir,
fell down dead. Robert Willoughby, Roger
Lord of Scales, and Henry de Ferrariis of Groo-
by, as next heirs at Law, divided the eſtate. Irq. 5
And Richard the ſecond advanced Michael de Rich. 2.
la Pole, from a Merchant, to this honour, and x «1 c
to the dignity of Lord Chancellor of England. Gg
Who (as Thomas Walſingham tells us) was Can.,
better vers'd in merchandiſe (as a Merchant himſelj, Waling'nn,
and the ſon of a Merchaat,) than in martial affairs. 357 ag
For he was ſon of William de la Pole, the firſt Felt. 32
Mayor of Kingſton upon Hull, who, on account |
of his great wealth, had the dignity of a Baue- See = 4
ret confer d upon him by Edward the third. beer
But wanting a mind fit to bear ſuch a flow of p. 304,
proſperity, he was forced to quit his Country, his Disse.
and dy'd in baniſhment. However, his being , P. 45,
a Merchant does by no means detra& from 58,55
his honour: for who knows not, that even the
ſons of Noblemen have been Merchants? Nor
will 1 deny, that he was nobly deſcended, tho'
a Merchant. Michael his ſon being reſtor'd,
had a ſon Michael, ſlain in the battel of A-
gincourt ; and another, Milliam, whom Henry
the ſixth, from Earl of Suffolk, firſt advanced
to be Marquiſs of Suffolk, to him and the heirs-
male of his body ; that he aud the heirs-male of
his body, on the Coronation-day of the Kings of
England, do carry a golden Verge with a dove on the
top of it; and ſuch another Verge of Ivory at the
Coronation of the Queens of England. Afterwards,

—

(a) Theſe Bricks are nigh a foot and half in length, and almoſt a foot in breadth; and ſo do agree pretty

exactly with the account of Roman Bricks, given by
Caſtle looking to the eaſt, remains ſtill in its full len

Vitruvius, and (after him) by Pliny, The wall of the
gth, being about 220 yards; the height about 17 Or 18

foot, with 4 round towers, each about 14 foot diameter, and of equal height with the wail.

: Theſe towers are joyn'd with the wall : but yet jut out ſo far beyond it, that only a ſmall part of the pe-
riphery is within: they are not hollow within, but ſolid. At north and ſouth, are two other walls, now not
above one hundred and twenty yards in length, the reſt being laid in rubbiſh; as is alſo the weſt-wall towards
the river, if there ever was 1 For it is poſſible, the ſteepneſs of the hill, and a moraſs below, next

the river, might be thought a

cient ſecurity on that fide,

| he

_—

LOT GR AL OE REY

LE = bf
Ss 36

PC

*
e
9 .

Nie

INI SE — cadet.

*Noſtre
monetæ.

+ Atratuſ
inte rſuit.

|| Sudore

Britannic

+ oa a> a Wc od too On on wa. Oh

wo

4 *
J. > 24. 4 Sura. . 1 : as >

& W
ene

a4 MCs. My SY SEM

"SUFFOLK

— 2 A tit

. .
— Wo

Noſtræ
monetæ.

+ Atratuſque
interſuit,

|| Sudore
Britannico,

he advanc'd the ſame perſon, for his great|to whom ſucceeded Geage his brother, and

merits, to the honour and title of Duke of Suf-| then Henry, brother to the two laſt ; whoſe ſon,
folk. And indeed he was a perſon truly great | Henry, created Earl of Bindon and Baron of
and eminent. For when his father and three|Cheſterford in the life-time of his father, be-
brothers had loſt their lives for their Country, came alſo Earl of Suffolk, and was ſucceeded
in the French wars; he (as we read in theſ by Charles, his ſon and heir, the preſent Earl.1

Parliament-Rolls of the 28th of Henry the

ſixth) | ww thirty-tour whole years in the ſame
0

war.
came home; once he was taken, while but a

Knight, and pay'd twenty thouſand pounds

r ſeventeen years together, he never

There are in this County 575 Pariſhes.

þ

* ſterling for his ranſom. Fifteen years he was More rare Plants growing wild in Suffolk.

Privy-Councellor ; and Knight of the Garter,

thirty. By this means, as he gain'd the entire] Abrotanum campeſtre C. B. Park. Ger. Arte-

favour of his Prince, ſo did he raiſe the envy

miſia tenuifolia S. leptophyllos, aliis Abrota-

of the people; and ſo, for ſome flight miſde-|num ſylveſtre. J. B. Wild Sorhermuood or

meanours, and thoſe too not plainly prov'd

leav d Mugwort. At a place cal d Elden in 75

upon him, he was baniſh'd, and, in his paſ- folk, rwelve miles beyond New-market in the way to-

ſage into France, was intercepted by his ene-
mies, and beheaded. He left a ſon, John, who
marry'd Edward the fourth's ſiſter, and had
by her John Earl of Lincoln. This Earl John,
being declar'd heir apparent to the Crown b
Richard the third, could not bridle his ambi-
tion, but preſently broke out againſt King
Henry the ſeventh, to his own deſtruction (for
he was quickly cut off in the Civil war;) and
to his father's ruin alſo, who dy'd of grief;
and laſtly, to the ruin of the whole family,
which expir'd with him. For his brother Ed-
mund, ſtil d Earl of Suffolk, making his eſcape
into Flanders, began a Rebellion againſt King
Henry the ſeventh ; who, better pleas'd with
repentance than puniſhment, had before par-
don'd him for ſome very heinous Crimes. But
a little after, he was by Philip of 3 ** Duke
of Burgundy (againſt the Laws of Hoſpitality,
as the Cry then run) deliver'd up to Henry,
who ſolemnly promis'd him his lite, but put
him in priſon. Henry the eighth, not think-
ing himſelf oblig'd by this promiſe of his fa-
ther, when he had thoughts of going for France,
cut him off, for fear of Inſurrections in his
abſence. But Richard his younger brother, li-
ving under baniſnment in France, us'd the ti-
tle of Duke of Suftolk ; who was the laſt male
of the family that I know of, and dy'd bravely
in the midſt of the enemy's troops anno 1524,
in the battel of Pavia, wherein Francis the firſt,
King of France, was taken priſoner. In re-
ſpect to his great Valour, his very enemy the
Duke of Bourbon beſtow'd on him a ſplendid

wards Lynne, on the balks of the Corn-fields, and
by the way-fides abundantly for a mile in length and
breadth. Alſo a mile from Barton-mills, where a
mark ſtandeth in the way to Lynne to direct paſſen-

Y|gers, and among the Furze-buſhes under the hill

plentifully. Though this Plant be very common be-
ond Seas, yet hitherto I have not heard of any other
place in England where it grows ſpontaneouſly.
Agrifolium baccis luteis nondum deſcriptum
P. B. Tellow-berried Holly. At Wiſton in this Coun-
ty not far from Buers.
Carduus tomentoſus Corona fratrum Park,
eriocephalus Ger. Whoolly-headed ThifFle. Near
Clare in Suffolk plentifully. See the Snonymes in
Cambridge-Catalogue.
Caucalis tenuifolia floſculis ſubrubentibus
Hiſt. noſt. arvenſis echinata parvo flore C. B.
Fine-leav'd baftard-Parſley with a ſmail purpliſh
flower. Amongſt the Corn here at Notley, and in
many ot her places. |
Crithmum chryſanthemum Park. Ger. mariti-
mum flore Aſteris Attici C. B. marinum ter-
tium Matthioli, flore luteo Buphthalmi J. B.
N Sampire. On the bank of the rivet
juſt above Fulbridge at Maldon in Eſſex.
Gramen dactylon latiore folio C. B. Iſchæ-
mon ſylveſtre latiore folio Park. Plentiſully in
; the plowed-fields about Elden aforeſaid.
Lychais viſcoſa flore muſcoſo C. B. Seſamoides
Salamanticum magnum Ger. Muſcipula Salman-
tica major Park. Muſcipula muſcoſo flore ſeu
Ocymoides Belliforme J. B. Spaniſh Catchfly. In
and about the gravel-pits on the north-fide of New-
market town : alſo by the way-fides all along from

Funeral, f and was himſelf one of the Mourn-| Barton-mils to Thetford in Norfolk.

ers. Afterwards, King Henry the eighth con-| Lychnis noctiflora C. B. Park. Ocymoides
fer'd the title of Duke of Suffolk upon Charles] non ſpecioſum J. B. Night-flowering Campicn. A-
Brandon, to whom he had given Mary his ſi-|mong corn about Saxmundham, and between the two
ſter (widow of Lewis the twelfth, King of Windmills and Warren-lodge at Mewel.

France) in marriage. He was ſucceeded by
his young ſon Henry, and Henry by his bro-
ther Charles ; but both dying of the || Sweating-
ſickneſs in the year 1551, Edward the fixth

Militaris Aizoides Ger. Stratiotes ſ. Mili-
taris Aizoides Park. Aloe paluſtris C. B. Ai-
zoon paluſtre ſive Aloe paluſt. J. B. The Freſh-
water-Soldier or Water-Aloe. In the lake in Lo-

dignify'd Henry Grey Marquiſs of Dorcheſter |ving-land. : 5
(who had marry'd Frances their ſiſter) with] Piſum marinum Ger. aliud maritimum Pri-

that title. But he did not enjoy it long, be-

tannicum Park. Our Engliſh Sea-peaſe. On the

fore he was beheaded by Queen Mary, for en-|/tone-baich between Orford and Alburgh cal d the
deavouring to advance his daughter to the | Shingle, eſpecially on the further end toward Oi ford a-
Throne; and was the laſt Duke of Suffolk. From | bundantly. Geſner. lib. de Aquatil. 4. p. 256.
that time the title of Suffolk lay dead, till |from the Letters of Dr. Key; and from bim Jo.
t very lately King James ſthe firſt, in the firſt|Stow in his Chronicle tells us, That in a great dearth
year of his reign, created Thomas Lord How- | which happen d in the year 1555, the poor people in
ard of Walden ( ſecond ſon of Thomas Howard|this part of the Country, maintain'd themſelves and
Duke of Norfolk) Earl of Suffolk ; whom, |their children with theſe Peaſe, which, ſaith he, to
for his approv'd fidelity and valour, he had |a miracle ſprung up in the Autumn, among the bare
before made Lord Chamberlain. [Thomas was|/tones, no earth being intermix d, of their own ac-
ſucceeded by his ſon and heir Theophilus, who ſcord, and bore fruit ſufficient for thouſands of peo-
in his father's life-time bore the title of Lord ple. That theſe Peaſe did then ſpring up miracu-
Howard of Walden; and dying June 3. 1640, [louſly for the relief of the poor, I believe nut : that
left. this honour to James his ſon and heir; [there might be then, Providence Jo ordering it, an

tra-

6„1%ͤ. . — —— —

. n EE I EEO
—
= — — Me

— —

— — W . # #
a b . p g Dh —
n mm oath. = . * 1 . — pf 2 —

—
=
= * —
— 3
— — ——

ICE

NL;

extraordinary crop of them, I readily grant. Vet do
they not grow among the bare ſtones : but ſpread their
roots in the ſand below the ſtones, wherewith there
may alſo perhaps be ſome ouze mixt, and are nou-
riſh'd by the Sea-water penetrating the ſands, as are
many other maritime plants. Neither did they owe
their original to Shipwracks or Peaſe caſt out of Ships,
as Camden hints to be the opinion of the wiſer ; but
without doubt ſprung up at firſt ſpontaneouſly, they
heing to be found in ſeveral the like places about En-
gland. See Kent and Suſſex.

Sium alterum Oluſatri facie Ad. Lob. Ger.
Emac. majus alterum anguſtifolium Park. Eru-
cæ tolio. C. B. q. Cicuta aquatica Geſneri J. B.
Long-lead d Water-Hemlock or Parſnep. In the lake
of Loving-land.

Tritolium cum glomerulis ad caulium nodos
rotundis. Knotted Trefoil with round heads. 1
found this in gravelly places about Saxmundbam in
this County.

Tritolium floſculis albis, in glomerulis ob-
longis aſperis, cauliculis proxime adnatis. An
Trifolium rectum flore glomerato cum ungui-
culis J. B? White-flower'd knotted Trefoil with
oblong rough heads. At New-market, where the

Seſamoides Salamanticum grows, and in other pla-

Ces,

Trifolium cochleatum modiolis ſpinoſis. Hedge-
hog Trefoil with rundles reſembling a thin ſegment of
a cone, At Orford in Suffolk on the Sea-bank cloſe
by the Key plentifully.

Veronica erecta, foliis laciniatis. Alſine fo-
liis hederaceis Rutz modo diviſis Lob. recta tri-
phyllos five laciniata Park. triphyllos cærulea
C. HB. recta Ger. folio profunde edo, flore pur-
pureo ſeu violaceo J. B. Upright Speedwell with
divided leaves. At Mewell between the two Wind-
mills and the Warren-lodge : And in the gravel-pits
two miles beyond Barton-mills on the ridge of a
hill where a ſmall cart-way croſſeth the road to Lynne,
and in the graſs thereabout plentifully.

Urtica Romana Ger. Park. Romana ſeu mas
cum globulis J. B. urens, pilulas ferens, prima
Dioſcoridis, ſemine lini C. B. Common Roman
Nettle. About Aldburgh, and elſewhere on the Sea-
coaſt plentifully.

Sedum minimum non acre flore albo. Sal!
mild white-flower'd —_— In the more bar-
ren pony all along between Yarmouth and Done-
wich. This differs ſpecifically from the common
CI and not in the colour of the flouer
only.

_ — —

NORTH-FOLX or NORFOLK.

NORFOLK, commonly North-
folk, that is, if you expreſs it
in Latin, Borealis populus, or
the Northern People, [ (from
its northern ſituation, with re-
o gard to the reſt of the Eaſt-
Angles ; )\ is the entire North-

Survey of this his Native Country; out of
; which many things, very curious and remarka-
ble, are inſerted in this preſent Work.] But,
even among the common people you ſhall meer
with many, who (as one expreiſes it) it no
quarrel offers, are able to pick one out of the
: quirks and niceties of the Law. And, for the

bound of Suftolk, trom which it is divided b {preventing of the great and frequent Conten-
the two little rivers I mention'd, Ouſe the leſs, tions that might enſue there upon, and the in-
and H/averey, running contrary ways. On the; conveniencies of too many Attorneys, a ſpecial

eaſt and north ſides, the German Ocean, |

abounding with Fiſh, beats violently 2 the|
P

ſhore; on the welt, Ouſe the Greater, ſporting
it ſelf with many turnings and windings, parts
it from Cambridgeſhire. The County is large,
and almoſt all Champian, except in ſome pla-
ces, Where there riſe gentle hills. It is very
rich, and well ſtor'd with flocks of ſheep ; and
abounds with Conies. It has great numbers
of populous villages ( for beſides twenty-ſeven
Market-towns, it has ſix hundred twenty-five
Country-towns and villages, ſor, according to
the Book of Rates, thirty-two markets, and
ſeven hundred and eleven villages ;)1 and is alſo
well water'd, and does not want wood. The
ſoil is aifterent, according to the ſeveral quar-
ters; in ſome places, it is fat, luſcious, and
moiſt, as in Merſbland and Hegg; in others,
eſpecially to the weſt, it 1s poor, lean, and ſan-
dy; and in others, clayey and chalky. But
(to follow the directions of Varro) the good-
neſs of the ſoil may be gather'd from hence,
that the inhabitants are of a bright clear com-
plexion ; not to mention their ſharpneſs of wit,
and ſingular ſagacity in the ſtudy of our Com-
mon-Law. So that it is at preſent, and al-

quity.

But leſt, while I conſult brevity, I ſufter my

; ſelf to be drawn into digreſſions; I will pals

trom theſe, to the places themſelves : and,
beginning at the ſouth- ſide, will take a ſhort
view of ſuch as are of greateſt note and anti-

Upon Ouſe the leſs, where the little river Thet

joyns it out of Suffolk, is ſeated, in a low ground,
the ancient City Sitomagus, mention'd by # See Wi
Antoninus, and corruptly nam'd in the frag-pet in .

ments of an old Table, Simomagus, and Sino-!%

conſider, whether there is not ſomething in
theſe names, which implies its being the Ca-
pital city of the Leni. It we take Sinomagus
to be the right Reading, Ptolemy's Simeni
(for ſo he names the people of thoſe parts) will
tavour it : and Sinomagus comes nearer the name
Leni, eſpecially if we may ſuppoſe the 1 caſt
away, as in Hiſpani, Spani. Beſides, Czlar's

opinion ſhould be read Leni, Regni,) farther

ways has been reputed, the moſt fruitful Nur-
ſery of Lawyers. [(Particularly, it produced in
the laſt age the great Sir Henry Spelman, a moſt
zealous and ſucceſsful Advocate of the Rights
of Church and Clergy ; from whom Mr. Speed
acknowledges he receivd his deſcription of

confirms this conjecture. ] It is now call'd Thet-
ford, and in Saxon Deotrons, by keeping the
firſt ſyllable of the old name, and adding the
German ford. For as Sitomagus ſignifies in Bri-
tiſh a city upon the river Sit, now Thet (and,

Norfolk, and who, beſides, drew up a complete

the authority of Pliny ; ) ſo does Thet/ord ſig-
nity

t Statute was made as long ſince as the time of; Stit;
King Henry the ſixth, to reſtrain the number H. 6. 6.
of Attorneys in Norfolk, Suffolk, and Norwich. |

* . 1tomagee%
magus. | And yet it may be worth while to a

calling this people Cenimagni (which f one, F See the“

. 5 1 7 heſore Wt
finding them diſtinctly read Cen, Agai, is ot 1.9 *

that Magus formerly lignified a City, we have Mags

14.

1

WII. :

a8, 1
ford. A

| the le.

{ore Jul.

1

*

*

3

”
* .
—
—
&,
-
* 92
* *
*
-
*
*
*
*
*
*

« *

*
= > - F *

*
\
.

Dt ei

we

a

Nc er nn, Tet

| 77

ä win, ech

80 % 4 1
SHIRF A by { *
Zaun Cu.
= Su Sau. C7 or i tt
9 | 6 CCCPCCCCCCGCGGGG Ing

| E mn.

| . An

FREEBRLIDGE.

5 th
V aflton Net
DO

Om n T1.”
Z. .

is. 1 AL oft All

OF

AST An
N. / 2/nvole, CA

Lon u Nee,

——
i

Li brevton

*

3 A2.
—— 4. 9

MARSHL AND

* firm

SaLbbowe

*

1

. TY *
4

1. ys *

.

4 C roms ha

* Nen wet
BA 4 ik
Dereham

g gh

.in

.
in
. «ft .
8 of 5

, —FrEBRID GE. Grimelon

\ mr Ls 4k

I) *＋

x" chath

/ \\ . n 2
&HM 554 bredge

if 4 .
. . - > 7 rt Row =
—_— * — * 25 orto, -
C771, 2 3 i
Z 2 4 42
rin Amn dee

.
22 |

Ainglen . 1 —

Ln.

Harclis

* *
*
%.»

Ti; = * «

ben

ta.
— "thor

: Fo Sb ene SE.

Y $7 » [3 7 - go
A ee, ham b eh 2
e, i bh. knghom  "& Mx
8 >
, | GRE ENH

[In

—
—

.

Nin. Der 2.

e x h. COD
22

Ly

| 1
1115 © 1 —

N Snctiham "74,
2

Py Ad ; . ged. am.

[1 7

*

; a þ | . <
FN ord HUNDRED, 4
_ _— »

*
Ny * J

Tx. Y

: mm * brats 6 |

— er
SN I THDO N
Ir 4. 11ar
- al 2

.

—
ty
10

72

—
Auen
mag 8
Nun. Vn

71 urnyham

Woil:Nonton bn

Faun, bn

. "en hes "mt

Nr 7
* .

9

g * pA

Bahame nol es UV

7

HUNDRED "TY HUNDRED
Grang . be 1/ un Hoden 0
% . ; =
knit N wy
Nele . IWretton . run, E
Bu. 4 Fouldo
<a*Y..x off Fouldon
I „ - .

1

75 IT) 8 ' *

. At hive 3 * 0 0
a þ . ·˖[
— A

g Methold Gerd =

8 L d
20 * A J .
12 / GR 822 ö

; nol 7¹¹ "lh 7 * .
1 * 7. . A 4 7 7 7

-1/ TX NH "114 J
k 3 —— C. U, * A, '®.,

Atrandon FA „

1
j
i

Ie my

=

1

PART

5 5 by
. 6

A Et, yd Gas CPV,
TY owe
"FS <= 1 3

Z.. bun „ | // 7 Laine.

N . 9 7 ts * S= G
d = mr"

8
. Honghtmon i

Mot" 2 —
HunDRED

ON M1717,

\\
2 _ \ pony 7

—

* g — *
C , wok * 8
11 W. u Ir

r.. 2
wo. W N -

2

LS —
0 * 7 FA." N

; Burn. Hams im

= l N

/
"#7

8 £ TY %

- olds 71 A

i. X. 2414 Aam FR he *

—

i 21. 7
4;0r. 3 e —
Ford 4 8
= =
Len
i Ribury
2 Hus »

LAuNDIT C H 1 2 hs \ Marth.
[4 WA "rune * Ehnham

LET * f F 5 HAY
Raves 1 3 and i. ; 5 1 n.
n 17 7 2 a bb. ö — ; Briley 244 0
—— - 2 5 =<x 2
4 5 Hs Flom. th, 1/1 > bay ts Wu AY | Pit: 1 : — n UL F. 5 7
HunDRE D , Ai nd m - Hama has. BWW 7 . i] N 3 Bibuor „ | 18 wu
— 6 4 Yr lor * . af
- { : — ham * 0 —
4 * 4 WA Winch *\ Lu, * . gow £ 1 N, us 5 |
N E a — * 2 ee ton Been ; Dillingh# PM TY Sranton Hl
+ 7¹ en as 1 Dunham 47 Br 11g Seed
n „ —
9 0 KN * // £ranthum Wl wad Hux D.
- e N77 ö 1
ws / ; * 7 4 7 4 .
Maugord = . | Eee . 2 =Y Hranshart ar 5 " - 1} .
D ee — * Deerbam

+ — -
A 0 25 3 As

Vinh 922 . un

L. . {fac I ” (4 4 a FA TF ORD %

H tum rough
Ronme n
n HH UND.

MA. Pfalal

2

1

"A. DRE
ln

UNDRED
Wilkbre ”—

Cn "It

22
2 —

—

Fs

5 1

# * eee D 8 4 5 it =

. a |

7 | wH pe 7 my « Holt | . e |
ee d ay 2 Jiu, . 8
2 4 * g ,

7
5 Fine .

[regs — 7

N

1 \ 4 F b LY
{Bris tor Ms 127 I * * Ne 2
4 Brunt [UND Trun ky en
gun IuNx STE D

. Bradih

„ 7 . —
Hf i

N
H 20.10

7 "FP 2 N
A *.

* 1 — | LLo 1m

—

1

Amme fs,
*

8 arrow. 4
— 2 71 A ws

Ac NP... ” N |
"ig "ne 1h

„ton #;

8 — "4 in. S2xtho — cunuet . =
Py ton, \ Jo EEE 2 — « D mn me | war ry
AA * 2 est 1 Kube Y

L —
* 98
Lan. Mili \
WS *

tho "RUN - u.

2 ES ©

5”: Naſt 7. 4 hs | | Aly: /
N.. L 5 . ea; N Raunen LE
ho He udn Ole. "Ie * * * 75 —.— —— 4h AT
S War.smawk.”” 4 los- 2
I : "/

L whts

br % £dmond
2, vw:

2M 2 .

Ii 12

5 —
| n © | .\" Buri : . * 425
. 5 1 . „ ru. Br. J- nw al eee 1 Lobo PIN »
cer am | 2 / cuir Br, a doctoul "n aol — 7 ,
2 — — BLOFIE LD Barba u b

[4.4 þ
. A177 * A \ ; —. 2
Fa 7 «YT; 7 7 2 4? alt wr, 74 1 ” | | 6 : 4 . *
mag (Buy [ Tour | "a 4

< & MeBball Lmgwoo? /

2 South
HUNDRE D

'HuUuNnDRED

K
7 *
2 in/ton =

2 * B 6s wo

I — ff
| a I
ee; A Stockton 1. |

Borough Gree

. |

* ttleboxc a

E ] , Ao yo
„

| Bu md
HUNDRED
es a
. Cot * q | uu.

.
Rushme

. g,

| Tun.
* AF * en, ; Hub- — n N.
8 argerets h * « Wu 2 4. ar Benarre
write , LY 7 Sanderoft Alu

Parr or SUFFOLK
Great a SS
44... ĩð⁊1—5—ĩvröv«1 —¼

P; >

» GHH 8 8

4

I Trinty

4
Zhen. |
„ 1 AM, nf Gone Ws | A Scale of 10 Alzes . % 3 * 2
_ — cc. | — — — — — == — —
4 | | | 10 * 20 150 - 5
— : 2 a ; — }
| e |
| 4
1
2 1 |
—

— ——— —

_O

5
87 1
e
Ea,
S
© 998
Ar
9
5 Two, C
Fa
* Omnem
ſum excuſſe
+ Antiq.
Cant. p; L.
| |
4 187. % — * 228?! — — — a 8 ag — =
4 f „ 9 . : v .

tt. a os os wm $66 9 a EP

NONFOLX

* o
r 2 "as "On 2 2 * Wo . *

2 * . 332 2 N 2 i :
eee i i CR: Sa 2

6
* Dr

Two, C.

* Omnem *

ſum excuſſerat. it * had made them altogether deſperate.

+ Antiq.

t. p,148,

nify in Engliſh a ford of the Thet, and theſe two
names Sit and Thet are not very unlike. But
if we ſuppoſe (what is affirm' by others upon
the authority of the beſt Copies) that the true
name is Dec>pond, then the interpretation muſt
be, a ford of the people. It was formerly famous
for being a ſeat of the Kings of the Eaſt-
Angles ; but ſir is now thin-peopled, tho?
pretty large, and once a populous and noted
place. Beſides other marks of its antiquity, it
ſhews a huge Mount caſt-up to a great height,
and fortify'd with a double rampire, and former-
ly too (as they ſay) with walls. Some will have
it to have been a work of the Romans; but
others are rather inclin'd to think it done by

| antiquity,) is à point too large to be diſcuſs d

here.

Notwithſtanding the Eminence, which the
ſeat of the Eaſt-Saxon Kings, the Biſhops-See,
and ſeveral Monaſteries have entail'd npon this
place ( ſuch Honours as pethaps few Cities can
boaſt of;) yet in the g" of Edward the firſt
it was neither city nor burrough ; for, that King
requiring an account of the cities, burroughs,
and villages of this Shire, Norwich was the only
City return'd, and Tarmouth and Lynne, the onl
burroughs ; poſſibly, becauſe ſuch had only that
name, as ſent Repreſentatives to Parliament;
whereas that Privilege was not then granted to
this place. In the ſeventh year of King James

the Saxon Kings, under whom it was in a flou-|the firſt, a Statute paſs'd in Parliament, for the
riſhing condition for a long while; ſand others foundation of an Hoſpital, a Grammar-School,
again think it the work of the Danes, hof and maintenance of a Preacher in this town,
made ſo conſiderable a figure in thoſe parts; for ever, according to the laſt Will and Teſta-
becauſe the camps, both of Romans and Saxons, [ment of Richard Fulmarſton Knight. And of
are generally obſerv'd to be much larger. ater days, Sir Joſeph Williamſon, Principal Se-
By the cruelty of Sueno the Dane, who ſet |cretary of State to King Charles the ſecond,
it on fire in the year 1004, and that of the] built here a new Council-houſe, and was other-
Danes, who ſpoil'd it ſix years after, it loſt all wiſe, both in his life-time and by will, a con-
its dignity and grandeur. For the reſtoring of|{iderable Benefactor to this place.
which, Arfaſtus the Biſhop remov'd his Epiſco-}] Upon Maveney (which is the other boundary-
al See from Elmham to this place; and his river, running eaſtward) not far from its head,

ſucceſſor William ſpar'd neither coſt nor pains|are Buckenham and Kenninghal. This latter Wachen

in adorning and beautifying it; ſo that, under] (which ſeems to have had the name left it by Kenninghall.
Edward the Confeſſor there were reckon'd in itſ the Leni) f was the ſeat of the honourable fa- + Is, C.
nine hundred and forty- ſeven Burgeſſes. And mily of the Howard, whoſe glory is greater
in the time of William the Conqueror it had|than to be obſcur'd by the envy of Buchanan;
ſeven hundred and twenty manſions, whereot|[but it was long ſince demoliſh'd.} The for-
two hundred and twenty-four ſtood empty; and|mer, I ſhould think, togk its name from beech-
their chief Magiſtrate was ſtil'd Conſul. But trees, call'd by the Saxons Bucken; [if they,
when the third Biſhop, Herbert, ſirnam'd Lo-|who know the condition of the place, did not
ſenga (as being made up of lying and flattery,|affirm that they have few or no trees of that
[for learung in Saxon ſignifies a lie or trict) I ſort; and therefore the more probable origi-
and one who rais'd himſelf to this honour nal may be, from the great number of Bucks,
by ill arts and bribery ; when he (I ſay) had|with which we may eaſily ſuppoſe the neigh-
tranſlated this See to Norwich ; this City re-|bouring woods to have been ſtock'd, and which
laps'd, as if come to its laſt period. Nor did|at this day they do not altogether want.] Ir
the Monaſtery of Cluniacks, built there by his|is a very beautiful and ſtrong Caſtle, built by
means, make amends for the removal of the] William d Aubigny or de Albeneio the Norman,
Biſhop. That Religious houſe was built by|ro whom the Conqueror had granted the place.
Hugh Bigod, as appears from what is ſaid in his|By his poſterity (who were Earls of Arundel)
original Foundation-Charter. I Hugh Bigod,|it deſcended to the Torſalls[in the time of Hen-
Steward to King Henry, with his conſent, and by ry 3. by marriage, and from them by Caly and
the advice of Herbert Biſhop of Norwich, placed che Cliftons, it came at length to the family of
Cluniac-Monks in the Church of St. Mary, lately|che Knevetts. This laſt is very ancient: having ꝑamily of che
the Epiſcopal See of Thetford; which I gave them, been famous ever ſince the time of John Kne- Knevers,
and afterwards founded them another more conve- vet, Lord Chancellor of England under Edward
nient, without the village. Then the greateſt part] the third, and very much enlarged and branch-
of the City, which had ſtood on the hither-|ed ir ſelf by honourable marriages. For be-
bank, fell to decay by little and little; but in|ſides thoſe of Buckenham ; the famous Knights,
the other part (tho” that too decay'd very Sir Henry Knevet of Wilſhire, and Sir Thomas
much,) about + three ages ſince were ſeven| Knevet of Aſhellwell-thorp were deſcended
Churches; beſides three ſmall Monaſteries, one|thence. This Aſbellwell-thorp is a neighbouring A geen.
whereof, they ſay, was built in memory of the little town, which, from the Therps, ancient thorp,
Engliſh and Danes ſla in here. For our Hiſto- Knights, did, by the Tilneys and Lords Bour- Lord Bour-
rians tell us, that the moſt holy King Edmund, | chiers of Bernes, at laſt deſcend by inheritance pra of
a little before his death, engag'd the Danes to the above-mention'd Thomas Knevet. The
hard by, for ſeven hours together, not without |foreſaid Buckenham is held upon this condition,
vaſt loſs on both ſides ; and that at laſt, they] that the Lords of it be Butlers at the Coro-
arted with equal ſucceſs : ſuch effect had thoſe nation of the Kings of England. So, in Carle-

uent turns of fortune on both ſides, that] ton a neighbouring village (a thing perhaps not
unworthy our notice) Ralph de Carleton, and
[An anonymous Author quoted by f Caius, another perſon, held Lands by the Service of car-
tells us, there was formerly a Great School, or | rying our Lord the King an hundred herrings in pies, ¶ Paſtillos ba-
Nurſery of Learning, in this place. It may poſ-|when they firſt came in ſeaſon, to what part of lecum.

: Hiſt, Eccl. ſibly be the ſame that Bede hints, when he | England ſoever he ſhould then be in. | The town

3. c, 18.

informs us, how Sigebert (after he was return d of Larmouth by Charter is bound to ſend to
home, and ſettled in his kingdom) built a School] the Sheriffs of Norwich theſe hundred herrings,
for the education of youth, in imitation of what he which are to be bak'd in twenty-four pies or
had obſeru'd of that nature in France. Whether |paſties, and thence deliver'd to the Lord of the
this paſſage belongs to Thetford or Cambridge (for |manour of Eaſt-Carleton, who is to convey them
the latter lays claim to it, to advance its own|to the N Which is every year 22 *
m m erv

„„

»
7

—

459 ICE

NI.

— —

ſerv'd to this day, and an Indenture drawn up,
the ſubſtance whereof is, Thar upon delivery
of theſe pies to the Lord of the manour, he
ſhall acknowledge the receipt, and be oblig d
to convey them to the King.

North trom Carleton, and not far from
Depcham, Aſhwel-thorp, is Depeham, where grows the
Linden-tree mention'd and deſcrib'd by Mr. Eve-
lyn in his Sylva; a tree of vaſt bigneſs, which
he calls Tillia Coloſſia Depemenſis, To the eye,
it ſtands over the other trees, when viewed
at a diſtance, as a Giant looks among ſo ma-
ny Pigmies. At the foot of it, is a Spring,
which petriſies ſticks, leaves, and whatever falls
into it. But to return. ] The river Waveney
preſently waters Diſce, now Dis, a little town
of pretty good note, which King Henry the
firſt beſtow'd upon Richard de Lucy, and he,
ſhortly after, made over to Walter Fitz- Robert
with his daughter. Robert Fitz-Walter, one
cf his poſterity, procur'd of Edward the firſt
the privilege of a Market for this place. From
hence, tho Maveney is f thick-ſet with towns,
yet has it not one that can boaſt of antiqui-
ty ; except it be Shelton, which is at ſome di-
{tance from it, and gave. name to the very an-
Shelton, cient family of the Sheltont. Bur before it gets
v. to the ſea, it joyns the river Garienis, call'd by
the Britains Guerne, and by the Engliſh, Gerne
and Jere; without doubt, from the Alder-trees
(fo nam'd in Britiſh,) with which it is ſhaded.
It riſes in the middle of this County, not far
trom a ſmall village call'd Garveſton, to which it
gave name ; and has near it Hengham, which
had its Barons, call'd alſo de Rhia, deſcended
from John Mareſchal (brother's ſon to William
Mareichal Earl of Pembroke) to whom King
John gave the lands of Hugh de Gornay, the Trai-
tor, with the daughter and coheir of Hubert
Lord of Rhia. But in proceſs of time, it
paſs'd from the Mareſchals to the Morleys, and
trom them, by Lovel, to the Parkers Lords Mor-
ley. Afterwards, it was purchaſed by Sir Phi-
lip Woodhouſe, and then came into the poſſeſ-
ſion of the Lord Crew, by marriage with the
Widow of Sir Thomas H/oodhouſe. | At a little
diſtance is Skultoy, otherwiſe call'd Burdos, which
was held on this condition, that the Lord of
it, at the Coronation of the Kings of England,

ſhould be chief Lardiner, as they term him.
[Near Skulton, is J/oodrifing, the ſeat for-
merly of the Family of Southwell ; bur ſince
ſold, firſt to Sir Francis Crane, and then to
Robert Bedle. The Southwells ( of which fa-
mily was the late Sir Robert Southwell, Princi-
pal Secretary of State for the kingdom of Ire-
land, and employ'd in ſeveral Negotiations
abroad) are now ſeated at Kings-weſton in
Gloceſterſhire.| More to the eaſt, we fee Vi-
mundham, now contracted into Vindbam | (in
the Hundred of Forehowe, ſo call'd from the four
hills or high places, in Saxon heah, upon which
they held their meetings ;) ] and famous for
being the burying-place of the Albinies, Earls
of Arundel, whoſe Anceſtor H/iliam de Albiney,
Butler to King Henry the firſt, built a Church
here, and made it a Cell to the Monaſtery of
St. Albans. Upon the ſteeple, which is very
high, William Kett, one of the two Norfolk-
incendiaries, was hang'd, in the year 1549.
{It was ſold by the laſt of the Knevets of that
place to Henry Hobart Chief Juſtice of the Com-
mon-Pleas.| Nor muſt we paſs by Attilborough
at five miles diſtance, the oe of the ancient
family of the Mortimers, whoſe bearing is dif-
ferent from thoſe of Wigmore (namely, a Shield
Or, Seme de fleures de Lyz ſables,) and who found-
ed here a Collegiate Church, whereof, at pre-

— — —

Dis.

+ Redimitus.

Garienis ri

Barons of Rbie
Or Heng bam.

Woodriſing.

Windham,

A ttilborough.
Morti mers.

— «% —g̃—nä—
* 8 8 —

4h

ſent, there are no remains. Their eſtate paſſed D

N. 61
formerly by marriage, to the Ratcliffs Earls ö
of Suſl'x, to the family of Fitz-Ranulph, and
to Ralph Bigod, [or elſe came from the Bigods
to Fitz-Ranulph, and ſo to the Ratclifts, as ſome
affirm. This place (if John Bramis, a Monk
of Thetford, may be credited) is of great note
and antiquity. He will have it to have been
built and fortify'd by Artlyage a King of thoſe
parts; and his evidence for it, are two Copies
of that Hiſtory which he tranſlated, one in
French and the other in old Engliſh. What-
ever credit theſe may deſerve, it is certain that
the termination burrough, wherever it occurs,
denotes ſomething of antiquity, as a caſtle, a
fort, or the like. But to return to the ri-
ver.

The Tare has not run far, towards the eaſt,
till a little river Wentſum (by others call'd
Wentfar) empties jt ſelt into it from the ſouth.
Upon this, near it's riſe, is a ſquare entrench-
ment at Tatesborough, containing twenty-four
Acres. It ſeems to be an Encampment of the
Romans; poſſibly, that which in the Choro-
graphical Table publiſh'd by Marcus Velſerus,
is calld Ad Taum. [Hard by, is Thurton, Thanx
where, about twenty years ſince, were dug-up
ſeveral Roman Coins of Quintillus, Tetricus, Gal-
lienus, Victorinus, and others. | Higher up, or.
the ſame river, formerly ſtood Venta Tenorum, yer 14,
the moſt flouriſhing City of this People; but rum,
now 1t has loſt the ancient name, and is call'd
Caſter. Nor need we wonder, that of the three Cafter
Venta in Britain, this alone ſhould have loſt
it's name, when it has loſt it's very being.
For now, ſetting aſide the broken walls (which,
in a ſquare, contain about thirty acres,) with
the marks where the buildings have ſtood, and
ſome few Roman Coins which they now and
then dig up; there is nothing of it left. The
deſcription of this place agrees exactly with
thoſe given by Polybius, Vegetius, and others,
concerning the ancient way of encampment
among the Romans; the Places alſo tor the
four gates are ſtill manifeltly to be ſeen. The
Porta Pratoria look'd toward the eaſt ; oppoſite

33 edt Eon ooo f "are. et.” nat rnd PI ge yg pr” wy rw = 'T WT THT T1 Ea, 3

r

to which (without the Porta Decumana, and : Auguſta
cloſe by the river- ſide) there ſtill remain ſome KRauraco-

. rum,
ruins of a tower. The walls, encloſing the ;

camp, were of flint and very large bricks. |
Bur, in after-ages, Norwich, at three miles di-
ſtance, had it's riſe out of this; ſtanding near

the confluence of Yare, and another anonymous
river call'd by ſome Bariden; ſ not far from the

head of which, is Raynbam, the ſeat of Charles Raytbas
Lord Viſcount Townſend, a perſon of great
Virtue, Honour and Abilities; whoſe father
Horatio Lord Townſend Baron of Kings-lynn,

was, in the year 1682, advanced to the more
honourable T'itle of Viſcount Townſend of Rayn-
ham.l The ſaid anonymous river, in a long
courſe, with it's dinted and winding banks,
comes to the Tare, by Attilbridge : leaving
Horsford to the north, where the Caſtle of Wil- Horsford.
liam de Cafinet or Cheney (who in the reign

of Henry the ſecond was one of the chief
among the Nobility) lies overgrown with
buſhes and brambles.

Norwich, above-mention'd, is a famous City, Norwit:
call'd in Saxon NonSpic, i. e. the northern bay

or boſom (if pic in Saxon ſignity a bay or wind- pie, wit ©
ing, as Rhenanus has told us; ) for here the tgnife :
river runs along with many windings : or, the m9"s
northern Station (it pic, as Hadrianus Junius will vous
have it, ſignifie a ſecure Station, Where the hou-

ſes are built cloſe one to another ; ) or elſe, the
northern Cattle, if pic (as Alfrick the Saxon has
affirm'd ) denote a Catle. And the origins!

0

5

1

3
147

Artar.

ps ſord.

arwict.

c, whit
nikes 3
ng tht
xons.

wm
b j

4

N

F

NORFOL K. 4 462

of the name ſeeins plainly to be from the caſtle} winding reaches, over which are four Brid on
there. For though it cannot be deny d but|waſh'd the north-part of the City.

ges,
In the in-

pic ſignifies a boſom of the Sea, and a ſtation for fancy whereof, and in the reign o King Ethel-

Ships, and a Village, as well as a Caſtle ; yet the

dred (a Prince of no policy nor conduct) Sue-

circumſtances ſeem here to determin it to[xo the Dane, who invaded England with
the laſt ſenſe. For the initial North being a[great army, firſt ſpoil'd, and Go Bebe. ir.

relative term, mult have' ſomething oppoſite to

Notwithſtanding which, it recover'd, and (as

anſwer it: whereas we meet with no bays or appears by the Conqueror's Survey) in the

boſoms on the ſouth- ſide: but, not above three
miles ſouth, we find the foreſaid Remain of

reign of Edward the Confeſſor, had one thou-
ſand three hundred and twenty Burgers. At which

an ancient Royal caſtle, which ſtill keeps ſome|time (to deſcribe it from the {ame Book) it
footſteps of antiquity in it's name of Caffor.|paid twenty pounds to the King and ten to the Earl;
Now, from hence the age of the Town does and beſides that, twenty ſhillings, four Prebendaries,
in ſome meaſure appear. For if it took the] fix Sextaries of honey, and || a bear with fix dogs to U;ſum, &

name from the Cattle, it is evident it muſt be

bait him. Now, it pays ſeventy pounds by weight toſex canes ad

of leſs antiquity. The Caſtle indeed, one would [the King, a hundred (billings * as on als u.
imagin, from the circular form of the ditch and | with — ambling 0 nh nad of blank al, e Gerſu-

vaſt compaſs of it, to have been either Daniſh|to the Earl, and twenty ſhillings fine by tale.
or Norman; but that there muſt have been the rei of William £ fl, ie Kt hs

In 4 Blanc,
ſeat

one earlier, is clear both from the Saxon ori-|of a Civil war, which Ralph Earl of the Eaſt-
ginal, and a Charter of =_—_ the firſt, dire-| Angles rais'd againſt that King. For after he

cted to Harvey firſt Biſhop of

y, whereby that | had eſcap'd by flight, his wife, with the Ar-

Church is abſobu'd from all ſervices due to the Ca-|morican Britains, endured a cloſe ſiege in this
ſtle of Norwich. Now (as Sir Henry Spelman|place; till, for want of proviſions, ſhe was

well obſerves ) ſuch ſervices could not be im-

torced to make her eſcape and quit her Coun-

pos'd, whilſt the lands were in the hands off try. And at that time the City was ſo im-
the Biſhops, Monks, Cc. and by conſequence|pair'd, that (as appears by the {ame Domeſ-
muſt needs become due whilſt in the hands of day) there were ſcarce five hundred and ſixty
{ome ſecular owner (and the laſt of theſe was] Burgers left in it. Lanfrank, Archbiſhop ot
Tombertus, Governour ot the Southern Girvii, Canterbury, mentions this ſurrender in a Let-
who beſtow'd them on his wife Ætheldreda, ter to King William, in theſe words : Tour king-
foundrels of the Monaſtery of Ely, about the |dom is purg d from the infeftion of the Britains (or
year 677.) So that from hence it appears, Armoricans: ) the Caſtle of Norwich is ſurren-
that the date of this caſtle is at leaſt ſo far der d; and the Britains, who were in it and had
back; and perhaps much further. The rea- lands here in England, upon granting them life and
ſon why Church-lands were exempt from Ser-|/imb, have taken an oath to depart your Dominions
vices, ſeems to be expreſs'd in the Laws of | within forty days, and never to return without your
Edward the ſecond, Becauſe the prayers of the|ſpecial licence. From that time forward, it be-
Church ought to be look'd on as more effettual, than gan by little and little to recover out of this

the aſſiſtance of the ſecular arm.

deluge of miſeries ; and Biſhop Herbert, whoſe

But it I ſhould imagin with ſome, that Nor- reputation had ſuffer d much by Simoniacal
wich was the ſame with Venta; this would be] practices, tranſlated the Epiſcopal See trom
wittingly to believe a lie. For it has no bet-¶ Thetford hither. He built a very beautiful Ca-
ter title to the name of Venta, than Baſil has thedral in the eaſt and lower part of the City,

to that of Auguſta, or Baldach to Babilonia :|in a place till then call'd Cow-holme, near the

agua Namely, as this laſt aroſe, upon the fall of|Caſtle ; the firſt Stone whereof, in the reign

auraco· Babilonia, and the firſt upon that of Auguſta ;|ot William Rufus, and in the year of our

— juſt ſo our Norwich roſe, tho” late, out ot the] Lord 1096. he himſelf laid, with this In-
ancient Venta. Which appears from its name ſcription :

in Britiſh Authors, Caer Guntum; wherein (as

alſo in the river Mentſum or Wentſar) we find DO MINUS HERBERTUS POSUIT
the plain remains of the name Venta. For the PPRIMUM LAPIDEM IN NOMINE PA-

name of Norwich does not appear in any of |TRIS, FILH, ET SPIRITUS SANCTL
our Writers, before the time of the Daniſh] AMEN.

wars. So far is it from having been built ei-

ther by Cæſar or Guiteline the Britain, as ſome That is,

fabulous Authors tell you, who ſwallow every

thing that is offer'd, without conſideration or | Lord [Biſhop] Herbertus laid the ff ſtone, in the
judgment. However, at preſent, on account | name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghoſt. Amen.

of its wealth, and populouſneſs, neatneſs of

buildings, and beautiful Churches, with the] Afterwards, he procured a Licence from Pope
| number of them (for it hath had fifty Parochial| Paſchal, to confirm and eſtabliſh it to be the mother
ic tas ſome Churches, and + thirty-ſix are now in uſe; ) as] Church of Norfolk and Suffolk; and endow d it
PPeriſbes, alſo for the induſtry of its Citizens, their Loy-] liberally with lands, ſufficient for the mainte-
. alty to their Prince, and Civility to Foreig-|nance of ſixty Monks, who had neat and cu-
ners; it is deſervedly reckon d among the moſt rious Cloyſters. But theſe were removed; and
conſiderable Cities in Britain. It's Latitude isa Dean, with fix Prebendaries, and others, ſet-
fifty two degrees, forty minutes : the Longi-|tled in their places. After the Church thus
tude twenty four degrees, fifty five minutes. built, and an Epiſcopal See placed here, it be-
It is pleaſantly ſeated, long-ways, on the ſide came (as Malmsbury has it) a Town famous for
of an hill, reaching from ſouth to north a mile Merchandiſe, and number of Inhabitants. And in
and half: the breadth of it is ſcarce half ſo the 17" of King Stephen (as we read in ſome
much, and towards the ſouth, it contracts it|ancient Records) Norwich was built anew, Was
ſelf by little and little, like a Cone. It is for- populous for a Village, and was made a Corporati-
tify'd with ſtrong walls (with a great many on. That King Stephen alſo granted it to his
turrets and eleven gates) on all ſides except Son William for an Appennage (as they call it)

the eaſt, which the river defends with its d

chanel and ſteep banks; after it has with it's cords. But Henry the ſecond took it rev
; I

or inheritance, is evident from the publick Re-

2 — *

3 . x

463 ICENT.

him, and held it himſelf ; norwithſtanding that
Henry his Son, the Junior-King, as they call d
him, when he was aſpiring to the Crown, had
promis'd it in ample terms to Hugh Bigod Earl
of Norfolk, whom he had drawn over to his
party. Bigod however, adhering to the young
King (who could not confine his eager hopes
of the Crown, within the bounds of Juſtice
and Equity) miſerably harraſs'd this City;
and is thought to have rebuilt that Caſtle on
the high hill near the Cathedral, within the
City, which is encompaſs'd with a trench of
ſuch vaſt depth, that in thoſe days it was
look'd on as impregnable. But Leuis of France,
under whom the rebellious Barons had, confe-
derated againſt King John, eaſily took it by
ſiege. The reaſon why I fanſy that it was
Bigod who repair'd the Caſtle, 1s becauſe I ob-
ſerv'd Lions ſaliant cut in a ſtone, in the ſame
manner, as the Bigods formerly us'd them in
their ſeals ; of whom there was one that ſeal'd
with a Croſs. And this was the condition of
Norwich in its infancy.

Bur in the next age it increas'd mightily,
and abounded with weanny Citizens; who,
by an humble petition in Parliament, deſir'd
liberty of Edward the firſt to wall their City
round: and afterwards accordingly did it, to
the great ſtrength and ornament thereof. In
the year 1403. they obtain'd leave of Henry
the N that inſtead of Bailiffs (which they

had before) they might elect a Mayor yearly;
and in the very heart of the City, they built
a very beautiful Town-houſe, near the market-
place, which, on the ſet- days, is plentifully fur-
niſh'd with all manner of proviſions. It is
partly indebted for its proſperity to the people
of the Netherlands; who, when they could no

Albani longer endure the tyranny of the Duke of || Al-

a, nor the bloody Inquiſition then ſetting up,

flock'd hither in great numbers, and firſt

+ Levidenſi- brought in the manufacture of flight ſtuffs f;

um quorun- [that is (according to tradition here) the Or-

dam panno- naments of Striping and Flowering the Stuff,

rum. which have been wonderfully improv'd by the

Ingenuity of the Weavers of late years, in

the making of Damasks, Camlets, Druggets,

black and white Crape, and other things ; in-

ſomuch that it is computed, that Stufts to the

value of 7000007. have ſometimes been ma-

nufactur'd here, in one year.] But why ſtay I

* All, C. fo long upon theſe matters? ſince * moſt of

them, together with the Hiſtory of the Biſhops,

the ſucceſſion of their Magiſtrates, and the Fu-

ry of that villanous rebel Kerr againſt this City,

are very elegantly deſcrib'd by Alexander Nevil,

a perſon eminent for birth and learning. I

will only add, that in the year 1583. the Citi-

| Inſtrumen- Zens, by the help of |} an Engine for that pur-

to Hydrago- poſe, convey'd water through pipes into the

gico, higheſt parts of the City. And here I could

ſummon both Polydore Virgil the Italian, and

Angelus Capellus the Frenchman, before the Tri-

bunal of venerable Antiquity ; to give an ac-

count, how they came to affirm that our old

Ordovices (who liv'd almoſt under another He-

miſphere) inhabited this Norwich. I could

bring the ſame Action againſt our Country-

man Caius; but that I am ſatisfy'd, it was no-

thing but a natural love of his native Country,
that blinded the good learned old man.

This City is honour'd, by making one of the
many titles of his Grace the Duke of Norfolk ;
the father of the laſt Duke being created by
King Charles the ſecond, in the twenty-fourth
year of his reign, Earl of Norwich.| And I have
nothing more to add about Norwich ; unleſs

you have a mind to run over theſe verſes nds
upon it by John Johnſton a Scotch-man.

Urbs ſpecioſa fitu, nitidis pulcherrima teflis,
Grata peregrinis, delicioſa ſuis.
Bellorum ſedes, trepido turbante tumultu,
Triſtia Neuſtriaco ſub duce damna tulit.
Vittis diſſidiis, poſtquam caput ardua cælo
Extulit, immenfis crevit opima opiby.
Cultus wincit opes, & cultum gratia rerum,
Quam bene ! fi luxus non comitetur opes.
Omnia fic adeo ſola hic fibi ſufficit, ut fi
Fors regno defit, hac caput eſſe queat.

A wa whoſe ſtately piles and happy
eat |

Her Citizens and Strangers both delight.

ae: * ro ſiege and plunder made het

| r

In Norman troubles an unhappy ſhare,

And feel the ſad effects of dreadful war.

Theſe ſtorms o'erblown, now bleſt with

| conſtant peace,

She ſaw her riches and her trade in-
creaſe.

State here by wealth, by beauty wealth's
out-done z

How bleſt, it vain exceſs be yet un-
known! |

So fully is ſhe from her ſelf ſupply'd,

That England, while ſhe ſtands, can never
want an head.

From Norwich, the river Tare, with an
increaſe of other waters which take the ſame
name, rowls-on in a winding chanel, and
abounds with the fiſh calld Ruffe ; and be- gs,
cauſe the Engliſh in that word expreſs the
Latin Aſperum, John Caius term'd the fiſh p. R
Ajſpredo. For the body of it is all over rough ; Animiliua
it is full of ſharp finns, loves ſandy places, Hiltria.
and in ſhape and bigneſs is much like a Perch.

The colour of + the back is a dark brown; tlie f Fer nm
80 belly, a paliſh yellow. Along the jaws, it is“ Ter in.
mark d with a double ſemicircular line: the

upper half of the eye is a dark brown ; the
under, yellowiſh like gold ; and the ball, black.

It is particularly remarkable for a line drawn

along the back, like a croſs thread ty'd to the

body. The tail and finns are all-over ſpotted

with black. When it is provok'd, the finns
briſtle up; when quiet, they lie flat and

cloſe. It eats like a Perch, and is particu-

by valu'd for it's || ſhortneſs and wholeſom-|| Frith
neſs. |

The Lare having paſs'd Claxton (where is a Claw
round Caſtle, built by Sir 7homas Gawdy Kr.
Chief Juſtice of the Common-Pleas) ſ runs to
Redeham, a (mall village upon the ſame river, Redehin
ſo call'd from the reeds growing in the marſhy
grounds thereabouts. Here it was, that Loch-
broc the Daniſh Noble-man landed, being by
a ſudden ſtorm driven from his own coalt,
while he was a hawking ; and finding enter-
tainment at King Edmund's Court, then at
Caſtor, he liv'd there, till he was murther'd by
the King's huntſman. Upon the news, his
ſons (though the murtherer had been ſuffi-
ciently puniſh'd) landed with twenty thouſand
men, to revenge the death of their tather, and
waſted the whole kingdom of the Eaſt-Angles ;
and on the 20") of November, Anno 870. bar-

barouſly murther'd the King thereof. By this
account, Redeham muſt be of elder date than
Yarmouth ; becauſe if this had been then built,
Lothbroc had no doubt ſtop'd there, for aſſiſtance
and direction, |

The

— 46%, i

465

8

k

1
© mouth.
n of
=.

(
:
4
|
|
|
-
]
0
*
|
5 |
ö |
| .
Vos, two.
H
)
;
c (
:
$ |
'

' |

#G:riaronum), 1

o

1.
=
'F -

.

4

W* C:urus 3 of
ich, ſee
Wooncr's

E rus lecius,
7 .

2 P bo

= + Aquilo,
4

ie. 2.

E1 Will, &
Ear

Ii. 3, Ce.

8 Carjanonum

3 Cerdick the
43 son.
JCerdick-

: lind,

dee Ham-

Guil, Worce
ler,

NE

0

—

.

465

N mouth.
15068 oft is

Y His

Ll 2 8 de b
1 F = WS. „ e E
2 i Y _ , 4 4

F \. oy
EE ˙ MEET EIA:

„
*

3
N
E.
7
A

-
4 7

E
"A

Gu:
le

T le. 2.
u. &
: 1 5 ſi

u M. 3, Ce. tures have paſs'd in Parliament, in regard of

lire.

r.

|

NORFOLK.

The Yare, now juſt at the Sea, takes a turn
ro the South, that it may deſcend more gently
into the Ocean : by which means it makes a
ſort of little tongue or flip of Land; waſh'd,
on one fide, by it ſelf, on- the other, by the
Sea. In this flip, upon an open ſhore, 1 ſaw
Yarmouth, in Saxon Trap-mus, and Jienp-muS,
i. e. the mouth of the Garienis, a very neat har-
bour and town, fortify'd both by Art and Na-
ture. For though it is almoſt ſurrounded with
water (on the weſt, with the river, over which
is a Praw-bridge, and on other ſides with the
Sea ; ) except to the North, where it is joyn'd
to the Continent : yet is it fenc'd with ſtrong
{tarely walls, which, with the river, give it
the figure of an oblong ſquare. Beſides the
rowers upon theſe, there is a mole or mount
to the Eaſt, from whence the great Guns com-
mand the Sea, Which is ſcarce fifty paces di-

b dow, tuo. tant from it. It t has but one Church: but

that is very large, and has a ſtately high ſpire;
built near the North-gate by Herbert Biſhop
of Norwich. Below which, the toundations
of a noble Work, deſign'd for an enlargement
to this, are rais'd above-ground. I dare not
affirm, that this was the old Garianonum,
where formerly the Stablefian Horſe lay in
garriſon againſt the Barbarians ; nor yet the
neighbouring little village Caſtor (tormerly the
ſear of Sir John Falſtoff an eminent Knight)
{amous among the Inhabitants on account ot
its antiquity ; though there is a report that
the river Tare had another mouth, juſt under
it. But as I am throughly convinc'd that the
Garianonum was at Burgh-caſtle in Suffolk,
which is fcarce two miles diſtant from the
oppoſite bank of the river; ſo am I apt to
think, that Tarmouth roſe out of its ruins, and
that that Caſtor was one of the Roman Caſtles,
placed alſo at a mouth of the river Tare now

1 10. * of ſhut up. For as the * North-welt-wind plays
ga, fee
W>onrcr's
, ccius,
3 Pp 59.
+ Aquilo,

the tyrant upon the coaſt of Holland, over-
againſt this place, and has ſtop'd up the mid-
dle-mouth of the Rhine with Sands; juſt fo
has the f North-caſt damag'd this coaſt, and
ſeems, by ſweeping- up heaps of Sand, to
have cbſtructed This harbour; for the clean-
ng and keeping-open of which, many Sta-

the great importance thereof, tor carry ing-on
the trade and navigation of this kingdom. |
Nor will it be any injury, it I call this our
Yarmouth (ſo nearly joyn'd to the old Garia-

landnum om) Garianonum it ſelf ; ſince the Garienis,

from whence it had the name, has now chan-
ged its chanel, and enters the Sea below
this town; to Which it alſo gave the name.
For I cannot but own, that this our Yarmouth
is of later date. For when that old Garia-
nonum Was gone to decay, and there were none

*

: og the lett to defend this ſhore, Cerdick the warlike
J Cerdick-
Y {in ,

Je Ham, ſand, and by other Hiſtorians + Cerdick-ſhore ; )

Saxon landed here (from whence the place is
call d by the Inhabitants at this day Cerdick-

and when he had harraſs'd the Leni with a
grievous war, he ſet ſail from hence for the
welt, where he ſettled the kingdom of the
Welt-Saxons. And not long after, the Saxons,
inſtead of Garianonum, built a new town in that
moiſt watery field upon the weſt-fide of the
river, which they call'd Tarmouth. But the ſi-
tuation thereof proving unwholeſom, they re-
mov'd to the other fide of the river, call'd
then (from the ſame Cerdick) Cerdick-ſand :
and there they built this new rown, wherein
(as Domeſday-book has it) there flouriſh'd in
the time of Edward the Confeſſor ſeventy Bur-

|. Worte.
Vorce- gers. Afterwards, about the year of our Lord

4

1340, the Citizens wall'd it round; and, in
a ſhort time, became ſo rich and powerful,
that they often engag'd their neighbours of
Leſtoff, and the Portuenſes (fo they call'd the
inhabitants of the Cinque-Ports) in Sea-fights ;
with great {laughter on both ſides. For they
had a particular ſpite againſt them ; poſſibly
upon this account, becauſe they were exclu-
ded out of the number and Privileges of the
Cinque-Ports, which the old Garianonum, and
their Anceſtors under the Count of the Sa-
xon ſhore, formerly enjoy'd. But a ſtop was
put to theſe Encounters, by Royal Authority;
or (as others think) by the damp caſt upon
them by that grievous plague, which in one
year took ſeven thouſand Souls out of this
little town, as appears by an old Chronogra-
phical Table hung up in the Church ; which
alſo gives an account of their wars with the
inhabitants of the Cinque-Ports and Leſtoff.
From that time they decay'd, and had not
wealth ſufficient to carry on their Trade ;
upon which they have betaken themſelves moſt-
ly to the herring-fiſhing (tor ſo they generally
* call them, though the learned think them * Haleces,
to be the Chalcides and the Leucomenides;) a ſort Stat. 31 E. 3.
of fiſh that is more plentitul upon this coaſt, . 1. & 35
than upon any other in the world. For it is K 3 © K.
almoſt incredible, what a great and throng
Fair here is at Michaelmas; and what quan-
tities of herring and other fiſh are vended.
At which time the Cingue- Porta, by an old cu-
ſtom, appoint a number of Bailiſts, as Com-
miſſioners, to ſend hither; who (to ſpeak out of
their Diploma or Commiſſion) do, along with
the Magiſtrates of the Town, during the free
Fair, hold a Court for matters belonging to the
Fair, govern it, execute the King's juſtice, and keep
the King's peace. The harbour underneath 1s
of great advantage, not only to the inhabi-
rants, ous to thoſe of Norwich alſo; and it 5 ;
an f infinite charge they are at, to keep it open T Stat. 1 |
againſt the violence > the Sea. Which, * 3 _
do juſtice and make amends for what it has 3. c. 35.
ſwallow'd up on this coaſt, has here heap'd 1 Ann. c. 7.
up Sands, and made them a little Iſland. [In
the reign of King Charles the ſecond, Sir
Robert Paſton of Paſton in this County, was,
from this place, created Viſcount, and after
that, Earl of Yarmouth ; in which Honour he
was ſucceeded by William his eldeſt fon, the
preſent Earl.
At this Mouth alſo, another river, - call'd by
ſome Thyrn, empties it ſelf with the Yare. It Thyrn river,
riſes near Holt, ſo call'd from the wood, and
noted for it's market : and, running all along
as it were in a parallel line with the Yare,
at about five miles diſtance it goes by Blickling, Blickling.
the ſeat of the ancient and famous family of
Clere, who liv'd formerly at Ormesby; | but here-
tofore the ſeat of the Bolens, of which family
was Thomas Bolen, Earl of Wiltſhire : and
Anne Bolen, wite ro Henry the eighth, and
mother to Queen Elizabeth, was born here.
It came to the Cleres by marriage with the
daughter of James Bolen, uncle to Queen Eli-
zabeth, and by Edward Clere, Knight of the
Order of St. Michael, was ſold to Sir Henry
Hobart, Chief Juſtice of the Common-Pleas,
who built there a ſtately Houſe, that is {till

| enjoy'd by his Poſterity.] Then, ir runs by

Ailecham, a pretty populous market-town, Ailesham,
where formerly the Earl of Atho! in Scotland
had Poſſeſſions: Then, by the ruinous Mo-
naſtery of St. Benedict de Hulmo (commonly S.
Benet in the Holme, i. e. in a river-Iland,) which St. Benet“.
was built by Canutus the Dane, and after-

wards ſo fortify'd by the Monks with ſtrong
| Nun Walls

|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|

467

ICENT

—

* Fibræ.

Ludham.

Clipsby.

Flegg.

Winterton.

A Soil very
lat.

Gimming-
ham,

walls and bulwarks, that it look'd more like a
Caſtle than a Cloyſter. So that, William the
Conqueror could not poſſibly take it, till a
Mon« betray'd it, on condition that he ſhould
be made Abbot ; which he accordingly was.
But preſently, the new Abbot (as the ſtor
goes among the inhabitants) was by the King's
{pecial order, hang'd for a Traitor, and ſo re-
ceiv'd the juſt reward of his treachery. The
ground in this Iſland is ſo fenny, that if you
only cut the “little ſtrings and roots of the
trees and ſhrubs that grow in it, it will ſwim
upon the water, and you may draw it after
you whither you pleaſe. And ſome conclude,
from the Cockles now and then dug-up there,
that the Sea has formerly broken in ſo far.
From hence the river glides on by Ludham,
[formerly] a Seat of the Biſhops of Norwich ;
then by Clipsby, which gave name to an an-
cient and eminent family in theſe parts : and
ſo, preſently joyns the Taze.

[Near the place where this river runs into
the ſea, it makes one ſide of a Peninſula,
call'd at this day Hegg. The ſoil is fruit-
tul, and bears corn very well ; and here the
Danes ſeem to have made their firſt ſettle-
ment, both becauſe it is neareſt their land-
ing, and is pretty well fortify'd by nature, as
being almoſt ſurrounded with water ; and,
alſo, becauſe in that little compaſs of ground,
we find thirteen villages ending in by, a Da-
niſh word, which fignities a village or dwelling-
place. And hence the Bi-lagines of the Daniſh
writers, and our by-/aws here in England, come
to ſignity ſuch Laws as are peculiar to each
town or village. |

From the Tare's mouth, the ſhore runs al-
moſt directly north to Mimerton, a little Pro-
montory of note among the Sea-men ; which,
I fanſy, had that name given it from the cold
and winterly ſituation. For it lies open to the
Sea (the Parent of winds and cold) which
ruſhes violently againſt the banks rais'd on
purpoſe to oppoſe it. And yet the neighbour-
ing fields all round, are look'd upon by ſeve-
ral, ro be the fatieſt and looſeſt in all England;
as requiring the leaſt labour, and bringing the
largeſt increaſe. For (as Pliny ſays of Biza-
cium in Africa) it may be plow'd with a horſe
ever ſo bad, and an old woman drawing againſt
him.

From WMinterton, the ſhore preſently turns
weſtward, going back for a long way together,
in a level, without any conſiderable juttings-
out into the ſea ; as tar as Eccles, which is
almoſt ſwallow'd up by the Ocean. Then it
runs on, with a higher ſhore, by Bronholme,
tormerly a ſmall Monaſtery, endow'd by the
Glanvils, and ſeated upon a high hill ; the
Croſs whereof was by our Anceſtors had in
mighty veneration : And not tar from Gim-
mingham, which, among other manours, J. Earl
of Warren and Surrey formerly gave to Thomas
Earl of Lancaſter. [Here ( faith Sir Henry
Spelman) the ancient cuſtom of Tenure in
Soccage is ſtill kept up; the Tenant not paying
his Rent in money, but in ſo many days work. |
Then, along by Cromer ( where the inhabitants
at great expence endeavour'd to maintain a

+ Cothonem. little harbour againſt the violence of the Sea,

Greſham.

Munde ſley.

but in vain.

Not far from whence, is Greſbam, which gave
name to a family, render'd particularly emi-
nent by Sir Thomas Greſham, 3 of Gre-
ſham-College and of the Royal Exchange in
London. Weſt of Greſham, at a ſmall diſtance
from the ſea, is Mundeſley, where ſome years
ago, at a cliff, were taken up large bones

(thought to be of a Monſter) which were
petrity'd.| From Cromer, the ſhore runs to

Market and Fair at the inſtance of Oliver d.

place; who made a Preſent of him to King
Henry the fourth. ] And over-againſt it on
the other bank of the little river, is Blalen
call'd by our Country-man Bale, Nigeria, a
tamous College of Carmelite Friars in the laſt

Bacon, and J. Brett. It bred John Baconthor

t was the ſeat of the knightly family of the
Heydons) a perſon in that age of ſo univerſal
and ſo protound Learning, that he was highly
admir'd by the Italians, and went commonly

mighty God, no one has writ more accurately upon
his Eſſence. If you have a mind to ſearch into the
cauſes of things, the effefis of nature, the various
motious of the heavens, and the contrary qualities of
the elements; here you are preſented with a Mu-
zine. This one Reſolute Doctor has ſurniſh'd the
Chriſtian Religion with the ſtrongeſt armour againſt
the Jews, &c. From WW arburue to the little
Promontory of St. Edmund, the coaſt lies low-
er, and 1s cut and parted by many rivulets,
and ſecur d with great difficulty againſt the

diſh and German Mul, ſignifying duſt. |

More inward, and ſcarce four miles from

of the ſea, Eraſmus calls Parathalaſſa. This lit-
tle rown is noted at preſent for producing the
beſt Saffron ; but was once famous througaout
England for Pilgrimages to the Virgin Mary,
in a Monaſtery built there by Richolde, 2 no-
ble widow, Lady of that manour, about tour
hundred years before the Diſſolution.] For

place, was look'd upon as impious and irreli-
gious. But take the deſcription of it from
Eraſmus, who was an eye-witneſs. Nor far
from the ſea, at almoſt four miles diſtance, there is
a Town in a manner entirely maintain'd by the great
reſort of Travellers. There is a College of Canons,

tween Monks and Secular Canons. This College has
ſcarce any other revenues, beſides the Offerings made
to the Bleſſed Virgin. For ſome of the Gijts ou)
that are more confiderable, are preſerv'd ; but if
it be any thing of money, or of ſmall value, it goes
to the maintenance of the Convent and their Head,
whom they ſtile Prior. The Church is ſplendid and
beautiful; but the Virgin dwells not in it: that,
out of veneration and reſpect, is granted to her foi.
She has her Church ſo contriv'd, as to be on the
right hand of her ſon. But neither in that does (be
live, the building being not yet finiſh'd 3 and the wind
runs through it on all ſides 3 for both doors aud win-
dows are open, and the Ocean (the Parent of winds)
is bard by. In the Church, which I told you is un-
finiſb d, is a little narrow Chapel of Wood, into
which the Pilgrims are admitted on each fide at 4
narrow door. T here is but little light; almoſt non:
indeed, except that of the wax tapers, which han,
a very grateful ſmell. But if you look in, you ll

ſay it is a ſeat of the Gods, ſo bright and ſbining
14

Wauburnehope, a creek t not long ſince fortity*d ; + $ f
ſo call'd from the little rown of J/auburne, inn 169,
to which King Edward the ſecond granted a Wubur,

Bourdeaux. Next to this is Clay, [a port, me- Clas
morable || for a ſon and heir to the King of! Walingk
Scotland being there intercepted, anno 1406, YProdig,
in his way to France, by the Seamen of the? 5%

OJ Blakere,,

age [ſave one, | built by Robert de Roos, Robert 1321.

7
(ſo nam'd from the place of his birth, which 8

＋ 15 now, C.

by the name of the Reſolute Doctor. Where- Pig, pc,
upon Paulus Panſa writes thus of him: / your lutas, ©
inclinations lead you to ſearch into the nature of Al-

incurſion of the ſea, by Sand-heaps call'd Meales, Me-ales, ot
[and ſo nam'd (faith Spelman) from the Swe- Miele.

hence, is Yalfingham ; which, from the nearneſs Walſngiin,

in the F laſt age, whoever had not made a viſit So (us,
and an offering to the Bleſſed Virgin of this“. 1057.

call d by the Latins Regular; a middle fort be- Regular

4 5 a v . * a . - x N y "FL *
E e e r > Fs 5 =— 7

4
4
*

£
”
>.

Morile-

| | Hol, p.57!

* A- Secrets,

Houghton,
Neirtur 5.

+ Petronill.
de Valllbus

+ Spelman,

* In eis.

Cie. de Le
ſub fin,

Bloodga

Prannod

num,

* Caftrut
Brancaſte

Bell. Ga
lid, 2,

TY # BY. W.

| Holl. p.57!

57.

FI

NORFOLK

EE

+ © faid,

ans 1607»

Morile-

* A-Sccret!s.

Houghton,

Neirtur us.

+ Petronilla enrich'd by matchi

it is all over, with jewels, gold, and jilver., But
within the memory of our + Fathers, when
Henry the eighth had ſet his eyes and heart
upon the treaſures and revenues of the Church,
all theſe were ſeis'd and carry'd off. And yet Sir
Henry Spelman tells us, there was a common tra-
dition when he was a Child, that the ſame King
Henry had gone barefoot thither from Baſham
(a rown lying South-weſt from hence) and offer'd
a neck-lace ot great value to the Virgin Mary.
But in the thirtieth year of his reign, Crom-
wel carry'd her image from hence to Chelſey ;
where he took care to have it burnt.] I have
nothing elſe to add about J/alfingham, but
that the knightly family of the J/alfinghams
(as the Genealogiſts will have it) had their
name and original trom this place. Of which
family, was Sir Francis Walfingham Secretary
of State to Queen Elizabeth; a perſon, as
admirably vers'd, ſo wonderfully aſſiduous, in
the great and weighty affairs of State. In the
neighbourhood, at Houghton, tormerly flouriſh'd
the famous family of the Neirfords ; very much
with f Parnel de Vaulx,

de Vallitus-who had a great eſtate about Holt, Clay, and

+ Spelman,

* In ſoſis,

in other parts. But to return to the ſhore.
[Towards the Sea-fide, are caſt-up all along
lictle Hills, which were doubtleſs the burying-
places of the Danes and Saxons, upon their
engagements in thoſe parts. Sepulchrum (ſays
Tacitus concerning the Germans) ceſpes erigit,
i.e. a Turt raiſes the Sepulcher. Thoſe two
People us'd to bury the whole body, and after-
wards raiſe a hill upon it : the Romans (as
appears in Virgil by the burial of Mezentius)
made their heap of turf, but only bury'd the
aſhes; ſo that whether they alſo might not
have ſome concern in theſe Hills (eſpecially,
Brannodunum being ſo near) cannot be diſco-
ver'd, but by digging. However, our + Learn-
ed Knight from thoſe circumſtances, has rais'd
theſe three following obſervations ; firſt, that
the perſons bury'd hereabouts, mult have been
Heathens, becauſe the Chriſtians follow'd the
Jewiſh way of burying * in low places. For
though our word bury (coming from the Sa-
xon by pigan, and that from beopg,, a hill) de-
notes a riſing- ground, as well as the Latin
tumulure, yet this is to be reckon'd amongſt
thoſe many words which Chriſtians have bor-
row d from the Heathens, and apply'd to their
own Rites and Conſtitutions. Secondly, that
thoſe parts which are now very fruitful in

* * Leg. corn, were then uncultivated ; becauſe the Su-
u N.

perſtition of the Heathens would not allow
them to bury in Fields. Thirdly, that this
mult have been a ſcene of war between the
Danes and Saxons : for in the fields near Creake,
there is a large Saxon Fortification; and the
way that goes from it is to this day call'd blood-

Bloodgate. gate, as a mark of the diſmal ſlaughter. Here-

abours, 1s alſo great plenty of the herb Ebulum,

which the inhabitants call Dane-blood, as if it

were the product of their blood ſpilt here. |
Near Wallingham, upon the ſea-ſhore to the

Prannodu- weſt, ſtood that ancient Brannodunum, where,

num,

#

* Caftrum,
Brancaſter.

Bell. Gall.

lid. 2.

when the Saxons began to infeſt Britain, the
Dalmatian Horſe kept garriſon under the Count

of the Saxon ſhore. Now, it is a Country -village,

retaining nothing but the remains of the name,
and ſhewing an entrenchment (the neighbours
call it“ Caſter) which includes ſome eight acres,
and is nam'd Brancaſter. Here, ancient Roman
Coins are frequently dug- up, ſand we ſee the
plain remains of the ſaid Roman- camp, an-
12 the figure of that which is deſcrib'd
by Cæſar, He commanded a Camp to be made twelve
foot bigh, with a rampire and ditch eighteen foot deep.

be confeſs

All the dimenſions of it ſhew, that it was not
made in haſte, but was regular, and deſign'd
on purpoſe for a ſtation upon that northern
ſhore, againſt the incurſions of the Saxons. It
ſeems to imply no more, by the name, than a
town upon a river; for dunum (as behig and bung
in Saxon) ſignifies as well a town, as a hill ;
and the Britiſh bran, as well as burne, ſignifies a
rivulet. Theſe two we find confounded in the
ſirname of Leofrick the Saxon, who is ſomerimes
call'd Dominus de Brane, and ſometimes de Burne.
Sir Henry Spelman tells us, there were ſeve-
ral coins dug-up there, in his time likewiſe,
of which he had ſome brought him; as alſo
two little brazen pitchers. |] This was a very
proper plice for a garriſon : for at the neigh-

tou built by the ſame St. Edmund, the ſhore
turns-in to the ſouth, and forms a large bay,

which is much expos'd to Pirates, and receives
ſeveral rivers,

ted to be heir of the kingdom of che Ealt-
Angles, landed with a great Retinue from Ger-

many, in ſome port not far from hence, call'd
Maiden-boure.

nor does Burnham ſeem largꝭ enough to receive
ſuch a wy upon that occaſion ; tho it mult

'd that their ſhips in thoſe times
were but ſmall. Lenn ſeems to lay the beſt

claim to it, both as the moſt eminent port,

and becauſe that is really Maiden-boure, St.
Margaret the Virgin being as it were the tu-
telary Saint of that place. In honour of her,
the Arms of the place are three Dragons heads,
each wounded with a Croſs (tor ſhe is ſaid
with a croſs to have conquer'd a Dragon.) And
their publick Seal has the picture ot the Vir-
gin, wounding the Dragon with a croſs, and
treading him under foot, with this inſcription
round it: Stat Margareta, draco fugit, in cruce
lata. ;
Hunſtanton aforemention'd is the place
where King Edmund reſided near a whole year,
endeavouring to get by heart David's Pſalms
in the Saxon language. Ihe very book was
religiouſly preſerv'd by the Monks of St. Ed-
mundsbury, till the general diſlolution of Mona-
ſeries. ! But neither is the place to be omit-
ted upon this account, that it has been the

bouring Chapel of St. Edmund, and at Hunftan- Hunſtanton.

St. Edmunds-Cape is ſo call'd, from EdmundSt.Edmund's«
King and Martyr; who being by Offa adop- Cape.

But which it ſhould be, is not Maiden-
ſo certain : Hecham is too little and obſcure ; boure.

ſeat of the famous family of Le-Strange Knights, Le-Strange,

ever ſince Jon Baron Le-Strange of Knockin, be-
ſtow'd it upon his younger brother Hamon ;
which was in the reign ot Edward the ſecond.

[Farther ſouthward, on the ſea-coaſt, lies

Ingleſthorp, f io call'd from a village built there ingleſthorp.
by one Ingulph, to whom Thoke the great Lord i Lib. Ms.
of theſe parts gave his only daughter in mar- eited by Sir
riage : tho', perhaps, it may be as probably Henry Spel-

fetch'd from Ingol, a little river which runs man

into the ſea there.

The catching of Hawks, and the abundance
of Fiſh, with the Jett and Amber commonly
found upon this coaſt, I purpoſely paſs by ;
becauſe other places alſo in thoſe parts afford

them in great plenty. Yet Sharzboriz upon this gharghorn.
coaſt is well worth our notice, becauſe Felix Falix the Ei-

the Burgundian, who converted the Eaſt- ſhop.

Angles to Chriſtianity, built here the fe
cond Chriſtian Church of that Province ( the
firſt, he is ſaid to have built at Babingley,

where he landed.) [Of this place Thoke was
Lord, when Falix came to convert the Eaſt-
Angles. Upon his converſion to Chriſtianity,
he built here a Church dedicated to St. Peter

and St. Paul. It was very little, and (accord-
| ing

471

10 E

NI.

—

——

„ h, ——
——

„1 A

The Waſhes.

ing to the cuſtom ot that age) made of wood,
tor which reaſon it was call'd Srock-Chapel; and

was probably the very ſame, that Feelix is ſaid buildings, and wealth of the Citizens, it f WAS4 Is (

As to Pabingley, Folix the; beyond diſpute the beſt town of the /ceni, Nor-

to have built.

[Yet for its ſafe harbour, with an entrance very
[

eaſy, tor the number of merchants, beauty of

Apoſtle of the Eaſt-Angles, coming about the wich only excepted ; (but, at preſent, Yarmouth

year 630, converted the inhabitants to Chri-

is ſo much grown in trade, as to have double

itianity, and (as hath been ſaid) built there the number of ſhipping, merchants, and inha-

the firſt Chriſtian Church in thoſe parts; of
which ſucceeding Ages made St. Felix the Pa-
tron. Some remains of this tranſaction ſeem
to be foundꝰ in the mountains call'd Chriſtian

bitants.) It enjoys alſo very large Immuni-
ties, which they purchas'd of King John with
the price of their own blood, ſpent in the de-
tence of his cauſe. For he granted them a

1 . - . . [ .
Fills; and in Flitcham, which imports as much | Mayor, and gave his own ſword to be carry'd

as the Village or Dwelling-place of Fulix. But to
return to Sharnborn.| It is alſo remarkable,
what we are inform'd by ancient Records,
that the Saxon Lord of this place, before
the coming-in of the Normans, had, upon a
fair hearing, ſentence given in favour of him
by the Conqueror himſelf againſt Marren, on
whom the ſame Conqueror had beſtow'd it. | The
name of the Lord of the place was Edwin,
a Dane, who came over with Canutus, Anno
1014. and had it by marrying an heireſs of
Thoke's family. It appears by a Manuſcript
quoted by Sir Henry Spelman, that his plea
againſt Narren was, That he had not been aiding
or aſſiſting againſt the King, directly or iadirettly,
either before, at, or aſter the Conqueſt ; but all that
while kept himſelf out of arms. And this he was
ready to prove whenever the King pleas d.] Which
inſtance is urg'd by thoſe, who hold that Mil-
liam did not poſſeſs himſelf of England by
Conqueſt, but by Treaty and Covenant.
he toremention'd Bay we call The Waſhes ;

Metaris «ſtu. but Prolemy calls it Aſtuarimm Metaris, poſſi-

ariium.

Len.

A *

+ So ſaid,
. ann. 1607.

bly inſtead of Maltraith, a name by which the
Britains call'd ſuch eſtuaries in other places,
and which imports no more than an uncertain
aſtuary, as this is. Upon it, where the river
O:je enters the Ocean, is ſeated Lime, per-
haps ſo nam'd from it's ſpreading waters; for

| before him [ (as they affirm)] with a filver cup

gilt, which they have to this day.

But, as to the Sword, there is ſome rea-
ſon to doubt the truth of this tradition: For
they tell you, it was given from King John's
ſide to be carry'd before the Mayor, whereas
he did not grant them a Mayor, but only

or was granted by King Henry the third,
as- a reward for their good ſervice againit the
Barons in the Iſle of Ely. Beſides, King John's
Charter makes no mention of the Sword ; ſo
that it is probable it might be given by Henry
the eighth, who (after it came into his hands)
granted the town ſeveral privileges, chang'd
their Burgeſſes into Aldermen, and granted them a
Sword (whereot expreſs mention is made in the
Charter) to be carry'd before their Mayor (a).

After K. John, they purchas'd their loſt Li-
berties of Henry the third, not without blood ;
when they ſided with him againſt the out-law'd
Barons, and engag'd them unſucceſsfully in tlie
Ifle of Ely. An account whereof we have in
the book of Ely, and in Matthew Paris.

This Town hath a very large Church
with a high ſpire, built by Biſhop Herbert,

that is imply'd by In in Britiſh. | But Spel-
man aftirms, that the right name is Len; from
Len, in Saxon a farm, or tenure in fee : fo Fu-
rethen, among the Germans, is the teure or
fee of a Barca ; and Len Epiſcopi is the Biſhop's
farm. He turthcr obſerves (tho' I could ne-
ver meet with any ſuch word amongſt our Eng-
liſh-Saxons) that the word Len is us'd alſo in
a more limited ſenſe by the Saxons to ſigni-
ty Church-lands, and appeals to the ſeveral names
ot places, wherein that ſenſe ot the word holds;
and further, Ter-llez (it ſeems) in Welſh is

All this was done by way of penance, after Si-
mony had been charg'd upon him by the See
of Rome. Ir hath no treſh-water ſprings ; but

is ſupply'd partly by a river from Gaywoed (the

water whereof is rais d by Engines, and from
thence ſome conduits in the town are {upply'd,)
and partly by water convey'd in leaden pipes;
one from Middletoz about three miles, the other
from Mintlin, about two miles oft, In order
to the Reſtoration of King Charles the ſecond,
the Harbour here was tortified, and confidera-
ble forces prepar'd, by Sir Horace Townſhend ot
Raynham in this County; who was thereupon,

Terra Eccleſiæ. This is a large town, almoſt

ſurrounded with a deep ditch and walls, and |vanced to the degree of a Baron of this Realm, Ser Raser
by the title of Lord Townſhend of Ning
Lyne.

divided by two Rivulets, which have ſome tit-
teen bridges over them. It is but of f late
date, and was call'd not long ſince Biſhop's
Linne, becauſe till Henry the eighth's time it
belong'd to the Biſhops of Norwich (for it
aroſe out of the ruins of one more ancient,
which lies in Merſhland over-againſt it and is

+ And King's call'd at this day Old Lynne. f) | But that King

Lynre, C.

Len Regis,

exchanging the monaſtery of St. Bennet of Hulme
and other lands for the revenues of the Biſhop-
rick ; this, among the reſt, came into his hands,
and ſo, with the poſſeſſor, changed the name

. 4 . K 5 \
in the thirteenth year of the ſaid King, ad-

Il

a * Provoſt; and the privilege of a May- f.

who alſo built the Cathedral at Norwich, G24,
with the Churches ot Tarmouth and Elinham and de rr

Over the river, oppoſite to Lynne, lics Merſb- Merſtlind

land, | a Peninſula, almoſt ſurrounded with na-
vigable Rivers and an arm of the ſea ; being
a low marſby little tract (as the name implies,)
'every Where parcell'd with ditches and drains
to draw off the waters | which make it look as
if it were cut to pieces ; and they have over
them no leſs than one hundred and eleven
bridges. The whole, in the wideſt part, 15
but ten miles over, conſiſting of thirty thou-

into Len Regis. But altho' it is of late date, |jſand Acres. | The foil is exceeding fat; and

—

(a) I find a looſe Paper of Sir Henry Spel man's, dated Sept. 15. 1630, to this purpoſe; That he was then afur'd
by the Town-Clerk of Len, that the Sword-bearer about fifty years before, came to the School-malter of the
place, ard delir'd him, becauſe one fide of the hilt of the Town-ſword was plain and without any Inſcription, that

he wou!d direct how to engrave upon it, That, King John gave that Sword, to the Town,

Whereupon he cau-

{ed the perſon who gave this information and was then his Scholar, to write theſe words, Enſis hie ſuit donum Regs

Johannis a ſuo ipfius latere datum;

i. e. This Sword was the Gift of King Jobn, given from bis own ſide; attat

which, the Sword-bearer carry'd the writing to a Goldſmith, and caus'd him to engrave it, So that, by this
account, whatever Inſcription of that nature may be now upon it, muſt not of it ſelt be interpreted to amount

to a tull proof of that Antiquity, which the matter of the Inſcription ſets forth,

(turning

—— — — .

Tilrey-
Smet.

> . Ia W@ws ww ud po —_ * „ a md a ae -

*
* + eb. tos Km 7 its OS. © + © A , :

ASI. <p Ei
r

Walpole,

Tilney 8.
St. Marie
Ann. 1607

Downham,

Stow. Bat
dolf,

Weſt-Der:

ham,

Near, (
Rilng.Caf

7

Nair bar.

Mind,

— "2 puY > Ay) A
Fn * 4 ** NY ” 1 V * * E * *
n 2 ks - 4 48 2 N * * Eat; #-- * * * * * P : + w_ =” or " * F TY * Y oy
\- dk 5 * - * l CPE x * 2 2 PAC * 7 _ 4 4 * * * 2 3 * 1 p N 9 *
Ls mm mn ES r SES? 8 e rr 48 A \

| Tilrey-

0 8 F *
F öͤ 7·—m r ðĩ 1 TOTO Oe : " SEP 1

73

Smet.

Walpole,

Tilneys,
St. Maries.
Ann. 1607.

Downham,

Stow. Bar-
dolf,

Weſt-Dere-
ham,

houſe there, wherein (as an inſtance of grati-

{ Near, C.

Ring-Caſtle,

turning to more account by graſs than corn)
breeds a bundanee of cattel; ſo that in the place
call'd Tilzey-Smeth (tho' not any way above two
miles over) there feed to the number of about
thirty thouſand ſheep, [beſides the paſture of
all the larger cattel belonging to the ſeven
villages there. | Burt the fea, what by beating,
waſhing away, overflowing, and demoliſhing,
makes ſuch trequent and violerit attempts upon
them, that they have much ado to keep it out
by the wy ot the ſtrongeſt banks. Indeed,
the eaven ſuperficies, and other circumſtances, |
ſeem to argue its being formerly recover'd from
the ſea by the induſtry of the ancient inhabi-
rants. And Sir Henry Spelman tells us, that
within his memory, there were two general
overflowings, one of ſalt, and the other of freſh,
vater. By the latter (as appear'd upon oath
taken betore the Commiſſioners appointed to
inſpect that affair, whereof Sir Henry was one)
the inhabitants ſufter'd forty-rwo thouſand
pounds damage.
break down the bank (as at other times) but
ran over it, at leaſt a whole foor. bes are
within a few years fallen upon an expedient,
which, it is hoped, will prove a good defence
to the moſt dangerous and weakeſt parts ;
namely, a ſubſtantial brick-wall with earth,
which (where it was well contriv'd) hath re-
ſiſted the tides ; whereas the value of the eſtates
was almoſt yearly laid out in the old way of
imbanking. |

are, Walpole (1. e. a pool near the wall or rampire,
of the ſame original with its neighbours al-
ton, and Halſoke;)| which the Lord of the
Place formerly gave to the Church of Ely with
his ſon, whom he made a Monk there: Vi-
genhall, the poſſeſſion of J. Howard in the reign
of Edward the firſt, whoſe poſterity grew into
a moſt honourable and ilulfrious tamily : Til-
ney before-mention'd, which gave name to the

NORFOLK.

+74

For the water did not then

The moſt conſiderable places in this tract,

ancient family of the Tilneys Knights; and Se.
Maries, the feat of the ancient family of the
Carvils.

And thus we have ſurvey'd the whole ſea-
coaſt. More inward, on the weſt-ſide of the
County, there are alſo ſeveral towns; bur !
will only touch upon them, becauſe many of
them are of a late date. | Downham is ſo call'd
from its hilly ſituation (for dun ſignifies a hill,
and ham a dwelling.) In ſome old Records it
is call'd Downeham-hithe, i. e. Douneham- port,
from the river upon which it ſtands. The pri-
vilege of a Market belonging to this plat
is of a very ancient date, for it is confirm'd
by Edward the Confeſſor. A little more north-
ward is Stow-Bardolf, where Nicholas Hare built
a ſtately houſe ; but Hugh Hare, brother to
Nicholas, was he who ſo much improv'd the
eſtate ; and, dying without marriage, left a
vaſt Inheritance between two. nephews. Not tar
from hence lies Heſt-Dereham, famous for the
birth of Hubert Walter, who being bred up un-
der the famous Lord Chief Juſtice Glanville,
became Archbiſhop of Canterbury, Lord Chan-
cellor under King Richard the firſt, *
to Pope Celeſtine the fourth, and Chief Juſtice
of all England. The reſpect which he had
for the place, oblig'd him to build a Religious

tude for the many favours he had receiv'd) he
order d, that they ſhould conſtantly pray for

the ſoul of his great patron, Ralph de Glan-
villa.

that at Norwich. It was formerly t

+ On the other ſide of Linne, is Rifing
Caſtle, ſeated on a high hill, and vying with
ſeat of

hault by marriage with the ſiſter and coheir
of Hugh de Albiney Earl of Arundel; and
laſtly of the Mowbrays, deſcended (as I have
been told) from the ſame ſtock with the Albinies.
But now it is ruinated, and as it were expi-
ring with age. [To fortify the ſaid caſtle,
there is alſo a vaſt circular ditch ; the form
whereot (according to Procopius's deſcription)
anſwers the Gothick manner of fortitying :
and therefore it is probably a work of the
Normans, who were deſcended from the Goths.
The Saxons indeed made their ſeſſe circular,
but then it was more narrow, leſs deep, and
generally of greater circumference. But the
Romans alſo ſeem to have had ſomething of a
fortification here; the ſhore being much ex-
pos'd to Piracies (wherein the Saxons ſhew'd
themſelves great maſters ;) and the place, as
it were, guarding and overlooking one of the
beſt harbours in thoſe parts. Beſides, . there
was dug-up near this place a Coin of Conſtan-
tine the Great, which Sir Henry Spelman ſays was

brought to him, Near this is Congham, ho- Congham,

nourd with the birth of Sir Henry Spelman,

that great Oracle of the Law, and a true Patron

of the Clergy ; and indeed the Glory of the

Engliſh Nation. | Below, is Caſtle-acre, where Caſtle- acre.

formerly the Earls of Warren dwelt, in a Ca-
{tle now ruinous, which ſtood upon a little ri-
ver. The river is anonymous, riſing not far

from Godwicke, a lucky name, where is a {mall Godwicke.

ſeat ; but made great by the ornament it re-
ceiv'd from the tamous Sir Edward Cooke, Kt.
a perſon of admirable parts; than whom as
no one ever apply'd himſelf cloſer to the ſtudy
of the Common-Law, ſo never did any one
underſtand it better. Of which he fully con-
vinc'd England, by his excellent adminiſtration
for many years together, whilſt Attorney-Ge-

neral, f and by executing the office of Lord + And il
Chief Juſtice of the Common-Pleas ſ and King's- does, C.

Bench, I with the greateſt wiſdom and prudence.
Nor did he give leſs proot of his abilities, in
his Commentaries upon our Laws, whereby he
has highly oblig'd both his own Age, and

Poſterity. [ Near Godwicke, is Rougham, once Rougham.

the ſeat of the Telvertons ; of whom, William,
under Henry the ſixth, Chriſtopher under Queen
Elizabeth, and Henry under
firſt, were Lords Chiet Juſtices of England. |
The foremention'd little river glides gently

name to the famous family of the Neirfords 3
and by Neirborrough, where (near the feat of
the knightly family of Spilman) is a ſtrong and
ancient military entrenchment upon a high hill,
very conveniently ſituated for the defence of
the neighbouring Country. ¶ The termination

tiquity, and the place it {elf anſwers the name.
For ( beſides the fortification,) from hence to
Oxburgh, there has been a military joſe, tho
now levell'd in ſome places. And Sir Clement
Spelman, in contriving an Orchard. at the toor
of the hill, dug- up the bones of men in great
abundance, and likewiſe old pieces of armour. | -

let, [a little Religious houſe, ] which was for-
merly a common burying-place for the Nobility
of thoſe parts.

IWrongey, which Reginald de Harren brother o
William de Warren ſecond Earl of Surrey, had

the Albinies; afterwards of R de Mont-

O O0 0

ing Charles the

with his wife; Who ( as I have read) was f
the donation or Maritage of the laid Earl, as
they, worded it in that age. By his ſon's
daughter it preſently went to the Bardolphs, B
noble and honourable Barons, who — dolph.
or

of the name ſeems to ſuggeſt ſomething of an-

*

weſtward to Linne, by Neirford, which gave Netrford,

Next, Penteney is plac d upon the ſame rivu- penteney.

Neighbour to this, is Jormegay, commonly Wormegay.

arons Bar-

*
— — => —
* - * *
- — ——
* = —_— „
=
— — —_—— 4
* 2 2 3
- — — «

—
——

2 =3
—

0 % — * - 8 * wo _ y O 2
„ 2
= "= — » — » — » 5
& 4 4 * — — — — — —
. —— OIRS 2
2 ——ͤ „ " *
32344 - - _ ©
— — _ o -
n N —— — = — A — „ —
by — — 4 ©. Dd — d hd dt

ht — —.:—?— ud =

„„
"=" _—_

— — — — a -
.
— 2 *

— +
-
_
*
7 - —
Pt —
RT ——
-

e

mm 233 „ en — — LE 2 : K i -

bd
=
* —

a
4
|
1

— &. = __

475 5 TC ENI

K

for a long time, and bore three Cinque-foils Or
in a field azure. A great part of their eſtate,
together with the title, came to William Phel-
lips, and by his daughter to the Viſcount Beau-
Swaſſham. Mont. More to the eaſt, We ſee Swaffham, a
famous market-rown, formerly the poſſeſſion of
Aſhele. the Earl of Richmond: Aſbele-manour, in right
whereof the Haf7ings, and the Greys Lords of
ou prafue- Ruthum, || had formerly the overſight of the
runt. Table-cloaths and Napkins made uſe of at
L' Office de the Coronation of the Kings of England:
Napparyre. North-Elmham, where the Biſhops had their
ſeat for ſome time, when the Dioceſe was di-
vided into two. This, till within theſe two
ages, was never under the juriſdiction of any
{ecular Lord. For, under the Heathens, it is
{aid to have been the habitation of a Flami ;
and after their converſion to Chriſtianity by
Felix, it came into the poſſeſſion of the Bi-
ſhops. The See was firſt at Damuvich, but when
ir was thought too great for the management
of one, it was divided into two Dioceſes, the
one to reſide at Dunwich for Suffolk, and the
other at Elmham for Norfolk. Near this North-
Philoſoph  Elmham, have been lately diſcover'd great quan-
Tranſ. N. tities of Urns ; which had generally nothing in

257. them but Aſhes, and pieces of broken bones. |
Dereham, Next, is Dereham [ (called alſo Eaſt-Dereham,
and Market-Dercham)] where was bury'd
WWithburga daughter of King Anna, who di-
vorcing her felt entirely from the luxury and
levities of the world, and being a Virgin of
great ſanctity, was by our Anceſtors cano-
niz'd a Saint. [This, having been almoſt
burnt to the ground, is now rebuilt into a
fair town; and Hingham, another market-town
not far from it, hath had both the ſame fate, and
Greſſenhall, the ſame remedy.] Next to Dereham, is Greſ-
ſenhall, with its neighbour Elfing ; both, former-
Folliot, ly, the poſſeſſions of the Folliots, perſons of great
honour in their time. By the daughter of Ri-
chard Fvllior, they came to Hugh de Haftings of
the family of Abergeuenny : and at length, by the
daughters and heirs of Hugh Haſting the laſt,
Greſſenhall came to Hamon le Strange of Hunſtan-
Elüng. ſton, and Elfing to William Brown brother of
Anthony Brown firſt Viſcount Moztacute. In this
Bradenham. quarter alſo is [ Bradenham, from whence Tho-
mas Windſor, in the reg of King Henry the
eighth, had the title of Lord Windſor of Bra-
Ic-borough, denham ; and] Z{-borowgh, which Talbot takes
Kian. tobe the Iiani, mention'd by Antoninus. Nor
need I ſay any more about theſe parts, ſbut
Weeting. that ſome four miles from hence, lies Meeting,
near Brandon-ferry ; wherein is an old waſted
Caſtle, moated about; and at a mile's diſtance
eaſtward, is a hill with certain ſmall trenches or
Gimesgraves. ancient fortifications, call*d Gimes-graves, of
which name the Inhabitants can give no ac-
count. On the weſt- ſide of this place, from
the edge of the Fen, ariſes a bank and ditch,
which, runuing-on for ſome miles, parts the
bound of Meeting from Wilton and Feltwell ; and
is call'd the Foſs. In the fields of Mieeting, is
a fine green way, call'd Walfingbham-way, be-
ing the road for the Pilgrims to the Lady of
Walfingham. And about a mile from the town,
to the north, is another like it from Hockwold
and Milton, upon which are two ſtump croſſes
of ſtone, ſuppoſed to be ſet there for direction

to the Pilgrims. | 5

I have now nothing to do, but to reckon-
up the Earls and Dukes of Norfolk, and ſo to

go on to Cambridgeſhire. bu Batak
Packs and William the Conqueror placed one Ralph o-
Dukes of Nor- ver the Country of the * that is,
folk. the Counties ot Norfolk, Suftolk, and Cam-

i ho

476

bridgeſhire : but he was quickly depriv'd (as

I obſerv'd before,) for attempting Innovations
in the State. Some years after, in the reign
of King Stephen, Hugh Bigod was Earl of Nor-
folk. For when a Peace was concluded be-

tween Stephen and Henry of Anjou ( afterwards ,

Henry the ſecond,) it was expreſly provided, beast

that William ſon of Stephen, ſhould have the Stykn

whole County of Norfolk (except, among other idee
things, the third pemy which belonged to Hugh Anja,

Bigod as Earl : ) whom, notwithſtanding, King

Henry the ſecond, afterwards made Earl of the Rob
third penny of Norfolk and Norwic. In the 27th tends,

of Henry the ſecond, upon his death, his ſon
Roger ſucceeded him, who, for I know not
what reaſon, procur'd a new Creation-Chartet
from Richard the firſt. Roger was ſucceeded by
his ſon Hugh, who marry'd Mawd eldeſt daugh-
ter and coheir of Milliam Marſhal Earl of Pem-
broke. By her, he had Roger Earl of Norfolk

and Marſhal of England, who * having put his ;,...
Limbs out of joint at a Tournament, dy dena.

without iflue ; and Hugh Bigod, Juſticiary of
England, and ſlain in the battle of Lewes, whoſe
ſon Roger ſucceeded his Uncle in the dignity of
Earl of Norfolk, and Marſhal. But when his
inſolent and ſtubborn behaviour had brought
him under the diſpleaſure of Edward the firſt,
he was fore d to paſs- over his honours, and al-
moſt his whole eſtate, to the King, for the uſe
of Thomas de Brot herton, the King's ſon by Mar-
ſiſter to Philip the Fair, King of France.

or ſo the account is in a Hiſtory belonging to
the Library of St. Auguſtins in Canterbury. In
the year 1301. Roger Bigod Earl of Norfolk
made King Edward his heir, and deliver'd up to him
the Marſhal's rod, upon this condition, That if his
wife bore him any children, all ſhould be return d,
and he ſhould hold it peaceably without any lett on
the King's part. And the King gave him a thou-

and pounds in money, and a thouſand F pounds + Lila,

in lands for life, with the Titles of Marſhal and
Earl. But he dying without iſſue, King Ed-
ward the ſecond, by virtue of the ſurrender
above-mention'd, honour'd his brother Thomas
Brotherton with the titles of Marſhal, and Earl
of Norfolk. But his daughter Margaret (call d

Lady Marſhal and Counteſs of Norfolk, and Parl. 21
marry'd to John Lord ave,) was created Rich. 2.

Dutcheſs of Norfolk for lite by King Richard
the ſecond ; who at the ſame time created
Thomas Mowbray ( Earl of Nottingham and
grandchild to Margaret by a daughter) firſt

Duke of Norfolk to him and his heirs males ; ha- Dukes,

ving before granted him the dignity and ſtile of
Earl Marſhal of England. This is he who ac-
cus d Henry of Lancafer Earl of Hereford, to
the King, for uttering reproachful and mali-
cious words againſt his Majeſty. And when
they were to try it by duel, a Herald by the
King's authority pronounced ſentence at the
very Liſts, that both ſhould be baniſh'd, Lan-
caſter for ten years, but Mowbray for life, who
dy'd at Venice, leaving two ſons behind him
in England: Of whom, Thomas, Earl Mar-
ſhal and Earl of Nottingham (for he had no
other title) upon raiſing a conſpiracy, was be-
headed by Henry of Lancaſter, who had then
poſſeſs d himſelf of the Crown, under the name
of Henry the fourth. Bur his brother and heir,
John, by the favour of Henry the fifth, was
reſtor d; and being, for ſome years after, ſtil'd
only. Marſbal, and Earl of Nottingham, upon
Henry the ſixth's coming to the Crown, was

in virtue of a Patent granted by Richard the Rot. oe
ſecond, as' ſon of Thomas Duke of Norfolk his Her.“

Father, and heir to Thomas his brother, declar d
ND + Duke

C.

W + The 1:

*

-
1
=

An honorary b
Eſcocheon in t]
the Arms of x;
the Howards.

V
I
* Our own, 1
V
0

See in the F
Adages of t

Hadr, Jun,
Achilleum
vorum,

Duke, C.

0
& |
]
*
C
C
1
*
|
k
{
(
|

it the

14.

292 o®

477

NORFOLK

RE 478

0 Parl. 17
Fd. 4.

An bonorary
Eſcocheon in
the Arms of

the Howards.

Our own,
.

| See in the

Adages of
Hadr, Jun,
Ackilleum

dDotum.

Ire laſt
bule, C.

Duke of Norfolk, by authority of Parliament.
He was ſucceeded by his ſon John, who dy'd
in the firſt year of Edward the fourth; and
he alſo by his ſon of that name, who in the
life-time of his father was, by Henry the ſixth,
created Earl of Surrey and Warren. Whoſe on-
ly daughter Anne was marry'd to Richard Duke
of York, King Edward the fourth's ſon, and
with her, he received from his father the titles
of Norfolk, Earl Marſhal, Warren and Notting-
ham. But both he and his wife being taken
away while very young, Richard the third
King of England conter'd the title of Duke
of Norfolk, and the authority of Earl Marſhal,
upon Jom Howard, who was found Kinſman
and one of the heirs of Anne Dutcheſs of Tork
and Norfolk above-mention'd. For his mother
was one of the daughters of the firſt Thomas

Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, and King Edward |

the fourth advanc'd him to the dignity of a
Baron. This John was kill'd in the battle of
Boſworth, ageing valiantly for Richard againſt
Henry the ſeventh. His ſon Thomas (who by
creation from Richard the third, was Earl of
Surrey) was by King Henry the eighth reſtor'd
to his father's title of Norfolk, after he had
routed the Scotch-army at Hoddon, wherein
James the firſt King of Scots was ſlain. In
memory of which Victory, it was granted to
the family of the Howards, that in the middle
of the White Bend in their Arms, there ſhould
be added, Iz an Eſcocheon Or, a demy Lion ſhot
through the mouth with an arrow, within a double
treſſure adoru'd with Lilies on both fides Gules :
which comes very near to the Arms .of the
Kings of Scotland. He was ſucceeded by his ſon
Thomas; whom the * laſt Age ſaw toſs'd about
with the ebbs and flows of Fortune. His
Grandchild Thomas, by his ſon Henry (which
Henry was the firſt of our Engliſh Nobility,
that grac'd his high birth with the otnaments
of Learning) being attainted of High Treaſon
for endeavouring a match with Mary Queen
of Scots, and in the year 1572. beheaded, was
+ the laſt of thoſe more ancient Dukes of
Norfolk. From which time his poſterity as it
were lay dead; till, by the favour and bounty
of King James [the 1ſt] they began to revive
and flouriſh again. [By the Attainder of the
laſt Thomas, the title ot Duke of Norfolk being
taken away, Philip his eldeſt ſon was call'd on-
ly Earl of Arundel, by deſcent from his mo-
ther: and he being attainted of High Treaſon for
favouring the Popiſh party, had the ſentence
of death paſs'd upon him ; but his execution
being forborn, he dy'd in the Tower An.
1595. His ſon and only child Thomas was cre-
ated Earl of Norfolk Jun. 6. 20 Car. 1. and
dy'd at Padua An. 1646. leaving two ſons,

Heury and Thomas, of whom Henry ſucceeded his

father and he likewiſe was ſucceeded by To-

mas his eldeſt ſon in his Titles of Earl of 4-
rundel, Surrey, and Norfolk, who at the humble
petition of ſeveral of the Nobility, was, May
8. 13 Car. 2. reſtor'd to the title of Duke of
Norfolk. But he dying without iflue, the Ho-
nour deſcended to Henry Lord Howard his next
Brother, who was ſucceeded therein by Henry
his eldeſt ſon 3 who leaving no iſſue, was ſuc-
ceeded by Thomas, ſon of Thomas his younger

brother, in whom the Honour at preſent re-
mains. | Wy

There are in this County about 660 Pariſh-

Churches.

More rare Plants growing wild in Norfolk.

Atriplex maritima noſtras Ocimi minoris fo-
lio. Sea-Orrache with ſmall Bafil leaves. Found
by Dr. Plukenet near Kings-Lynne.

Acorus verus five Calamus Officinarum. Park.
The ſweer-ſmelling Flag or Calamus. Obſerved by
Sir Thomas Brown in the river Iure near Norwich.
See the Synonymes in Surrey.

Lychnis viſcoſa flore muſcoſo C. B. Seſamoi-
des Salamanticum magnum Ger. Muſcipula Sa-
lamantica major Park. Muſcipula muſcoſo
flore ſeu Ocymoides Belliforme F. B. Spaniſþ
Catchfly. By the way-frdes all as you travel
from Barton-mills to Thetford, plentifully.

Spongia ramoſa fluviatilis. Branched river-
ponge. In the river Yare near Norwich.

Turritis Ger. vulgatior J. B. Park. Braſſica
ſylveſtris foliis integris & hiſpidis C. B. Tow-
er- muſtard. In the hedges about the mid-way between
Norwich and Tarmouth,

Verbaſcum pulverulentum flore luteo parvo
J. B. an mas toliis anguſtioribus, floribus pal-
lidis C. B. Hoary Mullein. About the walls of
Norwich.

Vermicularis frutex minor Ger. Shrub Stone-
crop. This was ſbew'd us by Sir Thomas Brown
of Norwich, who had it from the ſea-coaſt of
Norfolk. See the Synonymes in Gloceſterſbire.

Urtica Romana Ger. Park. Roman Nettle.
At Yarmouth by the lanes fides not far from the
Key.

N. Travelling from Lynne to Norwich, I ob-
ſerved by the way-fide not far from Norwich the
Medica ſylveſtris J. B. which is uſually with a
yellow flower, and therefore called by Clufius Medi-

the flower, and to become purpliſh like the Bur
dy Trefoil or Sainf-foin. —

CAM:

ca fruteſcens flavo flore, to vary in the colour of

— — —— —

ICE

NI. Þ:

CAMBRID

=> ORE into the in-land Coun-|

WANG try, lies the County of
Cambridge, by the Saxons call-
ed [Epancabpycgreyp and
bpentbpigg-rey pe, | by later
Writers, according to the
ſeveral ages wherein they li-
ved, Cantebrigefire, Grantebridgeſcire, Cantebrigge-
ſchire.1 It is now commonly called Cambridge-
ſhire ; and is ſtretch'd length-ways to the north;
and borders upon Norfolk and Suffolk on the
eaſt, Eſſex and Hertfordſhire on the ſouth, Bed-
fordſbire and Huntingdonſhire on the welt, and
Lincolnſhire on the north. The river Ouſe, run-
ning trom weſt to eaſt, croſſes, and divides it
into two parts. The ſouth and lower part 1s
more improv'd, better planted, and conſequent-
ly more rich and fertile, than the other ;
ſufficiently plain, but not quite level; chiefly,
or indeed wholly (ſetting aſide that part which
produces plenty of Saftron) conſiſting of Corn-
tields, abundantly ſtor'd with the beſt Barley,

Byne, Malt. of which they make great quantities of Byne

Erming-
ſtreet,

Royſton,

or Malt, by ſteeping it till it ſprout again,
and then drying it over a Kiln: and this the
Engliſh make their Beer of. The Inhabitants
drive a gaintul trade with it, into the neigh-
bouring Counties. The north and farther part,
by realon of the floods, fens, and the man

Wlands, is call'd the Ae of Ely ; abounds with
rich paſtures, exceeding freſh and pleaſant, but
hollow and ſpungy, by reaſon of the waters
that undermine the Soil; which alſo ſome-
times overflow, and drown the greateſt part
of it. þ

[This County hath of late years had two
very conſiderable improvements, of its ſoil, and
air: the firſt by planting great quantities of
Saintfoine (which is brought from foreign parts,
and thrives only in very dry and barren ground ;)
the ſecond by draining the fens in the Iſle of
Ely, a work that was carry'd on at vaſt ex-
pence, but has at laſt turn'd to double ac-
count, both in gaining much ground, and
mending the reſt; and alſo in refining and
clearing the air of this Country.]

One of the Roman high-ways (call'd Erming-
ſtreat in the Ely book) runs along the weſt- ſide
of the lower part, and carries us directly to
Huntingdon, by Royſton, a town on the borders

See Hertford- of the County, ot ſome note, but of no anti-

ire.

Caxton.

Hatley St.
Gcorge.

Shengay,

quity, [lying partly in Hertfordſhire and partly
in this County ;1 of which we have ſpoken
before: and likewiſe through Caxton, former!
the Barony of Stephen de Eſchallers, from who
poſterity it deſcended to the Frevills in the
time of Henry the third, and from them, by
the Burgoins, to the Jermins. Nor is Gamling-
hay far oft, the habitation formerly of the Ave-
nels, whoſe eſtate came by marriage to the
ancient family of St. George; a family, that
ſince Henry the firſt has produc'd many worthy
Knights, who liv'd at Hatley, from them call'd
Hatley St. George.

More weſtward, there is a little river which
runs through the middle of this part, from
South to North, to mix with the Ouſe; riſing
at Aſhwell, and paſſing with many windings by
Shengay (where are the moſt pleaſant meadows
of the County,) formerly, a Commandery of
the Knights Templars, given to them by 571,
daughter of Roger Mont-gomery Earl of Shrews-

GESHIRE.

bury and wife of J. de Raines, in the year i 130,

A little way off, is | J/imple, a ſeat of the Lord Wing:
Harley, by marriage with the heireſs of John
late Duke of Newcaſtle ; and] Burne-caſtle, gy... .
which was anciently the Barony of one Picot, Rss“
Sheriff of this County, and alſo of the Peverills, Burn,
by one of whoſe daughters the Inheritance and
Honours came to Gilbert Peche ; the laſt of *
which family, after he had advanced his ſe- Hig, ©
cond wife's children, made King Edward the The x;

bility brought up. the ancient Roman cuſtom eres
in the time of their Emperors, of making their
Princes their heirs, whenever they were out

of favour. This Caſtle was burnt down in the
Barons war in Henry the third's time ; being

ſet on fire, by one Ribald de Iuſula, or L Ile;

at which time, alter of Cottenham, a great
man, was hang'd for rebellion.

[Near the ſame river, is Trumpington, where, Trans,

in a place call'd Dam-hill, have been diſcover'd tor,
Roman Urns, Patera's, and other antiquities Dam
of that People ; rogether with great numbers
of human bones. |

It 1s uncertain, by what name former wri-
ters call'd this river; ſome will have it to be
Grant, but others Cam ; which laſt to me ſeems
moſt probable, both becauſe it is ſo crooked (tor
ſo the Britiſh word Cam ſignifies ; whence a Cam g
crooked river in Cornwal is call'd Camel ; ) and
alſo, becauſe old Camboritum (a town men-
tion'd by Antoninus in his third Journey in
Britain) ſtood upon it, as I am perſwaded both
by its diſtance and name, and alſo by the
great number of Roman Coins, found nigh
the bridge. For Camboritum ſignifies a fed

tion this, that the French may better under-2"
. © » . * Gi ut

ſtand the meaning of Anguſtoritum, Darioritum,

Rithomagus, &c. in their own Country, How-

ever the Saxons choſe to uſe Iipant-ceaprep Gran:

and DBpont- cearcen for our Camboritum ; which
name it ſtill retains, but I cannot yet find the
derivation of ir. To derive it trom a Saxon

Gronnas paludofiſſimas, which is a mixture ot
Saxon and Latin; and it is well known, that
a city in Weſt-Friezland, of the like ſituation,
is call'd Groneingen. But let others hunt after
the Etymology of it. About the year 700,
Bede faith, This was a little deſolate city, when
he tells us, that juſt by its walls, was found a little
trough or coſſin of white marble delicately wrought,
with a lid of the ſame, exacily fitted for it. Now,
it is a ſmall village; part whercot Henry Lacy,
Earl of Lincoln, gave to his baſtard-ſon Heng;
on condition that his poſterity (which have
been long ſince extin&) ſhould take no other
name but Henry. King Henry the ſixth ot the
Houſe of Lancaſter, to whom the eſtate of Earl
Lacie fell, ſettled the other part upon his own

p. 402.

town was either a Limb, or the daughter of
the ancient Camboritum ; it is ſo nigh it in
name and ſituation. Nor am I apt to believe,
that Cam was ever form'd out of Grant; for
this is a change too forc'd and ſtrain'd, where
all the letters are loſt but one. I ſhould ra-
ther think, that the common people __
eep

firſt his heir. In thoſe days, the Engliſh No- beit u

tas

over Cam, or a crooked ford; the word rith in Ritt, is%

the Britiſh language ſignifying a ford. 1 men- one a
rituh 19

word Groz (a fenny place,) might prove a mi-# The
ſtake; and yet A/erins, more than once, has ingof 61

call'd ſome fenny grounds in Somerſetſhire, Hol.
Flor. V.,

College, call'd King's, in Cambridge; which Canv<7

"BA, N FI OS

—
>. —- *
-
£

** 5

87

*

*

*

2

*

* 5
* 2 4
* - -
= we
DC

*

22
*
12
——
—
—

4
994
7

AA) Hwgary

aug F
| AATAAATH

”
id
, 4

=
»

S
2

Bn  auva. |

re 9
Y

0 OH ITAV LS woo .

_—_—
*

-

—
- -
a.
PS. 2
* |

|

N : | a |
| | | WS | | : \ Ze
[ if * : * 2 1 3
| ſ | J 2 „ —
7 = g I , | N p 9 ' 8 /
A ung  yo1q 5188 22 ;
* 2 N - E/ | Lv
8 40 — |

Fur He

Auln S

IO. TLAuVAddN

Nee

NIOONII 40 LIunvag |.

* '

— — N HLNON

— — — — ———— =- — - - — —
— * at 2 A _ _ = * 5 . = —_— * 1 __ _— - —— <4 A ＋ Si... 3 — 1
„ e mr — 2 * r ———— ” 1 PR 1 PEI. oy 7 ww_. — — 5 * FEY m - -

_ 2 — 5 * 2 — 2
— 2 . A _ -
* „ " 3 — ——
. — * PRES b
$9 — — —
,

— Fo

4 <4 *

=
— — — Os. Mo — 4
So — . ee . eo * — —— e —_—_
— —
. — — —
- * — — Ls

ve | |
X OT ' * ——ů—
a 8 os 1 ; ©

Deine wor eff s q
C“ amg [ago i pr 8

- [*|
40449 |

\

TO Iva |

p Y

aNoiTIHy) | 335

5 Fainaxg —
2

— —
92
=

*

* —
. ge

4 1 \
CT INILNN}

-

„„

r. Pri-
rd. p. 33

4

14 nn. ne. 296 as ' y
G r r .
i 5 . c e bn 9 . * 1 1 .
| 2 N r
6 m D 1
a - " FI : 4

85

ti
.
CC
de
W.
ur
cle
gr
cti
an

& vw

DDr
7 ” i „ r ͤ ͤ N ꝗ⁰q 7 ˙ . eee
* nnn, .. n

# 2
.

'W \ 3
ll bo
£
*
70
*
—

2 .
„ „

>a .

1 ae” MN

81

* 3 n *
* - 25 nl SS * -
F wt 9 * D oe * 1 . . * Re ES.)

=

— 36s ane if TRI 6 * *
5 to n 1 e

r

ed

1 os " 9
eee "ESA 9 9 EE

|

Fuller,
eter-hou le,

ſer, Pri- the :
d. p. 33· pos d by ſome to be the Cair-Grauth, other-

of

: *
of 1
—

: >.

ohn Caius, and Halls were built for Students, tho with-
p. 26, out Endowments. But Hugh Balſbam Biſhop

CAMBRIDGESHIRE.

aide... W ot. SDL... 06:

—

—_——_ 4 a

482

keep to the old name of Camloritum, or the
river Cam, tho* Writers more commonly us d
Saxon word Grantbridge ; [and it 1s ſup-

wiſe Grant, mention'd by Ninnius among the
twenty-eight Bririſh Cities. The Saxons alſo
name it I pancanbnycge, Is npancabmucze, and
L pancebpige.

This City, the other Univerſity, the other
Eye, and Stay, of the Kingdom, this famous
Magazine of Learning and Religion, ſtands on
the river Cam ; which, after it has made ſeveral
pleaſant little Iſlands on the weſt-fide of it,
turns to the eaſt, and divides the town into
two parts; ſo that it is joyn'd by a bridge,
which hath given it that newer name of Cam-
bridge. Beyond the bridge, are, a large old
caſtle (well-nigh deſtroy'd by Age ; ) and Mag-
dalen-College. On this fide the bridge (where
lies the far greateſt part of the town) there
is a pleaſant proſpect of well-contriy'd Streets,
of a good number of Churches, and of ſixteen
fair Colleges, wherein great numbers of worthy
and learned men are maintain'd, and where the
ſtudies of Arts and Languages do exceedingly
flouriſh; ſo that they may deſervedly be term'd
the Fountains of Religion and Learning, which
ſcatter their wholeſom ſtreams, through he
Gardens of Church and State. Nor is there
any thing wanting, that is requir'd in the
moſt flouriſhing Univerſity ; were not the Air
a little too groſs, by reaſon of its fenny ſitua-
tion, But perhaps the firſt founders of it
were of Plato's opinion; who being of a ſtrong
conſtitution himſelt, made choice of the Aca-
demy for his ſtudies (which was a very un-
wholeſom place in Attica) the better to keep
under the body, that it might not too much
clog the brain. However, our Anceſtors, men of
great wiſdom, did, not without the divine Dire-
&ion, dedicate this place to Learning and Study,
and adorn it with many noble buildings.

That we may not ſeem guilty of the worſt
ſort of ingratitude to thole eminent Patrons
of Learning, or (to uſe Eumenius's words) thoſe
Parents of our Children ; let us briefly, out of
the er dy. 3mm make mention of them,
and their Colleges, which they conſecrated to
Literature and their own immortal Fame. 'The
ſtory goes, that Cantaber a Spaniard, three hun-
yes and ſeventy-five years before Chriſt, firſt
founded this Univerſity, and that Sebert King
of the Eaſt-Angles reſtor'd it in the year of
our Lord 630. Afterwards, it lay a 3
negle&ed, and was overthrown by the Daniſh
Storms, till all things reviv'd under the Nor-
man Government. Soon after, Inns, Hoſtels,

of Ely, founded the firſt College, call'd Peter-
houſe, in the year 1284, and endow'd it.
[When he was only Prior of Ely, he began
the foundation of this houſe (about the year
1257,) without Trumpington-gate near the
Church of St. Peter ; from whence it ſeems
to have taken the name. Bur all the advan-
tage which the Scholars had at firſt, was on-
ly the convenience of Chambers, which ex-
empted them from thoſe high rents that the
Townſmen had us'd to exact of them. The
endowment (as we have ſaid) was ſettled by
the ſame Hugh when Biſhop, in 1284, for a
Maſter, fourteen Fellows, &c. which number

founded Clare- hall, in the
before, built a houſe

year 1340; [having Clare-hall.
call'd Univerfity-hall, Univerſity.

wherein the Scholars liv'd upon their own ex- hall,

pence for ſixteen years, till it was burnt down
by a caſual fire, e founder, finding himſelf
unequal to the charge of rebuilding it, had
the aſſiſtance of the ſaid Elizabeth, third ſiſter
and coheir of Gilbert Earl of Clare, through
whoſe liberality it was built again, and en-
dow'd. It is, at preſent, one of the neateſt
and moſt uniform Houſes in the Univerſity :
having been lately new built, all of Free-ſtone.]
The Lady Mary St. Paul Counteſs of Pem-
broke, Pres
[She was third wife to
Earl of Pembroke; and her husband being

— flain at a Tilting on the wedding-
day, ſhe entirely ſequeſter'd her ſelf from all

worldly delights ; and, devoting her ſelf to God,
amongſt other pious a&s built this College,
which was afterwards much augmented by the
benefactions of others.

The Society of Friars in Corpus Chriſti founded

ed Pembroke-hal, in the year 13471 Pembroke.
Audomare de Valentia hall.

Corpus Chriſti College, call'd alſo St. Benet College, ann. St. Bennet's-
1346: | This aroſe out of two Guilds or Fraternities : College.

one of s-Chriſti, and the other of the Bleſ-

ſed Virgin. Theſe, after long emulation, being uni-

ted into one Body, did by a joint intereſt build
this College, which has its name from the ad-
joyning Church of St. Benedict. Their greateſt
modern Benefactor was Matthew Parker, once
Maſter of the College, and afterwards Arch-
biſhop of Canterbury, who, by his prudent
management, recover d ſeveral Rights of the
College; and, beſides two Fellowſhips and
five Scholarſhips, gave a great number of ex-
cellent Manuſcripts to their Library.]
William Bateman Biſhop of Norwich, founded
Trinity-hall, about the year 1353.
built, upon a place, which once belong'd ro the
Monks of Ely ; and was a houſe for Students
before the time of . Bateman, Who, by
exchange for the Advowſons of certain Re-
ctories, got it into his own poſſeſſion. He was
a great Maſter of Civil and Canon Law ; where-
upon, the Maſter, two Fellows, and three Scho-
lars (the number appointed by him at the firſt
Foundation,) were oblig'd to follow thoſe two
Studies. It has been, ſince, much augmented
by benefactions; and the number of its mem-
bers is proportionably encreas'd.]
Edmund Gonevil ann. 1348, and John Caius Do-
Ror of Phyſick in 4 our time, founded Gonevil and
Caius-College : This was firſt call'd Gonvil-hal,
and was built upon the place, where now are
the Orchard and Tennis-Court of Bennet-Col-
lege. But within five years, it was remov'd
into the place where it ſtands at preſent, by
Biſhop Bateman. Some time after, John Caius,

It was Trinity hall:

+ So ſaid,

ann. 1607.

Caius Col-
lege.

Doctor of Phyſick, improv'd this Hall into a

new College, ſince call d after his own name.]

Henry 6. King of England, founded King s- King's:Cof:

College (with a Chapel, deſervedly reckon'd
of the fineſt buildings in the world,) in the
year 1441 : [This College was at firſt but
{mall ; being built by the ſaid King for a Re-
Gor and twelve Scholars. There was near it
a little Hoſtel for Grammarians, built DY Wil-
liam Bingham, which was granted by the Found-
er to King Henry, for the enlargement of his
College. Whereupon, he united theſe two,
and, having enlarged them by addition of
the Church of St. John Zachary, tounded a
College for a Provoſt, ſeventy Fellows and

might be increas'd or diminiſh'd, according to
the improvement or abatement of their revenues.

His example was imitated by the follow-
ing perſons ;

Richard Badew, with the help| Queen's-Colege, ann. 144 )
of, the Lady Elizabeth Clare Counteſs of Ulſter, times that follow'd, would not give her leave

Scholars, three Chaplains, Cc. |
The Lady Margaret of Anjou his wife, founded
8; [but the troubleſom

do

P p p

one lege,

Queen's Col.

lege.

on
. —
n [= i *
— — — * —

483

PER TT Tomy

Katharine-
hall,

Chriſt-Col-
lege,

St. Tohn's-
Co lege;

+ So ſaid,

ann. 1607.

Magdalen-
College.

Trinity-Col-
lege,

to compleat her fabrick. The firſt Maſter of
it Audrew Ducket, by his induſtry and appli-
cation, procur'd great ſums of money trom
well-diſpos'd perſons, towards the finiſhing of
this work; and ſo far prevail'd with Queen
Elizabeth, wife to K. Edward the 4**, that ſhe;
perfected what her profeſs d Enemy had begun.
Robert Woodlark founded Katharine- hall,
in the year 1459 : [He was third Provoſt
of King's-College ; and the Hall was built
over-againſt the Carmelites houſe, for one Ma-
ſter and three Fellows ; and the numbers
were encreas'd, together with the Revenues.
About one half of it is lately new-built ;
and, when it is finiſh'd, it will give place to
none, in point of beauty and Tegularity. |

Jeſus College: Johm Alcocke Biſhop of Ely, founded Feſus-Col-

lege, ann. 1497, [out of an old Nunnery dedi-
cated to St. Radegund ; the Nuns whereof were:
ſo notorious for their incontinence, and ſo ge-
nerally complain'd of, that King Henry the
ſeventh, and Pope Julius the ſecond, beſtow'd
it upon John Alcock, Biſhop of Ely, to convert
it into a College; who eſtabliſh'd in it a Ma-
ſter, fix Fellows, and ſix Scholars, But their
numbers, by the great benefactions they have
had, are much encreas'd. | |

The Lady Margaret Counteſs of Richmond, and
mother to K. Henry 7, founded Chriſt-College | a-
bout the year 1506, upon the place where God's-
houſe formerly ſtood. She ſettled there, a Ma-
fter, and twelve Fellows, &c; which number,
being complain'd of as ſavouring of Superſti-
tion by alluding to our Saviour and his Apo-
ſtles, King Edward the ſixth alter'd, by the
addition of a thirteenth Fellowſhip ; with ſome
new Scholarſhips. This College, within the
preſent Century, or thereabouts, hath been a-
dorn'd with a very fine new building.

She alſo founded St. John's about the year 1506,
[upon the place, where ann. 1 134. Nigel or Neal,
ſecond Biſhop of Ely, founded an Hoſpital for
Canons Regular; which by Hugh de Balſbam
was converted into a Priory dedicated to St.
John ; and by the Executors of the ſaid Coun-
teſs of Richmond, into a College, under the
name of the ſame Saint. For ſhe dy'd before
it was finiſh'd, which retarded the work for
ſome time ; but it was afterwards carry'd on
by her ſaid Executors.] It is now f greatly
enlarg'd with fair new buildings.

Thomas Awdley, Lord Chancellor of England,
founded Magdalen-College, ann. 15 42, ſince enlarg'd
and endow'd by Sir Chriſtopher H/rey, Lord Chief
Juſtice of England: [ This College is cut off from
all the reſt, and ſtands by it felt on the North-
weſt- ſide of the river; and hath been improv'd
and adorn'd by a handſom piece of new build-
ing, not many years fince. |

The moſt potent and mighty Prince Henry the
8h founded Trinity-College, ann. 1546, out of
three others, St. Michael College, built by Hervie
of Stanton in Edward the ſecond's days; King -
hall, founded by Edward the third; and Fiſh-
wick -Hoſtel. And that the Students might
have a more delightful habitation, this Col-
lege was repair'd, or rather new-built, by the
great care of T. Nevill its worthy Maſter,
and Dean of Canterbury, with that ſpendour
and magnificence, that it is, for ſpaciouſneſs,
and for uniformity and beauty in the build-
ings, ſcarce inferior to any in Chriſtendom ;
and he himſelf may be counted truly Meaxomge-
Ty (magnificent) in the judgment even of the
greateſt Philoſopher, for neglecting his own
private Intereſts, and laying out ſuch large
ſums on the publick. [All which have fince
been improv'd by a moſt noble and ſtately

ſpot of ground without the burrough of Cambridge :

Library, begun under the government of «I»
late famous and learned Dr. Tſaac Barrow ; 4
building, for the bigneſs and deſign of it,
AT not to be match'd in theſe kingdoms.

That worthy and prudent perſon, Sir Jalters,,,..
Mildmay, + founded a new College dedicated to — N
Emanuel, in a place where was formerly alenigh
Convent of Dominicans founded in the year de ben
1280, by the Lady Alice Counteſs of Oxford. Fi %
After the ſuppreſſion of Monaſteries, this Con- He gd
vent came into the poſſeſſion of Mr. Sherwood, ded, C,
of whom Sir Walter Mildnay ſeems to have En
purchas'd it. It has a very neat Chapel, not .
long ſince built by the bounty of William Sau- |
croft, late Archbiſhop of Canterbury, and others.

Alſo the Lady Frances Sidney, Counteſs of.
Suſſex, by her laſt Will gave a Legacy of leg. ®
thouſand pounds for the founding of a Col- ©
lege to be call'd Sidney-Suſſex. But tho? this
College owes its riſe to the Charity of the
ſaid Lady, and the care of her Executors ; it is
exceedingly improv'd by the benefactions of
Sir Francis Clerk, who (beſides a ſet of new-
buildings by him erected, ) augmented the Scho-
larſhips, and founded four Fellowſhips with E
eight Scholarſhips more ; and of Sir John A
Brereton, who left to it above two thouſand 5
pounds, by will. 3

The Schools of this Univerſity were at firſt Scho.
in private houſes, hir'd from ten years. to ten AY
years for that purpoſe, by the Univerſity ; in -
which time they might not be put to any |
other uſe. Afterwards, Publick Schools were .
built at the charge of the Univerſity, in or 8
near the place where they now ſtand. But
the preſent fabrick, as it is now built of brick :
and rough ſtone, was erected partly at the ex- |
pence of the Univerſity, and partly by the
contributions of ſeveral Benefactors.

The Library was built by Rotheram Archbi- Libr,
ſhop of York, who (together with Tonſtal,
Biſhop of Durham) furniſh'd it with choice
Books; few whereof are to be found at pre- in Wilt»
ſent. But it hath been exceedingly augment- Wire, Waling-
ed by the bounty of King George 3 who, ha- t in Berks,
ving purchas'd a very large and moſt valuable *
Collection of Books, made with great judgment .
by Dr. John Moor, late Biſhop of Ely, did KEKing's-ditch, |
beſtow it, as a mark of his Royal favour, upon |
this Univerſity. |

I ſhall ſay nothing of the little Monaſteries
and Religious houſes ; ſince they were but of
{mall note: except Barnwell-Abbey, which Sir Bara
Payne Peverell, a famous Soldier, and Standard- bey.
bearer to Robert Duke of Normandy in the Ho-
ly-war in Henry the firſt's reign, remov'd from
St. Giles's Church (where Picot the Sheriff had
inſtiruted Secular Prieſts,) to this place, and
introduced thirty Monks, according to the
years of his age at that time. If you pleaſe,
you may know the reaſon of the name from
the private Hiſtory of this place. Payne Pe- Barn
werell obtain d a grant of Heury the firſt of a Hilo

— ld ee % en

—

» Caius I. 2. 1
FP: 117.

7

4 Fuller, p. 2+

1

,
1
2

a od ds i a fa

FR EET TT FF BY . YT Im Dm "Wah

9 A 7

Wh See Saligbu-

in the midſt of it, were extraordinary clear foun-
tains or wells, call d Barnwell, that is, the wells of
Children, or Barus ; for young men and boys met
here once a year, upon St. John's Eve, for wreſtling Teffred mad
and the like youthful exerciſes usd in England, and Adder of

alſo to make merry, with ſinging, and other muſick. 113
By this concourſe of boys and girls, who met here 1 *

E N ("Ye £ "Be * *
—B— CIOS K

for ſport, it grew to be a cuſtom for a great many

buyers and ſellers to repair hither at the ſame time;
ſand it is now commonly call'd Midſunmer-
Fair.\ .
Tho' Cambridge Was conſecrated to the Mu- 3
5, yet has it not always eſcap'd the fury of |
Mars ; tor when the Danes ravaged * and

own, 3

brary,

rnwell-1

rowell-

ſtory.

2 117.

4 Ful

[I
1
*
2
A
.

1

c

*

5 * * * 4

a * 2 : e * F
CCC
rr

4

5

8

*

*

bb

* 9

s

VS

CAMBRIDGESHIRE

down, they often took their Winter-quarters
here: and in the year toto, when Sueno the
Dane, with that deſperate rage and tyranny,

country as well as the town, that there was not a
Houſe, Bara, or Church, big enough to hold them

. - all. Upon which, they diſpers'd themſelves into ſe-
bore down all before him; neither its Fame | veral parts of the to: mitatine t/
nor the Muſes could protect it (tho' we read * wn, imitating the Univerſity

that Athens met with a better fate from Syla ;)

of Orleans. Betimes, in the morning, Frier Odo

: an excellent Grammarian and Satyrick-Poet, read
but it was barbarouily laid in Aſhes. How- | atyri re

ever, at the coming- in of the Normans, it

was reaſonably well peopled; for we find, in
Domeſday-book, that the Burrough of Grentbridge

is divided into ten Wards, aud contains three hun-

dred and eighty-ſeven dwelling-houſes, but eighteen
of them were pull d down to build the Caſtle ; when
William the firſt determin'd to ere& Caſtles in
all parts, to be a curb to his new-conquer'd
Engliſh. This Caſtle was ſtrong and ſtately,

having in it, among other rooms, a moſt mag-

nificent Hall. * The ſtones and timber were

Grammar to the boys and younger ſort, who were
aſſign'd him; according to the Doctrine of Priſcian,
and Remigius upon him. At one a clock, Terri-
cus a ſubtle Sophiſt, read Ariſtotle's Logick to the
elder ſort, according to Porphyry*s and Averroe's
Introduttions and Comments. At three of the clock,
Frier William read Lectures in Tully's Rhetorick
and Quintilian's Inſtitutions; aud Giſlebert,
the principal Maſter, preach'd to the people, upon
all Sundays and Holy-days. From this ſmall foun-
tain, we ſee large flowing ſtreams, making glad the
City of God, and enrichiag the whole kingdom with

afterwards beg'd of 17 the fourth by the many Maſters and Teachers, who come out of Cam-

Maſters and Fellows of

trench'd about, of a ſteep aſcent, and level at
the top.

Afterwards Roger of Montgomery deſtroy'd this

Town with fire and ſword, to be reveng'd of | of Hen

WWiliam Rufus; but King Henry the firſt, to
repair thoſe damages, beſtow'd many Privile-
ges upon it ; particularly, he freed it from the
power of the Sheriff, —_— it a Corporation,
upon the payment of an hundred and one marks
yearly into the Exchequer ; which ſum the
Sheriff paid before, for his profits out of
the town, when it was under his juriſdiction,
And, what ſeems to have been of moſt con-
ſequence, the Ferry over the river (which be-
fore was left at large) began to be fix'd near
this place ; which probably might have ſome-

ing 's-hall, towards] bridge as from the holy Paradice, &c.
ler, p. 2· the building of their a, a Nothing is t now

ſtanding but the Gate-houſe, which is the
Priſon ; and an artificial high hill deeply en-|for me.

Concerning the time when it was firſt made
an Univerſity, Robert of Remington ſhall ſpeak
In the reign of Edward the firſt,

verſity like Oxford, by the Court of Rome. [Be-

But why do I ſo inconſiderately run into the
liſts, where two ſuch learned old men have for-
merly encounter'd? to whom I freely deliver
up my arms; paying the utmoſt reſpect and
honour to ſuch venerable perſons. Cambridge
is in longitude, 23 degr. 25 min. in latitude,
52 degr. and f 11 min.

Arborough (in the territories of Cheſterton,) where

{quare. There have been

oman Coins found

thing of the ſame effect, as the building of;in it; one particularly of ſilver, with the head

new bridges, and turning the courſe of roads,

# we Haliabu- have had in || other parts of England.] It ſuf-

o Wilt- fer'd very much afterwards, in the Barons wars,

10g,

Fire, Waling- by thoſe Out-laws from the Ifle of Ely.
in Berks, Wherefore Henry the third, to put a ſtop to

their incurſions, order'd a deep ditch to be
thrown-up on the Eaſt-ſide of the town, which

of there are now. but very little remains (hou-
ſes being built on both ſides of it;) and,
among the inhabitants, the name it ſelf ſeems
to be clean forgotten. |

Here, poflibly ſome may expect my opinion
concerning the antiquity of this Univerſity ;
but I ſhall not intermeddle in that point.

|

of Rome on one ſide, and, on the reverſe,
Caſtor and Pollux on horſeback. The adjoyning
Cheſterton has probably its name from this Camp
jor old Caſtrum.

Hard by Cambridge to the South-eaſt, are

foot of them; where, as he adds, the Danes
committed all the Barbarities imaginable. On
the top of all, I ſaw an Entrenchment of conſi-
derable bigneſs, fortified with a threefoid ram-
pire, and impregnable in thoſe days (according
to the opinion of ſeveral judicious warriors)
were it not for its want of water; and ſome

Nor am I willing to make compariſons be-|believe, it was a Summer-retreat, of the Ro-
tween our two flouriſhing Univerſities ; which|mans, or the Danes. | But others think, it was

have none to rival them, that I know of. I

rather a Britiſh work. It has two graffs be-

am afraid, thoſe men have built caſtles in the{|trween the three rampires (as the uſual way
air, who have made Cantaber the founder ot|was; ) being rudely circular: and the Dia-
this Univerſity, immediately after the build-|meter is no leſs than two hundred and forty-
ing of Rome, and long before the time of|ſix paces. It is on the hill (as the Britiſh way

Chriſt ; ſtraining the antiquity of it beyond
all poſſibility of Credit. This is undeniable
(let its original be when it will) that it began Arborough ; which, from the form, coins, and
nearneſs of water (a thing that that people was
of King Henry the firſt ; as appears by an old always particularly careful of) muſt have been

fel made Appendix of Peter Bleſenſis, to Ingulph. Abbot|the work of the Romans. Near the Camp,
Abbot of

to be a Nurſery of Learning, abour the reign

of - encampment was;) and it is probable

Jottred ſent over to his manour of Cotenham nigh there runs a Roman high-way from the brow

# Crowland, Cambridge, Giſlebert his fellow-Monk and Divi-|of the hill ſouthwards; which, I ſu
* nity-Profeſſor, with three other Monks, who fol- gether with the Roman Coins, foun

mots (to-

there in

low'd him into England; and being well furniſb di digging, ann. 1685.) induced the Author of the

with Philoſophical Learning and other ancient Sci-
: where
they bir d a publick barn, made open profeſſion of
the Sciences, and in a little time drew a great num-
ber of Scholars together. In leſs than two years,

their number increas d ſo much, out of all that — confine their Camps to a Square, but de-
; | | |

ences, they daily repair'd to Cambridge

enough, that the antagoniſt to it might be at

late Commentary upon Antoninus, to reckon
it a work of the Romans ; not regarding the
circular figure ; inaſmuch as it appears, both
from Hegetius, and from ſeveral inſtances in o-
ther parts of England, that the Romans did

Grantbridge, from a Study, was made an Uni- De Studie,

tore which time, notwithſtanding, in the 5 2d Seld. MS.

the third, it is call d Univerſitas Sco- not. Memb.
larium, 2 the Records of the Tower.! 25»

17, more

[A mile north of Cambridge, is Arbury or 7 +70

* is a large camp, of a figure inclining to a+ Aubr, MS;

certain high hills, by the Students call'd Gog- Gogmagog

| magog-bills, and by Henry of Huntingdon, the moſt Hills.
© King's-ditch, ſtill goes by the name of King's-ditch ; | where-|pleaſant hills of Balſham, from a village at the

parted

— —

— Gr 2 ͤ ———

— —

* © —_— — — —

— —

- —
— —
= 8 — *

Ld — ee
- 8 —— ſ
—— — — —

© a — - —————
—
* — ©

— = we. A
— — .
” wa oc oc oo wn we
— . — a

\ _
. Cd. -
T—_—
_ * — *
3 — - —

1

.

. A EE EIS

8 8

487 ICE

parted from that, according as the nature and
conveniences of the ground required. |
This Camp ſeems to be the place that Gervaſe
of Tilbury calls Vandelbiria; Below Cambridge, ſays
he, there was a place call d Vandelbiria, becauſe the
Vandals, when they ruin'd ſome parts of Britain, and
cruelly deſtroy'd the Chriſtians, did encamp there;
pitching their tents on the top of a little hill, where
lies a Plain, ſurrounded with trenches, with only one
entrance, and that like a gate. As for the Martial
Ghoſt walking here, which he there mentions ;
I ſhall ſay nothing of it, becauſe it looks like
an idle ſtory of the common people. Ir is none
of my bulineſs (as a certain Author expreſles
it) to tickle mens ears with plauſible ſtories.
In a Vale nigh theſe hills, lies Salton, which
came to Sir 500 Nevill, Marquiſs of Mont-
acute, from the Burghs of Burgh-green, by Wal-
ter de la Pole and the Tugoldthorps; and by his
daughter, and heir, to the Huddleſtons, Who
liv'd here in great repute.
Hilderſham. More Eaſtward, we meet with Hilderſham,
+ But now, C. belonging formerly to the Buſtlers, and f after
that by marriage to the Pariſes; and next the
Horſheath. Woods, ſtands Horsheath, known, for many
deſcents, to have belong'd to the ancient and
noble families of the Argentons and Alingtons,
* Hertford- which I mention'd in * another place ; and
ſhire, now the ſeat || of the Bromlies. Next this,
Lee . lies Caſtle camps, the ancient ſeat of the Peres
. Earls of Oxford, held by Hugh Vere (ſays an old
Inquiſition) on condition that he ſhould be Cham-
berlain to the King. However, it is moſt cer-
tain, that Henry the firſt granted this Office
to Aubrey de Vere, in theſe words, Chief
Cameraria Chamberlain of England in fee and hereditarily ;
Anglix. with all the powers, privileges, and honours belong-
Lord great ig thereunto, as freely and honourably, as ever Ro-
COW bert Mallet held it, &c. But our Kings, at
their own pleaſure, have appointed ſometimes
one, and ſometimes another, to execute this
Office. Not far from hence, are thoſe great
and long ditches which were undoubtedly
thrown-up by the Eaſt-Angles to keep out the
Mercians, who us'd by ſudden Incurſions to
ruin all before hows ls firſt begins at Hinke-
| on, and runs eaſtward by Hilderſham towards
tera 3 for five miles ewe, 2 ſecond,
next to it, call'd Brent-ditch, runs from Mel-
borne by Fulmer. But it is now time to re-
turn, lince theſe and the like frontier-fences
will be ſpoken of in their proper places.
Nigh Cambridge to the eaſt, by a ſmall
brook call'd Sture, there is every year in Sep-
Sturbridge- tember the moſt famous Fair in the whole
Fair. Kingdom, both for reſort of people and pro-
portion of wares. Hard by, where the ways
were exceeding troubleſom and almoſt impaſ-
ſable, that worthy right-honeſt Gentleman
+ G. Camd. + Henry Hervy, Doctor of Laws and Maſter of
Vid. Sufiolk Jyinity-hall in Cambridge, with vaſt charge, and
A very pious and commendable deſign, || made
mondley, 2 fair rais'd Cauſey about three miles long,
| Lately leading to New-market.
made, C. At the end of this Cauſey, there is a third
Ditches, Ditch, thrown-up in ancient times; beginning
at the eaſt-ſide of the Cam, and running in a
ſtrait line by Fnn-Ditton (or rather Ditchton from
the foremention'd Ditch,) between great Vi-
berham and Fulburn, as far as Balſham. At preſent,
it is commonly call'd Seven-mile-dyke, becauſe it
lies ſeven miles from New-market : formerly it
Fleamditch, was call'd Fleam-Dyke, that is, Flight-Dyke, as
it ſeems from ſome remarkable flight at this
place. The ſame Wilberham, anciently Wil-
burgham, was formerly the ſeat of the Barons
He rubee- Lie of || Rougmount, a very ancient family,
monte, of which, John, for his warlike valour, was

Wandlesbury,

Salton,

uards, which came by marriage to the knight-

made one of the Knights of the Garter, in
the firſt Inſtitution, by King Edward the third.
There is f now an heir-male of the ſame fami- e.
ly (x reverend old man with a good ſtock of ad ll
children, nam'd Edmund LIe,) Lord of this but the;
place. 1 here 22
Five miles more inward to the eaſt, ſand a .
mile and half from New-market, | is the fourth —
Fortification or Ditch with a Rampart, [and Vb.
the Graff towards Cambridge. This is! the
largeſt of all; calld Devils-Dyke by the com-
mon people, becauſe they look upon it as the
work of Devils rather than Men : and Rech- |
Dyke by others, from Rech, a little market- 1
town at the beginning of it. Without doubt,
this is the ſame, that Abbo Floriacenſis ſpeaks |
of, in his Deſcription of the Eaſt-Angles :
On that fide where the Sun declines to the weſt,
this Province joins to the reſt of the Iſland, and con-
ſequently there is a clear open paſlage ; but to pre-
vent the enemies frequent incurſions, it is defended
* bank, like a lofty wall, and by a deep ditch.
his, for many miles together, croſſes that
Plain call'd Newmarket-heath, a place very much
expos'd to invaſions; beginning at Rech, be-
yond which the Country is fenny and impaſ-
ſable; and ending hard by Cowlidge, where
the Woods ſtop all marches. It was then the
bounds of the Kingdom, as well as of the Bi-
ſhoprick of the Eaft-Angles ; | whereupon, the
Pariſhes on the Eaſt-ſide of it (about ten or
eleven in number) do ſtill belong to the Bi-
ſhoprick of Norwich, tho' placed within the
County of Cambridge. |
It is uncertain who was the founder of this
mighty work ; ſome later writers aſcribe it to
King Canutus the Dane; tho' in truth AU, 4% 45
who mentions it, dy'd before Canutus began®* *
his reign ; and the Saxon Chronicle, where it , (.
treats of Atheluolf's Rebellion againſt Edward ms le-
the Elder, calls it ſimply the Ditch, and ſays, bis rig
that King Edward deſtroy'd all the Country '**
between the Ditch and the Ouſe, as far as The tens and
the North-tens, and that Athelwold the Rebel, Ile of Ely, ©
and Eohric the Dane, were at that time | |
| c
I

Devil's

ans vw Aa ax W dt.

nn , CO

} Chron, Sax.
. 977.

re eee @ MW A eee 0: www SOA tc ci

{lain there in battel. But Writers ſince Canu-
tus's time, have call'd it S. Edmund's Liberty,
and St. Edmund's Ditch, ſuppoſing that Canutus
made it; who was a moſt devout adorer of | ,
St. Edmund the Martyr, and, to make amends
for his father Swane's horrid cruelty to the Get
Religious of St. Edmundsbury, granted them vaſt
privilege, as far as this very ditch ; whence

illiam of Malmesbury, in his book of the
Prelates, ſays, That the Cuſtom-Officers in other
places fall out madly, without confidering right or
wrong 3 but on this fide St. Edmund's Ditch, tle
modeſt Suppliants immediately put a ſtop to all quar-
rels. Sure enough, the two laſt mention'd Bul-
warks were call'd H. Edmund's Ditches ; for
Matthew Florilegus declares, that that battel
againſt Athelwolt, was tought between St. Ed-
mund's two Ditches. |

Near Rech, lies Burwell, where was a Caſtle, Burw:!.
which in thoſe troubleſom times of King Ste-
phen was bravely attack'd by Geoffry || Man- De ng
devil Earl of Eflex (a perſon who loſt much vill.
honour by his unjuſt invafions of other mens
rights,) till an arrow, ſhot through his head,
freed thoſe Countries from the fears and ter-
rors they had long been under. Scarce two
miles oft, ſtands Lanheath, for f many years the
ſeat of that worthy family of Knights the Cot-
tors and, at a little diſtance from that, lies
Nebam, a town formerly belonging to the Ber-10chan»

fronds ,

* Myriada jus
Serum,

er > gf wy, LE i & Moc od at bot. eo. i at: on

Lanheat'
+ $0 ſaid,

nn. 1697?

ly family of the Peytons, from whoſe male-line I
prang the Lord (trom whom are the Lords 3

Earls

"CAMBRIDGESHIRE. |

Earls of Suffolk,)- as appears by their Coats of
Arms; tho', indeed, they took the firname of
Peyton, according to the cuſtom of thoſe times,

5 5 from Peyton a little town in Suffolk ; which

| FA ® was their ſeat for many years,

r 2. «:0ing. Upon the ſame Ditch, ſtands Kirtling, call'd
bi alſo Catlidg 3 remarkable for being the princi-
bers pal ſeat of the Barons North, of which fami-
vb. y, Edward North was the firſt, whom Queen
: Mary, for his extraordinary wiſdom, inveſted

1 j with that title. It is famous for a great Sy-

2.

nod [ſaid to be] held here, when the Clergy
| 575, had that mighty Conteſt about the celebration
, of Eaſter ; ſit indeed jt was held here, and not
(as others contend) at Kirtleton in the Coun-
ty of Oxford. For the Saxon Annals place it
at Kynzlingrune, by a miſtake from Kypr-
ungrune; Which is inter'd, not only from
the {imilitude of n and p, but alſo from the
Copyiſt's not underſtanding the language
(tor it is taken out of the Canterbury-Copy ; )
and from our later Hiſtorians calling it Kyrt-
linege, Kirding, and Kirling. As to the diffe-
rence then between the old and new name,
that is inconſiderable; and || we are told that
Sideman Biſhop of Devonſhire (tor ſo he is there
ſtil'd) dy'd at this Synod, and was bury'd at
St. Mary's at Abingdon. Now, ſay they, he
had no relation to that Church, and therefore
we may imagin, the only reaſon why King
Edward and Archbiſhop Dunſtan pitch'd upon
it for his burial, was the zearzeſs of the Place;
eſpecially, ſeeing they did it contrary to his own
expreſs deſire when alive, which was, that he
might be inter'd at his own Church of Cri-
diantun or Kirton. But, they add, that if he
had dy'd at Catlidge, — might have found
a more convenient Monaſtery for that purpoſe,
I mean Peterborough, no leſs eminent and much
nearer ; unleſs Abingdon might be more eligi-
ble upon this account, that it was within the
kingdom of the Weſt-Saxons. |
Tis bens ang The upper and north-part of this Shire is
lle of Ely, all-over divided into river-ifles (branch'd-our
by the _ flowings of ditches, chanels, and
drains,) which all the ſummer-long aftord a
moſt delightful green proſpect ; but in winter
are almoſt all laid under water, turther every
way than one can ſee, and in ſome fort re-
ſembling the ſea it ſelf. :

The inhabitants of this and the reſt of the
Fenny Country (which reaches ſixty-eight miles
from the borders of Suffolk to Wainfleet in
© + Myiada jus Lincolnſhire, containing ſome millions of

gerim, acres in the four Counties of Cambridge, Hun-
| tingdon, Northampton, and Lincoln) were
call'd Girvii in the time of the Saxons, that
is, as ſome interpret it, Fen-men; a ſort of
people (much like the place) of rugged unci-
viliz'd tempers, envying others whom my
term Upland-men, and uſually walking alo
upon a ſort of ſtilts: they all ro to the bu-

} Chron. Sax.
an, 977»

Cirvii.

| ſineſs of grazing, fiſhing, and fowling. All

1 . this Country, in the inter- time, and ſome-
times for the greateſt part of the year, is laid

x u;2 under-water by the rivers Ouſe, Grant, Nen,

Ila 0 Welland, Glene, and Witham, for want of
| ſufficient chanels and paſlages. Bur when theſe

keep to their proper chanels, it ſo ſtrangely

abounds with graſs and a fort of rank hay (by

them call'd Lid.) that when they have mow'd

"heat WA enough for their own uſe, in November they
80 ſaid, I burn the reſt, to make it come again the
mn. 16% ns thicker. About which time, one ſees all this
ebam. | mooriſh Country in a flame, to his great won-

der and ſurpriſe. Beſides, it aftords great
quancices of Turf and Sedge for firing, and
eeds for thatching ; and Elders alſo and other

i

| water-ſhrubs, eſpecially Willows in great abun-

dance, either growing wild, or ſet on the banks
of rivers to prevent overflowing : which be-
ing frequently cut down, f riſe again (to .

ſpring. It is of theſe that baskets are made, runt.
both here and in other places: and, ſince the
Britains call'd them Baskades, I here obſerve
by the way, that I do not underſtand Martial

in that place of his Apophoreta, if he mean not
theſe :

Barbara de pictis veni Baſcauda Britan-
nis,
Sed me jam mavult dicere Roma fuam.

From Britain's fartheſt Iſle the Baskets
come,
Which now are challeng'd, as her own, by
Rome.
Beſides, there grow large quantities of Scordi- Scordium,
um or Water-Germander, upon the banks of
the Ditches. As for theſe fenny Ifles, Felix,
an ancient writer, has deſcrib'd them thus;
There is a wonderful large Fen, beginning at the banks
of the river Gront, and abounding, here with Sedge,
there with dusky ſprings, at a third place with woody
Mes; and it takes a long courſe by many crooked
banks, from ſouth to north, as far as the ſea. It
is the ſame, that William, a Crowland-Monk,
has thus deſcrib'd in his lite of Guthlake :

Eſt A Ang ligenas a Grontæ flumine,

0ngo
Orbe per anfractus ſtagnoſos, & fluviales,
Circumſuſa palms, orientaliſque propinqua
Littoribiis pelagi, ſeſe diſtendit ab Auſtro
In longum ver ſus Aquilonem, gurgite tetro
Morboſos piſces vegetans, & arundine denſa
Ventorum ſtrepitus, quaſi quadam verba, ſu-

ſurraus.

In Britiſh Lands where Gront's old ſtreams
ſurround

The trembling marſhes and unfaithful
ground,

From ſouth to north is ſtretch'd a ſpacious
moor :

Near to the Ocean on the eaſtern ſhore ;

Where pois'nous fiſh the ſtinking water
breeds,

And ruſtling winds ſtill whiſtle in the
weeds.

If you pleaſe, add thus much out of Henry of
Huntingdon : This ſenny Country is mighty rich and
delightful, plentifully water'd by rivers, ſufficiently
garniſh'd with Lakes of all ſorts, and as much a-
dorn'd with Woods and Iſlands. Take alſo,
for a concluſion, this ſhort account out of
William of Malmesbury : Here is ſuch vaſt ſtore
of fiſh," as aſtoniſhes all ſtrangers ; for which the
Inhabitants laugh at them : nor is there leſs plenty
of water-fowl ; and for a fingle half-penny, frve
men may have enough of either, not only to ſtay their
ſtomachs, but for a full meal.

I ſhall ſay nothing of the ſound and whol-
ſome advice concerning the draining of theſe
tens (which yet was perhaps nothing but a ſpe-
cious pretence of doing good to the publick for
private Ends) that has been ſo often conſider'd,
and debated in Parliament. Ir is to be fear'd,
that they would ſoon return to their old ſtate,
as the Pontine Marſhes in Italy have often done

ſince their draining. So that ſome think it the Pauſanias in

ſafeſt way, to follow the Oracle's advice in the Corinth.
like caſe, Not to venture too far, where heaven has

pus a ſtop. |
Qqq The

Pliny's expreſſion) with a very numerous off- gerede profue ·

— ( D(—˙ — WS<

.
- > Sem — — a
Mi... el ABST. Lo WT
_—_

— : N s = — OE <4
-
—— — —_— On — 0

—
i” .

——

491

ICENT.

* — —„

—

Aud re.

Ie of Ely. was call'd by the Saxons Elig, now the Ie of

Fuller,

St, Etheldred,

commonly St.

Atudry,

Cradiden,

Soham.

St. Audrys
Liberty.

Ely-book,

The natural ſtrength of this Tra, with the
great plenty of Proviſions, has often made it a
retreat for rebels ; not only for the Engliſh a-
gainſt William the Conqueror ; but the Barons
alſo, whenever they were out-law'd, from hence
moleſted our Kings ; but were always unſuc-
ceſsful, though they erected forts at Eryth
and Athered, now Audre, where is an eaſy open
paſſage into the Ifle. And to this day, there is
a rampire nigh Audre, not high, but very large,
call'd Belſar's-hills, from one Beliſar 3 but who
or what he was, I know not.

The more ſoutherly and the largeſt part of
that fenny Country which belongs to this Shire,

Ely, from the chief of theſe Iflands. Bede de-
rives it from Eels, and therefore ſome have
call'd it the e of Eels, ſand we find, that in,
the year 1221, King Henry the third, being at
Oxtord, ſent to the Bailiff of Cambridge, as
living near Ely (the Staple for Fiſh) to ſend.
him a certain proportion of Eels for the provi-
ſion of his Court, promiſing that it ſhould be
diſcounted to him out of the Exchequer. | Yet
Polydore Virgil fetches it from EN , which
ſignifies a Marſh ; and others from Helig, a
Britiſh word ſignifying Willows or Sallows,
which it bears in abundance ; and indeed they
are the only thriving trees here. We find,
that one Tombert King of the South-Girvii, ſet-
led the greateſt part of this Country upon his
wife Etheldred for a joynture; who after ſhe
had left her ſecond husband Egfrid King of Nor-
thumberland, for the ſake of Religion, founded
a Nunnery in that chief Iſle that was pro-
perly call'd Ely g, and was then valu'd after
the rate of ſix hundred families; of which
place ſhe her ſelf was the firſt Abbeſs. How-
ever, this was not the firſt Church in this
Fenny Country; for the Elz-book mentions our
St. Auſtin as the founder of a Church at Cradi-
den, which afterwards was pull'd down by
Penda the Mercian ; and N ſays,
that Felix, Biſhop of the Eaſt-Angles, had his
firſt ſeat at Sham, which is {till in Norwich-

dioccſe. Soham, ſays he, is a Village fituated by

a Lake, formerly very dangerous to water-paſ-

ſengers from thence to Ely, but now paſſable on
foot, by reaſon of a cauſey made through the mar-

ſhes and reeds. There are ſtill the marks of a Church
demoliſh'd by the Danes, wherein the Inhabitants
were overwhelm'd, and burnt with it. At the ſame
time, St. Audry's Nunnery was pull'd down by
the Danes ; but was rebuilt by Ethelwold Bi-
ſhop of Wincheſter, who, by agreement with
the King, bought the whole Ille, ejected the
Prieſts, and fill'd it with Monks; to whom
King Edgar, as we find in his Letters Patents,
gave juriſdiction in ſecular cauſes over two Hun-
dreds in the fens, and over five Hundreds and a
half, out of the fens, in the Wicklaw, in the Pro-
vince of the Eaſt-Angles, which to this day is
call'd St. Audry's Liberty. After that, our Kings
and Noblemen endow'd it with large reve-
nues ; eſpecially Earl Brithnoth, who being about
to engage the Danes in the year 999, gave to the
Church of Ely, Somerſham, Spaldwic, Trumpinton,
Ratindum, Heisbury, Fulburn, Tmerſton, Triple-
ſtou, and Impetum, in caſe he dy'd in that bat-
tel ; becauſe theſe Monks had treated him no-
bly. But he was kill'd at Maldon, after he
had fought with the Danes fourteen days to-
gether. It was ſo rich a Monaſtery, that the
Abbot (ſays Malmesbury) put fourteen hundred
pounds yearly in his pocket. And Richard the
laſt Abbor, Earl Giſlebert's ſon (intoxicated,
as it were, with wealth, and diſdaining to
be under the Biſhop of Lincoln, ) en-

deavour'd to perſwade the King with golkm

promiſes (as the Monks write) and with great
applications, to erect a Biſhoprick at this place;
but his death hinder d that deſign. Soon after
Henry the firſt got leave of the Pope, and
made Hervy (Biſhop of Bangor in Wales, who
had been ejected by the Welſh) the firſt Biſhop
of Ely; to whom and his ſucceſſors, he aſſign'd
Cambridgeſbire for the Dioceſe, which before was
part of that of Lincoln; and likewiſe ſettled
upon them certain marks of Soveraignty in
theſe Iſlands. [So that here the Biſhop hath
all the rights of a County-Palatine, and bear-
eth chief ſway therein : for by his own power
he e a Judge to hear and determine
all Cauſes ariſing within the ſaid Ifle. He
holdeth Aſſizes, Gaol-delivery, and Quarter-Seſ-
ſions of the Peace for the ſaid Liberty, and hath
his chief Bailiff, and Under-Bailifs for the
execution of Proceſs. ! The fame Henry the
firſt gave the Biſhops of Lincoln the manour
of Spaldwic, to make them amends for the loſs
of Cambridgeſhire and this Iſle ; or, as the Ely-
book has it, The manour of Spaldwic was ſettled

upon the Church of Lincoln for ever, f in lieu of the l Bua
epiſcopal care over Grantbridgeſhire. Aſſoon ag line ti
Hervy was ſettled in his Biſhoprick, he made?

it his chief care to raiſe the grandeur of his
Church. He got it to be made toll-free in all place;
(ſaith Ely-book,) and freed it from that burthen
of watching and warding ; which was the duty that
it ow'd to Norwich-caſile : He made the way from
Exuing to Ely, about fix miles, through the fens,
and purchas d many fair eſtates for the Church's
uſe. His ſucceſſors, by leſſening the number
of Monks (for from ſeventy they reduc'd them
to forty) abounded with plency of every thing,

and overflow'd with wealth, untill the f [aſt age; 4 $ U,
and their Holidays and Feſtivals were always rn. 1&7

celebrated with ſuch mighty Preparation and
Pomp, that, in that point, they exceeded all
the Monaſteries in England. Whence a Poet
in thoſe times not improperly ſays,

Previfis alits, Elienfia feſta videre,
Eſt, quaſi praviſa note, videre diem.

After all others ſee but Ely's feaſt,
You'll ”_ glad day when tedious night is
palt.

The Cathedral alſo, which began to totter
with age, they rebuilt by degrees, and brought
it to the Magnificence we now ſee: It is a
2 ſtately, and beautiful ſtructure, but
omewhat defac'd by breaking down and man-
gling the Noblemens and Biſhops tombs, in
a very ſhameful manner. At preſent, inſtead
of the full Convent of Monks, there is a Dean,
Prebendaries, and a Free- ſchool for the teach-
ing and maintaining of twenty-four boys, and,
of later years, a ſtately Palace hath been built
here, for the Biſhops.] There are four things
about this Church, much talk'd of by the com-
mon people; The Lantern, on the top of all,
juſt over the Quire, ſupported by eight pil-
lars, built with ſingular art 4 John de
Hothum the Biſhop : St. Mary's Chapel, ſtand-
ing under the Church to the North, a delicate
piece of work, and built by Simon Montacute
Biſhop. A great round heap of earth and ve-
ry high, call'd The Mount, on the South-ſide,
where a Wind-mill ſtands: and laſtly, a fa-
mous fruitful Vine; but now wither'd away.
Which four were joyn'd together in theſe
Rhimes by a certain Monk of the place :

Hac ſunt Eliæ, Lanterna, Capella Maris,

Atque Molendinum, necnon dans. vinea Linum,
Saint

A
I Pp!
: E
1 di
:
;
:
,
2
$
1
;
1
8
A
i
'
q
© Hickeſ, The-
Hur. pe 187.
= inter Num- |
ns, ;
4
1

3 atk aw. ans en. oa

F il,

: =" 4
\ * « 4 „
© RE #- 1 n SY, nee 1 5 2 R

%

—

c

MBRIDGESHIRE ©

:

© Hickef, The- In

ur. pe 187.

© inter Num-
mos,

Abbey,

but not remarkable either for beauty or po-
pulouſneſs, by reaſon of its fenny ſituation

diſcover'd in ploughing. The ſhare

Saint Mary's Chapel you at Ely ſee,
The lofty Lantern rival of the sky,
The Mill and Vine that bread and drink

ſupply.
As for Ely it ſelf, it is a pretty large City,

and unwholeſom air.
In the Pariſh of Sutton, ſome few miles from
Ely, an. 1694, ſeveral pieces of antiquity were

the plough

laid hold of a thin plate of Lead, and brought
up with it ſeveral ſmall ancient Coins : this led
to a further ſearch, and one of the labourers
thruſting his hand into the earth (for it was a
light mooriſh ſoil,) he found three ſilver plates.

he two biggeſt were faſten'd with a round
filver wire that ran through the midſt of them,
and lock'd them together. One of the plates
has a Dano-Saxon Inſcription round it, very
lightly engrav'd.

The Inſcription is thus:

Engliſh (the three firſt words excepted,

rſon who read and ex-
confefles he did not un-
them to be Magical terms)

which the learned
plain'd it, ingenuo
derſtand, but takes
it is thus:

o Lord, Lord, him always defend, who carri-
eth me about with him : Grant him whatever he

deſires.

This Inſcription ſhews it to have been in-
tended for a Charm; and the Knots and HF-
gures, that are on the other ſide, are alſo ſup-
pos'd to be magical. With this, were found
divers large Rings of Gold, ſuppos'd to be the
treaſure of ſome noble Perſon, who, 1n time
of war, had retir'd into this fenny Country,
for ſafety and defence.

Amidh the ſame fens, to the North-weſt,
Was. another famous Abby, call'd, from its
ſtanding among buſhes and thorns, Thorney ;
and i An that, Ankerige, from the Anchorites

dwelling there; where Sæxuulph, a very reli-
gious and devout man (as it is in the Peter-
borough-book) founded a Monaſtery, with Her-
mits Cells, It was afterwards deſtroy'd by the
Danes, but Ethelwold Biſhop of Wincheſter,
to 8 the Monaſtick way of living,
rebuilt it, ſtored it with Monks, and encom-
paſs d it with trees. This place (ſays Malmes-
bury) is the very picture 0 parade; for plea-

marſhes, in trees whoſe ſtrait tapering tallneſs
mounts up to the Skies; a Plain (ſmooth as water)
charms your eyes with pleaſing greens, where is no
rub to ſtop or hinder the ſwifteſt pace. There is
not dn inch of ground uncultivated ; here, a place
wellig with apple-trees, and there a field over-
ſpread with vines, either creeping upon the ground,
or ſupported _— A mutual ſtrife there is
between nature and art, that one may always ſupply
what the other forgets. What ſhall I ſay of the
beauty of the buildings much to be admir d, if it
were only for the feuns making ſuch ſolid and —
a-

_+9+

ſantneſs, reſembling Heaven it ſelf : amidſt the very

r A = mm ___ MO —
„ ” *. *

9
L 2 — "Uh

——

= —

Coy „4 r — ths
CC — — a — Py

c 8
: r

1 ae. 8 * 4

495

ICE

WI. —

Wisbich.

foundations ? It is a wonderful ſolitary and retir'd |

place; fit for Monks, as making them more mindful
of keavenly things, and more mortify d to things be-
low. It is a prodigy, to ſee a woman here; but
when a man comes, he is welcom'd like an Angel.
So that I may truly call this Ile, a Lodge of Cha-

ſtity, an Harbour of Honeſty, and a School of Di-

vine Philoſophy. -
WWisbich, the Biſhop of Ely's caſtle, ſtands
about thirteen miles off, ſituated among fens

* Lately, C,and rivers, and in the * laſt age a pri-

ſon for the Romiſh Prieſts. And I have no-
thing more to ſay of it, but only, That this
Town and Walepole were both given to Ely-
Monaſtery by the owner of them, at the ſame
time that he dedicated his young ſon Alwin
to a monaſtick Life there ; That William the
firſt erected a caſtle here, when the out-laws
made their incurſions from theſe fenny parts;
and, That in the year 1236, the tompeſtuous
waves, for two days together, broke in upon
this ſhore ſo violently, that they drown'd both
land and people, all about. But the Brick-
caſtle that is ſtill there, was built by John

+ So ſaid, Morton Biſhop of Ely, in our f grandfathers
ann. 1605. days; who alſo drew through this tenny Coun-
Newleame, try a ſtrait ditch, call'd Newleame, for the bet-

Cloweroſs.

Earls of
Cambridge.

1399»

* Ft placatus
Ws”

ter convenience of water-carriage, and there-
by the encreaſing the trade and wealth of this
his town ; tho” it has fal'n out otherwiſe, for it
is but of ſmall uſe, and the neighbours com-
plain that this has quite ſtop'd the courſe of
the Auen or Nen into the Sea, by Clow-croſs.
The firſt Earl of Cambridge, was William,
brother of Ranulph Earl of Cheſter; as may
be ſeen in a Patent of Alexander Biſhop of Lin-
coln, dated 1139. After him, it 1s probable
that thoſe Earls of Huntingdon, who were of
the blood royal of Scr], were likewiſe Earls
of Cambridge ; for it appears from the publick
records, That David Earl of Huntingdon receiv'd
the third peuny of the County of Cambridge. A
long time after, John of Hainault, brother to
William third Earl of Holland and Hainault,
was advanc'd to this dignity by Edward the
third, for the ſake of his wite Q. Philippa, whoſe
Kinſman he was. For her ſake alſo, the ſame
King honour'd William Marquiſs of Juliers,
her ſiſter's ſon, with the ſame title, after John
had revolted and gone over to the French.
After the deceaſe of theſe Foreigners, King
Edward the third ſettled this Honour upon
his fifth ſon Edmund of Langley, which, after
he had held it four years (my Authority 1s an old
manuſcript belonging to that admirable Anti-
quary Francis Thinn) The Earl of Hainault, Queen
Philippa's kinſman, came and openly claim d in
Parliament; but he return d jatisfyd at laſt.

This Edmund of Langley, afterwards Duke of

York, had two Sons, Edward Duke of York
(for ſome time Earl of Cambridge, and ſlain
in the batrel of Agincourt ; ) and Richard, crea-

ted Earl of Cambridge by the meer favour of

Henry the fifth, and the conſent of his own
brother Edward. But after this perfidious and
ambitious man had ungratefully conſpir d againſt
the lite of that beſt of Princes, and ſo loſt his
head ; the title of Earl of Cambridge was ei-
ther loſt with him, or drown'd among the ti-
tles of his fon Richard, who was afterwards
Duke of York, and was reſtor'd to all his dig-
nities, as being Ainſman and Heir to his Un-
cle Edward Duke of York. [The ſame ti-
tle was confer d upon James Marquiſs of
Hamilton in the year 1619, Who was ſuc-
ceeded by James his eldeſt fon, and after-
wards by William his ſecond ſon; who re-
c:iv'd 4 mortal wound at Worceſter- fight, and

dy'd without iſſue-male ſurviving : ſo that the

honour died with him. After the Reſtoration,
this title was confer d upon Charles Stuart (el.-
deft fon to ＋ then Duke of York) who
was ſtil'd Du

Charles; who all died young. And, ſinice, the title
of Duke of Cambridge was confer'd by her Ma-
jeſty Queen Anne, upon the. Illuſtrious Prince
George Auguftis, Electoral Prince of Hanover,
and now Prince of Wales.

This Shire contains 163 Pariſhes.

n

More rare Plants grouing wild in Cambridge-
ſhire.

K. Acinos Anglicum Cluſ. Engliſh Stone-Bafil,
or common Stone-Baſil ; for theſe differ only acciden-
tally. In the plowed lands on the borders of Gog-
mages hills and Newmarket-heath.

Aloe paluſtris C. B. i. e. Militaris aizoi-
des Ger. Water Sengreen, or Freſbwater- Soldier.
In the rivers and Fen-ditches in many places of the
Iſle of Ely : as in the river and ditches near
Stretham-ferry, and about Audrey-cauſey. |

Alſine tenuifolia J. B. Fine-leav'd Chickweed,
In the corn-fields on the borders of Triplow-heath,
and elſewhere. |

Alyſſon Germanicum echioides Lob. Aparine
major Ger. German Madwort or Great Gooſe-graſ-.
It once grew plentifully at New-market (vid. Cat.
Cant.) but being an annual plant, I hear it is now
loſt there : poſſibly it may appear again here-
after.

K. Anagallis aquatica rotundifolia Ger. a-
quat. tertia Lob. Round-leaved Water-Pimpernel.
On Teverſham, Hinton, and Trumpington-moors in
the ditches, and by the water-courſes plentifully.

Anagallis fœmina Ger. cœruleo flore C. B.
Park. Female or blue-flower'd Pimpernel. In the cor
on the left-haud of the way leading to Hiſton a little
beyond the firſt cloſes.

Aparine minor ſemine læviore. Gooſe-graſs
with ſmoother ſeed. Very common among the corn,
eſpecially in chalky grounds. Q. An Aparine ſe-
mine levi Park.

E. Argemone capitulo longiore glabro Mo-
riſon. Long ſmooth-headed baſtard-poppy. In the corn.

Aſcyron ſupinum villoſum paluſtre C. B
Park. Marſh S. Peter"s-wort, with hoary leaves.
On the boggy grounds near Gamlingay.

Auricula muris pulchro flore albo J. B.
Caryophyllus holoſteus Ger. holoſteus arven-
ſis hirſutus, lore majore C. B. holoſteus ar-
venſis hirſutus Park. Long-leaved rough Chick-
weed with a large flower. On heaths and dry banks
2 bufhes, and in gravelly ground. See Cat.

c.

Bifolium paluſtre Park. Marſþ Twayblade.
On the boggy and fenny grounds near Gamlingay.

Camelina Ger. Camelina five Myagrum alte-
rum amarum Park. Myagrum ſiliqua longa C. B.
Myagro affinis planta filiquis longis J. B. cui
& Eryſimum Galeni & Theophraſti cenſetur.
Treacle-Wormſeed. In the Oſier-holts about the
bridge at Ely abundantly ; and in all the other Oſier-
grounds by the river-fide there. |

Carduus acaulis Lob. acaulis Septentrio-
nalium Park. acaulis minore purpureo flore
C. B. acaulis minor purpureo ta Ger. emac.
Chamæleon exiguus Tragi J. B. Dwarf Carline-
thiſtle. Upon the level near the new Peſt-houſes.
This occurs in moſt Counties of England, but not
very common.

Carduus

o

e of Cambridge; and afterwards Die,
upon his three brothers, James Edgar, and Cuntri/,,

x
;

497

8

1

25 PR " th PEPE *
—— et

"CAMBRIDGESHIRE

498

Park. item Carduus tomentoſus Anglicus ejuſ-

dem. Capite tomentoſo J. B. eriocephalus Ger.

mac. item globoſus capitulo latiore euſdem. ca-

pite rotundo tomentoſo C. B. item tomentoſus

capitulo majore ejuſdem. Mypolly headed T hiftle.

In many cloſes about Madingley, Childerley, King-
on, &C.

Caryophyllus minor repens noſtras. An Ca-
ryophyllus Virgineus Ger. Maiden Pinks. On a
little hill where Fiirze grows, next to Funiper-hill
near Hilderſham.

Caucalis arvenſis latifolia echinata C. B. item
lato Apii folio ejuſdem. Apii foliis, flore ru-
bente Ger. arvenſis latifolia purpurea Park.
item Anglica flore rubente ejuſdem. item ma-
jor ſaturè rubente flore ejuſdem. Lappula ca-
naria latifolia, five caucalis J. B. Purple-flow-
er great Baſtard Parſley. Among the corn in ma-
uy places of this County ; as, berween Cambridge
aud Cherry-Hinton, and near the Windmill in the
way to Comberton. This is a beautiful Plant, and
we have ſeldom found it in other Counties.

Chondrilla viſcoſa humilis C. B. Park. Ger.
emac. Lactuca ſylveſtris laciniata minima Cat.
Cant. The leaſt cut-leaved wild Lettice. In a
bank by a little lane-fide leading from London-road
to the river, a little beyond the Spittle-houſe-end at
Cambridge.

Conyza foliis laciniatis Ger. emac. helenitis
foliis laciniatis Park. Aquarica laciniata C. B.
Great jagged Fleabane. In the Fen-ditches about
Marſh and Chattereſſe in the Iſle of Ely.

Conyza paluſtris Park. paluftris ſerratifolia
C. B. Views aurez ſive ſolidagini anguſtifoliz
affinis, lingua avis Dalechampii J. B. Marſþ
Fleabane or Birds-tongue. In the Fen-ditches and
banks in the Iſle of Ely, but more rarely.

Convolvulus arvenſis minimus. The leaſt Bind-
weed. Among the corn between Harleſton and little
Everſden.

Crocus J. B. ſativus C. B. True or manured
Saffron. I is frequently planted and cultivated iu
this County. See Eflex.

Cyperus longus inodorus ſylveſtris Ger, long.
inod. vulgaris Park. long. inod. ſylv. Lobelio
J. B. long. inod. Germanicus C. B. Lang Ba-
ſtard Cyperns. In the watery places of Hinton-moor,
aud in divers Fen-ditches.

Elzagnus Cordi Lob. Rhus myrtifolia Bel-
gica C. B. Myrtus Brabantica Ger. Rhus ſylv.
five Myrtus Brabantica aut Anglica Park.
Gale frutex odoratus, ſeptentrionalium J. B.
Sweet -willou, Gaul, Dutch Myrtle. In the fens in
the Me of Ely in many places abundantly. This is
wont to be put among cloaths to rommunicate a ſweet
ſeent to them. |

Enula campana Offic. Park. Helenium Ger.
vulgare C. B. Helemum five Enula campana
J. B. In the paſture-fields about Madingley, Coton,
Barton, &c. in great plenty. Elecampane. It is
common to many Counties. |

Equiſetum paluſtre ramoſum aquis immer-
ſum, ſeu Miltefotium aquaticum equiſetifo-
lium. Horſetail water Milfoil. In flow or ſtagna-
ting waters every where .

Ferrum equinum Germanicum filiquis in
ſummitate C. B. equinum comoſum Park. Or-
nithopodio affinis vel potius Soleæ aut Ferro
equino herba J. B. Buſb- headed Horſe-ſboe Vetch.
On Gogmagog hills, New-market-heath, and the drin
er part of Hinton-moor, &c. |
Geranium hæmatodes, foliis majoribus, pal-
lidioribus, & altiùs inciſis. Bloody 'Cranes-bill,
with larger, paler, and more deeply divided leaves.
Found by My. Dale on the banks of the Devil
ditch towards Reche. |

Carduus tomentoſus, Corona fratrum dictus

7

Glaux Dioſcoridis Ger. Hiſpanica J. B. Hi-
ſpanica Clufii Park. Ciceri ſylveſtri minori affi-
nis fi non idem C. B. Dioſcorides his Milktare,
or — his Spaniſh Milkwort. On the drier
part of Hinton-moor, and almoſt a -
* — Neumarbet- heath. e

aux vulgaris Ad. Lob. vulgaris legumin
ſive Glycyrrhiza ſylveſtris Park. Glye.f —
floribus luteo- palleſcentibus C. B. Fenum Grz-
cum ſylveſtre five Glycyrrhiza ſylveſtris quibuſ-
dam 7. B. Wild Liquorice, or Liquorice-vetch.
About the caſtle-hill at Cambridge; by the lane -

fide that leads from Cambridge to Cherry-Hinton,

and in many other places.
Glycyrrhiza vulgaris Ger. emac. vulgaris ſili-
2 Park. filiquoſa vel Germanica C. B. ra-
ice repente Germanica J. B. Common-Liquo-
rice. Planted in good quantity at Elme in the Ile

of Ely. From its faculty of quenching or flaki
_ it Fey 1 ſome call d Adipſon; * — þ
to be t

adix Scythica of Theophraſtus,

which took away the ſenſe of hunger and thirſt

from thoſe who held it in their mouths.

Gnaphalium montanum album Ger. mont.
flore rotundiore C. B. montanum ſive Pes cati
Park. Piloſella minor quibuſdam, aliis Gnapha-
lii genus J. B. Mountain Cudweed or Catsfoor.
On Newmarket-heath, on the right hand of the road
Cambridge to Newmarket, about a quarter
a mile from Botteſham-beacon, and in other pla-
ces of the heath in great plenty.

Gratiola anguſtifolia Ger. emac. anguſtifolia
ſive minor Park. Hyſlopifolia C. B. aquatica J. B.
Small Hedge-hyſop or Graſs-Poley. In the corn-fields
and ſhadowy lanes about Hoginton and Hiſton ; and
in many places about Cambridge.

K. Herba Paris Ger. J. B. Park. Herb-Paris
or Herb True-love. In Kingſton and Everſden

Hieracium latifolium Pannonicum 1. Cluf.
1. latifolium Cluſii Ger. Pannonicum latifo-
lium 1. Cluſio, Piloſellæ majori, vel Pulmona-
riæ luteæ accedens, &c. J. B. Alpinum latifo-
lium hirſutie incanum, magno flore C. B. Broad-
leaved Hungarian Hawkweed. On the banks of
the Devil's-ditch near Reche not far from New-
market.

Hieracium minus Cichorei vel potius Stœbes
folio hirſutum Cat. Cant. Hier. Caſtorei odore
Monſpelienſium. Small rough Succory-hawkweed ſmel-
ling like Caſtor. In the paſtures between Cambridge
and Grantceſter, not far from the river.

Holoſteum medium Elienſe foliis rigidiori-
bus glaucis. 8 holoſteus foliis gra-
mineis Mentzel. forte. The middle ſort of Stich-
wort. It grows plentifully on the Fen-banks in the
Ne of Ely.

Jacobza montana anguſtifolia lanuginoſa, non
laciniata C. B. Pannonica folio non laciniato
J. B. anguſtifolia Ger. emac. anguſtifolia Panno-
nica non laciniata Fark. Narrow-leav'd moun-

tain Ragwort. On Gogmagog-hills and Newmarket-
heath.

Juncus paluſtris panicula glomerata ex rubro

nigricante Cat. Cant. ſemine Lithoſpermi Bot.
Mon. Round black-headed Marſp-Ruſh or Bog-Ruſh
with Gromill-ſeeds. Every-where in the watery
places of Hinton and Teverſham-moors.

Lathyrus major latifolius Ger. emac. major
rennis Park. major latifolia, flore purpureo ſpe-
cioſior J. B. latifolius C. B. Peaſe everlaſting. In
Madingley-wood, and other woods.

Linaria adulterina Ger. emac. montana floſcu-
lis albicantibus-C. B. Linariz fimilis F. B. Pſeu-
do-linariæ montana alba Park. Baſtard Toadflax,
On Gogmagog-hills and Newmarket-heath, but ſcat-

| teringly.

Rrr

Linum

ICE NI.

Linum ſylveſtre cæruleum perenne erectius
flore & capitulo majore. Mild perennial blue Hax
with larger heads and flowers. On the borders of

ramoſum. An gramineum ramoſum C. B. J. B.
Park. Millefolium tenuifolium Ger. emac. ico.
Fine or Fennel-leav'd Pondweed. In the river Cam

the corn-fields about Gogmagog-hills, and in ſjome|plentifully.

cloſes about Cherry- Hinton.

Linum ſylveſtre cæruleum procumbens, flo-
re & capitulo minore. Mild perennial blue Flax
with ſmaller heads and flowers. In the ſame places
with the former, obſerv'd by Mr. Dale.

Lychnis noctiflora C. B. Park. Ocymoides non
ſpecioſum J. B. Night-flowering Campion. Found
among corn between Newmarket and Wood-Ditton.

Lychnis ſylveſtris flore albo minimo. Lych.
ſylv. altera ſpic4 reflex Bot. Monſp. arvenſis mi-
nor Anglica Park. Small Corn-Campion with a ve-
ry ſmall white flower. Found among corn near the
Devil s-ditch.

Melampyrum criſtatum flore purpureo F. B.
an luteum anguſtifolium C. B. Park ? Purple-
beaded creſted Cow-wheat. In Madingley and Ring-
ſton woods, and in almoſt all the other woods in this
County. It alſo over-ſpreads all the paſture and com-
mon grounds you paſs through going from Madingley
to Dry-Drayton.

Millefolium paluſtre galericulatum Ger. emac.
aquaticum flore luteo galericulato J. B. aquati-
cum lenticulatum C. B. Hooded Water-Milfoil.
In the brook Stour by the Iſlet it makes : and in ma-
ny of the great Fen-ditches in the Ie of Ely plenti-
fully. There hath a leſſer ſort of this, with a ſmall
flower, been obſerved on Teverſham-moor.

Onobrychis Ger. vulgaris Park. foliis viciz
fructu echinato major C. B. Polygalon Geſneri
J. B. Caput gallinaceum Belgarum Lob. Medick-
wetchling, Cocks-head, commonly, but falſly call d
Saint Foine. On Gogmagog-hills, and the balks in
the corn-fields all thereabout.

Orchis lilifolius minor ſabuletorum Zelan-
diz & Bataviz J. B. chamzorchis lilifolia C. B.
Dwarfſ-Orchies of Zealand, or rather Maurſb-baſtard-
orchies. In the watery places of Hinton and Tever-
ſham-moors.

Orchis myodes Ger. myodes galea & alis
herbidis F. B. major muſcam referens C. B. The
Fly-Orchies. On the banks of the Devil's-ditch, and
in the cloſes about Hinton and Teverſham.

Orchis ſive Cynoſorchis minor Pannonica Ger.
militaris Pannonica Park. militaris pratenſis hu-
milior C. B. parvis floribus multis punctis nota-
tis, an Orchis Pannon. 4. Cluſii ? F. B. Little
purple-flower'd Dogs-ſtones. On Gogmagog-hills, New-
market-beath, and particularly on the Devil's-ditch
plentifully.

Orchis ſive Teſticulus ſphegodes hirſutoflore
J. B. fucum referens colore rubiginoſo C. B.
The green-winged Humble-bee Satyrion. In an old
gravel-pit near Shelford by the foot-way from Trum-
pington to the Church,

Orchis odorata Moſchata five Monarchis
C, B. puſilla odorata Park. parra Autumnalis
lutea J. B. The yellow-ſweet, or musk-orchies. In
the chalk-pit-cloſe at Cherry-Hinton, and in ſome pits
about Gogmagog-bil/s.

Papaver corniculatum violaceum J. B. Park.
C. B. cornutum flore violaceo Ger. Violet-colour'd
horned Poppy. In the corn-fields beyond Swafham,
as you go to Burwell.

Pimpinella ſaxifraga hireina major J. B. Park.
ſaxifraga Ger. ſaxifraga major umbella candida
C. B. Great Burnet-Jaxifrage. In the woods at
S. George-Hatley, and in many other woods on the
border of Bedfordſhire.

Potamogiton ramoſum caule compreſſo, folio
Graminis canini. Small-branched Pondweed with
a flat ſtalk. In the river Cam.

Potamogiton millefolium ſeu foliis gramineis

Pulſatilla Anglica purpurea Park. parad. flore
minore Ger. minore nigricante C. B. flore clauſo
cæruleo J. B. Common or Engliſh Paſque-flower.
On Gogmagog-hills on the left hand of the way lead-
ing from Cambridge to Haveril, juſt on the top of
2 = alſo about Hilderſham fix miles from Cam-
ridge.

Ranunculus flammeus major Ger. paluſtris
flammeus mayor Park. longifolius paluſtris ma-
jor C. B. longo folio maximus, Lingua Plinii
J. B. Great Spear-wort. In ſome ditches at Tever-
ſham-moor, and abundantly in many great ditches in
the fens in the Ne of Ely.

ibes nigrum vulgo dictum folio olente J. B.
fructu nigro Park. Groſſularia non ſpinoſa fru-
ctu nigro C. B. Black Currans, Squinancy-berries,
By the river gſide at Abington.

Rorella ſive Ros ſolis foliis oblongis J. B.
Park. folio oblongo C. B. Long-leav'd Roſa ſolis,
or Sung deu. On Hinton- moor about the watery pla-
ces plentifully.

Salix humilior, foliis anguſtis ſubczruleis, ut
plurimum ſibi invicem oppoſitis. Salix tenuior,
tolio minore, utrinque glabro fragilis F. B. The
yellow dwarf-willow, By the horſe-way-ſide t0
Cherry-Hinton, in the cloſe juſt by the water you paſs
over to go thither.

Scordium J. B. C. B. Ger. legitimum Park.
Water-Germander. In many ditches in the Iſle of
Ely, and in the Ofier-holts about Ely-city. Alſo in
a ditch on the left band of the road leading from
Cambridge to Hiſton, about the mid-way.

8. Seſamoides Salamanticum magnum Ger.
The greater Spaniſh Catchfly. Near the gravel-pits
as you go to the neareſt Windmill on the North-
fide of Newmarket-town. This place may be in Suf-

olk.
2 Solanum lethale Park. Ger. melanoceraſos C. B.
manicum multis five Bella donna J. B. Deadly
Nightſhade or Dwale. In the lanes about Fullorn
plentifully.

Thalictrum minus Ger. Park. C. B. minus, five
Rutæ pratenſis genus minus, ſemine ſtriato J..
The leſſer Meadou-Rue. About Newmarket, and
alſo about Bartlow and Linton in the chalky grounds.

Trifolium echinatum arvenſe fructu minore
C. B. Medica echinata minima J. B. echinata
parva rea Park. male ; non enim erigitur. The
ſmalleſt Hedge-hog-Trefoil. In an old gravel-pit in
the corn-field near Wilborham Church; alſo at New-
market where the Seſamoides Salamanticum grows.

Trifolium ſylveſtre luteum filiqui cornutd,
vel Medica fruteſcens C. B. Medica ſylveſtris
J. B. fruteſcens ſive flavo flore Cluſii Park. Tel-
low-medick with flat-wreathed cods. In many places
among the corn, as between Linton and Bartlow by
the road-fides ; between Cambridge and Trumpinton
near the river; about Quoy Church and Wilbor-
ham, &C.

Verbaſcum nigrum flore & luteo purpuraſcen-
te C. B. nigrum flore luteo, apicibus purpureis
J. B. nigrum Ger. nigrum falvifolium luteo
flore Lob. Sage-leav'd black Mullein. In many
places about Gogmagog- hills towards Linton, as by
the lanes-fides, and in the cloſes about Abington,
Shelford, &c. ;
Veronica picata recta minor J. B. Spicata mi-
nor C. B. mas erecta Park. aſſurgens five ſpica
Ger. Upright Male-Speedwell or Fluellin. In ſeve-
ral cloſes on Newmarket-heath, as in a cloſe near the
beacon on the left hand of the way from Cambridge to
Newmarket.

HUN-

£00

cc —. —_—

— —

as

*
4

4
.
3
_—
WT SY
* *
+ + | +
'
*
+

*
I
CA

*

.
*

+a
—
„
*

2 d
* * 1 *
1
| .
by
8 4
at .
* ud 7
12 7 | j E
8 N. . |
q .
*
o -
-
—

FF

Peterboroughſ £

”».
-o* TP

k

3 tolnk Þ Stan Jround
Bridf+ q

"4 Lan w/

OY

Ar 3 \> 0 11 tn

et Bs

£ &
Salom 2. Let

NORTHAMPTON

Lerhton p

Thrapiton A.

4, off | 7 2 >
ods ron ay, 4 320%

N
2 |

I
W — |
|

; 7,

—

F. mot | .
1
;

Hon, lers
Bridy
Wor hn
7557 71.

C208
iz
*

Yaxley

H UND RED.
So bm 4 Brick.

„

”
I Deuten

Cr nmyton or 8 i
Cunn 2 1% Ane Jipwood

A F
Bruck 35 De uten

olulton 4 caſtle | Wy ret
N + Saltrr . {hh | Nene ler
Siltrr* Hum Sultri- A 4 0
altrs N3 _ . IA. 89 2 n As * 5 2 K, *
Saltri- | A Saltri As TIT .
Hainer X'emmaton
Salter * 8
Hen /
Freut 3 ' e e 72 „ 1
J. 11 5 LAS mY 8 1. 3 92
oe 2 Ino nun- «3 * ο
43: * — 1 0
Copmaniford = + HUNDRED.
; Unton A. Y's [ton Lutl:
/ 3, £ Him Stukelor
. bunt or 1
4 er tl, Avi - 47 reat
TIES uk n  Stukelc *
EY Huck worth Ours ; oO * 125

n. erp | * ,
* 16 HT ON DIe
1 | > TD. twin . , 7
4. ane C7
Barham 4 vollos- AMT a br id os
. re 2 Winch
uli « um. eB

. 1
Gaſton A thore
0 Cut Pp þ 7 *.
Lunn. '

NF in
"Brampton
J. one 7 F 5
+ — 7 * —

—

* f n 9 — — , Ea)
2 rth A ; $irth »In Lore
Pee... Graſſham 132 lf 2, Ven
+ *

HUND RED.

1 U. l an '

TD — —

- —
— * 22

5 Swineſhead | 4 Fo y 1 N. 1 butt. lanſhus
4 Nerpark 7 |
7 1

eh bern 1 Sten

— —
*

——— —

4 Seale of Mules

rr p

„ —
— — ——

— der em

— 1.1 | es i 22
« DDnſhun SY
Jolin Church il.

A

Sturt»
— " 4 - Ir
Curl, * 2 13 A one vN Po LES *
K. b LEY WY 4 4 "4 Priory 4. -» *

11nbolton z j 2 Fg _ {len S x D, 4 Hon
"Knmuhantaon: 24 of

4 * N j] A |

1

' . * ,

„ ee A Little 7.

1 Dax ton
þ 7 I or AStou TRE -

Mall LE. 4

Littls 1
tounrhton>,_ The . Lore

* 9 98

0 * Hujſhmeal

rl L A N D

1
An het 25

e e

, of JOS
ush

nd 1 3

1
0 1 * Ache, orth

d * *
CAT

e
oranſden
f a

*

dere

Jeteortk

\

Nower heal

Tor * -
os n. „ «471017

Ain. nor t 4 Bluntshas

A 5 . ots
1 S

Fe mn” Stanton I

3-08-14

Holme *

3 Londſtow

£

4 „

O00 hon
» -&

4 hateres
Fo * r I -

Saudenham 4

Hilboror
29”

(one
Erith *
un- 1 «<7 — 8 * +. lulreth
; 7 4 * 22
ru 22 *

1
r ' | 1 X

Anapre 1 =

4 „l. leni le. a

. d G /E

A. ort I

\ | 1
MY aurdwick |
Box, 4 5
i * | LI *
* 2 » Comberton
I... s 5 _” 12
83
d Cul locote 24. -
" SC at Sl ", «Luſt mel
: ar Aa iel.
Bourne Deren Bn
dna

Kmaſton

„ AAurluton

Vumple

EMT 4

9 Irrmgton

R Orwell A. E .

FHontinc TON

STHIREF,
B. Rols M.,. .

F'itlborton
*

„ A l
7 I Ullmaham * : un
F > 4 enn
La
47 Ives. * 4
Fonn: | *
Druton 0 4 4 o 4611; —_ be 0
® 1 Ji runton * *
ds *
Fi ay 2 7
„ SO. 0 Þ
27 7 In. Iren. .
7 Hangin ton a * Y "th: J. an
1 *
Þ 0 „unt, WW
Z. £44 Girton 2.

"7

U.. un. NO A of cOttenham
n

Barton

Barrington

X'alton

| hal lon
PO» 4 *s wends#* 4
2 —
f Kneesworth &
« tle i. lloa- Shenh*4,
Bal born
7 .
Vorden 9 bY

Streatham a 4

ShelFo rd par

—

_—_ «or ton

* — oe

- Pater
A beach

91 p — 4544
ih ermmngser

nm
4 Hon

x WF. 7
. p —
—— — — —̃ 2— 22 -

n — =
0 Is
- : 8 Py
9 & -7

WR ——__

— =”

> — ꝓ ẽã ö — —— x „„

23

OR <a. Ba hh a
„% ERS, ER Le Pon Tn
— c

%
4g *
——
s =
-
a ©
2 ——
45 © * |
2 -
8 a & -
/ * 7 5 32
33 ag”
L124". OO
- 1 * 1
7. 5-8
929 ky
*
»
1
*
*
*
-
*
— a = — —
— — ' _— — — — re RS ů — — — — — — * 5 A
- — -_ — —— _
3 *
: — —
- * Dk
— — ar — — ; ks

HUNTINGDONSHIRE

8 N T the back of Cambridgeſhire| this County. The firſt is St. Neors, ſcall'd in
lies the County of Hunting- the Saxon Annals S. Neob, and] commonly
don, by the Saxons call d|St. Needs; from one Neotus, a learned and pi- st. Needs.
ſhuncandunerey ne and hun- ous perſon, who ſpent his life in propagating
* cedunercype, ſby the later the Chriſtian Religion: His body was remov'd
Writers, Hunteduneſcire, and from Neotſtock in Cornwall to this place; in ho-
W W Huntyngdonfchyre| commonly] nour of whom, Alfrick converted Earl Elfrid's
Huntingdonſhire ; ſituated ſo, as to have Bed-| Palace into a Monaſtery, which Roifia, the wife
fordſbire on the South, Northamptonſhire on the |of Richard Lord of Clare, ſoon after the coming-
Weſt and likewiſe on the North (where they [in of the Normans, endow'd with many fair
are parted by the river Avon,) and Cambridge-|eſtates. Betore that, this place was call'd Ai- Ainsbury.
ſoire on the Eaſt. It is of very ſmall extent, nulphabury, from one Ainulph another Saint;
ſcarce ſtretching out it ſelt twenty miles, tho*|which name a part of the Town ſtill retains,
1 from meaſur'd to the beſt advantage. f It has been At Hailweſton, a {mall village ſomewhar lower,
Robert an obſervation upon this County, that the fare two ſmall ſprings, one freſh, and the other y4eajcing
Gorton, families of it have been ſo worn out, that tho*[a little brackiſh ; one good for Scabs and Le- Springs.
it has been very rich in Gentry, yet but few |profies, as the Inhabitants ſay, and the other
Sirnames of any note are remaining, which|tor dimneſs of eyes. A little way further, the
can be drawn down beyond the reign of the|Ouſe runs by Bugden, a handſom Palace of the Bugden.
laſt Henry. The cauſe of ſuch decay in places|Biſhops of Lincoln; and ſo by Hinchingbroke, Hinching-
nearer London, is plain enough; viz. the ma- formerly a Nunnery (which was remov'd by broke.
ny temptations to luxury, and the great wealth] William the Conqueror from Elteſley in Cam-
of Merchants, always ready to ſupply the Ex-|bridgeſhire, to this place) and + ſince the ſeat of Now, C.
travagances of the Nobility and Gentry. But] the Cromwell, Knights; [but now of the Earl |
this cannot hold ſo well here; ſo that we mult | of Sandwich, to whom it affords the title of
conſider, whether a reaſon brought by a later] Viſcount, as St. Neors doth that of Baron.]
Author will not ſolve it, viz. That, moſt of the] From thence it runs to Huntingdon, by the Sa- Huntingdon,
County being Abby-land ; upon the Diſſolution, many | xons bundandun, according to Marianus [ and
new Purchaſers planted themſelves herein; and|alſo huncenzune, and huncenounepont ;] in
rhaps their new poſſeſſions might have the|the publick Seal Hunters-dune, that is (accord-
ame fate here, that Church-revenues have had|ing to Henry Arch-Deacon of this place, who
in other places, where they fell into Lay-hands. ||flouriſh'd “ five hundred years ago) the down or * Four, C.
It is a very good Corn-Country ; and for|mountain of Hunters; from whence they have a
feeding-ground, the fenny part of the Eaſt is] Huntſman in their Arms. Our Country-man
exceeding fat: the reſt is mighty pleaſant, by| Leland has upon this account coin'd that new
reaſon ot its ſwelling hills, and ſhady groves ;|Latin name, Venautodunum; [and alſo tells us,
for in ancient times it was all a wood, ac-|that in his time they had an ancient Coin,
cording to the report of the Inhabitants. That|dug-up not far from the Town, with the
it was a Foreſt, till Henry the ſecond deforeſted picture of a f hound on one fide, but that the 4 Canis lepo·
it in the beginning of his reign, is evident Inſeription was not legible.] This is the chief rarii. .
by an old Survey (Al, except Waybridge, Sap-[town of the whole County, and gives name
ple, and Herthei, which were woods of the Lords|to it; It excels the towns about it (ſays the ſame
demain, and do ſtill remain a Foreſt :) | and Sir] Areh-deacon) for its pleaſant ſituation, its hand- | |
Robert Cotton (who had himſelf delign'd a Hi-|ſomneſs and beauty, the convenience of the fens juſt
ſtory of this County) ſays, this was never fully |by, and the great advantages of hunting and fiſhing.
effected till the time of Edward the firſt. For|In the reign of Edward the Confeſſor, as it is |
altho* Henry the ſecond did pretend to en-|in Domeſday-book, This Burrough was divided 1
franchiſe his ſubjetts of this Shire from the ſervitude into four Ferlings ; two of them bad one hundred
of his beaſts, except Wabridge, Saple, and Her- and ſixteen Burgeſſes that paid cuſtom and gelt, and
thy, his own Demains ; yet ſuch were the en-|under them one hundred Bordarii; the other two
croachments of the ſucceeding Reigns, that the had one hundred and eleven Burgeſſes, who paid all
poor Inhabitants were fore'd to petition for ſthe King's cuſtoms and gelt. It ſtands on the
redreſs; which was granted them by the great] North-ſide of the Ouſe, on a riſing ground;
Charter of Henry the third. Only, his ſon] reaching lengthways to the North, and adorn'd

:
|
| |
reſum'd the fruits of his father's kindneſs ; till, anciently with fifteen Churches, and of la- + With four | (

in the 29th year of his reign, he confirm'd|ter days with four ; which were reduced in Churches, C.
the former Charter, and left no more of this] the late Civil wars to two; ] and heretofore :
Shire, Foreſt, than what was his own ground. | with a ſmall Abby, founded by the Empreſs
The government of the County is very pe- Maud and Euſtace Lovetoft, the ruins whereof
culiar ; Cambridgeſhire, in the Civil adminiſtra-|I ſaw out of the town Eaſtward. By the ſide
tion, being joyn d to it: ſo that there is but|of this river, nigh the fair Free-ſtone bridge,
one High-ſheriff for both Shires. He is cho- there is a mount, and ground-plot of a caſtle,
ſen out of Cambridgeſhire, one year; out of the|* built anew in the year 917 by Edward the , .
Ihe of Ely, a ſecond ; and the third, out of felder, [or (as others gather from Domeſday) Cotton. in 1 i
this Shire. In the Je of Ely, he is choſen|by William the Conqueror; and enlarg'd Speed. | 'F|
out of the north-part, one time; and out of|with ſeveral new works by David King of TH
| the ſouth, another. Scots, to whom King Stephen had given the
2 The river Ouſe, which I have ſo often men-|Burrough of Huxtingdon for an augmentation 11
b tion'd, waſhes the ſouth- part, and decks it]of his eſtate, as an ancient Hiſtorian has it; of |
with flowers. Beſides other meaner places, and laſtly demoliſh'd to the ground by Henry | |
there ſtand three towns of note upon this ri- |
ver, after it has left Bedfordſhire and enters
|
|
|

the ſecond, as well becauſe it wasa refuge to
— as to preyent the frequent quarrels

between

— 2 —

— — 5 -
9
— —— — ———— D:. -
—_— CY

*
ee

Ce CAO "0 — —_
2
i We. 1
ſi - — — — 1

Cotton, in

Goodman-
cheſter,

Duroſiponte.

between the Scots and the St. Lizes about it;
which made him ſwear in a great paſſion, that
he would leave no cauſe of contention to ei-
ther party. [By the toreſaid number of Chur-
ches in ancient times, 1t appears to have been
once a very flouriſhing Town. And the cauſe
of its decay, ſeems to have been the || altera-
tion made in the river, by Grey (a Minion of
the time, as my Author calls him) who pro-
cur'd the paſſage of it to be ſtop'd, whereas,
before, to the great advantage of the Inhabi-
tants, it had been navigable as far as this
Town. King John granted it, by Charter, a
peculiar Coroner, profit by Toll and Cuſtom, a Re-
corder, Town-Clerk, and two Bailiffs ; but at pre-
ſent it is incorporated by the name of a Mayor,
twelve Aldermen and Burgeſſes; and the river is
made navigable by ſmaller Veſlels, as high as Bed-
ford. ] From the caſtle-hill, there is a large pro-
ſpect, from whence we ſee a meadow encom-
paſs'd with the Ouſe, call'd Portſholme, exceeding
large ( and a more glorious one the Sun never

ſaw) to which in the Spring- time this Verſe
may be well apply'd :

Per pingit vario gemmantia prata colore.

Kind Spring with various colours paints the
| Meads.

This pleaſant Scene, as if contriv'd on pur-
poſe by ſome Painter, perfectly charms one's
eye. n the other fide of the river, over-
againſt Huntingdon, and as it were the Mother
that brought it forth, ſtands Gormonche#Fer,
now call'd Goodmanchefter. A large Country-
town eminent for tillage, and ſituated on a free
open ground, declining to the Sun. Nor 1s
there a Town in the Kingdom that has a great-
er number of luſty ſtout Husbandmen, or keeps
more Plows a going ; and they brag that they
have formerly entertain'd the Kings of En-
gland in their progreſs, with a ruſtick ſhow of
nineſcore Plows at once. Certainly, there are
none in the Nation that more advance Hus-
bandry (which Columella calls Wiſdom's Couſin)
either in reſpe& of their skill, their purſe, or
their genius that way. [By which means, they
grew ſo wealthy and conſiderable, that in the
reign of K: James the firſt, the Town was incor-
porated by the name of two Bailiffs, twelve A,
fiſtants, and Commonalty, of the Burrough of Good-
mancheſter.\ Henry of Huntingdon calls it in his
time a Village not unpleaſant ; but formerly, as he
truly writes, it had been a noble City. For
(omitting the Roman coins frequently plow'd-
up, and the diſtances in the Irinerary ; ſtoge-
ther with the bones of divers men of tar
greater ſtature than is credible to be ſpoken
of in thoſe days; )] omitting theſe, the very
name implies it to be the ſame City that Auto-
ninus calls Duroliponte, inſtead of Durofiponte ;
for Duroſi-ponte (pardon the alteration of one
letter ) ſignifies in Britiſh a Bridge over Ouſe :
(For all own, that this river was known indit--
terently by the names of Uſe, Ie, Oſe, and Ouſe:)
But in the Saxon times, when it loſt this name,
it took that of Gormonceſter, from Gormon the
Dane (who, by Artieles of Peace, had theſe
parts granted to him by our King Alfred) as

this Verſe may witneſs :

Gormonis 4 Caſtri nomine, nomen habet.
The Town from Gormond's Caſtle took its

name.

It is the ſame place that J. Picus, an ancient
writer, ſpeaks of, when he ſays, That King Al-

fred gain'd ſuch advantages over the Dan, the

they gave what hoſtages he demanded, either to legy
the Land, or turn Chriſtians. Which was put in
execution ; for Guthrum the King (whom they cal
Gormond) with thirty of his Nobility, and alma
all his people, were baptiz'd, and himſelf was a.
dopted Alfred's God-ſon, under the name of Athel-
ſtan. Upon this he ſettled here, and had the prp-
vinces * Eaſt- Angles and Northumbers le-
ſtow'd on him; to protect that now as bis Inheri-
tance under the King, which before he had waſted a;
a Robber. Nor muſt it be paſs'd over, that ſome
of theſe old writers have call'd this City Gumi-
ceſter, and Gumicaftrum, poſitively affirming
that Machutus had his Epiſcopal See at this
place. [Here is a School, called the Free Gram-
mar School of Queen Elizabeth, which was in-
corporated in the third year of K. James the firſt.

Ihe Ouſe, haſtning its courle from hence,
when it comes near Cambridgeſhire, glides thro'
pleaſant Meadows, where 1s -a pretty neat
Town call'd by the Saxons Slepe, and now St.
Ives; | which a late Writer deſcribes to be, 4
fair, large, and ancient Town, with a fine Stine-
bridge over the Ouſe. The name 1s derived]
from Ivo a Perſian Biſhop, who, as they write,
about the year 600, travell'd over England, with
great reputation of ſanctity, preaching the
Goſpel with great zeal wherever he came ; and
that he left his name to this place, where he
dy'd. Soon after, the Religious remov'd his
Body from hence, to Ramſey-Abby. Within
theſe Few years, a great part of it was burnt
down ; but it is built again.]

Turning almoſt three miles to one ſide, I faw

Somerſham, a large Palace lately belonging to the Somerſua,
Biſhop of Ely, being given to the Church S fit,
of Ely by Earl Brithnot in the year 991, and“ 18
enlarg'd with new buildings by that + lewd andy i avs
luxurious Biſhop, James Stanley. [It is now lexun ſil
the poſſeſſion of Anthony Hamond, of the anci- tu.

ent Family of that name in Kent.] A little
higher, ſtood the famous rich Abby of Ramſey,
(in Saxon Ramerige,) ]! among the fenns;
where the rivers ſtagnate in a ſpungy kind of
ground. The deſeription of this place, take in
ſhort out of the private Hiſtory of the Abby.

Ramſey, that is, the Rams Iſle, on the Weſt-fide Ramſey,

( for on all others there are nothing but impaſſible fens

for à great way together) is ſeparated from the firm

ground, almoſt two Bow-ſhots, by rough Quagmires.
Which place formerly us d to receive Veſſels into

the midſt of it, up a * flow river, by gentle gales of * Segri

wind; but now with great pains and coſt, theſe clay
Quagmires are ſtopped with large quantities of wood,
gravel, and ſtone, and footmen may paſs upon a
firm Cauſey almoſt tuo miles Jong, but not very
broad, It is enclos'd with Alders, which, with freſb
green Reeds, intermix'd with Bulruſhes, make a beau-
tiful ſhew. Long before it was inhabited, it was
all cover d over with ſeveral ſorts of trees, but with
wild Aſhes in abundance. But now of late, fiuce
theſe woods are partly cut down ; the land is found
to be arable and of a fat mould, and is plentiful
in fruit and corn ; planted with gardens, rich
in paſtures. In ſpring, the pleaſant meads ſmile on
the ſpeflators, and the whole Ie is embroider d as
it were, with variety of flowers. Beſides all this,
it s ſurrounded with Meres full of Eels, and with
Pools full of all ſorts of fiſh and water-fowl. Of
which, Ramſey-Mere is one, ſo call d from the name of R
the Ie, far excelling all the neighbouring waters both
in appearance and plenty; and where the Iſle is wi-
der, and wood thicker, it waſhes the ſandy banks,
and is mighty pleaſant to the beholders. Out of its
deep holes, they draw Pikes of wonderful bigneſs,
which they cal! Hakeds, either with Nets of ſe-

ments ;

[ver al forts, or baited Hooks, or other fiſhing Iiſtru-
1

St. Ih;

Haked:.

: Kirgsdelt,

& * Chron,
| SIX, p. 11.
un. 18.

: Cunringto

| Saltry,

Turkill th
Dare,

amſey.

HUNTING BONS HIN E

606

Naltry,

are,

ments; and though this place is perpetually haunted

by Fowlers, and always abundance is taken, yet is
there ſtill abundance left behind. Then he pro-
ceeds to ſhew at large, how one Ailuin of the roy-
al family (who on account of his great authority
and favour with the King, was firnam'd Healf-
Koning, i. e. Halt-King,) built this Abby, up-
on occaſion of a Fiſher's dream; how Biſhop
Oſwald enlarg'd it; how the Kings and others
encreas'd its endowments, ſo that it uſually
expended ſeven thouſand Pounds of our Money,
a year, to maintain ſixty Monks. But ſince
it is now diſſolv'd and gone, [and the very
place where it ſtood, forgotten; perhaps ſome
will think I have ſaid too much of it already ;
however, I will venture to add, out of the
ſame Author, the Epitaph on Ailuins Tomb,
becauſe it has in it ſuch an uncommon title of
Honour.

HIC REQUIESCIT AILWINVS IN-
CLITI REGIS EADGARI COGNA-
TVS, TOTIVS ANGLIZA ALDER-
MANNVS, ET HVIVS SACRI COE-
99 8 MIRACVLOSVS FVNDA-
OR.

That is,

Here reſts Ailuin, kinſman to the famoms King
Eadgar, Alderman of all England, and the miracu-
lons founder of this Monaſtery.

I will add alſo, that the Abbots of Ramſey
had place in Parliament ; the head of their
Barony being Broughton, at ſome diſtance to the
South, which had annex'd to it, in this Shire,
four Knights fees.

From Ramſey to Peterborough, diſtant about
ten miles, King Canute (as is commonly ſaid)
rais d a pay

*

was well-nigh impaſlable by reaſon of brooks

and floughs. | But what way ſoever is meant by;

that name, it is certain, that it cannot be Ca-
nutus s road; for the name Kingsdelf or Cinger-
dælp in thoſe parts appears upon Record be-
fore Canutus's time;
King Edgar, who, in his Charter to the Church

| + Chron, of Peterburrow, * makes this Cingeroælp one

[ * of the bounds of his Donation. Beſides, the way.
iN, 15,

Saxon ozlp will not anſwer a via conſtrata lapi-
dibus, or pav'd way, but ſeems rather to mark
out to us ſome ditch drawn
draining of thoſe fenny grounds, and reducing
the waters into one chanel.] As this Abbey
was an ornament to the eaſtern parts of the
County, ſo was Sawtry to the middle ; a Mo-
naſtery for Ciſtercians, founded by the ſecond
Simon de St. Lize, Earl of Huntingdon. A lit-

| Currington, tle way off, lies Cunnington ; held (as the Law-

yers word it) of the Honour of Huntingdon, where,
within a ſquare ditch, are the plain footſteps
of an ancient Caſtle, which with Saltry was

| Turkill the given by Canute to Turkill the Dane, who

livd among the Eaſt-Angles, and call'd-in
Sueno King of Denmark to plunder the Nation.
After Turkill's departure, it was pofleſs'd by
Waldeof Earl of Huntingdon, ſon to Siward
Earl of Northumberland, who marry'd Judith,
William the Conqueror's Niece b
ſiſter on the mother's ſide ; by whoſe eldeſt

deceaſe, marry'd David Earl of Huntingdon
(atterwards King of Scotland,) the younger

ſon of Malcolm Can-mor King of Scotland
and Margaret his Wife, of the Royal Family
of the Saxons (ſhe being King Edmund Iron-
fide's grandchild by his ſon Edgar, who was
ſirnam d the Baniſh'd.) David had a ſon call'd
Henry, and he another call'd David, who was
Earl of Huntingdon : by Jſabel, one of his
daughters, Cunnington and other large poſſeſ-
ſions, came by marriage to Robert Brus, from
whoſe eldeſt ſon Robert, ſirnam'd the Noble,
James (the firſt,] King of Great Britain, li-
neally * derived his Poſen 1 and from his e Derives, C.
younger {on Bernard, who inherited Cunningto;:

and Exton, Sir Robert Cotton Knight f derived 4 Derives, C.
his; a perſon, who, belides other excelleu-

cies, || was a great Admirer and Maſter of || Is, C.
Learning, and had here a Collection of An-“ Hath, C.
tiquities from all parts; from whoſe ſingular

courteſie I often receiv'd great light, in theſe

obſcure and intricate matters. Divers Ro-

man Monuments brought by him from the
Picts-wall, do ſtill remain in a Summer-houſe

in the Garden here ; and, in the Church, are

two ancient remarkable Monuments; the one

inſcrib'd, Imperator, Rex Francia, Anglo-Saxo-

num, Angliæ, Scotiz ; the other, Prince Henry

of Scotland, Lord of Cunnington ; but both with-

out date, |

By reaſon theſe parts lye ſo low, and are Mofſes.
under water for ſome months, and in ſome

places are ſo hollow, that they ſeem to float ;

they are much infeſted with the noiſome ſmells

of Lakes, and a thick foggy air. Here lies

that clear Lake ſo full of fiſh, call'd Mitlęſmere, y;yeſmere
ſix miles long and three broad, in a mooriſh Lake.
Country; but the great profit of fiſhing, the

lenty of Paſtures, and the abundance of Turf
foe ring do (as the neighbours think) ſuf-

cauſey with great labour and
charge (by our Hiſtorians call d Kings delf, nigh!
the great Lake Wittleſmere,) becauſe that way

mean, in the reign 2

at firſt for the

his halt

daughter it deſcended to the Royal Family of
Scotland. For ſhe, after her firſt husband's

ficiently make amends for the unhealthful-
neſs of the place. For King Canute gave orders
to Turkill the Dane ( whom we mention'd be-
fore,) that every village about the fens ſhould have
it's proper Marſh ; who ſo divided the ground, that
the Inhabitants of each village ſhould have juſt ſo
much of the Marſh for their own uſe, as lay right
againſt the farm-ground of the ſaid village. He
alſo made an order, that no village might dig or
mow in another's Marſh without leave ; but how-
ever, that the feeding ſhould be common to all,
that is, Horn under Horn, for the preſervation of

peace and quiet among them. But this by the

.

When the children and ſervants of Canutus were The little
ſent-for from Peterborough to Ramſey, as they Hiltory of
paſs'd this Lake, in the midſt of their pleaſant voy- EB.
age, and their ſinging and jollity, the turbulent winds,
and a tempeſtuons ſtorm, aroſe on all fides, and as
it were ſurrounded them ; ſo that they were utterly
in deſpair either of life, ſecurity, or ſuccour : but
ſo great was God's mercy, that they did not all be-
come a prey to that devouring Element : for ſome,
in his compaſſion and providence, he ſav'd from the The founda«
raging waves, but others, by his ſecret judgment, he 1
ſaller d to periſh in the deep. When this ſad neus &
was brought to the King, it put him into a dread-
ful terror and trembling ; but after he was a little
recover d, he did, by the counſel of his Nobility and
Friends (to prevent all future miſchances from this
mercileſs monſter,) order his ſoldiers and ſervants to
mark out a Ditch in the Marſhes between Ramſey
and Witleſy, with their Skeins and Swords, and ſet
Day-labourers to ſcour and cleanſe it; from whence,
as we have it from our Predeceſſors of good credit,
this ditch by ſome of the neighbours was call'd
Swerdes-delf, becauſe it was mark'd out by ſwords ; Swerdes-delf
but ſome would have it call'd Cnouts-delf, from different from

bat King's name. But now they commonly Kingſdelf.
8 5 call

—

| 906

call it Steeds-dike ; and it is the bound be-

tween this County and Cambridgeſhire.
Kimbolton, Ainnibantum-Caſtle, now Kimbolton, former-

ly the ſeat of the Mandevils, and after that
* Now of the of the Bohuns, Stafford, and WWingfeelds, is

Wingfields, C. one great ornament to the f Weſt-parts of | the f Durobrive of Antoninus, that is, the River-

AN C. this County. [Sir Richard Wingfield (as Le-

MS. vol. 1. land tells us) built new Lodgings and Gal-

leries upon the old foundations of this Caſtle,

which was double-ditch'd, and the building

of it very ſtrong. From the WWingfields, it

aſs'd by ſale to the Mountagues ; and Henry

Earl of Mancheſter, of that name, very much

improv'd the Caſtle, ſparing no coſt that might

add to its beauty ; but moſt of all hath it

been improy'd, or rather new-built, in a very

beautiful manner, by Charles, his grandſon ;

who hath been advanced by his Majeſty King

George, to the higher and more honourable

See Manche. Title of Duke of Mancheſter. Here is at pre-

er, in Lan- ſent a pretty fair town, ſeated in a bottom;

caſhire, which hath given the title of Baron, to the
ſucceſſive Earls of Mancheſter.

Stonely, Below this, was Stonely, a ſmall Convent

founded by the Bigrames. A little way from

Awkenbury, hence ſtands Awkenbury, which was given by

King John to David Earl of Huntingdon, and

Stephen Se- by John Scot his ſon to Stephen Segrave, a perſon

grave. whom I am the more willing to mention, be-

cauſe he was one of the Courtiers who have

* Nullam po- taught us, That no Power is powerful enough] Kinneburge-caſter, and afterwards for ſhortneſs
tentiam efſe to preſerve it ſelf. With a great deal of pains] Caſter. This Kinneburga, the moſt Chriſtian
potentem- he rais' d himſelf to a high ſtation, with as|daughter of the Pagan King Penda and wife
much trouble kept it, and as ſuddenly loſt it. of Altred King of the Northumbers, chang'd her
Matth. Paris. In his younger days, from a Clerk he was made] Sovereign Authority for Chrift's ſervice (to uſe the
Knight, tho but of a mean family ; in his latter [words of an old writer) and govern'd her own
days, by his induſtry and courage he ſo enrich'd and] Nunnery as a mother to thoſe holy Virgins. Which
advanced himſelf, that he was rank'd among the place about an. 1010, was level'd with the ground
% higheſt of the Nobility, and was made Chief Ju-

ſtice of England, and manag d almoſt all the A,
fairs of the Nation as he pleasd. At length, he
wholly loſt the King's favour, and ended his
days in a Monaſtery ; and he, who, out of pride,
muſt needs remove from Eclefiaſtical to Secular
Affairs, was forced to reaſſume his Ecilefiaſtical Of-

fie and ſhaven crown, which he had formerly laid] this, lies Overton , corruptly call'd Orton;

afide, without ſo much as conſulting his Biſhop. A
Leighton, little way from hence, ſtands Leighton, where
Sir Gervaſe Clifton Knight began a noble build-
ing, [and in the ſixth year of King James
the firſt was created Baron of this place ; to
which title his Great grand-daughter the
Lady Katharine OBrien was reſtor'd in the
reign of King Charles the ſecond. Ir hath ſince
been the poſſeſſion of the Lady Butler, daugh-
ter and heir to the late Richard Earl of Arran,
who had it in marriage with the ſole daughter
of James Duke of Richmond, as the Duke
had had it by marriage with a daughter and
keir of the Lord Clifton. From a place near
this, the Earl of Arran was created a Baron

higher, upon the Nen, nigh H/almsford, Rood w
a little city, of greater antiquity than all theſe,
call'd Caer Dorm and Dormeceaſter by Henry of
Huntingdon, who ſays it was utterly ruina-
ted betore his time. Undoubredly, this is

alma,

7 AP
paſſage, now for the ſame reaſon call'd Dyzy-+ Des

ford nigh Cheſterton, which, beſides the old *buſes 5%
Coins, has the manifeſt marks of a deſtroy'q Share ter
City. For a Roman way runs directly from — x
hence to Huntingdon ; and a little above i- fering ty
ton, formerly Stichilton, it appears with a high Siu.
bank, and in an old Saxon Charter is call'q dlton.
Erminſtreat. Here, it runs through the middle Eri.
of a ſquare fort, defended on the north-ſide firezt,”
with walls, on the reſt with ramparts of earth ;

nigh which, they + ſome time ſince dug-up ſe-4 850
veral ſtone Coffins or Sepulchres, in the ground ann. 149,
of R. Bevill ( deſcended from an ancient and

noted family in this County ; ) | now the joins
Inheritance of the Hewets of Warſly in this Coun-

ty, and the Drydeas; as deſcended to them by

the Siſters of the laſt Sir Robert Bevile.| Some

think that this City ſtood upon both banks of

the -river ; and others are of opinion, that the

little village Caſter on the other fide was part Caſter in
of it; and truly this opinion is ſupported by Nonthing
an ancient hiſtory, which ſays there was a tonſtir,
place call'd Durmundcaſter by Nene, where Kin-
neburga founded a little Nunnery, firſt call'd

by the Danes. A little before this river leaves
the County, it runs by an ancient Seat call'd
Bottle-bridge (for ſhortneſs inſtead of Bo:alph- g
bridge,) which the Draitons and Lovets brought bridge,
from R. Gimels to the family of the Shirlies,
by right of Succeſſion ; | but it is again paſſed
from them into other hands. | ,Adjoyning to

forfeited by Felony, and redeem'd of King

John by Neale Loveroft, whoſe ſiſter and coheir

was married to Hubert or Robert de Brounford,

and their children took the name of Lovetoft.
This County, in the decline of the Engliſh- g,,,Huw

Saxons, had Suard an Officiary Earl; for tingeor.

then there were no hereditary Earls in Eng-

land, but the Governors of Provinces, accord-

ing to the cuſtom of that age, were call'd

Earls, with addition of the title of the Pro-

vince or County they govern'd : as this Siward,

for the time he govern'd rhis County, was

call'd Earl of Huntingdon ; but ſoon after,

when he govern'd Northumberland, he was call'd

Earl of Northumberland. He had a ſon call'd

of this Realm, by the title of Lord Butler of | /aldeof, who, under the title of Earl, had the See the Earl

Weſton. |
Spaldwick, Hard by, lies Spaldwick, which was given to
the Church of Lincoln by Henry the firſt, to

8 of this County, by the favour of of Norm-
illiam the Conqueror, whoſe niece Judith, pronſhire.
by a ſiſter on the mother's fide, he had mar-

make amends for his taking the Biſhoprick of|ry'd. This Waldeof *s eldeſt daughter (ſays Wil-

By out of Lincoln-Diocele.

lam Gemeticenſis) was married to Simon || dey Suan

he river Nen, at its entrance into this Shire,| Seulys or St. Liz : ſhe brought him the Earldom fs. Lib. u

Elton · runs by Elton, the ſeat, [heretofore, | of the fa-
mous and ancient family of the Sapcors, where

+ Is, C. + was a private but very beautiful Chapel, with
curious painted windows, built by the Lady
Elizabeth Dinbam, widow of the Baron Fitz-
Warren, who marry'd into this family; (but

it hath been ruinous theſe many years; and

the place is now the ſeat of the Probies, who

have built here an elegant Houſe.} Somewhat

of Huntingdon, and had a ſon by him, call d Simon. cap. on
After her husband's deceaſe, ſhe was marry d t0
David brother of St. Maud Queen of England (who
was afterwards King of Scotland) by whom ſhe
had a ſon nam'd Henry. Afterwards, as For-
tune and the favour of Princes alter'd, this
8 was enjoy d ſometimes by the Scots,
and at other times by the St. Lizes; firſt,

Henry the ſon of David, then Simon &.. Liz,
Simon

f

| Matth, Paris

1243.

| See Dukes ©

Exeter,

tle-
ge.

ls of Hur
dor.

the Farl
Northam
nſhire,

lane len
Lib. ult,
6 6.

bun Fo
| » Seto-cbro- Kin
8 110 I, 8. c. 3 his

N 5, & 39

'
7

.

509

HUNTING DONSHIRE.

510

| , with its appurtenances.
| Marth, Paris 2d had it, and his ſon John Scot Earl of Che-

1243.

| See Dukes of

Exeter,

don Sim on the firſt's ſon ; after him, Malcolm

of Scotland, Earl Henry's brother ; after
ceaſe, Simon St. Liz, the third, who dying
without heirs, was ſucceeded by William King'
of Scotland, Brother of Malcolm. Thus fays
Ralph de Diceto in the year 1185, who liv'd at
that time: When Earl Simon, ſon bf Earl Si-
mon, died without children, the King reftor*d to
William King of Scotland the County of Huntingdon
Then, his brother Da-

ſter, who died without heirs ; and when Ale-
xander the ſecond, who marry'd King Henry
the third's daughter, had enjoy'd this title a
little while, and the Wars broke out, the Scots
loſt this honour, with a fair inheritance in
England. A good while after, Edward the
third created William Clinton, Earl of Hun-
tingdon; and Richard the ſecond put Guiſcard
de Angoleſme in his place: and after his death,
John Holland. He was ſucceeded by John and
Henry his ſons ; who were both Dukes of Exe-
ter alſo, This is the ſame Henry Duke of
Exeter, whom Philip Comines (as he affirms)
ſaw ing bare-foot in the Low-Comntries, |
whilſt he reſolutely adher'd to the Houſe of
Lancaſter, though he had marry'd Edward the
fourth's own ſiſter. Next to him, Thomas Grey,
afterwards Marquiſs of Dorſet, heid this ho-
nour a little while. It is alſo evident from
the Records, that William Herbert Earl of Pem-
broke, brought the Charter of Creation, whereby

Chancery to be cancel d, and that Edward the
tourth created him Earl of Huntingdon in the
ſeventeenth year of his reign. In the memo

—

of our f fathers, Henry the eighth confer'd 4. 80 (aid,

this honour
was ſucce by Fraxcts, and he by his ſon
Henry, a perſon truly honourable both for
his Nobility and Piety: He dying without
iſſue, his brother George ſucceeded him, whoſe

George Lord Haſtings; who ann, 1607,

grandchild by a ſon, Henry, * afterwards en- * Doth er-

joy'd the ſame honour ;
beth (daughter and coheir to Ferdinando Earl
of Derby) Ferdinauds Earl of Huntingdon, fa-
ther of Theophilus the ſeventh Earl of this fa-
mily, who was Captain of the Band of Gen-
tlemen Penſioners, Privy-Councellor to King
Charles the ſecond, and King James the ſe-
cond, by whom he was made Chief Juſtice in
Eyre ot all the Foreſts ſouth of Trent; as alſo
Lieutenant of the Counties of Leiceſter and
Derby. To him ſucceeded e Lord Haſtings
his ſon, who dying unmarry'd, the title de-
ſcended to Theophitus the preſent Earl, Son of
Theophilus by a ſecond marriage. |

This little Shire contains 78 Pariſhes.

— —

I have not as yet obſerved any Plants peculiar to
this County 3 the more rare being common to it, with

Cambridgeſhi

re,

his father was made Earl of Pembroke, into

and had by Eliza- joy, C.

pia.

Fn .

8 k 9
NN
. L

More's U

N

S 2 d e e eee
N N

_ CORITANE

E are now to vifit the Coritani, a People joyning to the Iceni, but more with-
in land; taking up a very large Traci of Ground in the middle part

the Mie, and as far as the German Ocean; viz. the Counties commonly 1
Northamptonſhire, Leiceſterſhire, Rutlandſhire, Lincolnſhire, Notting-
hamſhire, and Derbyſhire. I ſhall forbear to meddle with the Etymology of
the name, teſt I ſhould pretend to know what, in truth, to me is a myſtery. For,
notwithſtanding they are a People ſcatter d far and wide, which the Britains ex-

WD | preſs by Gur-tan1, yet, ſhould I aſſert that theſe Coritani took their name

from thence, would you not think this mere trifling ? They who are better skill'4
in that way, may give their conjettures with greater ſafety ;
of the Counties I now mentioned, in their refpettive order.

whilſt I, according to my defign, ſurvey each

NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.

E County of Northampton, in
1 LES] Saxon Nopp-aendon-recyne,
N Wi and Northantonſhire, common-
ly Northamptonſhire ; is ſituate

in the very middle, and heart
ss it were, of England; and

from the South-welt-ſide, where
it is broadeſt, it contracts it ſelf by degrees,
and runs out in length to the North-Eaſt. On

,

the Eaſt, lie the Counties of Bedford and Hun- |
tingdon 3 on the South, thoſe of Buckingham and

Oxford ; on the Weſt, Warwickſhire, and on the
North, the Counties of Leiceſter, and Rutland ;
and that of Lincoln, ſeparated from it by the
rivers Avon the leſs, and the Welland. [At the
time of the Conqueror's Survey, it was ſome-
thing larger, than now it is. For all the South-
part of Rutlandſbire muſt have been taken out
of it, becauſe in Domeſday-book we meet
with the Towns in that Tra&, under the title
of Northamptonſhire.| Watling-ftreet, one of the
Roman high-ways, runs along the Eaſt- ſide of
it from the Ouſe to Dowbridge : and the
Nen, called alſo by Hiſtorians Aufona, flows
gently through the middle and Eaſt parts of
it. It is a Champain Country, very populous,
and every where adorn'd with Noblemen and
Gentlemen's houſes ; and very full of Towns
and Churches; inſomuch that in ſome places

there are twenty, in others thirty Spires or

Steeples, more or leſs, in view at the ſame time.
Its ſoil, both for tillage and paſture, is ex-
ceeding fertile; but it is not well- ſtock d with
wood (unleſs at the hither and further end;)
[which, with its diſtance from the Sea, and
thereby a want of Coal, makes fuel extreme
dear. ] But every where (like the other Provin-
ces of England) it is fill'd, and as it were be-

Sheep. Jet with Sheep; which (as that Hythodeus ſaid)
Sir Thomas wſed to be ſo gentle, and fed with ſo little ; but now,
to- as it is reported, begin to be ſo ravenous and wild,

that they devour men, and waſte and depopulate 2
houſes, and towns, [It is ſo plentiful in all things

|

neceſſary to life, that it doth not need, nor
will allow, much of Marnufafture ; the ground
abundantly maintaining and employing the
Inhabitants. The Manufacture of Cloathing, it
is ſaid, was formerly attempted with great ap-Fuller, p17;
plication, and came to nothing ; but there 1s,
at this time, a conſiderable return from Nor-

ſtance, Daneſmore (for ſo it was anciently call'd, Daneſmur,
though now commonly Dunſmore,) which we Ib. 541-
may well derive from the Danes, ſince our Hi-
ſtorians give us an account of their Ravage and
Plunder in thoſe parts. Alſo a little lower, is
Charlton, near which is a Camp with a double Charltes.
Fortification, call'd Rainsborow ; the figure where- .
of is almoſt oval.

On the South- border, where the river Ouſe,
ſo often mention'd, has its ſpring, on a gentl
riſing ground, full of bubbling fountains, ſtands
Brackley, that is, a place full of brake or fern; Brackley.
anciently a famous ſtaple for Wool, but which
now only boaſts how great and wealthy 1t once
was, by its ruins, and by a Mayor whom 1t
ſtill retains for its chief Magiſtrate. The Zou-
ches, Lords of the place, founded a College here;
from them it came ſucceſſively in right of mar-
riage to the Hollands and the Lovell. But upon
the attainder of Lovel, in Henry the ſeventh s
time, the Stanleys, by a Grant from the King,
became Lords of it. But the College, f now rul- $o ſaid,
nous, belongs to Magdalen College in Oxford, ann. —_
who f kept it for a place of Retirement. This t Keep, +
Town was not a little famous in former -
for the memory of Rumbald à young intant,

who (as we read in his life) was a King's
ſon ; and as ſoon as he was born in this place,
{poke

1 ——ʒ —P— > EE — — „ — — —

* —

— — —

ne „„

N

—

p . * . 8 .
i, =F L BAT ts + | .
* = mg .. r

—_

„ rr *

*

44

„% % „% ee

*
*

* o
vv

*

—
oY

* * .
d
x *

*

.
„nn

| 3
2

89
.
|
:

dt ro < at walk tn... th * — 2 1 8
CO" Sn" EP 6 3 4 "IS .
wa. ak ak. 6 2 adit 8

|

0 XF O R D
| 5 H IR F.

. Banbury
Of Are.

Aale 5 | N
4 . W N | „Ding Þ a \, 5
| lifton - p - = Ax - '& 4 W .
— of, — —— "4 "4M 7 As

Samen Napa,

" _ s Aal f cu LEY HUND
Wu 4 ue
%) Se, 3 r We. 1 > 2p.
E «yd. Hoa EZ

( — *

aud
LY

bi Cromhton &. :
. — %

GE nun e
I 4 — 7

90
.
*

Caltletho :

ef Y
nu

* 5 A. ( roldin,

S toniſtratforc

| Mob. .

a UHpen
% wry _
| 3 4

nanu ;

85 PAR T F —
: | 2

| mpeg

C1

' | 4 | W uvx low Hv

5 ; tag RS * naton pv 4.

> . * NI Aue

—
* Wore oth 8 "i r 47. . I 2

3
2

| C4 oodlu#
„

| — — — Alle
7 Scales of "Mites

Small

© Sold by Abel Swale and
| | Auncham and John Churckit.

s

oT.
9
ot

2298
N

N G?
N HvND N .
a 8 4. 2

g On : **

712 ton

Wy —
INAVISFORD. Achurch

n
reg 'F X

-
232. — —
5 —— ̃  —— —
-, *
— 8

|
H V * T 1NGT O N |
| 8 HI RE
Fagr ah.
88 EE TN . 6
— — — F — Sp ;

—— ͤ— —

wh - 1 *

„

Aſtwell.

; ,
A The Raron
W of the Pin
| ceys.

Tripontium

I Dowbridg
0 in this Cou
4 tu. 4
. T: Gi, an

OY | "+ ® $ Mort. p. 50
* * | 4 dete below.

2 x F Some will

90 BY .
, bare the R

* F ver's nam
Tue, that
runs by it,

r

„**

x
7

LES 3
—

6 *
15 NORTHAMPTONSHIRE
1 =... gol I know not what holy words, and after] lour, who was fined one thouſand pounds Ster-
: he had profeſs'd himſelf a Chriſtian, and been ling by King Henry the ſixth, for marryin
baptiz'd ; immediately expird. Jaquet (Dowager of John Duke of Bedford,
Frene. Not far from Brackley, is Stene, the Seat of | and daughter of Peter of Luxenburgh Earl of
the Crews ; of which place John Crew, for his ſig-¶ St. Paul) without the King's Licence. Yet part 27. H. s
nal Services and Loyalty, was created Baron, by |afterwards, he advanced the ſame perſon to the 5
the title of Lord Crew of Stene.] Honour of Baron Middevil of Rivers. With
From Brackley northward, after I had gone | Elizabeth ( the daughter of this Lord, ) King
ſix miles through woods and | ang I ſaw, Edward the fourth privately contracted mar-
atwell, firſt Aſtwel, where T. Billing (tormerly Chief] riage, and was the firſt of our Kings, ſince
Juſtice of the King s Bench) dwelt in great |the Conqueſt, who married a Subject. But, by
repute : from whom it deſcended hereditarily |that, he drew upon himſelf and her relations a
ro the ancient family of the Lovels 5 [ſand hath world of trouble as may be ſeen at large in
been ſince one of the Seats of the Lords Fer- our Hiſtories. The ſaid Richard Widdevil, Lord
re Barony rers ot Chartley. Then Hedon, and Wapibam;| of Rivers, Grafton, and De la Mote, was by
„be Pirk- Which the family of the Pinkneys held by Baro- Edward the fourth, now his Son-in-law, ad-
ys. ny ; till ſuch time as H. de Pinkney made King vanced (theſe are the very words of the Char- Sort Rivers :
4 Edward the firſt his heir. Who being an ex- ter of Creation) to be Earl of Rivers, by the by
| cellent Prince, many 1ll men made him their cinſture of a Sword, to have the ſame to him aud
heir: whereas, according to Tacitus, a good his heirs-males, with the fee of twenty pounds by
| father makes no Prince, but a bad one, his heir. |the hands of the Sheriff of Northampton. And ſoon
E 7riportium. From hence I preſently came to Tripontium, which after, he was, with great honour, conſtituted Conſtable of
q Antoninus takes notice of, but not in its right | Conſtable of England (I ſpeak out of the ori- England.
4 ponbꝛidge, Place f. For I am of opinion, that it was the|ginal Patent) 7o occupy, adminiſter and execute the
, this Coun- very place which we now call Torceſter; and faid Office, by himſelf or his ſufficient Deputies, for
. there want not good Arguments to prove this. term of life, receiving yearly two hundred pounds
dil, and It Trimontium in Thrace had that name from | our of the Exchequer, with full power and autho-
| of” three Hills, Triturrita in Tuſcany from three| rity to take cogniſance, and proceed in cauſes of and
| Towers, and Tripolis from three Cities; there is concerning the crime of High Treaſon, or the occafi-
no room to doubt, but that this Tripontium of] on thereof : alſo to hear, examine, and in due man-
our's, was ſo nam'd from three Bridges. And] ner determin the cauſes and matters aforeſaid, with
Torceſter. here, at this Torceſter, the Roman Prætorian or| al and fingular Circumſtances thence ariſing, there-
Military-way, which appears very plainly in| unto incident, or therewith conjoyned, ſummarily and
ſeveral places between this and Sony- Stratford, without noiſe, or formal Proceſs, having only regard
is cut by three of the principal chanels Which to the truth of the falt, and with the King's
the little river divides it felt into; and theſe, hand, if it ſpall be thought convenient in our behal/,
as well anciently as now, muſt have had, of| without all appeal. But after he had enjoy'd
neceſſity, three ſeveral Bridges over them. Now, theſe honours a little while, he was beat in
if you ask a Britain what he calls Three Bridges the battle of Edgcote, fighting for his Son- in-
in Britiſh, he will preſently anſwer you, Tair|law ; and ſoon after taken and beheaded.
ponte; and ſome perſons of good credit, from And although this Family was extin&, and
whom I receiv'd ſeveral Roman coins here, po-| ended in his ſons (Anthony Earl Rivers being
dome win ſitively affirm that Torceſter is its true name, | beheaded by Richard the third, and Richard
have the Ri- and think it was ſo call'd from Towers, Ne-| and, his. Brothers dying without iffue ; ) yet
vers name, yertheleſs, Marianus calls it Toueceſter (if the| from the daughters, there ſprang very fair and

N * Book be not faulty,) in whom we read, That] noble branches. For from them iſſued the

— 2 *

7 Edw. 1.

—

this Town was ſo fortified in the year of our] Royal Line of England, the Marquiſſes of Dor-

Lord 917, that the Danes were by no means] ſer, Earls of E, Earls of Arundel, Earls of

able to take it; and that King Edward the Worceſter, Earls of Derby, and the Barons Staf-

Elder afterwards encompaſs d it with a Stone- ford. | We ſhall only obſerve further concerning

wall; yet, with all my ſearch, I could find] Grafton, that it was held in capize by John de

no footſteps of any ſuch Wall. Only there is] S. Mauro or Seymour f, by the ſervice of keep-+ An. 14

a Mount ſtill remaining (they call it Beri-| ing one white Bracket of the King's, having red Ed. 3.

bill, now taken up with private Gardens, and |ears. This Bracket ſeems to have been the ſame

planted on all ſides with Cherry-Trees. And|with the ancient Bracco, which fignity'd thoſe

time it ſelf has ſo ruin'd the Town, that it is] leſſer ſort of dogs, that ſcent out tor game.

beholden to the fituation, the name, and the] The place hath given the title of Duke, to Henry

ancient Coins now and then found here, for its] Firzz-Roy, Baron of Sudbury, Viſcount Ipſwich,

reputation of antiquity. For now it has no-|and Earl of Euſton; created Duke ot Grafton in

thing worth the notice, but one only Church, the year 1675, which honours Charles his only

large and fair; in which D. Spode, formerly |child enjoys; together with this ancient Sear. |

Rector thereof, and by report a good Benefa-| Behind Grafton is Sacy Foreſt, a place ſet a-

ctor both to Church and Town, lies inter'd in|part for game. More Eaſtward, the Villages

a Tomb of curious workmanſhip. But at E ſtand very thick ; among which theſe are of

ton hard by, you have the proſpe& of a beau-|greateſt note. Bliſworth, heretofore, ] the ſeat Bliſwort

tiful Seat, belonging to the family of the Far- of the Jakes, deſcended from the famous fa-

| mers Knights; ſince advanced to the dignity |mily of the Barons of Wake and Eftoteville; Pa-

of Barons, in the perſon of William Farmer, |teſhull, which gave name formerly to a noted Pateſhull.

: Lord Lempſter ; who much improved this Seat |family ; Greenes-Norton (fo nam'd of the Greenes, Greens - Nor-

of his Anceſtors, by building here a ſtately |perſons fam'd in the laſt age [ſave one] for their ton.

new houſe, and adorning it with ſuitable Plan-| wealth:) call'd before, if I miſtake not, Nor-

rations and Gardens; together with many cu- ton Dany, and held in Capite of the King, by the * Inq. 44

rious and ancient Ae, + Service of lifting up the right hand towards the Edw. 3.
The river that waters Torceſter, in its courſe] King, yearly on Chriftmas-day, in what place ſoever F Another

Sacy Foreſt,

Grafton.

Widder from hence towards the Ouſe, runs by Graſton, he then was, in England. Wardon, a Hundred, & 46 by

or Wodvil. an f Honour of the Kings, but formerly a ſeat which had its Lords deſcended from Guy de Warden.

123 H. 8. of the family of W/iddevil, of which was that] Reinbudcourt a Norman, whoſe eſtate came by ?
ep. 38, Richard, a perſon much renowned for his Va-! the Foliots to Guiſcard Leddet, Whoſe daughter,

1 Tit Chriſtian,

W "0 * —

515 CO RITANI. 9 50

—

Chriſtian, bare her husband, Henry de Braibrook,
ſeveral Children. But Guiſcard, the eldeſt, aſ-
ſum'd his mother's ſirname, Leddet. Shortly at-
ter, this great eſtate was divided by females be-
tween William and Jolm Latimers ot Corby, bro-
Barons Lati. thers. From the laſt, the Griffins in this Coun-

mer, ty had their original ; as from the firſt, the La-
timers, Barons of good antiquity in York-
ſhire,

Higher in the Country, northward, ariſes
the river Aufona or Avon (for Avon in the Bri-
tiſh tongue is a general name for all rivers : )

The river It is call'd Nen by the Inhabitants ; and paſſes
Nen. from the weſt- ſide of this County ( making ma-
ny reaches, by the winding of its banks) in a

manner through the midſt of it, to which it

is a continual bleſſing ; ſand for the making of

which navigable, an A& of Parliament was

paſſed in the twelfth year of Queen Anne. |

A very noble river it is; and, if I gueſs

right, it was garriſon'd in old time by the Ro-

* Citerfor, mans, For when * the hither part of Britain,
in the Emperor Claudizs's time, was brought

under the Roman Government, ſo as the Inha-

bitants thereof were termed Allies to the Ro-

+ Ulteriores. mans; when the f more Remote Britains alſo
made frequent incurſions into this Country,

and carried all before them; and theſe Allies
themſelves, more eaſily bearing the Govern-

ment than the Vices of the Romans, at every

turn conſpir'd with the more remote Britains:

then, P. Oſtorius (ſays Tacitus) cinctos caſtris An-

tonam (Aufonam I would read it, if I might

take that liberty) & Sabrinam cohibere parat.

That is, if I underſtand that paſſage right,

he, by placing Forts up and down upon theſe

[| UlterZores rivers, undertook to reſtrain the || more Re-
* Provincia mote Britains, and * thoſe of the Province, from
"tes, aſſiſting one another againſt the Romans.
What river this ſhou'd be, none can tell, Lip-

ſius, the Apollo of our age, hath either diſpell'd

this miſt, or I am in a cloud. He points out
Northampton, and I am of opinion that Antona

has crept into Tacitus inſtead of Aufoza, upon

which Northampton is ſeated. For the very

heart or middle of England is counted to be

near this place; where, out of one hill ſpring

three rivers running different ways; Cherwell

to the ſouth, Leame to the weſt ( which is re-

+ Aufona, ceiv'd by another f Avon, that runs into the
Severn weſtward,) and this Avon or Nen] to

Aufonæ. the eaſt. Of which, theſe || two Avons do ſo
croſs and divide England, that whoever comes

out of the north parts of the Iſland, muſt of
neceſſity paſs one of them. When therefore

Oſtorius had fortified the Severn and theſe two

Avons, he had no cauſe to fear any danger out

of Wales or the north parts of Britain, either

to the Romans or their Allies ; who at that

time had reduced only the hither parts of this

Iſle into the form of a Province, as Tacitus

himſelf witneſſes in another place. But, on

the contrary, if the ſenſe of the Hiſtorian be

(as a later writer has interpreted it) that Oſto-

rius block'd up the Britains between the rivers

Antona and Sabrina, it is impoſſible to fix it

here; ſince the Avon and Severn are ſo far from

joyning, that they take almoſt a quite contra-

ry courſe. Others therefore, from the whole

ſeries of that Action, and the thred of the
Hiſtory, think it more probable, that it was

that Avon which runs into the Severn ; as is

Mort. p. 516, already obſcrv'd in Viliſbire. Not but ſeveral
e. ancient Fortifications have been obſerv'd upon
the River Nen; as, at Mill-Cotton, Cheſter,

and Clifford-hill ; all which appear to have been

the work of the Romans, by the Coins, Urns,

and other plain teſtimonies of Roman Anti-

*

p

117
quity, which have been diſcover'd at ths 5 ply
and which are alſo frequently diſcover'd in I
many other parts of this County.

hoſe great fortifications and military fen- Gia.
ces to be ſeen at Gildiborough and Dantrey (be- rug.
tween the ſprings of the two Avons, which Parte,
run different ways, and where the only paſlage 2
id. ſapr.

is into the hither part of Britain, without ri-

vers in the way,) may ſeem to be ſome of the

forts which Oftorius erected; [on ſuppoſition, 3

that this Avon is the Antona of Tacitus. | That

at Gildsborough is great and large; but this other = +1n ſome

at Dantrey is greater and larger; for being es,
Mort. p. 501.

* four-ſquare, upon an high hill, from whence , .
all the Country beneath is feen far and near, ll *
and having on the eaſt-ſide a Mount, which ton 72
they call Selwell ; it encloſes, within a bank
caſt- up, two hundred acres or thereabouts.
Within theſe, the Country-people now and
then find Coins of the Roman Emperors; which
are certain proofs of it's antiquity. They are
much miſtaken therefore, who will have it to
be a work of the Danes, and that the Town
under it was thence nam'd Dantrey ; now no-
red for it's Inns, [and for giving the title of
Baron to the Earl Nottingham ; whoſe father
Sir Heneage Finch, Lord Chancellor of England,
was created a Baron of this Realm, by the
title of Lord Finch of Daventry ; ] and, for-
merly, for a Houſe of Auguſtin Fryers, of
which (as it is reported) H. de Faweſly was the
tounder.
[At Gildsborough, before-mentioned, is a
tair Free-School, erected and endowed by Sir
John Langham, ſometime Alderman of London;
who alſo tounded an Alms-houſe hard by, at
Cottesbrook, the Seat of the Langhams, which Cotteibrosk,
hath of late years been much improyed in
buildings and gardens, and in the Church
whereot are ſeveral curious Monuments be-
longing to that family.]

At the head of the Avon or Nen (to make
a ſtep backwards,) ſtands Catesby, which gave Cats!y,
name to an ancient family ; but now of exe-
crable memory, for a moſt cruel and horrible Gun pode,
plot, not to be parallel'd in any age, which Plot.
Robert Catesby of Aſhby St. Leger, the diſhonour
of his family ( deſperately bent upon villany
nd cruelty, and impiouſly conſpiring the de-
ſtruction ot his Prince and Country,) contriv'd,
under a ſpecious pretext of Religion. Con-
cerning this, let all ages be ſilent, and let not
chis Reproach be convey'd to poſterity, which
the preſent age cannot reflect on without hor-
ror; nay, even the dumb and inanimate Crea-
tures ſeem to be moved, at the hainouſneſs of
ſuch a villanous conſpiracy. [ Berween Cates-
by and Badby, is a large Encampment, the
Area of which is about ten Acres. It is now
call'd Arbury, or Arberry-Banks, and is one of Arberg
the higheſt hills in the whole Country.] Hard *
by Catesby, is Faweſley, where the Knightleys Paweley.
have long dwelt, formerly] adorn'd with the
honour of Knighthood, and deſcended from Sir Chriſtopher
the more ancient family of Knightley of Gnow- Hatton,
ſhall in Staffordſhire. And more eaſtward, upon
the Nen ( whoſe chanel as yet is but ſmall, )
ſtands Vedon on the Street (i. e. by the Roman Wedon on tie
way,) once the royal ſeat of Wolpher King of Street
the Mercians, and converted into a Mona- * Deſeryes,
ſtery by his daughter Merburg a moſt holy Vir- *
gin, whoſe miracles in driving away Geeſe from
hence, ſome credulous writers have very much
magnified. I ſhou'd probably injure truth,
ſhou'd I not think (though I have been of a
contrary opinion, ) that it is this Vedon which 3 He died,
Antoninus in his Itinerary calls Bannavemna, Ben- ;1q, jan ann. 1591,
uavenua, Bennaventa, and onee, corruptly, Jam venta, and

Not neceſ-
g, Mor-
tn.

E Mort. p. 627.
ether · Hey -

. ſord.
2

*
3
o

| Cilledikes,.
Mort. p. 543.

Althorp.

| Baron Spen-

: te 7.

Holdenby-
bouſe,

i Makes, C.

naventa 3 Iſanavati.

irreg:

ves
al, Mr.
n 52%,

croaf,

A

der.

on the

enng,
indi-
and
tis.

5 — —

8

+ Vid, ſapr.

Ii ſome
places, more,
Mort. p. 50 1.

| p Not nece i-

fſary, Mor-

A 809.
W Mort, p. 527.

ether - Hey

ſord.

| Callledikes,
Z Mort, Pe 543.

Alchorp,

| Baron Spen-

ter,

.

"NORTHAMPTONSHIRE

—

naventa; notwithſtanding there do not now re-
main any plain footſteps of that name : ſo
much does Time obſcure and alter all things!
For the diſtance trom the ancient Stations and
Quarters on both ſides, exactly agrees; and in
that very name of Banna vema, the name of the
river * Auſena [now Nen, | the head whereof is
near it, does in ſome meaſure diſcover it ſelf.
Likewiſe, a Military-way goes directly from
hence northward ; with a Cauſey broken and
worn away in many places, f and moſt of all
over-againſt Creke, a little Village, where of
neceſſity it was joyn'd with bridges; but
elſewhere it appears with a high ridge as far
as Dowbridge near Lilborne.

[Near Bannavenna, at Nether-Heyford, about
half a mile from Watling-ſtreet, was diſcover'd
in the year 1699. a noble chequer'd Pavement,
conſiſting of little Bricks or Tiles artificially
tinged with Colours, and as ſmooth as poliſhed
Marble; all of them ſquares, ſomewhar bigger
than common Dice. They were of four
lours, white, yellow, red, and blue, and diſpo-
ſed with great exactneſs into various regular
figures. When it was firſt uncover'd, it was
ſo cloſe and firm, as to bear walking upon it,
like a ſtone-floor ; but when it had lain a while
expoſed to the night-dews, the Cement became
relaxed, and the Squares eaſily ſeparable. By
the foundations which they dig-up, and the
thin and pale Greenſword hereabouts, different
from the reſt of the meadow, it appears that
here hath been a large building; as there hath
been alſo at Caftledikes, not far off; but this
laſt is thought to have been the work of the
Saxous, rather than of the Romans. |

A little more northward, I ſaw Althorp, the
noble and beautiful] ſear of the famous fa-
mily of the Spencers Knights, allied to very
many tamilies of great worth and honour ; of
which, Sir Robert Spencer, the fifth Knight in
2 continu'd ſucceſſion, an eminent Encourager
of virtue and learning, was by King James
[the firſt] advanced to the title and honour of
Baron Spencer of Wormleighton ; | fince which,
they have been rais'd to the title of Earls of
Sunderland, and have been employ'd in ſome
of the higheſt Offices in the State ; the pre-
ſent Earl, a perſon of great Learning, honour,
and abilities, having been one of the Principal
Secretaries of State, in the reigns of Queen
Anne and King George, and after that, ſuc-
ceffively, Preſident of his, Majefty's moſt Ho-
nourable Privy Council, and Groom of the
Stole. This ancient ſeat was rebuilt, with

great Improvement, by Robert the late Earl ;

Holdenby-
houſe,

Makes, C.

Kt Chriſtopher
Hatton,

(Deſerres,

He died,

and is particularly noted for a magnificent
Gallery, furniſh'd with a large Collection of
curious Paintings, by the beſt hands.| Hard
by Althorp, Holdenby-houſe f made a noble ap-
pearance ; a ſtately and truly magnificent piece
of building, erected by Sir Chriſtopher Hatton
(Privy-Counſellor to Queen Elizabeth, Lord
Chancellor of England, and Knight of the Gar-
ter) upon the lands and inheritance of his
great grandmother, heir of the ancient family
of the Holdenbies ; for the greateſt and laſt mo-
nument of his youth, as himſelf afterwards
was wont to call it. A perſon, to fay nothing
of him but what he truly“ deſerv

for his piety towards God, his fidelity to his
Country, his untainted integrity, and unparal-
lel'd charity: One alſo (which is not the leaſt
part of his character) who was 2 ready
to ſupport and encourage Learning. us, as
he liv d piouſly, ſo he dy d piouſly, in Chriſt :

ann, * a
591. and the monument which the Learned in their

i

„eminent.

writings have rais'd to him, ſhall render him
more illuſtrious than that moſt noble and ſplen-

erected, at great charge, to his memory, by
Sir William Hatton, Knight, his adopted ſon.
But this once ſtately Fabrick (made more
known, ſince it's ' founder's time, by the fre-
quent mention of it in our Hiſtories, as the
place of conſinement to that virtuous and reli-
gious Prince King Charles the firſt) is now ſo
ruinous (a very little of it excepted) that there
is ſearce one ſtone upon another.!“

Beneath theſe places, the Aufona, or Nen,
glides forward with a gentle ſmall ſtream, and
is ſoon after encreas'd by a little river from the
north ; where, at their very meeting, the Town,
call'd from the river, Northafandon, and by

on the ſouth- ſide with the other. Which I was
of late too eafily induc'd to believe the an-
cient Bannaventa but I err'd in my conjecture,
and my confeſſion muſt atone for it. As for
the name, it may ſeem | at firſt fight] to have
had it from the ſituation upon the north-ſide
of the Aufona. But againſt this, it is alledg'd,
that the ancient Saxon-Annals call it ſimply
hamrun (as well as they do Southampton,) and
never uſe our preſent name till ſome time after
the Conqueſt, and then write it expreſsly NopS-
hamcun and NopSamrtun, and never NopSa-
fandun. So that it ſcems not to have ever had
any relation to the river upon which it ſtands ;
but being at firſt call'd Hamtun (as numbers
of other towns were, and ſtill are,) had pro-
bably the initial Nopð put to it, when it and
Southampton (call'd alſo bhamcun) grew to be

very neat and elegant; in compaſs, indifferent

from which walls there is a noble proſpect eve-
ry way into a ſpacious champain Country. [Ir
had flouriſh'd and encreas'd for many ages to-
gether, when, in our's, a moſt lamentable fire
laid it intirely in aſhes. But the liberal con-
tributions of the Kingdom rais'd it up again
with much greater beauty; ſo that now it is
one of the moſt neat and complete towns in
the Kingdom. It has in it four Churches: the
great Church, as alſo the Seſſions-houſe, are
very beautiful Buildings; and they have two
Hoſpitals, with a Charity-School endowed, for the
inſtruction of poor Children, The principal
manufacture is that of Shoes, for which the place
is famed ; and, next to that, is their manufa-
cture of Stockings. | On the weſt-ſide it had an old
Caſtle, to which the very Antiquity of it add-

Northampton of that name ; who joyned like-
wiſe to it a beautiful Church dedicated to St.
Andrew, for his own burying-place, and, as
it is reported, rebuilt the town ; [but the Ca-
ſtle is now diſmantled.] Simon the younger,

la Pree, a Nunnery. It ſeems to have made
no figure during the Saxon Heptarchy, nor have
our Writers made any mention of it in all
thoſe depredations of the Danes ; unleſs it was,

with that barbarous fury and outrage. For
then, as Henry of Huntingdon reports, it was
ſer on fire, and burnt to the ground. In the

22 of St. Edward, there were in this City,

ed a beauty; it was built by Simon de Sancto Re
Licio, commonly call'd Sexliz, the firſt Earl of St.

his ſon, did alſo without the town found“ De « ».

when Sueno the Dane ravag'd, all over England,

a$ f

did Tomb t in St. Paul's Church, London; be- Hiſt. of St.
coming ſo worthy and eminent a perſon, and Paul's, Pp. $3.

contraction Northampton, is ſo ſeated, that on Northamp-
the weſt- ſide it is water'd with this river, and ton. :

conſiderable. | The Town it ſelf (which * ſeem'd * Seems, C.
to have been all of ſtone) f was in it's buildings + 1s, C.

large, | (|| containing ſeven Pariſh-Churches, [| Leland,
beſides two in the Suburbs, )] and wall'd about Itin. MS,

1075.

giſter of
Andrews,

Prat ic.

F 1 ⁵ rä ²˙¹-⁴ Q W

CO RITANI.

.
$20

as we find in Domeſday, fixty Burgeſſes in the
King's Domain, having as many Manſions : of theſe,
in King William the firſt's time, fourteen lay
waſte, and forty-ſeven remained. Over and above
theſe, there were in the new Borough forty Bur-
geſſes in the Domain of King William. Atter the
Norman times, it valiantly ſtood-out the ſiege
laid to it by the Barons, during the troubles
and ſlaughters with which they then embroil'd
and infeſted the whole Kingdom. Who being
maliciouſly bent againſt King John for private
and particular Ends, did yet ſo cloak them
with pretences of Religion and the publick
good, that they term'd themſelves, The Army
of God and of Holy Church ; at which time, they
ſay, that military work was made, call'd Huns-
hill. But it held not out, with like ſucceſs,
againſt Henry the third their lawful King, as
it did againſt thoſe Rebels. For when the
Barons, now inur'd to ſedition, begun a Re-
bellion again him in this place, he made a
breach in the wall, and ſoon won it by aſſault.
After this, as alſo before, the Kings now and
then held their Parliaments in this town, upon
account of the convenience of it's ſituation, in
the very heart of England: and in the year of
Chriſt 1460, a lamentable battel was fought
here; wherein, amidſt thoſe terrible ſeditions
and diſtractions, after the laughter of many
of the Nobility, Richard Nevill Earl of War-
wick took that moſt untortunate Prince King
Henry the ſixth, then a ſecond time made
Priſoner, - and a very lamentable Specta-
cle. [About the latter end of Henry the
+ Full, Hiſt, third, f it was made choice of by ſome ſcho-
of Cambr. lars of the Univerſity of Cambridge, for a re-
p. 13. tirement, occaſion'd by the quarrels that were
then on foot. Here, they met with many Ox-
ford-men, who had come away upon the like
occaſion ; and ſo, for a while (with the King's
leave) proſecuted their Studies together with
them : by which means, it had the face of an
Univerfity. It is poſſible, that the place in this
town which was call'd the College, was a re-
main of their preſence here. Burt after three
years continuance (as appears by the King's
Letters) it was diflolv'd, and expreſs orders
given, that for the future no one ſhould ſtudy
there, as in an Univerſity; becauſe (as the
ſaid Letters intimate) it was a manifeſt damage
and inconvenience to the ancient Univerſity of
Oxford.] To conclude, the longitude of Nor-
thampton (as our Mathematicians make it) is 22
degr. 29 min. and the latitude 52 degr. 13 min.
[About a mile ſouth of Northampton, is a
military Work call'd Hunsburrow, the area of
which is about an acre of ground, and the fi-
gure not quite circular, but rather oval. It is
thought to have been a Summer-Camp of the
Danes, by whieh they might awe the adjoyning
Country, and from whence they might ſally out
for forrage and plunder. |
From Northampton, the Nen haſtens [to the
two Billings ; in the greater of which is a very
delighttul Grove, with a pleaſant Seat of the
O Briens Earls of Thomond in Ireland ; and
Caſile-· Aſhby. thenTby Caſtle-Aſbby, where Henry Lord Com-
pton built a very fine Houſe ; [ whoſe deſcen-
dants, being advanced to the honour of Earls
of Northampton, have ſtill their principal Re-
ſidence at this place; and have particularly im-
prov'd it by a noble Chaſe.| Near which, is
Yardley Haſtings, ſo firnam'd of the Haſtings once
Earls of Pembroke, to whom it belong'd ; [and
at a little diſtance trom the river, Eaſton Man-
duit, the ſeat of the Lord Viſcount Longuevil,
and now Earl of Suſſex.] Next, the Nen goes
Willingbo- to Willinglorou, a market-town, call'd ancient-
row.

Exercitus
Dei.

Mort. p. 537.

Yardley,

ly Wedlingborough. Here, a Rivulet from the

eaſt runs into it, coming down by \ Harington, Ha:

a ſeat of the Lord Diſert ; and by] Ruſhton Ray

and Newton, f belonging [heretofore] to they.

Treſhams, ¶ but ſince the ſeat of the Lord Cul-4 wap

len; | then by . Geddington, where was a Ca-Gyyy,.

ſtle of the Kings ; and here yet remains a

Croſs erected in honour of Queen Eleanor,

— Edward the firſt's Conſort; and by
oughton, belonging to the knightly family of

the Montagues, advanced, by King *

the firſt, to the title of Lords Mountague of

Boughton ; by King William and Queen Mary,

to the dignity of Viſcount Monthermer and Earl

of Mountague; and by Queen Anne, to that

of Duke of Mountague ; in the perſon of Ralph,

not long ſince deceasd ; which Honours,

together with his Eſtate, are enjoy'd at pre-

ſent by John his only ſurviving ſon. Here is

2 very magnificent Hall, out of which is a

proſpe& of a ſpacious and beautiful Garden;

wherein are ſeveral Fountains, with a Canal

more-than half a mile in length, and a curious

Caſcade below a gloomy wilderneſs. Within

the Demeſnes of Boughton, * is a ſpring which “ Fal. .

incruſtateth wood, or any thing that falls intop. 2.

it, with a ſtony ſubftance. There was pre-

ſerv'd in Sidney-College in Cambridge, a skull

brought from thence, all- over ſtone both with-

in and without ; which was ſent-for by King

Ls the firſt, but was return'd to the Col-

ege.

Then the river runs by Kettering, a well- Kettering
traded market-town ; [ wherein, at this time, Lib. lg.
no leſs than one thouſand eight hundred hands if
are ſaid to be employ'd in the manufacture of
Serges and Shalloons 1

b
1
1
v
/
/
I
tl
1
tl
n

othering -
. Jy

A — , — ww — 2

near whieh ſtands Roy-
well, a noted Horſe-fair ; [and at ſome diſtance,
Naſeby, eminent of late years for the bloody Nay,
battel fought there in the year 1645. between
his Majeſty King Charles the firſt, and the
Parliament-Army. There are now no ſigns of
a fight remaining, except ſome few holes,
which were the burying-places of the dead men
and horſes. This town is ſaid by ſome to
ſtand upon the higheſt ground in England.!
Next, by Burton, the Barony likewiſe (it I mi- Burton,
ſtake not the place) of Alan de Dinant, ( for
King Henry the firſt gave him a Barony of that
name in this County, for killing the French
King's Champion in ſingle Combat, at Gizors ; )
and by Harrouden, the Lord whereof * Nicholas * Raon
Vaulx, Governor of Guines in Picardy, was Valk.
created a Baron by King Henry the eighth.

Hence the Avon or Nen keeps its courſe
to Higham, a town formerly belonging to the
Ferrers, from whom it took the name of Hig- Highim-
ham-Ferrers ; who had alſo their Caſtle here, Ferrer
the ruins whereof are yet to be ſeen near the
Church. Burt the chief ornament of this place
was Henry Chicheley Archbiſhop of Canterbury, pgynder of
who founded here a beautiful College for Se- All-foulin
cular Clerks, and Prebendaries ; as likewiſe an _
Hoſpital for the Poor. 'Thence it runs by may
Addington, anciently belonging to the Veres 3 Addisgton.
and by Thorpſton commonly call'd Thrapſton ;Thraphon
and it's oppoſite Drayton, the ſeat, in the laſt Drayton,
age [ſave one, of H. Green, but afterwards, by
his daughter, of John and Edward Stafford Earls
of Wiltſhire ; and after that, of the Lord Mor-
daunt ; to whom it deſcended hereditarily
from' the Greens, Gentlemen of great reputa-
tion in this County. Thence, it runs almol
round a pretty little town, which takes its
name from it; Oundale they call it, corruptly Oundik,
for Avondale, where nothing is to be ſeen be-
ſides a neat Church, a Free- ſchool for the edu-

Cicely Dut-
cheſs of Vork.

* Impotens,
7 Potentium.

L Rich. 3.

cation of youth, and an Alms-houſe ä
Y

8

"NORTHAMPTONSHIRE om

622

reell. Ba
d Lately re- wit

othering
1 .

by Sir Milliam Laxton ſometime Lord 2 of |

ands
Barnwell, a little Caſtle, * repair'd and adorn'd
h new buildings by the worthy Sir Edward
ird, C. Montacute Knight, of the ancient family of the | Kings.
3 Montacutes, as appears by his Coat of Arms.
It formerly belong'd to Berengarius le Moigne,

London, In the neighbourhood of this,

are ſometimes violently hurried away, as good
Pilots, with Tempeſts, whither they would
not. But what they do as crown'd Heads, we
mult leave to God, who only hath power over

The Avon, or Nen, touching upon the edge
of Huntingdonſhire, and running under a beau-

that is, Monk, and not, as ſome think, to that] tiful Bridge at Walmesford, paſſes by * Duro- Durobriyz.

Berengarius of ar whoſe opinion RY : |
the Euchariſt was formerly condemn'd in a Sy- Dormanceſter, as I ſaid before; which took 1
nod held by the Biſhop of Rome. After 144 2 nien too

it ſalutes Fotheringhay-Caſtle, environ'd on every

brivæ, a very ancient City, call'd in Saxon * At Brigca-

Lincolnſhire
up a great deal of ground on each ſide the Gale, yy *

river in both Counties. For the little village

ſide with very pleaſant Meadows, which in] Caſter, which ſtands a mile from the river,

Henry the third

s time (when the Strong-holds
cncourag'd the Nobility to revolt) was ſurpris d
by William Earl of Albemarle, who laid waſte

ſeems to have been part of it, by the inlaid
chequer'd pavements found there ; though we
read this more modern Inſcription upon their

all the Country round, as Matthew Paris in- |Church-wall :

forms us. At which time, it ſeems to have
belong'd to the Earls of Huntingdon. A good
while after, King Edward the third aſſign'd
Berl in be it f as it were for an Inheritance or Apennage

XV. KL. MAII DEDICATIO H-
IVS ECCLESLE MCXXIIII.

ll, Wer,

on,

dale.

(as they call it) to his ſon Edmund of Langley] The fifteenth of the Kalends of May, in the
Duke of York, who rebuilt the Caſtle, and year one thouſand one hundred twenty four, was the

made the higheſt Fortification or Keep thereot,
in form of a Horſe-Fetter, which was the De-

dedication of this Church.

vice of the family of Jork. His ſon Edward, | And doubtleſs it was a place of more than or-
Duke of York, in the ſecond year of Henry] dinary note; for in the adjoyning fields (which,

the fifth, 1415. (as appears by an Inſcription
in barbarous verſe,) tounded here a very fine

inſtead of Dormanton, they call f Normanton-4 Now, Nor-
fields,) ſuch quantities of Roman coins are mangate,

Collegiate Church, wherein himſelf, who was|thrown-up, that one would think they had

{lain at the Battel of Agincourt, as alſo Richard

been ſown there: and two high-ways, the

Duke of York his Brother's ſon, who loſt his] Cauſeys whereof are ſtill to be ſeen, went
life at Wakefield, and his wife Cicely Nevil, had from hence; the one call'd Forty-foor-way, from
all magnificent monuments ; which were thrown| its being forty foot broad, to Stanford : the

down and ruin'd, together with the upper part | other, Long-ditch, and High-ſtreet, by Lotham-1,ottham«

[or Chancel] of the Church. But Queen Eli-
zabeth commanded two monuments to be ſet

bridges (bridges certainly of great antiquity, bridges.
whereof eleven Arches are ſtill to be ſeen,

up in memory of them, in the lower end of tho“ ruinous with age) through Veſt-deping,
the Church now ſtanding ; which nevertheleſs] into Lincolnſhire. [In the fields of Caſtor, is a
(ſuch was their narrowneſs who had the charge] way, which among the common people goes
of the work) are look'd upon as very mean, by the name of my Lady Conyburrow's way, Conybur-
for ſuch great Princes, deſcended from Kings, | corruptly for Kyneburga's way, who (as we haverow-way.

and from whom the Kings of England are|obſerv'd 4 before) was wife to Alfred, Ki
Cictly Dut- deſcended. The ſaid Cicely ſaw too plainly,

f ng of + In Hun-
the Northumbrians, and Preſided here in hertingdonſhire,

hes of Vork. in the compaſs of a few years, what paſtime] own Nunnery. It ſeems to have begun about

t Impotens, * envious and unconſtant Fortune (if I may
+ Potentium, ſo ſay) makes her ſelf, with the miſeries t of | and (if we may judge of the whole by a part)

L Rich. 3.

Water-Newton on the other ſide of the river,

the mighty. For ſhe ſaw her husband Richard. to have been paved with a ſort of cubical

(even then when he thought himſelf ſure of | bricks or tiles.

the kingdom,) and her ſon the Earl of Rut-| Between Forty-foot-way, and Long-ditch,
land, flain together in a bloody battel ; and near the parting, ſtands Upton, upon a riſing- Upton.
ſome few years after, ſhe ſaw her eldeſt ſon|ground, whence it took the name; where Sr
Edward the fourth advanced to the Crown, | Robert Wingfield, Knight, deſcended from the

and taken away by an untimely death; ha-|ancient and famous family of the J/ingfields,

ving before made away his brother, George| which has produc'd abundance of renown'd

Duke of Clarence. After this, ſhe ſaw her] Knights, f had a very fine houſe, with moſt+ Hath, C.
other ſon Richard forcing his way to the —— walks; which, being transfer'd to
Crown, by the lamentable murder of his ne- Thomas Dove, Biſhop of Peterborow, did there-
phews, and ſlander of her, his own mother] upon become the ſeat of his name and family.)

(for he charg'd her openly with incontinency ; )| From Durobrive or Dormancheſter, the river Avon,

then, ſhe ſaw him poſleſs'd of the kingdom, | or Nen, paſſes-on to Peterborough, a little city peterbo-
and ſoon after ſlain in battel. Theſe her mi- ſeated in the corner of this County, where rough.
ſeries were ſo chain'd together alſo, that every | Writers tell us there was a gulph in the river,

day of her life was more doleful than other. of a prodigious depth, call'd AMedes-well, and a

As for that, which in this place befel another] town hard by it, nam'd from thence Medes-well-
mighty Princeſs, Mary Queen of Scots, I had hamſted, and Medes-hamſted. This (as Robert de

much rather it ſhould be buried in oblivion,

Swapham informs us) was built in a very con-

than remember'd. Let it be for ever forgot-|wenient place, having on one fide a Mere and excellent

ten, if poſſible; if not, let it however be

waters; on the other, many woods, meadows, and pa-

wrapped up in ſilence. Under the beſt of Prin-|/tures, every way beautiful to the eye ; and acceſſi-

ces, ſome there will be who being once arm'd|ble by land on the Eaſt-fide only. On the South-

with authority, know how to ſet a fair face|/ide of the Burrough, runs the river Nen. In the

of Conſcience and Religion upon their own | middle of this river, there is a place like a whirl-

private deſigns : and ſome again, who ſincerely | pool, ſo deep and cold, that in Summer no ſwimmer * This is
and heartily conſult the good of Religion, and |can go to the bottom, and yet it is never frozen in now common»
their Prince's ſecurity, and (which is the winter. For there is a ſpring continually bubbling- up! V done.
higheſt law) the publick ſafety. Neither can |with water. The place was in ancient times call d

it be deny'd, but that even the beſt Princes Medes-wel ; till Wolpher, Xing of the —
R |

U uu

a. aft... Ira 4

— —

28 9

CORIT

ANI 5

did there dedicate a Monaſtery to St. Peter. And
becauſe the place was mooriſh, he laid the foun-
dation (as the ſame Robert affirms) with ſtones
of a vaſt bigneſs, ſuch, as eight yoke of Oxen could
hardly draw one of them; which I my ſelf ſaw,
when the Monaſtery was deſtroy'd. Afterwards,
it began to be call'd Peterborow, and Burgh,
and was a very famous Monaſtery. I can-
not but think it worth while to give you
an account of its original and firſt build-
ing, abridged [for the moſt part} out of this
Robert de Swapham, a Writer of good antiquity.
Peada, the fon of Penda, the firſt Chriſtian
King of the Mercians, did, in the year of our
Lord 656, for the * of the Chri-
ſtian Religion, lay the foundation of a Mona-
ſtery at Medes hamſted, in the country of the
Girvians ; which he liv'd not to finiſh, being
made away by the wicked contrivances of his
wife. To Peada, ſucceeded his brother Wol-
pher, a bitter enemy to the Chriftian Religion ;
who thereupon moſt inhumanly murder'd his
own ſons, Wolphald and Rufin, fe their having
embrac'd it. But he himſelf, ſome few years
after, turn'd Chriſtian ; and, to expiate his
former impieties by ſome good work, he car-
ry'd on the Monaſtery which his brother had
begun; and, with the help of his brother Ethel-
red and his ſiſters Kineburg and Kineſwith, fi-
niſh'd it in the year 633, and dedicated it to
St. Peter (whence it came to be call'd Peter-
borow; ) endowing it with large revenues, and
making Sexwulph (a man of great piety, who
3 advis'd him to this week.) rſt Ab-
ot thereof. This Monaſtery flouriſh'd from
thenceforth, with the reputation of great ſan-
ity, for about two hundred and fourteen
e ; till thoſe dreadful times came, when the
anes waſted all before them. Then were the
Monks maſlacred, and the Monaſtery quite de-
ſtroy d; which lay bury'd in its ruins for a
hundred and nine _ [In which times alſo,
when the Danes had burnt the Monaſtery of
Croyland, the Abbot and Monks thereof fled
hither for protection, and being overtaken,
were cruelly murder'd in a back-court of this
Monaſtery, call'd thereupon the Monks-Church-
yard. In memory whereof, a Tomb-ſtone,
with the portraitures of the Abbot and his
Monks, was ſet over their common Grave,
which is to be ſeen here at this day.] Ar
laſt, about the year 960, Ethelwold Biſhop of
Wincheſter, a perſon wholly bent upon the
Eſtabliſhment of Monkery, began to rebuild
the Monaſtery, having the helping-hand of
King Edgar, and of Adulph the King's Chan-
cellor, who, by way of atonement for his own
and his wife's having over-laid a little infant
their only ſon, ſpent his whole eſtate in re-
.edifying this Monaſtery, and, bidding adieu to
the world, became the firſt Abbot after it's
reſtoration. From that time, it grew exceed-
ingly in revenues and privileges ; only, in the
reign of William the Norman, Herward an
Engliſh Out-law made an excurſion from the
Iſle of Ely, and plunder'd it; againſt whom,
Mont · Abbot Turold erected the Fort call'd Mont
Turold. Turold. Yet was it ſtill accounted very rich,
+ So ſaid, till within the memory of + our fathers ; when
ann. 1605. King Henry the eighth thruſt out the Monks
every- where (upon pretence that they were de-
generated from the ſtrictneſs of thoſe holy men,

the ancient Monks, and had riotouſly waſted

the goods of the Church, which were the pa-

trimony of the poor; ) and erected a Biſhop-

rick here, aſſigning this County and Rutland-

ſhire for its Dioceſe ; together with a Deanery,

and Prebends. So that, of a Monaſtery it

i

Petriburgus,
Petropolis,

became a Cathedral Church, the ftrufture
whereof is exceeding beautiful, and the more
ſo, for its great antiquity : its Front is noble
and majeſtick, and its Cloiſters large ; in the
Glaſs windows whereof, is repreſented the hi-
ſtory of Wolpher the founder, with the ſucceſ-
ſion of the Abbots. St. Mary's Chapel is a
large building, and full of curious workman-
ſhip : and the Choir is very beautiful ; where-
in two Queens, as unfortunate as any two
could be, Catharine of Spain, and Mary Queen
of Scots, lye inter'd ; finding reſt here from
their labour, ſorrow and miſeries. This place
hath afforded the title of Earl, to John Lord
Mordant, created Mar. 9. 3 Car. 1; who, in the
year 1643, was ſucceeded in that Honour by
Henry Lord Mordant his fon; and he dying
without iflue-male, this Honour deſcended to
Charles the preſent Earl, ſon of Jon Lord
Mordaunt of Rygate and Viſcount Avelon,
who was ſecond ſon to John, the firſt Earl of
this family.]!

Beneath Peterborrow, the Nen, by this time The Pema
remov'd ſome five and forty miles from its
head, and carrying along with it all the little
rivers and land- floods; divides it ſelf into ſe-
veral branches. And, finding no certain courſe,
ſpreads its waters all over the plains f, and o-+ This a
verflows them far and near in the winter, nay, chieb ad
and ſometimes for the greater part of the year z enn
ſo that it ſeems to be a vaſt level-Ocean, with and, by.
here and there an Ifland appearing above the Pram ul
ſurface of the waters. The cauſe of which, Embain,
the neighbouring people affirm to be this ; that
of the three chanels, in which ſuch a vaſt deal of
waters did uſe to be convey'd, the firſt, which
went to the Ocean by Thorney-Abbey, and thence
aſunder by Clowscrofs and Crow-land ; and the
ſecond, which went by the Cut made by Morton
Biſhop of Ely, call'd the New Leame, and then
by Wibich ; have a long time been neglected :
and, that the third, which runs by Horſey-
bridge, Wittles-mere, Ramſey-mere, and Salters-
load, is not able to receive ſo much vater; ſo
that it breaks out more plentifully into the ad-
joyning Flats. And the Country complains of
the injury done them, as well by thoſe who
have neglected to keep open and clear the cha-
nels, as by others who have diverted the water
to their private uſes: and, with the Reatines in
Tacitus, they ſay, That Nature hath provi-
ded excellently for the convenience of mankind, in
giving all rivers their months and their courſes 3
and their endings, as well as their ſprings. But
of this enough, it not too much.

In this place, the County is narroweſt ; for
between the Nen and the river Melland (one of
the boundaries on the North- ſide,) it is ſcarce
five miles over. Upon the Welland ( which
Ethelwerd an ancient Writer calls Weolod,

[the Saxon Annals Peolus, and Florence

of Worceſter Feolund ; and for the making

of which navigable, an Act paſled in the 13"

year of Queen Elizabeth,)] ſtands, near its

ſpring, \Sibertoſte, which manour Nicholas de Sibertole.
Archer, in the time of Edward the firſt, held by

the Service of carrying the King's bow, thro' 2 Edu. 1.
all the foreſts in England ; and] Braibrooke- 3
Caſtle, built by Robert May, alias de Braibrok, Pg,
a great favourite of King John; whoſe ſqn p,;;brooe,
Henry, having married Chriſtiana Ledet, heireis
to a great eſtate, his eldeſt ſon took the ſirname
of Leder. From one of whoſe grand-daughters
by his ſon (as I ſaid before) it came to the La-
timers, and from them to the Griffms, who now
enjoy it, [but have removed their ſeat to
Dingley ; where have been found an ancient

Bead, and a Coin of Cunobeline.] Hard by

Mort. p. 5%

Nockirgham. t
= *

\

©

4
|
L
:
q

I Laxton.
A Inq. 2 Ed. 2.
Hen. 4.

Higbieſley.

Hering-

& worth.

* De Cante-
# 1apo.

; Now, C.
Lords Zouch,

I De San
© Mauro.

Kirby.

Deane.

Barons of
Engain,
Blatherw
t Now li
=

Apthorp,

e Feng

4

This ni
ef and
ſe that ai
„Ae oy
2 b
aiming ul

NORTHAMPFONSHIRE.

41 IE \.. os s
of

Nockingham.

Lurton.
$

3
1

*
=:
8 *

; Inq. 2 Ed. 2.
& 4 Hen. 4+

| Highteſley.

© De Cante-

# 1upo.
L + Now, E.

Lords Zouch.

Braibrook, among the woods, I ſaw ſome few zabeth, for his virtue, wiſdom, piety, rr

remains of a Monaſtery, call'd anciently De
Divifis, now Pipuell, founded by William Butte-
vilein for Ciſtercian Monks, in the reign of
Henry the ſecond. From thence, we have a
ſight of Rockingham, a Caſtle formerly belong-
ing to the Earls of Albemarle, and built by
William the Conqueror ; at which time it was
a Waſte, as we find in Domeſday-book. It was
fortified by him with rampires, bulwarks, and
a double range of battlements, and is ſeated
upon an Hill in a woody foreſt, named from
thence Rockingham-Foreſt. From this place,
which is the ſeat of the J/atſons, Sir Lewts
HVatſon was, in the reign of King Charles the
firſt, created a Baron ot this Realm, by the title
of Lord Rockingham of Rockingham-Caſtle. In
whoſe poſterity this Eſtate doth ſtill remain;
and rhe preſent poſſeſſor hath been advanced
to the more honourable Title of Earl of Roc-
kingham. Not far from whence, is Laxton, where-
in were lands held by the Service of hunting
in all the King's foreſts and parks throughout
Oxfordſhire, Buckinghamſhire, Huntingdon-
ſhire, and this County, to deſtroy the vermin
in each; As the manour of Highteſley, was al-
ſo held upon condition #0 dogs for the de-
ſtruction of wolves, foxes, &c.] Next, the Wel-
land runs by Heringworth, the ſeat, formerly of
the Cantlows, and +} afterwards of the Lords
Zouch, who deriv'd their original from Eudo a
younger ſon of Alan de la Zouch of Aſbby, and
grew up to an honourable family of Ba-
rons ; being much enobled by matches with
one of the heirs of Cautlou, and alſo with ano-

4 De Saraorher of Baron + Seymour ; who likewiſe deriv'd
| Mauro.

p. 905.

Kirby.

Deane,

Barons of
Engain,

Blatherwic,
f Now live,

* Two, C.

Apthorp,

his pedigree from the heir of the Lord Zouch of
Aſbby, and from the Lovels Lords of Caſtle-
Cary in Somerſetſhire. It has been fince ſold
to a Gentleman who has a fair ſeat at Bullick
hard by. Only, where the great Houſe for-
merly ſtood, there was a Chapel in which the
family of the Zouches were bury'd ; and that,
with the monuments therein, was reſerved
for the ſaid family.1

Here alſo in this Foreſt, I ſaw | Xirby, the
ſeat of the Hattons, from which, Sir Chriſto-
pher Hatton, in the reign of King Charles the
firſt, was created a Baron, by the title of Lord
Hatton of Kirby ; whoſe ſon of the ſame name
was advanced by King Charles the ſecond to
the more honourable title of Viſcount Hatton;
which honour William his ſon and heir at pre-
ſent enjoys: and] Deane, belonging anciently
to the Deanes, and afterwards to . Tindals ;
which deſerves to be mention'd, if it were only
for being at preſent a beautiful ſeat of the Bru-
denels ; of which Family, Sir Edmund Brudenel
Knight, was a great lover and admirer of
Antiquities. [In the reign of King Charles the
firſt, they were advanced to the dignity of Ba-
rons ; and, in' that of K. Charles the ſecond,
to the more honourable title of Earls of Car-
digan. The family likewiſe of Exgain, which
was both ancient and honourable, had their
ſeat hard by at Blatherwic (where f lately lived
the Family of Staffords Knights, deſcended
from Ralph the firſt Earl of Stafford,) and con-
verted their Caſtle, named Hymel, into a Mo-
naſtery call'd Fniſbeved. Their Iſſue-male fail'd
* three hundred years ago ; but of the daugh-
ters, the eldeſt was married to Sir John Gol-
dington, the ſecond to Sir Lawrence Pabenham, and
the third to Sir William Bernack, Knights of
great worth and honour. Here alſo we ſee
Apthorp, | formerly] the ſeat of that worthy
Knight Sir Anthony Mildemay, whoſe father Wal-
ter Mildemay, Privy Councellor to Queen Eli-

vour to learning and learned men (ſhown b

his tounding Emannel-College in Cambridge) harh
deſerv'd to be regiſter d among the beſt men of
his Age. This, by marriage, became ſince the
poſſeſſion of the Earls of Weſtmorland.] In the

tamily fot Semarc; | whom K. James ſthe 1{,]
for his virtues, and his faithful ſervices in Fe-
land while he was Lord Deputy there, advan-
ced to the dignity of Baron Ruſſel of 7horn-
haugh ; | and whoſe deſcendants are fince ad-
vanced to the more honourable titles of Mar-
quiſs of Taviſtock and Duke of Bedford.) Nei-

Geoffrey de Ridell (who was drown'd with
King Henry the firſt's ſon,) deſcended to Ri-
chard Baſſet ſon of Ralph Baſſet Chief Juſtice of
England; in whoſe race it continu'd till Hen

the 47's time, when (the iſſue-male failing) it
came by females to the Knevetts and Alesburies.

From Heringworth, the MVellund goes to Col-

of Richmond, King Henry the ſeventh's mo-
ther, built a ſplendid and beautiiul houſe, Be-
neath Colliweſton, the neighbouring Inhabitants

tell you the Danes receiv'd a memorable Dc
teat. And now, Welland arrives at Burghley, a
moſt beautiful ſear, from which that moſt wiſe
and honourable Councellor Sir William Cecil,
Lord High Treaſurer of England, the great
ſupport of this Nation, receiv'd the title of

luſtre of his own virtues, and beautify'd with
magnificent buildings ; laying to it a large
Park for Deer ( ſuch as Varro calls Par-
cu,) encompaſs'd with a Stone-wall of great
circumference. | Which noble pile of ſtone-
building, rais'd (as we have ſaid) about a hun-
dred years ſince by William Lord Burghley, has
been greatly adorn'd by the late Earl of Exe-
ter; to which title the deſcendants of the faid
William were raiſed. For loftineſs of rooms,
variety of pictures, terraſſes, conduits, fiſh-
ponds, fountains, Cc. it may vie with the beſt
Seats in England. The painting and carving
are ſo curious, that Travellers have affirm'd,
they have met with nothing either in Italy or
France, that exceeds them. The Park alſo is
greatly improv'd, by planting a multitude of
walks, of aſh, elm, cheſnut, and ſeveral other

the Earl of Exeter hath another handſom ſear,
with a little Park wall'd about. It was built
by Thomas Cecil the firſt Earl of Exeter of this
family ; and though not very ſmall (for, after
the Reſtoration, it was large enough to receive
the then Duke of Buckingham, and his family,
for ſome years,) yet ſo mean did it ſeem in
compariſon of the former, that its Founder
pleaſantly ſaid, He built it only to retire-to out of
the duſt, while his great houſe of Burleigh was a
ſweeping. |

Below Burleigh, at Berneck,
Stone-Quarries, out of which the Abbies of Pe-
terborow and Ramſey were built. Here (to
uſe the very words of the Hiſtory of Ramſey,)
the ſtrength of the Quarry-men is often exercis'd, yet

till there remains work, whereon to employ them;
0 inaſmuch

neighbourhood, ſtands Thornhaugh, belonging T hornhaugh,
formerly to the family of || Semarc, and + atter- || De Sancto
wards to the honourable Milliam Ruſſel ſon of Medardo.

Francis Earl of Bedford, deſcended of the ſame t N

ow, G.

cher is the little Town of Melledon to be paſs'd Welledon.
oy, conſidering that anciently it was accounted Baſſets of
a Barony ; which by Maud daughter and heir of Welledon.

liwefton, where the Lady. Margaret, Counteſs Colliwefton,

dig great ſtore of Slates, for building. From Slates for co-
hence, Wittering-heath, a plain, runs out a long vering Hou-
way to the Eaſt ; upon which the Inhabiront: —
Wittering-
heath.
Burghley.

Baron Burghley, at the hands of Queen Eliza-g,,..
beth. This houſe, the owner adorn'd with the Burghley.

trees. At Mothorpe, a little diſtant from this, Wothorpe.

lie the old Berneck.

**

— ——

627 | EE "CORITANI.

—

Gal

inaſmuch as they veſt and refreſh the Quarries, now
and then, by ſucceſſion. And we read in King
Edward the Conteſſor's Charter, That, in confi-
deration of four thouſand Eeles in Lent, the Monks
of Ramſey ſhall have out of the Territory of St. Pe-
ter ſo much ſquare ſtone as they need, at Berneck;
and of rough ſtone for walls, at Burch. Above
Berneck, that Roman way, which the neigh-
bouring Inhabitants call the Forty foot way,
from its breadth, cuts this Shire in two, from
Caſter to Stamford, and appears in a high Cau-
ſey ; eſpecially by the little wood of Berneck,
3 it has a Beacon ſet upon the very ridge;
By the and runs along f through Burghley-Park, [and
F. .nl, C. ſo on to Walar\

Some few * hence, the 2 _ by

Maxe)-Caſtle, formerly belonging to the Barons

8 of Wake 4 and by Peag-Kirke (where, in the in-

Ingulphus, fancy of Chriſtianity in England, Pega, a holy
woman who gave name to the place, and
was ſiſter of St. Guthlac, together with
other devour Virgins, did by their lite and ex-
ample give excellent documents of Piety and
Chaſtity ; ) and then comes to the Fenns, ſo
often mention d. And, by reaſon the bank on
the South-ſide thereof is neglected, the river
over-flows the adjacent Lands ( to the great
damage of the proprietors; ) and, having thus
broken our of it's chanel, which went formerly
by Spalding, it falls into the Nen, and extream-
ly overcharges it.

The lefler Avon (Which, as I ſaid, is the
other boundary of this Shire northward, but
continues ſuch only about five or ſix miles
breaking out near the ſpring of the Welland,

Stanford, runs weſtward by Stanford upon Avon, the ſeat
Cave, of the family of Cave, out of which ſeveral
branches of good note have grown up in the
neighbouring Tract ; and alſo 4 Lilburne, the
ſear, formerly, of the Canvils. That this hath
been anciently a Roman Station, I am per-
ſwaded, by its ſituation upon one of their

+ Beneath,C.

military ways, and by the ancient Trenches|frey ſucceeding in the Earldom of Northampton,

there, and a little piked hill caſt-up, which
+ So ſaid, ſome dug of f late days, in hopes of finding
ann. 1607. old hidden treaſures ; but inſtead of Gold they
met with Coals. [Which ſaid marks of Anti-
quity, wy e with the diſtances anſwering
on both fides (viz. near twelve miles from
Bennavenna, and nine from Vennones,) induced
Pag. 99, the late Learned Commentator upon Antoni-
nus to fix the ancient Tripoutium here (at
 Dowbriage,) rather than at Towceſter ; which
he obſerves to be too much out of the courſe
of the Itinerary, and not to anſwer, in point
of diſtance from the Stations on each hand. |
And thus this little river, after it hath paſſed
under Dowbridge, leaves Northamptonſhire, and
enters Warwickſhire,
Bounds ofthe From the digging-up of the Coals before-
Ancients mention'd, what if I ſhould gueſs, that this
hill was thrown-up for a mark or Boundary ?
ſince Siculus Flaccus tells us, that either Aſhes,
or Coals, or Potſherds, or broken Glaſſes, or
Bones half-burnt, or Lime, or Plaiſter, were
wont to be put under ſuch bounds or limits ;
Lib. de Civ, and St. Auguſtine writes thus of Coals, Is it
Dei, 21. c. 4. not a W ul thing, that tho Coals are ſo brittle,
that with the leaſt blow they break, with the leaſt
preſſure they are cruſh'd in pieces, yet no time can
deſtroy them; inſomuch, that they who pitch Land-
marks, are wont to throw them underneath, to con-
vince any litigiom perſon, who ſhall u. though
ever ſo long after, that no Land-mark was there.
And ſo much the rather am I inclin'd to this
opinion, becauſe they who have written of Li-

mits, or Bounds, intorm us, that certain Hillock,
which they term'd Botontines, were placed in g,...
Limits. So that I ſuppoſe moſt of theſe x.
Mcunts and round Hillocks, which are ſo com- haps _
monly ſcen, were rais'd for this purpoſe ; and % B,
that Aſhes, Coals, Potſherds, c. might be
found under them, by digging deep into the
ground.

The firſt Earl that this County had, at leaſt kala
that I know of, was H/g/deof, ſon of the War- themen
like Siward ; who was alſo Earl of Huntino-
don, and loſt his head, for treaſon againſt Wi.
liam the Conqueror ; leaving only two daugh-
ters, which he had by Judith, the Conqueror's
niece by a ſiſter on the mother's ſide. Simon
* Sinlis, being ſcornfully rejected by Judith the The I!
mother, on account of his being lame, marry'd Wall: 0
Maud the eldeſt daughter, and built St. An-“ De 8. x,
drew's Church, and the Caſtle of Northam- d“ ©: 3
pton. To him, ſucceeded his ſon Simon the .
ſecond, who was a long time at law about his
mother's eſtate, with David King of Scots,
her ſecond husband : and, having ſided with
King Stephen, dy'd in the year of our Lord
1152. with this ||elogy, A youth addifted toy Eli ;
every thing that was unlawful, every thins that N
was unſeemly. His ſon Simon the third, going 8
on with the ſuit againſt the Scots for his right
to the Earldom of Huntingdon, waſted his
eſtate ; but, through the favour of King Henry
the ſecond, marry'd the daughter and heir of
Gilbert de Gant Earl of Lincoln 5 and having
at laſt recover'd the Earldom of Huntingdon,
and difleis'd the Scots, he died without iſſue
in the year 1185. Many years after, Edward
the third created Miliam de Bohun (a perſon of
approved valour) Earl of Northampton : and
when his elder brother Humfrey de Bohun, Earl
of Hereford and Eſſex, and Conſtable of Eng-
land, was not able in that warlike age to
ſupport the Character of Conſtable, he made
William, Conſtable of England. His ſon Hum-

as alſo in the Earldoms of Hereford and Eſſex

(upon his Uncle's dying without iſſue) had two
daughters ; one marry'd to Thomas of Wood-

ſtock, youngeſt ſon of King Edward the third,

the other to Henry of Lancaſter Duke of Here-

ford, and afterwards King of England. The
daughter of Thomas of Woodſtock brought her
grandfather's title of Northampton, together

with others, into the family of the Staffords by
marriage. But when they were depriv'd of

their honours, King Edward the ſixth advan-

ced William Par Earl of Eſſex, a moſt accom-
pliſh'd Courtier, to the title of Marguiſs of Nor-
thampton ; who, f within our memory, dy'd + So fad.
without iſſue. And King James [the firſt, aun, 19;
in the year of our Lord 1603, at one and the —
ſame time advanced Henry Howard Brother of this Work,
the f Duke of Norfolk (a perſon of great wit our mot *
and eloquence, a complete maſter of the molt rene 5
uſeful Arts and Sciences, exceeding prudent, + Lal Dale
and no leſs provident,) to the degree and {tile C.

of Baron Howard of Marnehill, and to the ho-

nour of Earl of Northampton. | Which Henry
having never marry'd, and dying 15. June
1614; this honour, in the year 1618, was con-

fer'd upon Miliam Lord Compton, Lord Pre-

ſident of Wales, who was ſucceeded firſt by
Spencer his ſon and heir, then by James his
grandchild, ſon and heir to the ſaid Spencer,

and father of George, the preſent Earl.

There belong to this Shire 326 Pariſhes.

More

CERT.

n 2 —
»”
—

* 3 *
* —

. TT OT

— 5 *
„ „„ *

WF

*

„„ - - — "0011 7 r L
0... — —j—ä 11 4 60% —2 — NI. acne
1
7
:

«A

a S# *

LOR

Ar 1
R ed ad oa

* ANG * 4 2

1 * — keND "SY ä * **

E 2
2 =o
LN —

[VI 5 1 LS WEL
i —ͤ — |
; . e = © 4 wa? 8 | e
— 4. w Pm ton p P A
: | Wd —
Cart L mot.
| | Dunnington \ t 0 1
14 8 by walton ; Af 7

| | = LEAR? Hor, h F — — N I, nun 775
4 1 5 & ae |
3: a FE p |
= - t 4 * ord q
| Worthington «lh 1 — 8 — A . =
S of. ; cath . * 15 , Hl mmol ld

PE Cote & , 0
Orton ® i 7 £ T Bur ton
* 1.4 Schopohond n n
6 6 8 of = Grace Dien ||
ART - 4 — 2 422 nm
| | . r \ nw; 5
| * 1 4 3 bly 22 „ urnwood . 5 1 \ row SH: .
: dies to g * ON F Chr y 4 1 Forr —_ . *
; 9 9 * * " 7 «A Hank. —_ rata 2 e
1 CHIRE N Srobeto — f 2 > |
F : — 2 e > ©
: 5 4 „ —
4 Hufen Je ,
Newton $ 2 > TY —
Aa norton 7 Ua
7 |; N = a 22
5
Bilfeon - 0
ſs Ort,
. a
14
19 i ; . > .
Ii book e may fd OO
5 ,
if F 7” BAN & *
| | Shoe pri Templs 4

| f | ; P ART err 5 P.M ” . anton ;
1 AR tcl As; * 3
h Cul 4 * 1 1 ſ ut cinen, * * e 2 / imberf?
O F Ather 8 4 | 2
Hort, A.

7 a oo ; 4 HO.  Probleton 1 4 2. 11 |

Fenm Draton Baue — 8 * T7 Med by J..
2 rar oh 3
N Stoke & G all, nes (2k * . * =,
ARWI- NZ,, 2 u..
- Barwell,, 2 5 . 2 wrelſton 3 * — T hurt
Oy — 1 Kue

5 toham - H UND. 4 , 4 Endrrhy CG 4 My tought
k r. e Crt Wn ncrote # Jp | Y 3

1 * E 4 g 4 F & Glen Pre” a.

— —— Hi — Patt: 2 4 15 0 |

Non Eaton _. = * * « — he - Varborow { * © * Wi 10 * 1 <8

ED. * and 4 7 ww) Nd  I#
x co * Stomſtant on * 1 * n

5 3 A 1 4 „ Coghy % | |
i 8. ö Ki J Ara umril op. * ” Co uti þ 01p P | Ger. \ 17g
| NJ Ta * Ho 2 uttou F a LAX ECV 1 1 A
DA \ . 4 "WW 1
CK VP 8 ** 2 8 22 * 4 TON. Newton ©
Cle Hu 7 Frolkwsrth | —
CEE rFobrwerth
lf "4 re 8 L 4 HWillou Wy ir uy F
Bentioncs CP N Mot. | =. P
* ee — -

x . * lllag u- N 4h, 475 ay 4 , A) 5 Hurt
| \ 6 2 b | 755 :

: a N N Arhby £7 : : 4 Po Fr £ ,
N Poathng picks A Sm.

Sy HIRE 1 2 IX
\F Biss, e Has Brantmgiporp 83 S24
| =. Walton

\ 2 0 1 5
| i Lattterworth A" of ©: r -A
A ſcale of Aller | 8 | * „ % 32 7 e

1 Alreterton
- * H 5.
ö A Kikeorth . Thedd
vas
rimini of Fort a9” -

225

| % : [MIL TT

FAT:

e

4 22 Shou br
2 ,

.

ETD |
S T., An 4

/ 2
45 Hoy Barkby
ih OP.” s
4 C OS *
8 Imam ton Bork

nw i” immbes Scone \ 2

Krhom : *
1 22 1

4 —

Thap ee „
V. art o

on Burrow &

worm

£ rn 11h14

3 Srenps 1 :
' * Zar

7 3 T hut nby *

Houten

NF

Tt , ad 1 Dillegdon

D GARTE -
* 0 n Wo mag A Galbey
2 N Now 3 ric

Fun 4 "Ya

G N 2 * 2 75 5 }
very 4 SVofetw . N
- Tlecrton +a Aue. *
A le, mu

e 44 Aue

* © Boanohamp *
ray Weorterby . 5 - '
- N. hurkmgton J — od © ae * nic un B . 4
A mag. 1 " * | *
IP | 5 6
|} \ leu, 4% Luton Wow oY |

Tlouthorpe > | Abel Smale

|NORTHAMPTON SHIRE . Tohn Churchal. D
Q

1 a 0 F
i
5
2 Nabu 4 4 LiINCOLNE
zi ll u, A
t ;
| . ——— +» Orr DBronrht.m 8 HIRE
a Ca , 2
NH rm nals 4 5 * — J *
* 2 wW -« .
I N D. H + * 13 - N
8 4 — I D hr 72 4. FA AN 4
— FF 4 .
22 PT 1 © '
2 2 N10 * : 4
— 1 * ®
a 4 af 1 8 — 8

Sold br Awnſham * .

** Wins . . | 50 | 49

Watling-

j

. — —— "__ I : , . : F en Bs „ e VIV (FD co 8 1 r n WR ad
j 8 E ht. BE Sag 1 19 by WA * . RI 4 "OE . F 0 Fe” "m_ 4 "RN mY 22
Ge. OR, , YEE [4 ho a *

Carleton
Curleu.
1 Have,
» Rhota
Fuller's
Werthie

— — — — — ä— — ——— —_
tm _— _— — ACC oat ͤ—R . * _— — —_ i
— Nr ö Teo ys . wee 2 —

K — — — — —— 8 — : - — a

_— ___ wv r - * *
* Sn —— 1 — — —
* —- **
, - — — Au »„—
— —— — > — —— —
= wy = a_ — — A
Ley —
—
3 — —— —

6 0, re "8. 72

LEICESTERSHIRE 3

© Watling-

& Harborrow.

v. Burton

Leic. p. 18.
f $7: & 127.

Carleton
& Curly,

I Have, C.

© * Rhotaciſ.
mus.

8 Fuller's

Vorthies.

bounded, on one hand with the river Avon bridge, and Bensford: It was a lo

in Cambridge (a native of this Carleton, as my

More rare Plants growing wild in Northam-
ptonſhire,

Eryngium vulgare J. B. vulgare & Came-
rarii C. B. mediterraneum Ger. mediterraneum
ſeu campeſtre Park. Common Eryngo. This was
ſent me by Mr. Thornton, who obſerved it not far
from Daventry, befide the old Roman way call'd
Watlingſtreet, near a village named Braokhall.

Gentiana concava Ger. Saponaria concava
Anglica C. B. folio convoluto J. B. Anglica
folio convoluto Park. Hollow-leaved Gentian, or

in a ſmall grove of a wood call d the Spinttey, near
Lichbarrow.

Gnaphalium montanum ſive Pes cati Park.
Mountain-Cudweed or Catsfoot. On Bernale- heath,
not far from Stamford.

Pulſatilla Anglica purpurea Park. parad. flore
clauſo cæruleo J. B. Common Paſque-flower. On
the ſame heath in great plenty. See the Synonyme
in Cambridgeſhire.

_ Millefolium paluſtre flore luteo galericulato.
Hooded Water-Milfoil. In the ditches by the rivers-

fide as you go from Peterborough to Thorp.

a.

LEICESTERSHIRE.

> ORTH of Northamptonſhire, |follow'd the track of this way very intently from
lies the County of Leiceſter, the Thames into Wales, for the diſcovery of pla-
call'd in Domeſday-book, Le-|ces of Antiquity; nor could I expect to meet
$ deceſterſcyre, and now Leiceſter-|with any other more faithful guide for that
. ſbire. It is all a champain|purpoſe. [Of which way, an ancient Eulogy of
country, rich in corn and Hiſtories writes thus;

grain, but for the
part deficient in woods, It is encompaſs'd on North-weſt. For it. begins at
the eaſt with Rutlandfpire and Lincolnſhire, on] the midſt of Kent by London; thence by St. Albans,
the north with Nottinghamſhire and Derbyſhire, | Dunſtable, Stratford, Touceſter, Littleborne,
on the weſt with Warwickſhire (from which it] St. Gilbert's-hill near Shrowesbury 3 thence by
is parted by the Military-way of the Romans] Stratton, and ſo through the middle of Wales to
call'd Hatlingſtreet, which runs along the welt| Cardigan. But to confine our ſelves to this
skirts of this County ;) and on the ſouth (as] County.] This Way, having paſs'd Dowbridge,
I obſerv'd before) it is bounded by Northam-]| where it leaves Northamptonſhire, is firſt in-
or rg The river Soar paſſeth through thejterrupted by the river Swift, which is but a
middle of it to the Trent; but along the eaſt}ſlow ſtream, tho* the name imports the con-
parts, there runs a ſmall gentle ſtream call'd|rrarpy but to the name it anſwers only in the
the Miele, which at laſt falls into the Soar. | winter-time. The bridge, over which this road

On the ſouth-ſide (where the County is|was heretofore continu'd, they call Brausford-

the leſs, and on the other with the Welland) ] down, and that occaſion'd this famous Way to
nothing of note preſents it ſelf ; unleſs it be] be fo little frequented for many years; but now
near the head of the Welland, where is the it is repair'd at the charge of the publick.
town of Haverburg, commonly call'd Harborrow, | Adjoyning on the one hand, weſtward, lies
famous for its Beaſt-Fair.
given the title, firſt of Baron, and then of Earl, thy of note, were it only for the Lord thereof
to the Right Honourable Bennet Sherrard, who, [Sir Full Grevill, a very eminent Knight, [ crea-
before his advancement to the ſaid honour of ted a Baron of this kingdom in the eighteenth
Earl, had been created Viſcount Sherrard of|year of King James the firſt, by the title of
Stapleford, in this County ;] and at a little di-|Lord Brook of Beauchamps- Court in the Coun-
ſtance from thence, Carleton, that is, the town|ry of Warwick.] But the name ſpeaks it a
of Husbandmen. I know not whether it be place of antiquity alſo, for our Anceſtors never
worth relating; but moſt of the natives of gave the name of Ceſter, but only to ancient
this town, either from ſome peculiar quality o Cities or. Caſtles, On the other hand, eaſt-

rather Sopewort. This was firſt found by Gerard

be ſecond principal way Lel. Ms.
greateſt is call'd Watling-ſtreate, going from South-eaſt to Tom. 2.
ver, runs through P. 255.

time broken Bensford,

Of late, it hath|Ceſter-Over, but in Warwickſhire ; a place wor- Cefter-over;

the ſoil, or water, or other unknown cauſe in] ward, on one fide lies Miſterton, belonging to Mifterton;

nature, f had an ungrateful and difficult way | the famous and ancient family of the Poultneys,

of ſpeaking, with a harſh guttural pronuncia-|and on the other, Lutterworth, a ſmall market- Lutterworth,

tion, and a ſtrange * wharling in the utrerance|rown, formerly (by report) the poſſeſſion of the

of their words. | A Fellow of Trinity-College Verdons. Near which, is a ſpring of water ſo A petrifying
very cold, that in a little time it converts well,

Author thinks) made a ſpeech of a competent
length, with ſele& words as to the matter, Church heretofore, was the famous John Wickliff,
without any [r] therein; contrived (as weſa man of a cloſe ſubtil wit, and very well vers d
may well ſuppoſe) on purpoſe to prevent a de- in the Scriptures ; who, having drawn his pen

ſtraws and ſticks, into ſtone. Rector of this

formity of pronunciation, upon the frequent
recurring of that letter. But yet the preſent
Inhabitants, as they retain no remains of it in
their ſpeech, ſo neither in their memory ; the
= : ancient among them knowing nothing
of it. x

The Roman way before-mention'd, whoſe
cauſey is in other places worn away, ſhews
it ſelt here very plainly, and runs northward,
almoſt in a direct line, along the weſt-ſide of
this County. You may perhaps laugh at my

_ expenſive diligence and curioſity; but I have

againſt the Pope's Authority, and the Church
of Rome, was not only grievouſly perſecuted
in his life-time, but one and forty years after
his death, by command of the Council of Si-
ema, his body was in a barbarous manner taken
out of the grave, and burnt. [The Church
is lately beautified with a coſtly pavement of
chequer'd ſtone, new Pews, and every. thing
elſe new, both in Church and Chancel, ex-

job Wickliff
y'd 1387.

cept the Pulpit made of thick Oak-Flanks

ſix-ſquare, with a ſeam of carved work in the

4 th. > * . * 1 . 3 o

joints; Which is preſerv'd and continu d in
> Yo © memory

CORITANL.

; —_—_

531

Cleyce ſter.
Cle ybrook.

after Bamaventa, were ſeated here.

Hinckley.

memory of JFichliff, whoſe Pulpit it was, it
conſtaut Tradition may be credited.

From Bensſord-bridge, the Old-way goes up
to High-crofs, ſo call d, becauſe formerly a croſs
was erected in that high place; inſtead of
which there is now a high poſt ſet up, with

rops to ſupport it. The neighbouring Inha-
francs told me, that the two principal ways
of England did croſs here; * that in this
place ſtood once a very flouriſhing city, call d
Cley-cefter, which had a Senate of it's own ; and

that Cley-brook, near a mile diſtant from _—
allo,

was part of the old Cleyceſter. They ſay a
that on both ſides the way, great foundations
of ſquare-ſtone have been diſcover'd under-
ground, and (a) Roman coins [and bricks] fre-
quently caſt-up by the plow. But whatever
may ba under-ground, above (as the Poet

ſays)

A Etiam ipſæ periere ruinæ.

The very ruins are decay'd and loſt. (6)

Theſe things conſider d, with its diſtance from
Banaventa, or edo (which agrees exactly,)
and the name of that bridge (of Bensford,)
are Inducements to believe, that the Bennones
or Venones, which manſion Antoninus places next
And the
rather, becauſe Antoninus tells us, that the
way parted here into two branches, which al-
ſo is the common Tradition. For North-eaſt,
in the road to Lincoln, the Fyſſeway leads to
Rata, and Vernometum ( of which places, more
hereafter ;) and to the North-weſt JPatling ſtreet
goes directly into Wales by Marveſſedum; of
which in its proper place, when I come to
Warwickſhire.

Not far from High-croſs, is Burbage, of
which Church Anthony Grey (afterwards Earl
of Kent) became Rector; and, notwithſtand-
ing the enjoyment of rhat Honour, he would
not relinquiſh the office and work of the Mi-
niftry, but continu'd therein till the end of
his life.) |

More above, on the fide of the foreſaid way,
ſtands Hinckley, formerly belonging to Hugh
Grantmaiſnill, High-{teward, or Seneſchal of
England, in the reigns of William Rufus, and
Henry the firſt. He had two daughters, Petro-
nila or Parnel, marry'd to Robert Blanchemaines,
Earl of Leiceſter (ſo firnam'd from the white-
neſs of his hands,) with whom he had the Stew-
ardſhip of England ; and Alice, married to Ro-

ger Bigod. Art the Eaſt-end of this Church, are

Boſworth.

trenches and rampires caſt-up to a great hetght,
which the Inhabitants as was Hugh's e.
Three miles from hence, lies Boſworth, an an-

cient market- town, ſand by way of diſtinction

from another of the ſame name in the Hundred

Burton, p. 47. of Gartery, call'd Market-Boſworth ; 1 which

* Three
miles diſtant.
+ So ſaid,
ann, 1607,

ſaid market, with its Fair, Richard Harecourt ob-
tain'd of King Edward the firſt. * Near this
town, Within the memory of our f grandfa-
thers, the right of the Crown of England was
finally determin'd in a pitch'd battel : for there,

Henry Earl of Richmond, with a ſmall body of ©

men, gave battel ro Richard the third, who
had villanouſly uſurp'd the Crown; and whilſt;
tor the liberty of his Country, Henry valiantly
expos'd his lite, he happily overcame and flew
the Tyrant ; and in the midſt of blood and

laughter, was with joyful acclamations ſaluted

King, having, by his valour, deliver'd England
from the dominion of a tyrant, and by his con-
duct freed the nation from the civil diſſen-
tions, which had ſo long diſturb'd it. Here-
upon Bernardus Andreas, a Poet of Tholouſe, who
livd in thoſe days, in an Ode to Henry the
ſeventh, alludes thus to the Roſes, which were
the || device of that King;

Ecce nunc omnes poſuere venti

Murmura, prater Zephyrum tepentem,

Hic Roſas nutrit, nitidoſque flores
Veris amæni.

Now the rough tempeſts all have breath'4

their laſt,

All vw are huſh'd except the gentle
weſt,

By whoſe kind gales are bluſhing Roſes
blown,

And happy ſpring with all its joys comes
on.

The exact place of this battel is frequent!

more and more diſeover d, by pieces of A ages Burton Lei,

{| Tnfgnia;

weapons, and other warlike accoutrements, — 5

up ; and eſpecially, a great many arrow-he

were found there, which are of a long, and
large proportion, far greater than any now in
uſe. There is likewiſe a little Mount caſt-up,
where the common report is, that before the
engagement, Henry Earl of Richmond, made
his Speech for the encuragement of the Army.

Not far from Boſworth, is Lindley ; of which Lindly.

Lordſhip it is remarkable (ſays Mr. Burton)
that therein was never ſeen adder, ſnake, or

lizzard ; tho' in all the bordering places they

have been commonly found. Not far from
hence, 1s Higham, in old Deeds written Hec-
ham; and memorable, among other things, for

a curious piece of Antiquity *, diſcover'd there ( Burton
in the year 1607, in the following manner. An Leic 5. ;.

Inhabitant of this town, in taking up a great
ſquare-ſtone, which lay in I/atlingſtreet-way,
upon the crofling of another way that leads
ro Coventry; met with about two hundred
and fifty pieces of filver of the coin of King
Henry the third, each of the weight of three-
pence. On the one ſide thereof was the King's-
head, with a hand holding a Scepter, cir-
cumſcrib'd Henricus Rex; on the other ſide, a
Croſs-molin between Rowundels, with this circum-
ſcription Fulle on Lued There was alſo a gold
ring, with a fair Ruby in it; and another with
an Agat; and a third of Silver, wherein was
a flat ruddy ſtone engraven with Arabick Cha-
racers, thus:

(a) One, of the Emperor Caius Caligula in Copper, ſtamp'd, as Occo ſets down, A. D. 42. Upon the one fide,
the Emperor with a Lawrel-wreath, with this Inſcription, C. Cæſar. Divi, Auli. Pron. Aug, P. M. T. R.
P. 1111. PP, Upon the reverſe, Veſta S. C. Veſta fitting in a Chair, holding in her right hand a diſh, Ano-

ther coin is of Conſtantine the great, ſtamp'd A D. 306.
cumſcrib'd, viz. Conſtantinus P. F. Aug.
the Sun. Burton's Leiceſterſhire.

Upon the one fide, the face with a Lawrel-wreath cir-

pon the reverſe, Soli inuiſto Comiti, T. F. P. T. R. The figure of

(% Sir William Dugdale farther obſeryes, that the earth (fo far as this extended) is of a darker colour than the
reſt thereabouts ; and of ſuch rankneſs, that much of it hath been carry'd by the husbandmen to further di-

ſtances, like dung, to make the ground more fertile,

Engliſhed

* 28 1

33

|
|
|

4

1 Burton's

E Leicelter-
E ſhire, p.13 1+

| Newbrig,
© Hiſt, I. 4.
4 . , 9, &c.
= Malmesd,
Ef |. 13. Co 4.

+ Stow's $
vey of Lo
don, fol. 3

Aſhby,
Barons Zo
of Aſhby,
Vid, Burt
b. 16.

LEICESTERSHIRE 534

Coheirs of Roger de Quincy Earl of Wincheſter;
came in her right to a great eſtate in this
County: but having commenced a ſuit againſt
John Earl of Warren, who choſe rather to de-
termine the matter by Sword than by Law,
he was Kill'd by him in the King's-hall at Weſt-
minſter, An. 1279. And ſome few years after,
» [the daughters and heirs of his Nephew con-
vey d this eſtate by marriage into the families
ot Seymour, and Holland. But this Town came
afterwards to the family of Haſtings, who have
here a f beautiful ſeat ; [though at preſent run- 4 Ann. 1607

| 222
12
>

tngliſh's by Mr. Bedwel,

3 By Mahomet magnifie him, 2 Ining to decay. Here are alſo two ruined -
A Turn from him each hand that may hurt] Towers of the Palace of the Earls of Hun-
e F him. , tingdon, built by the Lord Haſtings, who was

| g beheaded by King Richard the third. In the
He found likewiſe certain great Catch-hooks] late Civil Wars, it was a Garriſon for the King,
and Keepers of Silver, with ſome Links off and afterwards demoliſhed.) Of this Family,
an old-faſhion'd great Gold-chain. All theſe| Miliam procured * of Henry the ſixth the pri-
lay by the ſide of the ſtone, deep in the ground. | vilege of a Fair. [It's coming into this noble
Under the ſame ſtone, lay two or three pieces] Family happen'd upon the Attainder of James
of Silver Coins of Trajan the Emperor. Butler Earl ot Ormond and Wiltſhire, after King

+ This laſt paſſage would perſwade one; that Edward the fourth recover'd the Crown. Sir
the ſtone it ſelf was a 35 to ſome Altar de-|Wiliam Haſtings had a grant of it, in conſide-
hire, p.13 l. dicated to Trajan; according to that cuſtom ration of his ſignal Services againſt King Henry
4 of the R of laying ſome of the preſent|the fixth, and his party ; upon which account,

* Or, Ed, 4.

4 \ at's

© Leicelter-

omans,
Emperor's coins under the foundation of theirſhe was alſo made a Baron, Chamberlain of
buildings, monuments, &c. The ſame cuſtomſ the King's houſhold, Captain of Calais, and
they had in their Burials, as appears by the] Knight of the Garter. This I take to be the
Coins found in ſeveral Urns and Barrows|ſame William, mention'd before as procuring
throughout England. And this perhaps may for it the privilege of a Fair from Henry the
account for the ſtone and coins. The money, I ſixth (for the Market cannot be meant, be-
rings, and other things found by the fide of |cauſe the Town enjoy d that privilege long be-
| the ſtone, Mr. Burton conjectures to have been fore.) But in truth, it ſeems to be a miſtake
© | Nenbrig, the treaſure of ſome Jew. || For, that people f for Edward the fourth, becauſe Sir William al-
ig. l. 4. Aouriſh'd mightily in England a little after|ways oppos d the Lancaſtrian Party in favour
80, 9, & the Conqueſt, being encourag'd particularly by |of the Houſe of York, and upon that turn of
Names. William Rufus; upon which they became very government procur'd this grant, Beſides, it
© |. 13. . 4. h . — . .
; rich. But their wealth; in the ſucceeding reigns, |expreſly appears that 11 Edw. 4. he had a Char-
did them great injury; when they were mi- ter for two Fairs to be held there yearly ; with

ey, ſerably tortur'd by King John, to make them licence to make, amongſt other of his houſes,

diſcover and deliver up their hidden treaſures.
In the 11th of Edward the firſt, their Syna-
gogues were all pluck'd down; and in the
16th of that King, they were all baniſh'd the
Realm, to the number of fifteen thouſand.
But their riches were all to be left behind ;
ro,
| PL 13h

neceſſary

this of Aſpby, a Caſtle; which was demoliſh'd
in 1648 ; at what time, many other noble
ſeats underwent the ſame fate by - an ordi-
nance of the Parliament. This manour, in a
lineal deſcent from the ſaid Hiliam Lord Ha-
tings, came to the preſent Earl of Hunting-

and they were not allow'd to take any money don.

or goods away with them, ſave only for the] Nor ought I to omit Cole-Overton, the ſeatColorton,
charges of tranſportation. In which [of H. de Bellomont or Beaumont, deſcended from

difficulty, what can we imagin more probable, the ſame famous Family with the Viſcounts de

than that they bury'd and hid their treaſures] Bellomont, but this family is lately extin& by
under-ground, in hopes that the reigns of the|the dearh of Themas Lord Beaumont, who be-
ſucceeding Kings might be more favourable to|queathed his Eſtate to Sir George Beaumont

them? The ring with Arabick characters, ſeems | Baronet, of Stoughton-Grange, near Leiceſter.

to confirm the ſame thing; and might be In this Pariſh of Cole-Overton, is a noted mi-
brought over out of Paleſtine or ſome of thoſe|neral water call'd Grify-dam (as others alſoGriffy-dam,
Eaſtern Countries by ſome of the Jeus, who] have been lately diſcover'd in this County, at

(as Buxtorf tells us) having a natural love to Dunton and Cadeby.)| The place hath the name of

their own Country, us'd ſometimes to viſit|diſtin&ion, from Pit-Coles, being a bituminousPit-Coles,
it. And the learned Antiquary before-men-|earth harden'd by nature, and here (to the

tion'd, is of opinion, that it was laid here to] great profit of the Lord of the Manour) dug-
challenge the property, whenever there ſhould|up in ſuch plenty, as to ſupply the neighbour-

be occaſion to enter a claim, becauſe without] ing Country, all about, with firing.

[Not

ſome ſuch thing they would belong to the] far from whence, is Ogathorp, where Thomas Osgathorp.

King, or to a common perſon, by preſcription: |Harley, Citizen of London, built * ri

+ Stow's Sur- Thus, f when Lxdgate was taken down in the |nietit -Houſes for fix poor Miniſters Widows,
rey 2 year 1586. to be rebuilt, they found in the with the allowance of 101. per Ann. to each;

wall a ſtone engraven with Hebrew Letters to and alſo a Free- ſchool, with a

* good Sti-* gol. per
ann,

this effect, This is the dwelling of Rabbi Moſes, pend. :
the ſon of the honourable Rabbi -Jaac: | | North-weſt from hence is Stanton- Harold, in gt anton.
We meet with nothing more upon this Way, the Pariſh of Breeden; where, near the noble Harold.
worthy to be mention'd ; unleſs it be at ſome Seat of the right honourable the Lord Ferrers,

Aſhby, diſtance, Aſpby de la Zouch, a moſt pleaſant is a new-built Church, a very curious ſtru-

Barons Zouch Town, now belonging to the Earls of Hun- cture of ſquare-ſtone ; of the Founder whereof,

* by, tingdon; formerly, to Alan de la Zouch, a Baron, an Inſcription in the front gives this ac-
dis. who bore for his arms on a Shield Gules, 10 Be- count,

zants, This man, having marry'd one of the

i | In

—_—_—
—
%

——
-
*
—

d
K A ——— — ——— —
y N — . re yy
—
— — —

* .
7 P

—CORITANT © 9

95

Appleby.

Leiceſter.

V. Burton, ancient Hiſtories, it muſt be carefully

P · 160.

— — — —

In the year 1653.

hen all things ſacred throughout the Nation

Were either demoliſhed or prophaned,

Sir Robert Shirley Baronet founded this
Church;

IWhoſe fingular Praiſe it is, to have done

The beſt things in the worſt of times. |

And, at the like diſtance from Aſhby de la
Zouch, to the ſouth, at a place call'd Appleby,
Sir John Moore Citizen, and once Lord Mayor
of London, built a very noble School-houſe,
and endow'd it with extraordinary Salaries, for
a * Maſter, an 4 Uſher, and a || Writing-
maſter ; with a convenient houſe and out-
houſes for each.

The river Soar (as I have already obſery'd)
runs through the middle of this County ;
which riſing not far from the Street-way, and
encreaſing with the addition of many little
Springs, flows gently to the North, and, in its
courſe, waſhes the Weſt and North-ſides of the
principal Town of the Shire; calbd by Au-
thors Eee Ligoraceaſter, Lygraceaſter, Le-
graceaſter, Legoraceaſter, | Lage ceſtria, Leogora, Le-
geo-ceſter, and Leiceſter. (And in _— our

iſtin-
guiſh'd from the Britiſh Caer-legion, or Caer-
Jeon (i. e. Weſt-Cheſter,) which is named Le-
geceaſter, Legaceaſter, and, by middle-age-wri-
ters, Legaceſtre.)| This is a place of great an-
tiquity, and no leſs beauty. In the year 680,
when Sexwulph, by King Ethelred's order, di-
vided the Kingdom of the Mercians into Dio-
ceſes, he plac'd here a Biſhop's ſeat, and was
himſelf the firſt Biſhop of the See. | The Seat
was near St. Margaret's Church ; as appears by
a ground there, ſtill called the Biſhop's Barn-
cloſe, and a Royalty, called to this day the Bi-

Biſhop's Fee,” ſhop's Fee. | But after a few years, the See be-

ing tranſlated to another place, that dignity
determin'd, and the wealth and reputation of
the Town decay'd by little and little; till
Edelfleda a noble Lady, in the year of our Lord
914 27 and fortify'd the place with new
walls; ſo that Matthew Paris in his Leſſer Hi-
ſtory writes thus; Leyeceſtria is a moſt wealthy

City, and encompaſs'd with an indiſſoluble wall, of

which if the foundation were ſtrong and good, the
place would be inferiour to no City whatſoever. At

the coming-in of the Normans, it was well

Pint and

half, or 24
Ounces,

1171.

peopled and frequented, and had many Bur-
geſles, Twelve of ulom (as we find recorded in
William the firſt's Book) were by ancient Tenure
to go with the King as often as he went to war.
But in caſe he made an expedition by ſea, then they

ſent four horſes as far as London, for the carriage of

arms, or other neceſſaries. This Town paid to the
King yearly thirty pounds by Tale, and twenty in
Ore, and five and twenty f Sextaries of Honey. But
in the time of Henry the ſecond, it was op-
preſs'd with great misfortunes, and the walls
were demoliſh'd [by Richard Lucie, Chief Ju-
ſtice of England, who had the Government du-
ring the abſence of the King in Ireland, ann,
1173.| when Robert, ſirnam'd Boſſu, that is,

Crook-back, Earl of Leiceſter, endeavour'd to

raiſe an Inſurrection againſt his Prince. Which

Matthew Paris delivers in theſe words: For
the contumacy of Earl Robert in oppoſing the King,
the noble City of Leiceſter was befieged, and ruin d formerly Leire ; of which name, there is a
by King Henry, and the wall which ſeem'd indiſſo-
luble, thrown down to the very foundation, quite
round. Let me add out of the ſaid Leſſer Hi-

ſtory, That the walls (being faulty in the foundati-
ons) when they were undermin d, and the props burnt

| foot high, and called it his Novum one, vul- -

that ſupported them, ſell in great pieces, which re-
main to this day in the ſhape of rocks, for bigneſs * Mag,
and ſolidity ; ſuch was the indiſſoluble firmneſs of the ru The
morter. Miſerable was the condition of theſe 1255.
Citizens at that time, both in relation to their
Fines and Baniſhment ; who; having with a
ſum of Money purchas'd licence to depart, were
notwithſtanding ſo terrify'd, that they took
Sanctuary at St. Albans — St. Edmundsbury, Al-

ſo, the Caſtle here, which was a large and
ſtrong building, was diſmantled. It vas the
Court of the great Henry Duke of LancafFer ;
who added to it (by computation ) twenty ſix
Acres of ground which he encloſed with a ve-

ry ſtrong wall of ſquare-Stone, at leaſt eighteen

garly now, the Newark, where the beſt Houſes
in or near Leiceſter are, and do {till remain
Extra-Parochial, as being under Caſtle-guard,
by an ancient Grant from the Crown, The
all of this Palace, and the Kitchen, are pre- :
ſerved entire, by which a gueſs may be given 3
at the whole ; the former being ſo lofty and ;
ſpacious, that the Courts of-Juſtice, when the 8
Aſſizes are held there, are at ſuch a diſtance as
to give no diſturbance to each other. There f
are ſeveral Gate-ways to enter this Palace ;
but that whick faces the eaſt, is eſteemed a
curious piece of Architecture, for its noble
Arch ; over which, in the Tower, is kept the
Magazine for the Militia of the County.

Beneath this Caſtle, is a very fair Collegiate
Hoſpital ; in the Church whereof, Henry Earl of
Lancaſter, and Henry of Lancaſter, his ſon, who was
the firſt Duke of Lancaſter, lie buried. Which
Duke, in his old Age, piouſly built and dedicated 1336
the ſame, for the maintenance of poor people. Of
this, Henry Knighton of Leiceſterſhire, wholiv'd
in that age, writes as follows : Henry Duke of
| Lancaſter was the firſt founder of the Collegiate Church
and Hoſpital without the Southgate at Leiceſter, in
which he placed a Dean and twebve Canons Preben-
daries, with as many Vicars, and other miniſters, « \jnits,
one hundred poor and- weak People, and ten able
women to ſerve and aſſiſt the fick and weak ; and
he ſufficiently endow'd the ſaid Hoſpital. | This,
with divine Service therein, doth in ſome mea-
ſure {till ſubſiſt, by certain Stipends paid out
of the Dutchy of Lancaſter, together with di-
vers new Charities ; and there is another Hoſ-
pital built by Sir William ¶Migſton, a Merchant
of the Staple in this Town, in the reign of
King Henry the eighth, which is in a very
proſperous dice ö
n the other ſide of the Town, amongſt
pleaſant meadows water d by the Soar, was a
Monaſtery, call'd from its ſituation, f De pra- ner
tis ; of which the foreſaid Knighton writes
thus: Robert Je Boſſu, Earl of Leiceſter, founded 1141,
the Monaſtery of S. Mary de Prees of Leiceſter, and
richly endou d the ſame with lands, poſſeſſions, and
Revenues ; himſelf alſo, with conſent of Amicia his
wife, became a Canon Regular in the ſame, and fif-
teen years ſery'd God there in the habit of a Regu-
lar; and dyd in the Lord, a Canon. This his |
taking upon him the Canonical habit, was by 4
way of penance, for having been in arms a- J
gainſt his Prince. What name Leiceſter had in !
the times of the Romans, does not appear. 1
think, it is called in the Catalogue of Ninni- J
us, Caer Lerion : ſand Mr. Somner ſaith, it had
its name from the river, now called Soar, but

*
ö

gl F

” 4 *
W

” _ - __ _h * * — 2 " b * *
* n . 3 tanks, 9 „ e ho — — 9 u ha * * >
EAA ee es eee tes

Town, which ſtands near the head of it.] But
that it was built by the fabulous King Lerr,
let who will believe for me. It's ſituation on
the Military-way call'd the Foſſe, and its di-
ſtance from the Bennones [High- croſs! and Ve-

1 | rometum

122%

De pre

14}

_ * : -
,

8

5
*

6 * 2 = * * _ 6 9 of * * * — 22 2 * * Y _ * ; * PY 4 . 1
7 0 : _ 1 8 2 7 > p 2 p >> La Eta F * E
6 „* K E

1

LEICESTERSHIRE.

ts. — tet thi *

Natæ.

Gale, Itin-

» *% + .
N. oo

*

rometum | Burrow-hill| agree ſo exactly with
the deſcription of Antoninus, that I cannot but
believe, that this is the Rate, which in Pto-
lemy is call'd Rage ; though there is not the
leaſt footſtep of the word Rate remaining, un-
leſs it be in the name of an old trench ſcarce
half a mile diſtant from the South-gate of
Leiceſter, call'd Rawdikes, [and in Ratby three
miles from Leiceſter, too far remote trom the
Roman Foſſe, and without any marks of An-
tiquity. But (not to mention, that Fern, call'd
in Celtick, as Dioſcorides ſays, Ratis, and in
Britiſh Rhedyn, grows hereabouts in abundance)
that conjecture, grounded upon the fituation,
and diſt ance, is much confirmed by ſeveral

ieces of Roman Antiquities which have been
diſcover'd here. As 1ſt, An ancient Temple,
dedicated (as is ſuppos d) to Janus; which
had a Flamen or High-prieſt reſident here : an
argument whereof, 1s the great ſtore of bones
of beaſts (which were ſacrific d) that have been
dug-up. On this account, that place in the
Town is call'd Holy-bones ; where are ſome ru-
ins of ancient brick-work remaining. It is
ſaid, that the Church of S. Nicholas was built
out of the ruins of it; and indeed the con-
je&ure receives ſome ſtrength from hence, that
the preſent 1 many rows and pieces
of ancient bricks about it. 2. Another conſi-
derable piece of Antiquity was diſcover'd in
this Town by an Inhabitant, who ſeverzl years
ago was digging for a Cellar ; and the work-
men were very careful to have it preſerv'd.
It has been thought by many, to be the Fa-
ble of Acton, chiefly from it's having on it
a Creature with the A of a Stag; but that
appears to be only a Monſter with a Stag's
head. The figures, are, a Cupid with his
Bow drawn, and a Man with one of his Arms
about a Monſter's neck, as going to kiſs it ;
and the whole is indeed the Repreſentation
of that Fable, which feigns Venus to revenge
her ſelf upon one who had found fault with
her, by engaging her ſon Cupid to make him
fall in love with a Monſter. It is wrought
with little Stones, ſome white, and others of
a cheſnut Colour ; and is a very rare piece.
The Cellar is near the Elm-ttees, not far from
All-Saint's Church, and few Travellers of cu-
rioſity paſs by that way, without a fight of it.
3. There have been found here Medals and Coin,
in great abundance, both of ſilver and copper;
of Veſpaſian, Domitian, Trajan, Antonine, and
others. 4. Near the Town, ſomewhat deep
in the ground, was found a piece of work of
ſtone, arch'd over ; the ſtones very ſmall, abour
an inch long, and half an inch broad and thick,
finely jointed together with a thin mortar, It was
in length about five or fix yards, and in breadth
about four ; and the roof cover'd with a ſquare
kind of quarry, with ſmall earthen pipes therein.
This (as Mr. Burton thinks) was a Stouphe
or Hot-houſe to bathe in ; for Vitruvius tells
us, that the Romans growing by degrees wealthy
and wanton, made uſe of theſe hot bathes to
purge and clarifie themſelves. Not unlike this,
is a later diſcovery which hath been made, of
a Room twelve foot deep; the Walls of which

were finely painted, and in it were two
Chimnies. (a)

8

The Church of St. Margaret's, is a noble and
elegant Structure, and is famous for a Ring
of ſix Bells of ſo melodious a ſound and exact
notes, that they are reputed not inferior to
any. in the Kingdom. The chief Buſineſs of
Leiceſter, is the Stocking-Trade, of which there
hath been, for ſome years, an uſualreturn made
of ſixty thouſand pounds per amm.

Here, I am at a ſtand, and look about me
to ſee what Way I ſhall follow, as my guide
to the ancient Towns. Ranulph the Monk
of Cheſter tells us, that the old Street-way goes
from hence to Lincoln through the Waſts ;
but through what Maſts he tells us not. The
vulgar opinion 1s, that it went-on to the north,
through Nottinghamſhire ; but Antoninus the
Emperor (it I miſtake not) ſeems to intimate
that it went northward through this County
into Lincolnſhire. And this way, the footſteps
of Antiquity appear in ſome places, of which
we ſhall ſpeak in their order : but, that way,
though I have made diligent ſearch, I have not
hitherto diſcover'd any ſuch thing; what o-
thers may have done, I know not.

Near this place, is Grooby, a rich and ample Grooby.
Manour ; which from Hugh Grantnaiſmill (whom V+ Burton,
William the firſt had enrich'd with great reve-P 22.
nues) deſcended by the Earls of Leiceſter and
the Quincys to the family of the Ferrars ; of
which family, the Lords Ferrars of Grooby, for Ferrars and
a long time enjoy'd the honour of Barons ; but — og
at laſt leaving one only daughter, Jabella, ſhe 2
by marriage convey'd the ſame to the Greys,
from whom it came again to the Crown b
Attainder. But the moſt potent Prince, While Iam
King James [the firſt] reſtor'd Sir Henry Grey, 828
a Knight of great worth, to this honour of >
his Anceſtors, having before his Coronation
created him Baron Grey of Grooby ; [whoſe grand-
ſon of the ſame name was by King Charles the
firſt advanced to the higher dignity of Earl of
Stamford.

About ſeven miles north from Leiceſter, on
the Foſſe-way, is a ſmall round bill, ſuppoſed
to be one of the Roman Tumuli, and well known
to Travellers by the name of Seg-hill, or Sex-Segs-bill.
hill, there being ſix Pariſhes which center at
that hill, and ſet the marks of their Pariſh-
bounds there. |

Let us now return to the river Har; which,
having paſs'd by Leiceſter, [runs by Thurcaſton, Thurcaſton;
famous for the birth of that good Prelate and
devout Martyr Hugh Latimer ; where the Inha-
bitants pretend to ſhew ſome remainder of the
Houſe in which he was born, or at leaſt the
very Place where it ſtood. Then, the Soar]
giveth name to Montſorel, or rather Mont-Soar- Mont-Sore:
hill, a compound of Norman and Engliſh. It hill.
is now only noted for its market [kept on
Mondays, and a yearly Fair upon the 29th of
June, St. Peter's day ; Colon granted by King
Edward the firſt in the twentieth year of his
reign, to Nicholas de Segrave the elder.] But
heretofore it was moſt famous for a Caſtle,
ſeated on a ſteep and craggy hill, and hanging
over the river, This, firſt belong'd to the Earls
of Leiceſter, and afterwards to Saber de Ouincy,

Earl of Wincheſter, in the Barons war : At this

day, it is nothing but a heap of rubbiſh. For Hiſtor. mi-
in the year 1217. being taken after a long vor.

—

—

(a) With the Antiquities of this place, we muſt take notice of a memorable Epitaph in the Church of St.
Martin's here, over Mr. Jobs Heyrick, who dy'd the 2d of April, ay aged 76. He liv'd in one houſe with
Mary his wife full fifty two years; and in all that time never bury'd man, woman, nor child, though ſome-
times twenty in family, The ſaid Mary liv'd to ninety ſeven years, and ſaw before her death (Dec. $, 1611.)
of her children, and children's children, and their children, to the number of one hundred forty three,

Yyy ſiege,

$245 waly —— 2 Lad 2
—— — 64 2 — —_ COL EO To

+
. _—_—
ABC ITY AX”. H *

——

— —
— _ — — =
5 — — v— — —
F Py No — ages — £5407

*
—
— —-— —
n

— -”

— —_—_—
— —
W

=
—

* . -
AE — — —

—

*

* _ 8 . A -"—_
*
— "A 0
SS
Bis _
A we — 8
: - 0 —

— _e # 4

20 —
2 2 * 2

539

CORITANT.

| —

Bradgate.

Ratclif,

ſiege, the Inhabitants pull'd it down to the
ground as a eſt of the Devil, and a den of
Thieves and Robbers. ¶ Not far from whence, on
this ſide, is Bradgate, the ſeat of Thomas Grey
Earl of Stamford, and Baron Grey of Grooby ;
and on the other ſide of the river, Ratcliff, where
is an uncommon Tumulus, which ſeems to be
the Monument of ſome Daniſh King ; not on-
ly becauſe the Danes are known to have been
much converſant in thoſe parts, but alſo be-
cauſe the figure of it (which is Jong, whereas
theſe Tumuli are generally round,) agrees with
the account which Olaus Wormius gives of the
Sepulchers of the moſt ancient Daniſh Kings,
That they were made ad magnitudinem & figuram
Carine maxima navis Regia, in bigneſs and ſhape

+ Higher, C. like the Keel of a large Ship. f Lower, on
2 er ſide, the “ ſame ſide of the river, | is Barrow, where

Barrow.
|| Calx,

Loughbor-

row.

Burton, pag.
131,

| houſhold. | But upon her death, who

is dug the firmeſt and moſt approv'd ſort of
Lime for building. [In this Town is an Hoſ-
pital, newly erected by Theophils Cave, and
Humfrey Babington, and alſo well endowed ; for
the old Batchelors and Widowers of this Pa-
riſn and that of Quarendon adjoyning.| A
few miles from thence, the Soar ends its courſe
in the river Trent ; a little below Loughborrow,
a Market-rown, which, in the reign of Queen
Mary, had one Baron, Edward Haſtings, digni-
fy'd with this title. [It was the ancient inhe-
ritance of the noble family of the Deſpenſers,
who obtain'd the privilege of a weekly Mar-
ket, with certain Fairs to be kept here. But
upon the Death and Attainder of Hugh le
Deſpenſer, Earl of Wincheſter, the 19th of
Edward the 2d, it was forfeited to the Crown,
and granted by K. Edward the third to Hen-
ry Lord Beaumont in General-tail ; in whoſe
poſterity it continu'd, till William Viſcount
Beaumont, being in the battle of Touton-field,
on the fide of King Henry the ſixth, was at-
tainted of High Treaſon 1 Edw. 4, and the
manour granted to William Lord e But
the Viſcount Beaumont was reſtor'd to it by
King Henry the ſeventh, and upon the At-

tainder of Viſcount Lovel his ſucceſſor, it re-

turn'd to the Crown. The 19th of Henry the
eighth, the Marquiſs of Dorſet obtain'd a
you of it; but upon the Attainder of his
on Henry Duke of Suffolk, 2 Mar. it was for-
feited to the Queen, who granted it to Ed-
ward Lord Haſtings of Loughborough, from whom
it directly deſcended to the preſent Earl of
Huntingdon. This Edward was third ſon to
George, Earl of Huntingdon, and did great
Services to Queen Mary by the forces which
he had rais'd, on the death of King Edward
the ſixth, to oppoſe the Lady Jane Grey. He
was firſt made Maſter of her Horſe, and was
of her Privy Council, and Knight of the moſt
noble Order of the Garter. Having obtain'd
the Grant of rhis Manour, amongſt others,
he was created Lord Haſtings of this place,
and made Lord Chamberlain to that .

ad a
great affection for him, he, cloy'd with this
world, refus'd to live longer in it, and devo-
ting himſelf wholly to. God, retir'd into the
Hoſpital which he had erected at Stoke Pogeis
in Buckinghamſhire ; where he liv'd very pi-
ouſly, among the poor People, and with them
finiſh'd his courſe devoutly in Chriſt. [Since
his death, it has given the ſame title to Henry
Haſtings Eſquire, ſecond fon to Henry Earl of
Huntingdon, who was a perſon of great valour
and military conduct; and the firſt that ap-
pear'd in arms on the behalf of King Charles
the firſt, conducted the Queen from Burling-

|

$40
ton to Oxford, and planted divers garriſons with —
his own forces, and particularly that of Al
de Ia Zouch in this County; and, as a reward
for his extraordinary ſervice, was 19 Car, 1.
advanc d to the dignity of a Peer of this Realm;
by the title of Baron of Loughborough. He de-
parted this life unmarried at London, 18 Jan,
1666, in the 55th year of his age, and was
bury'd in the Collegiate-Chapel-Royal of St.
George in Windſor-caſtle.

That this Loughborough was that royal Vill
(in the Saxon tongue call'd Lieganbupge [by
the Saxon Annals Lygeanbuph, and Lyzean- | ometum.
bypig, by Florenee, Liganbuph, by later wri- „It Charn
ters Lienberig and Lienberi,)| which Marianus Fey, Dr. Gale
ſays, Cuthultus took from the Britains in the | uren bil
year of Chriſt 572 ; the affinity of the names _—
does in ſome ſort evince. But yet this may
ſeem to draw Cuthwulf too far out of his road;
the very next Town that he took, being Ailes-
bury ; which favours the Opinion of thoſe, who
chuſe rather to place it at Leighton in Bedford-
ſhire ; ſince it may juſtly be wonder'd, that
between this Town and Ailesbury (in ſo large
a ſpace) he ſhould not make an attempt upon
any other.] Ar preſent, this is juſtly eſteem'd
the ſecond Town of the County, next to Lei-
ceſter, as well in reſpect of its bigneſs and
buildings, as the pleaſant woods about it. For
near the Town, the foreſt of Charnwood, or Chi
Charley, * ſpreads it ſelf f a great way. With- *
in the bounds whereof is Beaumanour Park, * 20 nils
which the Lords Beaumont enclos'd (as I have comes, 1
heard) with a ſtone-wall. Theſe Lords were! n
deſcended (as is commonly believ d) from af.
French family : certain it is, that they come
from John de Brenne King of Jeruſalem, and that
they firſt ſettled in England about the reign
of Edward , the firſt; and, by marriage with
the daughter of Alexander Comyn, Earl of Bog-
han in Scotland (whoſe mother was one of the
heirs of Roger de Quincy, Earl of Wincheſter)
they got a very plentiful Eſtate, and became a
large Family, Of which family, in the reign viert
of Edward the third, Henry was for ſeveral Beaumort,
years ſummoned to Parliament by the name of
Earl of Boghan; and in the reign of Henry 6, Joln
was for a time Conſtable of England, and the firſt
in England (that I know of) whom the King ad- The & b
vanc'd to the honour of a Viſcount. But when nora Vis
William the laſt Viſcount dy'd without ifſue, cut in E-
his ſiſter was married to the Lord Lovel; and lire.
the whole inheritance, which was large, was
afterwards confiſcate for High Treaſon.

In this north part nothing elſe occurs worth
mentioning, unleſs it be a ſmall Nunnery foun-
ded by Roifia de Verdon, and call'd Grace- dieu,
that is, God's grace : And not far from thence,
by the Trent, Dunnington, an ancient Caſtle, Dunningros
built by the firſt Earls of Leiceſter, which at-
terwards came to John Lacy Earl of Lincoln,
who procur'd for it the privilege of a Market
and a Fair. But when, in the proſcription of
the Barons under Edward the ſecond, the poſ-
ſeſſions of the proſcribed were alienated and
divided, the King gave this Manour to Hugh
le Deſpenſer the younger; [whoſe father, Hugh le
Deſpenſer the elder, King Edward the ſecond
created Earl of Wincheſter, But 1 Edw. 3.
Henry Earl of Lancaſter obtain'd a Reverſal
of his brother's Attainder, together with a
reſtitution of his eſtate ; of which this Caſtle
and Manour was a part, Afterwards, deſcen-
ding to King Henry the fourth, it became par-
cel of the Dutchy of Lancaſter, and fo conti-
nu'd till the reign of Queen Elizabeth: when
Robert Earl of Eſſex, having obtain d a grant of

Verrome-
7

tam, or Ve

bin.

| Fernometu m,
| what it ſign
tes in the o
Gauliſh,

the

N ;
W' 2.crow-bill, toninus, were twelve miles, and there are al-

=
1

harnwool
reſt,

0 miles in
npaſs, Lt,
3

59.

1:counts
2Umont,

he firl be
rary Vit
unt in En

and,

unningtos

: —

! 4 rnome» * . *
1 — or Ve · have been ſituated in that place which is now
| rometum.

* 1 mile from the Town of Burrow : | For be-
337 I;

Þ + Eighteen, of the walls, which encloſed about ſ twelve acres
C. of land, ſ with a riſing in the middle of it. The

ö * Reſtibilie. joyning.| At this day, it is “ arable ground,

ſenemetum, With that of the Britains, Pernometum ſignifies

| what it ſigni- @ great and ſpacious Temple, as Venantius For-
fes in the old

LEICEST

ERSHIRE, 1

the Park, did, in the latter end of that Queen's
reign, ſell the ſame to George Earl of Hunting-
don, which is now the inheritance of the pre-
ſent Earl.

The eaſt part of this County, which is hilly,
and feedeth a vaſt number of Sheep, was here-
rofore adorned with two principal places of
great note; Vernometum, or Verometum, men-
tion'd by Antoninus ; and Burton-Lazers, of
great account in former ages.

Vernometum, having loſt its name, ſeems to

call'd * Burrow-hill, and Erdburrow, | near half
between Ferometum and Rats, according to An-

moſt ſo many between this place and Leiceſter.
The preſent name alſo of Burrou, comes from
Buppb, which ſignify' d among the Saxons a
fortify'd place. But the moſt conſiderable proof
is, that the ground is a ſteep hill, on all ſides
but the ſouth-eaſt ; on the top of which, re-
main the plain footſteps of a Town [or a Tem-
ple] deſtroy df a double trench, and the track

ſaid ditch and track are pretty plain: The en-
trance into it, both now and anciently, was
from the Eaſt and by South. There are two
banks caſt- up about ten yards in length, and
five or fix in diſtance one from the other; where
the Portal appears to have been, and where
the entrance 1s partly level from the field ad-

and noted on this account, chiefly, that the
youth of the neighbouring parts meet here year-
ly for wreſtling, and ſuch like exerciſes; [and it
hath a very pleaſant proſpe&, eſpecially to the |
weſt.] One would imagine from the name,
that ſome Temple of the Heathen Gods had
formerly ſtood in this place, For in the anci-
ent Language of the Gauls, which was the ſame

tunatus expreſsly tells us of Vernometum a Town
in France, in theſe Verſes in his firſt Book
of Poems :

Gaulifh,

Nomine Vernometum voluit vocitare ve-
tuſtas,

Quod quaſi famum ingens Gallica lingua
ſonat.

The Gauls, when Pernomet they call'd the
place,

Did a great Temple by the word expreſs.

And the interpretation of a great Temple
ſeems toanſwer the appearance of theplaceexceed-
ing well; for if we view it more nearly, there
do not ſo much appear the marks of a Town
demoliſh'd, as ſome particular great building ;
and rather a Temple than any other, to which
the ſeveral adjacent Colonies might convenient-
ly reſort.)

Burton-La- As for Burton, call'd for diſtinction Laxers,
— from Lazers (ſo they nam'd the Elephantiaci or
on, P. 83. Lepers 3) it was a rich Hoſpital, to the Ma-
{ter of which all the leſſer Lazer-houſes in En-
gland were in ſome ſort ſubjeR, as he himſelf
was to the Maſter of the Lazers of Jeruſalem.
It is ſaid to have been built in the beginning
of the Norman times, by a general colle&ion
throughout England, but chiefly by the aſſi-
ſtance of the Mowbrays. [(Leland faith, it was
tounded by the Lord Mowbray, for a Maſter
and eight A which did profeſs the Or-

der of St. Auſtin, about the reign of King
t

54:2
Henry the firſt.)] For about that time, the
Leproſie (by ſome call'd Elephantiaſis) ran by Leproſie in
infection over all England. And it is believ'd, England,
that the diſeaſe firſt came into this Iſland out
of Egypt : which more than once had ſpread
it felt into Europe; firſt, in the days of Pom-
pey the Great; afterwards under Heraclius, and
at other times, as may be ſeen in Hiſtory ;
but never (fo far as I have read) did it before
that time appear in England.

After theſe places of greater fame, we ought
not to omit Melton- Mowbray, near Burton : It Melton-
is a Market-town | (the moſt conſiderable for Mowbray:
Cattle in this part of England, )] ſo named from
the Mowbrays heretofore Lords thereof, where-
in nothing 1s more worthy of Obſervation;
than the beautiful Church; [which, the form
(like a Croſs,) together with the Stalls in the
Chancel, the place for hanging the Veſtments
of the Prieſts, the Organ-caſe remaining, and
other Monuments of Religious Antiquity, do
ſufficiently manifeſt to have been tormerly
Collegiate. And it had a Chantry for about
fourteen Prieſts ; but where that ſtood, is not
ealily diſcernible at ſuch a diſtance of time. Near
this place, is Stapleſord, the ſeat of Bennet Earl Stapleſord.

{of Harborow ; to whom alſo it gives the title

of Viſcount.] Nor muſt we omit Sheffington, Sheffington,
more remote, to the ſouth ; which as it hath

given name to a famous family, ſo hath it re-

ceiv'd fame and reputation from the ſame.

Leiceſterſhire hath been always famous for Earls of Lei-
it's Earls, perſons of very great note. And incefer,
regard that in the Saxon times its Earls were |
hereditary, I will firſt name them in their or-
der, according to the information given me by
Thomas Talbot (a perſon very well skill'd in
matters of Antiquity) our of the Publick Records,

In the time of Æthelbald, King of the Merci- * An accurate
ans, in the year of our Lord 716, Leofric was Succeſſion of
Earl of Leiceſter ; to whom ſucceeded, in a right 2 *
line, Algarus 1. Algarus 2. Leofric 2. Leof Han, .
Leofric 3. who was bury'd at Coventry; Alga- Antiquities of
rus 3. Who had iſſue two ſons, Eadwin Earl of Cheſhire.
March, and Morkar Earl of Northumberland;

and one daughter, Lucy, firſt marry'd to ſoo

Talboys of Anjou, and afterwards to Roger de

Romara, by whom ſhe had William de Romara

Earl of Lincoln. 'The male-line of this Saxon

family being thus extin&, and the Saxon name

no longer regarded, Robert de Bellomonte, or

Beaumont, a Norman, Lord of Pont-Audomar,

and Earl of Mellent, did, upon the death of

Simon Earl of Leiceſter, obtain a Grant of this

County, by the favour of King Henry the firſt,

in the year of our Lord 1102. He was amatr, xs...
of great learning, eloquent, ſubtle, prudent, and in his Epiſtle
witty ; but while he liv'd in great ſplendor and de conten-
glory, his wife was entic d from him by another temptu mun-
Earl; and ſo in his old age he became troubled di.

in mind, and fell into a deep melancholy. To him

ſucceeded his ſon, ſirnam'd Boſſu for diſtinction;

his grandſon, ſirnam'd Blanchemaines ; and his
great-grandſon, Fitz-Parnel ; all, Roberts. Of

which, the laſt (who was call'd Fitz-Parnel

from his mother Petronilla or Parnel, daughter

and coheir of the laſt Hugh Grant-maiſuill) dy'd got. in Theſ,

without iſſue. A few years after, Simon de Scacc.
Montfort (deſcended from a baſtard-ſon of Ro-

bert King of France) who had marry'd the ſi-

ſter of _ Fitz-Parnel, en ack þ this honour.

But he, and his, being f expell'd in the year

1200, Ranulph Earl of Cheſter obtain'd — TIP =
dignity, not by hereditary right, but by the fa- x
vour of his Prince. Yet, atterwards Simon de
Montfort, ſon of the aforeſaid Simon, obtain'd .

the Earldom ; Almaric his elder brother having
relinquiſh'd his right before Henry the _

94K „ 1 : —B 2 — —

Tu
— ww — ”
— © - —

3

——

2

————̃ͤͤ———

* 22

* * > = -
rr

—

4 wo—— - 0 as

—
—

— —
—

. 3 2 W 8 8

CORITANI on rl

See Foveſhamly oblig d him) by blowing up the ſtorms of
in Worceſter-a Civil war, wit

ſhire,

In the great
Regiſter of
the Dutchy

of Lancalter,

Rutland, why

ſo call'd.

4."

So great and unlimited was the favour of — of Leiceſter. Who dying without iſſue, this ho-

Henry the third to this man, that he recall d

nour came to John of Gaunt Duke of Lanca-

him from his baniſhment out of France, load-| iter, who had marry d Blaxche + the ſecond li- 4
ed him with riches, and honour'd him with|ſter of Maud. From which time it was uni-
the County of Leiceſter, and his own fiſter|red to the Houſe of Lancaſter, till it was “ re- In

in marriage. But being thus overwhelmed with

viv'd in Robert Dudley, whom Queen Elizabeth, Membray,

kindneſs, and in no condition to make a re-|in the fixth year of her reign, made Earl of ©
turn ( ſuch is the villany of ſome men,) he] Leiceſter, by the ceremony of girding with a
began to hate his benefactor; and occaſion d | ſword. Him the United Provinces (being
great troubles to the King (who had ſo high- deeply engag d in wars) unanimouſly choſe to

manage their Government, and ſoon caſt-off

h the rebellious Barons; in| again and rejected; after which, he finiſh'd this

which himſelf, at laſt, was ſlain. His honours|lite, anno 1588. [Some years after his death
and poſſeſſions were conter'd by the conqueror King James the firſt created Robert Sidney, Vie.

ing Henry the third, on his younger ſon Ed-
— call'd Crouch-back, Earl of Lancaſter.
From thence, this title lay drown'd for a long
time among thoſe of the Lancaſtrian family ;
and Maud, daughter of Henry Duke of Lan-
caſter, being marry'd to William of Bavaria,
Earl of Hanault, Holland, Zeland, Cc. added
to his other titles this of Leiceſter. For in
a Charter of the 35th year of Edward the third,
he is expreſsly nam'd Milliam Earl of Henhaud
and Leiceſter. And accordingly in an Inquiſt-
tion, 36 Edw. 3. ſhe, by the name of Dutcheſs
of Bavaria, held the Caſtle, Manour, and Honour

count Liſle ( deſcended from a ſiſter of the laſt
Robert) Earl of Leiceſter. To him ſucceeded
Robert his ſon, who had by the Lady Dorothy
daughter to Henry Earl of Northumberlang.
Philip, his heir and ſucceſſor in this dignity.
Philip marrying Katharine, daughter of the
Earl of Salisbury, had by her Robert, who
ſucceeded. in the ſame honour, and left it to
Philip his ſon ; who, dying two years after his
Father, left the title to John his brother, the
preſent Earl. |

| Within this County are 200 Pariſh-Churches,

_ RUTLANDS HIRE.

UTLAND, in Saxon Rode-
land, is in a manner encom-
paſs'd with Leiceſterſhire ; un-
leſs to the ſouth, where it lies
on the river Welland, and to
the eaſt, where it borders on
the County of Lincoln. It 1s
no way inferior to Leiceſterſhire, either in rich-
neſs of ſoil, or pleaſantneſs; but only in ex-
tent, in which reſpe& ir is much inferior ; be-
ing the leaſt County in England. It's form is
almoſt circular, and contains in compaſs as
much ground as a good horſeman may ride
round in one day, Hence it 1s, that the peo-
ple of this Country have a ſtory of I know
not what King, who gave to one Rut as much
land as he could ride about in a day ; and that
he riding round this County within the time
aſſign'd, had it thereupon given him, and call'd
it after his own name. But let ſuch fables
vaniſh : we will not injure truth with theſe
idle fancies. In regard therefore, that the
earth of this County is ſo red that it colours
the fleeces of the ſheep ; and conſidering that
the Saxons call'd a red colour Roet and Rad ;
why may we not believe that Rutland was ſo
nam'd, as if one ſhould ſay Red-land ? So the

Poet ſays, Conveniunt rebus nomina ſepe ſuis. ſignifying no more than eeper of the County. |
i. e. There's often an agreement between Names

and Things.

Several places, in all nations, have been na-|County, and divides it into two parts. In

med from redneſs : as Rutlan-Caſtle in Wales, built

on a red ſhore ; the Red Promontory; the Red Sea ſon a riſing- ground, from whence it had it's
between Egypt and Arabia; Erytheia, in Ionia, name; [tho', indeed, the riſing is very ſmall,
and abundance of other inſtances, which evince|and ſcarce amounts to a hill.] It is not me-
the ſame thing. There is therefore no occa-|morable for any thing beſides a well-frequented

account, how this came by a Latin name, more
than the other Counties of England. The Con-
quelt could not bring it in, becauſe we find
it call'd ſo in the time of Edward the Confeſ-
ſor ; and beſides, ſo much of it as belong'd to
Northamptonſhire (to which the name Roteland
was given, before the reſt came to be part of
it) is far from making a circular figure, how
round ſoever it may be, when all together.]
This little Tra& ſeems to have made a
County but of late days; for in the time of
Edward the Confeſſor, it was reckon'd part
of Northamptonſhire : And our Hiſtorians who
wrote before the laſt three hundred years, men-
tion not this in the number of the Counties.
[But that it was diſtin& before, is certain;
for in the fifth year of King John, Jſabel his
new Queen had, at her Coronation, aſſign'd
her in Parliament for her dowry, among other
lands, Com. Roteland. & vilam de Rokingham . wrigy,
in Com. Northampt. &c. And in the 12" of pag..
King John, the Cuſtos did account for the pro-
fits of this County in the Exchequer. Which
Cuſtos can ſignify nothing but the Sheriff of
the County, who was and ſtill is as it were
a Guard; and his office is imply'd in his name
5cype-Zepepa, from which Sheriff is contracted,

Waſh or Guaſb, a little 1iver, runs from weſt vd, ri.
to eaſt, almoſt through the middle of this

the hither, or ſouth diviſion, ſtands Uppingham yygingu®

ſion to have recourſe to fables for this Etymo-|market, and a handſom ſchool, which (as alſo
logy. [Bur it is affirm'd by ſome, that there|another at Okeham) Robert Fohnſon a Divine, to
is no ſuch redneſs in this County, as to di- promote the Liberal Education of youth,

ſtinguiſh it ſo remarkably from others, And þ
if this derivation is not to be admitted; nei- ther with two Hoſpitals, one at Okeham, and er

erected out of certain contributions; [ toge-* Lat)

ther is that other of Rotelandia, quaſi Rotunda-|another at this place.]

landia, to pafs, till we can give ſome probable

1 Below

— 3

—

—— — * — m

— —— — — q—]dü—2D— —— —— E__
2

IJ N ROE DET I

*
* 5 *
- - * _
. {
Y
*
.
x
.
*
= 4
* *
Ts xs
2 *W
— %
— e N. j *
— .
s {\YA®D
*
»
*
s
*
5 ke . n N — _ n _ R G
pots EOS ee * nn 2 r r
A* a
SE T WIC 2 * Py *

2
—

3

1 8 *
. P ˙— . —__ ——__—
- 4 7 _ a — LF 5 |
- A. — * —

£70f Time 2

rel

XILSTor

, Fi * Hr H \ J

« Hark Overton * <

| Greeth,, 7 .
KS

Hvg JR ED

I Wl

nt an.

2

HB .

—
E ol HOWTO

4 angha "t

2

| IE 5
1 A
— .
FF
* — d

pins .

42
Zaunbleton

AARTINSESLEY
2 hr e. as .
. zun

2 17 mon .

rum
a

The Old

Let L edge
———

- —

HuNDRED

0 Foreſt

&,
—

F. , . Pry 5
Prdling to! { —

Fg
Le,

Hu Nor RED

br Aon F N rnd
\\ * . F/ ot
8 Aub \

— * 43 are

A

| Fnrtler -

„
\ * Dan mont
0

17

. „ 22 O oh 17
Luullinglon —

ueber
0

4
w <9
-
-* *
—_ = -%
FR > *
— *
« * x
„ — $4 o
SS 0 N —
2
2 „0 = —
*
2
<4

56 *

— 1 Scale of” os

Dosyse

1 n

| *
go m . from London. | 145 12g =

. Cas as.

„

>
PI, Trellon 2 tockk ng

0 off

*

2 ham * bs

Ok. Soalk *
"a ra 2. *

\ ArsTor
do.

Str ollon

—
44

"Pubrorth o

*

A vt five mil. .
* .

-
a. %
*,

bg. *54
wn Sig,
*6s,, Pos
*. ”
* *
* *
*

hy.
9 ihe
*

Emping ” 97 1

* 5 F Gua flu:

*.
—

N itchley
{ a. Y / Zi und, þ
Nor: Hei fr g ; . * a
manton \ Ho 2 |
MARTINSILEY the Quarries

w E

Ae < Hon

—

F< | 21 1 |
4 Berth E. gen, 2 9 1

2
a. . e Soulh

7 L.n gonham

2

12 WRraNnGDpi K E. Lia e
1 F
. Warcot

8 Paromden k

HuxDpRED

ORTITAMPLTON

WP
*

[1rman .

Sold by

Nl | J|
— ——— 2 ph
| | 140: | 4 5 ——

Rrall

WR 2 22 ue, "It

4 Fo 7. —
nogr ap ham

* . chiales er- 1

Page mmer

Goes vel loca dev
Ohin Wille ITT

—'
— Doenotantur
8. 4 4

Zfcnd:n N

Part of

EAST

V 1

{ol thor | LINCOLN

SHITRE

* 5
* *
990
* 1
— .
.

*
.
SDSz4 6

* *
Ss *
220

Burley
by Stamford

A Tabula] Nova
\

A. Swale
A. Churchil

c & Partner.

C

{

4

h now ;
„C.
|

|

at
ded

1
8. c. 3

1505.

Digby
H
$4 Call'd L
Cromwel
Wimbled:
Stat. 3

+

dran
EL ydington-

Ad

x 0 TOR "IFC IT 1
N. e n

r =? WEED

|

=y — —ͤ—ñ—ũʒůj—ͤ——— — — — —ü—
* —— —— — — AO —
—— — I —
— — 8
— — ——
- — — my om —_— — — 8
FP ”
* — —
— > — —
— — e — b
Na
. - 1 . * . 1 — "WERE 3
. * ; 4 N a | |
* - T _ — y "— — _ | | | | | ;
. 2 * —„v nage _ 3 . do —< — 4 |
bs — 1 - ——— — * pe
| mY --
— ”-

i -
m— >

yen — nr — _ : | —

*
y

F
=
,
E

—
=
—

545

8

5 -
# % * 1

RUTLANDSHIRE ©

W pighy-

lich dow an eternal mark of infamy, by conſpiring with

l branded, C.

1505.
Ir ligron.

A By one Jil-
ſn

F

| þ Wright,
© P90

f
1

Cromwell of

Wimbledon,
Fut. 31
H. 8. c. 3,

FF

4 .
E Pry-Stokes
3
1

Below Uppingham, ſtands Dry-Stoke, which I |of 30 7 per . It is all in being, but ©:

Digbies : which Everard Digby + branded with of the old Caſtle-wall, there grows Dane-weed,
fam which comes up every ſpring, and dies in the

thoſe wretched Incendiaries, who had deſign d, | fall.] ; g
by one ſingle charge of Gunpowder, to have de-
ſtroy'd both their Prince and their Country.
(But from his eldeſt ſon, Sir Kenelm Digby, a] beneath. This f was the magni
rſon of diſtinguiſh'd worth and learning, it|the Harringtons, who, by marriage with the
bath ſince receiv'd great honour. daughter and heir of Colepeper, came to ſo large
Near this place is Lydington, where, about [an te in thoſe parts, that they continu'd
the year 1602. Thomas Lord Burghley ſettled [long a flouriſhing family: as did the Colepepers
an Hoſpital or Alms-houſe, for a Warden, |betore them, to whom, by N. Green, the great
twelve poor men, and two poor women ;|eſtate of the Bruſes did in part deſcend. Which
which he call'd Jeſs-Hoſpital. And in the ſame] Bruſes, being of the chief Nobility of England,
Hundred, at Morcot, f another was founded in} match'd into the Royal family of Scotland ;
the time of King James the firſt, for ſix poor | from whom, by Robert the eldeſt brother, the
people.] | Royal Line of the Scots, and by Bernard à
In the further diviſion, beyond the river, younger brother, the Cotrons of Connington in
lies a pleaſant and fruitful Vale, encompaſs'd |the Donny of Huntingdon ( of whom I have
with hills, and call'd, The Vale of Catmoſe, per- already ſpoken,) and theſe Harringtons, are all
haps from Coet maes, which in the Britiſh ſigni- Ane Upon which account, King James

fies a woody field or ground. In the middle of |{the firſt] dignify'd Sir Jom Harrington, a noted
this vale, 1384. Okeham, and ſeems, for the Y 11

like reaſon, to have taken it's name from Oaks.
Near the Church, are ſtill remaining the rui-
nous walls of an old caſtle, built, as is report-
ed, by Walkelin de Ferrarits in the beginning of
the Normans : [He was a younger ſon of Hil-
liam de Ferrers, Earl of _ ; holding Oke-

8 ſituated, as overlooking the Vale

Harrington, in this and ſeveral other fair Lord-
ſhips adjoyning, was afterwards purchas'd and
enjoy'd by the famous George Villiers Duke of
Buckingham; ſince the determination of which
Family, it hath been purchas'd of late years by

but ex-
cannot omit, in regard it hath been an old |tremely decay'd, and impoveriſh'd, and diffe-

ſeat of that famous and ancient family the rent from it's firſt Inſtitution. About the ruins

Over-againſt this to the eaſt, is Burley, moſt g.

cent. ſeat off x; now, C.

and worthy Knight, with the title of Baron Barons Hats
Harrington of Exton. [But the eſtate of the ringt.

34

rley.

ham by the ſervice of one Knight's fee and a
half, in the 12th of Henry the ſecond. ] And
that this was the habitation of the Ferrers, is
evident, beſides the authority of tradition, from
the Horſe-ſhoes (which that family gave for
their Arms) nail'd on the Gate, and in the
Hall. [And here is an ancient cuſtom, conti-
nu'd to this day, that every Baron of the Realm,
the firſt time he comes through this town, ſhall
give a horſe-ſhoe to nail upon the caſtle-gate ;
which if he refuſes, the Bailiff of that manour
has power to ſtop his coach, and take one off
his horſe's foot. But commonly they give five,
ten, or twenty ſhillings, more or leſs as they

Daniel Earl of Nottingham, Principal Secretary
of State, firſt to their Majeſties K. William and
Q. Mary, and ſince to Q. Anne, a perſon of
great honour and virtue, and excellently skill'd
in the Laws and Conſtitution of his Country;
who, in the place of the former houſe, hath
erected here a moſt beautiful and noble edifice,
with all other ornaments and embelliſhments
that are ſuitable ro ſo magnificent a building.
All which, with it's eminent ſituation, the 7
joyning Park encloſed by a wall of five or ſix
miles in compaſs, and many other advantages,

ive it a place among the principal ſeats of
England, and do particularly render it the great
grace and ornament of this. County.

Acura Lord read, gave him the title of + Baron. Henry

life and honours.

pleaſe; and in 28 to the gift, the ſhoe
is made larger or ſmaller, with the name and
titles of the Donor cut upon it; and ſo it is
nail'd upon the gate.] Afterwards, this town
belong d to the Lords of Tatteſhal/ : But when
King Richard the ſecond had advanced Ed-
ward, ſon of the Duke of York, to the title
of Earl of Rutland, he alſo gave him this Ca-
ſtle. In the memory of the laſt age [ſave one
it came to Thomas Cromwell, and, as I have

caſtle ; principally, I ſuppoſe, for the great height of

Cole-Overton. And as for the Marga; in the
fields about it there is great ſtore of lime-
ſtone, whereof good lime has been made ;
dignity ; but ſoon after, when by his many which agrees well with the Britiſh Marga,
projects he had expos'd himſelf to the ſtorms|that was us'd by them to improve their grounds.
of envy, on a ſudden he depriv'd him both of] Here are likewiſe to be found ſuch plenty of
Roman Coins, as but few places in thoſe parts
In the year 1619. was born here a Dwarf|afford. In the compaſs of a few years, were
ſcarce eighteen inches in height, when a year|gather'd between two and three hundred, on
old. His father was a luſty man, and ſo were|a little furlong about Half a mile from this
all his other children. Being taken into the] town. As for the diſtances with reſpe& to
family of the late Duke of Buckingham, when] other ſtations thereabouts, mw are very uni-
the Court came that way on a progreſs, he] form. From Gauſemnæ, 1. e. Brigg erton,
was ſery'd up to the table in a cold pye.|fix miles; from Verometum, i. e. Burgh-hill,
Between the ſeventh and the thirtieth year of|ſeveri miles: and from 4d Pontem, i. e. Great-
his age, he grew not much; but a little after] Paunton, ſeven miles. So that they who ſeek
thirty he ſhot u
remain'd at, in his old age, i. e. about three] their labour.
foot and nine inches. The objection :
In the 22d of King Richard the ſecond,|(the affinity whereof with the Latin name ſeems
William Dalby of Exton, a Merchant of the|ro have given the firſt hint to this conjecture, )
Staple, founded an Hoſpital here at Okeham for] muſt not be thought any remain of the Roman
the maintenance of two Chaplains and twelve|name, but grounded upon the Market, there
poor men, endowing the ſame with a revenue] held ber week.
Z 2

the eighth advanc'd this perſon to the highe

to that height, which he|it in f any other place, may probably loſes At n.

loughby in the 1
ainſ it is, that MarketWould, Not-

And there is no doubt,
/ but

North from hence, lies Market-Overton, where Market-
the Margidunum of Antoninus was f formerly pla- Qverton.

ced, but || afterwards removed to about 8

1590.

the hill, which anſwers the termination dunum. Edit. ult.
But there was no occaſion for that, ſince, Ape
Market-Overton ſtands upon the higheſt hill camdent epiſi.
within view thereabout, except Burley and p. 375.

ndix ad

Itiner. P. 101.

—

-
— * 3
—— —

—— ——— — wt
8 —

N N
1
1
"
f
8
|
4
i, v

W a.

ol Eſſenden. Of Efſenden.

8

but this has been the conſtant opinion of the [ter which was granted by King Henry OY

+ Baronage, inhabitants, time out of mind. Bur if f Dug- [firſt to Herbert Biſhop of Norwich, and to the

vol. 2. p.58. dale tranſcrib'd the name from the Charter, it
was call'd Market-Overton, before Bartholomew
Lord Baldiſmere, in the reign of Edward the
ſecond, obtain'd a grant for a weekly market
here; for in reciting that paſſage, he names
the town ſo. Beſides, ' I cannot conceive to
what end the word Market ſhould be added :
not, but it is common enough- to diſtinguiſh
a town, from ſome other of the ſame name,
which is not far off ; but in this neighbour-
hood there does not appear to be any ſuch,
So that, upon the whole, it is probable enough,
that poſterity finding ſomething prefix'd, that
ſounded like Market, might imagin that the
market there, gave occaſion to it, and ſo might
frame the name to their own fancies.

Not far from Market-Overton, is Cotſmore,
memorable for the charity of Anne Lady Har-
rington, widow of John Lord mayer gl of
Exton, who purchas'd a Rent-charge of a hun-
dred pounds per Ann. to be iſſuing out of this
manour of Cotſmore, and left it to be divided

uarterly for ever among the poor of ſeven
Pariſhes in this County.

On the eaſt-ſide of the Shire, upon the ri-
Brigcaſter- Ver Gwaſh, lye Brigcaſterton (of which more
ton. hereafter,) and Riha//, where, when ſuperſti-
Rihal. tion had ſo bewitch'd our Anceſtors, that it

had almoſt remov'd the true God by a mul-
The Falco- tiplicity of Gods, one Tilla, a Saint of the
ners Saint, letler rank, was worſhip'd by Falconers as a ſe-
cond Diana, and reputed a kind of Patroneſs
+ chron. Sax. of Fulconry. The f Saxon Annals tell us, ſhe
edit. Oxon. was bury'd at Rihala; and that after i
tab An. 964. came to be Abbot of Peterborough, he took up
the body of St. XKyneburge and St. Cyneſwithe,
and at the ſame time the body of St. Tibba;
ard carry'd them all three to his Monaſtery,
[| Offrede, in where, in one day, he || dedicated them to St.
the Saxon. Peter, the Saint of the place.]
Eſſenden. Hard by Rihal, is Eſſenden, whoſe Lord, Ro- |
bert Cecil (the excellent ſon of an excellent fa-
+ Was lately ther, once the ſupport of this kingdom,) f was
created, C. created by King James [the firſt, Baron Cecil

Baron Cecil

Cotſmore.

This little E Edward the Confeſſor
deviſed by his laſt Will to his wife Eadith;
conditionally, that after her death it ſhould
go to St. Peter's at Weſtminſter. Theſe are the
words of the Will: I will, that after the deceaſe
of Queen Eadgith my wife, Roteland, with all emo-
luments thereunto belonging, be given to my Mona-
ſtery of St. Peter, and that it be ſurrender d without
delay to the Abbot and Monks there ſerving God,
for ever. But this Teſtament was vacated by
William the Norman, who, reſerving a great

art of this eſtate to himſelf, divided the reſt

tween Judith the Counteſs (whoſe daughter
marry'd David King of Scots,) Robert Mallet,
Oger, Giſtebert of Gaunt, Earl Hugh, Alberic
the Clerk, and others. To Weſtminſter, he
left, at firſt, the tithes ; but afterwards only
the Church of Okeham with the Appendices or
Chapelries thereunto belonging.

Monks of the Church of the Holy Trinity there,

ble power royal,) ſent by that great Prince Ri-
chard Earl of Poitiers and Cornwal, to the She-
rift of Rutland, in behalf of a Nunnery about
_— King Henry the third granted him
the Caſtle of Okeham and cuſtody of this Coun-
ty ; and Selden brings this as one inſtance of
that vaſt power which Earls formerly enjoy d.]
But the Earl of Rutland, commonly known
to be ſo, ] was Edward, eldeſt ſon of Edmund
of Langley, Duke of York ; who, by the ſpe-
cial fayour of King Richard the ſecond, was
created during the life of his father, and after
that was by the ſame King declar'd Duke of
Albemarke. This is he who wickedly conſpir'd
to take King Henry the fourth out of the
way, and then with like levity diſcover'd the
Conſpiracy. Burt after his father's death, being
Duke of York, he was flain, valiantly fighting
amidſt the thickeſt of the enemies troops, at the
battel of Agincourt. A good while after, Edward,
the young ſon of Richard Duke of York, ſucceed-
ed in this Title; who was flain with his father
at the battel of J/akefield, during thoſe diſmal
Civil wars. Many years after, Henry the eighth
advanced Thomas Mannours to the Earldom of
Rutland, who in right of Eleanor his grandmo-
ther was then poſleſs'd of the large and no-
ble inheritance of the Barons Roos, lying in
the neighbouring parts. To him ſucceeded
Henry ; and after him Edward his ſon ; to
whom (not to ſay more) that of the Poet is
molt truly and exactly applicable:

A — enen virtutibus æquat,
Nec ſinit ingenium nobilitate premi.

—— -]n virtues as in titles great,
Nor lets his honour ſoar above his wit.

But he dying young, left this honour to Jon
his brother; and he alſo being ſoon after cut
off by death, Roger his ſon became his ſuc-

Anceſtors. | He marry'd the daughter and heir
of the famous Sir Philip Sidney, and, dying
without iflue, was ſucceeded by Francis his
brother and heir; who having no iſſue-male,
Sir George Maunours, his brother and next heir-
male, came to this dignity. But he likewiſe
dying without iſſue, rhis honour deſcended
to John Mannours Eſquire, fon and heir of Sir
George Manionrs, ſon of John Mannourt, ſecond ſon
of Thomas firſt Earl of Rutland of this family.
John departed this life, Sept. 29. 1679, and
left the title to John, his only ſon, who was
advanced, in the ſecond year of Queen Anne,

Earls of his County cannot boaſt of many Earls. title to John, his fon and heir, the preſent

Rutland. ¶ Among the witneſſes ſubſcribing to the Char- [Duke.]

L I N-

—

A. D. 1101, * we find this name and title, ,
Ego Robertus Comes Rutland. And the f Learned A
Selden tells us, that he had ſeen original Let- p. 4:
ters of Protection (a perfect and incommunica-t

p. 224,

540

"gl. VA

Na, v

ceſſor, in whom f there did [early] appear all, rr.
the marks of the Virtue and Nobility of his far, ab

to the more honourable title of Duke of Rut- pie if
land; and, dying in the year 1711, left thatjand,

VF.
wr
\S

1 ef + * 2

nar A EK L406 » to ENT I

a . AT "FEI FINDS

© Metaris,

t The Waſh

———ů— —

LINCOLNSHIRE.

On IS TP IL ISSN

— nnd RS. Oo

—
*

r

= ** a 7 a7

Ide Waſhes,

HE County of Lincoln borders

being call'd by the Saxons Lin-

| <:\ collreype, by the Normans, at

I their firſt entrance into this
land (by a tranſpoſal of Let-
ters) Nicolſbire; but common-
ly now, Lincolnſhire. It is a very large Coun-
ty, * almoſt ſixty miles long, and in {ome pla-
ces f above thirty broad; the Soil very fit for
the producing ot corn, and feeding of cattel :
adorn'd alſo with many towns, and water'd
with many rivers. On the Eaſt-ſide, it ſhoots
out into a f foreland of great compaſs, which
bounds upon the German Ocean ; on the
North, it reaches as far as the Abus or Hum-
ber, an arm of the ſea; on the Weſt, it joyns
to Nottinghamſhire ; and on the South, it is
parted from Northamptonſhire by the river
Welland. The whole County is divided into
three parts, Holland, Keſteven, and Lindſey.

Holland, which Ingulphus calls Hoiland, is
next the ſea : and, like Holland in Germany,
is ſo very moiſt in many places, that a dee
print of one's foot remains, and the ſurface it
{elf ſhakes, if ſtamp'd on: From whence it ma
ſeem to have taken the name ; unleſs wit
Ingulphus one ſhould call it Hoiland, and de-
rive it from plenty of Hay.

This, and Holland in the Low Countries,
agreeing ſo exactly in their ſituation, ſoil, and
moſt other circumſtances ; the original of the
name, 1s (without doubt) one and the ſame.
Mr. Butler's conjecture drawn from the Saxon
holt, a wood, and that other from hay; ſeem
both to have one and the ſame objection againſt
them, that the ſoil does not favour either;
at leaſt, not ſo much as to render the place
eminent for either; eſpecially, conſider'd in it's
ancient ſtate. I would not willingly go fur-
ther for the original of this name, than to the
Saxon heah deep; the remains whereof the
Northern parts do {till retain in their how,
which they uſe for deep or low ; and the break-
ings-in of the ſea, with the banks made againſt
it, ſufficiently declare how much the nature
of theſe places favour this conjecture. But in
the laſt age, theſe low Marſhes have been very
much drain'd and improv'd.]

All this part lies upon the Eſtuary, which
Ptolemy calls Metaris, inſtead of Maltraith, and
is call'd at this day, The Waſhes. This Eſtu-
ary is very large and noted, cover'd with wa-
ter at every flow, and paſſable again at every
ebb, tho" not without danger; as Ki
John found to his coſt, For in the Barons
war, attempting to paſs here, he loſt all his
carriages and equipage, near Foſs-dyke and Wel-
ſtream, by a ſndden inundation ; as Matthew
Weſtminſter tells us. This part of the Coun-
ty, which the Inhabitants, from the great heaps
of ſand (call'd Silt) believe to have been for-
ſaken by the ſea, is ſo terribly aſſaulted on
one fide with the Ocean, on the other with
a mighty flood of waters from the Upper Coun-
try, that all the winter they conſtantly watch
it, and can hardly defend themſelves with banks
againſt thoſe dangerous enemies. The ground
produces very little corn, but much graſs; and
abounds with fiſh and ſea-fowl ; but the ſoil
is ſo ſoft, that they work their horſes unſhod,

«x upon Rutlandſhire on the Eaſt ;
67

and their flocks are often taught by

King pec

and you ſhall not find ſo much as a little

ſtone, which has not been brought from ſome

other place : yet the Churches here are beau-

tiful, and built of ſquare-ſtone, It is very
evident from certain bariks, now diſtant two

miles from the ſhore, and from the hills near |
Sutterton which they call Salr-bill, that the ſea Salt-hills,
came further up. {And theretore Dugdale
ranks Holland, with Marſbland in Norfolk, and

ſome other maritime places, which by great
induſtry have been gained from the ſea; and,
before, were nothing but vaſt and deep fens.1

Here is great want of freſh water in all pla-

ces ; they having no other ſupply but the rain-
water in pits; which, if deep, ſoon turn the
water brackiſh, if ſhallow, are preſently d

Here are many quick-ſands ; and the ShepherdsQic ads
an
rous experience, that they have a Uber.
force in ſucking in, and holding faſt, whatever
comes upon them.
This Hoiland is divided into two parts, the
lower and the upper. The lower abounds with

pft filthy bogs and unpaſſable marſhes, which the Theſe are

inhabitants themſelves cannot go over, evennom much
with the help of their tilts. And becauſegter used
: . * raining,

its ſituation 1s very low, it is defended on one

ſide from the Ocean, on the other from the
waters that overflow the upper part of the Iſle

of Ely, by huge banks. Southybank is the moſt By others
noted; which the inhabitants take great care call d Southy-
of, being continually fearful leſt a breach ſhould

be made by that great flood of waters which
fall from the ſouth- parts, when the rivers ſwell,
and by their inundations lay. all a-float. For
the draining of theſe waters, the neighbouring
inhabitants began in the year 1599. to dig a
new chanel at Clows-croſs. :

[Upon the confines of Norfolk, lies Tydd,
a ſmall village, but famous for the once Rector
of it Nicholas Breakſpear, who planted Chriſtia-
nity in Nerway : tor which good ſervice to the
Church, he was afterwards made Cardinal, and
in the year 1154, Pope, under the name of
Hadrian the fourth. | in the ſame tract is
Sutton St. Maries, remarkable for the beauty of Sutton St.
its Church, and of a Chapel belonging to the Maries.
ſame ; the firſt owing it to a Gentleman of the
name of Allen, who was a generous benefactor
thereto ; the ſecond, to Dr. Busby, the famous
and worthy maſter of Weſtminſter-School, and
a native of this place. At Fleet, in this tract,
hath been found a large earthen pot, cover'd
with an oaken board, and in it about three
ks of Roman Copper Coins, piled down
edgewiſe, moſt of them about the time of Gal-
lienus.

Near [the foreſaid] Southybank, I ſaw C- Cn ad,
land, call'd alſo Croyland, a very noted town
among the Fenners ; which (as Ingulphus, Ab-
bot of the place, interprets it) ſignifies raw
and muddy land : a place (as they write) haunt-
ed in times paſt with I know not what fright-
ful apparitions, till Guthlacus, a very pious man,
became a hermit there. To whoſe memory,
and to the honour of God, Ethelbald King
of the Mercians founded a Monaſtery at great
charge in the year 716, very famous for reli-
gion and wealth; concerning which, take theſe
verſes of Felix, a pretty ancient Monk, in the

Tydd.

life of Guthlacus

Nunc

C ORI

TAN I

Nunc exercet ibi ſe munificentia Regis,

Et magnum templum magno molimine condit.

At cum tam mollis, tam lubrica, tam male
conſtans 3

Fundamenta palus non ferret ſaxea, palos

Pracipit infigi quercino robore caſos,

Leucarumque novem ſpatio rats fertur arena;

Inque ſolum mutatur humus, ſuffultaque tali

Cella laſi, multo ſtat conſummata labore.

Now here the Prince's bounteous mind was

ſhown,

And with vaſt charge a ſtately pile be-
gun. |

But when the trembling fenns, the faithleſs

| moor

Sinking betray'd the ſtony maſs they
bore ;

At _ command huge poſts of laſting

ak

Down the ſoft earth were for a baſis
truck :.

Nine leagues the labouring Barges brought?
the ſand :

Thus rotten turf was turn'd to ſolid
land ;

And thus the noble frame does ſtill unſha-
ken ſtand.

If out of the ſame Author I ſhould deſcribe

8 the Devils of Crowland (with their blubber
C n lips, fiery mouths, ſcaly faces, beetle heads,
ſharp teeth, long chins, hoarſe throats, black

skins, hump ſhoulders, big bellies, burning

loins, bandy legs, tail'd butrocks, Ct.) which
formerly haunted thefe places, and very much

merly paid yearly to the Abbot, as they do

- [now to the King, three hundred pounds ſter-

ling.

FThus was the ancient ſtate of this place,
and of the neighbouring Country; but of la-
ter years, the Soil hath been exceedingly im-
proved by Dreins and Sluices, and the greateſt
part of the Ponds are now turned into Corn-
fields. | | |

It is not neceſſary to write the private Hi-
{tory of this Monaltery, for it is extant in In-

| qa which 1s now printed ; yet I am wil-

ling to make a ſhort report of that which Pe-

firſt building of this Monaſtery in the year
1112, to the end that from one ſingle precedent
we may leafn by what means, and by whar
aſſiſtances, ſo many ſtately Religious-houſes
were built in all parts of this kingdom. YJoffrid
the Abbor obtain'd of the Arch-biſhops and Bi-
ſhops of England, to every one that helped forward ſo
religious a work, an Indulgence of the third part of
the Penance enjoyn d for the fins he had committed.
With this, he ſent out Monks every where to
make Collections; and having enough, he ap-
pointed St. Perpetua's and Felicitys Day to be
that on which he would lay the foundation, to
the end the work, from thoſe fortunate names,
might be auſpiciouſly begun. Ar which time,
the Nobles and Prelates, with the common
People, met there in great numbers. Prayers
being ſaid and Anthems ſung, the Abbot him-
ſelf laid the firſt corner- ſtone on the Eaſt-ſide ;
after him, every noble man, according to his
degree, laid his ſtone : and, upon it, ſome laid
money ; and others, Writings, by which they

annoy'd Guthlacus and the Monks; you would ſofferd Lands, advowſons of Churches, tenths of

laugh at the Hiſtory, and much more at my
madneſs in relating it. But ſince the ſituation and
nature of the place is ſtrange, and different
from all others in England, and fince the Mo-
naſtery was particularly famous in fotmer
times; I ſhall give you the deſcription of it
+ So, ann. ſomewhat more at large. f This Crowland lies
2 in fenns, ſo enclos'd and encompaſs'd with
is now much deep bogs and pools, that there 1s no acceſs ro
better d by it but on the north and eaſt-ſide, and there
Drains and too only by narrow Cauſeys. This Monaſtery,
Sluies. and Venice (if we may compare ſmall things
with great) have the ſame ſort of ſituation. Ir
conſiſts of three Streets, ſeparated from each
other by water-courſes, planted with willows,
and raiſed on piles driven into the bottom of
the pool ; having communication by a trian-
gular bridge of curious Workmanſhip, under
which the Inhabitants ſay there was a very
deep pit, that was dug to receive the concourle
of waters there. Beyond the bridge (where, as
In ſelum one words it, * a bog is become firm ground, ) ſtood
mutarur bu formerly that famous Monaſtery, though of a
A {mall compaſs; about which, unleſs on that
ſide where the 'Town ſtands, the ground is fo
rotten and boggy, that a pole may be thruſt
down thirty toot deep ; and there is nothing
round about, but reeds ; and, next the Church,
a grove of alders. However, the Town is
pretty well inhabited ; but the Cattle are kept
at ſome diſtance from it, ſo that when the
owners milk them, they go in boats (which
will carry but two) call'd by them Skerrys.
i Anatum a- Their greateſt gain, is from rhe fiſh and || wild
guatilium. Ducks that they catch ; which are ſo many,
that in Auguſt they can drive into a ſingle
net three thouſand Ducks at once, and they call
+ Ann, 1607.theſe Pools their Corn-fields; f there being no
corn growing within five miles of the place. For
this liberty of fiſhing and fowling they for-

their Sheep, and other tythes of their ſeveral
Churches, certain meaſures of wheat, or a cer-
rain number of workmen or maſons. On the
other ſide, the common people no le's zea-
lous, offer d with great devotion, {ome of
them money, and ſome one day's work every
month till it ſhould be finiſh'd ; ſome to
build whole pillars, and others, pedeſtals, and
others, certain parts of the walls. "The Abbot
afterwards made a Speech, commenu ung their
great zeal and bounty, in contributing to ſo
pious a work, and by way of requital made

the ſpiritual bleſſings of that Church. At laſt,
having entertain'd them with a plentiful feaſt,
he diſmiſs'd them in r joy. But I will not
ſtay longer upon theſe things.

From Crowland, between the river Weland
and the deep marſhes, there is a Cauſey with
willows on each ſide, leading to the North;
on which, two miles from Crowland, I ſaw
the fragment of a Pyramid with this In-
ſcription.

This rock I fay is Guthlack's utmoſt
bound.

Town enclos'd on all ſides with rivulets and
canals ; ſit is a handſome and large Market,
and indeed neater than can be reaſonably ex-
pected in this County, among ſo many lakes.
Here Ivo 7albeis, who is call'd ſomewhere in

Ingul-

Philof, Trax

trus Bleſenfis, t Vice-chancellor to King Henry + H=
the ſecond, has related at large concerning — 1

every one of them a member of that Mona- + gratis
ſtery, and gave them a right to partake in al/ tem

Higher up, on the ſame river, is Spalding, a Spalding

© Kirkton.

© Witham, riv

p Bolton,

$ Robbers un
der the dif.

. gui ſe of

L Monks,

* Arn, 160

Croeun.

| Fretton,
Barons ©

of. Trax

223,

Fraternits
Ms

paldings |

yicham, riv. tiful : After this, where the river Mitham, en-|revils, were very eminent in theſe

2 o

%

LINCOLNSHIRE 8 8 Jad

Ingulphus, Earl of Anjou, granted to the Monks|the foremention'd Yvo, and often conquer'd
of Anjou an ancient Cell. From hence, as far him, and at laſt took him priſoner, and would
as Deeping, which is ten miles off, Egelrick Abbot not ſuffer him to be ranſom'd, unleſs himſelf
of Crowland, afterwards Biſhop of Durham, might be receiv'd into the King's favour, and
made a firm Cauley for travellers, through the\ live and die in his Allegiance and Protection.
midſt of a vaſt foreſt and = marſhes (as Ingul-| And indeed his Valour, which is a quality that

hus writes,) of wood and gravel ; which was|we honour in our very enemies, deſerv'd this.

; call d, from his name, Elrich road: but at this His daughter was married to Hugh Enermeve

day nothing of it appears. Lord of Deping, and enjoy'd his poſſeſſions ;

In the Upper-Hoiland, which lies more to|which afterwards, as I have been informed,

1 Kirkton. the north, the firſt place is Kirkton, ſo call'd|came to the Barons de ale; a family who Barons of

from the Church, which is indeed very beau-[being much enrich'd by the Eſtate of the Eſto- Wake.

parts, till

time; but then, by an

clos'd on both ſides with artificial banks, runs] Edward the ſecond's
with a full Chanel into the ſea, ſtands theſheir female, their inheritance came in right

L Boon, Aouriſhing Town of Boſton, more truly Botolph's|of marriage to Edmund of Woodſtock Earl ef

Town ; for it took that name from Po a Kent, youngeſt ſon to King Edward the

pious Saxon, who (as Bede ſays) had a Mo-|firſt. From f a younger branch, is deſcended+ E flis ja-
naſtery at ſcanhoe. It is a famous Town, built. the ancient and famous family of the Wales nioribus.
on both ſides the river Mitham, over which ſef Bliſworth in Northamptonſhure, ſtill remain-

there is a very high wooden- bridge. It has aſ ing. |
commodious and well frequented harbour, a Fand ſo much for Holland, which as well as

great market, and a beautiful and large Church,] Lindſey-diviſion, has had its Earls, and gave

the tower of which is very high, and as it title to Henry Rich Lord Kenſington, created Earl

were ſalutes travellers at a great diſtance, and of Holland, Apr. 3. 22 Jac. 1. He was ſuc-

is a Landmark to the Seamen : [being twolceeded by Robert his ſon, who had the addi-
hundred cighty two foot in height; alſo of af tional title of Earl of Warwick by the death

moſt exquiſite and ſurpriſing fineneſs in the|of Charles Rich, Earl of that place, his Couſin-
workmanſhip.| This Town was miſerably |german. Whereupon, both titles were enjoy'd

ü ethers un- kuin'd in Edward the firſt's reign ; for in that by Eduard Rich, ſtil'd Earl of Warwick and

ar the dif- degenerate age, and univerſal corruption of| Holland; and, he dying, both deſcended to his

rie of manners throughout the kingdom, certain War-|ſon Edward-Henry, the preſent Earl.]
. Monks. riors, whilſt a tournament was proclaiming at] The other part of this Coun

{ 8 7 commonly
Fair- time, coming hither under the diſguiſe of|call'd Keſteven, but by Etheluerd an ancient Keſteyeni

Monks and Canons, ſer the Town on fire inſ author Ceoſtefne-wood, borders upon Hoiland on
many places, broke in upon the Merchants|the weſt, and is happy in an air much more
with ſudden violence, and carry'd away great wholſome, and a ſoil no leſs fruitful. [The
quantities of goods, but burnt more : inſo-|reaſon why Æthelwerd calls it Ceoftefne Sylva,
much that our Hiſtorians write (as the Anci-|j. e. the wood Ceoftefue (whereas, at preſent, no
ents did of Corinth, when it was demoliſh'd)] ſuch thing appears,) is, becauſe there was for-
that veins of gold and filver ran mix'd toge-|merly a great Foreſt at this end of the diviſi-
ther in one common current. Their Ring- Ion, where now are the large fenns, call'd Deep-
leader Rolert Chamberlain, after he had con- ing-Fenns, &c. A plain argument whereof is,
feſſed the fact, and expreſs d his deteſtation that the trunks of trees are dug-up in ſeveral
of the crime, was hang d; but could not by ditches thereabouts, which lie cover'd ſome
any means be brought to diſcover his accom- two foot, with a light black mold. And“ as Mr. Neale:
plices. However, better times ſucceeding, curious perſon (to whom the world is indebt-
Boſton recove d ir ſelf, and a Staple for Wooll|ed for this and other diſcoreries in this Coun-
was ſettled Here; which very much enrich'd|ry) affirms, that in a ditch of his own, at the
it, and drew hither the Merchants of the|edge of the fenns, there were ſeveral trunks of
Hanſe-Company, who fix'd their Gild in this trees lying in the bottom, and in another place as
Arn. 1607. place. At preſent, it is a fair-built, and tra-|many acorns turn'd out of one hole, as would fill
ding rich Town; for the Inhabitants applyſa hat; very firm and hard, but colour'd black:
themſelves both to merchandiſe and grazing :|and yet now, there is no tree ſtanding near
but in point of trade, they ſeem of late toſ that place by a mile, except here and there a
be on the declining hand. Here, the famous| willow lately fer. The ſame worthy perſon
John Fox, Author of the Acts and Monuments, adds, that he has by him the copy of the Ex-
was born. emplification of the f Letters Patents of Jac. 1. Dit. Wed
Croeun, Near this was the Barony de Croeun or Cre- wherein he recites by way of Iuſpeximis, the 1. Bong ;
Regiſt, de don; of which family, Alanus de Croeun founded|||Letters Patents of Henry the third, who thereby Ang}. & Scot.
| — the Priory of Freſton : and at length, Petronilla, di ſafforeſted the ſaid foreſt of Keſteven for ever, 41.
e of the heireſs of the family, being twice married, which was alſo confirm'd by Letters Patents of! _ _
| Crowne, brought no ſmall inheritance, firſt to the Loug-|* Edward the third; wherein the ſaid foreſt is 24. rowul 4
champs, from whom the Pedwardins, and ſe-|butted and bounded, to extend on one fide **29 Edw. 3.
condly to John Vaulx, from whom the Baron from Swafton to Eaſt-Deeping, as Caresdike ex-
Roos, are deſcended. This ' Moiland reaches|tends it ſelf (which is a dike, running croſs
carce ſix miles farther : it was entirely given] the top of the Fenns, not only of Deeping-Fenn,
by William the firſt to Yvo Talbois of Anjou, but alſo of that great fenn beyond the river

— the whoſe inſolences were ſuch, that Herward theſ Glen, call'd Lindſey-level;) and on the other

man. Saxon could not l ear them. This Herward was fide, to the diviſion call'd Holland. This Cares-Mortoh,
a perſon of an excellent diſpoſition and great] dike, or Caerdike, is a broad, deep, artificial Northampts
alour, the ſon of Leofrick Lord of Brane or] Chanel, which formerly extended from the ri-P- 523»
Irgulphus Burne ; and ſeeing his own and his Country's| ver Nen, a little below Peterborow, to the ri-
Crowlan. ſatety now at ſtake, and having a Soldier's| ver Witham, about three miles below Lincoln;
belt girt on him by Bran Abbot of Peterbo-| being almoſt forty miles in length, and 4
rough (who was alſo enrag' d againſt the Nor- ſed by ſome to have been the work of the Ro-
mans, ) he broke out into open war againſt] mans, and navigable.

Aaaa This

r_ N „
—— — ä
FW
i » i
3 * — r

* my
4 W — — —
+ —nar
— x gp —

an So ,
——_——— ——
A a — —

—

— Z— p —7—ð²ĩ44j —
d » I

CO Os Ä
—

—

—

2 — — — =» apy — —
—— —— — 2 adn

— — — —

— —

—

3

wi
—

* *
2 ten
8 __

—
=
9 —

—

—

2 —

—— — —aä

— — 6 —
er "Io" 12 — 4
1

oh.

555 e 2

550

This Rete ven-Diviſion is larger than the o-

ther, and is in all parts adorn'd with more

Towns. On the border, upon the river Hel-

Stanford. land, ſtands Stanford, in Saxon Sðcceanpopo,
E ſaxo ftri«-|| built of ſtone, from which it has it's name. It
Alt, is a populous Town of good reſort, endow'd
with divers privileges, and wall'd about. I.

paid Geld (as Domeſday-book has it) for twelve

Hundreds and a half to the army, and towards the

navy, and Danegeld ; and had in it fix Wards.

[As to the Antiquity of it; our Engliſh
Hiſtorians aftord us very large teſtimonies. Hen-

Lib. 5. p. 203. y Huntingdon in his deſcription of the wars
between Edmund Ironſide and the Danes, calls

Pag. 515. it an ancient City; and Ingulphus, tells us, there
were Terms held at Stamford ; and Hoveden in

Pag. 249. the book of Crowland, calls it Stamfordſbire,
being a County-town : and very commodious

it is for that uſe; this end of Lincolnſhire ad-

joyning to it, being thirty ſix miles from Lin-

cola, and the end of Northamptonſhire next 1t

on that ſide, no leſs from Northampton; which

diſtance is a great inconvenience to the In-

habitants, as often as their buſineſs calls them

to the publick Aſſizes.] When King Edward

the Elder fortified the ſouthern banks of the

Rivers, to hinder the Daniſh inroads from the

north ; he built on the ſouth bank over-againſt

this Town, a very ſtrong caſtle, call'd now
Stanford-Ba- Stanford-Baron, as Marianus has it. But at
ron, this day f nothing of it is to be ſeen ; for the
2 id. Burch. common report is, and the foundation-plot it
Yo" ſelf witneſſes, that the caſtle which Stephen for-
thampton- felt witneſſes, that the caſtle which Stephen for
ſhire, tified in the Civil wars againſt Henry of Anjou,
+ Probably, ſtood in the very town. {Stow alſo tells us,
= _ that there was a Mint for coyning of money
above the in Stamford-Baron, in the time of King A-
Spittal. thelſtan ; but this probably was a privilege
granted to the Abbots of Peterburrow ; for this

is that Pariſh which is in Northamptonſhire,

and is within a diſtin& liberty, granted to

them.] Afterwards, when Henry of Anjou

Lib. Ing. in Mas King of England, he gave the whole Village
the Exche- of Stanford (being his Demeſne,) excepting the fees
quer, of the Barons and Knights of the ſaid Village, to
Richard de Humez, or Humetz, who was Conſtable

to our Lord the King, to hold of him by homage and

other ſervice. And afterwards, The ſame was held

by William Earl of Warren, by the favour of King

Univerſity of John. In Edward the third's reign [(not to
Stamford, mention what the fragment of an old Manu-
ſeript Hiſtory ſays, concerning an Univerſity

here, long before our Saviour, )] an Univerſity

for the ſtudy and profeſſion of liberal Arts and

Sciences, Was begun here; which the Inhabi-

tants look upon as their greateſt glory. For

when the hot conteſts at Oxford broke out be-

tween the Students of the North, and the

South, a great number of them withdrew and

ſettled here. However, a little while after,

they return'd to Oxford, and put an end to

the new Univerſity which they had ſo lately

begun ; and from thence-forward it was provi-

ded, by an Oath to that purpoſe, that no Ox-

ford-man ſhould Profeſs at Stanford. Here are

ſtill the. remains of two Colleges, one call'd

Black-hall, Black-hall, and the other Brazen-noſe ; on the
and Brazen-gate whereof is a great brazen Noſe and a ring
_ Colle- through it, like that of the ſame name at Ox-
__ ford. And it is evident, that this did not take
its pattern from Oxtord, but Oxford from it ;

inaſmuch as that at Oxtord, was not built be-

fore the reign of Henry the ſeventh, and this

is at leaſt as old as Edward the third, and

probably older.] Notwithſtanding the loſs of

their Univerſity, Trade it ſelf ſupported the

Town, till in the heat of the Civil war os

tween tlie houſes of Lancaſter and York, the

Northern Soldiers ſtorm'd and utterly de-
ſtroy'd it with fire and ſword. Since that, it
could never perfectly recover and come up to
its former glory; though it is in a good con- A
dition at this day ; [being the faireſt built and
beſt compacted "Town in the County, and fine- .
ly ſeated for pleaſure and convenience.] It is
govern' d!“ by a Mayor, twelve Aldermen, and g. |
twenty four Burgelles : | But when this begun, dermn, »,
is not ſo certain; being much older than the 24, &.c,*
firſt Charter that they have. For there is a
Liſt of ſixty upon the Courr-Roll, ſworn there,
before the Incorporation, viz. from 1398. to
1460. the firſt year of Edward the fourth.
So that Edward the fourth by his Charter,
ſeems rather to have confirm'd an old cuſtom,
than to have eſtabliſh'd a new one. Ir is very
obſervable here, that they have the Cuſtom,
which Littleton, the famous Common-Lawyer,
calls Burrough Engliſh, i. e. the younger ſons
inherit what Lands or Tenements their fa-
thers die poſſeſs'd of, within this Manour.])
It has f five Pariſh-Churches ; [the fourteen , Alan 3c
which it anciently had, being reduced, by Act ok
of Parliament, in the zd year of King Ed-2 xa...
ward the ſixth ; one alſo hath been turned into |
a Free-Sehool, and another united to the
Church of AlL Saints. It hath likewiſe a
very fair old Hoſpital, founded by William
Brown an Inhabitant ; beſides another on this
ſide the bridge, || built by the Neſtor of Bri-|| Lately
tain, William Cecil Baron of Burghley, upon his built, C.
fixing that ſtately Seat at Burghley, of which
I have already ſpoken in Northamptonſhire.
He lies buried in a ſplendid tomb, in * St. St. Ces
Martin's Pariſh-Church [in Stamford-Baron ;]C-
a perſon, to ſay no more, who lived long
enough to Nature, and long enough to Glory,
but not long enough to his Country. [ After the
death of William Earl of Warren, the manour,
burrough, and caſtle of Stamford were granted
to John Earl Warren by Edward the firſt ; and
by his death reverted to the Crown. After
five or fix re-grants from the Crown to ſeveral
of the greateſt Nobility, and as many returns
to it, either by forteiture or for want of keirs-
male; Queen Elizabeth granted them to Mil-
liam Cecil, firſt Lord Burghley : from him they
deſcended to Anne, daughter and coheir of Vi-
liam Earl of Exeter, who was rarry'd to Hen-
ry Grey firſt Earl of Stamford ; advanc'd to that
dignity by King Charles the firſt, in the third
year ot his reign. He was father of Thomas
Lord Grey of Grooby, who dy'd in his father's
lite-time, having marry'd Dorothy daughter and
coheir of Edward Bourchier Earl of Bath ; by
which match, Thomas, the preſent Earl of
Stamford, is deſcended from Thomas of Wood-
ſtock Duke of Gloceſter, and from the Bohuns
Earls of Eflex, Hereford, and Northampton,
and ſeveral other noble Families. |

Though there are in this place ſome remains
of 2 and the Roman High-way,
(which you ſee as ſoon as you are out of this
Town, northward,) clearly ſhews, . that there
was formerly a Ferry here ; yet they do not
prove, that this was that Ganſennæ which An- Higb dhl
toninus places at ſome ſmall diſtance from Coy
hence. Bur ſince the little village Brigcaſterton Brigeale
(which by its very name appears to be ancient)
is but a mile off, where the river Gwaſh or
Waſh croſſes the military way; the nearneſs
of the name Gwaſh to Ganſennx, and the di- th
ſtance, not inconſiſtent, makes me believe, till Ngban,
time f produce ſome more probable conje- as better 1
cture, that Gauſennæ is at preſent call'd Brig- ſuering te
caſterton. It I ſhould- think Stamſord ſprang diſtance?

X . © makes this,
from the ruins of this Town, and that this y,,,yjv«
part

5
*
of 1
C :
* 5
'1 1 0 3
By u. 2
ermm, 14 5 % og
- 1 5 1
35 C. C | 1
K
18
* -
.
- ke *
4
|
TT x ,
* * B -
* * ”
About C bes
Ed. 1 tvs.
i , k
Lately
ulli C.
* at
5 : 5
; ' |
St. Geigen, : . —
— *
3
& 21
—
: f
1 2
92 *
--
* Li 0
* * 1 2 1
* -
- *
—
*
1 * 9
* * *
g \
4 5 .
* |
" 4 1
% F-/ 1
*

High-dykt, : 12 ö 1

3auſennt.

Zrigcalier |
if

* b
-Dr. Galt, xt ; 142
Vttingbam. Guy
s better ane
wering the
liſtances }
nakes this,
Durobriv#s

> © 2
3 Toeditork r r 22 ;

4% _ 4+ we we

— 0

S£. „ —— — —— —— . — 8
— ũ—ñ- — — — — — —

——— —

—
—— —— — — *

N DS 0 — — * As

— — — tm.

-
— —
r

— — —

D

99 „„

AS 4
— *

\
5
1
7
-

— jw
— 1 *

PR RU] T kr -

Brodhobnr * |
Ialrall
R N

2

— — oreat
ÞMidle Lanehamt \
EE * Small Punham |
Foldborte (

O F
Wilton

mY mnotn
Sttton
N Oo F * 12 4 "rletory

3

. ＋ * | Solli . [ Envy a
2 n »>
Laggrorth Wo Ag n wary : oth * V —
Aujcomb & St ot ay = 3 4 — F \ 55a 7 e
M A & * 2 relany - ty I £4. \
5 n . _
co Welhng of "uit av.
41 l 77 By "Bray FI —
N ewarke 2 — Yin, 2 en
Dum
. N L. *
3 Dk 7

CD

Nanni

IL EC ES T E RAU

5 aw /
Munytes O/ ee 7 2,1 Loudon [ " 4
1

Vrmondhands 4

2 1 . as

Det =, Glo 3:1

-v

roy oh ton

275 11 75

Some. rþ1-® % ay
AP 0 N me a.

a>. rob

he

7 * 2 1

> \ % ' ©
p. A *
m_ x N

W_

-

(rn that 2

- *
8 thre. . & V;

* 3 *

1 — Au or 12
ö ne 25 A Ai // | h. Now mankh es WA
| * WG.

2 "keen T4
AD DONS epham *

2 - 4-e-
3 — 7

22

8

S Linoroodo
N T2

8 EPS + HAN

*
a
Pl

INC

e BURN Wa APO N
amt 20;

h1tton

ub er
TE NE

WOT, Bon
* 2 7

8 Volton Aal In n
r vb LES I

l

V7 ja
ee

* 5 Nr | ir thy:
WEL HS 5 .
5 *
e 5
LO:

: 72 5 ”
F. - 7 WER.
q , 1 gt.

„ 2 re And 7:4

1 mby Fu Bri
1 af Aaron 72 * L

brig Biggereick

ATED

x Goat XL

RN Warg N
rot At

"po
73 x
| Ruadping

ens 6 4 ,

ha,

J 3
> IE
| * 7
.

*
4 .
pe 1 855 Ss, Lrringts

lines hr SN

vn Regis

een lug, Tar Fins SVames
Low Howe Hove

} Fleet Fon 9 SL. =
VWA O N

Gr owl a —Dowghttale & +

O F |

a o
'* ,
* —
| *
911
*
.
o
,
| as
0 2
*
.
o
-
- oy n
5
* 4 N
*
*
u
E
4
%
.. |
o
*
—
T
0
1 ,
4
.
is
;
[ 5
|
| |
ww
,
.
as. 4
as +
* 4
* mee vo
- . 2 A — & d —
| AAP * K |
Ee | * a
— — * — —

.

.
4
"4
*
4
—
- *
5
7
*

<4.
| I"

*

* *
> 1
2 a *
* « 3 .
-” 7 * 5 8
” ;
. ©

,
*
N
-
s
-
hs *
* 2
_—Y

The Spaws.

il. ina.

: Depirg:ſenrs.

5
4a

ve-34 -

Burn,

4 This |
W rather 2
W Buers, 1
5 Heßolt, 0

re.
„*

5

2

*

N
* .
* = {OL 2 Map WO

_
vp

ä r ä

r
..x

9
＋ 7

4
2 - —— —
PT tbo ro manecn wc 8
Se ny — —

——
— _—

——

U
L

LINCOLNSHIRE. 558
part of the County is call'd Keſteven trom Gau- of women, did, by authority of Pope Eugenius
ſennæ, as the other part is nam'd Lindſey from the third, ann. 1148 (contrary to the Conſti-
the City Lindum, I would have the reader |tutions of Juſtinian, which forbad all double
take it as a bare Opinion, and paſs what judg- | Monaſteries, that is, of men and women promiſ-
; ment upon it he thinks fir. It is the current [cuouſly) introduce an Order of men and women;
; belief, that this Gauſeanz was demolith'd (as which encreaſed to that degree, that he himſelf
| Henry Archdeacon of Huntingdon relates) when the founded 13 Convents of this Order, and liv'd
Pics and Scots ravag'd this Country as far as to ſee in them ſeven hundred Gilbertine
Stanford; where our Hengiſt and his Saxons, | Fryers and eleven hundred Siſters : but their
with great Reſolution and Gallantry, ſtop'd [Chaſtity was not to be brag'd of, if we may
their progreſs, and forc'd them to fly in great [believe Nigellus a Satyriſt of that age, who

diforder ; leaving many dead, and many more thus upbraids them;
priſoners, behind them. [Between Stamford and

2 7 y 5 oy 7
a a OY OT OO ERS by

2

.
7
:

*.

;

34
4]
;

| Lincoln, in the Keſteven-diviſion, are many Harum ſunt quadam ſteriles, quædam pa-

© The Spaws. Spaws or mineral chalybiate Springs; as, at rientes,
Bourne, Walcot by Folkingham, Pickworth, New- I irgineoque tamen nomine cuncta tegunt. |
ton, Aunsby, Aſerby, and, as is ſaid, in the Qua paſtoralis baculi dotatur honore, |
grounds eaſt of Dunsby-hall, three miles north Ila quidem melius, fertiliuſque parit. |

© + 1;4,inſr4. of Sleeford : * Thoſe chiefly celebrated and Vix etiam quævis ſterilss reperitur in illis, |

us'd, are Bourne and Walt. | But to pro- Donec eis atas talia poſſe neget.
ceed. |

In the eaſt part of Keſteven, which lies to-] Some are good breeders here, and others |
wards Hoiland, as we travel to the north, the fail,

Dieing. firſt Town we meet with, is Deping, that is, But all is hid beneath the ſacred veil.

J as Ingulphus has it, a deep meadow, where Ri- She that with paſtoral ſtaff commands the reſt,
chard de Rulos Chamberlain to William the Con-] As with more zeal, ſo with more fruit is |
2 queror, by throwing up a great bank, ſhut out the bleſt.
pepirg: ſenrs. river Wailand, which us'd often to overflow 3 and| Nor any one the courteſie denies, |
1 built on the ſaid bank many houſes, which in all Till age ſteals on, and robs them of their | |
made a large village. This Deping, or deep meadow, Joys.
is indeed very properly ſo call'd ; for the plain |
which lies beneath it, many miles in com-] Next is Folkingham, which alſo + belong'd + Belongs, C.
paſs, is the deepeſt in all this marſhy Coun- to the Clintons ; but was once a Barony of the
try, and the rendezvous of many waters ; and; Gaunts, deſcended from Gilbert de Gandavo or Lords of
what is very ſtrange, the chanel of the river Gaunt, || nephew to Baldwin Earl of Flanders, Folkingham,
Glen, which is pent in by its banks, and runs on whom William the Conqueror, very libe-|| Nebete. 1
from the weſt, lies much higher than this rally, beſtow'd great Poſſeſſions; for thus an
plain. [The manour came to the Crown by | old Manuſcript has it, Memorandum, That there
the black Prince's marrying Joan the Fair | came-in with William the Conqueror one Gilbert
Maid of Kent, who was daughter to Edmund | de Gaunt, to whom the ſaid William (having
of Woodſtock Earl of Kent, and of Margaret | diſpoſſeſs d a woman nam'd Dunmoch) granted the
ſiſter and heireſs to Thomas Wake, the laſt of! Manour of Folkingham, with the appurtenances
that line. It is very remarkable, that ſhe had thereunto belonging, and the Honour annex d to it.
f been twice marry'd before, and twice divorced.\, The ſaid Gilbert had Walter de Gaunt, his ſor
burn. Next, is Burn, {which by the ſame marriage | and heir, who had Gilbert de Gaunt, his for
\ came to the Crown, together with Deping, and heir, and Robert de Gaunt his younger ſon ;
© + This was and is] remarkable for the Inauguration ot | aud the ſaid Gilbert, ſon and heir, had Alice,
þ = at King Edmund, and for a caſtle of the Wales ;] his daughter and heir, who was marry'd to Earl
Þ $:4vik pic Who obtain'd for it of King Edward the tirſt, | Simon, and gave many Tenements to Religious Hou-

"tk the privilege of a Market. [Leland's account ſes, but dy d without iſſue by her. Then, the Iuhe-

of it, is, That in his time, there appeared |} ritance came to the aforeſaid Robert de Gaunt

great ditches, and the Dungeon-bill of it againſt | her uncle, who had Gilbert his ſon and heir, who
the weſt-end of the Priory, ſomewhat diſtant} had another Gilbert his fon and heir, who had alſo

from it, as on the other ſide of the ſtreet back- | another Gilbert his fon and heir, by whom the Ma-

ward; That it belong'd to the Lord Wale, nour of Folkingham, with its appurtenances, ' was

and, That much ſervice of the Hake-fee was | given to Edward, fon of Henry King of Eng- pi. 27 H. 2:
done to it, and every Feodary knew his ſtation, land. This Gilberr, as it is in the Pleas of Rot. 13. 1
and place of ſervice. The medicinal Spring a- the Crown, from which this Genealogy is Linc.

224 — —

e n
„ 9

4 riſing here in a farm-yard, is as ſtrong as that |prov'd, ſued for ſervice, againſt Milliam de Scremby. | 4
3 at Aſtrop in Northamptonſhire, and is much | At laſt, the King gave it to Henry de Brlomonte; j
3 drunk in ſummer-time. That other alſo, ſe- for nothing is more clear, than that he held it 1

k ven miles farther to the north, near the edge in Edward the fecond's reign. Near this, is Inq. 4 Ed. 2.
* Walzzt, of the fenns at Maleot by Folkingham, is much | Skrekingham, remarkable for the death of Alfric>%.ckinglam,
13 frequented by the Gentry of late years, and is] the ſecond Earl of Leiceſter, kill'd by Hubba
J ſomething ſtronger than the other; purging | the Dane. Which place, it is very probable
3 both by urine and ſtool, Not far from Bourn, | that Ingulphus ſpeaks of, when he writes thus,
& Grimsthorp. is Grimsthorp, the ſeat of his Grace the Duke | In Keſteven, three Danifh petty Kings were ſlain ;
of Ancaſter, Lord Great Chamberlain of En- and they imer d them in a certain village heretofore
B gland.) calꝰd Laundon, but no | Tre-king-ham, from this
be north- More to“ the eaſt, ſtands Imham, heretofore] burial of the three Kings. |
. a the Barony of Andrew Lutterell : And then Sem-| More to the eaſt, is Hather, famous for no- Hather.
: 18 pringham, famous for a very fine houſe builtſ thing but the f Bafſeys or Buſteys, who live here, 4 Now. the
nous, C by Edward Baron Clinton, atterwards Earl off and derive their pedigree from Roger de Buſley, N:wions.
bare. Lincoln, [which is now ruinous; | but hereto- who was contemporary with. the Conqueror, Buſſy.
ng: fore, for the Religious Order of the Gilber- And then Sleford, a caſtle of the Biſhops of Steford,
© trier Gil. £745 inſtituted by one Gilbert Lord of the Lincoln, erected by Alexander, Biſhop 3 where
© !*'rines, place. For he, as they write, being an admi- alſo John Huſſy, the firſt and laſt Baron of that Baron Huſſy.

rable perſon, and ſingularly skilled in the education name, built himſelf a feat, but loſt his head

t :

for

04040 6 Eee gn Sag Sed ESE

—— " Funn u ACER W WũÜV—dk nne —
— — i Fs. Aa — 2 * 8
””, OR RR_rTT OO. 1
—— — - " N
. : __ . _ e

669 : CORITANLI. : =

for engaging in that Inſurrection of 1537, vent regain this his hereditary Eſtate.
when the feuds and differences about Religion | About the caſtle, are found the ſtones call'd

firſt broke out in England. A few miles off, | Aſtroites, which reſemble little ſtars, mix'd one Aſter
ſtands Kime, from whence a noble family, call'd | with another, having five rays in every corner, "ky,

Ki
me, de Kime, had their name; but the Umfranvils|and in the middle of every ray a hollow. This 7 Bof-Bri

(three of whom were ſummon'd to Parliament, | ſtone among the Germans had its name from br

Earls of An- by the name of Earls of Angus in Scotland) Victory; for they think, as Georgius Agricola 0 k. p. 1

Bus. became at laſt poſſeſſors of it. The Sages of | writes in his ſixth book of Minerals, that Nalin
the Common Law would not allow the firſt | whoſoever carries this ſtone about him, ſhall Win Nottin-
of theſe (foraſmuch as Angus was not within | certainly be ſucceſsful againſt his enemies. But _—_—
the bounds of the Kingdom of England) to|I have not yet had an opportunity to make the 1 *
be an Earl, till he produced in open Court, experiment, whether this ſtone of our's, when ;
theKing's Writ by which he was ſummon'd to [put in vinegar, will move out of its place and © + caſtrum.
Parliament under the title of Earl of Angus. From | whirl round, like that in Germany. The
the Umfranvils, it came to the Talbois ; one of | Vale beneath this caſtle, commonly call'd from

which family, named Gilbert, was by Hen. 8. created | it, Ti he Vale of Belvoir, 1s pretty large, and ren-
Baron Talbois; whoſe two ſons dy d without iſſue, der d exceeding pleaſant by corn- fields and pa- ** Vat q
and ſo the inheritance went by females to the |{tures. It lies, part in Leiceſterſhire, part in by
families of the Dimocks, Inglebies, and others. | Nottinghamſhire, and part in Lincolnſhire,
Temple More to the weſt, ſtands Temple Bruer, that | If not in this very place, yet certainly very
Bruer. is, as I interpret it, Temple in the Heath: it|nearit, ſtood formerly that Margidunum which Mars;
ſeems to have been a Preceptory of the Tem- Antoninus mentions next to Vernometum; n
plars, for there are ſtill the ruinous walls of a [appears plainly enough, both by its name, and
demoliſh'd Church, not unlike thoſe of the |by the diſtances from Vernometum and the Town
New Temple in London. Near it, is Blankeney, Ad Pontem, otherwiſe Paunton ; for Antoninus
Barons Dein- once the Barony of the Deincourts, who flou- ger it between them. Ir ſeems to have ta-
AY riſh'd in a continu'd ſucceſſion, from the co- | ken this ancient name from Marga, and from
ming-in of the Normans to the time of Hen- | the ſituation. For Marga, among the Britains,
ry the ſixth, and then the heir-male fail'd in| was a ſort of earth with which they manur'd
iliam, whoſe two ſiſters and heirs were mar-| their grounds; and Dunum, which ſignify' d a
ry'd, the one to William Lovel, the other to | hill, is applicable only to high places. But I
Ralph Cromwell. I was the more willing to] do for all that queſtion this etymology, f ſee-z See Avi
take notice of this Family, that I might in| ing there is bur little Marle found in this place Out by
ſome meaſure anſwer the deſire of Edmund] (the not ſearching for it, being perhaps the Rutlandhirg
Baron Deincourt, who was ſo very earneſt to] reaſon ; ) except the Britains by the name of appar tic
preſerve the memory of his name, that having | Marga underſtand || Plaiſter-ſtone, which, as —
no iſſue-male, he petition'd King Edward the | am inform'd, is dug-up not far from hence, [| Can.
Inq. 21 H. 6. ſecond, for liberty To make over his Manours and (as Pliny declares in his Natural Hiſtory)
Pat. 10 Ed. 2. and Arms to whomſoever he pleas'd ; for he imagin'd was in great requeſt among the Romans, who
| that both his Name and Arms would go to the grave | us d it in their Plaiſterings and Cielings. ils
with him, and was very ſollicitous to have them ſur-| Thro' this part of the Shire, runs Witham, gi wing
vive, and be remember d. Accordingly, the King | a little river, but very full of Pikes; and the
comply'd, and he had Letters Patents for that | northern parts of the Diviſion are bounded by
end. Yet this ſirname, for ought I can find, it. It's head is at a little town of the ſame
is now quite extin&, and would have been for-| name, not far from the ruins of Bitham-caſtle, gitbam.
gotten for ever, if the memory of it had not] which, as we find in an old Pedigree, was
been preſerv'd in Books. given by William the firſt to Stephen Earl of
In the welt-part of Keſteven, where this | Albemarle and Holderneſs, to enable him to feed
County borders on Leiceſterſhire, on a ſteep, | his ſon, as yet a little infant, with fine white
Belvoir, or and as it ſeems artificial hill, ſtands Belvoir or| bread ; for at that time nothing was eaten in
Beauvoir-ca- Beauvoir-caſtle, ſo call'd (whatever the name | Holderneſs, but oat-bread, altho' it is now
tle, was formerly) from its pleaſant proſpe& ; | very little us d there. This caſtle, in the reign
which (with the little Monaſtery adjoyning, | of Edward the third (at what time William de Matt. pi,
and belonging to Leiceſterſhire, as Mr. Bur- Fortibus Earl of Albemarle, rebelliouſly forti-
ton pleads,)| is ſaid to have been built by To-|fy'd it, and plunder'd the whole neighbour-
- deneins a Norman; from whom, by the Alle- hood) was laid almoſt level with the ground.
nies Britons, and by the Barons Roos, it came | Afterwards, it became the ſeat, and as it were
Now Dukes, by inheritance to the Mamours, f Earls of Rut-|the head of the Barony of the Colvils, who Colvil.
land. [Mr. Burton differs ſomewhat from this|liv'd for a long time in very great honour,
account; being willing to have it rais'd by one | but failing in Edward the third's time, the
of the Houſe of Alleney; whoſe firſt name in- | Gernons and the Baſſet of Sapcot, had this Inhe-
deed he does not deny might be Totney, or |ritance in right of their wives.
Todeney. He grounds his opinion upon ſfome| A little way from the head of the river
ancient Records about the time of King Hen- | }/#ham, [at a ſmall diſtance from it, lies
ry the firſt, or elder, proving the Albenies to be | Boothby-pannel, upon which Dr. Robert Sander- Bootbby- Herlaxt
then reſident here; who were true Natives|ſon, particularly famous for his great know- Pane
of this land, and no Normans or Stran-|ledge in Caſuiltical Divinity ( who was for A golden
gers, as appears by the addition to their name, |ſome years Rector there) has entail'd a laſting Helmet.
viz. Willielmus de Albiniaco, Brito.] By the firſt |name and honour : as he did afterwards upon
of the Mannours (Thomas) as I have heard, it|the Regius-Profeſlor's Chair at Oxford, and
was rebuilt, after it had lain in ruins for|the See of Lincoln. The reaſon of the name
many years. For William Lord Haſtings, in | we learn from + Leland, who tells us, there was Lel. M.
ſpight to Thomas Lord Roos who ſided with | one Bouthely of very ancient time, whoſe Heir- P. 17. Somerton

— — —

} 4 Itinerar

Granth:

Fee Nabe
in Lor

Beltc

Sedgbroc

Henry the ſixth, did almoſt demoliſh it, and, | general was marry'd to Pan. — Dur
upon the attainder of the Lord Roos, had it] Hard by, upon the river, ſtands Paunton, Pauptos. nl,
granted him by Edward the fourth, with very | which boaſts much of its antiquity : chequer d Lords
large poſleſſions. But Edmund Baron Roos, ſon | pavements of the Romans are often dug-up in Bellom
of Thomas, did by the favour of Henry the ſe-'it, and here was formerly a bridge over the

river,

K Fs
A NS rn Be. —

*
F

6 ” L Ic ww
FOR. e

TIRETER

= —_—
1

4

1 * _—__——

E

| river. For both the name Paunton, and its
F diſtance, not only from Margidunum, but alſo
A rontem. from Croco-calana, ſhe w that this is that Ad
. ile poem, which Antoninus places ſeven miles
| i in Not from Margidunum. For Antoninus calls that
| nne town Croco-calana Which we now call f Ancaſter,
anten. being at preſent only one direct ſtreet along
» Nottin- the military way; one part of which not long
kbamſhire, ſince belong'd to the Yeſcies, ind the other to
EGale, P. 192* the Crommwells, In the entrance on the South-
| fide, I ſaw a trench, and it is very evident it
1. ln. Was a * Camp formerly; as on the other ſide
towards the Weſt, we ſee certain ſummer-
| camps of the Romans. It ſeems to have had

that Britiſh name from it's ſituation, for it lies

=
_
2
.

te Vale g under a hill, and we read in Giraldus Cambren-
elyair, fis and Ninnus, that among the Britains Cruc

maur ſignify'd a great hill, and Cruc-occhidient, a
mount to the weſt ; but I leave others to find out
the 1 of the word Colana. The anti-
ity of this town appears by the Roman
© + 1tlnerar. coins [ (ſome of which 4 Leland found to have
M. p. 20. been diſcover d before his time ; )] as alſo b
! the vaults that are often met with, by it's
ſituation on the military-way, and by the
fourteen miles diſtance between this and Lincoln
(the road lying over a green plain, call'd An-
caſter-heath; ) for juſt ſo many, Antoninus makes
it to be, between Croco-calana and Lindum.
Burt let us follow the river. |
Grantham, Near Paumon, we ſee Grantham, a pretty po-

Aargidy.
um,

See Maia, pulous town, [and a large market, and Cor-
verton, in ration; | adorn'd with a School, built by
—_— ichard Fox Biſhop of Wincheſter, and with
ation a fair Church having a ſpire ſteeple ſtwo hun-
lanum, dred and eighty foot in height ;1 of which
ian. abundance of ſtories are told. [ At this place,

| See Wakefield, a weekly Lecture, very well endow'd, was

in Yorkihire, founded by the munificence of the pious Lady

Sigili, Camden. Henry, eldeſt ſon of Henry d'Naſſau

iy.Withan, Seignior d Auverquerque a deſcendant from Mau-

rice of Naſſau Prince of Orange, was, in the

roth year of William the third, advanced to

the title of Earl of Grantham, being created

itham, at the ſame time Viſcount Boſton and Baron

of Alford Within a mile of this town, ſtands

Belton, Belton, a new-built houſe, belonging to the

family of the Brownlows (now Lords Tyrconnel

in Ireland ; ) one of the moſt regular and beau-

tiful ſeats in this County. Over-againſt Belton,

Sedgbrook, is Sedgbrook; in the Church whereof, is a par-

ticular burying- place of the family of the Mark-

latt. Par, hams, to whom this Lordſhip, till very lately,

| belong'd. Of this family, was the famous

Judge Markham, who being diſplaced on a very

honourable account, and having thereby deſer-

vedly obtain'd the name of the Upright Judge,

alyill retir'd hither, and built this burying-place,

and over it a Chamber, where he lodg'd, and

ſpent his latter days in great piety and devo-

tion. Here alſo he was bury'd in a fair mar-

ble tomb, which ſtill remains, not much de-
faced.] |

Beneath Grantham, near the little village

Herlaxton, was a brazen veſſel plow'd up in the

laſt age [ſave one; wherein they found an

A golden old-faſhion'd gold helmet, ſtudded with jewels,

Helmet. which was preſented to Katharine of Spain,

Queen Dowager to King Henry the eighth.

[In the ſame Pot (as Leland faith) they tound

1 alſo beads of ſilver, and writings corrupted. |

+ Lel. From hence, Witham (in a long courſe north-

Lehen. ward) runs near Somertos-caſtle, built by A-

bern thony Bec Biſhop of Durham, by whom it was

given to Edward the firſt; and a little after to

ene of William de Bellomont, who about that time came

*llomont. into England: from him did deſcend the fa-

zoothby⸗ Herlaxton.

annel.

„ 17+

Pauntor

mily of the Viſcounts de Bellomonte, which,

in the laſt age [ſave one, ! was in a man-

ner extint, when the ſiſter and heir of

the laſt Viſcount was matry'd to John Lord

Lovel of Tichmerſh ; but we have ſpoken

already of this family, in Leiceſterſhire. From

hence, the river winds towards the South-eaſt,

through a fenny country, and diſcharges it ſelf

into the German Ocean a little below Boſtor,

after it has bounded Keſteven to the North.

Altho” this river falls from a ſteep deſcent and

large chanel, into the ſea, yet by reaſon of

the great floods in winter, it overflows the

fenns on each ſide, with no ſmall loſs to the

8 3 however, theſe waters are drain'd

in the ſpring by ſluices, which they call Gores.

On the other ſide of Witham, lies the third

part of this County, call'd Lindſey, and by Bede Lindſey,

Lindiſſi, from the chief city 4 this ſhire: Ir

is bigger than Holland, and Keſteven ; jetti

out into the Ocean with a large front, whi

has the ſea continually playing upon it to the

Eaſt and North; on the Well, is the river

Trent, on the South it is parted from Keſteven

by the Witham and by the Foſs-dike (ſeven Fog-dike,

miles in length) which was cut by Henry the Hoveden,

firſt between the Witham and the Trent, for

the convenience of Carriage in theſe parts. At

the entrance of this Dike into Trent,

ſtands Torkeſey, in Saxon Tupcerig, now a lit- Torkeſey.

tle mean town, but heretofore very noted:

there were in it before the Norman times

(as it is in Domeſday-book) two hundred Bur- Domeſday:

gers, who enjoy d many privileges, on condi- book.

tion, that they ſhould carry the King's Am-

baſſadors, as often as they came that way,

down the river Trent, in their own barges,

and conduct them as far as York. [Their

ancient Charter is ſtill preſerv'd here; and

they enjoy thereby the privilege of a toll, from

ſtrangers who bring cattel or goods this way;

as alſo the privilege of a Fair on 1

in Whitſun- week, much reſorted to by thoſe

parts. Our Countryman Sheringham ſeems to

ſtrain too hard, when he endeavours to make

the name of this place favour his conjecture,

which he grounds upon Mela, that the Turks

were the ſame nation with the Tyrſagete and

the reſt of the Goths, from whom our Ance-

ſtors were deſcended : Unleſs this were coun-

tenanc'd by ſome peculiar paſſage in hiſtory,

there is nothing but the bare ſimilitude of

names ; and that too can contribute nothing,

if Mr. Somner's opinion may be taken, who

derives it from choge, a cockboat, and ige an

iſland. Two miles weſt from Lincoln, is Sbel- Sxelling ·

ingthorpe, the Lordſhip whereot (of grear * va- thorpe.

lue) was f bequeath'd to Chriſt's-Hoſpiral in Loy ge 8

London by the Lord of it, Henry Stone. This 1 hat

worthy perſon gave alſo, along with it, his 1693,

whole || perſonal eſtate to the ſame pious uſe.} y| 4000 l.
At the joyning of the Dike to Witham,

ſtands the Metropolis of this County, call'd by

Ptolemy and Antoninus Lindum, by the Bri- Lindum,

tains Lindcoit from the woods ( inſtead of

which it is in ſome places falſely written Luit-

coit;) Bede calls it Lindecollinum, and the city Lincoln,

Lindecollina, but whether from it's ſituation on

a hill, or becauſe it was formerly a Colony, I

will not undertake to determin ; the Saxons

call'd it Lindo-collyne, and Lind-cyllancear-

rep, the Normans Nichol, we Lincoln, the La-

tins Lincolnin. From whence Alexander Ne-

cham in his Treatiſe de Divina Sapientia :

Lindifia columen Lincolnia, five columna,

Munifica felix gente, repleta bonis,
B b b b |

Her

p.: — —

|

—— — —

— —
. _ -

” 4 *” EF
. * — -
— —

. * Py
c _ .
* 8

* —— — — —
*

— handy

1 — 1 5

"oO

CORITANTI.

Pag. 141.
255+

+ Fol. 24. b. has obſerv'd the name Nichol many

Her pillar thee, great Lincoln, Lindſey owns,
Fam 4 for thy ſtore of goods, and bounteous
ons.

Mr. Twyne, in his f Breviary of Britain, ſays,
times
in ancient Charters, and in the Records of the
Earls thereof, written in the French tongue.
And even as low as Edward the fourth's time,
William Caxton, in his Chronicle, calls it Ni-
hol.) Others believe, it had its name from
the river Witham, which, qe Buys was for-
merly call'd Linds ; but for that they have no
authority. For my part, I cannot agree with
them; for Necham himſelf, who wrote five

+ Four, C. hundred years ago, calls this river, Vitham, in

Itiner. p. 21.

— Itiner. p. 21. ĩit is that

Bede .

the following verſes ;

Trenta tibi piſces mittit, Lincolnia, ſed te
Nec dedigneris, Withama parums adit.

Trent, | Lincoln, ſends the fiſh that load thy
Ils,

And little Witham creeps along thy walls,

And waits on thee himſelf: ah! be not

ud,
dies Hs wt of the humble flood.

I ſhould rather derive it from the Britiſh word
Lhin, which with them ſignifies a Lake ; for I
was inform'd by the citizens, that formerly
the Mitham has been wider at Swanpole below
the city; altho' at this day it is pretty broad.
I need take no notice of Lindaw in Germany
(ſanding by the Lake Acronius,) nor of Linter-
num in Italy, ſituated upon a Lake; ſince Tal-
hin, Glau-uhin, Linlithquo, are towns in Britain,
ſtanding upon Lakes. The City is very large
and noted; built on the fide of a hill, where
the Witham winds about to the Eaſt, and, be-
ing divided into three ſmall chanels, watereth
the lower part of it. That the ancient Lindum
of the Britains ſtood on the very top of the
hill, which is of very difficult aſcent, and
ran much farther in length northward than the
gate, Newport ; is evident, by the plain marks
of a rampire and deep ditches remaining to
this day. [Leland ſays, that beyond old Lin-
coln, much money was found in the north-
fields ; and I know not any one who removes
Lindum from hence, except Talbot, who fixes
it at Lenton in Nottinghamſhire ; which opi-
nion is conſider'd in it's proper place.] Vor-
timer, that warlike Britain, who had ſo often
worſted the Saxons, dy'd in this City, and was
here inter'd, altho* he left commands to the
contrary : For he (as it is related by Ninnius,
the diſciple of Eluodugus) hop'd and believ'd,
that, [like Scipio's, | his Ghoſt would defend
Britain from the Saxons, if he ſhould be bu-
ry'd on the Sea-ſhore, But the Saxons, after
they had demoliſh'd this old Lindum, firſt in-
habited the South-ſide of the hill, and fortified
it with the ruins of the former town; then,
they went down to the river, and built in a
place call'd Wickanforde, and wall'd it where
it was not guarded by the water. [Of this
land tells us, he heard ſay, that
the lower part of Lincoln was all mariſh, and
won by 2 and inhabited for the conve-
nience of the water hard by; that in it he
ſaw eleven Parochial Churches, beſides one in
ruins; and that the Hhite-Friers was on the
welt ſide of the High-ſtreet here.] The Saxons
being ſeated here, Paulinus, as Bede affirms,
preach'd the word of God in the Province of Linde-
ley, and firſt of all converted the Governour of the

city Lindcolnia ( whoſe name was Blecca) with his
family. He alſo built in this city a curious Church
of ſtone, the roof whereof is either fall'n down for
want of repairing, or beaten down by ſome enemy ;
but the walls are in great meaſure ſtanding. After-
wards; the Danes won it twice by aflaulr ;
firſt, when thoſe pillaging Troops took it, out
of whoſe hands Edmund Ironfide recover d it by
torce ; ſecondly, when Canutus took it, from
whom it was retaken by AEthelred, who, on
his return out of Normandy, valiantly drove
Canutus out of this town, and beyond all ex-
pectation recover'd England, when it was well-
nigh loſt. In Edward the Confeſſor's reign,
there were in it, as it is ſet down in Domeſ-
day-book, one thouſand and ſeventy manſions inha-
bited, and twelve Lagemen having Sac and Soc. In
the Norman times, as Malmsb relates, it
was one 1 the more populous cities of England, and
a mart for all goods coming by land and water; for
at that time, there were tax'd in it (as it is
in the ſaid Domeſday-book,) Nine hundred Bur-

one hundred and fix, were deſtroy'd for the
caſtle, with ſeventy four more without the limits

the caſtle, not by the oppreſſion of the Sheriff and
his Miniſters, but by misfortune, poverty, and fire.
William the firſt, to ſtrengthen ir and to k

the citizens in awe, builc a very large _
ſtrong Caſtle on the ridge of the hiil; and,
about the ſame time, Remigius Biſhop of Dor-
cheſter, for a further ornament, transfer'd his
See hither from Dorcheſter, a little town in the
furtheſt part of his Dioceſe. And when the
Church which had been er-&ed by Paulinus, was
decay d and fal'n, The aforeſaid Remigius bought
certain Lands in the very higheſt part of the city

Huntingdon notes) with its mighty towers, and
built in a ſtrong place a ſtrong and fine Church, de-
dicated to the Virgin Mary, and endow'd it with
forty four Prebends ; at which the Archbiſhop
ot York was much offended, he claimed the
Juriſdiction of the Place. This Church being diſ-
figured by fire, was afterwards repair d (as the
ſaid Henry mentions) with very great perfection
in point of workmanſhip, by Alexander that muni-
ficent Biſhop of Lincoln, of whom the fore-
ſaid William of Malmsbury ſpeaks thus ; See-
ing he was lool d on as a prodigy for the ſmallneſs of
his Body, his mind ſtrove to excel and to make the
greater Figure And among other things, a Poet
of that age wrote thus ;

Qui dare feſtinaus gratis, ne danda rogen-
tur,

Quod nondum dederat, nondum fe credit ha-
bere.

Still your: frank gifts preventing each re-
ueſt,
What 15 not yet beſtow d he thinks not yet
poſleſs d.

And not only theſe two, but Robert Bloet,
who was predeceſſor to Alexander, and R. de
Beaumeis, Hugo Burgundus, and their ſucceſſors,
contributed to bring this work (which was too
much for one Biſhop) to its preſent ſtate and
grandeur. The whole pile is not only wy
{umptuous, but very beautiful, and rais'd wi

Weſt-end, which attracts and delights the Be-
holder's eye. Although there be ſeveral Tombs
of Biſhops and others, in this Church, yet the
only ones to be taken notice of here, are, that
of braſs in which the Entrails of the moſt excel-

lent Queen Eleanor, wife to Edward the firſt,

are

gelles; and many dwelling-houſes, to the number of

near the Caſtle, which overtops all ( as Henry of

He died,
1233.
Matth. P.
nnd an anc
3.

The Sta

* So ſai
ann, 10

+ Ann, 16
| Now, m

ruinous,

+ Stat. 2
| 6 45.

exquiſite art; eſpecially, that f porch on the pyylut

High-dil

K

i... ” Wy 1 * WE.

are inter d; and that of Nicholas de Cantelupo, | The Spittle in the ſtreet; and ftirther; ſto Mber- Phil. Tranſ.
with one or two belonging to the family of ew, where (as alſo a mile beyond; to the RG”.
Burgberſb; alſo, that of Katharine Swinford, north) are to be ſeen the foundations of Ro- Hiberbow.
third wife to John of Gaunt Duke of Lanca- Iman Buildings, with Tiles, Coins; and other
ſter, and mother of the Somerſet- family ; with] marks of Antiquity ; then through Scawby-
whom lies buried her * Joan, ſecond wood, by Broughton (where have been found Ro-
wife to Ralph Nevill the firſt Earl of Weſtmor-|man Tiles and Bri „ |] and abundance of pe-[ Phil. Tranſ.
land, who made her husband happy in a nu-|rtrify'd Shells; ſome with the Fiſh in them; N. 665.
merous iſſue. ; and, near it, a petrifying Spring ;) then,

The Dioceſe of the Biſhops of Lincoln (of|through Appleby-laye ; and at ſome little di-
far greater extent, than that of the Bifhops of ſtance from Roxby and M intertun (at the for-
Sidnaceſter, who in the primitive Saxon-Church|mer of which was lately diſcovered a Roman
Preſided in this County,) contain'd under it] Pavement, of Brick, Slate, and Cauk, ſet in
ſo many Counties, that it ſunk under it's own [curious figures and order; as at }interton-Cliff, Wintertors
— 4 and although Henry 2. took out of it have been Roman Buildings; and at Alkbur- Clif,
the Dioceſe of Ely, and Henry the eighth thoſe |row, two miles to the weſt, there is Rill a ſmall Alkburrow.
of eo get, 1 and Oxford, yet it is ſtill ac-|ſquare-camp or entrenchment : ) Then, the
counted the largeſt Biſhoprick in England, way (leaving Mintringham about half a mile)
both in juriſdiction and the number of ſhires, and goes to the Humber. It is called all along
contains no leſs than one thoufand two hundred by the Country-People, The High-Strezt, be-
forty ſeven Pariſh-Churches. Many excellent] ing caſt- up to a great height, and ſome ſeven
Biſhops have govern'd this See, fince Remigius; yards broad.]
but it is beſide my defign to enumerate them: | About three miles from Lincoln, I obſerv'd |
And therefore I make no mention of Robert|another military high-way, call'd Ouldſtreet, go- Ouldſtreet.
Bloer, on whom William Rufus ſet an amer-|ing out of this with a plain ridge to the weſt.
cement of fifty thouſand pounds, alledging I ſuppoſe, it is that which led to Agelocum the
that the Biſhop's title to the city of Lincoln next garriſon to Lindum. But I will follow the
was invalid ; nor, of that generous Alexander, | road that I am in.
who was ſo extravagantly fond of prodigious| The Witham being now paſt Lincoln, runs
buildings; nor yet of Hugo Burgundus, who be-|[on one hand, at ſome diſtance from Nocton, Noon,
ing canoniz'd, had his s carry'd to the] formerly a Religious Houſe, where is a rety
grave, on the ſhoulders of King John and hit beautiful ſeat built by Sir Miliam Elys ; and,
Nobles ; out of reſpect and duty (as my Author|on the other hand, at about the ſame diſtance, l
fays) to God, and the ſainted Prelate. I muſt] by Wragbye, a member of a Barony call'd
I not however omit to mention two perſons, | Truſbutt ; the title to which was convey'd by Barons of
© Us died. ann, the one, Robert Grofteſt, a much better Scholar] the Barons of Roos, to the Mannours now Trusbutt.
pa and Linguiſt than could be expected from the Dukes of Rutland. [Here, Sir Edmund 4 Earls, C.
© Match. Paris, age he livd in; an awful Reprover of the Pope, Turner founded an Hoſpital for Clergy-
ind an noni Monitor to the King, a Lover of Truth, a Cor-| men's Widows and others, in the year 16973
w Hiltort- Hor of Prelates, a Direttor of Prieſts, an Inſtru-| ind here, in 1676. a woman brought forth a
* Hor of the Clergy, a Maintainer of Scholars, a] male- child with two heads, which liv'd ſome
Preacher to the People, and a diligent Searcher of hours: ] After, it ſees the old ruin'd walls of
Scripture, a Mallet to the Romaniſts, &c. The Beapbena, or Peartaneu, commonly call'd Bard- Bardney.
other is the Right reverend Father Thomas | ney, heretofore a famous Monaſtery ; where
| Cooper, who hath highly deferved of the Com-] (as Bede writes) King Oſwald was inter'd, 054414's
= mon-wealth of Learning, and of the Church ; and had a banner gold and purple over Banner,

— At DA. — — —

| The Staple.

and whom I am bound in particular to ho-
nour, as the Maſter in whoſe School I muſt
gratefully own I had my education. The Ci-
ty it felt alſo flouriſh'd for a long time, be-

made by Edward the third a Staple or
» By for Wool, Leather, Lead, Cc. ough
it has not undergone any laſting or fatal Ca-

his tomb. The Hiſtorians of the foregoing
ages, did not account it enough to extol this
moſt Chriſtian Hero Oſwald, unleſs to his
glorious exploits they added ridiculous mira-
cles; all which I induſtriouſly omit. But that
his Hand remained here, uncorrupted, for

many hundred years, our anceſtors believ'd,

lamities; yet it has been once burnt ; once] and a very ancient Poet has told us:
beſieged, bur in vain, by King Stephen, who
was there overthrown, and made a priſoner ;
and once taken by Henry 3, when it was held
againſt him by his rebellious Barons, who had
called-in Lewis of France, to take upon him
the Government of England. However, it did
not ſuffer much damage. Since that, it is
incredible how it hath ſunk by degrees under
the weight of Time ; for of fifry Churches

*$o ſaid, that were remember d in it by our grandfa-

Nullo verme perit, nulla putredine tabet
Dextra viri, nullo conſtringi frigore, nullo
Diſſalvi fervore poteſt, ſed ſemper eodem

Inmutata ſtatu perſiſtit, mortua vivit.

Secure from worm and rottenneſs ap-

pears |
The wondrous hand ; nor cold nor heat it

ears,
\ any, 1607. thers [(Leland ſays, in his time, there was a| Nor e're diſſolv d with cold or parch'd with
e } Ann, 1607, tradition of fifty two ; )1 there are t now ſcarce heat,
„ | Now, many eighteen remaining; (to which number they] Lives after death, and keeps it's former
) ruins, were reduced by Act of Parliament, in the ſtate.
1 Ty Ed. + reign of Edward the ſixth.)] It is (that I
1 may alſo add this) fifty three degrees and] This Monaſtery, as Petrus Bleſenſis writes, Appendix to
5 twelve minutes in Latitude, and twenty two beim formerly burnt down by the fury of the Danes, Ingulphus.
 þ ru degrees and fifty rwo minutes in 1 and far many years together not inhabited; Gilbert
- As that famous Roman high-way leads di-|de Gaunt the noble and devout Earl of Lincoln re-
8 High-dike, rectly from Stanford to Lincoln; ſo from hence | built it, and very bountifully annex d to it the tithes
e it goes Northward in a high and ſtreight, [ef al his manours, whereſoever they were, in En-
r but yet here and there diſcontinued, Cauſey, gland, beſides many other poſſeſſions. Afterwards,
» for about ten miles, to a little Village call d [F/itham is encreas'd by the little river Ban,

which

—

—— — —

2
- had

i —— _
——— —— — — oo
— —— 5 8 — *
—
N . , _ — © % 2
pe n 7 4 4
p
— * N 7 ö * *
23 5 a

-
— Ar — — ——— —
— =
* = — — —

_CORI

TAN I,

56

Horne-caſlle,

Winceby.
+ Ooh. 5
1643.

Dimock.

which riſing in the middle of Lindſey {not tay!

from Ludford, in the fields whereof Roman
Coins are frequently ploughed- up, ] runs firſt
by Hornecaſtle, ſometime belonging to Adeliza de
Conde, but laid even with the ground in King
Stephen's reign : after that, it was a Barony
of Gerard de Rodes, but now of the Biſhops
of Carliſle; ſand a Market-town of good note.
This evidently appears to have been a Camp
or Station of the „ e ; as from the Caſtle
which is Roman work, ſo alſo from the Ro-
man coins ; ſeveral whereof were found there
in the time of King Charles the firſt, and ſome
they meet with at this day (though not ſo com-
monly) in the field adjoyning. The compaſs
of the Caſtle was about twenty Acres, which
is yet plainly diſcernible, by the foundation of
the whole, and by ſome part of the wall ſtill
ſtanding. It is a Seignory or Soke of thirteen
Lordſhips ; and was given by King Richard
the ſecond, to the Biſhop of Carliſle and his
Succeſlors, for his habitation and maintenance ;
when, by the frequent incurſions of the Scots,
he was driven from his caſtle of Roſe in Cum-
berland, and ſpoil'd of his revenues. Three
miles South-eaſt from hence is Hinceby, where
was a f battle fought between King Charles
the firſt and the Parliament ; (the forces of
the King commanded by Colonel Henderſon and
the Lord Widdrington, and thoſe of the Par-
liament by Colonel Cromwel : ) The fight
ſcarce laſted an hour, and the Victory fell to
the Parliament.] Then, Witham runs by Scri-
velby a manour of the Dimocks, who had it by

Inq.23 E. 3. deſcent from the Marmions, by J. Ludlow, and

King's
Champion.

Fines Mic.

An. 1 H.6.

Tatteſhall,

Cromwell,

hold it by ſervice of grand Serjeanty ( as the
Lawyer's term it,) viz. that whenſoever any King
of England is to be crown'd, the Lord of this ma-
our for the time being, or ſome in his name if he
be unable, ſhall come well arm'd, upon a good war-
horſe, into the preſence of our Lord the King, on the
day of his Coronation, and ſhall cauſe it to be pro-
claimed, That if any one ſhall ſay that our ſaid
Lord the King has not a right to his Crown and
Kingdom, he is ready to defend with his body, the
right of the King and Kingdom, and the dignity of his
Crown, againſt him and all others whatſoever. The
Ban, a little lower at Tatteſhall (a ſmall town
pretty commodiouſly ſituated, though in a mar-
ſhy Country ; noted for a Caſtle built for the
moſt part of brick, and for it's Barons,) runs
into the Witham. It is related, that Eudo and
Pinſo, Norman Noblemen, having enter'd into
a ſtrict friendſhip, had by the bounty of Wil-
liam the firſt, large poſſeſſions given them in
theſe parts, which they divided: and Tatteſbal
fell to Eudo, who held it by Barony ; from
whoſe poſterity it came, by Dryby and the
Bernakes, to Ralph de Cromwell, whoſe ſon of
the ſame name was Lord Treaſurer of En-
gland in Henry the ſixth's reign, and died
without iſſue. In the front of the caſtle, not

long ſince, were to be ſeen the Arms of the

Eresby.

Cromwells, the ancient Lords of it. It after-
wards came to be one of the ſeats of the Clin-
tons, Earls of Lincoln ; beſides another at Sem-
pringham, which is alſo mentioned in this
County.]! And in the faid diviſion, Eresby,
which is not far off, fell to Pinſo; from whoſe
children the Eſtate came by the Bekes to the

Willoughbies, Villoughbies, who had very large Acceſſions by

marriages, not only from the Ufords, Earls ot

Lords Welles. Suffolk, but alſo from the Lords de Welles, from

Lords En-
gain,

whom they had the great eſtate of the de Engains,
an ancient noble family, and which was of
great power in this County from the firſt co-
ing-in of the Normans. The moſt eminent of
thoſe Willoughbies, was Robert Willoughby in

Henry the fifth's reign, who for his great cou-
rage and bravery, was made Earl 4 Vandoſme
in France. From theſe, by the mother's ſide,
deſcended Peregrine Berty, Baron Willoughby of
Eresby, a perſon famous for his great ſoul and
warlike gallantry. | Accordingly, this place gives
the title of Baron, to the Marquiſs of Lindſey (the
third diviſion of this County) who hath alſo
a Seat here: The firſt that enjoy'd the title
of Lindſey (under the name of Earl,) was Robert
Lord Willoughby of Eresby, created Nov. 22.
in the ſecond year of K. Charles the firſt. He
was {on to that Peregrine Berty, whom Catharine
Baroneſs of Willoughby and Dutcheſs of Suf-
folk bore to Richard 'Berty, while they made
their eſcape into foreign parts in Queen Ma-
ry's perſecution. He was call'd Peregrine, eo
quod in terra peregrina pro conſolatione exilii ſui
pits parentibus a Domino _—_— (as the pub-
lick Regiſter of Meſel in the Dutchy of Cleve,
where he was born, expreſſes it) i. e. becauſe
in a ſtrange land he was beſtowed by God on his
pious Parents, for their comfort in an exiled State,
Art the requeſt of the honourable Charles Berty
(Envoy extraordinary to the Ele&ors and other
Princes of Germany) in his paſſage through
that City, the Burgomaſters, Aldermen, and
Counſellors, took a copy of the evidences of
his Birth and Chriſtening, as they found it in
their Regiſter, and — it to him under
the common Seal of the City. This Robert the
firſt Earl, Lord Great Chamberlain of En-
gland, was ſucceeded by his ſon and heir
Mountague (who, upon the reſtoration of King
Charles the ſecond, was made Knight of the
Garter,) and dying in the year 1666. was ſuc-
ceeded by Robert his eldeſt ſon. Which Ro-

bert, marrying Elizabeth daughter to Philip Lord

Wharton, had by her Robert his eldeſt ſon ; who
hath been advanced to the more honourable
Titles of Marguiſs of Lindſey, and Duke of
Ancaſter. ]

Witham, being now nigh the Sea, receives
out of the north another nameleſs little river,

[near the head of which ſtands * eminent Hateby

for the death of Queen Eleanor, wife to King
Edward the firſt, who being convey'd from
thence to Weſtminſter, had Croſſes erected to
her memory in ſeveral noted places. This is
the more neceſſary to be obſery'd, becauſe
our Chronicles tell us, ſhe dy'd at a place call'd
Hardby, and without giving us any hint where it

ſtands.1 At the head of the ſame river, in a very Lib, Sun
low ground, lies Bollingbroke-Caſtle, built by Bolling |
William de Romara Earl of Lincoln, of a brit-brokeGi*

tle ſandy ſtone ; and taken from Alice Lacy
by Edward the ſecond, for marrying againſt
his will: It is famous for the birth of Henry
the fourth, who from it had the name of Hen-
ry de Bollingbroke ; in whoſe time it began to

be accounted one of thoſe manours, call'd Ho-Horouts

nours, [Of this place, Oliver Lord St. John of
Bletſo was created Earl, 22 Jac. 1. Dec. 28.
and was ſucceeded by his grandſon Oliver St.
John by Pawlet his ſecond ſon ( Oliver Lord
St. John the eldeſt, being ſlain at Edge-hill-
fight : ) who. dying without iſſue, the title
deſcended to his brother and heir, Pawlet St.
John ; and he alſo dying without iflue, the
title became extin& ; and that of Viſcount Bo-
lingbroke was confer'd by Queen Anne upon
Henry St. John, who hath ſince forfeited it by
Attainder. | |

The Witham, having receiv'd this river,
diſcharges it ſelf into the ſea (as we have ſaid)
below Boſton.

From the mouth of Mitbam, as far as the

frith of Humber, the ſhore runs out, ou a
arge

C

4

& Caſto
W..
-
2
1
E
=

Byrſ;
1
4
2
N

b Thoreſw:

x .

£ a.

4 "A
-

508

69

LINCOLNSHIRE. „

large winding, into the German Ocean, and
is chop'd all along by little arms of the ſea.
It has but few towns, becauſe there are but few
harbours, and many ſhelves of ſand along the
ſhore. Yet ſome of them are remarkable, par-
Wainfleet. ticularly J/ainfleet, as being the birth place of
William Wainfleet Biſhop of Wincheſter, foun-
der of Magdalen-College in Oxford, and a
great Patron of learning ; [of whoſe Father, a
4 tair Monument of Alabaſter doth ſtill remain
© afford, in the Church here.] Next, Alford, memora-
43 ble for its Market, for which it is beholden to
© pirons Leon Lord Welles, who obtain'd that privilege
© Welles, of Henry the ſixth. This family of Welles was
© very ancient and honourable : the laſt of whom
marry'd King Edward the fourth's daughter,
and was made Viſcount ¶M elles by King —
the ſeventh ; but he dying without iflue, the
inheritance came by females to the Willoughbies,
© Touth Dimocks, De la launds, Hon, &c. Then Louth,
A little, C.“ a market-town of good reſort, which takes its
| name from Lud, a rivulet that runs by Cocke-
rington, heretofore the head of the Barony
of Scoteney. | Louth is a Town-Corporate, and
has a Free-ſchool founded by Edward the
ſixth, and a Church of a fair and large fa-
1 brick, with a beautiful Steeple, the higheſt in
> Grimsby. the County.] And laſtly, Grimsy, which our
© Eulogium. Sabines, lovers of their own conceits, will have
: ſo call'd from one Grime a Merchant, who
4 brought up a little child of the Daniſh blood-
: royal (nam'd Havelock) that had been expos'd ;
for which he is much talk'd of, as is alſo Haveloc
his Pupil, who was firſt a Scullion in the King's
kitchen, but afterwards for his eminent valour
had the honour to marry the King's daughter.
He perform'd I know not what wonderful ex-
loits ; which are very proper Entertainment
r tattling goſſips in a winter night. [At
this Grimesby were formerly three Religious-
houſes, i. e. one Nunnery, and two Monaſte-
1 ' ries : and not far from the ſame coaſt, between
E Saifletby, Salflet-haven and Louth, is Salflethy, memorable
{ for its late Miniſter, Mr. John Watſon, who
Hareby! 1 was incumbent ſeventy four years; during which
; time (as he himſelf reported it) he buried the
: Inhabitants three times over, ſave three or
q four perſons ; and dy'd Aug. 1693, being one
: hundred and two years old. |

Scarce ſix miles from hence, and further up
& Caſtor, in the Country, is the ancient caſtle call'd Ca-
© Thong caſtle, for, in Saxon Puang-carren and Thong- caſter,
F in Britiſh Caer-Egarry ; in both languages ta-
5 king it's name from the thing, viz. from a
Byrſa, hide cut in 2 ; as Byrſa, the famous Car-
thaginian caſtle, did. For our Annals ſay, that
Hengiſt the Saxon, having conquer'd the Picts
and Scots, and got very large poſſeſſions in
other places, beg'd of Vortigern as much ground
in this place as he could encompaſs with an
Orx's hide cut in very ſmall Thongt; upon which
he built this caſtle. Whence, one who has writ
a Breviary of the Britiſh Hiſtory in verſe, tranſ-

pos'd Virgil's Verſes in this manner,

Accepitque ſolum jacti de nomine Thon-
gum,
Taurino quantum poterat circundare tergo.

1

x *
|
« 1

3

Y

W

Lib. Stark,
Bolling -
broke- Cite

Honouts

Took, and call'd Thong, in memory of the

eed,
The 228 he compaſs d with an Ox's
hide.

| Thoreſmay, ¶ Not far from this Caſtle, is Thoreſway, from
| Which place, Sir John Colepeper, in the reign
of King Charles the firſt, had confer'd upon

—
—

him the title of Lord Colepeper of Thoreſuay; in
whoſe poſterity it ſtill remains.] |

From Grimesby, the ſhore draws in, with a
great winding (to make the æſtuary Alus or |
Humber,) by Thornton, heretofore a College for Thornton«
divine worſhip, founded by William Oaſſus College.
Earl of Albemarle, [the remains of which, are
{till very magnificent; ] and by Barton, where Barton upon
is a famous Ferry into the County of York. Humber,
Near this, is Ankam, a little muddy river
(and for that reaſon full of Eels,) which runs
into the Humber. Near the head of it ſtands _
Marlet-Raſiu, ſo call'd from a pretty throng Market. Ra-
Market there. ¶ At a little diſtance from which, ün.
it leaves Oumby, where, in the fields joining to Oumby,
the great road between Hull and Stamford, there
have been plough'd-up braſs and ſilver Coins,
with the figure of Rome on one fide and this
Inſcription, Urbs Roma ; and on the reverſe,
Pax & Tranquillitas.' | On the other fide of
the Ankam, ſtands Angotby [otherwiſe Ofſegobby,
and Oſgoteby,1 now corruptly Oggodby, belonging Oſgodby.
heretotore to the family of S Medard, from
whom the Airmoines had it by inheritance f; t Dag dale
_— 2 was N the eſtate — 1
ot the Hanſards, a very eminent family in this
County ; from * N came to the .
Knights, by marriage. Afterwards, the An- ty.
kam has a bridge over it at Glandford, a little Kelſay.
market- town, | very ancient, ] and call'd by = =o
the common people Brigg, from the bridge, the
true name being almoſt quite forgotten. Near
this town, within a Park, is Xertleby, the f ſeat Kettleby.
of the famous family of the Tirwhitts Knights, F Ann. 1607.
[who now reſide at Stanfield, but, formerly, Tirwhitts,
the dwelling-place of one Ketell, as the name
intimates ; which was a very common one a-
mong the Danes and Saxons. For, in Saxon,
Bye ſignifies an habitation, and Byan to in-
habit ; which is the reaſon why ſo many pla-
ces all over England, and eſpecially in this Coun-
ty, end in Bye. [A little lower, ſtands W/orlaby, Bye.
from which place, in the 20** of K. Charles Worlaby;
the firſt, John Bellafis was created Lord Bellafis
of Worlaby.

This Country is at certain ſeaſons ſo ſtock'd
with fowl (to ſay nothing of fiſh) that their
numbers are amazing ; and thoſe, not the known
ones, of teſt value in other Countries,
Teal, Quails, Woodcocks, Pheaſant, Partridge, Birds,
Cc. but ſuch as no other language has names
for, and are ſo delicate and agreeable, that the
niceſt palates and richeſt purſes greatly covet
them, viz. Puittes, Godwitts, Knotts, that is, as
I take it, Canutus's birds, for they are beliey'd
to come hither out of Denmark; and Dotterells, Dotterells.
ſo call'd from their dotiſh fillineſs : for the
mimick birds are caught at candle-light by
the geſtures of the Fowler ; if he ſtretch out
his arm, they ſtretch out their wing; if he
hold out his leg, they do the ſame ; to be
ſhort, whatever the fowler does they do after
him, till at laſt they let the net be drawn over
them. Burt theſe things are more proper for
the obſervation of the Virtuoſ, or Epicureans,

More weſtward, the river Trent (after a long
courſe, and when it has bounded this Coun-
ty with its ſandy banks, from the Foſſe-dike)
falls into the Humber ; having firſt run pretty
near Stow, where Godiva Earl Leofrick's wife, Stow.
built a Monaſtery, which, by reaſon of its
low ſituation under the hills, is {aid by Henry of
Huntingdon to lie under the Promontory of Lincoln.
[The Church here is a large building in the
form of a croſs, and very ancient. It was
founded by Eadnoth, Biſhop of Dorcheſter in

Oxfordſhire, before the Sce was remov'd to
| Cece L.—nncoln;

PTY —— oe — —— . — —— . —

— Anas

3 *

}
%4
by

rug *
* —__ Ls ® 4s
i... A. —_

| JO

571 CORITTANI. 3

Lincoln; and rebuilt by Remigius, the firſt thoſe Parts, who were call'd Biſhops of the Lin- ;

* 77d. infrs, Biſhop of Lincoln; and alſo was afterwards |diftari ; but this is now ſo entirely gone, that

Sidnaceller. made a Biſhop's ſeat, but there is little of neither ruins nor name are in being. [They

the ancient ruins now to be ſeen. Near [who have been for ſetling it at Stow, have ar-

the Church, ſtood an Abbey, where (after the |gu'd thus: That the See now at Lincoln, was

removal of the Monks by Robert Bloet, the [once at Dorcheſter near Oxford, is agreed by all:

ſucceeding Biſhop, to Eynſbam-Abbey, near|that likewiſe Eadhed was made Biſhop of Sid-

Oxford,) was the ſeat of an ancient family de |naceſter in the year 678: and that he was ſuc-

Burgh ; the native place of Sir John Borough, a ceeded by ſeveral other Biſhops under the ſame

valiant Knight, who ſerved under the Duke title, is as plain. But after Eadulf's death,

of Buckingham, and was ſlain at the Iſle ot [when it had been vacant about eighty years,

Rhee. In the pariſh of Stow, is a village call d|it was by Leofwin united to Dorcheſter, as that

' Stretton, Stretton, from the old cauſey running that of Leiceſter had been before. The ſixth from

way, as if one ſhould ſay the Street-town and Leofwin was Eadneth, who (as the interme-

in a field belonging to that place, are a great|diate Biſhops had done) enjoy'd the title of

Ophites, Many Ophites, or ſtones roll d up like ſer-|Dorcheſter, and, under that, of Sidnaceſter and

pents. | Leiceſter. This was that Eadnoth, who built

h Then the Trent runs by Knath, f the ſeat of | the Church of our Lady in Stou, and dy'd

+ Now "he the Lord Willoughby of Parham ; and before that, Anno 1050. Now, where can we imagine a

ſeat, C. of the Barons of Darcy, who had a great ac-|Biſhop of Sidnaceſter ſhould ſo probably build

ceſſion of honour and eſtate by the daughter|a Church as at Sidnaceſter? Or whence would

and heir of Meinil. This family of the Dar-[he ſooner take his pattern or platform, than

| Antiquiori, cies came from || one more ancient, to wit, from his own Cathedral of Dorcheſter > Be-

Darcy de Norman de Adrecy or Darcy of Nocton, who was|tween which, and that of Stow, there is a very

Noon and in high eſteem under Henry the third. His|near reſemblance ; and it they have been ſince

* poſterity endow d the little Monaſtery at Al rebuilt, we may probably conclude that the

vingham, in this County. But this honour was ſame form notwithſtanding was ſtill kept. The

in a manner extinct; when Norman, the laſt of See of Legeceſter or Leiceſter is concluded to have

b ra. the right and more ancient line, left only two] been where St. Margaret s now ſtands; and as
Fines 29 Fl ſiſters, one marry'd to Roger Penwardin, the that is a Peculiar, a Prebend, and an Archdea- |
oh other to Peter de Limberg. conry ; ſo is Stow too. Beſides, the preſent Pri- Henry
Gainsborrow, Afterwards, the Trent runs to Gainsborow, a vileges of this place are greater than any here- 1 oi 2
+ Little f town, which hath a large and fine market, |abouts, except Lincoln; and they have for- 6 *

Town, C. and is the moſt flouriſhing in the whole Coun-|merly exceeded even that. For that it was fa- i

ty for Trade and Buſineſs ; which have much |mous, before Lincoln was a Biſhop's Sce, is |

Alabaſt

*

.

— — — —

. — — 4 -

— 2 —
—
Ln =
- — * 3 —— — ws 1 3
— IG UT EE I A . 2 *
— — — — — * — > :
— — * — - _ — p .
As 0 - * *
” * . 4 —

Itiner. p. 24.

encreaſed of late Son, to the detriment of beyond diſpute; and it is a common notion in | Philoſ, Tr

Boſton, and even of Hull it ſelf, It was here-
tofore] famous for being the harbour of the
Daniſh ſhips, and for the death of Sueno Trugs-
lege, a Daniſh Tyrant; who when he had pil-
lag'd the Country, as Matthew Weſtminſter
writes, was here ſtab'd by an unknown hand,
and ſo at laſt ſuffer d the puniſhment that was
juſtly due to his wickedneſs. [ Leland ſays,
that upon the South-part of the town was an
old Chapel of ſtone, wherein the inhabitants
reported, that many Danes were bury'd ; and
that there were alſo the remains of another
Chapel of wood on the fide of the Trent, quite
demoliſh'd.] Some ages after the Danes, it
was the Poſſeſſion of William de Falentia Earl

thoſe parts, both of learned and unlearned, that
Stow was the Mother-Church to Lincoln. The
ſteeple of the Church (tho? large,) has been
much greater than it is: and Alfrick Puttock
Archbiſhop of York Anno 1023, when he gave
two great Bells to Beverley-ſteeple which he had
built, and two others of the ſame mould to
Southwwell ; beſtow'd two upon this Stow, Here
is likewiſe a place call'd yer by the name of
Gallouw-dale, ſuppos d to have been the place of
execution for malefactors; which (among other
marks of antiquity) tho? it has no relation to
the affairs of the Church, is yet a teſtimony of
the eminence of the place. But, they own, there
is one thing that lies in their way; for in the

N..

4
x 1
Dorterw

of Pembroke, who obtain'd for it, of Edward |* Lives of the Biſhops of Lincoln, written by“ Aug &.
the firſt, the privilege of a Fair. The Barons |Giraldus, it is ſaid, that Remigius, removing cc. a RB
Barons of of Borough who dwelt here (of whom we have his See to Lincoln, procur'd all Lyndefie to bef* Wh E the

—

- = — 18 -

+ — —— ooo oo by $
-” 22
RF. » " % ©. -»od *
— 22 * = "Fon g ,
—
— . - 1 —
© —— i © — *% * * *

= — —

8 -
—

— 4 —
* -
”
..

—

—
=
—— vx—— > d
rr < — ——_—— ——ů —³ꝛ1Z
* * , * > 8
2
— — * " 7
— 7 , 4
a
. p K— 4 —
1 *
— 2 « N et Np
*

4
3

— — —
—

Borough.

Sid naceſier. The city Sidnaceſter, once the ſeat of the Biſhops of [family of the Earls of St. Paul in France; but

ſpoken before, in Surrey) did deſcend from
this Earl, by the Scotch Earls of Athol, and
the Percies. In the year 1682, Edward Noel,

Lord Noel of Ridlington and Viſcount Camp-

raken from the Juriſdiction of the Archbiſhop
of York, and added to that of Canterbury,
And if all Zindſey belong'd to the Archbiſhop
of York till Remigius's time ( who liv'd ſince

den, had confer'd upon him the additional ti-|the Conqueſt,) the old Sidnaceſter, united after-
tle of Earl of Gainsburrow ; in which honour|wards to Dorcheſter, perhaps cannot be plac'd
he was ſucceeded by Myiotheſiey Baptiſt his ſon ;|{o reaſonably, within that Divifion.

who dying without iſſue-male, the title paſs'd
to his Coufin-german, Baptiſt, the preſent may probably enough be thought of, namely,

Earl.

If it may, there is alſo another place that

the Hills above Ley and Gainesburrow, where

A little above Gaintburrou, through the end have been taken- up many pieces of Roman
of a town call'd Marton, a Roman way goes|Urns, and many Coins of thoſe Emperors ;

into this County. It comes from Danum, i. e.

for the addition of Ceſter to the name, makes

Doncaſter, to Agelocum, or Littleburrow, from it highly probable, that Siduaceſter, wherever
whence it goes to Lindum, Lincoln. It is a|it may have been, was originally a Station of
great road for pack-horſes, which travel from ſthe Romans. The Caſtle-hill, eaſtward from

mention'd, there are yet remaining two or|than a hundred acres.]

three conſiderable pieces of Roman pavement Floarihes
or cauſey, which may be eaſily obſerv'd by | flouriſh'd the famous family of St. Paul}
Knights, corruptly call'd Sampe/, which I al- St. pul

travellers of curioſity.

I muſt not omit, that at Melkvood, there

In this part of the County ſtood formerly [ways thought came from the ancient Caſtilion-

the

2 Hen
the welt of Yorkſhire, to Lincoln, Lyn, and Nor-| Gainsborough-Church, is ſurrounded with en- + Cum
wich. A quarter of a mile from Marton above- |trenchments, containing ( as is ſaid) more tore eju

*

—

"72

ew BA. 6. £65.25

oO IT mH Ow rr 5w Ft

x
L

„„.

1

573

LINCOLNSHIRE ©

2

A xelholm.

Gall.

Alabaſter.

| + Henry 2.
| with reſpeRt

© to his ſon, the ferry; which Caſtle, a great number of the Lin- ance ; and from that time it became the in-
nuger.

| Philoſ, Tranſ.
b N. 67.

dotterwic.

1 V. Sup.

Axel.

Burton Sta-
4 ther,

Normanby,

| Alkborough,

| Earls of Lin- After Egga who liv'd in the year 710, and

pro

2 Hen, 2.

bear, is a proof that they came out of France,

2 Jecond, his only daughter to wife, f together with t

the Coat of Arms of Luxemburgh that they | fixth Earl of Cheſter, had this honour granted

f him by King Henry the third, and a litt
ſince the Caſtilion family of St. Paul was by | before his death * by Charter —

marriage ingrafted into that of Luxemburgh, | his ſiſter, wife of Robert de Quincy, the Earl-
about + three hundred years ago.

dom of Lincoln, ſo far forth as it nd
Above this, the Trent, the dell, and the him, that ſbe Sa wed dove 1 for 10
Dan, ſporting with their ſeveral ſtreams (ſo{are the very words of the Charter. She in

Frontinus expreſſes it,) make a river-Iſland, [like manner beſtow d it on John de Lacy Con-
cal'd Axelholme, in Saxon Eaxelholme, which | ſtable of Cheſter, and the heirs he ſhould have
is part of Lincolnſhire; in length, from ſouth|by Margaret her daughter. This John had
to north, ten miles, but not half ſo broad. | Edmund, who dying before his mother, left
The lower part near the rivers is marſhy, and| this honour to be enjoy'd by Henry his ſon,
produces an odoriferous ſhrub, call'd Gall. The] the laſt Earl of that family. For his ſons ha-
middle has a ſmall aſcent, and is rich and|ving dy'd young, he contracted Alice his only
fruitful, yielding flax in great abundance, and] Child, when but nine years old, to Thomas
alſo Alabaſter ; which being not very ſolid, is| ſon of Edmund Earl of Lancaſter, on condi-
more proper for lime and plaiſter-work, than tion, that if he ſbould dye without iſſue of his bo-
for other uſes. The chief town was formerly] dy, or if they ſhould dye without heirs of their bo-
call'd Axel, now Axe); and of that, and the] dies, his Caſtles, Lordſhip |

a river-iſland) the name, without queſtion, heirs for ever. But this Alice having no chil-
was compounded. It hardly deſerves the name] dren by her husband Thomas (who was be-
of a Town, it is ſo thinly inhabited; bur] headed) did afterwards much blemiſh her re-

there is the platform of a caſtle, that was de- putation by her light behaviour; and without
the King's conſent marry'd Eubulo Le-Strange, Edw. 2;

moliſh'd in the Barons war, and belong'd to

the Mowbrays, who at that time were poſ-| with whom ſhe had been very familiar before ;
ſeſs'd of a great part of the Iſland. In the| upon which the offended King ſeiz d her
year 1173 Roger de Mowbray (as the Author] eſtate. But Alice being very old, and dyi

of an old Chronicle has it) forſaking his alle- without iſſue, Henry Earl of Lancaſter, —
giance to the Elder King, repair d a caſile formeriyſ child to Edmund by his ſecond ſon, had this
demoliſh'd, in the Ile Axelholme, near Kinard-| noble eſtate by virtue of the foreſaid convey-

colnſhire-men, paſſmg-over in boats, beſieg'd, and heritance of the houſe of Lancaſter. Never-
compell'd the Conſtable and all the ſoldiers to ſur- rheleſs, the Kings of England have confer'd on
render, and then pull d it down. (In this fenny| ſeveral the title of Earl of Lincoln; as, Ed-
tract, part in Lincolnſhire, and part in York-| ward the fourth on John De-la-pole, and Hen
ſhire, there have been found, in digging, the eighth on Henry Brandon; who were bot

, „ Cc. ſhould come in re- e
Saxon word Holme (which with them ſignify'dſ mainder to Edmund Earl of — pag yr ve 2 er · book

tanlow.

abundance of Oak, Firr, and other trees, ſons of the Dukes of Suffolk ; and both dy'd Ses Dukes of
lying near the roots, which ſtand as they| without iflue. Then Queen Elizabeth pro- Suffolk,

been burnt, and not cut down. 1 Higher up, lie
Botterwic ; the owner whereof, Edmand Sheffeld,
was the firſt Baron of that name and family ;|nour. After him, it was
created by Edward the ſixth, He loſt his lite] by Thomas, and Theophilus, of the ſame name.
in the ſervice of his Country againſt the Nor-| The latter of theſe was ſucceeded by Edward
folk Rebels; having had by Anne Pere, a] Lord Clinton (his grandchild by his eldeſt ſon
daughter of the Earl of Oxford, John the ſe-| Edward ; ) who dying without iſſue, this

grew; and it appears that ſome of them Nie moted to this honour, Edward Baron Clinton,

| 4Who is now; cond Baron, father to Edmund, + Knight of| honour came to the iflue of Sir Edward
C.
| Epworth,

the moſt noble Order of the Garter. | Not Clinton, Knight, ſecond brother to Thomas
far from hence, is Epworth, a long ſtraggling] Earl of Lincoln : whoſe ſon Francis firſt en-

market-town, and now“ the beſt in the Ae. joy'd it; and after him, Henry, ſon of Francis,
More to the north, on the other ſide of Trent, the preſent Earl,
is Burton-Stather, of which I have not read any

thing remarkable; ſ and not far from it, Nor-

Lord High Admiral of England; + to whom + Which his
ſucceeded his ſon Henry, a perſon of great ho- ſon, Ce. now
A enjoy d enjoys, C.

7 . . * 6 + 6 | :
manby, from whence the Duke of Buckingham There are in this County abont * 685 Pariſhes. 30, C.

takes his title of Marquiſs. At Alkborough,
two miles north of Burton-Stather, near the
water-ſide, old Fortifications, and other marks
of antiquity, are to be ſeen. |

More rare Plants growing wild in Lincolnſhire.

f Atriplex maritima, Halimus dicta, humilis
2 3 bg 2 dry Sn oY erecta, ſemine folliculis membranaceis bivalvi-
William de Romara a Norman, after whoſe bus, in latitudinem expanſis & utrinque recur-
death (for the title was never enjoy d by his rise 19089 Pediculo inſidentibus clauſo. Near
ſon, who dy'd before him, nor by his grand —_— oa ym a mile diftant from Boſton,
ſon,) King Stephen confer'd it on Gilbert de|? fully. Dr. ER i
Gaunt ; but he dying, Simon de St. Lis, the yo Alſine Polygonoides tenuifolia, floſculis ad
ger, ſon of Earl Simon (you have the very word longirudinem caulis velut in ſpicam diſpoſitis.
of Robert Montenſis, who liv'd about tha — . — __ erectum.
. . C: 6D . . . eea=1 N Yajs witÞ Very Aaarrow
time) wanting land, receiv'd from King Henry t has, * 1 775 2 7 22
honour. Afterwards, Lewis of France, who Pikes. ;
was call'd into England by the rebellious Ba- „ Carum vulgare Park. Caraways. In the mar-
rons, created another Gilbert, of the de Gau ber and fenny grounds plemifully. =
family, Earl of Lincoln; but as ſoon as Lewis| Cannabis ſpuria flore amplo, labio purpureo.
was forced home, and he found himſelf ac Fair-flower'd Nertle- Hemp. About Spalding plenti-
knowledg'd Earl by no body, he 3 theſ fully. |
title of his own accord. Then Ralph, the

f | Cochlearia

—
— CIC

— —

w

— —
7

*
[
|
11
SE
114
0 1 &
""
's
n
|
H
l

|
1

575

CORITANIT ©

2

*

— .

52

Foſs· way.

Cochlearia major rotundifolia. Garden Scurvy-
graſs. In the marſhes in Holland, and in many
other places near the ſea-ſide.

Oenanthe Staphylini folio aliquatenus acce-
dens J. B. In the marſh-ditches and flow ſtreams
of water in the pariſh of Quaplod near Spalding.

Lapathum folio acuto, flore aureo C. B. Gol-
den Dock. About Crowland, and in other places of
the Fens.

Pneumonanthe Ger. Gentianella Autumnalis
Pneumonanthe dicta Park. Gentiana paluſtris

anguſtifolia C. B. Gentianz ſpecies, Calathi-

na quibuſdam radice perpetua ſeu paluſtris.
J. B. Marſh Gentian or Calathian Violet. In a
Park at Tatteſhall » and on the heathy grounds
thereabout : alſo. on a heath a little beyond Wyauby
in the way to Hull.

Rhamnus Salicis folio anguſto, fructu fla-
veſcente C. B. Secundus Cluſii Ger. emac. pri-
mus Dioſtoridis Lobelio five litoralis Park.
Rhamnus vel Oleaſter Germanicus J. B. Sal-
low-thorn. On the ſea-banks on Lindſez-coaſt, plen-

tifully.

NOTTINGHAMSHIRE.

HE County of Nottingham bor-
ders upon that of Lincoln on
N the weſt, but is of much leſs
extent; call'd by the Saxons
Z&0N onotrengaham-rcype, iby the
ancient Annals 6notingabam-
fx cype,] and by us Nottingham-

ſhire. It is bounded on the north, by York-
ſhire, on the weſt by Derbyſhire, and in ſome
2 by Yorkſhire ; and on the ſouth by the
unty of Leiceſter. The ſouth and eaſt parts
are enrich'd by the noble river Trent and the
rivulets which run into it. The weſt-part 1s
entirely taken up with the foreſt of Shirwood,
which is very large. This part, becauſe it is
ſaudh, the inhabitants call the Sand; the other,
becauſe it is clayiſb, they call the Clay; and thus
have they divided their County into two parts.
[ Going out of Leiceſterſhire, the Fiſs-way
(which is the beſt, if not only direction, for
what we principally look after) Jeads us in-
to the ſouth-part of this County, and carries
us along the eaſt of it, into Lincolnſhire. And

Willoughby firſt, J/illoughby on the Wold, in the Hundred
on the Wold. of Rysdiff, on the ſouth-edge of this County,

Eaſt· Bridg-

ſord.

+ Mr, Fox-

croft.

may pretend to ſomething of antiquity. For
it lies near the Foſs; and in a field belonging
to it are the ruins (as the inhabitants ſay) of
a town call'd Long-Bilington, which has been a
great while demoliſh'd. Hereabouts the plow-
men and ſhepherds commonly gather-up coins
of the Romans, in great numbers. And its
diſtance from Caer-lerion, i. e. Leiceſter, and
from Vernometum or Burrough-hill (for it is 9
miles from each) is a further confirmation of
its Antiquity, All which, put together, would
tempt us to believe, that this had been a
Roman ſtation ; and Dr. Gale, in his Com-
ment -upon the Itinerary, makes it the Margi-
dunum of Antoninus. |

From hence, the Foſs paſles north-eaſt thro?
the vale of Belvoir, and therein thro* the field

of Eaſt-Bridgford, or Bridgford on the hill, in

which are ſtill the remains of a Roman ſta-
tion, near a ſpring, call'd The Old-wark:ſpring ;
and the field in Bridgford (in which, part
of this camp lies) is call'd to this day Burrow-

field. A f learned Antiquary alſo (to whoſe

skill and diligence, the diſcovery of thoſe pla-
ces is in great meaſure owing) affirms that
he has ſeen a fair ſilver coin of Yeſpafian which
was found there, and that others are ſometimes
plough'd up by the inhabitants of that town.
What further confirms the conjecture of a ſta-
tion here, is its diſtance from Willoughby, of
about eight miles; and near the ſame ſpace

Lorz Col from Long-Collingham, about three miles beyond

lingham,

Newark ; near which, in a large field, thete

is ſome reaſon to fix another ſtation. The F-
road, indeed, lies above a mile from it, but it
receives a ſufficient teſtimony of Antiquity,
from ſeveral of Conſtantine's Coins which have
been found there, as well as it's diſtance from
Lincoln (viz. nine miles) where was another
Station. By this means (if theſe conjectures
may be allow'd any colour of truth, as I ſee no
great objection that lies againſt them, ) that vaſt
breach between Leiceſter and Lincoln, along the
Foſſe, is pretty well fill'd up. From Leiceſter
to Willoughby, nine miles; from Millougbiy to
Eaſt Bridg ford about 8 miles; from thence to
Long-Collingham, nine miles; and from hence to
Lincoln, nine more: And, accordingly, Dr. Gale
in his Comment upon the Itinerary, has fix'd
them ; viz. the Margidunum of Antoninus here
at Willoughby on the Wold ; Ad Pontem, at Eaſt-
Bridgford and Crococolana at Collingham.
Having follow'd the Fyſs thus tar toward
the North, for the more convenient clearing
of this point ; we are drawn a little out of
our road, and muſt return to the ſouth-part.

Antiquaries of leſs note have call'd in Latin
Triginta, from its likeneſs to the French word
which ſignifies this number, ) after it has run
a long way, and then enter'd this County,
paſſes by Steanford, where are many remains of
Antiquity, and many Roman Coins are found,

ment is a Church, lately repair'd and beauti-

given both ſeat and name to the ancient fa-

above ſix hundred years, as appears by an In-
ſcription upon a Monument in the Chancel of
this Church.] Then the Trent receives the

King Henry the ſecond built a ſmall Mona-

cient family, deſcended from Ralph de Buron,
who in the beginning of the Norman times
flouriſh'd in great ſtate both in this County
and Lancaſhire ; [and whoſe deſcendants, in
the reign of King Charles the firſt, were ad-
vanced to the dignity of Barons.] Next, the

oſtentation, and to ſhow his great wealth,
did at vaſt charges build a very noble Houle,
both for proſpe& and workmanſhip ; ſ now the
ſeat of Thomas Willoughby, Baron Middleton,
to which Honour he was advanced by her
Majeſty Queen Anne. After this, it waſhes

in

—

The Trent, in Saxon Tpeonta (which ſome The Tr

Steanford,

as I am inform'd. ¶ But now its greateſt orna-

fy'd at the great expence of f the Patron+ Thu
thereof. ] Then it runs by Clifton, which hath Leven bf

mily of the Cliftons, [who have remained here Clifton.

little river Lin from the weſt, which riſes near Lin, rt.
Newſted, i. e. a new place, where formerly Newhed,

ſtery. Now it is the ſeat of the Byron, an an- Byron

Lin runs near Wollaton, where * in the laſt oh this 255
age, Sir Francis Willoughby Knight, out of Walzen.

Lenton, formerly famous for a Monaſtery, built Lentos.

.
2
*
an
=
*
x
=
7
=
0
B

3
2
--
A
4
=
*
A
8
1
4
44
„
*
*
*
3
2
3 Y
k
2

Fa

"_- — 1 7 x "Bs #2445

— IR" —— 5 — — — PAB xt 054.5 <2 & SER: entre en: De _ — . *
— * 1 .
* -
*
2 „ K ͤ%ͤc % ⁵ ee
*
j
1 1 *
*** ** — 4 . * 92 ** —— _
1 7
=
-
-
», *
%
**
* \. F
* *
a. 4
»..
*
*
4: J.
* at -
_—_—_
7
*
*
„
—
4
-
.
7
MY

The Tat
Steanford,

A-
VORTHCL/

Nor TINGHAMT
SHIRE

Rob —

» rare
Sou am WAPON TA K

Z.
5 Aeteleworth

Ala

OF

Luv,

beg by

A1 en in aue

\

DA R B 4 5 Vm ul N
| Ann #
10 E

| Hl 7d.
, 5

(Au (yt Tc

SHIRE

Aa Nel, nnr

A
| | * Tromell
on - - Rad,
«rithm N Cola tem

Tae: OS”.

|

[ tale Zo. MG, | » Bruamcot
| e 5 ,
| — . —ͤ—ͤ—ę—— — — a 1 5 Nez F
" * ny 2. n

Z. ae. Hen 1

— .
— —w__— ts
1 1 2 by «
2 - b
—
ww —_—— * 7 * a
2 — — —ʒ — -
* - 4 „
*
* *

1 | + s

| = E + 8

58

i Ut | I Sold by Abel Smale Aronſham & Tohn Ouwrchill
1152 RIS
SES . 55 * 1 — IDS
ö 1 — — — IND I = qo —

j by: * 30 An

o
— — 1 1 |

m_—

ann
Z | L.A |. 0 & |

o F |
20
Ny
[1
LI |
0
Beokingham „O N

SHIRE
|
470 . ————P—

6

. Os tte ag

+ Rurton,

[tin P. 20

fuw ſor

—
E

5 * — ——_—— —-—
L — * * " *
ode, ——

— ä —
25 *
5 — —

Itin. F

\ *

— — —— —-—-—

— —

77

NOTTINGHAMSHIRE

in honour ot the Holy Trinity by Milliam Pe-
verel, natural ſon of William the Conqueror ;
at preſent, only noted for a throng Fair there.
e This,“ Mr. Talbot, for ſome reaſons, was in-
lin, f. 204. clin d to believe the ancient Lindum of Anto-
ninus. I take it for granted, it was the affi-
nity of the two names, which firſt led him to
this conjecture, and that drew on other ima-
ginations, which might ſeem in any wiſe to
confirm his opinion. As, that the river which
runs through Nottingham into Trent, is at this
day call'd Liz or rather Lind ; but then, Len-
ron lying at ſome diſtance from it, he is fore'd
to back it with another Conjecture, that Len-
ton might be ſometimes part of Nottingham ;
tho” they are a mile aſunder one from the other.
What he ſays by way of reaſon why the old
Town might poſſibly be at Lenton, is very true,
That it is a thing frequently obſerv'd, that famous
towns have degenerated into little villages, and that
therefore its preſent meanneſs is no objection
againſt it ; but then, it can derive no autho-
rity from the river Lin or Lind. Beſides, the
obſcurity of a place is a real prejudice to its
antiquity, unleſs the diſcovery of camps, coins,
bricks, or ſome ſuch remains, demonſtrate its
former eminence. Nothing therefore that he
has ſaid in favour of this opinion, taken from
diſtances and the like, is of force enough to
draw the ancient Lindum from Lincoln. On
the other fide, is Wilford, in the field whereof a
large Pot was dug-up ſome years ago, with a
very great number of Copper Coins. At a
little diſtance from hence, ſtands, in a large
fwford, ficld, a Church with a ſpire- ſteeple, call'd Hau-
ford Church, the burying-place of Reddington, a
reat Country-rown aboye half a mile weſt
Hom it, But this having a large Chapel of
its own, the Church is the more neglected,
and has much rubbiſh in it. Among it, there
have been many ancient Monuments ; no doubt
of great note formerly. Some conſiderable
ones are yet remaining both in the chancel and
ſouth-iſle ; part whereof by the manner of
them, ſeem to imply, that the perſons to whom
they belong, have been engag'd in the Holy
War. North-eaſt from whence, is Aſtabron,
famous for the birth of Thomas Cranmer, Arch-

biſhop of Canterbury.
On the other ſhore, almoſt at the confluence
of the Lin and Trent, and on the fide of a
ſottingham. hill, ſtands Nottingham, which gave name to
the County, and is the chief Town in it; the
word being only a contraction and a ſoftening
of &nottenga-ham. For ſo the Saxons call'd
it, from the caves and paſlages under-ground,
which the Ancients dug, for retreat and
- habitation, under thoſe ſteep rocks in the
ſouth part, toward the little river Lin. [ Theſe,
ltin, p. 95. by the way, Dr. Gale will have to be the
work of the Romans ; and, to make good the di-
ſtances in the Itinerary, he places here the Gau-
ſennæ of Antoninus. From theſe Caves] Aſſer
renders the Saxon word önotrcengaham, Spe-
or. Wigorn, luncarum domus in Latin, and in Britiſh Tui
n, 890. ogo bauc, which ſignifies the very ſame, name-

Wilford»

own is very pleaſant: on one fide to the ri-
ver are very large meadows ; on the other ſide,
hills of eaſie and gentle aſcent : it is alſo

plentifully provided with all neceſſaries. Shire-
od ſupplies them with great ſtore of wood
tor fire (though many burn Pit-coal, the ſmell
whereof is very offenſive, ) and the Trent
ſerves them plentifully with Fiſh; Hence this
barbarous Verſe, |

- | ſufficient © garriſon i
| ly, a houſe of dens. In reſpe& of ſituation, the

Limpida ſylva focum, || Triginta dat mihi \| Trent. |
Piſcem.

Skirewood my fuel, Trent my fiſh ſupplies.

To wind up all; by its bigneſs, building, three

neat Churches, a very fine Market-place, and a

very ſtrong Caſtle, the Town is render'd reall

beautiful, [Here is alſo an “ Alms-houſe weil“ Built by
endowed for twelve poor People.] The Ca- Hanley,

{tle ſtands on the weſt- ſide of the Town, up-g,Þ 8 _—_
on a ſteep rock ; the very ſpot whereon that 1001

. ann,
tower is believ'd to have ſtood, which the de.
Danes held againſt Ethered and Alfred who
beſieg d it, till, without effecting any thing, they
roſe and || retir d. For when the Danes had || Vaſe conc1a:
got this Caſtle, Burthred [or Burbred,\ King of mãriat.
the Mercians, and the Mercians (as Aſſer, and
Florence] ſay ) ſent meſſengers to AEthered King
of the Wieſt-Saxons, and to Alfred Ins brother, hum-
bly intreating that they would aid them ; to the
end they might be able to engage the ſaid army. This
requeſt they eafily obtain'd. For the two brothers
having drawn together a great army from all parts
with the diſpatch they had promis'd, enter d Mer-
cia, and march'd as far as Snottenga-ham, with
a joint and unanimons defire to fight them, But
when the Pagans vefus'd to give them battle, ſecu-
ring themſelves in the caſtle ; and the Chriſtians
were not able to batter down the walls of the caſtle;

a Peace was concluded between the Mercians and

the Pagans, and the two brothers return d home

with their forces. Afterwards, Edward the El-

der built the village of Bridgesford over- againſt Bridgesford,
it, and rais'd a wall (now fallen) quite round

the Town. The only remains of it, are on

the weſt-fide. A few years atcer this, namely

in Edward the Confeſſor's time (as it is in
Domeſday) there were reckon'd one hundred

ſeventy three Burgeſles in it, and f from the t De duobus
two Mints there were paid forty ſhillings to the King. Mone tariis.
Moreover, the water of Trent and the Foſs-dike, and

the way towards Tork, were all look d after ; that | |
if any one hinder 4 Ships from paſſing, * he ſhou'd 1 7
be amerc'd four pounds. As for the preſent Ca-= * ©
ſtle, both the Founder, and the Largeneſs,

render it remarkable, For William the Nor-

man built it to awe the Engliſh, ſunleſs we
are rather to credit f the learned Hiſtoriogra- Dr. There:
pher of this County, who is poſitive that it“

was built by Peverell, baſe ſon to William the
Conqueror: for he, as it appears, had licence

from the King to include ten acres (ad faci-

endum pomerium) thereabouts, which, . after the
foreſt-meaſure, contains above fifty Statute-

acres; and that is near the proportion of the

old Park at Nottingham. Beſides, there is no

mention of it in Domeſday-book, which was

made the year before the Conqueror's death;

and therefore it is probable that his ſon built

it by order and commiſſion from him.] By

Nature and Art together, it was ſo ſtrong (as Wil-

liam of Newburrough tells us) That it ſeemed
impregnable, extept by Fumine; provided it had a

it. Aﬀterwards, Edward

the fourth' repair d it at great charge, and a-

dorn'd it with curious buildings ; to which

Richard the third made ſome additions. Nor

has it in any revolution undergone the com-

mon fate of great Caſtles; tor it was never ta-* gxpugna:
ken by ſtorm. Once it was beſieg'd in vain tum.

by Henry of Anjou; at which time the gar-

riſon burnt down all the buildings about it. 115g.
It was alſo/onee* taken, by ſurprize, by Ro- Rog, Love:

Yom

4

bert Count de Ferrars, in the Barons war, who den, p. 397»

depriv d the Townſmen of all they had. Thoſe ”
#* +4 8 $0 # up : — 9 ils D ddd ED 2: 27

5 Hs

1 ein

—— — _

—

4
- „
2
: :
-
of
4
oh
+
\ *
l *.»
| .
: *
7
-
5
”
_
=
: 4
1 "OZ
4 8}
9
.
iT.
* 17
1
4
*
1
+
hi |
8 |
"US
C

———_— - 7”
_
7 — n —
* — — ,
—'» a — — ve
1
*
a Fo, g — ge” d .
” - —— * 2 — "ny" — 4
— »

— —_—
—
.
* «
. .

--

— 2 —

—

— = MI
"+ —
—
— —

1
f

KK
- _
ET

Ce CIs 3 ures ů ˙ X — 22——

— — ß — .

1

e

- . 9
*

- -
. ” .
ms. a4. a *

—

_5b

bh —C

of the Caſtle tell many ſtrange ſtories of David
King of Scotland, a priſoner here ; and of
Roger Mortimer Earl ot March, as taken in
* Subterranc. this place by means of a ſubterraneous Maze,
as meats, and afterwards hang'd for betraying his Coun-
try to the Scots tor money, and for other
ambitious and villanous deſigns. In the firſt
court of this Caſtle, they ſtill go down a
great many ſteps with candle-light, into a
_ vault under-ground, and rooms cut out of the
very ſtone; in the walls whereof the Hiſtory
of Chriſt's paſſion, and other matters are en-
aved, by David the ſecond King of Scot-
fand (as they ſay) who was kept priſoner there.
In the upper part of the Caſtle alſo, which
ſtands very high upon the rock, we went
down many ſtairs into another vault under-
Mortimer: ground; which they call Mortimer's-hole, be-
Hole. cauſe Roger Mortimer abſconded in it, when
he found the juſt reward of his Wickedneſs
coming upon him. While this Caſtle was in
the hands of the Earl of Rutland, many of the
— buildings were apy down, and the
and other materials fold ; yet, in the
2 of the Civil wars, King Charles the
firſt made choice of it as the fitteſt place for
+ Circ. Aug, f ſetting up his Royal Standard. Shortly at-
2. 1642, ter, it became a Garriſon for the Parliament;
and in the end of the war, Orders were given
to pull it down: but it was not quite demo-
liſh'd. Since the return of King Charles the
ſecond, the Duke of Buckingham (whoſe mo-
ther was only daughter and heir of Francis
Earl of Rutland) ſold it to the then Marquiſs,
afterwards Duke, of New-Cafth, who in 1674.
to clear the foundations of the old
tower, and erected a moſt ſtately fabrick in the
place of part of it, which is greatly improved
and adorned by the preſent Duke. ! As for
ſition, this place is fifty three degrees in
E and twenty two degrees, fourteen
minutes, in Longitude.
From hence, the Trent runs gently by
Holme · Pier · Holme, call'd from its Lords Holme Pierpount, a
—— noble and ancient family, of whom, Robert
de Petræ Ponte or Pierpount was ſummon'd among
the Barons in Parliament by Edward the third;
ſand whoſe deſcendants have been at ſeveral
times advanced, firſt to the honour of Barons
of this place, and that of Viſcounts Newark ;
and afterwards to the higher Titles of Earl of
Kingſton, Marquiſs of Dorcheſter, and Duke
Fic of Kingſton.| Then, the Trent runs to Shel-
ford, the ſeat of the famous family of the Stan-

family of the Southwells took their name, and

hops, Knights, of great ſtate and eminence in
theſe parts; [of which Family, and a great y;;
Ornament to it, is the Right Honourable ning in Kew
James Stanhope, Principal Secretary of State; to
whoſe great Abilities, and unwearied Appli-
cation, his Country is indebted in a very e-
minent manner.] It was formerly the Barony
of Ralph Hanſelin, by whoſe daughters it came to
the Bardolphs and Everinghams. | As to Shelford ;
in the Civil wars, it was a Garriſon for the King,
and commanded by Colonel Philip Stanhove, a
younger {on to Philip the firſt Earl of Cheſter-
field ; which being taken by ſtorm, he and ma-
ny of his ſoldiers were therein ſlain, and the
houſe afterwards burnt. Over-againſt this, Aub. lun
is Barton; in the fields of which, upon a hill, MS.
is a fair Camp, ſuppoſed to be Britiſh. On Bartos.
the top of the hill (where ſeveral Coins have
been found) were large Fortifications, which
have been level'd, in this age, for the conve-
nience of plowing ; but on the ſide of it, the
Works remain, one above another, ike great
Waves. | |

Hence, the Trent goes to Stoke, a ſmall Vil- Stoke,
lage; but remarkable for no ſmall ſlaughter :
for here, John de la Pole, Earl of Lincoln (who Batte dt
was deſign d for the Crown by Richard the Stoke, 144,
third ) when he ſaw himſelf excluded from
the throne by Henry the ſeventh, rebelliouſly
fought for a counterteit Prince againſt his law-
ful King, and, after a ſtout 3 was cut
oft with his whole party. Not far from hence,
ſtands Sonrhwell, a Collegiate-Church of Pre- Southae,
bendaries, dedicated to the Virgin Mary ; not
very ſplendid, but ſtrong, and ancient, and of
great note. Paulinus, the firſt Archbiſhop of
York, is ſaid to have built it, after he had
baptiz'd the people of this Country in the ri-
ver Trent. From that time, the Archbiſhops
of York f had a large Palace here, with three + Hare bu,
Parks adjoyning, well ſtor'd with Deer; C.
[which hath been long in ruins, and the Eſtate
demiſed in Leaſe.] That this is the City which
Bede calls Tio vul- Fingaceſter, I the rather be- Tio fi
lieve, becauſe thoſe things which he relates of gacefer.
Paulinus's baprizing in the Trent near Tio-vul-
Fingaceſter, are poſitively ſaid to have been
done here, by the private Hiſtory of this
Church. [I will ſubjoin an Inſcription upon a
Pillar in the Church here, both becauſe I do
not obſerve it to be ſet down by Dr. Thoroton,
and becauſe it contains a fort of hiſtorical ac-
count of the place (a). From this Town, the

Fag. 197.

were

(a) Reges & Reginz erunt nutrices tuæ.

Hanc
Collegiatam & Parochialem Eccleſiam
Religioſa Antiquitas
Fundavit. 2
Lee Archiepiſcopo OS petente :

Rex Henricus 8. Illu- N reſtauravit | mans

ſtriſſimus 1543» piiſſimo
ina Elizabetha Re- T ſancivit F Edwino Sandys Archiepiſcopo Ebor. 2
Reg "Ligiolfſima 1 58 3 digniſſimo * Tintercedente 2
Monarcha lacobus Præ - 7 ſtabilivit F Henrico Howard, Comite Northamptonienſ :
— | 1604. ; prænobiliſſimo P 5 'T mediante.
A Domino factum eſt iſtud :
Da gloriam Deo
Honorem Regi.
Sint ſi cut Oreb & Zeb, & Zebe & Salmana
qui dicunt poſſidea mus Sanctuarium Dei.
| Pſal. 83. 11, |
* Det Deus hoc ſanctum ſanctis; fit ſemper Aſylum
„„ Exulis, Idolatras ſacrilegôſque ruat.
From benes | | * Gervaſ, Lee
5 * Id Tess. fg In piam n, 1— memoriam

pillar, £7 | 1608;

| 144%

ul · Tu

a

4.
FE

*

r i — e.. — .. "

8 A 8 — _——
.

HAMSHIRE

were anciently ſeated here. For mention 1s
„ Thorot, made in the“ Records, of Simon Southwell un-
nig bam der Henry the third, and of Sir John under

Henry the ſixth; when they ſpread themſelves
into Norfolk and Suffolk. In the reign of King

E- Edward the firſt, and of ſeveral others, down to

F Charles the ſecond, Sir Robert Southwell went

into Gloceſterſhire, where his Family is now

; ſeated, at Kings-weſton. |

|... .:, Hence, from the eaſt, the Snite, a ſmall river,

Snitty runs into the Trent; which, being yet ſhallow,
| Larger. runs to Langer, famous for its Lords the Tibe-
tots or Tiprofts, afterwards Earls of Worceſter.
But that name hath had no relation to this
place, ſince the time of King Edward the
third. For in the 46th year of his reign, Ro-
bert, the laſt of the 1 dying without
heir- male ; the cuſtody of all his lands, and
the care of his three daughters, were commit-
ted to Richard le Scrope ; and he marrying Mar-
garet, the eldeſt, to his ſon Roger, brought that
ſeat into the name of the Lords Scrope, where-
in it continu'd down to Emanuel, who was crea-
ted Earl of Sunderland, 3 Car. 1. But he ha-
ving no iſſue by his wife Elizabeth, that and
the reſt of his eſtate was ſettled upon his na-
tural iſſue (three daughters ; ) and Amnnabella,
the third of them (to whoſe ſhare this ma-
nour fell in the diviſion) marrying John Howe,
ſecond ſon of Sir John Howe of Compton in

| 4 Now, Viſ- Gloceſterſhire, brought it into that name. f
counts in Ir®- Then, the Snite runs to Miverton, which, from

3 ** Heriz, formerly a famous man in theſe parts,

Chaworths, came by the Bretts and Caltofts to the Chaworths,
orde Cadur- who derive their name from the Cadurci in
cis Caborkin. France, and their pedigree from the Lords de
erh. Walchervill.

Haram. Now, the Trent divides it ſelf [near Haram,
the ſeat of the Lord Lexington, ] and then
Newark, Waſhes Newark, a pretty large Town ; ſo call'd,

as if one ſhould ſay, 4 new work, from the
new caſtle there, very pleaſant and curiouſly built
(as Henry of Huntingdon deſcribes it) by A
lexander the munificent Biſhop of Lincoln;

g. 197. [or, as + Dr. Thoroton thinks) only repair d by

him. ] He ( to uſe the words of an old hi-
ſtorian,) being of a very generous temper, built this
and another caſtle, at vaſt expence. And, becauſe
buildings of this nature ſeem'd leſs agreeable to the
character of a Biſhop ; to extinguiſh the envy of
them, and as it were to expiate that offence, he

built an equal number of Monaſteries, and fill d

them with religious ſocieties. However, the pro-
fuſeneſs of this military Biſhop was ſoon pu-
niſh'd as it deſery'd. For King ＋ * who

had no better means to eſtabliſh the ſinking

ſtate of his kingdom, than the poſſeſſing him-

ſelf of the fortity'd places, oblig'd the Biſhop,

by impriſonment and famine, to deliver into

his hands, both this caſtle and that other at
Sleford. Here is nothing elſe memorable, but 216
that King John ended the courſe of a very ;
troubleſome and uneaſy Life, in this Caſtle.
From hence the river, uniting again, flows
directly to the north, by many villages. {Firſt

by Collingham, where (as we before obſerved) Cniggbam.
the marks of Antiquity, together with the 6
diſtances, make it probable that the Crococolana

of Antoninus is to be placed : and then,

at ſome diſtance, by Tuxford, where Charles Tuxſord.
Read, Eſq; built a curious Free-ſchool, and

endow'd it with fifty pounds per am. The

like he did at Corby in Lincolnihire and at

Drax in Yorkſhire ; to which laſt he added an

Hoſpital, and endow'd that alſo with fifty

pounds per amum.] But the Trent ſees no-

thing [very] remarkable, till it comes to Lit-x ;cHe.bor-
tleborrough, a ſmall town (and ſo, exactly an- rough,
ſwerable to the name ; ) where, as there is at

this day a ferry much us'd, ſo was there for-

merly * a famous Station which Antoninus « giatie ve
mentions twice; and which is variouſly read, Manſio.

in ſome copies, — and in others, Sege-
locum. Formerly, I ſought this place herea- Segelocum.
bouts in vain, but now I verily believe I have

found it; both becauſe this ſtands upon a mi-

litary way, and becauſe the marks of an old

wall are plainly diſcernible in the neighbouring

field, where many coins of the Roman Empe-

rors are daily found by the plow-men. Thefe

are call'd Swines pennies by the Country-peopte, _ ©}
becauſe they are often' difcover'd by the grub- Sine
bing of the Swine there. [Befides which, and **

the pieces of Urns and other Veſſels, which

have been taken up here; there harh been late-

ly found a Roman'Sn1zs, an Agate-Stone with

a Roman figure, many Corneltans with Ro-

|

man Engravings, and two Roman Altars, with
other Antiquities. ] The People imagin, ac-
cording to their poor ſenſe of things, that their
forefathers enclos'd the field with the ftone-

-wall, to keep the water from overflowing it in

winter. [Talbot fixes this Station at Awulerton'

in Sherwood; and Fut (contrary to Antoni-

3 8

1

— — — —

— — 4

That is,
Kings ſhall be thy nurſing Fathers, and Queens thy nurſing Mothers,

This |
Collegiate and Parochial Church

Religious
gn

Antiquity

| of Y

ri i ird it | pi -bbi fy
The Illuſtrious Prince, repai Edward Lee, the Tek e Lee geeding:

Henry 8. 1543.

The moſt Religious Queen 7 confirm'd it F Edwin Sandys, the moſt worthy. Archbiſhop ; Be ng
Elizabeth, — 3 ” * P Fintereedi ding :

1584.

of Vork

The * Wr it hm; Howard, the moſt noble Earl of Nor"? mediaring

This is the Lord's doing :
Give Glory to God :

Honour to the King,

Let them be as Oreb and Zeb,

8 0
N .

and likes Lebe arid fnbnone

Who ſay, let us take to our ſelves the Houſes of God in poſſeſſion.

Pſal, 83. 1 1. | |
This holy place let holy men enjoy,
A Refuge to the baniſh'd and dibref't, 8
But Ruin to ry, and Sacrilege.

Geryaſe: Lee 8 | |
To the pious and grateful memory of his Patrons. .

Placed this,
1608, nus,

„ N *
——— . ¶,ß Rt Rt a ü

Agelocum, or

—
=
- — — —

. *
3 — — —
— —. 2 —  _— --
— ——rů — ——-— LL CESS — — —— * *
* — 2 - .
—
yo” *

- 2 — —
a” Ons Lads
— >

—
3 — —
— — —
— — - -
— - —— 6 ——— AM
_ — =
= =
— — —
— Ks

— F WI WY

CORI

WS,

TANT

nus, who makes it diſtant from Lindum four-

teen miles at leaſt ) at Agle, almoſt ſix miles

from that place. Dr. Thoroton ſeems inclin'd

to reduce it to the bank of the river Idle (on
* Ann. 1694. Which, a f former Edition of this work, had
placed it;) where Eaton ſtands, which may upon
that account as well be call'd 7dleton ; and, Id or
Id in the Britiſh ſignifying corn (as Tdlan doth
a granary, ) there may ſeem to be ſome afh-
nity between that and Segelocum, as if it were
a place of corn. But then, it is ſcarce fair, to
bring it to {dleton upon the likeneſs in ſound
with Agelocum ; and afterwards to ſettle it there
upon a nearneſs in fignification to Segelocum 3
one of which readings muſt be falſe, and by
conſequence both may not be made uſe of, as
true, to confirm the ſame thing. Mr. Burton
approves the placing of it here ; and, to recon- |
cile Agelocum and Segelocum, has ingeniouſly
rank'd theſe two amongſt the words, to which
the Romans ſometimes prefix'd an S or Sibilus,
and ſometimes omitted it. So ( ſays he) they
call d the Alpes, which in Lycophron's Caſlandra
we find written E&xTus* and they who are call d
Asi Inſulæ by Dionyfius in his Periegeſis, the
ſame in Strabo are Taso; lying in the Britiſh
Sea. Salamantica of Spain is call'd by Polybius
Auarrixy, and Caſar's uaſſiones, in Ptolemy are
Oviarores, To add one common Noun out of Dioſco-
rides, what in Virgil's Eclogues is Saliunca, in him
is Aufi.

In the weſt part of this County (call'd the
Sand,) where the Erwaſh, a ſmall river, runs
toward the Trent; we ſee Strelley [ (otherwiſe
called Stradlegh and Straley,| heretofore Strel-

legh) which hath given name and ſeat to the
Strellies Knights (commonly call'd Sturly, ) one
of the moſt ancient and famous families of the
Shirewood, County. More inward, lies Shirewood, which
ſome interpret a clear Mood, others, a famous
Wood; formerly one cloſe continu'd ſhade,
with the boughs of trees ſo entangled in one
another, that one could hardly walk ſingle in
the paths. At preſent, it is much thinner ;
and feeds an infinite number of Deer and
Stags ; and has ſome Towns in it, whereof
Mansfield, Mansfield is the chief. This is a very plenti-
ful Market ; the name of which is made
an argument by ſome for the Antiquity of
the family of Mangfe/d in Germany, and they
rſt Earl of Mansfeld * was at the

* Menſam ro- {ay, the

== ug cele- Feaſt of the Round Table with our Arthur ;

and that he was born here. Our Kings were
formerly wont to retire hither for the diver-
fion of hunting, and, in the words of an
old Inquiſition, Heury Fuuconberge held the ma-
nour of Cukeney in this County, by Serjeanty, to
fhoe the King's horſe when he came to Mans-
feld. Many ſmall rivers ſpring out of this
wood, and run towards the Dent; the
lde. chief of them is Idle, upon which, near Jale-
ton in the year 616, the Fortune of Ethered,
a moſt potent King of the Northumbrians,
ſtop'd and left him. For whereas before he
had ever fought with ſucceſs, here Fortune
turn'd, and he was cut off; being defeated
by Redwald King of the Eaſt-Angles, who
placed Edwin (excluded then, and depriv'd of
the throne of his Anceſtors,) over Northum-
Laxton. is Laxton, or Lexington, which gives the title of
Baron to the ancient and honourable family
of Sutton; of which family, Robert Sutton was,
in conſideration of his eminent Services t
King Charles the firſt, as alſo of his being
deſcended from an heir-female of the family
of Lexington, advanced to the dignity of a Ba-
ron of this Realm (21 Car. 1.) by the title of

| Lord Lexington of Aram. 1 The courſe of this

berland. ¶ Not far from the Idle, to the eaſt,] the Church of Tuttebury, © Robert the younger, I, ie

by Thomas his brother; who, by Richard the

little river Idle lies at no great diſtance from
Markham, a ſmall village; which yet gave yy,
name to the Markhams, a family very famous I”
heretofore, both for antiquity and valour ; the
greateſt ornament of which, was J. Markham;
who was Lord Chief Juſtice of England, and
temper'd his Judgments with ſo much Equity
(as you may read in the Hiſtories of England,)
that his name will endure, as long as Time
it ſelf, [He dy'd (as appears from an Inſcri-
ption in this Church) on St. Silveſter's day,
anno 1409.] Six miles from hence, to the
weſt, ſtands Workenſop, noted for its great pro-
duce of liquorice, and famous for the Earl,;
of Shrewsbury's houſe, built in f our memory, * 5
by George Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, with Duke c.
the magnificence becoming ſo great an Earl, Noridk,
and yet below Envy. To the Talbots, it came 7.9 ve,
with a ru eſtate from the Lovetoſis, the firſtt
Lords of it under the Normans, by the Fur-
nivals, and Nevils. Of theſe Lovetofts, G. Love-
toft in Henry the firſt's time built a Mona-
ſtery in this place; the Ruins of which are
ſtill to be ſeen among very pleaſant meadows
on the eaſt-ſide of the town: but the weſt-
part of the Church remains entire, with two
towers very fair and beautiful. About a mile
and half from Workeaſop, is Welbeck- Abbey, now Welbeck
a very noble Building, ſeated in the loweſt Abbe.
part of a fine park ſurrounded with trees of
excellent timber; and was the delightful ſeat
of Wiliam and Henry, Dukes of Newcaſtle ;
as it was afterwards of John Holes, Marquiſs
of Clare, and Duke of Newcaſtle, who marry'd
Margaret, daughter and one of the coheirs of
Henry aforeſaid. And about fix miles eaſt from
hence, ſtood the Abbey of Rughſord ; the noble Rugiiny,
and pleaſant ſeat of the late Marquiſſes of Abbey.
Hallijax.\

A little higher [than Jorkenſop,] upon the
ſame river, I ſaw Blithe, a noted market-town, j;th-,
which was fortity'd with a caſtle (as I am
inform'd) by Bulle) or Buſly, a Nobleman of
Norman Extraction; but f at this day, hardly + Arm.1%7,
any Ruins appear: ſo deſtructive is age to
every thing in this world. The little Mona-
ſtery there, was built by Roger Buſly and
Foulk de Lifieurs ; and this is almoſt the laſt
town of Nottinghamſhire to the North ; ex-
cept Scroby, a little town belonging to the Scroh.
Archbiſhop of York, on the very edge of the
County. Nor ſhall we ſay any more con-
cerning the places in this neighbourhood ; un-
leſs it be, that at Tyln, in the Pariſh of Hay-
ton, near Eaſt-Retford, there has been lately
found a Druid Amulet of an aqueous tranſpa-
rent colour, with ſtreaks of yellow ; and many
Cornelians with Roman Engravings. |

William the Conqueror made his natural Lords 1d
ſon William Peverel Governor of this County, 2
not by the title of Earl, but Lord, of Nottin- 1 ih M. Lit
gham. He had a ſon, who dy'd during the ton.
life of his father; and this likewiſe a fon of Matth. Ph
the ſame firname, who was depriv d of his g. dr gn
eſtate by Henry the ſecond, for poyſoning wy Derby.
Ranulph Earl: of Cheſter. About the ſame Match. Pay
time, Robert de Ferrariis, who plunder'd Not- p. 2%
tingham, us'd this title in the gitt he made to prone,

Workenſo,

Earl of Nottingham. But afterwards, King 4 feen
Richard the firſt gave and confirm'd to his miſc
brother John, the County and caſtle of Not-
ringham,' with the whole Honour of Peverel.
Long after tHat, Richard the ſecond honour'd

John de Mowbray with this title ; but he, dy-

ing young and without iſſue, was ſucceed

ſecond,

Ho — — 2 ” _—_ 7 — _— -

5 2 . SL 4 — — v . INOS. W Pe

— i — * * — —— * * — 6
— — 91 K * 2

6. —_—
.

* JV ——

922 24 ale, 41 222 — 2
5 | Degree

22

A FAS,

Fane 2 bee

Muli ing don Grange

—— 8 A Un

ny |
O F | O R Ky

 _ __ *
Auen

. e — NOT TIN

ms” onus QY Aby de la Zoudh
or ' 4 . Link, has © \ ,
A Ty OA, HG SHIRE

5 WE
_ — 1 6 .

CE TO -

|

.

„ * 9 : , *
4 * rs
*
n * V —_
9 + ? J

; _ . . —
! 1 W m — - :
'
*
8 3

— g :

= % L

—
„ 72 |
,
1

| 6 - as
2 * |
5 . & * f by us
! 7 *.
me ,
« * * =
| , * * 0 4
1 8 6 | 1
; l ”
* 3
. . N
2
ol -
. k 4
1 +
' *
} . * \
5 v
2 *
* 1 |
| .
; A.
*
1 |
— * 3
g | + Lately, u
*
,
8 | '? the year,
*
© 1 *
| & 1 | Is, *
4
oi
. 4
, 4
| 3 4-4
1 A *
= - ' * :
=
, * =
8 *
* 9 . ;
d 5
i as
' F * N18 1
.
.
, — . =. 7 . # . © # - . 1
* - 4
429 1 's * : $ -« V F
— : ”_ *
. þ 4 N v4 e
— 8 ' bo * 1 *
* py 1 J | £
: F % # a -
*
* ol
i 2 a * F _ 7 ; :
* 1 Ws L * 5
* » 4
* ,
\ 4
. ” 2 % "% 1
* * * * S 4% *
*
9. dl
* ] . 4 5
— a g
« I » .
. Sa
| +>» 4 1 4
, * JY Cc
* * 1
1 * ** 4
% * vs * N * o
1 . .
: o
. * 3 2
* ? * * 1 5
2 - g * 1 V ”
8 —
, * 78 p 8
* y = +
d F AT”
? 4 . * ai.
* — ,
. =
x 45 P *
5 % = Y. Ss o UE 4%;
* * F © l 4 4
. ; 1

, : 4
*
2 \
% 1 ,
F @% o *
—
* o
| \ 1
1 %
1 1
1
* *
1
.
” oy
# % *
- = * 7 P
* —
*
-
= . — a
a A
ww
9 Tc
LOS
? L
v4 £
Y *
*
E .
=
-
, ad
* — .
*
6 1
8 .
%
— *
7 „
* 1 5
*
©
:
, —
*.
. Ea.”
*
A *
*
-
4 6 * K ———— 8 — i my
-_ — — — —— — — —— — — — — rr ermar_— nc — 4
— - — — — — — — — —
- — ; —_ —

*

—

ſecond, was created Earl Marſpal and Duke of

ſon, the Right Honourable, Daniel Finch, doth See Burly in
Norfolk; and, being. baniſh'd immediately

now enjoy the ſame Honours. | Rutlandſhire,

F the year,

+ Lately, in

ll Is, C.

- crofles the ſouth point which I juſt now men-

The Peak,

Greiſely-
Caſtle,

The family of built by the Greiſleys, formerly Lords of it, who
the Greiſleys. derived their

* So ſaid,
ann, 1607.

after, he begat Thomas Earl Marſhal, who was

beheaded by Henry the fourth, and Joh Mow-

bray, who, as alſo his ſon and grandſon, were
ſucceſſively Dukes of Norfolk, and Earls..ol
Nottingham. But the iflue-male of this fa-
mily failing, and Richard, the infant-ſon. of
Edward the fourth, and Duke of York, ha-
ving enjoy'd this title among others for a lit-
tle time; Richard the third honour'd William
Marquiſs of Barkley, and Henry the eighth,
Henry Fitz-Roy his natural ſon, with this title
of Earl of Nottingham : but both dy'd without
iflue. And f in the year 1597. Queen Eliza-

C. beth ſolemnly inveſted Charles Howard, Lord

High Admiral of England (who || was deſcend-
ed from the Mowbrays) with this honour, for
his faithful and ſucceſsful ſervices by ſea (as
the Charter of Creation has it) againſt the
Spaniard, in the year 1588, and for his taking
ot Cadiz in the year 1596 ; he having the
command by Sea, as the Earl of Eſſex had by
Land. Which Charles, dying Anno 1624, was
ſucceeded by his ſecond ſon Charles; William
the elder brother dying before him, without
iſſue-male. This Charles was ſucceeded by a
ſon of his own name, who was likewiſe his
ſecond ſon, James the elder dying unmarry'd.
In the 33d year of King Charles the ſecond,
Sir Heneage Finch, Lord Finch of Daventry and
Keeper of the Great Seal, was advanced to
the dignity of Earl of Nottingham ; whoſe

There are 168 Pariſh-Churches in this County.

aw.

More rare Plants growing wild in Nottin-
ghamſhure.

Caryophyllus minor repens noſtras. An Be-

tonica coronaria, five caryophyllata repens ru-

bra J. B. Purple creeping Mountain-Pink. By the
road-fide on the ſandy hill you , aſcend going from
Lenton to Nottingham, plentifully ; a in other
ſandy grounds in this County. |
Gramen tremulum medium elatius, albis glu-
mis non deſcriptum. Said to in a hollow
lane between Peaſely and Mansfield by P. B. I have
not ſeen this ſort of 77 my ſelf, nor do I much re-
ly on the authority of this book : only T propoſe it
to be ſearched out by the curious. |
Glycyrrhiza vulgaris Ger. emac. Common Eng-
liſh Liquorice. It is planted and cultivated for ſale
at Workſop in this County : which Camden alſo takes
notice /.
Lychnis ſylveſtris alba nona Cluſii Ger. emac.
montana viſcoſa alba latifolia C. B. Sylveſtris
alba five Ocimoides minus album Park. Pole-
monium petræum Geſneri J. B. MHhite wild
Catchfly. On the walls of Nottingham-caſftle, and
on the grounds thereabout.
Verbaſcum pulverulentum flore luteo parvo
J. B. Hoary Mullein with ſmall flowers, About

Iollaton-hall, the ſeat of my honoured Friend Sir
Thomas Willoughby Baronet.

DERBY

. N the Weſt of Nottingham-
Z Y ſmire, lies the County of Derby,
in Saxon Deopnbi-rcynpe, and
commonly Derbyſhire; bounded
YN on the ſouth by Leiceſterſhire,
on the weſt by Staffordſhire,
and on the north by Yorkſhire.
It is in ſhape like a triangle, but not equilate-
ral. For at the ſouth point, it is hardly 6 miles
broad; but widens ſo by degrees on both ſides,
that towards the north it is about 30 miles in
breadth. It is divided into two parts, by the
river Derwent running thro' the middle; which
riſing in the northern border of it, flows with
its black waters (colour'd by the ſoil it runs
thro”) ſouthward, to the Trent: For the Trent

tion'd. The eaſt and ſouth parts are well cul-
tivated, and pretty fruitful ; and have many
Parks. The weſt part beyond the Derwent, call'd
The Peake, is all rocky, rough, and mountai-
nous, and conſequently barren ; yet rich in
lead, iron, and coal, and convenient enough for
feeding of ſheep.

The firſt thing remarkable in the South-cor-
ner, is Greiſeley-caſtle, a meer ruin; which, with
the little Monaſtery of St. George there, was

pedigree from William ſon of
Nigell ſirnam'd de Greiſeley, and have flouriſh'd
from the Norman Conqueſt * to our times,
in great honour ; which they long ſince exceed-
ingly encreas'd, by marrying the daughter and
heir of the ancient family of Gaſteneys. Upon
the river Dove, which, till it runs into the
Trent, is the bound between this County and

SHIRE.

Staffordſhire, there is nothing to be ſeen but

Country-villages ; and Aſbburne, a Market- Aſhburn,

long flouriſh ; and Norbury, where that no-
ble and very ancient family the Firz-Herberts
have alſo long dwelt ; of which, was Anthony
Fitz-Herbert, ſo highly honour'd among us, for
his great knowledge in the Common-Law.

town, where the family of the f Cockains did F Now ex-

tinct

Norbury.

Not far from this place, is Shirley, the ancient Shirley.
eſtate of the famous family of the Shirleys, who The family of
are deſcended from one Fulcher ; and, beſides the Shirleys.

the antiquity of their family, have been much

honour'd and enrich'd by marriages with the
heirs of the Breoſes, Baſſets of Brailesford, Stan-
tons, Lovetrs, Cc. Here are many places round,
which have given both names and ſeats to
families of good note ; Longford, Bradburne, and

Kniveton, from whence f were the Kniverons of + Are, C.
Marcaſton and Bradley, of which Family * is“ Ann. 1607;

S. Lows Kniveton, to whoſe ſtudy and diligence
I am much indebted : Alſo Keidelfton, where
the Curſons dwell, as likewiſe at Croxton. Rad-
burne, where Sit John Chandos Knight, Lord of
this place, laid the foundation of a ſtately
houſe ; from whom by a daughter the Eſtate
came by Inheritance to the Poles, who live
here at this day. But I leave theſe particulafs
to a certain Gentleman, who * deſigns a com-
pleat Deſcription of this County,

Upon the Trent, where it receives the Dove,
ſtands Repandunum (ſo our Hiſtorians call it,)
but the Saxons hhepandun | and Þneopanoun, |
and we at this day Reptou ; which, from a
large Town, is now dwindled into a ſmall yil-
lage. For heretofore it was very famous, for

Radburne.

4 So ſaid,
ann, 1607.

Repton,

the burial of Æthellbald, the excellent King of
the

Feee

— —ö—œ — . % — 19%

_CORITANI.

¹Üb a —˙ -

1 587

the Mercians (who loſt his life by the treache-
ry of his own ſubjects, ) and of the other
Mercian Kings ; and alſo. for the misfortune

King Bur- of Burthred [or Burbred] the laſt King of the

: thred.

- . — — — —äL— = ——_— ”
” —

1 | Melborn.

Mercians, who after a reign of twenty years
(ſupported by fawning and bribery) was here
dethron'd by the Danes, or rather was freed
from the ſplendid Miſeries of a Crown ; whoſe
Example may ſhew us how weak and flip-
pery thoſe high places are that have no other
ſupport, but money. [Here Matilda, wife to
Ralph Ear! of Cheſter, founded a Priory of
Canons-Regular of the Order of St. Auſtin,
in the year 1172. And ſince the Diſſolution
of Monaſteries, Sir John Port of Etwall in this
County, by his laſt Will, order'd a Free- ſchool
to be erected, appointing certain lands in the
Counties of Derby and Lancaſter, for the main-
tenance of this, and an Hoſpital at Erwall :
om which are ſtill in a proſperous condi-
tion.

Next, not far from the Trent, ſtands Mel-

* So ſaid, horn; a Caſtle of the Kings, but now decay-

Chatteſ-
worth.

niſh'd, C.

ſter.

Derby.

ann. 1607. ing apace; where John Duke of Bourbon, be-

ing taken priſoner in the battle of Agin-
court, was kept nineteen years, in cuſtody of
Nicholas Montgomery the younger. Scarce five
miles from hence, to the North, lies the courſe
of the river Derwent, which (as I already ob-
ſerv'd ) riſing out of Peak-hills in the North-
border of this County, flows for about thir-
ty miles (fometimes among great Stones, ſome-
times through green meadows ) almoſt in a
ſtreight line to the South. Yet in all this
long courſe, it ſees nothing entertaining, be-
ſides Chatteſworth, a large, elegant and admira-
ble Structure; which was begun by Sir Wil-
liam Candiſh or Cavendiſh Kt. deſcended from
the noble and ancient family de Gernon in Sut-

4 Lately f. folk, and + finiſh'd at great expence by his

wife Elizabeth, a Lady of great renown ; who
was alſo Counteſs of Shrewsbury. [But this
was pull'd down, and a new one far more
ſtately and elegant erected, by William late
Duke of Devonſhire; remarkable (beſides the
magni ficence of the Fabrick) for a beautiful Cha-

A and Hall, adorn'd with choice and curious

aintings by the hand of the famous Vario;
and for Statues and Water-works, of moſt rare
and exquiſite Contrivance, which make the
Gardens extremely Entertaining.]
Where the Derwent turns its courſe to the eaſt,

Little-Che- it paſſes by Little-Cheſter, i. e. a little city, where

old Roman Coins are often dug-up. [Ir has
now not above twenty houſes in it, and none
of them ancient. But it's Antiquity is ſuffi-
ciently atteſted (as we have ſaid) by the many
pieces of Roman Coyn, found both in digging
of Cellars, and plowing. Some of them are
of braſs, ſome of filver, and ſome few of

old ; bearing the Inſcription and Image of
3 of the Roman Emperors. In a clear
day, the foundation of a bridge may be ſeen,
croſſing the river to Darley-hill, which over-
looks the Town.] Upon the ſame river ſtands
Derby, in Saxon Nopchpopchig, and in Daniſh
(as that ancient writer Ethelwerd tells us) Deo-
raby, the chief Town of the Shire ; deriving
its name [perhaps] from the Derwent upon
which it ſtands, and giving it to the County ;
[or rather it may have been ſo called from its
beicg a ſhelter for Deer, which is imply'd in
the Saxon name Deopnaby. And what farther
confirms this, is, that it was formerly a Park,
and in the Arms of the Town to this day is
a buck couchant in a park. Which, joyn'd to the
Lodge-lane, (ſtill the name of a paſſage into the
Nuns-green ) as they ſeem to put the original

paſt doubt, fo do they ſhew the ancient condition
of the place. When this Town was built, does
not appear ; but its privileges and ancient
Charters argue it to be of good antiquity, It
is exempted from paying toll in London, or any
other place, except in Wincheſter, and ſome
few other Towns; and is a Staple-rown for
Wool, a very ancient manufacture of this King-
dom. There was formerly in it a Chapel de-
dicated to St. James, near which, in digging
ſome cellars and foundations of houſes, bones
of a great ſize have been found. And on the
north-ſide of St. James s lane, within the com-
paſs of ground where the Chapel ſtood, a large
Stone was made bare ; and this being gently
remov'd, there appear'd a ſtone-coffin, with a
very „* corps in it; but this, upon
the firſt motion of the ſtone, turn'd mito
duſt. The Coffin was ſo cut as to have a
round place made for the head; vide about
the ſhoulders, and ſo narrower down to
the feet. On the ſouth-eaſt corner of the
Town, there formerly ſtood a Caſtle ; though
there have been no remains of it within the
memory of man. But that there was one here-
tefore, appears from the name of the hill,

Deeds bears the name of Caſtle-gate.] The
Town is neat, and pretty large, and well
peopled ; on the eaſt-part, the river Derwent
runs very pleaſantly with a full and brisk
ſtream under a fair ' bridge ; upon which
ſtands a neat Chapel, built by our pious An-
ceſtors, | but now negle&ted. It was dedicated
to St. Mary ; and, in the reign of K. Charles
the ſecond, was a little repaired, and made

new-built, and converted into a Dye-houſe.1
The Sourth-part of the Town is croſs'd by a

cated to All-Saints, has a Steeple particularly
famous for height and workmanſhip, In this,
the Counteſs of Shrewsbury, whom we juſt
now mention'd, diſtruſting the care and affe-
ction of her heirs, built her ſelf a Tomb,
and an Hoſpital hard by for the maintenance of
twelve poor people, eight men and four wo-
men. In the ſame Church of All-Saints, is
alſo a noble Monument for the Earl of De-
vonſhire, and the Counteſs, his Lady. And
4 third, for Richard Craſhaw of London, who
dy'd the 2oth of June An. 1631, He was
originally a poor boy, a Nailer's fon, and went
to London in a ſuit of Leather; but having by
his own Induſtry got a conſiderable Eſtate, he
left at his death (beſides many charitable Acts
in his life) above four thouſand Pounds to
the maintenance of Lectures, relief of the Poor,
c.! This place is memorable for being a

fleda, the victorious Lady of the Mercians, took
it by ſurprize, and pyt them to the ſword. In
Edward the Confeſſor's time (as it is in Do-
meſday) there were one hundred forty three
Burgeſles in it; which number was ſo much
leſſen'd, that in William the Conqueror's reign
there were only one hundred remaining. Theſe

at the feaſt of S. Martin paid 12 trabes of corn to the This ſcems to

Aſſi- 2 Trrate
of Corn.

and The Beer.

d curmi

King. Its preſent reputation is from the
zes for the County which are held here,

from the excellent Ale brew'd in it; a word, n

a Meeting-houſe for ſome time; but it is ſince

* Retreat to the plundering Danes, till Ethel- 4 xqibulun- ;

. - +4. 5, 1

call'd Cow-Caftle-hill ; and from the ſtreet lead- Cow. all
ing weſt to St. Peters Church, which in ancient hill.

3

Turrebus,
Wine.

little clear river which they call Mertenbroke. It...
has five Churches; the greateſt of which, dedi-xiv.

* Propoli

The Baron
| Montjoy,

Elwaſton

+ Now Ea
C.

Is, C.

Hach,

Riſeley.
7 So ſai
ann, 16c

1553

Sandiacr

Grey of
Sandiacr

deriy'd from the Daniſh Oel, and not from in Dioſcri
Alica, as Ruellius would have it. The Bri- des isin Fr.

he ſays that the Britanni and the Hiberi (perhaps
c

tains expreſs'd it by the old word Kwrw, for bi
which Curmi is falſly read in Dioſcorides, where rd

ſh Ale, from | Colenor-C
; | ile,

Danilh

Oel.

509 : | NT DER BYSHIR E. 3

590
he means Hiberni) drank Curmi, a liquor made | age eame by marriage to the Zouches ; for John
of Barley, inſtead of Wine. For this is our|de la Zouch, ſecond ſon of William Lord de Barons Grey
' . Bartey-wine, which Julian the Apoſtate in- la Zouch of Haringworth, marry'd Elizabeth, of Codnor.
geniouſly calls, in an Epigram of his, nu end, heir to Henry Grey, the laſt Lord of Codenor.
* Beger d Beg won The off ipving of Corn, and wine] Next, Winfeld, a noble manour, where Ralph winge1a.
without wine. This is the ancient and peculiar | Lord Cromwel, in the reign of Henry the
Liquor of the Engliſh, and Britains; and i ſixth, built a houſe, very ſtately, conſidering
very wholeſom it is, notwithſtanding that [that age. Then Alfreton, which is thought to Alſfreton.
Henry of Auraunches the Norman, Poet-lau-|have been built by King Alfred, and nam'd
reat to King Henry the third, plays upon] from him. Ir has likewiſe had its Lords, ſir-
it in theſe Verſes ; nam'd from it De Alfreton ; of whom, the ſe-
ſcond, Robert the ſon of Ranulph, built the
Neſcio quod Stygiæ monſtrum conforme pa- little Monaſtery de Bello Capite, commonly Beau-
ludi, chief, in the remoteſt corner of this County.

66

Cerviſiam plerique vocant : nil ſpiſſius ila But a few years after, for default of heirs-
Dum bibitur, nil clarius eſt dum mingitur, | male, the eftate paſs'd with two daughrers to
unde | the family of the Cadurci, or Chaworth, and to
Conſtat quod multas faces in ventre relin- the Lathams in the County of Lancaſter, Their
quit. Arms were two Cheverons, Or, in a Shield A-The Arms of
zure. Which very Coat the Muyſards, Barons of the Barons of
Of this ſtrange Drink ſo like the Stygian |Staveley in this County, did likewiſe bear, but —
lake, with different colours; who, in the reign of dave Ye
Men call it Ale, I know not what to [Edward the firſt, were extinct in N Muſard ;
make. and his eldeſt ſiſter was marry d to T. de Freſ-
They drink it thick, and piſs it wondrous | chevill, whoſe poſterity flouriſh here + at this+ So ſaid,

thin; day; ſof which Family, John Freſcheville, in ann. 1807.
What ſtore of dregs muſt needs remain |conſideration of his eminent Services to King
| within! Charles the firſt, was in the 16" year of King
% Charles the ſecond, created Lord Freſche-
4 Turnebus, of However, one of the moſt learned men in ſvile of Staveley.| Higher up, on the very
Hie. France, does not queſtion but they who drink edge of the County eaſtward, and upon a
this Liquor, if they avoid exceſs, will live longer rough ground, ſtands Hardwick, which has Hardwick;
than if they drank wine; and that this is the|given name to a famous family in this County;
cauſe, why ſome among us that drink ale, live Com whom was deſcended Elizabeth Coun-Is, C.
to the age of an hundred years. Yet Aſcle-|reſs of Shrewsbury, who here + laid the foun-+ Hath now
piades in Plutarch (ſpeaking of ſome Britains|dation of two ſtately Houſes, almoſt joining laid, C.
who liv'd to the age of one hundred and twen- one to the other, which make a very beautiful
ty years) aſcribes it to the coldneſs of the [Show at a great diſtance, by reaſon of their
Climate, which preſerves the natural heat of high fituation. The title of this Barany was :
our bodies. enjoy'd by William Cavendiſh her — ſon, — * IS:
brot The wealth of this Town depends in great who was advanc'd by King James ſthe firſt,]4;q* * >
* 7ropolia, meaſure upon! a retail- trade; which is, to buy to the honour of Baron Cavendifh of Hard- 1605.
corn, and fell it again to the high-land coun- wick; [and after that, by the ſame Prince, to
tries; for the Town conſiſts chiefly of this|rhe dignity of Earl of Devonſhire; and whoſe
ſort of Merchants. deſcendants have been fince further honour d S. ,..,..
Not far from hence, the courſe of the river|with the additional titles of Marquiſs of Har- fire.
22 Derwent lies through the place where Ralph de tington and Duke of Devonſhire.) PRE;
| 92 Mont joy had lands in Edward the firſt's reign;] More inward, we ſee Cheſterfield in Scarſdale, Cheſterßeld.
Elwaſton, and then it runs by Elwaſton, the birth- place ſ that is, in a Dale enclos'd with rocks : (For rocks
of Walter Blunt, who was rais d by Edward ſor erags were call'd Scarrs by the Saxons ; [and
the fourth to the dignity of Baron of Mont-|are fo called to this day in the northern parts
joy: whoſe poſterity equall'd the glory of their of Great Britain.] Both the ruins of the
| = deſcent, by the glory of their learning; and] walls, and this new name, prove it to be of
| 8 Nom Earl, above the reſt, Charles t Earl of Devonſhire, great Antiquity: but the old name of it is quite
Baron of Montjoy, Lord-deputy of Ireland, and loſt; and it is only mention'd in Authors,
Il, C. Knight of the Garter, || was ſo eminent for [on account of a Battle between Henry the
3 virtue and learning, that in thoſe reſpects heſ third and the Barons ; in which Robert de
Hach, C,* had no ſuperior, and but few equals. Below| Ferrariis the laſt Earl of Derby of that family
this place, the Derwent runs into the Trent, | was taken, and degraded . by A& of Parlia-
which ſoon after receives Erewaſh, the boun- ment: after which, he liv'd privately, and his
* dary hereabouts between this and Nottingham Poſterity only enjoy'd the title of Barons.
+ So did. ire. Upon it, ſtands Rifeley, that f belongs This dor hath given the title of Earl, to
ann, 1807. to the Willoughbys ; of which Family (as I have Phili d Stanhope of Shelford, who was crea-
heard) was Sir Hugh Willoughby Knight, who|ted Aug. 4. 4 Car. 1, and was ſucceeded in
in diſcovering the frozen Sea near JYardhous| that honour by Philip Lord Stanhope, his grand-
1553. in Scandia, was ſtarv'd to death, with his|child, by Henry his eldeſt ſon. Scarſdale alſo,
Sandiacre, whole company» Near it, alſo, ſtands Sandia- the Diviſion wherein Cheſterfield ſtands, hath

a cre, or, as others would have it, Sainf# Diacre, | afforded the title of Earl to Francis Leak Lord
rey of the ſeat

alle,

tibulum

1 of the noble family of the Greys of San-| Deincourt of Sutton, created Novem. 11. 16453
; ſeemst0 * diacre, whoſe eſtate came to Edward Hilary in] and after that to Nicholas his ſon, and Robert
n Throw right of his wife (his ſon taking the name of| his grandſon : Who dying without ifſue-male,
= Grey ; ) one of whoſe daughters and heirs,|the title came to Nicholas (as ſon of Richard
1 cn ſome tew years after, was marry'd to Sir John] Leak, ſecond ſoh to Nicholas Leak Earl of

ioſcori
is in Ex-
Ale, from
anilh

d bel.

; Leak Knight, and the other to John Welſh. Scarſdale, and younger brother to the laſt

| Colmes. On the Eaſt- ſide; there ſtand in order, to the] Robert) who is the preſent Earl.)

| le, north, Codenor, heretofore Coutenoure, a Caſtle Next Cheſterfield, to the weſt, lies Valton, which Walton.
So ſaid, Which belong'd to the Barons Grey (ſid Lords|by Inheritance deſcended from the Bretons, by

ann. 1607, Grey of Codenor,) whoſe eſtate * in the laſt \Loudham, to the Filiambs, a Family of great

name

ll. Meath — 8 13

re
. — 5

_—_——

"CORITANTI.

—

$91

Bol ſover,

——— —

Wolves.

Wormdill.

Lead.

| BrodZzus,

+ Lopides

Antimony.

5 Fluores.
"i | Cryſtal,

Vernon,

The Peak,

Inq, 2 Ed. 2.

plumbarit.

Mill- tones,
Grind- ſtones.

* Metallicz.

name in thoſe parts. To the eaſt, lies Sutton, to Thomas Stanley deſcended from the D
of the Leaks |

whete the | forementioned] family
have long flouriſhed, \firſt] with the degree of
Knighthood, ſand fince, as hath been ſaid,
with the more honourable titles of Lord
Deincourt of Sutton, and Earl of Scarſ-
dale. |

At ſome ſmall diſtance from hence, ſtands
Bolſover, an old Caſtle ſeated upon a riſing
ground, which formerly belong d to the Ha-
ſtings Lords of Abergavenny, by exchange with
King Henry the third ; who being unwilling
that the County of Cheſter to which it belong'd,
ſhould be parceli'd out among diſtaffs,
other lands, here and there, in lieu thereof, to
the ſiſters of John Scor, the laſt Earl.

The welt part, on the other fide the Der-
went, which is nothing but hills and mountains
(for which reaſon perhaps, it was heretofore
call'd Peaclons in Saxon, and Peake at this
day; for that word with us ſignifies eminence)
is ſever d from Staffordſhire by the Dove, a
very ſwift and clear river ; of which in its
proper place. This part, though rough and
craggy in ſome places, has alſo graſly hills and
vales, which feed abundance of Cattle, and
great flocks of Sheep, very ſecurely. For now
there is no danger of Wolves in theſe places,
though infeſted by them heretofore ; for the
hunting and taking of which, ſome perſons held
lands here at Vormhill, from whence thoſe per-
ſons were calld Holvehunt ; as is manifeſt from
the Records of the Tower. It produces ſo
much Lead, that the Chymiſts (who condemn
the Planets to the Mines, as if they were guil-
ty of ſome great crime) tell us, ridiculouſly as
well as falſly, that Saturn whom they make to
preſide over Lead, is very gracious to us, be-
cauſe he allows us this Metal; but that he is
diſpleas'd with the French, as having deny'd it

them. However, I am of opinion, that Pliny

ſpoke of this tract, in that paſſage of his; In
Britain, in the very upper cruſt of the ground,
Lead is dug-up in ſuch plenty, that a Law is
made 0n pl to ſtint them to a ſet quantity.
Out of theſe Mountains, f Lead-ſtones ( fo
the Miners call them) are daily dug-up in great
abundance, which they melt down with large
wood fires, upon thoſe hills expos'd to the
Weſt-wind (about Creach, and Workeſworth ſo
called from the Lead-works, ) at certain times
when that wind begins to blow, which they
find by experience to be the moſt conſtant and
laſting of all winds : and then, digging Cha-
nels tor it to run into, they work it into
Sowes. And not only Lead, but Stibium alſo,
call'd Autimony in the ſhops, is found here in
diſtin& veins ; which was us'd formerly in
Greece by the women to colour their eye-brows,
and upon that account, the Poet Ion calls it
zue Mill-ſtones alſo and Grind-ſtones
are dug here; and ſometimes there is found in
theſe Mines a kind of white Fluor, that is in
all reſpe&s like Cryſtal (for thoſe Stones which
are found in Mines, like Jewels, are call'd
Fluores by the workers in Metals.) Beſides
Workeſworth, there is nothing that deſerves
mentioning, but Haddon, upon the river Me,
for a long time the ſeat of the Yernons, not
only an ancient but a very famous family in
thoſe parts; inſomuch, that Sir George Vernon,

* our time, Knight, who lived I in the laſt age ſave one,

by his magnificence and hoſpitality gained
the name of King of the Peak among the vu-
Igar. By his daughters and heirs, this noble
Eſtate was transterr'd to John Mannours of
the Family of the Earls of Rutland, and

avel

*

of Derby. [In the grounds belonging to
Haddon-houſe, (a ſtately building with noble Haday,
Gardens, and a ſeat of the Dukes of Rut- bout,
land,) was dug-up this Altar, cut in a rough
_ of Stone, ſuch as the Houſe it ſelf is built
of:

46 Edw. 3 |

e
0

Mamſor.

This (with one or two more, which were
broken and very imperfect, and without any di-
rection here they were found,) were copy'd
out by * a learned Perſon now dead, whoſe « yy, ;
large Collection of Antiquities, being purchas'd bouſe, Mn.
by Mr. Thoresby of Leeds, are now part of that fler of Dy.
large and valuable Treaſure, which remains Hell in In.
in the poſſeſſion of his ſon. Among the reſt,
was a piece of a bone, and a tooth, of a won- |
derful proportion ; dug-up near Bradwall, a- |
bout ſeven miles from Haddon. The tooth le
(though about a quarter of it is broken off,) —_—
is thirteen inches and a half in compaſs, weigh- >
ing three pound, ten ounces, and three quar-
ters. With theſe, were likewiſe found many
other bones, which were broken and diſpers d;
with the Skull, which held ſeven pecks of
Corn, as ſeveral perſons of good credit affirm'd.
Upon the ſight of the tooth, a f learned per- br
ſon took it to be the Deus molaris of an Ele-
phant, and writ a Diſcourſe upon it ; but the
late Author of the Natural Hiſtory of Lan-
caſhire and Cheſhire (ſpeaking of theſe Bones,)
takes them, and others of the ſame kind, to
be only Sports of Nature, in ſparr and other
indurated Bodies, which, he reckons, were all
fluid at firſt, and capable of any Impreſ-
ſion. |

Near this, lies Bakewel, upon the ſame little Bakens!,
river, which makes it ſelf a paſſage amo
theſe hills into the Derwent. This was call
by the Saxons Baddecanpell and Basecanpylla;]
and Marianus tells us, that Edward the Elder
built a Fort there. Whether it took this + z,,q,n
name from the Baths there, which the old conſtitaiſe
Engliſh call'd Bade and Baden ( as the Ger-
mans likewiſe did, from whence are the
names of Baden in Germany, and Buda in
Hungary ; ) I cannot tell. This is certain,
that at the riſe of the river Me, not far from
hence, there are nine Springs of hot water,
call'd at preſent Buxton-uell; which being found Buxton-well
by experience to be very good for the ſtomach,
the nerves, and the whole body, the moſt ho-
nourable George Earl of Shrewsbury * adorn'd « Hath hte.
them with buildings; upon which they fbegan ly 14
to be frequented by great numbers of the No- T Bebit,
bility and Gentry. About that time, the un-
fortunate and heroick Princeſs Mary Queen of
Scots took her farewell of Buxton in this diſtich;
being Cæſar's Verſes upon Feltria, apply d to
Buxton :

Devil's Arſe
| in the Peake,

Pooles-ho

Byrch ·

Buxtona que calidæ celebrabere nomine lym-
phe 3
Forte mihi poſthac non adeunda, vale.

Buxton, whoſe fame thy Baths ſhall ever tell,

Whom 1, perhaps, ſhan't ſee again, *
ut

B __DERBISHERDR

594

But this is foreign to my buſineſs, That theſe
| Baths were anciently known, the Cart-road or
Bathgate. Roman Conley call'd Bathgate, which continues
: ſeven miles from hence to the little village
Burgh, does plainly teſtify : [and much more

Burgh. plainly the Roman Wall, cemented with red

| Burgh, ſtands an old Caſtle upon the top of
6: a hill, formerly belonging to the Peverell,

: call'd the Caſtle in the Peake, and in Latin De
46 Edw. 3+ alto Pecco; which K. Edward the third gave with

oman Plaiſter, cloſe by St. Ams Well; where |
are the ruins of the ancient Bath.] Near this |

cone to compriſe in theſe four Ver-
es:

Mira alto Pecco tria ſunt, barathrum, ſpe-
cus, anirim;
Commoda tot, plumbum, gramen, ovile
pecus.
Tot ſpecioſa fimul ſunt, Caſtrum, Balnea,
hatſworth :
Plura ſed occurrum, que ſpecioſa minus.

Nine things that pleaſe us at the Peak

——

this Manour and Honour to John Duke of Lan- we ſee,
caſter his ſon, upon his ſurrender of the Earldom| A Cave, a Den, and Hole, the Wonders
of Richmond to him. [Not far from whence, be,
Mamſor. is Aſamſor, a Hill on which a Fortification is] Lead, Sheep, and Paſture, are the uſeful
| ſeen, and a Spring within it.] Below the ſaid three:
Caſtle; is a Den or Cave underground, which] Chatſworth, the Caſtle, and the Bath, de-
perils Arſe (ſaving your preſence) is call'd the Devil's Arſe, light; =
in the Peake. very wide and gaping, and having many apart-“ Much more you'll find, but nothing worth
| ments in it; wherein Gervaſius Tilburienſis, your ſight.
6. — 1 whether out of ignorance or a lying humour, |
od. tells us that a Shepherd ſaw a ſpacious Coun- [And Mr. Hobbes has comprehended the Sever
| in Nn. try, with many rivulets, and vaſt pools off Wonders in this one Verſe ;
K a ſtanding water. Yet from ſuch ſtories, is this
Hole reckon'd among the Prodigies of England. Ades, Mons, Barathrum, Binus fons, Antra-
; The ſame ſort of Fables are likewiſe told of que bina.
another Cave in this neighbourhood, call'd
* Elden-hole. Elden-hole, which is wonderful for nothing] Houſe, Mountain, Depth, two Fountains,
i but bigneſs, ſteepneſs, and depth; ( it hath} and two Caves. |
been plumb'd to the depth of eight hundred
fathoms, and no bottom found.) But, that! Thoſe of the family of Peverel, who, as I
Winds have their vent here, is a miſtake in|ſaid before, were Lords of Nottingham, are alſo Lords and
thoſe who have writ ſo; nor are thoſe Ver-|ſaid to have been Lords of Derby. Afterwards, Earls of Per-
ſes of Necham concerning the Miracles of Eng- King Richard the firſt gave and confirm'd to his 9
1610 gland, applicable to either Cave: brother John, the Counties and Caſtles of Not- Simeon Du-

Eſt ſpecus ZEoliis ventis obnoxia ſemper,
Impetus e gemino maximus ore venit.
Cogitur injectum velamen adire ſupernas

Partes, deſcenſum impedit aura potens.

Vex'd with perpetual ſtorms, a Cave there

tingham, Lancaſter, Derby, &c. with the Honours velmenſis.
belonging to them, and alſo the Honour of Peverel. 1
After him, thoſe of the family of the Fr- 204.
rars (as I gather from the Regiſters of Tut-
bury, Merivall, and Burton Monaſteries) were
Earls; viz. William de Ferraris {on of the daugh-

ter and heir of Peverel, whom King John (as a, ancient

lies it is in an ancient Charter) || created Earl of Charter,

Where from two holes the ſtruggling blaſts Derby with his own hands: William his ſon ; 1 Joan.

ariſe. | and Robert the ſon of this William, who in the || Ct, &c.
= Throw in a Cloath, you'll ſee it ſtrait . Civil wars was fo entirely ſtrip'd of this dignity,
aſcend, that none of his poſterity, though they liv'd in
For all's bore upward by the conqu'ring great ſplendour, were ever reſtor d. A great
wind. art of Robert's Eſtate was given by King
| 1 Hen the third. to his younger ſon Edmund ;
15. | Coytmoſſe, Near Buxton alſo, by a hill call'd Co- and King Edward the third (ſo ſays the ori-

Pooles-bole, mofſe, is a very wonderful Cave, nam'd Pooles-[ginal record) gave by Act of Parliament to
L hole. It's entrance is very ſtrait and low but]. Hey of Lancaſter,” the ſon of Henry Earl of

not unlike the roof of ſome large Cathedral. In

at once put the finger and thumb o

ten yards inwards, you have room to toſs a LancsFer,” the Rarldom of Derby, to him and
ſpear ; being of a conſiderable height, andſ his hzirs ; and did likewiſe ſettle on him one

thouſand marks yearly, during the life of Hen-

moſt parts of the Cave, there are little drop- ry Earl of Lancaſter his father, From that
ping waters, which, having a petrifying virtue,| time, the title continu'd in the family of Lan-
make many curious ſhapes, and fanciful works, A. till Henry the ſeventh beſtow'd it upon id: g,,,...
upon the ſides. At a little diſtance from 7.

hence, is a ſmall clear brook, memorable for] King's mother, ſto whom
being made up both of hot and cold water, Edward, Henry, and Ferdinand; and | then] J/il-of * Fa-
ſo joyn'd in the ſame ſtream, that you may] liam, the ſixth Earl of Derby, a perſon of f N.

Stanley, who had marry'd Margaret the ite, in Lan-
7 3 Thomas, — = Tie —

+ Now, C.

8 the ſame] great worth and honour. [| Which William, de- Sce Latham
hand, one into hot water, and the other into

cold. In thoſe parts alſo, near a Village call'd

parting this life Ann. 1642, was ſucceeded by in Lanceſbire.
James his ſon and heir, eminent for his good

Brrch-over, Byrch-over, is a large rock ; and upon it, are| ſervices to King Charles the firſt, as was alſo
two tottering Stones: one of theſe is four] his excellent Lady Charlotte. But, after the fight
yards in height and twelve yards about, and] at Vorceſter, he being taken in Cheſhire, and
yet it reſts upon a point, ſo equally pois'd,| upon the 15th of Ottober beheaded at Bolton
that one may move it with a nger. Which|in Lancaſhire, was ſucceeded oy Charles his

we the rather mention here, becauſe Main-| ſon. Which Charles was ſucceede

in this ho-

amber in Cornwall, a ſtone which was much] nour, firſt by William-Richard-George his eldeſt

like this, is now thrown down. 1

ſon, and then (he dying without iflue-male,

But the things ſmoſt] remarkable in this| and alſo Robert his ſecond ſon dying young)
high and rough Country, a certain perſon has] by James his third ſon, the preſent Earl.

FFF Thus

I IT rn 5
SA. 2 2 a. =
=
. = 5 8 - —
<p —_— = _
+ D—

* — =y > — 2 —
- oh —
- = — 3 —
— ne en E ——— — = ® ”

E -

CORITANT

3 — * 2 7 — —

The Nor-
thern Mer-
clans.

Trachelium majus Belgarum Park. maj

Thus far, of the Counties of Nottingham aud] Belgarum ſive Giganteum Park. Campanula
Derby ; which were, in part, inhabited by thoſe who in| maxima, foliis latiſſimis C. B. Giant Throat-worr.
Bede time were calPd Mercii Aquilonares (be-| In the mountainous paſture-fields by the hedge-fides,
cauſe they dwelt beyond the Trent, northward) ] &c. plentifully, as well in this County as in Tork-

and who poſſeſs d, as he ſays, the land of ſeven
thouſand families.

This County has in it 106 Pariſhes.

—_—— .
* E

More rare Plants growing wild in Derbyſhire.
Alſine puſilla pulchro flore, folio tenuiſſimo

ire, Staffordſbire, Nottinghamſhire.

Viola tricolor Ger. tricolor major & vulgaris
Park. Jacea tricolor, ſive Trinitatis flos J. B.
Panſies or Hearts-eaſe. In the mountains among the
corn, and upon the mud-walls and fences of Stone.

Viola montana lutea grandiflora noſtras.
Flammea lutea ſeu 5 Ger. Panfies with a large
yellow flower. In the mountainous paſtures of the
Peak in ſeveral places, principally where the ſoil is
moiſt and bo |

noſtras ſeu Saxifraga puſilla earyophylloides,, Vitis Idza ſemper virens fructu rubro J. B.

flore albo pulchello. Small fine leau d mountain

Idza, foliis ſubrotundis non crenatis, fructu ru-

Chickweed, with a milk-white flower. In the moun- bro C. B. Vaccinia rubra Ger. rubra buxeis
tainous parts of Derbyſhire about Workeſworth and] foliis Park. Red-whorts or Bilberries. In the

elſewhere, plentifully.
Cochlearia rotundifolia Ger. major rotundi-

mountains of the Peak plentifully.
On the mountains in the Peak grow alſo thiſe

folia five Batavorum. Park. Common round-leaved| great moſſes called Muſcus clavatus five Lycopo-

Scurvy-graſs or garden Scurvy-graſs. On the moun-
tains at Caſtleton in the Peak, about the great ſub-
terraneous vault or hole.

Lapathum folio acuto, flore aureo C. B. an-
thoxanthon J. B. Golden Dock. In the meadows
by the road-fide leading to Swarſton-bridge, which
in winter-time in floods are overflown by the Trent.

dium, Club-moſs or Wotves-daw, and Muſcus
erectus abietiformis, Firr-leaved moſs. Of which
we have made mention, and given the Synonymes in
Yorkſhire.

Nothing more common there than Alchimilla vul-
garis or common Ladies mantle, known to the vul-
gar by the name of Bearsfoot.

CORN A-

59

—

4]
5

„ *
*

a

—

-
4
„„ aac --- * *

IIS
need -
FA

—

o
4

/{ &

*

, Le ot

- —_— — = —_— - ——
i
*
9 » w© _—y vas 7 * 2
_ — - _ -- wa » 2 41 *
*
5
=
*
W. *
« +
PR:
PX
-
* ,
- 7
_— = * *

* ” PT

6 —m—ü—ä—ä—ʒ ——2—ñ — —  — _—_ —

*

1

—

0 —_

2 n n
"ttm... anti. a.
——
*

*

— ä —

—
——

_—

a + Minutes of Zone Nox rir » Ys
P he NN |
, — r oF N © Tan, thh 45
| | @as. dd. D : |
35 -.  - I STAFFORD -: A MN 2
| —_ „ vs ney
——— — Ln N
* = — . b ** 4 —
oH ny |
WARWICK „ PſA 40.79
. " * x , :
SHIRE @ A Vo:
\ l . * H . hat
| RY | | * E CottouR
A | py - une , F —
2 3 * Rob. Morden. 1 1 N . — 4
— Sandwaf lard Bridoe | 4
1 —_— _” Wee *
s _ | | ,
| | — : _ ; | | . 4 * r ä o |
| . — a fs En ih. p
f ton Ca/Ho Bromwich |
* 4 4 * LF 4 RI TN [
Bri a eret Ef, A I
alu germ. 2 — 1 * VU >
Bronce 0 : *
bau ® un A — V
25 * * TT AJ O
0 *
N - on
=” and 2 * "iy
* <
5h
S._
> Con
2
| „
. | » Srden Shall |
| PA R 84 & e *S |}+ 2. Crhnlf © Fa Af |
F | Naas) Airs gt WI
| ' > tx ; "<d | 5 a 3 |= — c *
1 * © % * 1 1 1 2 Kings 1 P08 - 3 N
N 2 8 = > E. Pu
| 25 2. 22 * ** 4 * *
N oP 43> . *. nee
O F — E * PA oy | Br Bagot 15 N 2
— f 2 (ate 1
4 XI 2 #- ; i 8 LY —
A Fed - 2 1 40 | „r Us „ in er L, - W244 \
„ S
8 - „ 8 MY
r r a2 FAME. in
> * r 7 0] | . a Mt dl An. Eo , = 1275 g 18 1 |
W OR CEF. S TE : R | | w-z D 77774 4 7 IG N .
1 , 3 1 "i on . 457 N Belts Fug ** 4 F &f
: | | — . Bay! |
i By 1 ; 2 N £ Ik N. * 9 ft 1. : 2 7 k
= Waltote © =
2 3 nfs 5 5 3. -2/3%"
| -V-th * | . ( eckel, ay , 2 4 55 . - . 3
rock gering 2 ray An. 1160 8 tratfo - Flr ri | k/
8 H : N E. * q x S 4 N 3 5 up * o 16.llinnton Fab uh Mov? —
"7 $6,450 p e eBridaton * 4 + - L 4
ngts abr. Ju- 8,70 Lulu rats 7 - _ * 4 -
1 # en nigh 2 IP 5 | [1 . — L ford
Prioraha "ome ff, /).. Þ | 4 4 ' Lag A
5 Abbots Sa _ F. * J 1
f . — _— Wor 4 on 4 HL ea | , wok
5 * Beit 751 bn einm ton Cha
5 PA mT: xi ter ger, wr” Spar
von ae Aufma NR. | N
— h
O F
Aueintef
Eveline of Farcote ©
—_— ming
1. 0 mY
Campden Stre
| berton 5
:C ES TTA |
o Paxford N
: arc
H 1 R E ePlockley
Shire
2, PPearzes 3%. a #5 4% JO 3's — omplon ,
— — eee 4 $28 | Compte L 2

\ f g *
© = |
þ Snareton |
#995] „un F
— PART © F

0 erer
4. 8 -

1 „ i # «
! A. e
vitry- _ i ; Ah
bs | Nun Faton
astlc W 8
9 2 2

* '

TE".
1 <3
_

ST 342
194% a

Ms / |

- \ 7 ron
” 11.8. tu; For fo
j 1

A J. noton
Cubbinot

bold co!

2 7

J Nen
E C WY” Tullio
Murdack F4/ ford
14

he / amp ton

.
ite Cue ie CD HAI AER
8
= A
F 9
©.
. 4 |

Meroto Butdger 6
* 1 v/ R" f

vg

AMP To N 8 n
Scales 99 Mile

| 44 — — |
. 4 N
—

| Soll by Abel Swale, Awnſham Din Chi rehal.

— r

8 | Dearee

—_— —

wk

— — — — 0

— 0

—_
:

4
= a
— ——

—
* -— —
. ˙ ů ,
—̃ ia MTS WEE. vo oo en
* = % a * e *
— —

7 * —
G Pigs
—
fa <
»

a.
*

1
WE *» AP

*
—

_

— -

N
. . . »
4G CG „% 1„%ée.᷑ GW —

COTS

rene.

= ® & 4
: . W s
|
% Lo CY
*
*
-4 *
9 —
—
. * a = 4  t# ——
1
$ o
7 —_—
- = .
- no Af *
- - * %
9 oy $ *
2 Fe \
*
*

Low „.

—— — —
_

-

ry. —
"

Cage ww -,

7

r ore tn, oo
an *

2 *

2

2833244228238 7 5 145228
9. 5. C2

WILT: ix gl *

,
1 AE I AF AY
CORNAVIL

— uin 4, in order, the Counties of the Coritani, who were ſeated ih
e e we proceed to tale a view of the Cornabii or Cornavii ;
| | | the original of which name, I muſt leave to others. It is true, I could wreſt

e fince none will either ſuit the nature of the
Place, or genius of „I ſhall not ſwell my book with them. To purſue
n defign therefore, I 2 erally go through thoſe Provinces, which (actord-
A ing to Prolemy”s deſcription) the Cornavii ſeem to have poſſeſs'd, (viz.) War-
W wickſhire, Worceſterſhire, Staffordſhire, Shropſhire, and Cheſhire, In
all which, not the leaſt
although it ſeems to have continu'd down to the

ep of the name Cornavii remains at this day;
on of the Roman Empire. For the A Numeri &

22 a * bl # T .
7 the later Emperors ; as may be ſeen in the * Breviary of the r

titiarum.

Ag 74 "4 * %

* w py "I.

W ARWICKSHIRE.

ez HE County of Maud. call'd| On the South-ſide of Avon, lies #2/don, a Feldons
ſent, | champain Country, whoſe fertile fields of corn,

and verdant paſtures, yield a moſt delightful

e Edge-hill ; (which hath

Ny EA th |been made remarkable, by the ſignal * battel * Sept. 9;

By AT K Parliament, 1642.

ning obliq
thro

the

| kept o a neighbouring Freeholder, who
ſture. For the Iron-works in the Counties enjoys _ lands by that ſervice.) In this

round, deſtroy'd ſych prodigious quantities of | part of the County, the places worthy of note,

Whereupon, the Inhabitants of the Woodland,
partly by their own induſtry, and partly

the aſſiſtance of Aſarie, and of other uſeful| is this objection, that Henry the firſt gave the
contrivances, have turn'd ſo much of Wood | Church under the name of Chinton to the Ca-

and Heath-land into Tillage and Paſture, chat] nons of Kenilworth, whereas the market was Regiſt. de
they produce corn, cattel, cheeſe, and butter] not granted till the 4% of Henry the third. Kenilworth,
enough, not only for their own uſe, but alſo It is probable, it had the name from be- p. 143.

to furniſh other Counties; whereas, within] ing the poſſeſſion of the Kings, particularly, of
the memory of man, they were ſupply d with| Eduard the Confeſſor, or William the Conque-
ror. And to the North-weſt of the town, —

| rae

Corn, &c. from the Fxldon.

—B—

599

CORNADT TT.

—
—_—

-
* - -
dy PET — * — —
_
r tr ro 2 1 nd — "—— us. BE

*

w— —— .

- — 1
— — —— A WW

—— —

colnſhire.
Sautham.

the point of a hill, ſtill call'd Caſtle-hill, there
has 3 a Caſtle (as appears by a little mount
caſt- up, and a broad and deep ditch round it,)
where tradition ſays that King John kept his
Court : a Spring alſo, at the foot of the hill,
goes at this day by the name of King John's-
Chadſhunt, well. Hard by Kineton, is Chadſbunt, one of the
twenty-four towns which were given by Leo-

frick Earl of Mercia to the Monaſtery of Co-
ventry ; call'd in his Charter Chaddeſteybunt,

and in Domeſday, Cedeſieſhunte. It is probable,

that it had the name trom St. Chadde, call'd

alſo Cedde, and Ceadde. For in the Chapel-

ard was an ancient Oratory, and in it (as

the Inhabitants report) the Image of St. Chadde;
which, by reaſon of the reſort of Pilgrims, was
wif. capt, Worth 16 J. per Ann. to the Prieſt. Here is
liz. alſo a Well or Spring, that ſtill retains the
name of Chad's-wel. Not far from hence, is
Nether- Nether-Eatingdon, which manour was held of
Eatingdon. Henry de Ferrers at the time of the Conqueſt,
and continues at this day in the hands of his

poſterity of the male-line ; which is ſuch an
uninterrupted ſucceſſion of owners for ſo ma-

ny ages, as we ſeldom meet with. Till Henry

the third's time, it was their principal ſeat :

then, removing into Derbyſhire, they took the
name of Shirley, and are now Earls of Ferrers.
Compton, Then, Compton in the hole, ſo call'd from its
being ſituated in a bottom, almoſt ſurrounded

with hills; yet is it not without its Pleaſures.
From this place, a noble family borrow'd their
name; a deſcendant of which, Henry Compton,

in the year 1572. was, by the moſt illuſtrious
Princeſs Queen Elizabeth, raiſed to the dig-
nity of a Baron, [and who are fince advan-
Long- Ced to the honour of Earls. Long-Compton, in
Cempton, Which Pariſh is Weſton, remarkable for the
ſtately houſe built there by Ralph Sheldon for
himſelf and his poſterity, who are ſtill Lords
thereof; and which at a great diſtance makes
a fine proſpect.

At ſome diſtance, on the edge of Northam-
Wormleigh- ptonſhire, is] Wormleighton, well-known for the
ton, richneſs of its ſheep-paſtures ; but much more
remarkable, ſince King James [ the firſt, in the

firſt year of his reign, | created that excellent
perſon, Robert Spencer ( of whom I have al-

ready ſpoken) Baron Spencer of Mormleigbron,
[whoſe grandſon Henry Lord Spencer being
advanced by King Charles the firſt to the ti-
tle of Earl of Sunderland, and being in arms
for that 2 — wo” Civil 2 loſt his life
in the firſt battle of Newbury.] Shugbury,
— where the Star-ſtones (Aſtroites) are found;
* which the Lords of that manour, the Shug-
buries, have long ſince taken into their Coat-
| armour. [ Theſe, being put into a glaſs or cup
Vide Lin- of vinegar, ſtir about, and keep themſelves in
motion. | — 5 market-town of _ =_
2 and well frequented, Leamington ( fo call
ron. from the litele river Leame, which runs through
the precin& thereof; ) where there riſes a ſalt
ſpring, [which is uſed by the poorer Inhabi-
Vehindon, £ants for ſeaſoning of their bread.] Vebindon,
now Long-Ihingdon; and Harbury. Theſe two
places are memorable on account of the death
of Fremundus, ſon of King Offa, who was
baſely and treacherouſly ſlain betwixt them.
A perſon of great eminence in his time, and
of ſingular piety; whom nothing made the
mark and object of envy, but that in an un-
happy juncture he happily triumph'd over the
infilence of his enemies. But this undeſerv'd
fate turn'd to his greateſt glory; for being bu-
ry*d at the palace of his father Offa (now call'd

Off. Church. O- Church) his memory was continu'd to po-

his life written by an ancient Poet in a tole-
rable ſtrain. Some of which (deſcribing. the
villain, who, ſpur'd on with the defire of a

crown, did aſſaſſinate him,) it may not be
amiſs to ſubjoin:

Non ſperans, vivo Fremundo, regis honore

Optato ſe poſſe frui, molitur in ejus

Immeritam tacito mortem, gladioque profa-
nus

Irruit exerto ſeruus, Dominique jacentis

Tale nihil veritum ſævo caput amputat ictu.

Talis apud t Wydford Fremundum palma
coroxat,

ſons.

Deſpairing e're to reach his proud deſires
While Fremund livd, he wickedly con-

„ *

Againſt his life, and with his treacherous
ſword |

Beheads his ſleeping and unthinking Lord.

At Whdford thus bleſt Fremund gain'd a
crown,

While guilty blood he ſhed, and guiltleſs
ſpent his own.

[ Ichingdon aforeſaid is ſo call'd from the ri-
ver {hene, on which it ſtands, || and was the
birth- place of St. Volſtan the famous Biſhop
of Worceſter ; who being educated in the Ab-
bey of Peterburrow, was ſhorn a Monk in the

came Biſhop of the place, upon the removal
of Aldred to the See of York. This town
was anciently one of the chief of the County,
as appears by the large number of Hides which
it contain'd in the Conqueror's Survey, and
by its being rank'd in the number of thoſe
few, which, in the 15* of Henry the ſecond,
were put under the title De auxilio villarum
& burgorum ad maritandam filiam Regis, i. e. of
the Aid of villages and burroughs, towards the
marriage of the King's daughter, whereunto
the inhabitants hereot paid C. ſhillings.]

Bur I muſt not omit to acquaint you, that

Feldon or Champain part; [ſome remains of
whoſe Cauſey, in paſtures now trackleſs and

the dwelling-place of the very ancient family the
Peitoes ; of which family, 6

Edward the firſt is call'd Richardus de Pictavia,
or Poittou in France; and of the ſame family,

whom Paul the fourth then Pope, to mortify
Cardinal Pool (Thus divine minds, you ſee, are ſub-

Jett to human paſſjons ) created in vain Car-

dinal and Legate of England; having cited Pool,
as guilty ot ſome heretical opinions, to anſwer
the ſame at Rome. For Mary Queen of Eng-
land, although entirely devoted ro the See of
Rome, ſo interpos'd in it, or rather oppos'd
the ſame, that Peito was inhibited from entring
England, and Pool preſerv'd his Legatine au-
thority entire. | This Cheſterton ſhews a three-
fold evidence of its antiquity ; The firſt it
carries in the name; for the Saxon Learrep,
and ſo our Cheſter, comes plainly from the Ro-
man Caſtrum, and is not originally a German
word, but was us'd by them here in England,

plain from Mr. Burton's obſervation, That he
never found the termination added to any

places,

ſterity; that is, he was canoniz d, and .
divine honours paid him by the people, and

| 1. In fone
Dum fimul & ſontes occidit, & occidit in- La

Monaſtery at Worceſter, and * afterwards be- An 1:5

the Foſs (that old Roman-way) crofſerh this pog-qy,

unfrequented, are to be ſeen near Chefterton, Chellerton.

ne in the 28 of

was that Wiliam Peito, the Franciſcan Frier, peits,

after the Romans had left it. And this is

»

601

——

Roſs, and
7. B. agal
the demo-
liſhers of

.

flugby.

= # Warwic
ſhire, p. 2

Brounſoy

Stre

** ”

—

8 /

TARWICKS

HIRE.

—

602

*

ws

Roſs, and
T. B. aga
the demo-
liſhers of

g

© Rupby.

* Warwick.
ſhire, p. 26,

hp Brainforer,

Stretton, wickſhire.

inſt merous army of ſheep, fell with great fury on

ly a little caſtle, which ſtood about a furlong

laces, but ſuch only where the Romans had
uilt their Caſtra. The ſecond mark, is its
nearneſs to the Roman Foſs ; upon which it is
evident, that at convenient diſtances, places of
entertainment were built for the reception of
the armies in their march ; if indeed this was
a building at that time, and not rather a
ſquare camp or intrenchment, as it ſeems to
have been. The third token is, that in the
compaſs within which the Roman building is
ſuppos'd to have ſtood, ſeveral old coins have
been dug-up. And theſe three amount to little
leſs than a demonſtration of its Roman anti-
quity. | Perhaps, it may not be impertinent to
mention, what ſome writers under the reign of
Edward the fourth | parabolically repreſenting
the great depopulation cauſed by incloſing of
Common: fields, have complain'd of, viz. That
Covetouſneſs coming down at the head of a nu-

the populous villages of this tract, and drove
out their ancient inhabitants with a mighty
laughter. Which great deſtructiom made a per-
ſon of learning in that age exclaim, with the
Poet;

Quid facerent hoſtes capta crudelius urbe ?

Could plund'ring foes more cruelty have
ſhown ?-

On the bank of Avon, where with a ſlender
ſtream it enters this County, Rugby firſt ofters
it ſelf to your view, a market-town abound-
ing with butchers. [In Domeſday-book it is
written Rochebery, which name Sir William

dale derives from Roche, a rock or quarrey
of ſtone, For ſuch (ſays he) there is, weſtward
from this town, about half a mile; and it is very
like that the ground whereon the town ſtands being
high, is of the ſame condition. Here was former-

yet remaining. The foremention'd Author is'
of opinion, that it was built in the time of!
King Stephen, who, fearing an invaſion from
Maud the Empreſs, granted leave to the No-
bility to build every man his caſtle within his
own grounds. Not far from Rugby, is Brounſo-
ver, on the Eaſt-bank of the river Swift ; in
the original whereof ( as alſo of many other
names of the ſame termination) ve muſt
crave leave to diſſent from Sir Miliam Dugdale,
who tells us that over, as us'd upon thoſe oc-
caſions, ſignifies always ſupra, above, over, or
higher. For tho' it certainly is ſo, wherever
it has nether anſwering it in the name of a
— at ſome little diſtance; yet whenever
uch places ſtand upon rivers, it is much more
natural to fetch the name from the Saxon oppe,
ripa, a bank, which as it is ſuited to the con-
dition of the place, ſo does it prevent the
abſurdity of laying down a relative name with-
out a correlative to anſwer it. This conje-
cure is confirm'd by inſtances in moſt Counties
in England ; as it 1s here particularly, in War-
More to the weſt, we find Stretton,
ſo nam'd from its ſituation upon that Stra-
tum or Street of the Romans, call'd the Foſs.
There is another place of this name not far
from Stew in Lincolnſhire, which likewiſe ſtands
upon a Roman Cauſey ; and that name, where-
ſoever it occurs throughout the kingdom, ſeems
to have the ſame original; which obſervation
may be of uſe to perſons of curioſity, whoſe

Going along with the Foſs towards. Leiceſter- Dugd, Wars

ſhire ; at a little diſtance from it, is Monks-kirkby,

where are certain tokens of a Roman ſtation. xi

For, by digging the ground near the Church,

there have been di ſcover'd the foundations of

old walls and Roman bricks. There are alſo
three or four heaps of earth in an adjoyning
paſture, which are apparently the monuments
or Sepulture of ſome military perſons in thoſe
days: and theſe badges are ſufficient to prove,
that it hath been a place of note many hun-
dred years ſince. But what my Author adds;
And it may very well be, that thoſe materials for
building, by reaſon of the ruins before mention'd, ſo
ready at hand, became a ſpecial motive to that re-
nown'd Lady ÆEthelfleda (ſo much taken notice of
by our old Hiſtorians, and ſtild Merciorum Do-
mina) to begin the ſtrutture of this place: This
(I ſay) we muſt not agree to, for two reaſons ;
the firſt, becauſe that place is call'd in Saxon,
Cymcbypg ; and we never obſerve, that their
bypig paſſes into our modern by or bie; nor
is this termination the ſame with byrig (as Sir
William Dugdale intimates) which comes from
beopg, collis, and includes in irs ſignification a
rifing ground, ſuch as their Forts were generally
built upon ; whereas the other (by or bie) im-
plies no more than a bare dwelling-place, with-
out any reſpe& to the ſituation, and is (if I
miſtake not) of Daniſh original; by Tait as
alſo the very ſame thing in the old Iflandick.
My ſecond reaſon is, that another place offers
it ſelf with greater probability ; and it is
Chirbury on the weſt-part of Shropſhire, which
as it retains the old name, ſo lying upon the
frontiers of the kingdom of Mercia, and not
far from the Severn, it ſeems much more pro-
bable to be rhe place, than this other. |

Bur to return to the river; lat Newenham Re-
is, on the oppoſite fide to Rugby, ariſe three

50.
onks-

rkby,

Newenham,

prings percolated, as it is probable, through Medicinal

an Alom Mineral ; whoſe waters of a milky Springs.
the Church northwards, as is to be ſeen f taſte; have the reputation of being very me-+ Colour and

by the banks of earth, and part of the moat! dicinal in the Stone. They certainly are ex- taſte, C.

ceeding * Diuretick, and cloſe and heal green
wounds; and being drunk with ſalt, are laxa-
tive, with ſugar, reſtringent. f Agreeably to
the name of Newenham Regis, the Town ap-
pears, by the Quo warranto Roll of the 13%
of Edward the firſt, to have been in the poſ-
ſeſſion of the King.] Then, Baęginton, which
had its caſtle | (nothing whereof remains, but
the moat, and ſome heaps of rubbiſh ;)] here-
tofore it belong'd to the Bagotts, a very honou-
rable family. From which, at a little diſtance,
lies Stoneley, where King Henry the ſecond
founded a ſmall Abby. Oppoſite to this, on
the bank of the Avon, ſtood a little caſtle
call'd Stoneley- Holme, built in Holme-hull,

* 'Tis only a
weak chaly-

beate.

Bagginton.

Stoneley.
Regiſt. Mo-

naſt, de Stone ·
ley.

which was deſtroy'd at the time when England
was over-run by the Danes under their Leader
Canutus ; [and now there are no remains, ei-

ther of thing or name. In the reign of King

Charles the firſt, Sir Thomas Leigh of Stoneley

Lord Leigh of Stoneley.]

was, for his loyalty, advanced to the degree
of a Baron of this Realm, by the title of

The next place on the banks of Avon, is

the principal rown of the Connty, which we

cient Annals Pzpmzpic, | and Ninnius and
the Britains Caer Guaruic and Caer-Leon. [John
Rous of Warwick derives theſe names from
Gwayr a Britiſh Prince; and Matthew Paris
(in the life of King Ofta) from Waremund,
father of the firſt Otta King of the Mercians.]

inclinations lead them to the tracing of thoſe
ancient ways.

But all the [toreſaid] names ſeem to be de-
6886 riv'd,

call Warwick, the Saxons Pappinz-pic, [the an- Warwick.

4
--
2 — TR
— —

— —
=. 230 . — -
* * * = a - g ”

* 3s

» AÞ—— — — .
1
LY
—
2 —
3 k

—
—
_ x
— — o *
2 5 ink;
bs =
% — —
-—- * —

— ——
— - — —
Ax —— ——
— * — 4
” 422
—— by =p 7 -
— : 2 —
— 1 5 * *
Wark, — 2
_

„*
o —

4 * =
* =
*

—— — F
2
8 o . We 2

—
TT oe CT a +a.
* *

*

*

CORN

7 II 5

Præſidium.

Foreign
troops in
garriſon,

Florus, I. 4.

c. ult.

riv d, either from the Britiſh word Guarth,
which ſignifies Præſidium, a Fortreſs; or from
Legions poſted in ſuch places for their ſecu-
rity : which inclin'd me to think (altho' I am
more a Seeptick than Critick, in matters of
Erymology,) that this was the very town
which the Romans call'd Prafidium where (as
it is in the Notitia) the Præfect of the Dal-
matian horſe was poſted, by the appointment
of the Governour of Britain. Theſe Troops
were levied in Dalmatia and here, we may
obſerve the politick Prudence of the Romans,
who in their Provinces diſpos'd and quarter'd
their foreign Troops in garriſons ; between
whom and the natives (by reaſon of the di-
verſity of language, and humours) there could
be no ſecret Combination. For, as Florus
writes, Nations not habituated to the yoke of ſla-
very, would otherwiſe be always attempting to ſhake
it of. Hereupon it was, that from Africa the
Moors, from Spain the Aſturians and Vettones,
trom Germany the Batavi, the Nervii, Tungri,
and Turnacenſes ; from Gaul, the Lingones and
Morini, and from other parts the Dalmatians,

Boatſwains, or in lieu of them four pounds in De-
niers. In this Burgh, the King hath in Demeſue
one hundred and thirteen Burgeſſes ; and the Barons
of the King one hundred and twelve.

Roger, the ſecond Earl of Warwick of the
Norman race, built in the middle of the town
the beautiful Church of St. Mary; which the
Beauchamps, ſucceeding Earls, adorn'd with their
monuments : more eſpecially the laſt of the
Beauchamps, Richard Earl of Warwick and

with great magnificence and funeral pomp
brought over and inter'd here. [And beſides
the monuments of the Beauchamps ; the Church
of St. Mary is honour'd with thoſe of Robert
Dudley Earl of Leiceſter, and Ambroſe Dudley
Earl of Warwick. On the north-ſide alſo of
the Quire, in an octangular room (formerly
the Chapter-houſe) is a ſtately monument, be-
ing black and white marble, of Fulk Lord
Brook, erected by himſelt in his life-time, and
circumſcrib'd with this Epitaph : Fulk-Grevil,

Thracians, Alains, &c. were all brought over to|ſervant to Queen Elizabeth, Counſellor to King

ſerve in -Britain ; as we ſhall obſerye in the
roper places. But to return to our buſineſs:
Le none think that the Britains deriv'd the
word Guarth, from the Franks; for, if we be-
lieve Lazius, it is of Hebrew extraction, in
which original very many Countries agree. But
that this was the Prafidium, the authority of
our Annals may convince us, affirming that
the Roman Legions had a ſtation here ; and
alſo its ſituation, almoſt in the centre of the
Province. For it lies at an equal diſtance
from the coaſt of Norfolk on the eaſt, and of
Wales on the weſt; juſt ſuch a ſituation as

James, and friend to Sir Philip Sidney. Tro-
phaum Peccati. In the Church it ſelf, lies John
Rous, a native of this place, and Chantry-
prieſt of Guy's Cliff. Sir William Dugdale calls
him a famous Antiquary ; and Leland and Bale
give him a character as ample, when they tell
us, that he had devoted himſelf wholly to the
ſtudy and ſearch of Antiquities, particularly
of this his native place; and to that end had
view'd and examin'd moſt Libraries in England.
Here lies alſo Thomas Cartwright (firſt Maſter
of the Earl of Leiceſter's Hoſpital) who is
ſtil'd in the Hiſtory of Queen Elizabeth, Inter

was that of Prefidium, a town of Corfica, in the
heart of that Iſland. Nor will it ſeem ſtrange,
that the Romans ſhould have a fortreſs or mi-
litary ſtation in this place; if we conſider its
fituation on a ſteep and rocky eminence over
the river Avon, and that the ways on every fide
leading up to it, are cut through the rock.,
{For it ſtands on a hill, which 1s one entire
rock of free-ſtone ; out of whoſe bowels were
wrought all the publick buildings that adorn
it. Each of the four ways to it (anſwering
the four points) lead you by a Religious houſe,
through a rock, over a current of water, and
through ſtreets which do all meet in the cen-
tre of the town. The wells and cellars are
made in the rock; and the deſcent every way
keeps it clean. Under it, on the ſouth, is a
fruitful Champain Country ; on the north, are
groves, woods, and parks ; and it is ſupply'd
with water brought in pipes, from ſprings
at half a mile's diſtance.] That it hath been
fortified with walls and a ditch, is manifeſt.
The caſtle is very ſtrong both by nature and
art ; the ſeat heretofore of the Earls of War-
wick, extending it ſelf ſouth-weſt. [It is now
made a moſt noble and delightful dwelling ; the
height of the ſolid rock from the river on
which it ſtands, is forty foot: but on the
north- ſide it is eaven with the town.] The town
it ſelf is adorn'd with fair buildings, and owes
very much of its beauty to Ethelfleda, Lady of
the Mercians, who, in the year 911, rais'd it
out of its ruins. At the Norman invaſion it
was in a flouriſhing ſtate, and had many Bur-
geſſes ; of whom twelve were by tenure to ac-
company the King in his wars, as may be
ſeen in Domeſday-book. He, who upon warning
given did not go, was fin'd one hundred ſhillings to
the King. But if the King croſs d the Seas againſt

Puritanos Anteſignanus, the Ringleader of the
Puritans.

On the fifth of September 1694, the beſt
part of this Town was deſtroy'd by a caſual
Fire, occaſion'd by the mere accident of a ſpark
blown from a ſtick, as it was carrying croſs a

for the rebuilding of it; by means whereot,
and the liberal Contributions of the Nation,
it is riſen again, with a far more ſtately and
beautiful appearance.

wall, was beheaded by the Barons. For this
man, exalted with the favour of his Prince
and the flatteries of Fortune, had aſſum'd ex-
ceflive Liberties, and debauch'd the King: he
vility'd the good, prey'd upon the eſtates of all,
and, like a crafty old Courtier, promoted
uarrels betwixt the King and the Nobility.
or which reaſons, Guy de Beauchamp, Earl
of Warwick, ſeis'd him at Walingford, as they
were carrying him Priſoner to London, and
brought him hither, and without any Proceſs
of Law cut-off his head. |

old Norman race. This place is the ſear of
Pleaſure : a ſhady grove, cryſtal ſprings, molly
caves, meadows ever green, a ſoft and mur-
muring fall of waters under the rocks; and,
to crown all, ſolitude and quiet, the great de-
light of the Muſes. Here, fame tells us, that

built a Chapel, led a Hermit's life, and was

an enemy, then they were either to ſend him four

at laſt bury'd. But the wiſer ſort think, _
| this

Lieutenant General, Governour of the Realm
of France, and of the Dutchy of Normandy, lef Nan
who dying at Roan in the 1 1439, was dy, C.

lane. Upon which, an Act of Parliament paſs'd s Will. 3c.

Near Warwick, to the north, is Blacklow- Blacklow-
hill, on which Peter de * Gaveſton, whom Ed- hill
ward the ſecond from a mean condition had“ Al. C
rais'd to the honour of the Earldom of Corn-

Hard by, upon the Avon, ſtands Guy-cliff, Guy lil.
call'd by others Gib-cliff, f heretofore the+ The ay?
ſeat of Thomas de Bellofago or Beauſoe, of the ſent ext

Guy of Warwick, the celebrated Hero, after Guy of.
he had finiſh'd his Martial Atchievements, Warwie

—
605

—

Barford,

* Whob
G

Stratſo
upon A
+ Four
the Cl
G

30.0.

1

f
5
7
0

: e
py
5
5
1

|

OW» 1

605

"WARWIONGHIRE _ _ a

this place took its name from Guy de Beau-
champ, who liv'd much later. And certain it
is, that Richard de Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick,
did here build and dedicate a Chapel to St.
Margaret, and ſet up the Gyant-like ſtatue
of the famous Guy, [eight foot in height. 'The
truth is, the ſtory of the famous Guy of this
place, is ſo much obſcur'd by fables and ro-
mances, that it is difficult to d-*ermin how
far it ought to be credited. certain,
however, that ſome Centuries ſince, rne great-
eſt of the Earls of Warwick paid a mighty
veneration to his memory. William Beauchamp
call'd his eldeſt ſon after him, Guy; Thomas,
by his laſt will, bequeath'd the Sword and
Coat of Mail of this Guy, to his ſon ; ano-
ther Chriſten'd a younger ſon by the name
of his ſucceſſor, and dedicated to him a noble

| fourteen arches. He was younger brother of

an ancient family, which took their name from
the adjacent manaqur of Clopton, from the time
that Malter Cocksfield, ſtil'd Knight- Marſhal, fix'd
a ſeat at Clopton, for himſelf and his poſterity,
Their inheritance in the * laſt age deſcended * In our
to two ſiſters coheirs ; one of them marry'd time, C.
to Sir George Carew a famous Knight (Vice-

chamberlain to her moſt Serene Majeſty Queen

Anne,) whom King James ſthe firſt] created

Baron Carew of Clopton, and the mention of ga ron Cans
whom, if for no other reaſon, I cannot omit, of Clopton,
for his great reſpe& to Antiquities. [This |
place was given by Ethelardus a ' Viceroy of
Worceſterſhire, to the Biſhoprick of Worceſter,

three hundred years before the Conqueſt. The

Church was Collegiate, and the College is {till

ſtanding : in the Chancel lies William Shake-

Tower, the walls whereof are ten foot thick, ſpear, a native of this place, who has given

the circumference one hundred and twenty-ſix,
the height from the bottom of the ditch up-
ward, one hundred and thirteen foot. Ano-
ther left a ſuit of Arras, wherein were wrought
the heroick Acts of Guy, as an heirloom to his
family. Laſtly, his ſword and other Accoutre-
ments, now to be ſeen in the Caſtle, were by
Patent, 1 Henry 8. granted to William Hoggeſon
Yeoman of the Buttery, with the fee of two
pence per diem for that ſervice. Whether it
was the example of this Hero, that put a ſpi-
rit in his ſucceſſors, I know not; but we
find by our Hiſtories, that in ancient times,
from the Conqueſt to the death of Ambroſe
Dudley, there was ſcarce any one conſiderable
ſcene of action, wherein the Earls of Warwick
made not a great figure. T'wo miles below
Barford, Warwick is Barford, where one Samuel Fairfax,

ample proof of his genius and great abilities,
in the forty-eight Plays he has left behind
him. The ſtone that covers him, has this In-
{cription :

Good friend, for Jeſus ſake, forbear

To dig the duſt incloſed here.'

Bleſt be the man that ſpares theſe Stones,
And curſt be he that moves my Bones.

Avon ſees nothing more on its banks, beſides |
Bitford, a market-town and ſome little coun- Bitford.
try villages ; before it makes its entry into
Worceſterſhire. |

Now let us take a view of the J/oodland ; Woodland.
which, lying on the north-ſide of Avon, ex-
tends into a much greater compaſs than the

born in the year 1647, when he was twelve
years of age, dwelt under the ſame roof, and
eat at the ſame table with his father and
mother, grandfather and grandmother, great
grandfather and great grandmother ; who all
liv'd very happily together: and none of the
three generations of either ſex had been twice
marry'd.

From Warwick, the Avon with a fuller bo-
dy paſles by Charlcott, the ſeat of the noble
and [heretofore] knightly family of the Lucies;
which came to them long ſince by inheritance
from the Charlcotts : [William de Lucy, ſon of
Walter de Charlcott, was the firſt who aſſu-
med the name, in the time of King Henry
* Who built, the third, *and built a Religious houſe (for

the ſupport and entertainment of poor people

and ſtrangers) at Thelisford. For the brook

was call'd Thelley ; which runs by Compton Mur-

dack, heretofore belonging to the Murdacks,

now to the family of the Verneys, Knights;

[of whom, Sir Richard Ferney, being deſcended

through an heireſs of Grevil, from Robert Wil-

loughby Baron of Brooke, and thereupon laying

claim to that title, had it adjudg'd to him in
Parliament ; to which he accordingly receiv'd
Summons, by the title of Lord Willoughby of

Brooke, and, dying in a good old age, convey'd

the ſame honour to his poſterity.1 Thence,
running by Thellisford, it falls into Avon.

Which river within à little way ſalutes Strat-

ford, a pretty handſom market-town, that owes

its ornaments and beauty chiefly to two of its

Stratford natives; to John de Stratford Archbiſhop of
upon Avon. Canterbury, [who +4 built the South-Ifle of the
+ Founded Church; the Quire being built b T. Bal-
- Church, ſhal, and the north and ſouth-croſs by the
g Executors of Hugh Clopton; | and to [the
ſame] Hugh Clopton ſometime Lord Mayor ot

London, who at extraordinary expence built

\Feldan. It is for the moſt part + cloath'd with I See, at the

woods, yet wants not paſtures nor corn-fields ; Deginving of
and it — alſo ſeveral veins of Iron [ adjoin- er.
ing to it in Worceſterſhire and Staffordſhire,

but none have been yet found in this Coun-

ty. ] As it is now call'd the H/oodland, ſo by

a more ancient name it was call'd Arden: which, Arden;

in my opinion, are but two words importing

the ſame thing. For Arden, among the ancient

Britains and Gauls, ſeems to have denoted a

wood; ſince we know, that in France a vaſt

wood has the name of Arden; and a town in

Flanders ſituated near another wood, is call'd
Ardeuburg; and this celebrated foreſt in Eng-

land, || paring off the firſt ſyllable, retains the || Truncato
name of Den. Not to mention the Diana, who vocabule.

in the old Gallick Inſcriptions is call'd Ard- Piana

Ardwena,

wena and Ardoina, i. e. (if I am not much mi- Seid. Polyolb;

ftaken) Slueſtris, or, Of the woods, and who
was the ſame, that in the Italick Inſcriptions
is call'd Nemorenfis, or Diana of the Groves.
From this woody tract, Turkill de Arden who
reſided here, and was in great favour with
King Henry the firſt, aſſum'd that firname ;
and his Deſcendants the Ardens, famous in ſuc-
ceeding ages, were branch'd out into all parts
of England. | |
On the weſt- ſide of the H/oodland ; the river
Arrow makes haſte, by Stzdly (ſome ages ſince Studly.
a caſtle belonging to John ſon of Corbutio)
to joyn the river Avon. But whether it be ſo
call'd (as Tigris a river of Meſopotamia, which
in the Perſian language ſignifies an Arrow)
from the ſwiftneſs of its current; or. from its
flow courſe (for that the word Ara among the
old Britains and Gauls imported ;) I leave to
the ſearch of others. [I was once of opinion,
that it was this river which the Danes ſail'd
up, when they had a * upon the king-
Vas induc'd to by

P- 2 29.

the Stone- bridge over the Avon, conſiſting of

— of Mercia; and this

the ſimilitude between Appan, the ancient
name,

CORNADITII

60

name, and Arrou the preſent. What made it

yet more probable, was, the reading of Florence

of Worceſter and Hoveden, wherein I find the

ſame river call'd Arewe. But upon weighing

the circumſtances of that action, I found it ne-

ceſſary to quit that opinion ( tho* without the
vid. o- welgood fortune of meeting with any other
in Eſſex, and place, where I could ſafely ſettle the ancient
Ware in Hert- Anpan.) For firſt, Arrow riſes in Worceſter-
fordſmere. hire, and does not run long, before it joins
it ſelf to the Avon; being no way ſo conſi-
derable, as to be capable of carrying veſſels,
tho? very ſmall. Then, the hiſtory tells us,
that they went out of the Thames, and after
they had compaſs d their deſign, brought the
ſpoil into the river Medway in Kent; which
makes it probable, that this place was not
at ſo great a diſtance as Warwickſhire.
But to return.] On the banks of Arrow, lies
Coughton, the chief ſeat of the knightly fami-
ly of the Throckmortons, who, ſince they mar-
ry'd with the heireſs of Speney, grew very nu-
merous, famous, and fruitful of good Wits.
Ouſeley. Not far from hence, lies Onſeley, memorable
for the ancient Lords thereof, the Butlers, Ba-
rons of Wem, from whom it hereditarily de-
ſcended to the Ferrars of Ouſley. Whoſe inhe-
ritance in a ſhort time was divided betwixt
John Lord of Greiſtocke, and Ralph Nevil. A
Beauchamps. little lower, upon Arrow, is ſeated Beauchamp's
Court, Court, ſo calld from Baron Beauchamp of
Powicke ; from whom, by the only daughter
of Edward Willoughby ſon of Robert Mil-
loughby Lord Brook, it came to Sir Full Grevill
Knight, a perſon no leſs eſteem'd for the ſweet-
neſs of his temper, than the dignity of his
+ Doth, C. ſtation. Whoſe only ſon, of the ſame name, + did

ſo entirely devote himſelf to the ſtudy of real
| Virtue and Honour, that the nobleneſs of his
Exceeds, C. mind far || exceeded that of his birth; for whoſe
extraordinary favours, tho' I muſt deſpair of
making ſuitable returns, yet, whether ſpeaking
or ſilent, I muſt ever preſerve a grateful re-
membrance of them. In this noble family
the honour ſtill continues, in the perſon of
Fulk Lord Brooke. |

Below Beauchamp -Court, the river Alne or
Alenus falls into Arrow ; having, in its courſe
through a woody Country, paſs'd by Henley, a
little market-town, near which the Montforts,
a noble family of great name, had a caſtle,
which, from its delightful ſituation on a hill
amidſt the woods, was call'd by a French
name Bell-deſert. But the caſtle Hath long ſince
been bury'd in its own ruins. They deriv'd
their pedigree, not from the Almarian family
of the Montforts, but from Turſtan de Baſtanberg
a Norman. Their inheritance, at length,
paſs'd by daughters to the Barons of Sudley
and the Frevils, At the confluence of the two
rivers Arrow and Aulne, I ſaw Aulceſter, by
Matthew Paris call'd Alenceſter; and that more
properly. 'The Inhabitants, becauſe ir hath
been a place of great note and antiquity, will
needs have the true name to be Ouldceſter. This
A Book in the ua (as we read in an old Inquiſition) a free
Exchequer. Burrough of our Lord Henry the firſt, which the

Jame King gave to Robert Corbet for his good
ſervices : and when the ſame Robert dy'd, it de-
ſcended to William de Botereux, and to Peter the ſon
of Herbert. And when William de Botereux dy d,
his Moiety deſcended to Reginald de Botereux as
heir, who now holds it : and when Peter the ſou
of Herbert dy'd, his Moiety deſcended to Herbert the
Jon of Peter ; which Herbert gave it to Robert de
Chaundois. But trom a very great town, it is
now reduc'd to a ſmall market, tho? ſtill much

Cough ton.

T hrockmor-
ton.

Grevills.

Henley.

Aulceſter.

noted for all ſorts of grain. [* The very termi-* D
nation of this name leads us to expect ſome- x
thing of Antiquity ; as doth alſo its ſituation
upon the Roman way Teeni/d-ſtreet ; and, upon
the authority of Sir William Dugdale (who Wir
tells us, that old foundations of buildings, Ro-
man bricks, and coins both of gold, ſilver, and
braſs, have been frequently found there) we
need not ſcruple to affirm, that this was for-
merly a Roman ſtation. Above half a Cen-
tury ſince, in an old foundation where they
were digging a Cellar, an urn was taken up,
with {ix hundred and odd pieces of Roman
coin in it; eight of them gold, and the reſt
filver. Moſt of theſe are * Roman Emperors,
and the Reverſes generally different. They
tell to the right honourable the Lord Brooke,
as Lord of the manour. Not far from Aul-
ceſter, is Ragley, from whence Francis Lord Roger.
Conway takes the ſlile and title of Baron of ©
Ragley; to which honour he was advanced
in the ſecond year of Queen Anne.
Higher, where the Country is not now ſo
thick cloath'd with woods; ' her Wroxhall ; wrorlul.
where Hugo de Hatton built a little Mona-
ſtery or Priory : And Badeſiey, formerly the Buleſyy,
poſleſſion of the Clintons, now of the Ferrars.
And Balfhall, heretofore a Preceptory of the Balgay,
Templars, which Roger de Mowbray gave them; Regiltr a
whoſe munititence to the Order of the Knights- ra
Templars was ſo extraordinary, that by unani- Ge eh
mous conſent of their Chapter, they decreed, ſohn of ſerv
that he ſhould have the power of pardoning 'ilem,
any Brother who had tranſgreſs'd the Rules
of the Order, provided he came and acknow-
ledg'd his crime before this their Benefactor.
And the Knights of the Order of St. John
of Jeruſalem, to whom all the poſſeſſions of
the Templars in England were aſſign'd (for
to give to profane uſes things which had been
once conſecrated to God, our Anceſtors thought
a crime not to be aton'd for,) in teſtimony of
their gratitude, granted to John Mowbray de gee the St.
Axholm, ſucceſſor of the ſaid Roger, that he de Temple,
and his ſucceſſors, at every Aſſembly of their
Order, ſhould be receiv'd in the next degree
of honour to Soveraign Princes. [By the cu-
{tom of this place, the Tenants could not mar-
'} their daughters, without the conſent of the
raternity of Templars, or Hoſpitalers ; as ap-
pears by an account taken in the 31ſt year
of King Henry the ſecond. The Lady Ka-
tharine Leveſon founded an Hoſpital here; for
the government whereof, an Act of Parliament, 1 Anrz,
not long ſince, was made. |
More to the north-eaſt, in the midſt of a
Chaſe and Park, a confluence of little ſtreams
form a Lake; which being preſently confin'd
within banks, make a Chanel or Kennel. Upon
this ſtands Kenelworth, heretofore vulgarly call'd geretworth,
Kenelworda ; and corruptly Killingworth. From commonly
this town a moſt noble, beautiful, and ſtrong Killin
Caſtle, encompaſs'd with a Chaſe and Parks,
takes its name. It was built, neither by Ke-
nulphus, nor Kenelmus, nor Kinegliſus, as ſome
Hiſtorians have dreamt; but by Geoffrey de
Clinton Lord Chamberlain to King Henry the
firſt, and his ſon (as may be ſcen in authen-
tick Evidences,) after he had founded there a
Monaſtery for Canons-Regular. But Henry his
* nephew's ſon, having no iſſue, ſold it to # Pronepss
King Henry the third, who granted it to Simon
de Monteſort Earl of Leiceſter with Eleanor his
ſiſter, tor her portion. Bur preſently after,
this bond of amity and friendſhip being bro-
ken, and Earl Simon, after diſmal commotions,
being {lain in the Barons wars, the caſtle en-

' p 509.

dured

1266.

* Now of
late, by, C

+ Regard, (

May, C

Bremich:

Sutton - C
field,

a

WARWICKSHIRE.

609
5 dared a ſiege of fix months, and at laſt was
ſurrender d to King Henry the third, Who
made it part of the inheritance of the Lanca-
ſtrian family. At which time, was made and
publiſh'd the Edict which our Lawyers ſtile
Diftum de Kenelworth; whereby it was enacted,
that all who had taken up I. againſt the
King, ſhould pay frue years * all their lands,
&c. A very wholſom piece of ſeverity, with-
out effuſion of blood, to check thoſe ſeditious
ſpirits, ſo pernicious to the Government;
whoſe only hopes were placed in the diſtra-
ctions of the State at that time. They {till
tind Balls of ſtone, ſixteen inches diameter, ſup-
pos'd to have been thrown in ſlings, in the
time of the Barons wars. King Edward the
ſecond was for ſome time detain'd Priſoner here.
But * by the royal munificence of Queen Eli-
zabeth, it became the ſeat of Robert Dudley
Earl of Leiceſter ; who in rebuilding and adorn-
ing it, ſpar'd no coſt ; [being ſaid to have be-
ftow'd 60000. upon it.] So that whether
+ Regard, C. you + regarded the magnificence of the Build-
| ings, or the nobleneſs of the Chaſe and Parks ;
| May, C. it || might claim a ſecond place among the
ſtatelieſt Caſtles of England. [The ſaid Earl
Robert entertain'd Queen Elizabeth and her
Court, in this place, ſeventeen days, with all
the variety and magnificence beth of Feaſting
and Shows. In which time, he ſpent three
hundred and twenty Hogſheads of ordinary
beer, as appears by the accounts of his Stew-
ard; which I add (tho' a circumſtance ſeem-
ingly little) to ſhew as well the —_— of
the Royal Retinue, as the ſplendor of the En-
tertainment. From Robert Dudley, Earl of Lei-
ceſter, it paſs'd to Sir Robert Dudley his natu-
ral ſon, who ſold it to Prince Henry; and he
dying without iflue, it came into the hands
of Frince Charles, who committed the cuſtody
of it to Robert Earl of Monmouth, Henry
Lord Carey his eldeſt ſon, and Thomas Carey
Eſquire ; the inheritance whereof was granted
to Lawrence Viſcount Hide of this place, and
Earl of Rocheſter. But the Caſtle, in the late
Civil wars, was demoliſh'd by thoſe who pur-
chas'd it of the Parliament, with defign to
make money of the materials.

From hence (that I may purſue the ſame
courſe that I did in my journey) I ſaw Solyhill;
in which was nothing worth the fight, be-

Bremicham, fides the Church. Next, Bremicham, ſwarm-
ing with Inhabitants, and echoing with the
noiſe of Anvils ( for here are great numbers
of Smiths, ſand of other Artificers in Iron and
Steel, whole performances in that way are

reatly admired both at home and abroad.
he lower part of the Town is very watery.
The upper part riſes with abundance of — þ
ſome buildings : and it is none of the leaſt ho-
nours of the place, that from hence the noble
and warlike tamily of the Bremichams in Ire-
land, had both their original and name; [and
that it gives the title of Baron to Edward Lord
Dudley and Ward ; of which family, Humble
Ward was created, by King Charles the firſt,
Lord Ward of Bermingham.] From thence, in
the extreme point of this County northward,

Sutton-Cole- lies Sutton Colefield, in a foreſty, unkind, and

feld. barren ſoil ; boaſting of it's native John JVoiſy
Biſhop of Exeter, who, in the reign of King
Henry the eighth, raiſed this little Town,
then ruinous and decayed, and adorn'd it with
buildings, and ſeveral Privileges, and a Gram-
mar- ſchool ; ſand lived and died here in the
one hundred and third year of his age. Here,
the Earls of Warwick had a Chaſe of great

Þ+ 59,

12656,

* Now of
late, by, C.

e Stu.

plaruti

ply

7

610
extent; but the Market which they have, is
now almoſt _ diſuſed. |] From hence go-
ing ſouthward, I came to Coleſhul, belonging Colethuy,
heretofore to the Clintons, | where, in an old
foundation, hath been dug-up a Roman co |
per Coin of Trajan; and not far from it, is Blith, Blith,
memorable tor nothing, but that it was pur-
chas'd by Sir Wiliam Dugdale, and was his
place of reſidence when he compil'd that accu-

rate and elaborate work, the Antiquities of

this County.] Neighbour to Coleſbull is Max- Maxſlock-
tock-Caſtle, which in a continu'd ſucceſſion had Caſtie.
for it's Lords, the Lindſeys, who were Lords

of Wolverly ; and the Oding ſels, having their

original from Flanders; and the Clintons, who

have been very eminent in this County. Low-

er, in the middle of this woody country, is

ſeated Coventry, ſo called (as I conjecture ) Coventry;
from a Convent; for ſuch a Convent in our

tongue we call a Covent, and Covent ; and fre-

quently, in our Hiſtories, and in the Pontifi-

cal Decrees, this is call'd Conventria ; as par- Honorius 2.
ricularly in that, Either the Biſhop of Conventry cap, 14.
is not in his right wits, or he ſeems wilfully to Deeret.
have quitted common ſenſe ; [(which muſt relate

to Alexander de Savensby, who was conſecrated
in the year 1224, and lived in the time of

Pope Honorius the third, He was a very learn-
ed man, bur, ſaith Biſhop Godwin, pretended
to Viſions and Apparitions ſcarce credible.)

Yet ſome there are, who will have the name
of this place taken from a rivulet running

through it; at this day called Shirburn, and in
an old Charter of the Priory, Cuentford. Whence-
ſoever the name was taken, the City being ſome
ages ſince enrich'd with the Manufacture of

Cloathing and Caps, was the only Mart-town

of this Country, and of greater reſort than
could be expected from its Mid-land ſituation ;
but now both theſe Trades are much decayed. ]

It is commodiouſly ſeated, and is large and

neat ; fortify'd with very ſtrong walls, and a-
dorn'd with beautiful buildings : amongſt

which, two Churches of excellent Architecture

ſtand near together, as it were rivalling each
other ; one dedicated to the Holy Trinity, the

other to St. Michael. There- is nothing in it

of very great Antiquity. { Their ſtately Croſs,

for workmanſhip and beauty inferior to few

in England, was built (33 Henry 8.) by Sir

William Hollies ſometime Lord Mayor of Lon-

don. But] that which ſeems to be the greateſt
Monument, is the Religious-houſe or Priory,

whoſe ruins I ſaw near theſe two Churches.
This, King Canutus founded for Nuns ; who
being expell'd within a little time, Leofrick
Earl of Mercia enlarg'd it, and in a manner
built it a-new, in the year 1040; with ſo great
a fbow of gold and filver (to uſe Malmesbury's
words) that the walls of the Church ſeem'd too
ſtrait to contain the treaſures of it. This was very
prodigiom to behold ; for from one beam were ſcrap d
t froe hundred marks of filver. And he endow'd + 50. C
it with ſo great revenues, that Robert dey, Duga,
Limſey, Biſhop of Lichfield and Cheſter, re-

mov'd his See hither, as to the golden ſands of -
Lydia ; that (as the ſame Malmesbury hath
it) he might ſteal from the treaſures of the Church
wherewithall to fil the King's Coffers, and to cheat

the Pope of his Proviſions, and to gratifie the Ro-
man avarice. However, this Sce, after a few
years, return'd back to Lichfield ; but upon
theſe terms, that one and the ſame Biſhop
ſhould be ſtil'd Biſhop of Coventry and Lichfield.
The firſt Lord of this City that I know of,
was Leofrick; who, being incens'd againſt the

Lords of Co-
yentr Yo»

Citizens, laid upon them very heavy taxes :
H h hh theſe

m * 4 *

COR I

th

De monte the
Alto,

Swanſewell-

pool,

or Monthault ; whoſe grandchild by his ſon

Sheriffs; and the Citizens began to encloſe it

theſe he would by no means remit (notwith-
ſtanding the great interceſſion of his Lady
Godiva) unleſs ſhe would conſent to ride na-
ked through the moſt frequented parts of the
City : which (if credit may be given to tra-
dition) ſhe pertorm'd, having cover'd her body
with her long diſchevel'd hair, without being
ſeen by any one : and fo freed her Citizens
from many heavy impoſitions for ever. [In
memory of Leofric (who dy'd in the 13th year
ot Edward the Confeſſor) and of Godiva his
Counteſs, their Pictures were ſet up in the Win-
dows of Trinity Church, with this Inſcrip-
tion ;

I Lurick for the love of thee
Do ſet Coventry Toll-free.

And a Proceſſion or Cavalcade is ſtill yearly
made in memory of Godiva, with a naked
figure, repreſenting her 'riding on horſe-back
through the City.! From Leofrick, this City,
by Lucia, daughter of his ſon Algar, came into
the poſleſſion of the Earls of Cheſter ; for ſhe
had marry'd Ranulph ( the firſt Earl of that
name, and the third of the family) who grant-
ed the ſame Liberties to Coventry, that Lincoln
enjoy'd ; and gave a great part of the City to
the Monks. The reſidue of it, and Chilmore their
manour-houſe near the City, he reſerv'd to him
and his heirs ; who dying, and the inheritance
for want of iſſue-male coming to be divided
amongſt the ſiſters, Coventry, by the death of
rls of Arundel, fell to Roger de Monte alto

Robert granted all his right, in default of iſſue-
male, to Queen Iſabel, Mother of King Edward the
third, to hold during her life : after her deceaſe, the
remainder to John de Eltham brother of the King,
and to the heirs of his body begotten. In default of

Cc. For ſo you have it in the . of a
Fine, in the ſecond year of Edward the third.
But John of Ekham was afterwards created
Earl of Cornwall, and this place became an-
nex'd to the Earldom of Cornwall : from
which time, it hath flouriſh'd very much. Se-
veral Kings beſtow'd upon it divers immuni-
ties and privileges, eſpecially Edward the third,
who granted it the Election of a Mayor and
two Baylifts : and Henry the ſixth, who having
laid to it ſome of the neighbouring villages,
granted by his Charter (for ſo are the very
words of it,) That it ſhould be an entire County,
incorporate by it ſelf in deed and name, and diſtinct
from the County of Warwick. At which time,
in lieu of two Bayliffs, he conſtituted two

with very ſtrong walls. In theſe are moſt
noble and beautiful gates. At that Gate which
goes by the name of Gosford, is to be ſeen a
vaſt ſhield-bone of a Boar ; which you may
believe, that Guy of Warwick, or Diana of
the Groves (which you pleaſe) kill'd in hun-
ting, after he had with his ſnout turn'd up
the pit or pond that is now called Swanſewel/-
pool, but in ancient Charters Swineſwell. [An-
ciently, Edward the fourth, for their diſloy-
alty, took the Sword from the Mayor, and
ſeiſed their Liberties and Franchiſes, which
they redeemed with five hundred marks : and,

it ; the firſt in the 6th of Hen. 4, call'd from
the excluſion of the Lawyers Parliamentum in-
dottorum, or the unlearned Parliament; the lat-
ter in the 38th Hen. 6, which, from the At-
tainders of Richard Duke of York, and the Earls
of Salisbury, Warwick, and March, was call'd
by ſome Parliamentum Diabolicum, or the Devi-
liſh Parliament. It hath afforded the title of
Earl to George Villiers, created Earl of Coven-
try and Duke of Buckingham, 18 May, 21
Jac. 1, in which honours he was ſucceeded by
his ſon of the ſame name. Who dying without
iſſue, the Title of Earl of Coventry (together
with that of Viſcount Deerhurſt,) was confer'd
upon Thomas Lord Coventry of Allesborough, in

As to the Longitude of this City, it lies in
25 degrees, and 52 ſcruples; and as to Lati-
tude, in 52 degrees, and 25 ſcruples. Thus
much of Coventry; which yet (that I may in-
genuouſly acknowledge the perſon who fur-
niſh'd me with it) you muſt know you have
not from me, but from Henry Ferrars of Badſley,
2 perſon to be reſpected as for his birth, ſo
for his great knowledge in Antiquity, and my
very good friend ; who in this and other
places courteouſly directed me, and (as it were)
gave me leave to light my candle at his.

Near Coventry, to the North, are ſituated

monly call'd Caledon, an ancient feat of the
Barons Segrave, from whom it deſcended to
the Barons de Berkley, by one of the daughters
of Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk. Theſe
Segraves ( from the time that Stephen de Se-
grave was Chief Juſtice of England) were Ba-
rons of this Realm, and came to the Inheri-
tance of the Chaucurmbs, whoſe Arms from that

ot this family, marry'd Margaret Dutcheſs of
Norfolk, daughter of Thomas de Brotherten ;
and had ifluc Elizabeth, who carry'd the ho-
nour of Marſhal of England, and title of
Duke of Norfolk, into the family of the Mow-

brays.

belong'd many fair poſſeſſions lying round: but
time hath ſwept away the very ruins of it.
It is, in all 7 older than the Nor-
man Conqueſt; otherwiſe our publick Records,
or ſome other Authorities, would certainly
have taken notice of it. If we ſhould carry it
back to the times of the Romans, there are
ſeveral circumſtances which ſeem to juſtifie
ſuch a conjecture. As, that the Saxons often
apply'd their þleap (from whence our low is
derived, ) to ſuch places as were remarkable
[for the Roman Tumwi ; that there is an emi-
nent tumulus, upon which the Keep or Watch-

the Roman Foſſe-way; and is at a convenient
diſtance from the Bemones. Time hath alſo
ſwept away the ruins of the Monaſtery of
Combe, vw. hich the Camvils and the Mowbrays en-
dow'd ; and out of whoſe aſhes the beautiful
Seat of the Harringtons aroſe in this place. As
you go Eaſtward, Ceſter-over, the polleſſion of

of late years, the Walls and Towers were de- che Grevils, and which I have touched upon

moliſhed, by command of King Charles the

ſecond, upon his Reſtoration, and only the

Gates left ſtanding ; by which one may eaſily
gueſs at the ſtrength and beauty of the Walls
and Towers. This City is famous, among

before, preſents it ſelf : [(ſo call'd more lately;
t but anciently, Th'efter-over, as ſeated eaſtward
from Monks-kirby, where have been found a
conſiderable number of Urns.) Near Ceſter-

other things, for the two Parliaments held in

over, | Watlingſtrect a Military way of the Ro-
mans, dividing tis County trom Leiceſter-

ſhire,

—

the gth year of King William the third.

Auſley, a Caſtle heretofore of the Haſtings Lords Auſt;
of Abergavenny ; and f Brandon formerly a ſeat —

of the YVerdons. To the Eaſt is Caloughdon, com- 138
aledon,

Barons de.

grave.

ſuch, the remainder to Eduard King of England, tinie they aſſum'd, viz. A Lion rampant, Ar- Arms of ths
gent, crowned Or, in a ſhield, Sable. John the laſt Segtae,

Not far from hence, is Brinklo, where was Brinkloc
an ancient Caſtle of the Mowbrays ; to which fle.

rower of the caſtle did ſtand ; that it lies upon

Combe-Ab
bey.

+ Dugd,
p. 60.

Aſteley-
Caſtle.
Baron Aſte-

e.

Manduefſe-

dam.

Manceſter.

Oldbury.

Merl- v:

Polleſwc

|
|

(613 W ARWICKSHIRE. 614
— _— ſhire, runs to the north, by High-croſs, of | bert Marmion, a Nobleman (who had his Caſtle WT

| nn Eaton. which we have already ſpoken : near Nonn- in the neighbourhood at Stipperſpull) repair d.
* Eaton, which of old was call'd Eaton; but af- Here, (a) Sir Francis Netherſole, a Kentiſh Gen-
| ter Amicia the wife of Robert Boſſu Earl of Lei-|tleman, and ſometime publick Orator of the
ceſter (as Henry Knighton writes) had founded| Univerſity of Cambridge, at the inſtance of his
a Monaſtery of Nuns here, in which ſhe her ſelf Lady, built, and liberally endow'd a Free-
was projeſs'd of that number; from thoſe Nuns | ſchool : on the front of which is this In-
it had the name of Non-Eaton. And former-| ſcription :

ly, it was much fam'd for the piety of its =

holy Virgins, who, being conſtant in their De- Soli Deo Gloria.

votions, gave a good example of holy living Schola pauperum

to all about them. Near this, ſtood hereto- Puerorum. Puellarum.
\teley- fore Aſteleycaſtle, the chief ſeat of the family

Caftle, of the Aſteleys ; the heireſs of which was the Hard by alſo, in the Saxon times, flouriſh'd a

Baron Aſte- ſecond wife of Reginald Grey Lord of Ruthin.| Town (of which there appear now but very

ley. From him ſprang the Greys Marquiftes of Dor-|ſmall remains) call'd Secandunum, and at this
ſet ; ſome of whom were inter'd in the neat|day Seckinton ; where ZEthelbald, King of the Seckinton{
College here. Mercians, in a civil war, was aſſaſſinated and

A little higher, upon 7/atlingſtreet ( for|{lain by Beared [called in the Saxon-Annals
ſo we commonly call this Military way ot|Beopnpes,| in the year 749 ; but in a little
the Romans,) where is a bridge of ſtone 0-|time the Aflaſſin was cut off by King Offa ;

Mandueſe- ver the river Anker, Mandueſſedum is ſeated ; aby the ſame means falling from the throne, by
lam, Town of very great Antiquity, mention'd by | which he had impiouſly aſcended it. From
Antoninus: which having not yet altogether [this Engagement, probably, it took the name;
Manceſter, loſt the name, is call'd Manceſter, and in Nin-{recce in Saxon ſignifying battle, and dun (which
nius's Catalogue, Caer Mancegued. Which name | afterwards was chang'd into ton) a hill. Scarce
(ſince a quarry of frec- ſtone lies near it) waS|a furlong north of the Church, is a notable
probably given it, from the ſtone there dug and | fort; and near it, an artificial hill, 43 foot in
hew'd. For in the Gloflaries of the Britiſh |heighth.]
tongue, we find that Main ſignifies a ſtone, and | 1 muſt now give a Catalogue of the Earls of Earls of Wat;
Foſſwad in the Provincial language, digging ; Warwick. And to paſs by Guar, and Morin- wick.
which being joyn'd together, ſeem aptly enough | ds, and Guy (the Echo of England) with ma-
to expreſs the name Manduefſedum. But how|ny more of that ftamp, which the fruitful
great, or of what note ſoever it was in thoſe times,| wits of thoſe times brought forth at one birth:
it is now a poor little village, containing not] Henry ſon of Roger de Bellomonte, brother of
above fourteen {mall houſes ; and hath no other] Robert Earl of Mellent, was the firſt Earl of
monument of Antiquity to ſhew, but |Coins|the Norman race; who marry'd Margaret
of ſilver and braſs, which have by digging and] daughter of Ernulph de Heſdin, Earl of Perch,
plowing been frequently brought to light and1]a perſon of mighty power and authority. They
Oldbury, AN old Fort, which they call Oldbury, i. e. an of this family who bore that honour, were,
old Burrough, [of a Quadrangular Form, and Roger ſon of Henry, William ſon of Roger (who
containing ſeven acres of ground; with an En-|dy'd in the zoth year of King Henry the ſe-
trenchment about a lands-length diftant from|cond,) J/aleran his brother, Henry ſon of Wal-
it. In the North-part of it, there have been|leran, Thomas his ſon (who dy'd without iſſue
found ſeveral flint-ſtones about four inches in| in the 26th of Henry the third ; ) and his ſiſter
length, curiouſly wrought, by grinding, or by | Margery ſurviving, was Counteſs of Warwick,
ſome ſuch way. One end is ſhap'd like the and dy'd without iſſue. Her two husbands ne-
edge of a Pole-ax ; and they are thought by |vertheleſs, firſt John Mareſchal, then John de p1.cit. E. 2.
Sir William Dugdale, to have been weapons Pleſſers, in right of their wife, and by the fa- N 82 *
us'd by the Britains, before the art of making] your of their Prince, were rais'd to the ho- l
arms of braſs and iron. They muſt have been nour of Earls of Warwick. But theſe dying
brought hither for ſome extraordinary uſe,| without iſſue by Margery ; Walleran, Marge-
becauſe there are no flints to be found with-|ry's uncle by x father, ſucceeded in the *
in forty miles of the place. One of them is] nour; and he dying without iſſue, Alice his
now to be ſeen in Mr. Aſhmole's Muſaum in] ſiſter came to the Inheritance; and after her,
Oxford.] Atherſton, on one fide, a well-fre-| Miliam her ſon ( call'd Male-doclus, Malduit,
quented Marker (where the Church of the| and Manduit, de Hanſlap ; ) who dy'd alſo with-
Friers was converted into a Chapel, which ne- out iſſue. But Jabel his ſiſter being marry'd
i vertheleſs acknowledges that of Manceſter to to William de Bello Campo, or Beauchamp, Baron
b be the Mother-Church;) and Nonreaton, on] of Elmeſly, carry d the Earldom into the family
i the other ſide, have, by their nearneſs, re- of the Beauchamps. Who (if I am not miſta-
duc'd Mancefter to what you ſee. Neighbour] ken) becauſe they were deſcended from a daugh-
Meri-yal, to Atherſton is Meri-val, i. e. Merry-vale, where |ter of Urſus de Abtot, gave the Bear for their
Robert de Ferrers built and dedicated a Mona- Cogniſance, and left it to their poſterity. Of
ſtery to God and the bleſſed Virgin; in which |this family there were ſix Earls and one Duke,
his body, wrapp'd up in an Ox-hide, lies in- Milliam ſon of Iſabel, John, Guy, Thomas,
ter d. Thomas the younger, Richard, and laſtly Henry,
Ab polleſuorth. Beyond theſe, Northward, lies Palleſuorth, to whom King Henry the ſixth made a Grant
| where Modwena an iriſh Virgin, fam'd for her | without precedent, That he ſhould be primier
wonderful piety, built a Nunnery ; which Ro-] Earl of all England, and uſe this title, Heury

ver

5 * —

*

. he * „* —
Rik ws
1 —
a2 2
1 m > by
— * —
* .

*
— + — 1 8
— — —
— — — ů— —y—œ — — — —
— — _—— — — — 4
— = ART ow —

— }

| (a) He enfeof'd fix Gentlemen and ſeven Divines, in as much as amounted to one hundred and forty pounds
d, | IF per annum at the leaſt, for a liberal maintenance of a School-mafier and School.miſtreſs to teach the Children of
the Pariſh, And what remain'd, was to be employ'd in charitable uſes, ſuch as he in his life · time ſhould think

hr, and, in default of his own actually diſpoſing of it, left it to the diſcretion of his Truſtees, He likewiſe
built a fair Houſe for the Vicar of Polleſworib. |

®* primier

615 2

" CORNAVIL.

- : —
I 2 ̃˙ unc
0 —

— I”. by > * * — » — —

*
—
-
att

— —

*
ꝶ3＋ß—?»“ cans

8 2 * * * -
— — V -K ons ont oo ðͤ . — ͤ ‚ͤ—W‚«WVœ T——_—,

— —
892 —— ͤ—
o 2 —  -

= — =
———— ——_—_— PI — ls 4s
__— W .
- . — —

2
T a _—
— — © - a : 1
” - 5 * — -
— — — — — 2 — , — —
—— — _—__ —— — . Ds. 4

9 -
ts A

2
— x. —

* 2 2 .
HS, at L. * A
= * 9 4 yo ADS
— — — - - - —
r — —=ꝛ _ — ‚ũj— ——

* Pracomes. * primier Earl of all England, and Earl of War-
Rot. Parl. wick. He made him alſo f King of the Ifle of
23 Hen. & Wight, and afterwards created him Duke of
1 Reg Warwick, and by the expreſs words of his Pa-

tent, granted that he ſhould have place in Parlia-
ment, and elſewhere, next to the Duke of Norfolk,
and before the Duke of Buckingham. He had but
24 Hen, 6. one daughter, Anne, who in the Juquifitions is
ſtil'd Counteſs of Warwick, and dy'd in her In-
fancy. She was ſucceeded by Richard Nevill
who had marry'd the daughter of the ſaid
ke of Warwick; ) a er of an invincible
ſpirit, but changeable and fickle in point of Loyal-
y, and the very ſport and tennis- ball of fortune.
ho, although no King himſelf, was ſuperiour
to Kings; as being the perſon who depos'd
Henry the ſixth (a moſt bountiful Prince to
him,) and ſet up Edward the fourth in his
place. Afrerwards he un-king'd him again,
and re-eſtabliſh'd Henry the ſixth in the
Throne, and involv'd the kingdom in the flames
of a civil war, which were not extinguiſh'd
but with his own blood, and ſcarce with that.
Edward, ſon of one of his daughters by George
Duke of Clarence, ſucceeded ; whom Henry
the ſeventh (for neither youth nor innocence
could prote& him) to ſecure himſelf and his
line, put to death, The title of this Earldom
(which was become formidable to Henry the
eighth by the great troubles which Richard
Nevil, that ſcourge of Kings, had raiſed) lay
dormant, till Edward the ſixth gave it to John
Dudley; as deriving a title from the Beauchamps.
He (as the before-mention'd Richard had done)
endeavouring to ſubyert the Government under
een Mary, had his boundleſs ambition pu-
niſh'd with the loſs of his head. But his fon,
John, whilſt his father was living, and Duke
of Northumberland, by the courteſie;of Eng-
land made uſe of this title for ſome time:
and afterwards Ambroſe, a perſon moſt accom-
pliſh'd in all heroick qualities, and of a ſweet
diſpoſition, by the royal favour of Queen Eli-

* So ſaid, zabeth, had * in our memory the title reſtor'd
ann. 1607. to him, and ſupported it with great honour,

and at laſt dy'd without iſſue, [in the year
1589. Afﬀter this, Robert Lord Rich of
Leeze was created Earl of Warwick 16 Jac. 1,
and dying ſoon after, was ſucceeded by his ſon,
and grandſon, both Roberts. Charles, brother
to the latter, was next Earl, who, dying the 24th
of Auguſt 1673, left the honour to Robert Rich,
Earl of Holland, his Couſin- german. Which
Robert was ſucceeded in both the honours, by
Edward his ſon and heir; whoſe ſon Eduard-
Henry doth now alſo enjoy both thoſe honoura-
ble Titles.1

In this County are 158 Pariſh-Churches.

*

More rare Plants growing wild in Warwick-
ſhire, 4

Though I have lived ſome years in this County,
yet have I met with no peculiar local plants growing
therein : The more rare and uncommon are,

Cyperus gramineus miliaceus Ger. Millet-
Opernegraſs mention d in Efſex. Frequent by the
river Tames-fide near Tamworth and elſewhere.

Cyperus longus inodorus ſylveſtris Ger. Gra-
men cyperoides altiſſimum foliis & carina ſerra-
tis P. Boccone. Long-rooted baſtard Cyperus. In
7 Places by the river Tame at Dorſthill near

amworth.

Equiſetum nudum Ger. junceum ſeu nudum
Park. foliis nudum non ramoſum ſeu junceum
C. B. Naked Horſe-tail or Shave-graſs. This ſpe-
cies is more rare in England. We found it in a
moiſt - ditch at Middleton toward Drayton. It is
brought over to us from beyond Sea, and employ d
by artificers for poliſhing of veſſels, handles of tools,
and other utenfils : it is ſo hard that it will touch
iron it ſelf. I am inform d by my honoured Friend
Mr. Jom Awbrey, that it is to be found in a rivu-
let near Broad-ſtitch Abbey in Wiltſhire, plenti-
fully. That ſort which grows common with us i;
ſofter, and will not ſhave or poliſh wood, much leſ;
iron.

Juncus lævis minor panicula glomerata nigri-
cante; call d by thoſe of — with whom
alſo it is found, Juncus ſemine Lithoſpermi.
Black-headed Ruſh with Gromil-ſeed. In the ſame
places with the Cyperus longus inodorus.

Gramen cyperoides paluſtre elegans, ſpica
compoſita aſperiore. Elegant Cyperus-graſs with
a rough compound head. In a Pool at Middleton to-
wards Coleſhill.

Gramen cyperoides polyſtachion majus, ſpi-
cis teretibus erectis. Cyperoides anguſtifolium
ſpicis longis erectis C. B. Great Cyperni-grafs with
7 upright ſpikes. In ſeveral pools about Mid-

u.

Lunaria minor, Ger. Park. Moonwort. This is
found in ſeveral cloſes about Sutton-Colfeld, on the
weſt-fde of the town.

Narciſſus ſylveſtris pallidus, calyce luteo C. B.
Pſeudo-narcifius Anglicus Ger. Anglicus vulga-
ris Park, Bulbocodium vulgatius J. B. Wild
Engliſh Daffodil. In ſome paſtures about Sutton-
Colfeld on the Eaſt-fide of the town plentifully.

Ranunculo five Polyanthemo aquarili albo
affine. Millefolium maratriphyllum fluitans F.B.
Millefolium maratriphyllum Ranunculi Hore
Park. Millef. aquat. ile Feeniculi, Ranunculi
flore & capitulo C. B. Fennel-leav'd Water-Crow-
foot. In the River Tame, and the Brooks that run
into it plentifully. It is alſo found in the river
Ouſe near Oxford. It is a perfect genuine Crow-
foot, and ought to be call'd Ranunculus aquaticus
Feniculi foliis.

Turritis Ger. vulgatior J. B. Park. Braſſica
ſylveſtris foliis integris & hiſpidis C. B. Tower-
* On Dorsthill-hill near Tanrworth.

accinia rubra buxeis foliis Park. Red-whorts
or Bill-berries. See the other Synonymes in Der-
byſhire. On the black boggy-heaths between Middle-
ton and Sutton.

Equiſetum ſylvaticum Tab. Ger. ſylvaticum
tenuiſſimis ſetis C. B. omnium minimum tenui-
folium Park. Equiſetum five Hippuris tenuiſſi-
ma non aſpera J. B. Wood-Horſetail. In moiſt
places, and by the watery ditches by the wood-fide on
the right-hand as you go from Middleton to Sutton, a
little before you come to the heath.

Erica baccitera procumbens nigra C. B. bac-
cifera procumbens Ger. baccifera nigra Park.
baccitera Matthioli J. B. Black-berried Heath,
Crow-berries or Crake-berries. On the moiſt banks by
the new Park at Middleton, on that fide next
road, where is alſo found Oſmunda Regalis.

Biſtorta major Ger. maj. vulgaris Park. maj.
rugoſioribus foliis J. B. maj. radice minus in-
torta. The greater Biſtort or Suakeweed. In the
meadows at 4 and Fuſeley plentifully.

Vitis Idæa Thymi foliis. Idæa paluſtris C. B.
Vaccinia paluſtria Ger. Park. Oxycoccus ſeu vac-
cinia paluſtria J. B. Marſþ Whortle-berries, Moſ
berries, Moor-berries or Corn-berries. In the moorifh
grounds and quagmires in Sutton-Colfeld-park plen-
tifully.

WO R-

—

art of Shrop
Shire

Hales Owen

\ $979 Re.

Sturton FY 4

Brahe Part or
tafford Sh.

A

S | ; —Þ
— —— "Chadderw
Chaddecler —

HALFE\ 5 HIRE H vx D RE

4 Stone

I llers,
Ay Lon 4 'engſo, AJ. ton Hewhington 4, Areth. *

o v 14, x 6 T R E\ E
Rock Redjto 4

ESHyxppzrD I We
— I». 4, Aberley f

Upton Narr
74 Le Priors
—

Bunbury

enhar

Of 2 x
Orlton ® a= Witley
rlton JN. SA. 4 rd

a. 4A x 2

Shelſev ESD

F rd pra
Teme R.

—

Park :
* * „ 1 Shelf, >> SR as 1 0
Baule, rim ley 3 DEV y A Au eta ;
Over Jah -, 2 1 Po Tibberton uf
| * 4 we ns \ Crowle Fliford ">
i Stoke p J \ ÞPurrenton 4 .
1 t
pn i or ISS \ + \ > Naher rg
N ,
I BockSiton "by = . . N « al Gon of Poe ka Aer A
| Tedſton del as 0 Worc: el _ 1 Brought
| hs Þ . 8 5
: 0 = pg SE es * aye + - TP .
P 4A ÞF TID Noh TO
| Aae ; de:  Pipleton, *
EZ Po i *. HUN |
Alulſſick | A, 7 N. ton INV —

DRED.
1. PS.

A
Sto 4

—-

« {Birlinoha

A

Clerelod

ro me Spun

3

4
Caſe Hache

H E R E F.

1 &
Defford.

ern

1

-

«Vor ton

2 —— wi

2 Aorton Birch |
A "> .

S I 1 R. E Lydbury
A Haus Miles

Eldres Field 3, ©

1 R J
"IM rley |
k Dabicor s oe 3

E

FR” 1 N |
art of Shro 2 all
Shire
Auer Owen

WORCESTER
> SJHIRE

aeg

MINA

.
—

ec Ken han 8 =

a

Fo rreſt a

*
Rd
| **
x

*

—

# 4s

Bradley” ;
OSWAL -

* A Tnkbarrow

4 Nin ton

PE

F Z
N H b 1 R ou E. f ; ,
4 Loxley T

ers

ii unhbleton

ey
uddiuton, ! ( An 9

3
Crowle Nr 4

Stretforc

»
=

3 _-

4 Abberton
packet (EPrule North

ont
—

N

1 * 5
\ | Shodg/burs * a

mt

lo to bes

Vaunto * Church
”" Lench
IShampton

R

N
,

Farwvingro 4
Litleton//North

* LOW ; — | |

* 2 | * i fe 2 5 * redington

2 N — f : ” "oz R . : a ; . | | 5 7 & 1 : ”

0 5 "0 3 .
” Oy *

Wh TE: Ea

ceſter
1 Sh.
* . Aton 8

HUN
, —

DRED. +

Parshore *

-
<- 2 —
—

Chil.ls Pi

—

le ll

Part of Hanging : aſton
Vorthwick Worce |
ter Sh

52

———

n J

Leming ton

Glock
: ; esford Wormington k.

Part * aſhborn Al F
F SIWorceſter |
, Tlingigh . 1.2

Aſhchurch * 7 Auljt; :

The Four Shi
 Ntons, £

born P

| | g |; . sbury

ſo

" = _ -
.
= * N
> - ( b
| Bs | E , , e 7
— F |
4 ,
: " 4 — . my
- * ; |
v.7 1 6 1
; - .

n

: ,
R uy” | |
| — = = = — »
, : * 4 ;
— _ I ” 5 . |
E — — — =
- N — — - * N 1
1 g p 1
© — -
"0" Fon, = — A
f m - _ a
f . - 4
- : | |
; - - : N ,
0 6 j . f - % 3 „ * 9 A _= |
| — ——
(Loc a” wy - — — .
} ; | . | |
— . - A
— a — 5 2 "i
| ws — — 1
0 : |
: : |
" 4 -
| : ar
E 2 « 4 — 2
5 or
—
.

* GLOCESTER SHIRE | |
— — r ee — | —
— — 2% 55 . 45 | „ ane”

*

vw -

—

—
= —

_

:, 2 —_—_— a >: P 4

** —
©

p ” * * —

— 2 * —_ * —

2
2 -
be — ©
_ -

— —

22 — ———ꝛ—
— * ory
* *

— * —— ws
—— —
. —

_ *

—

* Rreviar,

6. 26. P. 1.

U iccii.

*
＋

=

GH

lib, 2. (
| Cone,

=
+

1. P. 4

2
>

* Breviar.
6. 26, P. 1.

W iccii.

Salt. pits.

* P, 889.
edit, 2
quarto.

+} Hiſt. Eccl.
b. 2. cap. 2. Of the

Cone. Tom. Micciſca, or ¶Miccian- bill

1. p. 433.

WORCESTERSHIRE.

HE Second Province of the
Cornavii, having now changed
its name, is from the prin-
cipal town calFd in Latin V-

BA EATON gornienſis Comitatus, wa 2

SY WES )inecearcen-rcype, and in the
- Oy —— ui, Morceſterſbire.
It is well known, that after the Britains
were expell'd this Nation by the Conquering
Saxons, they retir'd beyond the Severn, and
defended their new Territories againſt the en-
croaching enemy, So that this County, with
thoſe others through which that large river
runs, were for a long time the frontiers be-
tween the two people. And (Vas Mr. Twine
has obſerv'd) moſt of the great cities that lye
upon the Eaſt-ſhore of Severn and Dee, were
built (to reſiſt the incurſions of the Britains)
by the Romans or Saxons, or both.] The
Inhabitants of this part, with their neigh-
bours, in the time of Bede, before England
was divided into Counties, were call'd Miccii;
which name, if not given them from the wind-
ing courſe of the river on which they dwell
(for as I have before obſerv'd, the Saxons {til'd
the winding reach of a river, pic,) may ſeem
to be deriv'd from the Salt-pits, which the an-
cient Engliſh in their language nam'd J/iches.
For in this Country, there are noble Brine-
pits ; and many Salt-ſprings are ever and anon
diſcover'd, but are preſently ſtop'd up, becauſe,
as I learn from ſome ancient writings, they
are oblig'd, for the preſervation of wood, to
make ſalt only in one place. Nor let it be
thought improbable, that places ſhould take
their names from Salt-pits, ſeeing there are
many inſtances hereof in all Countries; and
our Anceſtors the Germans (as Tacitus reports)
firmly believ'd ſuch places to be neareſt Hea-
ven; and that mens prayers are no Where
ſooner heard by the Gods.

[Theſe Wiccii ſeem to have inhabited all that
tract, which was anciently ſubje& to the Bi-
ſhops of Worceſter, that is, all Gloceſterſhire on
the eaſt-ſide Severn, with the city of Briſtol ;
all Worceſterſhire, except ſixteen Pariſhes in the
north-welt part, lying beyond Aberley-hills, and
the river Teme; and near the ſouth-half of
Warwickſhire with Warwick town. For, as un-
der the Heptarchy, at firſt there was but one
Biſhop in each kingdom, and the whole realm
was his Dioceſe ; ſo upon the ſubdividing the

— EE}
40 10 2

kingdom of Mercia into five Biſhopricks, An.] of

Dom. 679. (of which Florentius Wigornienſis ſaith,
Miccia was the firſt,) doubtleſs the Biſhop had
the entire Province under his juriſdiction, and
accordingly he was ſtil'd Biſhop of the Wiccians,
and not of Worceſter. This will appear more
2 yet, from a paſſage in * Florentius, who
aith that Oſpere, Viceroy of the Miccians, per-
ſwaded /thelred, King of Mercia, to make this
diviſion, out of a defire that the Province of
Wiccia, which he govern'd with a ſort of Regal
power, might have the honour of a Biſhop of
its own. This being effected, his See was at
Worceſter, the Metropolis of the Province, which,
8 to | Bede, border'd on the kingdom
| eſt-Saxons, that is, Wiltſhire and So-
merſetſhire ; and Coteſwold-hills lie in it, which
in Eadgar's Charter to Oſwald is call'd Mons
tho' || Spelman reads it

hills, is ſaid by f Florentizs to be in Miccia.

the eaſt, by Gloceſterſhire on the ſouth, by the
Counties of Hereford and Salop on the weſt, and
on the north by Staffordſhire. To ſay all in
one word ; the Air and Soil are both ſo pro-
pitious, that it is inferior to none of its neigh-
bours, either for health or plenty. It produ-
ceth, eſpecially, Pears in great abundance, which,
though they be not grateful to nice palates,
nor do they keep well ; yet they afford a vi-
nous juice, of which is made a fort of counter-

though it be, like other liquors of that kind,
both cold and flatulent.

Neither is tt leſs happily accommodated with
Water; for it hath in all parts very fine ri-
vers, which furniſh it plentifully with fiſh of
the moſt delicious kinds. Not to mention
thoſe rivers which are leſs remarkable, the mioſt
noble river of Severn directs the courſe of its
rich ſtream from north to ſouth through the
very middle of the County, and Avon waters
the ſouth-part thereof in its way out of War-
wickſhire into Severn.

[In the very north-point,
nam'd from the river Stour upon which it ſtands: a
well-built market-town, and of late much enrich'd
by the iron and glaſs-Works. King Edward 6.

founded and liberally endow'd a Grammar-

ſchool here ; and in our time, near this place,
the pious munificence of Thomas Foley, Eſq;
erected a noble Hoſpital, and endow'd it wit
Lands for the maintenance and education of
ſixty poor Children, choſen moſtly out of this
and fome neighbour-pariſhes. 'They are in-
ſtructed in Grammar, Writing, Arithmetick,
Cc. to fit them for trades. Their habit and
diſciplin are much like that of Chriſt's Hoſpi-
tal in London.]

Severn, at its very firſt entrance into this

hill over the weſtern bank of the river: it

Wyre, which are f now in a manner all gone;
whence our Poet and Antiquary Leland faith
It,
Delicium rerum Bellus Locus undique floret
Fronde coronatus Virianæ tempora Syluz.

Fair ſeated Beawdley a delightful town,

Which 7/ire's tall Oaks with ſhady branches |

crown.

But now, this little town is celebrated only for
its delicate ſituation and beauty; together with
the Palace of Tickenhal, which King Henry the
ſeventh built, to be a place of retirement for
Prince Arthur. [The true name is probably
Ticcen- hill, that is, Goats-hill, and was the name
of the place, before the houſe, or hall, was
built; which, with the adjoyning Park, was

deſtroy'd in the late times of Uſurpation,
The former, Kidderminſter, which is alſo call'd
li ii Kiddel-

618

corruptly Monte Wittiſca, and the * Monaſticon* Mop.
more corruptly Mibiſca. Moreover Sceorſtan, Angl. T. 1.
which poſſibly is the Shire-ſtone, beyond theſe f. 4.

This County is bounded by Warwickſhire on AO

feit wine call'd Pyrry, that is very much drunk; Pyrry.

lies Stourbridge, ſo Stourbridge.

County, runs between Kidderminſter and Beawd- x iddermin-
ley ; the latter juſtly taking that name from its ſter and
moſt pleaſant ſituation, upon the declivity of a Beawdley.

was f lately remarkable for the wonderful If So ſaid,
height of the trees in the adjacent foreſt of ann. 1807.

— 3

—— —— öé——— —

.

1 - oh
* * - —
- _ *
. - — _
— —
- EI. 1 * —
7 — - — — — -
- 3 P
w4 — — .
4 2 PRE. * Py * - — o — —
= * 2 — . 2 .

—
— —_
we,

= — =
— — — =
”w 'of * 7 * — *
* *
*
DV -_ *
— ” : .
4 -

Wt — — —
K * — — — - * — - —
— *
— _ . —
q —— 1 : : K — — PX... . — — '
— : « — WE — —
* 7 — ” 4 2 BY. A
— 2 2 . "Wha re. —
— — — — "x — - — —
a - « ns <7

— —

4

——
— — — —

tt.

8

2 *

. , 9
-
Sy

-

——_— ti.

*

619

| —
CO RNAV TI.

— —— —

Kiddelminſter, lies over-againſt it on the eaſt-
ſide, but at a greater diſtance from the river ;
a neat town, and a market well furniſh'd with
all commodities, and divided by the little ri-
ver Stour, which runs through it. The great-
eſt ornaments it hath at preſent, are, a very
fair Church, in which ſome of the eminent
family of the Cokeſeys lie inter'd ; and a fine

* They do houſe of the“ Blounts, a good family, honour'd|

not reſde with Knighthood, and deſcended from thoſe
here, of Kinlet. Put anciently this place was of note
for its Lords the Biſſets, very great men in
their time ; whoſe rich Patrimony coming at
length to a diviſion among ſiſters, part went
to the Barons of Alergavenny, and part to an
Hoſpital of Leprous women in Wilſhire ; which
houſe one of theſe ſiſters, being her ſelf a Le-
per ſas is commonly faid] built and endow'd
with her ſhire of the eſtate. But the Hoſ-
+ Monaſt, pital of Maiden-Bradley, in truth, was f built
Angl. Tom. by Manſer Biſſet in King Stephen's time, or the
2. P. 408. beginning of Henry the ſecond, and endow'd
by him and his fon Henry, long before the
* Dugd, Ba- eſtate was divided among daughters. For
ronage, T. 1. that happen'd not till the year 1241, ſo that
Pe 632. the Tradition of the Leprous Lady is a vulgar
fable. Afterwards, this place gave the title
of Baron to John Beauchamp, Steward of the
Houſhold to Richard the ſecond, who by his
Baron Beau- Letters Patents created him Baron Beauchamp
champ of of Kidderminſter. Soon after this, he, with ma-
Kiddermin- ny other eminent perſons, was, in defiance of
_— that King, condemn'd and beheaded by the
Barons, who making an Inſurrection with the
Commons, in contempt of the King's Autho-
rity, call'd all his prime Favourites to account
for male-adminiſtration. [And in our time,
Thomas Foley of Whitley Court, hath been ad-
vanced to the Honour of a Baron of this
realm, by the title of Baron Foley of Kidder-
minſter, | |
Hence, Severn taking ſomewhat an oblique
Hertlebury. courſe, ſalutes Hertlebury, a Caſtle of the Bi-
ſhops of I orceſter, not far diſtant from it;
Whitley, and ſo goes on [near J/hitley, the ſeat of the
Bolts, in ola Lord Foley,] to Holt (which hath that name
Engliſh, from the thick woods,) a caſtle formerly be-
Woods or longing to the Abtots, and ſince to the Beau-
Feen champs. Theſe, ſpringing from William Beau-
champ, ſirnam'd the blind Baron, grew up into
a very honourable family; whoſe eſtate after
ſome time by heirs- female came to the Guiſes
and Peniſtones. [It was, ſince, the inheritance of
the Bromleys, deſcended from Sir Thomas Brom-
ley, Lord Chancellor of England in the mid-
dle of Queen Elizabeth's reign : The eldeſt
branch of which family being lately extin& by
the death of Wiliam Bromley, Eſq; (a perſon
of great worth) without iſſue- male; this eſtate
is now paſs'd into another family of the ſame
name, in the County of Cambridge.] In its
paſſage downward, Severn feeds ſuch a num-
Lampreys. ber of * that Nature ſeems to
have made a Pond for them in this place, ſuch
as the Romans anciently invented in the height
of their Luxury. Lampreys have their name
from the Latin Lampetra, or licking the rocks ;
they are like Eels, ſlippery and of a dark co-
lour, only ſomewhat blueiſh on the belly :
on each ſide the throat they have ſeven holes,
at which they receive water, having no gills
at all. They are beſt in ſeaſon in the ſpring,
as being then of a moſt delicious taſte, whereas
in the ſummer the ſtring within them, which
doth the office of a back-bone, groweth hard.
The Halians do much improve the delicacy of
their taſte, by a particular way of dreſſing
Vino Cre- them. Firſt, they kill the fiſh in“ Malveſey,

tico.

—— o .
— ay a ie,

— —

and ſtop the mouth with a nutmeg, and each
hole with a clove ; then rolling them up round,
they add the kernels of filbirds ſtamp'd, with
crums of bread, oil, Malveſey, and Spices ;
and then ſtew them all together carefully in
a pan over a moderate fire for ſome little
time. Bur to inſtruct Cooks and Epicures, is
no part of my Buſineſs.

Below Holt, the Severn opens its eaſtern bank
to receive the river Salwatp ; [for the making
of which navigable, together with the neigh-
bouring Stour, an f Act of Parliament was pro-
cur'd in the reign of King Charles the ſe-
cond.] This Sal warp, riſing in the north-part
of the County, runs by Brome grave, a conſi-
derable market- town, not far — Grafton, a
ſear of the renowned family of the Talbots,
which (upon the Attainder of Humfrey Staf-
ford)] King Henry the ſeventh gave to Gilbert
Talbot a younger ſon of John the ſecond Earl
of Shrewsbury ; whom, for his bravery in war,
and his extraordinary wiſdom, he alſo made
Knight of the Garter, and Governour of Ca-
lice in France. | Upon the death of Edward
Earl of Shrewsbury, Feb. 7. 1617. (the laſt

heir-male of John the third Earl of this fa- Nobili
mily) the honour came to the houſe of Graf Vi
ton; Which was the ſeat of Charles Earl of gion,
Shrewsbury, the next lineal heir of Sir Gilbert Dagd. B,

Talbot betore-mention'd.]
From Brome's-grave, Salwarp proceeds to

Droitwich (Durtwich ſome call it, from the pus

Brine-pits and its wet ſituation, as Wetus in
Beotia | is ſaid to be] from its dirty ſoil. ¶ Se-
phanus Byxantius, in his book De Urbibus, un-
der "Tyr]ss, mentions this reaſon of the name.

* Nevertheleſs, it feems not improbable, that Ser pu;
the town in Bœotia deriy'd its name from Hy- nias, lg,

ettus an exile from Argos who fix d here; —
the Greek name is not rie, but Turo. But

as long ſince as King Henry the ſeventh, were
froe in number.] They are ſeparated by a brook
of treſh water which runs between them. And
out of them is made the pureſt and whiteſt
kind of Salt, for fix months in the year, that is,
from the Summer to the Winter Solſtice ; (be-
ing prepar'd in feveral little boiling houſes
built about the pits. [Not that they obſerve
theſe ; as the ſeaſons of wealling, nor do they
at any time leave oft, becauſe the brine is too
weak to make ſalt (for the ſprings yield ſtrong
brine all the year round,) but they leave off
only, when they judge the quantity of ſalt
made, ſufficient to ſerve their markets, which
they are careful not to overſtock ; and if that
require the making it all the year, they do it.
The proportions here made, may be gather'd
from the Taxes annually paid from hence to
the Crown, above fifty thouſand pounds per
an. at the rate of 3 s. 6d. per buſhel. ] What
a prodigious quantity of wood theſe ſalt-works

this by the way. | || Here riſe *ſeveral ſprings by j vide py
nature's particular bounty yielding plenty ef Trat nad
brine, [(which lately were three, but anciently, 155.

conſume, though men be ſilent, yet Feckenham Feckenham
Foreſt, once very thick with trees, and the Forel.

neighbouring woods, do by their thinneſs de-

clare daily more and more; [which being not+ So (iid,
equal to ſo great and conſtant a conſumption, ann. 1607:

they now burn coal, and not wocd, in their
Seales. The number of the Pits hath been

Tom
029 621
:
+ 14 Cz, t
n. 46,
Brome
wy
raiton,
Brook' Cx rtuni
Notte 0 2 ſor
oppor tund 70
cent's Co-. 3 oy it
I. l, Ps 33%
ö Leiceſter's
Antiquit,
p. 427.
ö + Spelm.
Sg. Gloſ.in Su
ma, Lom. *
p. 256, col. ö
Annal. Wi-
E gorn,
Hesli

conſiderably encreas'd, and it is not at all to
be doubted, but many more may be yet made. |

If I ſhould ſay, that Richard de la Wich, Bi- Richard de

is prayers obtain theſe Salt-ſprings, I am
afraid ſome would cenſure me as very injurious
to the Divine Providence, and .
0

hop of Chicheſter, who was born here, did la Wich.
b

* 4 ' r

5
ck.
by

 WoRGESTERSHIRE 572

5 of old wives fables. Nevertheleſs, ſo great was the Lord Monteagle, by Mrs. Abingdon his ſiſter,
the pious credulity of our Anceſtors, that they|which gave ſome light into the horrid deſign.

did not only believe it firmly themſelves, and A large deſcription of Myrcgſterſpire, was writ-

tranſmit it in writing to us, but alſo upon that ſten by an able and induſtrious Antiquary of

R account paid him honours in a manner divine :|this family; the publication whereof hath been
N when, for his skill in the Canon-Law, and — expected from him, theſe many
ſanctity of life, he was ſolemnly canoniz'd for years.
a Saint by Urban the fourth. [And at this] Not four miles below Droitwich, Severn
day, a Wake is annually kept here, in memory with a flow courſe, and as it were admiring,
of him, founded probably upon the credit of|paiſleth by Forceſter the chief town of this Worceſter;

this Legend.] Yet before this Richard was|Shire, and ſeated on its bank: and really it
born, Gervaſe of Tilbury wrote the following [deſerveth admiration, both for its Antiquity
account of theſe Springs, tho' not exactly true: fand Beauty. For Antoninus mentions it by the
In the Dioceſe of Worceſter, there is a village not name of Branonium, and Ptolemy (in whom * Dr. Gale
far from that city, nam d Wich, where at the foot by the tranſcriber's negligence it is miſplaced) ſettles in at
of a little hill, there runs a ſtream of very ſweet|yy the name of Branogenium, whence the Bri- — of
water. On the bank hereof, are certain pits, few in|tains or Welſh call it at this day Cair Wrangon, hich 3 a
number, and of no great depth, whoſe water is ex- and in the Catalogue of Ninnius it is call'd Branoge-
tremely ſalt ; which, boil'd in pans, condenſeth into] Caer Guorangon and Caer Guorcon, (which, al- nium.
very white ſalt. All the Country report, that from|tho* deny'd by + Mr. Burton as to both, is . Comm.
Chriſtmas to Midſummer there comes up very ſtrong|confirm'd by Archbiſhop Uſher as to Caer Euo- p. 252.
brine ; but that all the veſt of the year, the water|rangon; but the ſame * learned Primate judges * Prim. c. 5;

| is ſomewhat freſh and unfit to make ſalt. And] Caer Guorcon to be either Warwick, or Wroxe- |

© + Opportiens which I think more wonderful, when the water, f not ter in Shropſhire.| Afterwards, the Saxons

partem, for ſtrong enough for making ſalt, riſeth, it ſcarce ever|call'd it Feogane-ceartcen, Fegeopna-cearteg,

qportuna Fa- runs over the pit; at the ſeaſon of its ſaltneſs, the and Pine-ceafcen, || as ſome think from Wire a | Perhaps, C.

hook '* brine is not in the leaſt weaken'd by the vicinity woody foreſt adjoyning. [But that foreſt ly- |

4 the freſh river; and yet it is not at all near theſ ing near twelve miles from the city, and as

Sea. Moreover, in the King's Survey, which|much in Shropſhire as in this County; Pipecercep

we call Domeſday-book, In Wich there be eight [muſk be a contraction of P1zopa or Pigna-

fats of ſalt belonging to the King and to the Earl, cercep, as it was call'd in the days of the Son-

which in every week of wealling yield on the Fri-|queror and his ſons. And Pighacercen it ſelf

day fixteen Bullions. | What proportion this is, II ſeems to be a contraction of Pic-papa-cerrep,

cannot determin. Monſieur du Cange, in his] i. e. the city of the men of Wiccia ; juſt as Can-

Gloſlary, contents himſelf to ſay in general, terbury is of Cant-papa-byp . i. e. the burrough

that it is a meaſure of Salt. I am apt toſef the men of Kent. The 1 in writing

; think, it is the ſame with Bullitiones in Domeſ- Feogopa, Feo Onena, Feogopna, and Figpa-

leiceſters day-book, where an account is given of the cercen, is of no moment; for our Saxon-

Antiquit. rent of eight fats belonging to the King and] Anceſtors us d eo and i indifferently, as Be-

F. 427. Earl at Nantwich, which paid every Friday fix-|ophepals Biphepals, Feobrcan pihrran; and

N teen Bulitiones ; and it follows, that fifteen of ſo, Feozopa, Piogopa, and Vigna-cercen. And

| theſe made unam ſummam, one ſeam or horſe-|the difference in termination is as little mate-

© + Spelm. load, or eight buſhels N And in the Mona- rial; for as here we have Feogopa and Peogo-

Gloſl.in um ſticon Anglicanum, four ſums are ſaid to contain] pena-cerrep; ſo in Bede we have Lancpapa and

mY * 2 forty Bullions, which I conceive to be Barrows,|Canzpanena by ig. The preſent name Worce-

| 025% 0 the ſize whereof hath been different, at diffe-|/er, is either form'd from Wircefter by the

rent places and times. But whatever be the[change of one vowel, or elſe by contracting

| meaning of that expreſſion in Domeſday ; it and melting the g; in Peogopcerrcep. In Latin

| Annat, Wi. is certain, that theſe Springs were known and it is NNgornia. One of the firſt who mentions

| gorn, uſed, long before that Book was com il d. it by that name, if I miſtake not, is Joſeph

ö Witneſs, divers Grants of the Saxon Kings, |of Exeter (the moſt elegant Poet of that age,

Kenulph, Edwin, and Edgar, to the Church of| whoſe book paſſeth undef the name of Corne-

Worceſter, and the Convent of Parſhore ; and|J;us Nepos) in theſe verſes to Baldwin Archbi-

one other to the ſaid Church as early as King | ſhop of Canterbury:

Athelſtan ; in all which, expreſs mention is]

made of the Pits and Salt in this place ; and In numerum jam creſcit howor, te tertia

they are, by conſequence, at leaſt five hundred poſcit

years, and upwards, older than Richard de la Infula, jam meminit Wigornia, Cantia

Wich. The town it ſelf is very wealthy; it diſcit, |

had great privileges granted it by King John, Romanus meditatur apex, & naufraga Petri

whoſe Charter they have to ſhew at this day; Duttorem in mediis expectat cymba procellis,

(after whoſe time, in the year 1290, St. An-

drew's Church, with the greater part of the] Now thy. vaſt honours with thy virtues

town, was burnt : ) They were alſo much fa- grow,

ham vour'd by his ſon King Henry the third and! Now a third mitre waits thy ſacred brow.

| other Princes; particularly King James the] Deſerted Yigorn mourns that thou art

a2,

firſt, in the 22d year of his reign, granted gone,
ad, them a Charter. The Burrough is govern'd] And Kent's glad ſons thy happy conduct
07. by two Bailiffs and a certain number of Bur- own.
geſſes: they ſend alſo two Members to Par-| Now Rome deſires thee, Peter wants thy
liament. Between Droitwich and Worceſter, hand
Henlip, at no great diſtance from the Severn, is Hen-] To guide his leaky veſſel ſafe to land.
lip, a fair ſeat of the Abingtons, remarkable for
4 de the taking of Garnet and Oldcorn, two eminent] [This name Mgornia is made like Cantuaria;
I Jeſuits concern'd in the Powder-plot ; who, by ſoftenipg the termination after the mode
after many days fruitleſs ſearch, were found in |ot the Latins. Bur as to the antiquity of the
a cavity of a wall over a chimney. In the name, it is obſerv'd by others, that Florentius,
{ame houſe was written that obſcure Letter to who dy'd above ſixty years before Joſeph of

Exeter,

*

—

* — — 7 a — — = - — — - .- - -
— = — —
I a od —_—_—
—
* . — 2 &
4 es > - — 4 -- -—- - — 1
— ; N 1 — — 2 — — = — —
2 4 - 8 . OJ
— - —
* 3 — 2 — — 2 _
— 7 — — * >
he — — . — * " nw —_ ao 5 _—
4 - — — —2 — —
- * * — -
_ — - — — .

—
— ũ A— —

623 "CORN

„

Exeter, dedicating his Book to Baldwin, us d

the name Higornia ; ſo that Joſeph, tho one

* Burton's Of the firſt, was not (as * ſome will have him)
Comment the firſt writer who call'd it by that name.
upon Antoni- This city was, in all probability, built by the
nus, P. 252 Romans, when, to curb the Britains who dwelt
beyond Severn, they planted cities at conve-

nient diſtances all along upon its eaſt-bank,

juſt as they did ſin Germany] on the ſouth-

fide of the Rhine. [It's foundation is refer'd

by John Rous of Warwick to King Conſtan-

tius ; I ſuppoſe, he means Chlorus.] It is ſeat-

ed on an eaſy aſcent from the river, over which

lieth a bridge, with a tower upon it. It was

anciently ſeuced with loſty Roman walls, as an

old parchment-roll informs us; and hath to

this day a good firm wall, Bur it's great glo-

ry confiſts in the inhabitants; who are nume-

rous, courteous, and wealthy by means of the
Cloathing-trade ; as alſo in the neatneſs of

its buildings, the number of Churches, and

moſt of all, in the Epiſcopal See, which Sexu-

ulfus Biſhop of the Mercians placed here A. D.

680, building a Cathedral Church in the ſouth-

art of the city. [This was dedicated to St.

bow and diſus'd, by degrees, after that Bi-

ſhop Oſwald had finiſh'd his Convent ; and

the Church thereof (dedicated to the Virgin

Mary) became the Epiſcopal See; continuing ſo,

till Biſhop Wulſtan pull'd it down, and began

to erect a new one, in the year 1084 ; | which

hath often been repair'd, and by the Biſhops

and Monks hath been lengthen'd weſtward, a

little at a time, almoſt to Severn-ſide, | Aft-

ter it had ſuffer d greatly by fire in the year|number of Monks to fifty, and alſo * built a Vid. fg,

1113, and after that in the year 1202, and

was repair'd again ; it was dedicated anew to|the account of that age, but a perſon of ſuch
Mary the mother of God, St. Peter, and St. Oſwald|ſimplicity and unfeigned integrity, and of a

and J/ulſtan Confeſſors, (i. e. the greater Altar
to St. „and St. Ofwald, and the middle
Altar to St. Peter and St. Wulftan; ) then, it

was new-fronted from the foundation; and] Church gave him a place in the Kalendar,
many years after, the Tower was rebuilt, Bi-|among the Saints. But after they had flou-
ſhop Giffard (who was alſo Lord Chancellor of| riſh'd in great wealth and power above five
England) beautify'd the Pillars of the Quire, | hundred years, King Henry the eighth expel'd

and the Chapels and Ifles ſurrounding it, b
interlacing little Pillars of grey Marble, whie

he faſten'd with rings of Copper gilt. Between | ſchool for the inſtruction of youth, Cloſe b
the years 1317 and 1327, Biſhop Cobham vaulted | this Church, remain the bare name and ground-

the north-lile of the body of the Church; and
Biſhop Wakefield afterwards lengthen d the body
of it by the addition of two Arches (of different

forms) to the weſt-end, and built the north-| the firſt, built in the very teeth of the Mons; ſo

porch. 1 It is really a fair and magnificent Stru-
cture, ennobled with the monuments of K. John,
Arthus Prince of Wales, and ſome of the Beau-
champs; as alſo with a College of learned men
call'd Prebendaries, no leſs famous than were

tormerly the Priory of Monks, or College of| withſtanding that Grant, it was ſtill claim'd by

Secular Prieſts here, For in this Church, pre-

ſently upon its firſt foundation (as in the other bog: at laſt, ann. 1276, they releas'd all right and

Marry'd Abbies of England) were placed marry'd Pres-
Prieſts. byters, who govern'd thoſe Churches a long
time with great reputation for ſanctity; till

Dunſtan, Archbiſhop of Canterbury, in a Sy-|caſualty of fire, hath many years ſince been

nod, decreed, That for the future all the Religious
in England fhould lead a fingle life.

Regiſter of I This, according to the date of King Ead-

the Church gar's Charter in the Church of Worceſter, was

1 n the year 964 ; which date, tho? very nicely
the King, the day of the month and the week,)
is nevertheleſs manifeſtly falſe, For Florentius,
the Annals of Worceſter, and other monuments,
with one conſent fix the expulſion of the Se-

cular Prieſts to the year 969, and ſome of |firſt, that, in the days of Edward the Con-

them add, that Winſim was created Prior in

e particular (having the Indiction, the year of his Officers who collected the Danegelt,) did yarianus

AV 11, L 1

the year 971, Which Hinfius is in the body of 1
this Charter mention'd as then actually Prior, |
ſo that 964 cannot be the true date f. The4
ſaid Decree being made, | Oſwald, Biſhop of Wig, a, *
this See, who was a moſt zealous promoter of Ang], 805
Monkery, remov'd the Prieſts, and plac'd Monks * 1. p. 4
in their room; which King Edgar atteſts in Cs: 58.
theſe words: The Convent. both of Monks and Mailros g
Virgins were deſtroy'd and neglefted all England Hoved adi.
over, which I have determin'd to repair to the praiſe mY. Artis
of God for the benefit of my own ſoul, and to in- Dag Vi
creaſe the number of the ſervants of God of both mY

ſexes ; and accordingly, I have already ſettled Monks
and Nuns in ſeven and forty houſes, and reſolve (if
Chrift fpare me life to do it) that I will go on in
the oblation of my devout munificence to God, till I
have made them up fiſty, the number of the years of
Remiſſion. Wherefore, at preſent, that Monaſtery
in the Epiſcopal See of Worceſter, which the Reve-
rend Biſhip Oſwald hath to the honour of Mary
the holy mother of God enlarg'd, and (having ex-
pel'd the Secular Clerks, &c.) by my aſſent and fa-
vour beſtou d on the religious ſervants of God the
Monks ; I do by my royal authority confirm to the
ſaid religious perſons leading a Monaſtick life, and
with the advice and conſent of my Princes and No-
bles do corroborate and confign, c. After ſome
conſiderable time, when, through the incur-
ſions of the Danes, and civil broils, the ſtate
of this Church was ſo decay'd, thar in the place
of that numerous company of Monks which
Oſwald founded here, ſcarce twelve were left;
Wulf#tan, who was Biſhop of this See about
A. D. 1090, reſtor'd it, and augmented the

Se. Welt,
new Church. He was a mean ſcholar even in

© Vil, Stat,

converſation ſo ſevere and ſtrict, that he was et

a terror to ill men, and belov'd by all that
were good; inſomuch, that after his death, the

theſe Monks, and in their room placed a Dean
and Prebendaries, and founded a Grammar-

plot of the Caſtle, Mich (as we read in Wil-
liam of Malmesbury's hiſtory of Biſhops) Urſus
who was made Sheriff of Worceſter by William

that the graff took away part of their cemetry. | All
that was taken away, together with an acre
and half of ground, for their greater conve-
nience, was afterwards reſtor'd to them in the
time of King Henry the third. But, not-

the Sheriffs (who were the Earls of Warwick,)

claim to it, in due form of Law, in conſiderati-
on of one hundred pounds paid by the Monks. 1
But this Caſtle, through the injury of time and

ruin'd.

The City alſo hath been more than once
burnt down, A. D. 1041. it was ſet on fire
by Hardy-Canute, who being enraged at the
Citizens for killing his Huſcarles (ſo they call'd

not only fire the City, but alſo maſlacre all
the Inhabitants, except ſuch as eſcap'd into
Beverly, a ſmall iſland in the river. Never-
theleſs, we find in the Survey of William the

feſſor, it had a great many Burgeſſes, and was Ne
| te

, PEE * „ RN e r * een. 1, 2 2 3 — OTIS —
MT WORCESTERSHIRE 26
— | 3 ted at fifteen hid?-land ; and when the Mint went, | main of this Saint, was St. Ofwald's Hoſpital, St, Oſwald's
every Minter gave twenty ſhillings at London for | not far off, built and endow'd by him in the Hoſpital.
ſtamps to coin withall, In the year 1113. a ca-|year 960; but, in the reign of Queen Eliza-
* Flo, ſual fire, which conſum'd the Caſtle, burnt |beth, pull'd down by Sir John Bourn, Lord of
1 55 the roof of the Church alſo, | During the Ci- the manour of Holt. Upon the Reſtoration, |
* vil wars in King Stephen's reign, it was fir'd the late excellent Prelite Dr. Fel, with great |
2 5 5 once and again; but ſufter'd moſt, when that [pains and charge, recover'd much of the Poſ- 5 mt
. „ took the City, which he had unadvi- ] ſeſſions, and erected a fair and large Hoſpi-Stat. 15 Car;
TY 5 sud. Reg. fedly put into the hands of Walleran Earl of tal, wherein twelve poor men are comfortably 2. n. 19. 1
* g Mellent; but at that time he could not carry | maintain'd. | | | 1
* | the Caſtle. [To which we may very well] From Worceſter, the river taking its courſe Barons of
add the plunder thereof by the Cromwelians| ſouthward, paſſeth by Powick, anciently the ſeat Powick. ih

Wultün,

d. ſupra

/

after Worceſter-fight, Sept. 3. 1651, in which
the Army (conſiſting moſtly of Scots who en-
deavour'd to re-inthrone King Charles the ſe-
cond) being routed, that Prince was wonder-
fully conceal'd till he could make his eſcape into
France.] However, it ſtill roſe up again with

3 lach flou- greater beauty, and * flouriſh'd under an ex-
ned, C. cellent Government, manag'd by two Bailiffs

choſen out of twenty-four Citizens, two Al-
dermen and two Chamberlains, with a Com-
mon-Council conſiſting of forty-eight Citizens
more. [But now, by virtue of a Charter of
King James the firſt, dated Octob. 2. in the
19 year of his reign, this City is govern'd
by a Mayor and fix Aldermen, who are Ju-
ſtices of the Peace N Aldermen are choſen
out of the twenty-four Capital Citizens, ) and
a Sheriff, uſually choſen out of the ſaid twenty-
four ; and likewiſe a Common- Council conſiſt-
ing of 48 other Citizens, out of which num-
ber are annually elected the two Chamberlains.
They have alſo a Recorder, a Town-Clerk,

of John Beauchamp, whom King Henry the
fixth raiſed to the dignity of a Baron ; whoſe
eſtate, ſoon after, was carry'd by heirs-female
to the Milloughbies of Broke, the Reads, and
the Ligons. |

[Below Powick, on the eaſtern bank of the
Severn, ſtands Kemſey, an ancient manour ofKemſey;
the Biſhops of Worceſter ; where, before- the
Conqueſt, and many Ages after, they had a
noble Palace, which hath been long ſince de-
moliſh'd, ſo that the ruins are not diſcernible.
Here are ſome remains of a ſquare camp, with Aubr. Ms.
ſingle great rampires. About three miles ſouth-
ward, is Cromb D'aletot (nam'd from UrſoCromb
D'abetot anciently Lord thereof) the chief ſeat D'abetor,
of the Lord Coventry ; as the adjoyning Church
is the burial-place of the family. About two
miles on the weſt- ſide of the Severn, is Great Great
Malvern, an Abbey ſeated at the foot of the Malyern,
hill, which was founded by one Alduin a Her-
mit, in the eighteenth year of the Conque-
ror's reign ; and himſelf, with K ing Henry his

two Coroners, &c. The City is a County of] ſon, were benefactors to it. This houſe was

— — — -
j—— — On

— — Me

oat
n
—

—

it ſelf; and is much adorn'd by a capacious of the Benedictine Order, and a Cell belong-
and beautiful ſtructure, erected by the generous] ing to Weſtminſter-Abbey. A very fair Church
b Contributions of many Citizens and neigh-| is yet remaining, which ſerves the Pariſh ; but
vid. Stat, bouring Gentry for a Publick J/orkhouſe ; in] almoſt nothing is left to maintain a Miniſter.
© 2 Ann, c. 8. which, Children of both ſexes are train'd up] Two miles ſouth from this, lies Little Malvern, Little Mal-
4 to the knowledge of Trade, and (what is off in a diſmal cavity of the hill. It was found- vern.
far greater advantage) to the practice of Reli-|ed An. Dom. 1171, by Joceline and Edred, two
gion and Virtue; by whoſe labour alſo the aged| brothers, who were ſucceſſively Priors of the |
and decrepit, who cannot work, are ſupported. | houſe ; which was alſo of the Benedictine-
For the better management hereof, the Mayor] Order, and a Cell of the Monaſtery of Wer-
of the City, with divers others, are by Act] ceſter. |
of Parliament . erected into a Corporation to] From Powick and Kemſey, through rich 1%
continue for ever. Oppoſite to this, is a fine] and fragrant meadows, the river runs by Hanley, Hanley. 7
Hoſpital for 12 poor men, erected by Robert] formerly a Caſtle belonging to the Earls of
Berkley of Spetchley, Eſquire; who by Deed |Glocefter ; and Upton, a noted market- town, Upton,
| ſettled two thouſand pounds for the building, where Roman Coins are frequently dug-up.
and four thouſand pounds for the endowment | Not far off, on the right-hand, Severn ha |
thereof.] As to the Geographical account of the proſpect of Malvern hills; hills indeed, or Malveri if
it, its Longitude from the weſt Meridian is] rather great and lofty mountains, riſing like hills. |
21 degrees, 52 minutes, and hath the north-|ſtairs one higher than the other, for about
pole elevated 52 degrees and 12 minutes. ſeven miles together, and dividing this County
Fee p. 629. Between Morceſter and Speechley, on a riſing- from that of Hereford ; near which diviſion,
| ground, is probably the old Ofwald's-Law ;|is a ſpring, that hath been long famed for Phil. Tranſ,
+ Concil, Which, f Sir Henry Spelman ſays, ſignifies as] the virtue of healing eyes, and other parts of * 20. |
T. 1. p. 434. much as Lex Ofwaldi, and is the Conſtitution] the head; call'd therefore Eye-wel : And be-
that was made for expelling marry'd. Prieſts ; fides this, two other ſprings iflue out of theſe
and he is follow'd, in that opinion, by other] mountains; one call'd Holywel, heretofore much
learned men. But it muſt be obſerv'd, that in| reſorted to, for curing all ſcorbutick humours
ancient writings it is not Ofwaldes laga, but] and external Ulcers, by bathing, and drinking
law, which ſignifies a knap or little-hil, and] of the waters; the other, famous for curin
Edgar's Charter gives that name to the placeſ of accidental Tumours, and outward: Sores.

Anus.

where Oſwald's Hundred-Court was to be kept ;
and the whole Hundred took its name from
thence. It is very uſual for Hundreds to be
denominated from a hill, a field, a tree, a ſtone,
or a croſs, where the Court is call'd. In this
Charter, there is mention of Ulferes law and
Cuthburges lau-Hundreds, now ſwallow'd up in
Ofwald's law; and in other Counties, the
names of Hundreds often terminate in /aw, as
in Herefordſhire, Radlaw and Yormlaw Hun-
reds. On the riſing- ground before-mention d,
the Hundred -Court is ſtill call d. Another re-

U

On the top of theſe hills, Gilbert de Clare Earl
of Gleceſter did anciently caſt-up a ditch all
along, ro or his lands from thoſe of the
Church of Worceſter, ſas is ſaid by ſome ; |.
which ditch is ſtill to be ſeen, and is wry
much admir'd. [But others have obſerv'd,
that this muſt be meant of the Church of He-
reford, and not of Worceſter. For the Church
of Hereford hath ſeyeral manours on the weſt-

fide Mabvern-hills, and * there was a famous * Angl. Sacr.
e between Thomas de Cantilupe Biſhop of Annal. Wigs

reford, and this Earl, touching ſome lands _=
Kkkk claim'd P. 5.

„ —

627

CORNAVII.

dd

e

62

Elmley-
caſtle,

Waſhborn,

from t
of the bod

Eveſliam:

Bredon hills.

Parcel of the quite ſever'd from the main body. And di-
Shire ſevered vers other like
re

7* leſs it were this, That the Governours of this

+ Vide An- mits of the two Counties f. Of theſe diſmem-
nal, Wigorn. ber'd
ad An. 1238.
in Angl. ſacr,

T. 1. p. 490.

ſham, which the Monkiſh writers tell us, had

claim'd by the Biſhop in Malvern-chace; and
the Judges who were to decide that contro-
verſy, ſate in the Chace.] On the other fide
Severn, and near the ſame diſtance from it,
Bredon hills, tho' much leſſer than thoſe of
Matvern, riſe with a ſort of emulation. Upon
theſe, appears Elmley, a Caſtle, which once be-
long'd to Urſus or Urſo d Abtot, by whoſe daugh-
ter and heir Emeline it deſcended by inheri-
tance to the Beauchamps. At the foor of theſe
hills ſtands Bredon, a village, touching whoſe
Monaſtery, Offa King of the Mercians faith,
I Offa, King of the Mercians, will give thirty-five
acres of tributary land to the Monaſtery which is
call d Breodun in the Province of the Wiccians,
and to the Church of St. Peter, Prince of the Apo-
files, in that place ; which my grandfather Ean-
yu built to the glory and praiſe of the everliving
God.

Under Bredoz hills, to the ſouth, lies Vaſb-
born, a village or two, which gives the ſirname
to an ancient and eminent family in theſe parts.
They lie in a ſpot of this County, that is

parcels lie diſpers'd up and
down; the reaſon of which I know not, un-

County in elder times, having eſtates of their
own lying near, annex'd them to the County
which they govern'd. [It is worthy our ob-
ſervation, that in fa& all theſe diſmember'd
parts, except Dudley, were originally Church-
lands. Old Barrow environ'd by Warwickſhire,
belong'd to Eveſham-Abbey, and Alderminſter
to Perſhore. All the reſt were the lands of the
Biſhop and Church of J/orceſter, before the di-
viſion of England into Counties; and tho' ſe-
veral of theſe have been alienated many ages,
yet they are ſtill in Oſwaldiow Hundred; as
Olb-barrow is in the Hundred of Blackenhwr#?,
and Alderminſter in Perſhore Hnndred ; but the
foundation of the laft Abbey is later than the
diviſion into Shires. As for Dudley, the Ca-
ſtle ſtands in Staffordſhire, but the Church and
Town in this County. Before the Conqueſt,
Edwin Earl of Mercia, had both town and ca-
ſtle, which were given to William Fitz- Auferlf,
from whom through ſeveral hands they came
to the Lord Ward, heir of the laſt Lord Dud-
ley by his mother, who, thereupon, after her
deceaſe, did alſo enjoy the title of Lord Dud-
ley. It appears that above four hundred and
fifty years ago, the town and caſtle were un-
der different civil Juriſdictions, as at preſent,
and the Ecclefiaſtical Juriſdiction was ſettled
wy the Pope's Mandate between the Biſhops
Worceſter and Lichfield, according to the li-

places, one is B , a Palace of the
Biſhops of Worceſter, before the Reformation,
where they alſo frequently reſided ; but it is
now quite demoliſh'd. The Foſſe-way runs
out of Gloceſterſhire, through a village in
this Pariſh, call'd Dorn; which, the Country-
people have a Tradition, was formerly a City;
and the many old Foundations that have been
dug-up here, with the abundance of Reman
and Britiſh Coins commonly found by the
husbandmen, and the lines in which the ſtreets
ran, {till very diſcernible, are all evident marks
of its antiquity, and ſhew that a Colony of
the Romans muſt have reſided here for ſome
conſiderable time.

A little higher runs the river Avon in its
way to Severn in this County it waters Eove-

its name from Eves, ſwineherd to Egwine Biſhop
of Worceſter (being alſo formerly call'd Eath-

home, and Heath-field ; ) a neat town, ſeated on The by

were in its ſuburbs ; which William d'Audeville,
Abbot, recovering from William Beauchamp, «t-
terly demoliſh'd, and caus'd the ground to be con-
ſecrated for a Church-yard. The town is famous
for its Monaſtery, which Eguine, by the help
of King Kenred ſon of Wolſer King of the
Mercians, built about the year 700 as alſo

fruitfulneſs is juſtly ſtil'd the Granary of theſe
parts; ſo liberal is the ſoil in affording the
beſt corn in great abundance. In more an-
cient times, this town was very famous for

He being a perſon of a very wicked diſpoſition,
and extremely perfidious, taught us by expe-
rience the truth of that ſaying, Favours are
eſteem d Obligations, no longer than they can be re-
quited. For when King Henry the third had
with a liberal hand heap'd all poſſible favours
upon him, and given him his own ſiſter to

the moſt implacable hatred. For he raiſed a moſt
dangerous war, and miſerably waſted a great
part of England under pretence of redreſſing
grievances and aſſerting its liberties, leaving no
method unprafis'd whereby he might depoſe
the King, and change the Government from a
Monarchy to an Oligarchy. But after he had
proſper'd a while in his enterprize, he, with
many others of his party, fell in this place,
being ſubdu'd in a pitch'd battel by the va-
lour of Prince 1 And inſtantly, as tho
the ſink of miſchiefs had been cleans' d, a wel-
come peace, which he had baniſh'd, did every
where appear. [This town 1s an ancient Bo-
rough, enjoying many privileges, ſome by pre-
ſcription, and others by divers Charters. It
was govern'd by two Bailiffs till the third year
of King James the firſt, who, at the requeſt
of Prince Henry, granted them a new Charter,
giving the chief Magiſtrate the title of Mayor,
and making the Corporation to conſiſt of ſeven
Aldermen, twelve capital Burgeſſes, a Recor-
der, and Chamberlain, who are all of the Com-
mon-Council ; as alſo four and twenty other
Burgeſſes call'd A/jjſtants : and he extended their
juriſdiction over the adjoyning pariſh of Beng-
worth. He likewiſe granted them more ample
privileges, particularly power to try and exe-
cute Felons within the Borough. It ſends alſo
two Burgeſſes to Parliament. In the year
1697, Sir John Sommers was created a Baron

of for his great abilities, eſpecially in the know-
ledge of the Law ; was choſen, among others
the moſt eminent Counſellors of that rime, to
plead the Cauſe of the impriſon'd Biſhops in
the reign of King James the ſecond ; and, upon
the happy Revolution which follow'd, he was
made ſucceſſively Solicitor-General, Attorney-
General, Lord Keeper, and Lord Chancellor of
England: being alſo (beſides his extraordinary
Abilities in that Profeſſion, and an accurate and
uncommon knowledge in the molt polite parts
of Learning) univerſally eſteem'd and acknow-
ledg'd to be the ahleſt Srateſman of this age. |
Hard by Eveſham, upon the ſame river, lies
Charleton, once the eſtate of a famous knight!
family of the Hanſacres, but now of the Dinlies
or Dinglies, who, being deſcended of an ancient
family of that name in Lancaſhire, came to this

by

for the Vale of Eveſham lying about it, and ta-
king its name from the town, which for its Eng) ©

the overthrow of the Barons, and of Simon 81 0 l.
Mountfort Earl of Leiceſter, our Engliſh Cataline. fort.

wife, he had no other returns from him, than

a gentle aſcent trom the river. Bengworth Ca- Eren h
ſtle anciently ſtood at the bridge-foot, as it tuen.

the
Year 1135

of this Realm, by the title of Lord Sommers, Lord Som-
Baron of Eveſham ; who being a perſon of ex- mers, Bum
traordinary endowments, and early taken notice uf E

htly Charleton-

a : 9 a "
4 . Y P * » * * *
£ W 7 * 9 DEP * 5 _ ne K * T Ft
* WHEY ” 8 * 0 Fe E a 9 * 9 * "a I * n *
o EO nes A T7 A WO — ö * *

Alesboroug

> Ofwalds-la

hundred.

© See before,
. 625.

| || Vol. x,
# * Vol, "'H
| P-140,

Auſtin's. O

A. D. 60:

Vile &
han,

on More,

d Som-

irleton.

*
ts
L
4
4
4
A
%
|
4
4
4
-
.
-4
2
os

W 9

=
"
”_—
M
IJ
4
F,
A
*
Y
S
1
„
=
1
„
7
=
13
*
4 4.
D
3
i,
*
.
=
3
*
$3
x
*
#3
„

© Ofwalds-law-

- p. 625.

| || Vol. 1.
b p. 433.
ai.

1

r py

MES PLACID Ly wo

n

62 2 1

ORC ESTENSHINE

—

- —
”

I

by inheritance. [Not far from hence, below
Fladbury, a {mall ſtream runs into the Avon;
at the head of which is Abberton, where are
one wells that yield a water bitter and purging,
| little inferior in virtue to thoſe of Epſom, it
not equal to them. This, before the diſſolu-
tion, was part of the poſſeſſions of the Abbey
of Perſhore, and afterwards became the inhe-
ritance of an ancient family, the Sheldon. I A

|

little below Charlton, in the primitive times of
our Engliſh Church, there was another Reli-
rladbury- gious houſe, then call d Fleodanby pig, now Flad -
perſlore. #17) ſbefore- mentionꝰd | ; and near this, Per-

ſhore, in Saxon Pe pirconan, nam'd from the
Pear-trees 3 Which, as that excellent Hiſtorian
IWViliam of Malmesbury informs us, Egeluard,
Duke of Dorſet, a man of a generous ſpirit, and
wholly devoted to pious munificence, built and finiſb d
in King Edgars time. But alas, what vaſt loſſes
hath it fiuce ſuſtain'd ! part, the ambition of great
men hath ſeix d, part is forgotten aud loſt ; and a
very conſiderable part of its poſſeſſions, King Edward
aud William beſtew'd on Weſtminſter. | Near this,
is Alesborough, from which place the Earls of
Coventry os the honourable title of Baron;
being firſt beſtow'd by King Charles the firſt
upon Sir Thomas Coventry Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal of England.] From Perſhore, the
Avon runs ſmoothly down by Strenſbam a ſeat
of the Ruſſels, an ancient family of the degree
of Knights; [now extinct by the death of Sir
Francis Ruſſel Baronet, a perſon of great worth
and honour, who built here an Hoſpital for fix
poor widows, with a plentiful endowment ; and

whoſe ſurviving Lady ſince ſettled a Charity-
ſchool for poor Children to be taught to read
and work. | The Avon, [having paſs'd by this
place, at ſome diſtance] diſchargeth its waters
into Severn.

Hereabouts, in the ſouth-part of the Shire,
lies Oſwalds-law-hundred, ſo call'd from Oſwald
ted, Biſhop of Worceſter, who obtain'd it of .
See betore, the immunities whereof are thus regiſter d in
the Survey of England, which William the
Conqueror made; The Church of St. Mary in
Wirceſter hath a Hundred call d Oſwalds-low, in
which lie three hundred Hide-land, where the Biſhop
of this Church hath by wery long preſcription all the
fervices and cuſtomary duties pertaining to the Lord's
Pourveyance, the King's ſervice, his own : ſo
that no Sheriff may hold à Court there, in auy plea
or other cauſe whatſoever. This is atteſted by the
whole County. [But it is more truly obſerv'd
by others, that this Hundred 1s not one con-
tinu d tract of ground, but conſifts of Town-
ſhips ſcatter'd in all ts of the County,
where the Biſhop or Monaſtery of Morceſter
had lands, at rhe time when King Edgar grant-
ed that Charter to Oſwald. This is evident to
any perſon who obſerves the places nam'd in
that Charter, as it is printed in |] Spelmar's
Councils, and. in the * Monaſticon Anglicanum.
It is eſteem'd a full third part of the County,
but at this day doth not enjoy a third part of
that Hundred. 5

There is a place ſome-where in this Coun-
ty, but not certainly known, call'd Augu-
Auſtin's. Oak, FTOIPEFFAC, i. e. Auguſtine's-Oak, at which Au-

guſtine, the Apoſtle of the Engliſh, and the
Britiſh Biſhops, met; and, having for ſome
time diſputed about the keeping of Eaſter,
and preaching God's word to the Engliſh,
and adminiſtering the Sacrament of Baptiſm
after the rites of the Church of Rome; in
concluſion, both ſides went away diſſatisfy'd.
Some conjectures have been offer'd at the pre-
Ciſe place. Sir Henry Spelman thinks, there are

Alesborough,

P. 1 40.

A. D. 603.

footſteps of the name in Auſric, a, village in
this County bordering on Herefordſhire, Which
(as he expounds Henry of Huntingdon) lies
in the confiues of the Wiccians aud the Weſt-Saxons.
The name ot this village, he ſuppoſes, may be
a contraction of Aurtiner pic, i. e. Auſtin's ter-
ritory. But to omit ſome other material obje-
ctions, it is certain that the vulgar maps de-
ceiv'd that learned Knight, which are falſe
printed, and ſhould be Aulfrick ; which name
at its full length in old writings is Alfredes-
wic: but it is his own miſtake, to make Here-
fordſbire a province of the Weſt-Saxons. Others
have conjectur'd, that Auſtins-Oak may have
been in a Pariſh call'd corruptly the Rock; but,
doubtleſs, by our Saxon Anceſtors pæge ac,
and in Latin Aka. Now this pariſh lies in
that part of the Shire, which is moſt remote
from the Welt-Saxon kingdom, bordering on
Shropſhire. All the light we have, 1 *
Bede, who is the only writer within four hun-
dred years of the time, that mentions this
congreſs. He ſays, it was in the confines of the
Wiccians and Weſt-Saxons. He doth not ſay
it was in ¶ccia, much leſs that it was in that
part of the Province which is now call'd Wor-
cefterſhire ; but that it was in the confines of
the Weſt-Saxons, upon whom Morceſterſbire doth
not border any where. So that admitring this
Oak to be in Hwiccia, it muſt needs have ſtood
in that part of Glaceſterſbire which bounds the
Counties of Wiles and Somerſet, Provinces of
the Weſt-Saxon Kingdom.

Now, we will give a particular view of the
welt-ſide of this County. The river Teme, in Teme;
Latin Temedus, waters the north-weſt part of
this Shire, taking its courſe into the Severn
through rich meadows ; and the ſoil on both
ſides produceth excellent Syder, and Hops in
great abundance. On the edge of Shropſhire,
the river po its name to Temebury, a ſmall,
but well-trequented market-town. This town,
with moſt of the Lands between Teme and
Herefordſhire, were held by Robert Fitz-Richard,
Lord of Ricards-Caſtle, whoſe fon Hugh mar-
rying Euſtachia de Say a great heireſs, the iſſue
of that match took the ſirname of Say. Theſe
Lands, by Margery an heir-temale, came to Ro-
bert Mortimer about King Johns time; and
the iflue-male of the family of Mortimers failing,
the patrimony was divided between two daugh-
ters; the elder of which being marry'd to Geoffry
Cornwall, part of it continues in the Ss of
their poſterity, but the reſt hath often chang'd
its Lords.

About ſeven miles below Temebury, the river
paſſeth under Y/oodbery-hill, remarkable for an yy
old entrenchment on the top, vulgarly call'd hill.
Owen Glendowr's Camp; Which notwithſtanding
is probably of greater antiquity, Hence runs
a continu'd ridge of hills from Teme almoſt
to Severn; and it ſeems to have been the boun-
dary of the 8 Province. At the foot of
Whoodbery-hill, ſtands Great-Witley, where is a "0
fair new-built houſe, the chief ſeat of the by. 8
Foleys, who an; it of the Ryſſels, to whom
it came about King Henry the ſeventh's time
by marriage with one of the coheirs of Caſſy,
who had marry'd the heir-general of the Coke-
ſayes, its more ancient Lords. Under the weſt-
fide of Moodbery-hill, lies Shelſley-Beauchamp,
and over-againſt it Shelley Walſh, where dwelt Shellley
Sir Richard Walſh the famous Sheriff of this Walſh.
County at the time of the Pouder- plot, who
purſu'd the traitors into Saffordſbire, and took
them there. On the ſouth-eaſt ſide of the
hill (now, all together, call'd Abberly-hill,)

and

|

Temebury,

oodberys

1

—

„ —— — ”
— ———— — —
— =

F
1 _ 4 LO —_
— 2 — — * *
— == * 3
— 4
1:6 : .
* > — 2 *
* - w; - — _—
— — —
. : —
S 8
as . *
— 2 9
LS —

tt

—
— * * * WY

» = . :
-_ — 2 — —

— ͤU— T — 2 — wy -

{ a . „ LO * « © . 1 -
-_— as. LES. 4 n * 2

631

CORNER

PR

Abberley.

Hamme-
caſtle,

Coderidge.

Leigh.

Earls of Wore This County, after the Norman Conqueſt,

ceſter.
D' Abior.

Robert de
Monte.

and near the top of it, very loftily ſtands Al-
berley-lodge, the ſeat of another branch of the
ancient family of the Walſhes, deſcended from
Sir Henry le Walſh Knight, in the time of
Henry the third ; to the name of which branch,
William Walſh Eſquire, a perſon of excellent
Parts and Abilities, put a period, by dying
unmarry'd, and leaving only ſiſters.

A little lower, ſtood Hamme-caſtle; and now
in the place of it a fair ſeat, which the an-
cient family of the Jeffreys have enjoy'd about
two hundred years. Hence, by Martley, Teme
paſſeth under Coderidge, a manour of the Berk-
leys, formerly of the Actons, and in more an-
cient times belonging to the Mortimers and
Says. On the oppoſite bank, ſtands Leigh, a
manour of the Viſcount of Hereford ; whence
the 1 haſting to Powick, falls into the Se-
Vern

had for its Sheriff Urſo d"Abrot, to whom and
his heirs King William the firſt gave large
poſſeſſions, together with that honour. Roger
his ſon ſucceeded him, who (as Wiliam of |
Malmesbury reports) enjoy d his father's poſſeſſions ;
but was diveſted of them, by falling under the hea-
wy diſpleaſure of King Henry the firſt, becauſe in
a furious paſſion he had commanded one of the
King's Officers to be put to death. But this dig-
nity of Sheriff, by Emeline Siſter to this Roger,
n to the family of the Beauchamps ;
for ſhe was marry'd to Walter de Beauchamp,
whom King Stephen made Conſtable of England
when he diſplac'd Miles Earl of Gloceſter. In
a few years after, King Stephen made Walleran
Earl of Mellent, brother to Robert Boſſu Earl
of Leiceſter, the firſt Earl of Worceſter, and
gave him the City of Worceſter ; which Wal-
leran became a Monk, and dy'd at Preaux in
Normandy in the year 1166. His ſon Robert,
who marry'd the daughter of Reginald Earl of
Cornwall, and ſet up the ſtandard of Rebellion

ainſt Henry the ſecond, and Peter the ſon
of Robert who revolted to the French in 1203,
uſed only the title of Earl of Mellent (as far
as I have obſerv'd,) and not of Worceſter. For
King Henry the ſecond, who ſucceeded Ste-
_ did not eaſily ſuffer any to enjoy thoſe
onours under him, which they had receiv'd
from his enemy. [On the contrary,] as the
Annals of the Monaſtery of Waverley have it,
he depos'd the titular and pretended Earls, among
whom King Stephen had indiſcreetly diſtributed all
the Revenues of the Crown. After this, till the
time of King Richard the ſecond, I know
of none who bore the title of Earl of Wor-
ceſter. He confer'd it upon Thomas Percy;
who being ſlain in the Civil wars by Henry
the fourth, Richard Beauchamp, deſcended from |
the Abtots, receiv'd this honour from Kin
Henry the fifth. After him, who dy'd with-

of Ireland, was created Earl of Worceſter bj
King Henry the fixth. And he, preſently of
ter, ſiding with Edward the fourth, and ac-
commodating himſelf with a blind obedience
to the humour of that Prince, became the
Executioner of his vengeance, till he in like
manner loſt his own — when Henry the ſixth
was reſtor d. But King Edward having re-
cover'd the Crown, reſtor'd Edward his fon
to all again. He dy'd without iſſue, and the
eſtate was divided among the ſiſters of that

—

621

John 2 who was Earl of Worceſter. g,;

Which fi
Lord Dudley, and Edmund Ingoldſthorp; where-
upon Charles Somerſet, natural ſon of Henry Duke
ot Somerſet, was honour'd with that title b

King Henry the eighth, to whom, in a dired
line, have ſucceeded Henry, William, and Ed-

ward, who, among his other virtuous and no-

ers were marry'd to the Lord Roos, R. dg

Who is

ble qualities, f was deſervedly honour'd, as a now lis
at Patron of learning. [He dying, wasand=C.

ucceeded by Henry his fon, who was created
Marquiſs of Morceſter by King Charles the firſt.
This honour was, after him, enjoy'd by Ed-
ward his ſon, and by Henry his grandſon ; who
was created Duke of Beaufort by King Charles
the ſecond, and (Charles his ſon, who was ſtil'd
Marquiſs of Worceſter, a perſon of great accom-
pliſhments, dying in his Father's life-time,)
this title, with the other Honours, did next
deſcend to Henry, eldeſt ſon of Charles afore-
ſaid ; and, by his death, to Henry his eldeſt
ſon, the preſent Duke.

This County hath 152 Pariſhes.

*

More rare Plants growing wild in Worce-
ſterſhire.

Colchicum vulgare ſeu Anglicum purpureum
& album, Ger. Park. Common meadow-Saffron. 1
obſerv'd it growing moſt plentifully in the meadows
of this County.

Cynogloflum folio virenti J. B. Cynogloſ-
ſum minus folio virente Ger. ſemper virens
C. B. Park. The leſſer green-leav'd Hounds-tongue.
It hath been obſerv d in ſome ſhady lanes near Wor-
cefter by Mr. Pitts an Apothecary and Alderman of
that City.

Sorbus pyriformis D. Pitts : which I ſuſpeft to
be no other than the Sorbus ſativa C. B. legitima
Park. That ts, the true or manur d Service or Sorb-
tree. Found by the ſaid Mr. Pitts in a foref# of
this County.

Triticum majus glumi foliaceã ſeu Triticum

Polonicum D. Bobert. An Trit. ſpecioſum grano

oblongo J. B? Polonian Wheat. It is found in

g | the fields in this County ; and, as Dr. Plot tells us,

in Staffordſhire alſo.

out heirs-male, John Tiptoſt, Lord Lieutenant

ST A F-

—— — ——— Cs _ ——  - —— — —
— —

+ Is, C.

q
we
a
—
%
*
5
L
*
.
X
4
a
Fl
1
*

gout >.

4 Gn

4 EO £4 -
—_— ML nec

- - _ —_— W OE” — —- ——— I. 40 wv oo—_ == wa - - "_ - — 4-4
* * q 2
1 _ *
- » = * 9 * — * 3 MO oe N 223 „„ r *
5 i „ 4 —— — <a „„ b-c.coc oc +.» -— > —
£
0 0
— & * a
4 * * 4
h 8
*
-
* p
— 7 CZ ——
* — * 39
0
7

. 4
* a
A 8 1h 4 : PF
* 4 , 7 þ _
* { . * * * F * 9
N * RN
" e 1 4
1 2 4 »
. 7 * 1
| . Sz -% 1 , F
4 a 4% \ |
: b =. * *
* V % * 0 * $ 4
- E % 1
4 10 * 7 * ;\ * -
, i .
, Sat 50-404 34.57 4
* 4 2 we oY i q Anm 2
1 * *
— : 4 , 2 -
' ' 4 1 —_—_—— —"_ Pet &
: : « Fa 1 — py V4 — — 20
: L 2 1 Ss . Ce —
[ s .
+
* .
*-
:
2 : «2 4 * *
* 18 \ . | v4 .
N iN $ 8. 5 -
Deen 5
38
—
c
—

ws, **

„
9

AY _ WV?
©
AL
792277

| *
2 \ a4
womege\” oo

0

on

„% r
u uod; is Dy mn
F-acopn497{l

9

P = *
9 9 7 F 7 : o
„ we 8 a * hy Dp. l .
en * " Y
p ' . = 00 | s
2 1 78 4
f — 3

$0927

*
oe 03g” We; *
A aſſut gif

> Saat

0-277. 729

Do-

272 2 : J
Neu 3

De

yy” Tn}

* 4 eiu M 1199917; *
vg 4921 e

* mf wy 219g -

1e ..

9 Aung? 2441J109 49,

wr 72

Joſe ap NK

Nod NA.

JL NV d. wm

FHUT 41 >
Treis

2
e

00

.

—Wan il

r. 4 Wop

e

7
uo oi duo

o wu

* *
D gorge =
27 - 4 A844

Juen nge 7 7

: 0
100g

2 ou as my.

ug 10d, Mum

— — 30919
277 Jo LAY

—

-
-
— — —
--

-
5 **

Naben

he,

_ pueaegee 1

Toνj 7 WF. = ury, * "IF

7 ye.
ay vugurnzſ'© de —

Too
A x xr) 20
NIONNT

F T- ping apy

prupagres— AY of

pete
(9

2 *
_ «44 „„ 0

La 2
Go fe Tt *
3

OT

—

4

7 yp my 41fep
.D wmyfucy N 4q 195 |
r ll

11H18

i-

i Med
terrancle

Angl

12
-
=
=
(9)

Dudley-(

Tron,
tle,

The

SrAFFOR

IHE third part of that Coun-
try which was inhabited by
ay the Cornavii, and is now call-
ed Staffordſhire, in Saxon &cap-
poor rcype (the people where-
oft, as living in the heart of
1 2 England, are 'call'd in Bede
133 li Mediterranei,) is bounded on the eaſt by
| Argh Mort — and Derbyſbire, on the ſouth by
the County of Worceſter, and on the weſt b
Shropſhire. It lies, from ſouth to north, almo
in the form of a Rhombis, being broad in the
middle, but narrow and contracted toward the
ends. The north part-is mountainous, and
leſs fertile; but the middle, which is water'd
by the Trent, is fruitful, * and woody; and is
render'd pleaſant, by an equal mixture of ara-
ble and meadow grounds: ſo is alſo the ſouth,
which has much - pit-coal and mines of Iron;
but whether to their loſs or advantage, the
natives themſelves are the beſt Judges ; and to
them I refer it. Le: de
As this County hath the advantage of tw
ancient ways running through it, which have
ſecur'd to us conſiderable remains of Roman
Antiquity ; ſo is it remarkable for ſeveral en-
gagements and revolutions relating to-the Saxon
and Daniſh times. For Britiſh Antiquities, it
is not altogether ſo conſiderable ; though there
want not ſome ſmall footſteps of that People
too, whom the diſcoveries of ſuch Weapons
as we know they formerly us'd, have pointed
out to us. | | |
In the ſouth part next to Morceſterſbire, ſtands,
Dudley-Ca- firſt Dudley-Caſtle, built by Dudo or Dodo, a
lle. Saxon, about the year 700, and ſo call'd from
him. In William the firſt's time (as it is in
his Survey) it belong'd to William the ſon of
Auſculphus ; afterwards it came to ſthe Paga-
nels, of which Family Gervaſe Paganel founded
a Priory here : then, by an heireſs, to] thoſe of
Somery ; and at laſt ro Sir Richard Sutton Kt,
by marrying an heireſs of the Someries ; [who
was deſcended from the Suttons of Nottingham-
| ſhire, and | whoſe poſterity, call'd from that time:
Barons of Dudley, grew up to a very honou-
rable family. [Afrerwards, the Dudleys were
poſſeſſed of it, from whom it paſs'd, by the
daughter and heir of Sir Ferdinando Dudley (ſon
and heir of the laſt Lord Dudley) to Humble
Lord Ward of Rirmicham. | 2
After this, the places memorable in this
Chellington, tract, are Chellington, a very fine ſear, and the
manour of that ancient and famous family
The Giffards. the Giffards. It was given to Peter Giffard, in the
reign of Henry the ſecond, by Peter Corbuchin, to
whom alſo Richard Stronghow, who conquer'd
| Ireland, gave Tachmelin and other Lands in
Pattingham, that Country, [ Pattingham, where, in the year
Dr. Zeigh, 1700. was found a large and ponderous Torgues
P. ©4. Of the of fine gold; the weight, three pounds and
Walks in 4 two ounces; the length, about two foot; cu-
rion, riouſly twiſted and writhen, with two Hooks,
at each end, cut eaven but not twiſted. The
metal fine and very bright; and ſo flexible,
that it would wrap round the hat or arm, and
eaſily extend again to its own ſhape, which
reſembled the bow of a Kettle. Pulfrunes-hamp-
ton, ſo call'd from Vulfruma, a very pious woman,

9 N 2

Iron.

DSHIRE.

who built a Monaſtery. in the Town, which

before had the name of Hampton z and hence, for

Vulfrunes-hampton, it is corruptly call'd Voluer- Wolver-

hampton - ; and is chiefly remarkable for the hampton. ,

College there, annex d to. the Dean and Preben-

daries of Windſor. The Town had, by King

Henry the third, a Fair granted to it upon the

eve and day of St.) Peter and St. Paul; and

likewiſe a Market weekly on Wedne/days., Here

is a Free-ſchool, founded by Sir Stephen Jen- g

ning, fometime Lord Mayor of London.) Theo- Theoten-halt,

ten-hall, that is to ſay, a houſe of Pagans ſor,

as others interpret it, the Hall or Palace, 72

Lord, | now called Tetnall, where many of the

Danes were cut off in, the year 911. by Ed-

ward the Elder. }/rottefley, * eminent tor * Hiſt, of

the remains of ſome Britiſh or other Antiquity, Staff p. 394.

whether Fortification or City. My Author Wrotteſley.

inclines to the latter, becauſe of the ſeveral

partitions, like Streets, running divers ways,

which are within the limits of it; as alſo the

large hinges: which have been found here, and

ſome of the Stones ſquar d. The whole con-

tains, in circuit, about three or four miles; and

(a) Stones of a. vaſt bigneſs have been found

hereabouts. Seaſdon is on the edge of Shropſhire, Sea don

near which, at a place call'd Abbots, or Ape- Id. p. 397.

wood-caſtle, is an ancient fortification, ſtanding

on a lofty; round promontory, with a ſteep -

ridge for a mile together; having hollows cut

in the ground, over which it is ſuppoſed that

they anciently ſet, their tents, The hills at

each end, which ſeem to have been the baſti-

ons, make it probable, that the whole has been

one continu'd fortification. Whether it.be Ro-

man or Britiſh, is not fo eaſily determin'd ;

only, we know of no ſignal action hereabours ;

which makes it more probable that it is Britiſh,

becauſe if it had been Roman, their Hiſtories

might perhaps have left us ſome account of it.

And Tacitus makes it pretty plain, that the Anpal. 1. 12.

Britains fortified as well with earth caſt up, as c. 3i.

with ſtones, when he tells us, that the Veni

choſe a place ſeptum agreſti aggere; which does

moſt probably ſigniſie a bank of earth. | |
Toward the ſouth-eaſt from hence, is Kings King's Swin-

Swinford ; in which pariſh, upon Aſþwood-heath, ford.

is a large Entrenchment, meaſuring about

140 paces over, which, notwithſtanding its

diſtance from the Wa), is in the opinion of Dr.

Plot, really Roman, i. e. a tent or caſtrametati-

on; made at that diſtance, on account of their

being drawn off from their ways and ordinary

quarters, to Skirmiſh with the enemy as occa-

fon might require. In this pariſh likewiſe,

at Barrow-hill, are two uniform Barrows or Tu- Barrow: hill,

muli, all rock ; which, notwithſtanding, the ſame

learned perſon thinks to have been eqrth at firſt,

and turn d into ſtone by ſubterraneal heats, At

the utmoſt ſouth-borders of this County, lies

Clent, famous for the death of S. Kenelm, who Clent,

was ſlain at ſeven years of age by the contri-

vance of his ſiſter Quendred. Not far from

whence, is Kinfare ; where is an old fortifica- Kinfare,

tion of an oblong ſquare, about three hundred

yards long, and two hundred over, The name

will anſwer either a Daniſh or Saxon original ;

ſo that it will not be fate to conclude upon

either, barely from that; and the ſignification

3

(a) One of theſe made one hundred loads; another,

after ten loads hew'n off, required thirty fix yoke of

Oxen to draw it, and made a great Ciſtern in a Mault-houſe here at Wrotteſley, which, though left very thick
toth at bottom and ſides, wets thirty ſeyen ſtrikes of Barley at a time, |

LTTY / does

33 3 ,
— -= ————

Cr og DO — At PE IIa mor I —%— ð⁰ ði —
DI Oy bc —
LEE 5 try « — — — —
* wx + 44
f - -_ 2 Pp - oi — 7 — -
= SE” * i —_
— .

. . ” 4

—

785 n

— 85

does not imply, that any one was kill'd there.
For Fape, though it ſignifies a going (an expe-
dition, or journey ;) yet it fgver dapates paſſing
into another world. I ſhould rather believe,
that ſome King in his march had ſtop'd there,
or made that his head-quarters, and ſo deriv'd.

Weddesbor- the name to it. | HWeadesburg, now IWeddsboy-

ps row, Was heretofore fortified by Æthelfleda Go-

Walſall, verneſs of the Mercians; and H/alſal . is none
of the meaneſt Market-towns.

Near this, lies the courſe of the river Tame,
which riſing not far off, runs for ſome miles
on the eaſt-lide of this County toward the
Trent, paſſing, at ſome ſmall diſtance, by Drai-
ton Baſſet, the ſeat of the Baſſets, Who are

deſcended from one Turſtin Lord of this place

in the reign of Henry the firſt, and are grown
up into a numerous and eminent Family. For
this is the ſtock, from which the Baſſets of
IPelleden, Wiccomb, Sapcott, Chedle, and others ot
them, were propagated. But of theſe Ballets of
Draiton, Ralph was the laſt, a wy eminent
Baron, who marry'd the ſiſter of Johm Montfort
Duke of Bretagne, and died without iſſue in
the reign of Richard the ſecond. |
Going to Wuatlingſtreet, we meet with Hynts ;
near which place, is a large Roman Tumulus,

now (like thoſe at Barrow-hil!) turn'd into a

hard rock. There are alſo other Roman Bar-

rows upon this Street ; one at Catts-hill, and

two on Calve-heath, and another near Great
Sarden.\

From Draiton-Baſſet, the Tame paſſing thro*

Falkefley. the bridge at Fulleſiey, over which an ancient

Tamworth. Roman-way lay, runs by Tamworth, in Saxon

Tamaypeond, [by the Saxon Annals Taman-

peonS1ze, and] in Marianus, Tamawordina ; {0

ſituated between the borders of the two Shires,

that one part of it, which formerly belong'd to

the Marmions, is in Warwickſhire ; the other,

which belong'd to the Haſtings is in this Coun-

ty. It takes its name from the river Tame,

„ ( which runs by it) and the Saxon word

+ u. eons, which fignifies a f yard or farm, and

alſo a river-iſland, or any place ſurrounded

with water; as, Keyſers-wert and Bomelsweort, in

Germany, ſignifie Cæſar's-Iſland and Bome-

lus's-Iſland. In the time of the Mercian King-

dom, this was a Royal ſeat, and, as it is in

Tiber Wi-* the Leiger-book of Worceſter, a very eminent

Tame, riv,

Baſſet,

Hy nts,

pleat harneis into the King's Hall, and in a
ſet form challenge any man to duel, that would
dare to oppoſe the King's Title. And this is
certain from the Publick Records, that Alex-

[held this ſame Calile by that kind of ſervice.
Yet the Frevi/ls, at the Coronation of Richard
the ſecond, loſt this honour, which went by
3 to the family of Dimock in Lincoln-
hire. 7

| [A little farther. towards the north, lies

ſcription of which, after a curious examinati-
on, Dr, Plot has given us. Level with the ſur-
face of the ground about it, is a moiſt. blackiſh
ſort of earth without any mixture of gravel

in the ſame form with the Tumulus it (elf ; on
the edge whereof, the ſame Author obſerv'd
aſhes and charcoal in their true colours, and
ſeveral pieces of bones in the middle of it, ſo
friable,. that they would crumble betwixt the
fingers. Which plainly proves it ro. be Ro-
man ; unleſs (which does not appear) the Sax-
ons alſo or Danes may be ſuppoſed to have
burnt their dead bodies,

But to return: At the bridge of Falkeſtey al-

have, occaſion to take notice of, enters this
County; and, croſſing it almoſt in a ſtreight
line, runs weſtward into Shropſhire. I ſurvey'd

tum, which Antoninus makes the next Station
after Manveſſedum : and by good luck I have
at laſt found it; and muſt ingenuouſly own
my ſelf to have been in an error heretofore.
For at that diſtance which Antoninus makes
between Manveſſedum and Etocetum, I happen'd
to meet with the ruins of an old City near this
Way, ſcarce a mile ſouth from Litchfield (emi-
nent for the Biſhop's See there.) 'The name

from the remains of the Walls there (which
encompaſs about two acres of ground ) call'd

the Caſtle ; [and here have been tound two an-
cient Pavements, wherein appeared Roman
Bricks. | Near this ſtood another ancient little
City on the other {ide of the way, which was
demoliſh'd betore William the Conqueror's
time, as the Inhabitants, from an old tradi-

ernie. piace. (Particularly, in the year 781. it appears
to have been the Palace of the Mercian Kirgs,
by a Grant of Offa to the Monks of Worceſter,
which is dated from his Royal Palace there. A
ſquare trench is ſtill remaining by the name of
Aubr. MS.

tion, tell us; and they ſhew the place where
the Temple ſtood, gueſſing it to have been a

King 5-ditch, which is very large; and of late Temple, from the largeneſs of the foundation;
years, a great many bones of men, and hor-|and they produce many Coyns of the Roman

ſes, as allo ſpears heads, have been found here, Emperors, which are the moſt infallible proofs
in digging. ] Afterwards, it wasdeſtroy'd in the of Antiquity. But that which mainly con-
Daniſh wars, but rebuilt by ZEthelfleda the firms this point, is, that the Military-way con-
Mercian, and Editha the daughter of King 'tinues from hence, very fair, and plain, and

Edgar, who declining marriage out of reve-
rence to the Virgin- ſtate, is kalender'd among
the ſhe-ſaints. She founded a lirtle Houſe tor
Nuns in this place ; which was ſome few years
after tranſlated to Polleſworth by the Marmions

of Normandy, when they built a Collegiate
Church here, wherein ſome of their tombs
are ſtill to be ſeen ; having had the Town
given them by William the Conqueror. Here
likewiſe they built a neat Caſtle, which from
them went by the Frevils to the Ferrars, a fa-
mily deſcended from a younger brother of the
Barons Ferrars of Groby. Theſe Marmions (as
The King*ir is in Hiſtory) were hereditary Champions to

Sa the Kings of England. For upon every Co-

County of ronation of a new King of England, the heir

Lincoln, of this family was bound to ride arm'd in com-

almoſt without any breach, till it is croſs'd
and interrupted by the river Penck, and hath a

diſtance which Antoninus has fix'd. Which
Town has not quite loſt the name at this day,

yet one Objection there 1s (it's lying trom the
Great way at leaſt two miles) which, conſidering
the deſign of theſe Stations, is an objection of
ſome weight, notwithſtanding the affinity of
the names. And Stretton (as Dr. Plot has ſettled
it) which has the advantage of ſtanding upon
the Way, may ſeem to lay a juſter claim to it.
The name too favours the conjecture ; for a
little obſervation will teach any one, that where
Street or Cheſter is part of the name, he ſhall

ſeldom

ander Frevill, in the reign of Edward the third, Inq, 211.

Elford, where is a Roman Tumulus, the de- Elforg,

or ſtones, about two yards diameter, and a
foot and half deep in the middle, lying much

ready mention'd, that military Roman-way, Watling.
which I have often had, and hereafter ſhall ſtreet.

it very accurately, in hopes of finding Etoce- Etocetim.

of the place is at this day in Engliſh al, war,

the Caſtle-croft, as it one ſhould ſay, the field of Caltlewi,

o ? 4 l ?
. dg N. n .

ſtone- bridge built over it at Pennocrucium, ſo Pennocruds
call'd from the river, and ſtanding at the ſame um.

being, for Pennocrucium, call'd Penckridge. [But penckridg:

527

— —

4

*
.
0

Plot, Fig. 5+

Jab. 33+

L

4

The River
Iren.

9333

Newcaſtle

ſeldom |
quities. |
village,
Blunt, «
King E,
Way fo!
of Brew
of a Ca
' ver'd at
Lows up
worth ;
form; \
Roman
action.!
rable in
it be th
by whit
yate in

middle-
Trent ; 1
trace tl
its cour

The

land, if

in the 1

Some 15

name 1
Trente,
thirty 1

many k

of whit
pris di

ſtick tc
rians at
it conf!
fiſh. I
with n

under Lime, under I.

the Ea
count «
not far
I ſaw
old Ca
Earl of
after, |

the Hc

- nothing

1 Trentham. to be

«

*

4

"$f Latte

Darlaſton,
Berry-bank. call d

Tricing
was ac
of Bar
tenham
little !
Werbr

ruins
vallum

and fit

Plot, p. 497. traditi

" Stone,

* N OT

Ht"

2 W 9

*

cia, v
Chriſt
a Mar

on tir

which
to he:
the p
phere,
ans, b
Rutin
when
to the

* Hiſteria Pe- which

X troburgenſis, calbd

Sandon.

Trent
Sandor

+ Of late, C. knigh

= Erdeſwick,

wards

STAFFOR

DSHIRE

ſeldom loſe his labour in the ſearch after Anti-
quities. At preſent . Penckridge is only a ſmall
village, famous for a Horſe-tair, which . Hugh
Blunt, or Hans, the Lord of it,-obtain'd of
King Edward the ſecond. A little below the
5 Way ſouthward, near Fetherſtone, in the pariſh
8 of Brewood, was found a braſs-head. of the bolt
; of a Catapulta; another was likewiſe diſco-
; ' ver'd at Buſhbury ; a third in the biggeſt of the
Plot, Fig. 5 Lows upon the Morridge; and a fourth at Hundſ-
Tab. 33. worth ; all of braſs, and much of the ſame
| form; which certainly ſhow, that all-theſe are
Roman Tumuli, and probably places of ſome
action.] From hence there is nothing memo-
rable in this County upon the old Way, unleſs
it be that clear and broad lake near Weſton,
by which it continues in a direct line to Oken-
yate in Shropſhire. And now, we paſs to the
middle-part of the County, water'd by the
Trent; in deſcribing of which, my deſign is to
: trace that river from its firſt riſe ; following
: irs courſe and windings.

'The Trent, which is the third River in Eng-
land, ſprings from two neighbouring fountains
in the upper-part of this County to the welt.

*
7

The River
Trent.
*

638
very eminent perſon, and a great proficient in
the ſtudy of Antiquities ; and no leſs me-

morable upon that account, than for being di-

rectly, in the male-line, deſcended from Hugh Names

de Vernon, Baron of Shipbroc 3 the name being chang'd and
varied, by change of habitation, firſt into Hol- alter'd, as the
grave, and after that into Erdeſwick. 15 x
Here the Trent turns to the Eaſt, with Ca- tion.
nockwood on the South of ir, commonly Cank- Cankwood,
wood, which is every way of great extent; and

at laſt it receives the river Sow, on the left.

This river riſes near Healy-caſtle, built by the

Barons of Aldeleg or Audley, to whom this Barons Aud-
place was given by Harvy de Stafford, as like-ley.

wiſe Aldelegh it ſelt by Theobald de Verdon: and

from theſe, ſprang the family of the Stanleys

Earls of Derby, but the inheritance and name

deſcended to the Touchetts, in whoſe poſterity

and name it ſtill remains [in the perſon of

James Touchett, Lord Audley and Earl of Ca-

ſtlehbaven in Ireland. About the head of this |
river, is Blore-heath, where a Stone, ſet up in Blore-heath,
memory of James Lord Audley, deſerves our

notice. He was ilain in that place, fighting

againſt the Earl of Salisbury in the quarrel of

3 Some ignorant and idle pretenders imagin the
name to be derived from the French word
Trente, and upon that account have been

thirty rivers running into it, and likewiſe ſo

many kinds of Fiſh ſwimming in it; the names

of which, the people thereabouts have com-

pris d in an Engliſh rhyme. Neither do they

ſtick to aſcribe to this river what the Hunga-

rians attribute to their Tibiſcus, namely, that

it conſiſts of two parts water, and the third

fiſh. From the riſe, it firſt runs ſouthward,

Newcaſtle With many windings, not far from New-Caſtle
under Lime. under Lime (built in Henry the third's time by
| the Earl of Lancaſter, and)] ſo call'd on ac-
count of an older Caſtle which formerly ſtood

not far from it at- Cheſterton under Lime, where

I ſaw the ruinous and ſhatter'd walls of an

old Caſtle, which firſt belong'd to Ranulph

Earl of Cheſter by the gift of King John, and

after, by the bounty of Henry the third, to

the Houſe of Lancaſter ; [| whereof, at this day,

; nothing but ſome very obſcure Remains are
© Trentham. to be ſeen.] Then by Trentham, heretofore
: Tricingham, (the ſeat of the Lord Gower, who
was advanced by Queen Anne to the dignity

of Baron, by the title of Baron Gower of Sit-

tenham in the County of York. Here was| a

little Monaſtery of the holy and royal Virgin
Darlaſton, Werburga. Then | to Darlaſton; where in a place
Berry-bark. call d Berry-bank, on the top of a hill, are the
: ruins of a large Caſtle fortify'd with a double
; vallum and entrenchments, about two hundred
and fifty yards diameter. This, according to
tradition, was the ſeat of Ulfere King of Mer-
cia, who murther'd his two ſons for embracing
Chriſtianity. | From hence it haſtens to Stone
a Market-town, which had its riſe in the Sax-
on times, and its name from thoſe Stones
: which our Anceſtors were accuſtom'd yearly
2 to heap together, to preſerve the 3 of
the place, where ſas hath been ſaid] Wol-

| phere, that moſt heathen King of the Merci-
ans, barbarouſly flew his ſons, Vulfald and
Rutin, for turning Chriſtians. At which place,
when after- ages had conſecrated a little Church
N to their memory, a Town preſently grew up,
Alters Te- which the Hiſtory of Peterborough tells us was
'roburgenſis. call'd Stone, from theſe ſtones. From Stone the
Trent flows with a ſmooth and eaſie courſe by
Sandon, formerly the ſeat of the Staffords, a

FAST i OY cows +

1

Plot, p. 40).

4 Stone,

SES on LSE ef te gd
Bo e 1 5

| Sandon,

. r
ü POE ETSY EET TIN

+ Of late, C, kni : 8
Erdeſwi- knightly and very famous family, but f after

*. wards of Sampſon Erdeſwick by inheritance; a

Henry the ſixth ; in which battle no leſs than
two thouſand four hundred were (lain upon
the ſpot. | I muſt not omit to take notice of
the Houſe call'd Gerards Bromley, both upon Gerards-
account of its magniſicence, and alſo becauſe Bromley.
it f was the chief ſeat of Thomas Gerard, whom + 18, C.
King James [the firit,] in the firſt year of his
reign, created Baron Gerard of Gerards Brom-
ley.

The Sow keeps in a parallel line, at equal
| dance trom the Trent, and runs by Chebſey,
| which formerly belong'd to the Lords Haſtings ;
and then, not far from Eccleſhal, the reſidence Eccleſhall,
of the Biſhop of Lichfield. [This Caſtle was
either built, or at leaſt repair'd, by Walter de
Longton Biſhop of Lichfield and Lord Treaſurer
of England, in the reign of Edward the firſt.
Not far from whence, is Motton, Where is a Wotton:
high-pav'd way, which Dr. Plot believes to have
been a Roman Via Vicinalis, or by-way, from
one Town to another, | and Elenball, which
formerly was the ſeat of the Noels, a famous Noel.
family, who founded a Monaſtery at Raunton
hard by: from them, it deſcended hereditarily
to the Harcourts, who are of an ancient and
noble Norman race, and have flouriſh'd for a
long time in great dignity. Of the male-line
of theſe Noels, * was Andrew Noel of Dalby, « x,, C.
an eminent Knight; as alſo the Noels of Welles
borow in the County of Leiceſter, [and thoſe of
Hilcote-Hardby, with Baptiſt Earl of Gainsbur-

pounds in deniers.

fr

and Seſſions to be holden here.] It owes its n. 37.

row, | and others, remaining at this day. From

hence the Sow runs by Stafford, heretofore call'd Stafford, |
Statfard, and before that, Betheney, where Ber- |
telin liv d an Hermit, with the reputation of

great ſanctity. Edward the elder in the year

914- built a Tower upon the North-ſide of

the river here. When William the firſt took

his Survey of England, as it is ſaid in Domeſ-

day-book, the King had only eighteen Burgeſſes here,

belonging to him, and twenty manſions of the Ho-

nour of the Earl ; it paid for all cuſtoms, nine

In another place ; The King

commanded a Caſtle to be made there, which was

lately demoliſb d. But at that time (as at this

day) Stafford was the chief Town of the Coun-

in tavour of which, a Law paſſed in the

year of Queen Elizabeth, for the Aſſizes Stat. 1 ix,

greatelt glory to Stafford, 2 Caſtle adjoyning
to it, built by the Barons of Stafford for a
ſeat. [Ir is certain, that Erhelfezda, the Mer-

clan

”
PE . _
b * — EN Al, a l
. — n .
a * e Ret OT
o 3 ; — -
F . . o - - =
a ; — - a =
T — ki —— 0 *
— — II — -
_ 2 - —— — um
— . — ' — N
= . * 0 % *
—
- *
3 * - — — —
P — ö Ld
— * 2 =
G
-
* *

—_—
mm + — ei at

= — — R——_—_—

1
9

— —„»„ —

— —ũ—3ͥ2— — ama
2 v—ñ—ͤ—— —— ——

60 — — é

ap N
4 . 1
— * -
—

— —ä——ä——. ͤ—— ũ —— —
* »
- _

—
—

—

CORNAVI11.

—

en —— att.
* wi |

040

—
cian Queen, built a Caſtle at Stafford, whereof
there is nothing remaining ; this upon the hill,
at a mile's diſtance from the Town, being built
by Ranulph or Ralph the firſt Earl of Stafford,

| View of 2 long time after. Tho' Mr. || Erdeſwick in-

Staffordſhire, deed concludes, that he only re-edify'd the Ca-
ſtle, and did not new build it; becauſe he had
{een a certain Deed dated from the Caſtle near
Stafford long betore the days of Earl Ralph. But
Dr. Plot is of opinion, that the old Caſtle
there mention'd, might rather ſtand within the
entrenchment at Billington, which perhaps (lays
he ) may be only the remains of this Caſtle;
the lands, wherein theſe entrenchments are,
being not far diſtant, and ſtill remaining part
of the demeſne land of the Barony of Srafford.\
Below this, the Sow is joyn'd by a little river
Penke, riv.call'd Penke, that gives name to Pennocrucium an
ancient Town, of which we have already made
mention. Near the confluence of the Sow and

Ticks- hall. the Trent, ſtands Ticks-hat, where the family

of the Aſtons dwell, which for Antiquity and

Alliances, is one of the beſt families in theſe

Ingeſtre, parts. {Not far from whence, ſtands Ingeſtre,
an ancient ſeat of the family of the Chetwinds 3

the laſt owner of which (who dy'd without

iſſue A. D. 1693.) was Walter Chetwind Eſq;,

a Gentleman, eminent, as for his ancient fa-

mily and great hoſpitality, ſo for his admira-

Dr. Plot. ble skill in Antiquities ; the Hiſtory of Sraf-
fordſhire receiving great encouragement from
him. He was likewiſe a perſon of a charita-
ble and publick ſpirit, as appear'd by new

building the Pariſh-Church ot Tageſtre after a

very beautitul manner, and alſo adding to

the Vicarage ſuch tythes as remain'd in his
hands. |

Vith theſe waters the Trent glides gently,
through the middle of the County, tothe Eaſt ;
having Charzley-caſtle at two miles diſtance on
the lett of it, which from Ranulph Earl of Cheſter
who built it, came to the Ferrars, by Agnes his
ſiſter, who was married to William de Fer-
rars Earl of Derby ; trom whom, deſcended
ng Ferrar5the Lords Ferrars of Chartley. Anne, daughter

Chartkez. of the laſt of them, brought this Honour, as

a portion, to Halter D'eureux her husband,

from whom is deſcended Robert D'eureux Earl

of Eſlex, and Lord Ferrars of Chartley. But

Rebert D'eurenx (fon of the ſaid Robert,) who

was the laſt Earl of Eflex and Lord Ferrars of

that name, dying without iſſue; King Charles
the ſecond created Sir Robert Shirley, Lord Fer-
rars of Chartley ; who was alſo afterwards ad-
vanced by Queen Anne to the more honoura-
ble Titles of Viſcount Tamworth and Earl of

Ferrars.

On the right fide of the ſame river, almoſt
at the ſame diſtance, ſtands Beaudeſert, moſt
delicately ſeated among the Woods. It was
tormerly the Houſe of the Biſhops of Lichfield,
but afterwards of the Barons Paget. For Wil-
liam Paget (who for his approv'd Wiſdom and
Knowledge in matters both at home and abroad,
was in great favour with King Henry the
eighth and King Edward the ſixth) having got
a large eſtate, was created Baron Paget of Beau-
deſert by Edward the ſixth. His grandſon
William, the fourth Baron, f was by his
virtue, and great progreſs in learning, an or-
nament to his family, and in that reſpect 1s
juſtly diſtinguiſh'd by an honourable mention in
this Work; {and another of the ſame name, the
late Lord Paget, having been Ambaſlador Extra-
ordinary to the Grand Seignior, gave great proofs
of his Wiſdom and Abilities in the progreſs of

Chartley-
Caſtle.

Beaude ſert.

Barons Paget.

* Who now
flouriſhes, C.
+ ls, C.

he was induced to, b
of Ofta King of the M
to Jeambert or Lambert Archbiſhop of Can- gy, ve
terbury, who offer d his aſſiſtance to Charles year 779.
the Great, if he would invade England. But Hitt. Rage.
this Archiepiſcopal Dignity expir'd with Of-
fa and Eadulph. Among the Biſhops, the moſt
eminent is * Chad, who was canoniz'd for his“ 5 Ceatis
ſanctity, and, as Bede expreſſes it, when the
Prelacy was not yet tainted with exceſs and
luxury, made himſelf a houſe to live in not far
diſtant from the Church, wherein with a few others,
that 15, with ſeven or eight of his brethren, he
was wont privately to read and pray as often as
he had leiſure from preaching the word of God.
In that age, _ was a ſmall Village, and
in populouſneſs far

bout it is woody ; and a little river runs near it.
The Church was but of ſmall compaſs, according to
the mean and humble model of thoſe ancient times.
When in a Synod 1075. it was decreed, that the
Sees of Biſhops ſhould not be in obſcure Vil-
lages, Peter Biſhop of Lichfeld transfer d his
See to Cheſter.
ceſſor, remov'd it to Coventry. A little after,

the year 1698. In the Park of Beaudeſert, re-
mains a large fortification, called the Caſtle-bil,
encompaſled with a double agger and trench,
which are in a manner circular, except on the
ſouth-eaſt- ſide. It is probable, this was caſt
up by Canutus, when he made that diſmal
waſte of thoſe parts, which our Hiſtorians
ſpeak of.] - :
From hence the Trent ſees Lichfield, ſcarce
four miles diſtant from the right ſide of it.
Bede calls it Licidfeld, which Rows of Warwick
renders a Field of Curcaſſes, and tells us, that
many Chriſtians ſuffer d martyrdom there, un-
der Diocleſian. The Story is, that a thou-
ſand Chriſtians (who had been inſtructed by
St. Amphibalus in a place call'd Chriſtian-field)
were martyr'd, and their bodies left unburied,
to be devour'd by birds and beaſts ; from whence
the City bears for their Device, an Eſcocheon
of Landskip with many Martyrs in it, in ſe-
veral manners maſlacred.] The City ſtands
low, and 1s pretty large, and neat, and is di-
vided into two parts by a kind of lough or
clear water which is but ſhallow : however,
they have a communication by two cauſeys made
over it, which have their “ reſpective ſluices. «

the greater, being divided into ſeveral Streets;
and it has in it a School, and a pretty large
Hoſpital dedicated to St. John, tor relief of
the Poor. The further is the leſs, yet adorned
with a very beautiful Church ; which, with
the fine Walls that furround it like a Caſtle,
and the fair Houſes of the - Prebendaries, and
the Biſhop's Palace, all about it, makes a
lovely ſhow, with three lofty Pyramids of
Stone riſing from it. This was a Biſhop's See
many ages ſince. For in the year 606. Oſuy
King of Northumberland, having conquer'd the
Pagan Mercians, built a Church here for the
propagation of the Chriſtian Religion, and made
Duina the firſt Biſhop ; whoſe Succeilors were
ſo much in favour with their Princes, that they
had not only the preheminence among all the
Mercian Biſhops, and were enrich'd with very
large poſſeſſions (Cankwood or Canoc a very great
Wood, and other large Eſtates, being given
them : ) but the See alſo has had an Arch-Bi-
ſhop, namely Eadulph, to whom Pope Adrian

ue the Pall, and made all the Biſhops of the

ercians and Eaſt-Angles ſubject to him. This
the go/den Arguments
ercians, out of ſpight

ort of a_ City. The Country a-

But Robert of Limſey his ſuc-

that famous Peace concluded at Carlowitz, in

| Roger Clinton brought it back again to Lich feld,

and

The South part, or the hithermoſt, is by much 7;

*
—

3
2
5

*
2

Liebbeld.

Saq Emile

—
641
a” 7
in ho

and

ſtroy

+ 80 ſaid, day.
ann. 1607+ Fath

streethe).
whe

+ Plot's Staf- the
ſrlſbire, p- fron
402. {am
ON

mile

theſ

of t

x {ide
Eddingal. ſtan
tow

tro
Alabaſter. it 1
ſte!
the
0
Al
fo!
82
She is alſo me
call'd Mow- Al

enna, A

Burton upon
Trent,

+Tir-Conel z
but accordin
to Archbiſhop
Ulter, Clan.
conal, in
Dewn, Ant.
Brit, pP · 369.

*
.

*
4 n
-
4
he.
2 i
1

— — ITS 2 1 —_—_—_—_ MR » A v *

—

—

4
*
—
5
2.
}

STAFrORDSAOIRE

*
— *

+ 0 (aid,
ang. 1607.

streethe).
+ Plot's Staf-

ſolſhire, P-

402.

Eddingal.

Alabaſter,

Burton upon
Trent,

She is alſo
call'd Mow-
enna,

and began a very beautiful Church Amr. 1148.
in honour to the Virgin Mary and St. Ceada,'
and repair'd the Caſtle, which is quite de-
ſtroy'd, without any remains to be ſeen at this
day. The Town, within the memory of * our
Fathers, was firſt Incorporated under the name
of Bailiffs and Burgeſſes, by King Edward the
ſixth ; land hath given the title of Earl to
Bernard Stewart, youngeſt fon of Eſme Duke of
Lennox and Earl of March, created in the 21ſt
year of K. Charles the firſt, Being ſlain at the
battle of Rowton-heath in Cheſhire, he was ſuc-
ceeded by Charles Stewart his nephew, who dy'd
Ambaflador in Denmark in 1672. About two
years after, the title was conter'd upon Ed-
ward Henry Lee, created, June 5. 1674, Baron
of Spellecbury, Viſcount Quarendon, and Earl of
Lichfield. It is fitty two degrees and forty two
minutes in Latitude; and in Longitude twen-
ty one degrees, twenty minutes.

Not far from hence is Streethey, the name
whereof ſeems to be taken from its ſituat ion upon
the old way, call'd Nenildiſtreet; aud its diſtance
from Streeton (another Town lying upon the
{ame road, and claiming the — Antiquity,
on account of its — being about twelve
miles, makes it reaſonable to ſuppoſe that
theſe two might be ſtations for the reception
of the Armies in their march. Upon the eaſt
{ide of the road, between Streethey and Burton,
ſtands Eddingal, where is a rais'd way, pointing
towards Lullington in Derbyſhire, which, Dr.
Plot is of Opinion, might probably be one of
the Roman Vie vicinales, or by-roads ; for {ſuch
they had, beſides their great high-ways, tor the
convenience of going between Town and
Town. |

The Lake at Lichfield, is at firſt pen'd up in-
to a narrow compaſs, and then grows wider
again ; but uniting at laſt into one chanel, ir
preſently falls into the Trent, which continues
its courſe Eaſtward till it meets the river Tame
from the South; in conjunction with which,
it runs through places abounding with Alaba-
ſter to the North, that it may ſooner receive
the river Dove; and almoſt encompaſſes Bur-
ton, formerly a Town, remarkable for the
Alabaſter-works, for a Caſtle of the Ferrars,
for an ancient Monaſtery founded by Ultric
Spot Earl of the Mercians, and for the Retire-
ment of Modwena, an Iriſh woman. Of the
Abbey, the Book of Abingdon ſpeaks thus ;
A certain ſervant of King Zthelred, cal'd Ultric
Spot, built the Abbey of Burton, and endow'd it
with all his paternal eſtate, to the value of ſeven
hundred pounds; and, that this gift might ſtand good,
he gave King Ethelred three hundred mancs of

gold for his Confirmation, and to every Biſhop froe

+FTir-Conel ;
but accordin
to Archbiſho
Ukter, Clan.
conal, in
Down, Ant.
Brit, p · 369.

mancs ; befides the Town of Dumbleton, over and
above, to Alfrick Archbiſhop of Canterbury. So that
we may fee, that Gold was plentiful and pre-
dominant in zhoſe ages, and that it ſway'd even
in ſpiritual matters. In this Monaſtery, Mod-
wena, eminent for her ſanctity in theſe parts,
lies buried, and on the Tomb were inſcribed
theſe Verſes :

Ortum Modwenuz dat Hibernia, Scotia
finem

Anglia dat tumulum, dat Deus aſtra
oli,
Prima dedit vitam, ſed mortem terra ſe-
cunda,

Et terram terræ tertia terra dedit :
Aufert Lanſortiu quam f terra Conallea pro-
fert ,

Felix Burtonium virginis ofſa tenet.

By Ireland life, by Scotland death was
given,

A Tomb by Eugland, endleſs joys by Hea-
ven.

One boaſts her birth, one mourns her hope-
leſs fate,

And one does Earth to Earth again com-
mir.

Lanfortin raviſh'd what Tircomel gave,

And pious Burton keeps her ſacred grave.

Near Burton, between the rivers Dove, Trent,
and Blith (which laſt waters and gives name
to Blithfield, the beautiful feat of an ancient Blithfield,
and famous family, the Bagots) ſtands Needwood, Need wood ·
a large Foreſt, with many Parks in it, where; foreſt.
in the Gentry hereabouts frequently exerciſe
themſelves with great application, in the a-
greeable toil of hunting. | As to Blithfield, it
came into the family of the Bagors, by the
marriage of the daughter and heir of Blithfield,
in the reign of Edward the ſecond. Before
which time, they were ſeated at the neigh-
bouring Village of Bagotts- Bromley. From this
tamily were alſo deſcended the ancient Barons
of Stafford, afterwards Dukes of Buckingham.
So much for the inner parts.

The North-part of the County riſes gently
into ſmall hills ; which begin here, and, like
the Apennine in Italy, run through the middle
of England in one continu'd ridge, riſing higher
and higher, as far as Scotland ; under ſeveral
names. For here they are call'd Moorelaud, after Mooreland,
that Peake, then Blackſton-edge, anon Craven, next
Stanmore, and laſt ot all, when they branch out
into horns, Cheviot. This Mooreland (ſo call'd
becauſe it riſes into high hills and mountains,
and is untruittul ; which ſort of places we call
in our language Moors,) is a tract fo very rug-
ged, foul, and cold, that the ſnows continue
long undifloly'd ; ſo that, concerning a Coun=
try- Village here, call'd Wotton, ſeated at the
bottom of Wever-hill, the Neighbours have
this Rhyme among them, intimating that, God
never Was in that place:

Wotton under Wever,
Where God came never.

It is obſerv'd by the Inhabitants, that the
Weſt-wind always cauſes rain; but that the
Eaſt and South-winds, which are wont to
bring rain in other places, make fair weather
here, unleſs the wind ſhift about from Weſt to
South ; and this they aſcribe to their nearneſs
to the Iriſh-ſea. From thoſe Mountains ſpring
many rivers, in this Shire ; the chief are, the
Dove, the Hanſe, Churnet, Tein, and Blith ; and
Trent, which receives them all, and carries them
into the Sea, The Dove (the banks whereof Dove.
are a hard Limeſtone which they burn to ma-
nure their fields, ) runs ſwiftly, for a great
way, along the Eaſt-part of this County; ſeve-
ring it from Derbyſhire, by its white clayiſh
chanel, without any ſhelves of mud: Which
running thro” a Lime-ſtone ſoil, ſucks- in ſuch
richneſs from thence, that in the very middle of
winter the Meadows on both ſides look treſh
and green ; and if it overflows and lays the
Meadows afloat in April, like another Nile it

makes them ſo fruitful, that the neighbouring

Inhabitants thereabouts joyfully apply to it the
following Rhyme,

In April Dove's flood

Is worth a King's good.
M m m m This

* . *

8

© x, fo — — — —
p< 2 >

A „ —
—

* — C. *
3 8 1

643

CORNAVDITT..

Hans.

Churnet.
De-La-Cres.
Leike.
Aulton.

Tein.

Cheddle.

Chec kley.

This river will ſwell ſo much in twelve hours
time, that, to the great terror of the Inhabi-
tants thereabouts, it will waſh off the Sheep
and Cattel, and carry them down with it; yet
it falls again within the ſame time, and re-
turns to its old chanel : whereas the Trent, be-
ing ouce over the banks, keeps the Fields a-
float four or five days together. But now,
concerning thoſe rivers which run into it:
The firſt is, Hans, which falling under-ground,
breaks out again three miles off, The next
that joyns it, is the Churnet, which runs by De-
la- Cre Abbey, built by Ranulph the third of
that name, Earl of Cheſter : by Leike, noted
for its Market; and then by Aulton, formerly
the Caſtle of the Barons de Verdon, from whom,
by the Furnivals, it deſcended to the Talbots
Earls of Shrewsbury. A little lower, the Tein,
a ſmall river, runs into the Dove ; which ri-
ſing not far from Cheddle, the ancient ſeat of
the Baſlets deſcended from the Baſſets of Drai-
ton, runs on in a courſe ſo winding, that in a
mile's riding I croſs'd it four times. Near
this, in Checkley Church-yard, ſtand three Stones
raiſed Spire-wiſe, two of which have little
images upon them; and that in the middle is
the higheſt. The Inhabitants talk of an En-
gagement between two Armies there ; one
with weapons, the other without ; and that
three Biſhops were ſlain in that battle, in me-
mory of whom theſe Stones were erected. What
hiſtorical truth may be couch'd under this
Story, I am not yet able to ſay. [Not far

Croxden-Ab-from Checkley, by a ſmall brook call'd Peak, are

bey.

Utcefter,

Tutbury-
caſtle,

In lib. delau-
dibus Divinæ

Sa pien tiæ.

the ſtately ruins of Croxden- Abbey, formerly a
Monaſtery of Ciſtercian Monks, founded by
Theobald de Verdon, a Norman Baron, about the
time of Henry the ſecond. |

Now the Dove runs under a firm Stone-
bridge to Utceſter, in Saxon Urrok-cerren,
ſeated on a hill of eaſie aſcent, and rather rich
by means of its fine meadows and cattel, than
neat and handſom in reſpect of buildings. Be-
fore I ſaw it, I took it for Erocetum, being
induc'd to that Opinion by the affinity of the
two names. But now time has undeceiv'd me.
Afterwards, when the Dove draws toward the
Trent, it ſees Tutbury-caſtle (called alſo Stutes-
bury, ) formerly very large, and commanding
the lower Country by its high ſituation on an
Alabaſter-hill. It was built ( with the little
Monaſtery) by Henry de Ferrars a noble Nor-
man, to whom William the firſt gave large
poſleſſions in this County, which were all for-
teited by Robert de Ferrariis Earl of Derby, up-
on his ſecond revolt from Henry the third.
For though after the many Diſturbances which
he had raiſed in the Barons war, he was re-
ceived again into favour by the King, and
then bound himſelf by a ſtri& oath to be faith-
ful to him for the future; yet the reſtleſs
temper of this man (that he might make For-
tune comply by force, ſince ſhe would not by
courtſhip) ſoon after hurry'd him a-new into
arms, againſt his Soveraign ; and being at laſt
taken, that I may uſe the words of the Re-
cord, he was, purſuant to the tenor of his
Obligation, wholly diveſted of his Honour and
Eſtate. There is a lake ſomewhere in this
Shire, if Necham deceive us not, into which
no wild beaſt will go upon any account : but
ſince the place is uncertain, and indeed the
thing more; I will only ſubjoin theſe Ver-
ſes of Necham about it, intitled by him

De Lacu in Staffordia.

Rugitu Lacs eſt eventus præco futuri,
Crjus aquis fera ſe credere nulla ſolet.

—

%

Inſtet odora canum virtus, mors inſtet aterba, 3
Non tamen intrabit exagitata lacum.
Of a Lake in Staffordſhire.

A Lake that with prophetick noiſe does

roar,

Where beaſts can ne'er be forc'd to venture
o'er.

By hounds, or men, or fleeter death

purſ u'd,
They'll not plunge in, but ſhun the hated
flood.

Alſo, concerning another Lake in this Ger, Ti,

County, Gervaſius Tilburienſis, in his Otia rienſi.
Imperialia to Otho the fourth, writes thus;
In the Biſhoprick of Coventry, and in the County of
Stafford, at the foot of the mountain which the In-
habitants call Mahull, there is a water very broad
like a Lake, in the out-grounds of a Village which
they call Magdalea. There is great ſtore of wood
all along upon the lake, the water of which is very
clear, and ſo effettual a refreſhment, that when the
hunters have given chace to a Stag or other wild
beaſt, and their horſes are ſpent and weary, if they
do but drink of this water in the moſt ſcorching
heat of the Sun, and water their horſes with it,
they recover their ſtrength to run again, to that de-
gree, that one would think they had not run at
all.

As for the title of Stafford, it “ continued“ Hath cx.
in the poſterity of Robert cf Stafford (whom tinud, C.
William the — enrich'd with great poſ-
ſeſſions,) till f our times. A family exceeding So fail,
eminent as well as ancient; and which has ex-Ann. 1607,
perienc'd ſeveral turns of fortune. Firſt they gar 2d f.
were Barons of Stafford, then Earls, after that rons o Sui.
Dukes of Buckingham and Earls of Stafford. ford.
And + at laſt it was their fortune to be reduc d t No C.
to their old title of Baron only; and thoſe
great eſtates which they had gain'd by their
honourable marriages, are all fled and ſcat-
ter d. In lieu whereof, they || enjoy'd a happy || Enjoy, C.
ſecurity, which ſeldom cohabits with greatneſs
and great Men. [After Edward Stafford laſt
Duke of Buckingham of that name, there were
three of the family, who enjoy'd the title of
Lords Stafford, Henry, Edward, and another
Henry : the daughter of which laſt being mar-
ry'd to William Howard, ſon of Thomas Earl of
Arundel and Surrey, King Charles the firſt
created them jointly Baron and Baroneſs of
Stafford, and did afterwards create her husband
Viſcount Stafford, in the year 1640. Which
William was beheaded on Touerbill, in the
year 1680, for the part which he had in the
Popiſh Plot ; but Henry his eldeſt ſon, was
created Earl of Stafford, in the fourth year of
King James the ſecond.

There are 130 Pariſhes in this County.

More rare Plants growing wild in Staftord-
ſhire,

The mountainous part of this Country, called the
Moorelands, produceth the ſame plants with the
Peak-Country of Derbyſhire. The more depreſſed and
level parts, with Warwickſhire.

At a Village called Worton in this County, about
two miles diſtaut from Newport in Shropſhire grow
n 12 the

bies Ger. Park. fæmina, five RA SN

i

J. B. The female or Tew-leav'd Firr-tree : which,
whether they were native of this place, or anci-
ciently

— — — —

- 1
n

5 * /7, p 8 ' 9 "
\ Fo wo FOR We” i
: , Mow wo thous
ae 1. We
£4 0 Nu: 2 |
1 . A110 e,
 L45h 1 2 2

kit chi 2 7

Brinknalt Sg}

nu. 4 "4

ib took , Srl . il 4 8
an Ei [xt 4 It ral „ue,
l 3 a —＋ | 2 . RC "IF MW 7
-' hi hn ' tos 2 VS
r A. I 3 Wins £6 E-
Px H I I, II Park hop Aub.
|

Fargoreen

N 22 — |
- * =
nts: \ HUND Lee

N o HM

2 af”.

- * 0

E nn NV.

lun

. 4 8
ae
Foe \ © fp ab,
0 ae 3g garner
IC

9

*

Welſh Poole

| —

95
; 4

A H*®wu N * ou Mag
3 2288

WOE ee — 4

Oo

Sf, Anton - /
wi ' 0

4
vide.
on. | 2 Ps

1
: od „
* 1

of 0 unts 0 — F |
N 2 R | 2 ,
Is Lu . 42 * e | . Tai — *
Proton - c NN took . , Oo w 4 at y Seto
N . * nt. a0 ton,

24 : | ,
Ws Alone 2 —
| * | nb "<<? S 4

; Toa mT
EX 6, E
-D 0 N CO” MS,
Puckett
Hon 7

D. Sudbury

- Hh thorn

RN;

a CR *
Lu '# be _..

RADNOR SHIRT

ore Gy/ble
PART

HEREFORD SHIREFT

oO 45 4 © 35 : 2

2

Dara

ByRob ert Morden.

%

OV
W

— >

+ rien

ol

N o | -

5 8 Fr
222
ns rA gf ak

Tory orion ©

rr ow
8 aa 4 LED „. . Ar N Hale of " Mea/ured Miles
* a
— 7 10 , 9 7 A 75 W- 77 E 7 4 : Whore Sac
Ts 1 WT Earncot 77 * |

ON ; | nee N 2
A. Wot 4 2 n,

e
4.81 Od alter fol ES, e

-D 8 1 Q
Fd 2 TTY ? 4. oy + =

1 * — 7 patty... f 1 20 + J
, debe, — ee fd
od me aloe” |
Vil, ew 1 llc, /s \© wits |
Torn — ö /
per 1 2 7 1 DI 4
LE, wer 1/rr nw oo _ | | |
2 2 11
. A-. * Y
25
Lbel Swale
Sold bi 1 Dwn/ham and
An Churchill
20
ORCESTER SHIRE
2 20 45 40 5 222 5 _ 4 0
2
% *

2
8.

1 1
* 7

PS 4 * i

Delle 2 a+ a”

— — — — — —

'
»
*
3
*
-
*
%. —
»
4, +, * <
* „3
T is
IT)
S$:- o
o
. , *
S
* * 980
XI LY
— 2
4," * >
*
US wa * * =
, 7
*
.
- by
*
* ?

> — $ 1
„ eee e

e

b err 3 oy 0.

lot,
*

i OI

*

E

* Jn arcendis. it )
ing

Fri

* The Mar- we

ches. ing
In

Lords Mar- tit
chers. ex

+ See the of
Catalogue, in
Radnor ſbi,

| What this bc
is, ſee Che» In
ſhire, W

Marquiſſes of ly
the Marches. th

SHROPS

77 72 3333 =

— 1 * . A
22S £2 the a Seats Nt i CER RNT .

ue, in

*
. a 1 = "ET Pd *
- AA *

2 24 n 2 4
— i Sov f.- N

ciently planted here, is ſome queſtion. That they
were natives Dr. Plot gathers not only from their
diſorderly natural fituation, and exceſſive height, to
which planted trees ſeldom arrive, but chiefly from
the ſtools or ſtumps of many trees which he ſuſpetts
to have been Firrs found near them, in their natural
poſition in the bottoms of Moſſes and Pools (particu-
larly of Shebben-pool) ſome of the bodies whereof
are daily dug up at Laynton, and in the old Pewet-
pool in the * pariſh where theſe now grow.
Sorbus Pyriformis D. Pitt. The Pear-like Ser-
vice. I have already declared my opinion, that this
is no other than the common Service-tree, Dr. Plot

tells us that it grows in the Moorelands at many

places.

Sambucus fructu albo Ger. Park. fructu in
umbella viridi C. B. acinis albis J. B. White-
berried Elder. In the hedges near the village of
Combridge plentifullyj. Dr. Plot, hiſt. nat. Staff.

Tripolium minus vulgare. The leſſer Sea-

ſtar-wort. Said to grow in the grounds of Mr. Chet-

wynd of Ingſtree, within two miles of Stafford, in
a place call d the Marſh, near the place where the
brine of it ſelf breaks out above ground, frets away

the graſs, and makes a of Salt-water. Dr.
Plot, hiſt. nat. Staff. pla

SHROP

= HE fourth diviſion of that
Country which ( as is gene-
IN rally believ'd) the Cornavii in-
W habited, was known in the
fox EAT Saxons time by the name of
<0 WEE [ 5cnobberbymgreyne, l5cipyp-
reype, | Scnobbrape | an
Shpobbe-xcype, which [later writers call Sa-
lopſchire, Scropſcire, and Schropſhire, | we Shropſbire,

and the Latins Comitatus Salopienſis. It much

exceeds the reſt in compaſs, and is nos infe-
rior to any in fruitfulneſs, or pleaſure. Ir is
bounded on the Eaſt by Staffordſhire, on the
Weſt by Montgomeryſhire and Denbyſhire, on the
South 4 IWorceſterſhire, Herefordſhire, and Rad-
norſbire, and on the North by Cheſhire. It is
environ d on every fide with towns and caſtles,
inſomuch that a late Author ſays, it may ſeem
on the weſt to be divided from Wales with a
wal! of continu'd Caſtles ; and Speed tells us,
that beſide ſeveral towns ſtrongly walled, thirty-
two Caſtles have been built in it;] being a
frontier County, or (as Siculus Flaccus words

* Jnarcendis, it) Ager arcifinins ; and, of great uſe * in check-

ing the excurſions of their Welſh neighbours.
From whence, the borders of it 8 Wales
were call'd by a Saxon Name, the Marches, be-
ing the limits between the Engliſh and Welſh.
In this Country, certain Noblemen were in-
titled Barones Marchiæ, F Lords Marchers, who
exercis'd within their reſpective liberties a ſort

SHIRE.

I would not be underſtood (therefore I give
this caution) that all the County belong'd to
the Cornavii, but ſo much only as lies on this
ſide the Severn, That on the other fide, be-

| long'd to the Ordovices, a People of great ex-
tent; ſome part of whoſe Country (as alſo
di ſome ſmall parcels on this fide Severn, which

belong'd to the Lords Marchers) were laid to

this Shire, not long ſince, by Act of Parlia- * So gia,
ment. The Diviſion of the Shire into theſe ann. 1607.
two parts is the more proper and convenient, 27 H. 8.

becauſe the river Severn runs through it from

Weſt to South-eaſt. The part beyond the Se-

vern, 1s bounded on the South by the river

Temd, in Welſh Tifidiauc, which, at ſome di-

ſtance, is joyn'd by the river Colun, call'd in

Welſh Colurwy, but for ſhortneſs Clune. This The river
riſes higher up in the Country, not far from Cane.

a well-trequented little town, call'd Biſhops- Biſhops-caſtle:
caſtle, becauſe it belong'd to the Biſhops of
Hereford, whoſe Dioceſe takes in a great part
of this Shire. [At ſome diſtance from hence,
is Chirbury, near the Severn ; where one of the
ancient Caſtles before-mention'd, ſeems to have
been. For /Ethelfled, Lady of the Mercians,
is N ſaid to have built one at Cypicbypig; I Chr. Sax;
Now, as to the affinity between the old and
new names, it we add the Norman [h] after
C, the change is very eaſy and natural ; and
as for the condition of the place, nothing can
anſwer more exactly; for where ſhould ſhe

of || Palatine juriſdiction, and held Courts of more probably build it, than here, when her
Juſtice to determine Controverſies among neigh-| mai

main defign was to ſecure her kingdom againſt

bours, and preſcrib'd for ſeveral privileges and] the Incurſions of the Welſh ? This place gives

immunities ; one of which was, that the King's
Writs ſhould not run here in ſome aufs
But, whatever controverſies aroſe concerning
the right of the ſeveral Baronies, or their ex-
tent, were only determinable in the King's
Courts of Juſtice. We find theſe ſtil'd former-

Marquiſſes of ly Marchiones de Marchia Wallis, Marquiſſes of
the Marches. the Marches of Wales, as appears by the red

book in the Exchequer ; where we read, that
at the Coronation of Queen Eleanor, Conſort
to Henry the third, theſe Marquiſſes, or Lords
Marchers of Wales, viz. John Fitz- Alane, Ralph
de Mortimer, John de Monmouth, and Walter de
Clifford, in behalf of the Marches, did claim in
their right, to provide filver ſpears, and bring them

1 The Canopy, 10 ſupport the ſquare Canopy of purple filk at the

Coronation of the Kings and Queens of England :
but peaceful times and Royal Authority did by
degrees aboliſh the private rights of theſe Lords;

vide kent. [and this, particularly, belongs now, amongſt

other immunities and privileges, to the inhabi-
tants of the -Cinque-port-Towns, |

/

the title of Baron, to a Family of the Herberts;
Sir Edward Herbert, a perſon of great learning,
being advanc'd to the dignity of a Baron of
this Realm, 5 Car. 1, by the title of Lord
Herbert of Chirbury.

The river Colun gives name to Culun or
Clune-caſtle, which was built by the Hu- Alans Clune · caſlle:
(deſcended from one Alan the ſon of Flaold a
Norman, and afterwards Earls of Arundel,) at
ſuch time as they were Lords Marchers here,
and annoy'd the Welſh with frequent Inroads :
But where it meets the river Tenid, amon
ſeveral dangerous fords ariſeth a hill [ (ac-

|<eflible but at one place, and very famous-in

ancient times)] call'd Caer Caradock ; becauſe, Oer Cara-
about the year of our Lord 53, Caratacis a dock.
renown'd Britiſh King, fortify*d it with a bul- King Cara-

| wark of ſtone, and defended it gallantly againſt tacus.

Oftorius and the Roman Legions ; till the 93
making a breach with no great difficulty 2 _
ſo ſlight a work (the ruins of which are yet
E be ſeen, ) forc'd the Britains, who had no

arms,

— — — — ** 0 «Aa —
_—

"CORNAVPTT.

648

arms, to betake themſelves to the Mountains.
The King himſelf eſcap'd by flight, but his
wite, daughter, and brothers, were taken pri-
ſoners; yet was not his Eſcape a Security to
him (men in adverſity being no where ſecure;)
for afterwards he was deliver'd up to OfForins
by Queen Cartiſmandua (with whom he had
truſted himſelt,) and was carry'd to Rome;
where, notwithſtanding he had engag'd the
Romans in ſo tedious and toilſom a war, he
procur'd his own and his family's Pardon, of
Claudius Caſar ; and that by no baſe or preca-
rious ſollicitations, but by a noble and maje-
ſtick freedom of addreſs. For the taking of
this hill, and Caratacus, a Triumph was decreed
to Offorims; nor did the captive King ſeem
a leſs prize to the Senate, than the two Royal
Priſoners, Syphax, whom P. Scipio, and Perſes,
whom I. Paulus, Preſented to the Romans. And
* ZHiſtorie notwithſtanding ® our ſorry Hiſtorian has omit-
noſtre Surci · ted the account both of this battel, and of this
nator. gallant Britain, yet is not his memory, nor
the ſtory, extinct among the Country-people.
They tell us, that a King was beaten upon
this hill ; and in the Welſh-book call'd Triades,
among the three renowned Britiſh Heroes, Ca-
+ With a rYadauc f Uridfra: is the chief; who to me
{trong arm. ſeems, undoubtedly to have been this very Ca-
ratacus. And as the Action was great and
| Aubrey's eminent, || ſo the remains of it to this day,
Monujienta are very conſiderable. Near Lanterden, about
Britan, the meeting of the rivers Teme and Clun, are

vol. 2. two barrows, in which have been found burnt
bones and an urn. And a little way eaſt of
Brandon, Teme, at Brandon, is a ſingle ſquare work with

four ports, very commodiouſly ſituated, as ha-
ving near it the river to ſerve them with wa-
ter; a thing, which the Romans were always
careful to ſecure, if poſſible. And theſe are
the Remains of the Romans.

As for the Britains; here is a Camp of theirs
alſo about half a mile from Brandon, at a place
call'd Coxoll near Brampton-Bryan-Caſtle; Which
is now cover d with great oaks. From hence
they ſeem to have been beaten: and about
three miles to the north, 1s the foremention'd'
large Camp, Caer-Caradock. The trenches are
very deep, and yet the foil is a hard rock.
The Rampires are wall'd, but the wall is now
cover d with earth; which if one remove a lit-

* Dugd. Vi-tle, the ſtones appear. Ir is now vulgarly
ſitation of call'd the Gair, fituate on the eaſt-point of a
Shropſhire. very ſteep hill; and has no acceſs, as we have
obſerv'd, but one way, and that is from a plain

on the weſt-part. It is three times as long,

as it is broad; having its entrance to the —

fenced with a high treble rampire. There is

alſo a narrow paſlage out of it towards the eaſt,

upon the very pitch of the hill, The north-

ſide of it is fortity'd with a deep and double

trench; but on the ſouth-ſide it hath but a

ſingle trench ; becauſe the ſteepneſs of that fide

of the hill, is of it ſelf a defence. On

the ſouth-point of a high hill (a mile north

Tonrgley.of Clun) call'd Tongley, is a large fortification ;

| ſomewhat larger than Caer-Caradock ; it is made

circular, and defended with three deep tren-

ches drawn round it. And a mile from Biſhops-

caſtle, towards Montgomery, is a place call'd the

Biſhops mote, Biſhops-mote, where is a very ſteep and high
hill, like the Keep of a Caſtle at the weſt-end;
and towards the eaſt, near an acre of ground
is ſurrounded with an entrenchment. Theſe
are the marks which we have left, of this me-
morable Engagement. |
Next, is Ludlow, in Welſh Dinan, and Lys-

— yd

Ludlows

—

on a hill, at the joyning of the Temd with the
river Corve; a town of greater elegance than
antiquity. Roger de Montgomery firſt built here

a beautiful and ſtrong Caſtle, hanging over the

river Ce; and then enclos'd it with walls,

about a mile in compals. This, when his ſon

Robert was proſcrib'd, King Henry the firſt

took into his own hands, and detended it

againſt King Stephen, who laid cloſe ſiege to

it ; and Henry, Ga of the King of Scots, be-

ing lifted up from his Horſe by an Iron-hook, ,,..

had been drawn within the walls, if King Ste- _—_
phen himſelf had not aſſiſted him, and with wa, pur,
lingular courage deliver'd him from that im-
minent danger. Afterwards, King Henry the
ſecond gave this caſtle, with the vale below
it along the Corve (commonly call'd Corves-dale,)
to Fulk de Dinan - next, it came to the Lacies
of Ireland, and by a daughter to Jeffrey de
Jenevile a Poictovin, or (as ſome ſay) of the
Houſe of Lorrain; from whoſe poſterity it
deſcended by a daughter to the Mortimers,
and from them, hereditarily, to the Crown.
Afterwards, the Inhabitants erected a fair
Church in this pace, upon the higheſt ground
in the heart of the town, the only one they
have ; and from this time, we may date its
reputation, and eminence beyond any of its
neighbours. Tho' King Stephen, Simon de
Mountford, and Henry the ſixth, did much dam-
nify it in the ſeveral Civil wars; yet it always
recover'd : more eſpecially, ever ſince King
Henry the eighth eſtabliſh'd the Council of the The Cour)
Marches (not unlike the French Parliaments) of the Mar
the Lord Preſident whereof generally * kept ©%
his Courts here, which ſeldom + wanted buſineſs 4 Wade C.
either owing to the great extent of the Juriſ-
diction, or to the litigious temper of the Welſh

ple. The Council || conſiſted of a Lord ſ Candle c
reſident, as many Counſellors as the King
* pleaſed, a Secretary, an Attorney, a Solici- * ples, C.
tor, and the four Juſtices of the Counties of
Wales: [But that Council, together with the
ſaid Courts, being a great grievance to the
Subject, were diſſolv'd and as away by Par-
liament, in the firſt year of King William and Cap, xi.
Queen Mary. ; |

Not far from the foremention'd river Corve,
ſtands Ryſhbury, to which place Dr. Gale re- Ruſtbury,
moves, from Worceſter, the Bramonium or Bra-
vonium, or, as the Simlerian Edition has it,
the Bravinium, of Antoninus ; induced there-
unto, partly becauſe Bruynen in Britiſh ſignifies
a bulruſh, which ſuits the preſent name ; and
partly by reaſon of the diſtance from Magnis
on one hand, and the direct road, through
this town, to Uyiconium on the other; whereas
he obſerves, that Worceſter is forty miles out
of the way.]

Below Ludlow, upon the river Temd, we ſee
Burford, which, from the poſterity of Theodo- Burford,
rick Say, deſcended to Robert de Mortimer,
and from his heirs to Jeffrey de Cornubia, or
Cornuaile, of the lineage of Richard Earl of Cornwaile
Cornwall, and King of the Alemans ; whoſe heirs,
even to f our time have born the honourable + $o ſaid,
title of Barons; but not ſuch as might fit in ann. 165).
Parliament. Burford is held of the King, to find Inq. 49 E-%
five men towards the army of Wales, and by
the ſervice of a Barony, as appears by the In-
quiſition. But obſerve by the way, that
choſe who held an entire Barony, were tor-
merly reputed Barons ; and ſome Sages of the
Common Law will have Baron and Barony, to Baron
have been Conjugates, like Earl and Earldom, —
Duke and Dukedom, King and Kingdom. on

Jenevile,

tuyſoc, that is, the Prince's Palace; it is ſeated

Here,

—

x
3 bh
+3
4
7 - | |
4 5 n

* Barley, C.
by miſtake.

; Cley bury».

Kinlet.
Blunt -
ges yellow
ork, in the
Norman
tongues
Bridge»

morte.

* Camden,
Somner .

+ Is, C.

Demina Mere.

- forum,

|| Beliſm, C. 4
u

of

2
2 ,
4 : " :
2
*
x

SHROPS

—_— —

1 ——
ay „

= Clee-bill,

* Barley, C-

by miſtake.

Cleybury.

Kinlet.
Blunt (igni-
ges yellow

hair, in the

Norman
tongues
Bridge»
morte.

* Camden,
Somner .

+ Is, C.

Here, Temd leaves Shropſhire ; and near its
banks, to the north, are hills of an eaſy aſcent,
call'd Clee-hill, famous for producing the beſt
* Pitcoal, and not without veins of Iron; [on
which are the remains of an ancient Camp.1
Ar the bottom of this, in a little village call'd
Cleybury, Hugh de Mortimer built a caſtle, which
ede King Henry the ſecond ſo entire-
ly demoliſh'd, as a Nurſery of Rebellion, that
7 Mes any remains of it are viſible at this
day. Kinlet, a ſeat of the Blunts, a name ve
famous in theſe parts, and deriv'd from their
golden locks. This is a _ ancient, honourable,
and numerous Family. Then we ſee Brugmorfe,
commonly call'd Bridgnorth, on the right hand
bank of the Severn ; ſo call'd of Burgh, and
Morfe [once] a Foreſt, adjoyning to it, (but
now a Waſte, with ſcarce a Tree upon it;)
being before call'd Burgh only. [Leland ſays,
it was call'd in all old Records, Bridge : and
the more ancient name is that given it by the
Saxon Annals, Bnicge; from which, by ſome
of our later Hiſtorians it is term'd Brugge and
Bruggenorth ; the addition of north being made,
upon the building of ſome bridge over the Se-
vern, ſouth of this. The Caſtle which was
built by the Danes Anno 896, call'd in Saxon
Cpacbpicge, ſeems to be the very ſame ; tho
* ſome learned perſons are inclin'd to place it

at Cambridge in Gloceſterſhire. For firſt, It is

ſaid expreſsly to be upon the Severn, whereas
Cambridge is two miles diſtant ; and beſides,
this Caſtle was probably built to guard the
paſſage over the Severn. 2. The Canterbury-
copy reads it expreſsly Biege, as the Chroni-
cles call it Bridgenorth ; which is at this day
commonly nam'd Brigge. And 3. As to the
former part of the word, there is a tow

about a mile diſtant call'd Quatford, and ano-
ther at two miles diſtance call'd Quat; ſo that
one may reaſonably imagine Epacthicze ſhould
not be far off.] It + was enclos'd and forti-
ty'd with walls, a ditch, a large caſtle, and
the river Severn, which, with a very ſteep fall,
flows in among the rocks ; [but the walls and
caſtle are now quite ruinated.] Ir ſtands ſe-
cure upon a rock, through which the ways
that lead into the upper part of the town,

Domina Mey, Were cut. It was firſt built by Edelfleda, Lady

- forum,

of the Mercians, and wall'd round by Robert

|| Beliſm, C. de || Beleſm, Earl of Shrewsbury ; who, relying

Evelyn,

Willey, or
Willeley,

Lacon, famous family of the Lacons,

upon the flrength of the place, revolted from
Henry the firſt, as did afterwards Roger de
Mortimer from Henry the ſecond, but both
without ſucceſs ; for they were forced ro ſur-
render, and fo their Rebellions were ſuppreſs'd.
At the ſiege of this caſtle (as our Chronicles
tell us) King Henry the ſecond had like to have
loſt his life by an arrow, which being ſhot at
him, was intercepted by a truly gallant man,
and lover of his Prince, Hubert de Saint-Clere,
who ſav'd the King's life by the loſs of his
own. Art this place alſo, Ralph de Pichford had
behav'd himſelt ſo valiantly, that King Henry
the firſt gave him little Brug near it, to hold
by the ſervice of finding dry wood for the great
chamber of the caſtle of Brug, againſt the coming of
his Soveraign Lord the King. | Northward from
hence, is Evelyn ; from which place, the fami-
ly of that name came into Surrey, ſome ages
ſince, along with the Onſlous and Hattons ;
where theſe three ſeated themſelves near one
another, and have remain'd a long time.] Mil-
leley is not far from Bridgnorth, formerly the

leu, and * afterwards improv'd by the poſleſ-* Lately, C.
ſions of Sir J. Blunt of Kinlet, Kt.

Other caſtles and towns lie ſcatter'd here- Caſtles,
abouts, as New-caſtle, Hopton-caſtle, Shipton, and

Corveſham upon the river Corve (the gift of ,
King Henry the ſecond to Walter de Clifford,) Lib. Inq.
Brancroft, and Holgot commonly call'd Howgate,

which formerly belong'd to the Mandutes, then

to Robert Burnel Biſhop of Bath, and after-

ward to the Lovels.

Higher up, ſtands }/exleck, now famous for Wenlock,
lime- ſtone, but formerly, in Richard the ſe-
cond's time, for a copper-mine ; and moſt re-
markable in the Saxon times, for a very an-
cient Nunnery, where Milburga a devout Vir- William
gin, lid, and was bury'd : It was repair'd, Malmesb.
and filfd with Monks, by Earl Roger de Mont-
omery. [| Upon the edge of Staffordſhire, is the
Well of St. Kenelm, to whom the Kingdom of —
Mercia fell at ſeven years of age. But Quen-⸗-
dred his ſiſter, practiſing with the young King's
guardians, made him away.

Near Wenlock, at Broſeley, there hat! been Philoſ. Trani.
lately diſcover d a Burning well, which, being Þ 324"
lighted, burns like the ſpirit of wine, or bran- —
dy, and much exceeds the heat of other fire,
and boils any thing that is ſet over it, much
ſooner. If you put upon it green boughs, or
any thing elſe that will burn, it preſeatly
conſumes them to aſhes. But yet the water,
of it ſelf, is extreme cold; and afloon as ever
the fire is put out, it feels as cold, as if no
fire had been there. Not far from hence, is!

Acton Burnell, a caſtle of the Burnels, and after- Acton Bur-
wards of the Lovels, which was honour'd with nel

an Aſſembly of Parliament in Edward the firſt's

reign, [The Houſe of Commons far in a barn

then belonging to the Abbot of the Monaſtery

of St. Peter and St. Paul, which is ſtill ſtand-

ing.] This family of the Burnelt was very ho- Barons Bur-
nourable and ancient, and much enrich'd by nll.

the Biſhop before-mention'd ; but it was ex-

tin& in Edward the ſecond's reign, when Maud

the heireſs marry'd John Love! for her firſt

husband, and John Haudlow for her ſecond,

whoſe ſon Nicholas took the name of Burnel ;

from whom the Razcliffs Earls of Suflex, and

others, derive their pedigree. Scarce a mile

from hence, is Langley, ſituated low, and in a Langley,
woody park, the ſcat of the Leas, one of the

ancient and honourable families in theſe parts;

[which is now extin&.] Next is Condover, for- Condover.
* manour of the Lovels, and * afterwards * Lately, C.
of Thomas Owen, one of the Juſtices of the

Common Pleas, and a great lover of learning;

who dying, left behind him a ſon, Sir Roger + Who being
Owen, an excellent ſcholar, and worthy of ſo dead, hath
excellent a father. It appears by the Records, left, C.
that this is holden of the King in chief, To

find two foot-ſoldiers for one day towards the army

of Wales, in time of war. A remark, which 1

think proper to make once for all, 'That the

Gentry of theſe parts held their eſtates of the

King of England by tenure, to aid him with

ſoldiers for defence of the Mirchet, whenever a

war broke out between the Engliſh and Welſh.

Near this, is a little village calld Pitchford, Pitchford.
which formerly gave name to the ancient fa-

mily of the Pitchfords ; but is now the poſſeſ-

fion of ® the Orelies. Our Anceſtors gave it the c R. Otetey;
name of Pitchford, from a ſpring of pitchy wa- C. ;
ter ; for in thoſe days, they knew no diſtin-

ction between pitch and bitumen. And here is |

a well in a poor man's yard, upon which there 4 bituminous

ſeat of Warner of Milleley, from whoſe poſte-[floats a ſort of liquid bitumen, although it be well.
rity by the Harleys and Peſbal it came to theſ every day ſcumm'd off; after the ſame manner

who were muchas it doth on the lake Aſphaltites in Judæa, and

enrich'd by marriage with the heir of Paſſe- on a ſtanding pool about Samoſata, and on a

nnn ſpring

— ———

a.
— —
ä —ů 2

2

wr n on TER”
2214
—

a4 we %

—
— > £ =
— —
— ww

AS Sa -

wu - montane wait. -

G_ _ —_—
— at Won. „„ +

„ - — ——— oo ou er ew” — ————— —ę— — — — — —

— > —— —— — —

n

= n

80

foring by Agrigentum in Sicily: but the inhabi- where it begins. In the hithermoſt or eaſtern

tants make no other uſe of it, than as pitch.
Whether it be a preſervative againſt the Falliug-
ſiekneſs, or be good for drawing and healing
of wounds (as that in Judaa is,) I know no
Phil. Tranf, one yet that has made the experiment. | Here,
n. 228, and in the adjacent places, there lies over moſt
of the Coal-pits or Mines, a Stratum or Layer
of blackiſh rock ; of which, by grinding and
boiling, they make pitch and tar, and from
which alſo a kind of Oil is diftill'd.} More
eaſtward ſtands Pouderbache-caſtle, now ruinated :
Purle-bache, it was formerly call'd Purle-bache, and was the
ſeat of Ralph Butler, younger {on of Ralph But-
ler of Wem ; from whom came the Butlers of
Woodhall, in the County of Hertford. Below
Stiperſton's this, Huckſtow foreſt fetches a great compals
hill. among the mountains; where at Hiperſton's hill,
are great heaps of ſtone, like little riſing rocks,
very near one another: the Welſh call them
Carneddau tewion ; but I dare not ſo much as
conjecture that theſe, among others, were the
ſtones which Giraldus Cambrenſis deſcribes in
this manner; Harald the laſt, on foot, with a com-
pany of foot, lightly arm'd, and ſtock'd with ſuch
proviſions as the country afforded, march d round the
whole Country of Wales, and through and through
it ; inſomuch that he ſcarce left any alive behind
him : in memory of which total defeat, you find in
Wales many hillocks of ſtones, after the ancient
manner, in the places where he obtain d his victories;
and they bear this Inſcription :

HIC FVIT VICTOR HARALDVS.
At this place Harald was Conqueror,

Caurſe. More to the north, Caurſecaſtle is ſituated,
the Barony of Peter Corbet, from whom it came
to the Barons of Stafford, and ſince to the

Routon, Lord Weymouth;| and near it Routon, which
is very ancient, ſituated upon the weſtern bor-
ders of the Shire, not far from the Severn, and
formerly belonging to the Corbers, but now to
the ancient family of the Liſters. Some time
before, John L Eſtrange of Knocking enjoy'd it;
till, out of ſpite to him, Leolin Prince of Wales
ras'd it to the ground, as we read in the Lite
of Fulk Fitz-IWWarin. We find it flouriſhing by
the ſame name in the time of the Romans,

| Rutunium, being call'd Rutunium by Antoninus: nor can
it be a miſtake, ſince both the name, and the

- diſtance from the famous Uriconium, do exactly

Abberbury concur. Near this, is Abberbury-caſtle ; and

and Wat» Matlesbury, which from the Corbets came to the

ſeeburys Leightons, Knights, an honourable family. Ir
ſeems to have taken its name from that Con-
ſular-way, and the King's high-road, call'd
Matlingit reet, which goes by this place into
the furtheſt parts of Wales, as Ranulphus Ce-
ſtrenſis ſays. It runs through two ſmall towns,
that [(like ſeveral others elſewhere)] are call'd
from it Strettons ; between which, in a valley,
ſome ruins are to be ſeen of an ancient caſtle

Brocards- call'd Brocards-caſtle, ſurrounded with green

calle. meadows, which were formerly fiſh-ponds. But
theſe caſtles, with others, too many to be rec-
kon'd up here (owing their decay to length
of time and an uninterrupted peace, and not

+ So ſaid, to the deſolations of war,) are, generally, f rea-

ann. 1607. dy to drop to the ground.

Now, paſling over the river Severn, we come
®* Cis-Sabri- to the ſecond Diviſion; which lies on this
na. ſide the Severn, and (as we ſaid) belong'd to

the Cornauii. This likewiſe is divided into
two parts by the river Teru, which flows from
north to ſouth, and has its name from a large
pool in Staffordſhire (ſuch as we call Tearnes,)

part of theſe Diviſions, near the place where
Tern and Severn joyn, ſtood Uriconium ; for ſo
Antoninus calls it, but Ptolemy Viroconium, and
Ninnius Caer Pruach ; the Saxons call'd it
Fpeken-cearten, and we Mieclceter and Wrox-
ceter, It was the Metropolis of the Cornaviz,
and built probably by the Romans, when they
tortify d the bank of the Severn ; which is here
fordable, and not any where lower toward the
mouth. But this being ſhatter'd by the Sa-
xon wars, was quite deſtroy'd in thoſe of the
Danes, probably by Burning; the way where

blackneſs and rankneſs of the ſoil. 1 It is now a
very little village, and meanly inhabited ; but
they frequently plow-up ancient coins, which
bear witneſs of its antiquity. [Some of theſe
are of gold, though but rarely found; ſome of
ſtone, red, green, blue, &c. and others of ſil-
ver, which are very commonly met with ; and
the reſt of braſs, copper, and mix'd metals.
They are call'd by the inhabitants Dynders,
and are ſo worn and decay'd, that there is nor
one in ten found, the Inſcription whereof is
— legible, or the Image diſtinguiſhable,
Amongſt all theſe (as I have the account from
a perſon who has been an eye-witneſs) there
is not one but what is Roman; from whence
they that contend for the antiquity of Shrews-
bury, which roſe out of the ruins of this, do
inter, that the deſtruction of this city was be-
fore the coming over of the Saxons, or at la-
teſt, in their wars with the Britains ; for if it
had continu'd till the Daniſh times, there
would certainly have been ſome of the Saxon
Coins mix'd amongſt thoſe of the Romans,
And the Saxon name Ppekenceartcen (from
whence the preſent Moxeter flows) perhaps
may imply, that it was, when they came, ppæ-
ced, that is, wrack'd and deſtroy d; unleſs we
may ſay, that this name is moulded out of the
old Uriconium.

But whenever it was demoliſh'd, it hath cer-
tainly been a place of great Note and Anti-
quity : Upon ſearching into their places of
burial, there have been teeth taken out of the
jaw-bones of men near three inches long, and
three inches about ; and thigh-bones have been
lately found by the inhabitants of a full yard
in length. Their way of burying the dead
bodies here (when they did not burn the corps,
and put the aſhes in urns) has been obſerv'd
to be this. Firſt, they made a deep wide
grave, in the bottom whereof they fix'd a bed
ob. very red clay, and upon that laid the body.
With the ſame ſort of clay they cover'd it;
tencing the clay with a ſort of thin flats againſt
the earth or mould, which otherwiſe would
have been apt to break through it to the dead
body. Laſtly, they fill'd the grave, and co-
ver'd it with great ſtones, ſometimes five or ſix
upon à grave, which are now ſunk into the
earth, e part of the bones thus inter'd,
which have happen'd to lie dry in the duſt
or clay, remain pretty ſound to this day. AS
to the Urns ; ſeveral have been found whole
in the memory of man, when they have had
occaſion to dig three or four foot deep in their
ſandy land. For as the dead corps here bu-
ry'd, are in red clay; fo are their urns lodg d

more barren than the reſt, they found, in dig-
ging, a ſquare room, wall'd about, with four
46 of of {mall brick pillars to ſupport a double
[oor made of mortar ; which is ſuppos'd to

have

*
1 „

5

* Vide inf,
hre has gone, being ſtill diſcernible by the

in a red ſand. A few years ſince, in a place phil. Tn.
where a piece of land was obſery'd to be n. 306.

653

have
Ron

H
Cit)
by t
the
one

+ Septemplict in
Britannico« afte
rum endine. the

thr
Stratton. Str

4 80 (aid, wa
and. 1607. A I

O1

Bildas, ly

Okenyate. tl
U

tl
al
0c

Uſocona, U
+ Burt, Itin. t.

Charleton, u
|

683 „ © ab
TN” have been a Sudatory or $ weating-houſe for the. than a great Bell, famous 1 thoſe parts * bon ay

Roman Soldiers, | bigneſs. Hard by, ſtands Albrighton, which, in Atvri '
Here is nothing to be ſeen of the ancient|the reign of KELL the fir, was the ſeat .

City, but a few remains of broken walls, call'd|of Ralph de Pichford, but now of the Talbots, |
by the people, The old Works of Wroxceter, I near who — Fr aku y the Earls 7 | RE
the midſt of it, about twenty foot high and] bury. 1 |
one hundred long, ] built of hewn ſtone Kid] Beyond the river Tern, and upon the bank
+ Septempliciin * ſeven rows without, and arch'd within, of it, lies Draiton; where, during the Civilpraiton.
Britannico» after the faſhion of the Britains. That, in|wars between the houſes of Lancaſter and Jork, 1459.
rum ordinee the place where theſe are, there was formerly] was a battel fought, very fatal to the Gen-
a caſtle, is probable from the uneavenneſs of|try of Cheſhire ; for though it is hard to ſay
the ground, the heaps of earth, and, here and|which fide had the better, yer they being di-
there, the rubbiſh of walls. The plot where|yided, and adhering to both parties, were cut
this city ſtood, is no {mall ſpot of ground, ſbut off in great numbers. [This is ſuppos'd by Uner. Prim.
about three miles in circumference ; the walls ſome to be the Cair Darithou, which Ninnius p. 35+
built upon a foundation for the moſt part mentions among the 28 Cities of Britain;
made of pebble- ſtones, about three yards thick, and which Henry of Huntingdon calls Draiton.1
and a valt trench round, which in ſome places| Lower down, and pretty near the Tern, lies Hod-
appears exceeding deep to this day. | This plot is net, formerly inhabited by Gentlemen of that Hodnet.
a blacker earth than the reſt, and yields the] name; from whom, by the Ludlows, it came
largeſt crops of the beſt barley. Below this by inheritance to the Vernon. It was formerly Inq. 10 Ed. a,
city, [as hath been ſuppos'd,1 went the Roman] held of the Honour of Montgomery, by y ſervice |
military high-way call'd Watling-ſtreet, either| of being Steward of that Howour. The Tern, af-
thro' a ford, or over a bridge, directly to theſ ter that, paſſing by ſome ſmall villages, is
Stratton. Stratton before-mention'd, that is, Towns ſeated| joyn'd by a rivulet call'd Rodan ; and after it
by the Street ; the foundation of which bridge] has run a few miles further, near Uriconium
+ So ſaid, was f lately diſcover'd a little above, in ſetting] which we have ſpoken of before, it falls into
ann. 1507. a Mar (tor ſo they call a fiſhing-dam) in the|the Severn. Not far from the head of this
river: but now there is no track of the Way.|river Rodan, ſtands Jem, where + were the wem.
[And it is true, that there is ſtill diſcernible|marks of * an intended caſtle, [of which no-+ Are, C.
in the bottom of the Severn, at !low-water, thing is now to be ſeen, but the bank it ſtood * Iba
the foundation of a ſtone-work ; which is pro-|on.] It was the Barony of William Pantulph
bably the remains of a bridge; but yet it is about the beginning of the Norman times,
obſerv d, with great certainty, that the road from whoſe poſterity it came at length to the
went through the midſt of the city, and ſo] Butlers; and from them, by the Ferrers of Ouſeley
through the ford now call'd Mroxeter-ford; as|and the Barons of Greyſtock, to the Barons Da-
is plainly to be diſcover'd by the old Strait-|cre of vn; 726 [The title of this Barony was
way, painting exactly upon it, on each ſide] given by of, 8 the ſecond to Sir George
of the river. This ancient name of Viracanium Jefferies, Lord Chancellor of England; to whom
is more maniteſt in a neighbouring mountain|the Manour and Royalty did alſo belong. | A
Wrekenhin, ſabout a mile oft, call'd Hreken-bill, and by little diſtant from this, upon a woody hill, or
ſome Gilberts-hill, which gradually falls into af rather rock (which was anciently call'd Rad-
pleaſant level, and yields an entertaining pro- cliff ) ſtood a caſtle, upon a very high ground,
ſpect of the plains about it, | being, as Leland|call'd from the reddiſh ſtone, Red-caſtle, and Red-caflle,
{aith, the higheſt ground of all that wages by the Normans, le Rous ; heretofore the
This hill runs out into a great length, and 1 [ſcat of the Audleys (by the bounty of Mawd
thick cloath'd with trees: and. under it, where | the Stranger or Le-ſtrange;) but now there is
the Severn rowls along, at Bu!dewas, common- nothing to be ſeen, but decay'd walls. Scarce
Bildas, ly call'd Bildas, was formerly a noted Mo-|a mile from hence, is a ſpot of ground where
naſtery, the burying-place of the Burzels, a fta-|a ſmall City once ſtood, the very ruins of
mous family, and Patrons of it. Above it is] which are almoſt gone; but the Roman Coins
a Lodge, call'd Watling-ſtreet, from its ſituation found there, with ſuch bricks as they us'd in
upon the publick Street or military high-way ;| building, are evidences of its Antiquity, and
Dalaley, and hard by, are the remains of Dalaley-caſtle,| Founders. The people of the neighbour-
which, upon the Attainder of Richard Earl] hood call it Bery, from Burgh; and affirm it
of Arundel, King Richard the ſecond by A&|to haye been very famous in King Arthur's
of Parliament annex'd to the Principality of| days.
Cheſter, which he had ereted. Not far from] After that, upon the ſame river, appears 3
the foot of this hill, in a deep valley, and upon] Mortan-Curbet, a caſtle of the Corbets ; where, Morton.
Okepyate. that Roman military high-way, is Okewyate, aſf within the memory of man, Robert Corbet, to Sofbet
ſmall village, noted for the plenty of pit-coal |gratify his eurioſity in Architecture, began a , 50 ſaid;
that it affords ; which, by its low fityation, noble building, much more large and ſplendid ann. 1607.
and that diſtance which Antoninus ſays than the former; but death, countermanding
ocana is from Uriconium and Pennocrucium, muſt | his deſigns, took him off, and 10 his project
Uf.ocona, undoubtedly be the ſame with Uſ-ocong, x writ-| was left unfiniſh'd. In the late Civil Wars,
+ Burt, Itin. ten alſo, according to ſeveral Copies, Uſoccona,| being made a Garriſon, it was almoſt ruin'd.]
and Uxaccona.) Nor does the name make againſt The family of theſe Corbets is ancient, and of
this conjecture ; for the word B, which in — eminence, in this Shire; and held large
Welſh ſignifies Low, ſeems to be added to ex- Poſſeſſions by fealty, of Roger de Montgomery
preſs its ou ſituation. On the other ſide, Earl thereof, about the coming in of the Nor-
Charleton, under this hill, appears Charleton-caſtle, ancient- mans; wiz. Roger Fitz-Corbet held Huelebec, Corbet
ly belonging to the Charletons Lords of Powis :| Hundeſlit, AFun, Ferules, &c. Robert Fitz -Cor-Prænomen.
and more caſtward, towards Staffordſhire, 1s|bet held lands in Uleſtauſton, Rotlinghop, Bran-
Tong, Tong-caſtle, call'd formerly Toang, and repair'd ten, Udecot. More to the ſouth, lies Arcoll, the Arcon,
So fad, not long ſince by the Vernons; as likewiſe [ſear of the Newports Knights; | of whom, Sir
ann, 1607+ was the College within the town, of which the Richard Newport was, in the reign of Ki
Penbriges (as I have read) were the firſt Found- Charles the firſt, created a Baron of this
ers. The inhabitants boaſt of nothing more, Realm, by the title of Lord Newport of

High-

wn nd

e

N

655

© «4 * «a.

4

CORNAVII.

656

Hagmond-
Abbey.

Shrewsbury,

High-Ercall ; whoſe ſon Francis was created by
King Charles the ſecond Viſcount Newport of
Bradford, and, by King William and Queen
Mary, further advanc'd to the dignity of Earl
of Bradford. In the neighbourhood of Arcol, is
Hagmond-Abbey, which was well endow'd, it
not founded, by the Fitz-Alanes. Not much
lower, is pleaſantly ſituated upon the Severn,
the Metropolis ot this County (riſen out of the
ruins of old Uriconium,) which we now call,
in a ſmoother way, Shrewsbury and Shrowsbury ;
but our Anceſtors call'd it Sõchobber-bypig,
becauſe the hill it ſtands on was well wooded.
From whence alſo the Greeks nam'd their Beſſa;
and the Britains call'd this city Penguerne, that
is, a brow of Alders; where likewiſe was a
noble Palace of the ſame name : but how it
comes to be call'd in Welſh Tmwithig, and by
the Normans Scropesbery, Sloppesbury, and Salop,
and in Latin Salopia, I know not; unleſs they
be deriv'd from the old word Scrobbes-berig,
differently wreſted. Yet ſome Criticks in the
Welſh tongue, imagine that it was call'd Yn-
withig (as much as Placentia,) from the Welſh
Mithau; and that their -Bards gave it that
name, becauſe the Princes of Wales delighted
moſt in this place. It is ſeated on a hill, the
earth of which is of a reddiſh. colour. The
Seyern is here paſſable by two fair bridges, and
embracing it almoſt round, makes it a Penin-
ſula, as Leland, our Poet and Antiquary, de-
{cribes it :

Edita Pinguerni late faſtigia ſplendent,

Urbs fita Iunato veluti mediamnis in orbe,

Colle tumet modico, duplici quoque ponte ſu-
perbit,

Accipiens patria fibi lingua nomen ab alnis.

Far off its lofty walls proud Shrewsb'ry
ſhows,

Which ſtately Severn's cryſtal arms en-
cloſe. |

Here two fair bridges awe the ſubje&
ſtream,

And Alder-trees beſtow'd the ancient
name. Fn:

Nor is it only ſtrong by nature, but well
tortity'd by art; for Roger de Montgomery, who
had it given him by the Conqueror, built a
Caſtle in the north part of the Town, up-

+ So thought, on a riſing + rock i (tho' now the bank appears

inn, 1607,

outwardly to be nothing but a ſoft mould, for
the moſt part ſandy ;)] after he had pull'd down
about fifty houſes for that end; whoſe ſon
Robert, when he revolted from Henry the firſt,
enclos'd it with walls on that fide where the
Severn does not defend it ; which were never
aflaulted, that I know of, but in the Barons
wars againſt King John. [Now it is wall'd
quite round, though not very ſtrongly ; and
where the river doth not fence it (i. e. on the
neck of the peninſula) is the Caſtle.] When
the Normans firſt ſettled here, it was a well-
built and well frequented City ; for it appears
by Domeſday-book, that it was tax'd at 71.
16s. to the King, yearly. There were reckon'd
two hundred and fifty two Citizens; twelve
of whom were bound to keep guard when the
Kings of England came hither, and as many
to attend him in hunting; which I believe
was firſt occaſion'd by one Edrick Sueona, a
Mercian Duke, but a profligate villain ; who
not long before, [about the year 10061 had
way-lay d Prince Alfhelm, and ſlain him as he
was hunting. At which time (as appears by

—— — — — —
3 — 2 —V—— ts

the ſame book) there was a cuſtom in this
city, That howſoever a woman marry d, if a wi-
dow, ſhe ſhould pay to the King twenty ſhillings ;
but if a virgin, ten ſhillings, howſoever ſhe took a
husband ; | of which Cultom, there are not now
the leaſt remains. } But to return; the ſaid
Earl Roger not only fortify'd it, but improv'q
it much in Buildings both publick and pri-
vate ; and founded a beautitul Monaſtery de-
dicated to St. Peter and St. Paul, and endow'd
it with large Poſſeſſions, as alſo with the
Church of St. Gregory ; according to the follow-

d. ing tenor (ſo a private hiſtory of this Mona-

ſtery expreſles it) That as the Prebendaries there-
of ſhould die, the Prebends ſhould go to the Monks.
From which aroſe no ſmall conteſt, upon the
Prebendaries ſons ſuing the Monks, to ſucceed
their fathers in thoſe Prebends ; for at that
time Prebendaries and Prieſts in England were
not oblig'd to Geer and it was grown into

a Cuſtom for Eccleſiaſtical Benefices to deſcend Preterg f.
hereditarily to the next of blood. But this heritabl:

controverſy was ſettled in Henry the firſt's
reign, That heirs ſhould not inherit Eccleſia-
ſtical Benefices : about which time, laws were
alſo enacted, obliging Clergy-men to Celibacy,
[The very marks of the Church of St. Gregory
aforeſaid, are quite gone ; unleſs it was miſta-
ken for St. Giles's, yet ſtanding in the ſame
Pariſh, tho' ruinous, and which, ſome affirm,
was the ancient Pariſh-Church ; the Church-
yard thereof being their common place of Bu-
rial.] Afterwards, other Churches were built
here; and, to paſs by the Convents of Do-
minican, Franciſcan, and Auguſtine Friers,
founded by the Charltons, Fenevills, and Staf-
ford; here were two Collegiate Churches erect-
ed ; St. Chad's, with a Dean and ten Preben-
daries; and St. Mary's, with a Dean and nine
minor Prebendaries. [Beſides which, there are
two other Pariſh-Churches within the Walls,
St. Alkman's and St. Fulian's. | At this day, it
is a fine City, well inhabited, and of good
commerce; and, by the induſtry of the Citi-
zens, and their Cloath- manufacture, and their
trade with the Welſh, is very rich; for hither
the Welſh-commodities are brought, as to the
common Mart of both Nations. Its inhabi-
tants are partly Engliſh, partly Welſh : they
uſe both Languages ; and this, among other
things, muſt be mention'd in their praiſe, that

they f erected one of the largeſt Schools in + He end
England for the education of youth ; for which, ed, C.

Thomas Aſton, the firſt School-maſter, a perſon
of great worth and integrity, provided by his
own induſtry a competent Salary. [The preſent
School (a fair ſtately ſtone building, erected
and endow'd by Queen Elizabeth) hath one
Maſter and three Under-maſters ; with a very
good Library. The Buildings and Library are
not inferior to many Colleges in the Univer-
ſities: beſides which, there are very good hou-
ſes for the School-maſters belonging to it. About
four or five miles diſtant, at a place call'd Erin-
ſvill, there is another School-houſe built of the
ſame white ſtone ; whither the Maſters and
Scholars may repair, in caſe any contagious di-
ſtemper, or other cauſe, ſhould render it un-
ſafe for them to ſtay in the town.] When
Henry Percy the younger rebell'd againſt Henry
the fourth, and was about to ſtorm this City
(tho' the King had made the walls exceeding
ſtrong;) by a turn of Fortune, he was pre-
vented, and his meaſures broken in a trice.
For the King himſelf was ſuddenly at his heels

with an army; whom the raſh youth engaging, Te battel o

after a long and ſharp diſpute deſpair d of g1,eqgur.

ſuccels,

Biꝛttleßeld.

= Creating-
ſickneſs.

H. Fracaſto.

11.5,

1 So ſaid,
ann, 1607.

Flotes,

Coracle,

P H * *

5 * . 5 p N Fog -

* 9 x SEES. SS Lf
a ** aw. 7 W * -- 2 *

—
„

SAROPS

HIRE.

Battlefield.

Cweating-
ſickneſs.

H. Fracaſto.

11.5,

. of the blood: But, be the cauſe what it will, it is

+ So ſaid,
ann, 1607.

Flotes,

Coracle,

it, either dy'd or recover'd in the ſpace of

ſucceſs, and wiltully ſought his own death.
The place, from this battel, is yet call'd Battle-|
field, where the King afterwards built a Cha-
pel, and ſettled two Prieſts to pray for the ſouls
of the ſlain. Shrewsbury is 20 degr. and 37
min. diſtant from the Azores, and 52 degr.
and 53 min. from the Æquator.

I know not whether it is worth my while,
and not foreign to my purpoſe, to tell you,
that out of this city came the Sweating-ſickneſs,
in the year 1551, which ſpread it ſelf through-
out the whole Kingdom, and was particularly
fatal to middle-aged perſons. They who had|

twenty-four hours. But there was a ſpeedy
remedy found out, That they who were taken
ill in the day-time, ſhould immediately go to
bed in their cloaths, and they who ſicken'd in
the night ſhould lie out their four and twenty
hcurs in bed, but were not to ſleep at all.
The moſt eminent Phyſicians are puzzled about
the cauſe of this diſtemper : there are ſome,
who aſcribe it to the chalky grounds in Eng-
land, which yet are very rare. They tell you,
That in ſome certain moiſt conſtitutions, the ubtle
but corrupt ſteams that evaporate from that ſort of
ſoil, which are very piercing and contagious, either
infett the animal ſpirits, or the thin frothy Serum

moſt certain there is ſome analogy between it and the
ſubtle parts of the blood, which occafions, in fo ſmall
a ſpace as twenty-four hours, the expiration either
of the Patient or the Diſeaſe. But let others en-
quire into theſe matters ; for my part; I have
obſery'd it thrice, f in the laſt age, rife,
throughout the kingdom of England, and I
doubt not but it had been ſo before, tho' we
do not find it recorded. I obſerve it firſt in
the year 1485, wherein Henry the ſeventh
began his reign, ſome time after a great con-
junction of the ſuperior Planets in Scorpio; ſe-
condly, leſs violent (but accompany'd with the
Plague) in the 33d year after, namely 1518,
after a great oppoſition of the ſame Planets in
Scorpio and Taurus, at which time it was
likewiſe rife in the Low-Countries and Germany;
and laſtly, 33 years after that, in the year
1551, While another conjunction of the ſame
Planets in Scorpio ſhew'd its malignant influ-
ences. But enough has been ſaid of this;
which will ſeem trifling to thoſe who have no
reliſh of experimental learning.

Near this city, the river Severn has a great
many windings, but eſpecially at Roſal, where
it fetches ſuch a compals, that it almoſt returns
into it ſelf ; ſand well nigh encloſes a large
plot of ground of ſeveral miles in compals,
call'd, for that reaſon, The Ie. Hereabours,
are thoſe old-faſhion'd boats, call'd in Latin
Rates, i. e. Flotes, made of rough timber planks,
joyn'd together with light ribs of wood, which
convey carriages with the ſtream. The uſe
and name of them was brought by the Engliſh
from the Rhine in Germany, where they have
the ſame name of Flotes; [but they are ſel-
dom ſeen here, of late. The fiſhermen in theſe
parts uſe a ſmall thing call'd a Coracle, in which
one man being ſeated, will row himſelf with
incredible ſwiftneſs with one hand, whilſt with
the other he manages his net, angle, or other
fiſhing-rackle. It is of a form almoſt oval,
made of ſplit Sally-twigs interwoven (round
at the bottom,) and on that part which 1s next
the water, it is coyer'd with a horſe-hide. It
is abour five foot in length, and three in breadth;
and is ſo light, that, coming off the water,
they take them upon their backs, and carry

Near the river, ſtands Shrawerden, a caſtle Shrawerden,
formerly of the Earls of Arundel, which after-
wards belong'd to the moſt honourable Tho-
mas Bromley, ſometime Lord Chancellour of
England : and Knocking, built by the Lords Knocking,
LEſtrange, from whom it came by inheritance
to the Stanleys Earls of Derby. |

And not tar from hence, is Neſſ, over which Neſſe.
there hangs a craggy rock, with a noted cave ;
this place, together with Cheſwerden, King Hen-
ry the ſecond gave to John L'Eſtrange, from Barons
whom are deſcended the moſt noble families, -'Eftrange
the LEſtranges of Knocking, Avindelegh, Elleſmer, 20 *
Blakmere, Lutheham, and Hunſtanton in Norfolk.
But from thoſe of Knocking (by the death of
the laſt of them without iſſue- male) the inhe-
ritance deſcended by Joan, a ſole daughter, and
wife of George Stanley, to the Earls of Derby.
At a greater diſtance from the river, towards
the weltern bounds of this County, lies O Oſweſtre,
weſtre or Oſwaldſtre, in Welſh Croix Ofwalde ; a
little town enclos'd with a wall and a ditch,
and fortify'd with a ſmall caſtle. It is a place
of good traffick, for Yelſb-Cottons eſpecially, Welſh-
which are of a very fine, thin, or (if you will) Cottons.
of a * flight texture; of which great quantities * Levidenſas,
are weekly vended here. It derives its name 6 placet, vo-
from Oſwald King of the Northumbrians (but, ces.
more anciently, it was call'd Maſer field; ) which Maferfield,
Oſwald was by Penda the Pagan Prince of the
Mercians (after he had ſlain him in a hot engage-
ment) torn limb from limb with the utmoſt
barbarity ; and that gave occaſion to thoſe ver-
ſes of a Chriſtian Poet of ſome antiquity :

Cajus & abſeiſſum caput, alſciſſoſque lacer-
tos,

642.
Oſwald ain,
Et tribus affixos palis pendere cruentus

Penda F mac ; per quod reliquis exempla re-
inqaat |

Terroris manifeſta ſui, regemque beatum

Eſſe probet miſerum : 2 cauſam fallit u-
tramque. |

Ultor enim fratris minime timet Ofwins
illum,

Imo timere facit, nec Rex miſer, imo bea-
tu

Eſt, * fonte Loni fruitur ſemel, & fine

Whoſe head all black with gore and man-
gled hands, |

Were fix'd on ſtakes at Penda's curſt com-
mands,

To ſtand a ſad example to the reſt,

And prove him wretched who is ever
bleſt.

Vain hopes were both! for Oſwy's hap-
pier care

Stop'd the proud Victor, and renew'd the
War.

Nor him mankind will ever wretched
own, |

Who wears a peaceful and eternal crown,

It ſeems to have been firſt built upon 4 Re- See in Nor-
ligious account ; for the Chriſtians of that age thumberland,
look'd upon it as holy : and Bede has told us,
that ſome miracles were wrought in the place
where Oſwald was kill'd. It was built by
Madoc the brother of Mereduc (according to
Carodocus Lancabernenfis ;) and the Fitz-Alanes,
Normans, who were afterwards Lords of it
and Earls of Arundel, enclos'd it with a wall.
[Here (t ſaith Leland) is St. Oſwald's Church, + Itin. MS.
a very fair. building leaded, with a tower-
ſteeple: but it ſtands without the new gate;

them home. |

ſo that no Church is within the town. It
O OOo Was

A PW. - i ——

659

"CORNADT TI.

055

was ſometime a Monaſtery call'd the J/hite-
minſter, and was afterwards turn'd to a Pariſh-
Church.) Ir is obſervable, that the Ecliples;
of the Sun in Aries have been very fatal to
this place ; for in the years 1542, and 1567,
when the Sun was eclipſed in that Sign, it
ſufter'd very much by fire ; and after the lat-
ter Eclipſe of the two, the fire ſpread fo far,
that about two hundred houſes, in the Town

* Ad Cir- and Suburbs, were conſum'd. Below this, to

ciam. the north-welt, is a hill entrench'd with a tri-
Hen-dinas, ple ditch, call'd Hen-dinas, that is, the ancient
Aubrey's Palace. It is every way riſing, the form where-
Monumenta of js an oblong ſquare, encompaſs'd with 3 great
Britan. MS. orks, one higher than another. The ſpace
within, is about ſeven acres. | The inhabitants
thereabouts think it was once a City; but

Eclipſes in
Aries.

Lord Talbott, Lord Furnivall, Lord Verdon, Lord
Strange of Blackmere, and Marſhal of France,

MCCCCLIIK

Theſe Talbots many years ago came, by mar-

is ſeen in this neighbourhood, and call'd Black-

ennobled, and their Eſtate encreas'd, by mar-
riage with a daughter and coheir of John Gif-
fard of Brimsfield, of an honourable and an-
cient Family in Gloceſterſhire, whoſe wite
Mawd was the only daughter of Walter Clif-

who dy'd in battel, at Burdews, VII of July,

riage, to the Inheritance of the Barons L Eſtrange Baron
of Blackmere, in this place. For they were L'Eſtrange c
Lords Marchers in this County ; and their ſeat Blackmere,

mere, from a Lake of blackiſh water, but f now + 50 fig
almoſt quite ruin d. This family was much ann, 1607,

others judge it to have been the Camp, either |ford the third.

of Penda, or Ofwald, [and the Tradition is, that] More to the eaſt, lies Eleſmer, a ſmall tract Ellefne:

this * was the laſt Retreat of the Bri- of rich and fertile ground, which (according 203.
Whittington, tains. | Scarce three miles off, ſtands hitting to the Cheſter-Chronicle,) King John ſettled,

ton, not long ſince a caſtle of the Fitz-WHarrens, together with the caſtle, upon Lewellin Prince

who derive their pedigree from Warren deſof North-Wales, when he made the match be-

Metz, a Lorainer : he took to wife the heireſs |rween him and his natural daughter. 'Then,

of William Peverel, who is ſaid to have built|it came to the L'Eftranges ; and after that had 4 Non ba.

it, and had iſlue by her, Fulk, the father off its Baron Thomas Egerton, who for his ſingu- C. /
The life of the renown'd Full Fitz-F/arren, whoſe various lar wiſdom and integrity, was by Queen Eli-
Falk written Fortune in War, was matter of great admira-|zabeth made Lord Keeper of the Great Seal,
in French. tion among our Anceſtors. In Henry the third's and afterwards by King James | the firſt ] ad-

reign, there was a Commiſſion to Full Fitz-| yanced to the higheſt dignity of the Long-robe,

Warren, to fortify the caſtle of Whittington ſuſſi- by being made Lord Chancellor, and created

ciently, as appears by the Cloſe-rolls in the fifth ſ firſt | Baron of Elteſmer ; [and then, Viſcount Baron of
Barons Fitz- year of that King's reign. The Barony of | Brackley ; Whoſe poſterity do ſtill enjoy thoſe ti- Elleſmer,

Warren. theſe tz Marrens expir'd in a female; having tles, with the additional one of Earl of Bridg-
+ So ſaid, f in the laſt age paſs'd from the Hancfords, to Water.
ann. 1607. the Bourchiers, Earls of Bath. Below this | To ſay ſomewhat briefly of the Earls of Ear dt

Now Earls, caſtle, J//y-noc the ſon of Meuric, held certain Shrewsbury: Roger de Beleſm or Montgomery, Shrew,
8 lands by the ſervice of being Latimer between the | was created by William the Conqueror, firſt
Engliſh and Welſh, that is, Interpreter. This Earl of Shrewsbury ; who alſo had the greateſt
I remark from an old Inquiſition, for the bet-| part of this tract beſtow'd on him. His eldeſt
The Ggnifica- ter underſtanding of the name Latimer; which ſon Hugh was his immediate ſucceſſor, but was
tion of Lati - few know, tho” it is a name very famous 1n|afterwards ſlain in Wales, leaving no iſſue be-
er. this kingdom. Upon the North-bounds of hind him. Next, was Robert, another of his
Shenton, this Shire, ſtands firſt, Shexuton, a'feat of the; ſons, a man barbarouily cruel both towards his
Needhams, a famous family, [of which, was Sir own ſons, and his hoſtages, whoſe eyes he
Robert Needbam Knight, who had conſiderableipull'd out, and then gelded them, with his
Commands during the war in Ireland, under|own hands. But at laſt, being attainted of
Queen Elizabeth. He was afterwards Vice- High Treaſon, he was puniſh'd by King Henry
Preſident of the Council in the Marches off the firſt with perpetual impriſonment, where
Wales, and created by King Charles the firſt, his ſufferings were a juſt judgment upon him
. Viſcount Xilmorey: To him ſucceeded Thomas for his inhuman Cruelties.
his ſon, who built a noble Houſe in this place, | The revenues of the Earldom were trans-* Maln H
and was ſucceeded by Robert Viſcount Kil-|fer'd to Queen Adelixia, for her dower. Many Novel. 5+ BF
morey his ſon.] Next, Jhite-church, or the] ages after, King Henry the ſixth, in the twen- |
white Monaſtery, famous for ſeveral monu-|tieth year of his reign, confer'd this honour
ments of the Talbots, but more particularly for upon John Lord Talbot, who by nature, as
that of our Engliſh Achilles John Talbot, the] well as his own choice, + ſeem'd to have been f Seems C.
firſt Earl of Shrewsbury of this family, whoſe | deſtin'd for military achievements. And in the
1 I here inſert; not that it comes up to 04h tra of his reign, he encreas'd his honours,
the character of ſuch a Hero, but only for a] by adding to his title of Earl of Shrewsbury and
Specimen, to ſhew how the ſtile of every] Weigford, that of Earl of Waterfurd, and the
age varies, in framing their monumental In-| Barony of Duxgarvan, and the Lieutenancy of
ſcriptions. Ireland. He was afterwards ſlain in a battel
| at Chaſtilon in Aquitain, with his younger ſon
ORATE PRO ANIMA PRENOBILIS| John, Viſcount Lie, after he had carry'd his
DoMINIL. DOMINI IOANNIS TAL-| Trophies of Victory over a great part of France,
BOTT QVONDAM COMITIS SALO-|for four and twenty years together. His ſon
PLE, DOMINI TALBOTT, DOMINI| John ſucceeded him (whoſe mother was the
FVRNIVALL, DOMINI VERDON, DO-| daughter and coheir of Thomas Neil Lord
MINI STRANGE DE BLACKMERE, ET Furnivall ; ) but he, eſpouſing the intereſt of
MARESCHALLI FRANCLE, QVI OBIIT |the houſe of Lancaſter, loſt his life in the bat-
IN BELLO APVD BVRDEWS VII. LVLII|tel of Northampton. To him was born John
MCCCCLIII. . the third Earl of Shrewsbury, and Gilbert, from
{whom the Talbots of Grafton are deſcended.
2142 That is, Next, ſucceeded George, and after him Huncis
Pray for the ſoul of the right honourable Lord, his ſon, the father of George Talbot Earl of
Lord John Talbott, ſometime Earl of Shrewsbury,|Shrewsbury, a perſon of untainted honour, and

great

White-
church.

* N *
e * * -
Ss 2 a6". 5, . N e e HEN 15 * 2 2 "= -

8 — .
* r -.

= — —

he.
— - - a i

——
.

— We on

*

ME FFF 8 _

*

**
EY —_

4 XII nt of une

*
+5 >
H. Formby Wd
* Sand = D Creat Crofbu |
>=" — * | 4 N
| e — 2 1.
| 3 urbo * | - Þ |
' B We - — . 8K Hall A R T
3 7 & Kirk dale
n.
3 e Leverpole
Ale : Douce Sf 7
58 * : if
Sand 7
A wo Halewood -
2 K. Hall 1 / W
ne
35

*
”
r
%%% „„

. * 13
el W

*

arden Loft

Broughton
Hodleflon

£Auvnnarton

Bur te

P T- QF

&
Bretton TY

"at
»

Sold by Abel Swale «1unsham &
John Churchil .

SF 1 1N TT

Mm Nm Wi MUM

8

Warrington

Mother Walton

Fo: 4

—
—
—

15

Y

20

Wulton

Theluwth
Cropenhall
o ©

2
& ents —
Iu” Table dr
Hg

22
1 r -

ns 3 5 —
D Lung; o

c Vite

*

Aollr Crone
Rixton br

—

91
Urhburton hay
- " Bollin &*

6' 4. une

* loy hege
— 25 os 2 22. =

Chap

Connavih
M WICH
a2 *

ART OF SEHR.

— | ——_
| *

=

11 — ͥ— —„—¼d — = . ———
g . A 8 [3 Dagrees | ä

1

;
9

—  —

_ — *

EY

— ONE | : Tom | | |
5 wt Parr or
Foxx IIK.

de — II HE WS

5 —7ꝙ —— . "hw |
OH
74 % 2

p c * 3

ne

*®.
* * 2 Jule, Nog 4

; 4 . Bd - 14 *
1 1

Cale rel.
**

« Hell. * R
hy 1 7
Bothemshall

H rhonſhaw . & Ouloractt

13 A-R--B Y
dr Berdhall

Redings Gs

A Altrincham &fimperts”
euro,. hap

; Hollin 4 0 4 - R :
* | Ofirwn N ton 2 _Cnllorhall 1 Firth
, 8 4, ne — «Vor hall Br — . „.
Seele, Alyagen = T 4
8 1 Honſford 68 „ | 8 HI R F
« os 7 + nf engto

Pot Chap.”

od

*

. „

Oo W 2 2 |
NN in theStroot \ dy Cerehal "oh * P 8
of *Tah og . * alderle, 19h
& Fs 4 8 S erk . ge H 1 N D

Birtley

Orer Poor CQO mw
lh vn

Cl
: — 88 28

„ee,
Hr

me Le

—

$4 *STAFFORD SHIRE
*

8 —
You

ch
3

OF SHROP SHIRE

2

— 7
2 DD ˖——
8 — Sas
— 8 -

_— — —

av ITY IT ATR

* —

2 — +
-* - q —
—— 2 —

D
24 *

*

gre
+ At this wh
day fop: his
ports, C

0
a County Pala-
. 5 tine.

t
ee 6 |
ies

a ]

]

Peter Pithz- |
I us in the De-
: ſcription of
Champain,
J. Tilius.
4
o
| + Per gle
| dium.
|
. :
is
5
5
3
|
\
ö f
FX
ls

Sk Py * no

"CHES

3
— —

FRE

$

ports,

reat experience in the weighty affairs ot State ;

+ At this whoſe ſon Gilbert * ſupported the character of
day *

his Anceſtors, with great ſplendor and virtue.
Gilbert dying without iſſue-male, was ſucceed-

More rare Plants growing wild in Shrop-
ſhire.

ed in this honour by Edward his brother; dut Gramen juncoides lanatum alterum Park:

he alſo dy'd without iſſue ſurviving : and the
chief branch of this noble family being thus
extin&, George Talbot of Grafton in Worceſter-

Juncus Alpinus capitulo lanuginoſo, ſive Schœ-
aolaguros C. B. Hares-tail-ruſh., On Eleſmeer
neers in great abundance. This is the ſame with

ſhire, lineal heir to Sir Gilbert Talbot, ſecond {the Gramen junceum montanum ſubcerules ſpi-

ſon to the famous Jobs ſucceeded ; who dy-
ing alſo without iſſue, his nephew John Talbot
ſucceeded to the title of Earl; who dying,
left Francis his eldeſt ſon, Earl of Shrewsbury ;'
father of Charles the late poſſeſſor of this title,
who, in the ſixth year of William and Mary,
was created Marquiſs of Alton and Duke of
Shrewsbury. But he dying without iſſue, the
title of Duke became extinct ; and that of Earl
deſcended to George, the ſon of Thomas Talbot
of Longford in this County ; which Thomas
was younger brother to Charles, the late
Dake. |

There are in this Shire about 170 Pariſhes.

ca Cambrobritannicum of Parkinſon, who makes
two Plants of one : it is alſo the Gramen plumo-
ſum elegans Phyt. Brit.
Perſicaria filiquoſa Ger. Codded Arſmart, or
Touch-me-not. On the banks of the river Kemlett
at Marington in the Pariſh of Cherbury : alſo at
Guerndee in the Pariſh of Cherſtock, half a mile
from the foreſaid river, among great Alder-trees in
the bigh-way. Ger. p. 446. |

Roſmarinum ſylveſtre minus noſtras impro-
prie dictum cum Ciſtiledon dicti potius ſpecies
ſit, Quidam ad Ericas referunt. At Birch in
the moors of Elleſmeer plentifully. It grows in all

the Countries near, viz. Cheſhire, Lancaſhire, &c.

in moſſes and boggy places.

CAES

H E fifth and laſt part of thoſe
Counties which were formerly
aN poſſeſſed by the Cornavii, is the
\-\ County of Cheſter, call'd in
Saxon Lexcpe-rcype, and now
commonly Cheſhire and the
County Palatine of Cheſter ; for
the Earls of it had Palatine Juriſdiction be-
longing to them, and all the Inhabitants held
of them as in chief, and were under a ſove-
raign allegiance and fealty to them, as they were
to the King. As for the word Palatine (that
I may here repeat what I have ſaid of it before)
it was formerly common to all who had any

N

N
County Pala- 57 7
tine. —

Peter Pithz- Office in the King's Court or Palace; and in

wh. the Dh that age, Comes Palatinus was a title of digni-| nates of the Rhine, Durham, and Lancaftter. |
Cala, ty conterr'd upon him who had before been] Whether therefore the ancient Palatines were |

]. Tilius,

Palatinus, with authority to hear and determin
Cauſes in his own territory ; and as well his
Nobles, whom they call'd Barons, as his Vaſ-
ſals, were bound to frequent the Palace of the
Count, both to give their advice as there
ſhould be occaſion, and to grace his Court
with their preſence. {It had this additional
Title of Palatine, upon the coming over ot the

Normans. At firſt, indeed, Miliam the Con-

queror gave this Province to Gherbord a Noble-
man of Flanders, who had only the ſame title
and power as the Officiary Earls amongſt the
Saxons had enjoy d; the

HIRE.

As to the original of Palatinates in general,
it is clear (as hath been already obſerved) trat
anciently, in the decline of the Roman Em-
pire, the INazazria, as the name imports, were
only Officers of Princes. The term, in pro-
ceſs of time, was reſtrain'd to thoſe who had
the final determination of Cauſes under the
King or Emperor. And thoſe, who exercis'd
this ſovereignty of juriſdiction in any Precinct
or Province, were call'd Comites Palatini ; and
the place where the juriſdiction was us'd, Pala-
tinatus, a Palatinate. Inſtances ot ſuch pertonal
offices in the Court, we may ſtill obſerve in
the Palatine of Hungary ; and examples of
ſuch local authority we have in the Palati-

equal to the Prafetti Pratorio, the Curopalate,
the Grand Maiſtres in France, or the ancient
Chiet Juſtices in England, we need nor diſpute,
lance it is clear, chat the Comites Palatini, as all
new-erected Officer's titles, retain'd many of
the powers of the ancient, but ſtill had many
characters of difference, as well as ſome of re-
ſemblance.

By virtue of this Grant, Cheſter enjoy'd all
ſovereign juriſdiction within its own precin&s ;
and that in ſo high a degree, that the ancient
Earls had Parliaments conſiſting of their own

eritance, the Earl- Barons and Tenants, and were not oblig'd by the

3 2 ů ——
—
——
— —
— —
—

*
ms > — PR — — — —

ET ———— —«« — . — — ren
** 1 92 >
— — _ — 5
—— : TT PR _— — —

_— —

- * —— —

— — > - _—
— » a

——
—

11

dom, and grandeur of the Tenure being not Engliſn Acts of Parliament. Theſe high, and | 4 |

yet ſertl'd. Afterwards Hugh Lupus, fon of the |otherwife unaccountable, juriſdictions were 04
Viſcount of Aurancbes, = Nephew of William thought neceſlary upon the Marches and Bor- .

che Conqueror by his ſiſter, receiv'd this Earl-|ders of the Kingdom, as inveſting the Gover- 04 4

dom from the Conqueror under the greateſt |nour of the Provinces with Dictatorial power, 142

and moſt honourable Tenure that ever was land enabling them more effectually to ſubdue # £2

to a Subject; He gave him this uhole the common enemies of the Nation. But en 151

+ Per gla- Commty, to hold to him and his heirs, as freely, f by che ſame power, that was formerly a good bar 144
dium. the Sword, as the King beld the Crown of Englaud. | againſt Invaders, grew formidable to tlie Rin 1
The vaſt extent of the Powers convey'd in thisſ themſelves, Henry the eighth reſtrain'd the "4 110%

Grant, cerry'd in them Palatine Juriſdiction ; vereignty of the Palatinates, and made them | 6 1

though it is certain, that neither Hagh Lupus, not only ſubordinate. to, but dependent on, rhe 1

nor any of his ſucceſſors, were in the Grant it Crown of England. Aud yet after that re- 1
ſelf, or in any ancient Records, ſtil'd Comres | ſtraining Statute, all Pleas of Lands and Te- | +4 3
Palatini. | ments, all Contracts ariſing within this Coun- f

]

DE Fi
J

f

e a PA

F
**

8

WB
N 1
£
|.
8
4 4
GH
-

— OO — —

. * _ 0 R ,
* .
er. 8 8 5 838 8

"CORN

FFF

The beſt
Cheeſe.

ty, have been, are, and ought to be, judicially
heard and determin'd within this Shire, and

| ſhire and Derbyſhire, on the North with Lan-
caſhire, and on the Weſt with Denbighſhire

not elſewhere : and it any determination beſ and Flintſhire. Toward the North-weſt, it
made out of it, it is void, and coram non judice ;| ſhoots out into a conſiderable * Peninſula; where «
except in caſes of Error, Foreign Plea, and Fo-|the Sea breaking-in on both ſides, makes two

reign Voucher. And there is no other crime but

Creeks, which receive all the rivers of this

Treaſon, that can draw an Inhabitant of this|County, Into that Creek which is more to

County to a Trial elſewhere.

the Weſt, runs the river Deva or Dee, which

This Juriſdiction, though held now in other divides this County from Denbighſhire : Into
Counties alſo, was moſt anciently claim'd and|that which is more to the Eaſt, the Mer, that
enjoy d by this County of Cheſter. The Palati- goes through the middle of the County, and
nate of Lancaſter, which was the Favourite-|the Merſey, that ſevers it from Lancaſhire, diſ-
Province of the Kings of that Houſe, was ere-|charge themſelves. And in deſcribing this
&ed under Edward the firſt, and granted by County, I know no better method, than to

him to Henry, the firſt Duke of Lancaſter ;

follow the courſe of theſe rivers ; for all the

and even in the Act of Parliament that ſepa-|places of greateſt note, are ſituate upon them.
rates that Dutchy from the Crown of England, But before I enter upon particulars, I will pre-
King Henry the fourth grants Al other Liberties|miſe what Lucian the Monk has ſaid of it in
and Royalties whatever, belonging to a County Pala-|general, leſt I ſhould be accus'd hereafter of
tine, as freely and entirely as the Earl of Cheſter|omitting any thing that might conduce to the
ts known to enjoy them, within the ſaid County of [honour of the Inhabitants ; beſides, that Au-
Chefter. Which ancient reference proves plainly, thor is now ſcarce, and as old almoſt as the

that the County of Cheſter was eſteem'd the

ham doth in ancient Plea lay claim to Royal [other places of the Kingdom; they are found to be
Juriſdiction in his Province from the time of |partly different from the reſt, partly better, and in
the Conqueſt, and before ; yet it is evident, that |ſome things equal. But they are ſeen eſpecially ( which

not Durham it ſelf (much leſs Ely, Hexam-

is very conſiderable in point of civility and breeding)

ſhire, or Pembroke) was erected into a County Pa- to feaſt in common, are cheerful at meals, liberal in

latine, before Cheſter. And as this is the moſt

entertainments, haſty but ſoon pacified, talkative, a-

ancient, ſo it is the moſt famous and remar-|wverſe to ſubjettion and ſlavery, merciful to thoſe in
kable Palatinate in England: inſomuch that a ſdiſtreſi, compaſſionate to the poor, kind to relations,
late Author, Becman, who uſually miſtakes in not very induſtrious, plain and open, moderate in
Engliſh Affairs, ſays of Cheſhire ; I i pecu-|eating, far from deſigning, bold and forward in bor-
liar to the County of Cheſter, that it enjoys the |rowing ; abounding in woods and paſtures, and rich
Title of a Palatinate ; a title, not to be found in cattle. They border on one fide upon the Welſh,

elſewhere, but only among the Germans.

and have ſuch a tinfture of their manners and

This Country, Malmesbury ſays, yields corn very| cuſtoms by intercourſe, that they are very like them.
ſparingly, eſpecially wheat, but cattle and fiſh in a-| It is alſo to be obſerv'd, That as the County of Che-
bundance. On the contrary, Ranulph of Che- ſter is ſhut in, and ſeparated from the reſt

ſter affirms, that ¶ hatever Malmesbury might

England, by the Wood Lime, ſo is it diſtinguiſb d

fanſy from the report of others, it affords great ſtore|from all other parts of England, by ſome peculiar
of all ſorts of victuali, corn, fleſh, fiſh, and eſpe- | immunities : by the grants of the Kings, and the E-
cially of the beſt of Salmon : it drives a confidera-|minence of the Earls, they have been wont, in
ble trade, not only by importing but by return, as ha- Aſſemblies of the people, to attend the Prince's ſword,

ving, within it ſelf, ſalt-pits, mines, and metals

«| rather than the King's crown, an to try cauſes of

Give me leave to add farther, that the graſs of |the greateſt conſequence within themſelves, with full
this Country has a peculiar good quality, ſo authority and licence. Cheſter it ſelf is frequented
that they make great ſtore of Cheeſe, more a- hy the Iriſh, is neighbour to the Welſh, and plenti-
greeable and better reliſh'd than thoſe of any [fully ſerv'd with provifions by the Engliſh : it is cu-

other parts of the Kingdom, even when they
procure the ſame Dary-women to make them.
And here, by the by, I cannot but admire

at what Strabo writes, that ſome of the Bri-|worthy to be call'd a City; ſecured and guarded

tains in his time knew not how to make

with continual watchings of holy men, and through

Cheeſe ; and that Pliny expreſſes his won- |the mercy of our Saviour ever preſerved by the aid of
der, how barbarous people who liv'd upon milk, |the Almighty.

come to deſpiſe, or elſe not know for ſo long time,

way of Curdling it to a pleaſant tartneſs, and of | abounds with Salmon, and ſprings from two foun-

making fat butter of it. From whence it may
be inter'd, that the art of 7 Cheeſe was
taught us by the Romans ; ſand t

affording no other name for Cheeſe, but Caws ;

which 1s a manifeſt corruption of the Latin

tains in Wales, from which ſome believe it had
its denomination, For Dwy ſignifies two in

is inference | their language. But others, from the nature alſo
ſeems to be confirmed by the Britiſh language, and meaning of the word, will have it to ſig-

fie black water; others again, God's water, and & Pei aqus

Divine water. Now although, as we learn from

Caſeus. But the ſame may be noted of all the] Auſonius, a Fountain ſacred to the Gods was

other modern languages of Europe.
Although this Country is inferiour to many

was the ſame with our Britiſh ; ) and although

others of the Kingdom in fruitfulneſs, yet it all rivers were Atn«&;, and by Antiquity
has always produc'd more Gentry, than any of |eſteem'd Divine, and our Britains too paid them
them. There was no part of England that for- divine honours, as Gildas informs us; yet I
merly ſupply'd the King's army with more] cannot ſee, why they ſhould attribute divinity

Nobility, or that could number more Knights-

families. On the South-ſide, it is bounded

with Shropſhire, on the Eaſt, with Stafford-|nours to the river Pæneus, on account of its

plea-

123

riouſly fituated, having gates f the ancient model. Poſnine
Ii has been exercis'd with many difficulties ; is fortified atiqui.
with a river and f Watches, according to the name, I 0culis,

The river Dee, call'd in Latin Deva, in Bri- The river
the benefit of Cheeſe, eſpecially ſeeing they had the |tiſh Dyffyr dwy, that is, the water of the Duy, Des. |

call'd Divona in the old Gallick tongue (which Dixon.

to this river Dwy in particular, above all others. Rivers (#
We read, that the Theſſalians gave divine ho-cred.

Wirrall,

1 e |Conquelt : But if any man be deſirozs, either fully, Lucian the in
moſt ancient and beſt ſettled Palatinate in this or as near as may be, to treat of the manners of

Kingdom. And although the Biſhop of Dur-

Monk in com- n
the Inhabitants, with reſpef# to them that live in <ndation df . V

.

Banchor.

„* Malmesb.
in Hiſt. &
lib. 4. de
Pontiſice.

1 + Beda Eccl
hiſt, lib. 2.
c. 2.

Sr Ont LORE”. 1

Polychro
I. 4. c. 51.

1 . „ w li WHO M6 SHE INF HED. A 18 of

Not, in
fat. p. 7

P

Dev

y 8 y 6 *
* e 1 2 *

"CHESHIRE.

pleaſantneſs ; the Scythians attributed the ſame
to the Jſter, for its largeneſs ; and the Ger-
mans, to the Rhine, becauſe it was their judge
in caſes of ſuſpicion and jealouſie between mar-
ried perſons : but I ſee no reaſon (as I aid
before ) why they ſhould aſcribe Divinity to
this river ; unleſs perhaps it has ſometimes
chang'd its courſe, and might preſage victory to
the Inhabitants When they were at war with
one another, as it inclin'd more to this or that
ſide, when it left its chanel ; for this is rela-
ted by Giraldus Cambrenſis, who in ſome mea-
ſure believ'd it. Or perhaps they obſery'd, that
contrary to the manner of other rivers, it does
not overflow with a fall of rain, but yet will
ſwell ſo extraordinarily when the South-wind
bears upon it, that it will overflow the neigh-
bouring fields. Again, it may be, the water
here ſeem'd Holy to the Chriſtian Britains;
for it is ſaid, that when they ſtood in battel-
array ready to engage the Saxons, they firſt
kiſs'd the earth, and devoutly drank of this river,
in memory of the blood of their holy Saviour.
The Dee (the courſe whereof, from
Wales, is ſtrong and rapid) has no ſooner en-
ter'd Cheſhire, but it's force abates, and it

Ponium, Tuns more gently through Bonium, which in

Banchor.

ſome copies of Antoninus is read Bovium ; an
eminent City in thoſe times, and afterwards a
famous Monaſtery. From the Choir or Quire,
it was call'd by the Britains Bonchor and Ban-
chor, and by the Saxons Bancopna-bymg and
Banchor. Before we go farther, it will be ne-
ceſſary to arm the reader againſt a miſtake in

* Malmesb, * Malmesbury, who confounds this with the E-

in Hiſt, &
lib, 4. de
Pontiſice.

piſcopal See in Caernarvonſhire call'd Bangor;
whereas (as Mr. Burton obſerves) the latter was
like a Colony drawn out of the former. That
Gildas, the moſt ancient of our Britiſh wri-
ters, Was a member of this place, we have the
authority of Leland ; but upon what grounds

+ Beda Eccl, he thinks fo, is not certain. f As for Dinothus,

hiſt, lib. 2.
c. 2.

he was undoubtedly Abbot there, and was
ſent-for ro meet Auſtin, at the Synod which
he call'd here in this Iſland.
many very. good men, it is ſaid by ſome to have
produc'd that greateſt and worſt of hereticks
Pelagius, who perverting the nature of God's
grace, did. ſo long infeſt the Weſtern Church
with his pernicious Do&rine. [ Ranulphus Ce-

|| Polychron. ſtrenſis tells us, that in his time it was || thought

I. 4. c. 51.

fo by ſome people; and John of Tinmouth, in the
life of St. Alban, exprelly ſays that he was Ab-
bot here.] Hence, in Proſper Aquitanus he is
call'd Coluber Britannus :

Peſtifero vomuit Coluber ſermone Britannus.

The Britiſh Adder vented from his poys nous
tongue. |

Which I mention for no other reaſon, than
that it is the intereſt of all mankind to have
notice of ſuch infections. In the Monaſtery (Bede
ſays) there were ſo many Monks, that when they
were divided into ſeven parts, having each their diſtinci
ruler appointed them, every one of theſe particular
Societies conſiſted of three hundred men at leaſt, who
all liv'd by the labour of their own hands. Edil-
fred, King of the Northumbrians, flew twelve
hundred of them, for praying for the Britains
their fellow Chriſtians, againſt the Saxon-Infi-

Not. in Pra- dels. [So ſay all our ancient Hiſtorians : only,

fat. p. 7,

the Publiſher of King Zlfred's life has con-
trated the number into two hundred, and,
contrary to the general voice of Antiquity (un-
leſs the Ulfter-Annals be on his ſide) makes the
Battle to be fought in the year 613, which per-

haps was after the death of Auguſtine the
Monk. Concerning this Bangor [skoed (for ſo
it is generally called, to diſtinguiſh it from
Bangor in Caernarvonſhire) take alſo the follow-
ing account out of a Manuſcript Hiſtory of
r. Robert Vaughan : Bangor Monachorum (leich
he) ſo call d from the famous Monaſtery that was
once there, lies fituate in Maelor Seiſnig, or Brom-
field, not far from Kaer Lheion, or Weſt-cheſter.
Both Town and Monaſtery hath ſo felt the injuries
of time, that at this day there are hardly any ruins
of them remaining. For we find now only a ſmall
Village of the name, and uo footſteps of the old City,
except the rubbiſh of the two principal Gates, Porth

And among

Kleis and Porth Wgan ; the former looking to-
wards England, and the latter towards Wales. They

are about a mile diſtant from each other, whence we

may conje:ture the extent of the City, which lay be-
tween theſe two Gates, the river Dee running through

the midſt of it. The old Britiſh Triades tell us,
that in the time of the Britiſh Kings there were in

the Monaſtery of Bangor two thouſand four hundred
Monks, who in their turns ( viz. a hundred each
hour of the 24) read Prayers and ſung Pſalms con-
tinually, ſo that Divine Service was perform'd day
and night without intermiſſion, &c.

And now, to digreſs a little, upon the men- |
tion of theſe Monks ; The Inſtitution of a Mo- Monaſtick
naſtick lite did firſt proceed from the terrible life.
perſecutions of the Chriſtian Religion ; to a-
void which, good men withdrew themſelves,
and retir'd into the Deſerts of t, to the
end they might ſafely and freely exerciſe their
profeſſion ; and not with a deſign to involve Rutilius *
themſelves in miſery rather than be made miſe- Claudius in
rable by others, as the Heathens upbraided Itinerario.
them. There, they diſperſed themſelves among
the mountains and woods, living firſt ſolitarily

in Caves and Cells, from whence they were
call'd by the Greeks Monachi : afterwards they
began, as nature it ſelf prompted them, to live
ſociably together, finding that more agreea-
ble, than, like wild beaſts, to ſculk up and
down in the Deſerts. Then, their whole bu-
ſineſs was to pray, and to ſupply their own
wants with their own labour, giving the over-
plus to the poor, and tying themſelves, by
Vows, to Poverty, Obedience, and Chaſtity.
Athanaſius firſt introduced this Monaſtick way
of living in the Weſtern Church. Whereunto
S. Auſtin in Africa, S. Martin in France, and
Congell (as it is ſaid) in Britain and Ireland,
very much contributed, by ſettling it among
the Clergy. Upon which, it is incredible how
they grew and ſpread in the world, how many
and great Religious Houſes were prepared to
entertain them, which, from their way of
living in common, were call'd Cænobia; as they
were alſo call'd Monaſteries, becauſe they ſtill
retain'd a ſhew of a ſolitary life : and there
was nothing in thoſe times eſteem'd ſo ſtrictly
religious. For they were not only ſerviceable to
themſelves, but beneficial to all mankind, by
their prayers and interceſſions with God, and
by their good example, learning, labour, and
induſtry. But as the times corrupted, this holy
zeal of theirs began to cool: Rebus ceſſere ſecundis,

as the Poet ſays ; i.e. Proſperity debauch'd
them. But now ro return.

From hence-forward this Monaſtery went to
decay; for William of Malmesbury, who liv'd
not long after the Norman Conqueſt, ſays,
There remain d here ſo many figns of Antiquity, ſo The Banchoy

many broken walls of Churches, ſo many turns and nn—_— bY

paſſages through gates, and ſuch heaps of rubbifh ; the life of Aa
as were hardly elſewhere to be met with. But now lachias, was

there is ſcarce any appearance of a City orin Ireland,

Monaſtery ; the names only of two gates re- Ses fore.
Pp p p main,

667

CORNAVDIT

_—

main, Port-Hoghan, and Port-Cleis, which ſtand

at a mile's diſtance; and, between them, Ro-

man coyns have been often found. [Theſe and

other Remains of Britiſh and Roman Antiqui-

ty (ſuch are, ſaith Leland, the bones and ve-

{tures of Monks, ſquared Stones, Roman Coins,

and the like) are teſtimonies of the ancient

glory of this place.] But here I muſt note, that

Honjum be- Benium is not reckon'd within this County,

longs toFlint- but in Flintſhire ; a part of which is in a man-

ſhire, ner ſcver'd from the reſt, and lies here between
Cheſhire and Shropſhire.

After the river Dee has enter'd this County,

Malpas. it runs by the town Malpas or Malo paſſus, ſi-

tuate on a high hill not far from it, which had

formerly a Caſtle ; and from the ill, narrow,

ſteep, rugged way to it, was call'd in Latin

Mala platea, or Il-ſtreet : for the ſame reaſon it

was called by the Normans Mal-pas, and by the

Engliſh, near the ſame ſenſe, Depen-bache. Hugh

Earl of Cheſter gave the Barony of this place,

Ex Rotulo to Robert Fitz-Hugh. In the reign of Henry

Domeſday. the ſecond, William Patrick, {on of William Pa-

— trick, held 2 ; of which race was ow

enriz. Patrick, who forteited it by f outlawry. Some

8998 years after, David of Malpas, by a Writ of Re-

Malpas, cogniſance, got a moiety of that Town, which

then belong'd to Gilbert Clerk; but a great part

of this Barony deſcended afterwards to thoſe

Suttons who were Barons of Dudley; and a par-

De Sano Pe- cel thereof fell to Urian de S. Petro, commonly
_ Sampier. And from Philip, a younger ſon of
David of Malpas, is deſcended that famous and

Egertons, knightly family of the Egertons, who derived
this name from their place of habitation, as di-

vers of the ſame tamily have done from other

places, viz. Cotgrave, Overton, Codington, and

Golborn. But betore I leave this place, I muſt

beg leave, though upon a ſerious and grave ſub-

ject, to recite a pleaſant Story concerning the

name of it, out of Giraldus Cambrenſis. I

Itirer. lib. 2. happen d (ſays he) in our times, that a certain Jeu
cap. 13. travelling towards Shrewsbury, with the Arch-deacon
of this place, whoſe name was Peche, that is, Sin,

and the Dean, who was call'd Devil ; and hearing

the Arch-deacon ſay, that his Arch-deaconry began at

a place call'd Ill- ſtreet, and reach'd as far as Mal-
pas towards Cheſter : the Jeu knowing both their
names, told them wery pleaſantly, he found it would
be a miracle if ever he got ſafe out of this County,
where Sin was the Arch-Deacon, and the Devil was
the Dean ; where the entry into the Arch-dea-
conry was Ill-ſtreet, and the going out again
Malpas.

From hence, Dee is carried down by Shoclach,
where was formerly a Caſtle ; then by Alford,
belonging heretofore to the Arderns; next by

Pouleſord. Pouleford, where in Henry the third's reign,

Ralph de Ormesby had his Caſtle ; and laſtly by

Eaton. Eaton, the feat of the famous family of Groſue-

Groſverour, nour, i. e. grandis venator, or great hunter; whoſe

poſterity go corruptly by the name of Gra-
Venor.

A little higher, upon the ſame river, and not
far from the mouth (which Ptolemy calls Seteia,
for Deia ) ſtands that noble City, which the
ſame Ptolemy calls Deunana, and Antoninu
Deva. Deva, from the river ; the Britains, Caer-Legion,
Caer-Leon-Vaur, Caer-Leon ar Dufyr Dwy, and
by way of preheminence Caer ; as our Ance-
ſtors the Saxons called it Legeacertep, from
the Legion there, and we more contractly, Weſt-
cheſter, from its weſterly ſituation ; and ſimply
Cheſter, according to that Verſe,

Shoclach.

Deunana.

Cheſter,

Ceſtria de Caſtris nomen quafs Caſtria

ſumpfit.

Cheſter from Caſter (or the Camp) was

nam' d

And without doubt, theſe names were derived
from the twentieth Legion, call'd Vittrix. For
in the ſecond Conſulſhip of Galba the Empe-
ror with Titus Vinius, that Legion | ſay ſome]
was tranſported into Britain. But concerning
this Legion, two points are controverted among
learned men ; the firſt, What was the true
name ; the ſecond, what was the preciſe time
of its coming over? For the firſt, it is gene-
rally call'd Legio Viceſima Viftrix ; but that ſeems
to be defective, if we may depend on the au-
thority of an old Inſcription upon an Altar
dug-up in Cheſter A. D. 1653, and do compare
it with what Dio has ſaid of this Legion. The
Inſcription is this,

I. O. M. TANARO

from the Bri.

Tunarut is the

TELVPIVS GALE R.!
PRAESENS., Mx

tiſh Taran
Thunder, or
an, fre,
Gale, Itiner,

P+ 53»

Praſes Gum.
thæ, or North.
Wales, Pri,
Marm, 4-

rund. & Gal,

RI. LEG. xX. 5.

COMMODO-ET

LATERANO
COS.

Ni 8, Jo» i.

Which TI read thus:

Jovi Optimo Maximo Tanaro
Titus Elupius Galerius
: Przſens Gubernator
Principibus Legionis Viceſimæ Victricis Valeriæ
Commodo & Laterano Conſulibus
Votum ſolvit lubens merito.

For if that Legion was call'd ſimply Vicefma
Victrix, what occaſion was there for doubling
the V ? To make it Vige/ima quinta, would be
a Conjecture altogether groundleſs : and yet it
the firſt V denote Vittrix, the ſecond muſt
ſignifie ſomething more. There is alſo another
Altar (dug-up at Crowdundal-waith in Weſtmor-
land ) that obliges us not to be too poſitive,
that thoſe who think it might be call'd Valens
Victrix, or Valentia Viftrix, are in an error.

VAROQONIVY. cc. ECFYS
LEG. XX. V. V. Cc.

Here

ES,

"PF
.

eee emen

l af
S 3 a Th we 4

Legionum.
* Annot, ad
Polyolb.
Cant, 11.

7
1
1
[
+ Julianarum -
;
(
{
|
|
|

;
\
;
J
q
7

EN eee

a ES e.

„

3

” 4. 4 oF v 4 *
4 1

6

CHESHIRE.

Here alſo we ſee the V. is doubl'd. Whether
the latter ſignifie Valeria, will beſt appear out
of Dio, that great Hiſtorian, who in his re-
cital of the Roman Legions preſery'd under
Auguſtns, hath theſe words concerning the 20%
Legion: Kat 5 exoso} & & Ovantgianiy & Nixrroges aro-
ua, 9 ow Beerlariz Y arw des, Acnacg arg py
rer rie AH A, ixorlur, Y w Th Tegh⁰iν,t [Th
dro] nt ler, & & rd f pil dd du Oba-
Aigle NA D, pre wy r 7H we ονοον raorg
ce, wANανννοα ringe. be twentieth Legion
which is alſo called Valeria and Victrix, is now in
Upper-Britain, which Auguſtus preſerv'd together
with the other Legion that hath the name of Vi-
ceſima, and hath it's winter-quarters in Lower-
Germany, and neither now is, nor then was uſually
and properly call'd Valeria.

Mr. Burton is induc'd by the Weſtmorland-
Monument to make an addition to Vittrix, and

ſets down Valeus; but why this paſſage ſhould] }

not have induced him rather to make choice of
Valeria, J confeſs I perceive no reaſon. For
firſt, the diſtinction he makes between the Vi-

ceſima in Britain and that in Germany, is plain,

not only from the natural conſtruction of the
words, but likewiſe becauſe Dio's nineteen Le-
gions, Which were kept entire by 2
cannot otherwiſe be made up. Next, ſuppo-
ſing this diſtinct ion, it is very evident, that
he poſitively applies the name Valeria to the firſt,
and as plainly denies that the ſecond ever had
that title. And why ſhould not we as well
allow the name of Valeria to this, as we do to
other Legions the additional titles of Ulpia,
Flavia, Claudia, Trajana, Antoniana ?
The ſecond Point, When this Legion came
over, or when they were ſettl'd here, cannot
be preciſely determin'd. That this was a
Colony ſettl'd by Julius Cæſar (as Malmes-
bury ſeems to affirm) implies what never
any one dreamt of, that Julius Caſar was
in thoſe territories. Giving an account of the
name Caerlegion, he lays down this reaſon of it,
becauſe there, the Emeriti or old Soldiers of the
+ Julianarum 4 Julian Legions refided. The learned Selden
1 would excuſe the Monk, by reading Militarium
nnot, ad :
polyolb. for Julianarum ; but that, his own ancient
Cant, 11. Manuſcript would not allow. To bring him
off the other way, by referring Julianarum, not
to Cæſar but Agricola, who in Veſpaſian's time
had the ſole charge of the Britiſh Affairs, ſeems
much more plauſible. Before that time, we
find this Legion mention'd by Tacitus, in the
Lower Germany, and their boiſterous behaviour
there. And in Nero's time, the ſame Author
acquaints us with their good ſervices in that
memorable defeat, which Suetonius Paulinus gave
to Queen Boadicia. So that whenever they
might ſettle at Cheſter to repel the incurſions
of the active Britains ; it plainly appears they
came over before Galba's time.
Another Altar was found at Cheſter with
this Inſcription.

Vid. Philoſ.
ITranſ. N.
222.

PRO-SAT:DOMM
OM. MT-INVI
CTSSEMORYV M
VGG-GENO-LOCI
FLAVIVS-LONG--

LONGNVS-FE --
EINS. # DOMO
SAMOSATA-

It was diſcover'd by the Architect in dig-
ging for a * Cellar, and was view'd and de- e 38
lineated by a curious f Gentleman of that Ci- e.
ty, to whom we are indebted for the de- I Mr. Preſ-
ſcription of it. It lay, with the Inſcription cott.
downward, upon a Stone two foot ſquare,
which is ſuppos d to have been the Pedeſtal :
the foundation lay deep and broad, conſiſting
of many large ſtones. The earth about it was
ſolid, but of ſeveral colours; and ſome aſhes
were mix'd in it, About the foundation, were
diſcover'd ſigns of a Sacrifice, viz. the bones,
horns, and heads of ſeveral creatures, as the
Ox, Roe-buck, Cc. with theſe two Coyns :
I. Braſs. On the firſt fide, Imp. Caes. Veſpaſi-
an. Aug. Cos. 111. and the face of the Emperour.
On the reverſe, Victoria Auguſti S. C. and a wing-
ed Victory ſtanding. II. Copper. On the firſt ſide,
Fl. Val. Conſtantius Nob. C. and the face of
Conſtantins. On the reverſe, Genio populi Romani.
A Genius ſtanding, holding a bowl (us'd in Sacrifices)
iu the right hand, and a Cornucopia in the left.

On the left ſide of the Monument, was a
flower-pot ; on the top, a Cotyla or Cavity; in
the bottom of that Cavity, a young face, ſup-
poſed to be that of the Genius; on the back,
ornaments of drapery of uncertain figures.

On the right ſide, a Genius ſtanding with a
Cornucopia in Ris left hand; the right hand be-
* fs off by the workman, unawares.

ere, the f Legion growing too heady, and t Heeſima
too formidable to the Lieutenants as well C-Leg, Kc.
lar as Prætorian; the Emperor Veſpafian made f- mY
Julius Agricola Lieutenant over them, and they
were at laft ſeated in this City, which I be-
lieve had not been long built, tor a check and
barrier to the Ordovices. Though I know, ſome
aver it to be older than the Moon, that is, to
have been built many thouſand years ago, by
the gyant Leon Vaur. But theſe are young
Antiquaries, and the name it ſelf might con-
vince them of their error. For they cannot
deny, but Leon Vnur in Britiſh ſignifies a great
Legion;

r

PU be as th a.

"CORNAVITT.

Legion ; and whether it is more natural to de-

rive the name of this City from a great Legion,

or from the gyant Leon, let the world judge :
conſidering, that in Hiſpania Tarraconenfis we

find a territory call'd Leon from the ſeventh

Legio Germanica ; and that the twentieth Le-

+ See, before, Bion, call d f Britannica, Valens Victrix, or Va-
; teria Victric, was quarter'd in this City, as

Ptolemy, Antoninus, and an ancient Coin of

Septimius Geta, 3 By the Coin laſt
; mention'd, it appears alſo that Cheſter was a
man Coley: Colon , for the reverſe of it is inſcribed COL.
DIVANA LEG. XX. VICTRIX. And
though at this day there remain few memori-
als of the Roman magnificence, beſides ſome
pavements of Chequer-works ; yet in the laſt
age it afforded many, as Ranulph, a Monk of
this City, tells us in his Polychronicon. There
are ways here under-ground, wonderfully arched with
ſtone-work, vaulted Dining-rooms, huge ſtones engra-
ven with the names of the Ancients, and ſometimes
Coins dug-up with the Inſcriptions of Julius Cæſar
and other famous men. Likewiſe [the ſame Po-
lychronicon, and | Roger of Cheſter in his Po-
lycraticon ; When I beheld the foundation of vaſt
buildings up and down in the ſtreets, it ſeemed ra-
ther the eſfect of the Roman ſtrength, and the work
of Giants, than of Britiſh Induſtry.

The City is of a ſquare form, ſurrounded
with a Wall about two miles in compaſs, and
contains eleyen Pariſh-Churches. Upon a ri-
ſing ground near the river, ſtands the Caſtle,
built by the Earl of this place, wherein the
Courts Palatine are held, and the Aſ/izes twice a
The Rowes, Vear. The buildings are neat, and there are
+ Prejectis + Piazza's on both ſides, along the chief Street.
Menianis The City has not been equally proſperous at
Porticus: all times: firſt, it was demoliſh'd by Egfrid
h the Northumbrian ; and then, by the Danes ;

Domina. but it was repair'd by Edelfleda * Governeſs
of the Mercians, and ſoon after ſaw King Ead-
gar gloriouſly triumphing over the Britiſh Prin-
ces. For, being ſeated in a triumphal Bar

Circ, An. at the 8 Kinnadius King of Scotland,

960,

See Leigh,
Lib, 1, P+12

Wales who were brought to ſubmiſſion, row'd
him up the river Dee, like Bargemen, to the
Churches re- great joy of the Spectators. Afterwards, about

|

and inſtituted Prebends, and raiſed it again to
a Biſhop's See, to contain, within it's juriſdi-

of York.

But now let us come to points of higher An-
tiquity. When the Cathedral here was built,
the Earls, who were then Normans, tortified
the Town with a wall and caſtle. For as the
Biſhop held of the King that which belonged to his
Biſhoprick (theſe are the very words of Domeſ-
day-book made by William the Conqueror, )
ſo the Earls, with their men, held of the King,
wholly, all the reſt of the City. It paid gelt for fi,
ty hides, and there were four hundred thirty one hou-
ſes geldable, and ſeven Mint-maſters. When the
King came in perſon hither, every Carrucat paid
him two hundred Heſtha s, one Cuna of Ale, and
one Ruſca of Butter. And in the ſame place ;
For the repairing of the city-wall and bridge, the
Provoſt gave warning by Edict, that out of every
hide of the County one man ſhould come ; and who-
ſoe ver ſent not his man, he was amerced forty ſhil-
lings to the King and Earl. If I ſhould particu-
larly relate the skirmiſhes here between the
Welſh and Engliſh in the beginning of the Nor-
man times, the many inroads and excurſions,
the frequent firings of the ſuburbs of Hanbrid
beyond the bridge ( on which account the
Welſh call it Treboeth, that is, the burnt Town; )
and ſhould tell you of the long wall made there
of Welſh-mens skulls : I ſhould ſeem to forget
my felt, and run too far into the buſineſs of an
Hiſtorian. From that time, the Town of Che-
ſter hath very much flouriſhed ; and King Hen-
ry the ſeventh incorporated it into a itin&
5 Nor is there now any thing wanting
to make
that the Sea is not ſo favourable, as it has
been, to ſome few Mills that were formerly ſi-
tuated upon the river Dee ; from which it has
gradually withdrawn, and the Town has loſt
the advantage of an Harbour, which it enjoy'd
heretofore. It's ſituation, in Longitude, is

Malcolin King of Cumberland, Macon King of twenty degrees and twenty three minutes; in
Man and of the Iſlands, with all the Princes of

Latitude, fifty three degrees, and eleven mi-
nutes. Whoever deſires to know more of this
City, may read a paſſage taken out of Lucian

the Monk, who lived almoſt * ſix hundred years“ Fixe, C.

ſtor'd. ö
_ the year 1094. when (as one ſays) by a pions

dolphus. other Churches began to be more decent and ſtately,

and the Chriſtian world to raiſe it ſelf from the old
dejetted ſtate and ſordidneſs to the decency of white
Veſtments, Hugh the firſt of Norman blood that
was Earl of Cheſter, repair'd the Church which
Leofrick had formerly founded here in honour
of the Virgin Saint Werburg, and by the ad-
vice of Anſelm, whom he had invited out of
Normandy, granted the ſame to the Monks.
Now, the Town is famous for the tomb of
Henry the fourth, Emperor of Germany, who
having abdicated his Empire, is ſaid to have
become an Hermit here ; and alſo for its be-
ing an Epiſcopal See. This See, immediately
after the Conqueſt, was tranſlated from Lich-
field hither, by Peter Biſhop of Lichfield. | And
this 1s the reaſon, why the Biſhops of Lichfield
are ſometimes called by our Hiſtorians, Biſhops
of Cheſter ; and why this Peter who tranſlated
it hither, is by the Saxon Annals called Epiſco-
pus Licifeldenfis frve Ceſtrenſis, i. e. Biſhop of
Lichfield or Cheſter.) Afterwards, it was tran-
{lated to Coventry, and from thence to the an-
cient Sce again : ſo that Cheſter continu'd
+ So ſaid, without this dignity, till the f laſt age, when

ago. Firſt, it is to be confidered, that the City of

Ro- kind of Emulation, the fabricks of Cathedrals and; Cheſter is a place very pleaſantly fituated ; and, le-

ing in the weſt parts of Britain, ſtood very conveni-
ent to receive the Roman Legions that were tranſported
hither : and beſides, it was proper for watching the
frontiers of the Empire, and was a perfett key to
Ireland. For being oppoſite to the north parts of
Ireland, it open d a * thither for Ships and Sea-
men, who were continually in motion to and again,
either in the way of merchandiſe, or upon other bu-
fineſs. And if you turn to the Eaſt, it gives you a
proſpect, not only towards Rome and the Empire, but
the whole earth : a ſpectacle expoſed to the eye of
all the world : ſo that from hence may be diſcern d
the great actions of the world, and the firſt ſprings
and conſequences of them, the perſons by whom, the
places where, and the times when, they were tranſacted.
We may alſo know what has been done well, and learn
to avoid the ill. The City has four gates 2
the four winds ; on the eaſt-fide, it has a proſpe

towards India, on the weſt towards Ireland, and on
the north towards the greater Norway; and laſtly,
on the ſouth, to that little corner wherein God's ven-
geance has confined the Britains, for their civil wars
and diſſenfions, which heretofore changed the name
of Britain into England : and how they live to
this day, their neighbours know to their ſorrow.

ann. 1607, King Henry the eighth diſplaced the Monks,

Moreover, God has bleſt and enrich'd —
| wit /

ction, this County, Lancaſhire, Richmond, Cc. Stat.
and to be it ſelf contained within the Provincec. 31.

it a flouriſhing City; except it be,

2H.

652 |

-
Ws 4. > rg *% c

E . . ⁵˙ 8m WTI A GIICT

WES, IV 2 2
8 Page,
rr „

Stanlaw.
Law, what, |

|

1173.

II- bre.

+ Are, C.

, 4
„ ts

in ² Ad I ILL IBS APY BE >

»

CHESHIRE.

#4 4 „ , ”
- . . 1
83 * — —_ 3 _—_
— *

674

Wirall,

with a river, pleaſant and well-ſt *d with fiſh, run-
ning by the city walls ; and on the ſouth-fide with a
harbour for Ships coming from Gaſcoign, Spain, Ire-
land, and Germany; who by Chriſt's aſſiſtance, and
by the labour and condutt of the Mariners, repair
hither, and ſupply them with all forts of Commu-
dities. So that, being comforted by the favour of
God in all things, we drink wine very plentifully ;
for thoſe countries have abundance of Vineyards.
Moreover, the main Sea ceaſes not to viſit us every
day with a tide ; which, according as the broad
ſhelves of ſand are open or ſhut by tides and ebbs, is
wont more or leſs to do good or harm, to change, or
ſend one thing or another, and, , by reciprocal ebbs and
flows, either to bring in or carry out.

From the City, to the northweſt, there runs
out into the Sea, a large Cherſoneſe or Penin-
ſula, incloſed on one {ide with the æſtuary Dee,
and on the other with the river Merſey. | The
Saxon Annals call it Pipheale, Matthew Weſt-
minſter Virale, we Wirall, and the Welſh
(becauſe ir is a corner) Kill-gury ; all, hereto-
fore, a deſolate foreſt and not inhabited (as the
natives ſay;) but King Edward the third diſ-
foreſted it. Now, it is well furniſh'd with
Towns, which are more favour'd by the Sea
than by the Soil ; for the land aftords them
very little Corn, but the water great plenty of
Fiſh. [The laſt mentioned Hiſtorian con-
founds this with Cheſter, making them one
place. Which error proceeded from the miſ-
underſtanding of that paſſage in the Saxon
Chronicle, hie gedydon on anne perene cearcpe
on PJinhealum. rio ir Legacearcpe gehacen,
i. e. They abode in a certain weſtern City in ir-
heale, which is called Legaceaſter. The latter part
of the ſentence, he imagin'd, had reference to
Wirheale, whereas it is plainly a further ex-
plication of the Heſtern City In the entry
into Mirral, on the ſouth-ſide, by the æſtuary,

Shotwick. ſtands Shorwick, a caſtle of the Kings: on the

Hooton.

Poole.

Stanlaw.

north, ſtands Hooton, a Manour which in Ri-
chard the ſecond's time fell to the Stanleys,
who derive their pedigree from one Alan Sylve-
ftris, upon whom Ranulph, the firſt of that
name who was Earl of Cheſter, confer'd the
Bailywick of the Foreſt of Wiral by the delivery
of a horn. Hard by this, ſtands Poole, from
whence the Lords of that place (who have liv'd
very honourably, and in a flouriſhing condition,
a long time) took their. name. Near this, is
Staulaw, that is, as the Monks there have ex-

Law, what, plain'd it, a ſtonz-Hill; where John Lacy, Con-

1173.

table of Cheſter, built a little Monaſtery,

which, by reaſon of inundations, they were
forced afterwards to remove to bah in the
County of Lancaſter. Ar the furtheſt end of
this Cherſoneſe, there lies a little barren dry

Il-bre. ſandy Ifland, called Höre, which had formerly

a ſmall Cell of Monks. More inward, eaſt of
this Cherſoneſe, lies the famous Foreſt, called
the Foreſt of Delamere ; the Foreſters whereof,

+ Are, C. by inheritance, f were the Dawns of Utkinton,

hall,

ot an honourable family, deſcended from Ra-
nulph of King/eigh, to whom Ranulph the firſt
Earl of Cheſter pave the inheritance of that
office of Foreſter, | and the Eſtate of which fa-
mily is now come by marriage to the Crews, |
In this Foreſt, Ædelfleda the famous Mercian
Lady, built a little City called Eader-bupg,
that is, a happy Town, which has now loſt both
its name and being ; for at preſent it is only
a heap of rubbiſh, which they call the Cham-

Edisbury- ber in the Foreſt. | Edisbury-hall, which gives

name to an eminent Family, and a whole Hun-
dred, in theſe parts, ſeems to have had the
name from thence.)] About a mile or two

S —

from it, are alſo to be ſeen the ruins of Fin-Finberrow,.
borrow, another Town built by the ſame

_

— 4 the upper part of this Foreſt, lies
the courſe of the river ver, which iſſues out
of a lake in the ſouth-ſide of the County, at
a place called Ridley, [heretofore] the ſeat of Ridley!
the famous and ancient family of the Egertons,
deſcended from the Barons of Malpas (as I have
already obſerved ; ) not far from Bunbury,
where they built a College; and from Beeſton- Beeſton,
caſtle; a place well guarded, by walls of a great
compaſs, by the great number of its towers,
and by a mountain with a very ſtcep aſcent.
This Caſtle was built by Ranulph the laſt
Earl of Cheſter of that name ; concerning \
which, Leland writes thus,

Aſſyrio rediens victor Ranulphus ab orbe,

Hoc poſuit Caſtrum, terrorem gentibus olim
Vicims, patriæque ſus memorabile vallum.
Nunc licet indignas patiatur fratta rui-

nas, |
Tempus erit quando rurſus caput exeret
my

Vatibus antiquis fi fas mihi credere vati.

CRM returning from the Syrian
nd,

This Caſtle rais'd, his Country to de-

fend,

The borderers to fright and to com-
mand.

Though ruin'd now the ſtately Fabrick
lies,

Let with new Glories it again ſhall

riſe,
If I a Prophet may believe old Pro-
phecies.

J.

Hence, the ever continues its courſe ſouth-
ward, not far from J/oodhay, where the famous Woodhay.
and Knightly family of the Willurhams liv'd
long in great repute ; alſo, by _ and Bulkeley,
Cholmondley, which gave names to two famous — holmond-
and Knightly families; and laſtly, not far,“
on one hand from Baddeley, formerly the ſeat Baddely.
of the ancient family of the Praeries ; and on
the other hand, from Cumbermer, where Milli-
am Malbedeng founded a little Religious-houſe.
[Of which fore-mentioned Families; the Chol-
mondleys, or Cholmleys, were advanced to the dig-
nity of Barons of this Realm, in the twenty.
firſt year of King Charles the firſt, in the per-
ſon of Sir Robert Cholmley Viſcount Cholmley of
Kellis in Ireland, and created Lord Cholmley of
Wiche Malbank, or Nantwich; which ſaid Ti-
tle was confer'd upon Hugh, his nephew's ſon,
in the firſt year ot William and Mary ; who
alſo in the fifth year of Queen Anne, was ad-
vanced to the higher Honours of Viſcount Mal-

1134«

pas and Earl of Cholmley. |

Where the river touches the ſouth part of

this County, it paſſes through heaths and low

places, in which (as in other parts of the

County) they often dig-up trees, which they Trees under
— to have lain there ever ſince the Deluge. ground.
Afterwards, as it paſſes through fruitful fields,

it receives a little river from the eaſt, upon

which is ſituated Mibbenbury, ſo call'd from

WWibba King of the Mercians. Next to that,

is Hatherten, formerly the ſeat of the Orbies, |
after that of the Corbets, and + afterwards of+ At preſent,
Thomas Smith, ſon of Sir Laurence Smith Knight: C.
then, Dodington, the eſtate of the Delvefies : Ba-

therton, of the Griphins : and Shavington of the
Whaodenoths (who by their name ſeem to have

Qqqq ſprung

675

"CORNAVIY.

676

* Woden. ſprung from the *Saxons; ) belides the {eats of
Ann. 1607. other honourable families, which are very nu-
merous in this County. From hence, the ri-

ver Never goes on by Nantwich, at ſome di-

ſtance from Midlewich, to Norwich, "Theſe are
Salt-wiches, the noble Salt-wiches, about five or fix miles
diſtant one from another, where they draw
brine or ſalt-water out of pits, and do not,
according to the method of the old Gauls and

| Germans, pour it upon burning wood, but
boil it upon the fire, to make it into Salt:
Nor do I at all queſtion, but theſe were known
to the Romans, and that their Impoſt for ſalt
was laid on them. For there was a noble 'Way
from Midlewich to Northwich, which has been

of natural Salt, from which iſſu'd a vigorous
ſharp Brine, beyond any of the ſprings made
aſe of in the ſalt-works. |

This Dan, or Davan, ſprings from the moun-
tains which ſeparate this County from Staf-
fordſhire on the eaſt-ſide ; and runs, without
any increaſe, to Condate, a town mention'd in Condat
Antoninus, and now corruptly nam'd Congleton. Congletor
[ Of this opinion, are alſo Mr. Burton, Mr. Tal- ;
bot, and others. Wherever it was, it ſeems
probable enough (as Mr. Burton has hinted) * Conn,
that it came from Condate in Gaul, famous for upon the
he death of St. Martin. For f Czſar expreſsly Itirera.
tells us, that even in his time they tranſlated 1 De ho
themſelves out of that part of Gaul into Bri- Gall l. 5.

rais'd ſo high with gravel, that one may eaſilyſ tain; and that being ſettled, they call'd their

diſcern it to be Roman; eſpecially, if he con-

ſiders, that gravel is ſcarce in this County, and

that private men are even forc'd to rob the

road of it for their own uſes. Matthew Paris

ſays, theſe Salt-pits were ſtop'd up by Henry

the third, when he waſted this County ; that

the Welſh, who were then in rebellion, might

have no ſupplies from them. But, upon the
next return of peace, they were open'd again.

Nantwich, the firſt of them that is viſited

by the ever, is the greateſt and beſt- built

town of the County, call'd by the Welſh Hel-

lath Wen, that is, White-ſalt-wich, becauſe the

whiteſt ſalt is made here; and by the Latins,

Vicus Malbanus, probably from William call'd

Malbedeng and Malbanc, who had it given him

+ Ann, 1607, upon the Norman Conqueſt. + There is but

one Salt-pit (they call it the Brine-pit) diſtant

about fourteen foot from the river. From this

Brine-pit they convey ſalt-water by wooden

troughs into the houſes adjoyning, where there

ſtand ready little barrels fix d in the ground,

which they fill with that water; and at the

notice of a bell, they preſently make a fire un-

der their Leads, whereof they have ſix in every

houſe for boiling the water. Theſe are attend-

ed by certain women call'd Waller, who with

little wooden rakes draw the falt out of the

bottom of them, and put it in baskets; out

of which the liquor runs, but the ſalt remains

| Of the ma- and ſettles ||. here is but one Church in

Nntwich.

— = this town, but it is a neat fabrick, belonging
Ray's Nor- heretofore (as I have heard) to the Monaſtery

of Cumbermer. Hence the Fever runs in a very
P. 204. oblique courſe, and is joyn'd by a little river
* 1226 which riſes in the eaſt, and paſſes by Crew,
53 K 15% where formerly liv'd a famous family of that
name. At ſome further diſtance from the weſt-
fide of it, ſtands Calveley, which has given both
ſear and name to that noble family the Cal-
veleys ; of whom, in Richard the ſecond's time,
was Sir Hugh de Calveley, who in France had
the reputation of ſo valiant a ſoldier, that no-
thing was held impregnable to his courage and
conduct. Hence the river goes on by Minſbul,
[ heretofore] the ſeat of the Minſbuls, [but now
come by marriage to the Cholmleys of Vale
Vale Royal. Royal: 1 And by Vale Royal, an Abbey found-
ed in a pleaſant valley by King Edward the

firſt, where now the famous family of the Hol-

Northwich. crofts dwell ; then, by Northwich, in Britiſh
Hellath Du, i. e. the black Salt-pit ; where is a deep

and 5 Brine- pit, with ſtairs about it, by

which, when they have drawn the water in

their leather-buckets, they aſcend half naked to

the troughs, and fill them ; from whence it is

convey'd to the Vich- houſes, near which ſtand

many great piles of wood. Here, the Wever

receives the Dan, which we will now follow ;

Phil. Tranſ. | having firſt obſerv'd, that, in the year 1670,
N.66, there was diſcover'd in this County a Rock

thern words,

Calveley.

Minſhul,

reſpective cities after the names of thoſe, where-
in they had been born and bred. Whether
any Remains of Roman Antiquities that have
been diſcover'd at Congleton, induced our Anti-
quaries to fix it there, is uncertain, ſince they
are ſilent in that matter: but || it 1s certain, I Ga
that the Military way, the courſe of the Iti⸗-
nerary, and the diſtance from Mancunium on
one ſide and Deva on the other, do all de-
termin it to theſe parts; and altho* a * Roman- « pere .
Altar, of the Inſcription whereof Condati is the Thore).
firſt word, was dug-up at Conscliffe near Perce-
bridge in the Biſhoprick of Durham (a draught
of which ſhall be given in its proper place ; )
yet that is ſo wholly out of the way, thar
there can be no ground to remove this Station
thither.] .
The middle of this Town is water'd by the

little brook Howty, the eaſt-fide by the Daning-

Schow, and the north by the Dan. Altho',

in conſideration of its greatneſs, populouſneſs,

and commerce, it has deſervd a Mayor and

fix Aldermen to govern it, yet it has only one

Chapel in it, and that entirely of wood, un-

leſs it be the quire and a little tower. The
Mother-Church to which it belongs, is Aſtbury,

about two miles off, which is indeed a curious
fabrick ; and tho' the Church be very high, yet

is the weſt porch equal to it ; and there is alſo

a ſpire-ſteeple. In the Church-yard are two
grave-ſtones, having the portraiture of Knights

upon them, and in ſhields tue bars, Being
without their colours, it is not eaſy to deter-
min whether they belong'd to the Breretons,
the Manwarings, or the Venables, which are the

beſt families hereabouts, and bear ſuch bars in
their arms, but with difterent colours.
Next, the Dan comes to Davenport, Com-Dayenger,

monly Danport, which gives name to the fa-
mous family of the Davenports : and Holmes- Holme:
Chapel, well known to travellers ; where, with- Chapel.
in the memory of f the laſt age, a bridge was 4 This, C.
built by J. Needham. Not far from this, ſtands
Rudheath, formerly an Aſylum or Sanctuary to Rudheith,
thoſe of this Country, and others, who had
broken the laws; where they were protected |
a year and a day, Next, it runs by XKinderton, Kinderton.
the ancient ſeat of an ancient family, the Ve-

nables, who from the time of the Conqueſt
* flouriſh'd here, and + were commonly call'd * -w
Barons of Kinderton ; [ the laſt of which fami- C.
ly, was Anne, ſole heir to Peter Venables ; who ;
being marry'd to Montague, the preſent Earl of
Abingdon, dy'd without ifſue.| Below this

lace, to the ſouth, the river Dan is joyn'd

y the Croc, a brook riſing out of the lake
Bagmere, Which runs by Brereton. As this town Brereton.
has given name to the famous, ancient, nu-
merous, and knightly family of the Breretons,
ſo Sir Wiliam Brereton || added much to its|| Hath
Glory by a very ſtately building which he added, C.
rais d.

— |

$5 nt AE Mb CHER T4 £4

Lib, 2. de
Faſcino.

Angels.

Devils.

Middlewich

* Ann. 160.

Boſtock.

e. a CIT +4

1 CO. 3 a. yg

CAESHIRE.

*

6578

rais d. Here is one thing exceeding ſtrange, |
but atteſted, in my hearing, by many perſons,
and commonly believd. Before any heir of
this family dies, there are ſeen in a lake ad-
joyning, the bodies of trees ſwimming upon
the water for ſ:veral days together; not much
different from what Leonardas Puirus relates,
upon the authority of Cardinal Granvelan, That
near the Abbey of St. Maurice in Burgundy,
there is a fiſh-pond, into which a number of
fiſhes are put, equal to the number of the
Monks of that place. And if any one of them
happen to be fick, there 1s a fiſh ſeen floating
upon the water ſick too; and in caſe the fit
ot ſickneſs prove fatal to the Monk, the fiſh
foretells it by its own death ſome days before.
As to theſe things, I have nothing to ſay to
them; for I pretend not to ſuch myſterious
knowledge: but if they are true, they muſt
be done either by the Holy Angels, whom
God has appointed Guardians and Keepers of
us, or elſe by the art of Devils, whom 'God
permits now and then to exert their Powers in
this lower world. For both of them are intelli-
gent Beings, and will not produce ſuch preter-
natural things, but upon deſign, and to attain
ſome end or other : thoſe ever purſuing the good
and ſafety of mankind ; theſe ever attempting
to ruin, vex, or delude us. But this is foreign
to my purpoſe.
A little after Croke is got beyond Brereton, it
Middlewich, comes to Middlewich, ſituated near the union
of Croke and Dan; where are two fountains
of ſalt-water (ſeparated from one another by a
+ Ann, 1607, little brook) which they call Sheaths. * The
one is not open'd, but at ſet-times ; to pre-
vent the ſtealing away the water, which is of
2 more peculiar virtue and excellence than the
other. Whence the Dan runs by Boſtock, for-
merly Boteſtock, the ancient ſeat of the noble
and Lnightly family of the Boſtocks, which, by
marriage with Ame the only daughter of Ralph,
ſon and heir of Sir Adam de Boſtock Knight,
paſs'd, together with a vaſt eſtate, to John
Savage. Out of this ancient houſe of the Bo-
ſtocks, as out of a fruitful ſtock, ſprung a nu-
merous race of the ſame name, which ſpread
themſelves in Cheſhire, Shropſhire, Berkſhire,
and other places. Beneath Northwich, the Dan

Lib, 2. de
Faſcino.

Angels.

Devils.

Boſtock.

unites it ſelf with the ever, which running

* I
tn. Ms... ih a

on to the weſt in a ſtrait line, receives from
the eaſt, Peer. This gives name to the town Pever.
Pever, by which it paſſes; and which is the
ſeat of that aneient and noble family, the Mei-

nilwurrens, commonly Manewarings, one of

whom call'd Ralph, marry'd the 4

Hugh Kevelioc Earl of Cheſter, as appears by |
an old Charter which was in the hands of * Now is, C.
the heir of this family! The courſe of the

aughter of

Wever is, next, by Mimington, which 4 gave Winnington:
ſeat and name to the famous and ancient fa-+ Gives, C.

mily of the Minningtons and then, at ſome

little diſtance from Merbury, which detives that Merbury,
name from a pool under it, and gives the fame

to the famous family of the Arburies. From

hence, the river runs near Dutton, [heretofore] Dutton;
the eſtate of that worthy family the Durtons,
deſcended from one Hudardis, who was rela-

ted to the Earls of Cheſter, This family, by
an old cuſtom, hath a particular authority over
all Pipers, Fidlers, and Harpers of this County,

ever ſince one R. Dutton, an active young Gen- Chronicon

tleman of a great ſpirit, with a rabblo of ſuch Wallix.

fort of men, reſcu'd Ranulph the laſt Earl of

Cheſter, when he was beſet by the Welſh, and

was in danger of being beſieg d by them. Nor

muſt I forget to take notice of Nether-IWhitley Nether.
in theſe parts, out of which came the Tyſchetts Whitley.
or Towchetts, who are Barons Audley of Healye, Towchett,

Now, the Wever flowing between Frodeſham, a prodeſham.

caſtle of ancient note, and Clifton, at preſent
call'd Rock-Savage, a f new houſe of the Sava- Rock- Savage:
get, who by marriage came to a great eſtate + So ſaid,

here; ſand, in the reign of King Charles the aun. 1607.
firſt, were advanced to the honour of Earls
Rivers ; | it runs at laſt into the zſtuary of the
Merſey. This is ſo call'd from the river Mer-

ſey ; which, running between this County and

Lancaſhire, empties it ſelf here; after it has
firſt paſs'd-by fome inconſiderable towns, and

among the reſt by Stockport, which formerl :
had its Baron ; and has receiv'd the river Bolli e

which flows out of the large foreſt of Macles-
feld. Upon that river, ſtands the town of Macles- yqaclesfeld;
feld, from whence the foreſt has its name;
and where a College was founded by T. Savage,
firſt, Biſhop of London, and then Archbiſhop
of York ; in which ſeveral of that noble family,
the Savages, are bury'd (a). This town of

Macclesfield hath given the title of Earl to the
family

—_—

_—

(a) Here alſo (in a Chapel or Oratory on the South- ſide of the Parochial Chapel, belonging to the LZeighs
of Lyme) in a braſs Plate, is the following account of two worthy perſons of that family,

Here lyeth the body of Perkin A Legb

That for King Richard the death did dye
Betrayed for righteouſneſs.

And the bones of Sir Peers his ſonne

That with King Henry
In Paris.

This Perkin ſerv'd King Edward the third,

and was at the Battel of Creſſie, and bad Lyme given bim for that ſe

the fifth did wonne

and the Black Prince bis ſon in all their wars in France,
| ruice. And after their deaths

ſerved King Richard the ſecond, and left him not in bis troubles, but was taken with him, and bebeaded
at Cheſter by King Henry the fourth. And the ſaid Sir Peers his ſonne, ſerved King Henry the fifth,

and was ſlain at the batte! of Agen-court,

In their memory Sir Peter Legb of Lyme Knight, deſcended from them, finding the ſaid old verſes
written upon a ſtone in this Chapel, did re-edify ibis place An. Dom. 1026.

On the other fide of the ſame Parochial Chapel, in an Oratory belonging to the Earl Rivers, is this Copy

of a Pardon gray'd in a braſs Plate,

The pardon for ſaying of v pater nofters and v aves and a , + .,

xXyi dayes of pardon,

1

» « is xxvi thouſand yeres and

Another

e *
uy —ͤ———— — — — — — — *

— — —
P wo 1

_— —— —— 2 —ů

#4 fs
— — —
+ ror ann, WM —
*
-

CORNADT II

680

See Ox ſord-
ſhire.

Dunham,

Thelwall,

Runckhorne,

Fthelfleda, or
Elfeda,

family of Gerrards, the firſt whereof | inveſted
with that Honour, was Charles, created Earl of
this place, 31 Car. 2; who was alſo ſucceeded
by his ſon and heir ; by whoſe death, it was
extinct; and his Majeſty King George hath
confer'd the honour of Baron of Macclesfield
on Sir Thomas Parker (firſt, Lord Chiet Juſtice
of the King's-Bench, and now Lord High
Chancellor ot Great Britain,) in conſideration
of his diſtinguiſh'd Abilities, and his impor-
tant Services to the Crown.] Upon the {ame
river ſtands Dunham, which from Hamon de
Maſcy, by the Fittons and Venables, came by in-
heritance to the famous family of Booth. | Of
which, was Sir George Booth, noted for his Loy-
alty to King Charles the firſt, and, in conſi-
deration thereof, advanced to the dignity of a
Baron of this Realm by the title of Lord De-
lamere of Dunham-Maſſey; whoſe deſcendants
have been ſince rais'd to the more honourable
title of Earls of Warington. | |
From hence the Merſey goes on to Thelwal ;
before it is much paſt Xnotsford, i. e. Canutus s
ford, of which there are two, the Upper and the
Lower; and then to Lee, from whence is a family
of the ſame name, famous not only for its no-
ble race, but for the number of its branches.
As for Thelwall, it is now an obſcure little
village, tho' formerly a large city, tounded by
King Edward the elder, and ſo call'd, as
Florilegus witneſles, from the trunks of trees
fix'd in the ground, which enclos'd it, inſtead
of a wall. For the Saxons expreſs the trunk of a
tree by the word Dell, and the Latin Murus by
wall, At the very mouth of this river, ſtands
Runck-horae, | call'd in the Saxon Annals Runco-
fan, by Huntingdoh Rumcoven, and by others
Runcoven and Runcofan ; | built in the very
ſame age by Ethelfleda, and now likewiſe re-
duced to a few cottages. Since I have ſo often
mention'd this Edelfleda, it will not be impro-
per to note, that ſhe was ſiſter to King Ed-
ward the elder, and wite to Ethelred a petty
Prince of the Mercians ; and that, after her hus-
band's death, ſhe govern'd eight years in very
troubleſom times, to her immortal Praiſe. In
2 of Huntingden, there is this encomium of
er: a |

O Elfleda potens, ò terror virgo virorum,
Victrix naturæ, nomine digna viri.
7 * ſplendidior fieres, natura puellam,
e probitas fecit nomen habere viri.
Te mutare decet, ſed ſolum, nomina ſexus,
Tu Regina potens, Rexque trophaa parans.
Jam nec Caſarei tantum meruere triumphi,

Caſare ſplendidior virgo virago, vale.

Victorious Elfled, ever famous maid,

Whom weaker men, and nature's ſelf o-
bey'd.

Nature your ſofter limbs for eaſe deſfign'd,

Bur Heav'n inſpir'd you with a manly
mind.

You only, Madam, lateſt times ſhall ſing

A glorious Queen and a triumphant King.

Farewel brave Soul! let Ceſar now look
down,
And yield thy triumphs greater than his

own.

Below Runchhorne, and more within the
County, ſtands the town of Haulton, where is Haul
a caſtle which Hugh Lupus Earl of Cheſter
gave to Nigellus, a certain Norman, upon con-
dition, that he ſhould be Conſtable of Che-
{ter ; by whoſe poſterity it came atrerwards to
the houſe of Lancaſter. Nor muſt I omit, that
William, ſon of this Nigel, founded a Mona-
ſtery at Norton not tar from hence; a town
* heretofore belonging to the Brokes, an ancient “ Now, C.
family. Whether I ſhould place the Cangi here,
who are a people of the old Britains, is what,
after much enquiry and conſideration, I cannot
yet determin f. Antiquity has ſo far bury'd all+ Vide 85.
memorials of them, that there remain not the Merſetlhire,
leaſt footſteps, whereby to trace them. So that .
tho Fuſtus Lipfius, that great Maſter. of polite
learning, takes me for a competent judge in
this matter, I muſt ingenuoully profeſs my ig-
norance, and that I would rather recommend
this task to any one elſe, than take it to my
ſelf. However, if the Ceangi and Cangi may be
allow'd to be the ſame (and I don't know
why they may not ; ) then it is probable enough,
that they liv'd in || this County. For while I || This is a
was reviewing this work, I heard from ſome — *
credible paring, that there have been twenty 8
pieces of Lead dug- up on this ſhore, of a on Jul, U.
ſquare oblong form, and thus inſcrib'd in the 1.
hollow of the upper part.

IMP. DOMIT. AVG. GER. DE
CEANG.

Bur in others ;

IMP. VESP, VII. T. IMF. V. © an Ce
COSS.
Which ſeems to have been a monument rais'd
on account of ſome victory over the Cangi.
And this opinion is confirm'd by the ſituation
upon the Iriſh Sea: for Tacitus in the twelfth
Book of his Annals, writes, That, in Nero's An. Chr. gi.
time, Oſtorius led an Army againſt the Cangi, by
which the fields were waſted, and the ſpoil every-
where carry'd off ; the enemy not daring to engage,
but only at an advantage to attack our rear, and
even then they ſuffer d for their attempt. They were
now advanced almoſt as far as that Sea towards
Ireland, uben a mutiny among the Brigantes,
brought back the General again. But from the
former Inſcription, it ſhould ſeem that they
were not ſubdu'd before Domitian's time ; and
conſequently, by a Chronological computation,
it muſt be when Julius Agricola, that excellent
Soldier, was Proprator here. Moreover, Ptole-
my places the -Promontorium Kaſxarar, on this
coaſt. Neither dare I look in any other part
beſide this Country, for the garriſon of the

Conganii, Where, towards the decline of the Congasii

—_—

Another braſs Plate in the ſame Chapel has this ancient Inſcription :

Orate pro animabus Rogeri Legh & Elizabeth uxoris ſue: qui quidem Rogerus obiit iiii, die No-
vembris, Anno Domini . v. c. vi. Elizabetb vero obiit v* die Octobris, Anno Domini Mcccelxxxix.

quorum animabus propitictur Deus,

Ei

Pray for the Souls of Roger Legb and Elizabeth his wife : which Roger dy'd the qth day of
November, in the year of our Lord Nl. v. c. vi. and Elizabeth, on the 5th day of October, in the

year of our Lord Mcceclaxxix. to whoſe

Souls may God be propitious.
= Roman

681

Earls of
Cheſter.

+ Nepotis
Fliæ.

l Remait
and flou-
riſh, C.

1 So ſaid
ann. 160

See beſo

* Hat!
gella.

Earls ©
ſter.

= * N *. 4
n —W

a

p a
ES" tt. Mi 2

CHESHIRE.

+ Cheſter

Roman Empire, a Band of Vigiles with their

to Hugh the firſt Earl ; and left a ſon, Ranulph,
ſirnam'd de Gernoniis, the fourth Earl of Che-
ſter, a ſtout Soldier, who at the ſiege of Lin-

| coln took King Stephen priſoner. His ſon
As for the Earls of Cheſter ; to omit the Sa- Hugh, ſirnam'd Kevelioc, was the fifth Earl;

xons who held this Earldom barely as an Ot-|who dy'd An. 1181, leaving his ſon Ranulph,
fice, and not as an Inheritance: William the ſirnam'd de Blundevil, the ſixth in that digni-
Conqueror made Hugh, firnam'd Lupus, ſon to ty, who built Chartley and Beeſton-caſtles, and
the Viſcount de Auranches in Normandy, the] founded the Abbe de-la-Creſs, and dy'd with-
firſt hereditary Earl of Cheſter, and Count Pa- out iflue, leaving four ſiſters, his heirs ; Maud,
latine ; giving unto him and his heirs this whole wife of David Earl of Huntingdon ; Mabil,
County f to hold as freely by is ſword, as he did wife of William de Albeney Earl of Arundel;

Captain, under the Dux Britannie, kept watch
and ward. Put I leave every man to his own
judgment. |

given to Ro- poland by his crgwn 3 (theſe are the very] Agnes, wife of William de Ferrars Earl of Der-
ger of 45 words of the Feoftment, as we have before ob- by; and laſtly, f Avis, wife of Robert de T Hanif.

mery« rus
Vit. p. 509

Barons of
Cheſter.

+ Nepotis
Fliæ.

|} Remaih
and flou-
riſh, C.

1 So ſaid,
ann, 1607.

See beſore.

* Hauber-
gella.

Earls of Che- Hugh the firſt Earl of Cheſter, already ſpo-

ſer,

ſerv'd.) Hereupon, the Earl preſently ſubſti- Quincy. The next Earl of this County, was
tuted theſe following Barons, Nigel (now Niel) John, ſirnam'd Scotus, the ſon of Earl David by
Baron of Haulton, whoſe poſterity took the name the eldeſt ſiſter Maud aforeſaid. He dying
of Lacey (from the eſtate of the Laceys, which likewiſe without iſſue, King Henry the third,
fell to them,) and were Earls of Lincoln: Ro-|charm'd with the fight of ſo fair an Inheri-
bert Baron de Mont-hault, Seneſchal or Steward] tance, annex d it to the Crown, and allow'd the
of the County of Cheſter ; the laſt of which | ſiſters of John other Revenues for their Fortunes;
family dying without iſſue, made Iſabel Queen not being willing (as the King himſelf worded
of England, and John de Eltham Earl of Corn- it) that ſuch a vaſt eſtate ſhould be parcel'd
wall, his heirs : William de Malbedenge Baron of| among Diſtaffs. The Kings themſelves, when
Malbanc, whoſe + nephew's daughters trans- this unty devoly'd to the Crown, maintain'd
fer'd this inheritance, by marriage, to the Ver- their ancient Palatine Prerogatives, and held
nons and Baſſets : Richard Vernon, Baron of Sip-|their Courts (as the Kings of France did in
broke, whoſe eſtate, for want of heirs-male, the County of Champain) that the Honour of
came by ſiſters to the Wilburhams, Staffords,| the Palatinate might not be extinguiſh'd by
and Littleburies : Robert Fitz-Hugh Baron of diſuſe. An Honour, which afterwards was
Malpas, who (as I have obſerv'd already) ſeems] confer'd upon the eldeſt ſons of the Kings of
to have dy'd without iſſue: Hamon de Maſcy,| England; and firſt granted to Edward ſon of
whoſe eſtate deſcended to the Fittons of Bolin :| Henry the third, who being taken priſoner by
Gilbert Venables, Baron of Kinderton, whoſe po- rhe Barons, parted with it as a ranſom for his
ſterity || remain'd and flonriſh'd, in a direct line Liberty to Simon de Montfort Earl of Leice-
to | this preſent age: N. Baron of Stockport, to|ſter ; but Simon being cut off ſoon after, it
whom the Warrens of Ponton (deſcended from | quickly return'd to the Crown, and Edward
the noble family of the Earls of Warren and the ſecond made his eldeſt ſon, Earl of Che-
Surrey) ſucceeded in right of marriage. And | ſter and Flint, and under theſe titles ſummon d
theſe are all the Barons I can hitherto find, be- him, when a Child, to Parliament. Afterwards,
longing to the Earls of Cheſter. ho (as it] Richard the ſecond by Act of Parliament rais d
is 42 in an old book) had their free Courts this Earldom to a Principality, and annex d to
for all Pleas and Suits, except thoſe belonging to the it the Caſtle of Leon, with the Territories of
Earl's ſword. They were beſides to be the Earl's| Bromfield and Tale, and likewiſe the Caſtle of
Counſel, to attend him, and to frequent his Chirk, with Chirkland, and the Caſtle of Ofwalds-
Court, for the honour and greater grandeur of | ſtreet with the Hundred, and eleven towns ap-
it; and (as we find it in an old Parchment) pertaining to the ſaid Caſtle, and the Caſtles
they were bound in times of war with the Welſh, to of Jſabella and Delaley, and other large Poſſeſ-
find for every Knight's fee one Horſe with Furni- ſions, which by the * OQutlawry of Richard * proſeripte;
ture, or two without Furniture, within the Diviſions Earl of Arundel, were then forfeited to the
of Cheſhire; and that their Knights and Freeholders| Crown. Richard himſelf was ſtiled Princeps
uld have Corſlets and Haubergeons, and de- Ceſtriz, Prince of Cheſter. But this title was
fend their own Fees with their own Bodies. | but of ſmall duration : no longer, than till
Henry the fourth repeal'd the Laws of the ſaid
ken ot, was ſucceeded by his ſon Richard, who, | Parliament ; for then it became a County Pala-
together with William only ſon of Henry the] tine again, and retains that Prerogative to this
firſt, and others of the Nobility, was caſt away day; which tis adminiſter'd by a Chamberlain, a + Ann. 1605.
between England and Normandy Anno 1120.| Judge Special, two Barons of the Exchequer, three Sn, as fol-
He dying without iſſue, Ranulph de Meſchines | Serjeants at Law, a Sheriff, an Attorney, an Eſ- any Ag rnb
was the third in this dignity, being ſiſter's ſon r &c. fx

J. Tilius,

: Chamber-

| lain, Baron,
* . . o De t *
This County has in it about 68 Pariſhes — Seal.
E have now ſurvey'd the Country of the Cornavii, who, together with the Coritani, Dobuni, and mier. —4
Catuellani, made one entire Kingdom in the Saxon Heptarchy, then call d by them My pena- pic, lif-ltinerant,
and eanc-lond, but render d by the Latins Mercia; from a Saxon word Meanc, which fignifies a Philazer.

limit ; for the other Kingdoms border'd upon it. This was by far the largeſt Kingdom of them all,

| begun by Crida the Saxon about the year 586, and enlarg'd on all fides by Penda ; and a little after,

under Peada, converted to Chriſtianity, But after a duration of two hundred and fifty years, it was,

too late, ſubjected to the Dominion of the Weft-Saxons, when it had for many years endured all the outrage
and miſery that the Daniſh wars could inflif# upon it. |

The more rare Plant yet obſery'd to grow in | Merry-tree. Near Stock-port, and in other places:
Cheſhire, is | Mr. Lawſon could obſerve no other difference between

this and the common Cherry-tree, but only in the fi-
Ceraſus avium fructu minimo cordiformi|gure and ſmallneſs of the fruit.

Rrrr SIL U-

Phyt. Brit. The leaſt wild Heart-Cherry-tree or

% + —
* *

683

7 >, S. *. 3.3 (4

: 8443233883333 5888. #2 8888.
l N

JJC.
F

SILURES

= T ſeems moſt adviſeable, before ue go to the other parts of England, to take 4

OA LESS | round into Cambria, or Wales, which is ſtill poſſeſs d by the Poſterity of the old
ys Britains: though I cannot lool upon this as a Digreſſion, but a purſuing of the
moſt natural courſe. For this tract is ſpread out along the fides of the Corna-
vii, and ſeems to have a right to be confider d here, as in its proper place. Eſ-
pecially, ſeeing the Britiſh or Welſh, the Inhabitants of theſe parts, enjoy the ſame
laws and privileges with a, and have been for a long time as it were engrafted

into our Government.

Wales. Wales therefore ( which formerly comprehended all beyond the Severn, but
Silures, has now narrower bounds) was formerly inhabited by three People, the Silures, the Dimetz, and the
— tes. Ordovices. To theſe belong d not only the twelve Counties of Wales, but alſo the tuo others lying beyond

the Severn, Herefordſhire aud Monmouthſhire, now reckon'd among the Counties of England. To take
them then as they lie : the Silures (as we gather from Ptolemy's deſcription of them) inhabited thoſe Countries
which the Welſh call by one general name Deheubarth, i. e. the Southern part; branched at this day into
the new names of Herefordſhire, Radnorſhire, Brecknockſhire, Monmourhſhire, and Glamorgan-
ſhire ; within which compaſs, there are ſtill ſome remains of the name Silures. As to the derivation of
the word, I can think of none that will anſwer the nature of the Country; but as to the original of the

Tacitus P _— Tacitus imagines them to have come from Iberia, upon account of their * ruddy complexion, their * Colorati ule
curl d hair, and their fituation over-againſt Spain. But Florianus del Campo, a Spaniard, is ver) l. |

politive in that matter, and takes a great deal of pains to find the Silures in Spain, and would obrrude
upon 1s Ihm not what ſtories about Soloria and Siloria among the Aſtures. However, the Territories of
this People were very large ( for it ſeems probable from Pliny and Tacitus, that they were poſſeſs d of
all South-Wales,) and the Inhabitants were hardy, ſtout, warlike, utterly averſe to ſervitude, of great
boldneſs and reſolution (that ſort of it which the Romans term Pervicacia, i. e. obſtinacy and ſtub-
bornneſs,) not to be wrought upon either by threats or kindneſſes : and their Poſterity have not degenera-
ted, in any of theſe particulars. When the Romans, out of a defire to enlarge their Empire, made at-
tempts upen them, they (partly repofing a confidence in the courage and valour of King Caratacus, and
partly incens'd by a ſaying y Claudius the Emperor, That they were to be as entirely extinguiſhed,
as the Sugambri had been) engaged the Romans in a very troubleſome and difficult war. For having in-
tercepted the Auxiliary Troops, and cut off the Legion under Marius Valens, and waſted the territories of
their Allies ; P. Oſtorius, Proprator in Britain, was quite worn-out with theſe croſſes, and ſo dy d. Ve-
ranius 200, who govern'd Britain under Nero, was baffled in his enterprize againſt them. For where
Tacit. Annal. Tacitus Jays, Illum modicis excurſibus Sylvas populatum eſſe, that he deſtroy'd and waſted the woods
LXIV. with ſlight excurſions; inſtead of Sylvas, with the Learned Lipſius only read Siluras, and all is right.
Nor could an end be put to this war, before the reign of Veſpaſian. For then Julius Frontinus ſub-
+ Legicnario dued them, and kept them in quiet, | by garriſons of the Legions. A certain Countryman of ours bas
milite. ureſted that Verſe of Juvenal upon 8 to theſe Silures: 4

— magna qui voce ſolebat
Vendere municipes fractã de merce Silurog,

h =— o with hideous cry
Bawl'd out his broken Sturgeon in the Streets.

as if ſome of our Silures had been taken priſoners, and expos'd to ſale at Rome. But depend upon it;
he miſtook the ſenſe of the Poet. For any one that reads that paſſage with attention, will quickly perceive,
that ' by Siluros he defigns to expreſs a ſort of Fiſh, and not à People.

HE RE-

> DOI WD eee Ee ES

«/

1 x
— - =
*
=
6
0
*
*
.
4 *
.
o
F
*
-
*
*
-.
*
* 0
9 *
> Sud
=
*

ik
"
„

20

— —

Arr.
en _ — — —
*
"a
* 1
.
„ >
* 5
1 o
*
®, F
* 1 .
-
*
- ws
— — *

* 2 W r = N 2 e . *

2 * 4 PBurrington

3 ye : CY Elton — 0

* DN.

— — J Ire, * 7

ATRETFORD 72

oh _
N

*
* 4
| +
Af
fr
«
2 7
*

Ad pics oo wh
UNTING TON,

— —— — —  -

so

, * * .
. : Eq —
. F
*

Birrianton

*
*
<>

X 2.

2

- Haden

Ml. gan o Tat- a ;
Ae 1 OLPHEY HUNDRED

AA alten
o Stockton *l of” ba * F
en ap Leominſter or, - 2

e mtter 2

R Warn
One! ö

"d —
OXPS11 \HUNDRED

GRIMSWORTH ;

U

. whe.

Und Fore
2 A WEB fa” © Hop nee. 2

GL, 1

[Re - RA, A " A
| Y * . >
| —

HEREFORD.

2 by Abel Sale . /
& Tohn (ui.

— - — — — — — —

PART or
Tterinns

MON MOUTH,

4 Michael Church
n Kere, Tg

Jon 4

I Deg rees

PART 01

——  —
—— — 2

till , ran bor 1

Selen, neh

Wonc Es-

N N 0 . 4

2 HDOxwp: fra

3 all 2 Fon
agen 8 —
A Tarington pA.
ike Edith
Am wort Ea Paxler

ore? 2 u
n 8
* 0 AE Y TREE...

fd Bramp tor. - Thbot
2 all

HEREFORD

IIR.
By Rob: Morden

"my

rh

— —
— —

—

F 17

mm

0 wy" 8

5 4 4 1

by the 1 WY "4
-@ _ 1 * 4

———— ́— —ůͤ»“ ?

0 n
— OEn

—

Bleſti

Old Tor

+ In the
of Quee}
zabeth,

HEREFORDSHIRE.

Erefordſbire, call'd by the Bri-j daughter, and coheir, transfer'd it by marriage
tains Ereinuc, is in a manner] to the Lords Tregoz, trom whom it came at Lords Tre.
& of a circular form: bounded|length to the Lords of Grandiſon, who were goze and

** | a * 1 Aan _ a _ * —— 1 —
7 * = ak dt r . * P pad Lay * 9 Secs ä n
71 6 " * e 4 K NY * 4 as N techs * ** . 8 Ca + i a * ,

W ties of Worceſter and Gloceſter ;

norſbire and Breknockſbire ; and on the North
with Shropſhire. Being as it were a Frontier
in all che Wars between the Engliſh and Welſh,
it has upon that account been b erer
ble for its number of Forts and Caſtles (no
fewer than twenty eight,) the greateſt part
whereof have now little to ſhew, beſides the
name.] A Country it is (beſides its pleaſant-
neſs) of an excellent Soil throughout, both for
feeding of Cattel, and produce of Corn;
and admirably well provided with all neceſſa-
ries for life. Inſomuch, that it may diſdain
to come behind any County in England, in
point of Fertility. [But its preſent peculiar
eminence, is in Fruit of all ſorts, which give
them an opportunity, particularly, of making
ſuch vaſt quantities of Syder, as not only to ſerve

on the Eaſt with the Coun- originally of Burgundy ; of whom elſewhere. randiſon.

Now the Dore (falling down from the North,

on the South with Monmouth by Suott hill, a Caſtle, and ſometime the Barony Snotthill.
ſbire ; on the Welt with Rad- of Robert Chandois, where there is a Quarry of

excellent Marble) cuts its way through the mid-
dle of the Valley, which the Britains, from
the river, call Diffrin Dore; but the Engliſh,
that they might ſeem to expreſs the force of

that word, have call'd ir The Gilden Vale. duden Vale;

Which name it may well be thought to deſerve,
for its golden, rich, and pleaſant Fertility. For
the hills that encompaſs it on both ſides, are
cloathed with woods; under the woods lie
corn- fields on each hand; and under thoſe fields,
lovely and fruitful meadows. In the middle,
between them, glides a clear and cryſtal river,
upon which, Robert Earl of Ewias erected a
beautiful Monaſtery, wherein very many of the
28 and Gentry of theſe parts were bu-
ried. |

Part of this County, which bends towards

their own families (for it is their common and] the Eaſt from hence, now call'd Irchenfeld, in Irchenfeld;
ordinary Drink,) but alſo to furniſh London Domeſday Archenfeld, was (as Hiſtorians write)
and other parts of England; their Red-ſtreak]laid waſte with fire and ſword by the Danes,
(from a ſort of Apple of that name) being ex-|in the year 715 ; Camalac, a Britiſh Biſhop,
treamly valu'd.] To theſe excellencies are to being then carried away caprive. Herein, ſtood
be added, its fine rivers, the Mie, the Lag, and] Kilpec a noted Caſtle, the ſeat of the noble fa-
the Munow, which after they have water d the] mily of the Xilpecs, who, as ſome report, were Kilpec.
verdant flow'ry meadows, and fruitful corn-| Champions of the Kings of England, in the be-
fields, at laſt meet together, and paſs in one ginning of the Normans ; which I alſo rea-
chanel to the Severn-Sea. For the making|dily believe. In the reign of Edward the firſt,
two of theſe (namely Me and Lug) Naviga-| Robert Wallerond liv'a here, whoſe * nephew * Nepoe.
Stat. 14 Car, ble, two Statutes have been paſſed in Parlia- Alan Plugenet was honour'd with the title of a
2. n. 4. ment, ſince the Reſtoration of King Charles the] Baron. In this Archenfeld likewiſe, as we read
7 W. 3. c. 14 ſecond.) in Domeſday-book, certain Reyenues were
The River The Munw has its riſe in Hatterell-hills, aſſigned by an old cuſtom to one or two
Munow, Which ſhooting up aloft, like a Chair, are a Prieſts, on this condition, that they ſhould go
| IX ſort of Wall to this Shire on the South-weſt- on Embaſſies for the Kings of England into
| fide. Hence, the river deſcending, firſt ſtruggles] Wales; and, to uſe the words of the ſaid
Bleſtium. Southward along the foot of the hills, to Ble-| Book, The men of Archenfeld, whenever the Army
ſtium, a Town ſo plac'd by Antoninus, that both| marches againſt the Enemy, by cuſtom make the A-
for ſituation and diſtance, it can be no other] vauntward, and in the return homeward, the
than that which ſtands upon this river, and is by] Rereward.
the Britains call'd Caftle-Hean, that is, the Ola] As the Munow runs along the lower part of
Old Town. Caſtle, and by us The old Town. It is an incon-|this County, ſo the Me with a winding courſe The River
ſiderable Village, but nevertheleſs this new cuts it in the middle: upon which, in the We- Wye.
name makes much for its Antiquity, for in ſtern bound, ſtands caffe l caltle, which Willi- c;g,,4- *
both tongues it ſignifies an Old Caſtle or Town.|am Fitz-Osborn Earl of Hereford built upon his Caſtle.

rn

*
28
,

— *
p a Wr (fs "uy *

* e

rr F N

8

„1

RG STS IS +84
„„

*

the Seat of water, and as it were a River-Iſland; the ſeat|day-book, ) but Ralph de

the Cecils, deny held it. It is

in former ages of the ancient and knightly fami- ſuppos d, that it came afterwards to Multer
ly of the Sitflers or Cecils ; whence was deſcen- I the ſon of Richard Punt, a Norman; for his
ded my right honourable Patron, highly accom- I ſirname was de Clifford, and from him the illu-
pliſh'd with all the Ornaments of Virtue, ſtrious family of the Cliſfords, Earls of Cum-
Wiſdom, and Nobility, Sir Milliam Cecil, Ba-|berland, did * 1 deſcend. But in King
F In the time ron of Burgi ley, and f Lord High Treaſurer of Edward the firlt's time, John Giffard held it, Ing. 26 E. 1.
E Queen Eli- England. who married the heir of Walter Clifford.
= — her ce, the Muxow turning Eaſtward,| Thence the He, with a crooked and winding
for a good way parts this County from Mon- ſtream rolls along by L hitney, which has given Whitney.
mouthſhire, and is augmented by the river Dore, name to a noted family ; next by Bradwardin-Bradwardin-
Herald. at a Caſtle call'd Map-Harald or Harald Ewias.| Caſtle, which gave both original and name toCaſtle.
The FP. 1. This Euia-Caſtle (to give you the words off the famous Thomas Bradwardin Archbiſhop of
Ewias, King William the firſt's Book) was repair d ly] Canterbury, who for his great variety of know-
| Alured of Marleberg. Afterwards, it belonged] ledge, and his admirable proficiency in the moſt
Their Arms, to one Harald a Nobleman, who, in a Shield] abſtruſe parts of learning, was in that age ho- Ths pro-
Argent, bore a Feſs, Gules, between three Eſtoiles,|nour'd with the title of f Doctor profundus. found Doctor.
Salle; from whom it began to be call'd Ha- Upon the ſame river, two miles from Here-
1 Prourgti. re/d-Ewias but Sibyll his * Great-grand-Iford, is Eaton-wall, a Camp, containing about Eaton.
* 8 ; | thirty * Aubr, MS.

n IR „ * | _—_ g * ; N
* % A ˙— tte ad 7 e
. ˙²˙Ü 2 r rechnen

Alterynnis, Next to this, lies Alierynnis, ſurrounded with ſoun Waſte (theſe are the * words of Domeſ- Clivas fortis.
0 0

— — a——_— — — yy P 0 — m—_. „
<>

— 3
2 ; — : - N _
OSS. uw wo lee 0 ont. ol» oo oe -

Co

:
4
*

— — —

$.

TY

taken into the Catalogue of S. Ethelben

SILURE 1

——

687

. EEE ens — —

Hereford.

Kencheſter.

Aubr. Ms.

+ Carries, C.

g

thirty or forty acres. The works of it are ſin- He was 3
gle, except a little on the Weſt-ſide. And a- Martyrs, and had

bout two miles from hence, and a mile from |dicated to him by Mzilfrid a petty King of the
Creden-· hill. Kencheſter, is Creden-hill ; upon which, is a very Country; which being ſoon after adorn d with

great Camp, and mighty works : the graff here
is inwards as well as outwards ; and the whole
contains by eſtimation about forty acres.] At
length, the Ae comes to Hereford, the Metro-
polis of this County. -
How far that little Tra&, Arcenfeld, reach'd,
I know not; but the affinity between theſe
names, Ereinuc, Arcenfeld, Ariconium (the Town
mention'd by Antoninus in theſe parts,) and

Hareford or Hereford, the preſent Metropolis of

this Shire ; have by degrees induced me to
think that all the reſt are derived from Arico-
nium. And yet I do not believe Ariconium and
Hereford the ſame ; but as Bae in Germany has
the name of Auguſt᷑ a Rauracorum, and Baldach
in Aſlyria the name of Babylon ( becauſe, as
this had its original from the ruins of Baby-
lon, ſo that had it from thoſe of Auguſta; ) juſt
ſo our Hariford ( for thus the common people
call it) had its name and original, in my o-
pinion, from its neighbour Ariconium ; which
at this day has no clear marks of a Town, ha-
ving been deſtroyed, as is reported, by an Earth-
quake. Only, it till retains a ſlight ſhadow
of the name, being call'd Kencheſter, and ſhews
ſome ruins of old Walls call'd Kencheſter-Walls,
about which are often dug-up ſtones of inlaid
Chequer-work, Britiſh Bricks, Roman Coyns,
Cc. [Here, about the year 1669. was found
in a wood, a great vault, with tables of plaſter
in it. The vault it ſelf was paved with ſtone ;
and, thereabouts, were dug-up alſo many pieces
of Roman Coins, with large Bones, leaden
Pipes, ſeveral Roman Urns with aſhes in them,
and other veſſels, the uſe whereof was un-
known. And upon another view of the place,
in the year 1670, was diſcovered a Bath ; and

the brick-pipes which heated it, remained en-

tire. But Hareford her daughter f would carry
more expreſs remains of the name ; [if this in-
deed were the true name. Bur it is really of
a pure Saxon original, implying no more than
a ford of the Army : nor ought the vulgar's
pronouncing it Hariford to be of any weight,

*See the Gloſ- When it appears by our moſt ancient Annals,
fary, and the that it was conſtantly written hepepond. Which
ſeveral places interpretation doth alſo well ſuit the ſituation
wherein it is of the place; the Severn being for many hun-

mention'd,

793+

dred years the frontier berween two Nations
almoſt always at war.]

This City ſtands eaſtward, ſcarce three Ita-
lian miles from Kencheſter, amongſt Meadows
extremely pleaſant, and Corn-fields very fruit-
ful; encompaſs'd almoſt with rivers ; by an ano-
nymous one, on the north and weſt- ſides, and
on the ſouth, by the Me, which haſtens hi-
ther out of Wales. It is ſuppoſed to have
firſt ſprung-up, when the Saxon Heptarchy was
in its glory ; founded, as ſome write, by Ed-
ward the Elder : and indeed there is no men-
tion of it more ancient. For the Britains,

before the name of Hereford was known, called

the place Trefawith, from Beech-trees 3 and Hen-
ford, from an Old way : and the Saxons them-
ſelves, pepn-leg, from Fern. It owes, if I mi-
ſtake not, it's greateſt encreaſe and growth, to
Religion, and the Martyrdom of Ethelbert, King
of the Eaſt-Angles; who (whilſt in perſon he
courted the daughter of Offa King of the
Mercians) was villanouſly way-laid and mur-
der'd by Quendreda, Offa's wife, who longed
more for the Kingdom of the Eaſt-Angles,
than to ſee her daughter honourably married.

2 Biſhop's See, grew very rich, by the libera-
lity, firſt of the Mercian, and atterwards of
che Weſt-Saxon, Kings. For they at length
were poſleſled of this City, as may be gather'd
from William of Malmesbury ; where he writes,
that Athelſtan the Weſt-Saxon had reduced the
Princes of Wales in this City, to ſuch ſtreights,
that they agreed to pay him tribute (beſides
hounds and hawks) viz. twenty pound weight
of Gold, and three hundred pound of Silver,
every year. This City, as far as my reading
has carry'd me, had never any misfortune, un-
leſs it were in the year of our Lord 1055,
when Gryffin Prince of South Wales, and Al-
gar an Engliſhman, rebelling againſt Edward
the Confeſlor, and having routed Earl Ralph,
ſacked the City, deſtroy'd the Cathedral, and
carried away captive Leofgar the Biſhop. But
Harold, having ſoon ſuppreſs'd this rebellion,

fortified it, as Floriacenſis informs us, with a

broad and high Rampire. Upon this account it

a Church here built and de- Martyr,

is, that Malmesbury || writes thus; Hereford i; || Lib. de
no great City, and yet by the high and formidable *ilcibus,

ruins of its ſteep and broken Bulwarks, it ſhews that
it has been confiderable : and as it appears by
Domeſday-book, there were in all but one hundred
and three men, within and without the walls. The
Normans afterwards built a very large and
ſtrong Caſtle (on the eaſt-ſide of the Cathedral,
along the river Je; the work, as ſome re-
port, of Earl Miles ; which is now ruin'd by

time, and falling to decay. | Leland * ſays, that“ Itinerr, ;

been one of the faireſt, largeſt, and ſtrong-
eſt in England. The walls were high, and firm,
and full of great towers ; and where the river
was not a ſufficient defence for it, there it was
ſtrongly ditch d. It had two Wards, each of them
ſurrounded with water: the Dungeon was high
and exceeding well fortify'd, having, in the
outward wall or ward, ten towers of a ſemi-
circular figure, and one great tower in the in-
ner ward. Some think ( ſays the ſame writer)
that Heraldus began this Caſtle, after that he
had conquer'd the rebellion of the Welſhmen in
King Edward the Confeſſor's time. Some think,
that the Lacies Earls of Heretord were the

reat makers of it, and the Bohuns Earls of
Hereford. Afterwards, they wall'd the City
about. In the reign of King Henry the firſt,
the preſent beautitul Church was Guided by
Biſhop Reinelm; which his ſucceſſors enlarged
by adding to it a neat College, and fine hou-
ſes for the Prebendaries. For, beſides the Bi-
ſhop (who has three hundred and two Church-
es in his Dioceſe) there are in this Church, a
Dean, two Archdeacons, a Præcentor, a Chan-
cellour, a Treaſurer, and twenty eight Pre-
bendaries. I ſaw ſcarce any Monuments in it,
beſides thoſe of the Biſhops : and I have heard,
that Thomas Cantlou the Biſhop, a perſon nobly
born, had there a ſtately and magnificent tomb;
who being canonized for his holineſs, wanted
little of out-ſhining the Royal Martyr Ethel-
bert : ſo great was the opinion of his piety
and devotion. The City is pretty large, and
had once fix Pariſh-Churches ; but two of theſe
were demoliſhed in the late Civil wars. It is
govern'd by a Mayor and ſix Aldermen, a Re-
corder, Cc. and has an Hoſpital liberally en-
dow'd for the maintenance of twelve poor peo-
ple ; which had like to have gone to ruin, had

this Caſtle, by the ruins, appear'd to have Ns.

+ Mr. Greg)

not the care of two f worthy Perſons preven- and Mr.

ted Oi.

* 99 n .

*
OG.
*

_

J — - *
P

4 ä — ITY "PET" ä „ * N : „
ATTY py ee es aa Fr” r * 9 7 r AN 5 —

- r

* Aubr. M
Oy er · hil

Lug, ris

Br2mptc
Bria n,

+} Aubr. *
Brando

I Aubr.

Wigm

chards-C

Bone-\

* Y a * u *
enen os PRO

2 * * —__

HEREF0

RDSHIRE.

689

5 A abr. M 8.
Oy ler hill.

9
=
*

* , * r
* r

m 20 1 * os
of * * «ax? ks

***

* * my OO
bs

_ N 8 1

Bra mpton
Brian.

4 Aubr. MS.

Brandon,

t Aubr, MS,

Wigmore,

Richards-Ca-
ſtle.

Lords of Ri-
chards· Caſtle.

Bone - Well.

Lemſter.

ted it.] According to Geographers, the Lon-

itude of this City is twenty degrees, twenty-

Par minutes; Latitude fifty two degrees, tix
minutes.

[Above the City, in the Pariſh of Dinder,

* is a Roman Camp call'd Oyfter-hill ; which

name may perhaps retain ſome footſteps of O-

ſtorius Scapula, who commanded in thoſe parts;

unleſs it ſhall appear to have ſome known
and ſpecial relation to the Shell-fiſh of that
name.

The ye has ſcarce gone three miles from

Lug, riv. this City, but it meets the river Lug; which

having run with a rapid ſtream from Radnor-
Hills, glides with a ſtill courſe through this
County, from north-weſt to ſouth-eaſt. At
the firſt entrance, it has a diſtant proſpe& of
Brampton Brian, a Caſtle which a famous fami-
ly (hence firnam'd de Brampton, whoſe Chriſti-
an nante was uſually Brian) held by a continu'd
ſucceſſion ro the time of King Edward the firſt,
when by heirs-temale it came to R. Harley.
[About the borders between Shropſhire and
this County, near Lanterdin, f is a perfect Ro-
man Camp, call'd Brandon, very commodioully
ſituated for water, by reaſon of the nearneſs of
the river Teme. It is a ſingle ſquare-work with
four ports. And about halt a mile from hence,
on the other fide of the river, was the Britiſh
Camp (now cover'd with great Oaks,) call'd
Coxall. It hath been obſeryv'd in ſome old Deeds of
the Harleys (of Brampton-Bryan-caſtle hard by)
that it is written Coxwall, not Coxall or Coxhall ;
ſo that the place ſeems to have had the latter
part of the name from this vallum or wall; in
like manner, as the Hall in Wiltſhire, Walton
in Surrey, Eaton's-wall, and Walford under
Brandon. A quarter of a mile from Brandon,
are two barrows. One of them was caus'd
to be dug in the year 1662. when they met
with a great deal of Coals and ſome pieces of
burnt Bones. Alſo, in the middle, they found
an Urn about two foot and a half high, full of
coals and aſhes, with ſome pieces of burnt
bones. | But the We has a nearer view ot
Wigmore, in Saxon Pyginga-mene, which was
repair'd in ancient times by King Edward the
elder, and afterwards fortity'd with a Caſtle by
William Earl of Hereford, in the waſt of a ground
(for ſo it is in Domeſday-book) which was called
Mareſtun, in the tenure of Ranulph de Mor-
timer, from whom thoſe Mortimers who were
afterwards Earls of March, were deſcended :
but of theſe, more in Radnorſbire. Three
miles off, there is another neighbouring Ca-
{tle call'd Richard's-Caſtle, which was polleſled,
firſt by the Sayes, then by the Mortimers, and
afterwards by the Talbots. Ar length, by the
daughters of J. Talbot, the inheritance was di-
vided betwixt Guarin Archdeacon and Mat-
thew Guraay. It ſtands on the top of a ver
rocky hill, well wooded ; but even in Leland's
time the walls and towers of it were going to
decay.] Beneath this Caſtle, Nature (which
no where ſports her ſelf more in ſhewing
wonders, than in the waters,) hath brought-
forth a little Well, which is always full of
ſmall fiſh-bones (or as others think, ſmall
frog-bones, ) notwithſtanding it is ever now
and then emptied and clear'd of them ; whence
it is commonly call'd Bone- Mell. And not far off
ſtands Croft-Caſtle, belonging to the famous and
very ancient and knightly family of the Crofts.
In the Park, is a large Camp with two great
ditches, call'd the Ambry : from whence is a
very lovely proſpe&. | | |

Thence the Me goes on to Lemſter, called
alſo Leonminſter and Leonis Monaſterium, from a

Lion that appear'd in a Viſion [to King Mer-

here, | as ſome have dream'd. But by the Bri-
tains it is called. Lhan-Lieni ; which, ſignity-
ing a Church of Nuns, and it being certain
that Merewalch a Mercian King founded here
a Church tor Nuns ( which was afterwards a
Cell belonging to the Monaſtery of Reading ; )
to ſeek atter another Original of the name,
would be labour in vain. And yet there are
{ome who derive it from Linum Flax; the beſt
kind of which, grows here. In this place

walſh, and ſome of his Succeſſors, had a Caſtle
or Palace, on a hill-ſide by the Town; the
place (ſays Leland) x now call d Comfor-caſtle,
and there are to be ſeen tokens of ditches where build-
ings have been. But now it glories chiefly in
the Moo ot the neighbouring parts (com-

counted the beſt. It is ſo famous alſo for
Wheat, and the fineſt J/hite-bread, that Lem-
ſter Bread and Weably-Ale ( a Town belonging
to the noble family of D'Eureux,) are grown
into a Proverb. By reaſon of theſe Commodi-
ties, the Markets of Lemſter were very much fre-
quented ; and they of Hereford and Morceſter
obſerving it, were ſo Envious, that they obli-
ged them, by Virtue of the King's Authori-
ty, to alter their Market-day ; complaining
that the confluence of people thither, impair'd
their Markets. [From this place, William Far-

this Realm, in the fourth year of King Willi-
am and Queen Mary. | I have nothing
more to add concerning it, but that William
Breoſa Lord of Brecknock, when he revolted
from King John, ſer it on fire, and defaced it.
As for Welle), it is ſeated more within the
Country, and was the Barony of the Verdons;
the fr of which family, Bertram de Verdon,
came into England with the Normans, and his
poſterity, by marriage with one of the heirs
of the Laceys of Trim in Ireland, were for
ſome time hereditary Conſtables of Ireland :
but at laſt, the eſtate devolved, by daughters,
to the Furnivals, Burgherſh, the Ferrers of Gro-
by, and Crophull ; and from the Crophulls, b

the Ferrars of Chartley, to the D'Evereux's
Earls of Effex. Near neighbours to Melly, but
more weſtward, are, Huntingdon-Caſtle, which for-
merly belong'd to the Bohuns, Earls of Here-
ford and Eſſex; Kinnerſtey, which belong'd to
the ancient Houſe of De-la-bere; and Erdſ/ley,
the habitation, for a long time, of the famous and
ancient family of the Baskerviles ; which bred in

duce their original from a f Niece of Gunora,
the moſt celebrated Norman Lady, and flou-
riſhed long ſince in this County, and its neigh-
bour Shropſhire ; and held (to note ſo much

the King one barbed Arrow as often as he came
into thoſe parts to hunt in Cornedon-Chace.
Now, the Lug haſtens to the He, firſt, by

the Wardrobe to King Henry the fourth, who
married one of the heirs of Thomas Earl of A-
rundel, built a very fine Houſe, which the
Coningsbeys, a family of great note in theſe parts,
have a good while inhabited, [Of this dans fe
Thomas Coningsby hath not long ſince been ad-
vanced to the dignity of a Baron, and Earl of
this Realm ; and his daughter, Margaret Co-

ningsby, hath alſo been created Baroneſs and
Vilcounteſs Coningsby 1 F TIT
8

690

*

wald, upon which he began his Nunnery « Lel. Itiner.

(according to tradition) King Merwald or Mer-Ibia.

monly called Lemſter Ore,) which, excepting that Lemſter. Ore,
of Apulia and Tarentum, is by all Europe ac- the belt Wool.

Lemſter-
Bread and
Webley-Ale.

mer, Lord Lemſter, was created a Baron of

Webley.

Barons Ver:
don.

Huntingdon-

Caſtle.
Kinnerſley.
Erdſley.)

Baskervile.

old time ſo many noted Knights: they de- — Gemitic,
I u C.

+ Nepti.

by the by) the Hamlet of Lanton in Capite, as of Fines Hilarii
the Honour of Montgomery, by the ſervice of giving 20 E. 3.

Hampton, where Rowland Lenthall, Maſter of Hampton.

|
|
|
|

4.

Sc

SILURES.

— 2 2 . r r -

Wergins,

Marcley-hill.

A moving
Mountain.

Ledbury.
+ Walter

Mapes calls

him Alvo-
dus, and

ſays he was ſuaſion, that he was cured of the Palſie by

the ſon of

E454. S the interceſſion of St. Ethelbert. [At this place,
veſter, Lib. an Hoſpital was founded by Hugh Follioe Biſhop

de Nug.
Curial, 2.
» cap. 11.

Colwal.

Holme Lacy.
Scudamore, or

Eſcudamore.

Brockhamp-
ton.

Wobury.

Roſſe.
Wilton.
Baron Grey
of Wilton.

the Lug runs by Marden, and Sout hon, or Sutton :
of which, Sutton ſhews ſome ſmall remains of
King Offa's Palace, infamous tor the murder
ot King Ethelbert ; and Marden is noted for
the tomb of the ſaid King Ethelbert, who for
a long time lay bury'd here in obſcurity, before
he was tranſlated to Hereford. | Between Sut-
ton and Hereford, in a common Meadow call'd
the Wergins, were plac'd two large Stones for
a water-mark ; one erected upright, and the
other laid arhwart, In the late Civil wars, a-
bout the year 1652, they were remov'd to a-
bout twelve ſcore paces diſtance, and no body
knew how ; which gave occaſion to a common
Opinion, That they were carry'd thither by
the Devil. When they were ſet in their places
again, one of them requir'd nine yoke of Ox-
en to draw it.] Near the conflux of the Lug
and the Hye, eaſtward, a Hill, which they call
Marcley-Hil, did in the year 1575. rowſe it ſelt
as it were cut of ſleep, and for three days to-
gether ſhoving its prodigious body forward
with a horrible roaring noiſe, and overturning
every thing in its way, rais'd it ſelf (to the
great aſtoniſhment of the beholders) to a higher
place ; by that kind of Earthquake, I ſuppoſe,
which the Naturaliſts call Braſmatia. Not far
from hence, towards the Eaſt likewiſe, under
Matvern-hills (by which the eaſt-ſide of this
County is here bounded,) ftands Ledbury, upon
the river Ledden ; a Town of note, which I Ed-
win the Saxon, a perſon of great power, gave
to the Church of Hereford, out of a per-

of Hereford ; for the retrieving of which, when
it was greatly decayed and impoveriſhed, a
Statute paſſed in Parliament in the 23 year of
Queen Elizabeth.] As for the Military En-
trenchment on the neighbouring hill, I need
ſay nothing of it, ſince in this tract (which
was a Frontier, and the ſeat of war, firſt
between the Romans and the Britains, and
afterwards between the Britains and the Sax-
ons) the like are to be ſeen in many places.
Not far from Lidbury, is Colual ; near which,
upon the Waſte, as a Countryman was digging
a ditch about his Cottage, he found a Crown
or Coronet of gold, with gems ſet deep in it.
It was of a ſize large enough to be drawn o-
ver the arm, with the ſleeve. The Stones of
it are ſaid to have been ſo valuable, as to
be ſold by a Jeweller for fifteen hundred
pounds.

Now, the Wye, enlarg'd by the Lag, fetches
a winding compaſs, firſt by Holme Lacy, the
ſeat of the ancient and noble family of Suda-
mores, which was much advanced by matching
with an heireſs of the Houſe of Ewias in this
County, and with Huntercombe, &c. elſewhere ;
and, of later years, by enjoying the title of
Viſcount Sligce in the Kingdom of Ireland.
From henee, the Mie paſſes [by Brockhampton;
near which, upon Capellar-hill, is a very large
ſ{quariſh Camp, called J/obury. It is double-
trenched, and near half a mile long, but nar-
row, Then, it runs] between Roſs noted for
Smiths, and Wilton over-againſt it, a very an-
cient Caſtle of the Greys, from which ſo man
famous perſons of that ſirname have had their
original. It was built, as the cemmon report
goes, by Hugh Long-champ : but publick Re-
cords aſſure us, that King John gave Milton,
with the Caſtle, to Henry Long-champ, and that
it came by marriage to William Fitz-Hugh, and
likewiſe, not long after ( in King Edward the

firſt's time) to Reginald Grey. After the Ie

rſhal, and which was afterwards the prin-
cipal ſeat of the Talbots ; it takes leave of He-
retordſhire, and goes into the County of Mon-
mouth. In the South limit of this County,
is Doward (in the pariſh of Whitchurch) a pretty
high hill, on the top whereof, one would guels
by the ditches, that there had been an ancient
fortification; and what makes it more proba-
ble, is, that in digging there for Iron-ore and
Lime-ſtone, broad Arrow-heads have been found
of late years ; and not long ago, the greateſt
part of the bones of a Gigantick perſon were
found here inter'd, in a place which ſeem'd to
be arch'd over. The length of all the joints

tlemen to a Surgeon in Briſtol
In the declenſion of the Saxon Government,

Edward the Confeſlor's filter, govern'd this
County as an Officiary Earl. But the Nor-
mans diveſted him of this honour, and ſubſti-
tuted in his room William the ſon of Osbern
of Crepon, or, as the Normans call'd him, Fitz-
Osbern, a perſon very nearly allied to the Dukes

of Normandy, He being lain in the wars in
Flanders, was ſucceeded by his ſon Roger ſir-

ving no legitimate iſſue, Then, King Stephen
reſtor d to Robert le Boflu Barl of Leiceſter,
ſon of the heir of Emma de Bretevill (I ſpeak
out of the very original) the Borough of Hereford,
and the Caſtle, and the whole County of Hereford,
to deſcend by inheritance ; but to no purpoſe. For
Maud the Empreſs, who contended with Ste-
phen for the Crown, adyanced Miles, ſon of
Walter, Conſtable of Gloceſter, to that honour,

of theſe honours. This Miles had five ſons,
Roger, Walter, Henry, William, and Mahel,
all perſons of great note ;- and who dy'd un-
timely deaths, after they had all, except William,
ſucceeded one another. in their father's eſtate,
without any iſſue. King Henry, amongſt other

ford, of which he made him Earl. But upon Ro-
ger's death, if we may credit Robert Monten-
ſis, the ſame King kept the Earldom of Hereford
to himſelf. Margaret the eldeſt ſiſter of thoſe,
was marry'd to Humphrey Bohun, the third of
that name, and his Poſterity were Conſtables
of England, viz. Humphrey Bohun the fourth,

dy'd in the fourth year of King Henry

phrey the fixth, who dy'd before his father,
having firſt begot Humphrey the ſeventh upon
a daughter and one of the heirs of Milliam
Breos Lord of Brecknock. His ſon Humphrey
the eighth was ſlain at Boroughbrig, leaving by
Elizabeth his wife, daughter of King Edward
the firſt, and dowager of the Earl of Holland,
a numerous iſſue, viz. John Bohun, Humphrey
the ninth, both Earls of Hereford and Eſſex,
who dy'd without iſſue ; and William, Earl ot

3 who had, by Elizabeth,
a

nam'd de Bretevill, who T2 * outlaw'd, lea-

Doward,

were twice the length of others of this age ; Capt, &.
and were given by two EP nn Gen-

r. White,

Ralph ſon of Walter Medantin by Goda King Fark, te.

Profru

and made him Conſtable of England. Never-Conſtables &f
theleſs, King Stephen afterwards diveſted him England,

things, gave to Roger The Mote of Hereford, Girald.
with the whole Caſtle, and the third peuny of the Cambrig |
revenues of the Pleas of the whole County of Here- Itin. l. 1:6 %

1156,

and Henry his ſon, to whom King John grant-2 Par, Chart,
ed Twenty pound, to be receiv'd yearly of the third _ 1 Reg:
penny of the County of Hereford, whereof he made 2 Paris
him Earl. This Henry marry'd the fiſter and Lib. Wa.
heir of William Mandevill Earl of Eſſex, anddens.

the Lib, Mow:
third. Humphrey the fifth of that name, his n

ſon ; who was alſo Earl of Eſſex, and had 8

— —

— .

92

has run a little further, and ſaluted Goderich- Goderic

Caſtle, which King John gave to William Earl fs. ©

ore, and

4 % "—_ | — * ä 9 * ww N
N 6 ” i 4 . n 4 * 1 he, 7 1 ” - 7
e ů OT TT non Oe OP * N "4th =

Henry tb
fourth Ki
of Engla!

+ So ſa
ann. 10

V
ö
23 A
„
.
2
- 2 e
;
E
=.
*
*
1
4
*
1
hy
I
£
:

553 HEREFORDSHIRE.

and one of the heirs of Giles Lord Badleſmer, wards created Earl of Eſſex by Queen Elizabeth.
Humphrey Bohun (the tenth and laſt of the And ſince, this title came by the ſaid Walter
Bohuns,) Earl of Hereford, Eſſex, and Nor-| into the family of D'Eureux, it has been poſ-
thampton, and alſe Conſtable of England. He left] ſeſs'd firſt by a grandſon of the ſame name,
two daughters, Eleanor wife of Thomas de and then by two Roberts, alſo Earls of Eſſex.
Woodſtock Duke of Gloceſter, and Mary mar- But upon the death of the laſt (who was like-
Henry the ry d to Henry of Lancaſter Earl of Derby, who] wiſe the laſt Earl of that family,) Sir Malter
— King was created Duke of Hereford, and was aſter- D' Eureux, ſon and heir to Sir Edward Deve-
of England. wards crown'd King of England. After this, reux, who was the only ſon of Walter Viſcount
the Staffords Dukes of Buckingham took the ti-| Hereford before-mention'd, ſucceeded in the
tle of Is of Hereford : they were deſcend-| title of Viſcount Hereford. . After him, it was
ed from a daughter of Thomas of Woo ;| enjoy'd by his ſon and grandſon (both Leice-
which daughter was afterwards marry'd to] fters;) and after them, by Edward Devereux,
+ So ſaid, William Bourchier, call'd Earl of Ew. But ſ in| brother to the laſt. Who dying without iflue,
4 1607. our memory, King Edward the ſixth honour'd| the Honour devoly'd upon Price Devereux, deſ-
Walter D'Eureux, deſcended by the Bourchiers| cended from Sir George Devereux, brother of the

from the Bohuns, with the title of Viſcount{laſt Walter, before-mention'd. ]
Hereford, whoſe grandchild by a ſon was after-|

— ART rw n 6

e
NN

SY Dee

Part of a LETTER from Mr. Edward Lhwyd, con-
cerning his Tranſlation of the Counties of Wales, and
his Additions thereunto.

— JN the Tranſlation, I have, without favour or prejudice, endeavour'd to retain the ſenſe

of the Author : but whereas I have ſometimes differ'd in writing the Welſh names of

Perſons and Places; I preſum'd few Readers would ſcruple to allow me that liberty.
Nor can it derogate any thing from our excellent Anthor's charatter, that a native of that country ſhould
pretend to a more comprehenfrve knowledge of the Britiſh than himſelf. However in this caſe, as I have
not wholly written the Welſh words according to the Engliſh Cuſtom, ſo neither haus I kept ſtriftly to the
common method of writing Welſh ; but have usd a more general Alphabet, whereby ſuch as are unac-
quainted with that Language, will pronounce the words much truer ; and they that underſtand it, will
find no occaſion of miſtakes. For example, in _ the letter C in the Welſb and Iriſh, is before all
Vouels pronounced like K (as Cilcen is read Kilken,) but in every other language obtains that Pronun-
ciation only before a, o, and u; I have in ſuch words as are purely Welſh ſubſtituted K for it; in
the pronunciation whereof, all Languages agree. Nor can the Criticks in the Welſh call this an Innova-
tion, the Letter K being common in ancien MSS. though never us'd a 1% Books. I have alſo, for
the like reaſons, taken the ſame liberty in writing V for F, and F for Ff, Lh for Ll, and Dh for Dd.
And whereas the word Lhan in the names of Churches is commonly joyn'd with that which follows, as
Lhanelian, Lhanieſtin, &c. I thought it better Orthography to ſeparate it; writing Lhan Elian,
which fignifies St. Elian's Church; and Lhan Ieſtin, i. e. St. Juſtin's. — - What I have
added, are generally Obſervations of my own ; and where they are not ſo, I have taken care to inform the

Reader.

Pronunciation of the WELS H.

Ch is pronounced as the Engliſh Gh amongſt the Vulgar in the Notth, but more roughly,

Dh as Th in the words This, That, &c. f |

G as the Engliſh G in the words Gain, Gift, &c.

Jas in Engliſh, in the words Vin, Kin; but never as in Wind, Kind, &c.

Lh is only a ſibilating L, and is pronounc'd in reſpe& of L as Th with reference to 7.

U as the Engliſh 7 in the words Limb, Him, &c.

is always a Vowel, and pronounced like the Engliſh oo. :

Y in monoſyllables, and in the Anal Syllables of other words, as in Engliſh ; but generally in
the penultima or atitepenultima as Zin the Engliſh words, Third, Bird; © in Honey, Money;

Din Mud, Myſt, &c. 3

All the other Letters are pronounc'd as in Engliſh, and never alter their pronunciation.

* denotes a long Vowel ; as Mix is pronounc'd like the Engliſh word Mane.
* ſhews only the Accent in ſhort Vowels.

R A D-
