Popular Tales of the West Highlands, Vol. III (J. F. Campbell, 1860; public domain)
===============================================================================
Vol. III of Campbell's West Highland tales. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/populartalesofwe03camp).

tm-^


À


(^j/OX^,  \^C


POPULAE    TALES


THE   WEST  HIGHLANDS.


PRINTED  BY  R.  &    R.  CLARK,


EDMONSTON  AND  DOUGLAS,  EDINBURGH.

LONDON      .  .  HAMILTON,    ADAMS,   &,  CO.

CAMBRIDGE  .  MACMILLAN   <fc   CO.

DUBLIN       .  .  W.    ROBERTSON.

GLASGOW  .  .  JAMES  MACLEHOSE.


7

POPULAR   TALES        /££2-


THE  WEST  HIGHLANDS

OEALLY    COLLECTED

Wiìi^  H  franslatioit
By   J.   r.    C A:\IPB ELL


YOL.  Ill

MYTHOLOGICAL  TALES,  FABLES,  AND  OSSIA^TIC  BALLADS.


EDIXBUEGH :

EDMOXSTOX    AXD    DOUGLAS.

1862.


30       my'


CONTENTS.


NAME.

LYIII.  THE  RIDER  OF  GRIAN-
AIG,  AND  IAIN  THE  SOL-
DIER'S SON.
1.

2.  Nollaig

3.  Fhiorrachd  Fhuarrachd.  etc.   ...
4.

5.

6.  Ceap

7.  Godar  Leum

8.  Tom  Luacharach

9.  Fo  Gheasan

Gaelic

LIX.  FIONN'S  QUESTIONS...

LX.      D  I A  R  M  A  I  D       AND
GRAINNE.

Gaelic

LXI.    THE    LAY     OF    DIAR-

MAID.
1.

(Jaelic

3.  The  Lay  of  Yeearmaid

Gaelic

4.  The  Boar  of  Ben  Laijrhal

Fables

LXII.  HOW  THE  FOX  TOOK
A  TURN  OUT  OF  THE  GOAT

Gaelic

LXIIL  HOW  THE  COCK  TOOK
A  TURN  OUT  OF  THE  FOX
Gaelic

LXIV.  THE  HEN

Gaelic

LXV.  THE  KEG  OF  BUTTER..
Gaelic

LXVL  THE  FOX  AND  THE

LITTLE  BONN  AC  H.

Gaelic


Donald  MacNiven,  carrier


Donald  MacPhie,  smith
Alexander  Macalister  ..

Mrs.  MacTavish

Janet  Currie

Hector  Boyd

Do.

Do.
Do.
Do.


CONTENTS.


Date.

Place.

Collector.

Page

July  1859

Hector  MacLean  ....

1

18
19
20
20
21
21
21
22
22
24

October  1860
July  1859

Barra

36
39

45

Nov.  1859

50

Sept.  1860

Stoneybridge,  South  Uist ..

64
55
78
64
65
81
90

...

Barra

_

91

102

Sept.  1860

93
102

October  1860

94
103

Sept.  18G0
Do.

Castle  Bay,  Barra

96

104
100

106  1

CONTENTS.


NAME.

LXVII.  GAOL  REIDHINN

Gaelic

LXVIII

Gaelic

LXIX.  THOMAS      OF     THE
THUMB.
Gaelic

LXX.  THE  BULLS

Gaelic

LXXL  THE  HOODIE  CATE-
CHISING THE  YOUNG  ONE
Gaelic

LXXIL  THE  HOODIE  AND  THE
FOX.
Gaelic

LXXIIL    THE    YELLOW    MUIL-
EARTEACH.

Gaelic

Notes

LXXIV.  THE  STORY  OF  THE
LAY  OF  THE  GREAT  FOOL

The  Lay  of  the  Great  Fool

Gaelic

LXXV.  GTTAIGEAN  LADHRACH
S'  LOIKEAN  SPAGACH.
Notes

LXXVI.  CON  ALL  GULBAN;   OR
GUILBEINACH,    OR    GUL-
BAIRNEACH.
Notes

LXXVIL    JOHN,    SON    OF    THE
KING  OF  BERGEN.
Gaelic


Alexander        Carmichael,
Esq.,  excise  officer


Catherine  Macfarlane.


John  Dewar


John  MacArthur,  shepherd
Angus  MacDonald


Kate  MacFarlane.


John  Dewar


Angus  Mackinnon,  tailor .


Date.

Place.

Collector.

Page

July  1860

Port  Charlotte,  Islay

108

110

111
113

1809

114

116

November  1860

...

118
119

120

121

121

121

Sept.  1860

Staoine-breac,  South  Uist..

122

123
145

Sept.  1860

Stoneybridge,  South  Uist..

146

154
155

October  1860

John  Dewar.

180
184

J.  F.  C

185
279

Dallabrog,  South  Uist

282
283

NAME.

LXXVIII.  THE  MASTER  AND  HIS
MAN
Gaelic

LXXIX.  THE  PRAISE  OF  GOLL
Gaelic

LXXX.    OSGAR,   THE    SON    OF
OISEIN.

LXXXI.  THE  LAY  OF  OSGAR  ...

Gaelic

LXXXII.    HOW    THE    EEN   WAS
SET  UP.
Gaelic

LXXXIII.  THE  REASON  WHY  THE
DALLAG  (DOG-FISH)  IS
CALLED  THE  KING'S  FISH

Tiie  Lay  of  Magnus

Notes

LXXXIV.  MANUS

Gaelic

Notes

LXXXV.     THE    SONG    OF    THE
SMITHY.

Gaelic

Duan  iia  Ceardacli,  etc

LXXXVI.  NIGHEAN  RIGH  FO
THUINN.


Donald  MacPhie


Donald    MacPhie,    smith,
and  others.


Angus  MacDonald

Angus  MacKinnon

Donald  MacPhie

Do.

Malcolm  MacPhail

Roderick  MacLean,  tailor.


Sept.  1860


Breubhaig,  Barra

Breubhaig,  BaiTa

Stoney  bridge,  South  Uist
South  Uist

Tocbdar,  South  Uist

Breubhaig,  Barra

Scanastle,  Islay

Ken  Tangval,  Barra


Collector.  Page


LIST  or  ILLUSTEATIONS.


Page

1.  Sketch  from  a  Stone  at  Elgin      .  .  .35

2.  Sketcli  from  a  Stone  in  tlie  Churchyard  of  St.

Vigeans,  near  Arbroath  .  .  .49

3.  Wolf.— From  a  Stone  at  St.  Anch-ews      .  .96

4.  Fox,  Himtsman,  and  Falcon. — From  a  Stone  at

Shandwick     .  ,  .  .  .100

5.  Sketch  from  a  Stone  at  Inverness  .  .117

6.  Harper. — From  a  Stone  at  Monifeith      .  .122

7.  Sketch  from  a  Stone  Coffin  at  Govan.      .  .123

8.  Deer  and  Hoimd. — From  a  Stone  at  Kirriemnir     154

9.  Elk. — From  a  Stone  in  the  Churchyard  of  Meigle    155

10.  Ox. — From  a  Stone  at  Fowlis  Wester,  near  Crieff  180

11.  Sketch   from  a  Stone  in  the  Cemetery  of  Inch

Brayoc,  in  the  South  Esk        .  .  .  206

12.  Bard. — From  a  Cross  near  Dupplin        .  .231

13.  Sketch  from  a  curious  Cross  near  Duj^pUn  Castle   242

14.  Hounds  and  Huntsmen,  Ornaments,  and  Charac-

teristic Symbol  .  .  .  .287

15.  Fish,  with  some  Characteristic  Ornaments  .  339

16.  Manus  .  .  .  .  .348

17.  Sketch  from  a  Stone  in  the   CTiurchyard  of  St.

Vigeans         .  .  .  ,  .361


EEEATA.


Page  24
25
26
37


line    22    for    dhuiblisee      read       dhuibhse


dhaor
mo


103
lOi
106
118


131
139
142
155
163
105
1G9

175
178
227


seire
darusd


turc


seirc
dorusd


„      d'  en  „          de  'n

„       chiud  ,,           chuid

„       ionnsaidh  ,,           ionnsuidhli

„       ruim  „          riiun

„       niae  ,.          mac

„      b  „          bi

What  is  (the  reason  of)  thy  coming  from  the

land?'  read,  "What  is  thy  land's  pro-
duce ?"


doirn'eig  ,
mhorbhadhsa
pad
Craohh

marbh  ,
an

chrainnaibh  ,

Brembhaig  ,

chu  ,

Gruagach  ,

ghleantna  ,

Gruagaich  ,

un  ,

OS  riiin  ,

muiun  ,

Deogh  ,


duirneig

mharbhadhsa

gad

Craobh

mharbh

a'

chrannaibh

Breubhaii;

cha

Ghruagach

ghleannta

Ghruagaich

an

as  ruin

muin

Deagh


ERRATA.


Page  231  Note


240
243
245


251
265
294
295
305
309
313
317


319


12

20
4

—  „       19
326      „       21

341      „       20

—  „       27
364,  at  the  top.


for  ghaoidheadh  read

the  „

„  Treanghaisgeach

.,  bharragh         ,,

,,  dheag  „

,,  sbluisd  „

„  haislean  ,.

„  ainmeanan      „

„  ceanu  „

„  anam  „

„  Leomham        ,

„  niin  „

„  Fhian-ta         „

„  Leagalh         „

,1  sind  »

„  lasgara  ,,

„  ficheud  Ghaidheal

„  Eiroina  „

,,  airnn  „


ghlaoidheadh

thee

Treunghaisgeach

barragh

dheug

soluisd

uaislean

ainmeannau

ceann

annam

Leomhan

mill

Fhiannta

Leagadh

siud

lasgarra

fichead  Gaidheal

Eirionn

oirnn

gaisg'

around


„      about  around,
„       phiathar         .,  phiuthar

„       phiathar         „  phiuthar

The  Lay  of  Magnus  was  written  from  the

dictation  of  Alexander  MacDonald,  and  subsequently  compared  with

the  recitation  of  the  other  authority.


364
367

376
377
384


387
391
392
394
397


Beith

ora'  ,,

non  „

gruagch

carr-shiuflach


Beithe

am'

nan

gruagach

carr-shiubhlach


like  blade's  daughter  the  smith's
shop,"  read,  "  like  blade  the  smith's
shop's  daughter  "


mis  „

chuinir  „

fheail  dhaoise
they  had  before ;
jun  „

played  „

lomagain         „
comihairle      ,,


nis

chuimir
fheoil  dhaoine
;  they  had  ijefore
gun
placed
iomagain
comhairle


Tt  may  be  some  excuse  for  this  long  list  of  errors,  and  for  the


ERRATA.  XV

Gaelic  orthography,  that  the  printers  do  not  understand  Gaelic,  the
scribes  dwell  far  from  them,  the  penmanship  is  sometimes  indistinct,
and  the  usual  spelling  of  words  is  often  wilfully  modified,  to  express
the  pronunciation  of  various  districts,  while  adhering  to  the  rules  of
Gaelic  orthography.

The  variations  are  often  of  philological  value,  as  for  example —
Fail  is  the  Islay  value  of  Fa-r— where,  and  it  seems  to  be  a  very
ancient  form  of  Gaelic,  which  is  not  in  any  modern  book,  even  mine,
for  the  scribe  did  not  venture  to  take  such  a  liberty.  But  in  an
Irish  MS.,  written  prior  to  1150,  quoted  p.  49  of  the  Transactions  of
the  Ossianic  Society,  is  this  line—

"  Baile  i  tegtis  fecht  fir."

"  In  the  place  where  men  were  wont  to  pass."'

Or  perhaps,

"  The  town  where,  come  past  men."

Thus  Faile,  where,  is  equivalent  to  ans  a'  bhaile,  in  the  town
where;  and  so,  Balla,  a  wall ;  Baile,  a  town,  or  a  f:irni,  or  any  col-
lection of  liouses ;  is  made  to  have  the  same  meaning  as  Faile,  a
definite  place,  distinguished  from  an  indefinite  place,  such  as  the  site
of  a  wanderer's  camp  would  be.  The  change  then  from  Fail,  to  Far,
and  the  preservation  of  Fail  in  one  locality,  and  the  relation  of  Far
to  baile,  are  worth  the  departure  from  a  system  not  yet  fixed.


LVIIL

THE  EIDEE  OF  GRIANAIG/  AND  IAIN
THE  SOLDIER'S  SON.

From  Donald  MacNiven,  a  lame  carrier.     Bowmore,  Islay,
5tli  July  1859.     Written  down  by  Hector  MacLean.

T^HE  knight  of  Grianaig  had  three  daughters,  such
-^  that  their  like  were  not  to  he  found  or  to  be  seen
in  any  place.  There  came  a  beast  from  the  ocean  and
she  took  them  with  her,  and  there  was  no  knowledge
what  way  they  had  taken,  nor  where  they  might  be
sought.

There  was  a  soldier  in  the  town,  and  he  had  thi-ee
sous,  and  at  the  time  of  Chiistmas  ^  they  were  inlaying
at  shinny,  and  the  yoimgest  said  that  they  should  go
and  that  they  should  drive  a  hale  on  the  lawn  of  the
knight  of  Grianaig.  The  rest  said  that  they  should
not  go ;  that  the  knight  Avould  not  be  pleased ;  that  that
would  be  bringing  the  loss  of  his  children  to  his  mind,
and  laying  sorrow  upon  him.  "Let  that  be  as  it
pleases,"  said  Iain  the  youngest  son,  "  but  we  will  go
there,  and  we  will  drive  a  hale ;  I  am  careless  of  the
knight  of  Grianaig,  let  him  be  well  pleased  or  angry."

They  went  to  play  shinny,  and  Iain  won  three
hales  from  his  brethren.  The  knight  put  his  head  out
of  a  window,  and  he  saw  them  playing  at  shinny,  and
he  took  great  wrath  that  any  one  had  the  heart  to  play
shinny  on  his  lawn — a  thiug  that  was  bringing  the  loss

VOL.  HI.  B


2  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

of  his  chikben  to  his  mind,  and  putting  contempt
upon  him.  Said  he  to  his  wife,  "  Who  is  so  impudent
as  to  be  playing  shinny  on  my  ground,  and  bringing
the  loss  of  my  children  to  my  mind  ?  Let  them  be
brought  here  in  an  instant  that  punishment  may  be
done  upon  them.  The  three  lads  were  brought  to  the
presence  of  the  knight,  and  they  were  fine  lads.

"  What  made  you,"  said  the  knight,  "  go  and  play
shinny  upon  my  ground  and  bring  the  loss  of  my
children  to  my  mind  ?  you  must  suffer  pain  for  it."

"It  is  not  thus  it  shall  be,"  said  Iain  ;  "but  since
it  befell  us  to  come  wrong  upon  thee,  thou  hadst  best
make  us  a  dwelling  of  a  ship,  and  we  will  go  to  seek
thy  daughters ;  and  if  they  are  under  the  leeward,  or
the  windward,  or  under  the  four  brown  boundaries  of
the  deep,"  we  will  find  them  out  before  there  comes
the  end  of  a  day  and  year,  and  we  will  bring  them
back  to  Grianaig."

"  Though  thou  be  the  youngest,  it  is  in  thy  head
that  the  best  counsel  is,  let  that  be  made  for  you."

Wrights  were  got  and  a  ship  was  made  in  seven
days.  They  put  in  meat  and  drink  as  they  might
need  for  the  journey.  They  gave  her  front  to  sea  and
her  stern  to  land,  and  they  went  away,  and  in  seven
days  they  reached  a  white  sandy  strand,  and  when
they  went  on  shore  there  were  six  men  and  ten  at
work  in  the  face  of  a  rock  blasting,  with  a  foreman
over  them.

"What  place  is  here?"  said  the  skipper.

"  Here  is  the  place  where  are  the  children  of  the
knight  of  Grianaig ;  they  are  to  be  married  to  three
giants."

"  Wliat  means  are  there  to  get  where  they  are  ? "

"  There  are  no  means  but  to  go  up  in  this  creel
against  the  face  of  the  rock."


THE  RIDER  OF  GRIANAIG.  3

The  eldest  son  went  into  the  creel,  and  when  he
was  up  at  the  half  of  the  rock,  there  came  a  stumpy-
black  raven,  and  he  began  uj^on  him  with  his  claws,
and  his  wings  till  he  almost  left  liim  blind  and  deaf.*
He  had  but  to  turn  back.

The  second  one  went  into  the  creel,  and  when  he
was  up  half  the  way,  there  came  the  stumpy  black
raven  and  he  began  upon  him,  and  he  had  for  it  but
to  return  back  as  did  the  other  one.

At  last  Iain  went  into  the  creel.  Wlien  he  was
up  half  the  way  there  came  the  stumpy  black  raven,
and  he  began  upon  him,  and  he  belaboured  him  about
the  face.

"  Up  with  me  quickly  ! "  said  he,  "  before  I  Vie
Winded  here."

He  was  set  up  to  the  toj)  of  the  rock.  "Wlien  he
was  up  the  raven  came  where  he  was,  and  he  saiil  to
him.

"  Wilt  thou  give  me  a  quid  of  tobacco  V"

'•  Thou  high-priced  rogue !  little  claim  hast  thou
on  me  for  giving  that  to  thee."

"  Never  thou  mind  tliat,  I  will  be  a  good  friend
to  thee.  Now  thou  shalt  go  to  the  house  of  the  big
giant,  and  thou  wilt  see  the  knight's  daughter  sewing,
and  her  thimble  wet  with  tears."

He  went  on  before  him  till  he  reached  the  house
of  the  giant.  He  went  in.  The  knight's  daughter
was  sewing.

"  What  brought  thee  here  ? "  said  she.

"  Wliat  brought  thyself  into  it  that  I  might  not
come  into  it."

"  I  Avas  brought  here  in  spite  of  me."

"  I  know  that.     Where  is  the  giant  ?"

"  He  is  in  the  huntiiig  liill."

"  What  means  to  get  him  home  1 "


4  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  To  shake  yonder  battle-chain  -without,  and  there
is  no  one  in  the  leeward,  or  in  the  windward,  or  in
the  four  brown  boundaries  of  the  deep,  who  will  hold
battle  against  him,  but  young  Iain  the  soldier's  son,
from  Alloainn,  and  he  is  Isut  sixteen  years  of  age,  and
he  is  too  young  to  go  to  battle  against  the  giant."

"  There  is  many  a  one  in  Albainn  as  strong  as  Iain
the  soldier's  son,  though  the  soldier  were  with  him."

Out  he  w^ent.  He  gave  a  haul  at  the  chain,  and
he  did  not  take  a  turn  out  of  it,  and  he  went  on  his
knee.  He  rose  up,  he  gave  the  next  shake  at  the
chain,  and  he  broke  a  linlc  in  it.  The  giant  heard  it  in
the  hunting  hill.

"  Aha  ! "  said  he,  "  who  could  move  my  battle  chain
but  young  Iain  the  soldier's  sou  from  Albaiun,  and  he
is  but  sixteen  years  of  age  ;  he  is  too  young  yet  V

The  giant  put  the  game  on  a  withy,  and  home  he
came.

"Art  thou  young  Iain  the  soldier's  son,  from
Albainn  Ì "

"Not  I."

"  Who  art  thou  in  the  leeward,  or  in  the  windward,
or  in  the  four  brown  boundaries  of  the  deep,  that  could
move  my  battle  chain,  but  young  Iain  the  soldier's  son,
from  Albainn  V

"  There  is  many  a  one  in  Albainn  as  strong  as
young  Iain  the  soldier's  son,  though  the  soldier  should
be  with  him."

"  I  have  got  that  in  the  prophesyings."

"  Never  thou  mind  what  thou  hast  got  in  the  pro-
phesyings."

"  In  what  way  wouldst  thou  rather  try  thyself  ? "

"  When  I  and  my  mother  used  to  be  falling  out
with  each  other,  and  I  might  wish  to  get  my  own  will,
it  was  in  tight  wrestling  ties  we  used  to  try ;  and  one


THE  RIDER  OF  GRIAX.UG.  .     5

time  she  used  to  get  the  better,  and  two  times  she  used
not."

They  seized  each  other,  and  they  had  hard  hugs,
and  the  giant  put  Iain  on  his  knee.

"I  see,"  said  Iain,  "that  thou  art  the  stronger."

"  It  is  known  that  I  am,"  said  the  giant.

They  Avent  "before  each  other  again.  They  were
twisting  and  hauling  each  otlier.  Iain  struck  a  foot  on
the  giant  in  the  ankle,  and  he  put  him  on  the  thews  of
his  back  under  him  on  the  ground.  He  wished  that
the  raven  were  at  him.

The  stumpy  black  raven  came,  and  he  fell  upon  the
giant  about  the  face  and  about  the  ears  with  his  claws
and  with  his  wings  until  he  blinded  him,  and  he
deafened  liim.

"  Hast  thou  got  a  nail  of  arms  that  will  take  the
head  off  the  monster  ? "

"  I  have  not."

"  Put  thy  hand  under  my  right  wing,  and  thou
wilt  find  a  small  sharp  laiife  which  I  have  for  gather-
ing briar-bucLs,  and  take  the  head  off  him."

He  put  his  hand  under  the  raven's  right  wing  and
lie  found  the  knife,  and  he  took  the  head  off  the  giant.

"E'ow  Iain  thou  shalt  go  in  where  is  the  big
daughter  of  the  knight  of  Grianaig,  and  she  will  be
asking  thee  to  return  and  not  to  go  farther ;  but  do
not  thou  give  heed,  but  go  on,  and  thou  "wilt  reach  the
middle  daughter ;  and  thou  shalt  give  me  a  quid  of
tobacco."

"  I  wiU.  give  that  to  thee  indeed ;  well  hast  thou
earned  it.     Thou  shalt  have  haK  of  all  I  have."

"  I  will  not.     There's  many  a  long  day  to  Bealtain."

"  Tlie  fortune  will  not  let  me  be  here  till  Bealtain."

"  Thou  hast  knowledge  of  what  has  passed,  but  thou
hast  no  knowledge  of  what  is  before  thee ;  set  warm


6  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

water,  clean  thyself  in  it ;  thon  wilt  find  a  vessel  of
balsam  above  the  door,  rub  it  in  thy  skin,  and  go  to
bed  by  thyself  and  thou  wilt  be  whole  and  wholesome
to-morrow,  and  to-morrow  thou  shalt  go  on  to  the  house
of  the  next  one."

He  went  in  and  he  did  as  the  raven  asked  him.  He
went  to  bed  that  night  and  he  was  whole  and  whole-
some in  the  morning  when  he  arose.

"It  is  better  for  thee,"  said  the  knight's  big  daughter,
"  not  to  go  further,  and  not  to  put  thyself  in  more  danger ;
there  is  plenty  of  gold  and  silver  here,  and  we  will  take
it  with  us  and  we  will  return."

" I  will  not  do  that,"  said  he ;  "I  will  take  (the
road)  on  my  front."

He  went  forwards  till  he  came  to  the  house  where
was  the  middle  daughter  of  the  knight  of  Grianaig.
He  went  in  and  she  was  seated  sewing,  and  she  (was)
weepiug,  and  her  thimble  Avet  with  her  tears.

"  What  brought  thee  here  ? "

"What  brought  thyseK  into  it  that  I  might  not
come  into  it?"

"  I  was  brought  in  spite  of  me."

"  I  have  knowledge  of  that.  What  set  thee
weeping  V

"  I  have  but  one  night  till  I  must  be  married  to
the  giant."

"  Where  is  the  giant  V

"  He  is  in  the  hunting  hill."

"  What  means  to  get  him  home  ? "

"  To  shake  that  battle  chain  Avithout  at  the  side  of
the  house,  and  he  is  not  in  the  leeward  nor  in  the
windward,  nor  in  the  four  brown  boundaries  of  the
deep,  who  is  as  much  as  can  shake  it,  but  young  Iain
the  soldier's  son,  from  Albainn,  and  he  is  too  young  yet,
he  is  but  sixteen  years  of  age."


THE  RIDER  OF  GRIANAIG.  7

"  There  are  men  in  Albainn  as  strong  as  yoimg  Iain
the  soldier's  son,  though  the  soldier  should  be  with  him."

He  went  out,  and  he  gave  a  haul  at  the  chain,  and
lie  came  upon  his  two  knees.  He  rose  up  and  gave
tlie  next  haul  at  it,  and  he  broke  three  links  in.  it.

The  giant  heard  that  in  the  hunting  liiU.

"  Aha  !"  said  he,  and  he  put  the  game  on  a  withy
on  his  shoulder,  and  home  he  came.

"  "\^Tio  could  move  my  battle  chain  but  young  Iain
the  soldier's  son  from  Albainn,  and  he  is  too  young  yet ;
he  is  but  sixteen  years  of  age  ] "

"  There  are  men  in  Albainn  as  strong  as  young
Iain  the  soldier's  son,  though  the  soldier  should  be  with
him."

"We  have  got  that  in  the  prophesyings."

"  I  care  not  what  is  in  your  prophesjangs."

"In  what  way  wouldst  thou  rather  try  thyself?"

"  In  hard  hugs  of  -nTestlhig."

They  seized  each  other  and  the  giant  put  him  on
his  two  knees.

"  Thine  is  my  life,"  said  Iain,  "  thou  art  stronger
than  I.     Let's  try  another  turn."

Tliey  tried  each  other  again,  and  Iain  struck  his
lieel  on  the  giant  in  the  ankle,  and  he  set  him  on  the
tliews  of  his  back  on  the  ground.

"  Eaven  !"  said  he,  "a  flapping  of  thine  were  good
now."

The  raven  came,  and  he  blinded  and  deafened  the
giant,  giving  it  to  him  with  his  beak,  and  with  his
claws,  and  "wdth  his  wings.

"  Hast  thou  a  nail  of  a  weapon  V

"  I  have  not."

"  Put  thy  hand  under  my  right  wing,  and  thou  wilt
find  there  a  small  sharp  knife  that  I  have  for  gathering
briar-buds,  and  take  the  head  off  Mm."


O  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

He  put  liis  hand  under  the  root  of  the  raven's
right  wing,  and  he  found  the  knife,  and  he  took  the
head  off  the  giant.

"  'Now  thou  shalt  go  in  and  clean  thyself  with  warm
water,  thou  wilt  find  the  vessel  of  balsam,  thou  shalt
rub  it  upon  thj^self,  thou  shalt  go  to  bed,  and  thou  wdlfc
be  whole  and  wholesome  to-morrow.  This  one  will  be
certainly  more  cunning  and  more  mouthing  than  was
the  one  before,  asking  thee  to  return  and  not  to  go
further ;  but  give  thou  no  heed  to  her.  And  thou
shalt  give  me  a  quid  of  tobacco."

"  I  will  give  it  indeed;  thou  art  worthy  of  it."

He  went  in  and  he  did  as  the  raven  asked  him.
When  he  got  up  on  the  morrow's  morning  he  was
whole  and  wholesome.

"Thou  hadst  better,"  said  the  knight's  middle
daughter,  "  return,  and  not  put  thyself  in  more  danger ;
there  is  plenty  of  gold  and  of  silver  here."

"  I  will  not  do  that ;  I  will  go  forward."

He  went  forward  till  he  came  to  the  house  in  which
was  the  Uttle  daughter  of  the  knight ;  he  went  in  and
he  saw  her  sewing,  and  her  tliimble  wet  with  tears.

"  What  brought  thee  here  Ì"

""WHiat  brought  thyself  into  it  that  I  might  not
come  into  it  Ì "

"  I  was  brought  into  it  m  spite  of  me."

"  I  know  that."

"Art  thou  young  Iain  tlie  soldier's  son,  from
Albainn  Ì" ,

"  I  am;  what  is  the  reason  that  thou  art  weeping?"

"  I  have  but  this  night  of  delay  without  marrying
the  giant."

"Where  is  he  ?"

"He  is  in  the  hunting  hill."

"  AVhat  means  to  bring  him  home  ? "


THE  RIDER  OF  GRIAXAIG.  9

"To  shake  that  battle  chain  without."

He  went  out,  and  he  gave  a  shake  at  the  chain  and
down  he  came  on  his  hnrdies.

He  rose  again,  and  he  gave  it  the  next  shake,  and
he  broke  four  links  in  it,  and  he  made  a  great  rattling
noise.  The  giant  heard  that  in  the  hunting  hill ;  he
put  the  withy  of  game  on  his  shoulder.

""Who  in  the  leeward,  or  in  the  windward,  or  in
the  four  brown  boundaries  of  the  deep,  could  shake
my  battle  chain  but  young  Iain  the  soldier's  son,  from
Albainn  ;  and  if  it  be  he,  my  two  brothers  are  dead
before  this?"

He  came  home  in  his  might,  making  the  earth
tremble  before  him  and  behind  him.

"  Art  thou  young  Iain  the  soldier's  son  Ì "

"Not  I."

"  Who  art  thou  in  the  leeward,  or  in  the  wind-
ward, or  in  the  four  brown  boundaries  of  the  deep,
that  could  shake  my  battle  chain  but  young  Iain  the
soldier's  son,  from  Albainn  ?  and  he  is  too  young  yet,
he  is  but  sixteen  years  of  age."

"  Is  there  not  many  a  one  in  Albainn  as  strong  as
young  Iain  the  soldier's  son,  though  the  soldier  were
with  him?

"  It  is  not  in  our  prophesyings."

"  I  care  not  what  is  in  your  prophesyings."

"  In  what  way  wouldst  thou  Like  thy  trial  Ì "

"  Tight  wrestling  ties."

They  seized  each  other  and  the  giant  set  him  on
his  haunches.

"  Let  me  go  ;  thine  is  my  life."

They  caught  each  other  again ;  he  struck  his  heel
on  the  giant  in  the  anlde,  and  he  laid  him  on  the
shower  top  of  his  shoulder,  and  on  the  thews  of  his
back  on  the  ground.


lO  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  Stumpy  black  raA^en,  if  thou  wert  here  now  ! "

No  sooner  said  he  the  word  than  the  raven  came.
He  belaboured  the  giant  about  the  face,  and  the  eyes,
and  the  ears,  with  his  beak,  and  with  his  claws  and
with  his  wings. '

"  Hast  thou  a  nail  of  a  weapon  ?"

"  I  have  not."

"  Put  thy  hand  under  the  root  of  my  right  wing
and  thou  wilt  find  a  small  sharp  knife  that  I  have  for
gathering  whortle  berries,  and  take  his  head  off."

He  did  that.

"  Xow,"  said  the  raven,  "  take  rest  as  thou  didst
last  night,  and  when  thou  returnest  with  the  three
daughters  of  the  knight,  to  the  cut  (edge)  of  the  rock,
thou  shalt  go  down  first  thyself,  and  they  shall  go
down  after  thee ;  and  thou  shalt  give  me  a  quid  of
tobacco."

"  I  will  give  it ;  thou  hast  well  deserved  it ;  here  it
is  for  thee  altogether."

"  I  will  but  take  a  i^uid ;  there  is  many  a  long  day
ti)  Bealtain."

"  The  fortune  will  not  let  me  lie  here  till  Bealtain."

"  Thou  hast  knowledge  of  what  is  behind  thee,  but
thou  hast  no  knowledge  what  is  before  thee."

(3n  the  morrow  they  set  in  order  asses,  and  on
their  backs  they  put  the  gold  and  the  silver  that  the
giants  had,  and  he  himself  and  the  three  daughters  of
the  knight  reached  the  edge  of  the  rock  :  when  they
reached  the  edge  of  the  rock,  for  fear  giddiness  should
coiue  over  any  of  the  girls,  he  sent  them  down  one
after  one  in  the  creel.  There  were  three  caps  of  gold
on  them,  made  up  finely  with  "daoimean"  (diamonds);
caps  that  -were  made  in  the  Roimli  (Rome),  and  such
that  their  like  were  not  to  be  found  in  the  universe.
He  kept  up  the  cap  that  was  on  the  youngest.      He  was


THE  BIDER  OP  GRIANAIG.  I  I

Avaiting  and  waiting,  and  though  he  should  be  waiting
still,  the  creel  would  not  come  up  to  fetch  him.  The
rest  went  on  board,  and  away  they  went  till  they
reached  Grianaig.

He  was  left  there,  and  without  a  way  in  his  power
to  get  out  of  the  place.  The  raven  came  where  he
was.

"  Thou  didst  not  take  my  counsel  ? "

"  I  did  not  take  it ;  if  I  had  taken  it  I  should  not
be  as  I  am."

There  is  no  help  for  it,  Iain.  The  one  that  will
not  take  counsel  will  take  combat.  Thou  shalt  gÌA^e
me  a  c^uid  of  tobacco."

"  I  will  give  it."

"  Thou  shalt  reach  the  giant's  house,  and  thou  shalt
stay  there  tliis  night."

"  Wilt  thou  not  stay  with  me  thyself  to  keep  off
my  dulness  ?"

"  I  will  not  stay ;  it  is  not  suitable  for  me."

On  the  morrow  came  the  raven  where  he  was.

"  Thou  shalt  now  go  to  the  giant's  stable,  and  if  thou
art  quick  and  active,  there  is  a  steed  there,  and  sea  or
shore  is  all  one  to  her,  and  that  may  take  thee  out  of
these  straits."

They  went  together  and  they  came  to  the  stable,
a  stable  of  stone,  dug  in  into  a  rock,  and  a  door  of  stone
to  it.  The  door  was  slamming  without  ceasing,  back-
wards and  forwards,  from  early  day  to  night,  and  from
night  to  day.

"  Thou  must  now  watch,"  said  the  raven,  "  and  take
a  chance,  and  try  if  thou  canst  make  out  to  go  in  when
it  is  open,  without  its  getting  a  hold  of  thee."

"Thou  hadst  best  try  first,  since  thou  art  best
acquainted."

"  It  will  be  as  well'


12  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

The  raven  gave  a  bob  and  a  hop  and  in  he  went,
but  the  door  took  a  feather  out  of  the  root  of  his  wing,
and  he  screeched.

"Poor  Iain,  if  thou  couldst  get  in  with  as  little
pain  as  I,  I  would  not  complain."

Iain  took  a  run  back  and  a  run  forward,  he  took  a
spring  to  go  in,  the  door  caught  him,  and  it  took  half
his  hurdies  off.  Iain  cried  out,  and  he  fell  cold  dead
on  the  floor  of  the  stable.  The  raven  lifted  him,  and
he  carried  him  on  the  points  of  his  wings,  out  of  the
stable  to  the  giant's  house.  He  laid  liim  on  a  board  on
his  mouth  and  nose,  he  went  out  and  he  gathered  plants,
and  he  made  ointments  that  he  set  i;pon  him,  and  in
ten  days  he  was  as  well  as  ever  he  was.

He  went  out  to  take  a  walk  and  the  raven  went
with  him.

"Now,  Iain,  thou  shalt  take  my  counsel.  Thou
shalt  not  take  wonder  of  any  one  thing  that  thou  mayest
see  about  the  island,  and  thou  shalt  give  me  a  quid  of
tobacco."

He  was  walldng  about  the  island,  and  going  through
a  glen ;  he  saw  three  full  heroes  stretched  on  their  backs,
a  spear  upon  the  breast  of  every  man  of  them,  and  he
in  lastmg  sound  sleep,  and  a  bath  of  sweat.

"  It  seems  to  me  that  this  is  pitiable.  What  harm
to  lift  the  spears  fi'om  off  them  1"

He  went  and  he  loosed  the  spears  from  off  them.
The  heroes  awoke,  and  they  rose  up.

"  Witness  fortune  and  men,  that  thou  art  young
Iain  the  soldier's  son,  from  Albainn,  and  it  is  as  spells
upon  thee  to  go  with  us  through  the  southern  end
of  tliis  island  past  the  cave  of  the  black  fisherman."

He  went  away  himself  and  the  three  full  heroes.
They  saw  a  slender  smoke  (coming)  out  of  a  cave.
They  went  to  the  cave.     One  of  the  heroes  went  in


THE  RIDER  OF  GRIANAIG.  I  3

and  when  he  went  in  there  was  a  hag  there  seated,  and
the  tooth  that  Avas  the  least  in  her  mouth  would  make  a
knitting  pin  in  her  lai?,  a  staff  in  her  hand,  and  a  stir-
ring stick  for  the  embers.  There  was  a  tmm  of  her  nails
about  her  elbows,  and  a  twst  of  her  hoary  hair  about
her  toes,  and  she  was  not  joyous  to  look  upon.

She  seized  upon  a  magic  club,  she  struck  him,  and
she  made  him  a  bare  crag  of  stone.  The  others  that
were  without  were  wondering  why  he  was  not  re-
turning.

"  Go  in,"  said  Iain  to  another  one,  "  and  look  what
is  keeping  thy  comrade."

He  went  in,  and  the  carlin  did  to  him  as  she  did
to  the  other.  The  third  went  in,  and  she  did  to  liim
as  she  did  to  the  rest.  Iain  went  in  last.  There  was
a  great  red-skulled  cat  there,  and  she  put  a  barrow
full  of  red  ashes  about  her  fur  so  as  to  bhnd  and
deafen  him.  He  struck  the  point  of  his  foot  on  her
and  drove  the  brain  out  of  her.  He  turned  to  the
carliiL

"Don't,  Iain!  these  men  are  under  spells,  and  in
order  to  put  the  spells  off  them  thou  must  go  to  the
island  of  big  women  and  take  a  bottle  of  the  Hving
water  out  of  it,  and  v/hen  thou  rubbest  it  upon  them
the  s^jells  mU  go  and  they  will  come  alive."

Iain  turned  back  under  black  melancholy.

"  Thou  did'st  not  take  my  counsel,"  said  the  raven,
"  and  thou  hast  brought  more  trouble  upon  thyself.
Thou  shalt  go  to  lie  down  this  night,  and  when  thou
risest  to-morrow  thou  shalt  take  with  thee  the  steed,
and  shalt  give  her  meat  and  drink.  Sea  or  land  is
all  one  to  her,  and  when  thou  reachest  the  island  of
big  women  sixteen  stable  lads  will  meet  thee,  and  they
will  all  be  for  giving  food  to  the  steed,  and  for  putting
lier  in  for  thee,  but  do  not  thou  let  them.      Say  that


14  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

thou  wilt  thyself  give  her  meat  and  drink.  "When  thou
leavest  her  in  the  stable,  every  one  of  the  sixteen  will
put  a  turn  in  the  key,  but  thou  shalt  put  a  turn  against
every  turn  that  they  j)ut  in  it.  Thou  shalt  give  me  a
quid  of  tobacco."

"  I  will  indeed."

He  went  to  rest  that  night,  and  in  the  morning  he
set  the  steed  in  order,  and  he  went  away.  He  gave
her  front  to  sea  and  her  l)ack  to  shore,  and  she  went  in
her  might  till  they  reached  the  island  of  big  women.
Wlien  he  went  on  shore  sixteen  stable  lads  met  liim
and  every  one  of  them  asking  to  set  her  in  and  feed  her.

"  I  myself  wiU  put  her  in,  and  I  will  take  care  of
her ;  I  will  not  give  her  to  any  one."

He  put  her  in,  and  when  he  came  out  every  man
put  a  turn  in  the  key,  and  he  put  a  turn  against  every
turn  that  they  put  into  it.  The  steed  said  to  him  that
they  would  be  offering  him  every  sort  of  tbink,  but
that  he  should  not  take  any  drink  from  them  but  whey
and  water.  He  went  in  and  every  sort  of  drink  Avas
being  put  round  about  there,  and  they  were  offering
each  kind  to  him,  but  he  would  not  take  a  drop  of  any
drink  but  whey  and  water.  They  were  drinking,  and
drinking  till  they  fell  stretched  about  the  board.

The  steed  asked  him  before  she  parted  from  him
that  he  should  take  care  and  not  sleep,  and  to  take  his
chance  for  coming  away.  "VVlien  they  slept  he  came
out  from  the  chamber ;  and  he  heard  the  very  sweetest
music  that  ever  was  heard.  He  went  on,  and  he  heard
in  another  place  music  much  sweeter.  He  came  to  the
side  of  a  stair  and  he  heard  music  sweeter  and  sweeter,
and  he  fell  asleep.

The  steed  broke  out  of  the  stable,  and  she  came
where  he  was,  and  she  struck  him  a  kick,  and  she  awoke
him


THE  RIDER  OP  GRIAXAIG  I  5

"  Tliou  didst  not  take  my  counsel,"  said  she,  "  and
there  is  no  knowing  now  if  thou  canst  get  thy  matter
with  thee,  or  if  thou  canst  not  get  it."

He  arose  with  sorrow ;  he  seized  upon  a  sword  of
light  that  was  in  a  comer  of  the  chamber,  and  he  took
out  the  sixteen  heads.  He  reached  the  well,  he  fUled
a  bottle  and  he  returned  Tlie  steed  met  him,  and  he
set  her  front  to  sea  and  her  back  to  shore,  and  he
returned  to  the  other  island.     The  raven  met  liim.

"  Tliou  shalt  go  and  stable  the  steed,  and  thou  shalt
go  to  lie  down  this  night ;  and  to-morrow  thou  shalt  go
and  bring  the  heroes  alive,  and  thou  shalt  slay  the
carlin,  and  be  not  so  foolish  to-morrow  as  thou  wert
before  now."

"  Wilt  thou  not  come  with  me  to-night  to  drive  off
my  dulness  from  me  Ì "

"  I  will  not  come  ;  it  ^Yi]l  not  answer  for  me."

On  the  morning  he  reached  the  cave,  "  Failte  dhuit,
all  hail  to  thee,  Iain,"  said  the  carlin ;  "  Failte  dhuit' s,
all  hail  to  thee,  but  Cha  shlaixte  dhuit  not  health
to  thee."

He  shook  the  water  on  the  men  and  they  rose  up
alive,  and  he  struck  his  palm  on  the  carlin  and  scat-
tered the  brains  out  of  her.  They  betook  themselves
out,  and  they  went  to  the  southern  end  of  the  island.
They  saw  the  black  fisherman  there  working  at  his
tricks.*  He  drew  his  palm,  and  he  struck  him,  and
he  scattered  the  brains  out  of  him,  and  he  took  the
heroes  home  to  the  southern  end  of  the  island.  The
raven  came  where  he  was.

"Now  thou  shalt  go  home,  and  thou  shalt  take

*  Here  the  narrator  lias  evidently  forgotten  some  of  the
adventures.  A  similar  character  to  the  black  fisherman  appears
in  other  tales,  and  his  adventures  should  be  added  here,  if  the
story  were  mended.


10  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

with  tliee  tlie  steed  to  which  sea  and  shore  are  aHke.
The  three  daughters  of  the  knight  are  to  have  a  wedding,
two  to  be  married  to  thy  two  brothers,  and  the  other  to
the  chief  that  was  over  the  men  at  the  rock  Thou
shalt  leave  the  cap  with  me,  and  thou  wilt  have  but  to
think  of  me  when  thou  hast  need  of  it,  and  I  wiU  be
at  thee."

"  If  any  one  asks  thee  from  whence  thou  camest,  say
that  thou  earnest  out  fi'om  beliind  thee ;  and  if  he  say
to  thee,  where  art  thou  going'?  say  that  thou  art  going
before  thee."

He  mounted  upon  the  steed,  and  he  give  her  front
to  sea,  and  her  back  to  shore,  and  away  he  was,  and
no  stop  nor  stay  was  made  with  him  till  he  reached
the  old  church  in  Grianaig,  and  there  there  was  a  grass
meadow,  and  a  well  of  water,  and  a  bush  of  rushes,'
and  he  got  off  the  steed.

"  ISfow,"  said  the  steed,  "  thou  .shalt  take  a  sword
and  thou  shalt  take  the  head  off  me."

"  I  will  not  take  it  indeed ;  it  would  be  sad  for  me
to  do  it,  and  it  would  not  be  my  thanks."

"  Thou  must  do  it.  In  me  there  is  a  young  girl
under  spells,  and  the  spells  will  not  be  off'  me  till
the  head  is  taken  off  me.  I  myself  and  the  raven  were
courting ;  he  in  his  young  lad,  and  I  in  my  young  girl,
and  the  giants  laid  draoidheachd  magic  upon  us,  and
they  made  a  raven  of  him  and  a  steed  of  me." "

He  drew  his  sword,  he  turned  his  back,  and  he  took
the  head  off  her  with  a  scutching  blow,  and  he  left  the
liead  and  the  carcass  there.  He  went  on  forwards  and
a  carUn  met  him.

"  From  whence  didst  thou  come  V  said  she.

"  I  am  from  behind  me."

"  Whither  art  thou  gomg  ] "

"  I  am  goijig  before  me."


THE  RIDER  OF  GRIAXAIG.  1 7

"That  is  the  answer  of  a  castle  man."

"  An  answer  that  is  pretty  answerable  for  an  impu-
dent carlin  such  as  thou  art."

He  went  in  with  her  and  he  asked  a  drink,  and  he
got  that.

"  Where  is  thy  man  1 "

"  He  is  at  the  house  of  the  knight  seeking  gold
and  silver  that  will  make  a  cap*^  for  the  knight's  young
daughter,  such  as  her  sisters  have ;  and  the  lilve  of  the
caps  are  not  to  be  found  in  Albainn."

The  smith  came  home.

"  What's  trade  to  thee,  lad  ?"

"  I  am  a  smith."

"  That  is  good,  and  that  thou  shouldst  help  me  to
make  a  cap  for  the  knight's  young  daughter,  and  she
going  to  marry."

"Dost  thou  not  know  tliat  thou  canst  not  make
that."

"  It  must  be  tried ;  unless  I  make  it  I  shall  be
hanged  to-morrow  ;  here  thou  hadst  best  make  it."

"  Lock  me  into  the  smithy,  keep  the  gold  and  silver,
and  I  will  have  the  cap  for  thee  in  the  morning."

The  smith  locked  him  in.  He  -wished  the  raven
to  be  with  him.  The  raven  came,  he  broke  in  through
the  window,  and  the  cap  was  Avith  liim.

"  Thou  shalt  take  the  head  off  me  noAV."

"  It  were  sorrow  for  me  to  do  that,  and  it  would
not  be  my  thanks."

"  Thou  must  do  it.  A  young  lad  rmder  spells  am  I,
and  they  will  not  be  off  me  till  the  head  comes  off  me."

He  drew  his  sword,  and  he  scutched  liis  head  off,
and  that  was  not  hard  to  do.  In  the  morning  the
smith  came  in,  and  he  gave  him  the  cap,  and  he  fell
asleep.  There  came  in  a  noble-looking  youth,  with
brown  hair,  and  he  awoke  him.

VOL.  III.  c


I  O  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"I,"  said  he,  "am  the  raven,  and  the  spells  are
off  me  now."

He  walked  down  with  him  where  he  had  left  the
dead  steed,  and  a  yoimg  woman  met  them  there  as
lovely  as  eye  ever  saw.

"I,"  said  she,  "am  tlie  steed,  and  the  spells  are
ojff  me  now."

The  smith  went  with  the  cap  to  the  house  of  the
knight.  The  servant  maid  betook  herself  to  the  knight's
yonng  daugliter,  and  she  said  that  there  was  the  cap
which  the  smith  had  made.      She  looked  at  the  cap.

"  He  never  made  that  cap.  Say  to  the  lying  rogue
to  bring  hither  the  man  that  made  him  the  cap,  or  else
that  he  shall  be  hanged  without  delay."

The  smith  went  and  he  got  the  man  that  gave
him  the  cap,  and  when  she  saw  him  she  took  great
joy.  The  matter  was  cleared  up.  Iain  and  the  knight's
young  daughter  married,  and  backs  were  turned  on  the
rest,  and  they  coidd  not  get  the  other  sisters.  They
were  driven  away  through  the  town  with  stick  swortls
and  straw  shoulder-belts.

[1.   Maclean  writes  as  follows  : —

Got  this  tale  from  Donald  M'Niven,  Bowmore,  who
learnt  it  from  an  old  man  of  the  name  of  Neil  Mac-
Arthur,  who  died  some  twenty  years  ago  or  more.

Donald  MacNiven  is  over  forty  years  of  age,  is  a
cripple,  but  is  sometimes  in  the  habit  of  acting  as  a
carrier,  and  di'iving  a  cart  from  Bowmore  to  Port  Ellon
and  Port  Askaig.  He  is  of  a  fair  complexion,  a  demure
expression,  and  evidently  loves  the  wonderful  I  do
not  think  he  can  either  read  or  write.  I  was  informed
that  he  could  recite  a  considerable  number  of  tales,
but  he  tells  me  he  has  quite  forgot  them,  from  having
given  up  reciting  them.


THE  RIDER  OF  GRIxVNAIG.  li)

EiDiKE  Ghriaìj AiG.  The  word  Ridire,  as  explained
elsewhere,  now  means  a  knight,  but  it  jDrobably  meant
a  minor  king  in  the  olden  time.

Ghrianaig  is  the  genitive  of  Grianag,  which  has
been  corrupted  into  Greenock.

That  town  is  called  by  its  Gaelic  name  tliroughout
the  Higlxlands.  It  is  derived  from  Grian  the  sun,
pronounced  GreeAn,  which  is  probably  the  root  of  many
names  Avhich  are  now  sounded  "  green,"  such  as  Grisnez
in  France,  Crinan  in  Argyllshire,  and  other  places
which  are  green  and  sunny  in  other  countries,  I  might
translate  the  words  freely,  the  kinght  of  Greenock,  the
knight  of  the  sun,  or  the  Eitter  of  Sunnynook,  but  act-
ing on  the  principle  with  which  I  set  out,  I  give  the
knight  Iris  Gaelic  name,  and  so  avoid  drawing  doubtful
conclusions. — J.  F.  C.

2.  NoLLAiG  is  Christmas,  and  is  also  used  for  New
Year's  day.  The  derivation  is  probably  nodh,  new ;
LA,  day  ;  French,  noel ;  Welsh,  nadolig  ;  Irish,  nodidag  ;
Manks,  noUirl- ;  Breton,  nadolig.  The  Highland  cus-
toms vrhicli  prevail  at  this  season  smack  rather  of  pagan
times.  Processions  of  boys  go  about  on  New  Year's
eve  shouting  curious  rhymes,  some  of  which  are  full  of
the  names  which  pervade  the  Ossianic  poems  ;  curious
ceremonies  are  performed,  and  the  singers  are  revrarded
with  food.  I  hojje  some  day  to  be  in  a  position  to  say
more  about  these  old  Christmas  customs ;  they  are  men-
tioned in  Chambers's  nursery  rhymes.

The  game  of  shinny  is  usually  played  at  this  sea-
son, and  the  great  game  used  to  come  oif  on  the  day  of
the  great  "  noUaig,"  New  Year's  day,  old  style.  The
game  is  played  in  all  parts  of  the  United  Elingdom  as
"  hocky,"  "  hurling,"  etc.,  and  something  like  it  is  still
played  in  the  far  east  on  horseback.     To  drive  the  ball


20  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

from  one  goal  to  tlie  other  is  called  Leth  Bhair,  a
"half  hale  ;"  to  drive  it  back  again  is  Bair,  a  "  hale  ;"
and  to  win  a  goal  at  the  man's  game  is  nearly  as  great
a  feat  as  to  gain  a  battle.  In  some  parts  of  the  BLigh-
lands  hundi-eds  used  to  be  engaged,  all  excited  to  a
degree  that  those  who  have  been  at  a  jiublic  school,  or
who  have  read  Tom  Brown's  account  of  football,  may
perhajDS  understand.

3.  Fhiorrachd  Fhuarrachd,  etc.  Tliis  phrase  is
(according  to  Maclean)  frequently  used,  though  few
know  what  the  words  literally  mean.  The  common
meaning  attached  to  them  is,  "  Not  to  be  found  any-
where." May  they  not  be  corrupt  forms  of  iochdrachd
and  uachdrachd,  it  is  not  in  the  liigher  or  lower
regions.

I  have  given  a  different  rendering  ;  I  have  heard
very  similar  words  used  by  boatmen  for  beating  to  wind-
ward and  running  to  leeward,  and  veering  is  an  Eng-
lish sailor's  word  still.

Eannan  is  used  for  r«/«nean,  divisions^  in  this  tale.
This  form  of  the  word  in  this  sense  is  obsolete  in  Islay,
and  I  suspect  elsewhere.  It  now  signifies  verse,  wliich
Ls  no  doubt  so  called  from  being  divided  into  lines  and
stanzas.  We  still  use  it  in  the  genitive,  thus,  An
Eainn,  the  Rhynns  ;  Ceann  shios  na  ranna,  the  farthest
down  part  of  the  Ehpms  ;  An  rugha  Eannach.  —
H.  M'L.

4.  The  raven  attacking  the  man  in  the  basket  might
be  a  i)icture  drawn  from  nature.  Boys  are  often  lowered
over  rocks  in  the  Western  Highlands  to  take  birds'
nests,  and  the  old  birds  occasionally  resent  the  injury.
I  have  myself  seen  sparrow-hawks,  terns,  and  other
birds   stooping  viciously  at  men  who  had  gone  near


THE  RIDER  OF  GRIANAIG.  2  I

their  nests.  I  have  heard  of  a  man  having  his  head
laid  open  by  enraged  sea-swallows  ;  and  there  are  all
manner  of  stories  current  of  adventures  with  birds  in
rock  climbing. — J.  F.  C.

5.  The  quid  of  baccy  needs  no  explanation,  when
it  is  remembered  that  the  common  fee  for  the  story-
teller is  a  quid.  An  old  man  long  ago  was  teaching
a  boy  to  play  the  fiddle,  and  the  following  dialogue  is
recorded: — "Which  fi.nger  shall  I  raise?"  "Hast
thou  tobacco  Ì "  "  iSTo ;  which  finger  shall  I  lift  Ì "
"  Hast  thou  got  tobacco  Ì "  "  !N"o. "  "  Then  lift  and  lay
them  down  as  it  may  please  thyself"  There  is  a  hunger-
ing after  tobacco  amongst  those  who  are  given  to  it,
and  cannot  get  it,  which  must  be  felt  to  be  understood.

6.  Ceap  may  have  been  substituted  for  currachd,  a
cap,  which  was  the  old  Gaelic  name  for  all  head-
dresses, male  or  female. — H.  M'L.

I  have  no  doubt  that  the  man  who  told  the  story
meant  a  cap,  and  I  have  so  translated  the  word,  but
the  Gaelic  word  means  a  trap  or  gin,  and  many  things
besides.  An  old  man  who  told  me  a  story  exceedingly
like  "the  Fisherman"  in  the  Arabian  Nights,  introduced
the  character  who  resembled  the  young  king  of  the
Black  Isles,  not  as  a  man  half  marble,  but  as  a  man
with  his  head  in  a  ceaj},  and  on  being  interrogated,  ex-
plained that  this  was  a  kind  of  head-dress  used  for
punishment  or  tortm-e,  in  which  the  head  of  the  victim
was  fastened.  Such  head-dresses,  made  of  rusty  ii'on,
may  be  seen  in  museums,  and  ceap  may  have  meant
something  like  a  helmet,  whose  machinery  beai's  some
resemblance  to  a  rat-trap.

7.  GoDARLEUM  (page  31). — This  is  a  new  word  to


2  2  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.

me.  The  reciter  could  give  no  explanation  of  it  farther
than  that  it  was  darting  off  very  abruptly,  which  the
context  leads  a  person  to  think.  Godadli  is  a  quick,
somewhat  violent  shake  of  the  head.  I  find  the  reciters
at  Eowmore  speak  a  more  corrupt  dialect  than  others
whom  I  have  met.  They  use  English  words  very  fre-
quently for  Gaelic  words  still  in  common  use.  This
gives  an  idea  of  the  manner  in  which  English  words
and  forms  of  speech  may  have  gradually  replaced  Gaelic
ones  in  these  tales,  MacNiven  alternately  used  fores-
man  and  UACHDARAN  in  speaking  of  the  overseer  of  the
sixteen  men  that  wrought  at  the  rock. — H.  M'L.

The  flapping  stone  door  occurs  in  a  book  called  the
"Romance  of  History,"  and  I  think  the  magic  cave
was  placed  somewhere  in  Spain.  I  have  an  impres-
sion that  I  have  heard  of  it  elsewhere. — J.  F.  C.

cS.  Tom  LUACHARAcn,  a  bush  of  rushes,  perhaps  a
ru.'^hy  knoll.

9.  Eg  gheasan.  Irish  writers  who  take  the  histo-
rical view  of  these  traditions,  translate  geasa  by  vow
or  promise.     This  seems  to- fix  the  meaning  at  magic.

I  have  translated  this  jDassage  as  literally  as  my
laiDwledge  of  the  two  languages  enables  me  to  do  it,
because  the  language,  which  is  simple  every  day  Gaelic,
seems,  when  considered  with  its  meaning  in  this  pas-
sage, to  throw  a  light  on  past  beliefs.  The  enchanted
steed,  and  men  at  the  present  day  when  they  speak
Gaelic,  talk  of  themselves  as  if  they  were  something
different  fiom  their  bodies.  In  English  it  is  said,  "  /
am  an  old  man  ;"  in  Gaelic,  "  I  am  in  my  old  man."

The  form  of  words  is  the  same  when  the  speaker
says  "  I  am  in  my  old  clothes,"  and  this  form  of  speech
is  here  used  together  with  DRAOiDH-eachd  (?),  druid'hun,


THE  RIDER  OF  GRIANAlG.  23

magic,  and  a  transformation  is  effected  by  steel  at  a
well,  in  a  grass  meadoio,  near  a  rusliy  knoll,  beside  an
old  church  at  Grianaig.

Something  to  do  with  grian  the  sun,  is  mixed  up
with  magic  and  worship,  at  an  old  church,  and  witli
(b'uidism,  and  wells,  and  magic  metal,  and  green  mea-
dows and  rushes,  things  which  usually  have  to  do  with
magic,  and  with  metempsychosis,  which  is  supposed  to
have  been  a  druidical  doctrine ;  and  all  comes  direct
from  a  man  who  cannot  possibly  know  anytMng  about
such  things  except  as  traditions,  which  are  supported
by  similar  traditions  found  elsewhere.  I  believe  this
tale  to  be  founded  on  Celtic  mythology. — J.  F.  C.

The  following  Gaelic  words  used  in  tliis  tale  are
very  near  to  the  English,  lena,  lawn  ;  grund,  ground ;
SGiOBAiR,  skipper ;  peanas,  penalty ;  blastadh,  corrup-
tion for  blasting  ;  sail,  heel.  Spaisdeair-achd  is  not
ill  English,  but  it  has  relations  in  Italian,  andar  a  s2}asso,
and  in  Norse  and  German,  spazieren.

The  incidents  may  be  compared  with  those  in  the
Big  Bird  Dan,  Xorse  Tales,  page  442  ;  the  King  of
Lochlin's  Three  Daughters,  vol.  i.,  page  236 ;  but
tliough  these  have  much  in  common,  I  know  nothing
quite  like  this  story  anywhere.  To  me  it  suggests  a
succession  of  \T.vid  pictures,  perhaps  because  I  under-
stand the  intention  of  the  narrator  from  my  knowledge
of  the  landscapes  which  he  clearly  had  before  his
mind.1


2  4  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


RIDIKE  GHRIANAIG.


Bha  aig  Ridire  Gliriauaig  (1)  tri  nigheanaii,  nach  robh  'n  leithid
ra  fhaotainn,  na  la  fhaicinn  an  aite  sam  bith.  Thainig  beisd  o'n
chuau,  's  thug  i  leath'  end,  's  cha  robh  fios  de  'n  rathad  a  ghabheud,
na  cait  an  racht'  a  'n  iarraidh.

Bha  saighdear  anns  a  bhaile,  's  bha  tri  mic  aige,  's  an  am  na
nollaig  (2)  bha  eud  aig  iomain,  's  thuiit  am  fear  a  b-oige  gun  rachadh
eud  agiis  gun  cuireadh  eud  bair,  air  leuna  ridire  Ghrianaig.

Thuirt  each  nach  rachadh,  nach  biodh  an  ridire  toilichte,  gun
biodh  siod  a  toirt  na  chuimhne  call  a  chloinne, 's  a  cuir  duilichinn
air.  "  Biudh  sinn  's  a  roghainn  da,"  urs'  Iain  am  mac  a  b-oige,
"ach  theid  sinn  ann,  's  bheir  sinn  bair,  tha  mise  com'  airson  ridire
Ghrianaig  biodh  e  buidheach  na  diombach."

Chaidh  eud  a  dh'  iomain  's  bhuidhinn  Iain  tri  bairean  air  a
bhraithrean.  Chuir  an  ridire  cheann  amachair  uinneig,  's  chimnaic
e  eud  aig  iomain,  's  ghabh  e  corruicb  mhor,  gun  robh  chridh'  aig  h-
aon  sam  bith  dol  a  dh'  iomain  air  a  leuna,  ni  bha  toirt  call  a  chloinne
na  chuimhne,  's  a  cuir  miothlachd  air.  Thuirt  e  ra  bhean.  "  Co  tha
cho  miobhail  's  a  bhi'  g  iomain  air  mo  ghrunndsa  toirt  call  mo
chloinne  'm  chuimhne  !  biodh  eud  air  an  toirt  an  so,  a  thiotamh,  's
gun  racbadh  peanas  a  dheanadh  orra."  Chaidh  na  triuir  ghillean  a
thoirt  an  lathair  an  ridire,  's  bha  eud  nau  gillean  gasda.

"  De  thug  dhiubsee,"  urs'  an  ridire,  "  bhi  cho  miobhail 's  dol  a
dh'  iomain  air  a  ghrunnd  agams'.  toirt  call  mo  chloinne  'm  chuimh-
ne !     Feumaidh  sibh  peanas  f  huileann  air  a  shon."

Cha  n  ann  mur  sin  a  bhitheas,"  urs'  Iain,  "  ach  o'n  thuit  duinne
tigh  'n  cearr  ort,  's  fhearra  dhuit  fardrach  de  long  a  dheanadh  dhuinn,
agus  folbhaidh  sinn  a  dh'  iarraidh  do  nigheaiian ;  's  ma  tha  eud  fo  'n
fhiorrachd  na  fo  'n  fhuarracbd,  na  fo  cheithir  rannan  ruagh'  an
domhain,  (3)  gheobh  sinn'  a  mach  eud,  ma  'n  d'  thig  ceann  lath'  a  's
bliadhna,  's  bheir  sinn  air  an  ais  eud  do  Ghrianaig."

"  Gad  is  ta  's  oige,  's  ann  a  'd  cheann  a  tha  chomhairl'  a  's  fhearr
Bidh  sinn  air  a  dheanadh  dhuibh."

Fhuaireadh  saoir,  's  bha  long  air  a  deanadh  ann  an  seachd
lathan.  Chuir  eud  a  stigh  biadh  is  deoch  mar  dh'  fheumadh  eud
airson  an  turais.  Thug  eud  a  h-aghaidh  ri  muir,  's  a  cul  ri  tir,  's  dh'
fholbh  eud  's  ann  an  seachd  laithean  rainig  eud  traigh  gheal  ghain-
bheicb,  agus  nur  a  chaidh  eud  air  tir  bha  se  fir  dheug  ag  obair  ann
an  aodann  creige  blastadh,  's  uachdaran  orra.

"  De  'n  t-aite  tha  'n  so  ?  "  ursa  'n  sgiobair.


EIDIRE  GHRIANAIG.  25

"  So  'n  t-aite  bheil  clann  ridire  Ghrianaig.  Tha  eud  ri  bhi  posd'
air  tri  fanihaiiean."

"  De  'n  doigh  air  faotainn  far  a  bheil  eud?"

"  Cha  'n  'eil  doigh  sain  bith  ach  dol  suas  anns  a  chliabh  so  ri
aodann  na  creige."

Chaidh  am  mac  a  bu  shine  anns  a  chliabh,  's  nur  a  bha  e  shuas
aig  leith  na  creige  thainig  fitheach  geair  dugh,  's  thoisich  e  air  le  a
inean,  's  le  a  sgiathan,  gus  nach  mor  nach  d'  fhag  e  dall  bodhar  e.
(4)  Cha  robh  aig  ach  tilleadh  air  ais.

Chaidh  an  darna  fear  sa  chliabh,  's  nur  a  bha  e  shuas  leith  an
rathaid,  thainig  am  fltlieach  gearr  dugh  's  thoisich  e  air,  's  cha  robh
aig  ach  tilleadh  air  ais  mur  a  rinn  am  fear  eile.

Chaidh  Iain  ma  dheireadh  sa  cliabh.  Nur  a  bha  e  shuas  leith  an
rathaid,  thainig  am  fitheach  gearr  dugh,  's  thoisich  e  air,  's  ghread  e
ma  'n  aodann.  "  Suas  mi  gu  clis,"  urs'  esan,  "  ma  'm  bi  mi  dall  an
so."  Chuireadh  a  suas  e  gu  braigh  na  creige.  Nur  a  bha  e  shuas
thainig  am  fiiheach  far  an  robh  e,  's  thuirt  e  ris.

"  An  d'  thoir  thu  dhonih  greim  tho.mbaca.'  "

"  A  dhoar  shlaightire !  's  beag  coiiiain  agad  orm  airson  sin  a
tlioirt  duit."

"  Na  biodh  amhail  agad  da  sin  bidh  raise  'm  charaid  math  dhuit.
Nis  theid  thu  do  thi-h  an  fhamhair  mhoir,  's  chi  thu  nighean  an
ridire  fuaghal,  's  a  meuran  fliuch  le  deoir."

Ghabh  e  air  aghaidh  gus  an  d'  rainig  e  tigh  an  fhamhair.  Chaidh
e  stigh.    Bha  nighean  an  ridire  fuaghal.

"  De  thug  an  so  thu  ?"  urs'  ise.

"  De  thug  thu  fein  ann  nach  fliaodainnsa  tigh  'n  ann  ?"

"  Thugadh  mis'  ann  gun  taing."

"  Tha  fios  agam  air  an  sin.     Ca  bheil  am  famhair  ?  "

"  Tha  e  sa  bheinn  sheilg."

"  De  'n  doigh  air  fliaotainn  daehaidh?"

"  An  t-slabhraidh  chomhrag  ud  a  mach  a  chrathadh  's  cha  n  'eil  san
fhiorrachd,  na  's  an  fhuarrachd,  na  'n  ceithir  rannan  ruagh'  an  domh-
ain,  h-aon  a  chumas  comhrag  ris,^ach  Iain  og  Mac  an  t-Saighdeir,  a
Albainn,  's  cha  n  'eil  e  ach  se  bliadhn'  deug  a  dh'  aois  's  tha  e
tuillidh  a  's  og  a  dhid  a  chomhrag  ris  an  fhamhair."

"  Tha  iomadh  h-aon  an  Albainn  cho  laidir  ri  Iain  Mac  an  t-
Saighdeir,  gad  a  bhiodh  an  saighdear  leis."

Cliaidh  e  mach.  Thug  e  tarruinn  air  an  t-slabhraidh,  's  cha  d'
thug  e  car  aisde,  's  chaidh  e  air  a  ghlun.  Dh'  eiridh  e  suas,  thug  e
'n  ath  chrathadh  air  an  t-slubhraidh,  's  bhrisd  e  tein'  innte.  Chual
am  famhair  sa  bheinn  sheilg  e.


2  6  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  Aha ! "  urs'  esan,  "  co  b-urrainn  mo  shlabhraidh  chomhraigs'  a
charachadh,  ach  Iain  og  Mac  an  t-saighdeir  e  Albainn,  's  eha  n  'eil
e  acli  se  bliadhn'  deug  a  dh'  aois,  tha  e  ra  og  fhatbasd."

Chuir  am  famhair  an  t-sitheann  air  gad,  's  thainig  e  dliacbaidh.

"  An  tusa  Iain  og  Mac  an  t-saighdeir  a  Albainn?"

"  Cha  mhi."

"  Co  thu  ?  san  fhiorracbd,  na  san  fliuarrachd,  na  'n  ceithir  ranna
rnagh'  an  domhain,  a  b'  urrainn  mo  sblabhraidhs'  charachadh  ach
Iain  og  Mac  an  t-saighdeir  a  Albainn?"

Tha  iomadh  h-aon  an  Albainn,  cho  laidir  ri  Iain  og  ISIac  an  t-
saigbdear,  ged  a  bbiodh  an  saighdear  leis."

"  Tha  siod  san  fhaidheadairachd  agamsa."

''  Coma  leam  de  tha  san  fhaidheadaireachd  agadsa."

"  De  'n  doigh  air  am  math  leat  thu  fhe'  fheuchainn?"

"  Nur  a  bhithinn  fhe  's  mo  mhathair  thar  a  cheile,  's  a  bhiodij  toil
agam  mo  thoil  fhe  fhaotainn  ;  's  ann  an  snaomannan  cruaidhe
carachd  a  bhitheamaid  a  feuchainn,  's  ann  uair  a  gheobhadh  i  chuid
a  b'  fhearr,  's  da  uair  nach  fhaigheadh."

Rug  eud  air  a  cheile,  's  bha  greiineannan  cruaidh'  aca,  's  chuir
am  famhair  Iain  air  a  glilun.

"Tha  mi  faiciiin,"  urs'  Iain,  "gur  tu 's  laidireacha."

"  Tha  fibs  gur  mi,"  urs'  am  famhair.

Chaidh  eud  an  dail  a  cheile  rithisd,  bha  eud  a  caradii,'s  a  tarruinn
a  cheile.  Bhuail  Iain  a  chas  air  an  fhamhair  sa  mhuthairle,  's  chuir  e
air  slaitidh  a  dhroma,  foidhe  air  a  ghrunnd  e.  Ghuidh  e  gum  biodh
am  fitheach  aige.  Thainig  am  fitlieach  gearr  dugb,  's  gliabh  do  'n
fhamhair  s  an  aodann,  's  ma  nacluasan,  le  a  inean,  's  le  a  sgiathan,
gus  an  do  dhall,  's  an  do  bhodhair  e  e.  "  Am  bheil  tarrunn  airm
agad  a  bheir  an  ceann  de  'n  bheisd?"

'•  Cha  n  'eil."

"  Cuir  do  lamh  fo  m'  sgeilh  dheis-sa,  's  gheobh  thu  core  bheag
bhiorach  ann,  a  bhiosagam  a  buain  nam  braonanan, 's  thoir  an  ceann
deth."

Chuir  e  lamh  fo  bhun  sgeith'  dheis  an  fiiithich  's  fliuaire  chore  's
thug  e  'n  ceann  de  'n  fhamhair.

"Nis  Iain  theid  thu  stigh  far  a  blieil  nighean  mhor  ridire
Ghrianaig  's  bidh  i  'g  iarraidh  ort  tilleadli,  's  gun  dol  na  's  fhaide,
ach  na  d'  thoir  thusa  feairt,  ach  gabh  air  t-aghaidh,  's  ruigidh  thu  'n
nighean  mheadhonach,  's  bheir  thu  dhomhsa  greim  thombaca."

"  Bheir  mi  sin  duit  gu  dearbh  's  math  a  choisinn  thu  e,  gheobh
thu  leith  's  na  th'  agam."

"  Cha  'n  fliaigh  gu  dearbh  ;  's  iomadh  la  fada  gu  bealtainn."


RIHIRE  GHRIAXAIG.  27

Cha  ììg  am  fortan  gam  bi  mis"  an  so  gu  bealtainn."

Tha  fiòs  agad  air  na  tha  seachad,  acli  cha  'n  'eil  fiòs  agad  air  na
tha  romhad.  Faigh  uisge  blath,  glan  thu  fein  ann,  Gheobh  thu
ballan  iocshlaint  as  cionn  an  doruisd,  rub  rì  'd  diraiceann  e,  theirig
a  laidhe  leat  fhe',  's  bidh  thu  gu  slan  fallan  am  maireach,  's  am  mair-
eacb  gabhaidh  tu  air  t-agbaidh  gu  tigh  na  h-ath  te.

Chaidli  e  stigh  's  rinn  e  mar  a  dh'  iarr  am  fitbeacb  aìr.  Chaidh
e  laidhe  'n  oidbcbe  sin,  's  bba  e  gu  slan  fallain,  sa  mhaidinn,  nur  a
dli'  eiridli  e.

"  'S  fbearra  dhuit,"  ursanigliean  mhor  an  ridire,  "giin  dol  na  's
fliaide,  "s  gun  thu  fhè'  cbur  an  tuillidh  cunnairt,  tba  na  leoir  de  dh'
or  "s  de'  dh'  airgiod  an  so,  's  bheir  sinne  leinn  's  tillidh  sinn."

"  Cba  dean  mi'  "  sin  urs'  esan,  "  gabhaitlh  mi  air  m'  agbaidh."

Gbabh  e  air  aghaidh  gus  an  d'  thainige  gus  an  tigh  an  robh  nigbean
mbeadbonacli  ridire  Gbrianaig.  Chaidh  e  stigh,  's  bha  ise  na  suidhe
fuaghal,  's  i  caoineadb,  's  a  nieuran  fliuch  le  a  deoir.

"  De  thug  thusa  'n  so?  "

"  De  thug  thu  fhè  ann  nach  fhandainnsa  tigh  'n  ann  ?"'

"  Thugadh  mise  gun  taing  ann."

'•  Tha  fhiosam  air  an  sin,  de  chuir  a  caoineadh  thu  ?''

"  Cha  "n  'eil  ach  aon  oidhch'  agam  gus  am  feum  mi  bhi  posd  air
an  niamhair.''

Ca  bheil  am  famhair  ?

"  Tha  's  a  bheinn  sheilg."

"  De  n  doigh  air  fhaotainn  dhachaidh  ?  "

"  An  t-slabhraidh  chomhraig  sinn  a  macli  taobh  an  tighchrathadh,
's  cha  n  'eil  e  's  an  fliiorracbd,  na  san  fhuarrachd,  na  'n  ceithir
rannan  ruagli'  an  domhain,  na  chrathas  i,  ach  Iain  eg  Mac  an  t-
eaghdeir  a  Albainn,  's  tha  e  ra  og  fhathasd ;  cha  'n  'eil  e  ach  se
bliadhiia  deug  a  dh'  aois."

"  Tha  daoin'  ann  an  Albainn,  cho  laidir  ri  Iain  og  Mac  an  t-
saighdeir,  gad  a  bhiodh  an  saighdear  leis."

Chaidh  e  mach  's  thug  e  tarruinn  air  an  t-slabhraidh,  's  tbainig
e  air  a  dha  gblun.  Dh'  eiridh  e  's  thug  e  n'  ath  tarruinn  urra,  's
bhrisd  e  tri  teiueachanan.    Chual  am  famhair  siod  'sa  beinn  sheilg.

"  Alia ! "  urs  esan,  "  's  chuir  e  'n  t-sitheann  air  gad  air  a  ghuall-
ainn,  's  thainig  e  dhachaidh."

"  Co  b'  urrainn  mo  shlabhraidh  chomhragsa  charachadh  ach  Iain
og  Mac  an  t-saighdeir  a  Albainn,  's  tha  e  ra  og  fhathasd  ;  cha  n  'eil
e  ach  se  bliadhn'  deug  a  dh'  aois."

"Tha  daoin'  ann  an  Albainn  cho  laidir  ri  Iain  og  Mac  an  t-
saighdeir,  gad  a  bhiodh  an  saigdear  leis."


2  8  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  Tha  siod  anns  an  fhaidheadaiieachd  againne."

"  Tha  mise  coma  de  th'  anns  an  fhaidheadaireachd  agaibhse."

"  De  'n  doigh  air  am  math  leat  thu  fein  fheuchainn  ?"

"  Ann  an  criiaidh  ghreimeannan  carachd."

Rug  eud  air  a  cheile  's  chuir  am  famhair  air  a  dha  ghlun  e.

"  'S  leat  mo  bheath,"  urs'  Iain,  "  's  tu  's  treise  na  mise.  Feucha-
maid  car  eile."

Dh'  fheuch  eud  a  cheile  rithisd  's  bhual  Iain  a  shall  air  am
fhamhair  sa  mhuthairle  's  chuir  e  air  slaitiJh  a  dhrom'  air
ghrunnd  e.

"  Fhithich,"  urs'  esan,  "  bu  math  dallanach  dhiot  anis."

Thaiaig  am  fitheach,  agus  dhall  agus  bhodhair  e  'm  famhair,  a
gabhail  da  le  a  ghob,  's  le  a  inean,  's  le  a  sgiathan.

"  A  bheil  tarrunn  airm  agad  ?"

"  Cha  'n  eil."

"  Cuir  do  lamh  aig  bun  mo  sgeithe  dheissa,  's  gheobh  thu  ann
core  bheag  bliiorach  a  bhios  agam  a  buain  nam  braonanan,  's  thoir
an  ceann  deth."

Chuir  e  lamh  fo  bhun  sgeithe  dheis  an  fhithich,  fhuair  e  chore,  's
thug  e  'n  ceann  de  'n  fhamhair.

"  Nis  theid  thu  stigh,  glanaidh  thu  thu  fein  leuisge  blath,  gheobh
thu  'm  ballan  iocshlaint,  rubaidh  tu  ruit  fhe'  e,  theid  thu  laidhe,  'a
bidh  thu  gu  slan  fallan  am  maireach,  Bidh  i  so  gun  taing,  na  's
seoltacha,  's  na  's  beulaiche,  na  bha  'n  te  roinihid,  aig  iarraidh  ort
tilleadh,  's  gun  dol  na  's  fhaide,  ach  na  d'  thobhair  thusa  feairt  urra,
's  bheir  thu  dhomhsa  greim  thombaca."

"  Bheithir  mi,  dearbh  's  aiiidh  air  thu."

Chaidh  e  stigh  's  rinn  mar  a  dh'  iarr  am  fitheach  air.  Nur  a  dh'
eiridh  e  'u  la'r  na  mhaireach  bha  e  gu  slan  fallan.

'•  'S  fhearra  dhuit  ursa  nighean  mheadonach  an  ridire,  tilleadh
's  gun  thu  fhe'  chur  ann  an  tuillidh  cunnairt,  tha  na  leoir  de  dh,  or,  s
do  dh'  airgiod  an  so."

"  Cha  dean  mi  sin  gabhaidh  mi  air  m'  aghaidh."

Ghabh  e  air  aghaidh  gus  an  d'  thainig  e  gus  an  tigh  anns  an
robh  nighean  bheag  an  ridire,  chaidh  e  stigh,  's  chanuaic  e  ise
fuaghal  's  a  mturan  fliuch  le  deoir.

"  De  thug  thusa  'n  so  ?"

•'  De  thug  thu  fhe'  ann  !  nach  fhaotainnsa  tigh'n  anu."

"  Thugadh  mis'  ann  gun  taing."

"  Tha  fhios'am  air  an  sin."

"  An  tu  Iain  og  Mac  an  t-saighdeir  a  Albainn  ?"

"  'S  mi,  de  's  ciall  duit  a  bhi  caoineadh  ?"


EIDIRE  GHRIAXAIG.


29


"  Cha  n  'eil  agam  dail  gun  laidlie  leis  an  fliamhair,  acb  an
oidhche  so."

"  Ca  bheil  e  ?"

"  Tha  e  'sa  bheinn  sheilg."

"  De  'n  doigh  an'  air  a  thoirt  dachaidh  ? ""

"  An  t-slabhraidh  chomhraig  ud  a  macb  a  chratbadh."

Chaidb  e  macb  's  thug  e  crathadh  urra,  's  tbainig  e  nuas  air  a
nihasan.  Db'  eiridh  e  ritbisd  's  tbug  e  'n  atb  chratbadh  urra  's  bhrisd
e  ceithir  teineachan  innte,  's  rinn  e  toirm  mbor.  Chual  am  famhair
siud  sa  bbeinn  sheilg.     Chuir  e  'n  gad  sitbinn  air  a  ghuallainn.

"  Co  's  an  fhiarracbd,  na  san  fhuarracbd,  na  'n  ceithir  rannan
ruagh  an  dombain  a  b"  urrainn  mo  shlabhraidb  cbomhragsa  cbrath-
adb,  acb  Iain  og,  Mac  an  t-saigbdeir  a  Albainn,  's  ma  's  e  th'  ann
tha  mo  dha  bbratliairsa  marbb  roimbe  so."

Tbainig  e  dbacliaidh  na  dbeann,  a  cuir  an  talanib  air  chritb
roimbe  's  na  dheigb.

"An  tu  Iain  og  Mac  an  t-saighdeir?"

«'  Cha  mbi."

"  Co  tlia  san  fliiorracbd,  iia  san  fhuarracbd  na  'n  ceithir  rannan
ruagh'  an  dombain,  a  b' urrainn  mo  shlabhraidb  cbiinliragsa  chratb-
adh acb  Iain  og  Mac  an  t-saigbdeir  a  Albainn  "s  tha  e  ra  og  fliathasd;
cba  n  'eil  e  acb  se  bliadbn'  deng  a  db"  aois."

"Nacli  ioinadb  h-aon  an  Albainn  cbo  laidir  ri  Iain  og  Mac  an  t-
saigbdeir,  gad  a  bbiodb  an  saigbdeir  leis."

"  Cha  n  'eil  e  san  fhaidheadaireachd  againne."

"  Coma  leam  de  tha  san  fbaidbeadaireaehd  agaibhse."

"  De  n  doigh  air  am  math  leat  t-fbcuchainn  ?"

"  Snaomannan  cruaidbe  caracbd."

Ghlac  eud  a  cbeile  's  chuir  am  famhair  air  a  tboin  e.

"  Lig  as  n.i  's  leat  mo  bbeatha  "

Rug  end  air  a  cbeile  rithisd,  bbuail  e  shail  air  an  ftiambair  sa
mhuthairle,  's  leag  e  air  e  fras  mbullacb  a  ghuaille  's  air  slaitith  a
dhrom'  air  an  lar  e.

"  Fhitbicb  ghearr  dhuigb,  na'm  biodh  thu  'n  so  anis."

Cha  bu  luailbe  'thuirt  e  'm  facal,  na  tbainig  am  fitheacb.  Leadair
e  "m  famhair  ma  'n  aodann,  's  ma  na  suilean,  's  ma  na  cluasan,  le  a
gho!),  's  le  a  inean,  's  le  a  sgiathan.

"  A  bbeil  tarrunn  airm  agad."

"Cha  n  'eil."

"  Cuir  do  lamb  fo  bbun  mo  Fgeitb  dbeis  's  gheobb  thu  core  bbeag
bhioracb  ann  a  bbios  agam  a  buain  nam  braoilleanan  's  thoir  an
ceann  detb."


3©  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Rinn  e  ^ìod.

"  Nis  urs'  am  fitheach  gabli  fois  mar  a  rinn  thu,  'n  rair,  's  nur  a
thilleas  thu  le  tri  nigheanan  an  ridire  gu  bearradh  na  creige,  theid
thu  fhè  sios  an  toiseach,  's  theid  eudsaii  sios  a  'd  dheigh,  's  bheir  thu
dhorahsa  greirn  thombaca."

"  Bheir  gu  deaibh  's  math  a  's  airidh  air  thu ;  so  dhuit  air  fad  e."
" Cha  gabh  mi  ach  gieim,  's  ioinadh  la  fada  gu  bealtainn."
"  Tha  libs  agad  de  tli'  as  do  dheigh,  ach  cha  n  'eil  fios  agad  de
tha  romhad."

An  la  r  na  mhaireach  chuir  eud  an  ordugh  asaicheann,  's  chuir
end  air  am  muinn  an  tor  's  an  t-airgiod  a  bh'  aig  na  fanihairean,  's
rainig  e  fein  agus  tri  nigheanan  an  ridire  bearradh  na  creige.  Nur
a  rainig  eud  bearradh  na  creige,  'n  earalas  gun  tochradh  tapadh-
cion  do  ghin  de  na  nigheanan,  chuir  e  sios  eud  te  an  deigh  te,  anns  a
chliabh.  Bha  tri  ceapannan  (6)  oir  orra  air  an  deanadli  suas  gu
gasda,  le  daoiniean  ceapannan  a  rinneadh  ann  's  an  Roimh,  's  nacli
robh  'n  leithidean  ra  fhaotainn  anns  an  domlum.  Ghleidh  e  bhos  an
ceap  a  bh'  air  an  te  b'  oige.  Bha  e  IVitheamh,  's  a  feitheamh,  's  gad
a  bhiodh  e  feitlieamh  fhathasd,  clia  d'  thigeadh  an  cliabh  a  nios  a  iarr-
aidh.  Chaidh  each  air  bord,  's  air  folbh  a  gliabh  eud,  gus  an  d'
rainig  eud  Grianaig.

Bha  esan  air  fliagail  an  siod,  's  gun  doigh  aig  air  faotainn  as  an
aite.     Thainig  am  fitheach  far  an  robh  e.
"  Cha  do  gliabh  thu  mo  chomliairle."

"  Cha  do  gliabh ;  na  'n  gabhadh  cha  bhitliinn  mar  a  tha  mi."
"  Cha  n  'eil  arach  air  Iain,  an  t-aon  nach  gabh  comhairle  gabh-
aidh  e  comhrag,  Bheir  thu  dhomhsa  greim  tlionibaca."
"  Bheir."

"  Ruigidh  thu  tigh  an  fhamhair  agus  fanaidh  thu  ann  an  nochd."
"  Nach  fhan  thu  fhe'  leam  a  chur  dhiom  mo  chianalais."
"  Cha  'n  fhan  cha  fhreagair  e  dliomh."
"  An  la  r  na  mhaireach  tliainig  am  titheacli  far  an  robh  e."
"  Theid  thu  nis  gu  stabull  an  fhamhair,  agus  ma  bhiòs  thu  tap-
aidh  tha  steud  an  sin  a  's  coingeis  leatha  niuir  na  tir,  a  dh'  fhaodas
do  thoirt  as  na  casan  so."

Dh'  fholbh  eud  comlila  's  thainig  eud  gus  an  stabull.  Stabull
cloich'  air  a  chlaghach  a  stigh  ann  an  creig,  agus  dorusd  cloiche  ris.
Bha  'n  dorusd  a  clapail  gun  stad,  air  ais  's  air  aghaidh,  o  mhoch  latha
gu  h-oidhclie,  's  o  oidhche  gu  latha.

"  Feumaidh  tu  nis  faire,"  urs'  am  fitheach,  "  agus  cothrora  a  ghabh-
ail  feuch  an  dean  thu  dheth  dol  a  stigh  nur  a  bhios  e  fujgailt  gun  e
dheanadh  greim  ort."


RIDIRE  GHRIANAIG.  3  1

"  'S  fhearra  dliuits'  flieuchainn  an  toiseacli  o  'n  a  's  tu  's  eolaiche."

"  Bidh  e  cho  math."

Thug  am  fitheach  beic,  agus  godarleum  (7)  as 's  chaidh  e  stigh,
ach  thug  an  doru<d  it'  e  bun  a  sgeith,  's  sgreuch  e.

'•  Iain  bhoclid  na  'm  faigheadh  thusa  'stigh  cho  beag  doruinn
riumsa,  cha  bhithinn  a  gearan."

Ghabh  Iain  loid  air  ais,  's  roid  air  agliaidh,  thug  e  leam  as  a
dhol  a  stigh,  rug  an  dornsd  air  's  tliug  e  leith  a  mhais  deth.

Ghlaoidh  Iain,  's  tJiuit  e  fuar  marbh  air  urlar  an  stabuill  (8).
Tliog  am  fitheach  e,  's  ghiulain  e  e  air  barraibh  a  sgeith,  mach  as
an  stabull,  do  thigh  an  fhamhair.  Leag  e  air  bord  air  a  bheul  's  air  a
shroin,  chaidh  e  mach,  chruinnicli  e  luigheannan,  's  rinn  e  ceirean
a  chuir  e  ris,  's  aim  an  deich  laitliean  bha  e  cho  math  sa  bha  e  riabh.

Chaidh  e  mach  a  dhol  a  ghabliail  sraid,  's  chaidh  am  fitheach  a
mach  leis.

"Nis  Iain  gabhaidh  fhu  mo  chomhairle,  's  cha  ghabh  thu  iongh-
antas  de  ni  sam  bith  a  chi  thu  feadh  an  eilean,  's  bheir  thu  dhomhsa
greim  thombaca."

Bha  6  spaisdireachd  feadh  an  eilein,  's  a  del  romh  glileann ;
chunnaic  e  tri  Ian  laoich  na  'n  sineadh  air  an  driom,  sleagh  air  uchd
a  li-uile  fir  dhiu,  's  e  na  shioram  suain  chadail,  's  na  Ion  falais.

"  Their  leam  fhe  gur  deisneach  so  ;  de  choire  a  bhiodh  ann's  na
sleaghannan  a  thogail  diu  ?"

Chaidh  e  agus  dh'  fliuasgail  e  dliiu  na  sleaghannan.  Dhuisg  na
laoich,  's  dh'  eiricih  eud  a  suas.

"  Fhianuis  air  an  fhortan,  's  air  daoine,  gur  tu  Iain  og  Mac  an
t-saiglideir  a  Albainn,  's  gu  bheil  e  mar  ghtasaibli  art  dol  leinne  romh
cheann  ma  dlieas  an  eilein  so,  seachad  air  uamh  'n  iasgair  dhuigh."

Dh"  fhalbh  e  fbe  's  na  tri  Ian  laoich,  Cliunnaic  eud  smuid  chaol  a
mach  a  uamh.  Chaidh  eud  gus  an  uamh.  Chaidh  h-aon  de  na  laoicli
a  stigh,  's  nur  a  chaidh  e  stigh  bha  cailleach  an  sin  na  suidhe,  's  an
fiiiacaill  a  bu  lugha  na  beul  dheanadh  i  dealg  na  h-uchd,  [org  na
laimh,  ngus  maide  brosnachaidh  do'n  ghriosaich.  Eha  car  da  h-inean
ma  h-uilt,  's  car  da  fait  liath  ma  lagharan,  's  cha  robh  i  aobhach  ri
amhrac  urra.

P.ug  i  air  slachdan  draoidheachd,  bhuail  i  e  's  rinn  i  carragh  maol
cloiche  dheth.  Bha  ionghantas  air  an  fheadhain  a  bha  mach  de
thuir  nach  robh  e  tilleadh.

"  Tlieirig  a  stigh,"  urs  Iain  ri  fear  eile,  "'s  airahric  de  tha  cumail
do  chompanaich."

Chaidh  e  stigh  's  rinn  a  chailleach  air  mar  a  rinn  i  air  an  fhear
eile.     Chaidh  an  treas  fear  a  stigli  "s  rinn  i  airsan  mar  a  rinn  i  air


3«  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

each.  Chaidh  Iain  a  stigh  ma  dheireadh.  Bha  cat  mor  claghann
ruagh  an  sin,  's  chuir  i  bara  de  'n  luaitli  dhearg  ma  cloinihe  an  los  a
bhodhradh  sa  dlialladh.  Bhiiail  e  barr  a  cliois  urra,  's  chuir  en  t-iona-
chainn  aisde.     Thug  e  lamh  air  a  chaillich.

"  Iain  na  dean.  Tha  na  daoine  sin  fo  gheasaibh  agus  airson  na
geasau  a  chur  dhiu  feumaidh  lu  dol  do  dli'  eilean  nam  ban  mora,  's
botall  de  'n  uisge  bheo,  thoirt  as,  's  nur  a  rubas  thu  riu  e,  folbhaidh  na
geasan  's  thig  eud  bco."

Thill  Iain  air  ais  fo  dhuibthiamhas.

"  Cha  do  ghabh  thu  mo  chomhairle,"  urs'  am  fitheach,  "  's  thug  thu
tuillidli  dragh  ort  fein,  Theid  thu  laidhe  nochd,  's  nur  a  dh'  eireas  thu
maireacli,  bheir  thu  leat  an  steud,  's  bheir  thu  biadh  is  deoch  dhi.  'S
coingeis  leatha  muir  na  tir;  's  nur  a  ruigeas  thu  eilean  nam  ban  mora,
coinneachaidh  se  deug  de  ghille  stabuill  thu,  's  bidh  eud  air  fad  air
son  biadh  a  thoirt  do  'n  steud,  sa  cuir  a  stigh  air  do  shon,  ach  na  lig
thusa  dhaibh.  Abair  gun  d'  thoir  thu  fhe'  biadh  a  's  deoch  dhi.  Nur
a  dh'  flia.ras  thu  san  stabuU  i,  cniridh  a  h-uile  h-aon  de  'n  t-se  deug
car  'san  uichair,  ach  cuiridh  thusa  car  an  aghaidh  h-uile  car  a  cbuireas
eud  ann.     Bheir  thu  dhomhsa  greim  thomhaca."

"  Bheir  gu  dearbh."

Chaidh  e  laidhe  'n  oidhche  sin,  's  anns  a  mhaidinn  chuir  e  'n  steud
an  ordugh,  's  ghabh  e  air  falbh.  Thug  e  h-aghaidh  ri  muir,  's  a
cul  ri  tir,  's  dh'  fholbh  i  na  deann,  gus  an  d'  rainig  eud  eilean  nam
ban  mora.  Nur  a  chaidh  e  air  tir,  choinnich  se  gille  deug  stabuill  e,
's  bha  h-uile  fear  aig  iarraidh  a  cuir  a  stigh  s  a  biadliadh.

"  Cuiridh  mi  file  stigh  i,  's  bheir  mi  'n  aire  dhi,  cha  d'  thoir  mi  do
li-aon  sam  bith  i."

Chuir  e  stiirli  i,  's  nur  a  thainig  e  mach  chuir  a  h-uile  fear  car  san
iuchair,  's  chuir  esan  car  an  aghaidh  h-uile  car  a  chuir  eud  innte.
Thuirt  an  steud  ris  gum  biodh  eud  a  tairg:'e  h-uile  seorsa  deoch  dha,
ach  gun  esan  a  ghabhail  deoch  sam  bith  uatha  ach  nieug  a  's  uisge.
Chaidh  e  stigh  's  bha  h-uile  seorsa  deoch  ga  cliuir  man  cuairt  an  sin,
's  bha  eud  a  tairgse  gach  seorsa  dhasan,  ach  cha  ghabhadh  esan  deur
de  dheoch  sam  bith  ach  meug  a  's  uisge.  Bha  eudsan  ag  ol,  's  ag
ol,  gus  an  do  thuit  eud  na  'n  sineadh,  man  bhord.

Dh'  iarr  an  steud  airsau  ma  n  do  dhealaich  i  ris,  e  tlniiit  an  aire
's  gun  cadal,  's  a  chothrom  a  ghabhail  airson  tigh  'n  air  folbh.  Nur
a  chaidil  eud  s  an  thanaig  e  mach  as  an  t-seomhar,  's  chual  e  'n  aon
cheol  a  bu  bhinne  chualas  riabh.  Ghabh  e  air  aghaidh  agus  chual  e
ann  an  ait'  eile  ceol  moran  na  bu  bhinne.  Thainig  e  gu  taobh  staigh-
reach  's  chual  e  ceol  na  bu  bhinne  's  na  bu  bhinne,  agus  thuit  e  na
cliadal.


EIDIRE  GHRIAXAIG.  JJ

Bhrisd  an  steud  a  mach  as  an  stabull,  thainig  i  far  an  robh  e,
bhuail  i  cic  air  's  dhuisg  i  e,  "  Cha  do  ghabh  thu  mo  chomhairl,"  urs
ise,  "  's  cha  n'  eil  fhios  a  nis  am  faigh  thu  do  ghnothach  leat  na  nach
fhaigh."  Dh'  eiridh  e  le  duilichinn.  Rug  e  air  claidheamh  soluisd
a  bha  "n  oiseia  an  t-seombair,  s  thug  e  na  se  cinn  deug  a  mach.
Eainig  e  'n  tobar,  lion  e  botall  's  thill  e.  Choinnich  au  steud  e,  's
thug  e  h-aghaidh  ri  muir  's  a  cul  ri  tir,  's  thill  e  gus  an  eilean  eiie.
Choinnich  am  fitheach  e.

"  Folbhaidh  thu  agus  stablachaidh  thu  'n  steud,  's  theid  thu  laidhe
nochd,  's  am  maireach  theid  thu  agus  bheir  thu  beo  na  laoich,  's  mar
bhaidh  thu  chailleach,  '3  na  bi  cho  amaideach  am  maireach  's  a  bha
thu  rohnhe  so."

"  Nach  d'  thig  thu  leam  a  nochd  a  chur  dhiom  mo  chianalais."

"  Cha  d'  thig  cha  fhreagair  e  domh."'

An  la'r  na  mhaireach  rainig  e'n  uamh.

"Failte  dhuit  Iain,"  urs'  a  chailleach.

"  Failte  dhuits'  ach  cha  shlainte  dhuit."

Chrath  e'n  t-uisg'  air  na  daoine,  's  dh'  eiridh  eud  beo ;  Bhuail  e
bhas  air  a  chaillicli,  a  's  spread  e  'n  t-ionachainu  aisde.  Ghabh  eud
a  mach,  's  chaidh  eud  gu  ceann  deas  an  eilean.  Chunnaic  eud  an  t-
iasgair  dugh  an  sin  ag  obair  ra  chuilbheartan.  Tharruinn  e  bhas 's
bhuail  e  e,  's  spread  e  n  t-ionachainn  as,  's  thug  e  na  laoich  dhachaidli
do  cheann  deas  an  eilean.    Thainig  am  fitheach  far  an  robh  e.

"Nis  theid  thu  dhachaidh  's  bheir  thu  leat  an  steud;  's  coingeis
leatha  muir  na  tir.  Tha  tri  nigheanan  an  ridire  ri  banais  a  bhi  ac-
a,  dithisd  ri  bhi  posd  air  do  dha  bhrathair,  agus  an  te  eile  air  a  cheann-
abhart  a  bh'  air  na  daoin'  aig  a  chreig.  Fagaidh  tu'n  ceap  agamsa,
's  cha  bhi  agad  ach  smaointeachadh  orm,  nur  a  bhios  e  dhith  ort,  's
bidh  mi  agad.  Ma  dh'  fheorachas  h-aon  diot  co  as  a  thainaig  thu
abair  gun  d'  thanaig  thu  as  do  dheigh ;  's  ma  their  e  riut  ca'  bheil
thu  dol,  abair  gu  bheil  thu  dol  romhad."

Chaidh  e  air  muinn  na  steud,  thug  e  h-aghaidh  ri  muir,  's  a  cul
ri  tir,  's  air  folbh  a  bha  e  's  cha  d'  riiineadh  stad  na  fois  Itis  gus  an  d'
rainig  e  'n  t-sean  eaglais  ann  an  Grianaig,  's  bha  Ion  feoir,  an  sin,
agus  tobar  uisge,  agus  tom  luachrach.     Thainig  e  bhar  na  steud.

"  A  nis,"  urs'  an  steud,  "  gabhaidh  tu  claidheamh,  agus  bheir  thu
'n  ceann  diomsa."

"  Cha  d'  thobhair  ga  dearbh,  bu  duilich  leam  a  dheanadh,  's  cha
b'  e  mo  chomain  e."

"  Feumaidh  tu  dheanadh,  's  ann  a  th'  annamsa  nighean  og  fo

gheasaibh,  's  cha  bhi  na  geasan  dhiom  gus  an  d'  thoirear  an  ceann

diom.    Bha  mi  fhe'  sam  fitheach  a  suiridh,  esan  na  ghill'  og,  's  mis'

D


i^  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

am'  nighinn  oig,  's  chuir  na  famhairean  draoidheachd  oirnn,  's  rinn
eud  fitheach  dhethsan  agus  steud  dhiomsa."

"  Tharruinn  e  chlaidheamh,  thionndaidh  e  chul,  's  thug  e  'n  ceann
dith  le  sgath  bhuille,  's  dh'  fhag  e  'n  ceann  sa  chlosach  an  siod.
Ghabh  e  air  aghaidh.     Choinnich  cailleach  e.

"  Co  as  a  thanaig  thu  ?"  urs  ise.

"  Thanaig  mi  as  mo  dheigh."

"  Ca  bheil  thu  dol  ?"  Tha  mi  dol  romham.

"  Sin  freagairt  fir  caisteil."

"  Freagairt  gu  math  freagrach  air  cailleach  mhiobhail  mur  a  tha
thusa."

Chaidh  e  stigh  leatha  's  dh'iarr  e  deoch.    Fhuair  e  siod.

«  Ca  bheil  t-fhear?"

Tha  aig  tigh  an  ridire  aig  iarraidh  or  is  airgiod  a  ni  ceap  do
nighean  og  an  ridire,  mar  a  th'  aig  a  peathrairchean,  's  gun  leithid
nan  ceapannan  ra  fhaotainn  an  Albainn."

Thanaig  an  gobha  dliachaidh.

"  De  's  ceaird  duit  oganaich  ?"

"  Tha  mi  'm  ghobha."

"  'S  math  sin,  's  gun  cuideachadh  thu  leamsa  ceap  a  dheanadh  do
nighean  og  an  ridire,  's  i  dol  a  phosadh."

"Kach  'eil  fhios  atrad  nach  urrainn  thu  sin  a  dheanadh."

"'S  eiginn  feucliainn  ris,  ma 'n  an  dean  mi  e  bidh  mi  air  mo
chrochadh  am  maireach."    "  So  a  's  fhearra  dhuit  a  dheanadh."

*' Glais  mise  stigh  's  a  cheardaich,  gleidh  an  t-or  's  an  t-airgiod,
's  bidh  an  ceap  agamsa  dhuit  sa  mliaidinn."

Ghlais  an  gobha  stigh  e.  Ghuidh  e  'm  fitheach  a  bhi  aige,
Thainig  am  fitheach,  Bbrisd  e  stigh  romh  'n  uinneag  's  bha  'n  ceap
leis.

''Bheir  thu  'n  ceann  dhiomsa  nis."

"Bu  duilich  leam  sin  a  dheanadh  's  cha  b'  e  mo  chomain  e."

"  Feumaidh  tu  dheanadh  's  gill'  og  fo  gheasan  mise,  's  cha  bhi  eud
(Jhiom  gus  an  d'  thig  an  ceann  dhiom."

Tharruinn  e  chlaidheamh,  's  sgath  e  'n  ceann  deth,  's  cha  robh
siod  doirbli  a  dheanadh.  Anns  a  mhaidinn  thanaig  an  gobha  'stigh
"s  thug  e  dha  'n  ceap.  Thuit  e  na  chadal.  Thainig  oganach  ciatach
le  fait  donn  a  stigh,  's  dhui?g  e.

"  S  mise,"  urs'  esan,  "am  fitheach,  's  tha  na  geasan  a  nis  dhiom."

Choisich  e  leis  sios  far  an  d'  fhag  e  'n  steud  marbh,  's  choinnich
boireannach  og  an  sin  eud  cho  aluinn  's  a  chunnaic  suil  riabh.

"'S  mis'  urs  ise  'n  steud  's  tha  na  geasan  diom  a  nis."

Chaidh  an  gobha  leis  a  cheap  gu  tigh  an  ridire,  Tliiig  an  sear-


RIDIRE  GHRIANAIG.


35


bhant  thun  nighean  og  an  ridire  e,  's  thuirt  i  rithe  gun  robh  'n  siod
an  ceap  a  rinn  an  gobha.     Dh'  aimhric  i  air  a  cheap.

"  Cha  d'  rinn  e  'n  ceap  so  riabh.  Abair  ris  an  t-slaightire  bhreug-
ach  e  thoirt  an  fbir  a  tliug  dha  'n  ceap  an  so,  air  neo  gum  bi  e  air
a  chrochadh  gun  dàil."

Chaidh  an  gobha  's  fhuair  e  'm  fear  a  thug  an  ceap  dha,  's  nur  a
chunnaic  is'  e  ghabh  i  boch  mor.  Chaidh  a  chuis  a  shoilleireachadh.
Phos  Iain  agus  nighean  og  an  ridire,  's  chaidh  cul  a  chur  ri  each,  's
cha  'n  fhaigheadh  eud  na  peathraichean  eile.  Chuireadh  romh  'a
bhail'  eud,  le  claidheamhannan  maide,  's  le  criosa  guaille  conlaich.

In  tliis  tale  the  Gaelic  is  "written  as  spoken  by  the
narrator.  There  are  instances  of  bad  grammar,  and  of
corruptions,  which  are  left  as  found.  Teine  is  used  for
tinne,  a  Unk.  Aig  is  a  small  bay  or  creek.  Grianaig
is  Sun  Creek.  Many  similar  names  are  found  in  the
Highlands.  In  Islay  is  Dun  Naomh-aig,  Holy  Creek
Fort ;  in  Barra,  Breubhaig-Breitheamliaig,  Judge  Creek.
The  word  is  no  doubt  allied  to  eag,  a  notch,  or  a  nook.
— H.  M'L.


From  a  Stone  at  ELGiii. —SculjHured  Stones  of  Scotland,  P2.  xvi.


{Under  the  following  numbers  I  have  grouped  together  a  fexo
traditions,  etc.,  relating  to  the  Campbell  legend  of  Diar-
maid  and  the  boar.']

LIX.
nONN'S  QUESTIONS.

From  Donald  MacPhie  (smith),  Breiibhaig,  Barra,  1860.

"  Fiona  would  not  marry  any  lady  but  one  who  could  answer  all
his  questions,  and  it  appears  that  this  was  rather  difficult  to  find.
Graidhne,  daughter  of  the  King  of  the  fifth  of  Ullin,  answered  them
all,  and  proved  herself  the  wisest  as  well  as  the  handsomest  of  women.
Fionn  married  Graidhne  because  she  answered  the  questions.  The
reciter  told  me  that  there  were  a  great  many  more,  but  that  these
were  all  that  he  could  remember  at  the  time."

H.  MacLean,  October  20, 1860.

CEISDEAN  FHINN.

[Seo  na  ceisdeau.

Fionn.  Dè  's  lionaire  na'm  fenr  ?

Ch'aidhne.  Tha  'n  driuchd ;  bidh  moran  bhoineacliaii
deth  air  aon  ghas  feoir.]

Fionn.  What  is  more  plenteous  than  the  grass  ?

Graidhne.  The  dew ;  there  will  be  many  drops  of
it  on  one  grass  blade.

[De  's  teotha  na'n  teine  ?

Ciall  mnatha  eadar  da  f  hear,]

V.Hiat  is  hotter  than  the  fire  ?

A  woman's  reasoning  betwixt  two  men.


DIARMAID  AXD  GRAIDHNE FIOXN  S  QUESTIONS.        37

[De  's  luaitlie  na  ghaotli  1
Aigne  innatha  eadar  da  f  hear.]
What  is  sivifter  than  the  wind  Ì
A  woman's  thought  betwixt  two  men.

[De  's  duibhe  na  'n  fitheach  ?
Tha  'm  has.]

What  is  blacker  than  the  raven  ?
There  is  death.

[De  's  gile  na  'lii  sneachd  ?
Tha  'n  fhirinn.]

What  is  whiter  than  the  snow  ?
There  is  the  truth.

[De  's  long  ri  gach  luchd  ?

Teanchair  gobha  ;  cumaidh  i  teith  a's  fuar.]

What  is  a  sliip  for  every  cargo  ?

A  smith's  tongs  ;  it  will  hold  hot  and  cold.

[De  air  nach  gabh  glas  na  slablu-aidh  cur  ?

Kasg  duine  ma  charaid  ;  cha  ghabh  e  dunadh  na
cumail  ach  ag  amharc  air.]

What  is  it  will  not  bide  lock  or  chain  1

The  eye  of  a  man  about  liis  friend  ;  it  Avill  not
brook  shutting  or  holding,  but  looking  on  him.

[De.  's  deirge  na  full  ?

Gnuis  duine  choir  nuair  thigeadh  coigrich  an  rathad
's  gun  bhiadh  aige  'bheireadh  e  dhaibli.]

Wliat  is  redder  than  blood  Ì

The  face  of  a  worthy  man  when  strangers  might
come  the  way,  and  no  meat  by  him  to  give  to  them.

[De  's  geire  na  claidheamh  Ì
Athais  namhaid.]
What  is  sharper  than  a  sword  Ì
Tlie  reproach  of  a  foe.


38  WEST  HIGHL.VND  TALES.

[Dè  's  fearr  de  bhiadli  ?

Bleaclid  ;  tliig  iomadh  atharracliadli  as,  niotar  im
a's  càise  dhetli,  's  beathacliaidli  e  leanabh  beag  a's
seaii-duine.]

What  is  the  best  of  food  Ì

Milk ;  many  a  change  comes  out  of  it ;  butter  and
cheese  are  made  of  it,  and  it  will  feed  a  little  child  and
an  old  man.

[De  's  measa  de  bhiadh?

Bhanach.]

"VVliat  is  the  worst  of  meat  Ì

Lean  flesh.

[De  'n  send  a's  f  hearr  Ì

Sgian.]

What  is  the  best  jewel  ?

A  knife.

[De  's  brisge  na  cluaran  Ì

Briathran  tore  muice.]

WTiat  is  more  brittle  than  the  sow  thistle  ?

The  words  of  a  boar  pig.

[De  's  maoithe  na  cloimhteach  Ì
Dearn  air  an  leaca.]
What  is  softer  than  down  Ì
The  palm  on  the  cheek.

[De  'n  gniomh  a's  f hearr  de  ghniomhaibh  ?
Gniomh  ard  a's  uaill  iseal.]
What  deed  is  the  best  of  deeds  ?
A  high  deed  and  low  conceit.

From  this  then  it  appears  that  Graidline  represents
quick  wit  and  beauty,  and  her  name  seems  to  mean
Gradh — love.


DIARMAID  AND  GRAINNE.  39

Fionn  always  represents  wisdom.

Mature  wisdom  marries  young  love,  and  in  the
stories  which  follow,  love  runs  away  with  young
valour.

They  follow  the  track  which  has  been  assigned  to
the  Celtic  race.  They  are  married  in  Eirinn,  and  ia
the  next  story,  the  course  of  their  wanderings  is  pointed
out.


LX.
DIAEMAID  AND  GEAINNE.*

From  Hector  MacLean,  July  6tli  1859.     Told  by  an  old  man  in
Bowmore,  Islay,  Alexander  Macalister.

FIONN  was  going  to  marry  Grainne,  the  daughter
of  the  king  of  Carmag  in  Eirinn.  The  nobles  and
great  gentles  of  the  Feimie  were  gathered  to  the  wedding.
A  great  feast  was  made,  and  the  feast  lasted  seven  days
and  seven  nights ;  and  when  the  feast  was  past,  their
own  feast  was  made  for  the  hoimds.  Diarmaid  was  a
truly  fine  man,  and  there  was,  ball  seirc,  a  love  spot
on  his  face,  and  he  used  to  keep  his  cap  always  down
on  the  beauty  spot ;  for  any  woman  that  might  chance
to  see  the  ball  seirc,  she  would  be  in  love  with  him.
The  dogs  fell  out  roughly,  and  the  heroes  of  the  Feinn
went  to  drive  them  from  each  other,  and  when  Diarmaid
was  driving  the  dogs  apart,  he  gave  a  Hft  to  the  cap,
and  Grahme  saw  the  ball  sekc  and  she  was  in  heavy
love  for  Diarmaid.

She  told  it  to  Diarmaid,  and  she  said  to  him,  "  Thou
shalt  run  away  Avith  me."

*  The  name  is  so  spelt  in  this  MS.,  and  it  is  so  spelt  in  Irish
books.


40  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  I  will  not  do  that,"  said  Diarmaid.

"  I  am  laying  it  on  thee  as  a  wash  ;  and  as  spells
that  thou  go  Avitli  me."

"  I  will  not  go  with  thee  ;  I  mil  not  take  thee  in
softness,  and  I  will  not  take  thee  in  hardness ;  I  will
not  take  thee  without,  and  I  will  not  take  thee  within  ;
I  will  not  take  thee  on  horseback,  and  I  will  not  take
thee  on  foot,"  said  he  ;  and  he  went  away  in  displeasure,
and  he  went  to  a  place  apart,  and  he  put  up  a  house
there,  and  he  took  his  dwelling  in  it.

On  a  morning  that  there  was,  who  cried  out  in  the
door  but  Grahme,  "  Art  thou  wdthin,  Diarmaid  ì "

"I  am."

"  Come  out  and  go  with  me  now."

"  Did  I  not  say  to  thee  already  that  I  would  not
take  thee  on  thy  feet,  and  that  I  would  not  take  thee
on  a  horse,  that  I  would  not  take  thee  without,  and
that  I  would  not  take  thee  within,  and  that  I  would
not  have  anything  to  do  with  thee."

She  was  between  the  two  sides  of  the  door,  on  a
buck  goat.  "  I  am  not  without,  I  am  not  within,  I
am  not  on  foot,  and  I  am  not  on  a  horse ;  and  thou
must  go  with  me,"  said  she.*

"There  is  no  place  to  which  we  may  go  that
Fionn  will  not  find  us  out  when  he  puts  his  hand
imder  his  tooth  of  knowledge,  and  he  will  kill  me  for
going  -with  tliee  ! "

"  "We  will  go  to  Carraig  (a  crag,  Carrick  ?)  and  there
so  many  Carraigs  that  he  will  not  know  in  which  we
may  be."

*  This  incident  may  be  compared  with  a  German  story
Die-kluge  Baiieren-tochter.  Grimm,  No.  94.  See  vol.  iii.,  p.  170,
for  numerous  references  to  versions  of  the  story  in  a  great  many
languages.  I  have  had  two  versions  of  the  story  in  Gaelic — one
from  Mr.  MacLauchlan,  the  other  from  an  old  man  in  Barra.


DIARMAID  AXD  GRAIXNB.  4 1

They  went  to  Carraig  an  Daimh  (the  stag's  crag).

Fionn  took  great  wrath  when  he  perceived  that  his
wife  had  gone  away,  and  he  went  to  search  for  her.
They  went  over  to  Ceantire,  and  no  stop  went  on  their
foot,  nor  stay  on  their  step,  till  they  reached  Carraig
an  Daiinh  in  Ceantire,  near  to  Cille  Charmaig.  Diar-
ruaid  was  a  good  carpenter,  and  he  used  to  he  at  making
dishes,  and  at  fishing,  and  Grainne  used  to  he  going
about  selling  the  dishes,  and  they  had  beds  apart.

On  a  day  that  there  was  there  came  a  great  sprawl-
ing old  man  the  way,  who  was  called  Ciofach  Mac  a
Ghoill,*  and  he  sat,  and  he  was  playing  at  dixxsirean
(wedges. t)  Grainne  took  a  liking  for  the  old  carl,  and
they  laid  a  scheme  together  that  they  woidd  kill
Diarmaid.  Diarmaid  was  working  at  dishes.  The
old  man  laid  hands  on  him,  and  he  turned  against  the
old  man,  and  they  went  into  each  other's  grips.  The
old  man  was  pretty  strong,  but  at  last  Diarmaid  put
him  imder.  She  caught  hold  of  the,  gearrasgiax,  knife,
and  she  put  it  into  the  thigh  of  Diarmaid.  Diarmaid
left  them,  and  he  was  going  fi^om  hole  to  hole,  and  he
was  but  just  alive,  and  he  was  gone  ujider  hair  and
under  beard.  He  came  the  way  of  the  Carraig  and  a
fish  with  him,  and  he  asked  leave  to  roast  it.  He  got
a  cogie  of  water  in  which  he  might  dip  hLs  fingers,
while  he  was  roasting  it.  ]S'ow  there  would  be  the
taste  of  honey  or  anything  which  Diarmaid  might
touch  with  his  finger,  and  he  was  dipping  liis  fingers
into  the  cogie.  Grainne  took  a  morsel  out  of  the  fish|
and  she   perceived  the  taste  of  honey  upon  it.     To

*  Ciofach,  tlie  son  of  tbe  stranger.  This  personage,  who  plays
this  part  in  another  version,  is  called  "  Cuitheach."

t  Or  DisNEAN,  dice  ?

t  There  seems  to  be  something  mythical  about  this  fish,  for
lie  appears  in  various  shapes  in  the  legend.


42  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

attack  Diarmaid  went  Ciofach,  and  they  were  in  each
other's  grips  for  a  turn  of  a  while,  but  at  last  Diarmaid
killed  Ciofach,  and  away  he  went,  and  he  fled,  and  he
went  over  Loch  a  Chaisteil.

When  Grainne  saw  that  Ciofach  was  dead  she
followed  Diarmaid,  and  about  the  break  of  day,  she
came  to  the  strand,  and  there  was  a  heron  screaming.
Diarmaid  was  up  in  the  face  of  the  movmtain,  and  said
Graimie —

"  It  is  early  the  heron  cries.
On  the  heap  aliove  SUabh  gaoU,
Oh  Diarmaid  0  Duiblme  to  whom  love  I  gave,
Wliat  is  the  cause  of  the  heron's  cry  Ì

"  Oh  Ghrainne,  daughter  of  Carmaig  of  Steeds,
That  never  took  a  step  aright.
It  seems  that  before  she  gave  the  cry
Her  foot  had  stuck  to  a  frozen  slab*

"  Wouldst  thou  eat  bread  and  flesh,  Diarmaid  ?"

"  Needful  were  I  of  it  if  I  had  it."

"  Here  I  will  give  it  to  thee  ;  where  is  a  knife  will
cut  it?"

"  Search  the  sheath  in  which  thou  didst  put  it
last,"  said  Diarmaid.

The  knife  was  in  Diarmaid  ever  since  she  had  put
it  into  him,  and  he  would  not  take  it  out.  Grainne
drew  out  the  knife,  and  that  was  the  greatest  shame
that  she  ever  took,  dra-\ving  the  knife  out  of  Diar-
maid,

Fear  was  on  Diarmaid  that  the  Fheitm  would  find
them  out,  and  they  went  on  forwards  to  Gleann  Eilg.

Tliey  went  up  the  side  of  a  bum  that  was  there,
*  There  seems  to  be  a  hidden  meaning  in  the  reply.


DIARMAID  AND  GRAINNE.  43

and  took    their   dwelling    there,   and  they  had   beds
apart.*

Diarmaid  was  making  dishes,  and  the  shavings
which  he  was  making  were  going  down  with  the  burn
to  the  strand.

The  Fiantan  were  hunting  along  the  foot  of  the
strand,  and  they  were  on  the  track  of  a  venomous  boar
that  was  discomfiting  them.  Fionn  took  notice  of  the
shavings  at  the  foot  of  the  burn.

"  These,"  said  he,  "  are  the  shavings  of  Diarmaid,"
"They  are  not;  he  is  not  aHve,"  said  they.
Indeed,"  said  Fionn,  "they  are.     We  wdl  shout
Foghaid  !  a  hunting  cry,  and  in  any  one  place  in  which
he  may  be,  he  is  sworn  to  it  that  he  must  answer."
Diarmaid  heard  the  Foghaid.
"  That  is  the   Foghaid  of  the  Fiantan ;  I  must
answer."

"  Answer  not  the  cry,  oh  Diarmaid  ;
It  is  but  a  lying  cry.-j-
Diarmaid  answered  the  shout,  and  he  went  down
to  the  strand.       It  was  set  before  Diarmaid  to  hunt
the  boar.     Diarmaid  roused  the  boar  from  Bein  Eidin
to  Bein  Tuirc.t

"VVliile  drawing  down  the  long  mountain,
The  brute  was  bringing  Diarmaid  to  straits.
His  tempered  blades  were  twisted
Like  withered  rushy  plaits,

*  Glen  Elg,  opposite  the  narrows  between  Skye  and  the  main-
land. There  are  two  "Pictish  towers"  in  a  glen  which  would
answer  to  the  description,  and  there  are  many  legends  of  the
Feinn  localised  about  that  spot.

t  This  is  a  line  of  the  poem  which  follows,  given  as  a  sen-
tence in  a  prose  tale ;  and  other  lines  occur  which  I  have  written
as  poetry  when  1  thought  I  could  recognise  them.

if  Two  well  known  Scotch  mountains.  ^..  -•'■


44  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Diarmaid  gave  a  draw  at  the  slasher  that  Lon  Mac
Liobhaiii*  made,  and  he  put  it  in  under  the  armpit
and  he  killed  the  boar.

This  was  no  revenge  for  Fionn  yet  over  Diar-
maid. There  was  a  mole  on  the  sole  of  the  foot  of
Diarmaid,  and  if  one  of  the  bristles  should  go  into  it,
it  woidd  bring  his  death.

Said  Fionn —
"  Oh  Diarmaid,  measure  the  boar,

How  many  feet  from  his  snout  to  his  heel  ?"

Diarmaid  measured  the  boar.

"  Sixteen  feet  of  measiu'e  true."

"  Measure  the  boar  against  the  hair."

He  measured  the  boar  against  the  hair,  one  of  the
bristles  went  into  the  mole  and  he  fell.

Fionn  took  sorrow  for  liim  when  he  fell.  "  What
would  make  thee  better,  Diarmaid  Ì "

"  If  I  could  get  a  draught  of  water  from  the  palms
of  Fionn  I  would  be  better."

Fionn  went  for  the  water,  and  when  he  thought  on
Grainne  he  would  spill  the  water,  and  Avhen  he  would
think  of  Diarmaid,  he  would  take  sorrow,  and  he  would
take  it  with  liim  ;  but  Diarmaid  was  dead  before  Fionn
returned,  t

They  walked  up  the  side  of  the  burn  till  they  came
to  where  Grainne  was ;  they  went  in  ;  they  saw  two
beds,  and  they  miderstood  that  Diarmaid  was  guiltless.

*  This  sword  maker  is  known  by  this  name  in  the  Isle  of
Man,  and  is  there  called  the  dark  smith  of  Drontheim.

t  In  Dr.  Smith's  Sean  Dana,  page  3  (1787),  is  this  note  on
the  Poem  of  Diarmaid.  "  A  long  dialogue  concerning  Cuach
Fhinn,  or  the  medicinal  cup  of  Fingal,  often  repeated  here,  is  re-
jected as  the  spurious  interpolation  of  some  later  bard.''

The  scene  is  often  laid  on  the  ridge  between  Oban  and  Loch
Awe,  and  I  well  remember  to  have  heard  how  Fionn  held  his


DIARMAID  AXD  GRAINNE,  45.

The  Fein  were  exceedingly  sorroTrful  about  what  had
befallen.     They  burned

Grainne,  daughter  of  Carmaig  of  steeds

That  never  took  a  step  aright,

In  a  faggot  of  grey  oak

This  story  then,  under  a  very  rough  exterior,  em-
bodies the  main  incidents  and  some  hues  of  the  poem
wliich  follows.

The  last  story,  Xo.  LIX.,  got  in  Barra,  started  the
heroine  in  Ireland  This,  got  in  Islay,  starts  her  in
Ireland  and  brmgs  her  through  Ceantire  into  Lorn  and
to  Glen  Elg,  opposite  to  Skye.

The  next,  the  Lay  of  Diarmaid,  got  from  several
people  in  Uist  and  Barra,  seems  to  leave  the  place  of
the  catastrophe  uncertain,  but  Behi-Gulban  is  the
haimt  of  tlie  heroes,  and  Irish  Avriters  say  that  Bein-
Gulban  is  Behi-Boolban  in  Sligo.

In  the  manuscript  histories  of  the  Ai'gyll  family,
Diarmaid's  sons  are  made  to  possess  Carrick.


DIARMAID  AG  US  GRAINNE.

Bha  Fionn  a  dol  a  phosadh  Ghrainne  nighean  righ  Charmaig  an
Eirinn.  Chruinneachadh  maitbibh  agus  mor  uaislean  na  Feinne
thun  na  bainse.  Rinneadh  cuirm  mhor  agus  mhair  a  chuirm  seachd
lathan  agus  seachd  oidhchean,  agus  nur  a  bha  chuirm  seachad  chaidh
an  cuirm  fhe'  dheanadh  do  na  coin.  Bha  Diarmaid  na  dhuine  fior
ghasda  's  bha  ball  seirc  air  aodann  's  bha  e  cumail  a  churraichd

palms  to  Diarmaid  filled  with  water  from  a  spring  which  is  still
shewn,  and  how  a  draught  from  the  hollow  palms  would  have
healed  the  dying  warrior ;  but  Fionn  thought  on  Graidhne  and
opened  his  hands  and  let  the  water  drain  away,  as  he  held  his
hands  to  Diarmaid's  mouth,  and  Diarmaid  died.

J.  F.  C.


4^  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

daonnan  a  nuas  air  a  bhall  sheirc ;  chionn  bean  sam  bith  a  chitheadh
am  ball  seire  bhiodh  i  ann  an  gaol  air.  Chaidh  na  coin  thar  a  cheile
gu  garbb  's  chaidh  gaisgich  na  Feinn'  a'n  cur  o  cheile  agus  nur  a
bha  Diarmaid  a  cur  nan  con  o  cheile  thug  e  togail  air  a  churrachd
's  chunnaic  Grainn'  am  ball  seirc  agus  bha  i  ann  an  trom  f,'haol  air
Diarmaid.  Dh'  innis  i  do  Dhiarmaid  e  's  thuirt  i  ris.  "  Ruithidh
thu  air  falbh  leam."

"  Cha  dean  mi  sin,"  ursa  Diarmaid.

"  Tha  mise  cur  mar  ghuidhe  's  mar  gheasaibh  ort  gun  d'  theid
thu  leam."

"  Cha  d'  theid  mi  leat ;  cha  ghabh  mi  'm  bog  thu,  's  cha  ghabh
mi  'n  cruaidh  thu,  cha  ghabh  mi  muigh  thu,  's  cha  ghabh  mi  stigh
thu,  cha  ghabh  mi  air  each  thu,  's  cha  ghabh  mi  'd  chois  thu,"  ars'
esan.  Agus  dh'  fholbh  e  le  miochiataich,  's  chaidh  do  dh'  aite
leathoireach,  's  chuir  e  suas  tigh  ann,  's  ghabh  e  comhmudh  ann.

Maidinn  a  bha  'n  sin  co  ghlaoidh  san  darusd  ach  Grainne,  "A
bheil  thu  stigh  a  Dhiarmaid?"

«  Tha."

"  Thig  a  mach  's  folbh  leam  a  nis."

"  Nach  d'  thubhairt  mi  riut  cheana  nach  gabhainn  a'  d'  chois  thu,  's
nach  gabhainn  air  each  thu,  nach  gabhainn  a  muigh  thu,  's  nach  gabh-
ainn a  stigh  thu,  's  nach  biodh  gnothach  agam  rint."

Bha  is,  eadar  da  bhith  an  doruisd  air  muinn  boc  goibhre.  "  Cha
n-eil  mi  muigh  cha  n-eil  mi  stigh  ;  cha  n'  eil  mi  m  chois  's  cha  n-eil
mi  air  each,  's  feumaidh  tu  dol  leam,"  ars'  ise.

"  Cha  n'  eil  ait,  an  d'  theid  sin  nach  fhaigh  Fionn  a  mach  sin  nur
a  chuireas  e  lamh  fo  dheud  fhiosach  's  marbhaidh  e  mis'  airson  folbh
leat."

"  Theid  sinn  do  Charraig,  's  tha  do  Charraigean  ann  's  nach  hi  fios
aige  CO  'n  te  sam  bi  sinn."

Chaidh  end  do  Charraig  an  Daimh.

Ghabh  Fionn  fearg  nur  a  mhothaich  e  gun  d'  fholbh  a  bhean,  's
chaidh  e  rurach  air  a  son.  Chaidh  cud  thairis  do  Chintire  's  cha
deach  stad  air  an  cois,  na  fois  air  an  ceum,  gus  an  d'  ranaig  end  Carr-
aig  an  Daimh  an  Cintire  lamh  ri  Cille  Charmaig.

Bha  Diarmaid  na  shaor  math,  's  bhiodh  e  deanadh  shoithichean,  's
aig  iasgach,  's  bhiodh  Grainn'  air  folbh  a  creic  nan  soithichean,  agus
bha  leab  air  leith  aca.

Latha  bha  'n  sin  thanaig  bodach  mor  cragach  an  rathad  ris  an
abradh  eud  Ciofach  Mac  a  Ghoill,  's  shudh  e,  's  bha  e  'g  imirt  air
dinnsirean.  Ghabh  Grainne  taitneachd  de  'n  bhodach.  Dh'  fhan  e
leatha  's  chuir  eud  an  comhairle  ra  cheile  gum  marbhadh  eud  Diar-


DIARMAID  AGUS  GRAINNE.  47

maid.  Bha  Diarmaid  ag  obair  air  soithichean.  Thug  am  bodach
lamh  air,  's  thionndaidh  e  ris  a  bhodach,  's  chaidh  end  an  glacaibh  a
cheile.  Bha  'm  bodach  gu  math  laidir ;  ach  ma  dheireadh  chuir  Diar-
maid fodh'  e.  Rug  ise  air  gearrasgian  's  dhinn  i  ann  am  bunamhas
Dhiarmaid  i.  Dh'  fliag  Diarmaid  eud,  's  bha  e  folbh  o  tholl  gu  toll,
's  gun  air  ach  gun  robh  e  beo,  's  bha  e  air  dol  fo  fliionna  's  fo  fheus-
aig.  Thanaig  e  rathad  na  carraige  's  iasg  leis,  's  dh'  iarr  e  cead  a
rosdadh.  Fhuair  e  gogan  uisg,  amis  an  tumadh  e  mheuran  an  eas  a
bhiodh  e  ga  rosdadh.  Nis  bhiodh  bias  na  meal'  air  ni  sam  bith  da'm
boineadh  Diarmaidh  le  a  mheuran.  Bha  e  tumadh  a  mheuran  anns'
a  ghogan.  Thug  Grainne  criomag  as  an  iasg  's  mhothaich  i  bias  na
meal  'air.  An  dail  Dhiarmaid  thug  Ciofach,  agus  bha  eud  an  glacaibh
a  cheile  car  treis,  ach  ma  dheireadh  mharbh  Diarmaid  Ciofach,  agus
air  folbh  a  ghabh  e,  's  theich  e,  agus  ghabh  e  thairis  air  Loch  a
Chaisteil.

Nur  a  chunnaic  Grainne  gun  robh  Ciofach  marbh  lean  i  Diarmaid,
agus  ma  bhrisdeadh  an  latha  thanaig  i  gus  a  chladach,  agus  bha
corra-chridheach  a  glaodhach.  Bha  Diarmaid  suas  ri  aodann  an  t-
sleibh  agus  ursa  Graidhne.

Gr.  'S  moch  a  ghoireas  a  chorr

Air  an  ton-  as  cionn  Shliabh  Gaoil ;

A  Dhiarmaid  O  Duibhne  da  n  d'  thug  mi  gradh,

De  'm  fath  ma  u  goir  a  chorr?


Dr.  A  Ghrainne,  nighean  Charmaig  nan  steud
Nach  d'  thug  riabh  ceum  air  choir,
Se  'n  t-aobhar  ma  'n  d'  thug  i  'n  glaodh
Gun  do  lean  a  cas  ri  lie  reot.
Gr.  An  itheadh  thu  aran  is  feoil  a  Dhiarmaid.
Dr.  B'  flieumail  air  mi  na  'm  biodh  e  agam.
Gr.  A  laoich  bheir  mise  dhuit  e
Cait  a  bheil  sgian  a  ghearras  i.
Dr.  "  Iarr  an  truaill  's  an  do  chuir  thu  ma  dheireadh  i,"  ursa
Diarmaid.

Bha  'n  sgian  ann  an  Diarmaid  o  'n  chuir  i  ann  i  gus  an  so'  's  cha
b' urrain  e  toirt  as.  Tharruinn  Grainne  as  an  sgian;  agus  's  e 'n
naire  's  motha  ghabh  i  riabh  tarruinn  na  sgian  a  Diarmaid.

Bha  eagal  air  Diarmaid  gum  faigheadh  an  Fheinn  a  mach  eud  's
ghabh  eud  air  an  aghaidh  gu  Gleann  Eilg.  Chaidh  eud  suas  taobh
uillt  an  sin,  's  ghabh  eud  corahnuidh  ann'  's  bha  leab  air  leith  aca.


^8  ,  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.  :

Bha  Diarmaid  a  deanadh  shoithicheann,  's  bha  na  sliseagan  a  bha  e
deanadh  a  dol  sios  leis  an  allt  gus  a  chladach.

Bha  na  Fianntan  a  sealgaireachd  a  chois  a  chladaich,  's  bha  eud
air  toir  tiiirc  nimh'  a  bha  fairsleachadh  orra.  Thug  Fionn  an  aire  do
shliseagan  aig  bun  an  uillt.

"  Se  so,"  urs'  esan  sliseagan  Dhiarmaid.

"  Cha  'n  e  cha  n'  eil  e  beo,"  urs'  eudsan.

"  Gu  dearbh,"  ursa  Fionn,  "  glaodhaich  siiin  foghaid,  "s  aon  ait  'am
bi  e  tha  mionnaichte  ris  gum  feum  e'  freagairt."

Chuala  Diarmaid  an  fhoghaid.  "  Siod  foghaid  nam  Fianntan,
feumaidh  mise  freagairt."

"  Na  freagair  a  Dhiarmaid."

"An  fhoghaid  cha  n'  eil  ann  ach  foghaid  bhreig."

Fhreagair  Diarmaid  an  flioghaid  's  chaidh  e  sios  gus  a  chladach.
Chuireadh  ma  i  hoinneamh  Dhiarmaid  an  tore  a  shealg.  Ruaig  Diar-
maid an  tore  o  Bheinn  Eidinn  gu  Beinn  Tuirc.

A  tan-uinn  leis  an  t-sliabh  fhada,
Bha  bheisd  a  toirt  Dhiarmaid  a  nasgaidh,

Chasadh  e  lanna  cruadhach,
Mar  shiofagan  do  shean  luachair.

Thug  Diarmaid  tarruinn  air  an  Leadarrach  a  reinn  Lon  Mac
Liobhann,  's  chuir  e  stigh  fo  a  asgaill  i,  's  mliarbh  e  n  tore.  Cha  bu
dioghaltas  le  Fionn  so  fhathasd  air  Diarmaid.  Blia  ball  dorain  air
bonn  cois  Dhiarmaid,  's  na  'n  rachadh  h-aon  de  na  cuilg  ann  bheireadh
e  bhas.    Ursa  Fionn,

A  Dhiannaid  tomhais  an  turc,
Co  mhiod  troigh  o  shoe  'ga  shail.

Thomhais  Diarmaid  an  tore.

"  Se  troighe'  deug  de  dli'  fhior  thomhas."

"  Tomhais  an  tore  an  aghaidh  an  fhionna."

Thomhais  e  n  tore  an  aghaidh  an  fhionna,  chaidh  h-aon  de  na
cuilg  's  a  bhall  dorain,  's  thuit  e.  Ghabh  Fionn  duilichinn  nur  a
channaic  e  a  tuiteam ;  urs'  e.  "  De  dheanadh  na  b'  fhearr  thu  Dhiar-
maid ?"  "  Na  'm  faighinn  deoch  uisg'  e  basan  Fhinn  bhithinn  na  b'
fhearr.  Chaidh  Fionn  airson  an  uisge,  's  nur  a  smaointeachadh  e
air  Grainne  dhoirteadh  e  'n  t-uisge,  's  nur  a  smaointeachadh  e  air
Diarmaid  ghabhadh  e  duilchinn  's  bheireadh  e  leis  e.  Ach  bha
Diarmaid  marbh  ma  'n  do  thill  Fionn.  Choisich  eud  suas  taobh  an
uillt  gus  an  d'  thanaig  eud  far  an  robh  Grainne.  Chaidh  eud  a
stigh,  chunnaic  eud  da  leaba,'s  thuigeud  gun  robh  Diarmaid  neochion-
tach.    Bha  'n  Fheinn  anabarrach  duilich  mar  a  thachair.    Loisg  eud


DIARMAID  AGUS  GRAINNE.


49


Graidhne  nighean  Charmaig  nan  steud,
Nach  d'  thug  riabli  ceum  air  choir.
Ann  an  cual  de  ghlasdarach.

The  only  points  in  which  the  tale  and  poem  published  by  Dr.
Smith  agree  are  those  of  the  death  of  Diarmaid.  It  is  so  long
since  I  read  Dr.  Smith's  Sean  Dana  that  I  have  but  a  faint  recol-
lection of  the  poem.  The  tale  would  seem  to  me  to  be  partly  a
parody  on  the  poem.  These  old  people  are  sometimes  confused
in  reciting  these  tales,  probably  much  is  lost,  and  from  confusion
of  memory  some  may  be  altered.  At  times  they  cannot  recite  at
all.  Shaw,  from  whom  I  got  Murchadh  Mac  Brian,  died  a  few
days  ago,  and,  so  far  as  I  can  ascertain,  there  is  none  in  Islay,
Jura  or  Colonsay,  that  can  recite  the  same  tale  now.

H.  MacLean.

Ballygrant,  July  6th,  1859.


From  a  Stone  in  the  Churchyard  of  St.  Vic.eans,  near  Arbroath.
Sculptured  Stones  of  Scotland,  PI.  Ixix.


LXI.
THE  LAY  OF  DIAEMAID.

T  HAVE  already  referred  to  a  note  by  Mrs.  Mac-
-^  Tavisli  on  this  subject,  vol.  ii.  473.  She  tells  bow
she  learned  Dan  an  Dearg  (the  Song  of  the  Eed)  more
than  sixty  years  ago,  from  a  ploughman  who  used  to
chant  it  at  bis  work  :  and  she  adds  : —

"  The  subject  of  the  song  is  Diarmaid  0  Duine,  or
Dearg  as  he  was  sometimes  called.  Diarmid  was,  as  I
daresay  you  know,  the  progenitor  of  the  clan  Campbell,
who  are  called  at  times  Siol  Diarmid,  at  other  times
Clann  Duine.  I  never  heard  who  his  wife  was,  but
she  was  esteemed  a  virtuous  and  worthy  person  ;  yet
she  had  enemies,  who  -wished  to  persuade  her  husband
that  she  did  not  love  him,  and  who  concerted  a  plot  to
prove  her  fidelity.  Diarmid  was  a  great  sportsman,  as
all  Fingahans  were,  and  hunted  wild  boars,  which,  it
Avould  appear,  were  numerous  in  the  Scottish  forests
at  that  period.  The  sport  at  times  proved  fatal  to
those  engaged  in  it.  Pretended  fi'iends  persuaded
Diarmid  to  pretend  that  he  was  killed  by  one  of  these
animals.  They  put  him  on  a  bier,  and  carried  him
home  to  his  wife,  all  bloody,  as  if  he  had  really  suf-
ferred  as  they  said.  She  conducted  herself  with  be-
coming fortitude  and  composure,  ordered  refreshments
for  those  assembled  to  watch  the  remains  of  their  chief,
sat  down  along  with  them,  and  commenced  singing  the
song   which    folloAvs.      It    is    very    touching   in    the


DL\JiMAID  AXD  GRAIDHNE.


51


original.  I!^ever  having  been  favoui-ed  by  the  muses,
I  cannot  do  it  the  justice  which  it  deserv^es,  or  that  I
could  wish.  The  translation  is  as  literal  as  I  can
make  it."*


iiiNlii


Derg    mac  Derg  gur


lipOElE^


mi    do  bhean.      Air      an  fhear     cha


I \-


mm:


A-P-


-a — ja-*—"- 1- ^ — • — »— =iiH


deao-ain  lochd.      Air      an  fhear  cha  dean-ain  lochd.


ee^


^È±


ee;


saoi  nach  d'fhuair  a  dheuchain.S'truas-'h  tba  mii

*     ■"-      #     ^"     ^


d.

1


ad  dheigh  an  nochd.


1


=i=


Derg,  son  of  Derg,  I  am  thy  Avife,
The  husband  whom  I  would  not  hurt,
The  husband  whom  I  would  not  hurt,
There  never  Avas  a  worthy  who  was  not  tried ;
Wretched  am  I  after  thee  this  night.
The  G.ielic  and  music  were  subsequently  got  from  the  same  ladv.


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


Derg,  son  of  Olla  of  the  enlightened  mind,
By  whom  so  softly  the  harp  was  played,
By  whom  so  softly  the  harp  was  played,
Beloved  was  the  hero  who  kept  no  wrath.
Though  Derg  was  laid  low  by  a  hog.


I  see  the  hawk,  I  see  the  hound,

"With  which  my  loved  one  used  to  hunt.

With  Avhich  my  loved  one  used  to  hunt.

And  she  that  loved  the  three

Let  her  be  laid  in  the  grave  -with  Derg.


Then  let  us  rejoice  this  night,
As  we  sit  around  the  corpse  of  a  king.
As  Ave  sit  around  the  corpse  of  a  king
Let  us  be  hospitable  and  liberal,
Thanks  be  to  God  for  every  tiling.


1

Derg  mac  Derg  gur  i  mi  do  bhean  ;

Air  an  f  hear  cha  deanain  lochd.

Cha  n'  eil  saoi  nach  d'  f  huair  a  dheuchain  ;

S"  truagh  tha  mise  ad  dheigh  an  nochd.


Derg  mac  Olla  ckridhe  'n  iuil,

Leis  an  seinte  gu  ciuin  cruit ;

B  ionmhuin  an  Laoch  air  nach  do  luidli  fearg  ;

Ged  do  thorchradli  Derg  le  muic.


DIARMAID  AND  GRAIDHNE.  5^5

3

Chi  mi  n'  t  seabhag  a's  an  cti
Leis  an  deauamli  mo  run  sealg ;
S'  an  neacli  leis  an  ionmhuin  an  truir
Chuirer  i  's  an  uir  le  Derg.

4

Bi  mid  gu  subhach  an  noclid
Sin  uar  suidhe  mu  chorj)  Eigh ;
Bi  mid  gu  furanacb.  fialaidb  ;
Buidheachas  do  Dbia  gacli  ni.

"  Diarinaid,  Avbo  was  never  conquered  in  battle,
was  destroyed  by  stratagem.  Some  one  of  bis  enemies
took  a  bet  with  liini  that  he  could  not  measure  the
length  of  a  boar  that  he  had  killed  by  pacing  its  back
against  the  bristles  -with  his  bare  soles,  which  gave  rise
to  the  saying —

Tomhas  n'  tuirc  n'  aghaidh  n'  f  hrioghain
Measuring  the  boar  against  the  bristles,

when  any  unlikely  thing  is  proposed.  He  gained  liis
bet,  but  it  cost  him  his  life ;  the  boar's  bristles  being
so  strong  that  he  bled  to  death.  This  legend  is  said
to  be  the  origin  of  the  boar's  head  being  the  crest  of
the  principal  families  of  tlie  Campbells.

Mary  MacTavish,  November  1859."

The  clan  MacTavish  are  a  branch  of  the  Camp-
bells, and  this  lady,  in  relating  a  legend  of  her  OAvn
family,  tells  it  as  I  have  heard  it  repeatedly  told,  with
variations,  by  peasants  and  fishermen,  who  firmly  be-
lieved in  their  own  descent  from  Diarmaid  0'  Duiblin,
and  in  the  truth  of  this  legend.

The  Lay  of  Diarmaid  is  quoted  p.  117,  and  men-


54  """EST  HIGflLAND  TALES.

tioned  iu  several  places  in  the  report  of  tlie  Highland
Society  on  the  poems  of  Ossian,  1805.  The  version
given  below,  though  it  resembles  those  which  I  have
seen  in  books  in  some  respects,  difiers  from  them  all  so
as  to  make  it  evident  that  it  is  taken  from  none.  I
have  no  doubt  that  it  is  purely  traditional

I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  there  Avas  a  real
Diarmaid,  in  Avhose  honour  poems  have  been  composed
by  many  bards,  and  sung  by  generations  of  Scotch
Highlanders,  and  that  to  him  the  adventures  of  some
mythical  Celtic  Diarmaid  have  been  attributed,  in  the
same  way  tliat  the  mythical  story  of  the  apple  has  been
ascribed  to  William  Tell.

Be  that  as  it  may,  the  Lay  of  Diarmaid  can  be
traced  for  a  period  of  300  years,  and  its  story  is  known
amongst  the  whole  Celtic  population  from  the  south
of  Ireland  to  the  north  of  Scotland.


The  Story  of  the  Lay  of  Diarmaid.*
No.  1.
PiONN  never  was  a  king  ;  it  Avas  Breean,   his  father's
brother,   Avho  was  king  over  the  fifth  which  the  Een
had  of  Eirinn,   and  Fionn  he  Avas  Fla,   the  chief  of
the  Feene,  and  it  was  Osgar  who  was  chief  of  the  men.

It  is  Djeearmaid  who  was  the  man  of  the  best  head
that  Avas  in  the  Een  altogether,  and  no  arm  at  all
could  make  an  impression  ujjon  him.  There  Avas
Ball  dorain  (a  mole,  an  otter-mark)  in  his  right  heel ;
and  he  could  not  be  killed  unless  a  spike  should  go
into  liis  heel  in  the  mole.

Graine,  the  Avife  of  Een,  saw  the  Ball  Seirc
(beauty  spot)  that  was  on  Djeearmaid,  and  she  took
love  for  him,  and  he  fled  before  her,  but  she  folloAved

*  In  tliis  I  have  tried  to  spell  the  sound  of  the  names.


DIARMAID  AND  GRAIDHNE.  55

liim;  and  tliey  were  dwelling  in  a  cave.  Djeearmaid
would  not  approach  her,  and  he  used  to  pnt  a  symbol
before  the  door,  a  quarter  of  a  slaughtered  animal
on  a  stake  ;  and  Fionn,  when  he  saw  the  sign,  was
satisfied ;  but  on  a  day  the  sign  was  changed.  A
ciuthach*  came  into  the  cave,  and  Djeearmaid  killed
him  with  a  spear,  for  Graine  was  unfaithful  even  to
her  lover.

There  was  an  old  woman  there  A\-hom  they  used  to
call  Mala  Llee  (gray  eyebrow),  and  she  had  a  herd  of
swine,  and  she  had  a  venomous  boar  for  guarding  the
pigs.  There  was  no  being  that  went  to  hunt  this  boar
that  came  back  alive.  So  it  was  that  Fionn  thought
to  send  Djeearmaid  to  himt  him,  to  put  an  end  to  him.

WTien  Djeearmaid  gave  out  the  shout  of  death,
said  Fionn  to  Graine —

"  Is  that  the  hardest  shriek  to  thy  mind  that  thou
hast  ever  heard  1 "

"  It  is  not,"  said  she,  "  but  the  shriek  of  the  ciuth-
ach, when  Djeearmaid  killed  him."

"  Ye  Gods  !  that  Djeearmaid  were  alive,"  said  Fionn.

From  Janet  Currie,  Stonybridge,  September  14,
1860. — H.  MacL. — Part  is  altered  and  omitted  in  the
translation,  and  the  Gaelic  is  not  given,  because  there  is
nothing  peculiar  in  the  language.  The  legend  is  remark-
able as  containing  incidents  common  to  the  story  pub-
lished bytheOssianicSociety  of  Dublin  in  1855. — J.F.C.

No.  2.
When  the  Fhinn  used  to  go  to  hunt,  one  of  them
used  always  to  stay  at  home  to  watch  the  women.  It
fell  upon  Diarmaid  on  that  day  that  it  was  he  who
*  Pr.  kewach,  described  in  the  Long  Island  as  naked  wild  men
living  in  caves,  supposed  to  be  derived  from  "  ciuth,  long  hair
behind,"  which  word  is  applied  in  Islay  to  a  pigtail.  French,  queue.


$6  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

should  stay.  There  was  a  thing  which  they  used  to  call
SuGH  Seiko  (love  juice),  a  kind  of  mark  in  the  face  of
the  man,  and  there  was  a  helmet  upon  him  that  must
not  be  raised,  for  there  Avas  no  woman  Avho  might  see
the  sugh  seirc  that  would  not  fall  in  love  with  him,
and  Diarmaid  knew  that  these  gifts  were  in  himself.
On  the  day  that  he  stayed  at  home  he  thought  that  no
being  was  seeing  him,  and  he  gave  a  lift  to  the  helmet ;
and  Graidhne,  the  daughter  of  the  King  of  Coig  Ullainn,
sees  the  face  of  Diarmaid.  The  warm  soul  would
not  be  in  her  unless  she  should  go  with  Diarmaid.

Said  Diarmaid,  "  That  will  not  answer  for  me  to
go  with  thee."

"  0  !  we  will  go,  or  else  I  w^ill  tear  my  clothes,  and
I  will  give  thee  up  to  Fionn."

"  I  have  no  doubt  of  thee  but  that  he  will  believe
thee,  because  thou  art  his  own  beloved  wdfe  indeed."

They  went  away,  and  they  travelled  together  days
and  tliree  nights.  They  were  crossing  a  river,  and  a
little  trout  rose  and  struck  her,  and  she  said —

"  Thou  art  bolder  than  Diarmaid.  If  thou  couklst
go  on  shore!"  ......

"  Now,"  said  he,  "  Fionn  has  come  home,  and  they
will  not  find  us  within,  then  they  will  come  on  our
tracks,  and  they  will  get  us."

"  They  wall  not  get  us,"  said  she.  "  Wliether  they
get  us,  or  get  us  not,  we  will  try  to  hide  ourselves.
The  thing  that  we  will  do  is  this,  we  will  go  up  to
this  Avood  up  here,  and  the  branches  and  leaves  of  the
trees  will  hide  us."

They  rose  up  into  the  tree,  and  they  went  into  the
heart  of  the  tree,  and  they  drew  the  branches  and
leaves  of  the  tree  about  them.

The  Fhinn  came  to  their  house,  and  they  did  not
find  Diarmaid  or  Graidhne  at  the  house.


DIAEMAID  zVXD  GRAIDHXE.  57

"  Here,  liere  !  lads,"  said  Fionn,  "  I  am  withoTit  a
wife,  and  the  Fhinn  without  Diarmaid.  We  ought  to
go  till  we  find  them."

They  weut  on  their  search,  and  they  went  over  the
same  river.     A^^len  they  went  over,  said  Fionn —

"  We  have  now  been  a  while  walking,  and  since
we  have  we  "will  breathe  a  little  at  the  root  of  this  tree
up  here."

They  took  the  advice  of  Fionn,  and  they  sat  at  the
foot  of  the  tree."

Said  Fionn — "We  should  turn  to  playing,  lads."

"  We  are  ^villing,"  said  they.

Fionn  and  Osgar  used  to  be  the  two  leaders  of  the
game.  It  was  Diarmaid  who  used  always  to  be  along
with  Fionn.  Fionn  knew  that  Diarmaid  had  magic
gifts  at  games.  ]N"ow  there  was  Osgar,  and  he  needed
a  mau  to  be  with  him,  and  it  was  his  own  father  who
used  to  be  with  him.  They  began  at  the  games.
Every  game  that  was  going,  it  was  against  Fionn  that
it  went,  and  Osgar  was  winning.  They  drove  three
games.

Said  Fionn — "  I  am  missing  Djeearmaid  hea^dly  ;
for  it  was  seldom  that  a  game  went  against  me  when
Diarmaid  was  with  me  ;  but  they  are  now  going
against  me  since  he  parted  from  me  ;  but  I  will  go
against  thee  another  time."

Diarmaid  was  listening.  He  went  and  he  put  his
hand  against  his  right  side, — thus ; — and  he  caught  hold
of  one  of  the  red  rowan  berries  that  were  on  the  tree,
and  he  let  it  fall  down  beside  the  tree,  and  the  back
of  Fionn  was  against  the  tree.  He  noticed  something
striking  him  on  the  back,  and  put  his  hand  behind
him,  and  he  caught  the  rowan  berry,  and  he  put  it
into  his  pouch.  They  began  at  the  game,  and  this
game  went  with  Fionn.


5»  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  One  is  with  me,"  said  Fionn.

"  It  is,"  said  Osgar  ;  "  but  two  are  wanting."

"  Wilt  thou  go  into  it  any  more  1 "  said  Osgar.

"  I  will  go,  I  will  go,"  said  Fionn  ;  "try  it  again."

Diarmaid  let  down  the  next  rowan  berry,  and
Fionn  won  this  one.

"  Wilt  thou  go  into  it  any  more  ]"  said  he.

"  I  will  go,"  said  Osgar.  "  If  thou  hast  tvt'o,  there
is  one  wanting."

Diarmaid  let  down  the  third  one,  and  Fionn  won
the  third  one.

"  We  are  now,"  said  Osgar,  "  even  and  even  ;  all
I  won  thou  thyself  hast  taken  it  back  again."

'•'  Wilt  thou  go  into  it  any  more  V  said  Fionn.

"  I  will  go,"  said  Osgar  ;  "  we  shall  have  know-
ledge of  its  good  or  evil  at  this  time."

They  went  at  it,  and  Diarmaid  let  down  the  fourth
one,  and  Fionn  Avon.

"  Howsoever,  it  was  whilst  thou  wert  without
Diarmaid  on  thy  side  I  was  winning.  Howsoever  the
matter  may  be,  there  were  matters  that  belong  to
Diarmaid  about  thee  this  day  before  thou  hast  won  the
fourth  time."

Said  Oisean — "  My  father  did  not  drive  (the  game)
against  us  with  right,  my  son,  at  all."

"  I  did  drive  it,"  said  Fionn.

"  Thou  did'st  not,"  said  Oisean.

"  I  did  ;  as  a  proof  that  I  did  there  are  four  rowan
berries  in  my  pouch  opposite  to  (for)  every  game  that
I  won."

He  took  out  the  four  rowan  berries,  and  when  he
took  them  out  he  said —

"  Come  down  from  that,  Diarmaid,  thyself  and
Graidhne,  daughter  of  the  King  of  Coig-Ullainn,  for  ye
are  there  together."


DIARMAID  AND  GRAIDHNE.  59

Diarmaid  and  Graidhne  came  down ;  the  party
was  made  anew,  and  Fionn  and  Osgar  fell  out.  The
arms  began,  and  the  skaith  began,  and  they  were  doing
much  harm  to  each  other.  The  other  part  of  the
Fhinn  were  seeing  that  Osgar  was  like  to  win  against
the  side  of  his  grandfather.

Said  Goll  Mac  Morna — "  Though  we  had  no  part  in
the  discord  we  should  make  a  redding,  and  an  umph'e's
parting,  between  the  children  of  Treun  ]Mhor."

Said  Conan — "  Let  the  Clann  Baoisge  hack  each
other's  bodies."

Then  Fionn  said  to  Osgar  to  stay  the  arms,  in  case
the  Clanna  Morna  should  still  be  after  them  in  Alba.
Fionn  took  notice  of  Diarmaid,  and  he  said —
My  frame,  and  my  hand,  and  mine  eye,
Ai-e  longing  to  do  honour  to  thee.
Oh  !  Dhiarmaid  0  Duibhne,  brave  man,
(xoing  ATÌth  my  consort  in  secret !

There  was  a  woman  avIio  was  called  Mala  Lith,
and  she  had  a  herd  of  swine,  and  there  was  a  venomous
boar  at  their  head,  and  many  a  good  lad  went  to  hunt
him  that  never  came  whole  from  the  boar.

Said  Fionn  to  Diarmaid — "  Go  to  hunt  the  boar
of  Mala  Lith  on  her  herd  of  swine.  Many  a  one  went
there  that  did  not  come  out  of  the  burn  besides  a
trout."     Diarmaid  went  to  hunt  the  boar.

H.  IMacLean.

The  Gaelic  follows  at  page  78.

These  two  stories  and  the  following  poem  give  the
relationships  of  the  chiefs  of  that  band  of  warriors  whose
exploits  form  the  subject  of  all  that  class  of  old  Celtic
poetry  which  is  attributed  to  Oisean,  Osin  or  Ossian,
and  is  called  Fingalian  in  English,  and  Fenian  in  Ixe-
land     This  is  the  familv  tree  as  here  set  forth  : —


6o  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Trbunmhor  (great,  mighty),  who  gives  his  name  to
the  tribe,  the  children  of  Treunmlior,  or  the  clan  of  the
Baoisge  (flashes  of  light,  coruscations,  gleams).

CuMHAL  (s]3elt  Cooal  in  Manx),  only  mentioned  as
the  father  of  Fionn.  He  is  sometimes  called  Mac-
Dhughil  (Macdugald),  or  the  son  of  black  and  white
Brian  the  king,  brother  of  Fionn's  father,  who  seldom
does  anything.

FiONN  MacChumail  (fair),  flath  na  Finne  (chief  of
the  Finne),  married  to  Graidhne,  daughter  of  the  king
of  the  fifth  of  Ullan.

OiSEAN,  the  last  of  the  Finne,  son  of  Fionn,  who
afterwards  sings  the  departed  glories  of  Iris  race  as  a
blind  old  man  in  poverty  and  wretchedness.

OsGAR,  his  son,  Flath  nam  Fear,  chief  of  men.

DoNN,  brown,  Avho  gives  his  name  to  a  tribe,  clan

0  Duibhne.

A  Sister  of  Fionn,  wdfe  of  King  0  Dhuine,  mother
of  DiARMAiD  0  Dhubhine,  the  Expert  Shield,  the  best
head  in  the  Finne,  whom  all  family  histories  and  oral
traditions  call  the  ancestor  of  the  Campbells,  but  whom

1  strongly  suspect  to  be  a  Celtic  divinity,  whose  attri-
butes have  been  ascribed  to  their  ancestor  by  a  Celtic
tribe.

GoLL  Mac  Morna,  who  is  only  mentioned  here  as
an  umpire  in  the  strife,  but  who  is  a  very  well  known
character  in  other  poems,  and  is  said  to  have  been  a
god  in  Ireland.

Conan,  who  only  appears  to  utter  a  bitter  taunt,
and  thereby  supports  the  character  always  assigned  to
him.     Maol,  the  blunt,  cropped,  or  bald.

The  Finne,  who  are  not  here  named  in  detail,  but
are  always  introduced  into  every  poem  or  story  in  which
the  rest  of  these  characters  are  named.  Besides  these
there  are —


DIARMAID  AND  GRAIDHNE.  01

Mala  Lith,  an  old  woman,  who  has  a  magical
white  boar  with  a  spike  of  venom  in  his  back,  invul-
nerable to  all  arms  but  the  arms  of  Diarmaid.

There  is  a  trout  which  Graidhne  wishes  to  come  on
shore.

A  savage  who  comes  to  the  cave  where  Graidline
is,  and  who  is  killed  by  Diarmaid,  to  whom  the  faith-
less Graidline  is  unfaithful.

There  is  the  rowan  tree,  which  is  magical,  and
whose  berries  are  amulets  to  this  day ;  and  nearly  all
this  is  common  to  Irish  stories,  as  published  in  1855.

The  scene  is  vague,  and  might  be  anywhere  in
Alba.  It  is  commonly  laid  near  Oban,  in  Lome,  but
BeLu  Gulbein  is  the  favourite  haimt  of  these  warriors,
and  it  is  generally  placed  in  Ireland,  and  is  said  to  be
in  Sligo,  and  Diarmaid  turns  his  dying  face  towards
Bein  Gidban,  wherever  it  may  be.

This  subject  is  referred  to  elsewhere  ;  but  let  me
here  point  out  that  the  "  Feene"  are  the  children  of
beams  of  light,  "Baoisge;"  of  Great  Mighty,  their
great  ancestor,  and  their  chief  is  Fair,  the  son  of  Cooal,
or  it  may  be  of  black  and  white,  light  and  darkness.
That  Djeearmaid  might  be  translated  "  the  armed  god,"
who  had  yellow  hair.  That  their  standard  was  called
the  sunbeam,  and  that  in  the  following  short  poem
we  have  similar  incidents  to  the  loves  of  Venus  and
Adonis,  the  death  of  Acliilles,  etc.,  and  that  all  this
points  rather  to  mjiihology  than  to  a  single  historical
incident  connected  with  the  disbanding  of  an  Irish
militia.

It  is  worth  remarlv  that  the  poem  alludes  to  several
well  known  adventures  wliich  are  now  told  as  stories,
wliich  may  have  been  poems  or  distorted  facts.

The  rowan  tree  dwelling,  verse  21,  is  No.  xxix.  in
vol  ii.  p.  73,  or  ISTo.   xxxvi.   p.    168.     I  forget  which


62  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

story  goes  by  the  name.  Who  White  Tooth  may  be  I
do  not  know,  but  Diarmaid  had  a  son  so  called.

As  to  the  date  of  the  poem  and  its  origin.  There
seems  every  reason  to  believe  that  it  is  old,  and  that  it
has  been  orally  transmitted  for  centuries  from  genera-
tion to  generation,  in  the  islands  of  Scotland,  wherever
it  was  composed.

A  version  of  it,  got  in  Kintp'e  or  on  Lochawe-side,
was  printed  by  John  Smith,  D.D.,  minister  of  the  gos-
pel at  Campbelton,  1787,  p.  99.  That  version  is
avowedly  pruned  and  polished.

It  is  printed  wdthout  division  into  stanzas,  but  the
rhythm  here  and  there  appears  to  indicate  that  such  was
the  original  form  of  the  poem.

That  which  is  now  printed  is  so  divided  by  me,
because  the  rhythm  generally  accords,  and  the  "  asson-
ance" and  sense  all  point  to  separate  verses,  each  com-
plete in  itself,  and  tit  for  singing  to  music,  as  these  old
songs  are  in  fact  sung  at  this  day.  Similar  Irish  poems
are  so  divided.

Several  of  the  lines  are  nearly  the  same  in  Dr.
Smith's  version  and  in  this  which  is  collected  from
the  people  eighty-four  years  later.

The  story  in  the  "  Sean  Dana"  is  clearly  the  same,
though  the  magic  is  avowedly  weeded  from  the  origi-
nal, and  GJraidhne  is  the  faithful  wife  of  Diarmaid,  not
the  faithless  w^ife  of  his  uncle  Fionn.

There  is  another  version  much  older,  in  a  MS.
now  in  course  of  publication,  which  dates  from  1539.

One  specimen  page  has  been  shewn  to  me,  and  it
contains  one  stanza  and  several  lines  almost  the  same
as  part  of  this  "  Lay  of  Diarmaid."  It  is  quite  certain,
then,  that  this  old  song  has  been  preserved  more  or
less  perfectly  by  oral  tradition  in  Scotland  amongst
people  Avho  can  neither  read  nor  write,  for  at  least  330


DIARMAID  AND  GRAIDHXE.  63

years,  and  it  gives  a  standard  by  wliich  to  form  an
opinion  of  popular  tradition  as  an  aid  to  written
history.

"The  pursuit  of  Diarmaid  and  Grainne"  fills  the
greater  part  of  vol.  iii.  of  the  Transactions  of  the  Dublin
Ossianic  Society,  170  pages;  and  a  glance  at  the  story  as
there  told  will  shew  that  it  is  founded  on  the  same
widely  spread  tradition,  which,  as  I  imagine,  is  not  a
tradition  of  any  one  real  event  which  happened  at  any
given  time  anywhere  ;  but  a  chapter  in  the  mythology
of  the  Pagan  world,  which  may  be  traced  far  and  wide
in  various  forms.

Of  the  following  poem,  founded  on  this  legend,
the  collector  MacLean  says  :

"  This  Laoidh  Dhiarniaid  is  one  of  the  most  popular
of  the  Ossianic  pieces  recited  in  the  Long  Island,  and  is
known  to  more  individuals  than  any  other.  In  South
Uist  I  heard  it  recited  by  Angus  M'Donald,  Janet
Currie,  Allan  M'Phie,  and  some  others;  in  Barra  by
Alexander  M'Donald,  and  Donald  M'Phie  (smith),
Breubhaig ;  also  by  a  man  in  Miuglay.  The  best
reciter  of  this  and  other  Ossianic  pieces,  that  I  have
met  with,  is  Donald  M'Phie.  This  M'Phie  says  he
learnt  the  poem  from  Neill  M'limes,  Gill  Bliarraidh,
who  died  about  twenty  years  ago,  about  sixty  years  of
age.  M'Innes  could  neither  read  nor  write.  M'Donald
says  he  learnt  it  from  his  mother,  Marion  Galbraith ;
and  traces  it  up  for  six  generations  to  a  maternal
ancestor  of  his,  who  came  from  Kintyre.  Janet  Currie
traces  it  to  ISTeill  Currie,  her  ancestor,  who  was  Clan-
ronald's  poet.  Hector  MacLean."

For  valid  reasons,  I  have  not  given  the  Gaelic
of  all  the  prose  stories,  or  the  whole  of  them,  or  the
whole  of  those  of  which  I  translate  a  part.     J.  F.  C.


04  west  highland  tales.

The  Lay  of  Yeearmaid.
No.  3.

I  have  tried  to  spell  the  names  so  as  to  convey  some  idea  of  th
sound  of  the  Gaelic  words  to  English  minds.— J.  F.  C.

1.

Hearken  a  space  if  you  Avish  a  lay
Of  the  tribe  that  from  us  are  gone,
Of  MacCooal  and  of  the  Feen,
And  of  the  prince  there's  a  woeful  song.

2.
Going  to  Vein  Goolban  to  himt
The  boar  that  the  weak  arms  cannot  wound,
That  venomous  boar,  and  he  so  fierce
That  Gray  eyebrows  had  with  her  herd  of  SAvine.

3.

Graine.
"  Oh  Yeearmaid  slip  not  the  hounds,
And  trust  not  but  this  is  a  party  of  guile.
For  it  is  hard  to  withstand  MacCooal,
And  he  is  in  sorroAv  deprived  of  a  wife."

4.
Djeearmaid.
"  0  Graine  wilt  thou  not  keep  still.
And  for  thy  first  love  earn  not  shame,
I  would  not  let  slip  my  share  of  the  hunt,
For  all  the  wrath  of  the  men  of  the  Feene."

5.

Graine.
"  Son  of  0  Duine,  valiant  chief,
Since  exploits  were  done  through  thee.
Be  thou  mindful  of  thy  hand.
Here  is  the  death  to  be  shunned  by  thee."


laoidh  dhiarmaid.  65

Laoidh  Dhiarmaid.

The  MS.  came  to  me  without  division  into  verses.  1  have  so
divided  it,  being  nearly  certain  that  I  am  right.  The  people  talk
of  "  ceathrannan,"  quatrains,  and  the  metre  is  clear,  and  fits  the
music. — J.  F.  C.

1
Eisdibh  beag  ma'  's  aill  leibli  laokUi,
Air  a'  mhuimitir  a  dli'  I'halbli  iiainn ;
Air  MacChumhail,  's  air  an  Fhinn,
'S  air  mac  an  righ,  gii  'm  blieil  sgial  truagli.

2
Dol  a  Blieinn  Gliulbann  a  shealg,
An  tnirc  nacli  dearg  na  h-airm  chli;'
'S  e  'n  tore  nimhe,  's  e  ro  gharg/
Bh'  aig  Mala  liath''  aig  sealbli  mliuc.
3
Graidhxe.
"  A  Dhiarmaid  na  leig  na  gadbair
'S  na  creid  nach  i  'n  fbaghaid  bhreige ;  ^
'S  gur  deacair  cur  ri  Mac  Chmnbail
A  's  cnmba  leis  'bhith  gun  cheile."
4

DiARMAID.

"  A  Ghraidhne  nach  fuirich  tbu  sambach
'S  na  coisinn  naire  dbo  d'  cbeud-gbaol ;
Cha  leiginn-sa  mo  chuid  de  'n  t-seilg
Air  son  feirge  fir  na  Finne."

5
Graidhne.
"  A  mbic  0  Duibhne,  a  fhlaith  threin/
Nis  o  rinneadh  euchdan'  leat
Bi-sa  cuimbneacb  air  do  laimh;
Sec  an  t-eug  o  'n  tearnar  leat."'


66  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

6.

The  monster  awakened  out  of  the  sleep,
She  went  round  about  the  glen,
And  when  she  heard  the  din  of  the  Feean,
East  and  west  she  turned  her  head.

7.
The  well  Skilled  Shield  Avithstood  her  then,
And  the  spear  went  into  the  belly  of  the  hoar,
It  broke  in  the  midst  of  the  shaft  again.
And  the  toughest  head  was  upon  the  hog.


The  ancient  blade  was  drawn  from  sheath.
With  which  each  battlefield  was  won.
The  son  of  king  Guyne  slew  the  beast.
And  he  withdrew  himself  whole  again.


"We  sent  the  white  hog  to  Leodrum,
And  wishfvil  we  were  to  go  to  spoil.  («)


10.

The  fairy  glen  and  the  glen  by  its  side,
Where  used  to  be  voice  of  hero  and  bird.
Where  was  the  hoarse  sound  of  the  Feean
Upon  the  mountain  after  their  hounds.

11.

But  anger  settled  on  Finn  of  the  Feean,

And  he  sat  moodily  on  the  mound.

About  Mac  0  Duine  of  the  mighty  arms.

It  -was  torture  that  he  came  whole  from  the  boar.


LAOIDH  DHLARMAID.  67

6

Dhiiisg  an  ulla-blieist'  as  an  t-suain;
Chaidh  i  mu  chuairt  air  a'  glileann,
'S  nuair  cliual  i  farum  nam  Fiann
Thug  i  'n  ear  's  an  iar  a  ceann.

7
Chaidh  an  sgiath  urla"  'na  dail
'S  chaidh  an  t-sleagh  an  tar ''  an  tuii'c  ;
Bhrisd  i  eadar"'  an  crann  a  ris
'S  hha  'n  ceann  bu  righn'  air  a'  mhuic.

8
Thairneadh  an  t-seann  lann  a  truaill
Leis  am  buinichte  buaidh  gach  blair ;
Mharbh  mac  righ  Dhuibhn'  a'  bheist ;
Thiarainn'^  e  fhin  'na  dèigh  slan.

9
"  Chiiir  sinn  a'  mliuc  bhàn  do  Leodrum
'S  bu  deonach  sinn  a  dhol  a  'reubadh ;


10
An  gleann  sith,  'san  gleann  ri  'thaobh,
Far  am  biodh  guth  laoich  a's  loin ;
Far  am  biodh  torman  nam  Fiann
Air  an  t-shabh  an  deigh  nan  con.

11
Gu  'n  d'  luidli  sprochd  air  Fionn  nam  Fiann,
'S  shuidh  e  gu  cian  air  a'  chnoc/^
Mu  mhac  0  Duibhne  nan  arm  aidh
Bu  chràiteach  leis  ti^hinn  slan  o  'n  tore.


68  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

12.

After  lie  liad  been  silent  a  Avliile

He  spoke,  and  it  was  ill  to  say,

"  Oh  Yeearmaid,  measure  the  boar.

How  many  feet  from  his  snout  to  bis  tail?'

13.
Djeearmatd.
"  Let  us  take  thy  counsel,  Een,
Since  it  was  grievous  coming  from  home  ;"
He  measured  tbe  boar  on  his  back,
King  Guyne's  son  of  the  rounded  foot.

14.

"  Fifteen  feet  of  the  measure  good
Are  in  the  back  of  the  wild  swine  ;"  (b)


15.

FlUK.

"  That  is  not  his  measure  at  all,

Measure  him  again,  Oh  Yeearmaid.

Against  his  bristles  measure  him.

And  thou  get'st  each  jewel  (c)  of  a  warrior  i)roud"

IG.
"  Oh,  Yeearmaid,  measure  again,
Softly  against  (the  hair)  the  boar,
And  thou  shalt  get  thy  prayer  from  the  khig,
Thy  choice  of  the  tough  keen  spears."

17.

He  rose,  and  that  was  no  journey  of  jo}',
And,  as  he  measured  the  boar  for  them.
The  venomous  spike  of  agony  pierced
The  heel  of  the  hero  not  mild  in  strife.


L.Ì.OIDH  DHIARMAID.  69

12

A  chionn  e  bliith  treis  'na  thosd'°
Labhair  e,  's  gu'ra  b'  olc  ri  'radh,
"  A  Dhiarmaid  tomhais  an  tore
Co  mhiad  troidli  0  'sboc  g'a  earr."

13

DiARMAID.

"  Gal)liam-sa  do  chomhaiii'  Fliinn

O  b'  aitbreach  leinn  tigb'n  o'n  taigh."

Thomhais  en  tore  air  a  dbriom  ;

Mac  rigli  Dliuibbn'  a  bu  cbruinn  troidb/'

14
"  Coig  troidhe  deug  d'en  deagh  tbomhas
Ann  an  driom  na  muiee  fiadhain."  '*


15

FlONN.

"  Clia'n  e  sin  idir  a  tbomhas
Tombais  e  ritbis  a  Dbiarmaid.
Tomhais  e'n  aghaidh  a'  ehuilg,
'S  gheibh  thu  'laoicb  bhuirb  gaeh  send.

IG
"  A  Dhiarmaid  tomhais  a  ri?.,
'Na  aghaidh,  gu  min,  an  tore,
'8  gheibh  thu  t'  achanaieb  o'n  righ, —
Eogba  nan  sleagb  ruigbinn  goirt.'"

17
Dh'  eirieb,  's  cha  b'e  'n  turas  aidh,
'S  gu  'n  do  thomhais  e  dhaibh  an  tore ;
Chaidh  am  bior  nirab  'bu  mhor  cradh,
An  sail  an  laoicb  nach  tlatb  'san  tvod.'°


70  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

18.

Djeearmaid.
"  Give  a  draught  from  thy  palms,  Oh  Een,
Son  of  my  king  for  my  succoiir,
For  my  life  and  my  dwelling."

FlUN.

"  Ochon  !  Oh  king  it  is  I  that  will  not."

19.

"  I  will  not  give  to  thee  a  draught,
And  neither  shall  it  quench  thy  thirst,
And  never  hast  thou  done  me  good,
That  thou  hast  not  helped  my  ruin."

20.
Djeearmaid.
"  I  have  never  done  ill  to  thee,
Hither  nor  thither,  nor  east  nor  west ;
But  travelling  with  Graine  in  a  yoke.
While  she  planned  to  bring  me  imder  spells.

21.

"  In  the  rowan  tree  dwelling,  and  thou  in  straits.

Bold  was  I  for  thy  succour  ;

At  the  time  when  death  Avas  upon  thee,

It  was  I  that  went  joyously  to  thee.

22.

"Een,  'tis  to  thee  that  my  succour  was  good ;
Hast  mind  of  the  day  of  the  combat  of  Conal  ?
The  Cairbre  and  his  tribe  was  before  thee,
And  I  was  behind  thee  to  help  thee.

23.
"  How  wretched  my  face  towards  Bein  Goolban  !
On  another  day  was  I  good  for  thee  ;
Wlien  the  white  tooth  was  hittiug  thee,
I  turned  upon  her  from  behind  thee.


LAOIDH  UHIARIIAID.  7  I

18
DiARMAID.

"  Thoir  deoch  bhar  do  bliasan,  Fliinn,
"'A  mliic  mo  rigli,  gus  mo  chobhair,
"'Air  son  mo  bliidli  agus  m'  aodaich."

FlONN.

"  Oclion,  a  righ,  's  mi  nacli  d'  thobhair."

19
"  Cha  d'  thoir  mise  dhuitse  deoch,
'S  cha  mho  a  chaisgeas  dlie  t'  iota  ;
'S  cha  d'  rinn  thu  riamh  dho  m'  leas
Nach  do  leasaich  tliu  dho  m'  aimhleas."

20

DlARMAID.^^

"Cha  do  rinn  mis'  ortsa  cron
Thall,  na  bhos,  an  ear,  na  'n  iar ;
Ach  imeachd  le  Graidlin'  ann  am  braid;
'S  i  tur  gam  thobhairt  fo  gheasaibli.

21

"'S  a'  Bhrnigliin  chaorainn,  's  tu  nad'  chàs,

Bu  dana  mise  gad'  chobhair;

'S  nuair  a  bha  'n  t-eng  air  do  mhuin

'S  mis'  a  chaidli  thugad  le  mcodhail.

22

"  Fhinn  's  ann  duit  bu  mhath  mo  chobhaii- ;
An  cuimlineach  leat  latha  cath  Clionaill?
Bha  'n  Cairbre  romhad  's  a  mhuinntirl
'S  bha  ]nis'  as  do  dheigh  gad'  chobhair  I

23
"  'S  gur  truagh  m'  aghaidh  ri  Beinn  Ghulbann !
Lath'  eile  bu  mhath  dhuit  mi
Nuair  a  bha  'n  Deud-gheal  gad'  bhualadh ;
Thionndaidh  mi  orr'  as  do  dheaghaiiin,


7  2  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

24.

"  And  I  succoured  thee  in  that  time  !
If  the  women  of  the  Feene  sliould  hear
That  I  was  wounded  on  this  ridge,
Dejected  would  be  their  faces.

25.
"  How  wretched  my  face  towards  Bein  Goolban  l{d)


26.
"  How  wretched  my  face  towards  Bern  Goolban
As  I  pour  in  a  flood  forth  my  vigour ;
And  though  I  be  the  son  of  0  Duine,
Farewell  be  to  courting  for  ever."

27.
There  Avas  Djeearmaid  on  the  hillock,
Heavy  the  hair  was  and  fine,
And  he  ever  losing  the  (life)  blood
From  the  wound  of  the  spike  in  his  sole.

28.

FlUN.

"  Poor  is  the  counsel  that  grew  witli  me
To  slay  the  son  of  my  sister ;
For  Graine  that  ill  of  a  woman
That  never  again  will  make  my  joy.

29.
"  That  is  great  the  loss  on  the  hillock.
For  the  price  of  the  wild  swine,
Graine  king's  daughter  of  Coig  Ullain,
Djeearmaid  and  the  two  hare  hounds.


LAOIDH  DHIARMAID.  73

24

"  'S  cliobliair  mi  ort  aims  an  uair  sin !
Na  'n  cluinneadh  mnathan  ua  Finne
Mis'  a  bhith  leoiit'  air  an  clriom  seo,
Bu  tursach  a  bliicxUi  an  adhart !

25

"  'S  gur  truagh  ni'  aghaicUi  ri  Beinn  Ghnlbann !


2G
"  Gut  truagh  ni'  agbaicUi  ri  Beinn  Ghulbann
'S  mi  air  tuil-bhruchdadh  mo  nearta  !
'S  gad  a  's  mise  mac  0  Duibhne ;
Soraidh  leis  an  t-suiridh  am  feasda  ! "

27
Gu  robli  Diarmaid,  air  an  tulaich,
Bu  gbrinn  am  fait  a's  bu  trom ;
'S  e  ri  sior  chall  na  fala,
Le  lot  a  bliior,  air  a  bhonn.


FlONX.

"'S  bochd  a'  cbomhairl'  a  chinn  agam,
Mac  mo  pbeathar  a  mharbhadh
Airson  Ghraidlm',  an  t-olcas  mnatha,
'S  nacb  dean  i  ritbis  mo  leanmbuinn.

29

"  'S  mor  sin  a  tha  db'  easbbuidli  na  tulaicb !
Air  tàillibb  na  muice  fiadbain,
Graidbne,  nigbean  righ  Cboig'  Ullainn,
An  da  gbearr  cbuilean,  agus  Diarmaid."*


74  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

30.

"  Djeearmaid,  deceiver  of  Avonien,

Son  of  king  Guyne  of  tlie  brilliant  hue,

No  maiden  will  raise  her  eye

Since  the  mould  has  gone  over  thy  visage  fair."

31.

"  Yellow  without  white  in  thy  hair  !
Long  thy  cheek  !  thine  eyelash  slow  !
Blue  without  rashness  in  thine  eye  !
Passion  (e)  and  beauty  behind  thy  curls !

32.

"  Oh  yesternight  it  was  green  the  hillock,
Eed  is  it  this  day  with  Yeearmaid's  blood  ;
And  with  the  Een  it  had  been  wretched
Unless  it  had  been  ordered  by  Finn."

33.

OlSEAN.

"  On  this  night's  night  though  I  be  wretched,
There  was  once  a  time  that  I  was  not  weak ;
Not  lacking  men,  nor  arms,  nor  feasting,
See  each  thing  changes  in  the  world  ! "

Notes. — Letters. — J.  F.  C.

a  The  metre  seems  to  require  two  lines  here.  I  have  not
attempted  to  fill  up  the  space,  but  I  adhere  to  the  division  into
verses  of  four  lines,  which  the  rhythm  seems  to  indicate.

b  Here  there  seems  to  be  a  break  in  the  metre.

c  Send  a  jewel,  an  instrument.  I  understand  it  here  to  mean
a  warrior's  jewels,  his  weapons,  but  it  might  mean  some  decora-
tion.    See  Graidhne's  answer.    "  A  knife  is  the  best  jewel."

d  Here  three  lines  seem  wanting  to  make  up  a  stanza.

e  Caise,  passion  (Armstrong).


LAOIDH  DHIARMAID.  75

30

"  Diarmaid,  fear  niheallatUi  nam  ban, —
Mac  rigli  Dlmibhn'  a  bu  ghlan  snuadh !
Suireadh  cha  tog  a  siiil"''
0  cliaidh  uir  air  do  gbnuis  gblain."

31
"  Buidbe  gun  ghil'  ann  a'd'  f  halt !
Fada  do  leac  !  mall  do  rasg  !
Guirme  gun  blirais'  ann  a'd'  shuil !
Caise  's  maise  'n  cul  nan  cleachd  !

32

"  'S  ann  an  raoir  bu  ghorm  an  tulach ;
'S  dearg  an  diugh  e  le  fuil  Dliiarmaid !
'S  gur  li-ann  leis  an  Fliiun  bu  duiUch,
Mar  a  bhithe  Fiomi  'ga  iarraidli ! "

33

OlSEAN,

"  Air  an  oidhche  nochd  gad  tlia  mi  truagh,
Bha  mi  uair  nacb  robli  mi  faoin ;
Gim  easbbuidh  dhaoin'  arm  na  fleadh ;
Faic  gach  ni  mu  seach  'san  t-saogh'l !"

Notes. — Numbers. — H.  MacLean.

'  Laoidh,  lay,  ode,  lyric  ;  it  differs  from  dan  a  poem,  in  being
more  melodious,  and  capable  of  being  sung.  It  narrates  rapidly
a  few  events  ending  tragically,  almost  invariably  the  death  of  a
hero.

^  Cli,  weak,  powerless.  Duine  gun  chli,  a  man  without
strength.     Airm  chli,  feeble  weapons.

^  Garg,  fierce.

*  Mala  liath.  The  reciters  pronounce  this  name  Mala  Hth,
but  the  Irish  pronounce  ia,  ee,  so  that  the  name  means  gray  eye-


76  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

brow,  the  old  woman  who  owned  the  venomous  boar  and  the
swine,  "  aig  sealbh  luhuc,"  guarding  her  swine  (herd  of  swine).

^  Faghaid  bhreige,  a  Ijing  hunting  party,  that  is  got  up  to
deceive  and  destroy  him.

^  Brave  hero.     Here  the  vocative  is  elegantly  used.

'  Euchdan,  exploits.

'  This  is  the  death  which  you  require  to  avoid.

'  A  monster  (feminine  in  Grelic).

^"  Sgiath  urla  or  urlaimh.  Expert  shield,  a  name  for  Diarmid,
from  his  adroitness  in  the  use  of  the  shield.

11  Tar,  the  belly.

'-  Eadar  an  crann.  Here  eadar  is  used  in  a  sense  not  com-
mon now ;  between  the  shaft,  that  is  in  the  shaft,  not  between
the  shaft  and  the  head.

^'  Tèarainn,  to  come  off  without  hurt.

^*  This  stanza  is  not  known  to  all  the  reciters,  given  by
Donald  M'Phie,  Breubhaig,  Barra.

Gleann  mo  chridhe  an  gleann  seo  ri  m'  thaobh,
Far  am  binn  guth  laoigh  a's  loin  ;
Far  am  bi  farum  nam  Fiann,
Air  an  t-sliabh  an  deigh  nan  con.

My  heart's  glen,  this  glen  by  my  side,
Where  sweet  is  the  voice  of  calf  and  bird  ;
Where  is  the  murmur  of  the  Feean,
On  the  mountain  side  after  their  hounds.

(This  is  almost  the  same  as  a  verse  of  an  old  manuscript  poem,
now  in  cour.se  of  publication  by  Messrs.  Edmonston  and  Douglas,
1861.-J.  F.  C.)

1^  These  are  the  lines  according  to  Allan  M'Phie,  and  Janet
Currie,  South  Uist.

"  Gu  'n  d'  shuidli  e  siar  air  a'  chnoc,"  according  to  some  ;
That  he  sat  west  on  the  knoll.

*'  A  chionn  e  bhith  treis  na  thosd.  After,  or  at  the  end  of
his  being  a  while  silent.

"  Bu  trom  troidh,  of  heavy  tread.  This  is  the  version  used
by  most  of  them,  and  they  explain  it  as  referring  to  the  warrior's
strong  firm  step,  and  the  largeness  and  strength  of  the  leg;  how-


LAOIDH  DHIARMAID.  77

ever,  I  have  inserted  bu  chruinn  troiJb,  wliicli  implies  a  well
formed  or  fine  foot,  which  is  Boyd's  version.

'^  Fiadhaiii,  more  poetic  than  fiadhaich.

^^  This  is  Janet  Currie's  version  of  the  line,  which  I  think  is
best.     Allan  MThie  gives,

"  Urram  nan  slighne  ghear  goirt ;"  a  pretty  line  also,  "  The
honour  of  the  sharp  keen  spear.''

A  great  many  give,  "  Taghadh  nan  sleagh  ruighinn,  geur,  goirt,"
Choice  of  the  keen,  tough,  sharp  spears,
which  I  think  is  inferior  in  poetic  merit  to  the  other  two.

""  Nach  tlath  'san  trod.  That  is,  "not  soft  in  fight."  Here
the  poet  very  beautifully,  in  an  abrupt  manner,  turns  off  to  the
present  tense,  so  as  to  produce  a  vivid  impression  of  the  hero's
great  bravery  on  the  mind  of  the  hearer.

'''■  "  A  dhealbhaich  mo  righ,"  Boyd.

"  "Air son  mo  bheath'  agus  m'  fhardoich,"  Boyd.

"^  This  beautiful  dying  speech  of  Diarmid  is  not  known
so  full  as  this  to  any  of  the  reciters,  except  to  Donald  MThie,
Breubhaig.

Cobhair  is  repeated  here  often,  from  the  exasperated  feeling
at  the  ingratitude  of  the  uncle.  Such  repetition  is  always  the
language  of  deep  passion,  as  for  instance  in  the  case  of  Coriolanus
in  his  reply,  when  called  "  thou  boy  of  tears."

The  repetition  of  this  line,  and  the  abruptness  with  which  be
turns  off  from  other  subjects,  is  very  pathetic.  Whoever  has
been  in  the  company  of  the  dying  can  feel  the  truth  of  this  line,
how  they  refer  constantly  to  some  of  their  favourite  haunts.  The
ruling  passion,  the  last,  a  favourite  theme  with  modern  philoso-
phers and  novelists,  is  here  finely  illustrated.

-*  "  A  dealbh-chuilean."  This  is  the  expression  given  by
Janet  Currie,  who  says  it  refei's  to  the  unborn  child ;  Graidhne,
according  to  her  being  with  child  to  the  Ciuthach.  Boyd  has  da
dhearbh  chuilean.  Macdonald  gives  the  words  inserted,  who  says
they  refer  to  the  two  best  dogs  of  the  Feen,  after  Bran,  which
were  killed  by  the  boar.

-'  Suireadh,  a  maid.  Suireadh  cha  tog  a  suil,  no  maid  will
raise  her  eye  ;  that  is  with  grief.  The  line  is  repeated  no  doubt
in  a  corrupt  manner,  thus —

*'  Suireach  cha  tog  a  shuil,"  no  lover  will  raise  his  eye,  which
would  make  no  sense.


yo  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Leac,  cheek.     Rasg,  eyelash,  also  the  eye  itself.

"  Guirme  gun  ghlaise,"  and  "  guirme  le  ghlaise."  Janet
Currie  gives  the  line  inserted,  which  is  prettier,  and  at  the  same
time  a  contrast  to  the  piercing  hlue  eye  ascribed  by  Tacitus  to
the  ancient  Germans.  Bulwer,  in  one  of  his  novels,  describes  the
French  dark  eye  as  milder  and  softer  than  the  Italian.

Cleachd,  a  ringlet.

Cùis  a's  mais'  air  chul  nan  gleachd.     Boyd.

The  poem  is  not  the  complete  version  of  one  reciter,  but  is
built  up  and  selected  from  several  long  versions,  written  from  the
dictation  of  the  people  named.  If  the  evil  spirit  of  the  Ossianic
controversy  still  cumbers  the  earth,  the  papers  can  be  produced,
and  the  authorities  are  alive.  I  will  answer  for  the  honest  inten-
tion of  the  collector  and  the  translator,  and  I  can  do  no  more.

J.  F.  C.


LAOIDH  DHIARMAID.

NoAiR  a  bhiodh  an  Fhinn  a'folbh  a  shealg  bhiodh  h-aon  diu  daonn-
an  a'  fantail  aig  an  taigh  a  choimhead  nam  ban.  Thuit  e  air  Diar-
maid  an  lath'  ud  gur  h-e  a  dh'  fhanadh.  Blia  rud  ris  an  canadli  lad
sugh  seirc  an  aodann  an  duine ;  's  bha  clogad  air  nach  fheumadh  e
thogail :  chionn  cha  robh  bean  a  chitheadh  an  sugh  seirc  nach  tuit-
eadh  ann  an  gaol  air  ;  's  bha  fios  aig  Diarmaid  gu  'n  robh  na  buadhan
seo  air  fhein.  An  latha  a  dh'  fhan  e  aig  an  taigh  bba  duil  aige  nach
robh  neach  'ga  fhaicinn,  's  thug  e  togail  air  'a  chlogad,  's  faicidh
Graidhne  nighean  righ  Clioig'  Uilainn  aodann  Dhiarmaid.  Cha
bhiodh  an  t-anam  blath  innte  mar  am  falbhadh  i  le  Diarmaid.

Arsa  Diarmaid,  "  Cha  fhreagair  domhsa  sin — falbh  leatsa."

"  0  !  falbhaidh  sinn  ;  airneo  sracaidh  mi  m'  aodach  's  bheir  mi
suas  thu  do  dh'  Fhionn."

"  Cha  'u  'eil  aicheadh  agara  ort  nach  creid  e  thu ;  chionn  gur  tu
a  bhean  dhileas  fhein  gu  dearbh."

Dh'  fhalbh  iad,  's  bha  e  ccmhla  rithe  tri  lathan  's  tri  oidhchean  ;
ach  bha  e  saor  a's  i.  Dh'  fhalbh  iad  air  an  aghaidh.  Bha  iad  a'  del
a  null  air  amhainn,  's  thog  ise  a  h'  aodach  suas  ma  'm  fliucht'  i,  's  dh'
eirich  breac  beag  an  uair  sin,  's  bimail  e  suas  air  a  sliasaid.

"  Mo  laochan  thu  fhein  a  bhric  bhig,  bheadaidh,  urad  s  a  thug
dhomh  de  thoilinntinn  cha  d'  thug  Di;irmaid  domh  o  cheann  nan  tri
lathan  's  nan  tri  oidhchean  a  tha  e  learn  ;  's  na  'm  biodh  tu  air
chomas  falbh  air  tir  learn  bu  choltach  gur  h-ann  mar  a  bu  lugha  an
duine  a  b'  fhearr  e."


LAOIDH  DHIAEMAID.  79

"  Mata,"  ars'  esaii,  "  na  a  dh'  fhulaing  mise  air  son  geanmnuidh-
eachd  de  thamailt  clia  'n  fhulaing  nil  na  's  fhaide  e."

"  Tha  Fionn  a  nis,"  ars'  esan,  "  air  tighinn  dachaidh  's  cha  'n
fhaigli  iad  sinn  a  staigh  ;  thig  iadan  sin  air  ar  toir  's  gheibh  iad  sin."
"  Cha  'n  t'haigh,"  ars'  ise.  "  Co  dhiu  a  gheibh  no  nach  fhaigh  bheir
sinn  ionnsuidh  air  sinn  fhein  fhalach."  Se  'n  rud  a  ni  sinn  theid
sinn  do  'n  choill  sec  shuas  's  falacliaidh  meanganan  's  duilleach  na
craoibhe  sin."  Dhirich  iad  do  'n  chraoibh  an  sin,  's  chaidh  iad  ann  an
cridhe  na  craoibhe,  's  thairuing  iad  meanglain  's  duilleach  na  craoibhe
mu  'n  cuairt  orra.

Thainii^  an  Fhinn  'ionnsuidh  an  taighe  's  cha  d'  fhuair  iad  Diar-
maid  na  Graidline  aig  an  taigh.  "  Seo,  seo,  Ghillean,"  arsa  Fionn,
"  tha  mise  gun  bhean  's  tha  'n  Fhinn  gun  Dhiarmaid  ;  's  coir  duinn
falbh  gus  am  faigh  sinn  iad."

Dh'  fhalbh  iad  air  an  torachd,  's  chaidh  iad  a  null  air  a  cheart
amhainn.  Nuair  a  chaidh  iad  a  null  arsa  Fionn,  "  Tha  sinn  an  deigh
treis  choiseachd  a  dheanadh,  's  o'n  a  tha,  leigidh  sinn  anail  bheag  aig
bonn  na  craoibhe  seo  shuas."  Ghabh  iad  comhairl'  Fhinn  's  shuidh
iad  aig  bonn  na  craoibhe.

Arsa  Fionn,  "  'S  coir  duinn  teannadh  ri  cluiche,  Ghillean."
"  Tha  sinn  deonach,"  ars'  iadsan.

B'  abhaist  do  dh'  Fhionn  's  do  dh'  Osgar  a  bhith  'nan  da  cheann
stochd.  'Se  Diarmaid  daonnan  a  b'  abhaist  a  bhith  comhla  ri  Fionn.
Bha  fios  aig  Fionn  gii  'n  robh  buaidhean  air  Diarmaid  aig  cluichean.
Bha  'nis  O.-gar  agus  dh'  fheumadh  e  duine  a  bhith  leis,  agus  's  e
'athair  fhein  a  'b  abhaist  a  bhith  leis.  Thoisich  iad  cur  nan  cluichean.
A'  h-uile  cluiche  a  bha'  'dol  's  aun  air  Fionn  a  bha  e  'dol,  's  bha
Osgar  a'  buidhinn.     Chuir  iad  tri  chluichean.     Arsa  Fionn.

"  Tha  mi  aig  ionndrainn  uam  Dhiarmaid  gu  trom  ;  chionn  b'
ainneamh  leomsa  cluich  a  dhol  a  m'  aghaidh  nuair  a  bhiodh  Diar-
maid leam  ;  ach  tha  iad  a  nis  a'  dol  a  m'  aghaidh  o'n  a  dhealaich  e
rium  ;  ach  theid  mi  uair  eile  riut."

Bha  Diarmaid  ag  eisdeachd.  Dh'  fhalbh  e  's  chuir  e  ri  thaobh
deas  mar  siud  a  lamh,  's  rug  e  air  t^  de  na  caora  dearga  a  bh'  air  a'
chraoibh,  's  leig  e  sios  ris  a  chraoibh  i,  's  driom  Fhinn  risa'  chraoibh.
Dh'  fhairich  e  rud  a'  bualadh  air  a  dhriom,  's  chuir  e  a  lamh  air  a
chul-thaobh,  's  rug  e  air  a  chaora,  's  chuir  e  'na  phoca  i.  Thoisich
iad  air  cluiche  's  chaidh  an  cluiche  seo  le  Fionn.  "  Tha  h-aon
agam,"  arsa  Fionn.  "Tha,"  ars'  Osgar,  "ach  tha  a  dha  gu
d'  dhith."  "  An  d'  theid  thu  tuilleadh  ann  ?"  ars'  Osgar.  "  Theid,
theid,"  ars'  Fionn.  "Feuch  a  ritiiis  e."  Leig  Diarmaid  sios  an
ith    chaora  's    bhuidhinn    Fionn    am    fear    seo.      "  An    d'   theid


8o  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

thu  ann  tuilleadh?"  ars' e.  "  Theid,"  ars'  Osgar,  "matha  a  dha
agad  tha  fear  gu  d'  dhith."  Leig  Diarmaid  a  nuas  an  treas  te
agu3  bbuidhinn  Fionn  an  treas  fear.  "  Tha  sinn  a  nis,"  ars'  Osgar,
"  cothrom  a's  cothrom  ;  ua  'bhuidhinn  mi  thug  thu  fhein  air  t'  ais  a
rithis  e."  "  An  d'  theid  tlm  ann  tuilleadh  ?"  arsa  Fionn.  "  Theid,"
ars'  Osgar,  "  bidh  fios  a  mhath  na  'uilc  againn  air  an  t-siubhal  seo."
Chaidh  iad  ann  a  rithis ;  leig  Diarmaid  a  nuas  an  ceathramh  te,  's
bhuidhinn  Fionn.  "  Ge  b"e  air  bith  mar  a  bha  fad  's  a  bha  thusa
gun  Diarmaid  leat  bha  mise  a'  buidhinn.  Ge  b'  e  an  bith  mar  a
tha  a'  chuis  tha  gnothaichean  a  bhoineas  do  Dhiarmaid  mu'n  cuart
ortsa  an  diugh  ma  'm  bheil  thu  air  buinig  a'  cheathramh  uair.
Ars'  Oisean,  "  Cha  do  chuir  m'  athair  oirnn,  a  mhic,  le  ceartas
idir."  "  Chuir,"  arsa  Fionn.  "  Cha  do  chuir,"  ars' Oisean.  "Chuir;
a  dhearbhadh  gu  'n  do  chuir  tha  ceithir  caoran  ann  a'm'  phoca  mu
choinneamh  a'  h-uile  cluich  a  bhuidhinn  mi."  Thug  e  mach  na
ceithir  caoran,  's  nuair  a  thug  e  mach  iad  thubhairt  e.

"  Thig  a  nuas  a  sin  a  Dhiarmaid,  thu  fliein  agus  Graidhne,
nighean  righ  Choig'  Ullainn  ;  chionn  tha  sibh  an  sin  comhla."

Thainig  Diarmaid  agus  Graidhne  a  nuas ;  Eoinneadh  a'  chuid-
eachd  as  ur,  's  chaidh  Fionn  a's  Osgar  thar  a  cheile.  Thoisich  na
h-airm,  's  thoisich  an  sgath,  's  bha  iad  a'  deanadh  moran  coire  air
a  cheile.  Bha  a'  chuid  eile  de  'n  Fhinn  a'  faicinn  gu  'n  robh
Osgar  a'  brath  buinig  air  taobh  a  sheanar.  Arsa  GoU  Mac  Morna,
"  Gad  nach  robh  cuid  againne  de  'n  aimhreit,  's  coir  dhuinn  reite
's  eadraiginn  a  dheanadh  eadar  clanna  Treunmhor."  Arsa  Conan,
"  Leig  le  Clanu  na  Baoisge  cuirp  a  cheile  a  ghearradh."  Thuirt
Fionn  an  sin  ri  Osgar,  Casg  a  chur  air  arraaibh,  ma  'm  biodh
Clanna  Morna  fhathasd  'nan  deigh  an  Alba.  Thug  Fionn  aire  do
Dhiarmaid  's  thuirt  e,

"  Tha  mo  ghrunnd,  's  mo  lamh,  's  mo  shuil
Deonach  cuirt  a  dheanadh  dhuit;
A  Dhiarmaid  O  Duibhne,  fhir  threin  !
Falbh  le  m'  cheile  gun  fhios  domli ! ! "

Bha  boireacuach  ann  ris  an  cainte  Mala  lith,  's  bha  speil  mhuc
aiee,  's  bha  tore  uimhe  air  an  ceann,  's  chaidh  iomadh  gille  math  a
'shealg  nach  d'  thainig  riomh  slan  o'n  tore.  Arsa  Fionn  ri  Diar-
maid, "A  Dhiarmaid  theirig  a  shealg  an  tuirc  aig  Mala  lith  air
shealbh  mhuc  'S  iomadh  fear  a  chaidh  ann  nach  d'  thainig  as  an
ailt  thar  bhreac."

Dh'  fhalbh  Diarmaid  a  shealg  an  tuirc.

From  Alexander  M'Donald,  Burgh,  Barra.     September  20,  1860.


THE  LAY  OF  DIARMAID.


m.  4.


One  more  version,  carries  the  legend  to  the  ex-
treme northern  and  eastern  Gaelic  frontier.  It  varies
somewhat  from  the  others,  but  the  main  incidents  are
the  same.  The  story  is  called  the  The  Boak  of  Ben
Laighal,  and  is  thus  told  : —

There  lived  once  upon  a  time  a  king  in  Sutherland,
Avhose  land  was  ravaged  by  a  boar  of  great  size  and
ferocity.  This  boar  had  a  den  or  cave  in  Ben  Laighal
(Pr  Loyal),  full  of  the  bones  of  men  and  cattle.

It  came  to  pass  that  the  king  swore  a  great  oath,
saying  he  would  give  his  only  daughter  to  the  man
who  should  rid  the  country  of  this  monster.  Then
came  Fingal,  Ossian,  Oscar,  and  I  know  not  who  be-
sides, and  tried  in  vain,  to  kill  the  boar,  whose  bristles
were  a  foot  long,  his  tusks  great  and  white,  and  whose
eyes  glowed  like  beltain  fires.  But  when  Diarniid  saw
the  king's  daughter,  whose  robes  were  white,  and  be-
held her  blue  eyes,  and  her  long  yellow  hair,  as  she
stood  in  the  gateway,  he  said  to  himself,  "  that  come
what  would  he  would  win  her."  So  he  went  out  ere
it  was  yet  dawn,  and  when  he  came  to  the  boar's  lair
he  saw  the  monster  lying,  as  large  and  black  as  a  boat
when  its  keel  is  turned  up  on  the  shore  ;  dra^ving  a
shot  from  his  bow  he  killed  it  on  the  spot.  All  the
Jving's  men  turned  out  and  pulled  the  carcase  home
with  shouts  to  the  palace  ;  and  the  king's  daughter
stood  in  the  gate,  beautiful  as  the  May  morn.  But
the  king's  heart  was  evil  when  he  saw  that  the  boar
was  dead.  He  went  back  from  his  word  secretly,  say-
ing to  Diarmid  that  he  should  not  have  his  daughter
till  he  had  measured  (by  paces)  the  body  of  his
Mien  foe,   once  from  the  head  to  the  tail,  and  once


82  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

again  backward  from  the  tail  to  the  snout.  That
would  Diarmid  gladly  do,  and  the  wedding  should  be
the  morrow's  morning.  He  paced  the  beast  from  tip
to  tail  without  harm  or  hindrance,  but  on  measuring
it  backwards  the  long  poisonous  bristles  pierced  liis
foot,  and  in  the  night  Diarmid  sickened  and  died.
His  grave  and  the  den  of  the  boar  may  be  seen  in  Ben
"  Loyal  "  to  this  day.

This  seems  a  different,  and  a  sadder  legend  than
the  one  which  gives  the  Campbells  their  boar's  head
crest  ;  nearly  as  tragical  as  the  fate  of  Adonis ;  but  it
is  common  in  the  west  of  this  county  to  call  the  Camp-
bells MacDiarmid. — C.  D.,  Sutherland.

It  may  be  interesting  to  shew  this  legend  of  "  Diar-
maid,"  as  the  word  is  spelt  now-a-days,  in  another
shape.

The  following  is  taken  fi-om  a  MS.  which  came
from  Cawdor  Castle,  and  is  now  in  my  possession  ;  it
is  called,

"  Genealogy  Abridgement  of  the  very  Antient  and
Noble  Family  of  Argyll,  1779."

The  writer  explains  that —

"  In  the  following  account  we  Lave  bad  regard  to  the  genea-
logical tree  done  by  Niel  MacEwen,  as  he  received  the  same  from
Eachern  MacEwen,  bis  ffather,  as  he  had  the  same  from  Art^
MacEwen,  his  grandfather,  and  their  ancestors  and  predecessors,
senachies  and  pensioners  to  great  ffamilys,  who,  for  many  ages
were  employed  to  make  up  and  keep  such  Records  in  their  accus-
tomed way  of  Irish  Rhymes;  and  the  account  left  by  Mr.  Alex'.
Colvin,  who  had  access  to  the  papers  of  the  ffamily,  and  Pedro
Mexva,  a  Spaniard,  who  wrote  the  origin  of  diverse  and  sundry
nations,  in  bis  book  entitled  the  Treasury  of  Antiquities."


THE  Lay  of  diarmaid.  83

The  first  statement  is  as  follows  : —

"The  Campbells  were  of  old,  in  the  Irish  language,  calleJ
Clan  Odinbhn  or  Oduimhn  (bh  and  mh  being  pronounced  as
the  Eoman  v),  id  est,  tbe  sons,  children,  or  posteritye  of  Duimhn,
knights  of  the  MacDuimhns  ;  particularly  from  Diarmid  Mac-
Duimhu,  who  makes  such  a  figure  in  the  Irish  history,  that  from
him  they  are  sometimes  called  Siol  Dirmed,  i.e.,  Diarmid's  seed,
or  Sliochd  Diarmid,  i.e.,  Diarmod's  offspring."

In  the  next  paragraph  it  is  said —

"  Yet  to  this  day  (1779),  in  the  Irish  language  or  Galic,  they
(the  Campbells)  are  called  both  by  the  name  of  Campbell  and
O'Duimhn."

I  may  add  that  at  this  day,  1861,  the  name  of
Campbell  is  very  rarely  used  in  speaking  Gaelic.  A
man  is  called  Kaim-bel-ach,  a  Campbelite,  or  the  Camp-
helltonian,  bitt  individually,  he  is  Iain  Euagh,  Pats-
set  John ;  if  he  has  the  common  burnt  Sienna  beard,
Iain  fada ;  long  John,  if  he  be  tall ;  Iain  na  Airde
bige,  John  of  the  little  hill,  if  his  farm  be  so  called ;
or  John  MacAllister,  if  his  father's  name  be  Alexander.
In  short,  surnames  are  not  yet  in  full  use  within  the
Highland  bounds.

Li  the  next  paragraph  the  rhymes  of  the  "  Senacliies"
of  the  Argyll  family  are  again  called  "  Irish,"  and  thus  it
appears  that  in  the  mind  of  this  writer  Irish  and  Galic
meant  one  and  the  same  language  in  1779,  as  I  hold
that  they  are  in  fact  now.      The  story  goes  on  thus : —

"  Although  the  common  and  ordinary  method  of  reckoning
the  genealogy  of  the  sirname  of  Campbell  or  Clan  O'Duimhn  is
to  begin  at  Arthur  of  the  round  table,  king  of  the  Britons,  as  a
person  very  great  and  famous  in  history,  yet  we  shall  begin  it
some  ages  before  him,  by  shewing  the  occasion  of  his  accession
to  the  crown  of  the  Britons,  as  Boethius  and  Buchanan  have  it
in  their  History  of  Scotland."


«4  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

And  accordingly  tlie  wiiter  begins  with  Constan-
tine,  grandfather  to  King  Ai-thur.

The  half  mythical  heroes  of  Welsh  and  Breton
tales,  and  of  niediteval  romances ;  and  personages  who
still  figure  in  Irish  and  Scotch  Gaelic  popidar  tales,
as  something  more  than  mere  mortals  : — Arthur  and
Diarmaid,  primeval  Celtic  worthies,  whose  very  exis-
tence the  historian  ignores,  are  thus  Ijrought  together
by  a  family  genealogist,  and  most  of  these  west-country
genealogies  agree  with  him  in  claiming  a  descent  from
King  Arthur  for  "  Mac  Callen  Mor."

The  fact  proves  nothing,  and  is  of  little  interest  in
itself,  but  when  brought  to  bear  upon  Celtic  mythology
it  acquires  an  interest,  for  it  shews  that  peasants'  stories
are  sufficiently  old  to  have  found  their  way  into  family
history  in  Scotland,  as  well  as  into  Avhat  is  called  the
Fenian  literature  of  Ireland.  The  Irish  theory  crowds
whole  centuries  of  adventure  into  the  lifetime  of  a
single  generation  of  one  family,  of  which  Fionn  was  the
head,  and  which  was  exterminated,  as  it  is  said,  about
A.D.  277  or  294,  at  the  battle  of  Gabhra  in  Ireland.
The  Scotch  genealogist  boldly  asserts  that

"  It  is  plain  that  the  family  can  trace  their  predecessors  from
father  to  son  for  upwards  of  1360  years,"

and  produces  Diarmaid  as  one  of  a  Scotch  family  all
aUve  in  943.  He  goes  on  to  shew  how  King  Arthur
brought  Ireland  under  tribute,  and  received  it  at
Cathair  Ler-eon,  now  West  Chester.

The  next  worthy  is
"  Smoroie  Mor,  or  as  others  have  it,  Sir  Moi'oie  Mor,  '  a  son
of  King  Arthur,'  of  whom  great  and  strange  things  are  told
in  the  Irish  traditions.  He  was  born  at  Dumbarton  Castle,  on
the  south  side  of  the  fort,  in  the  place  called  the  Red  Hall,  or  in
Irish,  Tour  na-hella  dlieirg,  i.e.,  the  Tour  of  the  Eed  Hall.  He
was  called  to  his  by-name,  The  fool  of  the  Forest ;  he  was  a  wild


THE  LAY  OF  DIARMAID.  05

and  undaunted  person,  and  married  a  sister  of  King  Andar's,  the
forty-ninth  king  of  the  Scots,  and  was  contemporary  with  Columbus
pius  ;  called  in  the  Gaelic  Colmkill,  or  Calum  na-kill,  because,  when
he  retired  from  company  they  were  always  sure  to  find  him  in  his
cell  at  prayer."

Now  tliere  are  a  great  many  poems  and  stories  still
extant  in  Gaelic,  some  printed,  others  still  as  traditions,
in  which  a  "  great  fool "  plays  the  chief  part.  I  would
refer  to  i^o.  xxxv.  vol  ii.,  and  to  the  "Lay  of  the
Great  Fool "  in  this  volume,  A  long  version  of  the  last
has  been  printed  abeady.

There  is  besides  an  Arthurian  tradition  in  England
of  a  buried  army  and  a  sleeping  king,  and  a  wizard
who  appears  occasionally  about  Alderley  edge,  not
far  from  Chester,  and  this  has  a  counterpart  in  a  story
got  from  Islay,  which  localizes  the  very  same  legend  in
another  shape  at  Dumbarton ;  and  that  tradition  of
Avarriors  sleeping  a  magic  sleep  in  a  cave  is  known  in
Barra  and  in  the  Isle  of  Man,  in  Spain  and  over
nearly  the  whole  of  Europe  ;  and  here  again  tradition
and  genealogy  point  to  a  common  origin  for  Celtic
tribes,  and  to  a  north-western  route,  and  to  a  common
mythology ;  for  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge  this
legend  is  imknown  beyond  the  Celts  in  the  north.
Having  brought  King  Arthur  to  Dumbarton,  the  gene-
alogist takes  to  dates  (wliich  I  give  as  I  found  them),
and  goes  on  with  a  list  of  wortliies,  most  of  whom  are
unknown  to  fame.

"  VI.  Ferither-Our,  i.e.,  Dun  Ferither,  a.d.  620.

"  VII.  Duimhn-Mor,  who  married  a  daughter  of  Duke  Murdoch
of  Moravian,  or  Murray,  or  Elgin,"

and  gave  a  name  to  the  family,  which  has  been  vari-
ously explained.

"  Odinbhin "  and  Mac-Oduimhn  might  suggest  a
Scandinavian  descent,   and  some  old  sea-rover  for  an


86  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES,

ancestor,  who  called  himself  a  son  of  Odin.  It  has
been  suggested  that  the  warriors  of  Fionn  were  fair
Norsemen.  Some  Campbells  are  proud  of  the  "  ginger-
hackle  "  which  commonly  adorns  their  chins,  and
claim  to  be  Northmen ;  but  if  the  name  be  Gaelic,  as
I  believe  it  to  be,  I  am  compelled  to  translate  Duimhn-
Mov,  as  the  Great  Brown.  The  Bro^yns  are  a  nume-
rous and  respectable  clan,  and  there  is  no  cause  to  be
ashamed  of  the  connection,  for  Brown  is  synonymous
with  Don,  and  there  are  Browns  and  Dons  of  high
degree.

"VIII.  Arthur  Oig  MacDuimhn,  i.e.,  Young  Arthur,  son  of
Brown,  084.

"  IX.  Ferither  eile  MacDuimhn.  The  other  Ferither,  son  of
Brown,  730.

"X.  Duimhn  fait  derig  MacDuimhn.  Brown  of  the  red
hair,  son  of  Brown,  786,  who  married  the  grand-daughter  of  Con-
nal  Gulban,  one  of  the  sons  of  Neal  na  Nidgheallach,  king  of
Ireland,  who  was  so  called  because  he  had  nine  chains,  fetters,
or  prisons,  for  confining  captives  taken  in  the  wars.  This  Neal
was  father  to  Longirius,  who  reigned  when  St.  Patrick  came  to
Ireland."

So  here  comes  in  another  hero  of  Gaelic  romance,
Connal  Gulban,  of  whom  there  are  more  stories  told
in  Gaelic  at  the  present  day  than  of  any  other  indi-
vidual, Fionn  always  excepted.  As  St.  Patrick  here
makes  his  appearance  on  the  stage  with  Diarmaid  and
Connal  Gulban,  and  as  he  brought  Christianity,  and
mayhap  civilization  to  Ireland,  it  seems  reasonable  to
suppose  that  such  an  event  would  stimulate  the  bards  ;
and  that  about  the  name  of  St.  Patrick  all  the  floating
legends  of  the  old  Pagan  history  and  mythology  would
group  themselves,  as  they  are  in  fact  found  to  do,  in
the  Irish  dialogues  between  St.  Patrick  and  Osin.
In  these,  the  old  blind  poet  tells  the  glories  of  his  de-


THE  LAY  OF  DI  ARM  AID.  87

parted  race,  and  argues  with  the  saint  in  a  very  dis-
contented and  rebellious  spirit,  to  say  the  least  of  it.
Osin,  whose  tribe  was  exterminated  about  277,  con-
verses with  St.  Patrick,  who  was  born  about  372,
flourished  in  430,  and,  according  to  this  genealogy,  was
contemporary  with  I^ongirius  and  Connal  Gulban.

"  XI.  Ferither  finruo,  i.e.,  reddish  white  MacDuimhn,  son  of
Brown.

"  XII.  Duimhn  dherig,  i.e.,  Brown  the  red,  860.

"  XIII.  Duimhn  donn,  i.e.,  Brown  Brown,  904,  was  cotem-
porary  with  Constantino,  seventy-fifth  king  of  the  Scots."

"  XIV.  Dirmaid  Mac  Duimhn,  943."
And  having  arrived  at  this  Dirmaid,  to  whom  all
popular  traditions  trace  the  Campbell  clan,  the  writer
breaks  off  into  a  digression  on  the  origin  of  surnames.
Of  Dirmaid  he  says  : —

"  This  Dirmaid  MacDuimhn,  from  whom  the  Campbells  were
called  Siol  Diarmaid,  i.e.,  Diarmaid's  seed,  gained  gi-eat  reputation
in  Ireland,  and  in  all  their  traditions  there  is  honourable  mention
made  of  him  for  his  conduct,  valour,  and  loyalty.  He  was  cotem-
porary  with  Malcolm  the  first,  seventy-sixth  king  of  the  Scots.  He
had  to  wife,  Graine,  niece  to  Cormac  Vic  Art  Vic  Chuin  Cheud
Chathach,  and  thus  his  son  was  great-grandchild  to  that  famous
Irish  monarch.  Conn  Cheud  Chathach,  so  called  because  he  fought
one  hundred  battles.

Diarmaid,  say  the  Irish  writers,  was  one  of  the
Fenians,  and  they  were  exterminated  a.d.  277;  that
is,  666  years  before  the  date  of  the  Dirmaid  and
Graine  of  the  genealogy.

And  then  we  are  told  how  Dirmaid  and  Graine
had  two  sons —

"  Arthur  Armderig,  977  (red  arms),  and  Duimhn  Dedgheal,
Brown  white  tooth,  who  had  to  his  son  Gilcolm  or  Malcolm  Mac-
Duimhn, who,  after  he  had  married  a  daughter  of  the  lords  of
Carrick,  by  whom  he  had  three  sons,  of  whom  afterwards,  and
after  her  death,  in  the  reign  of  Kenneth  the  Third,  the  eightieth
king  of  the  Scots,  the  said  Malcolm  MacDuimhn  went  to  Nor-


88  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

mandy  in  France  and  married  tbe  heretrix  of  Beauchamp,  i.e.,
campus  bellus,  or  pleasant  field,  sister's  daughter  to  William  the
Conqueror,  Duke  of  Nonnandy,  afterwards  King  of  England,  of
which  lady  he  had  three  sons,  who  were  called  Campbells  after
the  name  of  their  lands  in  Normandy."

Further  on  we  are  told  how  the  representative  of
the  French  branch  came  over  and  married  the  heiress
of  a  knight  of  Lochawe,  Evah,  and  how  the  clan  took
the  name  of  Campus  bellus  ;  and  how,  centuries  later,
French  worthies  were  entertained  at  Inverary,  and
acknowledged  themselves  to  be  of  the  same  race  and
descent  as  their  entertainer.  And  other  genealogical
incidents  are  related  in  the  same  quaint  style  down  to
the  writer's  time,  and  to  John  Duke  of  Argyll.

"44.  John  Campbell,  XXVIII.  Campbell,  XX.  MacCallen
Mor,  V.  Duke,  1768  ;  who  (amongst  other  deeds)  caused  remove
the  old  burgh  of  Inverary,  but  has  reared  up  a  much  prettyer
and  more  fashionable  burgh  royal,  about  a  furlong  south  of  the
palace,  upon  the  Gallow  failean  point."

So  here  are  Diarmaid  and  Graidlme,  the  hero  and
heroine  of  so  many  Gaelic  myths,  stories,  poems,  and
proverbs,  the  Venus  and  Adonis  of  Gaelic  mythology,
brought  into  juxtaposition  with  King  Arthur  and  his
knights,  honestly  married  and  planted  in  Scotland,  a.d.
943,  as  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Browai ;  a  family  tree  grafted  on
their  stock,  and  the  growth  of  the  tree  itself  all  set
forth  as  true  family  history  in  1789.

There  probably  were  j^eople  who  bore  these  names.
There  are  hundreds  of  Dermotts,  and  Dermids,  and
Donns,  and  Dons,  and  Guns,  Mac-Dermotts  and  Mac-
Diarmaids,  still  to  be  found  in  Ireland  and  in  Scotland
There  are  GwjTines  in  Wales,  and  there  are  many
similar  family  names  in  France  which  have  been  hooked
into  the  family  tree,  Avhich  springs  from  Oduimhn ;  but
it   is   surely  time  to  give  np  the  attempt  to  convert


THE  LAY  OF  DIARMAID.  89

Celtic  mytliology  into  comparatively  modem  history,
and  to  fix  a  time  and  place  for  the  slaj-ing  of  Diarmaid
by  the  venomous  boar  of  Beingiilban.

In  a  learned  note  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Ossianic
Society  (voL  v.  p.  62,  1860),  I  find  that  the  Celtic
legends  about  magic  boars  which  pervade  Ireland,
AVales,  and  Scotland,  have  already  attracted  the  notice
of  Irish  scholars,  and  that  they  are  taking  a  wide  view
of  their  popular  lore.  The  sacred  swine  of  the  ancient
Celts  are  supposed  to  have  given  rise  to  this  tradition.
It  is  suggested  that  there  was  a  "Porcine  worship
which  was  analogous  to,  if  not  identical  with,  the  exist-
ing worship  of  the  Hindoo  deity  Vishnoo,  in  his
avatar  as  a  boar."  And  that  Diarmaid  was  a  reformer
who  tried  to  abolish  the  worship  of  pigs,  and  died  in
the  attempt.

To  me  it  seems  perfectly  hopeless  to  attempt  to
explain  a  legend  which  is  at  least  as  old  as  the  loves  of
Venus  and  Adonis,  Ijy  referring  it  to  any  one  time  or
place.

It  is  like  making  Hercules  a  doctor  or  a  drainer,
and  the  Hydra  sulphuretted  hydrogen  embodied  in  an
epidemic,  and  cured  with  steel.

Let  this  tale  of  Diarmaid  rather  be  taken  as  one
phase  of  a  myth  which  pervades  haK  the  world,  and
which  is  still  extant  in  the  Higlolands  of  Scotland,  and
in  Ireland,  amongst  all  classes  of  the  GaeHc  population.
Let  aU  that  can  be  got  concerning  it  be  gathered  from
the  most  unsuspecting  and  the  most  unlearned  wit-
nesses ;  and  when  the  traditions  are  compared  Avith
what  is  known  to  the  learned,  there  is  some  chance  of
digging  knowledge  out  of  tliese  old  mines  of  fable.  At
all  events,  I  have  now  shewn  the  same  legend  in  a  poem,
a  popular  tale,  a  proverb,  a  family  tradition,  and  a
family  history  ;  I  have  shewn  it  in  Ireland,  Cantyre,


90  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Islay,  Lorn,  Skye,  tlie  Long  Island,  and  Sutherland  ;
and  I  believe  it  to  be  an  ancient  pagan  myth,  -wliich
belonged  especially  to  a  tribe  of  Celts  who  took  pos-
session of  Argyll,  and  which  has  been  transferred  to
the  family  of  the  cliief  of  the  most  numerous  clan,  and
perhaps  to  the  real  leader  of  the  tribe,  together  with
every  thing  else  which  a  race  of  family  historians
thought  likely  to  adorn  their  favourite  topic.

There  would  seem  to  be  two  distinct  forms  of  the
myth ;  one  the  wildest  and  best  known  to  the  people,  the
other  more  rational  and  best  known  to  the  educated
classes.*


FABLES.


I  am  told  on  good  authority,  that  stories  in  which
beasts  play  a  chief  part  are  perhaps  the  most  interest-
ing of  all  in  a  scientific  point  of  view.  I  accordingly
give  a  feAv  here,  which  should  belong  to  No.  XVII.  in
Vol.  I.  They  will  serve  as  a  contrast  to  the  heroic
traditions  with  which  I  had  intended  to  fill  this  third
volume.  Their  value  consists  in  their  close  resem-
blance to  well-known  stories,  found  elsewhere  amongst
peasants,  and  pubhshed  in  modern  times,  and  in  their
possessing  traits  of  their  own,  which  seem  to  incUcate
that  they  are  parallel  traditions  derived  from  a  com-
mon source  ;  not  stories  derived  fi'om  others,  and  fol-
lowing in  their  wake.

For  example,  the  whole  of  the  incidents  in  the
story  of  the  Fox  and  the  Wolf  are  to  be  found  in
Grimm ;  but  they  are  separated.  Some  of  the  inci-
dents are  also  in  the  Norse  tales  ;  but  the  Gaelic  tale
*  Since  this  was  written  I  have  seen  two  versions  of  the  Lay
of  DiarmaiJ,  one  of  1786,  the  other  written  about  1530.  I  refer
to  them  elsewhere.


THE  FOX  AND  THE  GOAT.  9  I

fits  Highland  ways  of  life  exactly,  and  tlie  story  is  so
■widely  spread  in  the  Highlands,  and  can  be  traced  so
far  back,  that  it  seems  almost  impossible  that  the  un-
lettered men  who  tell  it  to  their  cliildren  should  have
got  it  from  modern  books  which  they  could  neither
read  nor  understand.

LXIL

HOW  THE  FOX  TOOK  A  TUE:^^  OUT  OF
THE  GOAT.

From  Hector  Boyd,  Barra.

T^HERE  was  a  gray  goat  and  she  had  kids,  and  if
she  had,  the  fox  went  on  a  day  around  them,  and
he  caught  them,  and  he  killed  them,  and  he  ate  them.
Then  the  goat  came  home,  and  she  was  black  melan-
choly and  miserable  when  she  came  and  was  without
them  before  her.  She  took  on  her  way  and  she
reached  the  house  of  the  russet  dog,  and  she  went  up
on  the  top  of  the  house,  and  the  fox  cried  out —

"  Who  is  that  on  top  of  my  bothy,  maiden  my  deary.
That  will  not  leave  my  caldrons  to  boil,
That  will  not  leave  my  bonnachs  to  bake.
And  that  will  not  let  my  little  one  go  to  the  well?"
Goat.
"  There  is  mc  gray  goat,  harried  out.
Seeking  the  three  Idndly  kidlings.
And  the  gray-bellied  buck,
And  the  buck  lad."
Fox.
"  Well  then  ;  by  the  earth  that  is  beneath,
Ey  the  aether  over  head.
By  the  sun  that  is  gone  down.
That  I  have  never  seen  thy  set  of  kids."


92  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

There  was  no  bird  in  the  flock  that  she  did  not  go
to  ;  and  she  returned  home  and  she  did  not  get  them.

Tliis  story  is  known  to  that  section  of  the  poorer
Gaelic  population,  which  is,  and  which  has  been
3'oung  ;  but  though  everybody  knows  it,  nobody  will
tell  it.  I  persuaded  an  old  woman  on  the  banks  of
Loch  Hourn,  to  tell  it  to  nie  in  part,  and  so  far  as  it
went  her  version  was  better.

Chaidh  a  ghobhar  ghlas  don  traigh
Agus,  bhrisd  strabh  a  cas.

The  gray  goat  went  to  the  strand,  and  a  straw
broke  her  leg,  and  when  she  came  home  there  were

Na  tri  minneana  mine-glas
Taraigna  taraghlas
Driomana  driomaghlas
Agus  am  hoc  ceannaglas.

The  three  kindly  kidHngs-gray,
With  bellies  gray  bellied,
And  with  backs  gray  back-ed,
And  the  buck  gray-head.

And  the  ram  (something,  Avhich  I  forget) ;  and  a
whole  party  besides,  whom  my  informant  would  not
name ;  all  gone  away.  And  she  went  to  the  fox,  and
his  clearing  oath  was  : —

Air  an  draigheann  air  an  dreas
Air  an  talamh  fo  mo  chois
Air  a  ghrian  seachad  siar
Cha  n  f  haca  mise  riamh
Do  chuid  meann.

By  the  blackthorn  and  the  briar,
By  the  earth  beneath  my  foot,


THE  COCK  AND  THE  FOX.  93

By  the  siiii  that  has  gone  west,
I  have  never  never  seen
Thy  set  of  kids.

It  is  manifest  that  there  is  a  great  deal  more  of
this,  but  I  have  not  got  it.*

LXIII.

HOW  THE  COCK  TOOK  A  TUEN  OUT  OF

THE  FOX,

And  no  Creature  ever  took  a  Turn  out  of  Him  but

THAT  Cock.

From  Hector  Boyd,  Barra,  Sept.  20,  1860.

rr^HE  russet  dog  came  to  a  house,  and  he  caught  hold

of  a  cock.  He  went  away  with  the  cock,  and  the
l^eople  of  the  town-land  went  away  after  him.

"  Ai'e  they  not  silly  !"  quoth  the  cock,  "  going  after
thee,  and  that  they  cannot  catch  thee  at  any  rate."

The  cock  was  for  that  he  should  open  his  mouth
that  he  might  spring  out.

When  he  saw  that  the  cock  was  so  wilKng  to  go
along  with  liimself,  he  was  so  pleased.

"  Oh  !  musician  wilt  thou  not  say — It  is  my  own
cock  that  is  here,  and  they  will  turn  back,"  said  the
cock.

The  fox  .said,  "  She-mo-haolach-hay-n-a-han ;"  and
when  the  fox  opened  his  mouth  the  cock  sprung  away.
*  May  1861. — I  have  received  a  much  better  version  from  Mr.
Alexander  Carmichael,  from  Carbost  in  Sky.  The  fox,  disguised
as  the  goat,  after  several  trials  gets  in,  and  eats  the  kids.  The
goat  goes  to  the  houses  of  the  gull,  hoodie,  and  sheep,  and  at  last
to  the  fox.  He  lets  her  in,  eats  up  a  caldron  of  food,  gives  her
none,  and  makes  her  scratch  his  paunch.  The  goat  rips  him  up,
out  come  the  kids,  and  they  go  home.  The  rhymes  are  curious,
and  whole  very  original.


94  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

I  have  already  given  a  version  of  this  in  vol.  ii. ;
the  main  difference  is,  that  the  cock  here  calls  the  fox
a  musician,  as  the  fox  in  the  old  story  called  the  crow
when  he  did  him  out  of  a  cheese  by  the  same  stra-
tagem.    Ceolaire  is  used  to  express  a  silly  fellow.

LXIV.
THE    HEN.

From  Hector  Boyd.  Learnt  this  story  from  Donald  M'Kinnon,
Laidhinnis,  Barra,  wlio  died  twelve  years  ago  at  the  age  of  sixty.
—Castle  Bay,  October  4,  1860.

rpHERE  was  a  woman  before  now,  and  she  bore  a
hen  in  rock  by  the  shore,  after  she  had  been
driven  into  banishment  in  some  way  or  other.

The  hen  grew  big,  and  she  used  to  be  going  to  the
king's  house  every  day  to  try  if  she  could  get  some-
thing that  she  might  give  to  her  mother.  The  king
came  out  on  a  day  of  these  days,  and  he  said  to  her,

"  What,  thou  nasty  little  creature,  art  thou  doing
standing  there  upon  my  door  Ì "

"  Well,  then,  though  I  be  little,  and  even  nasty,  I
can  do  a  thing  that  the  fine  big  queen  thou  hast  can-
not do,"  said  she.

"  What  canst  thou  do  Ì "  quoth  the  king.

"  I  can  spring  from  spar  to  spar,  with  the  tongs
and  the  hook  for  hanging  the  pot  trailing  after  me."

He  went  in  and  he  told  that  to  the  queen.  The
hen  was  tried,  and  she  did  it ;  they  tied  the  pot-hook
and  the  tongs  to  her,  and  she  sprang  over  three  spars
(rafters),  and  she  came  down  on  the  ground.

Then  they  tied  the  pot-hook  and  the  tongs  to  the
queen,  and  she  went  and  she  took  a  spring  out  of  her-
self, and  she  cut  the  edge  of  her  two  shanks,  and  she
fell,  and  the  brain  went  out  of  her.


THE  HEN.  95

He  had.  four  queens,  and  the  hen  put  them  all  out
with  this  work.

"  It  would  be  better  for  you  to  marry  my  mother,"
quoth  the  hen  ;  "  she  is  a  very  fine  woman."

"  Avoid  me,"  said  the  king ;  "  thou  hast  caused  me
loss  enough  already,  thou  nasty  creature."

"  Well  then,  that  is  not  what  is  best  for  thee,  but
to  marry  her,"  said  the  hen.

"  Send  down  thy  mother  so  that  we  may  see  her,"
said  the  king.

She  went  where  her  mother  was,  and  she  said  to
lier,  "  The  king  is  seeking  you,  mother  ;  I  was  asking
him  to  marry  you."

She  went  up,  and  she  herself  and  the  king  mar-
ried.

Tlien  there  was  a  Sunday,  and  they  were  going  to
sermon,  the  king  and  the  queen ;  and  they  left  within
but  the  hen  and  the  son  of  the  first  wife.  The  hen
went  when  they  went  away,  and  she  went  to  a  cham-
ber, and  she  cast  off  her  the  husk  that  was  upon  her,
and  the  lad  went  into  the  room,  and  he  saw  the  husk
that  was  upon  her.  He  caught  hold  of  it  and  he  put
it  into  the  hot  middle  of  the  fire.  She  came  down
and  she  had  no  tale  of  the  "  cochall."

She  came  where  the  la<:l  was,  and  she  had  a  naked
sword,  and  she  said  to  him,

"  Get  for  me  my  husk,  or  else  I  will  take  the  head
off  thee,  against  the  throat."

The  lad  took  much  fear,  and  he  could  not  say  a
word  to  her.

"  Thou  nasty  creature,"  said  she,  "  it  is  much  for
me  that  thy  death  should  be  on  my  hands ;  I  don't
know  what  I  shall  do  now ;  if  I  get  another  cochall
they  will  think  that  I  am  a  witch,  and  I  had  better
stay  as  I  am."


96


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


When  the  king  came  home  he  saw  that  fine  woman
within,  going  about  the  house,  and  he  had  no  know-
ledge what  had  put  her  there,  and  the  king  must  know
what  sort  of  a  woman  she  was.  She  told  every  whit.
She  herself  and  the  king's  son  married,  and  a  great
wedding  was  made  for  them.

I  suspect  this  is  a  fragment  of  some  much  longer
tale.      I  know  nothing  like  it  in  any  other  language.


—From  a  stone  at  St.  AucIikws. — Sculptured  Stones o/ Scotland,  PI.  Ixi

LXV.
THE  KEG  OF  BUTTER

From  Hector  Boyd,  Barra,  who  learnt  it  from  Neill  M'Neill,
Watersay  ;  and  from  many  other  old  men.  Neill  M'Neill  died  ten
years  ago,  past  eighty  years  of  age. — Castle  Bay,  Sept.  20,  1860.

rpHE  russet  dog  and  the  wild  dog,  the  fox  and  the
-*-  wolf,  were  going  together  ;  and  they  went  round
about  the  sea  shore,  and  they  found  a  keg  of  butter,
and  they  buried  it.

On  the  morrow  the  fox  went  out,  and  when  he
returned  in  he  said  that  a  man  had  come  to  ask  him
to  a  baptism.  The  fox  went  and  he  arrayed  himself
in   excellent   attire,    and  he   went   away,   and  where


THE  KEG  OF  BUTTER.  97

should  he  go  but  to  the  butter  keg  ;  and  when  he
came  home  the  wolf  asked  liim  what  name  was  on  the
child;  and  he  said  that  there  Avas  Foveeal  (irnder  its
mouth).

On  the  morrow  he  said  that  a  man  had  sent  to  ask
him  to  a  baptism,  and  he  reached  the  keg  and  he  took
out  about  half.  The  wolf  asked  when  he  came  home
what  name  was  on  the  child.

"  "Well,"  said  he,  "  there  is  a  queer  name  that  I
myself  would  not  give  to  my  man  child,  if  I  had  him;
there  is  Moolay  Moolat  {about  half  and  half).

On  the  morrow  he  said  that  there  was  a  man  there
came  to  ask  him  to  a  baptism  again  ;  and  he  went  and
he  reached  the  keg,  and  he  ate  it  all  up.  When  he
came  home  the  wolf  asked  him  what  name  Avas  on  the
child,  and  he  said  that  there  was  Booill  eejilich
{tackling,  licMng,  or  Uckinrj  all  up).

On  the  morrow  he  went  and  he  said  to  the  wolf
that  they  ought  to  bring  the  keg  home.  Tliey  went,
and  when  they  reached  the  keg  there  was  not  a
shadow  of  the  butter  in  it.

"  AVell  !  thou  wert  not  without  coming  to  Avatch
this,  though  I  Avas  AA'ithout  coming  here,"  quoth  the
fox.

The  other  one  sAA'ore  that  he  had  not  come  near  it.
"  Thou  needst  not  be  blessing  that  thou  didst  not
come  here  ;  I  know  that  thou  didst  come,  and  that  it
Avas  thou  that  took  it  out ;  but  I  aa'ÌII  know  it  from
thee  when  thou  goest  home,  if  it  was  thou  that  ate  the
butter,"  said  the  fox.

He  AATut,  and  when  he  AA-ent  home  he  hung  the
Avolf  by  his  hind  legs,  Av-ith  his  head  dangling  below
liim,  and  he  had  a  dab  of  the  butter  and  he  put  it
under  his  mouth,  and  if  it  Avas  true,  it  AA-as  out  of  the
AvoK's  bellA^  that  it  came.


98  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.

"  Tliou  red  thief !"  said  he,  "  I  said  before  that  it
was  thou  ate  the  butter."

They  slept  that  night  as  they  were,  and  on  the
morrow  when  they  rose  the  fox  said,

"  AVell,  then,  it  is  silly  for  ourselves  to  be  going
to  death  in  this  way  with  great  excess  of  sloth  ;  we
will  reach  such  and  such  a  town-land,  and  we  will
take  a  piece  of  land  in  it."

They  reached  the  towni-land,  and  the  man  to  whom
it  belonged  gave  them  a  piece  of  land  the  worth  of
seven  Saxon  pounds.

It  was  oats  that  they  set  that  year,  and  they
reaped  it,  and  they  began  to  divide  it.

"  "Well,  then,"  said  the  fox,  "  whether  wouldst
thou  rather  have  the  root  or  the  tip  Ì  thou  shalt  have
thy  two  choices."

"  I'd  rather  the  root,"  said  the  wolf.

Then  the  fox  had  fine  oaten  bread  all  the  year,  and
the  other  one  had  fodder.

On  the  next  year  they  set  a  crop ;  and  it  was  tata
root  (potatoes)  that  they  set,  and  the  potatoes  grew
well.

"  Which  wouldst  thou  like  best,  the  root  or  the
crop  this  yearl"  said  the  fox.

"  Indeed,  thou  shalt  not  take  the  tAvist  out  of  me
any  more  ;  I  will  have  the  crop  (top)  this  year,"  quoth
the  wolf

"  Good  enough,  my  hero,"  said  the  fox.

Then  the  wolf  had  the  potato  tops  again,  and  the
fox  the  potatoes.  Then  the  wolf  used  to  keep  stealing
the  potatoes  from  the  fox.

"  Thou  hadst  best  go  yonder,  and  read  that  name
that  I  have  in  the  hoofs  of  the  gray  mare,"  quoth  the
fox.

Away  w^eiat   the  wolf,    and  he   began  to  read  the


THE  KEG  OF  BUTTER.  99

name  ;  and  on  a  time  of  these  times  the  white  mare
(h-ew  her  leg,  and  she  cast  the  head  off  the  wolf.

"  Oh  !"  said  the  fox,  "it  is  long  since  I  heard  it.
I  would  rather  be  a  clerk  than  be  reading  a  book."

He  went  home,  and  the  wolf  was  not  putting
trouble  upon  him  any  more.

I  heard  this  story  often  myself  in  boyhood.  There
is  some  portion  of  dialogue  that  I  remember,  not  in  this
version.  When  the  fox  speaks  to  the  wolf  about  the
clu-istening,  the  conversation  goes  on  in  this  manner  : —

Madadh  Ruadh.   Och  !  heun  !  thall.
Madadh  Alluidh.   De  tha  thu  'faicinn  ann.
Mddadli  Raadli.   Tha  iad  gam  iarraidh  gu  gois-
deachd.

Madadh  Alluidh.   Och,  och,  ann  d'  theid  thu  ann.
Madadh  Ruadh.   Och,  och,  theid.

Fox.  Och  !  hein  !  yonder.

Wolf.  ^Vhat  seest  thou  there  Ì

Fox.  They  are  asking  me  to  sponsorship.

Wolf.   Och  !  och  !  wilt  thou  go  there  1

Fox.   Och  !  och  !   I  will.

H.  MacLean.

See  Norse  Tales,  p.  -472,  where  the  creatures  are
fox  and  bear.

The  Boor  and  the  Fiend,  Grimm,  No.  189.  The
notes  in  vol.  iiL,  Grimm,  shew  that  this  is  widely
spread.  See  also  No.  2,  Grimm,  vol  iii.,  where  the
creatures  in  company,  in  various  versions,  are  cat  and
mouse,  cock  and  hen,  cock. and  fox.

See  also  stories  on  Proverbs,  1854,  London.

"  Send  not  the  cat  for  lard."  The  actors  are  a
kitten  and  a  rat  ;  the  scene,  a  belfry  and  a  garret.


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


^^rfè


Fox,  Huntsman,  and  Falcon. — From  a  stone  at  Shandwick.'
Sculptured  Stones  of  Scotland,  PI.  xxvi.


LXVI.
THE  FOX  AND  THE  LITTLE  BOXNACH.

From  Hector  Boyd,  who  learnt  it  from  one  John  Campbell,
who  died  three  years  ago,  at  the  age  of  thirty — Sept.  20,  1860.

ri^HE  fox  was  once  going  over  a  loch,  and  there
-*-  met  him  a  httle  bonnach,  and  the  fox  asked  liim
where  he  Avas  going.  The  Httle  bonnach  told  him  he
wa,s  gomg  to  such  a  place.

"  And  whence  camest  thou?"  said  the  fox.

"  I  came  from  Geeogan,  and  I  came  from  Cooaig-
EAN,  and  I  came  from  the  slab  of  the  bonnach  stone,
and  I  came  from  the  eye  of  the  quern,  and  I  wUl  come
from  thee  if  I  may,"  quoth  the  little  bonnach.

"  Well,  I  myself  will  take  thee  over  on  my  back,"
said  the  fox.

"  ThouTt  eat  me,  thou 'It  eat  me,"  quoth  the  little
bonnach.

"  Come  then  on  the  tip  of  my  tail,"  said  the  fox.

"  Oh  !  I  will  not ;  thou  Avilt  eat  me,"  said  the  little
bonnach.

"  Come  into  my  ear,"  said  the  fox.


THE  FOX  AXD  THE  LITTLE  BONNACH.  I  O  I

"  I  will  not  go;  thou  wilt  eat  me,"  said  the  little
bonnach.

"  Come  into  my  mouth,"  said  the  fox.

"  Thou  wilt  eat  me  that  time  at  all  events,"  said  the
little  bonnach.

"  Oh,  I  wall  not  eat  thee,"  said  the  fox.  "  At  the
time  Avhen  I  am  swimming  I  cannot  eat  anytliing  at  all."

He  went  into  his  mouth.

"  Oh!  ho  !"  said  the  fox,  "I  may  do  my  own
pleasui-e  to  thee  now.  It  is  long  since  it  was  heard
that  a  hard  morsel  is  good  in  the  mouth  of  the  sto-
mach."

The  fox  ate  the  little  bonnach.  Then  he  went  to
the  house  of  a  gentleman,  and  he  went  to  a  loch,  and
he  caught  hold  of  a  duck  that  was  in  it,  and  he  ate
that.

He  Avent  uj)  to  a  hill  side,  and  he  began  to  stroke
his  sides  on  the  hill.

"  Oh  king  !  how  finely  the  bullet  would  spank
upon  my  belly  just  now."

Who  was  listening  but  a  hunter.

"  It  wiU  be  tried  upon  thee  directly,"  said  the
hunter.

"  Bad  luck  to  the  place  that  is  here,"  quoth  the  fox,
"  in  wliich  a  creature  dares  not  say  a  word  in  fun  that
is  not  taken  in  earnest."

The  hunter  put  a  bullet  in  his  gun,  and  he  fired
at  him  and  killed  him.

See  Chambers'  Popular  Ehpnes  of  Scotland,  1858,
2.31.

See  also  "Wolf's  stories,  where  a  wolf  prays  to  Odin
that  an  axe  may  fall  on  his  head,  and  a  man  throws
one.


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


LXII.


Mak  a  thufj  am  Madadh  ruadh  an  car  as  a'  Ghobhair.

A'  ghobhar  glilas.

Bha  'n  siud  ann  gobhar  ghlas,  's  bha  minn  aice  ;  s'  ma  bha  chaidh
am  madadh  ruadh  latha  timchioU  orra,  's  rug  e  e  orra,  's  mharbh  e
iad,  's  dh'  ith  e  iad.  Thaniig  a  ghobhar,  an  seo,  dachaidh;  's  bha  i  gu
dubhach,  bronach  nuair  a  thainig  i,  's  gun  iadsan  air  a  coinneamh.
Ghabh  i  air  falbh,  's  rainig  i  taigh  a'  mhadaidh  ruaidh,  's  chaidh  i
air  mullacli  an  taighe.     Dh'  eubh  am  madadh  ruadh.

"  Co  siud  air  mullach  me  bhothain  ghruigich,  ghraigich,
Nach  leig  goil  dho  m'  choireachan,
'S  nach  leig  bruich  dho  m'  bhonnachan,
'S  nach  leig  mo  leanabh  beag  dh'  an  tobar."

GOBHAE.

"  Tha  mise  'ghobhar  ghlas  air  a  toirt  as,
Ag  iarraidh  nan  tri  minneana  mine,
'S  am  hoc  tarraghlas,
'S  an  gille  buic."

MADADH  RUADH.

"  Mata,  air  an  talamh  a  tha  fodhad ;
S'  air  an  athar  as  do  chionn  ;
'S  air  a'  ghrian  a  tha  sios;
Nach  fhaca  mise  riamh  do  chiud  meann."

Cha  robh  eun  a  bha  's  an  ealt  nach  deachaitlh  i  a  ionnsnidh  ;  's
thill  i  dhachaidh,  's  cha  d'  fhuair  i  iad.


LXIII.

Mae  a  thug  an  Coileach  an  car  as  a  mhadadh  ruadh  ;  's  cha  d'  thug
beathach  riamh  an  car  as  ach  an  coileach  a  bha  'n  siud.

Thainig  am  Madadh  ruadh  thun  taighe,  's  rug  e  air  coileach  Dh'
fhalbh  e  leis  a  choileach  's  dh'  fhalbh  muinntir  a'  bhaile  as  a  dheigh.

"  Nach  iad  a  tlia  gorrach,"  urs'  an  coileach,  "  a  falbh  as  do  dheigh,
's  nach  urrainn  iad  breith  ort  co-dhiu."  Bha  'n  coileach,  nuair  a  dh'
fhosgladh  e'  bheul,  gus  leum  as.  Nuair  a  chunnaic  e  gu  'n  robh  an
coileach  cho  deonach  air  falbh  comhla  ris  fhein  bha  e  cho  toilichte.

"  0,''  a  cheolaire !  nach  abair  thu,  "  'Se  mo  choileach  fhein  a  th'
ann',  's  tillidh  iad,"  ors'  an  Coileach.


A  CHEARC.  103

Thuirt  am  Madadh  ruadh.
"'Se  mo  clioileach  fhein  a  th'  ann."

'S  nuair  a  dh'  fhosgail  am  Madadh  Ruadh  a  bheul  leum  an  Coi-
leach  air  falbh.


LXIV.

A  CHEARC.

Bha  boireannach  ann  roimhe  seo  agus  rug  i  cearc  ann  an  sgorr
cladaich  's  iad  an  deigh  a  cur  air  fuadach  air  doigh  air  chor-eigin.
Dh'  fhas  a  chearc  mor,  's  bhiodh  i  'dol  do  thaigh  an  righ  'h-uile  latha
feuch  ann  faigheadh  i  rud  a  bheireadh  i  g'  a  mathair.  Thainig  an
righ  mach  latha  de  na  haithean,  's  thuirt  e  rithe.

"  De,  a  chreutair  bhig,  mhosaich,  a  tha  thu  deanadh  a  't,  sheasamh
air  mo  dhorus  an  sin."

"Mata  gad  a  tha  mi  beag,  mosach  fhein,  ni  mi  rud  nach  dean  a
bhanruinn  mhor,  bhreagh  agadsa,"  urs'  ise.

"  De'  'ni  thu  ?  "  urs'  an  righ.

"  Leumaidh  mi  o  sparr  gu  sparr,  's  an  clobha,  's  buthal  na  poite,
slaodadh  ruim."

Dh'  fhalbh  e  staigh  's  dh'  inuis  e  siud  do'  n  bhanruinn.  Chaidh
'f heuchainn  ris  a'  chirc  's  rinn  i  e ;  Cheangail  iad  am  buthal  san  clobha
rithe,  's  leum  i  thar  tri  sparrannan,  's  thainig  i  airlar.  Cheangail  iad
am  buthal  san  clobha  ris  a  bhanruinn  an  sin,  's  dh  fhalbh  i  's  thug  i
leum  aisde,  's  ghearr  i  faobhar  an  da  lurga  aice,  's  thuit  i,  's  chaidh
an  t-ionachainn  aisde.  Bha  ceithir  banruinnean  aige  's  chuir  a'  chearc
as  doibh,  air  fad,  leis  an  obair  seo.

"  'S  fhearra  duibh,"  urs'  a'  cTiearc,  "  mo  mhathair  a  phosadh ;  tha
i  'na  boireannach  breagh."

"  Seachainn  mi,"  urs'  an  righ ;  "  rinn  thu  call  na  leoir  domh  cheana
a  chreutair  mhosaich."

"  Mata  cha  'n  e  sin  a  's  fhearra  dhuit  ach  a  posadh,"  urs'  a'  chearc.

"  Cuir  a  nuas  do  mhathair  's  gu  'm  faiceamaid  i,"  urs'  an  righ.  Dh"
fhalbh  i  far  an  robh  a  mathair,  's  ars'  i  rithe,  "  Tha  'n  righ  'gar  n-iarr-
aidh  a  mhathair;  bha  mise  ag  iarraidh  air  bhur  posadh."

Chaidh  i  suas  's  phos  i  fhein  san  righ.

Bha  'n  sin  domhnach  's  bha  iad  a'  dol  do  'n  t-seannoin  an  righ  's
a'  bhanruinn,  's  cha  d'  fhag  iad  a  staigh  ach  a  chearc,  's  mac  o  'n
cheud  mhnaoi.  Dh'  fhalbh  a  chearc  nuair  a  dh'  fhalbh  iad,  's  chaidh
i  do  sheombar,  's  thilg  i  dhi  an  cochall  a  bha  orra,  's  dh'  fhalbh  an
gille  staigh  do  'n  rum  's  chunnaic  e  'n  cochall  a  bha  orra.     Rug  e  air


104  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

's  chuir  e'n  teis  meadhoin  an  teine  e.  Thainig  ise  nuas  's  cha  robh
sgeul  aice  air  a  chochall.  Thainig  i  far  an  robh  an  gille  's  claidh-
eamh  ruisgte  aice  's  thuirt  i  ris,  "  Faigh  dhomhsa  mo  chochall
airneo  bheir  mi  an  ceann  diot  an  aghaidh  na  braghad."

Ghabh  an  gille  raoran  eagail  's  cha  b'  urrainn  e  facal  a  radh  rithe.

"  A  chreutair  mhosaich,"  urs'  ise,  "  's  mor  leamsa  do  bhas  a  bhith
air  mo  lamhan.  Cha  'n  eil  fios  'am  a  nis  do  'ni  mi ;  ma  gheibh  mi
cochall  eile  saoilidh  iadgur  buitseach  a  th'  annam  ;  agus  's  fhearra
domh  fantail  mar  a  tha  mi."

Nuair  a  thainig  an  righ  dachaidh  chunnaic  e  'm  boireannach
breagh  sin  a  staigh  air  feadh  an  taighe,  's  cha  robh  fios  aige  dè  'chuir
ann  i.  B'  fheudar  gu  'm  faigheadh  an  righ  mach  dè  'n  seorsa
boireanniach  a  bh'  innte.  Dh'  innis  i'  'h-uile  dad.  Phos  i'  fhein  's
mae  an  righ  's  rinneadh  banais  mhor  daibh.


LXV.

AM  BUIDEAL  IME.

Bha  'm  madadh  ruadh  's  am  madadh  alluidh  a'  falbh  comhla,  's
chaidh  lad  timchioll  a'  chladaich,  's  fhuair  iad  buideal  ime,  's  thiodh-
laic  iad  e.

An  la  'r  na  mhaireach  chaidh  am  madadh  ruadh  a  mach,  's  nuair
a  thill  e  staigh,  thuirt  e  gu  'n  robh  duine  air  tighinn  a  'iarraidh  gu
baisteadh.  Dh'  fhalbh  am  madadh  ruadh  a's  sgeadaicli  e  e  fhein  ann
an  deagh  thrusgan,  's  ghabh  e  air  falbh,  's  cait  an  deachaidh  e  ach
'ionnsuidh  a'  bhuideil  ime,  's  thug  e  sios  gu  'bheul  gu  math  as  a'
bhuideal,  's  nuair  a  thanaig  e  dachaidh  dh'  fhoighnichd  am  madadh
alluidh  dheth  de  'n  t-ainm  a  bh'  air  a'  phaisde,  "s  thuirt  e  gu  'n  robh-
Fo  bhial.  An  la  'r  na  mhaireach  thuirt  e  gu  'n  do  chuir  duine  a
'iarraidh  gu  baisteadh,  's  rainig  e  'm  buideal ;  's  thug  e  as  mu  kith.
Dh'  fhoighneachd  am  madadh  alluidh,  nuair  a  thainig  e  dhachaidh,
de  "n  t-ainm  a  bh'  air  a'  phaisde.

" Mata,"  urs'  esan,  "tha  ainm  neonach  nach  d'  thugainn  fhein
air  mo  dhuine  cloinne  na  'm  biodh  e  agam,  tha  Mu  leith  mu  leith."

An  la  'r  na  mhaireach  thuirt  e  gu  'u  robh  duine,  an  siud,  air
tighinn  a  'iarraidh-san  a  rithis  gu  baisteadh.  Dh'  fhalbh  e  's  rainig
e  'm  buideal  's  dh'  ith  e  air  fad  e.  Nuair  a  thainig  e  dachaidh  dh'
fhoighnichd  am  madadh  alluidh  dheth  de  'n  t-ainm  a  bh'  air  a'
phaisde,  's  thuirt  gu  'n  robh,  "  Buill'  imlich.  An  la  'r  na  mhaireach
dh'  fhalbh  e  's  thuirt  e  ris  a'  mhadhadh  alluidh,  gu  'm  bu  choir


AM  BUTDEAL  IiME.  IO5

dhaibli  am  buideal  a  thoirt  dachaidh.  Dh'  fhalbh  iad  agus  nuair  a
rainig  iad  am  buideal  cha  robh  sgath  dh'  an  im  aim.

"  Mata  clia  robh  thusa  gu  'n  tighhin  a  choimhead  seo,  gad  a  bha
raise  gun  tighinn  ann,"  urs'  am  madadh  ruadh.  Mhionnaich  am
fear  eile  iiach  d'  tbainig  e  a  choir.  "  Cha  ruig  thu  leas  a  bhith  a'
mathachadh  nach  d'  thainig  thu  ann  ;  tha  fios  aganisa  gu  'n  d'  tbai-
nig, 's  gur  tu  thug  as  e ;  ach  aithneachaidh  mis'  ort,  nuair  a  theid  thu
dachaidh,  ma  's  tu  dh'  ith  an  t-im,"  ars'  am  madadh  ruadh.  Dh'
fhalbh  e,  's  nuair  e  chaidh  e  dachaidh,  chroch  e  'm  madadh  alluidh,
air  chasa  deiridh,  's  a  cheann  slaodadh  ris,  's  bha  cnap  de  'n  im  aige,
's  chuir  e  f o  a  bheul  e,  's  ma  b'  fhior,  gur  h-ann  a  broinn  a  mhadadh
alluidh  a  thainig  e.

"  A  dhearg  mheairlich,"  ars'  esan,  "thuirt  mi  roimhe  gur  tu  dh'
ith  an  t-im."

Chaidil  iad  an  oidhche  sin  mar  a  bha  iad,  's  an  la  'r  na  mhaireach,
nuair  a  dh'  eirich  iad,  thuirt  am  madadh  ruadh.

"  Slata  's  gòrrach  duinn  fhein  a  bhith  'dol  bas  mar  seo  le  barr-
achd  mor  de  'n  leisg ;  Ruigidh  sin  a  leithid  seo  de  bhaile  's  gheibh
sin  piosa  fearainn  ann."

Kainig  lad  am  bails,  's  thug  an  duine  leis  am  bu  leis  e  piosa
fearainn  daibh — fiach  sheachd  puinnd  Shasunnach.  'S  e  core  a  chuir
iad  a  bhliadhna  sin  agus  bhuain  iad  e  's  thoisich  iad  ri  'roinn.

"  Mata,"  ars'  am  madadh  ruadh,  "  co-dhiu  's  fhearr  leat  am  bun
na  'm  barr?    Gheibh  thu  do  dim  roighinn."

"  'S  fhearr  leam  am  bun,"  ars'  am  madadh  alluidh.  Bha  'n  sin
aran  breagh  core  aig  a'  mhadadh  ruadh  fad  na  bliadhna;  's  fodar  aig
an  fhear  eile !

An  ath  bhliadhna  chuir  iad  barr ;  's  e  buntàta  a  chuir  iad  agus
dh'  fhas  am  buntata  gu  math.

"  Co-dhiu  a  's  docha  leat  am  bun  na  'm  barr  am  bliadhna?"  ars'
am  madadh  ruadh.

"  Gu  dearbh  cha  d'  thoir  thu  'n  car  fuilleadh  asam !  Bidh  am
barr  am  bliadhna  agam,"  ars'  am  madadh  alluidh.

"  Gle  mhath  a  laochain  ;"  ars'  am  madadh  ruadh.  Bha  'n  sinn  barr
a  bhuntata  aig  a'  mhadadh  alluidh  a  rithis ;  's  am  buntata  aig  a'
mhadadh  ruadh.

Bhiodh,  an  seo,  am  madadh  alluidh  a'  gold  a  bhuntata  air  a'
mhadadh  ruadh.

"  'S  fhearra  dhuit  a  dholl  a  null  's  an  t'  ainm  sin  agam  ann  an
crodhan  na  laire  baine  a  leubhadh,"  ars'  am  madadh  ruadh.

Dh'  thalbh  am  madadh  alluidh  's  thoisich  e  air  leubhadh  an  ainm,
'3  uair  de  na  h-uairean  tharruiug  an  lair  bhan  a  cas,  's  thilg  i  'n  ceann
bhar  a  mhadadh  alluidh.


Io6  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  0 !"  ars'  am  madadh  ruadh,  "  'S  fhada  o'  n  a  chuala  mi  e.  B'
fliearr  learn  a  bhith  a'  m'  chleireach  na  'bhitli  leubhadh  leabhair."

Dh'  fhalbh  e  dachaidh,  's  cha  robh  am  madadh  alluidh  a  cur  dragh
air  tuilleadh.

LXVI.

AM  MADADH  EUADH  'S  AM  BONNACH  BEAG.

Bha  'm  madadh  ruadh  uair  a  dol  thar  loch,  's  choinnich  bonnach  beag

e,  's  dh'  fhoighnichd  am  madadh  ruadh  dheth  cait  an  robh  e  a'  dol.

Dh'  innis  am  bonnach  beag  gu  'n  robh  e'dol  a  leithid  seo  de  dh'  kite.

"  "S  CO  as  thainig  thu  V"  ars'  am  madadh  ruadh.

"  Thainig  mi  a  Giogan  's  thaiuig  mi  a  Cuaigean,  's  thanaig  mi  a
leac  nam  bonnach,  's  thainig  mi  a  suil  na  brathan,  's  thig  mi  uaitse
ma  dh'  fhaudas  uii."    Ars'  am  bonnach  beag.

"  Mata  bheir  mi  fhein  a  null  air  mo  mhuin  thu,"  ars'  am  madadh
ruadh.

"  Ithidh  tu  mi,  ithidh  tu  mi,"  ars'  am  bonnach  beag.

"  Thalia  air  barr  m'  urbaill  mata,"  ai's'  am  madadh  ruadh.

"  O  cha  d'  theid,  ithidh  tu  mi,"  ars'  am  bonnach  beag.

"  Thalia  nam  chluais,"  ars'  am  madadh  ruadh.

"  Cha  d"  theid  ;  ithidh  tu  mi,"  ars'  am  bonnach  beag.

"Thalia nam'  bheul,"  ars'  am  madadh  ruadh.

"  Ithidh  tu  mi  n'  uair  sin  co-dhiu,"  ars'  am  bonnach  beag.

"  Od  cha  'n  ith,"  ars'  am  madadh  ruadh ;  "  nuair  a  bhics  rai  a
snamh  cha  n'  urrainn  mi  rud  sam  bith  itheadh  "  Dh'  fhalbh  e  'na
bheul.

"  0  ho  !"  ars'  am  madadh  ruadh,  "  faodaidh  mi  mo  thoil  fhein  a
dheanadh  riut  a  nis.  'S  fliada  o  'n  a  chualas  e.  'S  math  greim
cruaidh  am  beul  a  ghoile."

Dh'  ith  am  madadh  ruadh  am  bonnach.  Rainig  e,  'n  seo,  taigh
duine  uasail,  's  chaidh  e  gu  loch,  's  rug  e  air  tunnag  a  bh'  ann,  s'  dh'
ith  e.

Chaidh  e  suas  air  taobh  cnoic,  's  thoisich  e  air  a  bhlianadh  fhein
air  a  chnoc.

"A  righ!  's  gasda  a  sgailceadh  am  peilear  air  mo  bhroinn  an
ceart'  uir,"  ars'  esan.

"  Co  a  bha  'ga  eisdeachd  ach  sealgair."

"  Bidh  e  air  fheuchainn  riut  an  ceart'  air,"  ars'  an  sealgair.

"  An  droch  comhdhail  air  an  ait  a  th'  ann,"  ars'  am  niadadb  ruadh.

"  Nach  eil  a  chridhe  aig  neach  facal  a  radh  am  beadradh  nach  b.
air  a  ghabhail  an  d'ar  righribh."

Chuir  a  sealgair  peilear  's  a'  ghunna,  's  loisg  e  air,  's  mharbh  e  e.


CAOL  REIDHINN.  IO7

Tlie  following  two  stories,  LXYII.  and  LXYIII.,
were  got  in  Islay  from  an  old  man,  whose  name  has
not  been  sent  to  me.  They  were  written  hy  Mr.
Carmichael,  an  enthusiastic  Highlander,  and  a  good
Gaelic  scholar,  who  was  stationed  in  Islay  in  July  1860,
and  is  now,  18G1,  at  Carbost  in  Skye.

The  main  incidents  of  these  stories  are  quoted  in
the  introduction,  as  known  in  the  Isle  of  Man.

The  Feinn  (Fane)  are  here  found  in  the  spot  where
the  Lay  of  Diarmaid  left  them,  stationed  near  the  old
"  Pictish  towers,"  opposite  to  the  Isle  of  Skye,  and
they  next  appear  in  Islay  where  the  forging  of  Fionn's
sword,  "  the  Son  of  Luinne,"  is  a  well-known  legend.
The  incidents  are  told  in  the  Isle  of  Man  of  a  baron,
and  the  scene  is  partly  Drontheim.  Fionn's  patrony-
mic, by  a  change  from  the  common  spelling  wliich
hardly  changes  the  sound,  here  becomes  MacDugald,
or  the  son  of  Black  and  White  ;  another  slight  change
would  make  it  MacDonald.  And  thus  the  most  nume-
rous clans  of  the  West  Highlands,  the  MacDonalds,
MacDugalds,  and  Campbells,  seem  aU  to  have  some-
tliing  to  do  with  MacCumlial  and  his  men,  who  may
have  been  Lish  warriors,  or  Celtic  gods,  nevertheless  ;
for  nearly  all  these  AYest  country  traditions  point  back
to  Eirinn  ;  and  the  deeds  of  the  Feinn  are  not  always
those  of  mortal  men.

There  is  a  curious  p)oem  of  twenty-six  verses  about
the  smithy  "  Ceardach  ]\IhicLuin,"  in  Gillie's  Collec-
tion, 1787,  p.  233.  Several  of  the  phrases  in  the
story  are  in  the  poem,  and  the  incidents  are  much  the
same.  I  have  often  heard  that  a  number  of  poems
were  collected  in  Islay  by  a  minister,  and  published,
and  verses  about  the  forging  of  Fionn's  sword  are  still
repeated  there.  Probably  the  poem  is  the  one  of
which  I  have  heard.


;o8


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


LXVIL
CAOL  EEIDHINK.

Why  the  Name  was  Given  to  it.

From  Mr.  Carmicbael  (excise  officer),  Islay.

r\^  a  certain  time,  when  the  Feinn  had  come  home
^^  from  the  chase  to  the  house  of  Farabhuil,  at  the
foot  of  Farabhein  in  Ardnamurachan,  they  were  much
astonished  to  find  tlieir  wives  so  histy,  fair,  and  comely  ;
for  the  chase  was  very  scarce  at  the  time  with  tlie
Feinn.

The  Feinn  determined  that  they  would  know  what
their  wives  were  getting  to  make  them  thus  ;  and
when  they  Avent  away  again  to  the  chase,  they  left
Conan,  one  of  themselves,  at  the  house,  so  that  he
might  find  this  out.

Conan  kept  a  watch,  and  the  meat  that  they  had
was  the  hazel  top  boiled,  and  they  were  drinking  the
bree.  It  is  said  besides  that  they  used  to  wash  them-
selves with  tliis.

The  women  understood  that  it  Avas  to  watch  them
that  Conan  had  been  left  at  the  house,  and  they  were
in  a  great  fury.

In  the  night  when  Conan  laid  down  to  sleep,  they
tied  his  hair  to  two  stakes  wliich  they  drove  into  the
earth  on  either  side  of  his  head.  Then  the  women
went  out  to  the  front  of  the  house,  and  they  struck
their  palms  Avith  a  great  lament,  till  they  awoke
Conan.

Conan  sprang  on  foot  with  great  haste,  but  he  left
part  of  his  hair  and  of  the  hide  of  his  head  fast  to  the
les.

When  Conan  got  the  women  witliin,  he  set  fixe  to


CAOL  KEIDHINN.  I  09

heather  and  faggots  in  the  front  of  the  house,  so  that
he  might  kill  the  -women  with  the  smoke.

The  Feinn  were  at  this  time  o^jposite  to  the  house
of  Farabheil  on  the  other  side  of  Caol  Eeadhin  (Kyle
Eay),  and  Avhen  they  saw  the  fire  and  the  smoke  rising
up,  they  cried  out  loudly,  striking  their  left  hands  on
the  front  of  their  faces  with  their  eyes  on  the  sky.

Then  they  ran  to  succour  their  set  of  wives,  but
the  strait  was  between  them ;  but  with  their  blades
they  leaped  the  strait,  (all)  but  one  Mac  an  Eeaidhinn
(Ramsay).  Mac  an  Eeaidhinn  fell  in  the  strait  and  he
was  droAvned ;  and  since  tlien  to  this  day's  day,  (the
name  of)  Eeaidhinn's  Strait  has  stuck  to  the  narrows.

Valour  so  swiftly  for  wives  of  the  Feinn,

And  each  one  sprang  on  the  point  of  his  spear  ;

And  they  left  Mac  an  Eeaidhinn  in  the  strait.

By  good  fortune  the  women  all  came  through  it
but  one  or  two  of  them,  for  the  Feinn  made  mighty
running  to  succour  them.  The  Feinn  were  in  great
fury  against  Conan  for  what  he  had  doiie,  and  they
seized  him  to  put  him  to  death.  Conan  asked  as  a
favoiir  that  the  head  should  be  taken  off  him  with  Mac
AN  LuiNNE  that  would  not  leave  a  shred  behind,  the
sword  of  Fionn  MacDhuil  (MacDuguld),  and  that  his
own  son  Garbh  should  smite  laim  on  the  thigh  of
Fionn.

With  earnest  entreaty  I  would ;  ask  it
And  my  soul's  privation  to  seek  it  ;
The  son  of  Luinne  to  reap  my  soul
Upon  the  thigh  of  the  sense  of  the  Feinn.

This  was  allowed  him,  but  first  seven  gray  hides
and  seven  faggots  of  firewood,  and  seven  "  tiruin  "  of
gray  bark  were  laid  about  the  thigh  of  Fionn.


I  I  O  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Then  the  head  of  Conan  was  laid  on  that,  and
Garbh,  his  son,  struck  the  head  off  him  with  Mac  an

LUINNE —

And  folds  in  the  palm  w^ere  not  more  plenteous
Than  severed  thews  in  the  thigh  of  Fionn.

Then  Garbh  asked  them  where  were  the  Feinn,
for  he  had  gone  mad  ;  and  they  said  to  him  that  they
were  below  beneath  him.  Tlien  he  went  down  till  he
reached  the  sea,  and  he  slashed  at  it  till  he  drowned
himself

LXVIII.

/^X  a  day  when  Fionn  and  his  set  of  men  were  out
^^  hunting  in  Haslainn,  in  Gortean  Taoit  in  He,  they
saw  coming  to  meet  them  an  unhandsome  man,  with  a
shaggy  eye  in  the  front  of  his  face.*  He  was  running
with  might,  and  making  right  for  Fionn  MacDhuil.
When  he  met  them  he  asked  them  to  follow  him  to
the  door  of  the  smithy.  Said  Fionn,  "  Where,  strip-
ling, is  thy  smithy  ì  or  shall  we  be  the  better  for  see-
ing it  Ì"

"  My  smithy,"  said  the  Fairy  Smith,  "  is  not  to  be
found  ;  and  if  I  may,  ye  shall  not  see  it."

The  Fairy  Smith  and  Daor  Ghlas  stretched  out
against  the  mountain  breast ;  and  they  would  but  give
the  one  step  over  each  cold  desert  glen  ;  there  could
but  scarce  be  seen  a  glimpse  of  their  clothes  on  their
hips.

On  Hearing  the  door  of  the  smithy  the  heroes
neared  each  other.

"  A  little  opening,"  said  the  Fairy  Smith.
*   He  is  one-legged  in  the  poem,  and  his  name  Lun  Mac-
Liobhain,  and  he  has  seven  hands.


CAOL  REIDHINN.  I  I  I

"  Tear  it  before  thee,"  said  Daor  Glilas.

Then  turned  round  the  Fairy  Smith  and  he  said,

"  Oh  king  !  that  thou  hast  earned  the  name  oli
Caoilte  (slenderness),  Daorglas  shall  not  be  thy  name
from  this  time."

It  Avas  then  that  they  began  at  Mac  an  Luinne,  and
when  they  were  at  it  the  daughter  of  the  Fairy  Smith
came  in  to  the  smithy,  and  she  asked,

"  Who  is  the  slender  grey  fearless  man  Ì "

"  A  shineadh  a'  pinah  cruach  1 "

The  maiden  fell  into  weighty  questions  with  Daor
Ghlas,  and  she  gave  him  notice  that  her  father  would
say  to  him  when  tlie  sword  was  ready,  "  What  did  it
want  now  Ì  "  and  that  he  should  say,  "  It  wants  one
little  thing  yet  ; "  then  that  he  should  seize  the  sword
and  thrust  it  through  her  father's  body  to  temper  it.


CAOL  EEIDHINN.

Carson  a  Thainig  an  t'ainm  aik.

Air  am  aridh,  an  do  no  Feinn  tighinn  dhachaidh  fo'n  t  'sealg,  do
thigh  Fharbheil,  aig  bun  Farabhein,  ann  an  Ardnamurachan,  bha
ionghnadh  mor  orra,  na  mnathan  aca  fhaodinn,  cbo  reanihar,  gheal
bhoidheach,  oir  bha  an  t  'sealg  finr  ghann,  air  na  Feinn  aig  an  am  so.

Chuir  na  Feinn  rompa,  gu'm  bithidh  fios  aca  gu  de  a  bha  na
mnathan  aca  faodinn,  ga  'n  deauadh  mar  so ;  agus  an  nuair  a  dhalbh
iad  a  ritliisd,  gus  an  t'  sealg,  'dh  fhag  lad  Conan,  fear  dhiubh  fhein,  aig
an  tigh,  a  chum  so  fhaodinn  a  mach.  Rinn  Conan  faire ;  agus  se
am  biadh  a  bha  aca,  barr  a  challtuin  air  a  bhurich,  agus  iad  a  g'  ol
an  t'  suigh.  Tba  e  air  a  ghrainn  cuideachd,  gu'n  robh  iad  ga  nigh-
ead  fliein  leis  a  so.  Tliuig  na  mnathan  g'm  h'an  ga  'm  faire  a  chai
Conan  fhngeil,  aige  an  tighe,  agus  bha  fearg  mhor  orra.

Ann  san  oidhche,  an  nuair  a  luidh  Conan  a  sis  gu  cadal,  cheang,
ail  iad  fhalt  ri  da  stop  a  chuir  iad  san  talamh,  air  gach  taobh  ga


I  I  2  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

cheann.  Chaidh  na  muathair  a  sinn  a  mach  gu  beul  an  tighe,  agus
bhuail  iad  am  basan,  le  guileag  mor,  gus  au  do  dhuisg  iad  Conan.

Leum  Conan  air  a  chois,  le  mor-chabhaig,  ach  fhag  e  pairt  ga
fhalt  'us  do  sheic  a  chinn  ceangailt  ris  na  stuip.

An  nuair  a  flmair  Conan  na  mnathan  'stigh,  chuir  e  teine  ri
fraoch  agus  counadh  ann  am  beal  an  tighe,  a  chnm  agus  na  mnathan
a  marthadh  leis  an  toit.

Bha  na  Feinn  aig  an  am  so,  mu-choinneamh  tigh  Fharabeil  air
taobh  eile  Chaol  Eeadhinn,  agus  an  nuair  a  churaaic  iad  an  teine
agus  an  toit,  a  g'  eridh  suas,  glilaodh  iad  gu  ro-mhor  a  bualadh  an
lamh  chli  air  clar-an  aoduinn  agus  an  suilean  air  an  speur.

Euith  iad  a  sinn  gu  'n,  cuid  mnathan  a  thearnadh,  ach  bha  'n
'caol  eadar  iad  agus  an  tigh  ;  ach  le  'n  lannan  leum  iad  'n  caol,  ach
aon  fhear— Jlacanreaidhinn,  Thuit  Macanredhinn  sa  chaol,  agus
chaidh  a  bhathadh ;  agus  foidh  sinn  gus  an  latlia  ii'  duigh,  lean
Caol  Readhinn  air  a  chaol.

Fion  ach  as  gu  luath  air  ban  traichd  Fheinn,
S'  leinn  gach  fear  air  barr  a  shleagh,
'Us  fliag  iad  Macaureadhinn  sa  chaol.

Gu  freasdalach  thainig  na  mnathan  uile  roinihe,  ach  aon  na  dithis
dhiu  on  rinn  na  Feinn  a  dean-ruith  g  'n  teasmiginn.  Bha  na
Feinn  ann  an  fearg  mhor  ri  Conan,  airson  mar  a  rinn  e',  agus  rug
iad  air  a  chum  a  chuir  gu  has.  Dh'  iar  Conan  mar  fhathor  gun
reacheadh,  an  ceann  a  thabliairt  dheth  le  Mac  an  Luinne,  nach  fag-
eadh  fuigheall  na  dheigh,  claidheamh  Fhionn,  Mhic  Dhuil,  agus  a
mhac  fhinn,  Garabh,  ga  bhualadh  air  sliasaid  Fhion : —

Achanidh  gan'  iarridh  mi
As  eugmhais  m'  an  am  ri  iaridh
Mac  an  Luinne  a  bhuinte  m'  anam
Air  muin  sleiste  geile  n'  Fheinn.

Chaidh  so  a  cheadachadh  dha;  ach  chaidh  an  toiseach,  seach
seicheann  glasa,  seach  cuailtean  connaidh,  agus  seach  tiruinn  do
riosga  glas,  a  chuir  air  muin  sliasaid  Fhionn.

Chaidh  ceann  Chonan  a  leageadh  (na  leageil)  air  a  sinn  agus
bhuail  Garabh  a  mhac  le  Mac  an  Luinne  an  ceann  deth  agus.

Cha  bu  lionmhoire  crois  san  dearni,
Na  cuisle  gearte  an  sliasoid  Fhionn.

Dh'  eoraich  Garabh  dhiu  a  siun,  caite  am  robh  na  Feinn,  oir  bha  e


CAOL  REIDHIXN.  I  I  3

air  dol  air  a  chuthaeach,  agus  thubhairt  iad  ris  gu'n  robh  iad  gu  h'
iseal  foidh.  Gliabh  e  siiia  a  sis  gus  an  d'  rainig  e  an  fharige,  agus
shlachdanich  e  i  gus  an  do  bhath  se  e  fhein.

LXVIII.

Latha  do  Fhionn,  agus  ga  chuid  dhaoine,  a  bhi  a  mach  a  sealg  ann
an  Haslainn,  ann  an  Gortean-taoid,  ann  an  He,  chunnic  iad  a  tighinn
na  'n  comhdhail,  duine  mi  sgiamhach,  agus  suil  raholach  (?)  na  'n
aodinn.  Bha  e  dian-ruitb,  agus  e  sior-dheanadh  air  Fionu  Mac-
Dhuil.  An  nuair  a  chonnich  e  iar  gh,  iar  e  orra,  a  bbi  ga  leantinn-
sa,  gu  doruisd  a  cheardeach.  Arsa  Fionn — "  Caite  a  thrua  a  bheil  do
cheardach,  na  n'  fhearte  sinne  faicinn?"  "  Mo  cheardach  sa,"  arsa  n
gobhainn,  sith,  "  cha  n'eil  ri  fhaodinn,  's  ma  g'  fhaodas  mise  cha  n'
fhaic  sibh."  *

Shin  'n  gobhain-sibh  agus  Daorghlas,  a  mach  ri  uchd  an  t'
sleibh,  'us  cha  d'  ugadh  iad  ach  aon  cheum,  thar  gach  aon  ghleann,
fuar,  fasich.  Cha  n'  fhaichte  ach  air  eigin  cearb  gan'  eideadh  far  am
masann.t

A  tearnadh  gu  dorus  na  ceardach  dhenich  na  laoich  ri  cheile.
Fosgla  beag,  arsa  'n  gobhainn  sith ;  srac  ronihad  e  arsa  Daorghlas.

Sinn  thundeigh  'u  gobhainn-sith  agus  thubhairt  e.  A  righ  gu
'm  meal  thu  t'  ainm  a  Chaoilte  cha  bhi  Daorghlas  ort  fo  n  am  so.

San  a  sinn  a  thoisich  iad  air  Mac-an-Luinne  agus  an  nuair  abba
iad  ri?,  thainig  nigheau  a  gobhainn-shith  a  stigh  do'n  cheardich  agus
dh',  eorich  i  "  Co  am  fear  caol,  glas,  gu'n  tima  a  shineadh  a'  tinah
cruach  ?"  |  Thuit  an  oighe  ann  an  trom  cheiste  air  Caoilte  (Daorglas)
agus  thug  i  rathadh  dha  gu  'n  abradh  a  n'athair  ris  an  n'uair  a
bhithadh  'n  claidheamh  deas  gu  de  bha  dhi  air  an  nis,  agus  easan  a
ghrainn  tha  aon  rud  beag  a  dhi  air  fathast ;  e  sinn  bheirsinn  air  a
chlaidheamh  agus  e  ga  chuir  roimh  chorp  a  h'  athair  ga  faobhairt.
Alasdair,  a.  Mac  'Illmhichbil.

I  have  followed  the  orthography  of  the  MS.

*  Faiceadh  sibhse  sin  ma  dh'  fhaodas
Ach  ma  dh'  fhaodas  mise  cha  'n  fhaic  sibh. — (Gillies.)

t  Cha  deanadh  an  Gobhain  ach  aon  cheuni
Thar  gach  gleannan  foin  'n  robh  fasach
Cha  ruigeadh  oirne  ach  air  eigin
Cearb  d'  ur  n'  aodach  shuas  ar  musnibh,— {Gillies.)
^  Here  also  come  in  several  lines  of  the  old  poem,  as  given
by  Gillies,  1786.

I


T


LXIX.

THOMAS  OF  THE  THUMB.

From  Catherine  Macfarlane  in  1809.    John  Dewar.

HEEE  was  one  before  now  whose  name  was
Tomas  na  h  òrdaig,  and  he  Avas  no  bigger  than
the  thumb  of  a  stalwart  man.  Tomas  went  once  to
take  a  walk,  and  there  came  a  coarse  shower  of  hail-
stones, and  Tomas  went  in  under  a  dock  leaf;  and
there  came  a  great  drove  of  cattle  past,  and  there  was
a  great  brindled  bull  amongst  them,  and  he  was  eating
about  the  docken,  and  he  ate  Tomas  of  the  Thumb.
His  mother  and  his  father  missed  him,  and  they  went
to  seek  him.  They  were  going  past  the  brindled  bull,
and  quoth  T6mas  na  h  òrdaig,

"  Ye  are  there  a  seeking  me,
Tlirough  smooth  places,  and  moss  places ;
And  here  am  I  a  lonely  one,
Within  the  brindled  bull"

Then  they  killed  the  brindled  bull,  and  they  sought
Tomas  na  h  òrdaig  amongst  the  paimches  and  entrails
of  the  bull,  but  they  threw  away  the  great  gut  in  which
he  was.

There  came  a  carlin  the  way,  and  she  took  the
great  gut,  and  as  she  was  going  along  she  went  over  a

Tomas  said  something  to  her,  and  the  old  wife
threw  away  the  great  gut  from  her  in  a  fright.


THOMAS  OF  THE  THUMB.  I  I  5

Tliere  came  a  fox  the  way,  and  he  took  with  him
the  gut,  and  Tomas  shouted

"  Bies  taileii !  the  fox.     Bis  taileii !  the  fox."

Then  the  dogs  ran  after  the  fox,  and  they  caught  him,
and  they  ate  him ;  and  though  they  ate  the  gut  they
did  not  touch  Tomas  na  hòrdaig.

Tomas  went  home,  where  his  mother  and  his  father
were,  and  he  it  was  indeed  that  had  the  queer  story
for  them.


This  varies  from  the  book  adventures  of  our  old
friend  Tom  Thumb,  who  is  now  supposed  to  have  been
the  dwarf  of  King  Arthur.  The  story  comes  from  Glen-
falloch,  which  is  not  far  from  Dumbarton,  which  was,
according  to  family  tradition,  the  birth-place  of  King
Arthurs  son.  It  was  told  to  Dewar  by  a  girl  who
took  charge  of  him  when  a  child^  and  it  is  known  to
one  other  man  whom  I  know.  I  used  to  hear  the
adventm-es  of  "  Comhaoise  Ordaig  "  (Thumb's  co-tem-
porary), from  my  piper  nurse  myself,  but  I  was  so
young  at  the  time  that  I  have  forgotten  all  but  the
name.

The  cry  of  "bis  taileu  "  may  still  be  heard  in  the
mouths  of  herd  laddies  addressing  their  collies,  and  it
may  be  the  same  as  "  tally-ho ! "  for  which  a  French
derivation  has  been  sought  and  found — "tallis  hors."
I  would  rather  imagine  King  Arthur,  and  his  knights,
and  liis  dwarf,  shouting  an  old  Celtic  hunting  cry,
and  red-coated  sportsmen  keeping  it  up  till  now,
than  trace  it  to  Korman- French ;  but  in  any  case,  here
is  something  like  tally-ho  in  the  mouth  of  Tom  Thumb,
and  in  a  glen  where  tally-ho  has  never  been  heard.


I  1 6  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

LXIX.

TOMAS  NA  H-OKDAIG.

Bha  fear  ann  a  roimh  so,  do  am  b'  ainn  Tomas  na  b-ordaig ;  agus
cha  bu  mho  e  na  ordaig  duine  foghainteach,  Chaidh  Tomas  aon  uair
a  ghabbail  sraid,  agus  thainig  fras  gbarbh  chlacban  meallain  ;  agus
chaidb  Tomas  a  stigb  fo  dhuilbeag  chopaig,  Agus  Thainig  dròbhmòr
cruidh  seachad,  agus  bha  tarbh  mòr  riabhach  na  measg,  agus  bha  e
ag  iche  tiomchiol  na  copagaich.  Agus  dh'  iche  e  Tomas  na  h-ordaic.
Dhiondrain  a  mhathair  s  athair  e,  a's  chaidh  iad  g'a  iarraidh.  Bha
iad  dol  seachad  air  an  tarbh  riabhach,  agus  thubhairt  Tomas  na  h-
ordaig,

"  Tha  sibhse  an  sin  g'  am  iarraidhse,
Feadh  mhinegean,  s  mhonagan ;
S  mise  an  so  am  aonarn,
An  ton  an  tairbh  riobhaich."

An  sin  mharbh  iad  an  tarbh  riabhach,  agus  dh'  iarr  iad  Tomas  na
h-ordaig,  air  feadh  maodail  s  caolain  an  tairbh.  Ach  thilg  iad  uapa
an  caolan  taomadh.     Agus  is-e  sin  an  caolan  ann  san  robh  e.

Thainaig  cailleach  an  rathad,  agus  thug  i  leatha  an  caolan  taom
adh,  agus  air  dh  i  a  bhith  dol  air  a  h-aghart,  bhi  a  dol  thair  feith  s

leig    .     .    s  Thubhairt  Tomas  na  h-ordaig,  "  tut

a  chailleach,"  agus  thilg  a  chailleach  uaipe  an  caolan.

Thainig  sionnach  an  rathad,  s  thug  e  leis  an  caolan,  agus  ghlaodh
Tomas  na  h-ordaig  "  bìs-taileù  !  an  sionnach,  bis-taileu  !  an  sionn-
ach."

An  sin  ruith  na  coin  an  deigh  an  t'  shionnaich  agus  bheir  iad  air,
agus  mharbh  is  dh  ith  iad  e,  s  ge-d  dh  ith  iad  an  caolan,  cha  do  bhuin
iad  do  h-Thomas  na  h-ordaig.  Chaidh  Tomas  dachaidh  far  an  robh
a  mhathair  s  athair,  agus  san  aige  a  bha  an  sgeul  neonnach  doibh.

John  Dewar.

This  is  the  original  spelling.


i


117


From  a  Stone  at  Inverness.— Sculptured  Stones  of  Scotland,  PL  xxxviii.

The  folloAving  is  a  very  good  gloss  upon  the  lan-
guage of  bulls.  The  imitation  can  be  made  very  close
by  any  one  who  will  repeat  the  Gaelic  conversation  of
the  champions,  with  the  intention  of  imitating  the
sound  of  their  angry  bellowings.  These  go  by  the  name
of  "Boor-eech"  in  GaeUc,  and  oo,  ee,  and  r,  express
the  prevailing  sounds.  I  have  tried  to  spell  these
sounds,  but  I  have  small  hopes  of  conveying  an  idea
of  them  by  letters.

Whether  this  is  a  story  foimded  on  some  old  battle
between  tribes,  which  fought  near  the  "  Stone  of  the
Bulls,"  or  if  so,  who  these  may  have  been,  I  will  not
attempt  to  guess.

There  are  bulls  and  bulls'  heads  in  the  armorial  bear-
ings of  several  of  the  Highland  clans  ;  and  the  nick-
name of  "John  Bull"  must  have  had  some  origin.
There  is  a  bull  sculptured  on  an  old  stone  near  Inver-
ness, which  is  figured  in  "The  Sculptured  Stones  of
Scotland,"  from  which  work  the  drawing  above  is
copied.  The  story  is  certainly  the  invention  of  some
one  familiar  with  bulls,  whatever  it  means.


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


LXX.


THE  BULLS.

From  John  Dewar.     November  17,  1860.
rpHEEE  came  before  now  a  red  bull  from  Sasunn
-*-      (England),  to  put  Albainn  to  shame.     He  stood
on  the  shoulder  of  Bein  Voorling,  and  he  bellowed,

"  StrooAli  n  dooaich  !  StrooAh  n  dooaich  !  The
country  is  pitiable  ! "

There  was  a  black  Gaelic  bull  on  the  other  side  of
Loch  Loimein  (Loch  Lomond),  opposite  the  top  of  Dun
Polachròdh  (Castlepool  Castle),  and  he  bellowed,

"  KecA  AS  A  HA  00  ?  KeeA  as  a  ha  oo  ?  Whence
art  thou  Ì "

Quoth  the  red  bull,  "  a  tjeer  do  nAvaid.  a  tjeer
do  UAvaid.     From  thy  foe's  land."

Said  the  black  bull,  "  Cud  e  hechd  an  tjeer.  Cud
è  hechd  an  tjeer  ?"  Wliat  is  (the  reason  of)  thy  com-
ing from  the  land  ?

"  KruinAchd  s  Feen.  KruinAchd  s  Feem  Wheat
and  wine,"  said  the  red  bull.

"  Hoorin  oo  n  coir  do  hooiL  Hoorin  oo  n  coir  do
hooil.     I'd  drive  thee  backwards,"  said  the  black  bull.

"  KAtche  n  do  roogatoo  ?  KAtche  n  do  roogatoo  ?
Where  wert  thou  born  Ì "  said  the  red  bulL

"An  craw  an  dooin.  An  craw  an  dooin.  In  the
castle  fold,"  said  the  black  bidL

"  Cud  boo  veeA  gooit  on  va  oo  d  laogh  ?  Cud  boo
veeA  gooit  on  va  oo  d  laogh  Ì  What  was  thy  food
since  thou  wert  a  calf!"  said  the  red  bull.

"  BAÌne  s  bAr  fraoich.  BAÌne  s  bAr  fraoich.  Milk
and  heather  tops,"  said  the  black  bull.

"An  aorAchd  chrom  shaw  am  bel  do  chlev.  An
aoPAchd  chrom  shaw  am  bel  do  chlev.  This  crooked
horn  in  the  front  of  thy  chest,"  said  the  red  bull.


THE  BULLS.  I  1 9

"  Hoogad  mee  !  liAn  egal  do.  Hoogad  mee  !  luui
egal  do.  Shun  me  !  no  fear  of  me,"  said  the  black
bull

And  the  black  bull  went  round  about  the  upper
end  of  Loch  Lomond,  and  the  two  bulls  met  each  other
on  the  upper  shoulder  of  beinn  Voorluig,  and  they  set
heads  to  each  other,  and  they  struggled.

The  black  bidl  drove  the  red  bull  backwards  as  far
as  a  great  stone  that  was  there,  and  they  rolled  the
stone  over,  and  the  stone  rolled  down  to  a  level  place
that  is  at  the  side  of  the  road,  about  five  miles  on  the
upper  side  of  the  Lomond  Tarbert,  and  three  miles  on
the  lower  side  of  the  U2:>per  end  of  the  Loch  of  Lomond.

The  black  bull  put  his  crooked  horn  into  the  front
of  the  chest  of  the  red  bull,  and  he  killed  him  ;  and
"  clach  nan  tarv,"  the  stone  of  the  bulls,  is  the  name
that  is  on  that  stone  till  this  day's  day,  and  that  is  the
greatest  stone  that  is  in  the  three  realms.


LXX.


THE  BULLS.
Thainig  roimli  so  tarbh  dearg  a  Sasunn,  a  chum  maslachadh  a  tlioirt
do  Albainn,  Sheas  e  air  gualla  beinn  mhiirluig,  s  ghlaodh  e  "  Is
truagh  an  diithaich,  Is  truaf^h  an  diithaich."

Bha  tarbh  dubh  gaidhealach,  air  taobh  eile  loch  Loimeiun,  ma
coinneamh  braigh  Dunn  pholachròdh,  agus  ghloadh  e,  "  Cia  as  a  tha
thu  ?    Cia  as  a  tha  thu  ?

Ars  an  Tarbh  Dearag  "  A  tir  do  namhaid,"  A'  tir  do  namhaid.

Ars  an  Tarbh  Dubh  "  Ciod  e  do  theachd  an  tir  ?  Ciod  e  do
theachd,  etc.

An  Tarbh  dearg  "  Cruinneachd  s  fion,  Cruinneachd  s  fion,"  etc.

An  T  Dubh,  "  Chuirinn  thu  an  coir  do  chiiil,  etc.

An  T  Dearg,  "  C  aite  an  do  rugadh  th  ?  c'  aite,"  etc.

T  Dubh,  "An  crò  an  DUinn,  "u  crò  an  diiinn."

"  T  dearg,  "  Ciod  bu  bhiadh  dhuit  on  bha  thu  ad  laogh  ?  Ciod  bu
bhiadh  dhuit,"  etc.

T  Dubh,  "  Bainne  's  barr  fraoich,  Bainne,"  etc.


I20  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

An  T  dearg,  "An  adhrac  chroui  so  am  beul  do  chlèibh,  an  adhrac
chrom  s,"  etc.

An  T  dubh,  "  Chugad  mi,  cha  'n  eagal  domh.  Chugad  mi !  cha
n  eagal  domh."

Agus  chaidh  an  tarbh  dubh,  timchiol  cheann  shuas  Loch-Ioimeainn
agus  choinnich  an  dk  tharbh  a  cheile  air  gualla  shuas  beinn  mhiir-
luig  agus.  Chuir  iad  cinn  ri  cheile,  s  gleachd  iad.  Chuir  an  tarbh
dubh  an  tarbh  dearag  iar  ais  an  coinnimh  a  chuil,  gu  ruig  Clacli
mhor  a  bha  an  sin,  's  cliuir  iad  car  de  'n  clach,  's  roil  a  chlach  sios  gu
còmhnart,  a  ta  aig  taobh  an  rathaid  mhòir,  tuaiream  air  coige  mile,
taobh  shuas  an  Fairebeart  loimeanach,  agus  tri  mile  an  taobh  shios
do  cheann  shuas  an  loch-loimeainn.  Chuir  an  tarbh  dubh  an
adhrac  chrom  aige,  am  beul  a  chleibh  aig  an  tarbh  dhearag  agus
mharbh  se  e.

Agus  is  e  clach  nan  tarbh,  an  t-ainm,  a  ta  air  a  chlach  gus  an
latha  diugh,  agus  is  i  clach  is  momh  a  ta  ann  is  na  tri  rioghachdan.

J.  Dewar.
This  is  the  original  spelling.


LXXI.

THE  HOODIE  CATECHISING  THE
YOUNG  ONE.

THE  hoodie  fell  to  at  catechising  the  gorrachan,  and
she  said  to  him, —

"  If  thou  seest  one  coming,  and  a  slender  stick  in
his  oxter,  and  a  broad  end  to  it,  flee — that  will  be  a
gun  ;  he  will  be  going  to  kill  thee.  If  thou  seest  one
coming,  and  Hfting  a  pebble,  it  is  lifting  it  to  kill  thee,
that  he  will  be — flee.  If  thou  seest  one  coming  fair
straight  forward,  and  without  anything  in  his  oxter,
and  without  stooping,  thou  needst  not  stir,  that  one
will  not  touch  thee."

"Wliat,"  said  the  croaker,  "if  the  stone  be  in  his
pouch?"

"  Oh  ! "  said  the  Hoodie,  "  I  need  not  be  instruct-
ing thee  any  longer."


THE  HOODIE  AND  THE  FOX.  I  2  I

AN  FHEANNAG  A'  LEAGASG  A'  GHORRACHDAIN.
Thoisich  an  fheannag  air  teagasg  a'  ghorrachdain  's  thiiirt  i  ris.
Ma  chi  thu  fear  a  tighinn  agus  stichd  chaol  'iia  asgaill  agus  ceann
leathann  urra  teich  ;  's  e  gunna  bhios  ann  ;  bidh  e  dol  a'd  mharbh-
adh."  Ma  chi  tliu  fear  a'  tighinn  agus  e  togail  doirnei'g,  's  ann  'ga
togail  a  dhol  a'd'  mhorbhadhsa  bhith  eaa  e  ;  teich.  "  Ma  chi  thu
fear  a  tighinn  lom,  direach,  's  gun  ni  'sam  bith  'na  asgaill,  's  gun  e
cromadh,  cha  ruig  thu  leas  carachadh ;  cha  bhoin  am  fear  sin  duit."
"  Gu  de  ars' an  gorrachdan,  ma  bhios  a' chlach 'na  phoca."  "0,"
ars'  an  fheannag,  "  cha  ruig  mise  leas  a  bhi  gad,  ionnsachadh  na'  s
fhaide."

LXXII.
THE  HOODIE  AND  THE  FOX.
rPHE  hoodie  and  the  fox  were  good  at  early  rising,  and
-*-  they  laid  a  wager  with  each  other,  for  which  should
soonest  get  up  in  the  morning.  The  hoodie  went  into
a  tree  top,  and  she  slept  ;  and  the  fox  staid  at  the
foot  of  the  tree,  looking  aloft  (to  see)  when  the  day
would  come.  As  soon  as  he  perceived  the  day  he
cried,  "  Se-n-lA-bAn-e."      It  is  the  bright  day.

The  hoodie  had  never  stirred  all  the  night,  and
then  she  awoke  with  the  cry,  and  she  answered,
"  SAd-0-bè-è,  SAd-o-bè-è."  It's  long  since  it  was.
Then  the  fox  lost  the  wasrer  and  the  hoodie  won.


AN  FHEANNAG  'S  AM  MADADH  RUADH.
Bha  'n  fheannag  's  am  madadh  ruadh  math  air  moch-eirigh,  agus
chuir  iad  geall  ri  'cheile  airson  co  a  bu  luaithe  dh'  eireadh  's  a'
mhaidinn.  Chaidh  an  fheannag  ann  am  barr  craoibhe  agus
chaidil  i,  's  dh'  fhan  am  madadh  ruadh  aig  bonn  na  craoibhe,  's  e  'g
amharc  an  aird  cuin  a  thigeadh  an  latha,  ach  cha  do  chaidil  e  idir.
Co  luath  's  a  mhothaich  esan  do  'n  latha  ghlaoidh  e,  "  'S  e  'n  latha
ban  e."  Bha  'n  fheannag  gun  smoisleachadh  fad  na  hoidhche  gus
an  sin ;  dhuisg  i  le  a  ghlaodh  san  agus  fhreagair  i,  "  'S  fhad'  o  b'  e  e,
— 'S  fhad'  0  b'  e  e."  Chaill  am  madadh  ruadh  an  seo  an  geall  's
bhuidhinn  an  fheannag.

From  John  MacArthur  (shepherd),  Uchd  nan  Clach,  who  says
he  learnt  them  from  Donald  MacGeachy,  carding-miller,  Walkmill,
a  native  of  Kintyre ;  andDugald  MacNiven  in  Cairnbui. — H.  M'L.


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


Harper. — From  a  stone  at  Monifeith. — Chalmers'  Sadptured  Stones  of  A  ngvs

LXXIII.
THE  YELLOW  MUILEAETEACH.
1 — Bard.
On  a  day  when  the  Fliinn  were  on  Oirill's  mound,
A  watcliing  the  Eireann  all  around,
There  was  seen  coming  on  the  tops  of  the  wave,
The  crooked,  clamouring,  shivering  brave.


The  name  of  that  luidaunted  wraith
"Was  the  bald  russet-yellow  Muilearteach  ;
From  Lochlann's  bounds,  coming  on  brine,
All  in  a  day  to  cover  Eiriim


A  MHUILEARTACH  BHUIDHE.


123


From  a  stone  coffin  at  Govan. — Sculptured  Stones  of  Scotland,  PI.  cxxxiv.

A  MHUILEAETACH  BHUIDHE  *

1
Latha  cUi'  an  Fhiun,  air  Tulacli  Oirill,'
A'  coimhead  na  h-Eireanu  mu  timchill
Chunnacas  a'  tighinn,  air  barraibli  tlionn,
An  eàrra,  gliàireach,  cliraobhaidli,  clu-om.^


'Se  b'  ainm  dli'  an  fuath  nach  bu  thini
A'  Mhuileartacb  mbaol,  ruaclb-bliuidhe,
O  chriochan  Loclilann  'tighinn  air  sail
Gu  h-Eirinn  a  clionihdacb  a  dh'  aon  la.
*  In  Gillies,  this  character  is  a  man,  and  called  a  Mhuireart-
each ;  perhaps  muir  iarteach, — sea  western.


124  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


A  rusted  glaive  was  upon  her  belt,

Will  give  them  a  grim  darkling  pelt ;

When  the  time  of  the  fury  of  battle  shall  come.


There  were  two  slender  spears  of  battle,
Upon  the  other  side  of  the  carlin  ;
Her  face  was  blue-black,  of  the  lustre  of  coal,
And  her  bone  tufted  tooth  was  like  rusted  bone.


In  her  head  was  one  deep  pool-hke  eye,
Swifter  than  a  star  in  a  winter  sky ;
Upon  her  head  gnarled  brushwood.
Like  the  clawed  old  wood  of  the  aspen  root.

6
Her  heart  was  merry  for  joy,
As  she  saw  in  the  south  the  Fiantaidh ;
"  Will  ye  not  teach  the  wretch  to  her  ruin.
Let  not  her's  be  a  good  gift  without  return."

7
And  a  hundred  warriors  she  sportively  slew,
And  there  was  a  grin  on  her  rugged  maw  ;
A  warrior  exalted  each  warrior  of  these,
And  that  were  raised  up  on  slender  trees.

8
A  pouring  of  their  blood  amongst  the  hounds.
And  the  juice  of  the  fruit  of  Oireal  was  threatened  ;


A  MHUILEARTACH  BHUIDHE.

3

Bha  claicUieainh.  meirgeach  air  a  crios
Bheix  dhaibh  caisgeadh  dtiige,  doite"
An  am  an  d'  tliigeadh  gairblie  catlia,

4

Bha  da  shleagha  chaola  chatha

Air  an  taobh  eile  dh.'  an  chaillich.

Bha  'h-aodann  dubh-ghorm  air  dreach  a'  ghuail,

'S  a  deud  cnabadach,  cnàmh-ruadh/

5

Bha  aon  suil  ghlumach^  'na  ceann
Bu  luaithe  na  rionnag  gheamhraidh  ;
"  Craohh  mhineach  chas  air  a  ceann
Mar'  choill  inich  de  'n  t-seana  chrithinn.

6

Bha  'cridlie  'mire  ri  h-àdh,

'Si  'g  amharc  nam  Fianntaidh  fo  dlieas,

"  Xach  deachd*  sibh  a'  bheist  thiin  a  h-aimhleis.

'S  gu  'n  tharladli  leatha  gean  gun  chomain  ; "


'S  gu  'n  marbh  i  le  'h-abhachd  ceud  Laoch
'S  gu  'n  robh  càir"  air  a  garbh  cliraos.
Laoch  inbheach  gach  laoch  a  bh'  ann,
'S  a  thogadli  air  chaola  chrann.


Air  sgath  fala,  'measg  nan  con,

'S  bha  brigh  mhios  Oirill  'ga  maoidheadh-


126


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


9 — Witch.


"  AVho  are  the  warriors  better  than  they  Ì "
Out  spoke  the  yellow  Muilearteach  ;
"  Terror  or  fear  there  is  not  upon  me,
Before  the  king  since  I  happened  upon  ye."

10— Bard.
To  Fionn  Prince  of  the  Finne  there  came,
The  ill-favoured  goblin  right  valiant ;
By  her  there  were  slaughtered  nine  in  the  plain,
As  she  sought  for  detestable  combat.

11 — Witch.
"  Now  since  I  have  come  over  the  brine,
For  the  taking  of  all  Eirinn  ;
Let  yielding  be  given  me  without  pain.
Or  else  a  whole  battle  of  hardy  men."

12 — BxVRD  and  Fionn.
Mac  Chumhail  would  give  that  without  displeasure,
Ten  hundred  hounds,  upon  leashes  of  leather  ;
"  Take  the  bribe,  and  besides  (behold).
Ten  hundred  ruddy  apples  of  gold."

13— Witch.

"  Although  I  should  get  all  the  value  of  Eirinn,
With  her  gold,  and  her  silver,  and  her  precious  things
I  would  rather  have  on  board  of  my  vessel.
The  heads  of  Osgar,  and  Eaonaidh,  and  CoiriL"

14 — Bard  and  Conan.
Spoke  a  hero  that  brooked  no  slur.
Son  of  great  Morna,  by  name  Conan  ;
"  Thou  shalt  loose  the  bush  of  thy  round  head.
Because  thou  hast  asked  for  the  son  of  Oisein."


A  MHUILEARTACH  BHUIDHE.
9

"  Cia  iad  na  laoich  a  's  flieaiT  na  sin  Ì "

Labhair  a'  Mhuileartacli  bhuidlie.

"  Fiamli  na  eagal  cha  'n  'eil  orm

Eoinih  'n  righ,  o'n  tliarladli  mi  thugaibh."*

10
Gu  Fionn,  flath  na  Flnne,  thainig
Am  fiiatb  dith-mhaiseach/"  deagh-dliana.
^NDiarbhadh  leatha  naonar  's  a'  ndiagh,
'S  i  'g  iarraidh  fuath'chadb  na  comliraig.

11
"  jSTis  o'n  thainig  mi  air  sail
Gu  h-Eirinn  uile  do  ghabliail,
Thugta  geill  gun  doruinn  domli,
Airneo  comhrag  cròdha  churaidliean."

12
Bheireadh  IMacChumliail  siud  di  gun  diombadli
Deicli  ceud  cu  air  choinili-lion  eille,
"  Gabb  an  cumlia,  is  e  'choir,"
"  Deich  ceud  ubhlan  dearg  òir."

13
"  Buaidli  na  h-Eirionn  gad  gheibhinn  uile,
Le  'h-or,  's  le  'h-airgiod,  's  le  'h-ionmlias,
B'  fhearr  learn,  air  bord  air  mo  luing,
Ceann  Osgaii-,  a's  Eaonaidh,  a's  Choiril."

14
Labhair  laoch  nach  d'  fliulaing  tair,
Mac  mor  j\Iorna  d'  am  b'  ainm  Conan,
"  Caillitlli  tu  dos  do  chinn  chruinn
Ann  an  dàil  j\Ihic  Oisein  iarraidh."

*  Another  version  is, — O'n  ti  a  tliarladh  mi  thurraibli.


128  west  highland  tales.

15— Bard.

When  they  saw  the  wrath  of  the  monster,
Up  rose  Fionn  the  Prince  of  the  Finne  ;
Up  rose  Oisean,  Prince  of  the  men,
Up  rose  Osgar,  and  loUainn.

16
Up  rose  Diarmaid  o'  Duibhne  ;
Up  rose  they,  and  lall  o'  Buidhne ;
Three  sons  of  the  dusky  black  king  Dhuinne
Up  rose  they,  and  Cearbhal.

17

Up  rose  Glaisean  o'  Damhach  ;

Up  rose  they,  and  Ard  Amharc  ;

Up  rose  Ciar  Dhubh,  Prince  of  Lomhann,

The  doughtiest  four  that  were  in  the  Fhinii.

18
Went  to  do  battle  with  the  beast.


She  was  serving  them  out  in  turn,
As  a  blade  might  run  through  flame  ;
Until  there  met  MacChumail  the  grand,
And  the  Muilearteach  hand  to  hand.

20
Their  equal  was  never  yet  seen.
Since  the  smithy  of  I;onn  MacLiobhainn  ;  *
Tliere  was  dew  on  the  points  of  the  spears.
Of  MacChumhail  of  the  sides  so  fair.
*  See  No.  LXVIII.


A  MHUILEARTACH  BHUIDHE.  I  29

15

Nuair  chumiaic  iacl  colg  na  beiste  ;
Gu  'n'  d'  eiiicli  Fionn,  flath  na  Finne  ;
Dh'  eirich  Oisean,  flatli  nam  fear  ;
Gu  'n  d'  eirich  Osgar  a's  loUainn.

16
Gu  'n  d'  eirich  Diarmaid  0  Duibhne ;
Gu  'n  d'  eirich  sin  a's  lall  0  Buidhne  ;
Triuir  mac  an  righ  chiar-dliubh  Dhuinne  ;
Gu  'n  d'  eirich  sin  agus  Cearbhall.

17

Dh'  eirich  Glaisean  0  DamJiach  ;

Dh'  eirich  sin  agus  Ard-amliarc ;

Dh'  eirich  Ciar-dliubh,  mac  righ  Lomhann.

A  cheathrar  a  b'  fhoghaintiche  'bha  'san  Fhlnn,

18
Chaidli  a  chomliraff  ris  a'  bheist.


19

Bha  i  'gam  frithealadli  mu  seach

Mar  a  ruitheadli  lann  roimh  lasair,

Gus  an  do  thachair  Mac  Chunihail  an  aidli

'S  a'  IVDiuileartach  lamh  ri  lamli.

20
An  aicheadh  cha  'n  fhacas  mar  sin
0  cheardach  Lonn  Mliic  an  Liobhann,
Bha  dealt  air  bharraibh  a  shleagh
Aig  Mac  Chumhail  an  taoibh  ghil.

K


130  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

21

Her  side  was  pierced  with  sharp  wounds,
There  was  raiu  of  her  blood  on  the  heather ;
The  Muilearteach  was  slain  by  the  king,
And  if  she  was  slain,  it  was  no  smooth  slaying.

22— Smith.
Tlae  smith  took  with  him  her  bree*
To  Tur  Leoin  of  the  high  king
"  My  sorrow  ! "  said  the  smith  of  the  axes,
"  If  bald  russet  Muilearteach  is  slain."

23— King.

The  king  said,   "  the  people  never  stood.
That  on  the  bald  russet  could  bring  blood  ;
Unless  in  a  land  of  holes  fell  she,
Or  was  drowned  upon  the  smooth  bare  sea."

24
"  There  never  yet  have  come  of  any.
Those  who  the  yellow  Muilearteach  could  slay  ;
They  did  not  sla}^  her,  but  the  Fhinn,
A  band  from  whom  tribute  is  not  won."

25
"  Great  is  the  shame  to  the  blossom  of  Phail,
To  give  under  to  the  people  of  a  single  isle  ;
To  the  travelling,  and  to  the  Avest,
Travel  we,  and  travel  we  in  haste."

26
"  That  I  would  give  my  vow  again,
If  my  mild  Muilearteach  has  been  slain  ;
That  I  with  my  people  should  never  return,
Till  Eirinn  to  a  heap  of  ashes  should  burn.

*  It  seems  that  she  was  the  wife  of  a  superhuman  Celtic  sea
smith,  who  goes  by  the  name  of  Balcan  sometimes.


A  MHUILEARTACH  BHUIDHE.
21

Bha  'taobli  air  a  tholladh  le  guin ;
Bha  braon  dh'  a  fiiil  air  na  fi-aochaibh.
Mliarbliadli  a'  Mhuileartacb  leis  an  righ ;
Ma  raharbliadli  cha  b'  e  'in  marbhadb  mxn.

22
Thug  an  gobha  leis  an  brigh
Gu  tùr  Leoin,  an  t-ard  righ.
"  Mo  bheud,"  arsa  gobha  nan  tuadh,
"  Ma  mharbhadh  a  Mhuileartacb  mhaol  ruadh.

23
Tlniirt  an  righ,  "  nach  d'  flias  a  shluagh
^Na  'bheireadh  Ml  air  a'  nihaoil  ruaidh.
Mar  an  deach  i  'n  talainh  toll,
Na  'bathadh  air  muir  sleanihuinn,  lonx"

24
"  Cha  d'  thainig  de  dhaoine  'sani  bith
Na  'mharbhadh  a'  Mhuileartacb  l:)huidhe.
Cha  do  mharbh  i  ach  an  Fhinn,
Buidheann  bhar  nach  biiinigear  cis."

25

"  'S  mor  an  naire  do  Bhlaith  Phàil
Geill  a  thoirt  do  luchd  aon  eilean.
Air  an  triallani,  's  air  an  iar  ;
Triallam,  agus  triaUam  mor."

2G
"  Gu  'n  d'  tliugainn — sa  mo  bhòid  a  ris,
]\Ia  mharbhadh  mo  Mhuileartacb  niMn,
A  choidhch  nach  tillinn  le  m'  sliluagh
Gus  am  biodli  Eirinn  'na  torr  luatha.


132  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

27

"  In  Eirinn  let  me  not  leave  a  stone,
In  bm-n,  or  in  moor,  or  in  mountain  lone  ;
Unlifted  ujDon  the  beaks  of  my  fleet,
Eirinn  level  of  such  great  weight."

28
"  I  will  bring  my  plungers  upon  the  brine
To  bring  out  of  her  sea  bent  all  Eirinn."


29— Bard.

Great  is  the  brag  for  the  white  ships
The  whole  of  Eirinn  to  uphft,
And  that  there  are  not  Avhite  ships  in  being
That  could  uplift  one  fifth  of  Eirinn.

.30— King.

"  Gather  to  me  my  worthy  race,
King  of  the  Spaniards  and  his  force,
The  king  of  Greece  and  of  Galha  clean,
King  of  Hispania  and  of  the  Inds."

31— Bard.
Gather  of  the  whole  world  the  clan.
The  cliikben  of  a  king  and  of  a  single  man.
Goblin  or  champion  shall  not  get  clear
From  the  beautiful  Fhinn  of  the  yellow  hair.

32

Seven  score  ships,  and  one  thousand

Gathered  the  king,  what  a  heavy  band

For  the  taking  of  all  Eirinn,

Could  it  be  brought  to  Fionn,  prince  of  the  Finno.


A  MHUILEARTACH  BHUIDHE.  I  3  3

27
"  All  Eirinn  na  fagam  clach,
An  allt,  na  'ni  nionadh,  na  'm  fireach,
Gun  thogail  air  cliorraibli  mo  long  ;
Eirinn  chothromacli,  clio  trom.

28
'"  Bheiream  breabanaicli  air  sail
Toirt  Eirinn  nil'  as  a  tan."


29
'S  nior  an  spleadh  do  luingeas  ban
Eirinn  uile  do  thogfàil ;
'S  gun  de  luingeas  ban  sani  bith
Na  thogadh,  a  dli'  Eirinn,  coigeamh.

30

PtlGH.

"  Tionail  tliugam  mo  theaglilach  coir,
Eigh  na  li-Easpanaidh  's  a  shlogb,
Eigh  Greige,  's  righ  Gallia  glan,
Righ  na  li-Easpaimi  a's  na  h-Inid."

31

FiLIDH.

Tionail  sluagli  an  t-saoghail  uile,
De  clilann  rigb,  's  de  dh'  aon  duine  ;
Fuatli  na  eàrrachd  cba  d'  thig  as
O'n  Fliinn  aluinn  ihalt-bhuidhe."

32.

Seacbd  fichead  a's  mile  long

Thionail  an  righ,  's  gu  'm  b'  f  heachd  trom,

Gu  gabliail  Eirimi  air  fed  ;

Gu  Fionn,  flath.  na  Finne  na  'n  tart  'e.


134  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

33

There  was  not  a  port  nor  a  half  port  within
The  five-fifths  of  the  Eireann
That  of  beaked  barks  was  not  full,
And  of  the  barges  of  their  lords  aU.

34

Though  it  was  evil  to  be  waiting  for  them,
'Twas  no  better  for  them  that  to  us  they  came.


35

A  messenger  came  from  Blaith  Phail,
To  find  for  him  the  Muilearteach,
Or  else  the  bold  youth  of  aU.  ELrmn,
The  children  of  a  single  man  or  of  a  king.

That  MacChumhail  would  give  to  the
King  of  Lochlann,  and  without  a  grudge.


36

Ten  hundi-ed  helmets  and  fine  mail,
Ten  hundred  shields  and  sheathed  glaives,
Ten  hundred  collars  of  gold  upon  hounds,
Ten  hundred  slender  stingers  of  battle.

37

Ten  hundred  fine  coloured  flags,

Ten  hundred  wise  warriors  whom  he  might  choose,

Ten  hundred  bridles  of  gold  and  saddles.


A  MHUILEARTACH  BHUIDHE.  I  3  5

33

Cha  robh  port  na  leith-phort  ami,
An  coig  choigeamh  na  h-Eireann,
Nacli  robh  Ian  tie  bharcaibli  bheaonach,
Agus  bhirlinnibli  o  tliighearnan.

34
Ge  b'  olc  dhuinn  a  bhitb  air  an  cionn,
Cha  'n  ann  daibh-san  a  b'  f  hearr  teachd  thugainn.


35

Thainig  teachdair  o  Bhlaith  Phàil
A  Mhuileartach  f  haotainn  da,
Airneo  borbraidli  Eirinn  uile
Eadar  clann  righ  's  aon  duine.

Bheireadh  MacChmnliail  siud  do  righ  Lochlann
'S  gun  diomadh  ; —


36
Deich  ceud  clogad  a's  caol  luireach,
Deich  ceud  sgiath  a's  claidheamh  comhdaicht,
Deich  ceud  lomhainn  oil-  air  chonaibh,
Deich  ceud  sallta  chaola  chatha,

37
Deich  ceud  bratach  luliine,  dhaite,
Deich  ceud  saoidli,  na  'm  b'  aille  leis,
Deich  ceud  strian  òir  agus  diollaid.


136  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

38.

Thougli  he  got  all  that,  the  king  of  Lochlann
And  the  bold  youth  of  the  whole  of  Eirionn,
For  ever  with  his  people  he  would  not  be  still
Till  Errinn  should  become  a  ruddy  hill.

39 LoCHLxVNNERS.

Then  spoke  an  answerable  true  wise  bard,
The  lad  that  could  answer  with  a  knowing  word
And  he  spoke  timidly  and  Hke  a  seer
Unto  the  king  that  was  too  early.

40— Bard.
"  Though  you,  like  the  whole  of  the  Fhinn,
In  the  front  of  battle  and  combat
You  must  come  as  lions,  weighty  and  gray,
Or  else  you  will  work  out  your  own  decay.

41.
"  It  were  better  to  get  us  on  a  single  place
Than  from  billow  to  billow  to  be  on  our  trace."


42— King.

"  Thy  counsel  is  lying,  thou  musical  bard,"
Out  spoke  the  king,  wrathfully,  hatingly,
"  Because  a  third  part  of  what  is  there  (seen)
Thou  hast  never  beheld  in  Eirinn."

43 — Feene,
*  Then  spoke  Garaidh  of  the  glens  :  (^)
"  If  you  will  take  my  counsel,  Fhinn,
Let  submission  be  given  on  the  sea.
That  for  ever  under  his  sway  you  may  be."

*  Here  tlie  action  changes  from  one  camp  to  the  other.


A  MHUILEARTACH  BHUIDHE.  I  3  7

38
Gad  a  gheibheadli  rigli  Lochlann  siud,
Agus  borbraidh  na  h-  Eirioim  uile,
Choidlicli'  cha  stadadh  e  le  'shluagh
Gus  am  biodh  Eiriiin  'na  torr  ruadli.

39
Thuirt  filidh  freagarrach,  fior-ghlic,
An  gille  fhreagradh  gii  li-eolach —
'S  labliair  e  gu  fromhaidli,  fàdh,
Eis  an  rigli,  gu  'n  robli  ro  tlirath.

40 — Filidh.
"  Ge  matli  leibbs'  an  Fhinn  uile
An  tus  cath  agus  comhraig  ;
Thig  sibh  'n  'ur  Leombana  trom,  gUas,
Airneo  ni  sibh  uil'  'ur  n-aimhleas.

41

B'  fbearr  'ur  faigliinn  air  aona  bhall,

Na  'bbitb  'g  ur  sireadh  0  tbuinn  gu  tuinn."


42— PtlGH.

'S  breugach  do  bbeacbd  f  bilidh  bhinn,
Thuirt  an  righ  gu  fuathach,  feargach  ;
"  Agus  trian  na  'bheil  an  sm
Nach  fhaca  tu  rianih  an  Eirinn."

43
An  sin  labhair  Garaidh  nan  Gleann,
"  Ma  ghabhas  sibh  comhairl,  Fhimi,
Rachadh  geill  a  thoirt  air  sail,
'S  gu  'm  biodh  sibh  gu  bràth  fo  iona."


138  west  highland  tales.

44 — Bard.
Up  rose  lollain  with  a  hero's  tread,
And  each  one  followed  him  side  by  side,
To  give  a  leathering  to  GaraicUi  from  the  wild,
Who  the  service  of  man  could  not  abide.

45 — FiONN.
"  Stay  thou,  lollain,  as  thou  mayest  be,"
Said  MacChumhail,  the  prince  so  high,
"Though  evil  the  counsel  of  the  man,
Stalwart  his  hand  when  the  strife  began."

46 — OSGAR.
Said  Osgar,  as  he  felt  the  pain,
"  Whatever  ship  is  of  loftiest  sail.
Shall  swim  in  blood  beneath  her  keel,
If  there  be  enough  within  her  hull."

47— Bard.
Then  raised  they,  and  they  were  not  scarce.
Their  slender  pennons  on  their  slender  shafts
The  standard  of  MacChumhail  of  Victories,
"  Sun's  brightness,"  above  the  trees.

48.
There  were  nine  chains  fi'om  it  downward  fell
Of  the  yellow  gold,  of  no  lustre  dull,
A  hero  at  every  chain  of  these.
That  was  holtUng  them  against  the  stays.

49.
In  the  camp  there  was  many  a  thousand  of  men.
Many  a  one  with  blades  and  spears  so  keen,
Many  a  trunkless  head  was  there.
Many  a  neck  there  was  swept  bare.

From  the  first  of  the  sun  tiU  the  same  evening.


A  MHUILEARTACn  BHUIDHE.  I  39

44

Dh'  eiricli  lollainn,  's  bu  cheum  laoich,
'S  gach  ti  lean  e  taobh  ri  taobh,
Thoirt  leadairt  air  Garaidh  o  'n  f  liasach,
'S  cha  b'  aill  leis  duine  'ga  f  hasdadh.

45 — FiONN.
"Stad  ort  lollainn  mar  a  ta  tliu  ;"
Arsa  Mac  Chiunliail  an  ard  fhlatha,
"  Ge  b'  olc  impidli  an  fhir,
"  Bu  teom'  a  lamb  arms  an  iorgiiiU."

46 OSGAR.

Thnirt  Osgar,  's  e  'gabhail  leon,
"  Ge  b'  e  long  a  's  airde  seol,
Snamhaidh  i  'm  foil  fo'  a  driom,
Ma  tba  na  h-urad  'na  colainn."

47 FiLIDH.

Thog  iad  an  siud,  's  cha  bu  gbann,
An  caol  slirolt,  air  an  caol  clrroinn  ; —
Bratach  Mhic  Cbumliail  an  aitUi,
Gile-glireine,  as  cionn  chrainnaibk

48
Bha  naoidb  slabbraidbean  aisde  sios
De  'n  or  bhuidbe  gim  dall-sgiamh  ;
Laoch  air  gach  slabhraidh  dhiu  sin
A  bha  'gan  cumail  ris  na  slàithean.

49
Bu  lionar  's  a'  chrò  mile  fear  ;
Bu  Uonar  fear  gheur  lann  's  sleagh  ann  ;
Bu  honar  ceann  ann  gun  chora  iona ;
Bu  lionar  muineal  ann  air  maoladh,
0  thus  greine  gu  cou-fheasgar.


140  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

50

Those  heroes  the  greatest  of  the  tribe
That  came  to  us  with  an  army  (of  pride),
To  them  the  camp  was  the  narrowest
Ere  their  rough  vapouring  was  dispersed.

51
In  the  thick  of  the  i)eople  Osgar  sleAv
One  hundred  sj^earmen  for  the  first  time,
Another  hundred  of  the  people  by  three,
Seeking  a  way  to  their  Ai'd  Eigh.

52
Another  hundred  of  the  hosts  of  men
On  the  further  side  of  the  king  of  Lochlann,
Until  he  slew,  in  the  thick  of  the  host,
The  king  for  all  his  great  honour's  boast.

53
"WTien  they  saw  that  the  king  had  fallen.
Their  courage  failed  them,  and  in  great  swiftness.
They  went  all  in  ranks  to  the  sea ;
And  the  battle  poet  was  driving  them.

54
Amongst  the  warriors  in  turn,
It  was  the  Osgar  that  was  urging  them.
After  he  had  given  the  war
Came  succour  to  the  hero  of  bright  arms.

55

For  through  the  spear-holes  there  might  go
The  sickles  f)  through  the  back  of  Osgar.


A  MHUILBARTACH  BHUIDHE.
50

'All  laocli  sin  bu  mho  dhe  'n  t-slioclid
A  tliaiiiig  tliugainn  le  'mhor  f  heachd  ;
'Sann  daibhsan  bu  chiiing'  an  crò
Ma'n  do  sgaoileadli  an  garbh  sgleo.

51
IVIliarbh  Osgar,  an  tiugb  an  t-shiaigh,
Ceiid  fear  sleagba  mar  cheud  uair,
Ceud  eil'  as  a'  phobidl  a  tri,
Ag  iarraidh  thun  an  ard  righ.

52
Ceud  eile  de  shluagh  nam  fear
An  taobh  tball  de  rigb  Locblann,
Gus  an  do  mliarbb  e,  'n  tiugb  an  t-sluaigb,
An  righ  air  mheud  onaracb.

53
Nuair  cbunnalc  iad  gun  d'  thuit  an  righ
Threig  am  meanmna  iad  's  am  mor  luathas
Cbaidli  iad  'nan  sreathan  gu  sail,
'S  a'  cbliar  cbatha  'gan  iomain.

54
Eadar  na  saoidhean  mu  seacb
'S  e'n  t-Osgar  a  bha  'gan  iomain ;
An  deis  a  bhitb  tabhairt  a'  bhlair,
'S  ann  thainig  cobhair  gu  laoch  arm-ghil.

55
Oir  rachadh,  roimb  thollaibh  nan  sleagh,
Na  còrran  roimb  dbriom  Osgair.


WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.


56.


Wliatever  that  day  miglit  hap  to  be
On  the  battle  steep  side  of  Beinn-Eudainn,
Such  Hke  great  peril  was  not  there  found
Prom  the  first  of  the  Finne  till  one  day

On  the  day  when  the  Fhinn  were  on  Oirill's  Mound.

Wrote  down  this  poem  from  the  recitation  of  Angus  MacDon-
ald,  Staoine-breac,  South  Uist,  September  1860,  and  again  from
that  of  Allan  MacPhie,  tailor.  MacDonakl  gives  the  same
authority  for  it  as  for  the  "  Great  Fool,''  and  MacPhie  says  he
learnt  it  from  one  Donald  Maclntyre,  who  has  gone  to  America,
and  if  living  is  now  about  80  years  of  age.  In  Barra,  I  heard  it
from  Alexander  MacDonald,  Burgh  ;  and  from  Donald  MacPhie,
smith,  Brembhaig,  who  learnt  it  from  an  uncle  of  his.  Hector
MacLaine,  also  a  smith.  Some  versions  have  lines  which  are
wanting  in  others,  and  in  some  lines  there  are  a  few  slight  varia-
tions. I  have  inserted  those  lines  and  words  which  I  thought
best  when  differences  occurred.  H.  M'L.

(1)  Maclean  translates  this  brushwood,  but  the  carlin  was  bald,
and  I  have  heard  the  word  used  to  express  a  picture  on  a  shield
of  some  large  bird,  like  an  eagle,  which  is  often  mentioned  in
stories  as  "  Creveenach."  The  word  may  have  something  to  do
with  GrifBn,  or  Tree  Lion.

(-)  This  warrior  is  said  to  have  given  the  name  to  Glengarry.
There  are  legends  about  him  still  current  in  that  neighbourhood.

(^)  Herons  is  the  more  evident  meaning,  but  corr  means  any
crooked  instrument.     The  line  occurs  elsewhere.

[In  translating  this,  I  have  aimed  at  giving  the
meaning  of  each  line,  at  imitating  the  rhythm  of  the
original,  as  well  as  I  could,  and  at  giving  the  same  amount
of  rhyme,  where  I  was  able  to  hit  upon  rhymes  that  would
not  alter  the  meaning.  MacLean's  manuscript  is  not
divided  into  quati-ains,  but  I  have  heard  this  chanted,
and  the  measure,  and  the  music,  and  the  meaning,  all


A  MHUILEARTACH  BHUIDHE.  I  43

56

Ge  b'  e  bliitheadh  an  latha  sin
Air  taobh  uclid-catlia  Bheinn  Eudainn  ;
A  leitbid  de  bhaoghal  elm  d'  f  huaras  anu,
0  thus  na  Finne  gus  an  aon  latba,

'S  latha  dha  'n  Fhinn  air  tnlach  Oirill.

point  to  a  division  into  quatrains.  I  am  indebted  to
the  collector  for  a  literal  translation,  which  has  been  of
the  greatest  assistance  ;  but  I  have  here  and  there  fol-
lowed Armstrong's  Dictionary,  which  contains  many
rare  words,  avowedly  taken  from  the  Ossianic  poems.
If  there  be  errors  in  the  translation,  I  hope  they  may
be  overlooked.

MacDonald,  who  sang  this  and  two  other  poems  to
me  in  Barra,  September  10,  1860,  did  it  with  only  one
mistake.  He  forgot  something  near  the  beginning,
and  stopped  short,  and  uttering  several  expressions  of
strong  disgust  at  his  own  forgetfulness,  he  turned
back  to  the  first  line  and  began  again,  and  got
over  the  difficulty  with  a  rush  that  reminded  me  of  a
man  taking  a  running  leap  over  a  stiff  hedge.  With
that  one  mistake  he  recited  a  whole  poem  ;  and  so  far
as  I  can  judge,  from  hearing  such  crabbed  Gaelic  once,
it  was  the  same  poem  wliich  is  here  given,  but  we  made
out  tliat  there  were  foiu'score  verses  in  it,  whereas  there
are  but  fifty-five  incomplete  in  MacLean's  manuscript.

I  observed  that,  two  or  three  times,  in  reciting  this
and  other  poems,  MacDonald  repeated  a  couple  of  lines
to  fill  up  the  time  and  complete  a  quatrain.

The  poem  was  attributed  to  Oisean,  and  whoever
composed  it,  clearly  did  so  in  the  character  of  that  old
half  mytliical  bard,  for  he  speaks  like  an  eye-witness,
and  dwells  on  the  prowess  of  his    son    Osgar.     I  am


144  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

not  sufiflciently  acquainted  with  early  Norwegian  and
Irish  history,  to  be  able  to  guess  at  the  event  which  is
celebrated,  or  at  a  date,  but  I  suspect  the  poem  was
composed  in  remembrance  of  some  real  invasion  of  Ire-
land by  the  sea  rovers  of  Lochlann,  in  which  they  got
the  Avorst  of  the  fight,  and  that  it  has  been  preserved
traditionally  in  the  Hebrides  ever  since.  Could  it
be  Brian's  famous  battle,  a.d.  1014.  MacLeau  has
named  his  authorities;  one  of  them,  MacDonald,  is
referred  to  above.  He  is  a  workman  who  cannot  read,
and  who  speaks  no  langiiage  but  Gaelic.  He  is  a  fine
intelligent  man,  with  a  clear  gray  eye  and  smooth  dark
hair,  very  fond  of  the  old  poetry  of  his  native  country,
and  charmed  to  recite  it  to  an  audience  able  to  take  an
interest  in  it.  The  audience  was  a  numerous  one  on
the  10th  of  September,  and  we  were  highly  attentive.
One  woman  was  industriously  weaving  in  a  corner,
another  was  carding  wool,  and  a  girl  was  spinning  dex-
terously with  a  distaff  made  of  a  rough  forked  birch-
branch,  and  a  spindle  w^hich  was  little  better  than  a
splinter  of  fir.  In  the  warm  nook  behind  the  fire  sat  a
girl  with  one  of  those  strange  foreign  faces  which  are
occasionally  to  be  seen  in  the  Western  Isles,  and  which
are  often  supposed  by  their  neighbours  to  mark  the
descendants  of  the  Spanish  crews  of  the  wrecked
armada — a  face  which,  at  the  time,  reminded  me  of  the
Nineveh  sculptures,  and  of  faces  seen  in  St.  Sebastian.
Her  hair  was  as  black  as  night,  and  her  clear  dark
eyes  gUttered  through  the  peat  smoke.  Her  com-
plexion was  dark,  and  her  features  so  unlike  those  who
sat  about  her,  that  I  asked  if  she  were  a  native  of  the
island,  and  learned  that  she  was  a  Highland  ghl.  Old
men  and  young  lads,  newly  returned  from  the  eastern
fishing,  sat  about  on  benches  fixed  to  the  wall,  and
smoked  and  listened :  and  MacDonald   sat  on  a  low


A  MHUILEARTACH  BHUIDHE.  I  45

stool  in  the  midst,  and  chanted  forth  his  lays  amidst
suitable  remarks  and  ejaculations  of  praise  and  sym-
pathy. One  of  the  poems  was  the  Lay  of  Diarmaid,
much  the  same  as  it  appears  here  ;  as  I  had  got  it  from
]\IacLean,  "who  had  written  it  from  the  dictation  of
another  man  elsewhere.  "  Och  !  och  ! — aw !  is  not
that  sad  1 "  said  the  women  when  Diarmaid  was  expir-
ing. One  of  the  audience  was  a  stranger  from  the
south,  a  Campbell,  who  had  come  to  Barra  from  some
other  place,  and  who,  as  usual,  hailed  me  as  a  kins-
man, claimed  Diarmaid  as  our  common  ancestor,  and
MacCalain  Mor  as  the  head  of  his  family.  His  hair
was  yellow,  though  tinged  with  white;  and  amongst
the  short,  dark  natives  of  Barra,  he  looked  large,  and
gaunt,  and  bony.  He  gave  me  his  prose  version  of
the  escape  and  pursuit  of  Diarmaid  and  Graidhne,  and
brought  the  fugitives  from  Ireland  to  the  Isle  of  Skye.
The  main  incidents  were  similar  to  those  already  given,
but  in  detail  they  differed  entirely,  as  all  versions
Avhicli  I  have,  do  from  each  other.  The  house  where
our  meeting  was  held  was  one  of  those  which  are
only  to  be  found  in  the  far  west,  and  this  may  serve
to  give  a  notion  of  the  people,  who  still  jDreserve  and
delight  in  this  old  Gaelic  poetic  lore.

May  11,  1861. — Since  this  was  printed,  I  have  found  a  version
of  "  Duan  a  Mhuirearteach"  in  a  collection  of  Gaelic  poetry,  made
by  Hugh  Gillies,  and  printed  in  1786  at  Perth.  I  am  indebted
to  the  Eev.  Mr.  MacLauchlan  for  a  loan  of  the  book,  which  is
rare,  and  which  I  had  sought  in  vain  at  the  British  Museum  and
elsewhere.  There  are  112  lines  arranged  in  stanzas  in  the  pub-
lished version  ;  213  in  the  traditional  version  here  given.

The  story,  and  some  lines  of  the  poetry,  also  appear  in  the
proceedings  of  the  antiquaries  of  Scotland  (vol.  iii.,  part  ii.  1861),
these  are  taken  from  a  MS.  collection  made  in  Lewis.  It  appears
that  the  heroine  was  wife  of  a  superhuman  Celtic  sea  smith,  who
is  a  kind  of  Neptune,  and  who  had  been  maltreated  by  the  Feen.
L


146  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Another  version  of  the  poem  was  written  from  the  dictation  of
a  man  at  Gairloch  ten  years  ago  ;  and  another  has  lately  been
written  by  Mr.  Torrie  in  Benbecula,  from  the  recitation  of  an  old
beggar  wife.

LXXIV.

THE  STOEY  OF  THE  LAY  OF  THE
GREAT  FOOL.

Written  by  Hector  MacLean,  September  13,  1860.  Eecitec
by  Angus  MacDonald  (constable)  at  Stoney  Bridge,  South  Uist,
who  styles  himself  Aonghas,  Mac  Iain,  Mhic  Aonghais,  Mhi(
Dhomhnuill,  Mhic  Thormaid,  Mhic  Iain,  Mhic  Neill,  Mhic  Cha
lain,  Mhic  Eoghain,  Mhic  Aonghais  oig,  Mhic  Aonghais  Mhoir
Mhic  Sheann  Aonghais,  a  He  's  tha  iad  ag  radh  nach  robh  e  cli
That  is  to  say,  Angus,  the  son  of  John,  and  up  to  the  thirteentl
ancestor,  "  Old  Angus  from  Islay ;  and  they  say  he  was  not  weak.'
MacDonald  says  he  learnt  this  poem  fifty-eight  years  ago  fron
Aonghas,  Raothaill  bhàin,  Mhic  Iain,  Mhic  Dhomhnuill,  Domh
nullaich,  Mhic  Ghilleaspaig,  Mhic  Iain,  Mhic  Uisdean,  Mhii
Aonghais,  Mhic  Eaothaill,  H.  Earaich  (that  is  to  say,  Angus
white  Ronald,  the  son  of  John,  and  up  to  the  tenth  ancestor),  wh(
lived  in  North  Uist,  at  Baile  RàthaiU,  and  who  died  more  tha
fifty  years  ago,  about  seventy  years  of  age.

He  could  neither  read  nor  write,  and  he  learnt  this  and  othei
stories  from  his  mother,  who  died  about  seventy  years  ago,  at  the
age  of  one  hundred  years.

He  (MacDonald)  says  that  the  song —

A  Nighean  bliuidh  bhàin  nam  falbhadh  tu  leom.
Gun  ceaunachain  Gùnn  de  'n  sioda  dhuit.
Thou  fair  yellow  girl,  if  thou'dst  go  with  me,
That  I'd  buy  a  gown  of  the  silk  for  thee,
was  composed  by  her.

The  poem  is,  as  usual,  preceded  by  a  short  prose  story,  which
is  as  follows : —

There  were  two  brothers  once  in  Eirinn,  and  one  of
them  was  a  king  and  the  other  a  "  ridire."  They  were
both  married.      On  the  knight  there  was  a  track  (that


THE  STORY  OF  THE  LAY  OF  THE  GREAT  FOOL.   I  47

is,  the  knight  had  children),  and  there  were  no  chil-
dren at  all  to  the  king.  It  was  a  source  of  insult  to
the  knight  and  his  lot  of  sons,  that  the  king  shoiUd
have  the  realm  at  alL  The  thing  that  happened  was,
that  they  gathered  armies,  both  of  them,  on  each  side.
On  the  day  of  the  battle  that  they  gave,  the  knight  and
his  three  sons  were  slain.

The  Avife  of  the  knight  was  heaAy,  and  the  king
sent  word  that  if  she  were  to  have  a  babe  son  to  slay
him,  but  that  if  it  were  a  baby  daughter  to  keep  her
alive,  and  keep  her.  It  was  a  lad  that  she  had,  and
there  was  a  kitchen  wench  within  who  had  a  love  son.
BraomaU  was  her  name,  and  Domhnidl  was  the  name
of  her  son.

"When  the  son  of  the  knight  was  born,  this  one
fled  with  the  two,  the  knight's  son  and  her  own  son.
They  were  being  fed  at  the  cost  of  the  knight's  ^A-ife.
She  was  there  on  a  day,  and  for  fear  they  should  be
hungi-y,  she  Avent  to  a  toAvn  land  to  seek  food  for  them.
They  Avere  hungry,  and  she  was  not  coming,  and  they
saAv  three  deer  coming  towards  the  bothy.  The
knight's  son  was  where  the  other  Avas,  and  he  asked
what  creatures  were  there.  He  told  him  there  were
creatures  on  which  there  was  meat  and  clothing.

"  If  Ave  were  the  better  for  it  I  would  catch  them,"
said  he.

He  ran  and  he  caught  the  tluee  deer,  and  they
were  before  his  "  muime"  when  she  came.  She  flayed
them,  and  they  ate,  and  she  made  a  dress  for  him  of
the  deer's  hides.*  Thus  they  were  in  a  good  Avay  till
the  deer  ftiiled,  and  hunger  came  upon  them  again,
and  she  went  again  to  the  tOAvn  land.  There  came  a
great  horse  that  belonged  to  the  king — a  Avild  horse —

*  I  have  several  versions  of  a  long  very  -wild  story  called  the
"  Lad  of  the  Skinny  husks."


I  48  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

to  the  place  where  they  were.  He  asked  of  Donald
what  beast  was  that.

"  Tliat  is  a  beast  on  which  sport  is  done,  one  is
upon  liini  riding  him."

"  If  we  were  the  better  for  him  I  would  catch
him,"  said  he.

"  Thou  ill-conditioned  tatterdemalion  !  to  catch
that  beast !  It  would  discomfit  any  man  in  the
realm  to  catch  him."  He  did  not  bear  any  more
chatter,  but  he  came  round  about,  and  he  struck  his
fist  on  Donald,  and  he  drove  his  brauis  out.  He  put
an  oaken  skewer  through  his  ear,  and  he  hung  him  up
against  the  door  of  the  bothy.  "  Be  there  thou  fifty
beyond  the  Avorst,"  said  he.

Then  he  stretched  out  after  the  horse,  and  the  hides
were  trailing  behind  him.  He  caught  the  horse,  and
he  mounted  him;  and  the  horse  that  had  never  borne
to  see  a  man,  he  betook  himself  to  the  stable  for  fear.
His  father's  brother  had  got  a  son  by  another  wife.
When  he  saw  the  palace  he  went  up  with  wonder  to
look  at  the  palace  of  his  father's  brother.

His  muime  never  had  called  him  anything  but
"the  great  fool"  and  "  Creud  orm."  When  he  per-
ceived the  son  of  his  father's  brother  playing  sliinty,  he
went  where  he  was,  and,  "  Creud  orm,"  said  he.

"Who  art  thou,"  said  the  king's  son — "of  the
gentles  or  ungentles  of  the  realm,  that  has  the  like
of  that  speech  Ì"

"  I  am  the  great  fool,  the  son  of  the  knight's
wife,  the  nursHng  of  the  nurse,  and  the  foster-brother
of  Donald  the  nurse's  son,  going  to  do  folly  for  my-
self, and  if  need  were,  it  is  I  that  could  make  a  fool
of  thee  also."

"Thou  ill-conditioned  tatterdemalion  !  make  a  fool
of  me  Ì "  said  the  king's  son.


THE  STORY  OF  THE  LAY  OF  THE  GREAT  FOOL.   I  49

He  put  over  the  list  and  he  drove  the  brain  out  of
him.  "Be  there,  then,  thou  fifty  over  worse,  as  is
Donald  tlie  nurse's  son,  with  an  oaken  skewer  through
his  ear."

He  went  in  where  the  king  was.  "  Creud  orm,"
said  lie.

"  Wlio  art  thou,"  said  the  king — "  of  the  gentles  or
ungentles  of  the  realm,  that  hast  such  a  speech  Ì "

"  I  am  the  great  fool,  the  son  of  the  knight's  wife,
the  nursKng  of  the  nurse,  and  the  foster-brother  of  the
nurse's  son,  going  to  make  folly  for  myself,  and  if  need
were,  it  is  I  that  could  make  a  fool  of  thee  also."

"Well,  then,  it  is  not  thou  that  made  me  that,  but
my  counsellor,  on  the  day  that  I  slew  thy  father,  and
did  not  slay  thy  mother."

Then  the  king  went  with  him.  Every  one,  then,
that  he  fell  in  with  in  the  town,  they  were  going  with
him,  and  that  was  their  blessing,  "  Creud  orm."

There  was  a  splendid  woman  in  the  realm,  and
there  was  a  great  "Fachach"  that  had  taken  her
away.  The  people  thought,  if  they  could  bring  him  to
the  presence  of  this  woman,  that  he  would  set  his  head
upon  her,  and  that  he  would  let  the  people  away ;  that
it  was  likely  they  would  come  between  himself  and  the
Fachach,  and  that  the  Fachach  would  kill  him.  That
time  he  was  an  utter  fool.

[Of  the  poem,  MacLean  remarks: — "Some  of  the  phrase-
ology and  pronunciation  is  such  as  is  considered  Irish  ;  for  ex-
ample, the  particle  ni  for  cha,  dho  for  dhà,  cos  for  cas  ;  but  these
forms  of  expression  were  common  in  the  Highlands  ;  add  to
which,  a  cultivated  dialect  was  probably  common  to  both  coun-
tries. The  versification  is  exceedingly  harmonious  iind  varied.
In  some  lines  the  number  of  syllables  is  shorter,  to  give  room
for  the  emphasis  and  slow  utterance  required  by  the  sense.  In
reciting  the  poem,  the  pronunciation  of  the  reciter  was  peculiar,
and  differed  widely  from  that  of  his  conversational  dialect.


150  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  It  appears  tbat  this  Lyric  was  considered  by  the  Gael  their
best,  for  it  is  said,  '  Gach  dan  gu  dan  an  Deirg  ; '  '  Gach  laoidh
gu  laoidh  an  amadain  mhoir;'  'Gach  eachdraidh  gu  eachdraidh
Chonnail.'  Each  poem  to  the  poem  of  the  Red  ;  each  lay  to  the  lay
of  the  great  fool ;  each  history  to  the  history  of  Conned  (ts  to  be  re-
ferred as  a  standard).  In  Dr.  Smith's  '  Sean  Dana,'  there  is  a
laoidh  an  amadain  mhoir  quoted,  entirely  different  from  this
one."— H.  MacL.]

The  lay  is  in  "  Sean  Dana "  as  part  of  Cath
Mhanuis.  Another  long  poem  was  published  under
the  name  of  "  Laoidh  an  Amadain  Mlioir,"  which  I
have  failed  to  get  at  the  British  Museum.  The  lan-
guage of  the  version  here  given  is  difficult,  and  it  differs
in  construction  and  in  sound  from  the  spoken  modern
Gaelic  of  the  district.  There  seems  every  reason  to
consider  it  as  a  fragment.  It  seems  to  describe  a  single
adventure  only,  and  there  must  have  been  a  prelude
and  a  sequel  to  it.

Perhaps  Gillmliin  (Fairfine)  was  the  lady  wdiom  the
Fachach  had  taken  away,  and  who  made  an  entire  fool
of  the  mighty  simpleton.

There  is  something  allegorical  in  the  adventure.
There  is  a  mystic  valley  in  which  the  hero  is  tempted,
and  yields  to  a  cup  of  pleasure,  but  when  he  perseveres,
his  punishment  is  lightened,  and  he  gets  to  tlie  golden
city.  There  he  yields  to  sloth,  but  when  he  holds  to
his  promise,  and  resists  temptation,  and  fights  manfully,
he  is  delivered  from  all  his  woes.  If  this  view  be
correct,  this  may  be  part  of  the  same  tradition  which  is
interwoven  with  the  romances  of  Arthur  and  his
knights,  which  were  certainly  founded  on  Celtic  tradi-
tions, and  which  pervade  all  Europe.

The  story  of  Peronnik  LTdiot,  in  the  "Foyer
Breton,"  is  of  the  same  class.  The  hero  is  an  orjihan,
and  a  simpleton,  and  proves  himself  a  hero  with  sharp


THE  STORY  OF  THE  LAY  OF  THE  GREAT  FOOL.   I  5  I

wits.  He  takes  service  as  a  herd  at  a  farm,  and  there
sees  knights  going  to  Kerglas  to  seek  the  golden  basin,
and  the  tliamond  lance.  The  one  is  filled  with  any
food  which  the  owner  desires,  cures  diseases,  and  raises
the  dead ;  the  other  crushes  all  that  it  touches,  and
sliines  like  a  flame ;  both  belong  to  a  giant  magician
who  lives  at  Kerglas.  Now  Kerglas  might  be  Cathair
Glas,  the  gray  or  mystic  city.  The  golden  basin,
though  it  has  more  virtues,  has  the  same  properties  as
the  GaeUc  Ballan  iochshlaint  (vessel  of  balsam),  and
the  shining  lance  is  own  brother  to  Claidheamh  geal
Soluis,  the  white  glaive  of  hght.

Kerglas  was  surrounded  by  an  enchanted  forest,
in  which  rivulets  seemed  to  be  torrents,  and  shadowy
rocks  and  vain  shows  terrified  the  wanderer.  Beyond
that,  a  dwarf  korrigan  guarded  an  apple  tree,  which
was  the  same  which  grew  in  Eden  ;  further  on,  a  lion
with  vipers  for  a  mane,  guarded  a  magic  flower,  which
dissolved  enchantments  ;  still  further,  a  shoal  of
dragons  watched  the  lake  in  which  they  swam;  and
lastly,  a  terrible  black  man,  with  many  eyes,  guarded
a  fearful  valley.  He  was  chained  to  a  rock,  and  armed
with  an  iron  bullet,  which  returned  to  him  when  he
had  thrown  it,  and  he  at  least  is  a  common  character
ill  GaeHc  tales  (see  page  15).  Wlien  all  these  dangers
were  passed,  temptation  assailed  the  adventurer  in  the
shape  of  delicious  food,  pleasant  drinks,  and  fair
women,  and  if  he  yielded  he  fell.

All  these  dangers  Peronnik  the  Breton  idiot  over-
comes by  wily  stratagems.  The  Gaelic  Amadaii  Mor
overcomes  temptation  also,  but  he  conquers  by  valour
and  dogged  perseverance,  rather  than  by  wiles.

Peronnik,  the  half-starved  idiot,  catches  a  colt  of
thirteen  months,  rides  through  the  wood,  and  at  last,
by  the  help  of  a  yellow  lady  who  turns  out  to  be  the


I  52  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

plague,  kills  the  magician,  and  acquires  the  magic
basin  and  lance.  He  appears  on  the  side  of  the  Bretons
in  a  war  with  the  French  at  Nantes,  kills  his  foes  with
the  lance,  brings  his  friends  to  life  when  killed,  and
feeds  them  when  alive  with  the  magic  basin;  and
finally,  he  goes  to  Palestine,  where  he  destroys  armies,
forces  the  Emperor  of  the  Saracens  to  be  baptized,  and
marries  his  daughter,  "  by  whom  he  had  one  hundred
children."

By  some  accounts  he  still  lives  with  all  his  family.
Tlie  great  fool  does  not  go  to  Palestine,  but  Connal
Guilbeinach  does,  and  he  there  acquires  a  magic  shining
sword,  and  a  talisman,  which  brings  the  dead  to  life.
I  am  inclined  to  rank  "  the  Great  fool"  with  "  Peronnik
the  idiot,"  to  place  the  golden  city  on  the  same  magic
hill  of  the  imagination  as  Kerglas,  and  to  consider  the
"  lay "  as  one  episode  in  the  adventures  of  a  Celtic
hero,  who  in  the  twelfth  century  became  Perceval  le
chercheur  du  basin.  He,  too,  was  poor,  and  the  son  of
a  widow,  and  half  starved,  and  kept  in  ignorance  by  his
mother,  but  nevertheless  he  got  a  horse  and  venison,
and  acquired  knowledge  from  King  Arthur's  knights,
and  joined  them ;  and  in  the  end  he  became  possessed
of  that  sacred  basin  le  Saint  Graal,  and  the  holy  lance,
which,  though  christian  in  the  story,  are  manifestly  the
same  as  the  Gaelic  talismans  which  appear  so  often  in
GaeHc  tales,  and  which  have  relations  in  all  popular
lore, — the  glittering  weapon  which  destroys,  and  the
sacred  medicinal  cup  which  cures.

May  18,  1861. — The  fourteen  verses  numbered  with  an  (•)
are  inserted  from  a  version  written  down  for  Sir  Kenneth  Mac-
kenzie, in  1850,  at  Gairloch,  chiefly  from  the  recitation  of  John]
MacPherson,  then  eighty-eight  years  old,  and  thus  headed— "Howl
the  might  (neart)  of  the  Great  Fool  got  the  victory  over  the  1
Glamour  (druigheachd)  of  Mananan  (mhananain),  and  how


THE  STORY  OP  THE  LAY  OF  THE  GREAT  FOOL.   I  53

took  his  legs  back  again  from  him  by  his  might."  I  am  indebted
to  Mr.  Nicholson  of  Edinburgh,  who  had  the  MSS.

The  twelve  verses  numbered  with  (f)  are  not  in  the  Gairloch
version.  The  remaining  thirty-seven  verses  are  common  to  both.
No  two  verses,  hardly  two  lines  are  identical ;  but  the  variations
are  slight,  and  the  phonetic  value  of  the  words  is  preserved  in
almost  every  instance.  This  seems  a  strong  argument  for  the
traditional  preservation  of  these  poems.

2  and  3,  which  are  not  in  my  version,  and  4,  which  is  not  in
the  other,  together  lead  me  to  suspect  either  that  this  was  com-
posed to  imitate  an  older  poem,  and  to  teach  a  moral  lesson  ;  or
that  some  one  has  tried  to  give  an  old  poem  a  moral  turn.  The
language  of  2  and  3  is  biblical ;  4  is  magical,  and  so  is  the  bulk  of
the  poem  ;  and  the  rhythm  of  3  and  4  is  different  from  the  rest.
The  bearing  of  this  on  "Welsh  tradition  is  referred  to  elsewhere.


154


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


Deek  and  Hound. — From  a  stone  at  Kirriemuir. — Sculptured  Stones  of
Scotland,  PI.  xlvi.     See  Stanza  15.


THE  LAY  OF  THE  GKEAT  POOL.

1 — Bard.
Tale  of  wonder  that  was  heard  without  lie,
Of  the  idiot  to  whom  hosts  yield,
A  haughty  son  who  yields  not  to  arms,
Whose  name  was  the  mighty  fool.


2*

The  might  of  the  world  he  had  seized

In  liis  hands,  and  it  was  no  rude  deed.

It  was  not  the  strength  of  his  blade  or  his  shield,

But  that  the  mightiest  was  in  liis  grasp.

Od  his  falling  on  a  hidden  glen,

Wherein  he  never  hef'ore  had  staid,

Of  loveliest  strath  and  grass  and  plain,

And  sound  of  the  waves  'gainst  each  bright  stone.  (See  5.)


LAOIDH  AN  AMADAIN  MHOIR.  I  5  5


Elk. — From  a  stone  in  the  churchj'ard  of  Meigle. — Sculptured  Stones  of
Scotland,  PI.  Ixxii.    See  note  (2).


LAOIDH  AN  AMADAIN  MHOIE.— (1.)

1

Sgeul  uamharr  a  chualas  gim  bhreug,
Air  òinid  dli'an  geill  na  sloigh  ;
Mac  meanmnacli  uach  dearg  le  airm,
D'am  b'ainm  an  t-Amadan  mor.


Neart  an  domhain.  gii'n  glilac  e

'Na  lamhaibh  's  chu  Idu  ghniondi  borb.

Cha  be  neart  a  sgeith  no  lainn,

Acli  an  treine  bh'  ann  a  blii  na  dliorn.

Air  tachairt  a'n  gleann  cliomhair  dhò

Anns  nach  robh  e  fos  roimli  riamh,

A  b'  ailte  srath  a's  fear  a's  fonn,

Fuaim  nan  toun  ri  slios  gacli  leug.     (Gairlocli  4.)


56  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

3*

Lasting  long  ere  we  had  come,
Many  a  chief  is  beneath  his  sway  ;
Another  little  tale  I'd  tell,
Be  it  there  discerned,  and  it  is  strange.

4t
A  day  when  the  mighty  fool
Was  in  Lochlan's  bounds  in  a  magic  cloud,
Himself  and  one  beauteous  dame,
As  a  woman  her  beauty  sufficed.


Meeting  in  a  vast  shore-glen,
As  a  rose  ever  growing  through  it,
Floods,  and  strife,  and  grass,  and  sound,
Ptoar  of  waves  on  shore  of  sea.

6 GiLVEEN.

"  There  was  seen,"  said  Gilveen  young,

"  A  gruagach  of  the  yellowest  cloak  in  the  way,

A  new  coloured  vessel  in  his  grasp,*

Like  to  a  cup  in  which  was  drink."

7t — Fool.
It  was  then  the  great  hero  spoke,
"Is  it  an  empty  flower  I  see  Ì
It  is,  wlien  gi-eatest  is  my  thirst,
That  it's  coming  were  best  for  health."

8 — Gilveex.
"  An  earnest  entreaty  I  make  to  thee,
Drink  not  his  draught,  take  not  his  food,
Till  tliou  knowest  what  is  the  glen
"Wherein  thou  wert  never  before."
*  Of  flaming  gold.


LAOIDH  AX  AJIADAIX  MHOIR.
3*

A  leantuin  fad  air  dliuine  teachd
'S  iomadli  ceud  a  tlia  fu  'smaclid ;
Sgeul  beag  eile'  dh'  innsean  aim
Tuigear  thall  's  gu  blieil  e  ait.

4t
Latha  do'n  Amadan  mlior,
An  criochan  Loclilann  fo  cheo  draodli,-
E  f  hein  agus  aona  ruhaca  mna ;
Bu  leoir  a  h-ailleaclid  mar  inlmai.

5
Tachairt  an  gleann  diomliair,  rodli,
Mar  ròs  fas  roimhe  rianih,
Sionan,  streubh,  a's  feiir,  a's  fonn,
Stoirm  nan  tonn  ri  stios  na  lei.

6
"  Chiinnacas,"  arsa  Gilmliin  og,
"  Gruagacli  'san  rod  a's  buidh  brot,
Soitheacii  ui',  daite  'na  dorn*
Coltach  ri  corn  am  biodh  deoch.

7t
Sin  nuair  labhair  Macabh  mor,
"  An  e  ròs  fòs  (')  tha  mi  a  reir  ?
'San  uair  a's  motba  mo  thart,
'S  gii'm  b'  fliearr  a  tbeachd  gu  beatha.

8
"  Achanaich  a  dh'  iarrams'  art,
Ka  ol  a  dheocb  's  na  gabh  a  bhiadh,
Gu  fiosraich  gu  de  'n  gleami
Nach  robh  thu  ann  roimlie  riandi."
*  A  dh'  or  laiste.


5»  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

9t — Gruagach.
After  that  had  been  spoken  to  him,
Out  spoke  the  Gruagach  of  the  Cup,
"  Be  not  downcast  stalwart  youth,
Be  merry  and  quaff  thy  draught."

10— Bard.
In  the  like  commune  with  him
Out  spoke  he,  and  it  was  no  wise  speech.
He  gave  a  haughty  clashing  dart,
And  there  was  no  drop  in  the  cup  but  lie  drank

11

Away  went  the  Gruagach  of  the  Cup  :
Unlucky  was  the  cup  to  drink,
The  tw^o  legs  down  from  the  knee
Were  wanting  to  the  mighty  fool

12 GiLVEEN.

Then  it  was  young  Gilveen  spoke,
"  Great  is  this  woe  has  befallen  thee,
Scarce  are  thy  friends  in  the  great  world ;
Unliked  by  them  is  thy  Avant  of  feet.*

1 3 — Fool.
"  Hist !  now  thou  Gilveen  young,
Cease  thy  woe  and  be  thou  still,
No  leg  shall  be  under  one  in  the  land,
Or  I  myself  will  get  my  two  feet."

Ut— Bard.
Tliere  they  wended  the  pair,
The  woman  and  the  hero  of  heaviest  tread,
Swifter  was  he  on  liis  two  knees
Than  six  at  their  swdftness  of  foot.

*  They'll  not  weep  tby  want  of  feet.


LAOIDH  AN  AMADAIX  MHOIR.  I  59

9t

All  deigli  sill  fhoclachaclh  cUiò

Gu  'u  do  bheaiinaicli  gruagacli  a'  cliuirn,

"  Na  bi  dubliacli  oglaich  mhoir  ;

Bi  subhacli  as  ol  do  dbeocL"

10
Air  a'  chomain  chiadlma  dhò,
Labliaii-  esau  's  cha  b'  e  'ghloir  glilic  ;
Thug  e  sitlieadli  bruaisgneach  borb,
'S  cha  robh  braon  's  a'  chorn  nach  d'  ibli.

11

Gu  '11  d'  imich  gruagach  a'  chuirii,
Neo-bhuadhach  a'  chuirn  ri  ol ;
All  da  chois,  fo'ii  gliluin-shios,
Bha  'dhitli  an  Amadain  mhoir.

12

'Sin  nuair  lab  hair  Gibnhin  og,

"  'S  mor  am  bron  seo  thainig  ort,

'S  tearc  do  charaid  'san  domlian  mhor,

'S  ni  neo-oil  leo  thu  'bhith  gun  chois."*

13

"  Uist  a  nis  a  Ghihnhin  og,

Sguir  ad'  bhron,  a's  bi  nad'  thosd ;

Cha  bhi  cas  fo  f  hear  as  tir

Neo  gheibh  mi  fliin  mo  dha  chois."

14t
Dh'  iinich  iad  an  siud  'nan  dis,
A  bheaii  'san  laoch  bu  truime  trosd ;
Bu  luaithe  esan  air  a  dha  ghluin
Na  seisear  air  luathas  an  cos.

*  S  cha  bhron  leo  thu  bhi  gun  chos.


;6o  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

15

They  heard  the  hunt  in  the  glen,

The  voice  of  the  hound  and  music  sweet,

Eapidly  chasing  the  elkf)

On  the  moorland  that  suited  best.

IG
On  the  moorland  that  suited  liest
Was  seen  the  deer  from  the  mountains  wild,
The  red  eared  and  very  white  hound
Keenly  baying  upon  his  track.

17

Swiftly  he  gave  a  dart,
That  sudden  cast  with  his  keen  blade.
There  was  driven  by  force  of  the  hero's  hand
The  sp'ear  through  the  deer's  two  sides.

18— Fool.
They  caught  hold  of  the  white  stag-hoiuid,
And  out  of  hand  put  him  on  leash,
"  Be  there  making  music  by  me,
Till  one  comes  after  thee  from  the  chase."

19— Bard.
There  was  seen  descending  a  glen
A  Gruagach  in  full  splendour  of  gold,
Hand  on  blade  on  his  left  side,
And  his  two  spears  and  his  shield  in  his  grasp,

20
Certes  they  asked  a  tale  from  him,
Or  what  road  the  stranger  used.

*  They  took  an  alternate  tale  about

*  What  was  the  land  where  they  used  to  be.


LAOIDH  AN  AMADAIN  MHOIR.  I  6  1

15

Chual  iad  an  fliagliaid  's  a'  ghleann  ;
Guth  gadhair  ann  a  's  biiiii  ceol
A'  ruith  na  li-eilid  gu  dian
Air  an  f  hireacli  a  b'  iliearr  doigh.

16
Air  an  f  hireach  a  b'  fhearr  doigh,
Chimnacas  fiadli  o  blieanuaibh  l^orb,
'S  gadhar  cluas-dearg  gle  glieal
A'  tabhann  gu  geur  'na  lorg.

17
Thug  esan  sitheadh  gu  grad  ;
An  urchair  chlis  ud  le  lann  geur  ;
Thartadh,  le  neart  lamh  an  laoich,
An  t-sleagh  roimh  dha  thaobh  an  Fheidh.

18
Blieir  iad  air  a'  ghadhar  bhàn,
'S  air  a  laimh  gu  'n  chuir  air  eilL
"  Bi  tu  agam  deanadh  ciuil
Gu  'n  d'  thig  fear  o  'n  iuil  a'  d'  deigh."

19

Chunnacas  a'  tearnadh  le  gleann
Gruagach  ann  Ian  dearsadh  òir,
Lamh  air  lann  air  a  thaobh  cli,
'S  a  dha  shleagh  's  a  sgiath  'na  dhorn.

20

Dh'  fhoighneachd  iad  sgeul  deth  gu  beachd,
Na  co'n  rod  a  chleachd  an  aoidh  ì

*  Gabh  iad  sgeula  dheth  niu  seach,

*  Ciod  i  'n  tir  a'n  do  chleachd  a  bhi.


102  west  highland  tales.

21 — Gruagach.
"  Kidire  Corcair  is  my  name,
And  on  each  sjiot  I  have  victory  won.
I  am  the  Gruagach  of  the  white  stag-hound
That  has  fallen  into  tlaine  hand."

22— Fool.
"  Thou  Gruagach  of  the  handsomest  mien,
I  will  give  thee  assurance  of  this,
That  Gruagach  of  the  white  stag-hound
Shall  not  henceforth  be  said  to  thee.

23
"  Will't  not  suffice  thee,  mighty  son,
A  make-weight  or  two  to  he  in  the  scale  Ì
As  the  whole  of  the  hunt  is  beneath  thy  power
To  leave  the  wliite  stag  hound  with  me.

24 — Gruagach.
"  It  is  I,  indeed,  who  made  the  hunt.
As  the  idiot  is  wrathful  and  fierce,
Whichever  one  is  of  strongest  hand.
His  be  the  white  stag-hoimd  and  the  deer."

25*
"  Since  my  stag- hound  has  fallen  to  thee,
And  thy  feet  are  awanting,
Food  and  clothing  take  thy  desire ;
I  would  give  that  to  thee  and  thy  wife.

26 GiLVEEN.

"  Accept  that,  said  Gilveen  young,
And  give  the  white  stag-hoimd  to  him,"
"  r  11  give  him,  and  a  speckled  hound,
And  if  it  pleased  thee,  a  greater  tiling."
*  There  seems  to  be  some  description  of  a  figlit  wanting  lien
unless  the  Gairloch  version  is  right.

"  It  is  I  myself  who  made  the  hunt,"

So  said  the  fool  fiercely.


LAOIDH  AN  AMADAIN  5IH0IR.  I  63

21

"  Ridire  Corcair  b'e  m'  aimn,
'S  air  gach  ball  gu  'n  d'  thug  mi  buaidk
'S  niise  gruagach  a'  ghadhair  bliàin
A  tharladli  aim  an  laimli  tliu  ;  ''


"  A  Gruagach  ud  a  's  ailne  dealbh
Bheir  mise  'dhearbhadh  sin  duit,
Nach  bi  gruagach  gadhair  bain
As  an  seo  ri  radii  riut."

23

"  Nach  fhoghainn  leatsa  'jMhice  mhoir
Leatrom  no  dha  'bliith  'san  roinn,
'S  an  t-seUg  uile  'bhith  fo  d'  bhinn,
'S  an  gadhar  ban  a  leiginn  learn."

24
"  'S  mise  siu  a  rinn  an  t-seilg;
Mar  tha'n  t- Amadan  garg,  dian ;
'S  ge  b'  e  neach  a's  treise  lamh
'S  leis  an  gadhar  ban  's  am  fiadli."

25

"  'S  0  tharUadh  mo  ghadhar  ort,
Agus  do  chosan  gu  d'  dhith,
Biadh  a's  aodach,  gabli  d'a  reir,
Bheirinn  dliuit  f  hein  's  do  d'  mhnaoi

26
"  Gabh  siud,"  arsa  Gihiihin  og,
'S  an  gadhar  ban  a  thoirt  dhò."
"  Bheiream  agus  gadhar  breac,
'S  11a'  b'  aUl  leat  na  bu  mho."


164  west  highland  tales.

27— Bakd.
Then  wended  they  on  the  three,
Under  the  guidance  of  the  man.
He  raised  in  the  hollows  of  his  sliield
The  sUng-shaft  ('),  and  the  woman,  and  the  deer.

28
Then  was  seen,  appearing  aside,
A  still  city  fiUed  with  the  glitter  of  gold,
And  there  was  no  hue  that  eye  hath  seen
That  was  not  in  plenty  the  court  within.

29 — Fool.
Then  asked  the  mighty  fool,
"  "Wliat  was  the  city  of  gold  by  the  way,
Of  noblest  form  and  most  beauteous  mien.
Shall  I  find  out  from  whence  it  came  Ì "

30 — Gruagach.
"  Gold  Yellow  City  is  its  name,
From  Mount  Modest  and  glens  of  gloom,*
And  there  are  in  it  of  guileful  men.
But  I  only  and  my  single  dame.

31t
"  Yonder  glen  that  thou  camest  through.
Full  of  glamour  it  is  always.
But  Little  it  has  taught  to  me
But  to  behold  the  worth  of  my  dame.

32t
"  A  youiTg  wife  that  I  found  in  the  tower,
The  sight  of  an  eye  no  better  was,
Whiter  than  very  snow  is  her  form,
Gentle  her  eye,  and  her  teeth  like  a  flower."
*  Perhaps   "  Glannasmoil,"   in  the  county  of  Dulilin,  wliei'e
Fenian  legends  are  localized.


LAOIDH  AN  AMADAIN  MHOIR.  I  65

27

Dli'  imich.  iad,  an  sin  'nan  triair,

Anns  an  iuil  a  rinn  am  fear ;

Thog  e  'n  crannagaibh  a  sgiath

An  crann-tabhuiU,  's  am  liadli,  's  a'  bhean.

28
Chminacas  a'  tighinn  ri  taobh
Cathair  chaomh  's  Ian  dearsadli  oir  ;
'S  cha  robh  datb  a  chimnaic  suil
Nach  robh  anns  a'  chuirt  na  's  leoir.

29
Dh'  f  hoighneachd  an  t-Amadan  mor,
"  Co  i  'cliathair  oir,  ri  'h-iiiil,
A's  breagli  crutli  's  is  ailne  dreach  Ì
'S  am  faigh  mi  mach  co  dbetli  a  tùs  ?"

30
"  'Chatbair  orbbuidh  gii  'm  b'  e  'h-ainm
0  Dhun  Tuirbb  's  o  gbleantna  Smol,
'S  cha  'n  'eil  innt'  a  dJi'fbearaibb  foil
Ach  niise  fòs  a's  m'  aona  bhean.*

31

"  An  gleann  sin  roimh  d'  thainig  thu  trid
Lan  de  dhraodhachd  tha  e  'glinath ;
'S  beag  a  dh'  f  haogUiiim  e  dhomh  f  hein
Ach  'bhith  'g  amharc  beus  mo  mhna.

32t
"  Bean  og  a  f  huair  mi  'san  tur
Nach  robh  amliarc  sùl  na  b'  f  hearr  ;
'S  gile  na  gach  sneachd  a  corp,
'S  mall  a  rosg,  's  a  deud  mar  bhlath."
*  A  chatliair  orruidli,  and  Dungarbli  (Gairloch  version),  coiniiin
chrois ;  a  name  incomprehensible.


1 66  west  highland  tales.

33* — Lady.

The  dame  of  exceeding  beauty  blessed
Tlie  Gruagach  so  lovely  and  brown.
"  Who  is  the  lady  stately  and  young,
Or  the  big  man  thou  hast  yielded  to?"

34* — Gruagach.
"  The  mighty  Fool  is  his  name,
And  his  wife  is  the  yoimg  Fairfine;
The  men  of  the  world  are  at  his  beck,
And  the  yielding  to  him  was  mine."

35*— Lady.
"  I  think  marvellous  what  thou  say'st,"
So  said  the  young  Fairfine  ;
"  If  the  men  of  the  world  are  at  his  beck,
That  he'd  let  his  legs  go  with  them."

36* — Gruagach.
"  I  '11  give  thee  my  word,  oh  dame,
That  the  men  of  the  Avorld  are  at  his  beck  ;
And  were  it  not  glamour  of  Comain  cross,
He'd  not  let  his  legs  go  with  them."

37

"  And  now  that  I  may  go  to  the  chase,

To  the  ruddy  mountains  and  glens  of  gloom,

Do  thou  watch,  my  brother  of  love.

My  house,  my  wife,  and  my  store  of  gold !

38

"  So  long  as  I  am  without.

Do  thou  nor  slumber  or  droop  thy  head.

Let  never  a  man  "nathLu

Or  a  man  out,  if  one  come  in."


LAOIDH  AN  AMAD.UN  MHOIR.  I  67

33*

Bhearmaich  a  bhean  a  b  f  hearr  snuagh

Do  na  Gruagach  alumn  donn.

"  Co  macan  steudgheal  og

No  'm  fear  mor  d'an  d'  tlmg  thu  geill?  "

34*
"  An  t  amadan  mor  gur  e  ainm
'S  a  gheilbhirm  og  gur  i  'bhean
Fir  an  domliain  tha  gu  'mhein
'S  mise  fein  gu'n  glieill  da."

35*

■'  'S  ioglmadh  learn  na  tha  thu  agradh,"
'Se  labhair  a  Gheilbhinu  og ;
"  Fir  an  domhain  gu  bheil  gu'  mhein
S  gu  leigeadh  e  a  chasan  leo."

36*
"  Bheil-  mise  mo  bhriathra'  bhean
Fir  an  domhain  gu  bheil  gu  mliein  ;
'S  mar  b'  e  druidlieachd  Chomaia  chrois
Cha  leigeadh  e  a  chasan  leo."

37
Gu'n  d'  theid  mise  'nis  a  shealg
A  bheanntai  dearg  's  a  ghleanntai  smol ;
Mathaich  thusa,  'bhrathair  ghraidh,
Mo  theach,  's  mo  mhnai,  's  mo  chuid  oir.

38

Cho  fad  's  gu'm  bi  mise  muigh

Ka  deansa  lochd  's  na  crom  do  cheann ;

Na  leig  duin'  idir  a  steach ;

Na  duine  'mach  ma  this  ann."


[68  west  highland  tales.

39— Bard.
They  went  to  the  chase  the  three,
The  clog,  and  the  Gruagach,  and  the  white  stag-hound.
The  two  fair  ones  and  the  great  son
Stayed  waiting  within  the  city  of  gold.

40— Fool.
Then  outspoke  the  hero  large,
"  Gilveen  young,  here  at  my  head,
A  heavy  sleep  is  enticing  me.
We  did  not  yield  up  in  the  glen."

41*— Bard.
He  was  not  long  in  his  sleep
A  Gruagach  came  in  from  the  way.
And  gave  a  kiss  to  the  Gruagach's  dame.
And  the  lady  was  not  ill  pleased  that  he  came.

42t — Bard  and  Gilveen.

The  young  wife  sat  beneath  his  head ;

In  her  mien  she  pictured  a  sun,

And  said  she  to  the  stalwart  youth,

"  Thou  hast  slumbered,  but  not  for  thy  good.

43
"  Thou  hast  slumljered,  but  not  for  thy  good.
There  came  a  mighty  warrior  in
And  gave  a  kiss  to  the  Gruagach  dame  ;
Unlucky  it  is  that  the  stranger  came."

44 — Bard.

Up  rose  the  mighty  fool,

To  the  doorway  went  he,

Never  struck  blacksmith,  tinker,  or  wright

A  door  more  strongly  than  the  angry  wight.


LAOIDH  AN  AMADAIN  MHOIR.  1  69

39

Dh'  imicli  iad  a  shealg  'nan  triuir
An  cu,  's  an  gruagaeh,  's  an  gacUiar  ban  ;
An  dithis  ban  's  am  macabh  mor
Dh'  flian  's  a'  cliathair  oir  ri  h-iuil.

40
Sin  do  labbair  Macabh  mor,
"  Ghilmhin  og  seo  aig  mo  cheann
Tha  'n  cadal  trom  'gam  bhuaireadh ;
M  'n  òbamaid  suas  's  a'  ghleann."

41*

Cha  b'  f  hada  bha  e  na  shuain

Thainig  Gruagacli  a'  rod  a  steach

'S  do  bhean  a  Gruagaich  thug  e  pog

'S  cha  b'  fhuathach  leis  un  oigh  a  theachd.

42t
Gu'n  shuidh  an  og-bhean  fo  'cheann ;
Mac  samhlaidh  dealbha  i  ri  grain ;
'S  thuirt  i  ris  an  oglach  mhor,
"  Rinn  thu  suaimhneas,  's  cha  b'  e  t'  f  heum.

43
"  Einn  thu  suaimlmeas,  's  cha  b'  e  t'  f  heum ;
Thainig  gaisgeach  treun  a  steach,
'S  do  'n  mhnaoi  ghruagaich  thug  e  pog ;
'S  neo-bhuadliach  an  aoidh  a  theachd."

44
Dh'  eirich  an  t-Amadan  mor;
Thun  an  doruis  a  ghabh  e.
Cha  d'  bhuail  gobha,  ceard,  na  saor,
Comlila,  's  treise  na  'n  laoch  borb.


i  7  o  west  highland  tales.

45*— Fool.
"  Unless  I  were  sound  enough
He  liad  not  come  in  from  the  road,
Till  comes  tlie  Gruagach  of  the  golden  doon,
With  my  will  he  goes  not  out."

46 — Gruagach.
Up  rose  the  Avarrior  straight  and  broAvn,
And  the  arms  were  seized  by  grasp.
"  Leave  the  doorway,  stalwart  youth,
Thou  art  there  instead  of  right."

47t — Fool,
Thus  answered  the  warrior  great
To  the  hero  of  the  firm  speech,
"  Till  he  comes,  the  Gruagach  who  is  out,
Thou  shalt  be  in  or  thy  head."

48*
"  Still  will  I  give  my  vows,
Though  thou  thinkest  much  of  thy  speech  ;
When  comes  the  Gruagach  of  the  golden  doon
He  will  repay  thee  for  his  wife's  kiss."

49* — Gruagach.
"  Wilt  not  suffice  thee,  thou  mighty  man,
Seven  vats  full  of  glittering  gold.
Cattle  and  horses,  and  untaxed  land,
Plain  of  the  plains  and  the  woman's  doon  V

50*
"  Thou  mayest  get  that,  and  to  boot
My  tissue  vesture  and  horse,
WTio  's  as  ready  on  sea  as  on  land,
If  thou  wilt  but  let  me  go  out."


LAOIDH  AN  AMADAIN  MHOIK.  I  7  I

45*

"  Mur  bhithiim  a'  m'  sliuain  gn  leor
Cha  tigeadh  e  a'  rod  a  steach
'S  gus  an  tig  Gruagach  dun  an  oir
Le  mo  dlieoin  cha  teid  e  mach."

46
Dh'  eirich  an  gaisgeach  deas,  donn,
S'  ghlacadh  leis  na  h-airm  'na  dhorn,
"  Fag  an  dorus  oglaich  mhoir  ;
An  àite  coir  a  bhiodh  tii  ann."

47t

Air  freagairt  do  Mhacabh  mor,
Air  a'  ghaisgeach  na  gloir  theann,
"  Gu  'n  d'  tliig  an  gruagach.  tha  muigh
Bidh  tusa  steach  no  do  chearux"

48*
"  Bheir  mise  mo  bhriathra  fos
Ge  mor  leat  na  bheil  thu  ag'  radh ;
Nuair  thig  Gruagach  dun  an  oir
Gu'n  diol  e  ort  peg  a  mhna."

49*
"  Nach  foghnadh  leatsa  mliic  a  mhoir
Seachd  Ian  dabhaich  'a  dli'or  glan
Crodh  a's  eich  fearann  saor
Eaon  nan  raon  a's  dun  nam  ban."

50*
"  Gheibheadh  tu  sin  a's  ni  's  mo
Mo  chulaidh  shroil  agus  m'  each
'S  CO  deas  leis  muir  agus  tir
A  chionn  mo  ligeadh  a  mach  "


172  west  highlais'd  tales.

51*— Fool.

"  Still  will  I  give  my  vows,
Though  thou  thinkest  much  of  thy  speech  ;
Wlien  comes  the  Gruagach  of  the  tissue  cloak,
He  wiU  rejiay  thee  for  his  wife's  kiss."

52 — Gruagach.
"  From  the  Gruagach  of  the  Cup  I  got
Thy  one  foot  to  let  me  in  ;
I  '11  blow  it  beneath  thee  with  joy
If  thou  leave  the  way  to  go  out."

53 — Bard.

"With  his  own  magic  he  blew
His  one  foot  beneath  him  as  ever  it  was,
And  said  the  Gruagach,  who  was  wise,
"  It  is  time  for  me  now  to  depart."

54_FooL.
Thus  answered  the  warrior  great,
"  A  Httle  stay  yet  for  a  slow  space,
The  other  foot  for  a  stui-dy  step,
I'll  take  from  thee  or  thy  head."

55 — Gruagach.
T\Tien  the  hero  was  in  hard  straits.
He  suddenly  sprang  to  the  breast  of  his  dame
"  My  comeliness  I  throw  upon  thee.
Guard  me  my  feet  and  my  hand  "

56t— Fool.

"  K  death  be  a  terror  to  thee.
For  the  dear  wife  of  most  beauteous  mien.
The  other  foot  thou  wouldst  give  away
A  refuge  in  that  hour  for  thy  head."


LAOIDH  AN  AMADAIN  MHOIR.  I  7  3

51*

"  Bheir  mise  mo  bhriathra  fos
Ge  mor  leat  na  blieil  tliii  ag'radh
Gu'n  tig  Gruagacli  a  bhrait  shroil
'S  gu'n  diol  e  ort  pog  a  mhna."

52
"  Fliuair  mi  o  gliruagach  a'  cliuirn
Do  leitli  clios  a  m'  leig  a  steach  ;
Seideam  fodliad  i'  gu  m'  dheoin,
'S  ma  leigeas  an  rod  a  mach."

53

Sheid  esan  le  dhraodliachd  fhein
A  leitli-chos  foidli  mar  bha  i  riamh  ;
'S  thuirt  an  gruagach  a  bba  glic,
"  Gut  tim  dhomli  bliith  nis  a  triall."

54
Ail"  freagairt  do  Mhacabh  mor,
"  Stad  beag  fathasd  gu  foil  mall ;
A  cbas  eile  gu  ceum  cruaidh
Bheir  mise  uait  no  do  cheann."

55+
Nuair  a  bha  'n  gaisgeach  an  eàs  cruaicUi,
Duibh  leum  gu  luath  ri  uchd  na  mnai,
"  Tilgidli  mi  mo  ehuimriii  {*)  ort ;
Dion  domli  mo  chosan  's  mo  lamh."

56t

"  Ma  's  h-eagal  leat  am  bàs,
Do  'n  ghraidli-bhean  a  's  ailne  dealbh
A'  chas  eile  bheireadh  tu  uait ; —
Didean,  air  an  uair,  dho  d'  cheann."


174  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

57t — Bard.
He  was  not  allowed  to  come  to  words,
When  the  great  one  was  uj^on  him,
And  unless  t'  other  foot  was  given  him
Slice  in  two  !  ere  he  could  cry  for  Fionn.

58* — Gruagach,
Then  with  his  own  glamour  he  put
His  two  legs  under  him  as  they  were,
And  said  the  Gruagach,  who  was  wise,
*'  It  is  time  for  me  now  to  begone."

59 — Fool.
"  These  feet  I  have  now  got  below
I  yield  not  to  thee  nor  to  them,
Tlie  day  will  not  come  that  thou  goest  out,
Till  comes  the  Gruagach  of  the  golden  doon."

60 — Gruagach.
"  I  am  the  Gruagach  of  the  golden  doon,
And  great  is  my  boast  of  thy  good  will.
And  (I  am)  the  Gruagach  of  the  wliite  stag  hound
That  fell  into  thy  hand,

61t
"  And  that  took  these  feet  off  thee
To  try  thy  courage  and  thy  force ;
I  blow  them  beneath  thee  again,
Eight  as  straight  as  thou  wert."

62*
"  Youth  of  most  beauteous  mein,
I  esteem  thee  great  in  each  thing ;
It  was  I  took  thy  legs  off  thee
To  try  thy  valour  and  mind."


LAOIDH  AN  AMADAIX  MHOIR.  I  7  5

57t
Cha  d'  leigeadli  gu  focail  dliò
Nuair  bha  'm  fear  mor  as  a  chionn ;
'S  gun  a  chos  eile  tlioirt  dliò,
Sgiol  na  dliu  ma  'n  goii-ear  Fionn.

58*
Cliuir  e'n  sin  lè  dliruddlieacM  fein
A  dha  chos  fodha  mar  blia  iad  riamh
S  thu'  irt  an  Gruagach  a  bha  glic
"  'S  mitliicli  a  nis  a  bhi  tiiall."

59
"  Na  casan  seo  flmair  mi  fodham
Cba  leig  mi  leat  iad  na  leo.
Cha  d'  tliig  an  la  a  theid  tbu  macli
Gus  an  d'  tliig  gruagach.  Dhun  an  oir."

60

"  'S  mise  gruagach  Dhim  an  oil-,
'S  bu  mhor  mo  bhosd  os  do  riun,
Agus  gruagach  gadhair  bhcàin
A  tharladh  arm  an  lamh  thu.

Git
"  'S  a  thug  na  cosan  ud  diot
A  dhearbhadh  do  ghniomh  a's  do  lugh ;
Seideam  fodhad  iad  a  ris
Cheart  cho  direach  's  a  bha  thu."

62*
"  Oganaich  is  ailte  dreach
Gur  mor  mo  bheach  ort  's  gach  cuis  ;
'S  gur  mi  bhiin  do  chasan  d'  iot
A  dhearbhadh  do  ahniomh  's  do  thurn."


176  west  highland  tales.

63— Bard.
Then  they  laid  hold  hand  on  hand,
Love  on  love,  and  good  will  on  good  will,
One  little  tale  on  the  dames,*
A  wondrous  tale  heard  without  a  lie.

*  Together,  like  the  fellowship  of  the  Fane.
And  so  the  tale  passed  away. — (Gairloch.)

(^)  Fas,  empty.  Ròs,  a  flower — probably  the  cup  is  called  a
flower.

C)  The  word  is  translated  hind,  roe,  etc.  It  is  the  same  word
as  elk,  but  it  means  a  stag  here.

O  Crann  tabhail  is  translated  "sling"  in  Armstrong;  but
tabhail,  according  to  the  same  authority,  is  "  catapult ;  "  "  Crann"
is  a  tree.  It  seems,  then,  that  the  word  means  some  instrument
made  partly  of  wood,  and  used  iu  the  chase  ;  and  I  suspect  it
means  cross-how.  Men  are  represented  on  the  sculptured  stones
of  Scotland  shooting  with  cross-bows.     See  p.  100.

(*)  Cuimeir,  neat,  trim,  well  formed,  elegance  ;  cuimrin,  my
elegance,  my  elegant  self


LAOIDH  AN  AMADAIN  MHOIR.  177

63

Rug  iad  an  sin  lamli  air  lamh ;
Gaol  air  ghaol  a's  minn  air  mliinn  ;
Aona  sgeul  beag  air  na  mnai,
Sgeul  uamharr'  a  chualas  gun  bkreig.

*  Araon  mar  chomunn  na  Feinne
'S  dh  imich  an  sgeul  mar  sin.
Caogad,  fifty.     Ibh,  to  drink.

SiONAN,  I  do  not  know  this  word,  unless  it  is  a  corruption  of
sithean,  a  knoll.  Stkedbh,  I  do  not  know  unless  it  is  strath,  a
strath.     The  line  might  be  read  this  way —

Sithean,  srath,  a's  feur  a's  fonn.
Knoll,  strath,  grass,  and  land.
Stios  na  lei,  I  think  is  slios  na  lei.     Lia,  an  old  name  for  a
stream  :  on  the  side  of  the  stream.     Eòdh,  I  suspect,  is  "  very
extensive."     Maca  mna,  is,  I  think,  a  superior  woman.

SÒITHEACH  UR  DAiTE  na  dorn,  should  be,  I  think,  'na  dhorn.

H.  M'L.

On  the  authority  of  Armstrong,  and  taking  similar  words,  I
have  put  a  meaning  on  the  doubtful  line,  but  I  am  not  sure  that
it  is  correct.     See  various  readings,  footnote.  J.  F.  C.


178  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


LAOIDH  AN  AMADAIN  MHOIR.
Bha  dithis  bhraithrean  uair  an  Eirinn,  's  fear  dhiu  'na  righ  's  fear  na
ridire.  Bha  iad  posda  le  cheile.  Air  an  ridire  bha  sliochd,  's  cha
robh  sliochd  air  an  righ  idir.  Bu  tamailteach  leis  an  ridire  's  le  'chuid
mac  an  riogbachd  a  bhith  aig  an  righ  idir.  'Se  an  ni  a  bh'  ann
chruinnich  iad  arm  le  cheile  air  gach  taobh.  An  latha  blair  a  thug
iad  mharbhadh  an  ridire  's  a  thriuir  mac.

Bha  bean  an  ridire  trom,  's  chuir  an  righ  fios  na  'm  bu  leanabh
mic  a  bhiodh  aice  a  mharbhadh,  ach  na  'm  bu  leanabh  nighinn  a
bhiodh  ann  a  chumail  beo  's  a  ghleidheadh.  'Se  gille  a  bh'  aice ;  's
bha  searbhanta  cidsin  a  staigh  aig  an  robh  mac  diolain  ;  's  e  Braomall
a  b'  ainn  di,  agus  's  e  DomhnuU  a  bh'  air  a  mac.  Nuair  a  rugadh
mac  an  ridire  theich  i  seo  leis  an  dithis,  mac  an  ridire  's  a  mac  fhein.
Bha  iad  'gam  beathachadh  air  taillibh  bean  an  ridire.  Bha  i  'n  sin
latha  's  eagal  gu  'm  biodh  acras  orra  dh'  fhalbh  i  gu  baile  a  dh'  iar-
raidh  bklh  dhaibh.  Bha  'n  t-acras  orra,  's  cha  robh  ise  a'  tighinn,
's  chunnaic  iad  tri  feidh  a'  tighinn  ionnsuidh  na  botha.  Bha  mac  an
ridire  far  an  robh  am  fear  eile  's  dh'  fhoighneachd  a  de  na  creutairean
a  bha  'n  siud.  Dh'  innis  e  dha  gu'n  robh  creutairean  air  an  robh
biadh  agus  aodach.

•'  Na  'm  b'  f heairde  sinne  e  bheirinn  orra,"  ars'  esan.

Ruith  e  's  rug  e  air  na  tri  feidh,  's  bha  iad  air  coinneamh  a
mhuime  nuab-  a  thainig  i.  Dh'  fheann  i  iad,  's  dh'  ith  iad,  's  rinn  i
deise  dhasan  de  cliraicinn  nam  fiadh.  Bha  iad  mar  seo  gu  doigheil
gus  an  do  theirig  na  feidh  's  an  d'  thainig  an  t-acras  orra  a  rithis,  's
chaidh  ise  an  sin  thun  a'  bhaile.  Thainig  each  mor  a  bheanadh  do'n
righ  de  dh  dh'  each  fiadhail  far  an  robh  iad.  Dh'  foighneachd  esan
de  Dhomhnull  de  'm  beathach  a  bha  'n  siud.

I'Tha  'n  siud  beathach  air  am  biotar  a'  deanadh  spors;  biotar  air
a  maiun  ga  mharcachd."

"Na'm  bfheairde  sinn  e  bheirinn  air,"  ars  esan.

"  Thusa  a  luidealaich  dhona  a  bheireadh  air  a  bheathach  'ud !  dh,
fhairtlich  e  air  duine  s'  an  riogbachd  breitb  air."  Cha  d'  fhulaing  e
tuilleadh  seanacbais,  ach  thainig  e  mu  'n  cuairt  's  bhuail  e  dorn  air
Domhnull,  's  chuir  e  'n  t-eanchainn  as.  Chuir  e  stob  daraich  roimh
a  »rh1iiaia  's  chroch  e  ri  dorns  na  botha  e.

"Bi  an  sincaogad  thar  mhiosa,"  ars'  esan.

Shin  e  air  an  each  an  seo  's  na  craicinn  slaodadh  ris.  Rug  e  air
an  each  's  chaidh  e  air  a  mhuin ;  's  an  t-each  nach  d'  fhulaing  duine
riamh  fhaicinn  thug  e'n  stabuU  air  leis  an  eagal.     Bha  brathair  'athar


LAOIDH  AN  AMADAIN  MHOIR.  I  79

an  deigh  mac  fhaotainn  o  mhnaoi  eile.  Nuair  a  chunnaic  esan  am
paileas  ghabh  e  suas  le  ioghnadh  a  choimhead  paileas  bhrathair  'athar.

Cha  d'  thubhaiit  a  mhuinie  ris  riamh  ach  an  t-amadan  mor  agus
'  Creud  orm."  Nuair  a  mhothaich  esan  mac  bhrathair  'athar  ag
iomain  chaidh  e  far  an  robh  e  's,  "  Creud  orm,"  urs'  esan.

"Co  thusa,"  arsa  mac  an  righ,  "de  dh'  uaislean  na  de  dh'  an-
uaislean  na  rioghachd  aig  am  bheil  a  leithid  sin  de  chaint  ?  "

"  Tha  mise,  an  t-amadan  mor,  mac  bean  an  ridire,dalta  na  banal-
trum,  's  comlidhalta  Dhomhnuill,  mac  na  banaltrum,  a'  falbh  a'  dean-
adh  amadanachd  domh  fliein,  's  na  b'  (heudar  e  's  mi  a  dheauadh
aniadan  diotsa  cuideachd  "

'■  Thusa  a  luidealaich  dhona  a  dheauadh  amadan  dhiomsa,"  arsa
Mac  an  Righ.

Chuir  e  thairis  an  dorn  's  chuir  e  'n  t-eanchainn  as.

•'  Bi  thusa  an  sin  caogad  thar  mhiosa  mar  a  tha  Domhnull  mac
na  banaltrum  agus  stob  daraich  roimh  a  chluais."

Ghabh  e  staigh  an  sin  far  an  robh  an  righ,  "  Creud  orm  ;  ars'  esan.

"Co  thusa,"  ars'  an  righ,  "de  dh'  uaislean  na  de  dh'  au-uaislean
an  rioghachd  aig  am  bheil  a  leithid  sin  de  chomhradh  ?  "

"  'Se  mise  an  t- Amadan  mor,  mac  bhean  an  ridire,  dalta  na  banal-
trum, 's  comhdhalta  Dhomhnuill,  mac  na  banaltrum,  air  falbh  a"
deanadh  amadanachd  dhomh  fhein,  's  na  'm  b'  fheudar  e  's  mi  a
dheanadh  amadan  diotsa  cuideachd."

"  Mata  cha  tu  a  rinn  diomsa  e  ach  mo  chomhairleach  an  lath,  a
mharbh  mi  t'  athair  nach  do  niharbh  do  mhathair."

Dh'  fhalbh  an  righ  an  sin  leis.  A'  h-uile  h-aon  an  sin  a  bha  ag
amas  air 's  a  bhaile  bha  iad  a'  falbh  leis,  's  b'  e  siud  am  beannachadh
"  Creud  orm."  Bha  boireannach  riomhach  anns  an  rioghachd,  's  bha
fachach  mor  an  deigh  a  toirt  air  falbh.  Smaointich  an  sluagh  na'n
d'  thugadh  iad  am  fianuis  a'  bhoireannaich  a  bha  'n  seo  e,  gu  'm  gab-
hadh  e  cean  urra,  s'  gu  'n  leigeadh  e'n  sluagh  air  falbh ;  gur  docha  gu
'n  d'  tiiigeadh  iad  eadar  e  fnein  's  am  fachach;  's  gu  'm  marbhadli
am  fachach  e.  Leig  e  a  chead  do'n  t-sluagh  's  mharbh  e  am  fachach.
Bha  e  'n  uair  sin  'na  Ian  amadan.


i8o


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


An  Ox  "the  Points  of  whose  Horns  were  ì>ai  Ku-Aiir«  instead  of
BEING  Forwards." — From  a  stone  at  Fowlis  Wester,  near  Crieft'. — Sculptured
Stones  of  Scotland,  PI.  Ix.  The  sculjiture  probably  represents  a  procession
;  an  ox  to  be  sacrificed.


LXXV.

GUAIGEAN  LADHEACH  S'  LOIREAN
SPAGACH.

From  Kate  MacFarlane,  as  early  as  1810,  John  Dewar,
October  1860.

THERE  was  at  some  time  a  king  in  Albainn  wliose
name  was  Cumhal,  and  he  had  a  great  dog  that
used  to  watch  the  herds.  When  the  cattle  were  sent
out  the  dog  would  lead  them  to  a  place  where  there
might  be  good  grass ;  and  the  dog  would  herd  them
there  for  the  day,  and  in  the  evening  he  would  bi-ing
them  home.

There  were   certain   people   dwelling   near  to   the


GUAIGEAX  LADHRACH  S    LOIREAN  SPAGACH.         I  b  I

King's  house,  and  they  had  one  son,  and  they  used  to
send  the  son  on  matters  to  the  king's  house  every  even-
ing. There  was  one  beautiful  sunny  evening,  and  the
boy  was  going  to  the  king's  house  on  a  matter,  and  he
had  a  ball  and  a  shinny,  and  he  was  playing  shinny
forwards  on  the  way  to  the  king's  house.*  A  dog
met  him,  and  the  dog  began  to  play  with  the  ball ;  he
would  hft  it  in  his  mouth  and  run  with  it.  At  last
the  boy  struck  a  blow  on  the  ball  while  it  was  in  the
dog's  mouth,  and  he  drove  the  ball  down  the  dog's
throat ;  he  stuffed  it  down  with  the  shank  of  the
shinny,  and  he  choked  the  dog ;  and  since  he  had
choked  the  dog,  he  himself  had  to  go  and  keep  the
king's  cattle  instead  of  the  dog.  He  had  to  drive  out
the  cattle  in  the  morning,  to  drive  them  to  good  grass,
and  to  stay  and  herd  them  all  day,  for  fear  they  should
be  stolen,  and  to  bring  them  home  in  the  evening  as
the  dog  used  to  do.  So  since  he  killed  the  dog,  and
since  it  was  in  the  place  of  the  king's  dog  that  he  was,
it  wag  "  Cu  Chumhail "  (Cual's  dog)  that  they  used  to
say  to  him ;  and  afterwards  they  altered  the  name  to
"  Cuthullain."  t

On  a  day  of  the  days  Cuchullin  put  out  the  cattle,
and  he  drove  them  to  a  plain  that  was  there,  and  he
was  herding  them  ;  and  he  saw  a  giant  who  was  so
big  that  he  thought  he  could  see  the  lift  between  his
legs,  coming  to  the  side  where  he  was,  and  driving  a
great  ox  before  him  ;  and  there  were  two  great  horns
on  the  ox,  and  their  points  were  backwards  instead  of
being  forwards.  The  giant  came  forward  with  the  ox
where  CuchulHn  was,  and  he  said,

*  This  is  a  common  practice  among  Higliland  laddies  now.

t  The  writer  means  the  Ossianic  hero,  commonly  called
CuchulHn  ;  so  I  have  followed  the  usual  spelling  rather  than
Dewar's,  which  is  but  another  way  of  expressing  the  same  sound.


102  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  I  am  going  to  take  a  while  of  sleep  here,  and  if
thou  seest  any  other  man  of  the  giants  coming  after
me,  awaken  me.  It  may  be  that  I  will  not  easily  he
wakened,  but  waken  thou  me  if  thou  canst."

"  What  is  waking  to  thee  ] "  said  Cuchullin.

"  It  is,"  said  the  giant,  "  to  take  the  biggest  stone
thou  canst  find  and  strike  me  on  the  chest  with  it,  and
that  will  Avake  me."

The  giant  lay  and  slept  and  his  snoring  was  as
loud  as  thunder.  But  sleep  was  not  long  for  him,  till
Cuchullin  saw  another  giant  coming,'  who  was  so  big
that  he  thought  he  could  see  the  lift  between  his  legs.

Cuchullin  ran  and  he  began  to  awaken  the  first
giant  that  came,  but  waken  he  Avould  not.  Cuchullin
was  shoving  him,  but  his  wakening  could  not  be  done ;
but  at  last  he  lifted  a  great  stone,  and  he  struck  the
giant  in  the  chest  with  it.  The  giant  awoke,  and  he
rose  up  sitting,  and  he  said,  "  Is  there  another  giant
coming  ] "

"  There  is ;  yonder  he  is,"  said  Cuchullin,  as  he
held  his  forefinger  towards  him.

The  giant  struck  his  two  palms  on  each  other,  and
he  said,  "Ach,  he  is  !"  and  he  sprang  on  his  feet.

The  other  giant  came  forwards,  and  he  said,  "  Yes !
Ghuaigean  làdhraich,*  thou  hast  stolen  my  ox."

"  I  did  not  steal  it,  Loirean  Spàgaich,"t  said  he,  "  I
took  it  with  me  in  the  sight  of  every  man  as  my  own."

Shamble  Shanks  seized  one  horn  of  the  ox  to  take
it  with  him,  and  Crumple  Toes  seized  the  other.
Shamble  Shanks  gave  a  swift  jerk  at  the  horn  Avhich
he  had  in  his  hand,  and  he  took  it  off  the  bone  ;  he
threw  it  from  him  with  all  his  strength,  and  he  drove

*  Crump-footed,  toe-ish.

f  Straddling  tracker,  or  shambling  shanks.     A  band^-legged
man  is  spagach.


GUAIGEAN  LADHRACH  s'  LOIREAN  SPAGACH.        I  8  3

it  into  tlie  earth,  point  foremost,  and  it  went  down  into
the  earth  to  the  root.  Then  he  seized  the  bone,  and
the  two  hauled  at  the  ox  to  drag  it  from  each  other.

At  last  the  head  of  the  ox  split,  and  the  ox  tore
asunder  down  through  his  very  middle  to  the  root  of
the  taU.  Then  they  threw  the  ox  from  them,  and
they  began  at  wrestling  ;  and  that  was  the  wrestling !
there  was  no  knowing  which  of  them  was  the  stronger.

Cuchullin  came  to  bring  aid  to  Crumple  Toes  ;  he
could  not  reach  up  aloft  to  give  a  blow  to  Shamble
Shanks  with  a  sword  which  he  had,  but  he  began  to
cut  at  the  back  of  his  legs  to  try  to  make  a  stair  up
the  back  of  the  giant's  legs,  up  wliich  he  might  climb
to  give  him  a  blow  of  his  sword.

Shamble  Shanks  felt  something  picking  the  back
of  his  legs,  and  he  put  down  his  hand  and  he  threw
CuchuUiu  away ;  and  where  should  Cuchullin  go  but
foot  foremost  into  the  horn  of  the  ox,  and  out  of  the
horn  he  coidd  not  come.  But  at  the  time  that  Sham-
ble Shanks  was  throwing  CuchulHn  away,  Crumple
Toes  got  a  chance  at  him  and  Shamble  Shanks  was
levelled,  and  Crumple  Toes  got  him  killed.

'\^^len  that  was  done  he  looked  about  for  CuchuUin,
but  he  could  not  see  him ;  and  he  shouted,  "  Where
art  thou  now,  thou  little  hero  that  wert  helping  me  ?"

Quoth  Cuchullin,  ''  I  aili  here  in  the  horn  of  the
ox."

The  giant  went  to  try  to  take  liim  out,  but  he
could  not  put  his  hand  far  enough  down  into  the
horn  ;  but  at  last  he  straddled  his  legs  and  he  drove
his  hand  down  into  the  horn,  and  he  got  hold  of
CuchulUn  between  his  two  fingers,  and  he  brought  him
up.  CuchullLu  went  home  with  the  cattle  at  the  going
down  of  the  sun,  and  I  heard  no  more  of  the  tale.

John  Dewar.


184  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

I  have  not  given  the  Gaelic  of  this,  because  there  is  nothing
peculiar  in  the  language.  It  is  curious  as  having  a  general  resem-
blance to  the  adventures  of  Jack  the  Giant  Killer  and  Tom  Thumb,
Thor,  and  other  such  worthies;  and  as  showing  two  well-known
Ossianic  heroes  in  a  nursery  tale,  as  "early  as  1810."  Curahal  the
father  of  Fionn ;  and  Cuchullin.

I  have  another  version  of  th^se  incidents  in  a  story  dictated  by
Neil  Macalister,  Port  Charlotte,  Islay,  and  written  by  Mr.  Carmichael
at  the  request  of  my  old  friend,  John  MacLean,  of  Coulabus.

The  Feinn  were  all  in  Islay  to  drive  away  the  Lochlanners,  and
when  they  had  succeeded,  Cuchullin  fell  in  with  a  fairy  sweetheart,
who  had  flocks  and  herds,  and  he  staid,  while  the  rest  went  north  to
fight  the  Lochlanners  in  Skye.  The  fairy  sweetheart  bore  a  son,  and
by  desire  of  his  father,  called  him  Conlaoch.  There  was  a  neighbour
called  Garbh  Mac  Stairn,  who  was  far  stronger  than  Cuchullin,  and
one  day  he  went  to  take  his  fine  light-coloured  bull.  Cuchullin  dis-
guised himself  as  herd,  met  the  giant,  told  him  his  mistress  was  ill  in
bed,  and  then  ran  round,  and  got  into  bed  behind  her.  The  wife  said
she  had  got  a  baby,  and  the  giant  poked  his  finger  into  his  mouth,  to
see  if  he  would  make  "  fisean  Cuin,"  a  whelp  of  Conn,  and  the  hero
bit  him  to  the  bone.  The  wife  complained  of  the  draught  from  the
door,  lamenting  her  husband's  absence,  for  he  would  turn  the  house
away  from  the  wind.  The  big  man  tried,  but  could  not,  so  he  made
oflf  to  the  cattle.  The  seeming  herd  got  there  before  him,  and  they
seized  the  bull  by  the  horns,  and  tore  him  in  two.  Then  they  try
the  feats  which  Cuchullin  could  do.  The  giant  carries  a  millstone
which  the  herd  cannot  lift,  to  a  hill  top,  and  the  herd  rides  it  to  the
bottom.  The  giant  tries,  and  gets  many  a  hard  fall.  They  go  to  a
rock  more  than  a  hundred  fathoms  high,  and  perform  a  feat  which
used  to  be  attributed  to  Islay  boys ;  they  "  measure  two  feet  and  two
fists  "  over  the  edge.  The  giant  puts  one  heel  on  the  edge,  the  other
against  his  toe,  stoops,  and  places  his  clenched  hands  on  each  other,  on
the  other  toe  ;  and  tumbles  headlong  into  the  "  fierce  black  green  sea."

Cuchullin  gives  a  feast,  and  then  goes  to  Skye  to  help  Fionn>
leaving  a  ring  for  his  son.  He  grows  up  and  follows,  and  his  mother
swears  him  never  to  tell  his  name  till  forced.  Conlaoch  finds
the  Feinn  fighting  at  "  Thaigh  Mheile  aun  an  Dura."  Fionn
sends  to  find  out  his  name.  Conan  goes ;  they  fight,  and  Conan  is
beat.  Cuchullin  goes,  and  the  son  keeps  him  off  with  his  sword.
They  go  out  into  the  sea,  to  the  bands  of  their  kilts,  to  try  "cath
builg,"  and  they  cast  their  spears  at  each  other,  but  the  son  casts  shaft


THE  STORY  OF  COXALL  GULBAN.  I  6  5

foremost.  At  last  he  is  pierced  by  his  father,  and  discovers  himself;
and  they  curse  the  fairy  mother.  The  last  few  lines  are  fragments  of
a  poem,  and  make  sis  verses.  "  The  death  of  Conlaoch  "  is  told  in  an
undated  quarto  MSS.  in  the  Advocates'  Library,  the  action  is  partly
in  Scythia,  and  there  is  much  more  incident.  The  poem  of
"  Carthon,"  is  founded  on  the  incidents,  but  the  names  are  different.
This  then  is  old,  Ossiauic,  mytliological,  and  Celtic ;  it  is  common  to
Scotland  and  Ireland  ;  to  MSS.,  print,  and  tradition.
See  Carleton  Irish  stories,  Dublin,  1846,  p.  107,  etc.


LXXVI.

CONALL  GULBAjS^;  OE  GUILBEmACH,
OE  GULBAIENEACH.

In  translating  tliis  I  have  departed  from  my  first  jilan,
which  was  to  give  in  all  cases  exactly  what  I  got  from
one  man,  and  abstracts  of  other  versions.  In  this  case
the  longest  version  was  translated ;  and  to  it  passages
and  notes  were  added  from  tliree  other  written  versions  :
and  from  two  of  which  I  took  notes  myself.  Where
the  same  incidents  are  given  by  two  men  in  different
words,  the  passage  which  seemed  best  has  been  selected.
Where  one  version  has  an  additional  incident  which
the  rest  have  not,  it  is  inserted  in  its  order.  Where
versions  vary,  the  variation  is  given  in  a  note.  Thus
many  passages  are  substituted  and  inserted,  but  I  have
carefully  avoided  adding  anytliing  of  my  own  invention.

At  the  earnest  request  of  the  pulDlishers,  the  Gaelic
of  this  long  story  is  omitted,  to  make  room  for  other
matter ;  but  the  manuscript  is  preserved,  and  some
few  curious  passages  are  given  in  foot  notes.

The  chief  "author,"  as  the  scribe  calls  him,  is
John  MacNair,  who  lives  at  Clachaig,  near  the  powder
mills  at  Dimoon.  The  scribe  is  John  Dewar,  a  labourer
now  working  in  the  woods  at  Eosneath,  and  their  ver-


1 86  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

sion  fills  sixty  foolscap  pages.  I  find  that  there  is  a
tendency  to  change  dialogue  into  narrative  in  writing
a  story,  as  is  the  case  here  ;  but  when  these  men  tell
stories,  dialogue  predominates.

MacNair,  who  is  a  shoemaker,  got  the  story  about
thirty-five  years  ago  from  an  old  man  named  Duncan
Livingston,  who  lived  in  Glendaruel,  and  was  then
about  sixty -five.  Dewar  says  that  he  was  a  shoemaker,
and  grandfather  to  another  old  shoemaker,  James
Leitch,  who  Hves  at  Eas  klachain  in  Glendaruel,  and
from  whose  dictation  Dewar  has  taken  down  several
long  and  curious  stories  which  I  have.  Leitch  says
that  his  grandfather  "  had  Ossian's  Poems  by  heart,"
and  many  tales  "  sgeidachd ;"  and  a  list  of  those  Avho
still  know  the  latter  is  given.

Of  Livingston,  MacNair  says —

"  I  have  an  interesting  story  about  that  old  man.  In  the  time
of  the  American  war,  the  laird  was  pressing  the  tenants  to  go,
and  this  old  man  seemed  not  willing ;  so  they  pursued  him
through  a  deep  river  or  burn,  as  we  call  it ;  and  when  he  saw  he
could  not  escape,  he  placed  his  leg  between  two  stones  and
snapped  it  in  two,  so  they  had  to  carry  him  home."

The  second  version  was  written  by  Hector  Mac-
Lean,  and  fills  twenty-five  pages.  The  reciter  was
Alexander  MacNeill,  who  hves  in  Barra,  and  who
names  as  his  authorities  several  old  men.  He  also
recited  No.  XXXVI.

The  third  was  also  written  by  MacLean,  from  the
telling  of  John  MacGilvray,  labourer,  Colonsay,  in
July  1860.  It  fills  fourteen  pages,  and  has  tMs  tra-
dition attached  to  it, — "  Two  ministers,  long  ago,
desirous  of  trying  the  powers  of  the  Gaelic  language,
composed  this  story  and  the  Knight  of  the  Eed  Shield
(No.  LIL).     MacLean  suggests  two  Monks  of  lona.

The  fourth  was  written  by  Mr.  Fraser  of  Mauld,


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAN.  I  by

near  Beaulay,  Inverness-shire,  and  fills  six  pages.  It
was  told  by  Dugald  Martin  in  Crochal.

I  have  heard  the  story  told  by  various  reciters,
particularly  by  Donald  MacPhie  in  South  Hist,  and
Charles  Maclntyre  in  Benbecula.  The  latter  spoke
for  an  hour.  I  did  not  time  the  former,  but  he  spoke
for  a  long  time,  and  I  thought  his  version  the  most
consistent  and  the  most  complete  story  which  I  had
then  heard.

The  story  then  is  very  widely  spread  in  Scotland
— from  Beaulay  on  the  east,  to  Barra  on  the  west,  and
Dunoon  and  Paisley  in  the  south.  No  two  give  it  in
the  same  words,  or  give  exactly  the  same  incidents  ;
but  MacXair's  version  written  in  Dunoon,  and  Mac-
Neill's  in  Barra,  -WTitten  independently  by  different
scribes,  so  far  as  they  go  together,  closely  resemble  each
other.

Dewar,  who  is  a  very  intelligent  man,  suggests
that  the  story  is  "  purely  Irish,"  and  that  "  it  was
composed  about  the  time  of  the  crusade,  as  it  tells
about  the  Turks  invading  the  Idng  of  lubhar's  country."
He  thinks  the  Green  Isle  is  one  of  the  Orkneys.

"  Imise  terrain,  the  isles  of  noise.  Ossian's  poem
on  Cathul,"  so  called  because  covered  with  fir  trees
and  with  large  rocks  facing  the  sea,  against  which  the
waves  make  a  great  noise."  (There  are  no  trees  in
Orkney.)  Dewar  does  not  think  this  tale  so  old  as
many  of  the  others  which  he  has  written  for  me.

My  own  opinion  is  that  the  story  is  mixed  with  the
adventures  of  the  Norse  sea  rovers  who  frequented  the
Western  Isles ;  and  that  it  is  impossible  to  say  whether
it  was  composed  in  Ireland  or  in  Scotland ;  but  it  is
clear  that  it  was  composed  a  long  time  ago,  and  by  some
one  able  to  imagine  and  carry  out  an  elaborate  plot.
There  are  many  old  men  in  Scotland,  widely  separated,


1 88  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

and  who  cannot  read,  who  know  the  story  and  can
remember  the  plot,  in  whole  or  in  part ;  so  it  must  be
old.  It  is  also  known  in  Ireland.  I  have  traced  the
incidents  amongst  Irish  labourers  in  London.  One
man,  a  bricklayer,  had  "  seen  Conall  Gulban  in  an  Irish
manuscript ;"  and  a  story  so  called  is  mentioned  in  the
transactions  of  the  Ossianic  Society  of  Dublin.


THE  STOEY  OF  COXALL  GULBAN.

npHERE  was  at  some  time  a  young  king  in  Eirinn,
-*-  and  when  he  came  to  man's  estate  the  high  coun-
sellors of  the  realm  were  counselling  him  to  marry  ;
but  he  himself  was  inclined  to  go  to  foreign  countries
first,  so  that  he  might  get  more  knowledge,  and  that
he  might  be  more  instructed  how  the  realm  should  be
regulated ;  and  he  put  each  thing  in  order  for  matters
to  be  arranged  till  he  should  come  back.  He  staid
there  a  while  till  he  had  got  every  learning  that  he
thought  he  could  get  in  that  realm.  Then  he  left
Greece  and  he  went  "  do'n  Eheadailte,"  to  the  Italy  to
get  more  learning.  When  he  was  in  that  country  he
made  acquaintance  with  the  young  king  of  "  an  lubh-
air,"  and  they  were  good  comrades  together  ;  and  when
thej''  had  got  every  learning  that  they  had  to  get  in
Italy,  they  thought  of  going  home.

The  young  king  of  the  lubhar  gave  an  invitation
to  the  young  king  of  Eirinn  that  he  should  go  to  the
realm  of  the  lubhar,  and  that  he  should  stay  a  while
there  with  hun.  The  young  king  of  Eirinn  went  with
him,  and  they  were  together  in  the  fortress  of  lubhar
for  a  while,  at  sports  and  himting.

The  king  of  Iixbhar  had  a  sister  who  was  exceed-
ingly handsome  ;  she  was  "  stuama  beusach,"  modest


THK  STOEY  OF  CONALL  GULB.VN.  I  »9

and  gentle  in  her  ways,  and  she  was  right  (well)  in-
structed. The  young  king  of  Eirinn  fell  in  love  with
her,  and  she  fell  in  love  Avith  the  young  king  of  Eirinn,
and  he  was  willing  to  marry  her,  and  she  was  willing
to  marry  him,  and  the  king  of  lubhar  was  willing  that
the  wedding  should  go  on  ;  but  the  young  king  of
Eiriun  went  home  first,  and  he  gathered  together  the
high  coruisellors  of  the  realm,  and  he  told  them  what
he  desired  to  do  ;  and  the  high  counsellors  of  the
realm  of  Eirinn  counselled  their  king  to  marry  the
sister  of  the  Idng  of  lubhar.*

The  king  of  Eirinn  went  back  and  he  married  the
king's  sister  ;  and  the  king  of  the  lubhar  and  the  king
of  Eirinn  made  "  co-cheanghal  "  a  league  together.  If
straits,  or  hardship,  or  extremity,  or  anything  counter
should  come  upon  either,  the  other  was  to  go  to  his  aid.

"When  they  had  settled  each  thing  as  it  should  be,
the  two  kings  gave  each  other  a  blessing,  and  the  king
of  Eirinn  and  his  queen  went  home  to  Eirinn.

At  the  end  of  a  little  more  than  a  yeart  after  that
they  had  a  young  son,  and  they  gave  hiin  Eobhan  as  a
name.  Good  care  was  taken  of  him,  as  should  be  of  a
king's  son.  At  the  end  of  a  little  more  than  a  year
after  that  they  had  another  son,  and  they  gave  him
Claidliean  as  a  name.  Care  was  taken  of  this  one  as
had  been  taken  of  liis  brother ;  and  at  more  than  a
year  after  that  they  had  another  son,  and  they  gave

*  This  seems  to  shew  that  Celtic  kings  did  not  act  without
the  consent  of  their  chiefs  ;  and  this  appears  in  other  places,  in
this,  and  in  many  other  stories.  lubhar  is  a  name  for  Newry
but  the  story  is  not  consistent  with  the  supposition  that  Newry
is  meant.  I  suspect  Jewry  is  the  word,  and  that  the  Holy  Land
is  meant.

t  The  island  reciters  always  say,  "  at  the  end  of  three  quar-
ters," etc.


190  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

him  Conall  as  a  name,  and  care  was  taken  of  him  as
had  been  taken  of  the  two  others.*

*  The  parentage  and  education  of  Conall  are  differently  given,
in  a  very  good  though  short  version,  written  by  Mr.  Fraser  of
Mauld.  It  is  called  the  tale  of  Conall  Guilbeanach,  sou  of  the
King  of  Eirinn,  and  Gealmhaiseach  mhin  (fair,  beauteous,  smooth)
daughter  of  the  King  of  Lochlann.

A  king  of  Eirinn  was  fond  of  the  chase,  and  on  a  fine  spring
day  he  chased  the  deer  till  he  lost  his  dogs,  and  his  people.  In
the  gray  of  the  evening  he  sat  on  the  side  of  a  green  knoll,  be-
hind the  wind  and  before  the  sun,  and  he  heard  a  voice  beside
him  say,  "  Hail  to  thee,  King  of  Eirinn."  "  Hail  to  thyself  thou
old  gray  man,"  said  the  king.

The  old  man  took  him  into  the  mountain,  and  there  he  saw
what  he  had  never  seen  before  ;  such  food  and  drink,  meat  and
music,  and  dancing,  and  the  old  man  had  a  beautiful  daughter.
He  slept  that  night ;  and  when  he  arose  in  the  morning  he  heard
the  cry  of  a  child ;  and  he  had  to  stay  for  the  christening  of  his
son,  and  he  was  named  Conal  Guilbeanach.

The  king  sent  him  venison  from  time  to  time,  and  he  grew  up
to  be  a  stalwart  youth,  swift  and  strong.

Then  war  sprung  up  between  the  King  of  Eirinn  and  the  King
of  Lochlann ;  and  the  king  sent  Caoilte  (one  of  the  Feine),  the
swiftest  man  in  the  realm,  for  Conall,  and  be  could  not  keep  up
with  Conall  on  the  way  home.

The  old  gray  man  gave  him  a  sword,  and  he  said,  "  Here  is
for  thee,  Conall,  A  Gheur  Ghlas  (the  keen  gray),  that  I  got  myself
from  Ossean  MacOscar  na  Feinne,  etc.

An  old  man  in  Benbecula,  Donald  Maclntyre,  told  me  this
story  in  1859.  It  lasted  about  an  hour,  and  I  did  not  take  notes,
but  his  version  was  the  same  as  Mr.  Fraser's,  so  far.  A  king  of
Eirinn  gets  lost  in  a  magic  mist,  is  entertained  by  a  giay  old
man,  stays  in  his  house  for  a  night,  sees  the  man's  daughter,
"  and  wheresoever  the  girl  slept,  it  was  there  the  king  rose  in  the
morning."  He  had  been  there  a  year  and  a  day.  Conall  was
born,  and  when  the  king  went  home  he  said  nothing  about  his
adventures.

The  man  who  was  sent  for  Conall,  when  war  broke  out  with


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAX.         I9I

T&ey  were  coming  on  well,  and  at  the  fitting  time
a  teacher  was  got  for  them.  A\Tien  they  had  got  about
as  much  learning  as  the  teacher  could  give  them,  they
were  one  day  out  at  play,  and  the  king  and  the  queen
were  going  past  them,  and  they  were  looking  at  their
clanm

Said  the  C[ueen,  "  This  is  well,  and  well  enough,
but  more  than  this  must  be  done  for  the  children  yet.
I  think  that  we  ought  to  send  them  to  Gruagach  Bhein
Eidinn  to  learn  feats  and  heroes'  activity  (luth  ghaisge),
and  that  there  is  not  in  the  sixteen  realms  another  that
is  as  good  as  the  Gruagach  of  Beinn  Eidinn.*

The  king  agreed  with  her,  and  word  was  sent  for
the  Gruagach.  He  came,  and  Eobhan  and  Claidhean
were  sent  Avith  him  to  Beia  Eidinn  to  learn  feats  and

the  Turks,  and  the  king's  two  sons  refused  to  stay,  was  so  swift
that  he  could  cover  seven  ridges  at  a  stride  ;  but  Conall  beat  him
at  all  feats  of  agility,  and  when  he  came  home  with  him  he  was
seven  ridges  before  him  ;  and  as  he  went  he  kept  a  golden  apple
playing  aloft  with  the  points  of  bis  two  spears,  etc.

Old  Donald  MacPhie,  in  South  Uist,  also  told  me  the  story.
Like  all  versions  which  I  have  heard,  it  was  full  of  metrical  prose
passages,  "  runs  "  as  they  are  called.  His  version  agreed  with
Maclntyre's  as  to  the  parentage  of  Conall.

The  correct  reading  then  seems  to  be,  that  Conall's  two  bro-
thers were  the  sons  of  the  queen,  but  that  the  hero  was  the  son
of  the  daughter  of  Gruagach  (?the  Druid)  of  Beinn  Eudain,  an
old  gray  man,  who  lived  in  the  mountain,  and  who  had  been  a
comrade  of  Oisean  and  the  Feine.

Conall  had  the  blood  of  the  ancient  heroes  in  his  veins,  and
they  helped  their  descendant.

•  *  Dewar  says,  "  a  master  of  arts  and  sciences,  a  title,  old
Gaelic;"  but  he  says  so  only  on  the  authority  of  his  stories.  I
suspect  the  word  to  be  the  same  as  Druidhach,  a  Druid  or  magi-
cian ;  and  that  this  relates  to  some  real  school  of  arms  and  warlike
exercises.     What  the  sixteen  realms  may  mean  I  don't  know.


192  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

activity,  and  what  thing  so  ever  besides  the  Gruagach
could  teach  them.

They  thought  that  Conall  was  too  young  to  send
him  there  at  that  time.  When  Eobhan  and  Claidhean
were  about  a  year  by  the  Gruagach,  he  came  with  them
to  their  father's  house  ;  they  were  sent  back  again,  and
the  Gruagach  was  giving  every  learning  to  the  king's
childi-en.  He  took  them  with  liini  one  day  aloft  up
Beinn  Eidinn,  and  wlien  they  were  on  high  about  half
the  mountain,  the  king's  children  saw  a  round  brown
stone,  and  as  if  it  were  set  aside  from  other  stones.
They  asked  what  was  the  reason  of  that  stone  being
set  aside  so,  rather  than  all  the  other  stones  on  the
mountain.  The  Gruagach  said  to  them  that  the  name
of  that  stone  was  Clach  nan  gaisgeach,  the  stone  of  the
heroes.  Any  one  that  could  lift  that  stone  till  he
could  place  the  wind  between  it  and  earth,  that  he  was
a  hero.

Eobhan  went  to  try  to  lift  the  stone  ;  he  put  his
arms  about  it,  and  he  lifted  it  up  to  his  knees  ;
Claidhean  seized  the  stone,  and  he  put  the  wind  be-
tween it  and  eaith.

Said  the  Gruagach  to  them,  "  Ye  are  but  young
and  tender  yet,  be  not  spoiling  yourselves  with  things
that  are  too  weighty  for  you.  Stop  till  the  end  of  a
year  after  this  and  you  will  be  stronger  for  it  than  you
are  now."

The  Gruagach  took  them  home  and  taught  them
feats  and  activity,  and  at  the  end  of  a  year  he  took
them  again  up  the  mountain.  Eobhan  and  Claidhean
went  to  the  stone  ;  Eobhan  lifted  it  to  liis  shoulder
top,  and  set  it  doAvn  ;  Claidliean  lifted  the  stone  up  to
liis  lap,  and  the  Gruagach  said  to  them,  "  There  is
neither  want  of  strength  or  learning  with  you  ;  I  will
give  you  over  to  your  father."


THE  STORY  OF  COXALL  GULBAX.  I  93

At  the  end  of  a  few  clays  after  that,  the  Gruagach
Avent  home  to  the  king's  house,  and  he  gave  them  to
their  father  ;  and  he  said  that  the  king's  sons  were
the  strongest  and  the  best  taught  that  there  were  in
the  sixteen  reahns.  The  king  gave  thanks  and  reward
to  the  Gruagach,  and  he  sent  Conall  -udth  him.

Tlie  Gruagach  began  to  teach  Conall  to  do  tricks
and  feats,  and  Conall  pleased  him  well ;  and  on  a  day
he  took  Conall  -n-ith  him  up  the  face  of  Beinn  Eidinn,
and  they  reached  the  place  Avhere  the  round  brown
stone  was.  Conall  noticed  it,  and  he  asked  as  his
brothers  had  done ;  and  the  Gruagach  said  as  he  said
before.  Conall  put  his  hands  about  the  stone,  and  he
put  the  Avind  between  it  and  earth  ;  and  they  went
home,  and  he  was  with  the  Gruagach  getting  more
knowledge.

Tlie  next  year  after  that  they  went  up  Beinn
Eidinn  where  the  round  broA\Ti  stone  was.  Conall
thought  that  he  would  try  if  he  was  (na  bu  mliurraiche)
stronger  to  lift  the  heroes'  stone.  He  caught  the  stone
and  he  raised  it  on  the  top  of  the  shoulder,  and  on  the
faggot  gathering  place  of  liis  back,  and  he  carried  it
aloft  to  the  top  of  Beion  Eidinn,  and  ào^Yn  to  the
bottom  of  Beinn  Eidinn,  and  back  again  ;  and  he  left
it  where  he  found  it.

And  the  Gruagach  said  to  him,  "  Ach  !  thou  hast
enough  of  strength,  if  thou  hast  enough  of  SAviftness."

The  Gruagach  shewed  Conall  a  black  thorn  bush
that  was  a  short  way  from  them,  and  he  said,  "  If  thou
canst  give  me  a  bloAV  with,  that  black  thorn  bush
yonder,  before  I  reach  the  top  of  the  moimtain,  I  may
cease  giving  thee  instructions,"  and  the  Gruagach  ran
up  the  hill.

Conall  sprang  to  the  bush  ;  he  thought  it  would
take  too  much  time  to  cut  it  with  his  sword,    and  he


194  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

pulled  it  out  of  the  root,  and  he  ran  after  the  Gruagach
with  it ;  and  before  he  was  but  a  short  way  up  the
mountain,  Conall  was  at  his  back  striking  him  about
the  backs  of  his  knees  with  the  black  thorn  bush.

The  Gruagach  said,  "  I  will  stop  giving  thee  in-
structions, and  I  wiU  go  home  and  I  wiU  give  thee  up
to  thy  father."

The  Gruagach  wished  to  go  home  with  ConaU,  but
ConaU  was  not  willing  tiU  he  shoidd  get  every  know-
ledge that  the  Gruagach  could  give  him  ;  and  he  was
with  him  after  that  more  than  a  year,  and  after  that
they  went  home.

The  king  asked  the  Gruagach  how  ConaU  had
taken  up  his  learning.  "  It  is  so,"  said  the  Gruagach,
"  that  Conall  is  the  man  that  is  the  strongest  and  best
taught  in  the  sixteen  realms,  and  if  he  gets  days  he
will  increase  that  heroism  yet."

The  king  gave  full  reward  and  thanks  to  the
Gruagach  for  the  care  he  had  taken  of  his  son.  The
Gruagach  gave  thanks  to  the  king  for  the  reward  he
had  given  liinu  They  gave  each  other  a  blessing,  and
the  Gruagach  and  the  king's  sons  gave  each  other  a
blessing,  and  the  Gruagach  went  home,  and  he  was
fuUy  pleased.*]

The  young  King  of  Eirinn  and  the  king  of
Laidheann  were  comrades,  and  fond  of  each  other;
and   they   used   to    go  to  the  green    mound    to    the

*  So  far,  I  have  followed  MacNair's  version,  which  is  the  only
one  with  this  part.  I  have  shortened  it  hy  striking  out  repeti-
tions ;  but  I  have  followed  Dewar's  spelling  of  the  names.  The
next  bit  may  be  but  another  version  of  the  education  of  the  war-
rior, but  it  seems  as  if  something  were  wanted  to  complete  it.  It
is  the  beginning  of  the  story  as  told  in  Barra,  and  I  give  it  as
part  of  the  same  thing.  It  agrees  with  the  mysterious  origin  of
♦I'onall.


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAX.  I  95

side  of  Beinn  Eudain  to  seek  pastime  and  pleasm*e  of
mind.

The  King  of  Eirinn  had  three  sons,  and  the  King
of  Laidheann  one  daughter  ;  and  the  youngest  son  that
the  King  of  Eirinn  had  was  Conall.  On  a  day,  as  they
were  on  the  green  mound  at  the  side  of  Beinn  Eudain,
they  saw  the  seeming  of  a  shower  gathering  in  the
heart  of  the  north-western  airt,  and  a  rider  of  a  bkck
filly  coming  from  about  the  shower ;  and  he  took  (his
way)  to  the  green  moimd  where  were  the  Eang  of
Eirinn  and  tlie  Iving  of  Laidheann,  and  he  blessed
the  men,  and  he  inquired  of  them.  The  King  of
Eirinn  asked  what  he  came  about  ;  and  he  said  that
he  was  going  to  make  a  request  to  the  King  of  Eirinn,
if  it  were  so  that  he  might  get  it.  The  King  of  Eirinn
said  that  he  should  get  it  if  it  should  be  in  his  power
to  give  it  to  him.

"  Give  me  a  loan  of  a  day  and  a  year  of  Conall
thy  son."

"  I  myself  promised  that  to  thee,"  said  the  King
of  Eirinn  ;  "  and  unless  I  had  promised  thou  shouldst
not  get  him."

He  took  Conall  A^àth  him.  Xoav  the  King  of
Eirinn  went  home  ;  he  laid  do'mi  music,  and  raised  up
woe,  lamenting  his  son  ;  he  laid  vows  on  himself  that
he  would  not  stand  on  the  green  mound  till  a  day  and
a  year  should  run  out.  There  then  he  was  at  home,
heavy  and  sad,  till  a  day  and  a  year  had  run.

At  the  end  of  a  day  and  year  he  went  to  the  green
moimd  at  the  side  of  Beinn  Eudain.  There  he  was  a
while  at  the  green  mound,  and  he  was  not  seeing  a
man  coming,  and  he  was  not  seeing  a  horseman  com-
ing, and  he  was  imder  sorrow  and  under  grief.  In  the
same  airt  of  the  heaven,  in  the  mouth  of  the  evening,
he  saw  the  same   shower  coming,  and  a  man  upon  a


196  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

black  filly  in  it,  and  a  man  behind  Mm.  He  went  to
the  green  mound  where  the  man  was  coming,  and  he
saw  the  Iving  of  Laidlieann.

"  How  dost  thou  find  thyself.  King  of  Eirinn  Ì "

"  I  myself  am  but  middling."

"  What  is  it  that  lays  trouble  on  thee.  King  of
Eh-inn  V

"  There  is  enough  that  puts  trouble  upon  me.
There  came  a  man  a  year  from  yesterday  that  took
from  me  my  son  ;  he  promised  to  be  with  me  this  day,
and  I  cannot  see  his  likeness  coming,  himself  or  my
son."

"  "Wouldst  thou  know  thy  son  if  thou  shouldst  see
him?"

"  I  think  I  sliould  know  him  for  all  tlie  time  he
has  been  away."

"  There  is  thy  son  for  thee  then,"  said  the  lad  who
came.

"  Oh,  it  is  not ;  he  is  unlike  my  son  ;  so  great  a
change  as  might  come  over  my  son,  such  a  change  as
that  coidd  not  come  over  him  since  he  went  away."

"  He  is  all  thou  hast  for  thy  son."

"  Oh,  you  are  my  father,  surely,"  said  Conall.

"  Thanks  be  to  thee,  king  of  the  cliiefs  and  the
mighty  !  that  Conall  has  come,"  said  the  King  of
Eirinn  ;  "  I  am  pleased  that  my  son  has  come.  Any
one  thing  that  thou  settest  before  me  fn-  bringing  my
son  home,  thou  shalt  get  it,  and  my  blessing."

"  I  will  not  take  anything  but  thy  blessing  ;  and
if  I  get  thy  blessing  I  am  paid  enough."

He  got  the  blessing  of  the  King  of  Eirinn,  and
they  parted  ;  and  the  King  of  Eirimi  and  his  children
went  home.]

After  the  sons  of  the  King  of  Eirinn  had  gotten
their  learning,  they  themselves,  and  the  king  and  the


THE  STORY  OP  CON ALL  GULBAN,  I  97

queen,  were  in  the  fortress ;  and  they  were  full  of
rejoicing  with  music  and  joy,  when  there  came  a  mes-
senger to  them  from  the  King  of  lubhar,  telling  that
the  Turcaich  were  at  war  with  him  to  take  the  land
from  him ;  and  that  the  realm  of  lubhar  was  sore  be-
set by  the  Turks  ;  that  they  were  (lionar  neartmhor
s'  bore)  numerous,  powerful,  and  proud  (ra  gharg),
right  fierce,  merciless  without  kindUness,  and  that
there  were  things  incomprehensible  about  them ;
though  they  were  slain  to-day  they  would  be  alive  to-
morrow, and  they  would  come  forward  to  hold  battle
on  the  next  day,  as  fierce  and  furious  as  they  ever
were  ;  and  the  messenger  was  entreating  the  King  of
Eirinn  to  go  to  help  the  King  of  lubhar,  according  to
his  words  and  his  covenants.*  The  King  of  Eirinn
must  go  to  help  the  King  of  the  lubhar,  because  of
the  heavy  vows  :  if  strife,  danger,  straits,  or  any  hard-
ship should  come  against  the  one  king,  that  the  other
king  was  to  go  to  help  liim.t]  JiacNa

They  put  on  them  for  going  ;  and  when  they  had
put  on  them  for  going  away,  they  sent  away  a  ship
with  provisions  +  and  with  arms.  There  went  away
right  good  ships  loaded  with  each  thing  they  might
require ;  noble  sliips  indeed.  The  King  of  Eirinn  and
the  King  of  Laidheann  gave  out  an  order  that  every
man  in  the  kingdom  should  gather  to  go.

*  All  versions  agree  that  there  was  war  between  Eirinn  and
the  Turks.

t  This  is  the  fullest  version.  MacNeill  gives  the  same  inci-
dents in  a  very  few  words.  The  Colonsay  man,  MacGilvray,
begins  here.  "  The  King  of  Eirinn  thought  that  he  would  go  to
put  the  Turks  out  of  the  realm  of  the  Emperor — Impire.
Another  version  also  says  that  the  king  had  gone  to  put  the
Turks  out  of  the  realm  of  the  Emperor.

*  The  word  provGOshon  has  been  adopted  by  reciters.


198  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

The  King  of  Eirinn  asked,  "  Is  there  any  man
about  to  stay  to  keep  the  wives  and  sons  of  Eirinn,
till  the  King  of  Eh'inn  come  back]  Oh  thou,  my
eldest  son,  stay  thou  to  keep  the  kingdom  of  Eirinn
for  thy  father,  and  thine  is  the  third  part  of  it  for  his
life,  and  at  his  death."

"  Thou  seemest  light  minded  to  me,  my  father,"
said  the  eldest  son,  "  when  thou  speakest  such  idle
talk  ;  I  would  rather  hold  one  day  of  battle  and  com-
bat against  the  great  Turk,  than  that  I  should  have
the  kingdom  of  Eirinn  altogether."

"  There  is  no  help  for  it,"  said  the  king.  "  But
thou,  middlemost  son,  stay  thou  to  keep  the  kingdom
of  Eirinn  for  thy  father,  and  thine  is  the  half  for  his
life,  and  at  his  death."

"  Do  not  speak,  my  father,  of  sucli  a  silly  thing !
Wliat  strong  love  should  you  have  yourself  for  going,
that  I  might  not  have  V

"  There  is  no  help  for  it,"  said  the  King  of  Eirinn.
"  Oh,  Conall,"  said  the  king,  "  thou  that  hast  ever
earned  my  blessing,  and  that  never  deserved  my  curse,
stay  thou  to  keep  the  wives  and  sons  of  Eirinn  for  thy
father  until  he  himself  returns  home  again,  and  thou
shalt  have  the  realm  of  Eirinn  altogether  for  thyself,
for  my  life,  and  at  my  death."

"  Well  then,  father,  I  will  stay  for  thy  blessing,
and  not  for  the  realm  of  Eirinn,  though  the  like  of
that  might  be."*]

The  king  thought  that  Conall  was  too  young  for
the  realm  to  be  trusted  to  him  ;  he  gathered  his  high
counsellors  and  he  took  their  counsel  about  it.  The  coun-

*  The  Colonsay  version  and  MacNair's  give  the  same  incidents  ;
and  Conall  says  that  if  the  others  get  as  much  as  Eirinn,  they
will  be  well  off.  "Thou  art  wise,  Conall,"  said  the  king;  and
Conall  was  crowned  King  of  Eirinn  before  they  staited.


THE  STORY  OF  COXALL  GULB.VX.  I  99

sellors  said  that  Conall  was  surely  too  young,  but  that
was  (faillinn  a  bha  daonan  a  dol  am  feobhas)  a  fail-
ÌDg  that  was  always  bettering  ;  though  he  was  young,
that  he  would  always  be  gro-^ing  older  ;  and  that  as
Eobhan  and  Claidliean  would  not  stay,  that  it  was  best
to  trust  the  realm  to  Conall.]  siacXair.

Then  here  went  the  great  nobles  of  Eirinn,  and
they  put  on  them  for  going  to  sail  to  the  realm  of  the
Tuirc,  themselves  and  the  company  of  the  King  of
Laidhean  altogether.*]  MacNeiu.

They  went  aAvay,  and  Conall  went  along  with  them
to  the  shore  ;  he  and  his  father  and  his  brothers  gave
a  blessing  to  each  other  ;  and  the  King  of  Eirinn  and
his  two  sons,  Eobhan  aud  Claidhean,  went  on  board  of
a  ship,  and  they  hoisted  the  speckled  flapping  sails  up
against  the  tall  tough  masts  ;  and  they  sailed  the
ship  fiulpandet  fiullandet.  Sailing  about  the  sandy
ocean,  where  the  biggest  beast  eats  the  beast  that  is
least,  and  the  beast  that  is  least  is  fleeing  and  hiding
as  best  he  may ;  and  the  ship  would  spht  a  hard  oat
seed  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,  so  well  would  she  steer  ;
and  so  she  was  as  long  as  she  was  in  the  sight  of
ConalL

And  Conall  was  heavy  and  dull  when  his  father
and  brothers  left  him,  and  he  sat  down  on  the  shore
and  he  slept ;  and  the  wakening  he  got  was  the  one
wave  sweeping  him  out,  and  the  other  wave  washing
him  in  against  the  shore.

Conall  got  up  swiftly,  and  he  said  to  himsel:^  "  Is
this  the  first  exploit  I  have  done  !  It  is  no  wonder
my  father  should  say  I  was  too  young  to  take  care  of
the  realm,  since  I  cannot  take  care  of  myself"

*  The  other  versions  do  not  say  that  the  company  cf  the  King
of  Laidhean  went,  but  it  is  implied.

t  Bounding.  +  Seaworthy.


2  00  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

He  went  home  and  he  took  better  care  of  himself
after  that.]

There  was  not  a  man  left  in  the  realm  of  Eirinn
but  Conall  ;  and  there  was  not  left  a  man*  in  the
realm  of  Laidheann,  but  the  daughter  of  the  King  of
Laidheann,  and  five  hundred  soldiers  to  guard  f  her.

Anna  Diucalas,  daughter  of  the  King  of  Laidheann,
was  the  name  of  that  woman,  the  very  drop  of  Avoman's
blood  that  was  the  most  beautiful  of  all  that  ever  stood
on  leather  of  cow  or  horse.  Her  father  left  her  in  his
castle,  with  five  hundxed  soldiers  to  keep  her ;  and  she
had  no  man  with  her  in  Laidheann  but  the  soldiers,
and  Conall  was  by  liimself  in  the  realm  of  Eirinn.

Then  sorrow^  struck  ConaU,  and  melancholy  that  he
should  stay  in  the  realm  of  Eirinn  by  himself  j  that  he
liimself  Avas  better  than  the  people  altogether,  though
they  had  gone  away.  He  thought  that  there  was  nothing
that  would  take  his  care  and  his  sorroAV  from  off  him
better,  than  to  go  to  the  side  of  Beinn  Eudainn  to  the
green  mound.  He  went,  and  he  reached  the  green
mound ;  he  laid  his  face  downwards  on  the  liillock,  and
he  thought  that  there  was  no  one  thing  that  would  suit
himself  better,  than  that  he  shoidd  find  his  match  of
a  woman.  Tlien  he  gave  a  glance  from  him,  and  what
should  he  see  but  a  raven  sitting  on  a  heap  of  snoAV  ;  }

*  A  man,  duine,  means  a  human  being.

t  Guard,  this  is  an  English  word  which  has  crept  into  Gaelic
stories  ;  saighdair  probably  meant  archer  ;  it  means  soldier.

I  This  incident,  with  variations,  is  common.  It  is  clear  that
the  raven  ought  to  have  been  eating  something  to  suggest  the
blood  ;  and  so  it  is  elsewhere.

Mr.  Fraser  of  Mauld,  Inverness,  East  Coast.

He  had  gone  to  see  his  grandfather,  the  mysterious  old  gray
man.

"  When  he  got  up  in  the  morning  ttiere  was  a  young  snow,


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAN.        20I

ami  he  set  it  before  him  that  he  would  not  take  a  wife
forever,  but  one  whose  head  should  be  as  black  as  the
raven,  and  her  face  as  fair  as  the  snow,  and  her  cheeks
as  red  as  blood.  Such  a  woman  was  not  to  be  found,
but  the  one  that  the  King  of  Laidheann  left  within  in
his  castle,  and  it  would  not  be  easy  to  get  to  her,  for
all  the  soldiers  that  her  father  left  to  keep  her ;  but  he
tliought  that  he  could  reach  her.

He  went  away,  and  there  went  no  stop  on  Iris  foot
nor  rest  on  his  head,  till  he  reached  the  castle  in  which
was  the  daughter  of  the  King  of  Laidlieann.]  MacNeiii.

He  took  (his  burden)  upon  him,  and  he  went  on
board  of  a  skiff,  and  he  rowed  till  he  came  on  shore  on
the  land  of  the  king  of  Laidheann.*     He  did  not  know

ami  the  raven  was  upon  a  spray  near  him,  and  a  bit  of  flesh  in
his  beak.  The  piece  of  flesh  fell,  and  Conall  went  to  lift  it ;  and
the  raven  said  to  him,  that  Fair  Beauteous  Smooth  was  as  white
as  the  snow  upon  the  spraj',  her  cheek  as  red  as  the  flesh  that
was  in  his  hand,  and  her  hair  as  black  as  the  feather  that  was  in
his  wing."

MacPhie,  Uist.

On  a  snowy  day  Conall  saw  a  goat  slaughtered,  and  a  black
raven  came  to  drink  the  blood.  "Oh,"  says  he,  "that  I  could
luarry  the  girl  whose  breast  is  as  white  as  the  snow,  whose  cheeks
are  red  as  the  blood,  and  whose  hair  is  as  black  as  the  raven  ;  "
and  Conall  fell  sick  for  love.

(Benbecula)  Macintyre  gave  the  same  incident.

The  Colonsay  version  introduces  an  old  nurse  instead.

MacNair  simply  says  that  Conall  heard  of  the  lady.

*  It  seems  hopeless  to  try  to  explain  this  topography.  Laid-
heann should  be  Leinster,  and  lubhar  might  be  Newry,  and
Beinn  Eudainu  or  Eideinn  is  like  the  Gaelic  for  Edinburgh,
though  the  stories  place  the  hill  in  Ireland  ;  and  here  are  the
king  of  Eirinn  and  his  son  rowing  and  sailing  about  from  realm
to  realm  in  Ireland,  and  the  Turks  at  Newry  a  foreign  land.  If
lubhar  mean  Jewry,  and  this  is  a  romance  of  the  crusades,  it  is
more  reasonable.


202  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

the  road,  but  he  took  a  tale  from  every  traveller  and
walker  that  he  fell  in  Avith,  and  when  he  came  near  to
the  dun  of  the  king  of  Laidheann,  he  came  to  a  small
strait.  There  was  a  ferry  boat  on  the  strait,  but  the
boat  was  on  the  further  side  of  the  narrows.  He  stood
a  Uttle  while  looking  at  its  breadth ;  at  last  he  put  his
pahn  on  the  point  of  the  spear,  and  the  shaft  in  the

MacNair.  sea,  he  gave  his  rounded  spring,  and  he  was  over.]
Then  here  he  was  on  a  great  top  that  was  there,  and
he  w^as  looking  below  beneath  him,  and  he  saw  the  very
finest  castle  (luchau-t)  that  ever  was  seen  from  the
beginning  of  the  imiverse  till  the  end  of  eternity,  and
a  great  wall  at  the  back  of  the  fortress,  and  iron  spikes
within  a  foot  of  each  other,  about  and  around  it ;  and
a  man's  head  upon  every  spike  but  the  one  spike.
Fear  struck  him,  and  he  fell  a  shaking.  He  thought
that  it  was  his  own  head  that  would  go  on  the  head-

MacGiivray,  less  spike.]  The  dun  was  guarded  by  nine  ranks  of
soldiers.  There  were  nine  warriors  (curaidhnean)  at
the  back  of  the  soldiers  that  were  as  mighty  as  the  nine
ranks  of  soldiers.  There  were  behind  the  warriors  six
heroes  (gasgaich)  that  were  as  mighty  as  the  nine  war-
riors and  the  nine  ranks  of  soldiers.  There  were
behind  these  six  heroes  tliree  full  heroes  (langasgaich)
that  were  as  mighty  as  all  that  were  outside  of  them ;
and  there  was  one  great  man  behind  these  three,  that
was  as  mighty  as  the  whole  of  the  people  that  there
were  altogether,  and  many  a  man  tried  to  take  out  Ann
luchdaris,*  but  no  man  of  them  went  away  alive.

*  This  name  is  variously  spelt : — 1,  as  above ;  2,  Anna  Diu-
calas;  and  3,  An  TJchd  Solais.  The  first  is  like  a  common
French  name,  Eucharis,  the  second  MacLean  thinks  has  some-
thing to  do  with  the  raven  black  hair.  The  third  was  used  by
the  Colonsay  man  and  means  bosom  of  light.  All  three  have  a
MacNair.       similar  sound,  and  I  take  Breast  of  Light  as  the  most  poetical.]


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAN.        203

He  came  to  near  aljout  the  soldiers,  and  he  asked
leave  to  go  in,  and  that  he  would  leave  the  woman  as
she  was  before.

"  I  perceive,"  said  one  of  them,  "  that  thou  art  a
beggar  that  was  in  the  land  of  Eirinn ;  what  worth
would  the  king  of  Laidheann  have  if  he  should  come
and  find  his  daughter  shamed  by  any  one  coward  of
Eirinn."

"  I  will  not  be  long  asking  a  way  from  you,"  said

Conall.]  MacNeill.

Conall  looked  at  the  men  who  were  guarding  the
dun,  he  went  a  sweep  round  about  with  ears  that  were
sharp  to  hear,  and  eyes  rolling  to  see.  A  glance  that
he  gave  aloft  to  the  dun  he  saw  an  open  window,  and
Breast  of  Light  on  the  inner  side  of  the  window  comb-
ing her  hair.  Conall  stood  a  little  while  gazing  at  her,
but  at  last  he  put  his  palm  on  the  point  of  his  spear,
he  gave  liis  roimded  spring,  and  he  was  in  at  the  win-
dow beside  Breast  of  Light.

"  Who  is  he  this  youth  that  sprang  so  roundly  in
at  the  window  to  see  me  ?  "  said  she.

"There  is  one  that  has  come  to  take  thee  away,"
said  Conall.

Breast  of  Light  gave  a  laugh,  and  she  said —
"  Sawest  thou  the  soldiers  that  were  guarding  the  dun  ? "

"  I  saw  them,"  said  he  ;  "  but  they  let  me  in,  and
they  will  let  me  out."

She  gave  another  laugh,  and  she  said — "  Didst  thou
see  the  warriors  that  are  witliin  the  soldiers?"

"  I  saw  them,"  said  he  ;  "  they  let  me  in,  and  they
will  let  me  out."

She  gave  another  laugh,  and  she  said — "  Many  a
one  has  tried  to  take  me  out  from  this,  but  none  has
done  it  yet,  and  they  lost  their  luck  at  the  end ;  my
counsel  to  thee  is  that  thou  try  it  not."


204


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


Couall  put  his  hand  about  her  very  waist,  he  raised
her  in  his  oxter,  he  took  her  out  to  the  rank  of  sol-
diers, he  put  his  palm  on  the  point  of  his  spear,  and  he
leaped  over  their  heads ;  he  ran  so  swiftly  that  they
could  not  see  that  it  was  Breast  of  Light  that  he  had,
and  when  he  was  out  of  sight  of  the  dim  he  set  her  on
the  ground.]  (Was  not  that  the  hero  and  the  u-orthy
wooer  !  that  his  like  is  not  to  he  found  to  day .')]

Breast  of  Light  heaved  a  heavy  sigh  from  her
breast.  "  What  is  the  meaning  of  tliy  sigh  1 "  said
ConaU.

"  It  is,"  said  she,  "  that  there  came  many  a  one  to
seek  me,  and  that  suffered  death  for  my  sake,  and  that
it  is  (gealtair)  the  coward  of  the  great  world  that  took
me  away."

"  I  little  thought  that  the  very  coward  of  Eirinn
that  should  take  me  out  who  staid  at  home  from
cowardice  in  the  realm  of  Eirinn,  and  that  my  own
father  should  leave  five  hundred  warriors  to  watch  me
without  one  drop  of  blood  taken  from  one  of  them."]

"  How  dost  thou  make  that  out  1 "  said  Conall.

"  It  is,"  said  she,  "  that  though  there  were  many
men  about  the  dun,  fear  would  not  let  thee  tell  the
sorriest  of  them  who  took  away  Breast  of  Light,  nor  to
what  side  she  was  taken."*

{That's  it — the  women  ever  had  a  torturiwj  tomjue,
teanga  ghointe.)  ]

Said  Conall — "  Give  me  thy  three  royal  words,
and  thy  three  baptismal  vows,  that  thou  wilt  not
move  from  that,  and  I  will  still  go  and  tell  it  to  them."

"  I  will  do  that,"  said  she.]

Conall  turned  back  to  the  dun,  and  nothing  in  the
world,  in  the  way  of  arms,  did  he  faU  in  wdth  but  one
*  Macgilvray  also  gives  this  incident,  but  omits  the  next.  She
kilted  her  gown  and  followed  hira.


THE  STORY  OF  CON  ALL  GULBAN.  205

horse's  jaw  whicli  he  found  iu  the  road ;]   aud  when  MacNeiii.
lie  arrived  he  asked  them  what  tliey  would  do  to  a
man  that  should  take  away  Breast  of  Light.

"  It  is  this,"  said  they,  "  to  drive  off  his  head  and
set  it  on  a  spike."

Conall  looked  under  them,  over  them,  through,
and  before  them,  for  the  one  of  the  biggest  knob  and
slenderest  shanks,  and  he  caught  hold  of  the  slenderest
shanked  and  biggest  knobbed  man,  and  with  the  head
of  that  one  he  cbove  the  brains  out  of  the  rest,  and  the
brains  of  that  one  with  the  other's  heads.  Then  he
drew  his  sword,  and  he  began  on  the  nine  warriors,  and
he  slew  them,  and  he  killed  the  six  heroes  that  were
at  their  back,  and  the  three  fidl  heroes  that  were  l^ehind
these,  and  then  he  had  but  the  big  man.  Conall  struck
him  a  slap,  and  drove  his  eye  out  on  his  cheek,  he
levelled  him,  and  stripped  his  clothes  off,]  and  he  left  Mar Nair.
no  one  to  tell  a  tale  or  wear  out  bad  news,  but  the  one
to  whom  he  played  the  clipping  of  a  bird  and  a  fool,
and  though  there  should  be  ten  tongues  of  a  true  wise
bard  in  that  man's  head,  it  is  telling  his  own  exploits,
and  those  of  his  men  that  he  would  be  ;  the  plight
that  the  youth  who  had  come  to  the  town  had  made  of
them.*]  He  asked  him  where  was  the  king  of  Laid- MaoNeiii.
heann,  and  the  big  man  said  that  he  was  in  the  hunt-
ing hill  with  his  court  and  his  following  (dlieadliachail)
of  men  and  beasts.

Said  Conall  to  liim — "  I  lay  it  on  thee  as  disgrace
and  contempt  (tair  agus  tailceas)  that  thou  must  go
stripped  as  thou  art  to  tell  to  the  king  of  Laidlieann
that  Conall  Guilbeanach  came,  the  son  of  the  king  of

*  This  is  common  to  many  stories.  Beaarradh  coin  us
amadain,  means  shaving  and  clipping  and  stripping  one  side  of
a  man,  like  a  bird  with  one  wing  pinioned.


From  a  Stone  in  the  Cemetery  of  Inch  Brayoc,  in  the  South  Eslv.
SciUptured  Stones  o/ Scotland,  PI.  Ixviii.


THE  STORY  OF  COXALL  GULBAN.         207

Eirinn,  and  that  he  has  taken  away  Ms  daughter  Breast
of  Light.*

When  the  big  man  understood  that  he  was  to  have
his  life  along  Avith  him,  he  ran  in  great  leaps,  and  in  a
rough  trot,  like  a  venomous  snake,  or  a  deadly  dragon  ;t
he  would  catch  the  swift  March  wind  that  was  before
him,  but  the  smft  March  wdnd  that  was  after  him
could  not  catch  liim.  The  King  of  Laidlieann  saw  him
coming,  and  he  said,  "  'V^^lat  evil  has  befallen  the  dun
this  day,  when  the  big  man  is  coming  thus  stark  naked
to  us  ? "     They  sat  down,  and  he  came.

Said  the  king,  "  Tell  us  thy  tale,  big  man  ?"
"  That  which  I  have  is  the  tale  of  hate,  that  there
came  Conall  Guilbeanach,  son  of  the  King  of  Eirinn,
and  slew  all  that  there  were  of  men  to  guard  the  dim,
and  it  was  not  my  OAvn  might  or  my  own  valour  that
rescued  me  rather  than  the  sorriest  that  was  there,  but
that  he  laid  it  on  me  as  disgrace  and  reproach  that  I
should  go  thus  naked  to  tell  it  to  my  king,  to  tell  him

*  The  spirit  of  this  is  like  the  Icelandic  code  of  honour
described  in  the  Njal  Saga.  It  was  all  fair  to  kill  a  man  if  it  was
done  openly,  or  even  unawares  if  the  deed  were  not  hidden,  and
here  the  lady  was  offended  because  the  swain  had  not  declared
his  name,  and  quite  satisfied  when  he  did.

f  Na  leumanan  garbh  's  na  gharbh  throte  mar  nathair  nimh,
na  mar  bheithir  bheumanach.

What  the  artist  meant  who  sculptured  the  stone  from  which
this  woodcut  is  taken  is  not  clear,  but  the  three  lower  figures
might  mean  Conall  knocking  out  the  big  man's  eye  with  a  jaw
bone,  and  the  lady  looking  on.  It  might  mean  Samson  slaying  a
Philistine.  The  upper  part  might  represent  the  king  hunting,
but  there  is  a  nondescript  figure  which  will  not  fit,  unless  it  be
the  monster  which  was  slain  at  the  palace  of  the  King  of  Light.
The  date  and  origin  of  stone  and  story  are  alike  unknown,  but
they  are  both  old  and  curious,  and  may  serve  as  rude  illustrations
of  past  customs  and  dresses  and  of  each  other.


208


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


that  there  came  Conall  Guilbeanach,  son  of  the  King  of
Eirinn,  and  he  has  taken  away  Breast  of  Light  thy
daughter."

"  Much  good  may  it  do  him  then,"  said  the  Iving  of
Laidheann.  "  If  it  is  a  hero  Hke  that  who  has  taken
her  away  he  will  keep  her  better  than  I  could  keep
her,  and  my  anger  will  not  go  after  her."*]

Conall  returned,  and  he  reached  the  woman  after
he  had  finished  the  hosts.

"  Come  now,"  said  he  to  Breast  of  Light,  daughter
of  the  King  of  Laidlieann,  "  and  walli  witli  me  ;  and  un-
less thou  hadst  given  me  the  spiteful  talk  that  thou
gavest,  the  company  would  be  alive  before  thy  fatlier,
and  since  thou  gavest  it  thou  slialt  walk  thyself.  Let
thy  foot  be  even  with  mine."

{My  pie  fellow  Conall,  thafs  the  way  with  Aer.)]

She  rose  well  pleased,  and  she  went  away  with
him ;  they  reached  the  narrows,  they  put  out  the  ferry
boat,  and  they  crossed  the  strait.  Conall  had  neither
steed,  horse,  nor  harness  to  take  Breast  of  Liglit  on,
and  she  had  to  take  to  her  feet.

"When  they  reached  where  Conall  hatl  left  the  cur-
rach  they  put  the  boat  on  the  brine,  and  they  rowed
over  the  ocean.  They  came  to  land  at  the  lower  side
of  Bein  Eidin,  in  Eirinn.  They  came  out  of  the  boat,
and  they  went  on  forward.]

They  reached  the  green  mound  at  the  foot  of  Bein
Eidin.]

Conall  told  Breast  of  Light  that  he  had  a  failing,
every  time  that  he  did  any  deed  of  valour  he  must
sleep  before  he  could  do  brave  deeds  again.-}]


•  The  king's  company  had  started  for  the  wars  ;  it  is  to  be
assumed  the  king  followed,

t  MacNair  also  gives  the  next  passage  in  different  words,


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAN.        209

"  There  now,  I  will  lay  my  head  in  thy  lap."

"Thou  shalt  not,  for  fear  thou  should'st  fall
asleep."

"  And  if  I  do,  wilt  thou  not  waken  me  ?"

"  What  manner  of  waking  is  thine  Ì "

"Thou  shalt  cast  me  greatly  hither  and  thither,
and  if  that  will  not  rouse  me,  thou  shalt  take  the  breadth
of  a  penny  piece  of  flesh  and  hide  from  the  top  of  my
head.  If  that  will  not  wake  me,  thou  shalt  seize  on
yonder  great  slab  of  a  stone,  and  thou  shalt  strike  me
between  the  mouth  and  nose,  and  if  that  will  not  rouse
me  thou  mayest  let  me  be."

He  laid  liis  head  in  her  lap,*  and  in  a  little  instant
he  fell  asleep.

He  was  not   long  asleep   when  she  saw   a  great

and  with  the  variation,  that  a  joint  of  his  little  finger  was  to  be
cut  off.

Macgilvray,  the  same  in  different  words.  According  to  the
introduction  to  Njal  Saga,  there  were  in  Iceland  long  ago  gifted
men  of  prodigious  strength,  who,  after  performing  feats  of  super-
human force,  were  weak  and  powerless  for  a  time.  While  en-
gaged in  London  about  this  story,  an  Irish  bricklayer  came  to
mend  a  fire-place,  and  I  asked  him  if  he  had  ever  heard  of  Conall
Gulban,  "Yes  sure,''  said  the  man  with  a  grin,  "he  was  one  of
the  Finevanians,  and  when  he  slept  they  had  to  cut  bits  off  him
before  he  could  be  wakened.  They  were  cutting  his  fingers  off."
And  then  he  went  away  with  his  hod.

Tlie  incident  is  common  in  Gaelic  stories,  and  Conall  is  men-
tioned in  a  list  of  Irish  stories  in  the  transactions  of  the  Ossianic
society.

*  And  he  laid  his  head  in  her  lap,  and  she — dressed— his
hair.  (MacPhie,  Uist.)  This  is  always  the  case  in  popular
tales  of  all  countries,  and  the  practice  is  common  from  Naples  to
Lapland.  I  have  seen  it  often.  The  top  of  his  little  finger  was
to  be  cut  off  to  rouse  him,  and  if  that  failed,  a  bit  from  his  crown,
and  he  was  to  be  knocked  about  the  ribs,  and  a  stone  placed  on
his  chest.


2IO  WEST  HIGHLjUSTD  TALES.

vessel  sailing  in  tlie  ocean.  Each  path  was  crooked,
and  each  road  was  level  for  her,  tiU  she  came  to  the
green  mound  at  the  side  of  Bein  Eidin.

There  was  in  the  ship  but  one  great  man,  and  he

would  make  rudder  in  her  stern,  cable  in  her  prow,

tackle  in  her  middle,  each  rope  that  was  loose  he  would

MacNeiii.     tie,  and  each  rope  that  was  fast  he  would  loose,]  and

the  front  of  each  rope  that  was  on  board  was  towards

MacNair.      him,*]   till  he  came  on  shore  at  the  shoulder  of  Bein

Mac.Neiii      Eidin.]     He  came  in  with  the  ship  at  the  foot  of  Bein

Natr'^'"^      Eidin,  and  the   big  man   leapt   on  shore  ;  he  caught

hold  of  the  prow  of  the  ship,t  and  he  hauled  her  her

own  nine  lengths  and  nine  breadths  up  upon  green

grass,  where  the  force  of  foes  could  not  move  her  out

without  feet  following  behind  them.

He  came  where  Breast  of  Light  was,  and  ConaU
asleep,  with  his  head  on  her  knee.     He  gazed  at  Breast
MacNair.     of  Light,  and  she  said, — ]

"  "What  side  is  before  thee  for  choice  ?  Or  where
art  thou  going  Ì "

"  Well,  they  were  teUing  me  that  Breast  of  Light,
daughter  of  the  Kmg  of  Laidheann,  was  the  finest  woman
in  the  world,  and  I  was  going  to  seek  her  for  myself."
"  That  is  hard  enough  to  get,"  said  she.  "  She  is
in  yonder  castle,  with  five  hundred  sokUers  for  her
guard,  that  her  father  left  there."

"Well,"  said  he,  "though  she  were  brighter  than
the  sun,  and  more  lovely  than  the  moon,  past  thee  I
will  not  go."

"  Well,  thou  seemest  silly  to  me  to  think  of  taking
me  with  thee  instead  of  that  woman,  and  that  I  am
not  worthy  to  go  and  untie  her  shoe."
MacNeiii.  "  Be  that  as  it  will,  thou  shalt  go  lìàtli  me.]      I

*  MacGilvray  gives  the  incident  in  different  words,
f  Long  means  a  large  ship.


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAX.  2  I  I

know  that  it  is  thou  by  thy  beauty,  Breast  of  Light,
daughter  of  the  king  of  Laidheann."

"  Thou  hast  the  wishing  knowledge  of  me,"  said
she  ;  "  I  am  not  she,  but  a  farmer's  daughter,  and  this
is  my  brother  ;  he  lost  the  flock  this  day,  and  he  was
running  after  them  backwards  and  forwards  throughout
Bein  Eudain,  and  now  he   is  tired  and  taking  a  while

of  sleep."]  MacNair.

"  Be  that  as  it  will,"  said  he,  "  there  is  a  mirror
in  my  ship,  and  the  mirror  will  not  rise  up  for  any
woman  in  the  world,  but  for  Uchd  Soluisd,  daughter
of  the  King  of  Laidheann.  If  the  mirror  rises  for  thee,
I  will  take  thee  with  me,  and  if  it  does  not  I  will
leave  thee  there."

He  went  to  the  mirror,  and  fear  would  not  let  her
cut  otf  the  nttle  finger,  and  she  could  not  awaken
Conall.  The  man  looked  in  the  mirror,  and  the  mirror
rose  up  for  her,  and  he  went  back  where  she  was.]        Macgiivri

Said  the  big  one,  "  I  will  be  surer  than  that  of  my
matter  before  I  go  further."  He  plucked  the  blade  of
Conall  from  the  sheath,  and  it  was  full  of  blood
"  Ha  ! "  said  he,  "  I  am  right  enough  in  my  guess.
Waken  thy  champion,  and  Ave  will  try  with  swift
wrestUng,  might  of  hands,  and  hardness  of  blades,
which  of  us  has  best  right  to  have  thee."*

"  Who  art  thou  ?"  said  Breast  of  Light.

"  I,"  said  the  big  man,  "  am  Mac-a-Moir  MacEigh
Sorcha  (son  of  the  mighty,  son  of  the  King  of  Light).
It  is  m  pursuit  of  thee  I  came."t]  MacNair.

*  A  good  illustration  of  the  law  of  the  strongest,  which  seems
to  have  been  the  law  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  old  times  in  Ice-
land, and  probably  in  Ireland  and  Scotland  also.

t  Here,  as  it  seems  to  me,  the  mythological  character  of  the
legend  appears.  Sorcha  is  ligiit,  in  opposition  to  Dorcha,  dark  ;
and  further  on   a  lady  is  found  to  match    the  king  of  Sorcha,


212  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  Wilt  thou  not  waken  my  companion,"  said  she.

He  went,  and  he  felt  him  from  the  points  of  the
thumbs  of  his  feet  till  he  went  out  at  the  top  of  his
head.  ''I  cannot  rouse  the  man  myself;  I  like  him
as  well  asleep  as  awake."]

Breast  of  Light  got  up,  and  she  began  to  rock
(a  chriothnachadli)  Conall  hither  and  thither,  but  he
would  not  take  waking.

Said  Mac-a-Moir — "  Unless  thou  wakest  him  thou
must  go  with  me  and  leave  liim  in  his  sleep."

Said  she — "  Give  thou  to  me  before  I  go  wdth  thee
thy  three  royal  words  and  thy  three  baptismal  vows
that  thou  wilt  not  seek  me  as  wife  or  as  sweetheart  till
the  end  of  a  day  and  a  year  after  this,  to  give  Conall
time  to  come  in  my  pursuit."

Mac-a-Moir  gave  his  three  royal  words  and  his  three
baptismal  vows  to  Breast  of  Light,  that  she  should  be
a  maiden  till  the  end  of  a  day  and  a  year,  to  give  time
to  Conall  to  come  in  piirsuit  of  her,  if  he  had  so  much
courage.  Breast  of  Light  took  the  sword  of  Conall
from  the  sheath,  and  she  wrote  on  the  sword  how  it
had  fallen  out.  She  took  the  ring  from  off  the  finger
of  Conall,  and  she  put  her  own  ring  on  his  finger
in  its  stead,  and  put  Conall's  ring  on  her  own  finger,
and  she  went  away  with  ]\Iac-a-Moir,  and  they  left
Conall  in  his  sleep.]  He  took  the  woman  with  him
on  his  shoulder  and  he  went  to  the  sliip.  He  shoved
out  the  ship  and  he  gave  her  prow  to  sea,  and  her
stern   to   shore  ;  he   hoisted   the  flapping  white   sails

who  is  in  a  lofty  turret  whicli  no  man  could  scale,  but  which  the
great  warrior  pulled  down.  So  far  as  I  know  there  is  no  place
which  now  goes  by  the  name  of  Sorcha,  unless  it  be  the  island
of  Sark.  According  to  Donald  MacPhie  (Uist),  this  was  Eigh-
an-Domhain,  the  King  of  the  Universe,  which  again  indicates
mythology.


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAN.  2  I  3

against  the  mast,  tall  and  enduring,  that  would  not
leave  yard  unbent,  sail  untorn,  running  the  seas,
ploochkanaiche  plachkanaiche,  blue  clouds  of  Loch-
lanach,  the  little  buckie  that  Avas  seven  years  on  the
sea,  clattering  on  her  floor  with  the  excellence  of  the
lad's  steering.

When  Conall  awoke  on  the  green  mound  he  had
but  himself,  a  shorn  one  and  bare  alone.  Glance  that
he  gave  from  him,  what  should  he  see  but  herds  that
the  king  of  Eirinn  and  Laidheann  had  left,  dancing  for
joy  on  the  point  of  their  spears.  He  thought  that
they  were  mocking  him  for  what  had  befallen  hint
He  went  to  kill  the  one  with  the  other's  head,]  and  MacNeui.
there  was  such  a  (sgi'ann)  grim  look  upon  him  that
the  little  herds  were  fleeing  out  of  his  way.

He  said  to  one  of  them — "  What  fleeing  is  on  the
httle  herds  of  Bein  Eidin  before  me  this  day,  as  if  they
were  mad ;  are  ye  mocking  me  for  what  has  befallen

me  1 "  *]  MacNair.

"  We  are  not,"  said  they  ;  "  it  was  grievous  to  us
(to  see)  how  it  befell  thee."

"  What,  my  fine  fellow,  did  you  see  happening  to

me  Ì  "]  MacNeill.

Said  the  little  herd — "  Thou  art  more  like  one  who
is  mad  than  any  one  of  us.  If  thou  hadst  seen  the
rinsing,  and  the  sifting,  and  the  riddling  (an  Luasgadh,
an  cathadli,  'as  an  creanachadh)  that  they  had  at  thee
down  at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  thou  wouldst  not  have
much  esteem  for  thyself  I  saw,"  said  the  Httle  herd,
"  the  one  who  was  with  thee  putting  a  ring  on  thy


Conall  looked,  and  it  was  the  ring  of  Breast  of
light  that  Avas  on  his  finger.

*  Macgilvray  awakens  him  by  a  troop  of  school-boys  who  were
playing  tricks  to  him.


2  I  4  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Said  the  little  herd — "I  saw  her  writing  some-
thing on  thy  sword,  and  putting  it  into  the  sheath."

Conall  cbew  his  sword,  and  he  read — "  There  came
Mac-a-Moir,  the  king  of  Sorcha,  and  took  me  away,
Breast  of  Light ;  I  am  to  be  free  for  a  year  and  a  day
in  his  house  waiting  for  thee,  if  thou  hast  so  much
courage  as  to  come  in  j^ursuit  of  me."

Conall  put  his  sword  into  its  sheath,  and  he  gave
three  royal  words.*]  "  I  lay  it  on  myself  as  spells  and
as  crosses,  that  stopping  by  night,  and  staying  by
day,  is  not  for  me,  tiU  I  find  the  woman.  Where  I
take  my  supper,  that  I  will  not  take  my  dinnei",  and
that  there  is  no  place  into  which  I  go  that  I  will  not
leave  the  fruit  of  my  hand  there  to  boot,  and  the  son
that  is  unborn  he  shall  hear  of  it,  and  the  son  that  is
unbegotten  he  shall  hear  tell  of  iff]

Said  the  little  herd  to  him — "  There  came  a  ship  to
shore  at  the  port  down  there.  The  shipmen  (sgiobe)
went  to  the  hostelry,  and  if  thou  be  able  enough  thou
mayest  be  aw^ay  with  the  slaip  before  they  come  back."§

Conall  went  away,  and  he  went  on  board  of  the

*  He  also  gives  the  following  passage,  but  less  fully.

f  It  was  a  common  practice,  according  to  the  Njal  Saga,  for
the  old  Icelanders  to  bind  themselves  by  vows  to  perform  certain
deeds,  and,  according  to  Irish  writers,  a  like  practice  prevailed  in
Ireland.  It  seems  that  the  custom  is  remembered  and  preserved
in  these  stories.  The  fruit,  tokadh,  rather  means  a  harvest;
he  will  leave  a  harvest  of  dead  reaped  by  his  hand.

g  Mr.  Fraser,  Invernesshire.  "  His  grandfather  took  him  to
the  side  of  the  sea,  and  he  struck  a  rod  that  was  in  his  hand  on  a
rock,  and  there  rose  up  a  long  ship  under  sail.  The  old  man  put
'  a  gheur  ghlas,*  the  keen  gray  (sword)  on  board,  and  at  parting
he  said,  in  every  strait  in  which  thou  art  for  ever  remember  me."
— MacPhie.  He  wished  for  his  grandfather,  who  came  and  said,
"  Bad  !  bad  !  thou  hast  wished  too  soon,''  and  raised  a  ship  with
hitì  magic  rod.


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAN.  2  I  5

ship,  and  he  was  out  of  sight  with  her  before  the  mari-
ners missed  him.]  He  gave  her  prow  to  sea,  and  herMacNair.
stern  to  shore,  helm  in  her  stern,  rope  in  her  proAv,
that  each  road  was  smooth,  and  crooked  each  path,  till
he  went  iiito  the  realm  of  Lochlann*]  at  a  place  which  MacNeUi.
was  called  Cath  nam  peileirn  (Battle  of  bullets),  but  he
did  not  know  liimself  where  he  was.

He  leaped  on  shore,  and  he  seized  the  prow  of  the
ship,  and  he  pulled  her  up  on  chy  land,  her  own  nine
lengths  and  nine  breadths,  where  the  foeman's  might
could  not  take  her  out  without  feet  following  be-
hind.

The  lads  of  the  realm  of  Lochlann,  were  playing
shinny  on  a  plain,  and  Gealbhan  Greadhna,  the  son  of
the  King  of  Lochlann,  working  amongst  them.t]  He  MacNeiu.
did  not  know  who  they  were,  but  he  went  to  where
they  were,  and  it  was  the  Prince  of  Loclilann  and  his
two  scholars,  and  ten  over  a  score;  and  the  Prince  of
Lochlann  was  alone,  driving  the  goals  against  the  whole
of  the  two-and- thirty  scholars.

Conall  stood  singing  "  iolla"  to  them,  and  the  ball
came  to  the  side  where  he  was ;  Conall  struck  a  kick
on  the  ball,  and  he  drove  it  out  on  the  goal  boundary
against  the  Prince  of  Lochlann.  The  prince  came
where  he  was,  and  he  said,  "Thou,  man,  that  came
upon  us  from  off  the  ocean,  it  were  little  enough  that
would  make  me  take  the  head  off  thee,  that  we  might
have  it  as  a  ball  to  kick  about  the  field,  since  thou
wert  so  impudent  as  to  kick  the  ball.  Thou  must
hold  a  goal  of  shinny  against  me  and  against  the  two-
and-thirty  scholars.     If  thou  get  the  victory  thou  shalt

*  The  only  variation  here  is  the  words.

t  I  have  never  seen  the  game  of  shinny  played  in  Norway,
but  there  is  mention  of  a  game  at  "  ball"  in  Icelandic  sagas.


2l6  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

be  free ;  if  we  conquer  thee,  every  one  of  us  will  hit
thee  a  blow  on  the  head  with  his  shinny."*]

"Well,"  said  Conall,  "  I  don't  know  who  thou  art,
great  man,  but  it  seems  to  me  that  thy  judgment  is
evil.  If  every  one  of  you  were  to  give  me  a  knock  on
my  head,  you  would  leave  my  head  a  soft  mass.  I
have  no  shinny  that  I  can  play  with."

"  Thoushalt  haveashLiuiy,"said  Gealbhan  Greadhna.

Conall  gave  a  look  round  about,  and  he  saw  a
crooked  stick  of  elder  growing  in  the  face  of  a  bank.
He  gave  a  leap  thither  and  plucked  it  out  by  the  root,
and  he  sliced  it  wdth  his  sword  and  made  a  shinny
of  itf]

Then  Conall  had  got  a  shinny,  and  he  himself  and
Gealbhan  Greadhna  (cheery  fire)  went  to  play.

Two  halves  were  made  of  the  company,  and  the
ball  was  let  out  in  the  midst.  On  a  time  of  the  times
Conall  got  a  chance  at  the  ball ;  he  struck  it  a  stroke
of  his  foot,  and  a  blow  of  his  palm  and  a  blow  of  his
shinny,  and  he  drove  it  home.

"  Thou  wert  impudent,"  said  Gealbhan  Greadhna,
"  to  drive  the  game  against  me  or  against  my  share  of
the  people."

"  That  is  well  said  by  thee,  good  lad  !  Thou  shalt
get  two  shares  (earrann)  of  the  band  with  thee,  and  I
will  take  one  share."

"  And  what  wilt  thou  say  if  it  goes  against  thee  ? "

*  lomhair  Oaidh  MacEigh  na  Hiribhi,  Iver,  sod  of  the  King
of  Bergen,  is  the  person  who  plays  this  part  in  the  Inverriess-shire
version.  He  was  a  suitor,  and  he  was  thrashed,  but  he  afterwards
plays  the  part  of  the  King  of  Sorcha,  and  is  killed.  MacPhie
makes  him  a  young  man,  and  a  suitor  for  the  Princess  of  Norway.

f  According  to  MacPhie  (Uist),  he  wished  for  his  grandfather,
who  appeared  with  an  iron  shinny,  and  said,  "  Bad,  bad,  thou
hast  wished  too  soon."


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAX.  2  I  7

"  If  it  goes  against  me  with  fair  play  there  is  no
help  for  it,  but  if  it  goes  against  me  other-\\dse  I  may
say  what  I  choose."

Then  divisions  were  made  of  the  company,  and
Gealbhan  Greadhna  had  two  divisions  and  Conall  one.
The  ball  was  let  out  in  the  midst,  and  if  it  was  let  out
Conall  got  a  chance  at  it,  and  he  struck  it  a  stroke  of
his  foot,  and  a  blow  of  his  palm,  and  a  blow  of  his
shinny,  and  he  drove  it  in.

"  Thou  wert  impudent,"  said  Gealbhan  Greadhna  a
second  time,  "  to  go  to  drive  the  game  against  me."

"  Good  lad,  that  is  well  from  thee  !  but  thou  shalt
get  the  whole  company  the  third  time,  and  Avliat  wilt
thou  say  if  it  goes  against  thee  ? "

"  If  it  goes  by  fair  play  I  cannot  say  a  jot  ;  if  not,
I  may  say  my  pleasure."

The  ball  was  let  go,  and  if  so,  Conall  got  a  chance
at  it,  and  he  all  alone ;  and  he  struck  it  a  stroke  of  his
foot,  and  a  blow  of  his  palm,  and  a  blow  of  his  shinny,
and  he  drove  it  in.

"  Thou  wert  impudent,"  said  Gealbhan  Greadhna,
"  to  go  and  drive  it  against  me  the  third  time."

"  That  is  well  from  thee,  good  lad,  but  thou  shalt
not  say  that  to  me,  nor  to  another  man  after  me,"
and  he  struck  him  a  blow  of  his  shinny  and  knocked

his  brains  out.*]  MacNeill.

He  looked  (taireal)  contemptuously  at  them;  he
threw  his  shinny  from  him,  and  he  went  from
them.  ^

*  This  description  of  a  game  of  shinny  is  characteristic,  and
the  petulance  of  Prince  Cheery  Fire,  with  his  two-and-thirty
toadies,  and  the  independence  of  the  warrior  who  came  over
the  sea,  and  who  would  stand  no  nonsense,  are  well  described.
MacNair's  version  is  not  so  full,  nor  is  the  catastrophe  so  tragic,
but  otherwise  the  incidents  are  the  same.


2  I  8  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

He  was  going  on,  and  he  saw  a  little  man  coming
lauglaing  towards  liim.

"What  is  the  meaning  of  thy  langhing  at  me?"
said  Conall.

Said  the  little  man,  "  It  is  that  I  am  in  a  cheery
mood  at  seeing  a  man  of  my  country."

"Who  art  thou,"  said  Conall,  "  that  art  a  country-
man of  mine  Ì "

"I,"  said  the  little  man,  "  am  Duanach  Mac-
Draodh  (songster,  son  of  magic),  the  son  of  a  prophet
from  Eirinn.  "  Wilt  thou  then  take  me  as  a  servant
lad."*

"  I  will  not  take  thee,"  said  Conall.  "  I  have  no
way  (of  keeping)  myself  here  without  word  of  a  gillie.
What  realm  is  this  in  which  I  am,  here  Ì"

"  Thou  art,"  said  Duanach,  "  in  the  realm  of  Loch-
lann."

Conall  went  on,  and  Duanach  with  him,  and  he
saw  a  great  town  before  him.

"  Wliat  town  is  there,  Duanach?"  said  Connal.

"  That,  said  Duanach,  "  is  the  great  town  of  the
realm  of  Lochlann."

They  went  on  and  they  saw  a  big  house  on  a  high
place.

"What  big  house  is  yonder,  Duanach?"

"  That,"  said  Duanach,  "  is  the  big  house  of  the
King  of  Lochlann  ;"  and  they  went  on.

They  saw  another  house  on  a  liigh  place.


*  From  the  Njal  Saga  it  appears  that  the  Northmen,  in  their
raids,  carried  off  the  people  of  Ireland,  and  made  slaves  of  them.
Macgilvray  called  this  character  Dubhaii  MacDraoth,  blacky,  or
perhaps  crook,  the  son  of  magic,  and  he  explained,  that  draoth
was  one  who  brought  messages  from  one  enemy  to  another,  and
whose  person  was  sacred.


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAN.  2  I  9

"  What  pointed  house  (biorach  with  points  ?  palli-
sades  or  what)  is  there,  Duanach  V  said  ConalL

"  That  is  the  house  of  the  Tamhasg,  the  best  war-
riors that  are  in  the  realm  of  Lochlann,"  said  DuanacK

"  I  heard  my  grandfather  speaking  about  the
Tamhaisg,  but  I  have  never  seen  them  ;  I  will  go  to
see  them,"  said  Conall.

"  It  were  not  my  counsel  to  thee,"  said  Duanach.*]  MacNair.

On  he  went  to  the  palace  of  the  King  of  Loch-
lann (bhuail  e  beiun  sgeithe)  and  he  clashed  his  shield,
battle  or  else  combat  to  be  sent  to  him,  or  else  Breast
of  Light,  the  daughter  of  the  King  of  Laidheann.

That  was  the  thing  he  should  get,  battle  and  com-
bat ;  and  not  Breast  of  Light,  daughter  of  the  King
of  Laidheann,  for  she  was  not  there  to  give  him  ;  but
he  should  get  no  fighting  at  that  time  of  night,  but  he
shoidd  get  (fardoch)  lodging  in  the  house  of  the  amh-
usg,  where  there  were  eighteen  hundred  amhusg,  and
eighteen  score  ;  but  he  would  get  battle  in  the  mor-
row's morning,  when  the  first  of  the  day  should  come.

'Twas  no  rmi  for  the  lad,  but  a  spring,  and  he
would  take  no  better  than  the  place  he  was  to  get.
He  went,  and  he  went  in,  and  there  were  none  of  the
amhuish  within  that  did  not  grin.  When  he  saw  that
they  had  made  a  grin,  he  himself  made  two.]  MacNeiU

"  What  was  the  meaning  of  your  grinning  at  us?"
said  the  amhusg.

""Wliat  was  the  meaning  of  your  grinning  at  meV
said  Conall.

Said  they,   "  Our  grinning  at  thee  meant  that  thy

*  Here  my  two  chief  authorities  vary  a  little  in  the  order  of
the  incidents.  MacNair  sends  him  first  to  this  house,  the  other
takes  him  there  later;  they  vary  but  little  in  the  incidents.
Macgilvray  takes  him  at  once  to  the  palace,  where  he  finds  a
great  chain  which  he  shakes  to  bring  out  the  foe.


220  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

fresh  royal  blood  will  be  ours  to  quench  our  thirst,
and  thy  fresh  royal  flesh  to  polish  our  teeth."

And  said  Conall,  "  The  meaning  of  my  grinning  is,
that  I  will  look  out  for  the  one  with  the  biggest  knob
and  slenderest  shanks,  and  knock  out  the  brains  of  the
rest  with  that  one,  and  liis  brains  with  the  knobs  of
the  rest.]

Every  one  of  them  arose,  and  he  went  to  the  door
and  he  put  a  stake  of  wood  against  the  door.  He  rose
up  and  himself,  and  he  put  two  against  it  so  tightly,
that  the  others  fell.

"  "WHiat  reason  had  he  to  do  that  ? "  said  they.

"  Wliat  reason  had  you  to  go  and  do  it  ?"  said  he.
"  It  were  a  sorry  matter  for  me  though  I  should  put
two  there,  when  you  yourselves  put  one  there  each,
every  one  that  is  within."

"  Well,  we  will  tell  thee,"  said  they,  "  what  reason
we  had  for  that :  we  have  never  seen  coming  here  (one),
a  gulp  of  whose  blood,  or  a  morsel  of  whose  flesh  could
reach  us,  but  thou  thyself,  except  one  other  man,  and
he  fled  from  us  ;  and  now  every  one  is  doubtmg  the.
other,  in  case  thou  shouldst  flee."

"  That  was  the  thing  that  made  me  do  it  myself
likewise,  since  I  have  got  yom^selves  so  close  as  you
are."  Then  he  went  and  he  began  upon  them.  "  I
feared  to  be  chasing  you  from  hole  to  hole,  and  from
hill  to  hill,  and  I  did  that."  Then  he  gazed  at  them,
from  one  to  two,  and  he  seized  on  the  one  of  the  slen-
derest shanks  and  the  fattest  head  ;  he  drove  upon  the
rest  sHochd  !  slachd  !  till  he  had  killed  every  one  of
them  ;  and  he  had  not  a  jot  of  the  one  with  whom  he
was  Avorking  at  them,  but  what  was  in  his  hands  of
the  shanks.*

*  Amhas,  a  madman,  a  wild  ungovernable  man  ;  also,  a  dull
stupid  person  (Armstrong).     Amhasan,  a  sentry  (ditto) ;  also,  a


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAK.  2  2  1

He  killed  every  man  of  them,  and  though  he  was
such  a  youth  as  he  was,  he  was  exhausted  (enough-i-
fied,  if  I  might  coin  a  word).  Then  he  began  redding
up  the  dwelling  (reitach  na  h  araich)  that  was  there,  to
clean  it  for  liimself  that  night.  Then  he  put  them  out
in  a  heap  altogether,  and  he  let  himself  (drop)  stretched
out  on  one  of  the  beds  that  was  within.*

There  came  a  cbeam  (Bruaduil)t  to  him  then,  and
he  said  to  him,  "  Else,  oh  Conall,  and  the  chase  about
to  be  upon  thee."

He  let  that  pass,  and  he  gave  it  no  heed,  for  he
was  exhausted.

He  came  the  second  journey,  and  he  said  to  him,
"  Conall,  wilt  thou  not  arise,  and  that  the  chase  is
about  to  be  upon  thee."

He  let  that  pass,  and  he  gave  it  no  heed  ;  but  the
third  time  he  came  to  him,  he  said,  "  Conall,  art  thou
about  to  give  heed  to  me  at  all !  and  that  thy  life  is
about  to  be  awanting  to  thee."

He  arose  and  he  looked  out  at  the  door,  and  he
saw  a  hundred  carts,  and  a  hundred  horses,  and  a  hun-

wild  beast,  according  to  the  Highland  Society  Dictionary.  Per-
haps these  may  have  something  to  do  with  the  Baresarks  of  the
old  Norsemen,  who  were  "  public  pests,''  great  warriors,  half
crazy,  enormously  strong,  subject  to  fits  of  ungovernable  fury,
occasionally  employed  by  saner  men,  and  put  to  death  when  done
with.  The  characters  appear  in  many  Highland  tales  ;  and  an
Irish  blind  fiddler  told  me  a  long  story  in  which  they  figured.  T
suspect  this  guardhouse  of  savage  warriors  has  a  foundation  in
fact.     Macgilvray  gives  the  incidents  also.

*  He  made  himself  a  bed  of  rushes  at  the  side  of  the  house. —
Macgilvray.

t  This  word,  thus  written,  is  in  no  dictionary  that  I  have,
but  it  is  the  same  as  brudair  ;  and,  the  other  version  proves  that
a  dream  is  meant.  It  is  singular  to  find  a  dream  thus  personified
in  the  mouth  of  a  Barra  peasant.


22  2  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

dred  carters,  coming  with  food  to  the  amhusg  ;  sup-
posing that  they  had  done  for  the  youth  that  went
amongst  them  the  night  before  ;  and  a  piper  playing
music  behind  them,  with  joy  and  pleasure  of  mind.

They  were  coming  past  a  single  bridge,  and  the
bridge  was  pretty  large  ;  and  when  Conall  saw  that
they  were  together  (cruin  round)  on  the  bridge,  he
reached  the  bridge,  and  he  put  each  cart,  and  each
horse,  and  each  carter,  over  the  bridge  into  the  river  ;
and  he  dro'wned  the  men.

There  was  one  little  bent  crooked  man  here  with
them  behind  the  rest.

"  My  heart  is  warming  to  thee  with  the  thought
that  it  is  thou,  Conall  Gulban  MacNiall  Naonallaich  ;
the  name  of  a  hero  was  on  his  hand  a  hundred  years
ere  he  was  born."

"  Thou  hast  but  what  thou  hast  of  knowledge,  and
the  share  that  thou  hast  not,  thou  wilt  not  have  this
day,"  said  Conall  Gulban.

He  went  away,  and  he  reached  the  palace  of  the
King  of  Lochlann  ;  and  he  clashed  his  shield,  battle
or  else  combat  to  be  given  to  liim,  or  else  Ereast  of
Light,  daughter  of  the  King  of  Laidheann.

That  was  the  thing  Avhich  he  should  have,  battle
and  combat  ;  and  not  Breast  of  Light,  for  she  was  not
there  to  give  him.*]

(So  he  went  back  and  slept  again.)

Word  reached  the  young  king  of  Lochlann,  that
the  big  man  who  came  off  the  ocean  had  gone  to  the
house  of  the  "  Tamhasg  j"  that  they  had  set  a  combat,
and  that  the  "  Tamhasgan "  had  been  slain.  The
young  king  of  Lochlann  ordered  four  of  the  best  war-

*  MacNair  has  not  got  this  adventure  of  the  carts  ;  and
MacNeill  has  not  the  next  adventure,  unless  it  be  the  same  con-
siderably varied.     I  give  both  upon  chance.


THE  STORY  OF  COXALL  GULBAX.         223

riois  that  were  in  his  realm,  that  they  should  up  to
the  house  of  the  Tamhasg,  and  take  off  the  head  of
the  hig  man  that  had  come  off  the  ocean,  and  to
bring  it  up  to  him  before  he  should  sit  down  to  his
dimier.

The  warriors  went,  and  they  found  Duanach  there,
and  they  railed  at  him  for  going  with  the  big  man  that
came  out  of  the  outer  land,*  for  they  did  not  knoAV
who  he  was.

"  And  why,"  said  Duanach,  "  should  I  not  go  with
the  man  of  my  own  country  ]  but  if  you  knew  it,  I
am  as  tired  of  him  as  you  are  yourselves.  He  has
given  me  much  to  do  ;  see  you  I  have  just  made  a
heap  of  corpses,  a  heap  of  clothes,  and  a  heap  of  the
arms  of  the  "  Tamhaisg  ; "  and  you  have  for  it  but  to
hft  them  along  with  you."

"  It  is  not  for  that  we  came,"  said  they,  "  but  to
slay  him,  and  to  take  his  head  to  the  young  king  of
Lochlann  before  he  sits  to  dine.  Who  is  he  ?"  said
they.

"  He  is,"  said  Duanach,  "  one  of  the  sons  of  the
king  of  Eiiinn."

"  The  young  King  of  Lochlann  has  sent  us  to  take
his  head  off,"  said  they.

"  K  you  kill  one  of  the  children  of  the  King  of
Eirinu  in  his  sleep  you  will  regret  it  enough  after-
wards," said  Duanach.

"What  regret  will  there  be  Ì"  said  they.

"  There  is  this,"  said  Duanach.  "There  ^vill  be
no  son  to  woman,  there  will  be  no  calf  to  cow,  no
grass  nor  braird  shall  grow  in  the  reahn  of  Lochlann,

*  "  An  fhoirs  tir  ;"  this  word  is  now  commonly  applied  to
the  furthest  ground  known,  such  as  the  outermost  reef  or  even
fishing  bank  ;  it  is  also  written  oirthir,  edge-land.


224  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

till  the  end  of  seven  years,*  if  ye  kill  one  of  the  clan
of  the  King  of  Eirinn  in  his  sleep,  and  go  and  tell  that
to  the  young  King  of  Loclilann."

They  went  back,  and  they  told  what  Duanach  had
said.

The  young  King  of  Lochlann  said  that  they  should
go  back,  and  do  as  he  had  bidden  them,  and  that  they
should  not  heed  the  hes  of  Duanach.

The  four  warriors  went  again  to  the  house  of  the
"Tamliasg,"  and  they  said  to  Duanach, —

"  We  have  come  again  to  take  the  head  off  the  son
of  the  King  of  Eirinn."

And  Duanach  said  "  He  is  yonder  then,  over  there
for  you,  in  liis  sleep  ;  but  take  good  heed  to  yourselves,
unless  your  swords  are  sharp  enough  to  take  off  his
head  at  the  first  blow,  all  that  is  in  your  bodies  is  to
be  pitied  after  that ;  he  will  not  leave  one  of  you  alive,
and  he  will  bring  (sgrios)  ruin  on  the  realm."

Each  of  them  stretched  his  sword  to  Duanach,  and
Duanach  said  that  their  swords  were  not  sharp  enough,
that  they  should  go  out  to  the  Tamhasg  stone  to  sharpen
them.  They  went  out,  and  they  were  sharpening  their
swords  on  the  smooth  grinding-stone  of  the  Tamhasg,
and  Conall  began  to  dream  (again).

It  seemed  to  him  that  he  was  going  on  a  road  that
went  through  the  midst  of  a  gloomy  wood,t  and  it
seemed  to  him  that  he  saw  four  lions  before  him,  two
on  the  upper  side  of  the  road,  and  two  on  the  lower
side,  and  they  were  gnashing  their  teeth,  and  switching

»  Cha  bhith  mac  aig  bean  ;  cha  bhith  laogh  aig  mart ;  's  cha
chinn  fear  na  focban,  ann  an  rigbacbd  Locblaun,  gu  ceann  seachd
Bliadhna,  etc.

f  Coille  udlaidh,  lonely,  morose,  cburlish,  gloomy.  Pr.  ood-
lai.     Compare  outlaw,  outlying.


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAN.  225

their  tails,*  maldng  ready  to  spring  upon  him,  and  it
seemed  to  him  that  it  was  easier  for  the  hons  that  were
on  the  upper  side  of  the  road  to  leap  down,  than  it  was
for  the  Ho]is  that  were  on  the  lower  side  to  leap  up  ;
and  it  was  better  for  him  to  slay  those  that  were  on
the  upper  side  first,  and  he  gave  a  cheery  spring  to  be
at  them  ;  and  he  sprang  aloft  tlirough  his  sleep,  and
he  struck  his  head  against  a  tie  beam  (sail  shuimear)
that  was  across  above  him  in  the  house  of  the  "  Tam-
hasgan,"  and  he  drove  as  much  as  the  breadth  of  a
half-crown  piece  of  the  skin  off  the  top  of  his  head,
and  then  he  was  aroused,  and  he  said  to  Duanach, —

"  I  myself  was  dreaming,  Duanach/'  and  he  told  him
his  dream.

And  Duanach  said,  "  Thy  dream  is  a  dainty  to
read.  Go  thou  out  to  the  stone  of  the  Tamhasg,  and
thou  wilt  see  the  four  best  warriors  that  the  King  of
Lochlann  has,  two  on  each  side  of  the  stone  round
about  it,  sharpening  their  swords  to  take  off  thy  head."

Conall  went  out  with  his  blade  in  his  hand,  and  he
took  off  their  heads,  and  he  left  two  heads  on  each  side
of  the  stone  of  the  Tamhasg,  and  he  came  in  where
Duanach  was,  and  he  said,  "  I  am  yet  without  food
since  I  came  to  the  realm  of  Lochlann,  and  I  feel  in
myself  that  I  am  growing  weak."

And  Duanach  said  "  I  will  get  thee  food  if  thou
wilt  take  my  counsel,  and  that  is,  that  thou  shouldst
go  to  court  the  sister  of  the  King  of  Lochlann,  and  I
myself  will  go  to  redd  the  way  for  thee.t]  MacXair.

Tliere  were  three  great  warriors  in  the  king's
palace  in  search  of  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  Loch-
lann, and  they  sent  word  for  the  one  who  was  the

*  A  casadh  am  fiacall  s'  a  sguitse  le  n"  earball.

t  He  has  not  got  the  next  adventure,  which  I  take  from  Mac-

Neill.


226


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


most  valiant  of  them  to  go  to  combat  the  youth  that
had  come  to  the  town.  This  one  came,  and  the
Amhus  Ormanach  was  his  name,*  and  he  and  Conall
were  to  try  each  other.  They  went  and  they  began
the  battle,  Conall  and  the  Avas  Ormanach.  The
(laughter  of  the  king  of  Lochlann  came  to  the  door,
and  she  shouted  for  Duanachd  Acha  Draohd.t

"  I  am  here,"  said  Duanach.

"Well,  then,  if  thou  art,  it  is  but  little  care  thou
hast  for  me.  Many  calving  cattle  and  heifers  gave  my
father  to  thy  father,  though  thou  art  not  going  down,
and  standing  beliind  the  Avas  Ormanach,  and  giving
him  the  urging  of  a  true  wise  bard+  to  hasten  the  head
of  the  wretch  to  me  for  my  dinner,  for  I  have  a  great
tliirst  for  it."

"  Faire  !  faire  !  watch  oh  queen,"  said  Duanach ;
"  if  thou  hadst  quicker  asked  it,  thou  hadst  not  got  it
slower."

Away  went  Duanach  down,  and  it  was  not  on  the
side  of  the  Avas  Ormanach  he  began,  but  on  the  side
of  Conall.      "  Thou  hast  not  told  it  to  me  for  certain

*  Amhus,  the  savage,  or  wild  man,  Ormanach  is  not  so  clear  ;
written  from  ear  it  might  be  a  word  beginning  with  an  aspirated
silent  letter,  such  as  th,  which  would  make  the  word  "  noisy,"  or
it  may  be  some  compound  of  or  gold,  such  as  or-mheinneach,
gold-ore-ish,  which  would  make  him  the  wild  man  of  the  gold
mines,  or  armour,  or  hair,  or  something  else.  Macgilvray  called
him  an  Amhas  Orannach,  the  wild  man  of  songs.

t  Songstership  of  magic  field,  which  is  MacNeill's  name  for
the  character.

I  Brosnachadh  file  fiorghlic.  It  is  said  that  the  bards  from
the  earliest  of  times  sang  songs  of  encouragement  to  the  warriors.
The  old  Icelanders,  as  it  is  asserted  in  their  sagas,  sung  them-
selves in  the  heat  of  the  fight,  and  here  is  a  tradition  of  something
of  the  kind.  In  Stewart's  collection,  1804,  is  the  battle  song  of
the  Macdonalds  for  the  battle  of  Harlaw.


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULB.VN.  227

yet  if  it  be  tliou,  when  tliou  art  not  hastening  thine
hand,  and  making  heavy  thy  blow  !  And  to  let  slip
that  -NYi-etch  that  ought  to  be  in  a  land  of  holes,  or  in
crannies  of  rock,  or  in  otter's  cairns  !  Though  thou
shouldst  fall  here  for  slowness  or  slackness,  there  would
neither  be  wife  nor  sweetheart  crying  for  thee,  and  that
is  not  the  like  of  what  would  befall  him."

Conall  thought  that  it  was  in  good  purpose  the
man  was  for  him,  and  not  in  evil  purpose ;  *  he  put
his  sword  under  the  sword  of  the  Avas  Ormanach,  and
he  cast  it  to  the  skies,  and  then  he  himseK  gave  a
spring  on  his  back,  and  he  levelled  him  on  the  ground,
and  then  he  began  to  take  his  head  off.

"  Still  be  thy  hand,  0  ConaU,"  said  Duanach  Acha
Draodh,  "make  him  the  binding  of  the  tlu-ee  smalls
there,  until  he  gives  thee  his  oaths  under  the  edge  of
his  set  of  arms,  that  there  is  no  stroke  he  will  strike
for  ever  against  thee."t

"I  have  not  got  strings  enough  to  bind  him,"  said
Conall.

*  Deogli  run,  droch  run.  Bdn  has  many  meanings — love,
etc.  ;  purpose,  etc. ;  a  person  beloved;  a  secret,  a  mystery;  and,
according  to  Armstrong,  it  is  the  origin  of  "  runic."  The  man
who  told  this  story  clearly  meant  "purpose"  by  run ;  but  per-
haps the  original  meaning  of  the  passage  which  comes  repeatedly
in  this  story  was  that  Songstership  of  Magic  field  sang  "  good
runes  for  the  victory  of  his  countrymen."  It  must  be  remem-
bered that  Barra  was  in  the  way  of  Norsemen,  and  that  their
ways  of  life  throw  light  on  Gaelic  traditions.  According  to  Mac-
gilvray — another  islander — Dubhan  MacDraoth  was  the  Draoth
(?  herald)  of  the  king  of  Eirinn  when  he  went  to  put  the  Turk
out  of  the  realm  of  the  emperor,  and  the  king  of  Lochlann  brought
him  home  thence,  and  he  was  his  draoth.  As  there  was  a  guard
of  Norsemen  in  Constantinople  this  looks  like  a  possible  fact.

t  "  The  d 1  has  sworn  by  the  edge  of  his  knife." — Carle

of  Kelhjhurn  Braes,  Old  Song.


228  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"That  is  not  my  case,"*  said  Duanach ;  "I  have
of  cords  what  will  bind  back  to  back  all  that  are  in  the
realm  of  Lochlann  altogether."

Duanach  gave  the  cords  to  Conall,  and  Conall
bound  the  Avas  Ormanach.  He  gave  his  oaths  to
Conall  under  the  edge  of  his  set  of  arms,  that  he  was  a
loved  comrade  to  him  for  ever  ;  and  any  one  stroke  he
might  strike  that  he  would  strike  it  with  him,  and  that
he  would  not  strike  a  stroke  for  ever  against  him  ;  and
MacNair.  lie  left  his  life  with  the  Avus  Ormanach.]  "  Thou
shalt  have  that  woman  whom  thou  art  courting  and
making  love  to  (a  suridh  s  a  seircanachadh),  the  daugh-
ter of  the  king  of  Lochlann,"  said  the  Amhus  Ormanach.
"  Thou  shalt  have  that  woman  for  thyself,"  said  Conall;
JiaoGiivray.  t«  j^  {g  j^ot  her  that  I  am  courting  and  making  love  to."]

The  daughter  of  the  king  of  Lochlann  was  right
well  pleased  that  he  had  left  Ms  life  witli  the  Avus
Ormanach,  so  that  it  might  be  her  own  ;  but  what
should  she  do  but  send  for  Conall.  t

*  Clia  D  e  sin  domh  's  e. — It  is  not  tliat  to  me  it  is.
t  MacNair  gives  the  following  incidents  more  in  detail,  and
more  as  matter  of  fact.  The  bard,  to  get  food  for  the  warrior,
persuades  the  lady  that  he  has  come  to  court  her,  and  with  her
consent,  takes  him  food,  and  guides  him  to  her  chamber.  He
places  a  drawn  sword  between  them,  and  never  speaks.  The
bard  sleeps  on  the  stair  outside  ;  the  king's  men  seek  in  vain  for
Conall ;  and  in  the  morning  the  bard  explains  the  mystery  of  the
drawn  sword  to  the  lady,  who  is  content.  And  so  it  happens
thrice,  when  Conall  feels  able  to  fight  the  lady's  brother,  and  the
lady  finds  that  the  warrior  is  faithful  to  his  first  love,  and  the  bard
a  cunning  deceiver.  This  incident  is  very  widely  known  in  popu-
lar tales.  See  the  "  Arabian  Nights,''  Grimm,  etc.  "  Gu  de  am
fath  ma  'n  do  rinn  se  c  mata?  "  orsa  ise.  "  Tha,"  orsa  Duanach,
"  tha  e  a  los  ma  bhitheas  leanabh  gille  eadar  sibh  gu  am  be  e  na
fhear  claidheamh  cho  math  ris  fein."  Thuirt  ise,  "  Ach  na  an
saoillinn  sin  dheanainn  a  bheatha  ciod  air  bhith  doigh  air  an
tigeadh  e."


THE  STORY  OF  CON  ALL  GULBAN.  229

What  should  the  daughter  of  the  King  of  Lochlann
do  but  send  word  for  Conall  to  pass  the  evening
together  with  the  Queen  and  with  herself,  and  if  it
were  his  wiU  that  she  would  not  give  him  the  trouble
of  taking  a  step  with  his  foot,  but  that  she  would  take
him  up  in  a  creel  to  the  top  of  the  castle.  Conall
thought  that  much  reproach  should  not  belong  to  one
that  was  in  the  realm  of  Lochlann,  against  one  that  was
in  the  realm  of  Eirinn,  that  he  should  go  to  do  that.
He  went  and  he  gave  a  spring  from  the  small  of  his
foot  to  the  point  of  his  palm,  and  from  the  point  of  his
palm  to  the  top  of  the  castle,  and  he  reached  the  woman
where  she  was.*

"  If  thou  art  now  sore  or  hurt,"  said  the  daughter
of  the  King  of  Lochlann,  "  there  is  a  vessel  of  balsam
(ballan  fiochslilaint),  wash  thyself  in  it,  and  thou  wilt
be  well  after  it."

He  did  not  know  that  it  was  not  bad  stuff  that  was
in  the  vessel.  He  put  a  little  twig  into  the  vessel,  so
that  he  might  know  what  thing  was  in  it.  The  twig
came  up  full  of  sap  (snodliach)  as  it  went  down.  Then
he  thought  that  it  was  good  stuff",  and  not  bad  stuff.
He  went  and  he  washed  himself  in  it,  and  he  was  as
whole  and  healthy  as  he  ever  was.  Then  meat  and
drink  went  to  them,  that  they  might  have  pleasure  of
mind  while  passing  the  evening,  and  after  that  they
went  to  rest  ;  but  he  drew  his  cold  sword  between
himself  and  the  woman.  He  passed  the  night  so,  and
in  the  morning  he  rose  and  went  out  of  the  castle.
He  clashed  his  shield  without,  and  he  shouted  battle
or  else  combat  to  be  sent  to  him,  or  else  Breast  of
Light,  daughter  of  the  King  of  Laidheann.      It  was

*  Thug  e  leum  0  chaol  ca  clioise  go  barr  a  bboise,  's  0  barr  a
bboise  go  mullach  a  cbaisteil.


230  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

battle  and  combat  be  sbould  get,  and  not  Breast  of
Light,  for  she  was  not  there  to  give  him.

Then  the  daughter  of  the  King  of  Lochlann  called
out,  "Art  thou  there,  my  brother]*

"  I  am,"  said  her  brother.

"  Well,"  said  she,  "  it  is  but  little  count  that  thou
hadst  of  me.  That  man  who  has  made  me  a  woman
of  harrying  and  hurrying,  to  whom  I  fell  as  a  wedded
wife  last  night,  not  to  bring  me  hither  his  head  to  my
breakfast,  when  I  am  greatly  thirsting  for  it."

"  Faire  !  faire  !  watch,  oh  queen,"  said  he,  "  if
thou  hadst  asked  it  sooner  thou  hadst  not  got  it  slower.
There  are  none  of  men,  small  or  great,  in  Christendom,
who  Avill  turn  back  my  hand."

He  went,  and  before  he  reached  the  door,  he  set
earthquaking  seven  miles  from  liim.  At  the  first
(mothar)  growl  he  gave  after  he  got  out  of  the  castle,
there  was  no  cow  in  calf,  or  mare  in  foal,  or  woman
with  child,  but  suffered  for  fear.  He  began  himself
and  Conall  at  each  other,  and  if  there  were  not  gasgich
there  at  work  it  was  a  strange  matter.]

They  drew  the  slender  gray  swords,  and  they'd
kindle  the  tightening  of  grasp,  from  the  rising  of  sun
till  the  evening,  when  she  would  be  wending  west ;
and  without  knowing  with  wliich  would  be  loss  or
winning.  Duanach  was  singing  iolladli  to  them,  and
when  the  siui  was  near  about  west,  t

*  According  to  MacNeill  it  was  her  father  ;  and  as  the  young
king  goes  away  afterwards  and  is  married,  I  follow  MacNair.
MacNeill  killed  a  brother  at  landing.  MacNair  left  him  alive  to
be  introduced  further  on,  so  I  have  altered  one  word  in  MacNeill's
account  of  the  fight,  and  assume  that  Prince  Cheery  fire  was  a
younger  brother  of  the  young  king.

t  Tharruing  iad  an  claidheamhaimn  caola  glas-adh  a's  dh
fhadadh  iad  teaneacha  dorn,  0  na  dh  eiridh  a  ghrian  gus  am
feasgar  tra  bhithidh  i  a  dol  siar.


THE  STORY  OF  COXALL  GULBAX.


231


Then  the  daughter  of  the  King  of  Lochlann  cried
out  for  Duanach  acha      ,    1

I y


Draodh  that  he  should
go  down  to  give  the
ui'ging  of  a  true-wise
bard  to  her  brother,  to
bring  her  the  head  of
the  wretch  to  her
breakfast,  that  she  was
thirsting  greatly  for  it.

Duanach  went,  and
if  he  did,  it  was  not  at
the  back  of  the  King
of  Lochlann  he  went,
but  behind  ConalL

"Oh,  Conall,"  said
he,  "thou  hast  not  told
me  yet  if  it  be  thou.
When  thou  art  not
hastening  thine  hand,
but  making  heavy  thy
blow !  and  level  that
wretch  that  ought  to
be  in  a  land  of  holes,  or  in  clefts  of  rock,  or  in  otters'
cairns  !  Though  thou  shouldst  fall,  there  would  be  no
wife  or  sweetheart  crying  for  thee,  and  not  so  with
him."*

Conall  thought  that  it  was  in  good  purpose  the
man  was  for  him,  and  that  it  was  not  in  bad  purpose.

*  As  this  is  a  kind  of  chorus,  and  probably  old,  I  give  the
original.  Nur  nach  eil  thu  luaireachadh  do  laimh,  ach  a  trom-
achadh  do  bhuille,  agus  a  bhiast  sin  a  bo  choir  a  bhi  'n  talamh
toll,  na  'n  sgeilpidh  chreag  na  'n  earn  bhiasta  dugha  leagail !  gad
a  thuiteadh  tusa,  cha  bhiodh  bean  na  leannan  a  glaoidheadh  air
do  shou,  cha  b  ionann  sin  a's  esan.


-From  a  cross  near
Dupplin.


232  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

He  put  his  sword  under  the  sword  of  the  King  of
Lochlann,  and  he  cast  it  to  the  skies  ;  and  then  he
gave  a  spring  himself  on  his  back,  and  he  levelled  him
on  the  ground,  and  he  began  to  take  off  his  head.

"  Still  thy  hand,  Conall,"  said  Duanach  achaidh
Draodh,"  little  is  his  little  shambling  head  worth  to
thee.*]  You  are  long  enough  at  that  game,  throw  away
youT  swords  and  try  another  way.  They  threw  away
their  swords,  and  they  put  the  soft  white  fists  in  each
other's  breasts  ;  but  they  were  not  struggling  long  till
Conall  gave  the  panting  of  his  heart  to  the  young
King  of  Lochlann  on  the  hard  stones  of  the  cause-
way, t

Said  Conall  to  Duanach,  "  Eeach  hither  to  me  my
sword,  that  I  may  take  off'  his  head."

"  Not  I,  indeed,"  said  Duanach.  "  It  is  better  for
thee  to  have  his  head  for  thyself  as  it  is,  than  five
hundred  heads  that  thou  mightest  take  out  with  strife.
Make  him  promise  that  he  will  be  (diles  duit)  a  friend
to  thee."

Conall  made  the  young  King  of  Lochlann  promise
with  words  and  heavy  vows,  that  he  would  be  a  friend
to  Conall  Guilbeanach,  the  son  of  the  Kmg  of  Eirinn,
in  each  strait  or  extremity  that  might  come  upon  him,
whether  the  matter  should  come  with  right  or  un-
right ;  and  that  Conall  should  have  the  realm  of  Loch-
lann under  cess.t

*  MacNeill,  who  goes  on  to  repeat  the  binding  of  this  warrior
in  the  same  words.  For  variety,  I  substitute  MacNair's  descrip-
tion of  the  same  fight,  which  he,  like  the  other,  repeats  several
times  as  a  kind  of  chorus.

f  Chuir  iad  na  duirn  bhogadh  ghealladh  an  cneasadh  a  cheile,
ach  cha  bu  fhada  a  gabh  iad  do  an  ghleachd  gus  an  tug  Conall
cneadhaiseach  a  chridhe  do  righ  og  Lochlann  air  clach'n  cruaidh
a  chausair.     As  written  by  Dewar.

I  Fo  chis,  tribute  or  subjection.     It  seems  almost  a  hopeless


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAN.         233

When  the  King  of  Lochlann  had  given  these  pro-
raises,  Conall  let  him  up,  and  they  caught  each  other
by  the  hand,  and  they  made  peace  and  they  ceased.

And  the  young  King  of  Lochlann  gave  a  bidding
to  Conall  that  he  should  come  in  with  him  to  liis
great  house,  to  dine  with  him ;  and  the  young  king
set  a  double  watch  upon  each  place,  so  that  none
should  come  to  disturb  himself  or  the  young  son  of  the
King  of  Eirinn,  while  they  were  at  their  feast.]  AMacNair.
churchman  was  got,  and  the  Amhas  Ormanach  was  mar-
ried to  the  daughter  of  the  King  of  Laidlieann.]  Macgiivray.

When   each  thing  was  ready  the   royal  ones   sat
at  the  great  board  ;  they  laid  down  lament,   and  they
raised  up  music,  with  rejoicing  and  great  joy,]  and  theyiiacNair.
were  in  great  pleasure  of  mind.      Meat  was  set  in  the
place  for  eating,  drink  in  the  drinking  place,  music  in

task  to  raake  romance  reasonable,  and  yet  I  am  convinced  that
these  are  semi-historical  romances.  When  it  is  certain  that
Norse  sea-rovers  were  actually  settled  in  the  Hebrides,  and  wan-
dered from  America  to  Constantinople,  and  levied  tribute  wher-
ever they  could ;  when  it  appears  from  their  sagas,  which  are  be-
lieved to  be  almost  true  history,  that  these  raids  were  often  made
in  single  ships,  and  when  simple  Icelanders  fought  with  Orkney
earls  and  Norse  kings,  and  Norman  adventurers  conquered  Eng-
land ;  it  seems  possible  that  one  of  the  body  guard  from  Constanti-
nople might  become  "Emperor  of  the  world"  in  the  Hebrides,  and
a  voyager  from  Greenland  "  king  of  the  green  isle  that  was  about
the  heaps  of  the  deep ;"  and  that  such  exploits  as  these  men  per-
formed might  be  magnitied,  and  applied  to  a  Celtic  warrior  by
Celtic  bards  ;  or  that  a  Celtic  warrior  may  have  done  as  much.  It
is  admitted  that  Irish  priests  had  found  their  way  to  Iceland  be-
fore the  Norsemen  went  there,  and  if  so,  perhaps  Irish  warriors
may  have  been  pirates  or  varan gians,  and  successful  in  forays  on
the  Vikings,  as  Vikings  were  in  Irish  forays.  We  believe  the
Sagas,  so  far  as  they  are  reasonable ;  why  should  not  truth  be
sifted  from  these  romances  also.


'34


WEST  HIGHLAND  T.U:.ES.


the  place  for  hearing ;  and  they  were  plying  the  feast
with  great  sport  in  "  cm  dining-room  "  of  the  King  of
Loclilann,]  and  tliey  so  lildng  and  loving  about  each,
taking  their  feast.

The  soldiers  were  without  watching,  to  guard  the
big  house  of  the  king,  and  they  saw  a  great  tasba-
rltach*  coming  the  way  ;  they  had  such  fear  before
him  that  they  thought  they  could  see  the  great  world
between  his  legs.  As  he  was  coming  nearer,  the  watch
were  fleeing  till  they  reached  the  great  house,  and  into
the  passage,  and  from  the  passage  into  the  room  where
were  the  young  King  of  Lochlann  and  the  young  son
of  the  King  of  Eirinn,  at  their  feast ;  and  the  great
raw  bones  that  came  began  to  fetter  and  bind  the  men,
and  to  cast  them  behind  him,  till  he  had  bound  every
one  of  them  ;  and  till  he  reached  the  young  King  of
Lochlann,  and  he  and  the  big  man  wrestled  Avith  each
other.]  He  drew  his  fist  and  he  strack  the  King  of
Loclilann  between  the  mouth  and  nose,  and  he  drove
out  three  front  teeth,  and  he  caught  them  on  the  back
of  his  fist ;  +]  but  the  end  for  them  was,  that  the  young
King  of  Lochlann  was  bound  and  laid  under  fetters,
and  thrown  behind  together  with  the  rest  ;]  and  the
big  man  gave  a  dark  leap  and  he  seized  the  bride,  and
he  took  her  with  him.]

Conall  gazed  on  all  the  company  that  was  witliin,
to  try  if  he  could  see  any  man  rising  to  stand  by  the
king.  When  he  saw  no  living  man  arising,  he  arose
himself]  "Let  that  woman  go,"  said  he;  "thou  hast
no  business  Avith  her."  That  he  would  not  do.]  He
gave  a  spring,  he  caught  the  slender  black  man  be-
tween the  two  sides  of  the  door  (bhith),  and  he  levelled


*  Large,  lean  boned,  savage  and  swarthy. — Dewar.
f  MacNeill,  who  says  he  was  a  slender  black  man.


THE  STORY  OF  COX  ALL  GULBAN.  235

him ;  and  when  he  had  levelled  him,  he  let  the  weight
of  his  knee  on  his  chest.

"  Has  death  ever  gone  so  near  thee  as  that?"  said
Conall.

"  It  has  gone  nearer  than  that,"  said  the  slender
black  man.

He  let  the  weight  more  on  him.  "  Has  he  gone
as  near  as  that  to  thee  1"

"  Oh,  he  has  not  gone  ;  let  thy  knee  be  lightened,
and  I  will  tell  thee  the  time  that  he  went  nearest  to
me."

"  I  will  let  thee  ;  stand  up  so  long  as  thoii  art
telling  it,"  said  Conall.*]  MacNeUi.

Conall  loosed  the  young  King  of  Lochlann  and  his
men  from  their  bonds  and  from  their  fetters,  and  he
sat  himself  and  the  young  King  of  Lochlann  at  the
board,  and  they  took  their  feast ;  and  the  big  man  was
cast  in  under  the  board.  Again  when  they  were  at
supper  the  king's  sister  was  with  them,  and  every
word  she  said  she  was  trying  to  make  the  friendship
greater  and  greater  between  her  brother  and  ConalL
The  big  man  was  lying  under  the  board,  and  Conall
said  to  him,  "  Thou  man  that  art  beneath,  wert  thou
ever  before  in  strait  or  extremity  as  great  as  to  be
lying  under  the  great  board,  under  the  drippings  of  the
waxen  torches  of  the  King  of  Lochlann  and  mine  Ì "

Said  he,  "  If  I  were  above,  a  comrade  of  meat  and
cup  to  thee,  I  woidd  tell  thee  a  tale  on  that."

At  the  end  of  a  while  after  that,  when  the  drink
was  taking  Conall  a  little,  he  was  willing  to  hear  the
tale  of  the  man  who  was  beneath  the  board,  and  he

*  MacNair's  versioD  is  almost  the  same  in  different  words.
This  has  some  resemblance  to  the  story  of  Conall,  Nos.  V.  VI.
VII. ;   but  the  adventures  of  this  man  are  quite  different.     Mac-

gilvray  gives  the  same  story.


236  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

said  to  him,  "  Thou  that  art  beneath  the  board,  if  I
had  thy  name  it  is  that  I  would  call  thee ;  wert  thoii
ever  in  strait  or  extremity  like  that  Ì"

And  he  answered  as  before.

Said  Conall,  "  If  thou  wilt  promise  to  be  peaceable
when  thou  gettest  up,  I  Avill  let  thee  come  up  ;  and  if
thou  art  not  peaceable,  the  two  hands  that  put  thee
down  before,  will  put  thee  down  again."

Conall  loosed  the  man  who  was  beneath,  and  he
rose  up  aloft  and  he  sat  at  the  other  side  of  the  board,
opposite  to  Conall ;  and  Conall  said,

"  Aha  !  thou  art  on  high  now,  thou  man  that  wert
beneath.  If  I  had  thy  name  it  is  that  I  would  call
thee.  Wliat  strait  or  extremity  wert  thou  ever  in  that
was  harder  than  to  be  laid  under  the  board  of  the  young
king  of  Lochlann,  and  mine  ] "

Story  of  the  King  op  Spain.
Said  he — "My  name  is  Garna  Sgiathlais  Eigh  na
lospainde  Garna  Skeealace,  king  of  Spain.*  Let  me
tell  you  the  hardest  strait  in  which  I  ever  was.]  I
was  once  a  warrior,  and  the  deeds  of  a  warrior  were  on
my  hand  well  enough,  and  I  was  on  my  way  to  the
dun  of  the  king  of  Laidheann  to  take  out  Breast  of
Light  with  right  strong  hand  ;  and  I  saw  Mac-a-Mor,
son  of  the  king  of  the  Sorcha,  and  the  most  beauteous
drop  of  blood  that  I  ever  saw  upon  his  shoulder.  I
never  saw  a  woman  that  I  would  rather  wish  to  have  for
myself  than  that  woman.      I  was  working  with  my

*  It  is  not  easy  to  put  a  meaning  on  these  names  ;  there  are
two  Gaelic  words  which  are  like  Sgiathlais,  and  which  have
appropriate  meanings ;  one  means  winging  about,  the  other
story-telling.  MacNeill  gives  neither  name  nor  country.  It
might  mean  "Cut  of  the  tale-telling,''  because  the  episode  cuts
the  story  in  two.     Old  MacPhie  did  not  give  it.


THE  STORY  OF  COX  ALL  GULB.iJN^.  237

own  sword  at  him  as  high  as  the  band  of  his  kilt.
He  had  but  the  one  duan  (song)  for  me — '  Wilt  thou
not  cease,  and  wilt  thou  not  stop  '? '  but  I  gave  no  heed
to  him.*]  He  fell  upon  me,  and  he  bound  me,  and  fet-  MacNeiU.
tered  me,  and  set  me  on  the  horse  before  him,  and  he
took  me  to  the  top  of  a  rock.  The  rock  was  high,  and
he  threw  me  down  the  rock,  and  if  I  had  fallen  to  the
bottom  I  had  gone  to  little  morsels,  but  so  it  was  that
I  fell  into  the  nest  of  a  dreagan.t  When  I  came  to
myself  I  looked  about  me,  and  I  saw  tliree  great  birds
in  the  nest,  and  I  held  my  hands  and  my  feet  to  them
as  they  were  bound,  until  they  loosed  them  ;  the  mon-
sters !  that  they  might  tear  me  asunder.]  I  saw  a  Macgiivray.
cave  at  the  back  of  the  nest,  and  I  dragged  myself  into
the  cave,  and  when  the  old  dreagan  would  come  and
leave  food  for  the  young  ones,  I  would  stay  till  the  old
dreagan  woidd  go,  and  then  I  Avould  come  out  and  I'd
take  the  food  from  the  young  cbeagans,  that  was  all  I
had  to  keep  aUve  upon.  But  at  last  the  young  dreagans
found  death  for  want  of  food.  The  old  dreagan  under-
stood that  something  Avas  eating  their  food,  and  she  ran-
sacked all  about  the  nest,  and  she  went  into  the  cave.t]  MacXair.
She  seized  me  then  in  her  talons ;  she  sailed  to  the
back  of  the  ocean  with  me ;  and  she  sprang  to  the
clouds  with  me,  and  I  was  a  while  that  I  did  not  know
wluch  was  heaven  or  earth  for  me,  nor  whether  she
would  let  me  fall  in  the  drowning  sea,  or  on  rocks  of

*  Mac^air  mounts  him  on  a  horse.  MacE^ilvray  makes  him
the  king  of  the  universe.

f  MacNeill  says,  Cro  mhineach,  which  is  a  vast  hird  like  an
eagle  to  be  found  in  stories  all  over  the  world.  Macgilvray  says
Ghri  Mhineach  greeveen-each,  and  I  have  no  doubt  the  word  is
the  same  as  Griffin.

X  The  other  version  is  the  same,  less  the  cave,  and  there  was
but  one  chick.


238  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

hardness,  or  on  cairns  of  stones  ;]  she  "was  lifting  me
and  letting  me  down,  till  she  saw  that  I  was  soon
dead,  on  the  breast  of  the  sea.  Though  I  was  not
heavy,  when  I  took  the  brine  I  was  heavy  indeed ;
and  when  she  was  lifting  me  she  was  spent.  She
lifted  me  with  her  from  the  surface  of  the  sea  as  I  \vas
dead,  and  she  sailed  with  me  to  an  island,  and  the  sun
Avas  so  hot ;  and  she  put  me  myself  on  the  sun  side  of
the  island.  Sleep  came  upon  herself,  and  she  slept.
The  sun  was  enlivening  me  pretty  well  though  I  was
dead.]  She  had  come  down  at  the  side  of  a  well,  and
when  she  awoke  she  began  at  working  herself  about  in
the  well.  I  understood  that  there  was  iocshlaint,  heal-
ing in  the  w^ell,  because  of  how  the  side  of  me  that  was
nearest  to  the  well  was  healing  with  the  splashes  of
water  that  the  dreagan  was  putting  from  her.  And  I
moved  the  other  side  of  me  towards  the  well,  till  that
side  was  healed  also.  Then  I  felt  for  my  sword  ;  my
sword  had  always  stuck  by  me  ;*  and  I  got  it,  and  I
rose  up  and  I  crept  softly  (eallaidh  mi)  to  the  back  of
the  dreagan,  and  with  the  sword  I  struck  off  her  head.
But  it  was  but  simple  to  strike  off  her  head,  by  keep-
ing it  off.  The  balsam  that  was  in  the  well  was  so
strong  that  though  the  head  should  be  struck  off  her,
it  would  spring  on  again,  till  at  last  I  got  the  sword
held  between  the  head  and  neck,  till  the  hag's-marrow
froze,  and  then  I  got  the  head  and  neck  driven
asunder.]  I  did  not  leave  a  thong  of  her  uncut,  and
that  is  the  death  that  went  nearest  to  me,  till  the  blood
dried  throughout  the  island,]  and  when  the  blood  dried
I  put  the  dreagan  into  the  well,  and  I  went  and  I
washed  myself  in  it,  and  so  it  was  that  it  seemed  to
myself  that  I  grew  stronger  and  more  active  than  I  had

*  Claidlieamh  beag  cliorr  na  sgeithe,  the  little  sword  of  the
crook  of  the  shield,  according  to  MacNeill.


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAN.  239

ever  been  before.  And  the  first  exploit  (gaisge)  that
I  tried  to  do  after  that,  was  to  try  to  contend  against
the  king  of  Lochlann  ;  and  it  would  have  gone  with
me  liadst  thou  not  been  here.  And  my  being  cast  into
the  nest  of  the  di'eagan,  and  what  I  bore  before  I  got
out,  is  a  harder  strait  and  a  worse  extremity,  in  my
esteem,  than  to  be  under  the  board  of  the  king  of
Lochlann  and  thine."


When  Garna  Sgiathlais  had  finished  his  tale,  he
said  to  Conall,  "  jS'ow,  thou  man  that  art  yonder,  I
should  like  to  have  thy  tale,  thy  name,  thy  land,  and
what  is  the  reason  of  thy  journey  to  Lochlann."  And
Conall  said — "  My  name  is  Conall  Guilbeanach,  son  of
the  king  of  Eirinn."     And  he  told  his  own  tale.*

The  sister  of  the  king  of  Lochlann  was  listening ;
she  grew  sorrowful,  and  the  drops  rained  from  her
eyes  when  she  understood  that  Conall  had  another
sweetheart.  She  arose,  and  she  left  the  room,  and  she
was  heavy  and  sad.  Duanach  followed  her  to  console
her,  and  put  her  in  order  as  best  he  might.  She  took
a  ring  from  her  finger,  and  she  sent  it  to  Conall  by
Duanach.

Conall  tm-ned  Duanach  back  with  it  to  herself
agam.  He  said  that  he  had  a  ring  from  another  on
his  finger  already,  since  he  had  got  no  gift  (tabhartas)
to  give  it  to  her,  as  eiric.t

She  sent  Duanach  back  again  with  the  ring  to
Conall,  and  she  asked  him  to  wear  it  for  her.  Conall
took  the  ring  and  put  it  i;pon  his  finger.]  MacNair.

"Thou  must  go  with  me,"  said  Conall  to  Garna
Sgiathlais,  "  in  search  of  that  woman  Breast  of  Light."

*  Here  the  heads  of  all  that  has  gone  before  are  given  in  the
original,

t  This  gives  eiric  the  meaning  of  a  forfeit  or  fine.


240


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


"  It  is  easier  for  me  to  bear  death  than  to  go  to
meet  that  man  any  more."

"Thou  wilt  find  death  where  thou  art,  then,"  said
ConalL

"  It  is  certain  that  if  I  am  to  suffer  death  Avhere  I
am  that  I  will  go  with  thee,"  said  the  slender  black
man."]

"  The  young  king  of  Lochlann  said  that  he  would
go  too."      Said  Conall,

"  Who  will  be  a  guide  to  us  to  take  us  the  shortest
Avay  ?"

Said  Duanach — "  I  will  make  a  guide  for  you  (ni
mise  lull  d'  uibh).

Conall  and  his  warriors  made  ready.  The  king  of
Lochlann's  sister  wished  Duanach  to  stay  with  her  till
the  rest  should  come  back,  but  Duanach  Avould  not
stay.]

Away  went  Conall,  and  he  rigged  a  ship,  and  when
the  ship  was  rigged  he  took  with  him  the  slender  black
man,  Duanach  acha  Draodli,  the  king  of  Lochlann,  and
the  Amhus  Ormanach  ;  they  sailed,  and  crew  enough
with  them,  and  they  reached  the  realm  of  the  Sorcha.*]
When  they  reached,  Duanach  went  in  to  the  house
of  Mac-a-Moir,  and  he  said — "Hospitality  from  thee,  A
Mhic-a-Mhoir."

"  Thou  shalt  have  that  A  Dhraoth  aoith."

"  Champions  to  fight  fi'om  the  great  warrior."

"Thou  shalt  have  that,  thou  Druid."

"A  sight  of  Breast  of  Light,"  said  Duanach.

"Thou  shalt  have  that,  Druid,"  said  Mac-a-Moir.

Duanach  got  a  sight  of  Brea.st  of  Light,  and  he
told  her  that  Conall  had  come  with  his  warriors  to  take


board.


According  to  MacNair  tbere  were  but    two  cliampions  on


THE  STORY  OP  CONALL  GULBAX.        24I

her  from  Mac-a-Moir,  and  Breast  of  Light  was  pleased,
for  she  was  tired  of  being  kept  there.

Duanach  came  out,  and  he  told  it  to  Conall,  and
the  next  day  Conall  came  to  the  landmark  of  Mac-a-
Moir.  He  clashed  his  ftliield — "Yielding  or  battle
upon  the  fieltl"

"  Yielding  thou  gettest  not  in  this  town,"  said  Mac-
a-Moir  ;  "  Though  it  were  but  speech  it  was  a  mark  to
Mac-a-Moir  to  come  out  to  try  a  combat  -with  ConalL"*]^^'"^'^''"''

"I  should  go  up  to  seek  the  thing  I  want,"  said
Conall.

"  Well,  indeed,  thou  shalt  not.  There  promised
to  fall  first  none  but  me,"  said  the  slender  black  man.
I  will  go  up  before  thee,  and  I  will  come  to  thee  -with.
word  how  the  place  is  up  before  thee."

The  slender  black  man  went  up,  and  he  shouted
battle  or  combat,  or  else  Breast  of  Light,  daughter  of
the  King  of  Laidhean,  to  be  sent  out.  That  he  should
have  battle  and  combat,  but  not  Breast  of  Light,
daughter  of  the  King  of  Laidlieamt

*  Geill  ua  comhrag  air  an  fhaiche  Geill  cha  'n  fhaighe  tu
ann  sa  bhaille  so  orsa  Mac-a-Moir  Ga  d'  b'  e  bu  chainnte  b'  a  bu
chomhra  do  Mhaea-Moira  tighinn  a  macb  dhfeuchainn  comhrag
ri  Conall ;  as  written  by  Dewar.

f  The  Barra  version  (MacXeill's)  here  varies  considerably
from  the  Cowall  version  (MacNair's).  There  is  more  incident  in
the  latter,  which  I  have  followed ;  but  the  language  of  the  former
is  more  curious.  It  is  wilder  altogether,  and  savours  more  of  an
old  Bardic  composition.  It  is,  in  fact,  the  version  of  a  practised
narrator,  who  cannot  read.  All  the  fights,  are  described  by  both
the  men  in  nearly  the  same  words  ;  but  each  has  a  different  set
of  phrases,  though  sometimes  they  are  very  like  each  other.
When  these  are  rapidly  given,  the  effect  is  that  of  a  kind  of
chant ;  something  which,  with  music,  would  almost  be  a  rude
chorus,  and  might  be  so  uttered  as  to  express  the  battle.

The  Barra  battles  are  thus  arranged,  and  they  have  that
R


242


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


They  stood,  Conall,  the  young  King  of  Lochlann,
and  Garna  Sgiathlais,  opposite  to  the  house  of  Mac-a-
Moir,  and  they  clashed  their  shields  for  battle.     Mac-a-

kind  of  symmetry  which  pervades  Gaelic  popular  tales,  as  they
exist  in  the  islands.

Ist,  The  slender,  dark  man,  who,  according  to  MacNair,  is
the  King  of  Spain,  says  that  he  will  not  let  Conall  go  first  on
shore,  because  he  has  promised  to  be  the  first  to  fall.     He  lands.


These  strange  figures  may  represent  warriors  of  the  period  to  which
these  romantic  Gaelic  stories  chiefly  belong.  They  are  copied  from  plate  |
Ivii.,  Sculptured  Stones  of  Scotland,  which  represents  a  curious  cross  near  j
Dupplin  Castle.  Tliey  are  consequently  waniors  who  lived  after  the  intro-  j
duction  of  Christianity  into  Scotland,  and  beyond  that  I  believe  the  date  to  i
be  as  uncertain  as  that  of  Conall.  A  great  number  of  animals,  knots,  men,  j
and  monsters,  are  sculptured  on  the  same  cross,  and  it  is  manifestly  vei7  old.  j


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAN.        243

Moir  sent  out  the  three  best  warriors  that  were  in  hits
realm  to  battle  with  them.  They  drew  their  slender
gray  swords,  and  they  went  to  meet  each  other,  but

and  strikes  his  shield.  Five  hundred  Lughghaisgeach,  and  as
many  Treanghasgeach  are  sent  out ;  he  slays  them  all,  and  lies
down  amongst  them.

2d,  Conall,  in  the  ship,  says  that  he  has  fled,  and  offers  again
to  go  himself ;  but  the  Amhas  Ormanach  has  sworn  to  fall  first,
and  he  goes.  He  finds  the  dead  hosts,  and  thinks  the  plague  is
in  the  place,  and  keeps  to  windward ;  but  his  comrade  is  alive,
and  tells  him  that  he  must  do  as  much  as  he  has  done  ;  so  he
clashes  his  shield,  and  there  come  500  lughghaisgeach,  500
treanghaisgeach,  and  500  langhaisgeach  (a  larger  number,  and
the  last  of  higher  rank,  full  heroes) — these  he  slays,  and  lies
down.

'òd,  The  scene  on  board  is  repeated,  and  the  King  of  Loch-
lann  goes,  and  repeats  the  scene  on  shore  ;  slays  1500,  and  lies
down.  To  complete  the  symmetry,  the  first  should  have  killed
500;  the  second,  1000  ;  and  the  third,  1500.

4</*,  Conall  says  he  was  wrong  to  trust  his  matter  to  any
other,  and  goes  himself,  followed  by  Duanachd  acha  Draodh,
repeats  the  scene  on  shore,  and  is  told  by  his  comrades  that  the
King  of  Sorcha  has  none  alive  now,  but  his  "  beag  chuideachd,"
small  company,  and  that  he  will  rather  come  out  than  send
them.     They  will  not  interfere  unless  Conall  flees.

So  far,  then,  the  whole  goes  on  increasing  to  the  grand
climax — which  is  the  drawing  of  the  great  foe,  the  victoiy  of  the
hero,  the  death  of  the  villain,  and  a  happy  wedding  ;  and  this  is
no  solitary  instance  of  such  an  artificial  arrangement,  but  is  the
principle  on  which  a  whole  class  of  similar  tales  are  arranged.
From  this  symmetry,  and  the  rhythmical  jingle  which  pervades  the
language,  I  feel  convinced  that  the  island  versions  are  the  oldest,
and  that  the  mainland  versions,  though  better  preserved  as  to
incident,  have  lost  somewhat  of  their  original  shape.  There  is  as
much  diflerence  in  the  stories,  as  there  is  in  the  manners  of
mainlanders  and  islanders,  and  that  difference  is  very  much
greater  than  is  generally  known.

Mac-a-Mor  Mac  Righ  Sorcha  comes  out  to  answer  Conall


2  44  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

the  combat  did  not  last  long  tiU  the  three  heroes  were
slain.

On  the  next  day  Mac-a-Moir  sent  the  Eidire  Leidire,

"and  the  step  of  Conall  was  back,  and  not  forwards;"  but
Duanacb  stands  behind,  and  urges  him  with  the  words  given
above,  perhaps  words  which  have  really  been  spoken  by  bards  in
real  fights — and  Conall  casts  up  the  sword  of  his  foe  to  the  skies.
"he  leaped  on  his  back,  and  struck  oiF  his  head."  Then  the
head  was  aiming  straight  at  the  trunk  ;  but  Conall,  by  the  advice
of  Duanach,  put  the  iron  on  the  neck,  and  the  head  played
"  gliong  "  on  the  sword,  and  sprang  up  again  to  the  skies.  Then
Duanach  shouted,  "step  on  one  side;  the  head  is  aiming  at
thee ;"  and  he  did  so,  and  the  head  went  seven  feet  into  the  earth
with  the  force  that  it  had ;  and  here  the  narrator  remarked,
"  was  not  that  a  head  !  did  not  Conall  escape  well!  "

Then  Conall  took  the  lady  from  the  castle,  and  the  narrator
exclaimed  triumphantly,  "  "Was  he  the  dastard  of  Eirinn  now  !,"
The  hero  and  his  three  comrades,  and  the  rescued  lady  get  into
their  ship,  and  reach  an  island  called  Na  h  Otolia.

Old  MacPhie  told  this  part  better  than  I  have  ever  heard  a
story  told  ;  it  was  exceedingly  symmetrical,  full  of  "  ruithean  "
(runs),  and  very  original.

Conall  sails  to  the  realm  of  the  King  of  the  Universe,  and
strikes  his  shield  blow.  Soldiers  came  out,  and  he  slew  them  ;
nobles  came  out,  and  he  knocked  their  brains  out  with  one  of
their  number  ;  then  came  the  king's  son,  and  he  bound  his  wrists
and  ankles  to  the  small  of  his  back.  He  promised  to  serve  him,
and  they  sailed  on  to  some  realm,  and  challenged.  The  house  of
the  Tamhasg  here  came  in,  and  Duanach  appeared,  but  he  was  the
son  of  the  King  of  Lochlann,  wounded,  and  a  prisoner.  He  cured
his  wounds  with  white  sugar,  and  another  fight  took  place,  nearly
the  same  as  the  last.  They  go  on  with  the  new  king  and  the
half-starved  wight,  and  sail  to  Sorcha.

Conall  lands  as  a  poor  man,  and  learns  that  the  lady  is  to  be
married  to  the  king  of  Sorcha's  son,  so,  on  the  morrow  he  chal-
lenges. He  hears  men  coming,  and  he  says,  "Look  out;  who
comes  ;  is  that  himself?"  There  came  a  company  in  a  particu-
lar dress  (I  think  the  dresses  were  red,  green,  and  blue),  but  I


THE  STORY  OP  CONALL  GULBAN.         245

1

j  the  knight,  the  mangier,  his  brother,  out  to  try  a  com-
I  bat  with  any  one  of  Conall's  warriors  who  had  the
I    heart  to  try  against  him.

did  not  note  it,  and  I  forget.     These,  said  he,  are  but  the  ser-
vants ;  go  out  and  slay  them.     Then  came  the  first  of  the  nobles
'    in  another  dress,  and  the  same  was  repeated ;  then  the  last  of
I    the  nobles  in  another  dress.     Then  came  the  son  of  the  King  of
j    Light  himself,  and  then  a  fight  indeed.     Conall  conquers,  and  is
;    about  to  sail  back  to  Eirinn,  when  an  old  man  appears  in  a  boat,
,    and  challenges.     The  warriors  go  one  by  one,  and  are  slain,  all
:    but  Conall ;  then  he  thinks  for  the  third  time  of  his  grandfather,
who  appears  and  says,  that  old  man  was  with  me  a  student  of
the  black  art  (then  a  lot  of  queer  words,  which  I  could  not  catch,
and  have  never  heard  since),  but  he  could  beat  him  at  one  art,
80  they  try,  and  the  grandfather  wins.     After  that  Conall  goes  to
Turkey,  and  rescues  the  King  of  Eirinn  ;  and  by  the  help  of  a
magic  ring  he  forces  the  queen-mother  to  confess  that  her  two
I    sons  are  not  the  king's  children,  and  Conall  reigns.     It  will  be
seen  from  these  abstracts  that  the  version  which  I  have  followed
I    is  much  more  reasonable  than    the    common   versions.      For
;    example —

The  Colonsay  version,  which  varies  here  from  all  the  rest.

■  When  they  set  off  from  Lochlann  to  take  Breast  of  Light
from  the  King  of  the  universe,  Conall  remembers  that  his  father

■  told  him  that  he  might  get  aid  in  extremity  from  Righ  na
:  lorramhaich  (the  King  of  the  Boat-songsters  ?).  That  personage
f  says,  I  have  twelve  sons,  and  thou  shalt  get  them.  I  have
(  thirteen  sons,  but  Cod  is  just  married,  and  Cod  has  counsel  him-
!  self.     Eeach  Cod."

!  The  Counsellor  Son,  whose  name  may  be  translated  "  'What,"

.  agrees  to  go  if  he  has  two-thirds  of  his  counsel,  till  they  come
back,  and  away  they  go,  with  a  kind  of  Rhyme-list,  which  is  re-
peated several  times.

Dh  fholbh  an  seo  Conall  Gulbairneach

S  'an  t  Amhas  Orannach  Mac  Righ  bharragh  nan  sgiath.

S  am  Macabh  Mor  Mac  Righ  na  Sorcha

S  tri  Mic  dheag  righ  na  h  lorramhaich

Cead  a's  Cod  a's  Michead.


246  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  Who  will  go  to  battle  with  this  hero  of  exploits
to-day  Ì "  said  Conall.

Dubhan  Mac  Draodh  a'a  Mac  Righ  Sigil

A  dh  iarraidh  Uchd  sbluisd  nigliean  Eigli  Laidhean

Then  went  Conall  Curlew,

And  the  Savage  of  Songs,  son  of  the  King  of  Splitting  the

Shields  ;
And  the  great  warrior,  son  of  the  King  of  the  Light ;
And  the  thirteen  sons  of  the  King  of  the  Boat-songsters  ;
Leave,  and  "What,  and  Refusal.
Hook,  son  of  Herald,  and  the  King  of  Seegeel,*

To  seek  Breast  of  Light,  daughter  of  the  King  of  Leinster ;

Going  past  a  castle,  there  cried  out

The  great  man  whose  the  castle  was,

Co  sibh  a  dh  haislean  nan  tri  rann  ?

Na  ce  ur  n-ainmeanan  ?

Na  'ur  n  eachdraidh  a  niotar  ?

Who  are  ye  of  the  gentles  of  the  three  divisions  ?f

Or  what  are  your  names  ?

Or  (who)  will  your  histories  make  ?

Conall  Gulbeirneach  gum  be  m  ainms'  e

Mac  Righ  Eirinn  bu  mhor  airm

A  cheile  comhraig  fo  leon

A  shleaghau  cha  d'  fhuair  an  t-ath-bheo

Conall  Curlew,  it  is  my  name.

Son  of  Eirinn's  King  of  Great  Arms  ;

His  battle  spouse  (adversary),  under  wounds

Of  his  spears,  never  got  the  next  life.

*   Stripe  making  siogail  means  streaked,  striped,
t  This  would  seem  to  indicate  a  date  earlier  that  the  discovery
of  the  4th  division,  America.


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAK        247

"  Myself,"  said  Garna  Sgiathlais,  "  because  of  how
his  brother  threw  me  into  the  nest  of  the  dreagan."

They  went  to  meet  each  other ;  they  drew  their
slender  gray  swords,  and  the  two  battled  with  each

They  reached  the  house  of  the  King  of  the  Universe,  and  the
herald  went  in,  and  there  he  found  the  most  beautiful  woman
that  ever  was  seen  from  the  beginning  of  the  universe  to  the  end
of  eternity,  with  two  drops  of  blood  on  every  eye,  weeping  for
Conall.

The  herald  repeats  the  list,  and  she  says,  "  Every  Draoth  I
ever  saw  was  telling  lies  ;  if  it  were  Conall  he  would  come  in."
Accordingly  Conall  sprang  in,  and  gave  her  na  tri  poga  milisde
blasda,  the  three  sweet  tasty  kisses,  and  sprang  out  again.

The  King  of  the  Universe  yields  the  lady  without  a  struggle,
comes  home  from  his  hunting,  and  asks  them  all  to  a  feast ;  a
"  minister  "  was  got,  and  they  were  married.

In  the  midst  of  the  festivities,  a  shout  was  raised  that  the
King  of  the  Universe  had  fallen  in  combat  with  a  monster  on  the
strand.  Conall  got  up  to  help,  but  Cod  bade  him  sit  still ;  and
the  king  was  seen  in  his  chair.

This  happened  a  second  time;  and  the  third  Cod  had  no
share  of  the  counsel,  so  Conall  took  his  own,  and  went  out.

He  found  the  monster  and  the  King  of  the  Universe  dead,
sole  to  sole  ;  and  there  came  a  dove  from  the  east,  and  she  was
stooping  down  to  the  monster  with  a  leig  (a  pebble  possessed  of
medicinal  virtues,  a  chrystal,  a  talisman),  which  she  had,  and
the  creature  was  stirring,  and  opening  its  eyes.  He  sprang,  and
took  hold  of  the  leig,  and  took  it  from  the  dove.

"Give  me  my  leig,"  said  the  dove,  "and  I  will  bring  thy
father  and  brothers  alive  in  the  Tuirk."

"  If  thou  wilt  do  but  that,  I  will  do  it  myself,"  said  ConaU.
He  seized  the  dove,  and  pulled  his  head  off;  and  who  came  to
meet  him  but  Cod.  Then  Conall  and  Cod  and  Dubhan  and  the
lady  went  to  Turkey,  and  found  out  the  graves  of  the  king  and
the  rest,  and  brought  them  alive,  and  took  them  home  ;  and  the
descendants  of  these  people  are  yet  in  Eirinn —

Said  John  Macgilvray,  labourer,  Colonsay,  July  9, 1860.


248  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

other ;  but  long  before  the  suii  went  west,  the  Eidire
Leidire  was  slain.

Garna  Sgiathlais  took  off  his  head,  and  he  opened
the  mouth,  and  he  cut  the  tongi;e  out,  and  he  spht  the
tongue,  and  he  struck  it  three  slaps  against  liimself ;
and  he  said  to  Mac-a-Moir —

"  There,  that  is  for  thee,  for  how  thou  didst  cast
me  into  the  dreagan's  nest."

At  night  Duanach  went  into  the  house  of  Mac-a-
Moir,  and  he  said —

"  Hospitality  from  thee,  Vic-a-Voir."

"  Thou  shalt  get  that,  thou  Druid."

"  Warriors  to  combat  Conall  to-morrow,"  Vic-a-voir.

"  Thou  shalt  get,  thou  Druid."

"  A  sight  of  Breast  of  Light  ?"  said  Duanach.

"Thou  shalt  get  that,  thou  Druid,"  said  Mac-a-
Moir.

Duanach  got  a  sight  of  Breast  of  Light,  and  he  told
her  each  thing  as  it  was  going  on  outside  of  the  dim,
and  she  was  sorrowful  that  so  much  blood  was  being
spilt  for  her  ;  and  Duanach  came  out,  and  he  gave  the
tale  of  Breast  of  Light  to  Conall.

On  the  next  day  Mac-a-Moir  himself  came  out  to
try  a  combat  with  any  one  who  had  the  heart  to  go
to  try  him.

"  Who  will  go  to  battle  with  the  hero  of  exploits
to-day]"  said  Conall.

"  MyseK,"  said  Garna  Sgiathlais,  "  for  the  day  that
he  cast  me  down  the  rock  to  the  dreagan's  nest."

They  came  in  front  of  each  other  ;  they  drew  their
slender  gray  swords,  and  they  kindled  a  fire  of  fists
with  their  swords,  from  the  rising  of  the  sim  till  she
was  going  west ;  but  at  last  it  went  with  Mac-a-Moh
to  level  Garna  Sgiathlais,  to  bind  bim  and  fetter  him ;
and  he  took  him  with  him,  and  he  cast  him  into  a  den


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAN.         249

of  lions  that  he  kept  for  pastime  for  himself,  and
Mac-a-MoLT  ■would  not  come  out  again  till  the  end  of
two  days.

When  the  night  came  Duanach  went  into  the
house  of  Mac-a-Moir,  and  he  said —

"  Hospitality  from  thee,  Vic-a-Voir."

"  Thou  shalt  get  that,  thou  Druid."

"  A  sight  of  Breast  of  Light  Ì "  said  Duanach.

"  Thou  shalt  not  get  that,"  said  Mac-a-]\Ioir  ;  and
then  Breast  of  Light  was  put  into  a  dark  chamber,
where  she  could  not  hear  voice  of  friend,  and  where
she  could  not  see  light  of  suru

"Wlien  the  battle-day  of  Mac-a-Moir  came,  he  came
out,  and  he  clashed  his  shield.*

"  AVho  will  go  to  battle  Avith  the  hero  of  exploits
to-day  Ì "  said  Conall.

"  Myself,"  said  the  Young  King  of  Lochlann.-J-

They  came  in  front  of  each  other  ;  they  drew  their
hard  thin  swords,  and  they  went  to  battle  with  each
other.  But  long  before  the  sim  went  west,  the  yoimg
King  of  Lochlann  was  levelled,  bound,  and  fettered,
and  taken  away,  and  cast  into  the  den  of  lions,  where
Garna  Sgiatlalais  was ;  and  Mac-a-jMoir  would  not
come  out  any  more  to  hold  battle  till  the  end  of  five
days.

Duanach  went  in  every  night  of  these  to  seek
food,  and  he  got  it ;  and  on  a  night  of  these  nights  he
asked  for  warriors  to  hold  battle  against  ConaU.

*  There  seems  to  be  a  regular  system  in  this  series  of  battles.
The  victor  in  the  last  battle  now  comes  out,  and  gives  the  chal-
lenge.

t  Here  there  is  a  hole  in  the  story.  The  King  of  Lochlann
ought  clearly  to  have  some  quarrel  to  avenge,  but  he  has  none ;
and  the  King  of  Spain  had  two  fights  for  the  same  quarrel,  which
is  entirely  against  regularity  and  order.


5°


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


"  Thou  slialt  get  that,  thou  Druid,"  said  Mac-a-
Moir.  A  hundi'ed  full  heroes  were  set  in  order  before
the  great  house  on  the  next  day.

It  seemed  strange  to  Conall  to  see  the  host  going
into  order  at  the  front  of  the  big  house  ;  and  he  asked
if  there  was  any  knowing  what  was  the  meaning  of
that  host  going  into  order,  in  ranks,  at  the  front  of  the
big  house  this  day.

Said  Duanach,  "  I  thought  thou  wert  finding  the
time  long  here,  not  doing  anything,  and  I  asked  for
warriors  to  combat  with  thee."

"  I  have  no  wish  myseK  to  be  slaying  men  without
knowing  why  ;  and,  besides,  how  should  I  contend
against  a  hundred  full  heroes,  and  I  alone  Ì "  said
Conall.

"  So  many  as  thou  dost  not  slay  with  thy  sword  I
will  kill  with  my  tongue,"  said  Duanach.*

They  went  to  meet  ConalL]

The  smooth  lad  looked  from  one  to  two ;  and
where  they  were  thickest,  there  they  were  thinnest ;
and  where  they  were  thinnest,  there  were  none  at  all
there.]

He  struck  them  under,  and  over,  through,  and
throughout ;  and  those  who  were  thinnest,  were  most
ill  scattered  ;  and  as  many  as  were  dead  of  them  were
lying  down  ;  and  as  many  as  were  hurt,  they  sat ;  and
the  rest  that  were  alive  of  them  ran  away.t

*  This  is  like  a  sly  allusion  to  the  romantic  and  untrue  side
of  the  tale,  and  to  the  poetical  license  of  bards  such  as  Duanach.

f  Sheall  an  gille  min  o  h-aon  go  dha  's  far  am  bo  tiughe  eud
's  an  a  bo  tainn'  eud  's  far  am  bo  tainn'  eud  cha  robh  gin  idir
ann,]  Bhuail  e  iad  fodh-pa  tharta  trid  us  rompa  s  a  chuid  a  bu
tainne  dhiubh  gu  am  b  ia  bha  a  bu  mhi-sgaoltiche,  s'  a  mhead  a
marbb  dhiubh  bha  iad  nan  luidh  's  a  mhead  's  a  bha  leointe
dhiubh  bha  iad  nan  suidh  agus  an  corr  a  bha  beo  dhiubh  theich.]


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAX.        2  5  I

And  when  the  five  days  of  delay  that  Mac-a-Moir
had  were  gone  past,  Conall  went  to  the  fence  of  liis
house.

Mac-a-Moir  had  a  bell  on  the  top  of  his  house,  and
he  was  a  warrior,  any  one  who  could  strike  a  blow  on
the  bell ;  and  when  a  blow  was  struck  on  the  bell,
unless  Mac-a-Moir  should  come  out,  then  he  was  a
dastard  (cladhah'e).  Then  when  Mac-a-Moir  was  eat-
ing his  breakfast,  Conall  went  up  upon  the  top  of  the
house,  and  he  struck  a  blow  on  the  bell,  and  he  drove
the  tongue  out  of  the  bell ;  and  the  tongue  fell  down
through  the  house,  and  down  through  the  board  at
which  Mac-a-Moir  was  taking  his  food ;  and  Mac-a-
Moir  said,  "  Ha,  ha !  comrade,  it  was  easier  to  hold
battle  against  thee  on  the  day  of  Bein  Eidinn  than  on
this  day."*

Mac-a-Moir  came  out  to  hold  battle.  Conall
clashed  his  shield,  and  he  said,  "  Yielding,  or  battle  on
the  fielcL"

"Yielding  thou  gettest  not  in  this  town,"  said
Mac-a-Moir.     Though  it  Avas  but  speech,  it  was  a  sign

Mr.  Fraser,  Inverness. — Thoisicli  è  air  an  arm  Loclilannach
a  sgathadh  air  an  darna  ceanu  gus  an  deacli  e  macli  air  a  cliean
eille.  Far  am  bu  tiugh  cud,  san  a  bu  tainn  end,  s  far  am  bu
tainn  eud  san  a  bu  luaidh  shiulacb  eud  ;  far  am  bo  luaidh  sbiul-
ach  eud,  san  bo  luaidli  a  mharbbadh  eud  ;  gus  nach  d'  fbag  e
ceann  air  conn,  acb  aon  fhear  cbloain  ruaidb.

He  began  at  slicing  at  one  end  of  the  army  of  Lochlann  till
he  went  out  at  the  other  end ;  where  they  were  thickest  they
were  thinnest ;  where  they  were  thinnest  they  were  swiftest ;
where  they  were  swiftest  they  were  soonest  slain,  till  he  left  no
head  upon  hound,  but  on  one  gleed  old  man.

*  Compare  the  battle  chain  of  the  giants  in  No.  58,  vol.  iii.
In  old  romances  there  is  always  a  horn,  or  some  other  instrument,
for  making  a  noise,  hung  up  at  the  door  of  the  castle,  for  the
challenger's  special  convenience.     Compare  St.  Patrick's  bell.


252  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

for  Mac-a-Moir  to  come  out,  to  try  a  battle  witli
Conall.

They  drew  their  slender  gray  swords,  and  they
kindled  a  fire  of  fists,  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  till
the  evening,  when  she  would  be  going  west  ;  without
knowing  with  which  of  them  the  victory  would  be.

Duanach  was  singing  "  iolla  "  to  them,  and  he  said,
"  You  are  long  enough  at  this  play  ;  tlu'ow  from  you
yoiu'  swords,  and  try  it  another  way.  They  threw
from  them  their  swords,  and  they  put  their  soft  white
fists  in  each  other's  breasts,  and  they  wrestled,  but
they  did  not  take  long  at  the  wrestling,  till  Conall
give  the  panting  of  his  heart  to  Mac-a-Moir  on  the
hard  stones  of  the  causeway.  "  Stretch  hither  my
sword,"  said  Conall,  "  until  I  reap  the  head  off  him."

"  I  will  not  stretch  it,"  said  Duanach.  It  is  better
for  thee  that  thou  shouldst  have  his  head  for  thyself  as
it  is,  than  five  hundred  heads  that  thou  mightest  take
out  with  strife,"  said  Duanach  ;  "  take  a  pledge  of  him
that  he  will  be  faithful  to  thee."

Conall  made  him  promise  that  he  would  be  faithful
to  Conall  Guilbeanach,  son  of  the  King  of  Eirinn,
whether  the  matter  should  come  under  right  or  un-
right ;  and  that  the  realm  of  Sorcha  should  be  under
cess  to  the  realm  of  Eirinn ;  and  Mac-a-Moir  gave
these  pledges  to  Conall,  and  he  bound  liimself  with
words,  and  with  weighty  vows.  Conall  let  him  aloft ;
they  caught  hold  of  each  other's  hands,  and  they  made
peace  with  great  friendship,  and  they  were  quiet.*

Then  the  first  thing  that  Conall  did  was  to  go  to
the  den  of  lions,  to  see  if  his  two  comrades  were  alive,

*  According  to  the  Barra  version,  the  Amhas  Ormanach  here
went  home  to  his  own  country  ;  and  as  he  does  not  appear  again,
it  is  to  be  hoped  that  he  went  home  to  his  wife,  the  Princess  of
Norway.


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAN.        253

and  they  were  ;  for  it  is  as  left  with  the  lions  that  they
will  not  touch,  and  that  they  will  not  do  any  hurt  to
kings,  or  to  the  clan  of  kings.*

And  Conall  took  Garna  Sgiathlais  and  the  young
King  of  Lochlann  out  of  the  lion's  den,  and  he  loosed
each  bond  and  fetter  that  was  upon  them,  and  they
were  free  and  whole.

The  next  thing  that  Conall  did  was  to  take  Breast
of  Light  out  of  the  dark  jilace  in  which  she  was,  and
she  was  j^leased  and  joyful  coming  out.

]Mac-a-Moir  gave  a  bidding  to  Conall,  and  to  Ereast
of  Light,  to  the  King  of  lospainde,  and  the  young  King
of  Lochlann,  to  come  into  his  house  to  take  a  feast.  They
went  there.  They  raised  music,  and  they  liid  sorrow  ;
word  was  sent  for  a  priest,  and  Conall  was  wedded  to
Breast  of  Light,  and  they  made  a  wedding  that  lasted
for  the  six  days  of  the  week,  and  the  last  day  was  no
worse  than  the  first,]  and  that  was  the  wedding  that  MacNair.
was  cheery.  ]\Ieat  was  set  in  the  place  for  using,  and
drink  in  the  drinking  place,  and  music  in  the  place  for
hearing.  They  plied  the  feast  and  the  company  with
joy,  and  pleasure  of  mind,  and  long  was  there  mind  of
the  wedding  of  Conall  and  Breast  of  Light.]  MacNeSii.

But  there  Avas  much  envy  (farnaite)  with  the
young  King  of  Lochlann,  Garna  Sgiathlais,  and  Mac-
a-Moir  at  Conall,  to  see  liim  married  to  one  so  beautiful,
modest,  and  learned,  and  that  they  themselves  should
be  wifeless,  and  they  thought  her  like  was  not  to  be
found.     Each  one  of  them  Avas  as  anxious  as  the  rest

*  Oir  tha  e  mar  fliagail  aig  na  leomhainn  nacli  buin  iad  agus
nach  deann  iad  dolaidli  air  bith  air  Kighreanna  air  clan  Eiglire.
(As  written  by  Dewar.)

Here,  according  to  Macgilvray,  Conall  acquired  a  talisman
from  a  mysterious  pigeon,  and  fell  in  with  a  monster  which  slew
and  was  slain  by  the  King  of  the  Universe.     (See  page  247).


i2  54  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

that  her  like  should  be  his  as  a  wife,  and  they  left  it
to  Breast  of  Light  to  say  who  was  the  other  one  that
would  come  nearest  to  herself  in  look,  learning,  and
modesty.  She  said  that  there  was  AiUidh,  daughter  of
the  King  of  Greece,  but  it  was  by  mighty  deeds  that
she  would  be  got  (sar  ghaisge).

The  three  kings  made  it  up  that  they  would  go  to
seek  Aillidli,  daughter  of  the  King  of  Greece.  Breast
of  Light  was  unAviUing  that  Conall  should  go  with  the
rest,  but  the  rest  would  not  go  without  him,  and  when
she  saw  that  she  consented.

It  was  left  to  Conall  to  say  which  of  them  was  to
get  Aillidh,  and  Conall  said,  "  Since  the  King  of
Lochlann  was  the  first  king  who  had  come  under  cess
to  him,  that  he  was  the  first  for  whom  he  would  get  a
wife."  Duanach  wished  to  go  with  them,  but  Conall
left  him  to  be  a  king,  and  to  take  care  of  Breast  of
Light  tiU  he  should  come  back.

Away  went  ConaU,  young  son  of  the  King  of
Eirinn,  Mac-a-Moir,  son  of  the  King  of  Sorcha,  and
Garna  Sgiathlais,  King  of  the  Hispainde,  to  get  Aillee
(Beauty),  daughter  of  the  King  of  the  Grayke  (Greece),
for  the  young  King  of  Lochlann  to  wife,  and  they
reached  Greece.*

*  This,  at  first  sight,  appears  utterly  extravagant,  if  only  from
the  distances,  but  the  story  is  not  more  improbable  than  similar
romances  in  other  languages.  It  is  far  less  improbable  in  Gaelic
than  it  would  be  in  French  or  German.  A  glance  at  the  story  of
Burnt  Njal  will  shew  that  in  the  eleventh  century  locomotion  was
not  the  difficulty  for  the  Western  Islanders  ;  for  example,  Audun,
an  Icelander,  before  lOGO,  and  within  two  years,  sailed  from  Ice-
land to  Norway,  and  thence  to  Greenland,  back  to  Norway,  and
thence  to  Denmark,  to  give  the  king  a  white  bear.  He  made  a
pilgrimage  to  Rome,  and  returned  to  Denmark  and  Norway  again,
and  went  home  to  Iceland  with  a  big  ship,  having  conversed  on
equal  terms  with  the  Kings  of  Denmark  and  Norway,  and  this


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAN.  255

An  old  man  met  them  that  was  their  guide.  He
gave  them  a  tale  about  the  realm  of  Greece,  the  desire
of  the  hosts,  the  battle  ;  the  form  of  the  arms,  and  the
customs  of  the  country  (miann  sloidh,  feachd  ;  s'  rian
nan  arm,  agus  cleachdanan  na  ducha),  and  he  told
them  the  tale  of  the  King  of  Greece,  and  how  his
daughter  was  kept  in  the  dun,  and  that  no  one  at  all
was  to  get  Beauty,  daughter  of  the  King  of  Greece,  to
marry,  but  one  who  could  bring  her  out  by  great
valour  ;  and  the  old  man  told  them  about  the  wall  that
was  for  a  bulwark  (daingneach)  roimd  about  the  dun,
how  many  heroes  and  soldiers  there  were  in  the  inside
of  the  ramparts  ;  and  besides,  that  there  was  no  way  to
get  Beauty  but  by  strong  battle,  brave  deeds,  and
ruse  (feachd  làdir,  sàr  ghaisge,  agus  seoltachd).
Conall  went,  and  the  three  other  kings,  aloft  up  a
mountain  that  was  above  the  dun  of  the  big  town  of
the  king,  so  that  they  might  see  what  was  going  on
below  beneath  them.  They  lighted  upon  himting
bothys  (bothain  sheilg)  in  the  mountain,  and  they  went
in  into  them,  and  they  were  there  all  night,  and  on
the  next  day  they  foimd  old  clothes  in  the  hunting
huts.

Conall  put  on  some  of  the  old  clothes  which  they
found,  to  go  in  the  semblance  of  a  poor  lad,  to  try  if  he
could  get  to  the  inside  of  the  gates  (cachlaidhean)  of

story  is  believed  to  be  true.  The  countrymen  of  Audun  fought
in  Ireland  in  1014,  and  got  the  worst  of  it,  and  one  who  was  at
the  battle  went  to  Rome,  and  returned  to  Iceland.  In  short,  sup-
posing this  to  be  a  romance  of  that  period,  nothing  is  more  in
accordance  with  probability  than  that  a  lot  of  warriors  should  set
out  in  search  of  kingdoms  and  princesses  along  the  sea-coast  of
Europe,  and  that  their  adventures  should  be  woven  in  with  the
romances  of  the  Western  Islands  of  Scotland,  which  the  Norse-


256  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

the  dun  of  the  king's  town,  and  he  said  to  the  other
kings  if  they  should  hear  on  the  third  day  a  hunting
cry,  or  any  terror  (faoghaid  na  fuathas),  that  they
should  run  swiftly  to  help  him.  He  went,  and  he
reached  one  of  the  gates  (geata)  of  the  dungeon  (daing-
neach),  and  he  was  as  a  shy  boy,  ill-looking,  without
the  look  of  a  man,  without  the  port  of  a  lad,  or  a  dress
of  armour  (mar  bhallach  moitire  mi  sgiamhach,  gun
aogosg  duine  gun  dreach  gille,  na  culaidh  armachd).

He  reached  the  gate-keeper  (fear  gleidh  a  gheata),
but  that  one  would  not  let  him  in.  He  asked  him
what  he  sought,  and  Conall  said  that  he  had  come  to
see  if  he  could  get  teaching  in  feats  of  arms,  nimbleness,
and  soldier-craft  (ionnsach  ain  iomairt  arm,  luth  chleas,
's  gaisge).  The  gate-keeper  sent  word  for  the  ruler  of
the  fort  (fear  riaghladli  an  duin),  and  he  came  and  he
asked  Conall  whence  he  was.  Conall  said  that  he  had
come  from  the  neighbourhood  (iomal)  that  was  furthest
off  of  the  realm.  The  high  ruler  asked  him  what  customs
the  people  of  that  place  had,  and  if  they  tried  to  do
any  feats  ?

Conall  said  that  they  used  to  try  casting  the  stone
of  force  (clacli  neart),  and  hurling  the  hammer.*

The  high  ruler  asked  Conall  to  come  in,  and  he  set
some  to  try  putting  the  stone  against  Connal.  Conall
could  throw  the  stone  further  than  any  of  them,  and
*  I  myself  once  tried  a  match  witli  a  small  Greek  sliepherdin
a  sheep-skin  capote,  in  a  glen  near  the  top  of  Mount  Parnassus.
He  had  guided  me  there,  and  we  were  waiting  in  hopes  a  mist
would  clear  away.  To  keep  ourselves  warm  we  fell  to  at  putting
the  stone,  leaping,  and  hop-skip-and-jump.  Such  games  pre-
vailed in  ancient  Greece  long  ago,  as  they  still  do  in  the  High-
lands and  Lowlands  of  Scotland.  The  hitch  in  romances  is  in
the  language.  Heroes  must  have  been  great  linguists,  but  even
that  hitch  is  here  met,  for  the  old  Irish  king  was  educated  in
Italy  and  Greece.


THE  STORY  OF  COXALL  GULBAN.        257

they  saw  that  he  had  no  want  of  strength  if  there  were
enough  of  coiu-age  in  liim.

A  stick  sword  was  given  him,  and  they  were  teacli-
ing  him  swordsmanship,  and  Conall  was  coming  on
well  But  it  was  little  they  knew  about  the  teaching
that  Conall  had  got  from  the  Gruagach  of  Beinn
Eidinn  before  then.  Conall  made  himseK  acquainted
with  the  keeper  of  the  arms,  and  he  was  exceedingly
anxious  to  get  a  sight  of  theii"  arms-house,  but  the
armourer  said  that  could  not  be  done,  for  fear  of  the
high  ruler  of  the  dun.  But  on  the  morning  of  the
third  day,  when  the  governor  was  eating  hLs  breakfast,
the  armourer  said  to  Conall,  that  if  he  were  able  enougli
now,  that  he  might  get  a  sight  of  the  armoury  before
the  high  man  who  ruled  the  dun  should  come  out
from  his  morning  meal.

Conall  went  with  him  swiftly,  and  the  man  who
was  keeping  the  arms  opened  the  armoury  (taisg  airm).
Conall  went  in  and  he  looked  amongst  the  arms,  and
he  spied  great  glaives  at  the  furthest  off  end  of  the
armoury.  He  went  where  they  were,  and  he  began  to
try  them,  he  would  raise  them  in  his  hand,  and
brandish  them,  and  some  he  would  shake  out  of  their
hilts  (ceana  bhairt),  and  others  he  would  break  The
man  who  had  the  care  of  the  arms  began  to  shout  to
him  that  he  should  come  out,  but  Conall  was  not  pre-
tending that  he  heard  hinx  Conall  would  look  at  the
swords,  and  some  were  rusted,  and  some  were  not.
At  last  he  found  a  sword  that  pleased  him.*

He  was  going  the  way  of  the  door  of  the  arms-
house  with  it,  and  the  man  who  had  the  care  of  the

*  This  incident  is  told  in  Uist  of  a  man  whose  grave  ia  shewn
there   still.     The   "armoury"  is  a  "barrel,"  but  it  is  the  same
incident  told  as  a  fact.     I  believe  it  to  be  a  bit  of  popular  lore  of
unknown  antiquity,  for  it  is  common  in  stories.
S


258  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

arms  was  begging  him  to  put  it  from  him,  but  Conall
gave  him  no  heed,  and  the  man  who  had  charge  of  the
armoury  said —

"  If  the  high  governor  of  the  dun  comes  he  will
take  the  head  off  me  for  letting  thee  in."

When  Conall  was  at  the  door  the  governor  came
in,  and  he  desired  Conall  to  put  away  that  sword.  If
he  knew  the  name  of  the  man  who  had  had  that  sword
that  he  would  not  be  long  putting  it  from  him  ;  that
his  name  was  Mor  ghaisge  na  mor  ghleadh.  Great
valour  of  the  great  tricks.

"  You  may  give  it  that  name  still,"  said  Conall.

Tlie  high  governor  said  that  he  would  drive  the
head  off  the  man  who  had  the  care  of  the  arms  for
letting  Conall  into  the  armoury,  and  off  Conall  for
taking  the  sword  out.

"Take  thou  care  that  it  is  not  tliine  own  head
that  ■will  be  down  first,  comrade."

The  high  governor  called  for  his  men.  Conall
struck  the  head  off  the  high  Governor,  and  he  gave  a
hunting  whistle  {fead  fhaoghaid),  and  the  people
gathered  with  their  arms  about  Conall.

He  struck  them,  under  them,  over  them,  through,
and  tliroughout  them  ;  where  they  were  thickest  there
they  were  thinnest ;  where  they  were  thinnest  they
were  most  scattered.

The  king  came  out,  and  he  said  to  Conall,  "  Thou
man  that  came  on  us  a-new  ;  hold  on  thy  hand,  and  thy
blade.*

The  three  other  kings  came  to  the  gate,  but  they
were  not  getting  in.  Conall  ran  to  the  gate,  and  he
struck  it  a  kick,  and  he  drove  it  into  splinters.  Then
came  the  King  of  Lochlann,  and  the  King  of  Light,

*  Fhir  a  thainaig  oirn  as  uir  cum  air  do  laimh  as  do  lanii.


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAN.         259

and  the  King  of  tlie  Hispainde,  in  with  their  arms.  The
people  of  Greece  fled  hack,  and  the  King  of  Greece
said —

"  Ouhh  hhonhh  ouv  vouv  !  "  ""V^liat  a  wonderful
turn  has  come  on  the  matters  !  It  was  in  the  pro-
phecies that  a  son  of  a  king  of  Eirinn  would  come,  and
that  he  would  lay  the  realm  of  Greece  under  cess,  and
instead  of  that  is  an  awkward  fellow  t)f  an  ill-looking
boy,  that  came  and  put  the  realm  under  cess."*

Said  Conall,  with  a  high  voice,  Thou  King  of
Greece,  take  not  thou  each  man  according  to  his  seem-
ing.-{-  I  am  Conall  Guilbeinach,  son  of  the  Eling  of
Euinn,  but  it  is  not  to  put  the  reahn  of  Greece  under
cess  I  am  come,  but  to  take  out  Beauty,  thy  daughter.

Said  the  King  of  Greece,  "  Thou  shalt  have  Beauty,
my  daughter,  and  two-thirds  of  my  realm  wliile  I  my-
self am  alive,  and  the  whole  after  my  death."

Conall  asked  that  AilKdh  should  be  brought  out,
and  she  came,  and  she  was  right  willing  to  wed  Conall,
but  Conall  told  her  he  was  married  already  to  Breast
of  Light,  daughter  of  the  King  of  Laidhean ;  and  the
King  of  Greece  said —

"  If  thou  hast  got  Breast  of  Light,  it  is  no  wonder
though  thou  shouldst  not  take  my  daughter."

Conall  told  Beauty  that  she  had  her  two  choices,  to
take  the  King  of  Lochlann,  or  be  Avithout  a  husband  ;
and  she  preferred  to  marry  the  young  King  of  Loch-
lann.

And  word  was  sent  for  a  priest ;  and  Aillidli,
daughter  of  the  King  of  Greece,  was  wedded  to  the

*  This  is  the  idea  which,  in  No.  58,  has  expanded  into
another  shape.  The  King  of  Greece  and  the  first  giant  were
clearly  once  the  same  personages.

f  This  is  the  very  foundation  of  all  popular  tales  ;  the  most
despised  is  the  most  worthy.


26o  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

young  King  of  Lochlanii,  and  they  made  a  wedding
that  lasted  for  the  six  days  of  the  week,  and  the  last
day  was  no  worse  than  the  first  day.

And  when  they  "w^ere  at  the  Avedding,  they  asked
Aillidli,  the  bride  of  Loclilann's  Bang,  who  was  the
next  one  that  was  nearest  to  her  in  beauty  and  come-
liness, virtue  and  learning.  And  she  said  that  there
was  Cuimir,*  daughter  of  the  King  of  Na  Frainge
(the  Franks,  France).

Conall  asked  Garna  Sgiathlais  if  he  were  willing  to
take  that  one  as  a  wife,  and  he  said  that  he  was.
Conall  asked  Aillidh  where  Cuimir  was  dwelling,  and
Beauty  told  that  she  was  in  the  great  royal  house,  and
that  there  was  a  great  fortress  wall  about  the  great
house,  and  that  there  was  a  lion  on  either  side  of  the
gate,  that  was  in  through  the  wall,  and  that  there  was
the  house  of  the  Tarahaisg,  the  best  warriors  that  the
King  of  France  had,  a  little  further  on ;  and  the
Tamliaisg  were  proud  and  merciless  to  any  over  whom
they  might  gain  victory.t

The  valiant  kings  made  ready  to  go  to  France,  but
Aillidh  was  not  -ndlling  to  part  with  her  new  married
husband,  but  the  other  warriors  would  not  part  from
him  ;  he  must  needs  go  with  them,  till  they  should
put  an  end  to  all  the  valorous  deeds  they  had  to  do,
before  they  could  get  wives  for  Garna  Sgiathlais,  King
of  Hispania,  and  Mac-a-Moir,  son  of  the  King  of
Sorcha.

The  four  valorous  kings  put  each  matter  in  order
in  Greece  as  best  they  might,  and  they  left  Beauty  in
the  care  of  her  father  till  the  King  of  Lochlann  should
come  back.    They  went  to  France  and  when  they  reached

*  Well  formed,  neat,  trim.     Carbad  cuimeir  Chuchullin.
f  "  Gu  borb  aniocbdmbor  ri  feadbainn  air  bitb  air  am  faighe
iad  buaigh.


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAN.  26  I

France  they  took  a  tale  from  eacli  traveller  that  met
them  by  the  way,  and  so  they  got  gaiidance  to  the  great
royal  house,  and  when  they  reached  the  gate,  that  was
without  in  the  fortress  wall,  there  was  a  great  lion  at
either  side  of  the  gate,  but  that  put  neither  fear  nor
sorrow  upon  them,*  because  it  is  as  a  charge  left  Avith
lions  that  they  will  not  injure  kings,  or  the  clan  of
kings.  And  Conall  went  on  past  the  Hons,  and  no  one
of  them  stuTed  his  head  at  him.  He  reached  on  for-
ward to  where  the  Tamhasgan  were,  and  they  began
gnasliing  their  teeth,t  making  ready  to  spring  upon
him.  He  took  sm-e  notice  of  them,  for  the  thick  knob-
biest  one  and  the  thinshankiest  of  them.  He  com-
passed them,  under  them,  over  them,  through  and
throughout  them ;  and  he  seized  on  the  two  shanks  of
the  thinshankiest  one  amongst  them,  and  he  was  driv-
ing out  the  brains  of  the  rest,  with  the  knob  of  that
one,  and  the  brains  of  that  one  with  the  knobs  of  the
rest,  till  the  part  that  was  thickest  of  them  was  tliinnest,
and  the  lot  that  was  thinnest  they  were  the  most  ill-
scattered.

The  King  of  France  came  out,  and  he  said  to
Conall.

"  Thou  man  that  hast  come  on  us  from  a  strange
land,  withhold  thy  blade  and  thine  hand ;  slay  not  my
warriors  wholly ;  these  are  the  Tamhaisg,  the  best  war-
riors I  have  to  guard  the  great  royal  house  ;  but  they
are  but  as  reeds  in  the  fi'ont  of  a  meadow  before  thee.
How  camest  thou  past  the  lions  ? "

"  Thou  and  thy  Hons  ! "  said  Conall ;  "  I  will  go
down  past  thy  lions,  and  I  will  come  up  past  thy  lions,
and  they  -will  not  touch  me  ;  and  I  will  bring  up  three
other  warriors,  that  are  do^vn  here,  and  the  lions  vn.\\
not  touch  them."

*  Eagal  na  smuairean.         f  A  càsadh  am  fiacall.


202


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


Garna  Sgiatlilais  Mac-a-Moir  and  the  King  of  Loch-
lann  came  up  past  the  lions,  kings  were  they,  and  a
clan  from  kings  all  together,  and  the  Uons  did  not  stir
their  tongues  against  them.

The  ELing  of  France  asked  whence  they  were,  and
Conall  told  that  he  was  Conall  Guilbeanach,  son  of  the
King  of  Eirinn,  and  he  shewed  the  young  Iving  of
Lochlann,  and  Mac-a-Moir,  son  of  the  King  of  8orcha,
and  Garna  Sgiathlais,  king  of  Hispania ;  and  he  told
him  that  it  was  not  to  disturb  France  they  had  come,*
but  to  take  out  Cuimir,  daughter  of  the  King  of  France,
to  be  wife  to  Garna  Sgiathlais  King  of  Hispania.

Said  the  King  of  France,  "  He  shall  get  that."

Cuimir  was  brought  out,  and  the  matter  was  hidden,
and  it  was  Conall  she  would  ratlier  take,  for  it  was  he
that  had  done  the  bravest  deeds  ;  but  Conall  told  her
that  he  was  wedded  already  to  Breast  of  Light,  daughter
of  the  King  of  Laidhean,  and  that  the  young  King  of
Lochlann  was  wedded  to  Aillidh,  daughter  of  the  King
of  Greece,  and  that  it  was  Garna  Sgiathlais,  King  of
Hispania,  she  was  to  have.  Cuimir  was  willing  to
take  the  King  of  Hispania,  so  that  she  might  be  a
queen  in  a  realm  that  was  near  the  realm  of  her
father.  Word  was  sent  for  a  priest,  and  the  wedding
was  done,  and  they  made  a  wedding  that  lasted  for  the
six  days  of  the  week,  and  the  last  day  was  no  worse
than  the  first  day.

When  they  were  at  the  wedding  they  were  talking
about  who  they  should  get  for  a  wife  for  Mac-a-Moir ;
and  they  left  it  to  be  said  by  Cuimir,  the  young  Queen
of  Spain.  Who  was  the  one  that  was  fittest,  in  her
esteem,  to  be  wdfe  to  Mac-a-Moir.  And  she  said
that  there  was   Deo   Greine   nighean  righ  an  Eilean

*  A  chungais-each  Da  Frainge.


THE  STORT  OF  COXALL  GULBAN.        263

Uainc*  They  asked  her  if  that  one  was  to  be  got.
She  said  that  she  was  not,  but  by  exceeding  valour  ;
that  there  was  a  fortress  wall  round  about  the  dun  of
the  king,  and  that  it  discomfited  the  heroes  ;  that
Deo  Greine  would  be  in  a  turret  that  was  on  the  top
of  the  dun,  and  that  none  but  a  valiant  warrior  could
get  her  ;  but  if  IMac-a-Moir  should  get  her,  that  he
had  no  cause  to  regret  that  he  was  the  last  of  the  kings
who  had  got  a  wife.

Mac-a-Moir  was  longing  to  begone  in  pursuit  of
Deo  Greine,  and  the  rest  were  as  willing  and  well
pleased  as  himseKt  When  they  were  at  the  feast,
the  King  of  France  was  setting  a  ship  in  order  for
them.  Cuimir,  daughter  of  the  King  of  France,  was
not  willing  to  let  her  new  married  husband,  Garna
Sgiathlais,  away  with  the  rest,  but  when  the  rest  saw
that,  they  would  not  go  without  him.  When  Cuimir
understood  that,  slie  agreed  to  let  him  go  with  them.

The  King  of  France  set  his  slender  ship  in  order
for  them,  with  a  crew  of  disciplined,  active,  strong,
hardy  men,  and  the  four  honourable  kings  went  on
board,  and  the  Frenchmen  sailed  with  them  to  the
shore  of  the  Green  Island.+

*  Sunbeam  or  breath,  daagbter  of  the  Kiug  of  the  Green
Island.  Who  this  mythical  personage  may  be,  I  cannot  make  out.
The  Green  Island  occurs  continually,  and  is  the  land  of  wonders,
beyond  the  sea.  I  have  surmised  that  it  might  mean  America.
That  the  Son  of  Light  should  marry  the  daughter  of  the  mythical
.Green  Isle  in  the  west,  where  the  sun  sets,  seems  all  right,  and
the  warriors  are  working  westwards.  I  had  imagined  that  Sorcha
might  possibly  be  same  as  Sarkland  of  Icelandic  Sagas,  but  that
is  identified  with  Africa,  Saracen  land,  and  would  not  fit  this
story,  here,  at  all  events.

\  Togarach  aighearach.

:j:  Chuir  High  na  Frainge  a  chaol  loingeas  air  doigh  air  an
son,  le  sgioba  do  dhaoine  foghluinte,  easgaidh,  ladir,  cruadalach  ;
s  chaidh  na  ceithir  righrean  uramach  air  bord.


264  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

They  brouglit  the  ship  to  port,*  and  they  put  Mac-
a-Moir  and  the  three  gallant  kings  who  were  with
him  on  shore,  and  they  themselves  sailed  hack,  home
to  France.

They  went  on  forwards  to  the  dun  of  the  town  of
the  King  of  the  Green  Island,  taking  a  tale  from  each
traveller  and  journeyer  that  might  fall  in  with  them.
They  got  on  till  they  reached  the  fortress  gate  of  the
dun  of  the  king's  town.  Conall  struck .  at  the  gate,
and  the  gate-keeper  asked  what  they  sought.  Conall
answered  that  they  came  to  seek  Sunbeam,  daughter  of
the  King  of  the  Green  Isle,  to  be  wife  to  one  of  them.
Word  was  sent  for  the  high  Governor  of  the  dun,  and
he  came,  and  he  asked  them  who  they  were,  and  what
they  sought.  Conall  told  him  that  they  were  kings,
and  they  had  come  to  seek  Sunbeam  as  a  wife  for  one
of  them.  The  high  Governor  said  that  they  should
not  get  her  but  by  exceeding  valour  ;  that  they  must
hold  a  battle  against  the  warriors  of  the  dun,  and  gain
victory  over  them.

Conall  asked  who  was  the  sturdy  hero  that  would
go  first  to  battle  against  the  warriors  of  the  dun.

"  Myself,"  said  Mac-a-Moir.  "  If  I  am  to  get  the
daughter  of  the  King  of  the  Green  Island  as  a  wife,  I
wiU  shew  that  I  am  worthy  to  have  her."

They  were  asked  in,  and  they  went.

Warriors  were  got  to  combat  Mac-a-Moii',  son  of
the  King  of  Sorcha.  They  drew  theh'  blades,  and
Conall,  and  Garna  Sgiathlais,  and  the  yoimg  King  of
Lochlann  were  singing  ioUa  to  theuL  But  they  had
not  taken  long  of  the  contest,  when  Mac-a-Moir  struck
the  head  off  the  champion  of  the  King  of  the  Green  Isle,

Said  Mac-a-Moir  to  the  Governor,  "  Pick  up  the
champion's  head,  and  get  me  another  one."
*  Calla.     Compare  Calais.


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAN.  265

Another  was  got ;  but  they  had  not  taken  long  at
the  combat  when  Mac-a-Moir  struck  the  head  off  that
one  too.  He  asked  for  another,  and  another  was  got,
but  it  was  not  long  till  the  head  went  off  that  one  in
like  manner.

The  King  of  the  Green  Isle  was  taking  sport  at
them,  and  he  said —

"  I  see,  my  hero,  that  thou  wouldst  slay  my  men
altogether,  one  after  another,  if  thou  hadst  chance  of
arms.  I  am  not  for  spilling  more  blood  ;  I  will  try
it  another  way.

My  daughter  is  in  a  turret,  that  is  at  the  top  of  the
dun,  and  the  man  that  can  take  her  out  shall  get  two-
thirds  of  my  realm  while  I  live,  and  the  whole  of  my
realm  when  I  die ;  I  am  but  an  old  man,  and  it  is  not
hkely  that  I  will  be  long  aliye  now,  at  all  events.*

The  Avay  was  shewn  them  to  the  turret,  in  which
was  the  king's  daughter,  at  the  top  of  the  dun.

"  Who  is  the  first  man  that  will  try  to  take  the
king's  daughter  out  of  the  tim-et  ]"  said  Conall.

"Myself,"  said  Mac-a-Moir.

The  tm-ret  was  aloft,  on  the  top  of  three  carraghan
aid,  lofty  pillars.

Mac-a-Moir  went,  and  he  did  his  very  best,  but  he
could  not  get  aloft ;  he  thrust  the  pillars  hither  and
thither  ;  he  tried  every  way  he  knew,  but  it  discom-
fited him.

"Wlio  will  try  it  again  V  said  Conall.

"  Myself,"  said  the  young  King  of  Lochlann.  He
Avent,  and  tried  as  well  as  he  could,  but  he  could  not


*  This  is  a  very  common  saying  amongst  old  Highlanders
here  put  into  the  mouth  of  the  king.  Cha  neil  anam  ach  sean
duine  an  nis,  s  chu'n  eil  a  coltach  gu'  m  hi  mi  fada  beo  a  nis  co
dhiubh.


2  66  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

level  one  of  the  posts  that  ivas  beneath  the  turret,  but
it  beat  him.

Said  the  King  of  the  Green  Isle,  "  I  perceive,  my
men,  that  it  will  not  go  with  you  to  take  my  daughter
out  of  the  turret.  Many  a  man  has  striven  to  take
her  out,  but  it  went  with  none  of  them,  and  I  see  that
it  will  not  go  with  you  any  more  ;  you  may  be  off
home."

"  Well,  then,  if  it  does  not  go  with  us  to  bring  her
out,  it  is  a  great  disgrace  to  us,"  said  Conall.

He  went  and  he  struck  a  kick  on  one  of  the  posts
that  was  keeping  the  turret  aloft,  and  the  post  broke,
and  the  turret  fell,  but  Conall  caught  it  between  his
hands  before  it  reached  the  ground.  A  door  opened,
and  Sunbeam  came  out,  the  daughter  of  the  Ivhig  of
the  Green  Isle,  and  she  clasped  her  two  arms  about  the
neck  of  Conall,  and  Conall  put  liis  two  arms  about
Sunbeam,  and  he  bore  her  into  the  great  house,  and  he
said  to  the  King  of  tlie  Green  Isle,  "  Thy  daughter  is
won."

Sunbeam  was  very  willing  to  stick  to  Conall,  but
Conall  told  her  that  he  was  married  already  to  Ereast
of  Light,  daughter  of  the  King  of  Laidheann,  and  the
King  of  Lochlann  was  wedded  to  Eeauty,  daughter  of
the  King  of  Greece,  and  that  Garna  Sgiathlais,  King
of  Hispania,  was  married  to  Comely,  daughter  of  the
King  of  France,  and  that  Great  Hero,  son  of  the  King
of  the  Light,  was  the  only  one  of  them  that  was  un-
married. The  King  of  the  Green  Isle  was  pleased
when  he  understood  that  they  were  honourable  kings
altogether,  and  that  his  daughter  had  been  taken  out
with  honour ;  and  he  said  that  he  would  give  two-thirds
of  his  realm  while  he  was  alive,  and  the  whole  after
his  death,  to  the  one  that  his  daughter  should  have,
and  that  he  was  an  old  man,  and  that  he  would  not  be


THE  STORY  OF  COXALL  GULBAN.         267

long  alive  altogetlier.  Every  one  of  thena  Avas  married
but  Mac-a-Moir,  and  he  was  the  most  unblemished
amongst  them.  Sunbeam  took  a  look  around  at  each
one  of  them.  Though  Mac-a-Moir  was  not  so  hand-
some as  the  rest,  he  was  a  stately,  comely,  personable
man  ;  and  Sunbeam  said  that  he  was  the  husband  she
would  have,  and  word  Avas  sent  for  a  priest,  and  Sun-
beam, the  daughter  of  the  King  of  the  Green  Island,
was  wedded  to  Mac-a-Moir,  son  of  the  King  of  Light,
and  they  made  a  wedding  that  lasted  for  the  six  days
of  the  week,  and  the  last  day  was  no  worse  than  the
first  day,  and  if  there  were  better  there  were,  and  if
not  let  them  be.

A\^ien  the  other  heroes  found  that  ]\Iac-a-Moir  was
married,  they  were  in  great  haste  to  go  home  to  see
theh  oAvn  wives.*

The  King  of  the  Green  Isle  set  in  order  a  great
high  masted  Avliite-sailed  ship.  There  was  a  pilot  in
her  prow,  and  a  steersman  in  the  stern,  and  men
managing  the  rigging-ropes  in  the  middle.  Each  meat
and  each  drink  as  was  seemly  for  kings  was  put  on
board.t

When  each  thing  was  ready,  and  each  matter
arranged  as  it  ought  to  be,  Conall,  son  of  the  King  of
Eirinn,  Garna  Sgiathlais,  King  of  Hispania,  and  the
King  of  Lochlann  left  a  blessing  with  the  King  of  the
Green  Isle,  with  Mac-a-Moir,  and  Deo  Greine,  and  they
went  on  board  of  the  ship.  The  shipmen  sailed  with
the  ship,   and  they  sailed    to   realm  of  Sorcha,   with

*  Here  I  omit  a  recapitulation  of  the  wives,  aud  their  coun-
tries.

+  Long  ard-chranach  bhreidgheal  air  doigli.  Bba  iull  na
toiseach,  i'ear-stiurr  aig  a  deireadh,  's  fir  iomairt  na'  m  ball  beart
na  buillsgain.  Chaidh,  gach  bidh,  s  dibb,  mur  bu  chubhraidh  do
rigbre  a  cliuir  air  bord.


268  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Conall,  the  son  of  the  King  of  Eirinn.*  Conall  reached
the  drni  of  the  big  town  of  Sorcha,  came  to  Breast  of
Light  and^Duanach,  without  their  having  hopes  of  him,
and  they  rejoiced  with  great  joy  to  see  him.  Conall
and  Breast  of  Light  were  a  while  merry,  and  joyously,
and  fontUy  about  each  other,  and  Duanach  was  bhthely
and  cheerily  with  them,t  and  when  Conall  had  spent  a
while  cheerily  joyously  with  Breast  of  Light  and
Duanach,  he  began  to  think  it  long  that  he  was  not
hearing  from  the  realm  of  lubhar  how  the  fight  was
coming  on  between  liis  mother's  brother  and  the  Turks,+
or  if  his  father  or  brothers  were  yet  aHve.  He  thought
that  he  would  go  to  the  realm  of  the  lubhar  to  see.
He  wished  to  leave  Duanach,  as  he  was  before,  to  take
care  of  Breast  of  Light  and  the  realm,  but  Duanach
would  not  stay.  If  Conall  would  go  to  the  realm  of
lubhar,  Duanach  would  go  with  him.  Breast  of
Light  wished  Conall  to  go  first  to  Eirinn  to  see  if
each  tiling  were  right  in  Eirimi,  but  his  own  counsel
was  best  with  Conall,  and  he  -wished  Duanach  to  stay.
But  this  is  what  Duanach  said,  "  If  thou  goest,  Conall,
to  the  realm  of  lubhar  thou  wilt  fight,  and  I  will  be
needful  enough  for  thee."

And  so  it  was  agreed  that  ConaU  should  take
Duanach  as  a  servant  and  counsellor.

Breast  of  Light,  and  Conall,  and  Duanach,  went
away.§]

*  MacNair  here  sends  the  two  kings  home,  but,  according  to
MacNeill  and  the  rest,  Conall  and  two  comrades  sailed  to  the
realm  of  the  Turk.     So  I  leave  out  a  paragraph.

t  Gu  aighearach  aobhach  speiseil  ma  cheile  's  Duanach  gu
sundach  sodanach  comhla  riu.

I  If  lubhar  were  a  corruption  for  Jewry,  then  the  geography
would  be  right,  and  this  might  be  a  romance  founded  on  some-
thing to  do  with  wars  in  the  Mediterranean.

§  This  is  shortened.


THE  STORY  OF  COXALL    GULBAN.  269

Then  he  took  with  him  the  woman  on  board  of  the
ship,  and  when  he  and  his  men  were  returning  he  was
iTinning  out  of  provisions.  There  was  an  island
here  which  they  called  Eilean  na  h  Otolia.  The  man
who  was  over  the  island  was  (so)  that  if  he  was  for
giving  food  it  could  be  got  for  money,  and  if  he  were
not  he  had  three  big  dogs,  and  he  would  let  them  out,
and  they  woidd  kill  them  all.

Said  the  slender  dark  man  to  Conall,  "  I  would
rather  myself  thou  wouldst  stay  out  of  it,  than  go
into  it."

"  I  myself  would  not  rather  stay  than  go,  I  will
go  and  I  will  get  it ;  but  if  you  see  that  he  is  not  -\W11-
ing  to  give  it  to  me,  you  will  leave  me  the  front,  and
you  will  stay  behind  me,  if  so  be  that  he  hounds  the
dogs  at  us,"  said  Conall.

He  went  up  to  the  house,  and  he  asked  if  he  could
get  food.  He  said  that  they  should  not,  that  plenty
were  asking  for  it  who  were  more  likely  to  get  it  than  he.

He  let  out  the  dogs.  Every  one  of  the  company
stood  at  the  back  of  Conall,  and  he  himself  went  to  the
front,  he  caught  a  napkin  and  put  it  about  his  fist.
Each  one  as  he  came,  he  was  seeing  his  hver  clown
through  his  mouth,  from  the  rage  that  he  had  towards
the  men.  He  thrust  his  hand  into  the  mouths  of  the
dogs,  one  after  another,  and  he  took  the  heart  and  the
liver  out  of  them,  and  he  killed  them.

"  Come  now  and  you  shall  get  food,"  said  the  man
who  was  over  the  island.

"  Thou  mayest  give  that  now,  but  I  -will  not  give
thee  one  '  sgillinn '  for  it ;  unless  thou  thyself  hadst
been  a  '  Trusdar,'  a  stingy  filthy  -RTetch,  thou  hadst
got  papnent  ;  but  since  thou  wert  so  dirty,  thou  shalt
not  get  payment,  and  we  shall  get  meat  in  spite  of
thee."


270  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  That  is  easy  enough  for  you  now,"  said  he.  "  But
hast  thou  heard  how  it  has  befallen  the  King  of  Eirinn
and  the  King  of  Laidheanj  they  were  fighting  the
Turk?"

"  Well  then  I  have  heard  how  it  has  befallen  these
doubtless  ;  the  battle  went  with  the  Turk,  and  aU  the
company  that  the  King  of  Eirinn  and  the  King  of
Laidhean  had,  have  been  slain ;  and  the  Great  Turk
has  the  King  of  Eirinn,  and  the  King  of  Laidhean  bound
back  to  back,  iinder  cats,  and  dogs,  and  men's  spittle,
and  with  shame  and  insult  on  themselves  and  on  their
hosts,  that  came  to  give  battle  and  could  not  do  it."

"  That  story  is  sad  for  me  to  hear,  but  though  it
is,  keep  thou  tliis  woman  for  me  till  I  come  back  from
these  men."

"  Well,  then,"  said  he,  "  I  will  not  keep  her,  I  have
no  way  of  keeping  her.  The  thing  that  I  had  myseK
for  that,  thou  thyself  hast  put  me  in  want  of  it."

"  Unless  thou  hadst  been  such  a  Trusdar  of  a  man
as  thou  wert,  I  had  not  put  thee  in  want  of  it,  but
thou  must  keep  this  woman,  or  else  there  will  not  he
much  of  the  world  for  thee,  after  letting  her  go,"  said
Connal.]

He  went  and  he  left  the  woman,  and  wdien  they
reached  the  realm  of  lubhar  the  fighting  was  going  on,
Conall  and  Duanach  did  not  go  to  the  house  of  the
king  but  to  a  hostelry.  They  got  their  supper  that
night  and  they  went  to  bed.  On  the  next  morning
Conall's  waking  was  to  hear  shouts  of  hosts  and  clash
of  armour  ;*  heroes  starting,  commanders  arraying  sol-
diers to  go  to  give  a  day  of  battle  to  the  Turks.
Conall  arose  and  Duanach,  they  put  on  them  their  array

*  Oighich  sliiaidli  's  gleadhraich  arm,  clisg  air  gaisgich,
cumandairean  a  cuir  an  ordugh  shaighdearar,  gu  dol  a  thobhairt
lathd  blair  do  na  Turcaicb.


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAN.  2  7  I

and  their  armour  of  battle,  and  they  went  to  the  fight

on  the  side  of  the  peojile  of  the  lubhar.      The  fighting

began  and  Conall  was  mowing  do^vn  the  Turks  as  though
:  it  were  a  man  who  was  cutting  down  sow-thistles.
[  There  was  one  big  man  amongst  the  Turks,  and  he  was
I  mowing  down  the  people  of  the  lubhar  in  the  same
i  way.  It  was  not  going  with  any  one  to  slay  him,  and
[   they  thought  that  no  arms  could  touch  him.     He  and

Conall  met  each  other  in  the  fight.  They  tried  their
,  nimble  feats  upon  each  other,  and  Conall  slew  the  big
i  Turk  When  the  Tiu'ks  saw  that  their  champion  was
i  slain  they  fled ;  and  the  people  of  the  lubhar  followed
!  the  rout,*  and  they  thought  that  they  had  not  left  many
I  of  the  Turks  alive.  In  the  night  the  people  of  lubhar
I  returned  back,  and  they  thought  they  would  have  peace
1  on  the  next  day  ;  and  no  one  of  them  could  understand
1  who  he  was,  the  hero  that  had  slain  the  big  Turk,  that
\  had  done  them  so  much  skaitki"

As  on  the  other  days  ConaU  and  Duanach  went  to
,  the  hostelry  where  they  were  the  former  night,  they  got
!  food  and  bed,  and  they  thought,  by  the  number  of
I  Turks  that  had  been  killed,  that  the  war  was  at  an  end,

and  they  went  to  sleep.

The  King  of  the  lubhar  had  never  seen  Conall
:  before  ;  but  it  seemed  to  him,  by  the  look  of  his  face,!
'1  that  he  was  of  the  people  of  Eirinn.  They  went  to
;  rest  that  night  full   of  joy,  thinking  that  the  Turks

would  not  bring  any  more  trouble  upon  them.  But
'  no  matter.     "\¥liat  they  got  in  the  morning  was,  the

tale  of  horror  that  the  Turks  were  coming  forward  as
:  numerous  as  they  ever  were.     They  had  for  it  but  that

they  must  arise,  and  put  men  in  their  harness,  to  go
■  to  give   a   day  of  battle   to   the   Turks   again  ;    and

*  An  ruaig.  f  Dolaidh.

[  i  Fiamh  a  gnuis  might  mean  terror  of  his  countenance.


272  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Conall's  morning  waking  was  to  hear  the  shout  of  the
cliiefs  calling  out  their  soldiers  to  give  a  day  of  com-
bat to  the  Turks*

Conall  sprang  out  of  his  hed  and  he  put  on  his
array  and  armour,t  and  he  went  with  the  host  of  the
lubhar  to  battle  against  the  Turks.  When  the  two
hosts  met  each  other,  Conall  saw  the  big  Turk  that  he
had  slain  the  day  before  coming  forward  that  day
again,  and  mowing  down  the  people  of  the  lubhar  as
he  used  to  do.

Conall  was  mowing  down  the  Turks  till  he  and  the
big  Turk  met  each  other,  and  tried  their  agile  valour
upon  each  other  that  day  again  ;  and  the  big  Turk  was
killed  again  that  day  by  Conall.  When  the  Turks  saw
that  their  champion  had  been  slain,  they  fled,  and  the
people  of  lubhar  followed  the  rout,  and  killed  so  many
(jf  the  Turks,  that  it  seemed  to  them  there  were  not
many  of  them  to  the  fore,  and  they  returned  joyfully,
cheerily,  thinking  that  there  was  an  end  of  the  war.
When  Conall  returned  to  the  hostelry,  he  ate  his  supper
and  lay  down  to  sleep.

It  seemed  to  the  King  of  lubhar,  that  the  man
who  had  done  the  great  feats  of  valour  was  his  sister's
son  Conall,  and  he  went  to  inquire  about  him.  He
heard  that  it  was  in  the  hostelry  that  the  gallant  man
was  dwelling,  and  the  king  reached  the  inn.

Duanach  knew  him,  and  the  king  asked  Duanach
if  his  master  were  in.

"  He  is,"  said  Duanach,  "  but  he  is  in  liis  sleep,
and  I  will  not  wake  hinL"

"  I  am  anxious  to  see  him,"  said  the  king.

"  K  thou  choosest  thyself  to   go  to  wake  him,"

*  Eigh  nan  ceannairdean,  a  gairm  a  macli  na'n  saigbdearn,  gus
latlia  comlira  g  a  tboirt  do  na  Turcaicli.
f  Eididh  a'  s  armachd.


THE  STORY  OP  COX ALL  GULBAN.  273

said  Duauach,  "  thou  mayest,  but  I  will  not  wake
liim."

""VVlaat  is  thy  country  ?"  said  the  king.

"  It  is,"  said  Duanach,  "  the  country  from  which
my  master  came."

"  What  is  the  country  *  whence  came  thy  mas-
ter ?"

"  That,"  said  Duanach,  "  is  the  realm  whence  came
the  King  of  Eirinn."

"  What  is  his  name  Ì"   said  the  king.

"  It  is,"  said  Duanach,  "  Conall  Guilbeanach  Mac
do  Eigh  Eirinn."

"  Tell  Conall,  when  he  wakes,  that  his  mother's
brother  came  to  visit  him,  and  that  he  wishes  to
see  liim  at  the  house  of  the  King  of  lubhar  to-
morrow."

"  I  will  do  that,"  said  Duanach.  t

On  the  next  day  the  Turks  were  coming  on  to
drive  the  battle  as  they  used,  against  the  host  of
lubhar ;  and  it  was  rustling  of  plumes,  and  shouting
of  hosts,  I  that  awoke  Conall.  Then  there  were  chiefs
setting  soldiers  in  order  to  go  to  hold  battle  against
the  Turks.  Conall  arose  and  put  on  his  armour,  and
as  soon  as  he  could,  and  he  went  with  the  people  of

*  Co  i  an  duthaich.     Who  she,  the  country  ?

t  This  is  a  good  instance  of  the  strange  jumble  of  ideas  which
are  found  in  popular  tales.  Here  is  Conall,  the  hero  of  romance,
lodging  at  an  inn,  supping  and  going  to  bed  like  a  Highland  drover,
while  the  king  walks  down  in  the  evening,  and  calls  and  leaves  a
message  with  a  gille,  to  invite  the  warrior  to  the  palace,  exactly
as  a  hospitable  Highland  farmer  often  does  when  he  hears  of  a
stranger  at  the  country  inn,  and  asks  him  to  his  house.  Accord-
ing to  MacNair,  this  was  the  King  of  Eirinn,  but  as  he  was  a
prisoner  or  slain  according  to  the  others,  I  have  substituted  the
uncle  for  the  father.

I  Is  b'e  fuaim  dhos,  is  eidhich  sluaigh.
T


274  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Inbhar  to  the  battle.  Conall  saw  the  big  Turk  coiu-
ing  opposite  to  bim  the  third  time  ;  they  met,  and
Conall  killed  the  big  Turk  the  third  time,  and  the
rout  went  over  the  Turks.  The  people  of  lubhar
followed  them,  and  they  slew  the  Turks  vnih  a  great
battle  ;*  and  when  no  more  of  the  Turks  were  to  be
seen,  the  host  of  lubhar  returned.

It  seemed  to  Conall  that  there  was  something  that
was  to  be  imderstood  going  on  in  the  field  of  battle  in
the  night  ;  and  he  ordered  Duanach  to  go  to  the
hostelry  to  take  his  sleep,  and  that  he  himself  would
stay  to  Avatcli  the  slain,  f  Duanach  went  a  little  Avay
from  Conall,  and  he  stayed  to  watch  Conall.

When  the  night  grew  dark  there  came  a  great
Turkish  Carlin,  and  she  had  a  white  glaive  of  light
with  which  she  could  see  seven  miles  behind  her  and
seven  miles  before  her ;  and  she  had  a  flask  of  balsam  t
carrying  it.

And  Avhen  she  would  reach  a  corpse,  she  Avould  put
three  drops  of  the  balsam  in  his  mouth  ;  she  would
strike  tliree  slaps  on  their  hurdles,  and  she  would  say,
"  Get  up,  and  go  home  ;  thy  kail  will  be  cold,"  §  and
they  would  rise  and  go.

She  was  going  from  one  to  one,  and  bringing
them  ahve,  and  they  woidd  be  ready  to  come  to  fight
again  on  the  next  day.  At  last  she  came  where  ConaU
was  himself ;  she  put  three  drops  of  balsam  into  his
mouth,  and  hit  him  three  slaps,  and  she  said,  "  Get  up,
and  go  home,  thy  kail  will  be  cold."

Conall  sprang  up  suddenly,  and  she  knew  that  he
was  not  of  the  dead  Turks,  by  his  sudden  rising,  and
she  fled.  Conal  stretched  out  after  her  ;  she  threw
away  the  flask  of  balsam  that  she  had,  and  the  white

*  Il-ar.  t  Na  ilh-raice.  +  Buideal  Ian  iocshlaint.

^  Eiricli  's  rach  dacLaidli  bithidh  do  chal  fuar.


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAN.         275

glaive  of  liglit,  but  Conall  ran  till  he  was  up  with  her  ;
he  gave  a  stroke  of  his  sword,  and  he  made  two  halves
of  her.  He  turned  back,  and  he  found  the  white
glaive  of  light,  but  he  could  not  find  the  flask  of  bal-
sam. He  was  seeking  it  back  and  forwards,  and
hither  and  thither,  and  at  last  he  saw  Duanach,  and
he  shouted.

"  Is  that  thou  ?  "  Duanach.

"  It  is  I,"  said  Duanach  ;  "  and  it  is  well  for  thee
that  I  am  here."

"  Hast  thou  got  the  flask  of  balsam  Ì "  said
Conall.

"I  have,"  said  Duanach.

Duanach  took  the  flask  of  balsam  where  Conall  was,
and  ConaU  gave  the  white  glaive  of  light  to  Duanach
to  lead  the  Turks  who  had  been  brought  alive  out  of
the  field,  and  Conall  went  to  sleep  since  he  could  do
no  more  good  till  he  should  sleep  ;  and  he  put  the  flask
of  balsam  under  his  head,  and  he  slept.  Duanach
went  away  with  the  sword^  and  he  led  the  Turks  out
of  the  field  ;  he  led  them  through  mosses  and  bogs,
and  when  he  found  that  they  were  in  a  dangerous
place  he  would  put  the  sword  out  of  sight,  and  the
Turks  could  not  see,  and  they  would  fall  into  holes,
and  they  would  go  down  into  marshes  (criathraichean),
and  into  well-eyes  (suiltean  cruthaich),  and  they  would
be  drowned.  And  again,  he  would  bring  the  sword
in  sight,  and  the  sword  would  shine,  and  the  Turks
that  had  not  been  drowned  would  follow,  and  Duanach
would  lead  them  through  places  where  there  were  many
scaurs,  and  Duanach  would  put  a  covering  on  the
white  glaive  of  hght,  and  darkness  would  come,  and
many  of  the  Turks  would  fall  amongst  the  scaurs  ;  and
when  they  were  out  of  that  peril  Duanach  would  bring
the  white  glaive  of  light  into  sight  to  let  them  see,  and


276  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

he  -would  lead  them  amongst  crags  ;  and  he  would  hide
the  sword,  and  the  Turks  would  lose  their  way,  and
they  would  go  over  the  crags.  It  was  thus  that
Duanach  followed  on  till  he  had  put  an  end  to  all  the
Turks  by  leading  them  over  crags,  and  thi"ough  scaurs,
and  amongst  bogs.  Then  Duanach  turned  back  to
where  Conall  was,  and  he  staid  near  him  till  he  had
got  his  sleep  over.  When  Conall  awoke,  Duanach
told  him  how  he  had  done  with  the  Turks,  and  Conall
Avas  pleased  that  the  war  was  over.*]

Then  Conall  brought  the  people  that  were  slain  to
life  with  the  balsam.  He  went  about  the  field,  and  he
found  one  of  his  brothers  there  levelled,  and  he  said  to
Garna  Sgiathlais,  "  Come  thou  and  take  this  one  with
thee,  and  take  care  of  him  till  I  come  back."  He
looked,  and  he  searched  about,  and  he  found  another
of  his  brothers,  and  he  j^ut  him  on  the  back  of  the
King  of  Locldann,  and  he  asked  him  to  take  liim  with
him.t]  He  went  in  where  his  father  was,  and  the
Great  Turk  came  out  on  his  hands  and  knees.]  He
found  liis  father  and  the  King  of  Laidheann  bound
He  loosed  liis  father  and  the  King  of  Laidheann,  and
he  seized  nobles  as  honourable  as  there  Avere  witliin,
and  he  bound  them  instead  of  his  father  and  the  King
of  Laidheann.

Then  he  asked  what  death  the  Great  Turk  was
threatening  for  his  father  and  the  King  of  Laidlieann.
They  said  that  he  was  threatening  to  hang  them  to  an
oaken  beam  that  was  within,  and  to  thrust  two  iron
darts  through  the  bodies  of  each  one  of  them.      "  The

*  Here  tbere  is  a  hole  in  MacNair's  version.  No  use  is  made
of  the  balsam.  It  is  evident  that  it  ought  to  be  used,  and  so  I
follow  MacNeill  and  the  Colonsay  version.

t  These  were  the  Amhas  Ormanach,  and  the  slender  black
man,  King  of  Spain,  according  to  MacNeill.


THE  STORY  OF  CON.U:.L  GULBAN.  277

very  death  -natli  which,  he  threatened  you  I  will  give  to
him,"  said  ConalL

He  seized  the  Great  Turk  and  he  hanged  him,  and
he  thrust  the  darts  tlu'ough  his  hody,  and  he  did  the
very  same  to  another  great  noble.*]  MacNem.

The  King  of  Eirinn  was  right  well  pleased,  and
that  day  they  had  peace.  Tlie  King  of  Eirinn  took
Conall  before  the  King  of  the  lubhar.  The  King
made  great  rejoicings  at  seeing  Conall,  and  because
Conall  had  given  peace  to  the  realm  of  the  lubhar.
Ko  less  woidd  suffice  the  brother  of  Conall's  mother
than  that  Conall  should  be  crowned  King  of  the  realm
of  lubhar.  The  nobles  of  the  reahn  (flathan  na  Eiog-
hachd)  were  gathered,  a  great  feast  was  made,  and
Conall  was  crowned  King  over  the  lubhair ;  but
though  he  was  he  did  not  stay  in  that  realm.  He
was  in  haste  to  see  Breast  of  Light.]  He  took  hisMacNair.
father  with  him  and  the  King  of  Laidheann  and  they
sailed  to  the  island  (na  h  otolia).  They  took  Breast  of
light  on  board  out  of  that  realm  and  they  put  the
young  King  of  Lochlann  on  shore  in  a  fitting  place
for  going  to  Greece,  and  Garna  Sgiathlais  on  shore  in
France.]  Tliey  sailed  to  Eirinn,]  and  they  sent  a  gille  MacXair.
on  foot,  and  a  giUe  upon  the  top  of  a  horse,  and
another  gille  swifter  than  that,  to  tell  the  Queen  of
Eirinn  that  the  king  was  coming  home,  and  that  Conall
was  married,  and  that  he  and  his  wife  were  coming
home  with  the  king.  When  the  message  came  to  the
Queen  of  Eirinn,  that  was  the  joyfid  tale  for  her.  She
made  a  great  preparation  that  she  might  have  a  feast
ready  for  them,  and  a  cheery  company  gathered  to  give
them  a  royal  welcome,  and  when  the  King  of  Eirinn,
Conall,  and  Breast  of  Light  came  home,  there  were
there  to  welcome  them,  Duncan  MacBrian,  ]\luxdoch
*  MacPbie's  version  agrees.


278  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

MacBrian,  Frenzy,  and  Whitebelly,  red  men  from
Mull,  boatmen  from  Lorn,  the  brave  blinding  band  of
the  King  of  Eirinn,  and  the  great  gentles  of  the  realm,
together  as  many  as  there  were  of  them  at  the  time.*

They  had  a  hearty  feast,  with  joy  and  solace  ;  they
raised  music,  and  laid  down  lament,  and  each  one  was
content,  they  never  saw  such  rejoicing  before ;  and
when  the  people  thought  the  time  fitting  to  go  home,
each  one  went  to  his  own  place,  and  there  was  peace
and  quiet  in  Eirinn.

Conall  and  Breast  of  Light  thought  that  they
would  go  to  the  realm  of  Laidlieann  to  see  her  father.
They  made  ready  a  ship,  they  went  on  board,  and  they
sailed ;  they  reached  the  realm  of  Laidheann,  and  the
king  had  no  hope  or  expectation  of  them  at  the  time,
but  he  saluted  them,  and  made  them  welcome.]  Each
thing  was  set  in  order  to  make  Conall  and  Breast  of
Light  happy  and  merry.  ■]•

And  Conall  and  Breast  of  Light  stayed  in  the  realm
of  Laidheann  till  they  had  their  first  son,  and  they  were
happy  and  pleased  together,  but  that  she  had  had  a  cut
slicing  tongiie  at  odd  times,  as  happed  to  many  of  the
women,  and  sure  am  I  that  Duanach  Achaidh  Draodh
stuck  to  Conall,  and  that  his  counsel  was  ever  truly

*  Donacha  MacBhrian,  Muracha  MacBlirian  Taoig  a's  Tarra-
gheal  fir  dherag  o  mliuile  fir  clironaig  ea  Latharna  Buidheann
chròdhalanda  a  righ  Eirinn.  Agus  mor  maithean  na  rioghacbd
gu  leir  mhead  a's  a  blia  leis  diubh  san  am.

I  am  not  sure  of  the  whole  of  this  translation ;  the  spelling  of
the  scribes  being  somewhat  independent  of  rules,  these  quaint  old
passages  are  not  easily  rendered.  Cronnag,  means  a  kind  of
basket.  Crannag  has  the  meaning  of  a  boat,  and  this  may  mean
the  corracle  men  of  Lome.  Their  passage  from  Eirinn  was  early
enough  to  have  been  made  in  such  vessels,  and  the  name  may
have  stuck  to  them.

f  Gu  sonadh  aiteasach.


THE  STORY  OF  COXALL  GULBAX.        279

.    wise  and  truly  moderate.]      And  again,  their  son  was  MacXeiii.

j    crowned  Emperor  of  Eirinn,  and  King  over  the  realm

j     of  Laidheann,  and  over  the  reabn  of  lubhar,  and  he

I    had  the  realm  of  Lochlann,  the  realm  of  Sorcha,  the

!    realm  of  Greece,  France,  and  Hispania,  under  cess,  and

j    so  be  they  left.]  MacXair.

According  to    MacPhie  and    others,   Conall  was  the  king's

son,  by  a  girl,  who  was  daughter  of  a  mysterious  old  man,  and  he

was  a  comrade  of  the  Finne,  and  lived  underground ;  he  is  a

magician  always.     Conall,  at  the  end,  puts  a  ring  on  the  Queen's

finger,  it  tightens,  and  forces  her  to  confess  that  her  sons  are  not

the  king's  children,  and  Conall  reigns  as  the  king's  only  son.

This  incident  ends  several  long  Gaelic  stories  of  the  same  stamp

as  this  long-winded  history  of  Conall  Gulban,  which  has  the

name  of  being  the  best  of  its  kind.

June  1861, — Mac]N"air  tells  me  that  his  authority,
Livingston,  was  an  old  tailor,  not  the  shoemaker  men-
tioned by  Dev/ar ;  and  he  adds,  that  several  passages
in  which  his  story  seems  to  vary  from  MacXeill's,  are
mistakes  made  by  the  scribe.

There  were  tliree  champions  on  board  when  they
sailed  from  Lochlann,  and  two  sailed  to  the  realm  of
the  Turk,  so  that  all  my  authorities  agree.

The  Gaelic  passage,  page  278,  is  one  of  those  which  often  give  a
clue  to  other  stories  and  traditions ;  which  are  clearly  old,  easily
remembered,  and  hard  to  explain.  Wishing  to  get  all  I  could  out  of
it,  I  asked  several  men  to  translate  the  passage  and  the  names,  and
to  give  any  reasons  for  the  epithets.  The  variety  in  these  transla-
tions will  perhaps  be  the  best  excuse  which  I  can  giv^e  for  my  own
shortcomings,  so  I  give  a  few  examples.

First,  Scribe  who  wrote  down  what  he  heard  according  to  my
special  request: — "Duncan  MacBrian  and  Murdoch  MacBrian,
Passionate,  and  White  Belly  ;  Dearg's  men  from  Mull,  and  Fortress
men  from  Lorn ;  the  King  of  Eirinn's  valiant  band,  and  the  great
chieftains  of  the  realm,  altogether  all  that  were  \\i;h  him  at  the  time
(at  the  wars)."

This  gives  the  sound  "derag"  as  the  proper  name  "Dearg,"


2 bo  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

which  "translators"  made  "Dergo,"  and  which  means  Eed  ;  and  it
localizes  an  Ossianic  hero  in  Mull.  It  gives  "  chronaig  "  (genitive
of  cronag),  the  value  of  "  fortress,"  and  suggests  the  wattled  forts
found  in  lakes  and  mosses,  which  are,  I  believe,  called  cranogues  by
the  learned  in  such  matters.  This  is  the  simple  country  translation
of  an  intelligent  man,  and  it  throws  light  upon  the  traditions  and
antiquities  of  his  country.

Second,  from  a  gentleman  who  for  a  quarter  of  a  century  has  been
occupied  about  Gaelic  books  and  translations;  a  native  Highlander,
who  is  an  authoritj'  in  Gaelic  writings,  and  lives  in  a  city,  but  who
had  nothing  to  guide  him  but  the  words  before  him  : — "  Duncan,  son
of  Brian;  Murdoch,  son  of  Brian;  Thadeus  and  Whitebelly,  ruddy
men  from  Mull,  swarthy  men  from  Lorn,  a  valiant  band  from  the
King  of  Ireland,  and  all  the  nobles  of  the  kingdom,  as  many  as  were
with  (or  adhered  to)  him  at  the  time."

The  same  authority  informs  me  that  there  is  a  place  in  Lorn
called  Gill  a  chronaig,  and  another  in  Mull  called  Derbhaig.

This  simply  translates  the  Gaelic  names  into  their  modern  Eng-
lish equivalents;  Taoig  into  Thadeus,  Murcba  into  Murdoch,  Donacha
into  Duncan,  and  so  on.  It  gives  the  passage  reasonably,  and  as  it
were  historically  or  geographically ;  and  it  differs  from  the  others  in
the  meaning  of  "chronaig,"  which  it  renders  "  swarthy,"  from  cron,
brown  ;  and  this  is  the  usual  method  of  translating  doubtful  Gaelic
into  English  :— freely.  I  also  had  translated  the  passage  freely.  I
was  uncertain  of  the  meaning  of  "  Taoig,"  but  as  it  is  the  genitive  of
Taog,  a  fit  of  passion,  I  gave  it  that  meaning  rather  than  assume
that  it  meant  Teague,  Thaddy,  or  Thadeus  ;  names  which  had  some
meaning  once.  It  is  established  that  a  sound  like  Donacha  shall
mean  Duncan  ;  and  Muracha  Murdoch,  so  I  too  followed  the  stream;
but  I  should  have  done  better  to  translate  the  names,  for  every
Gaelic  proper  name  has  a  meaning,  which  may  be  dimly  seen  in
Gaelic,  but  is  utterly  lost  in  its  English  equivalent.  The  passage
fully  translated,  as  I  understand  it  by  the  help  of  my  peasant  autho-
rities and  Armstrong's  dictionary,  would  run  thus— "  Donacha,"  *
Brown  of  battle ;  "  Mac,"  son  of  the  judge  (or  ruler,  or  king ;  the
man  of  words  of  authority.  "Brian,"f  Breean,  Brethon,  Bren).
"  Muracha,"!  wall  of  battle  ;  "  Mac,"  son  of  Brian  the  ruler ;  Fury  and
Whitebelly  ;  the  men  of  the  Red,  from  "  Muile,"  the  bluff;  Wattle-

*  Donn-a-chath.  f  Brian.  t  Mur-a-chath.

The  first  might  also  mean  Brownfield.  The  second  might  be
Murrach-a-chath,  able  of  battle ;  or  Murcach,  murky,  gloomy.  The
third  means  "  a  word,  a  composition,  a  warrant,  an  author ;  and  it  is


THE  STORY  OF  CONALL  GULBAN.  2  «  I

fort,  or  boat-men  from  the  grounds  or  settlements  (from  lar,  a  floor,
the  ground,  etc. ;  or  lathar,  an  assembly,  from  Larne,  a  loch  in  Ire-
land ;  or  Latharna,  a  district  of  Arfryll,  now  Englished  "  Lome  ").
The  camp-winnowing,  or  blind-valiant,  or  brave-blinding  (chro  or
chrodha-dhallan-da,  from  cro,  a  circle  or  fold,  or  enclosure,  or  cattle.
Or  from  crodha,  active,  valiant,  etc. ;  and  dallan,  a  blind  man,  also  a
large  fan  for  winnowing ;  from  dall,  because  of  the  blinding  dust)
band  of  the  king  of  the  western  island  or  islands  (of  which  Ireland  is
one,  and  Great  Britain  another),  and  the  great  good  ones  of  the  king-
dom altogether,  as  much  as  w^ere  with  him  in  the  time.

Dewar  understands  "gabhail  iolla  "  to  mean,  "taking  notice  of
without  joining  in  what  was  going  on."  The  first  word  is  the  only
one  used  for  singing  or  reciting  a  tune,  a  song  or  story ;  and  it  has
the  meaning  of  taking,  and  many  other  meanings  besides.  The
second  is  not  in  dictionaries,  and  I  did  not  know  it ;  but  iuladh  and
ioladh  have  nearly  the  same  sound  as  iolla,  and  mean  fun,  sport ;
lolach  is  a  shout,  mirth :  liilach,  guiding,  directing;  and  from  the
context  I  believe  the  words  to  mean  sometimes,  that  the  lookers  on
were  enjoying  the  fight,  "taking  sport ;"  and  at  others,  that  they  were
shouting  or  singing  to  the  combatants.  Singing  "iolla,"  a  loud-
directing  or  guiding  song,  such  as  the  words  of  Duanach  to  Conall.
If  I  am  right,  this  is  a  new  Gaelic  word ;  if  I  am  wrong  I  cannot
help  it,  but  this  will,  I  hope,  excuse  mistakes  in  my  translations,  for
it  shews  that  authorities  may  differ,  and  that  dictionaries  are  bad
guides.  It  will  also  shew  the  object  which  I  had  in  view  in  gene-
rally translating  as  closely  as  I  could,  in  utter  disregard  of  English
composition,  rather  than  freely  and  according  to  precedent.

Dewar  translates  "  Dos,  a  sounding  horn  ;"  and  for  "feet  following,"
he  gives  "  rapid  pursuit,  toir  chas."  He  says,  "  There  is  an  Irish  poem
about  Conall  Ghulbain  coming  to  war  against  the  Fiauds  ;  he  killed
many  of  them,  at  last  Oscar  fought  him,  and  it  was  doubtful  for  a
long  time  which  of  them  would  have  victory;  at  last  Oscar  struck
Connal's  head  off  and  threw  it  off  the  battle-field.  Music  was  got  to
cheer  Oscar  from  his  weariness,  but  the  music  that  was  best  with
Fionn  was  what  happened.  It  is  evident  that  this  tale  was  composed
a  long  time  after  the  Fiand's  time."  Dewar  does  not  himself  under-
stand Irish  of  some  kinds,  for  I  tested  him  with  an  Irish  blind  fiddler
whose  dialect  I  could  only  partially  understand  myself.  1  know
nothing  more  about  this  poem ;  unless  it  be  "  ConuU  Ghulbuinn,"
published  by  MacCallum,  1816,  which  is  Gaelic  taken  down  in  Scot-
land (162  lines).     In  this,  "  ConuU  "  is  slain  by  "  Oscar."

close  to  Breith,  a  judge,  to  judge  ;  and  to  the  word  Brethon,  which  is
applied  to  a  code  of  Irish  laws,  and  suggests  Bren,  holy,  and  our  old
school  acquaintance  Brennus.


282  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

LXXVIL
JOHN,  SOX  OF  THE  KING  OF  BERGEN.

From  Angus  Mackinnon  (tailor),  South  Uist.
1 COMHRAG.

"  '  Tis  the  track  of  the  youth  beside  the  ford,
And  the  great  impetuous  stride.

2

"  '  Tis  not  the  daughter  of  Locha  Luin,
And  '  tis  not  Diarmaid  of  the  clear  eye.

3

"  It  is  not  one  of  the  band  of  Fionn
That  wended  last  night  in  the  heavy  glen.

4
"  I  gathered  my  garments,  and  wended  forth  ;
The  gathering  was  hard  throughout  the  moss.

5
"  I  was  rushing  and  bounding.
And  the  big  man  hard  striding.

G
"  Then  at  the  time  I  caught  him.
And  the  precious  woman  between  two  scaurs.

7
"  I  asked  so  quietly  of  him,
Great  man,  whence  comest  thou  thus?"

8 — Seathan.
"  But  little  one,  there,  little  man,
Thouffh  thou  asked,  it  w^as  not  -wise.


SEATHAX  MAC  RIGH  BEIRBH.  283


SEATHA]^  MAC  EIGH  BEIEBH.

1

'  S  lorg  an  oga  seach  au  t-atli ;
'  S  an  ceum  rodli  a  tha  ro  dhian  ;

2
Clia  'u  i  nighean  Loclia  Liiin  ;
'  S  cha  '  n  e  Diarmaid  an  ruisg  glilain  ;

3

Cha  '  n  e  li-aon  a  chnideachd  Fhinn  ;
A  dh'  imicla  an  raoir  'san  troma  ghleann.

4

Tkruis  mi  m'  aodach  '  s  thar  mi  as  ;
Feadh  na  mointich  bu  gharbh  truis.

5
Bha  mise  nam'  ruith  's  nam'  leum,
'  S  am  fear  mor  '  s  e  '  na  chniaidh  clieum.

6

An  sin  an  uair  a  rug  mi  air,
'S  a'  bhean  leig  eadar  da  sgoir.

7
Gn  'n  d'  fhiosraicli  mi  dheth  gxi  foil,
"  Fliir  mhoir  ciod  as  mar  seo  ?"


"  Acli  fliir  btiig  sin — ach.  fliir  bliig,
Gad  a  dh'  fharraid  cha  bu  shlic.


284  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

9.

"  Tliou  hadst  need  bring  the  whole  of  the  Een
To  find  out  the  race  of  a  single  man."

10 COMHRAG.

"  If  I  should  bring  the  whole  of  the  Een,
A  Avhole  bone  woidd  n  't  be  thy  body  within.

11.

"  Tliat  which  they  would  not  crush  with  theh-  hands,
Sure  with  their  breath  they  would  consume.

12.

"  That  was  the  time,  when  liis  weapon  he  cast,
The  mighty  spear  that  w^as  in  his  grasp.

13.
"  That  he  cast  it  beyond  me,  behind,
Seventeen  feet  into  the  ground."

1 4 — Seathan.
"  Thy  trimmed  shaft  has  touched  my  heart.
And  the  leech  will  not  make  my  healing.

15.

"  Farewell,  and  arise  to  thy  house,
Yellow-haired  youth  of  the  curling  locks."

1  6 COMHRAG.

"  For  thee,  it  is  all  the  worse,
That  thou  didst  not  declare  thy  race.

17.

"  That  the  head  huntsman  of  Fionn
Gave  thee  battle  in  the  heavy  glen."

18 — Seathan.
"  I  am  John,  son  of  Bergen's  king,
Son  of  the  fierce  one  of  the  sturdy  tread."


SEATHAN  MAC  RIGH  BEIRBH.  285

9

"  Cha  b'  uilear  dhuit  an  Fhinn  uile
'Tlioirt  gu  sloinneadli  an  aon  duine."

10
"An  Fhinn  uile  na  'n  d'  thugainn  ann
An  cnaimh  slan  cha  bhiodh  a'd'  cholainn  ;

11
"  A '  chuid  nach  pronnadh  iad  le  '  n  lamhan,
'S  dearbh  gu  'n  loisgeadh  iad  le  'n  anail."

12

An  sin  an  uair  a  thilg  e  arm,

An  t-sleagh  mhor  a  bha  '  na  dhorn.

13

Gu  'n  d'  chuir  e  i  tharuna  siar
Seachd  troidhe  diag  anns  an  talamh.

14

"  Bhoin  do  chiann  gleusta  do  m'  chri,
'  S  cha  dean  an  ligliich  mo  leigheas."

15
"  Beannachd  dhuit  '  s  eirich  gu  teach,
Oganaich  bhnidhe  'chuil  chlannaich.

16
"  Gur  h-ann  duitse  's  measa  sin,
Xach  d'  rinn  thu  do  shloinneadli  a  dlieanadh.

17

"  Gu  'n  d'  thug  gille  cinn  Choin  Fhinn
Com  brag  diots'  anns  an  troma  glileann."

18
"  Mise  Seathan,  Mac  Eigh  Beirbh,
Mac  an  f  hir  shairg  bu  mlior  trosd.


286                              WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.
1  9 COMHEAG.

"  My  name  shall  be,  on  coming  home,

Combat  of  five  hundred  hounds."
I  have  not  found  this  fragment  anywhere  else.
This  seems  to  describe  a  raid  made  by  the  son  of  the
King  of  Bergen,  who  carried  off  a  woman,  and  was
tracked  and  overtaken,  and  slain  in  a  rift,  by  Comhrag
of  the  five  hundred  hounds,  Fionn's  head  huntsman.
I  am  responsible  for  the  division  into  stanzas  of  two
lines.  Siar  generally  means  west ;  here  it  means  behind,
probably,  for  the  same  reason,  that  south  and  to  the
right  are  synonynious.  A  man  facing  the  rising  sun
has  his  back  to  the  west,  and  his  right  hand  to  the
south  (deas).  The  left  hand  (lamh  thosgail),  to  the
north,  and  the  sun  (air  a  Bheultaobh),  on  his  mouth  side,
on  Baal's  side.  This  may  be  fancy,  but  unless  some
explanation  is  found,  it  does  not  appear  how  a  man
can  have  a  north  and  south  hand,  and  a  western  back.

J.  F.   C.

From  Angus  MacKinnon,  tailor,  Dallabrog,  South
Uist,  who  is  a  little  dark-haired  man,  with  quick-
moving  grey  eyes,  and  lively,  kindly  manner.  He
wears  neither  shoes,  nor  stockings,  nor  bonnet,  and
seemingly  never  has.  He  sings  these  pieces  with  con-
siderable pathos,  and  has  a  tolerably  good  voice.  He
appears  to  me  to  be  about  seventy  years  of  age.

Beirbhe.  Dictionaries  translate  Beirbhe,  Copenhagen,  but  it
is  more  probably  tbe  Gaelic  form  of  Bergen,  whicb  was  formerly
the  capital  of  Norway,  which  is  part  of  the  Gaelic  Lochlann,  as
well  as  Denmark.  How  Bergen  may  have  2)assed  into  the  Gaelic
Beirbhe,  may  be  illustrated  by  the  frequency  with  which  bh  passes
into  g,  or  gh,  and  vice  versa  ;  thus,  ubh  or  ugh,  an  egg;  dubh,
or  dugh,  black,  etc. ,  oovoog,  doo.  H.  M'L.

September  16,  18G0.


SEATHAN  MAC  RIGH  BEIRBH.
19

"  Gur  h-e  b'  aimn  dhomli  ligliimi  gu  teacli
Comlirag  nan  coig  ceudan  con.


287


Hounds  and  Hdntsmen,  Ornaments  and  Characteristic  Symbol. —
Copied  from  the  "Sculptured  Stones  of  Scotland."  At  Kirriemuir,  PI.  xliii.
and  xlv.  ;  near  Dupplin,  PI.  Iviii.  ;  Standing  Stone  of  Sauchope,  Crail,
PI.  lix.  ;  Fowlis  Wester,  near  Crieff,  PI.  Ix.  ;  Crail,  PI.  Ixiv.  ;  Largs,
PI.   Ixvi. ;  Meigle,  PL  Lxxii.  ;  near  Aberlemno,  PI.  Ixxx.


2  00  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

LXXVIII.

THE  MASTEE  AND  HIS  MAK

From  John  Dewar.

rPHEEE  were  at  some  time  ere  bow  bad  times,  and
-^  there  were  many  servants  seeking  places,  and
there  were  not  many  places  for  them.

There  was  a  farmer  there,  and  he  would  not  take
any  servant  but  one  who  would  stay  with  him  till  the
end  of  seven  years,  and  who  would  not  ask  for  wages,
but  what  he  could  catch  in  his  mouth  of  the  seed  corn,
when  he  should  be  thrashing  corn  in  the  barn.

None  were  taking  (service)  with  him.  At  last  he
said  that  he  would  let  them  plant  theii'  seed  in  the
best  ground  that  he  might  have,  and  they  should  get
his  own  horses  and  plough  to  make  the  thraive,  and  his
own  horses  to  harrow  it.

There  was  a  young  lad  there,  and  he  said,  "  I  will
take  wages  with  thee,"  and  the  farmer  set  wages  on
that  lad,  and  the  bargain  that  they  made  was  that  the
wages  which  the  lad  was  to  have  were  to  be  as  many
grains  of  seed  as  he  coidd  catch  in  his  mouth  when
they  were  beating  sheaves  in  the  barn,  and  he  was  to
get  (leave)  to  plant  that  seed  in  the  best  land  that  the
farmer  had,  and  he  was  to  keep  as  much  as  grew  on
that  seed,  and  to  put  with  it  what  seed  soever  he  might
catch  in  his  mouth  when  he  was  thrashing  the  corn,
and  to  plant  that  in  the  best  land  wliich  the  farmer  had
on  the  next  year.  He  was  to  have  horses,  and  plough,  or
any  other  "  gairios  "  *  he  might  want  for  planting  or

*  Apparatus  ;  also  spelt  goireas  and  gairaois.


THE  MASTER  AND  HIS  MAN.  289

reaping  from  his  master,  and  so  on  to  the  end  of  the
seven  years.  That  he  should  have  seven  winters  in  the
barn  thi-ashing,  seven  springs  to  plant,  seven  summers
of  growth  for  the  crop,  and  seven  autumns  of  reaping,
and  whatsoever  were  the  outcomiug  that  might  he  in
the  lad's  seed,  that  was  the  wage  that  he  was  to  have
when  he  should  go  away.

The  lad  went  home  to  his  master,  and  always  when
he  was  thrashing  in  the  barn  his  master  was  thrashing
with  him,  and  he  caught  but  three  grains  of  seed  in  his
mouth  on  that  winter;  and  he  kept  these  carefully
till  the  spring  came,  and  he  planted  them  in  the  best
land  the  carle  had.

There  grew  out  of  these  three  ears,  and  there  were
on  each  ear  threescore  good  grains  of  seed.

The  lad  kept  these  carefully,  and  what  grains
soever  he  caught  he  put  them  together  with  them.

He  planted  these  again  in  the  spring,  and  in  the
autumn  again  he  had  as  good  as  he  had  the  year  before
that.

The  lad  put  his  seed  bye  carefully,  and  anything
he  caught  in  liis  mouth  when  he  was  tlirashing  in  the
next  winter  he  put  it  "with  the  other  lot ;  and  so  with  the
lad  from  year  to  year,  till  at  last,  to  make  a  long  story
short,  the  lad  planted  on  the  last  year  every  (bit  of)
ploughing  land  that  the  carle  had,  and  he  had  more
seed  to  set,  and  the  carle  was  almost  harried.  He  had
to  pay  rent  to  the  farmer  who  was  nearest  to  him,  for
land  in  which  the  lad  might  set  the  excess  of  seed
which  he  had,  and  to  sell  part  of  his  cattle  for  want  of
ground  on  which  they  might  browse,  and  he  would  not
make  a  bargain  in  the  same  way  with  a  servant  foi-
ever  after.


290  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

This  story  only  wants  a  moral  to  be  a  regular  fable,
and  the  meaning  is  so  clear  that  to  express  it  by  a
moral  would  be  waste  of  words.  Scotchmen,  all  over
the  world,  are  noted  for  frugality,  and  here  is  the  les-
son taught  by  a  Celtic  peasant  to  Ms  son.  I  suspect
there  has  been  a  numerical  puzzle  upon  the  numbers  3,
7,  and  20,  which  is  lost.  Words  relating  to  agri-
culture are  interesting,  and  this  gives  a  number  of  them.
I  subjoin  an  attempt  at  phonetic  spelling.

Siol,  sited;  seed,  the  young  offish,  oats,  etc.  etc.

Crann,  kvAn  ;  a  tree,  a  plough,  a  mast,  etc.  etc.

Cliathadh,  KleeAug  ;  harrowing,  from  cliath,  basket
work  of  any  kind,  a  liush  harrow,  from  which  it  fol-
lows that  ploughs  an<i  harrows  were  made  of  wood.

Treabh,  Treo;  to  till,  plough,  probably  from
troimh,  through,  a  thraive,  a  furrow.  Sanscrit  root,
Tra,  an  instrument  of  any  kind,  a  plough.

Biceannan,  Eeeganan;  grains,  beag,  small,  diminu-
tive, Bigan.

Bualadh,  BooAlug ;  thrashing,  beating,  striking,
hitting.

Sabhal,  SavuI  or  Sa-uI  ;  a  barn.

Arbhar,  Atav  ;  corn  as  reaped,  standing  corn.
Sanscrit  root,  Ar,  to  plough,  to  cut  open ;  to  plough
tlie  sea.      Gaelic,  Eithir,  a  boat.

Ire,  Eere ;  land,  also  produce.  Sanscrit,  Ira,
earth.

Earrach,  Yarach ;  spring,  earing  time.

Cur,  Coor;  to  plant,  to  put,  to  set.

Cinneas,  Keenyas ;  growth,  also  kin.

Bar,  Bav  ;  top,  point,  crop.

Buain,  Booain  ;  to  gather,  pluck,  reap.

Toradh,    Tcmrug ;  increase,  probably   from  tor,
heap,  a  heaping.

Màl,  MaI  ;  mail,  rent.

Tuathannach,  TooAUAch  ;  a  farmer.


AM   MAIGHISTIR  AGUS  AX  GILLE.  29  I


AM  MAIGHISTIR  AGUS  AN  GILLE.

Bha  uaireiginn  roimh  so  'droeh  thimannan  ann  agus  bha  mòran  de
sheirbhisich  ag  iarraidh  aiteachaiin,  agus  cha  robh  meran  de  aite-
acbann  ann  d"  aibh.  Bha  tuathannacb  an  sin,  agus  cha  gabhadh  e
gille  sara  bith,  ach  gille  a  dh'  fhuireadh  leis  gu  ceaun  seachd
bliadhna,  agus  nach  iarradh  de  thuarasdal  ach  na  ghlacadh  e  na
bheul  de'n  t-siol,  tra  bhiodh  e  a  bualadh  an  arbhair  anns  an  t-
fabhaL

Cha  robh  gin  a  gabhail  aige.  Ma  dheireadh  thubhairt  e,  gun
leigeadh  e  leo  an  siol  a  chur  anns  an  ire  a  b  f  hearr  a  bhiodh  aige,
agus  gum  faigheadh  iad  na  h-eich,  s  an  crann  aige  fein  a  dhean-
arah  an  treabh,  agus  na  h-eich  aige  fein  thun  a  chliathadli.

Bha  gille  òg  an  sin,  agus  thubhairt  e,  "  Gabhaidh  mise  tuarasdal
agad  ■'  S  chuir  an  tuathanach  tuarasdal  air  a  ghille  sin.  Agus  se
am  bargan  a  rinn  iad,  gum  b'e  an  tuarasdal  bha  gu  bhith  aig  a
ghille,  na  ghlacadh  e  de  bhiceannan  siol  na  bheul,  tra  bhitheadh  e  a
bualadh  an  arbhair,  anns  an  t-sabhal.  Agus  bha  e  gus  faotuinii
an  siol  sin,  a  chur  anns  an  ire  b'  f  hearr  a  bh'  aig  an  tuathanach,
agus  bha  e  gus  na  chinneadh  air  an  t-siol  sin  a  ghleidh,  agus  ciod
ar-bhith  an  siol  a  ghlacadh  e  na  bheul,  tra  bhitheadh  e  a  bualadh  an
arbhair,  a  chuir  comhla  ris,  a^ius  sin  a  chur  anns  an  ire  a  b'  fhearra
bh'  aig  an  tuathanach  an  ath  bhliadhna.  Bha  e  gu  eich  's  crann,  na
gairaois  air  bith  eile  a  bhiodh  feumail  d'a  air  son  cur  na  buain,
fhaotuinn  o  mhaighistir  ;  agus  mar  sin  gu  ceann  nan  seachd  bliadh-
na. Gu  'm  bitheadh  aige,  seachd  geamhraidhean  san  t-sabhal  a
bualadh,  seachd  earraich  gu  cur,  seachd  samhraidhean  cinneas  do'n
bharr,  agus  seachd  fogharadh'n  buain,  agus  ciod  air  bhith  an  tighinn
a  mach  a  bhiodh  an  siol  a  ghille  's  na  seachd  bliadhna,  b'e  sin  an
duais  a  bha  gu  bhith  aige  tra  dh'  fhalbhadh  e.

Chaidh  an  gille  dachaidh  thun  a  mhaighistir  agus  daonnan  tra
bhiodh  e  a  bualadh  anns  an  t-shabhal,  bhitheadh  a  mhaighistir  a
bhualadh  leis.  Agus  cha  do  bheir  e  na  bheul,  ach  air  tri  bigeannan
sil,  re  a  gheamhraidh  sin.  Agus  ghleidh  e  iad  sin  gu  ciiramach,  gus
gu'n  d'  thainig  an  t-earrach,  agus  chuir  e  iad  anns  an  ire  b'  fhearr
a  bh'  aig  a  bhodach.

Chinn  asda  sin  tri  diasan,  agus  bha  air  gach  dias,  tri-fichead
bigeannan  matha  sil.


292  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Ghleidh  an  gille  iad  sin  gu  curamach,  agus  ciod  air  bhith  big-
eannan  sil  air  an  do  bheir  e,  chuir  e  còmhla  riu  iad.

Chuir  e  iad  sin  a  rithis  aig  an  earrach.  Agus  aigh  an  fhogharadh
a  rithis'd  bha  toradh  aige,  clio  math  is  a  bh'  aige  a  bhliadhna  roimh
sin.

Chuir  an  gille  seachad  a  shiol  gu  curamach,  agus  ciod  air  bhith  a
ghlac  e  na  bheul,  tra  bha  e  a'  bualadh  san  ath  gheamhradh,  chuir  e
leis  a  chuid  eile  a.

Agus  mas  sin  do'n  ghille,  o  bhliadhna  gu  bliadhna  gus  ma  dheir-
eadh,  a  dheanamh  sgeul  fada  goirid  ga'n  do  chuir  an'  gille,  air  a
bhliadhna  ma  dheireadh  na  h-uile  ire  threabhaidh  a  bh'  aig  a  bhod-
ach.  Agus  bha  corr  sil  aige  ri  chuir  agus  cha  bu  mhòr  nach  robh
am  bodach  air  a  chreachadh.  B'  fheudar  d'a  mal  a  phaidh  do'n
tuathanach  b'  fhaigse  dha,  air  son  ire  sa  'n  cuireadh  an  gille  an  corr
sil  a  bh'  aige,  agus  pairt  de  "n  spreidh  aig  a  chreic,  a  chion  gruinnde
air  an  ionaltraidh  iad ;  agus  cha  deanadh  e  baraga  air  a  cheart  doigh
ri  gille  gu  brath  tuille.

From  my  father  more  than  forty  years  ago. — John  Dewak.


THE  PRAISE  OF  GOLL.  293

LXXIX.

THE  PEAISE  OF  GOLL.

From  Donald  MacPhie,  Breubhaig,  Barra.

There  came  a  stranger  the  way  of  the  Finne,  and
he  asked  what  sort  of  man  Goll  was,  and  Fionn  said —

1  High  mind  of  Goll,  Fionn's  man  of  war,

2  Broad,  burly*  hero,  dauntless  and  hardy  ;

3  Fair  generous  hero,  of  sweetest  speech.

4  His  mildness  mild,  harmless  his  grace.

5  Of  brightest  mood,t  teacher  of  schools.

6  King-like  is  Goll,  hide  it  not  Fionn.

7  Might  of  the  waves,  by  valour  bright.  J

8  Lion  like  hind,  vahant  in  deed

9  Powerfid  his  hand,  choice  of  the  kings.

1 0  Man  friendly  kind,  forsakes  not  his  ùiend.

11  In  strife  of  kings,  not  slack  his  hand.

12  Crushing  his  shout,  hound- Hke||  his  might.

13  Youthful  and  soft,  warlike  and  great.


294  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


MOLADH  GHUILL.

Thainig  coigreach  an  rathad  na  Finne  a  dh'  fheor-
aicli  de  'n  saeorsa  duine  a  bha  ann  an  Goll  's  thuirt
Fionn.

1530  1787  1860

MS.       Gillies.       Oral.

71  lines   18  lines     13  lines

Ard  aigne  Ghuill  fear  cogaidh

Fhinn  ;
Laocli  leothar,  lonn,*  fulangach

nacli  tim  ;
Laoch    fionn,    fial,   a  's    misle

gloir ;
A-mliine  mm;  sgèimh  gun  chron.
'S  c  's  glaine   gean,t  oide   na

sgoil.
Amliuil  righ  a's  Goll  na  ceil  ort

Fliinn  ;
Treise  nan   tonn ;    air  ghaisge

grinn.|
Leomham  mar  agh  ;  crodha  'na

ghniomh ;
Neartar    a    lamli ;    rogha    nan

righ.
Fear    daimheil,     caomh,     nach

treig  a  dhaimli  ;
An    cogadli    righ    nach   lag   a

lamh.

*  Lonn,  strong,
t  Perhaps  Gein,  a  sword,  of  brightest  sword,  or  of  purest  kin.
J  Grinn,  means  excellent  and  beautiful,  and  is  the  superlative
'  praise,  applicable  to  anything.


1

1

1

2

2

2

9

3

3

12

5
6

4
5

26

7

6

27

8

7

36

9

8

37

10

9

551

15

10

56

11

11

OSGAR,  THE  SON  OF  OISEIX.  295

30  17  12        Pronntacli  a  ghair  ;  conach  *  a

threoir  ;

31  18  13     Fiuranta  miu  ;  mileanta  mor.

From  Donald  MacPhie,  Breubhaig,  Barra,  who
says  he  learnt  it  from  his  uncle,  Hector  MacLaine,
Breubhaig,  Barra.      October  1,  1860. — H.  M'L.

This  is  a  tratlitional  fragment  of  the  poem  given
at  page  29  of  the  selections  from  the  Dean  of  Lis-
more's,  MSS.  1530.  Of  the  thirteen  lines  here  given,
nine  are  ahnost  identical  with  the  Gaelic,  as  given  by
Mr.  MacLauchlan.  There  are  seventy-one  lines  in  the
oldest  version.  The  corresponding  numbers  are  here
placed  opposite  to  the  lines  for  reference.  Another
version  is  printed  in  Gillies'  collection,  1784.  Page
34,  there  are  eighteen  hnes,  of  which  tliirteen  appear
here  slightly  modified,  and  in  a  different  order.  There
are  considerable  variations  in  several  of  the  lines,  for
example,  damhail,  friendly,  is  deud-gheal,  white-toothed.
A  fourth  version,  eighteen  lines,  was  published  by
MacCallum,  1816,  and  has  five  lines  which  I  have  not.


LXXX.

OSGAPv,  THE  SOX  OF  OISEIX.

WHEX  Osgar  was  a  boy  he  was  sent  to  a  school.
AMien  they  used  to  get  out  at  the  mid-day,  they
used  to  go  to  play  shinny  on  to  a  strand  that  was
there.     At  the  time  when  he  was  sixteen  years  of  age,

*  Conach,  canine.  The  old  stag-hounds  were  powerful,  large
active  animals,  and  they  are  constantly  represented  on  old  stones
in  Scotland.     (See  page  287.)


296  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

there  would  be  a  like  number  of  the  lads  working  on
each  side,  and  the  side  on  which  Osgar  might  be,  that
was  the  side  wliich  would  hold-
He  became  exceedingly  big,  so  that  there  was  no
one  of  his  cotemporaries  that  he  was  not  twice  as  much
as  he.  At  last  there  used  to  be  two  divisions  against
him,  and  one  division  with  him.  At  last  there  would
be  no  man  with  liim  but  liimself,  and  the  rest  alto-
gether against  him.

They  were  there  on  a  day  of  these  days  playing
shinny,  and  they  saw  a  boat  coming  in,  and  one  man
in  her,  and  they  never  saw  a  man  equal  to  him.  The
scholars  took  great  fear  before  the  man  when  they  saw
him  coming,  and  they  gathered  about  Osgar,  every  be-
gotten one  of  them,  to  make  a  protector  of  him,  and
this  wild  man  that  was  here  came  down  where  they
were,  and  not  a  bit  of  him  to  be  seen  but  the  eyes,
with  blue-green  scales  of  hardening  upon  him.*

He  came  towards  them,  and  every  one  on  whom
he  would  strike  his  pahn  he  would  level  him  on  the
strand.  He  struck  Osgar  and  put  him  in  a  faint.  It
was  but  scarcely  that  he  could  rise  ;  but  he  thought
that  it  was  best  for  him  to  lie  still  ;  if  he  should  get
up  again  that  he  would  slay  him  utterly.

Then  he  seized  on  Osgar,  and  he  put  him  on  the
end  of  a  withy,  and  sixteen  of  the  scholars  on  top  of
him.  He  put  the  withy  on  his  shoulder,  and  he  be-
took himseK  to  the  boat  with  it.  He  put  in  the  withy,
"and  it's  I  that  was  under  altogether,"  said  Osgar.t

*  Probably  " tempered  scale  armour;"  here  a  scaly  monster.
The  phrase  is  not  in  Gaelic  dictionaries,  but  it  occurs  pretty
often  sligneach  chruadhach.

f  This  idea  is  taken  from  the  common  method  of  carrying
fish,  viz.,  on  "  gad,"  a  withy.  A  hook  is  left  at  the  large  end  of
a  supple   stick,  and   the  small  end  is   run  through  the   gills  of


OSGAR,  THE  SON  OF  OISEIN.  297

"  I  am  saying  to  you,"  said  Osgar,  "  that  was  as
sore  a  blow  as  I  have  had,  when  he  struck  my  ribs
against  the  boat's  floor,  and  the  rest  on  top  of  me."
Then  he  rowed  the  boat  away  for  the  length  of  a  time,
and  he  reached  an  island,  and  then  he  caught  hold  of
the  withy  again,  and  he  put  it  out.  Then  he  took
with  him  the  withy  on  his  shoulder,  and  I  below.  He
reached  a  castle,  and  he  went  in.  He  left  the  withy
there,  and  he  went  up  to  the  end  of  the  house,  and
there  was  a  fine  woman  there.  He  said  to  her  that  he
was  going  to  take  a  nap,  and  when  he  should  wake
that  the  best  hero  who  was  there  should  be  cooked
before  him."*

"  She  went  where  the  withy  was,  and  she  began  to
feel  them.  And  I  was  the  biggest  there.  I  caught
her  by  the  hand,  and  said  to  her  to  let  me  be  for  the
present.  She  went  and  she  took  with  her  the  best  one
she  found  of  the  others.  She  put  the  roasting  stake
through  loim,  and  she  roasted  him  on  the  fire.  Then
he  got  up,  and  he  asked  if  she  had  got  him  cooked.
She  said  that  he  was.  Then  he  said,  "  There  was  a
better  boy  than  this  there  ;  I  am  going  to  sleep,  and
unless  thou  hast  him  cooked  when  I  awake,  I  will
have  thyself  in  his  place."  f

a  lot  of  cuddies  or  trouts.  Consequently,  the  first  has  all  the
others  upon  him,  and  he  often  has  a  rough  time  of  it,  for  the
hoys  do  not  trouble  themselves  to  kill  their  prizes.

*  That  is  to  say,  the  castle  was  in  the  mind  of  the  narrator  a
building  like  his  own  dwelling  ;  a  long  room,  with  the  wife  at  the
end  of  it,  beside  the  fire  ;  and  the  fine  lady  was  to  cook  a  warrior
as  his  wife  would  roast  a  herring.

t  With  proper  audience  and  emphasis,  with  fish  broihng  on
a  peat  fire,  and  a  string  of  cuddies  in  a  corner  ;  with  a  ruddy
light  within,  and  a  winter's  night  outside,  this  must  be  a  thrilling
passage.


298  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

She  went  down  then  again  and  said,  "  I  must  take
thee  with  me  now."

"  That  is  not  best  for  thee,  but  leave  me  alive.
Art  thou  liis  wife  ?"

"  Not  I.  It  is  (so)  that  he  stole  me  here  seven
years  ago,  and  I  in  dread  that  he  will  slay  me  every
day.  Do  thou  help  me,  and  I  will  help  thee,  and
may  be  that  we  might  put  an  end  to  the  monster.
Put  thou  the  poker  in  the  fire,  and  when  it  is  red  give
me  notice."

She  did  this,  and  when  it  was  red  she  gave  him
notice.*  Osgar  went  up  then  when  she  loosed  lum,
and  he  took  the  poker  with  him  to  where  he  was  in
his  sleep.  There  was  no  part  of  his  face  bare,  with
scales  of  hardness,  but  his  two  eyes.  He  put  the
poker  down  through  his  eye  to  the  ground  ;  and  she
caught  hold  of  his  sword,  and  she  struck  off  his  head.

They  went  away  then,  and  they  took  with  them
silver  and  gold  enough,  and  Osgar  hit  upon  the  spot
where  they  had  left  the  httle  boat.  He  did  not  know
to  what  side  he  should  turn  her  prow,  but  they  began
to  row,  and  they  reached  the  very  spot  from  which
they  had  gone,  on  the  strand.  Then  he  reached  the
king  of  the  Finne.  They  took  exceeding  good  care  of
the  woman  that  was  there.t

The  heroes  of  the  Finne  went  one  day  to  the  hunt-

*  It  is  curious  how  often  in  this  and  in  other  cases  the  nar-
rator identifies  himself  for  a  time  with  his  hero.  A  story  so  told
becomes  a  kind  of  dramatic  representation,  and  the  more  untu-
tored the  narrators  the  more  dramatic  they  are.

t  This  first  adventure  is  like  part  of  Nos.  V.  VI.  VII.  and  of  a
vast  number  of  other  stories  which  I  have.  It  is  at  least  as  old  as
Homer  ;  but  as  the  Gaelic  versions  invariably  introduce  a  woman.
I  do  not  believe  that  the  stories  come  from  Homer.  See  notes,
Vol.  I.  154.


OSGAR,  THE  SON  OF  OISEIN.  299

ing-hill,  and  they  parted  from  each  other.  They  went
to  a  glen  that  was  there,  and  they  did  not  know  that
they  had  eA'er  been  in  the  glen  before.  They  hit  upon
a  kind  of  burgh  there,  and  a  great  Avild  savage  of  a
giant  in  the  upper  end  of  the  house.

"  What's  the  news  of  the  warriors  of  the  Finne  ?"
said  he.

"  Well,  then,  we  have  the  news  that  we  had  no
knowledge  of  ever  having  been  in  this  place  before."

He  arose,  and  he  put  a  caiddi'on  on  the  fire,  and
a  stag  of  a  deer  in  it.

"  Sit,"  said  he,  "  and  burn  (fuel)  beneath  that
cauldron,  but  unless  the  deer  be  cooked  when  I  awake,
you  shall  have  but  what  you  can  take  off  his  head,
and  by  all  you  have  ever  seen  do  not  take  out  the
head."

They  were  tonnented  by  hunger,  and  they  did  not
know  what  they  shoidd  do.  They  saw  a  little  shaggy
man  coming  down  from  the  mountain.  "  Ye  are  in
extremity,"  said  he,  himself ;  "  why  are  ye  not  tasting
what  is  in  the  caxildron  ?"

"  We  are  not,"  said  they  ;  "  fear  will  not  let  us."

They  took  the  lid  out-  of  the  end  of  the  caukbon,
when  they  thought  it  was  boiled,  and  so  it  was  that
there  was  frozen  ice  came  upon  it.

The  old  carl  got  up  so  wildly,  and  when  he  saw
the  little  shaggy  man,  he  laid  the  one  great  grasp  upon
him.

The  carle  went  down,  and  he  asked  battle  or  combat
from  them.  Caoilte  rose  in  front  of  him,  and  they
began  ujDon  each  other.  He  was  about  to  have  got
Caoilte  under  him  now,  and  the  little  shaggy  man  got
up,  and  he  shook  himself

"  Take  notice  that  I  am  here,"  said  he  to  the  giant.
He  took  to  the  tuft  of  (fell  upon)  the  giant,  and  he  kept


300  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

back  Caoilte.  Tliey  arose  against  each  other  now,  and
the  little  shaggy  man  slew  the  giant.

"  Go  now,  and  be  going  home."  They  went,  and
they  were  going  before  them,  but  they  were  not  liitting
upon  the  proper  road.  They  saw  the  very  finest  man
they  had  ever  seen  coming  to  meet  them,  and  he  met
them,  and  he  asked  what  was  their  wish.

They  told  him  that  they  were  seeldng  (to  get)  home
to  the  Finne.

"  It  were  right  for  me,  Osgar,  son  of  Fionn,"  said
he,  "  to  tell  the  way  to  thee.  I  am  the  ugly  man
whom  ye  saw  coming  through  the  moimtain,  and  that
slew  the  giant.  He  has  had  me  under  spells  for  eight
years  there,  and  I  shoidd  have  been  there  for  ever,
unless  thou  hadst  come  to  help  me  to  kill  him.  I  am
the  son  of  the  Iving  of  Greece,  and  it  was  a  sister  of
mine  that  thou  tookest  from  the  other  giant  in  the
island."

They  reached  the  Fhinn,  and  the  son  of  the  King
of  Greece  and  his  sister  knew  each  other.  He  kissed
her,  and  he  himself  and  she  herself  went,  and  Fionn,
and  Osgar,  to  Greece ;  and  before  they  came  back,
Osgar  married  her.


The  Gaelic  is  omitted  to  make  room.

This  then  gives  part  of  the  early  adventiu-es  of
Osgar.  If  any  reliance  is  to  be  placed  on  early  Irish
history,  he  was  a  real  personage  ;  and  if  so,  this,
stripped  of  the  marvellous  element,  would  seem  to
shew  that  he  was  carried  off  by  a  mail-clad  warrior ;
that  he  escaped,  and  made  liis  way  to  Greece.  The
reasonable  explanation  would  be  that  this  is  part  of
the  history  of  a  sea  rover,  who  wandered,  as  the  Ice-
landers  did  in   the  ninth  century,  from  Labrador  to


OSGAR,  THE  SON  OF  OISEIN.  3OI

Constantinople.  The  caldron  that  froze,  the  more  it
was  boiled,  indicates  a  cold  climate.  But  wliile  there  is
a  reasonable  exj^lanation  for  the  story,  there  is  a  mythi-
cal element  which  cannot  be  reasonably  explained ;  and
probably  the  name  of  Osgar  has  attracted  a  lot  of  float-
ing myths  whose  origin  cannot  be  discovered

The  following  poem  relates  the  death  of  Osgar,  and
is  more  reasonable  ;  it  certainly  relates  to  some  real
event  in  Irish  history.  The  first  volume  of  the  trans-
actions of  the  Ossianic  Society  of  Dubhn  (1853)
contains  an  Irish  poem  on  the  "  Battle  of  Gabhra,"
which  embodies  the  main  incidents,  such  as  : — War
between  Cairbre,  the  red-haired,  and  the  Feen  ;  the
death  of  Cau-bre  and  liis  son,  by  the  hand  of  Osgar ;
the  wounding  of  Osgar  by  a  spear-thrust  from  the
hand  of  Cairbre  ;  the  arrival  of  Fionn  on  the  field
after  the  battle ;  the  placing  of  Osgar  on  a  mound ;
the  examination  and  nature  of  the  wound,  which  had
been  foretold  ;  the  weeping  of  Fionn,  who  never  wept
but  for  Osgar  and  for  Brann  ;  the  death  of  Osgar,  and
the  lament  for  hiim  There  is  enough  resemblance  to
shew  clearly  that  the  two  poems  relate  to  the  same
events.  There  are  several  stanzas  which  seem  to  indi-
cate a  common  origin,  but  there  the  resemblance  ends.
The  two  poems  are  wholly  distinct,  and  probably
separated  from  one  another  by  centuries  ;  and  yet  they
must  have  had  a  common  origin,  unless  they  are  inde-
pendent accounts  of  a  real  event.  At  page  75  is  this
stanza, —

"When  we  marched  from  Binn  Eadair.

"  The  bands  of  the  Fians  of  Alba,
And  the  supreme  King  of  Britain,
Belonging  to  the  order  of  the  Fian  of  Alba,
Joined  us  in  that  battle."


302  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Beinn  Eadair,  say  the  Irish  authorities,  is  the  Hill
of  Howth.  It  is  the  haunt  of  the  Feen  and  of  Conal
Gulban,  according  to  Gaelic  stories,  if  it  be  Beinn  Eudain
or  Eidain.  In  the  introduction  to  the  Irish  poem,  which
was  taken  as  it  appears  from  a  comparatively  modern
MS.,  a  fragment  is  quoted,  taken  from  an  ancient
Irish  MS.,  now  preserved  in  the  College  Library,  and
supposed  by  good  authority  to  have  been  written  prior
to  A.D.  1150.  This  contains  the  incidents  of  the  death
of  "  Oscar"  by  the  hand  of  "  Cairpre,"  the  grandson
of  "  Conn,"  and  the  death  of  Cairpre  by  the  hand  of
Oscar,  "  by  a  mighty  spear,  on  a  white  horse's  back."

It  seems,  then,  that  this  traditional  poem,  written
from  the  dictation  of  a  peasant  in  Barra  in  1860,  relates
to  a  battle  fought  prior  to  1150,  near  the  Hill  of
Howth,  at  which  the  "  Fenians "  of  Alba  were  present,
and  that  the  battle  was  called  the  battle  of  Gabhra  in
Ireland.  The  Scotch  Gaelic  word  used  means  corpses.
The  Irish  explain  Gabhra  to  mean  Garrystown,  near
DubUn.

At  page  25  of  the  selections  from  the  Lismore
MSS.,  a  Scotch  poem  on  the  same  subject  is  given.  It
is  attributed  to  Allan  MacRuaraidh,  and  was  written
at  least  three  centuries  ago.  The  incidents  are  much
the  same,  and  several  lines  are  common  to  this  tradi-
tional version.  Another  version  is  quoted  as  written
down  in  1856,  from  the  dictation  of  an  old  woman  in
Caithness.  It  is  therefore  beyond  a  doubt  that  this  is
one  of  many  poems  relating  to  the  same  ancient  event,
some  of  wliich  are  orally  preserved  and  still  recited,  and
others  are  found  in  MSS.  of  various  ages.

A  poem,  almost  identical,  was  printed  in  1787,  at  ,
page  313  of  Gillies'  collection  ;  another  version  of  120  I
lines  is  given  at  page  167  of  the  same  book  ;  another  [
version,    247   lines,    is  at   page   154    of   MacCallum,      j


OSGAR,  THK  SON  OF  OISEIN.  303

181G.  The  incidents  are  the  opening  of  Macpherson's
Temora,  and  I  have  heard  of  several  other  versions
orally  collected.  Here,  then,  are  seven  Scotch  versions
—  one  orally  collected  in  1860,  one  in  1856,  one  in
1816,  two  before  1786  —  Macpherson's  versions,  of
doubtful  authority,  1760,  and  Dean  MacGregor's  MS.
version  of  1530,  besides  an  Irish  book  of  1853,  and  an
Irish  fragment  of  some  date  before  1100  ;  nine  Gaelic
poems,  all  different,  yet  aU  teUing  the  same  story,  and
there  are  many  other  versions.

The  conclusion  which  I  would  draw  is,  that  this  was
a  Celtic  popular  ballad,  composed  to  celebrate  a  real
battle  between  an  Irish  usurper  named  Cairbre,  and  a
band  of  warriors  who  spoke  Gaelic,  who  were  headed
by  the  Osgar  (the  bounding  warrior),  who  went  from
Scotland  to  Ireland  on  this  occasion,  whatever  his
native  country  may  have  been ;  who  was  the  grandson
of  Fionn,  the  chief  of  the  Finne,  who  on  this  occasion
came  from  Scotland  after  the  battle  ;  and  the  son  of
Oisein,  in  whose  person  the  poet  sjieaks,  and  who  is
supposed  to  be  addressing  "  Padruig."  He  would
be  an  illiberal  Celt  Avho  claimed  tliis  for  Scotland
or  for  Ireland  alone,  and  a  very  prejudiced  critic  who
could  now  attribute  Temora  wholly  to  Macpberson.
This  ballad  is  later  than  St.  Patrick  and  earlier  than
1530.  The  battle  was  earHer  than  1100  ;  I  will  not
attempt  to  fix  the  date  of  either.


304  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Lxxxr.

THE  LAY  OF  OSGAE.

From  Donald  MacPhie,  Smith,  Breubhaig,  Barra ;  and  others.

"FT  was  said  at  that  time  that  Eirinn  was  the  better
-■-  chase  than  Albainn  ;  that  there  were  many  great
beamed  deer  in  it,  rather  than  in  this  Albainn.  It
was  this  which  used  to  cause  the  Fhinn  to  be  so  often
in  Eirinn  ;  but  true  Albanian  Gaul  (Scotch  liighland-
ers)  they  were.

The  red-haired  Cairbre  came  in  as  king  over  the
fifth  part  of  Eirinn,  at  the  southern  end.  The  Fhinn
were  now  over  in  Eirinn,  and  Fionn  had  dwelling-
houses  in  every  place  in  wliich  it  was  most  usual  for
them  to  stay.

The  ord  Fhiann  (hammer  of  Fionn)  was  a  bell.  It
was  not  to  be  struck  but  in  time  of  great  rejoicing,  and
in  time  of  hard  straits,  and  it  could  be  heard  in  the
five-fifths  of  Eirinn.

They  had  a  house  on  the  land  of  the  red-haired
Cah'bre,  and  they  came  on  the  northern  side  of  Eirinn
to  hunt.

Padruig  was  asking  Oisean —

"  Would  their  set  of  arms  be  on  them  when  they
went  to  hunt  ?"

Oisean  said  to  him —
"  Without  oiir  armour  and  our  arms  ;
We  woidd  not  go  to  hunt  like  that.
There  would  be  arms,  and  stout  headgear,
And  in  each  man's  grasp  were  two  great  spears."

When  the  Flxinn  went  to  hunt  to  the  northward)
they  left  Osgar  to  keep  the  house,  and  tliree  hundred
of  the  old  warriors  with  him,  for  they  were  heavy  for
walking.  Said  Oisean,  when  he  was  going  to  tell  the
old  story  to  Padruig  (a).


LAOIDH  OSGAIR.  305


LAOIDH  OSGAIE.

Bha  e  aij  a  radii  'sau  am  ud  gu  'm  b'e  Eirinn  a  b'
thearr  sealg  na  Albainn ;  gu  'n  robh  moran  de  dh'
f  heidli  chabrach  inbor  innte  seacli  an  Albainn  seo.  'Se
sin  a  bliiodb  a'  toirt  do  'n  Fliinn  gai  'm  biodh  iad  cho
trie  an  Eirinn  ;  acli  'se  fior  Gliaidlieil  Albannach  a  bha
annta.

Tliainig  an  Cairbre  ruadh  a  stigh  'na  righ  air  a'
choigeauih  cuid  de  dh'  Eirinn  air  a'  cheann  deas.  Bha
'n  Fhinn  'san  am  seo  thall  an  Eirinn,  's  bha  tighean
comhnuidli  aig  Fionn  anns  a'  h-uile  h-àite  a  bu  trie
leo  a  bhith  stad  ann.

Clag  a  bha  anns  an  ord  Fhiann  ta.  Cha  robh  e  ri
'bhualadli  aeh  an  am  toil-inntinn  mhoir,  'san  am  eigin
ehruaidh,  's  chluinnt'  ann  an  coig  choigeamh  na  h-
Eirionn  e.

Bha  tigh  aca  air  fearann  a'  Chairbre  ruaidh,  's
thainig  iad  air  an  taobh  mu  thuath  de  dh'  Eirinn  a
shealgaireachd.

Bha  Padruig  a  foighneachd  de  dh'  Oisean,

"  Am  biodh  an  ciiid  arm  orr'  uile  nuair  a  rachadli
iad  a  shealgaireachd  Ì "

Thuirt  Oisean  ris,
"  Gun  ar  n-eideadh,  's  gtm  ar  n-airm,
I  Cha  rachamaid  a  shealg  mar  siud  ;

Bhiodh  ah-m,  agus  ceannabheart  ehorr,
'S  da  shleagh  mhor  an  dorn  gach  fir."
Nuair  a  chaidh  an  Fhinn  a  shealgaireachd  do'n  taobh
tuath  dh'  fhag  iad  Osgar  a'  gleidheadh  an  tighe  's  tri
cheud  de  na  seami  laoich  comhla  ris,  0  bha  iad  trom
gu  coiseachd.

Thuirt  Oisean  nuair  a  bha  e  'dol  a  dh'  innseadh  an
t-seanachais  do  Phadruig.  (a)

X


306                             WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.
1 OlSEAN,

"  I  will  not  style  my  strain,  '  my  Prince,'
How  sad  is  Oisean  to-niglit.
Osgar  and  the  Cairbre  stalwart
Ebb  away  in  strife  of  corses.  (')


"  The  venomous  spear  in  the  hand  of  Cairbre,

In  anger's  hour,  how  baneful  was  it  ;

The  raven  would  iitter  wdth  fear.

That  with  it  should  be  slain  the  Osgar."

3  — Eaven.

"  It  is  worse,"  to  himself  he'd  say
That  black  raven  in  his  craze,
"  These  five  to  be  washing  about  a  trough,
Than  blood  of  men  to  be  gorging  us."

4 — Osgar.

"  Why  should  our  own  blood  choke  us  ?

What  weakness  is  on  oiu'  eyehds  ?

Tliat  we  for  such  small  cause  should  weep."

5 — Washerwoman.
"  The  raven  will  croak  to-morrow  early
Upon  thy  cheek  in  the  field  of  battle  ;
From  the  socket  thine  eye  shaU  be  forced  ;
Out  of  this  thus  much  will  come."


Said  one  of  the  old  warriors,  as  he  saw  the  hue  of
the  blood  on  the  water  that  she  had  washing  the  clothes
of  Osgar.


LAOIDH  OSGAIR.  307


"  Cha  'n  abair  mi,  mo  thriath,  ri  m'  cheol,

Cia  V  oil  le  Oisean  e  nochd ;

Osgar  agus  Cairbre  calma,

Traghar  iad  aim  an  cath  cairbhre.  C)


"  An  t-sleagh  nimhe,  's  i'n  laimh  Chairbre,
Gu'n  craidhteach  i  ri  uair  feirge ;
Theireadb  am  fitheach  ri  'gbiomh,
Gur  h-ann  leatba  'mharbht'  an  t-Osgar."


"  'S  miosa  theireadli  e  ris  f  hein, —
Am  fitbeacb  dubh  'na  mhi-cheill ;
A'  choigear  a'  taLseadh.  mil  (b)  'n  chlar,
Acb  foil  fir  a  bbith  'gar  tacadb.


"  Com'  an  tacadli  ar  foil  fhein,
De  gbiamb  a  tb'  air  ar  rasgabb  ;
Nuair  a  cbaoineamaid  cbaol  reacbdaibb.

5 — Bean  Nighidh.

"  Gairidli  am  fitheacb,  mocb  a  inaireacli,
AÙ-  do  gbruaidh-sa  anns  an  araick
Cuireadar  do  sbuil  a  gbicbd  ;
As  an  sin  a  tbig  na  b-uiread."

Arsa  fear  de  na  seann  laoicb,  's  e  'faicinn  datb  na
fala  air  an  ixisge  a  bb'  aice  a'  nigbeadli  aodacb  Osgair.(')


308  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

6

"  Surely  it  is  a  shroud  thou  washest,
Eed  is  the  look  that  is  upon  it,
But  until  this  day  had  come,
Hiat  shroud's  sj^aeing  was  not  evil."

7 OSGAR.

"  Thou  witch  there  thy  clothes  that  washest,
Make  for  us  a  sure  soothsaying  ;
By  us  shall  a  man  of  them  fall.
Ere  that  we  all  go  to  nothing  V

8— She.
"  Five  hundred  by  thee  shall  die  ;
Wounded  by  thee  the  king's  self ;
Thus  much,  and  a  man  of  law  (cut)  oif,
Off  the  world  all  that  came  (c)."

9 OSGAR.

"  Let  him  not  hear  thee,  Easg  MacEuaidh,
ISTor  one  that  belongs  to  his  people  ;
Let  not  the  Een  hear  thee  this  night,
Lest  we  be  spiritless  alL"

10— OlSEAN.

"  Heard  ye  of  the  raid  of  Een,
The  time  he  wended  to  Eirinn  ;
There  came  the  fierce  Carbre  of  spears,
And  grasped  all  Eirinn  under  sway.

11

"  Away  went  we  with  eager  hurry.
As  many  Feen  as  were  of  us  ;
We  laid  our  army  and  our  people
On  the  northern  side  of  Eirinn.


LAOIDH  OSGAIR.  309


"  'S  dearbh  gur  u-aobli  sin  tha  tliu  nigheadli
'S  dearg  an  t-aogasg  a  tha  orra  ;
Ach  gus  an  d'  thainig  an  diugh
An  aobh  sin  clia  b'  olc  a  h-inneal.

7 — OSGAE.
"  A  bhaobli  sin,  a  niglieas  t'  aodach,
Dean-sa  dhuinne  faisneachd  chinnteach  ;
An  tuit  aon  duine  dhiu  leinn
Ma'n  d'  theid  sinn  uile  do  neo-ni  ?

8 ISE.

"  Marbhar  leatsa  coig  ceud,
A's  gonar  leat  an  rigli  fhein  ;
Mar  sin  a's  fear  Lagha  dhethf)
Bhar  saogliail  uile  gu  'n  d'  thainig.  (')

9 OSGAR.

"  Xa  cluinneadh  e  thu,  Easg  MacEuaidh,
Xa  duine  'bheanas  dh'  a  shluagh  ;
Na  cluinneadh  an  Fhinn  thu  nochd,
Ma  'm  bi  sinn  uile  gun  mhisneach.Q

10— OlSEAN.

"  An  cuala  sibhse  turas  Fhinn
An  uair  a  ghluais  e  gu  h-Eirinn  ?
Thainig  an  Caii'bre  sleaghach,  garg,
A's  ghlac  e  Eirinn  fo  aon  smachd

11

"  Dh'  f  halbh  sinne  le  dian  damhair, — f)
A  lion  de'n  Fhinn  's  a  bha  dhinn  ;
Leagalli  leinn  ar  feachd,  's  ar  sluagh,
Air  an  taobh  mu  thuath  de  dh'  Eirinn.


3IO  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

12

"  There  was  sent  down  by  Cairbre
Word  for  Feene's  hardy  Osgar,
To  go  down  to  the  Feen's  carousal,
And  he  would  get  his  cess  according.

13

"  He  rose  who  never  baulked  a  foeman,
The  beauteous  Osgar  to  the  king's  hearth,
Three  hundred  stalwart  men  with  him,
To  answer  his  will  and  need.

14

"  We  found  honour,  we  found  food,

As  we  ever  before  had  found  ;

We  were  merrily  within,

With  Cairbre  in  the  house  of  the  king."

1 5 — Cairbre.

"  Upon  the  last  drinking  day,"

Said  the  Cairbre  with  a  voice  so  high,

"  An  exchange  of  spear-shafts  I  'd  hke  from  thee,

Thou  brown  Osgar  of  the  Alba."

16 — Osgar.
"  What  shaft's  exchange  wouldst  thou  wish.
Thou  red-haired  Cairbre  of  the  ports  of  ships  ?
Oft  were  my  spear  and  myself  with  thee,
In  the  day  of  battle  and  combat  (free)."

1 7 — Cairbre.
"  I'd  need  no  less  than  cess  and  kain
From  any  warrior  your  shores  withm.
And  I'd  need  no  less  for  my  hfe's  term,
Than  to  get  as  I  ask  for  it  every  arm."


LAOIDH  OSGAIR.  3  I  I

12
"  Chuireadh  le  Caii'bre  'nuas
Fios  air  Osgar  cruaicUi  na  Finne,
A  dhol  a  dh'  ionnsnidh  fleadli  na  Finne,
'S  gu'm  faiglieadh  e  cis  a  reir  sin.

13

"  Dh'  eirich,    o  nacli  d'  ob  e  naniliaid,
An  t- Osgar  aluinn  gu  Leac  Eigli ;
Tri  cheud  fear  treun  dh'  imicli  leis
A  f hreasdal  dh'  a  thoil  's  dh'  a  fheum.

14

"  Fhuair  sinn  onair,  f  huair  sinn  biadli,
Mar  a  fhuair  sinn  roimhe  rianili ;
Bha  sinn  gu  subhach  a  steach
Maille  ri  Cairbre  'san  Teanihraidh."  (")

15 — Cairbre.
"  An  latha  mu  dheireadh  dh'  an  ol"
Thuirt  an  Cairbre  le  guth  mor.
"  lomlaid  croinn  sleagh  b'  aill  learn  uait
Osgair  dhuinn  na  h-Albann."

1 6 — Osgar.
"  Gu  de  an  iomlaid  croinn  a  bhiodh  ort,
A  Chairbre  ruaidh  nan  long-phort  Ì
A's  trie  'bu  leat  mi  f  heiu  's  mo  shleagh
An  latha  oath  agus  comhraig."

17 — Cairbre.
"  Cha  b'  uilear  leamsa  cis  a's  cain
Bhar  aon  seoid  a  bhiodh  'nar  tir ;
'S  cha  b'  uilear  learn  ri  m'  linn  a  bhos,
Gach  send  a  dli'  iarrainn  mi  'm  faishinn."


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


1 8 OSGAR.


"  In  sooth,  there's  nor  gold,  nor  precious  thing,
That  might  be  asked  from  us  by  the  king,
Without  dishonour  or  disgrace.
That  were  not  thine,  oh  Tjeearnai's."

19

"  But  exchange  of  shafts  without  head's  exchange,
Tliat  Avere  unjust  to  demand  from  us  ;
The  reason  thou  hast  asked  it  is.
That  I  am  without  Een  and  father."

20 — Cairbre,
"  Although  the  Feene  and  thy  father
Were  as  good  as  they  were  ever  ;
I'd  need  no  less  for  my  life's  term.
Then  to  get  as  I  ask  for  it  every  arm."

21 — OsGAR.
"  Were  but  the  Feene  and  my  father
As  well  in  life  as  they  were  ever ;
That  thou  scarcely  .shouldest  win
Thy  dwelling's  breadth  in  Eirinn."

22— OlSEAN.

"  Coldness  fell  on  the  warrior's  keen.
At  hearing  the  skirmishing  ;
There  were  rough  vows  bandied  there,
Between  the  Cairbre  and  the  Osgar."

23 — Cairbre.
"  I  will  give  a  lasting  vow,"
So  would  say  the  red-haired  Cairbre,
That  he  'd  plant  the  seven-edged  spear  (d)
Between  his  reins  and  his  navel.


LAOIDH  OSGAIR.  3  I  3

18— OSG.VR.

"  Cha  n-'eil  or,  na  earras,  ga  fior,
A  dli'  iarradh  oirnn  an  righ,
Gun  tair,  na  tailceas  dliuinn  e,
!N'ach  bu  leatsa  'tliighearnais."(')

19

"  Acli  nialairt  croinn,  gun  mhalairt  cinn,
B'  eucorach  sind  iarraidh  oirnn  ;
'S  e'm  fath  mu  'n  iarradh  tu  oirnn  e
Mise  bhith  gun  Fliinn,  gun  athair."

20 — Cairbre.
"  Gad  a  bhiodli  an  Fhinn  a's  t'  atliair
Co  math  's  a  bha  iad  riamh  'nam  beatba,
Cha  b'  uilear  leamsa  ri  m'  hnn,
Gach  send  a  dh'  iarrainn  gu'm  faigliinn."

21— OSGAR.

"  Na  'm  biodh  an  Fhinn  agus  m'  athair
Cho  math  's  a  bha  iad  riamh  'nam  beatha,
'S  teann  air  am  faigbeadh  tu  sin, —
Lend  do  thaigh  ann  an  Eirijin."

22 OlSE^VN.

"  Lion  fuarrachd  na  laoich  loin
Ei  claistinn  na  h-iomarbbaidh  : —
Bha  briathran  garbha,  leith  mar  leith,
Eadar  an  Cairbre  's  an  t-Osgai'."

23 — Cairbre.
"  Bheireamsa  briatbar  buan,"
'Se  'theireadli  an  Cau-bre  ruadh ;
Gu'n  cuireadh  e  sleagh  nan  seachd  seang  (d )
Eadar  'airnean  agus  'imleag.


3  I  4  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

24

"  Another  vow  against  that,"
So  would  say  the  Osgar  valiant,
That  he'd  plant  the  nine-edged  spear
About  the  shaping  of  face  and  hair.

Eeciter.
The  Cairhre  had  a  place  made  in  a  pillar  of  rock,
and  there  would  not  be  a  bit  of  him  out  but  his  face.

25
"That  lasting  vow,  then  ;  that  lasting  vow,"
So  would  say  the  red-haired  Cairbre,
That  he  would  bring  chase  and  sorrow
To  Albainn  upon  the  morrow.

26

"  Another  vow  against  that,"
So  would  say  the  Osgar  valiant,
That  he  'd  plant  the  nine-edged  spear
About  the  shaping  of  face  and  hair.

27
"  That  night  we  were  without  aid,
Hither  and  thither  about  the  river  ;
There  was  an  isthmus  in  the  midst ;  (/)
There  was  a  great  isthmus  betwixt  us.


"  An  olla  was  heard  with  a  soft  voice,
On  a  sweet-toned  harp,  bewailing  death  ;
Up  rose  Osgar  in  heavy  wi'ath.
And  seized  his  arms  in  his  mighty  grasp.


LAOIDH  OSGAIR.  315

24

"  Briathar  eile  'n  agliaidli  sin,"
'Se  'tlieireadh  an  t-Osgar  calnia  ;
Gru'n  cuireadh  e  sleagh  nan  naoi  seang
Mu  chumadli  fliuilt  agiis  aodainn.

Bha  ait  aig  a'  Cliairbre,  air  a  dlieanadh  ann  an
carragh  creige,  's  clia  bhiodli  niir  a  mach  deth  ach  an
t-aodenn.

25
"  Briathar  buan  sin, — briathar  buan,"
'Se  'theireadh  an  Cairbre  ruadh  ;
Gu  'n  d'  thugadh  e  sealg  agus  creach,
Do  dli'  Albainn  an  la'r  na  nihaireach.

26
"  Briathar  eile  'n  aghaidh  sin,"
'Se  'theireadh  an  t-Osgar  calma ;
Gn  'n  cuireadh  e  sleagh  nan  naoi  seang,
Mu  chumadh  f  huilt  agus  aodainn.

27
"  An  oidhche  sin  duinne  gun  chobhair
Thall  agus  a  bhos  mu  'n    amhainn  ;
Bha  doirlinn  leith  mar  leith, — (/)
Bha  doirUnn  mhor  eadaruinn.

28

"  Chualas  011a,  le  guth  tim.
Air  chlarsaich  bhinn  a'  tuireadh  bais.
Dh'  eirich  Osgar  ann  am  feirg, —
'S  ffhlac  e  'airm  'na  dhornaibh  aidli.


3  1 6  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

29

"  Uprose  we  upon  the  morrow,

The  whole  of  our  people,  as  many  as  we  Avere  ;

We  raised  a  raid  upon  Sliabh  Goill,

So  swiftly,  actively,  strongly.

30
"  Wlien  we  arrived  there  within
The  pass  of  combat  of  the  narrow  glen  ;
Then  warmed  the  Cairbre  high,
Brandisliing,  and  coming  to  meet  us.

31

"  Fivescore  of  Gaidheal  fierce.
That  came  to  land  in  time  of  storm  ;
These  fell  yonder  by  the  hand  of  Osgar,
'Tis  a  rousing  for  the  "King  of  Eirinn.

32

"  Fivescore  of  men  of  bows
That  came  to  Cairbre's  succour  ;
These  fell  yonder  by  the  hand  of  Osgar,
'Tis  a  rousing  for  the  King  of  Eirmn.

33

"  Seven  score  of  men  of  war,
That  came  from  the  snowy  shore  ;
These  fell  yonder  by  the  hand  of  Osgar,
The  shame  is  for  the  king  of  Eirinn.

34

"  Seven  score  men  of  gray  glaives,
That  never  went  backAvards  a  single  pace,
There  fell  yonder,  by  the  hand  of  Osgar —
The  shame  is  for  the  King  of  Eirinn.


LAOIDH  OSGAIR.
29

"  Dh'  eirich  sinn  an  la'r  na  mhaireach, —
Ar  sluagh  uile, — sin  na  'bha  dliinn,
Thog  sinn  creach.  air  Sliabh  Goill
Gu  luath,  lasgara,  lugliar.

30

"  Nuair  a  rainig  sinn  ann, —

Bealach  comhraig  nan  caol  ghleann,

'S  ann  a  bhlath  an  Cairbre  ard,

A'  lannaireachd  a'  tighinn  'nar  comhdhail.

31

"  Coig  ficheud  Ghaidlieal  garg(^)
A  tbainig  do  'n  tir  an  uair  gharbh  ; — -
Thuit  siud  le  laimb  Osgair  thall,
'Se  'mosgladh  gu  righ  Eirionn.

32

"  Coig  fichead  de  dh'  f  hearaibh  bogha
Thainig  air  Cairbre  g'  a  chobhair ; —
Thuit  siud  le  laimh  Osgair  thall,
(')'Se  mosglacUi  gu  righ  Eiroinn.

33

"  Seachd  fichead  de  dh'  f  hearaibh  feachdC")
A  thamig  a  tir  an  t-sneachd  ; —
Thuit  siud  le  lainili  Osgair  thall,
Tha  'mhasladli  gu  righ  na  h-Eirionn.

34

"  Seachd  fichead  fear  claidlieamh  glas
I^ach  deach  aon  troidh  riamh  air  'n  ais,
Thuit  siud  le  laimh  Osgair  thall ;
Tha  'mhasladh  gu  righ  na  h-Eirionn.


3  1  8  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

35

"  Four  huntlred  of  mighty  men,
Tliat  came  to  us  from  the  Lion's  land,
These  fell  yonder,  by  the  hand  of  Osgar —
The  shame  is  for  the  King  of  Eirinn.

36

"  Five  score  of  a  royal  breed,
Whose  birthright  was  valour  and  great  deeds,
These  fell  yonder,  by  the  hand  of  Osgar —
The  shame  is  for  the  King  of  Eirinn.

37

"  Mangan  MacSeirc,(")  who  was  a  foe
That  could  combat  a  hundred  gray  glaives,
That  one  fell  yonder,  by  the  hand  of  Osgar —
The  shame  is  for  the  King  of  Eirinn.

38
"  Tlie  five  who  were  nearest  the  king
Of  great  valour  and  deeds.
These  fell  yonder,  by  the  hand  of  Osgar —
The  shame  is  for  the  King  of  Eirinn.

39
"  When  the  red-haired  Cairbre  saw
Osgar  a-hewing  the  people.
The  envenomed  dart  in  his  hand
He  let  it  off  to  meet  him.

40
"  Osgar  fell  on  his  right  knee,
And  the  deadly  spear  tlirough  his  waist ;
He  gave  another  cast  thither,
And  the  King  of  Eirinn  was  slain  by  him.


LAOIDH  OSGAIR.  3  1 9

35

"  Ceither  cheucl  de  dh'  fhearaibh  mora,('')
Thainig  airnn  o  tliir  nan  leomlian  ;  (")
Thuit  siud  le  laimh  Osgair  thall,
Tha  'mhasladli  gu  righ  na  li-Eirionn.

36
"  Coig  fichead  de  chlannaibh  righ
D'  am  bu  dual  gaisge  's  mor  ghniomh  ;
Tbiiit  siud  le  laimh  Osgair  thall,
Tha  'mhasladh  gu  righ  na  h-Eirionn.

37

"  Mungan  MacSeirc  a  bu  namh,
A  chomhraigeadh  ceud  claicUieamh  glas  ;
Thuit  siud  le  laimh  Osgair  thall,
Tha  'mhasladh  gu  righ  na  h-Eirionn.

38
"  An  coigear  a  b'  f  haisge  do  'n  righ,
Bu  mhor  gaisge'  agus  gniomh  ;
Thuit  siud  le  laimh  Osgair  thall,
Tha  'mhasladh  gu  righ  na  h-Eirionn.

39
"  An  uair  a  chunnaic  an  Cairbre  ruadh,
Osgar  a  suaidlieacUi  an  t-sluaigh  ;
A'  claraosach  nimhe  'bha  'na  laimh,
Gu  'n  do  leig  e  i  'na  chomhdhail.

40
"  Thuit  Osgar  air  a  ghluin  dels,
'S  an  t-sleagh  nimhe  roimh  a  chneas  ;
Thug  e  urchair  eile  null,
'S  mharbhadh  leis  righ  na  h-Eirioun.


320  west  highland  tales.

41 — Cairbre.

"  Arise  Art,  and  grasp  thy  glaive,
And  stand  in  the  place  of  thy  father  ;
And  if  thou  get'st  thy  due  of  the  world,
I'll  think  that  thou  art  a  king's  son."

42 OlSEAN.

"  He  gave  another  cast  aloft,
Its  height  appeared  to  us  sufficient ;
There  fell  by  him,  by  his  aim's  greatness,
Art  MacCairbre  at  the  next  spear  cast."

Eeciter.
The  Cairbre  was  dead,  and  Osgar  was  upon  his
knees,  and  the  spear  through  liim.  Cairbre  had  a
ceap  made  against  the  rock,  and  they  put  the  ceap
(helmet)  on  the  crag,  so  that  Osgar  might  think  he
was  alive.

43 — Oisean.
"  Tliey  set  about  the  king  his  ceap,
Cairbre's  people,  rough  in  fight.
That  they  might  reap  the  fruit  of  the  field,
When  they  saw  that  Osgar  was  woimded.

44
"  He  lifted  a  slab  from  a  hard  plain.
From  off  the  earth  of  the  ruddy  side  ;
He  broke  the  pillar  on  which  was  the  ceap,
The  last  deed  of  my  worthy  son."

45 — Osgar.
"  Eaise  me  now  with  you,  Eeanna,
Never  before  have  you  lifted  me  ;
Take  me  now  to  a  clear  mound.
That  you  may  strip  off  me  my  armour."


laoidh  osgair.  3  2  i

41 — Cairbre.
"  Eiricli  Art  a's  glac  do  clilaklheamli,
A's  seas  aim  an  àite  t'  athar ;
'S  ma  gheibh  thu  do  dhiol  saoghail,
Saoilidh  mi  gur  mac  rigli  tliu."

42
"  Thug  e  urcliair  eile  'n  airde  ; —
Air  leiime  gu  'm  bu  leoir  a  h-airde,
Leagadli  leis,  aig  meud  a  chuimse,
Art  MacCliairbre  air  an  atli  urchair."

Bha  Cairbre  marbb,  's  bha  Osgar  air  a  ghluiueau.
'san  t-sleagh  roimhe.  Bha  ceoj;  aig  Cairbre  air  a
dheanadh  ris  a'  chreig,  's  chuir  iad  an  ceap  air  a  chreig,
air  dhoigh  's  gu  'n  saoileadli  Osgar  gu  'n  robh  esan
beo.

43

"  Chuir  a  chum  an  righ  mu  cheajj
Sluagh  Chairbre  bu  gharbh  gleachd,
An  los  gu  'n  buinte  leo  buaidh  larach,
Air  faicimi  daibh  Osgair  gu  craidhteach.

44
"  Thog  e  leac  a  comlmard  cruaidh,
Bhar  na  tabnhuinne  taobh-ruaidh  ;
Bhrisd  e  'n  carragh  air  an  robh  'n  ceap,
Gniomli  mu  dheireadh  mo  dlieagh  mhic."

45 — Osgar.
"  Togaibh  leibh  mi  nis  Fhiaima,
Xior  thog  sibh  mi  roimhe  riamh ;
Thugaibh  mi  gu  tulaich  ghlain,
Ach  an  'm  buin  sibh  dhiom  an  t-aodach."


322  WEST  HIGHLxVND  TALES.

46 — OlSEAN.

"  There  was  heard  at  the  northern  strand,
Shouts  of  people  and  edge  of  arms  ;
Our  warriors  suddenly  started,
Eefore  that  Osgar  was  yet  dead."

47 — Osgar.
"  Death's  shrouds  be  about  thee,  thou  victory's  son,
A  second  time  wilt  thou  lie  to  us  ;
These  are  my  grandsire's  ships,
And  they  are  coming  with  succour  to  us."

48 OlSEAN.

"  We  all  gave  blessing  to  Fionn  ;
What  though  he  saluted  not  us
Until  we  reached  the  hillock  of  tears,
Where  was  Osgar  of  the  keen  arms."

Eecitee.
Fionn  could  heal  any  wound  that  might  be  on  any
being  in  the  Een,  unless  there  should  be  poison  in  it.

49 — Fionn.
"  Worse,  my  son,  wert  thou  for  it,
The  battle  day  of  Bein  Eidinn  ;
The  sickles  might  float  through  thy  waist,
It  was  my  hand  that  made  thy  healing."

^0 OSGAR.

"  My  healing  does  not  increase,
No  more  shall  it  be  done  for  ever ;
The  Cairbre  planted  the  seven-edged  spear
Between  my  reins  and  my  navel.  (")


LAOIDH  OSGAIR.  323

4G OlSEAN.

"  Chualas  aig  an  traigh  mu  tliuatli
Eibheach  sluaigh  a's  faobhar  arm,
Chlisg  ar  gaisgich  gu  luath
Ma  'n  robh  Osgar  fhathasd  marbh."

47 — Osgar.

"  Marbhphaisg  ort  a  mhic  na  buaclha,
Ni  thu  breug  an  darna  uair  dhuinn  ;
Luingeas  mo  sheanar  a  tli'  ann,
'S  iad  a'  teachd  le  cobhair  tbugaiun."

48 OlSEAN.

"  Bheannaich  sinn  tdle  do  db'  Fhionn,
Gad  tha  cha  do  bheannaich  dhuinn  ;
Gus  an  do  rainig  sinn  tulach  nan  deur,
Far  an  robh  Osgar  nan  arm  geur."

Leighseadh  Fionn  creuchd  sam  bith  a  bhiodh  air
neach  san  Fhinn,  ach  gun  puinsean  a  bhith  ann.

49 — Fionn.
"  'S  miosa  'mhic  a  bhiodh  tu  dheth,
An  latha  catha  air  Beinn  Eudainn  ;
Shnandiadh  na  corran  roimh  d'  chneas,
'S  i  mo  lanihsa  rinn  do  leigheas."

50— Osgar.
"  Mo  leighas  cha  n  'eile  e  'fas,
'S  cha  mho  a  niotar  e  gu  bràch ;
Chuir  an  Cairbre  sleagh  nan  seachd  seang
Edar  m'  imleag  agus  m'  airnean.


324  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

51

"  I  planted  the  nine-edged  spear
About  the  shaping  of  his  face  and  hair  ;
The  deep  sting  in  my  right  side,
The  leech  has  no  skill  to  heal  it."

52 — FiONN.

"  Worse,  my  son,  wert  thou  for  it,

On  the  battle  day  of  Dun  Dealgan  ;

Tlie  geese  might  iloat  tlu'ough  thy  waist,  (")

It  was  my  hand  that  made  thy  healing."  (r/)

53 OSGAR.

"  My  healing  does  not  increase,
No  more  shall  it  be  done  for  ever ;
The  Cairbre  planted  the  seven-edged  spear
Between  my  reins  and  my  navel.

54
"  I  planted  the  nine-edged  spear
About  the  shaping  of  his  face  and  hair ;
The  deep  sting  in  my  right  side,
The  leech  has  no  skill  to  heal  it."

55 OlSEAN.

"  That  was  the  time  that  Fionn  went
Up  to  the  mound  above  him ;
The  tears  streamed  down  from  his  eyelids,
And  he  turned  liis  back  to  us."

56 — Fionn.
"  jVIy  own  calf,  thou  calf  of  my  calf.
Thou  child  of  my  fair  tender  child.
My  heart  is  bounding  like  an  elk,
Kot  tiU  the  last  day,  rises  Osgar.


LAOIDH  OSGAIR.  325

51

"  Chuir  mise  sleagli  nan  naoi  seang
Mu  cliuniadh  fhiiilt-san  agns  aodainn  ;
An  gath  domhainn  am'  thaobli  deas
Cha  dual  do'n  leigh  a  leigheas."

52 — FioxN.
"  'S  miosa  'nihic  a  bhiodli  tu  dlieth,
Latha  catha  sin  Dhun  Dealgain ;
Shnamhadh  na  geoidli  roimli  d'  chneas,
'Si  mo  lanihsa  rinn  do  leigheas."

53 OSGAR.

"  Mo  leigheas  cha  n-'eil  e  'fas,
'S  cha  mho  a  dh'  eireas  mi  gu  bràch  ;
Chuir  an  Cairbre  sleagh  nan  seachd  seang
Eadar  m'  imleag  agus  m'  airnean.

54
"  Chuir  mise  sleagh  nan  naoi  seang
Mu  chumadh  f  huilt-san  agus  aodainn  :
An  gath  domhainn  a'  m'  thaobh  deas
Cha  dual  do  'n  leigh  a  leigheas."  ('")

55 OlSEAN.

"  'Sin  an  uair  a  chaidh  Fionn,
Air  an  tulaich  as  a  chionn  ;
Shruthadh  na  deoir  sios  o  'rasgaibh,
'S  thionndaidh  e  ruinn  a  chvd."

56— F:oxx.
"  Mo  laogh  f  hein  thu — 'laoigh  mo  laoigh,
A  leinibh  mo  leinibh  ghil  chaoimh
Mo  chridhe  'leunu'aich  mar  Ion  ;
('■)  Gu  lath  bhràch  cha  'n  eirich  Osgar  !


326  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


57


"  Tlae  whining  of  the  hounds  by  my  side,

And  the  waihng  of  the  ancient  warriors,

The  crying  of  the  women  in  turns —

These  were  the  things  that  pierced  my  heart-strings.

58
"  So  it  was  that  I  ever  thought
No  fleshly  heart  was  in  my  breast  ;
But  a  heart  of  the  holly  spikes,
All  over-clad  with  steel.

59
"  Pity  it  was  not  I  that  fell
In  the  battle  of  Corses,  not  scarce  in  deeds  ;
And  thou  in  the  east  and  the  west  ward,
Thou'dst  be  before  the  Fiantan  Osgair."

60— CONAN.

"  Although  it  had  been  thou  that  fell
In  the  battle  of  Corses,  not  scarce  in  deeds  ;
Alas  !  in  the  east  or  the  west  ward,
Groaning  for  thee  would  not  be  Osgar."

61 OlSEAN.

"  We  raised  with  us  lovely  Osgar,

On  shoulders  and  on  lofty  spear-shafts  ;

We  had  a  glorious  carrying

Until  we  reached  the  house  of  Konn.

62
"Xo  wife  would  weep  her  own  son,
Xo  man  bewail  his  brother  kind ;
As  many  as  we  were  about  around  the  house.
We  were  all  bewailing  Osgar."


LAOIDH  OSGAIR.  327


57


"  Donnalaich  nan  con  ri  m'  thaobh,
Agus  buirich  nan  seann  laocli  ;
Gaiiich  nam  ban  mu  seaeh  ;  (^)
Siud  an  rud  a  gbon  mo  chridhe.

58

"  'S  ann  a  shaoil  mi  roimlie  riamh,  (")
Nach  cridlie  feola  'blia'nn  a'  m'  cliliabh  ;
Acli  cridlie  de  gbuin  na  cuilinn
Ail-  a  cliomlidachadh  le  stailinn.

59

"  'S  truagli  nach  mise  thuiteadh  ann
An  catli  Cairblire,  an  gnionih  nach  gann
A's  tusa,  'n  ear  agus  an  iar
A  bliiodh  roimli  na  Fiarmtan  Osgair."

60 CONAN.

"  Gad  a  bu  tusa  'thuiteadh  ann

An  cath  Cairbhre  an  gniomh  nach  gann,

Ochon  !  an  ear  na  'n  iar

A'  t'  iargain  cha  bliiodh  Osgar."

61 — O1SE.ÌN.
"  Thog  sinn  leinn  an  t-Osgar  aluinn
Air  ghuaillibh  't  air  slileaghaibh  arda ;
Thug  sinn  as  iomchar  ghrinn
Gus  an  do  rainig  sinn  taigh  Fhinn.

62
"  Cha  chaoineadh  bean  a  mac  f  hein,
'S  cha  chaoineadh  fear  a  bhrathair  caomli,
'S  cia  lion  's  a  bha  sinn  mu  'n  teach  ;
Bha  sinn  uile  caomeadh  Osgair."


328                              WEST  HIGHLAKD  TALES.
63 FlONN.

"  Death  of  Osgar  that  tortured  my  heart,
Eirinn's  men's  lord,  our  mighty  loss  ;
Where  in  thy  time  was  ever  seen,
One  so  hardy  behind  a  Wade."

64 OlSEAN.

"  Fionn  never  gave  over  trembling  and  woe,
From  that  day  till  the  day  of  for  ever  ;
He  would  not  take,  and  he  would  not  desire,
A  third  of  his  life  though  I  should  say.  (^'')

(')  Cairbhre,  abounding  in  carcases,  producing  carcases  ;  from
cairbb,  a  carcase.     H.  M'L.  Gabbra,  in  Gillies.        J.  F.  C.

(^)  Araon  's  am  fear  a  (laghadh  Laoidheadb)  dh'e.     J.  F.  0.

(')  Together,  and  one  wbo  would  sing  of  it  (a  reading  in
Gillies).    J.  F.  G.

(*)  This  introduction  is  given  in  Gillies ;  it  varies  somewhat
from  this,  but  it  is  not  a  whit  more  comprehensible.    J.  F.  C.

(*)  Damhair,  hurry.

(*)  Teamhradh,  a  royal  residence  ;  from  tàmh  righ,  king'i
dwelling,  or  rest,  "  Temora."

(')  Tighearn,  a  lord,  or  proprietor  of  land  ;  from  ti  fhearani
person  of  lands.  In  this  line  tighearnas  is  used  in  the  sam<
sense  as  majesty.  Tighearn  was  evidently  synonymous  wi
Righ,  king,  at  one  time,  and  is  no  doubt  the  same  word  as  th(
Greek,  turannos,  a  king,  H.  M'L.

(^)  From  this  line  it  might  be  inferred  that  the  Gaels  at  som(
period  were  not  the  native  race  in  the  south  of  Ireland.    H.  M'Ij

(^)  Tha  mhasladh  gu  righ  na  h-Eirionn. — Patrick  Smith
This  seems  to  me  to  be  the  better  line,  as  the  one  inserted  hard]
makes  sense.  H.  M'L.

(")  The  Scandinavian  race.  H.  M'L.

(*^)  Bear,  son  of  Love.

(*^)  This  stanza  is  from  Patrick  Smith,  who,  in  the  enumera
tion  of  the  heroes,  invariably  uses  ceithir  ceud,  four  hundred.

PI.  M'L.


LAOIDH  OSGAIR.  329

63— FlOXX.

"  Bàs  Osgair  a  chraidli  mo  chii,
Triath  fear  Eiriomi  's  nior  g'  ar  dith  ;
Cait  am  facas  riamh  ri  d'  linn,
Aon  cho  cniaidh  riut  air  cid  laiim.

G4 OlSEAN.

"  !N^ior  cliuir  Fionn  detli  crith  a's  grain
O'n  latha  sin  gii  la  bhi-ach  ;
Cha  gliabhadli,  's  cha  L'  f  heairde  leis
Trian  de  'n  bheatha  gad  dh'  abruinn.

Q^)  The  PhcEnician  or  Carthaginian  race.  H.  M'L.

(^*)  Here  Osgar  exults  in  having  given  the  nobler  wound.

H.  M'L.

(>=)  (?)  The  winds.

(^^)  Na  'n  ruigeadh  nio  dhuirn  a  chneas,
Cha  deanadh  an  leigh  a  leigheas.

(")  'Se  mo  chreach  nach  eirich  Osgar,— Patrick  Smith.

C^)  Gul  a'  bhannail  'caoidh  mu  seach. — Donald  MacPhie.

(")  These  lines  are  put  in  the  mouth  of  Oscar  by  some  re-
citers, and  in  the  version  published  by  MacCallum,  which  would
imply  that  Oscar's  fortitude  gave  way  from  the  pain  of  his  wounds  ;
but  this  is  altogether  inconsistent  with  the  character  ascribed  to
Oscar  in  all  Fenian  tales  and  poems,  while,  on  the  contrary,  when
uttered  by  Fionn,  the  loftiest  heroism  that  can  be  conceived  is
represented ;  the  steel-encased  holly  heart  overpowered  by  deep
feeling;  the  stern,  indomitable  old  captain  completely  subdued
by  the  tears  of  warm  and  generous  affection.  H.  M'L.

Part  of  this  poem  was  recited  to  me  by  Patrick  Smith,  South
Boisdale,  South  Uist,  September  17,  1860.  The  whole  of  it  as
written  here,  excepting  a  few  lines  peculiar  to  Smith's  version,
was  got  from  Donald  MacPhie,  smith,  Breubhaig,  Barra,  October
1,  1860.  It  seems  to  be  a  fragment  of  a  much  larger  poem,  some
peculiar  ancient  drama.  The  commencement  is  rather  obscure,
and  it  is  not  easy  to  make  sense  of  some  of  the  lines.     H.  M'L.

(-")  This  abrupt  termination  seems  to  indicate  more  to  follow,
or  a  repetition  of  the  first  line,  which  seems  to  be  the  usual  ter-
mination of  these  poems.  J.  F.  C.


23°  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

(a)  This  introduction  is  curious.  The  Irish  tradition  is,  that
Scotland  was  the  hunting  ground  of  Fionn.  The  lay  is  part  of
a  dialogue  between  the  old  poet  and  St.  Patrick,  which  savours
of  Irish  exti-action  ;  but  Barra  is  a  Roman  Catholic  district.

(b)  Moistening,  Taiseadh.  This  seems  to  refer  to  some  ancient
method  of  soothsaying  connected  with  washing  clothes.  In  broad
Scots  it  is  mentioned  in  an  old  song,  which  I  quote  from
memory —

"  My  droukit  sark  sleeve  I  was  waulking,
His  likeness  cam  ben  the  house  stalkin'."

The  verra  grey  breeks  o'  Tam  Glen."

In  Britany  (Foyer  Breton,  vol.  i.,  144),  the  night  washerwomen
(kannerez-noz)  were  a  troop  of  ghosts,  which  appeared  on  a  certain
night  in  November.  They  washed,  they  dried,  and  they  sewed
the  shroud  of  the  dead  who  yet  walk  and  talk,  singing, —

"  Till  there  come  Christians'  saviour,
We  must  bleach  our  shrouds,
Under  the  snow  and  the  wind."

They  asked  passengers  to  help  to  wring  the  wet  sheets,  and  if
a  man  turned  the  clothes  with  them  it  was  well,  if  he  turned
against  them  he  was  crushed,  and  died.

Taisbean,  s.m.,  means  a  vision,  an  apparition.

Taisbein,  v. a.,  to  reveal.

Taisgeal,  s.m.,  the  finding  of  something  lost,  and  I  have  heard
"  an  Taistear  "  used  as  a  term  of  opprobrium.  The  collector  is
unable  to  explain  the  passage,  but  this  seems  to  be  an  imperfect
explanation  of  it.  The  raven  has  been  a  soothsayer  time  out  of
mind.

(c)  This  8th  stanza  seems  imperfect,  and  it  is  very  hard  to
make  any  sense  of  it  as  it  stands,  but  supposing  that  I  am  right
in  my  explanation,  this  might  be  an  exclamation  of  the  mystic
washerwomen  previous  to  their  disappearance.  See  note  (2),
page  328.

(d)  'Seang  probably  refers  to  the  slender,  sharp,  tough,
qualities  of  a  spear.  Three  slender  points  and  throe  thin  edges
make  a  barbed  head,  and  a  tough  springy  shaft  makes  a  spear  of
seven  "  seang,''  add  to  that  a  couple  of  slender  cords  for  throwing


HOW  THE  EBN  WAS  SET  UP.  3  3  I

the  weapon,  of  which  there  are  traces  in  Irish  stories  ;  and  we
have  a  spear  of  nine  "seang,''  slenders,  and  a  phrase  similar  to
the  "binding  of  the  three  smalls."

(/)  This  line  is  given  in  Armstrong's  dictionary  under  the
word  doirlinn.

{fj)  The  geese  might  float.  This,  taken  literally,  is  absurd,  and
is  at  variance  with  the  spirit  of  the  rest  of  the  poem.  I  suspect,
therefore,  that  the  word  which  now  means  geese,  and  nothing  else
must  have  had  some  other  meaning,  as  the  word  which  means
herons  in  verse  49  also  means  any  crooked  cutting  instrument.
It  might  be  gaoithe,  winds,  and  suggest  the  idea  of  the  breath
escaping  from  the  wound.


LXXXII.

HOW  THE  EEX  WAS  SET  UP.

From  Angus  MacDonald,  Stoneybridge,  South  Uist.

rpHERE  was  a  king  on  a  time  over  Eirinn,  to  whom
the  cess  which  the  Lochlanners  had  laid  on  Alba
and  on  Eirinn  was  grievous.  They  were  coming  on
his  own  realm,  in  harvest  and  summer,  to  feed  them-
selves on  his  goods  ;  and  they  were  brave  strong  men,
eating  and  spoiling  as  much  as  the  Scotch  and  Irish
(Albannaich  and  Eirionnaich  ;  Alban-ians  Eirin-ians)
were  making  ready  for  another  year.

He  sent  word  for  a  counsellor  that  he  had,  and  he
told  him  all  what  was  in  his  thought,  that  he  wanted
to  find  a  way  to  keep  the  Scandina^nans  (Lochlannaich  ;
Lochlan-ians)  back.  The  counsellor  said  to  him  that
this  woidd  not  grow  with  him  in  a  moment ;  but  if  he
would  take  his  counsel,  that  it  would  grow  with  him
in  time.


332  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  Marry,"  said  he,  "  the  hundred  biggest  men  and
women  in  Eirinn  to  each  other  ;  marry  that  race  to
each  other  ;  marry  the  second  race  to  each  other  again  ;
and  let  the  third  kindred  (ginealach)  go  to  face  the
Lochlaners."

This  was  done,  and  when  the  third  kindred  came
to  man's  estate  they  came  over  to  Albainn,  and  Cum-
hal  at  their  head.*

It  grew  with  them  to  rout  the  Lochlaners,  and  to
drÌA^e  them  back.  Cumhal  made  a  king  of  himself  in
All3a  that  time  with  these  men,  and  he  would  not  let
Lochlaner  or  Irelander  to  Alba  but  himself  This
was  a  grief  to  the  King  of  Lochlann,  and  he  made  up
to  the  King  of  Alba  that  there  should  be  friendship
between  them,  here  and  yonder,  at  that  time.  They
settled  together  the  three  kings — the  King  of  Loch-
lann, and  the  King  of  Alba,  and  the  King  of  Eirinn —
that  they  would  have  a  great  "ball"  of  dancing,  and
there  should  be  friendship  and  truce  amongst  them.

There  was  a  "  schame  "  between  the  King  of  Eirinn
and  the  King  of  Lochlann,  to  put  the  King  of  Scotland
to  deatk  Cumhal  was  so  mighty  that  there  was  no
contrivance  for  putting  him  to  death,  unless  he  was
slain  with  his  own  sword  when  he  was  spoilt  with
drink,  and  love  making,  and  asleep.

*  This  seems  to  have  a  trace  of  probability  about  it.     There
must  have  been  more  spoil  on  the  more  fertile  and  accessible  J
east    coasts  of  Ireland  and    Scotland  to  tempt  invaders  ;
the  Celts  might  well  assemble  amongst  the  mountains  and  wild
islands  of  the  western  coasts  of  Ireland  and  Scotland  to  make
head  against  the  Norsemen,  who  certainly  were  settled  in  Ireland,!
about  Dublin  and  elsewhere,  in  historical  times.     Cumhal  and
warlike  tribe  might  well  have  risen  and  set  up  in  Scotland,  and  this
story  gives  more  standing  ground  for  MacPherson's  story  of
king  in  Morven  than  anything  which  I  have.    This  also  explains!
one  meaning  of  Cumhal,  subjection.


HOW  THE  EEN  WAS  SET  UP.  333

He  had  his  choice  of  a  sweetheart  amongst  any  of
the  women  in  the  company ;  and  it  was  the  daughter
of  the  King  of  Lochlann  whom  he  chose.

"When  they  went  to  rest,  there  was  a  man  in  the
company,  whose  name  was  Black  Arcan,  whom  they
set  apart  to  do  the  murder  when  they  should  be  asleep.
"\Mien  they  slept  Black  Arcan  got  the  sword  of  Cumhal,
and  he  slew  him  with  it.  The  murder  Avas  done,  and
everything  was  right.  Alba  was  under  the  Lochlaners,
and  the  Ii'elanders  and  Black  Arcan  had  the  sw^ord  of
CumhaL*

The  King  of  Lochlann  left  liis  sister  with  the  King
of  Eirinn,  with  an  order  that  if  she  should  have  a  babe
son  to  slay  him ;  but  if  it  were  a  baby  daughter,  to
keep  her  aHve.  A  prophet  had  told  that  Fionn  Mac-
Chumliad  would  come ;  and  the  sign  that  was  for  this
was  a  river  in  Eirinn  ;  that  no  trout  should  be  killed  on
it  till  Fionn  should  come.  That  which  came  as  the
fruit  of  the  wedding  that  was  there,  was  that  the
ilaughter  of  the  King  of  Lochlann  bore  a  son  and
daughter  to  CumhalL  Fionn  had  no  sister  but  this
one,  and  she  Avas  the  mother  of  Diarmaid.  On  the
night  they  were  born  his  muime  (nm'se)  fled  with  the
son,  and  she  went  to  a  desert  place  with  him,  and  she
was  keeping  him  up  there  till  she  raised  liim  as  a
stalwart  goodly  child,  t

She  thought  that  it  was  sorry  for  her  that  he  should
be  nameless  -with  her.  The  thing  which  she  did  was
to  go  with  him  to  the  town,  to  try  if  she  could  find
means  to  give  him  a  name.  She  saw  the  school-boys
of  the  town  swimming  on  a  fresh  water  loch.

*  Supposing  this  to  refer  to  an  early  attack  on  Ireland  and
Scotland  by  Scandinavians,  the  story  is  probable  enough.

f  This  is  manifestly  the  same  story  as  that  of  the  Great  Fool
(See  No.  75),  and  it  is  in  Irish  also.


33+  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"Go  out  together  with  these,"  said  she  to  him,
"  and  if  thou  gettest  hold  of  one,  put  him  under  and
drown  him  ;  and  if  thou  gettest  hold  of  two,  put  them
under  and  drown  them."

He  went  out  on  the  loch,  and  he  began  drowning
the  children,  and  it  happened  that  one  of  the  bishops
of  the  place  was  looking  on.*

"  Who,"  said  he,  "  is  that  bluff  fair  son,  with  the
eye  of  a  king  in  his  head,  who  is  drowning  the  school-
boys Ì "

"  May  he  steal  his  name  !"  said  his  muime.

"  Fionn,  son  of  Cumhall,  son  of  Finn,  son  of  every
eloquence,  son  of  Art,  son  of  Eirinn's  high  king,  and
it  is  my  part  to  take  myself  away."

Then  he  came  on  shore,  and  she  snatched  him  with
her.

When  the  following  were  about  to  catch  them,  he
leapt  off  his  muime's  back,  and  he  seized  her  by  the
two  ankles,  and  he  put  her  about  his  neck.  He  went
in  through  a  wood  with  her,  and  when  he  came  out
of  the  wood  he  had  but  the  two  shanks.  He  met  with
a  loch  after  he  had  come  out  of  the  wood,  and  he
threw  the  two  legs  out  on  the  loch,  and  it  is  Loch  nan
Lurgan,  the  lake  of  the  shanks,  that  the  loch  was  called
after  this.  Two  great  monsters  grew  from  the  shanks
of  Fionn's  muime.  That  is  the  kindred  that  he  had
with  the  two  monsters  of  Loch  nan  Lurgan.  t

Then  he  went,  and  without  meat  or  drink,  to  the
great  town.      He  met  Black  Arcan  fishing  on  the  river,


*  This  makes  the  date  of  Fionn  later  than  the  establishment
of  Christianity  in  Ireland.

■f  This  gives  the  clue  to  another  story  which  I  have  not  yet
got  hold  of,  and  seems  to  be  a  bit  of  mythology  grafted  on  a  tra-
dition of  some  historical  event.


I


HOW  THE  EEN  WAS  SET  UP.  33  5

and  a  hound  in  company  with  him.  Bran  MacBuid-
heig  (black,  or  raven,  son  of  the  Httle  yellow).

"  Put  out  the  rod  for  me,"  said  he  to  the  fisher-
man, "  for  I  am  hungry,  to  try  if  thou  canst  get  a  trout
for  me."  The  trout  laid  to  him,  and  he  killed  the
trout.     He  asked  the  trout  from  Black  Arcan.

"  Thou  art  the  man  ! "  said  Black  Arcan  ;  "  when
thou  wouldst  ask  a  trout,  and  that  I  am  fishing  for  years
for  the  king,  and  that  I  am  as  yet  without  a  trout  for
him."

He  knew  that  it  was  Fionn  he  had.  To  put  the
tale  on  the  short  cut,  he  killed  a  trout  for  the  king,
and  for  his  wife,  and  for  his  son,  and  for  his  daughter,
before  he  gave  any  to  Fionn.  Then  he  gave  him  a
trout.*

Thou  must,  said  Black  Arcan,  broil  the  trout  on
the  further  side  of  the  river,  and  the  fixe  on  this  side
of  it,  before  thou  gettest  a  bit  of  it  to  eat ;  and  thou
shalt  not  have  leave  to  set  a  stick  that  is  in  the  wood
to  broil  it.  He  did  not  know  here  what  he  should  do.
The  thing  that  he  fell  in  with  was  a  mound  of  sawdust,
and  he  set  it  on  fire  beyond  the  river.  A  wave  of  the
flame  came  over,  and  it  burned  a  spot  on  the  trout,
the  thing  that  was  on  the  crook,  t     Then  he  put  his

*  I  have  heard  a  similar  story  told  of  a  saint  who  came  to  a
fisherman,  and  got  the  promise  of  the  first  fish  he  should  catch.
The  first  was  a  large  one,  so  he  promised  the  next ;  hut  that  was
larger,  so  he  promised  the  next ;  and  so  on  till  the  thirteenth,
which  was  a  toad.  He  gave  that  to  the  saint,  who  cursed  him
and  the  river,  saying  that  no  more  salmon  should  ever  be  caught
there.  The  story  was  told  of  a  small  river  which  runs  out  of
Loch  Guirm  in  Islay,  up  which  salmon  cannot  get  for  natural
obstacles,  but  where  salmon  are  often  seen  leaping  in  the  sea.
A  similar  story  is  told  of  rivers  in  Ireland,  and  I  think  there  is  some
such  legend  about  Kent.

f  This  word   is   used  for  a  crozier  and  a  shepherd's  crook.


336  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

finger  on  the  black  spot  that  came  on  the  trout,  and  it
burnt  him,  and  then  he  put  it  into  his  mouth.  Then
he  got  knowledge  that  it  was  tliis  Black  Arcan  who  had
slain  his  father,  and  unless  he  shoidd  slay  Black  Arcan
in  his  sleep,  that  Black  Arcan  would  slay  him  when  he
should  awake.  The  thing  that  happened  was  that  he
killed  the  carle,  and  then  he  got  a  glaive  and  a  hound,
and  the  name  of  the  hound  was  Bran  MacBuidheig.

Then  he  thought  that  he  would  not  stay  any  longer
in  Eirinn,  but  that  he  would  come  to  Alba,  to  get  the
soldiers  of  his  father.  He  came  on  shore  in  Farbaine.
There  he  found  a  great  clump  of  giants,  men  of  stature.
He  understood  that  these  were  the  soldiers  that  his
father  had,  and  they  (were)  as  poor  captives  by  the
Lochlaners  hunting  for  them,  and  not  getting  (aught)
but  the  remnants  of  the  land's  increase  for  themselves.
The  Lochlaners  took  from  them  the  arms  when  war  or
anytliing  should  come,  for  fear  they  should  rise  with  the
foes.  They  had  one  special  man  for  taking  theii*  arms,
whose  name  was  Ullamh  Lamh  fhada  (Pr.  oolav  lav  ada
oòlav  long  hand).  He  gathered  the  arms  and  he  took
them  with  him  altogether,  and  it  fell  out  that  the  sword
of  Fionn  was  amongst  them.     Fionn  went  after  liim,

Bachal  ?  Baculum.  Here  it  seems  to  mean  the  metbod  of  roast-
ing fish,  which  1  learned  from  liapps,  and  have  practised  scores
of  times.  Wooden  skewers  are  stuck  through  slices  of  fish,  and
a  long  rod  is  spitted  through  these,  and  one  end  is  planted  in  the
ground  to  windward  of  a  fire  of  sticks.

The  incident  of  saw-dust,  as  wood  that  grew  and  is  neither
crooked  nor  straight,  is  proverbial  in  the  Highlands,  and  common
to  many  stories.  So  is  the  fish  which  gives  knowledge  when
eaten.  (See  No.  47.  Vol.  II.  362).  This,  then,  is  clearly  some
wide-spread  myth  about  a  fish  attached  to  a  Celtic  hero.  It  is
given  in  the  transactions  of  the  Ossianic  Society  of  Dublin  in
another  shape,  and  has  very  old  Irish  manuscript  authority.


HOW  TUE  EEN  WAS  SET  UP.  337

asking  for  his  own  sw^ord.     When  they  came  within
sight  of  the  armies  of  Lochlann,  he  said —

"  Blood  on  man  and  man  bloodless,
Wind   over  hosts,    'tis   pity  without  the  son
of  Luin.

"  To  what  may  that  belong  V  said  Ulamli  lamh
fliada.

"  It  is  to  a  httle  bit  of  a  knife  of  a  sword  that  I
had,"  said  Fionn.  "  You  took  it  with  you  amongst
the  rest,  and  I  am  the  worse  for  wanting  it,  and  you
are  no  better  for  having  it."

"  "WTiat  is  the  best  exploit  thou  wouldst  do  if  thou
hadst  it  ? "

"  I  would  quell  the  third  part  of  the  hosts  that  I
see  before  me."

Oolav  Longhand  laid  his  hand  on  the  arms.  The
most  likely  sword  and  the  best  that  he  found  there  he
gave  it  to  him.  He  seized  it,  and  he  shook  it,  and  he
cast  it  out  of  the  wooden  handle,  and  said  he —

It  is  one  of  the  black-edged  glaives.
It  was  not  Mac  an  Luin  my  blade  ;
It  w^as  no  hurt  to  draw  from  sheath.
It  would  not  take  off  the  head  of  a  lamb.

Then  he  said  the  second  time  the  same  w^ords.
He  said  the  third  time —

"  Blood  on  man,  and  bloodless  man,
Wind  o'er  the  people,  'tis  pity  without  the  son
of  Luin."

"  What  wouldst  thou  do  with  it  if  thoix  shouLlst
get  it?"

"  I  would  do  this,  that  I  would  quell  utterly  all  I


338  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

He  threw  down  the  arms  altogether  on  the  ground.
Then  Fionn  got  his  sword,  and  said  he  then —
"  This  is  the  one  of  my  right  hand."

Then  he  returned  to  the  people  he  had  left.  He
got  the  t-ord  fiannta  (?  Dord)  of  the  Fian,  and  he
sounded  it.  (See  illustration,  page  287,  for  an  ancient
horn,  sculptui'ed  on  a  stone  in  the  east  of  Scotland.)

There  gathered  all  that  were  in  the  southern  end  of
Alba  of  the  Fiantaichean  to  where  he  was.  He  went
with  these  men,  and  they  went  to  attack  the  Loch-
laners,  and  those  which  he  did  not  kill  he  swept  them
out  of  Alba.*

*  This,  then,  seems  to  he  popular  historj',  interlarded  witli
Celtic  mythology.  History  of  a  successful  rising  of  Celts  iu
Scotland,  headed  by  a  leader  who  was  a  Scandinavian  by  the
mother's  side  ;  against  the  Scandinavians  who  had  beaten  them
twice  before.  Once  and  for  a  long  time  in  Ireland,  whence  they
retired  to  Scotland,  and  again  long  afterwards,  treacherously  and
by  the  help  of  Irish  allies  in  Scotland.

The  mythology  has  to  do  with  fish ;  so  has  that  of  the  two
stories  which  follow  ;  so,  as  an  illustration,  I  have  copied  all  the
fish  which  are  figured  in  the  "  sculptured  stones  of  Scotland,"
together  with  some  of  the  characteristic  ornaments  which  accom-
pany them.

It  is  remarkable  that,  with  the  exception  of  two,  all  these  are
swimming  from  the  left  to  the  right  of  an  observer,  and  that  a
nondescript  creature  which  is  often  figured  on  the  same  stones
with  fish,  heads  the  same  way.  I  take  the  monster  to  be  a  repre-
sentation of  a  water  animal,  a  walrus,  by  an  artist  who  had  never
seen  one.

As  no  explanation  Iftis  yet  been  found  for  the  symbols,  as  fish
clearly  have  to  do  with  Celtic  mythology,  and  as  Celtic  mytho-
logy appears  to  have  been  mixed  with  solar  and  well  worship,
it  seems  worth  considering  whether  these  symbols  may  not
have  an  astronomical  meaning.  One  of  the  signs  of  the
Zodiac  is  and  has  been  for  many  a  day  Pisces ;  and  the  symbol  is
K.     The  sua  passes  northwards  through  the  constellation  in


now  THE  EEN  WAS  SET  UP.  339


the  spring,  and  when  the  sun  is  travelling  north  "the  fish"  are
swimming  south.  South  and  to  the  right  are  expressed  by  the
same  word  in  Gaelic — "  deas."  Fish  swimming  to  the  right  are
swimming  south  (deas).  The  sun  crosses  the  equator  at  the  vernal
equinox ;  and  one  of  the  emblems  here  associated  with  fish  con-
sists of  circles,  which  still  stand  for  the  sun  in  our  almanacks ;
joined  by  two  crescents  which  in  like  manner  stand  for  moons  or
months,  and  separated  by  a  line.     Another  consists  of  a  circle


34°  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


MAR  A  CHUIREADH  SUAS  AN  FHINN.

Bha  righ  aon  uair  air  Eirinn  leis  am  bu  duilich  cis  a  leag  na  Loch-
lannaich  air  Alba  's  air  Eirinn.  Bha  iad  a'  tighinn  air  a  riogbachd
fheiii  an  am  fobhair  agus  sanihraidh  'gam  beathachadh  fliein  air  a
chuid,  's  iad  'nan  daoine  calma,  laidir ;  ag  itheadh  's  a'  milleadh  'na
'blia  na  h-Albannaich  's  na  h-Eirionnaich  a'  deanadh  ri  bliadhna  eile.
Chuir  e  fios  air  comhairleach  a  bh'  aige  's  db'  innis  e  dha  na  'bha  'na
bheachd  ;  gu  'n  robh  toil  aige  air  doigh  fhaotann  air  na  Lochlann-
aich  a  chumail  air  an  ais.  Thuirt  an  comhairleach  ris  nach  cinneadh
siud  leis  an  gradaig,  ach  na'n  gabhadh  e  chomhairle-san  gu  'n  cinn-
eadh e  leis  ri  uine,

"  Pos,"  ars'  an  comhairleach,  "  an  ceud  fear  agiis  an  ceud  bean  a's
mo  an  Eirinn  air  a'  cheile ;  pos  an  sliochd  air  a  cheile  a  rithis ;  leig
an  treas  ginealacb  an  coinneamh  nan  Lochlannach."  Cbaidh  seo  a
dheanadh,  's  nuair  a  thainig  an  treas  ginealach  gu  h-inbhe  dhaoine
thainig  iad  a  nail  a  dh'  Albainn  agus  Cumhal  air  an  ceann.  Chinn-
ich  leo  na  Lochlannaich  a  sgrios  's  a  chur  air  an  ais.  Rinn  Cumhal
righ  deth  fhein  an  Alba  an  uair  sin  leis  na  daoine  seo,  's  cha  leigeadh

bisected  by  a  double  line,  which  also  cuts  two  smaller  circles,
touching  it  on  either  side.  May  not  all  these  symbols  refer  to  the
sun  of  winter  and  the  summer  sun  ;  to  the  sun  crossing  the  line  at
the  vernal  equinox  ;  and  may  not  these  rude  sculptured  stones  be
erected  to  mark  spots  for  celebrating  festivals.  A  sword,  a  mirror,
and  a  comb,  or  things  like  them,  accompany  the  fish  ;  and  at
first  sight  they  would  appear  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  this
supposition.

But  the  sword  may  be  the  bright  shining  mystic  Sword  of
Light  of  Gaelic  stories,  and  an  emblem  of  the  sun,  and  it  points  to
the  left  or  north.  The  sun  is  the  God  of  the  long  yellow  bright
hair  everywhere,  and  the  comb  may  be  another  of  his  emblems  ;
and  the  looking-glass,  if  it  be  one,  might  be  a  third  emblem  for
its  brightness.

This  is  but  conjecture  thrown  out  for  the  consideration  of  the
learned.  I  am  quite  prepared  to  believe  that  the  emblems  repre
sent  the  frying  pans,  gridirons,  cauldrons,  and  spits  on  which
ancient  North-Britons  cooked  the  fish  whose  portraits  they  drew
so  well.


MAR  A  CHUIREAUH  SUAS  AN  FHINN.  34  1

e  Lochlannach  na  Eirionnach  a  dh'  Albainn  ach  e  fhein.  Bha  seo
'na  dhoilgheas  le  righ  Lochlann,  's  rinn  e  suas  ri  righ  Albann  gu  m
biodh  cairdeas  eatorra  thall  's  a  bhos  an  uair  sin.  Chuir  iad  ri  cheile,
na  tri  righean,  righ  Lochlann,  's  rigli  Albann,  's  righ  Eirionn,  gu  'm
biodh  bail  mor  damhsaidh  aca,  's  gu  'm  biodh  cairdeas  agus  reite
eatorra.

Bha  sgeira  eadar  righ  Eirionn  agus  righ  Lochlann  righ  Alba  a
chur  gu  bks.  Bha  Chumhal  cho  treuu  's  nach  robh  innleachd  air  a
chur  gu  biis,  mar  am  marbhta  le  a  chlaidheimh  fhein  e,  nuair  a
bhiodh  e  diolta  oil  agus  mnatha,  'na  chadal.  Bha  'roghainn  aige  de
dh'  aona  bhoireannach  a  bha  's  a'  chuideachd,  agus  's  i  nighean  righ
Lochlann  a  ghabh  e  mar  roghainn.  Nuair  chaidh  iad  a  luidhe  bha
duine  anns  a'  chuideachd  d'  am  b'  ainra  Arcann  dubh  a  shonraieh
iad  airson  am  mort  a  dheanadh  nuair  a  bhiodh  iad  'nan  cadal.  Nuair
a  chaidil  iad  fhuair  Arcan  dubh  claidheamh  Chumhail  's  mharbh  e
leis  e.  Bha  'm  mort  deanta  's  bha  'h-uile  cuis  ceart.  Bha  Alba  fo
na  Lochlannaich  's  fo  na  h-Eirionnaich,  's  bha  claidheamh  Chumhail
aig  Arcan  dubh.

Dh'  fhag  righ  Lochlann  a  phinthar  aig  righ  Eirionn,  's  ordan  aige
na  'm  bu  leanabh  mic  a  bhiodh  aice  a  mharbhadh,  ach  na  'm  bu
leanabh  nighinn  a  bhiodh  ann  a  cumail  beo.  Bha  faidheachd  ag
innseadh  gu  'n  d'  thigeadh  Fionn  Mac  Chumhail,  's  gur  h-e  'n  comh-
arra  a  bha  air  seo,  amhainn  a  bha  an  Eirinn,  nach  marbhta  breac
urra  gus  an  d'  thigeadh  Fionn.  'Sea  thionndaidh  a  mach  a  thor-
adh  na  ceud  oidhche  a  bha  'n  sin  gu'n  d'  rug  nighean  righ  Lochlann
mac  agus  nighean  do  Chumhal.  Cha  robh  pinthar  aig  Fionn  ach  i
seo,  's  b'  i  mathair  Uhiarmaid.  An  oidhche  a  rugadh  iad  theich  a
mhuime  leis  a'  mhac,  's  chaidh  i  do  dh'  kite  fasail  leis,  's  bha  i  'ga
bheatliachadh  's  'ga  chumail  suas  an  siu  gus  an  do  thog  i  'na  leanabh
foghainteach,  tlaclidar  e.

Smaointich  i  gu  'm  bu  duilich  leatha  e  'bhith  gun  ainm  aice.  'S
e  'n  ni  a  rinn  i  dh'  fhalbh  i  leis  thun  a'  bhaile  feuch  am  faigheadh  i
innleachd  air  ainm  a  thoirt  air.  Chunnaic  i  sgoilearan  a'  bhaile  a'
snamh  air  loch  uisge.

"  Falbh  a  mach  cuide  riutha  siud,"  ars'  ise  ris,  "  's  ma  gheibh  thu
greim  air  h-aon  cuir  fodha  e  's  bath  e,  's  ma  gheibh  thu  greim  air
dithis  cuir  fodha  iad  's  bath  iad."

Ghabh  esan  a  mach  air  an  loch  's  thoisich  e  air  bathadh  na
cloinne.  Thuit  gu  'n  robh  fear  de  dh'  easbuigean  an  àite  ga
choimhead.

"  Co,"  ars'  esan,  "  am  Mac  Maol  Fionn  'ud,  s  rasg  righ  'na  che;mn
a  tha  a'  bathadh  nan  sgoilearan  ?"


342  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  Gu  meal  e  ainm/'  ars'  a  mhuime,

Fionn  Mac  Chumhail  Mhic  Fhinn  MHc  Uile-bbeurais,

Mhic  h-Art,  Mhic  Ard-righ  Eirionn,

'S  tha  uams'  a  bhith  'gam  thoirt  fhein  as."

Tbainig  esan,  an  sin,  air  tir  agus  sgriob  ise  leatba  e.  Nuair  a  bha
'n  toil-  gu  breitb  orra  leum  e  bhar  muin  a  mhuime,  's  rug  e  air  cbaol
da  chois  urra,  's  chuir  e  mu  amhaicb  i.  Chaidh  e  staigh  roimh
choille  leatha,  's  nuair  a  tbainig  e  mach  as  a'  choille  cba  robh  aige
ach  an  da  lurga.  Thachair  loch  ris  an  deigh  tighinn  a  mach  as  a'
choille  's  tbilg  e  'n  da  chois  a  mach  air  an  loch.  'S  e  Loch  nan  Lur-
gann  a  theirte  ris  an  loch  as  a  dheigh  seo.  Dh'  fbas  da  bheist  mhoir
a  da  lurgann  muime  Fhinn.  'S  e  siud  an  cairdeas  a  bb'  aige  ri  da
bheist  Loch  an  lurgann.

Dh'  f halbh  e  'n  seo,  's  e  gun  bbiadh  gun  dibh,  'ionnsuidh  a'  bhaile
mhoir.  Choinnicb  Arcan  dubh,  ag  iasgach  air  an  amhainn,  e,  agus
cu  air  cuideacbd  ris.  Bran  Mac  Buidheig.

"  Cuir  a  mach  an  t-slat  air  mo  shonsa,"  ars'  e  ris  an  iasgair,  "  's
an  t-acras  orm,  feuch  am  faigb  thu  breac  dhomb.

Luidh  am  breac  ris,  's  mbarbh  e  'm  breac.  Dh'  iarr  e  'm  breac
air  Arcan  dubh.

"  'S  tusa  'm  fear,"  ars'  Arcan  dubh,  "  nuair  a  dh'  iarradh  tu  'm
breac,  's  mise  'g  iasgach  o  cheann  bhliadhnaichean  do  'n  rigb,  's  gun
breac  agam  da  fhathasd."

Dh'  aithnich  e  gur  h-e  Fionn  a  bh'  aige.  Gus  an  sgeul  a  churan
aithghearr  mbarbh  e  breac  do  'n  righ,  's  d'a  mhnaoi,  's  d'a  mhac,  's
d'a  nighinn,  ma  'n  d'  thug  e  gin  do  dh'  Fhionn.  Thug  e  'n  sin
breac  da.

"  Feumaidh  tu,"  ars'  Arcan  dubh,  "  am  breac  a  bhruich  an  taobh
thall  de  'n  amhainn,  'san  teine  'n  taobh  seo  di,  ma  'm  faigh  thu  mir
deth  ri  'itheadh  ;  's  cba  'n  fhaigh  thu  cead  maide  'tha  's  a'  choille  a
chur  a  'bhruich."

Cba  robh  fios  aige  'n  seo  de  a  dheanadh  e.  'S  e  an  ni  a  thachair
air  torr  min  sliaibb,  's  chuir  e  'na  teine  i  thar  na  h-amhann.  Tbainig
tonn  de  'n  lasair  a  nail 's  loisg  i  ball  air  a'  bhreac,  ni  a  bha  air  a
bhacail.  Chuir  e  'n  seo  a  mheur  air  a'  bhall  dubli  a  tbainig  air  a
bhreac,  's  loisg  e  i,  's  chuir  e  'n  sin  'na  bheul  i.  Fliuair  e  'n  seo  fios
gur  h-e  Arcan  dubh  seo  a  mharbh  'athair ;  's  mar  am  marbhadh  esan
Arcan  dubh,  's  e  'na  chadal,  gu  'm  marbhadh  Arcan  dubh  esan  an
uair  a  dhuisgeadh  e.  'Se  'n  ni  a  bha  ann  mharbh  e  'm  bodach.
Fhuair  e  'n  sin  cu  's  claidheamh  ;  's  e  b'  ainm  do  'n  cbu  Bran  Mac
Buidheig.


MAR  A  CHUIREaDH  SUAS  AN  FHINN.  343

Smaointich  e  'n  sin  nach  d'  thoireadh  e  'n  Eirinn  na  'b'  fhaide,
ach  gu  'n  d'  thigeadh  e  dh'  Alba  airsou  saighdearan  'athar  fhaotainn.
Thainig  e  air  tir  am  Farbaiue.  Fhuair  e  'n  sin  meall  mor  a  dh'
Ataich,  daoine  gnathasda.  Thuig  e  gu  'm  b'  e  na  saighdearan  a  bha
aig  'athair  a  bha  ann,  's  iad  'nan  ciomaich  bhochd  aig  na  Lochlann-
aich,  a'  sealg  daibh,  's  gun  iad  a'  faotainn  ach  an  t-iomall  'na  theachd-
an-tir  dhaibh  fhein.  Thug  na  Lochlannaich  uatha  na  h-airm  nuair
thigeadh  cogadh  na  ni  sam  bith  eagal  eiridh  leis  na  uaimhdeau.  Bha
aon  duine  sonraicht,  aca  airson  togail  nan  arm  sin  d'  am  b'  ainm
Ullamh  Lamh-fhada.  Chruinnich  esan  na  h-airm  's  thug  e  leis  iad
uile,  's  thuit  gu  'n  robh  claidlieamh  Fhinn  'nam  measg.  Dh'  fhalbh
Fionn  as  a  dheigh  's  e  'g  iarraidh  a  chlaidheimh  fhein.  Nuair  a
thainig  iad  an  sealladh  an  airra  Lochlannaich  thubhairt  e.
Fuil  air  fear  's  fear  gun  fhuil,
Gaoth  thar  sluaigh,  's  truagh  gun  Mac  an  Luin.

"  De' a  bhith  g' am  buin  sin?"  arsa  Ullamh  Lamh-thada.  "A'
chorcag  chlaidheimh  a  bha  agam,"  arsa  Fionn,  "  thug  sibh  leibh  a
measg  chaich  i ;  's  misde  mise  gum'  dhith  i  's  cha  'n  fheairde  sibhse
agaibh  i."

"  De  'n  t-euchd  a  b'  fhearr  a  dheanadh  tu  leatha  na  'm  biodh  i
agad?"

"  Cheannsaichinn  an  treas  cuid  de  'na  chi  mi  mu  m'  choinneamh
de  shluagh."

Thug  Ullamh  Lamh-fhada  lamh  air  na  h-airm.  An  claidheamh
a  bu  choltaiche  's  a  b'  fhearr  a  fhuair  e  ann  thug  e  dha  e.  Rug  e  air
's  chrath  e  e,  's  thilg  e  as  a  mhaide  feadain  e,  's  ars'  e,

'S  e  fear  dh'  an  ealtuinn  dhuigh  a  th'  ann ;
Cha  b'  e,  !BIac  an  Luin — mo  lann ;
Cha  bu  lochd  a  thoirt  a  truaill,
Bhar  uain  cha  d'  thugadh  e  'n  ceann.

Thuirt  e  'n  dara  uair  na  briathra  ciadhna,  Thuirt  e  'n  treas  uair,

Fuil  air  fear  agus  fear  gun  fhuil,

Gaoth  thar  sluaigh  's  truagh  gun  Mac  an  Luin.

"  De  a  dheanadh  tu  leis  na  'm  faigheadh  tu  e?"
"  Dheanadh  gu  'n  ceannsaichinn  uile  na'  chi  mi."
Thilg  e  air  lar  na  h-airm  uile.     Fhuair  Fionn  a  chlaidheamh,  's
ars'  e  'n  sin,  "  'Se  sec  fear  mo  laimhe  deise-sa."

Thill  e  'n  sin  'ionnsuidh  nan  daoine  a  dh'  fhag  e.  Fhuair  e  'n  t-
ord  fiannta  's  sheinn  e  e.  Chruinnich  na  bha  'n  taobh  deas  de  dh'
Alba  de  na  Fianntaichean  far  an  robh  e.    Dh'  fhalbh  e  leis  na  daoine


h


344  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

seo,  's  chaidh  iad  am  bad  nan  Lochlannach,  's  a'  chuid  nach  do
mharbh  iad  diu  sgiurs  iad  a  Alba  iad.

From  Angus  MacDonald,    Staoine-breac,  Soutli  Uist,  Sep-
tember 14,  1860.

This  story  is  very  popular  in  South  Uist  and  Barra,  and  is
known  to  the  most  of  old  people  in  these  islands. — H.  M'L.


LXXXIIT.

THE  EEASOX  WHY  THE  DALLAG  (DOG-FISH)
18  CALLED  THE  KING'S  FISH.

From  Angus  MacKinnon,  South  Uist.

WHAT  but  that  the  King  of  Lochlann  should  come
to  the  King  of  Eirinn  to  be  a  while  along  with
him.

Tlie  King  of  Loclilann  and  Fionn  went  on  a  day
to  fish,  and  they  had  a  little  boat,  and  they  had  no
man  but  themselves.

They  spent  the  greatest  j^art  of  the  day  fishing,
and  they  did  not  get  a  thing.

Tlien  there  laid  a  beast  on  (the  hook  of)  Fionn,
and  he  fell  to  fishing,  so  that  he  put  the  hook  into
liim.*  He  took  in  the  fish  ;  and  what  fish  was  it  but
a  dog-fish.  The  hook  of  the  King  of  Lochlann  was  in
her  maw,  under  the  hook  of  Fionn,  and  the  hook  of
Fionn  was  in  the  outer  mouth.  Then  the  King  of
Lochlann  fell  to  at  taking  out  the  dog-fish,  since  it
was  his  hook  that  was  farthest  down  in  her.     Tliey

*  This  is  peculiarly  descriptive  of  handline  fishing,  when  a
"  beast"  takes,  it  feels  as  if  a  weight  had  foicZ quietly  on  the  line,
and  a  green  hand  often  loses  a  fish  by  neglecting  to  strike,  not
knowing  that  the  fish  is  there.


THE  KINGS  FISH.  345

fell  to  arguing  with  each  other,  and  Fionn  would  not
}-ield  a  bit  till  they  should  go  to  law.

Then  they  went  to  land  with  the  boat,  and  thej-
went  to  law,  and  the  law  made  (over)  the  fish  to
Fionn  ;  and  that  there  should  be  a  fine  laid  upon  the
Iving  of  Lochlann,  since  he  had  not  felt  the  fish  when
first  it  struck  Mm.

"With  the  rage  that  the  Iving  of  Lochlann  took  he
went  home  to  Lochlann,  and  he  told  to  his  muime  and
his  oide  (his  foster  parents)  how  it  had  happened.

The  Muilearteach  was  his  muime,  and  the  Smith
of  Songs,  who  was  married  to  her,  was  his  foster-
father.

She  said  that  it  was  she  who  would  bring  out  the
recompense  for  that.

Then  she  came  till  she  reached  Eirinn,  and  the
King  of  Lochlann  with  her,  and  the  Smith  of  Songs.

The  Dallag  was  never  said  after  that  but  the
king's  fish  *

*  A  creature  something  like  a  king-fish,  which  is  a  sort  of
diminutive  shark,  is  figured  on  the  sculptured  stones  of  Scotland.
A  version  of  this  is  already  referred  to,  page  145.  It  is  a  kind  of
introduction  to  the  Muilearteach,  and  explains  who  that  personage
was.

The  Smith  of  Songs  is  probably  the  same  as  Loan  Mac
Libhinn,  the  maker  of  Fionn's  sword,  about  whom  there  is  a  long
poem,  and  I  suspect  them  to  be  mythological,  perhaps  Thor  and
his  wife.  Thor  and  a  giant  once  rowed  out  together  in  a  small
boat  to  fish,  and  Thor  hooked,  and  lost  the  sea-serpent.  Perhaps
the  giant  was  Fionn.

The  coming  of  the  Muilearteach  to  Islay  with  the  smith  and
the  smithy  on  her  back,  is  told  in  another  story.     See  No.  8.5.


346  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


THE  LAY  OF  MAGNUS.

A  poem  so  called  is  known  in  Ireland,  and  is  pre-
served in  MSS.  in  Dublin,  according  to  writers  in  the
transactions  of  the  Ossianic  Society.

A  poem  of  172  Imes,  "  comhrag  Fhein  agus
Mhannis  "  was  published  in  1786,  in  Gillies'  Scotch
collection.  An  Irish  version  was  published  by  Miss
Brooke,  1789.  I  have  compared  my  version  with  the
poem  in  Gillies.  I  find  that  they  vary  from  each  other;
in  words,  in  lines,  and  even  in  whole  stanzas ;  but  the
two  might  be  fused  so  as  to  produce  a  third,  perfectly
genuine,  and  more  complete  than  either.  The  version
orallj^  collected  in  1860  goes  a  step  beyond  the  other,
printed  in  1786,  and  I  feel  certain  that  it  is  historical.
This  story  is  in  substance  the  same  as  "  Fingal,"  and
might  be  the  germ  of  that  poem.  Irish  writers  claim
it  as  Irish,  and  assert  that  the  Lay  of  Magnus  was
MacPherson's  original  for  part  of  Fingal.  It  first  ap-
peared in  print  in  Scotland,  and  it  is  still  repeated
there,  wherever  it  was  composed.  Irish  collectors
have  copies  taken  down  orally  in  Scotland  long  ago.

Now,  if  Magnus  can  be  identified,  it  would  fix  the
earliest  possible  date  for  the  poem,  and  a  later  date  for
the  poet  than  is  usually  given  to  Oisein,  by  Scotch
and  Irish  writers  ;  and  this  opinion  agrees  with  Miss
Brooke's.

The  prose  tale  is  also  about  Magnus ;  it  was  written
by  MacLean.  I  heard  it  recited  by  old  MacPhie  in
1860.  He  is  failing  fast,  and  cannot  dictate  slowly  ;  I
miss  several  of  tlie  measured  prose  passages,  which  I
heard  him  repeat  with  the  utmost  fluency,  when  he


THE  LAY  OF  MAGNUS,  347

was  allowed  to  go  his  own  pace.  The  story  is  mani-
festly incomplete  ;  and  it  reminds  me  of  one  which  old
MacPhie  repeated  a  second  time  for  me.  He  then
gave  disjointed  incidents,  and  broken  sentences,  instead
of  a  connected  story  in  very  good  language,  with  iew
repetitions,  with  curious  rythmical  passages  interspersed,
-«'hich  he  gave  the  first  time.

It  is  hard  to  say  what  this  story  means,  unless  it
is  Celtic  mythology  engrafted  upon  a  bit  of  !N"orwegian
history.

I  give  it  Avith  all  its  shortcomings,  because,  if  Celtic
mythology  is  ever  to  be  discovered,  it  will  be  found  in
some  such  shape.

We  have  here,  at  aU  events —

The  King  of  the  World,  whose  life  is  in  that  of  a
horned,  deadly  or  hurtful  or  venomous  animal ;  and
his  son  Brodram.

The  King  of  Light,  who  is  conquered  by  a  lion  ;
and  his  son,  the  white  long-haired  one,  whose  hfe  is
in  that  of  three  fish  ;  who  has  twelve  bald  ruddy
daughters  ;  who  marry  twelve  men,  the  foster-brothers
of  Manus  the  hero.

Balcan,  the  smith,  who  has  twelve  apprentices ;  and
Ills  son,  who  is  a  sailor,  and  has  a  wonderful  spotted
ship,  and  twelve  sailors.

In  short,  there  are  many  things  which  suggest  solar
worship  and  mythology — Aries,  Taurus,  Leo,  Pisces —
12  hours  of  day,  12  of  night,  12  months,  12  signs  of
the  zodiac,  Light,  the  Smith  or  artificer  Balcan ;  the
sailor,  liis  son : — Vulcan  and  Neptune,  &c.  But  while
there  is  much  to  suggest  inquiry,  there  is  nothing
definite.

The  poem,  on  the  contrary,  is  definite  enough,  and
in  that  respect  it  resembles  other  poems  which  I  have
collected,  and  differs  from  the  prose  romances.


MAN  us.


THE  LAY  OF  MAGNUS.  349

I  have  endeavoured  to  restore  this  dress  from  various  authori-
ties. From  grave  stones  ;  two  in  lona,  and  two  in  Islay,  of  which
I  happened  to  have  very  rough  sketches;  and  from  tradition.

I  leave  the  legs  bare,  because  there  is  no  indication  of  any
covering  on  the  legs  of  the  sculptured  figures,  and  because  Mag-
nus the  Great  was  called  "  barelegs"  when  he  adopted  the  dress  of
the  islands,  and  because  there  is  no  mention  of  any  covering  for
the  legs  in  the  traditional  descriptions  of  dress.  On  the  contrary,
at  page  442,  vol.  ii.,  it  appears  that  the  warriors  had  shoes,  but
that  their  legs  were  bare.

Some  stones  indicate  that  the  arms  were  clothed  in  some
material,  with  longitudinal  folds  ;  others  indicate  no  covering.

The  shape  of  the  shield  is  from  a  stone  at  lona.  On  some
there  are  traces  of  armorial  bearings.

The  lion,  snake,  and  griffin,  are  from  the  story  as  repeated  to
me  by  old  MacPhie,  "  His  boss-covered,  hindering,  sharp-pointed
shield  on  his  left  arm,  with  many  a  picture  to  be  seen  thereon.
Lion  and  Creveenach,  and  deadly  Serpent."  A  lion  and  a  ser-
pent appear  in  the  Welsh  romance  of  the  Lady  of  the  Fountain,
which  this  story  resembles  in  some  degree.

The  helmet  and  sword  are  copied  from  stones,  some  of
which  are  roughly  carved  in  relief  nearly  six  inches  above  the
surface.

The  tippet  and  shirt  are  very  like  the  dress  commonly  worn
by  the  Lapps  of  the  Luleo  river,  and  by  little  Scotch  children  at
the  present  day.

The  Lapps  wear  a  loose  deer-skin  shirt,  and  a  belt  round  the
waist,  and  a  tall  conical  cap.  In  rainy  weather  they  slip  a  tippet
over  their  heads,  which  is  tied  round  the  forehead,  and  protects
the  chin,  throat,  and  shoulders,  covering  all  but  the  face.

Scotch  children  wear  a  kilt  and  sleeve-waistcost  in  one,  into
which  they  slip,  and  which,  with  a  shirt,  often  constitutes  tlieir
whole  attire.

The  warrior's  outer  dress  was  probably  some  such  garment
made  of  leather,  with  iron  scales.  The  same  Gaelic  word  means
patched  cloak,  and  coat  of  mail,  and  such  a  dress  seems  to  be
meant  at  page  205,  vol.  ii.  The  virgin  and  child  are  from  the
stone  in  Kilnaughtou  church,  Islay,  and  the  symbol  indicates
a  Christian  warrior  and  a  date.


3  50  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

LXXXIV.

MANUS.
From  Donald  MacPliie,  lochdar,  South  Uist.

rriHERE  was  a  King  of  Lochlann,  and  he  married,
-*-  and  two  sons  were  born  to  him.  Oireal  was  the
name  of  one,  and  larlaid  of  the  other.  Their  father
and  mother  died.  A  "Parlamaid  "  sat  to  put  "Cilead-
earachd,"  a  regency  on  the  realm,  till  the  children
should  come  to  age,  and  till  they  should  take  the  vows
of  the  realm  on  themselves.  They  sent  word  for  the
lads,  and  Oireal  was  a  feeble  man,  and  larlaid  was  the
bigger.  Oireal  said  to  the  "  Parlamaid "  that  he
would  not  have  anything  to  do  with  the  realm  as  yet.

"  Clod  of  it  you  shall  not  have,"  said  the  Parlia-
ment, "  unless  you  take  it  this  day."

Said  larlaid  to  Oireal,  "  take  thou  the  one  half,
and  I  will  take  the  other  half"

"  Well,  then,"  said  Oireal ;  "  I  will  do  that."
The  realm  was  written  upon  the  lads.     In  a  few
years  larlaid  married  the   daughter  of   the   King  of
Greece,  and  Oireal  married  the  daughter  of  King  Sgiath
Sgial,  King  of  the  Arcuinn.*

Sgiath  Sgial  gave  six  maids  of  honour  with  his
daughter,  and  the  King  of  Greece  gave  the  very  Like
with  his  own  daughter.

Three  quarters  from  that  night  the  ailment  of  chil-
dren struck  the  daughter  of  the  King  of  Greece  ;  and,
besides,  the  ailment  of  children  struck  the  daughter  of

*  I  have  no  notion  what  monarch  or  realm  is  meant,  but  the
Orkney  would  be  appropriate.


MANUS.  3  5  I

Sgiath  Sgial,  and  sons  were  born  to  them,  and  twelve
sons  were  born  to  maids  of  honour.  Manus  was  given
(as  a  name)  to  the  son  of  Oireal,  and  Eochaidh  to  the
son  of  larlaid.  The  sons  began  to  come  on  ;  Manus
was  growing  l^ig,  and  Eochaidli  was  but  httle.  They
were  sent  to  school,  and  his  own  foster  brethren  were
together  Avith  each  one  of  them.

They  were  playing  shinny  on  the  field,  coming
from  school,  and  Manus  drove  the  ball  agamst  Eoch-
aidh.

"  I  will  have  my  own  ftxther's  realm,"  said  Manus.

Said  the  daughter  of  the  King  of  Greece,  "  It  were
my  wish  to  put  an  end  to  Manus,  of  murdering  and
spoihng  and  slaying."

"  Well,  then,  that  were  the  great  pity  to  put  that
(end)  to  the  son  of  our  brother,"  said  the  king.

"  If  thou  wilt  not  do  it,  I  will  do  it,"  said  she.

She  went  in,  and  gave  a  slight  box  on  the  ear
(Leideag)  to  her  own  son,  and  she  drove  him  out  of  the
house.

"  Begone,"  said  she,  "  and  betake  thyself  to  the
four  brown  boundaries  of  the  world,  and  let  me  not
see  thy  sole  on  the  same  land  as  long  as  the  world  is
set.  I  Avill  take  Manus  with  me,  and  he  shall  be  a
son  for  myself."

She  took  Manus  in  with  herself,  and  she  set  her
own  son  on  a  beautiful  sunny  single-stemmed  hill,
Avhere  he  could  see  every  man,  and  no  man  him.

Manus  was  within  wdth  her,  and  he  was  not  get-
ting to  see  his  mother  at  all.  Then  his  mother  said
that  she  would  go  where  her  muime  was,  and  that  she
would  take  her  counsel.

At  the  end  of  a  year  she  sent  word  for  Manus.
And  in  a  few  years  the  wife  of  his  father's  brother
sent  word  for  Manus.


352  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  What,  oil  Manus  !  said  the  daughter  of  the  King
of  Greece,  "  art  thou  thinking  of  doing  this  day  Ì  If
thou  wilt  marry,  thou  wilt  get  the  third  part  of  the
realm ;  land,  corn-land,  and  treasure."

"Well,  then,  I  am  not  of  age  to  marry  at  all,"
said  he.

"  Thou  needst  not  (say)  that,"  said  she.  "There
is  one  man  on  my  own  land  that  will  suit  thee.  Thou
shalt  go  to  ask  his  daughter,  and  thou  shalt  marry  her.
He  is  the  Earl  of  Fiughaidh  ;  thou  shalt  marry  the
daughter  of  the  Earl  of  the  Fiughaidh."*

She  went  away,  and  she  took  with  her  high  fami-
lies, and  she  would  take  with  her  five  huncbed  men.
She  reached  the  house  of  the  Earl  of  Fiughaidh,  to
give  her  to  Manus  to  marry.

Said  the  wife  of  the  Earl  of  the  Fiughaidli  to  her,
"  My  daughter  is  not  of  age  to  marry  yet,  and  Manus
is  not  of  age  to  marry."

"  Well,"  said  the  daughter  of  the  King  of  Greece,
"  house  or  heap  thou  shalt  not  have  upon  my  land
unless  thou  givest  thy  daughter  to  him."

The  man  thought  that  there  was  no  good  for  him
to  refuse  her,  and  Manus  and  the  daughter  of  the  Earl
of  the  Eiudliaidh  were  married  to  each  other.

They  lay  that  night  in  the  house  of  his  father's
brother.

"  Is  it  thou  that  art  here,  Manus,  mighty  son,  and
bad  man  ì  dost  thou  know  what  wife  yonder  one  gave
to  her  own  son,  Eochaidh  1  She  gave  him  the  swift
march  wind.  It  was  not  to  a  worldly  wife  she  mar-
ried him,  so  that  he  might  take  the  head  off  thee.
Thou  with  a  wife  on  thy  bed  at  this  time  of  night !

*  Here,  again,  I  am  at  fault.  This  probably  is  a  real  name,
but  corrupted  by  transfer  to  another  language,  and  by  the  lapse
of  time.


MANUS.  353

Thou  wilt  be  going  back  every  day,  and  thou  wilt  not
hold  battle  agamst  liim."

"  Is  it  thus  it  is  Ì  "  said  Manus.

He  went  where  she  was.

"  Be  leaving  the  realm,"  said  the  wife  of  his  father's
brother  to  him,  "  or  else  thou  wilt  have  but  what  thou
takest  to  its  end."

"  It  was,"  said  he,  "  the  third  part  of  the  realm
that  thou  didst  promise  me."

"  Clod  thou  shalt  not  have  here,"  said  she.  "  Thy
share  is  under  stones  and  rough  mountains  in  the  old
Bergen."

"  Well,  then,  since  thou  art  putting  me  away,  give
me  the  six  foster  brothers  of  Eochaidh,  that  I  may  have
twelve."

He  got  that  ;  he  went  away,  and  he  betook  him-
self to  the  old  Bergen.

When  he  reached  the  old  Bergen,  no  man  dared  to
come  near  his  castle.  There  were  sheep  in  the  old
Bergen,  and  sheep  of  Corrachar,  is  what  they  were
called.

They  fell  to  making  pits  in  the  earth  ;  the  sheep
were  going  into  the  pits,  and  they  were  catching  them,
and  they  were  killing  them,  and  keeping  themselves  in
flesh  thus  in  the  old  Beigen.*

"  Be  it  from  nie  !  be  it  from  me  ! "  said  Manus  ;
"  it  is  a  year  since  I  saw  my  muime  ;  I  had  better  go
and  see  her."

"  It  were  not  my  advice  to  thee  to  go  there,"  said
they ;  "  but  if  thou  art  going,  thou  hast  twelve  foster
brothers,  and  take  them  with  thee."

*  I  am  not  aware  that  there  are,  or  ever  were,  wild  sheep  in
Bergen  ;  but  a  wilder  hunter's  land  does  not  exist,  and  wild  rein-
deer, and,  I  believe,  wild  goats  may  yet  be  found  in  the  high
mountains.

2  A


354  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  They  were  no  sorry  company  for  me  to  be  with
me,"  said  he.

He  went.  The  daughter  of  the  King  of  Greece
was  looking  out  of  a  window,  and  she  perceived  Manns
coming.  She  went  down  to  where  his  fatlier's  brother
was.

"  The  son  of  thy  brother  is  coming  here,"  said  she,
*'  with  costly  coloured  belts  on  his  left  side,  with  which
might  be  got  the  love  of  a  young  woman,  and  the
liking  of  maidens ; "  that  it  were  for  her  pleasure  to
put  an  end  to  him,  of  murdering,  and  misusing,  and
slaying.

His  father's  brother  said  that  were  a  great  pity,  and
that  he  would  not  be  to  the  fore  to  do  that  to  him.

"  If  thou  wilt  not  do  it,  I  will  do  it,"  said  she.

She  went  out  of  the  house,  and  she  took  his  twelve
foster  brethren  from  him,  and  she  swore  them  to  her-
self. He  went  back  to  the  Old  Bergen  by  himself,
gloomy,  tearful,  sorrowful,  and  it  was  late.  What
should  he  see  but  a  man  in  a  red  vesture.

"  It  is  thou  that  art  here  Manus?"  said  he.

"  It  is  I,"  said  Manus.

"  I  think  if  thou  hadst  bad  or  good  arms  that  thou
would' st  get  to  be  King  over  Lochlann."

"  I  have  not  that,"  said  he.

"  WeU,"  said  he  of  the  red  vesture,  "  if  thou
would' st  give  me  a  promise  I  would  give  thee  arms."

"  What  promise  shall  I  give  thee  ?  I  have  not  a
jot  to  give  thee."

"  WeU,  I  wiU  not  ask  thee  much.  I  was  the
armourer  of  thy  grandfather,  and  thy  great-gi'andfether,
if  thou  wouldst  give  me  a  promise  that  I  should  be
armourer  with  thee  I  would  give  thee  arms  this  night."

"  I  will  give  thee  that  (promise),  if  so  be  that  I
am  ever  a  king."


MANus.  355

Tliey  went,  and  tliey  reached  the  house.  The  man
of  the  red  vesture  took  out  a  key,  and  he  opened  a
door,  and  when  he  had  opened  it  the  house  was  full  of
arms,  and  not  a  jot  in  it  but  arms.

"  Begin  now  and  choose  arms,"  said  the  man  of
the  red  vesture.

Manus  seized  a  sword,  and  he  broke  it,  and  every
one  he  caught  he  was  breaking  it.

"  Don't  do  that  Manus,  don't  be  breaking  the  arms,
in  case  thou  mightest  have  need  of  them  yet.  TMien
I  was  a  young  man  thy  grandsire  had  a  war,  and  I  had
an  old  sword,  an  old  helmet,  and  an  old  mail  shirt  on,
try  them,"  said  the  man  of  the  red  vestiu-e.

Manus  seized  the  sword,  and  it  beat  him  to  break
it.  He  put  the  SAvord  and  the  helmet  on.  Wliat
should  he  see  but  a  cloth  (hanging)  down  from  the
ridge  of  the  house.  "  AAHiat  is  the  use  of  that  cloth  ? "
said  Manus.  "It  is,"  said  he  "  that  when  thou  sj^readest
it,  to  seek  food  and  drink,  thou  A^dlt  get  as  thou  usest.
There  is  another  virtue  in  it.  If  a  foe  should  meet  thee,
he  woidd  give  a  kiss  to  the  back  of  thy  fist."

He  gave  the  cloth  to  ]\Ianus,  and  he  folded  the
cloth  in  his  oxter.  VHiat  should  he  see  but  an
iron  chain  (hanging)  down  from  the  ridge  of  the  house.

"  What  is  the  good  of  that  chain  Ì "  said  Manus.

"  There  is  no  creature  in  the  world  that  if  yonder
thing  should  be  put  about  his  neck  the  battle  of  a
hundred  men  would  not  be  upon  him,"  said  the  man
of  the  red  vestui-e.

Manus  took  the  chain  with  him.  AVIien  he  was
going,  what  should  he  see  but  two  lions,  and  a  whelp
Avitli  them.  The  lions  came  in  front  of  him  to  eat
him,  and  to  put  him  to  skaith.  He  spread  the  cloth,
and  the  Lions  came,  and  they  kissed  the  back  of  his  fist,
and  they  went  past    him.       The  lion   Avhelp   got   in


356  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

amongst  the  folds  of  the  cloth,  and  he  wrapped  the
cloth  about  him,  and  he  lifted  him  with  him  to  the
old  Bergen.*

When  he  reached  the  old  Bergen  the  daughter  of
the  Earl  of  the  Fiughaidh  was  within.  He  put  the
chain  about  the  neck  of  the  lion  whelp.  The  lion
whelp  went,  and  he  cleared  the  castle ;  he  did  not
leave  a  creature  or  a  monster  ahve  in  it.  He  set  fire
to  the  castle,  "i"  He  was  there  a  year,  and  he  had  no
want.

He  went  out  one  day,  and  he  said  he  would  go  to
see  his  muime.

He  took  the  lion  whelp  with  him,  and  he  went
away.  She  perceived  him  coming.  There  was  a
sword  at  his  side  that  day.  She  came  out  to  meet
him,  and  she  had  a  brown  lap-dog.  He  went  to  meet
Manus  with  his  mouth  open,  to  put  Manus  to  skaith,
and  to  eat  him.  Away  went  the  lion  whelp,  and  he
went  before  Manus,  and  he  set  liis  paw  at  the  back  of
the  throat  of  her  "  measan,"  and  he  let  out  his  entrails
on  the  earth.

"There,  Manus,"  said  she,  "but  put  thy  whelp  in
at  the  ridge  of  the  lion's  house."

He  put  the  hon  whelp  in  at  the  ridge  of  the  house,
and  he  put  tlie  chain  about  his  neck,  and  he  did  not
*  When  the  old  man  told  me  the  story,  he  described  devices
on  the  shield  of  Manus,  and  a  lion  was  one  of  them.  This  proba-
bly is  founded  on  some  lion  on  a  flag.  According  to  Gaelic  poems
Fiona's  people  had  banners  with  devices  on  them,  and  Icelandic
warriors  had  devices  on  their  armour  in  the  ninth  century,  accord-
ing to  the  Njal  Saga.  Some  of  the  articles  are  amongst  the  gear
of  King  Arthur  in  the  Mabinogion.

t  It  is  manifest  that  something  is  wanting  here.  There  is
nothing  before  said  about  an  enchanted  castle,  beset  by  monsters,
and  an  imprisoned  lady  ;  but  there  must  have  been  monsters  to
clear  out.


MANUS.  357

leave  a  lion  imder  the  ridge  of  the  house  unslain,  and
laid  himself  (down)  stretched  for  dead  along  Avith
them.*

Manus  went  home  without  whelp,  without  man,
that  night.  Wliat  work  should  his  twelve  foster
brethren  be  set  to,  but  to  clear  out  the  lion's  house.
Wlien  they  were  put  out  there  was  not  a  lion  under
the  ridge  of  the  house  that  had  not  his  tln-oat  cut.  The
lion  whelp  was  without  a  drop  of  sweat  upon  him,  and
the  iron  chaiu  that  Manus  had  put  on  him  (was)  about
liis  neck.  One  of  them  said  that  the  lion  which  was
yonder  seemed  strange  to  him,  without  a  drop  of  sv/eat
upon  him,  unlike  the  rest.

"That  is  the  lion  whelp  of  the  man  of  my  love,"
said  one  of  the  company.      "  The  Hon  Avhelp  of  Manus."

"  Well,  then,"  said  one  of  them,  "  though  we  are
sworn  not  to  go  out  of  the  town,  before  he  rises  we
might  go,  and  give  a  message."

"  There  is  no  man  who  goes  out  of  tlris  town,"  said
the  rest,  "  after  the  coming  of  night  that  there  is  not
the  pain  of  seven  years  upon  him  afterwards."

They  went  to  the  window,  and  Avhen  they  went  to
tlie  window  the  lion's  Avhelp  opened  liis  eyes,  and  lie
came  alive.

She  Avent  where  her  husband  Avas,  and  she  said  to
him  to  put  the  rough  travellert  in  order,  and  five  hun-
dred men  in  it.

He  said  that  there  would  be  the  pain  of  seven
years  on  any  being  who  should  go  out  after  the  falling
of  the  night.

*  This  is  like  a  bit  of  the  story  of  Conall,  and  the  house  of  the
Tamhasg.

t  Another  possible  meaning  for  this  word  may  be  the  corpse
buryer.  It  is  often  impossible  to  translate  these  names,  the
reciters  do  not  understand  them,  and  the  context  gives  no  help.


3  5»  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

She  said  though  there  should  be  the  pain  of  seven-
teen years  in  it,  that  they  shoukl  go  to  seek  the  head
of  Manus.

The  deaf  halt  man  was  what  they  used  to  call  the
man  who  was  guarding  the  realm  at  that  time,  and  he
could  not  hear  a  jot  till  there  should  be  nine  nines
shouting  in  liis  ear.  He  could  kill  nine  nines  back-
wards, and  nine  nines  forwards  -with  his  sword.  What
should  awake  him  but  the  stormy  soimd  of  the  rough
traveller  coming,  and  he  thought  that  it  was  a  foe  that
was  there.  He  arose  upon  the  rough  traveller,  and  he
did  not  leave  a  mother's  son  of  the  five  himdred  alive,
himself  and  the  lion's  whelp,  and  the  twelve  foster
brothers  of  Manus  went  to  the  Old  Bergen.

"Never  thou  mind,"  said  she.  "Though  Manus
did  that  to  me.  There  is  the  Eed  Gruagach,  son  of
the  King  of  Greece,  and  he  will  take  the  head  of  Manus
out  of  the  Old  Bergen."

Then  went  his  mother  here,  and  she  sent  a  ship  to
Manus  to  tlie  Old  Bergen  to  take  him  aAvay  before  the
Eed  Gruagach  should  take  the  head  ofi"  liim.  What
should  his  muime  do  but  put  a  sea  thickening  on  the
ocean,  so  that  Manus  might  not  get  away.  His  mother
sent  a  pilot  in  the  ship,  and  what  should  the  ship  do
but  stop  in  the  sea  thickening.

"  Is  there  a  ship  in  the  world  that  will  take  us
out  of  this  Ì "  said  Manus  to  the  pilot.

"  Indeed  there  is  the  speckled  ship  of  the  son  of
Yalcan  Smith,"  said  the  pilot.*

They  were  on  board,  and  they  could  not  stir.

*  Bhalcan.  There  seems  to  have  been  some  Celtic  divinity,
who  was  a  smith,  and  a  sea  god — a  kind  of  Neptune  and  Vulcan
in  one.  Bhalcan  occurs  in  Irish  poema,  and  modern  Gaelic  poets
have  introduced  Venus,  Cupid,  and  other  classical  names  into
their  modern  songs.     See  note,  Gaelic  below,  page  377.


MANUS.  359

At  the  mouth  of  the  night  the  lion  whelp  thrust
his  head  under  the  arm  of  Manus,  and  he  went  out  off
the  sliip,  and  Manns  on  liis  back.  He  went,  and  he
reached  a  scaur.  He  left  Manus  on  the  scaur,  and
he  himself  made  a  spring  down  the  other  side  of  it.
Manus  fell  asleep,  and  he  would  like  as  well  to  find
death  with  the  rest,  rather  than  be  left  by  himself  on  a
rock.  There  came  a  voice  to  him,  and  it  said  to  him
"  Arise."     He  rose,  and  he  saw  a  ship.

Who  was  here  but  the  ship  of  MacBhalcan  Smith,
and  the  lion  whelp  in  the  shape  of  pilot  at  the  helm,
and  Mac-Vic-Valcan  Smith  and  his  twelve  sailors  dead
on  her  deck.  He  reached  the  ship,  and  he  put  liis
twelve  foster  brethren  and  the  daughter  of  the  Earl  of
the  Fiughaidh  in  the  ship  of  MacBhalcan  Smith.  He
fell  to  at  sailing  amongst  the  thickening.  What
should  he  see  but  land,  and  when  he  saw  the  land  he
saw  the  very  finest  castle  he  ever  saw.  He  went  on
shore,  and  he  put  MacBhalcan  Smith  and  liis  twelve
sailors  on  shore  on  a  point.  He  reached  the  castle,  and
he  went  in,  and  there  was  a  fine  woman  there  within,
and  twelve  bald  ruddy  maidens.  His  twelve  foster
brothers  sat  beside  the  bald  ruddy  maidens,*  and  they
said  that  they  woidd  never  go  for  ever  till  they  should
get  them  to  marry.

It  was  not  long  tiU  there  came  home  the  White
Gruagach,  son  of  the  King  of  the  Light,  and  a  great
auburn  clumsy  woman,  his  mother.

"  Who  is  here,"  said  he,  "  looking  my  twelve
brown  ruddy  daughters  in  the  front  of  the  face  ?  and
that  I  never  saw  a  man  that  might  look  at  them  that  I
would  not  take  his  head  off  against  his  throat."

"  These  are  my  twelve  foster  brothers,    and  they

*  Or  cro^jped  auburn  maidens.


360  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

have  taken  love  for  thy  bald  ruddy  daughters,  and  thou
must  give  them  to  them  to  marry,"  said  Manus.

''  Well,"  said  the  White  Gruagach,  "  the  covenant
on  which  I  would  do  that,  I  am  sure  that  thou  wouldst
not  do  it  for  me,  that  is,  to  put  me  in  against  my
father,  and  that  I  am  out  from  him  for  seven  years."

"  I  will  do  that,"  said  Manus,  "  but  that  thou  thyself
shouldst  go  with  me."

On  the  morrow  they  went  away,  and  they  reached
the  King  of  the  Light.  The  King  of  the  Light  came
out,  and  he  gave  his  right  hand  to  his  own  son,  and
his  left  hand  to  Manus.*  The  lion  whelp  went,  and
he  seized  him,  and  he  levelled  him.

"  Choke  off  me  the  monster  before  he  takes  my
life  from  off  me,"  said  the  King  of  the  Light.

"  I  will  do  that,"  said  Manus,  "  but  write  with  a
drop  of  thy  blood  that  thy  son  is  thy  beloved  heir."

"  Well,  it's  long  since  I  would  have  done  that,
if  he  had  come  himself  to  ask  it."

Then  he  went  and  he  wrote,  and  they  went  away
to  come  home.  When  they  were  coming  the  daughter
of  the  Earl  of  the  Fiughaidh  was  in  a  burn.

"  0,"  said  the  A^Tiite  Gruagach,  "  I  am  dead."

"  What  ails  thee  ?"  said  Manus.

"  There  is  a  stone,"  said  he,  "  in  the  burn,  and
there  are  three  trouts  under  the  stone,  and  they  are  in
thy  wife's  apron.  As  long  as  the  trouts  should  be
alive  I  would  be  alive,  and  thy  Avife  has  one  of  them
now  in  the  fire."t

*  His  south  hand,  and  his  northern  hand.

f  The  word  which  now  means  trout  in  Gaelic  means  speckled,
and  is  sometimes  translated  salmon.  It  appears  that  there  were
sacred  salmon  in  Irish  mythology.  Fish  appear  on  the  sculptured
stones  of  Scotland,  and  salmon  commonly  appear  as  something
magical  in  other  Gaelic  stories.


36i


"  Is  there  anything  in  the  world,"  said  Maniis,
tliat  would  do  thee  good?"

"  The  King  of  the  Great  World  has  a  horned
venomous  (creature),  and  if  I  could  get  his  blood  I
would  be  as  well  as  I  ever  was."


From  a  Stone  in  the  Churchyard  of  St.  Vigeans.— Sculptured  Stones  of
Scotland,  PI.  Ixx.  The  stone  has  Christian  symbols,  but  this  would  seem  to
rejiresent  the  sacrifice  of  some  fabulous  animal.  The  people  who  sculp-
tured the  cross,  the  monks,  and  this  figure,  may  have  intended  to  represent
the  myths  or  ceremonies  connected  with  the  stone  in  Pagan  and  in  Chris-
tian times.

They  reached  the  house,  and  the  White  Gruagach
Avas  dead.

Then  Manus  went,  and  the  speckled  sliijj  was
stolen  from  him,  and  there  was  no  knowing  who  in  the
world  had  taken  it  from  him.

One  of  his  foster  brothers  said  that  Brodram,  son
of  the  King  of  the  Great  World,  had  taken  it  with  him.


362  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

He  went  away  to  Brodrani.  He  asked  liim  what
made  him  take  that  ship  from  him.  He  said  that  he
had  stolen  her  himself  hefore,  and  that  he  had  no  right
to  her.  He  said  that  his  father  had  a  venomous
horned  (creature),  and  that  while  the  Beannach  Nimhe
was  alive  that  his  father  would  be  alive,  and  that  if
the  Beannach  Nimhe  was  slain  that  he  would  have  the
realm.

He  went  with  Brodram,  and  the  venomous  horned
beast  was  in  a  park.  The  Hon  whelp  went  into  the
park,  and  he  put  his  paAv  into  the  hollow  of  the  throat
of  the  venomous  horned  beast.  The  venomous  horned
beast  fell  dead,  and  the  king  fell  dead  within.

Then  Brodram  was  King  over  the  Great  "World,
and  Manus  got  the  blood,  and  he  returned  back,  and
with  it  he  brought  the  Wliite  Gruagach  to  life.

"  It  may  not  be  that  thou  wilt  not  go  thyself  with
me  now  to  put  me  in  on  the  realm,"  said  he  to  the
Wliite  Gruagach.

The  White  Gruagach  said  that  he  would  go.  He
reached  Brodram,  and  he  said  that  he  would  go  with  him.
Balcan  and  his  twelve  apprentices  were  working  in
the  smithy,  and  he  revived  his  twelve  sailors.  He
asked  him  to  go  with  him,  and  Balcan  said  that  he
would.

There  went  Balcan,  and  the  White  Gruagach,  and
Brodram,  and  the  Gruagach  of  the  Tower,  son  of  the
King  of  Sigmn,  with  him.

They  reached  Lochlann,

There  met  them  a  man  in  a  red  vesture  ;

Tlie  Wliite  Gruagach,  and  the  Eed  Gruagach  began

Fearfully,  hatefully  proudly,

Three  destructions  they  would  drive  off  them.

To  the  cloud  flakes  of  aether  and  heaven.


MANUS.  363

Tliere  gathered  stag  hounds,  savage  hounds,
To  take  pleasure  in  the  monsters.
They  would  make  the  sea  dry  up,
And  the  earth  burst,
And  the  stars  fall

The  Eed  Gruagach*  was  slain,  and  his  head  stuck
on  a  stake,  and  Manus  was  crowned  King  over  Loch-
lann,  and  he  did  not  leave  a  living  man  in  Lochlann.


Here  I  had  intended  to  give  the  "  orally  collected  "
version  of  the  poem  of  Magnus  as  the  fitting  sequel  and
contrast  to  this  story,  but  as  there  is  scant  room  within
my  limits,  I  give  the  prose  stories  which  go  with  it.
The  lay  of  Magnus  has  often  been  translated.  I  hope
to  be  believed  when  I  say  that  Magnus  as  I  found  him
in  1860  resembles  Gillies,  1786,  very  closely.

This  is  the  opening  story  of  Magnus.

"  When  the  Lochlannaich  came  on  shore,  Fionn  said
to  the  lads  that  they  should  go  to  hunt ;  that  he  wished
to  give  them  a  feast  that  night,  because  it  was  not
nicely  that  they  themselves  had  much.  They  went  to
hunt,  and  when  the  himt  was  over,  Caoilte  was  sent  to
gather  the  game  since  he  was  the  swiftest.  It  was
three  himdred  deer  they  killed,  and  twenty  boars.

"  Now  when  Caoilte  had  gathered  the  game  there
went  two  hundred  to  gather  heather  to  cook  them,
a  hundred  and  a  half  went  to  set  in  order  the  stones
under  the  caldron,  and  it  was  ten  (deichnar)  who  were
burning  (the  fuel)  beneath  it.  Three  hundred  went  to
flay.  Then  Fionn  sent  Fearghus  down  to  give  a  bid-
ding to  the  Lochlannaich,  and  they  did  not  deign  to
answer  him.  Fionn  took  much  proud  anger  because
the  feast  had  been  made  and  they  had  not  answered."
*  The  Greek  personage.


364  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Then  follows  the  poem  as  repeated  by  Donald
MacPhie  (smith),  Breubhaig,  Barra,  October  18 GO,
who  learned  it  from  his  mother,  and  traces  it  up,  for
six  generations,  to  an  ancestor  Avho  came  from  Kintyre.

The  poet,  supposed  to  be  Oisein,  speaks  as  one  who
was  present  at  "  Uisge  Laoire  nan  sruth  seimh,"  where
the  scene  is  laid.  They  see  a  thousand  barks  coming
to  shore.  The  Feinn  gather  from  every  place,  and
converse.  Conan,  as  usual,  is  cross  grained  throughout.
Feargus,  the  son  of  Fionn,  the  brother  of  the  poet,  goes,
and  finds  that  it  is

"  Mànus  fuileach  am  fear  fial
Mac  righ  Beith  nan  sgiath  dearg
Ard  righ  Lochlann  ceann  nan  cliar,"  etc.

Blood  spilling  Manus,  the  generous  one,
Beithe's  king's  son,  of  the  red  shields  (?  Bergen).
High  King  of  Lochlann,  chief  of  the  brave,  etc.

Come  to  seek  Fionn's  wife,  and  his  famous  hoimd  Bran.
A  battle  ensues,  Manus  is  bound,  and  allowed  to  go
home,  and  so  it  goes  on  for  164  lines  of  very  smooth
good  Gaelic  verse.

In  Gillies  there  are  172  lines,  or  43  verses,  I
have  a  verse  wliich  is  not  in  Gilhes,  and  the  variations
only  amount  to  different  readings,  and  to  variations  in
language  and  orthography.  After  the  poem  comes  the
sequel  of  the  story,  also  taken  down  from  Donald
MacPhie,  which  is  not  in  GilHes.

"  After  the  battle  that  was  here,  the  Lochlanners
were  tlu'ee  years  in  disgrace  with  their  Avives.  Fionn
had  been  before  this  in  Lochlann,  and  the  daughter  of
the  King  of  Lochlann  had  taken  love  for  him.  The
tiling  which  they  did  Avas  to  send  Athach  (a  monstrous
warrior  or  giant)  to  ask  him  to  a  feast  in  Lochlann,  to


MANUS.  365

make  the  arrangement  of  a  league  between  them,  that
there  might  not  be  disputes  for  ever."

"  In  the  Athach  there  was  but  one  eye,  and  what
was  the  very  day  that  he  reached  the  house  of  Fionn
but  a  day  that  Fionn  had  a  great  feast  for  his  set  of
lads.  It  was  late  that  they  had  the  feast,  and  when
the  Athach  came  in  they  had  just  sat  at  the  feast.  The
Athach  took  (his  way)  up  without  leave  or  bidding,
and  he  sat  at  the  right  shoulder  of  Fionn.  "WTien
Conan  saw  how  bold  he  was,  he  arose  and  he  smote
him,  and  he  levelled  him.  Fionn  got  up  on  the  instant,
and  he  seized  his  shoulder,  and  he  raised  him,  and  he
set  him  sitting  where  he  was  before.  Then  Fionn
asked  the  Athach  what  man  he  was,  and  he  told  who
he  himself  was.  He  said  that  he  was  a  herald  (teach-
dair)  from  the  King  of  Lochlann,  that  came  to  give  a
bidding  to  themselves  to  a  feast  in  Lochlaim  ;  that  the
daughter  of  the  King  of  Lochlann  was  in  great  grief
with  the  love  she  had  taken  for  himself,  and,  though
he  had  another  wife,  if  he  himself  should  lay  bare  one
sight  of  her,  there  was  no  knoA\-ing  but  that  she  would
be  the  better  of  it."

"  A^Hien  Fionn  heard  that  it  was  a  herald  from  the
King  of  Loclilann,  he  desired  Conan  to  be  seized,  and
the  binding  of  the  three  smalls  to  be  laid  on  him,  and
that  he  should  be  cast  into  a  dark  hole,  Avhere  he
should  see  neither  night  nor  day  till  the  feast  should
be  tinishecL  Conan  was  there  but  half  an  hour  when
Caoilte  said, —

"  I  never  saw  a  herald  coming  from  the  King  of
Lochlann,  for  whose  sake  I  would  leave  Conan  bound,
and  that  there  is  no  knowing  but  he  did  the  better
deed."

"  He  let  Conan  loose,  and  he  brought  him  in  to  the
feast.     They  took  well  and  right  well  to  the  Athach


366  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

that  night,  and  on  the  morrow  they  made  (ready)  for
going  with  him.      Said  Fionn  to  Goll, —

"  It  is  a  shame  for  us  to  carry  arms  to  a  feast.  It
will  not  be  fitting  to  see  them,  but  we  will  take  with
us  knives,  that  we  may  hide  under  our  cloaks,  and  do
not  uncover  them  for  ever  till  I  give  you  warning."

"  Then  here  they  went,  and  they  reached  Loch-
lann."

(And  here  let  me  point  oiit  how  exceedingly  incon-
sistent all  this  is  with  the  common  meaning  of  Loch-
lann,  Scandinavia,  and  how  simjily  is  it  all  explained,
by  supposing  Lochlann  to  be  the  possessions  of  the
Lochlanners,  the  Scandinavians  in  Ireland,  or  in  Scot-
land, or  in  any  one  of  the  islands.)

"  When  they  arrived,  the  Athach  steered  them  to  a
great  long  house,  with  a  door  at  its  end.  There  was  a
board  there,  from  the  door  till  it  reached  the  upper  end
of  the  house.  The  Avay  of  sitting  they  had  was,  one  of
the  company  of  Fionn  was  set  about  the  board,  and
two  Lochlanners  at  his  side.  When  the  house  was
filled,  on  each  side  there  were  two  Loclilanners  on  each
side  of  the  Fiantan.  The  feast  was  on  the  board,  but
it  was  not  to  be  touched  till  the  King  of  Lochlann  and
the  Queen  should  come  in.  The  king  came,  and  the
queen,  and  their  daughter.  When  the  king  came  in,
Fionn  rose  up  standing  to  salute  and  welcome  him
(cuir  failte  air),  and  he  would  not  take  his  hand.  It
seems  that  he  Avould  not  take  his  hand  till  every  one
who  had  slain  any  of  his  lot  of  sons  should  tell  in  what
place  he  had  left  him.  Every  man  was  telling  where
he  left  the  son  he  had  slain.  It  was  from  Osgar  that
he  asked  the  last  one,  and  said  Osgar, —

Mharbh  mis  e  air  truigh  Chliabhain  mu  thuath.
Far  an  do  thuit  do  mhor  shluagh


MAXUS.  367

Gun  taing  do  dliuin  agaibh  d'a  chionn,

A  dli'  f  has  riamh  an  riogliachd  Lochlann.

I  slew  him  on  the  strand  of  Cliabhain  in  the  north,

Wliere  fell  thy  mighty  host,

In  spite  of  a  man  of  you  of  any  kin,

That  ever  waxed  in  the  realm  of  Lochlann.

An  seo  nuair  dh'  aithnich  Fionn,

Gun  robh  miothlachd  ri  blaith  ami ;

Thoisich  Fionn  an  sin,

Air  deanadli  ranu.

Here  now  when  Fionn  perceived,

That  ill  blood  was  to  be,

Tlien  Fionn  began

At  making  rymes.

"  ISTa'm  bithinns'  um'  ghobha,

'S  math  a  dlieanainn  sgeanan,

Chuirin  cruaidh  'non  saidhean,*

S'  chuirin  siomt  'nan  roinnean.+

Chuirinn  casan  fraoich,

Le  'n  cinn  bhuidlie,

Ann  an  cuil  tliiugha,

]S"am  faobhar  tana."

If  I  were  a  smith.

Well  I'd  make  knives,

I'd  put  temper  in  handles,

I'd  put  shimmer  on  points.

I'd  put  hafts  of  heather,

With  their  ends  of  yellow.

In  the  tliick  backs

Of  the  keen  edges.

*  Saidhean.    The  part  of  a  knife  or  sword  which  goes  into
the  haft.     There  is  no  equivalent  in  English,  so  far  as  I  know,
f  SioM.     An  image  reflected  by  a  blade  from  high  polish.
i  Roinn.     The  point  of  a  sword,  dagger,  or  knife.


368  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Then  they  arose  and  they  fell  upon  each  other.
They  had  but  their  knives,  and  the  Lochlanners  were
under  full  arms.

Said  Fionn —
"  Where  are  they  great  vo-v\\s,  Manus  1
They  were  left  where  they  were  found  said  Manus."
"  Caite  am  bheil  na  mionnan  mor  a  Mhanuis  Ì
Dh  fhagas  far  an  d'  fhuaras  thar  Manus."

While  the  rest  were  at  work,  Fionn  was  in  a  dark
corner  making  love  to  the  daughter.  The  Fhinn  beat
the  Lochlanners  with  the  knives,  and  Manus  was  slain.
Fionn  took  the  daughter  with  lum,  and  she  was  a  year
with  him  as  a  wdfe.

MacTiCan  truly  says,  "  this  description  of  the  manu-
facture of  knives  is  wonderfully  vivid  and  vigorous,  and
shews  the  richness  of  the  language  in  such  terms,  while
it  appears  to  prove  that  the  construction  of  warlike
weapons  was  well  understood  in  past  times  in  the  High-
lands;" but  the  next  story  seems  to  shew  that  the
smith's  art  wa.s  not  known  in  the  days  of  the  mythical
Fionn,  who  got  his  sword  from  the  fairy  smith  of
Lochlann.  Archaeology  seems  to  prove  that  the
ancient  inhabitants  of  Britain  were  once  armed  wdth
bronze  weapons,  poor  in  iron,  and  rich  in  gold,  and  the
Feinn  were  armed  with  pointed  sticks,  hardened  in  the
fire,  when  they  put  gold  rings  on  the  fingers  of  warriors
whom  they  had  slain,  and  wished  to  honour.  Icelandic
.sagas  speak  of  abundance  of  gold  amongst  the  Irish  ;
Gaelic  stories  mention  gold  frequently,  and  abundance  of
gold  ornaments  are  dug  up  all  over  the  United  Kingdom :
but  iron  s^vords  are  always  mythical,  and  iron  swords  are
rarely  found,  and  their  pattern  is  often  Scandinavian  on
the  sculptured  stones,  and  when  they  are  dug  up.

May  not  the  Scandinavians  have  been  better  black-


MANUS.  369

smiths  than  the  Western  Islanders,  and  the  Celts
better  goldsmiths,  richer,  and  more  civilized  than  the
iS^orsemen  when  they  first  met  ?


MAN  US.


Bha  rii,^h  Lochlann  ann,  "s  phos  e,  's  rugadh  dithis  mac  da.  'S  e
Oireal  a  bha  air  an  darna  fear  agus  larlaid  air  an  fhear  eile.  Dh'
eug  an  athalr  "s  am  matbair.  Shui'ili  Parlamaid  arson  cileadaireachd
a  chur  air  an  rioghachd  gus  an  d'  thigeadh  a'  chlann  gu  h-aois,  's
gus  an  gabbadh  iad  bòidean  na  riogbachd  orra  fhein.  Chuir  iad
fios  air  na  gillean ;  "s  bba  Oireal  'na  dhuine  meata  ;  's  e  larlaid  a  bu
mbotba.  Thuirt  Oireal  ris  a'  pharlamaid  nach  gabbadh  e  gnothach
fhatbasd  ris  an  riogbachd.

"  Plocbd  cha  bhi  agaibh  di,"  arsa  a'  pharlamaid,  "mar  an  gabh
sibh  an  diugh  i."

Ars'  larlaid  ri  Oireal,  "  Gabh  thusa  an  dara  leitb  "s  gabhaidh mise
an  leith  eile."

"  Mata,"  ars'  Oireal,  "  ni  mi  sin."

Sgriobhadh  an  riogbachd  air  na  gillean.  An  am  beagan  bhliadh-
iiachan  phos  larlainn  nigbean  righ  na  Greige,  's  phos  Oireal  nighean
righ  Sgiath  sgial,  righ  na  h-Arcuinn.  Thug  Sgiath  sgial  seisear
mhnatban  coimhideachd  le  a  niginn  's  thug  righ  na  Greige  'leitbid
eile  le  a  nighinn  fhein.  Tri  raithean  on  oidhcbe  sin  bhuail  anacair
cloinne  nighean  righ  na  Greige,  's  cuideachd  bhuail  anacair  chloinne
nighean  Sgiath  sgial,  's  rugadh  niic  dhaibb,  's  rugadh  da  mhacdbeug
do  na  mnathan  coimhideachd.  Thugadh  Manus  air  mac  Oireil,  's
Eochaidh  air  mac  larlainn.  Thoisich  na  mic  air  tighinn  air  an
aghaidh.  Bha  Manus  a'  fas  mor,  's  cha  robh  Eochaidh  ach  beag.
Chuireadh  do  'n  sgoil  iad,  's  bba  a  chomhdbaltan  fhein  comhla  ris  a'
h-uile  fear  aca.

Bha  iad  ag  iomain  air  an  fhaiche  'tighinn  as  an  sgoil,  's  chuir
Manus  am  ball  air  Eochaidh.

"  Bidh  rioghachd  m'  athar  fhein  agamsa,"  arsa  Manus.

Thuirt  nigbean  righ  na  Greige,  "  B'e  mo  thoil  crioch  mhoirt,  agus
mhillidh,  agus  mharbhaidh,  a  chur  air  Manus.''

"  Mata  b'  e"  sin  a  bu  mhor  am  beud  a  chur  air  mac  mo  bhrathar
fhein,"  ars'  an  righ.


370  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  Mar  an  dean  thusa  e,  ni  mise  e,"  ars'  ise.

Dh'  flialbh  i  staigh  's  bhuail  i  leideag  air  a  mac  fhein,  's  chuir  i
mach  as  an  taigh  e.

"  Falbh."  ars'  ise,  "  's  thoir  ceithir  ranna  ruadha  an  t-saoghail  ort,
's  na  faiceam  air  do  bhonn  air  an  fhonn(«)  chiadhna  thu  fhad  's  a
bhitheas  an  saoghal  air  suidheachadh.  Bheir  mise  learn  Manua  's
bidh  6  'na  mhac  agam  fhein."

Thug  i  Manus  a  staigh  leatha  fhein  agus  chuir  i  'mac  fhein  air
grianan  aluinn,  aon  chasach,  far  am  faiceadh  e  a'  h-uile  duine,  's
nach  fliaiceadh  duine  e.  Bha  Manus  a  staigh  aice  's  cha  robh  e  a'
faighinn  dol  a  dh'  amharc  a  mhathar  idir.  Thuirt  a  mhathair,  an
siud,  gu  'u  rachadh  i  far  an  robh  a  mhuime  's  gu'n  gabhadh  i  a
comhairle.  Ann  an  ceann  bliadhna  chuir  i  lios  air  Manus.  Ann  am
beagan  bhliadhnachan  chuir  bean  bhrathar  'athar  fios  air  Manus.

"  De  a  Mhanuis,"  arsa  nighean  righ  na  Greige,  "  a  tha  thu  a'
smaointeachadh  a  dheanadh  an  diugh  ?  Ma  phosas  thu  gheibh  thu
an  treas  cuid  de  'n  rioghachd ;  fonn,(a)  a's  fearann,  agus  ionmhas."

"  Mata  cha  'n  'eil  aois  posaidh  agams'  ann,"  ars'  esan.

"  Cha  ruig  thu  leas  sin,"  ars'  ise,  "  tha  aon  fhear  air  an  fhearann
agam  fhein  a  fhreagras  duit.  Theid  thu  a  dh'  iarraidh  a  nighinn
agus  posaidh  tu  i.  'Se  larla  na  Fiughaidh  a  th'  anu.  Posaidh  tu
nighean  larla  na  Fiughaidh."

Dh'  fhalbh  i  's  thug  i  leatha  corr-theaghlach,  's  bheireadh  i
leatha  coig  ceud  fear.  Kainig  i  taigh  iarla  na  Fiughaidh  a  'toirt  do
Mhanus  a  'posadh.  Thuirt  bean  iarla  na  Fiughaidh  rithe,  "  Cha  'n
'eil  aois  posaidh  aig  mo  nighinnsa  fhathasd,  's  cha  'n  'eil  aoi.-;  posaidh
aig  Manus."

"  Mata,"  arsa  nighean  righ  na  Greige,  "taigh  na  tulach  cha  bhi
agad  air  an  fhearann  agamsa  mar  an  d'  thoir  thu  do  nighean  da."

Smaointich  an  duine  nach  robh  math  dha  a  diultainn,  's  phosadh
Manus  agus  nighean  Iarla  na  Fiughaidh  ri  'cheile.  Chaidh  iad  a
luidhe  an  oidche  sin  an  taigh  bhrathar  'athar.

"  An  tu  seo  a  Mhanuis,  a  mhic  aidh  agus  a  dhuine  dhona?  Am
bheil  fios  agad  d^  a'  bhean  a  thug  i  siud  do  dh'  Eochaidh,  a  mac
fhein  ?  Thug  a'  gaoth  luimneach  Mhairt.  Cha  'n  ann  ri  mnaoi
shaoghalta  a  phos  i  e  ;  gus  an  d'  thugadh  e  'n  ceann  diotsa.  Thusa
agus  bean  agad  air  do  leabaidh  trath  oidhche!(^)  bidh  thu  'dol  as  a'
h-uile  latha,  's  cha  chum  thu  cath  risean."

"An  ann  mor  seo  a  thaV"  arsa  Manus.

Chaidh  e  far  an  robh  ise.

"  Bi  'fagail  na  rioghachd,"  arsa  bean  bhrathar  'athar  ris,  "  airneo
cha  bhi  agad  ach  na  'bheir  thu  g'  a  chionu."


MAXUS.  371

"  B'  e,"  ars'  esan,  "  an  treas  cuid  a  gheall  thu  domh  de  'n  riogh-
aclid."

"  Plochd  cha  bhi  agad  an  seo,"'  ars'  ise  ;  "  tha  do  chuid  fo  chlachan
agus  fo  gharblilach  anns  an  t-seana  Bheirbhe.'"(0

"  Mata,  on  a  th-i  thu  'gam  cliur  air  falbh,  thoir  dhomh  seisear
chomhdhaltan  Eochaidh,  's  gu  'm  biodh  a  dha  dheug  agam."

Fhuair  e  siud.  Dh'  fhalbh  e  's  thug  e  air  an  t-seana  Bheirbhe.f
Nuair  rainig  e  'n  t-seana  Bheirbhe  cha  robh  a  chridhe  aig  duine  dol
a  choir  a'  chaisteil ;  Bha  caoraich  anns  an  t-seana  Bheirbhe  agus  'se
na  caoraich  chorrachar  a  theirte  riutha.  Bhuail  lad  air  deanadh
sluichd  'san  talamh.  Bha  na  caoraich  a'  dol  'san  t-slochd  's  iad  a'
breith  orra ;  's  bha  iad  'gam  marbhadh  's  a'  cumail  feola  riutha  fhein.
Bha  iad  bliadhna  mar  seo  's  an  t-seana  Bheirbhe.

"  Bhuais  e !  Bhuais  e  ! "  arsa  Manus,  "  tha  bliadhna  o'n  a  chunnaic
mi  mo  muime.     "S  fhearra  dhomh  dol  a  'faicinn."

"  Cha  b'  e  mo  chomhairle  duit  dol  ann,"  ars'  iadson;  ach  ma  tha
thu  a'  falbh  tha  da  chomhdhalta  dheug  agad,  's  thoir  leat  iad."

"  Cha  chuideachadh  suarach  dhomh  fhein  iad  a  bhith  leam,"  ars
esan.

Ghabh  e  air  falbh  agus  bha  nighean  righ  na  Greige  ag  amharc
a  mach  air  uinneig  's  mhothaich  i  do  Mhanus  a'  tighinn.  Chaidh  i
sios  far  an  robh  brathair  'athair.

'•  Tha  mac  do  bhrathar  a'  tighinn  an  seo,"  ars'  ise  "  le  criosan
duinte,  daite,  air  a  thaobh  cli,  air  am  faighte  gaol  ban  og  agus  gradh
mhaighdeanr.an."

Gu  'm  b'  ann  g'  a  toilse  crioch  mhoirt,  agus  mharbhaidh,  agus
mhillidh  a  chur  air.  Thuirt  brathair  'athar  gu  'm  bu  mhor  am  beud
siud ;  's  nach  biodh  esan  an  lathair  siud  a  chur  air.

"  Mar  an  dean  thusa  e  ni  mise  e,"  ars'  ise.

Chaidh  i  mach  as  an  taigh  "s  thug  i  a  dha  chomhdhalta  dheug
uaidh  's  mhionnaich  i  iad  di  fhein.  Dh'  fhalbh  esan  air  ais  gus  an
t-seana  Bheirbhe  leis  fhein  gu  dubhach,  deurach  bronach  ;  's  bha  'n
t-anmoch  ann.     De  a  chunnaic  e  ach  fear  earraidh  dheirg.  ((')

•'  An  tu  seo  a  Mhanuis  ?  "  ars'  esan.

"  'S  mi,"  arsa  Manus.

"  Tha  mi  'sraaointeachadh,  na  'm  biodh  olc  na  mhath  de  dh'  airm
agad,  gu  'm  faigheadh  th  'd"  righ  air  Lochlainn."

''  Cti  'n  'eil  sin  agam,"  ars'  esan.

"  Mata,"  arsa  fear  an  earraidh  dheirg,  "  na  'n  d'  thugadh  tu
gealltanas  domhsa  bheirinn  airm  dhuit."

"  De  'n  gealltanas  a  bheir  mise  dhuit  'i  Cha  'n  'eil  dad  agam  ri
'thoirt  duit."


372  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  Mata  cha  'n  iarr  mi  moran  ort;  blia  mi  ann  a'ni  fhear  pasgaidh
arm  aig  do  slieanair 's  aig  do  shionseanair;  na 'n  d' thugadh  tusa
gealltanas  domli  gu  'm  bithinn  ann  a'  m'  fhear  pasgaidh  arm  agad
bheirinn  airm  duit  a  nochd."

"  Bheir  mise  sin  duit  ma  's  e  gu  'm  bi  mi  gu  brach  a'  m'  righ."
Dh,  fhalbh  iad  's  rainig  iad  an  taigh.     Thug  fear  an  earraidh
dheirg   iuchair  a  mach  's  dh'  fhosgail  e  'n  dorus,  's  nuair  a  dh'
fhosgail  e  e  bha  "n  taigh  sin  Ian  arm ;  's  gun  bideag  ann  ach  airm.

"  Silid  a  nis  's  tagh  airm,"  arsa  fear  an  earraidh  dheirg.  Rug
Manus  air  claidheamh  's  bhrisd  e,  's  a'  h-uile  fear  a  bha  e  'breith  air
bha  e  'ga  bhrisdeadh.

"  Na  dean  a  Mhanuis,— na  bi  a'  brisdeadh  nan  arm,  's  gun  fhios
nach  bi  feum  agad  orra  fhathasd.  Nuair  a  bha  mise  ann  a'  m'
dhuine  og  bha  cogadh  aig  do  sheanair,  's  bha  seaua  chlogad,  agus
seann  luireach  orm.  Feuch  iad."  Arsa  fear  an  Earraidh  dheirg.
Rug  Manus  air  a'  chlaidheamh  's  dh'  fhairtlich  air  a  bhrisdeadh.
Chuir  e  'n  clogadh  's  an  claiilheamh  uime.  De  a  chunnaic  e  'n  sin
ach  brot((')  a  nuas  a  driom  an  taighe.  "  De  air  am  math  am  brot
ud  ?  "  arsa  Manus.

"  Tha,"  ars'  esan,  "  nuair  a  sgaoileas  tu  oirean  air  seilbh  bidh  agus
diblie,  gheibh  :hu  e  m.ir  a  chosgas  tu.  Tha  buaidh  eile  air;  na  'n
coinneachadh  namhaid  thu,  a'  gabhail  seachad,  bheireadh  e  pog  do
chul  do  dhuirn."

Thug  e  'm  brot  do  Mhanus,  's  phaisg  e'm  brot  na  achlais.     De  a
chunnaic  e  ach  slabhraidh  iaruinn  a  nuas  a  driom  an  taighe.
"  De  air  am  math  an  t-slabhraidh  ud  ?  "  arsa  Manus.
"  Cha  'n  'eil  creutair,  air  an  t-saoghal,  a  chuirte  siud  mu  amhaich
nach  biodh  comhrag  ceud  fear  air."     Arsa  fear  an  earraidh  dheirg.

Thug  Manus  leis  an  t-slabhraidh.  Nuair  a  bha  e  a'  falbh  de  a
chunnaic  e  ach  da  leomhan  agus  cuilean  aca.  Thainig  na  leomhain
mu  choinneamh,  's  iad  gus  itheadh,  's  gus  a  sgath.  Sgaoil  e  'm  brat,
's  thainig  na  leomhain  's  phog  iad  cul  a  dhuirn,  's  ghabh  iad  seachad
air.  Dh'  fhalbh  an  cuilean  leomhain  feadh  a'  bhruit  's  phaisg  e  'm
brot  mu  'n  cuairt  air.  Phaisg  e  'm  brot  mu  'n  cuairt  air  's  thug  e
leis  gus  an  t-seana  Bheirbhee.  Nuair  a  rainig  e  'n  t-seana  Bheirbhe
bha  nighean  larla  na  Fiughaidh  a  staigh.  Chuir  e  'n  t-slabhraidh
mu  amhaich  a'  chuilean  leomhain.  Dh'  fhalbh  an  cuilean  leomhain
's  ghlan  e  'n  caisteal,  's  cha  d'  ffaag  e  creutair  na  uile  bheist  beo  ann.
Chuir  e  teine  anns  a'  chaitteal.  Bha  e  bliadhna  an  seo  ann  's  cha
robh  dith  air.  Chaidh  e  mach  latha  's  thuirt  e  gu  'n  rachadh  e  dh'
amharc  a  mhuime.

Thug  e  leis  an  cuilean  leomhain  's  dh'  flialbh  e.     Mhothaich  ise


MANUS.  373

dha  a'  tighinn.  Bha  claidheamh  aira  thaobh  an  latha  sin.  Thainig
i  mach  'na  choinneamli  's  bha  measan  donn  aice.  Ghabh  e  'n
coinneamh  Mhanuis,  's  a  bheul  fossailte,  gus  Manus  a  sgath  agus
itheadh.  Dh'  fhalbh  an  cuilean  leomhain  's  ghabh  e  air  thois-
each  air  Manus,  's  chuir  e  'spog  ann  an  cul  a'  bhraghaid  aig  a
mheasan  aice-se,  's  leig  e  'mhionach  a  mach  gu  talamh.

"  Siud  a  Mhanuis,"  ars'  ise,  "  ach  cuir  do  chuilean  a  staigh  air
driom  taigh  nan  leomhan."

Chuir  e  'n  cuilean  leomhain  a  staigh  air  driom  an  taighe,  's  chuir
e  'n  t-slabhraidh  mu  'mhuineal,  's  cha  d'  fhag  e  leomhan  fo  dhriom
an  taighe  gun  mharbhadh,  's  leig  e  e  fhein  'na  shineadh  marbh
comhla  riu.  Chaidh  Manus  dachaidh,  gun  chuilean  gun  duine,  an
oidhche  sin.  De  'n  obair  gus  an  do  chuireadh  a  dha  chomhdhalta
dheug  ach  a  chartadh  taigh  nan  leomhan.  Xuair  a  chuireadh  a  mach
iad  cha  robh  leomhan  fo  dhriom  an  taighe  nach  robh  'sgornan  air  a
ghearradh.  Bha  'n  cuilean  leomhain  agus  gun  bhoinne  falais  air,  's
an  t-slabhraidh  iaruinn,  a  chuir  Manus  air,  mu  'amhaich.  Thuirt
fear  diu  gu  'm  bu  neonach  leis  an  leomhan  a  bha  'n  siud;  gun
bhoinne  falais  air,  seach  each.

"  Sin  cuilean  leomhain  fir  mo  ghaoil,"  arsa  fear  de  n  chuideachd,
"  cuilean  leomhain  Mhanuis  !  "

"  Mata,"  arsa  fear  diu,  '•  gad  a  tha  mionnan  oirnn  gun  falbh  as  a'
bhaile  ;  ma  'n  eireadh  esan  dh'  fhalbhamaid  agus  bbeiremaid  brath
seachad."

"  Cha  'n  'eil  duine  a  theid  a  mach  as  a'  bhaile  seo,"  arsa  each,
"  an  deigh  do  'n  oidhche  tighinn,  nach  'eil  goirteas  sheachd  bliadhna
air  as  a  dheigh."

Chaidh  iadsan  thun  na  h-uinneig ;  's  nuair  a  chaidh  thun  iad  na
h-uinneig  dh'  fho?gail  an  cuilean  leomhain  a  sliuilean,  's  thainig  e
beo.  Dh'  fhalbh  ise  far  an  robh  a  fear  's  thuirt  i  rh,  an  garbh-
theaghlach  (/)  a  chur  air  doigh  agus  coig  ceud  fear  ann.  Thuirt  esan
gu  'm  biodh  goirteas  sheachd  bliadhna  air  neach  a  rachadh  a  mach
an  deigh  thuiteam  na  na  h-oidhche.  Thuirt  ise  gad  a  bhiodh  goirteas
sheachd  bhadhna  deug  ann  gu  'm  falbhadh  iad  a  db'  iarraidh  ceann
Mhanuis.

'Se  'm  Bodhar  Bacach  a  theireadh  iad  ris  an  fhear  a  bha  a'  dion
na  rioghachd  anns  an  am  sin,  's  cha  chluinneadh  e  smid  gus  am
biodh  naoidh  naonar  ag  eubhach  'na  chluais.  Mharbhadh  e  naoidh
naonar  air  ais,  's  naoidh  naonar  air  adhart,  leis  a'  chlaidhimh.  De'  a
dhuisg  e  ach  stoLrm  a'  gharbh  theaghlaich  a'  tighinn,  agus  shaoil  e
gur  h-e  namhaid  a  bha  ann.  Dh'  eirich  e  air  a'  gharbh-theaghlach,
's  cha  d'  fhag  e  mac  mathar  de  'n  choig  ceud  beo ;  e  fhein  agus  an


374  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

cuilean  leomhain.  Dh'  flialbh  an  cuilean  leomhain,  's  da  chomh-
dhalta  dheug  Mhanuis,  do  'n  t-seana  Bheirbhe.

"  Coma  leat,"  ars'  ise,  "  gad  a  rinn  Manus  siud  ormsa  tha  'n
Gruagach  dearg,  mac  righ  na  Greige  ann,  's  bheir  e  ceann  Mhanuis
as  an  t-seana  Bheinne."

Dh'  fhalbh  a  mhathair,  an  seo,  's  chuir  i  soitheach  thun  Mhanuis
gus  an  t-seana  Bheirm,  g'a  thoirt  air  falbh,  ma  'n  d'  thugadh  an
gruagach  dearg  an  ceann  deth.  De  a  rinn  a  mhuime  ach  muir-
tiothachd  (fj)  a  chur  air  a'  chuan  air  alt 's  nach  faigheadh  Manus  falbh.
Chuir  a  mathair  mairnealaiche  (h)  anns  an  t-soitheach.  De  a  rinn  an
soitheach  ach  stad  anns  a'  mhuir  tiothachd.

"  Am  bheil  soitheach  air  an  t-saoghal  a  bheir  as  an  seo  sinn  ?"  arsa
Manus  ris  a'  mhairnealaiche.

"An  leobhra  tha;  long  bhreac  Mhic  BhalcainCO  ghobha,"  ars'
am  mairnealach.

Bha  iad  air  bord  's  cha  b'  urrainn  iad  gluasad.

Am  beul  na  h-oidhche  sparr  an  cuilean  leomhain  a  cheann  fo
achlais  Mhanuis,  's  ghabh  e  mach  bhar  na  luinge,  's  Manus  air  a
mhuin.  Dh'  fhalbh  e  's  rainig  e  sgeir.  Dh'  fhag  e  Manus  air  an
sgeir  's  ghearr  e  fhein  leum  leis  an  taobh  eile  di.  Thuit  Manus  'na
chadal;  agus  bu  mhath  leis  am  bas  fhaighinn  le  each,  seach  fhagail
leis  fhein  air  sgeir.  Thainig  guth  g'a  ionnsuidh  's  thuirt  e  ris,
"  Eirich."     Dh'  eirich  e  's  chunnaic  e  soitheach.

Co  a  bha  'n  seo  ach  long  Mhic  Bhalcain  gobha,  agus  an  cuilean
leomhain  'na  riochd  air  an  stiuir,  's  Mac  Mhic  Bhalcain  gobha,  's  a
dba  sheoladair  deug,  marbh  air  a  h-urlar.  Eainig  e  'n  soitheach,  's
chuir  e  'dha  chomhdhalta  dheug,  's  nighean  larla  na  Fiughaidh  ann
an  long  Mhic  Bhalcain  gobha.  Bhuail  e  air  seoladh  air  feadh  na
tiothachd.  De  a  chunnaic  e  ach  fearann ;  's  nuair  a  chunnaic  e  'm
fearann  chunnaic  e  'n  aona  chaisteal  a  bu  bhreagha  a  chunnaic  e
riamh.  Ghabh  e  air  tir  's  chuir  e  Mac  Bhalcain  gobha  's  a  dha
sheoladair  dheug  air  tir  air  rugha.  Rainig  e  'n  caisteal,  's  chaidh
e  staigh,  's  bha  boireannacb  breagha  staigh  an  sin  's  a  dha  dheug
de  nigheana  maola,  ruadha.  Shuidh  a  dha  chomhdhalta  dheug
lamh  ris  na  nigheana  maola,  ruadha,  's  thuirt  iad,  nach  fhalbhadh
iad  gu  bràch  gus  am  faigheadh  iad  ri  'm  posadh  iad.

Cha  b'  fhada  gus  an  d'  thainig  an  gruagach  ban  mac  righ  na
Sorcha  dachaidh  's  buinnseachC  )  ruadh  'na  mathair  dha.

"  Co  seo  ag  amharc,"  ars'  esan,  "  air  mo  dha  dheug  de  nigheana
maola,  ruadha  an  clar  an  aodainn  ?  's  nach  fliaca  mi  duine  riamh  a
bhiodh  ag  amliarc  orra  nach  d'  thugainn  an  ceann  an  aghaidh  na
braghad  deth."


MANUS.  375

"  Tha  da  chomhdhalta  dheug  agamsa  's  tha  iad  an  deigh  gaol  a
ghabhail  air  do  nigheana  maola,  ruadha,  's  feumaidh  tu  'n  toirt  daibh
a  'm  posadh,"  arsa  Manus.

"  Mata,"  ars'  an  Gruagacli  ban,  "  an  cumhnant  air  an  dean-
ainnsa  sin,  tha  mi  cinnteach  nach  deanadh  tusa  rium  e;  sin  mise
a  cliur  a  staigli  air  m'  athair,  's  mi  muigh  air  o  cheann  seachd
bliadhna."

"  Ni  mi  sin,"  arsa  Manus,  "  ach  thu  f  hein  a  dhol  comlila  rium."
An  la  'r  na  mbaireach  dli'  fhalbh  iad.  Rainig  iad  righ  na  Sorcha.
Thainig  righ  na  Sorcha  mach,  's  thug  e  'lamh  dheas  d'a  mhac  fhein,  's
a  lamh  thoisgeal  do  Mhanus.  Dh'  fhalbh  an  cuilean  leomhain  's  rug
e  air,  's  leag  e  e.

"  Caisg  diom  a'  bhiasd  ma  'n  d'  thoir  e  mo  bheatha  diom,"  arsa
righ  na  Sorcha.

"Ni  mi  sin,"  arsa  Manus,  "  ach  sgriobh  le  boinne  de  t'  fhuil  gur
h-e  do  mhac  t'  oighre  dligheach."

"  Mata  's  fhada  o'n  a  dheanainnsa  sin  na  'n  d'  thigeadh  e  fhein
g'a  iarraidh."

Dh'  fhalbh  e  'n  seo  agus  sgriobh  e  e  's  dh  fhalbh  iadsan  an  seo
gu  tighinn  dachaidh.  Nuair  a  bha  iad  a  tighinn  an  seo  bha
nighean  larla  na  Fiughaidh  ann  an  allt.

"  O,"  ars'  an  gruagach  ban,  "  tha  mise  marbh."

"  De  a  th'  ort  ?"  arsa  Manus.

"  Tha  clach,"  ars'  esan,  "  anns  an  allt,  's  tha  tri  brie  fo  'n  chloich,
's  tha  iad  ann  an  apran  na  mnatha  agad.  Fad  's  a  bhiodh  na  brie
beo  bhithinn-sa  beo.  Tha  fear  aca  's  an  teine,  an  drasd  aig  do
mhnaoi-sa."

"  Am  bheil  dad  air  an  t-saoghal,"  arsa  Manus,  "  a  dheanadh  feum
dhuit  ?  "

"  Tha,"  ars'  esan,  "  beannach  nimhe  aig  righ  an  domhain  mhoir
's  na  'm  faighinn  fhuil  bhithinn  clio  math  's  a  bha  mi  riamh."

Eainig  iad  an  taigh  's  bha  'n  gruagach  ban  marbh.  Dh'  fhalbh
Manus  an  seo,  's  bha  'n  long  bhreac  an  deigh  a  gold  air,  's  cha  robh
fios,  air  an  t-saoghal,  co  a  thug  uaidh  i.  Thuirt  fear  d'a  chonihdh-
altan  gu  'n  d'  thug  Brodram,  mac  righ  an  domhain  mhoir,  leis  i.
Ghabh  e  air  falbh  gu  Brodram.  Dh'  fhoighneachd  edheth  de'athug
dha  an  soitheach  a  thoirt  uaidh.  Thuirt  esan  gur  h-e  gold  a  rinn  e
fhein  roimhe,  's  nach  robh  coir  aig  urra.  Thuirt  e  gu  'n  robh  beann-
ach nimhe  aig  'athair,  agus  fhad  's  a  bhiodh  am  beannach  nimhe  beo
gu  'm  biodh  'athair  beo,  's  na  'm  marbht  am  beannach  nimhe  gu  'm
biodh  an  rioghachd  aigesan.

Dh'  fhalbh  e  le  Brodram,  's  bha  'm  beannach  nimhe  a  staigh  ann


376  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

am  pairc.  Chaidh  an  cuileanleomhain  a  staigh  do  'n  phairc,  'schuir
e  a  spog  ann  an  lag  a  bhraghad  aig  a  bheannach  nimhe.  Thuit  am
beannach  nimhe  niarbh  's  thuit  an  righ  marbh  a  staigh.  Bha  Brod-
ram  an  seo  'na  righ  air  an  domhain  mhor,  's  fhuair  Manus  an  fhuil,
's  thill  e,  's  thug  e  beo  leatha  an  gruagach  ban.  "  Cha  'n  fhaod  e
'bhith  nach  d'  theid  thu  fhein  learn  a  nis  a  m'  chur  a  staigh  air  an
rioghachd,"  ars'  e  ris  a'  ghruagach  bhkn.

Thuirt  an  gruagach  ban  gu  'n  rachadh.

Rainig  e  Brodram  's  thuirt  Brodram  gu  'n  rachadh  e  leis.  Bha
Balcan  's  a  dha  fhaolainn  (0  deug  ag  obair  'sa'  cheardaich  's  dh'  ath
bheothaich  e  a  dha  sheoladair  deug.  Dh'  iarr  e  air  dol  leis  's  thuirt
Balcan  gu  'n  rachadh.

Dh'  falbh  Balcan,  's  an  gruag  ch  ban,  a's  Brodrara,  's  gruagach
an  tuir,  mac  righ  Siginn  leis.  Rainig  iad  Lochlainn.  Choinuich
tear  an  earraidh  dheirg  iad.

Thoisich  an  gruagach  ban  agus  an  gruagach  dearg('n)

Gu  fiachach,  fuachach,  meanmnach.

Chuireadh  iad  tri  dithean  diu

Ann  an  cleidibh(ft)  atliair  agus  iarmailt.

Chruinnich  mialchoin  Fialchoim(o)  (J.  F.  C.)

A  ghabhail  aighir  air  na  biastan.

Bheireadh  iad  air  an  fhairge  traoghadh;

Air  an  talamh  s:;aineadh ;

Air  na  rionnagan  tuiteum.

Mharbhadh  an  grua'gach  dearg,  's  chuireadh  a  cheann  air  stobj
's  chrunadli  Manus  na  righ  air  Lochlainn,  's  cha  d'  fhag  iad  duine
beo  ann  an  Lochlainn.

From  Donald  MacPhie,  lochdar.  South  Uist,  who  learnt  it  from
Iain  MacDhomhnuill  Ic  Thormaid  Domhnullach,  Aird  a  mhachair,
who  died  sixty  years  ago  at  the  age  of  sixty.  H.  ftl'L.

I  heard  the  man  tell  part  of  the  story  myself.  J.  F.  C.


Notes  for  Gaelic.


(a)  Fonn,  land  generally  on  a  larger  scale  than  fearann.  Probably
fearann  may  be  arfhonn,  arable  land,  the  f  slipping  in  as  frequently
happens  in  Gaelic  words.

(6)  Trath  oidhche,  the  time  of  night ;  different  in  meaning  from
trath  'sau  oidhciie.  early  in  the  night.


MANUS.  377

{<•)  A  Bheirbhe,  sometimes  the  old  man  said  Bheirm.  This  word
is  translated  Copenhagen  by  some  scholars,  I  don't  know  why-  The
sound  is  nearer  to  Bergen,  for  b  and  g  frequently  replace  each  other
in  Gaelic  ;  e.g.  ubh,  ugh,  dubh,  dugh,  etc.

(d)  Earradh,  a  dress,  costume.  Aodach  trusgan,  eideadh  earradh.
Aodach  is  any  clothes  good  or  bad;  Trusgan  is  a  good  dress;
Eideadii  is  a  distinguishing  dress  or  uniform  ;  Earradh  is  a  dress
rather  distinguishing  an  individual  from  others.  Eideadh  gaidheal-
ach,  we  could  never  say  an  t-earradh  Gaidhealach.

(0  Brot,  same  as  brat.

(/)  Garbh-theagblach,  this  seems  to  have  been  some  large  kind  of
vehicle.  It  is  spelt  as  it  was  pronounced.  It  might  have  been
garbh-shinbhlach  or  carr-shiuhlach.

(<;)  Muir-tiothach,  some  curious  thickening  of  the  ocean  so  as  to
prevent  the  ship  from  moving.  Muir-teachd  may  be  the  same  word
as  this  differently  pronounced  ;  and  if  so,  it  means  gelly  fish.

(ft)  Mairnealaiche,  a  pilot.

(0  Balcan.  Is  this  the  same  as  Vulcan  ?  Bailc  means  a  plunge,
a  flood.  The  smith  constantly  plunging  his  iron  or  steel  in  water
might  receive  this  name  in  consequence  ;  falc  is  to  bathe.

C^)  Buinnseach,  a  big,  strong,  clumsy  woman.

Q)  Faolainn,  same  {is  foghlainte  or  foghlaiuteach,  an  apprentice.

{m)  An  gruagach  dearg,  a  different  person  from  the  other  fear  earr-
aidh  dheirg.

('i)  Cleid,  a  flake.  Cleidean  athair,  sky  flakes,  clouds  ;  probably
the  fine  white  clouds  called  cirri.  May  not  this  word  be  the  root  of
cloud.  H.  M'L.

(0)  Fialchoin,  so  pronounced ;  probably  Fiadh-choin,  deer-dogs,  or
wild-dogs,  wolves,  probably  the  last.  J.  F.  C.


378  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


LXXXV.

THE    SONG    OF    THE    SMITHY.

From  Donald  MacPhie,  Breubhaig,  Barra.
1 — OlSElN.
On  a  day  as  were  on  wide  spread  Eushes,
A  valiant  four  of  the  company,
Myself,  and  Bound,  and  Grey  Earth,
Fair's  self  was  there,  he  was  Bondage's  son.

2
There  was  seen  a  coming  from  the  plain
The  big  young  lad  on  a  single  foot.
In  liis  black,  dusky  black  skin  mantle.
With  his  dusky  head-gear  so  rusty  red.

3

Grim  was  the  look  of  the  young  lad.

Hideous  it  was,  and  disfigured.

With  his  largeheaded  mighty  helmet.

With  his  blunt  ploughshare  (a)  that  grew  russet  red.

4 — FlONN.

Then  spoke  to  him  Fionn  MacChumail,
As  a  man  Avho  was  like  to  faint,
"  At  what  place  is  thy  dwelling.
Thou  lad  with  thy  dress  of  skins  1 "

5 — Smith.
"  Blade,  son  of  Furbishing,  's  my  right  name,*
If  you  had  the  knowledge  of  a  tale  of  me  ;
I  was  a  while  at  the  smith's  mystery.
With  the  King  of  Lochlann  at  Upsala.  (b)
*  Gillies,  1786     .  .     Lun  MacLiobhainn.

MacCallum,     1816     .  .     Luinn  MacLiobhuinn.
MacPherson         ....     Luno.


DUAN  NA  CEARDACH.  379


DUAN  NA  CEAEDACH.

1
Latha  cUminii  air  Luacliair  leothair,
Do  clieathrar  chrodlia  de  'n  bhuidliiim  ;
Mi  fhein,  a's  Osgar,  a's  Daorglilas  ;
Bha  Fioiiii  fhein  aim,  's  b'  e  Mac  Cluimliail.


Chuimacas  a'  tighinn  o'n  mliagli

An  t-olacli  mor  's  e  air  aona  chois,

'Na  mhamidal  dubh,  ciar-dliubli  craicinn,

Le  cheaniia-bheairt  laclidann  's  i  ruadh-mheirg.

3

Bu  ghruamach  coslas  an  olaich  ;

Bu  ghramida  sin  agus  bii  dnaiclinidli  ;

Le  'chlogada  ceann-mhor,  ceutach  ;

Le  'mhaoil  eitidli  a  dh'  f  has  ruadh  dhearg.

4
Labhair  ris  Fionn  MacChumliail,
Mar  dhnine  'bhiodh  a'  dol  seachad,
"  Co  'm  ball  am  bheil  do  thninidli,
'lUe  le  d'  chulaidli  chraicinn  Ì"

5
"  Lon*  MacLiobhann,  b'e  ni'  ainm  ceart  e,
Na  'm  biodh  agaibhs'  orm  beachd  sgeula  ;
Bha  mi  treis  ri  uallach  gobhainn
Aig  righ  Lochlann  ann  an  Spaoili.'

*  LoNN,  a  sword,  a  blade,  a  bar,  a  stake  of  wood,  a  bier  pole,
anger ;  a  surge,  a  sea  swell ;  strong,  powerful.  Lonneach,  bright,
etc.,  a  blaze,  a  gleam.  Ldnn,  a  smootli  rolling  swell,  an  oar
handle.    Manks,  LJmn,  or  Lhunn.


380  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


"  I  am  laying  you  under  enchantments,
Since  you  are  a  people  in  need  of  arms  ;"
That  you  shall  follow  me,  a  band  of  quietness,
Westward  to  my  smithy  doors."

7 — FlONN.
"  Upon  what  place  is  thy  workshop.
Or  shall  we  profit  by  seeing  it  Ì "

Smith.
"  Do  you  see  it,  if  it  may  be,
But  see  it  you  shall  not,  if  I  can."

8 OlSEIN.

Then  they  set  them  to  their  travel.

O'er  the  fifth  of  Munster  in  their  hurrying  speed,

And  on  yellow  glens  about  birch  trees,

Then  went  they  into  four  bands,  (c)

9
One  band  of  these  was  the  blacksmith,
Another  band  of  them  Daorghlas  ;
Fionn  was  behind  them  at  that  time.
And  a  few  of  the  chiefs  of  the  Finne.

10

The  blacksmith  would  cut  but  the  one  step,
On  each  lonely  glen  tlirough  the  desert.
But  scarcely  liis  arms  would  reach  to
A  tuck  of  his  clothes  on  his  haunches.

11

Ascending  the  ground  of  the  corrie,
Descending  the  pass  of  the  edges  ;
"A  little  delay,"  said  the  blacksmith,
"  Shut  not  before  me,"  quoth  Daorghlas.


DUAN  NA  CEARDACH.  3  8  1

6

"  Tha  mise  'gur  cur-sa  fo  gheasaibh,
O  's  luchd  sibh  'tlia  'm  freasdal  armaibh,
Sibh  gum'  leantail,  buidlieami  sliocrach,
Siar  gu  dorsan  mo  dieardacL"

7 — Fioxx.
"  Co  'm  ball  am  bheil  do  cheardacli  Ì
Na  'm  feairde  sinne  g'a  faicinn  ?"

GOBHA.

"  Faiceadh  sibbs'  i  ma  dli'  f  baodar ;

Acli  ma  dli'  fboadas  mise  clia  'ii  fbaic  sibk"


Gu  'n  d'  thug  iad  an  sin  'nan  siubbal
Air  Cboige  Mbumba  'nan  luatb  dbearg  ;
'S  air  Gbleannan  bnidhe  mu  bbeitbe
Gu  'n  deacb  iad  'nan  ceithir  buidbnibb.

9
Bu  bbuidbeann  diu  sin  an  gobba  ;
Bu  bbuidbeann  eile  dhiu  Daorgblas  ;
Bba  Fionn  'nan  deagbainn  an  uair  sin
A's  beagan  de  db'  uaislean  na  Finne.'

10
Cba  gbearradh  an  gobba  ach  aona  cbeuui
Air  gacb  gleannan  faoin  roimb  f  basacb,
'S  cba  ruigeadb  airm  acb  air  eigin
Cearbli  db'  an  aodlacb  sbuas  air  mliasan.

11

A'  direadh  ri  urlar  a'  cboire,
A'  tearnadli  ri  bealach  nam  faobbar,
"  Fosadb  beag  ort"  ars'  an  gobba  ;
"  Na  cbuid  romliam,"  arsa  Daorgblas.


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


12— Smith.


"  Thoiid'st  not  be  in  the  door  of  my  workshop,
In  a  strait  place,  were  I  alone."  (il)


13— OlSEIN.

Then  they  got  bags  for  blowing,
The  workshop  was  scarcely  found  out ;
Four  men  were  found  of  the  king  of  Bergen,
Of  crossgrained  men  and  unshapely.

14

To  every  smith  there  were  seven  hands.
Seven  pincers  light  and  substantial;
And  the  seven  hammers  that  crushed  them,
And  no  worse  would  it  suit  with  Daorghlas.

15

Daorghlas  who  watched  at  the  Avorkshop,
'Tis  a  certain  tale  that  they  fell  out;
He  was  red  as  a  coal  of  the  oaktree,
And  his  hue  like  the  fruit  of  the  working.

16

Out  spoke  one  of  the  blacksmiths

So  gruffly,  and  eke  so  grimly,

"  Who  is  that  daimtless  slender  man

That  would  stretch  out  a  bar  of  temper?"

17

Out  spoke  Fionn,  who  was  standing,
The  man  of  good  answer  at  that  time,
"  That  nickname  shall  not  be  scattered,
His  name  was  Daorglilas  till  this  hour."


DUAN  NA  CEARDACH.  383


12

"  Clia  bliiodh  tu  'n  dorus  luo  cheardach
An  àite  teaun  's  nii  'nam  aonar."


13

Fhuair  iad  an  sin  biiilg  ri  sheideadh  ;
Fhuaradh  air  eigin  a'  cheardach  ;
Fhuaras  ceathrar  dhaoine  righ  Meirbhe/
De  dliaoine  doirhhe,  mi-dhealbhack

14*
Bha  seachd  lamhan  air  gach  gobha  ;
Seachd  teanchairean  leothair/  aotrom,
'S  na  seachd  uird  a  bha  'gan  siDreigeadli  ;
'S  clia  bu  mhiosa  'fhreagradh  Daorghlas.

15

Daorghlas,  fear  aire  na  ceardach,
'S  sgeula  dearbha  gu  'n  do  throid  iad,
'S  e  cho  dearg  ri  gual  an  daraich,
'S  a  shnuadb  a  thoradh  na  h-oibre.

16

Labhair  fear  de  na  goibhnean

Gu  grimach  agus  gu  gruamach  ;

"  Co  e  'm  fear  caol  gun  tioma

A  thairneadli  a  mach  teinne  (")  cruadhach  Ì '

17
Labhair  Fionn  a  bha  'na  sheasamh,
Fear  a  bu  mhath  freagairt  'san  uair  sin,
"  Cha  bhi  'n  t-ainm  sin  sgaoilte,
Bha  Daorghlas  air  gus  an  uair  seo."

*  This  verse  is  not  in  MacCallum's  version.


384  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

18

Then  they  got  there  stretched  out
The  arms  that  were  straight  and  coloured,
The  completed  work  that  was  finished,
Of  finished  arms  for  the  battle.

19*
"  Hiss"  and  "Fye"  and  "  Make  sure,"
And  the  "  Lil^e  blade's  daughter  the  smith's  shop,"
And  the  long  blade  of  Diarmaid —
Many  was  the  day  that  he  tried  it.

20

I  had  "the  Tinker  of  striplings,"

Of  loud  rattle  in  the  battle  keen  ;

And  "the  son  of  the  surge,"  that  was  MacChumail's,

Which  never  left  a  shred  of  the  flesh  of  man.

21

Then  we  took  to  our  travel,

To  take  a  tale  from  the  king  of  Lochlann  ;

Then  out  spoke  the  king  so  high  born

With  force  of  sweet  words  as  became  him  well.

22
We  would  not  give,  by  your  fear,
A  tale  of  six  of  our  party  ;
We  lifted  up  the  spears,
And  it  was  in  front  of  the  banners.

*  The  following  verse  from  MacCallum   gives  the  names  of
some  more  of  the  swords  : —

The  "  Magic  bladed  "  was  the  blade  of  Oscar,
And  the  "  Hard  Massacrer  "  the  blade  of  Caoilte,
And  the  "  Polisher"  the  blade  of  Diarmaid,
Many  a  wild  man  killed  she.


DUAN  XA  CEAEDACH.  385

18
Tliuair  iacl  an  siii  'nan  smeaclh
^a  li-airm  a  bha  direacli  claite,
'S  an  coimlilionadb.  a  bh'  air  a  dheanadh
De  dli'  arniaibh  deanta  na  faiche.

19*
"  Fead"  agus  "  Fuidli,"  agns  "  Fasdail,"
'S  a'  "  Chomhlann"  'Ic  na  Ceardaicli,
'S  an  lann  f  hada  'bli'  aig  Diarmaid,
'S  iomadli  latha  riamli  a  dhearbh  i.

20

'S  agam  fliem  bha  "  Ceard"  nan  gallan"

A  b'  ard  farum  'n  am  nan  garbh  chatli ;

"  'S  Mac  an  Luin"  a  bh'  aig  Mac  Chumliail  t

Nach  d  fhag  Mgheall  rianili  dh'  fheoil  dhaoine.

21
Gu  'n  do  ghabh  sinne  mu  sliiubhal
A  ghabhail  sgeula  de  righ  Lochlann  ;
Sin  nuair  labhair  an  righ  iiasal
Le  neart  suairce  mar  bu  chiibhaidli.

22
Cha  d'  thugamaid,  air  bhiir  n-eagal,
Sgeula  do  sheisear  dli'  ur  buidhinn,
Gu  'n  do  thog  siime  na  sleaghan  ;
'S  gu  'm  b'  anil  ri  aghaidh  nam  bratock

*  The  following  verse  is  from  MacCallam  : —

Bi  n  Druidh  lannach  laun  Oscair

'S  b'  i  Chruaidli  Cosgaireach  lann  Chaoilte

'S  gu'  m  b'  i  n  Liobbanach  lann  Dhiarmaid

'S  iomadb  fear  fiadhaich  a  mbarbh  i.
t  Irish,  Mac  an  Loin.

2  c


386  WEST  HIGHLAJfD  TALES.

23

They  were  in  seven  battalions,  (e)
And  no  warrior  thought  of  fleeing  ;
But  on  the  ground  of  the  field  of  Fine
"We  were  there  but  six.

24

Two  of  these  were  myself  and  Caoilte,
Three  of  them  was  wily  Faolan,
Four  of  them  was  Fionn  the  foremost,
And  five  of  them  was  Osgar  valiant.

25

Six  of  them  was  Goll  MacMorna
That  brooked  no  shir  that  I  can  mind ;
Now  will  I  cease  fi-om  the  numbering,
Siace  the  Fhuin  have  gone  to  decay.

26
We  were  good  in  the  day  of  the  Teavrai,
In  the  workshop  of  Lon  MacLiobhain  ;
This  day  how  frail  is  my  strength,
After  having  numbered  the  band.

(a)  Eite  is  a  piece  added  to  a  ploughshare  when  worn,  a  peri-
phrasis for  an  old  sword  ?     Eite  is  the  word  in  Gillies.

(b)  I  am  indebted  to  MacLean  for  this  clever  suggestion.  The
grave  of  Thor  is  shewn  at  Old  Upsala.  The  same  Gaelic  word
is  used  in  Gillies.

(c)  In  Gillies  this  varies  considerably.

(d)  Here  there  is  a  break  in  Gillies  also,  and  the  meaning  is
obscure.  MacCallum  makes  it,  Leave  me  not  alone  in  a  strait
place.

(e)  This  is  so  in  Gillies  also.  Irish  writers  say  that  the  Feinne
were  a  standing  army  of  Irish  warriors  divided  into  seven  bat-
talions ;  this  makes  the  men  of  Lochlaun  to  be  so  divided.  One
Irish  author  says  that  the  Feinne  were  Norsemen  who  guarded
Dublin.


DUAN  NA  CEARDACH.  387

23

Bha  iadsan  ann  'nan  seaclid  cathan,

'S  cha  do  smaointich  flatli  air  teicheadh ;

Ach  air  lar  na  Faiclie  fine

Cha  robli  sinne  ann  acli  seisar.
24

Bu  dithis  diu  sin  mis'  agus  Caoilte  ;

Bu  trinir  diu  Faolan  feall  ;"

Bu  cheathrar  dliiu  Fionn  air  thoiseacli ;

'S  bu  choigear  diu  'n  t-Osgar  calnia.
25

Bu  sheisar  Goll  MacMorna

Nach  d'  f  hulaing  tair  ri  m'  chuimlme  ;

Sguiridli  mi  mis  dh'  an  aireamli

0  chaidli  an  Fhinn  gu  sodradh.
26

Bu  mhath  sinn  latlia  na  Teamluuidli

Ann  an  ceardacti  Lonn  'Ic  Liobbann  ;

An  diugh.  is  anmhunn  mo  cbàil

An  deis  a  bliith  'g  aireamli  na  buidlme.

^  Spaoili,  probably  Upsala.

^  Teinne,  a  mass,  or  bar  of  metal.

'  Meirbhe,  same  as  Beirbhe,  Bergen  ?

*  Leothair,  substantial,  from  leoir.

^  Ceard,  any  kind  of  smitli ;  or-cheard,  a  goldsmith  :  ceard
airgid,  a  silversmith  ;  ceard  copair,  a  coppersmith ;  ceard  stavin,
a  tinsmith,  tinker ;  ceard  spainean,  a  spoonsmith.  Gipsies  and
travelling  tinkers  are  pre-eminently  ceardan  or  smiths,  because
they  work  in  a  great  variety  of  metals.  Ceard  nan  Gallan,  the
smith  of  the  branches  or  youths,  so  called  from  being  well
adapted  to  cut  down  the  young  and  strong.

°  Feall  here  is  probably yiai  mispronounced.

From  Donald  MacPhie,  smith,  Breubhaig,  Barra,  who  learnt
it  from  his  uncle  Hector  MacLaine. — H.  M'L3an.
Breubhaig,  Barra,  October  1,  1860.


30  0  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

So  far  this  is  almost  the  very  same  as  the  version
given  in  Gillies,  published  1786.  The  number  of
A^erses  is  the  same,  and  the  number  of  lines,  and  the
order  of  the  story  the  same  ;  but  there  are  consider-
able variations  in  a  small  way.  In  the  8th  verse
they  set  off  to  travel  "  as  chuige  mugha  na  luimedh-
eirg,"  on  a  yellow  mountain,  as  Beither,  a  dragon,
which  may  mean,  like  the  fifth  of  Munster  of
Limerick,  but  which  I  suspect  refers  to  some  other
legend,  for  it  does  not  appear  how  Munster  should  run
like  a  dragon.  In  the  IGth  verse  only  one  smith,  he
who  spoke,  has  seven  hands.  In  the  20th  verse
Ossian's  sword  is  "  Deire  na  'n  colg,"  the  end  of  anger.
In  the  26th,  the  word  is  teann  ruith,  hard  running,
instead  of  the  word  pronounced  teavrai ;  and  there  are
many  sHght  verbal  differences  and  changes  in  ortho-
graphy. The  piece  is  without  doubt  the  very  same
which  is  in  Gillies,  and  if  the  book  is  in  the  Long
Island  it  might  have  been  learned  from  it.  But,  on
the  other  hand,  the  book  professes  to  be  a  collection
made  in  the  Highlands,  its  genuineness  has  never  been
questioned,  and  I  believe  that  this  is  but  a  proof  of
the  tenacity  of  popular  memory  for  things  wliich  suit
popular  taste.

Another  version  was  taken  down  for  MacCaUum,
and  published  in  1816;  I  have  indicated  the  cliief
differences  in  the  footnotes.  There  is  an  Irish  prose
version  of  the  story  lately  published  (Ossianic  Society's
2d  vol.),  which  differs  materially;  it  reduces  the  whole
to  a  race ;  Fiona  carried  his  sword  with  him ;  the  smith
is  a  giant  with  one  leg,  one  arm,  and  one  eye,  who  is
bound  by  Fionn  ;  his  name  is  Eoc,  son  of  Diocan.
As  the  Manks  tradition  (see  introduction,  vol.  i.  Hii.)
agrees  with  these  Gaehc  poems,  I  suspect  the  Irish
story  is  the  tradition  more  fallen  to  decay.


DUAN  NA  CEAKDACH.  389

Now  as  an  example  of  the  way  in  which  these
poems  pervade  the  whole  traditions  of  the  country  and
are  interwoven  with  each  other,  let  me  give  the  follow-
ing account  of  a  visit  to  pick  up  a  version  of  the  poem
in  Islay.      MacLean's  letter  seems  worth  preservation.

Bally  grant,  May  27,  1861.

Sir — I  called  on  old  MacPhail  at  Scanlistle  last  Friday ;  it  was
the  first  time  I  had  spoken  to  him  for  at  least  twenty  years,  forit
is  but  lately  that  he  has  come  to  this  parish.  He  left  it  fully
more  than  twenty-five  years  ago,  and  was  for  a  long  time  a  workman
with  Doctor  MacTavish.  There  the  poor  fellow  got  hurt,  and  the
result  was  that  he  lost  his  leg.  It  may  be  well  to  state  that  he
was  a  skilful  and  industrious  workman,  as  there  is  a  current
opinion  that  these  storytellers  are  found  among  the  worthless  and
lazy.  Before  he  left  this  parish  he  was  a  workman  with  old
Rounsfell  at  Pearsabas,  and  he  was  the  person  that  was  always
sent  to  kiln-dry  and  mill  the  corn  at  Bally  grant.  It  was  then,
while  kiln-drying  corn,  that  he  amused  me  with  these  Fenian
stories.  I  regret  to  say  that  the  verses  are  not  so  comj)lete  as  I
used  to  hear  them  from  him.  I  reminded  him  of  Sinsearrachd
Fhinn,  of  which  he  was  wont  to  give  me  a  long  list,  but  of  this
he  could  remember  nothing  the  other  day.  I  remember  it  went
this  way : — Fionn  MacChumhail,  'Ic  Trathuil,  'Ic  treun-moir,
'Ic  Cham  laora,  but  I  cannot  remember  any  other  name  beyond
cam  laora,  or  crooked  toes.

When  I  entered  the  house  he  was  sitting  by  the  fireside  with
his  wooden  leg.  The  old  fellow's  eye  brightened  when  he  saw
me,  and  I  told  him  I  wished  to  hear  some  of  his  old  lore  again.
"  0,"  said  he,  "  b'  abhaist  domh  'bhith  'gan  gabhail  sin  achumail
toil  inntinn  riut ''  (I  used  to  be  reciting  these  to  thee  to  keep
thee  pleased).  "  Cha  bhiodh  esan  ach  'na  phaisde  an  sin"  (he
would  be  but  a  child  then),  said  his  brother's  wife.  "  Bha  e  'na
bhalach  caol,  luirgneach  'san  am"  (he  was  a  slender  leggy  boy  at
the  time),  a  description  which  is  not  altogether  inappropriate
yet.  I  inquired  of  him  about  the  old  people  whom  he  was  wont
to  hear  reciting  these  stories  in  his  youth,  and  he  enumerated
several,  and  said  that  the  poems  were  long  and  beautiful,  and  that
to  listen  to  them  was  the  delight  of  all.      He  quotes  something


39°  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

here  and  there  of  almost  all  I  have  got.  "  Bas  Gharuidh,"  he  re-
lated to  me,  "The  Incident  of  the  Pigeons;"  but  with  respect  to
Fionn,  he  says  his  thigh  was  cut  through,  and  that  he  was  worth-
less ever  afterwards.

"Obulurach  aneachdraidh  i  nuuir  abhiodh  i  air  ah-innseadh
gu  ceart"  (Oh  that  history  was  one  of  price  when  it  was  rightly
told),  exclaimed  he  with  enthusiasm.  During  the  conversation  I
gave  him  three  glasses  of  good  strong  whisky,  and  you  would  not
know  that  he  had  tasted  it,  further  than  being  in  good  spirits.
Verily  alcohol  is  not  always  poison,  as  total  abstainers  pronounce
it  to  be.— I  am,  Sir,  yours  sincerely,

Hector  MacLean.

The  conversation  is  written  in  Gaelic,  but  a  trans-
lation is  sufficient.

I  give  the  verses  as  an  example  of  the  way  in
which  scraps  may  be  picked  up,  which  might  be  used
in  mendin"  other  versions.


DUAN  NA  CEAEDACH,  Etc.

From  Malcolm  MacPhail,  Scanlistle,  aged  eighty  years.
Learnt  it  from  Alexander  MacQueen,  Persabas,  sixty  years  ago.
MacQueen  was  past  eighty  years  of  age  at  that  time.


Chunnacas  a  teachd  ar  coir,

Fear  mor  agus  air  aona  chois  ;

Le  a  mhantal  dubh  ciardhubh  craicinn  ;

Le  'ionnar  lachduinn  's  le  ruadh  bheairt.

2 — New  verse.
Aon  suil  mholach  an  clar  aodainn
'Se  sior  dheanadh  air  MacChumhail,
"  Co  thu  fhein?"  arsa  MacChumhail;
"  Na  cia  as  duit  ?  "


DUAN  NA  CEARDACH.  39  I

3 — GoBHA.    New.
"  Thainig  mis'  'ur  cur  fo  gheasaibh, —
Seisear  de  mhaitbibli  na  Feiuue,
A  Lhith  'gam  ruith  gun  easraich
Siar  gu  dorus  mo  clieardach."

4 — New.
Thug  e  as  mar  ghaotli  an  earraich
Mach  ri  beannaibh  dubba  'n  t-sleibbe.

10
Cha  d'  thugadli  e  ach  an  aona  cheum
Thar  gach  aon  ghleann  fuarraidh,  fasaidh  ;
'S  cha  'n  f  haiceadh  tu  ach  air  eigin
Cearb  d'  a  eideadh  thar  a  mhasan.

FiONN  RI  Caoilte.
"  Freagair  agus  sin  do  chasan,
'S  gabh  sgeula  de'n  rugha."  *

11

A'  tearnadh  aig  Alltan  a'  chuinir,
Fosgladh  gu  'n  d'  thug  an  gobha,
"  Na  druid  romham,"  arsa  Doorghlas.

7
Caoilte.
"  A  rugha  cait  am  bheil  do  cheardach  ?
Na  'm  b'  f  heairde  sinne  g'  a  faicinn  ?  "

Gobha.
"Mo  cheardach  cha  'n  'eil  ri  fhaotainn,
'S  ma  dh'  fhaodas  mise  cha  'n  fhaic  sibh."

14
Labhair  gobha  de  na  goibhnean,
Lo  curam  mor  agus  le  gruaim  ;
"  A  righ  CO  'm  fear  caol  gun  tioma.f
A  shineas  an  sineadh  cruadhach  ?"

*  Rugha,  a  smith.     Reciter.

f  Sineadh,  a  bar  of  metal.     Reciter.  j


39^  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

15— FiONx.
"  A  righ  gu  meal  tliu  t'  ainm  a  Chaoilte  !
Cha  bhi  Daorghlas  ort  o'n  uair  seo."

New.
A'  Cliruaidh  Chosgarracli  lann  Osgair,
An  Leadarnach  mhor  lann  Chaoilte,
Mac  an  Luin  aig  Fionn  MacChumhail,
Nach  fag  fuigheall  de  dh'  fheail  dhaoise.

2 — Various.
There  was  seen  nearing  us
A  big  man  upon  one  foot,
With  his  black  dusky  black  skin  mantle,
With  his  hammering  tools,  and  his  "  steel  lathe.  ^

New  verse — follows  the  3d.
One  shaggy  eye  in  his  forehead,
Making  ever  for  MacChumhail,
"  Who  is  tliyself,"  said  MacChumhail,
"  Or  whence  art  thou  Ì"

New  verse — follows  the  4th.
"  1  came  to  lay  you  under  enchantments.
Six  of  the  cliiefs  of  the  Feinne,
To  be  chasing  me  without  hurry.
West  to  the  door  of  my  workshop."

7  —  Half  new  verse;  follows  7  th.
He  set  off  Hke  the  wind  of  the  spring  time,
Out  to  the  dark  mountains  of  the  high  grounds.

10

He  would  take  but  a  single  step,
O'er  each  single  cold  glen  of  the  desert ;
Thou  could'st  have  seen  but  hardly
A  tuck  of  his  clothing  o'er  his  hurdles.


DUAN  NA  CEARDACH.  393

FiONN  TO  Caoilte.     JSTew — follows  10.
Answer  and  stretch  thy  legs,
And  take  a  tale  of  the  blacksmith.

Ruglia  is  a  smith  according  to  the  reciter.  Eaute
is  a  Lajjp  nickname  for  a  smith,  as  I  learned  on  the
Tana,  where  I  took  the  sketch  of  the  skin-clad  smith,
whose  portrait  I  give  as  an  illustration.

Here  the  old  man  forgot  his  poem,  hut  remembered
a  bit  of  his  story.

"  When  Caoilte  was  at  full  speed,  thou  might' st  see
tlu-ee  heads  on  him.  His  two  shoulders  would  be
rising  aloft,  as  though  there  were  two  heads,  and  his
head  would  be  croucliing  down,  he  would  be  going  as
it  seems  half  bent."  At  vol.  ii,  416,  this  occurs
in  the  tale  of  the  white  chief,  and  this  explains  what
I  did  not  understand.

Then  he  went  on  with  a  few  lines  of  verse.

11

Descending  by  the  streamlet  of  the  Shaper,

At  the  opening  that  the  smith  made,
"  Shut  not  befere  me,"  said  Daorghlas.

7 — Caoilte.
"  Oh,  Eugha,  where  is  thy  workshop,
Or  should  we  profit  to  see  it  ?  "

Smith.
"  My  smithy  is  not  to  be  found  out  ;
And  if  I  may,  see  it  you  shall  not."

1 4 — Various.
Out  spoke  a  smith  of  the  blacksmiths.
With  great  care  and  a  grim  frown,
"  King  !  who  is  the  slender  fearless  man,
That  will  stretch  the  tempered  bar."


394                             WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.
1 5 FlONN

"  Eang  !  mayst  thou  snatch  the  name,

Thou  shalt  not  be  Daorghlas  from  tliis  hour."

19— Partly  new;  follows  19.
"  Victorious  hardness,"  Osgar's  blade,
"  The  big  slasher,"  the  blade  of  Caoilte,
"  Mac-an-Luin"  was  Fionn  MacChumhail's,
That  never  left  a  shred  of  the  flesh  of  man.

Here  this  poem  ends,  so  far  as  tliis  old  man  is  con-
cerned ;  but  enough  remains  to  prove  that  he  did  not
borrow  from  Gillies  or  MacCallum,  for  there  are  several
lines  and  some  verses  which  are  not  to  be  found  in  the
books.

It  is  also  manifest  that  there  is  a  great  deal  mis-
sing. In  the  Lay  of  Diarmaid,  he  says  that  he  was
one  of  the  party ;  his  sword  is  mentioned  here,  but
he  is  not.

MacLean  writes  : — "  At  the  end  of  this  verse  Mac-
Phail  relates  that  the  arms  required  to  be  tempered  in
the  blood  of  a  living  person ;  that  the  smith's  daughter
took  a  fancy  to  Fionn,  who  had  a  love  spot  (which
was  Diarmaid's  property),  and  that  she  told  him,  un-
less he  killed  her  father  with  the  sword,  that  her
father  would  kill  him.  This  Fionn  accordingly  did.
This  is  different  from  the  usual  story,  according  to
which  the  sword  is  tempered  in  the  blood  of  the  old
woman,  the  smith's  mother.  Probably  the  variation
may  be  owing  to  forgetfukiess  on  the  part  of  Mac-
Phail,  caused  by  old  age  and  by  having  had  a  paralytic
stroke  last  winter."

"  This  was  Avhen  they  got  the  arms  they  had  before ;
but  '  Tunnachan,'  they  were  sticks  with  sharp  ends
made  on  them,  and  these  ends  burned  and  hardened
in  tlie  fire.     They  used  to  tlirow  them  from  them,  and


DUAN  NA  CEAHDACH.  395

they  coiild  aim  exceedingly  with  them,  and  they  conld
drive  them  through  a  man.  They  used  to  have  a
bundle  with  them  on  their  shoulders,  and  a  bundle  in
their  oxters.  I  myself  have  seen  one  of  them  that  was
found  in  a  moss,  that  was  as  though  it  had  been  har-
dened in  the  fire."

This  then  gives  the  popular  notion  of  the  heroes,
and  throws  them  back  beyond  the  iron  period.

"  There  was  a  great  day  of  battle  between  them-
selves and  the  Loclilanners,  which  was  called  Latha
nan  Tunnachan,  the  day  of  the  stakes.  I  have  heard
old  men  speaking  of  it,  and  it  was  down  thereabouts,
about  Chnoc  angail  that  they  gave  it.  They  had  a
great  day  there."

This  then  iixes  the  period  ;  at  the  time  of  the
wars  with  Lochlann  in  Islay.

"  It  Avas  in  the  side  of  a  knoll  at  Alltan  a  chuirin
that  the  fairy  smith  had  his  smithy."

"  There  was  a  great  carlin  once  in  Lochlann.  It  is
Muirearteach  maol  ruadh  that  they  used  to  say  to  her.
She  came  from  Lochlann,  and  she  brought  a  smithy
and  the  smith  (ceardach  agus  an  Gobha)  with  her  on
her  back  to  sharpen  the  spears  ;  she  was  but  a  witch,
but  the  Fheinn  slew  her.  Said  the  King  of  Loclilann
when  he  heard  this" — here  comes  in  verse  23  of  the
poem  given  already,  page  130,  -ttdth  the  EngHsh  word
sink  introduced,  and  a  few  variations  ;  and  this  joins
the  lay  of  the  witch  to  the  lay  of  the  smithy.

"  Tlie  Loclilanners  were  difficult  (that  is,  cross  and
fierce) ;  and  they  had  so  much  iodramanach  and  witch-
craft that  it  is  thus  they  used  to  do  much  of  their
valom\"

"GoU  was  the  strongest  man  that  was  in  the
Fheinn,  and  he  could  eat  seven  stags  at  his  dinner.
Fionn  was  a  patient  worthy  man,  and  they  used  always


39^  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

to  take  his  counsel.  Fionn  and  Osgar,  Goll  and
Oisean,  foiu-  '  postaichean'  of  the  Feinne,  the  high  hxw
people,  Luchd  ladh."

This  woiild  seem  to  explain  how  three  generations
fill  such  a  large  space  in  Celtic  popular  tradition.  If
the  names  of  the  original  warriors  became  the  names
of  offices  or  officers  they  may  have  been  Celtic  gods
at  first  and  commanders  of  Irish,  Scotch  Scandinavian,
and  British  Feinne  afterwards,  in  the  third  century
and  in  the  tweKth.  There  were  many  Osgars  at  the
battle  of  Gaura,  and  Fionn,  who  is  killed  in  one  cen-
tury, is  all  alive  in  the  next.

"  Fionn  was  not  a  king  over  land,  he  was  but  a
chief  over  the  men."

"  Was  there  any  other  name  said  to  him  but  Eigli
na  Feinne,  king  of  the  Fane  ?"

"  There  was  not."

"  It  is  Conan  who  was  the  weakest  man  that  was
in  the  Fheinn,  because  they  used  to  keep  liim  maol
(cropped).  He  had  but  the  strength  of  a  man,  but  if
the  hair  should  get  leave  to  grow  there  was  the  strength
of  a  man  in  him  for  every  hair  that  was  in  his  head  ;
but  he  was  so  cross  that  if  the  hair  should  grow  he
would  kill  them  aU.  He  was  so  short-tempered
(athghoirid)  that  he  used  to  be  always  fightmg  with
them."

So  all  accounts  agree  ;  and  Kai,  Arthur's  attendant,
was  of  the  same  disposition.

"  Wlien  Goll  would  be  in  great  rage  the  one  eye
would  come  '  dorn  gulban '  out,  and  the  other  eye  would
go  'dorn  gulban'  in.  I  think  myself  that  his  appear-
ance would  not  be  beautiful  then."

Neither  narrator,  scribe,  nor  translator  knows  what
"dorn  gulban"  means,  but  Conall  Gulban  struck  dorn
a  fist  on  a  man,  and  knocked  his  eve  out  on  his  cheek.


DUAN  NA  CEAEDACH.  397

"  Did  you  ever  liear,"  Eigh  JMhor  bheiiin  (king  of
Morven,  of  great  liills),  said  to  Fiorm  ?

"  I  have  heard  it"  (chual).  This  was  put  as  an
experiment  to  try  the  effect  of  a  leading  question,  and
it  produced  a  contradiction ;  hut  he  might  have  heard
the  name  and  have  forgotten  it  till  reminded.

"  They  would  he  always  staying  over  at  Eas  Laigh-
eann,  at  Goirtean  taoid,  when  they  were  in  this  island
(Islay),  and  the  place  for  the  caldron  is  there  yet,  and
they  say  that  the  caldron  is  buried  there.  It  is  Eas
Laigheann  nan  sruth  seimh  that  they  used  to  call  it —
lin  of  Laigheann  of  the  still  streams — they  were  so
fond  of  it.      They  had  no  house  at  all  there."

This  joins  Gaehc  to  Welsh  and  Irish  traditions,
for  this  caldron  is  often  mentioned,  and  it  upsets  Scotch
and  Irish  topography  altogether.

"  There  came  a  woman  on  them  there  once  from
the  westward,  and  they  said  to  her —

Tha  sinne  'cur  mar  choran  's  mar  gheasan  ort,

Gu  'n  innis  tliu,  co  thu  fhein  na  co  do  mhiunntir?

'S  mise  nigliean  righ  na  Sorcliann,

Sgiath  an  airm  ;

'S  gur  h-e  's  ainin  dlia  'm  Baoidbie  borb  ;

'S  gu  'n  d'  tboir  e  mise  leis,

Cià  mor  bhur  treis  as  an  Fheinn.

Cia  b'  fhada  'n  oidhche  gu  latha,

Cha  bu  ghna  leinn  'bhith  jun  cbeol.

We  lay  it  as  a  circuit  and  as  spells  on  thee,
That  thou  tell  us  who  thou  art,  or  thy  people.
"  I  am  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  Sorchann,*
•  Sorchann,  MacLean  suggests,  may  be  Drontbeim  or  Trond-
jem.     Soracban  used  to  mean  an  elevation  on  which  a  shinny
ball  was  played  to  be  "  hit  off,"  and  it  meant  any  other  hillock.

Baoidhre,  from  Beithir,  a  large  serpent  or  dragon,  and  Eigh,
a  king,  eo  called  probably  from  having  a  serpent  as  part  of  his
armorial  bearings. — H.  M'L.


39^  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Sliield  of  armies,

And  that  his  name  is  Eaoidlu-e  borb,

And  that  he  will  take  me  with  liim.

Though  great  our  time  from  the  Fane,

Though  long  Ije  the  night  to  day,

It  was  not  oiu'  wont  to  be  without  music.

"  They  were  in  such  a  great  (lomagain)  trouble
about  the  man  who  was  coming  that  they  did  not  set
up  any  music."

"  '  We  will  rise  out  in  the  morning,'  said  they,  '  to
see  who  is  coming  upon  us.'  "

Chunnucas  a'  teaclid  ar  coir  fear  mor  air  steiid  chiar-dhubh,
rionna-gheal,  a'  coiseachd  air  an  fhairge,  staigli  as  an  aird  an  iar.
Cuireamaid  ar  comihairle  ri  clieile,
Feuch  CO  'ghabhas  sgeula  de  'n  oigear.
Labhair  GoU  le  curam  mor  as  le  gruaim,
Co  'tbeid  fo  m'  sgeitb-sa  chumail   diom  nam  buillean
cruadbacb.
Bhuail  am  fear  a  tbainig  beum  sgèitbe  's  db'  iarr  e  combrag
coig  ceud  laocb.     Leum  an  deo  as  a'  mbnaoi  an  an  taobb  eile
dbiu  leis  an  eagal.

"  There  was  seen  coming  near  us  a  great  man  on
his  dun  black,  white-haired  steed,  wallving  on  the  sea,
in  from  the  western  airt.

'  Let  us  lay  our  counsel  together,
See  who  will  take  a  tale  from  the  youth,'
Spoke  Goll,  with  great  care,  and  a  frown,

'  Who  will   go  under  my  shield  to  ward  off  the
tempered  strokes.'

"  The  man  who  came  struck  a  shield  blow,  and  he
asked  for  a  battle  of  five  Inmdred  heroes.  The  life
leaped  out  of  the  women  on  the  other  side  of  them  for
fear.


DUAN  NA  CEARDACH.  399

"  Tliey  killed  him  at  last.

Thiodhlaicear  aig  braigli  an  eas,
Fear  mor  bu  mhor  meas  agus  miadh  ;
Chuir  Fionn  MacChumhail  fainn  oir,
Air  gach  iiieur  aig  an  onair  an  righ.

They  buried  at  the  top  of  the  Hn

The  great  man  of  gi-eat  honour  and  esteem,

Fionn  MacChumail  put  a  golden  ring

On  each  of  his  fingers  in  honour  of  the  king.

"  I  saw  a  man  in  Goirtean  taoid  (in  Islay),  and  he
found  one  of  the  rings  on  the  point  of  his  sock  when
he  was  plougliing — MurchacUi  j\lacXeacail.  It  was
one  of  the  old  Highland  ploughs  he  had.  There  were
great  long  beaks  on  them.  The  carle  got  much  money
for  the  ring."

Now  this  is  the  story  of  the  well-known  poem  of
Fainesoluis,  localized  in  Islay,  and  the  finding  of  a
gold  ring  assumed  to  be  proof  positive  of  its  exact
truth  by  the  old  man  who  tells  it.  I  also  have  a  gold
ring  which  Avas  found  in  Islay  with  a  lot  of  others.  It
is  said  that  the  finder  made  handles  for  a  chest  of
drawers  of  these  gold  rings,  and  that  a  pedlar  gave
him  a  fine  new  brass  set  in  exchange  for  the  old  ones,
which  he  carried  ofi"  and  sold.  Some  of  them  are  said
to  be  in  the  museum  at  Glasgow,  one  I  have,  and  the
rest  were  probably  melted.  I  know  of  several  dis-
coveries of  gold  rings,  chains,  etc.,  made  in  Islay.
j!^ow  it  is  possible  that  tliis  tradition  of  the  Feinne
may  be  true.  The  story  is  in  Dean  MacGregor's  MS.
as  a  poem  of  161  lines,  attributed  to  Ossian  in  1530.
It  is  an  episode  in  the  3d  book  of  Fingal,  1790.  It
is  claimed  by  Irish  ^vriters  asMoiraBorb,  1789,  in  vol.
V.  of  the  Ossianic  Society's  transactions,  1860.

I  have   tlu'ee  traditionary  version  as   poems,    one


400  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

wi-itten  down  in  September  1860,  in  Barra,  called
MacOighre  Eigli  na  lor-smàil ;  eighty-four  lines  from
Donald  MacPhie,  Breiibhaig,  who  says  he  learned  it
from  Hector  MacLaine  (smith),  an  uncle  of  his  who
could  neither  read  nor  write,  and  who  died  aged  about
eighty  some  twenty  years  ago.  In  this,  Padruig  and
Oisean,  and  Fionn,  and  Fionn's  four  sons,  and  Osgar,
and  the  daughter  of  the  king  under  the  waves,  and  a
big  man  who  comes  in  a  ship,  are  the  actors.  The
language  is  curious,  and  the  poetry  good.  I  regret
extremely  that  I  have  no  room  for  it.

The  other  is  fi'om  Patrick  Smith,  South  Boisdale,
South  Uist ;  an  old  man  w^ho  learned  it  in  his  youth
from  Roderick  Mac  Vicar,  North  Uist,  seventy-three
lines,  Macabh  Mor  MacEigh  na  Sorcha.  The  story
is  the  same,  but  Padruig  does  not  appear.  The  burial
of  the  hero  at  the  top  of  a  Hn  with  rings  on  his  fingers
is  given,  which  is  in  the  Dean's  version.     The  last  line,

Tba  sgeul  beag  agum  air  Fionn,

is  the  first  and  last  line  in  the  Dean's,  and  generally
my  versions  and  this  fragment  and  the  Dean's  might
be  fused  so  as  to  make  a  more  complete  story,  and  a
longer  and  perfectly  genuine  poem  in  Scotch  Gaelic.
The  tliird  version  is  called  dan  na  H  ighean,  and  has
eighty-foui"  lines,  written  by  Mr.  Torrie  in  Benbecula,
from  the  dictation  of  Donald  Macintyre,  who  learned
it  some  fifty  years  ago  from  an  old  man  who  afterwards
went  to  America,  John  Maclnnes  or  Iain  og  Mac-
Fhionlai.  This  joins  Scotch  and  Ii-ish  traditions,  Mac-
Pherson's  Ossian,  with  genuine  traditions  and  old  MSS.,
and  joins  poetry  to  j)rose  tales.

"  There  was  a  young  lad  in  the  Fheinn,  who  was
called  Coireall,  and  he  used  always  to  be  in  the  house
of  the  women,  because  he  had  not  come  to  the  age  of  a


DUAN  NA  CZÌARDACH.  4OI

man.  It  is  Goll  that  had  Mir  morra  na  Feinne,  the
great  morsel  of  the  Fane,  that  was  every  bit  of  marrow
that  was  in  every  bone  to  be  gathered  together  and
brought  to  him.  Coireall  came  in,  and  he  took  with
him  some  of  the  marrow,  and  he  and  Goll  fell  out
(went  over  each  other).  The  law  that  Fionn  made  Avas,
that  they  should  drive  bones  through  the  Avattled  rods
that  were  dividing  the  house,  and  the  one  with  whom
the  bone  should  go,  the  marroAv  to  be  his."

This  is  the  common  partition  in  Highland  cottages,
rods  woven  into  a  kind  of  rude  basket-work,  and
plastered  with  clay.  Eob  Eoy's  house  at  the  head
of  Glenshira,  near  Inverary,  is  so  divided.

They  did  that,  and  Goll  dragged  Coireall  through
the  wattled  rods  with  the  bone.

After  that  they  went  to  try  each  other  to  the
strand  (cladach),  and  Coireall  won  of  Goll,  and  he  left
the  woman's  house."

Cluiche  ri  cluiche  nan  soc,

Cluiche  nan  corcan  s  nam  liian  ;

A'  chulaidh  chomliraig  a  bh'  aig  an  dis

Cha  'n  fliaca  mi  roimhe  riamh.

Each  game  to  the  game  of  the  ends.
The  game  of  the  whittles  and  skins.
The  battle  array  that  these  two  had,
I  never  before  have  seen.

This  then  paints  the  dwelHngs  of  the  heroes  as  very
rude,  and  gives  the  clue  to  another  poem  which  I  have  :
sixty  lines  of  very  good  popular  poetry,  describing  how
Goll  slew  Coireall  at  a  merrymaking,  and  how  Fionn
lamented  over  his  son,  and  why  he  hated  Goll  thence-
forth. I  have  not  foimd  this  in  any  book  as  yet.
"  It  must  be  that  the  Feinn  were  strong  Ì "
"  Hoo  !  They  were  as  strong  as  the  horses.     There


402  WEST  HIGHLAJfD  TALES.

was  one  who  was  called  Mileach  Mor,  and  he  sent  word
for  them  once,  and  the  chase  fallen  short.  When  they
arrived,  they  were  put  into  a  long  house  there,  and
they  were  without  anything.  A  big  black  girl  came
in,  and  she  asked  a  battle  of  warriors  from  them."

"  Let  me  get  to  her,"  said  Conan.

Conan  went,  and  she  seized  him,  and  she  floored
him,  and  she  plucked  three  of  her  hairs,  and  she
bound  his  three  smalls.  Tlien  she  went  out,  and  they
loosed  Conan.  She  came  in  again,  and  she  sought  a
battle  of  warriors,  "  Let  me  get  at  her,"  said  Conan.

"  What  canst  thou  do  !"  said  they  to  him.  They
let  him  go,  and  she  floored  him,  and  this  time  she  did
something  else  to  him,  and  then  she  went  out.

They  killed  the  Mileach  Mor,  and  they  had  the
keep  of  a  day  and  a  year  there.

This  joins  an  Islay  tradition  to  one  pubhshed  by  Mr.
Simpson  in  1857,  as  current  in  Mayo  (see  pages  220
and  227),  and  it  also  joins  in  with  a  great  many  other
stories  which  I  have  in  manuscript,  and  with  Magach
Colgar,  No.  xxxvi,  and  so  to  ancient  MSS.  now  in
the  Advocate's  Library.  And  thus  one  old  Highlander
Avith  a  failing  memory,  but  who  can  still  remember
some  scraps  of  what  he  learned  in  his  youth,  and
could  remember  in  his  manliood,  forms  one  mesh  in  a
net- work  of  tradition,  and  manuscript  and  print ;  his-
tory and  mythology,  prose  and  poetry,  which  joins  the
whole  Gaelic  family  together,  extends  over  tliree  cen-
turies, and  may  be  found  to  join  them  to  the  earhest
records  of  the  Pagan  world.  This  is  no  solitary  case.
The  man  is  a  specimen  of  a  class  which  survives  in  far-
away corners,  but  which  must  soon  vanish  before
modern  ways,  together  with  the  Gaelic  language.


NIGHEAX  RIGH    FO  THUINN.  4O3


Xo.  LXXXVI.

XIGHEAX  PJGH  FO  THUIXX.
The  Dacghter  of  Kikg  Under-waves.

From  Roderick  MacLean  (tailor)  Ken  Tangyal,  Barra,  who
heard  it  frequently  recited  by  old  men  in  South  Uist,  about
fifteen  years  ago.  One  of  them  was  Angus  Macintyre,  Bornish,
who  was  about  eighty  years  old  at  the  time.  Written  by  H.  Mac-
Lean,  1860.  I  have  selected  this,  because  it  shews  one  of  the
Ossianic  heroes  in  a  very  mythological  character.  I  omit  the
Gaelic  for  want  of  room,  and  translate  closely  but  more  freely.

THE  Fhinn  were  once  together,  on  the  side  of  Eeinn
Eudainn,  on  a  wild  night,  and  there  was  pouring
rain  and  falling  snow  from  the  north.  About  midnight
a  creature  of  uncouth  appearance  struck  at  the  door  of
Fionu.  Her  hair*  was  down  to  her  heels,  and  she
cried  to  him  to  let  her  in  under  the  border  of  his
covering.  Fionn  raised  up  a  corner  of  the  covering,
and  he  gazed  at  her.  "  Thou  strange  looking  ugly
creature,"  said  he  "  thy  hair  is  down  to  thy  heels,  how
shouldst  thou  ask  me  to  let  thee  in  ? "

She  went  away,  and  she  gave  a  scream.  She
reached  Oisean,  and  she  asked  him  to  let  her  in
mider  the  border  of  his  covering.  Oisean  lifted  a
corner  of  his  covering,  and  he  saw  her.

"Thou  strange,  liideous  creature,  how  canst  thou
ask  me  to  let  thee  in  ?"  said  he.

"  Thy  hair  is  down  to  thy  heels.  Tliou  shalt  not
come  in."

*  A  ialt  's  a  fionna.


404  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

She  went  aAvay,  and  she  gave  a  shriek.

She  reached  Diarmaid,  and  she  cried  aloud  to  him
to  let  her  in  under  the  border  of  his  covering.

Diarmaid  lifted  a  fold  of  his  covering,  and  he  saw
her.  "  Thou  art  a  strange,  hideous  creature.  Thy
hair  is  down  to  thy  heels,  but  come  in,"  said  he.  She
came  in  under  the  border  of  his  covering.

"Oh,  Diarmaid,"  said  she,  "I  have  spent  seven
years  travelling  over  ocean  and  sea,  and  of  all  that  time
I  have  not  passed  a  night  till  this  night,  till  thou  hast
let  me  in.  Let  me  come  in  to  the  warmth  of  the
fire."

"  Come  up,"  said  Diarmaid.

Wlien  she  came  up,  the  people  of  the  Finn  began
to  flee,  so  hideoris  was  she.*

"  Go  to  the  further  side,"  said  Diarmaid,  "  and  let
the  creature  come  to  the  warmth  of  the  fire."

They  w^nt  to  the  one  side,  and  they  let  her  be  at
the  fire,  but  she  had  not  been  long  at  the  fire,  when
she  sought  to  be  under  the  warmth  of  the  blanket
together  with  himself

"  Thou  art  growing  too  bold,"  said  Diarmaid.
First  thou  did'st  ask  to  come  under  the  border  of  the
covering,  then  thou  did'st  seek  to  come  to  the  fire,  and
now  thou  seekest  leave  to  come  under  the  blanket  with
me  ;  but  come."

She  went  under  the  blanket,  and  he  turned  a  fold
of  it  between  them.  She  was  not  long  thus,  when  he
gave  a  start,  and  he  gazed  at  her,  and  he  saw  the  finest
drop  of  blood  that  ever  was,  from  the  beginning  of  the
universe  till  the  end  of  the  world  at  his  side.  He
shouted  out  to  the  rest  to  come  over  where  he  was,  and
he  said  to  them.

*  This  gives  to  Brat  the  meaning  of  tlie  cover  of  a  tent  or
booth,  it  generally  means  a  flag,  a  rag,  or  a  inantle.


XIGHEAN  RIGH  FO  THUIXN.  4O5

"Is  it  not  often  that  men  are  unkind  !  Is  not
this  the  most  beauteous  woman  that  man  ever  saw  ! "

"  She  is,"  said  they,  as  they  covered  her  up,  "  the
most  beautiful  woman  that  man  ever  saAv."*

Then  she  was  asleep,  and  she  did  not  know  that
they  were  looking  at  her.  He  let  her  sleej),  and  he
did  not  awaken  her,  but  a  short  time  after  that  she
awoke,  and  she  said  to  him,  "  Art  thou  awake
Diarmaid  ? "

"  I  am  awake,"  said  Diarmaid

"  Where  woidd'st  thou  rather  that  the  very  finest
castle  thou  hast  ever  seen  shoidd  be  built '? "

"Up  above  Beinn  Eudainn,  if  I  had  my  choice,"
and  Diarmaid  slept,  and  she  said  no  more  to  him.

There  went  one  out  early,  before  the  day,  riding,
and  he  saw  a  castle  built  up  upon  a  hiU.  He  cleared
his  sight  to  see  if  it  was  surely  there ;  then  he  saw  it,
and  he  went  home,  and  he  did  not  say  a  word.

Another  went  out,  and  he  saw  it,  and  he  did  not
say  a  word.  Then  the  day  was  brightened,  and  two
come  in  telling  that  the  castle  was  most  surely
there.

Said  she,  as  she  rose  up  sitting,  "  Arise  Diarmaid,
go  up  to  thy  castle,  and  be  not  stretched  there  any
longer."

"  If  there  were  a  castle  to  wliich  I  might  go,"  said
he.

"  Look  out,  and  see  if  there  be  a  castle  there."'

He  looked  out,  and  he  saw  a  castle,  and  he  came
in.  "  I  will  go  up  to  the  castle,  if  thou  wilt  go  there
together  with  me."

*  The  very  same  idea  exists  in  a  Spanish  legend  of  the  Cid,
who  in  like  manner  shewed  kindness  to,  and  shared  his  couch
with  a  leper :  in  the  night  he  changed  into  St.  Lazarus,  all  bright
and  shining.


406  ■  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  I  will  do  that,  Diarmaid,  but  say  not  to  me  thrice
how  thou  did'st  find  me,"  said  she.

"  I  will  not  say*  to  thee  for  ever,  how  I  found
thee,"  said  Diarmaid.

They  went  to  the  castle,  the  pair.  That  was  the
i)eautiful  castle  !  There  was  not  a  shadow  of  thing
that  was  for  the  use  of  a  castle  that  w^as  not  in  it,  even
to  a  herd  for  the  geese.

The  meat  Avas  on  the  board,  and  there  were  maid
.servants,  and  men  servants  about  itf

They  spent  three  days  in  the  castle  together,  and
at  the  end  of  three  days  she  said  to  him,  "  Thou  art
turning  sorrowful,  because  thou  art  not  together  with
the  rest."

"  Think  that  I  am  not  feeling  sorrow  surely  that
I  am  not  together  with  the  Fhinn,"  said  he.

"  Thou  had'st  best  go  with  the  Fhinn,  and  thy
meat  and  thy  drink  will  be  no  worse  than  they  are,"
said  she.

"  Who  will  take  care  of  the  greyhound  bitch,+  and
her  three  pups?"  said  Diarmaid

"  Oh,"  said  she,  "  what  fear  is  there  for  the  grey-
hound, and  for  the  three  pups  ? "

*  Nacan.  Cha  chan.  This  verb  is  not  common  in  some
districts.

t  This  description  of  magnificence  is  very  characteristic.
The  narrator,  knowing  nothing  earthly  about  castles,  describes
nothing,  but  leaves  everything  to  fancy,  except  the  goose
herd,  and  the  food,  and  the  waiters.  An  Arabian  story-teller
would  have  given  a  long  detail  of  eastern  magnificence,  the
Countess  d'Aulnoy  would  have  filled  in  the  picture  from  her  own
knowledge  of  courts,  and  when  all  is  done  the  incident  is  the
same.  It  was  the  most  magnificent  castle  that  could  be  imagined,
and  there  were  lots  to  eat,  and  servants  to  work,  and  there  is  an
end  of  it.

i  Sdighead  mialchoin ;  perhaps  arrow,  Greyhound.


NIGHEAN  PvIGH  FO  THUIXX.  4O7

He  Avent  caway  when  he  heard  that.  He  left  a
blessing  mth  her,  and  he  reached  the  people  of  the
Finne,  and  Fionn,  the  brother  of  his  mother,  and  there
Avas  a  chief's  honour  and  welcome*  before  Diarmaid
Avhen  he  arrived,  and  they  had  ill  willt  to  liim,  because
the  woman  had  come  first  to  them,  and  that  they  had
turned  their  backs  to  her,  and  that  he  had  gone  before
her  wishes,  and  the  matter  had  turned  out  so  well

She  was  out  after  he  had  gone  away,  and  what
should  she  see  but  one  coming  in  great  haste.  Then
she  thought  of  staying  without  tiU  he  should  come,  and
who  was  there  but  Fionn.  He  hailed  her,  and  caught
her  by  the  hand.

"Thou  art  angry  with  me,  damsel,"  J  said  he.

"  Oh,  I  am  not  at  all,  Fhinn,"  said  she.  "  Come
in  till  thou  take  a  draught  from  me."

"  I  wiU  go  if  I  get  my  request,"  said  Fionn.

"  "What  request  might  be  here  that  thou  should'st
not  get,"  said  she.

"  That  is,  one  of  the  pups  of  the  greyhound  bitch."

"  Oh,  the  request  thou  hast  asked  is  not  great,"
said  she ;  "  the  one  thou  mayest  choose  take  it  -with.
thee."

He  got  that,  and  he  went  away.§

At  the  opening  of  the  night  came  Diarmaid.  The
greyhound  met  him  without,  and  she  gave  a  yell.

"  It  is  true,  my  lass,  one  of  thy  pups  is  gone.  But
if  thou  had'st  mind  of  how  I  found  thee,  how  thy  hair
was  down  to  thy  heels,  thou  had'st  not  let  the  j)up  go."

"  Thou  Diarmaid,  what  saidest  thou  so  Ì"

"  Oh,"  said  Diarmaid,  "I  am  asking  pardon."

*  Flath  a's  failt.  f  Miorun.  |  Eighin.

g  This  is  cliaracteristic  of  Fioun,  as  he  always  appears  in
these  traditions ;  he  represents  wisdom,  but  crafty  wisdom,  and
gains  his  ends  by  stratagem.


408  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  Oh,  thou  shalt  get  that,"  said  she,  and  he  slept
within  that  night,  and  his  meat  and  di-ink  were  as
usual.

On  the  morrow  he  went  to  where  he  was  yesterday,
and  while  he  was  gone  she  went  out  to  take  a  stroll,
and  while  she  was  strolling  ahout,  what  should  she  see
but  a  rider  coming  to  where  she  was.  She  stayed  with-
out till  he  reached  her.

Who  reached  her  here  hut  Oisean,  son  of  Fionn.

They  gave  welcome  and  honour  to  each  other.  She
told  him  to  go  in  v.'ith  her,  and  that  he  should  take  a
draught  from  her,  and  he  said  that  he  would,  if  he
might  get  his  request.

"What  request  hast  thou?"  said  she.

"  One  of  the  pups  of  the  greyhound  hitch."

"  Tliou  shalt  get  that,"  said  she,  "  take  thy  choice
of  them."

He  took  it  with  him,  and  he  went  away.*

At  the  opening  of  the  night  came  Diarmaid  home,
and  the  greyhound  met  him  without,  and  she  gave  two
yells.

"  That  is  true,  my  lass,"  said  Diarmaid,  "  another
is  taken  from  thee.  But  if  she  had  mind  of  how  I
found  her,  she  had  not  let  one  of  thy  pups  go.  When
her  hair  was  down  to  her  heels."

"  Diarmaid  !  What  said'st  thou  ?"  said  she.

"  I  am  asking  pardon,"  said  Diarmaid.

"  Thou  shalt  get  that,"  said  she,  and  they  seized
each  other's  hands,  and  they  went  home  together,  and
there  was  meat  and  drink  that  night  as  there  ever  had
been.

In  the  morning  Diarmaid  went  away,  and  a  while
after  he  had  gone  she  was  without  taking  a  stroll.      She

*  This  is  foreign  to  the  character  of  Oisein  in  all  other  stories,
but  he  was  the  son  of  Fionn,  and  he  generally  tells  his  own  story.


XIGHEAN  RIGH  FO  THUINX.  4O9

saw  another  rider  coming  to-day,  and  lie  was  in  great
haste.  She  thought  she  woukl  Avait,  and  not  go  home
till  he  should  come  forward.  What  was  this  but
another  of  the  Fhinn.

He  -went  with  civil  words  to  the  young  damsel,
and  they  gave  welcome  and  honour  to  each  other.

She  told  him  to  go  home  with  her,  and  that  he
should  take  a  draught  from  her.  He  said  that  he
would  go  if  he  should  get  his  request.

She  asked  that  time  what  request  that  might  he,
"  One  of  the  pups  of  the  greyhound  bitch,"  said  he.

"  Tliough  it  is  a  hard  matter  for  me,"  said  she,  "  I
will  give  it  to  thee."

He  went  with  her  to  the  castle,  he  took  a  draught
from  her,  he  got  the  pup,  and  he  went  away.

At  the  opening  of  the  night  came  DiarmaicL  The
greyhound  met  him,  and  she  gave  three  yells,  the  most
hideous  that  man  ever  heard.

"  Yes,  that  is  true  my  lass,  thou  art  without  any
this  day,"  said  Diarmaid,  "  but  if  she  had  mind  of  how  I
found  hei',  she  would  not  have  let  the  pup  go  ;  when
her  hair  was  doAvn  to  her  heels,  she  would  not  have
done  that  to  me."

"  Thou,  Diarmaid,  what  said'st  thou  ?"

"  Oh,  I  am  asking  pardon,"  said  Diarmaid.  He
went  home,  and  he  was  without  wife  or  bed  beside
him,  as  he  ever  had  been.  It  was  in  a  moss-hole
he  awoke  on  the  morrow.  There  was  no  castle,  nor  a
stone  left  of  it  on  another.  He  began  to  weep,  and
he  said  to  himself  that  he  woiUd  not  stay,  head  or  foot,
till  he  should  find  her.

Away  he  went,  and  what  should  he  do  but  take
his  way  across  the  glens.  There  was  neither  house  nor
ember  in  his  way.  He  gave  a  glance  over  his  shoulder,
and  what  should  he  see  but  the  greyhound  just  dead.


41  O  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

He  seized  her  by  tlie  tail,  and  lie  put  her  on  his
shoulder,  and  he  would  not  part  with  her  for  the  love
that  he  bore  her.  He  was  going  on,  and  what  should
he  see  above  liim  but  a  herd.

"  Did'st  thou  see,  this  day  or  yesterday,  a  woman
taking  this  way  1 "  said  Diarmaid  to  the  herd.

"  I  saw  a  woman  early  in  the  morning  yesterday,
and  she  was  walking  hard,"  said  the  herd.

"What  way  did'st  thou  see  her  going  V

"  She  Avent  down  yonder  point  to  the  strand,  and
I  saw  her  no  more."

He  took  the  very  road  that  she  took,  till  there  was
no  going  any  further.  He  saw  a  ship.  He  put  the
slender  end  of  his  spear  imder  his  chest,  and  he  sprang
into  her,  and  he  went  to  the  other  side.  He  laid  him-
self down,  stretched  out  on  the  side  of  a  hill,  and  he
slept,  and  when  he  awoke  there  was  no  ship  to  be  seen.
"A  man  to  be  pitied  am  I,"  said  he,  "I  shall  never
get  away  from  here,  but  there  is  no  help  for  it."

He  sat  on  a  knoll,  and  he  had  not  sat  there  long
when  he  saw  a  boat  coming,  and  one  man  in  her,  and
he  was  rowing  her.

He  went  down  where  she  was,  he  grasped  the  grey-
hound by  the  tail,  and  he  put  her  in,  and  he  went  in
after  her.

Then  the  boat  went  out  over  the  sea,  and  she  went
down  under,  and  he  had  but  just  gone  do-wia,  when  he
saw  ground,  and  a  plain  on  which  he  could  walk.*
He  went  on  this  land,  and  he  went  on.

*  This  notion  of  a  land  under  the  waves  is  very  widely  spread,
and  common  to  many  nations.  The  Arabian  Nights  are  full  of
stories  about  people  who  lived  under  the  sea,  but  this  was  not
taken  from  the  Arabian  Nights,  for  it  is  common  to  all  the  surviv-
ing branches  of  the  Celtic  family,  and  to  other  races.

In  the  story  of  "  Kouge  Gorge,"  Foyer  Breton,  1858,  a  maiden


NIGHEAN  RIGH  FO  THUINN.  4 1  1

He  was  but  a  short  time  walking,  when  he  fell  in
with  a  gulp  of  blood.      He  lifted  the  blood,  and  he

befriends  a  red-breast,  and  by  his  aid  and  advice  gets  magic
sabots  and  a  stick,  walks  over  tbe  sea  to  certain  islands,  where
she  knocks  at  a  rock,  and  out  comes  Mor  vyo'ch,  the  sea  cow,
which  only  varies  from  other  cows  in  being  better,  and  magical.
In  Gaelic  it  would  be  muir  bho.  By  thrice  rejieating  the  name
of  Saint  Eonan  d  Hybernie,  and  stroking  the  beast  with  a  magic
herb,  the  cow  which  had  been  sold,  and  had  returned,  was  trans-
formed to  Marc'h  mor,  the  sea-horse,  which  again  is  like  other
horses,  only  ten  times  better.  The  word  Marc'h  does  not  now
survive  in  Gaelic,  but  riding  is  Mar-each.

The  horse  is  sold,  and  returns,  and  is  transformed  by  the  same
means  into  Mor  Vawd.  Mer  veau,  muir  bho,  the  sea-calf  or  cow,
which  is  a  sheep  with  fine  red  wool,  which  is  sold  also,  but  jumps
into  the  sea,  and  escapes  to  the  Seven  Isles,  and  vanishes  into  a
rock.

In  the  story  of  the  Groach  d  1'  ile  de  Lok  (156),  a  man  goes
into  a  boat  like  a  swan,  and  when  he  is  on  board  the  swan  awakes,
and  dives  down  to  the  bottom  of  a  pool  in  the  middle  of  a  Sea
Island,  and  there  he  finds  a  magnificent  dwelling,  and  a  fairy,
who  treats  him  well  for  a  time,  but  turns  him  into  a  frog  at  last.

In  the  Mabinogion  it  appears  that  Cardigan  Bay  was  once  dry
land,  and  that  the  land  sank,  and  the  people  survive,  with  their
dwellings  and  possessions.

In  a  curious  pamphlet  which  I  picked  up  in  Dublin — "  The
History  of  the  Isle  of  Man,"  etc.,  "  with  a  succinct  detail  of  en-
chantments that  have  been  exhibited  there  by  sorcerers  and
other  infernal  beings,"  etc.,  1780, 1  find  the  account  of  an  English
tourist,  who,  like  Herodotus,  wrote  down  all  he  heard,  and  seems
to  have  believed  a  great  deal  of  it.  He  mentions  the  "  Mauthe
doog,"  which  a  Gaelic  scholar  would  spell  Madadh  dubh  dog,
black,  who  is  a  Celtic  goblin  still,  and  endless  other  stories  and
superstitions  which  are  familiar  to  me ;  but  amongst  others,  he
tells  a  tale  of  Port  Iron,  where  the  people  were  quite  familiar  with
mermen,  and  had  caught  a  merwoman  in  a  net  one  moonlight
night  on  the  shore.  She  would  not  speak  till  she  was  allowed  to
escape  to  her  own  people.     She  had  a  tail  like  a  fish.     So  has


412  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

put  it  into  a  napkiii,  and  lie  put  it  into  his  pouch.
"  It  was  the  greyhound  which  lost  this,"  said  he.

Abdallali  of  the  sea  in  Lane's  Arabian  Nights.  But  this  is
nothing.  A  company  was  formed  for  diving,  "  in  glass  machines
cased  with  thick  tough  leather,"  and  a  man  was  let  down  near
the  Isle  of  Man  to  seek  for  treasure.  The  diver  passed  through
the  region  of  fishes,  and  got  into  a  pure  element,  clear  as  the  air.
He  saw  the  ground  glittering  with  all  manner  of  magnificence,
streets  and  squares  of  mother  of  pearl.  He  hauled  his  diving
bell  into  a  house,  and  almost  within  reach  of  treasures,  but  there
was  no  more  line,  and  he  was  hauled  back  empty  handed.

This  is  a  "story  "  in  every  sense  of  the  term,  and  it  is  so  elaborate
and  ornamented  that  it  must  have  been  cooked  for  the  stranger,
or  by  him,  but  the  main  idea  is  that  there  is  a  world  under  the
waves,  and  the  Manks  sailors  then  declared  that  they  commonly
heard  at  sea  the  bleating  of  sheep,  the  barking  of  dogs,  the  howl-
ing of  wolves,  and  the  distinct  cries  of  every  beast  the  land
affords,  and  they  now  believe  in  the  water  horse,  and  the  water
bull,  and  the  sea  man.

Being  lately  in  Ireland,  I  proceeded  to  pump  a  carman,  who
had  the  reputation  of  being  full  of  stories,  and  after  many  vain
attempts  I  got  him  started,  as  we  drove  home  to  AVaterford  in
the  dark.  The  first  thing  he  told  me  was  a  story  which  was
perfectly  familiar,  though  told  with  an  Irish  brogue,  and  with
Irish  characteristics — a  story  of  a  man  who  grew  rich  by  get-
ting sea  cows  and  sheep.  His  place  of  abode,  and  all  particulars
were  given,  but  I  knew  that  the  same  story  was  told  in  Orkney,
Harris,  and  Barra ;  here  I  had  it  at  Waterford,  and  it  was  the
same  as  the  Breton  story  quoted  above,  for  the  end  of  it  was  that
the  cow  and  all  her  progeny  ran  off,  and  jumped  into  their  native
sea,  because  the  man  wanted  to  slaughter  the  cow.

The  same  idea  is  in  Straparola's,  Italian.  A  man  is  swallowed
by  a  mermaid,  and  restored  from  the  bottom  of  the  Atlantic.  It
is  in  old  Scotch  ballads  where  men  fall  in  love  with  mermaids.
It  is  in  German  stories  where  men  are  carried  off  by  Nixies.  It
is  in  Norse  and  Swedish,  and  it  was  in  Greek  and  Latin,  for
there  were  sea  gods  of  old,  and  from  all  this  fiction  I  would
gather  one  probable  fact.     The  men  whose  minds  first  conceived


XIGHEAN  KIGH  FO  THUINN.  4  I  3

He  was  a  while  walking,  and  he  fell  in  with  the
next  gulp,  and  he  Hfted  it,  and  put  it  into  his  pouch.
He  fell  in  with  the  next  one,  and  he  did  the  like  with
it.  What  should  he  see  a  short  space  from  him,  after
that,  but  a  woman,  as  though  she  were  crazed,  gather-
ing rushes.  He  went  towards  her,  and  he  asked  her
what  news  she  had.  "  I  cannot  tell  till  I  gather  the
rushes,"  said  she.

"  Be  telling  it  whilst  thou  art  gathering,"  said
Diarmaid.

"  I  am  in  great  haste,"  said  she.

"  "VVliat  place  is  here?"  said  he.

"  Tliere  is  here,"  said  she,  "  Rioghachd  Fo  Thiiinn,
Realm  Underwaves."

"  Eealm  Underwaves  ! "

"  Yes,"  said  she.

"  What  use  hast  thou  for  rushes,  when  thou  art
gathering  them  Ì "  said  Diarmaid.

"  I  will  tell  thee  that.  I  perceive  that  thou  art  a
stranger."

"  Yes,  a  true  stranger,"  said  Diarmaid.    I

"  The  daughter  of  King  Underwaves  has  come
home,  and  she  was  seven  years  under  spells,  and  she  is
ill,  and  the  leeches  of  Christendom  are  gathered,  and
none  are  doing  her  good,  and  a  bed  of  rushes  is  what
she  finds  the  wholesomest."

this  idea  were  not  bred  near  the  sea,  or  used  to  it,  they  were  not
sailors.  They  surely  came  from  some  inland  countrj'  to  the  sea,
and  peopled  it  with  the  creatures  of  the  land.  If  they  saw  a
seal  they  might  fancy  it  a  man.  A  walrus  they  might  call  a
cow,  and  if  the  idea  was  so  formed  by  those  who  first  arrived  at
the  sea,  it  has  survived  till  now.

A  mermaid  was  lately  seen  off  Plymouth,  according  to  a  young
sailor  of  my  acquaintance,  and  Diarmaid  went  to  the  land  under
the  waves  to  search  for  the  daughter  of  the  king.


4^4  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  Well  then,  I  would  be  far  in  thy  debt  if  thou
would'st  see  me  where  that  woman  is."

"  Well  then  I  will  see  that.  I  will  put  thee  into
the  slieaf  of  rushes,  and  I  will  put  the  rushes  under
thee  and  over  thee,  and  I  will  take  thee  with  me  on
my  back."

"  That  is  a  thing  that  thou  can'st  not  do,"  said
Diarmaid.

"  Be  that  upon  me,"  said  she.

She  put  Diarmaid  into  the  bundle,  and  she  took
liim  on  her  back.

(Was  not  that  my  lass!)  When  she  reached  the
chamber  she  let  down  the  bundle.

"  Oh  !  hasten  that  to  me,"  said  the  daughter  of
King  Underwaves.

He  sprang  out  of  the  bundle,  and  he  sprang  to
meet  her,  and  they  seized  each  other's  hands,  and  there
was  joy  then.

"  Three  parts  of  the  ailment  are  gone,  but  I  am
not  well,  and  I  will  not  be.  Every  time  I  thought  of
thee  when  I  was  coming,  I  lost  a  gulp  of  the  blood  of
my  heart."

"  Well  then,  I  have  got  these  thiee  gulps  of  thy
heart's  blood,  take  thou  them  in  a  drink,  and  there
Avill  be  nothing  amiss."

"  Well  then,  I  will  not  take  them,"  said  she;  "  they
wiU  not  do  me  a  shade  of  good,  since  I  cannot  get  one
thing,  and  I  shall  never  get  that  in  the  world."

"  What  thing  is  that  ?"  said  he.

"  There  is  no  good  in  telling  thee  that ;  thou  wilt
not  get  it,  nor  any  man  in  the  world  ;  it  has  discomfited
them  for  long."

"  If  it  be  on  the  surface  of  the  world  I  will  get  it,
and  do  thou  tell  it,"  said  Diarmaid.

"That   is  three  draughts  from  the    cup    of    Kigh


XIGHEAX  RIGn  FO  TUUINN.  415

Magli  an  loglmaitlh,  the  King  of  Plain  of  Wonder,
and  no  man  ever  got  that,  and  I  shall  not  get  it."

"  Oh  ! "  said  Diarmaid,  "  there  are  not  on  the  sur-
face of  the  world  as  many  as  will  keep  it  from  me.
Tell  me  if  that  man  be  far  from  me."

"  He  is  not ;  he  is  within  a  bound  near  my  father,
but  a  rivulet  is  there,  and  in  it  there  is  the  sailing  of
a  ship  with  the  wind  behind  her,  for  a  day  and  a  year,
before  thou  reach  it."

He  went  away,  and  he  reached  the  rivulet,  and  he
spent  a  good  while  walking  at  its  side.

"  I  cannot  cross  over  it ;  that  was  true  for  her,"
said  Diarmaid.

Before  he  had  let  the  word  out  of  his  mouth,  there
stood  a  little  russet  man  in  the  midst  of  the  rivulet.*

'•  Diarmaid,  son  of  Duibline,  thou  art  in  straits,"
said  he.

"  I  am  in  a  strait  just  noAV,"  said  Diarmaid.

"  What  wouldst  thou  give  to  a  man  who  would  bring
thee  out  of  these  straits  ]  come  hither  and  put  thy  foot
on  my  palm."

"  Oh !  my  foot  cannot  go  into  thy  palm,"  said
Diarmaid.

"  It  can."

He  went,  and  he  put  his  foot  on  his  palm.  "  jSTow,
Diarmaid,  it  is  to  King  Mag  an  lunai  tliat  thou  art
going."

"  It  is,  indeed,"  said  Diarmaid.

"  It  is  to  seek  Iris  cup  thou  art  going."

*  This  personage  plays  a  part  which  is  common  enough,  that
of  the  ferrymen,  of  whom  Charon  was  one.  A  little  rc-d-haired
man  rising  in  the  middle  of  a  river  that  was  a  year's  sail  wide,
and  taking  a  great  hero  over  on  the  palm  of  his  hand,  is  not  to
be  reasonably  accounted  for,  and  he  should  be  some  marine  divi-
nity.    He  tells  his  own  employment  below.


41 6  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  It  is."

"  I  will  go  with  thee  myself."

"  Thou  shalt  go,"  said  Diarmaid.

Diarmaid  reached  the  house  of  Iving  Wonderplain.
He  shouted  for  the  cup  to  be  sent  out,  or  battle,  or
combat  ;  and  it  was  not  the  cup.

There  were  sent  out  four  hundred  Lugh  ghaisgeach,
and  four  hundred  Lan  ghaisgeach,  and  in  two  hours  he
left  not  a  man  of  them  alive.

He  shouted  again  for  battle,  or  else  combat,  or
the  cup  to  be  sent  out.

That  was  the  thing  he  should  get,  battle  or  else
combat,  and  it  was  not  the  cup.

There  were  sent  out  eight  hundred  loo  gaishgeach,
and  eight  hundred  lan  gaishgeach,  and  in  three  hours
he  left  not  a  man  of  them  alive.

He  shouted  again  for  Ijattle,  or  else  combat,  or  else
the  cup  to  be  sent  out  to  him.

There  were  sent  out  nine  hundred  strong  heroes,
and  nine  hundred  full  heroes,  and  in  four  hours  he  left
no  man  of  them  alive.

"  Whence,"  said  the  king,  as  he  stood  in  his  own
great  door,  "  came  the  man  that  has  just  brought  my
realm  to  ruin  1  If  it  be  the  pleasure  of  the  hero  let
him  tell  from  whence  he  came."

"  It  is  the  pleasure  of  the  hero  ;  a  hero  of  the
people  of  the  Finn  am  I.      I  am  Diarmaid."

"  Why  didst  thou  not  send  in  a  message  to  say
who  it  was,  and  I  would  not  have  spent  my  realm  upon
thee,  for  thou  wouldst  kill  every  man  of  them,  for  it
was  put  down  in  the  books  seven  years  before  thou
wert  born.     What  dost  thou  require  Ì "

"  That  is  the  cup  ;  it  comes  from  thine  own  hand
for  healing."*

*  The  resemblance  which  all  this  bears  to  mediaeval  romance,


NIGHEAN  HIGH  FO  THUINN.  4I7

"  Xo  man  ever  got  my  cup  but  thou,  but  it  is  easy
for  me  to  give  thee  a  cup  ;  but  for  healing  there  is  but
the  cup  that  I  have  myself  about  the  board."

Diarmaid  got  the  cup  from  King  Wonderplain.

"  I  will  now  send  a  ship  \vith  thee  Diarmaid,"
said  the  king.

"  Great  thanks  (Taing  ralior)  to  thee,  oh  king.  I
am  much  in  thy  debt ;  but  I  have  a  ferry  of  my  own."  *

Here  the  king  and  Diarmaid  parted  from  each
other.  He  remembered  when  he  had  parted  from  the
king  that  he  had  never  said  a  word  at  all,  the  day  be-
fore about  the  little  russet  man,  and  that  he  had  not
taken  him  in.  It  was  when  he  was  coming  near  upon
the  rivulet  that  he  thought  of  Mm ;  and  he  did  not
know  how  he  should  get  over  the  biu^n.

"  There  is  no  help  for  it,"  said  he.  "  I  shall  not
now  get  over  the  ferry,  and  shame  will  not  let  me
return  to  the  king."t

Wliat  should  rise  while  the  word  was  ia  his  mouth
but  the  little  russet  man  out  of  the  burn.

and  to  Welsh  popular  tales,  is  striking.  The  subject  is  referred
to  elsewhere.  Fionn  had  a  heahug  cup,  which  he  refused  to
give  Diarmaid  after  the  fatal  boar-hunt,  and  a  great  part  of
mediaeval  romance  hinges  on  the  search  for  a  mystic  healing
cup.  There  is  another  story  of  which  I  have  read  in  which  Conan
goes  to  Ifrionn  ;  the  cold  isle  of  the  dead.

*  Some  Saxon  foe  relates  that  a  Mac had  proved  unwit-
tingly that  his  family  were  older  than  the  flood.  The  other
objected  that  there  were  none  of  that  name  in  the  ark,  to  which

the  highlander  replied — "  The  Mac s  had  always  a  boat  o'

their  ain."

f  The  idea  of  the  ferry  is  clearly  that  of  one  of  the  danger-
ous tidal  fords  which  abound  in  the  islands.  One  between
North  Uist  and  Benbecula  is  said  to  be  six  miles  wide.  It  is
crossed  on  foot,  at  low  tide,  and  in  a  boat  when  the  tide  is  high,
and  at  night  it  is  dangerous  enough.
VOL.  in.  2  E


41  8  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  ThoTi  art  in  straits,  Diarmaid."

"  T  am."

"  It  is  this  day  that  thou  art  in  extremity."

"  It  is.  I  got  the  thing  I  desired,  and  I  am  not
getting  across."

"  Tliough  thou  didst  to  me  all  that  wliich  thou  hast
done  ;  though  thou  didst  not  say  a  word  of  me  yester-
day ;  put  thy  foot  on  my  palm  and  I  will  take  thee
over  the  burn."

Diarmaid  put  his  foot  on  his  palm,  and  he  took
him  over  the  burn.

"  Thou  Avilt  talk  to  me  now  Diarmaid,"  said  he.

"  I  will  do  it,"  said  Diarmaid.

"  Thou  art  going  to  heal  the  daughter  of  King
Underwaves  ;  she  is  the  girl  that  thou  likest  best  in
the  world."

"  Oh  !  it  is  she."

"  Thou  shalt  go  to  such  and  such  a  well.  Thou
wilt  find  a  bottle  at  the  side  of  the  well,  and  thou  shalt
take  it' with  thee  full  of  the  water.  Wlien  thou  reachest
the  damsel,  thou  shalt  put  the  water  in  the  cup,  and  a
gulp  of  blood  in  it,  and  she  ^vill  chink  it.  Thou  shalt
fill  it  again,  and  she  will  drink.  Thou  shalt  fill  it  the
tliird  time,  and  thou  shalt  put  the  third  gulp  of  blood
into  it,  and  she  will  drink  it,  and  there  will  not  be  a
w^iit  ailing  her  that  time.  When  thou  hast  given  her
the  last,  and  she  is  well,  she  is  the  one  for  whom  thou
carest  least  that  ever  thou  hast  seen  before  thee."

"  Oh  !  not  she,"  said  Diarmaid.

"  She  is  ;  the  king  will  know  that  thou  hast  taken
a  dislike  to  her.  She  -w^ill  say  Diarmaid  thou  hast
taken  a  dislike  to  me.  Say  thou  that  thou  hast.  Dost
thou  know  what  man  is  speaking  to  thee  Ì "  said  the
little  russet  man.

"  Not  I,"  said  Diarmaid.


NIGHEAN  RIGH  FO  THCIXX.  4I9

"  In  me  there  is  the  messenger  of  the  other  world,
who  helped  thee  ;  hecause  thy  heart  is  so  warm  to  do
good  to  another.  King  XJnderwaves  will  come,  and
he  wiU  offer  thee  much  silver  and  gold  for  healing  his
daughter.  Thou  shalt  not  take  a  jot,  but  that  the
king  should  send  a  ship  Avith  thee  to  Eiririn  to  the
place  from  whence  thou  earnest."*

Diarmaid  went ;  he  reached  the  well ;  he  got  the
bottle,  and  he  filled  it  with  water  ;  he  took  it  mth
him,  and  he  reached  the  castle  of  King  XJnderwaves.
When  he  came  in  he  was  honoured  and  saluted.

"  E"o  man  ever  got  that  cup  before,"  said  she.

"  I  would  have  got  it  from  aU  that  there  are  on
the  surface  of  the  world ;  there  was  no  man  to  tiu'n
me  back,"  said  DiarmaicL

"  I  thought  that  thou  wouldst  not  get  it  though
thou  shoiddst  go,  but  I  see  that  thou  hast  it,"  said
she.

He  put  a  gulp  of  blood  into  the  water  in  the  cup,
and  she  drank  it.  She  drank  the  second  one,  and  she
drank  the  third  one ;  and  when  she  had  drunk  the
third  one  there  was  not  a  jot  ailing  her.  She  was
whole  and  healthy.  When  she  was  thus  well,  he  took
a  dishke  for  her ;  scarcely  could  he  bear  to  see  her.

"  Oh !  Diarmaid,"  said  she,  "  thou  art  taking  a
dislike  for  me."

"  Oh  !  I  am,"  said  he.

Then  the  king  sent  word  throughout  the  town  that
she  was  healed,  and  music  was  raised,  and  lament  laid
down.  The  king  came  where  Diarmaid  was,  and  he
said  to  him,

"  Now,  thou  shalt  take  so  much  by  counting  of

*  This  bit  bears  some  resemblance  to  the  German  story  of
Godfather  Death,  in  that  the  messenger  of  the  other  world  in-
structs a  man  in  the  healing  art,  and  he  heals  a  king's  daughter.


42  O  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

silver  for  healing  her,  and  thou  shalt  get  herself  to
marry."

"  I  wiU  not  take  the  damsel ;  and  I  will  not  take
anything  but  a  ship  to  be  sent  with  me  to  Eirinn,
w^here  the  Fhinn  are  gathered."

A  sliip  went  with  him,  and  he  reached  the  Fhinn
and  the  brother  of  his  mother;  and  there  was  joy  be-
fore him  there,  and  pleasure  that  he  had  returned.


MacLean  quotes  a  Gaelic  proverb —

"  Cha  d  thug  gaol  luath  nach  d'  thug  fuath  cHs."
"  None  gave  love  quickly  but  gave  sudden  hate."

Which  might  be  the  pith  of  this  curious  story.  Unless
it  is  mythological  it  cannot  be  explained.  At  all
events,  here  is  one  of  the  heroes  of  Ossian  meeting
with  the  messenger  of  the  other  world  in  the  Eealm
under  the  Waves,  and  crossing  a  river  ]i"I  ì  the  pious
^neas,  when  he  went  below.  The  stor'  -i  manifestly
imperfect.  Something  should  have  been  clone  Avith  the
greyhound,  but  I  have  no  version  which  fills  up  the

gap-
There  is  an  Irish  story  which  seems  to  bear  upon
the  incident.  Tuirreann,  the  sister  of  Fionn's  mother,
is  married  to  lollan  Eachtach,  and  his  fairy  sweetheart
transforms  her  into  a  hoimd,  and  takes  her  to  Fergus.
She  tliere  gives  birth  to  a  couple  of  puppies,  "  Bran"  and
"  Sceoluing,"  Finn's  favourite  hounds,  which  were  conse-
quently his  cousins.  Diarmaid  is  one  of  the  names
mixed  uj)  Avith  this  strange  Irish  story,  and  this
favourite  hound  might  have  been  the  transformed  lady,
and  if  so,  Diarmaid's  relative — his  grand  aunt.  It  is
not  easy,  then,  to  accomphsh  the  feat  of  malcing  the


MGHEAN  RIGH  FO  THUINN.  42  I

Fionn  of  the  stories  a  real  comniander  of  mortal  Irish
militiamen.

The  incident  of  the  gi'eyhound  and  her  three  pups,
formed  part  of  a  story  wliich  was  told  to  me  at  Polchar
inn  on  the  3d  of  September  1860.  The  narrator  was
a  slender  middle-aged  woman,  with  black  hair  and
gray  eyes,  returning  from  durance  at  the  jail  at  Loch
Maddy;  her  offence  had  been  the  sale  of  imlawful
whisky.  I  heard  her  crooning  a  very  pretty  old  Gaelic
love  song  to  a  baby,  and  went  down  into  the  kitchen.
I  found  a  whole  tribe  of  black-haired  gii'ls,  of  all  ages,
barefooted,  and  barelegged,  clustered  about  the  peat
fii'e  with  their  bare  arms  all  twined  about  each  others'
necks  and  waists,  and  their  bright  eyes  and  teeth
glancing  in  the  red  light  over  each  other's  shoulders,
as  they  peeped  at  the  stranger.  An  old  man  was
smoking  on  a  bench,  and  the  singer  -with  black  elf-
locks  was  dancing  the  baby  on  her  knee.  We  soon  got
friends,  and  the  story  was  the  result.  It  was  a  step-
mother story,  and  the  wicked  muime  gave  away  the
pups  to  a  captain  of  a  ship,  and  accused  the  king's
daughter  of  killing  them,  and  broke  candlesticks  and
laid  the  blame  on  the  girl,  till  the  king  took  her  out
to  a  lonely  moor,  and  said —

"  "Whether  woiddst  thou  rather  that  I  slew  thee
outright,  or  that  I  should  cut  off  one  hand,  and  one
breast,  and  one  knee."

Here  the  old  dame  used  action  and  great  emphasis,
and  a  shiver  of  horror  ran  through  the  junior  part  of
the  audience,  who  were  hstening  intently.

The  deed  was  done,  and  the  girl  crawled  to  a  house
where  there  Hved  three  king's  sons  under  spells,  and
she  went  in  and  found  food.  They  came  home  and
put  off  their  cochal,  that  is  their  enchanted  form ;  and
one  of  them  said,  "  Here  is  a  drop  of  king's  blood  on  the


422  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

board  ; "  and  he  sought,  and  found  her,  and  dressed  her
Avounds,  and  washed  her,  and  "  dried  her  with  a  towel."

She  married  this  one,  had  tlu-ee  sons,  and  by  the
help  of  a  poor  woman,  and  through  the  agency  of  a
well,  recovered  her  lost  members.

She  went  home  at  last,  and  found  her  father  -with
a  wounded  leg,  which  would  never  be  well,  till  his
daughter  cured  it  with  her  two  hands.  She  laid  her
recovered  hands  on  the  knee,  the  penitent  father  cut  a
caper  quite  well,  and  the  muime  was  roasted.

This  joins  the  traditions  of  the  Feinne  to  Grimm's
Handless  Maiden.

The  idea  of  a  land  under  ground  is  also  very  com-
mon in  Gaehc  stories,  and  I  had  intended  to  give
several  illustrations  of  the  behef  I  had  also  selected
a  number  of  other  specimens  of  traditions  of  the
Feinne,  popular  history,  and  proverbs,  stories  of  water
horses,  water  bulls,  and  other  such  matters.  The  last
number  on  my  Gaelic  list  is  308,  on  my  English  list,
357,  making  about  665  stories,  but  the  wish  to  give
one  long  one  as  a  specimen,  and  to  preserve  as  much
Gaelic  as  possible,  has  exhausted  my  allotted  space.

In  the  oldest  Gaelic  manuscript  in  Edinburgh,  an
ancient  scribe  has  written — "  And  I  regret  that  there
is  not  left  of  my  ink  enough  to  fill  up  tins  line  ;  I  am
Fithil,  an  attendant  on  the  school."  So  I,  Hke  Fithil.
must  stop  scribbling,  though  not  for  want  of  matter,
and  write


Finis.


v;>^


«-  9\


>.  *:


f-H>a


'ÌT^m^


^:^.,

■  '^

31^  ;■
