Popular Tales of the West Highlands, Vol. II (J. F. Campbell, 1860; public domain)
===============================================================================
Vol. II of Campbell's West Highland tales. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/populartaleswes06campgoog).

Google


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.
We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I


POPULAR  TALES


OF


THE  WEST  HIGHLANDS.


PRINTED   BY   R.  &  R.   CLARK

VOB

EDMONSTON   ANp   DOUGLAS,  EDINBURGH.

LONDON     .     .  HAMILTON,  ADAMS,   &  CO.

CAMBRIDGE  .  MACMILLAN  à  CO.

DUBLIN      .     .  W.  ROBERTSON.

GLASGOW.     .  JAMES  MACLEH08E.


POPULAB  TALES


OP


THE  WEST  HIGHLANDS


OEALLY   COLLECTED


WSìiìg  s  S^ranslatton


By  J.   F.   CAMPBELL.


VOL.  II.


EDINBUKGH:
EDMOJS^STON  AND   DOUGLAS.

1860.


CONTENTS.


I


VI


CONTENTS.


NAME

■Told  sr

XVTTT.  THK  nHF.ST

Mrs.  MacGeachy

Gaelic   ,

•  •  •

John  Mackinnon,  stable-boy
Donald  Macintvre

Notes    ,...,

XIX.  THE  INHERITANCE

XX.  THE  THREE  WISE  MEN
Notes

Donald  MacPhie,  S.  Uist  ...
Kenneth  MacLennan

XXI.  A  PUZZLE

Gaelic

•  ••

John  Mackenzie,  fisherman

«  ••

•  ••

Alex.  McDonald,  tenant,  and
others.

•  ••

Do.
• ...

Do.

•  •  •

Do.

...

W.  Ross,  stalker

XXII.  THE   KNIGHT  OF  RID-
DLES.
Gaelic   ,,.,

Notes ,

XYTTL  THK  T^TTRGH

Gaelic   .••

XXIV.  THE  TULMAN

Gaelic

•XXV.  THE  ISLE  OF  PABAIDH
Gaelic

XXVL  SANNTRAIGH

Gaelic   »

XXVIL  CAILLIACH    MHÒR
CHLIBHRIGH.

XXVIIL  THE    SMITH  AND   THE
FAIRIES.
Twenty-nine  Fairy  Stories

Various  sources

XXIX.  THE  FINE

Alex.  M'Donald.  etc  ...     .

Gaelic

•  •  •

•  ••

•  ••

•  ••

An  old  carter.  Jnhn

Notes

XXX.  THE  TWO  SHEPHERDS
Gaelic

2.  Big  Black  John

3.  The  Red  Book

4.  How  the  Book  was  eot

Do.

CONTENTS.


VU


Date.


Apri]  1869

Septiseo.

Sept.  6)  1859

Do.

Sept.  1860.

July  1859

•••

April  1859


July  1859

Sept  1860.

Do

•  •  •

Do.

•  •  •

Do.


JiUy  1859

...
•••

Do.


1860
Do.


Plaob.
May,  Argyll

•  •  »

Broadford,  Skye

Benbecola

Do.

•  ••

Tomaid,  Ross

Inverary

.         •••

...

Barra

•  •  •

Do.

...

Do.

Do.

•..

Sutherland

Islay

Various  parts  of  Scotland
Barra

•  ••

•  *•

«••

•  •  •

•  ••

Ardkinglas

Do.


GOLLBCTOR.


Hector  MacLean   ...

•  •  •

V«    £•    \jm  •••••••••••••••

J.  F.  C

Do.

Hector  Urquliart   ...

•  ••

Do.


•  ••

•  ••


Hector  MacLean  and
J.  F.  C.


Do.

•  •  •

Do.

...

Do.


CD.


Bey.  T.  Pattison    ...
Different  Collectors
Hector  MacLean    ...


Do.

A    member    of   the

Ossianic  Society.

•  ••

Hector  Urquhart  ...
Do.


Page


1

8

13

16

20
24

25
26

27

82
85

87
88

89
40

•41
41

42

44

46


47
51

78

77
79

82
84

85
86
87


VlU


CONTENTS.


NAME.


6.  Headless  Tnmk

6.  The  Bauchan

7.  The  Herdsman

8.  Uistean  Mor   and  the  Earl  of

Antrim's  Daughter.

9.  Do.  and  the  Goat

10.  Same  Story

XXXI.  OSEAN  AFTEJR  THE  FEEN
Gaelic

2.  Same  Story  .».

3.  Do

4.  The  Last  of  the  Giants

6.  Do

XXXII.  BARRA  WIDOWS  SON...
Gaelic

XXXIII.  THE  QUEEN  WHO
SOUGHT  A  DRINK  FROM
A  CERTAIN  WELL.

Gaelic  :

Notes

XXXnr.  THE  ORIGIN  OF  LOCH

NESS.

XXXV.  CONALL

Gaelic

Notes

XXXVI.  MAGHACH  COLGAR

Gaelic

Notes » *

XXXVIL  BROLACHAN

10  Stories

XXXVIII.   MURACHADH   MAC
BRIAN.

Gaelic

Notes

XXXIX.  THE  THREE  WIDOWS.:.
Gaelic


Told  by


A  dancing  master  *....

Do.

Johanna  MacCrimmon

John  Campbell

Do.
Alex.  Ma>onald

••«

.<•

MacDonald,  tinker

Several  men

A  gamekeeper

Hngh  MacColl,  gardener  ...

Alexander  MacNeill,  tenant
...

Mrs.  MacTavish


»•.

Thomas  MacDonald^  game-
keeper.

Alexander  MacNeilli  tenant
and  fisherman.

•  ••

•  ••

Alexander  MacNeill  .t..^....

■  ••

•  ••

Widow  Calder *....

Various  sources

Donald  Shaw,  old  soldier  ...

Hector  Boyd,  fisherman

...


CONTENTS.


IX


Date.


1860


t>o.
August  1859
1859

i>o.
Do.

August  1859


Place


Eilberry


Do.

Bemeray

Strathgairloch  ,


Inyerasdale
Barra...


Do^


Inverary   ..
Soath  Uist
SatherlaDd
Ardkinglas


Ceann  Tangval,  Barra


Islay


COLLECTOB.


John  CampbeU,  Esq.

of  Eilberry.

Do.

Hector  MacLean    ...

Hector  Urquhart  ...

Do.
•.*

Hector  MacLean    *..


J.F.C

J.F.C

CD

H.  MacCoU


Dnnrobin,  Sutherland.


Barra


Do.


Sutherland

Sutherland,  Islay,  etc.

Islay


Barra


Hector  MacLean    ...

•••

Mrs.  MacTayish


...
...


v.   JS  t  V^....  ••***•.•...»•..


Hector  MacLean   »..


»..


Do.


•••


CD.    ...
C  D.  Ac.


Hector  MacLean  ...


Do.


Page


89

91
93
97

99
100

102
105
106
107
107
109

110
121

130


132
133

186


137

155

166

168
179
186

189
190

195

206
214

218
225


CONTENTS.


NAME.


2.  Bibin  Robin,  &c

8.  Brian  Briagach

4.  £obhan  lurrach

Notes

XL.  THE    SON  OF   THE    SCOT-
TISH YEOMAN.
Gaelic '

2.  The  Clever  Thii"*'.!!.'.'!!!!!!!!!!!!!

3.  The  Clever  Thief.

4.  The  Big  Weaver

5.

Notes

XLI.  THE  WIDOW  AND  HER
DAUGHTERS.

Gaelic

Notes

XLII.  THE  TALE  OF  THE  SOL-
DIER.
Gaelic

XLIII.       THE     SHARP      GREY
SHEEP.

Gaelic

Notes

XLIV.  THE  WIDOW'S  SON

XLV.  MAC-A-RUSGAICH

Gaelic

Notes  and  References

XLVL  MAC  LAIN  DIREACH    ...

XLVII.  FEARACHUR  LEIGH

Stories  about  Serpents,  etc.

XLVIIL  SCIRE  MO  CHEALAG

XLIX.  CAT  AND  MOUSE

L.  THREE  QUESTIONS

A  lot  of  Riddles


Told  by


Donald  MacLean

Margaret  Mackinnon

•  ••

•  ••

Donald  MacLean

•  ••

Donald  MacCraw,  drover  ...

(?)
Alexander  Macalister

•  •  •

Mrs.  MacGeachy,  Islay

•••
«..

John  Mac  Don  aid,  travelling
tinker.

•  •  •

John  Dewar

...

...

Donald  MacPhie  and  Donald
MacCraw.

John  Dewar

...
•>•

Angus  Campbell,  quarryman

various  sources

John  Campbell

Hector  MacLean...,

Brothers  MacCraw

Various  sources


CONTENTS.


xi


Date.


1859  and  I860


April  I860


Place.

Edinburgh

Bemeray

Argyllshire

•••

Edinburgh

North  Uist  '!!...

Sutherland

Islay

Benbecula...

•••

Islay

•  ••

•  ••

Inyerary

•••

Glendaruail

•  •t

•  ••

South  Uist

Clachaig

•  ••

•  ••

Rosneath

Sutherland

Gairloch

Islay „

North  Uist

...


COLLECTOB.


Rev.  Mr.M*Lauchlan
Hector  MacLean  ...
John  Dewar


Rev.  Mr.  M'Lanchlan


J.F.C

CD

Hector  MacLean


Hector  MacLean    ...


Hector  Urquhart   ...


J.  Dewar


J.  F.  C.


J.  Dewar,


...
Do.


CD.


Hector  Urquhart  ...
Hector  MacLean    ...


J.  F.  C

Hector  MacLean  ...


Page

229
233
235
236

289

250
257
260
261
261
262

265

270
273

276

281

286

289
291

293

304
318
326

328

361

373

389

891
394


xu


CONTENTS.


NAME.

LI.  GRUAGACH  BAN

Gaelic

Kotes  etc

Ul.  KNIGHT   OF   THE   RED
SHIELD.

Gaelic

2.  Notes,  Abstracts,  etc

For  intervening  Stories,  see  XVII
a,  bj  c,  d,  in  Volume  L

LVIL  THE  TAIL


Told  by


Alex.  MacNeill,  fisherman...


...


John  MacGilvray,  labourer,
Colonsay,  and  Alexander
Campbell,  farmer,  Islaj.


.•t
...


John  Campbell,  piper,  and
others  latelj.


CONTENTS.


ZIU


Date.


•••

•••


•••


Place,


Barra


laiaj  and  Colonsay


•••
••t


isaaj


COLLECTOB.


Do.


Do.


•••

•••


Page


410
425
484

436


455
467


V  •  J?  •  Xjf     •••••••**•••  •••


477


POPULAE  TALES


OF


THE  WEST  HIGHLANDS.


THE    CHEST.      .

From  Mrs  MacG^achy,  Islaj.

~DEEOEE  this  there  was  a  king,  and  he  wished
-■-^  to  see  his  son  with  a  wife  before  he  should  depart
Hifl  son  said  he  had  better  go  for  a  wife ;  and  he  gaye
him  half  a  hundred  pounds  to  get  her.  He  went  for-
ward the  length  of  a  day,  and  when  the  night  came  he
went  in  to  a  hostelry  to  stay  in  it  He  went  down  to  a
chamber  with  a  good  fire  in  front  of  him ;  and  when  he
had  gotten  meat^  the  man  of  the  house  went  down  to
talk  to  him.  He  told  the  man  of  the  house  the  jour-
ney on  which  he  was.  The  man  of  the  house  told
him  he  need  not  go  further ;  that  there  was  a  little
house  opposite  to  his  sleeping  chamber ;  that  the  man
of  the  house  had  three  fine  daughters ;  and  if  he  would
stand  in  the  window  of  his  chamber  in  the  morning,
tiiat  he  would  see  one  after  another  coming  to  dress
fierseK  That  they  were  all  like  each  other,  and  that
he  could  not  distinguish  one  from  the  other,  but  that

/7  VOL.  IL  B


2  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

the  eldest  had  a  mole.  That  many  were  going  to  ask
for  them,  but  that  none  got  them,  because  whoever
wished  for  one,  must  tell  whether  the  love  he  liked
best  was  younger  or  older  ;  and  if  he  made  her  out,
that  she  would  cost  him  a  hundred  pounds.  "  I  have
but  half  a  hundred,"  said  the  king's  son.  "  I  will
give  thee  another  half  hundred,"  said  the  man  of  the
house,  "  if  thou  wilt  pay  me  at  the  end  of  a  day  and  a
year ;  and  if  thou  dost  not  pay  me,  a  strip  of  sldn  shall
come  from  the  top  of  thy  head  to  the  sole  of  thy  foot."

On  the  morrow  when  he  rose  he  went  to  the  win-
dow ;  he  saw  the  girls  coming  to  dress  themselves  ;
and  after  meat  in  the  morning,  he  went  over  to  the
house  of  their  father.  When  he  went  in  he  was  taken
down  to  a  chamber,  and  the  man  of  the  house  went
down  to  talk  to  him.  He  told  the  journey  oa
which  he  was,  and  he  said  to  him,  "  They  tell
me  that  thou  hast  three  fine  daughters."  "  I  have  that
same,  but  I  am  afraid  that  it  is  not  thou  who  wilt  buy
them."  "  I  will  give  them  a  trial,  at  all  events,"  said
he.  The  three  were  sent  down  before  him,  and  it  was
said  to  him  *'  Whether  she,  the  one  he  liked  bestj  was
the  elder  or  younger."  He  thought  he  would  take  the
one  with  the  mole,  because  he  knew  she  was  the  eldest.
She  then  was  much  pleased  that  it  was  she  herseK  he
was  for.  He  asked  her  father  how  much  she  would
be,  and  her  father  said  she  would  be  a  hundred  pounds.
Ho  bought  her,  and  he  took  her  to  the  house  of  his
father,  and  they  married.  Shortly  after  they  married
his  father  departed.

A  day'  or  two  after  the  death  of  the  old  king,  the
young  king  was  out  hunting ;  he  saw  a  great  ship
coming  in  to  the  strand ;  he  went  down  to  ask  the
captain  what  he  had  on  board.  The  captain  said,
'*  That  he  had  a  cargo  of  silk."     "  Thou  must,"  said


THE  CHEST.  3

he,  "  give  me  a  gown  of  the  best  silk  thou  hast  for  my
wifa"  "  Indeed  !"  said  the  captain,  "  thou  must  have
an  exceedingly  good  wife  when  thou  must  have  a  gown
of  the  best  silk  I  have  on  board."  "  I  have  that,"
said  the  king,  "  a  wife  many  of  whose  equals  are  not
to  be  got"  "  Wilt  thou  lay  a  wager,"  said  the  cap-
tain, "that  with  all  her  goodness  I  will  not  get
leave  to  enter  thy  chamber Ì"  "I  will  lay  a  wager,
anything  thou  desiredstj  that  thou  wilt  not"  "  What
wager  wilt  thou  lay  ?"  said  the  captain.  "  I  will  put
the  heirship  in  pledge,"  said  the  king.  Said  the  cap-
tain, "  I  will  put  all  the  silk  in  ship  in  pledge  to  thee
that  I  wilL"  The  captain  came  on  shore  and  the  king
went  on  board.

The  captain  went  where  the  hen  wife  was,  to  try
if  she  could  make  any  way  to  get  in  with  to  king's
chamber  that  night.  The  henwife  thought  a  while,
and  she  said  "  That  she  did  not  think  that  there  was
any  way  that  would  succeed."  The  captain  rose  here,
and  he  was  going.  "  Stop  thou,"  said  she,  "  I  have
thought  on  a  way ;  her  maid  servant  and  I  are  well
with  each  other ;  I  will  say  to  her  that  I  have  got  word
from  a  sister  of  mine  that  I  will  scarce  find  her  alive  ;
I  will  say  to  the  king's  wife  that  I  must  go  to  see  my
sister  ;  that  I  have  a  big  kist,  of  good  worth,  and  I
should  like  if  she  would  oblige  me  and  let  it  into  her
own  sleeping  chamber  till  I  come  back."  She  went
where  the  queen  was,  she  asked  her  this,  and  she  got
leave.  Here  the  captain  was  put  into  the  kist^  and
the  king's  gUlies  were  gathered,  and  the  kist  put  in
the  chamber.  The  kin^s  wife  was  within  by  herself
wearying,  for  the  king  was  not  coming  home.  At
last  she  went  to  bed ;  when  she  was  going  to  bed
she  put  a  gold  ring  that  was  on  her  finger,  and  a  gold
chain  that  was  about  her  neck,  on  a  board  that  was  op-


4  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

posite  to  the  bed.  When  the  man  who  was  in  the  kist
thought  that  she  had  time  to  be  asleep,  he  rose  and  he
took  with  him  the  chain  and  the  ring,  and  he  went
into  the  kist  again.  At  the  mouth  of  day  came  the
hen  wife  to  ask  for  the  kist ;  the  gillies  were  gathered,
and  the  kist  was  taken  down.  When  every  one  went
from  the  house,  as  soon  as  he  could,  the  captain  rose
and  he  went  down  to  the  ship ;  he  shook  the  chain
and  the  ring  at  the  king.  Then  the  king  thought  that
the  captain  had  been  with  his  wife,  or  that  he  could
not  have  the  chain  and  ring.  He  said  to  the  captain,
*'  Would  he  put  him  over  to  the  other  side  of  the
loch  r  The  captain  said,  "  That  he  would."  When
the  captain  got  him  over  he  returned  himself,  and  he
went  to  dwell  in  the  king's  house.  Then  the  king's
wife  did  not  know  what  to  do  with  herself  for  that
the  king  had  not  come  home.  She  went  that  day  and
she  dressed  herself  in  man's  clothes,  and  she  went
down  to  the  strand ;  she  met  with  a  boat^  and  she
said  to  them,  "  Would  they  put  her  over  on  the  other
side  Ì"  They  put  her  over,  and  she  went  on  forward
till  she  reached  the  house  of  a  gentleman ;  she  struck
in  the  door,  and  the  maid  servant  came  down.  She
said  to  her,  "  Did  she  know  if  her  master  wanted  a
stable  gillie?"  The  maid  servant  said,  "That  she  did
not  know,  but  that  she  would  ask."  The  maid  servant
went  and  she  asked  her  master  if  he  wanted  a  stable
gillie.  He  said,  "  He  did ;"  and  he  asked  that  he
should  come  in  ;  he  engaged  her,  and  she  stayed  work-
ing about  the  stable.  There  was  a  herd  of  wild  beasts
coming  every  night,  and  going  into  an  empty  bam
that  the  gentleman  had ;  a  wild  man  after  them,  and
his  face  covered  with  beard.  She  kept  asking  her  mas-
ter to  send  a  man  with  her,  and  that  they  would  catch
him.     Her  master  said,   "  That  he  would  not ;  that


THE  CHEST.  5

they  had  no  business  with  them ;  and  that  he  had  not
done  any  harm  to  them."  She  went  out  one  night  by
herself  and  she  stole  with  her  the  key  of  the  bam
door  ;  she  lay  hid  in  a  hole  till  the  wild  man  and  the
beasts  went  in ;  she  took  with  her  the  gUHes,  and  they
caught  the  wild  man.  They  brought  him  in  and  they
took  off  his  beard  ;  when  the  beard  came  off  him  she
knew  him,  but  she  took  no  notice ;  and  he  did  not
know  her.  On  the  morrow  he  was  about  to  go,  but
she  spoke  to  her  master  to  keep  hiTn  ;  that  the  work
was  too  heavy  on  her,  and  that  she  needed  help.  Her
master  ordered  her  to  keep  him.  She  kept  him  with
her,  and  he  himself  and  she  were  cleaning  the  stable.

A  short  time  after  this  she  spoke  to  her  master  for
leave  to  go  home  on  a  trip  to  see  her  Mends.  Her
master  gave  her  leave.  She  said  she  would  like  well
to  have  her  gillie  with  her,  and  the  two  best  horses
that  were  in  the  stable.

When  they  went^  she  was  questioning  him  by  the
way  what  had  made  him  go  with  these  beasts ;  or
what  he  was  at  before  the  day.  He  would  not  tell
her  anything.  They  went  on  forward  till  they  came
to  the  hostelry  where  he  had  got  the  half  hundred
pounds.  When  she  set  her  face  down  to  the  house,
he  refused  to  go  into  it  She  said  to  him,  '^  Did  he
do  anything  wrong,  as  he  was  refasing  to  go  into  it."
He  said,  "  That  he  had  got  half  a  hundred  pounds
from  the  man  of  the  house."  She  said  to  him,  "  Had
he  paid  them  ;"  and  he  said^  "  That  he  had  not  paid,
and  that  a  strip  of  skin  was  to  come  from  the  top  of
his  head  to  the  sole  of  his  foot,  if  it  was  not  paid  at
the  end  of  a  day  and  a  year."  She  said,  "  It  would
be  well  deserved  ;  but  that  she  was  going  to  stay  the
night  in  the  hostelry,  and  that  she  must  go  down."
She  asked  him  to  put  the  horses  into  the  stable,  and


■»    IW     ■       "<"'  '■"'


6  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

they  went  in  to  the  hostelry.  He  was  standing  in  the
door  of  the  stahle,  and  his  head  was  bent,  tìie  man
of  the  house  came  out,  and  he  saw  him.  "  My  big
gillie,  I  haye  thee  here,"  said  the  man  of  the  house ;
"  art  thou  going  to  pay  me  to-day  1"  "  I  am  not,"
said  he.  Then  he  went  in,  and  they  were  going  to
begin  to  cut  the  strip  of  skin.  She  heard  the  noise,
and  she  asked  what  they  were  going  to  do  to  her
gillie.  They  said,  "  They  were  going  to  cut  a  strip  of
skin  off  him  from  his  crown  to  his  sole."  "  K  that
was  to  be  done,"  said  she,  "  he  was  not  to  lose  a
drop  of  blood  ;  send  up  here  a  web  of  linen,  let  him
stand  on  it,  and  if  a  drop  of  blood  comes  out  of  him,
another  strip  of  skin  shall  come  off  thee."  Here
there  was  nothing  for  it  but  to  let  him  go  \  they
could  not  make  anything  of  it  Early  on  the  mor-
row she  took  him  over  with  her  to  the  house  of  her
father.  If  he  was  against  going  to  the  hostelry  the
night  before,  he  was  seven  times  as  much  when  going
to  her  father's  house.  "  Didst  thou  do  harm  here  too,
as  thou  art  against  going  in  T  "  I  got  a  wife  here
such  a  time  since."  "  What  came  of  her  ?"  "  I  don't
know."  "  J^o  wonder  whatever  happens  to  thee,  thou
hast  only  to  put  up  with  all  that  comes  thy  way."
When  her  father  saw  him,  he  said,  "  I  have  thee  here !
Where  is  thy  wife  1"  "  I  don't  know  where  she  is."
"  What  didst  thou  to  her  1"  said  her  father.  He  could
not  tell  what  he  had  done  to  her.  ]S"ow  there  was
nothing  to  be  done  but  to  hang  him  to  a  tree.  There
was  to  be  a  great  day  about  the  hanging,  and  a  great
many  gentlemen  were  to  come  to  see  it  She  asked
her  father  what  they  were  going  to  do  to  her  gillie.
Her  father  said,  "  liat  they  were  going  to  hang  hÌTn  ;
he  bought  a  wife  from  me,  and  he  does  not  know  what
has  happened  to  her."   She  went  out  to  see  the  gentles


THE  CHEST.  7

coming  in  to  the  town ;  she  asked  of  the  one  of  the
finest  horse,  what  was  his  worth.  "  Five  score,"  said
ha  "Though  he  were  five  hundreds,  he's  mine,"  said
she.  She  told  her  servant  to  put  a  shot  in  the  horse.
She  asked  her  father  if  he  had  paid  for  his  wife.  He
said  he  had  paid  "  If  he  paid,"  said  she,  "  thou  hast
no  business  with  him,  he  might  do  what  he  liked  with
her;  I  bought  the  finest  horse  that  came  into  the
town  to-day ;  I  made  my  gillie  put  a  shot  in  him,
and  who  dares  to  say  that  it  is  ilL"  Here  there  was
nothing  to  be  done  but  to  let  him  loose.  They  qould
do  nothing  to  him  because  he  had  bought  her.

Here  she  went  in  to  her  father's  house,  and  she
told  one  of  her  sisters  to  give  her  a  gown.  "  What
art  thou  going  to  do  with  a  gown  V*  said  she.  "  Never
mind,  if  I  spoil  it  I'll  pay  for  it"  When  she  put  on
the  gown  her  father  and  sisters  knew  her.  Her  father
and  sisters  told  him  that  it  was  she  was  with  him,
and  he  did  not  believe  them.  She  put  off  the  woman's
clothes  and  put  on  the  man's  clothes  again.  They
went,  herself  and  he  ;  they  went  on  forward  till  they
were  near  his  own  old  house.  "  ]S"ow,"  said  she,  "  we
will  stay  here  to-night ;  do  thou  sit  at  the  top  of  the
stair,  and  thou  shalt  set  down  all  the  talk  that  I  and  the
man  of  the  house  will  have."  When  they  went  in  and
sat,  she  and  the  man  of  the  house  began  to  talk  to-
gether. "  I  thought,"  said  she  to  the  captain,  "  that  a
king  was  dwelling  here ;  how  didst  thou  get  it  Ì"  "  He
was  that  who  was  here  before  ;  but  I  am  thinking,  as
thou  art  a  stranger,  that  I  may  tell  thee  how  I  got  it"
"  Thou  mayest,"  said  she,  "  I  wiU  not  make  a  tale  of
thee,  the  matter  does  not  touch  me."  He  told  her
every  turn,  how  the  hen  wife  had  put  him  in  the  kist,
and  the  rest  of  the  matter,  to  the  going  of  the  king  on
the  morrow.


8  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Very  early  on  the  morrow  the  man  of  the  house
was  going  to  court ;  he  said  to  her  "  That  if  she  was
not  in  a  hurry  to  go  away,  that  she  might  go  with  him
to  listen  to  the  court."  She  said  "she  would  be
willing,  and  she  would  like  well  that  her  gillie  should
be  with  her."  She  went  in  the  coach  with  the  cap-
tain, and  her  giUie  rode  after  her.  When  the  court
was  over  she  said,  "  That  she  had  got  a  word  or  two  to-
say,  if  it  were  their  pleasure  to  let  her  speak."  They  said
to  her,  "  To  let  them  hear  what  she  had  to  say."  She
said  to  her  gillie,  "  Eise  up  and  give  them  the  paper
thou  wrotest  last  night"  When  they  read  the  paper,
she  said,  "  What  should  be  done  to  that  man  V*
"  Hang  him,  if  he  were  here,"  said  they.

"  There  you  have  him,"  said  she,  "  do  with  him
what  you  wUL"  Herself  and  the  king  got  back  to
their  own  house,  and  they  were  as  they  were  before.


URSGEUL.

Bha  righ  ann  roimhe  so,  's  bha  toil  aige  bean  fhaidnn  aig  a  mhac
ma'n  sihbhladh  e.  Thuirt  e  r'a  mhac  gam  b'  fhearra  dha  folbh  airson
mnatha,  's  thug  e  dha  leith  chiad  punnd  airson  a  faotainn.  Ghoisich
e  air  aghaidh  fad  latha ;  's  nur  a  thainig  an  oidhche  chaidh  e  stigh
do  thigh  òsd*  airson  fantainn  ann.  Chaidh  e  sios  do  sheombar,  *8
gealbhan  math  air  a  bheulthaobh ;  's  nnr  a  fhuair  e  *bhiadh  chaidh
fear  an  tighe  sios  a  chomhnadal  ris.  Dh'  innia  e  do'  dh'  fbear  an  tighe
an  turas  air  an  robh  e.  Thuirt  fear  an  tighe  ris  nach  ruigeadh  e  leas
dol  na  b'  fhaide ;  gu'  robh  tigh  beag  ma  choinneamh  an  t-seombair
chadail  aige ;  gu'  robh  tri  nigheanan  gasd'  aig  fear  an  tighe ;  agus
na  'n  seasadh  e  'n  uinneag  a  sheombair  anns  a'  mhadainn,  gu'  faioeadh
e  te  an  d^igh  te  'tighinn  a  'h-^ideadh  f^in.  Gu'  robh  iad  air  fad  cos-
mhuil  r'a'  ch^ile,  's  nach  aithneachadh  e  eadar  te  seach  te ;  ach  an  te
'bu  shine,  gu'  robh  ball  dòrain  urra.  Gurobh  mòran  a'  dol  g*an  iarr-
aidh,  ach  nach  robh  gin  'gam  faotainn ;  a  thaobh  gu'  feimiadh  neacfa
a  bhiodh  air  son  h-aon  diu  innseadh  co  dhiu  a  bl  an  te  d'an  robh  tait-


UBSQEUL.  9

neachd  aige  b'  òige  na'  bu  shine;  's  na'n  dèanadh  e  mach  i  gnn  cosd-
adh  i  dha  ciad  punnd.  <*  Gba  'n  *eil  agams'  ach  leith  chiad/'  ursa
mac  an  ligh.  **  Bheir  mise  dhuit  leith  chiad  eile,"  nrsa  fear  an  tighe,
"ma  phàigheaa  thu  mi  'n  oeann  la  is  bliadhna ;  's  mar  am  pàigh  thig
iaU  o  mhnllach  do  chinn  gu  bonn  do  choise."  Nur  a  dh'  èirìdh  e  'u
U  'r  na  mhàireach  cbaidh  e  gns  an  uinneig.  Chnnnaic  e  na  nigbe-
anan  a*  tighinn  a'n  eideadh  fein,  's  an  d^igh  a  bbidh  'sa  mhadainn
chaidh  e  nunii  gu  tigh  an  athar.  Nur  a  cbaidh  e  stigh  chaidh  a
thoirt  8Ì08  do  sheombar,  's  chaidh  fear  an  tighe  sios  a  cbomhnadal  ris.
Dh'  innis  e  'n  turns  air  an  robh  e,  's  thuirt  e  ris,  **  Tha  iad  ag  ràdh
rìnm  gu'  bheil  tri  nigheanan  brèagh  agad."  *'  Tha  sin  fèin  agam ;
ach  tha  eagal  orm  nach  tosa  'cheannaicbeas  iad."  **  Bheir  mi  feucb-
ainn  dhaibh,"  urs'  esan.  Chaidh  an  tri  chuir  sios  ma  'choinneamh,  *b
a  ràdh  na,  cò^ca  a  b'i  'n  te  d*an  gabhadh  e  taitneachd  an  te  bu  shine
na  'n  te  b'  òige.  Smaoinich  e  gu*n  gabhadh  e  t^  a'  bhall  dòrain ;  o'n
a  bha  fhios  aige  gur  h-i  'bu  shine.  Ghabh  ise  an  sin  toil-inntinn
mhòr  gnr  h>i  fein  a  bha  e  air  a  shon.  Dh*  fheòraich  e  d'a  b-athair  oo
mhiod  a  bhitheadh  i,  's  thuirt  a  h-athair  gum  biodh  i  ciad  punnd.
Cheannaich  e  i,  's  thug  e  leis  i  gu  tigh  athar,  's  phòs  iad.  6<Hrid  an
dèigh  dhaibh  pbsadh  shiubbail  athair.

Latha  na  dha  an  deigh  has  an  t-sean  rìgh,  bha  'n  righ  òg  a  roach
a'  Malgaireachd.  Chnnnaic  e  long  mhòr  a*  tighinn  a  stigh  thun  a'
chladaich.  Chaidh  e  ^ps  a  dh'  fheòraìch  de  'n  chaibhtinn  de  'bha
aige  air  bbrd.  Thuirt  an  caibhtinn  gu'  robh  luchd  sioda.  **  Feum-
«dh  ta/'.urs'  esan,  *'guthann  de  'n  t-sioda  's  fheàrr  a  th'  agad  a
thoirt  dhòmhsa  airson  mo  mhnatha."  "  Seadh,"  urs'  an  caibhtinn,
*'feamaidh  gu'  bheil  bean  fhuathasach  mhath  agadsa,  nur  a  dh'
fhenmaa  i  guthann  de'n  t-sioda  is  fhekrr  a  th'  agamsa  air  bòrd."
**  Tha  sin  agam,"  urs'  an  rìgh,  **  bean  nach  'eil  mòran  d'a  leithidean,
r*a  fhaortainn."  "  An  cuir  thu  gealV  urs'  an  caibhtinn,  '*  a'  h-uile
mathas  a  th'  urra,  nach  fhaigh  mise  dol  a  laidhe  leatha  nochd  ? "
**  Cuiridh  mi  geall,  ni  'sam  bith  a  shanntaicheas  thu,  nach  fhaigh."
*'  D4  'n  geall  a  chuireas  tu  ? "  urs'  an  caibhtinn.  **  Cuiridh  mi  'n
oi^ireachd  an  geall,"  urs'  an  ligh.  Urs'  an  caibhtinn,  **  Cuindh  mise
na  bheil  de  shioda  'san  long  an  geall  riutsa  gu'm  faigh."  Thàinig
an  caibhtinn  air  tir,  *s  chaidh  an  righ  air  bòrd.  Chaidh  an  caibhtinn
far  an  robh  cailleach  nan  cearc  feuch  an  dèanadh  i  dòigh  'sam  bith
air  'fhaotainn  a  stigh  le  bean  an  ligh  an  oidhche  sin.  Smaointich
4»aillftai»h  nan  cearc  tacan,  's  thuirt  i  nach  robh  dhil  aice  gu'  robh
dòìgh  'sam  bith  a  dhèanadh  feum.  Dh'  èiridh  an  caibhtinn  an  sin,  's
bha  e  '&lbh.  *'  Stad  ort,"  urs'  ise, «  smaointich  mi  air  dòigb."  Tha
'n  searbhannt  aice  's  mi  fein  gu  math  mbr.    Their  mi  ritbe  gu'n  d'


10  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

fhaair  mi  fios  o  pfainthar  dhomh  nach  beirinn  beò  urra.  Their  mi
ri  bean  an  ligh  gu'  feam  mi  folbb  a  dh'  fbaidnn  mo  pheathar;  ga
'bheil  dsde  mbòr  agam  gn  math  Inachar,  a  bu  mhath  leam,  na'n
laghasachadh  i  dhomh,  a  leigeil  d'a  seombar  cadail  fèin  gas  an  till
mi."  Chaidh  i  far  an  robh  'bhannghinn;  dh*  f  heòraich  i  so  dhi,
's  fhnair  i  cead.  Chaidh  an  so  an  caibhtinn  achnr  a  stigh  do'n  chisde,
's  gillean  an  righ  a  chroinneachadh,  's  a'  chisde'  dmr  do  *n  t-seombar.
Bha  bean  an  rìgh  a  stigh  leatha  fèin,  's  fodal  urra  nach  robh  an  ligh
a'  tighinn  dachaidh.  Ma  dheireadh  chaidh  i  'laidhe.  Nor  a  bha  i
'dol  a  laidhe  chnir  i  fàìnne  òir  a  bha  air  a  meur,  agns  slabhraidh  òir
a  bha  ma  'maineal  air  bòrd  a  bha  ma  choinneamh  na  leapa.  Nxu  a
smaointich  am  fear  a  bha  'sa'  chisde  ga*  robh  iiine  aice  *blù  'na  cadal,
dh*  èiridh  e,  s  thag  e  leis  an  t-slabhraidh  's  am  fàinne,  's  chaidh  e
stigh  do'n  chisde  a  rithisd.  Am  beal  an  lath  a  thàinig  cailleach  nan
cearc  a  dh'  iarraidh  a  cisde.  Chaidh  na  gillean  a  chroinneachadh
*s  a'  chisde  'thoirt  a  naas.  Nor  dh*  fholbh  a*  h-uile  daine  o'n  tigh>
cho  loath  sa'  ba  lear  dha,  dh*  èirìdh  an  caibhtimi,  's  dh'  fholbh  e  sios
than  na  lainge.  Chrath  e'n  t-slabhraidh  *8  am  flunne  ris  an  ligh.
Smaointich  an  ligh  an  sin  gan  d'thoair  an  caibhtinn  a  stigh  le  a
bhean,  no  nach  biodh  an  t-slabhraidh  *8  am  fìiinne  aige.  Thoirt  e  ria
a'  chaibhtinn  an  coireadh  e  nonn  e  gas  an  taobh  eile  de'n  loch.
Thoirt  an  caibhtinn  gon  coireadh.  Nor  a  f  hoair  an  caibhtinn
thairis  e,  thill  ef^in  's  chaidh  e  'chòmhnoidh  do  thigh  an  ligh.

Bha  bean  an  rìgh  an  sin  's  gon  f  hios  aice  d^  a  dhèanadh  i  rithe
f^in,  o'n  nach  d'  thàinig  an  righ  dhachaidh.  Dh'  fholbh  i  'n  latha
sin,  's  dh'  èid  i  1  f^in  ann  an  aodach  fir,  's  chaidh  i  sios  thon  a'  chlad-
aich.  Thacluùr  bata  orra,  's  thoirt  i  rio  an  coireadh  iad  ise  a  nann
air  an  taobh  eile.  Choir  iad  a  nonn  i,  's  ghabh  i  air  a  h-aghaidh  goa
an  d*  ràinig  i  tigh  doine  oasaiL  Bhoail  i  'san  donis,  's  thkinig  aa
searbbannt*  a  noas.  Thoirt  i  rithe  an  robh  f  hios  aice  an  robh  gille
stiiboUl  a  dhith  air  a  maighstir.  Thoirt  an  searbhannta  nach  robh
fbios  aice,  ach  go  'foighneachdadh  i.  Chaidh  an  searbhanta  *s  dh'
fheòraich  i  d'a  maighstir,  an  robh  gille  stàboill  a  dhith  air.  Thoirt  e
gon  robh,  agos  dh'  iarr  e  e  'thighinn  a  stigh.  Dh*  f  hasdaidh  e  i,  'a
dh'  fhan  i  *g  obair  ma'n  stàboll.  Bha  'n  sin  trend  de  bheathaichean
fiadhaich  a'  tìghinn  a'  h-oile  h-oidhche,  's  a'  dol  a  stigh  do  shabhal
fas  a  bha  aig  an  doine  oasal,  's  doine  fiadhaich  as  an  d^gh,  *s  aod-
ann  còmhdaichte  le  feosaig.  Bha  ise  ag  iarraidh  air  a  maighstir
na'n  coireadh  iad  doine  leatha,  gam  beireadh  iad  air.  Thoirt  a
maighstir  nach  coireadh,  nach  robh  gnothoch  aca  ris,  's  nach  d*
rinn  e  coire  'sam  bith  orra.  Dh'  fholbh  ise  mach  oidhche  leatha
f^in,  's  ghoid  i  leatha  iachair  dorois  an  t-sabhaiL    Laidh  i  'm  falach


URSGEUL,  I  I

ann  an  toll  gas  an  deachaidh  an  duine  fiadhaich  agns  ua  beathaichean
a  stigh.  Thug  i  leatba  na  gillean,  's  rng  iad  air  an  duine  fhiadh-
aich.  Thng  iad  a  stigh  e,  's  thng  iad  dheth  an  f  heusag.  Nnr  a
ihàinig  an  f  heusag  dheth  dh'  aithnich  ise  e,  ach  cha  do  leig  i  md  sam
bith  urra,  's  cha  d'  aithnich  esan  ise.  An  la  'r  na  mhaireach  bha  e'
dol  a  dh'  f  holbb,  ach  bhruidhinn  ise  r'a  maighstir  airson  a  ghleidh-
eadh,  gu'n  robh  an  obair  tnillidh  is  trom  urra,  's  gu  'feunadh  1
enideachadh.  Dh'  òrduich  a  maighstir  dhi  'ghleidheadh.  Ghl^idh  i
leath  'e,  's  bha  e  fein  agus  ise  a'  glanadh  an  stàbuill.

Beagan  bine  W  dhèigh  so  bhruidhinn  i  r'a  maighstir,  airson  cead
a  dhol  dhachaidh  air  sgiiob  a  dh'  f  haicinn  a  càirdean.  Thug  a
maighstir  cead  dhi.  Thuirt  i  gu*m  bu  mhath  leatha  a  gille,  's  an  da
each  a  V  f  heàrr  a  bh'  ann  's  an  stàbull  a  bhi  leatha.  Nur  a  dh'
f  holbh  iad  bha  i  'ga  cheasnachadh  air  an  rathad ;  àè  thug  dha  bhi
folbh  leis  na  beathaichean  ud,  na  de  bha  e  ris  an  toiseach  a  latha.
Cha  'n  innseadh  e  ni  sam  bith  dhi.  Ghabh  iad  air  an  aghaidh  gus
an  d*  thàinig  iad  gus  an  tigh  òsda  far  an  d'  thuair  esan  an  leith  cMad
punnd.  Nur  a  thug  ise  a  h-aghaidh  sios  gus  an  tigh,  dhiult  esan
a  dhol  ann.  Thuirt  i  ris  an  d'  rinn  e  ni  sam  bith  cekrr,  nur  a  bha  e
dihltainn  dol  ann.  Thuirt  e  gun  d'  thuair  e  leith  chiad  punnd  o  fhear
an  tighe.  Thuirt  i  ris  an  do  phaigh  e  iad,  's  thuirt  e  nach  do  phàigh,
's  gu'n  robh  iall  ri  tighinn  o  mhullach  a  chinn  gu  bonn  a  choise,  mar
am  biodh  e  pMghte  an  ceann  la  is  bliadhna.  Thuirt  i  gum  bu  mhath
an  aindh ;  ach  gu'  robh  ise  a'  dol  a  dh'  fhant^n  's  an  tigh  òsda  'san
oidhche,  's  gu'  feumadh  e  dol  sios.  Dh'  iarr  i  air  na  h-eich  a  chur  a
stigh  'san  stàbull,  's  chaldh  end  a  stigh  do  'n  tigh  òsda.  Bha  esan  'na
sheasamh  ann  an  dorus  an  stàbuill,  's  a  cheann  crom.  Thainig  fear
an  tighe  mach  's  chunnaic  e  e.  "  Mo  ghille  mòr  tha  thu  an  so
agam."  ursa  fear  an  tighe.  "Am  bheil  thu'  dol  am'  phàigheadh  an
diugh?  "  **  Cha  'n  'eil/'  urs'  esan.  Chaidh  e  'sin  a  stigh,  's  bha  iad
a'  dol  a  thbiseachd  air  an  iall  a  ghekrradh.  Chual  ise  an  fhuaim,
's  dh'  fbeòraich  1  gu  d^  'l^ha  iad  a'  dol  a  dhèanadh  air  a  gille.  Thuirt
iad  gun  robh  iad  a'  dol  a  ghearradh  iall  deth  o  mhullach  gu  bonn.
"  Ma  bha  sin  r'a  dhèanadh,"  urs'  ise,  **  cha  robh  e  ri  deur  fola  a  chaU."
**  Cuir  an  nuas  an  so  lion  aodoch,  a's  seasadh  e  air,  's  ma  thig  deur  fola
as  thig  iall  eile  dhiotsa."  Cha  robh  an  so  ach  a  leigeil  ma  sgaoil.
Cha  b'  urrainn  iad  stugh  a  dhèanadh  dheth.  Mochthradh  an  la'r
na  mhMreach  thug  i  leatha  nunn  e  gu  tigh  a  h-athar.  Ma  bha  e  'n
agh«dh  dol  a'n  tigh  bsda  an  oidhche  roimhid,  bha  e  seachd  uairean
na  bu  mhotha  'n  aghaidh  dol  do  thigh  a  h-athar.  **  An  do  rinn  thu
cron  an  so  cuideachd  nur  a  tha  thu  'n  aghaidh  dol  ann  ?  "  "  Fhuair
mi.bean  an  so  o  cheann  a  leithid  do  dh'  tiine."  "  De  'thàinig  urra  ?  "


I  2  WEST  HIGHLAto  TALES.

«  Cha  'n  *eil  fhioa'am."  «*  Cha  'n  iongantach  d^  dh'  ^ireas  duit !  cha
'n  'eil  agad  ach  gabbail  ris  na  thig  a'd'  rathad !"  Nor  a  chuniiaic  a
h-atbair  e  tboirt  e,  *'  Tha  tha  'so  agam ;  cèdt'  a*  bheii  do  bbean?"
"  Cha  'n  'eU  fhiosam  càit'  a'  bheil  i."  «  D^  a  rinn  tbu  rithe?"
urs'  a  b-athabr.  Cha  b*  nrrainn  e  innseadh  àè  a  rinn  e  rithe.
Cha  robh  'nis  ach  a  cbrochadb  ri  craoibh.  Bha  latha  mòr  ri  'bhi
timchioU  a  cbrochaidh,  's  bha  mòran  de  dhaoine  uaisle  ri  tighinn
a  'fhaicinn.  Dh*  fheòraich  ise  d'a  b-athair  àè  'bha  iad  a  dol  a
dhèanadh  r'a  gille.  Tbairt  a  b-athab*  gu'n  robh  iad  a'  dol  da
chrocbadh.  "  Carson,"  ure'  ise,  *'a  tha  e  r*a  cbrochadb."  "  Cheann-
aich  'e  bean  uamsa,  's  cha  'n  *eil  fbios  aige  64  'thàinig  rithe.  Dh'
fholbh  i  'mach  a  dh'  fhaicinn  nan  uaislean  a*  tighinn  a  stigh  do'n
bhaile.  Dh^  fheòraich  i  de  'n  fbear  a  bu  cbiataich'  each  de  'b'  fbiach
dba.  **  Coig  fichead,"  urs'  esan.  *'  Gled  a  bhiodb  e  coig  ciad  's
leamsa  e,"  urs*  ise.  Thuirt  i  r'a  gille  urchair  a  char  'san  each.  Dh'
fheòraich  i  d'a  h-athair  an  do  phUgh  e  'bhean.  Thuirt  e  gun  do
phàigb.  "  Ma  phaigh, "  urs'  ise,  **  cha  'n  'eil  gnothach  agadsa  ris ;
dh'fhaodadh  e'roigbinn  a  dhèanadh  rithe.  Cheannaich  mise  an
t-each  a  bu  chiataiche  a  thàinig  a  stigh  do  'n  bhaile  an  diugh.  Thug
mi  air  mo  gbille  urchair  a  chur  ann,  's  oo  aig  a'  bbeil  a  chndhe  a  ràdh
gur  olc.  Cha  'n  robh  'so  ach  a  leigeil  ma  sgaoil.  Cha  b'  urrainn  iad
stugh  a  dhèanadh  air ;  o'n  a  cheannaich  e  i.

Chaidh  i  an  sin  a  stigh  do  thigh  a  h-athar,  's  thuirt  i  ri  h-aon
d'a  peathraichean  guthann  a  thoirt  dhL  "  De  'tha  thusa  'dol  a
dbèanadh  do  ghuthann?"  urs'  ise.  "Nach  coma  leatsa.  Ma
ni  mi  miUeadh  air  pàighidh  mi  e.  Nur  a  chuir  i  urra  an  guthann  dh'
aithnich  a  h-athair  's  a  peathraichean  i.  Dh'  innls  a  b-athair  *s  a
peathraichean  dba  gur  h-i  'bha  leis,  's  cha  robh  e  gan  creidsinn.
Chuir  i  dhi  an  t-aodach  mnatha,  's  chuir  i  urra  an  t-aodach  fir  a
rithisd.  Dh'  fholbh  i  f^in  is  esan,  's  ghabh  iad  air  an  aghaidh  gus  an
robh  iad  dliith  air  a  shean  tigh  fèin.  *'  Nia"  urs'  ise^  ^'feumaidh  sin
fuireacbd  an  so  an  nochd.  Suldbidh  tusa  air  bràigh  na  staighreach,
agus  cuirridh  tu  sios  gach  comhnadal  a  bhios  agams'  agus  aig  fear
an  tighe.  Nur  a  chaidh  iad  a  stigh  's  a  shuidh  iad,  thòisich  i  fein
agus  fear  an  tighe  air  comhradh.  **  Sbaoil  mi,"  urs'  i  ris  a'  chaibbtinn,
'*  gum  b'  e  ligh  a  bha  'chòmhnuidh  an  so.  Demur  'fhuair  thusa  e  ?'*
"  'Se  sin  a  bha  roimhid  an  so ;  ach  tha  mi  smaointeacbadh,  o'n  a  tha
thusa  a'd'  choigreach,  gum  faod  mi  innseadh  dhuit  demur  a  fhuair  mi
e."  "  Faodaidh,"  urs'  ise,  "  cha  dean  mise  sgeul  ort ;  cha  bhoin  an
gnothach  dhomh."  Dh'  innis  e  dhi  'h-uile  car  mar  a  chuir  cailleach
nancearc  a  stigh  'sa  bhisd'  e,  's  a'  chuid  eile  de'n  cbbis ;  's  gun  d'
fholbh  an  rìgh  an  la  'r  na  mhàireach.


THE  CHEST.  I  3

Mochthrath  an  la  'r  na  mhkireach  bha  fear  an  tighe  'dol  gn  ctiirt.
Thnirt  e  rithese,  mar  an  robh  deifir  nrra  a  dh'  fholbh,  gum  faodadh  i
dol  leisean  a  dh'  ^isdeachd  na  cUirt.  Thuirt  i  gum  biodh  i  toileacb,  's
gum  bn  mhath  leatha  a  gille  'bhi  leatha.  Chaidh  ise  anns  a'  charbad
Ids  a  chaibhtinn,  's  mharcaich  a  gille  'na  d^igh.  Nor  a  bha  'chhirt
seachad,  thnirt  i  gnm  robh  facal  na  dha  aicese  r'a  ràdh,  n'am  b'  e'n
toil  leigeil  leatha  bmidhinn.  Thnirt  iad  rithe  leigeil  a  chluinntinn
daibh  gn  d^  "bha  aice  f&  ràdh.  Thuirt  i  r*a  gille.  ''  Eiridh  suae  's
thoir  dhaibh  am  paipeir  sin  a  sgriobh  thn  'rair."  Nnr  a  leubh  iad  am
paipeir,  thuirt  i  dè  'bu  choir  a  dhèanadh  air  an  fhear  sin.  *<  A
chrochadh  na'm  biodh  e  'n  so/'  urs'  iadsan.  '*  Sin  agaibh  e,**  nrs*  ise,
*8  deanaibh  bhur  roighinn  ris."  Fhnair  i  f^in  'san  righ  tiHeadh  air
an  ais  d*an  tigh  fèin,  's  bha  iad  mar  a  bha  iad  roimhid.

This  was  written,  April  1859,  by  Hector  MacLean,  "  from  the
dictation  of  Catherine  Milloy,  a  Oowal  woman,  married  to  a  farmer
at  Kilmenj,  Islaj — one  Angus  MacGeachj.  Mrs.  MacGeachj
learned  the  story  from  a  young  man  who  resides  in  Cowal,  Robert
MacColl."

May  1860. — ^No  other  version  of  this  story  has  come  to  me  as
yet.  It  resembles  Gymbeline  in  some  of  the  incidents ;  and  one
incident,  that  of  the  blood,  is  like  Portia's  defence,in  the  Jew  of
Venice.  It  is  worth  remark  that  the  scene  of  Gymbeline  is  partly
laid  in  Britain,  partly  in  Italy.

In  the  Decameron,  2d  day,  novel  9,  is  the  Italian  story  from
which  Gymbeline  is  supposed  to  have  originated.  "  Bernard  of
Grenoa  is  imposed  upon  by  one  Ambrose,  loses  his  money,  and
orders  his  wife,  who  is  quite  innocent,  to  be  put  to  death.  8he
makes  her  escape,  and  goes  in  man's  dress  into  the  service  of  the
Sultan ;  there  she  meets  with  the  deceiver,  and,  sending  for  her
husband  to  Alexandria,  has  him  punished ;  she  then  resumes  her
former  habit,  and  returns  with  her  husband  rich  to  Genoa."

In  the  Decameron,  the  Italian  merchants  dispute  at  Paris,
and  lay  a  bet.  *'  A  poor  woman  who  frequented  the  house,"  re-
places the  Gaelic  "  Hen  wife."  The  man  who  was  hid  in  the
chest  took  a  ring,  a  girdle,  a  purse,  and  a  gown,  and  in  the  Gaelic
be  takes  a  ring  and  a  chain.  The  wife  disguises  herself  as  a
man  in  both,  hut  the  service  which  she  undertakes  is  different ;
and  "  the  Sultan  "  is  replaced  by  *'  a  gentleman."  In  both  stories
she  discloses  the  cheat  in  open  Court, — in  the  one,  before  **  the


1  4  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Sultan's  court ;  "  in  the  other,  *'in  a  court " — "  to  them.**  But
though  there  are  such  resemblances,  the  two  stories  differ  widely
in  spirit,  in  incident,  in  scene,  and  in  detail.  Those  who  hold
that  old  stories  are  handed  down  traditionally,  will  probably  con-
sider this  to  be  one  of  the  kind ;  and  if  so,  Shakspeare  may  have
gathered  his  incidents  at  home.  On  the  other  hand,  so  well
known  a  book  as  the  Decameron,  translated  into  English,  1566,
might  well  account  for  part  of  the  story.

In  either  case  it  is  curious  to  trace  the  resemblance  and  the
difference  in  these  three  versions  of  what  appears  to  be  the  same
popular  tale  ;  told  by  Boccaccio,  Shakspeare,  and  a  farmer's  wife
in  the  Highlands.  If  traditional,  the  story  would  seem  to  belong
to  a  forgotten  state  of  society.  It  is  not  now  the  custom  to  buy
a  wife,  and  thereby  acquire  the  right  to  shoot  her ;  and  yet  this
right  is  insisted  on,  and  acknowledged,  and  the  story  hinges  on
it.  It  seems  that  the  Gauls  had  the  power  of  life  and  death  over
their  families,  and  that  there  was  a  custom  very  like  the  purchase
of  a  wife  among  the  old  Icelanders.

There  used  to  be,  and  probably  there  still  are,  certain  cere-
monies about  betrothals,  both  in  Norway  and  in  the  Highlands,
which  look  like  the  remains  of  some  such  forgotten  practice.

In  the  Highlands,  a  man  used  to  go  on  the  part  of  the  bride-
groom to  settle  the  dower  with  the  bride's  father,  or  some  one
who  acted  for  him.  They  argued  the  point,  and  the  argument
gave  rise  to  much  fun  and  rough  wit.  For  example,  here  is  one
bit  of  such  a  discussion,  of  which  I  remember  to  have  heard  long  ago.
*'  This  is  the  youngest  and  the  last,  she  must  be  the  worst ;
you  must  give  me  a  large  dower,  or  I  will  not  take  her."

**  Men  always  sell  the  shots  first  when  they  can  ;  this  is  the
best — ^I  should  give  no  dower  at  all.''

The  first  knotty  point  settled,  and  the  wedding  day
fixed,  the  bridegroom,  before  the  wedding  day,  sent  a  best
man  and  maid  to  look  after  the  bride,  and  gathered  all  his  friends
at  home.  The  bride  also  gathered  her  friends,  and  her  party  led
the  way  to  church,  the  bride  was  supported  by  the  best-man  and
best-maid,  and  a  piper  played  before  them.  The  bridegroom's
party  marched  first  on  the  way  home  ;  and  then  there  was  a  jolli-
fication, and  a  ball,  and  some  durious  ceremonies  with  a  stocking.
The  strip  of  skin  to  be  cut  from  the  debtor  is  mentioned  in


THE  CHEST.  1 5

other  stories  ;  and  1  believe  sucli  a  mode  of  torture  can  be  traced
amongst  the  Scandinavians  who  once  owned  the  Western  Islands.

In  another  story  which  I  have  heard,  a  man  was  to  be  punished
hj  cutting  lAiiL,  a  thong,  from  his  head  to  his  heels,  another  from
his  forehead  to  his  feet,  a  thong  to  tie  them,  and  a  thong  to  make
all  fast.

TiGH  OBD*  is  the  word  commonly  used  for  an  inn.  It  is
probably  derived  from  the  same  root  as  Hostelry ;  Spanish,
Osdal ;  French,  Hotel.

Seombabìs  pronoanced  almost  exactly  like  the  French  chambre
— ^the  only  difference  being  that  between  the  French  a  and  the
Gaelic  o.

Seabbhaitnt  is  very  near  the  French  servante.


XIX.
THE  INHEEITANCE.

From  Donald  Macintyre,  Benbecula.

THERE  was  once  a  farmer,  and  he  was  well  off.  He
had  three  sons.  When  he  was  on  the  bed  of
death  he  called  them  to  him,  and  he  said,  '^  My  sons,
I  am  going  to  leave  you  :  let  there  be  no  disputing
when  I  am  gone.  In  a  certain  drawer,  in  a  dresser  in
the  inner  chamber,  you  will  find  a  sum  of  gold ;
divide  it  fairly  and  honestly  amongst  you,  work  the
farm,  and  live  together  as  you  have  done  with  me ; "
and  shortly  after  the  old  man  went  away.  The  sons
buried  him  ;  and  when  all  was  over,  they  went  to  the
drawer,  and  when  they  drew  it  out  there  was  nothing
in  it.

They  stood  for  a  while  without  speaking  a  word.
Then  the  youngest  spoke,  and  he  said — "There  is
no  knowing  if  there  ever  was  any  money  at  all;"
the  second  said — "  There  was  money  surely,  wherever
it  is  now ;"  and  the  eldest  said — "  Our  father  never
told  a  lie.  There  was  money  certainly,  though  I  can-
not understand  the  matter."  "  Come,"  said  the  eldest,
"  let  us  go  to  such  an  old  man ;  he  was  our  father's
friend ;  he  knew  him  well ;  he  was  at  school  with
him ;  and  no  man  knew  so  much  of  his  affairs.  Let
us  go  to  consult  him.

So  the  brothers  went  to  the  house  of  the  old  man,


THB  INHEBITANOK  1 7

and  they  told  him  all  that  had  happened.  "  Stay  with
me,"  said  the  old  man,  ''  and  I  will  think  over  this
matter.  I  cannot  understand  it;  but,  as  you  know,
your  father  and  I  were  very  great  with  each  other.
When  he  had  children  I  had  sponsorship,  and  when  I
had  children  he  had  gostjc.  1  know  that  your  father
neyer  told  a  lia"  And  he  kept  them  there,  and  he
gaYB  them  meat  and  drink  for  ten  days.

Then  he  sent  for  the  three  young  lads,  and  he
made  them  sit  down  beside  him,  and  he  said—

"  There  was  once  a  young  lad,  and  he  was  poor  ;
and  he  took  love  for  the  daughter  of  a  rich  neighbour,
and  she  took  love  for  him  ;  but  because  he  was  so  poor
there  could  be  no  wedding.  So  at  last  they  pledged
themselves  to  each  other,  and  the  young  man  went
away,  and  stayed  in  his  own  house.  After  a  time
there  came  another  suitor,  and  because  he  was  well  off,
the  girl's  father  made  her  promise  to  marry  him,  and
after  a  time  they  were  married.  But  when  the  bride-
groom came  to  her,  he  found  her  weeping  and  bewail-
ing ;  and  he  said,  *  What  ails  thee  ? '  The  bride  would
say  nothing  for  a  long  time ;  but  at  last  she  told  him
all  about  it^  and  how  she  was  pledged  to  another  man.
'Dress  thyself'  said  the  man,  *and  follow  me.'  So
she  dressed  herself  in  the  wedding  clothes,  and  he  took
the  horse,  and  put  her  behind  him,  and  rode  to  the
house  of  the  other  man,  and  when  he  got  there,  he
struck  in  the  door,  and  called  out,  'Is  there  man
within  V  and  when  the  other  answered,  he  left  the
bride  there  within  the  door,  and  he  said  nothing,  but
he  returned  home.  Then  the  man  got  up,  and  got  a
lights  and  who  was  there  but  the  bride  in  her  wedding
dress.

"  *  What  brought  thee  here?'  said  he.  *  Such  a
man,'  said  the  bride.     '  I  was  married  to  him  to-day,

VOL.  II,  0


X8  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALEa

aud  when  I  told  Tn'm  of  the  promise  we  had  made,  he
brought  me  here  himself  and  left  me.*

"  *  Sit  thou  there/  said  the  man ;  *  art  thou  not  mar-
ried ?'  So  he  took  the  horse,  and  he  rode  to  the  priest,
and  he  brought  him  to  the  house,  and  before  the  priest
he  loosed  the  woman  from  the  pledge  she  had  given,
and  he  gave  her  a  line  of  writing  that  she  was  free,
and  he  set  her  on  the  horse,  and  said,  *  Now  return  to
thy  husband.'

"  So  the  bride  rode  away  in  the  darkness  in  her
wedding  dress.  She  had  not  gone  far  when  she  came
to  a  thick  wood  where^  three  robbers  stopped  and
seized  her.  *  Aha ! '  said  one,  *  we  have  waited  long,
and  we  have  got  nothing,  but  now  we  have  got  the
bride  herself.'  *  Oh,'  said  she,  4et  me  go  :  let  me  go
to  my  husband  ;  the  man  that  I  was  pledged  to  has  let
me  go.  Here  are  ten  pounds  in  gold — ^take  them,  and  let
me  go  on  my  journey.'  And  so  she  begged  and  prayed
for  a  long  time,  and  told  what  had  happened  to  her.
At  last  one  of  the  robbers,  who  was  of  a  better  nature
than  the  rest,  said,  *  Come,  as  the  others  have  done
this,  I  will  take  you  home  mysel£'  'Take  thou  the
money,'  said  she.  *  I  wiU  not  take  a  penny,'  said  the
robber  ;  but  the  other  two  said,  *  Give  us  the  money,'
and  they  took  the  ten  pounds.  The  woman  rode  home,
and  the  robber  left  her  at  her  husband's  door,  and  she
went  in,  and  showed  hiTn  the  line — the  writing  that
the  other  had  given  her  before  the  priest,  and  they
were  well  pleased."

"  Now,"  said  the  old  man,  "  which  of  all  these  do
you  think  did  best  Ì  So  the  eldest  son  said,  "  I  think
the  man  that  sent  the  woman  to  him  to  whom  she  was
pledged,  was  the  honest,  generous  man :  he  did  well'*
The  second  said,  "  Yes,  but  the  man  to  whom  she  was
pledged  did  still  better,  when  he  sent  her  to  her  bus-


THE  INHERITANCE.  1 9

band"  "Then,"  said  the  youngest,  "I  don't  know
myself ;  but  perhaps  the  wisest  of  all  were  the  robbers
who  got  the  money."  Then  the  old  man  rose  up,  and
he  said,  "  Thou  hast  thy  father's  gold  and  silver.  I
have  kept  you  here  for  ten  days ;  I  have  watched  you
weD.  I  know  your  father  never  told  a  lie,  and  thou
hast  stolen  the  money."  And  so  the  youngest  son  had
to  confess  the  fact,  and  the  money  was  got  and
divided.

I  know  nothing  like  i^o.  19.  No.  20  begins  like  a  German
stoiy  in  Grimm;  but  the  rest  is  anlike  anything  I  have  read
or  heard.  The  first  part  has  come  to  me  in  another  shape,
from  Boss-shire;  and  some  men  whom  I  met  in  South  Uist
seemed  to  know  these  incidents.

The  two  belong  to  the  class  referred  to  in  the  Introduction,
page  xliii,  as  fourth.  Many  of  the  novels  in  Boccaccio  might  be
ranked  with  the  same  class ;  they  are  embryo  three-volume
novels,  which  only  require  nursing  by  a  good  writer  to  become
fiiU-grown  books.  There  are  plenty  of  the  kind  throughout  the
Highlands,  and,  as  it  seems  to  me,  they  are  genuine  popular  tra-
ditions, human  stories,  whose  incidents  would  suit  a  king  or  a
peasant  equally  well.  Without  a  wide  knowledge  of  books,  it  is
impossible  to  say  whence  these  stories  came ;  or  whether  they
are  invented  by  the  people.  Maclntyre  said  he  had  learned  those
which  he  told  me  from  old  men  like  himself,  in  his  native  island;
and  all  others  whom  I  have  questioned  say  the  same  of  their
stories.


XX.
THE  THEEE  WISE  MEN.

From  Donald  Maclntyre,  Benbecula.

THERE  was  once  a  farmer,  and  he  was  very  well  ofl^
but  he  had  never  cast  an  eye  on  the  women,
though  he  was  old  enough  to  be  married.  So  one  day
he  took  the  horse  and  saddle,  and  rode  to  the  house  of
another  farmer,  who  had  a  daughter,  to  see  if  she
would  suit  him  for  a  wife,  and  when  he  got  there  the
farmer  asked  him  to  come  in,  and  gave  him  food  and
drink,  and  he  saw  the  daughter,  and  he  thought  she
would  suit  him  well.  So  he  said  to  the  father,  "  I  am
thinking  it  is  time  for  me  to  be  married,  I  am  going
to  look  for  a  wife  " — (here  there  was  a  long  conversa^
tion,  which  I  forget).  So  the  man  told  his  wife  what
the  other  had  said,  and  she  told  her  daughter  to  make
haste  and  set  the  house  in  order,  for  that  such  a  man
was  come  and  he  was  looking  for  a  wife,  and  she  had
better  show  how  handy  she  was.  "Well  never  mind,
the  daughter  was  willing  enough,  so  she  began  to  set
the  house  in  order,  and  the  first  thing  she  thought  of
was  to  make  up  the  fire,  so  she  ran  out  of  the  house  to
the  peat-stack.  Well,  while  she  was  bent  down  filling
her  apron  with  peats,  what  should  fall  but  a  great  heap
from  the  top  of  the  stack  on  her  head  and  shoulders.
So  she  thought  to  herself,  "  Oh,  now,  if  I  were  mar-
ried to  that  man,  and  about  to  be  a  mother,  and  all


THE  THREE  WISE  ICEN.  2 1

diese  peats  fallen  on  my  head,  I  should  now  be  finished
and  all  my  posterity  f  and  she  gaVe  a  great  burst  of
weeping,  and  sat  down  lamenting  and  bewailing.  The
mother  was  longing  for  her  daughter  to  come  back,  so
she  went  out  and  found  her  sitting  crying  in  the  end
of  the  peat-stack,  and  she  said,  '^  What  is  on  thee?'*
and  the  daughter  said,  "  Oh,  mother,  the  peat-stack  fell
on  my  head,  and  I  thought  if  I  were  now  married  to
that  man,  and  about  to  be  a  mother,  I  was  done,  and
aU  my  posterity ;''  and  the  mother  said,  ''That  is  true
for  thee,  my  daughter ;  that  is  true,  indeed,"  and  she
sat  down  and  cried  too.  Then  the  father  Was  getting
cold,  so  he  too  went  out,  wondering  what  kept  the  women,
and  when  he  found  them,  they  told  him  what  had  hap-
pened, and  he  sdd,  ''That  would  have  been  unfor*
tunate  indeed,**  and  he  began  to  roar  and  cry  too.  The
wooer  at  last  came  out  himself,  and  found  them  all
crying  in  the  end  of  the  peat-stack,  and  when  they  had
told  him  why  they  were  lamenting,  he  said,  "  "Èqy&s
you  mind.  It  may  be  that  this  will  never  happen  at
alL  Gro  you  in-doors,  and  cry  no  more.*'  Then  he
took  his  horse  and  saddle,  and  rode  home  ;  and  as  he
went,  he  thought,  "  What  a  fool  I  am  to  be  stopping
here  all  my  life.  Here  I  sit,  and  know  no  more  of  the
world  than  a  stock.  I  know  how  to  grow  com,  and
Ihat  is  all  I  know.  I  will  go  and  see  the  world,  and
I  will  never  come  home  till  I  find  three  as  wise  as
thoee  were  foolish  whom  I  left  crying  in  the  peat-stack.**
And  so  when  he  got  home,  he  set  everything  in  order,
and  took  the  horse  and  Went  away.  And  he  travelled
the  Gr^ldom  and  the  Galldom  Highlands  and  strange
lands  for  many  a  day,  and  got  much  knowledge.  At
last^  one  fine  evening  he  came  to  a  pretty  plot  of  green
ground  in  a  glen,  by  a  river ;  and  on  it  there  were
three  men  standing.     They  were  like  each  other,  and


21  WEST?  HIGHLAND  TALES.

dressed  alike.  Their  dress  was  a  long  coat  with  short
brigis,  and  a  broad  belt  about  the  middle,  and  caps  on
their  heads.  (What  dress  is  that  1  That  is  the  dress
they  tised  to  wear  here.  I  remember  my  father  well ;
he  silways  wore  it.)  So  he  put  Failte  on  them
(saluted  them).  The  three  men  never  answered  a  word.
They  looked  at  him,  and  then  they  bent  their  heads
slowly  towards  each  other^-(here  the  narrator  bent  his
own  head,  and  spoke  solemnly) — and  there  they  staid
with  their  heads  bowed  for  ten  minutes.  Then  they
raised  their  heads,  and  one  said,  "  If  I  had  without  what
I  have  within,  I  would  give  thee  a  night's  share ;"  the
second  said,  "  If  I  had  done  what  is  undone,  I  would
give  thee  a  night's  share ;"  and  the  third  said,  "  I
have  nothing  more  than  usual,  come  with  me."  So
the  farmer  followed  the  old  man  to  his  house,  wonder-
ing what  all  this  should  mean.  When  they  had  gone
in  and  sat  down,  he  wondered  still  more,  for  his  host
never  offered  him  a  drink  till  he  had  told  him  all  about
his  journey.  Then  he  said,  "  Quicker  is  a  drink  than
a  tale  ;"  and  the  old  man  gave  a  laugh,  and  struck  the
board,  and  a  fine  woman  came  in  and  gave  him  a  great
cup  of  ale,  and  that  was  good.  And  he  drank  it,  and
thought  to  himself,  "  If  I  had  that  woman  for  my  wife,
she  would  be  better  than  the  one  I  left  weeping  in  the
peat-stack."  The  old  man  laughed  again,  and  he  said,
"If  two  were  willing  that  might  be."  The  fanner
wondered  that  this  old  man  should  know  his  thoughtSy
and  answer  them,  but  he  held  his  tongue.  Then  the
old  man  struck  the  board,  and  a  girl  came  in,  and  he
thought,  "  If  I  had  that  one  for  my  wife,  she  would
be  better  than  the  girl  I  left  howling  in  the  peat-stack."
The  old  man  gave  another  little  laugh,  and  he  said,
"  If  three  were  willing  that  might  be  too,"  and  the  girl
set  a  small  pot  on  the  fire.     The  farmer  looked  at  it,


THE  THREE  WISE  HEN,  23

and  thought,  '^  This  man  must  have  a  small  company.'*
*' Ah,"  said  the  man,  "it  will  go  about"

"  Now,"  said  the  farmer,  "  I  rmist  know  what  all
this  means.  I  will  neither  eat  nor  diink  in  this  house
unless  you  tell  me.  I  saluted  you,  and  you  bent  your
heads,  and  never  answered  for  ten  minutes.  When
you  did  speak,  I  could  not  understand  you,  and  now
you  seem  to  understand  my  thoughts."  Then  the  old
man  said,  "  Sit  down,  and  I  will  explain  it  all.  Our
father  was  a  very  wise  man.  We  never  knew  how
wise  he  was  till  long  after  he  went  away.  We  are
three  brothers,  and  on  the  bed  of  death  our  father  left
us  this  pretty  place,  and  we  have  it  amongst  us,  and
plenty  besides.  Our  father  made  us  swear  that  we
would  never  talk  on  important  matters  but  in  whis-
pers. When  thou  camest,  we  bent  our  heads  and
whispered,  as  we  always  do,  for  men  cannot  dispute  in
a  whisper,  and  we  never  quarrel  My  first  brother  had
the  corpse  of  his  mother-in-law  wiiidn ;  he  was  un-
willing to  ask  a  stranger  to  a  house  of  sorrow.  She  is
to  be  buried  to-morrow — If  that  were  out  which  he
had  within,  he  had  given  thee  a  night's  share.  My
second  brother  has  a  wife  who  wiU  do  nothing  till  she
gets  three  blows  of  a  stick.  Then  she  is  like  other
women,  and  a  good  wife  j  he  did  not  like  a  stranger
to  see  the  blows  given,  and  he  knew  she  would  do  no-
thing without  them — If  he  had  done  what  was  un-
done, he  had  given  thee  a  night's  share.  I  had
nothing  to  do  more  than  usual  Thou  didst  tell  thy
news,  and  when  my  wife  came  in,  I  knew  thy  thought
If  I  were  dead,  and  thou  and  she  were  willing;  you
might  be  married.  So  if  I^  and  thou,  and  my
daughter  were  willing,  you  might  be  married  too.
Now,  then,  said  the  old  man,  sit  and  eat  The  little
pot  will  go  about  j  it  will  serve  for  us.     My  company


24  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALBS.

eat  without"  On  the  morrow,  the  old  man  said,  "  I
must  go  to  the  funeral  to  my  brother's  house.  Do
thou  stay  here ;"  but  he  said,  "  I  will  not  stay  in  any
man's  house  when  he  is  away.  I  will  go  witìi  you  to
the  funeral"  When  they  came  back  he  staid  some
time  in  the  old  man's  house.  He  married  the  daugh-
ter, and  got  a  good  share  of  the  property.  And,  now,
was  not  that  a  lucky  peat-stack  for  the  farmer.

This  Rtory  and  No.  19  were  told  to  me  on  tbe  6th  of  Sep-
tember 1859,  in  the  inn  at  the  Sound  of  Benbecnla,  by  a  man
whose  name  woald  sound  to  Saxon  ears  like  Dolicolichyarlich ;
a  Gelt  would  know  it  for  Donald  MacDonald  MacCharles,  and
his  simame  is  Maclntyre ;  he  is  a  cotter,  and  lives  in  Benbecnla.

Donald  is  known  as  a  g^od  teller  of  tales,  so  I  walked  six  miles
to  his  house  and  heard  him  tell  a  long  version  of  the  tale  of
Oonal  Gulbanach.

It  lasted  an  hour,  and  I  hope  to  get  it  written  some  day ;  I
have  other  versions  of  the  same  incidents.  There  was  an  audi-
ence of  all  the  people  of  the  village  who  were  within  reach,  in-
cluding Mr  Torrie,  who  lives  there  near  Baile  nan  Cailleach,
which  is  probably  so  called  from  an  old  nunnery.  After  the
story,  the  same  man  recited  a  fragment  of  a  poem  about  Fionn
and  his  companions.  A  man  returning  from  battle  with  a  vast
number  of  heads  on  a  withy,  meets  a  lady  who  questions  him,  he
recites  the  history  of  the  heads,  and  how  their  owners  died.  The
poem  was  given  rapidly  and  fluently.  The  story  was  partly  told
in  measured  prose  ;  but  it  was  very  much  spun  out,  and  would
have  gained  by  condensation.

I  told  the  old  man  that  he  had  too  many  leaves  on  his  tree,
which  he  acknowledged  to  be  a  fair  criticism.  He  followed  me
to  the  inn  afterwards,  and  told  me  other  stories ;  the  household
being  assembled  about  the  door,  and  in  the  room,  and  taking  a
warm  interest  in  the  proceedings.  After  a  couple  of  glasses  of
hot  whisky  and  water,  my  friend,  who  was  well  up  in  years,
walked  off  home  in  the  dark ;  and  I  noted  down  the  heads  of  his
stories  in  English,  because  my  education,  as  respects  GaeKc
writing,  was  never  completed.  They  are  given  as  I  got  them,
condensed,  but  unaltered.  Donald  says  he  has  many  more  of
the  same  kind.


XXI.
A   PUZZLE.

From  Kenneth  M*Lennan,  Tumaid,  BoBS-Bhire.

THEEE  was  a  custom  once  through  theGseldom,  when
a  man  would  die,  that  the  whole  people  of  the  place
would  gather  together  to  the  house  in  which  the  dead
man  wa&  Tigh  aire  faire  (the  shealing  of  watching),
and  they  would  be  at  drinking,  and  singing,  and  telling
tales,  till  the  white  day  should  come.  At  this  time  they
were  gathered  together  in  the  house  of  watching,  and
there  was  a  man  in  this  house,  and  when  the  tale  went
aboaty  he  had  neither  tale  nor  song,  and  as  he  had  not,
he  was  put  out  at  the  door.  When  he  was  put  out  he
stood  at  the  end  of  the  barn  ;  he  was  afraid  to  go  far-
ther. He  was  but  a  short  time  standing  when  he  saw
nine,  dressed  in  red  garments,  going  past,  and  shortly
after  that  he  saw  other  nine  going  past  in  green  dresses ;
shortly  after  this  he  saw  other  nine  going  past  in  blue
dresses.  A  while  after  that  came  a  horse,  and  a  woman
and  a  man  on  him.  Said  the  woman  to  the  man,  "  I
will  go  to  speak  to  that  man  who  is  there  at  the  end
of  the  bam."  She  asked  him  what  he  was  doing  stand-
ing there?  He  told  her.  "Sawest  thou  any  man
going  past  since  the  night  fell  Ì "  said  she.  jSe  said
that  he  had;  he  told  her  aU  he  had  seen.  '^Thou
sawest  all  that  went  past  since  the  night  fell,"  said  she.
"Well  then,"  said  she,  "the  first  nine  thou  sawest
these  were  brothers  of  my  father,  and  the  second  nine
brothers  of  my  mother,  and  the  third  nine,  these  were
my  own  sons,  and  they  are  altogether  sons  to  that  man


26  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

who  is  on  the  horse.  That  is  my  husband  ;  and  there
is  no  law  in  Eirinn,  nor  in  Alaba,  nor  in  Sasnnn  that
can  find  fault  with  us.  Go  thou  in,  and  I  myself  will
not  beheve  but  that  a  puzzle  is  on  them  till  day  ;"  and
she  went  and  she  left  him.


TOIMHSEACHAN.

Bha  deachdadh  aon  uair  air  feadhna  Gaeltachd,  dar  a  Bhasaicheadh
doine,  gu  tionaladh  sluagh  a'  bhaile  uile  gu  leir,  dho*ii  tigh  sam
bitheag  an  duine  marbh,  tigh  aire  fairt^  agas  bhithag  iad  ag*  61  's
ag  bran  *8  aginnse  sgeulachdan,  gas  an  digad,  an  latha  Geal.  Air  an
am  60  bba  iad  cruinn  'san  tigh  fhaire,  agus  bha  duine  anns  an  tigh  so,
agas  dar  a  chaidh  an  sgeulachd  mu  'n  cuairt  cha  robh  aon  chuid  aige»
sgenlachd,  na  bran,  agas  bho'n  nach  robh  chaidh  a  chur  a  mach  air
an  dorns.  Dar  a  chaidh  sheas  e  aig  ceann  an  t-sabhail,  bha  eagal  air
dol  ni  b'  fhaide.  Cha  robh  e  ach  goirid  na  sheasaidh  dar  a  chnnnaic  e
naodhnar  air  an  sgeadachadh  ann  an  trasgain  dhiarga  a'  dol  seachad,
agas  goirid  na  dbeighe  sin  chunnaic  e  naodhnar  eile  a*  dol  seachad
ann  an  deiseachan  naine ;  began  an  deighe  so  chnnnaic  e  naodhnar  eile
a'  dol  seachad  ann  an  deiseachan  gorma ;  taean  an  d^igh  so  thàinig  each,
's  bean  \  duine  air  a  mhain.  Thuirt  a'  bhean  ris  an  duine,  '*  Th^d  mi
'bhruidhinn  ris  an  fhear  a  tha  *siud,  aig  ceann  an  t-sabhail."  Dh^  fhoigh-
nichd  i  ris  d^  bha  e  dianamh  an  siad  'na  shiasamh.  Dh*  innis  e  dhi.
"Am  faca  tu  duine  air  bhith  a'  dol  seachaid  bho  thuit  an  oidhche? "
OS  ise.  Thuirt  gu  'fac.  Dh'  innis  e  dhi  na  chunnaic  e.  "  Chunna  tu
na  chaidh  seachad  bho  thuit  an  oidhche/'  os  ise.  **  Mata,*'  na  ise, "  na
ceud  naodhnar  a  chunna  tu  'se  sin  bràithrean  m'  athar,  agus  an  darna
naodhnar  bràiUirean  mo  mhàthair,  agus  an  treas  naodhnar  'se  sin  mo
mhic  fh^in ;  agus  's  mic  dha  n'  duine  ud  a  tha  air  muin  an  eich  iad
nile  gu  l^ir.  'Se  sin  an  duine  agamsa ;  agus  cha  'n  'eil  lagh  ann  an
Eirinn,  na  'n  Allaba,  na  'n  Sasunn  a's  urrainn  coir'  fhaotainn
dhuinn.

Folbh  thnsa  a  nis  a  steach;  's  cha  chreid  mise  nach  'eil  toimhs-
eachan  orra  gu  latha."    'S  d*  fholbh  i  's  dh'  fhàg  i  e.

Written  by  Hector  Urquhart.  The  answer  is  founded  on  a
mistaken  belief  that  it  is  lawful  for  a  woman  to  marry  her  grand-
mother's husband.  I  am  told  that  there  ore  numerous  pozzies
of  the  same  kind  now  current  in  India.


XXIL
THE  EIDEEE  (KNIGHT)  OF  EIDDLES.

From  John  Mackenzie,  fisherman,  near  Inverary.

TTTEEE  was  a  king  once,  and  he  married  a  great  lady,
and  she  departed  on  the  birth  of  her  first  son.  And
a  little  after  this  the  king  married  another  one,  and  he
had  a  son  by  this  one  too.  The  two  lads  were  growing
up.  Then  it  struck  in  the  queen's  head,  that  it  was  not
her  son  who  would  come  into  the  kingdom ;  and  she  set
it  before  her,  that  she  would  poison  the  eldest  son.  And
so  she  sent  advice  to  the  cook  that  they  would  put
poison  in  the  drink  of  the  heir ;  but  as  luck  was  in  it,
so  it  was  that  the  youngest  brother  heard  them,  and  he
said  to  his  brother  not  to  take  the  draught,  nor  to
drink  it  at  aU  j  and  so  he  did.  But  the  queen  wondered
that  the  lad  was  not  dead ;  and  she  thought  that
there  was  not  enough  of  poison  in  the  driuk,  and  she
asked  the  cook  to  put  more  in  the  drink  on  this  night.
It  was  thus  they  did  :  and  when  the  cook  made  up  the
drink,  she  said  that  he  would  not  be  long  alive  after
this  draught  But  his  brother  heard  this  also,  and  he
told  this  likewise.  The  eldest  thought  he  would  put
the  draught  into  a  little  bottle,  and  he  said  to  his
brother — "  If  I  stay  in  this  house  I  have  no  doubt  she
will  do  for  me  some  way  or  other,  and  the  quicker  I
leave  the  house  the  better.  I  will  take  the  world  for
my  pillow,  and  there  is  no  knowing  what  fortune  will


28  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

be  on  me."  His  brother  said  that  lie  would  go  with
him,  and  they  took  themselves  off  to  the  stable,  and
they  put  saddles  on  two  horses  and  they  took  their
soles  out  of  that

They  had  not  gone  very  far  from  the  house  when
the  eldest  one  said — "  There  is  no  knowing  if  poison
was  in  the  drink  at  all,  though  we  went  away.  Try  it
in  the  horse's  ear  and  we  shall  see,"  The  horse  went
not  far  when  he  fell.  "  That  was  only  a  rattle-bones
of  a  horse  at  all  events,"  said  the  eldest  one,  and  toge-
ther they  got  up  on  the  one  horse,  and  so  they  went
forwards.  "But,"  said  he,  "I  can  scarce  believe
that  there  is  any  poison  in  the  drink,  let's  try  it
on  this  horse."  That  he  did,  and  they  went  not
far  when  the  horse  fell  cold  dead.  They  thought  to
take  the  hide  off  him,  and  that  it  would  keep  them
warm  on  this  night  for  it  was  close  at  hand.  In  the
morning  when  they  woke  they  saw  twelve  ravens
coming  and  lighting  on  the  carcase  of  the  horse,
and  they  were  not  long  there  when  they  fell  over
dead.

They  went  and  lifted  the  ravens,  and  they  take  them
with  them,  and  the  first  town  they  reached  they  gave
the  ravens  to  a  baker,  and  they  asked  him  to  make  a
dozen  pies  of  the  ravens.  They  took  the  pies  with
them,  and  they  went  on  their  journey.  About  the
mouth  of  night,  and  when  they  were  in  a  great  thick
wood  that  was  there,  there  came  four  and  twenty  rob-
bers out  of  the  wood,  and  they  said  to  them  to  deliver
their  purses ;  but  they  said  that  they  had  no  purse,  but
that  they  had  a  little  food  which  they  were  carrying  with
them.  "  Good  is  even  meat  1 "  and  the  robbers  began
to  eat  it,  but  they  had  not  eaten  too  boldly  when  they
fell  hither  and  thither.  When  they  saw  that  the  rob-
bers were  dead  they  ransacked  their  pockets^  and  tiiey


THE  BIDERB  (kNIOHT)  OF  RIDDLES.  2g

got  much  gold  and  silver  on  the  robbers.     They  iir ent
forward  till  they  reached  the  Eoiight  of  Eiddles.

The  house  of  the  Knight  of  Eiddles  was  in  the
finest  place  in  that  country,  and  if  his  house  was  pretty,
it  was  his  daughter  was  pretty  (indeed).  Her  like  was
not  on  the  surface  of  the  world  altogether ;  so  handsome
was  she,  and  no  one  would  get  her  to  marry  but  the
man  who  would  put  a  question  to  this  knight  that  he
could  not  solve.  The  chaps  thought  that  they  would
go  and  they  woidd  tiy  to  put  a  question  to  him ;  and
the  youngest  one  was  to  stand  in  place  of  gillie  to  his
eldest  brother.  They  reached  the  house  of  the  Knight
of  Biddies  with  this  question — ^*  One  killed  two,  and
two  killed  twelve,  and  twelve  killed  four  and  twenty,
and  two  got  out  of  it ;"  and  they  were  to  be  in  great
majesty  and  high  honour  tiU  he  should  solve  the  riddle.

They  were  thus  a  while  with  the  Eidere,  but  on  a
day  of  days  came  one  of  the  knighf  s  daughtefa  maidens
of  company  to  the  giUie,  and  asked  him  to  teU  her  the
question.  He  took  her  plaid  firom  her  and  let  her  go,
but  he  did  not  tell  her,  and  so  did  the  twelve  maidens,
day  after  day,  and  he  said  to  the  last  one  that  no  crea-
ture had  the  answer  to  the  riddle  but  his  master  down
below.  !No  matter !  The  gìUie  told  his  master  each
thing  as  it  happened.  But  one  day  after  this  came  the
knight's  daughter  to  the  eldest  brother,  and  she  was  so
fine,  and  she  asked  him  to  tell  her  the  question.  And
now  there  was  no  refusing  her,  and  so  it  was  that  he  told
her,  but  he  kept  her  plaid.  And  the  Knight  of  Bid-
dies  sent  for  him,  and  he  solved  the  riddle.  And  he
said  that  he  had  two  choices,  to  lose  his  head,  or  to  be
let  go  in  a  crazy  boat  without  food  or  drink,  without
oar  or  scoop.  The  chap  spoke  and  he  said — "  I  have
another  question  to  put  to  thee  before  all  these  things
happen."  *'  Say  on,"  said  the  Kjiight.  "  MyseK  and  my


30  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

gillie  were  on  a  day  in  the  forest  shooting.  My  giUie  fired
at  a  hare,  and  she  fell,  and  he  took  her  skin  off,  and  let
her  go,  and  so  he  did  to  twelve,  he  took  their  skins  off
and  let  them  go.  And  at  last  came  a  great  fine  hare,
and  I  myself  fired  at  her,  and  I  took  her  skin  off,  and
I  let  her  go."  "  Indeed  thy  riddle  is  not  hard  to
solve,  my  lad,*'  said  the  knight.  And  so  the  lad  got
the  knight's  daughter  to  wife,  and  they  made  a  great
hearty  wedding  that  lasted  a  day  and  a  year.  The
youngest  one  went  home  now  that  his  brother  had  got
so  well  on  his  way,  and  the  eldest  brother  gave  him
every  right  over  the  kingdom  that  was  at  home.

There  were  near  the  march  of  the  kingdom  of  the
Knight  of  Eiddles  three  giants,  and  they  were  always
murdering  and  slaying  some  of  the  knight's  people,
and  taking  the  spoil  &om  them.  On  a  day  of  days  the
Knight  of  Eiddles  said  to  his  son-in-law,  that  if  the
spirit  of  a  man  were  in  him,  he  would  go  to  kill  the
giants,  as  they  were  always  bringing  such  losses  on  the
country.  And  thus  it  was,  he  went  and  he  met  the
giants,  and  he  came  home  with  the  three  giants'  heads,
and  he  threw  them  at  the  knight's  feet  ^^  Thou  art  an
able  lad  doubtless,  and  thy  name  hereafter  is  the  Hero
of  the  White  Shield."  TÌe  name  of  the  Hero  of  the
White  Shield  went  far  and  near.

The  brother  of  the  Hero  of  the  White  Shield  was
exceedingly  strong  and  clever,  and  without  knowing
what  the  Hero  of  the  White  Shield  was,  he  thought  he
would  try  a  trick  with  him.  The  Hero  of  the  White
Shield  was  now  dwelling  on  the  lands  of  the  giants,  and
the  knight's  daughter  with  him.  His  brother  came
and  he  asked  to  make  a  comhrag  (fight  as  a  bull)  with
him.  The  men  began  at  each  other,  and  they  took  to
wrestHng  from  morning  till  evening.  At  last  and  at
lengthy  when  they  were  tired,  weak,  and  given  up,  the


THE  BIBEBE  (kNIOHT)  OF  RIDDLES.  3  I

Hero  of  the  White  Shield  jumped  over  a  great  rampart,
and  he  asked  him  to  meet  him  in  the  morning.      This
leap  put  the  other  to  shame,  and  he  said  to  him  ''  Well
may  it  be  that  thou  wilt  not  be  so  supple  about  this
time  to-morrow."     The  young  brother  now  went  to  a
poor  little  bothy  that  was  near  to  the  house  of  the  Hero
of  the  White  Shield  tired  and  drowsy,   and  in  the
morning  they  dared  the  fight  again.     And  the  Hero  of
the  White  Shield  began  to  go  back,  till  he  went  back-
wards into  a  river.     "  There  must  be  some  of  my  blood
in  thee  before  that  was  done  to  me.*'     "  Of  what  blood
art  thou?"  said  the  youngest     "'Tis  I  am  son  of
Ardan,  great  King  of  the  Albann."      "  'Tis  I  am  thy
brother."     It  was  now  they  knew  each  other.      They
gave  luck  and  welcome  to  each  other,  and  the  Hero  of
the  White  Shield  now  took  him  into  the  palace,  and
she  it  was  that  was  pleased  to  see  him — the  knight's
daughter.     He  stayed  a  while  with  them,  and  after  that
he  thought  that  he  would  go  home  to  his  own  kingdom  ;
and  when  he  was  going  past  a  great  palace  that  was
there  he  saw  twelve  men  playing  at  shinny  over  against
the  palace.     He  thought  he  woidd.  go  for  a  while  and
play  shinny  with   them;    but  they  were  not  long
playing  shiimy  when   they  fell  out,   and   the  weak-
est of   them  caught  him  and  he  shook  him  as    he
would  a  child.     He  thought  it  was  no  use  for  him  to
lift  a  hand  amongst  these  twelve  worthies,  and  he  asked
them  to  whom  they  were  sons.      They  said  they  were
children  of  the  one  father,  the  brother  of  the  Hero  of
White  Shield,  but  that  no  one  of  them  had  the  same
mother.     "  I  am  your  father,"  said  he ;  and  he  asked
them  if  their  mothers  were  all  alive.      They  said  that
they  were.     He  went  with  them  till  he  found  the
mothers,  and  when  they  were  all  for  going,  he  took
home  with  him  the  twelve  wives  and  the  twelve  sons ;


32  WEST  HIGHLAND  TAI^S.

and  I  don't  know  but  that  hi9  seed  are  kings  on  Alba
till  this  very  day.


RIDERE  NAN  CEIST.

Bha  righ  ann  aair,  's  phòs  e  ban-tighearna  mhòr,  agus  shiubhail
i  air  a  chend  mhac  ach  bha  am  mac  bèo ;  agas  beagan  na  dh^igh  so,
pfaòs  an  righ  tè  eile,  's  bha  mac  aige  rithe  so  cuideachd.  Bha  'n  da
ghille  cinntmn  snas.  An  sin  bhuail  an  ceann  na  banrigh,  nach  b'è
macse  a  thigeadh  a  stigh  air  an  rìoghachd,  agus  chnir  i  roimpe  gu
'm  puinseanaicheadh  i  'm  mac  bu  shine,  agus  mar  so  chuir  i  comh-
airle  ris  a  chòcaire,  gu  'n  cuireadh  iad  ptiinsean  ann  an  deoch  an
oighre;  ach  mar  bha  sonas  an  dkn^  chual'  am  bràthair  a  b'  òige  iad,
agus  thubhairt  e  ri'  bhrkthair,  ^  Gun  an  deoch  a  ghabhail  na  idir  a
h-òl ;  agus  mar  so  rinn  e :  Ach  bha  iongontas  air  a  bhan-righ  na<^
robh  an  gille  marbh,  a^us  smaoinich  i  nach  robh  na  leòir  a  phhinsean
anns  an  deoch,  's  dh'  iarr  i  air  a  chbcaire  tuillidh  a  chuir  'san  deoch
air  an  oidhche  so.  'S  ann  mar  so  a  rinn  iad,  agus  a  nuair  a  rinn  an
cbcaire  suas  an  deoch,  thubhairt  i  *nach  bitheadh  e  fada  beo  an  d^igh
na  dibhe  so ;  ach  chual*  a  bhràthair  so  cuideachd  's  dh'  innis  e  so  mar
an  ceudna.  Smaonich  e  gu*  cuireadh  e  *n  deoch  ann  am  botul  beag,
agus  thubhairt  e  ri'  bhrathair,  "  Ma  dh*  fhanas  mi  'san  tigh  cha  *n
*eil  teagamh  agam  nach  cuir  i  as  domh  dòigh  a  thaobhaigin,  's  mar  is
luaithe  dh'  f  hbgas  mi  'n  tigh,  'se  is  fekrr.'*  ''Bheir  mi  'n  saoghal
fo'  m'  cheann,  *s  cha  'n  'eil  fios  de  'm  fortan  a  bhitheas  orm."  Thubh-
airt a  bhrathair  gu'  falbhadh  e  leis,  's  thug  iad  orra  do  'n  stàbull,  'a
chuir  iad  diollaid  air  da  each,  's  thug  iad  na  buinn  asda.  Cha  deach
iad  gìè  f  had'  o'n  tigh,  dur  a  thubhairt  am  fear  bu  shine,  "  Cha  'n  'eil
fios  an  robh  puinsean  idir  san  deoch  ged  a  dh'  f  halbh  sinn ;  feuch
ann  an  duais  an  eich  e,  's  chi  sinn."  Cha  V  f  hada  chaidh  an  t-each
dur  a  thuit  e.  **  Cha  robh  an  sud,  ach  gliogaire  do  dh'  each  co  dhin,"
thubhairt  am  fear  bu  sine,  agus  le'{ch^ile  ghabh  iad  air  muin  an  aoin
eich 's  mar  so  chaidh  iad  air  an  aghaidh.  **  Ach,  ars'  esan,  's  gann
orm  a  chreidsinn,  gu'  bheil  puinsean  sam  bith  'san  deoch;  feucham  i
air  an  each  so."  Sin  a  rinn  e,  agus  cha  deach  iad  fada  nuair  a  thuit
an  t-each  fuar,  marbh.  Smaonich  iad  an  t-seiche'  thabhairt  dheth  's
gu  cumadh  i  blàth  iad  air  an  oidhche  oir  bha  i  dltith  dhUmh.  'JSa*
mhaduinn,  'n  uair  a  dhhisg  iad,  chunnaic  iad  da  f  hitheach  dheitg  a
tighinn,  's  laidh  iad  air  dosaich  an  eich.     Cha  b'  f  hada'  bha  iad


RIDEBB  NAN  CBIST.  33

an  sin,  'n  nair  a  thuit  iad  thairis  marbh.    Dh'  f  halbh  iad  *8  thog  iad
na  fithichf  's  thugar  leo  iad,  agus  a  cheud  bhaile  a  ràinig  iad,  thug
iad  na  fithich  4o'  dh^  f  huineadair  's  dh'  iarr  iad  air  dusan  pith  a
dheanamh  do  na  fithich.    Thug  iad  leo  na  pithean,  *s  dh'  f  halbh  iad
air  an  turns.     Mu  bheul  na  h-oidhche,  's  iad  ann  an  coille  mhbr
dhiimhail  a  bha  sin  thàinìg  ceithir  thar  f  hichead  do  robairean  a
mach  as  a  choUle,  's  thubhairt  iad  no,  ^lad  a  liobhairt  an  sporain ;
ach  thubhairt  iadsan,  <*  Nach  robh  sporan  aca,  ach  gu  'n  robh  beagan
bidh  a  bha  iad  a  giulan  leo."    "  'S  maith  biadh  f  h^in,"  agus  thoisich
na  robairean  air  itheadh.     Ach  cha  deach  iad  ro  dhkna,  'n  nair  a
thnit  fear  thall  sa  bhos  dhiubh.    A  nuair  a  chunnaic  iad  gn'n  robh
na  robairean  marbh,  rannsaich  iad  na  pocaichean  aca,  's  f  huair  iad
mòran  or  's  airgiod  air  na  robairean.    Dh'  f  halbh  iad  air  an  aghaidh
gQ3  an  dràinig  iad  ridire  nan  Ceist     Bha  tigh  ridire  nan  Ceist
anns  an  kite  bu  bhrèagha  san  diithaich  sin,  agus  xaa.  bha  'n  tigh
bòidheach,  'se  bha  bòidbeach  a  nighean.    Cha  robh  a  leithid  air
nachdar  an  t-saoghail  gu  Mir,  Co  maiseach  rithe.    'S  cha  'n  f  haigh-
eadh  a  h-aon  ri  phòsadh  i,  ach  fear  a  chnireadh  Ceist  air  an  ridire
80  nach  h'urrainn  da  f  haasgladh.    Smaonich  na  fleasgaich  gu  'n
rachadh  iad 's  gu  feucbadh  iad  ceist  a  chuir  air ;  agus  bha  'm  fear
a  b'  òige  gu  seasadh  an  kite  gille  d'a  bhràthair  bu  sine.     Ràìnig
iad  tigh   ridire  nan   Ceist,  leis  a   cheist  so,   ''Mharbh  a  h-aon,
dithis,  's  mharbh  dithis  a  dba-dheug  's  marbh  dha-dheug,  Ceithir,
thar-f  hichead,  's  thàìnig  dithis  as ;  's  bha  iad  gu  bhi  air  bhòrt
mòr  's  àirde  onair  gus  am  fuasgladh  e  a  cheist.    Bha  iad  greis
mar  so  leis  an  ridire;   ach  oidhche  do  na  h-oidhchean,  thàinig
te  do  na  maighdeannan  coimhideachd  aig  nighean  an  ridire,  gu
leaba  'ghille,  's  thubhairt  i  ris,  "  K'  an  innseadh  e  à  cheist  dhith  gu'
rachadh  i  luidhe  leis,  agus  mar  sin  f  hèin  rinn  i ;  ach  mu  'n  do  leig  e
air  falbh  i,  thug  e  a  l^e  dhi,  ach  cha  do  dh'  innis  e  dhi  a  cheist ;
agus  mar  sin  rinn  an  da  mhaighdean  dhèug,  oidhch'  an  d^igh  oidhche
agua  thubhairt  e  ris  an  te  mu  dheireadh,  **  Nach  robh  fios  an  toimh-
scachan  aig  neach  air  bith  ach  aig  a  mhaighstir  san  a  mhkin.**
Comaco-dhiiidh'  innis  an  gille  gach  ni  mar  a  bha'  tachairt  da  mhaigh-
stir; ach  aon  oidhch'  an  dèigh  so,  thkinig  nighean  an  ridire  do  sheb-
mar  a  fohrathair  bu  sine,  's  tiiubhairt  i  gu'n  rachadh  i  luidhe  leis  na
*n  iimseadh  e  a'  cheist  dhi.     Nise  cha  robh  na  chomas  a  ditiltadh,
agus  'a  ann  mar  so  a  bha,  chaidh  i  luidhe  leis,  ach  anns  a  mhaduinn,
thug  e  a  lèine  dhi,  's  leig  e  air  falbh  i,  's  co  luath  'sa  dh'^irich  ridire
nan  Ceist,  chuir  e  fios  air,  'b  dh'  f  hnasgail  e  a'  cheist,  's  thubhairt  e
ris,  "  Gun  robh  a  dha  roghainn  aige,  an  ceann  a  chall,  na'  leigeil
air  fklbh  ann  an  eithear,  gun  bhiadh  gnn  deoch,  's  gun  ràmh  na

VOU  II.  D


34  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

taoman."  Labhair  am  fleasgach,  's  thubhairt  e,  '*Tha  Ceist  eil
agam  ri  chuir  ort  mu  'n  tachairna  h-uile  nithibh  so."  **  Abair  romh-
ad,'*  thtiirt  an  ridire.  "  Bha  mi  fein  's  mo  ghille,  latha  ann  am
frìdh  a'  sealg ;  loisg  mo  ghille  air  maigheach  's  thuit  i  ;  thug  e  'n
craiceann  dhi,  's  leig  e  air  falbh  i.  Rimi  e  mar  sin  air  a  dha-dheug  ;
thug  e  'n  craiceann  diubh  's  leig  e  air  falbh  iad,  agus  mu  dheireadh,
thainig  maigheach  mhòr  bhrèagha,  's  loisg  mi  fein  oirre,  's  thug  mi  'n
craiceann  dhi,  's  leig  mi  air  falbh  i."  **  Moire,  cha  'n  ^eil  do  cheist
duillich  f  huasgladh  bganaich,"  thuirt  an  ridire,  **  tha  sin  ag  inns-
eadh  gu'n  do  luidh  do  ghille  le  dk  mbaighdean  dheug  mo  nighinn-sa,
agus  thu  fein  le  mo  nighean  's  gu'n  d'  thug  sibh  na  Mintean  dhiubh."
Sin  agad  do  thoimhseachain  mo  ghille  maith,  agus  feuma  tu'  pòsadh/'
Agus  se  sin  a  rinn  iad  's  banais  mhbr,  ghreàdhmach  a  mhair  latha  's
bliadhna.  Dh'  f  halbh  am  fear  a  b-òige  dhachaìdh  an  so,  'n  uair  a
f  hoair  e  a  bhràthair  co  maith  air  a  dhòigh,  's  thug  am  brkthair  bu
sine  dha  na  h-uile  cbir  air  an  rioghachd  a  bha  aig  an  tigh.  Bha
dliith  do  dh'  f  hearann  ridire  na^  Ceist  tritiir  f  hamhairean,  agus  iad
daonnan  a'  mort  'sa'  marbhadh  cuid  do  dhaoine  an  ridire,  'sa  tabhairt
uapa  spiiill.  Latha  do  na  laithean,  thuirt  ridire  nan  Ceist  ri
chliamhuinn,  na  'm  biodh  spiorad  duin'  ann,  gu'n  rachadh  e  a  mharbh-
adh  nam  famhairean.  Agus  's  ann  mar  so  a  bha,  dh'  f  halbh  e,  's
choinnich  e  na  famhairean  agus  thainig  e  dhachaidh  le  ceann
nan  tri  famhairean,  *s  thilg  e  iad  aig  casan  an  ridire.  "  'S  olach
tapaidh  thu  gu  'n  teagamh,  agus  'se  is  ainm  dhuit  na  dheigh  so,
Gaisgeach  na  sgiath  bàine."  Chaidh  ainm  gaisgeach  na  sgiath  bàine
am  fad  *s  an  goirid.  Bha  brkthair  gaisgeach  na  sgiath  bkine  anabarr-
ach  laidir,  tapaidh,  agus  gun  f  hios  aige  co  e  gaisgeach  na  sgiath
bkine,  smaoinich  e  gun  rachadh  e  dh'  f  heuchainn  deas  ris.  Bha
gaisgeach  na  sgiath-bàine  a'  gabhail  còmhnuidh  air  fearann  an
f  hamhair  a  nis,  's  nighean  an  ridire  leis.  Thkinig  a  bhrkthair  's  dh'
iarr  e  còmhrag  a  dhèanamh  ris.  Thbisich  na  fir  air  a'  ch^ile,  agus
thug  iad  air  gleachd  bho  mhaduinn  gu  feasgar.  Mu  dheireadh  thall
'n  uair  a  bha  iad  sgith,  fann,  's  air  toirt  thairis,  leum  gaisgeach  na
sgiath  bkine  am  Baideal  mbr,  's  dh'  iarr  e  air  coinneachainn  ris  sa
mhaduinn.  Chuir  an  leum  so  am  fear  eile  fuidh  sprochd,  's  thubhairt
e,  "  Math  dh'  f  haoidte  nach  bi  thu  co  subailte  mu  'n  am  so  am
màireach."  Chaidh  am  brkthair  bg  a  nise  do  bhothan  beag,  bochd  a
bha  dllith  do  thigh  gaisgeach  na  sgiath-bkine  gu  sgith,  airsnealach ;
agus  anns  a  mhaduinn,  dh'  iiraich  iad  an  tuasaid  agus  thbisich  gaisg-
each na  sgiath-bkine  air  dol  air  ais,  gus  an  deach  e  'n  coimhir  a  chuil
ann  an  abhuinn.  '*  Feumaidh  e  gu'  bheil  cuid  do  m '  f  huil  annad  ma  'n
deanadh  tu  so  ormsa."    "Co  'n  fhuil  da  'm  bheil  thu?"  thuirt  am


RIDERE  NAN  CEIST.  3  5

fear  a  b*  òìge.  **  'S  mise  mac  Aidean  righ  mòr  na  h-Albann."  **  'S
mise  do  bhràtbair."  'S  ann  an  so  a  dh'  aithnich  iad  a*  ch^ile.  Chair
iad  fàilte  'a  furan  air  a  ch^ile,  's  thug  gaisgeach  na  sgiath-bàine  an
so  a  stigh  e  do  'n  lùchairt,  agus  's  e  'bha  toileach  f  haicinn  nighean  an
ridire.  Dh^  f  han  e  car  tamull  maille  riu,  agus  *iia  dheigh  sin,  smaoin-
ich  e  gun  rachadh  e  dhachaidh  d*a  rioghachd  f^in,  agus  a  nuair  a
bha  e  gabhail  seachad  air  pkileas  mòr  a  bha'  sin,  chunnaic  e  da
f  hear  dheug  a*  camanachd  fa  chomhair  a  phàileis.  Smaoinich  e  gun
rachadh  e  greis  a  chamanachd  leo,  ach  cha  b'  f  had'  a  bha  iad  a'  cam-
anachd *n  uair  a  chaldh  iad  a  mach  air  a'  ch^ile,  agus  rug  am  fear  bu
suarraiche  dhiubh  air,  agus  chrath  'se  e  mar  gu'n  deanadh  e  air  pàisde.
Smaoinich  e  nach  robh  math  dha'  Ikmh  a  thogail,  am  measg  an  da
cheathaimeach  dheug  so,  agus  dh'  f  heoraich  e  dhiubh,  co  dha  bo
mhic  iad  ?  Thubhairt  iad,  **  Gu  'm  Ve  clann  aon  athar  iad,  bràthair
do  ghaisgeach  na  sgiath-bàine,  agus  nach  b'e  an  aon  mhktbair  a  bh'
aig  a  h-aon  dhiubh."  **  'Smise  bhur  n-athair,"  thubhairt  esan ;  s  dh'
fharraid  e  dhiubh,  "An  robh  am  mkthraichean  uile  beo?"  Thuirt
iad  ^a  'n  robh.  Chaidh  e  leo  gus  an  d'f  huair  e  na  mkthraichean,
agus  a  nuair  a  bha  iad  uile  gu  falbh  thug  e  leis  dhachaidh  an  dh
bhean  dèug  's  a'  dha  mhac  dheug,  agus  cha  'n  'eil  fìos  agamsa  nach
e  'n  aliochd  a  tha  'nan  righrean  air  Alba  gus  a'  latha  'n  diugh.

Written  down  from  the  recitation  of  John  Mackenzie,  fisher-
man at  Inverary,  who  says  that  he  learned  the  tale  from  an  old
man  in  Lorn  many  years  ago.  He  has  been  thirty-six  years
at  Inyerary.  He  first  told  me  the  tale  fluently,  and  afterwards
dictated  it  to  me ;  and  the  words  written  are,  as  nearly  as  pos-
sible, those  used  by  Mackenzie  on  the  first  occasion.

April  1859.  Hectob  Urquhart.

The  word  pronounced  Rèet-djS-rS,  and  variously  spelt  Ridir,
Bighdir,  and  Kighdeire,  is  explained  in  a  manuscript  history
of  the  Campbells,  written  about  1827,  as  Righ,  king — dei,  after
— m,  king.  If  this  be  correct,  the  word  would  mean  a  following
or  minor  king.  It  may  equally  be  a  corruption  of  Ritter,  or
Reiter ;  and  I  have  translated  it  by  knight,  because  it  is  now
applied  to  all  knights.

The  author  of  the  manuscript  says : — The  term  is  handed
down  even  in  Gaelic  tales,  and  mentions  several  which  were  then
current,  Bighdiere  nan  Spleugh,  and  an  Righdeiri  Ruadh ;  he  adds,
that  Bighdeirin  dubh  Loch  Oigh  (the  Black  Knights  of  Loch


36  WEST  HIQHLAND  tales.

Awe)  was  the  name  then  used  bj  old  Highlanders  in  mentioning
the  chiefs  of  the  Duin  (Campbells),  and  that  the  ruins  of  Eredin
Castle  were  then  known  by  no  other  name  than  Larach  tai  nan
Bighdeirin — ^the  ruins  of  the  house  of  the  knights.

The  writer  argues  from  old  manuscript  histories,  charters,
etc.,  that  the  term  was  brought  from  Ireland  by  the  colony  who
settled  in  Cantire  at  a  very  early  period,  and  who  spread  thence
over  Argyllshire,  and  founded  a  kingdom,  of  which  frequent  men-
tion is  made  in  Irish  annals  as  the  Dalreudinan,  or  Scoto-Irish
colonization  of  Argyll,  Cantire,  Lorn,  and  Islay.  .  It  is  supposed
to  have  taken  place  about  a.d.  503,  under  Laom,  Fergus,  and
Angus,  three  sons  of  Eric,  the  descendant  of  Cairbre  Ruadh,  a
son  of  Conary  II.,  who  ruled  as  chief  king  of  Ireland  a.d.  212.
Be  that  as  it  may,  all  the  Gaelic  traditions  now  current  in  the
Isles  point  at  an  Irish  migration  which  took  place  in  the  year  of
grace  once  upon  a  iimej  and  the  word  Bighdeire  occui's  continu-
ally, where  it  seems  to  mean  a  small  king,  and  a  king  of  Erin  ;
for  example,  "  there  was  a  king  (Bee)  and  a  Beet-djer — as  there
was  and  will  be,  and,  as  grows  the  fir-tree,  some  of  them  crooked
and  some  of  them  straight — and  he  was  a  king  of  Erin."  Even
the  word  Albanach,  now  used  for  Scotchman,  means  Wanderer.
When  the  king's  son  changes  his  name,  after  killing  the  giants,
it  seems  as  if  he  were  made  a  knight.

This  tale,  then,  would  seem  to  be  some  mythological  account
of  events  which  may  be  traced  in  Grimm's  stories,  in  the  Classics,
and  elsewhere,  mixed  up  with  names  and  titles  belonging  to  the
colonization  of  Argyllshire  by  Irish  tribes,  and  all  applied  to  the
kings  of  Scotland  in  the  last  sentence.  It  is  a  fair  representation
of  the  strange  confusion  of  reality  and  fancy,  history  and  mytho-
logy, of  which  I  believe  these  stories  to  be  composed.

The  nearest  story  to  it  which  I  know  is  Das  Bathsel,  in
Grimm,  No.  22.  Several  versions  are  given  in  the  third  volume,
which  seem  to  vary  from  each  other,  about  as  much  as  this
Gaelic  version  varies  from  them  all.

There  is  something  like  the  fight  between  Bomulus  and  hie
brother.    Alba  means  Scotland.


XXIII.
THE  BURGH.

From  Alexander  M 'Donald,  tenant,  and  others,  Barra.  Jaly  1859.

C^OTJE  were  watching  cattle  in  BaLlebhurgh  (Burgh
-■-  Farm).  They  were  in  a  fold.  The  four  were
Domhnull  MacGhilleathain,  Domhnull  Macant'  Saoir,
Calum  MacNill,  and  Domnnll  Domhnullach.  They
saw  a  dog.  Calum  MacNill  said  that  they  should
strike  the  dog.  Said  Domhnull  MacGhilleathain,  "  We
will  not  strike.  K  thou  strikest  him  thou  wilt  repent
it"  Calum  MacNill  struck  the  dog,  and  his  hand
and  ins  arm  lost  their  power.  He  felt  a  great  pain  in
his  hand  and  his  arm,  and  one  of  the  other  lads  car-
ried his  stick  home ;  he  could  not  carry  it  himsel£
He  was  lamenting  his  hand,  and  he  went  where  there
was  an  old  woman,  Mc  a  Phi,  to  get  knowledge  about
his  hand.  She  said  to  him  that  he  would  be  so  till
the  end  of  a  day  and  a  year ;  and  at  the  end  of  a  day
and  year,  to  go  to  the  knoll  and  say  to  it,  "  If  thou
dost  not  let  with  me  the  strength  of  my  hand,  I
or  my  race  will  leave  neither  stick  nor  stone  of  thee
that  we  will  not  drive  to  pieces."

At  the  end  of  a  day  and  year  his  comrades  said,
"  There  is  now  a  day  and  year  since  thou  hast  lost
the  power  of  thy  hand,  come  to  the  knoll  till  thy  hand
get  its  power,  as  the  woman  said."  He  went  himself
and  his  comrades.     They  reached  the  hill.     He  drew


38  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

his  stick,  and  lie  said  to  the  knoll,  "  If  thou  dost  not
let  with  me  the  strength  of  my  hand,  I  myself  or  my
race  will  leave  neither  stick  nor  stone  of  thee  that  we
will  not  drive  to  pieces."  And  he  got  the  power  of
his  hand.


BAILE  BHUIRGH.

Bha  ceathrar  a'  faire  cniidh  ann  am  Baile  bhuirgh.  Bha  iad  ann  an
cuidh.  B'e  'cheathrar  Domhnull  MacGbilleathain,  Domhnull  Mac-an
t-Saoir,  Calam  MacNill,  agas  Domhnnll  Domhnullach.  Chnnnaic  iad
ctu  Thmrt  Calnm  MacNill  gnmbuaileadh  ead  an  cti.  Thuirt  DombnuU
MacGhilleatbain.  *''  Cha  bhuail,  ma  bbuaileas  tu  e  bidh  aithreachas
ort.''  Bhaail  Calum  MacNill  an  cii  agas  chaill  a  Ikmh  agus  a  ghkirdean
an  liigh.  Bha  e  mothachainn  cràdh  mòr  'na  Ikimb  agas  'na  ghàird-
ean,  agns  ghitilain  h-aon  de  na  gillean  eile  dachaidh  am  bata,  cha  b'
orrainn  e  fhin  a  ghitilan.  Bha  e  'gearan  a  Ikimhe,  's  chaidh  e  far  an
robh  seana  bhean,  Nic  a  Phi  airson  eolas  fhaotamn  ma  Ikimh.
Thairt  i  ris  gam  biodh  e  mar  sin  ga  ceann  la  as  bliadhna,  's  an  ceann
la  a's  bliadhna  e  dhol  gos  a'  chnoc,  's  a  radh  ris  "  Mar  an  lig  thu
leamsa  liigh  mo  Ikimhe  cha  n  fhag  mise,  na  mo  shliochd,  clach  na
crann  diot  nach  cair  sin  as  a  ch^le."  An  ceann  la  a's  bliadhna
thuirt  a  chompanaich  ris.  "  Tha  nis  la  a*s  bliadhna  o'n  a  chaill  thn
liigh  na  Ikimhe,  thalla  gos  a'  chnoc,  's  go'm  faigheadh  do  Ikmh  a  Itigh
mar  a  thairt  a'  bhean."  Dh'  fholbh  e  fhin  *8  a  chompanaich,  's  rkinig
end  an  cnoc.  Tharruinn  e'm  bata  's  thairt  eris  a'  chnoc,  *'Mar  an  lig
thu  leamsa  Ihgh  mo  Ikimhe  cha  *n  fhkg  mi  fhin,  na  mo  shliochd,
clach  na  crann  diot  nach  d'  thoir  sin  as  a  cheile."  Fhuair  e  Itigh  na
Ikimhe.

Written  by  Hector  MacLean,  from  the  telling  of  a  man  in
Barra.  This  may  be  compared  with  the  Manks  tradition  about
the  Black  Dog,  at  Peel  Castle.


XXIV.
THE  TULMAN.

From  Alexander  M'Donald,  tenant,  and  others,  Barra.  July  1859.

rriHEEE  was  a  woman  in  Baile  Thangusdail,  and  she
-■-  was  out  seeking  a  couple  of  calves ;  and  the  night
and  lateness  caught  her,  and  there  came  rain  and  tem-
pest, and  she  was  seeking  shelter.  She  went  to  a
knoll  with  the  couple  of  calves,  and  she  was  striking
the  tether  peg  into  it.  The  knoll  opened.  She  heard
a  gleegashing  as  if  a  pot-hook  were  clashing  beside  a
pot.  She  took  wonder,  and  she  stopped  striking  the
tether-peg.  A  woman  put  out  her  head  and  all  above
her  middle,  and  she  said,  "  What  business  hast  thou
to  be  troubling  this  tulman  in  which  I  make  my  dwell-
ing ?"  "I  am  taking  care  of  this  couple  of  calves,
and  I  am  but  weak.  Where  shall  I  go  with  them  ? "
"  Thou  shalt  go  with  them  to  that  breast  down  yon-
der. Thou  wilt  see  a  tuft  of  grass.  K  thy  couple  of
calves  eat  that  tuft  of  grass,  thou  wilt  not  be  a  day
without  a  milk  cow  as  long  as  thou  art  alive,  because
thou  hast  taken  my  counsel"

As  she  said,  she  never  was  without  a  milk  cow
after  that,  and  she  was  alive  fourscore  and  fifteen  years
after  the  night  that  was  there.


40  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


AN  TULMAN.

Bha  boireannach  ann  am  Baile  Tbangasdail,  's  bha  i  mach  sag  iarr-

aidh  caigionn  laogb,  agos  rug  an  oidhche  'san  t-anmocb  urra,  agus
thkinig  sileadh  agus  sion,  *s  bha  i  'g  iarraidb  fasgaidh.    Chaidh  i  go

cnoc  leis  a'  chaigionn  laogb  ^s  bba  i  'bualadh  a^  cbipein  ann.    Db*

fhosgail  an  cnoc     Chual  i  gliogadaicb,  mar  go*m  biodh  buthal  a*

gleadhraicb  taobh  poite.     Ghabb  i  ionghantas.     Stad  i  'bboaladh  a'

cbipein.    Cbnir  boireannach  a  macb  a  ceann,  's  na  robh  as  cionn  a

miadboin,  's  tbuirt  i  rithe.  "  D4  'n  gnothach  a  tb'  agad  a  bhi  'cur  dragh

air  an  tulman  so  's  a'  bbeil  mise  'gabbail  combnuidb?  "     **  Tba  mi

'toirtan  abr'  air  a*  cbaigionn  laogh  so,  's  cba  'n  'ell  mi  ach  lag,  ca'  n  d'

tb^id  mi  leo?  "    Th^id  tbu  leo  'ionnsoidb  an  ncbd  'ud  shias,  cbi  thu

bad  feoir  an  sin.    Ma  db'  itbeas  do  chaigionn  laogb  am  bad  feoir  sin

cba  bbi  tbu  latba  gun  mhart  bainne  fhad  's  is  beo  tbu,  o'n  a  gbabh

tbu  mo  chombairle."    Mar  a  tbubhairt  i,  cba  robh  i  riabb  gun  mhart

bainn'  as  a  db^igh  so,  's  bba  i  bob  còig  deug  agus  ceitbir  ficbead  bliadb

na  'n  d^igb  na  h'  oidhche  'bba  'n  siod."

Written  by  Hector  MacLean,  from  the  dictation  of  a  man  in
Barra.


XXV.
THE  ISLE  OF  PABAIDH.

From  Alexander  M'Donald,  tenant,  and  others,  Barra.  July  1859.

rjlHEKE  came  a  woman  of  peace  (a  faiiy)  the  way  of
-■-  the  house  of  a  man  in  the  island  of  Fahaidh,  and
she  had  the  hunger  of  motherhood  on  her.  He  gave
her  food,  and  that  went  well  with  her.  She  staid  that
night.  When  she  went  away,  she  said  to  him,  "  I  am
making  a  desire  that  none  of  the  people  of  this  island
may  go  in  childbed  after  this."  None  of  these  people,
and  none  others  that  would  make  their  dwelling  in  the
island  ever  departed  in  childbed  from  that  time.


EILEAN  PHABAIDH.

THATinG  boireannach  sith  rathad  tigh  dain^  ann  an  eilean  Phabaidh,
agns  acras  na  laidhe  shiUbhl'  urra.  Thag  e  biadh  dhi,  *s  ghabh  sin  go
math  aice.  Dh'  fhan  i  'n  oidhche  sin.  Nur  a  dh'  fhalbh  i  thuirt  i
ris.  **  Tha  mise  deanadh  iarrtas  nach  fhalbh  gin,  de  dhaoin*  an  eilean
80,  ann  an  leaba  na  sihbhla  as  a  dh^igh  so."  Cha  d'  fhalbh  gin  riabh
de  na  daoine  sin  *na  gin  eile  bhiodh  a^  gabhail  comhnuidh  *san  eilean
naidhe  sin,  ann  an  leaba  na  siiibhia.

Written  by  Hector  MacLean,  from  the  telling  of  a  man  in
Barra.


XXVI.
SANNTEAIGH.

From  Alexander  M 'Donald,  tenant,  and  others,  Barra.  July  1859.

rpHEEE  was  a  herd's  wife  in  the  island  of  Sann-
■J-  traigh,  and  she  had  a  kettle.  A  woman  of  peace
(fairy)  would  come  every  day  to  seek  the  kettle.  She
would  not  say  a  word  when  she  came,  but  she  would
catch  hold  of  the  kettle.  When  she  would  catch  the
kettle,  the  woman  of  the  house  would  say —

A  smith  is  able  to  make
Cold  iron  hot  with  coal.
The  due  of  a  kettle  is  bones,
And  to  bring  it  back  again  whole.

The  woman  of  peace  would  come  back  every  day  with
the  kettle  and  flesh  .and  bones  in  it.  On  a  day  that
was  there,  the  housewife  was  for  going  over  the  ferry  to
Baile  a  Chaisteil,  and  she  said  to  her  man,  "  If  thou
wilt  say  to  the  woman  of  peace  as  I  say,  I  will  go  to
Baile  CastW  "  Oo  !  IwiUsayii  Surely  it's  I  that
will  say  it."  He  was  spinning  a  heather  rope  to  be
set  on  the  house.  He  saw  a  woman  coming  and  a
shadow  from  her  feet,  and  he  took  fear  of  her.  He
shut  the  door.  He  stopped  his  work.  When  she
came  to  the  door  she  did  not  find  the  door  open,  and
he  did  not  open  it  for  her.  She  went  above  a  hole
that  was  in  the  house.  The  kettle  gave  two  jumps,
and  at  the  third  leap  it  went  out  at  the  ridge  of  the
house.  The  night  came,  and  the  kettle  came  not.  The
wife  came  back  over  the  ferry,  and  she  did  not  see  a


SANNTRAIGH.  43

bit  of  the  kettle  within,  and  she  asked,  "  Where  was
the  kettle?"  "Well  then  I  don't  care  where  it  is,"
said  the  man  ;  "  I  never  took  such  a  fright  as  I  took
at  it.  I  shut  the  door,  and  she  did  not  come  any  more
with  it"  "  Good-for-nothing  wretch,  what  didst  thou
do  Ì  There  are  two  that  will  be  ill  off— thyself  and  I.''
"  She  will  come  to-morrow  with  it."     "  She  will  not


come."


She  hasted  herself  and  she  went  away.  She
reached  the  knoll,  and  there  was  no  man  within.  It
was  after  dinner,  and  they  were  out  in  the  mouth  of
the  night.  She  went  in.  She  saw  the  kettle,  and  she
lifted  it  with  her.  It  was  heavy  for  her  with  the
remnants  that  they  left  in  it.  When  the  old  carle
that  was  within  saw  her  going  out,  he  said —

Silent  wife,  silent  wife,
Tliat  came  on  us  from  tlie  land  of  chase,
Thoa  man  on  the  surface  of  the  "  Bruth,"
Loose  the  Black,  and  slip  the  Fierce.

The  two  dogs  were  let  loose ;  and  she  was  not  long
away  when  she  heard  the  clatter  of  the  dogs  coming.
She  kept  the  remnant  that  was  in  the  kettle,  so  that
if  she  could  get  it  with  her,  well,  and  if  the  dogs  should
come  that  she  might  throw  it  at  them.  She  perceived
the  dogs  coming.  She  put  her  hand  in  the  kettle.
She  took  the  board  out  of  it,  and  she  threw  at  them  a
quarter  of  what  was  in  it.  They  noticed  it  there  for  a
while.  She  perceived  them  again,  and  she  threw
another  piece  at  them  when  they  closed  upon  her.  She
went  away  walking  as  well  as  she  might ;  when  she
came  near  the  farm,  she  threw  the  mouth  of  the  pot
downwards,  and  there  she  left  them  all  that  was  in  it.
The  dogs  of  the  town  struck  (up)  a  barking  when  they
saw  the  dogs  of  peace  stopping.  The  woman  of  peace
never  came  more  to  seek  the  kettle.


44  WEST  HIQHLAin)  TALES.


SEANNTRA16H.

Bha  bean  fir  ooimhead  ann  an  eilean  Shanntraigh  agos  bha  coir'
aioe.  Thigeadh  bean  shith  h-nile  latha  dh*  iarraidh  a*  choire.  Cha
chanadh  i  smid  nor  a  thigeadh,  i  ach  bheireadh  i  air  a*  choire.  Nor  a
bheireadh  i  air  a*  choire  theireadh  bean  an  tìghe.

'S  treasaiche  gobha  gual
Go  iarrann  fiiar  a  bhruich ;
DIeasnas  coire  cnàimh
*Sa  thoirt  slàn  go  tigh.

Thigeadh  a'  bhean  shith  air  a  h-ais  h-uile  latha  leis  a*  choire,  agos
feoil  as  cnàmhan  ann.  Latha  bha  *n  sin  bha  bean  an  tighe  airson
dol  thar  an  aiseig  do  Bhail*  a  Chaisteil,  agus  thuirt  i  r'a  fear,  **  Ma
their  thusa  ris  a*  bhean  ahith  mar  a  their  mise  falbhaidh  mi  'Bhaile
Ghaisteil."  "  U I  their,"  urs*  esan,  ***8  cinnteach  gur  mi  'their."  Bha  e
sniamh  siamain  fraoich  gos  a  chur  air  an  tigh.  Chunnaic  e  bean  a*
tighinn  's  faileas  a  a  casan,  *s  ghabh  e  eagal  roimhpe.  Dhmid  e  'n
domsd  as  stad  e  d'a  obair.  Nur  a  thUnig  ise  do  *n  domsd  cha  d'  fhnair
i  'n  dorusd  fosgailte,  's  cha  d'  fhosgail  esan  di  e.  Chaidh  i  as  cionn
toll  a  bha's  an  tigh.  Thag  an  coire  da  leum  as,  agos  air  an  treas  leum
dh'  fhalbh  e  mach  air  diiom  an  tighe.  Thkinig  an  oidhche,  's  cha  d'
thàinig  an  coire.  Thill  a'  bhean  thar  an  aiseig,  's  cha  'n  fhac  i  dad  de
'n  choire  stigh,  agns  dh'  fhoighnichd  i  ca  'n  robh  'n  coire.  "  Mata  's
coma  learn  ca'  bheil  e,"  urs'  a  fear,  **  cha  do  ghabh  mi  riabh  a  leithid  de
dh'  eagal 's  a  ghabh  mi  roimhe.  Ghabh  mi  eagal,  's  dhhinn  mi  'n
domsd,  's  cha  d'  thàinig  i  tnillidh  leis."  '<  A  dhonain  dhona  de  rinn
thu?  's  dithisd  a  bhios  gu  don'  thu  fhin  agus  mise."  <*  Thig  i  'm
màireach  leia."    **  Cha  d'  thig."

Sgioblaich  i  i  fhin,  's  dh'  fhalbh  i'  *s  ràinig  i  'n  cnoc,  's  cha  robh
doine  stigh.  Bha  e  'n  dèìgh  na  dinnearach,  's  bha  eud  a  mach  am
bial  na  h-oidhche.  Ghabh  i  stigh.  Chunnaic  i  'n  coire  's  thog  i
leath'  e.  Bha  e  trom  aice,  'san  còrr  a  dh'  fhag  Aud  ann.  Nur  a
chunnaic  am  bodach  a  bha  stigh  i  dol  amach.    Thuirt  e.

A  bhean  bhalbh-a  bhean  bhalbh
A  thàinig  oimn  a  tir  nan  sealg ;
Fhir  a  tha  'n  uachdar  a'  bhruth,
Fuasgail  an  Dugh  's  lig  an  Garg.

Ligeadh  an  da  chh  ma  sgaoil,  's  cha  b'  fhada  bha  is*  air  falbh  nur  a
chual  i  strathail  nan  con  a'  tighinn.  Ghlèidh  i  *n  còrr  a  bha  's  a'  choire
air  alt  *a  na  'm  faigheadh  i  leath'  e  gum  bu  mhath,  'a  na  'n  d'  thigeadh


8EANNTBAIGH.  45

na  com  gun  tilgeadh  i  on'  e.  Dh'  fhairich  i  na  coin  a*  tighixm,  *8  chnir
i  làmh  Ba'  choire,  's  thug  i  *m  bbid  as,  ^8  thilg  i  onra  ceathra  de  na  bh'
ann.  Thng  end  an  aire  treis  air  an  siud.  Dh*  fhairich  i  1)8  end,  *8
thilg  i  pio8*  eil*  orra  nnr  a  dias  end  nrra.  Dh*  fhalbh  i  ooiaeachd  cho
math  'sadh'fhaodadhi  Nur  ihkmigidlhthair  a'  bhaile  thilg  1  ^hial
fodha,  '8  dh'  fhàg  i  n  sind  aca  na  bh'  ann.  Bhnail  coin  a*  bhail'  air
comhartaich  nnr  a  chunnaic  end  na  coin  shith  'stad.  Cha  d'  thàinìg
a'  bhean  shith  riabh  tnillidh  a  dh'  iarraidh  a'  choirs.

Written  by  Hector  MacLean,  from  the  telling  of  a  man  in
Barra.


1


XXVII.
CAILLIACH  MHOE  CHLIBHEICH.

From  W.  Ross,  stalker.

nPHIS  celebrated  witch  was  accused  of  having
^  enchanted  the  deer  of  the  Eeay  forest,  so  that  they
avoided  pursuit.  Lord  Eeay  was  exceedingly  angry,
but  at  a  loss  how  to  remedy  the  eviL  His  man
William  (the  same  who  braved  the  witch  and  sat
down  in  her  hut)  promised  to  find  out  if  this  was  the
case.  He  watched  her  for  a  whole  night,  and  by  some
counter  enchantments  managed  to  be  present  when  in
the  early  morning  she  was  busy  milking  the  hinds.
They  were  standing  all  about  the  door  of  the  hut  till
one  of  them  ate  a  hank  of  blue  worsted  hanging  from
a  nail  in  it.  The  witch  struck  the  animal,  and  said,
"  The  spell  is  oflf  you ;  and  Lord  Eeay's  bullet  will  be
your  death  to-day."  WiUiam  repeated  this  to  his
master  to  confirm  the  tale  of  his  having  passed  the
night  in  the  hut  of  the  great  hag,  which  no  one  would
believe.  And  the  event  justified  it,  for  a  fine  yellow
hind  was  killed  that  day,  and  the  hank  of  blue  yam
was  found  in  its  stomach.

This  is  one  of  nearly  a  hundred  stories,  gathered  amongst
the  people  of  Sutherland  by  a  very  talented  collector,  whose
numerous  accomplishments  unfortunately  do  not  include  Gaelic.
This  resembles  an  account  of  a  Lapp  camp  (see  Introduction).
It  also  bears  some  affinity  to  a  story  published  by  Grant  Stewart,
in  which  a  ghost  uses  a  herd  of  deer  to  carry  her  furniture.


XXVIII.
THE  SMITH  AND  THE  FAIEIES.

From  the  Rev.  Thomas  Pattieson,  lelay.

^^EAES  ago  there  lived  in  Crossbrig  a  smith  of  the
-^  name  of  MacEachem.  This  man  had  an  only
child,  a  boy  of  about  thirteen  or  fourteen  years  of  age,
cheerful,  strong,  and  healthy.  All  of  a  sudden  he  fell
ill ;  took  to  his  bed  and  moped  whole  days  away.  No
one  could  tell  what  was  the  matter  with  him,  and  the
boy  himself  could  not,  or  would  not,  tell  how  he  felt.
He  was  wasting  away  fast;  getting  thin,  old,  and
yellow  j  and  his  father  and  all  his  friends  were  afraid
that  he  would  die.

At  last  one  day,  after  the  boy  had  been  lying  in
this  condition  for  a  long  time,  getting  neither  better
nor  worse,  always  confined  to  bed,  but  with  an  extra-
ordinary appetite, — one  day,  while  sadly  revolving  these
things,  and  standing  idly  at  his  forge,  with  no  heart  to
work,  the  smith  was  agreeably  surprised  to  see  an  old
man,  well  known  to  him  for  his.sagacity  and  knowledge  of
out-of-the-way  things,  walk  into  his  workshop.  Forth-
with he  told  him  the  occurrence  which  had  clouded  his
Hfe.

The  old  man  looked  grave  as  he  listened ;  and
after  sitting  a  long  time  pondering  over  all  he  had
heard,  gave  his  opinion  thus — "  It  is  not  your  son  you
have   got     The   boy   has  been   carried  away  by  the


48  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

*  Daione  Sith,'  and  they  have  left  a  Sibhreack  in  his
place."  "  Alas  !  and  what  then  am  I  to  do  ?"  said  the
smith.  "Howamlever  to  seemy  ownsonagain?"  **I
will  tell  you  how,"  answered  the  old  man.  "  But,  first,
to  make  sure  that  it  is  not  your  own  son  you  have  got,
take  as  many  empty  egg  shells  as  you  can  get,  go
with  them  into  the  room,  spread  them  out  carefully
before  his  sight,  then  proceed  to  draw  water  with
them,  canying  them  two  and  two  in  your  hands  as  if
they  were  a  great  weight,  and  arrange,  when  full,  with
every  sort  of  earnestness  round  the  fire."  The  smith
accordingly  gathered  as  many  broken  egg-shells  as  he
could  get,  went  into  the  room,  and  proceeded  to  carry
out  all  his  instructions.

He  had  not  been  long  at  work  before  there  arose
from  the  bed  a  shout  of  laughter,  and  the  voice  of  the
seeming  sick  boy  exclaimed,  "  I  am  now  800  years  of
age,  and  I  have  never  seen  the  like  of  that  before."

The  smith  returned  and  told  the  old  man.  "  Well,
now,"  said  the  sage  to  him,  "  did  I  not  tell  you  that  it
was  not  your  son  you  had  :  your  son  is  in  Borra-cheill
in  a  digh  there  (that  is,  a  round  green  hill  frequented
by  fairies).  Get  rid  as  soon  as  possible  of  this  in-
truder, and  I  think  I  may  promise  you  your  son."

"  You  must  light  a  very  large  and  bright  fire  before
the  bed  on  which  this  stranger  is  lying.  He  will  ask
you,  *  What  is  .the  use  of  such  a  fire  as  that  Ì '  Answer
him  at  once,  *  You  will  see  that  presently ! '  and  then,
seize  him,  and  throw  him  into  the  middle  of  it.  K  it  is
your  own  son  you  have  got,  he  will  call  out  to  save
him ;  but  if  not,  this  thing  will  fly  through  the  roof!*'

The  smith  again  followed  the  old  man's  advice ;
kindled  a  large  fire,  answered  the  question  put  to  him
as  he  had  been  directed  to  do,  and  seizing  the  child
flung  him  in  without  hesitation.    The  "  Sibhreach"  gave


THE  SMITH  AND  THE  FAIRIES.  49

an  awful  yell,  and  sprung  through  the  roof,  where  a
hole  was  left  to  let  the  smoke  out.

On  a  certain  night  the  old  man  told  him  the  green
round  hill,  where  the  fairies  kept  the  boy,  would  be
open.  And  on  that  night  the  smith,  having  provided
Idmself  with  a  bible,  a  dirk,  and  a  crowing  cock,  was
to  proceed  to  the  hill.  He  would  hear  singing  and
dancing,  and  much  merriment  going  on,  but  he  was  to
advance  boldly ;  the  bible  he  carried  would  be  a  certain
safeguard  to  him  against  any  danger  from  the  fairies.
On  entering  the  hill  he  was  to  stick  the  dirk  in  the
threshold,  to  prevent  the  hill  from  closing  upon  him  ;
"  and  then,"  continued  the  old  man,  "  on  entering  you
will  see  a  spacious  apartment  before  you,  beautifully
clean,  and  there,  standing  far  within,  working  at  a
forge,  you  will  also  see  your  own  son.  When  you
are  questioned,  say  you  come  to  seek  him,  and  will  not
go  without  him."

Not  long  alter  this,  the  time  came  round,  and  the
smith  saUied  forth,  prepared  as  instructed.  Sure
enough  as  he  approached  the  hill,  there  was  a  light
where  hght  was  seldom  seen  before.  Soon  after  a
sound  of  piping,  dancing,  and  joyous  merriment
reached  the  anxious  father  on  the  night  wind.

Overcoming  every  impulse  to  fear,  the  smith  ap-
proached the  threshold  steadily,  stuck  the  dirk  into  it
as  directed,  and  entered.  Protected  by  the  bible  he
carried  on  his  breast,  the  fairies  could  not  touch  him  ;
but  they  asked  him,  with  a  good  deal  of  displeasure,
what  he  wanted  there.  He  answered,  "  I  want  my
son,  whom  I  see  down  there,  and  I  will  not  go  without
him."

Upon  hearing  this,  the  whole  company  before  him
gave  a  loud  laugh,  which  wakened  up  the  cock  he
carried  dozing  in  his  arms,  who  at  once  leaped  up  on

VOL.  n.  E


50  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

his  shoulders,  clapped  his  wings  lustily,  and  crowed
loud  and  long.

The  fairies,  incensed,  seized  the  smith  and  his  son,
and  throwing  them  out  of  the  hill,  flung  the  dirk  after
them,  "  and  in  an  instant  a'  was  dark."

For  a  year  and  a  day  the  boy  never  did  a  turn  of
work,  and  hardly  ever  spoke  a  word ;  but  at  last  one
day,  sitting  by  his  father  and  watching  him  finishing
a  sword  he  was  making  for  some  chief,  and  which  he
was  very  particular  about,  he  suddenly  exclaimed,
"  That  is  not  the  way  to  do  it ; "  and  taking  the  tools
from  his  father's  hands  he  set  to  work  himself  in  his
place,  and  soon  fashioned  a  sword,  the  like  of  which
was  never  seen  in  the  country  before.

From  that  day  the  young  man  wrought  constantly
with  his  father,  and  became  the  inventor  of  a  peculiarly-
fine  and  weU-tempered  weapon,  the  making  of  which
kept  the  two  smiths,  father  and  son,  in  constant  em-
ployment, spread  their  fame  far  and  wide,  and  gave
them  the  means  in  abundance,  as  they  before  had  the
disposition  to  live  content  with  all  the  world  and  very
happily  with  one  another.

The  walls  of  the  house  where  this  celebrated  smith,  the  arti-
ficer of  the  "  Claidheamh  Ceann-Ileach,"  lived  and  wrought,  are
standing  to  this  day,  not  far  from  the  parish  church  of  Kilcho-
man,  Islay,  in  a  place  called  Caonis  gall.

Many  of  the  incidents  in  tUs  story  are  common  in  other  col-
lections ;  bat  I  do  not  know  any  published  story  of  the  kind  in
which  the  hero  is  a  smith.  This  smith  was  a  famous  character,
and  probably  a  real  personage,  to  whom  the  story  has  attached
itself.

The  gentleman  who  has  been  kind  enough  to  send  me  this
tale,  does  not  say  from  whom  he  got  it,  but  I  have  heard  of  the
Islay  smith,  who  could  make  wonderful  swords,  all  my  life,  and
of  the  "  Swords  of  the  Head  of  Islay."  The  Brewery  of  Egg-
shells, and  the  Throwing  of  the  Fairy  Changeling  into  the  Fire,  are


THE  SMITH  AND  THE  FAIRIES.  $  I

well-known  popular  tales  in  collections  from  Ireland,  Scotland,
Wales,  and,  I  think,  Brittany.  The  man  carried  into  the  hill  and
there  remaining  for  a  long  time,  is  also  an  incident  common  to
many  races,  inclnding  the  Jews,  and  one  which  I  have  heard  in
the  Highlands  ever  since  I  can  remember,  though  I  do  not
remember  to  have  heard  any  of  the  peasantry  tell  it  as  a  story.

The  belief  that  *'the  hill"  opened  on  a  certain  night,  and
that  a  light  shone  from  the  inside,  where  little  people  might  be
seen  dancing,  was  too  deeply  grounded  some  years  ago  to  be
lightly  spoken  of;  even  now,  on  this  subject,  my  kind  friend  Mrs.
MacTavish  writes — "  You  may  perhaps  remember  an  old  servant
we  had  at  the  manse  who  was  much  offended  if  any  one  doubted
these  etoTÌeB— {I  remernber  her  perfectly).  I  used  to  ask  her  the
reason  why  such  wonders  do  not  occur  in  our  day,  to  which  she
replied,  that  religious  knowledge  having  increased,  people's  faith
was  stronger  than  it  was  in  the  olden  time.  In  the  glebe  of  Kil-
brandon  in  Lorn  is  a  hill  called  Crocan  Corr — the  good  or  beau-
tiful hill  where  the  fairies  even  in  my  young  days  were  often  seen
dancing  around  their  fire.  I  sometimes  went  out  with  others  to
look,  but  never  succeeded  in  seeing  them  at  their  gambols.

"  Are  you  aware  that 's  mother  was  carried  away  by  the

fairies — (/  know  *- — ►  vjeU).  So  convinced  were  many  of  this
absurdity,  which  I  remember  perfectly  well,  that  it  was  with  diffi-
culty they  got  a  nurse  for  his  brother ,  who  being  a  deli-
cate child,  was  believed  to  have  been  conveyed  away  along  with
his  mother,  and  a  fairy  left  instead  of  him  during  his  father's
absence  *  *  *  The  child  however  throve  when  he  got  a
good  nurse,  and  grew  up  to  be  a  man,  which,  I  suppose,  convinced
them  of  their  folly.  Mr.  — — •  minister  of had  some  diffi-
culty in  convincing  a  man  whose  wife  was  removed  in  a  similar
manner  (she  died  in  childbed)^  that  his  son,  a  boy  twelve  years  of
age,  must  have  been  under  some  hallucination  when  he  main-
tained that  his  mother  had  come  to  him,  saying  she  was  taken  by
fairies  to  a  certain  hill  in  Muckaim,  known  to  be  the  residence  of
the  fairies.

"  If  any  one  is  so  unfortunate  as  to  go  into  one  of  these  hills,
which  are  open  at  night,  they  never  get  out  unless  some  one  goes
in  quest  of  them,  who  uses  the  precaution  of  leaving  a  gun  or
swoBD  across  the  opening,  which  the  fairies  cannot  remove.    A


52  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

certain  young  woman  was  decoyed  into  one  of  these  openings,
who  was  seen  by  an  acquaintance  dancing  with  the  merry  race.
He  resolved  on  trying  to  rescue  her,  and  leaving  his  gun  at  the
entrance,  went  foi'ward,  and  seizing  the  young  woman  by  the  hand,
dragged  her  out  before  they  could  prevent  him.  They  pursued
them,  but  having  got  her  beyond  the  gun,  they  had  no  longer
power  to  keep  her.  She  told  him  she  had  nearly  dropped  down
with  fatigue,  but  she  could  not  cease  dancing,  though  she  felt  it
would  soon  kill  her.  The  young  man  restored  her  to  her  friends,
to  their  great  joy."

{I  remember  exactly  the  same  incident  told  of  a  Mil  called  Ben-

cnock  in  I  slay  ^  and  one  similar  of  another  hiU,  called  Cnoch-daun.)

**  When  poor  women  are  confined,  it  is  unsafe  to  leave  them  alone

till  their  children  are  baptised.    If  through  any  necessity  they

•must  be  left  alone,  the  Bible  left  beside  them  is  sufficient  protectiou.

"Many  were  the  freaks  fairies  were  guilty  of.  A  family
who  lived  in  Gaolin  Castle,  Kerrera,  near  Oban,  had,  as  they  sup-
posed, a  delicate  child ;  it  was  advancing  in  years  but  not  growing
a  bit ;  at  length  a  visitor  from  Ireland  came  to  the  castle,  and
recognized  her  as  the  fairy  sweetheart  of  an  Irish  gentleman  of
his  acquaintance.     He  addressed  her  in  Gaelic  or  Irish,  saying —

'  ThA.  THU8A  SINN  A  8HIRACH  BHEAO  LEANNAN  BbIAN  MacBrAOOH.'

— There  thou  art, -little  fairy  sweetheart  of  Brian  MacBroadh.  So
offended  was  the  elf  at  being  exposed,  that  she  ran  out  of  the
castle  and  leaped  into  the  sea  from  the  point  called  Buadh  na
SiRACH,  the  fairies'  point,  to  this  day.

"  Fairies  were  very  friendly  to  some  people  whom  they
favoured,  but  equally  mischievous  where  they  took  a  dislike.  A
hiU  in  the  farm  of  Dunvuilg  in  Craignish  was  one  of  their
favourite  haunts,  and  on  a  certain  occasion  they  offered  to  assist
an  honest  tenant's  wife  in  the  neighbourhood,  for  whom  they  had
a  kindness,  to  manufacture  a  quantity  of  wool  she  had  for  clothing
for  her  family.  She  was  very  glad  to  have  their  services,  and
being  always  an  active  race,  they  set  to  work  directly,  repeating

'  CiRADH,  CarDAH,  TlAMADH,  CuiOEAL,  BEARTIttHE  GU  LUATH  BURN
LUAIDH  AIR  TEINNE  CORE  lONNDBAIDH  MHOR  MHAITH  BEAN  N  TIOHE

PHiN.'  Teazing,  carding,  mixing,  distaff,  weaving  loom,  water
for  waulking  on  the  fire,  the  thrifty  housewife  herself  is  the  best
at  sitting  up  late.


'^^^rsi^  .  mi^i  ^B^ — ■  i.  -j^^jjsu


THE  SMITH  AND  THE  FAIBIES.  5)

"  In  tbe  lieat  of  their  operations  an  en^ous  neighbour  came
to  the  door  crying—*  Dunvdii^  ra  THEnrsE/  Dnnvoilg  on  fire  !
Danvnilg  is  on  fire  !  Dnnvuilg  is  on  fire  !  was  re-echoed  by  all
the  little  company.     '  M'  ci&d  is  m'  inhean  !  m'  uibd  is*  m'  dteanh

MO  CHLANN  BHEAG  s'  MO  DHAOINE  MORA  !  MO  CHLANN  BHEAG  s'  MO

DHAoiNE  MORA  t ' — '  Dnnvuilg  on  fire ;  my  hammers  and  my  anvil —
my  hammers  and  my  anvil ;  my  little  children  and  my  grown  men
—my  little  children  and  my  grown  men  !'  and  they  all  scampered
gS,  bnt  not  till  they  had  nearly  finished  the  hoasewife's  web.

'*  There  is  a  field  in  the  farm  in  which  I  was  bom,  said  to  have
been  the  scene  of  fairy  operations.  They  were  seen  at  work,
and  heard  encouraging  each  other  with  '  Caol  achadh  mhaidh
Bb4.NAi>H  an  TETH.*  The  com  in  the  field  was  found  in  stocks
in  the  morning.

*'  It  is  quite  common  to  remark,  that  the  fairies  are  at  some
meal  as  the  time  of  day  may  indicate  when  there  is  rain  with
sunshine,  bnt  I  never  heard  the  reason  why. — {In  England  it  it
the  d 1  beating  his  voife.)

"The  night  following  the  13th  of  May,  or  May -day,  old  style,
is  a  particularly  busy  season  with  both  fairies  and  witches.  Then
every  herd  and  dairy-maid  and  cannie  housewife  uses  various  arts
to  ward  oflf  the  many  evils  the  enemy  has  the  power  of  inflict-
ing. One  device  which  I  have  seen  used  was  putting  a  little
tar  in  the  right  ear  of  each  cow  beast  in  the  byre ;  but  all  these
charms  or  giosragan,  as  they  are  called,  had  always  some
reason.  Tar  has  a  disinfecting  quality  as  is  well  known,  and
used  to  be  put  on  clothing  under  the  arms  when  a  person  had
to  go  into  a  house  where  there  was  any  infectious  disease."

The  Dunbhulaig  story  is  all  over  the  Highlands,  and  there
seem  to  be  many  places  so  called.  Mr.  John  MacLean,  Kilcha-
maig,  Tarbert,  Argyle,  has  sent  me  a  version  which  varies  but
little  from  that  told  by  Mrs.  MacTavish.  The  scene  is  laid  on
the  Largie  side  of  Kintyre.  The  farmer's  wife  was  idle,  and  called
for  the  fairies,  who  wove  a  web  for  her  and  shouted  for  more  work.
She  first  set  them  to  put  each  other  out,  and  at  last  got  rid  of
them  by  shouting  "  Dunbhulaig  on  fire  !  "  The  fairies'  rhyme
when  working  was —

^  Is  fad  abhras  n'aon  laimh  air  dheradh
Ciradh  cardadh  Tlamadh  cuighel


54  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Feath  a  biftarst  fìtbidh  gu  luath

S  iiisge  laaidh  air  teinne

Obair  obair  obair  obair

Is  fad  abbras  'n  aon  laimb  air  dheradb."

Whicb  Mr.  MacLean  translates  freely —

**  Work,  work,  for  a  single  band
Can  bat  little  work  command,
Some  to  tease,  and  card,  and  spin  ;

Some  to  oil  and  weave  begin ;  j

Some  the  water  for  waulking  heat

That  we  may  her  web  complete.  I

Work,  work,  for  a  single  hand  I

Can  but  little  work  command."  I

The  rhyme,  when  they  depart  in  hot  haste,  is—

"  Mo  mhullachan  caise  m'ord  a's  m  innean
Mo  bhean  's  mo  phaisde  s'  mo  gogan  ima
Mo  bho  s'  mo  gobhair  s'  mochiste  beag  minne
Och  och  ochone  gur  truagh  tha  mise !  "

Freely  translated  thus  by  Mr.  MacLean-^

*'  My  wife,  my  child,  alas,  with  these,
My  butter  pail  and  little  cheese,
My  cow,  my  goat,  my  meal  chest  gone,
My  hammers  too,  och,  och,  ochone  !  "

Or  more  closely  thus—

"  My  mould  of  cheese,  my  hammer,  and  anvil.
My  wife  and  my  child,  and  my  butter  crock ;
My  cow  And  my  goat,  and  my  little  meal  kist ;
Och,  och,  ochone,  how  wretched  am  I !  "

I  heard  another  version  of  the  same  story  in  Lewis  from  a
medical  gentleman,  who  got  it  from  an  old  woman  who  told  it
as  a  fact,  with  some  curious  variations  unfit  for  printing.  Aod
my  landlady  in  Benbecula  knew  the  story,  and  talked  it  over  with
me  in  September  this  year.  The  versions  which  I  have  of  this
story  vary  in  the  telling  as  much  as  is  possible,  and  each  is  evi-


FAIBT  STORIES.  55

dentlj  the  prodaction  -of  a  different  mind,  but  the  incideBts  are
nearly  the  same  in  all,  and  the  rhyme  varies  only  in  a  few  points.
Danbhulaig  is  the  same  in  Kintyre,  Lorn,  Lewis  and  Benbecula.
I  am  not  aware  that  the  story  has  ever  before  been  reduced  to
writing.

The  Man  in  the  Hill  is  equally  well  known  in  Eirkcadbrigfat,
but  the  hiUj  has  become  a  mill^  and  the  fairies  Brownies.  The
fairies  of  Kirkcudbright  seem  to  have  carried  off  children,  like
the  Island  Elves  ;  to  have  borrowed  meal,  like  those  of  Suther-
land, and  to  have  behaved  like  their  brethren  elsewhere.  The
following  four  stories  were  got  for  me  by  the  sisters  of  Miss  Mary
Lindsay,  who  has  lived  so  long  with  us  as  to  have  become  one  of
the  family.


KIRKCUDBRIGHT.

Kirkcudbright,  Tuesdaff,  Feb,  1859.

My  Dear  Mary, — I  went  to  Johnny  Nicholson  last
night,  and  he  told  me  the  following  fairy  story.  I  must
give  it  in  his  own  words  : —


u


1.  "  You  have  been  often  at  the  Gatehouse,"  said  he,
well,  you'll  mind  a  flat  piece  of  land  near  Enrick  farm  ;
well,  that  was  once  a  large  loch  ;  a  long  way  down  from
there  is  still  the  ruin  of  a  mill,  which  at  that  time  was  fed
from  this  lochi.  Well,  one  night  about  the  Hallowe'en
times,  two  young  ploughmen  went  to  a  smiddy  to  get  their
socks  (of  their  ploughs)  and  colters  repaired,  and  in  passing
the  said  mill  on  their  way  home  again  they  heard  music
and  dancing,  and  fiddling,  and  singing,  and  laughing,  and
talking ;  so  one  of  the  lads  would  be  in  to  see  what  was
going  on  ;  the  other  waited  outside  for  hours,  but  his  com-
panion never  came  out  again,  so  he  went  home  assured
tliat  the  brownies  had  got  hold  of  him.  About  the  same
time  the  following  year,  the  same  lad  went  again  to  the


$6  ^  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

smiddy  on  the  same  errand,  and  this  time  he  took  another
lad  with  him,  but  had  the  precaution  to  put  the  Bible  in
his  pocket.  Well,  in  passing  the  mill  the  second  time,  he
heard  the  same  soimds  of  music  and  dancing.  This  time,
having  the  Bible  in  his  hand,  he  ventured  to  look  in,
when  who  should  he  see  but  his  companion  whom  he  had
left  standing  there  that  day  twelvemonths.  He  handed
him  the  Bible,  and  the  moment  he  did  so,  the  music  and
dancing  c«ased,  the  lights  went  out,  and  all  was  darkness  ;
but  it  is  not  said  what  his  companion  had  seen  or  had  been
doing  all  that  time."

2.  Another  story  he  told  me  was  about  a  boy  of  the  name
of  Williamson,  whose  father,  an  Irish  linen  packman,  was
drowned  on  his  way  from  Ireland,  where  he  had  gone  to
purchase  linen  ;  so  the  boy  was  brought  up  by  his  mother
and  grandfather,  an  old  man  of  the  name  of  Sproat,  who
lived  in  Borgue.  The  boy  disappeared  often  for  two  and
three,  and  often  ten  days  at  a  time,  and  no  one  knew
where  he  went,  as  he  never  told  when  he  returned,  though
it  was  understood  the  fgdries  took  him  away.  Upon  one
occasion  the  Laird  of  Barmagachan  was  getting  his  peats
cast,  and  all  the  neighbours  round  were  assisting.  At  this
time  the  boy  had  been  away  for  ten  days,  and  they  were
all  wondering  where  he  could  be,  when  lo  and  behold,  the
boy  is  sitting  in  the  midst  of  them.  "  Johnny,"  said  one
of  the  company,  who  were  all  seated  in  a  ring,  eating  their
dinner,  "  where  did  ye  come  from  ?"  "I  came  with  our
folks,"  said  the  boy  (meaning  the  fairies).  "  Your  folks ;
who  are  they  ?"  "  Do  you  see  yon  barrow  of  peats  a  coup-
ing  into  yon  hole  ?  there's  where  I  came  from."  An  old
man  of  the  name  of  Brown,  ancestor  of  the  Browns  of
Langlands,  who  are  stUl  living  in  Borgue,  advised  the
grandfather  to  send  the  boy  to  the  Papist  priest,  and  he
would  give  him  something  that  would  frighten  away  the
fairies  ;  so  they  accordingly  sent  the  boy,  and  when  he
returned  home  he  wore  a  cross  hung  roimd  his  neck  by  a


FAIRY  SfORIES.  57

bit  of  black  ribbon.  When  the  minister  and  kirk-session
heard  of  it  they  exconinmnicated  the  old  grandfather  and
old  Brown  for  advising  such  a  thing.  They  believed  in
fairies,  but  not  in  anything  a  Papist  priest  could  do.  How-
ever, the  boy  was  never  after  taken  away  ;  and  some  of  the
oldest  men  now  alive  remember  that  boy  as  an  old  man.
The  whole  affair  is  recorded  in  the  books  of  the  kirk-ses-
sion of  Borgue,  and  are  to  be  seen  any  day.

3.  One  day  as  a  mother  was  sitting  rocking  her  baby  to
sleep,  she  was  surprised,  on  looking  up,  to  see  a  lady  of
elegant  and  courtly  demeanour,  so  unlike  any  one  she  had
ever  seen  in  that  part  of  the  country,  standing  in  the
middle  of  the  room.  She  had  not  heard  any  one  enter,
therefore  you  may  judge  it  was  with  no  little  surprise,  not
unmingled  with  curiosity,  that  she  rose  to  welcome  her
strange  visitor.  She  handed  her  a  chair,  but  she  very
politely  declined  to  be  seated.  She  was  very  magnificently
attired  ;  her  dress  was  of  the  richest  green,  embroidered
round  with  spangles  of  gold,  and  on  her  head  was  a  small
coronet  of  pearls.  The  woman  was  still  more  surprised  at
her  strange  request.  She  asked,  in  a  rich  musical  voice,  if
she  would  oblige  her  with  a  basin  of  oatmeal.  A  basinful
to  overflowing  was  immediately  handed  to  her,  for  the
woman's  husband  being  both  a  farmer  and  miller,  had
plenty  of  meal  at  command.  The  lady  promised  to  return
it,  and  named  the  day  she  would  do  so.  One  of  the  chil-
dren put  out  her  hand  to  get  hold  of  the  grand  lady's
spangles,  but  told  her  mother  afterwards  that  she  felt
nothing.  The  mother  was  afraid  the  child  would  lose  the
use  of  her  hands,  but  no  such  calamity  ensued.  It  would
have  been  very  ungrateful  in  her  fairy  majesty  if  she  had
struck  the  child  powerless  for  touching  her  dress,  if  indeed
such  power  were  hers.  But  to  return  to  our  story,  the
very  day  mentioned,  the  oatmeal  was  returned,  not  by  the
same  lady,  but  by  a  curious  little  figure  with  a  yelping
voice  ;  she  was  likewise  dressed  in  green.     After  handing


58  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

the  meal  she  yelped  out, "  Braw  meal,  it*s  the  top  pickle  of
the  sin  com."  It  was  excellent ;  and  what  was  very  strange,
all  the  family  were  advised  to  partake  of  it  but  one  ser-
vant lad,  who  spumed  the  fairy*s  meal ;  and  he  dying
shortly  after,  the  miller  and  his  wife  firaaly  believed  it  was
because  he  refused  to  eat  of  the  meal.  They  also  firmly  be-
lieved their  first  visitor  was  no  less  a  personage  than  the  Queen
of  the  Fairies,  who  having  dismissed  her  court,  had  not
one  maid  of  honour  in  waiting  to  obey  her  commands.  A
few  nights  after  this  strange  visit,  as  the  miller  was  going
to  bed,  a  gentle  tap  was  heard  at  the  door,  and  on  its  being
opened  by  him,  with  a  light  in  his  hand,  there  stood  a
little  figure  dressed  in  green,  who,  in  a  shrill  voice,  but
very  polite  manner,  requested  him  to  let  on  the  water  and
set  the  mill  in  order,  for  she  was  going  to  grind  some
com.  The  miller  did  not  dare  to  refuse,  so  did  as  she
desired  him.  She  told  him  to  go  to  bed  again,  and  he
would  find  all  as  he  had  left  it.  He  found  everything
in  the  morning  as  she  said  he  would.  So  much  for  the
honesty  of  fairies.

4.  A  tailor  was  going  to  work  at  a  farm-house  early  one
morning.  He  had  just  reached  it,  and  was  going  to  enter,
when  he  heard  a  shrill  voice  call  out,  "  Kep  fast,  will  ye  f*
and  on  looking  quickly  roimd,  he  was  just  in  time  to  re-
ceive in  his  arms  a  sweet,  little,  smiling  baby  of  a  month
old,  instead  of  a  little  lady  in  green,  who  was  standing  to
receive  the  child.  The  tailor  turned  and  ran  home  as  fast
as  he  could,  for  tailors  are  generally  nimble  kind  of  folks,
and  giving  the  baby  to  his  wife,  ran  off  again  to  his  work,
leaving  his  better  half  in  no  pleasant  mood  with  the  little
intruder,  as  she  very  politely  termed  the  little  innocent.
Having  reached  the  farm-house,  the  tailor  found  the  inhabi-
tants all  thrown  into  confusion  by  the  screaming,  yelping,
little  pest,  as  they  called  their  little  nurseling,  for  the
little  woman  in  green  had  given  in  exchange  this  little
hopeful  for  their  own  sweet  little  one,  which  was  safe  with


FAIRY  STOBIEa  59

the  tailor^s  wife.  They  found  out  afterwaxda  it  was  the
nurse  who  had  done  it.  The  doctor  was  sent  for,  but  all
was  in  vain  ;  day  nor  night  rest  they  got  none.  At  last
one  day,  all  being  absent  but  the  tailor,  who  was  there  fol-
lowing his  trade,  he  commenced  a  discourse  with  the  child
in  the  cradle.  "  Will  hae  ye  your  pipes  Ì"  says  the  tailor.
"  They're  below  my  head,"  says  the  tenant  of  the  cradle,
"  Play  me  a  spring,"  says  the  tailor.  Like  thought,  the
little  man,  jumping  from  the  cradle,  played  round  the  room
with  great  glee.  A  curious  noise  was  heard  meantime  out-
side ;  and  the  tailor  asked  what  it  meant.  The  little  elf
called  out,  "  It*s  my  folk  wanting  me,"  and  away  he  fled
up  the  chimney,  leaving  the  tailor  more  dead  than  alive.
Their  own  child  was  brought  home,  the  guilty  nurse  dis-
missed, and  the  tailor's  wife  amply  rewarded  for  the  care
of  the  child.  She  was  heard  to  say,  ^*  It  was  a  glad  sight
the  wee  bit  baim."

5.  The  Macgowans  of  Grayscroft  inTongland,and  latterly
of  Bogra,  had  the  power  of  witchcraft  to  a  considerable
extent,  and  it  descended  from  one  generation  to  another.
At  the  time  we  refer  to,  Abraham  Macgowan  and  his
daughter  Jenny  resided  at  Grayscroft.  Jenny  had  an  un-
limited power  from  Old  Nick  to  act  as  she  pleased.  The
ploughmen  at  that  time  in  their  employ  were  Harry  Dew
and  Davie  Gordon,  young  men  about  twenty-two  years  of
age  ;  they  had  been  there  for  the  last  twelve  months  ;  and
conversing  one  day  together,  the  following  took  place  : —  ^

Harry — ^^  Losh  man,  Davie,  what  makes  ye  sae  drowsy,
lazy,  and  sleepy-Hke  the  day,  for  I  am  verra  sure  ye  work
nae  mair  than  I  do  ;  ye  eat  the  same  and  sleep  the  same
as  I  do,  and  yet  ye  are  so  thru  and  wearied  and  hungry-
like,  I  dinna  ken  ava  what  ails  ye  ;  are  ye  weel  eneugh,
Davie  ?"  "  Tm  weel  eneugh,  Harry,  but  it*s  a'  ye  ken
about  it  ;  sleep  a  night  or  twa  at  the  bedside,  and  maybe
you'll  no  be  sae  apt  to  ask  me  sic  questions  again.     Harry


60  WEST  fflGHLAND  TALES.

— "  The  bedside,  Davie  !  what  differ  will  that  make  ?  I
hae  nae  mair  objections  to  sleep  there  than  at  the  wa'. "
This  being  agreed  to,  they  exchanged  places.  Nothing
occurred  to  disturb  either  of  them  till  the  third  night,
although  Harry  kept  watch  ;  their  bed  was  on  the  stable
loft,  when,  about  midnight,  the  stable  door  was  opened
cautiously,  and  some  one  was  heard  (by  Harry  only)  coming
up  the  ladder  and  to  the  bedside,  with  a  quiet  step.  A
bridle  was  held  above  the  one  next  the  bedside,  and  the
words,  "  Up  horsey,"  whispered  in  his  ear  ;  in  one  moment
Harry  was  transformed  into  a  horse  at  the  stable  door.
The  saddle  was  got  on  with  some  kicking  and  plunging,
but  Jenny  gets  mounted,  and  off  theysetby  theElfcraigs,Auld
Brig  o*  Tongland,  the  March  Cleughs,  and  on  till  they
reach  the  Auld  Kirk  of  Buittle.  Harry  was  tied  to  the
gate  along  with  others.  Meg  o'  Glengap  was  there  on  her
dairymaid,  now  a  bonny  mare,  neat  in  all  her  proportions.
"  Tib"  o'  Criffle  came  on  her  auld  ploughman,  rather  wind-
broken.  "  Lizzy,"  frae  the  Bennan,  came  on  her  cot  wife,
limping  with  a  swelled  knee.  "  Moll  o'  the  Wood"  came
on  a  herd  callant  frae  the  "  How  o'  Siddick."  When  all  the
horses  were  mustered,  there  was  some  snorting  and  kicking
and  neighing  amongst  them.  Fairies,  witches,  brownies,  and
all  met  in  the  kirk  and  had  a  blithe  holiday,  under  the
patronage  of  his  Satanic  majesty,  which  continued  till  the
crowing  of  the  cock.  Wearied  with  his  gallop,  Harry,
when  the  charmed  bridle  was  taken  off,  found  himself  in
his  own  bed  and  in  his  own  shape.  Harry  is  determined
to  be  revenged  ;  he  finds  the  charmed  bridle  in  a  hole  in
the  kitchen  in  a  week  after  ;  he  tries  it  on  Jenny,  using
the  same  words,  when  Jenny  is  transformed  into  the  auld
brown  mare  of  the  farm ;  he  takes  her  to  the  neighbouring
smithy,  and  gets  her,  after  much  ado,  shod  all  round,  when
he  returns  and  leaves  her,  after  securing  the  wonderful
bridle.

Next  morning  Harry  is  ordered  to  go  for  a  doctor,  as
his  mistress  has  taken  ill.     He  goes  into  the  house  to  ask


FAIRY  STORIES.  6 1

for  her  ;  pulls  the  bed  clothes  off  her,  and  discovers  there
was  a  horse  shoe  on  each  hand  and  foot,  when  Hany  says,
"  Jenny,  my  lass,  that  did  ye."  Jenny  played  many  more
similar  tricks  on  her  neighbour  lads  and  lasses.


SUTHERLAND.

In  Sutherland  the  fairy  creed  is  much  the  same  as  else-
where in  Scotland,  but  there  is  a  generic  term  for  super-
natural beings,  which  is  rarely  used  in  West  Country  Gaelic.
Here  are  a  few  of  a  large  and  very  good  collection  of
Sutherland  stories.

1 .  Duncan,  sumamed  More,  a  respectable  farmer  in  Bade-
noch,  states  as  follows  : — "  A  matter  of  thirty  summers  ago,
when  I  was  cutting  peats  on  the  hill,  my  old  mother  that
was,  was  keeping  the  house.  It  was  sowens  she  had  in  her
hand  for  our  supper,  when  a  little  old  woman  walked  in  and
begged  a  lippie  of  meal  of  her.  My  mother,  not  knowing
her  face,  said,  *  And  where  do  you  come  from  ?'  *  I  come
from  my  own  place  and  am  short  of  meal.'  My  mother,
who  had  plenty  by  her  in  the  house,  spoke  her  civil,  and
bound  her  meal  on  her  back,  following  her  a  few  steps
from  the  door.  She  noticed  that  a  little  kiln  in  the  hill
side  was  smoking.  The  wife  saw  this  too,  and  said,  '  Take
back  your  meal,  we  shall  soon  have  meal  of  our  own.'
My  mother  pressed  ours  on  her  ;  but  she  left  the  pock
lying  ;  and  when  she  came  to  the  running  bum  went  out
of  sight ;  and  my  mother  just  judged  it  was  a  fairy."

2.  Once  upon  a  time  there  was  a  tailor  and  his  wife,  who
owned  a  small  croft  or  farm,  and  were  well  to  do  in  the
world  ;  but  had  only  one  son,  a  child,  that  was  more  pain
than  pleasure  to  them,  for  it  cried  incessantly,  and  was  so
cross  that  nothing  could  be  done  with  it.     One  day  the


62  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

tailor  and  his  helpmeet  meant  to  go  to  a  place  some  miles
distant,  and  after  giving  the  child  its  breakfast,  they  put
it  to  bed  in  the  kitchen,  and  bid  their  farm  servant  look
to  it  from  time  to  time  ;  desiring  him  also  to  thrash  out  a
small  quantity  of  straw  in  the  bam  before  their  return.
The  lad  was  late  of  setting  to  work,  but  recollected  before
going  off  to  the  bam,  that  he  must  see  if  the  child  wanted
for  anything.  "  What  are  you  going  to  do  now,"  said  the
baim  sharply  to  Donald,  as  he  opened  the  kitchen  door.
'*  Thrash  out  a  pickle  of  straw  for  your  father  ;  lie  still
and  do  not  ffirUf  like  a  good  baim."  But  the  baim  got
out  of  bed,  and  insisted  then  and  there  in  being  allowed  to
accompany  the  servant.  "  Go  east,  Donald,"  said  the  little
master,  authoritatively,  "  Gro  east,  and  when  ye  come  to
the  big  brae,  chap  ye  (anglicè  rap)  three  times  ;  and  when
tket/  come,  say  ye  are  seeking  Johnnie's  flail."  The  aston-
ished Donald  did  as  he  was  bid,  and  by  rapping  three
times,  called  up  a  fairy  ("little  man")  who  giving  him  the
flail,  sent  him  off  with  it  in  an  unenviable  state  of  terror.

Johnny  set  too  with  a  will,  and  in  an  hour's  time,  he
and  Donald  had  thrashed  the  whole  of  the  straw  in  the
bam  ;  he  then  sent  Donald  back  to  the  brae,  where  the
flail  was  restored  with  the  same  ceremony,  and  went
quietly  back  to  bed.  At  dusk  the  parents  returned  ;  and
the  admiration  of  the  tailor  at  the  quantity  and  quality  of
the  work  done,  was  so  great,  that  he  questioned  Donald  as
to  which  of  the  neighbours  had  helped  him  to  thrash  out
so  much  straw.  Donald,  trembling,  confessed  the  truth  ;
and  it  became  painfully  evident  to  the  tailor  and  his  wife
that  the  child  was  none  of  theirs.  They  agreed  to  dislodge
it  as  soon  as  possible,  and  chose  as  the  best  and  quickest
way  of  doing  so,  to  put  it  into  a  creel  (open  basket),  and
set  it  on  the  fire.  No  sooner  said  then  done  ;  but  no
sooner  had  the  child  felt  the  fire,  than  starting  from  the
creel,  it  vanished  up  the  chimney.  A  low  crying  noise  at
the  door  attracted  their  attention ;  they  opened,  and  a
bonny  little  baim  (which  the  mother  recognised  by  its


FAIBY  STORIES.  63

fpock  to  be  her  own,  stood  shivering  outside.  It  was  wel-
comed with  rapture  from  its  sojourn  among  "  the  little
people,"  and  grew  up  to  be  a  douse  and  wise-like  lad,  says
iiyr^informant.

3.  The  bum  of  Invemauld,  and  the  hill  of  Durchà,  on
the  estate  of  Roseh^,  are  still  believed  to  be  haunted  by
the  fairies,  who  once  chased  a  man  into  the  sea,  and  de-
stroyed a  new  mill,  because  the  earth  for  the  embankment
of  the  mill-dam  had  been  dug  from  the  side  of  their  hill.
The  hill  of  Durchà  is  also  the  locality  assigned  for  the
following  tale  : —

4.  A  man,  whose  wife  had  just  been  delivered  of  her  first-
bom,  set  off  with  a  friend  to  the  town  of  Lairg,  to  have
the  child's  birth  entered  in  the  session-books,  and  to  buy  a
cask  of  whisky  for  the  christening  fete.  As  they  returned,
weary  with  a  day's  walk  or  as  it  is  called  in  the  High-
lands "  travellings^  they  sat  down  to  rest  at  the  foot  of
this  hill,  near  a  large  hole,  from  which  they  were,  ere  long,
astonished  to  hear  a  sound  of  piping  and  dancing.  The
father  feeling  very  curious,  entered  the  cavern,  went  a  few
steps  in,  and  disappeared.  The  story  of  his  fate  sounded
less  improbable  then  than  it  would  now  ;  but  his  com-
panion was  severely  animadverted  on  ;  and  when  a  week
elapsed,  and  the  baptism  was  over,  and  still  no  signs  of  the
lost  one's  return,  he  was  accused  of  having  murdered  his
friend.  He  denied  it,  and  again  and  again  repeated  the
tale  of  his  friend's  disappearance  down  the  cavern's  mouth.
He  begged  a  year  and  a  day's  law  to  vindicate  himself,  if
possible  ;  and  used  to  repair  at  dusk  to  the  fatal  spot,  and
call  and  pray.  The  term  allowed  him  had  but  one  more
day  to  run,  and  as  usual,  he  sat  in  the  gloaming  by  the
cavern,  when,  what  seemed  his  friend's  shadow,  passed
within  it.  He  went  down,  heard  reel  tunes  and  pipes,  and
suddenly  descried  the  missing  man  tripping  merrily  with
the  fairies.     He  caught  him  by  the  sleeve,  stopped  him,


64  WEST  fìlGHLAND  TALES,

and  pulled  him  out.  "  Bless  me  !  why  could  you  not  let
me  finish  my  reel,  Sandy  ?"  "  Bless  me  !**  rejoined  Sandy,
"  have  you  not  had  enough  of  reeling  this  last  twelve-
month ?"  "  Last  twelvemonth  !"  cried  the  other,  in  amaze-
ment ;  nor  would  he  believe  the  truth  concerning  himseK
till  he  found  his  wife  sitting  by  the  door  with  a  yearling
child  in  her  arms,  so  quickly  does  tiije  pass  in  the  com-
pany of  THE  ^^  good  people!^

5.  Of  the  Drocht  na  Vougha  or  Fuoah — ^the  bridge  of
the  fairies  or  kelpies,  now  called  the  Gissen  Briggs,  a  bar
across  the  mouth  of  the  Dornoch  Frith.  It  is  said  that
the  Voughas  being  tired  of  crossing  the  estuary  in  cockle
shells,  resolved  to  build  a  bridge  across  its  mouth.  It
was  a  work  of  great  magnificence,  the  piers  and  posts,
and  all  the  piles  being  headed  and  mounted  with  pure
gold.  Unfortunately,  a  passer  by  lifted  up  his  hands
and  blessed  the  workmen  and  the  work  ;  the  former  va-
nished ;  the  latter  sank  beneath  the  green  waves,  where
the  sand  accumulating,  formed  the  dangerous  quicksands
which  are  there  to  this  day.

6.  The  Highlanders  distinguish  between  the  water  and
land  or  dressed  fairies.  I  have  given  one  story  which
shows  that  they  are  supposed  to  be  "  spirits  in  prison  ;"  it
is  not  the  only  legend  of  the  kind.  In  a  Ross-shire  nar-
rative, a  beautiful  green  lady  is  represented  as  appearing
to  an  old  man  reading  the  Bible,  and  seeking  to  know,
if  for  such  as  her.  Holy  Scripture  held  out  any  hope  of
salvation.  The  old  man  spoke  kindly  to  her ;  but  said,
that  in  these  pages  there  was  no  mention  of  salvation  for
any  but  the  sinful  sons  of  Adam.  She  flung  her  arms
over  her  head,  screamed,  and  plunged  into  the  sea.  They
will  not  steal  a  baptized  child  ;  and  "  Bless  you  ! "  said  to  an
imbaptized  one,  is  a  charm  against  them.  A  woman  out
shearing  had  laid  her  baby  down  under  a  hedge,  and  went
back  from  time  to  time  to  look  at  it.     She  was  going  once


»


TAXBY  STORIES.  65

to  give  it  Slick,  when  it  began  to  yell  and  cry  in  such  a
frightful  way  thaf  she  was  quite  alarmed.  "  Lay  it  down
and  leave  it,  as  you  value  your  child/'  said  a  man  reaping
near  her  ;  half  an  hour  later  she  came  back,  and  finding
the  child  apparently  in  its  right  mind  again,  she  gave  it
the  breast.  The  man  smiled,  told  her  that  he  had  seen
her  own  infant  carried  off  by  the  "  good  people,"  and  a  fairy
changeling  leffc  in  its  place.  When  the  '^folk''  saw  that
their  screaming  little  imp  was  not  noticed,  and  got  nothing,
they  thoi^ht  it  best  to  take  it  back  and  replace  the  little  boy.
As  fairies  are  represented  as  having  always  food,  and
riches,  and  power,  and  memment  at  command,  it  cannot
be  temporal  advantages  that  they  seek  for  their  children,
probably  some  spiritual  ones  are  hoped  for  by  adoption  or
marriage  with  human  beings,  as  in  the  romantic  legend  of
Undine  ;  and  that  this  tempts  them  to  foist  their  evil  dis-
posed little  ones  on  us.  They  never  maltreat  those  whom
they  carry  away.


BADENOCH.

The  Badenoch  account  of  the  fairies  is  much  the  same.
I  have  received  eight  stories  from  a  Highland  minister,  who
has  been  kind  enough  to  interest  hin^elf  in  the  matter,  at
the  request  of  the  Countess  of  Seafield.  These  show,  that
according  to  popular  belief,  fairies  commonly  carried  off
men,  women,  and  children,  who  seemed  to  die,  but  really
lived  underground.  In  short,  that  mortals  were  separated
from  fEuries  by  a  very  narrow  line.

1.  A  man  sees  fairies  carding  and  spinning  in  a  sheal-
ing  where  he  is  living  at  the  time.  Amongst  them  is  Miss
Emma  MacPherson  of  Climy,  who  has  been  dead  about  one
hundred  years.

2.  A  woman  benighted,  gets  into  a  faiiy  hill,  where
VOL.  n.  p


66  WEST  HIOHLAKD  TALES.

Rhe  promises  to  give  her  child,  on  condition  that  she  is  let
out.  She  gives  her  child  when  it  is  bom,  and  is  allowed
to  visit  it  ^^  till  such  time  as  the  child,  upon  one  occasion
looked  at  her  sternly  in  the  face,  and  in  a  very  displeased
mood  and  tone  upbraided  her  for  the  manner  in  which  she
had  acted  in  giving  her  child  over  unto  those  amongst
whom  it  was  now  doomed  to  dwell."  The  mother  scolded,
foimd  herself  standing  on  the  hillock  outside,  and  never
got  in  again.

3.  A  lad  recognizes  his  mother,  who  had  been  carried
off  by  fairies,  but  who  was  believed  to  be  dead.  She  was
recovered  from  the  fEÙries  by  a  man  who  threw  his  })onnet
to  a  passing  party,  and  demanded  an  exchange.  The  res-
cuer gave  up  the  wife,  and  she  returned  home.  Of  this
story  I  have  several  other  versions  in  Gaelic  and  in  Eng-
lish, and  I  believe  it  is  in  print  somewhere.

4.  An  old  woman  meets  her  deceased  landlord  and  land-
lady, who  tell  her  that  the  fairies  have  just  carried  off  a
young  man,  who  is  supposed  to  be  dead.  They  advise  her
not  to  be  out  so  late.

5.  The  young  Baron  of  Kincardine  is  entertained  by-
fairies,  who  steal  his  fetther's  snuff  for  hini  when  he  asks
for  a  pincL

6.  The  young  baron  meets  a  bogle  with  a  red  hand,
tells,  and  is  punished.

7.  The  baron's  dairymaid,  when  at  a  shealing,  has  a
visit  from  a  company  of  fairies,  who  dance  and  steal  milk.

8.  "  A  man,  once  upon  a  time,  coming  up  from  Inver-
ness late  at  night,  coming  through  a  solitary  part  called
Sloekmuir,  was  met  by  crowds  of  people,  none  of  whom
he  could  recognize,  nor  did  they  seem  to  take  any  notice


FAIBT  STORIES.  6*f

of  him.  They  engaged  in  close  conversation,  talked  on
subjects  not  a  word  of  which  he  could  pick  up.  At  length
accosting  one  individual  of  them,  he  asked  who  they  were  ?
'  None  of  the  seed  of  Abram  nor  of  Adam's  race  ;  but  men
of  that  party  who  lost  favour  at  the  Court  of  Grace/  "  He
was  advised  not  to  practice  late  at  night  travelling  in
future.

Thomas  MacDonald,  gamekeeper  at  Dunrobia,  also  gives
me  a  fairy  tale,  which  is  "  now  cammofdy  believed  in  Ba-
denochr

9.  A  man  went  from  home,  leaving  his  wife  in  childbed.
Her  temper  had  never  been  ruffled.  He  found  her  a
wicked  scold.  Thinking  all  was  not  right,  he  pOed  up  a
great  fire,  and  threatened  to  throw  in  the  occupant  of  the
bed,  unless  she  told  hiTn  "  where  his  own  wife  had  been
brought  She  told  him  that  his  wife  had  been  carried  to
Cnoc  Praing,  a  mountain  on  the  borders  of  Badenoch  and
Strathdeam,  and  that  she  was  appointed  successor.

The  man  went  to  Cnoc  Fraing.  He  was  suspected
before  of  having  something  supernatural  about  him  ;  and
he  soon  found  the  fairies,  who  told  hini  his  wife  had  been
taken  to  Shiathan  Mor,  a  neighbouring  moimtain.  He
went  there  and  was  sent  to  Tom  na  Shirich,  near  Inverness.
There  he  went,  and  at  the  "  Fairy  Knoll"  found  his  wife
and  brought  her  back.  "  The  person  who  related  this  story
pretended  to  have  seen  people  who  knew  distant  descendants
of  the  fooman,^


EOSS.


The  Ross-shire  account  of  fairies  is  again  much  the
same.  The  people  say  very  little  about  them,  and  those
who  have  been  kind  enough  to  note  stories  picked  up  amongst
their  less  instructed  neighbours,  have  only  sent  fresh  evi-


jii,_il.iJi.. BFTT7^ir?riii  Tiv  ^.iTV.^i'n^-r


68  WEST  HIGHLANB  TALES.

dence  to  prove  that  the  fiaiiy  creed  is  the  same  there  as
everywhere,  and  that  it  is  not  quite  extinct

1.  I  have  a  story,  got  through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Osgord
Mackenzie,  in  which  a  Lowland  minister  speaks  slightingly
of  the  fairies.  "  He  was  riding  home  through  a  dark  glen,
and  through  an  oak  wood,  where  there  was  many  a  green
tolman  (moimd).  He  was  surroimded  by  a  squad  of  little
men,  leaping  before  hini  and  dancing  behind  him.  They
took  him  off  the  horse  and  carried  him  up  through  the
skies,  his  head  under  him  now,  and  his  feet  under  again,
the  world  running  round  ;  and  at  last  they  dropped  him
near  his  own  house.

2.  In  another  story,  a  lot  of  fairies  borrow  a  weaver's
loom  at  night,  without  his  leave,  and  make  a  web  of  green
cloth  from  stolen  wool.


BEAENAmiDH.

There  was  in  Beàmairidh  in  the  Harris,  a  man  coming
past  a  knoll,  and  taking  the  road,  and  he  heard  churning
in  the  hill.  Thirst  struck  him.  "  I  had  rather,"  said  he,
that  my  thirst  was  on  the  herdswoman."  He  had  not
gone  but  about  twenty  rods  away  when  a  'Woman  met  him,
and  she  had  a  fine  green  petticoat  on  tied  about  her  waist,
and  she  had  a  vessel  of  warm  milk  between  her  two  hands.
She  offered  him  a  draught,  and  he  would  not  take  it.

"  Thou  one  that  sought  my  draught,  and  took  not  my
draught,  mayest  thou  not  be  long  alive."

He  went  to  the  narrows,  and  he  took  a  boat  there
over  ;  and  coming  over  the  narrows  he  was  drowned.

Bha  annn  am  Beàraairìdh  annns  na  h-Earadh,  fear  a'  tigbinn
seachad  air  cnoc  a'  gabhail  an  rathaid  agus  chaal  e  aunns  a*  chnoc
inaistreadh.     Bhnail  am  pathadh  e.     **  B"  fheàrr  leom,"  ars*  esan.


FAIRT  STOaiBS.  69

"  gon  robh  mo  phathadh  air  a*  bbanachaig."  Gha  deach  e  ach  mu
thnairean  fichead  slat  a!r  falbh,  an  nair  a  choinnich  boireannach  e,
agoB  còta  brìagh,  nain*  nrr'  air  a  cheanghal  mil  'miadhon,  agos
caman  bUitbaich  aic*  eadar  a  da  làimh.  Tbairg  i  da  deocb,  's  cha
ghabbadh  e  L  '*  Fbir  a  dh*  iarr  mo  dheocb,  'a  nach  do  gbabh  mo
dbeoch,iia  mu  fada  *bhios  thu  beò."  Gbabh  e  'ionnstiidb  a  choalais,
agog  gbabh  e  bat'  a  sin  thairis,  's  a'  tighian  thairis  air  a*  chaolas
cfaaidhabhàthadh.

From  Malcobn  MacLean,  who  learnt  it  from  his  grandfather,
Hagh  MacLean.

North  Uist,  August  11,  1859.

The  Argyleshire  stories,  which  I  can  well  remember  as
a  child,  are  of  the  same  stamp.  The  fairies  lived  in  hills,
they  came  ont  now  and  then  and  carried  people  away ;
and  they  spent  their  time  inside  their  dwellings  in  dancing
to  the  pipes.  They  stole  milk,  and  they  were  overcome
by  charms,  which  men  sold  to  those  who  believed  in  them.
Tliey  could  not  withstand  a  rowan-tree  cross ;  nor  could
they  follow  over  a  running  stream.

There  is  a  small  waterfall  in  a  wood  which  I  kaow,
where  it  used  to  be  said  that  the  fairies  might  be  seen  on
moonlight  nights,  fishing  for  a  magic  chain  from  boats  of
sedge  leaves.  They  used  to  drag  this  chain  through  the
meadows  where  the  cattle  fed,  and  the  milk  came  all  to
them,  till  a  lad,  by  the  advice  of  a  seer,  seized  one  end  of
the  chain  and  ran  for  his  life,  with  the  fairy  troop  in  pur-
suit ;  he  leaped  the  lin  and  dropped  the  chain  ;  and  the
lin  is  called  the  chain  lin  still.


MAN.


The  Manks  fairy  creed  is  again  the  same.  Similar
beings  are  supposed  to  exist,  and  are  known  by  the  name
of  Ferish,  which  a  Manksman  assured  me  was  a  genuine
Manks  word.     If  so,  fairy  may  be  old  Celtic,  and  derived


7Ò  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

from  the  same  root  as  Peri,  instead  of  being  derived
from  it.

The  fedries  in  the  Isle  of  Man  are  believed  to  be  spirits.
They  are  not  supposed  to  throw  arrows  as  they  are  said
still  to  do  in  the  Highlands.  None  of  the  old  peasants
seemed  to  take  the  least  interest  in  ''  elf  shots/'  the  flint
arrows,  which  generally  lead  to  a  story  when  shown  else-
where. One  old  man  said,  "  The  ferish  have  no  body,  no
bones/*  and  scorned  the  arrow  heads.  It  is  stated  in
Train's  history,  that  no  flint-arrow  heads  have  ever  been
found  in  the  Isle  of  Man;  but  as  there  are  numerous  bar-
rows, flint  weapons  may  yet  be  discovered  when  some  one
looks  for  them.

StUL  these  Manks  fairies  are  much  the  same  as  their
neighbours  on  the  main  land.  They  go  into  mills  at
night  and  grind  stolen  com;  they  steal  milk  from  the
cattle;  they  live  in  green  moimds;  in  short,  they  are  like
little  mortals  invested  with  supernatural  power,  thus:
There  was  a  man  who  lived  not  long  ago  near  Port  Erin,
who  had  a  Lhiannan  shee.  "  He  was  like  other  people,
but  he  had  a  fedry  sweetheart;  but  he  noticed  her,  and
they  do  not  like  being  noticed,  the  fairies,  and  so  he  lost
his  mind.  Well,  he  was  quite  quiet  like  other  people,
but  at  night  he  slept  in  the  bam;  and  they  used  to  hear
him  talking  to  his  sweetheart,  and  scolding  her  sometimes ;
but  if  any  one  made  a  noise  he  would  be  quiet  at  once."

Now,  the  truth  of  this  story  is  clear  enough;  the  man
went  mad ;  but  his  madness  took  the  form  of  the  popular
belief,  and  that  again  attributed  his  madness  to  the  fairy
mistress.  I  am  convinced  that  this  was  believed  to  be  a
case  of  genuine  fairy  intercourse;  and  it  shows  that  the
fairy  creed  still  survives  in  the  Isle  of  Man.


DEVONSHIRE.

The  same  is  true  of  Devonshire.     In  May  1860  I  was
told  that  many  of  the  farmers  '^  are  so  superstitious  as  to


FAIRY  STOBIBS.  7  I

beKeve  in  Piskibs;"  they  are  *' never  seen,  but  they  are
often  heard  laughing  at  people  in  the  dark,  and  they  lead
them  away."  My  informant  said  that  when  he  was  young
he  used  to  hear  so  many  stories  about  piskies  from  the  old
women  about  the  fireside,  that  he  used  to  be  frightened  to
go  out  at  night.

"  When  the  young  colts  are  out  running  wild,  their,
manes  get  rough  and  hang  down  on  both  sides,  and  get
tangled  with  the  wind  Kke;  not  Kke  manes  of  horses  that
are  well  kept  (here  the  speaker  pointed  with  his  whip  at
the  sleek  pair  which  he  was  driving);  and  when  the  far-
mers find  stirrups  like  in  the  hair  of  the  mane,  they  say
the  piskies  has  been  a  ridin'  of  them."

In  short,  this  notice  of  fairy  belief  might  be  extended
to  fill  volumes  ;  every  green  knoll,  every  weU,  every  hill
in  the  Highlands,  has  some  fairy  legend  attached  to  it.  In
the  west,  amongst  the  unlearned,  the  legends  are  firmly
believed.  Peasants  never  talk  about  fairies,  for  they  live
amongst  them  and  about  them.  In  the  east  the  belief  is
less  strong,  or  the  believers  are  more  ashamed  of  their
creed.  In  the  Lowlands,  and  even  in  England,  the  stories
survive,  and  the  belief  exists,  though  men  have  less  time
to  think  about  it.  In  the  south  the  fairy  creed  of  the
peasants  has  been  altered,  but  it  still  exists,  as  is  proved
occasionally  in  courts  of  law.  There  is  a  ghost  which
walks  under  the  North  Bridge  in  Edinburgh ;  and  even  in
the  cultivated  upper  strata  of  society  in  this  our  country,
in  Fiance,  and  elsewhere,  fairy  superstition  has  only  gone
down  before  other  stronger  beliefs,  in  which  a  table  is
made  the  sole  partition  between  this  world  and  the  next.
Whether  we  are  separated  from  the  other  world  by  a  deal
board  or  a  green  mound,  does  not  seem  to  make  much
difiTerence  ;  and  yet  that  is  the  chief  difference  between
the  vagrant  beliefs  of  the  learned  and  unlearned.

An  old  highlander  declared  to  me  that  he  was  once  in
a  boat  with  a  man  who  was  struck  by  a  fairy  arrow.     He


^^  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

had  the  arrow  for  a  long  time  ;  it  was  slender  like  a  sti^w
for  thickness.  He  himself  drew  it  out  of  the  temple  of
the  other  man,  where  it  was  stuck  in  the  skin  through  the
bonnet.  They  were  then  miles  from  shore,  fishing.  A
man,  whom  the  fames  were  in  the  habit  of  carrying  about
from  island  to  island,  told  him  that  he  had  himself  thrown,
the  dart  at  the  man  in  the  boat  by  desire  of  them;  '^  they
made  him  do  it.**

My  informant  evidently  believed  he  was  speaking
truth,  as  my  more  educated  friends  do  when  they  tell  me
sgeulachd  about  Mr.  Hume.

For  my  own  part,  I  believe  all  my  friendg  ;  but  I
cannot  believe  in  fairies,  or  that  my  forbears  have  become
slaves  of  a  table  to  be  summoned  at  the  will  of  a  quack.
I  believe  that  there  is  a  stock  of  old  credulity  smoulder-
ing near  a  store  of  old  legends,  in  some  corner  of  every
mind,  and  that  the  one  acts  on  the  other,  and  produces  a
fresh  legend  and  a  new  belief  whenever  circumstances  are
favourable  to  the  growth  of  such  weeds.  At  all  events,  I
am  quite  sure  that  the  fairy  creed  of  the  peasantry,  as  I
have  learned  it  from  them,  is  not  a  whit  more  unreason-
able than  the  bodily  appearance  of  the  hand  of  Napoleon
the  First  to  Napoleon  the  Third  in  1860,  as  it  is  described
in  print;  and  the  grave  books  which  are  written  on
"  Spiritual  Manifestations"  at  home  and  abroad.  What  is
to  be  said  of  the  table  which  became  so  familiar  with  a
young  lady,  that  it  followed  her  up  stairs  and  jumped  on
to  the  sofa.


XXIX.

THE   FINE.

THE  Feen  were  once,  and  their  hunting  failed,  and
they  did  not  know  what  they  should  do.  They
were  going  ahout  strands  and  shores  gathering  limpets,
and  to  try  if  they  should  fall  in  with  a  pigeon  or  a
plover.  They  were  holding  counsel  together  how  they
should  go  to  get  game.  They  reached  a  hiU,  and
sleep  came  on  them.  What  should  Fionn  see  but  a
dream.  That  it  was  at  yon  crag  of  rock  that  he  would
be,  the  longest  night  that  came  or  will  come ;  that
he  would  be  driven  backwards  till  he  should  set  his
back  to  the  crag  of  rock.  He  gave  a  spring  out  of
his  sleep.  He  struck  his  foot  on  Diarmid's  mouth,
and  he  drove  out  three  of  his  teeth.  Diarmid  caught
hold  of  the  foot  of  Fionn,  and  he  drove  an  ounce  of
blood  fix)m  every  nail  he  had.  "  Ud  !  what  didst  thou
to  me  !" — "  What  didst  thou  thyself  do  to  me  1"—"  Be
not  angry,  thou  son  of  my  sister.  When  I  tell  thee  the
reason,  thou  wilt  not  take  it  ill." — "  What  reason  ?"
— "  I  saw  a  dream  that  at  yonder  crag  I  would  pass  the
hardest  night  I  ever  passed  ;  that  I  should  be  driven
backwards  till  I  should  set  my  back  to  the  crag,  and
there  was  no  getting  off  from  there. "  "  What's  our  fear  !
Who  should  frighten  us  !  Who  will  come  !"  "I  fear,
88  we  are  in  straits  just  now,  that  if  this  lasts  we  may
become  useless."     They  went  and  they  cast  lots  who


74  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

should  go  and  who  should  stay.  The  Feinn  altogether
wished  to  go.  Fionn  was  not  willing  to  go,  for  fear
the  place  should  he  taken  out  before  they  should  come
(back).  "I  wiU  not  go,"  said  Fionn.  "Whether
thou  goest  or  stayest,  we  will  go,"  said  they.

lie  rest  went,  but  Fionn  did  not  go.  They  stop-
ped, on  the  night  when  they  went,  at  the  root  of  a
tree ;  they  made  a  booth,  and  they  began  to  play  at
cards.  Said  Fionn,  when  the  rest  were  gone,  "  I  put
him  &om  amongst  heroes  and  warriors  any  man  that  will
follow  me  out"  They  followed  after  Fionn.  They
saw  a  light  before  them,  and  they  went  forward  where
the  light  was.  Who  were  here  but  the  others  playing
at  cards,  and  some  asleep ;  and  it  was  a  fine  frosty
night  Fionn  hailed  them  so  stately  and  bravely.
WTien  they  heard  the  speaking  of  Fionn,  those  who
were  laid  down  tried  to  rise,  and  the  hair  was  stuck  to
the  ground.  They  were  pleased  to  see  their  master.
Pleasant  to  have  a  stray  hunting  night  They  went
home.  Groing  past  a  place  where  they  used  to  house,
they  saw  a  housa  They  asked  what  house  was  that.
They  told  them  there  was  the  house  of  a  hunter.
They  reached  the  house,  and  there  was  but  a  woman
within,  the  wife  of  the  fine  green  kirtle.  She  said  to
them,  "  Fionn,  son  of  Cumal,  thou  art  welcome  here."
They  went  in.  There  were  seven  doors  to  the  house.
Fionn  asked  his  gillies  to  sit  in  the  seven  door&  They
did  that  Fionn  and  his  company  sat  on  the  one  side
of  the  house  to  breathe.  The  woman  went  out  When
she  came  in,  she  said,  "  Fionn,  son  of  Cumal,  it  is  long
since  I  was  wishing  thy  welfare,  but  its  little  I  can  do
for  thee  to-night.  The  son  of  the  king  of  the  people
of  Danan  is  coming  here,  with  his  eight  hundred  full
heroes,  this  night.''  "Yonder  side  of  the  house  be
theirs,  and  this  side  ours,  unless  there  come  men  of


THE  FINE.  75

Eiriim."  Then  they  came,  and  they  sat  within.  "  You
will  not  let  a  man  on  our  side,"  said  Fionn,  "  unless
there  comes  one  that  belongs  to  our  own  company."
The  woman  came  in  again,  saying,  "  The  middle  son  of
the  king  of  the  people  of  Danan  is  coming,  and  his
five  hundred  brave  heroes  with  him."  They  came,
and  more  of  them  staid  without  on  a  knoU.  She
came  in  again,  saying,  "  The  youngest  son  of  the  king
of  the  people  of  Danan  is  coming,  and  his  five  hundred
swift  heroes  with  him."  She  came  in  again,  saying,
"That  Gallaidh  was  coming,  and  five  hundred  full
heroes." — "  This  side  of  the  house  be  ours,  and  that
be  theirs,  unless  there  come  of  the  men  of  Eirinn."
The  people  of  Danan  made  seven  ranks  of  themselves,
and  the  fourth  part  of  them  could  not  cram  in.  They
were  still  without  a  word.  There  came  a  gillie  home
with  a  boar  that  had  found  death  from  leanness  and
without  a  good  seeming,  and  he  throws  that  in  front
of  Fionn  with  an  insult.  One  of  Fionn's  gillies  caught
hold  of  him,  and  he  tied  his  four  smalls,  and  threw
him  below  the  board,  and  they  spat  on  him.  "  Loose
me,  and  let  me  stand  up ;  I  was  not  in  faulty  though
it  was  I  that  did  it^  and  I  will  bring  thee  to  a  boar  as
good  as  thou  ever  ate." — "  I  wiU  do  that,"  said  Fionn ;
"but  though  thou  shouldst  travel  the  five-fifths  of
Eiiinn,  unless  thou  comest  before  the  day  comes,  I  will
catch  thee."  They  loosed  him ;  he  went  away,  and
gillies  with  him.  They  were  not  long  when  they  got
a  good  boar.  They  came  with  it,  and  they  cooked  it,
and  they  were  eating  it  "A  bad  provider  of  flesh
art  thou,"  said  Gfillaidh  to  Fionn.  '^  Thou  shalt  not
have  that  any  longer  to  say ;"  and  the  jaw-bone  was  in
his  hand.  He  raised  the  bone,  and  he  killed  seven
men  from  every  row  of  the  people  of  Danan,  and  this
made  them  stop.     Then  a  gillie  came  home,  and  the


76  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

black  dog  of  the  people  of  Danan  with  him,  seeking  a
battle  of  dogs.  Every  one  of  them  had  a  pack  of  dogs,
and  a  dozen  in  every  pack.  The  first  one  of  them
went  and  slipped  the  first  dozen.  The  black  dog  killed
the  dozen  ;  he  killed  them  by  the  way  of  dozen  and
dozen,  till  there  was  left  but  Bran  in  loneliness.
Said  Fionn  to  Conan,  "Let  slip  Bran,  and,  unless
Bran  makes  it  out,  we  are  done."  He  loosed  him.
The  two  dogs  began  at  each  other.  It  was  not  long
till  Bran  began  to  take  driving ;  they  took  fear  when
they  saw  that ;  but  what  was  on  Bran  but  a  venemous
claw.  There  was  a  golden  shoe  on  the  claw  of  Venom,
and  they  had  not  taken  off  the  shoe.  Bran  was  look-
ing at  Conan,  and  now  Conan  took  off  the  shoe  ;  and
now  he  went  to  meet  the  black  dog  again ;  and  at  the
third  "  spoch"  he  struck  on  him  ;  he  took  his  throat
out  Then  he  took  the  heart  and  the  liver  out  of  his
chest.  The  dog  took  out  to  the  knoll ;  he  knew  that
foes  were  there.  He  began  at  them.  A  message  came
in  to  Fionn  that  the  dog  was  doing  much  harm  to  the
people  without.  "  Come,"  said  Fionn  to  one  of  the
gUlies,  "and  check  the  dog."  The  gillie  went  out,
and  (was)  together  with  the  dog ;  a  message  came  in
that  the  giUie  was  working  worse  than  the  dog.  From
man  to  man  they  went  out  till  Fionn  was  left  within
alone.  The  Feen  killed  the  people  of  Danan  alto-
gether. The  lads  of  the  Feen  went  out  altogether,  and
they  did  not  remember  that  they  had  left  Fionn
within.  When  the  children  of  the  king  saw  that  the
rest  were  gone,  they  said  that  they  would  get  the  head
of  Fionn  and  his  heart.  They  began  at  him,  and  they
drove  him  backwards  till  he  reached  a  crag  of  rock.
At  the  end  of  the  house  he  set  his  back  to  it,  and  he
was  keeping  them  off.  Now  he  remembered  the  dream.
He  was  tightly  tried.     Fionn  had  the  "  Ord  Fianna,"


THE  FINE.  77

and  when  he  was  in  extremity  it  would  sound  of  itself,
and  it  would  he  heard  in  the  five-fifths  of  Eirinn.  The
gillies  heard  it ;  they  gathered  and  returned.  He  was
alive,  and  he  was  no  more.  They  raised  him  on  the
points  of  their  spears  :  he  got  better.  They  killed  the
sons  of  the  king,  and  all  that  were  ahve  of  the  people,
and  they  got  the  chase  as  it  ever  was.


NA  FEINNE.

Bba  'n  Fhinn  nair  agas  cheileadh  an  t-aeilg  orra,  *s  cha  robh  fios  aca
dè  dhianadh  eud.  Bha  end  a'  falbh  feadh  tragha  as  cladach  a'  cruinn-
eachadh  bhàirneach,  's  fench  an  aimseadli  cahnan  na  feadag  orra.
Bha  eud  a'  gabhail  comhairle  comhlaairson  gum  falbhadh  eudairson
aeOgfhaotainn.    Ràinig  eud  cnoc  's  thàinig  cadal  orra.   D^  cbunnaic
Ronn  ach  bniadar,  gur  h'  ann  aig  a'  cbarragh  chreig*  ud  shios  a
bhiodb   e  'n  oidhcbe  a  V  fhaide  leis  a  tbig  na  'thàinig.      Gum
biodb  e  *ga  omain  air  ais  gus  an  cuireadh  e  'dhriom  ris  a'  cbarragh
chrdge.    Thug  e  leum  as  a  cbadal,  's  bhuail  e  chas  air  bial  Dhiarm-
aid,  ^8  chuir  e  tri  fiaclan  as.    Bug  Diarmaid  air  cas  Fhinn  *s  chuir  e
onnsa  fala  bbàr  h'  uile  fin'  a  bb'  aige.    «  Ud  de'  rinn  thu  orm?"
**  De  rinn  thu  fhin  ormsa?"    **  Na  gabh  thusa  miothlacbd  a  mhic
mo  pheatbar ;  nur  a  db'  innseas  mi  duit  an  reusan  cha  gabh  thu  gu
don'  e."    **  De  n  reusan?  "      *'  Chunna  mi  bruadar  gar  h-ann  aig  a'
cbarragh  sin  shios  a  chuirinn  seacbad  an  oidhcbe  bu  doirbbe  chuir
mi  riabb;  gnm  bithinn  air  m'  iomain  air  m'  ais  gus  an  cuirinn
mo  dhriom  ris  a'  cbarragh,  's  cha  robh  dol  as  an  sin."    **  De  's  eagal
doinn?    Co  chuireadh  eagal  oimn?    Co  tbig?"    Arsa  Diarmaid,
**  Tha  eagal  orm,  a's  sinn  air  anacotbrom  an  drasd,  ma  leanas  so  gum
fagar  gun  fheum  sinn."    Arsa  Fionn,  Dh'  fhalbh  end  's  thilg  eud
ooinn  CO  dh'  fbalbbadh  's  co  dh'  fbanadh.    Bha  'n  Fh^inn  nil'  airson
folbh.    Cha  robh  Fionn  deònach  folbb,  eagal  gun  d'  tbugt'  amach  an
t-yte  ma  *n  d'  uigeadh  eud.  "Cha  n  fholbh  mi,"  ursa  Fionn,  «*Còca
dh'  fbolbhaa  na  dh'  fhanas  thu  falbhaidh  sinne,"  ursa  iadaan.    Dh'
fholbh  càcb,  ach  cha  d'  fholbh  Fionn.   Stad  eud,  an  oidhcbe  sin  a  dh'
fholbh  cud,  aig  bonn  craoibbe.    Rinn  eud  biith  agus  tbòìsich  eud  air-


78  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

iomairt  chairtean.    Ursa  Fionn  nor  dh'  fholbh  each,  "  Tha  mi  'ga
chur  a  cuid  laoich  na  gaisgich  duine  sam  bith  a  leanas  a  mach  mi«
Dh'  fholbh  end  as  dèigh  Fhinn.  Chunnaic  eud  solusd  rompa.  Ghabh
eud  air  an  aghaidh  far  an  robh  'n  solusd.    Co  bha  *n  so  ach  each  a*
cluichd  air  chairtean,  's  blaigh  nan  cadal,  *8  oidhche  bhriagh  reoihaidh
aniL    Chair  Fionn  fàilt  orra  go  flathail,  fialaidh.    Kur  a  choal  eud
bruidhinn  Fhinn  thug  an  fheadhain  abhana'nlaidhe  Ikmh  air  èiridh^
's  bha  *n  gruag  air  leantail  ris  a*  ghrunnd.    Bha  eud  toilicht*  am
maighstir  fhaicinn.    Taitneach  còrr  oidhche  seilg  fhaotainn,  chaldh
eud  than  a'  bhaile.    'Dol  seacbad  air  kite  'b*  àbhaist  daibh  a  bhi
tighich  chunnaic  eud  tigh,  dh'  fheoraich  eud  's,  D4  'n  tigh  a  bha  *ii
siud.    Thuirt  eud  riu  gun  robh  tigh  sealgair.    Ràinig  eud  an  tigh,  'a
cha  robh  stigh  ach  boireannach.    Bean  a  chòta  chaoil  uaine.    Urs*  i
riu,  "  Fhinn  Mhic  Cnmhail  'se  do  bheatha  an  so."   Chaidh  eud  a  stigh.
Bha  seachd  dorsan  air  an  tigh.    Dh'  iarr  Fionn  air  a  ghillean  suidhe
ann  an  seachd  dorsan  an  tighe.    Rinn  eud  sin.    Shuidh  Fionn  'sa
chuideachd  san  darna  taobh  de  n  tigh  a  ligeil  an  analach.    Chaidh  a*
bhean  a  mach.  Nur  a  thkinig  ì  stigh  thuirt  i,  '*  Fhinn  Mhic  Cumhail
's  fhad'  o'n  a  bha  mi  'g  altachadh  le  slkinte  dhuit,  ach  's  beag  is  urra
mi  dheanadh  riut  a  nochd ;  tha  mac  righ  sluagh  de  Danainn  a*  tigh-
inn  an  so  a  nochd  agus  ochd  ciad  Ikn^haisgeach  aige."    **  An  taobh
ud  de  'n  tigh  acasan,  'san  taobh  so  againne,  mar  an  d'  thig  e  dh'
fhearaibh  Eirinn."    ThMnig  eud  an  sin's  shuidh  eud  a  stigh.    **  Cha
lig  sibh  duin'  air  ar  taobhne/'  ursa  Fionn.    "  Mar  an  d'  thig  duine
'bhoineas  d'ar  cuideachd  f  hin.    Thàinig  a'  bhean  a  stigh  a  rithiad
ag  ràdh.    *'  Tha  mac  miadhonach  righ  Sluagh  de  Dana  'tighinn  agus
còìg  ciad  treunghaisgeach  aige."    Thàinig  eud  's  dh'  fhan  còrr  dhia
mach  air  cnoc    Thdinig  i  stigh  a  rithisd  ag  rkdh.    **  Tha  mac  is  bige
righ  Sluagh  de  Dana  tighinn  agus  còig  ciad  Itigh-ghaisgeach  leis.*'
Thkinig  i  stigh  a  ris  ag  rkdh  gun  robh  Gallaidh  a'  tighinn  agus  còig
ciad  Ikn  ghaisgeach  leis.    **  An  taobh  so  'n  tigh  againne,  's  an  taobh
sin  acasan,  mar  an  d'  thig  e  dh' fhearaibh  Eirinn."    Arsa  Fionn,
Rinn  an  Sluagh  de  Dana  seachd  streathan  dhiu  fhin,  's  cha  do  theachd
an  ceathramh  cuid  a  stigh  dhiu.    Bha  eud  na  'n  tàmh  gun  smid.
Thàinig  gille  dachaidh  le  tore  a  fhuair  bks  leis  a'  chaoile,  gun  sgath
math,  's  tilgear  siud  air  bialthaobh  Fhinn  letàmailt    Rug  h-aon  de
ghillean  Fhinn  air  agus  cheanghail  e  cheithir  chaoil ;  thilg  e  fo  'n
bhbrd  e  's  bha  eud  a  caitheadh  smugaidean  air.     **  Fuasgail  mia'
agus  lig  'nam  sheasamh  mi,  cha  mhi  bu  choireach  gad  is  mi  rinn  e,
agus  bheir  mi  go  tore  thu  cho  math 's  a  dh'  ith  thu  liabh."   "  Ni  mise
sin,"  arsa  Fionn,  **  ach  gad  a  shihbhla  tu  cbig  chbigeabh  na  h-Eireann,
mar  an  d'  thig  thu  man  d'  thig  an  latha,  beiridh  mis'  ort"     Dh'


NA  FBINNB.  79

fhnasgail  ead  e.  Dh'  fhalbh  e  'a  giUean  leis.  Cha  V  fhada  bha  eud
nur  a  fhuair  end  deagh  thorc.  Thàinig  end  leis,  'a  bhruich  ead  e,  'a
bha  ead  'ga  itheadh.  <*  S  dona  'm  biataiche  feoV  tho,"  oraa  Gallaidh
li  Fionn.  '*  Cha  bhi  sin  agadsa  na  's  fhaide  r*a  ràdh,*'  araa  Fiona  agos
cnàimh  a*  chiobhoill  aige  'na  laimb.  Chaith  e  *n  cnàimh,  agas  mbarbh
e  seachd  daoin*  as  gach  streath  de  n  t-Sluagh  de  Dana,  agos  choir  so
ead  *nan  stad.  Thàinìg  gille  an  sin  dachaidh,  's  ch  dugh  Sluagh  de
Dana  leb'  aig  iarraidh  còmhrag  chon.  Bha  lodbainn  chon  aig  a'  h-oile
fear  diosan,  as  dusan  anns  a'  h-uile  lodbainn,  agas  dh'  fhalbh  a'  chiad
fhear  dia  agos  dh'  fhaasgail  e  chiad  dusan.  Mharbh  an  ch  dagh  an
dnsan.  Mharbh  e  end  a  Hon  dusan  a's  dusan,  gua  nach  d'  fhàgadh
ach  Bran  'na  ònrachd.  Ursa  Fionn  ri  Conan,  **  Lig  fuasgladh  do
Bhran,  agos  mar  dian  Bran  deih  e  tha  sin  deth.  Dh'  fhuaisgail  e  e.
ThòÌBÌch  an  da  chh  air  a  ch^ile.  Cha  b*  fhada  gos  an  do  thòiaich
Bran  air  gabhail  iomanach.  Ghabh  ead  eagal  nur  a  chunnaic  eud
sin ;  ach  d^  bha  air  Bran  ach  crudha  nimhe.  Bha  brbg  òir  air  a'
cfaradha  nimhe,  's  cha  d'  thng  eud  deth  a'  bhrbg.  Bha  Bran  ag  amh-
arc  air  Conan ;  's  thug  Conan  deth  a'  nis  a'  bhrbg.  Chaidh  e  nis  an
dkil  a'  choin  duigh  a  ris,  's  air  an  treas  spoch  a  bhuail  e  air,  thug  e  'n
^gòman  as.  Thug  e  'n  sin  an  cridhe  's  an  gruan  a  mach  as  an  uchd
aige.  Ghabh  an  ch  mach  than  a*  chnoic;  dh'  aithnich  gur  h-e  naimhd-
ean  a  bh'  ann ;  thbisich  e  orra.  Thàinig  braih  a  stigh  go  Fionn,  gon
robh  'n  ch  dianadh  mòran  cron  air  an  t-sluagh  a  muigh.  <<Tballa,'*
una  Fionn,  ri  fear  de  na  gillean,  **  agus  caisg  an  cU."  Chaidh  ao  gille
mach  comhla  ris  a'  chU.  ThMnig  brath  a  stigh  gon  robh  an  gille  *g
obair  na  bu  mhiosa  na  'n  ch.  O  f heai^  go  fear  chaidh  eud  a  mach  goa
an  d'  fh^adh  Fionn  a  stigh  'na  bnrachd.  Mharbh  an  Fhlnn  an
Snagh  de  Danainn  uile.  Dh'  fhalbh  gillean  na  Finne  mach  uile,  's
cha  do  chnimhnich  eud  gun  d'  fhàg  eud  Fionn  a  atigh.  Nur  a
chunnaic  clann  an  righ  gon  d'  fhalbh  each  air  fad  'thuirt  eud  gom
fiygbeadh  eud  ceann  Fhinn  'sa  chridhe.  Thbisich  eud  air,  agus  dh'
iomain  end  air  ais  e  'gos  an  d'  ràinig  e  carragh  creige  aig  ceaunn  an
tighe.  Chuir  e  dhriom  ris,  's  bha  e  'gan  cumail  deth.  Chnimhnich  e
'n  so  air  a'  bhmadar.  Bha  e  air  fheuchainn  go  teannn.  Bha  aig
Fionn  an  t-brd  Fianna,  's  nur  a  bhiodh  e  'na  èigin  sheinneadh
e  leia  fhin,  agus  chluint'  aunn  an  cbig  chbigeabh  na  h-Eireann  e.
Choal  na  gillean  e ;  chruinnich  eud 's  thill  eud.  Bha  e  beb,  's  cha  robh
tnaiMh  air.  Thog  eud  e  air  bharraibh  nan  sleagh.  Chtudh  e  'na  b'
fhrìuT.  Mharbh  eud  mic  an  righ  'a  na  bha  beb  d'  an  sluagh.  Fhuair
end  an  t-seilg  mur  a  bha  1  riabh.

This  story  is  one  of  the  kind  asaally  called  Scanachas  na


8o  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Feike,— that  is,  the  tradition,  conTersation,  or  tale  or  old  stories,
or  ancient  history,  history  or  hiography  (Maòklpine)  of  the
people,  hest  known  to  English  readers  as  the  Fingalians.  These
are  called  by  a  collective  name,  and  are  spoken  of  as  the  Feen  or
Fain.  They  are  generally  represented  as  hunters  and  warriors
in  Eirinn,  but  their  country  is  the  Feen.  Bran's  battle  and  his
venomous  claw  in  a  golden  shoe,  is  more  like  the  fight  of  a  tiger
or  cheetah  than  an  Irish  deer-hound.

The  people  of  Danan  are  called  Taatha  de  danan,  in  manu-
scripts and  books,and  are  supposed  to  be  Scandinavians.  The  name
by  a  slight  change  in  pronunciation,  might  mean,  the  daring
Northerns,  the  tenants  of  Danan,  or  the  people  of  Danan,  as  here.
Fionn,  in  various  inflections,  is  pronounced  Feeun,  Een,  Eeun.
Ord  Fianna  would  seem  to  mean  hammer  of  the  Feean  ;  if  so.
Fin  may  have  acquired  some  of  his  gear  of  Thor,  or  he  may  be
the  same  personage.  The  "  ord  Fiannar"  is  generally  supposed
to  be  a  whistle,  which  sounded  of  itself,  and  was  heard  over  the
five-fifths  of  Erin.

This  tale,  and  No.  24,  25,  26,  27,  and  the  two  which
follow,  were  told  to  Hector  MacLean  "by  four  individuals,
Alexander  MacDonald,  tenant,  Barra,  Bailebhuirgh,  who
heard  them  from  his  grandmother,  Mary  Gillies,  about  forty  years
ago,  when  she  was  more  than  eighty  ;  Neill  MacLean,  tenant,
ditto,  who  learnt  them  from  Donald  MacNeill,  who  died  aboat
five  years  ago,  about  eighty  years  of  age  ;  John  Cameron,  ditto,
who  heard  them  from  many,  but  cannot  name  any  in  particular.
They  state  that  these  tales  were  very  common  in  their  younger
days.  They  are  pretty  common  still.  They  can  tell  nothing  re-
specting the  tales  beyond  the  persons  from  whom  they  learnt
them;  of  those  from  whom  they  learnt  them  they  know  no-
thing."

There  are  numerous  prose  tales  of  the  Fingalians  in  Gaelic
manuscripts,  now  in  the  Advocates'  Library  in  Edinburgh  (ac-
cording to  an  abstract  lent  by  W.  F.  Skene,  Esq.)  One  is  pro-
bably the  same  as  this  tale;  it  is  No.  4  of  the  manuscript
numbered  4,  called  The  Booth  of  Eochaidh  Dearo  — ^a  tale  of
Fingal  decoyed  into  a  tent,  and  his  combats  with  monsters,
giants,  armies,  etc.

Of  this  manuscript  the  author  of  the  abstract,  £wen  Mac-


THE  PINR  8 1

Lachlan,  says  (1812) : — "  This  volume  is  evidently  a  transcript,
perhaps  Dot  older  than  half  a  century.  The  language  bespeaks
high  antiquity."

With  the  exception  of  a  few  words,  the  language  in  this
Barra  tale  is  the  ordinary  language  of  the  people  of  the  island.
It  seems,  then,  that  this  is  a  remnant  of  an  old  tale,  rapidly  fading
from  memory  and  mixing  with  the  mapners  of  the  day,  but  similar
to  tales  in  manuscripts  about  one  hundred  years  old,  and  to  tales
now  told  in  Ireland.    See  Poems  of  Osein,  Bard  of  Erin,  1857.


VOL.  n.  Q


XXX.

THE  TWO  SHEPHERDS.

rilHERE  were  out  between  Lochaber  and  BaideanacL
-*-  two  shepherds  who  were  neighbours  to  each  other,
and  the  one  would  often  be  going  to  see  the  other.
One  was  on  the  east  side  of  a  river,  and  another  on  the
west  The  one  who  was  on  the  west  side  of  the  river
came  to  the  house  of  the  one  who  was  on  the  east  of
it  on  an  evening  visit.  He  staid  till  it  was  pretty-
late,  and  then  he  wished  to  go  home.  "  It  is  time  to
go  home,"  said  he.  "  It  is  not  that  which  thou  shalt
do,  but  thou  shalt  stay  to-night^"  said  the  other,
"  since  it  is  so  long  in  the  night"  "  I  will  not  stay
at  aU  events  ;  if  I  were  over  the  river  I  don't  care
more."  The  houseman  had  a  pretty  strong  son,  and
he  said,  "  I  will  go  with  thee,  and  I  will  set  thee  over
the  river,  but  thou  hadst  better  stay." — "  I  will  not
stay  at  aU  events." — "  K  thou  wilt  not  stay  I  will  go
with  thee.''  The  son  of  the  houseman  called  a  dog
which  he  had  herding.  The  dog  went  with  him.
When  he  set  the  man  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,
the  man  said  to  him,  "  Be  returning  now,  I  am  far  in
thy  debt."  The  strong  lad  returned,  and  the  dog  with
him.  When  he  reached  the  river  as  he  was  returning
back  home,  he  was  thinking  whether  he  should  take
the  stepping-stones,  or  put  off  his  foot-clothes  and
take  below.     He  put  off  his  foot-clothes  for  fear  of


THE  TWO  SHEPHERDS.  8  3

taking  the  stepping-stones,  and  when  he  was  over
there  in  the  riyer,  the  dog  that  was  with  him  leaped
at  the  back  of  his  head  He  threw  her  off  him  j  she
leaped  again ;  he  did  the  same  thing.  When  he  was
on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  he  put  his  hand  on  his
head,  and  there  was  not  a  bit  of  the  bonnet  on  it.  He
was  saying,  whether  shonld  he  return  to  seek  the
bonnet,  or  should  he  go  home  without  it  "  Its  dis-
gusting for  me  to  return  home  without  my  bonnet ;  I
will  return  over  yet  to  the  place  where  I  put  my  foot-
clothes  off  me ;  I  doubt  it  is  there  that  I  left  it"  So
he  returned  to  the  other  side  of  the  river.  He  saw  a
right  big  man  seated  where  he  had  been,  and  his  own
bonnet  in  his  hand  He  caught  hold  of  the  bonnet,
and  he  took  it  from  him.  "  What  business  hast  thou
there  with  that? — It  is  mine,  and  thou  hadst  no
business  to  take  it  from  me,  though  thou  hast  got  it."
Over  the  river  then  they  went,  without  a  word  for
each  other,  fiercely,  hatingly.  When  they  went  over,
then,  on  the  river,  the  big  man  put  his  hand  under  the
arm  of  the  shepherd,  and  he  began  to  drag  the  lad
down  to  a  loch  that  was  there,  against  his  will  and
against  his  strengtL  They  stood  front  to  &ont,
bravely,  firmly  on  either  side.  In  spite  of  the  strength
of  the  shepherd's  son,  the  big  man  was  about  to  con-
quer. It  was  so  that  the  shepherd's  son  thought  of
putting  his  hand  about  an  oak  tree  that  was  in  the
placa  The  big  man  was  striving  to  take  him  with
him,  and  the  tree  was  bending  and  twisting.  At  last
the  tree  was  loosening  in  the  earth.  She  loosened  all
bat  one  of  her  roots.  At  the  time  when  the  last  root
of  the  tree  slipped,  the  cocks  that  were  about  the  wood
crowed  The  shepherd's  son  understood  when  he
beard  the  cocks  crowing  that  it  was  on  the  short  side
of  day.     When  they  heard  between  them  the  cocks


84  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

crowing,  the  big  man  said,  "  Thou  has  stood  well,  and
thou  hadst  need,  or  thy  bonnet  had  been  dear  for  thee."
The  big  man  left  him,  and  they  never  more  noticed  a
a  thing  near  the  river.


AN^DA  CHIOBAIR.

Bha,  mach  eadar  Locliabar  agns  Bàideanach,  da  cbiobair  a  bba  *nan
nàbudhean  aig  a  ch^ile,  's  bhiodh  an  dama  fear,  gu  bicheanta,  dol  a  dh'
amharc  an  fhir  eile.  Bha  fear  air  taobh  na  b-aird  an  iar  de  'n  abh-
ainn,  's  fear  eile  air  taobh  na  b-aird  an  ear.  Thkinig  am  fear  a  bh'
air  taobh  na  h-aird  an  iar  de  'n  abhainn  'ionnsaidh  tigh  an  fhir  a  bh'
air  taobh  na  h-aird  an  ear  di,  air  cheilidh.  *''  Dh'  fhan  e  gos  an  robh
e  go  math  anmoch,  's  bha  e  'n  sin  debnaeh  air  dol  dacbaidh.  **  Tha  'a
t-am  dol  dachaidh,"  urs*  esan.  **  Cha  'ne  sin  a  ni  tha  ach  fanaidli  ta
nochd,"  urs'  am  fear  eile, ''  on  a  tha  e  cho  fada  's  an  oidhche."  **  Cha
'n  fhan  mi  codhin  na;  *m  bithinn  thar  nah-abhann  tha  mi  coma  tuill-
idh."  Bha  mac  go  math  làidir  aig  fear  an  tighe  's  thoirt  e.  "  Thèid
mise  leat  *s  cairidh  mi  thar  na  h-aibhne  thu;  ach  's  fhekrra  duit  fant>
ail."  **  Cha  'n  fhan  mi  codhiu."  «*  Mar  am  fan  falbhaidh  mise  leat."
Dh*  eubh  mac  fir  an  tighe  air  galla  'bh*  aig'  a'  ciobaireachd.  Dh*
fhalbh  a'  ghalla  leis.  Nur  a  chuir  e  null  an  duin*  air  an  taobh  eile
de  'n  abhainn  thuirt  an  duine  ris.  "  Bl  tilleadh  a  nis  tha  mi  fad  ann
a'd'  chomain."  Thill  an  giUe  làidir  agos  a'  ghalla  comhla  ris.  i^ur
a  ràinig  e  'n  abhainn,  agus  e  tilleadh  air  ais  dacbaidh,  bha  e  smaoint-
eachadh  coca  a  ghabhadh  e  na  sinteagan,  na  chuireadh  e  dheth  a
chaisbheart  agus  a  ghabhadh  e  go  h-iseal.  Chuir  e  dheth  a  chaisbh-
eart  eagal  na  sinteagan  a  ghabhail,  's  nur  a  bha  e  null  anns  an  abh-
ainn, leum  a'  ghalla  bha  leis  ann  an  chl  a  chinn.  Thilg  e  deth  i.
Leum  i  rithisd.  Rinn  e  'n  ni  cianda.  Nur  bha  e  'n  taobh  thall  de  'n
abhainn,  chuir  elàmh  air  a  cheann,  's  cha  robh  spideag  de  'n  bhoinneid
air.  Bha  e  's  an  ag  a  gradh  coca  thilleadh  e  dh*  iarraidh  na  boinneid,
na  rachadh  e  dhachaidh  as  a  h'  ioghnais.  *'  'S  ceacharra  domh  fbàn
gun  till  mi  dacbaidh  gun  mo  bhoinneid ;  tillidh  mi  null  fhathasd  gos
an  Mte  an  do  chuir  mi  dhiom  mo  chaisbheart ;  's  ann  ann  a  tha  amh-
arus  agam  a  dh'  fhàg  mi  i."  Thill  e  'n  so  go  taobh  thaull  na  h-aibhne.
Chunnaic  e  fear  ro  mhòr  'na  shuidhe  far  an  robhe,  'sa  bhoinneid  fhin
'na  làimh.  Rug  e  air  a'  bhoinneid  *s  thug  e  uaidh'  i.  **  D4  do  ghnothach
aa  risan  sin  ?**     ^*  Mo  chuid  fhin  a  th'  ann,  's  nach  robh  g^othach


AN  DA  OHIOBAIR.  85

agadsa  toirt  nam,  gad  a  tfaa  i  agad.**  Nnll,  an  sin,  thar  an  abhainn
dh'  fhalbh  end,  *8  gun  ffiral  aca  r'a  ch^ile,  go  fiachach  fuachach.  Nnr
a  cfaaidh  end  a  null,  an  sin,  air  an  abhainn  choir  am  fear  mòr  a  làmh
fo  achlais  a'  chiobair,  's  thòisich  e  air  a'  ghille  a  thaminn  a  sàos  gn  loch
a  bha  *n  sin,  an  aghaidh  a  thoil  *b  an  aghaidh  a  neart.  Sheas  end
aghaidh  ri  aghaidh,  go  treon  calm*  air  gach  taobh.  A  dh*  aindeoin
cho  làidir  'a  a  bha  mac  a*  chiobair  bha  *m  fear  mòr  a'  brath  buadhacb^
adh.  'Se  smaointich  mac  a*  chiobair  a  nis  a  làmh  a  char  timchioU  air
craobh  dharaich  a  bha  'san  kite.  Bha  'm  fear  mòr  a*  sti^th  ra  thoirt
leia,  's  bha  chraobh  a*  lUbadh  *s  a'  f^gadh.  Fo  dheireadh  bha  chraobh
a**  foasgladh  as  an  talamh.  Dh*  fbuasgaH  i  ach  aon  fhreomhach  di.
*San  am  an  d*  fhuasgail  an  threamhach  ma  dheireadh  de  *n  chraoibh,
ghairm  n«  coilich  a  bha  feadh  na  coilie.  Thnig  mac  a*  cluobair,
nor  a  choal  e  na  eoilich  a'  gairm,  gon  robh  e  air  an  taobh  ghoirid
de  'n  latha.  Nur  a  chnal  end  eatorra  na  coilich  a'  gairm  thuirt  am
fear  mòr,  **  *S  math  a  sheas  thn,  's  bha  feum  agad  air,  aimeo  bhiodh  do
bhoinneid  daor  dait."  Dhealaich  am  fear  mòr  ris^  *8  cha  d*  fhairich
end  sgath  riabh  toillldh  a  choir  na  h-aibhne.

There  is  a  bogle  story  in  W.  Grant  Stewart's  Highland
Saperstitions  (pablished  1823  and  1851),  in  which  a  man  is
dragged  towards  a  river  by  a  sapemataral  being,  whom  be
kills  with  his  dirk.

2.  I  hare  another  story  like  this,  which  was  sent  to  me  by  a
yonng  gentleman,  a  member  of  the  Ossianic  Society  of  Glasgow.
It  has  some  Hkeness  to  No.  28,  The  Smith,  and  is  a  good  illus-
tration of  this  part  of  popnlar  mythology.  When  the  people  of
Eintyre,  Muintib  Chean  tibeadh  were  coming  home  from  the
Borthem  airt  from  fighting  against  Prince  Charles,  under  their
chieftain,  the  man  of  Skipnish  ;  they  were  going  together,  each
band  that  was  nearest  as  neighbours.  So  one  little  company
staid  behind  the  great  band,  in  Cean  loch  gilp,  Lochgilphead.
The  one  who  was  hindmost  of  this  company,  who  was  called  by
the  nickname  of  Iah  Dubb  Mob,  Big  Black  John,  heard  an  un-
earthly noise,  when  he  was  come  in  front  of  a  fall  that  was  at  A
HhaoilDubh,  on  the  northern  side  of  Taibbaibt  Ohean-tibbadh,
Tarbert  (which  may  be  rendered  Land's-end  drawboat.)

He  went  on,  and  in  a  bum  below  the  fall,  a  terrible  being  met
him ;  he  drew  his  blade.    Said  the  being  to  him,  "  Strike  me.''


86  WEST  HIGHIiANB  TALES.

**  I  will  not  strike,  thou  monster,"  said  John  ;  but  Brodaidh  mi-
THU,  "  I  will  prod  thee."

"  Prod  me"  the  being  would  saj*.  '*  I  will  not  prod  thee,
monster,  bat  I  will  strike  thee,"  John  wonld  say.

They  foaght  thas  for  a  great  time  till  the  cock  crew ;  and  the
being  said  to  Ian,  **  Thou  wilt  now  be  going,  bat  before  thou
gòest,  take  thy  choice  of  the  two  following  things — Ealan  ouh
BATH  NO,  BATH  GUN  EALAiN,  speechless  art,  or  artless  speech."

John  chose  speechless  art,  and  so  it  happened.  He  was  a
blacksmith,  as  skilful  as  ever  drew  hammer  on  anvil ;  but  he  was
not  much  better  for  that ;  there  was  no  penny  he  earned  that  he
would  not  spoil,  and  that  would  not  go  in  some  way  that  was  not
easily  explained.  As  an  instance  of  art,  he  could  mend  a  saw,
though  thou  hadst  a  bit  in  either  hand,  in  such  away  that  it  could
not  be  seen  where  it  was  broken  ;  and  a  gun  in  the  same  way.
There  would  be  a  covering  on  the  smithy  windows  when  he  would
be  mending  such  things.

Big  black  John  got  great  power  over  witchcraft,  Buitbeachas,
and  evil  eye.

There  was  a  man  in  Skipnish  who  had  made  money  by  smug-
gling, but  he  began  to  lose  his  money,  for  his  malt  refused  to
yield  its  product,  till  at  last  he  lost  the  whole  of  what  he  had
made  ;  and  he  was  a  poor  man.  He  went  at  last  to  Ionabair,
Ayr,  where  John  was  dwelling  at  that  time.  John  told  him  that
it  was  enmity  that  was  doing  the  ill.  Ho  did  not  learn  who  was
spoiling  him.  He  said  to  him,  "  Go  home  and  thou  wilt  get  back
the  produce  of  the  malt ;"  and  so  he  did.  Each  tooail  mashing
he  made,  began  to  give  more  than  the  other,  till  the  produce  he
got  frightened  him.  He  followed  on  thus  till  the  loss  was  made
up,  and  after  that  he  got  but  the  usual  product.

The  following  are  stories  of  the  san^e  kind.  The  prevailing
notions  are,  that  supernatural  beings  exist  which  cannot  with-
stand the  power  of  iron,  and  that  there  are  men  and  women  who
deal  with  them.  These  are  from  Mr.  Hector  Urquhart,  written
in  English,  and  given  in  his  own  words.

3.  One  day  last  week,  as  I  was  walking  up  Glenfyne,  I  over-
took an  old  man  who  was  carting  coals  up  to  the  Lodge.  "  Good
day  to  you  John."    "  Good  day  to  yourself,"  says  John.    From


THE  TWO  SHEPHERDS.  87

good  days  to  showery  days,  I  asl^ed  John  if  there  was  any  virtue
in  iron  against  witchcraft  or  fairy  spells.  "Indeed,  and  that's
what  there  is/'  says  John.  So,  when  we  came  to  the  Lodge,  I
wrote  the  following  story  from  his  telling  : — "  On  a  certain  year
and  me  a  young  lad,  all  onr  cows  lost  the  milk,  one  after  one ;  we
gaessed  what  was  wrong  with  them,  and  my  hig  brother  lost  no
time  in  going  to  Appin,  to  con  salt  the  man  of  the  bed  book.  He
no  sooner  entered  his  hoase  than  the  man  told  him  what  moved
him  from  home.  *It's  your  own  neighbour's  wife,'  says  he,
*  that  spoilt  your  cows  ;  she  is  this  moment  in  your  house,  in>
quiring  whether  you  went  from  home  to-day,  and  where  did  you
go  to ;  and  to  make  it  double  sure  to  you,  that  it's  her  who  spoilt
your  cows,  she  will  meet  you  under  the  lintel  of  your  door  coming
out  as  you  are  going  in.  Go  you  now  home,  and  take  a  shoe  of
an  entire  horse,  and  nail  it  on  your  byre-door ;  but  let  no  living
person-  know  of  it.'

'*  My  brother  came  home,  and  as  the  man  of  the  red  book  told
him,  this  identical  woman  met  him  on  the  threshold  as  he  was
going  in  to  the  house.  I  do  not  know  how  he  managed  to  get
hold  of  the  laird's  stallion,  but  the  shoe  was  nailed  on  our  byre
door  before  sunrise  next  morning,  so  our  cows  had  plenty  milk
from  that  day  forth."

4.  "  This  must  baa  wonderfìil  book,  John,"  says  I ;  '*  do  you
know  how  this  man  came  to  have  it  ?  "  *^  AVeU,"  says  John,  "  I'll
tell  you  that."

"  Once  upon  a  time,  there  lived  a  man  at  Appin,  Argyllshire,
and  he  took  to  his  house  an  orphan  boy.  When  the  boy  was
grown  up,  he  was  sent  to  herd ;  and  upon  a  day  of  days,  and  him
herding,  there  came  a  fine  gentleman  where  he  was,  who  asked
him  to  become  his  servant,  and  that  he  would  give  him  plenty
to  eat  and  drink,  clothes,  and  great  wages.  The  boy  told  him
that  he  would  like  veiy  much  to  get  a  good  suit  of  clothes,  but
that  he  would  not  engage  till  he  would  see  his  master ;  but  the
fine  gentleman  would  have  him  engaged  without  any  delay ;  this
the  boy  would  not  do  upon  any  terms  till  he  would  see  his  mas-
ter. *  Well,'  says  the  gentleman,  ^  in  the  meantime  write  your
marne  in  this  book.'  Saying  this,  he  puts  his  hand  into  his  oxter
{KMsket^  and  pulling  out  a  large  red  book,  he  told  the  boy  to  write


8S  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

his  name  in  the  hook.  This  the  hoy  would  not  do ;  neither  would
he  tell  his  name,  till  he  would  acquaint  his  master  first.  '  Now/
says  the  gentleman,  '  since  you  will  neither  engage,  or  tell  your
name,  till  you  see  your  present  master,  he  sure  to  meet  me  ahont
sunset  to-morrow,  at  a  certain  place.'  The  hoy  promised  that  he
would  he  sure  to  meet  him  at  the  place  ahont  sunsetting.  When
the  hoy  came  home  he  told  his  master  what  the  gentleman  said
to  him.  '  Poor  hoy,'  says  he,  *  a  fine  master  he  would  make  ;
lucky  for  yon  that  yon  neither  engaged  nor  wrote  your  name  in
his  hook ;  hut  since  you  promised  to  meet  him,  you  must  go ;  hut
as  you  value  your  life,  do  as  I  tell  you.'  His  master  gave  him  a
Bword,  and  at  the  same  time  he  told  him  to  he  sure  and  he  at  the
place  mentioned  a  while  hefore  sunset,  and  to  draw  a  circle  round
himself  with  the  point  of  the  sword  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity.
'  When  you  do  this,  draw  a  cross  in  the  centre  of  the  circle,  upon
which  you  will  stand  yourself;  and  do  not  move  out  of  that  posi.
tion  till  the  rising  of  the  sun  next  morning/  He  also  told  him
that  he  would  wish  him  to  come  out  of  the  circle  to  put  his
name  in  the  hook  ;  hut  that  upon  no  account  he  was  to  leave  the
circle  ;  *  hut  ask  the  hook  till  you  would  write  your  name  yourself*
and  when  once  you  get  hold  ofj^the  hook  keep  it,  he  cannot  touch
a  hair  of  your  head,  if  you  keep  inside  the  circle.*

"  So  the  hoy  was  at  the  place  long  hefore  the  gentleman  made
his  appearance ;  hut  sure  enough  he  came  after  sunset ;  he  tried
all  his  arts  to  get  the  hoy  outside  the  circle,  to  sign  his  name  in
the  red  hook,  hut  the  hoy  would  not  move  one  foot  out  of  where
he  stood ;  hut,  at  the  long  last,  he  handed  the  hook  to  the  boy,  so
as  to  write  his  name  therein.  The  book  was  no  sooner  inside  the
circle  than  it  fell  out  of  the  gentleman*s  hand  inside  the  circle  ;
the  hoy  cautiously  stretches  out  his  hand  for  the  hook,  and  as
soon  as  he  got  hold  of  it,  he  put  it  in  his  oxter.  When  the  fine
gentleman  saw  that  he  did  not  mean  to  give  him  hack  the  hook,
he  got  furious ;  and  at  last  he  transformed  himself  into  great
many  likenesses,  blowing  fire  and  brimstone  out  of  his  mouth  and
nostrils ;  at  times  he  would  appear  as  a  horse,  other  times  a  huge
nat,  and  a  fearfal  beast  (uille  bheast) ;  he  was  going  round  the
circle  the  length  of  the  night ;  when  day  was  beginning  to  break
he  let  out  one  fearful  screech ;  he  put  himself  in  the  likeness  of  a
large  raven,  and  he  was  soon  out  of  the  boy's  sight.    The  boy


THE  TWO  SHEPHERDS.  89

still  remaioed  where  he  vas  till  he  saw  the  smi  in  the  morning,
which  no  sooner  he  ohserved,  than  he  took  to  his  soles  home  an
fast  as  he  could.  He  gave  the  hook  to  his  master ;  and  this  is
how  the  far-famed  red  hook  of  Appin  was  got.'*

I  have  heard  many  old  people  say  that  they  went  from  all
parts  to  consult  the  red  hook  of  Appin,  though  this  is  the  hest
story  I  heard  ahout  it.  You  ask  if  there  were  virtue  in  iron  ;  you
must  know  that  iron  was  the  principal  safeguard  against  evil
spirits,  etc.,  etc. ;  which  I  shall  show  in  my  next  letter  on  the
fairies.

5.  The  next  is  from  the  telling  of  a  dancing  master,  a  north
country  Highlander,  and  written  hy  my  friend  Mr.  John  Camphell
of  Kilherry,  in  Argyllshire.  The  supernatural  heing  descrihed  as
Bauchan,  is  prohahly  Booah,  a  little  buck,  a  hobgoblin,  a  ghost,
a  sprite,  spectre  (Armstrong  and  other  Die.) ;  and  he  seems  but
a  half-tamed  specimen  of  the  same  genus  as  the  terrible  being
before  described.

CoLUimr  ouN  Cheaitn,  The  Headless  Trunk ;  Coluinn  Gun
Gheann  was  a  very  celebrated  Bauchkan,  who  favoured  the  family
of  the  Macdonals  of  Moran,  for  ages  immemorial,  and  was  fre-
quently seen  about  their  residence,  Moran  House ;  which  is
situated  on  the  main  land,  opposite  the  point  of  Slaate,  in  the
Island  of  Skye.  Though  a  protector  of  the  family,  he  was  parti-
cularly hostile  to  the  neighbourhood,  and  waged  war,  especially
with  all  the  strong  men  he  could  meet  with ;  for  this  purpose,  he
particularly  haunted  the  *'  Mile  Beith,*'  or  *'  Smooth  Mile,*'  one
end  of  which  was  not  above  200  yards  from  the  Mansion  (I  know
the  place  weD)  ;  the  other  end  of  the  Mile  terminated  at  a  large
stream,  called  the  Biver  Moran,  femed  in  history  for  salmon  fish-
ing ;  after  sunset,  people  did  wisely  to  avoid  that  part,  for  then
the  '*  CoLUinv  Guh  Cheann*'  was  sure  to  keep  his  vigils ;  and
any  stray  man  who  passed  was  sure  to  become  a  victim,  the
bodies  being  always  found  dead,  and  in  the  majority  of  instances
mutilated  also.  As  he  took  care  never  to  appear,  except  to  a  soli-
tary passenger,  it  was  in  vain  to  send  a  party  against  him.  He
was  seldom,  if  ever,  seen  by  women,  and  did  no  harm  either  to
them  or  to  children.  Once,  it  happened  that  a  distant  relative,
bat  intimate  fnend  of  Maasay'Sj  dared  his  fate,  and  remained  a


90  WEST  HIGHLÌlND  TAL£a

victim  on  the  ground.  This  came  to  the  ears  of  **  Ian  oarbh,
MacGillie  Challux,  Baasat,"  ''  Big  John,  the  son  of  M'Leod
of  Raasay ;"  he  was  celebrated  for  his  prowess  and  strength,  and
never  had  been  vanquished  in  any  fight,  though  he  had  tried  with
the  strongest.  He  told  his  step-mother  of  the  news  he  had  heard
fiom  the  Mainland,  and  asked  her  advice,  as  he  usually  did,  be-
fore he  undertook  any  exploit  of  the  kind.  She  advised  him  to  go,
and  avenge  the  blood  of  his  friend.  After  his  preparations  were
made,  and  not  without  a  blessing  from  the  Oracle,  he  set  out
on  his  circuitous  journey,  and  met  the  "  Goluinn"  after  sunset,
on  the  Mile  Beith,  and  a  battle  did  ensue,  and  I  daresay  it  was
a  very  stiff  one.  Before  sunrise,  it  was  necessary  for  the  Coluinn
to  be  off,  as  he  never  could  be  seen  in  daylight.  Whether  find-
ing he  made  no  progress  discouraged  him  or  not,  we  can*t  say,
but  Ian  got  the  victory.  Being  determined  to  get  a  sight  of  the
Coluinn,  and  also  to  prove  his  victory  to  others,  Ian  tucked
him  under  his  arm,  to  carry  him  to  the  nearest  light.  The
Coluinn  had  never  been  heard  to  speak ;  but  being  in  this  pre-
dicament, called  out,  "  Leig  as  mi,''  "  Let  me  go.''  "  Cha  usia
►n  AS  THU,"  **  I  will  not  let  thee  go.'*  Leig  as  mi,  he  repeated;
but  still  the  answer  was  Cha  leig  mi  as  thu.  **  Leig  as  mi,  agus
chan  feachear  an  so  mi  gu  brath  tuileadh."  ''  Let  me  go,  and  I
shall  never  be  seen  here  any  more."  "  Ma  bhoidachais  thu  air  a
leobhar,  air  a  chonail,  agus  air  a  stocaidh  dhubh,  bi  falbh."  "  If
thou  swear  that  on  the  book,  on  the  candle,  and  on  the  black
stocking,  begone  !  "  After  making  the  Coluinn  promise  this  on
his  knees,  Ian  liberated  him.  The  Coluinn  flew  off,  singing  the
following  doleful  words — "  8  fada  nam  fein  bonn  beinn  Hederin,  s
fada  nam  fein  bealach  a  bhorbhan,"  which  we  can  only  translate
by-

"  Far  from  me  is  the  hill  of  Ben  Hederin,
Far  from  me  is  the  pass  of  murmuring.'*

This  lament  was  repeated  as  long  as  Ian  could  hear,  and
these  words  are  still  sung  by  women  in  that  country  to  their
children,  to  the  following  notes,  which  tradition  says  was  the
very  air : —


THE  TWO  SHEFHEBD&


91


^^^^^^^^


S^S^


|lgEr^w%a#t^a


^^^^^^^m


In  the  next,  from  the  same  sonrce,  the  same  being  appears
foDj  tamed ;  still  sapematural,  still  possessed  of  extraordinary
strength,  but  attached  to  a  family,  and  a  regular  brownie.

6.  Id  the  neighbourhood  of  Loch  Traig,  in  Lochaber,  Galium
Mohr  Macintosh  held  a  little  farm.  There  were  rumours  of
his  haying  intercourse  with  a  mysterious  personage  called  a
haochan,  but  of  his  first  acquaintance  with  him  there  are  no
authentic  accounts.  One  thing,  however,  is  certain,  that  on  some
occasions  he  was  supematurally  aided  by  this  bauchan,  while  at
oUiers,  having  in  some  way  excited  his  displeasure,  Galium  was
opposed  in  all  his  schemes,  And  on  several  occasions  they  came
the  length  of  fighting  hand  to  hand,  Galium  never  suffering  much
injary.  On  one  occasion,  as  Galium  was  returning  from  Fort-
William  market,  he  met  his  friend  the  bauchan  within  a  short
distance  of  his  own  house,  and  one  of  these  contests  took  place,
during  which  Galium  lost  his  pocket-handkerchief,  which,  having
been  blessed  and  presented  to  him  by  the  priest,  was  possessed
of  a  peculiar  charm.  The  fight  being  ended,  Galium  hurried  home ;
bnt,  to  his  dismay,  found  that  he  had  lost  his  charmed  hand-
kerchief, for  which  he  and  his  wife  in  vain  sought.  Galium  felt
certain  he  had  to  thank  the  bauchan  for  this  mishap,  and  hurried


92  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

back  to  the  scene  of  action.  The  first  object  that  met  his  view
was  the  bauchan,  busily  engaged  in  rubbing  a  flat  stone  with  the
identical  handkerchief.  On  seeing  Galium,  he  called  out,  '*  Ah  I
you  are  back ;  it  is  well  for  you,  for  if  I  had  rubbed  a  hole  into
this  before  your  return  you  were  a  dead  man.  No  doctor  on
earth  or  power  could  save  you;  but  you  shall  never  have  this
handkerchief  till  you  have  won  it  in  a  fair  fight.'*  *^  Done,"
said  Galium,  and  at  it  they  went  again,  and  Galium  recovered
his  handkerchief.  Peats  were  almost  unknown  at  that  time,
and  Galium,  when  the  weather  grew  cold,  took  his  axe,  and
felled  a  large  birch  tree  in  the  neighbouring  forest,  the  branches
supplied  wood  for  the  fire  for  several  days,  and  Galium  did  not
trouble  himself  to  lay  in  a  store  nearer  hand — when,  lo !  a  snow
storm  came  on,  and  blocked  up  the  country,  so  that  he  was  cut
off  from  his  supply.  There  was  no  means  of  access  to  the  tree ;
and  careful  as  Gallum's  wife  was,  the  last  branch  was  almost
consumed,  and  the  fire  burnt  low.  Up  started  Galium  with  an
exclamation,  *'  Oh  I  wife,  would  that  we  had  the  tree  I  felled
in  the  forest  I  it  would  keep  us  warm  this  night."  Hardly  had  he
spoken  when  the  house  was  shaken  and  the  door  rattled ;  a  heavy
weight  had  fallen  nearthe  door.  Galium  rushed  to  see  whatthecause
was,  and  there  was  the  wished-for  tree,  with  the  Bauchan  grin-
ning at  him — "  Sma  am  Bauchan  fathast,  ged  a  sgain  an  Sag^*'
— (the  Bauchan  is  still  kind,  though  the  Priest  should  burst) —
said  the  wife.  On  another  occasion  it  happened  that  Galium  left
the  farm  he  was  in  and  went  to  one  adjoining  which  he  had  taken
carrying  with  him  his  wife  and  all  his  furniture.  In  the  night-
time Galium  turned  to  his  wife  and  said,  **  Well,  it  is  well  we
have  all  with  us ;  only  one  thing  have  we  forgotten,  the  hogshead
in  which  the  hides  are  being  barked ;  that  we  have  forgotten.'*
"  No  matter  for  that,'*  said  the  wife  ;  "  there  is  no  one  to  occupy
the  place  yet  a  while,  and  we  have  time  to  get  it  home  safe
enough ; "  and  so  the  matter  rested ;  but  on  going  round  the
end  of  the  house  next  morning,  what  did  Galium  see  but
his  own  identical  hogshead,  hides  and  all.  It  had  been
transported  the  distance  of  five  miles  of  most  rugged,  rocky
district.  None  but  a  goat  could  have  crossed  the  place,  and
in  the  time  it  would  have  bothered  one  to  do  it,  but  the
Baaohan  managed  it,  and  saved  Galium  a  most  troublesome


.  THE  TWO  SHEPHERDS*  93

joaraey.  If  yon  will  go  and  tak^  a  look  at  it — the  spot  is  there
jet — ^and  I  wonld  like  to  see  how  soon  yoa  would  manage  it,  let
alone  the  hogshead.

Poor  Callam,  however,  was  obliged,  with  many  of  his  neigh-
bonrs,  to  leave  Lochaber;  indeed,  he  was  amongst  the  first
embarking  at  Arisjug  for  New  York.  The  passage  was  a  tedious
one,  but  it  ended  at  lasfc,  and  without  any  particular  adventures  ;
but  on  arriving  they  had  to  perform  a  quarantine  of  many  days.
On  getting  pratique,  Galium  was  in  the  first  boat  which  landed,
and  happened  to  have  stowed  himself  in  the  bows  of  the  boat,
and  when  she  grounded,  was  the  first  man  to  jump  on  shore.
Directly  his  feet  touched  the  ground,  who  should  meet  him  in  the
shape  of  a  goat  but  the  Bauchan,  **  Ha,  ha  Galluni,  ha  mi  sho  air
Thoseach  orst."  Ha,  Malcolm,  I.  am  here  before  thee.  Here
ends  our  story ;  but  rumour  says  that  Galium  was  the  better  of
the  Bauchan*s  help  in  clearing  the  lands  of  his  new  settlement,
and  that,  till  he  was  fairly  in  the  way  of  prosperity,  the  Bauchan
abstained  from  teasing  and  provoking  poor  Galium.

The  next  makes  the  supernatural  beings  robbers,  and  is  a
further  argument  in  favour  of  the  theory  that  all  these  traditions
are  fictions  founded  on  fact ;  recollections  of  wild  savages  living
in  mountain  fastnesses,  whose  power,  and  strength,  and  cavern
dwellings  were  enlarged  and  distorted  into  magic  arts,  gigantic
stature,  and  the  under-ground  world.  I  translate  the  story  from
Gaelic,  written  by  Hector  MacLean  from  the  telling  of  JoHAimA
MAcGBUoioif  in  Bemeray,  August  1859.  This  woman  is  a
native  of  Skye,  and  descended  from  the  celebrated  pipers.  Her
&ther,  grandfather,  and  uncles  were  pipers.  She  learnt  the  story
from  her  grand-uncle  Angus  MacGrimmon.

7.  A  gentleman  had  aibeach,  a  herd's  dwelling,  and  he  was
out  in  a  far-ofif  glen  lung  in  the  year  with  his  herd  women  and  his
calf  herd.  They  had  every  man  they  needed,  and  they  were
there  till  the  middle  of  summer  was.  Then  the  herd  woman  said
that  she  must  go  to  seek  things  that  she  wanted.

The  herd  woman  went  away,  and  she  bad  a  great  distance  to
go  before  she  should  reach  the  farm.

She  said  to  the  herd,  in  spite  of  the  length  of  the  path,  that
she  would  try  to  be  back  that  night.     When  the  evening  was


'94  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES,

coming,  the  herd  was  wearying  that  the  herd  woman  was  not
coming.  Then  he  put  the  cattle  to  rights  agus  bkligh  e  bud,
and  he  milked  them,  and  there  were  wild  showers  of  snow  in  the
beginning  of  the  night.  He  went  home  when  the  beginning  of
night  was,  and  he  set  in  order  his  own  food,  after  he  had  taken  a
thought — ^DuiL  A  THOiBT  DETH — that  the  herd  woman  would  not
come.  He  took  his  food,  and  he  shut  the  door  as  well  as  be
could,  thinking  that  no  man  would  come  near  him  that  night.  He
put  NA  BEAiKTEAN  FRAOiCHE  the  bundles  of  heather  behind  the
.CÒMHLA  door,*  and  then  he  sat  to  toast  himself  at  the  fire  because
the  SIDE  weather  was  so  cold.  He  was  taking  his  dinner  there,
when  he  heard  a  great  tartar  noise  coming  towards  the  door.
Then  he  got  up  from  the  door  with  great  fear,  and  he  noticed  a
being  striking  the  door  again.  He  was  thinking,  and  he  did  not
know  what  to  do,  that  if  the  door  were  struck  a  third  time  it
.would  be  in.

*

He  got  up,  and  the  door  was  struck  a  third  time.  Then  he
crouched  in  a  comer  at  the  lower  end  of  the  shealing  when  he
saw  the  door  being  driven  in.

He  did  not  know  now  whether  he  should  stay  as  he  was  or
hide  himself.  When  he  noticed  the  door  being  pushed  in,  there
came  in  a  beast,  and  she  went  up  to  the  fire.

The  heather  took  fire  and  he  saw  this  nasty  beast  standing  at
the  fire.  And  she  had  a  great  long  hair,  and  that  creature  was —
A  CNAMH  A  oiB — chewiug  the  cud,  as  though  there  were  a  sheep
or  a  cow.  The  horns  that  were  on  her  were  up  to  the  top  of  the
shealing.  The  poor  man  that  was  within  thoaght  that  it  was
time  for  him  to  take  bis  legs  along  with  him,  and  he  went  out
through  the  night  and  the  winnowing  and  snow  in  it.

He  found  one  of  the  horses,  and  he  reached  his  master's
house  before  the  day  came.  Here  there  he  struck  in  the  door  of
his  master  furiously,  and  his  master  awoke  and  he  went  where  he
was,  and  he  told  his  master  the  uamhas — terrible  wonder  that
had  come  upon  him  since  the  herd  woman  left  him.


*  It  is  quite  common  in  Highland  cottages  to  keep  a  large
bundle  of  heather  or  brushwood  to  stuff  into  the  doorway  on  the
windward  side ;  sometimes  it  is  the  sole  door.


THE  TWO  SHEPHERDS*  9  J

The  master  went,  and  the  eldest  son  he  had  and  himself,  and
thej  took  a  gun  with  them.  They  went  as  fast  as  they  could  to
try  to  catch  the  beast  and  kill  her.  There  was  the  worth  of
much  money  in  the  ehealing,  and  they  thought  it  a  loss  that  they
should  want  it.  Then  when  they  were  coming  near  the  shealing
the  gentleman  pnt  a  charge  in  the  gun,  to  be  all  ready.  (Deibeal
— ^This  word  is  said  to  be  derived  from  South — about  the  old  prac-
tice being  to  make  a  turn  sun-wise  before  doing  anything  of  im-
portance).

They  reached  the  shealing,  and  they  let  off  a  shot  in.  Though
he  let  off  the  shot  he  did  not  notice  a  thing,  and  fear  would  not
let  one  of  them  search  within.  They  were  thus  at  the  door  and
they  perceived  the  beast  showing  herself  out.  It  was  hardly  that
she  dragged  herself  out  of  the  door  of  the  shealing.

There  ont  went  they — the  gentleman  and  his  son !  They
went  in  such  a  great  perturbation,  that  they  did  not  remember
the  horses ;  but  they  stretched  out  on  foot,  fleeing  before  the
beast  that  was  there.  What  but  that  the  beast  followed  after
them  till  they  reached  the  house,  and  they  thought  she  would
have  finished  tbem  before  they  should  arrive.  When  they  reached
the  fium,  one  of  the  gentleman's  men  met  him,  and  the  gentleman
told  him  that  he  was  almost  dead  at  all  events^  that  he  had  hopes
of  reaching  the  house,  and  that  he  should  go  to  try  to  meet  the
beast,  and  keep  her  back  a  space.

The  man  went  to  meet  the  beast  that  was  here,  and  she  full
of  the  snow;  and  he  looked  keenly  at  her.  He  returned  to  his
master  to  tell  him  what  sort  of  beast  it  was,  and  he  said,  "  Con)e
oat  here  that  you  may  come  and  see  the  beast."

When  they  went  out  to  see  the  beast,  what  was  here  but  the
hack  goat,  full  of  the  snow,  and  the  master  was  shamed  that  he
should  have  fled  from  the  like  of  that  beast.

The  herd  fled  by  the  way  of  the  banks  of  the  shore  ;  when  he
saw  his  master  running  away,  and  they  had  no  tale  of  him.
Three  of  the  servants  were  sent  about  the  glen  to  try  if  they
eoold  find  him ;  and  they  were  not  finding  him  at  all.

He  was  lost  thus  for  three  days  and  three  nights,  and  they
had  no  hope  that  they  would  find  him  for  ever.  On  the  third  day
he  was  going  at  the  side  of  the  shore,  and  water-horses  and
wild  beasts  coming  on  land  on  the  shores.     What  should  he


96  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

fall  in  with  bat  a  dwelling-place  there.  He  went  in.  There
was  no  man  there  bat  a  little  russet  man.  The  little  russet
man  put  welcome  on  him,  and  he  asked  him  to  come  forward —
that  he  was  welcome.  He  asked  of  the  little  russet  man  what
was  the  meaning  of  his  staying  in  such  a  place,  that  there  was
no  man  with  him.

"  Oh,'*  said  the  little  russet  man,  "  it  is  ndt  allowed  me  to
tell  aoything."

"  I  will  tell  thee,"  said  the  herd,  "  what  sent  me  in  here.  It
is  that  I  fled  from  uamhas — a  terrible  wonder."

"  This  is  the  thing  thou  shalt  do,"  said  the  little  russet  man.
"  Thou  shalt  stretch  thyself  on  this  bed  up  here,  and  thing  or
thÌDg  that  thou  seest  in  thy  sleep,  remember  on  thy  death  that
thou  dost  not  tell  it."

Then  when  he  went  to  stretch  himself  in  the  bed,  what  should
meet  him  in  the  bed  but  the  body  of  a  man ;  and  he  took  to
trembling  with  fear,  but  he  did  not  move.  He  thought  he
would  stay  as  he  was ;  that  the  dead  man  was  not  to  touch  him
at  all  events.  Then  he  heard  great  speaking  coming  towards  the
house ;  he  was  not  long  so  till  he  noticed  a  great  clatter  coming,
and  what  was  this  but — seisejlb  fbab  (collective  singular  noun  of
number,  six  man) — six  men  coming  in  and  a  cow  with  them.  The
master  that  was  over  the  six,  said  to  the  little  russet  man,
"Didst  thou  see  or  perceive  a  man  coming  this  way  since
early  earliness.'^

*'  I  did  not  see,"  said  he,  "  he  might  come  the  way  un-
known to  me."

"  Shut  the  door,"  said  the  big  man,  "  and  all  without  be
they  without,  and  all  within  within."

Then  they  put  the  cow  on  the  fire  in  a  great  caldron  after
they  had  torn  it  asunder  in  quarters.  When  they  had  put  this
on  the  fire  it  was  not  long  till  he  noticed  the  next  clatter,  and
what  was  here  but  another  band  coming.

What  should  this  band  have  but  another  cow  flayed,  and
they  had  a  pit  within,  and  there  they  salted  her.  When  the
flesh  that  was  in  the  kettle  was  cooked,  they  took  their  supper
all  together.

The  poor  man  that  was  here  in  the  bed  did  not  know  on
earth  what  he  should  do  for  fear.  I  Here  when  it  was  coming


THE  TWO  SHEPHERDS.  97

near  on  the  mouth  of  the  day,  the  little  russet  man  went  out
to  look  what  likeness  was  on  the  night.

When  he  came  in,  said  they  to  him,  "  What  seeming  is  on  the
night?"  "There  is  a  middling  seeming,"  said  he;  but  it  is  I
who  saw  the  terrible  man  Dunns  fuathasach  since  I  went  out,  as
though  he  were  listening  to  you.  I  think  that  it  is  fuamhaib
CHBEio  DALLAiG  the  giant  of  crag  dallag,  who  is  there.

There  out  went  eyery  man  of  them,  and  the  one  that  would
not  wait  on  his  bow  he  would  seize  on  his  sword  to  kill  him.

When  the  little  russet  man,  who  waB  within,  thought  that
they  had  hurried  well  from  the  hoase,  he  said  to  the  one  who  was
in  the  bed,  "  Thou  one  that  art  up  come  down  as  fast  as  thou
didst  ever."  Then  he  stretched  to  the  poor  man  who  was  in  the
bed,  as  fast  as  ever  he  did,  a  stocking  full  of  dollars j  and  he  gave
him  bread  and  cheese.  "  If  thou  ever  didst  it,  do  it  now,"  said
the  Uttle  russet  man  to  the  herdsman.  The  herdsman  went,  and
be  reached  the  house  of  his  master  whole  and  healthy.

The  moral  of  this  tale  seems  to  be,  that  he  who  runs  away
from  fancied  danger  may  fall  into  real  peril ;  but  what  bears  upon
the  theory  of  the  origin  of  such  stories  is,  that  the  reed  peril  is
from  "  water-horses  "  and  "  robbers,"  who  have  a  little  red  ruaoh
man  who  plays  the  part  of  the  enchanted  princess,  and  the  friendly
cat,  and  the  woman  who  is  the  slave  of  the  giants,  and  the  robbers ;
the  character  which  appears  in  all  collections  of  popular  tales  to
befriend  the  benighted  stranger,  or  the  wandering  prince.  And
what  is  more,  the  fancied  danger  was  from  a  creature  under  the
form  of  a  goat.  Why  a  man  should  be  frightened  by  a  goat,  ap-
pears from  the  last  of  following  two  stories,  translated  from  the
GraeHc  of  Hector  Urquhart,  and  written  from  the  telling  of  John
Campbell  in  Strath-Gairloch,  Boss-shire.  He  is  now  (1859)
tixty-three.

8.  At  some  time  of  the  world  the  lord  of  Gearloch  tighearna
OHEABLOGH  had  a  CEATHEABNACH,  who  used  to  be  slaying  fuathan,
bogles,  and  routing  out  the  spoilers.  The  name  of  this  stalwart
man  was  uistean  mob  mac  ghille  phadbig.  IJistean  was  on  a
day  hunting,  and  he  saw  a  great  wreath  of  mist  above  him,  and
heard  the  sweetest  music  he  ever  heard,  but  he  was  not  seeing  a
thing  but  the  mist  itself.    He  cast  a  shot  that  was  in  his  gun  at

VOL.  IL  H


98  WEST  mGTTTiAWP  TALES,

«

the  wreath  of  mist,  and  the  very  finest  woman  he  ever  saw  fell
down  at  his  side.    He  took  her  with  him  to  his  own  hoase,  bat
there  was  not  a  word  of  speech  in  her ;  and  she  was  thus  for  a
year  with  him,  and  she  never  saw  a  thing  that  she  could  not  do.
And  Uistean  was  thus  in  the  mountain  as  nsnal  slaying  the
-bogles,  FUATHAN,  and  on  a  day  at  the  end  of  the  year,  and  he  in
the  mountain,  the  night  come  on  him  as  he  was  coming  home.
There  he  saw  alight  in  a  hill ;  he  reached  where  the  light  was,  and
he  stood  in  the  door,  and  na  siTmcHEAir,  the  fairies,  were  within
making  music  and  dancing,  and  the  butler  that  they  had  going
round  about  amongst  them  and  giving  them  the  drink.    Uistean
was  looking  at  this  :  and  the  butler  said,  "  It  is  a  year  from  this
night's  night  that  we  lost  the  daughter  of  larla  Anndmm,  the
Earl  of  Antrim.    She  has  the  power  of  the  draught  on  her  that
she  does  not  speak  a  word,  till  she  gets  a  drink  from  the  cup  that
is  in  my  hand.    And  the  butler  was  going  round  about  till  be
reached  where  Uistean  was,  and  he  gave  the  cokn  cup  to  Uistean.
No  sooner  got  Uistean  a  hold  of  the  cup  in  his  hand  than  he  took
his  soles  out  (of  that),  and  they  after  him.    They  were  here  coming
close  to  (shearing  on)  Uistean,  and  when  they  were  come  within
sight  of  the  town  the  cock  crowed.     One  said,  "  It  is  as  well  for
as  to  return  ; "  but  another  said,  *'  It  is  but  BOaAO  foohair,  a
spring  soft  one.''    At  the  end  of  a  while  another  cock  crowed.
*'  But  it  is  time  to  return  now  ;  this  is  the  black  cock  of  March  "
— and  they  returned ;  but  Uistean  did  not  let  go  the  cup  till
they  reached  his  own  house,  and  till  he  had  given  a  draught
to  her  from  the  cup,  and  as  soon  as  she  had  drunk  a  draught
from  the  cup,  she  had  speech  as  well  as  another.    And  Uistean
went  on  the  spot,  back  with  the  cup,  and  he  left  it  on  the  hill ;
and  when  Uistean  came  back  to  his  own  house  she  told  him  that
she  was  the  daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Antrim,  and  that  the  fairies
had  taken  her  from  childbed.    Uistean  gave  her  two  choices,
whether  would  she  rather  stay  by  him,  or  be  sent  back  to  Eirinn  ;
aud  she  had  rather  go  home.    They  went,  and  when  they  reached
the  house  of  the  Earl  of  Antrim,  she  stayed  in  a  little  house  that
Was  near  upon  the  castle  for  that  night,  and  when  they  began  to
give  them  news,  the  housewife  told  them  that  the  daughter  of
the  Earl  of  Antrim  was  exceedingly  ill,  and  that  there  was  no
leech  in  Eirinn  that  could  do  her  good.    Uistean  said  that  he


THE  TWO  SHEPHERDS.  99

was  the  great  doctor  of  the  King  of  the  Gaeldoxn,  and  that  he
would  heal  her,  and  that  he  would  not  ask  payment  till  she  should
be  healed.

The  Earl  was  right  well  pleased  his  like  to  be  come  about,  and
it  was  told  to  the  one  who  was  on  the  bed,  that  a  great  Scottish
doctor  was  come  to  her  town  that  could  cure  her.  But  this  did
not  please  her  at  aU,  and  she  would  not  let  him  come  near  her.
But  Uistean  said  that  he  would  go  there  though  it  was  ill  with
her ;  and  he  went  where  she  was,  with  his  naked  sword  in  his
hand.  8he  who  was  in  the  bed  cast  an  eye  on  him,  and  she  said,
"  IT  I  had  been  to  pat  my  thumb  on  the  apple  of  thy  throat  on
the  night  that  thou  wert  bom,  thou  couldest  not  do  this  to  me
this  day."

And  when  Uistean  went  to  the  bed,  she  went  as  a  flame  of
fire  out  at  the  end  of  the  house.

Then  Uistean  gave  his  own  daughter  by  the  hand  to  the  Earl
of  Antrim,  whole  and  healthy.  The  Earl  of  Antrim  gave  Uistean
his  two  choices,  that  he  should  stay  with  him,  or  a  bag  of  gold
and  go  home.  Uistean  took  the  bag  of  gold,  and  he  came  home ;
and  he  began  at  killing  Fuathan,  as  he  was  before.

This  story  joins  Fairies  and  Fuathan,  and  has  many  relations
in  other  languages,  and  the  next  joins  the  whole  to  the  French
Loup  Crarou,  of  which  I  heard  from  a  peasant  in  France  in
November  1859,  but  the  wolf  is  a  goat  in  the  Highlands.

9.  Some  time  after  this,  word  went  to  Uistean  that  there  was
a  Fuath  on  Tombuidhe  Gheabblogh  on  the  yellow  knoll  of
(jairloch,  and  this  Fuath  was  killing  much  people,  and  sending
others  out  of  the  husk  (or  the  gates)  of  their  hearts,  ▲  choohail
AM  CBIDHE,  because  no  man  could  take  the  path  after  the  night
or  darkness  should  come.  ^

Uistean  came,  and  on  the  way  at  the  foot  of  the  knoll  Uistean
went  into  the  house  of  a  yellow-footed  weaver  that  was  living
there.  Said  the  weaver  to  Uistean,  "  Thou  hadst  best  stop  the
night/'

"  Well,  I  will  do  that,"  said  Uistean ;  "  I  am  going  to  kill  the
Fuath  of  Tombuidh  to-night."

"  Perhaps  that  is  not  so  easy,"  said  the  weaver ;  "  with  what
wilt  thou  kill  Gaohair  Mhoil-Bhui,  the  goat  of  Maol-buidh?"


lOO  .   WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  With  the  gun,"  said  Uistean.

"  What,"  said  the  weaver,  "  if  the  gun  will  not  suit?'"

"  If  it  will  not  suit,"  said  he,  "  I  will  try  the  sword  on  her.  "

"  What,"  said  the  weaver,  "  if  the  sword  will  not  come  out  of
the  sheath?"

*•  Well,"  said  Uistean,  "  I  will  try  my  mother's  sister  on  her."

And  on  every  arm  that  Uistean  named,  the  weaver  laid  bosad,
a  spell,  but  on  the  dirk  which  he  called  his  mother's  sister  the
weaver  could  not  lay  a  spell.  Then  Uistean  went  up  to  the.  top
of  the  knoll,  and  on  the  top  of  the  knoll  was  a  pit  in  which  the
goat  used  to  dwell.

She  let  out  a  meioaid  bleat,  and  Uistean  said,  *'  Dost  thoa
want  thy  kid  thou  skulker  ?"

"  If  I  do,  I  have  got  it  now,"  said  she.  Then  Uistean  laid
hands  on  his  gun,  but  she  would  not  give  a  spark.  Then  he  laid
hands  on  his  sword,  but  it  would  not  come  out  of  the  sheath.
"  Where  now  is  thy  mother's  sister?"  said  the  goat.

When  Uistean  heard  this  he  sprang  on  the  goat,  and  the  first
thrust  he  gave  her  with  the  biodag  dirk,  she  let  out  a  roar.

"  It  seems  odd  to  me,  poor  beast,  if  I  do  not  give  thy  kid  milk
now."

And  he  did  not  see  the  goat  any  more.  Uistean  turned  back
to  the  weaver's  house,  and  when  he  kindled  a  light,  he  found  the
weaver  under  the  loom  pouring  blood.

"  If  it  was  thou  who  madest  so  much  loss  on  the  yellow  knoll,
thou  shalt  not  get  off  any  farther,"  said  Uistean.

Then  he  killed  the  weaver  under  the  loom,  and  no  man  was
slain  on  the  yellow  knoll  since  then,  by  goat  or  bogle.

These  two  stories  are  certain  enough.  It  was  by  my  mother
I  heard  them,  and  many  a  tale  there  is  of  Uistean,  if  I  had  mind
of  them.

John  Campbell,  Strath  Gairloch,  Ross-shire.

10.  I  have  another  version  of  this  same  tale  written  by  a
school-master,  at  the  request  of  Mr.  Osgood  Mackenzie.  It  is  in
very  good  Gaelic,  but  to  translate  it  would  be  repetition,  for  it  is
almost  the  identical.  I  do  not  mention  the  name  of  the  writer,
for  it  might  be  displeasing  to  him.  The  narrator  is  Alexander
Macdonald,  Inverasdale.  The  goat  is  called  Gabhab  hhob  rhi
BEAOACH  FHEUBAGACH,  a  great  hairy-bearded  goat ;  and  the  dirk  is


THE  TWO  SHEPHERDS.  lOl

called  Catbiona  puithjlr  mo  bheaha  mhathaib,  Catherine,  my
grandmother's  sister.    He  finds  the  Beeabadaib  weaver  in  bed,
with  a  woand  in  his  thigh,  and  gives  him  his  death  thrust  there.
I  have  given  these  specimens  of  a  particular  class  of  tales
which  are  common  enough,  as  they  came  to  me,  because  they  seem
to  be  fair  illustrations  of  the  popular  creed  as  to  spirits ;  and  to
show  that  the  so-called  spirits  are  generally  very  near  mortal
men.    My  belief  is,  that  bocan,  bodach,  fuath,  and  all  their  tribe,
were  once  savages,  dressed  in  skins,  and  that  gruagach  was  a
half-tamed  savage  hanging  about  the  houses,  with  his  long  hair
and  skin  clothing ;  that  these  have  gradually  acquired  the  attri-
butes of  divinities,  river  gods,  or  forest  nymphs,  or  that  they  have
been  condemned  as  pagan   superstitions,  and   degraded  into
demons ;  and  I  know  that  they  are  now  remembered,  and  still
somewhat  dreaded,  in  their  last  character.    The  tales  told  of
them  partake  of  the  natural  and  supernatural,  and  bring  fiction
nearer  to  fact  than  any  class  of  tales  current  in  the  Highlands,
unless  it  be  the  fairy  stories  of  which  a  few  are  ^ven  under
number  28,  etc.


1


XXXI.
OSEAN  AFTER  THE  FEES.

From  Barra.

OISEAN  was  an  old  man  after  the  (time  of  the)
Feen,  and  he  (was)  dwelling  in  the  house  of  his
daughter.  He  was  blind,  dea^  and  limping,  and  there
were  nine  oaken  skewers  in  his  belly,  and  he  ate  the
tribute  that  Padraig  had  over  Eirinn,  They  were  then
writing  the  old  histories  that  he  was  telling  them.

They  killed  a  right  big  stag ;  they  stripped  the
shank,  and  brought  him  the  bone.  ''  Didst  thou  ever
see  a  shank  that  was  thicker  than  that  in  the  Feen  ?"
"  I  saw  a  bone  of  the  black  bird's  chick  in  which  it
would  go  round  about" — "  In  that  there  are  but  Uea"
When  he  heard  this,  he  caught  hold  of  the  books  with
rage,  and  he  set  them  in  the  fire.  His  daughter  took
them  out  and  quenched  them,  and  she  kept  them.
Ossian  asked,  with  wailing,  that  the  worst  lad  and
dog  in  the  Feen  should  lay  weight  on  his  chest
He  felt  a  weight  on  bis  chest  "  What's  this  Ì "— "  I
MacKuaghadh"  (son  of  the  red,  or  auburn  one).
"  What  is  that  weight  which  I  feel  at  my  feet  Ì  ** —
"  There  is  MacBuidheig^'  (the  son  of  the  Httle  yellow).
They  stayed  as  they  were  till  the  day  came.  They
arose.  He  asked  the  lad  to  take  him  to  such  a  glen.
The  lad  reached  the  glen  with  him.  He  took  out  a
whistle  from  his  pocket,  and  he  played  it.     "Seest


OSEAN  AFT£R  THE  FEEN.  IO3

thou  anything  going  past  on  yonder  mountain  Ì " — "  I
see  deer  on  it'* — "  Wliat  sort  dost  thou  see  on  it  Ì "
— "  I  see  some  slender  and  grey  on  it." — "  Those  are
the  seed  of  the  Lon  Luath,  swift  elk ;  let  them
pass." — "  What  kind  seest  thou  now  ?" — "  I  see  some
gaunt  and  grizzled." — "  Those  are  the  seed  of  Dearg
dasdanach,  the  red  Fierce :  let  them  pass." — "What  kind
seest  thou  now?" — "I  see  some  heavy  and  sleek."
—"Let  the  dog  at  them."  "Vic  Vuiaig!"  Mac-
Bhuieig  went  "  Is  he  dra^ng  down  plenty  ? " — *'  He
is." — "  Now,  when  thou  seest  that  he  has  a  dozen  thou
shalt  check  him*"  When  he  thought  he  had  them,  he
played  the  whistle,  and  he  checked  the  dog.  ^^  Now,
if  fJie  pup  is  sated  with  chase,  he  will  come  quietly,
gently ;  if  not,  he  wiU  come  with  his  gape  open."
He  was  coming  with  his  gape  open,  and  his  tongue  out
of  his  mouth.  "  Bad  is  the  thing  which  thou  hast
done  to  check  the  pup  unsated  with  chase." — "  When  he
comes,  catch  my  hand,  and  try  to  put  it  in  his  gape,
or  he  will  have  us."  He  put  the  hand  of  Oisean  in
bis  gape,  and  he  shook  his  throat  out.  "  Come,  gather
the  stags  to  that  knoll  of  rushes."  He  went,  and  that
is  done ;  and  it  was  nine  stags  that  were  there,  and
that  was  but  enough  for  Oisean  alone ;  the  lad's  share
was  lost  "Put  my  two  hands  about  the  rushy
knoll  that  is  here;"  he  did  that,  and  the  great  cal-
dron that  the  Feen  used  to  have  was  in  it  "  Now,
make  ready,  and  put  the  stags  in  the  caldron,  and  set
&re  under  it."  The  lad  did  that  When  they  were
here  ready  to  take  it,  Oisean  said  to  him,  "  Touch  thou
them  not  tiU  I  take  my  fill  first"  Oisean  began  upon
them,  and  as  he  ate  each  one,  he  took  one  of  the
skewers  out  of  his  belly.  When  Oisean  had  six  eaten,
the  lad  had  three  taken  from  him.  "  Hast  thou  done
this  to  me ? "  said  Oisean.     " I  did  it,"  said  he ;  "I


I04  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

would  need  a  few  when  thou  thyself  hadst  so  many  of
them." — '*  Try  if  thou  wilt  take  me  to  such  a  rock."
He  went  down  there,  and  he  brought  out  the  chick  of
a  blackbird  out  of  the  rock.  "  Let  ,us  come  to  be
going  home."  The  lad  caught  him  under  the  arm,
and  they  went  away.  When  he  thought  that  they
were  nearing  the  house,  he  said,  "  Are  we  very  near
the  house  Ì "  "  We  are,"  said  the  lad.  "  Would  the
shout  of  a  man  reach  the  house  where  we  are  just
now  Ì "  * — "  It  would  reach  it" — "  Set  my  front  straight
on  the  house."  The  lad  did  thus.  When  he  was
coming  on  the  house,  he  caught  the  lad,  and  he  put
his  baud  in  his  throat,  and  he  killed  him.  *'  Now,"
said  he,  "  neither  thou  nor  another  will  tell  tales  of
me."  He  went  home  with  his  hands  on  the  wall,  and
he  left  the  blackbird's  chick  within.  They  were  ask-
ing him  where  he  had  been  since  the  day  came ;  he
said  he  had  been  where  he  had  often  passed  pleasant
happy  days.  "  How  didst  thou  go  there  when  thou
art  bUndl" — "I  got  a  chance  to  go  there  this  day  at
aU  events.  There  is  a  Httle  pet  yonder  that  I  brought
home,  and  bring  it  in."  They  went  out  to  look,  and  if
they  went,  there  did  not  go  out  so  many  as  could  bring
it  home.  He  himself  arose,  and  he  brought  it  in.
He  asked  for  a  knife.  He  caught  the  shank,  he
stripped  it,  and  then  took  the  flesh  off  it.  He  broke
the  two  ends  of  the  bone.  "  Get  now  the  shank  of
the  dun  deer  that  you  said  I  never  saw  the  like  of  in
the  Feen."  They  got  this  for  him,  and  he  threw  it
out  through  the  marrow  hole.  Now  he  was  nfiade
truthfuL  They  began  to  ask  more  tales  from  him,  but
it  beat  them  ever  to  make  him  begin  at  them  any
more.

*  A  Lapp  measure  of  distance  is  "  a  dog's  bark."


0I8EAN  AN  DEIGH  NA  PBINNE.  IO5


OISEAN  AN  DEIGH  NA  FEINNE.

Bha  Oisean  'na  shean  dnin*  an  d^gh  na  Finne  's  e  faireachd  an  tigh
a  nigfainne.  Bha  e  danll,  bodhar,  bacach,  's  bha  naoidh  deilg  daraich
'na  bhroinn,  's  e  *g  itheadh  na  càìn  a  bh'  aig  Pàdraig  air  Eirinn.  Bha
end  an  sin  a'  sgriobhadh  na  seann  eachdraidh  a  bha  e  'g  innseadh
dhaibh.  Mharbh  end  damh  ro  mhbr ;  riiisg  end  an  calpa,  *8  thug  end
a  Honnsnidh  an  cnàimh.  *' A  nis  am  faca  ta  calpa  riabh  a  ba  ghairbhe
na  sin  'san  Fhinn."  **  Chnnna  mi  cnàimh  isein  an  Ion  daigh,  's  rachadh
e  ma  'n  cnairt  an  taobh  a  stigh  dheth."  **  Cha  n  'eil  an  sin  ach  na
briagan."  Nur  a  chual  e  so  rug  e  air  na  leabhraichean  le  corraich,
agas  choir  e  'san  tein*  end.  Thug  a  nighean  as  an  tein'  eud,  *s  chnir
i  as  end,  's  ghl^dh  i  end.

Dh'  iarr  Oisean  de  dh'  achanaich  an  gill*  agus  an  ch  bu  mhiosa
bha  'san  Fhkin  a  chur  cudthrom  air  uchd.  Dh'  fhairich  e  cudthrom
air  uchd.  **  D^  so?"  <<Mise  Macna  Ruaghadh."  **  De *n  cudthrom  ud
a  thamifiaotainn  aig  mo  chasan  ?"  <«  Tha  MacBuidheig."  Dh'  fhan  eud
mur  a  bha  eud  gos  an  d'  thkinig  an  latha.  Nur  a  thàinig  an
latha  dh*  ^iridh  eud.  Dh'  iarr  e  air  a  ghiUe  'thoirt  go  leithid
80  de  ghleann.  Ràinig  an  gille  an  gleann  leis.  Thug  e  mach
fideag  a  a  phbca  's  sheinn  e  i.  ^'Am  faic  thu  dad  sam  bith
a  dol  seachad  air  an  aonadh  ud  shuas?"  **  Chi  mi  f^idh  ann."  D^
*n  seorsa  a  chi  thu  ann?"  *<Chi  mi  feadhain  chaola  ghlas  ann."
"  Sin  agad  siol  na  Luine  luaithe  lig  seachad  eud."  *'  D4  'n  seorsa  chi
thu  'n  dràsd  ?"  "Ch  mi  feadhain  sheanga  riabhach."  ^  Sinn  agad  eàol
na  Deirge  dàsanaich  lig  seachad  eud."  **  D4  'n  fheadhain  a  chi  thu  'n
dràsd?"  *' Chi  mi  feadhain  throma  loma."  *' Lig  an  ch  thuca."  *'Mhic
Bhnidheig!"  Dh'fhalbh  Mac  Bhoidheig.  **A  bheil  e  leagaU  na
leoir  ?  "  "  Tha."  **  Nur  a  chi  thu  nis  aon  dusan  aige  caisgidh  thu  e.'
Nor  a  shaoil  e  gun  robh  eud  aige  sheinn  e  'n  fhideag  's  chaisg  e  'n  cù.
"  Nis  ma  tha 'n  cuilean  buidheach  seilge  thig  e  gu  modhail,  socair ;  mur
'eQ  thig  e  's  a  chraos  fosgailt."  Bha  e  tighinn  'sa  chraos  fosgailte  *sa
theanga  mach  air  a  bhial.  "  'S  dona  'n  rud  a  rinn  thu  an  cuilean  a
chaag  's  gun  e  buidheach  seilg.  Nur  a  thig  e  beir  air  mo  làinahsa  's
fiacfa  an  cuir  thu  stigh  na  chraos  i,  no  bidh  sinn  aige."  Chuir  e
stigh,  làmh  Oisein  'na  chraos  's  chrath  e  'n  sgòman  as.  **  Thalia
cndnnidi  na  daimh  'ionnsuidh  an  tom  luachrach."  Dh'  fhalbh  e  's
siud,  agus  'se  naoidh  daimh  a  bh'  ann,  agus  cha  b'  uilear  do  dh'
siud  'na  onrachd,  's  bha  cuid  a'  ghill  air  chauU.  **  Cuir  mo  dha
lajmhua  ma  'n  tom  luachrach  a  tha  'n  so."  Rinn  e  siud 's  bha  'n  coire
m2>r  a  V  àbhabt  a  bhi  aig  an  Fhinn  ann,  **  Dian  anis  deas  's  cuir  na


I06  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

daimh  anna  a*  choire  'a  coir  gealbhan  foidhe.*^  Rinn  an  gille  siod.
Nor  a  bha  ead  an  so  deas  ainon  an  gabhail,  nra'  Oiaean  ria.  **  Na
bean  thoaa  dhaibh  gos  an  gabh  miae  mo  dhUd  an  toiaeach."  Thòiaich
Oiaean  orra,  'aa  h-nile  fear  a  dh'  itheadh  e  bheireadh  e  fear  de  na
deilg  aa  a  bhroinn.  Nor  a  bha  aia  aig  Oiaean  air  an  itheadh  bha  tri
aig  a  ghill'  air  an  toirt  naidhe.  <*  An  d*  rinn  thu  ao  orm? "  urs*
Oiaean.  "  Rinn,*  ma*  eaan,  *  dh*  fhenmaSnnaa  beagan,  nur  a  bhu  mbran
agad  fhin  din."  **  Fiach  an  d'  thoir  thn  mia'  ionnauidh  a  leithid  ao  do
chreag.*'  Rinn  e  aind.  Chaidh  e  aioa  an  dn  'a  thng  e  mach  iaean
Ion  daigh  aa  a*  chreig.  ^  Thngainn  a  bhi  falbh  dachaidh.**  Rag  an
giir  air  aehlaia  air  'a  dh*  fbalbh  end.  Nnr  a  bha  e  amaointeachadh
gon  robh  end  a'  teannadh  air  an  tigh  thnirt  e.  '*  A  bheil  ainn  a'  teann-
adh  goirid  o'n  tigh.**  **  Tha,"  ura*  an  gille, "  An  migeadh  eubh  dnin'  air
an  tigh  far  a  bheU  ain  an  dràad."  <*  Rnigeadh."  "  Coir  m*  aghaidhaa
direach  air  an  tigh."  Rinn  an  gille  aind.  Nnr  a  bha  e  tigh  'n
air  an  tigh  rag  e  air  a'  ghille  'a  chair  e  làmh  *na  agbman  'a  mharbh  e
e.  **  So,"  ura'  eaan,  **cha,  bhi  thoaa  na  fear  eile  'g  innaeadh  eachd-
raidh  a*m'  dh^ighaa."  Chaidh  e  dachaidh  *8  a  Ikmhan  'a  a*  bhalla  'a
dh*  fhàg  e  iaean  an  Ion  doigh  a  atigh.  Bha  end  a'  feònddh  deth
càit'  an  robh  e  o  thàinig  an  latha.  Thairte  gon  robh  e  £uram  minig
an  do  choir  e  làithean  aòlaaach,  toilichte  aeachad.  '*  Demnr  a  chaidh
thoa*  an  ain  *8  thu  dauU?"  "  Fhnair  mi  cothrom  air  a  dhol  ann  an  diogh
CO  dhio.  Tha  psata  beag  an  aiod  a  thog  mi  dachaidh  's  thngaibh
a  ateach  e."  Dh*  fhalbh  end  a  mach  a  choimhead,  'a  ma  dh'  fbalbh,  cfaa
deach  a  mach  na  bheireadh  dachaidh  e.  Dh'  eiridh  e  flan  a  mach  *8
thog  e  ateach  e.  Dh'  iarr  e  core.  Rog  e  air  a  chalpa,  'a  riiiag  e  e,
'a  thog  e  *n  fheòil  deth.  Bhria  e  da  cheann  a*  chnàimh.  **  Faighibh  a
nia  calp'  an  daimh  odhair  a  bha  aibh  ag  radh  nach  fhaca  miae  riabh  a
leithid  'a  an  Fhinn.**  Fhnair  end  ao  dha  *a  thilg  e  mach  romh  thoU  an
amior  aig  e.  Bha  e  'n  ao  air  a  dhianadh  firinneach.  Thòiaich  endair
iarraidh  toUlidh  eachdraidh  air,  ach  dh'  fhairtlich  orra  riabh  toirt  air
tòiaeachadh  orra  tuillidh.


2.  A  yeraion  of  this  was  told  to  me  by  an  old  tinker  at  In^er-
ary,  bat,  according  to  him,  the  books  were  destroyed.  I  took
it  to  be  the  popular  account  of  the  Ossian  controversy.  Ossian,
MacPherson,  Dr.  Smith,  and  their  party,  fused  into  "  Ossian,"  Dr.
Johnson,  and  his  followers,  condensed  into  "Padraig."  The  fa-
mous Red  Book  of  Glanrannald  has  also  become  mythical.  Its
true  history  will  be  found  in  the  book  by  the  Highland  Society.  I
was  told  in  Besbecula  how  a  man  had  fonnd  a  book,  containing


OSEAN  AFTER  THE  FEEN.  IO7

tbe  history  of  the  Feen,  in  a  moss ;  and  how  be  had  parted  with
it  to  a  blind  beggar,  who  had  sold  part  to  a  clergyman,  the  rest
was  in  America.  "  The  book  was  not  dng  up ;  it  was  en  the
moss.    It  seemed  as  if  the  ancestors  had  sent  it."

3.  This  story  of  the  Blackbird's  Bone  is  common.  I  heard  it
myself  from  several  men  in  South  Uist,  with  variations.  Accord-
ing to  one,  the  deer's  bone  was  to  tnm  round  on  end  in  the
blackbird's  shank.  Another  version  has  been  sent  to  me  from
Satherland.  According  to  J.  H.  Simpson,  a  similar  tale  is  now
told  by  the  peasantry  of  Mayo.  (Poems  of  Ossin,  Bard  of  Erin,
from  the  Irish,  1857,  page  191.)  Mr.  MacLbas  very  ingeniously
suggests  that  the  word  which  now  means  Blackbird  (Londubh)
may  originally  have  meant  Black-ELK.  Armstrong's  Dictionary
gives  LÒH,  a  meadow ;  Lòn,  a  diet,  a  dinner,  a  store,  provision,
food ;  Loir,  an  ousel,  a  blackbird,  an  Elk ;  Lon,  greed,  prattle,
hunger;  also,  a  rope  of  raw  hides  used  by  the  people  of  St.  Kilda.
The  word,  then,  may  mean  almost  anything  that  can  be  eaten  by
man  or  beast  in  general ;  and  an  elk  in  particular.

There  are  plenty  of  elks  still  living  in  Scandinavia.  Their
gigantic  fossil  bones  are  found  in  Irish  bogs,  and  in  the  Isle  of
Man ;  a  whole  skeleton  is  to  be  seen  in  the  British  Museum ;  and
it  is  supposed  that  men  and  elks  existed  together  in  Ireland.
(See  Wilson's  Pre-historic  Annals  of  Scotland,  page  22 :  1851.)
Tlie  story  probably  rests  on  a  foundation  of  fact — ^namely,  the
discovery  of  fossil  bones — ^mized  up  with  the  floating  traditions
about  the  Feen  which  pervade  both  Ireland  and  Scotland,  and
which  have  been  woven  into  poems  for  centuries  in  both  countries.
These  may  date  from  the  days  when  men  hunted  elks  in  Erin,  as
they  now  do  in  Scandinavia.  "Padndg''  probably  slipped  in
when  that  curious  dialogue  was  composed,  of  which  several  ver-
sioiis  are  still  extant  in  old  manuscripts.

4.  The  Sutherland  version  is  as  follows : —

The  last  of  the  g^nts  lived  among  the  Feam  Hills  (Boss-
shiTB,  and  within  sight  of  the  windows  of  Skibo) ;  he  had  an  only
daughter,  married  not  to  a  giant,  but  to  a  common  man.

His  son-in-law  did  not  always  treat  him  well,  for  he  was  some-
timee  very  hungry,  and  had  to  wear  a  hunger-belt.


108  WEST  mGHLAND  TALES.

One  day  at  dinner  his  sister-in-law  said  to  him,  "  Did  you  ever,
amongst  the  giants,  eat  snch  good  beef,  or  from  so  large  an  ox  ?  '*

*'  Amongst  as,"  said  the  last  of  the  giants,  "  the  legs  of  the
birds  were  heavier  than  the  hind  quarters  of  your  ox."

They  laughed  him  to  scorn,  and  said,  that  it  was  because  be
was  blind  that  he  made  such  mistakes  ;  so  he  called  to  a  servant
atid  bid  him  bring  his  bow  and  three  arrows,  and  lead  him  by
the  hand  to  a  corrie  which  he  named  in  the  Balnagowan  forest.

"  Now,"  said  he,  "  do  you  see  such  and  such  a  rock  ?  "

"  Yes,"  said  the  servant.

"  And  is  there  a  step  in  the  face  of  it  ?  "

"  Yes,"  said  the  servant.

"  Are  there  rushes  at  the  foot  of  it  ?  "

"Yes,"  said  the  servant.

"  Then,  take  me  to  the  steps,  and  put  me  on  the  first  of  them."

The  servant  did  so.

"  Look  now,  and  tell  me  what  comes."

**  I  see  birds,"  said  the  fellow.

"  Are  they  bigger  than  common  ?  "

''  No  bigger  than  in  Feam,''  said  the  servant.  «

A  little  after,  "  What  do  you  see  ?  "

**  Birds  still,"  said  the  servant.

**  And  are  they  no  bigger  than  usual  ?  "

"  They  are  three  times  bigger  than  eagles."

A  little  later,  "  Do  you  see  any  more  birds  ?"  said  the  giant.

"  Yes,  birds  that  the  air  is  black  with  them,  and  the  biggest
is  three  times  as  big  as  an  ox."

*^  Then  guide  my  hand  to  the  bow,"  said  the  blind  ^ant ;  and
the  boy  guided  him  so  well  that  the  biggest  bird  fell  at  the  foot  of
the  rock  amongst  the  rushes.

"  Take  home  a  hind  quarter,"  said  the  giant,  and  they  carried
it  home  between  them.

When  they  came  to  the  house  of  his  son-in-law,  he  walked  in
with  it,  and  aimed  a  tremendous  blow  at  the  place  where  his  'son-
in-law  usually  sat.  Being  blind  he  did  not  see  that  the  chair  was
empty ;  it  was  broken  to  pieces ;  but  the  son-in-law  lived  to
repent,  and  treat  the  blind  giant  better.

I  have  another  version  written  in  English  by  Mr.  Hugh  MacColl,
gardener  at  Ardkinglass,  from  which  it  appears  that  the  blind  old


OSEAN  AFTER  THE  FEEN.  IO9

giant  was  Ossian,  and  that  his  father-in-law  was  Paal  na  nosi
clerach,  Panl  of  the  "nine  clerks  (whom  I  strongly  saspect  to  he
St.  Patrick).  They  questioned  him  about  deer ;  and  this  shows
how  stories  alter,  for  Damh  means  ox  and  stag^  and  in  Suther-
land it  has  become  ox.

5.  They  would  not  belieTe  that  Ossian's  black  birds  were  so
large.  He  got  a  boy  and  went  to  a  hill,  and  pulled  a  tuft  of  rushes ;
and  here  again  is  another  change  in  the  translation  from  Gaelic
to  English  ;  for  tom  means  a  JcnoU  and  a  hush.  Under  the  tuft
they  find  a  yellow  dog,  and  under  another,  firelocks  and  spades  ;
which  is  another  curious  change  from  the  bow  and  arrows.  Then
they  go  to  a  hiU  covered  with  wood,  which  suits  the  country  about
Stirling  ;  and  the  lad  is  made  to  dig  a  hole  with  the  spade,  and
put  his  head  into  it.  The  old  giant  whistles,  and  nearly  splits
the  boy's  head ;  and  he  does  this  thrice.  The  first  time  the  boy
sees  deer  as  big  as  peat-stacks ;  the  second,  as  large  as  house  ;
the  third,  as  large  as  hills  ;  and  they  slip  "  cue  buie  mac  kill  e
buiach,"  the  yellow  dog  after  them.

Then  they  kindle  a  fire  and  roast  the  deer.  Here  the  bettle
has  dropped  out,  and  the  boy  eats  some,  and  old  giant  is  flirious ;
for  if  he  had  eaten  all  he  would  have  recovered  his  sight.  Then
he  took  the  boy  to  a  wood,  and  made  him  shoot  a  blackbird  on
its  nest,  and  he  took  home  a  leg,  which  was  so  heavy  that  it
broke  the  table.

Then  they  tried  to  get  the  old  man  to  tell  them  more  about
the  Faen,  but  he  would  not,  because  they  would  not  believe  him  ;
and  the  next  day  he  went  with  the  boy  to  a  weU,  and  wrung  his
neck,  to  keep  him  silent  also.

Here,  as  in  all  the  versions  which  I  have  got,  the  h\&ckbird
seems  to  be  hauled  in  to  account  for  the  Gaelic  word,  which  is  but
rarely  used,  and  whose  meaning  is  forgotten.  Lon  dubh  means
bjackòtre^  or  black  Elk;  and  surely  deer  as  big  as  hills  might  have
done  to  prove  the  wonders  of  the  olden  time.  These  three
versions  of  the  same  story  show,  as  well  as  any  which  I  have,
how  the  same  tale  changes  in  various  localities,  and  why.

In  Sterling  and  in  Sutherland  Gaelic  is  fading  rapidly.  Elks
have  ceased  to  exist  in  Scotland ;  and  the  tradition  has  changed
with  the  times,  and  shapes  itself  to  suit  the  ideas  of  the  narrators,
and  the  country  about  them.


XXXIL
THE  BAKEA  WIDOWS  SON.

From  Alexander  MacNeill^  tenant  and  fiBherman.    Then

Tangual,  Barra.

THERE  was  a  poor  mdow  in  Barra,  and  she  had  a
babe  of  a  son,  and  Iain  was  his  name.  She  would
be  going  to  the  strand  to  gather  shell-fish  to  feed  herself
and  her  babe.  When  she  was  on  the  strand  on  a  day,
what  did  she  see  but  a  vessel  on  the  west  of  Barra.
Three  of  those  who  were  on  board  put  out  a  boat,  and
they  were  not  long  coming  on  shore.

She  went  to  the  shore  and  she  emptied  out  the
shell-fish  beside  her.  The  master  of  the  vessel  put  a
question  to  her,  ^'  What  thing  was  that  V  She  said  that
it  was  strand  shell-fish  the  food  that  she  had.  ''  What
little  fair  lad  is  this  Ì  " — "  A  son  of  mine." — "  Give
him  to  me  and  I  will  give  thee  gold  and  silver,  and  he
will  get  schooling  and  teaching,  and  he  will  be  better
oflT  than  to  be  here  with  thee.** — "  I  had  rather  suffer
death  than  give  the  child  away." — "Thou  art  silly.
The  child  and  thyself  will  be  well  off  if  thou  lettest
him  (go)  with  me."  With  the  love  of  the  money  she
said  that  she  would  give  hiTTi  the  child.  "Come
hither,  lads,  go  on  board ;  here 's  for  you  the  key.  Open
a  press  in  the  cabin,  and  you  will  bring  me  hither  a
box  that  you  will  find  in  it"  They  went  away,  they
did  that,  and  they  came.    He  caught  the  box,  he  opened


THE  BABBA  WIDOW's  SON.  Ill

it)  he  emptied  it  with  a  gush  (or  into  her  skirt),  and
he  did  not  count  it  all,  and  he  took  the  child  with  him.
She  staid  as  she  was,  and  when  she  saw  the  child
going  on  board  she  would  have  given  all  she  ever  saw
that  she  had  him.     He  sailed  away,  and  he  went  to
England.     He  gave  schooling  and  teaching  to  the  boy-
till  he  was  eighteen  years  on  the  vessel.     It  was  Iain
Àlbanach  the  boy  was  called  at  first,  he  gave  hÌTTì  the
name  of  Iain  Mac  a  Maighstir  (John,  master's  son),
because  he  himself  was  master  of  the  vessel.     The
"owner"  of  the  vessel  had  seven  ships  on  sea,  and
seven  shops*  on  shore — each  one  going  to  her  own
shop  with  her  cargo.     It  happened  to  the  seven  ships
to  be  at  home  together.     The  ovmer  took  with  him  the
seven  skippers  to  the  house,  "  I  am  growing  heavy  and
aged,"  said  he ;  "  you  are  there  seven  masters ;  I  had
none  altogether  that  I  would  rather  than  thou.     I  am
without  a  man  of  clan  though  I  am  married;  I  know
not  with  whom  I  wiU  leave  my  goods,  and  I  have  a
great  share  ;  there  was  none  I  would  rather  give  it  to
than  thee,  but  that  thou  art  without  clan  as  I  am  my-
self"    "I,"  said  the  skipper,  "have  a  son  eighteen
years  of  age  in  the  ship,  who  has  never  been  let  out  of
her  at  alL" — "  Is  not  that  wonderful  for  me,  and  that
I  did  not  hear  of  it ! " — "  Many  a  thing  might  the
like  of  me  have,  and  not  tell  it  to  you." — "  Gro  and
bring  him  down  hither  to  me  that  I  may  see  him."
He  went  and  he  brought  him  down,  and  he  set  him  in
order.     "  Is  this  thy  son  ?  " — "  It  is,"  said  the  skipper.
"Whether  wouldst  thou  rather  stay  with  me,  or  go
with  thy  father  on  the  sea  as  thou  wert  before,  and
that  I  should  make  thee  an  heir  for  ever  Ì  " — "  Well
then,  it  was  ever  at  sea  that  I  was  raised,  and  I  never
got  much  on  shore  from  my  youth ;  so  at  sea  I  would

*  ButhanaU)  Booths.


I  I  2  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

rather  be;  but  as  you  are  detennined  to  keep  me,  let
me  stay  with  yourseK."

"  I  have  seven  shops  on  shore,  and  thou  must  take
thy  hand  in  the  seven  shops.  There  are  clerks  at
every  one  of  the  shops,"  said  he.  "No  one  of  them
will  hold  a  bad  opinion  of  himself  that  he  is  not  as
good  as  L  K  you  insist  that  I  take  them,  I  will  take
the  seventh  one  of  them."

He  took  the  seventh  one  of  the  shops,  and  the  first
day  of  his  going  in  he  sent  word  through  the  town,
the  thing  that  was  before  a  pound  would  be  at  fifteen
shillings ;  so  that  everything  in  the  shop  was  down,
and  the  shop  was  empty  before  the  ships  came.  He
(the  owner)  went  in,  he  counted  his  money,  and  he
said  that  the  shop  was  empty.  "  It  is  not  wonderful
though  it  were,  when  the  thing  that  was  before  a  pound
is  let  down  to  fifteen  shillings." — "And  my  oide  are
you  taking  that  ill  Ì  Do  you  not  see  that  I  would  put
out  all  in  the  shop  seven  times  before  they  could  put  it
out  once." — "With  that  thou  must  take  the  rest  in
hand,  and  let  them  out  so."  Then  he  took  the  rest  in
hand,  and  he  was  a  master  above  the  other  clerks.
When  the  ships  came  the  shops  altogether  were
empty.  Then  his  master  said,  "  Whether  wouldst  thou
rather  be  master  over  the  shops  or  go  with  one  of
the  seven  ships  Ì  Thou  wilt  get  thy  choice  of  the  seven
ships." — "  It  is  at  sea  I  was  ever  raised  and  I  will  take
a  ship."  He  got  a  ship.  "  Come,  send  hither  here
to  me  the  seven  skippers."  The  seven  skippers
came.  "Now,"  said  he  to  the  six  skippers  that
were  going  with  Iain,  "Iain  is  going  with  you,  you
will  set  three  ships  before  and  three  behind,  and  he
will  be  in  the  middle,  and  unless  you  bring  him  whole
hither  to  me,  there  is  but  to  seize  you  and  hang
you." — "Well,  then,  my  adopted  father,"  said  Iain,


THE  BARRA  WIDOW's  SON.  1 1  3

"  that  is  not  nght.  The .  ships  axe  going  together,  a
storm  may  come  and  drive  us  from  each  other ;  let
each  do  as  best  he  may."  The  ships  went,  they  sailed,
and  it  was  a  cargo  of  coal  thiat  Iain  put  in  his  own.
There  came  on  them  a  great  day  of  storm.  They  were
driven  from  each  other.  Where  did  Iain  sail  but  to
Turkey.  He  took  anchorage  in  Turkey  at  early  day,
and  he  thought  to  go  on  shore  to  take  a  walk  He
was  going  before  him  walking ;  he  saw  two  out  of  their
shirts  working,  and  as  though  they  had  two  iron  flails.
What  had  they  but  a  man's  corpse  !  "  What  are  you
doing  to  the  corpse  Ì " — "  It  was  a  Christian ;  we  had
eight  marks  against  him,  and  since  he  did  not  pay  us
while  he  was  aHve,  we  will  take  it  out  of  his  corpse
with  the  flaUs." — "  Well  then,  leave  him  with  me  and
I  will  pay  you  tìie  eight  marks."  He  seized  him,  he
took  him  from  them,  he  paid  them,  and  he  put  mould
and  earth  on  him.  It  was  soon  for  him  to  return  till
he  should  see  more  of  the  land  of  the  Turk.  He  went
on  a  bit  and  what  should  he  see  there  but  a  great
crowd  of  men  together.  He  took  over  where  they
were.  What  did  he  see  but  a  gaping  red  fire  of  a
•great  hot  fire,  and  a  woman  stripped  between  the  fire
and  theuL  "  What,"  said  he,  "  are  you  doing  here  Ì ''
"  There  are,"  said  they,  "  two  Christian  women  that
the  great  Turk  got ;  they  were  caught  on  the  ocean ;  he
has  had  them  from  the  end  of  eight  years.  This  one
was  promising  him  that  she  would  marry  him  every
year ;  when  the  time  came  to  marry  him  she  would  not
marry  him  a  bit.  He  ordered  herself  and  the  woman
that  was  with  her  to  be  burnt.  One  of  them  was
burnt,  and  this  one  is  as  yet  unbumt"

"  I  will  give  you  a  good  lot  of  silver  and  gold  if
you  will  leave  her  with  me,  and  you  may  say  to  hiTn
that  you  burnt  her."     They  looked   at  each   other.

VOL.  IL  I


114  ^^^^l^  mOHLAND  TALES.

They  said  that  he  would  get  that.  He  went  and  he
took  her  with  him  on  board,  and  he  clothed  her  in
cloth  and  linen.

"  Now,"  said  she  "  thou  hast  saved  my  life  for  me ;
thou  must  take  care  of  thyself  in  this  place.  Thou
shalt  go  up  now  to  yonder  change-house.  The  man  of
the  inn  will  put  a  question  to  thee  what  cargo  thou
hast  Say  thou  a  cargo  of  coaL  He  will  say  that
would  be  well  worth  selling  in  the  place  where  thou  art
Say  thou  it  is  for  selling  it  that  thou  art  come  ;  what
offer  will  he  make  for  it  He  will  say,  to-morrow  at
six  o'clock  there  would  be  a  waggon  of  gold  going
down,  and  a  waggon  of  coal  coming  up,  so  that  the
ship  might  be  kept  in  the  same  trirn^*  till  six  o'clock
on  the  next  night  Say  thou  that  thou  wilt  take
that ;  but  unless  thou  art  watchful  they  will  come  in
the  night  when  every  man  is  asleep,  with  muskets  and
pistols ;  they  will  set  the  ship  on  the  ground ;  they
will  kill  every  man,  and  they  will  take  the  gold  with
them."

He  went  to  the  man  of  the  inn,  and  agreed  with
him  as  she  had  taught  him.  They  began  on  the  morrow,
in  the  morning,  to  put  down  the  gold  and  take  up  the
coal.  The  skipper  had  a  man  standing  looking  out
that  the  vessel  should  be  in  trim.  When  the  coal  was
out,  and  the  ship  was  as  heavy  with  the  gold  as  she  was
with  the  coal ;  and  when  he  was  on  shore,  she  got  an
order  for  the  sailors  to  take  her  advice  till  he  should
come.  "Put  up,"  said  she,  "the  sails,  and  draw  the
anchors.  Put  a  rope  on  shore."  They  did  that  He
came  on  board ;  the  ship  sailed  away  through  the  night ;
they  heard  a  shot,  but  they  were  out,  and  they  never
caught  them  more.

They  sailed  till  they  reached  England.      Three

*  Tramp.


THE  BABRA  WIDOW's  SON.  1 1  5

ships  had  returned,  and  the  three  skippers  were  in
prison  tm  Iain  should  come  back.  Iain  went  up  and
he  reached  his  adopted  father.  The  gold  was  taken
on  shore,  and  the  old  man  had  two-thirds  and  Iain  a
third.  He  got  chambers  for  the  woman,  where  she
should  not  be  troubled.

"  Art  thou  thinking  that  thou  wilt  go  yet  V  said
the  woman  to  him.  "I  am  thinking  that  I  have
enough  of  the  world  with  that  same," — "  Thou  wentest
before  for  thine  own  wiU,  if  thou  wouldst  be  so  good
as  to  go  now  with  my  will." — "I  will  do  that" —
"  Gome  to  that  shop  without  j  take  from  it  a  coat,  and
a  brigis,  and  a  waistcoat ;  try  if  thou  canst  get  a  cargo
of  herring  and  thou  shalt  go  with  it  to  Spain-  When
the  cargo  is  in,  come  where  I  am  before  thou  goest."

When  he  got  the  cargo  on  board  he  went  where
she  was.  "  Hast  thou  got  the  cargo  on  board  Ì " — "  I
have  got  it"

"  There  is  a  dress  here,  and  the  first  Sunday  after
thou  hast  reached  the  Spain  thou  wHt  put  it  on^  and
thou  wilt  go  to  the  church  with  it  Here  is  a  whistle
and  a  ring,  and  a  book.  Let  there  be  a  horse  and  a
servant  with  thee.  Thou  shalt  put  the  ring  on  thy
finger ;  let  the  book  be  in  thine  hand ;  thou  wilt  see
in  the  church  three  seats,  two  twisted  chairs  of  gold,
and  a  chair  of  silver.  Thou  shalt  take  hold  of  the
book  and  be  reading  it,  and  the  first  man  that  goes
out  of  the  church  be  thou  out  Wait  not  for  man
alive,  unless  the  King  or  the  Queen  meet  thee."

He  sailed  till  he  reached  the  Spain;  he  took
anchorage,  and  he  went  up  to  the  change-house.  He
asked  for  a  dinner  to  be  set  in  order.  The  dinner  was
set  on  the  board.  They  went  about  to  seek  him.  A
trencher  was  set  on  the  board,  and  a  cover  on  it^  and
the  housewife  said  to  him — "  There  is  meat  and  drink


1 1 6  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

enough  on  the  board  before  yon,  take  enough,  but  do
not  lift  the  cover  that  is  on  top  of  the  trencher."  She
drew  the  door  witìi  her.  He  began  at  his  dinner.  He
thought  to  himself,  though  it  were  its  fill  of  gold  that
were  in  the  trencher,  or  a  fill  of  "  daoimean,"  *  nothing
ever  went  on  board  that  he  might  not  pay.  He  lifted
the  cover  of  the  trencher,  and  what  was  on  the  trencher
but  a  couple  of  herring.  "  If  this  be  the  thing  she  was
hiding  from  me  she  need  not,"  and  he  ate  one  herring
and  the  one  side  of  the  other.  When  the  housewife
saw  that  the  herring  was  eaten, — "  Mo  chreach  mhor  1
my  great  ruin "  said  she ;  "  how  it  has  fallen  out !
Was  I  never  a  day  that  I  could  not  keep  the  people
of  the  reahn  tiU  to-day  1''—"  What  has  befaUen  thee  ?"
— "  It  is,  that  I  never  was  a  day  that  I  might  not  put  a
herring  before  them  till  to-day." — "  What  wouldst  thou
give  for  a  barrel  of  herrings?" — "Twenty  Saxon
pounds." — "  What  wouldst  thou  give  for  a  ship  load  ?"
— "That  isathing  that  I  could  not  buy."— "Well,  then,
I  will  give  thee  two  hundred  herring  for  the  two  herring,
and  I  wish  the  ship  were  away  and  the  herrings  sold"
On  the  first  Sunday  he  got  a  horse  with  a  bridle
and  saddle,t  and  a  giUie.  He  went  to  the  church ;  he
saw  the  three  chairs.  The  queen  sat  on  the  right
hand  of  the  king,  and  he  himself  sat  on  the  left ;  he
took  the  book  out  of  his  pocket,  and  he  began  reading.
It  was  not  on  the  sermon  that  the  king's  looks  were,
nor  the  queen's,  but  raining  tears.  When  the  sermon
skailed  he  went  out.  There  were  three  nobles  after  him,
shouting  that  the  king  had  a  matter  for  him.  He  would
not  return;  He  betook  himself  to  the  change-house
that  night  He  staid  as  he  was  till  the  next  Sunday,
and  he  went  to  sermon ;  he  would  not  stay  for  €uiy
one,  and  he  returned  to  tìie  change-house.     The  third

*  Diamonds.         f  AU  riders  have  not  these  luxuries.


^m^tg^r^m^rB9^^jf^i^Wimmf^f^^fKr^^nm^i^^^^m^i^f^r^^P9^^^^r^^^^^<^ir^smrTJ.~'  '  '»*.


THE  BARRA  WIDOW's  SON.  I  1 7

Sunday  lie  went  to  the  church.  In  the  middle
of  the  sermon  the  king  and  queen  came  out;  they
stood  at  each  side  of  the  (bridle)  rein.  When  the
king  saw  him  coming  out  he  let  go  the  rein ;  he
took  his  hat  off  to  the  ground,  and  he  made  manners
at  hinL  "By  your  leave;  you  needn't  make  such
manners  at  me.  It  is  I  i^at  should  make  them  to
yourself." — "K  it  were  your  will  that  you  should  go
with  me  to  the  palace  to  take  dinner." — "  Ud !  Ud  !  it
is  a  man  below  you  with  whom  I  would  go  to  dinner."
They  reached  the  palace.  Food  was  set  in  the  place
of  eating,  drink  in  the  place  of  drinking,  music  in  the
place  of  hearing.  They  were  plying  the  feast  and  the
company  with  joy  and  gladness,*  because  they  had
hopes  that  they  would  get  news  of  their  daughter.
"Oh,  skipper  of  the  ship,"  said  the  queen,  "hide  not
£rom  me  a  thing  that  I  am  going  to  ask  thee."  Any
thing  that  I  have  that  I  caa  tell  I  will  not  hide  it  from
you."  "  And  hide  not  from  me  that  a  woman's  hand
set  that  dress  about  your  back,  your  coat,  your  brigis,
and  your  waistcoat,  and  gave  you  the  ring  about  your
finger,  and  the  book  that  was  in  your  hand,  and  the
whistle  that  you  were  playing."  "  I  will  not  hide  it.
With  a  woman's  right  hand  every  whit  of  them  was
reached  to  me."  "  And  where  didst  thou  find  her  ?
'T  is  a  daughter  of  mine  that  is  there."  "  I  know  not
to  whom  she  is  daughter.  I  found  her  in  Turkey  about
to  be  burned  in  a  great  gaping  fire."  "  Sawest  thou  a
woman  along  with  her ? "  "I  did  not  see  her  ;  she
was  burned  before  I  arrived.  I  bought  her  with  gold
and  sUver.  I  took  her  with  me,  and  I  have  got  her  in
a  chamber  in  England. "  "  The  king  had  a  great  general,"
said  the  queen,  "  and  what  should  he  do  but  fall  in  love

*  This  passage  is  one  common  to  many  reciters,  and  spoiled
by  translation.


T  I  8  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

with  her.  Her  father  was  asking  her  to  marry  him,  and
she  would  not  marry  him.  She  went  away  herself  and  the
daughter  of  her  father's  brother  with  a  vessel,  to  try  if
he  would  forget  her.  They  went  over  to  Turkey ;  the
Turk  caught  them,  and  we  had  no  hope  to  see  her  ahve
for  ever."

"K  it  be  your  pleasure,  and  that  you  yourself
are  willing,  I  will  set  a  ship  with  you  to  seek  her ;
you  will  get  herself  to  marry,  half  the  realm  so  long
as  the  king  hves,  and  the  whole  realm  when  he  is
dead."  "I  scorn  to  do  that ;  but  send  a  ship  and  a
skipper  away,  and  I  will  take  her  home  ;  and  if  that
be  her  own  will,  perhaps  I  will  not  be  against  it."

A  ship  was  made  ready  ;  what  should  the  general
do  but  pay  a  lad  to  have  him  taken  on  board  unknown
to  the  skipper ;  he  got  himself  hidden  in  a  barrel
They  sailed  far ;  short  time  they  were  in  reaching
England  They  took  her  on  board,  and  they  sailed
back  for  Spain.  In  the  midst  of  the  sea,  on  a  fine
day,  he  and  she  came  up  on  deck,  and  what  should  he
see  but  an  island  beyond  him  ;  it  was  pretty  calm  at
the  time.  "  Lads,  take  me  to  the  island  for  a  while
to  hunt,  tiU  there  comes  on  us  the  likeness  of  a  breeze."
'*  We  wilL"  They  set  him  on  shore  on  the  island  ;
when  they  left  him  on  the  island  the  boat  returned.
When  the  general  saw  that  he  was  on  the  island,  he
promised  more  wages  to  the  skipper  and  to  the  crew,
for  that  they  should  leave  him  there ;  and  they  left
Iain  on  the  island

When  she  perceived  that  they  had  left  Iain  on  the
island,  she  went  mad,  and  they  were  forced  to  bind
her.  They  sailed  to  Spain.  They  sent  word  to  the
king  that  his  daughter  had  grown  silly,  as  it  seemed,
for  the  loss  of  the  form  of  her  husband  and  lover.  The
king,  betook  himself  to  sorrow,  to  black  melancholy,  and


«■    ■■■•"■^<v^P^«n«iHWMi«i«a0*w«vBv^


THE  BABRA  WIDOW's  SON.  1 19

to  woe,  and  to  heart-bieaking,  because  of  what  had
azisen;  and  (because)  he  bad  but  her  of  son  or
daughter.

Iain  was  in  the  island,  hair  and  beard  grown  over
Mm;  the  hair  of  his  head  down  between  his  two
shoulders,  his  shoes  worn  to  pulp,  without  a  thread
of  clothes  on  that  was  not  gone  to  rags ;  without  a
bite  of  flesh  on  him,  his  bones  but  sticking  together.

On  a  night  of  nights,  what  should  he  hear  but  the
rowing  of  a  boat  coming  to  the  island.  ^^  Art  thou
there,  Iain  Albanich  Ì "  said  the  one  in  the  boat
Though  he  was,  he  answered  not.  He  would  rather
find  death  at  the  side  of  a  hill  than  be  kiUed.

^'  I  know  that  thou  hearest  me,  and  answer  ;  it  is
just  as  well  for  thee  to  answer  me,  as  that  I  should  go
up  and  take  thee  down  by  force."  He  went,  and  he
took  himself  down.  ^*  Art  thou  willing  to  go  out  of
the  island  V*  ^^  Well,  then,  I  am  j  it  is  I  that  am
that^  if  I  could  get  myself  taken  out  of  it"  "  What
wouldst  thou  give  to  a  man  that  would  take  thee  out
of  this  Ì"  "  There  was  a  time  when  I  might  give
something  to  a  man  that  would  take  me  out  of  this ;
but  to  day  I  have  not  a  thing."  "  Wouldst  thou  give
me  half  tìiy  realm  ?"  "  No  realm  will  ever  be  mine ;
if  there  were,  I  would  give  it"  "  Wouldst  thou  give
one  half  of  thy  wife  to  a  man  that  would  take  thee  out
of  this  1"  "  I  have  not  that"  "  I  do  not  say  if  thou
hadst,  that  thou  wouldst  give  her  away."  "  I  would
give  her."  "  Wouldst  thou  give  half  thy  children  to
a  man  that  would  take  thee  out  of  this  ?"  ''  I  would
^ve  them."  "  Down  hither ;  sit  in  the  stem  of  the
boat"  He  sat  in  the  stem  of  the  boat  "  Whether
wouldst  thou  rather  go  to  England  or  Spain  ?"  "  To
Spain."  He  went  with  him,  and  before  the  day  came
he  was  in  Spain.


I20  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

He  went  up  to  the  change  house ;  the  housewife
knew  him  in  a  moment  ^^  Is  this  Iain  ! "  said  she.
"  It  is  the  sheath  of  all  that  there  was  of  him  that  is
here."

"  Poorly  has  it  befallen  thee  I"  said  sha  She  went
and  she  sent  a  message  to  a  barber's  booth,  and  he  was
cleansed;  and  word  to  a  taQor's  booth,  and  clothes  were
got  for  him ;  she  sent  word  to  a  shoemaker's  booth,  and
shoes  were  got  for  him.  On  the  morrow  when  he  was
properly  cleansed  and  arrayed,  he  went  to  the  palace  of
the  king,  and  he  played  the  whistle.  When  the  king's
daughter  heard  the  whistle  she  gave  a  spring,  and  she
broke  the  third  part  of  the  cord  that  bound  her.  They
asked  her  to  keep  still,  and  they  tied  more  cords  on
her.  On  the  morrow  he  gave  a  blast  on  the  whistle,
and  she  broke  two  parts  of  all  that  were  on  her.  On
the  third  day  when  she  heard  his  whistle, -she  broke
three  quarters ;  on  the  fourth  day  she  broke  what  was
on  her  altogether.  She  rose  and  she  went  out  to  meet
him,  and  there  never  was  a  woman  more  sane  than
she.  Word  was  sent  up  to  the  king  of  Spain,  that
there  never  was  girl  more  sane  than  she  ;  and  that  the
bodily  presence  of  her  husband  and  lover  had  come  to
her.

A  "  coach"  was  sent  to  fetch  Iain ;  the  king  and  his
great  gentles  were  with  him  ;  he  was  taken  up  on
the  deadly  points.*  Music  was  raised,  and  lament  laid
down ;  meat  was  set  in  the  place  of  eating,  drink  in
the  place  of  drinking,  music  in  the  place  for  hearing ;
a  cheery,  hearty,  jolly  wedding  was  made.  Iain  got
on#  half  of  the  realm ;  after  the  king's  death  he  got  it
altogether.      The  general  was  seized ;    he  was   torn

*  This  I  take  to  be  a  phrase  wrongly  used ;  an  old  phrase,
meaning  that  the  personage  was  raised  on  spears.  The  passage
is  common.


THE  BARRA  WIDOW's  SON.  I  2  J

amongst  horses ;  he  was  homed  amongst  fires  ;  and
the  ashes  were  let  (fly)  with  the  wind.

After  the  death  of  the  king  and  queen,  Iain  was
king  over  Spain.  Three  sons  were  horn  to  him.  On
a  night  he  heard  a  knocking  in  the  door.  "  The  asker
is  come,"  said  he.  Who  was  there  hut  the  very  man
that  took  him  out  of  the  island.  "  Art  thou  for  keep-
ing thy  promise  ?  "  said  the  one  who  came.  "  I  am,"
said  Iain.  "  Thine  own  he  thy  realm,  and  thy  children
and  my  hlessing  !  Dost  thou  rememher  when  thou
didst  pay  eight  merks  for  the  corpse  of  a  man  in
Turkey ;  that  was  my  hody ;  health  he  thine  ;  thou
wilt  see  me  no  more.


MAC  NA  BANTRAICH  BHABRACH.

Bha  bantrach  bhochd  ann  am  Barra,  agus  bha  leanabh  mic,  aice  agns
*s  e  Iain  a  b'  ainm  dba.  Bhiodh  i  dol  do  'n  tràigh  a  chruinneachadh
maoraich  airson  i  fhin  's  an  leanabh  a  bheatbachadh.  Nur  a  bha  i
'saD  trèdgh  latha  bha  'n  sin  d^  chtumaic  i  ach  soitheach  air  an  aird  an
lar  de  Bharra.  Cbuir  trioir  de  na  bha  air  bòrd  a  mach  bàta  's  cha  b '
fhada  bha  end  a*  tigh  'n  air  tir.  Chaidh  ise  gos  a'  chladach  's  dhbirt
i  'm  maorach  làmh  riutha.  Chuir  Maighstir  an  t-soithich  ceisd  urra
de  'n  rod  a  bha  'n  sind.  Thuirt  i  go  'n  robh  maorach  cladaich*  am
biadh  a  bh'  aice.  **  De  'n  gille  beag,  ban  a  tha  'n  so  ?  "  Mac  domh.
*  Thoir  dhomhs'  e,  agus  bheir  mi  dhuit  or  agus  airgiod,  agus  gheibh
e  Bgoil  as  ionnsachadh^'s  bidh  e  na  's  fheàrr  'na  bhi  agads'  an  so."
"  '3  fheàrr  learn  bàs  fhuileann  na  'm  pàisd'  a  thoirt  seachad.''  **  Tha
thu  gòrrach,  bidh  thu  flùn  's  an  leanabh  go  math  ma  Ugeas  tu  learn  e."
Le  gaol  an  airgid  thuirt  i  gon  d'  thugadh  i  'n  leanabh  da.  "  Thallaibh
an  soghillean.  Theirigibh  air  bòrd ;  so  duibh  iuchair ;  fosglaibh^rcj^
aans  a  chahin,  's  bheir  sibh  thugamsa  bòsdan  a  gheibh  sibh  ann."  Dh'
fhalbh  eud ;  rinn  end  siud  's  thàinig  eud.  Rug  e  air  bocsa*  dh'  fhosgail  e
e— dhoirt  e  'na  sgnirt  e  's  cha  do  chunnd  e  idir  e,  's  thug  e  leis  an  lean-
aUi.  Dh'  fhan  ise  mur  a  bha  i,  's  nur  chunnaic  i  *n  leanabh  a  dol  air
bòfrd,  bheireadh  i  na  chunnaic  i  riabh  go  'n  robh  e  aice.    Sheòl  esan


122  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

air  fÌEdbh  agus  ghabh  e  go  ndge  Sasann.  Thug  e  Bgoil  a*8  ionnsach-
adh  do  'n  bhalach  gos  an  robh  e  ochd  bliadhna  diag,  air:aii  t-soitheach.
'Se  Iain  Albannach  a  bh*  air  a*  bhalacb  an  toiseach.  Thag  esan  Iain
Mac  a  Mhaighstir  air'  a  thaobh  gom  be  fhin  maighstir  an  t-soithich.
Bha  aig  owner  an  t-soithich  seachd  soithichean  air  mnir'  agns  seachd
bhthannan  air  tir — a'  h-uile  t4  gabhail  thun  a  bùth  fbìn  le  a  luchd*
Thachair  do  na  seachd  loingeas  a  bhi  aig  an  tigh  comhla.  Thug  an
sealbhadair  suas  leis  na  seachd  sgiobairean  thun  an  tighe.  *'  Tha  mi
'fas  trom  aosdV  urs'  esan.  **  Tha  sibh  an  sin  seachd  maighstirean — cba
robh  gin  agam  gu  Mir  a  bu  docha  leam  na  thusa — tha  mi  gon  doine
cloinne  gad  a  tha  mi  posda.  Cha*n  'eil  fhios'am  co  aig  a  dh*  fhàgas
mi  mo  chuid,  agas  cnid  mhòr  agam.  Cha  robh  gin  a  bn  docha  leam  a
thoirt  da  na  thusa,  ach  go  'bheil  thn  gon  chlann  mu:  mi  fhin."  **  Th&
agams',"  vrs'  an  sgiobair,  *'  mac  ochd  bliadhna  diag  a  dh'  aois  anns  an
t-soitheach  gon  a  liginn  aisd'  idir."  **  Nach  nebnach  leamsa  sin  agad
s  gon  mise  g'a  chluinntinn  riabh."  *'  'S  iomadh  md  a  dh'  fhaodadh  a  bhi
aig  mo  leithidsa  nach  bithinn  aig  innseadh  dhuibhse."  **  Falbh  's  thoir
thugams'  a  nuas  e  's  gom  faicinn  e."  Dh'  fhalbh  e  's  thug  e  nuas  e,  's
chnir  e  'n  òrdugh  e.  "  An  e  so  do  mhacsa  ?"  **  'S  e,"  urs'  an  sgiobalr.
"  Coca 's  fhekrr  leat  fuireachd  agamsa,  na  falbh  le  t'  athair  air  a'  mhoir
mur  a  bha  thu  roimhid,  's  gun  dian  mise  dileabach  diotgo  bràthach."
*'  Mata  's  ann  air  muir  a  fhuair  mi  mo  thogail  riabh,  's  cha  d'  fhuair  mi
dad  0  m'  big  air  tir ;  le  sin 's  ann  air  muir  a  b'  fheàrr  leam  a  bhi;  ach
o  'n  tha  sibhs'  a'  cur  roimhibh  go  'n  cum  sibh  mi  *gom  fan  mi  agaiibh
fhin."  **  Tha  seachd  bhthannan  agam  air  tir,  agus  feamaidh  ta  làmh
a  ghabhail  anns  na  seachd  bhthannan."  "  Tha  cMireach  aig  a  h-nile
fear  riabh  de  na  bhthannan,"  urs'  esan,  **  cha  gabh  h-aon  aca  droch  bhar-
ail  orra  flùn,  nach  'eil  end  cho  math  riamsa ;  ma  tha  sibh  a  cor  mar
fhiachaibh  ormsa  go  'n  gabh  mi  end,  gabhaidh  mi  'n  seachdamh  fear
diu.

Ghabh  e  'n  seachdamh  fear  de  na  bhthannan,  'sa  chiadlathada  dol
ann  'chuir  e  fios  feadh  a'  bhaile,  an  md  a  bha  roimhid  punnd  gom  biodh
e  air  còig  tasdain  diag,  air  alt 's  gon  d'  thàinig  'h-uile  md  a  bha  a'
bhhth  nuas  's  gon  robh  'm  bhth  falamh  ma  'n  d'  thidnig  na  soithich-
ean. Ohaidh  e  stigh,  chuundais  e  chuid  airgid,  's  thuirt  e  go  'n  robh  'm
bhth  falamh.  *<  Cha  n'  ioghnadh  gad  a  bhitheadh,  san  rod  a  bha
roimhid  air  punnd  thu  g'a  ligeil  sios  go  còig  tasdain  diag."  **  Agns
oide  'bheil  sibhse'ga  ghabhail  sin  go  h-olc;  nach  'eil  sibh  a'  fiiicmn
gon  cuirinnsa  mach  na  bh'  anns  a  bhhth  seachd  uairean  ma  'n  coir-
eadh  eudsan  a  mach  aon  uair  e."  **  Leis  an  sin  feumaidh  tu  làmh  a
ghabhail  ri  each  agus  an  ligeil  a  mach  mur  sin."  Ghabh  e  n  sin
lamh  ri  chch,  agus  bha  e  'na  mhaighstir  as  donn  nan  dtfireach


MAC  NA  BANTRAICH  BHARRACH.  1 2$

eile.     Nor  a  thainig  na  soithichean   bha  na  buthannan  go   Mir
fidamh.

Thuirt  a  mhaighstir  ris  a  nis, "  Coca 's  fbekrr  leat  a  bhi  'd'  mhaigh-
stir  thar  nam  buthannan,  nafalbh  le  h-aon  de  na  seachd  soithichean ;
gheibh  thn  do  roi.a:hinn  de  na  seacbd  soithichean."  **  'S  ann  air  muir  a
thogadh  riabh  mi  's  gabhaidh  mi  soitheach."  Fhuair  e  soitheach.
"  Thallaibh  coiribh  thugamsa  na  seachd  egiobairean."  Thàinig  na
seachd  sgiobairean  a  'ionnsoidh.  **  Nis/'  nrs*  esan,  ris  na  sia  sgiobairean
a  bha  del  le  Iain.  '*  Tha  Iain  a*  dol  leibh — cuiridh  sibh  tri  soithichean
air  thoiseach,  's  tri  air  deireadh,  's  bidh  esan  'sa  mhiadhon ;  's  mnr  an
d'  thoir  sibh  thugamsa  slàn  e  cha  *n  'eil  ach  breith  oirbh  's  'nr  croch-
adh."  **  Mata  m*  oide,"  nrs'  Iain,  "  cha  *n  'eil  sin  freagarrach.  Tha  na
soithichean  a'  falbh  oomhla;  faodaibh  stoirm  tighinn  agus  arfaadach
o  ch^e.    Dianadh  h-uile  h-aon  mar  is  fheàrr  a  dh'  fhaodas  e."

Dh'  fhalbb  na  soithichean— sheòl  end— agus  'se  luchd  goail  a
chmr  Iain  a  stigh  na  the  f  bin.  Thàinig  latha  mòr  stoirm  orra.  Dh'
fhnadaicheadh  o  chèiF  end.  C*  a  'n  do  shebl  Iain  ach  do  'n  Tnirc
Ghabh  e  acair  's  an  Tnirc  trath  iatha.  Smaoinich  e  dol  air  tìr  a
ghabhail  srìdd.  Bha  e  gabhail  roimhe  'coiseachd.  Chunnaic  e  dith-
isd  as  an  l^intean  ag  obair,  's  mar  gom  biodh  da  shMsid  iaruinn  aca.
De  bh'  ac'  ach  corp  doine.  "  D^  tha  sibh  a  dianadh  ris  a'  chorp."  "  'Se
(Mofldaidh  a  bh'  ann.  Bha  ochd  mairg  againn  air,  's  o'n  nach  do
phkigh  e  sinn  nur  a  bha  e  beo  bheir  sinn  a  a  chorp  leis  na  stiisdean
e.**  ''liata  ligibh  learns'  e  agus  pàighidh  mi  dhuibh  na  h>ochd
mairg.'*  Rug  e  air—  thug  e  nath'  e — ^phaigh  e  end  agus  chuir  e  hir  as
talamh  air.

Bha  e  loath  leis  tilleadh  air  ais  gos  am  faiceadh  e  tuillidh  de  dh'
fhearann  na  Tuirc.  Ghabh  e  air  aghaidh  treis,  agus  de  chunnaic  e  'n
sin  ach  gronnan  mòr  dhaoine  cruinn.  Ghabh  e  null  far  an  robh  end.
D^  chonnaic  e  ach  craoslach  mòr  teine,  de  theine  mhor  leatbann,
agos  boireannach  rhisgt'  eadar  an  teine  's  eud  fhin.  *<  De,"  nrs'  esan
'  a  tha  sibh  a  dianadh  an  so."  **  Tha,"  nrs'  eudsan,  **  da  bhana  chriosd-
aidh  a  fhoair  an  Turcach  mbr.  Rugadh  orra  air  a'  chuan.  Tha  eud  o
dieann  ochd  bliadhna  aige.  Bha  'n  te  so  'gealltainn  da  gom  pòsadh
i  e  h-nile  bliadhna.  Nur  thMnig  an  t-am  cha  phbsadh  i  bad  deth.
Dh'  òrdaich  e  1  fhin 's  am  boireannach  a  bha  comhla  rithe  'losgadh.
Loiflgeadh  an  damatè  dhiu's  tha  i  so  gon  losgadh  fhathasd."  '*  Bheir
mi  fhin  doibh  tiodhlac  math  airgid  agus  òir  ma  ligeas  sibh  learn  i,
agus  fiaodaidh  sibh  a  ràdh  ris  gon  do  loisg  sibh  i."  Sheall  eud  air  a
chèile.    Thuirt  eud  gom  faigheadh  e  siud.    Dh'  fhalbh  e  's  thug  e

air  bord  i,  agus  sgeadaich  e  i  'n  aodach  's  an  anart.

"  Nis,"  ors'  ise,  <*  shabhail  thu  mo  bheatha  dhomh.  Feumaidh  to  'n


124  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

aire  thoirt  ort  fhin  's  an  àite  so.  Th^id  thu  snas  a  nis  do  'n  tigh
sheins'  ud  shuas.  Cuindh  fear  an  tigh  sheinse  ceisd  ort  d^  'n  luchd
a  th*  agad.  Abraidh  tusa  Inchd  goail.  Abraidh  esan  gor  math  a
mhiadh  siud  'san  kite  a  bheil  thn  airson  a  reic.  Abraidh  tusa  gor  ann
airson  a  reic  a  thàinig  thu ;  dè  *n  tairgse  bheir  e  air.  Their  esan,  **  A
màireach  air  sia  uairean  bidh  waggon  bir  a'  dol  a  sios  's  waggon  guail
a'  dol  a  suas,  air  alt 's  gon  cumar  an  soitheach  amis  an  aon  ti^mp  go
sia  uairean  an  ath  oidhch'."  Abair  thusa  gon  gabh  thu  siud ;  ach  anns
an  oidhche'  mur  am  bi  thusa  a*d-earalas  thig  eud  's  an  oidhche,  nura
tha  h-uile  duine  na  'n  cadal,  le  musgannan  's  le  dagannan ;  cuiridh
eud  an  soitheach  air  a  ghrund;  marbhaidb  eud  a  h-uile  duine,  's  *bheir
eud  leo  an  t-òr.  Chaidh  e  far  an  robh  fear  an  tigh  sheise  agus  chord
e  ris  mar  a  shebl  is*  e.  Thòisich  eud  an  la'r  na  mhàireach  'sa  mhad-
ainn  air  cur  sios  an  bir 's  air  toirt  suas  a*  ghuaiL  Bha  fear  aig  an  sgiob-
air  'na  sheasamh  ag  amharc  gom  biodh  an  soitheach  ann  an  trump.
Nur  a  bha  'n  gual  a  mach,  'sa  bha  'n  soitheach  cho  trom  leis  an  br  's  a
bha  i  leis  a  ghual,  's  nur  a  bha  esan  air  tir,  fhuair  is'  òrdan  na  seòl-
adairean  a  ghabhail  a  comhairle  gos  an  d'  thigeadh  esan.  '*  Cuiribh
suas,"  urs'  ise,  "na  siuil,  *s  tàimibh  na  h'  acraichean.  Cuiribh
rbp'  air  tir."  Rinn  eud  siud.  Thàinig  esan  air  bbrd.  Shebl  an  soith-
each air  falbh  feadh  na  h-oidhche.  Chual  eud  urchair;  ach  bha  eud-
san  a  mach  's  cha  d'  rug  eud  orra  tuillidh.  Shebl  eud  go  niige
Sasunn.  Bha  tri  soithichean  air  tilleadh,  's  bha  na  tri  sgiobairean
am  priosan  gos  an  tilleadh  Iain.  Ghabh  Iain  suas  's  ràinig  e  oide.
Chaidh  an  t-br  a  thoirt  air  tìr,  's  bha  da  dhrian  aig  a  bhodach,  's  drian
aig  Iain.  Fhuair  e  seombraicheau  do  'n  bhoireannach  far  nach  cnirte
dragh  urra.

''A  bheil  thu  smaointeachadh  go  falbh  thu  fhathasd,"  urs'  am  boir-
eannach  ris.  *^Tha  mi  smaointeachadh  go  bheil  na  leoir  dhe'nt-saoghal
agam  siud  fhin."  **  Dh'  fhalbh  t|iu  roimhid  le  t*  thoil  f hln ;  na  'm  biodh
tu  cho  math  's  gom  falbhadh  thu  nis  le  'm  thoilsa."  **  Ni  mi  sin."
**  Thalia  do  'n  bhuth  ud  a  muigh,  thoir  as  cbt',  agus  brigis,  agus  peit-
ean.  Feuch  am  faigh  thu  luchd  sgadain,  agus  th^id  thu  do  'n  Spain
leis.  Nur  a  bhios  an  luchd  a  stigh  thig  far  a  bheil  mise  ma  'm  falbh
thu."

Nur  a  Fhuair  e  'n  luchd  air  bbrd  chaidh  e  far  an  robh  i.  *'  An  d'
fhuair  thu  'n  luchd  air  bord?"  "  Fhuair."  "  Tha  deise  'n  so,  's  a  chiad
Domhnach  an  dèìgh  dhuit  an  Spain  a  ruigheachd,  cuiridh  tu  umad  i,
agus  theid  thu  do  'n  eaglais  leatha.  So  fideag,  agus  fàinne,  agus
leobhar.  Bidh  each  agus  gille  leat.  Cuiridh  tu  'm  fàinne  air
do  mhiar,  bidh  an  leobhar  a'd'  làimh.  Chi  thu  anns  an  eaglais
tri  cathraichean«  da  chathair  amlnidh  bir,  agus  cathair  airgid.  Beiridh


MAC  NA  BANTBAICH  BHARRACH.  I  2  5

ta  air  an  leabhar  's  bidh  tha  *ga  leubhadh;  's  a'  chiad  dnin'  a  th^id
a  mach  as  an  eaglais  bi  thus'  amach,  na  fan  ri  duine  beo  mar  an
coinnich  an  righ  sa  bhan-ngh  thu."

Sheòl  e  go  ruig  an  Spain,  ghabb  e  acarsaid,  *8  ghabh  e  anas  do  'n

tigh  sheinse.    Dh'  iarr  e  dinneir  a  cbiir  air  dòigh.    Chuireadh  tm

dinnear  air  a  bbòrd.   Dh'  iadhaicheadh  sios  'ga  iarraidb.    Chuireadh

a  BÌ08  tfiruear  air  a'  bhbrd,  agus  mias  air  a  mhninn,  agus  thuirt  bean

an  tigh  sheinse  ris.  *'  Tha  biadh  a*s  deoch  na  leoir  air  a  bhòrd  ma  'r

ooinneamh;  gabhaibh  'ur  leoir,  ach  na  togaibh  a  mhias  a  th'  air  muinn

an  trvMetr."   Tharruinn  i  'n  doras  leatha.    Thbisich  e  air  a  dhinneir.

Smaoinich  e  aige  fhin  gad  a  b*  e  'Ian  òir  a  bhiodh  anns  an  trinseir,  na

Ian  daoimean,  nach  deachaidh  sgath  riabh  air  a'  bhòrdnach  fhaodadh

e  phàigheadh.   Thog  e  mhias  bhàr  an  triaseir,  's  d^  bh'  air  an  trinsear

ach  da  sgadan.  "Ma 's  e  so  rud  a  bha  i  falach  orm  cha  ruigeadh  i  leas

e."   Dh'  ith  e  aon  sgadan  's  na  dama  taobh  do  'n  fhear  eile.    Nur

cbonnaic  bean  an  tighe  gon  robh  'n  sgadan  ithte.  *'  Mo  chreach  mhbr,"

nrs'  ise, "  mar  a  dh'  èiridh  domh ;  nach  robh  mi  latha  riabh  nach

fhaodainn  muinntir  na  rioghachd  a  ghleidheadh  gos  an  diugh.     De

dh'eiridh  dhnit?"    "Tha  nach  robh  ml  latha  riabh  nach  faodainn

8gadan  a  char  air  am  bialthaobh  gos  an  diagh."   "  De  bheireadh  tha

air  baraille  sgadan  ?"    "  Fichead  pannd  Sasnach."    "  De  bheireadh

tha  air  lachd  soithich  ? "    "  Sin  rud  nach  b'  nrra  mi  'cheannach."

"Mata  bheir  mise  doit  da  chiad  sgadan  airson  an  da  sgadain.    B*

fheanr  leam    gon   robh   'n   soitheach    air   fedbh    's   na   sgadain

creicte."

A  diiad  Di  Domhnaich  fhuair  e  each  le  strian  as  diollaid,  a^as
gille.  Dh'  fhalbh  e  do  'n  eaglais.  Chonnaic  e  na  tri  cathraichean.
Shuidh  a  bhanrigh  air  an  làimh  dheas  de  'n  righ  's  shoidh  e  fhin  air
an  làimh  thosgail.  Thag  e  mach  an  leobhar  a  a  phbca  's  thòisich  e
air  leubhadh.  Cha  b'  ann  air  searmoin  a  bha  air'  aig  an  ligh  na  aig
a  bhanrigh,  ach  a'  sileadh  nan  diar.  Nar  a  sgaoil  an  t-searmoin
^bh  e  mach.  Bha  triuir  stktan  as  a  dh^igh,  aig  eubhach  ris  gon
lobh  gnothach  aig  an  righ  ris.  Cha  tilleadh  e.  Thag  e  'n  tigh
Kins'  an  oidhche  sin  air.  Dh'  fhan  e  mar  a  bha  egos  an  ath  Dhomh-
nach.  Chaidh  e  'n  t-searmoin,  cha  'n  fhanadh  e  ri  duine,  *8  thill
e  do  'n  thigh  sheinse.  An  treas  Domhnach  chaidh  e  do  'n
eaglais.  Am  miadhan  na  searmoin  thàinig  an  righ  's  a'  bhanrigh
a  nuu:h.  Sheas  end  aig  gach  taobh  do  'n  t-sr^in.  Nur  chonnaic  an
righ  esan  a  tigh  'n  a  mach,  lig  e  as  an  t-srian,  thug  e  ada  dheth  go
Isr,  '■  rinn  e  modh  dha.  "  Le  'r  cead  cha  ruig  sibh  a  leas  a  leithid  sin  de
mhodh  a  dhianadh  dhomhsa,  's  ann  a  bu  choir  dhomhsa  dhianadh
dhnibh  fhin.*'    "  Na  'm  b'  e  'or  toil  gon  rachadh  sibh  lein  na  ghabhail


126  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

dinnear  do  V  phaUecu,^*    "  Ud  ud  's  e,  duine  sios  uaibhse  raohaiaDns
^ghabhail  dinnearach  leis  1"

Bainig  eud  am  paileas.     Chuireadh  biadh  an  kite  'chaitheadh
dhaibh,  agus  deoch  an  kite  ^h-òì,  's  cebl  an  ait'  ^deachd.  Bha  eud  a'
caitheadh  na  cnirme  's  na  cuideachd  le  solas 's  le  toil-inntinn,  ri  linn
dtiil  a  bhi  aca  gom  faigheadh  end  naigheadxd  air  an  nighinn.    '*A.
sgiobair  na  lainge,"  urs'  a  bhanrigh,  **  na  ceil  orm  dad  a  tha  mi  dol  a
db'  fhoighneachd  diot."    **  Dad  sam  bith  a  th'  agams'  is  iirrunn  mi
innseadh  dhuibh  cha  cheil  mi  oirbh."    ^  Na  ceilibh  orm  nach  làmh
boireannaich  a  chuir  a'  chulaidh  sin  ma'r  driom,  bhur  cota,  bhnr
brigis,  's  'ur  peitean ;  's  a  thug  dhuibh  am  f  àinne  bha  mu'r  miar,  's
an  leobhar  a  bha  'nur  lèdmh,  's  an  fhideag  a  bha  sibh  a*  seinn.'*
*'  Cha  cheil  mi.    Le  làimh  dheas  boireannaich  a  shineadh  a  h-uile
sgath  dhiu  sin  domhsa."    *'  *S  c'àit'  an  d'  fhuair  thu  i  ?  *8  nighean
leams'  a  tha  'n  sin."    ^  Cha  'n  'eil  fios  agamsa  co  da  'n  nighean  i.
Fhuair  mis'  i  anns  an  Tuirc  a'  dol  g'a  losgadh  ann  an  craoslach
mòr  teine.'*    "Am  fac  thu  boireannach  comhla  rithe?''    '*Cha'n
fhac.    Bha  i  'n  deigh  a  losgadh  ma  'n  d'  ràinig  mi.    Cheannaich  mi
ise  le  h-br  's  le  airgiod,  thug  mi  leam  i,  's  tha  i  ann  an  seombar  an
Sasunn."  **  Bha  Seanailear  mòr  aig  an  righ,"  ars'  a'  bhanrigh,  '*  's  dè
rinn  e  ach  gaol  a  ghabhail  urra.    Bha  h-athair  aig  iarraidh  urra
phbsadh  's  cha  phòsadh  i  e.    Dh'  fhalbh  i  fhin  's  nighean  bhràthar  a
h-athar  le  soitheach,  fiach  an  ligeadh  e  air  diochuimhn'  L  Chaidheud
thairls  do  'n  Tuirc.    Ghlac  an  Turcach  eud,  's  cha  robh  dull  againn
a  faicinn  beò  go  bràthach."

*'  Ma  'se  'ur  toils'  e,  *8  go  bheil  sibh  fhin  deònach,  cuiridh  mise  long
leibh  a  'h  iarraidh;  gheibh  sibh  i  fhin  a'  pòsadh,  leith  na  rloghachd  fad
's  is  beò  an  righ,  's  an  rioghachd  uile  nur  a  bhios  e  marbh.'*  **  Cha  'n
fhiach  leam  sin  a  dhianadh,  ach  cuiridh  sibhse  soitheach  agus  sgiob-
air air  falbh,  's  bheir  mise  dachaidh  i,  's  ma  's  e  sin  a  toil  fhin  dh*
fhaoidte  nach  bi  mise  'na  aghaidh."  Chaidh  soitheach  a  dhianadh  deas.
D4  rinn  an  seanailear  ach  gille  phàigheadh*  airson  a  tboirt  air  bòrd
gon  fhios  do  'n  sgiobair.  Fhuair  e,  'san  am,  e  fhin  flialach  ann  aui
baraille.  Shebl  eud,  fada  goirid  gon  robh  eud,  go  ruige  Sasunn.
Thug  eud  is'  air  bòrd  's  sheòl  eud  air  an  ais  airson  na  Spain.  Am
miadhon  a'  chuain,  lathabriagh,  thkinig  esan  agus  isenios  air  an
deck,  Dè  chunnaic  e  ach  eilean  an  taobh  thall  deth.  Bha  e  go  math
fèitheil  'san  am.  **  Ghillean,'^  ars'  esan,  '*  thugaibh  mis'  air  an  eilean,
treis  a  shealg,  gos  an  d'  tbig  coslas  soirbheis  oimn."  **  Bheir,'*  ars*
àdsan.  Chuir  eud  air  tar  air  an  eilean  e.  Nur  a  dh'  fhiig  eud  air  an
eilean  e  thill  am  bàta.  Nur  chunnaic  an  Seanailear  gon  robh  e  air
an  eilean,  gheall^e  tuillidh  tuarasdail  do  'n  sgiobair  agus  don  qgiobadh,


MAG  NA  BAKTRAIOH  BHABBAGH.  I  2  7

'fl  end  a  'fbiigail  an  rind  agasdh'  fhàg  end  Iain  air  an  eilean.  Nur
amhothaich  ise  gon  d'  fhàg  eud  air  an  eilean  e,  chaidh  i  air  a  choith-
each,  8  V  eigin  a  ceanghal.    Shebl  end  do  'n  Spain.

Chnir  eud  fios  'ionnsuidh  an  ligh  gon  robh  a  nighean  an  d€igh
£u  gòrrach,  a  rèir  coslais,  airson  call  aobhar  a  fir  *8  a  leannaln.
Chiiidh  an  righ  go  molad,  's  go  leann  dugh,  's  go  brbn,  's  go  bristeadh
cridhe  ;  chionn  mar  a  dh'  èirìdh  dha,  'a  gon  a  bhi  aig'  ach  i  do  mbac
na  'nighean.

Bha  Iain  'san  eilean,  fhionna  's  fhiasag  air  dol  tbairis  air,  a  ghruag
8108  eadar  a  dha  shlinnean,  na  brbgan  air  an  cnàmh,  's  gun  snàthainn
aodaich  air  nach  robh  air  falbh  na  bhideagan  gon,  ghreim  febl  air,
ach  na  cnàmhan  a'  leantail  ra  cheile.  Oidhche  de  na  h-oidhchean  dè
chnal  e,  ach  iomram  bata  tigh  'n  thun  an  eilean.  "  A  bheil  thu  'n  sin
Iain  Albanuaich?  "  ars'  am  fear  a  bha  'a  a  bhàta.  Gad  a  bha  cha  do
flireagair.  B'  fheàrr  leis  bàs  fhaotainn  taobh  cnoic  na  gbm  biodh  e
air  a  mharbhadh.  ^  *'  Tha  fhios*  am  go  bheil  thu  'gam  «*lì1ninntinTT
agns  fireagair,  's  oearta  cho  math  dhoit  mise  fhreagairt,  's  mi  dhol
nu8y  's  gon  d'  thoir  mi  nuaa  gon  taing  thu."  DV  fhalbh  e  'a
ghabh  e  sios.  "A  bheil  thu  debuach  falbh  as  an  eilean? "  *'Mata
tfajy  '8  mi  tha  'sin,  na  'm  faighinn  mo  thoirt  as."  **D4  bheireadh  thu
do  dhuine  bheireidh  as  an  so  thu  ?  "  "  Bha  uair  's  dh'  fhaodainn  rud
a  thoirt  do  dhuine  bheireadh  as  an  so  mi ;  ach  an  diugh  cha  'n  'eil
sgathagam."  ''And' thoireadhthudhaleith  do  rioghachd,?"  "Cha
bhi  rioghachd  am  feasd  agam,  na  'm  bitheadh  bheireadh."  **  An
d'  thugadh  thu  'n  dama  leith  de  d'  mhnaoi  do  dhuine  bheireadh  as
an 80  thu?"  **  Cha  'n  'eil  sin  agam."  <*  Cha  'n  'eil  mise  'g  radh  gad  a
bhitheadh  gon  d' thugadh  thu  seachad  i."  <<  Bheireadh."  «An  d
thugadh  thu  leith  do  chloinne  do  dhuine  bheireadh  as  an  so  thu  ?  "
«<  Bheireadh."  <*Nuas 'suidh  an  deireadh  a' bhàta."  Shuidh  e  'n
dfflrftudh  a  bhàta.  **  Co  dhiu  's  fheàrr  leat  dol  do  Shasunn  na  do  'n
Spain?"  '*  Do  'n  Spain."  Dh'  fhalbh  e  leis,  's  ma  'n  d'  thàmlg
an  latha  bha  e  'san  Spain.

Ghabh  e  suas  do  'n  tigh  sheinse.  Dh'  aithnich  bean  an  tigh  sheinse
'sa  mhionaid  e.  **  An  e  so  Iain  ?"  ars'  ise.  *<  'Se  'u  truaill  de  na  bh'
•lifi  deth  a  th'  ann,"  ars'  esan.  **  'S  bochd  mur  a  dh'  ^iridh  dhuit,"
ars'  ise.  Dh'  fhalbh  i  's  chuir  i  fios  go  buth  bearradair  s  ghlanadh
e,  choir  i  fios  go  bhth  tìùlleir  's  fhuàradh  aodach  da,  chuir  i  fios
go  bhth  griasaich  's  fhuaradh  brbgan  da.

An  la  'r  na  mhMreach,  nur  a  bha  e  air  a  ghlanadh,  's  air  a  sgead-
achadh  go  dbigheil,  chaidh  e  thun  phileas  an  sigh,  's  sheinn  e  'ji  fhid-
Nur  chual  nighean  an  ligh  an  fhideag  thug  i  leum  aisde,  's
i  'n  treas  earrann  de  'n  t-sreang  a  bha  'ga  ceanghal.    Dh'  iarr


128  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALBSk

ead  urra  fuireachd  socair  's  cheanghail  end  tnillidh  sreang  urra.  An
la  'r  na  mhàireach  thug  esan  sgàl  air  an  fhideig  's  bhris  i  da  earrann
de  na  bh'  urra.  An  treas  latha,  nur  a  chual  i  'n  fhideag,  bhris  i  tri  earr-
annan.  Air  a'  cheathramh  latha  bhris  i  na  bh'  urra  go  Mir.  Dh*  èirìdh
i  's  chaidh  i  mach  *nacbombdhaiI/s  cha  robh  boireannach  riabh  a  ba
stbldacha  na  i.  Chuireadh  brath  saas  thun  righ  na  Spain  nach  robh
nighean  riabh  na  bu  stbldacha  na  bha  i,'s  gon  d'  thàinig  aobhar  a  fir
'sa  leannain  a  'h  ionnsuidh.

Chnireadh  coach  a  dh'  iarraidh  Iain.  Bha  'n  righ  's  a  mhòr
uaislean  comhla  ris.  Thugadh  suas  air  bhàrr  bas  e.  Thogadh  cebl  's
leagadh  brbn.  Chnireadh  biadh  an  ait'  a  chaithidh,  deoch  an  ait'  a
h-bl,  's  cebl  an  ait*  ^isdeachd.  Rinneadh  banais,  shunndach,  eibhinn,
aighearach.  Fhuair  Iain  an  darna  leith  de  'n  rioghachd.  An  d€igh
bMs  an  righ  bha  'n  rioghachd  uile  go  l^ir  aige.  Bugadh  air  an
t-seanailear,  riasladh  eadar  eachaibh  e,  loisgeadh  eadar  thinean  e,  's
ligeadh  an  loaith  leis  a'  ghaoith.

An  d^igh  bàis  an  righ  's  na  banrigh  bha  Iain  'na  righ  air  an
Spain.  Rugadh  trinir  mac  da.  Oidhche  bha  'n  sin  chual  e  bualadh
'san  dorus.  '*  Tha'n  t-iarrtaich  air  tighinn,"  nrs'  esan.  D4  bh'  ann
ach  a  cheart  duin'  a  thug  as  an  eilean  e.  **  A  bheil  thu  airson  do
ghealladh  a  chumail  ? "  ars'  am  fear  a  thàmig.  '*  Tha,"  ars'  Iain.
**  Biodh  do  rioghachd  's  do  chlann  agad  fhin  's  mo  bheannachdsa.
A  bheil  cuimhn'  agad  nur  a  phàigh  thu  na  h-ochd  mairg  airson  cuirp
an  duin'  anns  an  Tuirc  ?  B'e  sin  mo  chorp  sa.  Slàn  leaf  cha  'n
fhaic  thu  mise  tnillidh."

Got  this  tale  from  Alexander  MacNeill,  tenant  and  fisherman,
Then  Tangval,  Barra.  Heard  his  father,  Roderick  MacNeill,
often  recite  it.  Roderick  M acNeill  died  about  twenty  years  ago,
about  the  age  of  eighty  years.  Heard  it  firom  many  other  old
men  in  youth,  and  says  it  was  pretty  common  then.

July  1859.  H.  MacLeak.


The  landscape,  and  the  ways  of  the  poor  of  Barra,  are  painted
from  nature  ;  the  flat  strand,  the  shell-fish,  the  ship  in  the  offing,
the  boat  at  the  edge  of  the  sea.  Then  comes  the  popular  ro-
mance, in  which  the  poor  man  is  to  become  a  prince.  The  life
of  shops  and  ships,  dimly  seen,  but  evident  enough.  Turkey  and
Spain  fairly  lost  in  a  distant  haze.    The  commercial  principle


THE  BàBBà  widow's  SON.  1 29

laid  down,  that  small  pivfits  make  quick  retarns ;  and  that  men
shoald  buy  in  the  cheapest,  and  sell  in  the  dearest  market ;  and
aQ  this  woven  with  a  love  story,  and  mixed  np  with  an  old  tale
which  Grimm  found  in  Germany ;  and  which  Hans  Anderson
has  made  the  foundation  of  one  of  his  best  tales.  Alas,  why  did
not  the  king  of  Spain  send  for  the  Barra  widow  to  make  it  com-
plete.


VOL.  II.


XXXIII.

THE  TALE  OF  THE  QUEEN  WHO  SOUGHT
A  DMNK  FEOM  A  CERTAIN  WELL

From  Mrs.  MacTavisli,  Port  Ellen,  Islay.

nPHEEE  was  before  now,  a  queen  who  was  sick,  and
-*-    she  had  three  daughters.     Said  she  to  the  one
who  was  eldest,   "  Go  to  the  well  of  true  water,  and
bring  to  me  a  drink  to  heal  me."

The  daughter  went,  and  she  reached  the  well.  A
LosGANN  (frog  or  toad)  came  up  to  ask  her  if  she
would  wed  him,  if  she  should  get  a  drink  for  her
mother.  "  I  wiU  not  wed  thee,  hideous  creature  !  on
any  account,"  said  she.  "  Well  then,"  said  he,  "  thou
shalt  not  get  the  water."

She  went  away  home,  and  her  mother  sent  away
her  sister  that  was  nearest  to  her,  to  seek  a  drink  of
the  water.  She  reached  the  well ;  and  the  toad  came
up  and  asked  her  "  if  she  would  marry  him  if  she
should  get  the  water."  "  I  wont  marry  thee,  hideous
creature  r"  said  she.  "  Thou  shalt  not  get  the  water,
then,"  said  he.

She  went  home,  and  her  sister  that  was  youngest
went  to  seek  the  water.  When  she  reached  the  well
the  toad  came  up  as  he  used,  and  asked  her  "  if  she
would  marry  him  if  she  should  get  the  water."  **  If
I  have  no  other  way  to  get  healing  for  my  mother,  I


THE  SICK  QUEEN.  I  3  I

will  marry  thee,"  said  she ;  and  she  got  the  water,  and
she  healed  her  mother.

They  had  betaken  themselves  to  rest  in  the  night,
when  the  toad  came  to  the  door  saying  : —

'•  A  OHAOMHAO,  A  CHAOHHA0,  "  Gentle  one,  gentle  one.
An  cuDfHNEACH  LEAT  Kememberest  thou

An  gealladh  beag  The  little  pledge
A  THUG  THU  Aio  Thou  gavost  me

An  tobab  dhomh,  Beside  the  well,

A  OHAOiL,  A  GHAOiL.''  My  love,  my  love."

When  he  was  ceaselessly  saying  this,  the  girl  rose
and  took  him  in,  and  put  him  behind  the  door,  and
she  went  to  bed ;  but  she  was  not  long  laid  down,
when  he  began  again  saying,  everlastingly  : —

*'  A  hàovaig,  a  hàovaig.
An  cuineach  leat
An  geallug  beag
A  hoog  00  aig
An  lobar  gaw,
A  gèule,  a  gèule."

Then  she  got  up  and  she  put  him  under  a  noggin ;
that  kept  him  quiet  a  while ;  but  she  was  not  long
laid  down  when  he  began  again,  saying  :—

"  A  hàovaig,  a  hàovaig.
An  cuineach  leat
An  geallug  beag
A  hoog  00  aig
An  tobar  gaw,
A  gèule,  a  geule."

She  rose  again,  and  she  made  him  a  little  bed  at
the  fireside ;  but  he  was  not  pleased,  and  he  began
again  saying,  "  A  chaoimheag,  a  chaoimheag,  an
cuimhneach  leat  an  gealladh  beag  a  thug  thu  aig  an
tobar  dhomh,  a  ghaoil,  a  ghaoil."     Then  she  got  up


132  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

and  made  him  a  bed  beside  her  own  bed ;  but  lie  was
without  ceasing,  saying,  "  A  chaoimheag,  a  chaoimheag,
an  cuimhneach  leat  an  gealladh  beag  a  thug  a  thug
thu  aig  an  tobar  dhomh,  a  ghaoil,  a  ghaoil."  But
she  took  no  notice  of  his  complaining,  till  he  said  to
her,  "  There  is  an  old  rusted  glave  behind  thy  bed,
with  which  thou  hadst  better  take  off  my  head,  than
be  holding  me  longer  in  torture."

She  took  the  glave  and  cut  the  head  off  him.
When  the  steel  touched  him,  he  grew  a  handsome
youth ;  and  he  gave  many  thanks  to  the  young  wife,
who  had  been  the  means  of  putting  off  him  the  spells,
under  which  he  had  endured  for  a  long  time.  Then
he  got  his  kingdom,  for  he  was  a  king  ;  and  he  mar-
ried the  princess,  and  they  were  long  alive  and  merry
together.


SGEULACHD  BAN-RIGH  A  DH'  lARE  DEOCH  A  TOBAB

ARAID.

Bha  banrigh  ann  roimhe  so  a  bha  tiim,  agus  bha  triiiir  nighean
aice.  Thnbbairt  i  ris  an  t^  *bu  shine,  **  Falbh  do  'n  tobar  fluor-msg*,
agus  ihabhair  do  m'  ionnsuidh  deoch  gu  m'  leigheas."  Dh*  fbalbh
an  nighean  agus  ràinig  i  'n  tobar.  Thàìnig  losgann  a  nios  a  dh**
fharraid  di  am  pòsadh  i  e  na  'm  faigheadh  i  deoch  d^a  màthair.
*'  Cha  phbs  mis'  thu  'chreatair  ghrànnda  I  air  aon  chur."  **  Mata,'*
ars'  esan,  '*  cha  'n  fhaigh  tbn  *n  t-uisge."  Dh*  fhalbh  i  dhachaidh,
agus  cbuir  a  mkthair  air  £ftlbh  a  pinthar  a  b'  f  haisge  dhi  a  dh'  iarr-
aidh  deoch  do  'n  uisge.  Bàinig  i  'n  tobar,  agns  thàinig  an  losgann
a  nios,  agas  dh'  fharraid  e  dhi  am  pòsadh  i  e,  na  'm  faigheadh  i  'n  t-
uisge.  "  Cha  phòs  mis'  thu  'chreutair  ghrànnd',"  ars'  ise.  **  Cha  'n
fhaigh  thu  'n  t-nisge  mata,"  urs*  esan.  ThiU  i  dhachaidh,  agns
chaidh  a  piutbar  a  b'  bige  'dh'  iarraidh  an  nisge.  An  uair  a  ràinig
i  'n  tobar  thàinig  an  losgann  k  lùos  mar  a  b'  àbhaist,  agus  dh'  fharr-
aid e  dhi  am  pbsadh  i  e  na  'm  faigheadh  i  'u  t-uisge.  "  Mar  am
bheil  sèol  eil'  agam  air  leigheas  fhaotainn  do  m'  mhàthair  pòsaidh
mi  thu,"  ars'  ise,  agus  fhuair  i  'n  t-uisge,  agus  shlànaicheadh  a
màthair.


THE  SICE  QUEEN.  I  33

Bha  lad  an  d^gh  gabhail  ma  thamh  'san  oidhche  an  nair  a  thàiuig
an  loegann  do  'n  dorns  aig  ràdh,  '*A  chaomhag,  a  chaomhag  an  cnimh-
neach  leat  an  gealladh  beag  a  thug  thu  aig  an  tobar  dhomh  ?  A
ghaoil I  a  ghaoil! "  An  nair  a  bha  egnn  tkmh  aig  ràdh  mar  so,  dh'
Sridh  an  nighean  agna  thng  i  stigh  e,  agus  chnir  i  ctil  an  doruis  e,
agua  cbaidh  i  laidhe ;  ach  cha  robh  i  fada  'na  luidhe  an  uair  a  thòis-
ich  e  rithis  air  a  ràdh,  a  choidh.  <*  A  chaomhag,  a  chaomhag  an
coimhneach  leat  an  gealladh  beag  a  thug  thu  aig  an  tobar  dhomh  ?
A  ghaoil  I  a  ghaoil  I "  Dh'  èirich  1  *n  sin  agus  chuir  i  fo  noigean  e.
Chum  sin  sàmhach  e  tacan ;  ach  cha  robh  i  fada  *na  luidhe  an  uair  a
thòisich  e  rithis  air  a  ràdh,  '*A  chaomhag,  a  chaomhag  an  cuimh-
neach  leat  an  gealladh  beag  a  thug  thu  aig  an  tobar  dhomh  ?  A
ghaoil  I  a  ghaoil  I  *'  Dh'  èirich  i  rithis  agus  rinn  i  leaba  bheag  dha
taobh  an  teine ;  ach  cha  robh  e  toUiehte.  Co  Inath  agus  a  bha  i  'na
leaba  thbisich  e  rithis  air  a  ràdh,  '*  A  chaoimheag,  a  chaoimheag
nach  coimhneach  leat  an  gealladh  beag  a  thug  thu  aig  an
tobar  dhomh  ?  A  ghaoil !  a  ghaoil  I "  Dh'  èirich  i  'n  sin
agus  rinn  i  leaba  dha  làmh  ri  *leaba  fdin ;  ach  bha  e  gun  tàmh  aig
rìkdh,  **  A  chaoimheag,  a  chaoimheag  an  cuimhneachleatan  gealladh
beag  a  thug  thu  aig  an  tobar  dhomh  ?  A  ghaoil  I  a  ghaoil ! "  Ach
cha  robh  i  'tabhairt  feairt  air  a  ghearan  gus  an  dubhairt  e  rithe,
'*  Tha  seana  chlaidheamh  meirgeach  ciil  do  leapa  leis  an  fheàrra
dhuit  an  ceann  a  thabhairt  dhiom,  na  'bhith  *gam'  chumail  am  p^in
ni  's  faide."  Ghabh  i  'n  claidheamh  agus  gheàrr  i  *n  ceann  deth.  An
uair  a  bhoin  an  stàilinn  da  dh'  thha  e  *na  òganach  dreachmhor,
agus  thug  e  iomadh  buidheacbas  do  'n  ògbhean  a  bha  'na  meadhon
an  drnidheachd,  foidh  an  robh  e  re  van.*  fhad'  a'  f ulann,  a  chur  dheth.
Fhuair  e  'n  sin  a  rioghaehd,  oir  bu  ligh  e,  agus  pfabs  e  'bhana*
phrionnsa,  agus  bha  iad  €ada  beò  gu  subhach  còmhla.

The  lady  who  has  been  so  kind  as  to  write  down  this,  and
other  stories,  is  one  of  my  oldest  friends.  She  has  brought  up  a
large  family,  and  her  excellent  memory  now  enables  her  to  remem-
ber tales,  which  she  has  gathered  daring  a  long  life  passed  in  the
West  Highlands,  where  her  husband  was  a  respected  minister.
The  story  is  evidently  a  Celtic  version  of  the  Wearie  Well  at  the
Warldis  End,  of  which  Chambers  has  published  one  Scotch  ver-
sion, to  which  Grimm  refers,  in  notes  "  Der  Froschkonig,"  in  his
third  volume.  There  are  many  versions  still  current  in  Scotland,
told  in  broad  Scots ;  and  it  can  be  traced  back  to  1548.  Ac-
cording to  Grimm,  it  belongs  to  the  oldest  in  Germany.    This


134  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

version  clearly  belongs  to  the  Gaelic  language,  for  the  speech  of
the  frog  is  an  imitation  of  the  gurgling  and  quarking  of  spring
frogs  in  a  pond,  which  I  have  vainly  endeavoured  to  convey  to  an
English  reader  by  English  letters ;  but  which  is  absurdly  like,
when  repeated  in  Gaelic  with  this  intention.  The  persevering,
obstinate  repetition  of  the  same  sounds,  is  also  exceedingly  like
the  habit  of  frogs,  when  disturbed,  but  not  much  frightened.
Let  any  one  try  the  experiment  of  throwing  a  stone  into  the
midst  of  a  frog  concert,  and  he  will  hear  the  songsters,  after  a
moment  of  stillness,  begin  again.  First  a  half-smothered  ouask
auA9K ;  then  another  begins,  half  under  water,  with  a  gurgle,
and  then  more  and  more  join  in  till  the  pond  is  in  full  chorus  once
again.    Guabk,  quark,  gooill-v^v^n/vx^  gk>oark  G^ooILL.^^^^^,^.,^^

Holy  healing  wells  are  common  all  over  the  Highlands ;  and
people  still  leave  offerings  of  pins  and  nails,  and  bits  of  rag,
though  few  would  confess  it.  There  is  a  well  in  Islay  where  I
myself  have,  after  drinking,  deposited  copper  caps  amongst  a
hoard  of  pins  and  buttons,  and  similar  gear,  placed  in  chinks  in
the  rocks  and  trees  at  the  edge  of  the  "  Witches*  Well."  There  is
another  well  with  similar  offerings,  freshly  placed  beside  it  in  an
island  in  Loch  Maree,  in  Boss-shire  ;  and  similar  wells  are  to  be
found  in  many  other  places  in  Scotland.  For  example,  I  learn
from  Sutherland,  that  "  a  well  in  the  black  Isle  of  Cromarty,  near
Kosehaugh,  has  miraculous  healing  powers.  A  country  woman
tells  me,  that  about  forty  years  ago,  she  remembers  it  being  sur-
rounded by  a  crowd  of  people  every  first  Tuesday  in  June,  who
bathed  or  drank  of  it  before  sunrise.  Each  patient  tied  a  string
or  rag  to  one  of  the  trees  that  overhung  it  before  leaving.   It  was

sovereign  for  headaches.     Mr —  remembers  to  have  seen  a

well  here  called  Mary's  Well,  hung  round  with  votive  rags."

Well  worship  is  mentioned  by  Martin.  The  custom  in  his
day,  in  the  Hebrides,  was  to  walk  south  about  round  the  well.

Sir  William  Betham  in  his  Gael  and  Cymbiri  (Dublin :  W.
Curry  jun.  &  Co.,  1834),  says  at  page  235,  "The  Celtae  were
much  addicted  to  the  worship  of  fountains  and  rivers  as  divinities.
They  had  a  deity  called  Divona,  or  the  river  god."

Divona  Celtarum  lingua  fons  addite  Divii  ("Atisonius.J

He  quotes  from  *'  The  Book  of  Armagh,  a  MS.  of  the  seventh  cen-
tury,"— "And  he  (St.  Patrick)  came  to  J^ina  ifa^e,  which  is  called


■sqp


THE  SICE  QUEEN.  1 35

Slane,  becanse  it  was  intimated  to  bim  tbat  tbe  Magi  honoured
this  fountain^  and  made  donations  to  it  as  gifts  to  a  god.*'  For
they  sacrificed  gifts  to  the  fountain  and  worshipped  it  like  a  god.
Tbe  learned  autbor  explains  bow  wells  are  now  venerated  in
Ireland,  and  traces  tbeir  worsbip  back  to  remote  ages ;  and  to
the  East,  by  way  of  Spain,  Cartbage,  and  Egypt,  Tyre  and
Sidon,  Arabia,  Gbaldea,  and  Persia,  wbere  men  still  bang  bits  of
rag  on  trees  near  wells.  Baal,  according  to  some  of  tbe  autbori-
ties  quoted,  is  mixed  up  witb  tbe  well  worsbip  of  tbe  Irisb  Sceligs.
Divona,  tbe  river  god,  or  Baal,  may  therefore  bave  degenerated
into  a  toad ;  and  tbe  princess  wbo  married  bim  may  once  bave
been  a  Celtic  divinity,  wbose  story  survives  as  a  popular  tale  in
Germany  and  in  Scotland.

Tbe  following  story  bears  on  tbe  same  subject,  and  may
explain  why  gifts  were  left  wben  a  drink  was  taken  from  a
well.  Tbe  story  was  told  to  me  long  ago,  while  seated  under
shelter  of  a  big  stone  waiting  for  ducks  on  the  shore.  It  was
told  in  Gaelic,  and  tbe  pun  upon  tbe  name  of  tbe  lake  is  lost  in
any  other  language.  Tbe  meaning  of  tbe  name  might  be  tbe
weasel  lake,  or  tbe  lake  of  tbe  fall ;  or  perhaps  the  lake  of  tbe
island ;  but  the  legend  gives  a  meaning,  which  tbe  sound  of  tbe
name  will  bear,  and  it  ought  to  be  right  if  it  is  not.


XXXIV.
THE  OEIGIN  OF  LOCH  NESS.

From  Mr.  Thomas  MacDonald,  now  gamekeeper  at  Dunrobin.

WHEKE  Loch  Ness  now  is,  there  was  long  ago  a
fine  glen.  A  woman  went  one  day  to  the  well
to  fetch  water,  and  she  found  the  spring  flowing  so
fast  that  she  got  frightened,  and  left  her  pitcher  and
ran  for  her  life ;  she  never  stopped  till  she  got  to  the
top  of  a  high  hill ;  and  when  there,  she  turned  about
and  saw  the  glen  filled  with  water.  Not  a  house  or  a
field  was  to  be  seen.  "  Aha  I"  said  she,  "  Tha  Loch
ann  a  nis."  (Ha  Loch  an  a  neesh).  There  is  a  lake  in
it  now ;  and  so  the  lake  was  called  Loch  Ness  (neesh).


XXXV.
CONALL.

From  Alexander  MacNeill,  tenant  and  fisherman,  Barra.

THEEE  was  an  old  king  before  now  in  Erin,*  and  a
sister  of  hiSy  whose  name  was  Maobh,  had  three
sons.  The  eldest  of  them  was  Ferghns,  the  middle-
most Lagh  an  Laidh,  and  the  youngest  one  Conall.

He  thought  he  would  make  an  heir  of  the  eldest
one,  Ferghus.  He  gave  him  the  schooling  of  the  son
of  a  king  and  a  ''  ridere,"  and  when  he  was  satisfied
with  school  and  learning  he  brought  him  home  to  the
palace.     Now  they  were  in  the  palace.

Said  the  king,  '^  I  have  passed  this  year  well ;  the
end  of  the  year  is  coming  now,  and  trouble  and  care
are  coming  on  me  with  it"

"  What  trouble  or  care  is  coming  on  thee  ?"  said  the
young  man.  '^  The  vassals  of  the  country  are  coming
to  reckon  with  me  to-day."  "  Thou  hast  no  need  to
be  in  trouble.  It  is  proclaimed  that  I  am  the  young
heir,  and  it  is  set  down  in  papers  and  in  letters  in
each  end  of  the  realuL  I  will  build  a  fine  castle  in
front  of  the  palace  for  thee.  I  wiU  get  carpenters,  and
stonemasons,  and  smiths  to  build  that  castle."

*  In  tliis  tale  Erin  is  spelt  instead  of  Eirinn  and  Eireann ;
Alba  and  Sassun,  Scotland  and  Ungland,  express  the  soand  of
the  Gaelic  words.


138  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  Is  that  thy  thought,  son  of  my  sister  ? "  said  the
king.  "  Thou  hadst  neither  claim  nor  right  to  the  realm
unless  I  myself  had  chosen  to  give  it  to  thee  with  my
own  free  ^  Thou  wHt  not  see  thyself  handling
Erin  till  I  go  first  under  the  mould."

"  There  wiU  be  a  day  of  battle  and  combat  before
I  let  this  go  on,"  said  the  young  man.

He  went  away,  and  he  sailed  to  Albeu  A  message
was  sent  up  to  the  king  of  Alba  that  the  young  king
of  Erin  was  come  to  Alba  to  see  him.  He  was  taken
up  on  the  deadly  points.*  Meat  was  set  in  the  place  for
eating ;  drink  in  the  place  for  drinking ;  and  music  in
the  place  for  hearing ;  and  they  were  plying  the  feast
and  the  company.

"  Oh !  young  king  of  Erin,"  said  the  king  of  Alba,
"  it  was  not  without  the  beginning  of  some  matter  that
thou  art  come  to  Alba."

"  I  should  not  wish  to  let  out  the  knowledge  of  my
matter  till  I  should  first  know  whether  I  may  get  it."

"  Anything  I  have  thou  gettest  it,  for  if  I  were
seeking  help,  perhaps  I  would  go  to  thee  to  get  it"

"  There  came  a  word  with  trouble  between  me  and
my  mother's  brother.  It  was  proclaimed  out  that  I
was  king  of  Erin ;  and  he  said  to  me  that  I  should
have  nothing  to  do  with  anything  till  a  clod  should
first  go  on  him.  I  wish  to  stand  my  right,  and  to  get
help  from  thee."

"  I  will  give  thee  that,"  said  the  king ;  "  three
hundred  swift  heroes,  three  hundred  brave  heroes,
three  hundred  full  heroes ;  and  that  is  not  bad
helping."

"  I  am  without  a  chief  over  them,  and  I  am  as  ill
ofiP  as  I  was  before  ;  but  I  have  another  small  request,
and  if  I  might  get  it,  I  would  wish  to  let  it  out"

•  Probably  lifted  on  spears.


CONALL.  1 39

"  Anything  I  have  that  I  can  part  from,  thou  shalt
get  it,"  said  the  king ;  "  but  the  thing  I  have  not,  I
cannot  give  it  to  thee.  Let  out  thy  speech,  and  thou
shalt  have  it"

"  It  is  Boinne  Breat,  thy  son,  at  their  head."

"  My  torture  to  thee  !  had  I  not  promised  him  to
thee,  thou  hadst  not  got  him.  But  there  were  not
bom  in  Alba,  nor  in  Erin,  nor  in  Sassun,  nor  in  any  one
place  (those)  who  would  gain  victory  over  my  son  if
they  keep  to  fair  play.  If  my  son  does  not  come  back
as  he  went,  the  word  of  an  Eriannach  is  never  again
to  be  taken,  for  it  is  by  treachery  he  wiU  be  overcome."

They  went  away  on  the  morrow,  and  they  sailed  to
the  king  of  Sassun.  A  message  went  up  to  the  king
of  Sassun  that  the  young  king  of  Erin  had  come  to
the  place.  The  king  of  Sassun  took  out  to  meet  him.
He  was  taken  up  on  the  deadly  points ;  music  was
raised,  and  lament  laid  down  in  the  palace  of  the  king
of  Sassun ;  meat  was  set  in  the  place  for  eating ;  drink
in  the  place  for  drinking  ;  music  in  the  plaxie  of  hear-
ing ;  and  they  were  plying  the  feast  and  the  company
with  joy  and  pleasure  of  mind.

"  Oh !  young  king  of  Erin,"  said  the  king  of
Sassun,  "  it  is  not  without  the  end  of  a  matter  that
thou  art  come  here."

"  I  got  the  schooling  of  the  son  of  a  king  and  a
lidere.  My  mother's  brother  took  me  home.  He  began
to  speak  about  the  vassals  of  the  country  and  the
people  of  the  realm ;  that  care  and  trouble  were  on
him ;  and  that  he  had  rather  the  end  of  the  year  had
not  come  at  aU.  Said  I  to  him,  '  I  will  build  thee  a
palace,  so  that  thou  shalt  have  but  to  wash  thy  face,
and  stretch  thy  feet  in  thy  shoes.'  Said  he,  *My
sister's  son,  thou  hadst  no  right  to  the  realm,  and  thou
gettest  it  not  tiU  a  clod  goes  on  me,  in  spite  of  every-


140  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

thing.'  Said  I,  '  There  will  be  a  day  of  battle  and
combat  between  thee  and  me,  before  the  matter  is  so.'
I  went  away ;  I  took  my  ship ;  I  took  a  skipper  with
me ;  and  I  sailed  to  Alba.  I  reached  Alba,  and  I  got
three  hundred  swift  heroes,  three  hundred  brave  heroes,
and  three  hundred  foil  heroes ;  now  I  am  come  to  thee
to  see  what  help  thou  wilt  give  me."

"  I  will  give  thee  as  many  more,  and  a  hero  at  their
head,"  said  the  king  of  Sassun.

They  went  away,  and  they  sailed  to  Erin.  They
went  on  shore  on  a  crag  in  Erin,  and  the  name  of
Carrig  Fhearghuis  is  on  that  rock  stilL  He  reaxjhed
the  king.  "Brother  of  my  mother,  art  thou  now
ready?" — "Well,  then,  Fhearghuis,  though  I  said
that,  I  thought  thou  wouldst  not  take  anger ;  but  I
have  not  gathered  my  lot  of  people  yet." — "  That  is  no
answer  for  me.  Thou  hast  Erin  under  thy  rule.  I
am  here  with  my  men,  and  I  have  neither  place,  nor
meat,  nor  drink  for  them."

"  Oo  ! "  said  the  king,  "  the  storehouses  of  Erin
are  open  beneath  thee,  and  I  will  go  away  and  gather
my  people."

He  went  away.  He  went  all  round  Erin.  He
came  to  a  place  which  they  called  "  An  t'  lubhar "
(Newry).  There  was  but  one  man  in  the  lubhar,  who
was  called  Goibhlean  Grobha  (Goivlan  Smith).  He
thought  to  go  in,  for  thirst  was  on  him ;  aad  that  he
would  quench  his  tMrst,  and  breathe  a  while.  He  went
in.  There  was  within  but  the  smith's  daughter.  She
brought  him  a  chair  in  which  he  might  sit.  He  asked
for  a  drink.  The  smith's  daughter  did  not  know  what
she  should  do,  for  the  smith  had  but  one  cow,  which
was  called  the  Glas  Ghoibhlean  (Grey  Goivlan),  with
the  vessel  he  had  for  the  milk  of  the  cow  ;  three  times
in  the  day  it  would  go  beneath  the  cow ;  three  times


CONALL.  141

in  the  day  thirst  would  be  on  him ;  and  he  would
diink  the  yessel  each  time,  and  unless  the  daughter
had  the  vessel  fiiU  she  was  not  to  get  off.  She  was  afraid,
when  the  king  asked  for  a  drink,  that  unless  she  had
the  vessel  fall  her  head  would  be  taken  off.  It  was
so  that  she  thought  the  vessel  should  be  set  before  the
king  at  all  hazards.  She  brought  down  the  vessel,  and
she  set  it  before  him.  He  drank  a  draught ;  he  took
out  the  fourth  part,  and  he  left  three  quarters  in  it.  '^  I
would  rather  you  should  take  it  out  altogether  than
leave  it  My  father  has  made  an  oath  that  unless  I
have  the  vessel  fall,  I  have  but  to  die."

"  Well,  then,"  said  the  king,  "  it  is  a  spell  of  my
spells  to  leave  the  vessel  as  fall  as  it  was  before."

He  set  the  vessel  on  the  board,  he  struck  his  pahn
on  it^  and  he  struck  off  as  much  as  was  above  the  milk,
and  the  vessel  was  full ;  and  before  he  went  away,  the
girl  was  his  own.

''  Now,  thou  art  going,  oh  king  of  Erin,  and  I  am
shamed ;  what  wilt  thou  leave  with  me  Ì "

'^  I  would  give  thee  a  thousand  of  each  hue,  a  thou-
sand of  each  kind,  a  thousand  of  each  creature.''

"  What  should  I  do  with  that,  for  I  will  not  find
salt  in  Erin  to  salt  them  ?  "

''  I  would  give  thee  glens  and  high  moors  to  feed
them  from  year  to  year."

"What  should  I  do  with  that?  for  if  Fearghus
should  kill  you,  he  will  take  it  from  me,  unless  I  have
it  with  writing,  and  a  drop  of  blood  to  bind  it"

"  I  am  in  haste  this  nighty  but  go  to-morrow  to
the  camp  to  Croc  Maol  Nam  Muc,"  said  the  king ;  and
he  left  his  blessing  with  her.

Her  feither  came.

"  Far  from  thee — ^far  from  thee  be  it^  my  daughter !
I  think  that  a  stranger  has  been  to  see  thee  here  this  day. "


I  42  WEST  HIGHl^AND  TALES.

"  How  dost  thou  know  that  V*

"  Thou  hadst  a  maiden's  slow  eyelash  when  I  went
out ;  thou  hast  the  brisk  eyelash  of  a  wife  now."

"  Whom  wouldst  thou  rather  had  been  here  ?"

"  I  never  saw  the  man  I  would  rather  be  here  than
the  king  of  Erin."

"  Well,  it  was  he ;  he  left  me  a  thousand  of  each
hue,  a  thousand  of  each  kind,  a  thousand  of  each
creature.

"  *  What,'  said  I,  *shaU  I  do  with  them,  as  I
cannot  get  in  Erin  as  much  salt  as  will  salt  them  V

"  Said  he,  *  I  would  give  thee  glens  and  high  moors
to  feed  them  from  year  to  year.'

"  '  What  shaU  I  do  if  Fearghus  should  kiU  you  ?    I
will  not  get  them.'

"  He  said,  *  I  should  have  writing  and  a  drop  of
his  own  blood  to  bind  it.' "

They  slept  that  night  as  they  were.  If  it  was
early  that  the  day  came,  it  was  earlier  that  the  smith
arose.  *'  Come,  daughter,  and  let  us  be  going."  She
went,  herself  and  the  smith,  and  they  reached  the  king
in  his  camp.

"  Wert  thou  not  in  the  lubhar  yesterday  ?"  said  the
smith  to  the  king,  "  I  was ;  and  hast  thou  mind  of  thy
words  to  the  girl  ?"

"  I  have  ;  but  the  battle  will  not  be  till  to-morrow.
I  will  give  thee,  as  I  said,  to  the  girl ;  but  leave  her."

The  smith  got  that,  and  he  went  away.

That  night,  when  she  had  slept  a  while,  she  awoke,
for  she  had  seen  a  dream.      "  Art  thou  waking  ?"

"I  am ;  what  wilt  thou  with  me ?  1  saw  a  dream
there :  a  shoot  of  fir  growing  from  the  heart  of  the
king,  one  from  my  own  heart,  and  they  were  twining
about  each  other."  "  That  is  our  babe  son."  They
sleptj  and  it  was  not  long  till  she  saw  the  next  dream.


CONALL.  143

"  Art  thou  waking,  king  of  Erin ]"  "I  am ;
what  wilt  thou  with  me  T  "  I  saw  another  dream.
Fearghus  coming  down,  and  taking  the  head  and  the
neck  out  of  me."

"  That  is,  Fearghus  killing  me,  and  taking  out  my
head  and  neck."

She  slept  again,  and  she  saw  another  dream.

"  Art  thou  sleeping,  king  of  Erin  ?"

"  I  am  not  j  what  wilt  thou  with  me  now  ?"

"  I  saw  Erin,  from  side  to  side,  and  from  end  to
end,  covered  with  sheaves  of  barley  and  oats.  There
came  a  blast  of  wind  from  the  east,  from  the  west,
from  the  north ;  every  tree  was  swept  away,  and  no
more  of  them  were  seen,"

'*  Fearghus  will  kill  me,  and  he  will  take  the  head
and  neck  out  of  me.  As  quickly  as  ever  thou  didst
(anything),  seize  my  set  of  arms,  and  keep  them.  A
baby  boy  is  begotten  between  thee  and  me.  Thou
shalt  suckle  and  nurse  him,  and  thou  shalt  set  him
in  order.  Keep  the  arms.  When  thou  seest  that  he
has  speech,  and  can  help  himself,  thou  shalt  send  him
away  through  the  world  a  wandering,  till  he  find  out
who  he  is.  He  will  get  to  be  king  over  Erin ;  his
son  will  be  king  over  Erin ;  his  grandson  will  be  king
over  Erin.  His  race  will  be  kings  over  Erin  till  it
reaches  the  ninth  knee.  A  child  will  be  born  from
that  one.  A  farmer  will  come  in  with  a  fish ;  he  will
cook  the  fish  ;  a  bone  will  stick  in  his  throat,  and  he
wiU  be  choked."

Maobh,  the  king's  sister,  the  mother  of  Fearghus,
had  two  other  sons,  and  the  battle  was  to  be  on  the
morrow.  Lagh  an  Laidh  and  Connal ;  and  Lagh  an
Laidh  was  the  eldest

"Whether,"  said  Ijagh  an  Laidh,  "shall  we  be
with  our  mother's  brother  or  with  Fearghus  ]"


1  44  W^T  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  I  know  not.  If  our  mother's  brother  wins,  and
we  are  with  Feaighus,  it  is  a  stone  in  our  shoe  for
ever ;  but  if  Fearghus  wins,  he  wiU  turn  his  back
to  us,  because  we  were  on  the  other  sida"

**•  Well,  then,  it  is  not  thus  it  ÌBhall  be ;  but  be
thou  with  Fearghus,  and  I  will  be  witih  our  mother's
brother."

''It  shall  not  be  so;  we  will  leave  it  to  our
mother."

"  Were  I  a  man,"  said  Maobh,  "  I  would  set  the
field  with  my  own  brother."

"  Well,  then,  I  will  be  with  Fearghus,"  said  Lagh
an  Laidh,  ''  and  be  thou  with  Fearghus,  oh  Gonnal !"

Fearghus  went  to  Fionn ;  he  blessed  him  in  calm,
soft  words.  Fionn  blessed  him  in  better  words ;  and
if  no  better,  they  were  no  worse.

*'  I  heard  that  there  was  a  day  of  battle  and  com-
bat between  thyself  and  thy  mother's  brother,"  said
he.

"  That  is  to  be,  and  I  came  to  you  for  help."

''  It  is  but  bold  for  me  to  go  against  thy  mother's
brother,  since  it  was  on  his  land  that  I  got  my  keep.
If  thy  mother's  brother  should  win,  we  shall  get  neither
furrow  nor  clod  of  the  land  of  Erin  as  long  as  we  live.
I  will  do  thus.  I  will  not  strike  a  blow  with  thee,
and  I  will  not  strike  a  blow  against  thee."

Feairghus  went  home  on  the  morrow,  and  they  set
in  order  for  the  battle.  The  king^s  company  was  on
one  side,  and  the  company  of  Fearghus  on  àie  other.
Fearghus  had  no  Gaibgioh  heroes  but  Boinne  Breat  and
his  company.  The  great  Saxon  hero  and  his  company,
and  Lagh  an  Laidh.  Boinne  Breat  drew  out  to  the  skirt
of  the  company ;  he  put  on  his  harness  of  battle  and  hard
combat.   He  set  his  silken  netted  coat  above  his  surety*

*  Cobb,  the  epithet  applied  to  shirt,  is  a  word  which  gives


OONALL.  145

fihìrt ;  a  booming  shield  on  his  left  side ;  how  many
deaths  were  in  his  tanned  sheath !

He  strode  out  on  the  stem  steps  like  a  sudden
blaze;  each  pace  he  put  fix>m  him  was  less  than  a  hill,
and  greater  than  a  knoll  on  the  mountain  side.  He  turned
on  them,  cloven  and  cringing.  Three  ranks  would  he
drive  of  them,  dashing  them  from  their  shields^  to
their  blood  and  their  flesh  in  the  skies.''^  Would  he
not  leave  one  to  tell  the  tale,  or  report  bad  news  ;  to
put  in  a  land  of  holes  or  a  shelf  of  rock.  There  was
one  little  one-eyed  russet  man,  one-eyed,  and  on  one
knee  and  one  handed.  "  Thou  shalt  not  be  to  tell  a
tale  of  me ;"  he  went  and  he  took  his  head  off.  Then
Boinne  Breat  shunned  the  fight,  and  he  took  his
armour  off

"Go  down,  Feaighus,  and  take  off  the  head  of
thy  mother^s  brother,  or  I  will  take  it  off."

Fearghus  went  down,  he  caught  hold  of  his  mother's
brother,  and  he  took  his  head  off  The  smith's  daugh-
ter went  to  the  arms,  and  she  took  them  with  her.

Lagh  an  Laidh  kept  on  his  armour.  When  he  saw
Fearghus  going  to  take  off  the  head  of  his  mother's
brother,  he  took  a  fi&nzy,  Lagh  an  Laidh  went  about
the  hill  to  try  if  he  could  see  Boinne  Breat,  who  was
unarmed.  Boinne  Breat  thought  that  man  was  drunk
with  battle.  He  thought  that  he  would  turn  on  the
other  side  of  the  hill  to  try  if  he  could  come  to  his
own  place.  Lagh  an  Laidh  turned  on  the  other  side
against  him.  He  thought  to  turn  again  to  try  if  the
battle  frenzy  would  abate.     The  third  time  he  said  he

the  meaning  of  greatness  or  excess ;  and  in  corrarij  means  an
iron  weapon,  or  a  sickle.    *' A  shirt  of  armour/'

*  This  passage  is  common ;  I  am  not  certain  that  it  is  cor-
rectly rendered.

VOL.  II.  L


146  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

would  not  turn  for  all  who  were  in  Albuin,  or  Einnn,
or  SassiUL  '*  It  is  strange  thou,  man,  that  wert
with  me  throughout  the  battle,  to  be  against  me  f "  I
wiU  not  believe  but  that  thou  hast  taken  the  drunken-
ness of  battle,"  said  Boinne  Breat.

"  I  am  quite  beside  myself."

"  Well,  then,"  said  he,  "  though  I  am  unarmed,  and
thou  under  arms,  remember  that  thou  art  no  more  to
me  than  what  I  can  hold  between  these  two  fingers."

"  I  will  not  be  a  traitor  to  thee,  there  behind  thee
are  three  of  the  best  heroes  in  Albuin,  or  Eirinn,  or
Sassun."

He  gave  a  turn  to  see  the  three  heroes,  and  when
he  turned  Lagh  an  Laidh  struck  off  his  head.

"  My  torture,"  said  Fearghus,  "  I  had  rather  my
own  head  were  there.  An  Eireannach  is  not  to  be
taken  at  his  word  as  long  as  a  man  shall  live.  It  is  a
stone  in  thy  shoe  every  day  for  ever,  and  a  pinch  of  the
land  of  Eirinn  thou  shalt  not  have."

Lagh  an  Laidh  went  away  and  he  went  to  the  moun-
tain. He  made  a  castle  for  himself  there,  and  he
stayed  in  it

The  smith's  daughter  came  on  well  till  she  bore  a
babe-son.  She  gave  him  the  name  of  Conal  Mac
Eigh  Eirinn.  She  nourished  him  well,  and  right  well.
When  speech  came  and  he  could  walk  well,  she  took
him  with  her  on  a  wet  misty  day  to  the  mountain
amongst  high  moors  and  forests.  She  left  him  there
astray  to  make  out  a  way  for  himself,  and  she  went
home.

He  did  not  know  in  the  world  what  he  should  do,
as  he  did  not  know  where  to  go,  but  he  found  a  finger
of  a  road.  He  followed  the  road.  What  should  he
see  but  a  little  hut  at  the  evening  of  the  day  at  the
wayside.    He  went  into  the  hut  :  there  was  no  man


^ip^Mr^^p^j»^^o»^«gj^^p^— 1 1  ■ .  I    mm


CX)NALL.  147

mthin :  lie  let  himself  down  at  the  fiie-side.  Theie
he  was  till  a  woman  came  at  the  end  of  the  night,  and
she  had  six  sheep.  She  saw  a  great  slip  of  a  man  be-
side the  file,  who  seemed  to  be  a  fool.  She  took  great
wonder  when  she  saw  him,  and  she  said  that  he  had
better  go  out  of  that,  and  go  down  to  the  king^s  honse,
and  that  he  would  get  something  amongst  the  servants
in  the  MtcheiL  He  said  he  would  not  go,  but  if  she
would  give  him  something  that  he  might  eat,  that  he
would  go  to  herd  the  sheep  for  herself.  What  should
be  the  name  of  the  woman  but  Caomhaq  Gentle.  "  If
I  thought  that,  I  would  give  thee  meat  and  drink,"
said  sha  On  the  morrow  he  went  away  with  the
sheep.  *^  I  have  not  a  bite  of  grass  for  them,"  said  she,
"  but  a  road ;  and  thou  shalt  keep  them  at  the  edge  of
the  road,  and  thou  shalt  not  let  them  off  it."

At  the  time  of  night  he  came  home  with  them  ;  on
the  morrow  he  went  away  with  the  sheep.  There
were  near  to  the  place  where  he  was  with  them  three
fields  of  wheat  that  belonged  to  three  gentlemen.  The
sheep  were  wearing  him  out  He  went  and  he  levelled
the  dyke,  and  he  let  them  in  from  one  to  the  other  till
they  had  eaten  the  three  fields.  On  a  day  of  days,  the
three  gentlemen  gathered.  When  they  came,  he  had
let  the  fields  be  eaten  by  the  sheep.

"  Who  art  thou  ?     Thou  hast  eaten  the  fields  Ì "

"  It  was  not  I  that  ate  them  at  all ;  it  was  the
sheep  that  ate  them."

"  We  will  not  be  talking  to  him  at  all ;  he  is  but
a  fooL  We  will  reach  Caomhag  to  see  if  the  sheep  are
hers."

They  reached  Caomhag.  They  took  her  with  them
to  the  court  This  was  the  first  court  that  Fearghus
had  made  after  he  got  the  crown

The  kings  had  a  heritage  at  that  time.     When


1 48  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

they  did  not  know  how  to  split  justice  properly,  the
jn(^ment-seat  would  begin  to  kick,  and  the  king's  neck
would  take  a  twist  when  he  did  not  do  justice  as  he
ought

"  I  can  make  nothing  of  it,"  said  the  king,  ^'but
that  they  should  have  the  tooth  that  did  the  damage."

The  judgment-seat  began  to  kick,  and  the  king's
neck  took  a  turn.  "  Come  here  one  of  you  and  loose
me;  try  if  you  can  do  justice  better  than  that"
Though  there  were  thousands  within,  none  would  go  in
the  king's  place.  They  would  not  give  the  king  such
bad  respect,  as  that  any  one  of  them  should  go  before
him.

"  Is  there  a  man  that  will  loose  me  ? "

"  There  is  not,  unless  the  herd  of  Caomhag  himself
will  loose  thee."

Gaomhag's  herd  was  set  down.

^'  Loose  for  me,  my  little  hero,  and  do  justice  as  it
should  (be  done),  and  let  me  out  of  this."

"  (Nor)  right  nor  justice  will  I  do  before  I  get  some-
thing that  I  may  eat."

Then  he  got  something  which  he  ate.

"What  justice  didst  thou  do  thyself? "  said  he.

"  I  did  but  (doom)  the  tooth  that  did  the  damage
to  be  theirs."

"  What  was  in  the  way  that  thou  didst  not  give
death  to  Caomhag?  This  is  what  I  would  do  : —
Caomhag  has  six  sheep,  and  though  the  six  sheep  were
taken  from  her,  they  would  not  pay  the  gentlemen.
Coamhag  will  have  six  lambs,  the  gentlemen  shall  have
the  six  lambs,  and  she  herself  shall  have  the  sheep  to
keep."

The  turn  went  out  of  the  king's  neck.  He  went
away,  and  they  did  not  ask  who  he  was,  and  he  got  no
skaitL


GONALL.  149

There  was  another  gentlemaii,  and  he  had  a  horse,
and  he  sent  him  to  a  smithy  to  he  shod.  The  smith
had  a  young  son  and  a  nurse  under  the  child.  What
should  it  be  but  a  fine  day,  and  it  was  without  that  the
horse  was  being  shod,  and  she  never  saw  a  horse  shod
before ;  and  she  went  out  to  see  the  shoeing  of  the
horse.  She  sat  opposite  to  the  horse,  and  he  took  the
nail  and  the  shoe,  and  he  did  not  hit  the  hoof  with  the
nail  but  he  put  it  in  the  flesh,  and  the  horse  struck  the
child,  and  drove  the  cup  of  his  head  off  They  had
but  to  go  to  justice  again  to  the  king,  and  the  justice
the  king  made  for  them  was,  that  the  leg  should  be
taken  off  the  horse.  The  judgment-seat  begem  to  kick
again,  and  the  king's  neck  took  a  tvòst  The  herd  of
Caomhag  was  there,  and  they  asked  him  to  loose  the
king.  He  said  that  he  would  not  do  a  thing  till  he
should  flrst  get  something  to  eat

He  got  that.     He  went  where  the  Mng  was.

"  What  law  didst  thou  make  Ì "

"  The  leg  to  be  taken  off  the  horse."

"  That  will  not  pay  the  smith.  Send  hither  to  me
the  groom  that  broke  the  horse,  and  the  gentleman  to
whom  he  belongs.      Send  over  here  the  smith  and  the


nurse."


The  gentleman  and  the  groom  came.

"  Well  then,  my  gentleman,  didst  thou  make  this
groom  break  this  horse  as  he  should  ?  "

The  groom  said  that  he  had  done  that  as  well  as  he
knew  (how  to  do  it).

"  "No  more  could  be  asked  of  thee.  Well,  smith,
didst  thou  give  an  order  to  the  nurse  to  stay  within
without  coming  out  of  her  chamber  ?  "

"I  did  not  give  it,"  said  the  smith,  "but  (she
might  do)  as  she  chose  herself."

"My  gentleman,"  said  he,   "since  thou  art  best


150  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

kept,  I  will  put  a  third  of  the  euug  of  the  smith's  son
on  thee,  and  another  third  on  the  smith  himself,  because
he  did  not  measure  the  nail  before  he  put  it  to  use,
and  another  third  on  the  nurse  and  the  groom  because
she  did  not  stay  within  in  her  chamber,  and  in  case  he
left  some  word  or  other  untaught  to  the  horse."

The  gentleman  went  away  and  the  smith;  the
judgment-seat  stopped,  and  she  had  n't  a  kick ;  the
turn  came  out  of  the  king's  neck,  and  they  let  him  go
as  usual

Said  the  king — "K  he  has  travelled  over  the
universe  and  the  world,  there  is  a  drop  of  king's  bloed
in  that  lad ;  he  could  not  split  the  law  so  well  as  that
if  it  were  not  in  him.  Let  the  three  best  heroes  I  have
go,  and  let  them  bring  me  his  head.*'

They  went  after  him.  He  gave  a  glance  from  him
and  what  should  he  see  coming  but  they.  They  came
where  he  was.  "  Where  are  you  going  ?  " — "  We  are
going  to  kill  thyself.     The  king  sent  us  to  thee."

"  Well,  then,  that  was  but  a  word  that  came  into
his  mouth,  and  it  is  not  worth  your  while  to  kill  me."

"  He  is  but  a  fool,"  said  they.

"  Since  he  sent  you  to  kill  me,  why  don't  you  kill
me?"

"Wilt  thou  thyself  kiU  thyself  my  Uttle  hero ?  "
said  thev.

«  How  shaU  I  kiU  myself  ?  "

**  Here's  for  thee  a  sword  and  strike  it  on  thee
about  the  neck,  and  cast  the  head  off  thyself,"  said
they.

He  seized  on  the  sword,  and  gave  it  a  twirl  in  his
fist     "  FaU  to  killing  thyself  my  Httle  hero."

"  Begone,"  said  he,  "  and  return  home,  and  do  not
hide  from  the  king  that  you  did  not  kill  me."

"  Well,  then,  give  me  the  sword,"  said  one  of  them.


CONALL.  I  5  I

"  I  will  not  give  it ;  there  are  not  in  Erin  as  many
as  will  take  it  from  my  fist,"  said  he.

They  went  and  they  returned  home.  As  he  was
going  hy  himself,  he  said,  "  I  was  not  bom  without  a
mother,  and  I  was  not  begotten  without  a  father.  I
have  no  mind  (of)  ever  coming  to  Erin,  and  I  know
that  it  was  in  Erin  I  was  bom.  I  will  not  leave  a
house  in  which  there  is  smoke  or  fire  in  Erin  till  I
know  who  I  (am)."

He  went  to  the  lubhar.  What  was  it  but  a  fine
warm  day.  Whom  did  he  see  but  his  mother  washing.
He  was  coming  to  a  sort  of  understanding,  so  that  he
was  thinking  that  it  was  his  mother  who  was  there.
He  went  and  he  went  behind  her,  and  he  put  his  hand
on  her  breast.  "  Indeed,"  said  he,  "  a  foster  son  of  thy
light  breast  am  I."  She  gave  her  head  a  toss.  "  Thy
like  of  a  tarlaid  drudge,  I  never  had  as  a  son  or  a  foster
son." — "My  left  hand  is  behind  thy  head,  and  a
sword  in  my  right  hand,  and  I  will  strike  off  thy  head
unless  thou  tell  me  who  I  am." — '*  Still  be  thy  hand,
Conall,  son  of  the  king  of  Erin."

"  I  knew  myself  I  was  that,  and  that  there  was
a  drop  of  the  blood  of  a  king's  son  in  me  ;  but  who
kiUed  my  father  ?  "

"Feaighus  killed  him;  and  a  loss  as  great  as
thy  father  was  slain  on  the  same  day — ^that  was
Boinne  Breat,  son  of  the  king  of  Alba."

"  Who  slew  Boinne  Breat  Ì "— "  It  is  a  brother  of
Fearghus,  whom  they  call  Lagh  an  LaidL"

"  And  where  is  that  man  dwelling  ?"

"He  could  not  get  a  bit  on  the  land  of  Erin
when  once  he  had  slain  Boinne  Breat ;  he  went
to   the   hills,   and   he   made   him   a   ^còs'^   in  the

*  CbSf  a  hollow  or  cave ;  bere  a  kind  of  dwelling  scooped  ont
in  the  side  of  a  hill.


152  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

forest,  amongst  '  uille  biaste,*  monsters,  and  untamed
creatures."

"  Who  kept  my  father's  arms  ?  "— "  It  is  I."

"  Gro  fetch  them,  and  bring  them  hither  to  me."
She  brought  fchem.

He  went  and  put  the  arms  on  him,  and  they  became
him  as  well  as  though  they  had  been  made  for  himself.

^'  I  eat  not  a  bit,  and  I  drink  not  a  draught,  and  I
make  no  stop  but  this  night,  until  I  reach  where  that
man  is,  wheresoever  he  may  be."

He  passed  that  night  where  he  was.  In  the  morn-
ing, on  the  morrow  he  went  away ;  he  went  on  till
there  was  black  upon  his  soles  and  holes  in  his  shoes.
The  white  clouds  of  day  were  going,  and  the  black
clouds  of  night  coming,  and  without  his  finding  a  place
of  staying  or  rest  for  him.  There  he  saw  a  great  wood.
He  made  a  "  cos,*'  in  one  of  the  trees  above  in  which
he  might  stay  that  night.  In  the  morning,  on  the
morrow  he  cast  a  glance  from  him.  What  should  he
see  but  the  very  uile  hheist,  whose  like  was  never  seen
under  the  sun,  stretched  without  clothing,  without
foot  coverings,  or  head  covering,  hair  and  beard  gone
over  him.  He  thought,  though  he  should  go  down,
that  he  could  not  do  for  him.  He  put  an  arrow  in  a
**  crois^^  and  he  "  fired  "  at  him.  He  struck  him  with
it  on  the  right  fore-arm,  and  the  one  who  was  below
gave  a  start  "  Move  not  a  sinew  of  thy  sinews,  nor  a
vein  of  thy  veins,  nor  a  bit  of  thy  flesh,  nor  a  hair  of
thy  locks,  till  thou  promise  to  see  me  a  king  over  Erin,
or  I  will  send  down  of  slender  oaken  darts  enough
to  sew  thee  to  the  earth."  The  uile  bheist  did
not  give  him  yielding  for  that  He  went  and  he  fired
again,  and  he  struck  him  in  the  left  fore-arm.  "  Did  I
not  tell  thee  before,  not  to  stir  a  vein  of  thy  veins  nor
a  bit  of  thy  flesh,  nor  a  hair  of  thy  locks  till  thou


CONALL.  153

shouldst  promise  to  see  me  king  over  Erin."—"  Come
down  then,  and  I  will  see  thyself  or  myself  that  before
this  time  to  morrow  night."     He  came  down.

"  If  I  had  known  that  it  was  thy  like  of  a  drudge
that  should  dictate  thus  to  me,  I  would  not  do  it  for
thee  for  anything ;  but  since  I  promised  thee  I  will
do  it,  and  we  will  be  going."

They  went  to  the  palace  of  the  king.  They  shouted
Battle  or  Combat  to  be  sent  out,  or  else  the  head  of
Fearghus,  or  himself  a  captive.

Battle  and  combat  they  should  get,  and  not  his
head  at  all,  and  they  could  not  get  himself  a  captive.

There  were  sent  out  four  hundred  swift  heroes,  four
hundred  ftdl  heroes,  and  four  hundred  strong  heroes.

They  began  at  them.  The  one  could  not  put  from
the  other^s  hand  as  they  were  killed.

They  shouted  battle  or  combat  again,  or  else  the
head  of  Fearghus  to  be  sent  out,  or  himself  a  captive.

"  It  is  battle  and  combat  thou  shalt  have,  and  not
at  all  my  head,  and  no  more  shalt  thou  get  myself  a
captive."

There  were  sent  out  twelve  hundred  swift  heroes,
twelve  hundred  full  heroes,  and  twelve  hundred  stout
heroes.

The  one  could  not  put  from  the  other's  hand  as  they
killed  of  them.

They  shouted  battle  and  combat,  or  else  the  head
of  Fearghus,  or  himself  a  captive.

Battle  and  combat  they  should  have,  and  not  the
head  of  Fearghus  at  all,  nor  himseK  a  captive.

There  were  sent  out  four  hundred  score  to  them.
The  one  could  not  put  from  the  other  as  they  killed.

They  shouted  battle  and  combat

*'  Those  who  are  without,"  said  Fearghus,  "  are  so
hard  (to  please)  that  they  will  take  but  my  head,  and


154  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

unless  they  get  (it)  they  will  kill  all  there  are  in  Erin
and  myself  after  them.  Take  one  of  yon  a  head  from
one  of  those  who  were  slain,  and  when  Lagh  an  Laidh
comes  and  asks  my  head,  or  myself  a  captive,  give  it  to
him,  and  he  will  tibink  it  is  my  head.'*

The  head  was  given  to  Lagh  an  Laidh,  He  went
where  Conall  was  with  it.

"  What  hast  thou  there  Ì  "  said  ConaE

"  The  head  of  Fearghus."

"  That  is  not  the  head  of  Fearghus  yet.  I  saw  him
a  shorter  (time)  than  thyself,  but  turn  and  bring  hither
to  me  the  head  of  Fearghus,"

Lagh  an  Laidh  returned.

^^  Let  another  go  to  meet  him  in  the  king's  stead,  and
say  that  it  is  his  head  he  shaU  get,  not  himself  a  captive.

ThÌ3  one  went  to  meet  Lagh  an  Laidh.  He  seized
him  and  took  the  head  out  of  his  neck.

He  reached  ConalL  "What  hast  thou  there?"
— *'  The  head  of  Fearghus."

"  That  is  not  the  head  of  Fearghus  yet ;  turn  and
bring  to  me  the  head  of  Fearghus."

Lagh  an  Laidh  returned.

"The  one  who  is  without  is  so  watchful,  and  the
other  is  so  blind,  that  there  is  no  man  in  Erin  but  they
will  kill  unless  they  get  myself."

"Where  art  thou  going,  Lagh  an  Laidh T'  said
Fearghus.

'  I  am  going  to  seek  thy  head,  or  thyself  as  a  captive."
It's  my  head  thou  shalt  get,  and  not  myself  as
a  captive;  but  what  kindness  art  thou  giving  thy
brother  Ì

"  The  kindness  that  thou  gavest  thyself  to  me,  I
will  give  it  to  thee."

He  took  the  head  out  of  his  neck,  and  he  took  it
with  him.     He  came  where  Conall  was.


CON  ALL.  155

**  What  hast  thou  there?"  — "The  head  of  Fear-
ghns."— "  It  is  not"—"  Truly  it  ia"— "  Let  me  see  it."

He  gave  it  to  him.  He  drew  it,  aud  he  struck
him  with  it,  and  he  made  two  heads  of  the  one.  Then
they  began  at  each  other.

They  would  make  a  hog  on  the  rock,  and  a  rock  on
the  bog.  In  the  place  where  the  least  they  would  sink,
they  would  sink  to  the  knees,  in  the  place  where  the
most  they  would  sink,  they  would  sink  to  the  eyes.

Conall  thought  it  would  be  ill  for  him  to  f«dl  after
he  had  got  so  near  the  matter.

He  drew  his  sword,  and  he  threw  the  head  off
Lagh  an  LaidL

"  Now  I  am  king  over  Erin,  as  I  myself  had  a  right
to  be."

He  took  his  mother  and  her  father  from  the  lubhar,
and  took  them  to  the  palace ;  and  his  race  were  in  it
till  the  ninth  knee.  The  last  one  was  choked,  as  a  babe,
with  a  splinter  of  bone  that  went  crosswise  into  his
throat,  and  another  tribe  came  in  on  Eibinn.


CONALL.

Bha  sean  righ  roimhe  so  ann  an  Eirinn  agoB  bha  tritiir  mac  aig  piuthar
dha.  fie  'm  fear  a  bu  shine  dhiu  Fearghns,  am  fear  a  bu  mhiadhonaicbe
Lagh  an  Làigh,  *s  am  fear  a  V  òige  ConaU.  Smaointich  e  gon  dian-
adh  e  oighre  do  'n  fhear  a  bu  shine  Fearghos.  Thng  e  sgoil  mhic
righ  agns  ridire  dha,  agus  nnr  a  bha  e  boidheach  sgoil  agus  ionnsach-
aidh  thng  e  dhachaidh  e  do  'n  phUleas.  Bha  end  an  so  anns  a*
phaQeas.  Urs*  an  righ, "  Chnir  mi  seachad  a'  bhliadhna  so  go  math.
Tha  ceann  na  bliadhna  nis  a'  tighinn  's  tha  trioblaid  agns  chram  a*
tigh  'n  orm  leatha."  "  D^  'n  trioblaid  na  'n  chram  a  tha  tigh  'n  ort  ?"
nrs'  am  fear  òg.  "  Tha  tnath  na  duthcha  tigh  *n  a  chnnndas  riom  an
dingh."  **  Cha  mig  thn  leas  chram  a  bhi  ort  'tha  e  air  eubhach  a
mach  gor  misr'  an  t-oigh  òg  's  air  a  chur  sios  ann  am  paipeirean  's  an


1 56  WUST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

litrichean  anns  gach  oelffii  de  *n  rioghachd.  Togaidh  mise  cauteal
bòidheach  air  bialthaobh  a'  phkileas  dnit.  Gheibh  mi  saoir  agos
clachairean  agos  goibfanean  gos  a'  chaisteal  sin  a  thogaiL"  "An  e  sin
amaointinn  a  th'  agad  a  mhic  mo  pbeathar  "  an'  an  BIgh,  **  cha  robh
oeart  na  coir  agad  air  an  riouhachd  Ihaotainn  mar  an  tograinn  flùn
a  toirt  dnit  le  m*  thoil  fhin.  Cha  'n  fhaic  thusa  laimhseachadh  Eirinn
agad  gos  an  d'  tMid  mise  an  toiseach  fo  'n  ùir."  <*  Bidh  latha  blèdr
agns  batailt  ann  ma  'n  lig  mise  sin  air  aghaidb,'*  urs'  am  fear  òg.

Dh'  fhalbh  e  agns  shebl  e  go  mig  Alba.  Ghaireadh  brath  a  snas
thun  righ  Alba  gon  robh  righ  bg  Eirinn  air  tigh  'n  go  mig  Alba  g'a
choimhead.  Thngadh  snas  air  bharraibh  bas  e.  Chuireadh  biadh
an  kit*  a  chaithidh,  deoch  an  ait  a  h-61,  agns  oeòl  an  ait'  èisdeachd.
Bha  end  a'  caitheadh  na  cairin  agns  na  cnideachd.

''Ai^h  òg  Eirinn,"  ursa  righ  Alba,  *' cha  n' ann  gon  cheann
gnothaich  a  tbkinig  thnsa  go  mig  Alba.'*  "  Cha  bumhath  learn  fios
mo  ghnothaich  a  ligeil  a  mach  gos  am  biodh  fhios'am  am  faighinn  an
toiseach  e."  **  Dad  's  am  biih  a  th'  agamsa  gheibh  thns*  e,  chionn
na'm  bithinn  aig  iarraidh  cuideachaidh  cha  Inghaide  gon  rachainn  a
t*  ionnsnidh-fl^  airson  f  haotainn."  "  Facal  a  thàinig  ann  an  doilgheas
eadar  mis'  agns  brath  'r  mo  mhàthar."  **  Bha  e  air  enbhach  a  mach  go
*m  bu  mhi  righ  Eirinn;  's  thuirt  e  riam  nach  biodh  gnothach  agam  ri
ni  gos  an  rachadh  plochd  airsan  an  toiseach.  Tha  toil  agam  mo
choir  a  sheasamh  agns  cnideachadh  fhaotainn  naitse."  **  Bheir  mise
sin  dnit,"  ars'  an  Righ,  "  tri  chiad  Ibgh  ghaisgeach,  tri  chiad  trenn-
ghoisgeach,  agns  tri  chiad  lànghabgeach,  's  cha  don'  an  cnideachadh
sin."  **  Tha  mise  gon  cheannard  as  an  cionn,  's  tha  mi  cho  dona 's  a
bha  mi  roimhid;  ach  tha  iarrtas  beageil'  agam,  agusna  "m  faighinn  e
bhithinn  deònach  air  a  ligeil  a  mach."  "  Rud  sam  bith  a  th'  agamsa,"
ars'  an  Righ,  *'  's  is  urra  mi  dealachadh  ris  gheibh  thn  e,  ach  rad
nach  'eil  agam  cha  n'  urra  mi  'thoirt  dnit ;  ach  lig  amach  do  chainnt  's
gheibh  thn  e."  **  'Se  sin  Boinne  Breat  do  mbac  air  ann  oeann."  "  Mo
ghonadh  dhnit,  na  'm  bithinn  gon  a  ghealltainn  dnit  cha  n'  fhaigheadli
thn  e ;  ach  cha  do  ragadh  an  Albainn,  na  'n  Eirinn,  na'n  Sasnnn,  na
'n  aon  kite  na  gheibheadh  bnaidh  air  mo  mhacsa,  ach  fantainn  aig
ceartas ;  mar  an  d'  thig  mo  mhacs'  air  ais  mar  a  dh'  fhalbh  e  cha  'n
'eil  facal  Eireannaich  ri  ghabhail  tnillidh,  chionn  's  ann  am  foill
a  thigt'  air."

Dh'  fhalbh  end  an  la  'r  na  mhkireach  's  sheòl  end  'ionnsnidh  righ
Shasuinn.  Chaidh  brath  snas  go  righ  Shasuinn  gon  robh  righ  bg
Eirinn  an  d^igh  tigh  *n  do  'n  kite.  Ghabh  righ  Shasuinn  'na  chomh-
dhail  's  thngadh  snas  air  bharraibh  bas  e.  Thogadh  ceòl  's  leagadh
bron  ann  am  pkileas  righ  Shasuinn.  Chuireadh  biadh  an  kit'  a  chaith-


GONALL.  157

eadh,  deoch  an  Ut'  a  h^l,  agns  oebl  an  ait*  èisdeachd.    Bha  end  a*
caitheadh  na  euirm  's  na  coideachd  le  ai^hear  *b  le  tojlinntinn.

**  A  righ  òg  Eirinn,"  uisa  righ  Shaaninn,  "  cha  n*  anngon  cheann
gnothaich  a  ihàimg  Urn  'n  so."  **  Fhnair  mise  sgoil  mhic  righ  agas
ridire.  Thug  brath  'r  mo  mhhthar  dachaidh  mi  Th^isich  e  air
hmidhiim  mo  thnath  na  dnthcha  'a  mo  mhuinntir  na  rioghachd,  gon
robh  caram  agns  trioblaid  air,  's  gom  b*  fhearr  Ids  nach  d'  tbàinìg
ceann  nh  bliadhn'  idir.  Ursa  mise  ris  togaidh  mise  paileas  duit,  air
alt 's  uach  bi  agad  ach  t*  aodann  a  nigheadb  's  do  chasan  a  shineadh
ann  a*d*  bhr^^.  Urs*  esan,  **A  mhic  mo  pheathar  cha  robh  coir  agad
air  an  rioghachd,  's  cha  'n  fhaigh  thn  i,  gos  an  d'  theid  plochd  ormsa,
aona  choid  a  dheoin  na  dh'  aindeoin."  Ursa  mi  ria^  "  fiidh  latha  bUdr
agns  batailt  eadar  mis'  agn^  thnsa  ma  'm  bi  chilis  mar  sin."  Dh'
fhalbh  mi,  ghabh  mi  go  long,  thug  mi  leam  sgioba,  agus  sheòl  mi  go
mig  Alba.  Bhinig  mi  Alba,  *8  flmair  mi  tri  chiad  Ihghghaisgeadi,
tri  chiad  trennghaisgeach,  agns  tri  chiad  Iknghaisgeacb.  l^is  thàinig
mi 't  *ionnsmdhsa  fiach  de  'n  cnideachadh  a  bheir  thn  dhomh.''  **  Bheir
mise  dhnit  urad  eile  agus  gaisgeach  air  an  ceann,"  ursa  Righ
Shassmnn.

Dh'  fhalbh  end  agns  shebl  end  go  Eirion.  Chaidh  eud  air  ùr  sag
Garraig  an  £irinn  *s  tha  Carraig  Fhearghuis  mar  ainn  air  a'  charraig
sin  fhathasd.  Rhinig  e  'n  righ.  '*A  bhrath  'r  mo  mhàthar  a'  bheil  thn
nis  deas."  **  Mata  Fhearghuis  gad  a  thuirt  mise  siud  shaoil  mi  oach
gabhadh  thn  cormich ;  ach  tha  mise  gon  mo  chuid  sluaigh  achruinn-
eacbadh  fhathasd."  **  Cha  fhreagair  sin  dorohsa,  tha  Eirinn  agadsa
fod'  smachd,  tha  mise  *n  so  le  m'  dhaoine  's  cha  'n  'eil  hite,  na  biadh,
na  deoch  agam  dhaibh."  <*  U ! "  urs'  an  righ,  <*  Fhearguis  tha  taighean
taisg  Eirinn  fosgailte  fodhad,  agus  faibhaidh  mise  *8  cruinnichidh  mi
mo  chuid  sinaigh.

Dh'  fhalbh  an  righ,  chaidh  ma  "n  cuairt  Eirinn.  Thàinig  e  go
Idte  ris  an  canadh  end  an  t-Iubhar.  Cha  robh  ach  aon  duine  'san
lubhar  ris  an  canadh  eud  Goibhiean  Gobha.  Smaointich  e  gabhail  a
stigh  's  am  pathadh  air,  's  gon  caisgeadh  e  phathadh  's  gon  ligeadh  e
treis  analach.  Ghabh  e  stigh.  Cha  robh  stigh  ach  nigbean  a*  ghobha.
Thug  i  a  'ionnsuidh  cathair  air  an  suidheadh  e.  Dh'  iarr  e  deoch.
Cha  robh  fios  aig  nighean  a'  ghobha  d^  dhianadh  i.  Cha  robh  aig  a'
ghobh  ach  an  aon  mhart  ris  an  abradh  end  a'  Ghlas  Ghoibhiean.
Leis  a'  chòm  a  bh'  aige  ri  bainne  na  bh,  's  tri  uairean  's  an  latha  a
rachte  fo  'n  mhart.  Tri  uairean  'san  latha  bhiodh  pathadh  airsan,  's
dh'  òladh  e  'n  com  air  a  h-uile  siubhal.  Mar  am  biodh  an  corn  Ian  aig
a  nigbinn  cha  robh  ri  dol  as  a  chionn  aice.  Bha  eagal  urra,  nur  a  dh'
iarr  an  righ  deoch,  mur  am  biodh  an  corn  Ikn  aice  gom  biodh  an  ceann


I$S  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

air  a  thoirt  dith.  'de  smaointich  i  gom  bn  choir  an  com  a  chur  sat
bialthaobh  an  rigb  codhiu.  Thug  i  nuas  an  com  'a  choir  i  air  a
bhialthaobh  e.  Dh'  ò\  e  deoch,  'a  thug  e  'n  ceathramh  cuid  aa,  'a  dh'
fhag  e  tri  earrannan  ann.  *'  B'  fhearr  learn  aibh  a  'thoirt  aa  go  1^  na
fliàgail.  Thug  m'  athair  mionnan  mar  am  bi  'n  corn  Ian  nach  eil
agam  ri  dol  go  chionn."  *'  Mata,"  ara'  an  righ,  **  'a  geaa  de  m'  gheaaana'
an  com  fhàgail  cho  Ian  *aa  bha  e  roimhid/'  Chuir  e  'n  com  air  a'
'  bhord'  bhuail  e  bhaa  air,  'a  chuir  e  dheth  na  bha  aa  cionn  a'  bhainne,  'a
bha  'n  com  Ian.  Man  d'  fhalbh  an  righ  fhuair  e  'n  nighean  da  fhin.
"  Tha  thu  falbh  a  righ  Eirinn  'a  miae  an  deigh  mo  mhaalachaidh ;  àè
tha  thu  f  àgail  agam?"  **  Bheireamaa  ain  duit  mU'  aa  gach  dath,  mil'  aa
gach  aebraa,  mil'  aa  gach  creutair."  '<  D4  ni  miae  deth  ain,  'a  nach
fhaigh  mi  'ahalann  an  Eirinn  na  ahaiUeaa  ain  ?'*  "  Bheiream  dhuit
glinn  a'a  monaidh  a  bheathaicheaa  eud  o  bhiiadhna  go  bliadhna."  **  D4
ni  miae  dheth  ain  ?  ma  mharbhaa  Fearghua  aibhse  'mkireach  bheir  e
uam  e,  o  'n  nach  robh  e  agam  le  agriobhadh  agua  boinne  fala  'ga
cheanghal.**  **  Tha  orma'  a  nochd  cabhag,  ach  theirig  am  màireach  do
'n  champ  go  Cnocmaol  nam  Muc,"  ara'  an  righ,  agua  dh'  fhàg  e  beann-
achd  aice.  Thkinig  a  h-athair.  **  Bhuaia  e,  bhuaia  e  nighean,  **  Cha  'n
'eil  dhil'  am  fhin  nach  robh  arbhalach  ga  d'  choimhead  an  ao  an
diagh."  **  C^mur  a  tha  thu  'g  aithneachadh  ain?"  "  Bha  raag  maull
maighdinn  agad  nur  a  chaidh  mi  mach;  tha  rasg  briag  mnà  agad  an
dràsd."  "  Co  b'  fhearr  leat  a  bhi  ann  ?"  *'  Cha  'n  fhaca  mi  duine  riabh
a  b'  fhearr  leam  a  bhi  ana  na  righ  Eirinn."  *'  Mata  'a  e  bh'  ann.
Dh'  fhkg  e  agam  mil'  aa  gach  dath,  mil'  aa  gach  aebraa,  mil'  aa  gach
creutair.  De,  uraa  miae,  ni  miae  dhiu,  'a  nach  fhaigh  mi  de  ahalann
an  Eirinn  na  ahaUIeaa  eud  ?  Ura'  eaan,  '*  Bheiream  duit  glinn  agua
monaidhean  a  bheathaicheaa  eud  o  bhiiadhna  go  bliadhna."  De  ni  mi
ma  mharbhaa  Fearghua  aibhae,  cha  'n  fhaigh  mi  ain?  Thuirt  e  rium
gom  faighinn  sgiiobhadh  'a  boinne  da  fhuil  fhin  'ga  cheanghal."

Chaidil  eud  an  oidhche  ain  mar  a  bha  eud.  Ma  bu  mhoch  a  thainig
an  latha  bu  mhoiche  na  ain  a  dh'  ^irìdh  an  gobha.  *'  Thalia  'nighean,
bitheamaid  a'  falbh."  Dh'  fhalbh  i  fhin  'a  an  gobha  'a  ràmig  eud  an
righ  anna  a'  champ.  '<  Nach  robh  thu  anna  an  lubhar  an  d^  ?"  ura'  an
gobha  ria  an  righ.  **  Bha."  **  Bheil  cuimhn'  agad  air  do  bhriathran
ria  an  nighinn  ao.  ^  Tha,  ach  eha  bhi  'm  blar  ann  ^oa  am  màireach,
bheir  mi  dhuit  mar  a  thuirt  mi  ria  an  nighinn  ach  go  fag  thu  iae."
Fhuair  an  gobha  aiud  agua  dh'  fhalbh  e.

An  oidhche  ain,  Nur  a  bha  iae  treia  na  cadal,  dhhiag  i,  'a  i  'n
dèlgh  aislig  fhaicinn.  «*  A'  bheil  thu  'd'  dhhagadh  ?  "  "  Tha,  d^  do
ghnothach  domh  ?  "  **  Chunnaic  mi  aialig  an  aiud,  gathar  giubhaia
a'  fka  a  cridh'  an  righ,  fear  a  m'  chridhe  fhin,  'a  eud  a'  anaomadh  'na


OONALL.  159

ch^ile.  **  Sin  leanabh  mic  an  d^gh  a  ghineach  eadar  thus'  a's  mis'
a  nochd."  Ghaidil  end  an  uair  sin,  's  cha  V  fhada  chaidil  end  gos  am
fac  i'n  ath  aislig.  <*A  bbeil  thu  'd'  dhtisgadh  a  righ  Eirinn?  "
"  Tha,  à.4  do  ghnothach  domh  ?  "  «  Chmmaic  mi  aislig  eile,  Fearghus
a'  tigh  'n  a  ntias  *8a  toirt  a*  chinn  *s  na  amhuich  agam  fhin  asam.*'
"  Sin  Fearghus  gam  mharbhadhsa  'sa  toirt  a'  chinn  's  na  amhtdch
asam."  Chaidil  i  lis  agus  chunnaic  i  aislig  eile.  '*  A  bheil  thu  'd*
chadal  a  righ  Eirinn?"  ''Cha  'n  *eil,  d^  do  ghnothach  domh  an
drasd  ?  "  **  Chunnaic  mi  Eirinn,  o  thaobh  go  taobh  agus  o  cheann
go  ceann,  air  a  chomhdach  le  sguaban  eòm'  agus  coirce ;  thàinig  oiteag
shoirbheis  0  *n  ear,  o  'n  iar,  o  'n  tuath ;  sguabadh  air  falbh  a  h-uile
craobh,  's  cha  'n  fhacas  gin  riabh  tuillidh  dhiu."  ^Marbhaidh
Fearghus  mise  's  bheir  e  'n  ceann  's  an  amhach  asam ;  co  luath  's
a  rinn  thusa  riabh  heir  air  mo  chuid  arm,  agus  gl^idh  eud.  Tha
leanabh  mic  air  a  ghineach  eadar  mis'  a's  thusa.  Bheir  thu  doch
as  altram  da,  's  cuiridh  thu  'n  òrdugh  e.  GMidh  na  h-airm.  Nur
a  chi  thu  gom  bi  cainnt  as  comhnadal  aige  cuiridh  tu  air  falbh  e,
feadh  an  t-saoghail,  air  seachran,  gos  am  faigh  e  mach  co  e  fhin.
Gheibh  esan  'na  righ  air  Eirinn,  bidh  a  mhac  *na  righ  air  Eirinn,
bidh  otha  'na  righ  air  Eirinn,  bidh  a  shliochd  na  'n  righrean  air
Eirinn,  gos  an  ruig  an  naoidheamh  glhn.  Bidh  leanabh  air  a  bhreith
do'n  fhear  sin,  thig  tuathanach  a  stigh  le  iasg,  bruichidh  e  'n  t-iasg,
'a  th^id  cnMmh  'na  amhuich,  's  tachdar  e."

Bha  dithisd  mac  eil'  aig  Maobh  (Piuthar  an  righ,  màthair  Fhear-
ghnis)  's  bha  'm  blkr  ri  bhi  ann  a  màireach,  Lagh  an  làidh  agus
GonaU,  agus  'se  Lagh  an  làidh  a  bu  shine.  **  Co  dhiu,"  ursa  Lagh  an
làidh,  a  bhios  sinn  le  brath  'r  ar  mkthar  na  le  Fearghus  ?  "  **  Cha  'n
'eil  fhios  'am ;  ma  bhuidhneas  Bràthair  air  ar  màthar  agus  gom  bi
sinn  le  Fearghus,  's  clach  'nar  bròig  go  brath  'ch  e ;  ach  ma  bhuidh-
neas Fearghus  cuiridh  e  chl  ruinn,  0  'n  a  bha  sinn  air  an  taobh  eiie."
"  Mata  cha  'n  ann  mar  sin  a  bhitheas,  ach  bi  thusa  le  Fearghus,  's
bidh  mise  le  bràthair  ar  màthar."  **  Cha  'n  ann  mur  sin  a  bhitheas,
ligidh  sinn  g'  ar  màthair  e."  ''Na  'm  bithinnsa  'm  fhirionnach,"
ursa  Maobh,  "  bhithinn  a'  cur  a  bhlàir  le  m  bhràthaìr  fhin."  **  Mata
bidh  mis'  aig  Fearghus,"  ursa  Lagh  an  làidh,  's  bi  thus'  aig  Fearghus
a  ChonaUl."

Dh'  fhalbh  Fearghus  'ionnsuidh  Ffainn,  's  bheannaich  e  dha  ann
am  briathran  ciuine,  mine.  Bheannaich  Fionn  da  ann  am  briathran
a  b'  fheàrr ;  mur  am  b'  eud  a  b'  fhelur  cha  b'  eud  a  bu  mhiosa.
'*  Chuala  mi  gon  robh  latha  blkir  agus  batailt  eadar  thu  fhin  agus
bràthair  do  mhàthar,"  ars'  esan.  **  Tha  sinn  ri  bhi  ann  's  thainig
mi  'ur  ionnsuidbsa  airson  cuideachaidh."     *'  Cha  'n  'eil  e  ach  dàna


I  60  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

domhsa  dol  an  aghaidh  bhràthair  do  mhàthar,  's  gur  ann  air  fhearann
a  fhuair  mi  mo  chumail ;  ma  bhuidbneas  bràthair  do  mhàthar  cha  'n
fhaigh  sinn  sgriob  na  plochd  de  dh'  fhearann  Eirinn  a  neas  'a  is  beò
sinn.  'S  e  80  a  ni  mi,  cha  bhoail  mibuille  leat,  's  chabhoail  mi  buille
V  aghaidh."

Chaidh  Fearghus  dachaidh  an  la  'r  na  mhàireach.  Chair  end  an
òrdugh  airson  a'  bhlàir.  Bha  cnideachd  an  righ  air  an  darna  taobh
*s  cnideachd  Fhearghuis  air  an  taobh  eile.  Cha  robh  'ghaisgich  aig
Fearghus  ach  Boinne  Breat  'sa  chuideachd,  an  gàisgeach  mòr  Sasnnn-
ach  's  a  chnideachd,  agns  Lagh  an  làìdh.

Tharminn  Boinne  Breat  a  mach  an  iomall  na  cnideachd.  Chaidh
e  na  chnlaidh  chaih  agns  chmaidh-chomhrag.  Chair  e  'chòtan  sròl
sàoda  air  uachdar  a  chorr-MinC)  sgiath  bhncaideach  air  a  thaobh  cli,
gom  bn  lianar  oideadhar  's  an  tniaill  chairtidh.  Theann  e  mach  air
na  ceumannan  moiteil  mur  Bhoillsgeadh.  Gach  ceom  a  chaireadb  e
uaidhC)  bn  lugh'  e  na  beinn,  'a  bn  mhoth'  e  na  meall-chnoc  aMibhe.
Thionndàidh  e  riatha  go  giogach,  gagach;  tri  dithean  gon  caireadh  e
dhia ;  gan  cailceadh  o  'n  agiathan  g'am  fail  agus  g'am  feoil,  anns  ann
iarmailt ;  nach  fhàgadh  e  fear  innsidh  sgeoil  na  chaitheadh  taairisgeil,
a  char  an  talamh  toll,  na  'n  sgeilpidh  chreag.  Bha  aon  fhear  beag,
cam,  ruadh  ann,  air  leith  shtdl  's  air  leith  ghltin  'a  air  leith  Ikimh.
**  Cha  bhi  thns'  ann  a  dh'  innseadh  sgeoil  ormsa."  Dh'  fhalbh  e  'a  thug
e  'n  ceann  deth.  Dh'  bb  Boinne  Breat  'a  chair  e  dheth  airm.  "  Falbh
sios  Fhearghuis  'a  thoir  an  ceann  de  bhràthair  do  mhàthar  no  bheir
mise  deth  e."  Chaidh  Fearghus  sios,  rug  e  air  bràthair  a  mhàthar  's
thug  e  'n  ceann  deth.  Thug  nighean  a'  ghobha  thun  nan  arm  's  thug
i  leath'  end.  Chum  Lagh  an  làidh  air  a  chuid  armaibh,  nur  a
chunnaic  e  Fearghus  a'  dol  a  thoirt  a'  chinn  de  bhrkthair  a  mhàtfaar.
Ghabh  e  feirg.  Chaidh  Lagh  an  Ikidh  ma  'n  cnairt  a  chnuic  fiach
am  faiceadh  e  Boinne  Breat  's  e  gon  armaibh.  Smaointich  Boinne
Breat  gor  misg  chath  a  ghabh  an  duin'  ud.  Smaointich  e  gon
tilleadh  e  air  an  taobh  eile  de  'n  chnoc  fiach  an  d'  thigeadh  e
go  kite  fhin.  Thiondaidh  Lagh  an  làidh  air  an  taobh  eile
*na  aghaidh.  Smaointich  e  tilleadh  a  i^  fiach  an  traoigheadh  e  'mhire-
'chatha.  An  treas  uair  thuirt  e  nach  tilleadh  e  airson  na  bha  'n
Albainn,  na  'n  Eirinn,  na  'n  Sasann.  **  'S  neònach,  fhir  a  bha  leam
fad  an  lath',  thu  bhi  'm'  aghaidh."  Cha  chreid  mi  nach  misg  chath  a
ghabh  thu  thugad  I "  **  Direach  as  an  aodann  a  tha  mL"  **  Mata,"
urs'  esan,  '*  gad  a  tha  mise  gon  armaibh,  agus  thusa  fo  armaibh,
cuimhnicb  nach  moth'  orm  thu  agus  na  chumas  mi  eadar  an  da  mhiar
sin."  "  Cha  'n  'eil  mi  ri  bhi  'm  brath  foille  dhuit ;  sin  air  do  chùl  an
trinir  ghaisgeach  is  fhearr  an  Albainn,  na  'n  Eirinn,  na'n  Sasunn."


CONALL.  1 6 1

Thug  e  tionndadh  air  a  dh'  fhaicimi  nan  tnoir  ghaisgeach,  agos  nur
a  thionndaidh  e  thug  Lagh  an  lòiàh  an  ceann  deth.  <*  Mo  gbonadh,"
ursa  Fearghos,  **  b'  fhearr  learn  mo  cheann  fhin  a  bhi  ann.  Cha  'n*eil
Eireannach  ri  ghabhail  air  fbacal  a  neas  is  beò  doine  taillidh.  *S
clach  a'd'  bbròig  e  h-uile  latha  go  bràthach,  agus  greim  de  dh'  fhear-
ann  Eirinn  cha  'n  fhaigh  thu.^'

Dh'  fhalbh  Lagh  an  làidh  agus  chaidh  e  'n  bheinn.  Rinn  e  caist-
eal  da  fhin  ann  agus  dh'  fhan  e  ann.  Bha  nighean  a'  ghobha  dgh  'n
air  a  h-aghaidh  go  math  gos  an  d'  rag  i  leanabh  mic.  Thug  i  Conall
mac  righ  Eirinn  mar  cuinn  air.  Bheatbaich  i  go  math  's  go  ro  mhath
e.  Nur  thidnig  càinnt  a's  coiseachd  go  math  dha  thug  i  leath'  e,
latha  bog,  ceòthar,  do  'n  bheinn  feàdh  monaidh  agus  coille.  Dh'  fhkg
i  'n  siud  e  air  seachran,  go  bhi  dianadh  an  rathaid'  dha  fhin,  agus
chaidh  ise  dacbaidh.

Cha  robh  fios  aig  air  an  t-saoghal  de  dhianadh  e,  gon  fhios  aige
c'a  'n  rachadh  e,  ach  fhuair  e  miar  de  rathad  mòr,  's  lean  e  'n  rathad.
D4  chunnaic  e  ach  bothan  beag,  feasgar  de  latha,  taobh  an  rathaid
mhòir.  Ghabh  e  stigh  do  'n  bhothan.  Cha  robh  duine  stigh  ann.
Lig  e  e  fhin,  ri  taobh  an  teine,  sios,  gon  bhiadh  gon  deoch.  Bha  e  'n
sin  gos  an  d'  thkinig  boireaunach  dachaidh  an  deireadh  na  h-oidhche
agus  sia  caoraich  aice.  Chunnaic  i  stiall  mhbr  duine  taobh  an  teine
cosail  ri  bhi  'na  amadan.  Ghabh  i  ionghantas  mbr  nur  a  chunnaic  i
e,  's  thuirt  i  ris,  gom  b'  fhearra  dha  falbh  e  siud  agus  dol  sios  go  tigh
an  righ,  's  gom  faigheadh  e  rud  a  miosg  nan  gillean  anns  a'  chidsinn.
Thuirt  e  nach  rachadh,  ach  na  'n  di  thngadh  i  dha  rud  a  dh'  itheadh
6,  gom  biodh  e  falbh  a  bbuachailleachd  nan  caorach  air  a  son  fhin.
D^n  t-ainm  a  bh'  air  a  bboireannach  ach  Caomhag.  '*  K'  an  saoilinn
sinn  gheibheadh  thu  biadh  a's  deoch,"  ars'  ise.

An  la  'r  na  mhaireach  dh'  fhalbh  e  leis  na  caoraich.  '*  Cha  'n  'eil
greim  feoir  agamsa  dhaibh,"  urs'  ise,  "  ach  rathad  mòr,  's  cumaidh  tu
eud  air  iomall  an  rathaid  mhbir,  's  cha  lig  thu  dfaeth  eud."  An  am
na  h-oidhche  thàinig  e  dacbaidh  leo.  An  la  'r  na  mhaireach  dh'
fhalbh  e  leis  na  caoraich.  Bha,  dliith  air  an  kite  'n  robh  e  leo,  tri
pàircean  cruinueachd  a  bheanadh  do  thri  daoin'  uaisle.  Bha  na
caoraich  ga  shkrachadh;  dh'  fhalbh  e  's  leag  e  'n  gàrradh,  's
lig  e  stigh  eud  o  the  go  t^,  gos  an  d'  ith  end  na  tri  pkircean.
Latha  de  na  Iluthean  chruinnich  na  tri  daoin'  uaisle.  Nor  a  thàinig
eud  bha  esan  an  d^igh  na  pkircean  a  liguil  itheadh  leis  na  caoraich.
'<  Ciod  thuige  dh'  ith  thu  na  pkircean."  **  Cha  mhis'  a  dh'  ith  eud  idir,
's  ann  a  dh'  ith  na  caoraich  end."  "  Cha  bhi  sinn  a'  bruidhinn  ris  idir,
cha  'n  'eil  ann  ach  amadan,  ruige  sinn  Caomhag  fiach  an  leathaise
na  caoraich."  Bainig  end  Caomhag.  Thug  eud  leo  'ionnsuidh  na
VOL.  IL  M


102  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Uirt  i.  B'i  so  a*  chiad  chuirt  do  Fhearghus  a  dhiànadh  an  d^igh  dha
'n  crtm  fhaotainn.

Bha  f  kgail  aig  na  righrean  'san  am  ud.  Nur  nach  V  aithne
dhaibh  an  ceartas  a  sgoltadh  dòigheil  thbiseacbadh  cathair  a'  bhreath-
anais  air  breabadaich,  's  rachadh  car  an  ambnich  an  rigb  nur  nach
dianadh  e  ceartas  mur  bu  choir  dha.

*'  Cha'n  urra  misedad  a  dhianadh,"  nrs'  an  righ,  **  ach  an  fhiacaill
a  rinn  an  sgath  i  bhi  aca."  Thoisich  cathair  a*  bhreathanias  ri  breab-
adaich,  's  chaidh  car  an  amhuich  an  righ.  "  Thigeadh  fear  agaibh  an
so  agus  fnasglaibh  orm,  fiach  an  dian  sibh  an  ceartas  na  's  fhearr  na
siud."  Gad  a  bhiodh  milteaii  a  stigh  cha  rachadh  gin  an  ait'  an  righ,
cha  rachadh  eud  a  thoirt  do  dhroch  mhios  air  an  righ  gon  rachadh
gin  diu  air  a  bhialthaobh.  "  A  biieil  dain*  a  dh'  fhuasglas  orm  ?"  **  Cha
n  'oil  mar  am  faasgail  buachaille  Chaomhaig  f bin  ort.'*  Chuireadb
SÌ0S  buachaille  Chaomhaig.  '*  Fuasgail  orm  a  laochain,  's  dian  an
ceartas  mur  is  coir,  's  lig  a  so  mi."  ^''Ceartas  na  coir  cha  dian  mise  gos
am  faigh  mi  'n  toiseach  rud  a  dh'  itheas  mi."  Fhuair  e  'n  sin  rud  a  dh'
ith  e.  **  De  'n  ceartas  a  rinn  thu  fhin  ?"  ars*  esan.  "  Cha  d'  rinn  mis'
ach  an  fhiacaill  a  rinn  an  sgath  a  bhi  aca."  **  Ciod  thuige  nach  d'  thug
thu  'm  has  do  Chaomhaig  ?  So  mur  a  dhianainnsa.  Tha  sia  caor-
aich  aig  Caomhaip;,  's  gad  a  bheirte  uaithe  na  sia  caoraich  cha  phaigh-
eadh  end  na  daoin'  naisle.  Bidh  sia  uain  aig  Caomhaig,  's  gheibh  na
daoin'  uaisle  na  sia  uain'  's  bidh  na  caoraich  aice  fhin  a'  cumail."  Dh'
fbalbh  an  car  a  amhuich  an  righ.  Dh'  fhalbh  esan,  's  cha  d'  fhoigh-
neachd  eud  co  e,  's  cha  d'  fhuair  e  sgath.

Bha  duin'  uasal  eil'  ann,  's  bha  each  aige,  's  chuir  e  thun  ceard-
ach  e  gos  a  bhi  air  a  chrtiidheadh.  Bha  mac  òg  aig  a'  ghobha,  's  ban-
altrum  fo  'n  leanabh.  D^  bh'  ann  ach  latha  briagh,  's  is  ann  a  mach  a
bha  'n  t-each  'ga  chrtiidheadh,  's  cha  'n  fhac  is'  each  ga  chrtiidheadh
riabh,  's  chaidh  i  mach  a  dh^  fhaicinn  crhidheadh  an  eich.  Shuidh  i
ma  choinnimh  an  eich,  's  thug  esan  an  tairg  'sa  chruidh,  's  cha  d'
amais  e  'n  crodhan  leis  an  tairg  ach  chuir  e  'san  fheoil  i,  agus  bhuail
an  t-each  an  leanabh,  's  chuir  e  copan  a'  chinn  deth.

Cha  robh  ac'  ach  dol  go  ceartas  a  rithisd  than  an  righ.  'Se  'n
ceartas  a  rinn  an  righ  dhaibh  a'  chas  a  thoirt  bhar  an  eich.  Thoisich
cathair  a  bhreathanais  air  breabadaich,  's  chaidh  car  an  amhuich  an
righ.  Bha  buachaille  Chaomhaig  a  làthair.  Dh'  iarr  eud  air  fuasgladh
air  an  righ.  Thuirt  e  nach  dianadh  e  sgath  gos  am  faigheadh  e  md
ri  itheadh  an  toiseach.  Fhuair  e  siud.  Chaidh  e  far  an  robh 'n  righ.
**  De  'n  lagh  a  rinn  thu? "  "  A  chas  a  thoirt  bhar  an  eich."  **  Cha
phàigh  sin  an  gobba."  **  Cuiribh  thugams'  an  groom  a  dh'  ionnsaich
an- teach,  agus  an  duin'  uasal  da  'm  bean  e."     Chuireadh  a  naull  an


'w^^immmf^mtmm^^nmm^^m'^tmamrvm


CONALL.  163

SO  an  gobha  agus  a'  bhanaltmin.  Thàinig  an  duin'  nasal  's  an  groom.
*'  Seadh  a  dhuin'  nasail,  an  d'  thug  thus*  air  a'  gkroom  an  t-each  so
ionnsachadh  mur  a  bu  choir  dha  ?  "  Thuirt  an  groom  gon  d'  rlnn  e
siudcho  math  's  a  b'  aithne  dha.  **  Cha  b'  urrainnear  tuillidh  iarraidh
ort."  Seadh  a  ghobha  an  d'  thug  thus'  ordugh  do  d'  bhanaltmm  fant-
ainn  a  stigh,  gon  tigh  'n  amach  a  a  seombar  ?  "  "  Cha  d'  thug,"  urs*
an  gobha,  **  ach  mnr  a  thogradh  i  fhin."  "  A  dhuin'  uasail,"  ars'
esan,  "  0  'n  is  tusa  's  fhearr  cumail,  cuiridh  mise  trian  ort  de  dh'  èirig
mhic  a*  ghobha,  agns  trian  eil'  air  a'  ghobha  fhin,  o  'n  nach  do
thomhais  e  'n  tairg  ma  'n  do  chuir  e  go  feum  i ;  agus  trian  eil'  air  a
bhanaltrum  's  air  a  ghroom;  0  'n  nach  d'  fhan  m'  a  stigh  na  seombar ;
's  gon  fhios  nach  d'  fhkg  escm  facal  air  choraigin  gon  ionnsachadh
do  'n  each."  Dh'  fhalbh  an  duin'  uasal  agus  an  gobha;  agus  stad
cathair  a'  bhreathanais,  's  cha  robh  car  aice;  thkinig  an  car  e
amhuich  an  righ;  's  lig  end  esan  air  falbh  mur  a  b'  àbhaist.

Urs'  an  righ,  **  ma  shiubhail  e  'n  domhan  agus  an  saoghal  tba
boinne  dh'  fhuil  mhic  righ  anus  a  ghiir  ud.  Cha  b'  urrainn  e  'n
lagh  a  sgoltadh  cho  math  an  siud  mar  am  biodh  e  ann ;  falbhadh  na
tri  ghaisgich  is  fhearr  a  th*  agam  agus  thugadh  end  a'm'  ionnsnidh  a
cheann."  Dh'  fhalbh  end  as  a  dhèigh.  Thug  e  suil  uaidhe,  's  de
chnnnaic  e  a'  tighinn  ach  end.  Thàinig  eud  far  an  robh  e.  **  C'a'  bheil
sibh  a  dol?"  <'Tha  sinn  a'  dol  ad'  mharbhadh  fhin ;  chuir  an  righ  gad'
ionnsuidh  sinn."  **  Mata  cha  'n  'eil  an  sin  ach  rud  a  thàinìg  'na  bhial,
*8  cha  mig  sibh  a  leas  mo  mharbhadh.**  *'  Cha  'n  'eil  ann  ach  amadan,"
ars*  eudsan.  ^'  O  'n  a  chuir  esan  sibhse  gum'  mharbhadh,  nach  marbh
sibh  mi?"  ''Am  marbh  thu  fhin  thn  fhin  a  laochain  ?"  ars*  iadsan.  "D^
mur  a  mharbhas  mi  mi  fhin?"  '*  So  dhuit  claidheamh  agus  buail  mu  'n
amhuich  ort  e,  *s  tilg  an  ceann  diot  fhin,"  ars'  iadsan.  Rug  e  air  a*
chlaidheamh ;  chuir  e  car  deth  'na  dhorn.  '*  Siud  a  laochain  air  thu
fhin  a  mharbhadh."  **  Falbhaibh,"  ars'  esan, "  agus  tillibh  dachaidb,  's
na  ceilibh  air  an  righ  nach  do  mharbh  sibh  mise."  ''Mata  thoir  dhomh
an  claidheamh,*'  ursa  fear  din.  "Cha  d*  thoir.  Cha  'n  'eil  an  Eirinn
na  bheir  as  mo  dhorn  e,"  ars*  esan.  Dh'  fhalbh  eud  agus  thill  eud
dachaidh.

Air  dha  bhi  falbh  leis  fhin  thuirt  e, "  Cha  do  rugadh  mi  gon
mhàthair,  *s  cha  do  ghineadh  mi  gon  atbair.  Cha  chuimboe  learn
tigh  'n  do  dh*  Eirinn  riabh,  agus  tha  fios  agam  gur  h-ann  an  Eirinn
a  rngadh  mi ;  cha  'n  fhàg  mi  tigh  's  a  bheil  smhid  na  tein'  ann  an
Eirinn  gos  am  bi  fhios  agam  co  mi.**

Chaidh  e  dha  'n  lubhar.  D^  bh*  ann  ach  latha  briagh  blkth.  Co
chnnnaic  e  ach  a  mhàthair  a  nigheadaireachd.  Bha  e  tigh  'n  go
seòrs'  aithne,  air  alt  'a  gon  robh  e  smaointeachadh  gur  i  mhhthair  a


164  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

bh'  ann.  Dh*  fhalbh  e  agus  chaidh  e  air  a  ciil,  's  chuir  e  lamb  sios
'na  broilleacb,  's  thag  e  cbioch  dheas  a  macb.  "  Dearbb/'  urs*  esan,
**  's  dalta  cicbe  deise  dbuit  mi."  Tbug  i  'n  togaii  sin  air  a  ceann.  "  Do
leitbid  de  tbàrlaid  cba  robb  agamsa  riabb,  na  mbac,  na  na  dlialta !"
**  Tba  mo  Ikmb  cbli  ann  an  cUl  do  cbinn,  agns  tba  claidheamb  ann
a^m'  laimb  dbeis,  agus  cuiridb  mi  *n  ceann  diot  mar  an  innis  tbu
domh  CO  mi."  *<Foi:i  air  do  laimh  a  Chonaill  mbic  righ  Eireann."
**  Dh'  aitbnicb  mi  fbin  sin,  gom  b'e  sin  mi,  's  gon  robb  boinne  db'  fhuii
mbic  rigb  annam ;  acb  co  mbarbb  m'  atbair  ?"  "  Mbarbb  Feargbus  ;
agus  diiibbail  cbo  mòr  ri  t'  atbair  mbarbbadh  e  cbeart  latha,  b'  e  sin
Boinne  Breat  mac  rigb  Alba."  "  Co  mbarbb  Boinne  Breat?"  "  Tba
brktbair  do  Fbeargbus  ris  an  can  end  Lagb  an  Ikidb."  *'  'S  c'kit'  a
bbeil  an  duine  sin  a  fuireacbd?"  ^'Cba'n  fbaigbeadb  e  sgatb  air
fearann  Eirinn  aon  uair  's  gon  do  mbarbb  e  Boinne  Breat.  Cbaidb
e  'n  bbeinn,  's  rinu  e  cos  'sa  cboille  miosg  b-uile  biast  a's  creutair
mi-gbnktbaicbte."  "Co  gbl^idb  airm  m'  atbar?"  «Tba  mise."
"  Tbeirig  agus  faigb  eud'stboir  tbugams'  eud."  Tbug  i  a'ionnsuidb
eud.  Db'  fhalbb  esan  agus  cbuir  e  na  b-aim  air,  agus  tbigeadb  end
dba  cbo  matb  's  gad  a  dbèania  dba  fbin  eud.  "  Cba  'n  itb  mi  greim,
's  cba  'n  òl  mi  deocb,  's  cba  dian  mi  stad  acb  a  nocbd ;  gos  an  ruig
mi  far  a  bbeil  an  duine  sin,  Ce  b'e  ait'  a  bbeil  e."  Cbuir  e  'n
oidbcbe  sin  seachad  far  an  robb  e.

Anns  a'  mbadainn  an  la  'r  na  nibàireacb  db'  fbalbb  e.  Gbabb  e
air  agbaidh,  gos  an  robb  dngbadb  air  a  bhonnaibb,  agus  tolladb  air  a
bbrògaibb.  Bha  neoil  gbeal'  an  latba  'falbb  's  neoil  dbugba  na  b~
oidbcbe  'tigbinn,  's  gon  e  faigbinn  àite  stad  na  tkmb  dba.  Cbunnaic
e  coille  mhòr  ann  an  sin.  Dhian  e  cos  ann  an  tè  de  na  craobban  go
b-ard  anns  am  fanadb  e  'n  oidbcbe  sin.  Anns  a'  mbadainn  an  la  'r
na  mbàireacb  tbug  e  sUil  uaidbe.  D^  cbunnaic  e  acb  an  aon  uUe-
bbeist,  nacb  fbacas  riabb  a  leitbid  fo  'n  gbr^in,  'na  sbineadb  gon  aod-
acb,  gon  cbaisbbeart,  gon  cbeann  aodacb ;  fbionn'  agus  fbiasag  air  dbol
tbairis  air.  Smaointicb  e  gad  a  racbadb  e  sios  nacb  dianadb  e  feuin
air.  Cbuir  e  saigbead  ann  an  crois  's  loisg  e  air.  Bbuail  e  anns  a
ghairdean  deas  air  i,  's  tbug  am  fear  a  bba  sbios  breab  as.  "  Na  gluais
feitbe  de  t'  fb^itbean,  na  cuisle  de  t'  chuislean,  na  lideag  de  t'  fbeoil,
na  ròinean  de  d'  gbruaig ;  gos  an  geall  tbu  gom  faic  tbu  mise  'nam
rigb  air  Eirinn,  no  cuiridb  mise  sios  dbetb  sbleagban  caola,  daraicb  na
db'  fbuaigbeas  ris  an  talamb  tbu."  Cba  d'  ttiug  an  uilebbeist  g^ill  dba
siud.  Db'  fbalbb  e  agus  loisg  e  ritbisd,  agus  bbuail  e  anns  a  gbaird-
ean  tboisgeil  e.  ''Nacb  d' thuirt  mi  riut  roimbid  gon  cuisle  de  d'
cbuislean  a  gbluasad,  na  bideag  de  t'fheoil,  na  ròinean  de  d'  gbruaig,
gos  an  gealladb  tbu  gom  faiceadb  tbu  mise  nam  rigb  air  Eirinn."


^■'  w  ^  ^"  I        I    uuMw^^v^M^"^— ^vw^BiVipp^VM^ipaiiaHWiQiViPPHIPP


CONALL.  165

Thig  a  naas  mata,  *8  chi  mi  tha  fliin  na  mi  fhin  ann  fo  *ii  am  so  'n
ath-oidhch'.  Thàinìg  e 'nnas.  "Nam  biodh  fhios'amgure  do  Idthid
de  thàrlach  a  chuireadh  a  leithid  mar  fhiachaibh  orm,  cha  dianalnn
doit  air  chor  sam  bith  e ;  ach  o  *n  gheall  mi  dnit  e  ni  mi  e,  's  bidh
Sinn  a'  falbh."

Ghabh  end  'ionnsuidh  pàileas  an  righ.  Dh*  eubh  end  cath  na
còmbrag  a  chur  amach,  airneo  ceann  Fhearghnis,  na  e  fhin  mar
phiiosanach.  Cath  a's  còmhrag  a  gheibheadh  end,  's  cha  b'e  cheann ;
's  idir  cha  'n  fhaigheadh  end  e  fhin  mar  phriosanach.  Chnireadh
a  mach  ceithir  chiadliighghaisgeach,  ceithir  chiad  lànghaisgeach,  agns
ceithir  chiad  treiinghaisgeach.  Thòisich  end  orra.  Cha  chuireadh
an  dama  fear  0  laimh  an  fhir  eile  mnr  a  mharbhadh  end.  Dh'  eubh
end  cath  as  comhrag  a  ris,  air-neo  ceann  Fbearghuis  a  chur  amach,
na  e  fhin  mar  phriosanach.  **  'Se  cath  as  comhrag  a  gheibh  thu ;  *&
idir  cha  'n  fhaigb  thu  mo  cheann,  's  cha  mhotha  'gheibh  thu  mi  fhin
mar  phrìosanach/'  Chuireadh  a  mach  da  chiad  diag  lùghghaisgeach,
da  chiad  diag  lànghaisgeach,  agus  da  chiad  diag  tretmghaisgeach.
Cha  chuireadh  an  darna  fear  a  laimh  an  fhir  eile  mur  a  mharbhadh
end  diu  sin.  Dh'  eubh  end  cath  as  còmhrasr,  airneo  ceann  Fbearghuis,
na  e  fhin  mar  phriosanach  Cath  as  comhrag  a  gheibheadh  end,  *8
cha  b'  e  ceann  Fbearghuis ;  's  idir  cha  'n  fhaigheadh  end  e  fhin  'na
phriosanach.  Chuireadh  a  mach  ceithir  chiad  fichead  a  'n  ionnsuidh.
Cha  chuireadh  an  darna  fear  0  'n  fhear  eile  mur  a  mharbhadh  eud.
Dh*  eubh  eud  cath  na  comhrag.  "  Tha  *n  fheadhain  a  tha  mach  cho
olc,"  ursa  Fearghus,  *'  's  nach  gabh  eud  ach  mo  cheann,  agus  mur  am
faigh  eud  marbhaidh  eud  na  bheil  an  Eirinn,  's  mi  fhin  as  an  dèigh.
Thugadh  fear  agaibh  an  ceann  bhar  aon  de  na  chaidh  a  mharbhadh,
agns  nur  a  thig  Lagh  an  Ikidh  's  a  dh'  iarras  e  mo  cheann  na  mi  fhin
a'm'  phriosanach,  thugaibh  dha  e,  agus  saoilidh  e  g'an  e  mo  cheannsa
bhiosann."  Thugadh  an  ceann  do  Lagh  an  Ikidh.  Chaidh  e  far  an  robh
Conall  leis.  **  D^  th'  agad  an  sin  ?"  ursa  Conall.  **  Ceann  Fhearghuis."
"  Cha  *n  e  sin  ceann  Fbearghuis  fhathasd,  's  mise  's  giorra  chunnaic  e
na  thu  fhin ;  ach  till  's  thoir  thugamsa  ceann  Fbearghuis."  Thill
Lagh  an  làìdh.  "  Kachadh  fear  eile  'na  choinneamh  an  kit'  an  righ,  's
abradh  e  gur  e  cheann  a  gheibh  e,  's  nach  e  fhin  mar  phiiosanach.
Chaidh  am  fear  so  an  coinneamh  Lagh  an  Ikigh.  Bu^  e  air  's  thug
e  'n  ceann  as  an  amhuich  aige.  Rkinig  e  Conall.  **  D4  th'  agad  an
sin  y*  **  Ceann  Fbearghuis."  "  Cha  *n  e  sin  ceann  Fbearghuis  fhathas  i .
Till  agus  thoir  am'  ionnsuidh  ceann  Fbearghuis."  Thill  Lagh  an  Ikidh.
'*  Tha  'm  fear  a  tha  muigh  cho  beachdùl,  's  am  fear  eile  cho  daull,  's
nach  'eil  duin'  an  Eirinn  nach  marbh  eud  mar  am  faigh  eud  mi  fhin.*'
<*  C  V  bheii  thu  dol  a  Lagh  an  Ikidh  ?"  ursa  Fearghus.    *<  Tha  mi  dol  a


I  66  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

dh'  ìarraìdh  do  chimisa  na  ihn  fhin  mar  phiiosanach."  <'*Se  mo  cheann
a  gheibh  tha,  's  cha  mhi  fhin  mar  phnosanach ;  ach  d^  bhàigh  a  tha  thu
toirt  do  d'  bhràthair?"  **  A  bbàigh  a  thug  tha  fhin  domhsa  bheir  mise
duits'  e."  Thug  e  'n  ceann  as  an  amhnich  aige  *8  thag  e  leis  e.
Thkinig  e  far  an  robh  Conall.  **  D^  th'  agad  an  sin  ?"  «  Ceann  Fhear-
ghuis."  "Cha'ne."  «  Go  dearbh 's  e."  «  Lig  fhaicinn  e."  Thug  e
dha  e.  Tharruinn  e  e  ag  bhaail  e  air,  's  rinn  e  da  cheann  de  'n  aon.
lliòisich  end  an  so  air  a  ch^ile.  Dhianadh  end  bogan  air  a  chreagan
agus  creagan  air  a  bhogan,  's  an  t-àite  bn  lagha  rachadh  end  fodha
rachadh  end  fodha  gan  glUinean,  's  an  t-àite  bn  mhotha  rachadh  end
fodba  rachadh  eud  fodha  *gan  shilean.  Smaointich  Conall  go  *m  ba
dona  dha  toiteam  's  e  'n  d^is  dol  cho  goirid  do'n  ghnothach.  Tharruinn
e  chlaidheamh  agus  thilg  e  'n  ceann  de  Lagh  an  làidh.  Tha  mise  nis
a'  m*  righ  air  Eirinn  mur  bu  choir  domh  fhin  a  bhi.

Thug  e  mhàthair  's  a  h'athair  as  an  lubhar,  's  thug  e  go  ruig  am
pkileas  eud.  'S  bha  shliochd  ann  gos  an  naoidheamh  gltin.  Thacadh
an  t-aon  ma  dheireadh,  'na  leanabh,  le  bideag  de  chnaimh  a  chaidh
tarsuinn  'na  amhuich,  's  thainig  treubh  eile  stigh  air  Eirinn.

Alexander  McNeill.

Heard  it  recited  bj  his  father  and  by  several  others  in  his
youth.

This  story  is  one  of  a  number,  all  of  which  relate  to  a  certain
Conall,  who  was  a  natural  son  of  a  king  of  Erin,  and  came  to  be
king  himself.

There  are  generally  two  elder  brothers  bom  of  the  queen,
(instead  of  three  uncles,)  who  are  less  brave  than  the  illegitimate
brother.  The  mother  is  generally  a  daughter  of  an  old  man  who
has  magical  arts.  The  king  stays  in  his  house  at  first  for  a  whole
year,  and  fancies  it  one  day  ;  all  sorts  of  adventures,  and  poetical
ornaments,  and  descriptions  of  dress,  and  feats  of  skill  are  joined
to  this  frame-work,  and  the  stories  are  always  told  with  a  great
deal  of  the  measured  prose  which  seems  to  belong  to  the  parti-
cular class  of  which  this  is  a  specimen.  They  are  always  long.
I  think  they  are  the  remains  of  compositions  similar  to  portions
of  the  manuscripts  in  the  Advocates'  Library  and  elsewhere —
which  are  a  curious  jumble  of  classical  and  native  allusions  woven
into  a  story ;  which,  for  want  of  a  better  illustration,  may  be  com-
pared with  the  old  romances  of  other  tongues.


^'t^^^^^^'^^'m^mmimmKmmF^^^fKmmmfi^mif^mm^tmmmgimit^m


CONALL.  167

The  story,  translated  into  English,  loses  part  of  its  merit,
which  consists  of  the  rapid  utterance  of  a  succession  of  words
which  convey,  by  their  sound  and  rhythm  alone,  the  idea  of  the
fight  which  they  describe ;  the  sounds —

"  Da  cheead  djSeag  Làngàsh-^ch
Da  cheead  djgeag  Loogash-gach
Da  chSead  djeeag  Train-gàuh-gàch

Gàn  cà'lchg-ag  on  sgèe-an
Gam  full  agiis  gam  feo-il
Ans  an  èeàr-màilt."

By  the  constant  repetition  of  the  sounds  djee,  gcuh,  gach,  suggest
the  singing,  creaking,  clashing,  and  hacking  of  blades  and  armour,
and  the  rhythm,  which  varies  continually,  and  must  be  heard  to  be
understood,  does  the  same.

The  narrator  heard  it  from  his  father  and  other  old  men  in  his
youth.  I  have  heard  similar  passages  frequently  from  others,
since  the  beginning  of  this  year,  and  I  remember  to  have  heard
something  of  the  kind  as  a  child.

One  of  the  names,  or  one  like  it,  occurs  in  a  MS.*  said  to  be
of  the  twelfth  century,  in  a  tale  called  "  The  Story  of  Art  Mac-
Cninn,  King  of  Ireland,  and  the  Battle  of  Magh  Muckruime,"
which'extends  to  forty-three  pages.  Art  MacCon  wins  a  battle
and  becomes  king  of  Ireland.  All  I  know  of  the  story  is  from  an
abstract ;  it  is  said  to  be  mixed  with  poetry.  The  tales  about
Conall  are  all  over  the  Highlands,  and  those  who  repeat  them
are  generally  old  men.  I  have  several  versions  written  which
differ  materially  from  this.


XXXVI.
MAGHACH  COLGAE.

From  Alexander  MacNeill,  Barra.

Tj^IONN,  the  son  of  Cumal.  Fionn  Mao  Cumhail
-■-  was  in  Eirinn,  and  the  king  of  Lochlann  in  Loch-
lann.  The  king  of  Lochlann  sent  Maghach  Coloar
to  Fionn  to  be  taught.  The  king  of  the  Sbalg  sent  to
him  his  own  son,  whom  they  called  iNNSRroH  Mao-
EiOH  nan  Sealg.  They  were  of  age,  six  years  (and)
ten.  Then  they  were  in  Erin  with  Fionn,  and  Fionn
taught  M^^hach,  son  of  the  king  of  Lochlann,  every
learning  he  had.

There  came  a  message  from  the  king  of  Lochlann,
that  he  was  in  the  sickness  of  death  for  leaving  the
world ;  and  that  the  Maghach  must  go  home  to  be
ready  for  his  crowning.  Maghach  went  away,  and  the
chase  failed  with  the  Fheinn,  and  they  did  not  know
what  they  should  do.

Maghach  wrote  a  letter  to  Fionn  from  Lochlann
to  Eirinn  :  "  I  heard  that  the  chase  failed  with  you  in
Eirinn.  I  have  burghs  on  sea,  and  I  have  burghs  on
shore ;  I  have  food  for  a  day  and  a  year  in  every  burgh
of  these — ^the  meat  thou  thinkest  not  of,  and  the  drink
thou  thinkest  not  of;  come  thou  hither  thyself  and
thy  set  of  Fhiantaohan.  The  keep  of  a  day  and  a
year  is  on  thy  head."


HA6HACH  COLGAR.  1 69

Fionn  got  the  letter,  and  he  opened  it :  "  He  is
pitiable  who  would  not  do  a  good  thing  in  the  begin-
ning of  youth;  he  might  get  a  good  share  of  it  again  in
the  beginning  of  his  £^e.  Here  is  a  letter  come  from
my  foster-son  from  Lochlann  that  he  has  burghs  on  sea
and  burghs  on  shore,  food  for  a  day  and  year  in  every
one  of  them — ^the  drink  that  we  can  think  of,  and  the
drink  that  we  do  not  think  of ;  the  meat  we  can  think
of,  and  the  meat  that  we  do  not  think  of — and  it  is
best  for  us  to  be  going."

"Whom  shall  we  leave,"  said  Fiachbrb  MacFhinn
(the  trier  son  of  Fionn)  his  son,  "  to  keep  the  darlings
and  little  sons  of  Eireann."

"  I  will  stay,"  said  Fiachere  MacFhinn.

"  I  will  stay,"  said  Diarmid  O'DroBHNE,  his  sister's
son.

"  I  will  stay,"  said  Innsridh  MacEigh  nan  Sealg,
his  foster-son.

"  I  will  stay,"  said  Cath  Conan  Mac  Mhic  Con.

"  We  will  stay  now,"  said  they — ^the  four.

"  Thou  art  going,  my  father,"  said  Fiachere,  "  and  it
is  as  well  for  thee  to  stay ;  how  then  shall  we  get  word
how  it  befalls  thee  in  Lochlainn  ? "

"  I  will  strike  the  ord  Fiannt  (hammer  of  Fiant)  in
Lochlainn,  and  it  will  be  known  by  the  blow  I  strike
in  Lochlainn,  or  in  Eirinn,  how  we  shall  be."

Fionn  and  his  company  went,  they  reached  Loch-
lainn. Maghach  Colgar,  son  of  the  king  of  Lochlainn,
went  before  them  to  meet  them.

"  Hail  to  thee,  my*  foster-father,"  said  Maghach.

"  Hail  to  thyself,  my  foster-son,"  said  Fionn.

"  There  is  the  business  I  had  with  thee ;  I  heard
that  the  chase  had  failed  in  Eirinn,  and  it  was  not  well
with  me  to  let  you  die  without  meat  I  have  burghs
on  sea  and  burghs  on  shore,  and  food  for  a  day  and


lyO  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

year  in  every  one  of  them,  and  which  kind  wouldst
thou  rather  choose  Ì "

"  It  is  on  shore  I  used  always  to  be,  and  it  is  not
on  sea ;  and  I  will  take  some  on  shore,"  said  Fionn.

They  went  into  one  of  them.  There  was  a  door
opposite  to  every  day  in  the  year  on  the  house ;  every
sort  of  drink  and  meat  within  it  They  sat  on  chairs  ;
they  caught  every  man  hold  of  a  fork  and  of  a  knife.
They  gave  a  glance  from  them,  and  what  should  they
see  in  the  "  araich"  (great  half-ruined  buUding),  but
not  a  hole  open  but  frozen  rime.  They  gave  them-
selves that  lift  to  rise.  The  chairs  stuck  to  the  earth.
They  themselves  stuck  to  the  chairs.  Their  hands
stuck  to  the  knives,  and  there  was  no  way  of  rising  out
of  that

It  was  day  about  that  Fiachaire  MacFhinn  and
Innsridh  MacEigh  nan  Sealg  were  going  to  keep  the
chase,  and  Diarmid  O'Diubhne  and  Conan  were  going
on  the  other  day.  On  their  returning  back,  what
should  they  hear  but  a  blow  of  the  hammer  of  Fionn
being  struck  in  Lochlainn.

"  If  he  has  wandered  the  universe  and  the  world,
my  foster-father  is  in  pledge  of  his  body  and  souL"

Fiachaire  MacFhinn  and  Innsridh  MacEigh  nan
Sealg  went  from  Eirinn,  and  they  reached  Lochlainn.

"  Who  is  that  without  on  the  burgh  Ì "

"I  am,"  said  Fiachaire  MacFhinn  and  Innsridh
MacEigh  nan  Sealg.

"  Who  is  there  on  the  place  of  combat  Ì "

"  There  are  two  hundred  score  of  the  Greugachaibh
Greeks  come  out  and  great  Iall  at  their  head  coming
to  seek  my  head  to  be  his  at  his  great  meal  to-morrow."

Fiachaire  MacFhinn  and  Innsridh  MacEigh  nan
Sealg  went  and  they  retu^hed  the  place  of  combat.

"  Where  are  ye  going  Ì "  said  Fiachaire  MacFhinn.


MAGHACH  COLGAR  I  7  I

"  We  are  going  to  seek  the  head  of  Mhic  Cumhail
to  be  ours  at  our  great  meal  to-morrow."

"  It  is  often  that  man's  head  might  be  sought  and
be  on  my  own  breast  at  early  morning."

"  Close  up,"  said  lall,  "  and  leave  way  for  the
people."

"  There  is  a  small  delay  on  that,"  said  Fiachaire.

Fiachaire,  son  of  Fhinn,  pressed  out  on  the  one  end
of  them.  Innsridh,  son  of  the  king  of  the  Sealg,
began  in  the  other  end,  till  the  two  glaves  clashed
against  each  other.  They  returned,  and  they  reached
the  burgh.

Go  aig  a  bha  'n  càth  grannda        **  With  whom  was  the  hideoHS  fight
A  bha  air  an  a  chomhrag  That  was  on  the  battle-place

Andiugh?  to-day?"

said  Fionn.

"  With  me,"  said  Fiachaire,  "  and  with  the  son  of
the  king  of  the  Sealg."

"  How  was  my  foster-son  off  there  Ì "

"Man  upon  man,"  said  Fiachaire.  "And  if  he
had  not  another  man,  he  had  lacked  none."

"  Over  the  field,  to  my  foster-son,"  said  Fionn ;
"  and  his  bones  but  soft  yet !  but  mind  the  place  of
combat  Yonder  are  three  hundred  score  of  the  Greeks
coming  out  seeking  my  head  to  be  theirs  at  their  great
meal  to-morrow."

Fiachaire  MacFhinn,  and  Innsridh  MacEigh  nan
Sealg  went,  and  they  reached  the  place  of  combat.

"Where  are  you  going?"  said  Fiachaire  Mac-
Fhinn.

"  Going  to  seek  the  head  of  Mhic  Cumhail  to  be
ours  at  our  great  meal  to-morrow."

"  It's  often  that  very  man's  head  might  be  sought,
and  be  on  my  own  breast  at  early  morning."


172  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALBa

"  Close  up  and  leave  way  for  the  people."

"  There  is  still  a  small  delay  on  that"

Fiachaire  began  in  the  one  end  of  the  company,

and  Innsridh  MacEigh  nan  Sealg  in  the  other,  tiU  the

two  glaves  clashed  on  each  other.     They  returned  to

the  burgh-

«  Who  is  that  r  said  Fionn.

"  I  am  Fiachaire,  thy  son,   and  Innsridh,   son  of

the  king  of  the  Sealg,  thy  foster  son,

With  whom  wae  the  hideous  fight
That  was  on  the  battle  place  (battle  ford)

To-day.

It  was  with  me  and   with   three  hundred  score    of
Greeks."

"  Mind  the  place  of  battle ;  there  are  four  hundred
score  of  the  Greeks,  and  a  great  warrior  at  their  head
coming  to  seek  my  head  to  be  theirs  at  their  great
meal  to-morrow."

They  went  and  they  reached  the  place  of  battle.

"  Where  are  you  going  ? "  said  Fiachaire  MacFhinn
to  the  Greeks.

"  Groing  to  seek  the  head  of  Mhic  Cumhail,  to  be
ours  at  our  great  meal  to-morrow."

"  It^s  often  that  man's  head  might  be  sought,  and  be
on  my  own  breast  at  early  morning."

"  Close  up  from  the  way,  and  leave  way  for  the
people."

"  There  is  a  small  delay  on  that  yet."

He  himself  and  Innsridh  MacEigh  nan  Sealg  be-
gan at  them  till  they  had  kiUed  every  man  of  them,
and  till  the  two  glaves  clashed  on  each  other.  They
returned  home,  and  they  reached  the  burgL

"  Who 's  that  without  ?"  said  Fionn.

**  I  am  Fiachaire,  thy  son,  and  Innsridh,  son  of
the  king  of  the  Sealg,  thy  foster-son,


MAGHACH  COLGAR.  173

With  whom  was  the  hideous  fight
That  was  at  the  battle  place  (ford)

To-day."

"  It  was  with  me  and  so  many  of  the  Greeks."

"  How  was  my  foster-son  off  there  ?  "

"  Man  upon  man,  and  if  there  had  been  no  one
besides,  he  had  lacked  none."

"Mind  the  place  of  battle.  There  are  twice  as
many  as  came  out  a  good  and  heedless  warrior  at
their  head,  coming  to  seek  my  head,  to  be  theirs  at
their  great  meal  to-morrow."

They  reached  the  place  of  battle  ;  and  when  they
reached  it,  there  came  not  a  man  of  the  people.

"  I  won't  believe,"  said  Fiachaire  MacFhinn,  "  that
there  are  not  remnants  of  meat  in  a  place  whence  such
bands  are  coming.  Hunger  is  on  myself,  and  that  we
ate  but  a  morsel  since  we  ate  it  in  Eii'inn.  And
come  thou,  Innsridh,  and  reach  the  place  where  they
were.  They  will  not  know  man  from  another  man,
and  try  if  thou  canst  get  scraps  of  bread,  and  of
cheese,  and  of  flesh,  that  thou  wilt  bring  to  us ;  and
I  myseK  will  stay  to  keep  the  people,  in  case  that
they  should  come  unawares."

"  Well,  then,  I  know  not  the  place.  I  know  not
the  way,"  said  Innsridh,  son  of  the  king  of  the  Sealg,
but  go  thyself  and  I  will  stay."

Fiachaire  went,  and  Innsridh  staid,  and  what
should  they  do  but  come  unawares.

"  Where  are  ye  going,"  said  Innsridh  ?

"  Going  to  seek  the  head  of  Mhic  Cumhail,  to  be
ours  at  our  great  meal  to-morrow."

"  It  is  often  that  man's  head  might  be  sought,  and
be  on  my  own  breast  at  early  morning."

"  Close  up,  and  leave  way  for  the  people."


1  7  4  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  There  is  a  small  delay  on  that  yet"  Innsridh
began  at  them,  and  he  left  not  one  alone.

"What  good  did  it  do  thee  to  slay  the  people,
and  that  I  will  kill  thee/'  said  the  great  warrior  at
their  head.

"  If  I  had  come  out,  from  my  meat  and  from  my
warmth,  from  my  warmth  and  from  my  fire,  thou
shouldst  not  kill  me.''  He  and  the  warrior  began  at
each  other.  They  would  make  a  bog  of  the  crag,  and
a  crag  of  the  bog,  in  the  place  where  the  least  they
would  sink  they  would  sink  to  the  knees,  in  the  place
that  the  most  they  would  sink  they  would  sink  to  the
eyes.  The  great  warrior  gave  a  sweep  with  his  glave,
and  he  cut  the  head  off  Innsridh  MacEigh  nan  Sealg.

Fiachaire  came.  The  warrior  met  him,  and  with
him  was  the  head  of  Innsridh.

Said  Fiachaire  to  the  great  warrior,  "  What  thing
hast  thou  there  Ì "

"  I  have  here  the  head  of  Mhic  Cumhail."

"  Hand  it  to  me."

He  reached  him  the  head.  Fiachaire  gave  a  kiss
to  the  mouth,  and  a  kiss  to  the  back  of  the  head.

"  Dost  thou  know  to  whom  thou  gavest  it  Ì "  said
Fiachaire  to  the  warrior.

"  I  do  not,"  said  ha  "  It  well  became  the  body  on
which  it  was  before."

He  went  and  he  drew  back  the  head,  and  strikes
it  on  the  warrior's  head  while  he  was  speaking,  and
makes  one  head  of  the  two.  He  went  and  he  reached
(the  place)  where  Fionn  was  again.

"  Who  is  that  without  ? "  said  Fionn.

"  I  am  Fiachaire,  thy  son,

With  whom  was  the  hideous  fi:;ht

O

That  was  at  the  battle  place

To.day."


MAGHACH  COLGAR.  I  7  5

"  It  was  with  Innsridh,  thy  foster-son,  and  with
the  Greeks."

"  How  is  my  foster-son  from  that  Ì "

"  He  is  dead  without  a  soul.  Thy  foster-son  killed
the  Greeks  first,  and  the  great  Greek  killed  him  after-
wards, and  then  I  killed  the  great  Greek."

"  Mind  the  place  of  combat.  There  is  Maghach,
son  of  the  king  of  Lochlann,  and  every  one  that  was  in
the  Greek  burgh  with  him."

He  went  and  he  reached  the  place  of  combat.

"  Thou  art  there,  Tiachaire  ?"  said  Maghach  Colgar.
i  am.

"  Let  hither  thy  father's  head,  and  I  will  give  thee
a  free  bridge  in  Lochlainn."

"My  father  gave  thee  school  and  teaching,  and
every  khid  of  draochd  (Magic)  he  had,  and  though
he  taught  thee  that,  thou  wouldst  take  the  head  off
him  now,  and  with  that  thou  shalt  not  get  my  father's
head,  until  thou  gettest  my  own  head  first."

Fiachaire  began  at  the  people,  and  he  killed  every
man  of  the  people.

"  Thou  hast  killed  the  people,"  said  Maghach,  "  and
I  wiU  kiU  thee."

They  began  at  each  other.

They  would  make  a  bog  of  the  crag,  and  a  crag  of
the  bog ;  in  the  place  where  the  least  they  would  sink,
they  would  sink  to  the  knees ;  in  the  place  where
the  most  they  would  sink,  they  would  sink  to  the  eyes.
On  a  time  of  the  times  the  spear  of  Mhaghach  struck
Fiachaire,  and  he  gave  a  roar.  What  time  should
he  give  the  roar  but  when  Diarmid  was  turning  step
from  the  chase  in  Eirinn.

"  If  he  has  travelled  the  universe  and  the  world,"
said  Diarmid,  "  the  spear  of  the  Maghach  is  endured
by  Fiachaire."


'V  m  mw'w^m^rw^^ff^m


mMH


mmtm


mmm


mwmmtm


176


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


"  Wailing  be  on  thee,"  said  Conan.     "  Cast  thy
spear  and  hit  thy  foe.*'

"  K  I  cast  my  spear,  I  know  not  but  I  may  kill  my
own  man."

"  If  it  were  a  yellow-haired  woman,  well  wouldst
thou  aim  at  her."

"  Wailing  be  on  thee  now ;  urge  me  no  longer."

He  shook  the  spear,  and  struck  under  the  shield
(chromastaich).

"  Who  would  come  on  me  from  behind  in  the
evening,  that  would  not  come  on  me  from  the  front  in
the  morning  ?"  said  Maghach.

"  'Tis  I  would  come  on  thee,"  said  Diarmid,  "  early
and  late,  and  at  noon."

"  What  good  is  that  to  thee,"  said  Maghach,  "  and
that  I  will  take  the  head  off  Fiachaire  before  thou
comest."

"  If  thou  takest  the  head  off  him,"  said  Diarmid,
"  I  will  take  off  thy  head  when  I  reach  thee."

Diarmid  reached  Lochlainn.  Maghach  took  the
head  off  Fiachaire.  Diarmid  took  the  head  off  the
Maghach.      Diarmid  reached  Fionn.

"  Who 's  that  without  Ì "  said  Fionn.

"  It  is  I,  Diarmid,

With  whom  was  the  hideous  fight
That  was  on  the  battle  place

To-day."

"  It  was  with  so  many  of  the  Greeks,  and  with
the  Maghach,  son  of  the  king  of  Lochlann,  and  with
Fiachaire,  thy  son ;  Fiachaire  killed  all  the  Greeks,
Maghach  killed  Fiachaire,  and  then  I  killed  Maghach."

"  Though  Maghach  killed  Fiachaire,  why  didst  thou
kill  Maghach,  and  not  let  him  have  his  life  Ì  but  mind
the  place  of  combat,  and  all  that  are  in  the  burghs  of
the  Greeks  coming  out  together.^


>>


mmmmmm


MAGHAOH  COLGAR.  IJJ

"Whether  wouldst  thou  rather,  Cath  Conan,  go
with  me^  ou  stay  here  Ì "

"  I  would  rather  go  with  thee."

They  went,  and  when  they  reached  the  place  of
combat^  no  man  met  them.  They  reached  where
they  were ;  they  sat  there,  and  what  should  Cath
Gonan  do  but  fall  asleep,  they  were  so  long  coming
out.  It  was  not  long  after  that  till  they  began  to
come,  and  the  doors  to  open.  There  was  a  door
before  every  day  in  the  year  on  every  burgh,  so  that
they  burst  forth  all  together  about  the  head  of  Diarmid.
Diarmid  began  at  them,  and  with  the  sound  of  the
glaves  and  return  of  the  men,  Cath  Conan  awoke,  and
he  began  thrusting  his  sword  in  the  mid  leg  of  Diarmid.
Then  Diarmid  felt  a  tickling  in  the  middle  of  his  leg.
He  cast  a  glance  from  him,  and  what  should  he  see
but  Cath  Conan  working  with  his  own  sword.

"  Wailing  be  on  thee,  Cath  Conan,"  said  Diarmid ;
**  pass  by  thy  own  man  and  hit  thy  foe,  for  it  is  as  well
for  thee  to  thrust  it  into  younder  bundle*  as  to  be
cramming  it  into  my  leg.  Do  not  thou  plague  me
now  till  I  hit  my  foe !"

They  killed  every  man  of  the  people.

They  thought  of  those  who  were  in  the  burgh,  and
ihey  without  food ;  each  one  of  them  took  with  him
the  full  of  his  napkin,  and  his  breast,  and  his  pouches.

"Who's  that  without  f  said  Fionn.

"  I  am  Diarmid,  thy  sister's  son."

"  How  are  the  Greeks  f '

"  Every  man  of  them  is  dead,  without  a  souL"

"  Oh,  come  and  bring  hither  to  me  a  deliverance
of  food."

*  There  is  a  pun  here,  which  cannot  he  rendered  a  hoot  or  a
hti/ndki  as  of  hay,  or  a  crowd  of  men.

VOL.  II.  N


^^^WC:^^««»^^— ^^W«W^^»^"^"*B^^B^«^^^BS^»»


1 80  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

dachaidh,  agos  cheileadh  an  t-seUg  air  an  Fheinn,  's  cha  robh  fios  acà
d^  dhìanadh  end.

Sgrìobh  Maghach  litir  go  Fionn  a  Lochlainn  do  dh'  Eirinn.
"  Chnala  mi  gon  do  cheileadh  an  t-seilg  oirbh  ann  an  Eirinn.  Tha
bruighean  air  muir  agam  's  tha  bruighean  air  tir  agam,  tha  16n  la  a's
bliadhn'  agam  anns  a  h-uile  bmgh  dhiu  sin,  am  biadh  nach  smaoint-
ich  tbu  's  an  deoch  nach  smaointich  thu.  Thig  thusa  'n  so  tha  fhin
agus  do  chuid  Fhiantachan.  Tha  Ion  la  agus  bliadhn'  air  do
chiona."

Fhnair  Fionn  an  litir  's  dh^  fhosgail  e  i,  "  'Smairg  nach  dianadh
rud  math  an  ttis  òige,  gheibheadh  e  rud  math  an  tùs  a  shine  deth
rithisd.  Tha  litir  an  so  air  tigh  'n  0  'm  dhalt'  a  Lochlainn  go  'bheil
bruighean  air  muir  agus  bruighean  air  tìr  aige.  Ion  la  as  bliadhna  's
a  h-uile  t4  dhiu,  an  deoch  a  smaointicheas  sinn  's  an  deoch  nach
smaointich  sinn,  am  biadh  a  smaointicheas  sinn  's  am  biadh  nach
smaointich  sinn,  agus  's  ann  is  fhearra  dhuinn  a  bhi  falbh."

**  Co  dh'  fhàgas  sibh,"  ursa  Fiachaire  MacFhinn  a  mhac,  **  a
ghleidheadh  miiim  agus  màcan  na  h-Eireann.*'  **  Fanaidh  mis',"
ursa  Fiachaire  MacFhinn.  *'  Fanaidh  misV^nrsa  Diarmaid  O  Duibhne
mac  a  pheathar.  *^  Fanaidh  mis',"  urs'  Innsridh  Mac  righ  nan  Sealg
a  dhalta.  **  Fanaidh  mis',"  ursa  Cath  Conan  Mac  mhic  Con.  '*  Fan-
aidh sinn  a  nis,"  urs'  àdsan  an  ceithrear  so.

**  Tha  thu  falbh  m*  athidr,"  ursa  Fiachaire,  "  agus  tha  e  cho  math
dhuit  fantail."  *'  D^  nis  mur  a  gheibh  sinn  brath  mur  a  dh'  èireas
duit  ann  an  Lochlainn?"  ''Buailidh  mis'  an  t-ord  Fiannt'  ann  an
Lochlainn,  's  aithneachar  air  a  bhuHl'  a  bhuaileas  mi  ann  an  Loch-
lainn na  'n  Eirinn  d^mur  a  bhitheas  sinn."

Dh'  fhalbh  Fionn  's  a  chuideachd.  Bàinig  eud  Lochlainn.
Chaidh  Maghach  Colgar  mac  righ  Lochlainn  'nan  coinneamh  agus
'nan  comhdhail.  **  Failt*  ort  m'  oide,"  ursa  Maghach.  **  Failt'  ort  fhin
a  dhalta,"  ursa  Fionn.  **  Siud  an  gnothach  a  bh'agam  riut,  chuala  mi
gon  do  cheileadh  an  t-seilg  an  Eirinn,  's  cha  bu  mhath  leam  'ur  lig-
eadh  bks  gon  bhiadh.  Tha  bruighean  air  muir  agam,  's  tha  bruigh-
ean air  tir  agam  agus  Ion  la  a's  bliadhn'  anns'  a  h-uile  gin  diu;  agus
co-dhiu  feadhain  is  roighniche  leat  ?"  **  'S  ann  air  tir  a  chleachd  mi
bhi  riabh,  's  cha  n'  ann  air  muir,  's  gabhaidh  mi  feadhain  air  tìr,"
ursa  Fionn.  Ghabh  eud  a  stigh  ann  a  h-aon  diu.  Bha  dorus  ma  choinn-
eamh  h-uile  latha  sa'  bliadhn'  air  an  tigh;  h-uile  seorsa  bidh  a's  dibhe
stigh  ann.  Shuidh  eud  air  cathraichean.  Bug  eud,  a  h-uile  fear,  air
fore  agus  air  sgithin.  Thug  eud  shil  uatha,  's  d^  chunnaic  eud  air
an  àraich,  ach  gon  toll  fosgailte,  ach  snidhe  reòta.  Thug  eud  an  togail
sinn  orra  go  èiridh.    Lean  na  cathraichean  ris  an  talamh,  lean  end


MAGHACH  COLGAR.  1 8  I

f  bin  lis  na  cathraichean,  lean  na  làmhan  rìs  na  sgeanan,  *s  cha  robh
coraas  air  ^iridh  as  an  siad.  'Se  latha  ma  seach  a  bhiodh  Fiach-
aire  MacFhinn  agus  Innsridh  Mac  Rigb  nan  Sealg  a*falbh  a  ghleidh-
eadh  na  seilg,  agus  bba  Diarmaid  O  Duibhne  agus  Conan  a*  falbh
an  lath  eile.  Air  tilleadh  dhaibh  air  an  ais,  d^  chual  end  ach  buill*
an  uird  aig  Fionn  'ga  bhualadh  ann  an  Lochlainn.  "  Ma  shiubhail  e
'n  domhan  agus  an  saoghal  tha  m'  oid'  ann  an  geall  a  chuirp  agus
anama."  Dh'  fhalbh  Fiacbaire  MacFhinn  agus  Innsridh  Mac  Rigb
nan  Sealg  a  Eirinn  agus  ràinig  eud  Lochlainn.  ''  Co  siud  a  mach  air
a  bhruighin?'  "  Tha  mis',"  ursa  Fiacbaire  MacFhinn, "  agus  Innsridh
Mac  Rigb  nan  Sealg.**  ^  Co  tha  'n  siud  air  an  àth  chombrag  ?"  "  Siud
da  chiad  fbicbead  de  na  Greugacbaibb  air  tigh  'n  a  mach,  agus  lall
mòr  air  anceann,  a  tigh  'n  a  dh*  iarraidh  mo  chinnsa  gos  a  bhi  ac'  air
an  diat  mhòr  a  mkireacb."  Dh'  fhalbh  Fiacbaire  MacFhinn  agus
Innsridh  Mac  Rigb  nan  Sealg  aecus  rkinig  end  an  t-àtb  chombrag.
"C  a*  bheil  sibb  a  doir  ursa  Fiacbaire  MacFhinn.  "  Tha  sinn  a'
dol  a  dh'  iarraidh  ceann  Mhic  Cumhail  gos  a  bhi  againn  air  ar  diat
inbòr  a  màireach."  "  S'  minig  a  rachadh  go  'iarraidh 's  gor  moch  air
mbadainn  air  mo  mbinid  fbin  e."  '*  Teann,"  urs'  lall, "  agus  lig  rathad
dha  'n  t-sluagb."  **  Tha  fuireachd  beag  air  an  sin,"  ursa  Fiacbaire.
Theann  Fiacbaire  MacFhinn  a  mach  anns  an  dama  ceann  diu,  tbòis-
ich  Innsridh  Mac  Rigb  nan  Sealg  anns  a'  cheann  eile,  gos  an  do
bhuail  an  da  chlaidheamh  ri  cbeile.  Thill  eud  agas  ràinig  eud  am
brugh.  **  Co  aig'  a  bha  'n  càtb  grannd'  a  bh'  air  an  àtb  chombrag
an  diugh?"  ursa  Fionn.  "  Agams',"  ursa  Fiacbaire,  **'s  aig  Innsridh
Mac  Rigb  nan  Sealg.*'

"Demur  a  bba  mo  dhalta  dbeth  sinn?"  "Fear  air  an  fhear,"
ursa  Fiacbaire,  "  *s  mar  an  robb  fear  a  bharracbd  aige,  cba  robh  gin
'na  uireasbbuidh."  **  Thar  an  ar  do  *m  dhalt',*'  ursa  Fionn,  "  *s  gon
a  chnàimhach  maoth  fbatbasd;  ach  cuimbnich  an  t-ktb  chomb-
rag. Siud  tri  chiad  fichead  de  na  Greugacbaibb  a'  tigh  *n  a  mach
a  dh*  iarraidh  mo  chinnsa  go  bhi  ac*  air  an  diat  mbòr  a  màir-
each."  Dh*  fhalbh  Fiacbaire  MacFhinn  agus  Innsridh  Mac  Rigb  nan
Sealg  agus  ràinig  eud  an  t-àth  chombrag.  '^C*  ait'  a  bheil  sibb  a  dol?"
ursa  Fiacbaire  MacFhinn.  "  Dol  a  dh*  iarraidh  ceann  Mliic  Cumhail
gos  a  bhi  againn  air  ar  diat  mbòr  a  màireach."  '*  'Sminig  a  racbadh  a
dh*  iarraidh  ceann  an  duine  sinn  fbin 's  gor  moch  air  mhadainn  air
mo  mbinid  f  bin  e.*'  '*  Teann  agus  lig  rathad  do  'n  t-slnagh.'*  '^  Tha
fuireachd  beag  air  an  sin  fbatbasd  "  Thòisicb  Fiachair'  anns  an
darna  ceann  de  'n  chuideachd,  *s  Innsridh  Mac  Rigb  nan  Sealg
anns  a  cheann  eile,  gos  an  do  bhuail  an  da  chlaidheamh  air  a  cbeile.

Thill  eud  *ionn8nidh  na  bruighne  a  ris.    <*  Co  siud?'*  ursa  Fionn.


I  82  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  Tha  mise  Fiachaire  do  mhac,  agas  Innsridh  Mac  High  nan  Sealg  d6
dhalta."

«*  Co  aig  a  bha  'n  cath  grannd'  a  bh'  air  an  àth  'n  diugh  ?"  "  Bha
agamsa  's  aig  tri  chiad  fichead  de  na  Greugachaibh."  "  Cuimhnich
an  t'  àth  chomhrag;  siud  ceithir  chiad  fichead  de  na  Greugachaibh  's
gaisgeach  mòr  air  an  ceann,  a'  tigh  'n  a  dh'  iarraidh  mo  chinnsa  go
bhi  ac'  air  an  diat  mhòr  a  màireach.*'  Dh'  f  halbh  eud  's  ràinìg  end  an
t'  àth  chomhrag.  "  C  kit*  a'  bheil  sibh  a  dol  ?"  nrsa  Fiachaire  Mac-
Fhinn  ris  na  Greugachaibh.  *'  Dol  a  dh'  iarraidh  ceann  Mhic  Cumhail
gos  a  bhi  againn  air  ar  diat  mhòr  a  màireach."  **  'Sminic  a  rachadh  a
dh*  iarraidh  ceann  an  dnine  sin,  's  gor  moch  air  madainn  air  momhion-
aid  fhin  e."  **  Teann  as  an  rathad  agus  leig  rathad  dba  'n  t-slnagh."
''  Tha  fuireach  beag  air  an  sin  f hathasd."  Thòisich  e  fh^in  agus  Inns-
ridh Mac  Righ  nan  Sealg  orra,  gos  an  do  mharbh  end  a  h-uile  duine
dhihbh,  's  an  do  bhuail  an  da  chlaidheamh  air  a  cheile.  Thill  eud
dachaidh  's  ràinig  eud  am  brugh.  <*  Co  siud  a  muigh?"  ursa  Fionn.
**  Tha  mise,  Fiachaire  do  mhac,  agus  Innsridh  Mac  Righ  nan  Sealg
do  dhalta/'  "  Co  aig  a  bha  *n  cath  grannd'  a bh*  air  an  àth  diugh  ?**
"  Bha  agamsa  's  aig  na  h'  niread  dheth  na  Greugachaibh."  "  Demur
a  bha  mo  dhalta  dheth  an  sin?  "  **  Fear  air  an  fhear,  smurrobh  fear
a  bharrachd,  cha  robh  gin  'na  uireasbhuidh."  "  Cuimhnich  an  t-àth
chomhrag.  Siud  a  dha  niread 's  a  thainig  a  mach  an  d^  tighinn  a
mach  an  diugh,  gaisgeach  gon  cbiall  air  an  ceann,  a'  tighinn  a  dh'
iarraidh  mo  chinnsa  go  bhi  ac'  air  an  diot  mhòr  a  mMreach.'*

Ràinig  eud  an  t-àth  chomhrag,  's  nur  a  ràinig  eud  cha  d'  thainig
duine  de  'n  t-sluagh.  **  Cha  chreid  mi,"  ursa  Fiachaire  MacFhinn,
*'  ait'  as  a  bheil  aleithid  siud  de  bhuidheann  a'  tighinn,  nach  bi  fuigh-
leach  bidh  ann.  Tha  'n  t-acras  orm  fhin,  's  nach  d'  ith  sinn  mir  o'n
a  dh'  ith  sinn  ann  an  Eirinn  e,  agus  thalla  thus'  Innsridh,  's  ruig  an
t-àit'  an  robh  eud,  's  cha  'n  aithnich  eud  duine  seach  duin'  eile,  agus
fiach  am  faigh  thu  criomagan  de  dh'  aran,  agus  de  chàis',  agus  de  dh
f heòil  a  bheir  thu  g'ar  n'  ionnsuidh,  's  fanaidh  mi  fhin  a*  gleidheadh
an  t-sluaigh,  gon  fhios  nach  d'  thigeadh  eud  gon  fhios  domh."
"  Mata  cha  'n  'eil  mis'  eòlach,  cha  'n  aithne  dhomh  an  rathad,"  urs'
Innsridh  Mac  Righ  nan  Sealg,  <^ach  falbh  fh^in,  agus  fanaidh
mise."

Dh'  f halbh  Fiachaire,  agus  dh'  fban  Innsridh,  agus  d^  rinn  àdsan,
ach  tighinn  gon  fhios  da.  **C'a'  bheil  sibh  a  dol?"  urs'  Innsridh.  **  Dol
a  dh'  iarraidh  ceann  Mhic  Cumhail  gos  a  bhi  againn  air  ar  diot  mhòr
a  màireach."  *'  'S  minic  a  dh'  iarradh  ceann  an  duine  sin,  's  gur
moch  air  mhadainn  air  mo  mhicnaid  fhin  e."  *'  Teann  agus  leig
rathad  do  'n  t-sluagh."    <*  Tha  fuireach  beag  air  an  sin.  f hatbasd."


HA6HA0H  OOLOAB.  1 8  3

Thòisich  Innsrìdh  orra  's  cha  d*  f  hkg  e  gin  diubh  na  ònrachd.  D^
"m  maith  a  rinn  e  duit  an  sluagh  a  mharbhadh  's  go  marbh  mis*
thus?"  ors'  an  gaisgeach  mòr  a  bh'  air  an  ceann.  <'Na  'n  d'
thiginnsa  mach  0  m'  bhiadh,  ague  0  m'  bblàthas,  o  m'  bhlhthas,  agus
o  m*  theine,  cha  mharbhadh  thusa  mi."  Thòisich  e  fh^in  *s  an
gaisgeach  air  a  ch^ile.  Dhianadh  eud  bogan  de  'n  chreagan,  agns
creagan  de  'n  bhogan.  An  t-àite  bu  lugha  'rachadh  eud  fodha
rachadh  eud  fodha  go  *n  gliiinean,  's  an  t-ikite  bn  mho  'rachadh  end
fodha,  rachadh  eud  fodha  go  'n  shilean.  Thug  an  gaisgeach  mòr
taiTuinn  air  a'  chlaidheamh,  's  thilg  e  'n  ceann  bhar  Innsridh  Mac
Bigh  nan  Seaig.

Thàinig  Fiachaire.  Choinnich  e  'n  gaisgeach,  *8  ceann  Innsridh
aige.  Ursa  Fiachaire  ris  a'  ghaisgeach  mhòr,  **  Dè  'n  rud  a  th'  agad
an  sin  ?"  **  Tha  agam  an  so  ceann  Mhic  Cnmhail."  **  Fiach  dhomh
e.**  Shin  e  dha  *n  ceann.  Thug  Fiachaire  pòg  dà  bhial  's  pòg  do  chnl
a  chinn.  *<  Am  bheil  fhios  agad  co  dha  thug  thn  e?"  ursa  Fiachaire,
ris  a'  ghaisgeach.  '<  Cha  n'  eil,"  urs'  esan.  **  Is  maith  a  thigeadh  e
air  a'  cholainn  air  an  robh  e  roimhe."  Dh*  fholbh  e,  agus  tharruing
e  *n  ceann  is  bnailear  air  ceann  a  ghaisgich  e,  neas  a  bha  e  bruidhinn,
is  dianar  aon  cheann  de  'n  dh^.  Dh'  f  halbh  e,  is  ràinig  e  far  an
robh  Fionn  a  rìs.

**  Co  siud  a  muigh  ?"  ursa  Fionn.  •*  Tha  mise,  Fiachaire  do  mhac."
"  Co  aig  a  bha  an  cath  grannd  a  bh'  air  an  àth  chomhràg  an  diugh  ?"
"  Bha  aig  Innsridh  do  dlialta,  is  aig  na  Greugachaibh."  **  Demur  a
tha  mo  dhalta  deth  sin?"  "Tha  e  marbh  gon  anam.  Mharbh  do
dhalta  na  Greugaich  an  toiseach,  is  mharbh  an  Greugach  mbr  esan  a
rithisd,  is  mharbh  mis'  an  sin  an  Greugach  mbr."

'*  Cuimhnich  an  t-àth  chomhrag.  Siud  Maghach  Mac  Righ  Loch-
lann,  is  a  h-uile  gin  a  bha  's  a  bhrugh  Ghreugach  leis."  Dh'  f  halbh  e
is  ribinig  e  *n  t-kth  chomhrag.  **  Tha  thu  'an  sin  Fhiachaire,"  ursa
Maghach  Colgar.  <*  Tha."  **  Leig  thugam  ceann  d'  athar,  is  bheir  mi
dhuit  drochaid  shaor  ann  an  Lochlainn."  '*  Thug  m'  athair  duit  sgoil
as  ionnsachadh,  's  a  h-uile  seorsa  draochd  a  bh'  aige,  's  gad  a  dh
ionnsaich  e  sinn  duitse,  bheireadh  tu  an  ceann  deth  rithisd ;  agus  leis
a  sin  cha  'n  f  haigh  thusa  ceann  m'  atharsa,  gos  am  faigh  thu  mo
cheann  f  bin  an  toiseach."

Thòisich  Fiachaire  air  an  t-sluagh,  is  mharbh  e  h-uUe  duine  de  'n
t-sluagh.  **  Mharbh  thus'  an  sluagh,"  ursa  Maghach,  <*  's  marbhaidh
mis'  thusa."  Thbisich  eud  air  a  cheile.  Dhianadh  end  bogan  de  'n
chreagan  agus  creagan  de  'n  bhogan.  An  t-àite  bu  lugha  rachadh
eud  fodha,  rachadh  eud  fodha  g'an  glhinean,  's  an  t-àite  bu
mho  a  rachadh  eud  fodha  rachadh  eud  fodha  g'an  stiilean.    Uair


1 8  4  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

de  na  h>iiaireaii,  bhuail  sleagh  Mhaghaich  Fiachaire  is  thn^
e  ran  as.  D^  *n  t-àm  's  an  d'  thug  e  ran  as  ach  mar  a  bha
Diarmaid  a  tionndadh  ceum  o'n  t-seilg  *an  Eirinn.  '*  Ma  shiubhail
e  'n  domhan  agus  an  saoghal,"  ursa  Diarmaid,  "tha  sleagh  a  Mhagh-
aich air  giùlan  Fhiachaire."  '*Amhradh  ort,**  ursa  Conan,  "caith
do  shleagh,  agus  amais  do  namhaid.*'  ''Ma  chaitheas  mise  mo
shleagh,  cha  'n  'eil  fhios'  a'm  nach  ann  a  mharbhainn  mo  dhuine
f  hin.'^  *'  Nam  bu  bhean  bhadanach  bhuidhe  bhiodh  ann  *s  maith  a
dh'  amaiseadh  thu  i."  **  Amhradh  ort  a  nis,  na  h-athnuadhaich  mi
na  's  f  haide."  Chrath  e  'n  t-sleagh,  's  bhuail  e  e  fo  'n  chromastaicb.
"Co  *thigeadh  orm  a  thaobh  mo  chiiil  anns  an  anmoch,  nach  d'
thigeadh  orm  a  thaobh  m'  aghaidh  anns  a'  mhadainn  ?"  ursa  Magh-
ach.  *'  Mise  thigeadh  ort/'  ursa  Diarmaid,  *'  moch  a's  anmoch  's  air
a  mhiadhon  latha."  "  D^  *m  maith  a  ni  sin  duitse?"  ursa  Maghach,
« *s  gon  d'  thoir  mis'  an  ceann  de  dh'  Fhiachaire  mu  'n  d'  thig  thu."
*'  Ma  bheir  thus'  an  ceann  deth,"  ursa  Diarmaid,  '*  bheir  mise  an  ceann
diotsa  nur  a  ruigeas  mi."  Ràinìg  Diarmaid  Lochlainn.  Thug
Maghach  an  ceann  bhàrr  Fhiachaire.  Thug  Diarmaid  an  ceann
bhàrr  a'  Mhaghaich.  Ràinig  Diarmaid  Fionn,  **  Co  siud  a  muigh?"
ursa  Fionn.  "  Tha  ann  mise  Diarmaid."  ^  Co  aig  a  bha  'n  cath
grannd  a  bh'  air  an  àth  chomhrag  an  diugh  ?"  *'  Bha  e  aig  na  b-uiread
de  na  Greugachaibh,  's  aig  a  Mhaghach  Mac  Righ  Lochlann,  's  aig
Fiachaire  do  mhac.  Mharbh  Fiachaire  h-uile  gin  de  na  Greug-
achaibh  mharbh  Maghach  Fiachaire,  's  mharbh  mis'  an  sin
Maghach."  "  Gad  a  mharbh  Maghach  Fiachaire  carson  a  mharbh
thusa  Maghach,  nach  do  leig  thu  leis  beo  ?  Ach  cuimhnich  an
t-àth  chomhrag,  's  a  h-nile  h-aon  am  bruighean  nan  Greug-
ach  a  tighinn  a  mach  comhla."  "Co  dhiubh  's  fhearr  leats'  a
Chath  Conan  falbh  leamsa,  na  fantainn  an  so?"  "Is  fhearr
learn  falbh  comhla  riutsa."  Dh'  fhalbh  end,  's  'nur  a  ràinig
eud  an  t-àth  chomhrag  cha  do  choinnich  duine  eud.  Ràinig  eud
far  an  robh  eud.  Shuidh  eud  an  sin  is  de  rinn  Cath  Conan  ach
tuiteam'na  chadal,  leis  cho  fada  's  a  bha  eud  gon  tighinn  a  mach.
Cha  b'  fhada  'na  dheigh  sin  gos  an  do  thòisich  eud  ri  tighinn,  agus
na  dorsan  ri  fosgladh.  Bha  dorus  ma  choinneamh  a  h-uile  latha  's  a
bhliadhn'  air  gach  brugh  air  alt 's  gon  do  mhaom  eud  a  mach  uile
ma  cheann  Dhiarmaid.  Thòisich  Diarmaid  orra,  agus  le  fiiaim  nan
claidhean  agus  le  tilleadh  nan  daoine  dhùisg  Cath  Conan,  's  thbisich
e  air  dinneadh  a'  chlaidheamh  ann  am  miadhon  a  chalp'  aig'  Diar-
maid. Fhuair  Diarmaid  an  so  tachas  ann  am  miadhon  a  chalp'  aige.
Thug  e  sùil  uaithe,  is  de  chunnaic  e  ach  Cath  Conan  ag  obair  leis  a
chlaidheamh  aige  fh^in?     "Amhradh  ort  a  Chath  Conain,"  ursa


MAGHACH  COLGAR.  l8c

Diarmaid,  "  seachainn  do  dhuine  f  h^in,  agus  amais  do  namhaid,  "s
gor  CO  maith  dhuit  a  bhi  'ga  dhinneadh  anns  a  bbota  ud  shuas,  *8  a
bhi  'ga  dhinneadh  a'm'  chalpasa.  Na  h-athnuadhaich  thnsa  mis*
anis,  ach  an  amais  mis'  air  mo  namhaid."  Mharbh  eud  a  h-uiie  duine
dhe  'n  t-sluagh.

Smaointich  eud  air  an  fheadhain  a  bha  's  an  ^raich  's  eud  gon
bhiadh.  Thug  gach  aon  diubh  leis  Ian  neapaigin,  'sa  bhrollaich,  's  a
phòcaidean.  "  Co  siud  a  muigh  ?"  ursa  Fionn.  "  Tha  mise  Diar-
maid  mac  do  pheathar."  "  D^mur  a  tha  na  Greugaich  ?"  <<  Tha  a
h-uile  duine  dhiubh  marbh  gon  anam."  '<  O  Thalia,  agus  their
thugam  teanachdas  de  bhiadh."  "Gad  a  bheirinnsa  dhuit  biadh
demur  a  dh'  itheadh  thu  e,  's  thu  ann  an  sin,  's  thu  ceanghailte  ?"

Cha  robh  saod  aig  air  biadh  a  thoirt  daibh,  ach  a  bhi  'toUadh  a'
bhrugh  as  an  cionn,  's  a'  leigeil  a  bhidh  sios  a  'n  ionnsuidh.  *'  De  tha
go  d'  f  huasgladh  as  a  sin  ?"  ursa  Diarmaid.  *'  Mata  is  deacair  sinn
fhaotainn,"  ursa  Fionn,  *'  's  cha  'n  e  h-uile  fear  a  gheibh  e,  's  cha  'n
'eil  e  ri  fhaotainn  idir."  "  Innis  thusa  dhomhs' e,"  ursa  Diarmaid,
*'  agus  gheibh  mi  e."  "  Tha  f  hios'  am  gon  ciosnaich  thu  'n  saoghal
gos  am  faigh  thu  e,  agus  cha  *n  'eil  mo  leigheas-sa  ri  fhaotainn,  na
fuasgladh  as  an  so,  ach  aon  rud."  "  D^  'n  aon  rud  a  th'  ann,  nach
innis  thu  dhomhs' e, 's  gom  faighinn  e?"  *'Triiiir  nigheanan  righ
ris  an  can  eud  Righ  Gil."  Tha  na  tri  nigheanan  ann  an  caisteal  ann
am  miadhon  acarsaid,  gon  searbhant,  gon  sgalag,  gon  duine  beo  ach
eud  f hin.  Eud  sin  fhaotainn,  'sa  h-uile  boinne  fala  tìi'  annt'  f hàsgadh
asda,  's  a  cuir  air  trinsearan,  's  ann  an  copain,— a  h-uile  diar  fal'  a  th'
annt  a  thoirt  asda,  's  am  Htgail  cho  geal  ris  an  anart."

Dh'  f  halbh  Diarmaid,  's  bha  e  'falbh  gos  an  robh  dubhadh  air  a
bhonnaibh,  agus  tolladh  air  a  bhrogan,  is  neoil  gheal  an  latha  'falbh,
's  neoil  dhubha  na  h>oidhche  tigbinn,  is  gon  e  faighinn  kite  stad  na
tàmh  dha.  Ràinig  e  'n  acarsaid,  's  chuir  e  ceann  caol  a  shleagh  fo
'uchd,  's  ghearr  e  leum,  s  bha  e  'sa  chaisteal  an  oidhche  sin.  An  la
'r  na  mhàireach  thill  e.  Thug  e  leis  dithisd  air  an  dama  guallainn
's  a  h-aon  air  a'  ghualainn  eile.  Chuir  e  ceann  caol  a  shleagh  fo  'uchd,
's  air  a  chiad  leum  bha  e  air  tir.  Ràìnig  e  Fionn.  Thug  e  d'a  ionn-
suidh na  nigheanan.  Dh'  fhàisg  e  h-uile  diar  fala  bh'  anns  na  h-uile
tè  riabh  a  mach  air  miaraibh  a  cas,  agus  a  làmh.  Chuir  e  brat  dubh
air  an  uachdar.  Thòisich  e  air  dortadh  na  faV  air  an  fheadhain  a
bha  stigh,  's  a  h-uile  fear  a  dhoirteadh  e  n  f  huil  air,  dh'  eireadh  e,  is
dh'  f  halbhadh  e.  Thèirig  an  f  huil,  is  bha  h-uile  fear  air  f  huasgladh
ach  h-aon  ris  an  canadh  eud  Conan.

"An  ann  a  brath  mis' fhàgail  an  so  a  tha  thu  Dhiarmaid?"
"  Amhradh  ort,  theirig  an  fhuiL"   **  Nam  bubhean  bhriagh,  bhadau-


1 86  WEST  piGHLAND  TALES.

ach,  bhnidhe  mise,  's  maith  a  dh'  amaiseadh  tu  mi."  ''Ma  leanas
do  chraicionn  riut  f  h^in,  na  do  chnamhan  ri  d'  f  beoil,  bheir  mis'  as
tha."  Dh'  fhalbh  e,  agus  rug  e  air  làimh  air.  Fhuair  e  ma  sgaoil,
ach  gon  do  lean  craicionn  a  mhàis  ris  an  kite  shuidhe,  agus  craicionn
nam  bonn  ris  an  talamb.  **  Bu  mhaith  a  nis,"  nrs'  eudsan,  **  na'm
biodh  clann  an  righ  mhaith  beb,  ach  's  coir  an  tiodhlacadh  fo  'n
talamh.'*  Dh'  fhalbh  end  far  an  robh  end,  's  fhnair  end  end  a
gàireachdaich  *8  a'  beadradh  r'a  chèile,  is  end  beo.  Dh'  fhalbh  Diar-
maid,  is  thug  e  leis  end  air  fras  mhullach  a  ghnaillean,  's  dh'  f  hag  e
end 's  a  chaisteal  mur  a  bha  end  roimhe.  Thàinig  end  uile  dhachaidh
do  dh'  Eirinn.

Got  this  tale  from  Alexander  MacNeill,  fisherman,  Then
Tangval,  Barra ;  says  he  learnt  it  from  his  father,  and  that  he
heard  it  recited  by  him  and  others  ever  since  he  remembers ;  says  it
has  been  handed  down  orally  from  one  person  to  another  from
time  immemorial.  MacNeill  is  about  sixty  years  of  age,  and  can
neither  read,  write,  nor  speak  English.  His  father  died  twenty
years  ago,  aged  eighty  years.

Barra,  July  1869.

I  know  nothing  like  this  anywhere  out  of  the  Highlands,  but
1  have  heard  similar  wild  rambling  stories  there  all  my  life.

The  heroes  are  the  heroes  of  Ossian,  with  the  characters
always  assigned  to  them  in  Gaelic  story.  Fionn,  the  head  of  the
band,  but  not  the  most  successful ;  Diarmaid,  the  brown-haired
admirer  of  'the  fair  sex ;  Conan,  the  wicked,  mischievous  charac-
ter, who  would  be  the  clown  in  a  pantomime,  or  Loki  in  Norse
mythology.  They  are  enchanted  in  a  Bbugh,  which  I  have  trans-
lated burgh,  on  the  authority  of  Armstrong;  and  they  fight
crowds  of  Greeks  on  a  place,  if  it  be  a  for  aitb  ;  or  at  a  ford,  if  it
be  ATH,  which  is  pronounced  in  the  same  way.  Greeks,  Greu-
GACHiBH,  may  possibly  be  GsuAGACH-ibh,  the  long-haired  people
mentioned  in  the  first  story,  changed  into  Greeks  in  modem
times  ;  or  "  Gbuagach  "  may  be  a  corruption  from  "  Greugach,"
and  this  story  compounded  by  some  old  bard  from  all  the  know-
ledge hehad  gathered,  including  Greeks,  just  as  the  fore-word  to  the
Edda  is  compounded  of  Tyrkland,  and  Troja,  and  Odin,  and  Thor,
the  Asia  men  and  the  Asa,  and  all  that  the  writer  knew.  The
stoty  as  told  is  extravagant.  Men  in  Eirinn  and  in  Lochlainn,  Ireland,


MAGHACH  COLGAR.  1 8  7

and  Scandinavia,  converse  and  throw  spears  at  each  other.  The
hammer  of  Fionn  is  heard  in  Ireland  when  struck  in  Lochlan.
But  one  of  the  mannscripts  in  the  Advocates'  Library  throws
some  light  on  this  part  of  the  tale.  If  the  scene  were  an  island
in  the  Shannon,  men  might  converse  and  fight  in  the  ford  well
enough.  The  MS.  is  a  quarto  on  paper,  with  no  date,  containing
five  tales  in  prose,  a  vocabulary,  and  poems,  and  is  attributed  to
the  twelfth  century.  "  Keating  considers  the  subject  of  Tale  2,
which  contains  forty-two  pages,  as  authentic  history."  One  of
the  people  mentioned  is  Aol  or  ^ul,  a  son  of  Donald,  king  of
Scotland,  who  is  probably  "  Great  lall,"  unless  lall  is  larl,  an
Earl.  Tale  3  sends  Cuchullin  first  to  Scotland  to  learn  feats  of
agility  from  Doiream,  daughter  of  King  Donald,  thence  to  Scythia,
where  a  seminary  is  crowded  with  pupils  from  Asia,  Africa,  and
Europe.  He  beats  them  all,  goes  through  wonderful  adventures,
goes  to  Greece,  returns  with  certain  Irish  chiefs,  arrives  in  Ire-
land,_and  is  followed  by  his  son,  a  half  Scythian,  whom  he  kills  at
a  ford.  No.  4,  the  story  of  the  children  of  Lir,  changed  into
swans,  is  very  curious*

No.  5  is  called  the  rebellion  of  Miodach,  son  of  Colgab,
against  Fingal,  and  seems  to  resemble  Maghach  Colgar.

Golgar,  king  of  Lochlin,  proposes  to  assume  the  title  of  Sove-
reign of  the  Isles,  and  to  subjugate  Ireland.  He  is  beaten  by
Fingal,  who  gives  him  a  residence  in  an  idand  in  the  Shannon,
After  eighteen  years  he  comes  to  propose  riddles  to  Fingal,  and
invites  him  to  an  entertainment.  They,  the  flngalians,  go,  and
are  enchanted^  sing  their  own  dirge,  are  overheard  by  a  friend
sent  by  Ossian.  Some  Oreeh  Claris  (Gaelic,  larla)  appear,  and
there  is  a  great  deal  of  fighting.  Ossian  dispatches  Diabmad  o
DuiBHNE  and  Fathì^oh  Cjlnnach,  who  guard  a  ford  and  perfonn
feats.  Oscar,  son  of  Ossian,  performs  prodigies  of  valour,  and
kills  Sinnsir.

This  abstract  of  an  abstract,  lent  me  by  Mr.  Skene,  is  sufficient
to  shew  that  this  old  manuscript  tale  still  exists  in  fragments,
as  tradition,  amongst  the  people  of  the  Isles.

The  transcriber  who  copied  it  into  the  Eoman  hand  in  1813,
considers  the  MS.  to  be  written  in  very  pure  Gaelic.  It  is  re-
ferred to  the  twelfth  or  thirteenth  century,  is  characterized  by
exuberant  diction,  groups  of  poetical  adjectives,  each  beginning


I  88  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

with  the  same  letter  as  the  substantive.  In  short,  Tale  5
seems  to  be  a  mnch  longer,  better,  and  older  version  of  the
tale  of  Maghach  Colgar.  The  transcriber  makes  a  kind  of
apology  for  the  want  of  truth  in  these  tales  at  the  end  of  his  ab-
stract. He  was  probably  impressed  with  the  idea  that  Ossian
and  his  heroes  sang  and  fought  in  Scotland,  and  that  Uirsgeul
meant  a  new  tale  or  novel,  unworthy  of  notice.  My  opinion
is  that  the  prose  tales  and  the  poems,  and  this  especially,
are  alike  old  compositions,  founded  on  old  traditions  common  to
all  Celts,  and  perhaps  to  all  Indo-European  races,  but  altered  and
ornamented,  and  twisted  into  compositions  by  bards  and  reciters
of  all  ages,  and  every  branch  of  the  race ;  altered  to  suit  the
time  and  place — adorned  with  any  ornament  that  the  bard  or
reciter  had  at  his  disposal ;  and  now  a  mere  remnant  of  the  past.

It  is  a  great  pity  that  these  MSS.  in  the  Advocates'  Library
are  still  unpublished.  They  could  not  fail  to  throw  light  on  the
period  when  they  were  written.

It  is  remarkable  that  the  so-called  Greeks  in  this  story  seem
to  want  the  head  of  Fionn  for  dinner.


XXXVII.
THE  BEOLLACHAN.

From  Widow  M.  Calder,  a  pauper,  Sutherland.

TN  the  mill  of  the  Glens  Muilionna  glbannan  lived
-■-  long  ago  a  cripple  of  the  name  of  Murray,  better
known  as  "  Ally  "  na  MuiHnn.  He  was  maintained
by  the  charity  of  the  miller  and  his  neighbours,  who,
when  they  removed  their  meal,  put  each  a  handful
into  the  lamiter's  bag.  The  lad  slept  usually  at  the
mill  j  and  it  came  to  pass  that  one  night,  who  should
enter  but  the  Brollaohan,*  son  of  the  Fuath.

Now  the  BroUachan  has  eyes  and  a  mouth,  and
can  say  two  words  only,  mi-fhbin,  myseli^  and  thu-
FHEiN,  thyself ;  besides  that,  he  has  no  speech,  and
alas  no  shape.  He  lay  all  his  lubber-length  by  the
dying  fire ;  and  Murray  threw  a  fresh  peat  on  the
embers,  which  made  them  fly  about  red  hot,  and
Brollachan  was  severely  burnt  So  he  screamed  in  an
awful  way,  and  soon  comes  the  "  Vough,"  very  fierce,
crying,  "  Och,  my  Brollachan,  who  then  burnt  you  ?"
but  all  he  could  say  was  "  mee  ! "  and  then  he  said
"  00 !"  (me  and  thou,  mi  thu);  and  she  replied,  "  Were
it  any  other,  would  n't  I  be  revenged."

*  Brollachan  is  a  Gaelic  expression  for  any  shapeless  deformed
creature. — Collector.  I  should  translate  it  breastling,  or  bant-
ling.—J.  F.  C.


190  WEST  mOHLAND  TALES.

Murray  slipped  tlie  peck  measure  over  himsell^  and
hid  among  the  machineiy,  so  as  to  look  as  like  a  sack
as  possible,  ejaculatiiig  at  times,  "  May  the  Lord  pre-
serve me,"  so  he  escaped  unhurt ;  and  the  "  Vough  "
and  her  Brollachan  lefb  the  mill.  That  same  night  a
woman  going  by  the  place,  was  chased  by  the  still
furious  parent,  and  could  not  have  been  saved  had  she
not  been  nimble  enough  to  reach  her  own  door  in  time,
to  leave  nothing  for  the  "  Vough"  to  catch  but  her
heel ;  this  heel  was  torn  ofi^  and  the  woman  went
lame  all  the  rest  of  her  days.

The  word  spelt  Vongh,  is  probably  spelt  from  ear ;  bnt  it  is
the  Gaelic  word  Faath,  which  is  spelt  Fonah  in  the  map  of  the
estate  where  the  mill  is.  The  story  was  told  in  Gaelic  to  D.  M.,
gamekeeper,  and  written  by  him  in  English.

Of  the  same  mill  another  story  was  got  from  the  same  source,
called —

1.  MouiJON  NA  Fdadh.  One  of  John  Bethune's  forebears,
who  lived  in  Tubeman,  laid  a  bet  that  he  would  seize  the  kelpie
of  Monlin  na  Fonah  and  bring  her  bound  to  the  inn  at  Inveran.
He  procured  a  brown  right-sided  maned  horse,  and  a  brown
black-muzzled  dog ;  and,  by  the  help  of  the  latter,  having  secured
the  Yough,  he  tied  her  on  the  horse  behind  him,  and  galloped
away.  She  was  very  fierce,  but  he  kept  her  quiet  by  pinning  her
down  with  an  awl  and  a  needle.  Crossing  the  bum  at  the  fur-
ther side  of  Loch  Migdal,  she  became  so  restless  that  he  stuck
the  shoemaker's  and  the  tailor's  weapons  into  her  with  great
violence.  She  cried  out,  "  Pierce  me  with  the  awl,  but  keep  that
slender  hair-like  slave  (the  needle)  out  of  me.  When  he  reached
the  clachan  of  Inveran,  where  his  companions  were  anxiously
waiting  for  him,  he  called  to  them  to  come  out  and  see  the  Vough.
Then  they  came  out  with  lights,  but  as  the  light  fell  upon  her
she  dropt  o£E|  and  fell  to  earth  like  the  remains  of  a  fallen  star —
a  small  lump  of  jelly.  (These  jellies  are  often  seen  on  the  moors ;
dropt  stars  resembling  the  medusie  on  the  shore — Collector.
They  are  white,  do  not  seem  to  be  attached  to  the  ground,  and


THE  BROLLACHAN.  I9I

are  always  attributed  to  the  stars.    Tfaey  are  common  on  moors,
and  I  do  not  know  what  they  are. — J.  F.  C.)
The  same  creature,  or  one  of  her  kind,

2.  In  Beann  na  Caltuinn,  one  day  called  to  Donald  MacRobb,
**  Will  you  eat  any  charcoal,  Donald  ?"  "  No,'*  he  said  ;  '*  my
wife  will  give  me  supper  when  I  go  home."

3.  And  it  said,  that  a  family  of  Munroes  had,  many  gener-
ations ago,  married  with  the  Yougha  of  Beann  na  Galtuinn.  Their
descendants  had  manes  and  tails  till  within  the  last  four  genera-
tions.

4.  Four  or  five  miles  from  Skibo  Castle  is  Loch  Nigdal,  with
a  great  granite  rock  of  the  same  name  to  the  north  of  it ;  at  one
end  is  a  bum  which  passes  the  mill  where  the  BroUachan  entered.
It  is  haunted  with  a  Banshee  (that  is,  female  fairy),  which  the
miller's  wife  saw  about  three  years  ago.  She  was  sitting  on
a  stone,  quiet,  and  beautifully  dressed  in  a  green  silk  dress,  the
sleeyes  of  which  were  curiously  puffed  from  the  wrists  to  the
shoulder.  Her  long  hair  was  yellow,  like  ripe  corn  ;  but  on
nearer  view  she  had  no  nose.

5.  A  Tery  old,  coarse,  and  dirty  Banshee  belongs  to  a  small
sheep-farm  of  Mr.  Dempster's.  A  shepherd  found  her  apparently
crippled  at  the  edge  of  the  moss,  and  offered  her  a  lift  on  his
back.  In  going,  he  espied  her  feet,  which  were  dangling  down,
and  seeing  that  she  was  web-footed,  he  threw  her  off,  flung  away
the  plùd  on  which  she  had  lain,  and  ran  for  his  life.

From  all  these  it  appears  that  the  Fuath  in  Sutherland  is  a
water  spirit ;  that  there  are  males  and  females  ;  that  they  have
web-feet,  yellow  hair,  green  dresses,  tails,  manes,  and  no  noses  ;
that  they  marry  men,  and  are  killed  by  light,  and  hurt  with
steel  weapons  ;  that  in  crossing  a  stream  they  become  restless.
From  the  following  stories  it  appears  that  they  are  hairy,  have
bare  skin  on  their  faces,  and  have  two  large  round  eyes.

The  Rev.  Mr.  Thomas  Pattieson  has  sent  me  a  story  from
Islay,  which  he  has  written  in  English,  but  which  he  picked  up
amongst  the  people.  It  is  as  follows  >  but  I  have  ventured  to
shorten  it  a  little  : —

6.  The  Water  Horse, — There  is  a  small  island  off  the  Bbinns


igi  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

of  Islaj,  where  there  is  a  light-house  now,  hnt  which  wag  formerly
used  for  grazing  cattle  only.  There  is  a  fearful  tide,  and  it  is
dangerous  to  cross  the  Sound  in  had  weather.  A  man  and  a
woman  had  charge  of  a  large  herd  of  cattle  there,  and  the  woman-
was  left  alone  one  night,  for  the  man  had  to  go  to  the  mainland,
and  a  storm  coming  on,  he  ccmld  not  return.  She  sat  ai  her  peat
fìre  in  her  cahin,  when  suddenly  the  heard  a  sound  as  of  living
creatures  all  about  the  hut,  She  knew  her  fellow-servant  could
not  have  returned,  and,  thinking  it  might  be  the  cows,  she  glanced
at  the  window  which  she  had  left  open.  She  saw  a  pair  of  large
round  eyes  fastened  upon  her  malignantly,  and  heard  a  low
whining  laugh.  The  door  opened,  and  an  unearthly  creature
walked  in.  He  was  very  tall  and  large,  rough  and  hairy,  with
no  skin  upon  his  fafie  but  a  dark  livid  covering.  He  advanced
to  the  fire  and  asked  the  girl  what  her  name  was.  She  answered
as  confidently  as  she  could,  "  Mise  mi  Fhin  " — me  myself.  The
creature  seized  the  girl,  and  she  threw  a  large  ladle  full  of  boiling
water  aHout  him,  and  he,  yelling,' bounded  out.  A  great  noise
ensued  of  wild  unearthly  tongues,  questioning  their  yelling
companion  as  to  what  was  the  matter  with  him,  and  who  had
hurt  him,  "  Mise  mi  Fhin,  Mise  mi  Fhin — me  myself,  me  my-
self," shouted  the  savage ;  and  thereupon  arose  a  great  shout  of
laughter.  No  sooner  did  that  pass  than  the  girl  rushed  out  in
terror,  turned  one  of  the  cows  that  was  lying  outside  from  its
resting-place,  and  having  made  a  circle  about  her,  lay  there  her-
self. The  storm  raged,  and  she  heard  the  rushing  of  many  foot-
steps, loud  laughter,  and  sounds  of  strife.  When  morning  dawned,
she  was  safe,  protected  by  the  consecrated  circle,  but  the  cow  she
had  disturbed  was  dead.

An  Islay  pilot  told  me  this  year  that  water-horses  still  haunt
a  glen  near  the  island.  Rattling  chains  are  heard  there.  An  ac-
count was  published  some  years  ago  in  newspapers  of  the  appear-
ance of  a  mermaid  near  the  spot.

7.  I  myself  heard  the  groundwork  of  this  story  long  ago
from  John  Piper ;  and  I  heard  a  similar  story  this  year  in  Man.
(See  Introduction.)  It  is  the  same  as  the  BroUachan.  The  creature
was  scalded  by  a  woman  (who  had  said  her  name  was  Mi  Fhin
when  he  came  in),  because  he  wanted  to  eat  her  porridge ;  and


mmi^gmamf^mmm^ma^m^tmmmmmmmmmmmmm^mm'^mmmmti'mmmmm'^


THE  BBOLLACHAN.  193

when  he  told  his  friends  Myself  had  horned  him,  they  said,  "  Ma
8*  thu  f  hin  a  losg  tha  f  hin  hi  gad'  leigheas  fhin  thu  f  hin — ^If  it
was  thyself  hamt  thyself,  he  thyself  healing  thyself."

8.  I  again  heard  a  similar  story  this  year  from  a  gentleman
whom  I  met  in  an  inn  at  Gairloch.  He  had  a  large  knowledge
of  Highland  tales,  and  we  spent  several  pleasant  evenings  to-
gether. He  has  every  right  to  stories,  for  one  of  his  ancestors
was  a  clever  doctor  in  his  day,  and  is  now  a  magician  in  legends.
Some  of  his  MSS.  are  in  the  Advocates*  Lihrary.

Mr.  Pattieson  points  out  the  resemblance  which  this  hears  to
part  of  the  story  of  Ulysses,  and,  for  the  8|ike  of  comparison,
here  it  is  from  the  ninth  hook  of  Pope's  Odyssey : —

9.  Ulysses  goes  into  the  cave  of  the  Cyclop  with  some  of  his
companions.  The  Cyclop  was  a  one-eyed  shepherd,  and  his  cave
is  described  as  a  dairy ;  his  flocks  were  goats  and  sheep,  which
he  milked  when  he  came  home.  He  shut  his  cave  by  rolling  a
stone.

"  Scarce  twenty-four  wheeled  cars  compact  and  strong
The  massy  load  could  bear  or  roll  along.*'

He  was  a  giant,  therefore,  living  under  ground ;  and  he  ate
two  of  the  strangers  raw.  He  spoke  Greek,  but  claimed  to  be
of  a  race  superior  to  the  Greek  gods.  He  ate  two  more  Greeks
for  breakfast,  and  two  for  supper.  Then  got  drunk  on  wine  given
him  by  Ulysses,  which  was  better  than  his  own.  Ulysses  said,
*'  No  man  is  my  name ;"  and  the  giant  promised  to  eat  him  last,
as  a  return  for  his  gift  of  rosy  wine,  and  went  to  sleep.

Then  they  heated  a  stake  in  the  fire,  and  drilled  his  eye  out.
The  Cyclops  assembled  at  his  '*  well-known  roar,"  asked  what  was
the  matter,  and  were  told —

"  Friends,  no  man  kills  me,  no  man  in  the  hour
Of  sleep  oppresses  me  with  fraudfiil  power.
If  no  man  hurt  thee,  but  the  hand  divine
Inflicts  disease,  it  fits  thee  to  resign.
To  Jove  or  to  thy  father  Neptune  pray,
The  brethren  cried,  and  instant  strode  away."

It  seems,  then,  that  the  Cyclop  was  a  water-being  as  well  as
the  Fuath  and  water-horse  of  Gaelic  story,  and  the  kelpie.   There
is  no  word  in  Gaelic  that  could  be  corrupted  into  Kelpie,  but
VOL.  IL  O


194  WEST  HIGHLAND  TAIJEIS.

he  is  the  same  as  Each  uisge.  The  Gaelic  tradition  inay  haVe
been  taken  from  Homer ;  but  if  so,  the  plagiarist  must  have
lived  some  time  ago,  for  the  story  is  now  widely  spread,  and
his  edition  must  have  had  some  other  reading  for  ovnsf  be-
cause the  Gaelic  word  is  "  myself,"  in  all  versions  I  know.

10.  The  Oailleach  Mhore  of  OLisBncK  was  a  very  rich
and  wicked  old  woman  (I  have  already  shown  that  there  is
some  reason  to  suppose  she  was  a  Lapp ;  and  no  Lapp  ever
offered  me  anything,  often  as  I  have  been  amongst  them),  who,
though  she  had  plenty  of  the  good  things  of  this  world,  never
gave  anything  away,  and  never  asked  a  traveller  to  sit  down
in  her  house.  A  bold  man  once  laid  a  wager  that  he  would
circumvent  her.  He  accordingly  walked  into  her  kitchen,
when  she  craved  to  know  whence  he  came  and  what  was  his
destination.  "I  came  from  the  south  and  am  going  north,"
said  he.  "  And  what  is  your  name  ?  "  said  the  hag  of  Greyside.
•'  My  name  is  William  Dean  Suidhe."  "  William  dean  Suidhe  !*'
(sit  down)  she  repeated ;  when  he  flung  himself  into  a  chair,  and
making  her  a  bow,  said,  "  That  will  I  when  the  mistress  bids  me."
She  was  very  angry,  and,  taking  out  an  enormous  bannock  as
round  as  the  moon,  began  to  eat  without  taking  any  notice  of
him.  "  Your  piece  seems  a  dry  one,  mistress,"  said  William.
''  The  fat  side  is  to  me,"  said  the  witch.  And  indeed  she  had
one  side  spread  with  butter  about  an  inch  thick.  "  The  side  that
is  to  you  shall  be  to  me,"  he  retorted  ;  and  caught  at  the  cake.
He  called  her  a  satanic  old  Cailleach,  and  left  the  hut  carrying
his  piece  away  as  a  trophy.  The  old  woman  was  left  cursing,
and  praying  that  the  cake  might  kill  him ;  but  he  had  too  much
sense  to  touch  it,  and  his  ill-wisher  (the  hag)  foolishly  finishing
the  remainder,  died  of  its  unhallowed  effects,  to  the  great  relief
of  her  neighbours.

Those  who  maintain  that  popular  stories  are  as  old  as  the  races
who  tell  them,  will  probably  consider  the  BroUachan,  and  the
Water-horse,  and  the  Greek  story,  as  so  many  versions  of  an
older  original.  In  this  case  Homer  has  a  strong  claim  ;  but  he
has  an  equal  claim  to  several  other  stories  in  this  collection,
which  Grimm  and  the  Arabian  Nights  claim  as  popular  lore.
Sindbad,  and  Conal  Crobhi,  and  Grimms'  Robber,  if  plagiarists,
are  far  more  guilty  than  the  BroUachan ;  and  Murachadh  Mac
Brian,  who  follows,  is  quite  as  bad.


vmm


XXXVIII.
MUEACHADH  MAC  BRIAN.

From  Donald  Shaw,  old  soldier,  Ballygrant,  Islay.

rpHEEE  were  three  men  in  the  land  of  Ceann  Coire,
-*-  in  Erin — that  was  Moorchug  MacBreean,  and
Donachug  MacBreean,  and  Breean  Borr,  their  fether.
They  got  a  call  to  go  to  dine  in  a  place  which  they
called  Maqh  o  Dorna.  They  took  with  them  three-
score knives,  threescore  bridles,  and  threescore  red-eared
white  horses.  They  sat  at  the  feast,  and  no  sooner  sat
they  at  the  feast  than  they  saw  the  maid  of  Knock
Seanan,  in  Erin,  parsing  hy.  Then  out  would  go
Moorchug,  then  out  would  go  Donachug,  and  then  out
would  go  Brian  Borr,  their  father,  after  them.

They  were  not  long  gone  when  they  saw  a  great
lad  coming  to  meet  them.

Brian  Borr  blessed  him  in  the  Fisniche  Faisniche —
soft,  flowing,  peaceful  words  of  wisdom.

He  answered  in  better  words,  and  if  they  were  no
better  they  were  no  worse.

"What  man  art  thou?'*  said  Brian  Borr.  "A
good  lad  am  I,  seeking  a  master."  "Almighty  of
the  world  against  thee,  beast  1  Dost  thou  wish  to  be
hanged  with  a  sea  of  blood  about  thine  eyes  !  Tis
long  I  would  be  ere  I  would  hire  thee  at  thy  size."  "  I
care  not,  may  be  Murachadh  would  hire  me."     He


196  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

reached  Murachadk  Miuachadh  blessed  him  in  the
FiSNioHB  Faisnichb — soft,  flowing,  peaceM  words  of
wisdom.  The  lad  answered  him  in  better  words,  and
if  no  better  they  were  no  worse.

"What  man  art  thoul"  says  Murachadh.  "A
good  lad  am  I,  seeking  a  master/'  said  he.  "  What
wages  wilt  thou  be  asking?"  "Two-thirds  of  thy
counsel  to  be  mine,*  and  thyself  to  have  but  one,  till
we  come  fix)m  chasing  the  maiden."

"  K  thou  gett'st  that,"  said  Murachadh,  "  man  got
it  not  before,  and  no  man  will  get  it  after  thee,  but
sure  if  thou  wouldst  not  honour  it,  thou  wouldst  not
ask  it."

When  they  had  agreed  he  took  a  race  after  the
maiden,  and  he  was  not  long  gone  when  he  came  back.
"  Almighty  of  the  world  against  thee,"  said  Brian  Borr.
"  Dost  thou  wish  to  be  hanged  with  a  sea  of  blood
about  thine  eyes?  I  knew  he  was  without  a  gillie
in  the  first  of  the  day  the  man  that  hired  thee,  and
had  he  taken  my  counsel  he  had  not  hired  thee."

"  I  will  not  do  a  good  turn  to-day  till  the  buttons
come  off  my  bigcoat"  Then  they  got  a  tailor,  and
the  tailor  had  not  as  much  skill  as  would  take  the
buttons  off  the  greatcoat.  Then  he  took  shears  out  of
the  rim  of  his  little  hat,  and  he  took  the  buttons  off
his  greatcoat  in  a  trice.

Then  he  took  another  race  afber  the  maiden,  and
he  was  not  long  away  when  he  came  back.  "Almighty
of  the  great  world  against  thee,"  said  Brian  Borr.  "  Dost
thou  wish  to  be  hanged  with  a  sea  of  blood  about
thine  eyes?  I  knew  that  he  was  without  a  gillie
in  the  first  of  the  day  the  man  that  hired  thee,  and
had  he  taken  my  counsel  he  had  not  hired  thea"

*  "  Da  dhrian  de  d^  comhairle."   I  am  not  sure  of  this  trans-
lation.


sammmmf^'^'^^^


MUBAGHADH  MAO  BRIAN.  1 97

"  I  wont  do  a  good  turn  to-day  till  the  buttons  go
on  the  bigcoat  again,  for  the  women  will  chase  ma"
They  got  a  tailor,  and  the  shears  would  not  cut  a  grain,
and  the  needle  would  not  sew  a  stitch.  Then  he  got
shears  and  a  needle  himself  out  of  the  rim  of  his  Httle  hat,
and  he  sewed  the  buttons  on  the  bigcoat  again.  He  took
another  little  race  after  the  maiden,  and  he  was  not
long  gone  when  he  came  back.  "  Almighty,  &c.
.     .     .     ,"  said  Biian  Borr.

"  I  will  not  do  a  good  turn  to-day  till  the  thorn  in
my  foot  comes  ouf  Then  they  got  a  leech,  but  the
leech  had  not  sMU  enough  to  take  the  thorn  out  of  the
foot  Then  he  himself  took  out  a  little  iron  that  he
had  in  the  rim  of  his  little  hat,  and  he  took  the  thorn
out  of  his  foot,  and  the  thorn  was  a  foot  longer  than
the  shank."

"  Oov !  oov  !*'  said  Brian  Borr,  "  that  is  a  wondrous
matter,  the  thorn  to  be  longer  than  the  shank."  "  Many
a  thing,"  said  he,  '^  is  more  wondrous  than  that ;  there
is  good  stretching  at  the  end  of  the  joints  and  bone&"
Then  he  took  a  little  race  away,  and  he  was  not  long
gone  when  he  came  back,  and  he  had  a  wild  duck
roasted  on  the  fire,  not  a  bit  burned  or  raw  in  her,  and
she  was  enough  for  every  one  within.  "  This  is  the
best  turn  thou  hast  done  yet,"  said  Brian  Borr.

"  I  will  not  do  a  good  turn  to-day  till  I  get  a
little  wink  of  sleep."  They  went  to  the  back  of  Knock
Seanan,  in  Erin,  behind  the  wind  and  before  the  sun,
where  they  could  see  each  man,  and  man  could  not  see
them.  He  slept  there ;  and  when  he  awoke,  what  but
the  maid  of  Knock  Seanan  was  on  the  top  of  the  hill !
He  rose,  he  struck  her  a  blow  of  his  palm  on  the  ear,
and  he  set  her  head  back  foremost  "  Almighty,  &c.
.     .     .     ,"  said  Brian  Borr.

"Set  the  head  right  on  the  maiden."- — "If  my


J  93  WB8T  HIGHLAJm  TALES.

master  asks  me  that,  I  will  do  it,  and  if  he  does  not
ask,  I  will  not  do  it  to-day  for  thea"

.  '^  There  she  is/'  said  Muiachadh,  '^  and  do  to  her
as]  thou  wilt"  Then  struck  he  a  fist  on  her,  and  he
knocked  her  brains  ont  They  were  not  long  there
when  they  saw  a  deer  and  a  dog  chasing  it  Out  after
it  went  they,  and  the  sparks  that  the  hound  sent  from
his  toes  were  hitting  Murachadh's  gillie  right  in  the
face.  The  sparks  that  Murachadh's  gillie  sent  £x)m  his
toes  were  striking  Muràchadh  right  in  the  feice,  and  the
sparks  that  Murachadh  sent  £x)m  his  toes  were  hitting
Donachadh  right  in  the  face,  and  the  sparks  that
Donachadh  sent  &om  his  toes  were  hitting  Brian  Borr
right  in  the  £ice.  In  the  time  of  lateness  Murachadh
lost  his  set  of  men  ;  nor  fstther,  nor  brother,  nor  gillie,
nor  deer,  nor  dog,  was  to  be  seen,  and  he  did  not  know
to  what  side  he  should  go  to  seek  them.  Mist  came
on  them.

He  thought  he  would  go  into  the  wood  to  gather
nuts  tiU  the  mist  should  go.  He  heard  the  stroke
of  an  axe  in  the  wood,  and  he  thought  that  it  was
the  man  of  the  little  cap  and  the  big  bonnet.  He  went
down,  and  it  was  the  man  of  the  little  cap  who  was
there.  Murachadh  blessed  him  ;  in  the  fisniche
foisniche,  soft  flowing  peaceful  words  of  wisdom ;  and
the  youth  blessed  him  in  better  words ;  and  if  no  bet-
ter they  were  no  worse.  "  I  am  thinking,  then,"  said
the  lad,  *'  that  it  is  of  the  company  of  Murachadh  Mac
Brian  thou  art."  "  It  is,"  said  he.  "  WeU !  I  would
give  thee  a  night's  share  for  the  sake  of  that  man,
though  there  should  be  a  man's  head  at  thy  belt"
Murachadh  feared  that  he  would  ask  him  to  put  the
faggot  on  his  back,  and  he  was  right  feared  that  he
would  ask  him  to  carry  the  axe  home,  for  its  siza
"  Good  lad,"  said  he,  "  I  am  sure  thou  art  tired  enough


■*>^"*— "■■■     ■^W^^^^W'^wa^f^p— ii^      I       I  I.    a  nu    I    J  I    w^inp^i


MURACHADH  MAO  BRIAN.  1 99

thyself  after  thy  trouble  and  wandering.  It  is  much
for  me  to  ask  thee  to  lift  the  faggot  on  my  back ;  and
it  is  too  much  to  ask  thee  to  take  the  axe  home."

He  went  and  he  lifted  the  faggot  of  fuel  on  his
own  back,  he  took  the  axe  with  him  in  his  hand ;
they  went  the  two  to  the  house  of  that  man  ;  and
that  was  the  grand  house  !  Then  the  wife  of  that
man  brought  up  a  chair  of  gold,  and  she  gave  ^it
to  her  own  man  ;  and  she  brought  up  a  chair  of
silver,  and  she  gave  it  to  Murachadh ;  she  brought
up  a  stoup  of  wine,  and  she  gave  it  to  Murachadh,
and  he  took  a  drink  out  of  it ;  he  stretched  it  to  the
other,  and  after  he  had  drunk  what  was  in  it  he
broke  it  against  the  walL  They  were  chatting  to-
gether, and  Murachadh  was  always  looking  at  the
housewife.  "  I  am  thinking  myself,"  said  the  man  of
the  house,  that  thou  art  Murachadh  Mac  Brian's  self"
— "  Well,  I  am." — "  I  have  done  thee  two  discourtesies
since  thou  camest  to  the  house,  and  thou  hast  done  one
to  me.  I  sat  myself  in  the  chair  of  gold,  and  I  set
thee  in  the  silver  chair ;  I  broke  the  drinking  cup  ;  I
&iled  in  that  I  drank  a  draught  from  a  half-empty
vessel  Thou  didst  me  another  discourtesy  :  thou  art
gazing  at  my  wife  there  since  thou  camest  into  the
house,  and  if  thou  didst  but  know  the  trouble  I  had
about  her,  thou  wouldst  not  wonder  though  I  should
not  like  another  man  to  be  looking  at  her."  "  What,"
said  Murachadh,  "  is  the  trouble  that  thou  hast  had
about  her  that  man  had  not  before,  and  that  another
man  will  not  have  again  after  thee  ?" — "  Sleep  to-night
and  I  will  tell  thee  that  to-morrow." — "  Not  a  cloud
of  sleep  shall  go  on  mine  eye  this  night  till  thou  tell-
est  me  the  trouble  that  thou  hast  had."

"  I  was  here  seven  years  with  no  man  with  me


200  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

but  myself  The  seanagal  (soothsayer)  came  the  way
one  day,  and  he  said  to  me,  if  I  would  go  so  for  as  the
white  Sibearta,  that  I  would  get  knowledge  in  it  I
went  there  one  fine  summer's  day,  and  who  was  there
but  the  Gruagach  of  the  island  and  the  Gruagach
of  the  dog  setting  a  combat.  The  Gruagach  of  the
island  said  to  me,  if  I  would  go  in  before  her  to
help  her,  that  she  would  give  me  her  daughter  to
marry  when  we  should  go  home.  I  went  in  on
her  side,  I  struck  a  fist  on  the  Gruagach  of  the
dog,  and  I  knocked  her  brains  out  Myself  and  the
Gruagach  of  the  island  went  home,  and  a  wedding  and
a  marriage  was  made  between  myseK  and  her  daughter
that  very  night ;  but,  with  the  hero's  fatigue,  and  the
reek  of  the  bowl,  I  never  got  to  her  chamber  door.
If  the  day  came  early  on  the  morrow,  'twas  earlier  still
that  my  father-in-law  arose  shouting  to  me  to  go  to  the
hunting  hill  to  hunt  badgers,  and  vermin,  and  foxes.
At  the  time  of  lifting  the  game  and  laying  it  down,
I  thought  that  I  had  left  my  own  wife  without  a  watch-
man to  look  on  her.  I  went  home  a  hero,  stout  and
seemly,  and  I  found  my  mother-in-law  weeping ;  and
I  said  to  her,  '  What  ails  thee  Ì '  ^  Much  ails  me,
that  three  monks  have  just  taken  away  the  wcmian
thou  didst  marry  thyself'

"  Then  took  I  the  good  and  ill  of  that  on  myself,
and  I  took  the  track  of  the  duck  on  the  ninth  mom.
I  feU  in  with  my  ship,  and  she  was  drawn  her  own
seven  lengths  on  dried  dry  land,  where  no  wind  could
stain,  or  sun  could  bum,  or  the  scholars  of  the  big
town  could  mock  or  launch  her.  I  set  my  back  to
her,  and  she  was  too  heavy ;  but  I  thought  it  was
death  before  or  behind  me  if  I  did  not  get  my  wife,
and  I  set  my  pith  to  her,  and  I  put  her  out  I  gave
her  prow  to  the  sea,  and  her  stem  to  the  land ;  hebn


•3


V.


MURACHADH  HAG  BB^AN.  SOI

in  her  stem,  sails  in  her  prow,  tackle  to  her  topes,  each
tope  &st  and  loose,  that  could  make  port  and  anchor-
age of  the  sea  isle  that  was  there.  I  anchored  my  ship,
and  I  went  up,  and  what  was  there  but  the  three
monks  casting  lots  for  my  wife.  I  swept  their  three
heads  off,  I  took  my  wife  with  me  and  I  set  her  in  the
stem  of  the  ship ;  I  hoisted  the  three  speckled  flapping
sails  against  the  tall  tough  splintery  masts.  My  music
was  the  plunging  of  eels  and  the  screaming  of  gulls ;
the  biggest  beast  eating  the  beast  that  was  least,  and
the  beast  that  was  least  doing  as  she  might.  The  bent
brown  buckle  that  was  in  the  bottom  of  ocean  would  play
haig  on  its  mouth,  while  she  would  cut  a  slender  com
straw  before  her  prow,  with  the  excellence  of  the  steer-
ing. There  was  no  stop  or  rest  for  me,  while  I  drove
her  on  till  I  reached  tiie  big  town  of  my  mother  and
&ther-in-law.  Music  was  raised,  and  lament  laid
down.  There  were  smooth  drunken  drinks,  and  coarse
drinks  drunken.  Music  in  flddle-strings  to  the  ever-
healing  of  each  disease,  would  set  men  under  evil  eye,
and  women  in  travail,  fast  asleep  in  the  great  town
that  night.  With  the  hero's  fettigue  and  the  reek  of
the  bowl,  I  slept  &r  from  the  wife's  chamber.

"  K  it  was  early  that  the  day  came  on  the  morrow,
'twas  still  earlier  that  my  father-in-law  arose  shouting
to  me  to  go  to  the  hunting  lull  to  hunt  badgers,  and
vermin,  and  foxes.  At  the  time  of  lifting  the  game
and  laying  it  down,  I  thought  that  I  had  left  my  own
wife  without  a  watchman  to  look  on  her.  I  went
home  a  hero,  stout  and  seemly,  and  I  found  my
mother-in-law  weeping.  'What  ails  thee  to-night  1'
'  Much  ails  me,  that  the  wet-cloaked  warrior  has  just
taken  away  the  bride  thou  didst  marry  thyself'

''  Then  took  I  the  good  and  ill  of  that  on  myself  and
I  took  the  track  of  the  duck  on  the  ninth  mom.    I  fell


a02  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

in  with  my  ship  ;  I  set  my  back  to  her,  and  she  was
00  heavy ;  and  I  set  my  pith  to  her  and  I  put  her
out.  I  gave  her  prow  to  tìie  sea,  and  her  stem  to  the
land ;  helm  in  her  stem,  saOs  in  her  prow,  tackle  to
her  ropes,  each  rope  fast  and  loose,  that  could  make
a  choice  port  and  anchorage  of  the  big  town  of  the
wet-cloaked  warrior.  I  drew  my  ship  her  own  seven
lengths  on  dried  dry  land,  where  wind  could  not  stain,
or  sun  bum  her ;  and  where  the  scholars  of  the  big
town  could  not  play  pranks  or  launch  her.  I  left  my  har-
ness and  my  spears  under  the  side  of  the  ship  ;  I  went
up,  and  a  herd  fell  in  with  me.  *  What's  thy  news
to-day,  herd  ] '  said  I  to  him.  *  Almighty,  etc.,'  said
the  herd,  *if  my  news  is  not  good,  a  wedding  and
a  marriage  between  the  wet-cloaked  warrior  and  the
daughter  of  the  Island  Gruagach ;  and  that  there  is
neither  glad  nor  sorry  in  the  realm  that  is  not
asked  to  the  weddiug.'  'If  thou  wouldst  give  me
the  patched  cloak  on  thee,  I  would  give  thee  this
good  coat  that  I  have  on,  and  good  pay  besides  for
that'  '  Almighty,  etc.  .  .  .  .'  '  That  is  not
the  joy  and  wonder  that  I  have  to  take  in  it  before
the  sun  rises  to  sky  to-morrow.'  I  struck  him  a  blow
of  my  fist  in  the  midst  of  his  face,  and  I  drove  the
brains  in  fiery  slivers  through  the  back  of  his  head,  I
put  on  the  patched  cloak,  and  up  I  went,  and  the  men
had  just  assembled  to  the  wed(Hng.  I  thought  it  was
lucky  to  find  them  gathered.  I  went  amongst  them
as  falcon  through  flock,  or  as  goat  up  rock,  or  as  a
great  dog  on  a  cold  spring  day  going  through  a  drove
of  sheep.  So  I  would  make  little  bands  of  large
bands,  hardy ''^  castles  which  might  be  heard  in  the
four  airts  of  heaven,  filaflhÌTìg  of  blades,  shearing
heroic  shields,  till  I  left  not  one  would  tell  a  tale  or

*  I  cannot  make  sense  of  this  phrase.


MURAGHADH  MAO  BRIAN.  203

withhold  bad  news;  how  one  would  be  one-legged,
and  one  one-handed;  and  though  there  were  ten
tongues  in  their  heads,  it  is  telling  their  own  ills  and
the  ills  of  others  that  they  would  be.  I  took  with
me  my  wife,  and  I  set  her  in  the  stem  of  the  boat  I
gave  her  prow  to  sea  and  her  stem  to  land  ;  I  would
make  sail  before,  and  set  helm  behind.  I  hoisted  the
three  speckled  flapping  sails  against  the  tail  tough
splintery  masts.  My  music  was  the  plunging  of  eels
and  the  screaming  of  gulls ;  the  beast  that  was  biggest
eating  the  beast  that  was  least,  and  the  beast  that  was
least  doing  as  she  might ;  the  bent  brown  buckie  that
was  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea  would  play  Haio  !  on  her
great  mouth,  as  she  would  split  a  slender  oat  stubble
straw  with  the  excellence  of  the  steering.

"  We  returned  to  the  big  town  of  my  father-in-law.
Music  was  raised,  and  lament  laid  down.  There  were
smooth  drunken  drinks  and  coarse  drinks  drunken.
Music  on  strings  for  ever  healing  each  kind  of  ill,
would  set  wounded  men  and  women  in  travaQ  asleep
in  the  big  town  that  night  With  the  hero's  fiitigue
and  the  reek  of  the  bowl,  I  never  got  to  my  bride's
chamber  that  night

"  If  it  was  early  that  the  day  came  on  the  morrow,
earlier  than  that  my  father-in-law  arose  shouting  to  me
to  go  to  the  hunting  hill,  to  go  to  hunt  brocks,  and
vermin,  and  foxea  At  the  time  of  lifting  the  game,
and  of  laying  it  down,  I  thought  that  I  had  left  my
own  bride  without  a  watchman  to  watch  over  her.  I
went  home  a  hero,  stout  and  seemly,  and  I  found  my
mother-in-law  weeping.  'What  ails  thee?"  said  L
'  Much  ails  me,'  said  she,  'that  the  great  hero,  son  of  the
King  of  SoBGHA  (light),  has  just  taken  the  bride  that
thou  didst  wed,  away  ;  and  he  was  the  worst  of  them
all  for  me.'     Let  it  be  taken  well  and  ill,  that  was  for


204  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

ma  I  took  the  track  of  the  duck  on  the  ninth  mom.
I  fell  in  with  my  ship ;  I  set  my  back  to  her,  and  she
was  too  heavy  for  me ;  I  set  my  back  to  her  again
and  I  set  her  out.  I  gave  prow  to  sea,  and  stem  to
land ;  Pd  set  helm  in  her  stem,  and  sails  in  her  prow,
and  tackles  in  her  middle  against  each  rope  that  was
in  her  loose  and  fast,  to  make  choice  port  and  anchor-
age of  the  big  town  of  the  great  hero  king  of  Sorcha.
I  drew  my  ship  her  own  seven  lengths  from  ebb,  on
dry  land,  where  wind  would  not  stain,  and  sun  would
not  bum,  the  scholars  of  the  big  town  could  make
neither  plaything  or  mocking,  or  launching  of  her.

"  I  went  up  and  a  beggar  fell  in  with  me.  '  What  *g
thy  tale  to-day,  oh  beggar  V  *  Mighty  of  the  world  be
against  thee !  dost  wish  to  be  hanged  with  a  sea  of
blood  about  thine  eyes :  great  and  sood  is  my  tale :  a
wedding  aad  a  man^dng  between  the  great  he^,  son  of
the  king  of  Sorcha,  and  the  daughter  of  the  island
Gruagach;  and  that  there  is  neither  glad  nor  sorry
in  the  land  that  is  not  called  to  the  wedding,'  *  If
thou  wouldst  give  me  thy  cloak,  I  would  give  thee
good  pay  and  this  good  coat  that  I  have  on  for  it.*
'Mighty  of  the  world,  thou  beast,  dost  wish  to  be
hanged  with  a  sea  of  blood  about  thine  eyes  1'  *  That
is  not  the  wonder  and  joy  that  I  am  to  get  from  it,
before  the  sun  rises  in  heaven  to-morrow.'  I  stmck
him  a  blow  of  my  fist  in  the  midst  of  his  &ce,  and  I
drove  the  brain  in  flinders  of  flame  through  the  back
of  his  head.  The  bride  knew  somehow  that  I  would
be  there,  and  she  asked  that  the  beggars  should
first  be  served.  I  sat  myself  amidst  the  beggars  ;
and  each  that  tried  to  take  bit  from  me,  I  gave  him
a  bruise  'twixt  my  hand  and  my  side ;  and  Fd  leave
him  there,  and  I'd  catch  the  meat  with  the  one  of
my  hands,  and  the  drink  with  the  other  hand.     Then


MUBACHADH  MAC  BRIAN.  205

some  one  said  that  the  big  beggar  was  not  letting
a  bit  to  the  heads  of  the  other  beggars.  The  bride
said^  to  be  good  to  the  beggars,  and  they  them-
selves would  be  finished  at  last.  AVhen  all  the  beg-
gars had  enough  they  went  away,  but  I  lay  myself
where  I  was.  Some  one  said  that  the  his  hessax  had
laid  down  drunk  The  man  of  the  weddinglaid,  to
throw  the  beast  out  at  the  back  of  a  hiU,  or  in  the
shelter  of  a  dyke,  till  what  was  in  his  maw  should  ebb.
Five  men  and  ten  came  down,  and  they  set  their  hand
to  lifting  me.  On  thy  two  hands,  oh  Murachadh ;  but
it  was  easier  for  them  to  set  Cairn  a  Choinnich  in
Erin  from  its  base,  than  to  raise  me  from  the  earth.
Then  came  down  one  of  the  men  that  was  wiser  than
the  rest ;  I  had  a  beauty  spot,  and  there  never  was
man  that  saw  me  once  but  he  would  know  me  again.
He  raised  the  cap  and  he  knew  who  it  was,  That  for-
tune should  help  you  here  to-night!  ^Here  is  the
upright  of  Glen  feite,  the  savage*  MacaUain,  pitiless,
mercUess,  fearless  of  God  or  man,  unless  he  would  fear
Murachadh  Mac  Brian.'  AVhen  I  myself  heard  that,
I  rose  to  put  on  my  tackling  for  battling  and  combat ;
I  put  on  my  charmed  praying  shirt  of  satin,  and  smooth
yellow  silk  stretched  to  my  skin,  my  cloudy  coat
above  the  golden  shirt,  my  kindly  coat  of  cotton  above
the  Mndly  cloak,  my  boas-covered  hindering  sharp-
pointed  shield  on  my  left  side,  my  hero's  hard  slasher
in  my  right  hand,  my  spawn  of  narrow  knives  in  my
belt,  my  helm  of  hardness  about  my  head  to  cover
my  comely  crown,  to  go  in  the  front  of  strife,  and  the
strife  to  go  after  it ;  I  put  on  my  hindering,  dart-hin-
dering resounding  mail,  without  a  flaw,  or  without
outlet,   blue -grey,  bright  blue,    "  leudar  leothar."

*  Feamanach, — Feaman  means   a   tail,    but  whether  this
means  the  man  with  the  tail  or  not,  I  do  not  know.


2o6  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Lochliner,  the  long-light  and  high-minded ;  and  I  left
not  a  man  to  tell  tale  or  withhold  bad  news.  If  there
was  not  one  on  one  foot,  and  one  one-handed,  and
though  there  were  ten  tongues  in  their  heads,  it  is
telling  their  own  ills,  and  the  iUs  of  the  rest  that  they
would  be.  I  took  my  bride  with  me,  I  set  her  in  the
ship,  I  hoisted  the  three  speckled  flapping  sails  against
the  tall  tough  splintery  trees.  My  music  was  the  plung-
ing of  eels  and  screaming  of  gulls ;  the  beast  that  was
biggest  eating  the  beast  that  was  least,  and  the  beast
that  was  least  doing  as  it  might ;  the  bent  brown
buckie  that  was  in  the  bottom  of  the  sea  she  would
play  Haig  on  her  mouth  as  she  would  split  a  slender
oat  stubble  before  her  prow,  with  the  excellence  of  the
steering.  Twas  no  stop  or  stay  for  me,  as  I  drove
her  on  till  I  reached  the  big  town  of  my  father-in-law."
"  That  was  my  first  rest,  Murachadh,  and  is  it  won-
drous that  I  dislike  any  man  to  be  gazing  at  her?"
"  Indeed,  it  is  not  wonderful,"  said  Murachadh.
Murachadh  lay  down  that  night,  and  he  found  himself
on  the  morrow  in  the  tower  of  Chinneooibe  in  Erin,
where  were  his  father  and  his  grandfather ;  and  the
deer  and  the  dog,  and  his  father  and  his  brother,  were
in  before  him.


MUBCHADH  MAC  BRIAN.

Bha  tritiir  dhaoine  ann  an  duthaich  Ghinn  a  Choire  ann  an
Eirinn;  V  e  sin  Morchadh  Mac  Brian,  agus  Donnachadh  Mac
Brian,  agos  Brian  Bòrr  an  athair.  Fhuair  iad  caireadh  a  dhol
ga  dinneir  ga  h-àite  ris  an  abradh  iad  Magh  O  Dòma.  Thng
iad  leotha  tri  fichead  sgian,  agos  tri  fichead  srian,  agos  tri  fichead
each  duas-dearg,  geal.  Shnidh  iad  aig  a'  choinn,  's  cha  luaith
shuidh  iad  aig  a^  chuirm,  na  chnnnaic  iad  gruagach  Chnoc  Seanain
an  Eirinn  a'  dol  seachad.    Siod  amach  gabhaidh  Mnrchadh ;  siod  a


MURACHADH  MAO  BRIAN.  ^toy

mach  gabhaidh  Donnacbadb ;  agns  siod  a  mach  gabhaidh  Brian
Bòrr,  an  athair  'nan  dèigh.  Gha  b'  fbada  'bha  iad  air  folbh  nor  a
cbunnaic  iad  òlacb  mòr  a'  tigbinn  'nan  coinneamh.  Bbeannaicb
Brian  Bòrr  e  ann  am  briathran  fisnicbe,  foisniche,  file,  mile,  citiin
an  seanachas.  Fhreagair  esan  ann  am  briathran  a  b'  f  heàrr,  's  mar
am  V  iad  a  b'  f  heàrr  cha  b'  iad  a  bu  mheasa.  **  De  'n  daine  thnsa  ?"
ursa  Brian  Bòrr.  *'  Is  gille  math  mi  ag  iarraidh  maighstir."  «  Uile
chumhachdan  an  t-saoghail  a' t'  aghaidh  a  bhiasd ;  am  mail  leat  do
chrochadh  is  sian  fala  ma  t'  shhilean ;  's  f  hada  bbithinn  f  h^in  mam
fasdainn  tha  aig  do  mheud."  «'S  coma  leam  cò-aca;  dh'  fhaoidte
gum  fasdadh  Murchadh  mi."  Ràinig  e  Murchadh,  's  bheannaich
Mnrchadh  e  ann  am  briathran  fisniche  foisniche,  file,  mile,  ciùin  an
seanachas.  Fhreagair  an  t-òlach  e  ann  am  briathran  a  b*  fheàrr,  's
mar  am  b'  iad  a  b'  f  hearr  cha  b'  iad  a  bu  mheasa.  **  De  'n  duine
thusa?"  ursa  Murchadh.  <*'S  gille  math  mi  'g  iarraidh  maighstir,"
urs*  esan.  **  De  'n  tuarasdal  a  bhios  thu  'g  iarruidh  ?"  "  Da  dhrian
de  d'  ckomhairle  gus  an  d'  thig  sin  o  ruith  na  gruagaich,  's  gun
a  bhi  agad  fèin  ach  an  t-aon.*'  <*Ma  gheobh  thusa  sin,"  ursa
Murchadh,  '*  cha  d'  f  huair  fear  romhad  e,  's  cha  'n  f  haigh  fear  a'  d'
dheigh  e ;  ach 's  cinnteach  mar  am  b'  airidh  thu  air  nach  iarradh
thu  e."

Nur  a  chord  iad  thug  e  roid  an  d^igh  na  gruagaich,  's  cha  b'  f  hada
'bha  e  air  folbh  nur  a  thill  e.  "  Uile  chumhachdan  an  t-saoghail  a'
t'  aghaidh,"  ursa  Brian  Bòrr,  "  am  math  leat  do  chrochadh  is  sian
fala  ma  t'  shiiilean?  dh'  aithnichmi  gun  robh  e  gun  ghille,  toiseach
an  latha,  am  fear  a  dh'  fhasdaidh  thu,  's  nan  gabhadh  e  mo  chomh-
airlesa  cha  'n  f  hasdadh  e  thu."  "  Cha  dean  mi  turn  math  an  diugh
gus  an  d'  thig  na  g^ineagan  bhàr  a'  chòta  mhòìr."  Fhnair  iad  an
siod  tàilleir,  's  cha  robh  de  dh'  innleachd  aig  an  tàiUear  na  'bhèireadh
na  g^ineagan  bhàr  a'  chbta  mhbir.  Thug  e  'n  sin  siosar  a  mach  a
bile  na  h-ata  bige,  's  thug  e  na  g^ineagan  bhar  a  chòta  mhòir  ann
am  mionaid.  Thug  e  roid  an  sin  am  dèigh  na  gruagaich  a  rithisd,  's
cha  b'  fbada  bha  e  air  folbh  nur  a  thill  e.  '*  Uile  chumhachdan  an
t-saoghail  a' t*  aghaidh,"  ursa  Brian  Bbrr,  **  am  mail  leat  do  chroch-
adh  is  sian  fala  ma  t'  shiiilean ;  dh'  aithnich  mi  gun  robh  e  gun  ghille
toiseach  an  latha  am  fear  a  dh'  fhasdaidh  thu,  's  na  'n  gabhadh  e  mo
chomhairlesa  cha  d'  fhasdaidh  e  thu."  **  Cha  dean  mi  turn  math  an
diugh  gus  an  d'  th^id  na  g^ineagan  air  a  chòta  mhòr  a  rithisd;  no  ma
chi  mnathan  a'  bhaile  mi  bidh  a  h-uile  te  dhiu  as  mo  dheigh."  Fhuair
iad  tàiUear,  's  cha  ghearradh  a  shiosar  gr^im,  's  cha  'n  f  huaigheadh  a
shnàthad  beum.  Thug  e  fheln  an  sin  siosar  is  snkthad  a  bile  na
h-ata  bige,  's  chuir  e  na  gèineagan  air  a'  chòta  mhòr  a  rithisd.  Thug


208  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

e  roid  blieag  eile  an  d^h  na  gmagaich,  's  cha  b'  f  hada  'bha  e  air
folbh  nor  a  thill  e.  "  Uile  dmmhachdan  an  t-saoghail  a' t*  agfaaidh,"
una  Brian  Bòrr^  **  dh* aithnich  mi  gun  robh  e  gun  ghilletoìBeach  an
latha  am  fear  a  dh*  f  basdaidh  thu,  's  na*n  gabhadh  e  mo  chombairlesa
cba  d'  f  basdaidh  e  thu.**  **  Cha  dean  mi  turn  math  an  diugh  gus  an
d'  thig  am  bior  a  th'  ann  a'm'  chois  aisde.**  Fhuair  iad  an  siodlèigh,
'a  cha  robh  do  dh*  innleachd  aig  an  lèigh  na  bheireadh  am  bior  as  a
chois.  Thug  e  f^in  ianmn  beag  a  bh*  aige  am  bile  na  h-ata  bige
a  machy  's  thug  e  *m  bior  as  a  chois,  's  bha  *m  bior  troigh  na  b*  f  haide
na*n  lurga.  "Ubht  nbhl"  urea  Brian  Bòrr,  '^'s  iongantach  an
gnothach  sin,  am  bior  a  bhi  na  b*  f  haide  na  'n  lurga  I "  <*  'S  iom-
adh,'*  urs'  esan,  *<  rud  is  iongantaiche  na  sin ;  tha  sineadh  math  an
ceann  nan  alt  *s  nan  cnàmh."  Thug  e  roid  bheag  air  folbh  an  sin,  's
cha  b'  fhada  *bha  e  air  folbh  nur  a  thill  e,  's  lach  aig  air  a  ròsdadh
air  an  teine,  's  gun  bhall  loisgte  na  amh  innte,  's  bha  sàith  a  h-
uile  duine  stigh  innte.  '*  'S  e  so  turn  is  f  hearr  a  a  rinn  thu  f  hathasd,"
nrsa  Brian  Bòrr.

"  Cha  dean  mi  turn  math  an  diugh  gus  am  faigh  mi  luchdan  beag
cadail."  Dh*  f  holbh  iad  air  chhl  Chnoc  Seanain  an  Eirinn,  ùr
chhl  gaotha,  's  air  aghaidh  gr^ine  far  am  faioeadh  iad  gach  duine  'a
nach  fidceadh  duine  iad.  Chaidil  e  'n  sin,  *8  nur  a  dhtdsg  d4  'bha
ach  gruagach  Chnoc  Seanain  air  mullach  a'  chnoic.  Dh'  èiridh  e,  's
bhuail  e  buille  d'a  bhois  urra  'sa  chluais,  's  chuir  e  'n  ceann  chl  air
bheul-thaobh.  *'  Uile  chumhachdan  an  t-saoghail  a'  t'  aghaidh,'*
ursa  Brian  Bòrr,  **am  mail  leat  do  chrochadh  is  nan  fala  ma  t'
shixilean.  Cuir  an  ceann  gu  ceart  air  a*  gtiruagaich."  "  Ma  dh'  iarraa
mo  mhaighstir  sin  orm  ni  mi  e,  's  mar  an  iarr  cha  dean  mi  'n  diugh
air  do  shons'  e."  **  Sin  agad  i,"  ursa  Murchadh,  **  's  dean  do  roghainn
rithe."  Bhuail  e  'n  sin  a  dhòm  urra,  's  chuir  e  'n  t-ionachuinu
aisde.

Cha  b'  fhada 'bha  iad  an  sin  nur  a  chnnnaic  iad  fiadh,  agus  gadhar
'ga  *ruith.  Mach  as  a  dhèigh  gabhaidh  iad ;  's  na  spreadan  a  bha  *n
gadhar  a'  cur  as  a  ladharan,  bha  iad  a  bualadh  gille  Mhurchaidh  an
dkr  an  aodainn ;  na  spreadan  a  bha  gille  Ifhurchaidh  a'  cur  a  a
ladharan,  bha  iad  a*  bualadh  Ifhurchaidh  an  dàr  an  aodainn ;  's  na
spreadan  a  bha  Murchadh  a'  cur  as  a  ladharan,  bha  iad  a  bualadh
Dhonnachaidh  an  clàr  an  aodainn ;  *8  na  spreadan  a  bha  Donnach-
adh  a*  cur  a  a  ladharan,  bha  iad  a  bualadh  Bhrian  Bòrr  an  dkr  an
aodainn.  An  am  an  anamoich  chaill  Murchadh  a  chuid  daoine.  Cha
robh  'athair,  na  bhrathair,  na  'ghille,  na  'm  fiadh,  na  'n  gadhar  r'a
f  haidnn ;  's  cha  robh  fios  aige  d^  'n  taobh  a  rachadh  e  a  *n  iarraidh.
Thàinig  ceo  orra.


HUBAOHADH  KAO  BBIAiKT.  209

Smaointich  e  gun  raòhadh  e  stigh  do  'n  choille  'chmlhneacbadb
chnutluui  gas  am  folbhadh  an  ceo.  Chnal  e  buille  tuaigh  anns  a'
choille,  is  smaointich  e  gum  Ve  fear  na  h<-ata  bige  's  na  boinneide
moire  bh'  ann.  Ghabh  e  sios,  *8  is  e  fear  atan  bhig  a  bh'  ann.
Bheannaich  Murchadh  e  ann  am  briathran  fisniche,  foisniche,  file,
nùle,  cihin  an  seanachas ;  's  f  hreagair  an  t-òlach  e  ann  am  briathran
a  b'  f  heàrr,  's  mar  am  b-iad  a  b'  f  heàrr  cha  b'  iad  a  bu  mheasa.  *'  Tha
diul'  am  f^/'  urs'  an  t-òlach  sin,  '*gur  h-ann  do  chuideachd
Ifhurchaidh  Mhic  Brian  thu."  ^  *S  ann,"  urs*  esan.  '*  Mata  bheir-
innsa  cuid  na  h-oidhche  dhnit  fiirson  an  duine  sin,  ged  a  bhiodh  ceann
dnine  air  do  chrios."  Bha  eagal  air  Murchadh  gun  iarradh  e  air  a'
chual  a  chur  air  a'  mhuinn^  's  bha  ra  eagal  air  gun  iarradh  e  air  an
tuagh  a  ghihlan  dachaidh  aig  a  meud.  *'6hille  mhath,"  urs'  esan,
« tha  ml  dnnteach  gu'  bheil  thu  f^n  g\è  sgith  an  dèigh  t'  allabain  is
t'  ànraidh.  Tha  e  mbr  learn  iarraidh  ort  a'  chual  a  thogail  air  mo
mhuinn,  's  tha  e  ra  mhòr  leam  iarruidh  ort  an  tuagh  a  thoirt  dach-
aidh."

Dh'  f  holbh  e  *s  thog  e  chual  chonnaidh  air  a  mhuinn  fein ;  thug  e
leis  an  tuagh  'na  làimh ;  dh'  f  holbh  iad  'nan  dithisd  gu  tigh  an  duine
sin,  's  b'  e  sin  an  tigh  ciatach.  Thug,  an  sin,  bean  an  duine  sin  a
nios  cathair  bir,  's  thug  i  d*a  fear  fein  i ;  's  thug  i  nios  cathairairgid,
's  thug  i  do  MhuTchadh  1.  Thug  i  nios  stòpan  f  ion,  's  thug  i  do
Mhurchadh  e,  's  thuge  deoch  as.  Shin  e  do  'n  f  hear  eile  e,  's  an  d^igh
dhàsan  na  bh'  ann  61  bhrisd  e  ris  a  bhall'  e.

Bha  iad  a'  seanachas  cbmhla,  's  bha  Murchadh  daonnan  ag  amh-
arc  air  bean  an  tighe.  **  Tha  dtdl'  am  f^in,"  ursa  fear  an  tighe,  **  gur
tu  Murchadh  Mac  Brian  fein."  "Mata  's  mi."  "Rinn  mise  da
mhiomhodh  ortsao'n  athàinig  thu  thun  an  tighe,  's  rinn  thusa  h-aon
ormsa.  Shuidh  mi  f^in  anns  a'  chathair  òir,  's  chuir  mi  thusa  anns
a  chathair  airgid.  Bhrisd  mi  'n  com  dibhe;  bha  de  dh'  easbhuidh
orm  gun  deoch  61  a  soitheach  leith  fhalamh.  Binn  thusa  miomhodh
eile  ormsa ;  tha  thu  'g  amharc  air  a'  mhnaoi  sin  agam,  o'n  a  thainig
thu  thun  an  tighe,  's  na  'm  biodh  f  hios  agad  na  f  huair  mi  'dhragh
lithe,  cha  bhiodh  iongantas  ort  ged  nach  bu  mhail  leam  duine
eile  'bhi  'g  amharc  urra."  "D^,"  ursa  Murchadh,  ''an  dragh  a
f  huair  thusa  rithe,  nach  d'  f  huair  fear  romhad,  's  nach  f  haigh
fear  eile  a'd'  dheigh  ?  "  **  Caidil  a  nochd  's  innsidh  mi  sin  duit  a
màireach."  *'  Cha  d'  th^d  neul  cadail  air  mo  shud  a  nochd,  gus  an
innis  thu  dhomh  d4  'n  dragh  a  fhuair  thu  rithe."

''Bha  mi'n  so  seachd  bliadhna  gun  duine  leam  ach  mi  fein.
ThMnig  an  seanaghal  latha  an  rathad,  's  thuirt  e  rium  na  'n  rachainn
gnsanruigan  sibearta  geal  gum  faighinn  fiosrachadh  ann.    Dh'
VOL.  II.  P


2  lO  WEST  HIGHLAin>  TALES.

fholbh  mi  'n  sin  latha  bbidheach  samhraidli,  's  co'  bh*  ann  ach  groag-
ach  an  eilean,  's  grnagach  a  ghadhair  a'  cur  blàir.  Thuirt  gruagach
an  eilean  riam  na'n  racbainn  a  stigh  air  a  h-aghaidh  a  chuideacbadh
leatba,  gan  d'  thngadb  i  dhomh  a  nigbean  r*a  pbsadb  nur  a  rach-
amaid  dbacbaidb.  Cbaidb  mi  stigb  air  a  beultbaobb.  Bbuail  mi
dòrn  air  gruagacb  a  gbadbair  's  cbuir  mi  'n  t-ionacbuion  aisde.
Cbaidb  mi  fèin  agus  gmagacb  an  eilean  dbacbaidb,  *s  rinneadh
banais  agus  pbsadb  eadar  mi  f^  agus  a  nigbean  an  oidbcbe  sin
fein-;  acb  le  s^os  a^  gbaisgicb,  's  atbar  na  pòit,cba  d'  fbuair  mise  dol
a  laidbe  leatba  an  oidbcbe  sin.  Ma  's  mocb  a  tbàinig  an  latba  an  la
*r  na  mbkireacb,  bu  mboicbe  na  sin  a  db'  ^iridb  m'  atbair  c^ile  a
gblaodbacb  rium,  a  dbol  do  'n  bbeinn  sbeilg  a  dbol  a  sbealg  bbrocbd^
uilc,  agus  sbionnacb.  An  am  togail  na  sitbinn  agus  a  leagalacb
smaointicb  mi  gun  d'  f  bag  mi  mo  bbean  fèin  gun  fear  faire  na
coimbid  urra.  Cbaidb  mi  dbacbaidb  mar  cburaidb  ro  cbalma,  's
fbuair  mi  mo  mbàtbab:  cbeile  'caoineadb,  *s  tbuirt  mi  ritbe,  **  D4  th*
ort  ?  "  "  *S  mbr  a  tb*  orm ;  an  tribbr  mbanacb  an  d^igb  a'  bbean  od
a  pbbs  tbu  f^in  a  tboirt  air  folbb."

Gbabb  mi  olc  's  a  mbatb  siod  orm  f^iu,  's  gbabb  mi  lorg  na  lach
air  an  naoidbeamb  tràtb.  Tbacbair  mo  long  orm,  's  bba  i  air  a  tarr-
uinn  a  seacbd  fad  f^in  air  fearann  tioram,  tràìgbte,  far  nacb  dubbadb
gaoitb,  agus  nacb  loisgeadb  grian,  's  nacb  dèanadb  sgoilearan  baile
mboir  magadb  na  fochaid  urra.  Cbuir  mi  mo  dbiiom  ritbe,  's  bba
i  ra  tbrom ;  acb  smaointicb  mi  gum  bu  bbàs  rombam  na  'm  dbeigb-
inn  e  mar  am  faigbinn  mo  bbean,  *s  cbuir  mi  mo  spionnadb  riUie,  'a
cbuir  mi  macb  i.  Tbug  mi  'toiseacb  do  mbuir  's  a'  deireadb  do  tbir;
stibir  'na  deireadb ;  siuil  'na  toiseacb ;  's  beairt  na  buill ;  agbudh
gacb  buill  ceangailt,  agus  foasgailt';  a'  deanadb  cala  agus  acarsaid
do  db'  eilean  mara  'bba  sin.

Db'  acraicb  mi  mo  long,  's  gbabb  mi  suas ;  's  dè  'bba  'sin
acb  an  tribir  mbanacb  a'  cur  crann  feucb  co  leis  aca  bbiodb  i
'san  oidbcbe.  Sgriob  mi  na  tri  cinn  diu;  tbug  mi  leam  mo
bbean;  's  cbuir  mi  ann  an  deireadb  na  luing  i.  Tbog  mi  na  tri
sibil  bbreaca,  bbaidealacb  an  aodann  nan  crann  fada,  fulannacb,
fibigbidb.  'Se  bu  cbeòl  dbomb  plubarsaicb  easgann,  's  b^iceardaich
f  baoileann ;  a'  bbèisd  a  bu  mbotba  'g  itbeadb  na  b^isd  a  bu  lugba,
's  a'  bbèisd  a  bu  lugba  deanadb  mar  a  db'  f  baodadb  i.  An  f  baocbag
cbrom,  chiar  a  bba  'n  grunnd  an  aigean,  bbeireadh  i  haig  air  a  beul
mbr.  Gbearradb  i  cuinnlean  coirce  romb  a  toiseacb  le  feobbas  an
stibraidb.  Cba  bu  stad  's  cba  b'  f  bois  dbomb,  's  mi  'ga  'caitbeadb,
gus  an  d'  ràìnig  mi  baile-mbr  mo  mbàtbair  cbeile  agus  m'  atbair
c^ile.    Thogadb  an  cebl,  's  leagadb  am  brbn.    Bba  deocbanna  mine.


MURAGHADH  MAG  BBIAN.  2  I  I

misgeach,  ^s  deochanna  garbha  'gan  gabhail :  cebl  ann  an  tendan
fiodhlacb,  a'  sior  leigbeas  gach  galair,  a  chuireadh  fir  gbointe  ague
mnathan  sibbhla  'nan  cadal  air  a  mhbr-bbaile  an  oidhche  sin.  Le
athar  na  pòìt,  's  le  agios  a'  gbaisgicb,  cha  do  laidh  mise  leis  a'  bhean
an  oidhche  sin.

Ma  ba  mhoch  a  thàinig  an  latha  an  la  'r  na  mhàireach,  bn
mhoiche  na  sin  a  dh'  èiridh  m'  athair  ceile  a  ghlaodhach  rium  fein  a
dhol  do  'n  bheinn  sheilg,  a  dhol  a  shealg  bhrochd,  is  uilc,  is  shionnach.
An  am  togail  na  sithinn  is  a  leagalach,  smaointich  mi  fèin  gan  d'
fhàg  mi  mo  bhean  gnn  fear  faire  na  fear  choimhead  urra.Ghabh
mi  dhachaidh  a'm'  choraidh  ro  chahna,  's  f  haair  mi  mo  mhàthair
chèile  'caoineadh.  "  Dè  th'  ort  a  nochd?"  'S  mòr  a  th'  orm,  Macan  na
Falloinne  flaiche  an  dèigh  a'  bhean  ud  a  phòs  thu  fein  a  thoirt  air
folbh.

Ghabh  'mi  a  mhath  is  olc  siod  orm  fein.  Ghabh  mi  lorg  an  lach
air  an  oaoidheamh  tràth.  Thachair  mo  long  orm.  Choir  mi  mo
dhiiom  rithe,  's  bha  i  ra  throm  learn.  Chair  mi  mo  dhriom  rithe  a
rithisd,  's  choir  mi  mach  i.  Thog  mi  'toiseach  do  mhoir,  's  a  deireadh
do  thir.  Dheanamn  stiair  'na  deireadh,  sioil  'na  toiseach ;  's  beairt
'na  buill ;  aghaidh  gach  boill  a  bh'  innte  ceangailt'  agos  foasgailt';  a'
deànadh  rogha  cala  agus  acarsaid  do  Bhaile-mbr  Macan  na  Falloinne
flioiche.  Tharroinn  mi  mo  long  a  seachd  fad  fein  air  fearann  tioram,
tràìghte,  far  nach  dobhadh  gaoith,  's  nach  loisgeadh  grian,  's  nach
deanadh  sgoilearan  baile-mhòir  culaidh  mhagaidh  na  f  hochaid  di.
Dh'  f  hag  mi  mo  luirg  's  mo  shleaghan  fo  thaobh  na  loinge.  Chaidh
mi  soas,  's  thachair  boachaill'  orm.  T>è  do  naigheachd  an  diogh  a
bhuachaille  ?  thoirt  mi  ris.  *'  Uile  chomhachdan  an  t-saoghail  a'
t'  aghaidh  a  bhiasd,  am  math  leat  do  chrochadh  is  sian  fala  ma
t'  shUilean  ;  's  mòr  's  is  math  mo  naigheachd ;  banais  agos  pbsadh
eadar  Macan  na  Falloinne  flioiche  's  nighean  groagach  an  eilean,  's
nach  'eil  mhime  na  maird  'san  rioghachd  nach  'eil  coireadh  aca
than  na  bainnse."  Nan  d'  thogadh  tho  dhomh  an  lUireach  sin  ort,
bheirinn  doit  an  cbta  math  so  'th'  orm  f^in,  's  pàigheadh  math  a
thoillidh  air  an  sin."  *'  Uile  chamhachdan  an  t-saoghail  a' t'  aghaidh
a  bhiasd,  am  math  leat  do  chrochadh  is  sian  fala  ma  t'  shhilean ;  cha
'n  e  sin  aighear  agos  ioghnadh  a  th'  agam  fein  r'a  ghabhail  aisde  ma
'n  ^irich  grian  air  athar  am  màireach."  Bhoail  'mi  boill  de  m'  dhom
air  an  clàr  an  aodainn  's  choir  mi  'n  t'-ionachainn  'na  choibeauan
teine  trid  chhl  a  chinn.

Chair  mi  orm  an  Ihireach,  's  ghabh  mi  soas,  's  bha  na  daoine  an
d^igh  croinneachadh  than  na  bainnse.  Smaointich  mi  gon  robh  e
fortanach  dhomh  am  faotainn  cniinn.    Ghabh  mi  na  'm  measg  mar


2  1 2  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

sheobhaig  romh  ealt,  nsmar  ghobhair  ri  creig,  na  mar  chu  mbr  aim
an  latha  fuar  Earraich  a*  dol  romh  thread  chaorach.  Sm  mar  a
dheknainn  bnidhmchean  beaga  do  bhuidhnichean  mora ;  caistdl
cbròdha  'chluiimt  'an  ceithir  àirdean  an  athair ;  slachdarsaich  lann
a'  gearradh  nan  sgiath  sonnalach;  gns  nach  d*  fhàg  mi  fear  mnaidh
tgeoil  JUL  chumadh  tnaùisgenl;  mar  am  biodh  fear  air  leith-chois  'a
£ear  air  leith-lkimh,  's  ged  a  bhiodh  deich  teangannan  'nan  ceann
's  ann  aig  innseadh  an  uilc  f^in  is  nilc  chàich  a  bhitheadh  iad.  Thng
mi  learn  mo  bhean  £^,  'a  choir  mi  ann  an  deireadh  na  luing  L  Thng
mi  'toiseach  do  mhnir  's  a  deireadh  do  thir.  Dheànainn  sihil  'na
toiseach,  stinir  'na  deireadh.  Thog  mi  na  tri  aihil  bhreaca,  bhaidealach
an  aodann  nan  crann  fada,  folannach,  fiogliaidh.  'S  e  ba  chebl
dhomh  plnbarsaich  easgann,  ab^iceardaichfhaoileann;  a'  bh^isd  a
ba  mhotha  'g  itheadh  na  b^isd  a  bu  Ingha,  's  a'  bhèisd  a  bn  Ingha
'deanadh  mar  a  dh*  f haodadh  L  An  fhaochag  chrom,  chiar  a  bha  'n
gnmnd  an  aigean  bheireadh  i  haig  air  a  benl  mòr.  Ghearradh  i
cainnlean  caol  coirce  le  feobhaa  an  stiiuraidh.  Thill  sinn  gn  baile
mbr  m'  athair  cèile.  Thogadh  an  ceòl  's  leagadh  am  brbn.  Bha
deochanna  mine,  misgeach,  s  deochanna  garbha  'gan  gabhail ;  ceòl
air  teudan,  a'  sior  leigheas  gach  seorsa  galair,  a  chnireadh  fir  ghointe
agas  mnathan  sinbhia  'nan  cadal  air  a'  mhbr-bhaile  an  oidhche  sin.
Le  sgios  a  ghaisgich,  agos  le  athar  na  pbit,  cha  do  laidh  mise  le  m'
mhnaoi  an  oidhche  sin.

Ma  bu  mhoch  a  thkinig  an  latha  an  la  'r  na  mhàireach,  bn  mhoiche
na  sin  a  dh'  èiridh  m'  athair  cèile  a  ghlaodhach  rium  a  dhol  do  "n
bheinn  sheilg,  a  dhol  a  shealg  bhrochd,  is  nilc,  is  shionnach.  An  am
togail  na  sithinn  is  a  leagalach,  smaointich  mi  gnn  d'  f  hitg  mi  mo
bhean  fèin  gon  f  hear  faire  na  iiiar  choimhead  nrra.  Dh'  f  holbh  mi
dhacbaidh  mar  choraidh  ro  chalma,  's  fhaair  mi  mo  mhàthair  chdile
'caoineadh.  D^  th'  ort  ?  **  'Smbr  sin,  Macan  mòr  mac  ligh  na  Sorcha
an  d^igh  a'  bhean  ud  a  phbs  thn  f^in  a  thoirt  air  folbh."  Is  e  bn
mheasa  learn  aca.  Ghabhtar  a  mhath  is  olc  siod  orm  fein.  Ghabh
mi  lorg  an  lach  air  an  naoidheamh  tràth.  Thachair  mo  long  onn.
Chuir  mi  mo  dhriom  rithe,  's  bha  i  ra  throm  leam.  Chair  mi  mo
dhriom  rithe  a  rithisd,  's  chuir  mi  mach  i.  Thug  mi  'toiseach  do
mhuir  's  a  deireadh  do  thir.  Dhèanainn  stiuir  'na  deireadh ;  sihil  'na
toiseach;  's  beairt  na  buillsgean;  aghaidh  gach  buill  a  bh'  innte
fuasgailt'  agus  ceangailte ;  a'  deanadh  rogha  cala  agus  acarsaid  do
bhaiie-mòr  Macan  mbr  righ  na  Sorcha.  Tharruinn  mi  mo  long  a
seachd  fad  f^in  o  thràigh  air  fearann  tioram,  far  nach  dnbhadh  gaoith,
's  nach  loisgeadh  grian,  's  nach  deanadh  sgoilearan  baile-mhòir
culaidh  bhiiird,  na  mhagaidh,  na  f  hochaid  dL


MURAGHADH  MAC  BBIAN.  2  I  3

Ghabh  mi  snas  's  thachair  bleidire  orm.  **  D4  do  naigheachd  an
dingh  a  bhleidire?"  ^  Cumhachdan  an  t-saoghail  a' t*  agliaidh;  am
mail  leat  do  chrochadh  is  sian  fala  ma  t'  shtiilean  ?  's  mòr  agus  is
math  mo  naigheachd ;  banaia  agus  pòsadh  eadar  Macan  mbr  ligh  na
Sorcha  agus  nighean  gmagach  an  eilean;  *8  nach  'eil  mhirne  na
mairde  'san  ùr  nach  'dl  air  an  cuireadh  than  na  bainnse."  **  Nan  d*
thngadh  thn  f^  dhomh  do  Ihireach,  bheirinn  dhoit  paigheadh  math,
agUB  an  cota  math  so  th'  orm  air  a  son?"  ** Cumhachdan  an
t-saoghail  a'  t'  aghaidh  a  bhiasd ;  am  mail  leat  do  chrochadh  agus
sian  fiila  ma  t'  shtiilean ;  cha  *n  e  sin  aighear  agus  ioghnadh  a  th'
agam  fdin  r'a  ghabhail  aisde  ma  'n  ^irich  grian  air  athar  am
màireach.^  Bhuail  mi  buille  do  m*  dhòm  air  an  clàr  an  aodainn,  's
chuir  mi  *n  t-ionachainn  'na  chhibeanan  teine  tAd  chhl  a  chinn.  Bha
f Mos  aig  bean  na  bainns'  air  altaigin  gum  bithinn  ann,  's  dh'  iarr
i  na  bleidirean  a  riarachadh  an  toiseach.  Shuidh  mi  fèin  am  meadhon
nam  bleidirean,  *s  a  h-uile  fear  a  theannadh  ri  nùr  a  thoirt  uam
bheirinn  bruthadh  dha  eadar  mo  làmh  's  mo  thaobh,  's  dh'  f  hàgainn
an  siod  e,  's  cheapainn  am  biadh  leis  an  dama  Ikmh,  's  an  deoch  leis
an  làìmh  eile.  lliuirt  cuideigin  nach  robh  am  bleidire  mòr  a  leigeil
mir  an  ceann  nam  bleidirean  eile.  Thuirt  bean  na  bainnse  iadsan  a
bhi  math  do  na  bleidirean,  's  gam  biodh  iad  f^in  r^idh  air  a'  cheann
ma  dheireadh.  Nur  a  f  huair  na  bleidirean  air  fad  an  lebir  dh'  f  holbh
iad,  ach  laidh  mi  f^in  far  an  robh  mi  Thuirt  cuideigin  gun  robh  am
bleidire  mòr  an  dèigh  laidhe  air  an  daoraich,  's  thuirt  fear  na  bainnse
a*  bhiasd  a  thilgeil  a  mach  air  chl  cnoic  na  'n  sgkth  ^rraidh,  gut
an  traoghadh  e  na  bha  'na  bhrainn.  Thàinig  còig  deug  de  na  daoine
hiuas,  's  thug  iad  làmh  air  mi  f^in  a  thogail.  Air  do  dha  làìmh  a
Mhurchaidh  gum  b'  f  hasa  dhaibh  Cam  a  Choinnich  an  Eirinn  a  chura
a  bhonn  na  mise  'thogail  o  'n  talamh*  Thàinig  h-aon  de  na  daoine
'bn  ghlioe  na  ch^ile  nuas,  bha  ball  seirc  orm,  s  cha  robh  duine
ehunnaic  riamh  mi  nach  aithneachadh  a  rithisd  mi,  's  thog  e  'a
currachd,  's  dh'  aithnich  e  co  'bh'ann.  ^  Gun  cuideachadh  am  fortan
leibh  an  so  a  nochd.  Tha  'n  so  Direach  Ghleann  fèite  Macallain,
am  feamanach  gun  iochd,  gun  trocair,  gun  eagal  Ni  Math,  na  duine ;
mar  an  dèanadh  e  do  Bfhurchadh  Mac  Brian  e."

Nur  a  chuala  mi  {iin  siod  dh'  ^idh  mi  dhol  ann  a'm'  threallaich-
ean  cath  agus  comhraig.  Chuir  mi  orm  mo  Mine  sheuntaidh,  sheumh
de  'n  t-srbl  's  de  'n  t-sioda  shleamhuinn  bhuidhe,  sinte  ri  m'  chrai-
donn ;  mo  chòta  neamallach  air  uachdar  na  h-br  l^e ;  mo  chbta
caomh  ootain  air  uachdar  a  chaomh  bhroitinn ;  mo  sgiath  bhucaideach,
bhacaideach,  bharra-chaol  air  mo  thaobh  cli ;  mo  shiachdanta  cruaidh
cnraidh  ann  a'm'  làimh  dhda;  m'  iuchair . aginnicbdinn  chaol  air  mo


214  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

cbrios ;  mo  chlogada  cruadhach  ma  m*  cheann  a  dhion  mo  mhaise
mhnllaich,  a  dhol  an  toiseach  na  h-iorguill,  's  an  iorguill  a'  dol  'na
deireadh.  Chuir  mi  onn  mo  liiireach  thorantach,  sbith  thorantach,
chorra-ghleusda,  gun  f  hbtas,  na  gun  os,  ghormghlas,  ghormghlan,
leudar,  lebthar,  Lochlannach,  f  hada,  aotxom,  inntinneach ;  *s  cha  d*
f  hag  mi  fear  innsidh  sgeoil  na  chumadh  tuairisgeul ;  mar  am  biodh
fear  air  leith-chois  ann,  's  fear  air  leith-làìmh,  's  ged  a  bhiodh  deich
teangannan  'nan  ceann,  's  ann  aig  innseadb  an  uilc  fein  is  nilc  chàich
a  bhitheadh  iad.

Thug  mi  learn  mo  bhean  's  chuir  mi  'san  luing  i.  Thog  mi  na  tri
Biùil  bhreaca,  bhaidealach  an  aodann  nan  cranna  fada,  fulannach,
fitighaidh.  'S  e  bu  chebl  dhomh  plubarsaich  easgann,  's  b^ioeardaich
f  haoileann ;  a  bh^isd  a  bu  mhotha  aig  itheadh  na  b^isd  a  bu  lugha,
's  a  bheisd  a  bu  lugha  a'  dèanadh  mar  a  dh'  f  haodadh  i.  An
f  haochag  chrom,  chiar  a  bha  'n  grunnd  an  aigean  bheireadh  i  haig
air  a  beul  mòr.  Gbearradh  i  cuinlean  coirce  romh  a  toiseach  le
feobhas  an  stiiiraidh.  Cha  bu  stad  's  cha  b'  f  hois  dhbmh,  's  mi  'ga
caitheadh,  gus  an  d*  rkinig  mi  baile-mòr  m'  athair  c^ile.  Sin  agad  a'
chiad  oidhche  a  f  huair  mise  le  m'  bhean  a  Mhurchaidh,  's  am  b  ion
gantach  ged  nach  bu  mhail  learn  duine  aam  bith  a  bhith  'g  amharc
orra.  "  6n  dearbh  cha  b'  iongantach/'  ursa  Murchadh.  Chaidh
Mnrchadh  an  oidhche  sin  a  laidbe,  's  f huair  e  e  f^in  an  Ik'r  na  mhàir-
each  ann  an  thr  Chinn  a  Choire  ann  an  Eirinn,  far  an  robh  athair
agus  a  sheanair ;  's  am  fiadb,  'a  an  gadhar,  is  athair,  's  a'  bhrkthair
a  stigh  air  thoiseach  tir.

This  tale  was  taken  down  in  May  1859,  from  the  recitation
of  Donald  Shaw,  then  aged  sixty-eight,  a  pauper,  living  at
Ballygrant  in  Islay,  who  was  in  the  42d  Highlanders  at
Waterloo.  He  served  in  the  army  about  three  years.  He  said
that  he  had  learned  it  from  one  Duncan  MacMillan,  a  Colon  say
man,  well  advanced  in  years,  about  fifty  years  ago.  On  the  6th
of  July,  Hector  MacLean  wrote : — '*  Shaw  died  a  few  days  ago,
and  80  far  as  I  can  ascertain,  there  is  none  in  Islay,  Jura,  or
Colonsay,  that  can  recite  the  same  tale  now."

I  have  oply  met  with  one  man  who  knew  it  by  this  name ;
MacPhie,  at  the  Sound  of  Benbecula,  a  very  old  man,  who  gave
me  the  outlitie  of  it.  Some  of  the  language  is  exceedingly
difficult ;  some  words  none  of  us  can  make  out ;  and  MacPhie's
version,  and  most  of  his  storiep,  were  full  of  such  language .

The  tale  then  is -found  in  Islay  and  South  Uist,  and  traced  to


MURAGHADH  MAG  BRIAN.  2  I  5

Colonsajf  and  is  certainly  about  fifty  years  old.     I  have  several
other  tales  which  resemble  it  in  some  degree.

The  little  hat  with  everything  in  it,  and  the  great  coat  and
buttons,  are  Irish.  There  is  mach  commanication  between
Ireland  and  the  Isles  at  this  day.  The  language  spoken  on  the
opposite  coasts  is  all  but  identical,  and  this  is  probably  common
.to  Ireland  and  the  Isles.

There  is  something  like  it  in  Mr.  Simpson's  book ;  and  some
of  his  words  resemble  words  in  this  story,  and  seem  to  have
puzzled  the  Irish  translators  as  much  as  they  have  puzzled  me.
The  phrase,  "As  a  falcon  through  a  flock  of  birds,"  is  in  Mr.
Simpson's  work.  The  man  with  the  bundle  of  wood  is  something
like  the  giant  in  Grimms'  Valiant  Tailor.  The  servant  who  drew
a  thorn  longer  than  his  leg  out  of  his  foot,  may  be  some  super-
natural personage.  The  measured  prose  descriptions  of  sailing,
arming,  and  fighting,  are  common  all  over  the  West  Highlands
amongst  the  eldest  and  poorest  men,  and  similar  passages  occur
.in  manuscripts.

For  descriptions  of  costume  and  for  language,  the  tale  is  very
curious,  and  worth  the  labour  bestowed  on  it,  which  is  consi-
derable. I  have  endeavoured  to  translate  closely,  and  at  the
same  time  to  imitate  this  tale ;  but  it  is  a  very  weak  attempt,  I
well  know.

The  manners  described  are  partly  those  of  the  day.  The
politeness  and  discourtesy  in  the  house  of  the  man  with  the  little
hat,  are  purely  Highland.  The  breaking  of  the  tumbler  is  a  mark
of  great  respect ;  no  meaner  lip  should  touch  the  glass  drained  to
an  honoured  guest ;  but  the  glass  must  be  first  filled  and  emptied
— no  half  cups  are  allowed.  The  best  seat  should  be  the  guest's.
The  telling  of  the  story  in  the  evening  is  the  real  amusement  of
the  poorer  classes  now,  and  used  to  be  much  more  common.

The  description  of  the  sailing  of  a  boat  amongst  the  fish  and
birds  is  true  to  nature ;  so  is  the  expression  the  track  of  the  dtick;
none  but  a  man  familiar  with  the  habits  of  birds  on  a  sea-coast
could  think  of  such  a  phrase.  Ducks  feed  on  shore,  and  return
to  the  sea  at  daylight.

The  .experience  of  the  old  soldier  probably  makes  the  drink
wine,  not  whisky  ;  and  Sibearta  is  probably  white  Siberia,  de-
rived from  the  same  source  ;  if  not,  I  can  make  nothing  of  it.


2  1 6  WEST  raOHLAND  TALES.

The  dress  described  may  be  the  old  dress  of  the  Isles,  as  de-
picted on  tombstones,  with  a  cotton  coat  slipped  in.  In  an  ac*
count  of  the  Danes  and  Norwegians  in  England  and  Ireland,  by
J.  J.  A.  Worsaae,  London,  1852,  it  is  stated  that  Magnns  Barfod
sat  himself  at  the  helm  while  his  ship  was  drawn  over  the
Peninsula  of  Tarbet  (draw-boat) ;  acquired  the  sovereignty  of  the
Western  Isles ;  and  adopted  the  dress  generally  worn  there,
"  They  went  about  the  streets  (in  Norway)  with  bare  legs,  and
wore  short  coats  and  cloaks,  whence  Magnus  was  called  by  his
men,  Barfod  or  Barbeen  (barefoot  or  barelegs),"  says  the  Ice-
landic historian,  Snorro  Sturleson,  who,  as  well  known,  lived  in
the  first  half  of  the  thirteenth  century.  It  is  remarkable  enough
that  this  is  the  oldest  account  extant  of  the  well-known  Scotch
Highland  dress,  whose  antiquity  is  thus  proved."

The  tale  might  be  taken  partly  from  the  Odyssey.  The  man
disguised  as  a  beggar,  going  to  a  wedding  where  his  own  wife
was  the  bride,  and  where  he  knocks  out  the  brains  of  a  beggar
with  a  single  blow,  and  makes  a  general  slaughter  afterwards,  is
very  like  Ulysses,  Penelope,  Irus,  and  the  Suitors,  but  similar
incidents  are  common  in  popular  tales.  There  is  a  story  in
the  Decameron  which  somewhat  resembles  the  incident  of  the
wife  carried  away.  On  the  whole,  I  think  this  story  is  a  remnant
of  an  old  bardic  composition,  of  which  very  little  remains.

The  word  GnuAaACH  is  here  used  both  for  a  maiden  and  for  a
woman  with  a  daughter ;  it  usually  means  a  maiden^  rarely  a
chief;  sometimes  it  seems  to  mean  a  conjuror^  or  philosopher,  or
instructor  ;  ofiten  the  being  called  Brownie.  It  probably  means
any  one  with  long  hair ;  from  gbuao,  the  hair  of  the  head.

Glossary.

Allaban  Anradh,  painful,  wandering.

Athar  na  Poit,  the  evil  effect  of  drinking.

Beart  na  buil,  tackle  in  her  ropes.

Beucarsaioh,  screaming.

Brochd  agus  Olk,  badgers  and  evil  creatures,  vermin.

Bucaidach,  pimply,  boss  covered,  or  perhaps  hollow.

Oala  agus  Acarsaid,  port  and  anchorage.

Cnock  Seanaw,  (?)  Hill  of  Jewels,  from  sean  or  seun,  a  jewel.


MURAÒHADH  MAO  BRIAN.  2  1 7

Cravna  fada  FxTLAmrACH,  trees  or  masts,  long-enduring.

File,  Mils,  soft,  fluent.

FiSNiCHE  Faisniche,  words  whose  meaning  is  lost  in  the  islands ;

probably  Irish ;  perhaps  knowing,  delaying,  that  is  wise,

eloquent.
Leudab  leothab  LocHULiraACH,  (?)  perhaps  a  description  of  the

man  ;  the  epithet  Lochlannach  is  the  only  one  of  the  three

which  is  comprehensible,  and  this  line  probably  belongs  to

something  else.
LoRO  NA  Lach,  the  track  of  the  duck ;  path,  towards  the  sea.
LuiRACH,  a  coat  of  mail,  also  a  patched  cloak.
Maoh  o  Dorna,  (?)  plain  of  pebbles,  from  dornag,  a  stone,  that

can  be  held  in  dom,  the  fist.
Neàm-a-laoh,  (?)  not  to  be  found  in  dictionaries.
Plubabsaich,  an  expressive  word  for  plunging  about.


XXXIX.
THE  THEEE  WIDOWS.

From  Hector  Boyd,  Fisbennan,  Barra.

^T^HERE  were  three  widows,  and  every  one  of  them
-*-  had  a  son  apiece.  Dòmhnull  was  the  name  of
the  son  of  one  of  them.*

Dòmhnull  had  four  stots,  and  the  rest  had  but  two
each.  They  were  always  scolding,  saying  that  he  had
more  grass  than  they  had  themselves.  On  a  night  of
the  nights  they  went  to  the  fold,  and  they  seized  on
the  stots  of  Dòmhnull  and  they  killed  them.  When
Dòmhnull  rose  and  went  out  in  the  morning  to  see  the
stots,  he  found  them  dead.

He  flayed  the  stots,  and  he  salted  them,  and  he
took  one  of  the  hides  with  him  to  the  big  town  to  selL
The  way  was  so  long  that  the  night  came  on  him  before
he  reached  the  big  town.  He  went  into  a  wood  and
he  put  the  hide  about  his  head.  There  came  a  heap  of
birds,  and  they  lighted  on  the  hide  j  he  put  out  his
hand  and  he  seized  on  one  of  them.  About  the  bright-
ening of  day  he  went  away  j  he  betook  himself  to  the
house  of  a  gentleman.

The  gentleman  came  to  the  door,  and  he  asked
what  he  had  there  in  his  oxter.  He  said  that  he  had
a  soothsayer.     **  What  divination  will  he  be  doing  V*

*  (Lit.)  It  was  Domhnnll  that  was  on  the  son  of  one  of  them.


THE  THREE  Wn)OWS.  2  1 9


u


He  will  be  doing  every  sort  of  divination,"  said
Dòmhnull.  "Make  him  do  divination,"  said  the  gen-
tleman.

He  went  and  he  wrung  him,  and  the  bird  gave  a
RAN.*  "What  is  he  saying?"  said  the  gentleman.
"  He  says  that  thou  hast  a  wish  to  buy  him,  and  that
thou  wilt  give  two  hundred  pounds  Saxon  for  him, "
said  DòmhnulL  "  Well,  surely  ! — ^it  is  true,  doubt-
less ;  and  if  I  were  thinking  that  he  would  do  divina-
tion, I  would  give  that  for  him,"  said  the  gentleman.

So  now  the  gentleman  bought  the  bird  from  Dòmh-
null,  and  he  gave  him  two  hundred  pounds  Saxon  for
him.

"  Try  that  thou  do  not  sell  him  to  any  man,  and
that  there  is  no  knowing  that  I  might  not  come  myself
to  seek  him  yet  I  would  not  give  him  to  thee  for
three  thousand  pounds  Saxon  were  it  not  that  I  am  in
extremity. "

Dòmhnull  went  home,  and  the  bird  did  not  do  a
pinch  of  divination  ever  after.

When  he  took  his  meat  he  began  at  counting  the
mohey.  Who  were  looking  at  him  but  those  who
killed  the  stot-s.     They  came  in.

"Ah,  Dòmhnull,"  said  they,  "how  didst  thou  get
all  the  money  that  is  there  1"

"  I  got  it  as  you  may  get  it  too.  It 's  I  that  am
pleased  that  you  killed  the  stots  for  me,"  said  he.
"Kill  you  your  own  stots,  and  flay  them,  and  take
with  you  the  hides  to  the  big  town,  and  be  shouting,
*  Who  will  buy  a  stot's  hide,  *  and  you  will  get  plenty
of  money."

They  killed  the  stots,  and  they  flayed  them.  They
took  with  them  the  hides  to  the  big  town,  and  they

*  There  seems  to  be  a  pun  here.    Kan  is  a  roari  a  hoarse
noise.    Ra.nn  is  a  rhyme,  a  Terse,  a  stanza.


220  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

began  at  shouting,  "Who  will  buy  a  stot's  hide."  They
were  at  that  work  the  length  of  the  day ;  and  when,  the
people  of  the  big  town  were  tired  making  sport  of
them,  they  returned  home.

Now  they  did  not  know  what  they  should  do.
They  were  vexed  because  of  the  stots  that  were
killed.  They  saw  the  mother  of  Dòmhnull  going  to
the  well,  and  they  seized  on  her  and  they  choked
her.

When  Dòmhnull  was  taking  sorrow,  so  long  was
his  mother  coming,  he  looked  out  to  try  if  he  could
see  her.  He  reached  the  well,  and  he  found  her  dead
there.

He  did  not  know  what  he  should  do.  Then  he
took  her  with  him  home.

On  the  morrow  he  arrayed  her  in  the  best  clothes
she  had,  and  he  took  her  to  the  big  town.  He  walked
up  to  the  king's  house  with  her  on  top  of  him.  When
he  came  to  the  king's  house  he  met  with  a  large  well.

He  went  and  he  stuck  the  stick  into  the  bank  of
the  well,  and  he  set  her  standing  with  her  chest  on  the
stick.  He  reached  the  door  and  he  struck  at  it,  and
the  maidservant  came  down.*

"  Say  to  the  king, "  said  he,  "  that  there  is  a  re-
spectable woman  yonder,  and  that  she  has  business  with
him."

The  maidservant  told  that  to  the  king.

"  Say  to  him  to  say  to  her  to  come  over, "  said  the
king.

"  The  king  is  asking  thee  to  say  to  her  to  come
over, "  said  the  maidservant  to  DòmhnulL

"  I  won't  go  there  ;  go  there  thyself ;  I  am  tired
enough."

*  The  manners  and  onstoms  of  kings,  according  to  west  coon-
try  fishermen,  were  primitive.


mmm


THE  THKEE  WIDOWS.  22  I

The  maid  went  up,  and  she  told  the  king  that  not
a  bit  of  the  man  would  go  there.

"  Go  there  thyself"  said  the  king.

"  If  she  will  not  answer  thee, "  said  Dòmhnnll  to
the  maidservant,  "  thou  shalt  push  her ;  she  is  deaf."

The  maidservant  reached  where  she  was.

"  Good  woman, "  said  the  maidservant  to  her,  "  the
ViTig  is  asking  yourseK  to  come  over."

She  took  no  notica  She  pushed  her  and  she  said
not  a  word.     Dòmhnull  was  seeing  how  it  was  without.

"  Draw  the  stick  from  her  chest,  '*  said  DòmhnuU  ;
"  it 's  asleep  she  is. "

She  drew  the  stick  from  her  chest,  and  there  she
went  head  foremost  into  the  well.

Then  he  shouted  out,  "  Oh  my  cattle  !  my  cattle !
oiy  mother  drowned  in  the  well !  What  shall  I  do
this  day?"  Then  he  struck  his  two  palms  against
each  otìier,  and  there  was  no  howl  he  gave  that  could
not  be  heard  at  three  miles*  distance.

The  king  came  out.  "  Oh,  my  lad,  never  give  it
voice  for  ever,  and  I  will  pay  for  thy  mother.  How
much  wilt  thou  be  asking  for  thy  mother  1 "

"  Five  hundred  pounds  Saxon,'*  said  Dòmhnull.

"  Thou  shalt  get  that  within  the  minute, "  said  the
king.

Dòmhnull  got  the  five  hundred  Saxon  pounds.  He
went  where  his  mother  was  ;  he  took  the  clothes  off
that  were  on  her,  and  he  threw  her  into  the  well.

He  came  home,  and  he  was  counting  the  money.
They  came — ^the  two — ^where  he  was,  to  see  if  he  should
be  lamenting  his  mother.  They  put  a  question  to  bim
— "  Wbere  had  he  got  all  the  money  that  was  there  Y*

"  I  got  it, "  said  he,  "  where  you  may  get  it  if  you
yourselves  should  choose. "

"  How  shall  we  get  it  ? "


222  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  Kill  you  yonr  mothers,  and  take  them  with  you  on
top  of  you,  and  take  them  about  the  big  town,  and
be  shouting,  *  Who  will  buy  old  dead  carlins  V  and  you
will  get  your  fortunes."

When  they  heard  that  they  went  home,  and  each
one  of  them  began  upon  his  mother  with  a  stone  in  a
stocking  till  he  killed  her.

They  went  on  the  morrow  to  the  big  town.  They
began  at  shouting,  "  Who  will  buy  old  carlins  dead  Ì "
And  there  was  no  man  who  would  buy  that.

When  the  people  of  the  big  town  were  tired
making  sport  of  them,  they  set  the  dogs  at  them
home.

When  they  came  home  that  night  they  laid  down
and  they  slept.  On  the  morrow,  when  they  rose,  they
went  where  DòmhnuU  was,  and  they  seized  on  him  and
they  put  him  into  a  barrel  They  went  with  it  to  reel
it  down  from  a  peak  of  rock.  They  were  thus,  and
they  had  time  about  carrying  it.  The  one  said  to  the
other,  "  Since  the  way  was  so  long,  and  the  day  so  hot,
that  they  should  go  in  to  take  a  dram."  They  went
in,  and  they  left  him  in  the  barrel  on  the  great  road
without.  He  heard  a  "  tristbich  "*  coming,  and  who
was  there  but  the  shepherd,  and  a  hundred  sheep  with
him.  He  came  down,  and  he  began  to  play  a  "trump  "
(Jew's  harp)  which  he  had  in  the  barrel.  The  shep-
herd struck  a  stroke  of  his  stick  on  the  barrel
"  Who's  in  here  Ì "  said  he.  " It's  me,"  said  Dòmh-
nulL  "  What  art  thou  doing  in  it  ? "  said  the  shep-
herd. "  I  am  making  a  fortune  in  it, "  said  Dòmh-
null,  "  and  no  man  ever  saw  such  a  place  with  gold
and  silver.  I  have  just  filled  a  thousand  purses  here,
and  the  fortune  is  nearly  made."

*  Tribtbich  :  a  word  which  exactly  descnhes  the  tripping
sound  of  a  lot  of  sheep  on  hard  groand.


^i^m^^i^m^m'^m^m


THE  THBEE  WIDOWS^  223

"  It's  a  pity,"  said  the  shepherd,  "that  thou  shouldest
not  let  myself  in  a  while."

"I  won't  let  thee.  It  is  much  that  would  make
me.

"  And  wilt  thou  not  let  me  in  ?  Mightest  thou  not
let  me  in  for  one  minute,  and  mightest  thou  not  have
enough  thyself  nevertheless  1 "

"  By  the  books,  poor  man,  since  thou  art  needful,
I  will  let  thee  in.  (Do)  thou  thyself  drive  the  head
out  of  the  barrel  and  come  here ;  but  thou  shalt  not
get  (leave)  to  be  long  in  it,  "  said  DòmhnuU.

The  shepherd  took  the  head  out  of  the  barrel,  and
he  came  out ;  he  seized  on  the  shepherd  by  the  two
shanks,  and  he  set  him  head  foremost  in  the  barrel.

"  There  is  neither  silver  nor  gold  here,"  said  the
shepherd.

"  Thou  wilt  not  see  a  thing  till  the  head  goes  on
the  barrel, "  said  DòmhnuU.

"  Oh,  I  don't  see  a  shadow  in  here, "  said  he.

"K  thou  seest  not>  so  be  it  with  thee,"  said
Dòmhnull.

Dòmhnull  went  and  he  put  on  the  plaid  that  the
shepherd  had,  and  when  he  put  on  the  plaid  the  dog
followed  him.  Then  they  came  out  and  they  seized
the  barrel,  and  they  raised  it  on  their  shoulders.  They
went  away  with  it

The  shepherd  would  say  at  the  end  of  every  mi-
nute, "It's  me  that's  in  it — ^it'sme  that'sinit"  "Oh,
it's  thou,  roguey  !  belike  it's  thou  ?"

They  reached  the  peak  of  the  rock,  and  they  let
down  the  barrel  with  the  rock  and  shepherd  in  its  in-
side.

When  they  returned,  whom  did  they  see  but  Dòmh-
nuU,  with  his  plaid  and  his  dog,  and  his  hundred  of
sheep  with  him  in  a  park.


?24  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

They  went  over  to  him.

"  Oh,  Dòmhimll,"  said  they,  "  how  gottest  thou  to
come  hither  Ì "

"  I  got  as  you  might  get  if  you  would  try  it.  After
that  I  had  reached  the  world  over  yonder,  they  said  to
me  that  I  had  plenty  of  time  for  going  over  there,  and
they  set  me  over  here,  and  a  hundred  sheep  with  me  to
make  money  for  myself"

"  And  would  they  give  the  like  of  that  to  us  if  we
should  go  there  Ì "  said  they.

"  They  would  give  (that.)  It 's  they  that  would
give,"  said  DòmhnulL

"  (By)  what  means  shall  we  get  going  there  Ì  "  said
they.

"  Exactly  the  very  means  by  which  you  yourselves
sent  me  there,"  said  he.

They  went  and  they  took  with  them  two  barrels  to
set  themselves  into  up  above.

When  they  reached  the  place  one  of  them  went  into
one  of  the  barrels,  and  the  other  sent  him  down  with
the  rock-  That  one  gave  a  roar  below,  and  his  brains
just  after  going  out  with  the  blow  he  got.

The  other  one  asked  DòmhnuU  what  he  was  saying  1

"  He  is  shouting,  *  Cattle  and  sheep,  wealth  and
profit,' "  said  DòmhnuU.

"  Down  with  me,  down  with  me  ! "  said  the  other
one.

He  did  not  stay  to  go  into  the  barreL  He  cut  a
caper  down,  and  the  brains  went  out  of  him.

Dòmhnull  went  home,  and  he  had  the  land  to  him-
self.


wmmmmmm


NA  TBI  BANTRAICHBAIT.  225

NA  TRI  BANTRAICHEAN.

Bha  tri  buntraichean  aann,  agus  bha  mac  an  t-aon  sag  a  h-uile  tè
dhiu.  'Se  Dòmhnull  a  bh'  air  mac  h-aon  diu.  Bba  ceithir  daimh
aig  DòmhnuU,  *a  cha  robh  ach  da  dhamh  an  t-aon  aig  càcb.  Bbiodh
end  a'  trod  daonnan,  ag  ràdh  go  'n  robh  barrachd  feòir  aige-san  's  a
bh'  aca  fhin.  Oidhche  dha  na  oidhchean  chaidh  eud  do  'n  chùith,
agus  rug  eud  air  na  daimh  aig  Dòmhnull,  agus  mharbh  eud  eud.
Nur  a  dh'  eiddh  DòmhnuU  'a  a  chaidh  e  'mach  'sa-  mhadainn  a
sheaultainn  air  na  daimh,  f  huair  e  marbh  eud.  Dh*  fheaunn  e  na
daimh  *s  shaill  e  eud,  's  thug  e  leis  t^  dha  na  seicheachan  dha  'n
bhaile  mhòr  a  'creic  Bha  'n  t-astar  cho  fada  's  gon  d*  thàinig  an
oidhch'  air  mu  'n  d'  rkinig  e  'm  baile  mòr.  Chaidh  e  'stigh  do  choille
's  chuir  e  'n  t^seiche  mu  cheaunn.  Thàinig  grunnan  ian  's  laidh  eud
air  an  t-seiche.  Chuir  e  'Ikmh  a  mach  's  rug  e  air  fear  dhiu.  Mu
shoillseachadh  an  latha  dh'  f  halbh  e.  Ghabh  e  go  tigh  duin'  uasail.
Thkinig  an  duin'  nasal  gos  an  dorusd  's  dh'  fhoighnichd  e  d^  bh'  aige
'na  achlais  an  siud.  Thuirt  e  go  'n  robh  liosaiche.  **  De  'n  f  hios*
achd  a  bhios  e  'dianadh  ?  "  **  Bidh  a  h-uile  seòrsa  fiosachd,"  ursa
DòmhnulL  *'  Bheir  air  fiosachd  a  dhianadh,"  urs'  an  duin'  nasal.
Dh'  f  halbh  e  agus  dh'  fhkisg  e  e  's  thug  an  t-ian  ran  as.  **  De  'tha
e  'g  riidh?'^  urs'  an  duin*  nasal.  "Tha  e  'g  rkdh  gom  bheil  toil
agadsa  'cheannach,  'a  gon  d'  thoir  thu  dk  chiad  punnd  Sasnach  air,"
ursa  Dbmhnull.  **  Mata,  go  dnnteach  I  tha  e  liar  gon  teagamh,  's
na  *m  bithinn  a  smaointeachadh  gon  dianadh  e  fiosachd  bheirinn  sinn
air,"  urs'  an  duin'  nasal.  Cheanuaich  an  duin'  uasal,  an  so,  an  t-ian
o  DhomhnuU,  *s  thug  e  da  chiad  punnd  Sasnach  dha  air.  "  Fiach
nach  creic  thuri  duine  'sam  bith  e,  's  gon  fhios  nach  d'  thiginn  fhin  a
'iarraidh  fhathasd.  Cha  d'  thugainn  duit  air  tri  mile  punnd
Sasnach  e  mur  a'  bhithe'  gom  bheil  mi  aunn  a'm'  èiginn."  Dh'
f  holbh  Dbmhnull  dachaidh,  's  cha  d'  rinn  an  t-ian  greim  fiosachd
riabh  tuilHdh.

"  Nur  a  ghabh  e  bhiadh  thbisich  e  air  cunntas  an  airgid.  Co
*bha  'ga  choimhead  ach  an  f  headhain  a  mharbh  na  daimh.  Thàinig
end  a  stigh.  **  A  Dhbmhnuill,"  urs'  àdsan,  "  demur  a  f  huair  thusa
na  'bheil  an  sin  de  dh'  airgiod  ?  "  "  Fhuair  mur  a  gheibh  sibhs'  e
cnideachd.  '3  mi  'bha  toilichte  go  'n  do  mharbh  sibh  na  daimh  onn,"
urs'  esan.  "  Marblmdh  sibhse  na  daimh  agaibh  fhin,  agus  feannaibh
eud,  agus  thugaibh  leibh  na  seicheachan  do  'n  bhaile  mhòr,  's
bithibh  ag  eubhach  co  cheannaclias  seiche  daimh,  agus  gheibh  sibh
na  leòir  de  dh'  airgiod."  Mharbh  end  na  daimh  's  dh'  fheaunn  eud
VOL.  IL  Q


226  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

eud.   Thug  end  leò  na  seicheachan  dp  'n  bhaile  mhòr,  'a  thòUich  end
air  enbhach  co  cheannachas  seiche  daimli.    Bha  eud  ris  an  obair  sin
fad  an  latha ;  's  nur  a  bha  mninntir  a*  bhaile  mhoir  sgith  'gabbail
spòrs  orra,  thill  eud  dacbaidh.    Cha  robh  fios  aca  an  so  de  'dhianadh
eud ;  bha  aireacbas  orra  chionn  na  daimb  a  mharbhadh.    Chunnaic
eud  mkihair  DhòmhnuiU  a*  dol  do  'n  tobar,  *»  rug  eud  urra  's  tbachd
end  i.   Nur  a  bha  DbmhnnU  a'  gabhail  mnlaid  fad  's  a  bha  mhàthair
gon  tighinn,  sheaull  e  'mach  fiach  am  faiceadh  e  i.  Bàinig  e  'n  tobar
's  fhnair  e  marbh  an  sin  i.     Cha  robh  fios  aige  de  'dhianadh  e.
Thug  e  leis  dhachaidh  an  sin  L   An  la  *r  na  mhkireach  'sgeadaich  e  i
aunns  an  aodach  a  b'  f  hearr  a  bh'  aico  *s  thug  e  dha  'n  bhaile  mhòr  i.
Choisicb  e  'suas  go  tigh  an  ligh  's  i  aig*  air  a  mhuinn.  Nur  a  thàinig
e  go  tigh  an  ligh  thachair  tobar  mòr  ris.     Dh'  f  halbh  e  's  stob  è  *m
bata  'm  bmach  an  tobair,  's  chuir  e  'na  seasamh  i  'sa  h-uchd  air  a'
bhatai.    Rkinig  e  *n  dorusd  *s  bhuail  e  aige,  's  thkinig  an  searbhanta
'nuas.    '*  Abair  ris  an  rigb,"  urs'  esan,  **  gom  bheil  boireannach  coir
thallad,  's  gom  bheil  gnothach  aice  ris.*'    **  Dh'  innis  an  searbhanta
sind  dha  'n  rìgh.    « Abair  ris  a  ràdh  rithe  tigh  'n  a  naull,"  ars'  an
rìgh.    **  Tha  "n  righ  'g  iarraidh  ort  a  rkdh  rithe  tigh  'n  a  naull,"  urs'
an  searbhanta  ri  Dbmhnull.    "  Cha  d'  th^id  mis'  aunn;  theirig  fhin
aunn ;  tba  mise  sgith  go  leòir."  Chaidh  an  searbhanta  'suas  's  thuirt
i  ris  an  an  ligh  nach  rachadh  bad  dha  'n  duin'  aunn.'*    **  Falbh  fhin
aonn,"  urs'  an  righ.    *'  Mur  am  freagair  i  thu,"  ursa  Dòmhnull  ris  an
t-searbhanta,  ''putaidh  tu  i ;  tha  i  bodhar."    Bkioig  an  searbhanta
far  an  robh  i    "A  bhoireannaich  choir,"  urs'  an  searbhanta  rithe,
*'tha  'n  righ  'g  iarraidh  oirbh  fhin  tigh  'n  a  naulL"    Cha  d'  thug  ise
feairt.     Phut  i  i  's  cha  d'  thuirt  i  focal     Bha  Dbmhnull  a'  faidnn
mur  a  bha  'muigh.   **  Tarruinn  am  bat'  o  a  h-uchd,"  ursa  DòmhnuU,
'*  'a  aunn  'na  cadal  a  tha  i."    Tharruinn  i  'm  bat'  o  a  h-uchd,  agus
siud  an  coinneamh  a  cinn  a  ghabh  i  aunns  an  tobar.    Dh'eubh  esan
an  80  a  muigh,  **  O  m'  f  heudail  I  m'  fheudail  I  mo  mhathair  air  a  bath*
adh  aunns  an  tobar  t     De  'ni  mis'  an  diogh  I "    Bhuail  e  'n  so  a  dha
bhoisri  ch^ile,  's  cha  'n  'eil  ran  a  bheireadh  e  as  nach  clainnte  tri  mil'
air  astar.    Thàinig  an  ligh  'mach.    '*  O  ghille,  na  d'  thoir  guth  go
brkch  air,  's  pàighidh  mise  do  mhkthair."    '^  De  'bhios  thu  'g  iarr-
aidh air  do  mhkthair?"    <*  Còig  clad  punnd  Sasnach,"  ursa  Dbmh-
nulL    ^  Gheibh  thu  sin  'sa  mhionaid,"  urs'  an  iigh«    Fhuair  Dbmh-
null na  cbig  ciad  punnd  Sasnach.   Chaidh  e  far  an  robh  'mhathair,  's
thog  e  dhi  an  t-aodach  a  bh'  urra,  's  thilg  e  's  an  tobar  i,

ThUnig  e  dhachaidh  's  bha  e  'cunntas  an  airg^d.  Thàinig  àdaan
'nan  dithisd  far  an  robb  e  fiach  am  biodh  e  'caoineadh  a  mhàthar.
Chuir  eud  oeist  air  oa'  *n  d'  fhuair  e  na  robh  'n  siud  de  dh'  airgiod.


wmm


NA  TRI  BANTRÀIOHEAN.  227

**  Fhtudr,**  HIS*  esan^  **  &r  am  fiugheadh  sibhs'  e  na  *n  toilicheadh
sibh  flun."  «  Demur  a  gheibh  sin  e?"  **  Marbhadh  sibhs'  'nrmatb-
raicheaD,  's  thngaibh  leibh  air  *nr  muin  end,  's  theirigibh  feadh  a
bhaile  mhòìr,  *b  bithibh  ag  enbhachd  00  a  cheamiachas  seana  chaill-
each  mharbh,  *»  gheibh  sibh  'or  fortan."

Nur  a  chnal  eud  so  chaidh  eud  dachaidh.  Shihd  gach  fear  ac'  air
a  mhàthair  le  dach  am  mogan  gos  an  do  mharbh  e  L  Dh*  f  halbh
eud  ao  hi  'r  na  mhàireach  do  'n  bhaile  mhòr.  Thòisich  eud  aireubh-
ach,  **  Co  cheaDnachas  seana  chaUleach  mharbh,"  's  cha  robh  duine
'bheannachadh  siud.  Nur  a  bha  muinntir  a  'bhaile  mhòir  sgith  'gabh-
ail  spòrs  orra,  lig  end  na  coin  aunnta  dhachaidh.

Nur  a  thèùnig  eud  dachaidh  an  oidhche  sin  chaidh  eud  a  laidhe  's
chaidil  end.  An  la  'r  na  mhàireach,  nur  a  dh*  ^iridh  eud,  thàinig  end
far  an  robh  Domhnull,  's  rug  eud  air,  *s  chuir  end  aunn  am  barailt  e.
Dh*  f  halbh  eud  leis  gos  a  rìleadh  a  sios  le  bàrr  creige.  Bha  eud  an
so  *s  treis  mu  seach  aca  *ga  *ghiulan  air  falbh.  Thuirt  an  dama  fear
ris  an  fhear  eile,  o  *n  a  bha  *n  t-astar  cho  fada  *s  an  latha  cho  teith,
go  *m  bo  choir  dhaibh  dol  a  stigh  a  ghabhail  drama.  Chaidh  end  a
stigh,  *s  dh'  f  hag  end  esan  annus  a*  bharailt  air  an  rathad  mhòr  a
mnigh.  Chnal  e  tristrich  a'  tighinn,  *s  co  'bha  *n  sin  ach  cibear
agns  dad  caora  leis.  Ghabh  e  'nuas ;  agus  thbisich  esan  air  seinn
tromp  a  bh'  aig'  aunns  a'  bharailt  Bhuail  an  cibear  buille  dha  'n
bhat'  air  a'  bharailt.  *<  Co  'tha  'n  so  ? "  urs'  esan.  "  Tha  mis',*'  ursa
Domhnull.  «De  *tha  thu  'dianadh  anun?**  urs'  an  dbear.  *<Tha
mi  'dianadh  an  f  hortain  aunn,*'  ursa  Domhnull ;  "  's  cha  'n  f  haca
dnine  riabh  a'  leithid  so  de  dh'  àite  le  or  a*s  airgiod.  Tha  mis'  an
d^h  mile  spòran  a  lianadh  an  so,  's  tha  m'  fhortan  thnn  a
bhith  dèante."  **  'S  tmagh,"  urs'  an  dbear,  **  nach  ligeadh  tn  mi
fhin  a  stigh  treis.*'  «Cha  lig;  's  mòr  a  bheireadh  orm  e.'*  *<'S
nach  lig  thu  aunn  mi,  nach  faodadh  tn  mo  ligeil  aunn  aona
mhionaid,  *s  nach  fàod  thu  na  leòir  a  bhith  agad  f  h\n  co-dhih."
"An  leòbhra  'dhuine  bhochd,  o  'n  a  tha  thu  febmach  ligidh  mi  aunn
thu.  Onir  fMn  an  ceaunn  as  a'  bharùit  's  thig  an  so,  ach  cha  'n  f had'
a  gheibh  thu  'bhith  aunn,"  ursa  DomhnulL  Thug  an  dbear  an
ceaunn  as  a  bharailt  *s  thkinig  esan  a  mach.  Rug  e  air  dhk  chois  air
a'  chibear  's  chuir  e  'n  coinneamh  a  chinn  *s  a  bharailt  e.  **  Cha  'n
'eQ  airgiod  na  or  an  so,"  urs'  an  dbear.  **  Cha  'n  f  haic  thu  dad  gos
an  d*  th^id  an  ceaunn  'sa  bharailt,"  ursa  Domhnull.  *'  O I  cha  'n
fhaic  mise  sgath  an  so,"  urs'  esan.  **Mnr  am  faic  biodh  agad,**  ursa
Domhnull.

Dh'  fhalbh  Domhnull 's  chuir  e  air  am  breacan  a  bh'  aig  a*  chib-
ear, 's  lean  a3&  eh  e  nur  a  dinir  e  air  am  breacan.    Thèdnig  àdsan,  an


228  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

so,  a'  mach  *s  rag  ead  air  a*  bharaflt  's  thog  end  air  an  gnaillean  e.
Dh'  fhalbh  end  lets.  Thdreadh  an  dbear  an  ceannn  h-nile  mionaid,
"  Mia*  a  til*  annn,  mis'  a  th'  aann."  <*  O  's  tn  bhniidean !  *s  dògh
gor  tn  I "  Bàinig  end  bàrr  na  creige,  's  lig  end  sine  am  barailt  leis
a'  cbreig  's  an  dbear  *na  bbroinn.

Nur  a  thill  end  co  dmnnaic  end  ach  Dòmhnnll  le  bhreacan  *s  le
chii,  'a  ciad  caor*  aig*  annn  am  pìòrc.  Ghabh  end  a  null  g'a  ionna-
nidh.  **  O  Dhòmhnnill/'  nrs*  2ui<an,  **  d^nr  a  fhnair  thuaa  tighinn
an  so  ?**  "  Fhnair  mnr  gheibheadh  sibhse  na  *m  fiadiadh  sibh  ris.
An  deigh  dbmhsa  an  aaoghal  thaull  a  ruighinn,  thnirt  end  rinm  gon
robh  nine  na  leòir  agam  go  dol  a  null,  's  dinir  end  a  nanll  mi  agus
ciad  caora  leam  go  airgiod  a  dhianadh  dhomh  f  bin/'  "  Agns  an  d'
thugadh  end  a'  leithid  sin  dninne  na  *n  radiamaid  flan  annn  ?  **  nrs'
itdsan."  "  Bheireadh,  *8  end  a  bheireadh,"  nrsa  Dbmhnnll.  **  De  *n
dòigh  air  am  faigh  sinn  dol  atmn,"  nrs'  àdsan.  **  Dìreach  air  an  aon
dòigb  air  an  do  chnir  sibh  fhin  mis'  annn,"  nra'  esan.

Dh'  fhalbh  end  's  thug  end  leotha  da  bharailt  go  end  fhin  a  chur
unnta  go  h-àrd.  Nnr  a  rkinig  end  an  t-kite  chaidh  fear  din  annn  a
h-aon  de  na  barailtean,  'a  dinir  am  fear  eQe  aios  leis  a'  chreig  e.
Thug  am  fear  ain  rkn  as  shios,  'a  an  t-ionachiùnn  an  dèlgh  dol  aa  leia
a'  bhniir  a  fhnair  e.  Dh'  fhoighneachd  am  fear  eile  de  Dhbmhnnll
de  'bha  e  *g  rkdh.  **  Tha  e  'g  eubhach,  Crodh  a's  caoraidi,  maoin
a  'a  mathas  "  nrsa  DòmhnuU.  **  Sioa  mi !  aioa  mi  I"  nrs'  am  fear  eile,
'a  cha  d'  fhan  e  ri  dol  annua  a'  bharailt.  Gbekrr  e  leum  aioa  'a
chaidh  an  t-ionachainn  aa.  Thill  Domhnull  dacbaidh'a  bha  'm
fearann  aige  da  fhin.


This  story  is  maryellonsly  like  Big  Peter  and  Little  Peter
(Norse  Tales,  p.  387),  published  in  1869.  That,  again,  is  equally
like  Grimms'  "Little  Farmer,"  p.  179  of  the  English  translation,
1857;  and  that,  again,  resembles  an  Italian  tale  printed  in
1567.

The  incident  of  the  man  in  the  cupboard  is  common  to  German
and  Norse,  it  is  not  in  the  Gaelic  tale,  but  it  is  the  whole  subject
of  the  "  Monk  and  the  Miller's  Wife  '*  by  Allan  Ramsay,  p.  620,
vol.  ii.  of  the  edition  published  in  1800;  and  that  has  a  much
older  relative  in  "  the  Friars  of  Berwick,"  published  in  "  Scottish
Ballads  "  by  John  Gilchrist,  1816,  p.  327.  That  tale  is  said  to  be
from  Sibbald's  Chronicle  of  Scottish  Poetry,  and  Pinkerton's
Scottish  Poets,  collated  with  the  Bannatyne  MS.    That  poem,  of


THE  THREE  WIDOWS.  229

rather  questionable  propriety,  contains  none  of  the  incidents  in
this  Gaelic  tale  ;  and  it  is  clearlj  not  derived  from  any  of  these
modem  books.  The  yersion  translated  was  written  down  in
Barra  by  Hector  MacLean,  in  July,  from  the  mouth  of  a  fisher-
man.

In  December,  the  following  version  was  written  down  by  the
Rev.  Mr.  MacLanchlan  of  Edinburgh,  a  very  highly  respected
gentleman,  well  known  as  one  of  the  best  Gaelic  scholars  of  his
day ;  while  he  is  also  a  zealous  and  active  minister.  He  has  in-
terested himself  in  the  collection  of  the  popular  lore  of  his  coun-
try ;  and  he  has  been  kind  enough  to  write  down  several  tales  for
me  from  the  dictation  of  one  of  his  parishioners.  He  gives  the
following  pedigree,  with  his  translation  of  the  Gaelic,  which  be
was  good  enough  to  send,  and  which  was  returned  to  him : —

2d.  From  Donald  MacLean,  bom  in  Ardnamurchan,  brought
up  from  the  age  of  3  years  in  Mull  (Jarvisfield),  69  years  of  age.
Heard  this  from  an  old  man  in  Ardnamurchan,  Angus  MacPhie,
who  died  forty.five  years  ago.  Reads  a  little  English ;  has  never
seen  any  of  these  stories  in  a  book ;  cannot  write ;  reads  no  Gaelic ;
lives  in  the  Grassmarket ;  came  to  Edinburgh  thirty-five  years
ago.

RlBIN,  R0BI2r,  AND  LeVI  THE  DUK  (LbVI-OUR).

Once  in  a  time  there  lived  three  men  in  the  same  place,  whose
names  were  Ribin,  Robin,  and  Levi-our.  The  men  were  not  on
friendly  terms  together,  as  the  other  two  disliked  Levi-our.  On
one  occasion  Levi-our  was  from  home,  when  the  other  two,  out  of
revenge,  killed  one  of  his  cows.  On  his  retum,  he  flayed  the  cow,
and  dried  the  hide.  He  made  two  pockets,  which  he  sewed  to
the  hide,  and  put  in  there  several  pieces  of  money  of  different
value.  He  went  with  the  hide  to  the  market  town.  He  was
trying  at  his  leisure  whether  he  could  find  any  one  to  buy  it.  He
saw  a  man,  who  had  the  appearance  of  being  rich,  come  to  the
place  in  which  he  stood,  and  he  made  an  offer  for  the  hide ;  but
Levi-our  thought  the  price  too  small.  Levi-our  said  that  they
had  better  go  into  the  inn  and  have  a  dram.  The  gentleman
assented,  and  they  entered  the  inn.    Levi-our  called  for  such  a


230  WE8T  HIGHLAND  TALES.

dram  aiB  was  suitable  in  the  circumstances,  and  they  got  it.
When  they  were  aboat  to  pay  for  the  dram  Levi-onr  stmck  a
stroke  of  his  stick  on  the  hide,  and  said,  "  Pay  this,  hide."  The
coin  of  money  that  was  necessary  to  pay  the  dram  leaped  out  on
the  floor.  The  gentleman  asked  him  whether  the  hide  wonld
always  pay  in  that  way.  He  said  it  wonld.  "  Whatever  a  man
drinks  in  an  inn  the  hide  will  pay  it."  "  Do  you  think,"  said  the
gentleman,  "  it  will  do  that  for  me  if  I  buy  it  ?  "  "  Oh,  yes,  the
very  same,"  said  the  other.  **  If  it  will,  I'll  give  yon  a  hundred
merks  for  it,"  said  he.  "It  is  yours,"  said  Levi-our,  "if  you
give  me  that  sum  for  it."  The  other  paid  the  money  and  got  the
hide.  The  gentleman  called  for  another  dram  which  they  drank
together.  Levi-our  bade  him  strike  the  hide  as  he  had  done,  and
he  would  see  that  the  hide  wonld  pay  as  it  did  for  him.  The
other  struck  the  hide  and  it  paid  the  money.  Levi-our  went
away  and  left  it  there,  and  so  pleased  was  the  other  with  his  pur-
chase that  he  called  for  more  drink  )n  the  inn.  He  struck  the
hide,  and  bade  it  pay  for  the  drink,  but  nothing  would  come  out
of  it ;  it  would  pay  no  more.  Levi-our  went  home,  and  next
morning  he  saw  Eibin  and  Bobin,  his  neighbours,  coming  to  the
house.  He  was  engaged  counting  the  money  he  got  for  the  hide
when  the  men  came  into  his  house.  "  Oh,  Levi-our,"  said  they,
"  where  did  you  get  all  that  money? "  "  One  of  my  cows  died,"
said  he,  "  I  flayed  her,  and  carried  the  hide  to  the  market  town  ;
I  sold  the  hide  and  got  all  this  money  for  it.  There  is  a  great
price,"  said  he,  "  to  be  had  for  raw  hides."  They  went  away
home,  and  killed  each  of  them  a  cow ;  they  took  the  hides  off  them,
and  dried  them.  They  went  with  them  to  the  market  town,  and
were  then  walking  backwards  and  forwards  asking  who  would
buy  raw  hides.  Several  people  came  their  way,  and  were  offering,
some  half-a-crown,  and  some  a  crown  for  each  hide.  They  were
resolved  not  to  sell  them,  unless  they  got  the  same  price  for  them
that  Levi-our  got  for  his.  They  saw  that  they  could  not  succeed
in  that,  so  they  were  just  obliged  at  last  to  return  home  with  the
hides.  They  went  to  Levi-our's  house.  Levi-our  left,  and  went
out  of  their  way.  There  was  nobody  to  be  found  within  but  an
old  woman,  his  mother.  It  was  this  they  did — ^they  killed  Levi-
our's  mother  out  of  revenge  toward  himself.  When  he  returned
home,  he  found  his  mother  dead.    He  took  the  body,  and  instead


.  THE  THREE  WIDOWS,  2  3  I

of  dressing  it  in  graye-clothes,  he  pat  on  his  mother's  usnal  dress,
and  went  awaj  with  it  to  the  market  town.  When  he  reached
the  market  town  he  looked  about  for  a  well,  and  he  saw  a  great
deep  well  there.  He  took  two  sticks,  and  propped  the  body  of
his  mother,  with  the  two  sticks,  at  the  side  of  the  well.  He  saw
a  number  of  fine  looking  scholars  flocking  out  from  a  school  in
the  neighbourhood.  He  asked  a  boy,  who  seemed  to  be  the  son
of  a  great  influential  and  distinguished  man,  if  he  would  be  so
good  as  go  and  tell  the  old  woman  who  was  standing'  near  the
well,  that  he  was  wishful  to  leave,  and  to  ask  lier  to  come  to  him.
The  boy  agreed,  and  went  to  the  old  woman.  She  took  no  notice
of  him.  He  returned  to  Levi-our,  and  said  that  she  did  not
answer  him.  "  Ud,"  said  Levi-our,  "  go  again  and  speak  loud
and  resolutely  to  her,  and  tell  her  it  is  her  own  son  wants  her. "
The  boy  returned,  and  went  up  close  to  her,  and  as  he  thought
she  was  deaf,  he  spoke  load  to  her.  As  she  made  no  reply,  he
gave  her  a  push,  when  down  she  tumbled  into  the  well.  Levi-
our  called  out  for  the  town-guard  and  told  them  to  seize  the  boy
that  had  drowned  his  mother.  The  officers  came  immediately,
arrested  the  boy,  and  put  him  in  prison.  Notice  was  given
through  the  town,  with  the  ringing  of  a  bell,  that  such  a  young
man  had  been  imprisoned  for  drowning  an  old  woman  in  a  well.
Who  did  the  boy  happen  to  be  but  the  son  of  the  provost  of  the
town.  The  provost  came  to  Levi-our  and  asked  what  he  would
take  on  condition  of  letting  his  son  off,  and  as  an  equivalent  for
the  life  of  his  mother.  Levi-our  said  it  was  not  an  easy  matter
to  say,  seeing  he  had  so  great  a  regard  for  his  mother.  "  Oh,"
said  the  provost,  "  I  will  see  your  mother  decently  buried,  and
will  give  you  besides  five  hundred  merks  in  consideration  of  her
having  been  drowned  as  happened."  "  Very  well,"  said  Levi-our,
'*  as  you  are  a  respectable  gentleman,  I  will  accept  that."  Levi-
our  returned  home.  Next  day  he  saw  his  two  neighbours  coming
towards  his  house.  He  commenced  counting  the  money  he  had
got  for  his  mother.  "  Oh,"  said  they,  ♦'  where  did  you  get  all
that  money  ?  "  *'  My  mother  died,"  said  he,  "  and  I  went  with
her  to  the  market  town  and  sold  her.  There  is  a  high  price  given
for  dead  old  women,  to  make  powder  of  their  bones."  "Then,"
said  they,  "  we,  ourselves,  will  try  the  same  thing."  He  who
had  no  mother  had  a  mother-in-law ;  so  they  killed  an  old  woman


232  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

each.  OS  they  go  next  day  to  the  market  town,  with  the  old
women  on  their  shoulders.  They  walked  backwards  and  forwards
through  the  streets,  crying  out  who  would  buy  dead  old  women.
All  the  loose  fellows  and  dogs  in  the  town  soon  gathered  around
them.  As  they  carried  the  dead  women  they  had  their  feet
around  their  necks,  and  their  bodies  hanging  down  along  their
backs.  When  they  saw  the  number  of  people  likely  to  gather
round  them,  they  began  to  get  out  of  the  way  as  fast  as  possible.
Before  they  got  to  the  other  end  of  the  town,  there  was  nothing
remaining  of  the  old  women  but  the  feet,  which  hung  around
their  necks.  They  threw  these  at  last  to  the  people,  and  made
off  as  fast  as  they  could.  Levi-our,  when  he  thought  that  they
were  likely  to  do  him  an  injury,  resolved  that,  by  the  time  of
their  return  home,  he  and  his  wife  would  have  a  great  feast  for
them.  He  did  so.  He  spread  a  splendid  table  covered  with
meat  and  drink  for  them.  He  filled  a  portion  of  a  sheep^s  gut
with  blood  and  tied  it  round  his  wife's  neck.  "  Now,''  said  he,
'*  when  they  come,  I  will  call  to  you  to  place  more  upon  the  table,
and  when  you  don't  lay  down  enough,  I  will  rise  and  take  my
knife,  and  stick  it  into  the  piece  of  gut  that  is  around  your  neck,
and  I  will  let  you  fall  gently  to  the  ground.  Afterwards  I  will
sound  a  horn.  You  will  then  rise  and  wash  yourself,  and  be  as
you  were— living  and  well."  Ribin  and  Eobin  came  to  the  house.
"  Come  away,  neighbours,"  said  he,  "  you  will  be  hungry  after
being  in  the  market  town."  There  was  as  much  meat  and  drink
before  them  as  would  serve  a  dozen  of  men.  He  was  always
bidding  his  wife  to  put  down  more  and  more.  On  one  of  these
occasions  Levi-our  rose  and  put  his  pointed  knife  into  the  piece
of  gut  that  was  round  his  wife's  neck.  *'  Oh  Levi-our,  senseless
man  as  thou  ever  wert,  what,  made  you  kill  your  wife  ?  "  "  Get
you  on  with  your  dinner,"  said  he,  "  I'll  bring  her  alive  whenever
1  choose."  They  took  such  alarm,  and  became  so  much  afraid
that  they  couldn't  eat  their  food.  Levi-our  rose,  seized  the  horn,
and  sounded  it.  His  wife  rose  and  shook  herself.  **  Now,"  said
he,  "  see  to  it  that  you  behave  well  hereafter,  and  that  you  don't
refuse  anything  I  require  of  you."  Ribin  and  Robin  went  away.
When  they  saw  the  strange  things  he  could  do,  they  could  not
remain  any  longer  in  his  company.  *'  Our  own  wives  might  very
well  provide  us  with  such  a  feast  as  we  had  from  Levi-our,"


THE  THREE  WIDOWS.  233

said  tbey,  '*  and  if  they  do  not  we  will  treat  them  just  as  Levi-oar
did."  So  soon  as  they  returned  home,  they  told  their  wives  that
they  must  prepare  them  a  feast,  and  a  better  one  than  Levi-our
gave  them.  Their  wives  did  so,  but  they  were  not  satisfied  ;  they
were  always  asking  for  more.  "  Oh,"  said  the  women,  "  Levi-our
has  sent  you  home  drunk,  and  you  don't  know  what  you  are
saying."  Both  of  the  men  rose  and  cut  the  throats  of  their  wives
at  once.  They  fell  down  and  were  shedding  their  blood.  The
men  then  rose  and  sounded  a  horn  to  raise  them  again.  Though
they  should  sound  the  hum  till  this  very  hour,  the  wives  wouldn't
rise.  When  they  saw  that  the  wives  would  not  rise,  they  resolved
to  pursue  Levi-our.  When  he  saw  them  coming,  he  took  to  his
heels  and  ran  away.  They  looked  at  nothing  else ;  but  after  him
they  ran,  determined  to  have  his  life.  He  had  n't  ran  far  on  his
way  when  he  met  in  with  a  man  having  a  flock  of  sheep,  lie
said  to  the  man,  **  Put  off  your  plaid,  and  put  on  what  I  am
wearing,  there  are  two  men  coming  who  are  resolved  to  have
your  life.  Bun  as  fast  as  you  can,  or  you  will  be  a  dead  man
immediately."  The  man  ran  away  as  he  was  bidden,  and  they
ran  hard  after  him.  They  didn't  halt  until  they  had  pushed  him
into  the  deep  black  {)ool  of  Ty-an  leòban.  The  man  fell  in,  and
he  was  never  t>een  afterwards.  They  returned  home.  Next  day,
what  did  they  see  on  looking  out  but  Levi-our  herding  a  fine
flock  of  sheep.  They  came  to  the  place  where  he  was.  *'  Levi-
our,"  said  they,  ''the  whole  world  won't  satisfy  you,  didn't  we
think  that  we  had  pitched  you  last  night  into  the  pool  of  Ty-an
ledban."  "  Do  n't  you  see  the  sheep  I  found  there  ?  "  said  he.
**  Would  we  find  the  same  if  we  went  in  ?  "  said  they.  "  Yes,  if
I  were  to  put  you  in,"  said  he.  Off  Bibin  and  Robin  set,  and  off
Levi-our  set  after  them.  They  reached,  and  when  they  got  to
the  hole  they  stood  still.  Levi-our  came  behind  them,  and  pushed
them  both  into  the  pool.  "Fish  for  sheep  there,"  he  said,  *'if
you  choose."  Levi-our  came  home,  and  got  everything  in  the
place  for  himself.    I  left  them  there.

I  have  a  third  version  of  this  written  by  Hector  MacLean,
from  the  telling  of  Margaret  MacKinnon  in  Bemeray,  in  the
Sotmd  of  Harris.    It  is  called

3.  Brian  Bbiagach — Bragging  Brian. — What  should  happen


2  34  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

but  that  a  great  merchant  should  come  to  the  house  of  lijÌDg
Brian,  and  what  should  he  have  but  a  great  grey  mare,  and  he
pretended  that  she  made  gold  and  silver ;  and  what  should  the
merchant  do  but  covet  this  mare  because  she  made  gold  and
silver.  Brian  gave  the  mare  money  amongst  her  food,  and  the
merchant  foand  it  when  he  looked  for  it,  and  he  gave  thousands
for  the  mare,  and  when  he  got  her  she  was  coining  money.

He  took  her  with  him,  and  he  had  her  for  a  week,  but  a  penny
of  money  she  did  not  coin.  He  let  her  alone  till  the  end  of  a
month,  but  money  nor  money  she  did  not  make.

Then  he  went,  at  the  end  of  the  month,  where  Brian  was,  to
talk  to  him  (a  chaikeadh)  for  the  lie,  and  to  send  the  mare  back
again.

Brian  killed  a  cow  and  filled  the  entrails  with  blood,  and
wrapped  them  about  his  wife  under  her  clothes ;  and  when  the
merchant  came,  he  and  the  wife  began  to  scold,  and  the  merchant
stnick  her,  and  she  fell  over  for  dead,  and  the  blood  ran  about
the  floor.

Then  Brian  went  and  he  catches  two  horns  that  were  in  the
top  of  the  bed,  barb  na  leapa,  and  he  blew  into  his  wife's  throat
till  he  broaght  her  alive  again.

The  merchant  got  the  horns,  and  promised  to  say  no  more
about  the  mare,  and  went  home  and  killed  his  wife,  and  his  sister,
and  his  mother,  and  he  began  to  blow  into  their  throats  with  the
horns,  but  though  he  were  blowing  for  ever  he  had  not  brought
them  alive.  Then  he  went  where  Lying  Brian  was  to  kill  him.
He  got  him  into  a  sack,  and  was  to  beat  him  to  death  with  flails,
but  Brian  asked  a  little  delay,  and  got  out  (it  is  not  said  how),
and  put  in  two  big  dogs.  The  men  threw  the  sack  out  into  the
sea  when  they  were  tired  of  beating  it.

What  was  more  wonderful  for  the  merchant  at  the  end  of  a
fortnight,  than  to  see  Brian  and  a  lot  of  cattle  with  him.

"  0  CHiAii,"  "  oh,  my  reason,'*  said  the  merchant,  "hast  thou
come  back,  0  Brian  !  "

"  I  came,"  said  Brian.  "  It  was  you  that  did  the  good  to  me  ;
when  you  put  me  out  on  the  sea  I  saw  thy  mother,  and  thy  wife,
and  thy  sister,  since  I  went  away ;  and  they  asked  thee  to  go  out
on  the  sea  in  the  place  where  thoa  didst  put  me  out,  and  that
thoa  thyself  shouldst  get  a  lot  of  cattle  like  this.''


THE  THJEIEE  WIDOWS.  23$

The  merchant  went  and  cuts  a  caper  out  aib  ▲  bhad  on  the
spot  where  he  had  put  out  Brian.  He  was  drowned,  and  Brian
got  his  house  for  himself.

I  have  a  fourth  version  written  hy  John  Dewar,  collected
somewhere  in  Argyleshire,  and  sent  May  1860.

4.  EoBHAN  luRRACH. — The  hero  and  two  others  were  working
a  town-land,  bails  fearainn,  together.  The  one  staid  at  home,
and  the  others  drowned  his  cow.  He  took  ofif  the  hide,  and  hung
it  on  the  rafters,  and  when  it  was  dry,  he  put  a  piece  of  money
into  each  knee  and  hoof,  and  took  it  to  the  town,  and  he  would

cry  out  **  00  A  CHANICHEAS  SEICfl    NA*M    BUINN    AIRGIOd" — "  who

will  huy  the  hide  of  the  pieces  of  money?"  and  he  would  strike  a
hlow  on  the  hide,  and  the  money  would  fall  on  the  street,  and
each  piece  as  it  fell  he  picked  up  and  put  it  into  his  pocket.

He  sold  it,  of  course ;  and  when  the  bargain  was  made,  he
knocked  out  all  the  money,  to  prove  that  it  was  no  cheat,  and  put
the  money  into  his  pocket,  and  went  home.

The  others  killed  their  cattle,  and  when  they  could  not  sell
the  hides,  they  decided  on  killing  Hugh,  but  he  was  outside
listening  to  all  they  said.

They  pulled  down  his  house,  but  he  was  in  the  bam,  and  his
mother-in-law  alone  was  killed ;  for  he  had  offered  his  own  bed
to  his  mother-in-law,  and  she  had  said, —

"  Oh,  my  little  hero,  thou  usest  always  to  be  kind  to  me."

Hugh  took  his  mother-in-law's  body  to  a  place  that  was  far
from  his  own  house,  and  there  was  a  well-spring  near  the  hostel,
TiGH  OSD,  and  there  he  propped  up  his  mother-in-law  with  a  stick
under  her  chin,  to  keep  her  standing.

Then  he  went  in  and  began  to  buy  a  drove  from  a  drover,  and
sent  out  the  drover  to  ask  his  deaf  mother  in  to  have  a  drink  of
beer,  because  she  was  very  hard  and  would  scold  him  for  spendiog
money  if  he  asked  her,  but  she  would  take  it  kindly  if  the  drover
did.  The  drover  went,  and  after  a  while  pushed  the  carlin,  and
she  fell  into  the  well.  He  got,  ciad  mabg,  a  hundred  marks  from
the  drover  by  threatening  him  with  the  gallows.

He  went  home,  told  his  friends  that  there  was  miadh  mob  air
OAILLEACHEAN  MARBH,  great  valuo  ou  dead  carlins ;  and  they
killed  their  mothers-in-law,  and  were  like  to  be  put  in  prison  for


236  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

trying  to  sell  them.  So  they  determined  to  serve  out  their  tricky
neighbour,  and  asked  him  and  his  wife  to  a  dance  at  an  inn.
But  Hugh  tied  a  pudding  full  of  blood  about  his  wife's  neck,  and
covered  it  up  with  a  meapaoajn,  and  when  he  and  his  wife  got
up  to  dance  a  reel  he  put  the  skian  dubh,  black  knife,  into  the
pudding,  and  the  wife  fell  as  dead.

Then  Eobhan  got  a  horn  which  hunters,  huinteb  seilqe,  had
at  same  time  for  the  wood,  and  he  put  it  to  his  wife,  and  he  blew
into  the  horn,  and  the  horn  gave  a  nuadhlan,  lamentable  groan ;
and  the  wife  of  Hugh  got  up  again,  and  she  began  to  dance.

The  neighbours  bought  the  horn  and  tried  feabtan  na  h-
ADHARC,  the  trick  of  the  horn,  on  their  own  wives.  They  killed
them,  and  blew,  but  thoagh  they  were  blowing  still,  their  wives
would  not  get  up.

Then  they  caught  Hagh  and  put  him  in  a  sack,  to  throw  him
over  a  fall.  They  went  into  an  inn  to  drink  beer.  A  drover
came  past,  and  Hugh  in  the  sack  began, — '*  I  am  going  to  the
good  place,  I  am  going  to  the  good  place,"  etc.  "  Where  art
thou  going?*' said  the  drover,  "It  is,"  said  Hugh,  "they  are
going  to  put  me  where  I  will  feel  neither  cold,  nor  weariness,  nor
hunger  more.  I  shall  not  feel  them,  nor  thirst."  "  Wilt  thou
let  me  there?  "  said  the  drover.  And  so  the  man  was  enticed  into
the  sack,  and  thrown  over  the  fall,  and  they  heard  him  saying,
"  o  CHOCH !  o  CHOCH !  's  o  MO  CHEANN  HO  CHEANN !  alas,  alas !
and  oh,  my  head  1  my  head !"

When  the  ;ieighbours  came  home  and  found  Hugh  counting
money,  and  heard  that  he  had  got  it  at  the  bottom  of  the  fall,  they
got  sacks,  and  the  one  threw  the  other  over  the  fall  till  there  was
but  one  left,  and  he  tied  the  sack  to  his  sides  and  threw  himself
over,  and  every  one  of  them  was  killed ;  and  Eobhan  lurach  got
the  farms  to  himself,  and  the  cattle  that  his  neighbours  had,  and
he  took  the  possession  of  both  artfully,  aous  oabh  e  seilbh  ahn

DA  GU  8E0LDA.

The  incident  of  getting  riches  by  accusing  people  of  killing  a
dead  body  is  common  to  one  of  the  African  tales.  Appendix  to
Norse  tales—"  The  Ear  of  Com  and  the  Twelye  Men."

The  selling  of  something  valueless,  as  a  source  of  riches,  is
common  to  a  story  which  1  used  to  hear  as  a  child,  from  John


THE  THREE  WIDOWS.  237

Piper  my  guardian,  and  wbich  I  lately  found  in  another  shape,  in
an  English  translation  of  Master  Owlglass.

The  story,  as  I  .remember  it,  was  this : — A  sailor  who  had
got  his  money,  and  who  knew  that  he  would  spend  it  all,  went
to  visit  his  friends.  On  his  way  he  paid  double,  and  generously,
for  his  board  and  lodging,  and  bargained  that  he  should  take  off
a  certain  old  hat  as  payment  on  his  way  back.

A  Jew  accompanied  him  on  his  return,  and  seeing  the  effect
of  the  hat,  begged  for  it,  offered  for  it,  and  finally  bought  it  for  a
large  sum.  Then  he  tried  it,  got  cudgelled  by  the  innkeepers,
and  cursed  the  clever  tar  who  had  outwitted  him.

Here,  then,  is  a  story  known  in  the  Highlands  for  many  years,
with  incidents  common  to  Gaelic,  Norse,  English,  Gkrman,  and
some  African  tongue,  and  with  a  peculiar  character  of  its  own
which  distinguishes  from  all  the  others.  I  am  indebted  to  the
author  of  Norse  Tales  for  a  loan  of  the  rare  book  mentioned  in  the
following  reference,  which  may  throw  some  light  on  the  story  and
its  history  :—

In  Le  Piacevole  Notte  di  Straparola,  1567,  the  story  is  told  of
a  priest  and  three  rogues  who  outwit  him  and  whom  he  outwits
in  return.

First,  they  persuade  him  that  a  mule  which  he  has  bought  is
an  ass,  and  get  it ;  which  incident  is  in  another  Gaelic  story  in
another  shape.  Then  he  sells  them  a  bargain  in  the  shape  of  a
goat,  which  is  good  for  nothing.

Then  he  pretends  to  kill  his  house-keeper  by  sticking  a  knife
into  a  bladder  filled  with  blood,  and  brings  her  alive  again  with
something  which  he  sells  to  them  for  two  hundred  fiorins  of  gold,
and  they  kill  their  three  wives  in  earnest.

They  are  enraged,  catch  the  priest,  and  put  him  into  a  sack,
intending  to  drown  him  in  a  river.  They  set  him  down,  and  a
shepherd  comes,  who  hears  a  lamentable  voice  in  a  sack  saying,
"  Me  la  vogliono  pur  dare,  and  io  non  la  voglio  " — ^They  wish  to
give  her  to  me,  and  I  don*t  want  her.  The  priest  explains  that
the  Lord  of  that  city  wants  to  marry  him  to  his  daughter,  and  by
that  bait  (not  the  bait  of  riches)  entices  the  shepherd  into  the
sack.  The  shepherd  is  drowned.  The  priest  takes  the  sheep,  and
the  rogues,  when  they  find  the  priest  with  the  sheep,  beg  to  be
put  into  three  sacks.    They  get  in,  are  carried  to  the  river  by


238  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

three  "facconi,"  and  disposed  of;  and  pre-Scarpaciflco,  rick  in
money  and  flocks,  returned  borne  and  lived  pleasantly,  etc.

By  what  process  this  story  got  from  Italian  into  Gaelic,  or
who  firgt  invented  it,  seems  worth  inquiry.  One  thing  is  clear ;
the  Italian  version  and  the  four  Gaelic  versions  now  given  re  -
semble  each  other  very  closely.

It  seems  possible  that  the  amusements  of  the  Court  of  Mary
Queen  of  Scots,  or  of  the  foreigners  whose  morals  so  enraged  John
Knox,  may  have  descended  to  the  Grassmarket  and  to  the  fisher-
men of  the  Western  Isles.  David  BÌ2zio,  a  Turinese,  has  the
credit  of  many  Scotch  airs.  He  was  killed  in  1567,  and  the
edition  of  Straparola  which  I  have  before  me,  printed  in  Venice,
1567,  if  it  be  the  first,  may  have  found  its  way  to  Scotland  through
some  of  the  countrymen  of  Hizzio.  If  that  explanation  be  con-
sidered reasonable,  it  has  still  to  be  shewn  how  the  story  got  to
Germany  and  Norway :  where  the  man  in  the  cupboard  went  in  :
and  whence  came  the  soothsaying  bird  in  the  grey  hide  and  the
unsaleable  dead  carUns,  for  they  are  not  in  the  Italian  version.

Having  carried  the  three  widows'  sons  from  Barra  to  the
Grassmarket,  where  they  are  named  Bibin,  and  Bobin,  and
Levi-our;  thence  to  Norway,  where  they  appear  as  Big  and
Little  Peter;  thence  to  Germany,  where  they  have  no  name;
and  thence  to  the  city  of  Postema  in  Italy  in  1567,— as  the  nar>
rator  says,  "  There  I  left  them."


XL


THE  SON  OF  THE  SCOTTISH  YEOMAN
WHO  STOLE  THE  BISHOFS  HOESE  AND
DAUGHTER,  AND  THE  BISHOP  HIM-
SELF.

From  Donald  MacLean,  Grassmarket,  Edinburgh.    Written  jn
Gaelic,  and  translated  bj  the  Bev.  Mr.  MacLanchlan.

rpHEEE  was  once  a  Scottish  yeoman  who  had  three
-*-  sons.  When  the  youngest  of  them  came  to  be  of
age  to  follow  a  profession,  he  set  apart  three  hundred
marks  for  each  of  them.  The  youngest  son  asked  that
his  portion  might  be  given  to  himself,  as  he  was  going
away  to  seek  his  fortune.  He  went  to  the  great  city
of  London.  He  was  for  a  time  there,  and  what  was
he  doing  but  learning  to  be  a  gentleman's  servant?
He  at  last  set  about  finding  a  master.  He  heard  that
the  chief  magistrate  (provost*)  of  London  wanted  a
servant  He  appHed  to  him,  they  agreed,  and  he
entered  his  service.  The  chief  magistrate  was  in  the
habit  of  going  every  day  in  the  week  to  meet  the
Archbishop  of  London  in  a  particular  place.  The  ser-
vant attended  his  master,  for  he  always  went  out  along
with  him.  When  they  had  broken  up  their  meeting
on  one  occasion,  they  returned  homewards,  and  the
servant  said  to  his  master  by  the  way, —

*  The  Gaelic  "  ProbhaiBd "  is  an  adaptation  of  the  English
"  Provost/*  as  the  latter  is  of  the  Latin  "  Propositus.*'


240  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

•"  That  is  a  good  brown  horse  of  the  bishop's,"  said
he,  "with  your  leave,  master."

"  Yes,  my  man,"  said  the  master,  "  he  has  the  best
horse  in  London."

"What  think  you,"  said  the  servant,  "would  he
take  for  the  horse,  if  he  were  to  sell  it  Ì "

"  Oh  !  you  fool,"  said  his  master,  "  I  thought  you
were  a  sensible  fellow ;  many  a  man  has  tried  to  iDuy
that  horse,  and  it  has  defied  them  as  yet."

"  m  return  and  try,"  said  he.

His  master  returned  along  with  him  to  see  what
would  happen.  This  was  on  a  Thursday.  The  young
man  asked  the  bishop,  would  he  "  sell  the  horse  ? "
The  bishop  became  amazed  and  angry,  and  said  he  did
not  expect  that  he  could  buy  it.

"  But  what  beast  could  you,  or  any  man  have,"
said  the  young  man,  "  that  might  not  be  bought  Ì "

"  Senseless  fellow,"  said  the  bishop ;  "  how  foolish
you  are  !  go  away  home,  you  shan't  buy  my  horse."

"What  will  you  wager,"  said  the  young  man,
"  that  I  won't  have  the  horse  by  this  time  to-morrow  ?"

"  Is  it  my  horse  you  mean  V*  said  the  bishop.

"  Yes,  your  horse,"  said  the  young  man.  "  What
will  you  wager  that  I  don't  steal  it  1"

"  I'll  wager  five  hundred  merks,"  said  the  bishop,
"that  you  don't."

"  Then,"  said  the  young  man,  "  I  have  only  one
pound,  but  m  wager  t^at,  and  my  head  besides,  that
I  do."

"  Agreed,"  said  the  bishop.

"Observe,"  said  the  young  man,  "that  I  have
wagered  my  head  and  the  pound  with  you,  and  if  I
steal  the  horse  he  will  be  my  own  property."

"  That  he  will,  assuredly,"  said  Ìhtì  chief  magistrate.

"  I  agree  to  that,"  said  t^e  bishop.


THE  SON  OP  THE  SCOTTISH  YEOMAN.  24I

They  returned  home  that  night

"  Poor  fellow,"  said  the  chief  magistrate  to  his  ser-
Tant  by  the  way,  "  I  am  very  well  satisfied  with  you
since  I  got  you.  I  am  not  willing  to  lose  you  now.
You  are  fooHsh.  The  bishop  will  take  care  that  neither
you  nor  any  other  man  will  steal  the  horse.  He'll
have  him  watched."

When  night  came,  the  young  man  started,  and  set
to  work  ;  he  went  to  the  bishop's  house.  What  did
he  find  out  there,  but  that  they  had  the  horse  in  a
room,  and  men  along  with  it,  who  were  busy  eating
and  drinking.  He  looked  about  him,  and  soon  saw
that  he  would  require  another  clever  fellow  along  with
him.  In  looking  about,  who  does  he  find  but  one  of
the  loose  fellows  about  the  town.

"  If  you  go  along  with  me  for  a  little  time,"  said
he,  "  I  will  give  you  something  for  your  pains."

"  rU  do  that,"  said  the  other.

He  set  off,  and  at  the  first  start,  both  he  and  his
man  reached  the  hangman  of  the  city.

"  Can  you  tell  me,"  said  he  to  the  hangman,  "  where
I  can  get  a  dead  man  Ì "

"  Yes,"  said  the  hangman,  "  there  was  a  man  hanged
this  very  day,  after  midday."

"  If  you  go  and  get  him  for  me,"  said  the  young
man,  "  I'll  give  you  something  for  your  pains."

The  hangman  agreed,  and  went  away  with  him  to
where  the  body  was.

"  Do  you  know  now,"  said  the  young  man,  "  where
I  can  get  a  long  stout  rope  > ''

"  Yes,"  said  the  hangman,  "  the  rope  that  hanged
the  man  is  here  quite  convenient ;  you'll  get  it"

They  set  off  with  the  body,  both  himseK  and  his
man.  They  reached  the  bishop's  house.  He  said  to
his  man  when  they  had  reached —

VOL.  II.  R


242  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  Stay  you  here  and  take  charge  of  this,  imtil  I
get  up  on  the  top  of  the  house."

He  put  both  his  mouth  and  his  ear  to  the  chimney
in  order  to  discover  where  the  men  were,  as  they  were
now  speaking  loud  from  having  drunk  so  much.  He
discovered  where  they  were.

"  Place  the  end  of  the  rope,"  said  he  to  his  man,
"  round  the  dead  man's  neck,  and  throw  the  other  end
up  to  me."

He  dragged  the  dead  man  up  to  the  top  of  the
chimney.  The  men  in  the  room  began  to  hear  the
rubbish  in  the  chimney  falling  down.  He  let  the  body
down  by  degrees,  until  at  last  he  saw  the  bright  light
of  the  watchmen  falling  on  the  dead  man's  feet.

"  See,"  said  they,  "  what  is  this  Ì  Oh,  the  Scottish
thief,  what  a  shift !  He  preferred  dying  in  this  way
to  losing  his  head.     He  has  destroyed  himself.

Down  from  the  chimney  came  the  young  man  in
haste.  In  he  went  into  the  very  middle  of  the  men,
and  as  the  horse  was  led  out  by  the  door,  his  hand  was
the  first  to  seize  the  bridle.  He  went  with  the  horse
to  the  stable,  and  said  to  them  that  they  might  now
go  and  sleep,  that  they  were  safe  enough.

"  Now,"  said  he  to  the  other  man,  **  I  believe  you
to  be  a  clever  fellow;  be  at  hand  here  to-morrow
evening,  and  I  will  see  you  again."

He  paid  him  at  the  same  time,  and  the  man  was
much  pleased.  He,  himself,  returned  to  his  master's
stable  with  the  bishop's  brown  horse.  He  went  to
rest,  and  though  the  daylight  came  early,  earlier  than
that  did  his  master  come  to  his  door.

"  I  would  n't  grudge  my  pains,"  said  he,  "  if  my
poor  Scotsman  were  here  before  me  to-day."

"I  am  here,  good  master,' '  said  he,  "and  the
bishop's  brown  horse  beside  me."


THE  SON  OP  THE  SCOTTISH  YEOMAN.  243

"Well  done,  my  man,"  said  his  master,  "  you're  a
clever  fellow.  I  had  a  high  opinion  of  you  before ;
I  think  much  more  of  you  now."

They  prepared  this  day,  too,  to  go  and  visit  the
bishop.     It  was  Friday.

"  Now,"  said  the  servant,  "  I  left  home  without  a
horse,  yesterday,  but  I  won't  leave  in  the  same  way
to-day."

"Well,  my  man,"  said  his  master,  "as  you  have
got  the  horse,  I'll  give  you  a  saddle."

So  they  set  off  this  day  again  to  meet  the  bishop,
his  master  and  himseK  riding  their  horses.  They  saw
the  bishop  coming  to  meet  them,  apparently  mad.
When  they  came  close  together  they  observed  that  the
bishop  rode  another  horse,  by  no  means  so  good  as  his
own.  The  bishop  and  chief  magistrate  met  with
salutations.  The  bishop  turned  to  the  chief  magis-
trate's servant, —

"  Scoundrel,"  said  he,  "  and  thorough  thief ! "

"  You  can't  call  me  worse,"  said  the  other.  "  I
don't  know  that  you  can  call  me  that  justly ;  for,  you
know,  I  told  you  what  I  was  to  do.  Without  more
words,  pay  me  my  five  hundred  merks."

This  had  to  be  done,  though  not  very  willingly.

"  What  would  you  now  say,"  says  the  lad,  "  if  I
were  to  steal  your  daughter  to-night  1"

"My  daughter,  you  worthless  fellow,"  said  the
bishop ;  "  you  shan't  steal  my  daughter."

"  I'll  wager  five  hundred  merks  and  the  brown
horse,"  said  the  lad,  "  that  I'll  steal  her."

"I'll  wager  five  hundred  merks  that  you  don't,"
said  the  bishop.

The  wager  was  laid.  The  lad  and  his  master  went
home.  "  Young  man,"  said  the  master,  "  I  thought
weU  of  you  at  one  time,  but  you  have  done  a  foolish


2  44  WEST!  HIGHLAND  TALES.

thing   now,  just  when  you   had  made   yourself  all
right"

"  Never  mind,  good  master,"  said  he,  "  TU  make
the  attempt  at  any  rate."

When  night  came,  the  chief  magistrate's  servant
set  off  for  the  bishop's  house.  When  he  reached,  he
saw  a  gentleman  coming  out  at  the  door.

"  Oh,"  said  he  to  the  gentleman,  "  what  is  this
going  on  at  the  bishop's  house  to-night  ?  "

"  A  great  and  important  matter,"  said  the  gentle-
man ;  "  a  rascally  Scotsman  who  is  threatening  to  steal
the  bishop's  daughter,  but  I  can  tell  you  neither  he  nor
any  other  man  will  steal  her ;  she  is  well  guarded."

"  Oh,  I'm  sure  of  that,"  said  the  lad,  and  turned
away.  "  There  is  a  man  in  England,  however,"  said
he  to  himself,  "  who  must  try  it"

He  set  of^  and  reached  the  king's  tailors.  He
asked  them  whether  they  had  any  dresses  ready  for
great  people  Ì

"  No,"  said  the  tailor  "  but  a  dress  I  have  for  the
king's  daughter  and  one  for  her  maid  of  honour."

"  What,"  said  the  chief  magistrate's  servant,  "  will
you  take  for  the  use  of  these,  for  a  couple  of  hours  1"

"  Oh,"  said  the  tailor,  "  I  fear  I  dare  not  give  them
to  you."

"  Don't  be  in  the  least  afraid,"  said  the  lad,  "  I'U
pay  you,  and  I'll  return  the  two  dresses  without  any
injury  or  loss.     You'll  get  a  hundred  merks,"  said  he.

The  tailor  coveted  so  large  a  sum,  and  so  he  gave
them  to  him.  He  returned,  and  found  his  man  of  the
former  night  They  went  to  a  private  place,  and  got
themselves  fitted  out  in  the  dresses  got  from  the  tailor.
When  this  was  done  as  well  as  they  could,  they  came
to  the  bishop's  door.  Before  he  arrived  at  the  door
he  found  out  that  when  any  of  the  royal  family  came  to


■'i.sxfyiM


THE  SON  OF  THE  SCOTTISH  TEOMAN.  245

the  bishop's  house  they  didn't  knock,  but  rubbed  the
bottom  of  the  door  with  the  point  of  the  foot.  He
came  to  the  door,  and  rubbed.  There  was  a  doorkeeper
at  the  door  that  night,  and  he  ran  and  told  the  bishop.

"  There  is  some  one  of  the  royal  family  at  the
door,"  said  he.

"No,"  said  the  bishop,  "there  is  not.  It's  the
thief  of  a  Scotsman  that  is  there."

The  doorkeeper  looked  through  the  key-hole,  and
saw  the  appearance  of  two  ladies  who  stood  there.  He
went  to  his  master  and  told  him  so.  His  master  went
to  the  door  that  he  might  see  for  himself.  He  who
was  outside  would  give  another  and  another  rub  to  the
door,  at  the  same  time  abusing  the  bishop  for  his  folly.
The  bishop  looked,  and  recognized  the  voice  of  the
king's  daughter  at  the  door.  The  door  is  quickly
opened,  and  the  bishop  bows  low  to  the  lady.  The
king's  daughter  began  immediately  to  chide  the  bishop
for  laying  any  wager  respecting  his  daughter,  saying
that  he  was  much  blamed  for  what  he  had  done.

"  It  was  very  wrong  of  you,"  said  she,  "  to  have
done  it  without  my  knowledge,  and  you  would  not
have  required  to  have  made  such  a  stir  or  been  so
foolish  as  all  this."

"  You  wiU  excuse  me,"  said  the  bishop.

"  I  can't  excuse  you,"  she  said.

In  to  the  chamber  he  led  the  king's  daughter,  in
which  his  own  daughter  was,  and  persons  watching  her.
She  was  in  the  middle  of  the  chamber,  sitting  on  a
chair,  and  the  others  sitting  all  around.

Said  the  king's  daughter  to  her,  "  My  dear,  your
father  is  a  very  foolish  man  to  place  you  in  such  great
danger ;  for  if  he  had  given  me  notice,  and  placed  you
under  my  care,  any  man  who  might  venture  to  approach
you  would  assuredly  not  only  be  hanged,  but  burned


246  WEST  mOHLAND  TALES.

alive.     Go,"  said  slie  to  the  bishop,  "  to  bed,  and  dis-
miss this  large  company,  lest  men  laugh  at  you."

He  told  the  company  that  they  might  now  go  to
rest,  that  the  queen^s  daughter  and  her  maid  of  honour
would  take  charge  of  his  daughter.  When  the  queen's
daughter  had  seen  them  all  away,  she  said  to  the
daughter  of  the  bishop, —

"Come  along  with  me,  my  dear,  to  the  king's
palace."  He  led  her  out,  and  then  he  had  the  brown
horse  all  ready,  and  as  soon  as  the  Scotsman  got  her  to
where  the  horse  stood,  he  threw  off  the  dress  he  wore
in  a  dark  place.  He  put  a  different  dress  above  his
own,  and  mounted  the  horse.  The  other  man  is  sent
home  with  the  dresses  to  the  tailor.  He  paid  the  man,
and  told  him  to  meet  him  there  next  night  He
leaped  on  the  brown  horse  at  the  bishop's  house,  and
off  he  rode  to  the  house  of  his  master.  Early  as  day-
light came,  earlier  came  his  master  to  the  stabla  He
had  the  bishop's  daughter  in  his  bed.  He  wakened
when  he  heard  his  master.

"  I  would  n't  grudge  my  pains,"  said  the  latter,  "  if
my  poor  Scotsman  were  here  before  me  to-day."

"  Eh,  and  so  I  am,"  said  the  lad,  "  and  the  bishop's
daughter  along  with  me  here."

"  Oh,"  said  he,  "  I  always  thought  well  of  you,
but  now  I  think  more  of  you  than  ever."

This  was  Saturday.  He  and  his  master  had  to  go
and  meet  the  bishop  this  day  also.  The  bishop  and
chief  magÌ8trate  met  as  usual  K  the  bishop  looked
angry  the  former  day,  he  looked  much  angrier  this
day  The  chief  magistrate's  servant  rode  on  Hs  horse
and  saddle  behind  his  master.  When  he  came  near
the  bishop,  he  could  only  call  him  "thief"  and
"  scoundreL"

"  You  may  shut  your  mouth,"  said  he  ;  "you  can-


SBBBlgWBgiqWgiiBy"-^—  MB  1111»     w   II  iw


THE  SON  OF  THE  SCOTTISH  TEOMAN.  247

not  say  that  to  me  with  justice.  Send  across  here  my
five  hundred  merks.  He  paid  the  money.  He  was
ahusing  the  other.

"  Oh  mftn,"  said  he,  '*give  up  your  abuse  ;  I'll  lay
you  the  ten  hundred  merks  that  Til  steal  yourself  to-
night."

"That  you  steal  me,  you  worthless  fellow,"  said
the  bishop.     "  You  shan't  be  allowed."

He  wagered  the  ten  hundred  merks.

"  m  get  these  ten  hundred  merks  back  again,"  said
the  bishop,  "  but  I'll  lay  you  fifteen  hundred  merks
that  you  don't  steal  me.

The  chief  magistrate  fixed  the  bargain  for  them.
The  lad  and  his  master  went  home.

"My  man,"  said  the  master,  "I  have  always
thought  well  of  you  till  now ;  you  will  now  lose  the
money  you  gained,  and  you  can't  steal  the  man."

"I  have  no  fear  of  that,"  said  the  servant.

When  night  came  he  set  off,  and  got  to  the  house
of  the  bishop.  Then  he  thought  he  would  go  where  he
could  find  the  fishermen  of  the  city,  in  order  to  see
what  might  be  seen  with  them.  When  he  reached  the
fishermen  he  asked  them  whether  they  had  "  any  fresh-
killed  salmon  Ì "  They  said  they  had.  He  said  to
them  —

"  If  you  skin  so  many  of  them  for  me  I  will  give
you  such  and  such  a  sum  of  money,  or  as  much  as
will  be  just  and  right."

The  fishermen  said  "they  would  do  as  he  wished,"
and  they  did  so-  They  gave  him  as  many  fish  skins
as  he  thought  would  make  him  a  cloak  of  the  length
and  breadth  he  wished.  He  then  went  to  the  tailors.
He  said  to  the  tailors,  would  they  make  him  a  dress  of
the  fish  skins  by  twelve  o'clock  at  night,  and  that  they
should  be  paid  for  it.     They  told  him  what  sum  they


Z^S  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

would  take.  They  took  tiie  young  man's  measure  and
began  the  dress.  The  Mress  was  ready  by  twelve
o'clock.  They  could  not  work  any  longer  as  the  Sun-
day was  coming  in.  He  left  with  the  dresp^  and  when
he  found  himself  a  short  way  fron;t  the  bishop's  church
he  put  it  on.  He  had  got  a  key  to  open  the  church
and  he  went  in.  He  at  once  went  to  the  pulpit  The
doorkeeper  casting  an  eye  in  on  an  occasion,  whUe  a  great
watch  was  kept  over  the  bishop,  he  went  and  said
there  was  a  light  in  the  church.

"A  light,"  said  his  master,  "go  and  see  what
light  it  is."  It  was  past  twelve  o'clock  by  this
time.

"  Oh,"  said  the  doorkeeper,  coming  back,  "  there  is
a  man  preaching  in  it"

The  bishop  drew  out  his  time-piece,  and  he  saw
that  it  was  the  beginning  of  the  Sunday.  He  went
running  to  the  church.  When  he  saw  the  brightness
that  was  in  the  church,  and  all  the  movements  of  the
man  that  was  preaching,  he  w|s  seized  with  fear.  He
opened  the  door  a  little^  and  put  in  his  head  that  he
might  see  what  he  was  like.  There  was  not  a  language
under  the  stars  that  the  man  in  the  pulpit  was  not
taking  a  while  o£  When  he  came  to  the  languages
which  the  bishop  understood,  he  began  to  denounce
the  bishop  as  a  man  who  had  lost  his  senses.  In  the
bishop  ran,  and  down  he  is  on  his  knees  before  tlie
pulpit  There  he  began  to  pray,  and  when  he  saw  the
brightness  that  was  about  the  pulpit,  he  took  to  heart
the  things  that  were  said  to  him.  At  length  he  said
to  him,  if  he  would  promise  sincere  repentsuice,  and  go
along  with  him,  he  would  grant  him  forgiveness.  The
bishop  promised  him  that  he  would.

"  Come  with  me  till  I  have  a  little  time  of  you,"
said  he.


PW^«lHHH^i^i9VHOTia^^B«iVi«iP«M«H«WV


THE  SON  OF  THB  SC0TTI8H  TEOMAN.  249

"  I  will,"  said  the  bisliof),  "  thougli  thou  shouldst
ask  me  to  leaye  the  world."^  •

He  went  along  with  him,  and  the  young  man
walked  before  him.  They  reached  the  stable  of  the
chief  magistrate.  He  got  a  seat  for  the  bishop,  and  he
kept  him  sitting.  He  sat  down  himself.  They  re-
quired no  light,  for  the  servants*  clothes  were  shining
bright  where  they  were.  He  was  then  expounding  to
the  bishop  in  some  languages  which  he  could  under-
stand, and  in  others  which  he  could  not  He  went  on
in  that  way  until  it  was  time  for  his  master  to  come  in
the  morning.  When  the  time  drew  near,  he  threw  off
the  dress,  bent  down  and  hid  it,  for  it  was  near  day-
light The  bishop  was  now  silent,  and  the  chief  ma-
gistrate came.

"  I  wouldn't  grudge  my  pains,"  said  he,  "  if  I  had
my  poor  Scotsman  here  before  me  to-day."

"  Eh,  so  I  am  here,"  said  he,  "  and  the  bishop
along  with  me.'*

"  Hey,  my  man,"  says  his  master,  "  you  have  done
well."  '

"Oh,  you  infamous  scoundrel,"  said  the  bishop,
is  it  thus  you  have  got  the  better  of  me  Ì "

"  rU  tell  you  what  it  is,"  said  the  chief  magistrate,
"  you  had  better  be  civil  to  him.  Don't  abuse  him.
He  has  got  your  daughter,  your  horse,  and  your  money,
and  as  for  yourself,  you  know  that  he  cannot  support
you,  so  it  is  best  for  you  to  support  him.  Take  him-
self and  your  daughter  along  with  you  and  make  them
a  respectable  wedding."  The  young  man  left  and  went
home  with  the  bishop,  and  he  and  the  bishop's  daughter
were  lawfully  married,  and  the  father  shewed  him
kindness.     I  left  them  there.


250  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


MAC  AN  TUATHANAICH  ALBANAICH,  A  GHOID  EACH,
AGUS  NIGHEAN  AN  EASBUIG,  AGUS  AN  T-EASBUIG
FHEIN.

Bha  triiiir  mhac  aig  tnathanach  Albanach  nair  de  na  bh'  ann.  *N
uair  a  thainig  am  fear  a  b^  òige  dhiubh  gu  aoise  Mhol  ri  ceàìrd,chuir
e  tri  cheud  marg  mu  choinnimh  gach  aon  dhiubh.  Dh'  iarr  am  fear  a
b'  òige  a  chuid  d'a  fhèln,  gun  robh  e  'falbh  a  dheanamh  an  f  hortain.
lliug  e  baile  mòr  Lunnuin  air.  Bha  e  greis  ann  an  sin,  'us  ciod  e  bha
e  ag  ionnsachadh  ach  a  bhi  'n  a  ghille  dnine  nasail !  Chuir  e  forthas
mu  dheireadh  c^  kite  am  faigheadh  e  maighistir.  Chuala  e  gun
robh  gille  a  dhith  air  Probhaist  Lunnuin.  Ràinig  e  e,  chord  lad,  'us
rinn  e  mninntireas  aige.  Bha  am  Probhaist  a  dol  na  h-uile  ]a  's  an  t-
seachduin  a  choinneachadh  Ardeaspuig  Lunnuin  ann  an  kite  sòn-
roichte.  Dh'  fhalbh  an  gille  le  a  mhai^bistir,  oir  bhitheadh  e  mach
lets  daonnan.  'N  uair  a  sgaoil  iad  a  choinneamh  a  bh'  aca  aon  la  thill
iad,  'us  thubhairt  an  gille^r'a  mhaighistir  air  an  rathad,  '*  Is  maith/'
ars*  esa,  **  an  t-each  donn  ud  a  th*  aig  an  Easbuig,  le  'ur  cead,  a
mhaighistir."  *<  Seadh,  a  laochain/'  ars'  a  mhaighistir,  "  tha  an
t-each  is  fhearr  *an  Lunnun  aige.'*  "  Saoil  mi,"  ars'  an  gille,  **  ciod
e  ghabhadh  e  air  an  each  nan  reiceadh  e  e."  "  XJh,  amadain,"  ars'  a
mhaighistir,  '*  shaoil  leam  gur  balach  ceart  a  bh'  annad,  is  iomadh
fear  a  dh'  fheuch  ris  an  each  ud  a  cheannach  *us  dh'  fhairtlich  orra
fhathasd."  «  Tillidh  mise 'us  feuchaidh  mi  ris,"  ars' esan.  ThUl  a
mhaighistir  corahluadh  ris  a  dh'  fhaidnn.  Is  ann  air  Diardaoine  a
thachair  so.  Thubhairt  an  gille  ris  an  Easbuig,  an  reiceadh  e  an  t-each.
Ghabh  an  t-Easbuig  ardan  'us  miothlachd,  'us  cha  robh  fiuthar  aig  gun
ceannaicheadh  esane.  "  Mata  ciod  e  am  beathach  bhitheadh  agadsa
no  aig  duine  eile  nach  fhaodar  a  cheannach,"  ars'  an  gille?  **  Bhuraidh
gun  tiir,"  ars'  an  t-Easbuig,  "  tha  thu  amaideach,  rach  dhathigh,  cha
cheannaich  thu  m'  eachsa."  **  Ciod  e  an  geall  a  chuireas  tu,"  ars'  an
gille,  **  nach  bi  e  agamsa  an  dàr-!ta  mkireach  ?"  *'  'N  e  m'  eachsa  bhith-
eas  agad,"  ars'  an  t-Easbuig.  *'  Is  e  d'  eachsa  bhitheas  agam,"  ars'
esan,  *'ciod  e  an  geall  a  chuireas  tu  rium  nach  goid  mi  e  ?  "  **  Cuir-
idh  mi  coig  ceud  marg  riut,"  ars'  an  t-Easbuig,  ''nach  dean  thu  sin."
'*  Mata,"  ars*  an  gille,  "  cha-n  'eil  agamsa  ach  aon  phunnd,  ach  cuiridh
mi  sin,  'us  mo  cheann  riut  gun  goid  mi  e."  "  Is  bargan  e,"  ars'  an  t-
Kasbuig.  '*  Thoir  an  aire,"  ars'  esan,  **  tha  mi  cur  mo  chinn  agus  am
punnd  riut,  agus  mu  ghoideas  mise  e,  is  e  mo  chuid  fèin  a  bhitheas
ann."  "  Bithidh  e  mar  sin  cinnteach,"  ars'  am  Probhaist.  "  Tha  mi
ag  aontachadh  ri  sin,"  ars'  an  t-Easboig.    Chaidh  iad  dathigh  an


MAC  AN  TUATHANAICH  ALBANAICH.  «51

oidhche.  sin.  **  Ghille  bhochd,"  ars*  a  mhaighistir  ris  air  an  rathad,
"  bha  thu  cordadh  gu  maith  rìum  o  fhuair  mi  thu.  Tha  mi  dailich
do  chall  a  nis.  Tha  thu  amaideach.  Bheir  an  t-Easbuig  an  aire
nach  goid  thusa  no  fear  eile  an  t-each ;  cumaidh  e  faire  Jiir."  Dh*
fhalbh  an  gille  *n  uair  thainig  an  oidhche  'us  ghabh  e  air ;  chaidh
e  gn  tigh  an  Easbuig.  Ciod  e  fhuair  e  mach  ach  gun  robh  an
t-each  stigh  ann  an  seòmar  aige,  agus  daoine  ann  an  sin  a  gabhail
da  ag  ith  'us  ag  61.  Sheall  gille  a  Probhaist  tirachioU  air  'us
smuanaich  e  gam  feumadh  e  fear  tapaidh  eile  fhaighinn  |comhluadh
ris.  Sail  d'  an  d'  thug  e  uaith,  ciod  e  chunnaic  e  ach  fear  a  bhith*
eadh  ri  cron  daonnan  feadh  a  bhaile.  "  Ma  theid  thu  combluadh
riumsa,"  ars'  esa',  "  beagan  iiine  bheir  mi  rud  eigin  duit  airson  do
shaothrach. "  "  Ni  mi  sin,"  ars'  am  fear  eile.  Dh'  fhalbh  esan  'us
air  a  cheud  dol  a  mach  "  rainig  e  fh^in  'us  an  gille  a  fhuair  e  an  croch-
adair  a  bha 's  a  bhaile,  ''An  urrainn  thu  innseadh  dhomhsa,"  ars'  esan,
"c*  kite  am  faigh  mi  duine  marbh ?  "  "Is  urrainn,"  ars'  an  crochad-
air,  *'  chaidh  duine  a  chrochadh  an  diugh  f  h^in  an  deigh  mheadhoin
latha."  "  Ma  theid  thu  'us  gum  faigh  mise  e,"  ars*  esa,  **  bheir  mi
rud  eigin  duit."  Dh'  fhalbh  e  leis  'us  rainig  lad  an  corp.  "  An
aithne  dhuit  a  nis,"  ars'  esan,  **  c'  kite  am  faigh  mi  ball  mòr  fad,
làidir ? "  "Is  aithne dhomh  sin,"  ars'  an  crochadair,  " tha  am  ball  a
chroch  an  duine  an  so  goireasach  dhuit  'us  gheibh  thu  e."  Dh'  fhalbh
e  leis,  efh^in  'us  an  gille  eile  a  fhuair  e,  'us  thug  iad  leo  e.  Chaidh
iad  gu  tigh  an  Easbuig.  Thubhairt  e  ris  a  ghille  'n  uair  a  rainig  e,
"  f  uirich  thusa  an  sin  'us  thoir  an  aire  dha  so,  ach  an  d'  theid  mise
suas  air  mullach  an  tighe."  Dh'  fhuirich  an  gille,  'us  chaidh  esan
suas  air  mullach  an  tighe.  Chuir  e  a  bheul  'us  a  chluais  ris  an  t*
Biomalair  ach  am  faigheadh  e  mach  c'  kite  an  robh  na  daoine,  agus
bruidheann  labhar  aca  leis  an  61.  Fhuair  e  mach  far  an  robh  iad.
"  Cuir  am  ball,"  ars'  esan,  "  timchioli  air  amhaich  an  duine  mhairbh,
'us  tilg  an  ceann  eile  aig  ormsa."  Shlaod  e  an  duine  marbh  leis  gu
mullach  an  t-siomalair.  Bha  na  daoine  bha  's  an  t-sebmar  a  fair-
eachduinn  na  bha  de  shalachar  's  an  t-siomalair  a  tuiteam.  Bha  esan
a  leigeadh  leis  's  a  leigeadh  leis  au  duine  mhairbh,  gus  am  faca  e  mu
dheireadh  an  solus  breagh  bha  aig  luchd  na  faire'  tighinn  air  cosaibh
an  duine  mhairbh.  "  Faicibh,"  ars'  iadsan,  '*  ciod  e  tha  so."  "  Oh
am  meirleach  Albanach,"  ars'  iadsan,  "  nach  e  thug  an  oidheirp  ?
B'  fhearr  leis  a  bheatha  chall  mar  so  no  a  cheann  bhi  aig  an  Easbuig,
an  ionnsuidh  thug  e  air  fhèin !"  Leis  an  t-siomalair  thainig  an  gille
le  cabhaig.  Am  meadhon  nan  daoine  bha  e  a  stigh  'us  mar  thainig
an  t-each  mach  air  an  dorus  b'e  a  chead  làmh  bha  'an  srian  an  eich
esan.    Dh'  fhalbh  e  leis  an  each  'na  stabull  'us  thubhairt  e  riu  gum


252  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

feodadh  iad  nis  dhol  a  chodal,  gan  robh  iad  sabhailt  ga  lebr.  **  Tha
mi  ereidsinn/'  an'  esan  ris  a  ghille  eile,  *'  gu  bheil  tha  'n  ad  ghille
tapaidh,  bi  aig  laimh  an  ath  oidhche  *us  chi  mi  i^  thu.**  Phaigh  e  an
gUle,  *a8  an  gille  ro  thoilichte.  Dh'  fhalbh  esan  dbathigh  ga  stabull
a  mhaigbistir  leeach  donn  an  Easbuig.  Ghabh  emn  thàmh  'us  ge  bu
mhoch  a  thainig  an  la  bu  mhoich  a  thaiuig  a  mhaigbistir  gu  donu
an  stabuilL  **  Gha  bu  ghearain  leam  mo  shaothair  nam  bitheadh  m'
Albanach  bochd  romham  an  so  an  diugh."  **  Tha  mi  ann  a  so,  a'
mhaigbistir  mhaith,"  ars'  esan, ''  agus  each  donn  an  Easbuig  agam."
*<Ud,  a  laochain,  a  ghille  thapaidh,"  ars'  a  mhaigbistir, ''  bha  meas  agam
ort  roimhe,  ach  tha  meas  mòr  nis  agam  ort"  Rinn  iad  reidh  an  la
so  rìs  dhol  a  choinneachadh  an  Easbuig  'us  b*  e  so  De-haohie.  ''Nis,**
ars'  an  gille,  *'  dh'  fhalbh  mi  gun  each  an  d^,  ach  cha-n  fhalbh  mi
mar  sin  an  diugh."  **  Mats,  a  laochain,  o  'n  a  fhuair  thufhèin  an  t-each
bheir  mise  dioUaid  duit."  Dh'  fhalbh  iad  an  la  so  lis  'an  ooinnimh  an
Easbuig,  a  mhaigbistir  'us  esan  air  muin  da  each.  Chunnaic  iad  an
t-Easbuig  a  tighinn  'n  an  coinnimh  'us  coltas  a  chutfaaich  air.  'N
nair  a  thainig  iad  an  lathair  a  chèile^  chunnaic  iad  gun  robh  an
t-Easbuig  air  muin  eich  eile  nach  robh  cho  maith  r'a  each  fh^n.
Chaidh  an  t-Easbuig  's  am  Probhaisd  an  ooinnimh  a  ch^ile  le  f  àilte.
Thionndaidh an  t-Easbuig  ri  gille  a  Probhaisd,*'  Shlaoitir,"  ars'  esan,
^  'us  a  dhearbh  mheirlich."  **  Cha^n  urrainn  thu  tuilleadh  a  ihàh
nam,"  ars'  gille  a  Phrobhaisd,  *'  cha-n  'eil  fhios  agam  an  urrainn  thu
sin  fhèin  a  radh  rium  le  ceartas,  thaobh,  dh'innis  mi  dhuit  gun
robh  mi  dol  g'a  dheanamh;  gun  tuilleadh  de  do  sheanachas  cuir  an
so  mo  chuig  ceud  marg  am  ionnsuidhse."  B'  €gin  d'a  sin  a  dhean-
amh ged  nach  robh  e  toileach.  **  Ciod  e  a  their  tha,"  ars'  an  gille,
**  ma  ghoideas  mi  do  nighean  an  nochd  ?"  'S  e  aon  nighean  a  bh'  aig
'as  cho  robh  bu  bhreagha  na  i  'an  Lunnun.  ^  Mo  nigheansa,  a
bhiasd,"  ars'  an  t-Easbuig,  ^  cha  ghoid  thu  mo  nigheansa."  *'  Cuir-
idh  mi,"  ars'  an  gille,  "  an  cuig  ceud  marg  a  thug  thu  dhomh  'us  an
t-each  donn  gun  gold  mi  i."  *<  Cuiridh  mise  deich  ceud  marg,"  ars^
an  t-Easbuig,  '<  nach  gold."  Rinn  iad  cordadh.  Dh'  fhalbh  esan  'us
a  mhaigbistir  dhathiglu  **  Laochain,"  ars'  a  mhaigbistir,  **  bha  mi  a
saoilsinn  gu  maith  dhiot  naireigin,  ach  rinn  thu  ttdm  amaideach  a
nia,  'n  nair  a  fhuair  thu  tbu  fh^in  ceart."  **  Coma  leibhse,  a  mhaigh*
istir  mhaith,"  ars'  esan,  **  bheir  mi  an  ionnsuidh  co  dhihbh;"  'N  uair
thainig  an  oidhche,  thog  gille  a  Probhaist  air,  'us  chaidh  e  air  falbh  gn
tigh  an  Easbuig.  'N  uair  a  rainig  e  tigh  an  Easbuig,  chunnaic  •
daine  nasal  'tighinn  a  mach  air  an  dorus.  ^  Oh,"  ars'  esan  ris  an  dnine
nasal,  <*ciod  e  so  aig  tigh  an  Easbuig  an  nochd?"  <<Tha  gnothnch
mòr  sonraichte,**  ars'  an  duine  nasal,  **  Albanach  musach  tha  an  and,


MAO  AN  TUATHANAICH  ALBANAICH.       253

a^ns  e  maoidheadh  a  nighean  a  ghoid,  ga  dearbh  cha-n  'dl  gin  an
Albainn  a  ghoideas  i  leis  an  fhaire  a  th'  oirre."    **  Uh,  tha  mi  cinnt-
each  nach  'eil,"  an'  an  gille,  agus  thionndadh  e  uaith.  **  Tha  fear  an
Saaunn  an  tràthaa,"  ars'  esa,  *<a  dh'  fheumas  feachainn  ris  co  dhiiibh."
Dh'  fhalbh  e,  agns  thug  e  taillearao  an  teaghlaich  rioghail  air.    Dh'
fharraid  e  dhinbh  an  robh  dad  de  dheiseachan  deas  aca  do  naislibh
mora.    '^Gha-n  'eil/'  an' an  taillear,  «ach  deise  a  th*  againn  do
nighean  an  righ,  agus  t^  d'a  maighdean  choimheadachd."     '^  Oiod
e,"  ars'  gille  a  Probhaisd  *<dh'  iarras  tn  air  iad  sin  fhèin  car  da  uair  a
dh'  iiine?  "     «  Oh,"  ars'  an  taillear,  **  tha  eagal  orm  nach  fhaod  mi
an  toirt  dnit"    *'  Na  bitheadh  eagal  air  bhith  ort,"  ars'  gille  a  Pro-
bhaisd,  **piUghidhmi  thu  agns  bheir  mi  an  da  dheise  gnn  bhend,  gan
mhillidh  air  an  ais.    Gheibh  thu  cend  marg,"  ars'  esan.    Sbanntaich
an  taillear  an  t-air^od  mòr  nd  'us  thug  e  dha  iad.    Dh'  fhalbh  e  'us
fhuair  e  an  gille  bh'  aig  an  oidhche  roimhe.    Chaidh  iad  dh'  aite
sbnruichte  'us  fhuair  iad  iad  fh^in  a  chur  'an  uidheam  's  an  da  dheise.
Dh'  fhalbh  iad  'n  uair  a  fhuair  iad  iad  fh^  cho  maith  'us  bu  mhaith
leo  gu  dorus   an  Easbuig.     Fhuair  e   macb   mnn  d'rainig  e  an
dorus,  *n  nair  a  thigeadh  aon  air  bith  do  'n  teaghlach  rioghal  ga
tigh  an  Easbnig,  nach  e  an  dorus  a  bhualadh  a  dheanadh  iad,  ach
sgriob  a  thabhairt  le  barr  an  coise  aig  bonn  an  doruis.    Thainig
esan  a  dh'  ionnsuidh  an  doruis  agus  riun  e  sgrioba.    Bha  dorsair
aig  an  dorus  an  oidhche  sin,  'us  dh'  fhalbh  e  'na  ruith  dh'  ionnsuidh  '
an  Easbuig.    "  Tha  aon  de  'n  teaghlach  rioghail  aig  an  dorus,"  ars'
esan.    **  Cba-n  'eil,"  ars'  an  t-Easbuig,  **  is  e  th'  ann  am  meirleach
Albannach."  Sbeall  an  gille  troimh  thoU  na  h-iuchrach  'us  chunnaic
e  gur  e  coslas  da  bhean  uasail  a  bh'  ann.    Dh'  fhalbh  e  dh'  ionnsuidh
a  mhaighistir  'us  dh'  innis  e  dha.    Cbaidh  a  mhaighistir  dh'  ionn-
suidh an  doruis  'us  sheall  e  fh^ln.    Bheireadh  an  gille  a  bha  mach
Bgriob  an  tràthsa  's  a  rìs,  'us  e  a  cath-throid  ris  an  Easbuig,  'us  e  ri
amaideachd.  Sheall  an  t-Easbnig  'us  dh'  aithnich  e  gur  e  guth  nigh-
inn  an  ligh  bha  's  an  dorus.  Fosgailear  gu  grad  an  dorus,  'us  deanar
a  chromaidh  gu  làr  rithe.    Bhuail  nighean  an  i^h  ris  air  son  a
nighean  chur  ann  an  geall  's  am  bith,  gun  robh  feadhain  a  gabhul
brath  air  airson  a  leithid  a  dheanamh.    **  Cha  mhòr  a  b'  fhiach  thn
a  dheanadh  a  leithid  gun  fhlòs  domhsa,  'us  cha  migeadh  tu  leas  a
leithid  a  dh'  othail  'us  a  dh'  amaideachd  a  dheanamh."    *'  Gabhaibh
sibh  mo  leithsgeul,"  ars'  esan.    '*  Cha-n  urrainn  mi  do  leithsgeul
a  ghabhail,"  ars'  ise.     Stigh  thug  e  nighean  an  righ  do  'n  t-seòmar
's  an  robh  a  nighean  'us  an  fheadhain  a  bha  'g  a  faireadh.    Bha  ise
'ammeadhon  an  t-sebroair  air  caithir  'n  a  suidhe  'us  càchceithir
thimchioU  oirre.  Ars'  nighean  an  righ  rithe,  **  Mo  ghaoil,  's  e  d'  athair


2154  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

an  daine  gun  tùr  a  chuir  's  a  chnnnart  tbu,  'ns  nan  d*  thug  e  f  ios
domhsa  'us  do  chuir  far  an  robh  mise,  aon  s  'ain  bith  thigeadh  a  d'
choir,  rachadh  an  crochach  *us  a  bharrachd  air  sin,  an  losgadh.
Falbh,"  ars*  ise  ris  an  Easbuig,  *'  a  'd  chodal,  'us  cuiribh  fa  sgaoil  a
chuideachd  mhbr  so  mus  bi  iad  a  magadh  oirbh.**  Thubhairt  an  t-
Easbuig  ris  a  chuideachd  gum  faodadh  iad  gabhail  mu  thàmh,  gun
d'  thugadh  nighean  an  ligh,  's  a  maighdean  choimheadachd  an  aire
dh'  a  nigheansa.  "N  uair  a  fhuair  nighean  an  righ  uile  gu  leir  air
falbh  iad,  '*  Thig  thusa,  a  nighinn  mo  ghaoi],  cuid  a  riumsa  gn  tigh
ligh  na  rioghachd."  Mach  a  thug  nighean  an  i^h ;  bha  an  t-each
donn  goireasach  ùce,  agus  cho  luath  's  a  fhuair  an  t-Albannach
mach  i  far  an  robh  an  t-each  donn,  tilgear  dheth  ann  an  kite  dorch
an  deise.  Chuir  e  uidheam  eile  air  as  ceann  'eudaich  fhèin  'us  air
muin  an  eich  chuir  e  i.  Cuirear  dhathigh  an  gille  leis  na  deiseachan
dh'  ionnsuidh  an  tàiUeir.  Phaigh  e  an  gille  'us  thubhairt  e  ris  a
choinneachadh  an  sud  an  ath  oidhche.  Leum  esan  suas  air  an  each
dhonn  aii;  tigh  an  Easbuig,  'us  air  a  thug  e  gu  tigh  a  mhaighistir.  6e
bu  mhoch  a  thainig  an  la,  bu  mhoiche  na  sin  a  thainig  a  mhaigistir  a
dh'  ionnsuidh  an  stàbuill.  *'Bha  esan  'us  nighean  an  Easbuig  'n  an
luidhe  'n  a  leabaidhse,  'us  dhiiisg  e  'n  uair  dh'  fhairich  e  a  mhaigh-
istir." '*  Cba  bu  chall  leam  mo  shaothair,"  ars'  esan,  "  nam  bitheadh
m'  Albannach  bochd  romharo  an  so  an  diugh."  "  Eh,  gu  bheil  mi,"
ars'  esan,  '*  agus  nighean  an  Easbuig  agam  ann  a  so."  ^  Oh,"  ars'
esan,  ''bha  meas  agam  ort  roimhe,  acb  a  nis  tha  measmòr  agam  ort."
Be  sin  De-sathuim.  Bha  aige-san  agus  aig  a  mhaighistir  gu  dhol
a  choinneachadh  an  Easbuig  an  la  sin  cuideachd.  Chaidh  an  t«
Easbuig  agus  am  Probhalst  an  coinnimh  a  ch^ile  mar  a  b'  àbhalsd.
Nam  b'  olc  an  coltas  bh'  air  an  Easbuig  an  la  roimhe,  bha  e  na  bu
mhios'  uile  an  la  sin.  Bha  gille  a  Phrobhaisd  'n  a  each  'us  'na  dhioll-*
aid  an  deigh  a  mhaighistir.  *N  uair  a  thainig  e  far  an  robh  an  t-
Easbuig  cha  robh  aig  ris  ach  **  a  mheirlich  'us  a  shiaoitir  ?"  <*  Faod-
aidh  tu  do  bheul  a  dhhnadh,"  ars'  an  gille,  **  cha  'n  urrainn  thu  sin
fh^in  a  radh  rium  le  ceartas.  Cuir  a  null  mo  dheich  ceud  marg  an
80."  Phaigh  e  an  t-airgiod.  BhH  e'g  a  chkineadh.  *<  Od  dhuine,"
ars'  esan,  ''  leig  dhiot  do  chaineadh,  cuiridh  mi  an  deich  ceud  maig
riut  gun  goid  mi  thu  fh^n  an  nochd."  *'  Gun  goid  thu  mise,  a  bhiaad,'*
ars'  esa,  **  cha-n  fhaigh  thu  a  chead."  Chuir  e  an  deich  ceud  marg  ris.
**  Gheibh  mi  an  deich  ceud  marg  ud  air  ais,"  ars'  an  t-£asbuig,  '<  ach
cuiridh  mise  cuig  ceud  deug  marg  riut  nach  goid  thu  mise."  *'Ni  mi
cordadh  riut,**  ars'  an  gille.  Cheangail  am  Probhaist  am  bargan  ead-
orra.  Dh'  fhalbh  an  gille  'us  a  mhaighistir  dhathigh.  *'  Laochain,*
ars'  a  mhaighistir,  **  bha  meas  m6r  agam  ort  gns  an  diugh,  caillidh  ta


MAC  AN  TUATHANAICH  ALBANAICH.  255

na  fhuair  thu  dh*  airgiod  agus  cha-n  urrainn  tbu  an  duine  ghoid."
**  Cha-n  'eil  eagal  sain  bith  orm  à  sin,"  ars'  an  gille.  *N  uair  thainig
an  oidbche  dh'  fhalbh  esan,  'us  thug  e  timchioll  tigh  an  Easbuig  air.
*' An  sin  smuainich  e  gun  rachadh  e  far  aa  robh  iasgairean  a  bhaile,
dh'  fheuchainn  ciod  e  cbitheadh  e  acasan.     'N  uair  a  tliainig  e  far
an  robh  na  h-iasgairean  dh'  fbarraid  e  dhiubh,  an  robh  dad  de
bhradanan  aca  air  an  tir-mharbhadh.     Thubhairt  iad  ris  gun  robh.
*'Ma  dh'  fheannas  sibh,"  ars'  esan,  **na  h-uiread  so    a  dh'   iasg,
bheir  mi  dhuibh  na  h-uiread  so  dh'  airgiod,  no  airgiod  sam  bith
a  's  coir  dha  bhi."      Thubhairt    na    h-iasgairean    gun  deanadh,
'us  rinn  iad  e.    Thug  iad  dha  de  chroiciunean  èÌAg  na  shaoil  leis  a
dheanadh  clebchd,  am  faide  'us  an  lend  a  shir  e.    Dh'  fhalbh  e  an  sin
dh'  ionnsuidh  nan  tàillearan.  Thuuhairt  e  rU  na  taillearan,  an  dean-
adh iad  deise  dha  de  chroicinnean  an  èisg,  a  cbionn  dk  uair  dheag  a
st-oidhche,  'us  gum  faigheadh  iad  pki^headh  air  a  shon.     Dh'  innis
iad  dha  ciod  e  an  t-suim  a  ghabhadh  iad.  Ghabh  iad  tomhas  a  ghille
'us  thòisich  iad  air  an  deise,    Bha  an  deise  ullamh  chionn  an  da
uair  dheug.  Cha-n  fhaodadh  iad  'bhi  na  b'  f haide ;  bha  an  Dòmhnach
'tighinn  a  stigh.     Dh'  fhalbh  e  leis  an  deise  'us  'n  uair  a  fhuair  e  e
fh^in  goirid  0  eaglais  an  Easbuig  chuir  e  uime  an  deise.    Fhuair  e
jucbar  a  dh'  fhosgladh  an  eaglais  'us  chaidh  e  stigh.    Chaidh  e  do  'n
chrannaig  air  ball.    Siiil  de  'n  tug  an  dorsair  uaith  'us  faire  mhòr
air  an  Easbuig,  dh'  fhalbh  e,  'us  thubhairt  e  gun  robh  solus  's  an
eaglais.    '*  Solus,"  ars'  a  mhaighi>tir,  "  raca  thusa  null  'us  faic  ciod  e
an  solas  a  th'  ann."    Bha  e  an  dèigh  an  da  uair  dheug  an  so.    **  O,"
ars'  an  dorsair  'us  e  tighinn,  **  tha.  duine  a'  searmonachadh  ann."
Tharruing  an  t-Easbuig  'uaireadair  'us  chunnaic  e  gun  robh  toiseach
an  dbmhnaich  a  tighinn  a  stigh.     Dh'  fhalbh  e  'n  a  ruith  dh'  ionn-
suidh na  h-eaglaise.  'JN'  uair  a  chunnajc  e  an  soillse  bha 's  an  eaglaia
'us  na  h-uile  car  chuir  an  duine  bha  'searmonachadh  dbeth,  ghabh  e
eagal.    Dh'  fhosgail  e  beagan  an  dorus  'us  chuir  e  a  cbeann  stigh  dh'
fhaicinn  ciod  e  an  Qoltas  a  bh'  air.    Am  fear  bha  's  a  chrannaig  cha
robh  cknain  bha  fo  na  rionnagan  nach  robh  e  toirt;  treis  air.    'N  uair
a  thigeadh  e  dh'  ionnsuidh  na  h-uile  cknain  a  thuigeadh  an  t-Easbuig
is  ann  'cur  iomchar  air  an  Easbui>>:  a  bha  e  gun  robh  e  air  call  a  ch^ill.
Sud  stigh  an  t-Flasbuig  agus  theirigear  air  a  ghliinan  aig  bonn  na
crannaig.  Thoisich  esan  air  asluchadh  ann  an  sin,  'us  'n  uair  chunn-
aic e  an  dearsadh  bha 's  a  chrannaig  ghabh  e  gu  cùram  leis  na  bha  e
ag  radh  ris.  Mu  dheireadh  thubhairt  e'  ris,  nan  gealladh  e  dhasan  gun
deanadh  e  aitbreachas  glan  'us  gum  falbhadn  e  leis-san  gun  d'
thugadh  e  maitheanas  dha.  Ghealladh  an  t- Easbuig  sin  da.   "  Falbh
learn sa,"  ars'  ^san}  **  gns  am  faigh  mi  beagan  Uine  ort.**     *'  Falbh-


256  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

aidV*  ars'  an  t-Easbuig, "  ged  a  b*  ann  as  an  t-saoghal  dh'  iarradh  ta
orm  falbh.**  Dh'  fhalbh  e  leis,  *a8  dh*  fhalbh  an  gUle  roimhe.
Rainig  iad  stabnll  a  Phrobhaisd.  Fhnair  e  kite  suidh  do  'n  Easbaig
*U8  choir  e  *n  a  shuidhe  e.  Shuidh  e  fh^in ;  cha  raigeadh  iad  a  leas
solus,  oir  bha  eudach  a  ghille  *deanamh  soluis  far  an  robh  iad.
Bha  e  'mineachadh  do  'n  Easbaig  an  sin  ann  an  canainean
a  thuigeadh,  agus  ann  an  coid  nach  tuigeadh  e.  Bha  e  mar
sin  ach  an  robh  an  t-àm  d'a  mhaighistir  tighinn  *s  a  mhadainn.
*N  uair  bha  an  t-am  teann  air  laimh,  thilg  e  dheth  an  deise^  lùb  e  'us
chuir  e  am  folach  i,  oir  bha  e  ris  an  t-soillearachd.  Bha  an  t-Easbuig
samhach  an  so,  'as  thainig  am  Probhaisd.  **  Cha  bu  ghearain  leam  mo
shaothair  nam  bitheadh  m*  Albannach  bochd  romham  an  so  an
dingh."  <*  £h,  ga  bheil  mi,"  ars'esan,  **an  so  'as  an  t-Easbaig  agam."
^  Ud,  a  laochain,"  ars'  a  mhaighistir,  <*  is  maith  a  gheibhear  thu.*'  **  Oh,
a  dhaoir-shlaoitir,"  ars'  an  t-£asbaig,  *'  'n  ann  mar  so  a  rinn  tint  an
gnothnch  orm  ?"  '*  Innsidh  mise  dhuit  mar  a  tha,**  ars*  am  Probhaisd,
^  is  fhearr  dhuit  deanamh  gu  maith  air,  no  bhi'g  a  chàineadh;  tha  do
nighean  aig,  agus  tha  d'each  aig,  agns  d'airgiod,  agns  air  do  shon
fh^in,  cha  ghleidh  esa  thusa,  ach  is  fhearr  dhoitse  esan  a  ghleidh-
eadh.  Thoir  e  fb^in  'us  do  nighean  ieat  'us  dean  banais  dhoibh
le  h-eireachdeas.  Dh'  fhalbh  e  'us  chaidh  edhathigh  leis  an  Easbuig,
'us  fhuair  e  e  fhèìn  'us  a  nighean  a  phÒFadh  gu  ceart  'us  rinn  e  gu
maith  ris.    Dh'  fhàg  mise  an  sin  iad.

I  had  the  above  tale  from  Donald  M'Lean,  now  resident  in
the  Grassmarket,  Edinburgh.  It  is  one  of  seyen  I  took  down
from  his  recitation  about  the  same  time.  M'Lean  is  a  native  of
Ardnamurchan,  but  crossed  at  an  early  age  to  Glenforsa  in  Mull,
where  he  spent  several  years.  He  heard  this  tale  recited  by  an
old  man,  Angus  M'Phie,  from  Ardnamurchan,  who  died  about
fifty  years  ago,  and  he  had  received  it  also  from  tradition.
M'Lean  recites  his  tales  without  the  slightest  hesitation,  although
in  some  cases  their  recitation  occupies  a  couple  of  hours.  It  will
be  manifest,  too,  from  reading  the  original  tale  here  given,  that
very  little  variation  could  be  allowed  in  the  words  used,  and  that
the  very  forms  of  expression  and  words  must  therefore  be  retained
unchanged.  M'Lean's  is  a  remarkable  instance  of  the  power  of
memory  in  the  uneducated,  shewing  that  it  is  quite  possible  to
retain  and  recite,  with  perfect  accuracy,  compositions  which
would  form  a  volume.  He  obtained  his  tales  from  different
parties,  and  says  they  were  recited  in  the  winter  evenings  at  the


THE  SON  OF  THB  SCOTT?ISH  YEOMAN.  «57

firesides  of  the  old  HigUanders  as  their  chief  amtisementB.
Some  of  them  he  heard  before  he  was  fourteen  years  of  age,  and
never  heard  since,  and  yet  he  retains  them  accurately.

It  will  be  observed  in  the  tale  now  given  that  some  of  the
terms  used  are  modem,  as,  for  instance,  ''  Probhaisd  "  (Provost),
and  not  known  in  our  older  Gaelic.  It  is  remarkable,  also,  that
the  bishop  of  London  is  the  party  fixed  upon  to  have  his  effects
stolen.  This  would  seem  to  indicate  that  the  tale  originated  at
a  time  when  the  Highlanders  were  acquainted  with  bishops,  and
would  carry  it  back  to  a  period  previous  to  the  Reformation,  the
inhabitants,  both  of  Ardnamurchan  and  Mull,  having  been  Pres-
byterians since  that  period;  unless,  indeed,  the  story  has  been
imported  into  the  Highlands  from  some  other  quarter.  Its  re-
semblance to  the  *' Master  Thief"  in  Mr.  Dasent*s  "Tales  from
the  Norse,"  cannot  fail  to  strike  any  one  acquainted  with  these
interesting  stories.  The  ''Tuathanach  "  is  translated  "  Yeoman,"
not  that  that  term  expresses  with  perfect  accuracy  the  meaning
of  the  Gaelic  word,  but  it  is  the  English  term  which  comes
nearest  to  it.  The  ' '  Tuathanach  "  among  the  Celts  is  a  "  farmer, "
or  one  who  holds  his  lands  from  another,  but  the  word  implies  a
certain  amount  of  consequence  and  dignity,  which  would  indicate
that  he  must  hold  land  of  considerable  extent.  The  term  is  mani-
festly either  the  radix,  or  a  relative  of  the  Latin  "  teneo,"  whence
the  English  "tenant,"  and  it  would  seem  also  to  be  the  real
source  of  the  word  "  Thane,"  or  one  who  held  as  tenant  the  lands
of  the  Crown.  The  tenants  and  their  subholders  were  dis-
tinguished as  ''Tuath  'us  Ceatharn,"  from  which  last  is  the
Saxon  '*Kem."

T.  M'L.

Edinburgh,  May  1860.

2.  Another  version  of  this  was  told  to  me  by  Donald  MacCraw,
drover,  September  1859,  as  we  walked  along  the  road  in  North
Uist.  It  was  given  in  return  for  a  bit  of  another  story,  which
also  treats  of  clever  thieves,  part  of  which  I  learned  from  my
piper  guardian  long  ago.    This  was  the  fly  which  raised  the  fish.

Two  thieves  once  came  to  a  gallows,  and  the  one  said  to  the
other,

**  We  have  often  heard  about  this  thing,  now  let  us  try  how

VOL.  II.  S


258  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

it  feels.  I  will  pnt  the  rope  about  my  neck,  and  do  thon  hang
me,  and  when  I  have  had  enongh,  I  will  grin  and  then  thon  shalt
let  me  down."

So  the  first  thief  was  hanged,  and  when  the  rope  tightened
he  grinned  horribly,  and  was  let  down  by  his  comrade  as  they
had  agreed.

•'  Well,"  said  he,  "  What  was  it  like?"

"  Not  so  bad  as  I  expected,"  said  the  other.  "  Now  I  will
hang  thee  and  when  thon  hast  enough,  whistle."

So  the  second  agreed,  and  he  was  strung  np  in  his  tnm,  and
he  grinned  too ;  bat  because  he  would  not  whistle,  his  friend  let
him  hang,  and  when  he  was  tired  of  waiting,  he  emptied  his
pockets  and  left  him  there.

*'  Have  you  any  more  of  that  story,"  said  I.

'*  No ;  but  I  have  one  about  a  smith's  servant,"  said  MacCraw.

There  was  once,  long  ago,  a  smith  in  Eirinn,  and  he  had  a
servant  who  was  very  clever  at  stealing ;  he  could  steal  anything.
His  master  was  working  with  an  Uachdarah,  gentleman,  and
the  gentleman  came  to  the  smithy  to  have  his  "  powney  "  shod,
(the  EnglÌHh  word  powney  is  commonly  used  in  Island  Gaelic),
and  he  and  the  smith  were  well  with  each  other,  and  they  began
to  talk,  and  the  smith  to  boast  of  his  apprentice,  and  how  well  he
could  steal.  At  last  he  offered  to  bet  that  the  lad  could  steal
the  gentleman's  horse,  and  the  gentleman  wagered  five  notes
that  he  would  not.  The  smith  laid  down  the  money  and  the  bet
was  made,  and  they  told  this  to  the  lad.

Well,  the  gentleman  went  home,  and  he  sent  his  gillies  to
watch  the  powney,  and  the  lad  went  and  he  bought  himself  three
bottles  of  whisky,  and  when  the  night  came  he  went  to  the
"  square  "  (this  word  has  also  crept  into  Gaelic,  and  is  applied
to  a  set  of  farm  buildings)  of  the  gentleman,  and  he  laid  him-
self down  amongst  the  litter,  and  he  began  to  snore  and  snort
and  pretend  to  be  dnmk.  So  out  came  one  of  the  watchmen  to
see  what  was  the  matter,  and  he  began  to  handle  the  drunken
man,  and  presently  he  felt  a  bottle  in  his  pocket ;  then  he  drew
it  out  and  he  told  the  others,  and  they  drank  it  all  up.  Then  they
said,

**  Let  us  see  if  there  is  not  another  bottle  in  the  other  pocket."
So  they  went  and  they  rolled  over  the  drunken  man,  who  kept


THE  SON  OP  THE  SCOTTISH  YEOMAN.  259

on  snoriog  and  snorting,  and  they  found  a  second  bottle,  and  then
they  went  into  the  stable  again.  At  the  end  of  a  little  while  the
lad  heard  them  getting  very  "  wordy  "  within,  and  soon  they
came  oat  again  a  third  time,  and  they  rolled  him  about,  and
found  the  third  bottle,  and  that  finished  them  off  and  they  fell
fast  asleep.  Then  the  lad  got  up  and  stole  the  powney,  and
went  to  the  smithy  and  then  he  .went  to  sleep  himself.

In  the  morning  the  gentleman  came  to  the  smithy,  and  he
had  to  pay  the  bet,  for  the  powney  was  there  before  him.

"Well,"  said  the  lad,  "that  is  but  a  small  matter,  I  will
wager  you  now  twenty  notes  that  T  will  steal  your  daughter."
"  I  will  take  the  wager,"  said  the  gentleman.
And  the  lad  said,  "  Now  master,  lay  down  the  twenty  notes
for  me."    So  the  smith  laid  them  down,  and  the  gentleman  laid
down  his,  and  the  wager  was  made.

(The  word  "  note  "  is  almost  always  used  in  Gaelic,  because
very  filthy  one  pound  notes  are  common  in  Scotland.  The  value
of  the  note  is  expressed  by  "pound  saxon."  It  seems  to  be
necessary  to  produce  the  money,  and  to  deposit  it  when  a  wager
is  laid.)

Now  no  time  was  fixed  for  stealing  the  daughter,  so  the
gentleman  went  home  and  he  set  a  watch  on  his  daughter's
room,  who  were  to  go  in  and  out  all  night  long.  The  lad  went
about  the  country  and  he  travelled  till  he  came  to  Baillb  puibt
a  seaport  town  on  the  other  side,  for  it  was  in  Eirinn  ;  and  there
he  remained  till  he  made  friends  with  a  ship  captain,  and  after
much  talk  (which  was  given  by  the  narrator)  the  captain  agreed '
to  help  him.  So  the  lad  dressed  himself  up  as  a  woman,  and  the
captain  said,  "  Now  I  will  say  that  I  have  a  sister  on  board,  and
if  we  are  asked  to  the  house  of  the  gentleman  when  the  ship
arrives,  do  thou  as  best  thou  canst."

So  the  ship  sailed,  and  she  sailed  round  Eirinn  till  she  came
to  the  gentleman's  house,  and  then  the  captain  went  up  and  told
how  he  had  been  a  long  voyage  to  the  Indies.

Then  the  gentleman  asked  if  he  had  any  one  else  on  board,
and  he  said  that  he  had  a  sister,  and  that  she  was  very  un-
well.

"  Oh ! "  said  the  gentleman,  "  ask  her  to  come  up  and  she

shall  sleep  in  my  daughter's  room."


26o  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES,

So  the  captain's  sister  came  np  and  they  had  a  pleasant  even-
ing, and  they  all  went  to  bed.

Bat  the  captain's  sister  could  not  sleep,  and  she  said  to  the
gentleman's  daughter,  "  What  are  these  men  that  are  always
walking  about  the  room,  and  up  and  down  before  the  windows  ?  '*

And  the  girl  said,  "  There  is  a  bad  man  who  has  laid  a  wager
that  he  will  steal  me,  and  my  father  is  afraid  that  he  may  come
any  night,  and  these  are  the  watchmen  who  are  guarding  me.
It  is  not  for  the  money,  but  my  father  is  so  angry,  because  that
bad  man  beat  him  once  already."

"  Oh,"  said  the  captain's  sister,  "  I  am  so  nervous  after  the
sea.  I  have  a  sort  of  nerves  (the  narrator  used  the  English
word)  that  I  shall  never  sleep  all  night.  I  shall  never  get  a
wink  of  sleep !  I  would  be  so  much  obliged  to  you  if  you  would
have  the  goodness  to  send  them  away."

And  so  at  last  the  men  were  sent  away,  but  the  captain's
sister  could  not  sleep  a  bit  better,  and  she  said,

"  When  I  was  in  the  Indies  I  used  to  be  so  troubled  with  the
heat,  that  I  got  a  habit  of  walking  out  at  night,  perhaps  I  could
sleep  if  I  were  to  take  a  little  walk  now.  Will  you  be  so  very
kind  as  to  come  out  for  a  little  walk  with  me.

So  the  gentleman's  daughter  got  up,  and  out  they  went  for  a
walk,  but  when  they  had  walked  a  little  way,  the  lad  carried  her
oif  bodily  to  the  smithy.

In  the  morning  the  gentleman  came  and  he  paid  the  bet,  and
it  is  told  that  the  lad  married  the  daughter.

"  And  is  that  all  he  ever  stole  ?  "  said  I.

"  That's  all  I  ever  heard  about  it  at  all  events,"  said  Mac-
Craw.

3.  In  the  Sutherland  collection  is  this  reference.  '•  The
Master  Thief  (see  Dasent's  Tales,  and  Thorpe's  Tales).  This
was  some  twenty  or  thirty  years  ago  a  common  schoolboy's  tale.
I  have  tried  in  vain  to  get  it  written  down  in  Gaelic,  but  they  tell
it  with  all  that  is  in  the  Norwegian  version,  and  more  besides,
such  as  the  theft  of  some  rabbits  (how  performed  I  cannot  hear),
and  that  of  a  lot  of  calves.  The  Master  Thief  stole  these  for  the
robbers,  by  imitating  in  the  woods  and  upland  pastures  the  cry
of  the  cows."     C.  1).


THE  SON  OF  THE  SCOTTISH  YEOMAN.  26 1

4.  Another  bit  of  the  Master  Thief,  as  ^ven  in  the  Norse
Tales,  forms  part  of  a  story  which  is  referred  to  in  Ko.  48.  It  is
the  incident  of  the  man  who  is  persuaded  to  put  his  finger  into
what  he  believes  to  be  a  cask  full  of  liquor,  while  the  clever  rogue
rides  off  on  his  horse,  on  pretence  of  catching  himself.

5.  I  have  heard  another  of  the  incidents,  as  a  theft,  accom-
plished by  tempting  a  man  to  run  after  broken-legged  rabbits.

This  story,  then,  is  now  widely  spread  in  the  Highlands,
however  it  got  there.  The  Rev.  Mr.  MacLauchlan,  one  of  the
best-known  and  most  respected  men  in  Edinburgh,  gets  one  ver-
sion from  an  old  man  in  the  Grassmarket,  who  gives  it  a  pedigree
of  some  fifty  years ;  I  got  another  myself  from  a  drover  in  Uist ;
a  very  able  collector  in  Sutherland  says  it  was  common  there
some  twenty  or  thirty  years  ago,  and  is  told  still ;  and  a  scrap  of
the  Norwegian  version  comes  from  Islay.  They  resemble  other
versions  in  other  languages,  but  they  resemble  each  other  more
than  they  do  any  published  version  which  I  know ;  and  there
seems  to  be  but  one  explanation  of  the  facts,  namely,  that  this  is
some  very  old  tradition,  common  to  many  races  and  languages,
and  derived  from  some  original  of  unknown  antiquity.

The  incidents  in  the  German  of  Grimm  are  shortly  these : —

A  poor  old  man  is  visited  by  a  gentleman  in  a  grand  carriage,
who  turns  out  to  be  his  son  who  had  run  away  and  become  a
master  thief.  They  go  to  the  Count,  who  sets  him  three  tasks  to
try  his  skill :  to  steal  his  favourite  horse ;  to  take  away  from  his
wife  and  from  him  the  counterpane  of  their  bed,  and  the  ring  ofi"
the  lady^s  finger ;  and,  thirdly,  to  steal  the  parson  and  clerk  out
of  the  church,  on  pain  of  his  neck.

He  makes  the  watch  drunk,  and  steals  the  horse.  He  makes
the  Count  shoot  at  a  dead  body,  and  while  the  Count  is  gone  to
bury  the  supposed  thief,  he  appears  as  the  Count,  and  gets  the
ring  and  bed-cover  from  the  Countess.

And  he  entices  the  parson  and  clerk  into  a  sack  by  pretending
to  be  St.  Peter.

The  Norse  story  has  many  more  incidents,  but  amongst  them
are  five  tasks  set  by  a  great  man  to  try  the  skill  of  the  Master
Thief:—

(1.)  To  steal  the  roast  from  the  spit  on  Sunday,  which  he


202  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

does  bj  enticing  the  servants  to  run  after  three  hares  which  he
lets  oat  of  a  bag.

(2.)  To  steal  father  Laurence,  the  priest,  which  he  does  by
pretending  to  be  an  angel,  and  so  enticing  him  into  a  sack.

(3).  To  steal  twelve  horses  from  the  stable,  which  he  does  by
appearing  as  an  old  woman,  and  making  twelve  grooms  drunk
with  a  sleepy  drink  in  brandy.

(4.)  To  steal  the  horse  from  under  the  squire,  which  he  does
nearly  in  the  same  way  as  the  clever  weaver  in  the  Islay
story.

(5.)  To  steal  the  sheet  of  the  gentleman's  bed,  and  the  shift
off  his  wife's  back,  which  he  does  in  nearly  the  same  way  as  it  is
done  in  the  German  version.

And  though  the  daughter  is  not  stolen  in  the  Norse  tale,  it  is
to  gain  the  daughter  that  all  these  tasks  are  performed.

Now  all  these  are  clearly  the  same  as  the  second  '*  Favola  "
in  the  first  book  of  Straparola,  printed  in  Venice,  1567.  In  this
Italian  story  the  scene  is  Perugia,  the  clever  thief,  a  certain
Cassandrino,  and  the  man  who  tries  his  skill  "II  Pretore/'  the
Priest.

Cassandrino  first  steals  the  Priest's  bed  from  under  him,  by
breaking  through  the  roof  and  throwing  down  the  dead  body  of  a
recently  buried  doctor  which  he  had  dug  up  and  dressed  in  his
clothes.  The  Priest  thinks  that  he  has  fallen  down  and  killed
himself,  goes  to  bury  him,  and  finds  his  bed  gone  when  he
returns.

Next  he  steals  the  horse  from  the  stable.  The  watchman
sleeps  in  the  saddle  ;  he  props  him  up  on  sticks,  and  steals  away
the  horse.

Lastly,  he  steals  a  country  clergyman,  whom  he  tempts  into
a  sack  by  dressing  as  an  angel  and  standing  on  an  altar  after
matins,  exclaiming  "  Chi  vuol  andar  in  gloria  entri  nel  sacco."
He  gets  a  hundred  florins  of  gold  each  time,  and  is  threatened
with  terrible  punishment  in  case  of  failure.  The  disguise  is  a
white  robe,  painted  paper  wings,  and  a  shining  diadem.

The  Italian  story  again  resembles,  though  in  a  less  degree,
the  Egyptian  story  of  Bhampsinitus,  told  in  Herodotus.  (Raw-
linson's  Herod,  vol.  ii.  p.  191 .)

The  king  had  a  treasure  chamber  built  of  hewn  stone,  but  the


THE  SON  OF  THE  SCOTTISH  YEOMAN.  263

builder  contrived  a  tarning-stoDe  in  the  wall,  and  told  the  secret
to  his  sons  when  he  was  about  to  die.

The  sons  plundered  the  treasury,  and  the  king  set  a  trap
which  caaght  one  of  them.  The  other  cut  his  head  off  to  pre-
vent discovery,  and  went  home  with  the  head,  leaving  the  body
in  the  trap.  The  king,  much  puzzled,  exposed  the  headless  body,
with  guards  beside  it,  to  watch  if  any  one  should  be  seen  weeping
near  it.  The  mother  sent  her  son  to- get  back  the  body,  and  he
did  very  much  as  the  clever  thief  in  the  modern  stories,  who  stole
the  horses ;  he  disguised  himself,  and  enticed  the  guards  into
drinking  till  they  fell  asleep ;  then  he  shaved  half  their  beards  off,
and  took  away  the  body.

Then  the  king  sent  his  daughter  to  find  out ;  and  the  clever
thief  went  to  her,  and  told  her  all  about  it ;  but  when  she  tried
to  seize  him,  he  gave  her  the  hand  of  a  dead  man,  which  he  had
cut  off  and  brought  with  him ;  and  so  he  made  his  escape,  leav-
ing the  hand.

Then  the  king  proclaimed  a  free  pardon  for  the  clever  thief
who  had  outwitted  him  three  times,  and  when  he  came  he  gave
him  his  daughter  in  marriage.

Other  references  are  given  in  Grimm's  third  volume  (see
page  260),  from  which  it  appears  that  this  story  is  very  widely
spread  in  Europe.  Now  the  Gaelic  agrees  with  Herodotus,  Stra-
parola,  and  Grimm,  in  that  there  are  three  tasks  accomplished
by  a  clever  thief;  and  the  number  three  is  almost  universally  used
in  Gaelic  tales.

One  of  the  Gaelic  incidents,  that  of  the  drunken  gaards,
agrees  with  the  story  in  Herodotus,  and  is  common  to  all  those
quoted.

The  Gaelic  agrees  with  the  Italian,  German,  and  Korse,  in  the
theft  of  the  horse  and  the  clergyman.

The  Gaelic  alone  has  the  theft  of  the  daughter.  The  Nor-
wegian version  mentions  the  daughter,  and  so  does  the  story  of
Rhampsinitus,  and  there  seems  to  be  fair  ground  for  arguing  that
all  this  must  have  come  from  some  original  which  it  is  vain  to
search  for  in  any  modern  work  or  in  any  modern  age.  Such  at
least  is  my  own  opinion,  and  I  have  endeavoured  to  give  others
the  means  of  judging  for  themselves  so  far  as  I  am  able,  by  giv-
ing all  I  get  unaltered,  and  by  naming  all  my  authorities.


264  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Another  Gaelic  story,  the  "Gillie  Carrach,'*  of  which  1  lately
(Jaoe  1860)  reoeived  a  long  version  from  John  Dewar,  contains
three  incidents  very  like  those  in  Herodotus;  mixed  with  others
which  are  new  to  me,  and  others  which  I  have  in  Gaelic  from
other  sources,  one  of  which  has  a  parallel  in  Italian  and  in
Sanscrit.

It  is  curious  to  remark,  that  the  very  same  ideas  seem  to  have
occurred  to  Herodotus,  while  on  his  travels,  which  now  arise  in
the  minds  of  worthy  pedagogues  in  the  Highlands.  They  ohject
to  old  stories  told  by  peasants,  because  they  are  ''fictions,"  and
not  historically  true.  I  have  repeatedly  met  men  who  look  on
the  telling  of  these  tales  as  something  almost  wicked.

Thus  wrote  Herodotus,  and  those  who  object  to  traditionary
fictions  might  take  example  by  the  father  of  history,  and  while
they  disbelieve  the  stories,  write  them  down.

"  Such  as  think  the  tales  told  by  the  Egyptians  credible,  are
free  to  accept  them  for  history.  For  my  own  part,  1  propose  to
myself,  thoaghout  my  whole  work,  faithfully  to  record  the  tra-
ditions of  the  several  nations."

Surely  if  Herodotus  did  not  think  it  beneath  him  to  record
such  frivolous  things,  and  if  men  of  the  highest  acquirements
now  make  them  a  study,  they  are  not  wholly  unworthy  of
notice.


XLI.
THE  WIDOW  AND  HEE  DAUGHTEES.

From  Mrs.  MacGeachy,  Farmer's  Wife,  Islaj.

T^HERE  was  formerly  a  poor  widow,  and  she  had
-*-  three  daughters,  and  all  she  had  to  feed  them  was  a
kailyard.  There  was  a  great  gray  horse  who  was  coming
every  day  to  the  yard  to  eat  the  kaiL  Said  the  eld-
est of  the  daughters  to  her  mother,  "  I  will  go  to  the
yard  to-day,  and  I  will  take  the  spinning-wheel  with
me,  and  I  will  keep  the  horse  out  of  the  kaiL"  "  Do,'*
aaid  her  mother.  She  went  out  The  horse  came  ;
she  took  the  distaff  from  the  wheel  and  she  struck
him.  The  distaff  stuck  to  the  horse,  and  her  hand
stuck  to  the  distaff.  Away  went  the  horse  till  they
reached  a  green  hill,  and  he  called  out,  "  Open,  open,
oh  green  hill,  and  let  in  the  king's  son ;  open,  open,
oh  green  hill^  and  let  in  the  widow's  daughter."  The
hill  opened,  and  they  went  in.  He  warmed  water  for
her  feet,  and  made  a  soft  bed-for  her  limbs,  and  she
lay  down  that  night.  Early  on  the  morrow,  when  he
rose,  he  was  going  to  hunt  He  gave  her  the  keys  of
the  whole  house,  and  he  said  to  her  that  she  might
open  every  chamber  inside  but  the  one.  "  By  all  she
ever  saw  not  to  open  that  one."  That  she  should  have
his  dinner  ready  when  he  should  come  back,  and  that
if  she  would  be  a  good  woman  that  he  would  marry


266  WEST  mOHLAND  TALEa

her.  When  he  went  away  she  began  to  open  the  cham-
bera  Every  one,  as  she  opened  it^  was  getting  finer
and  finer,  till  she  came  to  the  one  that  was  forbidden.
It  seemed  to  her,  "What  might  be  in  it  that  she
might  not  open  it  too."  She  opened  it^  and  it  was
fall  of  dead  gentlewomen,  and  she  went  down  to  the
knee  in  blood.  Then  she  came  out,  and  she  was  clean-
ing her  foot ;  and  though  she  were  cleaning  it,  still  she
could  not  take  a  bit  of  the  blood  off  it  A  tiny  cat
came  where  she  was,  and  she  said  to  her,  "K  she
would  give  a  little  drop  of  milk  that  she  would  clean
her  foot  as  well  as  it  was  before.  "Thou  !  ugly  beast !
be  off  before  thee.  Dost  thou  suppose  that  I  won't
clean  them  better  than  thou  V*  "  Yes,  yes,  take  thine
own  way.  Thou  wilt  see  what  will  happen  to  thee
when  himself  comes  homa"  He  came  home,  and
she  set  the  dinner  on  the  board,  and  they  sat  down
at  it.  Before  they  ate  a  bit  he  said  to  her,  "  Wert
thou  a  good  woman  to-day  V  "  I  was,"  said  she.
"  Let  me  see  thy  foot,  and  I  will  tell  thee  whether
thou  wert  or  wert  not."  She  let  him  see  the  one  that
was  clean.  "  Let  me  see  the  other  one,"  said  he.  When
he  saw  the  blood,  "  Oh  !  ho  !"  said  he.  He  rose  and
took  the  axe  and  took  her  head  off,  and  he  threw  her
into  the  chamber  with  the  other  dead  people.  He  laid
down  that  night,  and  early  on  the  morrow  he  went  to
the  widow's  yard  again.  Said  the  second  one  of  the
widow's  daughters  to  her  mother — "  I  will  go  out  to-
day, and  I  will  keep  the  gray  horse  out  of  the  yard."
She  went  out  sewing.  She  struck  the  thing  she  was
sewing  on  the  horse.  The  cloth  stuck  to  l^e  horse,
and  her  hand  stuck  to  the  clotL  They  reached
the  hilL  He  called  as  usual  to  the  hill ;  the  hill
opened,  and  they  went  in.  He  warmed  water
for  her  feet^  and  made  a  soft  bed  for  her  limbs,  and


THE  WIDOW  AND  HER  DAUGHTERS.  267

they  lay  down  that  night.  Early  in  the  morning  he
was  going  to  hunt,  and  he  said  to  her  that  she  should
open  every  chamber  inside  but  one,  and  "  by  all  she
ever  saw"  not  to  open  that  one.  She  opened  every
chamber  till  she  came  to  the  little  one,  and  because  she
thought  "  What  might  be  in  that  one  more  than  the
rest  that  she  might  not  open  it  V*  She  opened  it^  and  it
was  full  of  dead  gentlewomen,  and  her  own  sister
amongst  them.  She  went  down  to  the  knee  in  blood.
She  came  out,  and  she  was  cleaning  herself,  and  the
little  cat  came  round  about,  and  she  said  to  her,  "  If
thou  wilt  give  me  a  tiny  drop  of  nfilk  I  will  clean  thy
foot  as  well  as  it  ever  was."  "  Thou  !  ugly  beast !
begone.  Dost  thou  think  that  I  will  not  clean  it  my-
self better  than  thou  V  "  Thou  wilt  see,"  said  the  cat,
"  what  will  happen  to  thee  when  himself  comes  home."
When  he  came  she  set  down  the  dinner,  and  they
sat  at  it.  Said  he — "  Wert  thou  a  good  woman  to-
day ?"  '*  I  was,"  said  she.  "  Let  me  see  thy  foot,
and  I  will  tell  thee  whether  thou  wert  or  wert  not*'
She  let  him  see  the  foot  that  was  clean.  "  Let  me  see
the  other  one,"  said  he.  She  let  him  see  it.  "  Oh  !
ho  !"•  said  he,  and  he  took  the  axe  and  took  her  head
ofT.  He  lay  down  that  night.  Early  on  the  mor-
row, said  the  youngest  one  to  her  mother,  as  she
wove  a  stocking — "  I  will  go  out  with  my  stocking  to-
day, and  I  will  watch  the  gray  horse.  I  will  see  what
happened  to  my  two  sisters,  and  I  will  return  to  tell
you."  "  Do,"  said  her  mother,  "  and  see  thou  dost  not
stay  away.  She  went  out,  and  the  horse  came.  She
struck  the  stocking  on  the  horse.  The  stocking  stuck
to  the  horse,  and  the  hand  stuck  to  the  stocking.  They
went  away,  and  they  reached  the  green  hill.  He  called
out  as  usual,  and  they  got  in.  He  warmed  water  for
her  feety  and  made  a  soft  bed  for  her  limbs,  and  they


268  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

lay  down  that  night  On  the  morrow  he  was  going  to
hunt,  and  he  said  to  her — "  If  she  would  behave  her-
self as  a  good  woman  till  he  returned,  that  they  would
be  married  in  a  few  days/'  He  gave  her  the  keys,  and
he  said  to  her  that  she  might  open  every  chamber  that
was  within  but  that  little  one,  "  but  see  that  she  should
not  open  that  one/'  She  opened  every  one,  and  when
she  came  to  this  one,  because  she  thought  "  what  might
be  in  it  that  she  might  not  open  it  more  than  the  rest  f
she  opened  it^  and  she  saw  her  two  sisters  there  dead,
and  she  went  down  to  the  two  knees  in  blood.  She
came  out^  and  she  was  cleaning  her  feet^  and  she  could
not  take  a  bit  of  the  blood  off  them.  The  tiny  cat
came  where  she  was,  and  she  said  to  her — "  Give  me
a  tiny  drop  of  milk,  and  I  will  clean  thy  feet  as  well  as
they  were  before."  "  I  will  give  it^  thou  creature;  I
will  give  thee  thy  desire  of  milk  if  thou  will  clean  my
feet."  The  cat  licked  her  feet  as  well  as  they  were
before.  Then  the  king  came  home,  and  they  set  down
his  dinner,  and  they  sat  at  it.  Before  they  ate  a  bit,
he  said  to  her,  "  Wert  thou  a  good  woman  to-day  ?  "
"I  was  middling,"  said  she;  I  have  no  boasting  to
make  of  myself.  "  Let  me  see  thy  feet^"  said  he.  She
let  him  see  her  feet  "  Thou  wert  a  good  woman,"
said  he ;  "  and  if  thou  boldest  on  thus  till  the  end  of
a  few  days,  thyself  and  I  will  be  married."  On  the
morrow  he  went  away  to  hunt.  When  he  went  away
the  little  cat  came  where  she  was.  "  Now,  I  will  tell
thee  in  what  way  thou  wilt  be  quickest  married  to  him,"
said  the  cat.  "  There  are,"  said  she,  "  a  lot  of  old
chests  within.  Thou  shalt  take  out  three  of  them ;  thou
shalt  clean  them.  Thou  shalt  say  to  him  next  nighty
that  he  must  leave  these  three  chests,  one  about  of
them,  in  thy  mother's  house,  as  they  are  .of  no  use
here;  that  there  are  plenty  here  without  them;  thou


i^wwi^^—^


THE  WIDOW  AND  HER  DAUGHTERS.  269

shalt  say  to  him  that  he  must  not  open  any  of  them  on
the  road,  or  else,  if  he  opens,  that  thou  wilt  leave
him ;  that  thou  wilt  go  up  into  a  tree  top,  and  that
thou  wilt  be  looking,  and  that  if  he  opens  any  of  them
that  thou  wilt  see.     Then  when  he  goes  hunting,  thou
shalt  open  the  chamber,  thou  shalt  bring  out  thy  two
sisters  j  thou  shalt  draw  on  them  the  magic  club,  and
they  will  be  as  lively  and  whole  as  they  were  before  ;
thou  shalt  clean  them  then,  and  thou  shalt  put  one  in
each  chest  of  them,  and  thou  shalt  go  thyself  into  the
third  one.     Thou  shalt  put  of  silver  and  of  gold,  as
much  in  the  chests  as  will  keep  thy  mother  and  thy
sisters  right  for  their  lives.      When  he  leaves  the
chests  in  thy  mother^s  house,  and  when  he  returns  he
will  fly  in  a  wild  rage ;  he  will  then  go  to  thy  mother's
house  in  this  fury,  and  he  will  break  in  the  door ;  be
thou  behind  the  door,  and  take  off  his  head  with  the
bar ;  and  then  he  will  be  a  king^s  son,  as  precious  as
he  was  before,  and  he  will  marry  thee.     Say  to  thy
sisters,  if  he  attempts  the  chests  to  open  them  by  the
way,  to  call  out,  *  I  see  thee,  I  see  thee,'  and  that  he
will  think  that  thou  wilt  be  calling  out  in  the  tree.'*
When  he  came  home  he  went  away  with  the  chests,
one  after  one,  till  he  left  them  in  her  mother's  house.
When  he  came  to  a  glen,  where  he  thought  she  in  the
tree  could  not  see  him,  he  began  to  let  the  chest  down
to  see  what  was  in  it ;  she  that  was  in  the  chest  called
out,  "  I  see  thee,  I  see  thee  ! "

"  Good  luck  be  on  thy  pretty  little  head,'*  said  he,
"  if  thou  canst  not  see  a  long  way  !"

lliis  was  the  way  with  him  each  journey,  till  he
left  the  chests  altogether  in  her  mother's  house.

When  he  returned  home  on  the  last  journey,  and
saw  that  she  was  not  before  him,  he  flew  in  a  wild
rage ;  he  went  back  to  the  widow's  house,  and  when


tyO  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

he  reached  the  door  he  drove  it  in  before  him.  She
was  standing  behind  the  door,  and  she  took  his  head
off  with  the  bar.  Then  he  grew  a  king's  son,  as
precious  as  ever  came  ;  there  he  was  within,  and  they
were  in  great  gladness.  She  and  himself  married,  and
they  left  with  her  mother  and  sisters,  of  gold  and
silver,  as  much  as  left  them  well  for  life.


A  BHAINTREACH.

Bha  baintreach  ann  roimhe,  's  bha  tri  nigheanan  aice,  *8  is  e  na  bha

aice  airson  am  beathachadh  gàrradh  càil.    Bha  each  mòr  glas  a'  h-

aQe  latha  'tighinn  do  'n  ghàrradh  a  dh'itheadh  a  'chàil.  *'  Thairt  an  t4

ba  shine  de  na  nigheanan  r'a  mathair  theid  mise  d*an  ghàrradh  an

dingh  's  bheir  mi  ieam  a  chnibheal,  's  cumaidhmi  *n  t-each  as  a*  cbàL"

"  Dean,"  ars' a  mathair.  Dh*  fholbh  i  mach.  Thainig  an  t-each.  Thagi

'chuigeal  as  a'  chuibheil  's  bhaail  i  e.  Lean  a*  chaigeal  ris  an  each,  's

lean  a  làmhsa  ris  a*  chuigeel.    Air  folbh  a  bha*n  t-each,  gas  an  d*

rainigecnoc  uaine,  *s  ghlaoidh  e.  **  Fosgail-fosgail  a  chnaic  uaine  *8

ieig  mac  an  righ  stigh.  Fosgail — fosgail  a  chnoic  uaine 's  leig  nighean

na  baintrich  a  stigh."    Dh'  fhosgail  an  cnoc,  's  chaidh  iad  a  stigh.

Kinn  e  uisge  blàth  d'a  casan  's  leaba  bhog  d'a  leasan,  's  chaidh  i

laidhe  an  oidhche  sin.    Mochthrath  an  la'r  na  mhaireach  nur  a  dh'

eiridh  esan,  bha  e  'dol  a  shealgaireachd.    Thug  e  dh'ise  iuchraichean

an  tighe  air  fad,  *&  thuirt  e  rithe  gum  faodadh  i  h-uile  seombar  a  stigh

fhosgladh  ach  an  t-aon ;  air  na  chunnaic  i  namh  gun  am  fear  sin .

fhosgladh;  a  dhinneir-san  a  bhi  aice  reidh  nur  a  thilleadh  e ;  's  n'  am

biodh  i  'na  bean  mhath  gum  pòsadh  e  L    Nur  a  dh'  fholbh  esan

thòisich  ise  air  fosglaidh  nan  seombraichean.  A'  h-uile  fear  mar  a  dh'

fhosgladh  i  bha  e'  dol  na  bu  bhreagha  's  na  bu  bhrfagha,  gus  an

d'  thainig  i  gus  an  fhear  a  bh'  air  a  bhacail.    Their  leatha  d^  'dh

fhaodadh  a  bhith  ann  nach  fhaodadh  1  fhosgladh  cuid(  achd.    Dh*

fhosgail  i  e,  's  bha  e  Ian  do  mnathan  uaisle  roarbh,  's  chaidh  i  'sios

gus  a'  ghlim  ann  am  full.    Thainig  i  mach  an  sin,  's  blia  i  'glanadh  a

coise,  's  ged  a  bhiodh  i  ga  glanadh  fathast  cha  b'  urrainn  i  mir  de  'n

fhuil  a  thoirt  di    Thainig  cat  crion  far  an  robh  i,  's  thuirt  1  rithe,

na'n  d'  thugadh  i  dh*  ise  dear  beag  bainne,  gun  glanadh  i  *caa  cho

math  *s  a  bha  1  riamh.    **  Thusa  'bheathaich  ghrannda  I  bi  *folbh


A  BHÀINTREAGH.  2  7  1

romhad ;  am  bheil  dùil  agad  nacb  glan  mi  f^in  Ud  aa  's  fhearr  na
thusa  ?**  **  Seadh,  seadh !  leig  dhnit  t  Chi  thu  d^  dh'  èireas  doit  ma
a  thlg  e  fi^in  dachaidh  t "  Thàinìg  esan  dachaidh,  's  chuir  ise  an
dinneir  air  a'  bhòrd,  's  shuidh  iad  sios  aice.  Ma'n  d'  ith  iad  mir
thairt  esan  rithe.  <*  An  robh  thu  a*d'  bhean  mhath  an  dingh  ?"  **  Bba,"
urs'  ise,  "  Leig  fhaicinn  dòmhsa  do  chas,  *s  innsidh  mi  dhnit  cò-aca
*bha  na  nach  robh."  Leig  i  fhaicinn  da  an  tè  'bha  glan.  <*  Leig
fhaicinn  domh,  an  te  eile "  urs'  esan.  Nar  a  chnnnaic  e'  *n  fhuil,
<<  O !  ho  I"  urs'  e,  's  dh'  ^iridh  e,  's  ghabh  e  'n  taagh,  s  thug  e  'n  oeann
di,  's  thilg  e  'stigh  do  'n  t-seombar  i  leis  an  fheadhain  mharbh,  eile.

Chaidh  e  laidhe  an  oidhche  sin,  *s  mochthrath  an  la  'r  na
mhàireach  dh'  fholbh  e  gu  gàrradh  na  baintrich  a  rithisd.  Thuirt
an  darna  te  do  nigheanan  ua  baintrich  r'a  màthair.  **  Th^id  mi
mach  an  diugh,  's  cumaidh  mi  'n  t-each  glas  as  a'  ghàrradh."  Chaidh
i  'mach  a'  fuaghaL  Bhuail  i  'rud  a  bha  aice  'ga  'fhuaghal  air  an
each ;  lean  an  t*aodach  ris  an  each ;  's  lean  a  làmh  ris  an  aodach.
Ràinig  iad  an  cnoc.  Ghlaoidh  e  mur  a  b'  àbhaist  dha  ris  a'  chnoc.
Dh'  fhosgail  an  cnoc,  's  chaidh  iad  a  stigh.  Rinn  e  msge  blàth  d*a
casan,  's  leaba  bbog  d'a  leasan,  's  chaidh  iad  a  laidhe  an  oidhche  sin.
Mochthrath  an  la'r  na  mhàireach  blia  esan  a'  folbh  a  shealgaireachd«
's  thuirt  e  rithe  h-uile  seombar  a  stigh  fhosgladh,  ach  an  aon  fhear,  's
air  na  chunnaic  i  riamh  gun  am  fear  sin  fhosgladh.  Dh'  fhosgail  i
h-uile  seombar  gus  an  d'  thkinig  i  gus  an  fhear-  bheag,  's  air  leatha
d^  dh'  fhaodadh  a  bhith  anns  an  fhear  sin  na  's  motha  na  each  nach
fhaodadh  i  'fhos-gladh.  Dh'  fhosgail  i  e,  's  bha  e  Ian  de  mhnatban
uaisle  marbha,  's  a  piuthar  f^in  'nam  measg.  Chaidh  i  sios  'ga  gliin
ann  am  foil.  Thàinig  i  'mach,  's  bha  i  'ga  glanadh  f^in,  's  thàinig  an
cat  beag  ma'n  cuairt,  's  thuirt  i  rithe.  ''*  Ma  bheir  thu  dbòmhsa  deur
crion  bainne glanaidh mi  do  chas  cho  math 's  a  bha i  riamh? "  **  Thus*
a  bheathaich  ghrannda !  Gabh  romhad !  Am  bheil  dhil  agad  nach
glan  mi  fèin  i  na  's  fhearr  na  thusa  ?  "  **  Chi  thu,"  urs'  an  cat,  '*  de
dh'  èireas  duit  nor  a  thig  e  fein  dachaidh."  Nur  a  thàinig  e
dhachaidh  chuir  ise  sios  an  dinneir,  's  shuidh  iad  aice.  Thuirt  esan
rithe.  **An  robh  thua'd'  bhean  mhath  an  lUugh?"  **  Bha,"  urs'  ise.
*^  Leig  fhaicinn  domh  do  chas,  's  innsidh  mi  dhuit  cb-aca  'bha  na  nach
robh."  Leig  i  fhaicinn  da  'chas  a  bha  glan.  '*  Leig  fhaicinn  domh
an  te  eile,"  urs'  esan.  Leig  i  fhaicinn  i.  **  O  ho  I "  urs'  esan,  's  ghabh
e  'n  tuagh,  's  thug  e  'n  ceann  di.

Chaidh  e  'laidhe  an  oidhche  sin.  Mochthrath  an  la  'r  na  mhàir-
each,  urs'  an  te  b'  òige  r'a  màthair,  's  i  figheadh  stocaidh.  **  Th^id
mise  'mach  le  m'  stocaidh  an  diugh,  's  fairidh  mi  'n  t-each  glas;  chi  mi
àè  thachair  do  m'  dha  phiuthair ;  's  tillidh  mi  dh'  innseadh  dhuibhse."


27*'  '^'^BST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

**  Dean,"  urs'  a  màthair,  's  fench  nach  fan  thn  air £dlbli.'*  Chaidh  i' mach,
's  thàinig  an  t-each.  Bhuail  i  'n  stocaidh  air  an  each.  Lean  an  stocaidh
ris  an  each,  *b  lean  an  làmh  rìs  an  stocaidh.  Dh'  fholbh  iad,  *s  ràinig  lad
an  cnoc  uaine.  Ghlaoidh  e  mar  a  b^  àbhaistda,  's  fhuair  iad  a  stigh.
Rinn  e  uisge  blàth  d*a  casan  *8  leaba  bhog  d*a  leasan,  's  chaidh  iad  a
laidhe  an  oidhche  sin.  An  la  V  na  mhkireach  bha  e  'folbh  a  shealg-
aireachd,  *8  thnirt  e  rithise  na'n  dèanadh  i  bean  mhaih  gus  an  till-
eadh  e,  ann  am  beagan  Ikithean  gum  biodh  iad  pòsda.  Thug  e  dhi
na  h-iachraichean,  's  thnirt  e  rithe  gum  faodadh  i  h-uile  seombar  a
bha  stigh  fhosgladh  ach  am  fear  beag  ud,— ach  fench  nach  fosgladh
i  'm  fear  ud.  Dh*  fhosgail  i  h-uile  gin ;  's  nar  a  thàinig  i  gus  an
fhear  so,  air  leatha  d^  'bhiodh  ann  nach  fhaodadh  i  'fhosgladh,  na  's
motba  na  each.  Dh'  fhosgail  i  e,  's  chunnaic  i  'da  phiuthar  marbh
an  sin,  's  chaidh  i  sios  g'a  da  ghliin  ann  am  ftdl.  Thàinig  i  mach,
's  bha  i  'glanadh  a  cas,  's  cha  V  urrainn  i  mir  de  'n  fhuil  a  thoirt  diu.
Tbàinig  an  cat  crion  far  an  robh  i,  's  thuirt  i  rithe,  "  Thoir  dhòmhsa
deur  ciion  buinne,  's  glanaidh  mi  do  chasan  cho  math  's  a  bha  iad
riamh."  **  Bheir  a  chreutair—  bheir  mise  dhuit  do  dhiol  bainne  ma
ghlanas  thu  mo  chasan."  Dh'  imlich  an  cat  a  casan  cho  math 's  a
bha  iad  riamh.  Thàinig  an  ligh  an  sin  dachaidh,  's  chuir  iad  a  sios
a  dhinneir,  's  shuidh  iad  aice.  Ma'n  d'  ith  iad  mir  thuirt  esan
rithe,  **  An  robh  thusa  a'd'  bhean  mhath  an  diugh  ?  "  **  Bha  mi
meadhonach,"  urs'  ise,  *'  cha  'n  'eil  uaill  sam  bith  agam  r'a  dhèanadh
asam  fdin."  **  Leig  fhaidnn  domh  do  chasan,"  urs'  esan.  **  Leig  i
fhaicinn  da  *casan.  Bha  thusa  a'd'  bbean  mhath,"  urs'  esan,  **  's  ma
leanas  thu  mur  sin  gu  ceann  beagan  làithean  bidh  thu  fh^in  agna
mise  posda."  An  là'r  na  mhàireach  dh'  fholbh  esan  a  shealgaireachd.
Nur  a  dh'  fholbh  esan  tbàinig  an  cat  beag  far  an  robh  ise  J  <*  Nis
innsidh  mise  dhuit  d^  'n  dòigh  air  an  luaithe  am  bi  thu  pòsd'  air,"
urs'  an  cat  **  Tha,"  urs*  ise,  **  dorlach  de  sheanachisdeachan  a  stigh;
bheir  thu  mach  tri  dhiu ;  glanaidh  thu  iad ;  their  thu  ris  an  ath
oidhche  gum  feum  e  na  tri  chisdeachan  sin,  te  ma  seach  dhiu,  fhàg-
ail  ann  an  tigh  do  mhàthar,  chionn  nach  'eil  feum  an  so  orra,  gu
'bheil  na  leòir  ann  as  an  ioghnais ;  their  thu  ris  nach  fhaod  e  gin
dhiu  fhosgladh  air  an  rathad,  air  no  ma  dh*  fhosglas  gum  fkg  thu  e ;
gun  d'  th^id  thu  ann  am  bàrr  craoibhe,  *8  gum  bi  thu  'g  amharc,  's  ma
dh*  fhosglas  e  gin  dhiu  gum  faic  thu.  An  sin  nur  a  th^d  esan  a
shealgaireachd  fosglaidh  thu  *n  seombar ;  bheir  thu  'mach  do  dha
phiuthar ;  taimidh  thu  'n  slachdan  draoidheachd  orra ;  's  bidh  iad
cho  beb,  shlàn  's  a  bha  iad  riamh.  Glanaidh  thn  iad  an  sin,  's  cuir-
idh  thu  iè  anns  gach  cisde  dhiu,  agus  theid  thu  f^in  's  an  treas  t^.
Cniridh  thu  de  dh'  airgiod  agus  de  dh'  or  anns  na  cisdeachan  na


mm^^mmmm'm'


A  JBHAINTRBAOH.  ZJ  3

chamas  do  mhàthair  agus  do  pbeathraichean  ceart  r*am  beò.  Kar
a  dh'  fhàgas  e  na  cisdeachan  ann  an  tigh  do  mhathar,  's  a  tliiUeaa  e,
theid  e  ann  am  feirg  choimheach.  Folbhaidh  e  *n  sin  gu  tigli  -do
mhàthar  anns  an  fheirg  so,  's  brìsdidh  e  stìgh  an  dorus.  Bi  thusa
cùl  an  dorais,  's  thoìr  dheth  an  ceann  leis  an  t-sàbh,  's  bidh  e  *n  sin  *na
mhac  lìgh  cho  àlaìnn  's  a  bba  e  riamb,  *8  pòsaidh  e  tbu.  Abair  rì
d'  pheatbraichean,  ma  bheìr  e  Ihtnb  air  na  cisdeachan  fhosgladh  air
an  rathad  lad  a  gUaodhach,  "  Chi  mi  thu/'  chi  mi  tbu,  **  air  alt,  's
gon  saoiF  e  gar  tosa  a  bhios  a  glaodhach  'sa'  chraoibh.*'

Nur  a  thill  esan  dachaidb,  dh'  fholbh  e  leis  na  cisdeachan,  te  an
deigh  te,  gas  an  d'  fh^g  e  'n  tigh  a  màtbar  iad.  Nor  a  thàinig  e  gu
gleann  far  anrobh  e  smaointeachadh  nach  fhaiceadh  ise  'sa'  chraoibh  e,
thug  e  làmh  air  a'  chisde  leigeil  sios  airson  faicinn  d^  'bh'  innte.
Ghlaoidhan  te  'bha  'sa  chisde,  **  Chi  mi  tha — ^Chi  mi  thu."  "  Piseach
air  do  cheann  beag,  bòidheach,"  urs'  esan,  *'  man  am  fad'  a  chi  thu."
B'e  so  a  bu  dual  dha  air  gach  siubhal  gas  an  d'  fhàg  e  na  cisdeachan
air  fad  an  tigh  a  mathar.  Nur  a  thill  e  dhachaidh  air  an  t-siubhal  ma
dheireadh,  's  a  chunnaic  e  nach  robh  ise  roimhe,  chaidh  e  ann  am
feirg  choimheach.  Dh'  fholbh  e  air  ais  gu  tigh  na  baintrich,  's  nor
a  ràinig  e  'n  dorus  chuir  e  roimhe  e.  Bha  ise  'na  seasamh  air  chi  an
doruis,  's  thug  1  'n  ceann  deth  leis  an  t-sàbh.  Dh'  fhàs  e  'n  sin
'na  mhac  righ  cho  kluinn  'sa  thàinig  riamh.  Chaidh  e  stigh  an
sin,  's  bha  iad  ann  an  's  bha  iad  ann  an  toil-inn  tinn  mhòr.  Phbs
e  fh^in  agus  ise,  's  rinn  iad  banais  aighearach  shunndach«  Chaidh
iad  dachaidh  do  'n  chaisteal,  's  bha  iad  gu  math  comhla,  's  fhaair  a
màthair  's  a  peathreuchean  na  'chum  gu  math  r'am  beo  iad.

From  Catherine  Milloy,  Kilmenj,  Islay,  March  1859.

An  old  woman  of  the  name  of  Hutton^  in  Cowal,  told  this  to
Catharine  Milloy^  a  Cowal  woman,  married  to  a  farmer  at  Kil-
meny,  Angus  MacOeachy,  a  Campbelltown  man.  Written  down
from  her  dictation  by  Hector  MacLeany  Islay,  May  1859.

This  story  is  something  like  The  Hoodie  and  The  Daughter
of  the  King  of  the  Skies ;  it  has  a  bit  like  The  Mermaid.

I  have  another  version,  told  by  Hugh  Mac  in  deor,  an  old
man  at  Bowmore,  in  Islay,  who  can  recite  a  great  many  more
Btories ;  he  borders  upon  eighty,  is  very  poor,  and  has  had  but
little  education.  He  tells  MacLean  that  be  learnt  his  stories
long  ago  from  one  Angus  Brown,  who  was  known  by  the  soubri-
quet of  Aonghas  Gruama,  frowning  Angus,  of  whom  very  queer
anecdotes  are  told.    Mac  in  deor  was  able  to  play  the  pipes  in

VOL.  n.  T


274  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

his  day.  His  father  was  conBÌdered  an  excellent  piper;  and  his
son  Dugald  is  allowed  to  be  one  of  the  best  pipers  in  the
island

2d.  A  poor  woman  had  three  daughters  and  a  kail-yard,  and  a
horse  used  to  come  every  day  to  eat  the  kail.  The  daughters
went,  one  after  the  other,  to  drive  him  away  with  the  distaff,  and
the  distaff  stuck  to  the  horse  and  to  their  hands,  and  he  dragged
them  in  turn  to  a  castle.  (It  is  not  said  thai  the  horse  became  a
man.)  The  first  was  the  eldest  who  slept  in  the  castle  ;  on  the
morrow  she  got  a  key,  and  was  told  to  look  at  all  the  rooms  but
one  ;  and  to  milk  the  "  Three  Red-brown  Hornless  Cows."  She
looked  into  the  room  of  course,  and  sank  to  her  knee  in  blood  ;
and  "  a  great  grey  cat "  came  about  and  asked  for  a  drop  milk,
and  was  refused.

When  the  "  giant "  came  home  he  asked  to  see  her  foot,  and
it  was  red  with  blood  ;  and  he  smote  her  with  the  "  White  Glave
of  Light,"  and  killed  her.

The  very  same  thing  happened  to  the  second.  The  youngest
milked  the  three  Red-brown  Hornless  Cows ;  but  peeped,  and
sank  to  her  knee  in  blood,  and  saw  her  two  dead  sisters.  The
great  grey  cat  asked  for  milk,  and  got  it  and  drank  it,  and  be-
came  a  splendid  woman,  and  told  her  that  she  was  a  king^s
daughter  under  spells  ;  and  she  told  her  to  take  some  of  the  milk
and  to  clean  her  foot  with  it,  and  that  it  would  not  leave  a  speck
of  the  blood  on  her ;  and  so  she  did.

'*  Now,"  said  the  king's  daughter,  "  when  he  comes  in  and
sees  that  thy  foot  is  clean,  he  will  marry  thee ;  but  thou  wilt  not
be  long  alive  if  thou  art  with  him.  When  he  goes  to  the  hunting
hill,  thou  shalt  take  with  thee  am  ballan  ioc,  vessel  of  balsam
{baUan  is  a  teat),  and  rub  it  against  the  mouth  of  thy  big  sister ;
and  thou  shalt  put  her  into  a  sack,  and  gold  and  silver  with  her,
and  thou  shalt  stuff  the  sack  with  hay  ;  and  when  he  comes  home
tell  him  that  there  is  a  whisp  for  the  cow,  and  to  leave  it  with
thy  mother ;  and  the  next  day  do  the  same  with  thy  second
sister ;  and  on  the  third  day,  I  will  put  thyself  and  the  white
glave  of  light  into  the  sack.  When  he  knows  that  thou  art  not
with  him,  he  will  go  after  thee ;  and  when  he  is  coming  in  at  the
door,  "  sciAP "  the  head  off  him  with  the  sword,  and  hold  the


THE  WIDOW  AND  HER  DAUGHTERS.  275

sword  on  the  bmiob  chailleach  (spinal  marrow)  till  it  cools,  be-
fore the  bead  goes  on  again."

Tbe  girl  did  as  sbe  was  told  ;  and  be  took  tbe  three  sisters
afive,  and  bis  gold  and  bis  sword,  in  tbe  sacks  with  tbe  bay  on
bis  back  to  tbe  mother,  and  said  each  time,  "  So  A  chailleach
ensf  AauD  sop  don  bho,*'  *'  Here  carlin,  there  thou  bast  a  whisp
for  tbe  cow."

.  On  tbe  third  day  be  went  home,  and  when  be  lay  down  and
fonnd  that  she  was  not  there,  be  went  to  the  poor  woman's  house,
and  tbe  youngest  daughter  chopped  bis  bead  off  as  be  went  in  at
the  door ;  and  then  she  went  back  to  tbe  castle  and  stayed  in  it
with  tbe  king's  daughter.

3d.  This  is  manifestly  tbe  same  story  as  "  Tbe  history  of  Mr.
Greenwood,"  in  Mr.  Peter  Bucban's  unpublished  MS.  The
scene  of  that  story  is  laid  in  the  Western  Isles ;  it  is  brought
down  to  a  much  later  period  than  tbe  Gaelic  story  ;  and  tbe  lan-
guage is  not  that  of  peasants.

It  is  tbe  same  as  tbe  Old  Dame  and  her  Hen,  Norse  Tales,
No.  in.,  published  1859,  and  it  resembles  bits  of  other  tales  in
tbe  same  collection.  It  is  tbe  same  as  Fitcher's  Vogel,  Grimm,
No.  46;  and  Old  Rink  Rank,  196.  It  is  in  French  as  Barbe  Bleu  ;
in  English  as  Bluebeard  ;  and  according  to  tbe  notes  in  Grimm's
third  volume,  it  is  very  old  and  very  widely  spread.  Of  all  these
the  Norse  and  Gaelic  resemble  each  other  most.

Tbe  same  idea  pervades  a  number  of  other  Gaelic  stories,
namely,  that  of  a  people  living  underground,  who  assumed  tbe
shape  of  various  creatures,  and  lived  by  bunting ;  possessed  gold
and  silver,  and  swords ;  carried  off  women  and  children ;  ate
some,  murdered  others,  and  kept  a  larder  of  dead  gentlewomen,
whom  it  appears  that  they  carried  off,  married,  and  murdered.


XLIL
THE  TALE   OF   THE   SOLDIER

From  John  MacDonald,  travelling  tinker.

nPHEEE  was  an  old  soldier  once,  and  he  left  the
-*-  army.  He  went  to  the  top  of  a  hill  that  was  at
the  upper  end  of  the  town  land,  and  he  said —

"  Well,  may  it  be  that  the  mischief  may  come  and
take  me  with  him  on  his  back,  the  next  time  that  I
come  again  in  sight  of  this  town."

Then  he  was  walking  till  he  came  to  the  house  of
a  gentleman  that  was  thera  John  asked  the  gentle-
man if  he  would  get  leave  to  stay  in  his  house  that
night  "  Well,  then,"  said  the  gentleman,  "  since
thou  art  an  old  soldier,  and  hast  the  look  of  a  man  of
courage,  without  dread  or  fear  in  thy  face,  there  is  a
castle  at  the  side  of  yonder  wood,  and  thou  mayest
stay  in  it  till  day.  Thou  shalt  have  a  pipe  and  baccy,
a  cogie  full  of  whisky,  and  a  bible  to  read."

When  John  got  his  supper,  he  took  himself  to  the
castle  ;  he  set  on  a  great  fire,  and  when  a  while  of  the
night  had  come,  there  came  two  tawny  women  in,  and
a  dead  man's  kist  between  them.  They  threw  it  at
the  fireside,  and  they  sprang  out  John  arose,  and
with  the  heel  of  his  foot  he  drove  out  its  end,  and  he
dragged  out  an  old  hoary  bodach,  and  he  set  him  sit-
ting in  the  great  chair ;  he  gave  him  a  pipe  and  baccy,
and  a  cogie  of  whisky,  but  the  bodach  let  them  fall  on


THE  TALE  OF  THE  SOLDIER.  277

the  floor.  "  Poor  man,"  said  John,  "  the  cold  is  on
thee."  John  laid  himself  stretched  in  the  bed,  and
he  left  the  bodach  to  toast  himself  at  the  fireside  ;  but
about  the  crowing  of  the  cock  he  went  away.

The  gentleman  came  well  early  in  the  morning.

"  What  rest  didst  thou  find  John?"

"  Good  rest,"  said  John  "  thy  father  was  not  the
man  that  would  frighten  me."

"  Right,  good  John,  thou  shalt  have  two  hundred
*  pund,^  and  lie  to-night  in  the  castle."

"  I  am  the  man  that  will  do  that,"  said  John ;  and
that  night  it  was  the  very  like.  Theile  came  three
tawny  women,  and  a  dead  man's  kist  with  them
amongst  them.  They  threw  it  up  to  the  side  of  the
fireplace,  and  they  took  their  soles  out  (of  that).

John  arose,  and  with  the  heel  of  his  foot  he  broke
the  head  of  the  kist,  and  he  dragged  out  of  it  the  old
hoary  man ;  and  as  he  did  the  night  before  he  set  him
sitting  in  the  big  chair,  and  gave  him  pipe  and  baccy,
and  he  let  them  fall.  *'  Oh  !  poor  man,"  said  John,
"  cold  is  on  thee."  Then  he  gave  him  a  cogie  of  drink,
and  he  let  that  fall  also.  ''  Oh  !  poor  man,  thou  art
cold."

The  bodach  went  as  he  did  the  night  before;
"but,"  said  John  to  himself^  "  if  I  stay  here  this  night,
and  that  thou  shouldst  come,  thou  shalt  pay  my  pipe
and  baccy,  and  my  cogie  of  drink."

The  gentleman  came  early  enough  in  the  morning,
and  he  asked,  "  What  rest  didst  thou  find  last  night,
John?"  "Good  rest,"  said  John,  "it  was  not  the
hoary  bodach,  thy  father,  that  would  put  fear  on  me."

"Och!"  said  the  gentleman,  "  if  thou  stayest  to-
night thou  shalt  have  three  hundred  ^ puvd* "

"  It*s  a  bargain,"  said  John.

When  it  was  a  while  of  the  night  there  came  four


278  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

tawny  women^  and  a  dead  man's  kist  with  them
amongst  them;  and  they  let  that  down  at  the  side  of
John.

John  arose,  and  he  drew  his  foot  and  he  drove  the
head  out  of  the  kist,  and  he  dragged  out  the  old  hoary
man  and  he  set  him  in  the  big  chair.  He  reached
him  the  pipe  and  the  baccy,  the  cup  and  the  drink,
but  the  old  man  let  them  fall,  and  they  were  broken.

"  Och,"  said  John,  before  thou  goest  this  night
thou  shalt  pay  me  all  thou  hast  broken  ;'*  but  word
there  came  not  from  the  head  of  the  bodach.  Then
John  took  the  belt  of  his  "  abersgaic,"*  and  he  tied
the  bodach  to  Ids  side,  and  he  took  him  with  him  to
bed.  When  the  heath-cock  crowed,  the  bodach  asked
him  to  let  him  go.

"Pay  what  thou  hast  broken  first,"  said  John.
"  I  will  tell  thee,  then,"  said  the  old  man,  "  there  is  a
cellar  of  drink  under,  below  me,  in  which  there  is
plenty  of  drink,  tobacco,  and  pipes  ;  there  is  another
little  chamber  beside  the  cellar,  in  which  there  is  a
caldron  full  of  gold  ;  and  under  the  threshold  of  the
big  door  there  is  a  crocky  full  of  silver.  Thou  sawest
the  women  that  came  with  me  to-night  ?"

"  I  saw,"  said  John.

"  Well,  there  thou  hast  four  women  from  whom  I
took  the  cows,  and  they  in  extremity  ;  tbey  are  going
with  me  every  night  thus,  punishing  me ;  but  go  thou
and  tell  my  son  how  I  am  being  wearied  out.  Let
him  go  and  pay  the  cows,  and  let  him  not  be  heavy
on  the  poor.  Thou  thyself  and  he  may  divide  the
gold  and  silver  between  you,  and  marry  thyself  my  old
girl ;  but  mind,  give  plenty  of  gold  of  what  is  left  to
the  poor,  on  whom  I  was  too  hard,  and  I  will  find  rest
in  the  world  of  worlds."

*  Haversack,


THE  TALE  OF  THE  SOLDIEB.  279

The  gentleman  came,  and  John  told  him  as  I  have
told  thee,  but  John  would  not  marry  the  old  girl  of
the  hoary  bodach.

At  the  end  of  a  day  or  two  John  would  not  stay
longer ;  he  filled  his  pockets  full  of  the  gold,  and  he
asked  the  gentleman  to  give  plenty  of  gold  to  the  poor.
He  reached  the  house  (went  home),  but  he  was  weary-
ing at  home,  and  he  had  rather  be  back  with  the  regi-
ment. He  took  himself  off  on  a  day  of  days,  and  he
reached  the  hill  above  the  town  from  which  he  went
away  ;  but  who  should  come  to  him  but  the  Mischief

"  Hoth!  both  I  John,  thou  hast  come  back?"

"  Hoth !  on  thyself,"  quoth  John,  "  I  came  ;  who
art  thou  Ì"

"  I  am  the  Mischief;  the  man  to  whom  thou  gavest
thyself  when  thou  was  here  last"

"Ai!  ai!"  said  John,  "it's  long  since  I  heard
tell  of  thee,  but  I  never  saw  thee  before.  There  is
glamour  on  my  eyes,  I  will  not  believe  that  it  is  thou
at  all ;  but  make  a  snake  of  thyself  and  I  will  believe
thee."

The  Mischief  did  this.

"  Make  now  a  lion  of  roaring."

The  Mischief  did  this.

«  Spit  fire  now  seven  nules  behind  thee,  and  seven
miles  before  thee."

The  Mischief  did  this.

"  Well,"  said  John,  "  since  I  am  to  be  a  servant
with  thee,  come  into  my  *  abersgaic,'  and  I  will  carry
thee  ;  but  thou  must  not  come  out  till  I  ask  thee,  or
else  the  bargain's  broke."

The  Mischief  promised,  and  he  did  this.

"  Now,"  said  John,  "  I  am  going  to  see  a  brother
of  mine  that  is  in  the  regiment,  but  keep  thou  quiet"

So  now,  John  went  into  the  town ;  and  one  yon-


28o  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

der,   and  one  here,  would  cry,   "  There  is*  John  the
*  desairtair/  "

There  was  gripping  of  John,  and  a  court  held  on
him ;  and  so  it  was  that  he  was  to  be  hanged  abont
mid-day  on  the  morrow,  and  John  asked  no  favour  but
to  be  floored  with  a  bullet

The  ^  Coimeal"  said,  "  Since  he  was  an  old
soldier,  and  in  the  army  so  long,  that  he  should  have
his  asking."

On  the  morrow  when  John  was  to  he  shot,  and  the
soldiers  foursome  round  all  about  him,

"  What  is  that  they  are  saying  1"  said  the  Mischief.
"  Let  me  amongst  them  and  I  wont  be  long  scattering
them."

"  Cuist !  cuist ! "  said  John.

"What's  that  speaking  to  thee?"  said  the  Coir-
neaL

"  Oh !  it's  but  a  white  mouse,"  said  John.

" Black  or  white,"  said  the  Coimeal,  ''don't  thou
let  her  out  of  the  '  abersgaic'  and  thou  shalt  have  a
letter  of  loosing,  and  let's  see  thee  no  more."

John  went  away,  and  in  the  mouth  of  night  he
went  into  a  bam  where  there  were  twelve  men
threshing.

"Oh!  lads,"  said  John,  "here's  for  you  my  old
abersgaic,  and  take  a  while  threshing  it,  it  is  so  hard
that  it  is  taking  the  skin  off  my  back."

They  took  as  much  as  two  hours  of  the  watch  at  the
abersgaic  with  the  twelve  flaQs ;  and  at  last  every  blow
they  gave  it,  it  would  leap  to  the  top  of  the  bam,  and  it
was  casting  one  of  the  threshers  now  and  again  on  his
back.  When  they  saw  that,  they  asked  him  to  be  out
of  that,  himself  and  his  abersgaic ;  they  would  not  be-
lieve but  that  the  Mischief  was  in  it.

Then  he  went  on  his  journey,  and  he  went  into  a


THE  TALE  OF  THE  SOLDIER.  2  8  I

smitliy  where  there  were  twelve  smiths  striking  their
great  hammers.

"  Here^s  for  you,  lads,  an  old  ahersgaic,  and  I  will
give  you  half-a-crown,  and  take  a  while  at  it  with  the
twelve  great  hammers ;  it  is  so  hard  that  it  is  taking
the  skin  off  my  back."

But  that  was  fun  for  the  smiths;  it  was  good
sport  for  them  the  ahersgaic  of  the  soldier  ;  but  every
"  sgaile "  it  got,  it  was  bounding  to  the  top  of  the
smithy.  "  Go  out  of  this,  thyself  and  it,"  said  they ;
"we  will  not  beheve  but  that  the  'Bramman'*  is  in  it"

So  then  John  went  on  and  the  Mischief  on  his
back,  and  he  reached  a  great  furnace  that  was  there.

"  Where  art  thou  going  now,  John?"  said  the  Mis-
chief

"  Patience  a  little,  and  thou 'It  see  that,"  said  John.

"  Let  me  out,"  said  the  Mischief"  and  I  will  never
put  trouble  on  thee  in  this  world."

"  Nor  in  the  next  ?"  said  John.

"  That's  it,"  said  the  Mischief

"  Stop  then,"  said  John,  "till  thou  get  a  smoke ;"
and  so  saying,  John  cast  the  ahersgaic  and  the  Donas
into  the  middle  of  the  furnace,  and  himself  and  the
furnace  went  as  a  green  flame  of  fire  to  the  skies.


AN  SAIGHDEAR.

Bha  seann  saighdear  ann,  aon  aair,  &gus  tbreig  e  'n  t-arm.  Chaidh
e  gn  mallach  cnoc  *bba  'm  braigh  'bbaile,  agus  thabbairt  e,  **  6a  ma
th'  ann  a  thig  an  Donas,  agus  mise  a  thoirt  leis  air  a  dhmiin,  au  ath
uair  a  thig  mise  an  sealladh  a  bhaile  so  a  rithist"  Bha  e  so  a  cois-
eachd,  gns  an  d*  thainig  e  gn  tigh  duin'  nasail  a  bha  *n  sin.    Dh*

*  This  word  I  have  never  met  before.


282  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

fheocaich  Iain  do  *n  duin'  uasal,  **  Am  feadadh  e  fantainn  na  tbigb
air  an  oidhche  sin  ?  "    **  Mata,"  ars'  an  duin'  nasal,  **  bho  *n  is  seann
saighdear  thn,  agas  coslas  daine  calma  gun  f  hiamh  na  eagal  na  d'
ghnttis,  tha  caisteal  ri  taobh  na  coille  sin  thall,  agus  feuda  tu  fant-
ainn ann  gu  latba;  glieibb  thn  piob  's  tombaca,  coach  Ikn  nisge  agns
Biobnll  gu  lenbbadh.**     Dnr  a  f  hnair  Iain  a  shuipeir,  thug  e  'n
Caisteal  air.    Chuir  e  teine  mòr  air,  agns  dar  a  thainig  tacan  do  'n
oidhche  thainig  dithis  mhnathan  ruadh  a  steach,  's  ciste  duine  mhairbh
eatorral     Thilg  iad  i  ri  taobh  na  teallaich,  's  leum  iad  a  mach.
Dh*  eirich  Iain,  's  le  sail  a  cboise,  chuir  e  'n  ceann  aiste.    Tharminn
e  mach  seann  bbodach  liath,  agus  chuir  e  'na  shuidhe  anns  a'  chathair
mhbir  e :  thug  e  piob  's  tombaoa  dha,  agus  coach  oisge,  ach  leig  am
bodach  leo  tniteam  air  an  urlar.  '*  A  dhoine  bhochd/'  ars'  Iain,  "  tha
'm  fuachd  ort."    Chaidh  Iain  'na  shineadh  'san  leabaidh,  's  dh'  fhàg
e'm  bodach  ga  gharadh  ri  tcabh  a'  ghealbham;  ach  mo  ghairm
choileach  dh'  fbalbh  e.      Thainig   an   duin*  uasal  go  math  moch
'sa  mhadoinn.    <*  De  'n  tàmh  a  fhnair  tho,  Iain  ?"    '<  Tàmh  maith,
ars'  Iain,  "cha  be  t'  athair  am  fear  a  chuireadh  eagal  ormsa.'*
"  Ro  mhaith,  Iain;  gheibh  tho  da cheud  pund,  agus  luidh  a  nochd  'sa
chaisteal."    **  'S  mise  an  doin'  a  ni  sin,"  thuirt  Iain :  agos  air  an
oidhche  so,  b'e  'leithid  cheodna.    Thainig  triur  mhnathan  ruadh,  's
ciste  duine  mhairbh  acaeadar  iad.    Thilg  iad  suas  i  ri  taobh  na  teall-
aich,  's  thug  iad  na  biiinn  asda.  Dh'  einch  Iain 's  le  sail  a  choise,  bhrist
e  ceann  na  ciste,  's  shlaod  e  aif^te  an  seann  duine  liath,  agus  mar  a
rinn  e  an  oidhche  roimhe,  chuir  e  sa'  chathair  mhòir  e.    Thug  e  dha
piob  's  tombaca,  's  leig  e  leo  tuiteam.  "  A  dhuine  bhochd,"  ars'  Iain,
^  tha  fnachd  ort."    Thug  e  'n  so  cnach  Ian  dibhe  dha  's  leig  e  le  so
tuiteam  cuideachd.    **  O  t  a  dhuine  bhochd,  tha  fuachd  ort"    Dh'
fhalbh  am  bodach,  mar  a  rinn  e  'n  oidhche  roimhe.    **  Ach,"  ars*
Iain  ris  fhein,  **m&  dh'  fhanas  mis'  an  so  a  nochd,  agus  gun  d'  thig
thusa,  paidhidh  tusa  mo  phiob,  's  mo  thombaca,  's  mo.chuach  dhibhe."
Thainig  an  duin'  uasal  gle  mhoch  'sa  mhadninn,  's  dh'  fhoighneachd  e^
"  De  'n  tàmh  a  fhuair  tho  'n  raoir,  Iain  V  "  «  Tàmh  math,"  ars'  Iain,
«  cba  be  'm  bodach  liath  t'  athair  a  chuireadh  eagal  ormsa."  "Ach,"
ars'  an  duin'  uasal,  **  ma  dh'  fhanas  to  'nochd,  gheibh  thu  fri  cheud
pund."     **  'S  bargain  e,"  ars'  Iain.     'Nuair  a  bha  e  tacain  do  'n
oidhche,  thainig  ceathrar  do  mhnathan  ruadha,  's  ciste  duiiie  mhairbh
aoa  eadar  iad,  's  leig  iad  sud  sios  ri  taobh  Iain.    Dh'  eirich  Iain,  's
tharminn  e  'chas,  's  chuir  e  'n  ceann  as  a  chiste,  's  tharruinn  e  mach
an  seann  duine  liath,  's  chuir  e  sa  chathair  mhoir  e.  Shin  e  dha  piob
's  tombaca,  an  com  's  an  deoch,  ach  leig  an  seann  duine  leo  tuiteam,
's  bhristeadh  iad,    Ach  thubhairt  Iain,  **  Ma'm  fiilbh  thusa  'nochd


AN  SAIOHDEAR.  283

paidhidh  tu  dhomhsa  na  bhrist  thu/'  ach  fàcal  cha  d'  thainig  a  ceann
a'  bhodaich.  Ghabh  Tain  an  so  crios  abar^aic,  agos  cheangail  e  'm
bodach  ri  chliathaicli,  's  thag  e  leis  a  luidhe  e.  Dar  a  ghoir  an  coil-
each  fraoich  dh*  iarr  am  bodach  air  a  leigeil  as.  '*  Paidh  na  bhrist
thii  'n  toiseach,*^  ars'  Iain.  "  Innse  mise  dhuit  mata.'*  ars'  an  seann
daine,  tha  seilear  dibhe  shios  fotham,  anna  am  bheil  pailteas  dibhe,
tombaca  's  pioban :  tha  seomar  beag  eile  laimh  ns  an  t-seilear,  anna
am  bheil  coire  Ian  òir,  agas  fo  starsnaich  an  doruis  mhoir^  tha  crog-
an  Ian  airgiod.  Chunnaic  thu  na  mnathan  ud  a  thainig  leanua
'nochd."  '*  Chonnaic,"  ars'  Iain.  **  WeH,  sin  agad  ceathrar  rnhnathaii
bho  'n  d'  thag  mise  na  mairt^  agns  lad  'na  n  èigin ;  tha  iad  a  falbh
leamsa  na  h-uil*  oidhche  mar  so  ga  m'  phianadh  ;  ach  falbh  thusa,
agus  innis  do  m*  mhac,  mar  tha  mis'  air  mo  shàrachadh  ;  falbhadh
esan  agns  paidheadh  e  na  mairt»  agus  na  biodh  e  trom  air  a  bhochd.
Feuda  tu  fhein  agas  esan  an  t-br  's  an  t-airgiod  a  roinn  eadaruibh,  agns
pbs  fhein  mo  sheann  nighean,  ach  cnimhnich  thoir  pailteas  òir  do  na
th&  Uathair  do  na  bochdan,  air  an  robh  mise  ro  chruaidb,  agns  gheibh
mise  fois  gn  saoghal  nan  saoghal."  Thainig  an  doin'  nasal,  agus  dh'
innis  Iain  dba  mar  a  dh'  innis  mise  dliuitse,  ach  cha  pbosadh  Iain
seann  nighean  a'  bhodaich  Hath.  An  ceann  latha  no  dba,  cha  *u
fhanadh  Iain  ni  b'  fhaide^  Lion  e  phòcaidean  làn  do  'n  or,  's  dh'
iarr  e  air  an  duin'  nasal  pailteas  bir  a  thoirt  do  na  bochdan.  Rainig
e  'n  tigh,  ach  bha  e  'gabbail  fadail  aig  an  tigh,  agus  b'  fhearr  leis  bbi
air  ais  'san  Reisimeid.  Thog  e  air  latha  do  na  laithean^'s  rainig  e  'n
cnoc  a  bha  os  ceann  a  bhaile,  bho  'n  d'  fhalbh  e.  Ach  co  thainig  g'a
ionnsaidh  ach  an  donas  I  **  Hoth  I  both  !  Iain,  phill  thu."  **  Hoth !
ort  fhein,"  ars'  Iain,  **  phill :  co  thusa."  "  'S  mis'  an  Donas,  am  fear
do  'n  d'  thug  thusa  thu  fhein,  dar  a  bha  thu  'n  so  ma  dbeireadh."
"  Ai  I  ail"  ars'  Iain,  " 's  fada  bho  na  chuala  mi  iomradh  ort,  ach  cha
n'  fhaca  mi  riamb  roimhe  thu :  's  ann  a  tha  spleUmas  air  mo  shuil-
ean ;  cha  chreid  mi  gar  tuth'  ann  idir ;  ach  dean  nathair  dhiot  fhein,
agus  creididh  mi  thu."  Rinn  an  Donas  so.  ^  Dean  a  nis  leomhan
behchdach."  Kinn  an  Donas  so  I  **  Cuir  a  nis  smugaidean  teine
seachd  mile  as  do  dheigh  agus  seachd  mile  romhad."  Rinn  an  Donas
sol  I  **  Well,"  ars'  Iain  bho  na  tha  mi  gu  bhi  na  m'  gbill'  agad,  thig
a  steach  na  m'  abarsgaic,  agus  giulanidh  mis'  thu ;  ach  cha  'n  fheud
thu  tighinn  a  mach  gus  an  iarr  mise,  air  neo  tha  'm  bargain  briste."
Gheall  an  Donas,  's  rinn  e,  so.  **  ^is,"  ars'  Iain,  *'  tha  mise  dol  a  dh'
fhaicinn  brathair  dhomh  a  tha  'san  Reisimeid,  ach  fan  thusa  sàmh-
aeh."  Chaidh  Iain  an  so  a  stigh  do  'n  bhaile,  agus  ghlaodh  fear
thall  's  fear  a  bhos,  **  So  Iain  an  desairtair."  Chaidh  beireachd  air
Iain  's  mod  a  chuir  air,  agus  'se  bh'  ann  gu  'n  robh  e  gu  bhi  air  a


284  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

chrochadh  mn  mheadhon-latha  *màireach :  agus  cha  do  dh'  iarr  Iain
do  dV  fhabhor,  ach  e  bhi  air  a  thilgeil  le  peileir.  Thubhairt  an
Còimeal,  "  bho  *n  is  e  seann  saighdear  a  bh'  ann,  agas  e  anns  an
arm  cho  fada,  gu  'faigheadh  e  'iarrtas."  An  la'ir  na  mhkireach,  dar  a
bha  Iain  gu  bbi  air  a  thilgeil  *8  na  saighdearan  ceithir  chtiairt
thimchioll  air,  '*  De  sad  a  tha  iad  ag  radh,'*  ars'  an  donas, "  leig  mise
^nam  measg  's  cha  'n  fhada  a  bhios  mi  'gan  sgapadh."  ^*  Cuist  I  cuist  !'^
ars*  Iain.  "D^  sin  a  tha  bmidhinn  riut?**  ars' an  Còimeal.  **0I
cha  n  'eil  ach  Inch  bbàn,"  ars'  Iain.  ^<  Ban  na  dabh  i,"  ars'  an
Còimeal,  *'  na  leig  thus'  as  an  abarsgaic  i,  's  gheibh  thu  litir  fhnas-
glaidh;  's  na  faiceam  tuillidh  tha."  Dh'  fhalbh  Iain,  agas  am  beol  na
h-oidhche  chaidh  e  stigh  do  shabhall  far  an  robh  da  fhear  dheag  a
bualadh.  **  O !  'illean,'*  ars'  Iain,  **  so  dhaibh  mo  sheann  abarsgaic,
's  thugaibh  greis  bhualaidh  oirre;  bha  i  cho  craaidh,  's  gabheil  i  toirt
a  chraicinn  dheth  mo  dhroim."  Thag  iad  cho  maith  ri  da  uair  an
uaireadair  air  an  abarsgaic,  leis  an  da  shuisd  dhehg,  gas  ma  dheir-
eadh  na  h-oile  buille  a  bheireadh  iad  dhi,  leamadh  i  ga  mullach  an
t-sabhaill,  *s  bha  i  tilgeil  fear  air  a  dhroim  an  dràsta  's  a  rithist
dheth  na  baaladairan.  'Naair  a  channaic  iad  so  dh'  iarr  iad  air  a  bhi
muigh  a  sad,  e  fhein  's  abarsgaic ;  cha  chreideadh  iad  fhein  nach  robh
an  Donas  innte.  Dh'  fhalbh  e  'n  sin  air  a  thuras,  's  chaidh  e  steach
do  cheardaich,  far  an  robh  da  ghobha  dhèug  a  bualadh  nan  6rd  mora,
"  So  dhaibh,  'illean,  seann  abarsgaic,  's  bheir  mi  dhaibh  lethchrtin,  'g
thagaibh  greis  oirre  leis  an  da  òrd  mhòr  dheag ;  tha  i  cho  craaidh,  's
ga  'bheil  i  toirt  a  chraicinn  dheth  mo  dhraim."  Ach  ge  bha  aoibh-
inn,  b'  e  na  gobhainnan ;  ba  mhaith  an  spors  dhoibh  abarsgaic  an  t-
taighdeair,  ach  na  h-aile  sgailc  a  bha  i  faotainn,  bha  i  leiun  ga  mull-
ach na  ceardaich.  *'  Gabh  mach  a'  so  tha  fhein  's  ise,"  ars'  iadsan,
**  bho  'n  cha  chreid  sinn  fhein  nach  eil  am  Bramman  innte."  Dh'
fhalbh  Iain  air  aghaidh  mar  so,  's  an  Donas  air  a  dhraim  I !  's  rainig
e  faimeis  mhòr  a  bha  'sin.  "  Càit'  a  nis  am  bheil  tha  dol,  Iain,"  ars'
an  Donas.  **  Foighidinn  beag,  's  chi  thu  sin,"  ars'  Iain.  ^  Leig  as
mi,"  ars'  an  Donas,  '*  's  cha  chair  mi  dragh  ort  's  an  t-saoghal  so."
••No  'san  ath  fhear?"  ars'  Iain— «•  Seadh,"  ars'  an  Donas.  "Stad
mata,"  ars'  Iain,  ••  gas  am  faigh  thu  Smoc,"  's  le  so  a  radh,  thilg  Iain
an  abarsgaic 's  an  Donas  an  teis  meadhoin  na  fuimeis,  's  chaidh  e
fhein  's  an  fhuimeis  'na  lasair  uaine  anns  na  spèuran !


This  was  written  by  Hector  Urquhart,  from  the  dictation  of
John  MacDonald,  and  sent  January  1860.

It  is  clearly  the  same  story  as  that  of  the  man  who  travelled


THE  TALE  OP  THE  SOLDIER.  285

to  learn  what  sliiyering  meant  (Grimm),  though  it  has  only  a
very  few  of  the  incidents  which  are  in  the  German  version.

Another  version  of  the  same  story  was  told  me  in  English  hy
a  man  whom  I  met  in  London,  and  have  never  heen  able  to  find
again.    (See  Introduction.)

It  is  a  story  very  widely  spread  in  Europe ;  and  I  believe  this
to  be  a  genuine  tradition,  though  I  have  but  one  Gaelic  version
of  it.

John  MacDonald,  travelling  tinker,  has  but  a  small  stock
of  lore ;  and  the  tinker  whom  I  met  in  London  could  not  read
the  card  which  I  gave  him,  with  a  promise  of  payment  if  he
woald  come  and  repeat  his  stock  of  stories.  His  female  com-
panion, indeed,  could  both  read  the  card  and  speak  French.  The
whole  lot  seemed  to  suspect  some  evil  design  on  my  part ;  and  I
have  never  seen  the  one  who  told  the  story,  or  the  woman  since,
though  I  met  their  comrade  afterwards.

For  the  pedigree  of  Grimm's  version,  see  vol.  iii.  p.  15,  edition
1856.


XLIII.
THE  SHAEP  GEEY  SHEEP.

From  John  Dewar,  labourer,  Glendaraail,  Cowal.

THERE  was  a  king  and  a  queen,  and  they  had  a
daughter,  and  the  queen  found  death,  and  the
king  married  another.  And  the  last  queen  was  bad  to
the  daughter  of  the  first  queen,  and  she  used  to  beat
her  and  put  her  out  of  the  door.  She  sent  her  to  herd
the  sheep,  and  was  not  giving  her  what  should  suffice
her.  And  there  was  a  sharp  (horned)  grey  sheep  in
the  flock  that  was  coming  with  meat  to  her.

The  queen  was  taking  wonder  that  she  was  keep-
ing alive  and  that  she  was  not  getting  meat  enough
from  herself  and  she  told  it  to  the  henwife.  The
henwife  thought  that  she  would  send  her  own  daughter
to  watch  how  she  was  getting  meat,  and  M  Mhaol
Charach,*  the  henwife's  daughter,  went  to  herd  the
sheep  with  the  queen's  daughter.  The  sheep  would
not  come  to  her  so  long  as  Ni  Mhaol  Charach  was
there,  and  Ni  Mhaol  Charach  was  staying  all  the  day
with  her.  The  queen's  daughter  was  longing  for  her
meat,  and  she  said — "  Set  thy  head  on  my  knee  and  I
will  dress  thy  hair."t  And  Ni  Mhaol  Charach  set  her
head  on  the  knee  of  the  queen's  daughter,  and  she
slept

The  sheep  came  with  meat  to  the  queen's  daugh-

*  Bald  scabby  thing.  f  Fasgabhaidh.


THE  SHARP  GBEY  SHEEP.  287

ter,  but  the  eye  that  was  in  the  back  of  the  head  of
the  bald  black-skinned  girl,  the  henwife's  daughter,
was  open,  and  she  saw  all  that  went  on,  and  when  she
awoke  she  went  home  and  told  it  to  her  mother,  and
the  henwife  told  it  to  the  queen,  and  when  the  queen
understood  how  the  girl  was  getting  meat,  nothing  at
all  would  serve  her  but  that  the  sheep  should  be  killed.

The  sheep  came  to  the  queen's  daughter  and  said
to  her —

^'  They  are  going  to  kill  me,  but  steal  thou  my  skin
and  gather  my  bones  and  roll  them  in  my  skin,  and  I
will  come  alive  again,  and  I  will  come  to  thee  again.''

The  sheep  was  killed,  and  the  queen's  daughter
stole  her  skin,  and  she  gathered  her  bones  and  her
hoo£3  and  she  rolled  them  in  the  skin ;  but  she  forgot
the  little  hoofs.  The  sheep  came  alive  again,  but  she
was  lame.  She  came  to  the  king's  daughter  with  a
halting  step,  and  she  said,  "  Thou  didst  as  I  desired
thee,  but  thou  hast  forgotten  the  little  hoofs."

And  she  was  keeping  her  in  meat  after  that

There  was  a  young  prince  who  was  hunting  and
coming  often  past  her,  and  he  saw  how  pretty  she  was,
and  he  asked,  "  Who  's  she  ]"  And  they  told  him,
and  he  took  love  for  her,  and  he  was  often  coming  the
way;  but  the  bald  black-skinned  girl,  the  henwife's
daughter,  took  notice  of  him,  and  she  told  it  to  her
mother,  and  the  henwife  told  it  to  the  queen.

The  queen  was  wishful  to  get  knowledge  what  man
it  was,  and  the  henwife  sought  till  she  found  out  whom
he  (was),  and  she  told  the  queen.  When  the  queen
heard  who  it  was  she  was  wishful  to  send  her  own
daughter  in  his  way,  and  she  brought  in  the  first  queen's
daughter,  and  she  set  her  own  daughter  to  herd  in  her
place,  and  she  was  making  the  daughter  of  the  first
queen  do  the  cooking  and  every  service  about  the  house.


288  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

The  first  queen's  daughter  was  out  a  turn,  and  the
prince  met  her,  and  he  gave  her  a  pair  of  golden  shoes.
And  he  was  wishful  to  see  her  at  the  sermon,  but  her
muime  would  not  let  her  go  there.

But  when  the  rest  would  go  she  would  make  ready,
and  she  would  go  after  them,  and  she  would  sit  where
be  might  see  her,  but  she  would  rise  and  go  before  the
people  would  scatter,  and  she  would  be  at  the  house
and  everything  in  order  before  her  muime  would  come.
But  the  third  time  she  was  there  the  prince  was  wish-
ful to  go  with  her,  and  he  sat  near  to  the  door,  and
when  she  went  he  was  keeping  an  eye  on  her,  and  he
rose  and  went  after  her.  She  was  running  home,  and
she  lost  one  of  her  shoes  in  the  mud ;  and  he  got  the
shoe,  and  because  he  could  not  see  her  he  said  that  the
one  who  had  the  foot  that  would  fit  the  shoe  was  the
wife  that  would  be  his.

The  queen  was  wishful  that  the  shoe  should  fit  her
own  daughter,  and  she  put  the  daughter  of  the  first
queen  in  hiding,  so  that  she  should  not  be  seen  till  she
should  try  if  the  shoe  should  fit  her  own  daughter.

When  the  prince  came  to  try  the  shoe  on  her,  her
foot  was  too  big,  but  she  was  very  anxious  that  the  shoe
should  fit  her,  and  she  spoke  to  the  henwife  about  it
The  henwife  cut  the  points  of  her  toes  off  that  the  shoe
might  fit  her,  and  the  shoe  went  on  her  when  the
points  of  the  toes  were  cut

When  the  wedding-day  came  the  daughter  of  the
first  queen  was  set  in  hiding  in  a  nook  that  was  behind
the  fire.

When  the  people  were  all  gathered  together,  a  bird
came  to  the  window,  and  he  cried —

"  The  blood 's  in  the  shoe,  and  the  pretty  foot 's  in
the  nook  at  the  back  of  the  fire."^
*  The  words  in  Gaelic  have  a  loimd  that  might  be  as  imita-


THE  SHARP  GREY  SHEEP.  289

One  of  them  said,  "  What  is  that  creature  saying  ?"
And  the  queen  said — '*  It's  no  matter  what  that  crea-
ture is  saying ;  it  is  but  a  nasty,  beaky,  lying  crea-
ture.'^ The  bird  came  again  to  tiie  window  ;  and  the
third  time  he  came,  the  prince  said — "  "We  will  go  and
see  what  he  is  saying.*'

And  he  rose  and  he  went  out,  and  the  bird  cried —

"  The  blood 's  in  the  shoe,  and  the  pretty  foot 's  in
the  nook  that  is  at  the  back  of  the  fire."

He  returned  in,  and  he  ordered  the  nook  at  the
back  of  the  fire  to  be  searched.  And  they  searched  it,
and  they  found  the  first  queen's  daughter  there,  and
the  golden  shoe  on  the  one  foot.  They  cleaned  the
blood  out  of  the  other  shoe,  and  they  tried  it  on  her,
and  the  shoe  fitted  her,  and  its  like  was  on  the  other
foot  The  prince  left  the  daughter  of  the  last  queen,
and  he  married  the  daughter  of  the  first  queen,  and  he
took  her  from  them  with  him,  and  she  was  rich  and
lucky  after  that


A  CHAORA  BHIORACH  GHLAS.

Bba  Bigh  agus  Banrigh  ann,  agas  bha  nighean  aca.  A  gas  thuair  a
Bhanngh  bàs,  agas  phòs  an  Righ  h-aon  eile,  agus  bha  Bhanrfgh
ma  dbeireadh  dona  ri  nigbean  na  cead  Bhanngh,  agus  bhiodh  i
gabhail  orra,  agus  ga  cuir  amach  air  an  dorus.  Chuir  i  a  bbuacbaill-
each  nan  caorach  i,  agus  cha  robh  i  tabhart  dh'  i  na  dh'  fhoghnadh
dh'  i.  Agus  bha  caora  bbiorach  'ghlas  'san  trend  a  bha  tighinn  le  biadh
a*  h-ionsuidh.  Bha  a  Bhanrigh  a  gabhail  iongantas  gun  robh  i
fanach  beo,  agus  nach  robh  i  faotuinn  biadh  ni's  leoir  uaipefein;  agus
dh'  innis  i  do  chailleach  nan  cearc  e.  Smuainich  cailleach  nan  cearc
gun  cuireadh  i  a  nighean  fein  a  dh'  fhaireachdainn  ciamar  a  bha  i  faot-
inn  biadh.  Agus  chaidh  ni  mhaol  charach  nighean  chailleach  nan  cearc

tion  of  the  note  of  a  singing  bird  ;  the  vowel  sounds  are  ui  and
oij  and  there  are  many  soft  consonants.

VOL.  II.  U


29^  WEST  mGHLAND  TALES.

a  bhnachidlleacbd  nan  caoivch  le  nighean  na  Banrlgh.  Cha  tigeadh  a
chaora  d*a  h-ionsaidh  fhad  *8  bha  an  ni*  mhaol  charach  an  sin,  's  bha
ni'  mhaol  charach  a'  £iinach  fiid  an  la'  leatha.  Bha  nighean  na  Banrigh
'gabhail  fadail  arson  a  biadh,  agoa  thubhairt  i  ri  ni*  mbaol  charach.
**  Cnir  do  cheann  air  mo  ghlhn  agns  fugabhaidh  mi  thn.*'  Agna
choir  ni'  mhaol  charach  a  ceann  air  glon  nighinn  na  Banrigh  agua
choidil  i  Thainig  a  chaora  le  biadh  a  dh'  ionsnidh  nighinn  na
Banrigh.

Ach  bha  an  t-shil  a  bh*  ann  an  chl  cinn  nighean  mhaol  charach
nighean  chailleach  nan  cearc  fosgailte,  'a  chmmaic  i  na  bha  dol  air
aghaidh.  Agua  an  uair  a  dbaiag  i  dh'  fhalbh  i  dhachaidh,  agns  dh'
innis  i  e  d'a  mathair,  agns  chaidh  cailleach  nan  cearc  agns  dh'
innis  i  do'n  Bhanngh  e.  'Nnair  a  thnig  a  Bhanrigh  da  mar  bha  an
nighean  afaotninn  biadh  cha'n  fhoghnadh  ni  air  bi  dhi  ach  gnn  rachadh
a  chaora  a  mbarbhadh.  Thainig  a  chaora  a  dh*  ionnsnidh  nighinn  na
Banrigh  agns  thubhairt  i  ri,  **  Tha  iad  a  dpi  gnm'  mharbhadh;  ach  gold
thnsa  mo  chroicionn  agns  tmis  mo  dmamhan  agns  rol  'n  am'  chroic-
ionn  iad,  agns  thig  mi  beo,  agns  thig  mi  a'd'  ionsnidh  a  lis."  Chaidh
a  chaora  a  mharbhadh,  agns  ghoid  nighean  an  Bigh  a  croicionn  agna
thms  i  a  cnàmhan  agns  a  crodhain,  agns  rol  i  iad  'sa  chroicionn  ;
ach  dhiochnimhnich  i  na  crodhain  bheaga.  Thainig  a  chaora  beo
aris,  ach  bha  i  crhpach.  Thainig  i  dh'  ionsnidh  nighean  an  Bigh
's  oenm  crhpach  aice  's  ihnbhairt  i  rithe.  <*Rinn  ihn  mar  a  dh'
iarr  mi  ort,  ach  dhichnimhnich  ihn  na  crodhain  bheaga."  *S  bha
i  cnmail  biadh  rithe  an  deigh  sin.  Bha  Prionnsa  òg  ann  a  bha
sealgadh,  's  a'  tighinn  trie  seachad  orra,  agns  chnnnaic  e  cho  boidheach
's  bha  i,  's  fharaid  e,  '*  Co  i  ?  "  agns  dh'  innis  i  dha.  Agns  ghabh  e
gaol  d'  L  Agns  bha  e  'tighinn  bidheanta  an  rathad.  Ach  thng
nighean  mhaol  charach  nighean  chaflleach  nan  cearc  an  aire  dha  agns
dh'  innis  i  d'a  mathair  e.  Agns  chaidh  cailleach  nan  cearc  agns  dh'
innis  i  e  do'n  Bhanrigh.  Bha 'Bhanrigh  toileach  fios  fhaotninn  co  am
fear  a  bh'ann.  Agns  dh'iarr  cailleach  nan  cearc  gns  an  d'fhnair  imach
CO  e,  agns  dh'  innis  i  do'n  Bhanrigh.  'N  nair  a  chnala  a  Bhanrigh  co
bh'  ann  bha  i  toileach  a  nighean  fein  a  chnir  'na  rathad,  agns  thng  i
stigh  nighean  na  cend  Bhanrigh,  agns  chnir  i  a  nighean  fein
a  bhnachailleachd  na  h'  Idte,  agns  bha  i  toirt  air  nighean  na  cend
Bhanrigh  a  chbcaireachd  agns  na  h-nile  seirbhis,  a  dheanamh
tiomchioll  an  tighe.  Bha  nighean  na  cend  Bhanrigh  amach  sgriob,
agns  choinnich  am  Prionnsa  orra,  agns  thng  e  dh'  i  paidhir  do
bhrbgan  òir.  Agns  bha  e  toileach  a  fidcinn  aig  an  t-searmoin,  ach  cha
leigeadh  a  mnime  leatha  dol  ann.  Ach  'n  nair  a  dh'  fhalbhadh  each
dheanadh  ise  deas,  agns  dh'  fhalbhadh  i  'n  an  deigh^  agns  ahoidhibh


A  CHAOBÀ  BmORACH  GHLAS.  29 1

i  for  am  foicibh  e  i;  ach  dh'  ^readh  i  agas  dh'  fhalbhadh  i  mim
agoileadh  an  slnagli,  agus  bhitheadh  i  aig  an  tigb,  agus  na  h'  uile
nith  an  ordngh  mun  tigeadh  a  muime.  Ach  air  an  treas  uair  a
bha  i  ann  bha  am  Prionnsa  toileach  folbh  leatha,  agus  shuidh  e
dluth  do^n  dome,  agus  'n  nair  a  dh'  fhalbh  ise,  bha  esan  a  cuinail  sail
orra,  agns  dh'  eirich  e,  agus  dh'  fbalbh  e  as  a  deigh.  Bha  ise  'niidh
dhachaidh,  agus  chaill  i  h-aon  d*a  brògan  's  a  phoU,  agus  tbuair  esan  a
bhròg.  Agus  a  chionn  nach  b'  urrainn  dha  a  foicinn  thubbart  e  gum
b'e  an  te  aig  an  robh  cas  a  f  hreagradh  a  bhrog  dhi  a  bhean  a  bhitheadh
aigesan.  Bha  a  Bhanrigh  toileach  gu  freagradh  a  bhrog  a'n  nighinn
aice  fein,  agus  chuir  1  nighean  na  ceud  Bhanrigh  am  folach  air  alt 's
nach  biodh  i  r'a  fhaicinn  gus  am  faiceadh  i  am  freagradh  a  bhrog  a*
nighinn  fein.  'N  uair  a  thainig  am  Pronnsa  a  dh'  fheuchainn  na  broig
orrabha  a  cas  tuille'smòr;  ach  bha  i  ro  thoileach  gu 'freagradh  a*bhròg
i,  agus  bhrai4hinn  i  ri  cailleach  nan  cearc  uime.  Ghearr  cailleach  nan
cearc  bàrr  nan  laor  d'  i  's  gun  freagradh  a  bhrog  i,  agus  chaidh  a  bhrog
orra  'n  uair  bha  barr  nan  laor  gearrtadhi.  'N  uair  a  thainig  la  na
bainnse  chaidh  nighean  na  ceud  Bhanrigh  cbuir  am  folach  an  an  cMl
aig  CÌ1I  an  teine.  'N  uair  a  bha  an  sluagh  uile  cruinn  aig  a  bhanais,
thainig  eun  chum  na  h'  uinneig  agus  ghlaodh  e.  "  Tha  an  fbuil  's  a
bhròig  agus  tha  chos  bhoidheach  'sa  chUil  aig  clil  an  teine/'  Tbubhairt
h-aon  diubh,  '*  Ciod  e  tha  am  beathach  ud  ag  radh."  Agus  thubhairt
a  Bhanrigh,  '*'S  comadhciod  tha  am  beathach  ud  ag  radh  cha'n*eil  ann
ach  beathach  mosach,  gobach,  breugach."  Thainig  an  t-eun  aris
chum  na  h' uinneig;  agus  an  treas  uair  a  thainig  e  thubbart  am
Prionnsa.  "  Theid  sinn  agus  chi  sinn  ciod  tha  e  ag  radh."  Agus  dh'
eirich  e  agus  chaidh  e  mach  agus  ghlaodh  an  t-eun,  **  Tha'n  fbuil  'sa
bhròig  's  tha  chos  bhoidheach  sa'  chhil  aig  ctil  an  teine."  Phill  e
'stigh  agus  dh'  orduich  e  a  chuil  bh'  aig  cul  an  teine  iarruidh.  Agns
dh'  iarr  iad  i,  agus  thuair  iad  nighean  na  ceud  Bhanrigh  an  sin,  agus
bròg  òir  air  a  dama  cois.  Ghlan  iad  an  fhuil  as  a  bhrbig  eile,  agus
dh'  fheuch  iad  orra  i,  agus  fhreagair  a  bhrog  i,  agus  bha  a  leith-bhreac
air  a  chois  eile.  Dh'  fhàg  am  Prionnsa  nighean  na  Banrigh  mu
dheireadh,  agus  phbs  e  nighean  na  ceud  Bhanrigh,  agus  thug  e  leis
uapa  i,  agus  bha  i  sona,  saoibhir,  na  dheigh  sin.

*'  He  has  an  eye  in  the  back  of  his  head,"  is  a  common
saying  for  some  one  pretematurallj  sharp.

This  story  has  some  resemblance  to  Argus,  who  had  a  handred
eyes,  and  slept  with  two  at  a  time;  and  was  set  by  Juno  (a  qaeen)
to  watch  lo,  a  human  being  changed  into  a  heifer.


292  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

The  sheep  that  came  alive  and  was  lame,  is  like  Norse
mythology  {Edda — Dasent's  translation,  p.  51).  "  Thorr  took  his
he-goats  and  killed  them  both,  and  after  that  they  were  flain
and  home  to  the  kettle.  .  .  .  Then  laid  Thorr  the  goatskins
away  from  the  fire,  and  told  the  hnshand  and  his  household  they
should  cast  the  bones  into  the  goatskins.  .  .  .  Thorr  ,  .
hallowed  the  goatskins,  then  stood  up  the  goats,  and  one  of  them
was  halt  in  one  of  its  hind  feet.''

One  of  the  people  had  broken  the  thigh  for  the  marrow.

I  know  nothing  in  any  story  quite  like  the  first  part,  but  it
is  like  Cinderella  (Grimm,  English,  p.  81),  where  the  birds  and  the
shoe  appear ;  but  with  a  wholly  different  set  of  incidents.  It  is
like  One  Eye,  Two  Eyes,  and  Three  Eyes  (p.  387) ;  but  in  that
story  the  church  and  the  golden  shoe  do  not  appear.

See  Grimm,  vol.  iii.  p.  34,  for  numerous  references  to  versions
of  Cinderella  in  books  of  all  ages.

It  has  some  resemblance  to  Bellin  the  Kam  of  the  Countess
Daulnoy.

The  second  part  is  closer  to  the  Norse  versions  of  Cinderella
than  to  the  English  story,  and  may  be  compared  with  part  of
Katie  Woodencloak,  where  the  birds  and  the  shoe  appear ;  and
where  there  is  a  going  to  church.

I  have  many  Gaelic  versions  of  the  incidents,  all  of  which
resemble  each  other ;  the  golden  shoe  is  sometimes  transferred
to  a  man,  which  I  take  to  be  some  confusion  in  the  memory  of
the  person  who  tells  the  story.


l^^WSffW


XLIV.
THE  WIDOW'S  SON.

From  John  MacPhie,  South  Uist,  and  Donald  MacCraw,

North  Uist.

THEEE  was  a  poor  fisher's  widow  in  Eirinn,  and
she  had  one  son  ;  and  one  day  he  left  his  mother
with  a  lump  of  a  horse,  and  a  man  met  him  with  a
gun,  a  dog,  and  a  falcon  (gunna  en  agos  seobhag) ;  and
he  said,  "  Wilt  thou  sell  me  the  horse,  son  of  the  fisher
in  Eirinn  1"  and  he  said,  "What  wilt  thou  give  me?
Wilt  thou  give  me  thy  gun  and  thy  dog,  and  thy
falcon  ?"  And  he  said,  "  I  will  give  them ;"  and  the
bargain  was  struck ;  and  Iain,  the  fisher's  son,  went
home.  When  his  mother  saw  him  she  was  enraged,
and  she  beat  him ;  and  in  the  night  he  took  the  gun
and  went  away  to  be  a  hunter.*  He  went  and  he
went  till  he  reached  the  house  of  a  farmer,  who  was
sitting  there  with  his  old  wife.  The  farmer  said,  "  It
was  fortune  sent  thee  here  with  thy  gun ;  there  is  a
deer  that  comes  every  night  to  eat  my  com,  and  she
will  not  leave  a  straw."  And  they  engaged  Iain  the
fisherman's  son  to  stay  with  them^  and  shoot  the  deer;
and  so  he  stayed  ;  and  on  the  morrow's  day  he  went
out^  and  when  he  saw  the  deer  he  put  the  gun  to  his  eye
to  shoot  her,  and  the  lock  was  up ;  but  when  he  would

*  MacCraw  started  him  with  a  big  bonnoch  and  a  little  one,
and  his  mother's  blessing.


294  WEST  HIOHLAND  TALES.

have  fired,  he  saw  the  finest  woman  he  ever  saw  be-
fore him,  and  he  held  his  hand,  and  let  down  the  gun,
and  let  down  the  lock,  and  there  was  the  deer  eating
the  corn  again.

Three  times  he  did  this,  and  then  he  ran  after  the
deer  to  try  to  catch  her.

(In  the  other  version,  he  went  out  on  three  suc-
cessive days.  On  the  first,  when  he  aimed  he  saw  over  the
sight  a  woman's  face  and  breast^  while  the  rest  re-
mained a  deer.  "  Don't  fire  at  me,  widow's  son,"  said
the  deer  ;  and  he  did  not,  and  went  home  and  did  not
teU  what  had  happened.  The  next  day  when  he
aimed,  the  woman  was  free  to  the  waist,  but  the  rest
was  stiU  deer ;  and  on  the  third  she  was  free ;  and
she  told  the  hunter  that  she  was  the  king  of  Loch-
lin's  daughter,  enchanted  by  the  old  man,  and  that  she
would  marry  the  hunter  if  he  came  to  such  a  hill.)

The  deer  ran  away,  and  he  followed  till  they  came
to  a  house  thatched  with  heather ;  and  then  the  deer
leaped  on  the  house,  and  she  said,  "  Go  in  now,  thou
fisher's  son,  and  eat  thy  filL"  He  went  in  and  there
was  a  table  spread  with  every  kind  of  meat  and  drink,
and  no  one  within  ;  for  this  was  a  robber's  house,  and
they  were  away  lifting  spoil.

So  the  fisher's  son  went  in,  and  as  the  deer  had
told  him,  he  sat  him  down,  and  ate  and  drank  ;  and
when  he  had  enough  he  went  under  a  togsaid  (hogshead).

He  had  not  been  long  there  when  the  twenty- four
robbers  came  home,  and  they  knew  that  some  one
had  been  at  their  food,  and  they  began  to  grumble  and
dispute.  Then  the  leader  said,  "  Why  wiU  you  dis-
pute and  quarrel  ?  the  man  that  has  done  this  is  here
under  the  mouth  of  this  hogshead,  take  him  now,  and
let  four  of  you  go  out  and  kill  him."

So  they  took  out  Iain,  the  fisher's  son,  and  four  of


THE  WIDOWS  SON.  295

them  killed  him ;  and  then  they  had  their  food  and
slept,  and  in  the  morning  they  went  ont  as  nsnal.

When  they  had  gone  the  deer  came  where  Iain
was,  and  she  shook  sol  (wax)  from  her  ear  on  the  dead
man,  and  he  was  alive  and  whole  as  he  was  before.
"  Now,"  said  she,  **  trust  me,  go  in  and  eat  as  thou
didst  yesterday."

So  Iain,  the  fisher's  son,  went  in  and  ate  and  drank
as  he  had  done ;  and  when  he  had  enough  he  went
in  under  the  mouth  of  the  hogshead ;  and  when  the
robbers  came  home,  there  was  more  of  their  food  eaten
than  on  the  day  before,  and  they  had  a  worse  dispute.
Then  the  captain  said^  *'  The  man  that  did  it  is  there,
go  out  now  with  him  four  of  you,  and  kiU  him ;  and
let  those  who  went  last  night  be  killed  also,  because  he
is  now  alive."  So  the  four  robbers  were  slain,  and  Iain
was  killed  again  ;  and  the  rest  of  the  robbers  ate  and
drank,  and  slept ;  and  on  the  morrow  before  dawn
they  were  off  again.  Then  the  deer  came,  and  she
shook  SOL  from  her  right  ear  on  Iain  the  fisher's  son,
and  he  was  alive  as  weU  as  before,  in  a  burst  of  sweat

That  day  Iain  ate  and  drank,  and  hid  as  before ;
and  when  the  robbers  came  home,  the  captain  ordered
the  four  who  had  gone  out  to  be  slain;  and  now
there  were  eight  dead ;  and  four  more  killed  Iain  the
fisher's  son,  and  left  him  there.  On  the  morrow  the
deer  came  as  before,  and  Iain  was  brought  alive  ;  and
the  next  day  the  robbers  all  killed  each  other.*

*  I  am  sure  this  has  been  a  nnmerical  pazzle,  such  as  "  tlie

shealisg  of  Daan's  men."    As  it  now  stands  there  would  remain

four  robbers  who  had  not  earned  death  like  the  rest,  and  it  must  be

wrong.  Perhaps  this  is  the  problem : —

Alive.  Dead.

John  and  24  robbers    .     .     .    =26.

1.  John  killed  by  4  men    .    .    .    .    ^^  24  to  0,  and  has  2d  life.

2.  John  and  the  4  »=  5  killed  by  4  each  =^  20  to  4,  and  has  3d  life.


296  WUST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

On  that  day  tlie  deer  came,  and  Iain  followed  her  to
the  white  house  of  a  widow,  where  theye  lived  an  old
hag,  and  Gille  Gaol  dubh,  a  slender  dark  lad,  her
son,  and  the  deer  said,  "  Meet  me  to-morrow  at  eleven
in  yonder  church,"  and  she  left  him  there.

On  the  morrow  he  went,  but  the  carlin  stuck  a
BiOB  NIMH,  spike  of  hurt,  in  the  outside  of  the  door
post ;  and  when  he  came  to  the  church  he  fell  asleep,
and  the  black  lad  was  watching  him.  Then  they
heard  the  sweetest  music  they  ever  heard  coming,  and
the  finest  lady  that  ever  was  came  and  tried  to  waken
him ;  and  when  she  could  not,  she  wrote  her  name
under  his  arm,  Nighean  Eigh  Eioghachd  Baillb  fo'
THUiNN,  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  the  kingdom  of
the  town  under  waves  ;  and  she  said  that  she  would
come  to-morrow,  and  she  went  away.  When  she  was
gone  he  awoke,  and  the  slim  black  lad  told  him  what
had  happened,  but  did  not  tell  him  that  her  name  was
written  under  his  arm

On  the  next  day  it  was  the  same,  the  sweetest  of
music  was  heard,  and  the  lady  came,  and  she  laid  his
head  on  her  knee  and  dressed  his  hair;  and  when
she  could  not  awaken  him,  she  put  a  snuff-box  in  his
pocket,  and  cried,  and  went  away.

3.  The  20  have  all  earned  death,  and  kill  each  other,  and  John
remains,  having  had  2  lives  in  addition  to  the  1  which  he
first  had,  which  makes  up  the  usnal  mystic  number  3.  And
so  3  lives  dispose  of  24.

Or  this : —  Alive.  Dead-

John  and  24  robbers    .    .    .     «»25.

1.  John  killed  once  by  4  men      .    .    »»24  to  0,  and  has  2d  life.

2.  John  and  the  4  by  2  each,  10  men  «=  20  to  4,  and  has  3d  life.

3.  There  are  ten  guilty  and  ten  who  should  kill  them ;  they  kill

each  other,  and  so  the  3  lives  dispose  of  the  24.
This,  however,  is  but  a  guess.


THE  WTDOW'a  SON.  297

On  the  third  day  slie  said  she  would  never  come
again,  and  she  went  away  home ;  and  when  she  was
gone  he  awoke.

("  I^ow,  John  MacPhie,"  said  I,  "  did  she  not  come
in  a  chariot  with  white  horses  V^

"  Do  thou  put  in  what  I  tell  thee,"  said  the  nar-
rator.

"  Did  she  put  the  box  in  his  pocket  2"

**  Yes  she  did;  now,  go  on,  there  is  no  one  in  Uist
who  can  tell  this  story  as  I  can;  I  have  known  it  for
more  than  sixty  years.")

(MacCraw  had  said  that  the  old  woman  gave  the  lad
a  great  pin  to  stick  m  his  coat ;  that  he  went  to  meet
the  lady  on  a  hill,  and  then  he  slept  Then  came  the
lady  dressed  all  in  white  in  a  chariot,  "carbad,"  drawn
by  four  milk-white  steeds ;  and  she  laid  his  head  in
her  lap  and  dressed  his  hair,  and  tried  to  waken  him,
but  in  vain.  Then  she  dragged  him  down  the  hill,
but  he  slept  on  ;  and  she  left  him,  but  bid  the  black
rough-skinned  lad  teU  hiTn  to  be  there  on  the  morrow.
When  she  was  gone  he  awoke,  and  the  lad  told  him.
On  the  morrow  he  went  as  before,  and  the  lad  stuck
the  pin  in  his  coat,  and  he  slept ;  then  came  the  lady
with  a  sorrowftd  face,  and  she  was  dressed  all  in  grey,
and  her  chariot  was  drawn  by  grey  steeds ;  and  she
did  as  before  but  could  not  rouse  him.  On  the  next
day  he  would  have  none  of  the  big  ptn  ;  but  the  old
wife  gave  the  lad  an  apple,  and  when  they  sat  on  the
hill  thirst  struck  him,  and  the  lad  gave  him  the  apple,
and  he  ate  it,  and  slept  again.  Then  came  the  lady
dressed  all  in  black,  with  four  black  steeds  ia  her
chariot ;  and  she  laid  his  head  in  her  lap  and  dressed
his  hair,  and  she  put  a  ring  on  his  finger,  and  she
wept ;  and  as  she  went  away  she  said,  "  He  will  never
see  me  again,  for  I  must  go  home.")


29^  ^^T^  HIGHLAND  TALES.

When  the  lad  awoke  (said  John  MacPhie),  Bha  e
falbh  gas  an  robh  dabhadh  air  a  bhonan,  toladh  air  a
chasan,  neoil  dubha  doracha  na  oidhche  a  tighinn  neoil
sithe  seamh  an  latha  ga  f  hagail  gas  an  robh  eoin  bega
an  t-shleigh  a  gabhail  an  am  bun  gach  preass  a  b'  f  haisge
dhaibh  na  chèile.

He  was  going  tUl  there  was  blackening  on  hid
soles,  holes  in  his  feet,  the  dark  black  clouds  of  the
night  coming,  the  quiet  peaceful  clouds  of  day  leaving
him,  till  the  httle  mountain  birds  were  betaking  them-
selves about  the  root  of  each  bush  that  was  nearest  to
them ;  and  he  went  till  he  reached  the  house  of  a
wife,  who  said,  "  All  hail !  son  of  the  great  fisher  in
EirÌTìTì,  I  know  thy  journey  and  thine  errand;  come  in
and  I  will  do  what  I  can  for  thee  (and  here  came  in  a
lot  of  queer  language  which  I  could  not  catch).  So  he
went  in,  and  on  the  morrow  she  said,  "  I  have  a  sister
who  dwells  on  the  road  ;  it  is  a  walk  of  a  year  and  a
day,  but  here  are  a  pair  of  old  brown  shoes  with  holes
in  them,  put  them  on  and  thou  wilt  be  there  in  an  in-
stant ;  and  when  thou  art  there,  turn  their  toes  to  the
known,  and  their  heels  to  the  unknown,  and  they  will
come  home ;  and  so  he  did.

The  second  sister  did  the  very  same  ;  but  she  said,
"  I  have  a  third  sister,  and  she  has  a  son,  who  is  herd
to  the  birds  of  4;he  air,  and  sets  them  asleep,  perhaps
he  can  help  thee;"  and  then  she  gave  him  another
pair  of  shoes,  and  he  went  to  the  third  sister.

The  third  said  she  did  not  know  how  to  help  him
farther,  but  perhaps  her  son  might,  when  he  came
home  ;  and  he,  when  he  came,  proposed  that  the  cow
should  be  killed ;  and  after  some  talk,  that  was  done,
and  the  meat  was  cooked,  and  a  bag  made  of  the  hide,
red  side  out ;  and  John,  the  fisher's  son,  was  put
in  with  his  gun,  but  he  left  the  dog  and  the  Mcon.


THE  widow's  son.  ^99

He  had  not  been  long  in  the  bag  when  the  Crevee-
nach*  came,  for  she  had  a  nest  in  an  island,  and  she
raised  the  red  bag ;  but  she  had  not  gone  far  when
she  dropped  it  in  the  sea.  Then  the  other  one  came,
and  she  gripped  to  it  firmly  with  her  claws ;  and  at
last  they  left  the  bag  on  the  island  where  aU  the  birds
of  the  air  were  wont  to  sleep,  f  He  came  out  of  the
bag ;  and  he  was  for  a  day  and  year  living  on  what  he
had,  and  on  the  birds  which  he  kiUed  with  his  gun  ;
but  at  last  there  was  nothing  more  to  eat,  and  he
thought  he  would  die  there.  Then  he  searched  his
pockets  for  food,  and  found  the  box  which  the  lady
had  put  there  ;  he  opened  it,  and  three  came  out,  and
they  said,  "  Eege  gu  djeege,}  master,  good,  what  shall
we  do  ?"  and  he  said,  "  Take  me  to  the  realm  of  the
king  under  the  waves ;"  and  in  a  moment  there  he  was.§

*  This  word  is  unknown  to  me.  It  was  explained  to  mean  a
bird  like  a  large  eagle.

t  MacCraw  skipped  all  the  old  women  and  took  him  at  once
to  an  old  man,  who  was  herding  a  cow,  and  said  he  would  rather
do  anything  else,  hut  his  wife  made  him  do  it.  He  went  home
with  him,  and  after  much  chaflfering  bought  the  cow  for  as  much
gold  as  would  go  from  her  nose  to  her  tail.  Then  he  and  all
that  he  had  were  put  into  the  hide  with  the  meat ;  and  with  the
wind  oflf  the  strand  (traigh)  he  had  himself  thrown  into  the  sea.
The  great  birds  pounced  on  the  red  bag,  and  carried  him  to  their
nest,  where  he  killed  the  young  ones,  and  rolled  over  the  rock
into  the  sea.  He  was  lifted  again  by  the  birds  and  landed  in
Lochlinn.

i  The  explanation  of  these  sounds  was,  that  it  was  *'  as  if  they
were  asking."  The  sounds  mean  nothing  that  I  know  in  any
language.

§  MacCraw  said  that  the  box  had  been  given  to  him  by  his
grandfather.  It  first  appeared  in  Lochlann ;  and  "  he  "  that  was
within  said,  "  Good  master,  good  master,  what  shall '  we*  do  ?  "
The  hunter  had  then  been  recognized  by  the  king's  daughter ;  so
he  ordered  a  palace  to  be  built.


300  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

He  went  up  to  the  house  of  a  weaver ;  and  after
he  had  been  there  for  some  time,  the  weaver  came
home  with  flesh,  and  other  things  from  the  great  town ;
and  he  gave  Tiitti  both  meat  and  lodging.

On  the  morrow  the  weaver  told  him  that  there
was  to  be  a  horse  race  in  the  town  ;  and  he  bethought
him  of  the  box,  and  opened  it ;  and  three  came  out
and  said,  "  Eege  gu  djeege.  Master,  good,  what  shall
we  do  ?"  and  he  said,  "  Bring  me  the  finest  horse  that
ever  was  seen,  and  the  grandest  dress,  and  glass  shoes ;"
and  he  had  them  all  in  a  minute.  Now  he  who  won
the  races  was  to  have  the  king's  daughter  to  wife.
Then  he  went,  and  won,  and  the  king's  daughter  saw
him ;  but  he  never  stayed ;  he  went  back  to  the
weaver,  and  threw  three  "  mam "  handsfcdl  of  gold
into  his  apron,  and  said  that  a  great  gentleman,  who
won  the  race,  had  given  him  the  gold ;  and  then  he
broke  the  weaver's  loom,  and  tore  the  cloth  to  bits.

Next  day  there  was  a  dog  race  ;  and  he  got  a  finer
dress,  and  a  splendid  dog,  by  the  help  of  the  box,  and
won,  and  threw  handsfull  of  gold  to  the  weaver,  and
did  more  mischief  in  his  housa

On  the  third  day  it  was  a  falcon  race,  and  he  did
the  very  same ;  and  he  was  the  man  who  was  to  marry
the  princess,  but  he  was  nowhere  to  be  found  when
the  race  was  over.

Then  (as  happens  in  plenty  of  other  stories)  the
whole  kingdom  was  gathered,  and  the  winner  of  the
prize  was  nowhere  to  be  found.  At  last  they  came  to
the  weaver's  house,  and  the  hunter's  beard  was  grown
over  his  face,  and  he  was  dirty  and  travel-stained  ;  and
he  had  given  all  the  gold  to  the  weaver,  and  smashed
everything ;  and  he  was  so  dirty  and  ugly,  and  good
for  nothing,  that  he  was  to  be  hanged.  But  when  he
was  under  the  gallows,  he  was  to  make  the  gallows


THE  widow's  son.  3OI

speech,  seabmoin  na  cboighe  ;  and  he  put  up  his  arm,
and  the  king's  daughter  saw  the  name  which  she  had
written  there,  and  knew  hiTn  ;  and  she  called  out,
"  Hold  your  hands,  for  every  one  in  the  kingdom
shall  die  if  that  man  is  hurt"  And  then  she  took
him  by  the  hand,  and  they  were  to  be  married.

Then  she  dressed  him  grandly,  and  asked  how  he
had  found  her  out ;  and  he  told  her ;  and  she  asked
where  he  had  found  the  box ;  and  he  said,  when  he
was  in  extremity  in  the  island;  and  then  she  took
him  by  the  hand  before  her  father,  and  all  the  kings,
and  she  said  she  woidd  marry  the  fisher's  son,  for  he
it  was  who  had  freed  her  from  spells.*

"  Oh  kings,"  said  she,  "  if  one  of  you  were  killed
to-day,  the  rest  would  fly ;  but  this  man  put  his  trust
in  me,  and  had  his  head  cut  off  three  times.     Because

*  Here,  according  to  MacCraw,  he  built  a  palace  ;  and  one  of
the  rivals  stole  the  magic  box,  and  carried  off  the  princess  and
the  palace  to  the  realm  of  rats ;  and  when  the  widow's  son  saw
that  the  palace  was  gone  he  was  very  sorrowful,  and  went  down
to  the  shore  ;  and  there  he  met  with  an  old  man,  who  took  pity
ou  him,  and  offered  to  help  him.  He  threw  a  rod  into  the  sea,  and
it  became  a  boat ;  and  he  said,  "  Here 's  for  thee  a  he-cat,  and
he  will  sail  with  thee  ;'*  and  the  cat  sat  at  the  helm,  and  they
•  hoisted  the  three  tall  towering  sails,  etc.,  etc.  {The  cUdpcaaaget
descriptive  of  the  voyctge.)  When  they  reached  the  realm  of  rats,
the  first  rat  that  the  cat  saw  he  caught ;  and  the  rat  said,  '<  Thine
is  my  lying  down  and  rising  up ;  let  me  go  and  I  will  serre
thee.'*  So  the  cat  let  him  go;  and  the  man  said,  "Now  steal
for  me  the  snuff-box  that  the  man  in  the  castle  has."  "  That,"
said  the  rat,  "  is  easy,  for  it  is  on  the  window  ledge ; "  and
the  rat  stole  the  box.  Then  the  man  opened  it,  and  *'  they  "  said
" Qood  master,  good  master,  what  shall  'we*  do ? "  and  he  said,
"  Take  me  and  my  wife,  and  that  castle,  back  to  Loclilann  ;  and
be  knocking  each  other's  heads  about  till  we  arrive,  for  that  you
brought  it  here."  So  they  were  all  carried  back  to  Lochlann,
and  then  the  right  wedding  was  held.


302  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

he  has  done  so  much  for  me,  I  will  marry  him  rather
than  any  one  of  the  great  men  who  have  come  to
marry  me  ;  for  many  kings  have  tried  to  free  me  from
the  spells,  and  none  could  do  it  but  Iain  here,  the
fisher's  son."

Then  a  great  war  ship  was  fitted  up,  and  sent  for
the  old  carlin  who  had  done  all  the  evil,  and  for  her
black  slim  son ;  and  seven  fiery  furnaces  were  set  in
order,  and  they  were  burnt,  and  the  ashes  were  let  fly
with  the  wind ;  and  a  great  wedding  was  made,  and  "  I
left  them  in  the  realm."

This  story  was  first  told  to  me  on  the  2d  September  1869  by
MacCraw  as  we  walked  along  the  road.  He  said  that  he  had
learned  it  as  a  child  from  an  old  wife  in  North  Uist,  whose  cot-
tage was  the  resort  of  all  the  children  for  miles  and  miles.  He
has  often  gone  himself  six  or  seven  miles  in  the  snow,  and  he
used  to  sit  with  dozens  of  other  bairns  about  her  fire,  mute  and
motionless  for  the  best  part  of  the  night.  The  children  broaght
oiferings  of  tobacco,  which  they  got  from  older  people,  as  best
they  could,  and  for  each  bit  the  old  woman  gave  a  stoiy.  He
"  never  heard  her  like."

The  story  lasted  for  several  miles,  and  my  companion  said
that  he  had  forgotten  much  of  it.  He  had  forgotten  nearly  all
the  measured  prose  phrases  with  which,  as  he  said,  the  story  was
garnished,  and  he  said  that  he  had  not  heard  it  for  many  years.

It  seemed  to  resemble  the  story  of  Aladdin  in  some  incidents,
but  my  companion  said  that  he  had  never  heard  of  the  Arabian
Nights.  He  said  that  in  Kinross  and  Perthshire  it  is  the  custom
for  the  hinds  and  farm-labourers  to  assemble  and  repeat  stories  in
broad  Scotch,  which  closely  resemble  those  told  in  the  islands,
but  which  are  not  garnished  with  measured  prose.  He  thinks
that  as  there  are  many  Highland  servants  in  the  country,  they
tell  the  heads  of  their  stories,  and  then  others  repeat  them  in
Lowland  Scotch.  This  may  be,  and  in  like  manner  the  Highland
servants  may  pick  up  and  carry  home,  and  repeat  in  Gaelic,
scraps  of  such  books  as  the  Arabian  Nights.  Still,  as  such  stories
do  resemble  books  quite  beyond  the  reach  of  the  people,  the


THE  widow's  son.  303

resemblance  which  this  bore  to  the  Arabian  Nights  may  be  due
to  common  origin.

On  the  5th  I  asked  MacPhie  if  he  knew  the  story.  He  did ;
and  I  got  him  to  tell  it  twice  over.  It  was  vain  to  attempt  to  make
him  dictate,  for  he  broke  down  directly  he  was  stopped,  or  his  pace
altered ;  and  I  could  not  write  Gaelic,  at  all  events,  fast  enough
to  do  any  good ;  so  I  took  notes  in  English.  The  Magic  Box  was
in  both  versions,  but  the  transport  of  the  castle  to  a  foreign
country,  and  back  by  the  help  of  the  box,  was  not  in  old  Mac-
Phie's  story.

There  is  a  long  story  about  the  country  of  rats,  of  which  I
have  only  heard  part  as  yet.

BiOB  NiMH,  spike  of  hurt,  and  the  big  pin,  maybe  "  the  thorn
of  sleep  ''  referred  to  in  the  introduction  to  Norse  Tales,  as  men-
tioned in  the  Yolsung  Tale.

The  town  under  the  waves  is  common  in  Gaelic  stories;
the  phrase  probably  arose  from  the  sinking  of  hills  beneath  the
horizon  as  a  boat  sails  away  from  the  shore.  In  another  story  it
is  said,  Thog  eud  Eilean— they  "  raised  an  Island  "—when  they
were  approaching  one.

The  bag  of  skin  with  the  man  inside,  is  remarkably  like  a  tra-
dition of  the  skin  boats  in  which  the  old  inhabitants  of  Caledonia
used  to  invade  England.

The  great  birds  belong  to  popular  tales  of  many  lands,  and
are  common  in  Gaelic.  I  have  one  story  in  which  the  hero  is
carried  into  a  dragon's  nest,  and  does  much  the  same  as  this
one  did.


XLV.
MAC-A-EUSGAICH.

From  John  Dewar,  April  1860.

rpHEEE  was  (at)  some  time  a  tenant^  and  he  was  right
-*-  bad  to  his  servants,  and  there  was  a  pranky  man
who  was  called  Gille  Neumh  Mac-a-Eusgaich  (holy  lad
son  of  Skinner),  and  he  heard  teU  of  him,  and  he  went
to  the  fair,  and  he  took  a  straw  in  his  mouth,  to  shew
that  he  was  for  taking  service.

The  dour  tenant  came  the  way,  and  he  asked  Mac-a-
Eusgaich  if  he  would  take  service ;  and  Mac-a-Eusgaich
said  that  he  would  take  it  if  he  could  find  a  good
master ;  and  Mac-a-Eusgaich  said,

"What  shall  I  have  to  do  if  I  take  with  thee  ? "
And  the  dour  tenant  said,   "  Thou  wilt  have  to
herd  the  mountain  moor."

And  Mac-a-Eusgaich  said,  **  I  will  do  that."
And  ihe  tenant  eaid,  "  And  thou  wilt  have  to  hold
the  plough."*

And  Mac-a-Eusgaich  said,  "I  will  do  that."
"  And  thou  wilt  have  ever  so  many  other  matters  to
do."

And  Mac-a-Eusgaich  said,  "  Will  these  matters  be
hard  to  do?"

And  the  other  said,  "  They  will  not  be  (so),  I  will
but  ask  thee  to  do  the  thing  that  thou  art  able  to  do ;

*  Crann,  a  tree.


HAO-A-RUSOAICH.  305

but  I  will  put  into  thje  covenant  that  if  thou  dost  not
answer,  thou  must  pay  me  two  wages."

And  Mac-a-Eusgaich  said,  "  I  will  put  into  the
covenant,  if  thou  askest  me  to  do  anything  but  the
thing  which  I  am  able  to  do,  thou  must  give  me  two
wages."

And  they  agreed  about  thai

And  the  dour  tenant  said,  ^^  I  am  putting  it  into
the  covenant  that  if  either  one  of  us  takes  the  rue  that  a
thong  shall  be  taken  out  of  his  skin,  from  the  back  of
his  head  to  his  heel."

And  Mac-a-Eusgaich  said,  "  Mind  that  thou  hast
said  that^  old  carle."

And  he  took  service  with  the  hard  tenant,  and  he
went  home  to  him.

The  first  work  that  Mao-a-Eusgaich  was  bidden  to
do,  was  to  go  to  the  moss  to  cast  peats,  and  Mac-a-
Eusgaich  asked  for  his  momiug  meal  before  he  should

The  following  was  omitted  by  the  collector,  and  inserted  by
him  in  his  revise  of  the  Gaelic  : — "  There  was  (at)  some  time  a
tenant,  and  he  was  right  bad  to  his  servants  ;  and  when  the  time
of  service  was  nearly  ended,  he  used  to  find  a  pretext  for  quar-
relling with  them.  He  would  cast  out  with  them  and  send  theni
away  without  their  wages.  And  he  sent  away  many  of  his  ser-
vants in  this  way.  And  there  was  a  pranky  man  whose  name
was  Siunts  servant,  son  of  the  fleecer  (Gilleneaomh  Mac-a-Bus-
gaich),  and  he  said  that  he  would  take  service  with  the  dour
tenant,  and  that  he  would  give  him  trick  about,*  that  he  would
be  as  far  north  as  the  dour  tenant  might  be  south.  Mac-a-Bus-
gaich  went  to  the  fair  of  Peevish  fair,  and  he  took  a  straw  in  his
month,  to  shew  that  he  was  for  taking  service."

*  The  original  meaning  of  the  Gaelic  phrase  is  to  take  a  turn
oat  of  a  man,— untwist  his  turns.    The  expression  then  conveys
the  idea  of  a  man.  winding  coils  about  another ;  and  one  with  more
craft  unwinding  them ;  and  the  next  phrase  is  as  metaphorical..
VOL.  II.  X


306  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

go,  80  that  he  need  not  come  home  for  it,  and  he  got
as  much  m^  as  they  used  to  allow  the  servants  at  one
maal,  and  he  ate  that ;  and  he  asked  for  his  dinner,  so
that  he  need  not  stop  at  mid-Klay,  and  he  got  the
allowance  which  there  was  for  dinner,  and  he  ate  that ;
and  he  asked  for  his  supper,  so  that  he  need  not  come
home  at  nighty  and  they  gave  him  that,  and  he  ate
that;  and  he  went  where  his  master  was,  and  he
asked  him,

"What  are  thy  servants  wont  to  do  after  their
supper?"

And  his  master  said  to  him,  "  It  is  their  wont  to
put  off  their  clothes  and  go  to  lie  down.*'

And  Mac-a-Eusgaich  went  where  his  bed  was,  and
he  put  off  his  clothes,  and  he  went  to  lie  down.

The  mistress  went  where  the  man  of  the  town  (the
master)  was  and  she  asked  him,  "  What  sort  of  a  ser-
vant he  had  got  there,  that  he  had  eaten  three  meals  at
one  meal,  and  had  gone  to  lie  down)"  And  the
master  went  where  Mac-a-Eusgaich  was,  and  he  said  to
him,

"  Why  art  thou  not  at  work  ? "

And  Mac-a-Eusgaich  said,  "  It  is  that  thou  thyself
saidst  to  me  that  it  was  thy  servants'  wont^  when  they
had  got  their  supper,  to  put  off  their  clothes  and  go  to
lie  down."

And  the  master  said,  "  And  why  didst  thou  eat  the
three  meals  together  ?  "

And  Mac-a-Eusgaich  said,  '^  It  is  that  the  three
meals  were  little  enough  to  make  a  man  content"

And  the  master  said,  "  Get  up  and  go  to  thy  work."

And  Mac-a-Eusgaich  said,  "  I  will  get  up,  but  I
must  get  meat  as  I  need,  or  my  work  will  accord.  •  I
am  but  to  do  as  I  am  able.  See !  art  thou  taking  the
rue,  old  carle?"


MAO-A-RUSGAICH.  $OJ

'^  I  am  not,  I  am  not,"  said  the  carle,  and  Mac-a-
Ensgaicli  got  his  meat  better  after  that

And  there  was  another  day  and  the  carle  asked
Mac-a-Eusgaich  to  go  to  hold  the  plough  in  a  dale  that
was  down  j&x>m  the  house,  and  Mac-a-Rusgaich  went
away,  and  he  reached  (the  place)  where  the  plough
was,  and  he  caught  the  stilts  in  his  hands  and  there  he
stood

And  his  master  came  where  he  was,  and  his  master
said  to  him,

"  Why  art  thou  not  making  the  red  land  Ì  "*  And
Mac-a-Eusgaich  said,  '^  It  is  not  my  bargain  to  make  a
thraive,  but  to  hold  the  plough ;  and  thou  seest  that  I
am  not  letting  her  go  away."

And  his  master  said,  "  Adversity  and  calamities  be
upon  thee ! "

And  Mac-a-Rusgaich  said,  "  Adversity  and  calami-
ties be  on  thyself  old  carle  !  Art  thou  taking  the  rue
of  the  bargain  that  thou  madest  Ì "

^^  Oh  I  I  am  not^  I  am  not^''  said  the  old  carle.

*  Another  way  of  telling  this  part : — ^Thainìg  an  tuathanach
do  lonnBaidh,  s  dh  fharraid  e  deth  cia  air-son  nach  eil  thu  a
deanamh  an  deargadli,  Agus  Thabhairt  Mac-a-Knsgaich  ris,  cha
n  è  mo  bhargansa  deargadh  a  dheanamb,  ach  an  crann  achumail,
8  tba  tbn  a  faicinn  nacb  eil  mi  e  leigidb  leatha  falbh  na  'm
bithinn  a  deargadh  an  talamh,  cha  b'ann  a  cu'mail  a  chroinn  a
bhithinn.

The  farmer  came  to  him  and  asked  him,  why  art  thou  not
making  the  red  land?  And  Mac-a-Bnsgaich  said,  it  was  not  my
bargain  to  do  the  reddening,  bat  to  hold  the  plough ;  and  thou
seest  that  I  am  not  letting  her  go  away.  If  I  were  reddening  the
land,  it  would  not  be  holding  the  plough  that  I  would  be.

In  some  districts,  the  farmers  call  the  ploughed  land  the  red
land,  and  the  unploughed  land  white  land.

John  Pewab.


308  WEST  HIGHLAKD  TALES.

''  But  if  thou  wilt  give  me  another  lewaid  for  it^  I
will  make  a  plonghing,"  said  Mac-a-Knsgaicb.

^'  Oh,  I  wiU  give,  I  will  give  it ! "  said  the  carle  ;
and  they  made  a  bargain  about  the  thraiye.

And  there  was  a  day,  and  the  hard  tenant  asked
Mac-a-Eusgaich  to  go  to  the  mountain  moor  to  look  if
he  could  see  anything  wrong,  and  Mac-a-Eusgaich  went
up  to  the  mountain.*  And  when  he  saw  his  own
time  he  came  home,  and  his  master  asked  him,

^'Was  each  thing  right  in  the  mountain  ?"  and
Mac-a-Eusgaich  said,

'^  The  mountain  himself  was  all  right."

And  the  hard  tenant  said,  '^  That  is  not  what  I  am
asking ;  but  were  the  neighbours'  cattle  on  their  own
side?"

And  Mac-a-Eusgaich  said,  "  K  they  were  they  were,
and  if  they  were  not  let-a-be.  It  is  my  bargain  to  herd
the  mountain,  and  I  will  keep  the  mountain  where  it


is."


And  the  carle  said,  ^'  Adversity  and  calamities  be
upon  thee,  thou  boy ! "

And  he  said,  ^'Adversity  and  calamities  be  on
thyself,  old  carle  !  Art  thou  taking  the  rue  that  thou
has  made  such  a  bargain  T

"  I  am  not,  I  am  not ! "  said  the  dour  tenant ;  "  I
will  give  thee  another  reward  for  herding  the  cattle."

And  Mac-a-Eusgaich  said,  '^  K I  get  another  reward,
I  will  take  in  hand  if  I  see  the  neighbours'  cattle  on
thy  ground  that  I  will  turn  them  back,  and  if  I  see  thy
cattle  on  the  neighbours'  ground  I  will  turn  them  back
to  thine  own  ground ;  but  though  some  of  them  should
be  lost,  I  will  not  take  in  hand  to  find  them  ;  but  if  thou
askest  me  to  go  to  seek  them,  I  will  go,  and  if  I  get
them  I  will  bring  them  home."

*  Against,  or  at  the  monntain.


MAC-A-BUBOAICH.  309

'^And  the  dour  tenant  had  for  it  but  to  agree
with  Mac-a-Eusgaich,  and  to  give  Mac-a-Eusgaich  an-
other reward  for  herding  his  cattle.

Next  day  the  carle  himself  went  to  the  hill,  and
he  could  not  see  his  heifers ;  he  sought  for  them,  but
could  not  find  them.  He  went  home,  and  he  said  to
Mac-a-Eusgaich,

^^  Thou  must  go  thyself  to  search  for  the  heifers,
Mac-a-Eusgaich,  I  could  not  find  them  this  day ;  and
go  thou  to  search  for  them,  and  seiffch  for  them  until
thou  find  them."

And  Mac-a-Eusgaich  said,  ^'  And  where  shall  I  go
to  seek  them  ?  "

The  old  carle  said,  '^  Gk)  and  search  for  them  in  the
places  where  thou  thinkest  that  they  are  ;  and  search
for  them  in  places  where  thou  dost  not  suppose  them
to  be."

Mac-a-Eusgaich  said,  "  Well,  then,  I  will  do  that"

The  old  carle  went  into  the  house ;  and  Mac-a-
Eusgaich  got  a  ladder,  and  set  it  up  against  the  house ;
he  went  up  upon  the  house,  and  he  began  at  pulling
the  thatch  off  the  house,  and  throwing  it  down.  And
before  the  carle  came  out  again,  the  thatch  was  about
to  be  all  but  a  very  little  off  the  house,  and  the  rafters
bare ;  and  Mac-a-Eusgaich  was  pulling  the  rest  and
throwing  it  down.

The  old  carle  said,  ^*  Adversity  and  calamity  be
upon  thee,  boy ;  what  made  thee  take  the  thatch  off
the  house  in  that  way  1"

Mac-a-Eusgaich  said,  "It  is  because  that  I  am
searching  for  the  heifers  in  the  thatch  of  the  house."

The  old  carle  said,  "How  art  thou  seeking  the
heifers  in  the  thatch  of  the  house,  where  thou  art  sure
that  they  are  not."

Mao-a-Eusgaich  said,  '^  Because  thou  thyself  saidest


3  lO  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

to  me  to  search  for  them  in  places  where  I  thought
that  they  were  ;  and  also  in  places  where  I  did  not
suppose  them  to  be ;  and  there  is  no  place  where  I
have  less  notion  that  they  might  be  in  than  in  the
thatch  of  the  house."

And  the  carle  said,  "  Adversity  and  calamity  be
upon  thee,  lad."

Mac-a-RusgaLch  said,  "  Adversity  and  calamity  be
upon  thyself,  old  carle  ;  art  thou  taking  the  rue  that
thou  desiredst  me  to  search  for  the  heifers  in  places
where  I  did  not  suppose  them  to  be  Ì "

"  I  am  not,  I  am  not,"  said  the  carle.  "  Gro  now
and  seek  them  in  places  where  it  is  likely  that  they
may  be."

"  I  will  do  so,"  said  Mac-a-Rusgaich  ;  and  Mac-a-
Eusgaich  went  to  seek  the  heifers,  and  he  found  them,
and  brought  them  home.

Then  his  master  desired  Mac-a-Eusgaich  to  go  to
put  the  thatch  on  the  house,  and  to  make  the  house  as
water-tight  to  keep  out  rain  as  he  was  able.  Mac-a-
Eusgaich  did  so,  and  they  were  pleasant  for  a  while
after  that.

The  dour  tenant  was  going  to  a  wedding,  and  he
asked  Mac-a-Eusgaich  when  the  evening  should  come,  to
put  a  saddle  on  the  horse,  and  to  go  to  the  house  of  the
wedding  to  take  him  home ;  and  he  said  to  him,

"  When  it  is  near  the  twelfth  hour,  cast  an  ox  eye
on  the  side  where  I  am,  and  I  will  know  that  it  is
near  the  time  to  go  home."  *

'^  I  will  do  that,"  said  Mac-a-Eusgaich.

*  Damh  shrnl — an  ox  eye.  To  cast  an  ox  eye  at  any  one
means,  according  to  Dewar,  to  look  with  a  wry  face,  and  open  the
eyes  wide,  and  stare  at  a  person — as  a  signal.  The  idiom,  to
cast  an  eye,  is  common  to  Graelic  and  English ;  and  so  is  the  ex-
pression, to  cast  a  sheep^B  eye.


mao-a-rusgàich.  311

When  the  tenant  went  to  the  wedding,  Mac-a-Ens-
gaich  went  to  put  the  stots  into  the  fSemg,  and  he  took
a  knife  and  took  their  eyes  out,  and  he  put  the  eyes  in
his  pocket  j  and  when  the  night  came,  Mac-a-Eusgaich
put  the  saddle  on  the  horse,  and  he  went  to  the  wed>
ding  house  lo  seek  his  master,  and  he  reached  the
wedding  house,  and  he  went  into  the  company,  and
he  sat  till  it  was  near  upon  the  twelfth  hour.

And  then  he  began  at  throwing  the  eye  of  a  stot  at
the  carle  at  the  end  of  each  while,  and  at  last  the  old
carle  noticed  him,  and  he  said  to  hm^

"What  art  thou  doing?"

And  Mac-a-Eusgaich  said,  "  I  am  casting  an  ox-eye
on  the  side  that  thou  art>  for  that  it  is  now  near  upon
the  twelfth  hour."

And  the  old  carle  said,  "  Dost  thou  think  thyself
that  thou  hast  gone  to  take  the  eyes  out  of  the  stots  Ì "

And  Mac-a-Eusgaich  said,  "  It  is  not  thinking  it  I
am  at  all ;  I  am  sure  of  it  Thou  didst  ask  me  thyself
to  cast  an  ox  eye  the  side  thou  mightst  be  when  it  was
near  upon  the  twelfth  hour,  and  how  could  I  do  that
unless  I  shoidd  have  taken  the  eyes  out  of  the  stots  ?  "

And  the  tenant  said,  "  Adversity  and  calamities  be
upon  thee,  thou  boy."

And  Mac-a-Eusgaich  said,  "Adrersiiy  and  cala-
mities on  thyself,  old  carle  !  Art  thou  taking  the  rue
that  thou  didst  ask  me  to  do  it  ?  "

"  I  am  not,  I  am  not  I "  said  the  carle ;  and  they
went  home  together,  and  there  was  no  more  about  it
that  night

And  the  end  of  a  day  or  two  after  that,  his  master
asked  Mac-a-Eusgaich  to  go  up  to  the  gates  at  the  top
and  make  a  sheep  footpatL**^

*  Staib,  a  path  or  causeway  in  a  wet  bog.

Chasa,  for  the  feet,  or  of  the  feet.    Chaobach,  of  sheep.


312  WEST  mOHLAND  TALfiS.

^^I  will  do  that,"  said  Mac-arBusgalch ;  and  he
went^  and  he  put  the  sheep  into  {he  fang,  and  he  cut
their  feet  off,  and  he  made  a  stair  with  the  sheeps'  legs,
and  he  went  back  where  his  master  was,  andfhis  master
said  to  him,

"Didst  thou  that?"

And  Mac-a-Eusgaich  said,  *'  I  did.  Thou  majest
go  thyself  and  see."

And  the  master  went  to  see  the  sheep  footpath
that  Mac-a-Eusgaich  had  made,  and  when  he  arrived
and  saw  the  sheeps'  legs  in  the  path,  he  went  into  a
rage,  and  he  said,  "  Adversity  and  calamities  be  upon
thee,  boy ;  what  made  thee  cut  the  legs  off  the  sheep  ?"

And  Mac-a-Eusgaich  said,  "  Didst  thou  not  ask  me
thyself  to  make  a  sheep  footpath;  and  how  should  I
make  a  sheep  footpath  unless  I  should  cat  the  legs  off
the  sheep  Ì  See  !  Art  thou  taking  the  rue  that  thou
didst  ask  me  to  do  it,  old  carle  1"

"  I  am  not,  I  am  not ! "  said  his  master.

"  What  have  I  to  do  again  Ì "  said  Mac-a-Eusgaich.

"  It  is,"  said  his  master,  "  to  clean  and  to  wash  the
horses  and  the  stable,  both  without  and  within."

And  Mac-a-Eusgaich  went  and  he  cleaned  out  the
stable,  and  he  washed  the  walls  on  the  outside,  and  he
washed  the  stable  on  the  inside  ;  he  washed  the  horses,
and  he  killed  them,  and  he  took  their  insides  out  of
them,  and  he  washed  their  insides,  and  he  went  where

According  to  Dewar,  a  path  made  over  a  bog,  when  a  gate
happens  to  be  where  the  ground  is  soft,  or  where  peat  moss  is.
If  sheep  be  often  driven  through  such  a  gate,  the  pathway  soon
gets  soft,  so  that  the  sheep  sink  in  it.  It  is  repaired  by  cutting
brushwood  or  heather,  and  laying  it  on  the  soft  place  with  a
covering  of  gravel,  and  is  called  Stair  Ghaaa  Caorach.

I  know  the  kind  of  road  meant,  but  I  never  heard  the  name. —


MAO-A-RUSGAICH.  3  1 3

his  master  was,  atii  lie  asked  him  what  he  was  to  do
again ;  and  his  master  said  to  him  to  put  the  horses  in
what  concerned  them  (harness)  in  the  plough,  and  to
take  a  whOiet  at  ploughing.

Mac-a-Kusgaich  said,  "The  horses  won't  answer  me."

"  What  tils  them  Ì "  said  his  master.

"  They  won't  walk  for  me,"  said  Mac-a-Rusgaich.

"  Go  and  try*  them,"  said  his  master.

And  Mac-a-Rusgaich  went  where  the  horses  were,
and  he  put  a  morsel  of  one  of  them  into  his  mouth,
and  he  went  back  where  his  master  was,  and  he  said,
"  They  have  but  a  bad  taste."

"  What  fi^rt  thou  saying  ? "  said  his  master.

The  master  went  where  his  horses  were,  and
when  he  saw  them,  and  the  inside  taken  out  of  them
and  washed  and  cleaned,  he  said,  **  What  is  the  reason
of  this  Ì "

"It  is,"  said  Mac-a-Rusgaich,  "that  thou  thyself
didst  ask  me  to  clean  and  to  wash  both  the  horses  and
the  stable  both  without  and  within,  and  I  did  that.
Art  thou  taking  the  rue  Ì "  said  Mac-a-Rusgaich.

"  I  had  rather  that  I  had  never  seen  thee,"  said  the
master.

"Well  then,"  said  Mac-a-Rusgaich,  "thou  must
give  me  three  wages,  or  else  a  thong  of  thy  skin  shall
be  taken  from  the  back  of  thy  head  down  to  thy  heeL"

The  dour  tenant  said  that  he  had  rather  the  thong
to  be  taken  out  of  his  skin,  from  the  back  of  his  head
to  his  heel,  than  give  the  money  to  a  filthy  clown  like
Mac-a-Rusgaich.

And  according  to  law  the  dour  tenant  was  tied,  and
a  broad  thong  taken  from  the  back  of  his  head  down
his  back.  And  he  cried  out  that  he  had  rather  give
even  the  money  away  than  that  the  thong  should  be

*  Feuch,  Ì8  either  taste  or  try  in  the  Gaelic.


3  1 4  WEST  mOHLAND  TALES.

cut  any  longer ;  and  he  paid  the  money,  and  he  was
forced  to  be  a  while  under  the  leeches,  and  he  was  a
dour  man  no  longer.

After  that  Mac-a-Eusgaich  was  set  to  be  servant  to
a  giant  that  was  bad  to  his  servants.

Mac-a-Eusgaich  reached  the  giant,' and  he  said,
"  Thy  servant  is  come."

The  giant  said,  *'  K  thou  be  servant  to  me,  thou
must  keep  even  work  with  me,  or  else  I  will  break
thy  bones  as  fine  as  meaL"*

Said  Mac-a-Eusgaich,  "What  if  I  beat  thee  ?"
"If  thou  beatest  me,'*  said  the  giant^  "thou  shalt
have  like  wages."

"  What  are  we  going  to  do,  then  ? "  said  Mac-a-
Eusgaich.

"  It  is  (this),"  said  the  giant ;  "  we  wiLl  go  to  bring
home  faggots."

And  they  went  and  they  reached  the  wood,  and  the
giant  began  to  gather  every  root  that  was  thicker  than
the  rest^  and  Mac-a-Eusgaich  began  to  gather  eveiy
top  that  was  slenderer  than  the  others.

The  giant  looked  and  he  said,

"  What  art  thou  doing  so  1"

And  Mac-a-Eusgaich  said,  "I  am  for  that  we
should  take  the  whole  wood  with  us  instead  of  leaving
a  part  of  it  useless  behind  u&"

Said  the  giant,  "  We  are  long  enough  at  this  work ;
we  will  take  home  these  biu-dens,  but  we  will  get  other
work  again."

The  next  work  they  went  to  was  to  cut  a  swathe  :
and  the  giant  asked  Mac-a-Eusgaich  to  go  first  Mac-
a-Eusgaich  would  mow  the  swathe,  and  he  began  and
he  went  round  about  short  on  the  inner  side,  and  the
giant  had  to  go  a  longer  round  on  the  outside  of  him.

*  Fbonnoih,  coansei  unsifted  oatmeal ;  poandings.


MAC-A-BUSOAIOH.  3  I  $

^'  What  art  thou  doing  so  T'  said  the  giant*

"  I "  said  Mac-a-Busgaich,  "  am  for  that  we  should
mow  the  park  at  one  cut.  instead  of  turning  back  every
time  we  cut  the  swathe,  and  we  shall  have  no  time  lost
at  all.

The  giant  saw  that  his  cut  would  be  much  longer
than  the  cut  of  Mac-a-Eusgaich,  and  he  said,  "  We  are
long  enough  at  this  work,  we  will  go  to  another  work.
We  will  go  and  we  will  thresh  the  com."

And  they  went  to  thresh  the  com,  and  they  got  the
flails,  and  they  began  to  work.  And  when  the  giant
would  strike  tib.e  shea^  he  would  make  it  spring  over
the  baulk  (rafter),  and  when  Mac-a-Eusgaich  would
strike  it  it  would  He  down  on  the  floor.

He  would  strike,  and  Mac-a-Eusgaich  would  say  to
the  giant^

"Thou  art  not  half  hitting  it  Wilt  thou  not
make  it  crouch  as  I  am  doing )"

But  the  stronger  the  giant  struck,  the  higher  leaped
the  shea^  and  Mac-a-Eusgaich  was  laughing  at  him  ;
and  the  giant  said,

"  We  are  long  enough  at  this  work ;  I  will  try  thee
in  another  way.  We  will  go  and  try  which  of  us  can
cast  a  stone  sàx)ngest  in  the  face  of  a  crag  that  is  be-
yond the  falL"

"I  am  willing,"  said  Mac-a-Eusgaich;  and  the
giant  went  and  he  gathered  the  hardest  stones  he
could  find  And  Mac-a-Eusgaich  went  and  he  got
clay,  and  he  rolled  it  into  little  round  balls,  and  they
went  to  the  side  of  the  fall

The  giant  threw  a  stone  at  the  face  of  the  crag,  and
the  stone  went  in  splinters,  and  he  said  to  Mac-a-Bus-
gaich,

"  Do  that,  boy."

Mac-a-Busgaich  threw  a  diidan  lump  of  the  clay.


3  l6  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

and  it  stuck  in  the  face  of  the  cia^^  and  he  said  to  the
giant,  "  Do  that,  old  carL"

And  the  giant  would  throw  as  strongly  as  he  could,
but  the  more  pith  the  giant  would  send  with  the  stone
he  would  throw,  the  smaller  it  would  break.  And
Mac-a-Eusgaich  would  throw  another  little  ball  of  the
clay,  and  he  would  say,

"  Thou  art  not  half  throwing  it.  Wilt  thou  not
make  the  stone  stick  in  the  crag  as  I  am  doing )"

And  the  giant  said,  "  We  are  long  enough  at  this
work ;  we  will  go  and  take  our  dinner,  and  then  we  will
see  which  of  us  can  best  throw  the  stone  of  force
(putting  stone)."

"I  am  willing,"  said  Mac-a-Eusgaich,  and  they
went  home.

They  began  at  their  dinner,  and  the  giant  said  to
Mac-a-Eusgaich,

"  Unless  thou  eatest  of  bread  and  cheese  as  much  as
I  eat,  a  thong  shall  be  taken  out  of  thy  skin,  fìrom  the
back  of  thy  head  to  thy  heel."

"  Make  seven  of  it,"  said  Mac-a-EusgaicL  "  On
covenant  that  seven  thongs  shall  be  taken  out  of  thy
skin,  from  the  back  of  thy  head  to  thy  heel,  unless
thou  eatest  as  much  as  I  eat."

"  Try  thee,  then,"  said  the  giant

"  Stop  then  till  I  get  a  drink,"  said  Mac-a-Ensgaich ;
and  he  went  out  to  get  a  drink,  and  he  got  a  leathern
bag,  and  he  put  the  bag  between  his  shirt  and  his  skin,
and  he  went  in  where  the  giant  was,  and  he  said
to  the  giant,  "  Try  thee  now."

The  two  began  to  eat  the  bread  and  the  cheese,
and  Mac-a-Eusgaich  was  putting  the  bread  and  the
cheese  into  the  bag  that  he  had  in  under  his  shirty  but
at  last  the  giant  said,

"  It  is  better  to  cease  than  burst"


MAC-A-BUSOAIGH.  3  1 7

"  It  is  better  even  to  burst  than  to  leave  good  meat,''
said  Mac-a-Kusgaich.

"  I  will  cease/'  said  the  giant.

"  The  seven  Uiongs  shall  be  taken  from  the  back  of
thy  head  to  thy  heel,"  said  Mac-a-Eusgaich.

"  I  will  try  thee  yet,"  said  the  giant.

"  Thou  hast  thy  two  choices,"  said  Mac-a-Eusgaich.

The  giant  got  curds  and  cream,  and  he  filled  a
cup  for  himself  and  another  cup  for  Mac-a-Eusgaich.

"  Let's  try  who  of  us  is  best  now,"  said  the  giant.

''  It 's  not  long  till  that  is  seen,"  said  Mac-a-Eus-
gaich.  ''  Let's  try  who  can  soonest  drink  what  is  in
the  cup."

And  Mac-a-Eusgaich  drank  his  fill,  and  he  put
the  rest  in  the  bag,  and  he  was  done  before  the  giant

And  he  said  to  the  giant,  "  Thou  aji;  behind."

The  giant  looked  at  him,  and  he  said,  "Ceasing
is  better  than  bursting."

^'  Better  is  bursting  itself  than  to  leave  good  meat,"
said  Mac-a-EusgaicL

"  We  will  go  out  and  try  which  of  us  can  throw
the  stone  of  force  the  furthest,  before  we  do  more,"
said  the  giant

"  I  am  willing,"  said  Mac-a-Eusgaich.  And  they
went  out  where  the  stone  was,  but  the  giant  was  so
fall  that  he  could  not  stoop  to  lift  it

"  lift  that  stone  and  throw  it,"  said  the  giant

"  The  honour  of  beginning  the  beginning  is  to  be
thine  own,"  said  Mac-a-Eusgaich.

The  giant  tried  to  lift  the  stone,  but  he  could  not
stoop.     Mac-a-Eusgaich  tried  to  stoop,  and  he  said,

"  Such  a  belly  as  .this  shall  not  be  hindering  me,"
and  he  drew  a  knife  from  a  sheath  that  was  at  his  side,
and  he  put  the  knife  in  the  bag  that  was  in  front  of
idnXf  and  he  let  out  all  that  was  within,  and  he  said


3  1 8  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"There  is  more  room  without  than  within,"  and  he
lifted  the  stone  and  threw  it,  and  he  said  to  the  giant,
"  Do  that."

"  Canst  then  not  throw  it  farther  than  that )"  said
the  giant.

"  Thou  hast  not  thrown  it  as  far  as  that  same/'  said
Mac-a-Kusgaich

"  Over  here  thy  knife !"  said  the  giant

Mac-a-Kusgaich  reached  his  knife  to  the  giant
The  giant  took  the  knife,  and  he  stabhed  the  knife  into
his  belly,  and  he  let  out  the  meat ;  and  the  giant  fell
to  earth,  and  Mac-a-Eusgaich  laughed  at  him,  and  the
giant  found  death.

Mac-a-Eusgaich  went  in  to  the  giant's  house,  and
he  got  his  gold  and  silver,  then  he  was  rich,  and  then
he  went  home  fully  pleased.


SGEULACHD  MHAG  A  BUSGAICH.

Bha  uaireiginn  Tuathanach  ann  's  bha  e  ro  dhona  ri  sheirbhisich,  agus
tra  a  bhiodli  an  tiom-fleirbhis  aca  dlUth  air  a  bhitb  aig  crioiche,
gheibhidh  e  leisgeul  gu  connsacbadb  a  dheanamb  riuth,  tbilftadh  e  a
mach  riutha,  s  cbuireadh  e  air  falbb  iad  gun  an  tnarasdaL  Agns
chnir  e  air  falbb  moran  do  a  sheirbbishich  air  an  doigh  sin.  Agua
bba  fear  pratail  ann  do  b'  ainm  gillenaomh  Mac-a-Rnsgaich,  'b  chnal
e  iomradb  air  s  thubbairt  e,  gun  gabhadh  easan  tuarasdal  aig  an
toathanacb  dboirbh,  s  gnn  tugadh  e  car  man  seach  as,  gnm  bitbeadh
esan  cbo  fada  ma  tbuath,  is  a  bhiodh  an  toathanacb  doirbh  ma  dheas,
Cbaidb  Mac-a-Rasgaicb  chun  faigbir  na  feiU  groig,  s  ghabh  e  tràbh
na  bhenl,  mar  cbombarradh  ga*n  robh  e  los  mninntearas  a  gbabhail.
Thainig  an  Taatbanacb  doiribh  an  rathad  agos  db*  fharraid  e  do
Mac-a^Rnsgaich  a'  gabhadh  e  mninntearas,  *s  tbnbhairt  Bfao-a-Rosg-
aich  ga  ghabhadb  nam  fiiigheadh  e  maigbistear  math;  'S  thnbhairt
Ifac-a-Rusgaich,  *<  Ga-dtf  a  bhiodbsagum  ri  dbeanamh  ma  ghabhaa  ml
agnt?^  'S  thobhairt  an  toathanach  dohribh,  <*  Bithidh  agot  ris  a  monadh


SOEUIiÀOHD  HHÀC-A-BUSOAICH.  319

a  bhnachailleachd/'  *b  thnirt  Mac-a-Bnsgaich,  *<Ni  mi  sin,"  's  thnirt  an
tnathnach,  <^  'S  bithidh  agut  ris  a  chrann  a  chamaìl,"  *s  tìiuirt  Mac-a-
Rusgaich.  «  Ni  mi  Bin."  « 'S  bithidh  nathuìbhire  do  ^othaichean
eile  agut  ri  dheanamh  caideachd,'*  's  thuìrt  Mac-a-Kusgaich.  *'  Am  b
na  gnothaichean  sin  doilìch  a  dheanamh?"  's  tbuirt  am  fearefle,
**  iJha  bhì,  cha  'n  iart  mise  ort  a  dheanamh  ach  rnd  a  's  uirainn  duit
a  dheanamh,  Ach  cuirìdh  mi  ^sa  chumhnant,  mar  freagair  thn,  gn  'm
feum  thu  dà  thuarasdal  a  phaigh  dhomhsa,"  's  thoirt  Mac-a-fiusgaich
'*  Cuirìdh  mue  ann  sa  chnmhnant  ma  dh'  iarras  tu  orm  rud  air  bbithe  a
dhennamh  ach  rud  a  's  urrainn  mi  a  dheanamh,  gu  'm  feum  tbusa  dà
thnarasdal  a  thoirt  domhsa;"  *s  chòirt  iad  nime  a  sin.

Agos  thnbhairt  an  tnathanach  doirbh,  **  Tba  mise  a  coir  ann  'sa
chumhnaut  ma  ghabhas  a  h-aon  air  bith  againn  an  t-aithreachas,
gu  'n  teid  iall  a  thobhabrt  as  a  chraicionn  o  chiil  a  chinn  gu  'shail,**  *S
thubhairt  Mac-a-Rosgaich.  **  Cuimhnich  gun  dubhairt  thu  sin  a
bfaòdaìch,"  'S  ghabh  e  tuarasdal  aig  an  Tuathanach  dhoirbh,  's  chaidh
e  dachaidh  d'  a  ionnsaidh.

'Se  a  chiad  obair  a  chaidh  iarraidhair  Mao-a-Busgaich  a  dheanamh,
e  a  dhol  do  'n  mhonadh  athilgeadhmòine,  's  dh'  iarr  Mac-a-Busgaich
a  bhiadh-maidne  ma'm  falbhadh  e,  's  nach  ruigeadh  e  a  leas  tighinn
dachaidh  air  a  shon,  's  fhnair  e  na  bha  iad  a  luathtiachadh  do  bhiadh
air  seirbheisich  aig  aon  trà,  's  dh*  ith  e  sin,  's  dh'  iarr  e  a  dhinneir
's  nach  ruigeadh  e  a  leas  stad  aig  meadhon  latha,  's  f  huair  e  an  loath-
sacha  a  bha  air  son  a  dhinneir,  s  dh'ith  e  sin,  's  dh'iarr  e  a  shuipeir
's  nach  ruigeadh  e  a  leas  tighinn  dachaidh  aig  an  oidhche,  's  thug  iad
sin  da,  's  dh'ith  e  sin;  's  chaidh  e  far  an  robh  a  mhaighistear,  's  dh'
fharraid  e  deth,  *<  Ciod  's  àbbaist  do  na  seirbheisich  agutsa  a  dheanadh
an  deigh  an  suipeir?"  'g  thubhairt  a  mhaighistear  ris,  *'Is  àbhaist
doibh  an  aodach  a  chuir  diubh  's  dol  a  luidh,"  's  dh'  fhalbh  Mac-a-Bus-
gaich  far  an  robh  a  leaba,  's  chair  e  dheth  aodach  's  chaidh  e  a  laidb.
Chiùdh  a  bhana  mhaighistear  far  an  robh  fear  a  bhaile,  's  dh'  fharr-
aid i  deth,  **  Gu-dè  an  seorsa  gille  a  f  huair  e  an  siud,  gu'n  d'  ith  e  na
tri  tràithean  a  dh'  aon  trà,  's  gu'n  deachaidh  e  a  luidh  ?"  's  chaidh  a
mhaighistear  far  an  robh  Mac-a-Busgaich,  's  thubhairt  e  ris,  *'  Gar  son
nach  eil  thu  aig  obair?  's  thubhairt  Mac-a-Busgaich."  Tha  gun
dubhurt  thu-fein  rium,  gu'm  be  a  b'  àbhaist  do  d*  sheirbheisich-sa
dheanamh  'nuair  gheibheadh  iad  an  suipeir,  an  aodach  a  chuir  diubh
's  dol  a  luidh,  's  thubhairt  a  mhaighistear,  **  'S  cia  airson  a  dh'  ith  thu
na  tii  trà'ii  marchomhla?"  's  thuirt  Mac-a-Busgaich,  '*Thà  gu'n
robh  na  tri  triiithean  beag  gu  leoir  gu  duine  a  dheanamh  sàthach,"  's
thubhairt  am  maighistear,  <*£irich  's  rach  gu  t'  obair,"  's  thubhairt
Mac-a-Busgaicb  eiridh  ach  feumaidh  mi  mo  bhiadh  f  haotainn  mar  is


320  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

cobhaidh  dhomh,  air  neb  bidh  m'  obair  d*a  rdr,  cha*n  'eil  orm  a
dheanamh  ach  mar  is  urrainn  mi,  fench  a  bheil  thu  a  gabhail  an
aireachas  a  bho'daich,"Cha'n  'eil,  cba'n  *ei["  orsa  am  bodach,  *s  fhuair
Mac-a-Ru8gaich  a  bhiadh  na  b'  f  hearr  na  dbeigh  sin.

*S  bha  latha  eil'  ann  's  dh'  iarr  am  bodach  air  Mac-a-Rusgaich  e  a
dhol  a  chmnail  a  cbroinn  ann  'n  dail  a  bha  sb^it  bho'n  tigh,  'a  dh'
fhalbh  Mac-a-RasGraicb  's  rainig  e  far  an  robh  an  crann,  's  bheir  e  sir
na  uaidnean  na  larahan  's  sbeas  e  ann  sin.  'S  thainig  a  mhaighistear
fax  an  robh  e,  's  tbuirt  a  mhaighistear  ris,  **  Giaair  son  nach  'eil  thu  a
deanamh  an  treabhadh  ?**  *8  thubhairt  Mac-a-Rosgaich.  "  Cha'n  e  mo
bhargan  treabhadh  a  dheanamh,  ach  mi  a  chnmail  a  chroinn,  's  tha  thn
a  faicinn,  cha*n  'eil  mi  a  leigeal  leatha  falbh,"  's  thubhairt  a  mhaighis-
tear. **  Na  h-uire  *s  na  h-uireandan  orti"  's  thabhairt  Mao-a-Rnagaich.
*'Na  h-uire  agus  na  h-uireandan  ort  fhein  a  bhodaichi  a  bheil  thu
a  gabhail  an  aireachais  do'n  bhargan  a  rinn  thu?**  "0\  cha*n  eil,
cha'n  eil,"  thuirt  am  bodach,  **  Ach  ma  bheir  thu  dhomh  duals  eU'  air
a  shon,  nl  mi  treabba,"  orsa  Mac-a-Rusgaich.  **  O*  bheir,  bheir,"  orsa
am  bodach.    *S  rinn  iad  bargan  hr  man  treabhadh."

*S  bha  ann  latha 's  dh'  iarr  an  tuathanach  doiribh  air  Mac-a-Rusg-
aich,  e  a  dhol  ris  a  mhonadh,  a  shealtuinn  am  fidddh  e  ni  air  bith
air  an  dochair,  's  chaidh  Mac-a-Rosgaich  ris  a  mhonadh,  's  an  uair  a
chunnaic  e  a  thiom  fein  thainig  e  dachaidh,  s  dh'  fharraid  a  mhaighis-
tear deth,  '*Àn  robh  gach  ni  ceart  ann  sa*  mhonadh?"  's thuirt  Mac-a-
Rusgaich.  **  Bha  am  monadh  e  fhein  ceart,"  's  thuirt  an  tuathanach
doirbh.  <*  Cha*n  è  sin  a  tha  mise  a  farraid  /Kh  an  robh  crodh  nan
coimhearsnaich  air  an  taobh  fein?"  's  thubhairt  Mac-a-RusgaicK
«  Mo  bha,  bha,  's  mar  robh  leigear  da,  'se  mo  bhargansa  a  monadh  a
bhuachailleaehd)  8  gleidbidh  mise  am  monadh,  far  a  bheil  e,"  's  thubh-
airt am  bodach.  *'  Na  h-uire  s  na  h-uireandan  ort  a  bhallaich,"  *8
thubhairt  esan,  "Nah-uire's  na  h-uireandan  ort  fein  a  bhodaich,a  bheil
thu  a  gabhail  an  aireachas  gu*n  do  rinn  thu  a  leithid  do  bhargan?"
"  Cha*n  eil,  cha'n  eil,"  orsa  an  tuathanach  doirbh,  ^  bheir  mi  dhnit
duals  eile  air  son  an  crodh  a  bhuachailleachd,"  *s  thubhairt  Mac-a-
Rusgaich.  **  Ma  gheibh  mise  duals  eile,  gabhaidh  mi  os  laimh  mo  chi
mi  crodh  nan  coimhearsnaich  air  a  ghrunnd  agadsa,  gu'n  till  mi  air
an  ais  iad,  agus  ma  chi  mi  do  chrodhsa  air  grunnd  nan  ooimhean-
naich  tillidh  mi  air  an  aia  iad  thun  do  ghrunnd  fein,  ach  ged  do  theid
cuid  diubh  a  chall,  cha  ghabh  mi  os  laimh  am  faotainn,  ach  ma  dh*
iarras  tu  orm  dol  gu'n  iarraidh  theid  mi  ann,  *s  mo  gheibh  mi  iad  bheir
mi  dachaidh  iad.*'

'S  cha  robh  aig  an  tuathanach  dhoirbh  air  ach  cordadAf  Mac-a-
Rusgaich,  *8  duals  eQe  a  thobhairt  do  Mao-a-Ru8gaicb|  'a  duaia  eile  a


SQETJLACHD  MHAC-A-RUSGAICH.  3  2  I

thoirt  da  air  son  an  crodh  a  bhaachailleachd.  Agus  bha  iad  reidh  re
grathonn  n'a  dheigh  sin.

An  ath  latha  chaidh  am  bodadh  e  fhein  ris  a  mhonadh,  agus  cha
b*  nrrainn  d'a  na  h-aighean  aig  fhaicinn,  Dh  iarr  air  an  son,  ach  cha
b*  nrrainn  d'a  am  faotuinn.  Chaidh  e  dachaidh ;  s  thubhairt  e  ri
Mac-a-Rusgaich,  Is  fheudar  duit  fein  dol  a  dh  irraidh  air  son  na  *n
aighean  a  Mhic-a-Rusgaich,  cha  b*  nrrainn  mise  am  faotuinn  an
dingh,  Agas  rach  thusa  gu  an  iarraidh,  s  iarr  iad  gus  gu  m  faigh  thu
iad,

Thubhairt  Mac-a-Rusgaich,  *<  Agus  c'aite  an  teid  mise  ga'n  iarr-
aidh?"

Thubhairt  am  bodach,  **  Rach  agus  iarr  iad  ann  is  na  h-aiteachau
ann  san  saoil  thi^  iad  a  bhith,  agus  iarr  iad  ann  an  aiteachan  ann  is
nach  saoil  thu  iad  a  bhith."

Thubhairt  Mac-a-Rusgaich,  **  Ni  mise  mar  sin  ma-ta.**

Chaidh  am  bodach  a  stigh  do  'n  tigh,  Agus  fhuair  Mac-a-Rusg^
aich  fàra,  s  chnis  e  ris  an  tigh  a.  Chaidh  e  a  naird  air  an  tigh,  agus
thòisich  e  air  spionadh  na  tubhadh  far  an  taigh,  s  ga  thilgidh  le
leathad,  Agus  ma'n  d'  thainig  am  bodach  a  mach  a  rithis'd,  bha  an
tubhadh  gu  ach  ro  bheagan  far  an  taigh,  s  na  cabair  lom,  Agus  Mac-
a-Rusgaich  a  a  spionadh  s  a  tilgidh  le  leathad  a  chorr.

Thubhairt  am  bodach,  "  Na  h-unradh  s  na  h-nrchoidean  ort  a
bhallaich  cia-dè  a  thug  ort  an  tubhadh  a  thoirt  far  an  taigh  mar
sin?"

Thubhairt  Mac-arRfisgaich,  "  Tha  gu  m  bheil  mi  a'g  irraidh  na'n
aighean  ann  an  tubhadh  an  taigh."  Thubhairt  am  bodach,  **  cia  mar
a  tha  thu  a'g  iarraidh  na'n  Aighean  ann  an  tubha  an  taigh,  far  am
bh'eil  thu  cinnteach  nach  eil  iad  ?  "

Thubhairt  Mac-a-Rusgaich.  *'  Tha  gun  do  iarr  thu  fhein  orm,  an
iarraidh  far  an  saoilinn  iad  a  bhith.  Agus  cuideachd  mi  gu^n  iarr-
aidh ann  an  aiteachan,  far  nach  saoilinn  iad  a  bhith.  Agus  cha  *n
eil  aite  air  bith  far  an  lugh  a  tha  do  shaoilsinn  agamsa  iad  a  bhith
ann,  na  ann  an  tubh  an  taigh."

Thubhairt  am  bodach,  "  Na  h-unradh  agus  na  h-urchoidean  ort  a
bhallaich."  Thubhairt  Mac-a-Rusgaich,  "  Na  h-unradh  s  na  h-urch-
oidean ort  fein  a  bhodaich.  Am  bh^eil  thu  a  gabhail  an  aireachas  gun
d'  iarr  thu  orm  na  h-aighean  iarraidh  far  nach  saoilinn  iad  a  bhith?**
"  Chan  eil,  cha  'n  eil,  thubhairt  am  bodach,  Rach  a  nise  agus  iarr  iad
ann  an  aiteachan  far  am  bheil  a  coltach  gu  'm  fact  iad  a  bhih  ann.**
"Ni  mise  mar  sin,**  orsa  Mac-a-Rusgaich.

Dh  fhalbh  Mac-a-Rusgaich  a  dh  iarraidh  na*n  aighean,  Fhuair  e
iad,  s  thug  e  dachaidh  iad.  An  sin,  dh*  iarr  a  mhaighstir  air  Mac-a«

VOL.  II.  Y


322  :WBST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Basgaich,  è  a  dhol  a  chair  an  tubhadh  air  an  tigh,  sea  dheanamh
an  taigh,  cho  dionach  gn  uisge  a  chnmail  a  mach  is  a  b  nrrainn  d'a,
Binn  Mac-a-Bosgaich  sin,  Agus  bha  iad  reidk  re  grathunn  na  dheigh
sin.  .  .  .  ,:

Bha  an  toathanach  doirbh  a  dol  a  dh*  ionnsaidh  banais,  's  dh'  iarr
e  air  Mac-a-Busgaich,  tra  thigeadh  am  feasgar,  e  a  choir  diollaid  air
an  each,  'sea  dhol  a  dh'  ionnsaidh  tigh  na  bainnse,  gas  esan  a  thoirt
dachaidh,  's  thubhairt  e  ris.  "An  oair  a  bhithis  a  dlii  air  dk-uair-
dheag,  tilg  damh-shail  an  taobh  a  bhitheas  mi 's  aitheaidh  mi  ga'm
bheil  e  dlh  air  an  am,  gu  dol  dachaidh.'*  **  l^i  mi  sin,"  orsa  Mac-a-
Bhsgaicb.  Nuair  a  dh'  f  halbh  an  toathanach  thon  na  banais,  chaidh
Mac-a-Bhsgaich  's  choir  e  na  daimh  a  stigh  do'n  f  hang,  a  's  ghabh  e
sgian  's  thog  e  na  shilean  asta,  a's  choir  e  naphbc  na  sUilean,  's  noair
a  thainig  an  oidhche,  choir  Mac-a-Bhsgaich  an  dìoUaid  air  an  each,
's  chaidh  e  go  tigh  na  bainnse  a  dh'  iarraidh  a  mhaighistear,  a's  rainig
e  tigh  na  bainnse,  's  chaidh  e  a  stigh  do'n  choideachd  's  shoidh  e,  gas
an  robh  a  dlii  air.dà-oair-dheog.  A's  an  sin,  thbisich  e  air  tilgeadh
shil  diùmh  air  a  bhodacb,  aig  ceann  gach  tacan,  a  's  ma  dheireadh
thog  am  bodach  an  aire  dh'  a;  a's  thobhairt  e  ris,  "  Go-d^  a  tha  tho
a  deanamh  ?"  's  thobhairt  Mac-a-Kiisgaich.  "  Tha  mi  a  tilgeadh  siiil
daimh  an  taobh  a  tha  tho,  than  a  tha  e  dlU  air  an  dà-oair-dheog  a
nis,"  a 's  thubhairt  am  bodach.  **  An  saoil  thu  f  hein  gon  deachaidh  tbo
athairtnan  sUilean  as  na  daimh  t"  a's  thabhairt  Mac-a-Biusgaich.
*'  Cha'n  ann  ga  shaoilsinn  idir  a  tha  mi,  Tha  mi  cinnteach  as,"dh'  iarr
tho  fein  orm  mi  a  thilgciidh  soil  daimh  an  taobh  a  bbitheadh  to,  a
noair  a  bhithidh  a  dlii  air  an  dà-oair-dheag,  's  d^-mar  a  b'  arrainn  mi
sin  a  dheanamh,  mar  tugainn  na  sòilean  as  na  daimh,"  a  's  thobhairt
an  toathanach.  "  Na  h-oire  a  's  na  h-oraindean  ort  a  bhallaich,"  a's
thoirt  Mac-a-Biisgaich,  na  h-oire  's  na  h-oraindean  ort  f  heih  a  bhod-
aich,  a  bheil  tho  a  gabhail  aireachas,  ga'n  d'iarr  tho  orm  a  dheanamh?
**  Cha'n  eil,  cha'n  'eil,"  thoirt  am  bodach,  's  chaidh  iad  dachaidh
comhla,  's  cha  robh  toile  ma  dheibhinn  an  oidhche  sin.

A's  aig  ceann  latha  na  dbk  na  dheigh  sin,  dh'iarr  a  mhaighistear
air  Mac-a-Bhsgaich  e  a  dhol  an  àirt  thon  na  cath-chliathair  mhal-
laich  'sea  dheanamh  stair  chasa-caorach.  "  Ni  mi  sin,"  orsa  Mac-a-
Bhsgaich,  's  dh'  fhalbh  e,  a  's  choir  e  nacaoirich  a  stigh  do'n  f hang  a's
ghearr  e  na  casan  diobh,  a  'S  rinn  e  an  stair  le  cas'n  nan  caorach,
a  *s  chaidh  e  air  ais  far  an  robh  a  mhaighistear, 's  thobhairt  a  mhaigh-
istear ris.  "An  do  rinn  tho  siodi^"  'S  thubhairt  Mac-a-Bhsgaich,"  Binn,
faodaidh  to  fein  dol  go  fhaicinn."  'S  chaidh  am  maighistear  a  dh'fhaic-
inn  an  stair  chasarcaorach  a  rinn  Mac-a-BUsgaich,  a  's  a  noair  a
rainig  e,  's  a  chonnaic  e  casan  nan  caorach  ann  'san  stair,  chaidh  e  air  a


SGBULACHD  MHAC-A-RUSGAICH.  323

bhreasadh  's  thubhairt  e,  "  Na  thuirc  's  na  thuraindean  ort  a  bhallaich,
gu-d^  a  thug  ort  na  casan  a  ghearradb  fkrr  nan  caoraeh?*'  A's  thubh-
airt Mac-a-Rhsgaich.    "Nach  d'  iarr  thu  fein  orm  stair  chasa-caor-
ach  a  dheanamh,  's  cia-d^  mar  a  dheanainn  stair  chasa  chaorach
margearrainn  na  casan  flirr  nan  caoirich;  feuch  am  bheil  thu  a  gabh-
aill  an  aireachas  gun  d'  iarr  thu  orm  a  dheanamh,  a  bbodaich?*'
'*  Cha'n  eil;cha'n  eil  ■'  thubhairt  a  mhaighistear.  "  Cia-de  a  tha  agam
ri  dheanamh  a  rithisd,"  thuirt  Mac-a-Biisgaich.  **  Tha,"  orsa  a'  maigh-
istear,  **na  h-eich  's  an  stàpull  a  ghlanadh,  a 's  a  nigheadh  an  da  chuid  a
mach,  agns  a  stigh."    A's  dh'fhalbh  Mac-a-Riisgaich,  's  ghlan  e  a
mach  an  stkpally's  nigh  e  na  balladhan  air  an  taobh  a  mach,  a 's  nigh
e  an  stàpull  air  an  taobh  a  stigh;  nigh  e  na  h-eich,  a 's  mharbh  e  iad,  's
thug  e  an  taobh  a  stigh  ast*,  's  nigh  e  an  taobh  a  stigh  aca.    'S  chaidh
e  far  an  robh  a  mhaighistear,  's  dh'  fharraid  e  cia-d^  a  bha  aige  ri  a
dheanamh  a  rithisd,  *s  thubhairt  a  mhaighistear  ris  e'a  chuir  nan  each
'nan  uime  ann sa  chrann,  's  ethobhairt  tacain  air  an  treabhadh.  Thubh-
airt Mac-a-Biisgaicli,  "  Oha  f  hreagairna  h-eich  mi."   "  Cia-d^  a  dh'
airich  iad  ?"  orsa  a  mhaighistear.     "  Cha  choisich  iad  air  mo  shon/'
orsaMac-a-Rhsgaich.  "  Falbh  's  feuch  iad,"  thuirt  a  mhaighistear.'  A's
dh'  fhalbh  Mac-a-Rti8gaich,*far  an  robh  na  h-eich  's  chuir  e  crioman
do  h-aon  diubh  na  bh'eul,  's  chaidh  e  air  ais  far  an  robh  a  mhaighis-
tear, 's  thubhairt  e,  "  Cha'n  'eil  ach  droch  bhias  orra."  ^  Cia-d^  a  tha
thu  agràdh  ?"  thuirt  a  mhaighistear.  .  Chaidh  am  maighistear  fiir  an
robh  na  h-eich,  's  dra*  chunna  e  iad  a  *s  an  taobh  a  stigh  air  a  thoirt
asta,  's  iad  nighte  glante  thubhairt  e, "  Cia-d^  is  ciall  do  so  ?" .  **  Tha,"
orsa  Mac-a-RUsgaich,  **  gu'n'd'iarr  thu  fhein  orm,  an  da  chuidj  na  h-
eich  a 's  ah  stàpull  a  ghlànadh  agus  an  nigheadh  an  da'  chuid  a  mach
agus  a  stigh,  's  rinn  mi  sin."  "  A  bheil  thu  a  gabhail  an  aireachais  ?"
thubhairt Mac-a-RUsgaich.  '*  B'  fhearr  team  nach  fhaca  mi  riamh  thu,"
thubhairt  am  maighistear.  <'Ma-ta,"  orsa  Mac-a-Rhsgaich,  '*feumaidh
tu  trituarasdail  athobhairt  domhsa;  air  neo  theid  iall  do  d*  chaicionn
a  thoirt  0  chhl  do  chinn,  sios  gu  do  shàil.">  Thubhairt  an  tuathanach
doirbh,  gu'm  fhearr  leis  iall  a  bhi  air  thobhairt  as  a  chraicionn  bho
chhl  a  chinn  gu  shàil,  na  an  t-airgiod  thairt  do  thmsdar  coltach  ri
Mao-a-Rhsgaich.  Agus  do  r^ir  an  lagh,  chaidh  an  tuathanach  doirbh
a  cheangal  a  *s  iall  leathan  a  thoirt  0  chiil  a  chinn  sios  a  dhruim  's
ghlaoidh  e  gu'm  fhearr  leis  an  t-airgiod  fhein  a  thoirt  seachad,  na  an
iall  a  ghearradh  na  b'  fhaide,  's  phaigh  e  an  t-airgiod,  's  b'  eiginnd'a  a
bhith  greis  foigh  na  lighichean,  a's  cha  robh  e  na  dhuine  doirbh
tuile.

*  Dra  or  tra  is  =  when;


3^4  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Na  dheigh  sin,  chaidh  Mac-a-Kasgaich  a  chnir  gn  bhith  na  ghOle
aig  famhair,  a  bha  dona  ri  a  sheirbheisich.

Rainig  Mac-a-Rhsgaich  am  famhair  's  thubhairt  e, "  Tha  do  ghille
air  tighinn."  Tbubbairt  am  famhair,  **  Ma  s  gille  dhomhsa  thu,  feurn-
aidh  tn  comh  obair  a  churoail  riumi,  air  neo  bristidh  mi  do  chnaimhean
cho  min  ri  pronnan/'  Thuirt  Mac-a-Rti8gaich,  '*  Gu-d^  ma  dh*  fhaira-
lichis  mi  ort?"  "  Ma  dh'  fhairslichis/'  thuirt  am  famhair,  *'  gheibh  thu
do  dhuais  da  r^ir."  "  De  a  tha  sinn  a  dol  a  dheanamh  ma  ta  y  orsa
Mac-a-RÙ8gaich.  "  Thà,"  orsa  am  famhair,  **  theid  sinn  a  thobhairt
dachaidh  connaidh.'*  'S  dh'  f  halbh  iad  's  rainig  iad  a  choille,  a 's  thbis-
ich  am  famhair  air  trusadh  na  h-uile  bnn  bu  ghairbhe  na  cheile,  's
thbisich  Mac-a-Rhsgaich  air  na  th-uile  bharr  bu  chaoile  na  cheile  a
throsadh.  Sheall  am  famhair  air  's  thubhairt  e,  '^  Ciod  a  tha  thu  a
deanamh  mar  sin  ?*'  's  thubhairt  Mac-a-Rhsgaich,  **  Tha  mise  a  los
gun  toir  sinn  a'  choille  uile  leinn  seach  a  bhith  a  fkgail  pairt  dl  gun
fheum  'nar  deigh."  Thuirt  am  famhair,  <*  Tha  sinn  gìè  f hada  aig  an
obair  so,  bheir  sinn  dachaidh  na  h-eallachan  so,  ach  gheibh  sinn  obair
eile  a  rithisd.**

'Se  an  ath  obair  gus  an  deachaidh  iad  dol  a  bhuain  saidhe,  a 's  dh*
iarr  am  famhair  air  Mac-a-Rhsgaich,  esan  a  dhol  air  thoiseach.  Gheur-
aich  Mac-a-RUsgaich  an  speal  agus  thbisich  e  *s  chaidh  e  man  chnairt
ghoirid  air  an  taobh  a  stigh,  a  's  bha  aig  an  fhamhair  ri  dol  cuairt  a
b*  fhaide  air  an  taobh  a  mach  deth,  "  Gu-d^  a  tha  a  deanamh  mar
sin?"  thubhairt  am  famhair,  <<Thà,"  thuirt  Mac-a-Riisgaich,  *'mise  a
los  gum  buain  sinn  a  phàirìc  a  dh-aon  spaogh,  an  hite  a  bhith  a  till-
eadh  air  ar  n-ais,  na  h  uile  uair  a  gheuraich  ameaid  an  speal,  a  'scIih
bhi  tiom  chaillte  idiragainn."  Chunnaicam  famhair  gu*m  bitheadh  an
spaogh  aigsan  mbran  na  b'  fhaide  nabhiodh  spaogh  Mhic-a-Riiagùch,
's  thuirt  e.  "  Tha  sinne  gìè  fhada  aig  an  obair  so."  Theid  sinn  a
dh-ionnsaidh  obair  eile,  theid  sinn  as  buailidh  sinn  an  t-arbhar.  'S
dh'  f  halbh  iad  a  dh'  ionnsaidh  bualadh  anarbhair,  fhuair  iad  na  snis-
teachan,  thoislch  iad  air  obair,  's  dra  a  bhuaileadh  am  famhair  an
sguaib,  bheireadh  e  urra  leum  an  aird  thair  an  spàrr,  's  tra  bhuail-
eadh Mac-a-Rhsgaich  an  sguab,  laidheadh  i  s)os  air  an  uriar  bhuaJaidh,
*s  theireadh  Mac-a>Riisgaich  ris  an  fhamhair,  '*  Cha'n  'eil  thusa  ga
leath  bhualadh,  nach  toir  thu  urra  crhban  mar  a  tha  mise  a  dean-
amh." Ach  mar  bulkidireadh  a  bhuaileadh  am  famhair,  'sann  a  b'  airde
a  leumadh  an  sguab,  's  bha  Mac-a-Rusgaich  a'  gàiriachdaich  air,  s
thubhairt  am  famhair.  "  Tha  sinn  g\4  fhad  aig  an  obair  so,  fbnch-
aidh  mi  air  doigh  eile  thu.  Theid  sinn  's  feuchaidh  sinn,  cò  againn
is  làidìrich  a  thilgeas  cloch  an  aoddan  creige,  a  tha  air  taobh  thai!  an
eas."  «Thamitoileach,'*or8aMac-ap-Ro8gaich.  'Sdh'fhalbham&mhair


wmmammmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmKm


SGEULACHD  MHAC-A-RUSGAICH.  325

's  thrus  e  na  dachan  bu  chruaidh  a  V  arrainn  d'a  fhaotuinn,  a 's  chaidh
Mac-a-Rosgaich  *s  fhuair  e  crèadh,  's  rothail  e  na  bhtiill  bbeaga
chruinn'  e,  agus  chaidh  iad  a  dh*  ionnsaidh  taobh  an  eas.    Thilg  am
famhair  clach  an  aodann  na  craige,  's  chaidh  a'  chloich  na  criomagan,
's  thtiirt  e  ri  Mac-a-Rhsgaich,  **  Dean  sin  a  bhallaich."  Thilg  Mac-a-
Rtisgaich  dudan  do  an  chrèadh,  agus  stic  e  ri  aodan  na  craige,  a  's
thnbhairt  e  ris  an  fhamhair,  "  Dean  siod  a  bhodaich/'  'S  thilgeadh  am
famhair  cho  làidir  is  a  b'urrainn  e ;  ach  mar  bu  mhòmh'  a  chnireadh  am
famhair  do  neart  leis  a'  chloich  a  thilgeadh  e,  'sann  a  bu  mheanbhadh
abhriseadh  iad,  's  ghàireadh  Mac-a-Riisgaich,'s  thilgeadh  e  ball  beag
eile  do  an  chrèadh  's  theireadh  e,  **  Cha'n  'eil  thu  'ga  leath  thilgeadh,
nach  toir  thu  air  a'  chloich  sticeadh  ann  sa'  chraige  mar  a  tha  mise  a
deanamh."  Agus  thubhairt  am  famhair,  "  Tha  sinn  g\4  f  hada  aig  an
obair  so,  theid  sinn  a 's  gabhaidh  sinn  air  dinneir,  's  an  sin,  feuchaidh
sinn,  CO  againn  is  f  hearr  a  thilgeas  a'  chloich  neart."    **  Tha  mi  toil-
each,"  orsa  Mac-a-Riisgaich,  's  chaidh  iad  dachaidh.  Thòisich  iad  air
an  dinneir,  ais  thubhairt  am  famhair  ri  Mac-a-Rtisgaich,  "  Mar  ith
thu  do'n  aran  's  do'n  chaise  nibhir  is  a  dh'  ithis  mise  theid  iall  thoirt
as  do  chraicionn  bho  chùl  do  chinn,  gu  do  shki."     **  Dean  seachd
dheth,"  orsa  Mac-a-Rhsgaich,  "  air  chumha  's  gu'n  teid  seachd  iallan
a  thoirt  as  a  chraicionn  agudsa,  bho  chùl  do  chinn  gu  d'  shail,  mar
ith  thu  uibhir  a  's  a  dh'  itheas  mise."    **  Feuch  riut*  ma  ta,"  orsa  'm
famhair.  '*  Stad  ma  ta  gus  am  faigh  mise  deoch,"  thuirt  Mac-a-Rusg-
aich,  's«haidh  e  a  mach  a  dh'  f  baotainn  deoch,  agus  fhuair  e  balg  leath-
raich,  's  chuir  e  am  bàlg  eadar  a  l^ine  's  a  chraicinn,  's  chaidh  e  a
stigh  far  an  robh  am  famhair,  's  thuirt  e  ris  an  fhamhair,  **  Feuch  riut
a  nise."  Thòisich  an  dithis  air  itheadh  an  arain  's  a  chkise.  Agus  bha
Mac-a-Riisgaich  a  cuir  an  arain  *s  a  chaise  a  stigh  ann  sa'  bhàlg  a  bh'
aige  a  stigh  fo  alpine;  ach  ma  dheireadh  thuirt  am  famhair.    "Is
fearr  sgur  na  sgàine."    "  Is  fhearr  sgkine  fhein  na  biadh  math  fhkg-
ail,"  orsa  Mac-a-Rlisgaich.     "  Sguiridh  mise,"  orsa  am  famhair.
*''  Theid  na  seachd  iallan  thoirt  0  chlil  do  chinn  gu  do  shàil,"  orsa
Mac-a-Rusgaich.    ''Feuchaidh  mi  fhatbast  thu,"  orsa  am  famhair.
'*  Tha  do  dhk  roghuinn  agad,"  orsa  Mac-a-Riisgaich.    *^  Fhuair  am
famhair  gruth  's  cè,  's  lion  e  cuman  d'a  fhein,  's  curaan  eile  do  Mhac-
a-Ritsgaich."    "  Feuchamaid  cb  againn  is  fhearradh  an  nise^^orsa  am
famhair.     "  Cha'n  fhada  gus  am  faicir  sin,"  orsa  Mac-a-Riisgaich .
**  Feuchamid  cò  againn  is  luaith  a  dh'  bias  na  tha  ann  'sa  chuman.''
A 's  dh'òl  Mac-a-Rlisgaich  a  dhaoithnet  aige,  *s  chuir  e  a  chuid  eile
ann  'sa  bhalg,  's  bha  e  uUamh  air  thoiseach  air  an  fhamhair,  's  thuirt

*  Try  thyself  now.  f  Until  satisfied.


326  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

e  ris  an  fhamhair,  " Tha  thu  air  deireadh.  "Sheall  am  famhair air  *s
thuirt  e.  "  Is  fearradh  sgur  na  sgaineadh."  "  Is  feàrrsgàineadhfhein
na  biadh  math  fhàgàil,"  orsa  Mac-a-Riisgaich.  .  *i  Theid  sinn  a  mach
a  dh*  feuchaiun  cb  againn  is  faide  a  thUgeas  a  chlach  neart  mn'n  dean
sinn  tuile,"  orsa  am  famhair.  ■  **  Tha  mi  ioileach,'*  orsa  Mac-a-Rùs-
gaich.  A  's  chaidh  iad  am  mach  far  an  robh  a  chloich ;-  ach  bha  am
famhair  cho  Ian  's  nach  b'  nrrainn  d'a  cfomadb  gu  a  togail,  '^Tog  a
chloich  sin  a^s  tilg  i,"  orsa  am  famhair.  "  Tha  onair  toisèach  tòiseach
ga  bhith  agad  fhèin/'  orsa  Mac-a-Rùsgaich.  •  Dh'  fheach  am  famhair
ris  a'  chloicbi  a  thogail,  ach  cha  b'  urrainn  da  cromadh/dh'.  fh'euchiMac-
a-Rhsgaich  ri  cromadh  's  thuirt  è,.''Cha  bhì  a  lèithid  so  do  bhalg  a
comail  bacadh  -ormsa."  'S  tharrainn  e  sgian  a  tniaill  a  bha  ri  thaobh
's  chuir  e'n  sgian  sa'  bhalg  a  bha  air  a  bheulobh,  a  's  leig  e  a  mach
na  bha  ann-sa'  bhalg  agas  thuirt  e,  ■*  Tha  tuile  rum  a'  mach  na  tha
stigh,"  agus  thog  e  a  chloich  's  thilg  e  i,  's  thuirt  e  ris  an  fhamhair,
"Dean  sin."  <'Nach  tilg  thu  na's  faide  na  sin  i?"  orsa  am  famhair.
**  Cha  do  thilg  thusa  cho  fada  ri  sin  f  hein  i,"  orsa  Mac-a-Rhsgaich.
"  An  nail  an  so  do  sgian,"  orsa  am  famhair.  '■  Shin  Mac-a-Rtisgaich
an  sgian  aige  do  w  fhamhair,  ghabh  am  famhair  an  sgian,  agus  stope
a  stigh  na  bhrù  i,  a 's  leig  e  am  mach  am  biadh,  's  thuit  am  famhair  gu
làr,  's  ghàir  Mac-a-Rusgaich  air,  agus  fhuair  am  famhair  bàs.
Chaidh  Mac-a-Rusgaich  a  stigh  do  thigh  an  fhamhair,  's  fhuair  e  an  t-
or  a 's  an  t-airgiod  aige.'  Bha  e  an  sin  beartach,  's  dh'  fhalbhe  an  sin
dachaidh  Ian  thoilichte.  >     ■  John  Dewar.    :

.GiLLE,  the  servant  of.  ■  Neumh,  a  holy  man,  a  saint.  ■  Mac,
the  son  of.    Rusoaich,  the  peeler,  or  a  rough  man,  a.Tuffler.

Oille  Neumh  is  a  name  usually  translated  in  English,  Niyen.

The  whole  might  be  rendered  "  The  story  of  Saint's  servant,
Mac' Skinner."  •        .    .         .■

Mr.  Dewar  writes, — "  Tradition  says  that  Gille  Neumh  Mac
Rusgaich  disguised  himself  in  woman's  apparel,  went  to  lona,
passed  for  a  nun,  and' caused  some  of  the  sisters  to  become  frail
sisters^.  There  is  a  long  tale  about  him  and  his  sister. '  She
would  get  into  8ei*vice  to  attend' ladies,  and  Mac-a-Rusgaich
would  disguise  himself  in  his  sister's  clothes — but  that  part  of  the
sgeulachd  was  so  unbecoming  that  1  did  not  write  it.  I  heard
the  part  which  I  did, write  as  early  as  1810,  from  an  old  man  of
the  name  of  Alexander  Dewar  in  Arrochar."

The  story  of  MacRuslaig,  as  it  is  sometimes  called,  is  very
widely  spread,  and,  as  Dewar  says,  part  of  it  is  *'  unbecoming."


MAC-A-RUSGAICH.  3^7

I  believe  it  is  printed  in  Gaelic,  but  I  have  been  nnable  hitherto
to  see  the  book. — J.  F:  C.

A  very  similar  story  is  known  in  Sutherland.
2.  The  Erse  version  of  Jack  the  Giant  Killer.
"  The  opening  of  the  tale,  and  the  deaths  of  Cormoran  and
Blanderbore,  as  told  in  our  children's  books,  are  unknown  here  ;
and  the  whole  thing,  as  found  in  Sutherland,  more  nearly  resem-
bles the  Scandinavian  story' of  the  Giant  and  the  Herd  Boy,  given
in  Thorpe's  Yule-tide  stories:  .  (Bohn's  Lib.  edit.)  I  cannot  get
it  in  Gaelic  (that  is  to  say,  written  down  in  Gaelic) ;  but  am  told
that  it  happened. in  this  wise  : —  ■  .    ^     .     .

*'  The  giant  appeared  to  the  little  herd  boy  and  threatened  to
kill  him  ;  but  the  boy  gave  him  to  understand  that  he  had  better
not  try,  as  he  was  very  strong,  though  small ;  and  that  he  was
an  enchanter,  and  that  if  the  giant  ate  him  he  would  make  him
very  ill.  •  •

"  The  giant  did  not  quite  believe  him  ;  and  taking  up  a  stone,
he  ground  it  to  powder, by  closing  his  hand  over  it,  and  bid  the
herd  .do  the  same,  or  he  would  make  short  work  with  him.

"  The  lad  had  a  lump  of  curds  in  his  pocket,  which  he  contnved
to  roll  in  the  dust  till  it  looked  like  a  stone,  then  pressing  it  be-
tween his  fingers,  a  stream  of  whey  run  through  them,  and  the
giant  could  not  do  that.

•  "  The  next  trial  was  with  the  heavy  hammer ;  the  giant  threw
to  a  great  distance,  telling  the  would-be  enchanter  that  unless  he
could  match  that  he  would  knock  his  brains  out.     -
f   :  ",  *  I  suppose,'-  said  the  boy,  '  you  have  no  regard  for  the  ham-
mer, and  don't  care  whether  you  ever  see  it  again  or  not  ?*
.   • ."  t  What  do  you  mean  ? '.  growled  the  giant.  ^

"  *  I  mean,  that  if  I  take  up  the  hammer,  it  goes  out  of  sight
in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  and  into  the  sea.'

.  "  *I  beg  you  will  let  the  hammer  alone,  then,  for  it  was  my
great-grandlather's ' hammer,'  replied  the  giant;  and  they  were
both  well  pleased  with  the  bargain.  •        *  >

f  •  "  Then  followed  the  hasty-pudding  feat,  called  brose  or  brochan
here ;  and  the  experiment  with  the  black  pudding  which  the  boy
had  in  his  jacket,  and  which  ran  blood  when  he  pierced  it.  The
giant,  trying .  to  imitate  him, .  plunged  a  knife  into  himself  and
died,  as  may  be  seen  in  all  carefully  compiled  books  for  the  use  of
young  persons." — C.  D.


XLVI.
MAC  IAIN"  DIEEACH.

From  Angus  Campbell,  quarryman,  Knockderry,  Boseneath.

A  T  some  time  there  was  a  king  and  a  queen,  and
■^-^  they  had  one  son ;  but  the  queen  died,  and  the
king  married  another  wife.  The  name  of  the  son  that
the  first  queen  had,  was  Iain  Direach.  He  was  a
handsome  lad ;  he  was  a  hunter,  and  there  was  no
bird  at  which  he  would  cast  his  arrow,  that  he  would
not  fell ;  and  he  would  kill  the  deer  and  the  roes  at  a
great  distance  from  him ;  there  was  no  day  that  he
would  go  out  with  his  bow  and  his  quiver,  that  he
would  not  bring  venison  home.

He  was  one  day  in  the  hunting  hill  hunting,  and
he  got  no  venison*  at  all ;  but  there  came  a  blue
falcon  past  him,  and  he  let  an  arrow  at  her,  but  he  did
but  drive  a  feather  from  her  wing.  He  raised  the
feather  and  he  put  it  into  his  hunting  bag,  and  he
took  it  home ;  and  when  he  came  home  his  muime
said  to  him,  "Where  is  thy  game  to-day?"  and  he
put  his  hand  into  the  hunting  bag,  and  he  took  out
the  feather  and  he  gave  it  to  her.  And  his  muime
took  the  feather  in  her  hand,  and  she  said,  "  I  am
setting  it  as  crosses,  and  as  spells,  and  as  the  decay  of
the  year  on  thee ;  that  thou  be  not  without*  a  pool  in

*  The  Gaelic  word  means  rather  game  than  venison.


MAC  IAIN  DIREACH.  32g

thy  shoe,  and  that  thou  be  wet,  cold,  and  soiled,  until
thou  gettest  for  me  the  bird  from  which  that  feather
came."

And  he  said  to  his  muime,  "  I  am  setting  it  as
crosses  and  as  apells,  and  as  the  decay  of  the  year  on
thee  ;  that  thou  be  standing  with  the  one  foot  on  the
great  house,  and  the  other  foot  on  the  castle  ;  and  that
thy  fÌEice  be  to  the  tempest  whatever  wind  blows,  until
I  return  back."

And  Maclain  Direach  went  away  as  fast  as  he
could  to  seek  the  bird  from  which  the  feather  came,
and  his  muime  was  standing  with  the  one  foot  on  the
castle,  and  the  other  on  the  great  house,  till  he  should
come  b^k ;  and  her  front  was  to  the  face  of  the  tem-
pest, however  long  he  might  be  without  coming.

Maclain  Direach  was  gone,  travelling  the  waste  to
see  if  he  could  see  the  falcon,  but  the  falcon  he  could
not  see  ;  and  much  less  than  that,  he  could  not  get
her  ;  and  he  was  going  by  himself  through  the  waste,
and  it  was  coming  near  to  the  night.  The  little  flut-
tering birds  were  going  from  the  bush  tops,  from  tuft
to  tuft,  and  to  the  briar  rootsj  going  to  rest ;  and
though  they  were,  he  was  not  going  there,  till  the
night  came  blind  and  dark ;  and  he  went  and  crouched
at  the  root  of  a  briar ;  and  who  came  the  way  but  an
GiLLE  Maibtean,  the  fox;  and  he  said  to  him,  "Thou'rt
down  in  the  mouth  a  Mhic  Iain  Direach ;  thou  camest
on  a  bad  night ;  I  have  myself  but  one  wether's
trotter  and  a  sheep's  cheek,  but  needs  must  do  with  it"

They  kindled  a  fire,  and  they  roasted  flesh,  and
they  ate  the  wether's  trotter  and  the  sheep's  cheek  \
and  in  the  morning  GiUe  Mairtean  said  to  the  king's
son,  "  Oh  son  of  Iain  Direach,  the  falcon  thou  seekest
is  by  the  great  giant  of  the  Five  Heads,  and  the  Five
Humps,  and  the  Five  Throttles,  and  I  will  shew  thee


330.  WEST  HIGHLAND .  TALES.

where  his  house  is;'  and  it  is  my  advice  to  thee  to; go'
to  be  as ;  his .  servant,  >  and  that :  thou  be.  nimble  ^ and
ready  to  do  each  thing  that  is  asked  of  thee,  and  each
thing  that "  is  trusted  thee  ;  and'  be  very  good  ■  to ^  his
birds,  audit  well  may  be  that  he  wiU,  trust  thee  with-
the  falcon  to  feed  ; :  and  when'  thou  •  gettest  the^  falcon*
to  feed  be  right  good  to  her,  till  thou  gettest  a  chance;
at  the  time  when  the .  giant  is  not  at  home  .run  away,
with  her,  but  take  care  that  so  much  as  one  feather
of  her  does  not  touch  any  one  thing  that  is  within  the
house,  or  if.  it  touches,  it  will  not  go  (well)  with  ithee."'

Maclain  Direach  said  "  That  he  would  take .'  care
of  that ;".  and  he  went  to  the  giant's  house  ;•  he  ar-
rived, he  struck  at  the  door.  ;      i        i    ■     ;  ;

The  giant  shouted,  ".Who  is  there  r*     .

"It  is  me,''  said  Maclain  Direach ;  "  one  coming  to
see  if  thou  hast  need  of  a  lad."    .         •  «    >    .  '  .    .

"  What  work  canst  thou  do  ?"  said  the  giant.  -

"  It  is  (this),"  said  Maclain  Direach,  "I  can  feed
birds  and  swine,  and  feed  and  milk  a  cow,  or  goats  or
sheep."  •••    '-        ?     ■.?...,  .     •  ,    .•  ;    {iJ  ^     -I

"  It  is  the  like  of  thee  that  I  want," .  said  the
giant.   .  .    .     .      ,  .     .  ,    •    .  J   !  •  •!

The  giant  came  out  and  he  settled  wages  on  Mac-
Iain  Direach ;  and  he  was.  taking  right  good  care  of
everything  that  the  giant  had, '  and  he  was  very  kind
to  the  hens  and  to  the  'ducks  ; '  and  the-  giant :  took
notice. how  well  he  was . doing ;  and  he. said  .that  his
table  was  so  good  since  Maclain  Direach  had  come,  by
what '  it  was  before ;  •  that .  he  had  -  rather  one  hen  of
those  which  he  got  now,  than  two  of  those  he  used  :to
get  before.  :  **  My  lad  is  so  good  that  I  begin  to  think
I  may  trust  him  the  falcon  to  feed ;".  and  the  •  giant
gave  the  falcon  to  Maclain  Direach  to  feed,*  and  he
took  exceeding  care  of  the  falcon ;  and  when  the  giant


.  MAO  IAIN  DIREACH.    '  331;

saw  how  well  Maclain  Direach  was  taking  care  of  the
falcon,  he  thought  that  he  .iiiight>  trust  h^r  to  him- when
he  was.  (away)- from  the  house  ;  and  the  giant  gave  him
the  falcon  to  keep,  and  he  was  taking  exceeding  care
of  the  falcon.  i  .  r         ^    .

The  giant  thought  each,  thing  was  going  right,  and
he  went  fi?om  the  house  one  day ;  and.  Maclain  Direach
thought  that  was  the  time  to  run  away  with  the  falcon,
and  he  seized  the  falcon,  to  go  away  with  her  ;\  and
when  he  opened  the  door  and  the  falcon  saw  the  light,
she  spread  her  wings  to  spring,  and  the  point  of  one
of  the  feathers:  of  one  of  her  wings  touched  one  of  the
posts  of  the  door, .  and  the  door  post  let  out  a  screech.
The.  giant  came  home  runniiig, » and  he. caught  Maclain
Direach,  and  he  took  the  falcon  •  from  him ;  and  he
said  to  him,  "  I  would  not  give  thee  my  falcon,  unless
thou  shouldst  get  for 'me  the  White  Glave  of  Light
that  .the  Big  .Women. of  Dhiurradh  have  ;"  and  the
giant  sent  Maclain  away.        ...       •-'.        .    <    .  <.

Maclain  Direach  went. out  again  and  through  the
wastie,  and'  the  Gille  Mairtean  met  with  him,  and  he
said —   •—'•..        '  "■     '  •    .    •     :  •        '■      "  \  •      ■  '■'     •

"  Thou  art  down  in  the  mouth*  Maclain  Direach ;
thou' didst. not,  and  thou  wilt  not  do. as  I  tell  thee  ;
bad  is  the, night  on  which  thou  hast, come  ;  I  have  but
one  wether!s  trotter  and  one  sheep's  cheek,  but  needs
must  do  with. that".  /     ;        '  .  ■  •    >       ;

•  .,  They,  roused  a  fire,  and  they,  made'  ready  the
wether's  trotter'  and.  the  sheep's  cheek,  and  they  took
their  meat  and  sleep  ;  and  on  the  next  *  day  the  Gille
Mairtean  said,  "  We  will  go  to  the  side  of  the  ocean.'' '

They  went  and  they  reached  the  side  of  the  ocean,
and  the  Gille  Mairtean  said,

"  I  will  grow  into  a  boat,  and  go  thou  on  board  of
.*  Dewar  translates  the  phrase,  "  A  down  mouth  on  thee."


352  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

her,  and  I  will  take  thee  over  to  Dhiurradli ;  and  go
to  the  seven  great  women  of  Dhurrah  and  ask  ser-
vice, that  thou  be  a  servant  with  them ;  and  when
they  ask  thee  what  thou  canst  do,  say  to.  them  that
thou  art  good  at  brightening  iron  and  steel,  gold  and-
silver,  and  that  thou  canst  make  them  bright,  clear,
and  shiny;  and  take  exceeding  care  that  thou  dost
each  thing  right,  till  they  trust  thee  the  White  Glave
of  light;  and  when  thou  gettest  a  chance  run  away
with  it,  but  take  care  that  the  sheath  does  not  touch
a  thing  on  the  inner  side  of  the  house,  or  it  will  make
a  screech,  and  thy  matter  will  not  go  with  thee."*

The  Gille  Mairtean  grew  into  a  boat,  and  Maclain
Direach  went  on  board  of  her,  and  he  came  on  shore
at  creagan  nan  deargan,t  on  the  northern  side  of
Dhiurradh,  and  Maclain  Direach  leaped  on  shore,  and
he  went  to  take  service  with  the  Seven  Big  Women
of  Dhiurradh.  He  reached,  and  he  struck  at  the  door;
the  Seven  Big  Women  came  out,  and  they  asked  what
he  was  seeking.  He  said,  "  That  he  came  to  see  if  they
had  need  of  a  lad  ;"  and  they  asked  him  "  What  he
could  do  Ì  "  He  said,  "  He  could  brighten,  or  make
clear,  white  and  shiny,  gold  and  silver,  or  iron  or  steeL"
They  said,  "  We  have  need  of  thy  like ;"  and  set
wages  on  him.  And  he  was  right  diligent  for  six
weeks,  and  put  everything  in  exceeding  order ;  and
the  Big  Women  noticed  it ;  and  they  kept  saying  to
each  other,  "  This  is  the  best  lad  we  have  ever  had;  we
may  trust  him  the  White  Glave  of  light"

They  gave  him  the  White  Glave  of  Light  to  keep
in  order;  and  he  was  taking  exceeding  care  of  the
White  Glave  of  Light,  till  one  day  that  the  Big  Women

•  This  may  be  compared  with  the  theft  of  the  Bword  in  No.  I.
f  Deakoan,  a  fish  called  a  bream  (Dewar),  from  Dsako,  red.
Perhaps  a  flea,  for  there  were  mysti^^al  fleas  in  Jura. — J.  F.  G.


MAO  IAIN  DIREACH.  333

were  not  at  the  house,  he  thought  that  was  the  time
for  him  to  run  away  with  the  White  Glave  of  Light
He  put  it  into  the  sheath,  and  he  raised  it  on  his
shoulder  ;  but  when  he  was  going  out  at  the  door  the
point  of  the  sheath  touched  the  lintel,  and  the  lintel
made  a  screech  ;  and  the  Big  Women  ran  home,  and
took  the  sword  from  him  ;  and  they  said  to  him,  "  We
would  not  give  thee  our  White  Glave  of  Light,  unless
thou  shouldst  get  for  us  the  Yellow  (Bay)  Filly  of  the
King  of  Eirinn."

Maclain  Direach  went  to  the  side  of  the  ocean,
and  the  Gille  Mairtean  met  him,  and  he  said  to  him,
"Thou'rt  down  in  the  mouth,  Maclain  Direach  ;  thou
didst  not,  and  thou  wilt  not  do  as  I  ask  thee  ;  I  have
to-night  but  one  wether's  trotter  and  one  sheep's  cheek,
but  needs  must  do  with  it."

They  kindled  a  fire,  and  they  roasted  flesh,  and
they  were  satisfied  On  the  next  day  the  Gille  Mair-
tean said  to  Maclain  Direach,  "  I  will  grow  into  a
barque,  and  go  thou  on  board  of  her,  and  I  will  go  to
"RirÌTìTì  with  thee  ;  and  when  we  reach  Eirinn  go  thou
to  the  house  of  the  king,  and  ask  service  to  be  a  stable
lad  with  him  ;  and  when  thou  gettest  that,  be  nimble
and  ready  to  do  each  thing  that  is  to  be  done,  and
keep  the  horses  and  the  harness  in  right  good  order,
till  the  king  trusts  the  Yellow  (Bay)  Filly  to  thee  ;  and
when  thou  gettest  a  chance  run  away  with  her  ;  but
take  care  when  thou  art  taking  her  out  that  no  bit  of
her  touches  anything  that  is  on  the  inner  side  of  the
gate,  except  the  soles  of  her  feet ;  or  else  thy  matter
will  not  prosper  with  thee."

And  then  the  Gille  Mairtean  put  himself  into  the
form  of  a  barque,  Maclain  Direach  went  on  board,
and  the  barque  sailed  with  him  to  Eirinn.  When
they    reached    the   shore   of    Eirinn,    Maclain   Dir-


334  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

each  leaped  on  land,  and  he  went  to  the  house  of
the  king ;  and  when'  he  reached  the ,  gate,  the  gate-
keeper asked  where  he  .was  going  ;  and  he  said  "  That
he  wad.' going  to  see.  if  the  king  had  need  of  a  stable
lad  f!  arid  the  gate-keeper  let  him  past,  and  he  reached
the  king's  house  ;  he  struck  at  the  door  and  the  king
came  out ;  and  the  king  said,  "What  art  thou  seek-
ing here  r'  ■     ;  ,  -
» .. ;  Said  he,  /*  With  your  leave,  I  came  to  see  if  you
had  need  of  a  stable  lad."                     '  .
Hie  king  asked,  "  What  canst  thou  do  1"
Said  he,    !*  I :  can  clean  and  feed  the  horses,  and
clean  the  silver  work,  and  the  steel  work,  and  make
them  shiny."                                      •

The  king. settled  wages  on  him,  and  he  went  to  the
stable  ;  and  he  put  each  thing  in  good  order  ;  he  took
good  care  of  the  horses,  he; fed  them  well,  and  he  kept
them  clean,  •  and  their  skin  was  looking  sliom  sleek  ;
and  the  silver  work  and  the  steel  work  shiny  to  look
at ;  and  the  king  never  saw  them  so  well  in  order  be-
fore. :  And  he  said,  f'This  iathe  best  stable  lad  I  have
ever  had,  I  may  trust  the  Yellow  (Bay)  Filly  to
him."    •     .    .  .  .

•  The  king  gave  the  Yellow  (Bay)  Filly  to  Maclain
Direach  to  .  keep  ;  and.  Maclain'  Direach  took  very
great  care  of  the  Yellow  (Bay)  Filly ;  and  he. kept  her
clean,  till  her.  skin  i was  so  sleek .  and  slippery,  and  she
so  swift,  that  she  would  leave. the: one  wind  and  catch
the  other.     The  kiiig  never  saw  her  so  good.

.  The  king  went  one.  day  to  the  =  hunting  hill, .  and
Maclain  Direach .  thought  that  was  •  the  ;  time  to  run
away» with' the  Yellow  (Bay)  Filly.;  .and  he.  set.  her  in
what  belonged  to  her,  with  a  .bridle. and  a  saddle  ; '  and
when'  he  took  her  out  of  the  stable,-  he  was  taking  her
through-  the  gate,-  she  gave' a  switch  'sguaisìE' with  her


.    MAC  IAIN  DIREACH.  '  335

tail,  and  the  point  of  her  tail  touched  the  post  of  the
gate,  and  it  let  out  a  screech.  /

'  :The  king  came  running,  and  he  took  the. filly  from
Maclain  Direach ;  and  he  said  to  him,. " I  .wovud . not
give  thee  the  Yellow  (Bay)  Filly,  unless  thou  shouldst
get  for  me  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  the  Frainge.*  ;
!  And  Maclain  Direach  needs  must  go ;  and  when  he
was  within  a  little  of  the  side  of  the-  sea  the  Gille
Mairtean  met  him;  and  he  said  to  him,  "Thou  art
down  in  the  mouth,  oh  son  of  Iain  Direach ;  thou
didst  not,  and  thou  wilt  not  do  as  I  ask  thee;  we
must  now  go  to  France.  I  will  make  myself  a  ship,
and  go  thou  on  board,  and  I  will  not  be  long  till  I
take  thee  to  France."

The  Gille  Mairtean  put  himself  in  the  shape  of  a
ship,  and  Maclain  Direach  went  on  board  of  her,  and
the  Gille  Mairtean  sailed  to  France  with  him,  and  he
ran  himself  on  high  up  the  face  of  a  rock,  on  dry
land  ;  and  he  said  to  Maclain  Direach  "  to  go  up  to  the
king's  house  and  to  ask  help,  and  to  say  that  his  skip-
per had  been  lost,  and  his  ship  thrown  on  shore."

Maclain  Direach  went  to  the  king's  house,  and  he
struck  at  the  door ;  one  came  out  to  see  who  was
there ;  he  told  his  tale  and  he  was  taken  into  the
fort  The  king  asked  him  whence  he  was,  and  what
he  was  doing  here.  .

.  He  told  them  the  tale  of  misery;  "that  a  great
storm  had  come  on  him,  and  the  skipper  he  had  was
lost;,  and  the.  ship  he  had  thrown  on  dry  land,  and
she  was  there,  driven  up  on  the  face  of  a  rock  by  the
waves,  and  that  he  did  not  know  how  he  should  get
her  out."

The  king  and  the  queen,  and  the  family  together,

*  France  is  always  meant  by  tliis  word  now — The  Frang,
AN  Fhbaing.


'^"m'^mm^mmm&m^K^mmmimmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmimmtammmmmmi^mmm'^i'mmtmmm


336  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

went  to  the  shore  to  see  the  ship  :  and  when  they
were  looking  at  the  ship,  exceeding  sweet  music  hegan
on  board  j  and  the  King  of  France's  daughter  went  on
board  to  see  the  musical  instrument,  together  with
Maclain  Direach ;  and  when  they  were  in  one  cham-
ber, the  music  would  be  in  another  chamber ;  but  at
last  they  heard  the  music  on  the  upper  deck  of  the
ship,  and  they  went  above  on  the  upper  deck  of  the
ship,  and  (so)  it  was  that  the  ship  was  out  on  the
ocean,  and  out  of  sight  of  land.

And  the  King  of  France's  daughter  said,  "  Bad  is
the  trick  thou  hast  done  to  me.  Where  art  thou  for
going  with  me?"

"  I  am,"  said  Maclain  Direach,  "  going  with  thee
to  Eirinn,  to  give  thee  as  a  wife  to  the  King  of  Eiriim,
so  that  I  may  get  from  him  his  Yellow  (Bay)  Filly,  to
give  her  to  the  Big  Women  of  Dhiurrath,  that  I  may
get  from  them  their  White  Glave  of  light,  to  give  it
to  the  Great  Giant  of  the  Five  Heads,  and  Five  Humps,
and  Five  Throttles,  that  I  may  get  from  him  his  Blue
Falcon,  to  take  her  home  to  my  muime,  that  I  may  be
free  from  my  crosses,  and  from  my  spells,  and  from
the  bad  diseases  of  the  year."

And  the  King  of  France's  daughter  said,  "  I  had
rather  be  as  a  wife  to  thyself."

And  when  they  came  to  shore  in  Eirinn,  the  Gille
Mairtean  put  himself  in  the  shape  of  a  fine  woman,  and
he  said  to  Maclain  Direach,  "  Leave  thou  the  King  of
France's  daughter  here  till  we  return,  and  I  will  go
with  thee  to  the  King  of  Eirinn  ;  I  will  give  him
enough  of  a  wife."

Maclain  Direach  went  with  the  Gille  Mairtean  in
the  form  of  a  fine  maiden,  with  his  hand  in  the  oxter
of  Maclain  Direach.  When  the  King  of  Eirinn  saw
them  coming  he  came  to  meet  them  ;  he  took  out  the


MAO  IAIN  DIREAOH.  337

Yellow  (Bay)  Filly  and  a  golden  saddle  on  her  back,
and  a  silver  bridle  in  her  head.

Maclain  Direach  went  with  the  filly  where  the
King  of  France's  daughter  was.  The  King  of  Eirinn
was  right  well  pleased  with  the  young  wife  he  had  got;
.  .  but  little  did  the  King  of  Eirinn  know  that  he
had  got  Gille  Mairtean ;  and  they  had  not  long  been
gone  to  rest,  when  the  Gille  Mairtean  sprung  on  the
king,  and  he  did  not  leave  a  morsel  of  fiesh  between
the  back  of  his  neck  and  his  haunch  that  he  did  not
take  off  him.  And  the  Gille  Mairtean  left  the  King
of  Eirinn  a  pitifiil  wounded  cripple  ;  and  he  went  run-
ning where  Maclain  Direach  was,  and  the  King  of
France's  daughter,  and  the  Yellow  (Bay)  Filly.

Said  the  Gille  Mairtean,  *^  I  will  go  into  the  form
of  a  ship,  and  go  you  on  board  of  her,  and  I  will  take
you  to  Diurrath ;  he  grew  into  the  form  of  a  ship ;
and  Maclain  Direach  put  in  the  Yellow  (Bay)  FiUy
first,  and  he  himself  and  the  King  of  France's  daughter
went  in  after  her ;  and  the  Gille  Mairtean  sailed  with
them  to  Diurrath,  and  they  went  on  shore  at  Creagan
nan  deargan,  at  cilla-mhoire,  at  the  northern  end  of
Diurrath ;  and  when  they  went  on  shore,  the  Gille
Mairtean  said,  "  Leave  thou  the  Yellow  (Bay)  Filly
here,  and  the  king's  daughter,  tiU  thou  i-etum ;  and  I
will  go  in  the  form  of  a  filly,  and  I  will  go  with  thee
to  the  Big  Women  of  Diurrath,  and  I  will  give  them
enough  of  filly-ing."

The  Gille  Mairtean  went  into  the  form  of  a  filly,
Maclain  Direach  put  the  golden  saddle  on  his  back,
and  the  silver  bridle  in  his  head,  and  he  went  to  the
Seven  Big  Women  of  Diurrath  with  him.  When  the
Seven  Big  Women  saw  him  coming,  they  came  to  meet
him  with  the  White  Glave  of  Light,  and  they  gave  it
to  him.     Maclain  Direach  took  the  golden  saddle  off

VOL.  XL  z


33^  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

the  back  of  the  Gille  Mairtean,  and  tìie  silver  bridle
out  of  his  head,  and  he  left  him  with  them  :  and  he
went  away  himself  with  the  White  Glave  of  light,
and  he  went  where  he  left  the  King  of  France's
daughter,  and  the  YeUow  Bay  Filly  which  he  got  from
the  King  of  Eirinn ;  and  the  Big  Women  of  Diurrath
thought  that  it  was  the  Yellow  Bay  Filly  of  the  King
of  Eirinn  that  they  had  got,  and  they  were  in  great
haste  to  ride.  They  put  a  saddle  on  her  back,  and
they  bridled  her  head,  and  one  of  them  went  up  on
her  back  to  ride  her,  another  went  up  at  the  back  of
that  one,  and  another  one  at  the  back  of  that  one,  and
there  was  always  room  for  another  one  there,  till  one
after  one,  the  Seven  Big  Women  went  up  on  the  back
of  the  Gille  Mairtean,  thinking  that  they  had  got  the
Yellow  Bay  FiUy.*

One  of  them  gave  a  blow  of  a  rod  to  the  Gille
Mairtean ;  and  if  she  gave,  he  ran,  and  he  raced  back-
wards and  forwards  with  them  through  the  mountain
moors  ;  and  at  last  he  went  bounding  on  high  to  the
top  of  the  MoNADH  mountain  of  Duirrath,  and  he
reached  the  top  of  the  face  of  the  great  crag,  that  is
there,  and  he  moved  his  front  to  the  crag,  and  he  put
his  two  fore  feet  to  the  front  of  the  crag,  and  he  threw
his  aftermost  end  on  high,  and  he  threw  the  Seven
Big  Women  over  the  crag,  and  he  went  away  laugh-
ing ;  and  he  reached  where  were  Maclain  Direach  and
the  King  of  France's  daughter,  with  the  Yellow  Bay
FiUy,  and  the  White  Glave  of  Light.

Said  the  Gille  Mairtean,  "  I  will  put  myself  in  the
form  of  a  boat,  and  go  thyself  and  the  daughter  of  the
King  of  France  on  board,  and  take  with  you  the  Yellow

*  This  incident  is  told  of  a  baj  water-horse  in  Sutherland.
"  The  Seven  Herds  of  Sollochie."


MAO  IAIN  DIBEAOH.  339

Bay  Filly  and  the  White  Glave  of  light,  and  I  wiU
take  you  to  mahdand."

The  Gille  Mairtean  put  himself  in  the  shape  of  a
boat ;  Maclaui  Direach  put  the  White  Glave  of  light
and  the  Yellow  Bay  Filly  on  board,  and  he  went  him-
self and  the  King  of  France's  daughter,  in  on  board
after  them ;  and  the  GUle  Mairtean  went  with  them
to  the  mainland.  When  they  reached  shore,  the  Gille
Mairtean  put  himself  into  his  own  shape,  and  he  said
to  Maclain  Direach —

"  Leave  thou  the  King  of  France's  daughter,  the
Yellow  Bay  Filly  from  the  King  of  FnTÌTìn^  and  the
White  Glave  of  light  there,  and  I  will  go  into  the
shape  of  a  White  Glave  of  Light ;  and  take  thou  me
to  the  giant  and  give  thou  me  to  him  for  the  falcon,
and  I  will  give  him  enough  of  swords."

The  Gille  Mairtean  put  himseK  into  the  form  of  a
sword,  and  Maclain  Direach  took  him  to  the  giant ;
and  when  the  giant  saw  him  coming  he  put  the  blue
falcon  into  a  Muiblag,*  and  he  gave  it  to  Maclain
Direach,  and  he  went  away  with  it  to  where  he  had
left  the  King  of  France's  daughter,  the  Yellow  Bay
Filly,  and  the  White  Glave  of  Light

The  giant  went  in  with  the  Gille  Mairtean  in  his
hand,  himself  thinking  that  it  was  the  White  Glave  of
light  of  the  Big  Women  of  Diurrath  that  he  had,  and
he  began  at  Fionnsaibeach,  fencing,  and  at  sguaisbal,
slashing  with  it ;  but  at  last  the  Gille  Mairtean  bent
himself,  and  he  swept  the  five  heads  off  the  giant,  and
he  went  where  Maclain  Direach  was,  and  he  said  to
him,  "  Son  of  John  the  Upright,  put  the  saddle  of  gold
on  the  filly,  and  the  silver  bridle  in  her  head,  and  go

*  A  basket,  shaped  like  an  egg,  witif  a  hole  at  the  middle.
(Dewar.)  Sach  baskets,'  with  hens  in  them,  may  be  seen  now-a-
days.— J.  F.  C.


340  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

thyself  riding  her,  and  take  the  Xing  of  France's
daughter  at  thy  back,  and  the  White  Glave  of  light
with  its  back  against  thy  nose ;  or  else  if  thou  be  not
so,  when  thy  muime  sees  thee,  she  has  a  glance  that
is  so  deadly  that  she  will  bewitch  thee,  and  thou  wilt
fall  a  faggot  of  firewood  ;  but  if  the  back  of  the  sword
is  against  thy  nose,  and  its  edge  to  her,  when  she  tries
to  bewitch  thee,  she  will  fall  down  herself  as  a  faggot
of  sticks.

Maclain  Direach  did  as  the  Gille  Mairtean  asked
him  ;  and  when  he  came  in  sight  of  the  house,  and
his  muime  looked  at  him  with  a  deadly  bewitching
eye,  she  fell  as  a  faggot  of  sticks,  and  Maclain  Direach
set  fire  to  her,  and  then  he  was  free  from  fear  ;  and  he
had  got  the  Best  Wife  in  Albainn ;  and  the  Yellow  Bay
Filly  was  so  swift  that  she  could  leave  the  one  wind
and  she  would  catch  the  other  wind,  and  the  Blue
Falcon  would  keep  him  in  plenty  of  game,  and  the
White  Glave  of  light  would  keep  off  each  foe ;  and
Maclain  Direach  was  steadily,  luckily  off

Said  Maclain  Direach  to  the  Gille  Mairtean,  "  Thou
art  welcome,  thou  Lad  of  March,  to  go  through  Iny
ground,  and  to  take  any  beast  thou  dost  desire  thyself
to  take  with  thee  ;  and  I  will  give  word  to  my  ser-
vants that  they  do  not  let  an  arrow  at  thee,  and  that
they  do  not  kill  thee,  nor  any  of  thy  race,  whatever
one  of  the  flock  thou  takest  with  thee."

Said  the  Gille  Mairtean,  "  Keep  thou  thy  herds  to
thyself ;  there  is  many  a  one  who  has  wethers  and  sheep
as  well  as  thou  hast,  and  I  will  get  plenty  of  flesh  in
another  place  without  coming  to  put  trouble  on  thee  ;
and  the  Fox  gave  a  blessing  to  the  son  of  Upright
John,  and  he  wentT  away  ;  and  the  tale  was  spent


mmmmmmm^m


SGEULàGHD  MIG  IAIN  DIRIOH.  34I


SGEDLACHD  MIC  IAIN  DIRICH.

Bha  uaireiginn  Righ  agos  Bannrigh  ann,  's  bha  aca  aona  mhac,  ach
shiubhail  a*  Bhan-righ  agus  phòs  an  righ  bean  eile.  B*è  an  t'  ainm
a  bha  air  mac  na  ciad  Bbannrigh  Iain  Direach.  Bba  è  'na  ghille
dreachmhor.  Bha  è  'na  shealgair  *s  cha  robh  eun  air  an  tilgeadh  è  a
fihaighead  nach  leagadh  e.  Agus  mharbhadh  e  na  feidh  's  na  earb-
aichean  aig  astar  mòr  uaidh.  Cha  robh  latha  a  rachadh  e  a  mach  le
bbogha  *s  a  dhòrlach  nach  tugadh  e  dachaidh  sithionn.

Bha  e  aon  latha  ann  'sa  bheinn  sheilg  aig  sealg,  's  cha  d'  fhnair  e
sithionn  air  bhith  ach  thainig  seabhag  ghorm  seachad  air,  's  leig  è
saighead  rithe,  ach  cha  do  rinn  e  ach  aon  iteag  a  chuir  as  a  sgiath.
Thog  e  an  iteag,  's  chuir  è  na  bholg  seilg  i,  's  thug  e  dachaidh  i,  's  a
nuair  a  thainig  e  dachaidh,  thubhairt  a  mhuime  ris,  ''  C  àite  am
bheil  do  shithionn  an  diugh?  "  *8  chuir  esan  a  lamh  a  stigh  na  bholg
seilg,  's  thug  6  a  mach  an  iteag,  's  thug  è  d'i  i.

'S  ghabh  a  mhuime  an  iteag  'na  laimh,  's  sheall  i  urra,  *8  thubhairt
i, "  Tha  mise  a'  cuir  mar  chrosaibh  's  mar  gheasaibh  's  mar  eusaibh  na
bliadhna  ortsa,  nach  bi  thu  gun  loba  a'  d'  bhròig,  a's  gum  bi  thu  gu
fliucfa,  fuar,  salach,  gus  gu'm  faigh  thu  dhomhsa,  an  eun  as  an  d*
thainig  an  iteag  sin."

S  thubhairt  esan  ri  a  mhnime ;  ''  Tha  mise  a  cuir  mar  chros  'n  *s
mar  gheas*n  a's  mar  eusan  na  bliadhna  ortsa,  gum  bith  thu  a*d'  seas-
amh  *B  an  dama  cas  agad  air  an  tigh  mhòr  's  a  chas  eile  air  a  Chaist-
eal,  agus  gum  bi  t'  aodann  ri  aghaidh  nan  siantaidhean,  ga  b'e  gaoth
a  sh^ideas,  gus  gu'm  pill  mise  air  m'  ais."

'S  dh'  fhalbh  Mac  lain  Dirich  cho  luath  'sa  b'  urrainn  da,  a  dh'
iarraidh  an  coin  as  an  d'  thainig  an  itea.^,  's  bha  'mhuime,  na  seas-
amh  a's  an  dama  cas  aic'  air  a'  chaisteal,  a's  a*  chas  eile  aic'  air  an  tigh
mhòr,  gus  an  tigeadh  e  air  ais,  agus,  cuideachd,  bha  a  h-aodann  ri
aghaidh  nan  sian,  gab'e  aird  as  an  seideadh  a  ghaoth,  gus  an  tigeadh
esan  air  ais  a  riUiisd,  cia  air  bith  co  fada  is  a  bhitheadh  e  gu'n
tighinn.

Bha  Mac  Iain  Dirich  air  falbh  a'  siubhal  nam  f&sach,  a  sheall  am
faiceadh  e  an  t-seabhaig,  ach  an  t-seabhag  cha  b'  urrainn  d*a  fhaic-
inn,  's  moran  na  bu  lugha  na  sin  cha  b*  urrainn  da  a  faotuinn.  A's
bha  e  a'  falbh  leis  fhein  air  feadh  na  f&saich  's  e  a'  tighinn  dliith  air  an
oidhche,  bha  na  h-eoin  bheaga  bhaidealach  a'  dol  o  bhàrr  nam  preas,
o  dhos  gu  dos,  's  gu  bun  nan  dris,  a'  dol  gu  tàmh,  is  gad  bha  cha
robh  esan  a*  dol  ann,  gus  an  d'  thainig  an  oidhche  dhàll  dhorcha,  a's


34^  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

chaidh  e  's  chrùbain  è  aig  btin  pris,  s  co  a  thainig  an  ratbad  ach  an  gille
màìrteiu,  's  thubhairt  e  ris,  "  Beul-sios  ort  a  mhic  Iain  Dirich,  is  olc  an
oidhcbe  an  d*  tbainig  thn;  cba  'eil  agam  fhein  an  nochd  ach  aon  spàg
moìlt,  's  aon  leath-cheann  canra,  ach  is  ^igin  a  bhith  a  deanadh  leis."
Bheothaich  iad  gealbhan  's  ròist  iad  feoil,  's  dh'  ith  iad  an  spòig  mnilt  's
an  leath-cheann  caora,  's  aig  a'  mhaduinn,  thubhairt  an  gille-mairtein,
ri  mac  an  righ,  ''A  Mhic  Iain  Dirich,  tha  an  t-seabhag  a  tha  thn  ag
iarraidh  aig  famhair  mòr  nan  cnig  cinn,  nan  cnig  mill  's  na'n  coig
mnineal,  's  leigidh  mise  fhaicinn  doit  far  am  bheil  an  tigh  aige,  agns
's  e  mo  chomhairle-sa  dhnit  thu  a  dhol  gu  a  bhith  mad'  ghille  aige,  a*8
thu  a  bhith  gn  easgaidh,  ealamh  a  dheanamh  gach  ni  a  theid  iarraidh
ort,  a's  gach  ni  a  theid  earbaidh  rint,  's  bith  ra  mhath  ris  na  h-eoin
aige,  's  math  a  dh-fhaoid  t'  gnn  earb  e  rint  an  t-seabhag  a  bhiadh,
's  a  nnair  a  gheibh  thusa  an  t-seabhaig  ri  bhiadhadh,  bi  ra  mhath
rithe,  gns  gn  'm  faigh  thu  fàth,  an  uair  nach  bi  am  famhair  aig  aù
tigh,  mith  air  falbh  leatha,  ach  thoir  an  aire,  nach  bean  nibhir  is  aon
ite  dh'  1  do  ni  air  bith,  do  na  tha  air  taobh  a  stigh  an  taighe,  air  neo
ma  bheanas  cha  teid  leat."

Thuirt  Mac  Iain  Dirich  gu'n  thugadh  e  an  fhaire  air  sin,  a*s  dh*
fhalbh  e  a  dh'  ionnsaidh  tigh  an  fbamhair.  Bainig  e,  *s  bhnail  e  aig  an
doms.

Ghlaodh  am  famhair,  **  Co  a  tha  ann  an  sm  ?  "  '^  Tha  mise,"  thnirt
Mac  Iain  Dirich,  **  fear  a  tha  a'  tighinn  a  sheall  am  bheil  fenm  agad
air  gille."

*'  Dè  an  obair  as  nrrainn  duit  a  dheanamh?''  orsa  am  famhair.

**  ThV'  orsa  Mac  Iain  Dirich,  **  is  nrrainn  domh  eunlaidh  's  mncan
abhiadhadh,  's  bb,  na  gabhair,  na  caoirich  a  bhiadhadh  a 's  a  bleogh-
an."

**  'S  e  do  leithid  a  tha  a  dhith  orm,"  thuirt  am  famhair.

Thainig  am  famhair  a  mach  's  chnir  e  tuarasdal  air  Mac  Iain
Dirich.  A 's  bha  e  a'  tobhairt  aire  ra  mhath  air  gach  ni  a  bha  aig  aa
fhamhair,  's  bha  e  ra  mhath  ris  na  oearcan  's  ris  na  tonnagan,  a 's  thng
am  famhair  an  fhaire  cho  math  is  a  bha  e  a  deanamh,  's  thubhairt  e
gn'  m  bn  math  a  bhòrd  fun  a  thainig  Mac  Iain  Dirich  seach  mar  a
bha  e  aroimhe,  gu  'm  b'  fhearr  leis  aona  chearc,  do  na  bha  è  a'  faotainn
an  nise  na  dithis  do  na  gheibheadh  e  roimhe,  ^  Tha  mo  ghille  co
math,  's  gum  bheil  dtiil  agam  gn'm  faot  mi  earbadh  ris  an  t-seabhag  a
bhiadhadh."  A's  thug  am  famhair  an  t-seabhag  do  Mhac  Iain  Dirich
ri  bhiadhadh,  'a  thug  e  an  fhaire  shònraichte  air  an  t-seabhag.

'S  a  nuair  a  chunnaic  am  famhair  cho  math  is  a  bha  Mac  Iain
Dirich  a'  toirt  aire  air  an  t-seabhaig ;  bha  leis  gu  'm  faotadh  e  a  h-
earbadh  ris  a  nuair  a  bhltheadh  e  fhein  bho  'n  tigh.  S  thug  am  fiuBh-


SOEULAOHD  MIC  IAIN  DIBIGH.  $43

air  da  an  t-seabhag  ri  gleidh,  's  bha  Mac  Iain  Dirich  a'  tobhairt  an
fhaire  shonraichte  air  an  t-seabhaig.

Bha  Ida  an  fhamhair,  gn  'n  robh  gach  ni  a*  dol  ga  oeart  Agns
dh*  fhalbh  e  o'n  tigh  aon  latlia ;  a 's  smoaintich  Mac  Iain  Dirich,  gn
'm  b'e  sin  an  t-am  ga  mith  air  falbh  lets  an  t-seabhag,  'a  bheir  e  air
an  t-seabhaig  gn  falbh  leatha.  A  's  a  nuair  a  bha  e  a'  fosgladh  an
doruis,  is  a  chonnaic  an  t-seabhag  an  solus,  sgaoil  i  a  sgiathan  gu
lenm,  *s  bhean  barr  h-aon  do  na  itean,  aig  aon  do  na  sgiathan  aioe  do
aon  do  nrsainnean  an  doniis.  *S  leigan  nrsainn  sgreach  as.  Thainig
amfamhairdachaidh  'namith,  's  bheir  e  air  Mac  Iain  Dirich, 's  thng
6  uaidh  an  t-seabhag,  a  's  thubhairt  e  ris,  ^  Cha  tagainnsa  dhnit
mo  sheabhag,  mar  faighidh  tn  domh  an  claidheamh  geal  solnis  a
tha  aig  seachd  mnathan  mora  Dhiorath,"  's  chair  am  famiiMr  Mac
Iain  Dirich  air  falbh.

Chaidh  Mac  Iain  Dirich  a  rithisd  troimhe  an  fhàsaich,  's  ehoinnich
an  gille-màirtein  air,  's  thabhairt  e ;  "  Beul  sios  ort  a  Mhic  Iain
Dirich,  cha  do  rinn,  's  cha  dean  tha  mar  a  dh'  iarras  misidh  ort,  is
olc  an  oidhche  an  d'  thainig  thu  an  nochd,  cha  'n'ell  agam  ach  aon
spoig  moilt,  agofl  aon  leth-cheann  caorach*  is  eiginn  a  bhith  deanamh
leis."

Bheothaich  iad  gealbhan,  *s  rinn  iad  deis  an  spkg  muilte  's  an
leth-cheann  caora,  's  ghabh  iad  biadh  *s  chadal.  Agus  an  ath  latha^
thabhairt  an  gilie-màiitean,  thdd  sinn  gn  taobh  a'  chuain.

Chaidh  iad 's  rainig  iad  taobh  a  chuain ;  *&  thairt  an  gille-mkirt-
ean,  '*  Cinnidh  mise  ann  a*m*  bhkta,  's  rach  thasa  air  bòrt  orra,  's  bheir
mi  a  nnll  ga  Diurath  tha,  's  rach  a  dh'  ionnsaidh  seachd  mnathan
mora  Dhiarath,  's  iarr  seirbhis,  ga  tha  a  bhith  nad'  ghille  aca,  's  tra
a  dh'  fharraidies  iad  d'  iot,  ga-d^  is  orrainn  dait  a  dheanamh,  abair
riathit,  ga'm  bheil  tha  math  ahr  glanadh  iarnnn  agas  stìdlinn,  or  agus
airgiod,  agus  ga  'n  dean  thu  gu  glan,  soillear,  deàrlach  iad,  a 's  thoir
an  fhaire  shònraiehte  gu  *n  dean  thu  gach  ni  gu  ceart,  gus  gu  'n
earb  iad  an  claidheamh  geal-soluis  riut,  's  an  uair  a  gheibh  thu  fàth,
rufth  air  falbh  leis,  ach  thoir  an  fhaire,  nach  bean  an  truaill  do  ni  air
bith  air  taobh  a  stigh  an  taighe,  aimeo  ni  e  sgread  's  cha  teid  do
ghnothach  leat."

Chinn  an  gille  mairtean  'na  bhàta,  's  chaidh  Mac  Iain  Dirich  air
bòrd  urra,  's  thainig  i  air  tìr  aig  creagan  nan  deargan  aig  taobh  ma
thuath  Dhiiirath,  's  leum  Mao  Iain  Dirich  air  tir.  'S  chaidh  e  a
ghabhail  muintireas  aig  seachd  mnathan  mora  Dhihrath.  Bainig  e
a  *8  bhuail  e  aig  an  dorus,  thainig  na  seachd  mnathan  mòr  a  mach,
*s  dh*  fharraid  iad  ga-dè  a  bha  e  ag  iarraidh.  Thubhairt  e,  ga  *n
thainig  e  a  sheall  an  robh  feum  aoa  air  gille ;  dh'  fharraid  iad  deth.


344  '^'^ST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

ciod  a  b'  urrainn  d'a  a  dheanamh.  Thuirt  e,  gu  *in  V  urrainn  d^a  or
's  airgiod,  na  iarunn  na  stàilinn,  a  ghlanadh,  's  an  deanamh  ga
soilieir,  geal,  dearrsgnoidb.  Thuirt  iad  **  Thado  leithid  a  dhith  oim,"
's  cbuir  iad  tnarasdal  air.

Agasbba  e  ra  dhicbiollach  re  sè  seachdainean,  'a  cbnir  e  na  h-aile
ni  an  an  ordagh  anbharra.  A  's  thug  na  mnatban  mbr  an  fbaire  dh'
a,  's  bba  iad  ag  radh  ri  cbefle.  *<  'S  e  so  an  gille  is  f  hearr  a  bha  againn
riamh,  faotaidh  sinn  an  daidheamb  geal  soluis  earbadh  ris.**

Thng  iad  d'a  an  claidheamh  geal-soluis  ri  ghleidh  an  ordagh,  agos
bha  esan  a'  toirt  aire  sbònraichte  air  a'  chlaidbeamh  gheal-sboluis  gus
aon  latha  nach  robh  na  mnathan  mòr  aig  an  tigh.  Smuainich  esan
gu  'm  b'  è  sin  an  t-am  dh*  àsan  gu  ruith  air  falbh  leis  a'  chlaidbeamh
gheal  sholuis ;  chuir  e  ann  'san  truaill  e,  's  thog  e  air  a  ghoalainn  e ;
ach  a  nnair  a  bha  e  a'  dol  a  mach  air  an  dorus,  bhean  barr  an  truaill
do  an  ard-dorus,  's  rinn  an  t-ard-dorns  sgread,  's  ruidh  na  nmathan
mòr  dachaidh,  's  thug  iad  uaidh  an  claidheamh,  's  thuirt  iad  ris.  Cha
tugamaid  duit  nair  claidheamh  geal-soluis,  mar  faigheadh  tu  dhhinne
au  fhalaire  bbuidh  aig  righ  Eirinn.

Dh'  fhalbh  Mac  Iain  Dirich  gu  taobh  a*  chuain,  's  choinnich  an
gille -màirtean  air,  's  thuirt  e  ris,  *'  Beul  sios  ort  a  Mhic  Iain  Dirich,
cha  do  rinn 's  cha  dean  thu  mar  a  dh'  iarras  mis'  ort ;  cha  'n  'eil  agam
an  nochd  ach  aon  spog  muilte,  's  aon  leth-cheann  caora,  ach  is
eiginn  a  bbith  a'  deanamh  leis."  Bheothaich  iad  gealbhan,  's  roist
iad  feoil,  ghabh  iad  biadh  's  bha  iad  subhach.  An  ath  latha  thubhairt
an  gille-màirtean  ri  Mac  Iain  Dirich.  "  Cinnidh  mise  ann  'm  bhàrca
's  rach  thnsa  air  bòrt  urra,  's  theid  mi  a  dh'  Eirinn  leat,  's  a  nuair  a
ruigeas  sinn  Eirinn  rach  thusa  'dh'  ionnsaidh  tigh  an  righ,  as  iarr
seirbhis  gu  a  bhith  ann  a'  d'  ghille  stàpuil  aige,  's  a  nuair  a  gheibb  thu
sin,  bith  gu  easgaidh,  ealamh  a  dheanamh  gach  ni  a  tha  ri  dheanamh,
a  's  gleidh  na  h-eich  agus  an  usair  ann  'n  òrdugh  ra  mbath,  gus  gu
'h  earb  an  righ  an  fhalaire  bhuidh  nut,  a 's  a  nuair  a  gheibh  thu
fàth  ruith  air  falbh  leatha.

^*  Ach  thoir  an  fhaire  tra  a  bhitheas  tu  ga  toirt  a  mach,  nach  bean
mire  air  bith  dh*  i,  do  ni  air  bith  air  taobh  a  stigh  a'  gfaeata,  ach
bonnaibh  nan  cas  aice,  air  neo  cha  soirbhich  do  ghnothach  leat."

Agus  an  sin,  chuir  an  gille-màirtean  e  fhein  ann  an  riochd
bàrca,  chaidh  Mac  Iain  Dirich  air  bòrd,  's  sheol  a*  bhàrca  leis  do  dh'
Eirinn.  Tra  a  rainig  iad  tir  na  b-Eirionn,  leum  Mac  Iain  Dirich  air
tir,  's  chaidh  e  gu  tigh  an  righ ;  's  a  nuair  a  rainig  e  an  geata,  dh'
fharraid  fear  gleidh  a'  gheata  d'e  c'aite  an  robh  e  a'  dol,  *s  thubhairt
esan,  gu  'n  robh  e  a'  dol  a  shealltinn  an  robh  gille  stàpuil  a  dlùth  air
an  righ,  'sleig  fear  gleidh  a'  gheata  seachad  e,  's  rainig  e  tigh  an  righ.


SGEULAOHD  MIC  lÀlK  DIBIGH.  345

bhuail  e  aig  an  doms,  's  thainig  an  righ  a  mach ;  agns  thnbhairt  an
righ,  *'  De  a  tha  thu  ag  iarraidh  ann  an  so  ?'*

Thuirt  esan,  **  Le  n'  air  cead,  'sann  a  thainig  mi  a  shealltuinnj  an
robh  feom  agaibh  air  gille  stàpuil."

Dh'  fharraid  an  righ,  "  Ciod  a's  nrrainn  dnit  a  dheanamh  ?'*

Thnirt  esan,  "  Is  urrainn  mi  na  h-eich  a  ghlanadh  's  am  biadb-
adh,  a  's  an  usair  aca  ghlanadh,  a 's  an  obair  airgiod  a  's  an  obair
stàilinn  a  ghlanadh,  agus  an  deanadh  dearrsgnnidh."

Chuir  an  righ  toarasdal  air ;  's  chaidh  e  do  an  stàpall.  'S  chuir  e
gach  IÙ  an  òrdugh  math,  thug  e  aire  mhath  air  na  eich,  bhiadh  e  ga
math  iad,  's  ghleidh  e  glan  iad,  's  bha  an  craicionn  aca  ag  amhrac
sliom,  a's  an  obair  airgiod  's  an  obair  stailinn  gu  dearrsgnnidh  ag
amhrac,  's  cha'n  fhaca  an  righ  iad  cho  math  an  ordugh  riamh  roimh.
Agus  thubhairt  e,  '''S  e  so  an  gille  stàpuil  is  fhearr  a  bha  agam
riamh,  faotaidh  mi  an  fhàlaire  bhuidh  earbadh  ris."

Thug  an  righ  an  fhàlaire  bhuidh  do  Mhac  Iain  Dirich  ri  ghleidh,
agus  thug  Mac  Iain  Dirich  an  fhaire  shònraichte  air  an  fhàlaire
bhuidh,  bhiadh  e,  's  ghleidh  e  glan  i,  gus  an  robh  an  craicionn  aice  gu
sliom  sleamhainn,  's  i  cho  luath  a's  gu'm  fagadh  i  an  darna  gaoth,  's
gu'm  beireadh  i  air  a'  ghaoth  eile.  Cha'n  fhaca  an  righ  i  riamh  cho
math.

Chaidh  an  righ  aon  latha  do*n  bheinn  sheilg ;  Agus  smuaintich
Mac  Iain  Dirich,  gu*m  b'e  sin  an  t-am  gu  ruith  air  falbh  leis  an  fhàl-
aire,  chuir  e  na  h-iiim  i  le  srian  's  diolaid,  's  tra  thug  e  a  mach  as  an
stàpull  i,  's  a  bha  e  ga  toirt  a  mach  troimhe'n  gbeata,  thug  i  sguaise
le  a  h-earbull  's  bhean  barr  a  h-earbaill  do  hrsainn  a'  gheata,  a's  leig  i
sgread  aiste.

Thainig  an  righ  'na  ruith  's  thug  e  o  Mhac  Iain  Direach  an  fhàl-
aire,  agus  thubhairt  e  ris,  "  Cha  tugainnsa  dhuit  an  fhàlaire  bhuidh,
mar  faigheadh  tu  dhomh  nighean  righ  na  Frainge."

Agus  b*  eiginn  do  Mhac  Iain  Dirich  falbh,  's  a  nuair  a  bha  e  mar
bheagan  do  thaobh  na  mara,  choinnich  an  gille  màirtean  air,  *8
thubhairt  e  ris,  *'  Beul  sios  ort  a  Mhic  lain  Dirich,  cha  do  rinn  's  cha
dean  thu  mar  a  dh'iarras  mise  ort,  is  eiginn  duinne  an  nis  dol  do'n
Fhraing.  Ni  mise  mi  fhein  ann  a'm'  long,  's  rach  thusa  air  bòrd,  a's
cha'n  fhada  a  bhithis  mise  gus  an  toir  mi  do'n  Fhraing  thu."

Chuir  an  gille-màirtean  e  fhein  ann  'n  riochd  long,  's  chaidh  Mac
Iain  Dirich  air  bòrd  urra,  's  sheol  an  gille  màirtein  do'n  Fhraing
leis,  's  ruith  e  a  fhein  an  aird  ri  aodann  craige  air  tir  tioram,  's  thubh-
airt e  ri  Mac  Iain  Dirich  e  a  dhol  an  aird  gu  tigh  an  righ  a  dh'
iarraidh  cobhair  a  's  e  a  gh'  radh,  gu  'n  deachaidh  an  sgioba  a  chall,
a*8  an  long  aige  a  thilgeadh  air  tir.   Chaidh  Mac  Iain  Dirich  gu  tigh


34^  WEST  HIGHLAITO  TALES.

an  righ,  *8  bhtuiil  e  aig  an  dorns,  thainig  a  h-aon  a  mach  a  dh'
fhaicinn  co  a  bha  ann,  dh'  innis  e  a  sgenl,  *8  chaidh  a  thobhairt  a  stigh
do  'n  liichairt ;  dh'  fharraid  an  righ  dheih,  da  as  a  bha  e,  's  gn-dè  a
bha  e  a  deanamh  an  so.  Dh'  innis  e  sgenl  na  tniaighe  dhaibh,  gn  'n
d'  thainig  stoirm  mhbr  air,  's  gun  deachaidh  an  sgioba  a  bh'  aige  a
chall,  a 's  an  long  a  bh'  aige,  a  thilgeadh  air  tìr  tioram,  's  gn  'n  robh
i  an  siod,  air  a  cnir  an  sard  ri  aodann  creìge,lei8  na  tonnan,  'a  nach
robh  fios  aige,  gn-dè  mar  a  gheibheadh  e  as  i.

Chaidh  an  ligh  a's  a'  Bhanrigh,  's  an  teaghlach  gu  leir,  gns  a*
chladach,  a  dh'  fhaicinn  na  long,  's  tra  bha  iad  ag  amhrac  na  luing,
thbisich  ceol  anbharra  binn  air  bòrd.  Agus  chaidh  nighean  righ  na
Erainge,  air  bbrd,  a  dh'  fhaicinn  an  inneal  chitiil,  combla  ri  Mac  Iain
lAreach ;  'S  an  uair  a  bhitheadh  iadsan  ann  an  aon  seombar,  bhitheadh
an  oeol  ann  an  seombar  eile;  ach  ma  dhdreadh,  chnaladh  an  oeol
air  dair  nachdair  na  luinge,  's  chaidh  iad  an  aird,  air  a  clar  nachd-
air  na  long.  Agns  'sann  a  bha  an  long,  a  mach  air  a'  chuan  a
seailadh  tìr.

'S  thnbhairt  nighean  righ  na  Frainge,  "  Is  olc  an  cleas  a  rinn  thn
orm,  c'àite  am  bh'eil  thn  los  dol  leam?"  *'  Thà;"  thubhairt  Mac  Iain
Dirich,  <*mi  a'  dol  leat  do  dh'  Eirinn,  gas  do  thoirt  mar  mhnaoidh  do
righ  Eirinn,  's  gu'm  faigb  mise  uaidhsan  an  fhàlaire  bhuidh  aige,  gus
a  tobhairt  do  mhnathan  mora  Dhihrath,  's  gnm  faigh  mi  napsan
an  claidheamh  geal  soluis  aca,  gus  a  thoirt  do  fhamhair  mbr  nan  coig
cinn,  nan  coig  mill,  's  nan  coig  mninealan,  's  ga'm  fiiigh  mi  naidhsan
an  t-seabhagghorm  aige,  gus  a  tobhairt  dachaidh  a  dh'  ionnsaidh  mo
mhuime,  's  gu'm  faigh  mi  saor  o  m'  chrosan,  a's  o  m'  gheasan,  's
bho  dhroch  eusaibh  na  bliadhna."

'S  thubhairt  nighean  righ  na  Frainge,  **  B'  fhearr  leamsa,  a  bhith
mar  mhnaoidh  agad  fein."

Agns  tra  thainig  iad  gu  Ùr  aig  Eirinn,  choir  an  gille-mldrtean  e
fein  ann  an  riochd  mnaoidh  bhriagh,  's  thoirt  e  ri  Mac  Iain  Dirich,
**  Fag  thnsa  nighean  righ  na  Frainge  ann  an  so  gos  go*n  till  sinn ;  's
iheid  mise  leat  gu  righ  na  h-Eirionn;  'S  bheir  mise  a  dhiol  mnatha
dh'a."

Chaidh  Mac  Iain  Diridi  a's  an  gille-mMrtean  gn  tigh  righ  na
h-£irionn,  *8  an  gil1&>màirtean  ann  an  riochd  nighean  bhriagh,  's  a
laimh  ann  'n  asgailt  Mhic  Iain  Dirich ;  Tra  chunnaic  righ  na  h-£irionn
iad  a'  tighinn,  thainig  e  'nan  coinnimh,  thug  e  a  roach  an  fhàlaire
bhuidh  agufl  diolaid  òir  air  a  druim,  's  srian  airgiod  as  a  ceann.
Dh'  f  halbh  Mac  Iain  Dirich  leis  an  f  hàlaire,  far  an  robh  nighean  righ
na  Frainge.  Bha  righ  Eirinn  ra  thoilichte  leis  a'  mhnaoidh  òg  a
fhuair  e;  's  bha  cho  beag  foighldin  aige,  is  ga'n  robh  e  a  los  dol  a


SGBULACHD  MIO  IAIN  DIBICH.  347

laidh  leatha,  ma'n  d'  thumg  an  oidhche.  Chaidh  leabA  a  dheanamh
deas  daibh,  's  chaidh  iad  a  luidh,  ach  is  beag  fios  a  bha  aig  righ  Eirinn
ga*m  b'e  an  gille  màirtean  a  bha  aige.  'S  cha  robh  iad  fada  nan  Inidh,
gas  an  do  learn  an  gille  màirtean  air  an  righ,  's  cha  d*  f  hag  e  mire
feoil  eadar  ciil  a  mhoineil  a's  a  bhunamhàsi  naoh  tug  e  dheth.

*S  dh'  f  halbh  an  gille-mairtean,  's  dh*  f  hlig  e  righ  na  h-£irionn  na
abalach  traagh  leònta,  's  chaidh  e  'na  raith  far  an  robh  Mac  Iain  Dirich
's  Nighean  righ  na  Frainge,  's  an  fhUaire  bhoidh.  Thnirt  an  gille-
màirtean,  **  Theid  mise  an  riochd  long,  's  rachadh  sibhse  air  bòrd
nira,  's  bheir  mi  gu  Dihrath  sibh.

Dh'  fhòs  e  ann  an  riochd  long,  'a  chulr  Mac  Iain  Dirich  an  f  hàlaire
bhnidh  a  stigh  an  tòiseach,  's  chaidh  e  f  hein  's  nighean  righ  na
FraingCf  a  stigh  as  a  dèigh.  Agns  sheol  an  gille-mkirtean  leo  gn
Dihrath  's  chaidh  iad  air  Ùr  aig  creagan  nan  deargan,  aig  Cille-
mhoire,  aig  ceann  mo  thnath  Dhiùrath.  'S  tra  chaidh  iad  air  tir,
thubhairt  an  gille-mMrtean,  *<Fag  thnsa  an  fhàlaire  bhuidh,  's
nighean  an  righ  ann  an  so,  gus  gun  till  thu,  's  theid  mise  ann  an
riochd  fàlaire,  's  theid  mi  leat  gn  mnathan  mora  Dhihrath,  's  bheir
mis'  an  diòl  falaireachd  dhaibh."

Chaidh  an  gille-màirtean  ann  an  riochd  fàlaire,  chnir  Mac  Iain
Dinch  an  diolaid  òir  air  a  dhrim,  's  an  t-srian  airgiod  na  cheann,  's
chaidh  e  a  dh*  ionnsaidh  seachd  mnathan  mòr  Dhihrathleis.  Noaira
chonnaic  na  seachd  mnathan  mbr  e  a'tighinn,thainig  iad  na  choineamh
leis  a  chlaidheamh  gheal-sholais,  's  thug  iad  d'a  e.  Thug  Mac  Iain
Dirich  an  diolaid  bir  far  dmim  a*  ghille-mhàirtean,  's  an  t^srian  air-
giod a  a  cheann,  's  dh'  fhàg  s-e  aca  e,  a's  dh'  f halbh  e  fhein  leis  a
chlaidheamh  gheal-sholuis,  's  chaidh  e  far  an  d*  fhàge  nighean  righ  na
Frainge,  'S  an  fhalaire  bhuidh  a  fhuair  e  0  righ  na  h-£irionn.  Agus
shaoil  mnathan  mbr  Dhitirath,gu'mb'efàlaire  bhuidh  righ  nah-Eirionn
a  fhuair  iadsan,  's  bha  cabhaig  mhòr  urra  gu  dol  g'a  marcachd.  Chuir
iad  diolaid  air  a  druim,  's  shrianaich  iad  a  ceann,  's  chaidh  t^  dhinbh  an
aird  air  a  drim,  gus  a  marcachd,  chaidh  t^  eile  an  aird  air  chlabh
na  tè  BÌDf  *B  iè  eile  aig  chlamh  na  te  sin,  's  bha  daonnan  rum  air  son
t4  eile  ann,  gus  h^on  an  deigh  h-aon,  gu'n  deachaidh  na  seachd
mnathan  mbr  air  druim  a'  ghilie-mhiuirtain,  's  diiil  aca  gu'm  b'e  an
fhalaire  bhuidh  a  bha  aca.

Thug  t4  dhiubh  buille  le  slait  do'n  ghille  mhàirtean,  's  ma  thug,
ruith,  's  roideasairich  e  air  ais,  's  air  aghaidh,  leo,  air  feadh  a  mhonaidh,
's  ma  dheireadh  chaidh  e  'na  leum-ruich,  an  aird  thun  mullach  monadh
Dhihrath,  's  rainig  e  mullach  aodann  na  creige  mbr'  a  tha  ann  an  sin,
'a  chiuraich  e  aghaidh  ris  a'  chreige,  's  chuir  e  a  dhà  chas  toisich  ri
beulaobh  na  creige,  's  thilg  e  an  aird  a  cheann  deiridh,  's  thilg  e  na


1


34^  ^^^^  HIGHLAND  TALES.

seachd  mnathan  mbr  thair  a*  chreige.  *S  dh  f  halbh  e  a*  gkrachdaich,  's
rainig  e  far  an  robh  Iain  Direach  's  nighean  righ  na  Frainge,  leis  an
fhàlaire  bhnidh,  agus  an  claidheamh'geal-soluis.

Thubhairt  an  gille-mairtean,  "Cuiridh  mise  mi  fhein  ann  an
riochd  bàta,  's  rach  fein  agns  nighean  righ  na  Frainge  air  bòrd,  a'  a
thagaibh  leibh  an  fhàlaire  bhuidh,  's  an  claidheamh  geal  soluis,  'a
bheir  mise  gu  tir  mòr  sibh."

Chuir  an  gille  mairtean  e  fhein  ann  an  riochd  bàta,  chair  Mac
Iain  Dirich  an  claidheamh  geal-Bolnis,  's  an  f  biilaire  bhuidh  air  bòrd,
*8  chaidh  e  fhein  's  nighean  righ  na  Frainge,  a  stigh  air  bòrd  as  an
deigb,  's  chaidh  an  gille  mkirtean  ga  tìr  mòr  leo.  Kuair  a  rainig  iad
tir,  chuir  an  gille-mairtein  se  fhein  na  riochd  fein,  's  thubhairt  e  ri
Mac  Iain  Dirich.

**  Fag  thusa  nighean  righ  na  Frainge,  an  f  halaire  bhuidh  o  righ
Eirinn,  's  an  claidheamh  geal  soluis,  ann  an  sin,  's  theid  mise  ann  an
riochd  claidheamh  geal  soluis,  's  thoir  thusa  a  dh'  ionnsaidh  an
f  hamhair  mi,  's  thoir  thusa  dh'  a^  mi  air  son  na  seabhaig,  's  bheir
mise  Mhiol  claidheamh  dh'  a.

Chuir  an  gille  mairtean  e  fein  an  riochd  claidheamh  geal  soluis.
'S  thug  Mac  lain  Dirich  leis  e  adh'  ionnsaidh  an  f  hamhair.  'S  tra  a
chunnaic  am  famhair  e  a'  tighinn  choir  e  an  t-seabhag  ghorm
ann  am  miirlag,  's  thug  e  do  Mhac  Iain  Dirich i,  's  dh'  f  halbh  e  leatha
gus  far  an  d'  f  hag  e  nighean  righ  na  Frainge,  an  f  halaire  bhuidh,  'a
an  claidheamh  geal  soluis.

Chaidh  am  famhair  a  stigh  leis  a'  ghille-mbairtean  'na  laimh,  's  e
fhein  a'  saoilsinm  ga'm  b'  e  claidheamh  geal  soluis  mnathan  mora
Dhihrath  a  bha  aige.  'S  thbisich  e  air  fionnsaireachd  's  air  sguàiseal
leis;  ach  ma  dheireadh,  liib  an  gille  màìrtein  fhein,  agus  sguids  e  na
còig  cinn  fàrr  an  f  hamhair,  's  chaidh  e  far  an  robh  Mac  Iain  Dirich,  's
thubhairt  e  ris.

**  A  Mhic  Iain  Dirich,  cuir  an  diolaid  òir  air  an  fhàlaire,  a's  an  t-
srian  airgiod  na  ceann ;  's  rach  fein  ga  marcachd,  a's  thoir  nigh-
ean righ  na  Frainge  aig  do  chlaobh  a's  an  claidheamh  geal  soluis,  's  a
chhl  ri  d'  shròin.  Air  neò  mar  bi  thu  mar  sin,  tra  du  do  mhhimè  tho,
tha  sealladh  aic'  a  tha  cho  nimh  is  gu'n  gon  i  thu,  's  tuitidh  tn  ann
a'd'chhal  chrionaich;  ach  ma  bhitheas  ciil  a'  chlaidheimh  rid'shròin,
's  am  faobhar  rithse,  a  nuair  a  dh'  fheuchas  i  ri  doghonadh,  tuitidh  i
fein  'na  chal  chrionaich."

Rinn  Mac  Iain  Dirich  mar  a  dh'  iarr  an  giUe-màirtean  air,  'a  a
nuair  a  thainig  e  an  sealladh  an  taigh,  's  a  sheall  a  mhuime  air  le
shil  nimheil,  ghoimheil,  thuit  i  'na  chal  chrionaich ;  's  chuir  Mac
Iain  Dirich  teine  rithe,  's  bha  e  an  sin  saor  o  eagal,  's  bha  aige  a'  bhean


MAC  IAIN  DIBEACH.  349

a  b'  fhearr  an  Albainn,  's  bha  an  fhàlaire  bhnidh  cho  luath  is  gu'm
fàgadh  i  an  darna  gaoith,  's  bheireadh  i  air  a'  ghaoith  eile,  's  chnm-
adh  an  t-seabhag  ghorm  am  pailteas  sithinn  ns,  's  chmnadh,  an
claidheamh  geal-soluis  air  falbh  gach  nàmhaid,  's  bha  Mac  Iain
Dirich  gn  sochdrach  sona  dheth.

Thuirt  Mac  Iain  Dirich  ris  a'  ghille  mhàirtean,  '<  'S  è  do  bheatha
'ille-mhàirtean  ga  dol  feadh  mo  ghrimd  's  beothach  air  bith  a  shand-
aicheas  tn  fein  a  ghabhail  a  thoirt  leat,  *s  bheir  mise  àithne  do  m*
ghillean,  nach  tilg  iad  saithead,  's  nach  marbh  iad  thn  fhein  na  gin
do  d  àl,  ga  b*e  aon  do  an  trend  a  bheir  thn  leat

Thubhairtan  gille-màirtean,  <<61eidh  thusa  do  tbreud  dhuit  fhein,
is  iomadh  fear  aig  am  bheil  muilt  a's  caoirich  cho  math  is  a  tha
agadsa,  's  gheibh  mise  am  pailteas  feoil  an  àite  eile  gun  tighinn  a
chuir  dradh  ortsa,  *8  thug  an  gille-màirtean  beannachd  le  Mac  Iain
D^ich  'a  dh'  fhàlbh  e,  's  theirig  an  sgenl.

Told  by  Angus  Campbell,  qnarryman,  Knockderry,  Roseneath.
Written  by  John  Dewar,  whose  language  has  been  strictly  fol-
lowed. This  dialect  of  Gaelic  seems  to  contain  English  idioms ;
and  varies  from  the  island  Gaelic,  especially  in  grammatical  con-
struction.

In  this  form  the  intention  of  the  story  seems  to  be  the  same
as  that  of  Murchag  or  Mionachag,  No.  8.  Every  incident  gives
rise  to  another  till  the  whole  unwinds  as  a  chain  of  cause  and
effect ;  a  single  feather  is  the  first  link,  and  a  Princess  the  last,
and  then  the  whole  is  run  back  again  and  the  chain  wound  up,
and  it  ends  with  Theirig  an  sgeul,  which  means  that  the  story
came  to  an  end  because  there  was  no  more  of  it.

It  is  worth  remark,  that  the  objects  sought  are  those  which
have  been  valued  from  the  very  earliest  of  times ;  a  Falcon,  a
Sword,  a  Horse,  and  a  fair  Lady.  The  story  might  belong  to  any
country  and  to  any  age.  The  scene  is  as  usual  laid  to  the  west-
ward, as  far  as  it  will  go,  and  then  it  turns  back  to  the  nearest
and  best  known  foreign  country.

Only  two  spots  are  specified — one  is  close  to  the  Gulf  of  Corrie
Bhreacan,  the  most  remarkable  place  in  the  Highlands ;  the  other
the  most  conspicuous  rock  on  the  top  of  one  of  the  most  con>
spicuous  and  peculiar  mountains  in  the  West  Highlands.

It  seems  hopeless  to  speculate  who  these  seven  great  women
who  guarded  a  shining  sword  may  have  been,  but  the  worship


350  WE8T  HIGHLAND  TALES.

of  the  scimitar  maj  Aave  some  bearing  on  the  incident.  The
wicked  muime  fell  a  faggot  of  sticks  before  the  sword,  and
the  temple  of  the  Scythian  sword-god  was  a  heap  of  faggots,
from  which  human  victims  were  thrown  when  they  were  sacri-
ficed.

People  who  are  beaten  to  death,  or  enchanted  in  these  Gaelic
legends,  are  always  falling  like  a  faggot  of  sticks  or  twigs,  Cual
Chbionach  ;  so  the  expression  here  may  be  simply  an  illustration,
but  still  the  analogy  is  worth  remark.

The  language  is  peculiar  in  the  absence  of  pronouns ;  the
names  are  repeated  over  and  over  again,  but  this  belongs  rather
to  the  writer  than  to  the  telling  of  stories  in  general.  It  is  the  way
in  which  Dewar  expresses  himself  with  precision  and  accuracy.
There  can  be  no  mistake  about  the  meaning  of  anything  which
he  has  written  for  me.  The  effect  is  rather  too  much  repetition,
but  a  story  so  told  would  not  be  easily  forgotten  by  those  into
whose  heads  the  incidents  had  been  so  hammered.

The  following  stories  may  throw  some  light  on  the  Big  Women
of  Jura.  The  first  I  have  known  all  my  life.  They  were  sent  to  me
by  Mrs.  MacTavish  from  Islay.

2.  Chaileach  Bheine  Mhobe  lived  in  Jura,  at  Largic  Breae,
and  had  a  ball  of  thread  by  which  she  could  draw  towards  her,
any  person  or  thing,  if  she  could  throw  the  ball  beyond  them.

She  got  MacPhie  of  Colonsay  into  her  toils,  and  would  not
part  with  him.  Every  time  he  attempted  to  leave  her,  she  used
to  intercept  him,  and  even  after  he  got  into  his  Bioklikn,  or
barge,  and  got  off  from  the  shore,  she  would  get  him  ashore  again,
by  throwing  the  ball  into  the  boat.  (The  giant  in  the  story  of
Black  White-red  had  a  like  magic  clue).  At  last  he  pretended
perfect  contentment  in  his  bondage,  and  got  the  secret  from  her
that  she  had  a  hatchet  which  would  cut  the  thread  on  the
enchanting  clue.  He  watched  an  opportunity  and  stole  the
hatchet,  having  previously  ordered  his  boat  to  be  in  waiting  at
Onoc  Breac  at  the  foot  of  Bean  a  Ghaolis.  He  set  out  by  the
dawn  of  day,  and  was  seated  in  his  boat  before  the  Oaileach  got
to  the  top  of  the  hill,  which  she  had  climbed  with  speed,  as  soon
as  she  missed  him.  When  she  saw  him  in  the  boat,  she  cried
out  most  piteously —


MAG  IAIN  PIBEAGH.  35  I

A  Mhic  a  Phie

A  Gbaoils'  thasgaidh

An  d'  fhag  thu  air  a  cbladach  mi

Oh !  Mao  Phie

My  love  and  treasure,

Hast  thou  left  me  on  the  strand  ?

And  this  she  often  repeated  throwing  at  the  same  time  the
Cearsia  dhruidheachd,  magic  clue,  into  the  boat,  and  drawing  it
towards  the  shore.  But  when  she  saw  the  thread  cut  and  the
boat  rowing  off  beyond  her  reach,  she  got  desperate,  and  slid  down
what  is  called  Sgbiob  na  Cailioh,  crying  out,

A  Mhic  a  Phie

Charrich  granda

'An  d'  fhag  thu  ùr  a  cbladach  mi

Oh !  Mac  Phie

Bough  skinned  and  foul

Hast  thou  left  me  on  the  strand  ?

Sgriob  na  Cailich  is  a  very  curious  and  conspicuous  mark  on
the  north-western  side  of  the  highest  of  the  Jura  hills.  Two  rocky
gorges  begin  at  the  very  top  of  the  hill,  which  were  made  by  the
Oarlin's  heels,  and  two  strips  of  bare  grey  boulders  extend  across
the  side  of  lower  hills  almost  to  the  sea.  Unless  these  last  are
the  marks  of  lightning,  I  cannot  account  for  them.  This  is
the  place  where  Dewar's  fox  threw  the  big  women  over  the  rock.

In  her  time  the  Island  of  Jura  was  under  the  sway  of  Mac-
Donald  of  Islay,  but  this  Oarlin  was  so  powerful,  that  she  would
not  allow  the  Islay  post  to  pass  through  Jura,  for  she  killed  him
as  soon  as  he  crossed  the  ferry.

MacDonald  spoke  to  a  Jura  man  of  the  name  of  Buie,  who
lived  at  the  Ferry  and  promised  the  farm  of  Largie  Breac  where
the  Caileach  lived,  to  him  and  his  heirs  for  ever,  if  he  would  kill
her.

He  told  his  wife  the  offer  that  MacDonald  had  made  him,
remarking  at  the  same  time,  that  he  never  would  attempt  to
encounter  the  giantess.

Their  eldest  son,  however,  overheard  his  father,  and  set  off
the  next  day  to  offer  battle  to  the  Caileach.


352  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

They  had  wrestled  hard  and  long,  when  at  length  she  brought
him  on  his  knees,  and  she  said,  "  Thon  art  in  extremity,  a
Mhic  Meadb  Bhuie,  and  pity  it  is  so."  **My  grandmother,  on
the  Underside  of  Alba,  is  here,  and  will  come  to  help  me  if  I
be,"  said  he,  as  he  pnt  his  hand  on  his  dirk.

They  engaged  again,  and  she  brought  him  on  his  knees  again,
saying  the  same  words,  Tha  thu  a  t  eigin  a  Mhio  Meadh  Bhuie
6*  b  olc  an  arraidh  e,  when  he  drew  his  dirk  and  stabbed  her  to
the  heart.

MacDonald  performed  his  promise  of  giving  the  Baies  Largie
Breac,  which  they  held  for  centuries  after.

3.  There  is  a  song  about  the  same  personage,  whoever  she
may  have  been.    I  give  it,  though  I  do  not  quite  understand  it.

Oaileach  Bheinna  Bhric  horo
Bhric  horo  Bhric  horo
Caileach  Bheinna  Bhric  horo
Oaileach  mhor  leathan  ard
Oha  deachaidh  mo  bhuidheann  fhiadh
Bhuidheann  fhiadh  bhuidheann  fhiadh
Cha  deachaidh  mo  bhuidheann  riamh
A  dh'iarraidh  chlabba  do  n  traigh

Carlin  of  Ben  Breac  horo,  &c.,
Carlin  great  broad  high.
There  went  not  my  troop  of  deer,  &c.
There  went  not  my  troop  ever
To  seek  her  clack  to  the  strand.

Now  this  old  woman,  or  set  of  old  women  guarding  a  sword,
or  owning  magic  clues,  and  living  in  an  island,  are  surely  the
same  as  the  Groach,  of  whom  so  many  stories  are  told  in  Brittany,
and  these  are  presumed  to  have  been  a  college  of  Dmidesses.
See  Foyer  Breton,  vol.  i.  p.  157  ;  and  if  so,  the  Carlin  may  be  a
fiction  founded  upon  fact.

The  spelling  Diura  and  Dinrath  for  the  Island  of  Jura,  does
not  change  the  sound,  but  seems  to  indicate  a  reasonable  deriva-
tion for  the  name  which  is  common  to  the  "  Jura"  mountains,
and  may  well  be  an  old  Celtic  name  preserved,  an  diu  bath,  the
waste  steep,  the  Jura.


MAC  IAIN  DIBEAOH.  353

There  is  a  local  rhyme  in  support  of  this  view,  said  to  haye
been  composed  by  a  poetess  who  was  a  native  of  some'  other
island.

Din  Bath  an  domhain,

I*  diu  dath  an  domhain  ann,

Baidhe  Dugh  a's  Biabhach.

Waste  steep  of  the  world,

And  waste  hue  of  the  world  in  it,

Tellow,  black,  and  brindled.

These  three  colours  being  the  most  common  family  names,
until  very  lately,  in  the  island,  as  well  as  the  distinguishing
colours  of  the  landscape,  according  to  the  eye  of  the  discontented
lady.

4.  I  have  another  vernon  of  ihis,  which  gives  such  a  very  dif-
ferent view  of  the  same  incidents  that  I  translate  it,  giving  such
bits  of  the  Gaelic  as  seem  best  worth  preservation.

Ah  Sionkach,  the  Fox,  from  John  the  tinker,  Inverary,
written  by  Hector  Urquhart,  1859.

Brian,  the  son  of  the  king  of  Greece,  fell  in  love  with  the  hen-
wife's  daughter,  and  he  would  many  no  other  but  she.  His
&ther  said  to  him  on  a  day  of  days,  before  that  should  happen
that  he  must  get  first  for  him  the  most  marvellous  bird  that  there
was  in  the  world.

Then  here  went  Brian,  and  he  put  the  world  under  his  head,
till  he  went  much  farther  than  I  can  tell,  or  you  can  think,  till  he
reached  the  house  of  Gailleach  nan  Guaban,  the  carlin  of  bus-
kins. (A  sock,  a  brogue  of  untanned  leather  or  skin,  commonly
worn  with  the  hairy  side  outward ;  Lat.^  Gothumas ;  WeUh^
Gwaran ;  jPr.,  Gothume.)  He  got  well  taken  to  by  the  carlin
that  night,  and  in  the  morning  she  said  to  him,  *'  It  is  time  for
thee  to  arise,  the  journey  is  far."

When  he  rose  to  the  door,  what  was  it  but  sowing  and  win-
nowing snow ;  he  looked  hither  and  thither,  and  what  should  he
see  but  a  fox  drawing  on  his  shoes  and  stockings.

"Sha!  Bheathaich,  Sha!  beast,''  said  Brian,  '*Thou  hadst
best  leave  my  lot  of  shoes  and  stockings  for  myself."

"  Och,"  said  the  fox,  *4t's  long  since  a  shoe  or  a  stocking  was

VOL.  IL  2  A


^54  WEST  aiGHLAND  TALES.

on  me  ;  and  I  ami  thinking  that  I  shall  pnt  them  to  ase  this  day
itself."

"  Thon  ugly  ladama  (?)  heast,  art  then  thinking  to  steal  my
foot  webs,  CHATSBHEABT,  and  I  myself  looking  at  thee  ?"

"  Well,"  said  the  fox,  "  if  thou  wilt  take  me  to  he  thy  seryant,
thon  shalt  get  thy  set  of  dhoes  and  stockings."

"  Oh,  poor  beast,''  said  he,  "  thou  wooldst  find  death  with  me
from  hunger."

"  0  both  ! "  said  the  fox,  "  there 's  little  good  in  the  gille  that
will  not  do  for  his  ownself,  and  for  his  master  at  times."

"  Yes!  yes,"  said  he,  *'  I  don't  mind,  at  all  events;  thou  mayst
follow  me."  *

They  had  not  gone  far  on  their  journey  when  the  fox  asked
him  if  he  was  good  at  riding.  He  said  he  was,  if  it  could  be
known  what  on.

"  Come  on  top  of  me  a  turn  of  a  while,"  said  the  fox.

*'  On  top  of  thee !  poor  beast,  I  would  break  thy  back.*'

"  Ho !  huth !  son  of  the  King  of  Greece,"  said  the  fox,  "  thou
didst  not  know  me  so  well  as  I  knew  thee  ;  take  no  care  but  that
I  am  able  to  carry  thee."

But  never  mind ;  when  Brian  went  on  the  top  of  the  fox,

CUTREADH  IAD  SAD  AS  GACH  LODAlf  AGU8  BRAD  AS  OACH  CBEAaAN
8*  CHA  DO  GABH  IAD  TAMH  NA  FOIS  OUB  AK  d'  BAINIO  IAD  TIGH
FAMHAIB  NAN  COIG  CINN  s'  NAN  COIG  MILL  s'  NAN  OOIG  IfUINEAIL.

They  would  drive  spray  from  each  puddle,  spark  from  each
pebble  ;  and  they  took  no  halt  nor  rest  till  they  reached  the  house
of  the  Giant  of  Five  Heads,  Five  Humps,  and  Five  Throttles.

^*  Here 's  for  thee,"  said  the  fox,  "  the  house  of  the  giant  who
has  the  marvellous  bird,  an  t  eun  iongantach  ;  and  what  wilt
thou  say  to  him  when  thou  goest  in  ?  "

*'  What  should  I  say,  but  that  I  came  to  steal  the  marvellous
bird  ?  "

"  Hu  !  hu  ! "  said  the  fox,  "  thou  wilt  not  return  ;  but,"  said
the  fox,  *'  take  thou  (service)  with  this  giant  to  be  a  stable  lad,
and  there  is  no  sort  of  bird  fo  seachd  ronagan  ruadh  an  t
SAOOHAHi,  under  the  seven  russet  rungs  of  the  world  (from

*  So  far,  this  is  somewhat  like  the  opening  of  Puss  in  Boots,
mixed  up  with  something  else.


MAO  IAIN  DIREACH.  355

KONG,  a  joining  spar,  a  hoop,  perhaps  ring)  that  he  has  not  got ;
and  when  he  brings  out  the  marvellous  bird,  say  thou  ^  Faith !
fuith !  *  the  nasty  bird,  throw  it  out  of  my  sight,  I  could  find
braver  birds  than  that  on  the  middens  at  home."

Brian  did  thus.

"  S'  tia ! "  said  the  big  one,  "  then  I  must  go  to  thy  country
to  gather  a  part  of  them."

But  Brian  was  pleasing  the  giant  well ;  but  on  a  night  of  the
nights,  Brian  steals  the  marvellous  bird,  and  drags  himself  out
with  it.  When  he  was  a  good  bit  from  the  giant^s  house,  '*  S'tia !"
said  Brian  to  himself,  '*  I  don't  know  if  it  is  the  right  bird  I  have
after  every  turn.'*  Brian  lifts  the  covering  oflF  the  bird's  head,
and  he  lets  out  one  screech,  and  the  screech  roused  the  giant.

"  0 !  0 !  son  of  the  King  of  Greece,"  said  the  giant,  "  that  I
have  coming  to  steal  the  marvellous  bird ;  the  prophet  Faidh
was  saying  that  he  would  come  to  his  oird."

Then  here  the  giant  put  on  the  shoes  that  could  make  nine
miles  at  every  step,  and  he  was'nt  long  catching  poor  Brian.
They  returned  home  to  the  giant's  house,  and  the  giant  laid  the
binding  of  the  three  smalls  on  him,  and  he  threw  Brian  into  the
peat  comer,  and  he  was  there  till  the  morning  on  the  morrow's
day.

"  Now,"  said  the  giant,  "  son  of  the  King  of  Greece,  thou  hast
thy  two  rathers ;  whether  wouldst  thou  rather  thy  head  to  be  on
yonder  stake,  or  go  to  steal  for  me  the  White  Glave  of  Light  that
is  in  the  realm  of  Big  Women  ?"

'*  S'  BAiOHEiL  DUiNE  Ri  BHEATHA,  a  man  is  kind  to  his  life,"
flaid  Brian,  "  I  will  go  to  steal  the  White  Glave  of  Light."

But  never  mind ;  Brian  had  not  gone  far  from  the  giant's
house  when  the  fox  met  with  him.

**  0  DHUiNE  GUN  TUB  GUN  TOiNisG,  Oh  man,  without  mind  or
sense,  thou  didst  not  take  my  counsel,  and  what  will  now  arise
against  thee !  Thou  art  going  to  the  realm  of  Big  Women  to
steal  the  White  Glave  of  Light ;  that  is  twenty  times  as  hard  for
thee  as  the  marvellous  bird  of  that  carl  of  a  giant."

"  But  what  help  for  it  now,  bat  that  I  must,  ionnsaidh  a
THUBHAiBT  AIR,  betake  myself  to  it,"  said  poor  Brian.

•<  Well,  then,"  said  the  fox,  **  come  thou  on  top  of  me,  and  I
am  in  hopes  thou  wilt  be  wiser  the  next  time."


556  WEST  mOHLAKD  TALES.

Tbey  went  then  farther  than  I  can  remember,  till  they
reached  cnogan  na  'n  aoinb  ajb  cul  oaoithe  *s  aib  aodak
OBEiNE,  the  knoll  of  the  country  at  the  back  of  the  wind  and
the  face  of  the  snn,  that  was  in  the  realm  of  big  women.

**  Now,''  said  the  Fox,  "  thou  shalt  sit  here,  and  thon  shalt  begin
at  BUBBAi«AicH  blubbering,  and  caoimbadh  crying,  and  when  the
big  women  come  out  where  thon  art,  they  will  lift  thee  b'av
achlais  in  their  oxters,  and  when  they  reach  the  honse  with
thee,  they  will  tiy  to  coax  thee,  but  never  thou  cease  of  crying
until  thou  get  the  White  Glave  of  Light,  and  they  will  leaye  it
with  thee  in  the  cradle  the  length  of  the  night,  to  keep  thee  quiet."

Worthy  Brian  was  not  long  blubbering  and  crying  when  the
big  women  came,  and  they  took  Brian  with  them  Its  the  fox  had
said,  and  when  Brian  found  the  house  quiet,  he  went  away  with
the  White  Glave  of  Light,  and  when  he  thought  he  was  a  good
way  from  the  house,  he  thought  he  would  see  if  he  had  the  right
sword.  He  took  it  out  of  the  sheath,  and  the  sword  gave  out  binn,
a  ring.  This  awoke  the  big  women,  and  they  were  on  their  soles.
"  Whom  have  we  here,"  said  they,  *'but  the  son  of  the  King  of
Greece  coming  to  steal  the  White  Glave  of  Light."

They  took  after  Brian,  and  they  were  not  long  bringing  him
back.  Oheangail  iad  ou  cbudt  b,  they  tied  him  roundly
(like  a  ball),  and  they  threw  him  into  the  peat  comer,  till  the
white  morrow's  day  was.  When  the  morning  came  they  asked
him  CO  b  fhbabb  leis  a  bhi  fo  shradan  a  bhuilq  bheid'idh*  to
be  under  the  sparks  of  the  bellows,  or  to  go  to  steal  ah  dia

*  BoLG  BEiDiDH,  bag  of  blowiug.  The  bellows  used  for  melt-
ing copper  in  the  mint  at  Tangiers  in  1841,  consisted  of  two
sheepskins  worked  by  two  men.  The  neck  of  the  hide  was  fastened
to  the  end  of  an  iron  tube,  and  the  legs  sewn  up.  The  end  of
each  bag  opened  with  two  fiat  sticks,  and  the  workmen,  by  a
skilful  action  of  the  hand,  filled  the  bag  with  air  as  he  raised  it,
and  then  squeezed  it  out  by  pressing  downwards.  By  working
the  two  bags  turn  about,  a  constant  steady  blast  was  kept  on  a
crucible  in  the  furnace,  and  the  copper  was  soon  melted.  The
Gaelic  word  clearly  points  to  the  use  of  some  such  apparatus.  ]
believe  something  of  the  kind  is  used  in  India ;  but  I  saw  the
Tangier  mint  at  work.


MAO  IAIN  DIBBAOH.  357

GREiHB*  viaEAir  BiOH  Feill  Fiohk,  the  Snn  Gk>ddesB,  daughter
of  the  King  of  the  gathering  of  Fionn.

**  A  man  is  kind  to  his  life,"  said  Brian,  *'  I  will  go  steal  the
Son  GU>ddes8."

Never  mind.  Brian  went,  hut  he  was  not  long  on  the  path
AiB  AN  T  SUOHE  wheu  the  fox  met  him.

"  Oh  I  poor  fool,"  aaìà  the  fox,  "  thou  art  as  faoik  silly  as  thou
wert  ever.  What  good  for  me  to  he  giving  thee  counsel,  thou
art  now  going  to  steal  the  Sun  Goddess.  Many  a  hetter  thief
than  thou  went  on  the  same  journey ;  hut  ever  a  man  came
never  hack.  There  are  nine  guards  guarding  her,  and  there  is
no  dress  under  the  seven  russet  rungs  of  the  world  that  is  like  the
dress  that  is  on  her  hut  one  other  dress,  and  here  is  that  dress
for  thee.  And  mind,  said  the  fox,  that  thou  dost  as  I  ask  thee,
or,  if  thou  dost  not,  thou  wilt  not  come  to  the  next  soeula  tale."

Never  mind.  They  went,  and  when  they  were  near  the  guard
the  fox  put  the  dress  on  Brian,  and  he  said  to  him  to  go  forward
straight  through  them,  and  when  he  reached  the  San  Goddess  to
do  as  he  hid  him.  And,  Brian,  if  thou  gettest  her  out  I  will  not
he  fiir  from  you.

But  never  mind.  Brian  took  courage,  and  he  went  on,  and
each  guard  made  way  for  him,  till  he  went  in  where  the  Sun  God-
dess, daughter  of  the  King  of  the  Gathering  of  Fionn,  was.  She
put  all  hail  and  good  luck  on  him,  and  she  it  was  who  was  pleased
to  see  him,  for  her  father  was  not  letting  man  come  near  her.

And  there  they  were ;  hut  how  shall  we  get  away  at  ail  at  all,
said  she,  in  the  morning.  Brian  lifted  the  window,  and  he  put
out  the  Sun  Goddess  through  it.

The  fox  met  them.  *'  Thou  wilt  do  yet,"  said  he ;  **  leap  you
on  top  of  me.*'

And  when  they  were  far,  far  away,  and  near  the  country  of
hig  women,

"  Now,  Brian,"  said  the  fox,  **  is  it  not  a  great  pity  for  thy-
self to  give  away  this  Sun  Goddess  for  the  White  Glave  of  Light  ?"

"  Is  it  not  that  which  is  wounding  me  at  this  very  time?"  said
Brian.

*  DiA  GsEivE  may  perhaps  he  Deo  Gbeine,  the  sunheam,  the
name  given  to  Fionn's  hanner,  and  here  applied  to  his  daughter.


35^  WESI^  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  It  is  that  I  will  make  a  Sun  Goddess  of  mjself,  and  thod
shalt  give  me  to  the  big  women,"  said  the  fox.

"  I  had  rather  part  with  the  Sun  Goddess  herself  than  thee."

"  But  never  thou  mind,  Brian,  they  wont  keep  me  long."

Here  Brian  went  in  with  the  fox  as  a  Sun  Goddess,  and  he
got  the  White  Glave  of  Light.  Brian  left  the  fox  with  the  big
women,  aind  he  went  forward.

In  a  day  or  two  the  fox  overtook  them,  and  they  got  on  him,
and  when  they  were  nearing  the  house  of  the  big  giant,

"  Is  it  not  a  great  pity  for  thyself*  oh  Brian,  to  part  with  the
White  Glave  of  Light  for  that  filth  of  a  marvellous  bird."

"  There  is  no  help  for  it,"  said  Brian.

"  I  will  make  myself  a  White  Glave  of  Light,"  said  the  fox  ;
''  it  may  be  that  thou  wilt  yet  find  a  use  for  the  White  Glave  of
Light."

Brian  was  not  so  much  against  the  fox  this  time,  since  he  saw
that  he  had  got  o£Ffrom  the  big  women.

"  Thou  art  come  with  it,"  said  the  big  man.  "  It  was  in  the
prophesies  that  I  should  cut  this  great  oak  tree,  at  one  blow*
which  my  father  cut  two  hundred  years  ago  with  the  same
sword."

Brian  got  the  marvellous  bird,  and  he  went  away.

He  had  gone  but  a  short  distance  from  the  giant's  house,  when
the  fox  made  up  to  him  with  his  pad  to  his  mouth.

"  What's  this  that  befel  thee,"  said  Brian.  "  Oh,  the  son  of
the  great  one  !"  said  the  fox,  "when  he  seized  me,  with  the  first
blow  he  cut  the  tree  all  but  a  small  bit  of  bark ;  and  look  thyself
there  is  no  tooth  in  the  door  of  my  month  which  that  filth  of  a
Bodach  has  not  broken."

Brian  was  exceedingly  sorrowful  that  the  fox  had  lost  the
teeth,  but  there  was  no  help  for  it.

They  were  going  forward,  walking  at  times,  and  at  times
riding,  till  they  came  to  a  spring  that  there  was  by  the  nde  of  the
road.

"  Now,  Brian,"  said  the  fox,  "  unless  thou  dost  strike  off  my
head  with  one  blow  of  the  White  Glave  of  Light  into  this  spring,
I  will  strike  off  thine."

<*  S'tia  1'*  said  Brian,  "  a  man  is  kind  to  his  own  life,"  and  he
swept  the  head  off  him  with  one  blow,  and  it  fell  into  the  well ;


MAC  IAIN  DIREACH.    •  359

and  in  the  wink  of  an  eye,  what  should  rise  np  out  of  tlt^  well,
but  the  son  of  the  King  that  was  father  of  the  Snn  Goddess  I  ,
They  went  on  till  thej  reached  his  father's  hoDse,  and  his
father  made  a  great  wedding  with  joy  and  gladnem  that  lasted  a
day  and  a  year,  and  there  was  no  word  about  marrying  the  hen*
wife's  daughter  when  I  parted  from  them.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  is  the  same  legend  as  the
Golden  Bird  in  Grimm,  and  it  is  evident  that  it  is  not  derived  from
the  printed  story.  From  the  notes  in  Grimm's  third  volume,  it
appears  to  be  very  old  and  very  widely  spread.  I  am  told  that
even  now  there  is  some  trace  of  a  veneration  for  birds  amongst
the  Turks,  who  secretly  worship  parrots  even  at  Constantinople.

The  giant  of  many  heads  and  ornithological  tastes  is  not  in
the  German  version,  and  the  tinker  has  omitted  the  horse,  which
seems  to  hehug  to  the  story.

On  the  25th  of  April  1859,  John  the  tinker  gave  the  begin-
ning of  this  as  part  of  his  contribution  to  the  evening's  enter-
tainment. He  not  only  told  the  story,  but  acted  it,  dandling  a
fancied  baby  when  it  came  to  the  adventure  of  the  big  women,
and  rolling  his  eyes  wildly.  The  story  which  he  told  varied  from
that  which  he  dictated  in  several  particulars.    It  began :  ^

BhA  BiOH  ANN  AGUS  BHA  RiGHBEIBE  MAR  A  BHA  S  IfJ^B,  A
BHITHIS  S'  MAIL  A  CHINNIB  AN  GHIUTHAS,  CUID  DHE  CAM  s'  CUID
DHE  DIRBACH  AGUS  SE  RiGH  EiRINN  A  BH'  ANN.

'*  There  was  a  king  and  a  knight,  as  there  was  and  will  be,  and
as  grows  the  fir  tree,  some  of  it  crooked  and  some  of  it  straight,
and  it  was  the  King  of  Eirinn,  it  was ;  and  the  Queen  died  with
her  first  son,  and  the  King  marned  another  woman.  And  the
henwife  came  to  her,  and  she  said — A  Bhanrigh  dhona  gholach

CHA  NEIL  THUSA  OOSAIL   RI8   A  BhANRIGH  SHONA  8HÒLACH  A  BH'

AGAIN  ROiMHE  SO.  Oh !  bad  straddleing  Queen,  thou  art  not  like
the  sonsy,  cheery  Queen  that  we  had  ere  now.  And  here  came
a  long  bit  which  the  tinker  put  into  another  story,  and  which  he
seems  to  have  condensed  into  the  first  sentence  in  the  version
which  I  have  got  and  translated.  He  has  also  transferred  the
scene  from  Ireland  to  Greece,  perhaps  because  the  latter  country
sounds  better,  and  is  farther  o£F,  or  perhaps  because  he  had  got
the  original  form  of  the  story  from  his  old  father  in  the  meantime."


360  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Some  of  the  things  mentioned  in  the  tinker's  version  have  to
do  with  Dmidical  worship — the  magic  well,  the  oak  tree,  the
bird ;  for  the  Celtic  tribes,  as  it  is  said,  were  all  gnided  in  their
wanderings  by  the  flight  of  birds.  The  Snn  Goddess :  for  the  Druids
are  supposed  to  have  worshipped  the  snn,  and  the  snn  is  feminine
in  Gaelic.  These  are  all  mixed  up  with  Fionn,  and  the  sword  of
light,  and  the  big  women,  personages  and  things  which  do  not
appear  out  of  the  Highlands.  Perhaps  this  is  one  of  "  the  ser-
mons ''  to  which  Dewar  refers.    (See  introduction.)


XLVIL
FEAEACHTJR  LEIGH,

From  Sutherland.

NOW  Faiquhar  was  one  time  a  drover  in  the  Eeay
country,  and  he  went  from  Glen  GoUich  to  Eng-
land (some  say  Falkirk),  to  sell  cattle ;  and  the  staff
that  he  had  in  his  hand  was  hazel  (caltuinn).  One
day  a  doctor  met  him.  "  What's  that,"  said  he,  "  that  ye
have  got  in  y'r  hand?"  "  It  is  a  staff  of  hazel."  "And
where  did  ye  cut  that Ì"  "In  Glen  Golhg :  north,
in  Lord  Eeay's  country."  "Do  ye  mind  the  place
and  the  tree  ? "  "  That  do  L"  "  Could  ye  get  the
tree  Ì "  "  Easy."  "  Well,  I  will  give  ye  gold  more
than  ye  can  lift,  if  ye  will  go  back  there  and  bring  me
a  wand  off  that  hazel  tree ;  and  take  this  bottle  and
bring  me  something  more,  and  I  will  give  you  as  much
gold  agaLo.  Watch  at  the  hole  at  the  foot,  and  put
the  bottle  to  it ;  let  the  six  serpents  go  that  come  out
first,  and  put  the  seventh  one  into  the  bottle,  and  tell
no  man,  but  come  back  straight  with  it  here.

So  Farquhar  went  back  to  the  hazel  glen,  and  when
he  had  cut  some  boughs  off  the  tree  he  looked  about
for  the  hole  that  the  doctor  had  spoken  of.  Aud  what
^oxdd  oome  out  but  six  serpents,  brown  and  barred
like  addeia  These  he  let  go,  and  clapped  the  bottle
to  the  hole's  mouth,  to  see  would  any  more  come  out


362  WEST  HIGHTiAND  TALES.

By  and  by  a  white  snake  came  rolling  through.  Far-
quhar  had  him  in  the  bottle  in  a  minute,  tied  him
down,  and  hurried  back  to  England  with  him.

The  doctor  gave  him  siller  enough  to  buy  the  Eeay
country,  but  asked  him  to  stay  and  help  him  with  the
white  snake.  They  lit  a  fire  with  the  hazel  sticks,  and
put  the  snake  into  a  pot  io  boil.  The  doctor  bid
Farquhar  watch  it,  and  not  let  any  one  touch  it,  and
not  to  let  the  steam  escape,  "for  fear,"  he  said,  "folk
might  know  what  they  were  at."

He  wrapped  up  paper  round  the  pot  lid,  but  he
had  not  made  all  straight  when  the  water  began  to
boil,  and  the  steam  began  to  come  out  at  one  place.

"Well,  Farquhar  saw  this,  and  thought  he  would
push  the  paper  down  round  the  thing ;  so  he  put  his
finger  to  the  bit,  and  then  his  finger  into  his  mouth,
for  it  was  wet  with  the  bree.

Lo  !  he  knew  everything,  and  the  eyes  of  his  mind
were  opened.  "  I  will  keep  it  quiet  though,**  said  he
to  himself.

Presently  the  doctor  came  back,  and  took  the  pot
from  the  fir&  He  lifted  the  lid,  and  dipping  his  finger
in  the  steam  drops  he  sucked  it;  but  the  virtue  had
gone  out  of  it,  and  it  was  no  more  than  water  to  him.

"  Who  has  done  this ! ''  he  cried,  and  he  saw  in  Far-
quhar's  face  that  it  was  he.  "  Since  you  have  taken
the  bree  of  it,  take  the  flesh  too,**  he  said  in  a  rage,
and  threw  the  pot  at  him — (ma  dh'  ol  thu  'n  sugh  ith
an  fheoil).  Now  Farquhar  had  become  allwise,  and  he
set  up  as  a  doctor.  [The  collector  who  took  this  down,
grammar  and  all,  here  remarks,  that  Michael  Scott  got
his  knowledge  by  serpent's  bree  (brigh);  and  the  wis-
dom of  the  mouth  is  said  to  have  belonged  to  Fingal,
who  began  life  as  a  herd  boy  on  the  Shin.  Some  giants
came  to  him  one  day  and  bade  him  roast  a  fish  for  them,


FEARACHUR  LEIGH.  36^

threatening  to  kill  him  if  he  burnt  it.  He  did  so,  all
but  one  small  spot.  On  this  spot  he  quickly  put  his
finger,  and  aa  quickly  transferred  the  hot  finger  to  his
mouth,  putting  it  under  his  teeth :  a  gift  of  omniscience
was  the  result,  and  this  became  the  foundation  of  his
future  greatness.

The  very  same  incident  with  a  dragon's  heart  is  in
the  Volsung  tale,  see  Dasent's  introduction,  p.  65.  It
is  told  in  Chambers'  Nursery  Songs,  of  some  laird  in
Scotland.  Mrs.  MacTavish  tells  it,  and  I  have  heard
it  in  the  west  in  various  shapes  ever  since  I  can
remember.  Grimm  found  it  in  Germany  in  the  story
of  the  White  Snake ;  and  there  are  varieties  of  the
same  incident  scattered  throughout  Grimm ;  for  instance
in  the  Two  Brothers,  where  children  eat  the  heart
and  liver  of  a  golden  bird,  and  find  gold  under  their
pillows ;  and  this  story  has  a  relation  in  Gaelic  also.
But  to  return  to  Farquhar  Leech.]

He  set  up  as  a  doctor,  and  there  was  no  secret  hid
from  him,  and  nothing  that  he  could  not  cure.

He  went  from  place  to  place  and  healed  men,  and
so  they  called  him  Farquhar  Leigheach  (the  healer).
Now  he  heard  that  the  king  was  sick,  and  he  went  to
the  city  of  the  king,  to  know  what  would  ail  him*
It  was  his  knee,"  said  all  the  folk,  "  and  he  has  many
doctors,  and  pays  them  all  greatly;  and  whiles  they  can
give  him  relief,  but  not  for  long,  and  then  it  is  worse
than  ever  with  him,  and  you  may  hear  him  roar  and
cry  with  the  pain  that  is  in  his  knee^  in  the  bones  of
it"  One  day  Farquhar  walked  up  and  down  before
tìie  king's  house.     And  he  cried —

*'  An  daol  dubh  ris  a  chnamh  gbeal."
The  black  beetle  to  the  white  bone.

And  the  people  looked  at  him,  and  said  that  the


364  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALfeS.

strange  man  from  the   Eeay  country  was  throngb-
other.

The  next  day  Farquhar  stood  at  the  gate  and  cried,
'^  The  black  beetle  to  the  white  bone  !'*  and  the  king
sent  to  know  who  it  was  that  *cried  outside^  and  what
was  his  business.  The  man,  they  said,  was  a  stranger,
and  men  called  him  the  Physician.  So  the  king,  who
was  wild  with  pain,  called  him  in ;  and  Farqnhar  stood
before  the  king,  and  aye  ^'The  black  beetle  to  the
white  bone !"  said  he*  And  so  it  was  proved.  The
doctors,  to  keep  the  king  ill,  and  get  their  money,  put
at  whiles  a  black  beetle  into  the  wound  in  the  knee,
and  the  beast  was  eating  the  bone  and  his  flesh,  and
made  him  cry  day  and  night.  Then  the  doctors  took  it
out  again,  for  fear  he  should  die ;  and  when  he  was
better  they  put  it  back  again.  Tina  Farquhar  knew
by  the  serpent's  wisdom  that  he  had,  when  he  laid  his
finger  under  his  teeth ;  and  the  king  was  cured,  and
had  all  his  doctors  hung.

Then  the  king  said  that  he  would  give  Farquhar
lands  or  gold,  or  whatever  he  asked.  Then  Farquhar
asked  to  have  the  king's  daughter,  and  all  the  isles  that
the  sea  runs  round,  from  point  of  Storr  to  Stromness  in
the  Orkneys ;  so  the  king  gave  him  a  grant  of  all  the
isles.  But  Farquhar  the  physician  never  came  to  be
Farquhar  the  king,^  for  he  had  an  ill-wisher  that
poisoned  him,  and  he  died.

I  am  indebted  to  the  kÌDdness  of  Mr.  Cosmo  Lmes  for  the  fol-
lowing note,  which  joins  a  legend  to  an  historical  fact.

The  names  given  are  a  canoas  instance  of  old  Gaelic  spelling.
They  are  evidently  spelt  by  ear,  and  so  spelt  as  to  be  easily  un-
derstood ;  but  they  are  not  spelt  according  to  modem  rale.
"^ —      ■"      ■'    ■   I    '        I         ■  III  »

*  There  is  a  kind  of  rhyme  here,  in  Gaelic, — Fearachur  Leigh,
and  Fearachur  Righ.


feàraohub  IaEigh.  365

It  is  not  often  we  can  connect  these  wild  legends  with  record
pi*  charter,  hut  Farchar  Leech  receives  a  local  habitation  from
authentic  writs.

The  "  Beay  country"  of  the  legend  is  Strathnaver.  One  race
of  Mackajs  who  inhabit  it  are  called  by  their  coontrymen  clan
▼ic  Farquhar — from  what  Farquhar,  was  unknown  to  Sir  Bobert
Gordon  and  the  local  historians.  The  legend  points  to  the  man.
In  1379  Farquhar,  the  King's  physician  (medicuB  Begis)  had  a
grant  from  the  Prince  Alexander  Stuart  (die  Wolf  of  Badenoch)
of  the  lands  of  Mellenes  and  Hope  in  that  district ;  and  in  1386
King  Robert  II.  granted  to  the  same  person,  styled  Ferohard
Leech,  in  heritage,  the  islands  of  Jura  (now  Aldemey),  Calwa
Sanda  (J?a7u2a),  Elangawne,  Elanewillighe,  Elanerone,  i^anehoga,
Elanequochra,  Elanegelye,  Elaneyefe,  and  all  the  islands  lying
between  Bowestorenastynghe  (i.e.,  the  Sow  or  point  of  StorCt  in
AssyntX  and  Bowearmadale  (i.e.,  ArmidcUe  Mead  in  Farr),

The  writer  of  the  old  statistical  account  of  the  parish,  speak-
ing of  these  grants  from  hearsay  or  tradition,  names  the  grantee
"  Ferchard  Beton,  a  native  of  Isla,  and  a  famous  physician."
Perhaps  he  was  misled  by  the  celebrity  of  the  Isla  Betons,  several
generations  of  whom  were  "  mediciners,"  famous  throQgh  all  the
Islands  and  West  Highlands.

Whether  Farchar  Leech  died  by  poison  or  otherwise,  he
seems  to  have  left  descendants  who  inherited  his  lands ;  for,  so
late  as  1511,  Donald  M'Donachy  M*Corrochie  described  as
**  descendit  frae  Farquhar  Leiche ;""  resigned  Melness,  Hope,  and
all  his  lands  of  Strathnaver  in  favour  of  the  chief  family  of  the
Mackays.

The  marriage  with  the  King's  daughter,  as  well  as  the  black
beetle,  want  confirmation.

There  is  a  west  country  version  of  this  stoiy  which  I  have
known  all  my  life  in  part ;  and  which  agrees  with  the  account  of
the  writer  who  spoke  from  tradition  long  ago.

Mrs.  MacTavish  writes  : —

2.  The  Olladh  Ileagh  (Islay  Doctor).

There  were  three  brothers  of  the  name  of  Beaton,  natives  of
Islay,  famed  for  their  skill  in  medicine.  One  of  the  brothers,
called  John,  went  to  Mull,  and  was  known  as  the  OUadh  MuiUeachf


366  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

or  Mull  doctor.  His  tomb  is  to  be  seen  in  lona.  Another  called
Fergas  remained  in  Islay,  and  was  known  as  the  Olladh  Ileach.
The  third,  Gilleadha,  was  in  the  end  the  most  famed  of  the
three ;  he  was  the  herbalist,  and  employed  by  his  brother  Fergas
to  gather  herbs  and  prepare  them  for  use.

When  boiling  a  cauldron  of  herbs,  in  which  a  white  snake
had  been  pnt,  in  stirring,  it  bubbled  up  and  spattered  on  his  hand,
this  he  licked  off,  and  at  once  he  got  such  a  view  of  his  profession
as  to  make  him  unrivalled.  He  was  summoned  to  attend  one  of
the  Scotch  Kings,  who  was  cured  by  him  ;  but  through  the  jealousy
<>f  other  doctors,  he  never  returned  to  Islay,  having  been  poisoned.

(So  far  the  Islay  tradition  very  nearly  accords  with  the
Sutherland  account  of  Farquhar  Leech).  He  was  called  to  see
a  young  lady,  daughter  of  Mackay  of  Kilmahumaig,  near  Crinan.
When  approaching  the  house,  attended  by  a  servant,  the  latter
remarked  a  sweet  female  voice  which  he  heard  singing  a  song ; —

"  'S  binn  an  guth  cinn  sin*'  ars*  n  gilleadh.

"  'S  binn'*  ars'  an  t  OUadh,  "  air  uachdar  Losguin."

"  Sweet  is  that  head's  voice/*  said  the  lad ;
"  Sweet,**  said  the  doctor,  "  above  a  Toad.'*

The  poor  young  woman  had  an  enormous  appetite,  which  could
not  be  satisfied,  but  she  was  reduced  to  a  skeleton.  The  doctor,
on  hearing  her  voice,  knew  what  her  disease  was,  and  ordered  a
sheep  to  be  killed  and  roasted.

The  lady  was  prevented  from  getting  any  food,  from  which  she
was  in  great  agony.

She  was  made  to  sit  by  the  sheep  while  it  was  being  roasted,
and  the  flavour  of  the  meat  tempted  the  toad  she  had  swallowed
to  come  up  her  throat  and  out  of  her  mouth,  when  she  was  com-
pletely cured.    The  reptile  she  had  swallowed  was  called  Loh

C&A.01S.

Now,  something  very  like  this  part  was  told  me  in  Norway  as
a  fact  by  a  Norwegian,  the  travelling  interpeter  of  an  English
companion.  My  old  friend  Juil  has  since  become  a  flourishing
contractor.  He  had  seen  a  young  woman  on  board  a  steamer
going  with  her  friends  to  Christiania  for  advice.  She  had  been
reaping,  and  had  fallen  asleep  on  a  sheaf  of  com  in  the  field.
She  slept  with  her  mouth  open,  and  a  serpent  had  run  down  her


FEABAOHUB  LEIQH.  367

throat.  She  had  been  in  a  state  of  terror  and  horror  eyer  since,
and  they  were  taking  her  to  the  capital.  "  I  saw  her  myself,"
said  my  informant ;  "  I  heard  that  the  doctors  could  not  cure  her
at  Ghristiania,  and  that  she  went  to  Copenhagen.  There  all  the
great  doctors  were  beat';  but  a  young  doctor  made  them  put  her
in  a  dark  room,  lying  on  her  side  on  the  floor,  with  a  saucer  of
milk  before  her.  *  Serpents  are  very  fond  of  milk  you  see.'
The  first  time  they  opened  the  door  the  serpent  had  only  put  his
head  up,  and  he  drew  it  in  again  when  he  heard  the  noise.  The
second  time  they  moved  the  saucer  a  little  further  away,  and  he
came  out  altogether,  and  the  young  doctor  killed  the  serpent  and
shewed  it  to  the  young  *  womans,'  "  and  thus  she  got  quite  well.
**  And  that  is  quite  true."

Every  word  of  it  might  be  true,  if  we  suppose  a  clever  man
and  a  woman  possessed  with  an  idea  which  had  to  be  coaxed
out  of  her ;  but  the  question  is,  when  did  that  clever  man  live,
and  where? — in  Copenhagen — ^in  the  West  Highlands — or  in
Africa,  where  the  creature  swallowed  was  a  baboon,  and  the  bait
a  banana  skilfully  administered  by  a  doctor  to  Anansi  (Dasent,
Norse  Tales,  p.  602)  ;  or  in  London,  where  a  clever  doctor  tempted
a  serpent  out  of  a  patient  with  a  mutton  chop,  according  to  a
story  told  to  a  friend  of  mine  in  his  childhood  ;  or  have  there  been
many  doctors  and  patients  who  have  gone  through  the  same  ad-
venture ?    But  to  go  on  with  the  west  country  wise  men.

"The  wife  of  a  man  who  was  suffering  from  rheumatism
consulted  the  OUadh  Muileach.  He  went  to  see  him,  bringing  a
birch  rod,  and  having  got  his  patient  out  of  bed,  ordered  his  wife  to
lay  the  birch  rod  smartly  on  his  back,  and  chase  him  till  the  doctor
would  say  it  was  enough.  He  would  not  allow  her  to  cease  till
the  poor  man  perspired  freely  and  became  supple,  and  free  from
pain."

This  again  might  be  true,  every  word;  but  when  did  the
doctor  live,  and  where  ?    Was  it  in  the  country  of  King  Voonan  ?

A  learned  doctor  in  the  Arabian  Nights,  the  sage  Dooban,
makes  King  Voonan  play  at  ball  till  he  perspires  and  absorbs
some  medicaments  from  the  handle  of  the  **  Golfstick. "

"  Another  man  went  to  him  for  a  cure  for  sore  eyes.  The
doctor  examined  his  eyes,  but  told  him  he  was  likely  to  suffer  in
A  more  serious  manner  from  horns  that  would  soon  appear  on  his


368  WBST  BIOHLAND  TALE8.

knees.  The  man  seemed  much  alarmed,  and  asked  if  tliere  was
any  way  in  which  he  could  preyent  such  a  calamity.  '  No  way/
said  the  doctor,  *but  by  keeping  your  hands  on  your  knees  for-
three  weeks.  At  the  end  of  that  period  come  to  me,  that  I  may
see  how  you  get  on.*  The  man  did  as  he  was  adiiaed,  and  went
to  the  doctor."

'*  Well,"  said  the  doctor,  **  have  the  horns  made  their  appear-
ance ?  '*    **  No,"  said  the  man.

"  Have  you  attended  to  my  advice  ?"  said  the  doctor.  "  Oh,
yes,"  said  the  patient,  "  I  have  kept  my  hands  continually,  night
and  day,  on  my  knees.*'

"  How  are  your  eyes  ?"  said  the  doctor.  *'  My  eyes  are  quite
well,**  said  the  man.  *'  Very  well,'*  said  the  doctor,  **  go  home
and  keep  your  mind  easy  about  the  homsy  and  do  n*t  rub  your
eyes.**

<'  The  descendants  of  both  Fergus  and  Gilleadh  are  still  in
Islay.»*

The  name  of  Malcolm  Bethune  is  written  on  a  curious  old
manuscript  in  the  Advocate's  Library.  It  is  described  at  page  295
of  the  report  of  the  Highland  Society  on  the  poems  of  Ossian,
1805y  with  this  note  on  the  name  : — "  He  was  one  of  a  family
eminent  for  learning  that  supplied  the  Western  Isles  for  many
ages  with  physicians,  whose  diligence  and  skill  are  gratefully
remembered  in  the  traditionary  record  of  their  country.**

It  seems,  then,  that  fifty-five  years  have  not  obliterated  the
popular  tales  clustered  about  the  name  of  Bethune  or  Beaton,
stored  in  the  mind  of  one  lady  who  may  well  remember  the  publi-
cation of  the  report,  and  to  whose  excellent  memory  this  collec-
tion of  stories  owes  so  much.

Is  the  whole  of  this  a  remnant  of  Serpent  worship  and  sup-
posed possession  by  the  god  ?  In  the  Highlands  now,  as  elsewhere,
and  from  the  earliest  of  times,  serpents  have  something  to  do  with
healing.  From  the  brazen  serpent  in  the  wilderness,  to  iEscula-
pius,  and  from  ^sculapius  to  Farquhar  Leech  and  Dr.  Beaton,
is  a  long  stretch  of  time  and  space ;  but  snakes  are  still  associated
with  healing  amongst  Spartan  shepherds,  as  well  as  Highland
peasants,  as  the  following  extract  from  my  journal  will  shew : —

"  1852,  May  10. — Having  turned  some  Indian  com  out  of  a
loft,  took  up  our  quarters  for  the  night  at  a  half-ruined  hoose  not


PBARACHUR  LEIGH.  369

far  from  Si>arta.  At  the  door  were  a  lot  of  fellows  in  shaggy
eapoteB.  drinking  sour  wine  and  making  a  row.  One  of  tbem,
(tressed  in  a  kind  of  sheepskin  cloak,  with  a  long  crook  in  his
h^d,  astonished  me  by  pulling  out  a  serpent  a  yard  long,  which
he  handled  with  perfect  coolness.

"  I  rattled  down  the  ladder,  to  the  risk  of  my  neck,  and  found
that  he  had  a  bag  full.  There  might  have  been  half  a  dozen.  I
made  him  turn  them  all  out,  and  set  the  Greeks  to  catch  them
again.  My  friend  ended  by  producing  a  number  of  white  powders,
which  made  the  swallower  independent  of  snake  bites.  I  bought
a  dozen,  and  proceeded  to  test  them  in  the  candle.  They  were
vegetable,  and  I  suspect  flour."

In  Ceylon,  according  to  Sir  Emerson  Tennent  (page  193),  it
is  the  same.

"  There  is  a  rare  variety  (of  snakes)  which  the  natives  fanci-
fully designate  the  King  of  the  Cobras.  It  has  the  head  and  the
anterior  half  of  the  body  of  so  light  a  colour  that  at  a  distance  it
seems  like  a  silvery  white."    .     .    .    **  Raja  or  King."

In  the  same  page  it  appears  that  the  snake  charmers  use  a
certain  stone  to  cure  snake  bites,  and  that  they  also  use  a  certain
root.  I  do  not  know  the  word  for  snake,  but  Kaja  is  not  unlike
BiOH,  King.   Snake  charmers  are  also  common  in  Northern  Africa.

The  serpent  creed  then  is  very  widely  spread,  and  the  belief
in  the  Highlands  is  worth  illastration.

Widow  Mary  Calder  (in  Sutherland)  tells,  that  "The  great
white  snake  is  not  uncommon  in  Sutherland,  and  has  been  some-
times,  but  not  often,  killed.  It  never  rests  by  day  or  by  night,
and  besides  running  along  the  ground,  has  a  revolving  motion
peculiar  to  itself,  turning  over  and  over  through  an  ivory  ring
which  is  loose  on  its  body.  This  is  formed  from  its  own  slime,
and  sometimes  slips  off, — in  which  case  the  snake  makes  another,
and  the  finder  of  the  ring  is  safe  against  all  diseases  and  enchant-
ments."— Vide  adder  beads  in  the  Gallovidian  Encyclopaedia.

**  Another  great  serpent  has  been  seen  by  the  natives.  The
last  was  nine  feet  long,  and  covered  with  hair ;  it  had  a  mane,  and
was  a  bodily  manifestation  of  the  evil  one."

It  was  a  common  belief  in  the  West  that  "  snakes'  eggs"  were
lucky.  I  once  owned  one,  but  lost  it.  It  was  a  bead  of  various
colours,  blue  and  white,  apparently  of  glass,  very  like  those  figured

VOL.  U.  2  B


370  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

in  Wilson's  Prehistoric  Annals  of  Scotland,  page  304.    These  are
commonly  found  in  tumuli,  and  are  the  adder  stones  of  the  Low-
lands, and  Druid's  glass  in  Ireland.     They  are  supposed  by  Mr.
Wilson  to  have  been  worn  as  charms  by  women  of  that  unknown
prehistoric  race  which  once  inhabited  Scotland.    At  all  events,
the  idea  that  they  were  produced  by  snakes  is  common.    Mr.
Wilson  suggests  "the  probable  means  of  accounting  for  their
introduction  into  Britain  is  by  the  Phoenicians,  or  by  traders
in  direct  communication  with  that  people."  If  so,  the  same  people
may  have  brought  the  belief  and  the  tales  from  the  East,  where  a
serpent  has  had  to  do  with  mythology  from  the  earliest  of  times,
(See  Rawlinson's  Herodotus,  under  the  head  Serpent).    But  be-
sides this  white  king  of  snakes,  who  has  a  brother  Baja  in  Ceylon,
there  is  the  great  eel  which  is  always  appearing  in  lakes  and  in
the  sea,  and  which  is  firmly  believed  to  exist.   It  has  no  peculiarity
that  I  know  of  but  enormous  size.    A  keeper  used  to  tell  me  that
he  saw  it  repeatedly  in  a  small  but  very  deep  lake.    "  It  was  as
big  as  a  saik''  (sack).    I  am  quite  sure  the  man  believed  what  he
said,  though  I  believe  his  eyes  had  but  realized  an  old  legend.

Mrs.  MacTavish  writes : — "  An  old  man  in  Lorn  used  to  tell
that  he  went  one  summer  morning  to  fish  on  a  rock ;  he  was  not
long  there  when  he  saw  the  head  of  an  eel  pass.  He  continued
fishing  for  an  hour,  and  the  eel  was  still  passing.  He  went  home,
worked  in  the  field  all  day,  and  having  returned  to  the  same  rock
in  the  evening,  the  eel  was  still  passing,  and  about  dusk  he  saw
her  tail  disappearing  behind  the  rock  on  which  he  stood  fishing.'*
The  old  man  was  nicknamed  Donul  n*  ro ;  Donald  of  the  reef.

That  eel  was  a  bouncer,  but  not  so  big  as  the  sea-serpent  of
the  Edda,  which  went  round  the  world.

A  gentleman,  in  whose  house  I  dined  at  Tromsoe,near  the  arctic
circle,  told  me  that  "  the  fishermen  often  saw  the  sea-worm  in
Salten  Fjord."  All  the  world  have  heard  of  Capt.  MacQaae*8
sea-snake.  I  have  a  drawing  of  him  done  by  a  gentleman  who
was  a  midshipman  on  board  the  Doedulus,  and  saw  him.  I  lately
saw  a  master  of  a  merchant  vessel  at  Liverpool,  who  calmly
and  deliberately  assured  a  royal  commission  that  .he  had  seen
a  large  serpent  "in  the  sea  about  the  same  place."  He  said  nothing
about  it  in  the  papers,  for  no  one  would  believe  him  ;  but  he  had
no  doubt  about  it — ^he  saw  the  sea-snake.


FEARACHUR  LEIGH.  3  7 1

I  have  no  donbt  that  these  men  all  believed  what  they  said  to
be  true.  It  is  hard  to  believe  that  they  were  all  mistaken.  Few
of  them  can  have  heard  of  Pontoppidan,  Bishop  of  Bergen  ;  but
his  book  gives  pictures  of  the  sea-snake,  and  tells  how  it  was  seen
and  shot  at  in  Norwegian  Fjords  in  his  day.  There  surely  are
some  such  creatures  in  the  sea.  Highland  stories  are  full  of  sea
monsters  which  are  called  Uille  bheist  and  Draygan,  and  which
have  numerous  heads.  Surely  there  must  be  some  foundation  for
so  many  fictions.  St.  G-eorge  killed  a  Dragon  ;  Perseus  a  sea
monster ;  Bellerophon  the  Chimera ;  Hercules  the  Hydra ;  Apollo
killed  Pytho ;  Fraoch  killed,  and  was  killed  by,  a  Behir  (great
snake) ;  Vishnoo  killed  a  serpent  in  India.  *'  Sin,  the  giant
Aphophis,  as  Hhe  great  serpent,'  often  with  a  human  head,"  was
represented  pierced  by  the  spear  of  Horus  or  of  Atmoo  (as  Ke  the
Sun)  in  Egypt.*  In  short,  I  believe  that  the  Gaelic  serpent
stories,  and  the  Highland  beliefs  concerning  them,  are  old  myths,
a  part  of  the  history  of  the  oldest  feud  in  the  world ;  the  feud
with  the  serpent  who  was  "  more  subtile  than  any  beast  of  the
field  that  the  Lord  had  made,"  for  the  leading  idea  seems  always
to  be  that  the  holy,  healing  power  overcomes  the  subtile  destroyer.
Thus  Mrs.  MacTavish  tells  that  St.  Patrick  coaxed  the  last  Irish
snake  into  a  chest  by  the  promise  that  he  would  let  him  out  "  to
morrow,"  and  then  he  put  him  into  Lough  Neagh,  and  there  he
is  still.  The  serpent  is  always  asking,  "is  it  to-morrow ?*  but
a  to-morrow  *'  is  never  come ;  and  no  serpents  are  to  be  found  on
any  place  belonging  to  Ireland  to  this  day.

The  same  belief  extends  to  numerous  small  islands  on  the  coast
of  Scotland,  and  old  ruined  chapels  with  sculptured  grave-stones
are  generally  to  be  found  in  them.  I  know  one  such  island
where  some  boys  (as  I  was  told)  once  took  a  living  serpent,  and
it  died.  It  is  named  Texa,  and  this  legend  is  attached  to  it : —
"  It  is  a  portion  of  Ireland  which  a  giant's  wife  took  a  fancy  to
carry  across  the  Channel  in  her  apron.  From  a  rent  in  the  apron,
Tarsgier  fell  through,  and  the  rent  getting  larger,  Texa  fell  from
her,  and  so  by  degrees  did  all  the  other  rocks  and  islets  between
Texa  and  the  point  of  Ardmore,  where  she  left  Eillan  a  chuirn,
which  she  did  not  think  worth  taking  any  further,  being  so  much


*  Bawlinson's  Herod.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  261.


"   -^'**''**'^a>T'ai^-fT^-irr'iìrf'Tf'^'°™*^^r^=3V^>^^  ■"  i  ■.  w  ■i.^^^^^^»B^^y^i  m  i   i    i  ■  n


372  WJS8T  HIGHLÀin)  TALES.

annoyed  at  having  lost  the  rest.  Certain  it  is  that  neither  serpents
nor  toads  are  found  in  these  islands,  though  hoth  are  numerous  in
Islay.  It  is  said  that  neither  can  live  in  any  place  which  St.
Columba  blessed,  or  where  he  built  chapels  and  monasteries,  such
as  in  Eillach  a  Naomh  and  lona."

So  then,  in  the  West  Highlands  now,  the  holy  power  oyercomes
the  snake,  as  in  mythology  over  great  part  of  the  world,  and  as
it  seems  to  me  the  belief  may  perhaps  be  traced  to  holy  writ.


XLVIIL
THE  TALE  OF  SGIEE  MO  CHEALAG.

From  John  Campbell,  Stratb  Gairloch,  Boss.

T^HEEE  was  once  a  young  lad,  and  lie  went  to  seek
-*-  a  wife  to  Sgire  mo  Chealag;  and  he  married  a  far-
mer's daughter,  and  her  father  had  but  herself.  And
when  the  time  of  cutting  the  peats  came  on,  they  went
to  the  peat  hag,  the  four.

And  the  young  wife  was  sent  home  to  seek  the
food ;  and  when  she  had  gone  in  she  saw  the  speckled
filly's  packsaddle  over  her  head,  and  she  began  to  cry,
and  to  say  to  herself, —

*'  What  should  ^e  do  if  the  packsaddle  should  fall,
and  kill  herself  and  all  that  were  to  follow."

When  the  people  who  were  gathering  the  peats
found  that  she  was  long  without  coming,  they  sent  her
mother  away  to  see  what  was  keeping  her,  and  when
the  carlin  arrived  she  found  the  bride  crying,

"That  it  should  come  to  me  !"— Said  she,  "What
came  to  theel"

"Oh,"  said  she,  "when  I  came  in  I  saw  the
speckled  filly's  packsaddle  over  my  head,  and  what
should  I  do  if  it  should  fall  and  kill  myself,  and  all
that  are  to  follow  ! "

The  old  woman  struck  her  palms.  "  It  came  to
me  this  day !  If  that  should  happen,  what  shouldst
thou  do,  or  I  with  thee  !"


374  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALEa

The  men  who  were  in  the  peat-hag  were  thinking
it  long  that  one  of  the  women  was  not  coming,  for
hunger  had  struck  them.  So  it  was  that  the  old  man
went  home  to  see  what  was  keeping  the  women,  and
when  he  went  in  it  was  so  that  he  found  the  two  cry-
ing, and  beating  their  palms.

"  0,  uvon  !"  said  he,  "  what  came  upon  you  ?"

"  0  !  *'  said  the  old  woman,  **  when  thy  daughter
came  home,  did  she  not  see  the  speckled  filly's  pack-
saddle  over  her  head,  and  what  should  she  do  if  it
should  fall,  and  kill  herself  and  all  that  were  to
follow !"

"  It  came  upon  me ! "  said  the  old  man,  as  he  struck
his  palms,  "  If  that  should  happen ! "

The  young  man  came  at  the  mouth  of  night,  full
of  hunger,  and  he  found  a  leash  crying  together.

"Oovoo!"  said  he,  "what  came  upon  jouì"  and
when  the  old  man  told  him ;

"But,"  said  he,  **the  packsaddle  did  not  fall"

When  he  took  his  meat  he  went  to  lie  down;  and
in  the  morning  he  said,  "  My  foot  shall  not  stay  till  I
see  other  three  as  silly  as  ye."

Then  he  went  through  Sgire  mo  Chealag,  and  he
went  into  a  house  in  it,  and  there  was  no  man  within
but  a  leash  of  women,  and  they  were  spinning  on  five
wheels.

"  I  myself  will  not  believe,"  said  he,  "  that  it  is  of
the  people  of  this  place  that  you  are."

"  "Well,  then,"  said  they,  "  it  is  not.  We  ourselves
will  not  believe  that  it  is  of  the  people  of  the  place  that
thou  art  thyself.''

"  It  is  not,"  said  he.

"  Weel,"  said  they,  "  the  men  that  there  are  in  this
place  are  so  silly,  that  we  can  make  them  believe  any-
thing that  we  please  ourselves."


mmmmmmmmmmmmmmBmsmmfBgmr^smeBBS^^


THE  TALE  OF  SGIRB  MO  CHEALAG.  375

"  Weel,"  said  he,  "  I  have  here  a  gold  ring,  and  I
will  give  it  to  the  one  amongst  you  who  will  best  make
her  husband  believe."

The  first  one  that  came  home  of  the  men,  his  wife
said  to  him,  "  Thou  art  sick."

"  Am  I,"  said  he.

"  Oh  thou  art,"  said  she,  "  put  off  thee  thy  lot  of
clothes,  and  be  going  to  lie  down."

He  did  this,  and  when  he  was  in  the  bed  she  said
to  him,  "  Thou  art  now  dead."

"Oh,  am  I?"  said  he.

"  Thou  art,"  said  she,  "  shut  thine  eyes  and  stir  not
hand  or  foot."

And  now  he  was  dead.

Then  here  came  the  second  one  home,  and  his  wife
said  to  him,  "  It  is  not  thou."

0,  is  it  not  me  % ''  said  he.

"  0,  it's  not  thou,"  said  she.

And  he  went  away  and  betook  himself  to  the
wood

Then  here  came  the  third  to  his  own  house,  and  he
and  his  wife  went  to  He  down,  and  a  summons  went
out  on  the  morrow  for  the  burial  of  the  dead  man,  but
this  wife  would  not  let  her  husband  get  up  to  go
thera

When  they  saw  the  funeral  going  past  the  window,
she  told  him  to  be  rising.  He  arose  in  great  haste,
and  he  was  seeking  his  set  of  lost  clothes,  and  his  wife
said  to  him  that  his  clothes  were  about  him.

«  Are  they  Ì "  said  he.

"  They  are,"  said  she :  "  Haste  thee  that  thou
mayest  catch  them."

Here,  then,  he  went,  running  hard.  And  when
the  funeral  company  saw  the  man  who  was  stripped
coming,  they  thought  it  was  a  man  who  was  out  of  his


37^  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

reason,  and  they  themselves  fled  away,  and  they  left
the  funeral.  And  the  naked  man  stood  at  the  end  of
the  dead-chest.  And  there  came  down  a  man  out  of
the  wood,  and  he  said  to  the  man  who  was  naked, —

"  Dost  thou  know  me  ?"

"  ITot  I,"  said  he,  "  I  do  not  know  thee."

"  Oh,  thou  dost  not !  If  I  were  tomas  my  own  wife
would  know  me."

"  But  why,''  said  he,  "  art  thou  naked  ?"

"  Am  I  naked  ?  if  I  am,  my  wife  told  me  that  the
clothes  were  about  me."

"  It  was  my  wife  that  said  to  me  that  I  myself  was
dead,"  said  the  man  in  the  chest.

And  when  the  men  heard  the  dead  speaking,  they
took  their  soles  out  (of  that),  and  the  wives  came  and
they  took  them  home,  and  it  was  the  wife  of  the  man
who  was  dead  that  got  the  ring.

And  then  he  saw  three  as  silly  as  the  three  he  left
at  home,  and  returned  home.

And  then  he  saw  a  boat  going  to  fish,  and  there
were  twelve  men  counted  going  into  the  boat,  and  when
she  came  to  land,  there  was  within  her  but  eleven  men,
and  there  was  no  knowing  which  one  was  lost,  for  the
one  who  was  counting  was  not  counting  himseK  at  alL
And  he  was  beholding  this.

"  What  reward  would  you  give  me  if  I  should  find
you  the  man  that  is  lost  by  you  ?"

"  Thou  shalt  get  any  reward  if  thou  wilt  fijid  the
man,"  said  they.

"  Sit  there,"  said  he,  "  beside  each  other ;"  and  he
seized  a  rung  of  a  stick,  and  he  struck  the  first  one  a
sharp  stroke.

"  Mind  thou  that  thou  wert  in  her  "  (the  boat).

He  kept  on  striking  them,  till  he  had  roused  twelve
men,  and  made  them  bleed  on  the  grass.


THE  TALE  OF  SGIRB  MO  CHEALAG.  377

And  though  they  were  pounded  and  wounded,  it
was  no  matter,  they  were  pleased,  because  the  man  who
was  lost  was  found,  and  after  the  payment  they  made
a  feast  for  the  one  who  had  found  the  man  who  was
lost.

The  tenants  of  Sgire  mo  Chealag  had  a  loch  on
which  they  used  to  put  fish,  and  so  it  was  that  they
needs  must  drain  the  loch,  to  get  fresh  fish  for  the
feast ;  and  when  the  loch  was  drained,  there  was  not  a
single  fish  found  on  the  loch  but  one  great  eeL  Then
they  said, —

"This  is  the  monster  that  ate  our  fish."  Then
they  caught  her,  and  they  went  away  with  her  to  drown
her  in  the  sea.  And  when  he  saw  this  he  went  home  ;
and  -on  the  way  he  saw  four  men  putting  a  cow  up  to
the  top  of  a  house  that  she  might  eat  the  grass  that
was  growing  on  the  house-top.  Then  he  saw  that  the
people  of  Sgire  mo  Chealag  were  men  without  intelli-
gence ;  but  said  he,  "  What  reward  will  you  give  me,
and  I  will  bring  the  grass  down  Ì "

He  went  and  he  cut  the  grass,  and  he  gave  it  to
the  cow,  and  went  on  before  him.

Then  he  saw  a  man  coming  with  a  cow  in  a  cart,
and  the  people  of  the  town  had  found  out  that  the  man
had  stolen  the  cow,  and  that  mod  a  court  should  be
held  upon  him,  and  so  they  did ;  and  the  justice  they
did  was  to  put  the  horse  to  death  for  carrying  the  cow.

And  to  shew  you  that  this  tale  is  true,  it  was  this
that  made  Iain  Lorn  the  bard  say  : —

*'  As  law  of  ages  that  are  not
As  was  Sgire  mo  Cheallag,
When  doomed  they  the  garron  in  mote.


37^  ^^ST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


SGEULACHD  SGIRE  MO  CHEALAG.

Bha  Gille  og  ann  uair  's  chaidh  e  dh*  iarraidh  mna  do  Sgire  ma

Chealag,  agos  phos  e  nighean  tuathanaich  's  cha  robh  aig  a  h-

athair  ach  i  fliein,  agus  dar  a  thainig  am  bnain  na  mbinp,  chaidh

iad  do'D  bhlar  mhòìne  'nan  ceathrar.     'S  chuiradh  a'  bbean  og

dhacbaidh  air  tbbir  na  diatbad,  agus  air  del  a  stigh  dhi  cbunnaic  i

stratbair  na  Ikroch  brice  fos  a  cionn,  agns  thoisicb  i  air  caoineadh  's  air

gradba  rithe  f  bein,  de  dheanag  ise  na  'tuiteag  an  t-srathair,  's  gum

marbbag  e  i  fhein  's  na  bbeir  a  siabhal.  Dar  a  b'  fhada  le  luchd  bnain

na  moine  a  bha  e  gun  tighinn  chair  iad  a  mkthair  air  falbh  a  sbeallt-

ainn  de  bha  ga  cumail.  Nuair  a  ranig  a'  cbailleach  fhuair  i  'bhean  og  a

caoine  a steach,  "Air tighinn  ormsa,"  ars'  ise,  "de  thainig riut?"  "  O,"

as  ise,  "  dar  a  thainig  mi  steach  cbunnaic  mi  Stratbair  na  Ikroch  brioe

fos  mo  chionn  *s  de  dheanainn-sa  na'n  tuiteadh  i  's  gu  marbhag  1  mi

fhein  'b  na  th'air  mo  shiubhal  I "    Bhuail  an  t-seana  bhean  a  basan.

"  Thainig  ormsa  an  diugh  I  na'n  tachradh  sin,  de  dheanadh  tu,  na  mise

leat  I"    Bha  na  daoine  a  bha  'sa  bhlar  mhòin'  a  gabhail  fadachd  nach

robh  a  h-aon  do  na  Boireanaich  a  tighinn,  bho*n  bhuail  an  t-acras

iad.   'San  a  dh'  fhalbh  an  seann  duine  dhacbaidh,  a  dh'  fhaican  de  bha

cumail  nam  boireannach,  agus  dar  a  chaidh  e  steach  'sanii  a  fhuair  e  'n

dithis  a'  caoineadh  sa'  has  bhualadh.  "  Ochon,"  ars*  easan,  de  a  thainig

oirbh."  "  0,"  arsa'n  t-seana  bhean,  "dar  a  thainig  do  nighean  dachaidh,

nach  faco  i  stratbair  na  làiroch  brice  fos  a  cionn,  's  de  dhianag  ise

na  'n  tuiteag  i  's  gum  marbhag  i  i  fhein 's  na  bheir  a  siubbal.  *'  Thainig

ormsa,"  arsa  an  seann  duine  'se  buala,  nam  has  nan  tachradh  sin.

Thainig  an  duine  og  am  beul  na  h-oidhche  Ikn  acrais,  's  thuair  e

triur  a'  comb  chaoiniadh.     "  Ubh,  ubh,"  ars'  easan,  "  gu  de  thainig

oirbh."    Agus  an  uair  a  dh'  innis  an  seann  duine  dha.    "  Ach,"  ars'

easan,  "cha  do  thuit    an   t-srathair."      Nuair  a  ghabh  e  biadh

chaidh  e  luidhe,  agus  anns  a mhaduinn  thubhairt easan, "Cha stad mo

chas  ach  gu  faic  mi  triur  eile  cho  gbrrach  ruibh,  dh'  fhalbh  e  so  air

feadh  Sgire  mo  chealag,  agus  chaidh  e  steach  do  thigh  ann,  agus  cha

robh  duine  a  steach  ach  triur  bhan,  's  iad  a'  suiamh  air  coig  Cuigeal

an.  "  Cha  chreid  mi  fhein,"  ars'  easan,  "gur  h-ann  a'  mhuintir  an  kite

80  tha  sibh.  "  Ta,"  ars'  iadsan,  "  cha  'n  ann  cha  chreid  sin ;  fhein  gur

ann  a  mhuinter  an  kite  son  fhein,  'S  ann  cha  'n  ann,"  ars'  easan.

"  Will,''  &i's'  iadsan,  tha  na  daoine  tha  'san  kite  so  cho  faoin  's  gun

dobhair  sinn  a  chreidsinn  orra  na  h-uile  ni  a  thoileachas  sinn  fhein."

"Will,"  ars'  easan,  "thafkinne  òir  agam  an  so  agus  bheir  mi  e

do'n  te  agaibh  a 's  fearr  a  bheir  a  chreidsin  air  an  duine."     A  chend


SGEULAOHD  SGIBE  MO  OUEÀLAG.  379

fhear  a  thainig  dhachaidh  do  na  daoine  thuirt  a  bhean  ris,  *'  Tha  tha
tinn."  **  Am  bheU  ?  "  as  else.  **  O  tha,"  thuirt  ise.  «  Cuir  dhiot  do
chaid  aodaich  's  bi  dol  a  luidh."  Rinn  e  so ;  agus  dar  a  bha  6  anns
a*  leabaidh,  thuirt  i  ris,  "  Tha  thu  nise  marbh."  **  O  am  bbeil?"  as  eise.
**  Tha,"  as  ise,  **  dùin  do  shuilean  's  na  gluais  lamh  na  cas."  Agus
bha  e  so  marbh.  Thainig  an  so  an  darna  fear  dhachaidh,  agus  thubh-
airt  a  bhean  ris,  **  Cha  tu  th'ann."  **  O  nach  mi,"  as  eise.  "  O  cha
tu,"  as  ise.  'S  dh'  fhalbh  e  's  thug  e  choille  air.  Thainig  an  so  an
trithumh  fear  a  dh'ionnsaidh  a  thighe  fhein,  agus  chaidh  e  fhein
^sa  bhean  a  luidhe,  's  chaidh  gairm  a  mach  am  mairoch  chum  an
duine  marbh  a  thiolagag ;  ach  cha  robh  a  bhean-san  a  leigeil  leisean
eiridh  dho  dhol  ann,  Dar  a  chunnaic  iad  an  giulan  a*  dol  seachad  air
an  uineig  dh'  fhiar  i  air  e  bhi  'g  eiridh.  Dh'  eirich  e  'so  le  cabhaig
mhoir  's  bha  e  'g  iarraidh  a  chnid  aodaich  's  e  air  chall,  's  thubhairt,
a  bhean  ris  gun  robh  a  chuid  aodaich  uime.  **  Am  bheil  ?"  as  eise,
"  Tha,"  as  ise.  *^  Greas  thusa  ort  achd  gu  beir  thu  orra."  Dh'  fhalbh
e  'so  'na  chruaidh  ruith,  agus  an  uair  a  chunnaic  cuideachd  a'  Ghiul-
ain  an  duine  lomnochd  a'  tighinn,  smaoinich  iad  gur  duine  e  a  bha
as  a  chiall,  's  theich  iad  fhem  air  falbh,  's  dh'  fhag  iad  an  Giulan,
agus  sheas  an  duine  lomnochd  aig  ceann  na  ciste  mhairbh,  agus
thainig  duine  nuas  as  a'  choille,  agus  thubhairt  e  ris  an  duine  bha
lomnoehd,  **  Am  bheil  thu  dha  m'  ainmin  ?"  "  Cha  'n  'eil  mise,"  as
easan,  dha  'd  tainhi.  ^*  0  cha  'n  'eil ;  na  bo  mhi  Tomas  dh'  ainicbag
mo  bhean  fhein  mi."  *^  Ach  carson,"  as  easan,  a  tha  thusa  lomnochd?"
^'  Am  bheil  mi  lomnochd  ?  Ma  tha  thubhairt  mo  bhean  rium  gun
robh  an  t-aodach  umam."  **  'Se  mo  bhean  a  thubhairt  riumsa  gun
robh  mi  fhein  marbh,"  arsa  a'  fear  a  bha  'sa  chiste.  Agus  an  uair
a  chuala  na  daoine  am  marbh  a'  bruidhinn  thug  iad  na  buinn  asta  's
thainig  na  mnathan  's  thug  iad  dhachaidh  iad,  agus  'se  bean  an
duine  a  bha  marbh  a  fbuair  am  fàinne,  agus  chunnaic  easan^n  sin
triur  cho  gbrrach  ris  an  triur  a  dh'  fhag  e  aig  an  tigh,  agus  thill
easan  dhachaidh.

Agus  chunnaic  easan  an  sin  bàta  'dol  a  dh'  iasgach,  agus
chunntadh  da  dhuine  dheug  a'  dol  a  steach  do'n  bhàta,  agus  an
uair  a  thainig  i  gho  fìr  cha  robh  innte  ach  aon  duine  deug.  'S  cha
robh  fios  CO  a'  fear  a  bha  air  chall.  Agus  a'  fear  a  bha  ghan
'cunntag  cha  robh  e  gha  chuntag  fhein  idir,  agus  bha  easan  a*
coimhead  so.  **  Gu  de  an  duals  a  bheir  sibh  dhomhsa  na  'faoigh-
inn  a'  fear  a  tha  air  chall  uirbh  ?"  "  Gheamh  thu  duais  air  bhith
mo  Gheamh  thu  'n  duine,"  thubhairt  iadsan.  <<Dianaibh,"  as  easan
Sttidhe  ri  taobh  a  cheile  ma  tha.  Agus  rug  e  air  siulpan  maide,  agus
bhuail  e  'cheud  fhear,  **  Biadhag  cuimhne  agadsa  gu  robh  thu  fhein


jSo  WEST  HIGHLA.ND  TALES.

innte/'  Lean  e  air  am  bualadh  gas  an  d^  fhuair  e  naire  da  dhnine  dheag
'secuir  fail  gu  fear  orra,  agos  ged  abha  iad  pronnte  ages  leòinte  cha
robh  comas  air,  bha  iad  toilicbte  air  son  ga  'n  d'  fhuarag  an  duine  bha
air  chall,  agas  air  chiil  paigheag  ^s  ann  a  rinn  iad  cairm  d'on  daine  a
fhoair  a'  fear  a  bha  air  cball.

Bha  loch  aig  taath  Sgire  mo  chealag  air  am  bitheag  iad  a'
cmr  iasg,  agas  'ars  esan  'sann  bo  choir  dhaibh  a*  loch  a'  thrkig
gas  am  faigheag  iad  iasg  ùr  dhon  na  Cairme ;  agas  dar  a  thraog
an  loch  cha  d'  fhuarag  diarg  èisg  air  an  loch  ach  aon  Easg-
ann  mhor,  Thubhairt  iad  an  so  ga  'm  b'e  siad  a'  bhiast  a  dhith
an  t-iasg  oirra.  Rug  iad  orra  an  so  agas  dh'  fhalbh  iad  leatha  ga
bathag  'sa  mhuir ;  agas  a  naair  a  channaic  easan  so,  dh'  fhalbh  e
dhachaidh,  agas  air  a'  rathad,  channaic  e  ceathrar  dhaoine  a'  car
saas  mart  gho  mnllach  tighe  gas  an  itheag  e  feur  a  bha  cinntin  air
mullach  an  tighe.  Channaic  e  'so  ga  mo  daoine  gan  tamhoil  sluagh
Sgire  mo  chealag.  *'Ach,"  as  easan,  "de  'n  daais  a  bheir  sibh
dhonihsa  's  bheir  mi  nuas  am  feur?'*  Chaidh  e  's  dh'  iarr  e  fear  's
thag  e  do  'n  mhart  e,  agus  dh  imich  e  roimhe.  Channaic  e  'so  duine
a'  tighinn  's  mart  aige  ann  an  cairt,  agas  dh'  aithnich  daoine  a'
bhaile  gar  e  'goid  a'  mhairt  a  rinn  a'  fear  so.  '*  Agas 's  e  bo  choir  mod
a  char  air."  Mar  so  rinn  iad,  agus 's  e  'n  ceartas  a  rinn  iad  an  t-each
a  chuir  gu  bàs  airson  a  bhith  gihian  a'  mhairt.

Agus  gu  diarbhag  a  thoir  dhuibhsa  gu  'm  bheil  an  sgeulachd  so
fior  'se  so  a  thug  air  Iain  Lfim  am  Bard  a  chantamn,

**  Mar  lagh  na  linnibh  nach  mairionn
A  bha  'Sgire  Mo  cheallag
Dar  a  dbit  iad  an  gearran"
'Samhòd.
•  H.  Ubqukakt.

This  story  was  written  by  Hector  Urquhart,  from  the  telling
of  John  Campbell  in  Strathgairloch,  in  Boss-shire,  in  June  1859.
The  narrator  is  sixty-three,  and  he  says  he  learned  the  story  from
bis  father  about  forty  years  ago.  Iain  Lorn,  the  bard  quoted,
was  a  famous  Highland  poet,  and  lived  in  the  reigns  of  Charles
the  First  and  Second ;  he  died  at  a  very  advanced  age  about  1710.
His  name  was  Macdonald ;  his  country,  Lochaber ;  and  his
nickname,  Lorn,  means  bare  or  keen,  for  it  is  applied  to  a  beard-
less man  like  the  poet,  or  a  biting  keen  wind  like  his  sarcastic
genius.


THE  TALE  OF  SGIBE  MO  CHEALA6.  38  I

He  was  pensioned  by  Charles  the  Second  as  bis  bard,  brought
Montrose  and  the  Campbells  together  at  Inverlochy,  and  kept
out  of  the  fight,  saying  to  the  commaDder  of  the  Irish  auxiliaries,
"If  I  fall,  who  will  sing  thy  praises?"  He  did  sing  the  battle,
in  which  the  Campbells  got  the  worst ;  and  the  story  goes,  that
Argyll  was  so  nettled  by  the  song  that  he  offered  a  reward  for
his  head.

He  came  himself  and  claimed  the  reward,  and  was  courteously
received,  and  conducted  through  the  castle.  On  entering  a  room
hung  round  with  black-cocks'  heads,  Argyll  said,  "  Hast  thou
ever,  John,  seen  so  many  black-cocks  in  one  place?"  "  I  have
seen  them,"  said  John.  "Where?"  "At  Inmher  Lochaidh."
"  Ah !  John,  John,  thou  wilt  never  cease  gnawing  the  Campbells."
*'  The  worst  for  me  is  that  I  cannot  swallow  them,"  said  John.

This  story,  a  short  biography,  and  a  selection  from  the  poems
of  Iain  Lom,  will  be  found  in  John  Mackenzie's  "  Beauties  of
Gaelic  Poetry,"  1841,  (Glasgow :  MacGregor,  Poison,  &  Co.,  75
Argyll  Street),  a  work  which  deserves  to  be  better  known.  The
verse  quoted  horn  memory  by  John  Campbell,  is  in  a  song
dedicated  to  the  Macdugalds,  and  is  this : —

"  Cleas  na  binne  nach  mairean
Bha  'n  sgire  cille-ma-cheallaig
'Nuair  a  dhit  iad  an  gearran  'sa  mhòd ; "

and  the  story  told  in  the  note  is,  that  some  women,  as  judges,
doomed  a  horse  to  be  hanged.  The  thief  who  stole  him  first  got
off)  because  it  was  his  first  offence ;  the  horse  went  back  to  the
house  of  the  thief,  because  he  was  the  better  master,  and  was  con-
demned for  stealing  himself  the  second  time.

There  is  an  ingenuity  in  this  unreasonable  decision,  which
proves  the  inventor  of  that  story  to  have  been  no  fool.

The  story  had  passed  into  a  saying  long  ago : —

Gka.  TuaADH  AN  Cille-ma-Cheallaio  breath  bu  chlaoihb.

There  would  not  be  given  in  Cille  ma  Cheallaig  judgment
more  childish.

Part  of  this  story,  then,  has  a  Gaelic  pedigree  of  about  200
years.  Part  of  it  is  nearly  the  same  as  the  beginning  of  No.  20,
and  is  like  "Die  kluge  Else"  in  German,  which  has  a  German
pedigree  in  Grimm's  third  volume,  which  dates  from  1588.    The


382  WEST  HIGHLAKD  TALES.

Btory  belongs  to  the  same  class  as  an  old  English  rhyme,  of  which
a  version  is  given  in  Old  Nurse's  book,  by  C.  Bennet,  1857.

"  There  was  a  little  woman
As  I  've  heard  tell,
And  she  went  to  market
Her  eggs  for  to  sell,  etc.  etc.

She  goes  through  adventures, —

"  And  she  met  a  pedlar.
And  his  name  was  Stout,  *,

And  he  cut  her  pettiecoats
All  round  about.**

The  little  old  woman  got  very  cold,  and  when  she  awoke
doubted  her  identity,  and  when  her  little  dog  at  home  barked  at
her,  she  ran  away,  sure  it  was  not  her  (and  this  is  like  the  Norse
tale,  "Goosy  Grizzle.")

A  lot  of  similar  stories  are  common  in  the  Highlands.  The
following  are  from  Sutherland,  and  form  part  of  the  collections
already  referred  to : —

2.  The  Assynt  man's  mistakes.

Assynt  is  looked  on  in  Sutherland  and  Boss-shire  as  being  in  a
state  of  barbarism  resembling  that  which  the  people  south  of
Stirling  supposed  to  prevail  north  of  it ;  and  the  mistakes  of  the
Assyndiach  are  the  groundwork  of  half  the  children's  stories.  I
have  seen  nearly  all  these,  and  more,  ascribed  in  German  to  two
children,  Kordel.  und.  Michel,  whose  stupidity  has  become  pro-
verbial in  their  own  land.  1  am  told  that  schoolboys  are  conver-
sant with  a  Greek  version,  and  that  they  construe  a  tale  of  the
man  who,  when  asked  if  his  house  was  a  good  one,  brought  one
of  the  stones  as  a  sample.

The  Assyndiach  was  once  sent  by  his  wife  to  take  her  spinning-
wheel  to  the  turner's  to  get  it  mended.  In  coming  back  the  wind
set  the  wheel  in  motion,  so  he  threw  the  whole  thing  down,  saying,
•*  Go,  and  welcome."

He  struck  across  the  hills,  and  reaching  home,  asked  his  wife
if  she  had  got  her  wheel  yet.

"  No,"  said  she.

"  Well,  I  thought  not,"  said  he,  "  for  I  took  the  short  cut."


THE  TlLE  OP  SGIRE  MO  CHEALAG.  383

3.  A  very  similar  story  was  told  me  by  an  old  HigHander  in
London.

An  Inverness  wife  went  to  market  with  a  creelfdl  of  balls  of
worsted,  which  she  had  spent  a  long  time  in  spinning.  As  she
walked  along,  one  of  the  balls  fell  oat,  and  the  end  being  fast  to
the  others,  the  ball  followed,  rolling  and  bumping  along  the  road.

The  wife  turned  round,  and  seeing  the  ball  said,  "  Oh,  you
can  go  alone  !  Then  you  may  all  walk."  And  she  emptied  her
creel,  and  tied  the  ends  of  the  thread  to  it,  and  marched  into
Inverness  without  ever  looking  behind  her ;  but  when  she  got
there,  she  had  but  a  ravelled  hesp.

4.  A  traveller  stopped  at  his  (the  Assynt  man)  house  to  ask
the  hour.  He  lifted  a  large  sun-dial  from  its  stand,  and  put  it
into  his  lap,  that  he  might  see  for  himself.

5.  Seeing  a  four-wheeled  carriage,  he  exclaimed,  "  Well  done
the  little  wheels,  the  big  ones  won't  overtake  them  to-day."
(Which  story  is  told  of  Sir  Andrew  Wylie  in  Galt*s  novel).

6.  He  once  took  his  child  to  be  baptized ;  the  minister  said  he
doubted  if  he  were  fit  to  hold  the  child  for  baptism.

'^  Oh,  to  be  sure  I  am,  though  it  was  as  heavy  as  a  stirk.''

This^nswer  shewing  little  wit>  the  minister  asked  him  how
many  commandments  there  were.

"Twenty,"  he  said  boldly.

**  Oh,  that  will  never  do ;  go  back  and  learn  your  questions  "
(Shorter  Catechism).

Half  way  home  he  met  a  man.

"  How  many  commandments  will  there  be  ?  There  must  be
thirty,  for  the  minister  was  not  content  with  twenty."

He  was  set  to  rights  on  this  point,  and  turning  back  (it  was
winter),  he  thought  the  clergyman  would  not  refuse  him  this
time.

He  had  slipped  the  child  into  his  great-coat  sleeve,  and  tied
up  the  caff  with  a  string;  but  the  string  got  loose,  and  the  bairn
fell  out,  and  the  clever  father  never  heard  it,  for  it  fell  into  a  snow
wreath.  In  the  church  he  discovered  his  loss,  and  said  to  the
clergyman,  "  I  am  very  sorry,  but  not  a  bit  of  Kenneth  have  1 "
(no  wise  man  will  ever  name  an  unchristened  child).    The  un-


384  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

lackj  infant  nearly  died  in  the  snow,  and  I  do  not  know  that  the
sacrament  was  administered  to  it.

7.  The  Assynt  man  once  went  to  Tain  to  buy  meal.  Outside
the  town,  a  man  asked  bim  if  he  knew  what  o'clock  it  was.
"  Last  time  it  was  12.     If  it  is  striking  still,  it  must  be  at  50."

8.  His  wife,  like  the  Mutter  in  the  story  of  Michel  and  Cor-
delia, had  all  the  wit  of  the  family,  and  was  much  distressed  at
his  stupidity  and  simplicity.

He  was  carrying  two  bags  of  cheeses  to  market  for  her  one
day ;  one  bag  burst,  and  he  saw  all  the  cheeses  rolling  fast  down
hill.  Pleased  at  their  newly  discovered  power  of  locomotion*  he
undid  the  second  bag,  and  sent  its  contents  after  the  first,  and
walked  on  himself  to  market.  When  he  got  there,  he  asked  if
his  dairy  stuff  had  not  turned  up  yet  ?

"  No,*'  said  the  neighbours.  So  he  waited  all  day,  and  then
returned  to  tell  his  wife,  who,  guessing  his  mistake,  bid  him  look
at  the  bottom  of  the  hill,  where  he  was  enchanted  to  find  the
missing  cheeses.

9.  Seeing  a  hare  for  the  first  time,  he  backed  from  it,  repeat-
ing the  Lord's  Prayer,  till  he  fell  into  a  duck  pond,  froim  which
his  wife  drew  him  with  difiSculty.

This  last  adventure  is  like  the  '*  Seven  Swabians"  m  Grimm,
and  that  is  like  the  Hunting  of  the  Hare,  a  very  old  ballad ;  and
all  this  was  gathered  from  people  whose  names  are  not  given,  bat
who  belong  to  Sutherland,  and  whose  occupations  generally  are
such  as  to  make  it  probable  that  their  stories  are  what  they  pro-
fess to  be — traditions.

They  are  a  people  whose  native  language  is  Gaelic,  but  wbo
generally  speak  English.

10.  I  have  another  version  of  the  story  in  Gaelic,  from  Islay,
called  "  FiGHEADAiR  MOB  BAILS  NA  Gailleabain,"  '<  The  Big
"Weaver  of  the  Strangers'  Town,"  written  by  Hector  MacLean,
from  which  I  translate  the  following  extracts,  told  by  Alexander
Macalister,  Bow  more : —

There  was  a  poor  woman  before  now,  and  she  had  a  son,  and
he  was  reckoned  a  kind  of  leith-bhubbaidh — half  booby.


THE  TALE  OF  SGIBE  MO  CHBALAG.  385

A  ship  was  broken  on  the  shore,  and  it  was  a  cargo  of  wood
that  was  on  board,  and  he  stole  some  flancaiciien  (planks,  made
into  Gaelic)  out  of  her,  and  he  hid  them  in  the  gaud.  Much  of
the  wood  was  stolen  and  there  was  raknsachadh,  a  ransacking
going  on.  The  carlin  knew,  nam  fearachadh  eud,  if  they  should
ask  her  son  if  he  had  stolen  the  planks,  that  he  would  say  he  bad
stolen  them ;  so  in  the  morning  before  he  awoke,  she  put  on  a
pot,  and  she  made  milk  porridge,  and  she  took  the  porridge  with
her,  and  she  sprinkled  it  on  the  doors  and  the  door-posts.  When
her  son  got  up  he  went  out,  and  he  saw  the  porridge  on  the  door.

"  What  is  here  ?  "  said  he.

"Is  it  thus  thou  art?"  said  his  motlfer;  ''didst  thou  not
notice  the  shower  of  milk  porridge  at  all?"

*'  I  did  not  notice  it ;  this  is  a  marvellous  thing.  A  shower
of  milk  porridge ! "  said  the  son.

On  a  day  after  that,  all  about  the  place  were  called  on  to  be
questioned  about  the  wood.  They  asked  him  if  he  had  stolen
much ;  and  he  said  that  he  had.

"  When  didst  thou  steal  it  ?  »*

**  Have  you  any  knowledge  of  the  day  that  the  porridge
shower  was?"

*' There  is  enough!  there  need  not  be  any  more  speaking
made  to  thee,  be  thou  gone.**

At  the  end  of  a  while,  when  all  talk  was  past,  he  went  and  he
took  the  wood  and  he  made  innsbeabh  (?)  for  the  house,  and
OREADHAL,  a  Cradle,  so  that  when  he  should  marry  and  he  should
have  children,  that  the  cradle  might  be  ready.  He  married,  and
he  was  a  while  married,  and  he  had  no  children  at  all.

His  wife,  and  his  mother,  and  his  mother-in-law  were  in  with
him.  On  a  day  that  there  was,  he  was  weaving,  and  what  should
SFAi.,  the  shuttle,  do,  but  cast  meid  (?)  a  weight  into  the  cradle.
His  wife  got  up,  and  she  belaboured  her  palms,  and  she  roared
and  she  cried.  His  mother  got  up,  and  his  mother-in-law,  and
they  belaboured  their  palms,  and  they  roared  and  they  cried,
"  The  booby !  without  reason.  If  he  were  there  he  were  dead ;
was  there  ever  heard  tell  of  a  man  gun  mohathachadh  without
perception,  like  him !"

He  got  up  at  last,  when  he  was  sbarbh,  worn  out,  with  the
roaring  and  the  scolding.     ''  There  shall  not  come  a  stop  on  my

VOL.  IL  2  C


3^6  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

foot,  or  rest  4>ti  my  head,  till  I  hit  upon  three  more  silly  than
you.**    And  he  went  away.

The  first  fools  he  met  were  the  same  as  in  the  Ross-shire
version,  a  man  and  a  woman  trying  to  put  a  cow  on  a  house  top
to  eat  ooiRT,  corn,  which  was  growing  on  the  roof.  He  asked
what  they  would  give  him  if  he  would  make  the  cow  eat  it  below ;
and  when  they  said  that  could  not  be  done,  he  cut  the  com  with
his  knife  and  threw  it  down,  and  got  fifty  marks.

And  here  let  me  point  out  that  there  is  nothing  impossible  in
this  nonsense.  In  the  first  place,  com  and  hay  do  grow  on
thatched  houses  in  the  West  Highlands,  in  Norway,  and  in  Lap-
land, and  it  is  by  no  means  uncommon  to  see  goats  browsing
there.  I  have  seen  a  Lapp  mowing  his  crop  of  hay  on  the  top
of  the  best  house  in  the  village  of  Karasjok,  a  log-house  which
is  occupied  in  winter  and  deserted  in  suHuuer.

I  helped  the  people  at  their  hay  harvest  one  day,  and  tried  to
teach  them  the  use  of  a  fork.  Their  manner  was  to  gather  us
much  of  the  short  grass  as  they  could  grasp  in  their  arms,  and
carry  it  to  the  end  of  the  field.  I  and  my  comrade  cut  two
forked  sticks,  and,  beginning  at  the  end  of  the  swathe,  pushed  the
heap  before  us,  doing  as  much  at  one  journey  as  the  Lapps  at
half-a-dozen  trips.  But  we  had  fallen  in  with  one  of  the  old
school.  He  was  an  old  fellow  with  long  tangled  elf-locks  and  a
scanty  beard,  dressed  iu  a  deerskin  shirt  full  of  holes,  and  exceed-
ingly mangy,  for  the  hair  had  been  worn  off  in  patches  all  oyer.
He  realized  my  idea  of  a  seedy  Brownie,  a  gmagach  with  long
hair  on  his  head ;  an  old  wrinkled  face,  and  his  body  covered  with
hair.  He  gave  us  one  glance  of  sovereign  contempt,  his  daughter
a  condescending  smile,  and  then  they  each  gathered  another  arm-
ful of  grass,  and  toddled  away,  leaving  the  forked  sticks  where
they  were,  as  new-fangled  contrivances,  unworthy  of  the  notice
of  sensible  men.

And  let  any  inventor  say  whether  this  is  not  human  nature
all  over  the  world :  but  to  go  on.

He  went  on  till  he  came  to  some  men  who  were  building  a
dyke,  with  their  feet  bare.  There  came  a  shower  of  rain,  and  he
sat  in  the  shelter  of  a  dyke,  and  when  it  was  clear  they  sat  there,
and  there  was  no  talk  of  getting  up.

"  It  is  astonishing  to  me,"  said  he,  "  that  yoa  should  keep  on


THE  TALE  OF  SGIKE  MO  CHEALAG.  387

sitting,  now  tbat  it  is  dry.  It  did  not  astonish  me  that  you  should
go  to  shelter  in  the  rain,  but  it  must  be  that  you  are  not  diligent
for  your  master  when  you  are  sitting  while  you  ought  to  be  work-

"  That  is  not  it/'  said  thejr ;  "  it  is  that  our  legs  are  all  mingled
together,  and  not  one  of  us  can  recognize  his  own  legs.''

"  What  will  you  give  me  if  I  make  you  recognize  your  own
legs?"

"  What  wilt  thou  ask  ?"

''Half  a  hundred  mabg,  marks."

"  Thou  shalt  have  that  cha  bu  gheamha  dhuinn  air  moran
BABBAGHD.  It  wcro  no  pledge  for  us  by  much  more  to  be  thus
away  from  our  work."

He  went  down  to  a  bramble  bush,  and  he  cut  one  as  long  and
as  strong  as  he  could  see.  He  came  up  and  thug  e  ballsadh
ou  MATH  TEANN  ORBA,  and  he  gave  a  good  tight  raking  at  them
about  their  legs,  and  it  was  not  long  till  every  one  knew  his  own
legs.

(There  is  a  double  meaning  in  this  which  cannot  be  translated.
To  know  means  also  to  feel).

"Though  our  legs  are  sore  and  scratched,"  said  they,  "  it  is
well  for  us  to  be  able  to  go  to  our  work  rather  than  be  seated
thus."

"  You  are  strange  enough,"  said  he,  "  but  I  will  go  further."

And  then  he  goes  on  to  a  house,  and  plays  tricks  to  some
people  there,  and  says  his  name  is  Saw  te  eveb  mt  like.  And
when  the  old  man  of  the  house  came  home,  he  found  his  people
tied  upon  tables,  and  said,  "  What's  the  reason  of  this?"  ''Saw
ye  ever  my  like?"  said  the  first.  "No,  never,"  said  he.  And
went  to  the  second,  "  What 's  the  reason  of  this  ?"  said  he.

"  Saw  ye  ever  my  like  ?"  said  the  second.

"  I  saw  thy  like  in  the  kitchen,"  said  he ;  and  he  went  to  the
third.  "  What  is  the  reason  of  this  ?"  said  he.  "  Saw  ye  ever
my  like  ?"  said  the  other.  "  I  have  seen  plenty  of  thy  likes,"  said
he,  "  but  never  before  this  day."  And  then  he  understood  that
some  one  had  been  playing  tricks  on  his  people,  and  pursued  ;  but
the  weaver  played  him  a  trick,  which  is  almost  the  same  as  that
which  is  given  in  Norse  Tales  as  part  of  the  adventures  of  the
Master  Thief,  at  page  286,  second  edition.


3^8  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

And  so  here,  aa  in  almost  every  case,  the  popnlar  tales  of  the
West  Highlands  join  in  with  those  of  other  countries,  and  tarn
out  to  be  as  old  as  the  hills.

Now  surely  this  has  some  reason  and  some  foundation  in  fact.
When  so  many  popular  tales  agree  in  describing  a  set  of  strangers,
who  were  fools,  does  it  not  seem  as  if  each  land  had  once  been
occupied  by  a  race  who  appeared  to  the  new  comers  as  foolish  as
the  old  Lapp  haymaker  seemed  to  me.


¥


XLIX.
THE  CAT  AND  THE  MOUSE.*

From  Hector  MacLean,  Islay.

1.

THUIRT  an  lach  bheag  's  i  'san  toll,
*«  D^  'm  fonn  a  th'  air  a'  chat  ghlas  ?"
«  Fonn  math  is  deagh  shaod
Gmn  faodadh  thusa  tighinm  a  mach."

2.

*^  'S  mor  m*  eagal  romh  na  dubhain  chrom,
A  th'  agad  ann  am  bonn  do  chas
Mharbh  thu  mo  phiuthrag  an  d^
'S  fhuair  mi  feia  air  eigin  as."

3.
**  Gha  mhis'  a  bha  'sin  ach  cat  mhic  Iain  Buaigh
A  b'  àbhaist  a  bhi  magadh  chearc,
Ghoid  i  'n  caise  ^bha  'sa  chliabh,
'S  dh  'ith  i  'n  t-iasg  a  bha  'sa  Phreas."

TRANSLATION.
1.

Said  the  mousie  in  the  hole,
"What  is  that  purr  of  the  grey  cat  ?"
"  A  good  purr  and  a  pleasant  mood,
That  thou  mightest  come  out  of  that."

*  You  speak  of  Nursery  Rhymes.      The  following  is  a  very

trifling  one,  which  I  remember  myself,  and  have  never  been  able

to  forget.

Hector  MacLeav,  Islay,  June  29.


39^  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


2.


u


Great  is  my  fear  for  the  crooked  hooks
That  thou  hast  got  in  the  sole  of  thy  feet ;
Thou  killedst  my  sister  yesterday,
And  I  myself  got  hardly  quit"

3.

That  was  not  me,  but  John  Roy's  cat,
That  used  to  be  the  hen's  distress  :
She  stole  the  cheese,  that  was  in  the  creel.
And  ate  the  fish  that  was  in  the  pres&  "

This  old  rhyme  has  become  proverbial.    A  part  of  it  was  sent
as  a  proverb  from  Inverary.  J.  F.  C.


u


THE  THEEE  QUESTIONS.

From  the  Brothers  MacCraw,  North  TJist,  1859.

HHHEEE  was  once,  long  ago,  a  scholar ;  and  when  he

•^      had  done  learning,  his  master  said  that  he  must

now  answer  three  questions,  or  have  his  head  taken  off.

The  scholar  was  to  have  time  to  make  ready,  and  being

in  a  great  fright,  he  went  to  a  miller  who  was  the

master's  brother,  and  asked  his  aid.

The  miller  disguised  himself  and  went  instead  of

the  scholar,   and  the  first  question  put  to  him  was

this : — "  How  many  ladders  would  reach  to  the  sky  Ì"
"  Now,"  said  the  narrator,  "  can  you  answer  that  V
"  One,  if  it  were  long  enough."
"  That's  right."     The  second  was  : —
"  Where  is  the  middle  of  the  world  V*
So  the  miller  laid  down  a  rod,  and  he  said : —

"  Here,  set  a  hoop  about  the  world,  and  thou  wilt  find

the  middle  here."

The  third  was: — *'What  is  the  world's  worth?"
"Well,"  said  the  miller,  "the  Saviour  was  sold  for

thirty  pieces  of  silver,  I  am  sure  the  world  is  worth  no

more."

'^Oh,"  said  the  brother  who  was  riding  beside  us,

"  that 's  not  the  way  I  have  heard  it     The  second

was,"


392  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  How  long  will  it  take  to  go  round  the  world  V
And  the  miller  said  : —

"  If  I  were  as  swift  as  the  sun  and  moon,  I  would
run  it  in  twenty-four  hours."

"  And  the  third  was  : —

"  What  is  my  thought  ?''

And  the  miller  answered : —

"  I  can  tell ;  Thou  thinkest  that  I  am  thv  scholar,
but  I  am  thy  brother,  the  miller."

This  was  told  to  me  September  1,  1859,  in  North  Uist,  as
I  walked  along  the  road.  There  are-  a  great  many  similar
wise  saws  current,  which  are  generally  fathered  on  George
Buchanan,  the  tutor  of  James  YI.

The  following  are  a  few  riddles  of  the  same  kind,  collected  at
Gairloch,  for  Osgood  Mackenzie,  Esq.,  by  Mr.  Donald  MacDonald  :

1.  Whether  is  older,  the  man  or  the  beard  Ì

The  beard  is  the  older,  for  the  work  of  creation  was
all  finished  before  the  man,  and  the  beard  was  on  the
goat  before  the  man  was.

2.  What  is  the  wood  that  is  not  bent  nor  straight
Sawdust.     It  is  neither  bent  nor  straight.

This  riddle  forms  part  of  a  very  long  and  curious  story
which  I  heard  told  at  luverary,  at  Easter,  1859,  and  which  is
written  down.

3.  What  is  the  thing  which  the  Creator  never  saw,
and  that  kings  see  but  seldom,  and  that  I  see  every
day?

There  is  but  one  Creator,  for  that  he  never  saw  his
Hke.  King's  are  but  scarce,  for  that  they  see  each
other  but  rarely ;  but  I  see  my  own  Hke  every  day  that
I  get  up, — other  sinners  like  myself

The  riddle  is  very  well  known ;  but  this  is  another  view  of  it.

4.  There  were  three  soldiers  coming  home  on  fur-


THE  THREE  QUESTIONS.  393

lough,  and  their  three  wives  with  them ;  they  came  to  a
river  over  which  there  was  a  ferry,  hut  the  boat  would
take  with  it  but  two  together.  The  question  is,  how
did  they  make  the  passage,  for  no  one  of  them  would
trust  his  wife  with  another  man,  unless  he  was  himself
beside  her?

Two  women  went  over  first,  one  went  on  shore,
and  the  other  came  back  with  the  boat,  and  she  took
the  third  with  her.  One  of  them  went  back  and  she
stood  beside  her  own  husband,  and  the  two  husbands
of  the  women  who  were  over  went  back  with  the  boat ;
one  of  them  went  on  shore,  and  the  wife  of  the  man
who  was  in  the  boat  went  into  her  along  with  him,  and
they  went  to  the  other  side.  His  wife  went  on  shore,
and  the  man  who  was  yonder  came  in  the  boat ;  then
the  two  men  went  over  ;  then  there  were  three  men
over,  and  a  woman;  this  woman  took  over  the  other
women  by  the  way  of  one  and  one ;  and  there  seem
to  be  more  solutions  than  one  for  the  problem.

This  puzzle,  in  various  shapes,  is  well  known,  e,g.
the  Fox,  the  Goose,  and  the  Bag  of  Com,


TOIMHSEACHAIN.

1.  C,  Go  dhinbh  is  sine  an  duine  na  an  fheusag  ?

F,  Is  sine  an  fheusag;  oir  bha  obair  a  chruthachaidh  oile
deanta  roimh  an  duine,  agus  bha  feusag  air  na  gabhair  man  robh  an
dnine  ann.

2.  C.  Giod  e  am  fiodh  Dach  'eil  cuagach  no  direach  ?
F,  Min  an  t-saibh ;  cha'n  'eil  i  cuagach  no  direach.

3.  C,  Giod  e  an  md  nach  fac  an  Gruithfhear  riamh ;  is  nach  faic
righrean  ach  anminic ;  agus  a  chi  mise  na  h'uile  latha  ?

F,  Gha'n  'eil  Gruithfhear  ann  ach  a  h'aon ;  uime  sin  cha'n  fhaic
e  coimeas  da  fein ;  cha'n  eil  righrean  ach  tearc,  uime  sin  cha'n  fhaic
iad  a  cheile  ach  anminic;  ach  mise  chimi  mo  chglmeas  fein  na  h'uile
latha  dh'eirears  mi,— peacaich  eile  mar  mi  fein.


394  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

4.  C  Bha  triair  shaighdearan  a  tighin  dachaidh  air  forlach,  agus
an  triair  mhnathan  aca  maille  riu.  Thainig  iad  gn  abhainn  air  an
robh  aisig — ach  cha  tugadh  am  bata  leatha  comhla  ach  dithis.  Se  a
cbeisd  cionnus  a  rinn  iad  an  t-aisig,  's  na(^  faodadh  duine  dhiu  a
bhean  earbsa  ris  an  duine  eile  gun  e  fein  a  bhi  lamb  rithe?

F,  Cbaidb  dithis  bhan  a  null  an  toiseach ;  cbaidh  te  dhiu  air  tir
aens  thainig  an  te  'eile  air  a  h*ai8  leis  a  bhàta  agus  thug  i  leaiha  an
tritheamh  te.  Chaidh  te  dliiu  air  a  h-ais  agus  sheas  i  lamb  ri  'daine  fein
agus  thainig  dithis  dhaoine  nam  ban  a  bha  thall  air  an  ais  leis  abhàta ;
chaidh  fear  dhiu  air  tir  agus  chaidh  bean  an  duine  a  bh'anns  a  bhàta
a  steach  innte  maille  ris  agus  chaidh  iad  gus  an  taobh  eile.  Chaidh
a  bhean  air  tir  agus  thainig  an  daine  a  bha  thall  anns  a  bhata ;
chaidh  an  dithis  dhaoine  an  sin  a  null.  Bha  an  sin  an  triuir  dhaoine
thall  agus  bean ;  thug  a  bhean  so  a  lion  te  is  te  a  null  na  nmathan
eile.

Donald  M'Donald.


The  following  are  a  few  riddles,  collected  by  Hector  MacLean ;
most  of  them  from  a  little  school-girl  in  Islaj : —

1.

Eow  and  noise  and  racket

About  the  market  town,
It  is  no  bigger  than  a  flea,

An'  money  it  brings  home.

Lint  seed.

St-ioram  starom  stararaich
Air  feadh  a  bhaile  mhargaidh
Cha  mhoth*  e  na  deargann
Is  bheir  e  dhachaidh  airgiod.

Fras  lin— Linseed.

2.

Two  feet  down,  and  three  feet  up,

And  the  head  of  the  living  in  the  mouth  of  the  dead.

A  man  with  a  porridge  pot  on  his  head.


BIDDLEa.  395

Da  'chas  tiaoa  'a  tri  chasan  shnas
*S  oeann  a'  bheo  am  beul  a'  mhairbh.

H-^aon  aguB  poit  air  a  cheann.

3.

I  see  to  me,  over  the  Tiill,
A  little  one  with  a  cut  in  his  nose,
Two  very  long  teeth  in  his  jaw,
And  a  tatter  of  tow  about  his  tail.

A  hare.

Chi  mi  thngam  thar  a'  bheimi
Fear  beag  's  beum  as  a  shròin
Da  fhiacaill  fhada  'na  chir
*S  cirb  de  bhlaigh  Bn  ma  thòin.

Grearraidh.

4.

I  see  to  me,  over  the  fall,

A  little  curly  hasty  one ;

A  tuck  of  his  shirt  under  his  belt,

And  the  fall  of  the  world  under  his  power.

Death. — ^This  portrait  varies  from  the  usual  sketches.

Chi  mi  thngam  thar  an  eaa
Fear  beag  cuimeanach  cas
Cirb  d'a  l^e  fo  a  chrios
'S  Um  an  t-saoghail  fo  a  los.

Ambàs.

5.

I  see  to  me,  I  see  from  me,

Two  miles  and  ten  over  the  sea,

The  man  of  the  green  boatie.

And  his  shirt  sewn  with  a  thread  of  red

The  rainbow.


39^  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Chi  mi  thngam,  chi  mi  bhnami
Da  mhile  dheug  thar  a'  choidii.
Fear  a'  choitilein  uaine,
Is  snathainn  dearg  a*  fnaghal  alpine.

Am  boghafrois.

6.

Sheep  small,  and  very  small,
That  have  been  thrice  shorn  of  all,
On  the  hill  that  is  farthest  out,
Where  every  little  saint  will  be.

The  stars.

Caora  mhion,  mhionachag,

Air  an  treas  lomachag,  ^

Air  an  t-sliabh  is  fhaide  muigh,

Far  am  bi  gach  ionachag.

Na  reultan.

7.

The  bard,  the  bard,  the  Frenchman,
Behind  the  house  a  wheezing.

The.  nettle. — ^The  meaning  of  this  is  not  very  clear.

An  fhile  'n  fhile  Flirangach
Gnl  an  tighe  's  sreann  aice.

An  fheanndagacli.

8.

A  bent  crooked  stick  between  two  glens.
When  moves  the  crooked  bent  stick
Then  move  the  two  glens.

Scales  and  balance.

Maide  crom  cam  eadar  da  gbleann,
Ma<ibaracba8  am  maide  crom  cam
Carachaidh  an  da  ghleann.

Mddh  is  sgàlain.


RIDDLES.  397


'1


9.

Three  red  kine  on  the  bank  of  the  sea,

That  never  drank  a  drop  of  the  water  of  Alba.

Three  dogrose-hips.

Tri  ba  dearga  'chois  na  fairge,

Nach  d'  51  deur  do  dh^  nisg'  Alba  riabh.

Tri  mucagan  failm.
There  seems  to  be  a  pun  in  this  Alba  of  Scotland  or  wandering.

10.

Three  spotted  kine  under  a  stone,

A  drop  of  their  milk  never  was  milked.

Three  snakes.

Tri  ba  breaca  cliois  na  leaca,

Nach  do  bhleodhnadh  dear  d'am  bainne  riabh.

Tri  nathraichean.
11.

Four  shaking  and  four  running.
Two  finding  the  way.
And  one  roaring.

A  cow — feet  udder,  eyes,  and  moutL

Ceathrar  air  chrith  's  ceathrar  'nan  rinth,
Dithisd  a'  deanadh  an  rathaid
'S  h-aon  a'  glaodhaich.

A'  bhò.   Ceithir  casan,  ceithir  ballain,  da  shuil  's  a  benl.

12.

A  little  clear  house,  and  its  two  doors  shut.

An  egg.

Tigh  beag  soillear  's  a  dha  dhoxtisd  dtiinte.

An  iibh.


39^  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

13.

Two  strings  as  long  as  each  other.

A  river's  banks.

Da  thaod  cho  fhada.

Da  thaobh  na  h-abhann.

14.

Eounder  than  a  ball,  longer  than  a  ship.

%  A  clew.

'S  cminn'  e  na  ball 's  fhaid'  e  na  long.

Ceairsle.

15.

1  can  hold  it  myself  in  my  fist,

And  twelve  men  with  a  rope  cannot  hold  it

An  egg.

Cnmaidh  mi  fein  aW  dhom  e,
'S  cha  chum  da  fhear  dheng  air  ròp*  e.

An  ubh.

16.

A  great  crooked  stick  in  yonder  wood,
And  not  a  thing  in  it,
But  clang  bo  clang.

A  weaving  loom.

Maide  mor  cam  *b  a'  choill  ud  thall
'S  gnn  aona  mhir  ann

Ach  gliong  bo  gliong.

Beairt  fhighe.


RIDDLES.  399


17.


It  travels  on  the  little  meads,
It  travels  on  the  midden  steads.
It  travels  on  the  lengthened  riggs,
And  home  it  cometh  late  at  night

The  reaping  hook.

Siubhlaidh  e  na  letmagan,
Siubhlaidh  e  na  breunagan,
Siubhlaidh  e  'n  t-imire  fada,
'S  thig  e  dhachaidh  anmoch.

An  corran  buana.


18.

Clean  sour  (salt  or  of  the  field)  water  without  brine
or  salt.

Water  in  a  field. — There  is  a  pun  which  cannot
be  rendered.

Uisge  glan  goirt  gun  sàile  gan  salann.

Uisg'  aim  an  claiseachan  a'  ghoirt.


19.

A  rod  in  the  wood  of  Mac Alister,

And  neither  yew  nor  ivory,

Nor  tree  of  wood  in  the  universe.

And  the  deuce  take  him  that  it  measures  not.

A  snake.

Slat  an  colli  Mhic  Alasdair,

'S  cha  'n  iabhar  i  's  cha  n'  eabhar  i,

'S  cha  chraobh  de  dh*  fhiodh  an  domhain  1,

'S  an  deomhan  air  an  fhear  nach  tomhaia  i.

Natbair.


400  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


20.


A  black  cock  is  in  yonder  town,

Feather  black,  feather  brown,

Feathers  twelve  in  the  point  of  his  wing,

And  more  than  threescore  (thirsts)  in  his  back.

A  bottle  of  whisky. — ^The  pun  is  on  "  ite,"  a  feather
— or  thirst

Coileach  dubh  's  a'  bhail'  ud  thall,
lie  dhubh  is  ite  dhonn
Da  ite  dheug  am  bàrr  a  sgeith
M  'S  corr  is  tri  fichead  'na  dhriom.

Botall  uisge  bheatba.


21.

Guess-guess,  whelp,  son  of  the  son  of  guessing,
Twelve  chains  in  the  very  middle,
Four  ties,  guess-guess.

A  team  of  horses.

Tomb  tomb  a  chuilean  'ic  'ic  Thomh
Da  sblabbraidh  dheug  'san  teis  meadboin
Geitbir  cbeangbail  tomb  tomb.

An  t-seisreacb.

(Seisreacb  means,  literally,  a  team  of  six  horses ;  and  this  seems
to  be  the  sense  of  the  puzzle.)


22.

A  little  bit  cogie  in  yonder  wood.

Its  mouth  below,  and  it  spills  no  drop.

A  cow's  udder.

Miodaran  beag  's  a  cboill  ud  tball,
'S  a  bheul  foidbe,  's  cha  doirt  e  deur.

Utb  na  boine.


RIÌ>DL£S.  401

23.

A  little  gold  well  in  the  inidst  of  this  town,
Three  golden  endd  and  a  cover  of  glas&

A  watch.

TolMmm  òir  am  meadhon  a  bhaile  so
Trì  chinn  oir  Ì3  comhia  ghloine  ris.

IJaireadair. — Watch.

24

Clattering  without,  clattering  within,

A  box  fpur-comered,  and  brimful  of  clattering.

A  weaver^s  shuttle.

Gliogaran  a  maigh,  gliogaran  a  stigh,
Bocsa  oeithir  cheamach  's  e  Ian  ghliogaran.

Spàl  figheadair. — A  weaver's  shultte.

25.

No  bigger  it  is  than  a  barleycorn,
And  it  will  cover  the  board  of  the  king.

The  stone  (apple)  of  the  eye.

Cha  mhoth*  e  na  grainean  eoma
'S  comhdachaidh  e  bord  an  righ.

Clach  na  suil.

26.

A  small  wife  come  to  this  town.
And  well  she  makes  a  "  drandan ;  "
A  cap  of  the  chochiillainn  on,
And  yellow  coat  of  blanket.

A  bee.

VOL.  IL  2d


40i  WEST  HIOHLAITD  TALES.

Bean  bheag  a*  tigh  'n  do  'n  bhaile  so,
'S  gva  math  ami  dranndan,
Currachd  do  'n  cho  chullainn  urra,
'S  cbta  buidhe  plangaid.

Seillean.

27.

A  small  wife  coining  to  this  town,
And  creagada  creag  on  her  back.
Feet  on  her,  and  she  handless,
And  loads  of  chaff  in  her  chest

A  hen.

Bean  bbeag  a'  tigh  'n  do  'n  bhaile  eo^
'S  creagada  creag  air  a  main,
Caaan  nrra  *s  i  gun  làmhan
'S  nltacban  càthadh  'na  h-nchd.

Cearc.

28.

A  shaving  upon  the  floor,
And  well  it  makes  a  humming,
A  yard  of  the  Saxon  yew,
And  bow  of  the  yew  of  France.

The  fiddle.

Sliseag  air  an  urlar,

'S  gnr  math  a  ni  i  dranndan,

Slat  'n  iubhar  Shaaonnach,  *

A  *s  bogha  'n  inbhar  FhrangadL

Anfliidheal.

29.

It  came  out  of  flesh,  and  has  no  flesh  within,
It  tells  a  story  without  ever  a  tongue.

A  pen.


BIDDLES.  403

Thiùnig  e  a  feoil  's  cha  n*  eil  feoil  ann,
lonsidh  e  naii^heachd  'a  gua  teanga  'na  cbieann.

Peaun.

30.

A  golden  candlestick  on  a  two-leaved  board,
Guess  it  now,  come  quickly  guess  it

Death.

Coinnlear  òir  air  bord  da  shlisei^,
Tomhais  a  pis  e,  *s  tomhais  gu  dis  e.

Am  bàs.

31.

A  black  horse  and  a  brown  horse,  sole  to  sole,
Swifter  is  the  black  horse  than  the  brown.

Water  and  the  mill-wheel.

Each  dabh  is  each  donn  bonn  ri  bonn,

*S  laùthe  'n  t-each  dubh  na  'n  t-each  donn.

An  t-uisge  *s  roth  a'  mhuilinn.

32.

Twelve  brethren  in  one  bed.

And  no  one  of  them  at  the  front  or  the  wall.

Spokes  of  the  spinning-wheel.

Da  bhrathair  dheug  'san  aon  leaba,

'S  gun  h-aon  din  aig  a*  bheingidh  na  aig  a  bhalla.

Roth  na  caibhealach.

33.

Three  whales  so  black,  so  black,  three  whales  coloured,

coloured.
Whale  in  the  east,  whale  in  the  west>  and  punish  him

that  guesses  not

Waves.


404  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Tri  mncan  dnbha,  dnbha,  tri  mncan  datha,  datba;

Muc  an  ear,  's  muc  an  iar,  's  pian  air  an  fhear  nach  tomhais  e.

Na  tonnan.

34

A  small  house  out  in  the  West,
And  five  hundred  doors  in  it.

A  sieve.

Tigh  beag  'san  aird  an  iar
'S  coig  ciad  dorus  air«

Roideal.

35,

It  is  higher  than  the  king's  house,
It  is  finer  than  silk.

Smoke.

'S  aird  e  na  tigh  an  righ,
'S  min'  e  na'n  sioda.

An  toit.

36.

The  son  on  the  house  top,
And  the  father  unhorn.

Smoke  before  flame.

Am  mac  air  muin  an  tighe
'San  t-atbair  gun  bhreith.

An  toit  ma'n  gabh  an  gealbhan.

37.

A  man  went  eyeless  to  a  tree  where  there  were  apples,
He  didn't  leave  apples  on  it,  and  he  didn't  take  apples
off.

There  were  two,  and  he  took  one.


RIDDLES.  405

Chaidh  fear'gan  smiean  'ionnsuidh  craobh  air  an  robh  ubhlan
Cha  d'  fhag  e  ubhlaa  urra  'a  cha  d'  thag  e  abhlan  dith.

'Se  da  ubhal  a  bh*  air  a'  chraoibh  's  thag  e  h-aon  leis.

38.

Totaman,  totaman,  little  black  man,
Three  feet  under,  and  bonnet  of  wood.

(A  potato)  pot  with  the  lid  in.

Totaman,  totaman,  duine  beag  dugh,

Tri  chasan  foldhe,  agus  boinDeid  air  de  dh'  fhiodh.

Poit  agas  brod  innte.

39.

I  went  to  the  wood  and  I  sought  it  not,

I  sat  on  a  hill  and  I  found  it  not,

And  because  I  found  it  not,  I  took  it  home  with  nie.

A  thorn  in  the  foot

Chaidh  mi  *n  choille  *8  cha  d'  iarr  mi  e,

Shoidh  mi  air  cnoc  's  cha  d'  fhoair  mi  e,

'S  o*n  nach  d'  fhoair  mi  e  thug  mi  learn  dachaidh  e.

Bior  ann  an  cois.

4

40.

A  waveless  well,  it  holds  its  fill  of  flesh  and  blood.

A  tailor's  thimble.

Tobar  gon  tonn,  camaidh  e  Ikn  de  dh'  fhtdl  's  de  dh'  fheoii.

Meuran  tailleir.

41.

Blacky,  blacky,  out  at  the  door  and  a  human  bone  in
her  mouth.

A  shoe  on  a  foot.


4^6  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Dubhag,  dubhag  maeh  an  donisd  *8  cnaimh  dume  *om.  beul.

Bròg  air  cois,

42.

Red  below,  black  in  the  middle,  and  white  above.

Fire,  griddle,  and  oatcake,

Dearg  foidhe,  dagh  *na  inheadhon,  *8  geal  as  a  chionn.

An  gealbhan  a*  ghreideal  *8  an  t-aran,

43,

I  can  go  over  on  a  bridge  of  glass.
And  I  can  come  over  on  a  bridge  of  glass,
And  if  the  glass  bridge  break,
There 's  none  in  Islay,  nor  in  Eirinn,
Who  can  mend  the  bridge  of  glass.

Ice.

Theid  mi  nunn  air  drochald  ghloine,
'S  thig  mi  nail  air  drochaid  ghloine
'S  ma  bhrisdeas  an  drochaid  ghloine
Cha  'n  'eil  an  He  na  'n  Eirinn
Na  ohàraa  an  drochaid  ghloine.

Eitheandach.

44.

A  brown  stag  in  the  hill,  and  his  ear  on  fiie.

The  gun.

Damh  donn  *s  a*  bheinn  *8  a  cbloaa  ra  theinidh.

Angnnna.

45,

I  will  go.  out  between  two  woods,
And  I  will  oome  in  between  two  lochs,

A  pair  of  paUs,


BIDDLES.  407

Theid  mi  mach  eadar  dha  fhiodh,
'S  thig  mi  stigh  eadar  dha  loch.

Na  cuinneagan.

46.

A  gzeen  genUewoman  behind  tlie  door.
A  bioom,  usually  made  of  a  bunch  of  some  plant

Bean  nasal  naine  ctil  an  doruisd.

An  gaia  sgnabaidh.


47.

Wiggle  waggle  about  the  river,
Iron  its  head,  horse  its  neck,
Man  its  tail

A  fishing-rod.

Driobhal  drabhal  feadh  na  h-^ibhann,  lanmn  a  ebeann
Each  a  mhnineal  duin'  a  thòn.

Slat  iasgaich.

48.

A  sharp  sharp  sheep,  and  her  entrails  trailing.

A  big  needle.

Caora  bhiorach  bhiorach,  'b  a  mionach  alaodadh  fithe.

Snathadmhor.

49.

A  red  red  sheep,  red  mad.

The  tongue.

Caora  dhearg  dhearg,  air  an  dearg  choitheacb.

An  teanga.


/


\


\y*


408.  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


50.

I  have  a  puzzle  for  thee  :
It  isn't  thy  hair,  and  it  isn't  thy  locks,
It  isn't  a  bit  of  the  bits  of  thy  trunk,
It  is  upon  thee,  and  thou  art  no  heavier..

The  man's  name. — ^The  GaeHc  expression
being,  "  What  name  is  upon  thee  ? '

Tha  toimhseagan  agam  ort,
Cha  n'  e  t-fbionna  's  cha  'n  e  t-fhalt,
Cha  n'  e  ball  de  bhaHaibh  do  chnirp,
*S  tha  e  ort  's  cha  truimid  thu  e.

Ainm  dttine.


Got  these  puzzles,  riddles,  or  toimseagain,  from  Flora  Mac-
Intyi'e,  and  a  little  girl,  Catherine  MacArthur,  at  Ballygrant,
twelve  years  of  age.


GLOSSARY.

AiB  AN  T-SLiABH  IS  FHAiDB  KuiOH,  the  farthest  off  hill  or
mountain.

Beum,  a  piece  or  bit.

Blaioh  LÌN,  linen  cloth.

Breunaqan  ;  this  word  may  mean  every  filthy  piece  of  gronnd
over  which  the  sickle  passes.

Cathadh,  gen.  of  càith,  com  seeds.

CÌE,  the  fore-part  of  the  jams.

CoiTiLEAN,  a  garment  somewhat  of  one  piece,  serving  as  the
whole  clothes ;  or  perhaps  a  little  boat  or  skiff,  which  suggests
the  form  of  the  rainbow.

Gas,  fast.

OuiBNEANACH,  curlcd  in  ringlets.

Fhile  or  He,  or  perhaps  eibheal  or  eibhle,  an  emb^r.

loNACHAQ  may  be  aonachag,  from  aon,  a  solitary  little  thing.


RIDDLES.  409

LoMACHAQ,  a  bareness,  from  lorn.
Los,  power  of  destruction.

It  will  be  observed  that  these  riddles  are  all  of  a  peculiar
kind,  such  as  the  well  known

"  Polly  with  a  white  pettiecoat  and  a  red  nose,
The  longer  she  stands,  the  shorter  she  grows.'*

J.  F.  C.


LL


THE  FAIR  GRUAGACH,  SON  OF  THE
KING  OF  EIRINN.

From  Alexander  MacNeill,  fisherman,  Then  Tangval,  Barra.

rpHE  Fair  Chie^  son  of  the  King  of  Eirinn,  went
-*-  away  with  his  great  company  to  hold  court,  and  keep
company  with  him.  A  woman  met  him,  whom,  they
called  the  Dame  of  the  Fine  Green  Kirtle  ;  she  asked
him  to  sit  a  while  to  play  at  the  cards  ;  and  they  sat
to  play  the  cards,  and  the  Fair  Chief  drove  the  game
against  the  Dame  of  the  Fine  Green  Kirtle.

"  Ask  the  fruit  of  the  game,"  said  the  Wife  of  the
Fine  Green  Kirtle.

''  I  think  that  thou  hast  not  got  a  fruit ;  I  know
not  of  it,"  said  the  Fair  Chief,  son  of  the  King  of
Eirinn.

"  On  the  morrow  be  thou  here,  and  I  will  meet
thee,"  said  the  Dame  of  the  Fine  Green  Kirtle.

**  I  wiU  be  (here),"  said  the  Fair  Chie£

On  the  morrow  he  met  her,  and  they  began  at  the
cards,  and  she  won  the  game.

"  Ask  the  fruit  of  the  game,"  said  the  Fair  Chief.

"  I,"  said  the  Dame  of  the  Fine  Green  Kirtle,  "  am
laying  thee  under  speUs,  and  under  crosses,  under  holy
herdsmen  of  quiet  travelling,  wandering  woman,  the
little  calf,  most  feeble  and  powerless,  to  take  thy  head


THE  FAIR  QRlTAaACH;  4 1 1

and  thine  ear  and  thy  wearing  of  life  from  off  thee,  if
thou  takest  rest  by  night  or  day ;  where  thou  takest
thy  breakfast  that  thou  take  not  thy  dinner,  and  where
thou  takest  thy  dinner  that  thou  take  not  thy  supper,
in  whatsoever  place  thou  be,  until  thou  findest  out  in
what  place  I  may  be  under  the  four  brown  quarters  of
the  world."*

She  took  a  napkin  from  her  pockety  and  she  shook
it,  and  there  was  no  knowing  what  side  she  had  taken,
or  whence  she  came.

He  went  home  heavily-minded,  black  sorrowfully ;
he  put  his  elbow  on  the  board,  and  his  hand  under  his
cheek,  and  he  let  out  a  sigh.

"  What  is  it  that  ails  thee,  son  1 "  said  the  king  of
Eirinn  ;  "  Is  it  under  spells  that  thou  art  Ì  —  but
notice  them  not ;  I  will  raise  thy  spells  off  thee.  I
have  a  smithy  on  shore,  and  ships  on  sea ;  so  long  as
gold  or  silver  lasts  me,  stock  or  dwelling,  I  will  set  it
to  thy  loosing  till  I  raise  these  speUs  off  thee."

"  Thou  shalt  not  set  them,''  said  he  ;  *'  and,  father,
thou  art  high-minded.  Thou  wouldst  set  that  away
from  thyself  and  thou  wilt  lose  all  that  might  be  there.
Thou  wilt  not  raise  the  spells ;  thy  kingdom  will  go  to
want  and  to  poverty,  and  that  will  not  raise  the  spells ;
and  thou  wilt  lose  thy  lot  of  men  ;  but  keep  thou  thy
lot  of  men  by  thyself,  and  if  I  go  I  shall  but  lose
myself."

'  So  it  was  in  the  morning  of  the  morrow's  day  ho
went  away  without  dog,  without  man,  without  calf,
without  child.

He  was  going,  and  going,  and  journeying;  there
was  blackening  on  his  soles,  and  holes  in  his  shoes  ;  the
black  clouds  of  night  coming,  and  the  bright,  quiet

^  Tbis  sort  of  incantation  is  common,  and  I  am  not  certain
that  it  is  quite  correctly  rendered.


412  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

clouds  of  the  day  going  away^  and  without  his  finding
a  place  of  staying,  or  rest  for  him.  He  spent  a  -week
from  end  to  end  without  seeing  house  or  castle,  or  any
one  thing.  He  was  grown  sick;  sleepless,  restless,
meatless,  drinkless,  walking  all  the  week  He  gave  a
glance  from  him,  and  what  should  he  see  but  a  castla
He  took  towards  it,  and  round  about  it,  and  there  was
not  so  much  as  an  auger  hole  in  the  house.  His
"dudam"  and  his  "dadam"  fell  with  trouble  and
wandering,  and  he  turned  back,  heavily-minded,  black
sorrowfully.  He  was  taking  up  before  him,  and  what
should  he  hear  behind  him  but  a  shout.

"  Fair  Chief,  son  of  the  king  of  Eirinn,  return  :
there  is  the  feast  of  a  day  and  year  awaiting  thee  ;  the
meat  thou  thinkest  not  (of),  and  the  drink  thou  think-
est  not  of ;  the  meat  thou  thinkest  on,  and  the  drink
thou  thinkest  on,"  and  he  returned.

There  was  a  door  for  every  day  in  the  year  in  the
house  ;  and  there  was  a  window  for  every  day  in  the
year  in  it.  It  was  a  great  marvel  for  him,  the  house
that  he  himself  had  gone  round  about,  and  without  so
much  as  an  auger  hole  in  it,  that  door  and  window
should  be  in  it  for  every  day  in  the  year  when  he  came
back.

He  took  in  to  it.  Meat  was  set  in  its  place  for
using,  drink  in  its  place  of  drinking,  music  in  its  place
for  hearing,  and  they  were  plying  the  feast  and  the
company  with  solace  and  pleasure  of  mind,  himself
and  the  fine  damsel  that  cried  after  him  in  the  palace.

A  bed  was  made  for  him  in  the  castle,  with  pillowy
with  a  hollow  in  the  middle ;  warm  water  was  put  on
his  feet,  and  he  went  to  lie  down.  When  he  rose  up
in  the  morning,  the  board  was  set  over  with  each  meat
that  was  best ;  and  he  was  thus  for  a  time  without
his  feeling  the  time  pass  by.


THE  FAIR  GRUAGACBt.  4I3

She  stood  in  the  door.  "  Fair  Chief,  son  of  the
king  of  Eirinn,  in  what  state  dost  thou  find  thyself,
or  how  art  thou  ?"  said  the  damsel  of  the  castle,

"  I  am  well,*'  said  ho.

"  Dost  thou  know  at  what  time  thou  earnest  here?"
said  she.

"  I  think  I  shall  complete  a  week,  if  I  be  here  this
day,"  said  he.

"A  quarter  is  just  out  to-day,"  said  she.  *'Thy
meat,  thy  drink,  or  thy  bed  will  not  grow  a.  bit  the
worse  than  they  are  till  it  pleases  thyself  to  return
home."

There  he  was  by  himself  till  he  was  thinking  that
he  had  a  month  out.  At  this  time  she  stood  in  the
door.

"  Yes  !  Fair  Chief,  how  dost  thou  find  thyself  this
day  Ì "  said  she.

"  Eight  well,"  said  he.

**  In  what  mind  dost  thou  find  thyself? "  said  she.

"I  will  tell  thee  that,"  said  he  j  "if  my  two
hands  could  reach  yonder  peaked  hill,  that  I  would  set
it  on  yon  other  bluff  hilL"

"Dost  thou  know  at  what  time  thou  earnest
hither?"  said  she.

"  I  am  thinking  that  I  have  completed  a  month
here,"  said  he.

"  The  end  of  the  two  years  is  out  just  this  day,**
said  she.

"  I  will  not  believe  that  the  man  ever  came  on  the
surface  of  the  world  that  would  gain  victory  of  my-
self in  strength  or  lightness,"  said  he.

"  Thou  art  silly,"  said  she  ;  "  there  is  a  little  band
here  which  they  call  An  Fhinn  the  Een,  and  they  will
get  victory  of  thee.  The  man  never  came  of  whom
they  would  not  get  victory."


4  1 4  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  Morsel  I  will  not  eat,  draught  I  will  not  drink,
sleep  there  will  not  come  on  my  eye,  till  I  reach  wliere
they  are,  and  I  know  who  they  are,"  said  he.

"  Fair  Chief  be  not  so  silly,  and  let  that  lightness
pass  from  thy  head ;  stay  as  thou  art,  for  I  know  thou
wilt  return,"  said  she.

"  I  will  not  make  stay  by  night  or  day,  until  I  reach
them,"  said  he.

"  The  day  is  soft  and  misty,"  said  she,  **  and  thou
art  setting  it  before  thee  that  thou  wilt  go.  The  Feen
are  in  such  a  place,  cmd  they  have  a  net  fishing  trout
Thou  shalt  go  over  where  they  are.  Thou  wilt  see  the
Feen  on  one  side,  and  Fionn  alone  on  the  other  sida
Thou  shalt  go  where  he  is,  and  thou  shalt  bless  him.
Fionn  will  bless  thee  in  the  same  way  ;  thou  shedt  ask
service  from  him ;  he  will  say  that  he  has  no  service
for  thee,  now  that  the  Feen  are  strong  enough,  and
he  will  not  put  a  man  out.  He  will  say,  *  What  name
is  upon  thee  1 '  Thou  shalt  answer,  the  name  thou
didst  never  hide,  An  Gruagach  ban  Mac  Eigh  Eireann*
Fionn  will  say  then,  *  Though  I  should  not  want  of  a
man,  why  should  I  not  give  service  to  the  son  of  thy
father/  Be  not  high  minded  amongst  the  Feeantan.
Gome  now,  and  thou  shalt  have  a  napkin  that  is  here,
and  thou  shalt  say  to  Fionn,  whether  thou  be  alive  or
dead  to  put  thee  in  it  when  comes  its  need."

He  went  away,  and  he  reached  (the  place)  where
the  Feen  were ;  he  saw  them  there  fishing  trout,  the
rest  on  the  one  side,  and  Fionn  on  the  other  side
alone.  He  went  where  Fionn  was,  and  he  blessed
him.     Fionn  blessed  him  in  words  that  were  no  worse.

"  I  heard  that  there  were  such  men,  and  I  came  to
you  to  seek  hire  from  you,"  said  the  Fair  Chief.

"  Well,  then,  I  have  no  need  of  a  man  at  the  time,"
said  Fionn.     "  What  name  is  upon  thee  V


THE  FAIR  aBUAOAGH.  4 1  5

"  My  name  I  never  hid.  The  Gruagach  Ban,  son
of  the  king  of  Eireann/'  said  ha

"  Bad !  bad !  for  all  the  ill  luck  that  befel  me !
where  I  got  my  nourishment  young,  and  my  dwelling
for  my  old  age ;  who  should  get  service  unless  thy
father's  son  should  get  it ;  hut  be  not  high  minded
amongst  the  JFeeantan,"  said  Fionn.  "Come  hither
and  catch  the  end  of  the  net^  and  drag  it  along  with
ma

He  began  dragging  the  net  with  the  Feen.  He
cast  an  eye  above  him,  and  what  should  he  see  but
a  deer.

"  Were  it  not  better  for  the  like  of  you,  such  swift,
strong,  light,  young  men  to  be  hunting  yonder  deer,
than  to  be  fishing  any  one  pert  trout  that  is  here,  and
that  a  morsel  of  fish  or  a  mouthful  of  juice  will  not
satisfy  you  rather  than  yonder  creature  up  above  you —
a  morsel  of  whose  flesh,  and  a  mouthful  of  whose  broth
will  suffice  you,"  said  the  Fair  Chief,  son  of  the  king  of

"  K  yonder  beast  is  good,  we  are  seven  times  tired
of  him,"  said  Fionn,  "  and  we  know  him  well  enougL"

"  Well,  I  heard  myself  that  there  was  one  man
of  you  called  Luathas  (Swiftness)  that  could  catch  the
swift  March  wind,  and  the  swift  March  wind  could  not
catch,"  said  the  Fair  Chie£

"  Since  it  is  thy  first  request,  we  will  send  to  seek
him,"  said  Fionn.

He  was  sent  for,  and  Caoiltb  came.  The  Fair
Chief  shouted  to  him.

"  There  is  the  matter  I  have  for  thee,"  said  the
Gruagach,  "  to  run  the  deer  that  I  saw  yonder  above."

"  The  Fair  Chief  came  amongst  our  company  this
day,  and  his  advice  may  be  taken  the  first  day.  He
gave  a  glance  from  him,  and  he  saw  a  deer  standing


4 1 6  WEST  aiGHL AND  TALES.

•

above  us  ;  lie  aaid  it  was  better  for  our  like  of  swift,
strong,  light  men  to  be  hunting  the  deer,  than  to  be
fishing  any  one  pert  trout  that  is  here ;  and  thou  Caoilte
go  and  chase  the  deer."

"  Well,  then,  many  is  the  day  that  I  have  given
to  chasing  him,  and  it  is  little  I  have  for  it  but  my
grief  that  I  never  got  a  hold  of  him,"  said  Caoilte.

Caoilte  went  away,  and  he  took  to  speed,

"How  will  Caoilte  be  when  he  is  at  his  full
speed  r*  said  the  Fair  Chief

"  There  will  be  three  heads  on  Caoilte  when  he  is
at  his  full  speed,"  said  Fionn.

*'  And  how  many  heads  will  there  be  on  the  deerl"
said  the  Chief

'^  There  will  be  seven  heads  on  him  when  he  is  at
fall  swiftness,"  said  Fionn.*

"  What  distance  has  he  before  he  reaches  the  end
of  his  journey  Ì "  said  tìie  Chief

"  It  is  seven  glens  and  seven  hilk,  and  seven  sum-
mer seats,"  said  Fionn ;  "  he  has  that  to  make  before
he  reaches  a  place  of  rest."

"  Let  us  take  a  hand  at  dragging  the  net^"  said  the
Chief.

The  Fair  Chief  gave  a  glance  from  him,  and  he  said
to  Fionn,  "  Een,  son  of  Cumhail,  put  thy  finger  under
thy  knowledge  tooth,  too  see  what  distcoice  Caoilte  is
from  the  deer."

Fionn  put  his  finger  under  his  knowledge  tooth.
"There  are  two  heads  on  Caoilte,  and  on  the  deer
there  are  but  two  heads  yet,"  said  Fionn.

"  How  much  distance  have  they  put  past  Ì "  said
the  Fair  Chief.

*  What  this  means  I  do  not  know.  Perhaps  a  head  may  be
the  height  of  a  man,  a  fathom — ^three  and  seven  fathoms  at  a
stride.


THE  FAIR  GRUAGACH.  4^7

"  Two  glens  and  two  hills ;  they  have  five  unpassed
still,"  said  Fionn.

"  Let  us  take  a  hand  at  fishing  the  trout/'  said  the
JFair  Chief.

"  When  they  had  been  working  a  while,  the  Fair
Chief  gave  a  glance  from  him.  "  Fionn,  son  of  Cumal,"
said  he,  "  put  thy  finger  under  thy  knowledge  tooth
to  see  what  distance  Caoilte  is  from  the  deer."

"  There  are  three  heads  on  Caoilte,  and  four  heads
on  the  deer,  and  Caoilte  is  at  full  speed,"  said  Fionn.

"  How  many  glens  and  hills  and  summer  seats  are
before  them,"  said  the  Chie£

"There  are  four  behind  them,  and  three  before
them,"  said  Fionn.

"  Let  us  take  a  hand  at  fishing  the  trout,"  said  the
Fair  Chief.

They  took  a  while  at  fishing  the  trout

"  Fionn,  son  of  Cumal,"  said  the  Chief,  "  what  dis-
tance is  still  before  the  deer  before  he  reaches  the  end
of  his  journey  ?'^'

"  One  glen  and  one  hill,  and  one  summer  seat,"  said
Fionn.

He  threw  the.  net  from  him,  and  he  took  to  speed.
*He  would  catch  the  swift  March  wind,  and  the  swift
March  wind  could  not  catch  him,  till  he  caught  Caoilte  ;
he  took  past  him,  and  he  left  his  blessing  with  him^
.Going  over  by  the  ford  of  Sruth  Euadh,  the  deer  gave
a  spring — ^the  Fair  Chief  gave  the  next  spring,  and  he
caught  the  deer  by  the  hinder  shank,  and  the  deer  gave
A  roar,  and  the  Carlin  cried —

"  Who  seized  the  beast  of  my  love  Ì  "

*'  It  is  I,"  said  the  Fair  Chief,  "  the  son  of  the  king  of
Eirinn."

"  Oh,  Gruagach  ban,  son  of  the  king  of  Eiritiii,  lei
him  go,"  said  the  Carlin.  ^

VOL.  IL  2  E


41^  WEST   mOHLANB   TALES.

"  I  will  not  let  (him  go) ;  he  is  my  own  beast  now,'*
said  the  Gruagach.

"  Give  me  the  fall  of  my  fist  of  his  bnstlesy  or  a
handful  of  <his  food,  or  a  mouthful  of  his  brotl^  or  a
morsel  of  his  flesh/'  said  the  Carlin«

"  Any  one  share  thou  gettest  not,"  said  he.

"  The  Feen  are  coming,"  said  she,  "  and  Fionn  at
their  head,  and  there  shall  not  be  one  of  them  that  I  do
not  bind  back  to  back ' '

"  Do  that,"  said  he,  "  but  I  am  going  away."

He  went  away,  and  he  took  the  deer  with  him,  and
he  was  taking  on  before  him  till  the  £en  met  him.

"Een,  son  of  Cumal,  keep  that,"  said  he,  as  he
left  the  deer  with  Fionn.

Fionn,  son  of  Cumal,  sat  at  the  deer,  and  the  Fair
Chief  went  away.  He  reached  the  smithy  of  the  seven
and  twenty  smiths.  He  took  out  three  iron  hoops  out
of  it  for  every  man  that  was  in  the  Een  (Fhinn)  ;  he
took  with  him  a  hand  hammer,  and  he  put  three  hoops
about  the  head  of  every  man  that  was  in  the  £en,  and
he  tightened  them  with  the  hammer.

The  Garlin  came  out,  and  let  out  a  great  screeclu

"  £en,  son  of  Cumal,  let  hither  to  me  the  creature
of  my  love."

The  highest  hoop  that  was  on  the  Feeantan  burst
with  the  screech.  She  came  out  the  second  time,  and
she  let  out  the  next  yell,  and  the  second  hoop  burst
(Was  not  the  Carlin  terrible  !)  She  went  home,  and
she  was  not  long  within  when  she  came  the  third  time,  and
she  let  out  the  third  yell,  and  the  third  hoop  burst  She
went  and  she  betook  herself  to  a  wood ;  she  twisted  a
withy  from  the  wood  ;  she  took  it  with  her ;  she  went
over,  and  she  bound  every  man  of  the  Feeantaichean
back  to  back,  but  FiotUL

The  Fair  Chief  lai4  his  hand  on  the  deer,  and  he


THE   FAIR   GRUÀGàCH.  4I9

flayed  it.  He  took  out  the  gaorr,  and  every  bit  of  the
inside ;  he  cut  a  turf,  and  he  buried  them  under  the
eartL  He  set  a  caldron  in  order,  and  he  put  the  deer
in  the  caldron,  and  fire  at  it  to  cook  it.

"Een,  son  of  Cumal,"  said  the  Fair  Chief,  "whether
wouldst  thou  rather  go  to  fight  the  Carlin,  or  stay  to
boil  the  caldron?"

"Well,  then,"  said  Fionn,  "the  caldron  is  hard
enough  to  boil.  If  there  be  a  morsel  of  the  flesh  un-
cooked, the  deer  will  get  up  as  he  was  before ;  and  if  a
drop  of  the  broth  goes  into  the  fire,  he  will  arise  as  he
was  before.     I  would  rather  stay  and  boil,  the  caldron."

The  Carlin  came.  "Een,  son  of  Cumal,"  said
she,  "  give  me  my  fist  full  of  bristles,  or  a  squeeze  of
my  fist  of  GAORR,  or  else  a  morsel  of  his  flesh,  or  else
a  gulp  of  the  brotL"

"  I  myself  did  not  do  a  thing  about  it,  and  with
that  I  have  no  order  to  give  it  away,"  said  Fionn.

Here  then  the  Fair  Chief  and  the  Carlin  began  at
each  other  j  they  would  make  a  bog  on  the  rock  and  a
rock  on  the  bog.  In  the  place  where  the  least  they
would  sink,  they  would  sink  to  the  knees  ;  in  the  place
whore  the  most  they  would  sink,  they  would  sink  to
the  eyes.

"Art  thou  satisfied  with  the  sport,  Een,  son  of
Cumal?"  said  the  Fair  Chie£

"  It  is  long  since  I  was  satiated  with  that,"  said
Fionn.

"  There  will  be  a  chance  to  return-it  now,"  said  the
Chief.

He  seized  the  Carlin,  and  he  struck  her  a  blow
of  his  foot  in  the  crook  of  the  hough,  and  he  felled  her.

"  Een,  son  of  Cumal,  shall  I  take  her  head
off?"  said  the  Chief.

"  I  don't  know,"  said  Fionn.


420  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES.

"  Eeh,  son  of  CumaV  said  she,  "  I  am  laying  thee
under  crosses,  and  under  spells,  and  under  holy  herds-
man of  quiet  travelling,  wandering  woman,  the  little  calf,
most  powerless,  most  uncouth,  to  take  thy  head  and
thine  ear,  and  thy  life's  wearing  off,  unless  thou  be  as  a
husband,  three  hours  before  the  day  comes,  witk  the
wife  of  the  Tree  Lion.*

"  I,"  said  the  Fair  Chief,  "  am  laying  thee  under
crosses  and  under  spells,  under  holy  herdsman  of  quiet
travelling,  wandering  woman,  the  little  calf  most  power-
less and  most  uncouth,  to  take  thy  head  and  thine  ear,
and  thy  life's  wearing  off,  unless  thou  be  with  a  foot  on
either  side  of  the  ford  of  Sruth  Euadh,  and  every  drop  of
the  water  flowing  through  thee."

He  arose,  and  he  let  her  stand  up.

"  Eaise  thy  spells  from  off  me,  and  I  will  raise  them
from  him,"  said  the  Carlin.  "  Neither  will  I  lift  nor
lay  down,  but  so ;  howsoever  we  maybe,thoucomest  not."

The  Fair  Chief  went  and  he  took  off  the  caldron  ;
he  seized  a  fork  and  a  knife,  and  he  put  the  fork  into
the  deer ;  he  seized  the  knife  and  he  cut  a  morsel  out
of  it,  and  he  ate  it.  He  caught  a  turf,  and  cut  it,  and
he  laid  that  on  the  mouth  of  the  caldron.

"  Een,  son  of  Cumal,  it  is  time  for  us  to  be  going,"
said  he  ;  "art  thou  good  at  horsemanship?*'

"  I  could  hit  upon  it,"  said  Fionn.

He  caught  hold  of  a  rod,  and  he  gave  it  to  Fionn.
"  Strike  that  on  me,"  said  he.

Fionn  struck  the  rod  on  him  and  made  him  a  brown
ambler.

"  Now,  get  on  top  of  me,"  said  the  Chiè£  Fionn
got  on  him.

*  Lcsòmlian  chraobh.  Tliis,  I  presume,  is  a  gTÌ£Bn ;  I  have
often  heard  the  name  though  it  is  not  in  dictionaries.  The  word
griffin  is  also  omitted  from  some.


,  THE   FAIB   OBUAGAGH.  4!  I

"Be  pretty  watchful ;  I  am  at  thee."

He  gave  that  spring  and  he  went  past  nine  ridges,
and  Fionn  stood  (fast)  on  him.  "  She  *'  gave  the  next
spring  and  "  she "  went  past  nine  other  ridges  and
Fionn  stood  fast  on  "  her."  He  took  to  speed.  He
would  catch  the  swift  March  wind,  and  the  swift
March  wind  could  not  catch  him.

"  There  is  a  little  town  down  here,"  said  the  am-
bler, and  go  down  and  take  with  thee  three  stoups  of
wine  and  three  wheaten  loaves,  and  thou  shalt  give  me
a  stoup  of  wine  and  a  wheaten  loaf,  and  thon  shalt
comb  me  against  the  hair,  and  with  the  hair."

Fionn  got  that  and  they  reached  the  wall  of  the
Tree  lion.

"  Come  on  the  ground,  £en,  son  of  Cumal,  and
give  me  a  stoup  of  wine  and  a  wheaten  loaf"

Fionn  came  down  and  he  gave  him  a  stoup  of  wine
and  a  wheaten  loaf

"  Comb  me  now  against  the  hair,  and  comb  me
with  the  hair."

He  did  that

"  Take  care  of  thyself,"  said  the  ambler.

TKen  "  she  "  leaped,  and  she  put  a  third  of  the
wall  below  her,  and  there  were  two-thirds  above,  and
8he  returned.

"  Give  me  another  stoup  of  wine  and  another
wheaten  loa^  and  comb  me  against  the  hair,  and  comb
me  with  the  hair."  .

He  did  that

"  Take  care  of  thyself  for  I  am  for  thee  now,"  said
the  ambler.

She  took  the  second  spring,  and  she  put  two-thirds
of  the  wall  below  her,  and  there  was  a  third  over  her
head,  and  she  returned.

"  Give  me  another  stoup  of  wiae  and  a  wheaten


422.  WEST  HIGHLAND    TALES.

loaf,  and  comb  me  against  the  hair,  and  ^th  the
hair."

He  did  that.

"  Take  care  of  thyself,  for  I  am  for  thee  now,"  said
she.

She  took  a  spring,  and  she  was  on  the  top  of  the
walL

"  The  matter  is  well  before  thee,  Een,"  said  tlie
ambler,  "  the  Tree  Lion  is  from  home."

He  went  home.  My  Chief,  and  all  hail !  were  before
him  ;  meat  and  drink  were  set  before  him  ;  he  rested
that  nighty  and  he  was  with  the  wife  of  the  Tree  lion
three  hours  before  the  day.

So  early  as  his  eye  saw  the  day,  earlier  than  that
he  arose,  and  he  reached  the  ambler,  the  Gruagach
Ban,  and  they  went  away.

Said  the  Fair  Chief,  "  The  Tree  lion  is  fix)m
home  ;  anything  that  passed  she  will  not  hide ;  he  is
coming  after  us,  and  he  will  not  remember  his  book  of
witchcraft ;  and  since  he  does  not  remember  the  hook
of  witchcraft,  it  will  go  with  me  against  him  ;  but  if  he
should  remember  the  book,  the  people  of  the  world
could  not  withstand  him.  He  has  every  Draochd  magic,
and  he  will  spring  as  a  bull  when  he  comes,  and  I  will
spring  as  a  bull  before  him,  and  the  first  blow  I  give
him,  I  will  lay  his  head  on  his  side,  and  I  will  make
him  roar.  Then  he  will  spring  as  an  Aiseal  (ass),
and  I  will  spring  as  an  ass  before  him,  and  the  first
thrust  I  give  him  I  will  take  a  mouthful  out  of  him,
between  flesh  and  hide  as  it  may  be.  Then  he  will
spring  as  a  hawk  in  the  heavens ;  I  will  spring  as  a
hawk  in  the  wood,  and  the  first  stroke  I  give  him,  I
will  take  his  heart  and  his  liver  out  I  will  come
down  afterwards,  and  thou  shalt  seize  that  napkin
yonder,  and  thou  shalt  put  me  in  the  napkin,  and  thou


THE  FAIR  GBUA6ACH.  423

shalt  cut  a  turf,  and  thou  slialt  put  the  napkin  under
the  earth,  and  thou  shalt  stand  upon  it.  Then  the
wife  of  the  Tree  lion  will  oome,  and  thou  standing  on
the  top  of  the  turf,  and  I  under  thy  feet ;  and  she  with
the  book  of  witchcxafb  on  her  back  in  a  hay  band,
^nd  she  will  say — Een,  son  of  Cumal,  man  that
never  told  a  lie,  tell  me  who  of  the  people  of  the  world
killed  my  comrade,  and  thou  shalt  say  T  know  not
above  the  earth  who  killed  thy  comrade.  She  will  go
•  ^way  and  take  to  speed  with  her  weeping  cry."

When  they  were  on  forward  a  short  distance,  whom
saw  they  coming  but  the  Tree  lion.

He  became  a  bull ;  the  Fair  Chief  became  a  bull
before^  him,  and  the  first  blow  he  struck  him  he  laid
his  head  on  his  side,  and  the  Tree  lion  gave  out  a
roar.  Then  he  sprung  as  an  ass,  the  Fair  Chief
^rung  as  an  ass  before  him,  and  at  the  first  rush  he
gave  towards  him  he  took  a  mouthful  between  flesh  and
skin.  The  Tree  lion  then  sprang  as  a  hawk  in  the
heavens,  the  Fair  Chief  sprang  as  a  hawk  in  the  wood,
and  he  took  the  heart  and  liver  out  of  him.  The  Fair
Chief  fell  down  afterwards,  Fionn  seized  him  and  he
put  him  into  the  laapkin,  and  he  cut  a  turf,  and  he  put
the  napkin  under  the  earth,  and  the  turf  upon  it,  and
he  stood  on  the  turf  The  wife  of  the  Tree  lion  came,
and  the  book  of  witchcraft  was  on  her  back  in  a  hay
band.

"  Een,  son  of  Cumal,  man  that  never  told  a  lie,
who  killed  my  comrade  ? "

"  I  know  not  above  the  earth,  who  killed  thy  com-
rade," said  Fionn.

And  she  went  away  in  her  weeping  cry,  and  she
betook  herself  to  distance.

He  caught  hold  of  the  Fair  Chief  and  he  lifted  him
with  him,  and  he  reached  the  castle  in  which  was  the


4^4  wast   mOHLAND    TALE&

dame  of  the  Fine  Green  Kirtle.  He  leached  her  that
into  her  hand.  She  went  down  with  it,  and  she  was
not  long  down  when  she  came  up  where  he  was.

"Een,  son  of  Cumal  the  Gruagach  Ban,  son  of
the  king  of  Eirinn,  is  asking  for  thee."

"  That  is  the  news  I  like  hest  of  all  I  ever  heard,
that  the  Fair  Chief  is  asking  for  me,"  said  Fionn.

She  set  meat  and  drink  hefore  them,  and  they
would  not  eat  a  morsel  nor  drink  a  drop  till  they
should  eat  their  share  of  the  deer  with  the  rest  at
Sruth  Euaidh.

They  reached  (the  place)  where  the  Een  were  hound,
and  they  loosed  every  single  one  of  them,  and  they
were  hungry  enough.  The  Fair  Chief  set  the  deer
hefore  them,  and  they  left  of  the  deer  thrice  as  much
as  they  ate.

"  I  should  go  to  tell  my  tale,"  said  the  Fair  Chief.
He  reached  the  carlin  at  the  ford  of  Sruth  Euaidh,
and  he  began  to  tell  the  tale  how  it  befel  him.  Every
tale  he  would  tell  her  she  would  begin  to  rise  ;  every
time  she  would  begin  to  rise  he  would  seize  her,  and
he  would  crush  her  bones,'  and  he  would  break  them
until  he  told  his  lot  of  tales  to  her.

When  he  had  told  them  he  returned,  and  he
reached  the  Een  back  again.

Fionn  went  with  him  to  the  Castle  of  the  Dame  of
the  Fine  Green  Kirtle.

"  Blessing  be  with  thee,  Een,  son  of  Cumal,"  said
the  Fair  Chief,  son  of  the  King  of  Eirinn,  "  I  have
found  all  I  sought — a  sight  of  each  matter  and  of  each
thing,  and  now  I  will  be  returning  home  to  the  palace
of  my  own  father."

"  It  is  thus  thou  art  about  to  leave  me,  after  each
thing  I  have  done  for  thee ;  thou  wilt  take  another  one,
and  I  shall  be  left  alona"


AN  OBUAGACH  BAN,  MAC  RTGH  ÈIREANN.  425

....  ..

"  Is  that  what  thou  sayest  V*  said  he,  "  If  I  thought
{hat  might  be  done,  I  never  saw  of  married  women  or
maidens  that  I  would  take  rather  than  thee,  but  I  will
not  make  wedding  or  marrying  here  with  thee,  but
thou  shalt  go  to  the  palace  of  my  father  with  me."

They  went  to  the  palace  of  his  father,  himself  arid
the  dame  of  the  Fine  Green  Kirtle,  and  Fionn.  A
churchman  was  got,  and  the  Fair  Chief  and  the  dame
of  the  Fine  Green  Kirtle  married.  A  hearty,  jolly,
joyful  wedding  was  made  for  them ;  music  was  raised
and  lament  laid  down  ;  meat  was  set  in  the  place  for
using,  and  drink  in  the  place  for  drinking,  and  music
in  the  place  for  hearing,  and  they  were  plying  the  feast-
and  the  company  until  that  wedding  was  kept  up  for
a  day  and  a  year,  with  solace  and  pleasure  of  mind.


AN  GRUAGACH  BAN,  MAC  BIGH  EIREANN.

Dh'  fhalbh  an  Gruagach  bkn,  Mac  High  Eireann,  le  mhòr-chaìd-
eacfad,  a  chamail  ciiirt  agus  cnideachd  ns  fhin.  Choinnich  boirean-
nach  e  ris  an  canadh  end,  bean  a  chaol  chot'  naine.  Dh*  iarr  i  air
ireU  snidhe  dh*  iomairt  air  chairtean,  agns  shuidh  eud  a  dh'  iomairt
airna  cairtean,  agus  chuir  an  Gmagach  ban  an  cluichd  air  bean  a  chaol
chòt  naine.  "  Iarr  toradh  de  chlnichd,'*  nrsa  bean  a  chaol  cbot*  naine.
"Gha  "n  *eil  mi  smaointeachadh  gom  bheil  toradh  agad,—cha  *n  *eil
mi  fhin  fiosrach  air/*  urs*  an  Gmagach  ban,  Mac  Righ  Eireann.
**  Am  màireach  bidh  thu  aunn  an  so,  agus  coinneachaidh  mis*  thu,**
nrsa  bean  a  chòta  chaotl  naine.  *'  Bithidb,**  nrs*  an  Grnagacfa  ban.
An  la  *r  na  mhàireach  choinnich  e  i.  Agus  thbisich  end  air  na  cairt-
ean,  agns  bhuidhinn  is*  an  cinichd.  **  Iarr  toradh  de  chluichd/*  nrs'
an  Gruagach  ban.  **  Tha  mi/*  ursa  bean  a  chaol  chòt*  naine,  "  *ga  d'
c^ar  fo  gheasan  agus  fo  chroisean,  fo  naoidh  buaraiche  mnatha'sithe,
rihbhlaiche,  seachranaiche ;  an  laogh  beag  is  meata  *s  is  mi>threòr-
aiche  *thoirt  do  chinn,  *s  do  chluas,  *8  do  chaitheadh — beatha  dhiot ;
mn  ni  thu  tamh  oidbche  na  latha,  far  an  gabh  thu  do  bhraiceas  nach
gabh  thu  do  dhinneir,  agus  far  an  gabh  thtt  do  dhinneir  nach  gabh


4^6  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

tha  do  shaipeir,  ge  b'e  ait  'am  bi  thn,  gos  am  £ugh  tha  \nach  ge  b*e
kit  am  bi  mise  fo  cheithir  raiina  madha  'm  t-saoghaiU  Thag  i  neap-
argin  as  a  pòca,  's  chrath  i  e,  's  cha  robh  f  hios  co*a  taobh  a  gbabh  i  na
as  an  d'  thliinig  L

Chaidh  esan  dacbaidb  go  trom-inntinneadi,  dugh-bhrbnach.
Cbuir  e  nileann  air  a'  bbòrd  *s  a  lamb  fo  a  leitbcheann,  's  lig  e  osann
as.  <*  D^  sin  ort  a  mbic ; "  ursa  Bigh  Eireann.  "  An  amin  fo  gheasan
a  tba  thu?'*  *<Ach  na  biodh  nmhail  agad  din,  togaidb  mise  do
gheasan  diat  Tha  ceàrdach  air  tìr  agam  agns  luingeas  air  rnnir.
Fad  *s  a  mbaireas  or  na  airgiod  domhsa,  stocbd  na  iondas,  cairidh
mi  g*a  t'  f  huasgladh  e,  gos  an  tog  mi  na  geasan  so  diat.*'  **  Cha
chair,"  nrs*  esan ;  **agas  m*  atbair  tha  thu  gbrracb.  Cuiridb  tasa  sin
aur  falbb  uait  f  bin,  agus  caillidh  ta  na  bbios  an  sin.  Cha  tog  tha  na
geasan.  Th^id  do  riogfaachd  go  ditb  's  go  bochdainn,  agus  cha  tog
sin  na  geasan,  agns  caillidh  ta  do  choid  daoine.  Ach  gMidb  tbosa
do  cbuid  daoin'  agad  fhin;  's  ma  dh'  fhalbbas  mise  cha  bhidhith  orm
ach  mi-f  hin."

'Se  bfa'  aunn  aunns  a'  mhadainn  an  la  'r  na  mbàireach,  db'  f  halbh
e  gon  chh,  gon  duine,  gon  laogb,  gon  leanabb.  Bha  e'  falbb  agu^  a*
falbh,  's  ag  astarachadh.  Bha  daghadh  air  a  bbonnaibh  agaatolladh
air  a  bhrògan ;  neòil  dhugba  nah-oidbcb*  a'  tighinn^agiis  neòìl  gbeala,
sh^imbidh  an  latha  'falbh,  's  gon  e  faigbinn  aite  stad  na  tkmh  da.
Thug  e  seachduin  o  cfaeaunn  go  ceaunn  gon  ììrìì  na  caisteal  f  haicinny
na  gon  sgath.  Bha  e  air  fas  dona,  gon  chadal,  gon  tàmh,  gon  bhiadh,
gon  deoch,  a'  coiseacbd  fad  na  seachduin.  Thug  e  sealladb  naidh,  's
de  chunnaic  e  ach  caisteal  I  Ghabb  e  a  Moniisuidh,  's  gbabh  e  ma  *n
cuairtair.  Cha  d'  fhuair  e  urad  ri  toll  tora  de  dh*  fbosgladh  air  an
tigh.  Tbuit  a  dhudam  agus  a  dhadam  air  le  trioblaid  agus  le  allaban ;
agus  thill  e  go  trom-inntinneach,  dugfa-bhrònach.  Bha  e  'gabhail
suas  roimhe,  agus  de  chual  e  ach  eubh  as  a  dh^igh.  **  A  Ghraagach
bhàn,  Mbic  Righ  Eireann  till ;  tha-cuirm  la  a's  bliadhoa  feitbeamh
ort,  am  biadh  nach  sraaointich  thu  *s  an  deoch  nach  smaointicb  tha !
am  biadh  a  smaointeachas  thu  's  an  deoch  a  smaointeacbas  tba  V
Thill  e.  Bha  dorusd  ma  choinneamb  a  h-uile  latha 's  a'  bbliadhn
air  an  tigh,  's  bha  uinneag  mu  choinneamb  h-uile  latha 's  a'.bhliadhna
air;  bha  e  'na  ioghnadh  mòr  leis,aa  tigh  a  chaidh  e fhin  mu  'n  caairt
air,  's  gon  urad  agus  toll  tora  de  dh*  fbosgladh  air,  uinneag  agoa
dorusd  a  bhith  air  mu  choinneamb  h-uile  latha  's  a'  bhliadbna,  nar  a
thill  e  I  Thug  e  stigh  air.  Chuireadh  biadh  an  ait'  a  chaitheadh,
deoch  an  ait'  a  h-òl,  agus  cebl  an  ait'  ^isdeachd.  Agus  bha  eud  a'
caitheadh  na  cuirm  agus  na  cuideachd,  e  fhin  agus  an  nighean
bhriagh  a  dh'  eubh  as  a  dh^igh,  aunns  a'  phàileas.    Rinneadb  leaba


AN  GEUAGACH  BAN,  MAC  RIGH  EIREANN.  427

le  ceaunn  adhart  dha  amins  a'  chaisteal,  's  lag  'na  boitegem.  Chidr«
eadh  bum  blàth  air  a  chasan,  's  chaidh  e  'laidhe.  Nur  a  dh'  ^irìdh  e
*n  la  ^r  na  mhàireach  bba  'm  bòrd  air  cur  thairis  leis  gach  biadh  a  b*
fheàrr,  agus  bha  e  mar  ao  ri  uine,  's  gon  e  *mòth'chainn  na  h-tiine
Mol  seachad.  Sheas  is*  aunns  an  dorasd.  **  A  Gbruagach  bhàn,  Mhic
Rigb  Eireann,  de  'n  staid  aunns  am  bheil  thu'  ga  t*  fbaotaion  fhin  ?  "
••  na  d^mnr  tha  thu?"  nrs*  ise,  **  nighean  a  chaisteil/*  **  Tha  mi  go
math,"  urs'  esan.  *<  Am  bheil  fios  agad  de  *n  uin'  o  thMnig  tha  *n
so,"  urs'  ise.  **  Tha  mi  smaointeachadh  go  *n  slànaich  mi  ceachduin,
mu  bhios  mi  aunn  an  diugh/*  urs*  esan.  **  Tha  raithe  mach  direach
an  diugh,**  urs*  ise.  **  Cha  d*  th^id  do  bhiadh,  na  do  dheoch,  na  do
leaba,  mir  na 's  miosa  na  tha  eud  gos  an  togair  thu  tilleadh  dhach-
aidh."  Bha  e  'n  sin  leisfhin  gos  an  robh  e  smaointeachadh  gon  robh
mias  aige  'mach.  Aig  an  am  so  sheas  ise  *san  dorusd.  '<  Seadh  &
Ghmagach  bhkn,  demur  a  tha  thu*  ga  t'  fhaighinn  an  diugh  ?  **  urs*  ise.
'*  Gle  mhath,"  urs'  esan.  **  De  *n  inntinn  aunns  am  bheil  thu  *ga  t*
fhaotainn  fliin  ?**  urs'  ise.  **  Innsidh  mi  sm  duit,**  urs*  esan.  **  Na*m
b'  urrainn  mo  dha  lamb  ruighinn  air  a'  bheinn  bhioraich  *nd  shuai*,
gon  cuirinn  air  muinn  na  beinn  mhaoil  'ud  eil*  i*'  **  Am  bheil  fios
agad  de  *n  iiin*  o'  thàinig  thu  *n  so  ?'*  urs*  ise.  *'  Tha  mi  smaointeach-
adh gon  do  shlànaich  mi  mias  aunn,**  urs*  esan.  "  Tha  ceaunn  an  da
bhliadhna  direach  a  mach,**  urs'  ise.  "  Cha  chreid  mi  e,  air  uachdar
an  t-saoghail,  gon  d'  thàinig  aon  duine  'gheibheadh  buaidh  orm  fhin
ann  an  spionnadh  na  *n  aotromachd,*'  urs'  esan.  *'Tha  thu  gbrrach,"
nrs*  ise,  **  Tha  buidheann  bheag  an  so  ris  an  can  end  an  Fhinn,  *8
gheibh  eud  buaidh  ort ;  cha  d'  thàinig  am  fear  air  nach  fhaigh  eud
buaidh.'*  **  Gr^im  cha  'n  ith  mi,  deoch  cha  'n  òl  mi,  cadal  cha  d''
th^id  air  mo  shiul,  gos  an  ruig  mi  far  am  bheil  eud,  's  gos  am  bi
fhios  agam  cò  eud,"  urs'  esan.  **  A  Gbruagach  bhkn  na  bi  cho  gbrr^
ach,  agus  lig  seachad  an  f  haoineis  sin  as  do  cheaunn.  Fan  mur  a
tha  thu,  's  fios  agam  gon  till  end  thu,"  nrs'  iae.  **  Tàmh  oidhche  na
latha  cha  dian  mi  gos  an  ruig  mi  end,"  urs'  esan.  **  Tha  latha  bog,
ceòthar  aunn  an  diagh,"  urs'  ise,  **  agus  tha  thu  'cùr  romhad  gom
falbh  thu."  *^  Ilia  'n  Fhinn  'na  leithid  so  de  dh'  kite,  agus  lian  ac
ag  iasgach  brie.  Gabhaidh  tu  null  far  am  bi  end.  Chi  thu  'n  Fhinn
air  an  dama  taobh,  's  Fionn  na  ònrachd  air  an  taobh  eile.  Gabbaidb
tu  far  am  bi  e,  agus  beannachaidh  tu  dha.  Beannachaidh  Fionh
duit  aunns  an  dòigh  chiadhna.  larraidh  tu  cosnadh  air.  Abraidh  e-
nach  'eil  cosnadh  aige  dhuit  an  dràsd,  gom  bheil  an  Fhinn  gM  làidir,
*s  nach  cnir  e  duine  'mach.  Abraidh  e  de  'n  t-ainm  a  th'  ort.'
Freagraidh  tus'  an  sin,  t'  ainm  nach  do  cheU  thu  riabh,  an  Gruagacfa-
ban,  Mac  kigh  Eireann.    Abraidh  Fionn  an  sin,  Gad  a  bhitbinn*8»


428  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

gon  duine  dlùth  d^mur  nach  d'  thagainn  cosnadh  do  mhac  t'  athar
i>a;  achhabi  mbr-fhaclach  am  miosg  nam  Fianntan.  Thalia  nis
agas  gheibh  thu  nèapai^n  a  tha  'n  so,  agUs  bbeir  thu  leat  e,  agos
abrudh  ta  ri  Fionn,  co  'ca  bhios  thusa  beb  na  marbh  do  char  aann
nor  a  thig  fenm  air."

Dh*  fhalbh  e  agns  ràinig  e  far  an  robh  *n  Fhinn.    Chnnnaic  e  ead
an  sin  ag  iasgach  brie,  each  air  an  darna  taobh,  *s  Fionn  air  an  taobh
eile  na  ònrachd.    Chaidh  e  far  an  robh  Fionn,  agus  bheannaich  e
dha.    Bheannach  Fionn  dàsan  aunn  am  briathran  nach  bo  mhiosa.
'*  Chaala  mi  gon  robh  ^ur  leithidean  de  dhaoin'  anun,  agus  thàinig  mi
g'  'ur  ionnsuidh  airson  cosnadh  iarraidh  oirbh,"  nrs'  an  Grnagach  ban.
'^  Mta  cha  'n  'eil  duin'  a  dlùth  òirnn  'san  am/'  nrsa  Fionn.    De  'n  t-s
ainm  a  th^  ort?"   "M'  ainm  cha  do  cheil  mi  riabh,  an  Grnagach 'biui
Mac  Righ  Eireann,"  urs^  esau.     *'  Dona  I  dona  I  mur  a  dh'  èiridh  de
thabaist  domh  I    Far  an  d'  fhuair  mi  mo  thogail  go  h-òg,  agus  m^
àrach  gom*  shine.    Co  gheibheadh  cosnadh  mur  am  faigheadh  mac  t*
athar  e;  ach  na  bi  mor-fhaclach  am  miosg  nam  Fianntan,"   nrsa
Fionn.    **  Teaunn  a  nauU  agus  l>eir  air  ceaunn  an  lin,  agus  tarrninn
eomhia  riums*  e."    Thbisich  e  air  an  lian  a  tharruinn  leis  an  Fhinn.
Thug  e  shil  as  a  chionn,  agus  d^  ^chunnaic  e  ach  fiadh.    "  Nach  b
fhekrra  d'  ur  leithidean-sa  de  dhaoine  luath,  l^dir,  aotrom,  òg,  a
bhith  *g  ianach  an  fh^idh  *ud  shuas ;  seach  a  bhith  *g  Iasgach  aona
bhreac  beadaidh  an  so,  agus  nach  ruig  greim  dh*  a  iasg  sibh,  na  bals-
am dh'  a  shligh ;  seach  am  beathach  *ud  shuas  as  'ur  ciono,  a  migeas
gr^im  d'  a  fheoil  sibh  agus  balgam  d'a  eanruitli,"  urs'  an  Grnagach
ban,  Mac  Righ  Eireann.   **  Mu  's  math  am  beathach  sin,"  ursa  Frònn,
^  tha  sinne  seachd  sgith  dheth  's  tha  sinn  eòlach  na  leòìr  air."   **  Mata
ohuala  mi  ftùn  gon  robh  aon  duin'  agaibh  ris  an  canadh  end  Luathas,
a  bheireadh  air  a*  ghaoth  luath  Mhàrt,  agus  nach  beireadh  a  gbaoth
loath  Mhart  air,"  urs'  an  Gruagach  ban.    *'  O  'n  is  e  do  chiad  iarradas
ecuiridh  sinn  a 'iarraidh,"  ursa  Fionn.  Chuireadh  air'*a  shon,  's  thainig
Oaoilte.    Dh'  eubh  an  Gruagach  ban  air.    **  Siud  an  gnothach  a  bh'
agam  doit,"  urs'  an  Gruagach.    **  Dol  a  ruith  an  fh^dh  a  chunnaic
mi  shuas  'ud."    "  ThMnig  an  Gruagach  ban  an  diugh  'nar  cuideachd,
agus  faodar  a  'chomhairl'  a  ghabhail  a'  chiad  latha.    Thug  e  stiil
uaidh,  agus  chunnaic  e  fiadh  'na  sheasamh  as  ar  cionn.   Tbuirte  gom
b'  fhekrr  d'ar  leithidean-sa  de  dhaoine  luath,  Ikidir,  aotrom,  a  bhith
sealg  an  fh^idh,  na  bhith  'g  iasgach  aona  bhreac  beadaidh  an  ao ;
agus  a  Chaoilte  falbh  thus'  agus  ruith  am  fiadh,"  ursa  Fionn.   "  Mata
'a  ioma  latha  'thug  mis'  air  a  ruith,  agus  's  beag  a  bh'  agam  air  a
shon  ach  mo  thrioblaid  nach  d'  fhuair  mi  gr^im  riabh  air,"  nrsa
Caoilte.    Dh'  fhalbh  Caoilt'  agus  thug  e  go  h-astar.


AN  ORUAGACH  BAN,  MAG  HIGH  EIBEANN.  429

"D^mur  a  bliios  Caoilte  nur  a  bfaios  e *iia  12ui  luathasy^'urs'  an
Grnagacli  ban.  **  Bidh  tri  chiim  air  Caoilte  nur  a  bhios  e  aig  a  Ikn
luathas,"  ursa  Fionn.  **  'S  co  mhiad  ceaunn  a  bhios  air  an  fhiadfa>"
urs'  an  Gmagach.  **  Bidh  seachd  cinn  air  nur  a  bbios  e  'na  Ian
luathas,"  ursa  Fionn.  "  De  *n  t-astar  a  th'  aige  mu  'n  mig  e*  cbeaunn
uidhe  ?"  urs  an  Gmagach.  **  Tha  seachd  glinn,  agus  seachd  mill,  agus
seachd  aiteacha  suidhe  samhraidh,"  ursa  Fionn.  *'Tfaa  sin n  aige
r'  a  dhianadh  mu  'n  mig  e  àite  tàim)i.*'  <*Thngamaid  làmh  air
tarminn  an  lin,"  urs'  an  Gmagach.  Thug  an  Gmagach  ban  sealladh
naidh)  's  thuirt  e  ri  Fionn.  **  Fhinn  Mhic  Cumhail  cnir  do  mhisr  fo
d*  dheud  fios  fiach  de  *it  t-astar  's  am  bheil  Caoilte  dha  'n  fhiadh."
Chuir  Fionn  a  mhiar  fo  a  dheud  fios.  "  Tha  da  cheannn  air  Caoilt«,
*B  cha  ^n  'eil  air  an  fliiadh  ach  an  da  cheaunn  fhathasd,"  ursa  Fionni
*'  D^  chuir  eud  seachad  de  dh*  astar,"  urs'  an  Gmagach  ban.  **  Da
ghleann  1^^  da  mheauU ;  tha  coig  aca  gon  chur  seachad  fhathasad/*
ursa  Fiona.  "Thugamaid  lamb  air  iasgach  a'  bhric,"  urs'  an  Graag-^
ach  ban.  Thòisich  eud  air  iasgach  a'  bhric.  Air  treis  daibh  a  bhith
*g  obair  thug  an  Gruagach  ban  suil  Uaidh.  **  Fhinn  Mhic  Cumhail,"
urs'  esan,  *'cuir  do  mhiar  fo  d'  dheud  fios  fiach  de  'n  t-astar  a  tha
Caoilt'  0  'n  fhiadh."  **  Tha  tri  chinn  air  Caoilte  's  tha  ceithir  chinn
air  an  fhiadh,  's  tha  Caoilte  'na  Ian  luathas,"  ursa  Fionn.  Co  mhiad
gleaunn,  agus  meaull,  agus  kite  suidhe  samhraidh  a  tha  romhpa,"
urs'  an  Gruagach.  Tha  ceithir  as  an  d^igh  agus  tri  rompa,"  ursa
Fionn.  "  Bheireamaid  lamb  air  iasgach  a'  bhric,"  urs'  an  Gruagach
ban.  Thug  eud  treis  air  iasgach  a  bhric  '*  Fhinn  Mhic  Cumhail,**
urs'  an  Gruagach,  **  d4  'n  t-astar  a  tha  romh  *n  fhiadh  fhatbasd  mu
'n  mig  e  cheaunn  uidhe."  **  Aona  ghleaunn,  agus  aona  mheaull,  agus
aon  kite  suidhe  samhraidh,"  ursa  Fionn.

Thilg  e  uaidh  an  lian,  agus  ghabh  e  go  h-astar.  Bheireadh  e  air'
a'  ghaoth  luath  Mhàrt,  's  cha  bheireadh  a'  ghaoth  luath  Mhàrt  aifj
gos  an  d'  rug  e  air  Caoilte.  Ghabh  e  seachad  air,  's  dh'  fhàg  e  beann-;
achd  aige.  A'  dol  a  null  ri  dachan  Strath  ruaidh  thug  am  fiadh
kum  as.  Thuf;  an  Gmagach  ban  an  ath  leum  as,  's  rug  e  air  chalpa
deiridh  air  an  fhiadh,  's  thug  am  fiadh  ran  as,  's  dh'  eubh  a'  chaiU
leach.  **  Co  'rag  air  mo  bheathach  gaoil ?  "  **  Tha  mis,"  urs*  an  Gruag-
ach ban,  Mac  Bigh  Eireann.  *'A  Ghrnagach  bhàn,  Mhic  RitfU
Eireann  lig  as  e,"  urs'  a'  chailleach.  *'  Cha  lig  mi,  mo  bheathach  flaii
a  nis  a  th'  aunn,"  ur&'  an  Gmagach  ban.  *'Thoir  dhomh  Ian  mti
dhUirn  d'  a  chalg,  no  taosg  mo  dhùirn  d'  a  ghaorr,  air  neo  balgam
dh'  a  ghhgh,  airaeo  grèim  dh'  a  fheòil,"  urs'  a'  chailleach.  Aona
chuid  cha  'n  fhaigh  thu,"  urs'  esan.  "  Tha  'n  Fhbm  a'  tigliinn,"  xatf
ise,  **  agus  Fionn  air  an  ceann ;  cha  bhi  h-aon  aca  nach  oeanghaii  mi
CÙ1  ri  chl."    <<  Dian  sin,"  urs'  esan,  '*  ach  tha  mis'  a'  falbh."


430  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Dh*  fhalbh  e,  'a  thug  è  leis  am  £adh,  *8  l)ha  e  *gàbhail  roimhe  gos
an  do  choinnich  an  Flùnn  e.  "  Ffainn  Mhic  Cumhail  gl^idh  and,"
an*  esan,  's  e  fàgail  an  fh^idh  aig  Fionn.  Sfauidh  Fionn  Mac  Cnmli'
ail  aig  an  fhiadh,  's  dh'  fhalbh  an  Gruagach  bàn«  Ràinig  e  cekr-
dach  nan  seachd  goibhne  fichead.  Thug  e  tri  chearcaill  iarminn
aisdema  choinnearah  h-uile  daine  'bha  'san  Fhinn.  Thug  e  leis
làmh-òrd,  agus  chnir  e  tri  chearcaill  mu  cheann  a  h-uile  duine  'bhs
'san  Fhinn,  agus  tbeannaich  e  leis  an  òrd  eud.  Thàinig  a*  cbailleach
a  mach,  's  lig  i  sgairt  mhòr.  **  Fhinn  Mhic  Cumhail  lig  thugam  mo
bheathach  gaoil.**  Bhrist  an  cearcall  a  b*  airde  'bh'  air  na  Fianntan
leis  an  sgairt  ThMnig  1  'mach  an  dama  'uair,  's  lig  i  *n  ath  sgairt,
*s  bhrist  i  'n  dama  cearcall.  (**  Nacb  b*  uamhasach  a  chailleach.**)
Chaidh  i  dachaidh,  *s  cha  b*  tliad'  a  bha  i  stigh  nur  a  thàinig  i  'n
treas  uair,  *&  lig  i  'n  treas  sgairt,  *8  bhrist  i  'n  treas  cearcalL  Dh'
fhalbh  i ;  ghabh  i  go  ruige  coille ;  shniamh  1  gad  coille ;  thug  i  leath
e ;  ghabh  i  'null  agus  cheanghail  i  h-mle  fear  dha  na  Fiantaichean
cul  ri  cul,  ach  Fionn.

Thug  an  Gruagach  ban  làmh  air  an  fhiadh  *s  dh^  fheaunn  e  e.
Thug  e  'n  gaorr  as.  Rug  e  air  a  h-uile  sgath  dha  'n  mhionach  'a
dha  'n  ghaorr,  ghearr  e  plochd,  agus  thiodhlaic  e  fo  'n  talamh  eud.
Chuir  e  coir*  air  dòigh,  agus  chuir  e  'm  fiadh  's  a'  choire,  agus  teine
ris  a  'bhruich.  *'  Fhinn  Mhic  Cumhail,"  urs'  an  Gruagach  ban  ri
Fionn,  CO  *ca  *s  fheàrr  leatsa  dol  a  chòmhrag  na  caillich,  na  fiutail
a^  bruich  a*  choire.  **  Matà,"  ursa  Fionn,  *'  tha  *n  coire  gìè  dhoirbh  a
bhruich.  Mu  bhios  bldeag  de  'u  fheòil  gon  an  lith  'bhith  thairis^
eireachaidh  am  fiadh  mur  a  bha  e  roimhid;  agus  mu  th^d  boinne
dha  'n  Jithe  mu  'n  teine,  eireachaidh  e  mur  a  bha  e  roimhid.  'S
fheàrr  leamsa  fantail  a*  bruich  a*  choire."

Thkinig  a'  cbailleach  « Fhinn  Mhic  CumhaiV  nrs*  ise,  «bheir
domh  Ian  mo  dhiiim  dh*  an  chalg,  aimeo  taosg  mo  dhuim  dh'  a
ghaorr,  aimeo  greim  dh'  afhebil,  aimeo  balgam  dh'  a  eanroith."
"  Cha  d'  rinn  mi  f  bin  dad  timchioU  air,  agus,  leis  an  sin,  cha  'n  'eil
ordan  agam  air  a  thoirt  seachad,"  ursa  Fionn.  Thòisich  an  Grua-
gach ban  's  a'  cbailleach  air  a'  chèile  an  so.  Dhianadh  eud  bogan
air  a'  chreagan,  agus  creagan  air  a'  bhogan ;  an  t-àite  'bo  lugba
*rachadh  eud  fodha,  rachadh  eud  fodha  g'  an  gltiinean;  's  an  t-àite
'bo  mhoth'  a  rachadh  eud  fodha,  rachadh  eud  fodha  g*  an  shilean.
*'Am  bheil  thu  buidheach  aighir  Fhinn  Mhic  Cumhail,**  urs'  an
Gruagach  ban.  **  S  fhad  o  'n  a  bha  mise  buidheach  dheth  sin,*
ursa  Fionn.  **Bidh  cothrom  air  a  thoirt  seachad  a  nis,"  urs'  an
Gruagach.  Bug  e  air  a'  cbailleach,  's  bhuail  e  breab  urr'  aunn  am
bacan  na  h»easgaid,  's  leag  e  i.    **  An  d'  thoir  mi  'n  ceaunn  di  Fhinn


AN  ORUAOAGH  BAN,  MAO  BIGH  EIBEANN.  4}  1

BIhio  CnmhaiV*  urs'  an  Gmagach.  **  Clia  *n  'eil  fhios'  am,"  una
Fionn.  **Fhinn  Bihic  Cumhail,"  on'  ise,  "tha  mi  'gad'  char  fo
chroUean  'sfo  gheasan,  'a  fo  naodh  baaraiche  mnatba  sithe,  siùbblaicbe^
seachranaiche;  an  laogh  beag  is  meata  *8  is  mi-tbreòiriche  a  thoirt
do  cbinn,  's  do  do  chinas,  's  do  chaitheadh-beatba  dhìòt,  mur  am  bl
thn  mar  fhear  pòsd'  tri  nairean  mu  'n  d'  thig  an  latha  aig  bean  an
leòmhan  chraobh."  **  Tha  mis'/*  nrs*  an  Graagach  ban,  '*  'gad'  cbur-sa
fo  chroisean  agns  fo  ghcasan,  fo  naodh  buaraiche  mnatba  sithe,
siUbhlaiche,  seachranaiche ;  an  laogh  beag  is  meata  's  is  mi-threò-
iriche  thoirt  do  chinn,  's  do  chluas,  's  do  chaitheadh-beatha  dhiot,
mar  am  bi  thus'  agns  cas  air  gach  taobh  do  cblachan  Struth  ruadh
agady  agns  a  h-oile  diar  aisge  'dol  a  stigh  air  an  dama  oeaann,  's  a'
dol  a  mach  air  a'  cheaann  eile  diot."  Dh'  èiridh  e  agas  lig  e  'na
seasamh  L  ''Tog  dhiom  do  gheasan,  agns  togaidh  mise  dheth-san
end,"  ars'  a*  chailleacb.  <*  Cha  tog  agus  cha  leag  ach  mursiud.  Ge
V  e  air  bith  mar  a  thilleas  sinne  cha  d'  thig  thnsa*"

Dh'  fhalbh  an  Graagach  ban  's  thug  e  deth  an  coire.  Rug  e  air
fbrc  agns  air  sgian,  'a  chuir  e  'n  fhorc  aunns'  an  fhiadh.  Rug  e  air
an  sgithinn,  agas  gheàrr  e  grèim  as,  's  dh'  ith  e.  Rug  e  air  piochd,
's  ghearr  e  e,  's  chair  e  siud  air  ceaunn  a'  choire.  "  Fhinn  Mhic
Gumhail  tha  'n  t-am  againn  a  bhith  'falbh,"  ars'  esan,  "am  bheil  tha
math  go  marcachd?"  *'  Dh'  aimisinn  orra,"  ursa  Fionn.  Rug  e  air
alataig,  's  thug  do  dh'  Fhionn  i.  "  fiuail  siud  orms',"  ars'  esam
Bhnail  Honn  an  t-slatag  air,  's  rinn  e  f&laire  dhonn  dheth.  **  Theirig
a  nis  air  mo  mhuinn-sa,"  urs'  an  Graagach.  Chaidh  Fionn  air  a
mhainn."  Bi  go  math  furachar,  tha  mise  g'  a*  t'  ionnsuidh."  Thug
e  'n  leum  sin  as  's  chaidh  e  seachad  air  naoidh  iomairean,  agas  sheas
Fionn  air  a  mhainn.  Thug  i  'n  dama  leum  aisde,  's  chaidh  i  seachad
air  naoidh  iomairean  eile,  's  sheas  Fionn  air  a  muinn.  Thug  i  'n
treas  leum  aisde,  's  chaidh  i  seachad  air  naoidh  iomairean  eile,  's
sheas  esan  air  a  muinn.  Thug  e  go  astar.  Bheireadh  e  air  a'  ghaoth
loath  Mhkirt,  's  cha  bheireadh  a'  ghaoth  luath  Mhàirt  air  **  Tha
baile  beag  shios  an  so,"  urs'  an  fhàlaire,  agus  theirig  sios  'a
bheir  leat  tri  stòpanuan  fian  agus  tri  muilnean  crionachd,  agus
bheir  tha  dhòmhsa  stop  fian  agus  muileann  crionachd,  agus  cioraidh
tha  'n  aghaidh  an  fhionna  agus  leis  an  fhionna  mi"  Fhuair  Fionn
siad  agus  làinig  eud  ball'  an  leòmhan  chraobh.  "Thalia  air
làr  Fhinn  Mhic  Cumhail  agus  thoir  dhomh  stbpa  fian  agus  mnil*
eann  crionachd."  Thàinig  Fionn  a  nuas,  agus  thug  e  da  stbpa  fian
agns  moileann  crionachd.  ''Cior  a  nis  an  aghaidh  an  fhionna
mi,  agas  cior  leis  an  fhionna  mi."  Rinn  e  siud.  *' Bheir  an  aire
dhuit  fiùn»"  nrs'  an  fhàlaire.     Leom  i  'n  sin;-  agus  chmr  i  trian


43^  WEST  HIQHLAin)  TALES.

Ibiche  dlui  *n  bhalla,  *8  btaa  da  thrian  as  a  donn,  *8  thill  L  "Bb
dhomh  stop  flan  agus  muileann  criooachd  eile,  agus  càor  an  agfamidh
an  fliionna  mi,  agus  <àor  leis  an  fhionna  mL"  Sinn  e  siad.  **  Tlioir
an  aire  dhnit  fhin  's  mise  dha  f  ionnsnidli  a  nis,"  nra^  an  fhàlaire.
Thng  \  'n  dama  leam  aisde ;  agiu  chnir  i  da  thrian  de  ^n  bhaUa  foiche,
*8  bha  da  thrian  as  a  cionn,  agns  thill  i.  **  Thoir  domh  stop  fian  agus
mnileann  criooachd  eile»  agus  càor  an  aghaidh  an  fhionna  mi,  aena
dor  leis  an  fhionna  mi,*'  nrs*  ise.  Rinn  e  nud,  '*  Thoir  an  aire  dfauit
fnin  's  mise  dha  t'  ionnsuidh  a  nis,"  ars*  ise.  Thng  i  lenm  aiade  'a
bha  i  air  bàrr  a'  bhalla.  **  Tha  'n  gnothach  go  math  romhad  Fhinny*"
nrs'  an  fhUaire ;  **  tha  'n  leòmfaan  craobh  o  'n  tigh."  Ghabh  e  dhach-
aidh.  Bha  flath  agns  fàilte  roimhe.  Chnireadh  biadh  agns  deoch
air  a  bhialthaobh.  Ghabh  e  ma  tbàmh  an  oidfache  sin.  Mu  'n  d*
ihkinig  an  latha  bha  e  tri  nairean  mor  fhear  posd'  aig  bean  an  lebmb-
an  craobh.

Cho  moch  *8  a  chnnnaic  a  shhil  an  Uitha,  's  moiche  na  sin  a  dh*
èiridh  e,  's  a  rainig  e  'n  fhàlaire,  an  Gmagacfa  ban,  agns  dh'  fhalbh
end.    Urs'  an  Gruagach  ban,  ''Tha  'n  leòmhan.  craobh  o  'n  tìgìu
Dad  sam  bith  mnr  a  bha  cha  cheil  ise.    Tha  e  Yalbh  as  ar  d^hne*
's  cha  chnimhnich  e  air  an  leobhar  bhuidseachais,  agos  o  'n  nach
cnimhnich  e  air  an  leobhar  bbuidseachais,  thèid  agams*  air ;  ach  na
*n  cnimhneachadh  e  air  an  leobhar  cha  chuireadhslaagh  an  t-saogb*
ail  ris.    Tha  h-nile  draochd  aige^san,  agus  leumaidh  e  'na  thart>h
nnr  a  thig  e,  agns  leumaidh  mis  a'  m'  tharbh  ma  choinneamh,
agns  a'  chiad  bhniU*  a  bheir  raise  dha,  leagaidh  mi  cheannn  air
a  shlinnean,  *8  bheir  mi  rka  air.    Leumaidh  e  'n  sin  'na  aiseal,  'a
leumaidh  mise  *nam  alseil  rau  choinneamh;  agus  a*  chiad  speach
a  bheir  miae  dha,  bheir  mi  Ian  mo  bheòil  as  eadar  feòil  agus
craicionn  mar  a  bhitheas  e.    Leumaidh  e  'n  sin  'na  sheobhag  annus
na  speuran.    Leumaidh  mise  'nam  sheobhag  aunns  a'  choille,  's  a
chiad  speach  a  bheir  mi  dha  bheir  mi  'n  cridh*  agus  an  gman  as,
Thig  mis'  a  nuas  as  a  dh^igh,  agus  beiridh  tus'  air  an  nèapaigin  *ud
an  aiud,  agus  cuiridh  tu  aunns  an  nèapaigin  mi,  agus  gearraidh  ta
plochd,  's  cuiridh  tu  'n  nèapaigìn  fo  'n  talamh,  agus  seasaldh  tu  ain
Thig  bean  an  leòmhan  chraobh  an  sin,  agus  tbusa  'nad'  sheasamh
air  muinn  a'  phluichd,  agos  miae  fo  d'  chasan,  agus  an  leobharbuid*
aeachais  aie^  air  a  muinn  aunn  an  shgan,  agus  their  i,  '^  Fhinn  Mhie
Cumhail,  fhir  nach  d'  innis  briag  riabh,  innis  domh  co  'mharhh  uo
chompanach  a  shluagh  an  t-$>aogbai]  ?  "  Their  thusa,  <*  Cha  *n  aithne
dòmhs'  as  cionn  an  talanta  co  'mharbh  do  chompanach."    Falbhaidh
is'  agus  bheir  i  go  astar  urra  'na  gaoire  gull.'*

l^or  a  bha  eud  treis  air  an  aghaidh  co  'chnnnaic  end  a'  tighinn


AN  GRUAGACH  BAN,  MAC  RIGH  EIREANN.  433

ach  an  lebmhan  craobh.  Chaidh  e  'na  tharbh.  Chaidh  an  Graagach
bkn  *na  tharbh  mu  'choinneamh,  agus  a'  chiad  bhuill'  a  thug  e  dha
leag  e*  cheaunn  air  a  slilinnean,  agns  thug  an  lebmhan  craobh  ran
as.  I^am  e  'n  so  'na  aiseal.  Leum  an  Graagach  ban  'na  aiseal  ma
'choinneamh,  's  air  a*  chiad  speach  a  thug  e  a  'ionnsuidh  thug  e  Ian  a'
bheoil  as  eadar  fheoil'  agns  chraicionn.  Leum  an  lebmhan  craobh
an  so  'na  sheobhac;  aunns  na  speuran.  Leum  an  Gruagach  ban  *na
sheobhag  aunns  a'  choille,  agus  thug  e  'n  cridh*  agus  an  gruan  as.
Thuit  an  Gruagach  ban  a  nuas  as  a  dh^igh.  Kug  Fionn  air,  agus
chuir  e  aunns  an  nèapaigin  e,  agus  gheàrr  e  plochd,  agus  chulr  e  *n
nèapaigin  fo  'n  talamh  agus  am  plochd  air  a  mhuinn,  agus  sheas  e
air  muinn  a'  phluichd.  Thàinig  bean  an  lebmhan  craobh,  agus  an
leobhar  buidseachais  leath'  air  a  muinn  aunn  an  shgan.  **  Fhinn
Mhic  Cumhail,  fhir  nach  d'  innis  briag  riabh,  'co'  mharbh  mo  chomp-
anach?"  "  Cha  'n  aithne  dbmhs'  as  cionn  an  talanta  co  mharbh  do
chompanach,"  ursa  Fionn  agus  'dh  fhalbh  i  'na  gaoire  guil,  agus  thug
i  go  h-astar  urra.

Rug  e  air  a  Ghruagach  bhàn  agus  thog  e  leis  e,  agus  ràinig  e  'n
caisteal  's  an  robh  bean  a  chaol-chot'  uaine.  Shin  e  dhi  siud  'na
làimh.  Ghabh  i  'sias  leis,  agus  cha  b'  fhada  'bha  i  shias  nur  a  thàinig
i  nias  far  an  robh  esan.  "  Fhinn  Mhic  Cumhail,"  urs'  ise,  "  tha  'n
Gruagach  ban,  Mac  Righ  Eireann,  'ga  t'  iarraidh."  "  'S  e  sin
naigheachd  is  fhearr  leom  a  chuala  mi  riabh  fhatbasd,  gom  bheil  an
Gruagach  ban'  gam'  iarraidh,"  ursa  Fionn.  Chuir  i  biadh  agus  deoch
air  am  bialthaobh.  Cha  'n  itheadh  eud  greim,  's  cha  'n  bladh  end
diar,  gos  an  itheadh  eud  an  cuid  de  'n  fhiadh  le  each  aig  Struth
ruaidh.  Ràinig  eud  far  an  robh  'n  Fh\nn  ceanghailte,  agus  dh'  fhuasg.-
ail  eud  a  h-uile  h-aon  riabh  aca,  's  bha  acras  go  leoir  orra.  Chuir
an  Gruagach  ban  am  fiadh  air  am  bialthaobh,  's  dh'  fhàg  eud  dha  'n
fhiadh  tri  urad  's  a  dh'  ith  eud.  "  S  coir  dbmhsa  dol  a  dh'  innseadh
mo  sg^il,"  urs*  an  Gruagach  ban.  Ràinig  e  'chailleach  aig  clachan
Struth  ruaidh.  Thòisich  e  air  innseadh  a  sgeil  mar  a  dh'  ^iridh  dhi^.
H-uile  sgial  a  dh'  innseadh  esan  dise,  thbiseachadh  ise  ri  ^iridh.
H-uile  h-uair  a  thòiseacbadh  ise  ri  ^iridh,  bheireadh  esan  urra,  agus
phronnadh  e  na  cnàmhan  aice,  agus  bhristeadh  e  end,  gos  an  d'  innis
e  chuid  sgialachdan  di.  Nur  a  dh'  innis  e  eud  thill  e,  agus  ràinig  e
'n  Fhinn  air  ais.  Chaidh  Fionn  leis  go  caisteal  bean  a  chaol-chot'
uaine.  "  Beannachd  leat  Fhinn  Mhic  Cumhail,"  urs'  an  Gruagach
ban,  Mac  Righ  Eireann.  **  Fhuair  mise  na  bha  mi  'g  iarraidh,  fradharc
air  gach  cùis  agus  air  gach  gnothach,  agus  bidh  mi  'nis  a'  tilleadh
dhachaidh  go  pàileas  m'  athar  fhin."  **  'S  an  aunn  mur  so  a  tha  tha
'brath  mis'  fUagail  an  d^  gach  rud  a  rinn  mi  riat, — thu  'bhlth  aig  t^
VOL.  n.  2  F


4*34  ''^ST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

eile,  agos  mise  fEiiamhr'    ''An  e  dn  a  tha  thu  Vàdh?"  nrs*  essn,

'*Na  *b  saoiliunsa  gon    gabhadh    sin    dianadh,  cha  *n  fhaca  mi

'mhnathan  pòsda  na  diallainn  riabh  na  ghabhainn  a  roighinn  ort  I

Ach  cha  dian  mise  banais  na  pòsadh  leat  an  so,  ach  falbhaidh  tu  go

pàileas  m'  athar  learn."    Chaidh  end  go  pàileas  athar,  e  fhin,  agus

bean  a  chaol-chòt*  uaine,  agus  Fionn.    Fhuaradh  pears'  eaglais,  agus

phbs  an  Gmagaah  ban  agus  bean  a  chaol-chòt'  uaine.     Binneadh

banais  shunndach,  èibhinn,  aighearach  daibh.    Thogadh  ceòl  agus

leagadh  brbn.    Chuireadh  biadh  an  ait'  a  chaitheadb,  agus  deoch  an

ait'  a  h-òl  agus  cebl  an  ait'  ^isdeachd.    Bha  end  a'  caitheadh  na

cuirm  agus  na  cuideachd  gos  an  do  chumadh  suas  a'  bhanais  ain  la

agus  bliadhna  le  solas  agus  toileachas-inntinn.

Alexander  Mac  Neill,  Fisherman.
Ten  Tangval,  Barra.

This  is  another  specimen  of  what  is  called  Seanachas — one
of  those  old  Hi^land  stories  which  in  their  telling  resemble  no
others.  Fionn  and  his  comrades  are  mentioned  as  England  is  by
Americans.  They  are  the  greatest  of  heroes,  but  only  act  as
foils  to  one  still  greater.  "  The  Britishers  wop  the  world,  and  we
wop  the  Britishers,"  say  the  Americans.  And  Gruagach  Ban,
the  Irish  chief,  beats  the  Fingalians,  who  beat  the  world.  It
seems  hopeless  to  search  for  the  original  of  this,  unless  it  is  to  be
found  in  mythology.  The  history  of  the  Island  of  Barra,  and  the
name  of  the  place  where  the  story  was  told,  suggest  a  mixture
of  Norse  and  Celtic  mythology  as  the  most  probable.

Fionn  and  his  comrades  are  clearly  Celtic  worthies,  and
though  they  are  usually  brought  down  to  be  "  militia  **  raised  in
Ireland  by  a  particular  Irish  king,  at  a  certain  date,  I  strongly
suspect  them  to  be  divinities  in  disguise.  The  leader  at  one  end
of  the  net  and  all  his  comrades  at  the  other,  has  a  parallel  in  the
Edda  (page  76,  Dasent's  translation).

*'  When  the  net  was  made  ready,  then  fared  the  Asa  to  the
river,  and  cast  the  net  into  the  force ;  Thorr  held  one  end  and  the
other  held  all  the  Asa,  and  so  they  drew  the  net."

And  in  other  stories  Fionn  has  part  of  the  gear  of  Thorr  in
the  shape  of  a  hammer,  whose  stroke  was  beard  over  Eirinn  and
Lochlann,  and  which  surely  was  a  thunderbolt  rather  than  the
whistle  of  a  militiaman.

Fionn,  too,  has  the  character  of  the  leader  in  all  the  old


THE  FAIR  GBUAGACH.  435

Western  romances ;  and  in  all  mythology  of  which  I  know  any-
thing, he  is  the  chief,  but  he  is  not  the  strongest ;  he  is  the
wisest,  but  there  is  always  some  power  wiser  and  stronger  than
him.

The  dame  of  the  Fine  Green  Kirtle,  and  the  carlin  with  the
wonderfol  deer,  were  both  able  to  perform  feats  which  the  Feen
could  not  equal,  and  they  with  their  magic  arts  overcame  the
heroes,  as  the  Fates  ruled  Jupiter  and  the  Nomir  ruled  men,
though  there  were  Greek  and  Norse  gods  and  goddesses  in  plenty.
So  King  Arthur  was  chief  but  not  the  most  valiant,  the  wisest
but  not  the  best  of  his  time.  And  so  in  the  Niebelungen  Lied  there
was  always  a  hero  greater  than  the  great  man.  And  here  seems
to  be  something  of  the  same  kind  in  this  Gaelic  story.

The  wife  of  the  Tree  Lion  in  her  magic  castle,  and  the  leap-
ing man  in  disguise,  who  carries  the  wooer,  are  characters  which
may  be  traced  in  the  old  German  romance,  and  the  incidents
have  a  parallel  in  the  Volsung  tale,  as  its  outline  is  given  in  the
Norse  Tales.  There,  too,  is  a  lady  to  be  won^  and  an  obstacle
to  be  surmounted;  and  a  steed  which  springs  over  it,  and  a  dis-
guised worthy,  more  valiant  than  the  chief.

The  transformation  into  many  shapes  is  a  very  common  inci-
dent in  Gaelic  tales.  It  is  common  to  Norse,  to  Mr.  Peter
Bnchan^s  Scotch  MS.  Collection ;  and  is  somewhat  like  a  story
in  the  Arabian  Nights  where  a  princess  fights  a  genius.

The  dame  of  the  Fine  Green  Kirtle  is  a  common  character  in
Gaelic  tales.  In  Sutherland  she  was  mentioned  as  seen  about
hills.  She  is  always  possessed  of  magic  powers ;  and  I  know
nothing  like  her  in  other  collections.  The  carlin  with  the
deer  is  to  be  traced  in  the  Irish  tales  published  by  Mr.  Simpson,
and  in  Breton  tales  and  poems,  and  in  Welsh  stories ;  and  she  is
at  least  as  old  as  Diana  and  the  Sacred  Hind  with  golden  horns  and
brazen  feet,  which  Hercules  caught  after  a  year's  chase,  which
Diana  snatched  from  him,  reprimanding  him  severely  for  molest-
ing an  animal  sacred  to  her.


LIL
THE  KNIGHT  OF  THE  EED  SHIELD.

From  John  MacGilvray,  Colonsay.

THEEE  was  before  now  a  king  of  Eirinn,  and  he
went  himself,  and  his  people,  and  his  warriors,
and  his  nobles,  and  his  great  gentles,  to  the  hill  of
hunting  and  game.  They  sat  on  a  hillock  coloured
green  colour,  where  the  sun  would  rise  early,  and
where  she  would  set  late.  Said  the  one  of  swifter
mouth  than  the  rest.

"Who  now  in  the  four  brown*  quarters  of  the
universe  would  have  the  heart  to  put  an  affront  and
disgrace  on  the  King  of  Eirinn,  and  he  in  the  midst
of  the  people,  and  the  warriors,  great  gentles,  and
nobles  of  his  own  realm."

"  Are  ye  not  silly,"  said  the  king ;  "  he  might
come,  one  who  should  put  an  affront  and  disgrace  on
me,  and  that  ye  could  not  pluck  the  worst  hair  in  his
beard  out  of  it.*'

It  was  thus  it  was.  They  saw  the  shadow  of  a
shower  coming  from  the  western  airt,  and  going  to  the
eastern  airt  ;t  and  a  rider  of  a  black  filly  coming
cheerily  after  it,

*  Probably  a  corruption,  ruadh  for  roth,  tbe  four  quarters  of
the  wheel  or  circle  of  the  universe.

f  That  is  against  the  sun,  which  is  unlucky  according  to  all
popular  mythology.


THE  KNIGHT  OP  THE  RED  SHIELD.       437

As  it  were  a  warrior  on  the  mountam  shore,

As  a  star  over  sparklings,*

As  a  great  sea  over  little  pools,

As  a  smith's  smithy  coal

Being  quenched  at  the  river  side  ;

So  would  seem  the  men  and  women  of  the  world  beside  him,

In  figure,  in  shape,  in  form,  and  in  visage.

Then  he  spoke  to  them  in  the  understanding,
quieting,  truly  wise  words  of  real  knowledge  ;  and  be-
fore there  was  any  more  talk  between  them,  he  put
over  the  fist  and  he  struck  the  king  between  the  mouth
and  the  nose,  and  he  drove  out  three  of  his  teeth,  and
he  caught  them  in  his  fist,  and  he  put  them  in  his
pouch,  and  he  went  away.

"  Did  not  I  say  to  you,"*  said  the  king,  "  that  one
might  come  who  should  put  an  affront  and  disgrace  on
me,  and  that  you  could  not  pluck  the  worst  hair  in  his
beard  out  of  it ! "

Then  his  big  son,  the  Knight  of  the  Cairn,  swore
that  he  wouldn't  eat  meat,  and  that  he  wouldn't  drink
draught,  and  that  he  would  not  hearken  to  music,  until
he  should  take  off  the  warrior  that  struck  the  fist  on
the  king,  the  head  that  designed  to  do  it.

"  Well,"  said  the  Knight  of  the  Sword,  "  the  very
same  for  me,  until  I  take  the  hand  that  struck  the  fist
on  the  king  from  off  the  shoulder.

There  was  one  man  with  them  there  in  the  com-
pany, whose  name  was  Mac  an  Earraich  uaine  ri
Gaisge,  The  Son  of  the  Green  Spring  by  Valour.
"  The  very  same  for  me,"  said  he,  "  until  I  take  out  of
the  warrior  who  struck  the  fist  on  the  king,  the  heart
that  thought  on  doing  it."

**Thou  nasty  creature!"  said  the  Knight  of  the
Caim,  "  what  should  bring  thee  with  us  1     When  we

*  Boineagan,  small  stars,  minute  points  of  light,  v


/^\


43  S  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

should  go  to  valour,  thou  wouldst  turn  to  weakness  ;
thou  wouldst  find  death  in  boggy  moss,  or  in  rifts  of
rock,  or  in  a  land  of  holes,  or  in  the  shadow  of  a  'wall,
or  in  some  place."

"  Be  that  as  it  will,  but  I  will  go,"  said  the  Son
of  the  Green  Spring  by  Valour.

The  king's  two  sons  went  away.  Glance  that  the
Knight  of  the  Cairn  gave  behind  him,  he  sees  the  Son
of  the  Green  Spring  by  Valour  following  them.

"What,"  said  the  Knight  of  the  Cairn  to  the
Knight  of  the  Sword,  "shall  we  do  to  him  ?"

"  Do,"  said  the  Knight  of  the  Sword,  "  sweep  his
head  off."

"  Well,"  said  the  Knight  of  the  Cairn,  "  we  wiU
not  do  that ;  but  there  is  a  great  crag  of  stone  up
here,  and  we  will  bind  him  to  it."

"  1  am  willing  to  do  that  same,"  said  the  other.

They  bound  him  to  the  crag  of  stone  to  leave  him
till  he  should  die,  and  they  went  away.  Glance  that
the  Knight  of  the  Cairn  gave  behind  him  again,  he
sees  him  coming  and  the  crag  upon  him.

"  Dost  thou  not  see  that  one  coming  again,  and
the  crag  upon  him  !"  said  the  Knight  of  the  Cairn
to  the  Knight  of  the  Sword;  "what  shall  we  do
to  him  1"

"  It  is  to  sweep  the  head  off  him,  and  not  let  him
(come)  further,"  said  the  Knight  of  the  Sword.

"  We  will  not  do  that,"  said  the  Knight  of  the
Cairn ;  "  but  we  will  turn  back  and  loose  the  crag  off
him.  It  is  but  a  sorry  matter  for  two  full  heroes  like
us  ;  though  he  should  be  with  us,  he  will  make  a
man  to  polish  a  shield,  or  blow  a  fire  heap  or  some-
thing."

They  loosed  him,  and  they  let  him  come  with
them.  .  Then  they  went  down  to  the  shore  ;  then  they


THE  EKIOHT  OF  THE  BED  SHIELD.  ip39

got  the  ship,  which  was  called  an  Iubhraoh  Bhal-
LAOH,  The  speckled  barge.*

They  put  her  out,  and  they  gave  her  prow  to  sea,  and  her  stem

to  shore.  •
They  hoisted  the  speckled,  flapping,  hare-topped  sails
Up  against  the  tall,  tough,  splintery  masts,
They  had  a  pleasant  little  hreeze  as  they  might  choose  them  selves,
Would  hring  heather  from  the  hill,  leaf  from  grove,  willow  from

its  roots.
Would  put  thatch  of  the  houses  in  furrows  of  the  ridges.
The  day  that  neither  the  son  nor  the  father  could  do  it»
That  same  was  neither  little  nor  much  for  them,
But  using  it  and.  taking  it  as  it  might  come,
The  sea  plunging  and  surging.
The  red  sea  the  hlue  sea  lashing
And  striking  hither  and  thither  ahout  her  planks.
The  whorled  dun  whelk  that  was  down  on  the  ground  of  the

ocean,
Would  give  a  shag  on  her  gunwale  and  crack  on  her  floor.
She  would  cut  a  slender  oaten  straw  with  the  excellence  of  her

going.

They  gave  three  days  driving  her  thus.  "  I  my-
self am  growing  tired  of  this,"  said  the  Knight  of  the
Cairn  to  the  Knight  of  the  Sword.  "  It  seems  to  me
time  to  get  news  from  the  mast."

"  Thou  thyself  art  the  most  greatly  beloved  here,
oh  Knight  of  the  Cairn,  and  shew  that  thou  wilt  have
honour  going  up ;  and  if  thou  goest  not  up,  we  will
have  the  more  sport  with  thee,"  said  the  Son  of  the
Green  Spring  by  Valour.

Up  went  the  Knight  of  the  Cairn  with  a  rush,  and
he  fell  down  clatter  in  a  faint  on  the  deck  of  the  ship.

*  These  words  would  hear  many  translations  according  to
dictionaries,  such  as  the  spotted  stately  woman,  the  variegated
ahounding  in  hows.  The  meaning  seems  to  he  a  gaily  painted
boat..


440  VEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  It  is  ill  thou  hast  done,"  said  the  Knight  of  the
Sword

**Let  us  see  if  thyself  be  better  ;  and  if  thou  be
better,  it  will  be  shewn  that  thou  wilt  have  more  ^will
to  go  on ;  or  else  we  will  have  the  more  sport  -with
thee,*'  said  the  Son  of  the  Green  Spring  by  Valour.

Up  went  the  Knight  of  the  Sword,  and  before  he
had  reached  but  half  the  mast,  he  began  squealing  and
squalling,  and  he  could  neither  go  up  nor  come  down.

"  Thou  hast  done  as  thou  wert  asked ;  and  thou
hast  shewn  that  thou  hadst  the  more  respect  for  going
up  ;  and  now  thou  canst  not  go  up,  neither  canst  thou
come  down  !  No  warrior  was  I,  nor  half  a  warrior,
and  the  esteem  of  a  warrior  was  not  mine  at  the  time
of  leaving  ;  I  was  to  find  death  in  boggy  moss,  or  in
rifts  of  rock,  or  in  the  shade  of  a  wall,  or  in  some
place  ;  and  it  were  no  effort  for  me  to  bring  news  from
the  mast."

"  Thou  great  hero  ! "  said  the  Knight  of  the  Cairn,
"  try  it."

"  A  great  hero  am  I  this  day,  but  not  when  leaving
the  town,"  sedd  the  Son  of  the  Green  Spring  by
Valour.

He  measured  a  spring  from  the  ends  of  his  spear
to  the  points  of  his  toes,  and  he  was  up  in  the  cross-
trees  in  a  twinkling.

"  What  art  thou  seeing  Ì "  said  the  Knight  of  the
Cairn.

"  It  is  too  big  for  a  crow,  and  it  is  too  little  for
land,"  said  he.

"  Stay,  as  thou  hast  to  try  if  thou  canst  know  what
it  is,"  said  they  to  him  ;  and  he  stayed  so  for  a  while.*

*  The  whole  of  this  is  drawn  from  the  life  of  boatmen.  The
feat  of  climbing  the  mast  of  an  open  boat  under  sail  is  far  from
easy,  and  I  have  seen  it  done  as  a  feat  of  strength  and  skill.


THE  KIHGHT  OF  THE  RED  SHIELD.  44 1

"  What  art  thou  seeing  now  1 "  said  they  to  him.

"  It  is  an  island  and  a  hoop  of  fire  ahout  it,  flaming
at  either  end ;  and  I  think  that  there  is  not  one  war-
rior in  the  great  world  that  will  go  over  the  fire,"  said
he.

"  Unless  two  heroes  such  as  we  go  over  it,"  said
they.

"  I  think  that  it  was  easier  for  you  to  hring  news
from  the  mast  than  to  go  in  there,"  said  he.

"  It  is  no  reproach  ! "  said  the  Knight  of  the
Cairn.

"  It  is  not ;  it  is  truth,"  said  the  Son  of  the  Green
Spring  by  Valour.

They  reached  the  windward  side  of  the  fire,  and
they  went  on  shore  ;  and  they  drew  the  speckled
barge  up  her  own  seven  lengths  on  grey  grass,  with
her  mouth  under  her,  where  the  scholars  of  a  big  town
could  neither  make  ridicule,  scoffing,  or  mockery  of
her.  They  blew  up  a  fire  heap,  and  they  gave  three
days  and  three  nights  resting  their  weariness.

At  the  end  of  the  three  days  they  began  at  shar^)-
ening  their  arms.

"  I,"  said  the  Knight  of  the  Cairn,  "  am  getting
tired  of  this  ;  it  seems  to  me  time  to  get  news  from
the  isle."

"  Thou  art  thyself  the  most  greatly  beloved  here,"
said  the  Son  of  the  Green  Spring  by  Valour,  and  go
the  first  and  try  what  is  the  best  news  that  thou  canst
bring  to  us."

The  Knight  of  the  Cairn  went  and  he  reached  the
fire  ;  and  he  tried  to  leap  over  it,  and  down  he  went
into  it  to  his  knees,  and  he  turned  back,  and  there
was  not  a  slender  hair  or  skin  between  his  knees  and
his  ankles,  that  was  not  in  a  crumpled  fold  about  the
mouth  of  the  shoes.


44^  ^BST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

'*Ìa[e's  bad,  he's  bad,"  said  the  Knight  of  the
Sword.

"  Let  us  see  if  thou  art  better  thyself,  *'  said  the
Son  of  the  Green  Spring  by  Valour.  "  Shew  that
thou  wilt  have  the  greater  honour  going  on,  or  else  we
will  have  the  more  sport  with  thee."

The  Knight  of  the  Sword  went,  and  he  reached
the  fire ;  and  he  tried  to  leap  over  it,  and  down  he
went  into  it  to  the  thick  end  of  the  thigh ;  and  he
turned  back,  and  there  was  no  slender  hair  or  skin  be-
tween the  thick  end  of  the  thigh  and  the  ankle  that
was  not  in  a  crumpled  fold  about  the  mouth  of  the  shoes.

"Well,"  said  the  Son  of  the  Green  Spring  by
Valour,  "no  warrior  was  I  leaving  the  town,  in  your
esteem ;  and  if  I  had  my  choice  of  arms  and  armour
of  all  that  there  are  in  the  great  world,  it  were  no
effort  for  me  to  bring  news  from  the  isla"

"  If  we  had  that  thou  shouldst  have  it,"  said  the
Knight  of  the  Cairn.

"  Knight  of  the  Cairn,  thine  own  arms  and  armour
are  the  second  that  I  would  rather  be  mine  (of  all)
in  the  great  world,  although  thou  thyself  art  not  the
Second  best  warrior  in  it,"  said  the  Son  of  the  Green
Spring  by  Valour.

"  It  is  my  own  arms  and  array  that  are  easiest  to
get,"  said  the  Knight  of  the  Cairn,  "  and  thou  shalt
have  them  ;  but  I  should  Hke  that  thou  wouldst  be  so
good  as  to  tell  me  what  other  arms  or  array  are  better
than  mine."

"  There  are  the  arms  and  array  of  the  Great  Son
of  the  sons  of  the  universe,*  who  struck  the  fist  on  thy
father,"  said  the  Son  of  the  Green  Spring  by  Valour.

The  Knight  of  the  Cairn  put  off  his  arms  and

*  Mhacàibh  Mhoib  Mhachaibh  ah  Domhain;   who  this
personage  maj  be  I  cannot  even  guess.


THE  KNIGHT  OF  THE  BED  SHIELD.  443

array ;  and  the  Son  of  the  Green  Spring  hy  Valour
went  into  his  arms  and  his  array.

He  went  into  his  harness  of  battle  and  hard  combat,

As  was  a  shirt  of  smooth  yellow  silk  and  gauze  stretched  on  his

breast ;
His  coat,  his  kindly  coat,  above  the  kindly  covering ;
His  boss  covered  ;  hindering  sharp-pointed  shield  on  his  left  hand
His  head-dress  a  helm  of  hard  combat,
To  cover  his  crown  and  his  head  top,
To  go  in  the  front  of  the  fray  and  the  fray  long  lasting ;
His  heroes  hard  slasher  in  his  right  hand,
A  sharp  surety  knife  against  his  waist.

He  raised  himself  up  to  the  top  of  the  shore  ;  and
there  was  no  turf  he  would  cast  behind  his  heels,  that
was  not  as  deep  as  a  turf  that  the  bread  covering  tree*
would  cast  when  deepest  it  would  be  ploughing.  He
leached  the  circle  of  fire ;  he  leaped  from  the  points
of  his  spear  to  the  points  of  his  toes  over  the  fire.

Then  'there  was  the  very  finest  isle  that  ever  was
seen  from  the  beginning  of  the  universe  to  the  end  of
eternity  ;  he  went  up  about  the  island,  and  he  saw  a
yellow  bare  hill  in  the  midst.  He  raised  himself  up
against  the  hill ;  there  was  a  treasure  of  a  woman  sit-
ting on  the  hill,  and  a  great  youth  with  his  head  on
her  knee,  and  asleep.  He  spoke  to  her  in  instructed,
eloquent,  true,  wise,  soft  maiden  words  of  true  know-
ledge. She  answered  in  like  words  ;  and  if  they  were
no  better,  they  were  not  a  whit  worse,  for  the  time.

"  A  man  of  thy  seeming  is  a  treasure  for  me  ;  and
if  I  had  a  right  to  thee,  thou  shouldst  not  leave  the
island,"  said  the  little  treasure.

"  K  a  man  of  my  seeming  were  a  treasure  for  thee,
thou  wouldst  tell  me  what  were  waking  for  that  youth,"
said  the  Son  of  the  Green  Spring  by  Valour.

t  Dalla  ohbanh  abaih,  a  plough.


444  ^EST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  It  is  to  take  off  the  point  of  his  little  finger,"
said  she.

He  laid  a  hand  on  the  sharp  surety  knife  that  was
against  his  waist,  and  he  took  the  little  finger  off  him
from  the  root.  That  made  the  youth  neither  shrink
nor  stir.

"  Tell  me  what  is  waking  for  the  youth,  or  else  there
are  two  off  whom  I  will  take  the  heads,  thyself  and  the
youth,"  said  the  Son  of  the  Green  Spring  by  Valour.

"  Waking  for  him,"  said  she,"  is  a  thing  that  thou
canst  not  do,  nor  any  one  warrior  in  the  great  world,  but
the  warrior  of  the  red  shield,  of  whom  it  was  in  the  pro-
phecies that  he  should  come  to  this  island,  and  strike
yonder  crag  of  stone  on  this  man  in  the  rock  of  his
chest ;  and  he  is  unbaptized  till  he  does  that."

He  heard  this  that  such  was  in  the  prophecy  for
him,  and  he  unnamed.  A  fist  upon  manhood,  a  fist
upon  strengthening,  and  a  fist  upon  power  went  into
him.  He  raised  the  crag  in  his  two  hands,  and  he
struck  it  on  the  youth  in  the  rock  of  his  chest  The
one  who  was  asleep  gave  a  slow  stare  of  his  two  eyes,
and  he  looked  at  him.

"  Aha  V*  said  the  one  who  was  asleep,  "  hast  thou
come,  warrior  of  the  Red  Shield.  It  is  this  day  that
thou  hast  the  name;  thou  wilt  not  stand  long  to  ma"

"  Two  thirds  of  thy  fear  be  on  thyself,  and  one  on
me,"  said  the  Warrior  of  the  Red  Shield  ;  "  thou  wilt
not  stand  long  to  me."

In  each  other's  grips  they  went,  and  they  were
hard  belabouring  each  other  till  the  mouth  of  dusk  and
lateness  was.  The  Warrior  of  the  Red  Shield  thought
that  he  was  far  from  his  friends  and  near  his  foe ;  he
gave  him  that  little  light  lift,  and  he  struck  him  against
the  earth ;  the  thumb  of  his  foot  gave  a  warning  to  the
root  of  his  ear,  and  he  swept  the  head  off  him.


THE  KNIGHT  OF  THE  BED  SHIELD.  445

"  Though  it  he  I  who  have  done  this,  it  was  not  I
who  promised  it,"  said  he.

He  took  the  hand  off  him  from  the  shoulder,  and
he  took  the  heart  from  his  chest,  and  he  took  the  head
off  the  neck ;  he  put  his  hand  in  the  dead  warrior's
pouch,  and  he  found  three  teeth  of  an  old  horse  in  it,
and  with  the  hurry  he  took  them  for  the  king's  teeth,
and  he  took  them  with  him ;  and  he  went  to  a  tuft  of
wood,  and  he  gathered  a  withy,  and  he  tied  on  it  the
hand  and  the  heart  and  the  head.

"  Whether  wouldst  thou  rather  stay  here  on  this
island  by  thyself,  or  go  with  me  Ì"  said  he  to  the  little
treasure.

"  I  would  rather  go  with  thee  thyself,  than  with
all  the  men  of  earth's  mould  together,"  said  the  little
treasure.

He  raised  her  with  him  on  the  shower  top  of  his
shoulders,  and  on  the  burden  (bearing)  part  of  his
back,  and  he  went  to  the  fire.  He  sprang  over  with
the  little  treasure  upon  him.  He  sees  the  Ejiight  of
the  Cairn  and  the  Knight  of  the  Sword  coming  to  meet
him ;  rage  and  fury  in  their  eyes.

"  What  great  warrior,"  said  they,  "  was  that  after
thee  there,  and  returned  when  he  saw  two  heroes  like
usl"

"  Here's  for  you,"  said  he,  '*  this  little  treasure  of
a  woman,  and  the  three  teeth  of  your  father  ;  and  the
head,  and  hand,  and  heart  of  the  one  who  struck  the
fist  on  him.  Make  a  little  stay  and  I  will  return,  and
I  will  not  leave  a  shred  of  a  tale  in  the  island."

He  went  away  back  ;  and  at  the  end  of  a  while  he
cast  an  eye  behind  him,  and  he  sees  them  and  the
speckled  barge  playing  him  ocean  hiding.

"  Death  wrappings  upon  yourselves  !  "  said  he,  "  a
tempest  of  blood  about  your  eyes,  the  ghost  of  your


44^  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

hanging  be  upon  you  !  to  leave  me  in  an  island  by
myself^  without  the  seed  of  Adam  in  it,  and  that  I
should  not  know  this  night  what  I  shall  do."

He  went  forward  about  the  island,  and  was  seeing
neither  house  nor  tower  in  any  place,  low  or  high.  At
last  he  saw  an  old  castle  in  the  lower  ground  of  tlie
island,  and  he  took  (his  way)  towards  it  He  sa^nr
three  youths  coming  heavily,  wearily,  tired  to  the
castle.  He  spoke  to  them  in  instructed,  eloquent,
true,  wise  words  of  true  wisdom.  They  spoke  in  re-
turn in  like  words.

They  came  in  words  of  the  olden  time  on  each,
other ;  and  who  were  here  but  his  three  true  foster  bro-
thers. They  went  in  right  good  pleasure  of  mind  to
the  big  town.

They  raised  up  masic  and  laid  down  woe  ;
There  were  soft  drunken  draughts
And  harsh,  stammering  drinks,
Tranquil,  easy  toasts
Between  himself  and  his  foster  brethren,
Music  between  fiddles,  with  which  would  sleep
Wounded  men  and  travailing  women
Withering  away  for  ever ;  with  the  sound  of  that  music
.    Which  was  ever  continuing  sweetly  that  night.

They  went  to  lie  down.  In  the  morning  of  the
morrow  he  arose  right  well  pleased,  and  he  took  his
meat.  What  should  he  hear  but  the  gliogabsaich,
clashing  of  arms  and  men  going  into  their  array.  Who
were  these  but  his  foster  brethren.

"  Where  are  you  going  Ì "  said  he  to  them.

"  We  are  from  the  end  of  a  day  and  a  year  in
this  island,''  said  they,  "holding  battle  against  Mac-
Dorcha  MacDoilleir,  the  son  of  darkness  son  of  dim-
ness, and  a  hundred  of  his  people  ;  and  every  one  we


THE  KNIGHT  OF  THE  BED  SHIELD.        447

kill  to-day  they  will  be  alive  to-morrow.  Spells  are  on
us  that  we  may  not  leave  this  for  ever  until  we  kill
them."

"  I  will  go  with  you  this  day  ;  you  will  be  the  better
for  me,"  said  he.

"  Spells  are  on  us,"  said  they,  "  that  no  man  may
go  with  us  unless  he  goes  there  alone."

"  Stay  you  within  this  day,  and  I  will  go  there  by
myself,"  said  he.

He  went  away,  and  he  hit  upon  the  people  of  the
Son  of  Darkness  Son  of  Dimness,  and  he  did  not
leave  a  head  on  a  trunk  of  theirs.

He  hit  upon  MacDorcha  MacDoilleir  himself  and
MacDorcha  MacDoilleir  said  to  him,

"  Art  thou  here,  Warrior  of  the  Bed  Shield  ?"

"  I  am,"  said  the  Warrior  of  the  Eed  Shield.

"  Well  then,"  said  MacDorcha  MacDoilleir,  "  thou
wilt  not  stand  long  for  me."

In  each  other's  grips  they  went,  and  were  hard  be-
labouring each  other  till  the  mouth  of  dusk  and  late-
ness was.  At  last  the  Knight  of  the  Eed  Shield  gave
that  cheery  little  light  lift  to  the  Son  of  Darkness  Son
of  Dimness,  and  he  put  him  under,  and  he  cast  the
head  off  him.

Now  there  was  MacDorcha  MacDoilleir  dead,  and
his  thirteen  sons  ;  and  the  battle  of  a  hundred  on  the
hand  of  each  one  of  them.

Then  he  was  spoUt  and  torn  so  much  that  he  could
not  leave  the  battle-field  ;  and  he  did  but  let  himself
down,  laid  amongst  the  dead  the  length  of  the  day.
There  was  a  great  strand  under  him  down  below  ;  and
what  should  he  hear  but  the  sea  coming  as  a  blazing
brand  of  fire,  as  a  destroying  serpent,  as  a  beUowing
bull ;  he  looked  from  him,  and  what  saw  he  coming
on  shore  on  the  midst  of  the  strand,  but  a  great  toothy


44^  ^^^B8T  HIGHLAND  TALEa

carlin,  whose  like  was  never  seen.  There  was  the
tooth  that  was  longer  than  a  staff  in  her  fist,  and  the
one  that  was  shorter  than  a  stocking  wire  in  her  lap.
She  came  up  to  the  hattle-field,  and  there  were  two
between  her  and  him.  She  put  her  finger  in  their
mouths,  and  she  brought  them  ahve  ;  and  they  rose
up  whole  as  best  as  they  ever  were.  She  reached  him
and  she  put  her  finger  in  his  mouth,  and  he  snapped
it  off  her  from  the  joint.  She  struck  him  a  blow  of
the  point  of  her  foot,  and  she  cast  him  over  seven
ridges.

"  Thou  pert  little  wretch,"  said  she,  "  thou  art  the
last  I  will  next-live*  in  the  battle  field."

The  carlin  went  over  another,  and  he  was  above
her ;  he  did  not  know  how  he  should  put  an  end  to
the  carlin  ;  he  thought  of  throwing  the  short  spear  that
her  son  had  at  her,  and  if  the  head  should  fall  off  her
that  was  weU.  He  threw  the  spear,  and  he  drove  the
head  off  the  carlin.  Then  he  was  stretched  on  the
battle-field,  blood  and  sinews  and  flesh  in  pain,  but
that  he  had  whole  bones.  What  should  he  see  but
a  musical  harper  about  the  field.

"  What  art  thou  seeking  Ì "  said  he  to  the  harper.

"  I  am  sure  thou  art  wearied,"  said  the  harper  ;
*'  come  up  and  set  thy  head  on  this  little  hillock  and
sleep."

He  went  up  and  he  laid  down ;  he  drew  a  snore,
pretending  that  he  was  asleep,  and  on  his  soles  he  was
brisk,  swift,  and  active.

"  Thou  art  dreaming,"  said  the  harper.

"  I  am,"  said  he.    •

"  What  sawest  thou  ?"  said  the  harper.

*  Ath  BHE0THAI0HEÀ8 ',    there  is  no  such  verb  in  finglish,
hat  to  next-live  expresses  the  meaning.


Vfjf


THE  KNIGHT  OF  THE  RED  SHIELD.       449

"A  musical  harper,"  lie  said,  "drawing  a  rusty
old  sword  to  take  off  my  head,"

Then  he  seized  the  harper,  and  he  drove  the  brain
in  fiery  slivers  through  the  back  of  his  head.

Then  he  was  under  spells  that  he  should  not  kill  a
musical  harper  for  ever,  but  with  his  own  harp.

Then  he  heard  weeping  about  the  field.  "  Who
is  that?"  said  he.

"  Here  are  thy  three  true  foster  brothers,  seeking
thee  from  place  to  place  to-day,"  said  they.

"  I  am  stretched  here,"  said  he,  "  blood  and  sinews,
and  bones  in  torture.*'

"  K  we  had  the  little  vessel  of  balsam  that  the
great  carlin  has,  the  mother  of  MacDorcha  MacDoilleir,
we  would  not  be  long  in  healing  thee,"  said  they.

"  She  is  dead  herself  up  there,"  said  he,  "  and  she
has  nothing  that  ye  may  not  get"

"We  are  out  of  her  spells  forever,''  said  they.

They  brought  down  the  little  vessel  of  balsam,
and  they  washed  and  bathed  him  with  the  thing  that
was  in  the  vessel ;  then  he  arose  up  as  whole  and
healthy  as  he  ever  was.  He  went  home  with  them,
and  they  passed  the  night  in  great  pleasure.

They  went  out  the  next  day  in  great  pleasure
to  play  at  shinny.  He  went  against  the  three,  and
he  would  drive  a  half  hail  down,  and  a  half  hail  up,
in  against  them.

They  perceived  the  Great  Son  of  the  Sons  of
the  World  coming  to  the  town  ;  that  was  their
true  foster  brother*  also.  They  went  out  where  he
was,  and  they  said  to  him —

"  Man  of  my  love,  avoid  us  and  the  town  this  day."

"  What  is  tìie  cause  ?"  said  he.

*  Deabbh  CHOXHALTA ;  this  muBt  mean  sometbing  besides
true  foster  brother.

VOL.  IL  2  G


45 ^  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  The  Knight  of  the  Bed  Shield  is  within,  and  it
is  thou  he  is  seeking,"  said  they.

"  Gk)  you  home,  and  say  to  him  to  go  away  and  to
flee,  or  else  that  I  will  tsJ^e  the  head  off  him,"  said
the  Great  Son  of  the  Sons  of  the  Universe.

Though  this  was  in  secret,  the  Knight  of  the  Red
Shield  perceived  it ;  and  he  went  out  on  the  other
side  of  the  house,  and  he  struck  a  shield  blow,  and  a
flght  kindling.

The  great  warrior  went  out  after  him,  and  they  be-
gan at  each  other.

There  was  no  trick  that  is  done  hy  shield  man  or  skiff  mao.

Or  with  cheater's  dice  box,

Or  with  organ  of  the  monks,

That  the  heroes  conld  not  do ;

As  was  the  trick  of  cleiteam,  trick  of  oigeah,*

The  apple  of  the  juggler  throwing  it  and  catching  it

Into  each  other's  laps

Frightfully,  furiously,

Bloodily,  groaning,  hurtfully.

Mind's  desire !  umpire's  choice !

They  wonld  drive  three  red  sparks  of  fire  from  their  armour.

Driving Trom  the  shield  wall,  and  flesh

Of  their  breasts  and  tender  bodies,

As  they  hardly  belaboured  each  other.

"  Art  thou  not  silly.  Warrior  of  the  Red  Shield,
when  thou  art  holding  wrestling  and  had  battle  against
uie  Ì "  said  Macabh  Mhacaibh  an  Domhain.

"  How  is  this  1"  said  the  hero  of  the  Eed  Shield
"  It  is,  that  there  is  no  warrior  in  the  great  world
that  will  kill  me  till  I  am  struck  above  the  covering
of  the  trews,"  said  Macabh  Mor.f

*  These  may  mean  the  pen  trick — the  trick  of  writing ;  but  I
am  not  certain.

t  From  which  it  appears  that  he  was  too  tall  to  be  reached  by
the  other.


THE  KNIGHT  OF  THE  BED  SHIELD.  45  I

"The  victory  blessing  of  that  be  thine  telling
it  to  me  I  If  thou  hadst  told  me  that  a  long  time  ago,
it  is  long  since  I  had  swept  the  head  off  thee/'  said
the  Warrior  of  the  Ked  Shield.

"  There  is  in  that  more  than  thou  canst  do ;  the
king's  three  teeth  are  in  my  pouch,  and  try  if  it  be
thou  that  will  take  them  out,''  said  Macabh  Mor.

When  the  Warrior  of  the  Ked  Shield  heard  where
the  death  of  Macabh  Mor  was,  he  had  two  blows  given
for  the  blow,  two  thrusts  for  the  thrust,  two  stabs  for
the  stab ;  and  the  third  was  into  the  earth,  till  he  had
dug  a  hole ;  then  he  sprung  backwards.  The  great
warrior  sprung  towards  him,  and  he  did  not  notice  the
hole,  and  he  went  down  into  it  to  the  covering  of  the
trews.  Then  he  reached  him,  and  he  cast  off  his  head.
He  put  his  hand  in  his  pouch,  and  he  found  the  king's
three  teeth  in  it,  and  he  took  them  with  him  and  he
reached  the  castle.

"  Make  a  way  for  me  for  leaving  this  island,"  said
he  to  his  foster  brethren,  "as  soon  as  you  can."

"  We  have  no  way,"  said  they,  "  by  which  thou
canst  leave  it ;  but  stay  with  us  forever,  and  thou
shalt  not  want  for  meat  or  drink."

"  The  matter  shall  not  be  so  ;  but  unless  you  make
a  way  for  letting  me  go,  I  will  take  the  heads  and
necks  out  of  you,"  said  he.

"  A  coracle  that  thy  foster  mother  and  thy  foster
father  had,  is  here  ;  and  we  will  send  it  with  thee  till
thou  goest  on  shore  in  Eirinn.  The  side  that  thou
settest  her  prow  she  will  go  with  thee,  and  she  mil
return  back  again  by  herself ;  here  are  three  pigeons
for  thee,  and  they  will  keep  company  with  thee  on  the
way,"  said  his  foster  brothers  to  him.

He  set  the  coracle  out,  and  he  sat  in  her,  and  he
made  no  stop,  no  stay,  till  he  went  on  shore  in  Eirinn.


45 2  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

He  turned  her  prow  outwards ;  and  if  she  was  swift
coming,  she  was  swifter  returning.  He  let  away  the
three  pigeons,  as  he  left  the  strange  country  ;  and  he
was  sorry  that  he  had  let  them  away,  so  heautiful  was
the  music  that  they  had.*

There  was  a  great  river  between  him  and  the  king's
house.  When  he  reached  the  river,  he  saw  a  hoary
man  coming  with  all  his  might,  and  shouting,  "  Oh,
gentleman,  stay  yonder  until  I  take  you  over  on  my
back,  in  case  you  should  wet  yourself."

"  Poor  man,  it  seems  as  if  thou  wert  a  porter  on
the  river,"  said  he.

"  It  is  (so),"  said  the  hoary  old  man.

"  And  what  set  thee  there  Ì "  said  he.

"  I  will  tell  you  that,"  said  the  hoary  old  man  ;  "  a
big  warrior  struck  a  fist  on  the  King  of  Eirinn,  and  he
drove  out  three  of  his  teeth,  and  his  two  sons  went  to
take  out  vengeance ;  there  went  with  them  a  foolish
little  young  boy  that  was  son  to  me  ;  and  when  they
went  to  manhood,  he  went  to  faintness.  It  was  but
sorry  vengeance  for  them  to  set  me  as  a  porter  on  the
river  for  it."

"  Poor  man,"  said  he,  "  that  is  no  reproach  ;  be-
fore I  leave  the  town  thou  wilt  be  well."

He  seized  him,  and  he  lifted  him  with  him  ;  and
he  set  him  sitting  in  the  chair  against  the  king's
shoulder.

"  Thou  art  but  a  saucy  man  that  came  to  the  town  ;
thou  hast  set  that  old  carl  sitting  at  my  father's  shoul-
der ;  and  thou  shalt  not  get  it  with  thee,"  said  the
Knight  of  the  Caim,  as  he  rose  and  seized  him.

"  By  my  hand,  and  by  my  two  hands'  redemption,  it
were  as  well  for  thee  to  seize  Cnoc  Leothaid  as  to  seize

*  In  another  yersion  pigeons  were  his  foster  brothers  trans-
formed.


THE  KNIGHT  OF  THE  RED  SHIELD.  453

me,"  said  the  Warrior  of  the  Eed  Shield  to  him,  as  he
threw  him  down  against  the  earth.

He  laid  on  him  the  binding  of  the  three  smalls,
straitly  and  painfully.  He  struck  him  a  blow  of  the
point  of  his  foot,  and  he  cast  him  over  the  seven  high-
est spars  that  were  in  the  court,  under  the  drippings
of  the  lamps,  and  under  the  feet  of  the  big  dogs  ;  and
he  did  the  very  same  to  the  Knight  of  the  Sword  ;
and  the  little  treasure  gave  a  laugh.

"  Death  wrappings  be  upon  thyself ! "  said  the  king
to  her.  "  Thou  art  from  a  year's  end  meat  companion,
and  drink  companion  for  me,  and  I  never  saw  smile
or  laugh  being  made  by  thee,  until  my  two  sons  are
being  disgraced."

"  Oh,  king,"  said  she,  "  I  have  knowledge  of  my
own  reason."

"  What,  oh  king,  is  the  screeching  and  screaming
that  I  am  hearing  since  I  came  to  the  town  Ì  I  never
got  time  to  ask  till  now,*'  said  the  hero  of  the  Eed
Shield.

"  My  sons  have  three  horses'  teeth,  driving  them
into  my  head,  since  the  beginning  of  a  year,  with  a
hammer,  until  my  head  has  gone  through  other  with
heartbreak  and  torment,  and  pain,"  said  the  king.

"  What  wouldst  thou  give  to  a  man  that  would  put
thy  own  teeth  into  thy  head  without  hurt,  without
pain,"  said  he.

"  Half  my  state  so  long  as  I  may  be  alive,  and  my
state  altogether  when  I  may  go,"  said  the  king.

He  asked  for  a  can  of  water,  and  he  put  the  teeth
into  the  water.

"  Drink  a  draught,"  said  he  to  the  king.

The  king  drank  a  draught,  and  his  own  teeth  went
into  his  head,  firmly  and  strongly,  quite  as  well  as
they  ever  were,  and  every  one  in  her  own  place.


454  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  Aha  ! "  said  the  king,  "  I  am  at  rest  It  is  thou
that  didst  the  valiant  deeds ;  and  it  was  not  my  set  of
sons ! "

"  It  is  he,"  said  the  little  treasure  to  the  king,
"  that  could  do  the  valiant  deeds  ;  and  it  was  not  thy
set  of  shambling  sons,  that  would  be  stretched  as  sea-
weed seekers  when  he  was  gone  to  heroism."

"  I  will  not  eat  meat,  and  I  will  not  drink  dranght,"
said  the  king,  "  until  I  see  my  two  sons  being  burnt
to-morrow.  I  will  send  some  to  seek  faggots  of  grey
oak  for  burning  them."

On  the  morning  of  the  morrow,  who  was  earliest
on  his  knee  at  the  king's  bed,  but  the  Warrior  of  the
Eed  Shield.

"  Eise  from  that-,  warrior ;  what  single  thing
mightest  thou  be  asking  that  thou  shouldst  not  get,"
said  the  king.

"The  thing  I  am  asking  is,  that  thy  two  sons
should  be  let  go  ;  I  cannot  be  in  any  one  place  where
I  may  see  them  spoiled,"  said  he.  "  It  were  better
to  do  bird  and  fool  clipping  to  them,  and  to  let  them
go.  I

The  king  was  pleased  to  do  that     Bird  and  fool       I
clipping  was   done  to  them.     They  were  put  out  of
their  place,   and  dogs  and  big  town  vagabonds  after
them.

The  Uttle  treasure  and  the  Warrior  of  the  Red
Shield  married,  and  agreed.  A  great  wedding  was
made,  that  lasted  a  day  and  a  year ;  and  the  last  day
of  it  was  as  good  as  the  first  day.


RIDIRB  NA  SGIATHA  DBIBGE.  455


RIDIRE  NA  SGIATHA  DEIRGE.

BiiA  ann  roimbe  seo  Righ  Eireann  's  dh*  fholbh  e  fh^in,  'sa  shluagh
agas  a  laochraidh,  's  a  mhaithean,  's  a  mhòraaìslean  do  'n  bheinn
shithinn  agas  sheilg.  Sbuidh  ad  air  cnocaa  dath-uaine  daite,  far  an
eireadh  grian  gu  moch  agns  an  laidheadh  i  gu  h-anmoch.  Thtiirt
am  fear  a  bu  laaithe  beal  na  *cbèile.

**  Co  'neis,  ann  an  ceitbir  ranna  ruath  an  domhain,  aig  am  biodh  a
chridhe  tar  agas  tailceas  a  dhèanadh  air  Righ  Eireann,  's  e  am
meadhon  slòigh  agas  laochraidb,  mbruaislean  a^s  maithean  a  riogh-
achd  fh^in."

**  Nach  amaideach  sibh,"  ars'  an  righ,  "  dh'  fhaodadh  e  tighinn
fear  a  dheanadh  thr  agas  tailceas  armsa,  's  nach  b'  arrainn  sibh  an
rioba  'bn  mheasa  'na  fhensaig  a  thoirt  aisde."

'S  ann  mar  seo  a  bha.  Channaic  ad  dabhradh  frois'  a'  tighinn
bho  'n  aird  an  iar,  's  a'  triall  do  'n  aird  an  ear, — ^'S  marcaiche  fàlaire
doighe  'tighinn  ga  sanndach  'na  d^igh.

Mar  a  bu  charaidh  air  tir  na  sl^ibhte,
Mar  real  air  na  rionnagan,
Mar  mhair  mòr  air  lodannan.
Mar  ghaal  guibhne  gobha
'Ga  bbàthadh  aig  taobh  na  h-abhann  ;

'S  ann  mar  sean  a  dh'  amhairceadh  tir  agus  mnathan  an  domh-
ain lamb  ris,
An  dealbh,  *8  an  dreach,  san  crath,  agas  an  aogas.

Labhair  e  dhaibh,  an  sean,  ann  am  briathra  fiosneacha,  foisne,
acha,  f lor-ghlic,  tior-eòlais ;  's  ma  'n  robh  taillidh  seanachais  eatorra
chair  e  thairis  an  dom,  's  bhuail  e  'n  righ  eadar  am  beul  's  an  t-srbn
's  chair  e  tri  fiaclan  as,  's  cheap  e  'na  dhorn  ad,  's  chair  A'na  phòc
ad,  's  dh'  fbalbh  e.

**  Nach  d'  thubhairt  mi,  rnibh,"  ars'  an  righ,  <<gam  faodadh  e  tighinn
fear  a  dheanudli  tàir  agus  tailceas  ormsa,  's  nach  b'  arrainn  sibh  an
rioba  'bu  mhea>a  'na  fhensaig  a  thoirt  aisde."  Bhòidich  an  seo  a
mhac  mòr,  ridir'  a'  chtiirn,  nach  itheadh  e  biadh,  a's  nach  òladh  e
deoch,  a's  nach  (fisdeadh  e  ceòl,  gas  an  d'  thugadh  e,  bhkr  a'  ghaisg-
ijh  a  bhuail  an  dom  air  an  righ,  an  ceann  a  dbealbh  a  dheanadb.

**  Mata,"  orsa  ridir'  a'  chlaidbimh, "  an  t-aon  ciadhna  dhomhsa,
gus  an  d'  thoir  mi  'n  lamb,  a  bhuail  an  dom  air  an  righ,  o*n  ghual-
ainn  deth."

Bha  aon  fhear  leo,  an  sean,  's  a*  chmdeachd  d*  am  b'  unm  Mac


45^  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALEa

an  Earraich  uaine  ri  Gaisge,  "  An  t-aon  ciadhna  domhBa,"  ars'  esan,
"  gas  an  d'  thoir  mi,  as  a'  ghaisgeach  a  bhnail  an  dom  air  an  righ,
an  cridhe  'smaointich  air  a  dhèanadh.*'

"Thus*  a  bheathaich  mhosaich,"  orsa  Ridire  ChUim,  **dè  'bheir
thusa  leinn  ?  Nur  a  rachamaidne  air  thapadh,  rachadh  tus'Jair  mhi-
thapadb.  Geobhadb  ta  bàs  am  mòintìcb  bhuig,  na  'n  sgeilpe  chrea^,
na  'n  talamh  toll,  na  'n  sgàth  gàrraidb,  na  'n  àit-eigìn."

**  Biodb  sin  's  a  roghainn  da  acb  falbbaidh  mi,"  orsa  Mac  an
Earraich  uaine  ri  Gaisge.

Dh'  fhalbh  da  mhac  an  righ.  Siol  gu  'n  dug  Ridire  a  Cbiiim  as
a  dhèigh  as  faicear  Mac  an  Earraich  uaine  ri  Gaisge  'gan  leantoinn.

**  Gn-dè/'  orsa  Ridire  'Chuim  ri  Ridire  'Chlaidhimh,  **  a  ni  sinn
ris."

<*Ni,"  orsa  Ridire  'Chlaidhimh,  <'an  ceann  a  sgathadh  dheth."
"Mata,"  orsa  Ridire  'Chhirn,  '<cha  dean  sinn  sean;  ach  tha  carragh
mòr  cloiche  shuas  an  seo  aeus  ceanghlaidh  sinn  ris  e."

**  Tha  mi  toileach  sean  fh^in  a  dheanadh,"  ors*  am  fear  eile.

Cheanghail  ad  ris  a'  charragh  chloich*  e,  an  los  fhàgail  gas  am
bàsaicheadh  e,  's  ghabh  ad  air  falbh.  Stiil  gun  d'  thug  Ridire  'Chuim
a  rithiad  as  a  dh^igh,  's  faicear  a'  tighinn  e,  's  an  carragh  air  a
mhuin.

"  Nach  fhaic  thn,  neis,  am  fear  sean  a'  tighinn  a  rithisd,  'a  an
carragh  air  a  mhuin,"  orsa  Ridire  'Chiiim  ri  Ridire  ChlaidhirolL.
"Dè'nisinris?"

'*  Tha  'n  ceann  a  sgathadh  dheth  's  gan  a  leigeil  na  *s  fhaide,"  orsa
Ridire  'Chlaidhimh.

**  Cha  dean  sinn  sean,"  orsa  Ridire  'Chùim,  <'ach  tillidh  sinn  agus
fuasglaidh  sinn  an  carragh  dheth.  Is  suarrnch  d'  ar  leithidne  do  dha
làn-ghaisgeach  gad  a  bhiodh  e  leinn ;  ni  e  fear  ghlanadh  sgiath,  na
sheideach  thhrlach,  na  rud-eigin."

Dh'  fhtasgail  ad  e  agus  leig  ad  leo  e.  Ghabh  ad  a  sios  an  seo
thun  a'  chladaich.  Fhnair  ad  an  sean  an  long  ris  an  abradh  ad,  an
lubhrach  bhallach.

Chuir  ad  a  mach  i,  's  thug  ad  a  toiseach  do  mhuir,  's  a  deireadh

do  thir.
Thog  ad  pa  siuil  bhreaca,  bhaidealacha,  bhàrr-rùisgte.
An  aodann  nan  crann  fada,  fulannach,  fiiighaidh.
Bha  soirbheas  beag,  laghach  aca  mar  a  thaghadh  ad  fh^
'Bheireadh  fraghach*  a  beinn,  duilleach  a  coill,  seileach  a  a

fhreumhaichan.

*  Fraghach,  same  as  fraoch,  heather.


RIDIRÈ  NA  SGIATHA  DEIRGE.  457

'Chuireadh  tutha  nan  taighean  ann  an  claisean  nan  ìomairean,

An  latha  nach  deanadh  am  mac  na  "n  t-athair  e.

Gha  bu  bbeag  's  cha  bu  mbor  leòsan  sean  fhe'

Ach  'ga  caitheadh,  's  'ga  ghabhail  mar  a  thigeadh  e.

An  fhaiige  'fulpanaich  's  a'  falpanaìch ; —

An  lear  dearg  's  an  lear  uaine  'lachannaich,

'S  a'  bualadh  thall  's  a  bhos  ma  bòrdaibh.

An  fliaocbag  chrom  chiar  a  bba  shìos  an  grannd  an  aigein,

Bheireadh  i  snag  air  a  beul-mòr  agus  cnag  air  a  b-urlar.

Ghearradb  i  cuìnnlein  caol  coìrce  le  f heobhas  's  a  dh'  fhalbbadh  i.

Thug  ad  trì  lathan  'ga  caitheadh  mar  sean.

<'Tha  mi  fhèin  a' fìis  sgìth  dheth  seo,"  orsa  Ridire  Ghtdrn  ri
Ridire  Chlaidhimh ;  "  bu  mhìthidh  leam  sgeul  fhaotaìnn  as  a'
chrann."

*'  'S  tu  fh^in  a  *s  raòr-ionmbmuneach  ann  a  Ridire  Chìiim,  agas
leig  fliaicinn  gu  'm  bi  sp^is  agad  a  dhol  suas;  agus  mar  an  d*  tbèid
thu  suas  bidh  am  barrachd  spòrs  againn  ort,"  orsa  Mac  an  Earraich
uaine  ri  Gaisge.  Suas  a  ghabh  Ridire  Chùirn  le  roid,  's  thuit  e  nuas
'na  ghlag  paiseanaidh  air  clar^uachrach  na  luinge.

"'S  dona  'fhuaras  tu,"  orsa  Ridire  Chlaidhimh.

**  Faiceam  an  tu  fh^in  'is  fèarr ;  's  ma  's  tu  's  feàrr  leigear  fhaicinn
gum  bi  barrachd  toil  agad  dol  air  t'  aghaidh,  air-neo  bidh  am  barr-t
achd  spòrs  againn  ort,"  orsa  Mac  an  Earraich  uaine  ri  Gaisge.

Snas  a  ghabh  Ridire  'Chlaidhimh,  's  ma  'n  d'  ràinig  e  ach  leith  a'
chroinn  thòisich  e  air  sgiamhail  's  air  sgreadail,  's  cha  b'  urrainn  e
dol  a  suas  na  tighinn  a  nuas.

**  Rinn  tbu  mar  a  dh'  iarradh  ort,  's  leig  thu  fhaicinn  gun  robh  am
barrachd  speis  agad  a  dhol  suas ;  's  a  neis  cha  d'  theid  thusa  suas,  's
cha  mhotha  'thig  thu  nuas !  Cha  ghaisgeach  mise,  's  cha  leith  ghaisg-
each  mi,  's  cha  robh  meas  gaisgich  orm  an  am  fagoil."  Gheobhainn
has  am  mòintich  bhoig  na  'n  sgeiipe  chreag,  na  'n  sgàth  gàrraidh,  na
'n  àit-eigin,  **  agus  cha  bu  spàìm  orm  sgeul  a  thoirt  as  a'  chrann,"
orsa  Mac  an  Earraich  uaine  ri  Gaisge.

**  A  shaoidh  mhòir,"  orsa  Ridire  'Chtiim,  "feuch  ris."

'*  Is  saoidh  mbr  mi  'n  diugh ;  ach  cha  b'  eadh  a'  fàgail  a*  bhaile,"
orsa  Mac  an  Earraich  uaine  ri  Gaisge.

Thomhais  e  leum  bho  cheannaibh  a  shleagh  gu  barraibh  ordag,  's
bha  e  shuas  a  chlisgeadh  anns  a'  chrannaig.

«Gu-dè  'tha  thu  'faicinnV"  orsa  Ridire  'Chuim.

**  Tha  e  ro  mhòr  do  dh'  fheannaig  's  tha  e  ro  bheag  do  dh*  fhear-
ann,"  ore'  esan.


458  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

*'  Fan  mar  a  th*  agad  feuch  an  aithnich  thn  d^  'th'  ann,^  ors'  ad
ris,  's  dh'  fhan  e  mar  seo  treis.

"  Tie  'tha  thu  'faicinn  a  neis  ?  "  ors'  ad  ris.

"  Tha  eilean  agns  cearcall  teine  ma  'n  cnairt  air,  a'  lasadh  an  ceann
a  chèìle ;  's  tha  mi  'smaointeachadh  nach  'eil  aon  ghaisgeach  anns  an
domhan  mhbr  a  theid  thairis  air  an  teine,**  ara'  esan.

'*  Mar  an  d*  th^id  ar  leithidne  de  dba  ghùsgeach  thairis  air,"  ors
àdsan.

<<Tha  dhir  am  gum  b'  fhasa  dhuibh  sgenl  a  thoirt  as  a'  chrann
na  dol  a  staigh  an  siod,"  ars'  eisean.

'*  Cha'n  athais  e  ?  **  orsa  Ridire  Chiiim.

•*Cha'n  eadh,  's  firinn  el"  orsa  Mac  an  Earraich  uaine  ri  Gaisge.
'  Ràinig  ad  an  taobh  muin  de  'n  teine,  *s  chaidh  ad  air  tir,  's  tharruinn
ad  an  lubhrach  bhallach  snas  a  seachd  fad  fhèin  air  feur  glas,  's  a
beul  fòiche,  far  nach  deanadh  sgoilearan  baile-mhòir  bùirt,  na  focfa-
aid,  na  magadh  nrra.  Sbèid  ad  thrlach,  *s  thug  ad  tri  oidhchean  a's
tri  lathan  a'  leigeil  an  pgios.

An  ceann  nan  tri  lathan  thòisich  ad  air  liobhadh  nan  arm.

"  Tha  mi,"  orsa  Ridire  Chxiim,  "  a'  fìis  sgìth  dheth  seo,  bu  mhith-
ich  leam  sgeul  fhaotainn  as  an  eilean."

*•  *S  tu  f  h^in,"  orsa  Mac  an  Earraich  uaine  ri  Gaisge,  is  mòr-
ionmhuinneach  ann,  agus  folbh  an  toiseach  feuch  d^  'n  sgeul  a's
fhèarr  a  bheir  thu  a'r  ionnsuidh."

Dh'  fhalbh  ridire  chhim,  's  ràinig  e  'n  teine,  's  thug  e  làmh  air
leum  thairte,  's  a  sios  a  gbabh  e  innte  g'a  ghlidnean ;  's  thill  e  air
ais,  's  cha  robh  rioba  caoillejj  na  craicinn  eadar  a  ghliiinean  *s  a
mhuthaimean  nach  robh  'na  chuaran  raa  bheul  nam  bròg.

**'S  don'  e,  's  don'  e,"  orsa  Ridire  'Chlaidhimh.

**  Feiceam  an  tu  fh^in  a  's  f hèarr,"  orsa  Mac  an  Earraich  uaine  ri
Gaisge.  **Leigfhaicinngum  bi  barrachd  sp^is  agad  a' dhol  air  t'
aghaidh,  air-neo  bidh  am  borrachd  spòrs  againn  ort"

Dh'  fhalbh  Ridire  'Chlaidhimh,  's  rkinig  e  'n  teine;,  's  thug  e  làmh
air  leum  thairte,  's  chaidh  e  sios  innte  gu  ceann  ramhar  na  sMisde,  's
thill  e  air  ais,  's  cha  robh  rioba  caoille  na  craicinn  eadar  ceann  ramh-
ar na  sHisde  's  am  muthaim  nach  robh  'na  chuaran  ma  bheul  nam
bròg.

**  Mata,"  orsa  Mac  an  Earraich  uaine  ri  Gaisge,  '*  cha  bu  ghaisg-
each mise  an  am  fkgail  a'  bhaile  'nur  beachd-sa ;  's  na  'm  biodh  mo
rogha  arm  a's  ^ididh  agam  de  na  'bheil  anns  an  domhan  mhbr,  cha
bu  spàirn  orm  sgeul  a  thoirt  as  an  eilean."

''Na'm  biodh  sean  againn  gheobhadh  tus'  e,"or8a  Ridire  'Chtiim.
'*  A  Ridire  'Chiiim,  b'  e  t'  airm  agus  t'  èideadh  fh^in  dama  ainn


BTDIBE  NÀ  SOIATHÀ  DEIBOE.  4$9

agus  ^ideadh  a  Vfhèarr  leam  agam  annsan  domhan  mhor;  gad  nach
tu  fh^in  dama  gaisgeach  a  *8  fhèarr  a  th'  ann,"  arsa  Mac  an  Earraìch
uaine  ri  Gaisge.

^*  'Se  m'  airm  agos  m*  èideadh  fh^ia  a  's  fbasa  fhaotainn/*  orsa
Ridire  'Chuirn,  "  agus  gheobh  thus'  ad ;  ach  b'  fhèarr  leum  gum
biodh  ta  cho  math  's  gan  innseadh  tu  dhomh  co  na  h-airm  agus  an
t-èideadh  eile  's  fbèarr  na  oi'  fheadhainn-sa."

Tha  airm  agas  èideadh  Mhacaibh  mhoir  Mhacaibh  an  Domhaìn  a
bhuail  an  dom  air  t'  athair,"  orsa  Mac  an  Earraich  uaìne  ri  Gaìsge.

Chuir  Rìdire  ChUirn  dheth  airm  agus  èididh,  's  ghabh  Mac  an
Earraich  ri  Gaisge  nah-airm  agus  na  h<èididb.

Ghabh  e  'na  threall-aichean  cath  agus  cruaidh-chòmhraig.

Mar  a  bhaleine  'n  t-sròl  *8  a'n  t-sioda  shieamhuinn  bhuidhe  sinte
r'a  chneas,

A*  chbtainn  caomh  cotain  air  uachdar  na  caomh  chotaige,

A  sgiath  bhucaideach,  bhacaideach,  bharra-chaol  air  a  làimh  chlè,

A  cbeanna-bheart,  clogada  cruaidh-chòmhraig

A'  coiinhead  a  chiun,  's  a  cheanna-mhullaich,

An  toiseach  na  h-iorguill,— 'san  iorguill  an-diomain,

A  shlacanta  cruaidh  curaidh  'na  làimh  dheis,

Urra-sgithinn  gheur  an  taice  r'a  chneas.

Thog  e  suas  bràigh  a'  chladaich,  's  cha  robh  fbid  a  thilgeadh  e'n
d^igh  a  shàlach  nach  robh  cho  domhainn  ri  fbid  a,  thilgeadh  dalla-
ehrann  arain  nur  a  bu  doimhne  'bhiodh  e  'treobhadh.  Eàinig  e'n
cearcall  teine.  Leuiu  e  o  bharraibh  a  shleagh  gu  borraibh  òrdag
thar  na  teine.  Bha  'n  sean  an  aon  eilean  a  bu  bhòibhche  'chunneas
o  thus  an  domhain  gu  deireadh  na  dilinn.  Ghabh  e  suas  feadh  an
eilean  's  chunnaic  e  cnoc  maol  buidhe  'na  mheadhou.  Thog  e  ris  a'
chnoc  Bha  lonmhuinn  mhnatha  'na  suidhe  air  a'  chnoc,  's  òglach
mòr  's  a  cheann  air  a  glim,  's  e  'na  chadal.  Labhair  e  rithe  ann  am
briathra  fisneacha,  foisneacha,  fior-ghlic,  mine,  maighdeana,  fior-
eolais.  Fhreagair  ise  anns  na  briathra  ciadhna ;  's  mar  am  b'  ad  a
b'  fhèarr,  cha  b'  kd  dad  a  bu  mheasa  's  an  am.

"  'S  ioDmhuinn  leam  fh^in  fear  do  choltais,  's  na'm  biodii  coir
agam  ort-dh'  fhàgadh  ta'n  t-eilean,"  ors'  an  lonmhuinn.

'*  Nam  b'  ionmhuinn  leat  fear  mo  choslais  dh'  innseadh  tu
domh  d^  'bu  diisgadh  do  'n  òlach  seo,"  orsa  Mac  an  Earraich  uaine
ri  Gaisge.

**  Tha  bàrr  na  laodaig  a  thoirt  deth  "  ors'  ise.

Thug  e  Ikmh  air  an  urra-sgithinn  gh^ir  a  bha  'n  taice  r'a  chneas,


460  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

'b  thag  e'li  laodag  deth  o*n  bhun.    Cba  d*  thug  siod  emoidleacLadh  na
gluasad  air  an  òglach.

Innifl  domh  de  's  dUsgadh  do'n  òglach ; — air  neo  's  dithisd  deth  an
d'  thoir  mi  na  cinn  thu  fhèin  *s  an  t-òglach !  orsa  Mac  an  Earraich
naine  ri  Gaisge.

'*  'S  dhsgadh  dha,**  ors'  ise,  **  rnd  nach  dean  thusa,  na  aon  gbaisg-
each  anns  an  domhan  mhòr,  ach  gaisgeach  na  sgiatha  deirge,  do'n
robh  e  'a  an  talrgneachd  tighinn  do^n  eilean  seo,  agus  an  carragh  cloich*
ud  thall  a  bhualadh  air  an  duine  seo  ann  an  carraig  an  uchd ;  's  tha  e
gan  bhaisteadh  gas  an  dean  e  sean."

Chual  eisean  seo,  gn'  robh  leithid  anns  an  tairgneachd  dha,  *8  e
gun  bhaisteadh.  Cbaidh  dom  air  thapadh,  's  dòm  air  ghleusadh,  's
dom  air  spionnadh  ann.  Thog  e  'na  dha  làimh  an  carragh 's  bhuail  e
air  an  òlach  mhòr  an  carraig  an  uchd  e.  Thug  am  fear  a  bha  'na
chadal  blaomadh  air  a  dha  shuil  's  dh'  amharc  e  air.  *'  Aha,"  ors'  am
fear  a  bha  'na  chadal,  ^*  an  d'  thainig  tbu  'ghaisgich  na  Sgiatha  deirge  ?
's  ann  an  diugh  a  tha  'n  t-alnm  ort.  Cha*n  fhada  'sheasas  thu  dbomhsa."

"  Da  thrian  de  t*  eagal  ort  fh^in,  's  a'  h-aon  ormsa,'*  ar^a  Gaisg-
each na  Sgiatha  deirge,  **  cha  'n  fhad'  a  sheasas  thasa  domhsa."

An  caraibh  a  chèile  ghabh  ad,  's  bha  ad  a'  cruaidh  leadairt  a  chèile
gus  an  robh  an  beul  ath-dhatli  'san  anmoich  ann.  Smaointich
Gaisgeach  na  Sgiatha  deirge  gun  robh  e  fad'  0  a  chairdean  's  fagos
d'a  naimhdean,  's  thug  e'n  togail  bheag,  shoilleir  ud  air,  's  bhuail  e
ris  an  talamh  e.  Thug  ordag  a  choise  sanus  do  bhun  a  chluaise,
agus  sgath  e  dheth  an  ceann.

"  Gad  is  mi  'rinn  seo  cha  mhi  'gheall  e,"  ors'  esan.  Thug  e'n
lamb  o'n  ghuallainn  deth,  's  thug  e'n  cridhe  a  a  chom,  's  thug  e'n
ceann  bhar  a  mhuineil.  Chuir  e  'lamb  am  pòc'  a'  ghaisgich  mhairbh,
's  fhuair  e  tri  fiaclan  seann  eich  ann,  's,  leis  an  deifir,  ghabh  e'n  kite
fiaclan  an  righ  ad,  's  thug  e  leis  ad.  Chaidh  e  gu  torn  coille,  's
bhuain  e  gad,  's  cheanghail  e  air  an  Ikmh,  's  an  cridhe,  's  an  ceann.

"  Co'ca  's  fhèarr  leatsa  fan  tail  an  seo,  air  an  eilean  seo  leat  fhèin,
na  falbh  leansa,"  ors'  e  ris  an  lonmhuinn.

**  'S  fhèarr  leamsa  folbh  leat  fhèin,  na  le  fir  na  h-hir  tbalmhanta
gu  Mir,"  ors'  an  lonmhuinn.

Thog  e  leis  i  air  fras-mhullach  a  ghuailne  's  air  uallach  a  dhroma
's  ghabh  e  gus  an  teine.  Leum  e  thairis  'san  lonmhuinn  air  a  mhnin.
Faicidh  e  Ridire  'Chiiim  's  Ridire  'Chlaidhimh  a'  tighinn  'nachomh-
dhail,  's  boila's  buaireas  'nan 'sùilean.

**D4  'n  gaisgeach  mòr,"  ars'  àdsan,  *<a  bha  as  do  dheagbainn
an  siod,  's  a  thill  nur  a  chunnaic  e  ar  leithidnean  do  dha  gbaisgeach
a*  tighinn."


J


BIDIBE  NA  SGIATHA  DEIBGE.  46  I

"  Seo  doibhsè/'  ors'  esan,  ^'an  lonmhuinn  mhnatha  seo,  agos  tri
fiaclan  bhar  u-athar,  agos  ceann,  agus  làmh,  agus  cridhe  an  fhir  a
bhaail  an  dorn  air.  Deanaibh  fuireach  beag,  's  tillidh  miae,  's  cha  'n
'fhàg  mi  faigheall  sgeoil  anns  an  eilean.**

Ghabhfb  air  falbh  air  ais,  's  an  ceann  treis,  thug  e  sùil  as  a  dhèigh,
's  faicear  àdsan  agus  a*  Bhreacach  a'  deanadfafalach  caain  air.

**  Alarbh-phaisg  oirbh  fèin,"  ors*  esan ;  *'  sian  fala  ma'r  siiilean ;
manadli  'ur  crochaidh  oirbh !  m'  fhagail  an  eileau  learn  fh^in,  gun
duine  'shiol  Adhaimh  ann,  's  gun  fhios'am  a  nochd  d^  'ni  mL"

Ghabh  e  air  aghaidh  feadh  an  eilean,  's  cha  robh  e  'faicinn  taigh
na  thrais  an  kite  'sam  bith»  iseal  na  ard.  Ma  dheireadh  chunnaic  e
seana  chaisteal  an  iochar  an  eilean,  's  ghabh  e  a  'ionnsuidh.  Chunn-
aic e  tri  bganaich  a'  tighinn  gu  trom,  airtnealach,  sgith  thun  a*
chaisteil.  Labhair  e  dhaibh  ann  am  briathra  fisneacha,  foisneacha,
fiorghlic  fior<eolais.  Labhair  àdsan  an  comain  nam  briathra  ciadhna.
Thainig  ad  ann  am  briathra  seanachais  air  a  chèile ;  's  co  'bha  'seo
ach  a  ttiriuir  dhearbh  chomhdhaltan.  Ghabh  ad  a  staigh  an  deagh
thoil-inntinn  air  a'  mhòr-bhaile.

Thog  ad  ceòl  's  leag  ad  bròn

Bha  deochanna  mine,  meisgeach,

'6  deochanna  garga,  gachannach,

Beatbanna  saora,  socharach,

Eadar  e  fh^in  's  a  chomhdhaltan ;

Ceòl  eadar  fhidhlean  leis  an^caidleadh  fir  ghointe  's  mnathan

siublila ;
Searganaich  a'  sior  ghabhail  le  farum  a  chiuil  8ean>
A  bha  shiorrachd  gu  eàor-bhinn  an  oidhche  sean.

Ghaidh  ad  a  laidhe.  Anus  a*  mhaidinn  an  la'r  na  mhàireach  dU'
èiridh  e  ann  an  deagh  thoil-inntinn  's  ghabh  e  'bhiadh.  Dè  'chual  e
ach  gliogarsaich  arm  's  daoine  'dol  'nan  eideadh.  Co  'bha.  'so  ach  a
chomhdhaltan.

"  Ca'  bheil  sibh  a'  dol  ?  "  ars'  esan  riu.

"  Tha  sinn  0  cheann  la  a's  bliadhna  'san  eilean  seo,**  ors'  àdsan,
"  a'  cnmail  cogaidh  ri  Mac  Dorcha,  Mac  Doilleir,  's  ciad  sluaigh  aige,
's  a'  h-uile  h-aon  mharbh  as  sinn  an  diugh  bidh  e  beo  am  màireacb.
Tha  'gheasan  oimn  nach  fhaod  sinn  seo  fhagail  gu  bràch  gus  am
marbh  sinn  ad."

**  Th^id  mise  leibh  an  diugh ;  's  fhèairde  sibh  mi/'  ors'  esan.

**  Tha  'gheasan  oirnn,"  ors'  adsan^  "nach  fbaodduin'a  dhol  leinn,
mar  an  d'  thèid  e  ann  leis  fh^in."


462  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALEa

Fanadh  sibhse  staigh  an  dingh,  's  thèid  mis*  ann  learn  fh^,"  ors*
esan.

Thog  e  air  falbh  's  dh'  amais  e  air  slnagh  Mhic  Dorcha  Mhic
Doilleir,  's  cha  d'  fhkg  e  ceann  air  colainn  aca.  Dli'  amais  e  air
Mac  Dorcha  Mac  Doilleir  fhèìu,  's  thuirt  Mac  Dorcha  Mftc  Doilleir
ris,  "  An  tu  'seoa  Ghaisgich  na  Sgiatha  deirge."

"  'S  mi,"  orsa  Gaisgeach  na  Sgiatha  deirge.

"  Mata/*  orsa  Mac  Dorcha  Mac  Doilleir,  '*  cha  'n  fhada  sheasas
thu  dhomhsa.*'

An  caraibh  a  ch^ile  ghabh  ad,  's  bha  ad  a'  cruaidh  leadairt  a
chèile  gus  an  robh  beul  an  ath-dhath  's  an  anmoich  ann.  Mu  dheir-
eadh  thug  Ridire  na  Sgiatha  deirge  an  togail  bheag,  sbunndach,
shoilleir  nd  air  Mac  Dorcha  Mac  Doilleir,  's  chnir  e  foidhe  e,  'a  thilg
e  dheth  an  ceann.  Bha  *n  seo  Mac  Dorcha  Mac  Doilleir  marbh,
's  a  thri  niic  dheug,  's  oomhrag  ceud  air  IMmh  gach  fir  dhia.  Bha
eisean,  an  seo,  air  a  mhilleadh  *s  air  a  reabadh  cho  mòr  's  nach
V  nrrainn  e  *n  àrach  fhàgail,  's  cha  d*  rinn  e  ach  e  fh^in  a  leigeil
'na  laidhe  'meaag  nam  marbh  fad  an  latha.  Bha  tràigh  mhòr  fodha
gu  h-iseal;  *8  d^  'chual  e  ach  an  fhairge  'tighinn  'na  caora  teine
tein teach, — *na  nathair  bheumannach, — 'na  tarbh  truid.  Dh*  amhairc
e  uaidhe  's  de  chunnaic  e  'tighinn  air  tir  air  meudhon  na  tràgha  ach
cailleach  mhòr  fhiaclach  nach  facas  riabh  a  leithid.  Bha  'n  fhiacaill
a  b'  fhaide  'na  bata  'na  dorn,  's  an  tè  bn  ghiorra  'na  dealg  'n  h-uchd.

Ghabh  i  nios  gus  an  àraich,  's  bha  dithisd  eadar  i  agus  esan.
Cliuir  i  'meur  'nam  heal 's  thug  i  beo  ad,  's  dh'  èiridh  ad  suas  slàn
mur  a  b'  fhèarr  a  bha  ad  riabh.  Rainig  i  eisean,  's  chnir  i  'meur  'na
bheul,  agus  sgath  e  dhith  o'n  alt  i.  Bhuail  i  buille  de  bhàrr  a  cois'
air  agus  thilg  i  thar  seachd  iomairean  e.  ''A  bheadagain,"  ors'  ise,
"  's  tu  fear  ma  dheireadh  a  dh'  ath-bheothaicheas  mi  'san  èuraich  "

Ghrom  a'  chailleach  air  fear  eile  's  bha  eisean  an  taobh  shuas  dith.
Cha  robh  f  hios  aige  d4  mur  a  chuireadh  e  as  do  'u  chaillich.  Smaoint-
ich  e  air  an  t-sleagh  ghèarr  a  bh'  aig  a  mac  a  thilgeil  urra  'a  na  'n
tuiteadh  an  ceann  dith  gum  bu  mhath.  Thilg  e'n  t-sleagh  's  chuir
e'n  ceann  de  'n  chaillich.  Bha  e'n  seo  'na  shineadh  air  an  àraich ;
full,  a's  fèìthean,  a's  feoil  air  an  dochann,  ach  gun  robh  cnàmhan
fliàn  aige,    Vè  'mhotbaich  e  ach  craitire  ciuil  feadh  na  h-krach.

"  D^  'tha  thu  'g  iarraidh?"  ors'  e  ris  a'  chruitire.

'*  Tha  mi  cinnteach  gn  'bheil  n  sgith,"  ors'  an  craitire.

''Thig  a  nios  's  cuir  do  cheann  air  an  tulmsaig  seo,  's  dean
cadal."

Gbaidh  e  suas 's  laidh  e.  Tharminn  e  sieann  a*  leigeil  air  gu'n
robh  e  na  chadal.    Air  a  bhonn  a  bha  e  gu  brisg,  ealamb,  èaagmidb.


BIDIBE  NA  8GIATHA  DEIRGE.  '      463

"  Tha  thu  bruadar,"  ors'  an  cruitear  ris.

**  Tha,"  ors'  eisean.

**  D^  'chunnaic  thu  ?"  ors'  an  cruitear.

**  Cniitire  ciuil,"  ors'  eisean,  "a'  tarrainn  seana  chlaidheamh
meirgeacU  an  los  an  ceann  a  thoirt  diom."

Rug  e'n  seo  air  a'  chruitire  chiuil,  's  chuir  e'n  ionachainn  'na
cùibeanan  teine  trid  chtil  a  chinn.  Bha  e'n  seo  fo  gheasan  nach
marbhadh  e  cruitire  ciuil  gu  brathach  ach  le  a  chruit  fh^in.

Chuail  e,  'n  seo,  caoineadh  feadh  na  h-àraich.

"Co  siod?"  ors'  eisean.

**  Tha  'n  seo  do  thriuir  dhearbh-chomhdhaltan  ga  t'  iarraidh  o
kite  gn  h-kite  an  diugh,"  ors'  àdsan.

"  Tha  mise  am  shineadh  an  seo,"  ors'  eisean,  "  's  fuil,  a's  fèithean,
a's  cnàmhan  air  an  dochann."

*'  Na'm  biodh  againn  an  stbpan  ioc-shlaint  a  th'  aig  a  chaillich
mhòìr,  mkthhair  Mhic  Dorcha  Mhic  Doilleir  cha  b'  fhada  'bhltheam-
aid  gad'  leigheas,"  ors'  hdsan.

"  Tha  i  ih^in  marbh  shuas  an  sean,"  ors'  eisean,  **  's  cha  'n  'eil  ni
aice  nach  fhaod  sibh  fliaotainn."

**  Tha  sinne  as  a  geasan  gu  brathach,"  ors*  àdsan.

Thug  ad  a  nuas  an  stbpan  ioc-shlaint,  's  nigh  agus  dh'  fhailc  ad  e
leis  an  rud  a  bh'  anns'  an  stop.  Dh*  eiridh  e,  *n  scan,  suas  cho  slàn,
fallan  's  a  bha  e  riabh.  Chaidh  e  dachaidh  leo,  's  chuir  ad  an  oidhche
seachad  ann  an  deagh  thoil-inutinn.

Chaidh  ad  a  mach  an  la'r  na  mhàireach  ann  an  deogh  thoil-innt-
inn  a  dh'  ioroain.  Chaidh  eisean  ris  an  triuir,  's  chuireadh  e  leath-
bhàir,  8Ì0S,  's  leath-bhair  suas,  a  staigh  orra.  Mhothaich  ad  do
Mhacabh  mòr  Mhacaibh  an  Domhain  a*  tighinn  do'n  bhaile.  B'e  seo
an  dearbh-chomhdhalta.cuideachd.  Chaidh  ad  a  raach  far  an  robh
e  's  tbuirt  ad  ris.

**  Fhir  mo  ghaoil  seachainn  sinne  's  am  baile  an  diugh."

**  Gu-de  's  coireach  ?  "  ors'  eisean.

**  Tha  Gaisgeach  na  Sgiatha  deirge  staigh,  agus  's  tu  a  tha  e  *g
iarraidh,**  ors'  adsan.

**  Folbhadh  sibhse  dachaidh,  *s  abraibh  ris  falbh  agus  teicheadh,
air-neo  gu'n  d'  thoir  mis*  an  ceann  deth,"  orsa  Macabh  mòr  Mhacaibh
an  Domhain.

Gad  a  bha  seo  uaigneach  mhothaich  Gaisgeach  na  Sgiatha  deirge
dha,  's  chaidh  e  mach  air  an  taobh  eile  de  'n  taigh,  agus  bhuail  e
beum-sg^the,  agus  fad  comhraig.  Ghabh  an  gaisgeach  mbr  a  mach
as  a  dhèigh.    Thòisich  ad  air  a  chèile.


464.  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Cha  robh  cleas  a  dhèante  le  sgitbich  i^  le  sgothaich,

Na  le  disnein  ghillean-feall,

Na  le  organ  nam  manach,

Nach  dèanadh  na  gaisgich ;

Mar  a  bha  cleas  a'  chleiteam,  cleas  an  òigeam,

Ubhal  a'  chleasaiche  'ga  thilgeil  's  'ga  cheapail

An  uchdannaibh  a  cheil.

Gu  dèisinneach,  dàsonnacb,

Fuilteach,  cneadhacb,  creucbdanta.

Toil-inntinn  I  toil-eadraiginn !

Chuireadh  ad  trl  ditbeannan  dearga  teine  d'  an  armaibh

A  cailceadb,  d'  an  sgiathan,  fal'  agus  feòla

De  'n  cneas  agus  de  'n  caoimh-cbolainn,

'S  ad  a'  cruaidb  leadairt  a  cbèile.

*'  Nacb  amaideacb  tbosa  'Gbaisgich  na  Sgiatha  deirge,  nur  a  tha
tbu  'cumail  gleicbd  na  cmaidb  cbombraig  riumsa,^  arsa  Macabh
Mbacaibb  an  Dombain.

*'  De  mar  seo?"  orsa  Gaisgeacb  na  Sgiatba  deirge.

^*  Tba  nacb  'eil  gaisgeacb  anns  an  domban  mbòr  a  mbarbbas  mise
gas  am  boailear  ml  as  cionn  teacb  mo  tbriabbais,"  orsa  Macabh
mòr.

*'  A  bbaaidb  bbeannacbd  sean  dait  'ga  innseadb  dombsa  I  Na  *n
innseadb  ta  sean  domb  0  cbionn  fada,  *8  fbada  o'n  sgiiob  mi  'n  ceann
diot,"  orsa  Gaisgeacb  na  Sgiatba  deirge.

"  Tba  'n  sean  barracbd  *a  is  urrainn  tbu  'dbeanadb."

*'  Tba  tri  fiaclan  an  rigb  ann  a'm'  pboca,  's  feacb  an  tasa  bheir  as
ad,"  orsa  Macabb  mòr.

Nar  a  cbaala  Gaisgeacb  na  Sgiatba  deirge  ca'  'n  robh  bàs  Mbac-
abb  mbòir,  bba  da  bbaille  aige  air  a  thoirt  seacbad  ma  'n  bbuille,  da
sbàtbadb  ma  'n  c-sàthadb,  da  fbriocbdadb  ma*!!  fbriocbdadb,  's  bha
'n  treas  aon  anns  an  talamb,  gas  an  do  cblagbaicb  e  toll.  Leom  e'n
sean  an  coimbir  a  cbbil.  Leom  an  gaisgeacb  mbr  a  'ionnsnidh,  *s
cba  d'  tbug  e'n  aire  do'n  toll,  's  cbaidb  e  sios  ann  ga  teacb  an  tnubh-
ais.  Ràinig  eisean  air  an  seo,  's  tbilg  e  dbetb  an  ceann.  Chubr  e
'lamb  'na  pboca,  's  fbaair  e  tri  fiaclan  an  rigb  ann,  's  tbug  e  leis  ad,
agus  ràinìg  e'n  caisteal.

"  Deanaibb  saod  dombs'  air  an  eilean  seo  fbàgail,"  ore'  e  r'a
cbombdbaltan,  "  cbo  luatb  *s  is  urrainn  duibb."

*<  Cba  'n  'eil  saod  againn,"  ors'  àdsan,  *<  air  am  fag  thn  e ;  acb  fan
leinn  fbein  gu  bràcb,  's  cba  bbi  ditb  bitbidh  na  dibbe  ort."

**  Cba  bbi  'cbius  mar  sean ;  acb  mar  an  dean  sibb  saod  air  mo


BIDIBE  NA  SGIATHA  DEIRGE.  465

leigeil  air  falbh,  bheir  mi  na  tri  cinn  as  na  h-amhaichean   agaibh,"
on'  eisean.

"  Tha  curachan  a  bh'  aig  do  mhaime  's  aig  t'  oide  an  seo,  *s  cuiridh
sinn  leat  i  gus  an  d'  th^id  thu  air  tir  an  Eirinn.  An  taobh  a  chaireas
tvL  h-aghaidh  &lbhaidh  i  leat,  's  tlUidh  i  air  a  h-ais  a  rithisd  leatha
fhd*.  Tha  'n  seo  tri  chalmain  's  cumaidh  ad  airdeachd  riut  air  an
rathady"  ars'  a  chomhdhaltan  ris.

Ghuir  e'n  curachan  a  mach,  *s  shuidh  e  innte,  's  cha  d'  rinn  e  stad
na  fois  gas  an  deachaidh  e  air  tir  an  Eirinn.  Thionndaidh  e  'h-
aghaidh  a  mach,  's  ma  bha  i  loath  'tighinn,  bha  i  na  bu  Inaithe  till-
eadh.  Leig  e  air  folbh  na  tri  chalmain  a'  fàgail  na  h-eilthire.  Bha
doilichinn  air  gun  do  leig  e  air  falbh  ad  leis  cho  bòidheach  's  a  bha
'n  ceòl  a  bh'  aca.

Bha  abhainn  mhòr  eadar  e  agns  tigh  an  righ.  Nor  a  rkinig  e  'n
abhainn  chonnaic  e  duine  Hath  'tighinn  'na  dheann,  's  e  glaodhach,
**  A  dhuin'  uasail  fanaibh  thall,  gus  an  d'  thoir  mise  'nail  air  mo
mhuin  sibh,  ma'm  fliuch  sibh  sibh  p^in."

"  A  dhuine  bhochd,  's  cosail  gur  h-ann  a'd'  phortair  air  an  abh-
ainn a  tha  thu,"  ors'  eisean.

*'  *S  ann,"  ors'  an  seann  doine  Hath.

**  Agus  d^  'chuir  ann  thu  ?  "  orà^  eisean.

'*  Innsidh  mi  sean  duibh,"  ors'  an  seann  duine  Hath.

**  Bhuail  gaisgeach  mòr  dorn  air  righ  Eireann,  's  choir  e  tri  fiadan
as,  's  dh'  fhalbh  a  dha  mhac  a  thoirt  a  mach  dioghlaidh.  Dh'  fholbh
balachan  òg,  amaideach  a  bu  mhac  dhomhsa  leo,  's  nur  a  chaidh
àdsan  air  thapadh  chaidh  eisean  air  mhiapadh.  Bu  shuarrach  an
dioghaltas  leotha  mise  'chur  a'm'  phortair  air  an  abhainn  air  a  shon."

«  A  dhuine  bhochd,"  ors'  eisean,  **  cha  'n  athais  sean.  Ma'm  f  àg
mis'  am  baile  bidh  thusa  gu  math."

Bug  e  air,  's  thog  e  leis  e,  's  chuir  e  e  'na  shnidhe  anns  a'chathair
a  bha  ri  gualainn  an  righ  e.

<<Cha  'n  'eil  annad  ach  duine  miomh'ail  a  thàinig  a'n  bhaile.
Chuir  thu  'm  bodach  sin  'na  shuidhe  ri  gualainn  m'  athhar,  's  cha  'n
fhaigh  thu  leat  e,"  orsa  Ridire  Chhim,  's  e'g  ^ireachd  's  a'  breith  air.

'*  Air  mo  làimhsa,  's  air  mo  dha  làimh  a  'shaoradb,  gum  bu  cho
math  dhuit  breith  air  Cnoc  Leothaid  's  breith  ormsa,"  orsa  Gaisgeach
na  Sgiatha  deirge  ris  's  e  'ga  leagail  ris  an  talamh.

Chuir  e  ceanghal  nan  tri  chaoil  air  gu  daor  agus  gu  docair.
Bhuail  e  buiUe  de  bhkrr  a  chois'  air,  *s  thilg  e  thar  nan  seachd  sparr-
annan  a  b'  airde  'bha  's  a'  chuirt  e,  fo  shileadh  nan  lòchran  's  fo
chasan  nan  con  mora.  Binn  e  'leithid  eil  air  Bidire  Chlaidheimb  's
rinn  an  lonmhuinn  gàire.

VOL.  IL  2  H


466  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

*  «  Marbh^phaisg  ort  fh^,"  ors*  an  ligh  rithe,  ^  tha  ihu  o  cheaim
bliadhna  air  chomh-biadh,  air  chomh-deoch  rium,  's  cha  *n  fhaca  mi
gean  na  gàire  agad  ga  dheanadh  gas  am  bheil  mo  mhic  air  am  dms-
lachadh."

**  O  righ  I  **  ors*  ise,  "  tha  fios  mo  riasain  agam  fh^."

"6a  d^,  a  righ,  an  8ì;readaìl  's  an  »greuchail  a  tha  mi  'clnimitiiin
o  'n  a  thàinig  mi  'n  bhaile ;  cha  d'  fhnair  mi  fhaighneachd  gus  an
seo,"  arsa  Gaisgeach  na  Sgiatha  deirge.

"  Tha,  tri  fiadan  eich  aig  mo  mhic  'gan  sparrann  a'  m'  cheaim  o
cheann  bliadhna  le  ord,  gas  am  bheil  mo  cheann  air  dol  roimhe  chdile
le  brisdeadh  cridhe,  's  le  crkdh,  's  le  dòrmnn,"  ars'  an  righ.

^  Ga  d^  *bheireadh  thosa  do  dhoine  'choireadh  ann  a'd'  cheann
t'  fhiaclan  fh^in  gnn  neamh  gun  dbruinn,"  ors'  eisean.

**  Leith  mo  staid  fhad  's  a  bhithinn  beo,  's  mo  staid  air  fad  nor  a
dh*  fholbhainn,"  ors'  an  righ.  Dh'  iarr  e  cann'  uisge,  's  choir  e  na
fiaclan  anns  an  uisge.

**  01  deoch,"  ars'  e  ris  an  righ.

Dh'  Ò1  an  righ  deoch,  's  chaidh  fhiaclan  fh^in^'na  cheann,  ga
làidir  daingheann,  a  chearta  cho  math  *s  a  bha  ad  riabh,  's  a'  h-nile
t^  'na  h-àite  fh^in.  **  Aha,"  ars'  an  ligh,  "  tha  mis'  aig  socair.  'S
tasa  'rinn  an  tapadh,  's  cha  b'e  mo  chuid  macsa  I"

"'S  e,"  ors'  an  lonmhainn  ris  an  rìgh,  *<a  b'  orrain  an  tapadh  a
dheanadh,  's  cha  b'e  do  chaid  mac  leibideach-sa,  a  bhiodh  'nan
siaeadh  an  siiirra  feamann  nur  a  bhiodh  eisean  a'  dol  air  ghaisge."

'*  Cha  'n  ith  mi  biadh  's  cha  'n  bl  mi  deoch,"  ors'  an  righ,  **  gas
am  faic  mi  mo  dha  mhac  'gan  losgadh  am  m&ireach.  Cairidh  mi
feadhainn  a  dh'  iarraidh  cuallan  glas-daraich  airson  an  losgadh."

Anns  a'  mhaidinn  an  la'r  na  mhàireach  co  'ba  mhoiche  bh'  air
a  gbltin  aig  leabaidh  an  righ,  ach  gaisgeach  na  sgiatha  deirge.

.  "•  Eirich  as  an  sean  a  ghaisgich ;  de  'n  aon  ni  'bhiodh  ta  'g  iarr-
aidh  nach  faigheadh  tu?"  ors'  an  righ.

« 'Se  'n  rud  a  tha  mi  'g  iarraidh  do  dha  mhac  a  leigeil  air  folbh ;
cha  'n  arrainn  mi  'bhith  an  aon  àite  am  faic  mi  'gam  milleadh  ad,"
ors'  eisean ;  *'  b'  fhèarr  bearradh  eoin  agas  amadain  a  dheanadh  orra
*s  an  leigeil  air  folbh."

Thoilich  an  righ  siod  a  dheanadh.  Binneadh  bearradh,  eoin  ague
amadain  orra.  Chaireadh  a  mach  as  an  ìùt'  ad,  's  coin  a's  geocaich
baile-mhòir  as  an  d^igh.  Phòs  agas  chord  an  lonmhainn  agus  Gaisg-
each na  Sgiatha  deirge.  Rinneadh  banais  a  mhair  lath'  agus  bliadh-
na, 's  bha  'n  latlia  ma  dheireadh  dhi  cho  math  ris  a'  chiad  latha.

From  John  M'GilYray,  labourer,  Bail^  Baomainn,  Golonsaj,


THE  ENIOHT  OF  THE  BED  SHIELD.  467

aged  aeyenty-two  years.  Says  he  learnt  it  from  his  &ther,  Far*
quhar  M'Gilvray,  and  that  he  heard  him  tell  it  since  he  remem-
bers anything.

Farquhar  M'Gilvray,  his  &ther,  was  a  native  of  Mall,  and
there  learnt  this  tale  in  his  boyhood.  He  served  nine  years  in
the  army,  in  North  America,  and  subsequently  settled  in  Colon-
say.  He  died  near  about  forty  years  ago,  about  seventy-five
years  of  age.

BaUygrant,  Islay,  July  7,  1860.

I  was  uncertain  how  to  class  this  story — whether  to  consider
It  as  mock  heroic  or  a  romance — and  if  the  latter,  to  what  period
it  belongs.

The  island  with  fire  about  it  might  be  a  tradition  of  Iceland.
There  is  something  of  the  same  kind  in  the  V<^sxmg  tale,  as  given
in  the  introduction  to  Norse  Tales  ;  but  that  also  might  be  founded
on  the  wonders  of  Iceland  when  they  were  first  discovered.

The  language  of  the  story  is  a  good  example  of  the  way  in
which  these  tales  are  repeated  in  the  Highlands.  Words  all  but
synonymous,  and  beginning  with  the  same  letter,  or  one  like  it,
are  strung  together ;  there  are  strange  names  for  the  heroes,
roundabout  phrases  to  express  simple  ideas,  and  words  used
which  are  seldom  heard  in  conyersation,  and  which  are  hard  to
translate.

The  story  is  a  good  illastration  of  the  manner  in  which  such
popular  tales  are  preserved  by  tradition — ^how  they  change  and
decay.  Its  history  may  throw  some  light  on  the  subject ;  so  I
give  it.

The  first  incident  was  first  sent  to  me  by  my  kind  friend  Mrs*
MacTavish  from  Port  EUen,  in  Islay,  and  may  be  taken  to  re-
present that  portion  of  a  popular  tale  which  fixes  itself  in  the
minds  of  the  well  educated,  and  which  would  be  transferred  from
one  language  to  another.  It  is  the  beginning  of  Ursgeul  Bigh
Eilean  a  Bhacruidh,  and  is  thus  told : —

'*  This  king  was  out  hunting  with  a  number  of  attendants,
when  his  son  said,  *  Where  is  there  the  man  in  Ireland,  Scotland,
or  the  four  quarters  of  the  glebe  that  would  dare  strike  my  father
with  his  fist  in  the  midst  of  the  company  who  now  surround
him ;  *  or  in  Ghtelic,  '  Gaite  ain  bheil  am  fear  an  Erin  no  an


468  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Albaìn  no  an  eeUheir  ranna  ruadh  an  domhmn^  etc.  etc.  (the
words  translated  fowr  qitarters  of  the  globe  literally  mean  the
four  reddish  brown  diyisions  of  the  universe.  This  phrase,  there-
fore, in  translation  fits  itself  to  the  knowledge  of  the  person  who
nses  it,  and  loses  its  originality  in  the  new  language) .

*'  He  had  scarcely  uttered  these  words  when  a  dark  cloud
appeared  in  the  north,  and  a  rider  on  a  black  horse,  who  struck
the  king  with  his  fist,  and  knocked  out  one  of  his  front  teeth^
and  took  the  tooth  away  with  him.  The  king  was  downcast  at
the  loss  of  his  tooth,  when  his  son  said,  '  Let  it  cost  me  what  it
wUly  Imt  I  ìDÌU  not  rest  till  I  recover  your  lost  tooth  ;  *  or,  as  it  is
expressed  in  Gaelic,  *  Gha  d'  theid  ruith  as  mo  chois,  na  lodan,  as
mo  bhroig,  gas  am  faigh  me  t*  fhiacil '  (literally,  running  shall
not  go  out  of  my  foot,  nor  puddle  out  of  my  shoe,  till  I  get  thy
tooth).  Having  said  this  he  went  off  and  travelled  a  great
way."

So  here  again  the  original  is  better  than  the  translation.

The  incidents  which  follow  are  not  the  same  as  in  the  Knight
of  the  Red  Shield,  but  they  end  in  the  recovery  of  the  lost  tooth.
The  king^s  son  goes  to  three  houses,  where  he  finds  three  sisters,
each  of  whom  gives  him  a  pair  of  magic  shoes,  which  return  home
when  they  have  carried  him  seven  years'  journey  in  one  day.  The
last  sister  is  young  and  lovely ;  she  lowers  him  over  a  rock  in  a
basket  to  fight  her  brother,  who  is  a  giant  with  three  heads.  He
cuts  off  a  head  each  day ;  fires  a  pistol  shot  at  the  foot  of  the  rock
as  a  signal  to  be  hauled  up  each  evening,  for  this  giant  never  fought
after  sunset ;  he  is  cured  with  magic  balsam  by  the  lady  each-
night,  and  goes  out  fresh  each  morning.  The  giant's  third  head
leaps  on  as  often  as  it  is  cut  off,  but  an  eagle  comes  over  the
prince,  and  tells  him  to  hold  the  sword  on  the  neck  till  the  mar-
row freezes,  which  he  does,  and  the  giant  is  killed.  He  takes
his  spoil  from  a  castle,  finds  the  tooth  in  a  drawer,  returns  home
with  the  beautiful  lady,  and  marries  her.  ''And  the  festivities  on
the  occasion  continued  for  a  year  and  three  days,  and  they  lived
long  and  happily  together."

Two  of  the  teeth  and  two  of  the  adventurers  have  dropped
out  of  sight,  the  island  with  fire  about  it  is  exchanged  for  a  high
Tock,  and  the  magic  shoes,  which  are  so  common  in  all  popular
tales^  take  the  place  of  the  magic  boat.


THE  EKIQHT  OF  THE  BED  SHIELD.  469

The  story  then  in  this  form  is  wholly  different  irom  the  Knight
of  the  Red  Shield,  and  yet  its  groundwork  is  manifestly  the  same.
Incidents  remain,  and  style  and  accessories  change.

The  incident  of  the  king  on  the  hill  and  the  rider  in  the
shower  has  come  to  me  from  a  great  many  sources,  and  is  followed
hy  adventures  which  vary  with  every  narrator,  but  which  have  a
general  resemblance.

John  MacDonald,  travelling  tinker,  gives  the  incident  as  the
beginning  of  a  story  called  Loircean  na  luaith — Little  Shanks  in
the  Ashes,  which  was  written  down  by  elector  Urquhart.  It  is
very  like  the  Colonsay  version ;  but  instead  of  the  rider  on  the
black  horse —

"  One  looked  hither  and  one  thither,  and  they  saw  a  head
coming  in  a  flame  of  fire,  and  another  head  coming  singing  the
song  of  songs  (or  ?  St.  Oran).  A  fist  was  struck  on  the  door  of
the  mouth  of  the  king,  and  a  tooth  was  knocked  out  of  him,  and
there  was  no  button  of  gold  or  silver  on  the  coat  of  the  king  but
showered  off  him  with  the  shame.  The  head  did  this  three  years
after  each  other,  and  then  it  went  home.''

This  then  is  the  view  of  the  incident  taken  by  a  wild  harum*
scarum  strolling  character,  without  any  education  at  all,  but  with
a  great  deal  of  natural  wit ;  and  his  father,  aged  about  eighty,
told  me  a  story  with  the  incident  of  three  old  men  who  lived  on
separate  islands,  and  sent  a  wandering  hero  on  his  way,  with
what  I  then  took  to  be  currachd,  a  cap,  but  which  I  now  believe
to  be  CuBRACH  a  corracle,  which  did  the  same  as  the  magic  shoes.
Here  again  are  the  incidents,  but  told  in  a  different  manner.

The  remainder,  of  the  story  of  Loircean  is  nearly  the  same  as
the  Knight  of  the  Red  Shield,  but  with  great  variations.  The
king's  son,  who  is  a  knight,  ridere  ;  Cocaiicb  Claon  Ruadh,  a
red  skulled  cook ;  and  Shanks  in  the  Ashes  go  off  together,  and
play  the  part  of  the  king's  two  sons  and  the  son  of  the  Green
Spring.

They  climb  the  mast.  The  despised  one  succeeds.  The
voyage  is  there,  but  only  two  or  three  lines  of  the  descriptive
passage,  the  first  and  the  last.  "  They  set  her  prow  to  sea  and
her  stem  to  shore ;  and  she  would  split  a  grain  of  hard  com
with  the  excellence  of  the  steering."  Bat  while  much  is  left
out,  much  is  preserved  which  is  lost  elsewhere.


470  WEST  HIGHLAND  TAIiE&

"  When  Loircean  leHped  on  board  the  barge,  and  shook  the
ashes  off  him,  he  all  but  blinded  the  five  fifths  of  Eirinn,  and  there
fell  seven  bolls  of  ashes  on  the  floor  of  the  barge."

"  They  sailed  farther  than  1  can  tell  yen  or  you  can  tell  me."

** '  Oh,  lads,*  sidd  Loircean  (from  the  top  of  the  mast),  *  there
is  an  island  here  before,  and  it  is  in  a  red  blaze  of  fire.  It  is  not
in  our  power  to  go  nearer  to  it  than  seven  miles,  for  the  barge  wiU
go  on  fire  if  we  do ;  and  it  is  in  this  island  that  my  father's  teeth
are,  and  you  must  leap  on  shore.''

When  he  leaps  ou  shore.  "  Now,  lads,"  said  Loircean,  "  if
you  see  the  fire  growing  smaller  at  the  end  of  nine  days  and

nine  nights,  you  may  come  on  shore ;  but  if  you  do  no  see  it  *

And  saying  this  he  gave  a  dark  spring  (duileum)  on  shore,  and
every  handful  he  drove  out  was  scorching  those  who  were  in  the
ship."

And  then  follow  a  wholly  different  set  of  adventures  which  are
very  curious,  and  give  glimpses  of  forgotten  manners  with  the
same  characters  appearing.  The  fearful  old  woman,  with  the
marvellous  teeth  ;  the  gigantic  warriors,  of  whom  there  are  three
with  many  heads ;  and  three  lovely  ladies,  who  are  found  under
g^und,  and  carried  off  by  the  cowards.  The  story  ends  with  the
replacement  of  the  king's  lost  teeth,  and  the  punishment  of  the
knight  and  the  cook ;  and  Loircean  married  the  tiiree  ladies  at  once.

Again  the  veiy  same  incident  is  the  beginning  of  lullar  og
Armailteach  Mac  High  na  Greige,  Toung  Heavenly  Eagle,  Son  of
the  King  of  Greece,  which  was  sent  by  John  Dewar,  and  which
he  got,  in  Glendaruail,  from  J.  Leitch,  shoemaker,  in  1860,  and
in  1817  from  **  one  Duncan  Campbell  on  Lcchlong  side,  who  is
now  working  there  as  a  roadman."

The  three  adventurers  who  go  after  the  king's  two  teeth  and
and  a  hit  of  his  jaw  are  ubhab  athaibt  and  iullab,  and  they  go
through  a  vast  number  of  adventures  with  giants,  monsters,  and
magical  people  of  various  sorts,  which  are  also  very  curious.  But
still  they  set  off  in  a  boat,  and  for  the  same  reason.  TThe  descrip-
tive passage  of  the  voyage  is  there  in  nearly  the  same  words,  but
with  variations ;  two  are  cowards  ;  the  one  whom  they  despise  is
the  true  hero,  and  poetical  justice  is  done  at  the  end.  The  king's
teeth  are  restored  and  his  jaw  mended  ;  the  brave  lad  marriei  a
beautiful  Greek  lady  whom  he  has  rescued,  and  he  turns  out  to


THE  KNIGHT  OP  THE  RED  StilELD.  47  I

be  the  king's  only  legitimate  son,  and  lie  gets  the  kingdom,  while
the  others  are  degraded — one  to  be  a  swineherd  and  the  other  a
groom.

It  is  clearly  the  same  stoiy,  bat  a  different  part  of  it ;  except
the  sailing  passage,  which  is  almost  identical,  it  is  told  in  different
words.  The  names  are  all  different,  the  scene  is  different,  the
adventures  are  different,  but  yet  it  is  a  remnant  of  the  same  story
without  doubt.

John  Mackenzie,  fisherman,  near  Inveraiy,  repeated  another
story  to  Hector  Urquhart,  in  which  the  plot  is  much  the  same,  in
which  a  bit  of  the  sailing  passage  occurs,  in  which  the  three  ad-
venturers are  Iullin,  Iuar,  and  Abst,  sons  of  the  king  of  Greece,
and  their  object  the  possession  of  the  daughter  of  the  king  under
the  waves.  The  adventures  which  follow  are  again  different,  but
like  the  iiest,  and  they  link  the-  story  to  another  set  of  adventures,
which  generally  belong  to  the  story  of  "  Nighean  Righ  Fuidh
Thuim," — adventures  and  et^loits  some  of  which  are  attributed
to  f^onn  and  Ossian  and  Conan  in  Mr.  Simpson's  book  of  Irish
stories.

Many  other  versions  of  the  story  have  been  sent,  or  told,  or
mentioned  to  me.  A  gentleman  in  South  XTist  repeated  some  of
the  descriptive  passages  with  variations,  and  said  he  remembered
a  man  who  came  td  his  native  island,  Tyree,  and  who  used  to  re-
peat the  story  to  admiring  audiences,  about  thirty  years  ago.
Old  Donald  MacPhie,  at  the  sound  of  Benbecula,  repeated  part  of
the  descriptive  passages,  and  gave  me  the  outline  of  a  very  simi-
lar story.  On  repeating  the  boat  passage  to  a  native  of  Cantyre
whom  I  found  as  assistant  light-keeper  at  the  point  of  Ayre,  in
the  Isle  of  Man.  He  first  stared  in  dumb  astonishment  at  the
unexpected  sound  of  his  own  language  ;  and  then  exclaimed —
*'  Well,  I  have  heard  those  very  words  said  by  my  father  when  Ì
was  a  child !  '^  In  short,  the  incidents  and  the  measured  prose
passages  with  which  they  are  garnished  are  scattered  in  frag-
ments over  the  whole  West  Highlands  of  Scotland,  and  the  less
instructed  the  narrator  the  more  quaint  and  complete  his  ver«
sion  is.

The  conclusion  seems  unavoidable  that  these  are  the  fragments
of  some  old  romance  traditionally  preserved,  and  rapidly  fading
away  before  the  lights  of  modem  times.


47^  "TOST  HIGHLAND  TALBB,

If  further  evideDce  were  reqaired  it  is  not  wanting.  The
very  words  of  the  boat  pftfeisage,  and  a  great  deal  that  is  not  in
any  version  of  it  wbich  I  have  got,  is  in  th«  "  Fragment  of  a  Tale,
page  17th,"  lent  me  by  my  friend  Mr.  Bain,  and  referred  to  in
the  Introduction.  It  proves  that  the  passage  was  in  existence
about  the  beginning  of  this  century  at  all  events,  and  that  it  was
then  thought  worthy  of  preservation.

There  lire  many  other  similar  passages  in  the  manuscript  tale
of  which  I  have  found  no  trace  hitherto  amongst  the  people,  and
which  have  probably  died  out  with  the  old  race,  or  emigrated  with
^em  to  America.

I  have  been  permitted  to  have  access  to  other  manuscripts
belonging  to  the  Highland  Society.  They  are  nearly  all  poetry
One  is  marked  MS.  poems  collected  in  the  Western  Highlands
and  Islands  by  Dr.  John  Smith ;  and  from  it  I  copy  this

"  Advertisement.

"  The  following  poems  being  compiled  from  various  editions
"  will  often  appear  inelegant  and  abrupt,  it  being  sometimes
**  necessary  to  take  half  a  stanza  or  perhaps  half  a  line  from  one,
"  to  join  to  as  much  of  another  edition.

*'  In  order  to  complete  the  sense,  and  to  supply  many  defects
*'  in  the  versification,  recourse  has  frequently  been  had  to  the  tales
**  or  ursgeuU  which  generally  accompany  the  poems.  As  these
''  tales,  although  they  have  the  appearance  of  prose,  were  com-
''  posed  in  a  particular  kind  of  measure,  they  are  set  down  in  the
*'  form  of  verse,  but  without  any  alteration  in  the  arrangement  of
"  the  words.  This,  it  was  thought,  would  give  the  work  a  more
*'  uniform  appearance  than  if  it  had  been  a  mixture  of  prose  and
"  verse,  as  one  is  apt  to  suppose  it  on  hearing  some  parts  of  it  re-
"  peated.

*'  As  these  pieces  were,  for  the  most  part,  taken  down  from
"  oral  recitation,  frequent  mistakes  may  have  been  made  in  the
"  proper  division  of  the  lines,  and  in  the  assigning  of  its  due  quan-
"  tity  to  each.  A  matter  to  which  the  poets  themselves  do  not
"  always  seem  to  have  been  very  attentive,  their  measure  often
•"  varying  as  their  subject  changes.

**  As  those  who  recited  ancient  poems  took  frequently  the


THE  KNIGHT  OF  THE  BED  BHIELD.       473

«

"  liberty  of  sabstitating  such  words  as  they  were  best  ttcqnainted
**  with,  in  room  of  such  as  were  foreign  or  obsolete,  a  few  words
"  that  may  perhaps  be  considered  as  modem  or  provincial  may
"  occur  in  .the  course  of  these  compositions.  To  expunge  these
*'  words,  when  none  of  the  editions  in  the  editor's  hands  supplied
"  him  with  better,  was  a  task  which  he  did  not  consider  as  any
"  part  of  his  province.  He  hopes  that,  with  all  Iheir  imperfeo^
'*  tions,  the  poems  have  still  so  much  merit  as  to  give  the  reader
"  some  idea  of  what  they  had  once  been.  We  have  only  the
"  fragments  of  the  ruin,  but  they  may  serve  to  give  an  idea  of  the
"  grandeur  of  the  edifice.".

ThÌ0  then  is  the  statement  of  the  collector's  plan  of  action.

The  following  note  shews  the  spirit  in  which  the  best  of  them
worked  in  these  days.  I  think  it  was  a  mistaken  spirit  that
caused  the  Ossianic  controversy,  and  threw  discredit  on  Highland
literature.  Still,  as  it  is  openly  and  fairly  stated,  it  is  fair  to  be-
lieve what  is  asserted  by  a  gentleman  and  a  clergyman,  and  for  my
part  1  implicitly  believe  that  Dr.  Smith  of  Campbeltown  really
did  what  he  tells  us,  and  that  these  poems  are  what  they  purport
to  be, — ^patched  versions  of  oral  recitations,  with  portions  left  out.

"DiABMAiD.  —  This  poem  is  generally  interlarded  with  so
*'  much  of  the  ursgeuls  or  later  tales  as  to  render  the  most  common
*'  editions  of  it  absurd  and  extravagant.  But  the  fabulous  dross  of
'*  the  fifteenth  century  is  easily  separated  from  the  more  precious
"  ore  of  the  ancient  bards."

Of  part  of  this  same  story  of  Diarmaid,  Mrs.  MacTavish
writes  in  1859 : —

"A  dan  or  song  which  I  heard  an  old  ploughman  of  my
father's  sing  very  near  sixty  years  since.  He  had  a  great  collec-
tion of  tales  and  songs,  and  often  have  I  stood  or  sat  by  him  in
winter  when  kiln-drying  com,  or  in  summer  when  building  a  peat
stack,  listening  to  what  was  to  me  so  fascinating  in  those  days.
And  then  follows  the  story  of  how  Diarmaid  was  killed  by  pacing
bare-footed  against  the  bristles  of  a  boar  which  he  had  killed,  and
the  lament  of  Diarmaid's  love,  and  the  music  to  which  it  used  to
be  sung ;  and  this  same  story  of  Diarmaid  and  the  boar  was  sung
to  me  by  Alexander  MacDonald  in  Barra,  in  September  1860,
together  with  other  long  Gaelic  poems.    And  whatever  may  be


474  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

said  or  thoaght  of  MacP1ierson*s  collection,  this  at  least    is
genuine  old  poetry,  and  still  known  to  many  in  the  Highlands.

The  story,  then,  of  the  Knight  of  the  Red  Shield,  or  whatever
its  real  name  may  he,  seems  to  be  one  of  1;he  tales  which  were  de-
spised by  the  collectors  of  former  days,  and  which  hare  survived,
many  of  the  poems  which  were  fading  away  about  eighty  years
ago,  and  which  are  now  very  nearly  but  not  quite  extinct.

Hector  MacLean  sent  me  first  a  version  which  he  got  from  an
Islay  man,  Alexander  Campbell,  farmer  at  Mulreas.  He  named
his  authority,  "  an  old  man  still  living  in  Colonsay,  who  fre-
quently comes  to  Islay,  and  is  welcome  for  the  tales  he  recites/*

The  old  man  did  come,  and  his  version  of  the  story  being
more  complete,  is  given,  though  Campbell's  version  was  the  same
shortened.  It  is  said  that  it  was  written  down  by  desire  of  the
late  Captain  Stewart  of  Colonsay,  and  that  it  was  noticed
amongst  his  papers  after  his  death.

I  might  have  tried  to  reconstruct  this  tale  from  the  materials
which  I  have,  but  I  have  given  without  alteration  the  best  version
which  came  to  me.  I  may  some  day  try  to  fuse  what  I  have  into
a  whole ;  at  all  events,  here  is  the  clew  for  any  other  who  may
be  disposed  to  work  out  the  subject,  and  the  best  account  I  can
give  of  the  story.

"  Bearradh  EOiK  AGUS  AMADAiN."  Thls  pbraso  is  explained
to  mean  clipping  the  hair  and  beard  off  one  side  of  the  head.
The  idea  is  taken  from  clipping  one  wing  of  a  bird,  and  the  punish-
ment was  probably  inflicted  at  some  period,  for  the  phrase  occurs
several  times  in  Gaelic  tales.

Another  phrase,  which  occurs  in  this  and  other  stories,  probably
gives  a  true  picture  of  the  hall  of  a  chief  in  former  days.  A  feian
is  said  to  be  bound  with  the  binding  of  the  three  smalls  (wrists,
ancles,  and  small  of  the  back),  and  cast  under  the  board,  under
the  dripping  of  torches,  and  the  feet  of  big  dogs,  and  there  was
not  one  in  the  company  but  cast  a  bone  at  him  as  he  lay,  and  the
wicked  knight  is  kicked  over  the  rafters.  The  hall  meant,  then,
would  seem  to  have  been  a  large  room  without  a  ceiling,  full  of
men  and  big  dogs,  and  lighted  with  dripping  torches ;  the  scene
of  feasts,  which  consisted  of  flesh  rather  than  potatoes ;  while  the
prisoners,  bound  hand  and  foot,  lay  on  the  floor.

In  this,  as  in  the  great  majority  of  Gaelic  stories,  the  scene


THE  KNIGHT  OF  THE  BED  SHIELD.       475

is  laid  in  Ireland,'  but  it  seems  probable  that  the  cnstoms  of  the
Western  Isles  of  Scotland  and  of  Ireland  were  once  nearly
identical.

A  version  of  this  story,  under  the  name  of  **  The  Son  of  the
Green  Spring  by  Valour,"  was  repeated  to  me  by  an  old  man,
Alexander  MacNeill,  in  Barra,  on  the  10th  of  September  1860.

The  story  contained  less  of  the  measured  prose,  and  more  inci-
dent than  the  Colonsay  version.  The  hero  is  represented  as
sitting  with  his  feet  in  the  ashes,  like  "  Boots  "  of  the  Norse  Tales.
He  is  the  son  of  the  Bed  Bidere,  and  goes  o£f  in  the  boat  with
the  king's  two  sons  to  recover  the  king's  teeth.  When  the  feat
of  climbing  the  mast  occurs,  he  runs  up  **  faster  than  a  mad
woman's  tongue.'"  He  has  clach  bhuatdh,  a  stone  of  victory,
with  which  he  slays  his  foes.  There  is  the  magic  island  with  fir6
about  it,  the  lady  and  the  sleeping  warrior;  he  is  left  by  the  king's
sons,  goes  to  a  small  house  where  he  finds  no  man,  but  food  for
three — wine  and  wheaten  loaves.  He  takes  a  little  from  each
portion,  like  the  hero  of  many  popular  tales  in  many  languages,
and  gets  into  one  of  three  beds.  Three  sorely  wounded  men
come  in,  and  cure  themselves  with  magic  balsam,  and  discover
him,  and  on  the  morrow  he  goes  to  fight  for  them.  These  warriors
are  enchanted  princes,  the  rightful  heirs  of  this  fiery  island,  com-
pelled for  twenty  years  to  contend  daily  with  armies,  and  giants,
and  monsters.  They  have  lost  their  mother,  and  some  one  has
stolen  their  sister,  who  turns  out  to  be  the  lady  whom  the  hero
had  already  rescued.  They  tell  him  what  he  will  have  to  en-
counter, bat  he  goes  on  and  overcomes  everything,  and  his  coming
had  been  foretold.  Armies  of  enchanted  warriors  fall,  six  hun-
dred full  heroes ;  three  giants  with  several  heads  ;  "  tri  cruitairean
na  cruite  bige,*'  the  three  harpers  of  the  little  harps,  who  could
set  the  whole  world  asleep ;  the  son  of  darkness,  son  of  dimness  ;
and  a  terrible  old  carlin,  who  as  usual  was  the  worst  of  all.

He  takes  a  warrior  by  the  legs  and  kills  the  others  with  his
head  ;  he  drives  his  victory  stone  through  the  heads  of  the  giants,
and  of  MacDorcfaa  MacBoilleir.  When  the  harpers  come,  he
gnaws  his  fingers  till. his  moul^  is  iiill  of  blood,  to  keep  him.self
awake,  and  at  last  he  kills  the  magic  harpers  with  their  own
harps.  When  the  old  carlin  arrives  she  comes  over  the  sea  with
a  magic  cup  to  revive  her  dead  warriors,  and  her  sons ;  she  puts


47  6  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

her  finger  into  his  moath  and  he  bites  it  ofif.  She  has  a  tooth  for
a  staff)  and  a  tooth  as,  hrod  griosaoh,  a  poker,  one  eye  in  the
midst  of  her  face,  one  leg ;  and  her  heart,  her  liver,  and  her
langs  could  be  seen  through  her  moutlS  when  it  was  opened.
She  is,  in  short,  the  same  mythical  carlin  who  so  often  appears,
on  whom  the  tellers  of  stories  expend  their  powers  in  descrìbÌDg
all  that  is  hideous  and  monstrous.  The  hero  cuts  her  head  off,
it  leaps  on  again,  he  cuts  it  ofif  again,  and  it  flies  up  into  the
skies ;  he  holds  the  sword  on  the  neck,  and  looks  up,  and  sees
the  head  coming  down  and  aiming  at  him ;  he  leaps  to  one  side,
and  the  head  goes  four  feet  into  the  earth,  and  the  victory  is
gained.  The  three  warriors  carry  him  home  and  bathe  him  in
balsam,  and  he  recovers.  He  raises  their  fathei^and  mother  from
the  dead,  and  they  promise  him  their  daughter  and  realm.  He
gets  a  brown  mare,  recovers  the  king's  teeth,  returns  to  Ireland
with  a  magic  shoe,  rides  into  the  hall,  presents  the  magic  cup
with  the  teeth  in  it  to  the  king,  saying  "  I  have  travelled  Christen-
dom with  my  brown  mare,  and  I  have  found  out  the  king's  teeth."
He  looses  his  father,  the  Eed  Knight,  in  whose  stead  he  had  set
off,  ties  the  knights  to  his  shoe-ties  and  marries  the  fair  lady,
who  is  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  the  town  under  the  waves.

In  short,  it  is  manifest  that  this  Gaelic  story,  now  told  by  the
poorest  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  western  coasts  and  isles  of  Scot-
land, and  very  widely  spread,  is  the  ruin  of  some  old  romance^
similar  to  those  of  the  middle  ages.

It  is  surely  worth  attention,  though  it  is  not  strictly  "  true."
Certain  persons,  in  a  place  which  I  abstain  from  naming^  were
80  zealous  in  the  cause  of  "  truth,"  that  they  assured  a  simple  old
man  whi)  had  repeated  a  number  of  stories  to  one  of  my  collectors,
that  ha  would  have  to  substantiate  every  word  he  had  uttered,  or
suffer  punishment  for  telling  falsehoods^  I  found  him  in  great
perturbation,  eiyidently.  expecting  that  1  had  arrived  for  the  pur-
pose of  calling  him  to  account,  and  I  had  some  trouble  in  setting
his  mind  at  rest.  He  repeatedly  assured  me'  that  he  only  told
what  others  had  told  him.  In  this  instance,  fts  it  seems  to  mei
*' truth"  might  well  say,  "keep  me  from  my  friends."


477


LVII.
.  THE   TAIL.

Told  about  thirty  years  ago  by  John  Campbell,  piper  to  his  papil»

J.  F.  Campbell.

T^HERE  was  a  shepherd  once  who  went  out  to  the
-^  hill  to  look  after  his  sheep.  It  was  misty  and
cold,  and  he  had  much  trouble  to  find  them.  At  last
he  had  them  all  but  one ;  and  after  much  searching  he
found  that  one  too  in  a  peat  hag  half  drowned ;  so  he
took  off  his  plaid,  and  bent  down  and  took  hold  of  the
sheep's  taQ,  and  he  pulled !  The  sheep  was  heavy
with  water,  and  he  could  not  lift  her,  so  he  took  off
his  coat  and  he  pulled  1 1  but  it  was  too  much  for  him,
so  he  spit  on  his  hands,  and  took  a  good  hold  of  the
tail  and  he  pulled  !  !  and  the  tail  broke  !  and  if  it  had
not  been  for  that  this  tale  would  have  been  a  great
deal  longer.

This  may  be  compared  with  Grimm's  Golden  Key.  I  bave
not  given  it  in  Gaelic,  because,  so  far  as  I  remember,  tbe  story
was  never  told  twice  in  tbe  same  words  ;  and  it  can  be  told  cpiite
as  well  in  any  language.  It  is  very  well  known  in  many  districts
in  various  shapes.^    I  have  a  second  veraioii,  wbicb  is  called —

2.  Ursgeal  a'  Gbambna  dbuinn,  an  aill  leibb  as  a  tboiseacb  e,
The  tale  of  the  Brown  Stirk.  Dp  you  wish  from  the  beginning  ?
It  has  nothing  but  a  beginning ;  for  the  stirk  fell  over  a  rock
and  left  his  tail  in  the  herdsman's  hands ;  and  the  story  comes
to  an  untimely  end  with  the  Gaelic  proverbial  phrase — ^had  the


47^  WSST  HIGHLAKD  TALES.

tail  been  tougher  the  story  had  been  longer.    Na  *h  biodh  ak

T-URBALL  NA  BU  BTTISHNE  BHIODH  AN  T-UBSGEUL  NA  B^  FHAIDE.

3.  According  to  a  Skye  version,  a  man  put  the  stirk  on  a
bouse  top  to  eat  a  tuft  of  grass ;  the  beast  fell  down  the  chimney,
and  the  rapture  of  the  tail  was

FINIS.


t

4


PRINTED   BY  R,   AJtD  R.   CLARK,    BDIRBUROH.
