Popular Tales of the West Highlands, Vol. I (J. F. Campbell, 1860; public domain)
===============================================================================
Vol. I of the great Scottish Gaelic folklore collection, orally gathered in the Highlands — selkie and sea-maiden tales. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/populartalesofwe09camp).



POPULAR  TALES

OP

THE  WEST  HIGHLANDS.

^^^2:33;;      '^C[^  Cj^y  .J>SL^


PRINTED    BY    P..  &  R.   CLARK

FOB

BDMONSTON    AND    DOUGLAS,  EDINBURGH.


LONDON     .      .  HAMILTON,   ADAMS,    &   CO.

CAMBRIDGE   .  MACMILLAN   &   CO.

DUBLIN      .     .  W.   ROBERTSON.

GLASGOW.      .  JAMES  MACLEHOSE.


POPULAE  TALES


THE  WEST  HIGHLANDS


OEALLY    COLLECTED


Wiiih  a  cTranslatioit


By  J.   F.   CAMPBELL.


VOL.  I.


EDIXBURGH:

EDMONSTOX  AND  DOUGLAS.

1860.


Do

Iaix  Mac  Sheorais

Mac  Callex  Mok

MARQUESS    OF    LOENE.

My  Dear  IìOrne,

I  dedicate  this  collection  of  West  Country
Stories  to  yon  as  the  son  of  my  Chief,  in  the  hope  that  it
may  add  to  the  interest  which  yon  abeady  feel  in  a  people,
of  whom  a  large  nnmber  look  with  respect  on  "  Mac  Callen
Mor  "  as  the  head  of  their  tribe.  I  know  that  the  poorest
Highlanders  stiU  feel  an  honest  pride  whenever  their  chiefs,
or  men  of  their  name,  earn  distinction  ;  and  many  of
"  Clan  Dhiarmaid  "  take  a  warm  interest  in  you.

Amidst  curious  rubbish  you  will  find  sound  sense  if
you  look  for  it.  You  will  find  the  creed  of  the  people,
as  shewn  in  their  stories,  to  be,  that  wisdom  and  courage,
though  weak,  maj'  overcome  strength,  and  ignorance,  and
pride  :  that  the  most  despised  is  often  the  most  worthy  ;
that  small  beginnings  lead  to  great  residts.

You  will  find  perseverance,  fi'ugality,  and  filial  piety
rewarded  ;  pride,  greed,  and  laziness  punished.     You  will


VI  DEDICATION.

find  much.  AvMcli  tolls  of  barbarous  times ;  I  hope  you  i\-ill
meet  nothing  that  can  hurt,  or  should  offend.

If  you  follow  any  study,  even  that  of  a  popular  tale,
far  enough,  it  A\all  lead  you  to  a  closed  door,  beyond
which  you  cannot  pass  till  you  have  searched  and  found
the  key,  and  every  study  will  lead  the  ^^isest  to  a  fast
locked  door  at  last ;  but  knowledge  lies  beyond  these  dooi-s,
and  one  key  may  open  the  way  to  many  a  .store  which  can
be  reached,  and  may  be  turned  to  evil  or  to  good.

That  you  may  go  on  acquiring  knowledge,  selecting
the  good,  and  rejecting  the  evil  ;  that  you,  like  Conal  in
the  story,  may  gather  gold,  and  escape  unlianned  from  the
giant's  land,  is  the  earnest  wish  of  your  affecti(.)nate
kinsman,

J.  F.  CA^IPBELL.

Septkmber  18G0.


CONTENTS.


I.  THE  YOUNG  KIXG  OF  EAS-
AIDH  RUADH.
Gaelic

2.  The   Tale  of  the  Widow's   Son.

Abstract.
Notes

3.  An  Tuairisgeul  Mòr.     Abstract
Notes  and  references

II.  THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  BIRDS.
Gaelic

2.  The  Widow's  Son.     Abstract  ...

3.  The  Wren.     Abstract

4.  Reference

5.  Reference

6.  Abstract

7.  Uirsgeul.     Abstract

8    Nighean   Dubh   Gheal   Dearg.

Abstract.
Notes  and  references

HI.  THE  TALE  OF  THE  HOODIE

Gaelic

2.  Referred  to

Notes  and  references

IV.  THE  SEA-MAIDIiN

Gaelic

2.  A  Mhaighdean  Mhara.    Abstract

3.  Gille  Carrach  Dubh.    Abstract...

4.  The  Smith's  Son.     Abstract

5.  The  Fisher.     Reference

6.  The  Grey  Lad.     Reference

Notes  and  references

V.  CONALL  CRA  BHUIDHE

Gaelic

VL  CONAL  CROVI

Gaelic

VII.  THE  TALE  OF  CONNAL

Gaelic


James  Wilson,  blind  fiddler

John  Campbell,  sawyer

Donald  MacPhie,  crofter    ...

John  ]SIackenzie,^shcrman

Ann  Darroch

John  MacGibbon,  stable  boy

"  Old  Woman,"  pauper

"Old  Man,"

Donald  MacCraw,  drovpr,etc.

John  Dewar,  labourer

Roderick  JIackcnzie,  sawyer

Ann  MacGilvray

John  Dewar

John  Mackenzie,  fisherman

Donald  MacPhie,  fisherman

John  MacGibbon,  farm  ser-
vant, etc

B.  Macaskill

A.  IMacNeill,  fisherman

John  Smith,  labourer

James  Wilson,  blind  fiddler

Neill  Gillies,  fisherman

Kenneth  MacLennan


Date.

June  9, 1859

June  27,  1859

July"Ì859

April  1859

June  1859
April  23,  1859


Sept.  2, 1859

Oct.  28,  1859

July  1859


AprU  1859


April  1859


Place.


Islay,  Arg3'll

Strath  Gairloch,  Ross  ,
South  Uist


Near  Inverarv


Islay

Inverary

Dalnially

Sutherland

South  Uist

Glendaruail,  Argyll....
Strath  Gairloch,  Ross  .


Islay

Glendaruail


Near  Inverarv


Sept.  2, 1859    i  South  Uist.,

and  1860
April  23,1859


Aug.  1859
Do!


June  1859
May  27, 1859
June  27,  1859


Inverary    .

Bemeray    .
Barra

South  Uist.


Islav


Pool  Ewe


Collector.

Hector  MacLean  ...

Hector  Urquhart  ...

Hector  MacLean  ...

Hector  Urquhart    ...

Hector  MacLean   ...
J.  F.  C

C.  D.  &  Schoolmaster

J.  F.  C

John  Dewar

Hector  Urquhart   ...


Hector  MacLean    ...

John  Dewar

Hector  Urquhart    ...

J.  F.  C

J.  F.  C

Hector  MacLean   ...
Do.
Do.

Do.
Do.

lector  Urquhart    ...

Hector  Urquhart   ...

CONTEXTS.


4.  Uisdean  Mor.    Abstract

5.  An  Gadaiche  Dubh.    Reference.
Notes  and  references


VIII.  MURCIIAG  A  'S  MIONACHAG

Kotes

Gaelic


IX.  THE  BROWN  BEAR  OF  THE
GREEX  GLEN.

Gaelic

Notes


THE  THREE  SOLDIERS.

Gaelic

2d  Version

3d    Do

4th  Do

Notes,  etc

Am  Bochd  Ruagh


XI.  THE  WHITE  PET

Gaelic

Notes,  etc


THE    DAUGHTER    OF    THE
SKIES.

Gaelic

Notes,  etc


XIII.  THE  GIRL  AND  THE   DEAD

MAN.

Gaelic

Notes,  etc

XIV.  THE  KING  WHO  WISHED  TO

MARRY  HIS  DAUGHTER.

Gaelic

2d  Morag  a  Cliota  Bhain

Notes,  references,  etc

XV.  THE    POOR    BROTHER    AND
THE  RICH.

Gaelic

Notes


Alexander  M'Donald

Alex.  MacNeill,  fisherman


Many  narrators


John  MacDonald,  travelling
tinker.


James  MacLachlan,  servant

Hector  Mackenzie

Hector  Boyd,  fisherman

Kenneth  Mackenzie

"A  Woman"

Campbell,  a  servant  maid  ...


James  MacLauchlan,  servant

Ann  Darroch

Ann  Darroch

Donald  MacCraw,  drover  ...
Flora  IMacIntyre


Date.

Place.

Collector.

Page

Do.

Aug.  1859

April  1859

Inverasdale,  Ross..

Mr.  T.  Cameron

Hector  MacLeau    ...

Hector  MacLean    ...

152
153
153

157

Many  districts

160
161

May  1859

No  where  in  particular   ...

Hector  Urqnhart    ...

...

164

170
174

July  1859
June  1859

Jun'elSCO

Nov.  1859

Islay

Dibaiff,  Gairloch

Hector  MacLean   ...

Angus  SlacRae

Hector  MacLean    ...
Hector  Urquhart    ...

Hector  MacLean    ...

Mrs.  MacTavish     ...

176
183
188
189
191
191
192

194
197
199

Ross-shire

Islay  '.'.'.

Port  Ellen,  Islav

May  1859

Islay

Hector  MacLean   ...

202

208
211

Do.

Islay

Do.

213

215

217

Do,

Islay

Do.

219

Sept'."  1859

North  Uist..'.'.'

J.  F.  C.  '.'."

222
225
226

May  1859

Islav

Hector  MacLean    ...

230

233
235

NAME.

Told  by

XVI.  THE  KING  OF  LOCHLANN'S
THREE  DAUGHTERS.
Gaelic

NeiU  GiUies,  fishermau

Ann  MacGilvray       .         .  .

Notes,  etc

X^VII    MAOL  A  CHLIOBAIN

2d

3d  Maola  Bhoibean

4th  Maul  a  Mhoibeau

Johu  Crawfort,  fisherman  ...

XVIIa    FABLES,  etc

XVIIi.  BAILLIE  LUNNAIN

XVI  Ic.  THE     SLIM     SWARTHY
CHAMPION.
Qaeljc

James  Wilson,  blind-fiddler

John  Campbell,  crofter

fj.  Dewar  and

Gaelic

\j.  Macnair,  shoemaker  ...

Date.

Place.

Collector.

rage

May  27,  1859

April  1859

June  16,  1859
April  25, 1859
Feb.  2,  1860

1859  and  1860

Aug.  1859, 1860
1859

1859

1859
June  1860.

Inverary

Do.

Do.
J  F  C

236

243
249

251
256
259
260

Kilmeny,  Islay

Do.

Arrochar

John  Dewar

260

J.  F.  C >

Mr.  Donald  TorrieJ

Hector  Maclean

A  Schoolmaster

267
281
289

300
308

320
338

Benbecula

Islay

Strath  Gearloch

Clachaig,  Dunoon    j

ERRATA.


Pagexxv-i,  line    '2,

for  Ardmaddy,

..    liii,       ..    13,

..  Macubain,

..    Iv,               1,

..  Pliyiioddepe,
. .  John  MacPhie

Passim,

Page   95,      ..    30,

..  head.

r?   154,     ...    20,

..  Deccameron,

..    155,      ..     24,

..  Warsaae,

..    201       ..      l/.

..  MÌU.S,

..    218,      ..    31,

..  Sreath,

310,
316,


318,
319,


1,  . .  Ard  na  u  Uamha,
12,  . .  Aird  na  n  Uamha,
22,  . .  comiich.


read  Loelimaddy.
Maoabuin.
Phynodderee.
Donald  M'Phie.
vrmg.

Decanierou.
Woreaae.
Mil].
[?J    SoioH,   a  bitch   (Ros.s-

shire,  etc.)
with  lumps  of  tangled  hair

and  mud  dangling  about

Mm.
(  )•

Ai-d  na  h  Uamh.
Aid  na  h  Uamh.
cormich.


cormich,

Iasrle,

triol,

duicn,

baUliche

ceallaidc


corruich.

Iarle.

trid.

duine.

caUliche.

ceallaidh.

bu  learn  sa  an  dama  leith  '


line     1,  for  Aidean,
Ì,   . .  Osgord.


110,  128,  186,
and  passim,


122,
124,
129,
157,
182,
162,
166,


read  [?J  Ardan.
. .    Osgood.
oLmaln.
son-in-law.


bettle.
Sterling,

Then  Tangual,  and

other  readings
bhà  a'  bhuth,


ùirt,

medusie,
Nigdal,


kettle.
Stirling.

Ken     Tangval,

nouneed.— J.  F.
bhà  's  a'  bhuth.
sheinse.
Andersen,
ainm.

Cùirt.
agus.
medussp.
Migdal.


XXX VU I.  I'ui  tl


No.  XXXVIII

(passivi)
Page  202,


flir  spelling  of  tin
follows.


the  Gaelic  whicU


..  212,
. .  21.'J,
. .    21.5,


/or  Almighty,
. .  lianly  castles,


fuar,

iiiairde,

Sibearta,


read  All  the  powers.  (MaeLean.)
. .    funeral  cars,  casQ  crodha,
carriages    of    a    peculiar
fonn,  used  of  old  for  carrj'-
ing  the  dead.    (Dewar.)
. .    fear,
t),  . .  iiiairde,  . .    niainie.

means  "a  great  rock"  where  the
waves  dash  in  foam.  (Mac-
Lean).
No.  XXXIX.  Some  of  the  Gaelic  in  this  tale  is  so  spelt  as  to  imitate  the

speaker's  accent.
Page  270,  16,  for  chuigeel,  read  chuigeal.

..    281,  9,   ..  Sgaile,  ..    Sgailc.

..    282,  12,  ..  uisge,  ..    uisge-beatha.

..    282,  15,   ..  tcabii,  ..    Taobh.

No.  XLIII.  I  have  a  much  longer  and  more  complete  version  of  this.
Page  293,    line     2,  for  Jolm  MacPhie,         read  Donald.


296.

32,    ..   20  to  4.

..    20  to  5.

318,

This  Gaelic  is  som

ewhat  phonetic.

355,

1,  rong  [?]  The  seven

brown  stars— Rionnaca

370,      .

.    34,  for  Dcedulus,

read  Dsedalus.

399,      .

.    20,  . .  it  measures,

. .    guesses  it.

402,      .

.    IS,  ..  a  yard,

..    a  rod.

408,       .

.    2.3,  ..  jams,

..    jaws.

416,      .

.    26,  ..  too,

..    to.

448.      .

.    15,  ..  went,

..    bent.

450,      .

.    27,  ..  had.

..    hard.

4.55        .

.    2.1,   ..  Cràth,

..    C'mth.

INTEODUCTIOK


THE  FAIRY-EGG,  AND  WHAT  CAME  OUT  OF  IT.

On  the  stormy  coasts  of  the  Hebrides,  amongst  sea-
weed and  shells,  fishermen  and  kelp-burners  often  find
certain  hard  light  floating  objects,  somewhat  like  flat
chesnuts,  of  various  colours — grey,  black,  and  brown,
which  they  call  sea-nuts,  strand-nuts,  and  fairy-eggs.
Wliere  they  are  most  common,  they  are  used  as  snuflf-
boses,  but  they  are  also  worn  and  preserved  as  amulets,
with  a  firm  or  sceptical  behef  in  their  mysterious
virtues.  Old  Martin,  who  wrote  of  the  Western  Isles
in  1703,  calls  them  "  Molluka  beans,"  and  tells  how
they  were  then  found,  and  worn,  and  used  as  medicine  ;
how  they  preserved  men  from  the  evil  eye,  and  cured
sick  cattle  by  a  process  as  incomprehensible  as  mes-
merism. Practical  Highlandmen  of  the  present  day
call  the  nuts  trash,  and  brand  those  who  wear  them,
Uke  their  ancestors  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago,  as
ignorant  and  superstitious ;  but  learned  botanists,  too
vase  to  overlook  trifles,  set  themselves  to  study  even
fairy-eggs  ;  and  beheving  them  to  be  West  Indian
seeds,*  stranded  in  Europe,  they  planted  them,  and
some  (from  the  Azores)   grew.     Pliilosophers,  having

*  Mimosa  scandens,  great  pod-creeper.    3Iucuna  ureus.
a


X  INTRODUCTION.

discovered  what  they  were,  use  them  to  demonstrate
the  existence  of  the  Gulf  Stream,  and  it  is  even  said
that  they  formed  a  part  of  one  link  in  that  chain  of
reasoning  which  led  Columbus  to  the  Xew  "World

So  witliin  this  century,  men  have  gathered  nursery
tales.  They  set  themselves  earnestly  to  learn  all  that
they  could  concerning  them ;  they  found  similar  tales
common  to  many  languages  ;  they  traced  them  back  for
centuries  ;  they  planted  them  in  books,  and  at  last  the
Brothers  Grimm,  their  predecessors,  and  their  followers,
have  raised  up  a  pastime  for  children  to  be  "  a  study  fit
for  the  energies  of  grown  men  and  to  all  tlie  dignity  of
a  science."

So  at  least  says  the  learned  author  of  the  transla-
tion of  "  Korse  Tales,"  and  there  are  many  who  agree
•with  him.

Men  have  now  collected  stories  from  most  parts  of
the  world.  They  have  taken  them  from  the  dictation  of
American  Indians,  South  Sea  Islanders,  Lapps  and
Samoydes,  Germans  and  Eussians.  INIissionarics  have
published  the  fables  of  African  savages ;  learned  men
have  translated  Arabic,  Sanscrit,  and  Chinese  manu-
scripts ;  even  Egyptian  papyri  have  been  dug  up,  and
forced  to  yield  their  meaning,  and  all  alike  have  fur-
nished tales,  very  similar  to  stories  now  told  by  word
of  mouth.  But  as  some  of  these  are  common  to  races
whose  languages  have  been  traced  to  a  common  origin,
it  is  now  lield  tliat  nursery  stories  and  pojtular  tales
have  been  handed  down  together  with  tlie  languages  in
which  they  are  told ;  and  they  are  used  in  striving  to
trace  out  the  origin  of  races,  as  pliilologists  use  words
to  trace  language,  as  geologists  class  rocks  by  the  shells
and  bones  which  they  contain,  and  as  natural  philoso-
])hers  used  fairy-eggs  in  tracing  the  Gulf  Stream.

The  following  collection  is  intended  to  be  a  contri-


INTRODUCTION.  XI

bution  to  this  new  science  of  "  Storyology."  It  is  a
museiim  of  curious  rubbish  about  to  perish,  given  as
it  was  gathered  in  the  rough,  for  it  seemed  to  me  as
barbarous  to  "poHsh"  a  genuine  popular  tale,  as  it
would  be  to  adorn  the  bones  of  a  Megatherium  with
tinsel,  or  gild  a  rare  old  copper  coin.  On  tliis,  how-
ever, opinions  vary,  but  I  hold  my  own  that,  stories
orally  collected  can  only  be  valuable  if  given  unaltered ;
besides,  where  is  the  model  story  to  be  found  ?

Practical  men  may  despise  the  tales,  earnest  men
condemn  them  as  Hes,  some  even  consider  them
wicked ;  one  refused  to  write  any  more  for  a  whole
estate;  my  best  friend  says  they  are  all  "blethers."
But  one  man's  rubbish  may  be  another'.*,  treasure,  and
what  is  the  standard  of  value  in  such  a  pursuit  as  this  ?

"  And  what  are  you  going  to  do  with  them  stories,
Mr.  Camal  ?"  said  a  friend  of  mine,  as  he  stood  amongst
the  brown  sea-weed,  at  the  end  of  a  pier,  on  a  fine
summer's  evening,  and  watched  my  departure  in  a  tiny
boat.

"  Print  them,  man,  to  be  sure."

]\Iy  friend  is  famous  for  his   good  stories,  though
they  are  of  another  kind,  and  he   uses   tobacco  ;  he
eyed  me  steadily  for  a  moment,  and  then  he  disposed
of  the  whole  matter  monosyllabically,  but  forcibly,
"  Huch  !  !"

It  seemed  to  come  from  his  heart.

Said  a  Highland  coacliman  to  me  one  day,  "  The
luggage  is  very  heavy.  I  wiU  not  believe  but  there  is
stones  in  the  portmanteaus  !  They  wiK  be  pickiu'  them
up  off  the  rod,  and  takin'  them  away  with  them ;  I
have  seen  them  myself;"  and  then,  having  disposed
of  geology,  he  took  a  sapient  pinch  of  snuff.

So  a  benighted  Englishman,  years  ago  in  Australia,
took  up  his  quarters  in  a  settler's  hut,  as  he  told  me.


XU  INTRODUCTION.

Other  travellers  came  in,  and  one  had  found  a  stone  in
a  dry  river-com-se  which  he  maintained  to  be  partly  gold.
Tlie  rest  jeered  at  him  till  he  tlirew  away  his  prize  in
a  pet ;  and  then  they  all  devoured  mutton  chops  and
damper,  and  slept  like  sensible  men.

So  these  tales  may  be  gold  or  dross  according  to
taste.  jMany  will  despise  them,  but  some  may  take
an  interest  in  tlie  pastime  of  their  humble  country-
men; some  maybe  amused;  those  who  would  learn
Gaelic  Avill  find  the  language  of  the  people  who  told
the  stories ;  and  those  who  would  compare  popular
tales  of  dilFerent  races,  may  rest  assured  that  I  have
altered  nothing ;  that  these  really  are  what  they  pur-
port to  be — stories  orally  coDected  in  the  West  High-
lands since  the  beginning  of  1859.  I  have  but
carried  drift  rubbish  from  the  place  where  I  found  it
to  a  place  where  it  may  be  seen  and  studied  by  those
who  care  to  take  the  trouble.

The  resemblance  which  the  collection  bears  to
others  abeady  made,  is  a  strong  argument  for  the  com-
mon origin  of  the  stories,  and  of  the  people  who  tell
them.  But,  as  a  foundation  for  argument,  I  am  bound
to  give  the  evidence  on  wliich  I  have  formed  my  be-
lief in  their  antiquity,  for  the  stories  would  be  rubbish
indeed  if  they  were  not  genuine  traditions.

This  is  the  account  given  by  Mr.  Hector  MacLean,
parish  schoolmaster  at  Ballygrant  in  Islay,  Avhom  I
have  known  from  his  boyhood,  and  who,  at  my  request,
collected  stories  last  summer  in  the  Long  Island  : —

"In  the  Islands  of  Barra,  the  recitation  of  tales  during  the
long  winter  nights  is  still  very  common.  The  people  gather  in
crowds  to  the  houses  of  those  whom  they  consider  good  reciters
to  listen  to  their  stories.  They  appear  to  he  fondest  of  those
tales  which  descrihe  exceedingly  rapid  changes  of  place  in  very
short  portions  of  time,  and  have  evidently  no  respect  for  the


INTRODUCTION.  XUl

unities.  During  the  recitation  of  these  tales,  the  emotions  of  the
reciters  are  occasionally  very  strongly  excited,  and  so  also  are
those  of  the  listeners,  almost  shedding  tears  at  one  time,  and
giving  way  to  loud  laughter  at  another.  A  good  many  of  them
firmly  believe  in  all  the  extravagance  of  these  stories.

"  They  speak  of  the  Ossianic  heroes  with  as  much  feeling,
sympathy,  and  belief  in  their  existence  and  reality  as  the  readers
of  the  newspapers  do  of  the  exploits  of  the  British  army  in  the
Crimea  or  in  India ;  and  whatever  be  the  extravagance  of  the
legends  they  recite  respecting  them,  it  is  exceedingly  remarkable
that  the  same  character  is  always  ascribed  to  the  same  hero  in
almost  every  story  and  by  almost  every  reciter.  Fingal,  or  rather
Fionn,  is  never  called  the  king  of  any  country  or  territory,  but
the  king  of  the  Finn,  a  body  of  men,  who  were  raised,  according
to  the  traditions  current  in  the  Long  Island  and  other  parts  of
the  Highlands,  in  Ireland  and  in  the  Highlands,  to  defend  both
countries  against  foreign  invaders,  more  especially  against  the
Scandinavians.  The  origin  these  illiterate  people  assign  to
them,  according  to  the  traditions  handed  down  to  them,  is,
that  the  largest  and  strongest  bodied  young  men  and  women
were  selected  and  married  together  in  order  to  produce  a
brave  and  powerful  race  capable  of  withstanding  and  repelling
the  incursions  of  foreign  foes.  Any  hero  that  came  west,  east,
north,  or  south,  and  '  Cothrom  na  Finne '  (the  chance  of  the
Finne),  is  the  term  still  used  for  fair-play  in  the  Highlands.

"  In  no  tale  or  tradition  related  to  me  regarding  these  heroes
have  I  heard  the  name,  '  Eigh  Mhòr-bheinn,'  (king  of  Morven)
ascribed  to  Fionn ;  nor  have  I  heard  him  described  as  the  king
of  any  territory  or  country — always  '  Eigh  na  Finne  or  Fèinne.'
Feinn  or  Finn  is  the  plural  of  Fiann,  which  is  probably  de-
rived from  Fiadh  dhuine  ;  either  a  wild  man  from  his  strength
and  bravery,  or  else  the  man  of  deer,  from  their  maintaining
themselves  by  hunting  deer,  extensive  tracts  of  land  being
allotted  to  them  for  that  purpose.  This  last  etymology  I  believe
myself  to  be  the  coi-rect  one.

"  The  most  of  the  people  in  Barra  and  South  Uist  are  Eoman
Catholics,  can  neither  read  nor  write,  and  hardly  know  any
English.  From  these  circumstances  it  is  extremely  improbable
that  they  have    borrowed   much  from  the    literature    of  other


XIV  INTRODUCTION.

nations.  In  North  Uist  and  Harris  these  tales  are  nearly  gone,
and  this,  I  believe,  to  be  owing  partly  to  reading,  which  in  a
manner  supplies  a  substitute  for  them,  partly  to  bigoted  reli-
gious ideas,  and  partly  to  narrow  utilitarian  views."

This  clear  statement  is  accompanied  "by  a  descrip-
tion of  each  of  the  men  Avho  contributed,  from  which
it  appears  in  detail  that  the  greater  number  speak
Gaelic  only,  that  many  of  them  can  neither  read  nor
write,  and  that  they  arc  clever  though  uneducated ;
and  this  account  I  know  to  be  correct  in  some
cases,  from  my  own  personal  knowledge  of  the  men.
Hector  Urquhart,  now  gamekeeper  at  Ardkinglas,
whom  I  have  known  for  many  years,  agrees  with
MacLean  in  his  account  of  the  teUing  of  tliese  stories
in  other  districts  in  former  times.

Tliis  is  his  account —

"  In  my  native  place,  Pool-Ewe,  Eoss-shire,  when  I  was  a
hoy,  it  was  the  custom  for  the  young  to  assemble  together  on  the
long  winter  nights  to  hear  the  old  people  recite  the  tales  or
Rgeulachd,  which  they  had  learned  from  their  fathers  before  them.
In  these  days  tailors  and  shoemakers  went  from  house  to  house,
making  our  clothes  and  shoes.  When  one  of  them  came  to  the  village
we  were  greatly  delighted,  whilst  getting  new  kilts  at  the  same
time.  I  knew  an  old  tailor  who  used  to  tell  a  new  tale  every
night  during  his  stay  in  the  village  ;  and  another,  an  old  shoe-
maker, who,  with  his  large  stock  of  stories  about  ghosts  and
fairies,  used  to  frighten  us  so  much  that  we  scarcely  dared  pass
the  neighbouring  churchyard  on  our  way  home.  It  was  also  the
custom  when  an  aoidh,  or  stranger,  celebrated  for  his  store  of
tales,  came  on  a  visit  to  the  village,  for  us,  young  and  old,  to
make  a  rush  to  the  house  where  he  passed  the  night,  and  choose
our  seats,  some  on  beds,  some  on  forms,  and  others  on  three-legged
stools,  etc.,  and  listen  in  silence  to  the  new  tales  ;  just  as  I  have
myself  seen  since,  when  a  far-famed  actor  came  to  perform  in  the
Glasgow  theatre.  The  goodman  of  the  house  usually  opened  with
the  tale  of  Famhair  Mor  (great  giant)  or  some  other  favourite
tale,  and  then  the  stranger  carried  on  after  that.     It  was  a  com-


INTRODUCTION.  XV

mon  saying, '  The  first  tale  by  tlie  goodman,  and  tales  to  daylight
by  the  aoidh,'  or  guest.  It  was  also  the  custom  to  put  riddles,
in  the  solving  of  which  all  in  the  house  had  to  tax  their  ingenuity.
If  one  of  tlie  party  put  a  riddle  which  was  not  solved  that  night,
he  went  home  with  the  title  of  King  of  Riddles.  Besides
this,  there  was  usually  in  such  gatherings  a  discussion  about
the  Fein,  which  comes  from  Fiantaidh,  giant ;  the  Fiantaibh
were  a  body  of  men  who  volunteered  to  defend  their  country  from
the  invasions  and  inroads  of  the  Danes  and  Norwegians,  or  Loch-
linnich.  Fiunn,  who  was  always  called  King  of  the  Fein,  was  the
strongest  man  amongst  them,  and  no  person  was  admitted  into
the  company  who  was  less  in  height  than  he,  however  much  taller.
I  remember  the  old  black  shoemaker  telling  us  one  night  that
FiDNN  had  a  tooth  which  he  consulted  as  an  oracle  upon  all
important  occasions.  He  had  but  to  touch  this  tooth,  and  what-
ever he  wanted  to  know  was  at  once  revealed  to  him.

"  The  above  is  all  I  can  at  present  readily  call  to  mind  of  the  way
in  which  the  evenings  were  spent  in  the  Highlands  thirty  or  forty
years  ago.  The  minister  came  to  the  village  in  1 830,  and  the  school-
master soon  followed,  who  put  a  stop  in  our  village  to  such  gather-
ings ;  and  in  their  place  we  were  supplied  with  heavier  tasks  than
listening  to  the  old  shoemaker's  fairy  tales.  From  that  period  till
I  collected  the  few  in  this  collection,  I  have  not  heard  a  tale  re-
cited. On  going  to  visit  my  friends  last  summer  I  expected  that
I  would  get  some  old  tales  among  them,  but  I  found  that  the
most  of  the  old  men  who  used  to  relate  them  in  my  young  days
had  died,  and  the  few  who  were  then  alive  of  them  were  so  old
that  they  had  lost  their  memories,  so  that  I  only  got  but  a  trifle  to
what  I  expected.  Hectok  Ukquhakt.

March  18G0.

Joliii  Dewar,  a  labourer,  whom  I  never  saw,  but
who  has  written  and  sent  me  many  stories,  agrees  with
the  others.  These  men  have  never  met,  and  have
acted  independently ;  and  yet,  in  many  cases,  I  have
received  versions  of  the  same  story  from  each  and  from
other  sources,  and  I  have  myself  heard  the  same  inci-
dents  repeated   by   their   authorities,   and    by   others


XVI  INTRODUCTION.

whom  they  had  never  seen ;  sometimes  even  the  very
■words.

The  name  of  every  narrator  is  given  with  his  story,
and  I  am  satisfied  on  direct  evidence  that  most  of  these
were  known  in  the  Highlands  at  least  forty  years
ago.  Now,  for  the  benefit  of  those  who  know  as
little  of  the  subject  as  I  did,  let  me  give  the  theory  of
the  distribution  of  popular  tales,  as  I  have  gathered  it
from  the  able  introduction  to  the  Norse  Tales  and  other
sources,  and  then  let  me  point  out  the  bearing  of  this
collection  on  that  theory.

It  is  supposed  that  the  races  known  as  Indo-
European  came  from  Central  Asia  at  some  very  early
period,  and  passed  over  Europe,  separating  and  settHng
down  as  nations  ;  retaining  words  of  their  original  lan-
guage, and  leaving  the  traces  of  their  religion  and
history  everywhere  as  popular  tales ;  and  that  they
found  the  land  occuj^ied.  Each  wave,  it  is  said,
"  pushed  onwards  those  who  went  before,"  but,  as  it
seems  to  me,  each  in  turn  must  have  stopped  as  it
arrived  at  the  great  sea,  and  there  the  waves  of  this
stream  of  men  must  have  mingled  and  stagnated.

As  the  flotson  and  jetsam  of  American  rivers
and  of  the  Gulf  Stream  is  constantly  drifting  north-
wards and  eastwards,  and  finds  a  resting-place  on  some
western  shore,  so  the  traces  of  the  great  human  stream,
which  is  supposed  to  have  flowed  westwards,  should  be
found  in  greatest  abundance  stnmded  at  the  western
sea.  If  this  be  correct,  and  if  the  plains  of  Asia  sent
migratory  hordes  eastwards  as  well  as  westwards,  the
tales  and  languages  of  the  far  East  and  West  should
most  resemble  each  other,  and  should  also  resemble
more  than  others  the  oldest  forms  of  the  myths  and
languages  of  those  from  whom  they  sprang.  Brittany,
Scandinavia,  Ireland,  and  the  west  of  Scotland,  from


INTRODUCTION.  XTll

their  geograpliical  position,  should  contain  more  of  this
light  mental  debris  than  Central  Europe ;  for  the
same  reason  that  more  of  the  floating  rubbish  of
American  rivers  is  found  on  the  shores  of  Europe  than
anywhere  on  the  great  ocean ;  and  if  mankind  had  a
common  origin,  and  started  from  the  plains  of  Asia,
and  if  popular  tales  really  are  old  traditions,  then
the  tales  of  Ceylon  shoidd  resemble  those  of  Barra,  and
those  of  Japan  should  resemble  the  others,  because
men  travelling  eastwards  and  arrived  at  Japan,  could
not  easily  advance  farther.  Mr.  Oliphant  tells  us  that
both  in  China  and  in  Japan  groups  are  commonly  seen
listening  to  professional  story-tellers  in  the  streets,  and
it  is  to  be  hoped  that  some  one  will  enable  us  to  judge  of
their  talents.

Be  that  as  it  may,  fairy- eggs  are  not  the  only
foreign  products  found  on  the  shores  of  the  Hebrides,
and  the  people  who  dwell  there  know  stories  of  larger
growth  than  mere  nursery  tales.  Great  logs  of  drift-
wood find  their  way  to  shore,  and  are  turned  to  use.
Such  a  log  I  once  found,  and  used  myself,  long
ago.  It  was  haK  buried  in  the  sand ;  it  had  been
long  tossed  by  the  sea,  and  battered  against  rocks,
for  it  was  heavy  with  water,  sphntered  and  ground.
Jfo  tree  like  it  greAV  anywhere  near.  There  was  no
mark  of  a  tool  on  it.  The  stumps  of  its  roots  and
branches  remained,  and  it  seemed  as  if  it  had  been
torn  up  and  wafted  to  its  resting-place  by  winds  and
waves  alone.  I  have  now  no  doubt  that  it  came  from
America.  Had  it  been  insignificant,  and  useless,  like  a
fairy-egg,  we  might  have  left  it,  or  preserved  it  as  a
curiosity  ;  but  it  was  a  useful  log,  and  we  were  a  party
of  chilled  otter  hunters,  so,  after  a  few  speculations,  we
hoisted  the  prize  on  our  shoulders,  carried  it  to  our
dwellincf,  a  neighbouring  cave,  and  there  we  burned  it.


XVm  INTRODUCTION.

I  see  it  often,  hissing  and  sputtering,  and  lighting  up
the  bivouac  with  its  red  glare.  Its  ashes  may  be  there
still,  but  that  tree  is  a  tree  no  longer ;  its  origin  and
■wanderings  cannot  noAv  be  traced ;  it  has  shared  the
fate  of  many  a  popular  tale.  It  was  found  and  used
up.

Such  a  log  I  lately  saw  in  South  Uist.  No  tool
mark  was  on  it;  it  had  lost  its  own  foliage,  but  it  was
covered  with  a  brown  and  white  marine  foliage  of  sea-
weed and  dead  barnacles,  and  it  was  drilled  in  all
directions  by  these  curious  sea-shells,  which  are  sup-
posed by  the  people  to  be  embryo  geese.  It  was
sound,  though  battered,  and  a  worthy  Celtic  smith  was
about  to  add  it  to  the  roof  of  a  cottage,  which  he  was
making  of  boulders  and  turf.  It  was  about  to  share
the  fate  of  many  popular  tales,  and  become  a  part  of
something  else.  It  may  be  recognized  as  an  American
production  hereafter,  and  its  history  is  deeply  marked
on  it,  though  it  forms  part  of  a  house  by  this  time.
So  a  genuine  popular  tale  may  be  recognized  in  a  play
or  a  romance.

Another  such  tree  I  saw  in  Benbecula,  with  bark
still  on  the  roots,  and  close  to  it  lay  a  squared  log,
and  near  that  a  mast  with  white  paint  and  iron  bind-
ings, blocks  and  crosstrees,  still  attached  to  it.  A
few  miles  off  was  a  stranded  ship,  with  her  cargo
and  fittings,  a  wreck  about  to  be  sold,  and  turned  to
any  use  that  the  new  owners  might  think  fit.  All
these  were  about  to  be  changed,  and  as  it  is  with  drift-
wood in  the  Highlands,  so,  as  I  imagine,  it  has  been
with  popular  tales  everywhere.  They  are  as  old  as
the  races  who  tell  them,  but  the  original  ideas,  like
the  trees  from  which  logs,  masts,  and  ships  are  made,
have  been  broken  up,  cut,  carved,  and  ornamented —
lost  and  found — wrecked,  destroyed,  broken,  and  put


INTRODUCTIOX.  XIX

together  again ;  and,  though  the  original  shape  is  hard
to  find,  the  fragments  may  be  recognized  in  books,  and
wherever  else  they  may  now  be  found.

But  as  there  are  quiet  spots  in  the  world  where
drift-wood  accumulates  undisturbed,  so  there  are  quiet
spots  where  popular  tales  flourish  in  peace,  because  no
man  has  interfered  with  them.  In  Spitzbergen,  accord-
ing to  the  accounts  given  me  by  Norwegian  bear
hunters,  and  adventurous  English  nobles,  trees,  such  as
those  occasionally  found  in  Scotland,  are  piled  in  heaps.
Trees,  logs,  broken  spars,  and  wreck,  gather  and  bleach
and  decay  together,  because  there  are  no  men  on  that
wild  shore  to  use  them.  So  in  the  islands  where  the
western  "  wanderers,"  "  Albanich,"  settled  down,  and
where  they  have  remained  for  centuries,  old  men  and
women  are  still  found  who  have  hardly  stirred  from
their  native  islands,  who  speak  only  Gaelic,  and  cannot
read  or  write,  and  yet  their  minds  are  filled  with  a
mass  of  popular  lore,  as  various  as  the  wreck  piled  on
the  shores  of  Spitzbergen.  If  such  as  these  get  hold
of  the  contents  of  a  story  book,  they  seem  unconsciously
to  extract  the  incidents,  and  reject  aU  the  rest, — to  select
the  true  wood,  and  throw  away  foreign  ornament,  just
as  they  chip  off  the  paint  of  a  stranded  mast,  or  scrape
the  sea-weed  off  a  log  when  they  build  it  into  a  roof.
I  have  given  one  specimen  of  a  story,  which  I  beheve
to  be  derived  from  the  "  Arabian  Nights,"  though  it  is
quite  impossible  that  the  man  who  told  it  to  Hector
MacLean,  and  who  told  it  to  me  also,  in  nearly  the
same  words,  can  have  got  it  directly  from  any  book;
for  he  cannot  read  at  all,  and  he  does  not  understand
EugUsh.

I  have  found  very  little  notice  of  these  "West  High-
land prose  tales  in  books,  but  they  are  referred  to.  In
1703,  Martin  says  that  his  countrymen  then  told  long


XX  IXTRODUCTION.

tales  about  Fin  MacCoul,  but  he  adds  tliat  he  will  not
trouble  the  reader  "with  them.

In  1780,  Dr.  Smith,  in  his  book  on  Gaelic  poetry,
says,  that  prosaic  tales  should  be  preserved  in  the  same
manner  may  seem  strange,  but  so  it  is.  He  condemns
the  "urskels"  as  "later  tales,"  unworthy  of  notice,
probably  because  they  were  different  from  the  poetry
of  wliich  he  collected  so  -much.

Gaelic  dictionaries  mention  "legends"  as  sources
from  which  words  have  been  taken.  Amongst  the
Gaelic  MSS.  now  in  the  Advocates'  Library,  there  are
several  which  contain  tales  similar  to  those  now  told
in  the  Highlands.  One  passage  about  the  sailing  of  a
boat,  which  I  have  got,  -vvith  variations,  from  a  great
many  people  living  in  various  parts  of  the  Highlands,
I  find  in  a  ]\IS.  which  was  lent  to  me  by  the  secretary
of  the  Celtic  Society  of  London.  It  is  dated  23d
December  1808,  signed  Alexander  Stewart,  A.M.,  and
marked  Poems  of  Ossian.  It  contains  7721  lines  of
Gaelic,  mostly  poetry,  which  by  the  references  seem  to
have  been  copied  from  sometliing  else.  The  passage
to  which  I  refer,  occurs  in  a  "  Fragment  of  a  Tale,  p.
17,"  which  occupies  thirty-seven  folio  pages,  and  treats
of  carrying  off  a  lady  from  an  isLmd,  and  her  recovery
by  her  husband.

Dr.  MacLeod,  the  best  of  living  Gaelic  scholars,
printed  one  old  tale,  somewhat  altered,  with  a  moral
added,  in  his  "Leabhar  nan  Cnoc,"  in  ISS-i,  but  even
his  efforts  to  preserve  and  use  tliis  old  lore  were  un-
successful.

Those,  then,  wlio  understood  Gaehc,  thought  popular
tales  unworthy  of  notice ;  those  who  did  not  under-
stand Gaelic,  could  know  notliing  about  them ;  and
there  are  many  now  living  in  the  Highlands,  who
speak  Gaelic  and  yet  beUeved,  till  they  setu'ched  at  my


INTRODUCTION.  XSa

request,  that  stories  had  become  extinct  in  their  dis-
tricts. One  good  Highlander,  who  has  helped  me
much,  Mr.  James  Eobertson,  living  at  Inverary,  so
believed,  till  he  heard  his  own  nursemaid  repeat  No.
17,  and  a  neighbouring  fisherman  tell  No.  6.  In  the
Highlands,  as  elsewhere,  society  is  arranged  in  layers,
lilve  the  chmates  of  the  world.  The  dweller  on  an
Indian  plain  Httle  dreams  that  there  is  a  region  of
perpetual  frost  in  the  air  above  him ;  the  Esquimaux
does  not  suspect  the  slumbering  volcano  under  his
feet ;  and  the  dwellers  in  the  upper  and  lower  strata
of  society,  everywhere,  know  as  Httle  of  each  other's
ways  of  life,  as  the  men  of  the  plain  know  of  the  moun-
taineers in  the  snow.

Highland  stories,  then,  have  been  despised  by  edu-
cated men,  and  they  are  as  yet  unchanged  popular
tales.  It  so  happened  that  a  piper  was  the  instructor
of  my  babyhood.  He  was  a  stalwart,  kindly,  gentle
man,  whose  face  is  often  before  me,  though  he  has
long  since  gone  to  his  rest.  From  him  I  first  heard  a
few  of  the  tales  in  this  collection.  They  had  almost
faded  from  my  memory,  but  I  remembered  their  exist-
ence, and  I  knew  where  to  search,  so  I  began  at
the  beginning  of  1859  by  writing  to  my  Highland
friends,  of  all  degrees,  for  stories  of  all  kinds,  true
stories  excepted  ;  and  here  let  me  thank  them  cordially
for  the  trouble  which  they  have  taken,  for  they  are  too
numerous  to  thank  in  detail.

I  begged  for  the  very  words  used  by  the  people
who  told  the  stories,  with  nothing  added,  or  omitted,
or  altered.  Those  who  could  wrote  Gaehc,  those
who  could  not  did  their  best  in  English, — translated,  at
first  or  second-hand,  from  GaeUc  ;  and  when  I  had
so  gathered  many  versions  of  a  story,  I  thought  I
might  safely  conclude  that  it  had  been  known  in  the


XXll  INTRODUCTION.

country  for  many  years,  and  was  essentially  a  popular
tale.

My  next  step  was  to  go  at  Easter  to  a  Higliland
district,  near  the  lowlands,  where  a  gamekeeper  had
marked  down  a  lot  of  tale-tellers,  and  I  was  soon
convinced  that  there  was  plenty  of  game,  though  hard
to  get.

This  difficulty  may  be  worth  some  explanation,  for
it  exists  elsewhere,  and  bears  on  the  collection  of  tales
everj'where.  Highland  peasants  and  fishermen,  espe-
cially those  dwelling  near  the  lowlands,  are  shy  and
proud,  and  even  more  pecuharly  sensitive  to  ridicule
than  peasants  elsewhere.  Many  have  a  lurking  beUef
in  the  truth  of  the  stories  which  they  tell,  and  a  rooted
conviction  that  any  one  with  a  better  education  will
laugh  at  the  belief,  and  the  story,  and  the  narrator  and
his  language,  if  he  should  be  weak  enough  to  venture
on  English,  and  betray  his  knowledge  of  Sgcultachd
and  his  creed.  He  cannot  imagine  that  any  one  out  of
his  own  class  can  possibly  be  amused  by  his  frivolous
pastimes.  No  one  ever  has  liitherto.  He  sees  every
year  a  summer  flood  of  tourists  of  all  nations  pouring
through  his  lochs  and  glens,  but  he  knows  as  little  of
them  as  they  know  of  liim.  The  shoals  of  herrings  that
enter  Loch  Fyne  know  as  much  of  the  dun  deer  on  the
hill-side,  as  Londoners  and  Highland  peasants  know  of
each  other.  Each  gets  an  occasional  peep  at  the  other
as  the  deer  may  see  tlie  herrings  capering  on  the  loch —
each  affects  the  other  slowly  but  surely,  as  the  herrings
do  drive  away  the  wild  deer  by  attracting  men  to  catch
them  ;  but  the  want  of  a  common  language  here  as  else-
where, keeps  Highlands  and  Lowlands,  Celt  and  Saxon,
as  clearly  separate  as  oil  and  water  in  the  same  glass.

Tlie  first  step,  then,  towards  the  acquisition  of  a
story  is  to  establish  confidence.     It  may  be  that  the


INTRODUCTIOX.  XXUl

would-be-collector  sees  before  him  a  strapping  lad
dressed  in  the  garb  of  a  west  country  fisherman — a
rough  blue  bonnet,  jacket,  and  trousers.  He  steps  out
and  ranges  up  alongside.  The  Highlander  glances  from
under  his  bushy  eyebrows,  and  sees  with  his  sharp  grey
eyes  that  the  new  comer  is  a  stranger ;  he  looks  rather
like  a  Saxon  ;  Highland  curiosity  is  strong,  and  he  longs
to  ask  whence  he  comes ;  but  politeness  is  stronger,
and  it  would  be  uncivil  to  begin  questioning  at  once.
So  with  a  nervous  kick  of  one  foot,  and  a  quick  shy
glance,  the  fisherman  jerks  out,  "It's  a  fine  day."
"  Tha  n'  latha  briagh "  (The  day  is  fijie)  replies  the
stranger ;  and  as  he  speaks,  the  whole  face  and  manner
of  his  companion  change  as  if  by  magic ;  doubt  and
hesitation,  suspicion  and  curiosity,  become  simple  won-
der ;  Iris  eyes  and  liis  heart  open  wide  at  the  sound  of
liis  native  tongue,  and  he  exclaims,  "  You  have  GaeHc  !"
"  You  will  take  my  excuse  by  your  leave,  but  what
part  of  the  Gaeldom  are  you  from  Ì  "  And  then  having
found  out  all  that  is  to  be  discovered,  the  ice  being
broken,  and  confidence  estabhshed,  it  oozes  out  gradu-
ally that  the  fisherman  knows  a  story,  and  after  much
persuasion  he  tells  it,  while  he  rows  the  gentleman  who
can  talk  Gaelic  across  a  Highland  loch.  At  parting,  he
adds  that  he  has  only  told  it  to  please  a  "  Gael,"  and
that  he  would  not  have  said  one  word  to  a  GaU
(stranger).  But  the  man  who  is  fluent  in  his  boat,  is
shy  and  awkward  when  set  down  to  repeat  his  story  for
transcribing,  and  it  is  only  when  set  with  one  of  his
neighbours  whom  he  knows,  that  his  story  is  got  on
paper.

Or  it  may  be  an  old  dame  in  a  tall  white  mutch
with  a  broad  black  silk  band,  a  red  cloak,  and  clean
white  apron.  She  is  70,  and  can  walk  ten  miles ;
she    has    known    all    the    neishbourins    families  for


XXIV  INTRODDCTIOX.

generations.  If  you  can  claim  cousLnship  with  any,  she
is  your  friend  ;  but  she  imll  praise  the  ancestors  and
tell  of  the  adventures  of  Eob  Eoy  the  Gregorach,  the
last  of  the  freebooters.  "But  Mary  can  you  say
Murachag  and  Mionachag  ? "  "  Huch  !  my  dear,  that  is
an  lU'sgeul  that  is  nonsense.  Tlie  Good  Being  bless  you,
I  knew  your  grandmotlier,"  etc.  etc.  So  one  must  rest
contented  with  tlie  fact,  that  old  Mary  knows  one  tale,
and  probably  many  more,  which  a  week's  persuasion
might  perhaps  extract.

Or  it  may  be  a  pretty  lass,  whose  eye  twinkles
with  intelligence  at  every  catch- word,  thrown  out  as  a
bait,  but  whom  nothing  will  induce  to  confess  that  she
knows  the  foolish  tales  which  the  minister  has  con-
demned.

Or  it  is  an  old  wandering  vagabond  of  a  tinker,  who
has  no  roof  but  the  tattered  covering  of  his  tent.  He
has  pitched  it  in  a  quarry  under  a  giant  fir,  the  gnarled
roots,  half  bare,  hardly  support  the  tree  on  the  edge  of
a  red  clay  bank,  and  form  a  kind  of  hollow,  a  "  cos,"  in
which  the  tinker  and  his  tribe  have  nestled  at  odd  times
for  years.  A  thin  blue  smoke  is  curling  amongst  the
blackened  roots,  and  •landing  itself  about  the  noble  tree.
A  stately  mansion  and  a  Ande  domain,  and  a  blue
highland  loch,  with  a  shoal  of  brown  herring-boat.s,  can
be  seen  through  the  wood  from  the  door  of  the  tinker's
tent ;  and  there  he  lies,  an  old  man  past  eighty,  who
has  been  a  soldier,  and  "  has  never  seen  a  school ;  "  too
proud  to  beg,  too  old  to  work ;  surromided  by  boxes
and  horn  spoons,  with  shaggy  hair  and  naked  feet,  as
perfect  a  nomad  as  the  ■wildest  Lapp  or  Arab  in  the
whole  world.  It  is  easy  to  make  friends  with  such
men.  A  kind  word  in  their  native  language  is  all  that
is  required,  but  to  get  their  stories  is  another  affair.
"Donald,  did  you  ever  see  the  like  of  this?"     Up


INTRODUCTION.  XXV

starts  the  old  man  on  his  elbo-w, — "  Och  !  och  !  that's  a
fairy  arrow,  I  have  seen  that ;  och !  och  !  no  fairy  arrow
will  ever  hit  the  man  who  has  that — no  fire  will  ever
burn  the  house  where  that  is.  That's  lucky,  well !
well !"  and  the  old  man  sinks  down  on  his  bed  of  fern.
But  the  elf  shot  has  liit  the  mark,  and  started  a  train  of
thought,  which  leads  at  last  to  a  wild  weird  story  ;  but
before  that  story  can  be  written,  the  whole  tribe  decamp,
and  are  lost  for  a  time.

The  first  difficulty,  then,  was  the  nature  of  the
people  who  knew  the  stories  ;  and  the  second,  the  want
of  men  able  and  willing  to  write  Gaelic.  It  was  easy
to  write  English  versions  of  tales  heard  in  Gaelic,  but
I  wanted  the  Gaelic  as  it  was  told,  and  I  had  neither
time  nor  ability  to  wiite  it  down  myself.  I  therefore
sought  out  two  men  on  whom  I  could  rely,  to  collect
and  write  for  me,  and  the  largest  share  of  this  book
has  been  collected  and  written  by  them.  One  is  Mr.
Hector  Urquhart,  gamekeeper  at  Ardkinglas  on  Loch
Fyne;  the  other,  Mr,  Hector  MacLean,  schoolmaster
at  Ballygrant  in  Islay,  who  has  superintended  the  print-
ing of  the  GaeHc.  They  entered  into  the  spirit  of  the
work  at  once,  and  they  have  executed  their  share  of
it  mth  the  greatest  fidelity.  But  wliile  these  are  my
chief  aids,  I  am  largely  indebted  to  many  others  for
written  Gaelic  ;  for  example,  to  one  of  my  earliest
friends,  Mrs.  MacTavish  ;  to  the  Eev.  Mr.  MacLauchlan
of  Edinburgh  ;  to  Alexander  Eraser,  Esq.  of  Mauld,
near  Beaulay ;  to  many  of  the  schoolmasters  on  the
estate  of  Sir  Kenneth  MacKenzie  ;  to  Mr.  Donald
Torrie,  Benbecula ;  and  to  many  others,  including
John  Dewar,  a  self-educated  man  of  advanced  age,
whose  contribution  does  him  the  greatest  credit.

The  next  step  was  to  spend  a  summer  hoHday  in
studying  the  actual   condition   of   this    popular  lore,
h


XXVI  INTRODUCTION'.

where  I  had  found  that  it  existed  in  the  greatest  pro-
fusion. I  landed  at  Ardmaddy  in  North  Uist,  and
walked  with  a  knapsack  to  the  sound  of  Barra,  and
hack  to  Stornoway  ;  crossing  the  sound  of  Harris  in  a
fishing  boat.  I  found  a  population  differing  from  that
(jf  the  main  land,  perhaps  the  least  changed  from  their
old  ways  of  any  people  in  the  kingdom.  Gaelic  is
their  usual,  often  their  only  language.  Every  EngUsh
word  which  has  crept  in  has  a  Gaelic  head  and  tail.
Many,  I  know  not  how  many,  "have  no  English"  at  all,
and  have  never  been  taught  to  read.  In  many  islands
the  people  are  li-\dng  undisturbed,  where  their  ancestors
have  lived  time  out  of  mind.  They  are  a  small,  active,
intelligent  race,  with  dark  hair  and  eyelashes,  and  grey
eyes  ;  quick,  clever,  and  pugnacious.  I  had  expected
to  find  traces  of  Norwegian  occupation  in  the  people
and  their  language.  I  watched  carefully  for  Norwegian
words  and  featui-cs  ;  and  I  found  the  people  a  complete
contrast  to  Norwegian  peasants,  Avhom  I  know  well,
who  are  large,  bony,  light-haired  fau-  men,  sagacious
rather  than  quick  ;  and  generally  slow  to  anger.

I  could  find  nothing  Scandinavian,  except  certain
names  of  places,  and  certain  ruins,  which  it  is  the
fashion  to  attribute  to  the  Lochliners.  Even  the  houses
and  the  old  agricultural  implements,  where  they  are
still  used,  are  peculiar.  For  example,  the  old  crooked
spade  still  used  in  islands  in  the  sound  of  Barra,  and
elsewhere,  has  no  resemblance  to  any  agricultural  imple-
ment that  I  have  ever  seen  anywhere  out  of  the  AVest
lligldimds.  It  is  in  fiict  a  foot  plough  used  with-
out horses.  It  is  remarkable  that  a  steam  plough
should  be  at  work  at  the  same  time,  on  the  cast  coast
of  Cromarty  at  Tarbert.  Every  horse  I  met  on  the
road  stopped  of  liis  own  accord.  Every  man  asked  my
news,  "  whence  I  took  the  Avalking,"  where  I  Lived,  and


INTRODUCTION.  XXVll

why  I  came  1  Saddles  -were  often  sacks,  stirrups  a
loop  of  twisted  bent,  bridles  the  same,  and  bits  occa-
sionally wood.  Dresses  were  coarse,  but  good  ;  but
there  ■^^■as  an  air  of  kindly  politeness  over  all,  that  is
not  to  be  found  in  homespun  dresses  in  any  other
country  that  I  know.  When  I  was  questioned,  I
answered,  and  told  my  errand,  and  prospered.  "  I
was  not  a  drover  come  to  buy  cattle  at  the  fair  ;"
"  Neither  was  I  a  merchant  though  I  carried  a  pack."
"I  was  the  gentleman  who  was  after  Sgialachdan. "
My  collector  had  made  my  name  known.  I  spoke
Gaelic,  and  answered  questions.  I  am  one  of  themselves,
so  I  got  on  famously.

Men  and  women  of  all  ages  could  and  did  tell  me
stories,  children  of  all  sizes  listened  to  them  ;  and  it
was  self-evident  that  people  generally  knew  and  en-
joyed them.  Elsewhere  I  had  been  told,  that  thirty
or  forty  years  ago,  men  used  to  congregate  and  tell
stories ;  here,  I  was  told,  that  they  now  spend  whole
winter  nights  about  the  fire  listening  to  these  old  world
tales.  The  clergy,  in  some  places,  had  condemned
the  practice,  and  there  it  had  fallen  into  disuse  ;  stories
seemed  to  be  almost  exterminated  in  some  islands,
though  I  beheve  they  were  only  buried  alive  ;  but  in
other  places  this  harmless  amusement  is  not  forbidden  ;
and  there,  in  every  cluster  of  houses,  is  some  one  man
famed  as  "good  at  sgialachdan,"  whose  house  is  a
winter  evening's  resort.  I  visited  these,  and  Hstened,
often  with  wonder,  at  the  extraordinary  power  of
memory  shown  by  untaught  old  men.

It  is  perhaps  beyond  the  province  of  a  mere  col-
lector of  old  tales  to  be  serious ;  but  surely  Gaelic
books  containing  sound  information  would  be  a  vast
boon  to  such  a  people.  The  young  would  read  them,
and  the  old  would  understand  them.     All  would  take


XXVUl  INTRODUCTION.

a  warmer  interest  in  Canada  and  Australia,  where
strong  arms  and  bold  sjiirits  are  wanted,  if  they  knew
what  these  countries  really  are.  If  they  heard  more  of
European  hattles,  and  knew  what  a  ship  of  war  is  now,
there  would  be  more  soldiers  and  sailors  from  the  Isles
in  the  service  of  their  country.  At  all  events,  the  old
spirit  of  popular  romance  is  surely  not  an  evil  spirit  to
be  exorcised,  but  rather  a  good  genius  to  be  controlled
and  directed.  Surely  stories  in  Avhich  a  mother's
blessing,  weU  earned,  leads  to  success ;  in  wliich  the
poor  rise  to  be  princes,  and  the  weak  and  courageous
overcome  giants ;  in  which  wisdom  excells  Ijrute  force, —
surely  even  such  frivolities  are  better  pastime  than  a
solitary  whisky  bottle,  or  sleep,  or  grim  silence  ;  for
that  seems  the  choice  of  amusements  if  tales  are  for-
bidden, and  Gaelic  books  are  not  provided  for  men
who  know  no  other  language  ;  and  who,  as  men,  must
be  amused  now  and  then.

I  have  never  heard  a  story,  whose  point  was  ob-
scenity, publicly  told  in  a  Highland  cottage  ;  and  I
believe  that  such  are  rare.  I  have  heard  them  where
the  rough  polish  of  more  modern  ways  has  replaced
the  polished  roughness  of  "  wild  "  Highlanders  ;  and
that  where  even  the  bagpipes  have  been  almost  abo-
lished as  profane.

I  have  heard  the  music  of  the  Cider  Cellars  in  a
parlour,  even  in  polished  England,  when  I  had  fiiiled
to  extract  anything  else  from  a  group  of  comfortaiily-
dressed  villagers.  A  liaLf-polished  human  gem  is  but
a  spoiled  crystal  anywhere  ;  and  I  prefer  the  rough
diamond  or  the  finished  jewel.

But  this  is  foreign  to  my  work  ;  my  visits  Avere  to
the  tellers  of  old  stories,  and  had  nothing  to  do  with
pohtical  economy  and  public  morals.  I  paid  my
visits,  and   heard  the  stories  ;  and  a  goodly  audience


INTRODUCTION.  XXIX

often  gathered  to  sliare  the  treat,  and  all  seemed  mar-
vellously to  enjoy  it.  If  there  was  an  occasional  coarse
Avord  spoken,  it  was  not  coarsely  meant.

Let  me  describe  one  of  these  old  story  men  as  a
type  of  his  kind.  I  trust  he  will  not  be  offended,  for
he  was  very  polite  to  me.  His  name  is  MacPhie  ;  he
Kves  at  the  north  end  of  South  Uist,  where  the  road
ends  at  a  sound,  which  has  to  be  forded  at  the  ebb  to
get  to  Benbecula.  The  house  is  built  of  a  double  wall
of  loose  boulders,  with  a  layer  of  peat  three  feet  thick
between  the  walls.  The  ends  are  round,  and  the  roof
rests  on  the  inner  wall,  leaving  room  for  a  crop  of  yellow
gowans.  A  man  might  walk  round  the  roof  on  the  top
of  the  wall.  There  is  but  one  room,  mth  two  low  doors,
one  on  each  side  of  the  house.  The  fire  is  on  the  floor  ;
the  chimney  is  a  hole  above  it ;  and  the  rafters  are
huug  with  pendants  and  festoons  of  shining  black  peat
reek.  They  are  of  birch  from  the  mainland,  American
drift  wood,  or  broken  wreck.  They  support  a  cover-
ing of  turf  and  straw,  and  stones,  and  heather  ropes,
which  keep  out  the  rain  well  enough.

The  house  stands  on  a  green  bank,  with  grey  rocks
protruding  through  the  turf;  and  the  whole  neigh-
bourhood is  pervaded  by  cockle  shells,  which  indicate
the  food  of  the  people  and  their  fishing  pursuits.  In
a  neighbouring  kiln  there  were  many  cart-loads  about
to  be  burned,  to  make  that  Ume  which  is  so  durable  in
the  old  castles.  The  owner  of  the  house,  whom  I
visited  twice,  is  seventy-nine.  He  told  me  nine
stories,  and  like  all  the  others,  declared  that  there
was  no  man  in  the  islands  who  knew  them  so  well.
"  He  could  not  say  how  many  he  knew  ;"  he  seemed
to  know  versions  of  nearly  everything  I  had  got ;  and
he  told  me  plainly  that  my  versions  were  good  for
nothing.      "  Huch  !   Thou  hast  not  got  them  right  at


XXX  INTRODUCTION.

all."  "  They  came  into  his  mind,"  he  said,  "sometimes
at  night  when  he  could  not  sleep, — old  tales  that  he
had  not  heard  for  threescore  years."

He  had  the  manner  of  a  practised  narrator,  and  it
is  quite  e\àdent  that  he  is  one  ;  he  chuckled  at  the
interesting  parts,  and  laid  his  withered  finger  on  my
knee  as  he  gave  out  the  terrihle  bits  with  due
solemnity.  A  small  boy  in  a  kilt,  ^vith  large  round
glittering  eyes,  was  standing  mute  at  his  knee,  gazing
at  his  wrinkled  face,  and  devouring  every  word.
The  boy's  mother  first  boiled,  and  then  mashed
potatoes  ;  and  his  father,  a  well  grown  man  in  tartan
breeks,  ate  them.  Ducks  and  ducklings,  a  cat  and  a
kitten,  some  hens  and  a  baby,  all  tumbled  about  on  the
clay  floor  together,  and  expressed  their  delight  at  the
savoury  prospect,  each  in  his  own  fashion  ;  and  three
wayfarers  dropped  in  and  Hstened  for  a  spell,  and
passed  their  remarks  till  the  ford  was  shallow.  The
light  came  streaming  down  the  chimney,  and  through
a  single  pane  of  glass,  lighting  up  a  track  in  the  blue
mist  of  the  peat  smoke  ;  and  fell  on  the  white  hair
and  brown  withered  face  of  the  old  man,  as  he  sat  on
a  low  stool  with  his  feet  to  the  fire  ;  and  the  rest  of
the  dwelling,  with  all  its  plenishing  of  boxes  and  box-
lieds,  dishes  and  dresser,  and  gear  of  all  sorts,  faded
away  through  shades  of  deepening  brown,  to  the  black
ilarkness  of  the  smoked  roof  and  the  "  peat  corner."
There  we  sat,  and  smoked  and  talked  for  hours,  till
the  tide  ebbed  ;  and  then  I  ci-ossed  the  ford  by  watling
up  to  the  waist,  and  dried  my  clothes  in  the  wind  in
Benbecula.

Another  man  of  the  same  stamp,  Patrick  Smith,
lives  near  the  sound  of  Barra  ;  and  a  third,  "  Donald
MacDonald  MacCharlcs  Maclntyre,"  in  Benbecula ;
and  I  heard  of  plenty  more,  whom  I  had  not  time  to


IXTRODUCTION.  XXXI

visit.  I  found  them  to  be  men  with  clear  heads  and
wonderful  memories,  generally  very  poor  and  old,  living
in  remote  corners  of  remote  islands,  and  speaking  only
GaeHc  ;  in  short,  those  who  have  hved  most  at  home,
furthest  from  the  world,  and  who  have  no  source  of  men-
tal relaxation  beyond  themselves  and  their  neighbours.

At  Gearrloch  on  the  mainland,  some  old  namesakes
of  mine  are  of  the  same  stamp,  but  in  these  regions  the
schoolmaster  has  made  himself  at  home.  Tales  have
lieen  forbidden,  but  other  lore  has  been  provided.
There  are  many  weU  attended  English  schools,  so  old
men  have  access  to  books  and  newspapers  through
their  children.  Tradition  is  out  of  fashion  and  books
are  in.

Farther  east  stories  are  still  rarer,  and  seem  to
be  told  rather  by  women  than  by  men.  The  long
romances  of  the  west  give  place  to  stories  about
ghosts  and  fairies,  apparitions,  and  dreams, — stories
which  would  be  told  in  a  few  words,  if  at  all,  in
the  islands.  Fairy  belief  is  becoming  a  fairy  tale.
In  another  generation  it  will  grow  into  a  romance,  as
it  has  in  the  hands  of  poets  elsewhere,  and  then  the
whole  will  either  be  forgotten  or  carried  from  people
who  must  work  to  gentles  who  can  afford  to  be  idle
and  read  books.  Eailways,  roads,  newspapers,  and
tourists,  are  slowly  but  surely  doing  their  accustomed
work.  They  are  driving  out  romance ;  but  they  are
not  driving  out  the  popular  creed  as  to  supernaturals.
That  creed  •^dll  survive  when  the  last  remnant  of
romance  has  been  banished,  for  superstition  seems  to
belong  to  no  one  period  in  the  history  of  civilization,
but  to  all.  It  is  as  rife  in  towns  as  it  is  amongst  the
hills,  and  is  not  confined  to  the  ignorant.

I  have  wandered  amongst  the  peasantry  of  many
countries,  and  this  trip  but  confirmed  my  old  impres-


XXXU  INTRODUCTIOX.

sion.  There  are  few  peasants  that  I  thiuk  so  highly  of,
none  that  I  hke  so  well  Scotch  Highlanders  have
faults  in  plenty,  but  they  have  the  bearing  of  Nature's
own  gentlemen — the  delicate,  natural  tact  which  dis-
covers, and  the  good  taste  which  avoids,  all  that  would
hurt  or  offend  a  guest.  The  poorest  is  ever  the  readi-
est to  share  the  best  he  has  with  the  stranger.  A
kind  word  kindly  meant  is  never  thrown  away,  and
whatever  may  be  the  faults  of  this  people,  I  have
never  found  a  boor  or  a  churl  in  a  Highland  bothy.

Celts  have  played  their  part  in  liistory,  and  they
have  a  part  to  play  still  in  Canada  and  Australia,
where  their  language  and  character  will  leave  a
trace  if  they  do  not  influence  the  destiny  of  these  new
worlds.  There  are  hundreds  in  those  distant  lands,
whose  language  is  still  Gaelic,  and  to  whom  these
stories  arc  familiar,  and  if  tliis  book  should  ever
remind  any  of  them  of  the  old  country,  I  shall  not
have  worked  in  vain  in  the  land  which  they  call  "  Tir
nam  Beann  s'  nan  gleann  s'  nan  ghaisgach."*

So  much,  then,  for  the  manner  of  collecting  the
tales,  and  the  people  Avho  told  them.  The  popular
lore  which  I  found  current  in  the  west,  and  known  all
over  the  Highlands  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  amongst
the  poorer  classes,  consists  of : —

1st.  That  which  is  called  Seanachas  na  Finne,  or
Feiime,  or  Fiann,  tliat  is,  the  tradition  or  old  liistory
of  the  Feene.

This  is  now  the  rarest  of  any,  and  is  commonest,
so  far  as  I  know,  in  Barra  and  South  Uist.  There  are
first  fragments  of  poems  which  may  have  been  taken
from  the  printed  book,  which  goes  by  the  name  of  the
History  of  the  Finne  in  the  Highlands,  and  the  Poems
of  Ossian  elsewhere.  I  never  asked  for  these,  but  I
•  The  land  of  hills,  and  glens,  and  heroes.


INTRODUCTION.  XXXUl

was  told  that  the  words  were  "  sharper  and  deeper "
than  those  in  the  printed  book.

There  are,  secondly,  poetical  fragments  about  the
same  persons,  which,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  are
not  in  any  printed  book.  I  heard  some  of  these
repeated  by  three  different  men.

Patrick  Smith,  in  South  Uist,  hitoned  a  long  frag-
ment ;  I  should  guess,  about  200  lines.  He  recited
it  rapidly  to  a  kind  of  chant.  The  subject  was  a  fight
with  a  Norway  witch,  and  Fionn,  Diarmaid,  Oscar,  and
Conan,  were  named  as  Irish  heroes.  There  Avere
"  shij3s  fastened  with  silver  chains,  and  kings  holding
them ; "  swords,  spears,  helmets,  shields,  and  battles,
were  mentioned ;  in  short,  the  fragment  was  the  same
in  style  and  machinery  as  the  famous  Poems  ;  and  it
was  attributed  to  Ossian.  The  repetition  began  with
a  short  prose  account  of  what  was  to  follow.  Smith  is
sixty,  and  says  that  he  cannot  read.  He  does  not
understand  English.  He  says  that  such  poems  used  to
be  so  chanted  commonly  when  he  was  young.  The
same  account  of  the  manner  of  reciting  similar  poems
was  given  me  by  a  clergyman  in  Argyllshire,  who  said
that,  within  his  recollection,  the  "  death  of  Cuchulliu"
used  to  be  so  recited  by  an  old  man  at  the  head  of
Loch  Awe.

Donald  Macintyre,  in  Eenbecula,  recited  a  similar
fragment,  which  has  since  been  written  and  sent  to  me.
The  subject  is  a  dialogue  between  a  lady  and  a  mes-
senger returning  from  battle,  with  a  number  of  heads
on  a  withy  ;  the  lady  asks  their  story,  and  the  mes-
senger tells  whose  heads  they  were,  and  how  the  heroes
fell.  It  sounded  better  than  it  reads,  but  the  tran-
scriber had  never  written  Gaelic  before.

John  Campbell,  generally  known  as  "Yellow  John,"
living  in  Strath  Gearrloch,  about  twelve  miles  west  of


XXXIV  IXTRODUCTIOX.

Flowerdale,  repeated  a  similar  fragment,  which  lasted
for  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  He  said  he  had  known  it  for
half  a  century.  He  is  a  very  old  man,  and  it  is  diffi-
cult to  follow  him,  and  the  poetry  was  mingled  with
prose,  and  AA'ith  "  said  he,"  "  said  she."  It  was  the
last  remnant  of  something  wdiich  the  old  man  could
only  rememher  imperfectly,  and  Avhich  he  gave  in
broken  sentences ;  but  here  again  the  combat  was  with
a  Xorway  witcli,  and  the  scene,  Ireland.  Fionn  Diar-
maid  and  other  such  names  appeared.  Diarmaid  had
"his  golden  helm  on  his  head ;"  his  "two  spears  on
his  shoulder  ;"  his  "narrow-pointed  shield  on  his  left
arm  ;"  his  "  small  shield  on  his  right ;"  his  sword  was
"  leafy,"  (?)  leaf-shaped.  And  the  old  man  believed
that  Diarmaid,  the  Irish  hero,  was  his  ancestor,  and
his  own  real  name  O'duine.  He  spoke  of  "  liis  chief
MacCalain,"  and  treated  me  wdth  extra  kindness,  as  a
kinsman.  "  "Will  you  not  take  some  more"  (milk  and
potatoes).  "Perhaps  we  may  never  see  each  other
agaiiL     Are  we  not  both  Campbells  1 "

I  heard  of  other  men  who  could  repeat  such  poems,
and  I  have  heard  of  such  men  aU  my  life ;  but  as  I
did  not  set  out  to  gather  poems,  I  took  no  trouble  to
get  them.

Two  chiefs,  I  think  one  was  ;MacLeod,  sent
their  two  fools  to  gather  bait  on  the  shore,  and  to
settle  a  bet  wliich  fool  was  the  best,  they  strewed  gold
on  the  path.  One  fool  stopped  to  gather  it,  but
the  other  said,  "  "When  we  are  at  '  golding,'  let  us  be
'  golding,'  and  when  we  are  at  bait-making,  let  us  be
bait-making,"  and  he  stuck  to  his  business.  ]\Iy  busi-
ness was  prose,  but  it  may  not  be  out  of  place  to
state  my  own  opinion  about  the  Ossian  controversy,
for  I  have  been  asked  more  than  once  if  I  had  found
any  trace  of  such  poems.


INTRODUCTIOX.  XXXV

I  believe  that  there  were  poems  of  very  old  date,
of  which  a  few  fragments  still  exist  in  Scotland  as  pure
traditions.  That  these  related  to  Celtic  worthies  who
were  popular  heroes  before  the  Celts  came  from  Ireland,
and  answer  to  Arthur  and  his  knights  elsewhere.
That  the  same  personages  have  figured  in  poems  com-
posed, or  altered,  or  improved,  or  spoilt  by  bards  who
Hved  in  Scotland,  and  by  Irish  bards  of  all  periods ;
and  that  these  personages  have  been  mythical  heroes
amongst  Celts  from  the  earliest  of  times.  That  "  the
poems "  were  orally  collected  by  MacPherson,  and
by  men  before  him,  by  Dr.  Smith,  by  the  committee
of  the  Highland  Society,  and  by  others,  and  that  the
printed  Gaelic  is  old  poetry,  mended  and  patched,  and
pieced  together,  and  altered,  but  on  the  whole  a
genuine  work.  Manuscript  evidence  of  the  antiquity
of  similar  Gaelic  poems  exists.  Some  were  printed
in  1807,  under  the  authority  of  the  Highland  Society
of  London,  with  a  Latin  translation,  notes,  etc.,  and
were  reprinted  in  1818,  MacPherson's  "  transla-
tion" appeared  between  1760  and  1762,  and  the
controversy  raged  from  the  beginning,  and  is  growl-
ing still  ;  but  the  dispute  now  is,  whether  the
poems  were  originally  Scotch  or  Irish,  and  how  much
MacPherson  altered  them.  It  is  like  the  quarrel
about  the  chameleon,  for  the  languages  spoken  in  Islay
and  Eathlin  are  identical,  and  the  language  of  the
poems  is  difficult  for  me,  though  I  have  sjwken
Gaelic  from  my  childhood.  There  is  no  doubt  at
all  that  Gaelic  poems  on  such  subjects  existed  long
before  Macpherson  was  born ;  and  it  is  equally
certain  that  there  is  no  composition  in  the  Gaelic
language  which  bears  the-smallest  resemblance  in  style
to  the  pecidiar  kind  of  prose  in  which  it  pleased  Mac-
Pherson to    translate.       The  poems   have  a  peculiar


XXXVl  INTRODUCTION.

rhytlun,  and  a  style  of  their  own  which  is  altogether
lost  in  liis  Enghsh  translation.  But  what  concerns  me
is  the  popular  belief,  and  it  seems  to  be  this — "  Mac-
Pherson  must  have  been  a  very  dishonest  person  when
he  allowed  himself  to  pass  as  the  author  of  Ossian's
poems."  So  said  a  lady,  one  of  my  earliest  friends,
whose  age  has  not  impaired  her  memory,  and  so  say
those  who  are  best  informed,  and  understand  the
language.

The  illiterate  seem  to  have  no  opinion  on  the  sub-
ject. So  far  as  I  could  ascertain,  few  had  heard  of  the
controversy,  but  they  had  all  heard  scraps  of  poems
and  stories  about  the  Finne,  all  their  lives  ;  and  they
are  content  to  believe  that  "  Ossian,  the  last  of  the
Finne,"  composed  the  poems,  wrote  them,  and  burned
his  book  in  a  pet,  when  he  was  old  and  blind,  because
St.  Patrick,  or  St.  Paul,  or  some  other  saint,  would
not  believe  his  wonderful  stories."

Those  who  Avould  study  "  the  controversy,"  will
find  plenty  of  discussion  ;  but  the  report  of  the  High-
land Society  appears  to  settle  the  question  on  evidence.
I  cannot  do  better  than  quote  from  Johnson's  Poets  the
opinion  of  a  great  author,  who  was  a  great  translator,
who,  in  speaking  of  his  own  work,  says  : —

"  What  must  the  world  think  .  .  .  After  such  a  judgment
passed  by  so  great  a  critick,  the  world  who  decides  so  often,  and
who  examines  so  seldom  ;  tlie  world  who,  even  in  matters  of  litera-
ture, is  almost  always  the  slave  of  authority?  Who  will  suspect
that  so  much  learning  should  mistake,  tiiat  so  much  accuracy
should  be  misled,  or  that  eo  much  candour  should  be  biassed  ?
.  .  .  .  I  think  that  no  translation  ought  to  be  the  ground  of
criticism,  because  no  man  ought  to  be  condemned  upon  another

man's  explanation  of  his  meaning "     (Postscript  to

the  Odyssey,  Pope's  Homer,  Johnson's  Poets,  pp.  279,  280).

And  to  that  quotation  let  me  add  this  manuscript


INTRODUCTION.  XXXVll

note,  wliich  I  found  in  a  copy  of  the  report  of  the
Highland  Society,  on  the  poems  of  Ossian  ;  which
I  purchased  in  December  1859  ;  and  which  came  from
the  library  of  Colonel  Hamilton  Smith,  at  Plymouth.

"  The  Eeverend  Dr.  Campbell,  of  Halfway  Tree,  Lisuana,  in
Jamaica,  often  repeated  to  me  in  the  year  1799,  1801,  and  1802,
parts  of  Ossian  in  Gaelic  ;  and  assured  me  that  he  had  possessed
a  manuscript,  long  the  property  of  his  family,  in  which  Gaelic
poems,  and  in  particular,  whole  pieces  of  Ossian 's  compositions
were  contained.  This  he  took  out  with  him  on  his  first  voyage
to  the  West  Indies  in  1780,  when  his  ship  was  captured  by  a  boat
from  the  Santissima  Trir.idata  flagship,  of  the  whole  Spanish
fleet ;  and  he,  together  with  all  the  other  passengers,  lost  nearly
the  whole  of  their  baggage,  among  which  was  the  volume  in
question.  In  1814,  when  I  was  on  the  stafi"  of  General  Sir
Thomas  Graham,  now  Lord  Lyndoch,  I  understood  that  Mr.  Mac-
Pherson  had  been  at  one  time  his  tutor ;  and,  therefore,  I  asked
his  opinion  respecting  the  authenticity  of  the  Poems.  His  lord-
ship replied  that  he  never  had  any  doubts  on  the  subject,  he  hav-
ing seen  in  Mr.  MacPherson's  possession  several  manuscripts  in
the  Gaelic  language,  and  heard  him  speak  of  them  repeatedly ;
he  told  me  some  stronger  pai'ticulars,  which  I  cannot  now  note
down,  for  the  conversation  took  place  during  the  action  of  our
winter  campaign.

(Signed)         "  Charles  Ham"-  Smith,  Lt.-Col."

The  Colonel  had  the  reputation  of  being  a  great
antiquary,  and  had  a  valuable  library.  James  Mac-
Pherson,  a  "  modest  young  man,  who  was  master  of
Greek  and  Latin,"  was  "  procured  "  to  be  a  preceptor
to  "  the  boy  Tommy,"  who  was  afterwards  Lord  Ljti-
doch  (according  to  a  letter  in  a  book  printed  for  pri-
vate circulation).  As  it  appears  to  me,  those  who  are
ignorant  of  Gaehc,  and  now-a-days  maintain  that
"MacPherson  composed  Ossian's  Poems,"  are  hke  critics
who,   being  ignorant  of  Greek,   should  maintain  that


XXX\1U  INTRODUCTION'.

Pope  wrote  the  Odyssey,  and  was  the  father  of  Homer ;
or,  being  ignorant  of  Enghsh,  should  declare  that
Tennyson  was  the  father  of  King  Ai-thur  and  all  his
knights,  because  he  has  published  one  of  many  poems
which  treat  of  them.  It  was  different  when  High-
landers were  "rebels;"  and  it  was  petty  treason  to
deny  that  they  were  savages.

A  glance  at  "  -Johnson's  Tour  in  the  Hebrides,"
■will  show  the  feeling  of  the  day.  He  heard  Gaelic
songs  in  plenty,  but  would  not  beUeve  in  Gaelic
poems.  He  appreciated  the  kindness  and  hospitahty
with  wliich  he  was  treated  ;  he  praised  the  politeness
of  all  ranks,  and  yet  maintained  that  their  language
was  "  the  rude  speech  of  a  barbarous  people,  who  had
few  thoughts  to  express,  and  were  content,  as  they
conceived  grossly,  to  be  gros.sly  imderstood."

He  could  see  no  beauty  in  the  mountains  wliich
men  now  flock  to  see.  He  saw  no  fish  in  fording
northern  rivers,  and  explains  how  the  winter  torrents
sweep  them  away  ;  the  stags  were  "  perhaps  not  bigger
than  our  fallow-deer ;"  the  waves  were  not  larger  than
those  on  the  coast  of  Sussex ;  and  yet,  though  the
Doctor  would  not  believe  in  Gaelic  poems,  he  did  be-
lieve that  peat  grew  as  it  was  cut,  and  that  the  vege-
table part  of  it  probably  caused  a  glomug  redness  in
tlie  earth  of  which  it  is  mainly  composed ;  and  he
came  away  willing  to  believe  in  the  second  sight,
though  not  (piite  convinced.

That  sturdy  old  Briton,  the  great  lexicographer,  who
is  an  honour  to  his  country,  was  not  wholly  free  from
national  prejudice  ;  he  erred  in  some  things  ;  he  may
have  erred  in  a  matter  of  wliich  he  could  not  well
judge  ;  he  did  not  understand  Gaelic  ;  he  did  not  be-
lieve in  traditions  ;  he  would  not  believe  in  the  trans-
lations ;    and   MacPherson  seems  to  have  ended  by


INTRODUCTION.  XXXIX

encouraging  the  public  belief  that  he  was  the  author  of
poems  which  had  gained  so  wide  a  celebrity.

Matters  have  changed  for  the  better  since  those
days ;  Celt  and  Saxon  are  no  longer  deadly  foes.
There  stiU  exists,  as  I  am  informed,  an  anti-Celtic
society,  whose  president,  on  state  occasions,  wears
three  pairs  of  trousers  ;  but  it  is  no  longer  penal  to
dispense  with  these  garments  ;  and  there  are  Southerns
who  discard  them  altogether,  when  they  go  north  to
pursue  the  httle  stags  on  the  ugly  hills,  and  catch  fish
in  the  torrents.

There  are  Celtic  names  in  high  places,  in  India,
and  at  home  ;  and  an  English  Duke  is  turning  the
GaeHc  of  Ossian's  poems  into  English  verse.

Tliis,  however,  is  foreign  to  my  subject,  though  it
bears  somewhat  on  the  rest  of  the  traditions  of  the
Finne.  I  have  stated  my  own  opinion  because  I  hold
it,  not  because  I  wish  to  influence  those  who  diifer
from  me.  I  have  no  wish  to  stir  up  the  embers  of  an
expiring  controversy,  which  was  besprinkled  with
pecuHarly  acrid  ink,  and  obscured  by  acid  fumes.  I
neither  beheve  that  MacPherson  composed  Ossian,
nor  that  Ossian  composed  all  the  poems  which  bear
his  name.  I  am  cj^uite  content  to  believe  Ossian  to
have  been  an  Irishman,  or  a  Scotchman,  or  a  myth,
on  sufficient  evidence.

Besides  these  few  remnants  of  poetry  which  still
survive,  I  find  a  great  many  prose  tales  relating  to
the  heroes  of  the  poems  ;  and  as  these  personages
certainly  were  popular  heroes  in  Ireland  and  in
Scotland  centuries  ago,  I  give  what  I  have  gathered
concerning  them,  with  the  conviction  that  it  is  purely
Celtic  tradition.*

*  See  page  256  of  "  Scotland  in  the  Middle  Ages,"  by  Cosmo
Innes,  Edmonston  and  Douglas,  1860,  for  evideuc  taken  from


Xi  INTRODUCTIOX.

The  Seannaclias  of  the  Fine  consists,  then,  of
poetry  already  printed ;  fragments  which  are  not  in
print,  so  far  as  I  know,  and  which  are  now  very  rare  ;
and  prose  tales  which  are  tolerably  common,  but
rapidly  disappearing.

In  all  these,  according  to  tradition,  Fionn,  Diar-
maid,  and  the  rest,  are  generally  represented  as  Irish
worthies.  The  scene  is  often  laid  in  Ireland  ;  but  there
are  hundreds  of  places  in  Scotland  in  Avhich  some  of
the  exploits  are  said  to  have  been  performed.  I
know  not  how  many  cairns  are  supposed  to  contain
the  bones  of  the  wild  boar,  whose  bristles  wounded
the  feet  of  Diarmaid  when  he  paced  his  length  against
the  hair  ;  Kyle  Eeay,  in  Skye,  is  named  after  a  giant
warrior  wlio  leaped  the  strait.  Tliere  are  endless  moun-
tains bearing  Ossianic  names  in  all  parts  of  Scotland,
and  even  in  the  Isle  of  Man  the  same  names  are  to
be  found  mixed  up  with  legends.  In  April  I860,
I  met  a  peasant  near  Ramsay  who  knew  the  name  of
Fin  MacCoul,  though  he  would  not  say  a  word  about
him  to  me.  In  Train's  history  of  the  island,  published
by  Mar}'  Quiggin,  1845,  at  page  359,  is  this  note  : —

"  In  a  letter,  dated  20th  September  1844,  from  a  highly  re-
spected correspondent  in  the  Isle  of  Man,  he  says — '  Are  you
aware  that  the  septennial  appearance  of  the  island,  said  to  be
submerged  in  the  sea  by  enchantment  near  Port  Soderick,  is  ex-
pected about  the  end  of  this  month.'  Though  the  spell  by  which
this  fancified  island  has  been  bound  to  the  bottom  of  the  ocean
since  the  days  of  the  great  Fin  M'Coul,  and  its  inhabitants  trans-
formed into  blocks  of  granile,  might,  according  to  popular  belief,
be  broke  by  placing  a  bible  on  any  part  of  the  enchanted  land
when  at  its  original  altitude  above  the  waters  of  the  deep,  where

"  The  fathers  of  our  Scotch  literature,"  and  the  report  of  the

Highland  Society


INTRODUCTION.  xli

it  is  permitted  to  remain  only  for  the  short  space  of  thirty
minutes.  No  person  has  yet  had  the  hardihood  to  make  the
attempt,  lest,  in  case  of  failure,  the  enchanter,  in  revenge,  might
cast  his  club  over  Mona  also."

And  in  Cregeen's  Manks  dictionary,  by  the  same  pub-
lisher, 1835,  is  this  Manks  proverb —

"  Ny  three  geayghyn  s'  feayrey  dennee  Fion  M'Cooil
Geay  henneu,  as  geay  huill,
As  geay  fo  ny  shiauill."

"Wliich  I  understand  to  mean —

The  three  coldest  winds  that  came  to  Fion  M'Cooil,
Wind  from  a  thaw,  wind  from  a  hole,
And  wind  from  under  the  sails.

In  short,  I  believe  that  the  heroes  of  Ossian  belong  to
the  race,  not  to  any  one  set  of  poems,  or  to  any  single
branch  of  the  Celtic  language.

2d.  There  are  tales,  not  necessarily  about  the  Fine,
consisting  partly  of  plain  narrative  and  dialogue,  which
vary  with  every  narrator,  and  probably  more  or  less
every  time  the  story  is  told  ;  and  partly  of  a  kind  of
measui-ed  prose,  which  is  unHke  anything  I  know  in
any  other  language.  I  suspect  that  these  have  been
compositions  at  some  time,  but  at  what  time  I  cannot
even  guess.

These  almost  always  relate  to  Ireland  and  Scandi-
navia ;  to  boats,  knights,  swords,  and  shields.  Tliere
are  adventures  under  ground,  much  battle,  generally  an
island  with  fire  about  it  (perhaps  Iceland),  and  a  lady
to  be  carried  off.  Tliere  is  often  an  old  woman  who
has  some  mysterious  vessel  of  balsam  which  brings
the  dead  to  life,  and  a  despised  character  who  turns
out  to  be  the  real  hero,  sometimes  a  boaster  who  is
held  up  to  ridicule.  I  behove  these  to  be  bardic  re-
citations fast  disappearing   and   changing  into  prose  ;


xlii  IXTRODLX'TION.

for  the  older  the  narrator  is,  the  less  educated,  and
the  farther  removed  from  the  rest  of  the  world,  the
more  his  stories  are  garnished  with  these  passages.
"Fin  MacCumhal  goes  to  Gratfec,"  laublished  in  1857
from  Mayo,  is  e\adently  a  translation  of  a  tale  of  this
kind.  In  all  these,  the  scene  is  laid  in  Eirinn  and  Loch-
Ian,  now  Ii-eland  and  Scandinavia,  and  these  would
seem  to  have  been  border  countries.  Perhaps  the
stories  relate  to  the  time  when  the  Scandinai^ans
occupied  part  of  the  Western  Isles.

3d.  There  is  popular  liistory  of  events  which  really
happened  within  the  last  few  centuries  :  of  this,  I  have
gathered  none,  but  I  heard  a  great  deal  in  a  very  short
time,  and  I  have  heard  it  all  my  hfe.  It  is  a  history
devoid  of  dates,  but  with  clear  starting  points.  The
event  happened  at  the  time  of  Shamas  (James)  at  the
battle  of  Shirra  j\Iuir  ;  at  Inverlochy  ;  after  Culloden.
The  battle  was  between  MacXeill  and  MacLeod.
MacLeod  came  from  that  castle.  They  met  on  that
strand.  The  dead  are  buried  there.  Their  descendants
now  live  in  such  a  place.  He  was  the  last  man
hanged  in  Harris.  That  is  called  the  slab  of  lamenta-
tion, from  which  the  MacLeans  embarked  for  Ireland
when  the  MacDonuhls  had  conquered  them,  and  taken
the  land.  MacLean  exposed  liis  wife  on  the  Lady
Eock  because  she  had  made  his  servant  blow  up  one  of
the  ships  of  the  Spanish  Armada,  for  jealousy  of  the
Spanish  lady  who  was  on  board.  The  history  is
minute  and  circumstantial,  and  might  be  ver}'  interest-
ing if  faithfully  collected,  but  it  is  rather  local  than
national,  and  is  not  within  the  scope  of  my  work.  It
is  by  far  the  most  abundant  popular  lore,  and  has  still
a  great  hold  on  tlie  people.  The  decision  of  a  magis-
trate in  a  late  case  of  "  Sapaid"  (broken  heads)  was  very
effective,  because  he  appealed  to  this  feeling.     It  was


INTRODUCTION,  xliii

thus  described  to  me  :  "  All !  he  gave  it  to  them.  He
leant  back  in  liis  chair,  and  spoke  grandly  for  half  an
hour.  He  said  you  are  as  wild  men  fighthig  together
in  the  days  of  King  Shamas."

4th.  There  are  tales  which  relate  to  men  and
women  only,  and  to  events  that  might  have  happened
anywhere  at  any  time.  They  might  possibly  be  true,
and  equally  true,  whether  the  incidents  happened  to  an
Eastern  sage  or  a  wise  old  Higlilander.  Such  tales  as
Nos.  19  and  20.  These  are  plentiful,  and  their  charac-
teristic is  sagacity  and  hidden  meaning.

•5th.  There  are  chiltben's  tales,  of  wliich  some  are
given.  They  are  in  poetry  and  prose  as  elsewhere,  and
bear  a  general  resemblance  to  such  tales  all  over  the
world.  The  cat  and  the  mouse  play  parts  in  the
nursery  drama  of  the  Western  Isles,  as  well  as  in
"  Contes  et  Apolognies  Indiens  inconnus  jusqu'  a  ce
jour,"  etc.  ;  a  translation  into  French,  by  Mr.  Stanis-
laus Julien,  in  18C0,  of  Chinese  books,  which  were
translated  into  that  language  from  Sanscrit  in  1565,  by
a  Cliinese  doctor,  and  President  of  the  Ministry  of
Justice,  who  composed  "  The  Forest  of  Comparisons,"
in  twenty-four  volumes,  divided  into  20  classes,  and
subdivided  into  508  sections,  after  twenty  years  of
hard  labour,  during  which  he  abstracted  about  40U
works.  This  is  the  name  of  one  :  Fo-choue-kiun-
nieou-pi-king.

Let  those  who  call  Gaelic  hard,  try  that ;  or  this  :
Tchong-king-siouen-tsi-pi-yu-king.

Let  those  who  contemn  nursery  rhymes,  tliink  of
the  French  savant,  and  the  Chinese  cabinet  minister,
and  the  learning  which  they  have  bestowed  on  the  con-
versations of  cats  and  mice.

6th.  Eiddles  and  puzzles,  of  which  there  are  a  very
great  number.     They  are  generally  descriptive,  such  as.


Xliv  IXTRODUCTIOX.

"No  bigger  than  a  barley  corn,  it  covers  tlie  king's
board" — (the  eye).  I  have  given  a  few.  If  any
despise  riddles,  let  them  bear  in  mind  that  the  Queen
of  Sheba  is  beheved  to  have  propounded  riddles  to
Solomon,  and  that  Samson  certainly  proposed  a  riddle
to  the  Philistines.  I  am  told  that  riddles  are  common
in  India  now.

7th.  Proverbs,  in  prose  and  in  verse,  of  which
151.5  Avere  printed  in  1819,  and  many  more  are  still
to  be  got.  Many  are  evidently  very  old  from  their
construction,  and  some  are  explained  by  the  stories,  for
example,  "  Blackberries  in  February "  has  no  yery
evident  meaning,  but  a  long  story  explains  that  diffi-
culties may  be  vanquished.  A  king's  son  was  sent  by
a  stepmother  to  get  "  that  which  grew,  and  is  neither
crooked  nor  straight" — (sawdust).  "  Blackberries  in
February,"  which  he  found  growing  in  a  charnel-house,
and  a  tliird  thing,  equally  easy  to  find  when  the  way
was  known.

8th.  There  are  songs,  of  which  there  arc  a  vast
number,  pubhshed  and  unpublished,  of  all  sorts  and
kinds,  sung  to  wild  and  peculiar  tunes.  They  are  con-
demned and  forbidden  in  some  districts,  and  are
vanishing  rapidly  from  all.  These  used  to  be  sung
continually  within  my  recollection,  and  many  of  them
are  wild,  and,  to  my  ear,  beautiful.  There  are  songs
composed  in  a  particular  rhythm  for  rowing,  for  washing
clothes  by  dancing  on  them  ;  songs  whose  rhythm
resembles  a  piobroch  ;  love  songs  ;  war  songs  ;  songs
which  are  nearly  all  chorus,  and  which  are  composed
as  they  are  sung.  The  composer  gives  out  a  single
line  applicable  to  anything  then  present,  and  the
chorus  fills  up  the  time  by  singing  and  clapping  hands,
till  the  second  Hne  is  prepared.  I  have  known  such
lines  fired  at  a  sportsman  by  a  bevy  of  girls  who  were


INTRODUCTION.  xlv

waulking  blankets  in  a  byre,  and  who  made  tlie  gun
and  the  dog  the  theme  of  several  stanzas.  Eeid's
BibHotheca  Scoto  Celtica,  1832,  gives  a  list  of  eighty-
one  Gaelic  books  of  poetry  jn-inted  since  1785.  There
are  hymn  books,  song  books,  and  poetry,  composed  by
known  and  unknoAvn  bards,  male  and  female.  Of  the
former,  Mackenzie,  in  his  beauties  of  Gaelic  poetry,
gives  a  list  of  thirty-two,  with  specimens  of  their  works
and  a  short  biography.  Of  the  latter  class,  the  un-
known poets,  there  are  many  at  the  present  day,  and
who  is  to  guess  their  number  in  times  when  men  did
nothing  but  fight  and  sing  about  their  battles.  A  very
few  of  these  bards  have  become  known  to  the  world
by  name,  and,  in  all  probabiHty  their  merits  never
will  be  known.  Let  any  one  translate  Sir  Patrick
Spens  or  Annie  Laurie  into  French  or  Greek,  or  read
a  French  translation  of  Waverley,  and  the  effect  of
translation  on  such  compositions  will  be  evident.

9  th.  The  romantic  popular  tales  of  which  this
collection  mainly  consists.

I  presume  that  I  have  said  enough  as  to  their  col-
lection, and  that  I  may  now  point  out  what  seems  to
me  to  be  their  bearing  on  the  scientific  part  of  the  sub-
ject ;  that  I  may  take  them  as  traditions,  and  argue
from  them  as  from  estabhshed  facts.  I  have  endea-
voured to  show  how,  when,  and  where  I  got  the
stories  ;  each  has  its  own  separate  pedigree,  and  I  have
given  the  original  Gaelic,  with  the  closest  translation
which  I  was  able  to  make.

Now,  let  me  mention  the  works  in  which  I  have
found  similar  tales,  and  which  are  within  the  reach  of
all  who  can  read  English.  First — Tales  from  the  Xorse,
ti-anslated  by  G.  W.  Dasent,  published  1859.  Many  of
the  Gaelic  tales  collected  in  1859  resemble  these  very
closely.     The  likeness  is  pointed  out  in  the  notes.


Xlvi  IXTRODUCTIOX.

It  is  impossible  that  the  hook  could  have  become
known  to  the  people  who  told  the  stories  witliin  the
time,  but  if  it  were,  a  manuscript  which  has  been  lent
to  me  by  the  translator,  proves  that  the  stories  were
known  in  Scotland  before  the  translation  from  the
Norse  was  made  public.

It  is  a  verbatim  copy  made  by  a  clerrfyman  from  a
collection  of  fourteen  tales,  gathered  by  "  Pctor
Buchan,  editor  of  the  Ancient  Ballads  and  Songs  of
the  North  of  Scotland."  It  is  dated  1847,  Glasgow  ;
and  signed,  Alexander  B.  Gi'osart,  The  tales  are
written  in  EngUsh,  and  versions  of  all  except  three,
had  previously  come  to  me  in  Gaelic.  For  example,
(No.  2),  The  Battle  of  the  Birds  closely  resembles  "  Tlie
^Master  Maid"  from  Norway,  but  it  stiU  more  resem-
bles Mr.  Peter  Buchan's  "  Greensleeves,"  found  in
Scotland  thirteen  years  before  the  Norse  tales  -n-ere
translated.  The  manuscript  was  sent  by  ]\Ir.  Grosart,
after  he  had  read  the  Norse  tales,  and  it  seems  to  be
clearly  proved  that  these  stories  are  common  to  Nor-
way and  to  Scotland.

I  have  found  very  few  stories  of  the  kind  amongst
the  peasantry  of  the  low  country,  though  I  have  sought
them.  I  find  .such  names  as  Fingal  in  Mr.  Buchan's
stories,  and  I  know  them  to  be  common  in  the  islands
where  the  scene  is  often  laid.  The  language  is  not
that  of  any  peasantry,  and  I  have  come  to  the  con-
clusion that  this  collection  is  mostly  derived  from
Gaelic,  directly  or  indirectly,  perhaps  from  the  shoals
of  West  Highlanders  and  Irishmen  who  used  to  come
down  a.s  shearers  every  harvest,  and  who  are  now
scattered  all  over  Scotland  as  farm-servants  and  drovers,
and  settled  in  Edinburgh  and  Glasgow  as  porters.  I
know  from  one  of  these,  a  drover,  who  goes  every  year
to  the  south  with  cattle,  that  he  has  often  entertained


INTRODUCTION.  xlvii

lowland  farm-servants  by  telling  in  English  the  stories
A^'hich  he  learned  as  a  child  in  South  Uist.  I  know
of  men  in  Paisley,  Greenock,  and  Edinburgh,  who  are
noted  for  their  knowledge  of  sgeulachd.  But  while
I  hold  that  this  particular  collection  was  not  told  in
this  form  by  lowdand  Scotch  peasants,  I  know  that  they
still  do  tell  such  stories  occasionally,  and  I  also  know^
that  Englishmen  of  the  lower  ranks  do  the  same.  I
met  two  tinkers  in  St.  James's  Street  in  February,  with
black  faces  and  a  pan  of  burning  coals  each.  They
were  follow^ed  by  a  wife,  and  preceded  by  a  mangy
terrier  vnih  a  stiff  tail.  I  joined  the  party,  and  one
told  me  a  version  of  "  the  man  who  travelled  to  learn
what  shivering  meant,"  while  Ave  Avalked  together
through  the  park  to  Westminster.  It  Avas  clearly  the
popular  tale  which  exists  in  Norse,  and  German,  and
Gaelic,  and  it  bore  the  stamp  of  the  mind  of  the  class,
and  of  the  man,  who  told  it  in  his  OAvn  peculiar  dialect,
and  who  ckessed  the  actors  in  his  own  ideas.  A
cutler  and  a  tinker  travel  together,  and  sleep  in  an
empty  haunted  house  for  a  rcAvard.  They  are  beset  by
ghosts  and  spirits  of  murdered  ladies  and  gentlemen,
and  the  inferior,  the  tinker,  .shoAvs  most  courage,  and
is  the  hero.  "  He  went  into  the  cellar  to  draw  beer,
and  there  he  found  a  little  chap  a-sittin'  on  a  barrel
with  a  red  cap  on  'is  'ed ;  and  sez  he,  sez  he,  *  Buzz.'
'  "Wot's  buzz  Ì '  sez  the  tinker.  '  Never  you  mind
wot's  buzz,'  sez  he.  'That's  mine;  don't  you  go  for
to  touch  it,'  "  etc.  etc.  etc.

In  a  less  degree  many  are  like  the  German  stories
of  the  brothers  Grimm.  That  collection  has  been
translated,  and  a  book  so  well  knoAvn  may  possibly  have
found  its  way  into  the  Higldands.  It  is  impossible  to
speak  Avith  certainty  ;  but  when  all  the  narrators  agree
in  saying  that  they  have  knoAvn  their  stories  aU  their


xlviii  IXTRODUCTIOX.

lives,  and  when  tlie  variation  is  so  marked,  the  reseiii-
hlance  is  rather  to  be  attributed  to  common  origin  tlian
to  books.  I  only  once  heard  of  such  a  book  in  the
Highlands.  It  was  given  to  a  gamekeeper  in  Suther-
land for  his  children,  and  was  condeuuied,  and  put
out  of  the  way  as  trasL

The  Gaelic  stories  resemble  in  some  few  cases  the
well-known  tales  of  Hans  Andersen,  founded  on  popu-
lar tales  told  in  Denmark.

And  they  resemble  sundry  other  books  which  are
avowedly  founded  on  popular  tales  collected  in  various
countries.

Some  are  like  the  French  tales  of  the  Countess
D'Aulnoy,  Avhich  have  been  translated.  One  is  hke
part  of  Shakspeare,  but  it  is  still  more  like  the  Itahan
story  in  Boccaccio,  from  wliich  part  of  Cynibeline  is  sup-
posed to  be  taken.  Perliaps  Shakspeare  may  have
founded  Cymbehne  on  a  popular  tale  then  current  in
England  as  well  as  in  Italy.

A  few  resemble  the  Arabian  !N^ights,  and  in  some
cases  I  believe  that  the  stories  have  been  derived  from
early  English  translations  of  that  well-known  book.  I
used  myself  to  read  an  edition  of  1815  to  my  piper
guardian,  in  return  for  his  ursgeuls,  but  he  seemed
more  inclined  to  blame  the  tyranny  of  the  kings  than
to  admire  the  Eastern  stories.

MacLean  has  himself  told  tlie  story  of  Aladdin  in
Gaelic  as  his  share  of  a  winter  night's  entertainment,
and  I  have  heard  of  several  people  of  the  poorer  class
who  know  tlie  Arabian  Nights  well.  But  sucli  stories
are  easily  known  after  a  little  experience  has  been
gained.  The  whole  of  a  volume  is  run  together,  the
incidents  follow  in  their  order,  or  in  something  like  it.
The  difference  in  style  is  as  marked  as  the  contrast
between  a  drift  tree  and  a  wrecked  vessel,  but  as  it


INTRODUCTION.  xlix

is  curious  to  trace  the  change  from  Eastern  ways  as
seen  through  an  EngKsh  translation  of  a  French  view
of  the  original  Arabic,  I  give  specimens.  These  contain
the  incidents  embodied  in  stories  in  the  Arabian  Nights,
but  the  whole  machinery  and  decoration,  manners  and
customs,  are  now  as  completely  West  Highland  as  if
the  tales  had  grown  there.  But  for  a  camel  which
appears,  I  would  almost  give  up  my  opinion,  and  adopt
tliat  of  ]\IacLean,  who  holds  that  even  these  are
pure  traditions.

In  support  of  his  view  it  may  be  said  that  there
are  hundreds  of  other  books  as  well  known  in  England
as  those  mentioned  above,  of  which  neither  I  nor  my
collectors  have  ever  found  a  trace.  Jack  and  the
Bean-stalk,  and  Jack  the  Giant-killer,  Beauty  and  the
Beast,  and  the  Sleeping  Beauty  in  the  "Wood,  as  knoA\Ti
in  England,  are  unknoAvn  in  the  Highlands.  None  of
the  adventures  of  ]\Ir.  Pickwick,  or  Sam  Weller,  or
Jack  Shepherd,  or  Gulhver,  or  Eobinson  Crusoe,  are
mixed  up  with  the  prose  tales.  No  part  of  the  story
of  Wallace,  as  told  in  the  "  Scottish  chiefs,"  or  of
"  Waverley,"  is  to  be  found  in  popular  history.  There
is  notlhng  like  "  The  Mysteries  of  London."  There
are  none  of  the  modern  horrors  of  which  ballads  have
been  made,  such  as  "  Sad  was  the  day  when  James
Greenacre  first  got  acquainted  with  Sarah  Gale."
There  are  no  gorgeous  palaces,  and  elegant  fairies  ;
there  are  no  enchanters  flying  in  chariots  drawn  by
winged  griffins  ;  there  are  no  gentle  knights  and  noble
dames  ;  no  spruce  cavahers  and  well-dressed  ladies  ;
no  heroes  and  heroines  of  fashionable  novels  ;  but,  on
the  contrary,  everything  is  poj^ular.  Heroes  are  as
wild,  and  unkempt,  and  savage  as  they  probably  were
in  fact,  and  kings  are  men  as  they  appear-  in  Lane's
translations  of  the  Arabian  Nights.


1  IXTRODUCTIOX.

Eastern  tale  tellers  knew  what  Haroun  al  Easchid
must  have  suflfered  when  he  put  on  the  fisherman's
clothes,  and  ]\Ir.  Lane  has  not  scrupled  to  follow  the
original  Arabic.

K  the  peoi)le  of  the  AVest  Highlands  have  added
book  stories  to  their  traditions,  they  have  selected
those  oidy  which  were  taken  from  peasants  like  them-
selves in  other  countries,  and  tliey  have  stripped  off  all
that  was  foreign  to  their  own  manners.  The  people
have  but  taken  back  their  own.

Besides  books  accessible  to  all  English  readers,  I
tì.nd  similar  stories  in  books  beyond  the  reach  of  the
people.  I  have  pointed  out  in  the  notes  all  that  were
Avithin  my  reach,  and  came  under  my  notice  ;  but  this
part  of  the  subject  is  a  study,  and  requires  time  to
acquire  knowledge  wliich  I  do  not  possess.

Such,  then,  is  the  evidence  which  bears  on  the
immediate  origin  of  the  stories.  I  believe  them  to  be
pure  traditions,  very  little  affected  by  modern  books,
and,  if  at  all,  only  by  those  which  are  avowedly  taken
from  popular  tales.  A  trip  of  five  days  in  the  Isle  of
Man  in  April  18G0  lias  but  confirmed  this  opinion.

That  island,  in  spite  of  its  numerous  rulers,  is  still
peculiarly  Celtic.  It  has  belonged  to  Norwegians.  Eng-
lish, Scotch,  "Wclsli,  and  Irisli  have  fought  for  it.  It
has  a  Law  Court  witli  a  Norwegian  name  held  on  a
mound  ;  half  tlie  names  in  the  island  are  Norse,  such  as
Laxey  (Salmon  istlimus),  Langness,  Snafell  ;  but  these
names  are  not  understood  by  the  people  who  live  at
the  places.  Peel  has  a  descriptive  Gaelic  name,  which
means  island  port ;  a  Salmon  is  Braddan,  not  Lax ;  and
of  the  poorer  classes  living  in  the  mountain  farms,  and
on  the  points  and  distant  corners  of  the  island,  there
are  still  many  who  can  hardly  speak  anything  but
Manks.    Their  hair  is  dark  ;  the  sound  of  their  voices,


INTRODUCTION.  ll

even  their  houses,  are  Celtic.  I  know  one  turf  dwelling
which  might  be  a  house  in  North  Uist.  There  was  the
fire  on  the  floor,  the  children  seated  around  it,  the
black  haired  Celtic  mother  on  a  low  stool  in  front, —
the  hens  quarrelling  about  a  nest  under  the  table,  in
which  several  wanted  to  lay  eggs  at  once.

"  Get  out,  Polly  !  Drive  her  out,  John  !  "  And
then  John,  the  son,  drove  out  Polly,  the  hen,  with  a
stick ;  and  the  hen  said,  "  Gurr-r-m ; "  and  ran  in  under
the  table  again  and  said,  "  Cluck,  cluck,"  and  laid  the
egg  then  and  there.  There  was  the  same  kindly,  hospi-
table manner  in  the  poorest  cottage  ;  and  I  soon  found
that  a  Scotch  Highlander  could  speak  Manks  as  soon  as
he  could  acquire  the  art  of  mispronouncing  his  own  lan-
giiage  to  the  right  amount,  and  learn  where  to  introduce
the  proper  English  word.  "  La  fine  " — fine  day — was
the  salutation  everyndiere  ;  and  the  reply,  "Fine,  fine."
But  though  nouns  are  almost  the  same,  and  the  lan-
guage is  but  a  dialect  of  Gaelic,  the  foreigner  was
incomprehensible,  because  he  could  not  pronounce  as
they  did ;  and  I  was  reduced  to  English.  Now  this
island  is  visited  every  summer  by  shoals  of  visitors
from  the  mainland ;  steam-boats  bring  them  from
Liverpool,  a  thousand  at  a  time,  and  they  sweep  over  the
whole  country.  Lf  visitors  import  stories,  here,  there
are  plenty  of  strangers,  and  I  was  a  stranger  myself
K  stories  are  imported  in  books,  here  are  the  books  also.
The  first  picture  I  saw  on  landing  was  a  magnificent  Blue-
beard in  a  shop  window.  He  was  dressed  as  an  Eastern
potentate,  and  about  to  slice  ofi"  his  wife's  head  Avith  a
crooked  scimitar,  while  the  two  brothers  rode  up  to  the
gate  on  prancing  steeds,  with  horror  on  their  faces  and
swords  in  their  hands.  But  there  was  not  a  trace  of
any  of  that  kind  of  story  to  be  found  amongst  the
peasants  with  whom  I  spoke  in  the  Isle  of  Man.


lii


IXTRODUCTION.


I  found  them  willing  to  talk,  eager  to  question,
kindly,  homely  folk,  with  whom  it  was  easy  to  begin
an  acquaintance.  I  heard  ever}Tvhere  that  it  used  to
be  common  to  hear  old  men  telling  stories  about  the
fire  in  Manks  ;  but  any  attempt  to  extract  a  story,
or  search  out  a  queer  old  custom,  or  a  half-forgotten
belief,  seemed  to  act  as  a  pinch  of  suuff  does  on  a
snad.

The  Mauksman  would  not  trust  the  foreigner
with  his  secrets  ;  his  eye  twinkled  suspiciously,  and
his  hand  seemed  unconsciously  to  grasp  his  mouth,  as
if  to  keep  all  fast.  After  getting  quite  at  ease  "n-ith
one  old  fellow  over  a  pipe,  and  having  learned  that  a
neighbour's  cow  had  born  a  calf  to  the  "  Taroo  ustey,"
water  bull,  I  thought  I  might  fish  for  a  story,  and  told
one  as  a  bait.

"  That  man,  if  he  had  two  pints,  would  tell  you
stories  by  the  hour,"  said  a  boy.  "  Oh,  yes,  they  used
to  tell  jjlenty  of  stories,"  said  the  old  man,  "  Skyll  as
we  call  them."

Here  was  the  very  word  mispronounced,  "  sgcul,"
so  my  hopes  rose.  "  Wdl  you  tell  me  a  story  now  1"
"  Have  you  any  churches  in  your  country  T  "  Yes,
and  chapels  ;  but  will  you  tell  me  a  story  ?"  "  What
you  got  to  sell  in  your  bag  ?"  "  "What  a  shame  now,
for  you,  an  old  mananach,  not  to  tell  me  a  story  when
I  have  told  you  one,  and  filled  your  pipe  and  all."
"  What  do  you  pay  for  the  tobacco  f  "  Oh,  will  you
not  tell  the  man  a  story  !"  said  the  boy,  "  I  must  go
and  saw  now,"  said  the  old  man  ;  and  so  we  parted.

But  though  this  was  the  usual  thing,  it  was  not
always  so ;  and  it  soon  became  evident  that  the  stories
given  in  Train's  history  of  the  Isle  of  Man,  are  nearly
all  known  to  the  peojilc  now  ;  and  tliese  are  of  the
same  nature  as  some  knuwu  in  the  Ilij^hlands  of  Scot-


INTRODUCTION.  liii

land  ;   some  are  almost  identical ;   and  nearly  all  the
Manks  customs  are  common  to  tlie  Western  Isles.

Thus  I  heard  of  Fairies,  "Ferish,"  who  hve  in  green
mounds,  and  are  heard  at  times  dressing  mill-stones  in
haunted  mills  ;  of  Taroo  Ustey,  the  water  bull  ;  of
Dmny  Mara,  the  sea  man,  and  of  the  Mermaid  ;  of
Caval  Ustey,  the  water  horse  ;  of  Fion  MacCooil ;  of
a  city  under  the  waves  ;  of  a  magic  island  seen  in  the
far  west.  I  heard  of  giants.  ISTo  one  would  tell
about  them  ;  but  in  a  book  I  found  how  Goddard
Crovan  threw  a  vast  boulder  at  his  scolding  wife,
and  how  a  Norman  baron,  named  "  Kitter "  and
his  cook  ;  "  Eaoch,"  and  his  magic  sword,  "  Macubain,"
made  by  "  Loan  Maclibhuin,  the  dark  smith  of  Dron-
theim ;"  and  "  Hiallus-nan-urd,  the  one-legged  hammer-
man " — are  all  woven  into  a  story,  and  mixed  up  with
such  XoiTregian  names  as  Olave  and  Emergaid,  exactly
as  a  story  is  jumbled  together  in  the  "Western  Isles  of
Scotland.

I  got  some  stories  which  I  have  not  foimd  in  the
Manks  books,  so  I  give  them  here,  in  the  hope  that
some  Manksman  may  be  induced  to  gather  the  popu-
lar lore  of  liis  own  country.  This  from  a  woman  who
lives  near  the  Calf  of  Mam

"  Did  you  ever  hear  tell  of  the  Glashan  ]"

"  No ;  tell  me  about  the  Glashan."

"  Well,  you  see,  in  the  old  times  they  used  to  be  keeping  the
slieep  in  the  folds  ;  and  one  night  an  old  man  forgot  to  put  them
in,  and  he  sent  out  his  son,  and  he  came  back  and  said  the  sheep
were  all  folded,  but  there  was  a  year-old  lamb,  oasht  playing  the
mischief  with  them  ;  and  that  was  the  glashan.

"  You  see  they  were  very  strong,  and  when  they  wanted  a
stack  threshed,  though  it  was  a  whole  stack,  the  glashan  would
have  it  threshed  for  them  in  one  night.

"  And  they  were  running  after  the  women.  There  was  one
of  them  once  caught  a  girl,  and  had  a  hould  of  her  by  the  dress,


liV  IXTRODUCTION.

and  he  sat  down  and  he  fell  asleep  ;  and  then  she  cut  away  all
the  dress,  you  see,  round  about,  this  way,  and  left  it  in  his  fist
and  ran  away ;  and  when  he  awoke,  he  threw  what  he  had  over
his  shoulder,  this  way  ;  and  he  said  (something  in  Manks  which
I  could  not  catch).

"  Well,  you  see,  one  night  the  ould  fellow  sent  all  the  women
to  bed,  and  he  put  on  a  cap  and  a  woman's  dress,  and  he  sat
down  by  the  fire  and  he  began  to  spin ;  and  the  young  glashans,
they  came  in,  and  they  began  saying  something  in  Manks  that
means  '  Are  you  turning  the  wheel  ?  are  you  trying  the  reel  ?'
Well,  the  ould  glashan,  he  was  outside,  and  he  knew  better  than
the  young  ones  ;  he  knew  it  was  the  ould  fellow  himself,  and  he
was  telling  them,  but  they  did  not  mind  him  ;  and  so  the  ould
man  throw  a  lot  of  hot  turf,  you  see,  it  was  turf  they  burned  then,
over  them  and  burned  them  ;  and  the  ould  one  said  (something
in  Mauks).  '  Ton '11  not  understand  that,  now?'  'Yes,  I  do,
pretty  nearly.'  '  Ah,  well.'  And  so  the  glashans  went  away  and
never  came  back  any  more.''

"  Have  you  many  stories  like  that,  guidwife  ?"  "Ah,"  said
she,  "  there  were  plenty  of  people  that  could  tell  these  stories
once.  When  I  was  a  little  girl,  I  used  to  hear  them  telling  them
in  Manks  over  the  fire  at  night ;  but  people  is  so  changed  with
pride  now  that  they  care  for  nothing."

Xijw  liore  is  a  story  Avliich  is  all  over  the  High-
lands in  various  shapes.  Sometimes  it  is  a  Brolliclian
son  of  the  Fuath,  or  a  younjf  water  horse  transformeil  inU)
tlie  likeness  of  a  man,  which  attacks  a  lonely  woman,
and  gets  Inirned  or  scaliled,  and  goes  away  to  his
friends  outsiile.  In  the  islands,  the  woman  generally
says  her  name  is  myself ;  and  the  goblin  answers,
Avhen  asked  who  burned  him,  "  mysel£"  Tliis  Manks
story  is  manifestly  the  same,  though  this  incident  is
left  out.  I  have  heard  it  in  Lewes,  and  in  many  places
besides,  and  part  of  it  is  best  omitteil

The  Glashan,  as  I  found  out  afterwards,  frequented
neighbouring  farms  till  witliin  a  very  late  period.  lie
wore  no   clothes,  and   was   hairy  ;   and,  according   to


INTRODUCTION.  Iv

Train's  liistoiy,  Pliynoddepee,  wliich  means  sometliing
liairy,  was  frightened  away  by  a  gift  of  clothes, —
exactly  as  the  Skipness  long-haired  Gruagach  was
frightened  away  by  the  offer  of  a  coat  and  a  cap.  The
jNIanks  bro-\\Tiie  and  the  Argyllsliire  one  each  repeated
a  rlipue  over  the  clothes  ;  but  the  rhymes  are  not  the
same,  though  they  amount  to  the  same  thing.

Here,  then,  is  a  Gaelic  popular  tale  and  behef  in
Man  ;  and  close  to  it  I  foimd  a  story  which  has  a
counterpart  in  Grimm.  I  heard  it  from  my  landlady
at  Port  Erin,  and  I  met  two  Manlismen  afterwards  who
knew  it —

"  The  fish  all  gathered  once  to  choose  a  king ;  and  the  fluke,
him  that  has  the  red  spots  on  him,  stayed  at  home  to  make  himself
pretty,  putting  on  his  red  spots,  to  see  if  he  would  be  king,  and  he
was  too  late,  for  when  he  came  the  herring  was  king  of  the  sea.
So  the  fluke  curled  his  mouth  on  one  side,  and  said,  '  A  simple
fish  like  the  herring,  king  of  the  sea  !'  and  his  mouth  has  been  to
one  side  ever  since."

It  seems,  too,  that  the  Manks  version  of  "Jack
the  Giant  Killer  "  varies  from  the  English  ;  for

"  Jack  the  Giant  KiUer,"

"  Varv  a  Yuchd  in  the  river,"
killed  a  pig  in  the  river ;  and  the  English  hero  did
notliing  of  the  sort.  In  short,  the  Isle  of  Man  has  its
own  legends,  wliich  have  their  own  peculiarities ;  they
resemble  others,  and  do  not  seem  to  be  taken  from  books.
The  same  class  of  people  tell  them  there  as  elsewhere ;
the  difficulty  of  getting  at  them  is  the  same ;  and  the  key
to  the  secret  is  the  native  language.  From  what  I  gleaned
in  a  five  days'  walk,  I  am  sure  that  a  good  ]\Ianksman
might  yet  gather  a  large  harvest  within  a  very  narrow
space.      And  now  to  retm-n  to  my  own  subject.

I  find  that  men  of  all  ranks  resemble  each  other  ;
that  each  branch  of  popular  lore  has  its  own  special


Ivi  INTRODUCTIOX.

votaries,  as  branches  of  literature  have  amongst  the
learned  ;  that  one  man  is  the  peasant  liistorian  and  tells
of  the  battles  of  tlie  clans ;  another,  a  walking  peerage,
who  knows  the  descent  of  most  of  the  families  in
Scotland,  and  all  about  his  neighbours  and  their
origin ;  others  are  romancers,  and  teU  about  the
giants  ;  others  are  moralists,  and  prefer  the  sagacious
prose  tales,  which  have  a  meaning,  and  might  have  a
moral  ;  a  few  know  the  history  of  the  Feni,  and  are
antiquarians.  Many  despise  the  whole  as  frivohties  ;
tliey  are  practical  moderns,  and  answer  to  practical
men  in  other  ranks  of  society.

But  though  each  prefers  his  own  subject,  the  best
Higliland  story-tellers  know  specimens  of  all  kinds.
.Start  them,  and  it  seems  as  if  they  would  never  stop.
I  timed  one,  and  he  spoke  for  an  hour  without  pause
or  hesitation,  or  verbal  repetition.  His  story  was
Connall  Gulban,  and  he  said  he  could  repeat  fourscore.
He  recited  a  poem,  but  despised  "  Bardism  ;  "  and  he
followed  me  six  miles  in  the  dark  to  my  inn,  to  tell
me  numbers  1 9  and  20,  which  I  have  condensed ;  for
the  very  same  thing  can  be  shortly  told  when  it  is  not
a  composition.     For  example.

In  telhng  a  story,  narrative  and  dialogue  are
mixed  ;  what  the  characters  have  told  each  other  to  do
is  repeated  as  narrative.  The  people  in  the  story  tell
it  to  each  other,  and  branch  off  into  discussions  about
their  horses  and  houses  and  crops,  or  anytliing  that
happens  to  turn  up.  One  story  grows  out  of  another,
and  the  tree  is  almost  hidden  by  a  foliage  of  the
speaker's  invention.  Here  and  there  comes  a  passage
repeated  by  rote,  and  common  to  many  stories,  and  to
every  good  narrator.  It  seems  to  act  as  a  rest  for  the
memory.  Now  and  then,  an  observation  from  the
audience  starts  an  argument.      In  short,  one  good  story


INTRODUCTIO:^.  Ivii

in  the  mouth  of  a  good  narrator,  with  a  good  audience,
might  easily  go  rambling  on  for  a  whole  winter's  night,
as  it  is  said  to  do.

The  "  Slim  Swarthy  Champion  used  to  last  for  four
hours."  Counall  Gulban  "  used  to  last  for  three  even-
ings. Those  that  wanted  to  hear  the  end  had  to  come
back."  One  of  my  collectors  said  it  would  take  him
a  month  to  write  it  down,  but  I  am  bound  to  add  that
he  has  since  done  it  in  a  very  much  shorter  time.
I  have  heard  of  a  man  who  fell  asleep  by  the  fire,
and  found  a  story  going  on  when  he  awoke  next
morning.  I  have  one  fragment  on  which  (as  I  am
told)  an  old  man  in  Eoss- shire  used  to  found  twenty-
four  stories,  all  of  which  died  with  him.

There  are  varieties  in  pubHc  speakers  amongst  the
people  as  amongst  their  representatives,  for  some  are
eloquent,  some  terse,  some  prosy.

But  though  a  tale  may  be  spun  out  to  any  extent,
the  very  same  incidents  can  be,  and  often  are,  told  in
a  few  words,  and  those  tales  which  have  been  written
for  me  are  fair  representations  of  them  as  they  are
usually  told.  They  are  like  a  good  condensed  report
of  a  rambling  speech,  with  extraneous  matter  left  out.
One  narrator  said  of  the  longest  story  which  I  had  then
got — "  It  is  but  the  contents ;"  but  I  have  more  than
once  asked  a  narrator  to  tell  me  the  story  which
he  had  previously  told  to  one  of  my  collectors,  and
a  collector  to  write  down  a  story  which  I  had  pre-
\'iously  heard,  and  I  have  always  found  the  pith,
often  the  very  words.  In  no  instance  have  I  found
anjlhing  added  by  those  whom  I  employed,  when
their  work  was  subjected  to  this  severe  test.

This   is   the  account  which   one  of  my  collectors
gives  of  the  old  customs  of  his  class — he  is  a  workman
employed  by  the  Duke  of  Argyll ;  he  tells  me  that  he
d


Iviii


IXTRODCCTION'.


is  self-educated  ;  and  as  he  repeats  some  of  the  stories
which  he  has  written,  from  memory,  his  account  of  the
way  in  which  lie  acquired  them  is  valuable.

I  remember,  upwards  of  fifty  rears  ago,  when  I  was  a  boy,  roy
father  lived  in  the  farest  nortli  house,  in  the  valley  called  Glen-na
Callanach.  I  also  used  to  be  with  my  granfather ;  he  lived
near  Terbert,  Lochlomond  side.  I  remember,  in  the  winter
nights,  when  a  few  old  people  would  be  togather,  they  would
pass  ihe  time  with  telling  each  other  stories,  which  they  hnd  by
tradition.  I  used  to  listen  attentively,  and  hear  them  telling
about  the  ceatharnaich,  or  freebooters,  which  used  to  come  to
plunder  the  country,  and  take  away  cattle  ;  and  how  their  an-
cestors would  gather  themselves  togather  to  fight  for  their  pro-
perty, the  b.attles  they  fought,  and  the  kind  of  weapons  they  used
to  fight  with  ;  the  manners  of  their  ancestors,  the  dress  they  used
to  wear,  and  different  hardships  they  had  to  endure.

I  was  also  sometimes  amused,  listening  to  some  people  telling
Gaelic  romances,  which  we  called  sgeulachds.  It  was  customary
for  a  few  youngsters  to  gather  into  one  house,  and  whither  idle
or  at  some  work,  such  as  kniting  stockings  or  spinning,  they  would
amuse  each  other  with  some  innocent  diversion,  or  telling^sgeul-
achds.  Us  that  was  chieldren  was  very  fond  of  listening  to
them,  and  the  servant  maid  that  was  in  my  father's  house  would
often  tell  us  a  sgeulachd  to  keep  us  queit.

In  those  days,  when  people  killed  their  Marte  cow  they  kecpt
the  hide,  and  tanned  it  for  leather  to  themselves.  In  those  days
every  house  was  furnished  with  a  wheel  and  a  reel  ;  the  women
spun,  and  got  their  webs  woven  by  a  neighbouring  weaver ;  also,
the  women  was  dyers  for  themselves,  so  that  the  working  class
had  their  leather,  their  linen,  and  their  cloth  of  their  own  manu-
facturing ;  and  when  they  required  the  help  of  a  shoemaker,  or
of  a  tailor,  they  would  send  for  them.  The  tailors  and  shoe-
m.akers  went  from  house  to  house,  to  work  wherever  they  were
required,  and  by  travelling  the  country  so  much,  got  aquaint
with  a  great  maney  of  the  traditionary  tales,  and  divulged  them
through  the  country ;  and  as  the  country  people  made  the  telling
of  these  tales,  and  listening  to  hear  them,  their  winter  night's
amusement,  scarcely  aney  part  of  them  would  be  lost.     Some  of


IXTRODUCTIOX.  lÌX

these  ronicances  is  supposed  to  be  of  great  antiquity,  on  account
of  some  of  the  Gaelic  words  being  out  of  use  now.  I  remember,
about  forty  years  ago,  of  being  in  company  with  a  man  that  was
watching  at  night ;  he  wished  me  to  stop  with  him,  and  he  told
me  a  (sgeulachd)  romance  ;  and  last  year  1  heard  a  man  telling
the  same  story,  about  therty  miles  distante  from  where  I  had
heard  it  told  forty  years  before  that ;  and  the  man  which  told
me  the  tale  could  not  tell  me  the  meaning  of  some  of  the  old
Gaelic  words  that  was  in  it.  At  first  I  thought  they  were  foreign
words,  but  at  last  I  recollected  to  have  heard  some  of  them  re-
peated in  Ossian's  poems,  and  it  was  by  the  words  that  was
before,  and  after  them,  that  I  understood  the  meaning  of  them.
The  same  man  told  me  another  story,  which  he  said  he  learned
from  his  granfather,  and  Denmark,  Swedden,  and  Noraway  was
named  in  it  in  Gaelic,  but  he  forgot  the  name  of  the  two  last-
named  places.

It  appears  likely  to  me,  that  some  of  these  tales  was  invented
by  the  Druids,  and  told  to  the  people  as  sermons  ;  and  by  these
tales  the  people  was  caused  to  believe  that  thei-e  was  fairies  which
lived  in  little  conical  hills,  and  that  the  fairies  had  the  power  of
being  either  visible  or  invisible,  as  they  thought  proper,  and  that
they  had  the  power  of  enchanting  people,  and  of  taking  them
away  and  make  fairies  of  them  ;  and  that  the  Druids  had  charms
which  would  prevent  that;  and  they  would  give  these  charms  to  the
people  for  payment;  and  maney  stories  would  be  told  about  people
being  taken  away  by  the  fairies,  and  the  charms  which  had  to
be  used  to  break  the  spell,  and  get  them  back  again  ;  and  others,
on  account  of  some  neglidgeance,  never  got  back  aney  more.

Also  that  there  was  witches  ;  people  which  had  communica-
tion with  an  evil  spirit,  from  which  they  got  the  power  of  chang-
ing themselves  into  aney  shape  they  pleased ;  that  these  witches
often  put  themselves  in  the  shape  of  beasts,  and  when  they  were
in  the  shape  of  beasts,  that  they  had  some  evil  design  in  view,
and  that  it  was  dangerous  to  meet  them.  Also  that  they  could,
and  did,  sometimes  take  away  the  produce  of  people's  dairy,  and
sometimes  of  the  whole  farm.  The  Druidical  priests  pretended
that  they  had  charms  that  would  prevent  the  witches  from  doing
aney  harm,  and  they  would  give  a  charm  for  payment.  When
the  first  day  of  summer  came,  the  people  was  taught  to  put  the


IX  INTRODUCTION.

fire  out  of  their  bouses,  and  to  place  it  on  some  emince  near  tlie
house  for  to  keep  away  the  witches,  and  that  it  was  not  safe  for
them  to  kindle  a  fire  in  their  house  aney  more,  until  they  bought
it  from  beir  s  druide.  That  fire  was  called  beil-teine  (beils-
fire),  and  the  first  day  of  summer  was  called  beil-fires  day  ;  and
also  when  the  first  night  of  winter  came,  the  people  would  gather
fuel  and  make  blazing  fire  for  to  keep  away  the  witches,  or  at
least  to  deprive  them  of  the  power  of  taking  away  the  produce  of
the  farm,  and  then  they  would  go  to  the  Druid  and  buy  a  kindling
of  what  was  called  the  holy  fire.  The  Druids  also  caused  the
people  to  believe  that  some  families  had  been  enchanted  and
changed  into  beasts,  and  as  the  proper  means  had  not  been  used,
the  spell  was  never  broken  ;  and  that  swans,  teals,  and  mar-
maids  had  been  different  beings,  familys  that  had  been  enchanted.
Beil  or  Beul  was  the  name  which  the  Druids  gave  their  god,
and  the  Druids  of  Beil  pretended  to  be  the  fiiends  of  the  people  ;
they  pretended  to  have  chai-ms  to  cure  dififerent  kinds  of  diseases,
and  also  charms  to  prevent  fairies,  ghosts,  and  witches,  from
annoying  or  harming  people.  It  is  a  well-known  fact,  that  the
superstitions  of  the  Druids  has  been  handed  down  from  genera-
tion to  generation  for  a  great  maney  ages,  and  is  not  wholy
extinct  yet ;  and  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  some  of  the  tales,
which  was  invented  in  those  days  for  to  fright  the  people,  has
been  told  and  kept  in  rememberance  in  the  sell  and  same  manner.
The  priests  of  Beil  was  the  men  that  was  called  Druids,  the
miracles  which  they  pretended  to  perform  was  called  meur-
bheileachd  (beil-fingering),  and  their  magic  which  they  pretended
to  perform  was  called  druichd  (druidisem),  and  we  have  plenty
of  reason  to  believe  superstitious  tales  as  well  as  superstition,
originated  among  the  Druids.  John  Dewae.

"  J.  Campbell,  Esq.

"  Sir — I  hope  you  will  corect  aney  errors  that  you  may  find
on  this  piece  which  I  wrote."

I  have  corrected  only  two  or  three  errors  in  spelling,  and  the
writing  is  remarkably  clear,  but  I  have  left  some  words  which
express  the  Gaelic  ])ronunciation  of  English.

The  derivation  of  Miorbhuii.,  a  marvel,  from  the  finger  of
Bel,  was  suggested  by  Dr.  Smith  (see  Armstrong's  Die.)  J.F.C.


INTRODUCTION.  Ixi

Now  let  me  return  to  the  cottage  of  old  Macphie,
where  I  heard  a  version  of  the  Sea-Maiden,  and  let  me
suppose  that  one  of  the  rafters  is  the  drift  log  which  I
saw  about  to  be  added  to  a  roof  in  the  same  island.

The  whole  roof  is  covered  with  peat  soot,  but  that
may  be  scraped  away,  and  the  rough  wood  appears.
There  are  the  holes  of  boring  sea  shells,  filled  with  sand
and  marine  products.  It  is  evident  that  the  log  came
by  sea,  that  it  did  not  come  in  a  ship,  and  that  it  was
long  enough  in  warm  salt  water  for  the  bai*nacles  to
live  and  die,  and  for  their  dwelHngs  to  be  filled  with,
sea  rubbish ;  that  it  floated  through  latitudes  where
barnacles  live.  The  fairy  eggs,  which  are  picked  up  on
the  same  shore,  point  to  the  West  Indies  as  a  stage  on
the  way.  Maps  of  ocean  currents  shew  the  gulf- stream
flowing  from  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  past  the  Hebrides,
but  the  tree  is  a  fir,  for  there  is  a  bit  of  bark  which
proves  the  fact,  and  it  appears  that  pines  grow  between
40'^  and  GO*'  in  America.  It  is  therefore  possible  that
the  rafter  was  once  an  American  fir  tree,  growing  in  the
Eocky  Mountains;  that  it  was  swept  into  the  Mississippi,
and  carried  to  the  Gulf  of  INIexico  ;  drifted  by  the  gulf-
stream  past  the  West  India  Islands  to  the  Hebrides,
and  stranded  by  a  western  gale  on  its  voyage  to  Spitz-
bergen.  But  all  this  must  have  happened  long  ago,  for
it  is  now  a  rafter  covered  with  the  soot  of  generations.
That  rafter  is  a  strange  fact,  it  is  one  of  a  series,  and
has  to  be  accounted  for.  There  it  is,  and  a  probable
account  of  its  journey  is,  that  it  came  from  East  to
West  without  the  help  of  man,  in  obedience  to  laws
which  govern  the  world.

That  smoked  rafter  certainly  was  once  a  seed  in  a
fir-cone,  somewhere  abroad.  It  grew  to  be  a  pine  tree ;
it  must  have  been  white  vdih  snow  in  winter,  and
green  in  summer,  and  glittering  with  rain  drops  and


Ixii  IXTRODUCTIOX.

hoar-frost  in  bright  sunshine  at  various  times  and  sea-
sons. Tlie  number  of  years  it  stood  in  the  forest  can
be  counted  by  the  rings  in  the  Avood.  It  is  certain  that
it  was  torn  up  by  the  roots,  for  the  roots  are  there  still.
It  may  have  formed  a  part  of  one  of  these  wonderful  natu-
ral rafts  of  the  Mississippi,  of  which  one  in  1816  was  "no
less  than  ton  miles  in  length,  two  hundred  and  twenty
yards  -wide,  and  eight  feet  deep."*  It  has  been  to  warm
seas,  and  has  worn  a  marine  dress  of  green  and  brown  since
it  lost  its*  own  natural  dress  of  green  branches.  Birds
must  have  sat  on  it  in  the  forest, — crabs  and  shells
have  lived  on  it  at  sea,  and  fish  must  have  swam  about
it ;  and  yet  it  is  now  a  rafter,  hung  with  black  pen-
dants of  peat  smoke.  A  tree  that  grew  beside  it  may
now  be  in  Spitzbergen  amongst  walrusses.  Another
may  be  a  snag  in  the  Mississippi  amongst  alligators,
destined  to  become  a  fossil  tree  in  a  coal  iield.  Part
of  another  may  be  a  Yankee  rocking  chair,  or  it  may
be  part  of  a  ship  in  any  part  of  the  World,  or  the  tram
of  a  cart,  or  bit  of  a  carriage,  or  a  wheel-barrow,  or  a
gate  post,  or  anything  that  can  be  made  of  fir  wood
anywhere  ;  and  the  fate  of  stories  may  be  as  various  as
that  of  fir  trees,  but  their  course  may  be  guessed  at  Ijy
running  a  back  scent  overland,  as  I  have  endeavoured
to  follow  the  voyage  of  a  drift  log  over  sea.

^Macpliie's  story  l)egan  thus  : — "  There  was  a  poor  old
fisher  in  Skye,  and  liis  name  was  Duncan  ; "  and  every
version  of  the  story  which  I  have  found  in  the  High-
lands, and  I  have  found  many,  is  as  highland  as  tlie
peat-reek  on  the  rafters.  The  same  story  is  known  in
many  districts  in  Scotland,  and  it  is  evident,  that  it  has
been  known  there  for  many  years.  It  is  a  curious  fiict.
It  is  worth  the  trouble  of  looking  under  Avhat  is  purely
highland,  to  see  if  its  origin  can  be  discovered.
*  Lyell's  Principles  of  Geology,  p.  267.


INTRODUCTION.  Ixiii

First,  tlieii,  the  incidents  are  generally  strung  to-
gether in  a  particular  order  in  the  Highlands,  but,
either  separately  or  together,  every  incident  in  the
story  is  to  be  fomid  in  some  shape  in  other  languages.
jS^orse  has  it  as  ".Shortshanks."  Irish  has  it.  German
has  it.  It  is  in  the  Italian  of  Straparola  as  "  For-
tuuio."  In  the  French  of  le  Cabinet  des  Fees,  1785.
It  is  in  every  language  in  Europe  as  "St.  George
and  the  Dragon."  It  is  in  Mr.  Peter  Buchan's  English
of  18-17  as  part  of  "  Greensleeves."  It  is  in  "Perseus
and  Andromeda."  The  scene  of  that  story  is  placed  in
Syria,  and  it  is  connected  with  Persia.  There  is
sometliing  in  Sanscrit  about  Indra,  a  god  who  reco-
vered the  stolen  cattle  of  the  gods,  but  here  the  scent
is  very  cold,  and  the  hound  at  fault,  though  it  seems
that  tlie  Sanscrit  hero  was  the  sun  personified,  and
that  he  had  horses  of  many  colours,  including  red  and
wliite,  wliich  were  always  feminine,  as  the  horses  in
Gaelic  stories  are,  and  which  had  wings  and  flew
through  the  air.  These  were  "Svaiikas,"  with  beautiful
steps.  "  Eoliitas,"  red  or  brown  ;  GaeHc,  horses  are
often  described  as  "  Seang,"  "  P^uadh  ; "  and  here  seems
to  be  a  clue  which  is  w^orth  the  attention  of  Eastern
scholars.

There  is  a  mermaid  in  the  story,  and  mermaids
are  mentioned  in  Irish,  and  in  Arabic,  and  in  Manks,
and  Italian :  men  even  assert  that  they  have  seen  mer-
maids in  the  sea  within  the  last  few  years,  amongst
the  Hebrides  and  off  Plymouth.

There  are  creatures.  Falcon,  Wolf  and  Lion.  Tavo
of  them  were  natives  within  historic  times,  one  is  still ;
but  the  third  is  a  foreigner.  There  is  an  Otter,  and  a
Sea  Monster,  and  in  other  tales,  there  are  Bears  and
Doves,  and  other  animals  ;  but  every  one  of  them,
except  the  monster,   is  to  be   found   on  the  road  to


Ixiv  IXTRODrCTIOX.

the  land  -whore  Sanscrit  was  spoken,  and  all  these,  and
many  more,  play  their  part  in  popular  tales  elsewhere,
while  no  real  animal  is  ever  mentioned  which  is  pecu-
liar to  lands  out  of  the  road  which  leads  overland  to
India.

Xearly  all  these  have  Gaelic  names,  and  most  of
them  are  still  living  within  a  few  days'  journey  of  the
Hehrides  under  other  names.  I  saw  a  Hve  wolf  from
a  diligence  one  fine  morning  in  Brittany,  and  I  have
seen  bears  in  Scandinavia  and  in  Germany.  The
only  far-fetched  animal  is  the  Lion,  and  in  another
story  a  similar  creature  ap])ears  as  "  Cu  Seang."  Here
is  a  fresh  scent — for  Sing  is  Lion  in  India — and  may
once  have  meant  Lion  in  Gaehc;  for  though  Leomh-
an  is  the  word  now  used,  Seang  is  applied  to  any-
thing slender  and  active.  Shune  is  a  dog  in  Sanscrit,
Siunnach  a  fox  in  Gaelic,  and  there  are  many  other
Gaelic  words  which  point  to  the  "  eastern  origin  of
(Jeltic  nations."  The  story  cannot  have  crossed  the  sea
from  the  West.  It  is  therefore  probable  that  it  came
from  the  East,  for  it  is  not  of  home  growth,  and  the
•  juestion  is,  how  did  it  get  to  Barra  ?

It  seems  to  have  been  known  along  a  certain  track
for  many  ages.  It  is  possible  that  it  came  from  the
I'ar  East  with  the  peojile,  and  that  it  has  survived  ever
since.  It  is  hard  to  account  for  it  otherwise.  Those
who  have  most  studied  the  s\ibject  so  account  for
])opular  tales  elsewhere,  and,  therefore,  John  ]\Iacphie's
story  of  the  Sea-Maiden  acquires  an  interest  not  all  its
own.

Much  has  been  written,  and  said,  and  discovered
about  the  popular  migrations  which  have  jioured  from
East  to  West,  and  which  are  moving  on  still.  Philo-
logy has  mapped  out  the  cour.se  of  the  human  stream,
and  here,  in  the  mind  of  an  old  fisherman,   unable  to


INTRODUCTION.  Ixv

read,  or  to  speak  any  language  but  his  own,  is  the  end
of  a  clue  Avbicli  seems  to  join  Iran  and  Eirinn ;  as  a
rafter  in  his  hut  may  link  him  Avith  the  Rocky  Moun-
tains.

Admit  that  this  so-called  fiction,  and  others  like  it,
may  be  traditions,  Avhich  have  existed  from  the  earliest
of  times,  and  everj'  Avord  and  incident  acquires  an  in-
terest, for  it  may  lead  to  something  else.

The  story  certainly  grew  in  the  mind  of  man,  as  a
tree  grows  from  a  seed,  but  when  or  Avhere  Ì  It  has  cer-
tainly been  told  in  many  languages.  It  is  Avorth  in-
quiring hoAA^  many  races  have  told  it.

The  incidents,  like  drift  trees,  have  been  associated
Avith  people  and  BA^ents,  as  various  as  birds,  fish,  alli-
gators, AA'alrusses,  and  men  ;  mountain  ranges,  and  ocean
currents.  They  have  passed  through  the  minds  of  OAdd
and  John  Macphie.  They  have  been  adorned  by
poets,  painted  by  artists,  consecrated  by  priests, —
for  St.  George  is  the  patron  saint  of  England  ;  and
now  we  find  that  which  may  have  sprung  from  some
quarrel  about  a  cow,  and  Avhicli  has  passed  through
so  many  changes,  dropping  into  forgetfulness  in  the
mind  of  an  old  fisherman,  and  surrounded  with  the
ideas  wliich  belong  to  his  every-day  life.  Ideas  differ-
ing from  those  of  the  people  who  first  invented  the
story,  as  the  snow  of  the  Eocky  Mountains  differs  from
peat-reek.

Now,  to  look  forAvards,  and  folloAv  in  imagination
the  shoals  of  emigrants  from  Germany,  Scandinavia,
France,  Ireland,  and  Scotland,  who  are  settled  in
clumps,  or  scattered  over  America  and  Australia ;  to
think  of  the  stories  which  have  been  gathered  in
Europe  from  these  people  alone,  and  which  they  have
most  certainly  carried  Avith  them,  and  will  tell  their
children  ;    and  then  the  route  of  popular  tales  here-


Ixvi  INTRODUCTION.

after,  and  their  spread  in  former  ages,  can  be  traced
and  may  be  guessed.

I  liarve  inquired,  and  find  that  several  Islanders,
who  used  to  tell  the  stories  in  Gaelic,  are  now  settled
in  Australia  and  Canada.  One  of  my  relatives  was
nearly  overwhelmed  with  hospitality  in  an  Australian
village,  by  a  colony  of  Argyllshire  Celts,  who  had
fomid  out  that  he  was  a  countryman.

I  was  lately  told  of  a  party  of  men  who  landed  in
South  America,  and  addressed  a  woman  whom  they
found  in  a  hut,  in  seven  different  languages ;  but  in
vain.  At  last,  one  of  them  spoke  Gaelic,  which  he
had  not  done  for  many  years,  and  she  answered,
"  Well,  it  is  to  thyself  I  would  give  the  speech,"  for
she  was  a  native  of  Strathglas.

There  is  a  Gaelic  population  in  Upper  Canada  :
there  are  Highland  regiments  in  India :  many  of  the
Arctic  explorers  were  Highlanders,  and  most  of  the
servants  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company  still  are  :  Dr.
Livingstone  is  in  South  Africa  ;  and  what  is  true  of
Highlanders  is  equally  true  of  Germans  and  Scandi-
navians, they  are  spread  over  the  world.  In  short,
the  "  migration  of  races,"  and  "  the  diffusion  of  popular
tales,"  is  still  going  on,  the  whole  human  race  is
mmgling  together,  and  it  is  fair  to  argue  from  such
facts,  and  to  try  to  discover  that  wliich  is  mUaiown
from  that  which  is  proved.

What  is  true  of  one  Gaelic  story  is  true  of  nearly
all ;  they  contain  within  themselves  evidence  that  they
have  been  domesticated  in  the  country  for  a  long  time,
and  that  they  came  from  the  East,  l)ut  they  belong  to
the  people  now,  Avherever  they  came  from  ;  and  they
seem  also  to  belong  to  tlie  language.

Poems  and  compositions  clearly  do.  In  the  prose
tales,  when   animals  speak,   they  talk  in  their  natural


INTRODUCTION.  Ixvii

key,  so  long  as  they  speak  Gaelic,  and  for  that  reason,
among  others,  I  believe  them  to  be  old  traditions.
The  little  birds  speak  in  the  key  of  all  little  birds  (ee)  ;
they  say,  "  beeg,  beeg."  The  crow  croaks  his  own
music  when  he  says,  "  gawrag,  gawrag."  When  driven
to  say,  "  silly,  silly,"  he  no  longer  speaks  the  language
of  nature.  Grimm's  German  frog  says,  "  warte,  warte,"
he  sings,  "  mach  mir  auf,"  and  talks  his  own  language.
So  does  his  Gaelic  relative,  in  jSTo.  33,  when  he  says, —

"  A  cliaombag  a  chaomhag
An  cuimhne  acli  leat
An  gealladli  beag
A  thug  tliu  aig
An  tobar  Dbonib
A  gbaoil  a  gbaoil."

He  then  imitates  the  quarking  and  gurgling  of  real
frogs  in  a  pond  in  spring,  in  sounds  which  no  Saxon
letters  can  express  ;  but  when  he  sings, —

"  Open  the  door,  my  binney,  my  heart,
Open  the  door,  my  ain  wee  thing,
And  mind  the  words  that  you  and  I  spak',
Dpwn  in  the  meadow,  at  the  well  spring,"

he  is  speaking  in  a  foreign  tongue,  though  the  story
has  been  domesticated  in  the  Lowlands  of  Scotland  for
many  a  long  day,  and  is  commonly  told  there  still.
The  Scotch  story  has  probably  been  found  and  polished
by  some  one  long  ago,  but  when  the  frog  comes
''  loup,  louping,"  he  is  at  home  in  Low  Country  Scotch,
and  these  words  are  probably  as  old  as  the  story  and
the  language.

If  Motherwell's  beautiful  nursery  songs  were  to
be  collected  from  oral  recitation  anywhere,  they  would
prove  themselves  Scotch  by  this  test  :  The  watch- dog
says,    "  woutf,    wouff;"   the    hen    is   "chuckle;"  the


Ixviii  IXTRODUCTIOX.

chickens,  "wheetle,  wlieetics;"  the  cock  is  "  cockie-
leerie-laAV  ;"  the  pigeon,  "  croodle-doo  ;"  the  cow  says,
"  moo."  And  so  also  the  wood-pigeon  who  said,  "  take
two  sheep,  Taffy  take  two,"  spoke  English ;  but  the
blackcock,  and  cuckoo,  and  cock,  in  the  Norse  tales,
who  (juarrelled  about  a  cow,  are  easily  known  to  be
foreigners  when  they  speak  English,  for  the  original
Norse  alone  gives  their  true  note.  The  Gaelic  stories,
tried  by  tliis  test,  certainly  belong  to  the  language  as
they  do  to  the  people  ;  and  now  let  us  see  if  they  can
teach  us  anything  about  the  people,  their  origin,  and
their  habits,  past  and  present.

First,  the  manners  are  generally  those  of  the  day.
The  tales  are  like  the  feasts  of  the  pauper  maniac.
Emperor  of  the  world,  who  confided  to  his  doctor  that
all  his  rich  food  tasted  of  oatmeal  brose.  Kings  live
in  cottages,  and  sit  on  low  stools.  AVhen  they  have
coaches,  they  open  the  door  themselves.  The  queen
saddles  the  king's  horse.  The  king  goes  to  his  o's^ti
stable  when  he  hears  a  noise  there.  Sportsmen  use
guns.  The  fire  is  on  the  floor.  Supernatural  old
women  are  found  spinning  "  beyond"  it,  in  the  warm
place  of  honour,  in  all  primitive  dwellings,  even  in  a
Lapland  tent.  The  king's  mother  puts  on  the  fire,
and  sleeps  in  the  common  room,  as  a  peasant  does.  The
cock  sleeps  on  the  rafters,  the  sheep  on  the  floor,  the
bull  beliind  the  door.  A  ladder  is  a  pole,  with  pegs
stuck  through  it.  Horses  put  their  noses  "into"
bridles.  When  all  Ireland  passes  in  review  before
the  princess,  they  go  in  at  tlie  front  door  and  out  at
tlie  back,  as  they  would  through  a  bothy  ;  and  even
that  unexplained  personage,  the  daughter  of  the  king
of  tlie  skies,  has  maids  wlio  chatter  to  her  as  freely  as
maids  do  to  Highland  mistresses.  AVhen  the  jirince  is
at  death's   door  for  love  of  the  beautiful  lady  in  the


INTRODUCTION.  Lxix

swan's  do-wn  robe,  and  the  queen  mother  is  in  despair,
she  goes  to  the  kitchen  to  talk  over  the  matter.

The  tales  represent  the  actual,  every-day  life  of
those  who  tell  them,  with  great  fidelity.  They  have
dono  the  same,  in  all  likelihood,  time  out  of  mind,
and  that  which  is  not  true  of  the  present  is,  in  all
probabUity,  true  of  the  past ;  and  therefore  something
may  be  learned  of  forgotten  ways  of  life.

If  much  is  of  home  growth,  if  the  fight  with  the
dragon  takes  place  at  the  end  of  a  dark,  quiet
Highland  loch,  Avhere  real  whales  actually  blow  and
splash,  there  are  landscapes  which  are  not  painted
from  nature,  as  she  is  seen  in  the  Isles,  and  these
may  be  real  pictures  seen  long  ago  by  our  ancestors.
Men  ride  for  days  through  forests,  though  the  men
who  tell  of  them  hve  in  small  islands,  where  there
are  only  drift  trees  and  bog  pine.  There  are  traces  of
foreign  or  forgotten  laws  or  customs.  A  man  buys  a
vnie  as  he  would  a  cow,  and  acquires  a  right  to  shoot
her,  which  is  acknowledged  as  good  law.

Ca?sar  tells  of  the  Gauls,  that  "  men  have  the
power  of  life  and  death  over  their  wives,  as  well  as
their  children."  It  appears  that  an  Icelandic  betrothal
was  little  more  than  the  purchase  of  a  wife ;  and  in
this  the  story  may  be  a  true  picture  of  the  past.

Men  are  bound  with  the  binding  of  the  three
smalls — waist,  ankles,  and  wrists — tightened  and  tor-
tured. The  conqueror  almost  invariably  asks  the
conquered  what  is  his  "  eirig,"  an  old  law  term  for
the  price  of  men's  blood,  which  varied  with  the  rank
of  the  injured  man ;  and  when  the  vanquished  has
revealed  his  riches,  the  victor  takes  his  life,  and  the
spoil ;  his  arms,  combs,  basins,  dresses,  horses,  gold
and  silver,  and  such  deeds  may  have  been  done.  The
tales  which  treat  of  the  wars  of  Eiriiin   and  Lochlann,


IXX  INTRODUCTION.

and  are  full  of  metrical  prose,  describe  arms  and  boats,
liehnets,  spears,  sliields,  and  other  gear ;  ships  that  are
drawn  on  shore,  as  Icelandic  sliips  really  were  ;  boats
and  arms  similar  to  those  wliieh  are  figured  on  old
stones  in  lona  and  elsewhere,  and  are  sometimes  dug
out  of  old  graves  and  peat  mosses.  I  believe  them  to
be  descriptions  of  real  arms,  and  dresses,  manners,  and
events.

For  example,  the  warriors  always  abuse  each  other
before  they  fight.  So  do  the  heroes  of  Ossian;  so  do
the  heroes  of  Homer;  so  do  soldiers  now.  In  the  Times
of  the  29th  of  December  1859,  in  a  letter  from  the
camp  at  Ceuta  is  this  passage  : —

"  While  fighting,  even  when  only  exchanging  long  shots,  the
I^Ioors  keep  up  a  most  hideous  howHng  and  shrieking,  vituperat-
ing their  enemies  in  had  Spanish,  and  making  the  mountains  re-
sound with  the  often-repeated  epithet  of  " perros"  (dogs.)  To
this  the  Spaniards  condescend  not  to  reply,  except  with  bullets,
although  in  the  civil  war  it  was  no  unusual  thing  to  hear  Carlist
and  Christina  skirmishers  abusing  each  other,  and  especially  in-
dulging in  unhandsome  reflections  upon  each  others'  Sovereign."

Again,  the  fights  are  single  combats,  in  which  indi-
viduals attack  masses  and  conquer.  So  were  the
Homeric  combats.  What  Avill  be  the  story  told  in
Africa  by  the  grandson  of  the  Moor  here  descril)ed,
when  he  sits  on  his  flat  roof  or  in  liis  central  court  in
Tetuan,  as  I  have  done  with  one  of  the  Jews  now  ruined  ;
he  will  surely  tell  of  his  ancestor's  deeds,  repeat  the
words  in  which  Achmed  abused  the  unbeliever,  and
tell  how  he  shot  some  mystical  number  of  tlieni  witli
a  single  ball.

"  Upon  the  whole  they  stood  their  ground  very  stoutly,  and
some  of  them  gave  proof  of  great  courage,  advancing  singly  along
the  ridge  until  they  caught  siglit  of  the  first  Spaniards  posted
below  it.,  when  they  discharged  their  espingardus  and  retreated."


INTRODUCTIOX.  Ixxi

"  Stories"  had  begun  in  Morocco  by  the  9tli  of
January  1860,  when  the  next  letter  appeared  : —

"  The  Moors  have  been  giving  out  fantastical  histories  of  their
victories  over  the  Spaniards,  of  their  having  taken  redouhts,
which  they  might  have  held  had  they  thouglit  it  worth  while,
and  in  which  they  would  have  captured  guns  if  the  Christians
had  not  been  so  prudent  as  to  remove  them  beforehand.  These
are  mere  fables."

It  may  be  so,  but  Moors  seem  to  have  fought  as
■wild,  brave,  undisciplined  troops  have  always  fought —
as  Hoiuer's  Greeks  fought,  as  Highlanders  fought,  and
as  Fionn  and  his  heroes  fought,  according  to  tradition.
Omit  the  magic  of  Maghach  Colgar,  forget  that  Moors
are  dark  men,  and  this  might  be  an  account  of  Diar-
maid  and  Conan  in  the  story,  or  of  their  descendants
as  they  were  described  in  1745  by  those  who  were
opposed  to  them  : —

"The  Moors  are  generally  tall  powerful  men,  of  ferocious
aspect  and  great  agility,  and  their  mode  of  coming  on,  like  so
many  howling  savages,  is  not  calculated  to  encourage  and  give
confidence  to  lads  who  for  the  first  time  find  themselves  in  action.
It  seems  nearly  impossible  to  make  them  prisoners.  In  one  en-
counter (most  of  these  little  actions  are  made  up  of  a  number  of
small  fights  between  a  few  companies  of  Spaniards  and  detached
bodies  of  the  Moors,  who  seem  to  have  no  idea  of  attacking  in
battalion  or  otherwise  than  irregularly),  in  which  a  number  of
Moors  were  killed,  one  of  them  was  surrounded  by  four  Caza-
dores,  who  came  down  upon  him  with  fixed  bayonets,  shouting
and  signing  to  him  not  to  fire,  and  that  they  would  give  him
quarter.  The  Moor  took  no  heed  of  their  overtures,  levelled  his
long  gun,  and  shot  one  of  them,  whereupon  he  was,  of  course,  put
to  death  by  the  others."

So,  looking  to  facts  now  occurring,  and  to  history,
"  traditional  fictions"  look  very  true,  for  battles  are  still
a  succession    of  single  combats,   in  which  both  sides


Ixxii  IXTRODUCTIOX.

abuse  each  other,  and  after  whieh  they  boast.  "War
is  rapine  and  cruel  bloodshed,  as  described  by  old
fishermen  in  Barra,  and  by  the  Times'  correspondent
at  Tetuan ;  and  it  is  not  altogether  the  chivalrous
pastime  which  poets  have  sung.

In  another  class  of  tales,  told  generally  as  plain
narrative,  and  which  seem  to  belong  to  savage  times,  a
period  appears  to  be  shadowed  out  when  iron  weapons
were  scarce,  and  therefore  magical  ;  perhaps  before
the  wars  of  Eirinn  and  Lochlann  began  ;  when  combs
were  inventions  sufficiently  new  and  wonderful  to  be
magical  also  ;  when  horses  were  sacred,  birds  sooth-
sayers ;  apples,  oak  trees,  wells,  and  swine,  sacred  or
magical.  In  these  the  touch  of  the  cold  steel  breaks
all  spells  ;  to  relieve  an  enchanted  prince  it  was  but
necessary  to  cut  off  his  head ;  the  touch  of  the  cold
sword  froze  the  marrow  when  the  giant's  heads  leaped
on  again.  So  Hercules  finished  the  Hydra  with  iron,
though  it  was  hot.  The  white  sword  of  light  which
shone  so  that  the  giant's  red-haired  servant  used  it  as
a  torch  when  he  went  to  draw  water  by  night,  was
surely  once  a  rare  bright  steel  sword,  when  most  swords
were  of  bronze,  as  they  were  in  early  times,  unless  it
is  stiU  older,  and  a  mythological  Hash  of  lightning.

This  cLAiiJiiEAMH  GEAL  soLUis  is  ahuost  always
mentioned  as  the  property  of  giants,  or  of  other  super-
natural beings,  and  is  one  of  tlie  magic  gifts  for  which
men  contend  with  them,  and  fight  with  each  other  ;  and
in  this  the  Gaelic  tradition  agrees  with  other  popular
lore.

Fionn  had  a  magic  sword  forged  by  a  fairy  smith,
according  to  a  story  sent  me  from  Islay,  by  Mr.  Car-
michael.  King  Arthur  had  a  magic  sword.  The  Manks
hero,  "  Olave  "  of  Norway,  had  a  sword  with  a  Celtic
name,  "  ^Macabuin,"  made  by  a  smith  who  was  surely


INTRODUCTION.  Ixxiii

a  Celt, — "  Loan  Maclibliuin,"  tliough  he  was  "  The
dark  Smith  of  Drontheim"  in  the  story.*  King
Arthur  and  his  sword  belong  to  the  Bretons  and  to
many  other  languages,  besides  Welsh  ;  and  the  Bretons
have  a  wild  war  song,  "  The  wine  of  the  Gauls,  and
the  dance  of  the  sword,"  which  is  given  in  Barzaz
Breiz  (1846).t

There  is  a  magic  sword  in  the  Volsung  tale,  called
"  Gram,"  which  was  the  gift  of  Odin  4  and  a  famous
sword  in  the  Niebelungen  lied  ;  and  there  are  famous
swords  in  many  jDopular  tales  ;  but  an  iron  sword  was  a
god  long  ago  amongst  the  Scythians.§  "  An  antique
iron  sword  "  was  placed  on  a  vast  pile  of  brushwood  as
a  temple  in  every  district,  at  the  seat  of  government,
and  served  as  the  image  of  Mars.  Sacrifices  of  cattle
and  of  horses  were  made  to  it,  and  "  more  victims  were
offered  thus  than  to  all  the  rest  of  their  gods."  Even
men  were  sacrificed ;  and  it  is  said  that  the  weapons
found  in  Scythian  tombs  are  usually  of  bronze,  "  but
the  sword  at  the  great  tomb  at  Kertch  was  of  iron."

*  Train's  History  of  the  Isle  of  Man,  vol.  2,  p.  177.

f  The  Gaelic  word  for  a  sword  proves  that  English,  French,
Breton,  and  Gaelic  have  much  in  common — (Eng.)  glave,  (Fr.)
glaive,  (Breton)  korol  ar  c'  hleze — dance  of  the  sword,  (Gaehc)
claidheamh — pronounced,  glaiv,  the  first  letter  being  a  soft  "  c,"
or  hard  "g,"  the  word  usually  spelt,  clai/more.  Languages  said
to  he  derived  from  Latin  do  not  follow  their  model  so  closely  as
these  words  do  one  another — (Lat.)  gladius,  (Spanish)  espada,
(Italian)  spada ;  and  the  northern  tongues  seem  to  have  pre-
ferred some  original  which  resembles  the  English  word,  sword.
If  "spada"  belongs  to  the  language  from  which  all  these  are
supposed  to  have  started,  these  seem  to  have  used  it  for  a
more  peaceful  iron  weapon,  a  spade.

J  Norse  Tales,  Introduction,  62.

g  At  page  53  of  Rawlinson's  Herodotus,  vol.  3,  is  the  trauf-
lation  of  the  passage  in  which  this  worship  is  described.


IXXÌV'  INTRODUCTION.

It  seems,  then,  that  an  iron  sword  really  was  once  wor-
shipped by  a  people  \\-ith  whom  iron  was  rare.  Iron
is  rare,  while  stone  and  bronze  weapons  are  common
in  British  tombs,  and  the  sword  of  these  stories  is  a
personage.  It  shines,  it  cries  out — the  lives  of  men
are  bound  up  in  it.  In  one  stoiy  a  fox  changes  him-
self into  the  sword  of  light,  and  the  edge  of  the  real
sword  being  turned  towards  a  %\ackcd  "  muime,"  turned
all  her  spells  back  upon  herself,  and  she  fell  a  withered
fagot.

And  so  this  mystic  sword  may,  perhaps,  have  been
a  god  amongst  the  Celts,  or  the  god  of  the  people  with
whom  Celts  contended  somewhere  on  their  long  jour-
ney to  the  west.  It  is  a  fiction  now,  but  it  may  be
founded  on  fact,  and  that  fact  probably  was  the  first
use  of  iron.

Amongst  the  stories  described  in  the  index  to  the
Gaehc  ItlSS.  in  Edinburgh  is  one  in  which  the  hero
goes  to  Scythia  and  to  Greece,  and  ends  liis  adventures
in  Ireland.  And  in  the  "  Chi'onicles  of  the  Eri,"  1822,
by  O'Connor,  chief  of  the  prostrated  people  of  his
nation,"  Irish  is  usually  called  "  the  Phonieian  dialect
of  the  Scj-tliian  language."  On  such  questions  I  will
not  ventui-e.  Celts  may  or  may  not  be  Scjihians,  but
as  a  collector  of  cmiositics,  I  may  fairly  compare  my
museum  with  other  curious  things  ;  and  the  worsliip
of  the  Scimitar,  2200  yeai's  ago,  by  a  people  who  are
classed  with  the  Indo-European  races,  appears  to  have
some  bearing  on  all  magic  swords  from  the  time  of
Herodotus  down  to  the  "WTiite  Sword  of  Light  of  the
West  Highlands.

If  iron  weapons,  to  wliich  supernatural  virtues  arc
ascribed,  acquired  their  virtue  when  ii-on  was  rai-e,  and
when  its  quahties  were  sufficiently  new  to  excite
wonder — then  other  things  made  of  iron  should  have


INTRODUCTION.  Ixxv

like  virtues  ascribed  to  them,  and  the  magic  should  be
transferred  from  the  sword  to  other  new  inventions  ;
and  such  is  the  case.

In  all  popular  tales  of  which  I  know  anything,
some  mysterious  virtue  is  attributed  to  iron  ;  and  in
many  of  them  a  gun  is  the  weapon  which  breaks  the
spells.     In  the  West  it  is  the  same.

A  keeper  told  me  that  he  was  once  called  into  a
house  by  an  old  woman  to  cure  her  cow,  which  was
"  bewitched,"  and  which  was  really  sick.  The  cere-
mony was  performed,  according  to  the  directions  of  the
old  woman,  with  becoming  gra\'it3'.  The  cow  was  led
out,  and  the  gun  loaded,  and  then  it  was  solemnly  fired
off  over  the  cow's  back,  and  the  cure  was  supposed  to
be  complete.

In  the  story  of  the  hunter,  when  the  widow's  son
aims  at  the  enchanted  deer,  he  sees  through  the  spell,
only  when  he  looks  over  the  sight,  and  while  the  gun
is  cocked,  but  when  he  has  aimed  three  times,  the  spell
is  broken  and  the  lady  is  free.

So  in  a  story  (I  tliink  Irish)  which  I  have  read
somewhere,  a  man  shoots  from  his  hip  at  a  deer,  which
seems  to  be  an  old  man  whenever  he  looks  over  the
sight.  He  aims  well,  and  when  he  comes  up  finds
only  the  body  of  a  very  old  man,  which  crumbles  into
dust,  and  is  carried  away  by  the  wind,  bit  by  bit,  as
he  looks  at  it.  An  iron  weapon  is  one  of  the  guards
which  the  man  takes  into  the  fairy  hill  iu  the  story  of
the  Smith,  No.  28.  A  sharpshooter  fires  off  his  gun
to  frighten  the  troll  in  "  the  Old  Dame  and  her  Hen  ;"
the  boy  throws  the  steel  from  his  tiuder  box  over  the
magic  horse,  and  tames  him  at  once  in  the  Princess  on
the  Glass  HilL*  And  so  on  throughout,  iron  is  invested
with  magic  power  in  popular  tales  and  mythology  ;  the
*  Norse  Tales,  Nos.  3  and  13.


Ixxvi  INTRODUCTIOX.

last  iron  weapon  invented,  and  the  first,  the  gun  and
the  sword,  are  alike  magical  ;  a  "bit  of  a  rusty  reap-
ing hook"  does  equally  good  ser\àce,  and  an  old  horse
shoe  is  as  potent  a  spell  against  the  powers  of  evil  as
any  kno\\Ti  ;  for  one  will  be  found  on  most  stable  doors
in  England.

Now  comes  the  question,  Who  were  these  powers
of  evil  who  cannot  resist  iron  1  These  fairies  who  shoot
stone  arrows,  and  are  of  the  foes  to  the  human  race?
Is  all  this  but  a  dim  hazy,  recollection  of  war  between
a  people  who  had  iron  weapons  and  a  race  who  had
not  ?  the  race  whose  remains  are  found  all  over  Europe  ?

If  these  were  wandering  tribes  they  had  leaders,  if
they  were  warlike  they  had  weapons.  There  is  a
smith  in  the  pantheon  of  many  nations.  Yulcan  was
a  smith  ;  Thor  -wielded  a  hammer  ;  even  Fionn  had  a
hammer,  which  was  heard  in  Lochlann  when  struck
in  Eirinn,  according  to  the  story  found  midway  in
Barra.  Fionn  may  have  borrowed  his  hammer  from
Thor  long  ago,  or  both  may  have  got  theirs  from
Vulcan,  or  all  three  may  have  brought  hammers  Avith
them  from  the  land  where  some  primeval  smith
wielded  tlie  first  sledge  hammer,  but  may  not  all  these
smith  gods  be  the  smiths  who  made  iron  weapons  for
those  who  fought  with  the  skin-clad  warriors  who  shot  flint
arrows,  and  Avho  are  now  bogles,  fairies,  and  demons  ?

In  any  case,  tales  about  smiths  seem  to  belong  to
mythology,  and  to  be  common  property.  Thus  tlie
Norse  smith,  who  cheated  the  evil  one,*  has  an  Irish
equivalent  in  the  Three  Wishes,  f  and  a  Gaelic  story,
"The  Soldier,"  is  of  the  same  class,  and  has  a  Norse
equivalent  in  the  Lad  and  the  Deil.  There  are  many
of  the  same  class  in  Grimm  ;  and  the  same  ideas  per-
vade them  all.  There  is  war  between  the  smiths  and
*  Norse  Tales,  16,  53.  fCarlcton.    Dubliu,  184G.     P.  330.


INTRODUCTION.  IxXVÌÌ

soldiers,  and  the  devil ;  iron,  and  horses'  hoofs,  ham-
mers, swords,  and  guns  come  into  play ;  the  fiend  is
a  fool,  and  he  has  got  the  worst  of  the  fight ;  accord-
ing to  the  people,  at  all  events,  ever  since  St.  Dunstan
took  him  by  the  nose  with  a  pair  of  tongs.  In  all
probabihty  the  fiend  of  popular  tales  is  own  brother
to  the  Gruagach  and  Glashan,  and  was  once  a  skin-clad
savage,  or  the  god  of  a  savage  race.

If  this  theory  be  correct,  if  these  are  dim  recollec-
tions of  savage  times  and  savage  people,  then  other
magic  gear,  the  property  of  giants,  fairies,  and  bogles,
should  resemble  things  wliich  are  precious  now  amongst
savage  or  half  civiHzed  tribes,  or  which  really  have  been
prized  amongst  the  old  inhabitants  of  these  islands,
or  of  other  parts  of  the  world  ;  and  such  is  often  the  case.

The  work  of  art  which  is  most  sought  after  in
Gaelic  tales,  next  to  the  white  glave  of  light,  is  a  pair
of  combs.

Cm  MiN  oiR  AGUS  ciR  GARBH  AiRGiOD,  a  fine  golden
comb  and  a  coarse  comb  of  silver,  are  worth  a  deadly
fight  ì\àth  the  giants  in  many  a  story.

The  enchanted  prince,  when  he  ceases  to  be  a  raven,
is  found  as  a  yellow  ringletted  beautiful  man,  with  a
golden  comlj  in  the  one  hand  and  a  silver  com!)  in  the
other.  Maol  a  Chliobain  invades  the  giant's  house  to
steal  the  same  tilings  for  the  king.  When  the  coarse
comb  is  forgotten  the  king's  coach  falls  as  a  withered
faggot.  In  another  story  which  I  have,  it  is  said  of  a
herd  who  had  killed  a  giant  and  taken  his  castle,  "  He
went  in  and  he  opened  the  first  room  and  there  was
not  a  tiling  in  it.  He  opened  another,  and  it  was  full
of  gold  and  silver  and  the  treasures  of  the  world.
Then  he  opened  a  drawer,  and  he  took  a  comb  out
of  it,  and  when  he  would  give  a  sweep  Avith  it  on  the
one  side  of  liis  head,  a  shower  of  gold  would  fall  out  of


Ixxviii  IXTRODUCTIOX.

that  side  ;  and  when  he  would  give  a  sweep  on  the
other  side,  a  shower  of  silver  would  fall  from  that  side.
Then  he  opened  another  room,  and  it  was  full  of  every
sort  of  food  that  a  man  might  think  there  had  ever
been."

And  so  in  many  other  instances  the  comb  is  a  trea-
sure for  which  men  contend  with  giants.  It  is  asso-
ciated with  gold,  silver,  cbesses,  arms,  meat,  and  drink ;
and  it  is  magical.

It  is  not  so  precious  in  other  collections  of  popular
tales,  but  the  same  idea  is  to  be  traced  in  them  all.  There
is  a  water-spirit  in  Grimm  which  catches  two  children,
and  when  they  escape  they  throw  behind  them  a  brush,
a  comb,  and  a  mirror,  Avliich  replace  the  stone,  the  twig,
and  the  bladder  of  water,  which  the  Gaelic  prince  finds
in  the  ear  of  the  filly,  and  throws  behind  him  to  arrest
the  giant  who  is  in  pursuit.  In  the  nix  of  the  mill  pond
an  old  woman  gives  a  golden  comb  to  a  lady,  and  she
combs  her  black  hair  by  the  light  of  the  moon  at  the
edge  of  a  pond,  and  the  water-spirit  shews  the  hus-
band's head.  So  also  in  Snow  White  the  wicked  queen
combs  the  hair  of  the  beautiful  princess  with  a  poisoned
comb,  and  throws  her  into  a  deadly  magic  sleep.  That
princess  is  black,  white,  and  red,  like  the  giant  in
No.  2,  and  like  the  lady  in  Conal ;  and  like  a  lady
in  a  Breton  story;  and  generally  foreign  stories  in  which
combs  are  mentioned  as  magical,  have  equivalents  in
Gaelic.  For  example,  the  incidents  in  the  French  story
of  Prince  Cherie,  in  wliich  gifted  children  comb  jewels
from  their  hair,  bear  a  general  resemblance  to  many
Gaelic  and  German  stories.  Now  there  is  a  reason  for
everything,  though  it  is  not  always  easy  to  find  it  out ;
and  the  importance  of  the  comb  in  tliese  stories  may
have  a  reason  also.

In  the  first  place,  though  every  civilized  man  and


IXTRODUCTIOX.  IxxÌX

■woman  now  owns  a  comb,  it  is  a  work  of  art  which
necessarily  implies  the  use  of  tools,  and  considerable
mechanical  skill.  A  man  who  had  nothing  but  a  knife
could  hardly  make  a  comb ;  and  a  savage  with  flint
weapons  would  have  to  do  without.  A  man  with  a
comb,  then,  implies  a  man  who  has  made  some  progress
in  civilization  ;  and  a  man  without  a  comb,  a  savage,
who,  if  he  had  learned  its  use,  might  weU  covet  such  a
possession.  If  a  black-haired  savage,  living  in  the  cold
north,  were  to  comb  his  hair  on  a  frosty  night,  it  is  to
be  presumed  that  the  same  thing  would  happen  which
now  takes  place  when  fair  ladies  or  civilized  men  comb
their  hair.  Crackling  sparks  of  electricity  were  surely
produced  when  men  first  combed  their  hair  with  a  bone
comb ;  and  it  seems  to  need  but  a  little  fancy  and  a
long  time  to  change  the  bright  sparks  into  brilliant
jewels,  or  glittering  gold  and  silver  and  bright  stars,
and  to  invest  the  rare  and  costly  thing  which  produced
such  marvels  with  magic  power.

There  is  evidence  throughout  all  popular  tales  that
combs  were  needed.  Translations  are  vague,  because
translators  are  bashful ;  but  those  who  have  travelled
amongst  liaK  civilized  people,  understand  what  is  meant
when  the  knight  lays  his  head  on  tlie  lady's  knee,  and
she  "  dresses  his  hair."  In  German,  Xorse,  Breton,  and
Gaelic,  it  is  the  same.

From  the  mention  of  the  magic  comb,  then,  it
appears  that  these  legends  date  from  an  early,  rude
period,  for  the  time  when  combs  were  so  highly  prized,
and  so  little  used,  is  remote.

In  Wilson's  preliistoric  "  Annals  of  Scotland,"  page
42-1,  is  a  drawing  of  an  old  bone  comb  of  very  rude
workmanship,  found  in  a  burgh  in  Orkney,  together
with  part  of  a  deer's  horn  and  a  human  skeleton  ;
another  was  found  in  a  burdi  in  Caithness  :  a  third  is


IXXX  IXTRODCCTIOy.

mentioned ;  and  I  believe  that  such  combs  are  com-
monly found  in  old  British  graves.

At  page  554,  another  di-awing  is  given  of  one  of  a
pair  of  combs  found  in  a  grave  in  Orkney.  The  teeth
of  the  comb  were  fastened  between  plates  of  bone,
rivetted  together  with  copper  nails,  and  the  comb  was
decorated  with  ornamental  car\'ings.  With  these,
brooches  of  a  pecuHar  form  were  discovered.  Similar
brooches  are  commonly  found  in  Denmark.  I  have
seen  many  of  them  in  museums  at  Bergen  and  Copen-
hagen ;  and  I  own  a  pair  which  were  found  in  an  old
grave  in  Islay,  together  ^\^th  an  amber  bead  and  some
fragments  of  rusted  iron.

A  bronze  comb  is  also  mentioned  at  page  300,  as
having  been  found  in  Queen  Mary's  Mount,  a  great
cairn  near  the  battlefield  of  Langsyde,  which  was  pidled
to  pieces  to  build  stone  dykes,  and  wliich  was  found
to  contain  rude  arms,  bones,  rings  of  bituminous  shale,
ami  other  tilings  which  are  referred  to  very  early  pre-
historic ages.

At  page  500  Mr.  Wilson  mentions  a  great  number
of  monuments  in  Scotland  on  wliich  combs  are  repre-
sented, together  with  two-handed  mirrors  and  symbols,
for  which  deep  explanations  and  hidden  meanings  have
been  sought  and  found.  Combs,  mirrors,  and  shears
are  also  represented  on  early  Roman  tombs,  and  hid-
den meanings  have  been  assigned  to  them ;  but  Mr.
Wilson  holds  that  these  are  but  indications  of  the  sex
of  the  buried  person.  Joining  all  tliis  together,  and
placing  it  beside  the  mnffic  attributed  to  combs  in  these
Highland  stories,  this  view  appears  to  be  the  most  rea-
sonable. The  sword  of  the  warrior  is  very  commonly
sculptured  on  the  old  gravestones  in  the  Western  Isles.
It  is  often  tmsted  into  a  cmss,  and  woven  with  those
endless  knots  wlxich  resemble  certain  eastern  designs.


INTRODUCTION.  Ixxxi

Strange  nondescript  animals  are  often  figured  about  the
sword,  with  tails  which  curl,  and  twist,  and  sprout  into
leaves,  and  weave  themselves  into  patterns.  Those
again  resemble  illuminations  in  old  Irish  and  GaeUc
manuscripts,  and  when  the  most  prized  of  the  warrior's
possessions  is  thus  figured  on  liis  tomb,  and  is  buried
with  liim,  it  is  but  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  comb,
which  was  so  valued  as  to  be  buried  with  its  owner,
was  figured  on  the  monument  for  the  same  reason ;
and  that  sword  and  comb  were,  in  fact,  very  highly
prized  at  some  period  by  those  who  are  buried  in  the
tombs,  as  tire  stories  now  represent  that  they  were  by
men  and  giants.

So  here  again  the  popular  fictions  seem  to  have  a
foundation  of  fact.

Another  magical  possession  is  the  apple.  It  is
mentioned  more  frequently  in  Gaelic  tales  than  in  any
collection  wliich  I  know,  but  the  apple  plays  its  part
in  Italian,  German,  and  Xorse  also.  When  the  hero
wishes  to  pass  from  Islay  to  Ireland,  he  pulls  sixteen
apples  and  throws  them  into  the  sea,  one  by  one,  and
he  steps  from  one  to  the  other.  When  the  giant's
daughter  runs  away  with  the  king's  son,  she  cuts  an
apple  into  a  mystical  number  of  small  bits,  and  each
bit  talks.  When  she  kills  the  giant  she  puts  an  apple
under  the  hoof  of  the  magic  filly  and  he  dies,  for  his
life  is  in  the  apple,  and  it  is  crushed.  When  the  byre
is  cleansed,  it  is  so  clean  that  a  golden  apple  would  run
from  end  to  end  and  never  raise  a  stain.  There  is  a
gruagach  who  has  a  golden  apple  which  is  thrown  at
all  comers,  and  unless  they  are  able  to  catch  it  they
die ;  when  it  is  caught  and  tliroAvn  back  by  the  hero,
Gruagach  an  Ubhail  dies.  There  is  a  game  called
cluich  an  ulihail,  the  apple  play,  which  seems  to  have
been  a  deadly  game,  whatever  it  was.    When  the  king's.


Ixxxii  IXTRODUCTIOX.

daugliter  transports  the  soldier  to  the  green  island  on
the  magic  tablecloth,  he  finds  magic  apples  which  trans-
form him,  and  others  which  cure  him,  and  by  which  he
transforms  the  cruel  princess  and  recovers  liis  magic
treasures.  In  German  a  cabbage  does  the  same
thing.

A\Ticn  the  two  eldest  idle  king's  sons  go  out  to
herd  the  giant's  cattle,  they  find  an  apple  tree  whose
fruit  moves  up  and  down  as  they  vainly  strive  to
pluck  it.

And  so  on  througliout,  whenever  an  apple  is  men-
tioned in  GaeHc  stories,  it  has  something  marvellous
about  it.

So  in  German,  in  the  Man  of  Iron,  a  princess
throws  a  golden  apple  as  a  prize,  which  the  hero
catches  three  times  and  carries  otT  and  wins.

In  Snow  "White,  where  the  poisoned  comb  occurs,
there  is  a  poisoned  magic  apple  also.

In  the  Old  Griffin,  the  sick  princess  is  cured  by
rosy-cheeked  apples.

In  the  Giant  with  the  Three  Golden  Hairs,  one  of
the  questions  to  be  solved  is,  why  a  tree  wliich  used
to  bear  golden  apples  does  not  now  bear  leaves  Ì  and
the  next  question  is  about  a  well

So  in  the  Wliite  Snake,  a  servant  who  acquires  the
knowledge  of  the  speech  of  birds  by  tasting  a  white
snake,  helps  creatures  in  distress,  gets  their  aid,  and
procures  a  golden  apjole  from  three  ravens,  which  "  flew
over  the  sea  even  to  the  end  of  the  world,  where  stands
the  tree  of  hfe."  When  he  had  got  the  apple,  he  and
the  princess  ate  it  and  married,  and  lived  happily  ever
after.

So  in  Wolf's  collection,  in  the  story  of  the  Won-
derful Hares,  a  golden  apjile  is  the  gift  for  which  the
finder  is  to  gain  a  princess  :  and  that  apple  grew  on  a


INTRODUCTION.  Ixxxiii

sort  of  tree  of  wliicli  there  was  but  one  in  the  -whole
world.

In  Norse  it  is  the  same  ;  the  princess  on  the  Glass
Hill  held  three  golden  apples  in  her  lap,  and  he  who
could  ride  up  the  hill  and  carry  off  the  apples  was  to
win  the  prize  ;  and  the  princess  rolled  them  down  to
the  hero,  and  they  rolled  into  his  shoe.

Tlie  good  girl  plucked  the  apples  from  the  tree
which  spoke  to  her  when  she  went  down  the  well  to
the  underground  world  ;  but  the  ill-tempered  step-sister
thrashed  down  the  fruit  ;  and  when  the  time  of  trial
came,  the  apple  tree  played  its  part  and  protected  the
good  girl.

So  in  French,  a  singing  apple  is  one  of  the  marvels
which  the  Princess  Belle  Etoile,  and  her  brothers  and
her  cousin,  bring  from  the  end  of-  the  world,  after  all
manner  of  adventures  ;  and  in  that  story  the  comb,
the  stars  and  jewels  in  the  hair,  the  talking  sooth-
saying bird,  the  magic  water,  the  horse,  the  wicked
step-mother,  and  the  dragon,  all  appear  ;  and  there  is
a  Gaelic  version  of  that  story.  In  short,  that  French
story  agrees  with  Gaelic  stories,  and  with  a  certain
class  of  German  tales ;  and  contains  within  itself  much
of  the  machinery  and  incident  which  is  scattered  else-
where, in  collections  of  tales  gathered  in  modern  times
amongst  the  people  of  various  countries.

So  again  in  books  of  tales  of  older  date,  and  in
other  languages,  apples  and  marvels  are  associated.

In  Straparola  is  an  Italian  story  remarkably  like
the  Gaelic  Sea  j\Iaiden,  and  clearly  the  same  in  ground-
work as  Princess  Belle  Etoile.  A  lady,  when  she  has
lost  her  husband,  goes  off  to  the  Atlantic  Ocean  with
three  golden  apples  ;  and  the  mermaid  who  had  swal-
lowed the  husband,  shews  first  his  head,  then  his  body
to  the  waist,   and  then  to  the  knees ;  each  time  for  a


Ixxxiv  INTRODUCTION".

golden  apple  ;  and  the  incidents  of  that  story  are  all
to  he  found  elsewhere,  and  most  of  them  are  in
Gaelic.

So  again,  in  the  Arabian  Xights,  there  is  a  long
story,  The  Three  Apples,  which  turns  upon  the  steal-
ing of  one,  which  was  a  thing  of  great  price,  though  it
was  not  magical  in  the  story.

So  in  classical  times,  an  apple  of  discord  was  the
prize  of  the  fairest ;  and  the  small  beginning  from
which  so  much  of  all  that  is  most  famous  in  ancient
lore  takes  its  rise  ;  three  golden  apples  were  the  prize
of  one  of  the  labours  of  Hercules,  and  these  grew  in  a
garden  which  fable  has  placed  far  to  the  westwards,
and  learned  commentators  have  placed  in  the  Cape
Verde  Islands.

So  then  it  appears  that  apples  have  been  myste-
rious and  magical  from  the  earliest  of  times  ;  that  they
Avere  sought  for  in  the  west,  and  valued  in  the  east  ;
and  now  when  the  popular  tales  of  the  far  west  are
examined,  apples  are  the  most  important  of  natural
productions,  and  invested  with  the  magic  which  be-
longs to  that  which  is  old  and  rare,  and  wliich  may
once  have  been  sacred.

It  is  curious  that  the  forbidden  fruit  is  almost  al-
ways mentioned  in  English  as  an  appk'  ;  and  tliis
notion  prevails  in  France  to  such  a  degree,  that  when
that  mad  play.  La  propriete  c'est  le  vol,  was  acted  in
Paris  in  1848,  the  first  scene  represented  the  Garden
of  Eden  with  a  tree,  and  a  board  on  which  was  written
"  il  est  dcfendu  de  manger  de  ces  pommes."

And  it  is  stated  in  grave  histories  that  the  Celtic
priests  held  apples  sacred ;  so  here  again  popular  tales
hold  their  own.

Again,  supposing  tales  to  be  old  traditions,  some-
thing may  be  gleaned  from  them  of  the  past.     Horses,


INTRODUCTIOX.  IxxXV

for  example,  must  once  have  been  strange  and  rare,  or
sacred,  amongst  the  Celts,  as  among  other  races.

The  horses  of  the  Vedas,  which  drew  the  chariot
of  the  sun,  appear  to  have  been  confused  vnth.  the  sun-
god  of  Indian  mythology.  Horses  decided  the  fate  of
kingdoms  in  Persia,  according  to  Herodotus.  They
were  sacred  when  Phaeton  drove  the  chariot  of  the
sun.  The  Scandinavian  gods  had  horses,  according  to
the  Edda.  They  are  generally  supernatural  in  Grimm's
German  stories,  in  Norse  tales,  in  French,  and  in  many
other  collections.      They  are  wonderful  in  Breton  tales.

"When  the  followers  of  Columbus  first  took  horses
to  America,  they  struck  terror  into  the  Indians,  and
they  and  their  riders  were  demigods  ;  because  strange
and  terrible.

Horses  were  surely  feared,  or  worshipped,  or  prized,
by  Celts,  for  places  are  named  after  them.  Penmarch
in  Brittany,  means  horse-head  or  hill.  Ardincaple  in
Scotland  means  the  mare's  height,  and  there  are  many
other  places  with  similar  names.

In  Gaehc  tales,  horses  are  frequently  mentioned,
and  more  magic  properties  are  attributed  to  them  than
elsewhere  in  popular  lore.

In  No.  1,  horses  play  a  very  prominent  part ;  and
in  some  versions  of  that  tale,  the  heroine  is  a  lady
transformed  into  a  grey  mare.  It  is  to  be  hoped,  for
the  hero's  sake,  that  she  did  not  prove  herself  the  better
laorse  when  she  resumed  her  human  form.

In  No.  3,  there  is  a  horse  race.  In  No.  4,  there
are  mytliical  horses ;  and  in  an  Irish  version  of  that
story,  told  me  in  August  1860,  by  an  Irish  blind
fiddler,  on  board  the  Lochgoilhead  boat,  horses  again
play  their  part,  vnth.  hounds  and  hawks.  In  No.  14,
there  are  horses ;  in  one  version  there  is  a  magic
"po-^vney."     In  22,  a  horse  again  appears,  and  gives


Ixxxvi  IXTRODUCTIOX.

the  foundation  for  the  riddle  on  which  the  story  turns.
In  40,  a  horse  is  one  of  the  prizes  to  he  gained.  In
41,  the  horse  plays  the  part  of  blueheard.  In  48,  a
horse  is  to  be  hanged  as  a  thief  In  51,  the  hero
assumes  the  form  of  a  horse.  In  many  other  tales
which  I  have  in  manuscript,  men  appear  as  horses,
and  reappear  as  men  ;  and  horses  are  marvellous.  In
one  tale,  a  man's  son  is  sent  to  a  warlock  and  becomes
a  horse,  and  all  sorts  of  creatui'es  besides.  In  another,
a  man  gets  a  wishing  grey  filly  from  the  wind,  in
return  for  some  meal  which  the  wind  had  blown  away  ;
and  there  is  a  whole  series  of  tales  which  relate  to
water-horses,  and  which  seem,  more  than  all  the  rest,
to  shew  the  horse  as  a  degraded  god,  and,  as  it  would
seem,  a  water-god,  and  a  destroyer.

I  had  intended  to  group  all  these  stories  together,
as  an  illustration  of  this  part  of  the  subject,  but  time
and  space  are  wanting.  These  shew  that  in  the  Isle  of
Man,  and  in  the  Highlands  of  Scotland,  peoi^le  still
firmly  believe  in  the  existence  of  a  water-horse.  In
Sutherland  and  elsewhere,  many  believe  that  they  have
seen  these  fancied  animals.  I  have  been  told  of  Eng-
litih  sportsmen  who  went  in  pursuit  of  them,  so  cir-
cumstantial were  the  accounts  of  those  who  believed
that  they  had  seen  them.  The  witnesses  are  so  nume-
rous, and  their  testimony  agrees  so  well,  that  there  must
be  some  old  deeply-rooted  Celtic  belief  which  clothes
every  dark  object  with  tlie  dreaded  form  of  the  Each
UisGE.  The  legends  of  the  doings  of  the  Avater  kelpie
all  pomt  to  some  river  god  reduced  to  be  a  fuath  or
bogle.  The  bay  or  grey  horse  grazes  at  the  lake-side,
and  when  he  is  mounted,  ruslies  into  the  loch  and
devours  his  rider.  His  back  lengd;hens  to  suit  any
number  ;  men's  hands  stick  to  his  skin  ;  he  is  harnessed
to  a  plough,  and  drags  the  team  and  the  plough  into


INTRODUCTION.  IsXXVÌÌ

the  locli,  and  tears  the  horses  to  bits ;  he  is  killed,  and
nothing  remains  but  a  pool  of  water  ;  he  falls  in  love
with  a  lady,  and  when  he  appears  as  a  man  and  lays
his  head  on  her  knee  to  be  dressed,  the  frightened  lady
finds  him  out  by  the  sand  amongst  his  hair.  "  Tha
Gainmheach  aim."  There  is  sand  in  it,  she  says,  and
when  he  sleeps  she  makes  her  escape.  He  appears  as
an  old  woman,  and  is  put  to  bed  with  a  bevy  of  dam-
sels in  a  mountain  sheaHng,  and  he  sucks  the  blood  of
all,  save  one,  who  escapes  over  a  burn,  which,  water
horse  as  he  is,  he  dare  not  cross.  In  short,  these  tales
and  beliefs  have  led  me  to  tliink  that  the  old  Celts
must  have  had  a  destroying  water-god,  to  whom  the
horse  was  sacred,  or  who  had  the  form  of  a  horse.

Unless  there  is  some  such  foundation  for  the  stories,
it  is  strange  to  find  the  romances  of  boatmen  and
fishermen  inhabiting  small  islands,  filled  with  incidents
which  seem  ratber  to  belong  to  a  wandering,  horse-
riding  tribe.  But  the  tales  of  Iforwegian  sailors  are
.^milar  in  this  respect ;  and  the  Celtic  character  has
in  fact  much  which  savours  of  a  tribe  who  are  boatmen
by  compulsion,  and  would  be  horsemen  if  they  could.
Though  the  AVestern  islanders  are  fearless  boatmen,
and  brave  a  terrible  sea  in  very  frail  boats,  very  few  of
them  are  in  the  royal  navy,  and  there  are  not  many
who  are  professed  sailors.  On  the  other  hand,  they
are  bold  huntsmen  in  the  far  north  of  America.  I  do
not  think  that  they  are  successful  farmers  anywhere,
though  they  cling  fondly  to  a  spot  of  land,  but  they  are
famous  herdsmen  at  home  and  abroad.  On  the  misty
hills  of  old  Scotland  or  the  dry  plains  of  Australia,  they
still  retain  the  qualities  which  made  a  race  of  hunters,
and  warriors,  and  herdsmen,  such  as  are  represented
in  the  poems  of  Ossian,  and  described  in  history,  and
even  witliin  the  small  bounds  wliich  now  contain  the


lxXX\-iii  INTRODUCTION.

Celtic  race  in  Europe,  their  national  tastes  appear  in
strong  relief.  Every  deerstalker  vdil  bear  witness  to
the  eagerness  of  Highlanders  in  pursuit  of  their  old
favourite  game,  the  dun  deer ;  the  mountaineer  shews
what  he  is  when  liis  eye  kindles  and  his  nostril  dilates
at  the  sight  of  a  noble  stag  ;  when  the  gillie  forgets  his
master  in  his  keenness,  and  the  southern  lags  behind ;
when  it  is  "bellows  to  mend,"  and  London  dinners  are
remembered  with  regret.  Tyree  is  famous  for  its  breed
of  ponies  :  it  is  a  common  bit  of  Highland  "  chaff"  to
neigh  at  a  Tyree  man,  and  other  islands  have  famous
breeds  also  It  is  said  that  men  almost  starving  rode
to  ask  for  meal  in  a  certain  place,  and  would  not
sell  their  ponies  ;  and  though  this  is  surely  a  fiction,  it
rests  on  the  fact  that  the  islanders  are  fond  of  horses.
At  fairs  and  markets  all  over  the  Higldands  jjonies
abound.  Nothing  seems  to  amaze  a  Highlander  more
than  to  see  any  one  walk  who  can  afford  to  ride ;  and
he  will  chase  a  pony  over  a  hill,  and  sit  in  misery  on
a  packsaddle  when  he  catches  the  beast,  and  endure
discomfort,  that  he  may  ride  in  state  along  a  level  road
for  a  short  distance.

Irish  Celts,  who  have  more  room  for  locomotion,
cultivate  their  national  taste  for  liorse  flesh  in  a  higher
degree.  An  Irish  hunter  is  valued  by  many  an  Eng-
lish Nimrod ;  all  novels  ■which  purport  to  represent
Irish  character  paint  Irishmen  as  bold  riders,  and  Irish
peasants  as  men  who  take  a  keen  interest  in  all  that
belongs  to  hunting  and  racing.  There  is  not,  so  far
as  I  know,  a  single  novel  founded  on  the  adventures
of  an  Irish  or  Iligldand  sailor  or  farmer,  though  there
are  plenty  of  fictitious  warriors  and  sportsmen  in
prose  and  in  verse.  There  are  endless  novels  about
EngUsh  sailors,  and  sportsmen,  and  farmers,  and  tliough
novels   are   fictions,    they   too   rest   on    facts.      The


INTRODUCTION.  Ixxxix

Celts,  and  Saxons,  and  Normans,  and  Danes,  and
Romans,  who  help  to  form  the  English  race,  are  at
home  on  shore  and  afloat,  "whether  their  steeds  are  of
flesh  and  blood,  or,  as  the  Gaelic  poet  says,  of  brine.
The  Celtic  race  are  most  at  home  amongst  their  cattle
and  on  the  hills,  and  I  believe  it  to  be  strictly  in
accordance  with  the  Celtic  character  to  find  horses  and
chariots  playing  a  part  in  their  national  traditions  and
poems  of  all  ages.

I  do  not  know  enough  of  our  Welsh  cousins  to  be
able  to  speak  of  their  tastes  in  this  respect ;  but  I
know  that  horse  racing  excites  a  keen  interest  in  Brit-
tany, though  the  French  navy  is  chiefly  manned  by
Breton  and  Norman  sailors,  and  Breton  ballads  and
old  Welsh  romances  are  full  of  equestrian  adventures.
And  all  this  supports  the  tlieory  that  Celts  came  from
tlie  east,  and  came  overland  ;  for  horses  would  be  prized
by  a  wandering  race.

So  hounds  would  be  prized  by  the  race  of  hunters
who  chased  the  Caledonian  boars  as  well  as  the  stags  ;
and  here  again  tradition  is  in  accordance  with  proba-
bility, and  supported  by  other  testimony.  In  No.  4
there  are  mystical  dogs  ;  a  hound,  Gadhar  is  one  of  the
links  in  No.  8  ;  a  dog  appears  in  No.  11  ;  a  dog,  who
is  an  enchanted  man,  in  No.  1 2  ;  there  is  a  i^hantom
dog  in  No.  23  ;  there  Avas  a  "  spectre  hound  in  Man  ;"
and  there  are  similar  ghostly  dogs  in  England,  and  in
many  European  countries  besides.

In  19,  20,  31,  38,  and  in  a  great  many  other  tales
which  I  have  in  manuscript,  the  hound  plays  an  im-
portant part.  Sometimes  he  befriends  his  master,  at
other  times  he  appears  to  have  something  diabolical
about  him  ;  it  seems  as  if  his  real  honest  nature  had
overcome  a  deeply-rooted  prejudice,  for  there  is  much
which  savours  of  detestation  as  well  as  of  strong  afi"ec-


XC  INTRODUCTION.

tion.  Dog,  or  son  of  the  clog,  is  a  term  of  abuse  in
Gaelic  as  elsewhere,  though  cuilein  is  a  term  of  endear-
ment, and  the  hound  is  figured  beside  his  master,  or  at
liis  feet,  on  many  a  tombstone  in  the  "Western  Isles.
Hounds  are  mentioned  in  Gaelic  poetry  and  in  Gaelic
tales,  and  in  the  earliest  accounts  of  the  Western  Isles ;
and  one  breed  still  survives  in  these  long-legged,  rough,
wiry-haired  stag-hounds,  which  Landseer  so  loves  to
])aint.

In  one  story,  for  which  I  have  no  room,  but  which
is  well  worthy  of  preservation,  a  step-mother  sends  two
step-children,  a  brother  and  sister,  out  into  the  world
to  seek  their  fortune.  They  live  in  a  cottage  with
three  bare  yellow  porkers,  which  belong  to  the  sister.
The  brother  sells  one  to  a  man  for  a  dog  with  a  green
string,  and  so  gets  three  dogs,  whose  names  are  Know-
ledge, Fids  ;  Swift,  Luath  ;  Weighty,  Trom.  The
sister  is  enraged,  and  allies  herself  iidth  a  giant  who
has  a  hot  coal  in  his  mouth.  Knowledge  tells  his
master  the  dangers  which  await  him  :  how  the  giant  and
his  sister  had  set  a  venomous  dart  over  the  door.
Swiftness  runs  in  first,  and  saves  his  master  at  the
expense  of  his  own  tail,  and  then  the  three  dogs  upset
a  caldron  of  boiling  Avater  over  the  giant,  Avho  is  hid  in
a  hole  in  the  floor,  and  so  at  the  third  time  the  giant
is  killed,  and  the  only  loss  is  a  bit  of  the  tail  of  Luatli.

Then  the  king's  son  goes  to  dwell  with  a  beautiful
lady  ;  and  after  a  time  he  goes  back  to  visit  his  sister,
armed  with  three  magic  apj)]es.  The  sister  sets  three
venomous  porkers  at  him,  and  he,  by  throwing  the
ai)i)les  behind  him,  hinders  them  with  woods,  and  moors,
and  lakes,  which  grow  up  I'rom  the  apples  ;  but  tliey
follow.  The  three  dogs  come  out  and  beat  the  three  pigs,
and  kill  them,  and  tlien  the  king's  son  gets  his  sister
to  come  with  him,  and   she   was   as  a  servant-maid  to


INTRODrCTION.  XCl

the  prince  and  tlie  fine  woman  with  whom  he  Hved.
Then  the  sister  put  Gath  nimh,  a  poisonous  sting  or
thorn  into  the  bed,  and  the  prince  was  as  though  he
were  dead  for  three  days,  and  he  was  buried.  But
Knowledge  told  the  other  two  dogs  what  to  do,  and
they  scraped  up  the  prince,  and  took  out  the  thorn ;
and  he  came  alive  again  and  went  home,  and  set  on  a
fire  of  grey  oak,  and  burned  his  sister.  And  John
Crawfurd,  fisherman  at  Lochlong-head,  told  John
Dewar  "  that  he  left  the  man,  and  the  woman,  and  the
dogs  all  happy  and  well  pleased  together."  This  curious
story  seems  to  shew  the  hog  and  the  dog  as  foes.  Per-
haps they  were  but  the  emblems  of  rival  tribes  ;  per-
haps they  were  sacred  amongst  rival  races  ;  at  all
events,  they  were  both  important  personages  at  some
time  or  other,  for  there  is  a  great  deal  about  them  in
Gaelic  lore.

The  boar  was  the  animal  which  Diarmid  slew,  and
which  caused  his  death  when  he  paced  his  length
against  the  bristles, — the  venomous  bristles  pierced  a
mole  in  his  foot.  It  was  a  boar  which  was  sent  out  to
find  the  body  of  the  thief  in  that  curious  story,  an  gillie
carrach  ;  and  in  a  great  many  other  stories,  boars  appear
as  animals  of  the  chase.  The  Fiantaichean  or  Feen,
whomsoever  they  Avere,  are  always  represented  as  hunt-
ing wild  boars,  as  tearing  a  boar  to  bits  by  main  force,
or  eating  a  whole  boar.  Cairns,  said  to  have  been
raised  over  boars,  are  shewn  in  many  parts  of  Scotland
still.  I  myself  once  found  a  boar's  tusk  in  a  grave
accidentally  discovered,  close  to  the  bridge  at  Pool-
Ewe.  There  were  many  other  bones,  and  a  rough  flint,
and  a  lot  of  charcoal,  in  what  seemed  to  be  a  shalloM-
human  grave,  a  kind  of  stone  coffin  built  up  "\\ith
loose  slabs.

"Little  pigs"  play  their  part   in  the  nursery  lore


XOU  INTRODL'CTION'.

of  England.     Everybody  wlio  has  been  young  and  has
toes,  must  know  how

"  This  little  pig  went  to  market,
And  this  little  pig  staid  at  home —
This  little  pig  got  roast  beef,
And  this  little  pig  got  none  ;
And  tliis  little  pig  went  wee,  wee,  wee,  all  the  way  home."

There  i.s  a  long  and  tragic  story  which  has  been
current  amongst  at  least  three  generations  of  my  own
family  regarding  a  lot  of  little  \ngs,  who  had  a  wise
mother,  who  told  them  where  they  were  to  build
their  houses,  and  how,  so  as  to  avoid  the  fox.  Some
of  the  little  pigs  would  not  follow  their  mother's  counsel,
and  built  houses  of  leaves,  and  the  fox  got  in  and  said,
"  I  Avill  gallop,  and  I'll  trample,  and  I'll  knock  down
your  house,"  and  he  ate  the  foolish,  little,  proud  pigs ;
but  the  youngest  was  a  wise  little  pig,  and,  after  many
ailventures,  she  put  an  end  to  the  wicked  fox  when
she  was  almost  vanquished,  bidding  him  look  into  the
caldron  to  see  if  the  dinner  was  ready,  and  then  tilting
him  in  headforemost.  In  short,  pigs  are  very  impor-
tant personages  in  the  popular  lore  of  Great  Britain.

We  are  told  by  history  that  they  were  sacred
amongst  the  Gauls,  and  fed  on  acorns  in  the  sacred  oak
groves  of  the  Druids,  and  there  is  a  strong  prejudice
now  amongst  Highlanders  against  eating  pig's  flesh.

80  oak  trees  are  mythical.  Whenever  a  man  is  to  bo
burned  for  some  evil  deed,  and  men  are  always  goiiig
to  be  roasted,  fagots  of  "gro}-,"  probably  green  oak,
arc  fetched.  There  is  a  curious  story  which  the  liev.
Mr.  MacLauchlan  took  down  from  the  recitation  of  an
old  man  in  Edinburgh,  in  which  a  mythical  old  man  is
sliut  up  in  an  oak  tree,  which  grows  in  tlie  court  of  the
kiiig's  palace  ;  and  when  the  king's  son  lots  his  ball


J


INTRODUCTION.  XCUl

roll  into  a  split  in  the  tree  hj  chance,  the  old  man
tells  the  boy  to  fetch  an  axe  and  he  ^vill  give  him  the
hall,  and  so  he  gets  out,  and  endows  the  Prince  witli
power  and  valour.  He  sets  out  on  his  journey  with  a
red-headed  cook,  Avho  personates  him,  and  he  goes  to
lodge  with  a  swine-herd  ;  but  by  the  help  of  the  old
man  of  the  great  tree,  Bodach  na  croibhe  moire,  he
overcomes  a  boar,  a  bull,  and  a  stallion,  and  marries  the
king's  daughter,  and  the  red-headed  cook  is  burnt.

So  then,  in  these  traditions,  swine  and  oak  trees  are
associated  together  with  mythical  old  men  and  deeds  of
valour,  such  as  a  race  of  hunters  might  perform,  and
admire,  and  remember.  Is  it  too  much  to  suppose  that
these  are  dim  recollections  of  pagan  times  Ì  Druidh  is
the  name  for  a  magician,  Draochd  for  magic.  It  is
surely  not  too  much  to  suppose  that  the  magicians  were
the  Druids,  and  the  magic  their  mysteries  ;  that  my
peasant  collectors  are  right,  when  they  maintain  that
Gruagach,  the  long-haired  one,  was  "  a  professor "  or
"  master  of  arts,"  or  "  one  that  taught  feats  of  arms  ; "
that  the  learned  Gruagach,  who  is  so  often  mentioned,
was  a  Druid  in  his  glory,  and  the  other,  who  in  the
days  of  Johnson,  haunted  the  island  of  Troda  a.s
"  Greogaca,"  Avho  haunted  the  small  island  of  Inch,
near  Easdale,  in  the  girlhood  of  Mrs.  Mactavish,  who
is  remembered  still,  and  is  still  supposed  to  haunt
many  a  desolate  island  in  the  far  west,  is  the  phantom
of  the  same  Druid,  fallen  from  his  high  estate,  skulk-
ing from  his  pursuers,  and  really  living  on  milk  left  for
him  by  those  whose  priest  he  had  once  been.

"  The  small  island  of  Inch,  near  Easdale,  is  inhabited  by  a
brownie,  which  has  followed  the  MacDougalls  of  Ardincaple  for
ages,  and  takes  a  great  interest  in  them.  He  takes  care  of  their
cattle  in  that  island  night  and  day,  nnless  the  dairymaid,  when
there  in  summer  with  the  milk  cattle,  neglects  to  leave  warm


XCIV  INTRODUCTION.

milk  for  Lim  at  night  in  a  knocking-stone  in  the  cave,  where  she
and. the  herd  live  during  their  stay  in  the  island.  Should  this
perquisite  be  for  a  night  forgot,  they  will  be  sure  in  the  morning
to  find  one  of  the  cattle  fallen  over  the  rocks  with  which  the  place
abounds.  It  is  a  question  whether  the  brownie  has  not  a  friend
with  whom  he  shares  the  contents  of  the  stone,  which  will,  I  dare-
say, hold  from  two  to  three  Scotch  pints."
Mrs.  MacTavish,  1859,  Islay.

If  the  manners  and  customs  of  druids  are  described
as  correctly  as  modern  manners  really  are,  then  some-
thing may  be  gathered  concerning  druidical  -worship,
but  without  knowledge,  which  I  have  no  time  to
acquire,  the  fidl  bearing  of  traditions  on  such  a  subject
cannot  be  estimated.

The  horse,  and  the  boar,  the  oalc  tree,  and  the
apple,  then,  are  f)ften  referred  to.  Of  mistletoe  I  have
found  no  trace,  unless  it  be  the  sour  herb  which  brings
men  to  life,  but  that  might  be  the  "soma,"  which
plays  such  a  part  in  the  mythology  of  the  Vedas,  or
the  shamrock,  which  was  sacred  in  Irclanil.

Wells  are  indicated  as  mysterious  in  a  great  many
tales — poison  wells  and  healing  wells — and  some  are
still  frequented  with  a  half  belief  in  their  virtue ;
but  such  wells  now  often  have  the  name  of  some  saint
affixed  to  them.

Birds  are  very  often  referred  to  as  soothsayers — in
Xo.  39  especially ;  the  man  catches  a  bird  and  says  it
i.s  a  diviner,  and  a  gentleman  buys  it  as  such.  It  was
a  bird  of  prey,  for  it  lit  on  a  hide,  and  birds  of  prey  arc
continually  appearing  as  bringing  aid  to  men,  such  as
the  raven,  the  hoodie,  and  the  falcon.  The  little  birds
especially  are  frequently  mentioned.  I  should  therefore
gather  from  the  stories  tliat  the  ancient  Celts  drew
augury  from  birds  as  other  nations  did,  and  as  it  is  as-
.serted  by  historians  that  the  Gauls  really  did.     I  should


INTRODUCTION.  XCV

be  inclined  to  think  that  they  possessed  the  domestic
fowl  before  they  became  acquainted  with  the  country  of
the  wild  grouse,  and  that  the  cock  may  have  been  sacred,
for  he  is  a  foe  and  a  terror  to  uncanny  beings,  and  the
hero  of  many  a  story  ;  while  the  grouse  and  similar
birds  peculiar  to  this  country  are  barely  mentioned.
The  cat  plays  a  considerable  part,  and  appears  as  a
transformed  princess  ;  and  the  cat  also  may  have  been
sacred  to  some  power,  for  cats  are  the  companions  of
Highland  witches,  and  of  hags  all  the  world  over,  and
they  were  sacred  to  gods  in  other  lands  ;  they  were  made
into  mummies  in  Egypt,  together  with  hawks  and  other
creatures  which  appear  in  Highland  tales.  Eavens
were  Odin's  messengers  ;  they  may  have  been  pages  to
some  Celtic  divinity  also.  Foxes,  and  otters,  and
wolves,  and  bears  all  appear  in  mythical  characters.
Serpents  were  probably  held  in  abhorrence,  as  they
have  been  hj  other  races,  but  the  serpent  gave  wis-
dom, and  is  very  mythical.

Old  Macdonald,  travelling  tinker,  told  me  a  long
story,  of  which  one  scene  represented  an  incantation
more  vividly  to  me  than  anything  I  have  ever  read  or
hoard.  "  There  was  a  king  and  a  knight,  as  there  was
and  will  be,  and  as  grows  the  fir  tree,  some  of  it
crooked  and  some  of  it  straight,  and  he  was  a  king  of
Eirinn,"  said  the  old  tinker,  and  then  came  a  wicked
stepmother,  who  was  incited  to  evil  by  a  wicked  hen-
wife.  The  son  of  the  first  queen  was  at  school  with
twelve  comrades,  and  they  used  to  play  at  shinny
every  day  with  silver  shinnies  and  a  golden  ball.
The  henwife,  for  certain  curious  rewards,  gave  the
stepdame  a  magic  shirt,  and  she  sent  it  to  her  step  son,
"  Sheen  Billy,"  and  persuaded  him  to  put  it  on  ;  he
refused  at  first,  but  complied  at  last,  and  tlio  shirt  was
a  BEiTHiR  (great  snake)  about  his  neck.     Tlieu  he  was


XCVl  INTRODUCTIOX.

enchanted  and  under  spells,  and  all  manner  of  adven-
tures followed ;  but  at  last  he  came  to  the  house  of  a
"wise  woman  who  had  a  beautiful  daughter,  who  fell  in
love  with  the  enchanted  prince,  and  said  she  must  and
would  have  him.

"  It  will  cost  thee  much  sorrow,"  said  the  mother.

"  I  care  not,"  said  the  girl,  "  I  must  have  him."

"  It  will  cost  thee  thy  hair."

"  I  care  not."

"  It  will  co.st  thee  thy  right  breast."

"  I  care  not  if  it  .should  cost  me  my  life,"  said  the
girl.

And  the  old  woman  agreed  to  help  her  to  lier
will.  A  caldron  was  prepared  and  filled  with  plants  ;
and  the  king's  son  was  put  into  it  stripped  to  the
magic  shirt,  and  the  girl  was  stripped  to  the  waist.
And  the  mother  stood  by  with  a  great  knife,  -which
she  gave  to  her  daughter.

Then  the  king's  son  was  put  down  in  the  caldron,
and  the  great  serpent,  which  appeared  to  be  a  shirt
about  his  neck,  changed  into  its  own  form,  and  sprang
on  the  girl  and  fastened  on  her ;  and  slie  cut  away
the  hold,  and  the  king's  son  Avas  freed  from  the  speUs.
Then  they  were  married,  and  a  golden  breast  was
made  for  the  lady.  And  then  they  went  through  more
adventures,  which  I  do  not  well  remember,  and  whicli
the  old  tinker's  sou  vainly  strove  to  repeat  in  .Vugust
18G0,  for  he  is  far  beliiud  liis  father  in  the  telling  of
old  Highland  tales.

The  serpent,  then,  would  seem  to  be  an  emblem  of
evil  and  wisdom  in  Celtic  popular  mythology.

There  is  something  mysterious  about  rushes.  The
fairies  are  found  in  a  bush  of  rushes  ;  the  great  caldron
of  the  Feen  is  hid  under  a  busli  of  rushes  ;  and  in  a
great  many  other  instances  tom  luaciiarach  appears.


INTRODUCTIOy.  XCVU

I  do  not  know  tliat  the  plant  is  mentioned  in  foreign
tales,  but  it  occurs  several  times  in  border  minstrelsy.

If  the  Druids  worshipped  the  sun  and  moon,  there
is  very  little  direct  reference  to  such  worship  in  high-
land stories  now.  There  are  many  highland  customs
which  point  to  solar  worship,  but  these  have  been
treated  of  by  abler  pens,  and  I  have  nothing  to  add  on
that  head.

There  is  yet  another  animal  which  is  mythical^
the  water-bull.  He  certainly  belongs  to  Celtic  my-
thology, as  the  water-horse  does,  for  he  is  known  in
the  Isle  of  Man  and  all  over  the  islands.

There  are  numerous  lakes  where  water-bulls  are
supposed  to  exist,  and  their  progeny  are  supposed  to
be  easily  known  by  their  short  ears.  When  the
water-bull  appears  in  a  story  he  is  generally  repre-
sented as  friendly  to  man.  I  have  a  great  many  accounts
of  him,  and  liis  name  in  Skye  is  Tarbh  Eithre.

There  is  a  gigantic  water  bird,  called  the  Eoobrie,
which  is  supposed  to  inhabit  the  fresh  water  and  sea
lochs  of  Argyllsliire.  I  have  heard  of  him  nowhere
else  ;  but  I  have  heard  of  loim  from  several  people.

He  is  ravenous  and  gigantic,  gobbles  up  sheep
and  cows,  has  webbed  feet,  a  very  loud  hoarse  voice,
and  is  somewhat  like  a  cormorant.  He  is  reported  to
have  terrified  a  minister  out  of  his  propriety,  and  it  is
therefore  to  be  assumed  that  he  is  of  the  powers  of
evil.  And  there  are  a  vast  number  of  other  fancied
inhabitants  of  earth,  air,  and  water,  enough  to  form  a
volume  of  supernatural  history,  and  all  or  any  of
these  may  have  figured  in  Celtic  mythology  ;  for  it  is
hard  to  suppose  that  men  Hving  at  opposite  ends  of
•Scotland,  and  peasants  in  the  Isle  of  ]\Ian,  should  in-
vent the  same  fancies  unless  their  ideas  had  some
common  foundation.


XCVIll  IXTRODUCTIOX.

Besides  these  animals,  there  is  a  whole  supernatural
world  with  superhuman  gigantic  inhabitants.

There  are  continual  tights  with  these  giants,  wliich
are  often  carried  on  without  arms  at  all — mere  wrestling
matches,  which  seem  to  have  had  certain  rules.  It  is
somewhere  tohl  of  the  Germans  that  they  in  their  forests
fought  with  clubs,  and  the  Celtic  giants  may  once  have
been  real  men.  Hercules  fought  with  a  club.  Irish-
men use  shillelahs  still,  and  my  west  country  friends,
when  they  fight  now-a-days,  use  barrel  staves  instead
of  SATOrds,  and  use  them  well,  if  not  wisely  ;  but
whether  giants  were  men  or  myths,  they  are  always
represented  as  strange  lubberly  beings,  whose  dealings
with  men  invarial)ly  end  in  their  discomfiture.  There
are  giants  in  Herodotus  and,  I  believe,  in  every  popular
mythology  known.  There  are  giants  in  Holy  AYrit.
They  .spoke  an  unknown  tongue  everywhere.  They
said  "  Fee  fo  fum"  in  Cornwall.  They  say  "  Flaw
haw  foaghrich"  in  Argyll,  and  these  sounds  may
possibly  be  corruptions  of  the  language  of  real  big
burly  savages,  now  magnified  into  giants.

The  last  Avord  might  be  the  vocative  of  the  Gaelic
for  stranger,  ill  pronounced,  and  the  intention  may  be
to  mimic  the  dialect  of  a  foreigner  speaking  Gaelic.

An  Italian  organ-grinder  once  found  his  way  to  the
west,  and  sang  "  Fideli,  fidela,  fidelin-lin-la."  The
boys  caught  the  tunc,  and  sang  it  to  the  words,  "  Deese
creepe  Signaveete  ha,"  words  with  as  much  meaning
as  "  Fee  fo  fum,"  but  which  retain  a  certain  resem-
blance to  the  Italian  sound.

If  the  giants  Avere  once  real  savages,  they  had  the
sense  of  smell  peculiarly  sharp,  according  to  the  Gaelic
tales,  as  they  had  in  all  others  which  treat  of  them,  and
they  ate  their  captives,  as  it  is  asserted  that  the  early  in-
habitants of  Scotland  did,  as  Herodotus  says  that  Scyths


INTRODUCTION.  XCÌX

(lid  ill  liÌ8  tÌTiie,  and  as  the  Feejee  islanders  did  "very
lately,  and  still  do.  A  relative  of  mine  once  offered
me  a  tootli  as  a  relic  of  such  a  feast  ;  it  had  been
presented  to  him  in  the  Feejee  Islands  by  a  charming
dark  young  lady,  who  had  just  left  the  banquet,  but
had  not  shared  in  it.  The  Highland  giants  Avere  not  so
big  but  that  their  conquerors  wore  their  clothes  ;  they
were  not  so  strong  that  men  could  not  beat  them,  even
by  wrestling.  They  were  not  quite  savages  ;  for  though
some  lived  in  caves,  others  had  houses  and  cattle,  and
hoards  of  spoil.  They  had  slaves,  as  we  are  told  that
Scotch  proprietors  had  within  historic  times.  In
"Scotland  in  the  Middle  Ages,"  p.  141,  we  learn  that
Earl  Waldev  of  Dunbar  made  over  a  whole  tribe  to  the
Abbot  of  Kelso  in  1170,  and  in  the  next  page  it  is  im-
plied that  these  slaves  were  mostly  Celts.  Perhaps  those
Celts  who  were  not  enslaved  had  their  own  mountain
view  of  the  matter,  and  looked  down  on  the  Gall  as
intrusive,  savage,  uncultivated,  slave-owning  giants.

Perhaps  the  mountain  mists  in  like  manner  im-
peded the  view  of  the  dwellers  on  the  mountain  and
the  plain,  for  Fin  MacCoul  was  a  "  God  in  Ireland,"
as  they  say,  and  is  a  "  rawhead  and  bloody  bones"  in
the  Scottish  lowlands  now.

Whatever  the  giants  were  they  knew  some  magic
arts,  but  they  were  always  beaten  in  the  end  -by  men.

The  combats  with  them  are  a  Gaelic  proverb  in
action  : —

"  Tbeid  seoltachd  tliar  spionnadh."

Skill  goes  over  might,  and  probably,  as  it  seems  to
me,  giants  are  simply  the  nearest  savage  race  at  war  AAath
the  race  who  tell  the  tales.  If  they  performed  impos-
sible feats  of  strength,  they  did  no  more  than  Eob  Roy,
whose  "  putting  stone"  is  now  shewn  to  Saxon  tourists


C  IXTRODUCTION.

by  a  Celtic  coachman,  near  Bunawe,  in  the  shape  of  a
bouldfT  of  many  tons,  though  Eob  Euadh  lived  only  a
hundred  years  ago,  near  Inverary,  in  a  cottage  which
is  now  standing,  and  wliich  was  lately  inhabited  by  a
shepherd.

The  Gaelic  giants  are  very  like  those  of  Norse  and
German  tales,  but  they  are  much  nearer  to  real  men
than  the  giants  of  Germany  and  Scandinavia,  and
Greece  and  Rome,  who  are  almost,  if  not  quite,  equal  to
the  gods.  Famhairan  are  little  more  than  very  strong
men,  but  some  have  only  one  eye  like  the  Cyclops.

Their  world  is  generally,  but  not  always,  under
ground  ;  it  has  castles,  and  parks,  and  pasture,  and
all  that  is  to  be  found  above  the  earth.  Gold,  and
silver,  and  copper,  abound  in  the  giant's  land  ;  jewels
are  seldom  mentioned,  but  cattle,  and  horses,  and  spoil
of  dresses,  and  arms,  and  armour,  combs,  and  basins,
apples,  shields,  bows,  spears,  and  horses,  are  all  to  be
gained  by  a  fight  with  the  giants.  Still,  now  and  then  a
giant  does  some  feat  quite  beyond  the  power  of  man  ;
such  as  a  giant  in  Barra,  who  fished  up  a  hero,  boat
and  all,  with  his  fishing-rod,  from  a  rock,  and  threw
him  over  his  head,  as  little  boys  do  '  cuddies"  from  a
pier-end.     So  the  giants  may  be  degraded  gods  after  all.

But  besides  "  popular  tales,"  there  are  fairy  tales,
which  are  not  told  as  stories,  but  facts.  At  all  events,
the  creed  is  too  recoid  to  be  lightly  spoken  of.

Men  do  believe  in  fairies,  though  they  will  not
readily  confess  the  fact.  And  though  I  do  not  myself
believe  that  fairies  arc,  in  spite  of  the  strong  evidence
ofFered,  I  believe  there  once  was  a  small  race  of  people
in  these  islands,  who  are  remembered  as  fairies,  for  the
fairy  behef  is  not  confined  to  the  Highlanders  of  Scot-
land. I  have  given  a  few  of  the  tales  which  have
come  to  me  as  illustrations  in  Xo.  27.


INTRODUCTION.  CI

"  They"  are  always  represented  as  living  in  green
mounds.  Tliey  pop  up  their  Leads  when  disturbed  by
peoi^le  treading  on  their  houses.  They  steal  children.
They  seem  to  live  on  familiar  terms  with  the  people
about  them  when  they  treat  them  well,  to  punish  them
when  they  ill  treat  them.  If  giants  are  magnified,
these  are  but  men  seen  through  the  other  end  of  the
telescope,  and  there  are  such  people  noAv.  A  Lapp  is
such  a  man — he  is  a  little  flesh-eating  mortal — having
control  over  the  beasts,  and  living  in  a  green  mound —
when  he  is  not  Hving  in  a  tent,  or  sleeping  out  of
doors,  wrapped  in  his  deer-skin  shirt.  I  have  lived
amongst  them  and  know  them  and  their  dwellings
pretty  well.  I  know  one  which  would  answer  to  the
description  of  a  fairy  mound  exactly.  It  is  on  the
most  northern  peninsula  in  Europe,  to  the  east  of  the
North  Cape,  close  to  the  sea,  in  a  sandy  holloAv  near  a
burn.  It  is  round — say,  twelve  feet  in  diameter — and
it  is  sunk  three  feet  in  the  sand  ;  the  roof  is  made  of
sticks  and  covered  with  turf.  The  whole  structure,  at
a  short  distance,  looks  exactly  like  a  conical  green
mound  about  four  feet  liigh.  Tliere  was  a  famous  crop
of  grass  on  it  when  I  was  there,  and  the  children  and
dogs  ran  out  at  the  door  and  up  to  the  toj)  when  we
approached,  as  ants  run  on  an  ant  hill  when  disturbed.
Their  fire  was  in  the  middle  of  the  floor,  and  the  pot
hung  over  it  from  the  roof.  I  lately  saw  a  house  in
south  Uist  found  in  the  sand  hills  close  to  the  sea.  It
was  built  of  loose  boulders,  it  was  circular,  and  had
recesses  in  the  sides,  it  was  covered  when  found,  and
it  was  full  of  sand ;  when  that  was  removed,  stone
querns  and  combs  of  bone  were  found,  together  with
ashes,  and  near  the  level  of  the  top  there  was  a  stratum  of
bones  and  teeth  of  large  grass-eating  animals.  I  know
POu  what  they  were,  but  the  bones  were  splintered  and


CU  INTRODUCTION-.

broken,  and  mingled  with  aslies  and  shells,  oysters,
cockles,  and  wilks  (peri^vinkles),  shewing  clearly  the
original  level  of  the  ground,  and  proving  that  this  was
a  dwelling  almost  the  same  as  a  Lapp  "  Gam"  at  Hop-
seidet.

Now,  let  us  see  what  the  people  of  the  Hebrides
say  of  the  fairies.  There  was  a  woman  benighted
with  a  pair  of  calves,  "  and  she  went  for  shelter
to  a  knoll,  and  she  began  driving  the  peg  of  the
tether  into  it.  The  hill  opened,  and  she  heard  as
though  there  were  a  pot  hook  '  gleegashing,'  on  the
side  of  the  pot.  A  woman  put  up  her  head,  and  as
much  as  was  above  her  waist,  and  said,  '  What  business
hast  thou  to  disturb  this  tulman,  in  Avhich  I  make  my
dwelling. '  "  This  might  be  a  description  of  one  of  my
Lapp  friends,  and  probably  is  a  description  of  such  a
dwelling  as  1  saw  in  South  Uist.  If  the  people  slept
as  Lapps  sleep,  with  their  feet  to  the  lire,  a  woman
outside  might  have  driven  a  peg  very  near  one  of  the
sleepers,  and  she  might  have  stood  on  a  seat  and  poked
her  head  out  of  the  chimney.

The  magic  about  the  beasts  is  but  tlie  mist  of  anti-
quity ;  and  the  fairy  was  probably  a  Pict.  AVho  will
say  Avho  tlie  Pict  may  have  been  ?  Probably  the
great  ("libric  hag  was  one,  and  of  the  same  tribe.

"  In  the  early  morning  she  was  busy  milking  the
hinds  ;  they  were  standing  all  about  the  door  of  the
hut,  till  one  of  them  ate  a  hank  of  blue  Avorsted  hang-
ing from  a  nail  in  it."  So  says  the  "  fiction,"  which  it
is  considered  a  sin  to  relate.  Let  me  place  some  facts
from  my  own  journal  beside  it.

"Wednesday,  August  22,  1850.  Quickjok,  Swe-
dish Lapland. — in  the  evening  the  elfect  of  the  sunhght
through  the  mist  and  showers  was  most  beautiful.  I
was  sketching,  when  a  small  man  made  his  appearance


INTRODUCTION,  ClU

on  the  oi^posite  side  of  the  river  and  began  to  shout  for
a  boat.  The  priest  exclaimed  that  the  Lapps  had  come
down,  and  accordingly  the  diminutive  human  specimen
was  fetched,  and  proved  to  be  a  Lapp  Avho  had  estab-
lished his  camp  about  seven  miles  off,  near  Vallespik.
Pie  was  about  twenty-five  years  old,  and  with  his  liigh
blue  cap  on  could  stand  upright  under  my  arm."

I  had  been  wandering  about  Quickjok  for  a  week,
out  on  Vallespik  frequently,  searching  for  the  Lapps,
with  the  very  glass  which  I  had  previously  used  to
find  deer  close  to  Clibric,  which  is  but  a  small  copy  of
the  Lapland  mountain.

"Thursday,  23d. —  Started  to  see  the  deer,  with  the
priest  and  the  Clockar,  and  Marcus,  and  the  Lapp.
The  Lapp  walked  like  a  deer  himself,  aided  by  a  very
long  birch  pole,  which  he  took  from  its  hiding  place  in
a  fir  tree.  I  had  hard  work  to  keep  up  with  him.
]\Iarcus  and  the  priest  were  left  behind.  Once  up
through  the  forest,  it  was  cutting  cold,  and  we  Avalked
up  to  the  '  cota'  in  two  hours  and  a  quarter.  The
deer  were  seen  in  the  distance,  hke  a  brown  speck  on
the  shoulder  of  Vallespik  ;  and  with  the  glass  I  could
make  out  that  a  small  mortal  and  two  dogs  were  driv-
ing them  home.  The  cota  is  a  permanent  one,  made
in  the  shape  of  a  sugar  loaf,  with  birch  sticks,  and  long
fiat  stones  and  turf.  There  are  two  exactly  alike,  and
each  has  a  door,  a  mere  narrow  slit,  opening  to  the
west,  and  a  hole  in  the  roof  to  let  out  the  smoke.  I
crept  in,  and  found  a  girl  of  about  fifteen,  with  very
pretty  eyes,  sittmg  crouched  up  in  a  corner,  and  look-
ing as  scared  as  one  of  her  own  fa"\vns.  The  priest
said,  that  if  we  had  come  without  our  attendant  genius,
the  small  Lapp,  she  would  have  fainted,  or  run  away
to  the  hills.  I  began  to  sketch  her,  as  she  sat  looking
modest  in  her  dark  corner,  and  Avas  rejoicing  in  the


CIV  IXTRODUCTION',

extreme  stillness  of  my  sitter,  when,  on  looking  up
from  some  careful  touch,  I  found  that  she  had  va-
nished through  the  door- way.  I  had  to  bribe  her  with
bread  and  butter  before  she  could  be  coaxed  back.
A  tremendous  row  of  shouting  and  barking  outside
now  announced  the  arrival  of  the  deer,  so  I  let  my
sitter  go,  and  off  she  ran  as  fast  as  she  could.  I  fol-
lowed more  leisurely  to  the  spot  M'here  the  deer  were
gathered,  on  a  stony  hillside.  There  were  only  about
200  ;  the  rest  had  run  off  up  wind  on  the  -way  from  the
mountains,  and  all  the  other  Lapps  were  off  after  them,
leaving  only  my  pretty  sitter,  the  boy,  and  a  small
woman  vnth  bleared  eyes,  as  ugly  as  sin,  his  sister.

"  How  I  wished  for  Landscer's  pencil  as  I  looked
at  that  scene  !  Most  of  the  deer  were  huddled  close
together ;  hinds  and  calves  chewing  the  cud  Avith  the
greatest  placiditj',  but  here  and  there  some  grand  old
fellows,  with  wide  antlers,  stood  up  against  the  sky  line,
looking  magnificent.  I  tried  to  draw,  but  it  was  hope-
less ;  so  I  sat  down,  and  watched  the  proceedings  of
my  hosts.

"  First,  each  of  the  girls  took  a  coil  of  rope  from
about  her  neck,  and  in  a  twinkling  it  was  pitched  over
the  horns  of  a  hind.  The  noose  was  then  slipped  round
the  neck,  and  a  cou])le  of  turns  of  rope  round  the
nose,  and  then  the  wild  milkmaid  set  her  foot  on  the
halter  and  proceeded  to  milk  'niE  hind,  into  a  round
birch  bowl,  with  a  handle.  Sometimes  she  sat,  at
others  she  leant  her  head  on  the  deer's  dark  side,  and
knelt  beside  her.  I  never  saw  such  a  succession  of
beautiful  groups.

"  Every  now  and  tlicn  some  half-dozen  deer  would
break  out  of  the  herd  and  set  off  to  the  mountain,  and
then  came  a  general  skurry.  Tlie  small  La])p  man,
with  his  long  birch  pole,  would  rush  screaming  after


IXTRODUCTION.  CT

the  stragglers ;  and  his  two  gaunt,  black,  rough,  half-
starved  dogs  would  scour  off,  yelping,  in  pursuit.  It
generally  ended  in  the  hasty  retimi  of  the  truants,  with
weU-l:)itten  houghs  for  their  jDains ;  but  some  fairly  made
oft',  at  a  determined  long  trot,  and  vanished  over  the
hill.  It  was  very  curious  to  be  thus  in  the  midst  of  a
whole  herd  of  creatures  so  like  our  own  wild  deer,  to
have  them  treading  on  my  feet  and  poking  their  horns
against  my  sketch-book  as  I  vaLuly  tried  to  draw  them,
and  to  think  that  they  who  had  the  power  to  bid  de-
fiance to  the  fleetest  hound  in  Sweden  should  be  so
perfectly  tame  as  to  let  the  small  beings  who  herded
them  so  thump,  and  brdly,  and  tease  them.  The  milk-
ing, in  the  meantime,  had  been  progressing  rapidly  ;
and  after  about  an  hour  the  pretty  girl,  who  had  been
dipping  her  fingers  in  the  milk-pail  and  licking  up  the
milk  all  the  time,  took  her  piece  of  bread  and  butter,
and  departed  with  her  charge,  munching  as  she  went.

"  The  blear-eyed  one,  and  the  boy,  and  our  party,
went  into  the  cota,  and  dined  on  cold  roast  reiper  and
reindeer  milk.  The  boy  poured  the  milk  from  a  small
keg,  which  contained  the  whole  product  of  the  fiock  ;
and  having  given  us  our  share,  he  carefully  licked  uj>
all  that  remained  on  the  outside  of  the  keg,  and  set  it
down  ill  a  corner.  It  was  sweet  and  delicious,  like
tliick  cream.  Dinner  over,  we  desired  the  Lapp  to  be
ready  in  the  morning  (to  accompany  me),  and  with  the
docker's  dog,  '  Gueppe,'  went  reiper-shooting.  The
docker  himself,  with  a  newly-slaughtered  reindeer  calf
on  liis  shoulders,  followed  ;  and  so  we  went  home."

A  few  days  afterwards,  I  was  at  another  camp,
on  another  hill,  where  the  same  scene  was  going  on.
"  In  a  tent  I  found  a  fine-looking  Lapp  woman  sitting
on  a  heap  of  skins,  serving  out  coftee,  and  handing
reindeer  cream  to  the  docker  with  a  silver  spoon.  She
</


CVl  INTRODUCTION-.

had  silver  bracelets,  and  a  coui:)le  of  silver  rings ;  and
altogether,  with  her  black  hair,  and  dark  brown  eyes
glittering  in  the  fire-light,  she  looked  eastern  and  niag-
niiicent."  Her  husband  had  many  trinkets,  and  they
had,  amongst  other  articles,  a  comb,  which  the  rest
seemed  much  to  need.

Her  dxess  was  blue,  so  were  most  of  the  dresses,
and  one  of  her  possessions  was  a  bone  contrivance  for
weaving  the  bauds  which  all  wore  round  their  ankles.
She  must  have  had  blue  yarn  somewhere,  for  her
garters  were  partly  blue.

I  spent  the  whole  of  the  next  day  in  the  camp,
and  watched  the  whole  operations  of  the  day.

"  After  dinner,  the  cliildren  cracked  tlie  bones  with
stones  and  a  knife,  after  they  had  polished  the  outside,
and  sucked  up  the  marrow ;  and  then  the  dogs,  which
did  not  dare  to  steal,  were  called  in  their  turn,  and  got
the  remains  of  the  food  in  wooden  bowls,  set  apart  for
their  especial  use."

The  bones  in  the  hut  in  South  Uist  might  have
been  the  remains  of  such  a  feast  by  their  appearance.

"  The  cota  was  a  pyramid  of  sods  and  birch  sticks,
about  seven  feet  high,  and  twelve  or  fourteen  in  diameter.
There  were  three  children,  five  dogs,  an  old  woman,
Marcus,  and  myself,  inside  ;  and  all  day  long  the  hand-
some lady  from  the  tent  next  door,  with  her  husband,
and  a  couple  of  quaint-looking  old  fellows,  in  deer-
skin shirts,  kept  popping  in  to  see  how  I  got  on.  It
was  impossible  to  sit  upriglit  for  the  slope  of  the  walls,
as  I  sat  cross-legged  on  the  ground."

This  might  be  a  description  of  the  Uist  hut  itself,
and  its  inhabitants,  as  I  can  ftincy  them.

"The  tliree  dogs  (in  the  tent),  at  the  smallest
symptom  of  a  disturbance,  plunged  out,  barking,  to
add    to    the    row ;    tliey     popped    in    by   the    same


INTRODUCTION.  CVU

yvaj  under  the  canvas,  so  they  liad  no  need  of  a
door."

So  did  the  dogs  in  the  story  of  Seantraigh ;  they
ran  after  the  stranger,  and  stopped  to  eat  the  bones.
And  it  is  remarkable  that  all  civilized  dogs  fall  upon
and  worry  the  half-savage  black  Lapp  dogs,  and  bark
at  their  masters  whenever  they  descend  from  their
mountains,  as  the  town  dogs  did  at  the  fairy  dogs.  In
short,  these  extracts  might  be  a  fair  description  of  the
people,  and  the  dwellings,  and  the  food,  and  the  dogs
described  as  fairies,  and  the  hag,  and  the  tulman,  in
stories  wliich  I  have  grouped  together  ;  told  in  Scotland
within  this  year  by  persons  who  can  have  no  know-
ledge of  what  is  called  the  "  Finn  theory,"  and  given
in  the  very  words  in  which  they  came  to  me,  from
various  sources.

Lord  Eeay's  forester  must  surely  have  passed  the
night  in  a  Lapp  cota  on  Ben  Clibric,  in  Sutherland,  when
Lapps  were  Picts ;  but  when  was  that  ?  Perhaps  in
the  youth  of  the  fairy  of  whom  the  following  story  was
told  by  a  Sutherland  gamekeeper  of  my  acquaintance.

The  Herds  of  Glen  Odhar. — A  wild  romantic
glen  in  Strath  Carron  is  called  Glen  Garaig,  and  it  was
through  this  that  a  woman  was  passing  carrying  an  in-
fant wrapped  in  her  plaid.  Below  the  path,  overhung
with  weeping  birches,  and  nearly  opposite,  run  a  very
deep  ra-\dne,  known  as  Glen  Odhar,  the  dun  glen.  The
child,  not  yet  a  year  old,  and  which  had  not  spoken  or
attempted  speech,  suddenly  addressed  his  mother  thus  :  —

S  lionmhor  blio  mhaol  OLlliar,  Many  a  dun  bummel  cow,

Le  laogh  na  ghoblil,  With  a  calf  below  her,

Chunnaic  mise  gam  bleoglian  Have  I  seen  milking

Anns  a  ghlean  Odhar  ud  halla,  In  that  dun  glen  yonder,

Gun  chu  gun  duine,  Without  dog,  without  man.

Gun  bhean  gun  ghille,  Without  woman,  without  gillie,


CVIU  IXTRODUCTION.

Ach  aon  duine,  But  one  man,

S'e  liath.  And  he  hoary.

The  good  woman  flung  down  the  child  and  plaid
and  ran  home,  where,  to  her  great  joy,  her  baby  boy
lay  smiling  in  its  cradle.

Fairies  then  milked  deer,  as  Lapps  do.  They  lived
under  ground,  like  them.  They  Avorked  at  trades,
especially  smith  work  and  weaving.  They  had  hammers
and  anvils,  and  excelled  in  their  use,  but  though  good
weavers,  they  had  to  steal  wool  and  borrow  looms.
Lapps  do  work  in  metal  on  their  o^^^l  account  ;  they
make  their  own  skin  dresses,  but  buy  their  summer
clothes.  A  race  of  wanderers  could  not  be  weavers  on
a  large  scale,  but  they  can  and  do  weave  small  bands
very  neatly  on  hand-looms  ;  and  they  alone  make
these.  There  are  savages  now  in  South  Africa,  who  are
smiths  and  miners,  though  they  neither  weave  nor  wear
clothes.  Fairies  had  hoards  of  treasure — so  have
Lapps.  A  man  died  shortly  before  one  of  my  Tana
tcips,  and  the  whole  country  side  had  been  out  search-
ing for  his  buried  wealth  in  vain.  Some  years  ago
the  old  silver  shops  of  Bergen  and  Trondhjem  over-
flowed with  queer  cups  and  spoons?,  and  rings,  silver
plates  for  waist  belts,  old  plate  that  had  been  hidden
amongst  the  mountains,  black  old  silver  coins  that  had
not  seen  the  light  for  years.  I  saw  the  plate  and
bought  some,  and  was  told  that,  in  consequence  of  a
religious  movement,  the  Lapps  had  dug  up  and  sold
their  hoards.  Fairies  are  supposed  to  shoot  flint
arrows,  and  arrows  of  other  kinds,  at  people  now.
Men  have  told  me  several  times  that  they  had  been
shot  at  :  one  man  had  found  the  flint  arrow  in  an  ash
tree  ;  another  had  heard  it  whiz  past  his  ear  ;  a  third
had  pulled  a  slender  arrow  from  a  friend's  head.  If
that  be  so,  my  argument  fails,  and  fairies  are  not  of


INTRODUCTION.  CiX

tlie  iJast  ;  but  Californian  Indians  now  use  arrow-heads
which  closely  resemble  those  dug  up  in  Scotland,  in
Denmark,  and,  I  believe,  all  over  Europe.  Fairies  are
conquered  by  Christian  symbols.  They  were  probably
Pagans,  and,  if  so,  they  may  have  existed  when  Chris-
tianity was  introduced.  They  steal  men,  women,  and
cliildren,  and  keep  them  in  their  haunts.  They  are
not  the  only  slave  owners  in  the  world.  They  are
supernatural,  and  objects  of  a  sort  of  respect  and  won-
der. So  are  gipsies  where  they  are  rare,  as  in  Sweden
and  Norway ;  so  are  the  Lapps  themselves,  for  they
are  professed  wizards.  I  have  known  a  terrified  Swe-
dish lassie  whip  her  horse  and  gallop  away  in  her  cart
from  a  band  of  gipsies,  and  I  have  had  the  advantage
of  living  in  the  same  house  with  a  Lapp  wizard  at
Quickjok,  who  had  prophesied  the  arrival  of  many
strangers,  of  whom  I  was  one.  Spaniards  were  gods
amongst  the  Indians  till  they  taught  them  to  know
better.  Horses  were  supernatural  when  they  came,  and
on  the  whole,  as  it  appears,  there  is  much  more  reason
to  believe  that  fairies  were  a  real  people,  like  the  Lapps,
who  are  still  remembered,  than  that  they  are  "  creatures
of  imagination"  or  "spirits  in  prison,"  or  "fallen  angels  ;"
and  the  e\'idence  of  theh'  actual  existence  is  very  much
more  direct  and  substantial  than  that  which  has  driven,
and  seems  still  to  be  driving,  people  to  tlie  very  verge
of  insanity,  if  not  beyond  it,  in  the  matter  of  those
palpable-impalpable,  visible-invisiljle  spirits  who  rap
double  knocks  upon  dancing  deal  boards.

I  am  inclined  to  believe  in  the  former  existence  of
fairies  in  tliis  sense,  and  if  for  no  other  reason,  because
all  the  nations  of  Europe  have  had  some  such  belief,
and  they  cannot  all  have  invented  the  same  fancy.
The  habitations  of  Highland  fairies  are  green  mounds,
they  therefore,   like  the  giants,   resemble  the  "  under


ex  IXTRODUCTION.

jordiske  "  of  the  north,  and  they  too  may  be  degraded
divinities.

It  seems  then,  that  Gaelic  tales  attribute  super-
natural qualities  to  tilings  which  are  mentioned  in
popular  tales  elsewhere,  and  that  Gaelic  superstitions
are  common  to  other  races  ;  and  it  seems  worth  inquiry
whether  there  was  anything  in  the  known  customs  of
Celtic  tribes  to  make  these  things  valuable,  and  whether
tradition  is  supported  by  history.

In  the  first  place,  then,  who  are  Celts  now  ?  "Wlio
were  their  ancestors  ?  Wlio  are  their  relations  ?  and
where  have  Gaelic  tribes  appeared  in  history  ?

I  believe  that  little  is  really  known  about  the
Gael  j  and  in  particular,  the  origin  of  the  West  High-
landers has  been  very  keenly  disputed.  One  thing
is  clear,  they  speak  a  language  which  is  almost  iden-
tical with  the  Irish  of  the  north  of  Ireland,  and  they
are  the  same  people.  The  dialect  of  Irish,  Avhicli  varies
most  from  Scotch  Gaelic,  is  clearly  but  another  form  of
the  same  tongue.  Manks  is  another  ;  and  these  three
are  closely  related  to  Welsh  and  Breton,  though  the
difference  is  very  much  greater.  Gaelic,  Irish,  and
Manks  vary  from  each  other  about  as  much  as  Norse,
Swedish,  and  Danish.  AYelsh  and  Breton  vary  from
the  rest  about  as  much  as  German  and  Dutch  do  from
the  Scandinavian  languages.  Tliere  are  variations  in
Gaelic,  and  I  believe  there  are  in  all  the  five  sur\av-
ing  Celtic  dialects,  as  there  are  in  the  languages  of
different  counties  in  England,  of  every  valley  in  Nor-
way and  Sweden,  of  every  German  district,  and  of  every
part  of  France,  Spain,  and  Italy.  But  one  who  knows
Gaelic  well,  can  make  himself  understood  throughout
the  Highlands,  as  freely  as  an  Englishman  can  in  Eng-
land, though  he  may  speak  vnth  a  Northumbrian  burr,
or  a  west  country  twang,  or  like  a  true  Cockney.


INTRODUCTION.  CXI

These,  then,  form  the  Celtic  clan,  the  people  of  the
west  of  Scotland,  the  Irish,  the  ]\Ianks,  the  Welsh,  and
the  Breton.  Who  their  relations  are,  and  who  their
ancestors,  are  questions  not  easily  answered,  though
much  has  been  written  on  the  subject.  The  following
is  a  brief  outline  of  what  is  given  as  Celtic  history  by
modern  writers  whose  works  I  have  consulted  lately: —

According  to  Henri  IMartin,  the  French  historian,*
the  whole  of  Central  Europe,  France,  and  Spain,  were
once  overrun  by  a  race  calUng  themselves  Gael,  and
best  known  as  Gauls.  This  people  is  generally  admit-
ted to  have  been  of  the  same  stock  as  Germans,  Latins,
Greeks,  and  Slavonians,  and  to  have  started  from  Cen-
tral Asia  at  some  unknown  epoch.  They  are  supposed
to  have  been  warlike,  to  have  been  tatooed  like  modern
New  Zealanders,  and  painted  like  North  American
Indians,  to  have  been  armed  with  stone  weapons  like
the  South  Sea  Islanders  and  Californian  Indians  ;  but
shepherds,  as  well  as  hunters,  and  acquainted  with  the
use  of  wheat  and  rye,  which  they  are  supposed  to  have
brought  vrith  them  from  Asia.  One  great  confedera-
tion of  tribes  of  this  race  was  known  to  ancient  histo-
rians, as  KsXroi.  They  were  represented  as  fair  and
rosy-cheeked,  large-chested,  active,  and  brave,  and
they  found  the  Euskes  settled  in  the  south  of  France,
who  were  dark-complexioned,  whose  descendants  are
supposed  to  be  the  Euscualdonec  or  Basques  of  the
Pyrennees,  and  who  are  classed  with  the  Lapps  of  the
north  of  Europe,  and  with  tribes  now  dwelling  in  the
far  north  of  Asia.  I  have  seen  faces  in  Barra  very  hke
faces  which  I  had  seen  shortly  before  at  St.  Sebastian
in  Spain.  A  tribe  of  Gauls  made  their  way  into  Italy,
and  have  left  traces  of  their  language  there,  in  the
names  of  mountain  chains  and  great  rivers.  These
*  Histoire  de  France,  par  Henri  Martin  ;  1855.


CXU  INTRODUCTION.

are  named  "  Amhra,"  or  "  Ombres,"  and  Amhra  is
translated  Yalliant.  Tliis  invasion  is  calculated  to
have  taken  place  about  1500  b.c.

The  Gael  were  followed  by  Ivimri  or  Cimbri,  a  kin-
dred peoj^le  of  a  darker  complexion,  speaking  a  kindred
language,  and  their  descendants  are  supposed  to  be  the
Welsh  and  Bretons.  These  in  turn  occupied  the
interior  of  eastern  Europe,  and  were  followed  by  the
Scyths,  and  these,  says  the  French  liistorian,  were
Teutons.

According  to  the  learned  author  of  the  essay  on
the  Cimmerians,  in  the  third  volume  of  Eawlinson's
Herodotus,  p.  184,  it  is  almost  beyond  doubt  that  a
people  known  to  their  neighbours  as  Cimmerii,  Gimiri,
or  probably  Gomerini,  attained  a  considerable  power
in  Western  Asia  and  Eastern  Europe  witliin  the  period
indicated  by  the  dates  B.C.  800,  600,  or  even  earlier.

These  people  are  traced  to  the  inhabitants  of  Wales,
and  Gael  and  Cymri  are  admitted  by  all  to  be  KiXroi ;
and  still  keep  up  their  old  character  for  pugnacity  by
quarrelling  over  their  pedigrees.

Celts  Avere  undoubtedly  the  primitive  inhabitants
of  Gaul,  Belgium,  and  the  British  Islands,  possibly  also
of  Spain  and  Portugal  ;  but  no  word  of  the  language
spoken  by  these  ancient  Cimbri  has  been  preserved
by  ancient  authors,  except  the  name,  "  and  perhaps
the  name  Cimmerii  may  have  included  many  Celtic
tribes  not  of  the  Cynu-ic  branch."  These  Gauls  ap-
peared everywhere  in  Europe  ;  and,  in  particular,  they
who  had  probably  been  driven  out  by  the  Scythians
invaded  Scythia,  intermixed  with  the  people,  and
formed  the  people  known  in  history  as  Celto- Scythians ;
wlio  the  Scyths  were  (according  to  the  author)  appears
to  be  uncertain.  All  that  remains  of  their  language  is
a  list  of  words,  picked  out  of  the  works  of  ancient


INTEODUCTIOX.  CXUl

authors ;  and  knowing  wliat  modern  authors  make  of
words  which  they  pick  up  by  ear,  such  a  list  is  but  a
narrow  foundation  on  which  to  build.  Still  on  that
Ust  it  has  been  decided  that  Scyths  spoke  a  language
wliich  has  affinity  with  Sanscrit,  and  in  that  list,  as
it  seems  to  me,  there  are  several  words  which  resemble
Gaelic  more  closely  than  the  Sanscrit  words  given  with
them.  And  so,  according  to  this  theory,  the  Basques
were  found  in  Europe  by  the  first  Gael,  and  these  were
driven  westwards  by  Kimri,  and  these  again  by  Scy-
thians, and  these  by  Teutons,  and  all  these  still  occupy
their  respective  positions.  The  Basques  and  Lapps
pushed  aside  ;  the  Gael  in  Scotland  and  Ireland,  driven
far  to  the  westwards ;  the  Kimri  driven  westwards
into  Wales  and  Britanny ;  the  Scyths  lost  or  ab-
sorbed ;  and  the  Teutons  occupying  their  old  posses-
sions, as  Germans,  Saxons,  English,  Scandinavians,
and  all  their  kindred  tribes  ;  and  of  all  these  the
Basques  and  their  relatives  alone  speak  a  language
which  cannot  be  traced  to  a  common  unknown  origin,
from  which  Sanscrit  also  came.

A^Tiatever  then  throws  hght  on  the  traditions  of
the  fii'st  invaders  of  Europe  is  of  interest  to  all  the
rest,  for,  according  to  this  theory,  they  are  all  of  the
same  clan.  They  are  all  branches  of  the  same  old
stock  which  grew  in  Central  Asia,  and  which  has
spread  over  great  part  of  the  world,  and  whatever  is
told  of  Gauls  is  of  interest  to  all  branches  of  Celts.

Eome  was  taken  by  Gauls  about  390  b  c.  ;  Greece
was  invaded  by  Gauls  about  279  B.C.,  and  they  are  then
described  as  armed  with  great  swords  and  lances,  and
wearing  golden  collars,  and  fighting  savagely.  At  the
end  of  the  third  century  B.C.,  according  to  the  French
historian,  Gaul  might  have  been  a  common  name  for  the
greatest  part  of  Europe,  for  Gauls  were  everywhere.


CXIV  INTRODUCTION.

Now,  what  mariner  of  men  were  these  Ganls,  when
men  saw  them  who  could  describe  them  ?

All  the  Gauls  kept  their  hair  untouched  by  iron,
and  raised  it  like  a  mane  towards  the  top  of  the  head.
As  to  the  beard,  some  shaved  it,  others  wore  it  of  a
moderate  length.  The  chiefs  and  the  nobles  shaved
the  cheeks  and  the  chin,  and  let  their  mustache  grow
to  all  their  length.      (Histoire  de  France,  page  33.)

Their  eyes  were  blue  or  sea-green,  and  shone  under
this  thick  mass  of  hair,  of  which  the  blond  hue  had  been
changed  by  lime-water  to  a  flaming  tint.

Their  mustaches  were  "  Eousses,"  which  is  the  only
word  I  know  wliich  will  translate  ruadh.

The  warrior  was  armed  with  an  enormous  sabre  on
his  left  thigh  ;  he  held  two  darts  in  his  hand,  or  a  long
lance ;  he  carried  a  four-cornered  shield,  painted  of
various  brilliant  colours,  with  bosses  representing  birds
or  wild  animals ;  and  on  his  head  was  a  helmet  topped
with  eagles'  wings,  floating  hair,  or  horns  of  wild  ani-
mals ;  liis  clothes  were  particoloured,  and  he  wore
"brighis;"  he  was  always  fighting  at  home  or  abroad;
he  was  a  curious  inquiring  mortal,  always  asking  ques-
tions ;  and  truly  he  must  have  been  a  formidable
savage  that  old  French  Gaul.  Men's  heads  were  nailed
at  the  gates  of  his  towns  and  liis  houses,  beside  tro-
phies of  the  chase,  much  as  modern  Gael  now  hang
up  the  trophies  of  their  destructive  skill,  in  the  shape
of  pole-cats  and  crows.

The  chiefs  kept  human  heads  embalmed  and  pre-
served, like  archives  of  fixmily  prowess,  as  the  Dyaks
of  Borneo  and  the  New  Zealanders  still  do,  or  did  very
lately.  The  father  had  the  power  of  life  and  death  over
his  wife  and  children,  and  exercised  it  too  by  burning
the  guilty  wife  ;  and,  though  some  chiefs  had  several
Avives,   and  there  are  some   scandalous  stories  of  the


INTRODUCTION.  CXV

manners  and  customs  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  islands  ;
women  were  cousiilted  together  with  men  by  the  chiefs
on  matters  of  moment,  and  held  a  high  place  amongst
the  Gauls  of  France.

Now,  this  short  description  of  the  Gauls,  rapidly-
gleaned  from  the  pages  of  two  modern  books  of
high  authority  and  great  research,  after  my  Gaelic
stories  were  collected,  agrees  with  the  picture  wliich  the
Gaelic  tales  give  of  their  mythical  heroes  in  many
particulars.  They  have  long  beautiful  yellow  hair,
Leadanach  Buidh  Boicheach.  They  are  Kuadh  Eous-
ses.  They  have  large  swords,  claidheamh,  sometimes
duileagach,  leaf-shaped.  They  cast  spears  and  darts,
Sleadh.  They  are  always  asking  questions,  and  their
descendants  have  not  lost  the  habit  yet.  Tlieir  dwell-
ings are  surrounded  by  heads  stuck  on  staves,  stob.
They  have  larders  of  dead  enemies.  "When  a  man  is
described  as  ragged  and  out  of  order,  it  is  almost  always
added  that  his  beard  had  grown  over  his  face ;  and
though  beards  are  coming  into  fasliion  now,  it  is  not  a
highland  fasliion  to  wear  a  beard  ;  and  many  a  stinging
joke  have  I  heard  aimed  at  a  bearded  man  by  modern
Highlanders.  The  shields  of  the  warriors  are  Bucaid-
each,  bossed ;  Balla  Bhreachd,  dotted  and  variegated  ;
Bara  chaol,  with  slender  point ;  "  with  many  a  pic-
ture to  be  seen  on  it,  a  lion,  a  cremhinach,  and  a  deadly
snake  ; "  and  such  shields  are  figured  on  the  lona
tombs.  The  ancient  Gauls  wore  helmets  which
represented  beasts.  The  enchanted  king's  sons,  when
they  came  home  to  their  dwellings,  put  off  cochal,
the  husk,  and  become  men;  and  when  they  go  out,
they  resume  the  cochal  and  become  animals  of  vari-
ous kinds.  May  this  not  mean  that  they  put  on
their  armour.  They  marry  a  plurality  of  wives  in
many  stories.     la  short,  the  enchanted  warriors  are,


CXVl  IXTRODUCTIOK.

as  I  verily  believe,  nothing  but  real  men,  and  their
manners  real  manners,  seen  through  a  haze  of  cen-
turies, and  seen  in  the  same  light  as  they  are  seen  in
other  popular  tales,  but,  mayhap,  a  trifle  clearer,  because
the  men  who  tell  of  them  are  the  descendants  of  the
men  described,  and  have  mixed  less  with  other  men.

I  do  not  mean  that  the  tales  date  from  any  parti-
cular period,  but  that  traces  of  all  periods  may  be  found
in  them — that  various  actors  have  played  the  same
parts  time  out  of  mind,  and  that  their  manners  and
customs  are  all  mixed  together,  and  truly,  though  con-
fusedly, represented — that  giants  and  fairies,  and
enchanted  princes  Avere  men ;  that  Eob  Eoy  may  yet
wear  many  heads  in  Australia,  and  be  a  god  or  an
ogre,  according  to  taste — that  tales  are  but  garbled
popular  history,  of  a  long  journey  thi-ough  forests  and
wilds,  inhabited  by  savages  and  wild  beasts  ;  of  events
that  occurred  on  the  way  from  east  to  west,  in  the
year  of  grace,  once  upon  a  time.

Tales  certainly  are  historical  in  tliis  sense  when  they
treat  of  Eirinn  and  Lochlann,  for  the  islands  Avere  the
battlefield  of  the  Celts  and  Scandinavians,  and  though
they  lack  the  precision  of  more  modern  poi^ular  history,
they  are  very  precise  as  to  Irish  names  and  geography.
"  They  went  to  Cnoc  Soannan  in  Ireland."  ConaU
was  called  Gulbanach  from  Beinn  Gulbain  in  Ireland.
There  is  the  "  king  of  iHevn-j"  and  many  other  places
are  named  according  to  their  Gaelic  names,  never  as
they  are  named  in  English.  The  same  is  true  of  the
manuscript  tales  in  the  Advocates'  Library.  Places
about  Loch  Aavc  are  named,  and  the  characters  pass
backwards  and  forwards  between  Ireland  and  Argjdl,
as  we  are  told  they  really  did  Avhen  the  Irish  Celts  in-
vaded and  possessed  that  part  of  the  west  of  Scotland,
and  that  invasion  is  clearlv  referred  to  in  more  tlian


INTRODUCTION.  CXVll

one  popular  tradition  still  current.  When  Lochlann  is
mentioned,  it  is  further  off,  and  all  is  uncertain.  The
king's  son,  not  the  king  liiinself,  is  usually  the  hero.
Breacan  MacRigh.  Lochlainn  is  named,  or  the  son  of
the  king  of  Lochlann,  without  a  name  at  all,  but  the
Irish  kings  often  have  a  whole  pedigree  ;  thus,  Connall
Gulbanach  Maclulin  MacArt  Mac  some  one  else,  king  of
Ireland,  and  I  lately  heard  a  long  story  about  "Magnus."

This  again  is  like  distorted,  undated  popular  his-
tory of  true  events.  They  are  clearly  seen  at  home,
the  very  spot  where  the  action  took  place  is  pointed
to  ;  less  clearly  in  Ireland,  though  people  and  places
are  named ;  they  are  dimly  seen  in  Lochlann,  and  be-
yond that  everytliing  is  enlarged,  and  magical,  and
mysterious,  and  grotesque.  Eeal  events  are  distorted
into  fables  and  magnified  into  supernatural  occurrences,
for  the  Gaelic  proverbs  truly  say,  "There  are  long  horns
on  cattle  in  mist"  or  "  in  Ireland,"  and  "  Far  away  fowls
have  fine  feathers."

But  whether  the  stories  are  history  or  mythology,
it  is  quite  clear  that  they  are  very  old,  that  they
belong  to  a  class  which  is  very  widely  spread,  and  that
they  were  not  made  by  living  men.

All  story-teUers  agree  in  saying  that  they  learned
them  as  traditions  long  ago ;  and  if  all  those  whose  names
are  given  had  been  inclined  to  tell  "  stories"  in  another
sense,  they  could  not  have  made  and  told  the  same
stories  at  opposite  ends  of  Scotland,  almost  simultane-
ously, to  ditferent  people.  James  "Wilson  could  not
have  told  Conall  Cra  bhuidhe  to  Hector  MacLean  in
Islay,  about  the  same  time  that  Neil  Gillies  was  telling
Conal  Crobhi  to  me  at  Inverary,  and  a  very  short
time  before  Hector  Urquhart  got  ifo.  8  from  Kenneth
MacLennan  in  Gairloch.  An  old  fisherman  and  an  old
porter   could   not  have   combined    to   tell   a   "  story"


CXVUl  INTRODUCTIOX.

wMcli  was  in  Straparola,  in  Italian,  in  15G7,  to  Hector
MacLean  in  Barra,  in  1859,  and  to  the  Eev.  Mr.  Mac-
Lauclilan  in  Edinbnrgli,  in  1860,  nnless  these  stories
were  popular  facts,  though  despised  as  fictions ;  and
they  arc  curious  facts  too,  for  the  frame  of  Conal  is
common  to  old  German  manuscripts,  and  some  of  the
adventures  are  versions  of  those  of  Ulysses.  There
are  many  proverbs  which  are  only  explained  when  the
story  is  known  ;  for  example,  "  blackberries  in  Feb-
ruary" means  nothing  ;  but  when  explained  by  the
story,  the  meaning  is  clearly  the  idea  which  an  ac-
quaintance of  mine  once  embodied  in  a  French  toast,
as  "  les  impossibilites  accomplies."  The  stories  do
not  change  rapidly,  for  I  have  gone  back  to  a  reciter
after  the  lapse  of  a  year,  and  I  have  heard  him  again
repeat  in  Gaelic,  what  I  had  translated  from  liis  dic-
tation, with  hardly  a  change  (vol.  1,  p.  93).

I  have  now  no  doubt  that  the  popular  tales  are  very
old  ;  that  they  are  old  "Allabanaich,"  Highlanders  and
wanderers  ;  that  they  have  wandered,  settled,  and
changed,  with  those  who  still  tell  them  ;  and  call  them-
selves "  Albannaich;"  men  whose  wandering  spirit  is
not  yet  extinct,  though  they  were  settled  in  their  pre-
sent abodes  "  before  the  memory  of  man."

There  was  and  is,  a  wandering  spirit  in  the  whole
race,  Lf  Celts  are  Indo-Europeans.  In  the  people  who
delighted  in  the  adventures  of  Ulysses  and  Jineas,  a
longing  spirit  of  western  adventure,  which  was  shewn
in  the  fabled  Atalantis,  and  the  Island  of  the  Seven
Cities  and  St.  Brandon — the  spirit  which  drove  the
hordes  of  Asia  to  Europe,  and  urged  Columbus  to  dis-
cover America,  and  which  still  survives  in  "  the  Green
Isle  of  the  great  deep,"  "  Eilan  uaine  an  iomal  torra
domhain,"  of  which  so  much  is  told,  which  Highland
fancy  still  sees  on  the  far  western  horizon,  and  which,


INTRODUCTION.  CXIX

as   "  FLATHiNNis,"  the  Isle  of  Heroes,  has  now  been
raised  from  an  earthly  paradise  to  mean  Heaven.

j\Iuch  has  been  said  about  highland  suijerstitions,
and  highlanders  of  the  east  and  west,  like  their  south-
ern neighbours,  have  many,  but  they  are  at  least
respectable  from  their  age ;  and  because  they  are  so
widely  spread  over  the  world,  I  beHeve  them  to  be
nearly  all  fictions  founded  on  facts.

Thirteen  Highlanders  woidd  eat  their  potatoes  to-
gether without  fear,  and  one  of  them  might  spill  the
salt  without  a  shudder.  I  never  heard  of  a  Celtic  pea-
sant consulting  his  table  as  an  oracle,  or  going  to  a
clairvoyant;  but  plenty  of  them  dream  dreams  and  see
visions,  and  believe  in  them  as  men  in  Bible  history
did  of  old.

A  man  had  been  lost  in  crossing  the  dangerous
ford,  five  or  six  miles  of  sand  and  rock,  between  Ben-
becula  and  North  Uist,  shortly  before  I  was  there  in
1859.  I  was  told  the  fact,  and  it  was  added  inciden-
tally, "  And  did  he  not  come  to  his  sister  in  a  dream,
and  tell  her  where  to  find  him?  and  she  went  to  the
place,  and  got  him  there,  half  buried  in  sand,  after
the  whole  country  side  had  been  looking  for  him  in
vain."     Here  is  a  similar  story  from  Manchester  : —

"  Fulfilment  of  a  Dream. — An  inquest  was  held  last  even-
ing at  Sheffield,  hefore  Mr.  Thomas  Badger,  coroner,  on  the
body  of  Mr.  Charles  Holmes,  button  manufacturer,  Clough  House
Lane,  who  had  been  found  drowned  on  Monday  morning,  in  the
Lead-mill  dam  in  that  town.  The  deceased  left  his  home  on
Saturday  night  in  company  with  his  wife  ;  they  walked  through
the  town  together,  and  about  nine  o'clock,  at  which  time  they
were  at  the  top  of  Union  Street,  he  said  to  her,  '  I'm  going  to
leave  thee  here,  Fanny.'  She  said,  'Are  you?' and  he  replied,
'  Yes,  I  want  to  see  an  old  friend  who  is  going  to  Birmingham  on
Monday,  and  he  is  to  be  here.'  She  said  to  him,  '  Well,  Charlie,
don't  stop  long,  because  I  do  feel  queer  about  that  dream,'  and


CXX  INTRODUCTION.

he  replied, '  Oh,  don't  Bay  that ;  I'll  just  have  a  glass,  and  then
come  home.  Go  and  get  the  supper  ready,  and  I'll  come  directly.'
She  then  left  him.  When  he  got  into  the  house  he  was  invited
to  drink  with  his  friend,  but  he  exhibited  some  reluctance,  saying
that  on  the  night  before  his  wife  had  dreamed  that  she  saw  him
dead  in  a  public -house,  and  that  she  had  dreamed  a  similar  dream
about  a  week  before.  Unfortunately,  however,  he  yielded  to  the
temptation,  got  drunk,  and  did  not  leave  the  public-house  till  after
twelve.  He  was  accompanied  part  of  the  way  home  by  his  friend,
and  was  never  afterwards  seen  alive.  Near  his  house  are  the
Lead-mill  dams,  and,  in  consequence  of  his  not  returning  home,
his  wife  felt  convinced  that  he  had  fallen  in  and  got  drowned.  A
search  was  made,  and  on  Monday  morning  his  body  was  found
in  the  water,  and  was  removed  to  the  Eoyal  Standard  public-
house,  where  his  wife  saw  the  body,  and  identified  it  as  that  of
her  husband.  The  jury  returned  a  verdict  of  '  Found  drowned,'
and  recommended  that  an  opening  in  the  wall,  near  the  dam,
through  which  it  is  supposed  he  had  fallen,  should  be  built  up." —
Manchester  Examiner.

There  are  plenty  of  lowlaiiders  as  well  as  "ignorant"
Highlanders  who  think  that  they  are  seer-s,  without  the
aid  of  a  deal  board  through  which  to  look  into  futurity,
by  the  help  of  a  medium,  and  it  is  by  no  means  uncom-
mon, as  I  am  told,  for  the  Astronomer- Eoyal  to  receive
EngHsh  letters  asking  his  advice,  ex  officio.

It  may  not  be  out  of  place  to  add  a  word  as  to  the
spoken  Gaelic  of  these  tales ;  the  mode  of  writing  it ;
and  the  English  of  the  translation.  First,  then,  it  is
admitted  by  all  that  the  Gaehc  of  the  AYest  Highlands
is  a  branch  of  the  old  Celtic  stock,  that  is  to  say,  the
language  of  some  of  the  oldest  invaders  or  inhabitants
of  Eurojje  of  whom  anything  is  known.  Wliy  it  is  I
know  not,  but  from  works  on  philology  it  appears  that
the  Highland  dialect  has  been  least  studied,  and  for
that  reason,  if  for  no  other,  it  is  perhaps  best  worth
the  trouble.  I  thought  it  best  to  ignore  all  that  had
been   said  or  written  on  the   subject,   to  go  direct  to


INTRODUCTION.  CXXl

those  who  now  speak  the  language,  especially  to  those
who  speak  no  other  tongue ;  to  men  who  use  words  as
they  use  their  feet  and  hands,  utterly  unconscious  of
design  ;  who  talk  as  nature  and  their  parents  taught
them ;  and  who  are  as  innocent  of  philology  as  their
own  babies  when  they  first  learn  to  say  "  Abbi."

I  requested  those  who  wrote  for  me  to  take  doAvn
the  words  as  they  were  spoken,  and  to  write  as  they
would  speak  themselves ;  and  the  Gaelic  of  the  tales
is  the  result  of  such  a  process.  The  names  of  the
writers  are  given,  and  I  am  satisfied  that  they  have
done  their  work  faitlifully  and  well.  The  Gaelic  then
is  not  what  is  called  "  classical  Gaelic,"  It  is  generally
the  Gaelic  of  the  people — pure  from  the  source.

Next,  as  to  orthography.  I  chose  one  man,  Mr
Hector  MacLean,  whom  I  knew  to  be  free  from  prejudice,
and  who  knows  the  rules  of  Gaelic  spelling,  to  correct
the  press,  and  I  asked  him  to  spell  the  sounds  which
he  heard,  according  to  the  principles  of  Gaelic  ortho-
graphy, whenever  he  wrote  anything  down  liimseK ;  and
in  correcting  the  press  for  the  work  of  others,  to  cor-
rect nothing  but  manifest  mistakes,  and  this  he  has
done,  as  it  appears  to  me,  very  well.

In  Gaelic  there  are  certain  vowels,  and  combinations
of  them,  wliich  represent  certain  sounds  ;  and  they  are
all  sounded,  and  always  in  the  same  manner,  according
to  theory,  but  in  practice  it  is  a  very  different  matter.
In  speaking  Gaelic,  as  is  the  case  in  other  lan-
guages, various  modes  of  pronouncing  the  same  vowels
exist  in  various  districts.  The  consonants  meet  and
contend  and  extinguish  each  other,  and  change  the
sound  of  the  vowels  in  Gaelic  more  than  in  any  other
language  which  I  know ;  but  they  fight  by  rule,  and
the  conquered  and  the  slain  encumber  the  words  which
are  their  battle'fields,  as  dead  or  dying  consonants  stand-
h


CXSU  INTRODUCTION.

ing  beside  tlie  silent  h  which  kills  or  controls  them.
One  difficulty  in  writing  GaeHc  from  dictation  is  to
ascertain,  in  words  of  doubtful  meaning,  whether  the
sound  V  is  to  be  expressed  by  hh  or  mh.  The  first
letter  was  once  at  the  head  of  a  small  regiment  of  let-
ters, and  sounded  his  own  note  vi  or  h,  and  so  he
regulated  the  meaning  of  the  rest,  but  having  fallen
in  with  an  h  in  an  oblique  case,  and  being  changed
thereby  to  v,  the  whole  history  of  the  word  must  be
known  before  it  can  be  settled  Avhether  it  should  begin
with  mh  or  hii,  and  it  is  much  more  difficult  in  other
cases,  where  the  letter  is  silenced  altogether.  My
mother,  if  Gaelic,  might  become  vy  votlier- — father,  cither,
but  the  sounds  would  be  spelt  mhrdher,  fhather.  The
meaning  in  a  book  depends  on  the  spelHng,  but  in
speaking,  it  is  a  different  matter.  There  are  shades  of
sound  wliich  an  ear  used  to  a  language  can  detect,  but
which  letters  are  wholly  unfitted  to  express.

Gaehc  scholars,  tlien,  who  have  a  standard  for  Gaelic
Avriting,  and  who  adhere  to  it  strictly,  will  probably  find
much  which  will  appear  to  them  erroneous  spelhng.

An  English  scholar  reading  Sir  AValter  Scott's
novels  Avill  find  plenty  of  words  wloich  are  not  in
Jolmson's  Dictionary,  and  a  student  of  Pickwick  will
find  much  in  Sam  Weller's  conversation  which  he  Avill
not  discover  in  that  form  in  Shakspeare.

Had  I  found  stories  in  the  Isle  of  "Wight  I  should
have  spelt  good  morning  good  marnin,  because  it  is  so
pronounced  ;  falbh  is  spelt  folbh  Avhen  a  story  comes
from  some  of  the  Western  Islands,  because  it  is  so
pronounced  there  j  and  for  the  same  reason  iad  is  spelt
end.  I  have  no  doubt  there  are  errors.  I  can  only
vouch  for  having  chosen  men  who  did  their  best  in  a
very  difficult  matter ;  for  I  do  not  believe  that  there
are  ten  men  now  living  who  would  write  a  hundred


INTRODUCTION.  CXXIU

lines  of  Gaelic  off  hand  and  si^ell  them  in  the  same
way.  I  very  much  doubt  if  ten  men  evex-  did  live  at
the  same  time  who  would  have  agreed  as  to  Gaelic
spelling ;  and  I  know  that  I  find  forms  of  words  in
books  which  I  have  very  rarely  heard  in  conversation.
For  example,  the  plural  in  iibh  (iv)  is  very  rare,  the
common  form  is  an.

The  spelling  of  the  first  book  printed  in  the  Gaelic
language.  Bishop  Carswell's  Prayer-book,  1567,  is  not
the  same  as  the  spelling  of  the  Gaelic  Bible.  The  Gaelic
names  iii  old  charters  are  not  spelt  according  to  modem
rule.  The  old  Gaelic  manuscripts  in  the  Advocates'
Library  are  spelt  in  various  ways.  Every  man  who
has  written  Gaelic  for  me,  spells  words  variously.
Manks  spelling  is  phonetic.  Irish  spelling  is  difl'erent ;
and  where  there  is  so  little  authority,  I  hope  to  be  for-
given if  I  have  ventured  to  ask  men  to  follow  their
own  road.  I  hope  they  will  be  forgiven  if  they  have
taken  a  short  cut  to  gain  a  particular  object,  and  if  they
have  left  the  beaten  path.

For  the  translation  I  am  responsible,  and  I  feel
that  the  English  needs  excuse.  It  has  been  the  fashion
so  far  to  translate  Gaehc  freely ;  that  is,  to  give  the
sense  of  the  passage  without  caring  much  for  the  sense
of  words.  One  result  is,  that  dictionaries  give  so
many  meanings  that  they  are  almost  useless  to  any  one
ignorant  of  Gaelic.  There  are  many  words  in  these
tales  which  were  new  to  me,  and  I  have  repeatedly
been  driven  to  gather  their  meaning  from  the  context,
or  to  ask  for  it  at  the  sotu'ce,  because  of  the  multitude
of  contradictory  explanations  given  in  dictionaries.
Let  me  take  one  word  as  an  example.  In  the  first  tale
the  hero  meets  Gu  seang  na  coill,  uaine,  and  the
meaning  turned  on  the  word  Seang.  To  that  word
the     following     meanings     are    attached  : — Slender,


CXXIV  IXTRODUCTIOX.

slender-waisted,  hungry,  hungry-looking,  lank,  lean,
active,  handsome,  strong;  (applied  to  a  shirt-front),
fine  ;  "  Sad  am  I  this  day  arising  the  breast  of  my
shirt  is  not  seang  /'  (apphed  to  food  in  a  proverb),  meat
makes  men  "  seang  ;"  (apphed  to  hinds  in  an  ode),  neat ;
(applied  to  a  horse),  spirited ;  also  slmi,  small,  small-
belhed,  gaunt,  nimble,  agile ;  (applied  to  lady),  slender-
waisted.  On  looking  further  it  appears  that  Seangan
is  an  ant ;  that  ShukkA  is  the  Dakotah  for  all  animals
of  the  dog  species,  and  that  the  word  came  to  be  apphed
to  a  horse,  as  spirit  dog,  when  horses  came  first  to
that  country ;  and  it  further  appears  that  there  is  a
word  in  broad  Scotch  which  nearly  fits  the  Gaelic,
Swank;  that  Sing  means  a  Hon  in  India;  and  that  the
horses  of  the  sun  were  swankas  -with  beautiful  steps
in  Sanscrit.  It  seemed  to  me  that  the  phrase  might  be
thus  freely  translated  "  The  Forest  Lion."

But  though  it  seemed  to  me  possible  I  might  be
entirely  Avrong,  so  I  gave  the  meaning  of  the  words,
about  which  there  could  be  no  mistake  : —

Cu    seang    na    coill'    uaine.
Dog    slim  of  the  wood     green.

My  beUef  is,  that  the  word  was  an  adjective,  de-
scriptive of  the  quahties  of  a  lion  wherever  their  like-
ness is  to  be  found — as  strength,  activity,  high  courage,
bold  bearing,  slender  form,  hunger,  satiety  ;  but  I  did
not  venture  to  translate  cu  seang  by  "  lion,''  nor  by
"  oreyhound,"  as  I  was  advised  to  do.  I  tran.slated  it  by
those  words  which  seem  to  give  the  present  meaning
of  the  Gaelic.  Cu,  a  dog;  seang,  slim;  and  the  phrase
stands,  "The  sHni  dog  of  the  green  wood."

And  so  throughout  I  have  aimed  at  giving  the  pre-
sent real  meaning  of  every  separate  Avord,  but  so  as  to
give  its  true  meaning  in  the  passage  in  wluch  it  occurs.


INTRODUCTION.  CXXV

Where  I  have  not  been  able  to  do  both,  I  have  tried
to  keep  as  close  as  I  could  to  the  original  idea  involved.
For  example,  "  In  the  mouth  of  night "  is  new  to  Eng-
lish, but  it  is  comprehensible,  and  it  is  the  exact  mean-
ing of  the  phrase  commonly  used  to  express  the  first
coming  on  of  darkness.  The  expression  is  poetical.  It
seems  to  refer  to  some  old  mythical  notion  that  the
sun  went  into  a  cave  or  a  tent  to  sleep,  for  "  Take  thy
sleep  in  thy  cave  "  is  a  Hne  in  Ossian's  "  Address  to
the  Sun,"  and  though  it  was  suggested  to  me  to  alter
this  translation,  and  make  it  "  good  English,"  I  thought
it  best  to  adhere  to  my  original  plan.  Generally  where
the  phrase  occurs  it  is  translated  "  in  the  mouth  of
night,"  though  I  was  advised  to  write,  "  in  the  dusk,"
"  in  the  evening,"  "  at  nightfall,"  "  in  the  mantle  of
night,"  "at  twilight,"  "  in  the  grey  of  the  evening."

I  admit  that  aU  these  phrases  express  ideas  which
might  be  attached  to  the  words  ;  but  what  could  an
unfortunate  student  make  of  a  passage  in  Avhich  a  word
meaning  mouth  according  to  all  dictionaries,  should
seem  to  mean  mantle,  ov  /all,  or  grei/.  It  is  very  much
easier  to  write  naturally  and  translate  freely ;  and  as
I  have  tried  hard  to  make  my  translation  a  close  one,  I
hope  the  bad  English  wiU  be  forgiven.

Those  only  who  have  tried  to  turn  Gaelic  into  Eng-
Hsh  can  understand  the  difficulty.  Tliere  are  in  fact
many  GaeHc  phrases  which  will  not  go  into  English  at
aU.  For  example,  tha  so  aGam  (I  have  this),  is  this
at  me,  or  u-ith  me,  or  bi/  vie,  is  a  phrase  which  cannot
be  rendered  for  want  of  a  word  equivalent  to  ag  or  aig,
which  expresses  position  and  possession,  and  is  com-
bined with  am,  ad,  e,  inn,  ihh,  and  changed  to  aca  to
express  the  persons.  Gaelic  will  not  bear  literal  trans-
lation into  English,  but  I  have  tried  to  give  the  real
meaning  of  every  word  as  nearly  as  I  could,  and  to


CXXVl  INTRODUCTION.

give  it  by  using  the  English  word  which  most  resembled
the  Gaelic  ;  and  thus  I  have  unexpectedly  fallen  in
with  a  number  of  English  words  which  seem  to  have  the
same  origin  as  Gaelic,  if  they  are  not  survivors  of  the
language  of  the  ancient  Britons.  I  have  translated  Cl  aidh-
EAMH,  pronounced  Claiv,  by  glave,  Traill  by  thrall,
and  so  throughout  wherever  I  have  thought  of  an  Eng-
lish word  that  resembled  a  word  admitted  to  be  Gaelic.

It  is  my  own  opinion,  and  it  is  that  of  Mr.  Mac-
Lean,  that  the  Gaelic  language  is  the  same  from  Cape
Clear  in  Ireland  to  Cape  Wrath  in  Scotland,  though
there  are  many  dialects,  and  there  is  much  variety.
The  language  was  taught  to  me  by  a  native  of  Lorn,
and  he  was  chosen  by  the  advice  of  men  well  able  to
judge,  as  a  native  of  the  district  where  the  best  Gaelic
was  then  supposed  to  be  spoken.  Speaking  from  my  own
experience,  I  can  converse  freely  in  Lorn  Gaelic  with
Scotch  Highlanders  in  every  district  of  Scotland,  and
with  natives  of  Rathlin.  I  can  make  my  way  with
natives  of  the  North  of  Ireland,  but  I  cannot  converse
with  the  natives  of  some  Irish  districts.  I  could
not  make  the  Manksmen  understand  me,  but  I  can
readily  understand  most  of  the  words  in  Manks  and  in
Irish,  when  pronounced  sej^arately.

There  are  a  very  great  many  words  in  "Welsh  and
in  Breton  which  I  can  understand,  or  trace  when  they
are  separately  spoken,  but  the  difference  in  these  is
much  wider.  Peasants  come  from  Connaught  to  Islay,
and  in  a  very  short  time  converse  freely,  though  their
accent  betrays  them ;  but  an  Argyllshire  Highlander
is  known  in  the  north  by  his  accent,  just  as  a  York-
sliireman  would  be  found  out  in  Somersetshire,  An
Islay  man  is  detected  in  Mull,  and  a  native  of  one
parish  in  Islay  is  detected  when  he  speaks  in  another
but  though  there  are  such  shades  of  difference,  a  High-


INTRODUCTION^.  CXXVll

lander  used  to  hear  languages  variously  spoken  should
have  no  difficulty  in  understanding  any  dialect  of
GaeHc  spoken  in  Scotland,  and  most  of  the  Irish  dialects.
But  which  of  all  these  is  the  best  who  is  to  decide  ?
The  author  of  a  very  good  dictionary  says,  under  the
word  coiG,  that  "in  the  islands  of  Argyllshire  every  word
is  pronounced  just  as  Adam  spoke  it."  Dr.  Johnson  pro-
nounced the  whole  to  he  the  rude  speech  of  a  barbarous
people  ;  and  the  Saxon  knew  as  much  of  GaeHc  as  the
Celt  did  of  Adam.  One  Gaelic  scholar  wished  to  change
the  island  words ;  a  good  Highlander  told  me  that  Dal-
mally  was  the  best  place  for  Gaelic,  another  was  all  for
"Western  Eoss.  Nobody  has  a  good  word  for  Suther-
land GaeUc,  but  it  is  very  pure  nevertheless  in  some
districts  ;  north  country  men  are  all  for  Inverness.  I
have  heard  excellent  Gaelic  in  the  Long  Island.  On
the  whole,  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  dialect  the  best
wliich  resembles  the  largest  number  of  others,  and
that  is  the  dialect  spoken  by  the  most  illiterate  in  the
islands,  and  on  the  promontories  farthest  to  the  west.
I  will  not  venture  to  name  any  district,  because  I  have
no  wish  to  contend  with  the  natives  of  all  the  others.

The  spirit  of  nationality  is  one  which  has  a  large
development  amongst  my  countrymen,  and  the  subject  of
language  brings  it  out  in  strong  relief.  It  is  but  a
phase  of  human  nature,  a  result  of  the  quality  which
phrenologists  describe  as  combativeness,  and  it  seems
to  be  common  to  all  the  races  classed  as  Indo-European.

It  is  a  common  opinion  in  England  that  one  Eng-
lishman can  thrash  three  Frenchmen ;  and  I  have  no
doubt  that  a  similar  opinion  prevails  in  France,  though
I  do  not  know  the  fact.  Highlanders  beheve  that
lowlanders  generally  are  soft  and  effeminate ;  low-
landers  tliink  that  mountaineers  are  savages.  An  Irish
Celt  detests  his  brother  Celt  over  the  water.     A  Scotch


CXXVlll  INTRODUCTION.

Celt  calls  another  Eireannacli  when  he  abuses  liim,  but
let  a  common  foe  appear  and  they  -will  all  combine.

England,  Ireland,  and  Scotland  are  up  in  arms,  with
riiles  on  their  shoulders,  at  a  hint  of  the  approach  of  a
Frenchman ;  but  they  joined  France  with  heart  and
hand  to  fight  the  liussian  and  the  Chinese  ;  and  as  soon
as  the  battle  was  over,  they  came  back  and  fought  at  home.

The  English  lion  stbred  up  the  Scotch  lion  in  the
English  press,  and  the  northern  hon  growled  over  his
wrongs.  Ireland  began  to  tell  of  the  tyrant  Saxon,
and  a  stranger  might  tliink  that  the  Union  was  about
to  fall  to  pieces.  It  is  not  so ;  it  is  but  a  manifes-
tation of  superfluous  energy  which  breaks  out  in  the
other  "union"  over  the  water,  and  makes  as  much
noise  there  as  steam  blowmg  off  elsewhere.

I  maintain  that  there  is  chronic  war  in  every  part
of  her  Majesty's  dominions.  Not  long  ago  a  dispute
arose  about  a  manner  of  catching  herrings.  One  set  of
men  caught  them  with  drift-nets,  another  with  drag-
nets, and  one  party  declared  that  the  other  violated  the
law  ;  blood  got  up,  and  at  last  a  Avhole  fleet  of  fishing-
boats  left  their  ground  and  sailed  twenty  miles  down
to  attack  the  rival  fleet  in  form.  A  gun-boat  joined  the
party,  and  peace  was  preserved  ;  but  it  was  more  the
result  of  a  calm,  which  enabled  the  hght  row-boats  to
escape  from  the  heavier  sailing  fleet.  Both  parties  spoke
the  same  language,  and  on  any  subject  but  herrings,
they  woidd  have  backed  each  other  through  the  world.

The  purchase  of  an  orange,  and  a  box  on  the  ear,
grew  into  a  serious  riot  in  a  northern  town  last  year.
The  fight  spread  as  from  a  centre,  and  lasted  three
days  ;  but  here  it  developed  itself  into  a  fight  between
Celt  and  Saxon.  Both  sides  must  have  been  in  the
Avrong,  and  I  am  quite  sure  they  were  both  ignominiously
defeated,  although  they  may  hold  the  contrary.


INTRODUCTION.  CXXIX

Every  election  in  the  three  Idngdoms  is  a  shame-
ful riot,  according  to  some  public  organ,  whose  party-
get  the  worst  of  it.

There  is  a  regular  stand-up  fight  in  Paris  periodi-
cally, the  rest  of  Europe  goes  to  war  in  earnest  at
every  opportunity,  and  when  there  are  no  national  or
class  wars,  men  fight  as  individuals  all  over  the  world.
I  was  once  at  Christmas  at  a  hurling  match  in  Ireland.
The  game  was  played  on  ice  on  a  lake,  and  after  some
hours  the  owner  of  the  lake  sent  doAvn  a  Scotch  butler
with  bread  and  cheese  and  whisky  for  the  players.
They  gathered  about  the  cart  in  perfect  good  humour,
when   suddenly,  without    cause,  an    excited   banker's

clerk  shouted,  "Hurroo  for "  (the  nearest  post  town),

and  performed  a  kind  of  war  dance  on  the  outside  edge
of  his  skates,  flourishing  a  stick  -wildly,  and  chanting
liis  war  song,  "  I'  11  bet  ere  a  man  in  England,  Ireland,
or  Scotland."  A  knobby  stick  rose  up  in  the  crowd,
and  the  Scotch  butler  was  down  ;  but  an  Irish  boy
who  had  not  opened  his  mouth  was  the  next.  He
went  head-foremost  into  a  -willow  bush  amongst  the
snow,  and  three  men  in  frieze  great-coats  kicked  him
vnth  nailed  shoes.  In  ten  minutes  the  storm  was
over,  the  butler  was  up  again  in  his  cart  dispensing
the  refresliments,  the  man  in  the  bush  was  consoling
himself  vnth  a  dram,  and  all  was  peace.  But  that
night  the  country  party  took  up  a  position  behind  a
stone  wall,  and  when  the  others  came,  they  sallied  forth,
and  there  was  a  battle-royal.

So  I  have  seen  a  parish  shinny  match  in  the  High-
hmds  become  so  hot  and  furious,  that  the  leaders  were
forced  to  get  two  pipers  and  march  their  troops  out  of
the  field  in  opposite  directions,  to  prevent  a  civil  war
of  parishes.

And  so,  a  part  of  her  Majesty's  guards  having  gone


CXXX  INTRODUCTION.

out  to  exercise  at  Clewer,  and  being  stationed  as  "  the
enemy"  at  some  point,  obstinately  refused  to  "retreat
in  disorder ; "  but  stood  their  ground  ^vitli  such  deter-
mination, that  the  officers  had  to  sound  the  retreat  on
both  sides  to  prevent  a  serious  battle.

So  at  Eton,  shins  were  broken  in  my  tutor's  foot-
ball match  against  my  dame's  ;  and  boys  injured  them-
selves in  rowing  frantically  for  the  honour  of  upper  or
lower  sixes.

Two  twins,  who  were  so  hke,  that  one  used  to  skip
round  a  pillar  and  answer  to  liis  brother's  name,  and
who  probably  would  have  died  for  each  other,  still  fought
in  private  so  earnestly,  that  one  carried  the  mark  of  a
shovel  on  his  forehead  for  many  a  long  day ;  and  so
boys  fight,  and  men  fight,  individually  and  collectively,
as  parties,  races,  and  nations,  all  over  Europe,  if  not
all  over  the  world.

I  decline  to  state  my  opinion  as  to  Avliich  Gaelic  is  the
best,  for  that  is  a  pecuHarly  delicate  subject,  my  country-
men having  ceased  to  use  their  dirks,  are  apt  to  fight
Avith  pens,  and  I  would  rather  see  the  children  of  the
Gael,  in  this  as  in  other  matters,  fighting  shoulder  to
shoulder  against  foes,  and  working  side  by  side  "with
their  friends.

The  Gaelic  language  is  essentially  descriptive,  rich  in
words,  which  by  their  sound  alone  express  ideas.  The
thundering  sound  of  the  Avaves  beating  on  the  shore  is
well  expressed  by  Tonx,  a  wave ;  Lunn,  a  heavj'
Atlantic  swell.

The  harsh  rattling  and  crushing  of  thunder  by  Tair-

NEAXACH.

The  plunge  of  a  heavy  l:)ody  thrown  into  deep
water  by  Tunx,  plunge.

The  noise  of  small  stones  and  fine  gravel  streaming
seawards  from  a  beach  in  the  undertow  is  heard  in
Sgrithe.un^,  gravel.


IXTRODUCTION.  CXXXl

The  tinkling  of  shells  as  they  slip  and  slide  on  the
sand  at  the  edge  of  the  sea  is  heard  in  Sligean,  shells.

The  hard  sharp  knocking  of  stones  in  clach,  a
stone,  and  thence  all  manner  of  compound  ideas  follow
as  CLACHAXj  a  \illage  ;  clachair,  a  mason ;  clacharan,  a
stone  chat.

The  names  of  domestic  animals  usually  resemble
their  notes.  Bo,  a  cow ;  gobhar,  a  goat ;  caora,  a
sheep  ;  laogh,  a  calf.  Words  such  as  barking,  growl-
ing, squealing,  coughing,  sneezing,  suggest  the  idea  by
the  sound,  as  they  do  in  English.  Many  names  of
beasts  and  birds,  which  are  not  of  this  class,  are  de-
scriptive in  another  sense.  The  grouse  are  the  reddish
brown  cock  and  hen  ;  the  fox,  the  reddish  brown  dog  ;
the  wolf,  the  fierce  dog ;  the  sandpiper,  the  little
driolichan  of  the  strand.  The  crow  is  the  flayer,  the
falcon,  the  darter ;  the  otter  tlie  brown  or  black  beast.

It  is  a  language  full  of  metaphorical  and  descriptive
expressions.  "  He  went  to  the  beginning  of  fortune  ; "
"  he  put  the  world  under  his  head  ; "  "  he  took  his  own
body  home  ;"  "he went  away" — that  is,  he  went  home
sick,  and  he  died.  "  There  Avere  great  masses  of  rain,
and  there  was  night  and  there  was  darkness."  "  Ye
must  not  be  out  amidst  the  night,  she  is  dark."

It  is  rich  in  words  expressive  of  war,  by  no  means
rich  in  words  belonging  to  the  arts.  Crann,  a  tree,
means  a  mast,  the  bar  of  a  door,  a  plough,  and  many
other  things  made  of  wood.  Beairt  means  a  loom,
a  block  and  tackling,  and  engines  of  various  kinds.

It  seems  to  contain  words  to  express  the  great
features  of  nature,  which  can  be  traced  in  the  names
of  rivers  and  mountains  in  a  great  part  of  Europe,
such  as  eas,  a  rapid  (pr.  ace) ;  xth  (pr.  A,  and  Av.),  a
ford;  AMHATNN,  OBHAiNN,  ABHAiNN,  a  river,  variously
pronounced,  avain,  a-wen,  ovain,  o-in,  o-un,  o-n.     Calais


CXXXU  INTRODUCTION.

I  take  to  he  gala,  a  liarbour  ;  the  word  has  no  mean-
ing in  French.  Boulogne  might  be  Beul  Obhaixn,
river's  mouth  ;  Donau,  the  Danube,  might  mean  the
brown  river.  Tana  might  mean  the  shallow,  and  both
are  descriptive.

Rhine  might  mean  the  division,  and  there  is  a  dis-
trict in  Islay  Avhose  name  is  pronoimced  exactly  as  the
name  of  the  great  German  river.  Balaclava  is  exceed-
ingly like  the  name  of  an  Islay  farm,  and  might  mean
kite's  town,  Baile  Chlamhain;  but  though  such  re-
semblances can  hardly  fail  to  occiir  to  any  one  who
knows  the  Gaelic  language,  it  requires  time  and  care-
ful study  to  follow  out  such  a  subject,  and  it  is  foreign
to  my  i^urpose.  There  are  plenty  of  Gaelic  words
which  closely  resemble  words  in  other  Eiu'opean  lan-
guages. Amongst  the  few  Sanscrit  words  wliich  I  have
been  able  to  glean  from  books,  I  find  several  which  re-
semble Gaelic  words  of  similar  meaning — Jwala,  light
flame,  has  many  Gaelic  relations  in  words  which  mean
shining,  fire,  lightning,  the  moon,  white,  swan.

Dru,  day,  is  like  an  diugh,  to-day  ;  Mirah,  the
ocean,  like  muir  mara,  the  sea  ;  but  this  again  is  foreign
to  my  purpose.

yiy  wish  has  been  simply  to  gather  some  specimens
of  the  wreck  so  plentifully  strewn  on  the  coasts  of  old
Scotland,  and  to  carry  it  where  others  may  examine  it ;
rather  to  point  out  where  curious  objects  worth  some
attention  may  be  found,  than  to  gather  a  great  heap.  I
have  not  sought  for  stranded  forests.  I  have  not
polished  the  rough  sticks  which  I  found ;  I  have  but
cut  off"  a  very  few  oft'ending  splinters,  and  I  trust  that
some  may  be  found  who  will  not  utterly  despise  .such
rubbish,  or  scorn  the  magic  wliich  peasants  attribute  to
a  fixiry  egg.


POSTSCRIPT.

Septemher  I860.
The  stories  wldcli  follow  page  266  of  the  fii'st  volume
Avere  intended  for  tlie  second,  but  it  has  been  found
more  convenient  to  place  them  in  Vol.  I.  Those  -which
were  to  liaA^e  been  given  as  specimens  of  tales  probably
derived  from  the  "  Arabian  Mghts,"  have  been  left
out  to  make  room  for  others.

In  Augiist  and  September  1860  I  again  visited  the
Western  Highlands,  carrying  vnth.  me  nearly  the  whole
of  these  two  volumes  in  print.  I  have  repeatedly
made  the  men  who  told  the  stories  to  my  collectors
repeat  them  to  me,  while  I  compared  theh-  words  with
the  book.  In  two  instances  I  have  made  men  repeat
stories  Avhich  I  had  myself  written  down  in  English
from  theh'  Gaelic,  and  I  have  foimd  no  important
variation  in  any  instance.  I  find  that  the  story  is
generally  much  longer  as  told,  but  that  it  is  lengthened
by  dialogue,  which  has  often  little  to  do  with  the  inci-
dents, though  sometimes  Avorth  preservation.  I  have
now  seen  most  of  the  men  whose  names  are  mentioned,
and  I  have  myseK  heard  versions  of  nearly  every  story
in  the  book  repeated,  either  by  those  fi-om  whom  they
were  got,  or  by  people  who  live  far  from  them, — for
instance,  John  Mackinnon,  stableman  at  Broadford,  in
'Skj'e,  told  me  in  *September  a  version  of  Xo.  1 8,  which
contains  nearly  all  the  incidents  which  I  had  before
got  from  Islay,  and  several  which  were  new  to  me.


CXXXIV  POSTSCRIPT.

Including  those  which  are  printed,  I  have  more
than  two  hundred  stories  written  down  in  Gaelic.  I
have  about  an  equal  number  written  in  English  from
GaeHc,  and  I  have  heard  a  great  many  more,  while
Mr.  Hector  MacLeau,  Mr.  Dewar,  Mr.  Carmichael,
Mr.  Torrie,  Mr.  Fraser,  and  others,  are  still  writing
down  for  me,  in  the  Long  Island,  in  Argyllshire,  and
elsewhere.

If  I  have  time  and  opportunity,  I  hope  hereafter  to
arrange  these  materials  ;  to  place  the  incidents  in  each
story  according  to  the  majority  of  versions,  and  so
strive  to  get  the  old  form  of  the  legends;  for  I  am
convinced  that  much  is  to  be  learned  from  this  despised
old  rubbish,  though  it  must  be  sifted  before  it  can  be
turned  to  proper  use.

In  conclusion,  I  would  tender  my  thanks  once
more  to  all  those  who  have  given  me  their  assistance.
In  particular,  I  wish  to  express  my  sense  of  obligation
to  the  Eev.  Thomas  Maclauchlan,  Free  Chiu-ch  Gaelic
minister  in  Edinburgh,  who  has  contributed  many
stories,  written  down  by  himself  from  the  dictation  of
one  of  his  parishioners,  and  who  has  himself  published
a  volume  of  Celtic  gleanings.

I  am  also  much  indebted  to  the  Rev.  ]\Ir.  Beatson,
minister  of  Earra,  who  aided  Mr.  MacLean  in  his  search
for  legends,  and  who  shewed  much  kindness  to  myself ;
and  I  have  received  assistance  from  other  clergymen  of
various  persuasions,  including  the  Eev.  Thomas  Patti-
son  in  Islay.  I  am  happy  to  have  it  in  my  power  to
mention  such  names  ;  for  the  strange  idea  possesses  the
people  in  many  districts,  that  to  repeat  the  most  harudess
sgeulachd  is  a  grievous  sin,  and  that  |ables,  and  poems,
and  novels  of  every  sort  ought  to  be  put  down  and
exterminated,  because  they  are  fictions.  That  spirit,  if
strong   enough  and  put  in   action,  would  sweep  away


POSTSCRIPT.  CXXXV

luucli  of  the  literature  of  ancient  and  modern  times  ;
and  it  seems  strange  to  have  to  remonstrate  against  it
now-a-days.  Still,  strange  as  it  may  seem,  the  spirit
exists,  and  I  am  grateful  for  the  support  of  enlightened
liberal  men.  Surely  the  best  treatment  for  "  Super-
stition," if  tliis  bo  superstition,  is  to  drag  it  into  light,
the  very  worst  to  dignify  it  by  persecution,  and  strive
to  hide  it.


POPULAE  TALES

OF

THE  WEST  HIGHLANDS.


THE  YOUNG  KIN^G  OF  EASAIDH  EUADH.

From  James  Wilson,  blind  fiddler,  Islay.

rpHE  young  king  of  Easaidh  Euadh,  after  he  got  the
-■-  heirship  to  himself,  -was  at  much  merry  making,
looking  out  what  would  suit  him,  and  what  would
come  into  his  humour.  There  was  a  Gruagach  near  his
dwelling,  who  was  called  Gruagach  carsalach  donn —
(The  brown  curly  long-haired  one.)

He  thought  to  himself  that  he  would  go  to  play  a
game  with  liim.  He  went  to  the  Seauagal  (soothsayer)
and  he  said  to  him — "  I  am  made  up  that  I  will  go  to
game  with  the  Gruagach  carsalach  donn."  "  Alia  ! "
said  the  Seanagal,  "  art  thou  such  a  man  ?  Ai't  thou
so  insolent  that  thou  art  going  to  play  a  game  against
the  Gruagach  carsalach  donn  ?  'T  were  my  advice  to
thee  to  change  thy  nature  and  not  to  go  there."  "  I
wont  do  that,"  said  he.  "  'T  were  my  advice  to  thee,  if
thou  shouldst  win  of  the  Gruagach  carsalach  donn,  to

B


2  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.

get  the  cropped  rough-skimied  maid  that  is  behind  the
door  for  the  worth  of  thy  gaming,  and  many  a  turn  will
he  put  off  before  thou  gettest  her."  He  lay  down  that
night,  and  if  it  was  early  that  the  day  came,  'twas  earlier
than  that  that  the  king  arose  to  hold  gaming  against
the  Gruagach.  He  reached  the  Gruagach,  he  blessed
the  Gruagach,  and  the  Gruagach  blessed  him.  Said  the
Gruagach  to  Hm,  "  Oh  young  long  of  Easaidli  Euadh,
what  brought  thee  to  me  to-day  ?  Wilt  thou  game
■u^th  me  Ì  "  They  began  and  they  played  the  game.
The  king  won.  "  Lift  the  stake  of  thy  gaming  so  that
I  may  get  (leave)  to  be  moving."  "  The  stake  of  my
gaming  is  to  give  me  the  cropped  rough-skinned  girl
thou  hast  beliind  the  door."  "  ]\Iany  a  fair  woman
have  I  "vvithin  besides  her,"  said  the  Gruagach.  "  I
ivill  take  none  but  that  one."  "  Blessing  to  thee  and
cursmg  to  thy  teacher  of  learning."  They  went  to  the
house  of  the  Gruagach,  and  the  Gruagach  set  in  order
twenty  young  girls.  "  Lift  now  thy  choice  from
amongst  these."  One  was  coming  out  after  another,
and  every  one  that  would  come  out  she  would  say,  "  I
am  she  ;  art  thou  not  silly  that  art  not  taking  me  ■with
thee  ?"  But  the  Seanagal  had  asked  liim  to  take  none
but  the  last  one  that  would  come  out.  'WTien  the  last
one  came  out,  he  said,  "  This  is  mine."  He  went  with
her,  and  when  they  Avere  a  bit  from  the  house,  her  form
altered,  and  she  is  the  loveliest  woman  that  was  on
earth.  The  king  was  going  home  full  of  joy  at  getting
such  a  charming  woman.

He  reached  the  house,  and  he  went  to  rest.  If  it
was  early  that  the  day  arose,  it  was  earher  than  that
that  the  king  arose  to  go  to  game  with  the  Gruagach.
"  I  must  absolutely  go  to  game  against  the  Gruagach
to-day,"  said  he  to  his  wife.  "  Oh  !"  said  she,  "  that's
my  father,  and  if  thou  goest  to  game  with  him,  take


THE  YOUNG  KING  OF  EASAIDH  RUADH.  3

nothing  for  the  stake  of  thy  play  but  the  dun  shaggy
filly  that  has  the  stick  saddle  on  her."

The  king  -went  to  encounter  the  Gruagach,  and
surely  the  blessing  of  the  two  to  each  other  was  not
beyond  what  it  was  before.  "Yes!"  said  the  Grua-
gach, "how  did  thy  youiag  bride  please  thee  yesterday  ?"
"  She  pleased  fully."  "  Hast  thou  come  to  game  with
me  to-day  ?  "  "I  came."  They  began  at  the  gaming,
and  the  king  won  from  the  Gruagach  on  that  day.
"Lift  the  stake  of  thy  gaming,  and  be  sharp  about  it."
"  The  stake  of  my  gaming  is  the  dun  shaggy  filly  on
which  is  the  stick  saddle."

They  went  aAvay  together.  They  reached  the  dun
shaggy  filly.  He  took  her  out  from  the  stable,  and  the
king  put  his  leg  over  her  and  she  was  the  swift
heroine  !  He  went  home.  His  Avife  had  her  hands
spread  before  liim,  and  they  were  cheery  together  that
night.  "  I  would  rather  myself,"  said  liis  wife,  "  that
thou  shouldest  not  go  to  game  with  the  Gruagach  any
more,  for  if  he  wins  he  will  put  trouble  on  thy  head."
"  I  won't  do  that,"  said  he,  "  I  loill  go  to  play  with
him  to-day."

He  went  to  play  with  the  Gruagach.  "WTien  he
arrived,  he  thought  the  Gruagach  Avas  seized  with  joy.
"  Hast  thou  come  Ì  "  he  said.  "  I  came."  They  played
the  game,  and,  as  a  cursed  victory  for  the  king,  the  Grua-
gach won  that  day.  "  Lift  the  stake  of  thy  game,"  said
the  young  king  of  Easaidh  Euadh,  "  and  be  not  heavy
on  me,  for  I  cannot  stand  to  it."  The  stake  of  my
play  is,"  said  he,  "  that  I  lay  it  as  crosses  tind  as  spells
on  thee,  and  as  the  defect  of  the  year,  that  the  cropped
rough-skinned  creature,  more  uncouth  and  unworthy
than  thou  thyself,  should  take  thy  head,  and  thy  neck,
and  thy  life's  look  oif,  if  thou  dost  not  get  for  me  the
Glaive  of  light  of  the  king  of  the  oak  windows."    The


4  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

king  went  liome,  heavily,  poorly,  gloomily.  The  young
queen  came  meeting  him,  and  she  said  to  him,  "  Moh-
rooai !  my  pity  !  there  is  nothing  with  thee  to-night."
Her  face  and  her  splendour  gave  some  pleasure  to  the
king  when  he  looked  on  her  brow,  but  when  he  sat
on  a  chair  to  draw  her  towards  him,  his  heart  was  so
heavy  that  the  chair  broke  under  him.

"  AVhat  aUs  thee,  or  what  should  ail  thee,  that
thou  mightest  not  tell  it  to  me  ? "  said  the  queen.
Th(.^  king  told  how  it  happened.  "  Ha  ! "  said  she,
"what  should'st  thou  mind,  and  that  thou  hast  the
best  wife  in  Erin,  and  the  second  best  horse  ia  Erin.
If  thou  takest  my  advice,  thou  wilt  come  (well)  out  of
all  these  tilings  yet."

If  it  was  early  that  the  day  came,  it  was  earher
than  that  that  the  queen  arose,  and  she  set  order  in
everything,  for  the  king  was  about  to  go  on  his  journey.
She  set  in  order  the  dun  shaggy  filly,  on  which  was
the  stick  saddle,  and  though  he  saw  it  as  wood,  it
was  full  of  sparklings  with  gold  and  silver.  He  got
on  it  ;  the  queen  kissed  him,  and  she  wished  him  vic-
tory of  battlefields.  "  I  need  not  be  telling  thee  any-
thing. Take  thou  the  advice  of  thine  own  she  comrade,
the  filly,  and  she  Avill  teU  thee  what  thou  shouldest  do."
He  set  out  on  his  journey,  and  it  was  not  dreary  to
be  on  the  dun  steed.

She  would  catch  the  swift  March  wind  that  would
be  before,  and  the  swift  March  wind  would  not  catch  her.
They  came  at  the  month  of  dusk  and  lateness,  to  the
court  and  castle  of  the  king  of  the  oak  windows.

Said  the  dun  shaggy  filly  to  liim,  "  We  are  at  the
end  of  the  journey,  and  we  have  not  to  go  any  further  ;
take  my  advice,  and  I  will  take  thee  where  the  sword
of  light  of  the  king  of  the  oak  windows  is,  and  if  it
comes  with  thee  without  scrape  or  creak,  it  is  a  good


THE  YOUNG  KING  OF  EASAIDH  RUADH.  $

mark  on  our  journey.  The  king  is  now  at  liis  dinner,
and  the  sword  of  light  is  in  Ms  owti  chamber.  There
is  a  knob  on  its  end,  and  Avhen  thou  catchest  the  sword,
di'aw  it  softly  out  of  the  window  'case.'"  He  came
to  the  window  where  the  sword  was.  He  caught  the
sword  and  it  came  with  him  softly  till  it  was  at  its
point,  and  then  it  gave  a  sort  of  a  "  sgread."  "  We  will
now  be  going,"  said  the  filly.  "  It  is  no  stopping  time
for  us.  I  know  the  king  has  felt  us  taking  the  sword
out."  He  kept  his  sword  in  his  hand,  and  they  went
away,  and  when  they  were  a  bit  forward,  the  filly  said,
"  We  will  stop  now,  and  look  thou  whom  thou  seest
behind  thee."  "  I  see,"  said  he,  "a  swarm  of  brown
horses  coming  madly."  "  We  are  swifter  ourselves  than
these  yet,"  said  the  filly.  They  went,  and  when  they
were  a  good  distance  forward,  "  Look  now,"  said  she  ;
"  whom  seest  thou  coming  Ì"  "  I  see  a  swarm  of  black
horses,  and  one  white-faced  black  horse,  and  he  is  com-
ing and  coming  in  madness,  and  a  man  on  him."
"  That  is  the  best  horse  in  Erin ;  it  is  my  brother,  and
he  got  three  months  more  nursing  than  I,  and  he  will
come  past  me  with  a  whirr,  and  try  if  thou  wilt  be  so
ready,  that  when  he  comes  past  me,  thou  wilt  take  the
head  off  the  man  who  is  on  him ;  for  in  the  time  of
passing  he  will  look  at  thee,  and  there  is  no  sword  in
his  court  will  take  oif  his  head  but  the  very  sword  that
is  in  thy  hand."  When  tliis  man  was  going  past,  he
gave  his  head  a  turn  to  look  at  him,  he  drew  the  sword
and  he  took  his  head  off,  and  the  shaggy  dun  filly
caught  it  in  her  mouth.

This  was  the  king  of  the  oak  windows.  "  Leap
on  the  black  horse,"  said  she,  "  and  leave  the  carcass
there,  and  be  going  home  as  fast  as  he  will  take  thee
home,  and  I  will  be  coming  as  best  I  may  after  thee."
He  leaped  on  the  black  horse,  and,  "  moire  !"  he  was  the


0  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.

swift  hero,  and  they  reached  the  house  long  before  day.
Tlie  queen  was  without  rest  till  he  arrived.  They
raised  music,  and  they  laid  down  woe.  On  the  morrow,
he  said,  "I  am  obliged  to  go  to  see  the  Gniagach
to-day,  to  try  if  my  spells  will  be  loose."  "  Mind  that
it  is  not  as  usual  the  Gruagach  will  meet  thee.  He
will  meet  thee  furiously,  wildly,  and  he  will  say  to  thee,
didst  thou  get  the  sword  ?  and  say  thou  that  thou  hast
got  it ;  he  will  say,  how  didst  thou  get  it  Ì  and  thou
shalt  sa}^,  if  it  were  not  the  knob  that  was  on  its  end

1  had  not  got  it.  He  mil  ask  thee  again,  how  didst
thou  get  the  sword  Ì  and  thou  wilt  say,  if  it  were  not
the  knob  that  was  on  its  end,  I  had  not  got  it.  Then
he  will  give  himself  a  lift  to  look  what  knob  is  on  the
sword,  and  thou  wilt  see  a  mole  on  the  right  side  of
Ms  neck,  and  stab  the  point  of  the  sword  in  the  mole  ;
and  if  thou  dost  not  liit  the  mole,  thou  and  I  are  done.
His  brother  was  the  king  of  the  oak  windows,  and  he
knows  that  till  the  other  had  lost  his  life,  he  would
not  part  with  the  sword.  Tlie  death  of  the  two  is  in
the  sword,  but  there  is  no  other  sword  that  wiU  touch
them  but  it."  The  queen  kissed  him,  and  she  called
on  victory  of  battlefields  (to  be)  with  him,  and  he  went
away.

The  Gruagach  met  him  in  the  very  same  place
where  he  was  before.  "  Didst  thou  get  the  sword  ? "
"  I  got  the  sword."  "  How  didst  thou  get  the  sword  ?"
"  If  it  were  not  the  knob  that  was  on  its  end  I  had  not
got  it,"  said  he.  "  Let  me  see  the  sword."  "  It  was
not  laid  on  me  to  let  thee  see  it."  "  How  didst  thou
get  the  sword?"  "If  it  were  not  the  knob  that  was
on  its  end,  I  got  it  not."  The  Gruagach  gave  his  head
a  lift  to  look  at  the  sword  ;  he  saw  the  mole  ;  he  was
sliarp  and  quick,  and  he  thrust  the  sword  into  the
mole,  and  the  Gruagach  fell  down  dead.


THE  YOUNG  KING  OF  EASAIDH  RUADH.  7

He  returned  home,  and  when  he  returned  home,
he  found  his  set  of  keepers  and  watchers  tied  there
back  to  back,  -without  wife,  or  horse,  or  sweetheart  of
his,  but  was  taken  away.

When  he  loosed  them,  they  said  to  liim,  "  A  great
giant  came  and  he  took  away  thy  wife  and  thy  two
horses."  "  Sleep  will  not  come  on  mine  eyes  nor  rest
on  my  head  till  I  get  my  wife  and  my  two  horses  back."
In  saying  tliis,  he  went  on  his  journey.  He  took  the
side  that  the  track  of  the  horses  was,  and  he  followed
them  dihgently.  The  dusk  and  lateness  were  coming
on  him,  and  no  stop  cUd  he  make  till  he  reached  the
side  of  the  green  wood.  He  saw  where  there  was  the
forming  of  the  site  of  a  fire,  and  he  thought  that  he
would  put  fire  upon  it,  and  thus  he  would  put  the  night
past  there.

He  was  not  long  here  at  the  fire,  when  "  Cu  Seang"
of  the  green  wood  came  on  him.

He  blessed  the  dog,  and  the  dog  blessed  him.

"  Oov  !  oov  !"  said  the  dog.  "  Bad  was  the  pHght
of  thy  wife  and  thy  two  horses  here  last  night  with
the  big  giant."  "  It  is  that  which  has  set  me  so  pained
and  pitiful  on  their  track  to-night ;  but  there  is  no  help
for  it."  "Oh!  king,"  said  the  dog,  "thou  must  not
be  without  meat."  The  dog  went  into  the  wood.
He  brought  out  creatures,  and  they  made  them  meat
contentedly.  "  I  rather  think  myself,"  said  the  king,
"  that  I  may  turn  home ;  that  I  cannot  go  near  that
giant."  "Don't  do  that,"  said  the  dog.  "There's
no  fear  of  thee,  king.  Thy  matter  ivill  grow  with  thee.
Thou  must  not  be  here  without  sleeping."  "  Tear  will
not  let  me  sleep  without  a  warranty."  "Sleep  thou,"
said  the  dog,  "  and  I  will  warrant  thee."  The  king  let
himself  down,  stretched  out  at  the  side  of  the  fire,  and
he  slept.     When  the  watch  broke,  the  dog  said  to  him.


O  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  Eise  up,  king,  till  thou  gettest  a  morsel  of  meat  that
will  strengthen  thee,  till  thou  wilt  be  going  on  thy
journey,  Now,"  said  the  dog,  "  if  hardship  or  difficulty
comes  on  thee,  ask  my  aid,  and  I  will  be  with  thee  in
an  instant."  They  left  a  blessing  with  each  other,  and
he  went  away.  In  the  time  of  dusk  and  lateness,  he
came  to  a  great  precipice  of  rock,  and  there  was  the
forming  of  the  site  of  a  fire.

He  thought  he  would  gather  dry  fuel,  and  that  he
would  set  on  fire.  He  began  to  warm  himself,  and  he
was  not  long  thus  when  the  hoary  hawk  of  the  grey
rock  came  on  him.  "  Oov  !  oov  !"  said  she.  "  Bad
was  the  plight  of  thy  wife  and  thy  two  horses  last  night
with  the  big  giant."  "  There  is  no  help  for  it,"  said
he.  "  I  have  got  much  of  their  trouble  and  Httle  of
their  benefit  myself."  "  Catch  courage,"  said  she,
"Thou  wilt  get  something  of  their  benefit  yet.  Thou
must  not  be  without  meat  here,"  said  she,  "  There  is
no  contrivance  for  getting  meat,"  said  he,  "  We  will
not  be  long  getting  meat,"  said  the  falcon.  She  went,
and  she  was  not  long  when  she  came  -wath  three  ducks
and  eight  blackcocks  in  her  mouth.  They  set  their
meat  in  order,  and  they  took  it.  "  Thou  must  not  be
without  sleep,"  said  the  falcon.  "  How  shall  I  sleep
without  a  warranty  over  me,  to  keep  me  from  any  one
evil  that  is  here."  "  Sleep  thou,  king,  and  I  will
warrant  thee."  He  let  himself  down,  stretched  out,
and  he  slept.

In  the  morning,  the  falcon  set  him  on  foot.  "  Hard-
ship or  difficulty  that  comes  on  thee,  mind,  at  any
time,  that  thou  -wilt  get  my  help."  He  went  swiftly,
sturdily.  The  night  was  coming,  and  the  little  birds  of
the  forest  of  Brandling  bushy  trees,  were  taking  about
the  briar  roots  and  the  twig  tops ;  and  if  they  were,  it
was  stillness,  not  peace  for  him,  till  he  came  to  the  side  of


THE  YOUNG  KING  OF  EASAIDH  EUADH.  9

a  great  river  tliat  was  there,  and  at  the  bank  of  the  river
there  was  the  forming  of  the  site  of  a  fire.  The  king
blew  a  heavy,  Httle  spark  of  fire.  He  was  not  long
here  when  there  came  as  company  for  him  the  brown
otter  of  the  river.  "  Och  !  ocli !  "  said  the  otter.
"  Bad  was  the  plight  of  thy  wife  and  thy  two  horses
last  night  with  the  giant."  "  There  is  no  help  for  it.
I  got  much  of  their  trouble  and  httle  of  their  benefit."
"  Catch  courage,  before  mid-day  to-morrow  thou  wilt
see  thy  wife.  Oh  !  king,  thou  must  not  be  without
meat,"  said  the  otter.  "  How  is  meat  to  be  got
here  ? "  said  the  king.  The  otter  went  through  the
river,  and  she  came  and  three  salmon  with  her,  that
were  splendid.  They  made  meat,  and  they  took  it.
Said  the  otter  to  the  king,  "  Thou  must  sleep."  "  How
can  I  sleep  without  any  warranty  over  me  Ì"  "  Sleep
thou,  and  I  will  warrant  thee."  The  king  slept.  In
the  morning,  the  otter  said  to  him,  "  Thou  wilt  be  this
night  in  presence  of  thy  wife."  He  left  blessing  with
the  otter.  "  Now,"  said  the  otter,  "  if  difficulty  be  on
thee,  ask  my  aid,  and  thou  shalt  get  it."  The  king
went  till  he  reached  a  rock,  and  he  looked  down  into  a
chasm  that  was  in  the  rock,  and  at  the  bottom  he  saw
his  vnie  and  his  two  horses,  and  he  did  not  know  how
he  should  get  where  they  were.  He  went  round  till  he
came  to  the  foot  of  the  rock,  and  there  was  a  fine  road
for  going  in.  He  went  in,  and  if  he  went  it  Avas  then
she  began  crying.  "  Ud  !  ud  ! "  said  he,  "  this  is  bad  !
If  thou  art  crying  now  when  I  myself  have  got  so  much
trouble  coming  about  thee."  "  Oo  !  "  said  the  horses,
"  set  him  in  front  of  us,  and  there  is  no  fear  for
him,  till  we  leave  this."  She  made  meat  for  him,
and  she  set  him  to  rights,  and  when  they  were  a  while
together,  she  put  him  in  front  of  the  horses.  "When
the  giant  came,  he  said,  "  The  smell  of  the  stranger  is


lO  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.

within."  Says  she,  "  My  treasure  !  My  joy  and  my
cattle  !  there  is  nothing  but  the  smell  of  the  litter  of
the  horses."  At  the  end  of  a  while  he  went  to  give
meat  to  the  horses,  and  the  horses  began  at  him,  and
they  all  but  killed  him,  and  he  hardly  crawled  from
them.  "  Dear  thing,"  said  she,  "  they  are  like  to  kill
tliee."  "  If  I  myself  had  my  soul  to  keep,  it's  long
since  they  had  killed  me,"  said  he.  "  AVhere,  dear,  is
thy  soul  ?  by  the  books  I  will  take  care  of  it."  "  It
is,"  said  he,  "  in  the  Bonnach  stone."  When  he  went
on  the  morrow,  she  set  the  Bonnach  stone  in  order
exceedingly.  In  the  time  of  dusk  and  lateness,  the
giant  came  home.  She  set  her  man  in  front  of  the
horses.  The  giant  went  to  give  the  horses  meat  and
they  mangled  him  more  and  more.  "  What  made  thee
set  the  Bonnach  stone  in  order  like  that  Ì "  said  he.
"  Because  thy  soul  is  in  it."  "  I  perceive  that  if  thou
didst  know  where  my  soul  is,  thou  Avouldst  give  it  much
respect."  "  I  would  give  (that),"  said  she.  "  It  is
not  there,"  said  he,  "  my  soul  is ;  it  is  in  the  threshold."
She  set  in  order  the  threshold  finely  on  the  morrow.
Wlien  the  giant  returned,  he  w^ent  to  give  meat  to  the
horses,  and  the  horses  mangled  him  more  and  more.
"  What  brought  thee  to  set  the  threshold  in  order  hke
that  ?  "  "  Because  thy  soul  is  in  it."  "  I  perceive  if
thou  knewest  where  my  soul  is,  that  thou  wouldst  take
care  of  it."  "  I  would  take  that,"  said  she.  "It  is.
not  there  that  my  soul  is,"  said  he.  "  There  is  a  great
flagstone  under  the  threshold.  There  is  a  Avether  under
the  flag.  There  is  a  duck  in  the  wether's  belly,  ■
and  an  egg  in  the  belly  of  the  duck,  and  it  is  in  the  egg
that  my  soul  is."  AVhen  the  giant  went  aw^ay  on  the
morrow's  day,  they  raised  the  flagstone  and  out  went
the  wether.  "If  I  had  the  slim  dog  of  the  green-
wood, he  would  not  be  long  bringing  the  wether  to


THE  YOUNG  KING  OF  EASAIDH  RUADH.  I  1

me."  The  slim  dog  of  the  greenwood  came  -wdth  the
wether  in  his  mouth.  When  they  opened  the  wether,
out  was  the  duck  on  the  wing  with  the  other  ducks.
"  K  I  had  the  Hoary  Hawk  of  the  grey  rock,  she  would
not  be  long  bringing  the  duck  to  me."  The  Hoary
Hawk  of  the  grey  rock  came  with  the  duck  in  her
mouth ;  when  they  split  the  duck  to  take  the  egg  from
her  belly,  out  went  the  egg  into  the  depth  of  the  ocean.
"  If  I  had  the  brown  otter  of  the  river,  he  would  not
be  long  bringing  the  egg  to  me."  Tlie  brown  otter
came  and  the  egg  in  her  mouth,  and  the  queen  caiight
the  egg,  and  she  crushed  it  between  her  two  hands.
The  giant  was  coming  in  the  lateness,  and  when  she
crushed  the  egg,  he  feU  down  dead,  and  he  has  never
yet  moved  out  of  that.  They  took  with  them  a  great
deal  of  his  gold  and  silver.  They  passed  a  cheery
night  with  the  brown  otter  of  the  river,  a  night  with
the  hoary  falcon  of  the  grey  rock,  and  a  night  with  the
slim  dog  of  the  greenwood.  They  came  home  and
they  set  in  order  "  a  cuirm  curaidh  cridheil,"  a  hearty
hero's  feast,  and  they  were  lucky  and  well  pleased  after
that.


Received  June  9,  1859.

An  old  man,  of  the  name  of  Angus  MacQueen,  who  lived  at
Ballochrov,  near  Portaskaig,  in  Islay,  "  who  could  recite  Ossian's
Poems,"  taught  this  more  than  forty  years  ago  (say  1820)  to
James  Wilson,  blind  fiddler  in  Islay,  who  recited  it  to  Hector
MacLean,  schoolmaster,  Islay.

The  Gaelic  is  dictated  and  written  by  Islay  men.


WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.


RIGH  OG  EASAIDH  RUAGH.

Bha  righ  bg  Easaidh  Ruagh  an  dèigh  dha'n  oighreachd  f  haotainn  da
fèin  ri  mòran  àbhachd,  ag  amharc  a  mach  de  a  chordadh  ris,  's
dè  thigeadh  r  'a  nadur.  Bha  gruagach  fagus  d'a  chomhnuidh  ris  an
abradh  iad  a  ghruagacli  charsalach  dhonn.  Smaointich  e  ris  fèin  gun
rachadh  e  a  dh'  iomaii-t  cluiche  ris.  Dh'  f  halbh  e  tliun  an  t-seanagh-
ail,  's  thubhairt  e  ris,  "  tha  mi  air  a  dbeanadh  suas  gun  d'theid
mi  dh'  lomairt  cluiche  ris  a'  ghruagach  charsalach  dlionn."  "  Aha,"
arsa  'n  seanagheal,  "an  duine  mar  so  thu?  am  bheil  thu  clio  uaibh-
reach  's  gu  bheil  thu  a'  dol  a  dh'  iomairt  cluiche  ris  a  a'  ghruagach
charsalach  dhonn  ?  B'e  ino  chomhairle  dhuit  do  nadur  atharrachadh
's  gun  dol  ann."  "  Cha  dean  mi  sin."  "  B'e  mo  chomhairle  dhuit  ma
bhiiidhneas  thu  air  a'  i;bruagacb  charsalach  dlionu,  an  nighean  mhaol
charrach  a  tha  ciil  an  doruis  f  haotainn  air  son  brigh  do  chluicbe,  's
cuiridh  e  ioma  car  dheth  mu'ra  faigh  thu  i."  Chaidh  e  laidhe  'n
oidhche  sin,  's  ma 's  moch  a  thaiuig  an  latha  's  moiche  na  sin  a  dh'  èirich
an  righ  a  chumail  cluiche  ris  a'gliruagaich.  Rainig  e  a  ghruagach.
Bheannaich  e  do'n  ghruagaich  's  bheannaich  a  ghruagach  da.
Thuirt  a  ghruagach  ris,  "A  righ  og  Easaidh  Ruagh,  de  thug  a'
m'ionnsuidh  an  diugh  thu  ?  an  iomair  thu  cluiche  rium  ?"  Thòisich
iad  's  dh'  iomair  iad  an  cluiche.  Bhiiidhinn  an  righ.  '•  Tog  brigh
do  chluicbe  's  gu'm  faighinn  a  bhi  'g  imea<;hd."  "  'S  e  brigh  mo
chluicbe  thu  thoirt  domh  na  nighin  maoil  carraich  a  th'  agad  air  ciil
an  doruis."  "  'S  iomad  boireannach  maiseach  a  th'agamsa  stigh  a
bharrachd  urra."  "  Cha  ghabh  mi  gin  ach  i  siod."  "  Beannachd
dhuitse  's  mollachd  do  d'  oid-ionnsachaiiih."  Chaidh  iad  gu  tigh
na  gruagaich  's  chuir  a'  ghruagach  an  òrdugh  fichead  nighean  og.
"Tog  a  nis  do  roghainn  asda  sin."  Bha  te'  'tighinu  a  mach  an
dèigh  te,  's  a  h-uile  te  'thigeadh  a  mach,  theireadh  i,  "  is  mis'  i,  's
amaideach  thu  nach  'eil  'g  am  thobhairtse  leat ;"  ach  dh'iarr  an
seanaghal  air  gun  gin  a  gbabhail  ach  an  te  mu  dheireadh  a  thigeadh
a  mach.  'N  uair  a  tbainig  an  te  mu  dheireadh  a  mach  thuirt
e  "so  mo  thè-sa."  Dh'  fholbh  e  leatha  's  'nuair  a  bha  iad  stàtuinn
o'n  tigh  dh'atharraich  a  cruth,  agus  's  i  boireannacli  a  b'iiille  'bha
air  thalamh.  Bha'n  righ  'dol  dachaidh  Ian  toil-inntinn  leithid  de
bhoireannach  maiseach  f  haotainn.  Rainig  e'u  tigh.  Chaidh  e  laidhe.
Ma  's  moch  a  tbainig  an  latha,  is  moiche  na  sin  a  dh'èirich  an  righ,
'dhol  a  dh'iomairt  cluiche  ris  a  ghruagaich.  "  Is  èigiu  domh  dol  a
dh'iomairt  cluiche  ris  a  ghruau^aich  an  diugh,"  ars'  e  r'a  bhean.  "  O,"
ars'  ise,  "  sin  m'athair  's  ma  thcid  thu  dh'iomairt  cluiche  ris,  na  gabh
ni  sam  bith  airson  brigh  do  chluicbe  ach  an  loth  pheallagach  odhar


RIGH  OG   EASAIDH  RUAGH.  I  3

a  tlia  'n  diollaid  mliaid'  urra.  Dli'  f  Iiolbh  an  righ,  's  choinnicb  a
ghruagacli  e,  's  gu  cinnteach  cl}a  robh  'm  beannachadh  na  bu  taire
11a  bha  e  roimbe  aig  an  dithis  ri  cht'ile.  "Seadh,"  ars'  a  ghruagacb
"  demur  a  cbord  do  bliean  og  riut  an  de?'  "  Cbord  gu  h-iomlan.''
"An  d'  tbuinig  thu  db'iomairt  duiche  rium  an  diugb?"  "Thainig.''
Tliòisich  iad  air  a'  chluiche,  's  bhuidhinn  an  righ  air  a'  gbruagaich  an
latha  sin.  "  Tog  brigh  do  chkiiche  's  bi  ealamb  leis."  "  'S  e  brigh  mo
chluicbe  gum  faigh  mi  an  loth  phealbigacb  odiiar  air  a'  bheil  an
diollaid  mhaide."  Dh'  fholbh  iad,  còmhla.  Ràinig  iad  an  loth
pheallagach  odhar,  thug  e  much  as  an  stabuU  i,  's  chuir  an  righ  a
chas  thairte,  's  b'e  'n  curaidh  i.  Chaidb  e  dbachaidh ;  bha  lamhan
sgaoilt'  aig  a'  bhean  roimlie;  "s  bba  iad  gu  siinndach  comhia
an  oidhche  sin.  "  B'  f  hearr  learn  fèin,"  ursa  'bhean,  "  nach  rachadh
thu  'dh'iomairt  cluiche  ris  a'  ghruagacb  tuillidh,  cbioim  ma  bhuidh-
neas  e  cuiridh  e  dragh  ann  ad  cheann."  "  Cha  dean  mi  sin  ;
thèid  mi  dh'iomairt  cluiche  ris  an  diugb."  Chaidb  e  dh'iomairt
cluiche  ris  a'  gbruagaich.  'N  uair  a  ràinig  e,  thar  leis  gun  do  ghabh  a
ghruagacb  boch.  '•  An  d'  thainig  thu  ?"  "  Thainig."  Dh'iomair  iad
an  cluiche,  's  mar  bhuaidh  mhollachd  do'n  righ  bhuidhinn  a'  ghruagacb
an  latha  sin.  "  Tog  brigh  do  chluiche,"  arsa  rigb  og  Eas  ruagh, "  's  na
bi  trom  orm,  chionn  cha-n  urrainn  mi  seasamb  ris."  •'  S'  e  brigh  mo
chluiche-sa,"  urs'  esan,  "  gu  bheil  mi  'cur  mar  chroisean,  'us  mar
gheasan  ort,  'us  mar  sheisean  na  bliadbna,  am  beathach  maol  carracli
is  mithreubhaiche  's  is  mi-threonaicbe  na  thu  fe'in,  a  thoirt  do  cbinn  's
do  mhuineil  's  do  choimhead-beatha  dhiot,  mar  am  faigh  thu  dhomhsa
claidbeamh  soluis  righ  nan  uinneagan  daraich."  Chaidb  an  righ
dachaidh  gu  trom,  bochd,  duibhtbiambasach.  Thainig  a  bhanrighinn
og  na  cbomhdhail  's  thubhairt  i  ris,  "  Mo  thruaighe  !  cha  'n  eil  ni  'sam
bith  leat  a  nocbd."  Thug  a  h-aoidh  agus  a  h-ailleacbd  rudeigin  do
thoilinntinn  do'n  righ  nur  a  db'  amhairc  e  air  agnuis;  ach  nur  a
shuidh  e  air  cattiair  a  tharruinn  e  d'  a  ionnsuidh  thug  e  osann  as,  is
sgoilt  a  chathair  fodba.  "Do  th'  ort,  na  bhiodh  ort,  nach  fhaodadh
thu  innseadh  dhomhsa?"  ars'  a  bhanrigh.  Dh'  inuis  an  righ
demur  a  thachair.  "  Ud,"  ar.-.'  ise,  "  de  amhail  a  chuireas  thu  air,  's
gur  ann  agad  a  tha  'bhean  is  f  hearr  'an  Eirinn,  's  an  darra  each  is
f  liearr  'an  Eirinn.  Ma  ghabhas  thu  mo  chomhairle-sa  tbig  thu  as  gach
ni  dbiubb  sin  f  hathasd."  Ma  's  moch  a  thainig  an  litba  's  moiche  na
sin  a  dh'  èirich  a  bhanrighinn,  's  a  chuir  i  uidheam  air  gach  ni  chum
gum  bitheadh  an  righ  'dol  air  a  thurus.  Chuir  i  'n  ordiigh  an  loth
pheallagach.  odhar,  air  an  robh'n  diollaid  mhaide  ;  's  ged  a  chitheadh
esan  'n  a  maid'  i,  bha  i  Ian  dhealrach  le  or  is  airgeid.  Chaidh  e  air  a
muin.     Fhijg  a'  bhanrigh  e,  's  ghuidh  i  buaidh  larach  leis.     Cha  ruig


X  4  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.

mise  leas  a  blii  'g  innseadh  ni  sam  bith  dhuit,  gabh  thuoa  comhairle
do  bhanachonipanaich  fein,  an  loth,  's  innsidh  i  duit  de  's  coir
dhuit  a  (Iheauamh.  Ghabh  e  mach  air  a  thurus ;  's  cha  bu  chianalacli  a
bhi  air  niuin  na  steud  odhar.  Bheireadh  i  air  a'  gbaoth  luath  Mhairt
a  bhitheadb  roimpe,  's  clia  bheireadh  a'  ghaoth  luath  Mhairt  urra.
Thainig  iad  am  beul  an  athaidh  's  an  anamoich  gu  ciiirt  agus  cathair
righ  nan  uinneagan  daraich.  Urs'  an  loth  pheallagach  odhar  ris,  "  Tha
sinn  aig  ceann  ar  turuis,  's'cha-n'  eil  againn  ri  dol  na  's  f  haide,  gabh
thusa  mo  cliomhairle-sa  's  bheir  mi  tliu  far  am  bheil  claidheamh  soluis
righ  nan  uinneagan  daraich,  's  ma  thig  e  leat  gun  sgread  gun  sgrioch,
's  comharradh  maith  air  ar  turus  e.  Tlia  'n  righ  nis  aig  a  dhinneir,  's
tha  'n  claidheamh  soluis  'n  a  sheòmbar  fèin  ;  tha  cnap  air  a  cheann,  's
nur  a  bheireas  thu  air  a  chlaidheamh  tarruinn  gu  reidh  mach  a
"  case"  na  h-uinneig  e."  Thainig  e  gus  an  uinneig  far  an  robh  an
claidheamh.  Rug  e  air  a  chlaidheamh  's  thainig  e  leis  gu  reidh  gus
an  robh  e  aig  a  bharr,  's  thug  e  seòrsa  sgread  as  an  sin.  "  Bithidh
sinn  a  nis,  arsa  'n  loth,  aig  imeachd,  cha-n  am  stad  duinn  e,  tha  fios
agam  gun  do  mhothaich  an  righ  dhuinn  a  toirt  a  chlaidheimh  a  mach.
Ghle'idh  esan  an  claidheamh  'n  a  laimh  's  dh'  f  holbh  iad,  's  'n  uair  a
bha  iad  treis  air  an  aghaidh,  thuirt  an  loth,  "  Stadaidh  sinn  a  nis  's
amhaircidh  thu  co  "chi  thu  'd  dheigh."  "  Chi  mi,  ars'  esan,  sgaoth
dh'  eachaibh  donna  'tighinn  air  bhainidh."  ""S  luaithe  sinn  fein
na  iad  sin  fathasd."  Dh'  fhalbh  iad  's  'n  uair  a  bha  iad  astar
maith  air  an  aghaidh,  "amhairc  a  nis  ars'  ise  co  'chi  thu  teachd."
"  Chi  mi  sgaoth  dh'  eacha  dubha,  agus  aon  each  blàr  dubh,  'sea
tighinn  air  a  chuthach,  's  duin'  air  a  rahuin."  "'S  e  sin  an  t-each
is  fhearr  an  Eirinn,  's  e  mo  bhrathair  a  th'  ann,  's  f  huair  e  raidhe
baualtrachd  a  bharrachd  ormsa,  agus  thig  e  seachad  ormsa  le
sreann,  's  feuch  am  bi  thu  cho  tapaidh  's  'nur  a  thig  e  seachad
ormsa  an  d'  thoir  thu  'n  ceann  de  'n  f  hear  a  th'  air  a  mhuin ;
chionn  an  am  dol  seachad  amhaircidh  e  ortsa,  's  cha-u  'eil  claidh-
eamh 'n  a  chiiirt  a  bheir  an  ceann  deth,  ach  a  'cheart  chlaidheamh
a  tha'd  laiinh."  'N  uair  a  bha  'm  fear  so  'dol  .seachad  tliug  e  amh-
adh  air  a  cheann  a  dh'  amharc  air ;  tharruinn  esan  an  claidheamh
'us  thug  e  'n  ceann  deth,  's  cheap  an  loth  pheallagach  'n  a  beul  e.  B'  e
so  righ  nan  uinneagan  daraich.  "  Leura  air  muin  an  eich  dhuibh,"
urs'  ise,  "  's  fag  a  chlosach  an  siod,  's  bi  'dol  dachaidh  cho  luath  's  a
bheir  e  dachaidh  thu,  's  bithidh  mise  'tighinn  mar  is  fhearr  a  dh*
f  haodas  mi  'n  'ur  dcigli."  Leum  e  air  muin  an  eich  dhuibh,  's  am
Moire  b'  e  'n  curaidh  e,  's  rkinig  iad  an  tigh  fada  roimh  latha.  Bha
'bhan-righ  gun  laidhe  gus  an  d'  riiinig  e.  Thog  iad  ceòl  '.s  leag  iad
bròn.     An  la'r  na  mhaireach  thuirt  esan,  "  's  eigin  dòmhsa  dol  a  dh'-


RIGH  OG  EASAIDH  RUAGH,  I  5

amharc  na  gruagaich  an  diugli,  feuch  am  bi  mo  gheasan  ma  sgaoil."
"  Cuimhnich  nach  ann  mar  a  b-àbliaist  a  dh'  amaiseas  a  ghruagach
ort.  Coinnichidh  e  tliu  gu  feargach  fiadhaich  's  their  e  riut,  'an
d'f  huair  tlui  'n  claidheamh  ?'  's  abair  thusa  gun  d'f  huair.  Their  e  riut
ciod  e  mar  a  f  huair  thu  e'  ?  'us  their  thusa, '  mar  b'e  an  cnap  a  bh'  air  a
cheann  cha  d'fliuair  mi  e.'  Foighnichidh  e  rithisd  diot,  'demur  a
fliuair  thu  "u  claidheamh,'  's  their  thusa,  'mar  b'e  au  cnap  a  bh'
air  a  cbeaiin  cha  d'  f  huair  mi  e.'  Bheir  e  'n  so  togail  air  a  dh'
amharc  ciod  e  'n  cnap  a  th'  air  a  chlaidheamh  's  chi  thu  ball  dorain
taobh  deas  a  mhuineil,  agus  stol)  barr  a  chlaidheimh  anns  a  bhall
dorain  's  mar  amais  thu  air  a  bhall  dorain,  tha  thusa  's  mi.-e  reidh.
B'  e  'bhrathair  righ  nan  uinneagan  daraich  e,  's  tha  f  hios  aige  gus  an
cailleadh  am  fear  eile'bheatha  nach  dealaicheadh  eris  a  chlaidheamh.
Tlia  bas  an  dithis  's  a  chlaidheamh ;  ach  cha-n  'eil  claidheamh  eile
dheargas  orr'  ach  e."  Phòg  a  bhanrigh  e,  's  ghuidh  i  buaidh  larach
leis,  's  dh'  f  holbh  e.  Thachair  a  ghruagach  air  anns  cheart  ait'  an
robh  e  roimhid.  "  An  d'  f  huair  thu  'n  claidheamh  ?  "  "  Fhuair  mi  'n
claidheamh."  "  Demur  a  fhuair  thu  'n  claidheamh  ?  "  "  Mur  b'e  an
cnap  a  bh'  air  a  cheann  cha  n'  f  haighinn  e."  "  Leig  f  haicinn  domh  an
claidheamh."  "  Cha  robh  e  mar  fhiachaibh  orm  a  leigeil  f  haicinn
duit."  "  Demur  a  fhuair  thu  'u  claidheamh  ?"  "Mur  b'e  an  cnap  a
bh'  air  a  cheami  cha  d'  fhuair  mi  e."  Thug  a  ghruagach  togail  air  a
cheann  a  dh'  amharc  air  a  chlaidheamh.  Chunnaic  esan  am  ball
dorain.  Bha  e  urrant'  ealamh;  shiith  e 'n  claiaheamh  anns  a  bhall
dorain,  's  thuit  a  ghruagach  sios  marbh.  ThiU  e  dhachaidh,  's  'n  uair
a  thill  e  dhachaidh,  fhuair  e  luchd  gleidhidh  agus  coimhead  ceangailt'
an  sin  ciil  ri  ciil ;  's  gun  bhean,  no  each,  no  leannan  aige,  gun  a  bhi  air
an  toirt  air  folbh.  'N  uair  a  dh'  fhuasgail  e  iad,  tliubhairt  iad  ris,
"Thainig  famhair  mòr,  agus  thug  e  air  folbh  do  bhean  agus  do  dha
each."  "  Cha  d'  the'id  cadal  air  mo  shiiil  no  fois  air  mo  cheum,  gus  am
faigh  mi  mo  bhean  agus  mo  dha  each  air  au  ais.  Le  so  a  radh  dh'
fholbh  e  air  a  thurus ;  ghabh  e  'n  taobh  a  bha  lorg  nan  each,  's  lean  e
gu  dian  iad.  Bha  'n  t-athadh  's  an  t-anamoch  a  tighinn  air,  's  cha  d'
rinneadh  stadleis  gus  an  d'  rainig  e  taobh  na  coill'uaine.  Chunnaic
e  far  an  robh  larach  cruthachadh  gealbhain,  's  smaointiche  gun  cuir-
eadh  e  tein'  air,  's  gun  cuireadh  e  seachad  an  oidhch'  ann.  Cha  b'
f  had  'a  bha  e  'n  so  aig  a  ghealbhan  gus  an  d'  thainig  cu  seang  na
eoiir  uain'  air.  Bheannaich  e  do  'n  chii,  's  bheannaich  an  cii  da.  "  Ubh !
iibh ! "  ars'  an  ch,  "  b'  olc  diol  do  mhnatha  's  do  dha  each  an  so  an  raoir
aig  an  f  hamhair  mhòr."  "  'S  e  sin  a  chuir  mise  cho  peanasach  truagh
air  an  tòir  a  nochd,  ach  cha-n'  'eil  arach'  air."  "  A  righ,"  ars'  an
cii,"  cha-n'  f  haod  thu  bhi  gun  bhiadh."     Chaidh  an  cii  stigh  do  'n


l6  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

choille,  thug  e  mach  beathaichean,  's  rinn  iad  am  biadh  gu  tlachdmhor.
"  Tha  diiil  again  fdin,"  ars'  an  righ,  "  gum  faod  mi  tilleadh  dhachaidh,
nach  urrainn  mi  dol  a  choir  an  fhamhair  sin."  "Na  dean  sin,"  ars'
an  cU  ;  "  cha-n'  eagal  duit  a  righ,  cinn'idh  do  glinothuch  leat.  Cha-n
'f  haod  thu  bhi  so  gim  chadal."  "  Cha  leig  an  t-eagal  domh  cadal  's
gun  bhaiantas  orm."  "  Caidil  thus',"  ars'  an  cli,  "  's  barantachaidh
mis'  thu."  Leig  an  righ  e  fein  na  shineadh  taobh  an  teine  's  chaidil  e.
Nur  a  bhrisd  an  f  haire  thubhairt  an  cu  ris,  "  Eirich,"  a  riijh,  "  'us
gun  gabhadh  tlni  greim  bidh  a  neartaicheas  thu,  's  gum  bitheadh  thu
dol  air  do  thurus.  Nis,"  ars'  an  ch,  "  ma  thig  cruadhchas  no  cas  ort,
iarr  mo  ehuideachadh,  's  bithidh  mi  agad  a  thiotadh."  Dh'  f  hag  iad
beannachd  aig  a  cheile  's  dh'  fholbh  e.  An  am  an  athaidh 's  an
anmoich,  thhinig  e  gu  h-ailbhinu  mlior  creige,  agus  bha  cruthachadh
larach  gealbhain  ann.  Smaointich  e  gun  cruinneachadli  e  connadh,
's  gmi  cuireadh  e  air  teine.  Tliòisich  e  air  a  gharadh,  's  cha  b'  f  hada
bha  e  mar  so  'n  uair  a  thainig  seobhag  liatli  na  creige  glais'  air.
"  Ubh  !  iibh!"  ars'  ise,  "  b'  olc  diol  do  nihnatha  's  do  dha  each  an
rair  aig  an  fhamhair  mhbr."  "  Cha-n'  'eil  arach'  air,"  ar.s'
esan,  "  f  huair  mi  fein  mòran  d'  an  dragh  is  beagan  d'  an  iibhachd.
"Glac  misneach,"  ars'  ise,  "ghenbh  thu  rudeigiu  d'  an  abhachd
fhathasd.  Cha  n'  fhaod  thu  bhi  gun  bhiadh  an  so,"  ars'  ise.
"Cha-n'  'eil  seòl  air  biadh  fhaotainn  ars'  esan,"  "  Cha-u  fhada
bhitheas  sinn  a  faotainn  bidh."  Dh'  fholbh  i  's  cha  b-f hada  bha  i
n'  uair  a  thainig  i  's  tri  lachan  's  ochd  coilich  dhubha  'n  a  beul.  Chuir
iad  an  ordugh  am  biadh  's  ghabh  iad  e.  "  Cha-n  fhaod  thu  bhi  gun
chadal,  ars'  an  t-seobhag."  "  Demur  a  chaidleas  mi  gun  bharantas
'sam  bith  orm  gii  mo  dlùon  o  aou  olc  a  tha  'n  so  ?"  "  Caidil  thusa
righ,  's  barantachaidh  mis'  thu."  Leig  e  e  fe'in  'n  a  shineadh,  'a
chaidil  e.  Anns  a  mhaidinn  chuir  an  t-seobhag  air  a  chois  e.
Cruadhchas  no  chs  a  thig  ort,  cuimhnich  aig  am  sam  bith  gum  faigh
thu  mo  chuideachadhsa.  Dh'  fholbh  e  gu  dian,  foghainteach  luath,
laidir.  Bha  'n  latha  folbh  's  an  oidhche  tighinn,  's  eunlaith  bheaga
na  coille  craobhaich,  dosraiche,  dualaich,  a'  gabhail  ma  bhun  nam
preas  's  ma  bharr  nan  dos;  's  mu  bha,  cha  bu  tamh  's  cha  bu  chlos
dasan  e,  gus  an  d'  thhinig  e  gu  taobh  aimbne  nihòr  a  bha  sin,  agus
ai-,'  bruach  na  h-aimhne  bha  crutliachadh  larach  gealbhain.  Sheid
an  righ  srachdauach  trora  teine.  Cha  b'-f  haiia  bha  e  'n  so  'n  uair  a
thainig  ann  an  companas  ris  doran  donii  na  h-aimhue.  "  Och,"  ars'
an  doran,  "  b'-olc  diol  do  mhnaiha  'n  so  an  rair  aig  an  fhamhair."
"  Cha-n  'eil  arach'  air,  f  huair  mise  mòran  d'  an  dragh  is  beagan
d'  an  abhachd."  "  Glac  misneach,  fo  mheadhon  latha  mUirearh  clù
thu  do  bliean.     A  righ,  cha  "n  f  liaod  thu  bhi  gun  bhiadh,"  ars'  an


RICH  OG  EASAIDH  RUAGIl.  I  7

doran.  "Demur  a  gheibhear  biadh  an  so,"  ars"  an  righ.  Dh
f  holbh  an  doran  feadh  na  h-abhann,  's  thainig  e  's  tri  bradain  leis
a  bba  ciatacb.  Kinn  iad  biadh  is  ghabh  lad  e.  Thuirt  an  doran
ris  an  righ,  "  feumaidh  tu  cadal."  "  Demur  a  cbaidleas  mi  's  gun
bharantachadh  sam  bith  orm  ?"  "  Caidil  thusa  's  barantachaidh  mis'
thu  an  nochd."  Cbaidil  an  righ.  Anns  a  mhaduinn,  thuirt  an
doran  ris,  bithidh  thu  an  nochd  an  lathair  do  mhnatha.  Dh'  f  hag
e  beannacbd  aig  an  doran.  "Nis,"  ars'  an  doran,  "ma  bhitheas
càs  ort,  iarr  mo  chuideachadh-sa,  's  gheobb  thu  e."  Dh  'f  holbh  an  righ
gus  an  d'  rainig  e  creag,  's  dh'  amhairc  e  sios  ann  an  glomhas  a  bha
's  a  chreig,  's  aig  a  ghrunnd  chunnaic  e  a  bhean  agus  a  dliii  each,  's  cha
robh  fios  aige  demur  a  gheobheadh  e  far  an  robh  iad.  Ghabh  e  mu
'n  cuairt  gus  an  d'  thainig  e  gu  bun  na  creige,  's  bha  rathad  ciatach
a  dhol  a  stigh.  Chaidh  e  stigh,  "s  ma  chaidh,  's  ann  a  thoisich  is'  air
caoineadh.  "  Ud !  ud  !"  ars'  esan,  "  's  olc  so,  mi  fe'in  adh'  f  haotainn
na  h-uibhir  de  dhragh  a  tighinn  ma  d'  thuaiream,  ma  's  ann  a  caoin-
eadh a  tha  thu  nis."  "  U,"  arsa  na  h-eich,  "  cuir  thus'  air'  ur  beul-
thaobh-ne  e,  's  cha-n  eagal  da  gus  am  fag  sinne  so."  Rinn  i  biadh  da,
's  chuir  i  air  dòigh  e,  's  'n  uair  a  bha  iad  treis  comhla  chuir  i  air
beulthaobh  nan  each  e.     'N  uair  a  thainig  am  famhair  thubhairt  e,

"  THA  BOLADH  AN  FHARBHALAICH  A  STIGH.    Ars'  ise,  "  M'  ullaidh,  is

m'aighear,  is  m"  f  heudail,  cha-n'  eil  ann  ach  boladh  a  bhalaidh  bhreuna
de  na  h-eachaibh."  An  ceann  treis  chaidh  e  'thoirt  b'ldh  do  na  h-eich,
"s  thoisich  na  h-eich  air,  's  cha  mhòr  nach  do  mharbh  iad  e,  's  cha
d'  rinn  e  ach  sn'agan  air  eigin  uatha.  "  Ghr'aidh,"  ars'  ise,  "  tha
iad  a  brath  do  mharbhadh."  "  Na'm  b'  ann  agara  fein  a  bhitheadh
m'  anam  g'a  ghleidheadh  's  f  had'  o'n  a  mharbh  iad  mi,"  ars'  esan.
"  C  ait'  a  ghraidh  am  bheil  d'  anam  an  leòbhra,  gabhaidh  mise  cùram
deth."'  "  Tha  e,"  ars'  esan,  "  ann  an  clach  nam  bonnach."  Nur
a  dh"  f  Lolbh  esan  an  la'r  na  mh'aireach,  chuir  ise  an  òrdugh  clach
nam  bonnach  gu  fuathasach.  An  am  an  athaidh  's  an  anmoich
thainig  am  famhair  a  stigh.  Chuir  ise  a  fear  air  beulthaobh  nan
each.  Chaidh  am  fomhair  a  thoirt  bidh  do  na  h-eich,  's  leadair  iad  e
na  bu  mhotha  's  na  bu  mhotha.  "  Ciod  e  'thug  ort  clach  nam  bon-
nach a  chur  an  ordugh  mur  sin?"  ars'  esan.  "  Chionn  gu  bheil  d'
anam  innte."  "  Tha  mi  'g  aithneachadh  nam  bitheadh  fios  agad  c'
aite  'bheil  m'  anam,  gun  d'  thugadh  thu  taire  mhaith  dhk."  "  Bheir-
eadh.''  "  Cha-n  ann  an  sin  a  tha  m'anam  's  ann  a  tha  e  'sa  stars-
aich."'  Chuir  ise  an  ordugh  an  starsach  gu  gasd'  an  la  "r  na  mhair-
each.  Nut  a  thill  am  famhair  chaidh  e  thoirt  bidh  do  na  h-eich,  's
leadair  na  h-eich  e  na  bu  mhotha  's  na  bu  mhotha.  "  De'  'thug  ort
an  starsach  a  chuir  an  ordugh  mar  sud  ?  "    "  Chionn  gu  bheil  d'  anam


I  o  WEST  HIGHLA>T)  TALES.

iunte."  "  Tha  mi  'g  aithneachadh  na  'm  bitheadh  fios  agad  far  am
bheil  m'  anam  gun  gabhadh  thu  cliram  dheth."  "  Ghabhadh,"  ars'
ise.  "  Cha-n'  aun  an  sin  a  tha  m'  anam,  ars'  esan.  Tha  leac
mhòr  fo  'n  starsaich,  tha  molt  fo  'n  leachd,  tha  lach  'am  broinn  a
mhuilt,  agus  tha  ubh  am  broinn  na  lacha,  agus  's  ann  anns  an  ubh  a
tha  m'  anam.  'N  uair  a  dh'  f  holbh  am  famhair  an  la"r  na  mhaireach
thog  iad  an  leac,  's  a  mach  a  thug  am  molt.  Na  'm  bitheadh
agamsa  cli  seang  na  coill'  uaine,  cha  b'  f  had  'a  bhitheadh  e  'toirt  a'
mhuilt  a  m"  ionnsuidh.  Thainig  cii  seang  na  coiil'  uaine  ugus  am
molt  n  a  bheul.  'N  uair  a  dh'f  hosgail  iad  am  molt,  a  mach  a  bha  'n
lach  air  iteagach  leis  na  lachan  eile.  Na"m  bitheadh  agamsa  seobhag
liath  na  creige  glaise,  cha  b'  fhada'  bhitheadh  i  'toirt  na  lach  a  m'
ionnsuidh.  Thainig  seobhag  liath  na  creige  glaise  's  an  lach  'n  a  beul.
'N  uair  a  sgoilt  iad  an  lach  a  thoirt  na  uibhe  a  'broinn,  mach  a  ghabh
an  t-ubh  ann  an  doimhneachd  a  chuain.  Na'm  bitheadh  agamsa
doran  donn  na  h-amhaun,  cha  b'f  hada  bhitheadh  i  'toirt  a  m'  ionn-
suidh na  uibhe.  Thainig  an  doran  donn  's  an  t-ubh  na  beul,  "s  rug  a
bhanrigh  air  an  ubh 's  phronn  i  eadar  a  da  laimh  e.  Bha  'm  famhair
a  tighinn  anns  an  athamanaclid,  's  'n  uair  a  phronn  ise  'n  t-ubh  thuit  e
SÌOS  marbh,  's  cha  do  charaich  e  as  a  sin  f  hathasd.  Thug  iad  moran
leo  de  dh'  or  's  de  dh'  airgeid.  Chuir  iad  oidhche  shunndach  seachad
aig  doran  domi  na  h-abhann,  oidhch'  aig  seobhag  liath  na  creige
glaise,  agus  oidhch'  aig  cii  seang  na  coill'  uaine.  Thainig  iad  dach-
aidh  's  chuir  iad  an  òrdugh  cuirm  chridheil,  's  bha  iad  gu  sona,
toilichte  'n  a  dhe'igh  sin.

2.  I  have  another  version  of  this  tale,  written  by  Hector
I'rquhart,  told  by  John  Campbell,  living  at  Strath  Gairloch,
Koss-shire,  received  June  27,  1859.  It  is  very  well  told.  It
varies  a  little  from  the  Islay  version,  but  the  resemblance  is  so
close,  that  to  print  it  entire  would  be  repetition.  It  contains
many  characteristic  phrases  which  the  other  has  not  got,  so  I
give  this  abstract.     The  Gaelic  is  as  it  came  to  me.

The  "Sgedlacud"  of  the  Widow's  Son. — There  was  once
a  widow's  son,  and  he  was  often  stalking  (sealg).  On  a  day  of
days  and  he  stalking,  he  "  sits  "  at  the  back  of  a  knoll,  before
the  sun  and  bemnd  the  wind  (ri  agiiaidh  gbeine  's  ri  cul  na
gaoithe),  and  there  came  the  way  a  youth,  like  a  picture  (oganach
dealbhanach),  riding  a  blue  filly  (failoue  gorm),  and  he  sits
beside  him.  They  played  at  cards,  and  the  widow's  son  won,
and  when  evening  came  the  youth  said,  "  "What  is  the  stake  of


THE  YOUXG  KING  OF  EASAIDH  EUADH.  I  9

thy  gaming?"  (ce  dhe  buidh  do  chluiche?)  and  be  said,  "the
blue  filly  under  thee."  He  took  her  home,  and  she  changed  into
the  finest  woman  that  man  ever  saw.  Next  day  he  went  stalk-
ing, and  on  coming  home  in  the  mouth  of  night  (am  beol  na
oidche),  he  learned  that  the  big  giant  had  taken  away  his  sweet-
heart— CHA  NEIL  COMAS  AIR  AS  EISE   ACH   NA   BO  MHISE  BO  TEEASA

CHA  MHEALLADH  EISE  FAD  I.  "  There  is  no  help  for  it,"  said  he,
"  but  were  I  the  stronger,  he  would  not  allure  her  far."

Dh'  ERICH  MAC  NA  BANNTRiCH.     The  widow's  son  arosc,  's

CHAIDH  C  NA  CHKIOSIBH   lALLA  s'  NA  lALLA  GAISGICH,  and  he  Went

into  his  belts  of  thongs  and  his  thongs  of  warrior,  's  dh'fhalbh

E    LE    CECMANIBH  GU  TUISLEAG  DOMH   MHEANMNACH,  and   he  weut

with  leaping  strides,  cheerful  to  me  (or  ?  Doimhainneaclid — of
deepness)  s'  dheanadh  e  mile  tiioran  na  sleibu  leis  na  h  tjille
CEUM  A  dheanadh  e,  and  he  would  make  a  thousand  knolls  of
the  hill  with  every  step  he  made,  s'  b'  fhear  dha  namhaid  a
sheachanadh  na  tachairt  an  latha  sin  eis,  and  his  foe  had
better  avoid  him  than  meet  that  day  with  him.  He  saw  a  Httle  hut
"in  the  moulh  of  night,"  and  though  far  away,  not  long  to  reach
it.  Air  a  thubhadh  le  iteagan  garbha  nan  edn  a  muigh  s  le
iTEAGAN  MINE  NAN  EON  A  STEACH,  thatched  with  coarse  feathers
of  the  birds  without,  and  with  fine  feathers  of  the  birds  within,

AGUS  RUITHAG   AN    T   UBHAL  BHON   DARNA  CEAN   DHON  A  CHIN  EILE

LE  CHO  COMHRAD  s'a  bha  e,  and  the  apple  would  run  from  one
end  to  the  other  end,  so  even  it  was.  He  went  in  and  found  no
man,  but  two  great  fires  on  the  fire-place  (chagailt)  on  the  floor.
SuiL  DA  DUG  E,  glance  that  he  gave  he  saw  a  falcon  coming  in
with  a  heath  hen  in  her  claws,  and  the  nest  glance  it  was,  gille
BRiAGH  buidh,  a  braw  yellow  lad,  who  spoke  as  in  the  Islay
version,  entertained  him  and  told  him  in  the  morning  to  call  on
Seabhag  SUIL  ghorm  ghlenna  feist — the  blue-eyed  falcon  of
Glen  Feist.  Next  day  it  was  the  same,  and  he  came,  air  ciaeadh
DON  fheisgar,  at  the  turning-dun  of  the  evening,  to  a  second
hut,  thatched  like  the  other,  s'  bha  snathnean  beag  suarach
sioDA  cuMAiL  DION  A  DHROMA  EIS,  and  there  was  a  little  sorry
silken  thread,  keeping  the  thatch  of  its  back  on.  Dobhean  donn,
otter  brown,  came  in  with  a  salmon,  and  became  a  man,  and
spoke  as  the  other,  and  told  him  in  the  morning  to  call  on  dobh-
ean DONN  SRUTH  AN  t'  shiul — Brown  otter  of  sail  stream.     The


20  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

third  day  was  the  same,  the  hut  was  the  same,  hut  that  there  were
two  great  fires  on  each  fire-place,  and  there  came  in,  madadh  mor,
big  dog,  with  a  hare  by  the  throat,  who  became  the  finest  man,  aie
AN  DUG  E  ROSK  KiAMH,  he  ever  turned  face  to ;  who  said  as  the  others
did — "  It  was  late  when  the  big  giant  went  past  with  thy  sweet-
heart on  his  shoulder."  At  parting,  he  told  him  to  call  on  madadh
GLAS  DRiOM  AN  T-SHLEiBHE — grey  dog  of  mountain  back  in  time
of  need.  That  night  he  saw,  Tigh  mor  geal  an  an  gleann  fada
FAisiCH,  a  big  white  house  in  a  long  desert  glen,  and  saw  his
sweetheart  with  a  golden  comb  in  her  hand,  and  she  would  take
a  while  at  combing  her  hair,  and  a  while  at  weeping,  and  when
she  saw  him  she  said — "  My  pity,  what  brought  thee  here  ?  the
giant  will  kill  thee."  "Two  shares  of  fear  on  him,  and  the
smallest  share  on  me,"  said  the  widow's  son.

She  had  laid  it  as  crosses  and  as  spells  on  the  giant,  not  to
come  near  her  for  a  day  and  a  year,  and  they  were  together  in
the  giant's  house  till  evening.

She  hid  him,  and  had  a  long  talk  with  the  giant  when  he
came  home,  who  was  wheedled,  as  in  the  other  story,  into  telling
first  that  his  life  (betha)  was  in  (carn  glas  ud  thall)  yonder  grey
cairn.  The  lady  was  addressed  as  Xighinn  righ  choige  mugh —
O  daughter  of  king  of  coige  mcgh,  which  kingdom  is  not  within
my  geographical  studies.

The  giant  came  home,  and  found  the  grey  cairn  dressed  out
and  ornamented,  and  after  a  deal  of  persuasion,  gave  out  that  his
life  was  in  seann  stoc  darrich — an  old  oak  stump  on  the  bank
of  yonder  river.  So  the  next  day  that  was  dressed  out,  and  when
he  came  home  he  said,  "  Do  thou  make  the  stock  braw,  briagh,
every  day.  On  the  third  day  they  split  the  oak  stump  with  an
axe,  and  a  hare  leaped  out.  "  There  now  is  the  giant's  life
away,"  said  the  king's  daughter,  "  and  he  will  come  without
delay  and  kill  thee,  and  not  spare  me."  Grey  dog  of  mountain
back  was  called,  and  brought  the  hare,  and  a  salmon  leaped  out
into  the  river.  Brown  otter  of  sail  stream  brought  the  salmon,
and  a  heath  hen  sprang  out.  Blue-eyed  falcon  of  Glen  Feist
brought  the  bird,  and  the  giant  came  roaring — "  King's  daughter,
Jet  me  have  my  life  and  thou  shalt  have  the  little  chest  of  gold
and  the  little  chest  of  silver  that  is  in  yonder  grey  cairn."  The
widow's  son  answered,  "  I  will  have  that,  and  I  will  have  this  ; "


THE  YOUNG  KIXG  OP  EASAIDH  RUADH.  2  1

and  he  seized  the  axe,  and  the  stock  fell,  and  the  giant  was  dead.
And  the  widow's  son  and  the  daughter  of  King  Coige  Mugh,  in
Erin,  staid  in  the  house  and  the  land  of  the  giant,  and  their  race
were  there  when  I  was  there  last.

The  warrior's  dress  of  thongs  is  remarkahle,  and  something
like  it  is  described  in  another  tale.  There  is  a  curious  picture
at  Taymouth  of  a  man,  supposed  to  be  the  Regent  Murray,  in  a
Highland  dress,  which  may  be  the  dress  described.  The  upper
part  is  composed  of  strips  of  some  ornamented  material,  which
might  be  stamped  gilded  leather ;  the  rest  of  the  dress  is  a  linen
shirt,  with  ruffles,  and  a  plaid  wrapped  about  the  body  in  the
form  of  a  modern  kilt,  and  belted  plaid  ;  he  wears  stockings  and
shoes  of  a  peculiar  pattern :  the  head-dress  is  a  bonnet  with  an
ostrich  plume ;  the  ai-ms,  a  dirk  and  a  long  ornamented  gun.

There  is  another  picture  at  Dytchley,  in  Oxfordshire,  which
represents  an  ancestor  of  Lord  Dillon  in  an  Irish  costume.  The
dress  consists  solely  of  a  very  short  garment  like  a  shirt,  coloured,
and  very  much  ornamented  with  tags,  which  might  be  leather.
The  gentleman  is  armed  with  a  spear,  and  the  dress  is  probably
a  masquerade  representation  of  a  real  Irish  dress  of  some  period.

I  would  here  remark  that  the  personages  and  places  in  all
these  tales  are  like  the  actors  in  a  play  and  the  scenes.  The
incidents  vary  but  little,  but  the  kings  and  their  countries  vary
with  every  version,  though  there  is  a  preference  for  Erin,  Ireland ;
Lochlain,  Scandinavia,  or  rather  Denmark  and  Norway ;  and
Greuge,  the  Greekdom,  Greece.

3.  I  have  a  third  version  of  this  written  by  MacLean,  told
by  John  MacPhie,  in  South  Uist.  The  old  man  was  very  proud
of  it,  and  said  it  was  "the  hardest"  story  that  the  transcriber
had  ever  heard.     He  told  me  the  same.

As  often  happens  with  aged  reciters,  when  he  repeated  it  a
second  time  slowly  for  transcribing,  nearly  all  the  curious,  "im-
passioned, and  sentimental"  language  was  left  out.  This  is
SlacLean's  account,  and  it  entirely  agrees  with  my  own  expe-
rience of  this  man,  who  is  next  thing  to  a  professional  reciter  (see
introduction).  This  version  is  the  most  cui-ious  of  the  three.  I
hope  some  day  to  get  it  better  copied,  so  I  do  not  abstract  it  now


2  2  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

It  is  nearer  the  Eoss-shire  version  than  the  Islay  story,  and  carries
the  scene  to  Greece  from  Ireland.  The  reciter  is  79,  and  says
he  learned  it  in  his  youth  from  an  old  man  of  the  name  of  John
MacDonald,  Aird  a  Mhachair.

The  principle  on  which  gaming  is  carried  on  in  this  and  in
other  tales  is  peculiar.  The  stake  is  rather  a  ransom,  for  it  is
always  settled  after  the  game  is  decided.

The  game  played  is  taileash,  which  Armstrong  translates  as,
sport,  game,  mirth,  chess,  backgammon,  draughts.

This  story  resembles  in  some  particulars —

1.  The  Gaelic  tale  published  by  Dr.  MacLeod,  printed  page

30,  Leobhar  Nan  Cnoc.     1834.

2.  The  Sea  Maiden,  in  present  collection,  and  the  stories
referred  to  in  the  notes.

3.  The  Giant  who  had  no  Heart  in  his  Body.     Norse  Tales.

1859.

4.  The  Seven  Foals,  where  a  horse  advises  his  rider.     Norse

Tales.

5.  Dapplegrim,  where  the  same  occurs,  where  there  are  two

horses,  and  where  the  rider  hides  about  the  horses.  Norse
Tales.

6.  Fortunio,  where  the  horse  also  advises  his  rider.

7.  This  also  resembles  a  part  of  the  "Arabian  Nights,''  where

the  Calender  is  changed  into  a  monkey,  and  the  princess
fights  a  genius  in  various  shapes.

8.  "  The  Ball  of  Crystal,"   Grimm,  where  the  power  of  an

enchanter  is  in  a  crystal  hill,  in  an  egg,  in  a  fiery  bird,  in
a  wild  ox.

9.  The  Three  Sisters,  page  52,  where  a  little  key  is  found

in  an  egg,  in  a  duck,  in  a  bull.  This  book  is  an
English  translation  (1845)  of  Yolks  Miirchen,  by  Musaeus,
1782.  Said  to  have  been  published  in  English  in
1790.
10.  Another  version  of  the  Sea  Maiden  recited  to  me  in  South
Uist.  The  soul  of  the  Sea  Maiden  was  in  an  egg,  in  a
goose,  in  a  ram,  in  a  wild  hull,  and  was  got  by  the  help
of  aw  otter,  a  falcon,  a  v:olf,  and  a  lion.


THE  YOUNG  KING  OF  EASAIDH  RUADH.  23

Lempriere — jEgyptus — Kneph  or  Knouphis — A  God,  repre-
sented as  a  i-am.  He  was  the  soul  of  the  world  ;  his  symbol  a
circle,  in  the  centre  of  which  is  a  serpent  with  the  head  of  a  hawk,
or  a  globe  with  a  serpent  turned  round  it.  Together  with  mind,
the  primitive  matter  was  given,  both  produced  from  the  same  great
principle,  existing  in  it  from  all  eternity,  imperishable.  The
primitive  matter  was  rude  and  shapeless  when  the  spirit  imparted
to  it  the  power  of  motion,  and  gave  it  the  form  of  a  sphere.  This
became  the  sphere  or  egg  of  the  world  which  Kneph  let  fall  from
ids  mouth  when  he  wished  to  form  all  things.

It  is  warmly  contended  by  Irish  writers  that  the  religion  of
the  Celts,  and  the  Celts  themselves,  came  from  Phoenicia  and
Carthage.

If  this  story  be  mythological,  here  is  something  like  it.

We  have  the  hawJc,  ram,  and  a  bird;  and  in  the  In verary  ver-
sion we  have  a,  fish  and  the  egg,  with  the  life  of  bird,  beast,  fish,
and  man  in  it.

There  is  in  a  place  called  Loh  Marien-lcer,  in  Morbihan,  Brit-
tany, a  long,  dark,  undergronnd  passage,  at  the  end  of  which  are
certain  rudely  sculptured  stones.  On  one  of  these  is  something
which  bears  some  faint  resemblance  to  the  snake,  who  appears  in
the  next  tale.

There  is  one  word  in  this  tale,  "  Seang,"  which  is  not  given
in  dictionaries  as  a  substantive.  Sing,  applied  to  an  Indian
prince,  means  lion,  and  the  beast  here  described  might  be  one.
Seang,  as  an  adjective,  means  thin,  slim,  slender,  gaunt,  and  is
the  root  of  Seavgan,  an  ant.

In  Prichard's  "  Celtic  Nations,"  by  Latham,  1856,  a  Dacota
word  is  quoted — "  Songka,  which  originally  comprehended  the
idea  of  Dog,  Fox,  and  Wolf.

The  word  Grdagach,  which  here  means  some  male  person-
age, generally  means  a  maiden.  It  also  means  "  A  female  spectre
of  the  class  of  Brownies  to  which  the  Highland  dairy-maids  made
frequent  libations  of  milk — rarely  the  chief  of  a  place." —
Armstrong  die.  This  word,  which  has  not  its  common  mean-
ing, may  help  to  trace  the  language.  The  root  is  Gkuag,  the
hair  of  the  head.

A  Gruagach  used  to  haunt  Skipness  Castle,  and  is  still  re-


2  4  WEST  BIGHLAXD  TALES.

membered  there  as  a  supernatural  female  who  did  odd  jobs  about
the  house  for  the  maids,  and  lived  in  the  ruin.

"  There  was  also  a  Gruagach  in  Kerrisdale,  in  Gairloch,  in
Eoss-shire,  once  upon  a  time."

This  may  be  the  same  word  as  Groac'h  or  G'rath,  a  name
given  to  the  Druidesses,  who  had  colleges  in  an  island  near  the
coasts  of  Brittany  (p.  155,  vol.  i.,  Foyer  Breton).  The  story
given  has  many  incidents  common  to  the  Gaelic  stories.

The  sword  of  light  is  common  in  Gaelic  stories  ;  and,  stripped
of  supernatural  qualities,  the  whole  thing  seems  very  like  an
account  of  some  race  contending  with  another,  whose  chief  wore
long  hair,  who  had  horses  and  bright  (?  steel)  swords,  to  which
extraordinary  virtues  were  attributed,  and  who  were  at  the  same
time  beset  by  savages  who  lived  in  caves,  and  were  assisted  by
other  savages  represented  by  creatures.


II.

THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  BIEDS.

From  John  Mackenzie,  fisherman,  near  Inverarj.

rpHEEE  was  once  a  time  when  every  creature  and  bird
-■-  was  gathering  to  battle.  The  son  of  the  king  of
Tethertown*  said,  that  he  would  go  to  see  the  battle,  and
that  he  would  bring  sure  word  home  to  his  father  the
king,  who  would  be  king  of  the  creatures  this  year.
The  battle  was  over  before  he  arrived  all  but  one
(fight),  between  a  great  black  raven  and  a  snake,  and
it  seemed  as  if  the  snake  would  get  the  victory  over
the  raveu.  When  the  king's  son  saw  this,  he  helped
the  raven,  and  with  one  blow  takes  the  head  off  the  snake.
"When  the  raven  had  taken  breath,  and  saw  that  the
snake  was  dead,  he  said,  "  For  thy  kindness  to  me
this  day,  I  will  give  thee  a  sight.  Come  up  now  on
the  root  of  my  two  wings."  The  king's  son  mounted
upon  the  raven,  and,  before  he  stopped,  he  took  him
over  seven  Bens,  and  seven  Glens,  and  seven  Mountain
Moors.

"  Now,"  said  the  raven,  "  seest  thou  that  house
yonder  ?  Go  now  to  it.  It  is  a  sister  of  mine  that
makes  her  dwelling  in  it ;  and  I  mil  go  bail  that  thou
art  welcome.  And  if  she  asks  thee,  Wert  thou  at  the
battle  of  the  birds  ?  say  thou  that  thou  wert.  And  if
she  asks,  Didst  thou  see  my  likeness  ?  say  that  thou

*  Na  cathair  t'sheamain.     Heather  roiJes  are  used  for  binding
thatch  on  Highland  cottages.


26


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


sawest  it.  But  be  sure  that  tliou  meetest  me  to-morrow
morning  here,  in  this  place."  The  king's  son  got  good
and  right  good  treatment  tliis  night.  Meat  of  each
meat,  drink  of  each  drink,  warm  water  to  his  feet,  and
a  soft  bed  for  his  limbs.

On  the  next  day  the  raven  gave  him  the  same  sight
over  seven  Bens,  and  seven  Glens,  and  seven  Mountain
moors.  They  saw  a  bothy  far  off,  but,  though  far  off,
they  were  soon  there.  He  got  good  treatment  this
night,  as  before — plenty  of  meat  and  drink,  and  warm
water  to  his  feet,  and  a  soft  bed  to  his  limbs — and  on
the  next  day  it  was  the  same  thing.

On  the  third  morning,  instead  of  seeing  the  raven
as  at  the  other  times,  who  should  meet  him  but  the
handsomest  lad  he  ever  saw,  Avith  a  bundle  in  his
hand.  The  king's  son  asked  this  lad  if  he  had  seen  a
big  black  raven.  Said  the  lad  to  him,  "  Thou  wdlt
never  see  the  raven  again,  for  I  am  that  raven.  I  was
put  under  spells  ;  it  was  meeting  thee  that  loosed  me,
and  for  that  thou  art  getting  this  bundle.  Now,"
said  the  lad,  "  thou  wilt  turn  back  on  the  self-same
steps,  and  thou  wilt  lie  a  night  in  each  house,  as  thou
wert  l^efore  ;  but  thy  lot  is  not  to  lose  the  bundle
which  I  gave  thee,  till  thou  art  in  the  place  where  thou
wouldst  most  wish  to  dwell."

The  king's  son  turned  liis  back  to  the  lad,  and  his
face  to  his  father's  house ;  and  he  got  lodging  from
the  raven's  sisters,  just  as  he  got  it  when  going
forward.  When  he  was  nearing  his  father's  house  he
was  going  through  a  close  wood.  It  seemed  to  him
that  the  bundle  was  gro-\\ing  lieavj^,  and  he  thought  he
would  look  what  was  in  it.

\\nien  he  loosed  the  bundle,  it  was  not  without
astonishing  himseK.  In  a  twinkling  he  sees  the  very
grandest  place  he  ever  saw.      A  great  castle,  and  an


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  BIRDS.  27

orchard  about  the  castle,  in  which  was  every  kind  of
fruit  and  herb.  He  stood  full  of  wonder  and  regret
for  having  loosed  the  bundle — it  was  not  in  his  power
to  put  it  back  agaia — and  he  would  have  wished  this
pretty  place  to  be  in  the  pretty  httle  green  hollow  that
was  opposite  his  father's  house  ;  but,  at  one  glance,
he  sees  a  great  giant  coming  towards  liim.

"  Bad's  the  place  where  thou  hast  built  thy  house,
king's  son,"  says  the  giant.  "  Yes,  but  it  is  not  here
I  would  wish  it  to  be,  though  it  happened  to  be  here
by  mishap,"  says  the  king's  son.  "  What's  the  reward
thou  wouldst  give  me  for  putting  it  back  in  the  bundle
as  it  was  before?"  "What's  the  reward  thou  wouldst
ask  f  says  the  king's  son.  "  K  thou  wilt  give  me  the
first  son  thou  hast  when  he  is  seven  years  of  age,"  says
the  giant.  "  Thou  wilt  get  that  if  I  have  a  son,"  said
the  king's  son.

In  a  twinkling  the  giant  put  each  garden,  and
orchard,  and  castle  in  the  bundle  as  they  were  before.
"  Now,"  says  the  giant,  "  take  thou  thine  own  road,
and  I  will  take  my  road  ;  but  mind  thy  promise,  and
though  thou  shouldst  forget,  I  will  remember."

The  king's  son  took  to  the  road,  and  at  the  end  of
a  few  days  he  reached  the  place  he  was  fondest  of.
He  loosed  the  bundle,  and  the  same  place  was  just  as
it  was  before.  And  when  he  opened  the  castle-door
he  sees  the  handsomest  maiden  he  ever  cast  eye  upon.
"  Advance,  Idng's  son,"  said  the  pretty  maid  ;  "  every-
tliing  is  in  order  for  thee,  if  thou  wilt  marry  me  this
very  night."  "  It's  I  am  the  man  that  is  wilhng,"  said
the  king's  son.     And  on  that  same  night  they  married.

But  at  the  end  of  a  day  and  seven  years,  what
great  man  is  seen  coming  to  the  castle  but  the  giant.
The  king's  son  minded  his  promise  to  the  giant,  and
till  now  he  had  not  told  his  promise  to  the  queen.


2  8  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  Leave  thou  (the  matter)  between  me  and  the  giant,"
says  the  queen.

"  Turn  out  thy  son,"  says  the  giant ;  "  mind  your
promise."  "  Thou  wilt  get  that,"  says  the  king,  "  -when
his  mother  puts  liim  in  order  for  his  journey."  The
queen  arrayed  the  cook's  son,  and  she  gave  him  to  the
giant  by  the  hand.  The  giant  went  away  with  liim  ;
but  he  had  not  gone  far  when  he  put  a  rod  in  the  hand
of  the  little  laddie.  The  giant  asked  him — "  If  thy
father  had  that  rod  what  would  he  do  with  it  ? "  "If
my  father  liad  that  rod  he  would  beat  the  dogs  and  the
cats,  if  they  would  be  going  near  the  king's  meat,"  said
the  httle  laddie.  "Thou'rt  the  cook's  son,"  said  the
giant.  He  catches  him  by  the  two  small  ankles  and
knocks  him — "  Sgleog  " — against  the  stone  that  was
beside  him.  The  giant  turned  back  to  the  castle  in  rage
and  madness,  and  he  said  that  if  they  did  not  turn  out
the  king's  son  to  him,  the  highest  stone  of  the  castle
would  be  the  lowest.  Said  the  queen  to  the  king,
''  we'll  try  it  yet ;  the  butler's  son  is  of  the  same  age
as  our  son."  She  arrayed  the  butler's  son,  and  she
gives  him  to  the  giant  by  the  hand.  The  giant  had
not  gone  far  when  he  put  the  rod  in  his  hand.  "  If
thy  father  had  that  rod,"  says  the  giant,  "  what  would
he  would  do  with  it  ? "  "  He  would  beat  the  dogs  and
the  cats  Avhen  tliey  would  be  coming  near  the  king's
bottles  and  glasses."  "  Thou  art  the  son  of  the  butler,"
says  the  giant,  and  dashed  liis  brains  out  too.  The
giant  returned  in  very  great  rage  and  anger.  The
earth  shook  imder  the  sole  of  his  feet,  and  the  castle
shook  and  aU  that  was  in  it.  "  Out  here  thy  Son,"
says  the  giant,  "or  in  a  twinkling  the  stone  that  is
highest  in  the  dwelling  will  be  the  lowest."  So  needs
must  they  had  to  give  the  king's  son  to  the  giant.

The  "iant  took   him  to  his  own  house,  and   he


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  BIRDS.  29

reared  Mm  as  his  own  son.  On  a  day  of  days  wlien
the  giant  was  from  home,  the  lad  heard  the  sweetest
music  he  ever  heard  in  a  room  at  the  top  of  the  giant's
house.  At  a  glance  he  saw  the  finest  face  he  had  ever
seen.  She  beckoned  to  him  to  come  a  bit  nearer  to
her,  and  she  told  him  to  go  this  time,  but  to  be  sure
to  be  at  the  same  place  about  that  dead  midnight.

And  as  he  promised  he  did.  The  giant's  daughter
was  at  his  side  in  a  twinkhng,  and  she  said,  "  To-
morrow thou  wilt  get  the  choice  of  my  two  sisters  to
marry  ;  but  say  thou  that  thou  wilt  not  take  either,  but
me.  My  father  wants  me  to  marry  the  son  of  the
king  of  the  Green  City,  but  I  don't  like  him."  On  the
morrow  the  giant  took  out  his  three  daughters,  and  he
said,  "  Now,  son  of  the  king  of  Tethertown,  thou  hast
not  lost  by  Hving  with  me  so  long.  Thou  wilt  get  to
wife  one  of  the  two  eldest  of  my  daughters,  and  with
her  leave  to  go  home  vnth  her  the  day  after  the  wed-
ding." "K  thou  "wilt  give  me  this  pretty  little  one,"
says  the  king's  son,  "  I  will  take  thee  at  thy  word."

The  giant's  wrath  kindled,  and  he  said,  "  Before
thou  gett'st  her  thou  must  do  the  three  things  that  I
ask  thee  to  do."  "  Say  on,"  says  the  king's  son.  The
giant  took  him  to  the  byre.  "  Now,"  says  the  giant,
"  the  dung  of  the  hundred  cattle  is  here,  and  it  has
not  been  cleansed  for  seven  years.  I  am  going  from
home  to-day,  and  if  this  byre  is  not  cleaned  before
night  comes,  so  clean  that  a  golden  apple  will  run  from
end  to  end  of  it,  not  only  thou  shalt  not  get  my  daugh-
ter, but  'tis  a  drink  of  thy  blood  that  will  Cjuench  my
tliirst  this  night."  He  begins  cleaning  the  byi-e,  but
it  was  just  as  well  to  keep  bahng  the  great  ocean.
After  mid-day,  when  sweat  was  bhnding  him,  the
giant's  young  daughter  came  where  he  was,  and  she
said  to  him,   "Thou  art  being  punished,  king's  son."


30  "WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  I  am  that,"  says  the  king's  son.  "  Come  over,"
says  she,  "  and  lay  doivn  thy  weariness."  "  I  will  do
that,"  says  he,  "there  is  but  death  awaiting  me,  at
any  rate."  He  sat  down  near  her.  He  was  so  tired
that  he  fell  asleep  beside  her.  AYhen  he  awoke,  the
giant's  daughter  was  not  to  be  seen,  but  the  byi-e  was  so
well  cleaned  that  a  golden  apple  would  run  from  end  to
end  of  it.  In  comes  the  giant,  and  he  said,  "  Thou  hast
cleaned  the  byre,  king's  son  ?  "  "I  have  cleaned  it,"
says  he.  "  Somebody  cleaned  it,"  says  the  giant.  "  Thou
didst  not  clean  it,  at  all  events,"  said  the  king's  son.
"  Yes,  yes  ! "  says  the  giant,  "  since  thou  wert  so  active
to-day,  thou  wilt  get  to  this  time  to-morrow  to  thatch  this
byre  with  birds'  do^vn — birds  with  no  two  feathers  of
one  colour."  The  Idng's  son  was  on  foot  before  the  sun  ;
he  caught  up  liis  bow  and  liis  quiver  of  arrows  to
kill  the  birds.  He  took  to  the  moors,  but  if  he  did,
the  birds  were  not  so  easy  to  take.  He  was  running
after  them  till  the  sweat  was  bhnding  him.  About
mid-day  who  should  come  but  the  giant's  daughter.
"Thou  art  exhausting  thyself,  king's  son,"  says  she.
"  I  am,"  said  he.  "  There  fell  but  these  two  black-
birds, and  both  of  one  colour."  "  Come  over  and  lay
down  thy  weariness  on  this  pretty  liillock,"  says  the
giant's  daughter.  "  It 's  I  am  willing,"  said  he.  He
thought  she  would  aid  him  tliis  time,  too,  and  he  sat
down  near  her,  and  he  was  not  long  there  till  he  fell


When  he  awoke,  the  giant's  daughter  was  gone.
He  thought  he  would  go  back  to  the  house,  and  he  sees
the  byre  thatched  with  the  feathers.  When  the  giant
came  home,  he  said,  "  Thou  hast  thatched  the  byre,
king's  son  ? "  "  I  thatched  it,"  says  he.  "  Somebody
thatched  it,"  says  the  giant.  "  Thou  didst  not  thatch
it,"  says  the  king's  son.      "  Yes,  yes  ! "  says  the  giant.


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  BIRDS.  3  I

"  iN'ow,"  says  the  giant,  "  there  is  a  fir-tree  beside  that
loch  down  there,  and  there  is  a  magpie's  nest  in  its
top.  The  eggs  thou  wilt  find  in  the  nest.  I  must
liavc  them  for  my  first  meal.  Not  one  must  be
burst  or  broken,  and  there  are  five  in  the  nest."  Early
in  the  morning  the  king's  son  went  where  the  tree
was,  and  that  tree  was  not  hard  to  hit  upon.  Its
match  was  not  in  the  whole  wood.  From  the  foot  to
the  first  branch  was  five  hundred  feet.  The  king's
son  was  going  all  round  the  tree.  She  came  who  was
always  bringing  help  to  him.  "  Thou  art  losing  the
skin  of  thy  hands  and  feet."  "  Ach  !  I  am,"  says  he.
"  I  am  no  sooner  up  than  down."  "  This  is  no  time
for  stopping,"  says  the  giant's  daughter.  She  thrust
finger  after  finger  into  the  tree,  till  she  made  a  ladder
for  the  king's  son  to  go  up  to  the  magpie's  nest.
When  he  was  at  the  nest,  she  said,  "  Make  haste  now
■\\dth  the  eggs,  for  my  father's  breath  is  burning  my
back."  In  his  hurry  she  left  her  little  finger  in  the  top
of  the  tree.  "  Now,"  says  she,  "  thou  wilt  go  home  with
the  eggs  quickly,  and  thou  wilt  get  me  to  marry  to-
night if  thou  canst  know  me.  I  and  my  two  sisters
will  be  arrayed  in  the  same  garments,  and  made  hke
each  other,  but  look  at  me  when  my  father  says,  Go
to  thy  wife,  Idng's  son ;  and  thou  wilt  see  a  hand
without  a  little  finger."  He  gave  the  eggs  to  the
giant.  "  Yes,  yes  !"  says  the  giant,  "  be  making  ready
for  thy  marriage."

Then  indeed  there  was  a  wedding,  and  it  axis  a
wedding  !  Giants  and  gentlemen,  and  the  son  of  the
king  of  the  Green  City  was  in  the  midst  of  them.
They  were  married,  and  the  dancing  began,  and  that
was  a  dance  !  The  giant's  house  was  shaking  from
top  to  bottom.  But  bed  time  came,  and  the  giant
said,  "It  is  time  for  thee  to  go  to  rest,   son  of  the


32  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

king  of  Tethertown ;  take  thy  bride  ivitli  thee  from
amidst  those."

She  put  out  the  hand  off  which  the  Httle  finger
was,  and  he  caught  her  by  the  hand.

"  Thou  hast  aimed  well  this  time  too ;  but  there
is  no  knowing  but  we  may  meet  thee  another  way,"
said  the  giant.

But  to  rest  they  went.  "  Now,"  says  she,  "  sleep
not,  or  else  thou  diest.  We  miist  fly  cjuick,  quick,
or  for  certain  my  father  will  kill  thee."

Out  they  went,  and  on  the  blue  gray  filly  in  the
stable  they  mounted.  "  Stop  a  while,"  says  she,  "  and
I  Avill  j)lay  a  trick  to  the  old  hero."  She  jumped  in,
and  cut  an  apple  into  nine  shares,  and  she  put  two  shares
at  the  head  of  the  bed,  and  two  shares  at  the  foot  of  the
bed,  and  two  shares  at  the  door  of  the  kitchen,  and  two
.shares  at  the  big  door,  and  one  outside  the  house.

The  giant  awoke  and  called,  "  Are  you  asleep  ? "
"  We  are  not  yet,"  said  the  apple  that  was  at  the  head
of  the  bed.  At  the  end  of  a  while  he  called  again.
"  We  are  not  yet,"  said  the  apple  that  was  at  the  foot
of  the  bed.  A  while  after  tliis  he  called  again.  "  We
are  not  yet,"  said  the  apple  at  the  kitchen  door.  The
giant  called  again.  The  apple  that  was  at  the  big  door
answered.  "  You  are  now  goiiig  f"i'  fi'om  ine,"  says  the
giant.  "We  are  not  yet,"  says  the  apple  that  was
outside  the  house.  "  You  are  flying,"  says  the  giant.
Tlie  giant  jumped  on  his  feet,  and  to  the  bed  he  went,
but  it  was  cold — empty.

"  My  own  daughter's  tricks  are  trying  me,"  said
the  giant.      "  Here's  after  them,"  says  he.

In  the  mouth  of  day,  the  giant's  daughter  said  that
her  father's  breath  was  burning  her  back.  "  Put  thy
hand,  quick,"  said  she,  "  in  the  ear  of  the  gray  filly,
and  whatever  thou  findest  in  it,  throw  it  behind  thee."


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  BIRDS.  33

"  There  is  a  twig  of  sloe  tree,"  said  he.  "  ThroAv  it
behind  thee,"  said  she.

No  sooner  did  he  that,  than  there  were  twenty
miles  of  black  thorn  wood,  so  thick  that  scarce  a  weasel
could  go  through  it.  The  giant  came  headlong,  and
there  he  is  fleecing  his  head  and  neck  in  the  thorns.

"  My  own  daughter's  tricks  are  here  as  before,"  said
the  giant ;  "  but  if  I  had  my  own  big  axe  and  wood  knife
here,  I  would  not  be  long  making  a  way  through  this."
He  went  home  for  the  big  axe  and  the  wood  knife,  and
sure  he  was  not  long  on  his  journey,  and  he  was  the
boy  behind  the  big  axe.  He  was  not  long  making  a
way  through  the  black  thorn.  "  I  ■will  leave  the  axe
and  the  wood  knife  here  till  I  return,"  says  he.  "  If
thou  leave  them,"  said  a  Hoodie*  that  was  in  a  tree,  "  we
will  steal  them."

"  You  "svill  do  that  same,"  says  the  giant,  "  but  I
will  set  them  home."  He  returned  and  left  them  at
the  house.  At  the  heat  of  day  the  giant's  daughter
felt  her  father's  breath  burning  her  back.

"  Put  thy  finger  in  the  filly's  ear,  and  throw  behind
thee  whatever  thou  findest  in  it."  He  got  a  spHnter  of
gray  stone,  and  in  a  twinkhng  there  were  twenty  miles,
by  breadth  and  height,  of  great  gray  rock  behind  them.
The  giant  came  full  pelt,  but  past  the  rock  he  coidd
not  go.

"  The  tricks  of  my  own  daughter  are  the  hardest
tilings  that  ever  met  me,"  says  the  giant ;  "  but  if  I
had  my  lever  and  my  mighty  mattock,  I  woidd  not  be
long  making  my  way  through  this  rock  also."  There
was  no  help  for  it,  but  to  turn  the  chase  for  them  ;
and  he  was  the  boy  to  spHt  the  stones.  He  was  not
long  making  a  road  through  the  rock.     "  I  "will  leave

*  The  principal  Gaelic  vowels  bear  some  resemblance  to  the
cawing  of  a  hoodie.     They  are  all  broad  A.
D


34  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

the  tools  here,  and  I  -will  return  no  more."  "  If  thou
leave  them,"  says  the  hoodie,  "we  -will  steal  them."
"  Do  that  if  thou  vnlt ;  there  is  no  time  to  go  back."
At  the  time  of  breaking  the  watch,  the  giant's  daughter
said  that  she  was  feehng  her  father's  breath  burning
her  back.  "  Look  in  the  filly's  ear,  king's  son,  or  else  we
are  lost."  He  did  so,  and  it  w^as  a  bladder  of  water
that  was  in  her  ear  this  time.  He  threw  it  beliind  him
and  there  waS  a  fresh- w'ater  loch,  twenty  miles  in  length
and  breadth,  behind  them.

The  giant  came  on,  but  with  the  speed  he  had  on
him,  he  was  in  the  middle  of  the  loch,  and  lie  went
under,  and  he  rose  no  more.

On  the  next  day  the  young  companions  were  come
in  sight  of  his  father's  house.  "  !N"ow,"  said  she,  "  my
father  is  drowned,  and  he  won't  trouble  us  any  more  ;
but  before  we  go  further,"  says  she,  "  go  thou  to  thy
father's  house,  and  tell  that  thou  hast  the  like  of  me  ;
but  this  is  thy  lot,  let  neither  man  nor  creature  kiss
thee,  for  if  thou  dost  thou  wdlt  not  remember  that
thou  hast  ever  seen  me."  Every  one  he  met  was
giving  him  welcome  and  luck,  and  he  charged  his  father
and  mother  not  to  kiss  him  ;  but  as  mishajD  w^as  to  be,
an  old  greyhound  was  in  and  she  knew  him,  and  jumped
up  to  liis  mouth,  and  after  that  he  thd  not  remember
the  giant's  daughter.

She  was  sitting  at  the  well's  side  as  he  left  her,  but
the  king's  son  was  not  coming.  In  the  mouth  of  night
she  climbed  up  into  a  tree  of  oak  that  was  beside  the
well,  and  she  lay  in  the  fork  of  the  tree  all  that  night.
A  shoemaker  had  a  house  near  the  well,  and  about
mid-day  on  the  morrow,  the  shoemaker  asked  his  wofe
to  go  for  a  drink  for  him  out  of  the  well.  When
the  shoemaker's  wife  reached  the  well,  and  when
she  saw  the  shadow  of  her  that  was  in  the  tree,  think-


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  BIRDS.  3  5

ing  of  it  that  it  was  her  own  shadow — and  she  never
thought  till  now  that  she  was  so  handsome — she  gave
a  cast  to  the  dish  that  was  in  her  hand,  and  it  was
broken  on  the  ground,  and  she  took  herself  to  the
house  without  vessel  or  water.

"  A^Tiere  is  the  water,  wife  ?"  said  the  shoemaker.
"  Thou  shambling,  contemptible  old  carle,  without
grace,  I  have  stayed  too  long  thy  water  and  wood
thraU."  *  "  I  am  thinldng,  wife,  that  thou  hast  turned
crazy.  Go  thou,  daughter,  quickly,  and  fetch  a  diink
for  thy  father."  His  daughter  went,  and  in  the  same
way  so  it  happened  to  her.  She  never  thought  till
now  that  she  was  so  loveable,  and  she  took  herself
home.  "  Up  with  the  drink,"  said  her  father.  "  Thou
home-spunf  shoe  carle,  dost  thou  think  that  I  am  fit  to
be  thy  thrall."  The  poor  shoemaker  thought  that  they
had  taken  a  turn  in  their  understandings,  and  he  went
himseK  to  the  well.  He  saw  the  shadow  of  the  maiden
in  the  well,  and  he  looked  up  to  the  tree,  and  he  sees
the  finest  woman  he  ever  saw.  "  Thy  seat  is  wavering,
but  thy  face  is  fair,"  said  the  shoemaker.  "  Come
down,  for  there  is  need  of  thee  for  a  short  while  at  my
house."  The  shoemaker  understood  that  this  was  the
shadow  that  had  diiven  his  people  mad.  The  shoe-
maker took  her  to  his  house,  and  he  said  that  he  had
but  a  poor  bothy,  but  that  she  shoidd  get  a  shai-e  of  all
that  was  in  it.  At  the  end  of  a  day  or  two  came  a
leash  of  gentlemen  lads  to  the  shoemaker's  house  for
shoes  to  be  made  them,  for  the  king  had  come  home,
and  he  was  going  to  marry.  The  glance  the  lads  gave
they  saw  the  giant's  daughter,  and  if  they  saw  her,
they  never  saw  one  so  pretty  as  she.  "  'Tis  thou  hast
the  pretty  daughter  here,"  said  the  lads  to  the  shoe-
maker.    "  She  is  pretty,  indeed,"  says  the  shoemaker,

*  Traill,  a  slave.  f  Peillag,  felt,  coarse  cloth.


36  WEST  niGHLAXB  TALES.

"  but  she  is  no  daughter  of  mine."  "  St.  K'ail !"  said  one
of  them,  "  I  would  give  a  hundred  pounds  to  marry
her."  The  two  others  said  the  very  same.  The  poor
shoemaker  said  that  he  had  nothing  to  do  with  her.
"But,"  said  they,  "  ask  her  to-night,  and  send  us  word
to-morrow."  A\Tien  the  gentles  went  away,  she  asked
the  shoemaker — "  AVTiat  's  that  they  were  saying  about
me?"  The  shoemaker  told  her.  "Go  thou  after
them,"  said  she  ;  "  I  will  marry  one  of  them,  and  let
him  bring  his  purse  with  him."  The  shoemaker
went  after  them,  and  he  told  that.  The  youth  re-
turned, and  he  gave  the  shoemaker  a  hundred  pounds
for  tocher.  They  went  to  rest,  and  when  she  had  laid
down,  she  asked  the  lad  for  a  drink  of  water  from  a
tumbler  that  was  on  the  board  on  the  further  side  of
the  chamber.  He  went ;  but  out  of  that  he  could  not
come,  as  he  held  the  vessel  of  water  the  length  of  the
night.  "  Thou  lad,"  said  she,  "  why  wilt  thou  not  lie
down?"  but  out  of  that  he  could  not  drag  till  the
bright  morrow's  day  was.  The  shoemaker  came  to  the
door  of  the  chamber,  and  she  asked  him  to  take  away
that  lubberly  boy.  This  wooer  went  and  betook  him-
self to  his  home,  but  he  did  not  tell  the  other  two  how
it  happened  to  him.  Kext  came  the  second  chap,  and
and  in  the  same  way,  when  she  had  gone  to  rest —
"  Look,"  she  said,  "  if  the  latch  is  on  the  door."  The
latch  laid  hold  of  his  hands,  and  out  of  that  he  coidd
not  come  the  length  of  the  night,  and  out  of  that  he
did  not  come  till  the  morrow's  day  Avas  bright.  He
went,  under  shame  and  disgrace.  No  matter,  he  cUd
not  teU  the  other  chap  how  it  had  happened,  and  on
the  third  night  he  came.  As  it  happened  to  the  two
others,  so  it  happened  to  him.  One  foot  stuck  to  the
floor ;  he  could  neither  come  nor  go,  but  so  he  was
the  length  of  the  night.     On  the  morrow,  he  took  his


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  BIRDS.  37

soles  out  (of  that),  and  lie  was  not  seen  looking  behind
him.  "  Now,"  said  the  girl  to  the  shoemaker,  "  thine
is  the  sporran  of  gold  ;  I  have  no  need  of  it.  It  will
better  thee,  and  I  am  no  worse  for  thy  kindness  to  me."
The  shoemaker  had  the  shoes  ready,  and  on  that  very
day  the  king  was  to  be  married.  The  shoemaker  was
going  to  the  castle  with  the  shoes  of  the  young  people,
and  the  girl  said  to  the  shoemaker,  "  I  would  hke  to
get  a  sight  of  the  king's  son  before  he  marries."
"  Come  with  me,"  says  the  shoemaker,  "  I  am  well
acquainted  with  the  servants  at  the  castle,  and  thou
shalt  get  a  sight  of  the  king's  son  and  all  the  company."
And  when  the  gentles  saw  the  pretty  woman  that  was
here  they  took  her  to  the  wedding-room,  and  they
filled  for  her  a  glass  of  wine.  When  she  was  going  to
drink  what  is  in  it,  a  flame  went  up  out  of  the  glass,
and  a  golden  pigeon  and  a  silver  pigeon  sprung  out  of
it.  They  were  flying  about  when  three  grains  of  barley
fell  on  the  floor.  The  silver  pigeon  sprang,  and  he
eats  that.  Said  the  golden  pigeon  to  him,  "  K  thou
hadst  mind  when  I  cleared  the  byre,  thou  wouldst  not
eat  that  without  giving  me  a  share."  Again  fell  three
other  grains  of  barley,  and  the  silver  pigeon  sprang,
and  he  eats  that,  as  before.  "  K  thou  hadst  mind
when  I  thatched  the  byre,  thou  wouldst  not  eat  that
without  giving  me  my  share,"  says  the  golden  pigeon.
Three  other  grains  fall,  and  the  silver  pigeon  sprang,
and  he  eats  that.  "  If  thou  hadst  mind  when  I  harried
the  magpie's  nest,  thou  wouldst  not  eat  that  without
giving  me  my  share,"  says  the  golden  pigeon  ;  "  I  lost
my  httle  finger  bringing  it  down,  and  I  want  it  still."
The  king's  son  minded,  and  he  knew  who  it  was  he
had  got.  He  sprang  where  she  was,  and  kissed  her
from  hand  to  moutL  And  Avhen  the  priest  came  they
married  a  second  time.     And  there  I  left  them.


38  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALKS.

This  version  of  the  Battle  of  the  Birds  was  recited  by  John
Mackenzie,  April  1859,  and  written  in  Gaelic  by  Hector  TJrquhart.
The  reciter  is  a  fisherman,  and  has  resided  for  the  last  thirty-four
years  at  Ceanmore,  near  Inverary,  on  the  estate  of  the  Duke  of
Argyll.  He  is  a  native  of  Lorn.  He  says  he  has  known  it
from  his  youth,  and  he  has  been  in  the  habit  of  repeating  it  to
his  friends  on  winter  nights,  as  a  pastime.  ''He  can  read
English  and  play  the  hagpipes,  and  has  a  memory  liJce  Oliver  and
Boijd's  Almanac."  He  got  this  and  his  other  stones  from  his
father  and  other  old  people  in  Lorn  and  elsewhere.  He  is  about
sixty  years  of  age,  and  was  employed,  April  1859,  in  building
dykes  on  the  estate  of  Ardkinglas,  where  Hector  Urquhart  is
giimekeeper.  In  reciting  his  stories  he  has  all  the  manner  of  a
practised  narrator ;  people  still  frequent  his  house  to  hear  his
tales.  I  know  the  man,  and  I  have  heard  him  recite  many.  The
Gaelic  has  some  few  north  country  words.

CATH  NAN  EUN.

Bh.\  am  ann  uair,  anns  an  robh  na  h'  uile  beathach  's  eun  a  cruinn-
eachadh  gu  cath.  Thubhairt  mac  righ  Catliair  Sliiomain,  ''Gu'u
rachadh  e  a  dh'  f  haicinn  a  chath,  agus  gun  d'  thugadh  e  tios  cinut-
eacli  dhachaidh  do  dli'  atliair  an  righ,  co  a  bhiodh  'ua  righ  air  na
beathaichcan  air  a  bhliadhua  so."  Bha  'n  cath  seachad  mu  n
drainig  e,  ach  eadar  aon-f  hitheach  mbr  dubh  agus  nathair,  agus  bha
aogas  gu'm  faigheadh  an  nathair  buaidh  air  an  f  hitheach.  'Nuair
a  chunnaic  mac  an  righ  so,  chuidich  e  'm  litheach,  agus  le  aonbhuille
thugar  an  ceann  do  'n  nathair.  'Nuair  a  leig  am  fitheach  anail,  'sa
chunnaic  e  gu"n  robh  an  nathair  marbh,  thubhairt  e,  "  Air  son  do
chaoirahneis  dhòmhsa  an  diugh,  bheir  mise  sealladh  dhuit;  thig  a
nios  a  uis  air  bun  mo  dha  sgtìthe."  Chaidh  mac  an  righ  suas  air
muiii  an  f  hilhich  agus  mu  "n  do  stad  e,  thug  e  thairis  e  air  seachd
beanntaibh,  seachd  glinu,  agus  seachd  monaidhean.  "A  nis,"  ars'
am  fitheach,  "  am  bheil  thu  faicinn  an  tigh  'ud  ihail ;  falbh  a  nis  da
'ionnsuidh  ;  's  i  piuthar  dhombsa  a  tha  gabhail  còmhnuidh  ann  agus
tbeid  mis  'an  urras  gu'r  è  do  bheatha,  agus  ma  du"  f  hoighneachdas  i
dhiot,  'an  robh  thu  aig  Catli  nan  eun?  abair  thusa,  'gu'n  robh'."
"Agus  ma  dh'  fheoraicheas  i  dhiot,  'am  faca  tu  mo  choltas-sa,  aliair
thusa  'gu  "m  faca,  ach  hi  cinnteaeh  gu'n  coinnich  thu  mise  nioch  am
maireach  anns  an  kite  so."  Fhuair  mac  an  righ  gabhail  aii;e  gu
maith  's  gu  ro  mhaith  air  an  oidhche  so,  biadh  dheth  gach  biadh,  '3


CATH  NAN  EUN.  39

deoch  dheth  gacli  deoch,  uisge  blhth  d"a  chasan  's  leaba  bhog  d'a
leasan.  Air  an  atli  latba,  thug  am  litheach  an  sealladh  ceudna  dha
thairis  air  seacbd  beanutaibh,  seachd  glinn,  agus  seachd  monaidhean.
Chimnaic  iad  bothan  fad'  uatha  ach  ge  b'  f  had  uatha,  cha  b'  f  hada  'ga
"ruigheachd.  Fhuair  e  gabhail  aig'  air  an  oidhche  so  gu  maith  mar
an  ceudna;  pailteas  biadh  's  deoch,  "s  uisge  blàth  da  chasan,  's  leaba
bhog  d"a  leasan.  Ausn  treas  maduinn  an  ait'  an  fhithich  f  haicinn,
mar  air  na  h-uairean  roimbe,  Co  thug  coinneanih  dha,  ach  an  t-ògan-
acha  bu  dhreachmhoire  a  chunnaic  e  riamh,  agus  pasgan  aige  na
laimh.  Dh'  f  hoigneachd  mac  an  righ  do  'n  oganacli  so,  "  Am  fac  e
fitheach  mor  dubh "?  "  Thubhairt  an  t-òganach  ris,  "  Cha  'n  'f  haic  thu
'm  litheach  tuillidh,  Oir  's  mise  am  fitheach  a  bha  'sin ;  bha  mi  air
mo  chuir  fo  gheasaibh  agus  'se  thusa  a  choinneachadh  a  dh'  f  huasgail
mi,  air  son  sin,  tha  thu  a'  faotainn  a  phasgain  so."  ''  Nis,"  ars"  an
t-òganach,  "pillidh  tu  air  t'ais  air  a  chois-cheum  cheudna,  agus
bithidh  tu  oidhche  anns  gach  tigh  mar  a  bha  thu  roimhe ;  ach  am
bonn  a  tha  agad  ri  dhèanamh,  'na  fuasgail  am  pasgan  sin  a  thug
mi  dhuit,  gus  am  bi  thu  anns  an  kite  bu  mhiannaiche  leat  a  bhith
chòmhnuidh."  Thug  mac  an  righ  a  chill  air  an  oganach,  agus  thug
e  aghaiJh  air  tigh  Athar,  agus  f  huairr  eaoidheachd  aigpeathraichean
an  fhithich  ceart  mar  a  fhuair  e  'del  air  aghaidh.  Nuair  a  bha  e
dllithachadh  air  tigh  athar,  bha  e  'dol  troimhe  choille  dhiimhaU  ;  air
leis  gu  'n  robh  am  pasgan  a'  fas  trom,  agus  smaoLnich  e  gu  'n  seall-
adh e  gu  de'  a  bh'  ann.  'Nuair  a  dh'  f  huasgail  e  'm  pasgan,  cha  b'
ann  gun  iongantas  a  chur  air  f  he'in.  Ann  am  prioba  na  slila,  faicear
an  aon  hite  bu  bhrèagha  a  chunnaic  e  riarah  caisteal  mor,  agus  lios,
anns  an  robh  na  h-uile  seorsa  meas  is  luibhean  mun  cuairt  air  a'
chaisteal.  Sheas  e  Ian  iongantais,  agus  aithreachais  air  son  am  pas-
gan f  huasgladh.  Cha  robh  'na  chomas  a  chur  air  ais  a  rithist,  agus
bu  mhiann  leis  an  t-àite  bòidheach  so  a  bhith  air  an  lagan  bhoidheach
uaine  a  bha  fa  chomhair  tigh  athar.  Ach  siiil  do  'n  d'  thug  e,  faicear
famhair  mor,  's  e  gabhail  d'a  'ionnsuidh.  "  'S  olc  an  t-aite  anns  an
do  thog  thu  do  thigh,  a  mhic  an  righ,"  ars'  am  famhair.  "  Seadh,
ach  clia  b'  ann  an  so  bu  mhiannaiche  leam  e  'bhith,  ge  do  thachair
e  'bhith  ann  gu  tubaisteach,"  arsa  mac  an  righ.  "  Ciod  an  duais  a
bheireadh  tu  air  son  a  chur  air  ais  sa  phasgan  mar  a  bha  e  roimhe?  "
"  Ciod  an  duais  a  dh'  iarradh  tu  ?  ''  arsa  mac  an  righ.  "  Ma  bheir
thu  dhomhs'  a  cheud  mhac  a  bhitheas  agad,  'nuair  a  bhitheas  e  seachd
bliadhna  dh'  aois,"  ars'  am  famhair.  "  Gheibh  thu  sin  ma  bhitheas
mac  agam,"'  thubhairt  mac  an  rii;h.  Ann  am  prioba  na  siila  chuir
am  famhair  gach  lios  is  garradh  is  Caisteal  'sa  phasgan  mar  a  bha
iad  roimhe.    "  Kis,"  ars'  am  famhair,  "  gabh  thusa  do  rathad  fein,  's


40  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

gabhaidh  mise  mo  rathad  fe'in,  ach  cuirnhnich  do  ghealladh  's  ged
nach  ciiimhnich  thusa,  cha  di-clmimhnich  mise."  Tnug  mac  an
iigh  an  ratliud  air,  's  an  ceann  beagau  Ikithean  rainig  e  'n  t-aite  bu
mhiannaiche  leis;  dli'  fhuasgail  e  "m  pasgau,  qgiis  bha  'n  t-aite
ceudna  direach  mar  a  bha  e  roimlie,  agns  a  nuair  a  dh'  f  hosgail  e
(lorus  a  chaisteail,  faicear  an  òigh  bu  dhreachmhoire  air  an  d'  thug  e
siiil  riamh.  "  Thig  air  t-aghaidh,  a  mhic  an  rigli,"  ars'  an  nighean
bhoiilheach,  "  tha  gach  ni  an  òrdiigh  air  do  shon,  ma  phosas  tu  mise,
an  nochd  fein."  'S  mis'  an  duine  a  bhitheas  toileach,"  thubhairt
mac  an  righ ;  agus  air  an  oidhche  sin  fe'in  phòs  iad.  Ach  an  ceann
latha  "s  seachd  bliadhna  co  'm  fear  mor  a  chithear  a  tighinu  a  dh'
ionnsuidh  a  chaisteail  ach  am  famhair.  Chuimhnich  mac  an  rigli  a
ghealladh  do  "n  famhair,  agus  gus  a  so,  cha  d'  innis  e  do  'n  bhan-righ
a  ghealladh.  "  Leig  thus'  eadar  mise  's  am  famhair,"  ars'  a  bhan-
righ.  "  Cuir  a  mach  do  mhnc,"  ars'  am  famhair;  " cuimhnich  do
ghealladh."  "  Gheibh  thu  sin,"  ars'  an  righ,  "  'nuair  a  chuireas  a
mhathair  an  òrdugh  e  air  son  a  thurais."  Sgeadaich  a  bhan-righ
mac  a  chocaire  agus  thug  i  do  'n  f  hamhair  air  Ikimh  e.  Dh'  f  halbh
am  famhair  leis,  ach  cha  b'  f  hada  a  chaidh  e,  "nuair  a  chuir  e  slatag
.'inn  an  laimh  a  ghille-bhig.  Dh'  f  heoraich  am  famhair  dheth,  "  Na
"m  bitheadh  an  t-slatag  sin  aig  t-athair,  de  'dhèanadli  e,  leatha?"
"  Na  "m  biodh  an  t-slat  so  aig  m'  athair,  ghabliadh  e  air  na  Coin  's
air  na  Gait  na  'm  biodh  iad  a  dol  a  choir  biadh  an  righ,"  ars'  an  gille-
beag.  "  'S  tusa  mac  a  chocaire,"  ars'  am  famhair.  Beirear  air  dha
chaol  Cois'  air,  agus  sgleogar  e  ris  a  chloich  a  bha  ri'  thaobh.  Thill
am  famhair  air  ais  a  dh'  ionnsuidh  a  chaisteail  ann  am  feirg  is  cuth-
ach,  's  thubhairt  e,  "  Mar  cuireadh  iad  a  mach  dhasan  mac  an  rigli,  gu
"m  b'  e  'chlach  a  b'  àirde  a  chlach  a  b'  isle  bhiodh  do  'n  chaisteal."
Thubhairt  a  bhan-righ  ris  an  righ,  "  Feuchaidh  sinn  fathast  e,  tha
mac  a  bhuidealak  an  aon  aois  ri  ar  mac  fe'in."  Sgeadaich  i  mac  a
bhuidealair,  agus  thugar  do  'n  f  hamhair  e  air  laimh.  Cha  deach
am  famhair  ach  goirid,  nuair  a  chuir  e  'n  t-slatag  'na  laimh,  "Na  'm
bitheadh  an  t-slat  so  aig  t-athair,"  ars'  am  famhair,  "  de  a  dheau-
adh  e  leatha? ■'  "Ghabliadh  e  air  na  Coin  's  air  na  Cait  "nuair  a
bhiodh  iad  a  tighinn  dlUth  air  botail  's  air  gloinneaclian  an  righ."
"  'S  tusa  mac  a  bhuidealair,"  ars'  am  famhair,  is  spad  e  "n  t-eaiichainn
as  air  an  doigh  cheudna.  ThUl  am  famhair,  ann  am  feirg  is  corruich
ro  mhor.  Clirith  an  talamh  fo  "bhonn,  's  chrith  an  caisteal  's  na  bli'
ann.  "  Mach  an  so  do  mhac,"  ars"  am  famhair,  "  oir  an  nam  prioba
na  siila  's  e  chlach  is  "airde,  'chlach  is  isle  bhitheas  do  'n  aitreabh."  'S
e  bir  ann  gu  m  b'  liiginn  mac  an  righ  thabhairt  do  'u  f  hamhair.  Thug
am  famhair-  e  d'a  thigh  fein,  agus  thog  e  mar  miiac  dha  fein  e.


CATH  NAN  EUN.  4^

Latha  do  na  Ihithibh  's  am  famliair  bho  'n  bhaile,  chuala  an  t-ogan-
ach  an  ceol  bu  bliinne  a  cliual  e  viamh,  ann  an  seòmar  a  blia  'm  nmll-
acli  tigh  an  fliamliair.  Siiil  do  'n  d'tliug  e,  cliunnaic  e  an  aghaidli  bu
bhrèagha  a  chunnaic  e  riamh.  Smèid  i  air  e  thighinn  ni  bu  dliiithe
dhi,  agus  thubhairt  i  ris,  «  E'  dh'  f  halbb  air  an  am  so  ach  e  bhith
cinnteach  e  'bhith  anns  an  iiite  cheudna  mu  mharbh  mheadhain-na
h-oidhche  so;"  agus  mar  a  gheall,  choimlilion.  Bha  nigbean  an
fhamhair  ri'  thaobh  ann  am  priobana  siila  agus  thubhairt  i  ris,  "Am
maireach  gheibh  thu  do  roghainn  ri  phosadh  dheth  mo  dha  phiuth-
ar;  ach  abair  thusa  nach  gabh  thu  a  h-aon  dhiubh  ach  mise  ;  tha  m'
athair  air  son  gu  'm  pos  mi  mac  righ  na  Cathair  uaine,  ach  "s  coma
learn  è."  Air  an  latha  maireach,  thug  am  famhair  a  mach  a  thriuir
nighean  "s  thubhairt  e,  "  Nis  a  mhic  righ  na  cathair  shiomain,  cha
do  chain  thu  air  a  bhith  leamsa  cho  fada :  gheibh  thu  air  son  bean  aon
do  'n  dithis  is  sine  do  m'  nigheanaibh,  agus  bithidh  cead  agad  dol
dhachaidh  leatha,  an  dcigli  na  bainnse."  "  ]Ma  blieir  thu  dhomh  an
te  bheag  bhòidlieach  so,"  arsa  mac  an  righ,  "  gabhaidh  mi  air  t-
f hacal  thu."  Las  fearg  an  fhamhair,  agus  thubhairt  e,  ma'm  faigh
thu  sin,  feumaidh  tu  na  tri  nitheanana  a  dh'  iarras  mis'  ort  a  dhèan-
anih."  "  Abair  ronihad,"  arsa  mac  an  righ.  Thug  am  famhair  do  'n
bhkthaich  e.  "Ivis,'"  ars' am  famhair,  "  tha  innear  nan  ceud  damh
an  so,  agus  cha  deach  a  chartadh  o  cheann  seachd  bliadhna.  "Tha
mise  'dol  o  'n  bhaile  "n  diugh  anus  mar  bi  "m  bathach  so  air  a  chart-
adh mu  'n  d'thig  an  oidhche  cho  ghlan  's  gu'n  ruith  ubhall  bir  o  cheann
gu  ceann,  dith  cha  'n  e  mhain  nach  faigh  thu  mo  nighean,  ach  's  e
deoch  dhe  df huil  a  chaisgeas  mo  phathadh  a  nochd."  Toisichear
air  cartadh  na  bathaich,  ach  bu  cheart  cho  maith  teannadh  ri  taom-
adh  a  chuain  mhoir.  'X  de'igh  mheadhoin-latha  's  am  fallus  'ga
'dhalladh  thainig  nighean  og  an  fhamhair  far  an  robh  e  's  thubh-
airt i  ris,  "  Tha  thu  "ga'd'  phianadh,  a  mhic  an  righ."  "  Tha  mi  'n
sin,"  arsa  mac  an  righ.  "  Thig  a  nail,"  ars'  ise,  "  agus  leig  do
sgìos'."  "  Ni  mi  sin,"  ars  esan,  "  cha  'n  'eil  ach  am  bas  a  feitlieamh
orm  CO  dhiu."  Shuidh  e  sios  laimh  rithe.  Bha  e  cho  sgith,  agus
gu  "n  do  thuit  e  'na  chadal  ri  'taobh.  'Nuair  a  dhUisg  e,  cha  robh
nighean  an  fhamhair  ri  fhaicinn;  ach  bha,  bhathaich  cho  glan
cairte  's  gu  'n  niitheadh  ubhall  òir  bho  cheann  gu  ceann  dhith.  'Steach
thiyear  am  famhair,  's  thubhairt  e,  "  Chairt  thu  'm  bathaich,  a  mhic
an  rigb."  "  Chairt  mi,"  ars'  esan.  "  Chairt  neach  e'iginn  i,"  ars'  am
famhair.  "Cha  do  chairt  thus' i  co  dhiu,"  thubhairt  mac  an  rigli.
"Seadh!  Seadh!"  ars'  am  famhair,  bhon  a'  bha  thu  co  tapaidh  an
diugh,  gheibh  thu  gus  aa  am  so  am  maireach  gu  tubhadh  a  bhathaich
so  le  clòimh  eòin  gun  da  ite  air  an  aon  dath."    Bha  mac  an  righ  air


42  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALF.S.

a  chois  roi'n  ghrein.  Ghlac  e  a  bhogha  's  a  bhalg-saighead  a  mharbh-
adli  nan  èun.  Thug  e  'm  monadh  air,  ach  ma  thutr,  cha  robh  na  h-
eòin  cho  furasda  ri  'm  faotainn.  Blia  e  a  ruith  'nan  de'igh,  gus  an
robh  am  fallus  'g*  'dhalladh.  Mu  mheadhon-la  co  'thigeadh  ach
nighean  an  fhambair.  "  Tha  thu  ga'd' phianadh,  a  mhic  an  righ,"
ars"  ise.  "  Tha  mi,"  thubhuirt  esan,  "  cha  do  thuit  ach  an  da  lon-
dubh  so,  agus  iad  air  aon  dath."  "  Thig  a  nail,  's  leig  do  sgios  air  a
chnocan  bhoidheach  so,"  arsa  nighean  an  f  hamhair.  "  "S  mi  tha  toil-
each,"  thubhairt  esan.  Smaoinich  e  gu  n  cobhaireadh  i  air  air  an
am  so  cuitieachd.  Shiiidhe  sios  Ihimh  rithe,  's  cha  b"f  had'  a  bha  e  "n
sin  gus  an  do  thuit  e  "na  chadal ;  agus  a  nuair  a  dhiiisg  e,  bha  nigh-
ean an  f  hamhair  air  falbh.  Smaoinich  e  tilleadh  thun  an  tighe,  's
faicear  am  bathaich  tiighte  leis  na  h-itean.  'Nuair  a  thainig  am
famhair  dhachaidh  thubhairt  e,  "Thubh  thu  'm  bathaich,  a  mhic  an
righ."  "Thubh  mi,"  ars'  esan.  "Thubh  cuid-eiginn  i,"  ars' am
famhair.  "  Cha  do  thubh  thusa  i,"  arsa  mac  an  righ.  "  Seadh !
Seadh!"  ars'  am  famhair.  '•  "Nis,''  ars"  am  famhair,  "tha  craobh
ghiubhas  ri  taobh  an  loch  ud  shies  agus  tha  nead  pioghaid  'na
mnllach."'  "  Xa  h-uibhean  a  gheibh  thu  anns  an  nead,  feumaidh  iad
a  bhi  agamsa  gu  mo  cheud-lon,  gaidh ;  cha  'n  fhaod  a  h-aon  a  bhith
sgainte  no  bi  iste,  agus  's  e  còig  a  tha  'san  nead."  Moch  'sa  mhad-
uinn,  dh'fhalbh  mac  an  righ  far  an  robli  a  chraobh,  's  cha  robh  sin
duilich  amas  oirre.  Cha  robh  a  leith-bhreac  'sa  clioill'  air  fad.  Bho
'bonn  gii  ruig  a  ceud  mheanglan,  coig  ceud  troidh.  Bha  mac  an  righ
a  dol  ceithir  thoimchioll  air  a  chraoibh.  Thainig  ise  'bha  daonnan
a  dèanamh  furtachd  dha:  "  Tha  thu  air  call  craiceann  nan  lamh  's
nan  cas,  a  mhic  an  righ."  "Ach  tha,"  ars'  esan,  "cha  luaithe  shuas
na  shios  mi."  "Cha  'u  a'  fuireaclid  so,"  arsa  nighean  an  f hamhair.
Shhth  i'  meur  an  deigli  mpur,  gus  an  d'  rinn  i  faradli  do  mhac  an
righ  gu  dol  suas  do  nead  na  pioghaid.  'Xuair  a  bha  e  aig  an  nead,
thubhairt  ise,  "  Dean  cabhag  a  nuas  leis  na  h-uibheam,  oir  tha  anail
m'  athar  a'  losgadh  mo  dhroma."  Leis  a  chabhaig  a  bli'  air-saii,  dh'
fhag  ise  'liidag  am  muUach  na  craoibhe.  "Nis,"  ars'  ise,  "  thdid
tha  dhachaidh  leis  na  h-uibhean  gu  luath,  agus  gheibh  thu  mise  ri
phosadh  a  nochd  ma  dh'aithnicheas  tu  mi;  bithidh  mis'  agus  mo
dha  phiuthar  air  ar  n-eideadh  anns  an  aon  trusgan,  agus  air  ar
dèauamh  coltach  ri'  cheile ;  Ach  seall  thus'  ormsa  "nuair  a  their  m'
athair  'falbh  le  d'  mhnaoi,  a  mhic  an  righ ;  agus  chi  thu  Taimh  gun
lUdag."  Thug  e  na  h-uibhean  do'n  f  hamhair.  "  Seadh  !  Seadh  !  "
ars'  am  famhair,  "  bi'  dèanamh  deas  chum  do  phosadh."  'S  ann  an
sin  a  bha  bhanais,  s  b'e  bhanais  i,  f:mihairean  's  daoinc  uaisle,  "s
mac  figh  na  Cathair  luiiiie  "nam  meadliou.    Chaidh  am  pòsadh,  "s


CATH  NAN  EUN.  43

thòisich  an  damhsa,  's  b'e  sin  an  damhsa.  Bha  tigh  an  f  hamhair  air
chrith  bho  'mliullacli  gu  'bhonn.  Ach  thainig  am  dol  a  luidhe,  's
thubhairt  am  famhair,  "  Tha  "n  t-ani  dhuit  dol  a  luidbe,  a  nihic  righ
na  cathair  shiomain,  tboir  leat  do  bhean  as  am  meadhon  sin."  Chuir
ise  mach  a  liiimh  dheth  "n  robh  an  liidag  agus  rug  e  oirre  air  laimh.
"  Dh"  amais  thu  gu  maith  air  an  am  so  cuideacbd,  acb  cba  'n'eil  fios
nach  coinnich  sinn  tbu  air  doiah  eile,"  thubhairt  am  famhair.  Ach
a  luidhe  chaidh  iad.  "  A  nis,"  thuirt  ise ;  '•  cadal  cha  dean  thu,  air
neo  basaicliidh  tu ;  feumaidh  sinn  teicheadh  gu  luath,  oir  gun  teag-
amh  marbhaidh  m'  athair  thu."  A  mach  ghabh  iad,  agus  air  an  loth
dhuinn  a  bha  anus  an  stabuU,  chaidh  iad.  "  Dean  socair  beagan,"
ars' ise,  "agus  cluichidh  mise  cleas  air  an  t-seann  laoch."  Leum  i
stigh.  agus  ghearr  i  ubhall  'na  naoi  earannan,  's  chuir  i  da  earrann
dhith  aig  ceann  na  leapa,  agus  da  earrann  aig  casan  na  leapa;  da
earrann  aig  an  dorus-chadha,  agus  da  earann  aig  an  dorus  mhor,  agus
a  h-aon  air  taobh  a  mach  an  tighe.  Dhiiisg  am  famhair,  agus
ghlaodh  e,  "'M  bheil  sibhse  'nur  cadal."  "  Cha 'n  "eil  fathast,"  ars'
an  ubhall  a  bha  aig  ceann  na  leapa.  An  ceann  ghreis  ghlaodh  e
rithist,  "  Cha  "n  "eil  fathast,"  ars"  an  ubhall  a  bha  aig  casan  na  leapa.
Greis  an  deigh  sin,  ghlaodh  e  rithist,  "  Cha  'u  'eil  fathast,"  thubhairt
an  ubhal  aig  dorus  a  chadha.  Ghlaodh  am  famhair  a  rithist,  's
f  hreagair  an  ubhal  a  bha  aig  an  dorus  mhor.  "  Tha  sibh  a'  dol  ni's
faide  nam,"  ars'  am  famhair.  "  Cha  'n  'eil  fathast,"  ars'  an  ubhal  a
bha  air  taobh  a  mach  an  doruis.  "  Tha  sibh  a  teichadh,"  ars'  am
famhair.  Leum  am  famhair  air  a  chasan,  agus  gu  ruig  an  leabaidh
chaidh  e ;  ach  bha  i  gu  fuar,  fas,  "  Tha  cuilbheartan  mo  nighean
fe'in  a  feucliainn  rium,"  thubhairt  am  famhair.  Air  an  tòir  ghabh
e,"  Am  beul  an  latha,  thuirt  nighean  an  f  hamhair,  "  Gu  'n
robh  anail  a  h-"athair  a  losgadh  a  droma."  "  Cuir  do  Ikmh  gu
luath,"  ars"  ise,  "ann  an  cluais  na  loth  dhuinn,  agus  ge  be  ni
gheibh  thu  innte  tilg  "na  d'  dheigh  e."  "  Tha  bior  do  sgitheach  an
so,"  thubhairt  esan.  "Tilg  as  dc  dheigh  e."  Cha  luaithe  rinn  e  so,
na  bha  tichead  m\li^  do  sgitheach  cho  tiugh  ann  's  gum  bu  ghann  do
neas  dol  troimlie.  Thainig  am  famhair  'na  dhian  "s  siude  "n  coiuneamh
achinn  's  anihach  annsan  sgitheach  I!  "  Tha  cuilbheartan  mo  nighean
fe'in  an  so  mar  an  ceudiia,"  thubhairt  am  famhair;  "ach  na  'm
biodh  agamsa  mo  tliuagh  mhor  's  mo  chore  cboille  an  so,  cha  h'
fhad'  a  bliithinn  a  dèanamh  rathad  troimhe  so."  Thill  e  dhach-
aidh  air  son  na  tuaidh  moire  's  na  core  choille,  agus  gun  teagamh
cha  robh  e  fad  a'  dèanamh  rathad  troi  'n  sgitheach.  "Fagaidh
mi  'n  tuadh  "s  a  chore  choille  'n  so,  gus  am  till  mi,"  ars'  esan.
"Ma  dh'  fhagas,  thuirt  feannag  a  bha  ann  an  craobh,"  goididh


44  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

sinne  iad."  "  Ni  sibh  sin  fliein,"  ars'  am  famhair,  "  ach  cuiridh
mise  dhachaidh  iad."  Thill  e  agns  dh'  fhag  e  iad  aig  an  tigh.
Annan  teas  an  latlia  mliothaich  is  anail  ah'athar  alosgadh  a  droma.
"  Cuir  do  mheur  ann  an  cluais  na  lotha,  agus  tilg  na  gheibh  thu
innte  as  do  dhc'igh."  Fhuair  e  sgealb  do  clilach  glilais  's  thilg  e  as
a  dhc'igh  i.  Ann  am  prioba  na  siila,  bha  fichead  mile  do  chreag
mhòr  ghlas  air  lend  's  air  airde  as  an  deigh.  Thainig  am  famhar
'na  dheann,  ach  seachad  air  a'  direag  cha  robh  comas  dha  del.  "  'Se
cuilblieartan  mo  nighinn  fein  rud  as  cruaidh'  a  thachair  riamh  rium,"
ars'  am  famhair.  "Ach  na  'm  biodh  agamsa  mo  gheamhlag  's
mo  mhafag  mhòr,  cha  b'  fhada  a  bhithinn  a  dèanamh  rathad  roimh
'n  chreig  so  cuideaclid."  B'fhendar  tilleadh  air  an  son,  agus  b'e
fe'in  gille  sgoltadh  nan  clach.  Cha  robh  e  fada  a  dèanamh  rathad
troimh  'n  chreag.  "  Fhgaidh  mi  an  acf  huinn  an  so,  's  cha  thill
mi  tuillidh."  "Ma  dh'  fhagas,"  ars'  an  fheannag,  "goididh  sinn'
iad."  "  Tha  sin  's  a  roghainn  agad;  cha 'n'eil  tiom  tilleadh  ann."
Ann  am  bristeadh  na  fiiire  thubhairt  nighean  an  fhamhair,  "gu'n
robh  i  mothachainu  anail  a  h-athar  a  losgadh  a  droma."  "  Seall  ann
an  cluais  na  lotha,  a  mhic  an  righ,  air  neo  tha  sinn  cailte."  Rinn  e
so,  agus  's  e  aotroman  Ian  uisge  a  bha  'na  cluais  air  an  am  so.
"  Tilg  'na  d'  dheÌL^h  e,"  arsa  nighean  an  fhamhair.  Rinn  e  so,  agus
bha  loch  uisge  fichead  mile  air  fad  's  air  lend  'nan  deigh.  Thainig
am  famhair  air  aghaidh,  ach  leis  an  astar  a  bh'  aige,  bha  e  ann  am
meadhoin  an  loch,  agus  chaidh  e  foidhe,  's  cha  d'  e'irich  e  ni's  mo.
Air  an  ath  latha,  bha  a  chuideachd  og  air  tighinn  am  fradharc  tigh
athar-san.  "Nis."  ars'  ise,  "tha  m'athair  bliite,  's  cha  chuir  e
dragh  tuillidh  oirn ;  •' Ach  mu 'n  d'thcid  sinn  ni  's  faide,"  ars'  ise,
"rach  thusa  gu  tij:h  t'athar,  agus  innis  gu  'bheil  mo  leilhid-sa
agad ;  ach  am  bonn  a  tha  agad  ri  'dheànanih,  na  leig  le  duine  na
crèutair  do  phbgadh ;  oir  ma  ni  thu  sin,  cha  bhi  cuimhn'  agad  gu
'faca  tu  riamh  mi."  Chuir  gach  neach  mar  a  bha  tachairt  air  failte
is  furan  air,  's  thug  e  iiitlme  da  athair  's  d'a  mhlithair,  gun  esan  a
phogadh ;  ach  mar  a  bha  'n  tubaist  'an  dan,  bha  scan  mhial-chh  do
ghalla  'steach  's  dh"  aithnich  i  e,  's  leum  i  suas  ri  bheul,  agus  na
dheigh  sin  dhi-chuimhnich  e  nighean  an  fhamhair.  Bha  ise  'na
sui'lhe  aig  faobh  an  tobair  mar  a  dh'  fhag  e  i,  ach  cha  robh  mac  an
righ  a'  tighinn.  Ann  am  beul  na  h-oidhche,  streap  i  suas  ann  an
craobh  do  dharach  a  bha  ri  taobh  an  tobair.  Luidh  i  ann  an
gobhall  na  craoibhe  fad  na  h'oidhche  sin.  Bha  tigh  aig  greus-
aiche  dllith  do  'n  tobar,  agus  mu  mheadhon  la  a'  maireach,  dh'
iarr  an  greusaich  air  a  mhnaoi,  i  "dliol  airson  deoch  dha  as  an
tobar.    'Nuair  a  rainig  bean  a  ghreusaiche  an  tobar,  's  a  cliunnaic  i


CATH  NAN  EUN.  45

faileas  na  to  a  bha  anns  a  chraoibh,  air  saoilsinn  dh'ise  gu  'm  b'e
'faileas  fein  a  bb'  ami  ('s  cha  do  shaoil  leatha  gu  so  gu  'n  robh  i  co
brèagha),  tliug  i  tilgeil  do'n  chuman  a  bha  'na  laimh,  's  bhrist  i  ris
an  talamh  e,  's  thug  i  'n  tigh  oirre  gun  chuinneag  gun  uisge !
"Cait'  am  bheil  an  t-uisge,  a  bhean,"  thubhairt  an  greusaiche.
"A  bhodaich  leibidich,  shuaraich,  gun  mhaise,  dh'  fban  mi
tuilidh  's  fada  'n  am  thraill  uisge  's  connaidh  agad."  "  Tha  mi
fein  a  smaoineachadh,  a  bhean,  gu'n  deach  tbu  air  bhoile  ;  falbh
thusa  a  nighean,  gu  luath  's  faigh  deoch  do  d'  athaii'.  Dh'  fhalbh
a  nighean,  agus  air  an  doigh  cheudna  thachair  dhi.  Cha  do
shaoil  leatha  gu  so  gu  'n  robh  i  co  tlachdmhor,  's  thug  i  'n  tigh
oirre.  "Nios  an  deoch,"  ars'  a  h-athair.  "A  pheallaig  bhodaich
nam  brog,  an  saoil  thu  gu  'bheQ  mise  gu  bhi  'm  thraill  uisge  agad."
Smaoinich  an  greusaiche  bochd  gu  'n  d'  thug  iad  car  as  am  beachd,  's
dh  'fhalbh  e  fe'in  do  'n  tobar.  Chunnaic  e  faileas  na  gruagaiche  san
tobar,  's  dh'amhairc  e  suas  do 'n  chraoibh  's  faicear  amboirionnachbu
bhrèagha  a  chunnaic  e  riamh.  "  'S  corrach  do  ehuidheachan  ach  's
maiseach  do  ghniiis,"  thubhairt  an  greusaiche.  "  Tbig  a  nuas  oir,
tha  feum  dluiit,  car  liine  gheàrr  'nam  thigh-sa."  Thuig  an  greusaiche
gum  b'e  so  am  faileas  a  chuir  a  chuideachdsan  air  bhoile.  Thug  an
greusaich  i  gu  thigh  "s  thubhairt  e  rithe,  "  nach  robh  aige-san  ach
bothan  bochd,  ach  gu  'm  faigheadh  i  a  cuid  dhe  na  bb'  ann."  An
ceanu  latha  na  dha  'na  dheigh  so,  thainig  triiiir  fhleasgach  uasal  gu
tigh  a  ghreusaiche,  aii-son  brògan  a  dhèanamh  dhoibh,  's  an  righ  air
tighinn  dhachaidh,  agus  e  'dol  a  phòsadh.  Ach  siiil  do  'n  d'  thug
na  fleasgaich,  chunnaic  iad  nighean  an  fhamhair,  's  ma  chunnaic,
cha  'n  fhac  iad  riamh  te'  co  bòidheach  rithe.  '"S  ann  agad  a  tha  "n
nighean  bhoidheach  an  so,"  thubhairt  na  fleasgaich  ris  a  ghreusaiche.
"  Ach  cha  'n  e  mo  nighean-sa  th'  ann."  "  Naile  !"  arsa  fear  dhiubh,
"bheu-inn  fe'in  ceiid  punnd  air  son  a  posadh."  Thubhairt  an  dithia
eile  a  leithid  cheudna.  Thubhairt  an  greusaiche  bochd,  "  nach  robh
gnothuch  aige-san  ri  a  dheanamh  rithe."  "  Ach,"  ars'  iadsan,  "  farraid
thusa  dhith  'n  nochd,  agus  leig  fios  thugainne  'màireach."  Nuair
a  dh'  fhalbh  na  h'-uaislean,  dh'  fharraid  i  do'n  ghreusaiche,  "gu  de
sud  a  bha  iad  ag  radh  niu  'm  dheibhinnse  ?  "  Dh'  innis  an  greusaiche
dhith.  "  Falbh  'nan  deigh,"  ars'  ise,  "  pòsaidh  mi  fear  aca  a  nochd
fe'in,  "s  thugadh  e  leis  a  sporan  airgid."  Dh'  flialbh  an  greusaiche
"nan  de'igh,  's  dh'  innis  e  'u  sin  fein.  Thill  e'n  t-òganach.  Thug  e  ceud
punnd  do  'n  ghreusaiche,  air-son  tochar.  "  Chaidh  i  a  luidhe,  agus  an
uair  a  bha  aodach  an  oganaich  dheth,  dh'  iarr  i  air  deoch  uisge  as  a
chorn  a  bha  air  a  bhord  air  taobh  thall  an  t-seomair ;  dh'  fhalbh  e,
ach  as  a'  sin  cha  d'  thigeadh  e  fad  na  h'-oidhche,  is  greim  aig  air  an


46  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

t-soitheach  uisge."  Oglaieh  tliu.  Tbubliairt  ise,  "  cairson  nach  dig
thu  a  luidhe,"  ach  as  a'  so  clia  diongadh  e,  gus  an  robh  an  latha  geal
am  mkireach  ann.  Thainig  an  greusaiche  gu  dorus  an  t-seoniair,
agus  dlr  iarr  i  air,  "an  slaodaire  ballaich  sin  a  thabhairt  air
falbh."  Dh"  flialbh  an  suiricbe  so,  's  thug  'e  'n  tigh  air,  ach  cha
do  dh'  innis  e  mar  db'  eirich  dba  do  'n  dithis  eile.  Air  an  ath  oidhche,
thainig  an  darna  fleasgach,  agus  air  an  doigh  cbeudna  nuair  a
chaidb  i  a  luidlie,  "  Seall,"  tbuirt  ise,  "  am  bheil  an  crann  air  an
dorus."  Air  a  chrann  gliabh  a  lamban  gre'im,  agus  as  a'  sin  cha  d'
thigeadh  e  fad  na  h-oidhcbe,  as  a'  so  cba  d'  thigeadh  e  gu  latha  geal
am  inaireacli.  Db'  flialbli  e  fo  sprocbd  is  naire.  Coma  co  dhiu,  cba
d'innis  e,  mar  tbacbair,  do  'n  fhle.isgacb  eile,  agus  aii-  an  treas  oidhclie,
tliaiuig  am  fear  eile,  agus  mar  a  tbacbair  do  'n  ditbis  eile  tbacbair  dlia ;
bba  cas  air  an  leabaidb  's  cas  eile  air  an  urlar,  cba  d'tbigeadb  's  cba
racbadb  e,  acb,  air  an  dòigb  so  bba  e  fad  na  li'didbche.  Am  maireach
thug  e  'bhuinn  as,  's  cba  'n  fhacas  e'  sealltainn  'na  dheigb.  "  Nis,"
arsa  'n  nigbean  ris  a  glireusaicbe,  "  's  leatsa  an  sporan  oir,  cha  'n'eil
feum  agam-sa  air,  '3  feaird  thus'  e,  agus  cba  mbios'de  mis'  e,  airson  do
cbaoimbneis  dhomh."  Bba  na  brògan  ullarah  aig  a  ghreusaiche,
agus  air  an  latha  sin  fein,  bba  an  rigb  gu  pòsadb.  Bba  'n  greusaiche
dol  do  'n  cbaisteal  le  brogan  nan  òganacb,  's  tbubbairt  an  nigbean
ris  a  ghreusaiche,  "bu  mhaith  leara  sealladh  fbaicinn  dhe  mac  an
righ,  mu  'm  pòsadb  e."  "  Tbig  leamsa,"  ars'  an  greusaiche,  "  tha  mi
mion  eòlacb  air  seirbheisicb  a'  cbaisteail,  agus  gheibb  tbu  sealladh
air  mac  an  righ  's  na  cuideacbd  uile."  Agus  a  nuair  a  cbunnaic  na
h-uaislean  am  boireannach  bbidbeach  a  bba  'n  so,  thug  iad  i  do
sheòmar  na  bainnse,  agus  lion  iad  gloinne  fion  dhi.  'Xuair  a  bba
i'  dol  a  dh'  ol  na  bha  sa  gbloinne,  chaidh  lasair  suas  aiste,  agus
leum  caiman  oir  's  caiman  airgid  as  a'  gbloinne.  Bha  iad  ag
itealaicb  mu  'n  cuairt,  'nuair  a  tbuit  tri  ghrhinnean  eonia  air  an
urlar.  Leimi  an  caiman  airgiod,  agus  ithear  siid.  Tbubbairt  an
caiman  oir  ris,  na'm  biodli  cuimhn'  agad  'nuair  a  chairt  mi  'm
b'atbaich,  cha  'n  'ithe.^dh  tu  siud  gun  ciiuid  a  thoirt
Dhojihs'a.  a  ritbist  tbuit  tri  griiimiean  corn'  eile,  's  leum  an  caiman
airgiod  agus  ithear  siud  mar  an  ceudna.  "Na'm  bitheadh  cuimhn'
agad  'nuair  a  tbubh  mi  'm  bathaicb  cha  'n  itheadh  tu  siud,  gun
MO  chuid  a  thoirt  dhomhsa,"  ars'  an  caiman  oir.  Tuitear  tri
ghra  innean  eile,  s  leum  an  caiman  airgiod,  agus  ithear  siud  cuide.achd.
"  Na  'm  biodb  cuimbu'  agad  'nuair  a  clireach  mi  nead  na  pioghaid,
cha  'n'itheadh  tu  siud  gun  mo  chuii>  a  thoirt  dhomhsa,"  ars'
an  caiman  oir.  "  Chaill  mi  'n  liidag  'gad'  thabhairt  a  nuas,  agus
tha  i  dhitb  orm  fathast."    Chuimbnich  mac  an  rigb,  's  dh'  aitbnich


e  CO


CATH  NAX  EUN.  47

bh'  aige.  Leum  e  far  an  robh  i,  's  phòg  ei  bho  Ikimh  gu  i
beul,  agus  a  nuair  a  thainig  an  sagairt,  phòs  iad  an  darna  h-uair  ! !
Agus  dh'  f  hag  mis'  an  sin  iad.

Hectoe  Urquhaet.

2.  There  is  another  version  of  this  tale  current  in  Islay.  It
was  taken  down  from  the  recitation  of  Ann  Darrocli  by  Hector
Maclean.  It  is  called  the  "  Widow's  Son."  He  goes  to  seek
his  fortune,  and  comes  to  a  giant's  house,  where  he  engages
himself  as  a  servant  for  a  peck  of  gold  and  a  peck  of  silver.  He
is  sent  first  to  cleanse  the  seven  byres  that  have  never  been
cleansed  for  seven  years.  All  he  puts  out  at  one  door  comes  in
at  the  other.  The  giant's  daughter  comes ;  he  promises  to
marry  her,  and  she  says,  "  Gather,  oh  shovel,  and  put  out,  oh
grape,"  and  the  tools  work  of  themselves,  and  clear  the  byres.  Next
he  has  to  thatch  the  byres  with  feathers,  no  quills  to  be  upwards.
He  gets  only  one  feather,  and  the  giant's  daughter  takes  three
grains  of  barley,  and  throws  them  on  the  roof.  The  birds  of
the  air  gather,  and  thatch  the  byres  in  a  minute.  Next  day  he
has  to  catch  the  steed  that  had  never  seen  a  blink  of  earth  or  air.
The  girl  gives  him  a  little  rusty  bridle,  and  the  steed  comes  and
puts  her  head  into  it.  She  makes  six  little  cakes,  which  she
places  at  the  fire,  the  foot  water,  the  door  of  the  chamber,  the
side  of  the  bed,  and  the  kitchen  door,  and  tliey  mount  the
steed  and  ride  ofi".  The  giant  lies  down  and  calls  to  his
daughter.  The  cakes  answer,  till  there  are  none  leit  to  reply.
Then  he  rises,  takes  his  clothes,  his  boots,  and  his  sword  of
light ;  he  makes  seven  miles  at  each  step ;  he  sees  seven  miles
by  the  light  of  the  sword— he  follows  ;  they  hear  him  coming ;  the
girl  gives  the  widow's  son  a  golden  apple,  and  tells  him  to  throw
it  at  a  mole  on  her  father,  where  alone  he  is  vulnerable  ;  he  fears
that  he  will  miss  so  small  a  mark,  so  she  throws  it  herself,  and
the  giant  is  dead  in  an  instant.

They  reach  a  big  town.  He  is  told  to  kiss  nothing,  or  he
will  forget  the  girl  and  his  promise.  A  big  dog  comes  to  meet
him,  and  puts  his  paws  on  his  shoulder  and  kisses  him.  He
takes  service  with  the  king,  and  at  last  he  is  to  be  married
to  the  king's  daughter.

She  takes  service  with  a  smith,  disguised  as  a  man,  and


48  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  comes  on  famously."  The  smith's  daughter  falls  in  love  with
her,  and  wants  to  many  her.  She  tells,  at  last,  that  she  is  a  girl
in  search  of  her  own  lover.  On  a  day  of  days  the  smith  and  his
daughter  and  his  servant  are  invited  to  the  wedding  of  the
widow's  son  with  the  king's  daughter.  They  go,  and  the  giant's
daughter  sets  a  golden  cock  and  a  silver  hen  on  the  hoard  before
the  bridegroom.  She  takes  a  grain  of  barley  from  her  pocket
and  throws  it  before  them.  The  cock  pecks  the  hen  and  eats  the
barley  ;  and  the  hen  says,  "  Gog,  Gog,  if  thou  hadst  miud  when
I  cleansed  the  seven  byres  for  thee,  thou  wouldst  not  do  that  to
me."  She  does  this  three  times,  and  the  birds  remind  him  of
what  has  been  done ;  then  he  knows  her,  leaps  over  the  board,
catches  her  by  the  arm,  leaves  the  king's  daughter,  and  marries
her.

3.  There  is  another  version  current  at  Tnverary,  repeated  to
me  by  a  stable  boy  who  was  then  employed  at  the  ferry  of  St.
Katharines,  and  who  repeated  it  in  Gaelic  while  rowing  the  boat
to  Inverary.  It  began  thus  : — I  will  tell  you  a  story  about  the
wren.  There  was  once  a  farmer  who  was  seeking  a  servant,
and  the  wren  met  him,  and  he  said,  "  What  art  thou  seeking
for?''  "  I  am  seeking  a  servant,"  said  the  farmer.  "Wilt  thou
take  me  ?  "  said  the  wren.  "  Thee,  thou  poor  little  creature ;
what  good  wouldst  thou  do  ?"  "  Try  thou  me,"  said  the  wren,
So  he  engaged  him,  and  the  first  work  he  set  him  to  was  thresh-
ing in  the  barn.  The  wren  threshed  (what  did  he  thresh  with?
— a  flail  to  be  sure),  and  he  knocked  off  one  grain.  A  mouse  came
out  and  she  eats  that.  "  I  '11  praise  thee,  and  don't  do  that
again,"  said  the  wren.  He  struck  again,  and  he  knocked  off  two
grains.  Out  came  the  mouse  and  she  eats  that.  So  they  arranged
a  contest  that  they  might  know  which  was  strongest,  and
there  was  neither  mouse  nor  rat  on  earth  that  did  not  gather,
nor  was  there  bird  under  heaven  that  did  not  come  to  the  battle.
The  son  of  a  gentleman  heard  of  the  fight,  aud  he  came  also,  but
he  slept  before  it  was  over,  and  when  he  awoke  there  was  neither
"  mouse  nor  rat  to  be  seen ;  there  was  but  one  great  black  raven."
The  raven  and  the  man  agi'ee  to  travel  together,  and  they  come
to  an  inn.  The  gentleman  goes  in,  but  the  raven  is  sent  to  the
stable,  because  the  porters  and  waiters  object  to  the  like  of  a


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  BIRDS.  49

raven.  Here  he  picks  out  all  the  horses'  eyes,  ami  in  the
morning  there  is  a  disturbance.  The  gentleman  pays  and  scolds,
and  they  go  to  another  inn,  where  the  raven  is  sent  to  the  byre,
and  picks  out  all  the  cows'  eyes.  Then  they  part.  The  raven
takes  out  a  book,  and  gives  it  to  his  companion  with  a  warning
not  to  open  it  till  he  gets  home  to  his  father's  house.  He  breaks
the  charge,  looks,  and  finds  himself  in  a  giant's  house.  There  he
takes  service,  and  is  sent  to  clean  the  byre.  It  had  seven  doors,
it  had  not  been  cleaned  for  seven  years,  and  all  that  he  put  out
at  one  door  came  in  at  the  other.  Then  came  the  giant's  red-
haired  daughter,  and  said,  "  If  thou  wilt  marry  me  I  will  help
thee."  He  consents  ;  and  she  sets  all  the  grapes  and  forks
about  the  place  to  work  of  themselves,  and  the  byre  is  cleansed.
Then  the  giant  sets  him  to  thatch  the  byre  with  feathers,  and
every  feather  he  put  on  the  wind  blew  away.  Then  came  the
giant's  girl,  and  the  promise  was  repeated  ;  and  she  played  a
whistle  that  she  had,  and  he  laid  his  head  in  her  lap,  and  every
bird  there  was  came,  and  they  thatched  the  byre.

Then  the  giant  sent  him  to  the  hill  to  fetch  the  gray  horse
that  was  seven  years  old ;  and  she  told  him  that  he  would  meet
two  black  dogs,  and  she  gave  him  a  cake  of  tallow  and  half  a
cheese,  and  a  tether;  and  she  said  that  the  dogs  and  the  horse
would  kill  him  unless  he  gave  the  dogs  the  food,  and  put  the
tether  on  the  horse.  When  the  dogs  ran  at  him,  he  put  the
tallow  in  the  mouth  of  one,  and  the  cheese  in  the  throat  of  the
other ;  and  when  the  horse  came  down  the  hill  to  kill  him  with
his  mouth  open,  he  put  the  tether  in  his  mouth  and  he  followed
him  quietly  home.  "  Now,"  said  she,  "  we  will  be  off.''  So  they
mounted  and  rode  away,  but  first  she  took  four  apples,  three  she
placed  about  the  house,  which  spoke  as  in  the  other  tales,  the
fourth  she  took  with  her.  When  the  last  of  the  apples  had
spoken,  the  giant  rose  and  followed.  Then  the  girl  felt  her
father's  breath  on  her  back,  and  said,  "  Search  in  the  horse's
ear."  And  he  found  a  twig.  "  Throw  it  behind  .vou,"  said  she;
and  he  threw  it,  and  it  became  the  biggest  wood  that  ever  was.
The  giant  came,  and  returned  for  his  "  big  axe  and  his  little  axe,"
and  he  hewed  his  way  through ;  and  the  red-haired  girl  said
that  she  felt  her  father's  breath.  "  Now,"  said  she  to  the  king's
son  (here  the  narrator  remembered  that  he  was  a  prince  instead


50  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

of  a  young  farmer),  "  see  in  the  filly's  ear  "  (here  he  remembered
that  it  was  a  filly).  So  be  looked,  and  found  a  bit  of  stone,
threw  it,  and  it  became  a  mountain.  The  giant  came,  looked
for  his  big  hammer  and  bis  little  hammer,  and  smashed  bis  wa}'
through  the  hill,  and  she  felt  his  breath  again.  Then  he  sought
in  the  ear,  and  found  a  (something)  of  water,  and  threw  it,  and
it  became  a  loch  of  fresh  water.  The  giant  came,  and  returned
for  his  big  scoop  and  bis  little  scoop,  and  baled  the  water  out,
and  he  was  after  them  again.  Then  she  said,  "  My  father  is
coming  now,  and  be  will  kill  us.  Get  off  the  filly,  king's  son,"
and  be  got  off,  and  she  gave  him  the  apple,  and  she  said,  "  Now
put  it  under  the  filly's  foot.''  And  he  did  so  ;  and  the  filly  put
her  foot  on  it,  and  it  smashed  to  bits  ;  and  the  giant  fell  over
dead,  for  bis  heart  was  in  the  apple.  So  they  went  on  to  his
father's  bouse,  and  she  was  made  house-keeper,  for  they  were  not
married ;  then  in  a  short  time  she  became  house-maid,  then
kitchen-maid,  and  then  hen-wife  ;  and  then  the  king  was  to  be
married  (he  bad  now  become  a  king) ;  and  then  first  the  porter,
then  the  bead  waiter,  and  then  some  other  servant,  came  and
courted  her.  Tbey  promise  to  let  her  in  to  the  wedding,  and
give  her  a  fine  dress  each ;  and  each  in  turn  is  admitted  into
the  hen-wife's  room ;  but  the  first  goes  to  put  the  lid  on  the
kettle,  and  is  fast  by  the  hands  all  night ;  the  second  is,  in  like
manner,  fast  to  a  window  which  be  goes  to  shut ;  and  the  feet
of  the  third  stick  to  the  iioor.  Then  she  comes  to  the  porter  in
her  dirty  dress.  He  drives  her  away,  but  he  is  at  last  obliged
to  give  her  a  fine  dress,  and  let  her  in.  Then  she  comes  to  the
head  waiter  who  does  the  same.  Then  she  comes  to  the  ser-
vant, who  does  the  same,  but  is  forced  to  let  her  in  to  the
wedding.  Then  she  takes  out  a  golden  cock  and  a  silver  ben,
which  she  had  brought.  She  sets  them  on  the  floor,  and  tbey
talk.  "Dost  thou  remember  how  I  cleansed  byre?  Dost  thou
mind  how  I  tbatchod  the  barn  ?  Dost  thou  remember  bow  I  saved
thy  life?"  And  so  on,  till  tbey  repeat  the  whole  story,  remind-
ing the  king  bow  she  bad  been  the  house-keeper,  house-maid,  and
hen-wife,  and  faithful  throughout.  And  the  king  said,  "  Stop,  I
will  marry  thee."  And  when  she  said  that,  she  showed  the  fine
dresses  that  she  bad  got  from  the  porter,  and  the  head  waiter.


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  BIRDS.  5  I

etc.,  and  they  were  married;  and  if  tliey  have  not  died  since
then,  they  are  alive,  merry,  and  rich.

4.  The  stable  boy  said  that  he  had  learned  this  from  a  very
old  man,  now  living  near  Lochgilphead,  who  could  tell  it  much
better  than  he  could.  A  gentleman  at  the  inn  said  that  an  old
woman,  now  dead,  used  to  tell  something  like  this,  and  that  her
raven  was  the  son  of  the  king  of  Lochlin.  The  old  woman  lived
near  Dalmally,  and  her  daughter  is  said  to  be  there  still,  but  I
have  been  unable  to  find  her  out.  On  asking  for  her,  and  giving
my  reason,  I  was  told  by  a  waiter  that  "  light  had  dawned  in  that
district,  and  that  ignorance  was  banished."

5.  A  very  similar  story  is  well  known  in  South  Uist,  and  a
fragment  of  it  is  still  told  in  Sutherland.

6.  The  Uist  story  told  to  me  by  Donald  MacCraw  as  we  walked
along  the  road  last  September  is  called  "  Mother's  Blessing."
The  lad,  so  called  because  he  is  so  good,  goes  to  seek  his  fortune.
He  plays  cards,  and  wins  from  some  gentles ;  then  stakes  seven
years'  service  against  so  many  thousands,  and  loses  to  a  black  dog
who  comes  in  with  a  looking-glass  on  every  paw.;  He  goes  to  serve
the  dog,  and  is  shown  a  cave  where  there  are  a  hundred  stakes
and  ninety-nine  heads  on  them.  He  is  set  to  cleanse  the  byre,  to
catch  the  steed,  and  to  rob  the  nest.  The  black  dog's  daughter
helps.  She  throws  out  one  spadeful,  and  the  litter  flies  out,
"  seven  spadefuls  at  each  of  seven  doors  for  every  one  he  throws
out."  She  gives  a  rusty  bridle  for  the  steed.  She  strikes  the  sea
with  a  rod,  and  makes  a  way  to  the  island  where  the  nest  is,  and
gives  her  toes  to  make  a  ladder  to  climb  up.  He  leaves  one,  and
offers  one  of  his  own  instead.  She  refuses,  because  "  her  father
always  washes  her  feet  himself."  They  ride  off  on  the  horse — the
dog  and  his  company  follow.  A  wood  grows  and  a  river  flows
from  things  found  in  the  horse's  ear,  and  the  dog  is  defeated  but
not  killed.  She  gives  the  lad  a  treasure  which  is  found  under  a  tuft
of  rushes.  He  goes  home,  speaks  to  his  mother,  and  forgets  all.
He  builds  a  palace,  and  is  to  be  married  to  a  lady,  but  she  is  so
proud  that  she  will  have  the  widow's  hut  pulled  down.  Mother's
Blessing  will  not,  so  the  match  is  off,  but  after  a  time  it  is  on
again.  The  door  opens,  and  in  walks  the  black  dog  smoking  a  pipe.
He  goes  to  the  priest  and  forbids  the  ceremony.  The  priest
says,  "  Begone  to  thine  own  place  down  below.''     "It's  many


52  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.

a  long  day  since  tliou  art  \vanted  there,''  says  the  dog.  The
priest  defies  all  fiends,  and  loill  marry  the  pair.  The  dog  says,
"  If  I  tell  all  I  know  thou  wilt  not."  Then  he  whispers,  and  the
priest  is  silenced.  Then  he  brings  in  a  fine  gentleman,  and  says
to  the  bride — "  There  is  thy  first  lover  ;  marry  him."  And  they
are  married  then  and  there.  The  dog  brings  in  his  own  daugh-
ter :  Mother's  Blessing  marries  her,  and  the  dog  danced  at  the
wedding  with  the  priest.  MacCraw  said  there  was  something  left
out  which  his  informant  would  not  tell.

7.  I  have  received  yet  another  version  of  this  tale,  very  well
written  in  Gaelic,  from  John  Dewar,  who,  according  to  his  own
account  of  himself,  is  now  (October  1859)  residing  in  Glendavuail,
and  is  about  to  proceed  to  Eoseneath,  where  he  used  to  get  em-
ployment in  making  stobbs  for  the  fences.  He  heads  his  story —
"  Tales  of  the  Gael  in  the  "Winter  Xights,"  and  promises  to  send
more.  Uirsgealn  kan  Gael  s'  na  oidhchenan  geamhuaidh.
— His  GaeHc  spelling  is  rather  phonetic —

He  heard  it  from  his  mother,  told  nearly  as  the  stable-boy
gave  it ;  and  has  heard  it  lately  in  Glen  Daruail.  He  first  heard
an  abridgment  four  or  five  years  before  1812  or  1813,  when  he
learned  this  from  Mary  MacCalum,  a  native  of  Glen  Falloch,  at
the  head  of  Loch  Lomond.

It  begins  with  a  quarrel  between  a  mouse  and  a  wren  in  a
bam  about  a  grain  of  oats,  which  the  mouse  will  eat.  The  wren
brings  his  twelve  birds — the  mouse  her  tribe.  The  wren  says,
"  Thou  hast  thy  tribe  with  thee"' — "As  well  as  thyself,"  says  the
mouse.  The  mouse  sticks  out  her  leg  proudly,  and  the  wren
breaks  it  with  his  flail.  The  creatures  of  the  plain  and  of  the  air
all  joined  the  quarrel,  and  there  was  a  pitched  battle  on  a  set  day.
They  fought  the  battle  in  a  field  above  a  king's  house ;  and  the  fight
was  so  fierce,  that  there  were  left  but  a  raven  and  a  snake.  The
king's  son  looked  out  of  a  window,  and  saw  the  snake  twined  round
the  raven's  neck,  and  the  raven  holding  the  snake's  throat  in  his
beak — gob— and  neither  dared  to  let  go.  Both  jiromised  friend-
ship for  help,  and  the  king's  son  slew  the  serpent. — Nathair.

The  raven  lived  for  a  year  and  a  day  in  the  palace,  then  took
the  king's  son  hunting  for  the  first  time,  and  when  he  was  tired,
carried  him.  "And  he  put  his  hands  about  the  raven  before  his
wings,  and  he  hopped  with  him  over  nine  Bmis,  and  nine  Glens,


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  BIRDS.  53

and  nine  Moors."  They  go  to  the  three  sisters,  and  the  king's
son  gets  hospitality,  because  he  comes  from  tlie  land  where  the
birds  set  the  battle,  and  brings  news  of  the  raven,  who  is  yet
alive,  and  lived  with  him  for  a  year  and  a  day.  Each  day  the
number  of  glens,  and  hills,  and  moors  passed  over,  falls  from  nine
to  six  and  three.  The  same  thing  is  said  by  each  of  the  three
sisters  :  "  That  is  a  year  and  a  day  for  thee  in  this  place,  and  a  piece
in  thy  purse  on  the  day  when  thou  goest ; ''  but  he  keeps  tryst,  and
returns  to  the  raven.  On  the  third  day  came  a  mist,  and  the  raven
was  not  to  be  found ;  but  when  the  king's  son  was  nearly  beat,
he  looked  over  a  rock,  and  saw  Fear  leadanach  buidhe  boidh-

EACU   AGDS    cm    OIR  ANSA  n'  DARNA  LAIMH,  A(iUS    CIR   AIRGID    SAN

LAiMH  EiLE,  a  beautiful  yellow  ringlctted  man,  with  a  golden
comb  in  the  one  hand,  and  a  silver  comb  in  the  other,  who  asked
if  he  would  take  him  instead  of  the  raven.  He  would  not,  "nor
liaU'-a-dozen  such."  So  the  yellow  ringletted  man  told  him  that  he
was  the  Fitheach  crom  dubh — the  black  humpy  raven  that  was
laid  under  spells  by  a  bad  druidh  that  knew  how  to  put  under
spells.  He  had  been  set  free  by  coming  to  his  father's  house
with  the  king's  son.  Then  he  gave  him  a  book,  and  told  him  to
go  with  the  wind  the  way  it  might  blow,  and  to  look  in  the  book
when  he  wished  to  see  his  father's  house,  but  always  from  a  hill
top.

The  king's  son  soon  got  tired,  and  looked  in  the  book  at  the
bottom  of  a  glen,  and  saw  his  father's  house  at  the  bottom  of  a  peat
hag,  with  all  the  doors  and  windows  shut,  and  no  way  to  get  to  it.
Then  came  a  giant,  who  shewed  him  the  way  for  the  promise
of  his  first  son.  He  shewed  him  his  father's  house  on  the  top  of
a  hill,  with  each  door  and  window  open,  and  got  the  promise.
"And  it  was  the  giant  who  had  cast  druidheachd  upon  him,
that  he  might  see  his  father's  house  in  the  bottom  of  a  peat  hag."
"  Long  after  that  the  old  king  died,  and  the  son  got  the  kingly
chair.  He  married  ;  he  had  a  son  ;  and  he  was  coming  on  to  be
a  brave  lad,  and  they  were  dwelling  happily  in  the  castle.  The
giant  came  to  them,  and  he  asked  that  the  king's  son  should  be
sent  out  to  him  there,  and  they  were  not  very  wilHng  to  do  that ;
but  the  giant  said,  unless  they  sent  him  out,  that  the  highest
stone  of  the  castle  would  be  the  lowest  presently ;  and  they
thought  of  arraying  the  cook's  son  bravely,  and  sending  him  out ;


54  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.

and  they  did  that.  The  giant  went  away  with  him,  and  he  had  a
rod  in  his  hand,  and  when  they  were  a  little  bit  from  the  house,
the  giant  asked  the  cook's  son — '  What  would  thy  father  do  with
this  little  rod  if  he  had  it  V '  'I  don't  know  myself, 'said  the  cook's
son,  'unless  he  would  beat  the  dogs  away  from  the  meat.'  With
that  the  giant  understood  that  he  had  not  got  the  right  one,  and
he  turned  back  with  him,  and  he  asked  that  the  king's  son  should
be  sent  to  him.  Then  they  put  brave  clothes  on  the  son  of  the
Stiuard,  and  they  sent  him  out  to  the  giant,  but  the  giant  was
not  long  till  he  did  to  him  as  he  had  done  to  the  cook's  son,  and
he  returned  with  him  full  of  heavy  wrath.  He  said  to  them,  un-
less they  sent  out  to  him  there  the  king's  son,  that  the  highest
stone  in  the  castle  would  be  the  lowest  presently,  and  that  he
would  kill  all  who  were  within ;  and  then  they  were  obliged  to
send  out  the  king's  son  himself,  though  it  was  very  grievous ;
and  the  giant  went  away  with  him.  When  they  were  gone  a  little
bit  from  the  castle,  the  giant  showed  him  the  rod  that  was  in  his
hand  and  he  said — '  What  would  thy  father  do  with  this  rod  if
he  were  to  have  it?'  And  the  king's  son  said — '  My  father  has
a  braver  rod  than  that.'  And  the  giant  asked  him — '  Where  will
thy  father  be  when  he  has  that  brave  (briagh)  rod  ? '  And  the
king's  son  said — '  He  will  be  sitting  in  his  kingly  chair  ; '  and
the  giant  understood  that  he  had  the  right  one.  [This 2iassage  is
translated  entire,  because,  as  J  am  told,  there  is  a  similar  jxissaye
in  the  Volsuny  tale].  The  giant  took  him  home,  and  set  him  to
clean  the  byre  that  had  not  been  cleansed  for  seven  years  ;  and  in
case  of  failure,  threatened    se't  fhuil   urar  aluin    ghrinn  a

BHITHIS  AGUM  A  CHASGA  Si'  lOTADH  AGUS  t'  FHEOIL  UR  GHKINN  MAR

MHILLISTAIN  FHiACAL.  It  is  thy  fresh  goodly  beautiful  blood  I
will  have  quenching  my  thirst,  and  thy  fresh,  beautiful  flesh  as
sweetening  of  teeth  ;"  and  he  went  to  bed.

The  king's  sun  failed  of  course  ;  all  that  went  out  at  one  door
came  in  at  another.  Then  came  maki  ruadii,  Auburn  Mary,
the  giant's  daughter,  and  made  him  promise  to  marry  her,  and  he
gave  his  hand  and  his  promise.  She  made  him  set  all  the  caibe
and  shovels  in  order,  waived  her  hand,  and  they  worked  alone,  and
cleaned  the  byre.  "  She  took  an  apple  from  her  pocket — a  golden
apple — and  it  would  run  from  end  to  end,  and  would  raise  no  stain
in  any  place,  it  was  so  clean."


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  BIRDS.  5  5

The  daughter  "  had  beeu  in  sewing  all  day,"  when  her  father
came  home  from  hunting,  and  asked  his  housewife.  Next  came
the  thatching  of  the  barn  with  "  the  feathers  of  all  the  birds  the
giant  had  ever  killed,  to  be  laid  as  close  as  ever  they  lay  on  the
back  of  a  heather  hen  or  a  black  cock."  The  wind  blew  them
away  as  fast  as  he  put  them  on.  The  daughter  came,  and  after
a  new  promise,  "  chathddh,"  she  shook  them  as  chaff  (is  shaken
on  hill  tops  now),  with  the  wind,  and  the  wind  blew  them  straight
to  tlieir  own  place.  The  giant  came  home  from  his  hunting  as
usual,  and  asked — "  Housewife,  was  Auburn  Mary  out  at  all  to-
day ?  "  "  No,  she  was  within  sewing."  He  went  out,  and  brought
in  Srian  bhriagh  shoileir  dearrsach,  a  brave,  clear,  shiny  bridle,
and  ordered  the  king's  son  to  catch  the  Falaire,  filly,  on  yonder
hill,  and  tie  her  in  the  stable,  or  else,  &c.

The  fine  bridle  would  not  do.  Then  the  daughter  brought  from
the  stable,  Sean  Srian  dubh  meirgach,  an  old,  black,  rusty  bridle
that  was  behind  one  of  the  turf  seats,  and  shook  it,  and  the  filly
came  and  put  her  nose  into  it.

The  giant  had  the  usual  talk,  but  gave  no  more  orders,  and
his  daughter  told  the  king's  son  that  he  would  kill  him  that  night,
but  that  she  would  save  him  if  he  would  promise  to  marry  her.

"  She  put  a  wooden  bench  in  the  bed  of  the  king's  son  ;  two
wooden  benches  in  her  own  bed.  She  spat  at  the  front  of  her  own
bed,  and  spat  at  the  side  of  the  giant's  bed,  and  spat  at  the
passage  door,  and  she  set  two  apples  above  the  giant's  bed,  ready
to  fall  on  him  when  he  should  wake  and  set  him  asleep  again."
And  they  mounted  and  rode  away,  and  set  the  filly  "  running
with  might."

The  giant  awoke,  and  shouted — "Eise,  daughter,  and  bring
me  a  drink  of  the  blood  of  the  king's  son."  "I  will  arise,"  said
the  spittle,  in  front  of  his  bed  ;  and  one  of  the  apples  fell  and  struck
him  between  the  two  shoulders,  and  he  slept.  The  second  time
it  was — "  Rise,  wife  ;"  and  the  same  thing  happened.  The  third
time  he  shouted — "  Art  thou  rising  to  give  me  a  drink  of  the  blood
of  the  king's  son.  Oh  wife?"  "  Coming  with  it,"  said  the  spittle,
"  behind  the  door  of  the  cabh."

Then  he  lay  a  while,  and  got  up  with  an  axe,  and  struck  it
into  the  bench  in  the  bed  of  the  king's  son.  [So  did  a  giant  to
•Tack  the  giant-killer,  and  so  did  Skrymir  to  Thorr  in  Gylfi's  mock-


$6  WEST  IIIGHLAXD  TALES.

ing.  Edda  (translated  by  G.  W.  Dasent,  page  54.)  J  And  when
he  saw  what  he  had,  he  ran  to  his  daughter's  bed,  and  struck  his
axe  into  the  two  things  which  he  found  tliere.  Tlien  he  ran  into
the  stable,  and  then  he  ran  after  the  fugitives.  At  the  mouth  of
day,  the  daughter  said — "  I  feel  my  father's  breath  burning  me  be-
tween the  two  shoulders  ; "  and  the  king's  son  took  a  drop  of
water  from  the  filly's  right  ear,  and  threw  it  over  his  shoulder,
and  it  became  a  lake  which  the  giant  could  not  cross.  Then  he
said — This  is  a  jjart  of  my  own  daughter's  tricks  ;   and  he  called

out,  FIRE  FAIRE  A  MHARI  RUADH  AGUS  NA  THUG  MISE  DHUITSA  DO
Dh'  FHOLUM  AGUS  DO    lOXNSACHADH  n"  F.  SO  MAR    A    RINN  THU   ORM

MA  DHEiREADH.  "  Feere  Faire,  Auburn  ^Mary,  and  all  the  learn-
ing and  teaching  I  have  given  thee,  is  it  thus  thou  hast  done  to
me  at  last  ?"  And,  said  she,  chan  eile  agud  air  ach  a  bhi  nas
GLic  A  rithisd.  "  Thou  hast  for  it  but  to  be  wiser  again."  Then
he  said,  if  I  had  mo  bhata  dubh  dionach  fhein  nach  faca  gaoth
NA  GRiAN  o  CHEAN  SEACiiD  BLiADHNA.  My  own  tight  black  boat
that  saw  neither  wind  nor  rain  since  seven  years'  end.  And  his
daughter  said — "  Thou  hast  for  it  but  to  go  fetch  her  then."

Next  time  it  was  a  little  stone  that  was  found  in  the  left  ear
which  became  a  great  crag,  and  was  broken  through  with  the  big
hammer  and  the  little  hammer  ord  mor  agus  ord  beag,  which  broke
and  pounded  a  breach  through  the  rock  in  an  instant  by  them-
selves. The  third  time  it  was  the  seed  of  a  tree  which  became  a
wood,  and  was  cut  through  by  the  axes  tuathan  of  the  giant,
which  he  set  to  work,  and  his  wife  brought  up  the  black  dogs.

The  fourth  time  it  was  a  very  little  tiny  drop  of  water  that  was
found  in  the  left  ear,  which  became  a  narrow  loch,  but  so  deep  that
the  giant  could  not  cross  it.  He  had  the  usual  talk  with  his
daughter,  and  got  the  same  reply  ;  tried  to  drink  the  water,  but
failed,  for  a  curious  reason,  then  he  thought  he  would  leap  it,  but
his  foot  slipped  and  he  was  drowned.

Then  came  the  incident  of  the  kiss  and  the  old  greyhound.

She  went  to  the  house  of  a  sempstress,  and  engaged  herself,
and  was  a  good  workwoman.  When  the  king's  son  was  to  be
married  to  another,  the  cook  sent  one  of  his  underlings  to  the
well  for  water.  She  stood  on  a  branch  of  a  tree  above  the  fuaran
cold  spring,  and  when  the  mai<l  saw  her  shadow  in  the  well  she
thought  she  had  grown  golden  herself,  for  there  was   "  golden


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  BIRDS.


57


weaving  "  on  tlie  dress  of  Auburn  Mary.  And  she  went  back  to
tbe  cook  and  said :  "  Thou  art  the  lad  to  send  me  to  fetch  thee
water,  and  I  am  a  lump  of  gold."  She  sent  another,  with  the
same  result,  so  he  went  himself  and  saw  Mary  go  to  the  house  of
the  sempstress.  The  cook  told,  and  they  asked  about  the  stranger,
but  no  one  knew  anything  about  her,  till  the  hen  wife  went  to  the
seamstress  and  found  out  "  that  she  had  come  from  a  shore  afar
off ;  that  she  never  saw  her  like  for  sewing  nor  for  shape,  and
that  if  they  bad  her  at  the  wedding,  she  would  make  Feaetan
miracles  tliat  would  astonish  them.-'

The  hen  wife  told  the  queen,  and  she  was  engaged  to  help
to  make  the  dresses.  They  were  pleased  with  her,  and  asked  her
to  the  wedding,  and  when  there  they  asked  her  to  show  some  of
her  wonderful  tricks.

"  Then  she  got  a  pock,  and  showed  that  it  was  empty ;  and
she  gave  it  a  shake,  and  it  grew  thick,  and  she  put  in  her  hand
and  took  out  a  silver  hen,  and  she  set  it  on  the  ground,  and  it
rose  and  walked  about  the  house.  Then  came  the  golden  cock,
and  the  grain  of  corn,  and  the  pecking,  and  the  hen  said —
"  Leig  ma  choir  leam,
Ma  chuid  do  n'  eorna.


Leave  me  my  right,  my  share  of  the  corn  ;
her ;  and  she  stood  out  from  him,  and  said—


the  cock  pecked


Geog  Geog  Geoa.
A'n  cuimhne  leat  an  latha
Chuir  mi  m'  bathach  falamh
Air  do  shon  ?

'S  an  cuimhne  leat  an  latha
A  thubh  mi  n'  Sabbal
Air  do  shon  ?

'S  an  cuimhne  leat  an  latha
Ghlac  mi  n'fhailair
Air  do  shon  ?

'S  an  cuimhne  leat  an  latha
Bhàtli  mi  m'athair
Air  do  shon  ?


Geog  Geog  Geoa.
Dost  thou  remember  the  day
that  I  emptied  the  byre
for  thee  ?

Dost  thou  remember  the  day
that  I  thatched  the  barn
for  thee  ?

Dost  thou  remember  the  day
that  1  ciiught  the  filly
for  thee  ?

Dost  thou  remember  the  day
that  I  drowned  my  father
for  thee  ?


Then   the  king's   son  thought  a  little  and    he    remembered
Auburn  Mary,  and  all  she  had  done  for  him,  and  he  asked  a  voice


58  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

with  her  apart,  and  they  had  a  Httle  talk,  and  she  told  the  king
and  the  queen,  and  he  <bund  the  "gin  "  kin  good,  and  he  turned
his  back  on  the  other  one,  and  he  mariied  Auburn  Mary,  and  they
made  a  wedding  that  lasted  seven  years  ;  and  the  hibt  day  was
uo  worse  than  the  first  day —

S'ma  bha  na  b'f  hearr  ann,  bha,
S'mar  robh  leig  da
And  if  there  were  better  there  were.
And  if  not,  let  them  be.

The  tale  is  ended.

Tha  crioch  air  'n  sgeul.

This  version  is  probably  the  oldest.  It  is  the  most  pic-
turesque ;  it  contains  nearly  all  that  is  in  the  others,  and  it  is  full
of  the  quaint  expressions  which  characterize  the  telling  of  GaeHc
tales.  The  quarrel  is  remarkably  like  a  fable  aimed  at  the  greedy
castle  mouse  and  the  sturdy  country  wren,  a  fable  from  the
country  side,  for  the  birds  beat  the  beasts  of  the  plain,  the  raven
beat  the  snake.

8.  I  have  still  another  version,  told  by  Roderick  Mackenzie,
sawyer,  Gairloch,  and  v\-ritten  by  Hector  Crquhart.  It  is  called,
Njghean  Dubh  Gheal  Dearo,  The  daughter  of  Black-white  Red.

Three  sons  of  the  king  of  Erin  were  on  a  day  playing  shinny
on  a  strand,  and  they  saw  birds  whose  like  they  had  never  seen,
and  one  especially.  Their  father  told  them  that  this  was  Mao
Samhladh  NiGHiNN  DuBH  GnEAL  Deaeg,  and  the  eldest  son
said  that  he  would  never  rest  till  he  got  the  great  beautiful  bird
for  himself.  Then  his  father  sent  him  to  the  king  of  France
(na  Feainge),  and  he  struck  palm  on  latch,  and  it  was  asked
who  it  was,  and  he  said  that  it  was  the  son  of  Erin's  king,  going
to  seek  the  daughter  of  Black-white  Red.  He  was  entertained,
and  next  day  set  off  to  the  king  of  Spain  (na  Spaixde),  and  did
the  same  ;  and  thence  he  went  to  the  king  of  Italy  (na  'hEadilt).
He  gave  him  an  old  man,  Bodach,  and  a  green  boat,  and  they
sailed  (and  here  comes  in  a  bit  of  the  passage  which  is  common
to  so  many  stories  about  hoisting  the  sails,  etc.,  with  one  or  two
Hues  that  I  have  found  nowhere  else,  and  here  the  thrc  e  kings  seem
to  replace  the  three  old  women,  who  are  always  appearing,  tor


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  BIRDS.  59

they  know  where  the  lad  is  going  and  help  him  on).  The  old  man
sailed  the  boat  on  shore,  and  up  to  the  door  of  Black-white
Red,  a  giant,  who  as  usual  said  Fiu  fa  foagraich,  and  threatened
to  make  a  shinny  ball  of  his  head,  and  eat  him  unless  he  per-
formed the  tasks  set  him.  The  giant's  eldest  daughter  came  and
he  knew  her  at  once,  and  they  played  at  cards  all  night.  She  gave
him  a  tether  to  catch  the  little  dun  shaggy  filly,  which  he  would
lose  unless  he  put  it  on  the  fiist  time.

Next  he  had  to  kill,  Takbh  mor  na  Tanich,  the  great  bull
of  the  cattle,  (or  perhaps  of  the  earth.  Tan).  The  daughter  gave
him  her  father's  Bogha  saighead,  arrow  bow,  with  which  he
pushed  at  the  bull,  and  he  followed  him.  He  put  the  big  black
arrow  in  his  forehead  when  he  got  to  the  house.

The  third  task  was  to  cleanse  the  great  byre  of  the  seven
stalls  that  had  not  been  cleansed  for  seven  years,  or  his  head  to
be  a  football.  The  daughter  came  at  night  as  usual  and  gave
him  Baea  agus  Ckoman,  a  barrow  and  a  crook,  and  told  him  to
say  Cab  Cab  a  Chuomain,  Cum  aik  a  bhara  a  shluasaid,  cuir
a  mach  a  bhara,  and  the  tools  worked  of  themselves.

Then  he  had  three  more  tasks  set.  The  three  daughters
put  three  needles  through  three  holes  in  a  partition,  he  caught
the  one  without  "  Chko."(?)  They  put  out  three  great  pins,  and
he  caught  the  one  that  had  two  "  Phloc  "  heads.  Then  they
pushed  out  their  little  fingers,  and  he  took  the  one  with.  Cab  as
AN  lONGA,  a  notch  in  the  nail.

"Huh!  huh!"  said  the  giant,  "thou  hast  her  now,  but  to
Erin  thou  goest  not ;  thou  must  stay  with  me.''  At  last  they  got
tired  of  the  giant's  way  of  living,  and  set  off  together  and  pushed
out  the  barge  (Bielinn).  The  giant  awoke  and  asked,  what  was
that   sound?     One   of  the  daughters   answered,  that  it   was    a

OIDCHE    UAMHASACH   LE   TEIN-ADHAIR   's   TaIKNEANACH,    a    fearful

night  with  heaven — fire  and  thunder.  "  It  is  well  to  be  under
the  shelter  of  a  rock,"  said  the  giant.  The  next  scrape  of  the
boat  it  was  the  same  thing,  and  at  the  third  the  barge  was  out
and  under  sail,  but  the  giant  was  on  foot,  and  he  threw  a
CHEAKTLEADH  DHUBH,  his  black  clue,  and  the  boat  sailed  stern
foremost.  The  giant  sat  down  in  the  gravel  to  haul  the  boat,  and
the  daughter  shot  an  arrow,  ann  am  bonn  dubh  an  fhamhaie,
into  the  giant's  black  sole,  and  there  he  lay.


6o  WEST  niGHLAXD  TALES.

Then  they  got  to  Erin.  He  went  home  first ;  she  staid  in  the
barge,  till  tired  of  waiting,  she  went  to  a  smith's  house  where
she  staid  with  the  smith  and  his  mother.

One  day  the  smith  heard  that  the  RiDiEwas  going  to  be  mar-
ried, and  told  her.  She  sent  him  to  the  palace  to  tell  the  cook
that  the  finest  woman  he  ever  saw  was  living  with  him,  and
would  marry  him  if  he  would  bring  her  a  part  of  the  wedding
feast.

The  cook  came,  and  when  he  saw  her,  brought  a  back  load  of
viands.  Then  they  played  the  same  trick  to  the  butler,  and  he
brought  a  back  load  of  wine  every  day.  Then  she  asked  the
smith  to  make  her  a  golden  cock,  and  a  silver  hen  ;  and  when  he
could  not,  she  made  them  herself.  Then  she  asked  the  butler  if  she
could  get  a  sight  of  the  king's  son  and  the  bride,  "  and  the  butler
was  very  much  pleased  that  she  had  asked  him,  and  not  the  cook,
for  he  was  much  afraid  that  the  cook  was  looking  after  her  also.''
When  the  gentles  saw  her  they  asked  her  to  the  dancing  room,
and  then  came  the  cock  and  hen  play,  in  which  the  hen  said — A
CHOiLicH  DHURDANiCH  DHUiBH,  Thou  black,  murmuring  cock,
dost  thou  remember,  etc.  The  prince  remembers,  marries  the
true  girl,  "and  there  I  left  them."

This  version  varies  considerably  from  the  others.  It  is  veiy
well  told,  and  I  much  regret  that  space  will  not  allow  me  to  give
it  entire,  the  more  so  because  the  reciter  has  braved  the  preju-
dices of  some  of  bis  neighbours  who  object  to  all  fiction.  I  hope
I  have  said  enough  to  show  that  this  story  is  worth  preservation.

If  stories  be  mythological  this  contains  a  serpent.  Nathair,
pronounced  Na-ir,  and  a  raven,  Fitheach,  pronounced  Feeach,
who  seem  like  transformed  divinities,  for  they  appear  only  to
start  the  other  characters,  and  then  vanish  into  some  undescribed
kingdom.  There  is  one  passage  (referred  to)  which  resembles
Norse  mythology.

So  far  as  I  can  make  out,  it  seems  to  be  best  known  near  Cowai
in  Argyllshire,  though  it  is  known  throughout  the  Highlands.

It  would  have  been  easy  to  construct  one  version  from  the
eight  here  mentioned,  but  I  have  preferred  to  give  the  most
complete,  entire,  and  full  abstracts  of  the  rest.  Many  more  ver-
sions can  be  got,  and  I  shall  be  grateful  to  any  one  who  will
throw  light  on  the  story  and  its  origin.


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  BIRDS.


6i


One  of  the  tasks  resembles  one  of  those  imposed  on  Hercules.
It  might  have  been  taken  from  classical  mythology  if  it  stood
alone,  but  Norwegian  peasants  and  West  Highlanders  could  nut
so  twist  the  story  of  Hercules  into  the  same  shape.

All  the  Gaelic  versions  are  clearly  versions  of  the  same  story
as  the  Master  Maid,  in  Dasent's  Norse  Tales  ;  and  there  are  other
traits  in  other  Norse  stories,  which  resemble  the  GaeHc.

Of  the  forty-three  heroes  called  Hercules,  and  mentioned  in
ancient  lore,  one,  at  least,  is  said  to  have  made  long  voyages  in
the  Atlantic  beyond  his  own  pillars.  Another,  or  the  same,  was
prevented  from  being  present  at  the  hunting  of  the  Caledonian
boar,  having  killed  a  man  in  "  Calydo,"  which,  by  the  way,  is
Gaelic  for  Black  Forest.  Another  was  an  Indian,  and  this  may
be  one  of  the  same  clan.

If  stories  be  distorted  history  of  real  events,  seen  through  a
haze  of  centuries,  then  the  giants  in  this  tale  may  be  the  same
people  as  the  Gruagach  and  his  brother  in  the  last.  They  are
here  described  as  a  wise  learned  race,  given  to  magic  arts,  yellow
or  auburn  haired.  (Eu.ìidh)  jiossessing  horses,  and  knowing  how
to  tame  them — able  to  put  the  water  between  them  and  their  pur-
suers— able  to  sew  better  than  the  others — better  looking  —
musical — possessing  treasure  and  bright  weapons — using  king's
sons  of  other  races  as  slaves,  and  threatening  to  eat  them.  If
the  raven  was  one,  they  were  given  to  combing  their  own  golden
ringlets  with  gold  and  silver  combs  and  the  giant  maidens  dressed
the  hair  of  their  lovers  who  laid  their  heads  in  their  laps,  as  I
have  often  seen  black  haired  Lapland  ladies  dress  the  hair  of
Lapland  swains,  and  as  ladies  in  popular  tales  of  all  lands  always
do.  I  will  not  venture  to  guess  who  this  race  may  have  been,
but  the  race  who  contended  with  them  would  seem  to  have  been
dark  complexioned.  Nearly  all  the  heroines  of  Gaelic  songs  arc
fair  or  yellow  haired.  Those  are  dark  who  now  most  admire
yellow  locks.  A  dark  Southern  once  asked  if  a  golden  haired
youth  from  the  north  had  dyed  his  hair,  for  nothing  natural  could
be  so  beautiful.  Dark  Celts  and  fair  northmen  certainly  met
and  fought,  and  settled  and  intermarried,  on  the  western  isles
and  coasts,  where  this  tale  is  current,  but  I  am  told  that  it
has  traits  which  are  to  be  found  in  Eastern  manuscripts,  which
were  old  long  before   the  wars  of  the  Northmen,  of  which  we


62  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.

know,  began.  The  task  I  have  undertaken  is  to  gather
stories,  not  to  account  for  them,  but  this  much  is  sure,
either  Norway  got  this  from  Scotland  or  Scotland  from  Nor-
way, when  they  were  almost  one  country,  or  both  got  it  from
the  same  source.  The  Gaelic  stories  resemble  each  other  about
as  much  as  they  all  resemble  the  Norse.  The  translation  was
published  in  1859,  and  this  story  has  been  current  in  the  islands
at  least  for  40  years.  I  can  remember  to  have  heard  part  of  it
myself  more  than  20  years  ago.  I  believe  there  is  an  Irish  ver-
sion, though  I  have  not  met  with  it  in  any  book.  I  have  traced
the  story  amongst  Irish  labourers  in  London,  who  have  told  me
that  they  used  in  their  young  days  to  sit  about  the  fire  whole
winter  nights,  and  tell  about  the  fight  between  the  raven  and  the
snake;  about  the  giants.  Fin  MacCoul  and  Conan  Maol,  "who
had  never  a  good  word  for  anyone,"  and  similar  tales.  My  in-
formants were  from  Coi'k,  their  language,  though  difficult,  could
be  made  out  from  a  knowledge  of  Gaelic  only.

The  bridle  described  seems  to  be  the  old  Highland  bridle
which  is  still  common.  It  has  no  bit,  but  two  plates  of  wood
or  iron  are  placed  at  right  angles  to  the  horse's  mouth,  and
are  joined  above  and  below  by  a  rope,  which  is  often  made  of
horse-hair,   heather,   or   twisted   bent.      The  horse's  nose  goes

INTO  IT.

The  ladder  is  also  the  Highland  ladder  still  common  in  cot-
tages.    It  consists  of  a  long  stick  with  pegs  stuck  through  it.

There  are  many  stories  in  Grimm's  German  collection  which
resemble  the  Battle  of  the  Birds.  They  have  incidents  in  com-
mon, arranged  somewhat  in  the  same  order;  but  the  German
stories,  taken  together,  have  a  character  of  their  own,  as  the
Gaelic  versions  have :  and  both  differ  from  the  Norwegian  tale.
Each  new  Gaelic  version  which  comes  tome  (and  I  have  received
several  since  this  was  written),  varies  irom  the  rest,  but  re-
sembles them  ;  and  no  single  version  is  like  any  one  of  the  Ger-
man tales,  though  German,  Norse,  and  Gaelic  all  hang  together.


III.

THE    TALE    OF    THE   HOODIE.

From  Ann  MacGilvray,  lelay. — April  1859.

T~^HERE  was  ere  now  a  farmer,  and  lie  had  tliree
-*-  daughters.  They  were  waulking*  clothes  at  a  river.
A  hoodie  f  came  round  and  he  said  to  the  eldest  one,
'M-POS-u-Jii,  "Wilt  thou  wed  me,  farmer's  daughter?"
"  I  won't  wed  thee,  thou  ugly  brute.  An  ugly  brute  is
the  hoodie,"  said  she.  He  came  to  the  second  one  on
the  morrow,  and  he  said  to  her,  "  'M-pos-u-mi,  wilt
thou  wed  me  Ì  "  "  Not  I,  indeed,"  said  she  ;  "  an  ugly
brute  is  the  hoodie."  The  third  day  he  said  to  the
youngest,  'M-pos-u-mi,  "Wilt  thou  wed  me,  farmer's
daughter  Ì"  "I  will  wed  thee,"  said  she  ;  "  a  pretty
creature  is  the  hoodie,"  and  on  the  morrow  they  married.

The  hoodie  said  to  her,  "  Whether  wouldst  thou
rather  that  I  should  be  a  hoodie  by  day,  and  a  man
at  night ;  or  be  a  hoodie  at  night,  and  a  man  by  day  Ì  "
"  I  would  rather  that  thou  wert  a  man  by  day,  and  a
hoodie  at  night,"  says  she.  After  this  he  was  a  splen-
did fellow  by  day,  and  a  hoodie  at  night.  A  few  days
after  they  married  he  took  her  with  him  to  his  own  house.

At  the  end  of  three  quarters  they  had  a  son.      lu

*  Postadh.  A  method  of  washing  clothes  practised  in  the
Highlands — viz.,  by  dancingiSii  them  barefoot  in  a  tub  of  water.

t  Hoodie — the  Royston  crow — a  very  common  bird  in  the
Highlands;  a  sly,  familiar,  knowing  bird,  which  plays  a  great
j)art  in  these  stories.     He  is  common  in  most  parts  of  Europe.


04  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.

the  night  there  came  the  very  finest  music  that  ever
•was  heard  about  the  house.  Every  man  slept,  and  the
child  was  taken  away.  Her  father  came  to  the  door  in
the  morning,  and  he  asked  how  were  all  there.  He
was  veiy  sorrowful  that  the  child  should  be  taken  away,
for  fear  that  he  should  be  blamed  for  it  himself.

At  the  end  of  three  quarters  again  they  had  another
son.  A  watch  AA^as  set  on  the  house.  The  finest  of  music
came,  as  it  came  before,  about  the  house  ;  CA^ery  man
slept,  and  the  child  Avas  taken  away.  Her  father  came
to  the  door  in  the  morning.  He  asked  if  eveiy  thing
was  safe  ;  but  the  child  was  taken  aAvay,  and  he  did
not  know  what  to  do  for  sorrow.

Again,  at  the  end  of  three  quarters  they  had  another
son.  A  watch  was  set  on  the  house  as  usual.  Music
came  about  the  house  as  it  came  before ;  CA^ery  one  slept,
and  the  cliild  Avas  taken  aAvay.  When  they  rose  on  the
morrow  they  Avent  to  another  place  of  rest  that  they  had,
himself  and  Ms  Avife,  and  his  sister-in-laAv.  He  said  to
them  by  the  way,  "  See  that  you  have  not  forgotten  any
thing."  The  Avife  said,  "I  forgot  my  ccvrse  comb."
The  coach  in  which  they  were  fell  a  Avithered  faggot,
and  he  went  away  as  a  hoodie.

Her  two  sisters  returned  home,  and  she  folloAved  after
him.  T\lien  he  Avould  be  on  a  hill  top,  she  would  follow
to  try  and  catch  him  ;  and  when  she  Avould  reach  the
top  of  a  liill,  he  Avould  be  in  the  hollow  on  the  other  side.
WTien  night  came,  and  she  was  tired,  she  had  no  place
of  rest  or  dwelling  ;  she  saw  a  little  house  of  hght  far
from  her,  and  though  far  from  her  she  was  not  long
in  reaching  it.

"WTien  she  reached  the  house  she  stood  deserted  at
the  door.  She  saw  a  little  laddie  about  the  house,
and  she  yearned  to  liim  exceedingly.  The  houscAvife
told  her  to  come  up,   that  she   kncAV  her  cheer  and


THE  TALE  OF  THE  HOODIE.  65

travel.  She  laid  down,  and  no  sooner  did  the  day
come  than  she  rose.  She  went  out,  and  when  she  was
out,  she  was  going  from  hill  to  hill  to  try  if  she  could
see  a  hoodie.  She  saw  a  hoodie  on  a  hill,  and  when  she
would  get  on  the  hill  the  hoodie  would  be  in  the  hollow,
when  she  would  go  to  the  hollow,  the  hoodie  would  be
on  another  hill.  When  the  night  came  she  had  no
place  of  rest  or  dwelHng.  She  saw  a  little  house  of
hght  far  from  her,  and  if  far  from  her  she  was  not  long-
reaching  it.  She  went  to  the  door.  She  saw  a  laddie
on  the  floor  to  whom  she  yearned  right  much.  The
house-\vife  laid  her  to  rest.  No  earlier  came  the  day
than  she  took  out  as  she  used.  She  passed  this  day
as  the  other  days.  When  the  night  came  she  reached
a  house.  The  housewife  told  her  to  come  up,  that
she  knew  her  cheer  and  travel,  that  her  man  had  but
left  the  house  a  little  while,  that  she  should  be  clever,
that  this  was  the  last  night  she  would  see  him,  and  not
to  sleep,  but  to  strive  to  seize  him.  She  slept,  he  came
where  she  was,  and  he  let  fall  a  ring  on  her  right  hand.
Now  when  she  awoke  she  tried  to  catch  hold  of  Mm,
and  she  caught  a  feather  of  his  wing.  He  left  the
feather  with  her,  and  he  went  away.  When  she  rose
in  the  morning  she  did  not  know  what  she  should  do.
The  housewife  said  that  he  had  gone  over  a  hill  of
poison  over  which  she  could  not  go  without  horse-
shoes on  her  hands  and  feet.  She  gave  her  mans
clothes,  and  she  told  her  to  go  to  learn  smithying  till
she  should  be  able  to  make  horse-shoes  for  herself.

She  learned  smithying  so  well  that  she  made  horse-
shoes for  her  hands  and  feet.  She  Avent  over  the  hill
of  poison.  That  same  day  after  she  had  gone  over  the
liill  of  poison,  her  man  was  to  be  married  to  the
daughter  of  a  great  gentleman  that  was  in  the  town.

There  was  a  race  in  the  town  that  day,  and  every


66  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

one  was  to  be  at  tlie  race  but  the  stranger  that  had
come  over  the  poison  hill.  The  cook  came  to  her,  and
he  said  to  her,  "Would  she  go  in  his  place  to  make
the  wedding  meal,  and  that  he  might  get  to  the  race.

She  said  she  would  go.  She  was  always  watching
where  the  bridegroom  would  be  sitting.

She  let  fall  the  ring  and  the  feather  in  the  broth
that  was  before  him.  With  the  first  sj)oon  he  took  up
the  ring,  with  the  next  he  took  up  the  feather.  "When
the  minister  came  to  the  fore  to  make  the  marriage,
he  would  not  marry  till  he  shoidd  find  out  who  had
made  ready  the  meal.  They  brought  up  the  cook  of
the  gentleman,  and  he  said  that  tJiis  was  not  the  cook
who  made  ready  the  meal.

They  brought  up  now  the  one  who  had  made
ready  the  meal  He  said,  "  That  now  was  liis  married
wife."  The  spells  went  ofi"  Mm.  They  turned  back
over  the  hill  of  poison,  she  throA^ing  the  horse-shoes
beliind  her  to  him,  as  she  went  a  httle  bit  forward,  and
he  following  her.  "V^Tien  they  came  back  over  the
hill,  they  went  to  the  three  houses  in  which  she  had
been.  These  were  the  houses  of  his  sisters,  and  they
took  with  them  the  three  sons,  and  they  came  home
to  their  own  house,  and  they  were  happy.


Written  down  by  Hector  Maclean,  schoolmaster  at  Bally-
grant,  in  Islay,  from  the  recitation  of  "  Ann  MacGilvray,  a
Cowal  woman,  married  to  a  farmer  at  Kilmeny,  one  Angus
Macgeachy  from  Campbelltown."     Sent  April  14,  1859.

The  Gaelic  of  this  tale  is  the  plain  everyday  Gaelic  of  Islay
and  the  west  Highlands.  Several  words  are  variously  spelt,  but
they  are  variously  pronounced — falbh,  folbh,  tigh,  taighe,  taighean.
There  is  one  word,  Tapaidh,  which  has  no  English  equivalent ;
it  is  like  Tapper  in  Swedish.


URSGEUL  NA  FEANNAIG.  67


URSGEUL  NA  FEANNAIG.

Bha  tuathanach  ann  roimhe  so;  agus  bha  triiiir  nighean  aige.
Bha  eud  a'  postadh  aig  obhainn.  Thkinig  feannag  mu'n  cuairt  's
tliuirt  e  ris  an  te  bu  shine,  "  Am  pos  thu  mise  a  nighean  an  tuath-
anaich."  "  Cha  phòs  mis'  thu  'bheathaich  ghrannda  :  is  grannda  am
beathach  an  f  heannag,"  ar;;'  ise.  Tliainig  e  thun  na  darna  te  an  la  'r
na  mhaireach,  's  thuirt  e  rithe.  "  Am  pos  thu  mise."  "  Cha  phòs
mi  fe'in,"  ars'  ise ;  "  's  grannda  am  beathach  an  f  heannag."  An  treas
la  thuirt  e  ris  an  te  b'oige.  "  Am  pos  thu  mise,  a  nighean  an  tuath-
anaich."  "Pòsaidh,"  ars'  ise  ;  "  s  boidheach  am  beathach  an  f  hean-
nag." An  la'r  na  mhaireach  phòs  èud.  Thuirt  an  f  heannag  rithe.
'Co  'ca  is  fhearr  leat  mise  a  bhith  am  f  heannag '.san  latha'samdhuine
san  oidhche,  na  bhith  'san  oidhche  am  f  heannag  's  am  dhuine  "san
latha?"  "'S  fhearr  leam  thu  bhith  a'd'  dhuine  'san  latha  's  a'd'  f  hean-
nag 'san  oidhche,"  ars'  ise.  As  a  dhe'igh  so  bha  e  na  òganach  ciatach
'san  latha,  's'na  f  heannag  's  an  oidhche.  Am  beagan  Taithean  an  de'igh
dliaibhposadh  thug  e  leis  i  'ga  'thigh  fe'in.  Annan  ceann  tri  raithean
liha  mac  aca.  Anns  an  oidhche  thainig  an  aon  cheol  timchiol  an
taighe  bu  bhòidhche  'chualas  riamh.  Chaidil  a  h-uile  duine,  's  thug-
adh  air  folbli  am  paisde.  Thainig  a  h-athair  thun  an  doruisd  sa  mhad-
ainn.  Dli'f  heoraich  e  de  mur  a  bha  h-uile  h-aon  an  siod;  's  bha
duilichinn  mhor  air  gun  tugadh  air  folbh  am  paisde,  eagal  agus  gum
biodh  coir'  air  a  dhèanadh  air  fein  air  a  shou.  Ann  an  ceann  tri
raithhean  a  rithisd  bha  mac  eile  aca.  Chuireadh  faire  air  an  tigh.
Thainig  ceol  ra  bhoidheach  mar  a  thainig  roimhid  timchioU  an
taighe ;  chaidil  a  h-uile  duine 's  thugadh  air  folbh  am  paisde.  Thainig
a  h-athair  thun  an  doruisd  sa  mhaiduinn  dh'  f  heoraich  e  an  robh
gach  ni  ceart ;  ach  bha  'm  paisde  air  a  thoirt  air  folbh,  's  cha  robh
f  hios  aige  de  a  dhèanadh  e  leis  an  duilichiun.  Ann  an  ceann  tri
raithean  a  rithisd  bha  mac  eile  aca.  Chaidh  faire  'chur  air  an  tigh
mar  a  b'  abhaist.  Thainig  ceol  timchioll  an  taighe  mar  a  thainig
roimhid ;  chaidil  gach  neach,  's  thugadh  am  paisde  air  folbh.  Nur
a  dh'  e'iridh  iad  an  la  'r  na  mhaireach  chaidh  iad  gu  haite  tamh  eile
a  bha  aca,  e  fein  s  a'  bhean,  "s  a'  phinthar  che'ile.  Thuirt  e  riu  air  an
rathad.  Feuch  nach  do  dhichuimhnich  sibh  ni  'sam  bith.  Urs'  a'
bhean,  "  Duiochuimhnich  mi  mo  chir  gharbh."  Thuitan  carbad
anns  an  robh  eud  'na  chual  chrionaich,  s  dh  fhalbh  esan  'na  f  hean-
nag. Thill  a  dha  phiuthair  dhachaidh  's  dh'fholbh  ise  'na  dheigh-
san.  Nur  a  bhiodh  esan  air  mullach  cnoic  leanadh  ise  e  feuch  am
beireadh  i  air,  's  nur  a  ruigeadh  ise  mullach  a  chnoic  bhiodh  esan


68


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


san  lag  an  taobh  eile.  Nur  a  thainig  an  oidhche  's  i  sgith,  cha  robh
kite  tamh  na  fuireachd  aice.  Chunnaic  i  tigh  beag  soluisd  fada
uaithe  's  ma  b'  fhada  uaithe  cha  b'  f hada  a  bha  ise  'ga  ruigheachd.
Nur  a  rainig  i  an  tigh  sheas  i  gu  diblidh  aig  an  dorusd.  Chun-
naic i  balachan  beag  feadli  an  taighe,  s  theòigh  i  ris  gu  h-anabarrach.
Thuirt  bean  an  taighe  rithe  tighinn  a  mos,  gu  robh  fios  a  seud  's  a
siubhail  aicese.  Chaidh  i  laidhe,  's  cha  bu  luaithe  thainig  an  latha
na  dh'  e'iridh  i.  Chaidh  i  'mach,  's  nur  a  bha  i  'mach  bha  i  o  chnoc
gu  cnoc  feuch  am  faiceadh  i  feannag.  Chunnaic  i  feannag  air  cnoc,
"s  nur  a  rachadh  ise  air  a' chnoc  bhiodh  an  f  heannag  'san  lag  nur
a  rachadh  i  do'n  lag  bhiodh  an  f  bean  nag  air  cnoc  eile.  Nur  a
thainig  an  oidhche  cha  robh  kite  taimh  na  fuireachd  aice.  Chun-
naic i  tigh  beag  soluisd  fada  uaithe  's  ma  b'  fhada  uaithe  cha  b'  fhada
'bha  ise  'g  a  ruigheachd.  Chaidh  i  gus  an  dorusd.  Chunnaic  i  balachan
air  an  urlar  ris  an  do  theòigh  i  gu  ra  mhbr.  Chuir  bean  an  taighe  a
laidhe  i.  Cha  bu  rahoich'  a  thkinig  an  latha  na  ghabh  i  'mach  mar  a
b'abhaist.  Chuir  i  seachad  an  latha  so  mar  na  laithean  eile.  Nur  a
thainig  an  oidhche  rainig  i  tigh.  Thuirt  bean  an  taighe  rithe  tigh-
inn a  nios ;  gu  'robh  fios  a  seud  "s  a  siubhail  aice-se ;  nach  d'  rinii
a  fear  ach  an  tigh  f  hkgail  bho  cheann  tiota  beag;  i  'bhith  tapaidh,
gum  b'  i  siod  an  oidhche  ma  dheireadh  dhi  f  haicinn,  's  gun  i  'chadal,
ach  stri  ri  grc^im  a  dhèanadh  air.  Chaidil  ise,  's  thkinig  e.san  far  an
robh  i,  's  lig  e  tuiteam  do  dh'  f  hainn,  air  a  laimh  dheas.  Nur  a  dhuisg
ise  an  so  thug  i  Ikmh  air  breith  air,  's  rug  i  air  ite  d'a  sge'ith.  Leig  o
leatha  an  ite,  's  dh'fhalbh  e.  Nur  a  dh'  eiridh  i  'sa  mhadainn  cha
robh  fios  aice  de  a  dheknadh  i.  Thuirt  bean  an  taighe  gu'n  deach  e
thairis  air  cnoc  neamh  air  nach  b'urrainn  ise  del  thairis  gun  chriiidh-
ean  d'a  Iknihan  agus  d'a  casan.  Thug  i  dhi  aodach  fir  's  thuirt  i
rithe  dol  a  dh'  ionnsachadh  na  goibhneachd  gus  am  biodh  i  com-
asach  air  criiidhean  a  dhcanadh  dhi  fein.  Dh'  ionnsaich  i  'ghoibh-
neachd  cho  math  's  gun  d'  rinn  i  criiidhean  d'a  lamhan  agus  da  casan.
Dh  'fholbh  i  thairis  air  a  chnoc  neamh.  An  latha  sin  fein  an  dtìgh
dhi  dol  thairis  air  a  chnoc  neamh  bha  posadh  ri  bhith  aig  a  fear  ri
nighean  duine  uasail  mhòir  a  bha  'sa  bhaile.  Bha  rèis  anus  a  bhaile
an  latha  sin,  s  bha  h-uile  h-aon  ri  bhith  aig  an  reis  ach  an  coigreach
a  thkinig  thairis  air  a'  chnoc  neamh.  Thainig  an  cocaire  a  h-ionns-
uidh,  's  thuirt  e  rithe  an  rachadh  i  'na  kite  a  diièanadh  biadh  na
bainnse,  's  gu  'faigheadh  e  dol  thun  na  re'ise.  Thuirt  i  gu'  rachadh.
Bhai  furachail  daonnan  ckite  am  biodh  fear  na  bainnse  'na  shuidhe.
Lig  i  tuiteam  do  'n  f  hkinne  agus  do  'n  ite  'sa  bhrot  a  bha  air  a
bheulaobh.  Leis  a'  chiad  spain  thog  e'm  fkinne,  s  leis  an  ath  spkin
thog  e  'n  ite.      Nur  a  thkinig  am  niinistir  a  Ikthair  a  dheanadh


THE  TALE  OF  THE  HOODIE.  69

a  phòsaidh  cha  phòsadh  esan  gus  am  faigheadh  e  fios  co  a  rinn
am  biadh.  Thug  iad  a'  lathair  cocaire  an  duine  uasail,  's  thiiirt
esan  nach  b'  e  siod  an  cocaire  a  rinn  am  biadh.  Thug  iad  an
lh,thair  an  so  an  t-aon  a  rinn  am  biadh.  Thuirt  esan  gum  b'e  siod
a'bhean  phòsda-san  a  nis.  Dh'  f  holbh  na  geasan  dheth.  Thill  iad
air  an  ais  thairis  air  a'  chnoc  neamh  ;  ise  a  tilgeil  nan  criiidhean  as  a
d^igh  da  "ionnsuidhsan  nur  a  tliigeadh  i  treis  air  a  h-aghaidh,  's
esan  'ga  leantainn.  Nur  a  thainig  eud  air  an  ais  thar  a'  chnoic,
chaidh  iad  thun  nan  tri  taighean  anns  an  robh  ise.  B'e  sin  tri  taighean
a  pheathraichean-san,  thug  iad  leo  an  tri  raic.  Thainig  iad  dhachaidh
g'an  tigh  fein,  's  bha  iad  gu  toilichte.

Hector  MacLean.


2.  I  have  a  great  many  versions  of  this  tale  in  Gaelic ;  for
example,  one  from  Cowal,  written  from  memory  by  a  labourer,
John  Dewar.  These  are  generally  wilder  and  longer  than  the
version  here  given.

This  has  some  resemblance  to  an  infinity  of  other  stories.  For
example — Orpheus,  Cupid  and  Psyche,  Cinderella's  Coach,  The
Lassie  and  her  Godmother  (Norse  tales).  East  0'  the  Sun  and
West  o'  the  Moon  (ditto),  The  Master  Maid  (ditto),  Katie
Wooden  Cloak  (ditto),  The  Iron  Stove  (Grimm),  The  Woodcut-
ter's Child  (ditto),  and  a  tale  by  the  Countess  d'Aulnoy,  Prince
Cherie.

If  this  be  history,  it  is  the  story  of  a  wife  taken  from  an  in-
ferior but  civilized  race.  The  farmer's  daughter  married  to  the
Flayer  "Feannag,"  deserted  by  her  husband  for  another  in  some
distant,  mythical  land,  beyond  far  away  mountains,  and  bringing
him  back  by  steady,  fearless,  persevering  fidelity  and  industry.

If  it  be  mythology,  the  hoodie  may  be  the  raven  again,  and
a  transformed  divinity.  If  it  relates  to  races,  the  superior  race
again  had  horses — for  there  was  to  be  a  race  in  the  town,  and
every  one  was  to  be  at  it,  but  the  stranger  who  came  over  the
hill ;  and  when  they  travelled  it  was  in  a  coach,  which  was  suffi-
ciently wonderful  to  be  magical,  and  here  again  the  comb  is
mixed  up  with  the  spells.

There  is  a  stone  at  Dunrobin  Castle,  in  Sutherland,  on  which
a  comb  is,  carved  with  other  curious  devices,  which  have  never
been  explained.     Within  a  few  hundred  yards  in  an  old  grave


70  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

composed  of  great  slabs  of  stone,  accidentally  discovered  on  a
bank  of  gravel,  a  man"s  skeleton  was  found  with  teeth  worn  down,
though  perfectly  sound,  exactly  like  those  of  an  old  horse.  It  is
supposed  that  the  man  must  have  ground  his  teeth  on  dried  peas
and  beans — perhaps  on  meal,  prepared  in  sandstone  querns.  Here,
at  least,  is  the  comb  near  to  the  grave  of  the  farmer.  The  comb
which  is  so  often  found  with  querns  in  the  old  dwellings  of  some
pre-historic  race  of  Britons;  the  comb  which  is  a  civilized  instru-
ment, and  which  in  these  stories  is  always  a  coveted  object  worth
great  exertions,  and  often  magical.


IV.

THE   SEA-MAIDEN.

From  John  Mackenzie,  fisherman,  near  Inverary.

''PHEEE  was  ere  now  a  poor  old  fislier,  but  on  tliis
-*-  year  he  was  not  getting  much  fish.  On  a  day
of  days,  and  he  fishing,  there  rose  a  sea-maiden  at  the
side  of  his  boat,  and  she  asked  him  if  he  was  getting
fish.  The  old  man  answered,  and  he  said  that  he  was
not.  "  What  reward  wouldst  thou  give  me  for  sending
plenty  of  fish  to  thee  Ì  "  "  Ach  !  "  said  the  old  man,
"  I  have  not  much  to  spare."  "  Wilt  thou  give  me
the  first  son  thou  hast  Ì "  said  she.  "  It  is  I  that
would  give  thee  that,  if  I  were  to  have  a  son ;  there
was  not,  and  there  vnR  not  be  a  son  of  mine,"  said
he,  "  I  and  my  wife  are  grown  so  old."  "  Name  all
thou  hast."  "I  have  but  an  old  mare  of  a  horse,  an
old  dog,  myself,  and  my  wife.  There's  for  thee  all  the
creatures  of  the  great  world  that  are  mine."  "  Here,
then,  are  three  gTains  for  thee  that  thou  shalt  give  thy
uòfe  this  very  night,  and  three  others  to  the  dog,  and
these  three  to  the  mare,  and  these  three  likemse  thou
shalt  plant  behind  thy  house,  and  in  their  own  time
thy  -wife  vnll  have  three  sons,  the  mare  three  foals,  and
the  dog  three  puppies,  and  there  will  grow  three  trees
behind  thy  house,  and  the  trees  -will  be  a  sign,  when
one  of  the  sons  dies,  one  of  the  trees  will  wither.
Now,  take  thyself  home,  and  remember  me  when  thy
son  is  three  years  of  age,  and  thou  thyself  wait  get


72  WEST  niGHLANT)  TALES,

plenty  of  fish  after  tliis."  Everything  happened  as
the  sea-maiden  said,  and  he  himself  was  getting  plenty
of  fish  ;  but  when  the  end  of  the  tliree  years  was
nearing,  the  old  man  was  growing  sorrowful,  heavy
hearted,  while  he  failed  each  day  as  it  came.  On  the
namesake  of  the  day,  he  went  to  fish  as  he  used,  but
he  did  not  take  his  son  with  him.

The  sea-maiden  rose  at  the  side  of  the  boat,  and
asked,  "  Didst  thou  bring  thy  son  with  thee  hither
to  me  Ì "  "  Och  !  I  did  not  bring  him.  I  forgot
that  this  was  the  day."  "  Yes  !  yes  !  then,"  said  the
sea-maiden  ;  "  thou  shalt  get  four  other  years  of  him,  to
try  if  it  be  easier  for  thee  to  part  from  him.  Here
thou  hast  his  like  age,"  and  she  lifted  up  a  big  bounc-
ing baby.  "  Is  thy  son  as  fine  as  this  one  Ì  "  He  went
home  full  of  glee  and  dehght,  for  that  he  had  got
four  other  years  of  his  son,  and  he  kept  on  fishing
and  getting  plenty  of  fish,  but  at  the  end  of  the  next
four  years  sorrow  and  woe  struck  him,  and  he  took
not  a  meal,  and  he  did  not  a  turn,  and  his  wife  could
not  think  what  was  ailing  him.  This  time  he  did  not
know  what  to  do,  but  he  set  it  before  him,  that  he
Avould  not  take  liis  son  with  him  this  time  either.
He  went  to  fish  as  at  the  former  times,  and  the
sea-maiden  rose  at  the  side  of  the  boat,  and  she
asked  him,  "  Didst  thou  bring  thy  son  hither  to  me  ?"
"  Och  !  I  forgot  him  this  time  too,"  said  the  old  man.
"  Go  home  then,"  said  the  sea-maiden,  "  and  at  the
end  of  seven  years  after  tliis,  thou  art  sure  to  remember
me,  but  then  it  will  not  be  the  easier  for  thee  to  part
with  him,  but  thou  shalt  get  fish  as  thou  used  to  do."

The  old  man  went  home  full  of  joy ;  he  had  got
seven  other  years  of  his  son,  and  before  seven  years
passed,  the  old  man  thought  that  he  himself  would  be
dead,  and  that  he  would  see  the  sea-maiden  no  more.


THE  SEA-MAIDEN.  73

But  no  matter,  the  end  of  those  seven  years  was  near-
ing  also,  and  if  it  was,  the  old  man  was  not  without
care  and  trouble.  He  had  rest  neither  day  nor  night.
The  eldest  son  asked  his  father  one  day  if  any  one
were  troubling  him  ?  The  old  man  said  that  some  one
was,  but  that  belonged  neither  to  him  nor  to  any  one
else.  The  lad  said  he  must  know  what  it  was.  His
father  told  Idm  at  last  how  the  matter  was  between
him  and  the  sea-maiden.  "  Let  not  that  put  you  in
any  trouble,"  said  the  son  ;  "  I  will  not  oppose  you."
"  Thou  shalt  not ;  thou  shalt  not  go,  my  son,  though
I  should  not  get  fish  for  ever."  "  If  you  mil  not  let  me
go  with  you,  go  to  the  smithy,  and  let  the  smith  make
me  a  great  strong  sword,  and  I  will  go  to  the  end  of
fortune."  His  father  went  to  the  smithy,  and  the  smith
made  a  doughty  sword  for  liim.  His  father  came  home
with  the  sword.  The  lad  grasped  it  and  gave  it  a
shake  or  two,  and  it  went  in.  a  hundred  spHnters.  He
asked  his  father  to  go  to  the  smithy  and  get  him
another  sword,  in  which  there  should  be  twice  as  much
weight ;  and  so  did  his  father,  and  so  Hkewise  it  hap-
pened to  the  next  sword — it  broke  in  two  halves.
Back  went  the  old  man  to  the  smithy ;  and  the  smith
made  a  great  sword,  its  like  he  never  made  before.
"There's  thy  sword  for  thee,"  said  the  smith,  "and
the  fist  must  be  good  that  plays  tliis  blade."  The  old
man  gave  the  sword  to  his  son,  he  gave  it  a  shake  or
two.  "  This  wdl  do,"  said  he  ;  "  it's  high  time  now
to  travel  on  my  way."  On  the  next  morning  he  put
a  saddle  on  the  black  horse  that  the  mare  had,  and  he
put  the  world  under  his  head,*  and  his  black  dog  was
by  his  side.  Wlien  he  went  on  a  bit,  he  fell  in  with
the  carcass  of  a  sheep  beside  the  road.  At  the  carrion
were  a  great  dog,  a  falcon,  and  an  otter.  He  came  down
*  Took  the  world  for  his  pillow.


74  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

off  the  horse,  and  he  divided  the  carcass  amongst  the
three.  Three  thii-d  shares  to  the  dog,  two  third  shares
to  the  otter,  and  a  third  share  to  the  falcon.  "  For
this,"  said  the  dog,  "  if  swiftness  of  foot  or  sharpness
of  tooth  vrUl  give  thee  aid,  mind  me,  and  I  will  be  at
thy  side."  Said  the  otter,  "  If  the  swimming  of  foot
on  the  ground  of  a  pool  will  loose  thee,  mind  me,  and
I  will  be  at  thy  side."  Said  the  falcon,  "  If  hardship
comes  on  thee,  where  swiftness  of  wing  or  crook  of  a
claw  will  do  good,  mind  me,  and  I  will  be  at  thy  side."
On  tliis  he  went  onward  tiU  he  reached  a  king's
house,  and  he  took  service  to  be  a  herd,  and  his  Avages
were  to  be  according  to  the  milk  of  the  cattle.  He
went  away  with  the  cattle,  and  the  grazing  was  but
bare.  "When  lateness  came  (in  the  evening),  and  when
he  took  (them)  home  they  had  not  much  milk,  the
place  was  so  bare,  and  his  meat  and  drink  was  but
.spare  this  night.

On  the  next  day  he  went  on  further  Avitli  them  ;
and  at  last  he  came  to  a  place  exceedingly  grassy,  in  a
green  glen,  of  which  he  never  saw  the  Uke.

But  about  the  time  when  he  should  go  behind  the
cattle,  for  taking  homewards,  who  is  seen  coming  but
a  great  giant,  with  his  sword  in  his  hand.  "  Hiu  !
Hau  !!  HoGARAiCH  !!!"  says  the  giant.  "It  is  long
since  my  teeth  were  rusted  seeking  thy  flesL  The
cattle  are  mine  ;  they  are  on  my  march ;  and  a  dead
man  art  thou."  "  I  said,  not  that,"  says  the  herd  ;
"  there  is  no  knowing,  but  that  may  be  easier  to  say
than  to  do."

To  grips  they  go — himself  and  the  giant.  He  saw
that  he  was  far  from  his  friend,  and  near  his  foe.  He
drew  the  great  clean-sweeping  sword,  and  he  neared
the  giant ;  and  in  the  play  of  the  battle  the  black
dog  leaped  on  the  giant's  back.      The  herd  cbew  back


THE  SEA-MAIDEN.  75

his  sword,  and  the  head  was  off  the  giant  in  a  twink-
ling. He  leaped  on  the  black  horse,  and  he  went  to
look  for  the  giant's  house.  He  reached  a  door,  and  in
the  haste  that  the  giant  made  he  had  left  each  gate
and  door  open.  In  went  the  herd,  and  that's  the  place
where  there  was  magnificence  and  money  in  plenty,  and
dresses  of  each  kind  on  the  wardrobe  with  gold  and
silver,  and  each  thing  finer  than  the  other.  At  the
mouth  of  night  he  took  liimseLf  to  the  king's  house,  but
he  took  not  a  tiling  from  the  giant's  house.  And  when
the  cattle  were  milked  this  night  there  was  milk.  He
got  good  feeding  tliis  night,  meat  and  drink  "without
stint,  and  the  king  was  hugely  pleased  that  he  had
caught  such  a  herd.  He  went  on  for  a  time  in  this
way,  but  at  last  the  glen  grew  bare  of  grass,  and  the
grazing  was  not  so  good.

But  he  thought  he  would  go  a  Httle  further  forward
in  on  the  giant's  land  ;  and  he  sees  a  great  park  of
grass.  He  returned  for  the  cattle,  and  he  puts  them
into  the  park.

They  were  but  a  short  time  grazing  in  the  park  when
a  great  wild  giant  came  full  of  rage  and  madness.  "  Hiu !
Haw  ! !  Hoagraich  ! ! !"  said  the  giant.  "  It  is  a  drink  of
thy  blood  that  quenches  my  thirst  this  night."  "There
is  no  knowing,"  said  the  herd,  "  but  that 's  easier  to
say  than  to  do."  And  at  each  other  went  the  men.
There  was  the  shaking  of  blades  !  At  length  and  at
last  it  seemed  as  if  the  giant  would  get  the  victory
over  the  herd.  Th"n  he  called  on  his  dog,  and  with
one  spring  the  black  dog  caught  the  giant  by  the  neck,
and  swiftly  the  herd  struck  off  his  head.

He  went  home  very  tired  this  night,  but  it 's  a
wonder  if  the  king's  cattle  had  not  milk.  Tlie  whole
family  were  delighted  that  they  had  got  such  a  herd.

He  followed  herding  in  this  way  for  a  time  ;  but


76  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.

one  night  after  lie  came  home,  instead  of  getting  "  all
hail"  and  "good  luck"  from  the  dairymaid,  all  were  at
crying  and  woe.

He  asked  what  cause  of  woe  there  was  this  night.
The  dairymaid  said  that  a  great  beast  with  three  heads
was  in  the  loch,  and  she  was  to  get  (some)  one  every
year,  and  the  lots  had  come  this  year  on  the  king's
daughter,  "  and  in  the  middle  of  the  day  (to-morrow)
she  is  to  meet  the  uille  Bheist  at  the  upper  end  of  the
loch,  but  there  is  a  great  suitor  yonder  who  is  going
to  rescue  her."

"  Wliat  suitor  is  that  V  said  the  herd.  "  Oh,  he  is  a
great  General  of  arms,"  said  the  dairymaid,  "  and  Avhen
he  kills  the  beast,  he  will  marry  the  king's  daughter,
for  the  king  has  said,  that  he  who  could  save  his
daughter  should  get  her  to  marry."

But  on  the  morrow  when  the  time  was  nearing,
the  king's  daughter  and  this  hero  of  arms  went  to  give
a  meeting  to  the  beast,  and  they  reached  the  black  cor-
rie  at  the  upper  end  of  the  loch.  They  were  but  a  short
time  there  Avhen  the  beast  stirred  in  the  midst  of  the
loch  ;  but  on  the  General's  seeing  this  terror  of  a  beast
with  three  heads,  he  took  fright,  and  he  slunk  away,
and  he  hid  himself  And  the  king's  daughter  was
under  fear  and  under  trembling  with  no  one  at  all  to
save  her.  At  a  glance,  she  sees  a  doughty  handsome
youth,  riding  a  black  horse,  and  coming  where  she  w%^s.
He  was  marvellously  arrayed,  and  full  armed,  and  liis
black  dog  mo\Tng  after  him.  "  There  is  gloom  on
thy  face,  girl,"  said  the  youth.  "What  dost  thou
here?"  "Oh!  that's  no  matter,"  said  the  king's
daughter.  "  It's  not  long  I'll  be  here  at  all  events."
"  I  said  not  that,"  said  he.  "  A  worthy  fled  as  Ukely
as  thou,  and  not  long  since,"  said  she.  "  He  is  a
worthy  who  stands  the  war,"  said  the  youth.     He  lay


THE  SEA-MAIDEX.  77

down  beside  her,  and  he  said  to  her,  if  he  should  fall
asleep,  she  should  rouse  him  when  she  should  see
the  beast  making  for  shore.  "  What  is  rousing  for
thee  ?  "  said  she.  "  Rousing  for  me  is  to  put  the  gold
ring  on  thy  finger  on  my  Httle  finger."  They  were
not  long  there  when  she  saw  the  beast  making  for
shore.  She  took  a  ring  off  her  finger,  and  put  it  on
the  little  finger  of  the  lad.  He  awoke,  and  to  meet
the  beast  he  went  with  his  sword  and  his  dog.
But  there  was  the  spluttering  and  splashing  between
himself  and  the  beast !  The  dog  was  doing  all  he
might,  and  the  king's  daughter  was  palsied  by  fear
of  the  noise  of  the  beast.  They  would  now  be  under,
and  now  above.  But  at  last  he  cut  one  of  the  heads
ofi"  her.  She  gave  one  roar  Eaivic,  and  the  son  of
earth  Mactalla  of  the  rocks  (echo),  called  to  her
screech,  and  she  drove  the  loch  in  spindrift  from  end
to  end,  and  in  a  twinlding  she  went  out  of  sight.
"  Good  luck  and  victory  that  were  following  thee,
lad !"  said  the  king's  daughter.  "  I  am  safe  for  one
night,  but  the  beast  will  come  again,  and  for  ever,
until  the  other  two  heads  come  off  her."  He  caught
the  beast's  head,  and  he  drew  a  withy  through  it,  and
he  told  her  to  bring  it  with  her  there  to-morrow.  She
went  home  with  the  head  on  her  shoidder,  and  the
herd  betook  himself  to  the  cows,  but  she  had  not  gone
far  when  this  great  General  saw  her,  and  he  said  to
her  that  he  would  kill  her,  if  she  would  not  say  that
"t  was  he  took  the  head  off  the  beast.  "  Oh  !"  says  she,
"'tis  I  will  say  it,  ^^^lo  else  took  the  head  off  the
beast  but  thou !' "  They  reached  the  king's  house,
and  the  head  was  on  the  General's  shoulder.  But  here
was  rejoicing,  that  she  should  come  home  aHve  and
whole,  and  this  great  captain  with  the  beast's  head
full  of  blood  in  his  hand      On  the  morrow  they  went


7  8  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

away,  and  there  was  no  question  at  all  but  that  this
hero  would  save  the  king's  daughter.

They  reached  the  same  jilace,  and  they  were  not
long  there  when  the  fearful  uille  Bheist  stirred  in  the
nddst  of  the  loch,  and  the  hero  slunk  away  as  he  did
on  yesterday,  but  it  was  not  long  after  this  when  the
man  of  the  black  horse  came,  with  another  dress  on.
No  matter,  she  knew  that  it  was  the  very  same  lad.
"  It  is  I  am  pleased  to  see  thee,"  said  she.  "  I  am  in
hopes  thou  wilt  handle  thy  gi-eat  sword  to-day  as  thou
didst  yesterday.  Come  up  and  take  breath."  But
they  were  not  long  there  when  they  saw  the  beast
steaming  in  the  midst  of  the  loch.

Tlie  lad  lay  dowTi  at  the  side  of  the  king's  daughter,
and  he  said  to  her,  "  If  I  sleep  before  the  beast  comes,
rouse  me."  "  What  is  rousing  for  thee  ? "  "  Eousing  for
me  is  to  put  the  ear-ring  that  is  in  thine  ear  in  mine."
He  had  not  Avell  fallen  asleep  when  the  king's  daughter
cried,  "  rouse  !  rouse  !"  but  wake  he  would  not ;  but  she
took  the  ear-ring  out  of  her  ear,  and  she  put  it  in  the
ear  of  the  lad.  At  once  he  woke,  and  to  meet  the
beast  he  went,  but  tliere  was  Tloopersteich  and  Tlaper-
sticli  rawceil  s'tawceil,  spluttering,  splashing,  raving  and
roaring  on  the  beast  !  They  kept  on  thus  for  a  long
time,  and  about  the  mouth  of  night,  he  cut  another  head
off  the  beast.  He  put  it  on  the  ■^\ithy,  and  he  leaped
on  the  black  horse,  and  he  betook  himself  to  the  herd-
ing. The  king's  daughter  went  home  wdth  the  heads.
The  General  met  her,  and  took  the  heads  from  her,  and
he  said  to  her,  that  she  must  tell  that  it  was  he  Avho
took  the  head  off  the  beast  this  time  also.  "  Who  else
took  the  head  off  the  beast  but  thou  '?"  said  she.  They
reached  the  king's  house  with  the  heads.  Tlien  there
was  joy  and  gladness.  K  the  king  was  hopeful  the  first
night,   he  was    now  sure  that  this  great  hero  would


THE  SEA-MAIDEN.  79

save  his  daughter,  and  there  was  no  question  at  all
but  that  the  other  head  would  be  off  the  beast  on  the
morrow.

About  the  same  time  on  the  morrow,  the  two  went
away.  The  officer  hid  himself  as  he  usually  did.  The
king's  daughter  betook  herself  to  the  bank  of  the  loch.
The  hero  of  the  black  horse  came,  and  he  lay  at  her
side.  She  woke  the  lad,  and  put  another  ear-ring  in
his  other  ear  ;  and  at  the  beast  he  went.  But  if  rawceil
and  toiceil,  roaring  and  raving  were  on  the  beast  on  the
days  that  were  passed,  this  day  she  was  horrible.  But  no
matter,  he  took  the  tliird  head  off  the  beast ;  and  if  he
did,  it  was  not  without  a  struggle.  He  drew  it  through
the  ■^"ithy,  and  she  went  home  with  the  heads.  "When
they  reached  the  king's  house,  all  were  full  of  smiles,
and  the  General  was  to  marry  the  king's  daughter  the
next  day.  The  wedding  was  going  on,  and  every  one
about  the  castle  longing  till  the  priest  should  come.
But  when  the  priest  came,  she  would  marry  but  the
one  who  could  take  the  heads  off  the  withy  without
cutting  the  withy.  "Who  should  take  the  heads  off
the  withy  but  the  man  that  put  the  heads  on  ?  "  said
the  king.

The  General  tried  them,  but  he  could  not  loose
them ;  and  at  last  there  was  no  one  about  the  house
but  had  tried  to  take  the  heads  off  the  withy,  but  they
could  not.  The  king  asked  if  there  were  any  one  else
about  the  house  that  would  try  to  take  the  heads  off
the  withy  ?  They  said  that  the  herd  had  not  tried
them  yet.  "Word  went  for  the  herd  ;  and  he  was  not
long  throwing  them  hither  and  thither.  "  But  stop  a
bit,  my  lad,"  said  the  Idng's  daughter,  "  the  man  that
took  the  heads  off  the  beast,  he  has  my  ring  and
my  two  ear-rings."  The  herd  put  his  hand  in  his
pocket,  and  he  threw  them  on  the  board.      "  Thou  art


8o  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

my  man,"  said  the  king's  daughter.  Tlie  king  was  not
so  pleased  when  he  saw  that  it  Avas  a  herd  who  was  to
marry  liis  daughter,  Lut  he  ordered  that  he  should  he
put  in  a  hetter  dress  ;  hut  his  daughter  spoke,  and
she  said  that  he  had  a  dress  as  fine  as  any  that  ever
was  in  his  castle ;  and  thus  it  happened.  The  herd
put  on  the  giant's  golden  dress,  and  they  married  that
same  night.

They  were  now  married,  and  everything  going  on
well.  They  were  one  day  sauntering  by  the  side  of
the  loch,  and  there  came  a  beast  more  wonderfully
terrible  than  the  other,  and  takes  him  away  to  the  loch
without  fear,  or  asking.  The  king's  daughter  Avas  now
mournful,  tearful,  blind-sorrowful  for  her  married  man  ;
she  was  always  ■ndth  her  eye  on  the  loch.  An  old
smith  met  her,  and  she  told  how  it  had  befallen  her
married  mate.  The  smith  advised  her  to  spread  every-
thing that  was  finer  than  another  in  the  very  same
place  where  the  beast  took  away  her  man ;  and  so  she
did.  The  beast  put  up  her  nose,  and  she  said,  "  Fine
is  thy  jewellery,  king's  daughter."  "  Finer  than  that
is  the  jewel  that  thou  tookest  from  me,"  said  she.
"  Give  me  one  sight  of  my  man,  and  thou  shalt  get  any
one  thing  of  all  these  thou  seest."  The  beast  brought
him  up.  "  DeHver  him  to  me,  and  thou  shalt  get  all
thou  seest,"  said  she.  The  beast  did  as  she  said.  She
threw  him  ahve  and  whole  on  the  bank  of  the  loch.

A  short  time  after  this,  when  they  were  Avalking  at
the  side  of  the  loch,  the  same  l)east  took  away  the
king's  daughter.  Sorrowful  was  each  one  that  was  in
the  town  on  this  night.  Her  man  was  mournful,  tear-
ful, wandering  down  and  up  about  tlie  banks  of  the
loch,  by  day  and  night.  The  old  smith  met  him.  The
smith  told  him  that  there  was  no  way  of  killing  the
uille  Bheist  but  the  one  way,  and  this  is  it — "  In  the


THE  SEA-MAIDEN.  8  I

island  tliat  is  in  the  midst  of  the  loch  is  Eillid  Chais-
tliion — the  white  footed  hind,  of  the  slenderest  legs,
and  the  s-udftest  step,  and  though  she  should  be  caught,
there  would  spring  a  hoodie  out  of  her,  and  though
the  hoodie  should  be  caught,  there  would  spring  a  trout
out  of  her,  but  there  is  an  egg  in  the  mouth  of  the
trout,  and  the  soul  of  the  beast  is  in  the  egg,  and  if
the  egg  breaks,  the  beast  is  dead.

Now,  there  was  no  way  of  getting  to  this  island,
for  the  beast  would  sink  each  boat  and  raft  that
would  go  on  the  loch.  He  thought  he  would  try
to  leap  the  strait  A^ith  the  black  horse,  and  even  so  he
did.  The  black  horse  leaped  the  strait,  and  the  black
dog  with  one  bound  after  him.  He  saw  the  Eillid,
and  he  let  the  black  dog  after  her,  but  when  the  black
dog  would  be  on  one  side  of  the  island,  the  Eillid
would  be  on  the  other  side.  "  Oh  !  good  were  now
the  great  dog  of  the  carcass  of  flesh  here  ! "  No  sooner
spoke  he  the  word  than  the  generous  dog  was  at  his
side;  and  after  the  Eillid  he  took,  and  the  worthies
were  not  long  in  bringing  her  to  earth.  But  he  no
sooner  caught  her  than  a  hoodie  sprang  out  of  her.
"'Tis  now,  were  good  the  falcon  grey,  of  sharpest  eye
and  swiftest  wing  !  "  JSTo  sooner  said  he  this  than  the
falcon  was  after  the  hoodie,  and  she  was  not  long  put-
ting her  to  earth ;  and  as  the  hoodie  fell  on  the  bank
of  the  loch,  out  of  her  jumps  the  trout.  "  Oh,  that
thou  wert  by  me  now,  oh  otter ! "  No  sooner  said
than  the  otter  was  at  his  side,  and  out  on  the  loch  she
leaped,  and  brings  the  trout  from  the  midst  of  the
loch ;  but  no  sooner  was  the  otter  on  shore  with  the
trout  than  the  egg  came  out  from  his  mouth.  He
sprang  and  he  put  his  foot  on  it.  'Twas  then  the  beast
let  out  a  roar,  and  she  said,  "  Break  not  the  egg,  and
thou   gettest  all  thou    askest."      "Deliver  to  me  my

G


82  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.

wik  Ì "  In  the  wink  of  an  eye  she  was  by  liis  side.
When  he  got  hold  of  her  hand  in  both  his  hands  he
let  his  foot  (down)  on  the  egg  and  the  beast  died.

The  beast  was  dead  now,  and  now  was  the  sight  to
be  seen.  She  was  horrible  to  look  upon.  The  three
heads  were  off  her  doubtless,  but  if  they  were,  there
Avere  heads  under  and  heads  over  head  on  her,  and
eyes,  and  five  hundi'ed  feet.  But  no  matter,  they  left
her  there,  and  they  went  home,  and  there  was  dehght
and  smUing  in  the  king's  house  that  night.  And  till
now  he  had  not  told  the  king  how  he  killed  the  giants.
The  king  put  great  honour  on  liim,  and  he  was  a  great
man  with  the  king.

Himself  and  his  wife  were  walking  one  day,  when
he  noticed  a  little  castle  beside  the  loch  in  a  wood  ;  he
asked  his  wife  who  was  dwelling  in  it  ?  She  said  that
no  one  woidd  be  going  near  that  castle,  for  that  no  one
had  yet  come  back  to  tell  the  tale,  who  had  gone  there.

"  The  matter  must  not  be  so,"  said  he  ;  "  this  very
night  I  will  see  who  is  dweUing  in  it."  "Go  not,
go  not,"  said  she  ;  "  there  never  went  man  to  this
castle  that  returned."  "Be  that  as  it  pleases,"  says
he.  He  went ;  he  betakes  himself  to  the  castle.
When  he  reached  the  door,  a  Httle  flattering  crone  met
liiin  standing  in.  the  door.  "  All  hail  aud  good  luck
to  thee,  fisher's  son ;  'tis  I  myself  am  pleased  to
see  thee ;  great  is  the  honour  for  this  kingdom,  thy
like  to  be  come  into  it — thy  coming  in  is  fame  for
this  httle  bothy  ;  go  in  first ;  honour  to  the  gentles  ;  go
on,  and  take  breath."  In  he  went,  but  as  he  was
going  up,  she  drew  the  Slachdan  druidhach  on  him,  on
the  back  of  his  head,  and  at  once — ^there  he  fell

On  this  night  there  was  woe  in  the  king's  castle,
and  on  the  morrow  there  Avas  a  waQ  in  the  fisher's
house.     The  tree  is  seen  withering,  and  the  fisher's


THE  SEA  MAIDEN.  83

middle  son  said  that  liis  brother  was  dead,  and  he
made  a  \o^v  and  oath,  that  he  would  go,  and  that  he
would  know  where  the  corpse  of  his  brother  was  lying.
He  put  saddle  on  a  black  horse,  and  rode  after  his  black
dog  ;  (for  the  three  sons  of  the  fisher  had  a  black  horse
and  a  black  dog),  and  Avithout  going  hither  or  thither
he  followed  on  Ids  brother's  step  till  he  reached  the
king's  house.

Tliis  one  was  so  like  his  elder  brother,  that  the  king's
daughter  thought  it  was  her  ovm  man.  He  stayed  in
the  castle.  They  told  him  how  it  befell  his  brother  ;
and  to  the  little  castle  of  the  crone,  go  he  must — hap-
pen hard  or  soft  as  it  might.  To  the  castle  he  went ;
and  just  as  befell  the  eldest  brother,  so  in  each  way  it
befell  the  middle  son,  and  with  one  blow  of  the  Slach-
dan  druidhacli,  the  crone  felled  laim  stretched  beside  his
brother.

On  seeing  the  second  tree  withering,  the  fisher's
youngest  son  said  that  now  his  two  brothers  were  dead,
and  that  he  must  know  what  death  had  come  on  them.
On  the  black  horse  he  went,  and  he  followed  the  dog  as
his  brothers  did,  and  he  hit  the  king's  house  before  he
stopped.  'T  was  the  king  who  was  pleased  to  see  him  ;
but  to  the  black  castle  (for  that  was  its  name)  they  would
not  let  him  go.  But  to  the  castle  he  must  go  ;  and  so
he  reached  the  castle. — "  All  hail  and  good  luck  to  thy-
self, fisher's  son  :  't  is  I  am  pleased  to  see  thee  ;  go  in
and  take  breath,"  said  she  (the  crone).  "  In  before  me,
thou  crone  :  I  don't  hke  flattery  out  of  doors  ;  go  in  and
let'  s  hear  thy  speech."  In  went  the  crone,  and  when
her  back  was  to  him  he  drew  liis  sword  and  wliips  her
head  off ;  but  the  sword  flew  out  of  his  hand.  And
swift  the  crone  gripped  her  head  with  both  hands,  and
puts  it  on  her  neck  as  it  was  before.  The  dog  sprung
on  the  crone,  and  she  struck  the  generous  dog  with  the


©4  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

club  of  magic  ;  and  tliere  lie  lay.  But  this  went  not
to  make  the  youth  more  sluggisL  To  grips  wth  the
crone  he  goes  ;  he  got  a  hold  of  the  Slachdan  draidhach,
and  with  one  blow  on  the  top  of  the  head,  she  was  on
earth  in  the  -wink  of  an  eye.  He  went  forward,  up  a
little,  and  he  sees  his  two  brothers  Ipng  side  by  side.
He  gave  a  blow  to  each  one  with  the  Slachdan  djuidh-
ach  and  on  foot  they  were,  and  there  was  the  spoil  !
Gold  and  silver,  and  each  thing  more  precious  than
another,  in  the  crone's  castle.  They  came  back  to  the
king's  house,  and  then  there  was  rejoicing  !  The  king
was  growing  old.  The  eldest  son  of  the  fisherman  was
crowned  king,  and  the  pair  of  brothers  stayed  a  day
and  a  year  in  the  king's  house,  and  then  the  two  went
on  their  journey  home,  with  the  gold  and  sdver  of  the
crone,  and  each  other  grand  thing  which  the  king  gave
them ;  and  if  they  have  not  died  since  then,  they  are
alive  to  tliis  very  day.

Written,  April  1850,  by  Hector  Drquhart,  from  the  dictation
of  John  Mackenzie,  fisherman,  Kenmore,  near  Inverary,  who
says  that  he  learned  it  from  an  old  man  in  Lorn  many  years  ago.
He  has  lived  for  thirty-six  years  at  Kenmore.  He  told  the  tale
fluently  at  first,  and  then  dictated  it  slowly.

The  Gaelic  is  given  as  nearly  as  possible  in  the  words  used
by  Mackenzie,  but  he  thinks  his  story  rather  shortened.


A  MHAIGHDEAN  MHARA.

Bha  ann  roimhe  so,  sean  iasgair  bochd,  ach  air  a  bhliadhna  so,  cha
robh  e  faotainn  a  bheag  do  dh'iasg.  Latha  do  na  laithean  's  e  "g-
iasgach,  dh'  eirich  maighdean-mhara  ri  taobh  a  bbata,  's  dh'  f  heòr-
aich  i  dheth,  An  robh  e  faotainn  a  bheag  do  dh'iasg?  Fhreagair
an  seann  duine,  's  thubhairt  e  nach  robh.  "De  'n  duais  a  bheir-
eadh  tu  dhòmhsa  airson  pailteas  6isg  a  chuir  thugad  ?  "    Ach  ars'  an


A  MHAIGHDEAN  MHARA.  85

seann  duine,  "  Cha  'n  'eil  a  bheag  agamsa  ri  sheachnadh."  "  An
toir  thu  dhomh  an  cèud  mhac  a  bhitheas  agad  ?  "  ars'  ise.  "  'S  mise  a
bheireadh  sin  dhuit  na  'm  biodh  mac  agam  ;  cha  robh  's  cha  bhi  mac
agamsa,"  ars'  esan ;  "  tha  mi  fe'in  's  mo  bhean  air  cinntinn  co  sean.
'Ainmich  na  bheil  agud.'  Cha  'n  'eil  agamsa  ach  seann  lair  eicb,
seana  ghalla  choin,  mi  fe'in  's  mo  bhean ;  sin  agadsa  na  tha  chreu-
tairean  an  t-saoghail  mhor  agamsa."  "  So  agad,  mata,  tri  spilgeanan
a  bheir  thu  do  d'  mhnaoi  air  an  oidhche  nochd,  agus  tri  eile  do  'n
ghalla,  agus  an  tri  so  do  'n  chapull,  agus  an  tri  so  mar  an  ceudna,
cuiridh  tu  air  ciil  do  thighe;  agus  'nan  am  fein  bithidh  triliir  mhac
aigdo  bhean,  tri  searraich  aig  an  lair  tri  cuileanan  aig  a  ghalla,  agus
cinnidh  tri  chraobhan  air  ciil  do  thighe,  agus  bithidh  na  craobhan
"nan  samhladh ;  'nuair  a  bhasaicheas  a  h-aon  do  na  mic  seargaidh
te  do  na  craobhan.  Nis,  thoir  do  thigh  ort,  agus  coinnich  mise  dur
a  bhitheas  do  mhac  tri  bliadhna  'dli'  aois,  's  gheibh  thu  fein  pailteas
eisg  an  deigh  so."  Thachair  na  h-uile  ni  mar  a  thubhairt  a  mhaigh-
dean-mhara ;  agus  bha  e  fe'in  a  faotainn  pailteas  c'isg,  ach  a  nuair  a
bha  ceann  nan  tri  bliadhna  a  dUithachadh  bha  an  seann  duine  a  fas
cianail,  trom-chridheach,  's  e  'dol  uaithe  na  h-uile  latha  mar  bha
teachd.  Air  comhainm  an  latha,  chaidh  e'  dh'  iasgachd  mar  a
b'abhaist,  ach  cha  d'-thug  e  mhac  leis.

Dh'  eirich  a  mhaighdean-mhara  ri  taobh  a  bhhta,  's  dh'  fharraid
i,  "an  d'-thug  thu  leat  do  mhac  thugam?"  "Ach!  cha  d'-thug,
dhi-chuimhnich  mi  gu  'mi  b'e  so  an  latha."  "  Seadh  I  seadh  !  mata,"
ars'  a  mhaighdean-mhara,  "  gheibh  thu  cethir  bliadhn'  eile  dheth ;
faodaidh  gur  ann  is  usa  dhuit  dealachadh  ris  ;"  so  agad  a  chomh-
aoise,  'si  togail  suas  leanabh  brèagha  sultmhor,  "am  bheil  do
mhac-sa  cho  brèagha  ris  ?"  Dh'  fhalbh  e  dhachaidh  Ihn  sodain  is
solais,  a  chionn  gu  'n  d'  fhuair  e  ceithir  bliadlm'  eile  d'a  mhac ;  s
bha  e'g-iasgach 'sa'  faotainn  pailteas  eisg.  'Ach  an  ceann  na  h-ath
cheithir  bliadhna,  bhuail  mulad  's  bron  e,  's  cha  ghabhadh  e  Ion  's
cha  dèanadh  e  tiirn,  's  cha  robh  a'  bhean  a  tuigsLnn  dè  a  bha  cur  air.
Air  an  am  so,  cha  robh  fios  aige  de  'dhèanadh  e,  ach  chuir  e  roimhe,
nach  d'-thugadh  e  leis  a  mhac  air  an  uair  so  nis  mo.  Dh' -fhalbh
e  dh'  iasgach  mar  air  na  h-uairean  roimhe,  's  dh'èirich  a  mhaigh-
dean-mhara ri  taobh  a  bhata,  's  dh'  fheoraich  i  dheth,  "An  d' thug
thu  thugam  do  mhac?"  "Ach  dhi-chuimhnuich  mi  e  air  an  uair  so
cuideachd,  ars'  an  seann  duine."  "  Falbh  dhachaidh,  mata,"  ars'  a
mhaighdean-mhara,  "agus  an  ceann  seachd  bliadhna  na  dheigh  so,
tha  thu  cinnteach  mis  a  choinneachadh  ;  ach  cha  'n  ann  an  sin  is  usa
dhuit  dealachadh  ris ;  ach  gheibh  thu  iasg  mar  a  b-abhaist  dhuit."

Chaidh  an  seann  duine  dhachaidh  Ian  aoibhneis  :  fhuar  e  seachd


86  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.

bliadhn'  eile  da  mhac  !  agus  mu'n  rachadh  seachd  bliadhna  seachad,
bha  'n  seanu  duine  a  smuaineachadb  gu  'm  biodh  e  fein  marbh,  agus
nach  faiceadh  e  'mhaighdean-mbara  tuillidh.  Ach  coma  co  dhiu,  bha
ceann  nan  seachd  bliadhna  so  a  dlluhachadh  cuideachd,  agus  ma  "bha
cha  robh  an  seann  duine  gun  chiiram  a"s  trioblaid.  Cha  robh  fois  aige
a  latha  na  dh'  oidhche.  Dh'  fheòraich  am  mac  bu  shine  d'a  athair,
aon  latha,  an  rubh  ni  air  bith  a'  cuir  dragh  air  ?  Thubhairt  an
seanu  duine,  "gu'n  robh,  ach  uach  buineadh  sin  dhasan,  na
do  neach  air  bith  eile."  Thubhairt  an  t-oganach  gu  'm  feumadh
e  1Ì0S  fhaotainn  air,  's  dh'innis  athair  dha  mu  dheireadh  mar
a  bha  chuis  eadar  e  fein  'sa  mhaighdean-mhara.  "  Na  cuir-
eadli  sin  ciiram  'sam  bith  oirbh,"  ars'  am  mac :  "  Cha  teid,
mise  na  'r  n-aghaidh."  "  Cha  teid,  cha  teid,  a  mhic,  ged  nach
faighinn  iasg  a  chaoidh."  "Mur  leig  sibh  dhomh  dol  maille  ribh,
racliaibh  do"n  cheardach,  agus  deanadh  an  gobha  claidheamh  mor
laidir  dhomhsa,  "s  falbhaidh  mi  air  ceann  an  fliortain."  Chaidh
athair  do  'n  cheardaich,  's  rinn  an  gobha  claidheamh  foghainteach
dha.  Thainig  'athair  dhachaidh  leis  a  chlaidheamh.  Kug  an
t-òganach  air  's  thug  e  crathadh  na  dha  air,  's  dh'  fhalbh  e  'na
cheud  spealg.  Dh'  iarr  e  air  'athair  dol  do'n  cheardaich,  agus
claidheamh  eile  fhaotainn  deanta,  anns  am  bitheadh  a  dhh  uiread
do  chudthrom ;  agus  mar  so  rinn  athair,  agus  air  an  doigh  cheudna
thachair  do  'n  chlaidheamh;  bhrist  e  na  dha  leth.  Air  ais  chaidli
an  seann  duine  do'n  cheardaich,  agus  rinn  an  gobha  claidheamh  mor  :
a  leithid,  cha  'd'  rinn  e  riamh  roimhe.  "  So  agad  do  chlaidheamh,"
ars'  an  gobha,  "'sfeumaidh  an  dorn  a  bhi  maith  a  chluicheas  an
lann  so."  Thug  an  seann  duine,  an  claidheamh  d'a  mhac;  thug  e
crathadh  na  dithis  air ;  "  Ni  so  feum,"  ars'  am  mac,  "  's  mithich  a  nis
trial!  air  mo  thuras,"  ars'  esan.  Air  maduinn  an  ath  latha,  chuir  e
diollaid  air  an  each  dubh  a  bha  aig  an  lair,  agus  thug  e  'n  saoghal
fuidh'  cheann  's  an  ciith  dubh  ri  thaobh.  'N  uair  a  chaidh  e  greis  air,
aghaidh,  thachair  carcais  caora  ris  aig  taobh  an  rathaid.  Aig  a
cliarcais  bha  madadh  mor,  seabhag,  agus  dobhran.  Theirin  e  bhar
an  eich,  agus  roinn  e  a'  chlosach  eadar  an  trihir.  Tri  trianan  do'n
mhadadh,  da  thrian  do'n  dòbhran,  agus  trian  do'n  t-seabhag.
"  Airson  so,"  ars'  am  madadh,  "  Ma  ni  luathas  chas  na  geire  fiacail,
cobhair  dhuit,  cuimhnich  ormnsa,  agus  bithidh  mi  ri  d'  thaobh."
Thubhairt  an  dobhran,  "  JIa  ni  sn'amh  coise  air  grund  linne  fuasg-
ladh  ort.  cuimhnich  ormsa  agus  bithidh  mi  ri  'd'  thaobh."  Ars' an
t-seabhag,  "  Ma  thig  cruaidh  chas  ort,  far  an  delin  luathas  itean  na
crnm  ionga  feum,  cuimhnich  ormsa,  's  bithidh  mi  ri  'd'  thaobh."
Ghabh  e  "n  so  air  aghaidh,  gus  an  d'rUinig  e  tigh  righ,  's  ghabh  e


A  MHAIGHDEAN  MHARA.  87

muinntearas  gu  bhi  "na  bhuachaille,  agus  's  ann  a  reir  's  na  bhitb-
eadh  do  bhainne  aig  a  chrodh  a  bhiodb  a  thuarasdal.  Cliaidh  e
air  falbh  leis  a  cbrodh,  ach  cha  robb  an  t-ionaltradh  acb  lom.
'Nuair  a  thiiinig  an  t-anmoch,  's  a  thug  e  dhachaidh  iad,  cha  robh
"bheag  do  bhainn'  aca,  bha  'n  t-aite  co  lom,  's  cha  robb  'bhiadh  na
■dheoch  ach  suarrach  air  an  oidhche  so.  Air  an  ath  latha,  ghabh  e
air  adhart  ni  b'  fhaide  leo,  agus  mu  dheireadh  thainig  e  gu  aite  ana-
barrach  feurach ,  ann  an  gleann  uaine  nach  fac  e  riamh  a  leithid.
Ach  mu  am  dba  dol  mu  chiil  a  chruidh  gu  'n  tabhairt  dhachaidh,  co
a  chithear  a'  tighinn  ach  famhair  mor,  'sa  chlaidheamh  'na  Ihimh.
"  Hiu  !  Hau  I  HoAGRAiCH !"  ars'  am  famhair,  "  's  fada  bho  'n  bha
mcirg  air  m'  fbiaclan  ag  iarraidh  do  chuid  feola  :  's  leamsa  'n  crodh,
tha  iad  air  mo  chrich,  agus  is  duine  marbh  thusa."  "  Cha  dubhairt
mi  sin,"  ars'  am  buachaille ;  "  cha  'n  'eil  fios  nach  usa  sin  a  radh  na
dhèanamh.

Ann  am  badaibh  a'  cheile  gabhar  e  fe'in  's  am  famhair.  Chunnaic
e  gu  'n  robh  e  fada  bho  a  charaid  's  dlu  d'a  nhmhaid.  Thar-
ruing  e  'u  claidheamh  mor  nach  fhagadh  fuigheal  beum,  agus  dhliith-
aich  e  ris  an  fhamhair,  agus  ann  am  mireadh  a  chatha  leum
an  cU  dubh  air  ciil  an  fhamhair,  's  tharruing  am  buachaill'  a  clilaidh-
eamh  's  bha  'n  ceann  do  "n  fhamhair  ann  am  prioba  na  siiil.  Leum
e  air  muin  an  eich  dhuibh,  agus  chaidh  e  shealltainn  airson  tigli
an  fliamhair.  Rliinig  e  'n  dorus,  agus  leis  a'  chabhaig,  a  bha  air
an  fhamhair,  dh'  fhag  e  gach  geata  's  gach  dorus  fosgailte.  'Steach
chaidh  am  buachaille,  agus  'sann  an  sin  a  bha  'n  greadhnacbas,
or  's  airgiod  ann  am  pailteas,  's  trusgain  dheth  gach  seòrsa  air
am  faitheam,  le  or  's  airgiod  's  gach  ni  bu  riomhaiche  na  cheile.
Am  beul  na  h-oidhche  thug  e  caisteal  an  righ  air,  ach  cha  d'  thug  e,
dad  air  bith  leis  a  tigh  an  fhamhair ;  agus  a  nuair  a  chaidh  an  crodh  a
bhleogban,  's  ann  an  sin  a  bba  'm  bainne.  Fhuair  e  de  bheatha
mhaith  air  an  oidhche  so,  biadh  's  deoch  gun  ghainne,  agus  bha  an
righ  anabarrach  toilichte,  gu  'n  d'  fhuair  e  greim  air  a  leithid  do
bhuachaille.  Chaidh  e  air  aghaidh  air  son  hine  air  an  doigh  so,  ach
mu  dheireadh,  dh'  flias  an  gleann  lom  do  dh'  flieur,  agus  cha  robh  an
t-ionaltradb  cho  maith.  Ach  smaoinich  e  gun  rachadh  e  air  aghaidh
beagan  ni  b'fhaide  a'  stigh  air  coir  an  fhamhair,  agus  faicear  pàirce
mhòr  do  dh'  flieur.  Thill  e  airson  a  chruidh  agus  cuirear  a  stigh  do
'n  phairce  iad.  Cha  robh  iad  ach  goirid  ag  ionaltradh  'sa  phhirce,  'nuair
a  thainig  famhair  mor,  fiadhaich,  Ian  fearg  agus  corruich.  "  Hèu !
ho  I  hoagraich  !"  ars'  am  famhair,  "  'se  deoch  do  d'  fhuil  a  chaisgeas
mo  phathadh  a  nochd."  "  Cha  'n'  eil  fios,"  ars'  am  buachaille,  "  nach
fasa  sin  a  radh  na  dheanamh."    Ach  na  cheile  ghabh  na  fir-'s  ana


88  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

an  sin  a  bha  'n  crathadh  lann.  Mu  dheireadh  thall  bha  coltas  air
gu'm  faigheadh  am  famhair  buaidh  air  a  bhuachaille.  'N  sin  gblaodh
e  air  a  chii,  agus  le  aon  leum,  rug  an  cii  dubh  air  amhaich  air  an
fhamliair,  's  glirad  bhuail  am  buachaille  an  ceann  de.

Chaidh  e  dliachaidh  gle  sgitli  air  an  oidhche  so,  acli  nu'r  thaing,
mar  a'  robh  bainne  aig  crodli  an  rigb  !  's  bha  "n  teaghlach  air  fad  co
toilichte  air  son  gun  d'  fhuair  iad  a'  leithid  so  do  bliuachaille.  Lean
e  air  a  bhuachailleachd  air  an  doigh  so  re  iiine ;  ach  oidhclie  's  e  air
tighinn  dhachaidh,  an  kite  do  'n  bhanaraich  furan,  's  fiiilte  'criur  air,
's  ann  a  bha  iad  air  fad  ri  cuinha  's  ri  bron.  Dh'  fhoiglmeachd  e,
de  'n  t-aobhar  broin  a  bha'  so  an  nochd.  Thubhairt  a  bhanarach,  gu
n  robh  beist  mhor  le  tri  chinn  'san  loch,  agus  gu  'n  robh  i  ri  aon
fhaotainn  a  h-uile  bliadhna,  agus  gu  n  d'  thkinig  an  crannchur  am
bliadhna  air  nighean  an  righ,  "  's  mu  mheadhon  latha  'maireach,  tha  i
ri  coinneachainn  na  huile-bhe'ist  aig  ceann  shuas  an  loch ;  ach  tha
suiriche  mòr  an  siud  a  tha  'dol  g'a  tearnadh."  "  De  "n  suiriche  a
tha  ann  ?"'  thubhairt  am  buachaille.  "  O  !  tha  Seanalair  mòr  airm,"
thubhairt  a'  bhanarach,  "  agus  anuair  a  mharbhas  e  'bhe'ist,  pòsaidh
e  nighean  an  righ  ;  oir  thubhairt  an  righ  'ge  b"è  thearnadh  a  nighean,
gu  "faigheadh  e  i  ri  phòsadh."  Ach  air  an  latha  "maireach,'nuair  a  bha
an  t-am  a  dluthachainn,  dh'  fhaibh  nighean  an  righ  "s  an  gaisgeach  airm
so  gu  coinneamh  a  thabhairt  do  'n  bheist,  's  raiuig  iad  an  Coire  diibh
aig  ceann  shuas  an  loch.  Cha  robh  iad  ach  goirid  an  sin  'nuair  a
ghluais  a  bhe'ist  ann  am  meadhon  an  loch ;  ach  air  do'n  t-Seanalair
an  t-uanihas  beiste  so  fhaicinn  le  tri  chinn,  ghabh  e  eagal,  's  shèap
e  air  falbh  's  dh'  fhalaich  e  e  fein,  's  bha  nighean  an  righ  fo  chrith
's  fo  eagal,  gun  neach  ann  a  thearnadh  i.  Siiil  do  'n  d'  thug  i,  faicear
òganach  foghainteach,  dreachmhor  a  marcachd  each  dubh  's  a'  tighinn
far  an  robh  i.  Bha  e  air  a  sgeadachdhainn  gu  h-anabarrach  's  fo  Ian
armachd  's  an  cu  dubh  a'  siubhal  'na  dhe'igh.  "  Tha  gruaim  air  do
ghnliis,  a  nighean,"  ars'  an  t-oganach;  "  de'  tha  thu  deanadh  an  so?"
"  O !  's  coma  sin,  thubhairt  nighean  an  righ,  cha  'n  f  had'a  bhitheas  mi
ann  co  dhiu."  "  Cha  dubhairt  mi  sin,"  ars'  esan.  "  Theich  laochcho
coltach  riutsa,  's  cha  'n  'eil  fada  uaidhe,"  thubhairt  ise.  "  'Se  laoeh
a  sheasas  Cath,"  ars'  an  t-òganach.  Shuidh  e  sios  laimh  rithe  "s
thubhairt  e  rithe,  "  Na  'n  tuiteadh  esan  'na  chadal,  i  ga  'dhiisgadh
'n  uair  a  chitheadh  i  'bhe'ist  a'  deanamh  air  son  tir."  "  De  's  diisgadh
duit,"  thubhairt  ise  ?  "  'S  dusgadh  dhomh  am  fainne  th'  air  do  mheur
a  chur  air  mo  lughdag."  Cha  b'  f  hada  bha  iad  an  sin,  'n  uair  a
chunnaic  i  bheist  a  deanamh  gu  tir.  Thug  i  'm  fainne  bhàr  a  meur,
's  chuir  i  air  lughdag  an  òganaich  e.  Dhuisg  e,  agus  an  coinneamh
na  beiste  ghabh  e,  le  'chlaidheamh  's  le  chii;  ach  's  ann  an  sin  a  bha


A  MHAIGHDEAN  MHARA.  «9

"n  t-slupartaich  's  an  t-slapartaich  eadar  e  fein  's  a'  bheist ;  's  bha  'n
CÙ  dèanamh  na  b'  urrainn  e,  's  bha  nighean  an  righ  air  bhall-chrith
eagail  le  fuaira  na  beiste.  Bhiodli  iad  uair  fuidhe  's  uair  an  uachdar,
ach  ma  dheireadh,  ghearr  e  fear  do  na  cinn  di ;  thug  i  aon  raibheic
aiste,  's  ghoir  mac-talla  nan  creag  d"a  sgrèuch,  's  chuir  i  'n  loch  'na
lasair  bho  cheann  gu  ceann,  agiis  ann  am  prioba  na  siila,  chaidh  i  as
an  t-sealladh.  "  Piseach  's  buaidh  gu  'n  robh  ga  'd'  leantainn,  ògan-
aich,"  arsa  nighean  an  righ,  "  tha  mise  sabhailt  air  son  aon  oidhche  ;
ach  thig  a  bheist  a  rithist,  gu  brath  gus  an  d'  thig  an  da  cheann  eile
dhi."  Bug  e  air  ceann  na  beiste,  agus  tharruing  e  gad  roimhe  's
thubhairt  e  rithe,  "  I  ga'  thabhairt  leatha  'm  maireach  an  sud."  Dh'
f  halbh  i  dhachaidh  "s  an  ceann  air  a  guallainn,  's  thug  am  buachaille
na  mairt  air.  Ach  cha  b'  f  hada  bha  i  air  a'  rathad,  'n  uair  a  choin-
nich  an  Seanalair  mor  so  i,  agus  thubhairt  e  rithe  gu  marbhadh  e,  i
mur  canadh  i  gur  esan  a  thug  an  ceann  do  'n  bhe'ist.  "  0  !  ars'  ise,
's  mi  their !  co  eile  ."thug  an  ceann  do  "n  bheist  ach  thu.''  Rkinig  iad
tigh  an  righ  's  an  ceann  air  guallainn  an  t-Seanalair ;  ach  's  ann  an
so  a  bha  'n  t-aoibhneas,  i  'thighinn  dhachaidh  beò  slàn,  agus  ceann
na  beiste  Ian  fola  aig  a  Chaiptean  mhor  so  'na  laimh.  Air  an  latha
"maireach,  dh'fhalbh  iad,  agus  cha  robh  teagamh  sam  bith  nach
teamadh  an  gaisgeach  so  nighean  an  righ.  Eaiuig  iad  an  t-kite
ceudna,  "s  cha  robh  iad  fad'  an  sin,  'n  uair  a  ghluais  an  uile-bheist
oillteil  ann  am  meadhon  an  loch,  's  shèap  an  gaisgeach  air  falbh  mar
a  rinn  eair  an  lath'  dè.  Ach  cha  b'  fhad  an  deigh  so,  dur  a  thainig
fear  an  eich  dhuibh  "s  deis'  eile  air.  Coma  co  dhiu,  dh'aithnich  i  gur
e  cheart  oganach  a  bh'  ann.  "  'S  mise  tha  toilichte  d'  f  haicinn"  ars'
ise,  "  tha  mi  'n  dochas  gulaimhsich  thu  do  chlaidheamh  mor  an  diugh
mar  a  rinn  thu  'n  dè ;  thig  a  nios  's  leig  t-anail."  Ach  cha  b'  f  hada
bha  iad  an  sin,  'n  uair  a  chunnaic  iad  a  bheist  a  totail  am  meadhon  an
locb.  Luidh  an  t-òganach  sìos  ri  taobh  nighean  an  righ,  's  thubhairt
e  rithe,  "  Ma  chaidleas  mise  mu  'n  d'thig  a  bhe'ist,  diiisgj  mi."  "  De
as  dusgadh  dhuit?"  "'S  dusgadh  dhomh  a  chluais-fhail  sin  a  tha
"na  'd'  chluais,  a  chuir  "na  mo  the  fe'in."  Cha  mhath  a  chaidil  e  "n  uair
a  ghlaodh  nighean  an  righ,  "  Diiisg !  diiisg  !  Ach  dusgadh  cha
deanadhe;  ach  thug  i  chluas-fhail  as  a  cluais,  agus  chuir  i  'n  cluas
an  òganaich  e,  's  air  ball  dhiiisg  e,  's  an  car  na  beiste  chaidh  e  ;  ach
's  ann  an  sin  a  bha  'n  t-slupartaich  's  an  t-slapartaich,  raoiceil,  's
taoiceil  air  a  bheist.  Lean  iad  mar  so  re  iiiue  fada,  's  mu  bheul  na
h-oidhche,  ghe'arr  e  'n  ceann  eile  do  "n  bhe'ist.  Chuir  e  air  a  ghad  e  's
leum  e  air  muin  an  eich  dhuibh,  's  thug  e  'bhuachailleachd  air.  Dh'
f  halbh  nighean  an  righ  dhachaidh  leis  na  cinn :  thachair  an  Seana-
lair rithe 's  thug  e  uaipe  na  cinn,  's  thubhairt  e  rithe,  "  Gu  'm  feumadh


90  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

i  'chantainn  gu  'm  b'  esan  a  thug  an  ceann  do  'n  bheist  air  an  uair  so
cuideachd."  "  Co  eile  a  thug  an  ceann  do  'n  bheist  ach  thu  ?"  thuirt
ise.  Rainig  iad  tigh  an  righ  leis  na  cinn,  ach  's  ann  an  sin  a  bha
'n  t-aoibhneas  "s  an  t-aighear.  Ma  bha  an  righ  subhach  an  ceud
cidhche,  bhae  nis  cinnteach  gu  'u  teamadh  an  gaisgeach  mòr  so  a
nighean,  's  cha  robh  teagamh  sam  bith  nach  bitheadh  an  ceann  eile
do  'n  bheist  air  an  latha  maireach.  Mu  'n  am  cheudna,  fUi'  f  halbh
an  dithis  air  an  latha  'maireach.  Dh'  fhalaich  an  t-oifigire  fein
mar  a  b-abhaist :  thug  nighean  an  righ  bruaich  an  loch  oirre,  's
thainig  gaisgeach  an  eich  dhuibh,  's  luidh  e  ri'  taobh.  Dhiiisg  i  'n  t-
òlach  's  chuir  i  chias-f  hail  'na  chluais  eile  agus  ann  am  bad  nabeiste
ghabh  e.  Ach  ma  bha  raoiceil,  is  'staoiceil  air  a  bheist  air  na  laith-
ean  a  chaidh  seachad,  's  ann  an  diugh  a  bha  'n  t-uamhas  oirre.  Ach
coma  CO  dhiu,  thug  e  'n  treas  ceann  do  'n  bhe'ist,  's  ma  thug  cha  b'
ann  gun  spairn.  Tharming  e  ro  "n  ghade,  's  dh'  f  halbh  i  dhachaidh
leis  na  cinn.  'N  uair  a  rainig  iad  tigh  an  righ.  bha  na  h-uile  I'an
g'airdeachas,  's  bha  'n  Seanalair  ri  nighean  an  righ  phòsadh  air  an
ath  latha.  Bha  bhanais  a  dol  air  a  h-aghaidh  's  gach  neach  mu  'n
Chaisteal  's  fadal  air  gus  an  d'  thigeadh  an  sagairt.  Ach  a  nuair  a
thainig  an  sagairt,  cha  ph'isadh  i  ach  an  neach  a  bheireadh  na  cinn
do  'n  ghad  gun  an  gad  a  ghearradh.  "  Co  bheireadh  na  cinn  do  'n
ghad,  ach  am  fear  a  chuir  na  cinn  air',"  thubhairt  an  righ.  Dh'
fheuch  an  Seanalair  iad,  ach  cha  b-urrainn  e  .na  cinn  fhuasgladh;
's  mu  dheireadh,  cha  robh  a  li'aon  mu  'n  tigh  nach  d'  fheuch  ris'  na
cinn  a  thoirt  do  'n  ghad,  ach  cha  b-urrainn  iad.  Dh'  f  hoighneachd
an  righ,  "  An  robh  neach  air  bith  eile  mu  'n  tigh  a  dh'  fheuchadh
ris  na  cinn  a  thoirt  bhar  a  ghaid.''  Thubhairt  iad,  "  Nach  d'  fheuch
am  buachaille  fathast  iad."  Chaidh  fios  air  a'  bhuachaille,  's  cha
b'  f  hada  bha  esan  a  tilgeadh  fear  a  null  's  a  nail  diubh.  "  Ach
fan  beagan  òganaich,"  arsa  nighean  an  righ  :  "  am  fear  a  thug  na
cinn  do  'n  bheist,  tha  'm  fainne  agam  sa  aige,  agus  mo  dh'a  chluais-
f  hail."  Chuir  am  buachaille  'laimh  'na  phoca,  's  thilg  e  air  a  bhbrd
iad.  "  S'-tusa  mo  dhuine-sa,"  arsa  nighean  an  righ.  Cha  robh  an  righ
cho  toilichte,  'n  uair  a  chunnaic  e  gu  'm  b'e  'bhuachaille  a  bha  ri'  nigh-
ean a  phosadh;  ach  dh'  orduich  e  gu  feum  t'  a  chur  ann  an  trusgan
ni  b'fhearr.  Ach  labhair  a  nighean, 's  thubhairt  i,  "Gun  robh
trusgan  aige  cho  riomliach  'sa  bha  riamh  'na  chaisteal ;  agus  mur  so
thachair;  chuir  am  buachaille  deis'  oir  an  fhamhair  air,  agus  phos
iad  air  an  oidhclie  sin  fein.

Bha  iad  a  nis  pbsda  's  na  h-uile  ni  dol  air  aghaidh  gu  maith.  Bha
iad  aon  lath'  a  spaisdearachd  rau  thaobh  an  locha,  's  thainig  b^ist  a
b-uamhasaiche  na  'n  te  eile,  's  thugar  air  falbh  e  gun  athadh  gun


A  MHAIGHDEAN  MHARA.  9  I

fhoighneachd.  Bha  nighean  an  righ  an  so  gu  diibhach,  dèurach,
dalla-bhròuach  air  son  a  fear-posda.  Bha  i  daonnan  'sa  siiil  air
an  loch.  Thachair  seana  ghobha,  rithe,  's  dh'  innis  i  dha  mar
thachair  da  ce'ile-pòsda.  Chomhairlich  an  gobha  dhi  i  'sgaoileadh
gach  ni  bii  bhrèagha  na  cheile  anns  a  cheart  aite  'san  'd'  thug
a  bheist  air  falbh  a  duine;  agus  mar  so  rinn  i.  Chuir  a  bhèist
suas  a  sròn,  's  thubhairt  i,  "  'S  brèagh  'd'  ailleas  a  nighean  an  righe."
"'S  brèagha  na  sin  an  t-ailleagan  a  thug  thu  uam,"  thubhairt  ise.
"  Thoir  dhomh  aon  sealladh  do  m'  dhuine,  's  gheibh  thu  aon  ni  do
na  tha  thu  'faicinn."  Thug  a'  bheist  suas  e.  "  Aisig  dhomh  e,  's
gheibh  thu  na  tha  thu  'faicinn,"  ars'  ise.  Einn  a'  bheist  mar  a
thubhairt  i ;  thilg  i  beo  sliin  e  air  bruach  an  locha.  Goirid  'na  dheigh
sud,  's  iad  a  sràitlimeachd  ri  taobh  an  loch,  thug  a  bheist  cheudna
air  falbh  nighean  an  r'lgh.  Bu  bhrònach  gach  neach  a  bha  'sa
bhaile  air  an  oidhche  so.  Bha  a  duine  gu  dubhach,  deurach,  a'  siubhal
sios  agus  suas  mu  bhruachan  an  loclia  a  latha  's  do  dh'  oidhche.
Thachair  an  seana  ghobha  ris.  Dh'  innis  an  gobha  dha,  Nach
robh  dòigh  air  an  uile-bheist  a  mharbhadh,  ach  aon  dòigh,  Agus  's  e
sin.  "  Anns  an  eilean  "tha  am  meadhon  an  locha  tha  eilid  chaisf  hionn
as  caoile  cas  's  as  luaithe  ceum,  agus  ge  do  rachadh  beirsinn  oirre,'
leumadh  feannag  aisde,  agus  ged  a  rachadh  beirsinn  air  an  f  heannag,
leumadh  breac  aisde ;  ach  tha  ubh  am  beul  a  bhric,  agus  tha  anam
na  beiste  'san  nbh  's  ma  bhristeas  an  t-ubh,  tha  a'  bhe'ist  marbh."
Nis  cha  robh  dòigh  air  faotainn  do  'n  eilean  so,  bho  'n  chuireadh  a
bheist  foidh  gach  bata  's  gach  rath,  a  rachadh  air  an  loch.  Smaoin-
ich  e  gu  'm  feuchadh  e  'n  Caolas  a  leum  leis  an  eacli  dhubh,
agus  mar  so  fhein  rinn  e.  Leum  an  t-each  dubh  an  Caolas,  's  an
CU  dubh  le  aon  leum  as  an  de'igh.  Chunnaic  e'  n  eilid,  's  leig  e  'n
cii  dubh  'na  deigh,  ach  an  uair  a  bliiodh  an  cii  air  aon  taobh  do  'n
eilean  bhiodh  an  eilid  air  an  taobh  eile.  "  O !  bu  mhath  a  nis
raadadh  mor  na  closaiche  febla  an  so."  Cha  luaithe  'labhair  e  'm
facal  na  bha  'm  madadh  coir  ri'  thaobh,  agus  an  deigh  na  h-eihd
ghabh  e  's  cha  b'  f  hada  'bha  na  laoich  ga  cuir  ri  talamh ;  ach  cha  bu
luaithe  a  rug  e  oirre,  na  leum  feannag  aisde;  "'S  ann  a  nis  a  bu
mhath  an  t-seobhag  ghlas  as  geire  suil  's  is  làidire  sgiath."  Cha
luaithe  thubhairt  e  so,  na  bha  'n  t-seobhag  as  deigh  'na  feannaig,  's  cha
b'  f  hada  'bha  i  ga  cuir  ri  talamh  ;  agus  air  tuiteam  do  'n  f  heannaig  air
bruach  an  locha,  a  mach  aisde  leumtar  am  breac.  "  0  !  nach  robh  thus'
agamsa  a  nis,  a  dhobhrain."  Cha  luaith'  thubhairt  na  bha  'n  dobhran
ri  thaobh,  agus  amach  air  an  loch  leum  i,  "s  thugar  am  breac  a  meadhon
an  loch ;  Ach  cha  luaithe  bha  'n  dòran  air  tir  leis  a  bhi-eac  na  thainig
an  t-ubh  a  mach  as  a  bheul.    Ghrad  leum  esan,  's  chuir  e  'chas  air,


92  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

'S  ann  an  sin  a  leig  a  bh<^Ì5t  raoic  aisde,  's  thubhairt  i,  "  Na  brist  an
t-ubh,  's  gheibh  tliu  na  dh'  iarras  tw."  "  Aisig  dliomhsa  mo  bhean."
Ann  am  prioba  na  siila  bha  i  ri  'tbaobh.  "Nuair  a  fhuair  e  greim
air  a  laimh  "na  dha'  làimh,  leig  e  chas  air  an  ubh,  's  bbasaich  a
bhe'ist.  Bha  'bheist  marbh  a  nis,  agus  'sann  a  nis  a  bha  'n  sealladh
ri  fhaicinn.  Bha  i  uamhasach  ri  sealltainn  oirre,  bha  na  tri  chinn  di
gun  teagamh,  ach  ma  bha,  bha  ceann  os-ceann  cheann  oirre,  agus
suilean,  's  cuig  ceud  cas.  Coma  co  dhiu,  dh'  fliag  iad  ann  a  'sud  i,  's
chaidh  iad  dliachaidh.  Bha  solas  is  gairdeachas  ann  an  tigh  an  righ
air  an  oidhche  so,  's  cha  d'  innis  e  do  'n  righ  gu  so  mar  a  mharbh  e
na  famhairean.  Chuir  an  righ  urram  mòr  air,  's  blia  e  'na  dhuine
mòr  aig  an  righ.

Bha  e  fein  's  a'  bhean  a'  sraidimeachd  aon  latha,  'n  uair  a  thug
e  fainear  caisteal  beag  ri  taobh  an  loch,  ann  an  coille.  Dh'  fhar-
raid  e  do  'n  mhnaoi.  Co  bha  gabhail  còmhnuidh  ann  ?  "  Thubh-
airt i  nach  robh  neach  air  bith  a'  dol  a  choir  a  chaisteail  ud,  bho
nach  d'thainig  neach  air  ais  fathast  a  chaidh  ann  a  dh'  innseadh
sgeiiil."  "  Cha  'n  fhaud  a  chuis  a  bhi  mar  sin,"  ars'  esan  ;  "  a  nochd
fein  chi  mi,  co'  tha  gabhail  conhnuidh  ann."  "Cha  d'  theid,  cha  d'
theid,"  thubhairt  ise,  "  cha  deach  duine  riamh  do  'n  chaisteal  so  a
phill  air  ais."  "  Biodh  sin  's  a  roghainn  aige,"  ars'  esan.  Dh'
fhalbh  e,  agus  gabhar  do  'n  chaisteal  's  nuair  a  riiinig  e  'n  dorus,
thachair  cailleach  bheag,  bhrosgulach  ris  'na  seasamh  san  dorus.
•Furan  's  failte  dhuit,  a  mhic  an  iasgair  's  mi  fein  a  tha  toilichte
t'  fhaicinn  ;  's  mor  an  onair  do  'n  rioghachd  so  do  leithid  a  thighinn
innte  ;  's  urram  do  "n  bhothan  bheag  so  thu  thighinn  a  stigh ;  gabli
a  stigh  air  thoiseach,  onair  na  h-uaisle,  's  leig  f  anail :"  's  a  steach  ghabh
e ;  ach  a  nuair  a  bha  e  air  ti  dol  suas,  tharruing  i  an  slacan-druidh-
eachd  air  an  ciil  a  chinn,  's  air  ball  thuit  e  'n  sin.  "  Air  an  oidhche
so  bha  bron  ann  an  caisteal  an  righ  agus  air  an  latha  maireach  blia
tuireadli  ann  an  tigh  an  iasgair.  Chunnacas  a  chraobh  a  seargadh
's  thubhairt  mac  meadlionach  an  iasgair,  "  gu  'n  robli  a  bhrathar
marbh,"  's  thug  e  boid  is  briathar  gu  falbhadh  e  s  gu  'm  biodh  fios
aige  cait'  an  robh  Corp  a  bhrathar  na  luidhe.  Chuir  e  dioUaid  air
each  dubh,  's  mharcaich  c  an  deigh  a'  choin  duibh  (oir  bha  each  dubh
"s  cli  dubh  aig  triiiir  mhac  an  iasgair)  agus  gun  dol  a  null  na  nail,
lean  e  air  ceum  a  bhriithair  bu  sine,  gus  an  drliinig  e  tigh  an  righ.
Bha  e  so  co  coltach  ri  "bhrathair  's  gu  'n  d'  shaoil  le  nighean  an  righ
gu  "m  be  duine  fein  a  bh'  ann.  Dh'  flian  e  'n  so  'sa  chaisteal,  's  dh'
innis  iad  dha  mar  thachair  d'a  bhrathair,  agus  do  chaisteal  beag  na
cailliche  dh'  fheumadh  e  'dol  bog  na  cruaidh  mar  thachradh,  's  do  'n,
chaisteal  chaidh  e,  agus  ceart  mar  a  thachair  do  'n  bhrathair  bu  sine,


A  MHAIGHDEAN  MHARA  93

anns  gach  dbigh  thachair  do  'n  mhac  mheadhonach,  's  le  aon  bhuille
do  'n  t-slacan  dhruidlieachd,  leag  a'  chailleacli  e  na  shineadh  ri"  taobh
a  bhrathar.  Air  faicinn  an  darna  craobh  a'  seargadh  do  mhac  òg  an
iasgair  thubhaiit  e,  "  Gu  'n  robli  a  nis  a  dhithis  bhraithrean  marbh,
agus  gu'  feumadh  fios  a  bbi  aigesan  de  'm  bas  a  thainig  orra.  Air
muin  an  eich  dliuibh,  ghabh  e,  's  lean  e  'n  cii  mar  a  rinn  a  bhrathair,
agiis  tigh  an  righ  bhuail  e  niu  'n  do  stad  e.  'Se  'u  righ  bha  toil-
ichte  f  haicinn,  ach  do  "n  chaisteal  dubh  (oir  'se  so  ainm)  cha  leigadh
iad  e,  ach  do  'n  chaisteal,  dli'  fheumadh  e  dol,  's  mur  sin  raiuig  e  'n
caisteal.  "  Failte  "s  furan  dhiiit  fe'in,  a  mhic  an  iasgair,  's  mi  tha
toillichte  t'f  haicinn  ;  gabh  a  steach  'sleig  t-anail,"  thuirt  ise.  "  'Stigh
romham  thu,  a  chailleach,  's  coma  leam  sodal  a  muigh."  "  Each  a
steach 's  cluinneara  do  chòmhradh.  A'  steach,  ghabh  a  chailleach,  agus
a  nuair  a  bha  cul  ris,  thamiing  e  a  chlaidheamh  's  spadar  a  ceann  dhi,
ach  leum  an  claidheanih  as  a  laimh,  's  ghrad  rug  a  chailleach  air  a
ceann  le  a  da  laimh,  s  cuirear  air  a  h-amhaich  e  mar'  bha  e  roimhe.
Leum  an  cii  air  a  chaillich,  's  bhuail  i  m  "madadh  Coir  leis  an  t-
slacan-dhruidheachd,  's  luidh  esan  an  sin,  ach  cha  deach  so  air  mhith-
apadh  do  'n  olaeh,  's  an  sas  sa  chaillich  gabhar  e.  Fhuair  e  gre'im  air  an
t-shlacan-dhruidheachd,  agus  le  aon  bhuille  am  muUach  a  cinn,  bha  i  ri
talamh  ann  am  prioba  na  sul.  Chaidh  e  beagan  air  aghaidh  suas,  's
fuicear  a  dha  bhrathair  na  'n  luidhe  taobh  ri  taobh.  Thug  e  buille
do  gach  fear  dhiubh,  leis  an  t-slacan  dhruidlieachd  's  air  an  cois  bha
iad.  Ach  "s  ann  an  so  a  bha  'n  spuill  oir  's  airgid,  's  gach  ni  bu
luachmhoire  na  chèile  ann  an  caisteal  na  cailliche.  Thainig  iad  air
an  ais  do  thigh  an  righ,  's  ann  an  sin  a  bha  'n  gairdeachas.  Bha  'n
righ  a  fhs  sean,  agus  chaidh  mac  bu  sliine  an  iasgair  a  chrhnadh  'na
righ,  's  dh'  f  ban  an  dithis  bhraithrean  latlia  's  bliadhna  ann  an  tigh
an  righ,  's  dh'  f  halbh  an  dithis  a  nis  dhachadh  le  or  's  airgiod  na
Cailliche,  's  gach  ni  riomhach  eile  'thug  an  righ  dhoibh ;  's  mar  do
shuibhail  iad  uaidh  sin,  tha  iad  beo  gus  an  latha  'n  diugh.

Hectok  Uequhaet.

2.  Another  version  of  this  was  told  to  me  in  South  Uist,  by
John  MacPhie,  aged  79,  in  September  1859.

There  was  a  poor  old  fisher  in  Skye,  and  his  name  was
Duncan.  He  was  out  fishing,  and  the  sea-maiden  rose  at  the
side  of  his  boat,  and  said,  "  Duncan,  thou  art  not  getting  fi.sh."
They  had  a  long  talk,  and  made  a  bargain ;  plenty  of  fish  for  his
first  son.     But  he  said,  "  I  have  none."     Then  the  sea-maiden


94  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

gave  him  something,  and  said,  "  Give  this  to  thy  wife,  and  this  to
thy  mare,  and  this  to  thy  dog,  and  they  will  have  three  sons,
three  foals,  and  three  pups,"  and  so  they  had,  and  the  eldest  son
was  Iain.  When  he  was  eighteen,  he  found  his  mother  weeping,
and  learned  that  he  belonged  to  the  mermaid.  "Oh,"  said  he,
"I  will  go  where  there  is  not  a  drop  of  salt  water."  So  he
mounted  one  of  the  horses  and  went  away.  He  soon  came  to  the
carcass  of  an  old  horse,  and  at  it  a  lion  (Icon),  a  wolf  (matugally),
and  a  falcon  (showag).  Leòmuan-madaah  allujdh  Seabhag
or  Seobhag.

The  lion  spoke,  and  she  asked  him  to  divide  the  carcass.  He
did  so,  and  each  thanked  him,  and  said,  "  'WTien  thou  art  in  need
think  of  me,  and  I  will  he  at  thy  side  {or  thou  wilt  be  a  lion,  a
wolf,  or  a  falcon,  I  am  uncertain  which  he  meant),  for  we  were
here  under  spells  till  some  one  should  divide  this  carcass  for  us."

He  went  on  his  way  and  became  a  king's  herd.  He  went  to
a  smith  and  hade  him  make  him  an  iron  staff.  He  made  three.
The  two  first  bent,  the  third  did  well  enough,  fie  went  a-herding,
and  found  a  fine  grass  park,  and  opened  it  and  went  in  with  the
cattle.  Fdath  of  the  seven  heads,  and  seven  humps,  and  seven
necks,  came  and  took  six  by  the  tails  and  went  away  with  them
{so  Cacus  dragged  aicay  cows  hy  the  tail).  "Stop,"  said  the
herd.  The  Foath  would  not,  so  they  came  to  grips.  Then  the
fisher's  son  either  thought  of  the  lion,  or  became  one,  but  at  all
events  a  lion  seized  the  giant  and  put  him  to  earth.  "  Thine  is
my  lying  down  and  rising  up,"  said  he.  "  What  is  thy  ransom  ?  "
said  the  herd.  The  giant  said,  "  I  have  a  white  filly  that  will
go  through  the  skies,  and  a  white  dress;  take  them."  And  the
herd  took  off  his  heads.

When  he  went  home  they  had  to  scud  for  carpenters  to  make
dishes  for  the  milk,  there  was  so  much.

The  next  day  was  the  same.  There  came  a  giant  with  the
same  number  of  heads,  and  took  eight  cows  by  their  tails,  and
slung  them  on  his  back.  The  herd  and  the  wolf  (or  as  a  wolf)
beat  him,  and  got  a  red  filly  that  could  fly  through  the  air,  and  a
red  dress,  and  cut  off  the  heads.  And  there  were  still  more
carpenters  wanted,  there  was  so  much  milk.

The  third  day  came  a  still  bigger  giant  and  took  nine  cows,
and  the  herd  as,  or  with  a  falcon,  beat  him,  and  got  a  green


THE  SEA-JIAIDEN.


95


filly  that  would  go  througli  the  sky,  and  a  green  dress,  and  cut
his  heads  ofi',  and  there  was  more  milk  than  ever.

On  the  fourth  day  came  the  Carlin,  the  wife  of  the  last  giant,
and  mother  of  the  other  two,  and  the  fisher's  son  went  up  into  a
tree.  "  Come  down  till  I  eat  thee,"  said  she.  "  Not  I,"  said  the
herd.  "  Thou  hast  killed  my  husband  and  my  two  sons,  come
down  till  I  eat  thee"  "Open  thy  mouth,  then,  till  I  jump
down,"  said  the  herd.  So  the  old  Carlin  opened  her  gab,  and  he
thrust  the  iron  staff  down  her  throat,  and  it  came  out  at  a  mole  on
her  breast  [this  is  like  the  mole  of  the  Gruagach  in  No.  1],  and
she  fell.  Then  he  sprang  on  her,  and  spoke  as  before,  and  got  a
basiu,  and  when  he  washed  himself  in  it,  he  would  be  the  most
beautiful  man  that  was  ever  seen  on  earth,  and  a  fine  silver  comb,
and  it  would  make  him  the  grandest  man  in  the  world  ;  and  he
killed  the  Carlin  and  went  home.

[So  far  this  agrees  almost  exactly  with  the  next  version,  hut
there  is  a  giant  added  here  and  a  coarse  comb  left  out'].

When  the  fisher's  son  came  home,  there  was  sorrow  in  the
king's  house,  for  the  Deatgan  was  come  from  the  sea.  Every
time  he  came  there  was  some  one  to  be  eaten,  and  this  time  the
lot  had  fallen  on  the  king's  daughter.

The  herd  said  that  he  would  go  to  fight  the  draygan,  and  the
king  said,  "  No  :  I  cannot  spare  my  herd."  So  the  king's  daughter
had  to  go  alone.  [The  incident  of  the  coivardly  knight  is  here  left
out.]  Then  the  herd  came  through  the  air  on  the  white  filly,
with  the  white  dress  of  the  Fuath.  He  tied  the  filly  to  the
branch  of  a  tree  and  went  where  the  king's  daughter  was,  and
laid  his  bead  in  her  lap,  and  she  dressed  his  hair,  and  he  slept.
^Vhen  the  draygan  came  she  woke  him,  and  after  a  severe  battle
he  cut  off  one  head,  and  the  draygan  said,  "A  hard  fight  to-
morrow," and  went  away.  The  herd  went  ofi"  iu  the  white  filly,
and  in  the  evening  asked  about  the  battle,  and  heard  his  own
story.  Next  day  was  the  same  with  the  red  filly  and  the  red
dress,  and  the  draygan  said,  "The  last  fight  to-morrow,"  and  he
disappeared.  On  the  third  day  she  scratched  a  mark  on  his  fore-
head when  his  head  was  in  her  lap  :  he  killed  the  draygan,  and
when  he  asked  about  it  all,  there  was  great  joy,  for  now  the
draygan  was  dead.  Then  the  king's  daughter  had  the  whole  king-
dom gathered,  and  they  took  ofl'  their  head  clothes  as  they  ;


g6  WEST  HIGHL.^^D  TALES.

but  tLcic  wns  uu  mark.  Then  they  bethought  them  of  the  dirty
herd,  and  when  he  came  he  would  not  put  off  his  head  gear,  but
she  made  him,  and  saw  the  mark,  and  said,  "  Thou  mightest  have
a  better  dress."  He  used  his  magic  comb  and  basin,  and  put  on
a  dress,  and  was  the  grandest  in  the  company,  and  they  married.
It  fell  out  that  the  king's  daughter  longed  for  dulse,  and  he  went
with  her  to  the  shore  to  seek  it.  The  sea-maiden  rose  up  and
took  him.  She  was  sorrowful,  and  went  to  the  soothsayer  and
learned  what  to  do.

And  she  took  her  harp  to  the  sea  shore  and  sat  and  played,
and  the  sea-maiden  came  up  to  listen,  for  sea-maidens  are  fonder
of  music  than  any  other  creatures,  and  when  she  saw  the  sea-
maiden she  stopped.  The  sea-maiden  said,  "  Play  on  ;"  but  she
said,  "No,  till  I  see  my  man  again."  So  the  sea-maiden  put  up
his  head.  ( WJiat  do  you  mean  ?  Out  of  her  mouth  to  be  sure.
S'he  had  swallowed  him.)  She  played  again,  and  stopped,  and
then  the  sea-maiden  put  him  up  to  the  waist.  Then  she  played
again  and  stopped,  and  the  sea-maiden  placed  him  on  her  palm.
Then  he  thought  of  the  falcon,  and  became  one  and  flew  on  shore.
But  the  sea-maiden  took  the  wife.

Then  he  went  to  the  soothsayer,  and  he  said,  "  I  know  not
what  to  do,  but  in  a  glen  there  is  Tarbh  nimh,  a  hurtful  bull,
and  in  the  bull  a  ram,  and  in  the  ram  a  goose,  and  in  the  goose
an  egg,  and  there  is  the  soul  of  the  sea-maiden."

Then  he  called  on  his  three  creatures,  and  by  their  help  got
the  goose,  but  the  egg  fell  out  in  the  loch.

Then  the  lion  said  she  knew  not  what  to  do,  and  the  wolf  said
the  same.  The  falcon  told  of  an  otter  in  an  island,  and  flew  and
seized  her  two  cubs,  and  the  otter  dived  for  the  egg  to  save  her
cubs.  He  got  his  wife,  and  dashed  the  egg  on  the  stones,  and  the
mermaid  died.  And  they  sent  for  the  fisher  and  his  sons,  and
the  old  mother  and  brothers  got  part  of  the  kingdom,  and  they
were  all  happy  and  lucky  after  that.

I  asked  if  there  was  anything  about  one  brother  being  taken
for  the  other  and  the  naked  sword,  and  was  told  that  the  incident
was  in  another  story,  as  well  as  that  of  the  withering  of  the  three
trees.  These  incidents  were  in  the  version  of  the  stable  boy ;
and  as  they  are  in  Mackenzie's,  they  probably  belong  to  the  story
as  it  was  known  in  Argyllshire.


THE  SEA-MAIDEN.  97

3.  Another  version  of  this  was  told  in  April  1859,  by  John
MacGibbon,  a  lad  who  was  rowing  me  across  Loch  Fyne,  from
St.  Katharine's  to  Inverary  ;  he  said  he  had  heard  it  from  an  old
man  living  near  Lochgilphead,  who  could  tell  many  stories,  and
knew  part  of  the  history  of  the  Feine.

The  hero  was  the  son  of  a  widow,  the  youngest  of  ten  ;  black-
skinned  and  rough  "carrach."  He  went  to  seek  his  fortune,  and
after  adventures  somewhat  like  those  of  the  heroes  in  the  other
versions,  he  became  like  them  a  king's  herd,  and  was  in  like
manner  beset  by  giants  who  claimed  the  pasture.  Each  fight
was  preceded  by  a  long  and  curious  parley  across  a  ditch.  The
giants  got  larger  each  day,  and  last  of  all  came  the  wife  of  one,
and  mother  of  the  other  two,  who  was  worst  of  all.

He  got  spoil  from  each,  which  the  conquered  giant  named  as
his  ransom,  and  which,  as  usual,  the  herd  took  after  killing  his
foe.  From  the  mother  he  got  a  "  golden  comb,  and  when  he
combed  his  hair  with  the  fine  side,  he  was  lovely,  and  when  he
combed  it  with  the  coarse  side,  he  was  hideous  again,"  and  a
magic  basin  which  made  him  beautiful  when  he  washed  in  it.
And  he  got  wouderftil  arms,  and  dresses,  and  horses  from  the
giants.

Then  the  king's  daughter  was  to  be  given  to  a  giant  with
three  heads  who  came  in  a  ship.  When  he  leaped  on  shore,  he
buried  himself  to  the  waist,  he  was  so  heavy.  The  herd  was
asleep  with  his  head  in  the  lap  of  the  princess,  and  dressed  in  the
giant's  spoil,  combed  with  the  fine  gold  comb,  and  washed  in  the
magic  basin,  and  beautiful,  but  nevertheless  the  princess  dressed
his  hair.

He  was  awakened  each  day  by  biting  a  joint  ofif  his  little
finger — cutting  a  patch  from  the  top  of  his  head — and  a  notch  from
his  ear.  Each  day  he  cut  off  a  head,  and  the  giant,  when  he
leaped  from  the  ship  on  the  third  day,  only  sunk  to  his  ancles  in
the  sand,  for  he  had  lost  two  heads.

The  third  head  jumped  on  again  as  fast  as  it  was  cut  off,  but
at  last,  by  the  advice  of  a  hoodie,  the  cold  steel  of  the  sword  was
held  on  the  neck  till  the  marrow  froze,  and  then  the  giant  was
killed,  and  the  herd  disappeared  as  usual.

A  red-headed  lad,  who  went  to  guard  the  princess,  ran  away
and  hid  himself,  and  took  the  credit  each  day,  but  he  could  not
H


9.8  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

untie  the  knots  with  which  the  heads  were  bound  together  on
a  withy  by  the  herd.  Then  when  all  the  kingdom  had  been
gathered,  the  herd  was  sent  for,  but  he  would  not  come,  and  he
bound  three  parties  of  men  who  were  sent  to  bring  him  by  force.

At  last  he  was  entreated  to  come,  and  came,  and  was  recog-
nized by  the  marks,  and  then  he  combed  his  hair,  and  washed  in
the  magic  basin,  and  dressed  in  the  giant's  spoils,  and  he  married
the  princess,  and  the  Gille  Ruadh  was  hanged.

Here  the  story  ended,  but  so  did  the  passage  of  the  ferry.

4.  I  have  another  version  written  by  Hector  Maclean,  from
the  dictation  of  a  woman,  B.  JIacaskill,  in  the  small  island  of
Bemeray,  Aug.  18.59. —  Mac  a  Ghobha,  The  Smith's  Son.

A  smith  takes  the  place  of  the  old  fisherman.  The  mei-maid
rises  beside  his  boat,  gets  the  promise  of  the  son,  and  sends  him
fish.  [Tlie  three  mysterious  grains  are  omitted).  One  son  is
born  to  the  fisher,  and  the  mermaid  lets  him  remain  till  he  is
fourteen  years  of  age.

BhA  'n  gille  'n  so  CHO  MOE  an  CEADNN  nan  CEITHIR  BLIADHNA
DIAg!  ChA  KOBH  LEITHID  re  FHAIGHIN  CHO  MOE  'S  CHO  GARBH
's  CHO  FOGHAINTEACH  RIS.

The  lad  was  now  so  big  at  the  end  of  the  14  years  I  His
like  was  not  to  be  found,  so  big,  so  rugged,  so  formidable  as  he.

Then  he  asked  his  father  not  to  go  in  the  wind  of  the  shore
or  the  sea,  for  fear  the  mermaid  should  catch  him,  and  to  make
him  a  staff  in  which  there  should  be  nine  stone  weight  of  iron  ;
and  he  went  to  seek  his  fortune.  His  father  made  him  the  staff,
and  he  went,  and   whom  should  he  meet  but   madadh  ruadh

the  fox,  MADADH   ALLUIDH  the  Wolf,  AGUS  AN    FHEANNAG,  and   the

hoodie,  AGD8  OTHAiSG  ACA  GA  h'itheadh,  and  eating  a  year  old
sheep.  He  divided  the  sheep,  and  the  creatures  promised  to  help
him,  and  he  went  on  to  a  castle,  where  he  got  himself  employed
as  a  herd,  and  was  sent  to  a  park;  "no  man  ever  came  alive  out
of  it  that  ever  went  into  it."

A  big  giant  came  and  took  away  one  of  the  cows,  and  then
(Sabaid)  a  fight  began,  and  the  herd  was  undermost,  agus  de

RINN  AM  BUACHAILl'  ACH  CUIMHXEACHADH  AIR  A  MHADADH
ALLUIDH  AGCS  GHRAD  !  BHA  'm  BUACHAILL  AN  AIRD  AGUS  AM
FUAMHAIR  FODIIA  AGUS  MHARBil  E  'jl  FUAMHAIH,  and  what  did  the


THE  SEA-MAIDEN,  99

herd  but  remember  the  wolf,  and  swift !  the  herd  was  above
and  the  giant  below,  and  he  killed  the  giant,  and  went  home  -with
the  cattle,  and  his  master  said  to  the  banachagan,  "  Oh,  be  good
to  the  herd."  [The  sjyoil,  the  dresses,  and  the  horses  are  here
all  left  out).  The  second  day  it  was  the  same,  and  he  again
thought  of  the  wolf,  and  conquered  after  he  was  down.

The  third  day  it  was  again  the  same.  On  the  fourth  day
Cailleach  mhoe  a  great  carlin  came.  They  fought,  and  he  was
undermost  again,  bat  thought  of  the  wolf  and  was  up.     Bas  as

DO  CHIONN  A  ChAILLEACH  AKS  AM  BUACHAILLE  De'  t'  EIRIG.  ?*

"  Death  on  thytop,  Carlin,"  said  the  herd,  "what's  thy  value?"
"  That  is  not  little,"  said  the  Carlin,  "  if  thou  gettest  it.  I  have
tliree  truncannan  {an  English  word  with  a  Gaelic  plural)  full  of
silver.  There  is  a  trunk  under  the  foot-board,  and  two  others  in
the  upper  end  of  the  castle."  "Though  that  be  little,  its  my
own,"  said  he  as  he  killed  her.

On  the  morrow  the  king's  daughter  was  to  go  to  the  great
beast  that  was  on  the  loch  to  be  killed,  and  what  should  the  herd
do  but  draw  the  cattle  that  way,  and  he  laid  bis  head  in  her  lap
and  slept,  but  first  told  the  lady,  when  she  saw  the  loch  trembling,
to  take  ofFajointof  his  little  finger.  She  did  so.  He  awoke,  thought
of  the  fox,  and  took  a  head,  a  hump,  and  a  neck  off  the  beast,  and
he  went  away,  and  no  one  knew  that  he  had  been  there  at  all.
Next  day  was  the  same,  but  he  had  a  patch  cut  from  his  head.

The  third  day  she  took  off  the  point  of  his  ear,  he  awoke,  was
again  beaten  by  the  beast,  thought  of  the  fox,  and  was  upper-
most, and  killed  the  beast  (s'  bha  i  na  loch  uisge  n'  oair  a
MHARBH  E  i)  and  she  was  a  fresh  water  lake  when  he  had  killed  her.

( The  cowardhj  general,  or  knight,  or  lad,  or  servant,  is  here  left
out.)  Then  the  king's  daughter  gave  out  that  she  would  marry  the
man  whose  finger  fitted  the  joint  which  she  had  cut  off  and  kept  in
her  pocket.  Everybody  came  and  cut  off  the  points  of  their  little
fingers,  but   the  herd  staid  away  till  it  was  ,  found  out   by  the

*  EiRiG,  a  fine  for  bloodshed,  a  ransom.  Fine  anciently  paid
for  the  murder  of  any  person.  Scottish  Laws—Begiam  Ma-
jestam:  (Armstrong  die.)  The  Laws  of  the  Brets  and  Scots,
in  which  every  one  was  valued  according  to  his  degree  (Innes's
"  Scotland  in  the  Middle  Ages").


lOO  \?EST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

daiiymaids  that  he  wanted  the  joint,  and  then  he  came  and
married  the  lady.

After  thej  were  married  they  went  to  walk  by  the  shore,  and
the  mermaid  rose  and  took  him  away.  "  It  is  long  since  thou
wert  promised  to  me,  and  now  I  have  thee  perforce,"  said  she.  An
old  woman  advised  the  lady  to  spread  all  her  dresses  on  the
beach,  and  she  did  so  in  the  evening,  and  the  mermaid  came,  and
for  the  dresses  gave  back  her  companion,  "  and  they  went  at  each
other's  necks  with  joy  and  gladness."

In  a  fortnight  the  wife  was  taken  away,  "and  sorrow  was  not
sorrow  till  now — the  lad  lamenting  his  wife."  He  went  to  an  old
man,  who  said,  "  There  is  a  pigeon  which  has  laid  in  the  top  of  a
tree ;  if  thou  couldst  find  means  to  break  the  egg  anail,  the
breath  of  the  mermaid  is  in  it.''     Smaointich  e  air  an  fhean-

NAIG  'S  CHAIUH  E  NA  FHEANNAIG  's  LEUM  E  GO  BAER  NA  CRAOIBHE-

He  thought  on  the  hoodie,  and  he  became  a  hoodie  {went  into  his
hoodie),  and  he  sprang  to  the  top  of  the  tree,  and  he  got  the  egg,
and  he  broke  the  egg,  and  his  wife  came  to  shore,  and  the  mer-
maid was  dead.

It  is  worth  remarking  the  incidents  which  drop  out  of  the
story  when  told  by  women  and  by  men.  Here  the  horses  and
armour  are  forgotten,  but  the  faithful  lover  is  remembered.  The
sword  is  a  stick,  and  the  whole  thing  savours  strongly  of  the
every-day  experience  of  the  Western  Isles,  which  has  to  do  with
fishing,  and  herding  sheep  and  cattle.  It  is  curious  also  to  remark
the  variations  in  the  incidents.  The  hero  seems  to  acquire  the
qualities  of  the  creatures,  or  be  assisted  by  them.

5.  I  have  another  version  from  Barra,  but  it  varies  so  much,
and  has  so  many  new  incidents,  that  I  must  give  it  entire,  if  at  all.
It  most  resembles  MacGibbon's  version.  It  is  called  an  't  iasgair
the  fisher,  and  was  told  by  Alexander  MacNeill,  fisherman.

6. 1  have  a  sixth  version  told  by  John  Smith,  labourer,  living  at
Polchar  in  South  Uist,  who  says  he  learned  it  about  twenty
years  ago  from  Angus  IMacdonald,  Balnish.  It  is  called  An  gillc
Glas,  the  Grey  lad.  He  is  a  widow's  son,  goes  to  seek  his  fortune,
goes  to  a  smith,  and  gets  him  to  make  an  iron  shinny  (that  is  a
hockey  cluh),  he  becomes  herd  to  a  gentleman,  herds  cattle,  and  is
beset  by  giants  whom  he  kills  with  his  iron  club ;  he  gathers  the
skirt  of  his  grey  cassock  {which  looks  like  Odin),  he  gets  a  copper


THE  SEA-MAIDEN.  lOI

and  a  silver  and  a  golden  castle,  servants  (or  slaves)  of  various
colour  and  appearance,  magic  whistles,  horses,  and  dresses,  and
rescues  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  Greece.  The  part  of  the
cowardly  knight  is  played  hy  a  red  headed  cook.  The  language
of  this  is  curious,  and  the  whole  very  wild.  Unless  given  entire,
it  is  spoilt.

In  another  story,  also  from  Berneray,  the  incident  of  meeting
three  creatures  again  occurs.

There  is  a  lion,  a  dove,  and  a  rat.     And  the  lion  says : —

"  What,  lad,  is  thy  notion  of  myself  being  in  such  a  place  as
this  y  "

"  Well,"  said  he,  "  I  have  no  notion,  but  that  it  is  not  there
the  like  of  you  ought  to  be  ;  but  about  the  banks  of  rivers.''

It  is  impossible  not  to  share  the  astonishment  of  the  lion,  and
but  for  the  fact  that  the  rat  and  the  dove  were  as  much  surprised
at  their  position  as  the  lion,  one  would  be  led  to  suspect  that
Margaret  MacKinnon,  who  told  the  story,  felt  that  her  lion  was
out  of  his  element  in  Berneray.  Still  he  is  there,  and  it  seems
worth  inquiring  how  he  and  the  story  got  there  and  to  other
strange  places.

1st.  The  story  is  clearly  the  same  as  Shortshanks  in  Dasent's
Norse  Tales,  1859-  But  it  is  manifest  that  it  is  not  taken  from
that  book,  for  it  could  not  have  become  so  widely  spread  in  the
islands,  and  so  changed  within  the  time.

2d.  It  resembles,  in  some  particulars,  the  Two  Brothers,  the
White  Snake,  the  Nix  of  the  Mill  Pond,  the  Ball  of  Crystal,  in
Grimm  ;  and  there  are  similar  incidents  in  other  German  tales.
These  have  long  been  published,  but  I  never  heard  of  a  copy  in
the  west,  and  many  of  my  authorities  cannot  read.  It  is  only
necessary  to  compare  any  one  of  the  Gaelic  versions  with  any  one
German  tale,  or  all  together,  to  feel  certain  that  Grimm's  collec-
tion is  not  the  source  from  which  this  story  proceeded.

3d.  A  story  in  the  latest  edition  of  the  Arabian  Nights  (Lane's,
18.39),  contains  the  incident  of  a  genius,  whose  life  was  not  in  his
body,  but  in  a  chest  at  the  bottom  of  the  Circumambient  Ocean,
but  that  book  is  expensive,  and  quite  beyond  the  reach  of  peasants
and  fishermen  in  the  west,  and  the  rest  of  the  story  is  different.

4th.  There  is  something  in  Sanscrit  about  a  fight  for  cattle


I02  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.

between  a  herd  and  some  giants,  wliich  has  been  compared  with
the  classical  story  of  Cacus. — (Mommsen's  Roman  History).

5th.  lam  told  that  there  is  an  Irish  "  fenian  "  story  which  this
resembles.  I  have  not  yet  seen  it,  but  it  is  said  to  be  taken  from
a  very  old  Irish  MS.    (Ossianic  Society).

6th.  It  is  clearly  the  same  as  the  legend  of  St.  George  and  the
Dragon.  It  is  like  the  classical  story  of  Perseus  and  Andromeda,
but  Pegasus  is  multiplied  by  three,  and  like  the  story  of  Hercules
and  Hesione,  but  Hercules  was  to  have  six  horses.  On  the  whole,
1  cannot  think  that  this  is  taken  from  any  known  story  of  any
one  people,  but  that  it  is  the  Gaelic  version  of  some  old  myth.
If  it  contains  something  which  is  distorted  history,  it  seems  to
treat  of  a  seafaring  people  who  stole  men  and  women,  and  gave
them  back  for  a  ransom,  of  a  wild  race  of  "giants  "  who  stole  cattle
and  horses,  and  dresses,  and  used  combs  and  basins,  and  had
grass  parks ;  and  another  people  who  had  cattle,  and  wanted
pasture,  and  went  from  the  shore  in  on  the  giants'  land.

If  it  be  mythical,  there  is  the  egg  which  contains  the  life
of  the  sea-monster,  and  to  get  which  beast,  bird,  and  fish,  earth,
air,  and  water,  must  be  overcome.  Fire  may  be  indicated,  for
the  word  which  I  have  translated  Spindrift  lasair,  generally
means  jlame.

I  am  inclined  to  think  that  it  is  a  very  old  tale,  a  mixture  of
mythology,  history,  and  everyday  life,  which  may  once  have  been
intended  to  convey  the  moral  lesson,  that  small  causes  may  pro-
duce great  effects  ;  that  men  may  learn  from  brutes.  Courage  from
the  lion  and  the  wolf.  Craft  from  the  fox,  Activity  from  the  falcon,
and  that  the  most  despised  object  often  becomes  the  greatest.
The  whole  story  grows  out  of  a  grain  of  seed.  The  giant's  old
mother  is  more  terrible  than  the  giants.  The  little  flattering
crone  in  the  black  castle  more  dangerous  than  the  sea  monster.
The  herd  thought  of  the  wolf  when  he  fought  the  giants,  but  he
thought  of  the  fox  when  he  slew  the  dragon.  I  can  but  say  with
the  tale  tellers,  "  dh,  fh.àg  mise  n'  sin  eud."  "  There  I  left  them,"
for  others  to  follow  if  they  choose.  I  cannot  say  how  the  story
got  to  the  Highlands,  and  the  lion  into  the  mind  of  a  woman
in  Bernerav.


V.

CONALL    CEA    BHUIDHE.

From  James  Wilson,  blind  fiddler,  Islay.

pONALL  CEA  BHUIDHE  was  a  sturdy  tenant  in
^  Eirinn :  he  had  four  sons.  There  was  at  that  time  a
king  over  every  fifth  of  Eirinn.  It  fell  out  for  the  children
of  the  king  that  was  near  Conall,  that  they  themselves
and  the  children  of  Conall  came  to  blows.  The  children
of  Conall  got  the  upper  hand,  and  they  killed  the  king's
big  son.  The  king  sent  a  message  for  Conall,  and  he
said  to  him — "  Oh,  Conall  !  what  made  thy  sons  go  to
spring  on  my  sons  till  my  big  son  Avas  killed  by  thy
children  ?  but  I  see  that  though  I  follow  thee  revenge-
fully, I  shall  not  be  much  the  better  for  it,  and  I  will
now  set  a  thing  before  thee,  and  if  thou  wilt  do  it,  I
wiiL  not  follow  thee  with  revenge.  If  thou  thyseK,  and
thy  sons,  avlLI  get  for  me  the  broAvn  horse  of  the  king  of
Lochlann,  thou  shalt  get  the  souls  of  thy  sons."  "Why,"
said  Conall,  "  should  not  I  do  the  pleasure  of  the  king,
though  there  should  be  no  souls  of  my  sons  in  dread  at
all.  Hard  is  the  matter  thou  requirest  of  me,  but  I
vnW  lose  my  own  hfe,  and  the  hfe  of  my  sons,  or  else  I
Avill  do  the  pleasure  of  the  king."

After  these  words  Conall  left  the  king,  and  he  went
home:  when  he  got  home  he  Avas  under  much  trouble  and
perplexity.  When  he  went  to  lie  doAvn  he  told  his  Avife
the  thing  the  king  had  set  before  him.  His  wife  took
much  sorrow  that  he  was  obliged  to  part  from  herself,


I  04  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

while  she  knew  not  if  she  should  see  him  more.  "  Oh,
Conall,"  said  she,  "  why  didst  not  thou  let  the  king  do
his  own  pleasure  to  thy  sons,  rather  than  be  going  now,
while  I  know  not  if  ever  I  shall  see  thee  more  ?"  A\Tien
he  rose  on  the  morrow,  he  set  himself  and  liis  four  sons
in  order,  and  they  took  their  journey  towards  Lochlaun,
and  they  made  no  stop  but  (were)  tearing  ocean  till
they  reached  it.  "When  they  reached  Lochlann  they  did
not  know  what  they  should'  do.  Said  the  old  man  to
his  sons — "  Stop  ye,  and  we  avìU  seek  out  the  house  of
the  king's  miller."

When  they  went  into  the  house  of  the  king's
miUer,  the  man  asked  them  to  stojD  there  for  the  night.
Conall  told  the  miller  that  his  o-wn  cliildren  and  the
chikben  of  the  king  had  fallen  out,  and  that  his
children  had  killed  the  king's  son,  and  there  was
notliing  that  would  please  the  king  but  that  he  should
get  the  brown  horse  of  the  king  of  Lochlann.  "  If  thou
wilt  do  me  a  kindness,  and  wilt  put  me  in  a  way  to  get
him,  for  certain  I  ivill  pay  thee  for  it."  "  The  thing
is  silly  that  thou  art  come  to  seek,"  said  the  miller  ;
"  for  the  king  has  laid  his  mind  on  him  so  greatly  that
thou  wilt  not  get  him  in  any  way  unless  thou  steal
him ;  but  if  thou  thyself  canst  make  out  a  way,  I  will
hide  thy  secret."  "  This,  I  am  thinking,"  said  Conall,
"  since  thou  art  working  every  day  for  the  king,  that
thou  and  thy  gillies  should  put  myself  and  my  sons
into  five  sacks  of  bran."  "  The  plan  that  came  into
thy  head  is  not  bad,"  said  the  miller.  Tlie  miller
spoke  to  his  gillies,  and  he  said  to  them  to  do  this,
and  they  put  them  in  five  sacks.  The  king's  gillies
came  to  seek  the  bran,  and  they  took  the  five  sacks
Avith  them,  and  they  t-mptied  them  before  the  horses.
The  servants  locked  the  door,  and  they  v/ent  away.

"When  they  rose  to  lay  hand  on  the  brown  liorse,


CONALL  CRA  BHUIDHE.  IO5

said  Conall,  "  You  shall  not  do  that.  It  is  hard  to  get
out  of  this  ;  let  us  make  for  ourselves  five  hiding  holes,
so  that  if  they  perceive  us  we  may  go  in  hiding."
They  made  the  holes,  then  they  laid  hands  on  the
horse.  The  horse  was  pretty  well  unbroken,  and  he
set  to  making  a  terrible  noise  through  the  stable.
The  king  perceived  him.  He  heard  the  noise.  "  It
must  be  that  that  was  my  brown  horse,"  said  he  to  his
gillies  :   "  try  what  is  wrong  with  him."

The  servants  went  out,  and  when  Conall  and  his
sons  perceived  them  coming  they  went  into  the  hiding
holes.  The  servants  looked  amongst  the  horses,  and
they  did  not  find  anything  wrong  ;  and  they  returned
and  they  told  this  to  the  king,  and  the  king  said  to
them  that  if  nothing  was  wrong  that  they  should  go  to
their  places  of  rest.  When  the  gillies  had  time  to  be
gone,  ConaU  and  his  sons  laid  the  next  hand  on  the
horse.  K  the  noise  was  great  that  he  made  before,  the
noise  he  made  now  was  seven  times  greater.  The  king
sent  a  message  for  his  gillies  again,  and  said  for  certain
there  was  sometliing  troubling  the  brown  horse.  "  Go
and  look  well  about  him."  The  servants  went  out,  and
they  went  to  their  hiding  holes.  The  servants  rum-
maged well,  and  did  not  find  a  tiling.  They  returned
and  they  told  this.  "  That  is  marvellous  for  me,"  said
the  king  :  "  go  you  to  He  down  again,  and  if  I  per-
ceive it  again  I  will  go  out  myself."  When  Conall
and  his  sons  perceived  that  the  gillies  were  gone,  they
laid  hands  again  on  the  horse,  and  one  of  them  caught
him,  and  if  the  noise  that  the  horse  niade  on  the  two
'  former  times  was  great,  he  made  more  this  time.

"  Be  this  from  me,"  said  the  king ;  "  it  must  be
that  some  one  is  troubling  my  brown  horse."  IJe
sounded  the  bell  hastily,  and  when  his  waiting  man
came  to  him,  he  said  to  him  to  set  the  stable  gillies  on


I06  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

foot  that  something  was  wrong  Avith  the  horse.  The
gillies  came,  and  the  king  went  with  them.  "WTien
ConaU  and  his  sons  perceived  the  following  coming
they  went  to  the  hiding  holes.  The  king  was  a  wary-
man,  and  he  saw  where  the  horses  were  making  a
noise.  "  Be  clever,"  said  the  king,  "  there  are  men
within  the  stable,  and  let  us  get  them  somehow."
The  king  followed  the  tracks  of  the  men,  and  he  found
them.  Every  man  was  acquainted  vnih  ConaU,  for  he
was  a  valued  tenant  by  the  king  of  Eirinn,  and  when
the  king  brought  them  up  out  of  the  holes  he  said,
"Oh,  ConaU,  art  thou  here?"  "I  am,  0  king,  with-
out qiiestion,  and  necessity  made  me  come.  I  am
under  thy  pardon,  and  under  tliine  honour,  and  under
thy  grace."  He  told  how  it  happened  to  him,  and
that  he  had  to  get  the  brown  horse  for  the  king  of
Eirinn,  or  that  his  son  was  to  be  put  to  death.  "  I
knew  that  I  should  not  get  him  by  asking,  and  I  was
going  to  steal  him."  "  Yes,  ConaU,  it  is  well  enough,
but  come  in,"  said  the  king.  He  desired  his  look-out
men  to  set  a  watch  on  the  sons  of  ConaU,  and  to  give
them  meat.  And  a  double  watch  was  set  that  night
on  the  sons  of  ConaU.  "Now,  0  ConaU,"  said  the
king,  "  wert  thou  ever  in  a  harder  place  than  to  be
seeing  thy  lot  of  sons  hanged  to-morrow  Ì  But  thou
didst  set  it  to  my  goodness  and  to  my  grace,  and  that
it  was  necessity  brought  it  on  thee,  and  I  must  not
hang  thee.  Tell  me  any  case  in  which  tliou  wert  as
hard  as  this,  and  if  thou  teUest  that,  thou  sbalt  get  the
soul  of  thy  youngest  son  with  thee."  "  I  Vvill  tell  a
case  as  hard  in  which  I  was,"  said  ConaU.

"  I  was  a  young  lad,  and  my  fiither  had  much
land,  and  he  had  parks  of  year-old  cows,  and  one  of
them  had  just  calved,  and  my  father  told  me  to
■brinsr  her  home.       I  took  with  me  a  laddie,  and  we


CONALL  CRA  BHUIDHE.  IO7

found  the  cow,  and  Tve  took  her  witli  us.  There  fell  a
shower  of  snow.  We  went  in  to  herd's  bothy,  and  we
took  the  cow  and  the  calf  in  mth  us,  and  we  were
letting  the  shower  (pass)  from  us.  What  came  in  but
one  cat  and  ten,  and  one  great  one-eyed  fox-coloured
cat  as  head  bard*  over  them.  AVhen  they  came  in,  in
very  deed  I  myself  had  no  liking  for  their  company.
'  Strike  up  with  you,'  said  the  head  bard,  '  why  should
we  be  still  Ì  and  sing  a  cronan  to  Conall  Cra-Bhui.'
I  was  amazed  that  my  name  was  known  to  the  cats
themselves.  When  they  had  sung  the  cronan,  said  the
head  bard,  'Now,  0  Conall,  pay  the  reward  of  the
cronan  that  the  cats  have  sung  to  thee.'  '  Well,  then,'
said  I  myself,  '  I  have  no  reward  whatsoever  for  you,
unless  you  should  go  down  and  take  that  calf.'  ISTo
sooner  said  I  the  word  than  the  two  cats  and  ten
went  down  to  attack  the  calf,  and,  in  very  deed,  he
did  not  last  them  long.  'Play  up  with  you,  why
should  you  be  silent  Ì  Make  a  cronan  to  Conall
Cra-Bhui,'  said  the  head  bard.  Certainly  I  had  no
liking  at  all  for  the  cronan,  but  up  came  the  one  cat
and  ten,  and  if  they  did  not  sing  me  a  cronan  then  and
there  !  '  Pay  them  now  their  reward,'  said  the  great
fox-coloured  cat.  '  I  am  tired  myself  of  yourselves
and  your  rewards,'  said  I.  '  I  have  no  reward  for  you
unless  you  take  that  cow  down  there.'  They  betook
themselves  to  the  cow,  and  indeed  she  did  not  stand
them  out  for  long.

"  '  AVhy  will  you  be  silent  ?  Go  up  and  sing  a  cro-
nan to  Conall  Cra-Bhui,'  said  the  head.  bard.  And
surely,  oh,  king,  I  had  no  care  for  them  or  for  their  cro-
nan, for  I  began  to  see  that  they  were  not  good  com-
rades. When  they  had  sung  me  the  cronan  they  betook
themselves  down  where  the  head  bard  was.  '  Pay
*  Or  commanderin-cliief.


io8


VTEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.


now  their  reward,'  said  the  head  bard ;  and  for  sure,
oh,  king,  I  had  no  reward  for  them  ;  and  I  said  to  them,
'  I  have  no  reward  for  you,  unless  you  \rììì  take  that
laddie  with  you  and  make  use  of  liim.'  WTien  the
boy  heard  this  he  took  himself  out,  and  the  cats  after
him.  And  surelj^  oh,  king,  there  was  "  striongan  "  and
catterwaiding  between  them.  When  they  took  them-
selves out,  I  took  out  at  a  turf  window  that  was  at  the
back  of  the  house.  I  took  myself  off  as  hard  as  I
might  into  the  wood.  I  was  swift  enough  and  strong  at
that  time  ;  and  when  I  felt  the  rustUng  '  toirm'  of  the
cats  after  me  I  climbed  into  as  high  a  tree  as  I  saw  in
the  place,  and  (one)  that  was  close  in  the  top ;  and  I
hid  myself  as  well  as  I  might.  The  cats  began  to
search  for  me  through  the  wood,  and  they  were  not
finding  me ;  and  when  they  were  tired,  each  one  said
to  the  other  that  they  would  turn  back.  '  But,'  said
the  one-eyed  fox-coloured  cat  that  was  commander-in-
chief  over  them,  *  you  saw  him  not  with  your  two
eyes,  and  though  I  have  but  one  eye,  there 's  the  rascal
up  hi  the  top  of  the  tree.'  "When  he  had  said  that,
one  of  them  went  up  in  the  tree,  and  as  he  was  coming
where  I  was,  I  drew  a  weapon  that  I  had  and  I  killed
him.  '  Be  tliis  from  me  !'  said  the  one-eyed  one — '  I
must  not  be  losing  my  company  thus ;  gather  round
the  root  of  the  tree  and  dig  about  it,  and  let  down
that  extortioner  to  earth.'  On  this  they  gathered
about  her  (the  tree),  and  they  dug  about  her  root,  and
the  first  branching  root  that  they  cut,  she  gave  a  shiver
to  fall,  and  I  myself  gave  a  shout,  and  it  was  not  to  be
wondered  at.  There  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
wood  a  priest,  and  he  had  ten  men  \vith  him  dehàng,
and  he  said,  '  There  is  a  shout  of  extremity  and  I  must
not  be  -without  replying  to  it.'  And  the  wisest  of  the
men  said,  '  Let  it  alone  till  we  hear  it  amiin.'    The  cats


CONALL  CRA  BHUIDHE.  1  O9

began,  and  they  began  wildly,  and  they  broke  the
next  root ;  and  I  myself  gave  the  next  shout,  and  in
very  deed  it  was  not  Aveak.  '  Certainly,'  said  the
priest,  '  it  is  a  man  in  extremitj^ — let  us  move.'  They
were  setting  themselves  in  order  for  moving.  And  the
cats  arose  on  the  tree,  and  they  broke  the  third  root,
and  the  tree  fell  on  her  elbow.  I  gave  the  tliird  shout.
The  stalwart  men  hasted,  and  when  they  saw  how  the
cats  served  the  tree,  they  began  at  them  with  the  spades  ;
and  they  themselves  and  the  cats  began  at  each  other,
till  they  Avere  killed  altogether — the  men  and  the  cats.
And  surely,  oh  king,  I  did  not  move  till  I  saw  the  last
one  of  them  faUiug.  I  came  home.  And  there's  for
thee  the  hardest  case  in  which  I  ever  was ;  and  it
seems  to  me  that  tearing  by  the  cats  were  harder  than
hanging  to-morrow  by  the  king  of  Lochlann.

"  Od !  Conall,"  said  the  king,  "  thou  art  full  of
Avords.  Thou  hast  freed  the  soul  of  thy  son  with  thy
tale ;  and  if  thou  tellest  me  a  harder  case  than  thy
three  sons  to  be  hanged  to-morrow,  thou  wilt  get  thy
second  youngest  son  with  thee,  and  then  thou  wilt
have  two  sons."  "  Well  then,"  said  Conall,  "  on  condi-
tion that  thou  dost  that,  I  was  in  a  harder  case  than
to  be  in  thy  power  in  prison  to-night."  "  Let's  hear,"
said  the  king. — "  I  Avas  there,"  said  Conall,  "  as  a  young
lad,  and  I  Avent  out  hunting,  and  my  father's  land
was  beside  the  sea,  and  it  was  rough  with  rocks,  caves,
and  geos.*  When  I  was  going  on  the  top  of  the  shore,
I  saw  as  if  there  were  a  smoke  coming  up  between  tAvo
rocks,  and  I  began  to  look  Avhat  might  be  the  meaning
of  the  smoke  coming  up  there.  When  I  Avas  looking,
what  should  I  do  but  fall ;  and  the  place  was  so  full
of  manure,  that  neither  bone  nor  skin  was  broken.  I
knew  not  hoAV  I  should  get  out  of  this.  I  was  not
*  Kifts  or  chasms,  where  the  sea  enters.


I  lO  WEST  niGHLAND  TALES.

looking  before  me,  but  I  was  looking  over  head  the
Avay  I  came — and  the  day  wall  never  come  that  I  could
get  up  there.  It  was  terrible  for  me  to  be  there  till  I
should  die.  I  heard  a  great  clattering  '  tuarneileis '
coming,  and  what  was  tliere  but  a  great  giant  and  two
dozen  of  goats  with  him,  and  a  buck  at  their  head.
And  when  the  giant  had  tied  the  goats,  he  came  up
and  he  said  to  me,  '  Hao  0  !  Conall,  it's  long  since  my
knife  is  rusting  in  my  pouch  waiting  for  thy  tender
flesh.'  '  Och  ! '  said  I,  '  it's  not  much  thou  wilt  be
bettered  by  me,  though  thou  should' st  tear  me  asunder  ;
I  will  make  but  one  meal  for  thee.  But  I  see  that
thou  art  one-eyed.  I  am  a  good  leech,  and  I  will  give
thee  the  sight  of  the  other  eye.'  The  giant  went  and
he  drew  the  great  caldron  on  the  site  of  the  fire.  I  my-
self was  telling  him  how  he  should  heat  the  water,  so
that  I  should  give  its  sight  to  the  other  eye.  I  got
heather  and  I  made  a  rubber  of  it,  and  I  set  him  upright
in  the  caldi'on.  I  began  at  the  eye  that  was  well,  pre-
tending to  him  that  I  would  give  its  sight  to  the  other
one,  till  I  left  them  as  bad  as  each  other  ;  and  surely
it  was  easier  to  spoil  the  one  that  was  well  than  to
give  sight  to  the  other.

"When  he  'saw'  that  he  could  not  see  a  glimpse,
and  when  I  myself  said  to  him  that  I  would  get  out  in
spite  of  him,  he  gave  that  spring  out  of  the  water,  and
he  stood  in  the  mouth  of  the  cave,  and  he  said  that  he
would  have  revenge  for  the  sight  of  his  eye.  I  had
but  to  stay  there  crouched  the  length  of  the  night,
holding  in  my  breath  in  such  a  way  that  he  might  not
feel  where  I  was.

"  AVhen  he  felt  the  birds  calling  in  the  morning,  and
knew  that  the  day  was,  he  said — '  Art  thou  sleeping  1
Awake  and  let  out  my  lot  of  goats.'  I  killed  the  buck.
He  cried,   '  I  wdll  not  believe  that  thou  art  not  kilUng


CONALL  CRA  BHUIDHE.  I  I  I

uiy  buck.'  '  I  am  not,'  said  I,  '  but  the  ropes  are  so
tight  that  I  take  long  to  loose  them.'  I  let  out  one
of  the  goats,  and  he  was  caressing  her,  and  he  said  to
her,  '  There  thou  art  thou  shaggy,  hairy  white  goat,  and
thou  seest  me,  but  I  see  thee  not.'  I  was  letting  them
out  by  the  way  of  one  and  one,  as  I  flayed  the  buck,
and  before  the  last  one  was  out  I  had  him  flayed  hag
wise.  Then  I  went  and  I  put  my  legs  in  place  of  his
legs,  and  my  hands  in  place  of  his  fore  legs,  and  my
head  in  place  of  his  head,  and  the  horns  on  top  of  my
head,  so  that  the  brute  might  think  that  it  was  the
buck.  I  went  out.  When  I  was  going  out  the  giant
laid  his  hand  on  me,  and  he  said,  '  There  thou  art  thou
pretty  buck  ;  thou  seest  me,  but  I  see  thee  not.'  When
I  myself  got  out,  and  I  saw  the  world  about  me,  surely,
oh,  king  !  joy  was  on  me.  '\Vhen  I  was  out  and  had
shaken  the  skin  ofi"  me,  I  said  to  the  brute,  '  I  am  out
now  in  spite  of  thee.'  '  Aha  ! '  said  he,  '  hast  thou  done
this  to  me.  Since  thou  wert  so  stalwart  that  thou  hast
got  out,  I  will  give  thee  a  ring  that  I  have  here,  and
keep  the  ring,  and  it  will  do  thee  good.'  '  I  will  not
take  the  ring  from  thee,'  said  I,  'but  throw  it,  and  I
will  take  it  with  me.'  He  threw  the  ring  on  the  flat
ground,  I  went  myself  and  I  lifted  the  ring,  and  I  put  it
on  my  finger.  'V\Tien  he  said  me  then.  '  Is  the  ring  fitting
thee  '? '  I  said  to  him,  '  It  is.'  He  said,  '  Where  art  thou
ring?'  And  the  ring  said,  'I  am  here.'  The  brute  went  and
he  betook  himseK  towards  where  the  ring  was  speaking,
and  now  I  saw  that  I  was  in  a  harder  case  than  ever  I
was.  I  drew  a  dirk.  I  cut  the  finger  ofl'  from  me,  and
I  threw  it  from  me  as  far  as  I  could  out  on  the  loch,  and
there  was  a  great  depth  in  the  place.  He  shouted,
'  Where  art  thou,  ring  ? '  And  the  ring  said,  '  I  am
here,'  though  it  was  on  the  ground  of  ocean.  He  gave
a  spring  after  the  ring,  and  out  he  went  in  the  sea.


112  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

And  I  was  as  pleased  here  when  I  saw  him  drowning,
as  though  thou  shouldst  let  my  own  life  and  the  lite
of  my  two  sons  with  me,  and  not  lay  any  more  trouble
on  me.

"  'Wlien  the  giant  was  drowned  I  went  in,  and  I
took  with  me  all  he  had  of  gold  and  silver,  and  I  went
home,  and  surely  great  joy  was  on  my  j^eople  when  I
arrived.  And  as  a  sign  for  thee,  look  thou,  the  finger
is  off  me."

"  Yes,  indeed,  Conall,  thou  art  wordy  and  wise,"
said  the  king.  "  I  see  thy  finger  is  off.  Thou  hast
freed  thy  two  sons,  but  tell  me  a  case  in  which  thou
ever  wert  that  is  harder  than  to  be  looking  on  thy  two
sons  being  hanged  to-morrow,  and  thou  wilt  get  the
soul  of  thy  second  eldest  son  with  thee."

"Then  went  my  father,"  said  Conall,  "and  he  got
me  a  wife,  and  I  was  married.  I  went  to  hunt.  I
was  going  beside  the  sea,  and  I  saw  an  island  over  in
the  midst  of  the  loch,  and  I  came  there  where  a  boat
was  with  a  rope  before  her  and  a  rope  beliind  her,  and
many  precious  things  within  her.  I  looked  myself  on
the  boat  to  see  how  I  might  get  part  of  them.  I  put
in  the  one  foot,  and  the  other  foot  Avas  on  the  ground,
and  when  I  raised  my  head  what  was  it  but  the  boat
over  in  the  middle  of  the  loch,  and  she  never  stopped
till  she  reached  the  island.  "WTien  I  went  out  of  the
boat  the  boat  returned  where  she  Avas  before.  I  did
not  know  now  what  I  should  do.  The  place  was
without  meat  or  clothing,  without  the  appearance  of  a
house  on  it.  I  raised  out  on  the  top  of  a  hill.  I  came
to  a  glen  ;  I  saw  in  it,  at  the  bottom  of  a  chasm,  a  woman
who  had  got  a  (;hild,  and  the  child  was  naked  on  her
knee,  and  a  knife  in  her  hand.  She  Avould  attempt  to
])ut  the  knife  in  the  throat  of  the  babe,  and  the  babe
would  begin  to  lau"li  in  her  face,  and  she  would  begin


CONALL  CRA  BHUIDHE.  I  I  3

to  cry,  and  she  would  throw  the  knife  behind  her.  I
thought  to  myself  that  I  was  near  my  foe  and  far  from
my  friends,  and  I  called  to  the  woman,  '  V/hat  art  thou
doing  here  ? '  And  she  said  to  me,  '  What  brought  thee
here  Ì '  I  told  her  myself  word  upon  word  how  I  came.
'  Well  then,'  said  she,  '  it  was  so  I  came  also.'  She
showed  me  to  the  place  where  I  should  come  in  where
she  was.  I  went  in,  and  I  said  to  her,  '  What  was  in
fault  that  thou  wert  putting  the  knife  on  the  neck  of
the  child.'  '  It  is  that  he  must  be  cooked  for  the
giant  who  is  here,  or  else  no  more  of  my  world  will  be
before  me.'  I  went  up  steps  of  stairs,  and  I  saw  a
chamber  full  of  stripped  corpses.  I  took  a  lump  out
of  the  corpse  that  was  whitest,  and  I  tied  a  string  to
the  child's  foot,  and  a  string  to  the  lump,  and  I  put
the  lump  in  his  mouth,  and  when  it  went  in  his  throat
he  would  give  a  stretch  to  his  leg,  and  he  would  take
it  out  of  his  thi-oat,  but  with  the  length  of  the  thread
he  could  not  take  it  out  of  his  mouth.  I  cast  the  child
into  a  basket  of  down,  and  I  asked  her  to  cook  the
corpse  for  the  giant  in  place  of  the  child.  '  How
can  I  do  that  ?'  said  she,  '  when  he  has  count  of  the
corpses.'  'Do  thou  as  I  ask  thee,  and  I  will  strip
myself,  and  I  will  go  amongst  the  corpses,  and  then  hi'
will  have  the  same  count,'  said  I.  She  did  as  I  asked
her.  We  put  the  corpse  in  the  great  caldron,  but  we
could  not  put  on  the  lid.  When  he  was  coming  home
I  stripped  myself,  and  I  went  amongst  the  corpses.
He  came  home,  and  she  served  up  the  corpse  on  a  great
platter,  and  Avhen  he  ate  it  he  was  complaining  that  he
found  it  too  tough  for  a  child.

"  '  I  did  as  thou  asked  me,'  said  she.    '  Thou  hadst

count   of  the   corpses   thyself,    and    go   up   now   and

count  them.'      He  counted  them  and  he  had  them.    '  I

see  one  of  a  white  body  there,'   said  he.      I  will  lie

I


114  '"'EST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

down  a  while  and  I  will  have  him  when  I  wake.
When  he  rose  he  went  up  and  gripped  me,  and  I
never  was  in  such  a  case  as  when  he  was  hauling  me
down  the  stair  with  my  head  after  me.  He  threw  me
into  the  caldron,  and  he  Hfted  the  hd  and  he  put  the  lid
into  the  caldron.  And  now  I  was  sure  I  would  scald
before  I  could  get  out  of  that.  As  fortune  favoured
me,  the  brute  slept  beside  the  caldron.  There  I  was
scalded  by  the  bottom  of  the  cakbon.  \Vhen  she  per-
ceived that  he  was  asleep,  she  set  her  mouth  quietly  to
the  hole  that  was  in  the  hd,  and  she  said  to  me  '  was  I
alive.'  I  said  I  was.  I  put  up  my  head,  and  the  brute's
forefinger  was  so  large,  that  my  head  went  through  easily.
Everything  was  coming  easily  -ndth  me  till  I  began  to
bring  up  my  hips.  I  left  the  skin  of  my  hips  about
the  mouth  of  the  hole,  and  I  came  out.  When  I  got
out  of  the  caldron  I  knew  not  what  to  do ;  and  she
said  to  me  that  there  was  no  weapon  that  would  kill
him  but  his  own  weapon.  I  began  to  draw  his  spear,
and  every  breath  that  he  would  draw  I  would  think  I
would  be  down  his  throat,  and  when  his  breath  came
out  I  was  back  again  just  as  far.  But  with  every  ill
that  befell  me  I  got  the  spear  loosed  from  him.  Then
I  was  as  one  under  a  bundle  of  straw  in  a  great  wind,
for  I  could  not  manage  the  spear.  And  it  was  fear-
ful to  look  on  the  brute,  who  had  but  one  eye
in  the  midst  of  his  face ;  and  it  Avas  not  agreeable
for  the  Hke  of  me  to  attack  him.  I  drew  the  dart  as
best  I  could,  and  I  set  it  in  his  eye.  When  he  felt
this  he  gave  his  head  a  lift,  and  he  struck  the  other  end
of  the  dart  on  the  top  of  the  cave,  and  it  went  through
to  the  back  of  his  head.  And  he  fell  cold  dead  Avhere
he  was ;  and  thou  mayest  be  sure,  oh  king,  that  joy
was  on  me.  I  myself  and  the  woman  went  out  on
clear  ground,  and  we  passed  the  night  there.     I  went


CONALL  CRA  BHUIDHE.  I  I  5

and  got  tlie  boat  with  wliicli  I  came,  and  she  Avas  no
way  lightened,  and  took  the  -woman  and  the  child  over
on  dry  land ;  and  I  returned  home."

The  king's  mother  was  putting  on  a  fire  at  this
time,  and  listening  to  Conall  telling  the  tale  about  the
child.  "Is  it  thou,"  said  she,  "that  wert  there?"
"  Well  then,"  said  he,  "  'twas  I."  "  Och  !  och  ! "  said
she,  "  'twas  I  that  was  there,  and  the  king  is  the  child
whose  life  thou  didst  save ;  and  it  is  to  thee  that  life
thanks  might  be  given."     Then  they  took  great  joy.

The  king  said  "  Oh  Conall,  thou  camest  through
great  hardships.  And  now  the  brown  horse  is  thine,
and  his  sack  full  of  the  most  precious  things  that  are
in  my  treasury."

They  lay  down  that  night,  and  if  it  was  early  that
Conall  rose,  it  was  earher  than  that  that  the  queen  was
on  foot  making  ready.  He  got  the  brown  horse  and  his
sack  full  of  gold  and  silver  and  stones  of  great  price,
and  then  Conall  and  his  four  sons  went  away,  and  they
returned  home  to  the  Erin  realm  of  gladness.  He  left
the  gold  and  silver  in  the  house,  and  he  went  with  the
horse  to  the  king.  They  were  good  friends  evermore.
He  returned  home  to  his  wife,  and  they  set  in  order
a  feast ;  and  that  was  the  feast,  oh  son  and  brother  !

This  storv,  told  by  a  blind  man,  is  a  good  instance  of  the  way
in  which  a  popular  tale  adapts  itself  to  the  mind  of  everybody.
The  blinding  of  the  giant  and  bis  subsequent  address  to  his  pet
goat — "  There  thou  art,  thou  shaggy,  hairy,  white  goat :  thou
see'st  me,  but  1  see  thee  not" — comes  from  the  heart  of  the  nar-
rator. It  is  the  ornament  which  his  mind  hangs  on  the  frame  of
the  story.

"  James  Wilson  learnt  it  from  John  MacLachlan,  an  old  man
at  Kilsleven,  upwards  of  forty  years  ago.  The  old  man  would  be
about  eighty  years  of  age  at  the  time."

Cka  Bhuidhe  is  probably  a  corruption  of  some  proper  name.

Ceag  is  a  paw,  a  palm.     Buidhe,  yellow.


Il6  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.


CONALL  CRA-BHUIDHE.

Bha  Conall  cia-bliu!dhe  na  thuathanach  foghainnteacli  ann  an
Eirinn.  Bba  ceathrar  mhac  aige.  Blia  anns  an  am  sin  righ  air  a
h-uile  coigeamli  do  dh'  Eirinn.  Tbiuit  e  niach  do  chlann  an  righ  a
bha  fagus  do  Chonall  gun  deacb  iad  fein  atrus  clann  Chonaill  thar  a'
cheile.  Fhuair  clnnn  Chonaill  lamb  an  uachda',  's  mharbh  iad  mac
mbr  an  i  igh.  Chuir  an  righ  fios  air  Conall 's  thuirt  e  ris.  "  A  Chon-
aill de  thug  do  d'  mbicsa  del  a  leum  air  mo  mhicsa  gus  an  do
mharbhadh  mo  mhac  mor  le  d'  chloinnsa  ?  Ach  tha  mi  faicinn  ged
aleanuinn  le  dioghaltas  thu  nach  mor  is  fheairde  mi  e,  agus  cuiridh
mi  nis  ma  d'  choinneamh  ni,  agus  ma  ni  thu  e  cha  lean  mi  le
dioghaltas  thu.  Ma  gheobh  thu  fein  agus  do  mhic  dòmhsa  each
donn  righ  Lochlann  gheobh  thu  anamanna  do  mhac."  "  Carson,"  arsa
Conall,  "  nach  d^anainnsa  toil  an  righ  ged  nach  biodh  anamanna  mo
mhac  air  a  sgath  idir.  'S  crnaidh  an  gnothach  a  tha  thu  'g  iarraidh
orm,  ach  caillidh  mi  mo  bheatha  fein  agus  beatha  mo  mhac  air  neo
ni  mi  toil  an  righ.  An  deigh  nam  briathrau  so  dlr  f  hag  Conall  an
righ  's  chaidh  e  dhachaidh.  Nur  a  thainig  e  dachaidh  bha  e  fo
mhòran  trioblaid  agus  duibhthiambas.  Nur  a  chaidh  e  laidbe  dh'
inuis  e  d'a  bhean  an  ni  chuir  an  righ  ma  choinneamh.  Ghabh  a'
bhean  mòran  duilichinn  gum  b'  eigin  da  dealachadh  rithe  fe'in,  's
gun  f  bios  aice  'in  faiceadh  i  tuillidh  e."  "A  Chonaill,"  ars'  ise,  "  carson
nach  do  leig  thu  leis  an  righ  a  thoil  fein  a  dbèanadh  ri  d'  mhic,  seach
a  bhi  folbh  a  n's  's  gun  f  hios'am  am  faic  mi  tuillidh  thu."

Nur  a  dh'  eiridh  iad  an  la'  r  na  mhhireach  chuir  e  e  fein  's  a
cheithir  raic  an  ordugh,  's  ghabh  iad  an  turas  ma  thuaiream  Loch-
lann, 's  cha  d'  rinneadh  stad  leo  ach  a  reubadh  cuain  gus  an  d'
rainig  iad  e.  Nur  a  rhinig  iad  Lochlann  cha  robh  fios  aca  de
'dhèanadh  iad.  Arsa  'n  seann  duine  ra  mhic,  "  Stadadh  sibbse  agus
iarraidh  sinn  a  mach  tigh  muilleir  an  righ."  Nur  a  chaidh  iad  a
stigh  do  thigh  muilleir  an  righ  chuir  an  duine  iad  a  dh'  f  hantuinn
anns  an  oiahche.  Dh'  innis  Conall  do  'n  mhuilleir  gun  deach  a
chlann  fein  's  clann  an  righ  thar  a  cheile  's  gun  do  mliarbh  a
chlannsan  mac  an  righ  's  nach  robh  ni  sam  bith  a  thoileacbadh  an
righ  ach  e  'dh'  f  haotainu  each  donn  righ  Lochlann.  "Ma  ni  thusa
run  orm  's  gun  cuir  thu  air  doigh  mi  gum  faigh  mi  e,  gu  diongalta
phighidh  mi  air  a  shon  thu."  Orsa  Conall,  "  'S  amaideach  an  ni  a
thiiiiiig  thu  'dh'  iarraidh,"'  ars'  am  muillear,  "  chionn  tha  'n  righ  air
leagail  inntinn  air  cho  mor  's  nach  f  haigh  thu  air  doigh  sam  bith  e


CONALL  CRA  BHUIDHE.  II7

mar  an  goid  thu  e;  ach  ma  ni  thu  fe'in  dòigh  a  mach  ceilidh  mise  rim
ort."  "  'S  e  tha  mi  smaointeachadh,  ars'  Conall  o'n  a  tha  thu  'g  obair
h-uile  latha  do  'u  righ,  gun  cuireadh  thu  fcin  's  do  ghillean  mi  fein
's  mo  mhic  ann  an  coig  saic  pruinn.''  "  Cha  dona  'n  seol  a  thainig  a
'd'  cheann,"  orsa  'm  muillear.

Bhruidhinn  am  muillear  r"  a  ghillean,  's  thuirt  e  riu  so  a  dheanadh,
's  chuir  iad  ann  an  coig  saic  iad.  Thainig  gillean  an  righ  a  dh'
iarraidh  a  phruinn,  's  thug  iad  leo  na  coig  saic,  's  dhoirt  iad  air
beulthaobh  nan  each  iad.  Ghlais  na  seirbheisich  an  dorusd,  's  dh'
f  holbh  iad.  Nur  a  dh'  eirich  iad  a  thoirt  liimh  air  an  each  dhonn,
orsa  Conall,  "  Cha  dean  sibh  sin,  tha  e  doirbh  faotainn  as  a'  so ;
deanamaid  dhuinn  fe'in  coig  tuill  fhalaich,  air  alt 's  ma  mhòthachas
iad  duinn  gun  d'  theid  sinn  am  falach."  Einn  iad  na  tuill  Thug
iad  an  sin  larah  air  an  each.  Bha  "n  t-each  gu  math  uaibhreach,  's
chaidh  e  gu  stararaich  fhuathasach  feadh  an  stabuill.  Mhothaich
an  righ  dha ;  chual  e  'n  stararaich.  "  'S  eigiii  gur  h-e  siod  an
t-each  donn  agamsa,"  urs'  e  ra  ghillean,  "  feuchaibh  de  tha  cearr  air."
Chaidh  na  seirbheisich  a  mach,  's  nur  a  mhothaich  Conall  's  a  mhic
daibh  a  tighinn  chaidh  iad  's  na  tuill  fhalaich.  Dh'  amhairc  na
seirbheisich  feadh  nan  each,  's  cha  d'  f  huair  iad  ni  sam  bith  cearr.
Thill  iad  's  dh'  innis  iad  so  do  'n  righ,  's  thuirt  an  righ  riu,  mar  an
robli  stugh  cearr  iad  a  dhol  d'  an  kite  taimh.  Nur  a  bha  iiine  aig
na  gillean  a  bhith  air  folbh  thug  Conall  's  a  mhic  an  ath  lamb  air  an
each.  Ma  bu  mhor  an  stararaich  a  rinn  e  roimhe,  bu  sheachd  motha
an  stararaich  a  rinn  e  nis.  Chuir  an  righ  fios  air  a  ghillean  a  ris  '3
thuirt  e  gu  cinnteach  gun  robh  rudaigin  a  cur  dragh  air  an  each
dhonn.  "  Folbhaibh  agus  amhaircibh  gu  math  timcliioU  air,"  ors'
esan.  Chaidh  na  seirbheisich  a  mach,  's  chaidh  iadsan  do  na  tuill
fhalaich.  Ruraich  na  seirbheisich  gu  math,  's  cha  d'  f  huair  iad  ni.
Thill  iad  's  dh'  innis  iad  so.  "  Tha  sin  iongantach  leamsa,"  ars'  an
righ.  "  Theirigeadh  sibse  'laidhe  rithisd,  's  ma  mhòthachas  mis'  a
rithisd  e  theid  mi  fein  a  mach."  Nur  a  mhothaich  Conall  's  a  mhic
gun  robh  na  gillean  air  folbh  thug  iad  lamh  a  rithisd  air  an  each,  's
rug  fear  ac'  air,  's  ma  bu  mhor  an  stararaich  a  rinn  an  t-each  an  da
shiubhal  roimhid,  rinn  e  barrachd  air  an  t-siubhal  so.  "  Bhuam  so,"
urs'  an  righ;  " 's  e'igin  gu  'bheil  nitheigin  a'  cur  dragh  air  an  each
dhonn  agamsa."  Dh'  f  huaim  e  'n  clag  gu  deifireach,  's  nur  a  thainig
a  theachdaire  da  'ionnsuidh  thuirt  e  ris,  gillean  an  stabuill  a  chur  air
ghluasad,  gun  robh  rudaigin  cearr  air  an  each.  Thainig  na  gillean,
's  dh'  f  holbh  an  righ  leo.  Nur  a  mhothaich  Conall  's  a  mhic  an  tòir
a'  tighinn  chaidh  iad  do  na  tuill  fhalaich.  Bha  'n  righ  'na  dhuine
furachail,  's  chunnaic  e  far  an  robh  na  bha  toirt  air  ua  h-eich  a  bhi


i8


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


a'  dèanadh  stararaich.  "  Bithibh  tapaidh,"  urs'  an  ri^h,  "  Tha  daoine
a  stigh  's  an  stabuU,  's  faigheamaid  iad  air  altaigin."  Lean  an  righ
faileachd  nan  daoine,  's  f  huair  e  iad.  Bha  h-uile  duine  eolach  air
Conall ;  chionn  bha  e  'na  thuathanach  measail  aig  righ  Eireann.
'S  nur  a  thug  an  righ  nios  as  na  tuill  iad  thuirt  e  "U!  Chonaill
a'  bheil  thu  'n  so  '"  "  Tha  righ  mi  'n  so  gun  cheist,  'sthug  an  eigin
orm  tighinn  ann  tha  mi  fo  d'  mhathas  agus  fo  d'  onair  agus
fo  d'  ghras."  Dh'  innis  e  mar  a  thachair  da,  's  gun  robh  aige  'n
t-each  donn  r'a  fhaotainn  do  righ  Eireann  no  'mhac  a  bhi  air  a
chur  gu  has.  "  Bha  f  hios'am  nach  fhaighinn  e  le  iarraidh,  "s  bha  mi
'del  g'  a  ghoid."  "  Seadh  a  Chonaill  tha  e  gle  mhath  ach  thig  a
stigh,"  ars  an  righ.  Dh'  iarr  e  air  a  luchd  coimhead  faire  chur  air
mic  Chonaill,  's  biadh  a  thoirt  dhaibh;  's  chuireadh  faire  dhiibailt'  an
oidhche  sin  air  mie  Chonaill.  "Nis  a  Chonaill,"  ars'  an  righ,  "An
robh  thu  'n  aite  riabh  na  bu  chruaidhe  na  'bhith  'faicinn  do  chuid  mac
'gan  crochadh  am  maireach ;  ach  chuir  thusa  gum'  mhathas  a^us
gum'  ghras  e,  's  gur  e  'n  eigin  a  thug  ort  e,  's  cha  'n  f  haod  mi  thusa
a  chrochadh.  Innis  domh  cas  'sam  bith  "san  robh  thu  cho  cruaidh
ris  a'  so,  's  ma  dh'  innseas  thu  sin  gheobh  thu  anam  do  mhic  is  òige
leat."     "  Innsidh  mi  cas  cho  cruaidh  anns'  an  robh  mi,"  orsa  Conall.

"  Bha  mi  ann  am  ghill'  og,  's  bha  moran  fearainn  aig  m'  athair,
's  bha  paircean  bhiorach  aige,  's  bha  te  dhiu  an  deigh  breith.  Thuirt
mo,  mhathair  rium  a  toirt  dhachaidh.  Dh'  f  holbh  mi  agus  thug  mi
jeam  balachan,  agus  f  huair  sinn  a'  bho,  's  thug  sinn  leinn  i.  Shil
fras  shneachda,  chaidh  sinn  a  stigh  do  bhothag  iiiridh,  's  thug  sinn  a
bho  's  an  laosrh  a  stigh  leinn,  's  bha  sinn  a'  leigeil  dhinn  na  froise  ;
dè'  thàinig  a  stigh  ach  aona  chat  deug  's  cat  mor  ruagh  cam  na
cheannabhard  orra.  Nur  a  thainig  iad  a  stigh,  ga  dearbh,  cha  robh
tlachd  sam  bith  agam  fein  d' an  cuideachei.  "Suassibh,"  ursa  'n
ceannabhard,  "carson  a  bhiodh  sibh  'nar  t'amh,  aa;u3  seinnibh
crònan  do  Chonall  Cra-bhuidhe."  Bha  iongantas  orm  gum'  b'
aithne  do  na  cait  fein  m'ainm.  Nur  a  sheinn  iad  an  cronan,  urs'  an
ceannabhard.  "  Nis  a  Chonaill  pUigh  duais  a'  chrònain  a  sheinn  na
cait  duit."  "Mata,  ursa  mi  fein  "cha'n  'eil  duais  agamsa  dhuibh  mar
an  d'  theid  sibh  sios  agus  an  laogh  sin  a  ghabhail."  Cha  bu  luaithe
thuirt  mi  'm  facal  na  ghabh  an  da  chat  deug  a  sios  an  d'ail  an  laoigh,
's  gu  dearbh  cha  do  sheas  e  fada  dhaibh.  "  Suas  sibh,  carson  a
bhiodh  sibh  'nar  tosd  seinnibh  cronan  do  Chonall  Cra-bhuidhe,"  ars  an
ceannard.  Gu  diongalta  cha  robh  tlachd  'sam  bith  agam  fein  d'a'n
cronan,  ach  a  nios  a  ghabh  an  t-aon  chat  deug,  's  mar  an  do  sheinn
iad  dòmhsa  cronan  an  sin  agus  an  sin.

"  Paigh  a  nis  'nan  duais  iad,"  ars  an  cat  mor  ruadh.    Tha  mi  fe'in


CONALL  CKA  BHUIDHE.  I  I  9

sgith  dhibh  ft'in  's  de  'r  duais,  arsa  mise,  cha  'n  'eil  duais  agamsa
dliuibh  mar  an  gabh  sibh  am  mart  sin  shios.  Thug  iad  thun  a
mhairt,  's  gu  dearbh  cha  do  sheas  i  fada  dliaibh.  "  Carson  a  bhios
sibh  'nur  tosd  theirigibh  suas  agus  seinnibh  cronan  do  Chonall  Cra-
bhuidhe,"  ars  an  ceannard.  Gu  cinnteach  a  righ  cha  robh  amhnil
agam  dhaibh  fèin  no  d' an  cronan,  cbionn  bha  mi  faicinn  nach  bu,
chompanaich  mhath  iad.  Nur  a  sheinn  iad  dòmhsa  'n  cronan  thug
iad  a  SÌOS  orra  far  an  robh  an  ceannard.  "  Piiidh  a  nis  an  duais,"
urs'  an  ceaiinabh^rd,  "'S  gu  cinnteach  a  righ  cha  robh  duais  agamsa
dhaibh,  's  thuirt  mi  riu,"  bha  'n  'eil  duais  agamsa  dhuibh  mar  an
d'  thoir  sibh  am  baiach  sin  leibh,  "s  feum  a  dhèanadh  dheth.  Nur
a  chnal  am  balach  so  thug  e  'mach  air,  's  thug  na  cait  as  a  dheigh  ;  "s
gu  cinnteach  a  righ  bha  striongan  eatorra.  Nur  a  chaidh  iad  a
mach  ghabh  mise  mach  air  uinneag  sgroth  a  bha  air  taobh  ctiil  an
tighe.  Thug  mi  as  cho  cruaidh  's  a  dh'  f  haodainn  a  stigh  do  'n
choille.  Bha  mi  gle  luath,  laidir  'san  am  sin.  Agus  nur  a  mhothaich
mi  toirm  nan  cat  a'  m'  dhe'igh  streap  mi  aim  an  craoibh  cho  ard  's  a
chunnaic  mi  'san  iiite  agus  a  bha  diimhail  anus  a  bharr,  's  dh'
f  halaich  mi  mi  fein  cho  math  's  a  dh'  f  haodainn.  Thòisich  na  cait
air  m'iarraidh  feadh  na  coille,  's  cha  robh  iad  'gam' f  haotainn,  agus
nur  a  bha  iad  sgith  thuirt  gach  fear  ra  clieile  gun  tilleadh  iad,  ach
thuirt  am  cat  cam,  ruagh  a  bha  'na  cheannabhard  orra."  Cha  'n
f  haca  sibhs'  e  le  'ur  da  shiiil,  's  gun  agams'  ach  an  aon  siiil.  Siod  an
slaightire  shuas  am  barr  na  craoibhe !  Nur  a  thuii  t  e  sin  chaidh
fear  dhiu  suas  'sa  chraoibh,  's  nur  a  bha  e  tigh'n  far  an  robh  mi
tharruinu  mi  arm  a  bh'  at;am,  agus  mharbh  mi  e.  "  lihuam  so,"  urs'
am  fear  cam,  "  cha  'n'  f  haod  mi?e  'bhi  call  mo  chuideachd  mur  so.
Cruinnichibh  ma  bliun  na  craoibhe,  agus  cladhachaibh  timchioll
urra,  agus  leagaibh  an  nuas  an  rògaire  gu  talamh."  Chruinnich
iad  an  so  timchioll  urra,  agus  chladhaich  iad  ma  'bun,  agus  a  chiad
f  hremnh  a  ghearr  iad  thug  i  uileann  urra  gu  tuiteam,  's  thug  mi
fein  glaodh  asam  's  cha  b-ioghnadh  e.  Bha  ann  an  iomall  na  coille
sagairt  agus  deich  daoiu'  aig  a  ruamhar,  's  thuirt  e,  "  Tha  'n  siod
glaodh  saraichte  cha  n  'f  haod  mise  gun  a  f  hreagairt,"  Thuirt  fear  a
bu  ghlice  de  na  daoine.  '•  Leigeamaid  da  gus  an  cluinn  sin  a  rithisd
e."  Thòisich  na  cait's  thòisich  iad  gu  fiadliaich,  's  bhrisd  iad  an  ath
f  hreumh,  's  thug  mi  fe'in  an  ath  ghlaodh  asam,  's  gu  dearbh  cha
robh  e  fann.  "  Gu  cinnteach,"  ors'  an  sagairt,  "  's  duine  'na  eigin  a
th'ann  gluaisemaid."  Bha  iad  a'  cuir  an  ordugh  gu  gluasad,  's  dh'
eiridli  na  cait  air  a  chraoibh  gus  an  do  bhrisd  iad  an  treas  freumhach,
's  thuit  a  clu-aobh  air  a  h-uileann.  Thug  mi  'n  treas  glaodh  asam.
Dheihrich  na  daoine  foghainteach,  's  niu-  a  chunnaic  iad  an  diol  a


I20  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.

bh'  aig  na  cait  air  a  cbraoibh  thoisich  iad  urra  leis  na  spadan,  's
tliòisicli  iad  fein  's  na  cait  air  a  cheile,  gus  an  do  mharbhadh  gu  leir,
iad  na  daoin'  agus  na  cait ;  agus  gu  cinnteacb  a  righ  cba  do  charaich
mise  gus  am  facami  'n  t-aon  ma  dbeireadh  a'  tuiteam  diu.  Tbainig
mi  dacliaidli,  agus  sin  agad  an  cas  an  crualdhe  'n  robh  mise  riabh,  's
air  learn  gum  bu  chruaidbe  'bliitb  gam'  leobadh  aig  na  cait  na  bhith
'gam'  cbrocbadh  aig  righ  Loclilann  a  maireacb.

"  Od  a  Cbonaill,"ar.s  an ri-b, "  's  briatliarach  tbu,  shaor  thu  anam  do
miiic  le  d'  naigheacbd,  agus  ma  dh'  innseas  thudbomh  cas  is  cruaidhe
na  do  tbri  mic  a  bbi  'gau  crochadh  a  maireacb  glieobh  tbu  do  dbarna
mac  is  òige  leat  's  bidh  an  sin  da  mhac  agad."  "  Mata,"  orsa  Conall,
air  chiimhnant  gun  dean  tbu  sin,  bba  mi  'n  cas  h  bu  chruaidbe  na
'bhi'  agadsa  'nochd  am  priosan.  "  Cluinneam  e,"  urs'  an  righ.  Bha
mi  'n  siod,"  orsa  Conall,  "  am  ghill'  og  's  cbaidh  mi  macb  a  sbealgair-
eachd,  's  bha  crioch  m'  athav  taobh  na  fairge,  's  bba  i  garbh  le
creagan,  uanihacban,  agus  geothachan.  Nur  a  bba  mi  folbh  aig
braigb  a'  cliladaicb  cbunnaic  mi  mar  gum  biodh  toil  a'  tighinn
a  nios  eadar  da  chreag,  's  thug  mi  lamb  air  amharc  de  bu
chiall  do'n  toit  a  bhi  tighinn  a  nios  an  siod.  Nur  a  bha  mi  'g
amharc  de  rinn  mi  aeh  tuiteam  sios,  's  bha  'n  t-aite  cho  Ian
do  leasachadh  's  nach  do  biirisdeadb  cniiimh  na  craicionn.  Cba
robb  fios  'am  de  mur  a  gheobhainn  a  macb  as  an  so.  Cba  robh  mi  'g
amharc  romham  acb  bha  mi  'g  amharc  as  mo  chionn  an  rathad  a
tbainig  mi,  's  cha  d'  thig  an  lath'  a  gheobhainn  suas  an  sin.  Bha  e
uamhasach  learn  a  bhi  'n  sin  gus  am  basachainn.  Chuala  mi
tuaimeileis  mhòr  a'  tighinn,  's  de  bha  'n  sin  acb  famhair  mor,  's  da
dhusan  gobhar  leis,  agus  boc  air  an  ceann,  's  nur  a  cheangail  am
fiimbair  na  gobhair  tbainig  e  mos  's  thuirt  e  rium."  "  Haobh  a
Cbonaill  's  f  hada  mo  chore  a'  meirgeadh  ann  a'  m'  pbbca  a  feitheamh
air  t-f  hebil  mhaoth."  "  Ob,"  arsa  mise,  "Cha  mbor  is  f  beaird  thu  mise
ged  a  reubas  thu  mi  as  a'  clie'ile,  cha  dean  mi  acb  aon  trath  dhuit ;  ach
tha  mi  faicinn  gu  'bheil  thu  air  aon  sUil,  's  leigh  math  mise  's  bbeir  mi
sealladh  na  suil  eile  dhuit.  Db'  f  holbh  am  famhair  's  tharrairm  e
'm  brothadair  mor  ;iir  larach  a  ghealbhain,  's  bha  mi  fe'in  aig  ionnsach-
adb  dha  demur  a  theòigbeadb  e  'n  t-uisge,  clium  gun  d'  thugainn  a
sealladb  do  'n  t-siiil  eile.  Fhuair  mi  fraoch,  's  rinii  mi  rubair  dheth
's  chuir  mi  'na  sheasamh  anus  a'  bhrotliadair  e.  Thoisich  mi  air  an
t-siiil  a  bha  gu  math,  a'  cur  mar  f  hiachaibh  air  gun  d'  thugainn  a
sealladb  do  'n  te  eile  gus  an  d'  f  bag  mi  cho  dona  r'a  cheil  'iad;  agus
gu  cinnteacb  b'  fhasa  'n  te  bba  gu  math  a  nihilleadh,  na  'sealladh  a
thoirt  do  'n  te  eile.  Nur  a  cbunnaic  e  nach  bu  leur  dha  leus,  's  a
tlmirt  mi  fein  ris  gum  faighinn  a  macb  gim  taing  dha,  thug  e  'n


CONALL  CRA  BHUIDHE.  1  2  I

leum  sin  as  an  uisge  's  sheas  e  ann  am  beul  na  h-uamlia,  's  thuirt  e
gum  biodli  dioghladh  aig  airson  sealladh  a  shuil.  Clia  vobh  agani
ach  fantaiun  ann  am  pilleag  an  sin  fad  na  h-oidhche,  'cumail  m'  anail
a  stigh  air  dhoigh  's  nacli  mòtbchadh  e  càit'  an  robh  mi.  Nur  a
mhothaich  e  na  h-eòin  a'  gairm  anns  a  mhaidinn,  's  a  dh'  aithnich  e
gun  robh  an  lath'  ann,  thuirt  e  'bheil  thu'd'  chadal,  diiisg  agus  leig  a
niach  mo  cliuid  ghobhar.  Mharbh  mi  'm  hoc.  Ghlaoidh  esan,"  "  Cha
chreid  mi  nach  'eil  thu  marbhadh  mo  bhuic."  '•  Cha  n'  eil,"  orsa
mise  ach  tha  na  ròpaichean  cho  teann  's  gun  d'  thoir  mi  fad'  air  am
fuasgladh."  Leig  mi  mach  te  de  na  gobhair,  's  bha  e  ga  criodachadh,
's  thuirt  e  rithe.  "Tha  thus'  an  sin  a  ghobhar  bh'an,  riobagaeh,
ròineach,  's  clii  thusa  mise,  ach  cha  'n  f  haic  mis'  thusa.  Bha  mi
'gan  cuir  a  mach  a  lion  te'  's  te  's  a  feannadh  a  bhuic  's  ma'n  robh  'n
te  ma  dheireadh  dhiu  'mach  bha  feannadh  builg  agam  air.  Dh'
f  holbh  mi  'n  so  's  chuir  mi  mo  chasan  ann  an  aite'chasan,  deiridh  's
mo  làmhan  an  hite  'chasan  toisich,  agus  mo  cheann  an  aite'chinn,  's  na
h-adhaircean  air  mullach  mo  cliinn,  air  alt 's  gun  saoileadh  a  bheisd
gur  e  'm  hoc  a  bh'  ann.  Cbaidh  mi  'mach.  Nur  a  bha  mi  'dol  a
mach  chuir  am  famhair  a  lamb  orm,  's  thuirt  e."  "  Tha  thus'  an  sin  a
bhuic  bhòidhich,  chi  thusa  mi^e  ach  cha  'n  f  haic  mis'  thusa."  Nur  a
f  huair  mi  fe'in  a  mach,  's  a  chunnaic  mi  'n  saoghal  ma  'n  cuairt  orm,
gu  cinnteach  a  righ  bha  boch  orm.  Nur  a  bha  mi  mach,  's  a  chrath
mi  dhiom  an  craicionn,  thuirt  mi  ris  a  bheisd.  Tha  mi  mach  a  nis
guntaing  duit.  "  Aha,"  urs'  esan,  '•  an  d'rinn  thu  so  orm  ;  0  'n  a  bha  thu
cho  foghainteach  's  gun  d'  f  huair  thu  mach,  bheir  mi  dhuit  fainn'  a
th'  agam  an  so,  's  gle'idh  am  fainne  's  ni  e  feum  dhuit."  Cha  ghabh
mi  'm  fainne  uait,  arsa  mise,  ach  tilg  e,  's  bheir  mi  leam  e.  Thilg  e
'm  fainn'  air  a  bhlar,  chaidh  mi  fein  's  thog  mi  'm  fainne,  's  chuir  mi  air
mo  mlieur  e.  Nur  a  thuirt  e  rium  an  sin  a'  bheil  am  fainne  freagairt
dult,  thuirt  mi  ris,  tha.  Urs'  esan,  Ca'  'bheil  thu  f  hainne  ;  's  thuirt
am  fainne.  "  Tha  mi  'n  so."  Dh'  f  holbh  a'  bheisd  's  thug  e  ionn-
suidh  air  far  an  robh  'm  fainne  bruidhinn,  agus  chunnaic  mi  'n  so  gun
robh  mi  'n  ciis  na  bu  chruaidhe  na  bha  mi  riabh.  Tharruinn  mi
biodag;  ghearr  mi  dlùom  a'  mheur;  's  thilg  mi  uam  i  cho  f  hada  's  a
b'  urrainn  mi  mach  air  an  loch,  's  bha  doimhneachd  mhbr  's  an
aite.  Ghlaoidh  esan  Cait'  a'  bheil"thu  f  hainne;  's  thuirt  am  fainne,
"  Tha  mi  'n  so,"  ged  a  bha  e  'n  gruniid  a  chuain.  Thug  e  leum  as
de'igh  an  f  hainne,  's  a  mach  a  ghabh  e  anns  an  f  hairge  's  bha  mi
cho  toilichte  an  so  nur  a  chunnaic  mi  e  ga  bhathadh,  's  ged  a  leigeadh
thusa  mo  bheatha  fein  agus  beatha  mo  nihac  leam  gun  mir  dragh  a
chuir  orm.  Nur  a  bhathadh  am  famhair  chaidli  mi  stigh  's  thug  mi
leam  na  bh'  aige  'dh"  br's  do  dh'  airgiod,'s  chaidh  mi  dhachaidh,  's  gu


12  2  WEST  niGHLAXD  TALES,

cinnteach  bha  toilinntinn  nihor  air  mo  mhuiuntir  nur  a  rhinig  mi 's  mar
chomliarra  dhuit  fhaic  thu'mheur  dhiom.

■'Seadh  a  Clionaill 's  briathrach  seòlt'  thu,  ars  an  righ,  tha  mi
faicinn  do  mheur  dh\ot.  Shaor  thu  do  dha  mhac  a  nis  ach  innis  domh
cas  is  cruaidhe  an  robh  thu  riabh  na  bhi'g  araharc  air  do  dha  mhac  'gan
crochadh  a  maireach  's  gheobh  thu  anam  do  dharna  mic  is  sine  leat."

"  Dh'  f  holbh  an  siod  m'  athair,"  arsa  Conal.  "  agus  f  huair  e
dhomhbean, 'sbhamiairmophòsadb.  Dh' f  holbh  mi  shealg.  Bha  mi
folbh  taobh  na  fairge  's  chunnaic  mi  eilean  thallam  meadhon  an  loch,
agus  thainig  mi  far  an  robh  bata  an  am,  's  ropa  roimpe  's  ropa  na
deigh,  's  moran  do  nithean  luachmhor  an  taobh  a  stigh  dhi.  Dh'
amhairc  mi  fe'in  air  a  bhata  feuch  demur  a  gheobhainn  pàirt  diu,
Chuir  mi  stigh  an  darna  cas  's  blia  'chas  eile  air  a  ghrunnd,  's  nur  a
tliog  mi  mo  cheann  de  ach  a  bha  'm  bata  nunn  am  meadhon  an  loch,
's  cha  do  stad  i  gus  an  d'  r'ainig  i  'n  t-eilean.  Nur  a  chaidh  mi  mach
as  a  bhata  thill  am  bkta  far  an  robh  i  roimhid.  Cha  robh  fiosam  an
so  de'  dhòanainn.  Bha  'n  t-aite  gun  bhiadh,  gun  aodach,  gun  choltas
tighe  air.  Thog  mi  mach  air  mullach  cnoic.  Thainig  mi  gu  gleann.
Chunnaic  mi  ann  an  grunnd  glomhais  bean  agus  leanabh  aice,  's  an
leanabh  rhisgt'  air  a  gUiinean,  agus  simian  aice  'na  raimb.  Bheireadh
i  liimh  air  an  sgian  a  chuir  air  muineal  an  lèinibh,  's  thbiseacbadh
an  leanabh  air  gaireachdaich  na  h-aodann,  's  thoiseachadh  ise  air
caoineadh,  's  thilgeadh  i  'n  sgian  air  a  h-ais.  Smaointich  mi  fein  gun
robh  ^mi  fagus  do  m'  naimhdean  's  fad  o  m'  chairdean,  's  ghlaoidh
mi  ris  a  bhoireannach.  "  De'  tha  thu  'deanadh  an  so  ?  "  'S  thuirt  i  rium,
"  De  thug  thus'  an  so  ?  "  Dh'  innis  mi  fein  di  facal  air  an  f  hacal  mar
a  thainig  mi.  "  Mata,"  ors'  ise,  "  's  ann  mar  sin  a  thainig  mise  cuid-
eachd."  Sheòl  i  mi  gus  an  aite  'n  d'  thiginn  a  stigh  far  an  robh  i.
Chaidh  mi  stigh,  's  thuirt  mi  rithe,  De  bu  choireach  thu  bhi'  cur  na
si;ian  air  muineal  a  phaisde.  "  Tha  gu  'feum  mi  e'  bhi  bruich  airs«n
an  f  hamhair  a  tha  'n  so,  air  no  cha  bhi  tuillidh  do  m'  shaoghal  romh-
am."  Chaidh  mi  suas  ceumanna  sthiglireach,  's  chunnaic  mi  seòraar
làn  di)  chuirp  ruisgte.  Thug  mi  plaibean  as  a  chorp  a  bu  gbile,  agus
cheangail  mi  sreang  ri  cas  a  phaisde  's  sreang  ris  a  plilaibean,  's
chuir  mi  'm  plaibean  'na  bheul,  "s  nur  a  bhiodh  e'  dol  'na  mhuineal
bheireadh  e  sineadh  air  a  choi?,  's  bheireadh  e  as  a  mhuineal,  ach  leis
an  f  had  a  bha  's  an  t-smathainn  cha  b-urrainn  e  thoirt  as  a  bheul.
Thilg  mi  'ni  paisd'ann  am  baraille  clòimhe.'s  dh'  iarr  mi  urra  'n  corp
a  bhruich  do  'n  f  hamhair  an  hite'  phaisde.  "  Demur  is  urrainn  mi  sin  a
a  dheanadh, "  ars'  ise,  's  gu  bheil  cunndas  aig  air  na  cuirp.  Dean
thusa  mar  a  tha  mise  'g  iarraidh  ort,  's  riiisgidh  mise  mi  fein,  's  theid
mi'  measg  nan  corp,  's  bidh  an  cunndas  aig  an  sin,  ursa  mise.    Rinn


CONALL  CRA  BHUIDHE.  1  2  3

i  mar  a  dh'  iarr  mi  urra.  Chuir  sin  an  corp  anns  a  blirothadair
nihòr,  ach  chu  h-urrainn  duinn  am  brod  a  chur  air.  Nur  a  bha  esan
a  tigh'n  dachaidh  riiisg  mise  mi  fein  's  chaidh  mi  measg  nan  corp.
Thàinig  esan  dachaidli,  's  cliuir  ise  'n  corp  air  mias  mhòr,  's  nur  a  dh'
ith  e  e  biia  e  a'  gearan  gun  robli  e  tuillidh  is  righinn  leis  do  pliàisde."
"Rinn  mise  mar  a  dh'  iarr  thu,"urs'  ise,  "Bha  cunndas  agad  fe'in
air  na  cuirp,  's  theirig  suas  a  nis  agus  cunnd  iad."  Chunnd  e  iad  's
bha  iad  aige.  "  Tha  mi  'faicinn  fear  corp  geal  an  siod,"  urs'  esan
"  's  th^id  mi  'laidhe  treis,  's  bidh  e  agam  nur  a  dhUisgeas  mi.  Nur  a
dh'  eiridh  e  chaidh  e  suas  's  rug  e  orm,  's  clia  robh  mi  na  leithid  do
chiis  riamh,  's  nur  a  bha  e  'gam  shiao.lhadh  sios  an  an  staighir  's
mo  cheann  as  mo  dhei^h.  Thilg  e  anns  a"  choire  mi.  Thog  e  'm
brod,  's  chuir  e  'm  brod  anns  a  choire.  Bha  mi  'n  so  cinnteach
gum  bithinn  sgalte  ma  'm  faighinn  as  an  siod.  Mar  bhuaidh
fhortain  dòmhsa  chaidil  a  bheisd  taobh  a  choire.  Bha  mi  'n  sin
'gam  sgaladh  le  mas  a'  choire.  Nur  a  mhothaich  ise  gun  robh  e  'na
chadal  chuir  i  'beul  gu  reidh  ris  an  toll  a  bha  'sa'  bhrod,  's  thuirt  i
riura  an  robh  mi  beò.  Thuirt  mi  gun  robh.  Chuir  mi  suas  mo
cheann,  's  bha  corrag  na  beisde  cho  mòr  's  gun  deach  mo  cheann
roimhe  gu  soirbh.  Bha  h-uile  ni  tigh  'u  leam  gu  soirbh  gus  an  do
thoisich  mi  air  toirt  a  nios  mo  chruachan.  Dh'  f  hag  mi  craicionn
nan  cruaclian  ma  bheul  an  tuill,  's  thainig  mi  as.  Nur  a  f  huair  mi
'mach  as  a  clioire  cha  robh  f  hios  'am  de'  dhèanainn, 's  thuirt  ise  rium
nach  robh  arm  sam  bith  a  mharbhadh  e  ach  arm  fe'in.  Thoisich  mi
air  tarruinn  na  sleagh.  's  a'  h-uile  tarruinn  a  bheireadh  e  air  anail
shaoilinn  gum  bithinn  sios  'na  mhuineal,  's  nur  a  chuireadh  e  'mach
anail  bha  mi  cho  fad'a  rithisd  air  ni'  ais.  H-uile  h-olc  g'  an  d'
fhuaireadh  mi  f  huair  mi  n  t-sleagh  f huasgladh  uaidh.  Bha  mi  'n
sin  mar  gum  bithinn  fo  ultach  conlaich  ann  an  gaoith  mhòr,  's  nach
h-urrainn  mi  'n  t-sleagh  iomachar,  's  b-oillteil  a  hhi  'g  amharc  air  a
bheisd,  's  gun  ach  aon  sliil  an  clar  aodainn,  's  cha  b-aobhach  do  m'
leithidsa  dol  'na  dhiiil.  Tharruinn  mi  'n  t-sleagh  mar  a  b'f  hearr  a
b'urrainn  mi,  's  chuir  mi  'na  shiiil  i.  Nur  a  mhothaich  e  so  thug  e
togail  air  a  cheann,  's  bhuail  e  ceann  eile  na  sleagh  ri  driom  na  h-
uamha,  's  chaidh  i  roimhe  gu  clil  a  chinn,  's  thuit  e  fuar,  marbh  far  an
robh  e,  's  gu  cinnteach  dhuitse  a  righ  bha  hoch  ormsa.  Chaidh  mi
fein  's  am  boireannach  a  mach  air  fearann  glan,  's  chuir  sin  seachad
an  oidhche  an  sin.  Dh'  f  holbh  mi  agus  f  huair  mi  m  Xihta.  leis  an  d'
thainig  mi,  agus  cha  robh  iodramanachd  sam  bith  urra,  's  thug  mi
'bhean  agus  am  paisde  nunn  air  talamh  tioram,  agus  thill  mi
dhachaidh.

Bha  mathair  an  righ  a'  cur  air  gealbhan  san  am,  s  a  'g  eisdeachd


I  2  4  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

ri  Conall  aig  innseadh  an  naigheachd  ma  'n  plihisde.  "  An  tus',"  urs'
ise,  bha  'sin.  "  Mata,  urs  esan,"  's  mi.  "  Och  !  och ! "  ors'  ise,  "  's  mise
"bha  'n  sin,  agus  's  e  'n  righ  am  paisde  dan  do  shkbhail  thu  'bheatha,
agus  's  ann  ort  a  dh'  dfhaodar  buidlieachas  a  bheatha  thobhairt."
Ghabh  iad  an  so  toilinntinn  mhòr.  Uis'  an  righ,  "A  Chonaill
thainig  thu  ro  chasan  mor,  agus  's  leat  a  nis  an  t-each  donn,  agus  a
shachd  do  na  nitheannan  is  luachmhoire  'th'  ann  a'm'  conmhas."
Chaidh  iad  a  laidhe  'n  oidhdie,  sin  "sma  bu  mhoch  a  dh"  eiridh  Conall
bu  mhoiche  na  sin  a  bha  bhanrigh  air  a  cois  a  'dheanadh  deas.
Fhuair  e  an  t-eacli  donn,  's  a  shachd  do  dli'  or,  's  do  dh'  airgiod,  's  do
chlacha  luachmhor,  's  dh'  f  holbh  an  sin  Conall  's  a  cheathrar  mac,  's
thill  iad  dachaidh  do  rioghachd  aighearach  Eirinn.  Dh'fhiig  e 'n
t-or  's  an  t-airgiod  aig  an  tigh,  's  chaidh  e  leis  an  each  than  an  righ.
Chord  a  fcin  's  an  righ,  's  bha  iad  'nan  cairdean  matha  tuillidh.
Thill  e  dhachaidh  thun  a  mhnatha  s  chuir  iad  an  òrdugh  cuirm,  's  bi
chuirm  i  a  mhic  's  a  bhrUthair.


VI.

THE  TALE  OF  CONAL  CEOVI.

From  Neill  Gillies,  fislierman,  near  Inverary.

rpHERE  was  a  king  over  England  once,  and  lie  had
-■-  three  sons,  and  they  went  to  France  to  get  learn-
ing, and  when  they  came  back  home  they  said  to  theii-
lather  that  they  would  go  to  see  what  order  Avas  in  the
kingdom  since  they  went  away ;  and  that  was  the  first
place  to  which  they  went,  to  the  house  of  a  man  of  the
king's  tenants,  by  name  Conal  Crobhi.

Conal  Crovi  had  every  thing  that  was  better  than
another  waiting  for  them;  meat  of  each  meat,  and
draughts  of  each  drink.  When  they  were  satisfied,
and  the  time  came  for  them  to  lie  down,  the  king's  big
son  said —

"  This  is  the  rule  that  we  have  since  we  came  home
— ^The  goodwife  must  wait  on  me,  and  the  maid  must
wait  on  my  middle  brother,  and  the  guidman's
daughter  on  my  young  brother."  But  this  did  not
please  Conal  Crovi  at  all,  and  he  said — "  I  won't
say  much  about  the  maid  and  the  daughter,  but  I
am  not  willing  to  part  from  my  wife,  but  I  will  go
out  and  ask  themselves  about  this  matter  ;"  and  out  he
went,  and  he  locked  the  door  behind  him,  and  he  told
his  gillie  that  the  three  best  horses  that  were  in  the
stable  were  to  be  ready  Avithout  delay  ;  and  he  and
his   wife  went  on  one,  his  gillie  and  his  daughter  on


126  WEST  HIGHLAKD  TALES.

another,  and  liis  son  and  the  maid  on  the  third  horse,
and  they  went  where  the  king  was  to  tell  the  insult
liis  set  of  sous  had  given  them.

The  king's  watchful  gillie  was  looking  out  whom  he
should  see  coming.  He  called  out  that  he  was  seeing
three  double  riders  coming.  Said  the  king,  ha  !  hah !
This  is  Conal  Crovi  coming,  and  he  has  my  thi'ee  sons
under  cess,*  but  if  they  are,  I  will  not  be.  When
Conal  Crovi  came  the  king  would  not  give  him  a  hear-
ing. Then  Conal  Crovi  said,  when  he  got  no  answer,
"  I  will  make  thy  kingdom  worse  than  it  is,"  and  he
went  away,  and  he  began  robbing  and  lifting  s^joil.

The  king  said  that  he  would  give  any  reward  to  any
man  that  would  make  out  the  jilace  where  Conal  Crovi
was  taking  his  dwelling.

The  king's  swift  rider  said,  that  if  he  could  get  a  day
and  a  year  he  would  find  out  where  he  was.  He  took
thus  a  day  and  a  year  seeking  for  him,  but  if  he  took
it  he  saw  no  sight  of  ('onal  Crovi.  On  his  way  home
he  sat  on  a  pretty  yellow  brow,  and  he  saw  a  thin
smoke  in  the  midst  of  the  tribute  wood.

Conal  Crovi  had  a  watching  gillie  looking  whom
he  should  see  coming.  He  ^yeut  in  and  he  said  that  he
saw  the  likeness  of  the  s-nift  rider  commg.  "  Ha,  ha!  "
said  Conal  Crovi,  "  the  poor  man  is  sent  away  to
exile  as  I  went  myself."

Conal  Crovi  had  his  hands  spread  waiting  for  him,
and  he  got  his  choice  of  meat  and  drink,  and  warm
water  for  his  feet,  and  a  soft  bed  for  his  limbs.  He
was  but  a  short  time  lying  when  Conal  Crovi  cried,
"  Art  thou  asleep,  swaft  rider  ?"  "I  am  not,"  said  he.
At  the  end  of  a  while  again  he  cried,  "  Ai't  thou
asleep  f  He  said  he  w^as  not.  He  cried  again  the
thii'd  time,  but  there  was  no  answer.  Then  Conal  Crovi
*  CÌS,  cess,  tax,  subjection.


THE  TxVLE  OF  CONAL  CROVI.  I  2  7

cried,  "  On  your  soles  !  all  within,  this  is  no  crouching
time.  The  following  will  be  on  us  presently."  The
watch  man  of  Conal  Crovi  was  shouting  that  he  was  see-
ing the  king's  three  sons  coming,  and  a  great  company
along  with  them.  He  had  of  arms  but  one  black  rusty
sword.  Conal  Crovi  began  at  them,  and  he  did  not
leave  a  man  alive  there  but  the  three  king's  sons,  and
he  tied  them  and  took  them  in,  and  he  laid  on  them
the  binding  of  the  three  smalls,  straitly  and  painfully,
and  he  tlirew  them  into  the  peat  corner,  and  he  said
to  his  wife  to  make  meat  speedily,  that  he  was  going
to  do  a  work  whose  like  he  never  did  before.  "  What
is  that,  my  man  V  said  she.  "  Going  to  take  the  heads
off  the  king's  three  sons."  He  brouglit  up  the  big  one
and  set  his  head  on  the  block,  and  he  raised  the  axe.
"  Don't,  don't,"  said  he,  "  and  I  will  take  thy  part  in
right  or  unright  for  ever."  Then  he  took  the  middle
one,  he  set  his  head  on  the  block  and  he  raised  the
axe.  "  Don't,  don't,"  said  he,  "  and  I  will  take  with
thee  in  right  or  unright  for  ever."  Then  he  brought  up
the  young  one,  and  he  did  the  very  same  to  him.
"  Don't,  don't,"  said  he,  "  and  I  wiU  take  with  thee  m
right  or  unright  for  ever.  Then  he  went,  himself  and
the  king's  three  sons,  where  the  king  was.

The  watching  giUies  of  the  king  were  looking  out
when  they  should  see  the  company  coming  with  the
liead  of  Conal  Crovi.  Then  one  called  out  that  he
was  seeing  the  likeness  of  the  king's  three  sons  coming,
and  Conal  Crovi  before  them.

"  Ha,  hah  !"  said  the  king,  "  Conal  Crovi  is  coming,
and  he  has  my  three  sons  under  cess,  but  if  they  are  I
won't  be."  He  would  give  no  answer  to  Conal  Crovi,
but  that  he  should  be  hanged  on  a  gallows  in  the  early
morning  of  the  morrow's  day.

Now,  the  gallows  was  set  up  and  Conal  Crovi  was


I  2  8  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

about  to  be  hanged,  but  the  king's  big  son  cried,  "  I
will  go  in  his  place."  The  king's  middle  son  cried,  "  I
will  go  in  his  place ; "  and  the  king's  young  son  cried,
"  I  will  go  in  his  place."  Then  the  king  took  con-
tempt for  his  set  of  sons.  Then  .said  Conal  Crovi,
"  We  will  make  a  big  ship,  and  we  will  go  steal  the
three  black  whitefaced  stallions  that  the  king  of  Eirinn
has,  and  we  Avill  make  the  kingdom  of  Sasunn  as  rich
as  it  ever  was.  When  the  ship  was  ready,  her  prow
went  to  sea  and  her  stern  to  shore,  and  they  hoisted
the  chequered  flapping  sails  against  the  tall  tough
masts  ;  there  was  no  mast  unbent,  nor  sail  untorn,
and  the  brown  buckles  of  the  strand  were  "glagid"ing
on  her  floor.  They  reached  the  "  Paileas"  of  the  King
of  Eirinn.  They  went  into  the  stable,  but  when  Conal
Crovi  would  lay  a  hand  on  the  black  whitefaced  stal-
lions, the  stallions  would  let  out  a  screech.  The  King
of  Eirinn  cried,  "  Be  out  lads  ;  some  one  is  troubling
the  stallions."  They  went  out  and  they  tried  down
and  up,  but  they  saw  no  man.  There  was  an  old
hogshead  in  the  lower  end  of  the  stable,  and  Conal
Cro-vi  and  the  king's  three  sons  were  hiding  them-
selves in  the  hogshead.  When  they  went  out  Conal
laid  hands  on  the  stallion  and  the  stallion  let  out  a
screech,  and  so  they  did  three  times,  and  at  the  third
turn,  one  of  those  Avho  were  in  the  party  said,  that
they  did  not  look  in  the  hogshead.  Then  they  re-
turned and  they  found  the  king's  three  sons  and  Conal
in  it.  They  were  taken  in  to  the  king,  "  Ha,  ha,
thou  hoary  wretch,"  said  the  king,  "  many  a  mischief
thou  didst  before  thou  thoughtest  to  come  and  steal
my  three  black  stallions."

The  binding  of  the  three  smalls,  straitly  and  pain-
fully, was  put  on  Conal  Crovi,  and  he  was  thrown  in-
to the   peat  corner,   and  the   king's  tlu'ee   sons  were


THE  TALE  OF  COXAL  CROVI.  I  29

taken  up  a  stair.  Wlien  tlie  men  avIio  were  above
had  filled  themselves  full  of  meat  and  drink,  it  was
then  that  the  king  thought  of  sending  word  down  for
Conal  Crovi  to  tell  a  tale.  'T  was  no  run  for  the  king's
big  son,  but  a  leap  down  to  fetch,  him.  Said  the
king,  "  Come  up  here,  thou  hoary  wretch,  and  tell  us  a
tale."  "  I  will  tell  that,"  said  he,  "if  I  get  the  worth
of  its  telling ;  and  it  is  not  my  own  head  nor  the  head
of  one  of  the  company."  "  Thou  wilt  get  that,"  said
the  king,"  "  Tost  !  hush  !  over  there,  and  let  us  hear
the  tale  of  Conal  Crovi  :" —

"  As  a  young  lad  I  was  fishing  on  a  day  beside  a
river,  and  a  great  ship  came  past  me.  They  said  to
me  would  I  go  as  '  pilot'  to  go  to  Eome.  I  said
that  I  would  do  it ;  and  of  every  place  as  we  reached
it,  they  would  ask  was  that  Eome  Ì  and  I  would
say  that  it  was  not,  and  I  did  not  know  where  in  the
great  world  Eome  was.

"  We  came  at  last  to  an  island  that  was  there,  we
went  on  shore,  and  I  went  to  take  a  walk  about  the
island,  and  when  I  returned  back  the  ship  was  gone.
There  I  was,  left  by  myself,  and  I  did  not  know  what
to  do.  I  was  going  past  a  house  that  was  there,  and
I  saw  a  Avoman  crying.  I  asked  what  woe  was  on
lier  ;  she  told  me  that  the  heiress  of  tliis  island  had
died  six  weeks  ago,  and  that  they  were  waiting  for
a  brother  of  hers  who  was  away  from  the  toAvn,  but
that  she  was  to  be  buried  this  day.

"  They  were  gathering  to  the  burying,  and  I  was
amongst  them  when  they  put  her  down  in  the  grave ;
they  put  a  bag  of  gold  under  her  head,  and  a  bag  of
silver  under  her  feet.  I  said  to  myseK,  that  were
Ijetter  mine  ;  that  it  was  of  no  use  at  all  to  her.  When
the  night  came  I  turned  back  to  the  grave.*  When  I
*  The  same  word  means  cave  and  grave  ;  the  grave  is  dug
K


130  WEST  HIGHLANTD  TALES.

had  dug  up  the  grave,  and  when  I  was  coining  up
with  the  gold  and  the  silver  I  caught  hold  of  the  stone
that  was  on  the  mouth  of  the  grave,  the  stone  fell
down  and  I  was  there  along  with  the  dead  carlin.  By
thy  hand,  oh,  King  of  Eirinn  !  and  by  my  hand,  though
free,  if  I  was  not  in  a  harder  case  along  with  the
carlin  than  I  am  here  under  thy  compassion,  with  a
hope  to  get  off."

"  Ha  !  ha  !  Thou  hoary  -uTetch,  thou  camest  out
of  that,  but  thou  wilt  not  go  out  of  this."

"  Give  me  now  the  worth  of  my  ursgeul,"  said
Conal.

"  Wliat  is  that  ?  "  said  the  king.

"  It  is  that  the  big  son  of  the  Iving  of  Sasunn,
and  the  big  daughter  of  the  King  of  Eirinn,  should
be  married  to  each  other,  and  one  of  the  black  white-
faced  stallions  a  tocher  for  them."

"  Thou  shalt  get  that,"  said  the  king.

Conal  Crovi  was  seized,  the  binding  of  the  three
smalls  laid  on  him  straitly  and  painfully,  and  he  was
thrown  into  the  peat  corner  ;  and  a  wedding  of  twenty
days  and  twenty  nights  was  made  for  the  young  couple.
When  they  were  tired  then  of  eating  and  drinldng,
the  king  said  that  it  were  better  to  send  for  the  hoary
wretch,  and  that  he  should  tell  them  how  he  had  got
out  of  the  grave.

'T  was  no  run,  but  a  leap  for  the  king's  middle
son  to  go  to  fetch  him ;  he  Avas  sure  he  would  get  a
marriage  for  himself  as  he  had  got  for  his  brother.  He
went  down  and  he  brought  him  up.

Said  the  king,   "  Come  up  and  tell  to  us  how  thou

because  western  graves  are  dug  ;  but  the  stone  falls  on  the  mouth
of  the  grave,  probably  because  the  story  came  from  some  country
where  graves  were  caves.  There  is  an  Italian  story  in  \vhicli
this  incident  occurs — Decameron  of  Boccacio.


THE  TALE  OF  CONx\X  CROVI.  I  3  I

gottest  out  of  the  grave."  "  I  will  tell  that,"  said
Conal  Crovi,  "  if  I  get  the  worth  of  telling  it ;  and  it
is  not  luy  own  head,  nor  the  head  of  one  that  is  in  the
comi^auy."      "  Thou  shalt  get  that,"  said  the  king,

"  I  was  there  till  the  day.  The  brother  of  the
heiress  came  home,  and  he  must  see  a  sight  of  his
sister ;  and  when  they  were  digging  the  grave  I  cried
out,  oh. !  catch  me  by  the  hand  ;  and  the  man  that
woidd  not  wait  for  his  bow  he  would  not  wait  for  his
sword,  as  they  called  that  the  worst  one  was  there  ;
and  I  was  as  swift  as  one  of  themselves.  Then  I
was  there  about  the  island,  not  knowing  M'hat  side  I
should  go.  Then  I  came  across  three  young  lads,  and
they  were  casting  lots.  I  asked  them  what  they  were
doing  thus.  They  said,  'what  was  my  business  what  they
were  doing?'  'Hud!  hud!'  said  I  myself,  'you  will  tell
me  what  you  are  doing.'  Well,  then,  said  they,  a  great
giant  took  away  our  sister.  We  are  casting  lots  which
of  us  shall  go  down  into  this  hole  to  seek  her.  I  cast
lots  -with  them,  and  there  was  but  that  the  next  lot
fell  on  myself  to  go  down  to  seek  her.  They  let  me
down  in  a  creel.  There  was  the  very  prettiest  woman
I  ever  saw,  and  she  was  winding  golden  thread  oft"
a  silver  windle.  Oh. !  said  she  to  myself,  how  cUdst
thou  come  here  ?  1  came  down  here  to  seek  thee  ;  thy
three  brothers  are  waiting  for  thee  at  the  mouth  of  the
hole,  and  you  will  send  down  the  creel  to-morj-ow  to
fetch  me.  If  I  be  Hvmg,  'tis  well,  and  if  I  be  not,
there  's  no  help  for  it.  I  was  but  a  short  time  there
when  I  heard  thunder  and  noise  coming  Avith  the
giant.  I  did  not  know  where  I  should  go  to  hide
myself ;  but  I  saw  a  heap  of  gold  and  silver  on  the
other  side  of  the  giant's  cave.  I  thought  there  was
no  place  whatsoever  that  was  better  for  me  to  hide  in
than  amidst  the  gold.     The  giant  came  with  a  dead


I  3  2  ^VEST  niGHLAXD  TALES.

carlin  trailing  to  each  of  liis  slioe-ties.  He  looked
down,  and  he  looked  up,  and  when  he  did  not  see  her
before  him,  he  let  out  a  great  howl  of  crying,  and  he
gave  the  carlins  a  little  singe  through  the  fire  and
he  ate  them.  Then  the  giant  did  not  know  what
would  best  keep  wearj'ing  from  him,  but  he  thought
that  he  would  go  and  count  his  lot  of  gold  and  sih'er  ;
then  he  was  but  a  short  time  when  he  set  his  hand  on
my  own  head.  '  "Wretch  ! '  said  the  giant,  '  many  a  bad
thing  didst  thou  ever  before  thou  thoughtcst  to  come  to
take  aAvay  the  pretty  woman  that  I  had  ;  I  have  no
need  of  thee  to-night,  but  'tis  thou  shalt  polish  my  teeth
early  to-morrow.'  The  brute  was  tired,  and  he  slept
after  eating  the  carlms  ;  I  saw  a  great  flesh  stake  beside
tlie  fire.  I  put  the  iron  spit  in  the  very  middle  of  the
fire  till  it  was  red.  The  giant  was  in  his  heavy  sleep,
and  his  mouth  open,  and  he  was  snoring  and  blowing.
I  took  the  red  spit  out  of  the  fire  and  I  put  it  down
in  the  giant's  mouth  ;  he  took  a  sudden  spring  to
the  further  side  of  the  cave,  and  he  struck  the  end
of  the  spit  against  the  wall,  and  it  went  right  out
through  him.  I  caught  the  giant's  big  sword,  and  Avith
one  stroke  I  struck  the  head  off  him.  On  the  morrow's
(lay  the  creel  came  down  to  fetch  myself  ;  but  I  thought
I  would  fill  it  with  the  gold  and  silver  of  the  giant  ;
and  Avhen  it  was  in  the  midst  of  the  hole,  Avith  the
weight  of  the  gold  and  silver,  the  tie  broke.  I  fell
down  amidst  stones,  and  bushes,  and  brambles  ;  and
by  thy  hand,  oh,  King  of  Eirinn  !  and  by  my  hand,
though  free,  I  was  in  a  harder  case  than  I  am  to-night,
under  thy  clemency,  with  the  hope  of  getting  out."

■'  All  I  thou  hoary  wretch,  thou  earnest  out  of
that,  but  thou  wilt  not  go  out  of  tliis,"  said  the  king.

"  Give  me  now  the  worth  of  my  ui'Sgeul."

"  What's  that  ? "  said  the  king.


THE  TALE  OF  CONAL  CROVI.  I  33

"  It  is  the  middle  son  of  the  King  of  Sasunn,  and
the  middle  daughter  of  the  King  of  Eirinn  to  be  mar-
ried to  each  other,  and  one  of  the  black  -whitefaced
stalHons  as  tocher."

"  That  will  happen,"  said  the  king.

Conal  Crovi  was  caught,  and  bound  with  three
slender  ends,  and  tossed  into  the  peat  corner ;  and  a
wedding  of  twenty  nights  and  twenty  days  was  made
for  the  young  couple,  there  and  then.

When  they  were  tired  of  eating  and  drinking,  the
king  said  they  had  better  bring  Conal  Crovi  up,  till  he
should  tell  how  he  got  up  out  of  the  giant's  cave.
'Twas  no  run,  but  a  spring  for  the  king's  young  son  to
go  down  to  fetch  him  ;  he  was  sure  he  would  get  a
"  match  "  for  him,  as  he  got  for  the  rest.

"  Come  up  here,  thou  hoary  wretch,"  said  the  king,
"  and  tell  us  how  thou  gottest  out  of  the  giant's  cave."
"  I  wiU  tell  that  if  I  get  the  Avorth  of  telling  ;  and  it
is  not  my  own  head,  nor  the  head  of  one  in  the  com-
pany." "  Thou  Avilt  get  that,"  said  the  king.  "  Tost !
silence  over  there,  and  let  us  listen  to  the  sgeulach  of
Conal  Crovi,"  said  the  king.

"  Well !  I  was  there  below  wandering  backwards
and  forwards  ;  I  was  going  past  a  house  that  was  there,
and  I  saw  a  woman  there,  and  she  had  a  child  in  one
hand  and  a  knife  in  the  other  hand,  and  she  was
lamenting  and  crying.  I  cried  myself  to  her,  '  Hold
on  thy  hand,  woman,  what  art  thou  going  to  do  ? '
'  Oh  ! '  said  she,  '  I  am  here  with  three  giants,  and
they  ordered  my  pretty  babe  to  be  dead,  and  cooked
for  them,  when  they  should  come  home  to  dinner.'
'  I  see,'  said  I,  '  three  hanged  men  on  a  gallows  yon-
der, and  we  wiU  take  down  one  of  them  ;  I  will  go
up  in  the  place  of  one  of  them,  and  thou  wilt  make
him  ready  in  place  of  thy  babe.'        And  when   the


134  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.

giants  came  home  to  dinner,  one  of  them  would  say,
'  This  is  the  flesh  of  the  babe  ;'  and  another  would
say,  '  It  is  not.'  One  of  them  said  that  he  would  go
to  fetch  a  steak  out  of  one  of  those  who  were  on  the
gallows,  and  that  he  would  see  whether  it  was  the
tlesh  of  the  babe  he  was  eating.  I  myself  was  the  first
that  met  them;  and  by  thy  hand,  oh,  King  of  Eirinn,
and  by  my  hand,  were  it  free,  if  I  was  not  in  a  some-
what harder  case,  when  the  steak  was  coming  out  of
me,  than  I  am  to-night  under  thy  mercy,  with  a
hope  to  get  out."

"  Thou  hoary  wretch,  thou  earnest  out  of  that,
but  thou  wilt  not  come  out  of  this,"  said  the  king.

"  Give  me  now  the  reward  of  my  ursgeul  Ì "

"  Thou  wilt  get  that,"  said  the  king.

"My  reward  is,  the  j'oung  son  of  the  King  of
Sasunn,  and  the  young  daughter  of  the  King  of
Eirinn,  to  be  married,  and  one  of  the  black  stallions  as
tocher."

There  was  catching  of  Conal  Crovi,  and  binding
him  with  the  three  slender  ends,  straitly  and  pain-
fully, and  throwing  him  down  into  the  peat  corner  ;
and  there  was  a  wedding  made,  twenty  nights  and
twenty  days,  for  the  young  pair.  AYhen  they  were
tired  eating  and  drinking,  the  king  said  that  it  were
best  to  bring  up  that  hoary  wretch  to  toll  how  he  came
off  the  gallows.      Then  they  brought  myself  up.

"  Come  up  hither  thou  hoary  Avretch,  and  tell  us
h<5w  thou  gottest  off  the  gallows."  "  I  will  tell  that,"
said  I  myself,  "  if  I  get  a  good  reward."  "  Thou  wilt
get  that,"  said  the  king.

"  Well!  when  the  giants  took  their  dinner,  they  were
tired  and  they  fell  asleep.  When  I  saw  this,  I  came
down,  and  the  woman  gave  me  a  great  flaming  sword
of  light  that  one  of  the  giants  had  ;  and  I  was  not  long


SGEULACHD  CHONAIL  CHROBHIE.  I  3  5

throwing  tlie  heads  off  the  giants.  Then  I  myself,  and
the  woman  were  here,  not  knowing  how  we  should  get
up  out  of  the  giant's  cave.  We  went  to  the  farther  end  of
the  cave,  and  then  we  followed  a  narrow  road  through  a
rock,  till  we  came  to  light,  and  to  the  giant's  '  biorlinn '
of  ships.*  What  should  I  think,  but  that  I  would
turn  back  and  load  the  biorlinn  with  the  gold  and
silver  of  the  giant ;  and  just  so  I  did.  I  went  with
the  biorlinn  under  sail  till  I  reached  an  island  that
I  did  not  know.  The  ship,  and  the  woman,  and  the
babe  were  taken  from  me,  and  I  was  left  there  to  come
home  as  best  I  might.  I  got  home  once  more  to
Sasunn,  though  I  am  here  to-night."

Then  a  Avoman,  who  was  lying  in  the  chamber,
cried  out,  "  Oh,  king,  catch  hold  of  this  man ;  I  was
the  woman  that  was  there,  and  thou  wert  the  babe."
It  was  here  that  value  was  put  on  Conal  Crovi  ;  and
the  king  gave  him  the  biorlinn  full  of  the  giant's
gold  and  silver,  and  he  made  the  kingdom  of  Sasunn
as  rich  as  it  ever  was  before.

Told  by  Neill  Gillies  a  fisherman  at  Inverary,  about  fifty-five
years  old,  who  says  that  he  has  known  the  story,  and  has  repeated  it
for  many  years  :  he  learned  it  from  his  parents.    AVritten  down  by

Hector  Ukquhart.


SGEULACHD  CHONAIL  CHROBHIE.

Bha  rlgh  air  Sasunn  ann  uair,  agus  bha  triiiir  mhac  aige,  's  chaidh
iad  do  'n  Fliruing  a  dh'  f  haotainn  ionnsachadh,  agus  an  uair  a  thill  iad
dhachaidh,  thuirt  iad  ri  'n  athair  gun  rachadh  iad  a  shealltainn  de  'n
riaghailt  a  bha  san  riòghachd  0  'n  a  dh'  f  lialbh  iad,  agus  b"e  a  cheud


*  BiOK,  a  log  ;  Linn  a  pool ;  Luingeanach,  of  ships  ;  naval
barge;  or  Lunn,  handle  of  an  oar,  oared  large.


I  3  6  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

aite  do  'n  deach  iad  do  thigh  fear  do  thuathanaich  an  righ  do  'm  b'ainn
Conal  Cròbhi.  Bha  gach  ni 'b  'f  hearr  na  cheile  aig  Conal  Cròbhl  a
feitheamh  orra,  biadh  dheth  gach  biadh,  's  deoch  dheth  gach  deoch.
'Nuair  a  bha  iad  subhach  'sa  thainig  am  dhoibh  dol  a  hiidhe,  thuirt
mac  mor  an  rigb,  •'  'Se  so  an  riaghailt  a  tli'  againne  bho  thainig  sinn
dhachaidli,  gu  'ni  bi  mise  le  bean  an  tiglie  nochd,  agus  mo  bhrathair
meadhonach  leis  an  t-searbhanta,  's  mo  bhrathair  òg  le  nighean  tir
an  tighe."  Ach  cha  do  thaitinn  so  idir  ri  Conal  Crobhi,  's  thubhairt
e,  "  AIu  "n  nighean  's  mii'n  t-searbhanta  cha  'n  abair  mi  moran,  ach  cha
'n-'eil  mi  toilichte  dealachadh  ri  m"  bhean,  ach  the'id  mise  mach  agus
feoraichidh  mi-dhiubh  fhein  mu  thimchioU  na  ciiise  so;"  agus  a
mach  ghabh  e,  's  ghlais  e  'n  dorus  na  dhe'igh  's  dh'  iarr  e  air  a  ghille
na  tri  eich  a  b'  f  hekrr  a  bha  anns  an  stabull  a  bhi  deas  gun  dàil.
Chaidh  e  fdin  's  a'  bhean  air  fear,  's  a  ghille  's  a  nighean  air  fear  eile,
a  mhac  's  an  searbhanta  air  an  treas  each,  's  dh'  f  halbh  iad  far  an
robh  an  righ,  a  dh'  innseadh  am  masladh  a  thug  a  chuid  mac  dhoibh.
Bha  gille  furachail  an  righ  ag  amharc  a  mach  co  a  cliitheadh  e  'tighinn.
Ghlaodh  e,  "  gun  robh  e  'faicinn  triiiir  mharcaiche  diibailte  a'  tighinn."
Thuirt  an  righ,  "ha  !  hath  !  so  Conal  Crobhi  a'  tighinn,  's  mo  thriuir
mhacsafochis  aige,  ach  ma  tha  iadsan,  cha  bhi  mise."  'Nuair  a  thainig
Conal  Crobhi,  cha  d'  thugadh  an  righ  c'isdeachd  dha.  Thuirt  Conal
Crobhi  an  sin,  'nuair  nach  d'  f  huair  e  freasiairt,  "  Ni  mise  do  rioghachd
iia  's  miosa  na  tha  i,"  's  dh'  f  halbh  e  "s  dh'  f  hag  e  e,  "s  thòisich  e
air  robaireachd,  's  air  togail  chreach.

Thuirt  an  righ,  gii 'n  d'  thugadh  e  duals  air  bith  do  dhuine  a  gheibh-
adh  a  mach  an  t-aite  anns  an  robh  Conal  Crobhi  a'  gabhail  comlinuidh.
Thuirt  marcach  gemeartach  *  an  riuh,  "na  'm  faigheadli  esan  latha  's
bliadhna,  gu  'm  faigheadh  esan  amach  far  an  robh  e."  Thug  e  mar  so
latha  '9  bliadhna  'ga  'iarraidh,  ach  ma  thug,  cha  'u  fhac  e  sealladh  do
Chonal  Crobhi.  Air  an  rathad  dhaehaidh,  shuidh  e  air  maolan  bòidh-
each  buidhe  's  chunnaic  e  caol  smuid  ann  am  meadhon  na  Coille  Ubh-
laidh.  Bha  gille  furachail  aig  Conal  Crobhi  a'  sealltainn  co  'chitheadh
e  'tighinn.  Chaidh  e  stigh,  's  thuirt  e  gun  robh  e  'faicinn  coslas  a
mharcaich  (jhemeartaich  a'  tighinn.  "  Tha,  tha,  thuirt  Conal  Crobhi,
tha  'n  duine  bochd  air  a  chuir  air  falbh  air  fhgradh  mar  chaidh  mi
fein."  Bha  a  lamhan  sgaoilte  aig  Conal  Crobhi  a'  feitheamh  air,  's
f  huair  e  ro^ha  biailh  's  deocha,  's  burn  blatli  d'a  chasan,  's  leaba  bhog
d"a  leasan.  Cha  robh  e  acli  goirid  'na  luidhe  'nuair  a  ghlaodli
Conal  Crobhi,  "Am  bheil  thu  'd  Chadal,"  a  mharcaich'  gheineartaich.


*  Gemeartach,  swift  (not  in  dictionaries) ;  probably  from  Ceuji,
a  pace.


SGEULACHD  CHONAIL  CHROBHIE.  I  3  7

"  Cha  n'eil,"  thuirt  esan.  'N  Ceann  tacain  a  rithist,  ghlaodh  e,  "  'm
bheil  thu  'nad'  cliadal."  Thuirt  e,  nach  robh.  Ghlaodh  e  'rithist  an
treas  uair,  ach  cha  robh  freagradh  aim.  Ghlaodh  Conal  Crobhi  an
so,  "  Air  bhur  bonn  na  tha  stigh  ;  cha  'n  am  criiban  a  th'  ann,  bithidh
an  tòiroirnu  au  ceartair."  Bha  'm  fear  faire  aig  Conal  Crobhi  a
glaodhaich  gun  robh  e  'faicinn  triiiir  mhac  an  righ  a'  tigliinn  le
cuideachd  mhòr  maille  riii."'  Cha  robh  do  dh'  airm  aig'  ach  claidh-
eamh  meirgeach  diibh.  Thoisich  Conal  Crobhi  orra,  's  cha  d'  f  hag
e  duine  beò,  ach  triiiir  mhac  an  righ.  Cheangail  e  triiiir  mhac  an  righ
an  sin  's  thug  e  stigh  iad.  Chuir  e  ceangal  nan  tri  chaoil  orra  gu  daor
's  gu  docair,  's  thilg  e  ann  an  ciiil  na  mòn'  iad,  's  thuirt  e  ri  'bhean  biadh
a  dhòanamh  gu  luath,  gu  'n  robh  e  'dol  a  dheanamh  obair  nach  d'
rinn  e  riamh  roimhe  a  ieithid.  "  Gu  de  sin  a  dhuine,"  thuirt  ise.
"  Dol  a  thoirt  nan  ceann  do  thriliir  mhac  an  righ."  Thug  e  nios  am
fear  mòr, 's  chuir  e 'cheann  air  an  ealaig 's  thog  e 'n  tuadh.  "Na
dekn  !  na  dean,"  thuirt  esan,  "  's  gabhaidh  mi  leat  fliein  an  coir 's  an
eucoir  gu  bràth."  Thug  e  nios  an  sin  am  fear  meadhonach ;  chuir  e
cheann  air  an  ealaig,  's  thog  e  'n  tuadh.  "  Na  dehn !  Na  dean  !  "
thuirt  esan,  "  's  gabhaidh  mi  leat  f  he'in  an  coir  'san  eucoir  gubràth."
Thug  e  nios  an  sin  am  fear  og,  's  rinn  e  'Ieithid  eile  air.  "  Na  dean  !  Na
dean !  "  thuirt  esan,  "  's  gabhaidh  ini  leat  an  Coir 's  an  eucoir  gu  bràth."
Dh'  f  halbh  e  f  hein  an  sin  's  triiiir  mhac  an  righ  far  an  robh  an  righ.
Bha  gillean  furachail  an  righ  a'  sealltainn  a  mach,  cuin  a  chitheadh
iad  a'  tighinn  a  chudeachd  le  ceann  Chonail  Chrobhi.  Ghlaodh  fear
amach,  gun  robh  e  'faician  coslas  triiiir  mhac  an  rigli  a"  tis^^hinn,  's
Conal  Crobhi  air  an  toiseach.  "  Ha  !  ha !  thuirt  an  righ,"  tha  Conal
Crobhi  a'  tighinn  's  mo  thriUir  mhac  aige  fo  Chis,  ach  ma  tha  iadsan,
cha  bhi  mise.  Cha  d'thugadh  e  freagradh  do  Chonal  Crobhi,  ach  gu
"m  bitheadh  e  air  a  chrochadh  air  Croich  air  Moch  IMaduinn  an  latha
Maireach.  Nis  cbaidh  a  Chroich  a  chuir  suas,  "s  bha  Conal  Crobhi
gu  blii  air  a  chrochadh  ;  ach  ghlaodh  mac  mor  an  righ,  "  Theid  mise
na  aite."  Ghlaodh  mac  meadhonach  an  righ,  "Theid  mise  'na
iiite."  Ghlaodh  mac  og  an  righ,  "  Theid  mise  'na  aite."  Ghabh  an
righ  miothlachd  an  so  ri  'chaid  mac.  Tliuirt  Conal  Crobhi  an  sin,
"  Ni  sinn  long  mhòr  agus  theid  sinn  a  ghoid  na  'n  tri  òigeach  bhliira,
dhubha  a  tha  aig  righ  Eirinn,  's  ni  sinn  rioghachd  Shasuinn  co
beartach  sa  blia  i  riamh.

'Nuair  a  bha  'n  long  deas,  chaidh  a  toiseach  ri  muir  's  a
deireadh  ri  tir,  's  thog  iad  na  siuil  bhreaca,  bhaidealach  ri  aghaidh
nan  crann  fada,  fulannach,  's  cha  robh  crann  gun  liibadh  na  seòl
gun  reubadh,  's  bha  faochagan  ruadh  a  chladaich  a  glagadaich  air
a  h-urlar.    Rainig  iad  paileas  righ  Eirinn ;  Chaidh  iad  a  stigh  do  'n


138  WEST  niGHLAXD  TALES.

stabull,  ach  a  nuair  a  chuireadh  Conal  Crobhi  a  Ihmh  air  na  h-oigeich
bhlara,  dhubha,  leigeadh  na  h-oif,'eich  sgreuch  asda.  Ghlaodh  righ
Eirinn,  "Bithibh  a  tnach,  f  heaiaibh,  tba  Cuideiginn  a  cur  dragh  air
na  h-oigeich."  Chaidh  iad  a  mach,  "s  dh'  f  heuch  iad  sliios  as  shuas
.ich  cha  n"  f  hac  iad  duine.  Bha  seann  togsaid  an  ceann  sLlos  an
stabuill,  agus  bha  Conal  Crobhi  's  triUir  nihac  an  righ  'gam  folach
f  hein  "s  an  togsaid.  'Auair  a  chaidh  iadsan  a  niach,  chuir  Conal  a
lamh  air  an  oigeach,  ach  leig  an  t-oigeach  sgreuch  as.  Rinn  iad  so
tri  uairean,  agus  air  an  treas  tròmh,  thuirt  fear  do  na  bha  sa  chuid-
eachd,  nach  do  sheall  iad  san  togsaid.  Sheall  iad  an  sin,  's  f  huair
iad  triiiir  mhac  an  righ  agus  Conal  anns  an  togsaid.  Chaidh  an
tabhairt  a  stigh  a  dli'  ionnsaidh  an  righ.  "  Ha  !  ha  !  a  bhe'ist  liath,"
thuirt  an  righ,  "  's  iomadh  Cron  a  rinn  thu,  mu  'n  do  smaoinich  thu
tighinn  a  ghoid  nan  oigeach  dhubh  agamsa."  Cliaidh  ceangal  nan
tri  chaoil  gu  daor  's  gu  docaira  chur  air  Conal  Crobhi,  's  thilgeadh  an
ciiil  na  moine  e,  's  chaidh  trihir  mhac  an  righ  a  thoirt  an  aird  staidhir.
'Nuair  a  lion  na  fir  a  bha  gu  h-ard  iad  fein  Ian  do  bhiadh,  's  do
dheoch,  's  ann  a  smaoinich  an  righ  lios  a  chur  a  mos  air  Conal  Crobhi,
a  dh'  innseadh  sgeulachd.  Cha  bu  ruith  do  mhac  mor  an  righ  ach
leum  sios,  g'a  iarraidh.  Thuirt  an  righ,  "  Thig  a  nios  an  so,  a  bheist
liath,  's  innis  dhuinn  sgeulachd."  "  Innsidh  mi  sin,"  thuirt  esan,
"  ma  gheibh  mi  fiach  innseadh,  's  cha  "n  e  mo  cheann  f  hein  na  ceann
aon  do 'n  chuideachd."  "  Gheibh  thu  sin,"  thuirt  an  righ.  "Tosd!
thall  an  sin,  's  'cisdibh  ri  sgeulachd  Chonail  Chrobhi,"  thuirt  an  righ  !
"  'Nam'  «hiir  og,  bha  mi  'giasgach  latha  aig  taobh  aibhne,  'sthhiuig
long  mhor  seachad  orm  ;  thuirt  iad  rium  "an  gabhainn  a'  m'  (philot)
gu  dhol  an  liòimh:  thuirt  mi  gu  'n  dèanainn  e,  agus  na  h-uil'  aite,
do  'n  ruigeamaid,  dh'  f  heoraicheadh  iad,  am  b'e  siud  an  Roimh?  's
theirinn-sa  nach  b'i,  's  cha  robh  fios  agam,  C'ait'  air  an  t-saoghal  mhor
an  robh  an  Roimh.  Thàinig  sinn  mu  dheireadh  gu  h-eilean  a  bha  'n
sin.  Chaidh  sinn  air  tir  agus  cliaidh  mise  a  ghabhail  i^raid  feadh  an
eilean,  agus  dur  a  thill  mi  air  m'  ais,  bha  'n  long  air  falbh.  I3ha  mi
"n  sin  air  m"  f  hhgail  learn  f  hein,  's  cha  robh  fios  agam  de  a  dhèanainn.
Bha  mi  'dol  seacliad  air  tigh  a  bha  'n  sin,  's  chunnaic  mi  bean  ri
caoineadh.  Dh' f  heòraich  mi  dhi,  de 'm  bròn  a  bha  orra?  Thuirt  i
rium  'gu  'n  do  bhasaieh  ban-oighre  an  eilean  so  bho  cheann  sea
seachduinnean  agus  gu  'n  robh  iad  a'feitheanih  ri  brathair  dhi  'bha
air  falbh  o'n  bhaile,  ach  gu  'n  robh  i  ri 'tiòdhlacadh  an  latha  so.  Bha
iad  a'  cruinneachadh  gus  an  tiodhlacadh,  's  bha  mise  'nam  measg,
's  'nuair  a  chuir  iad  sios  anns  an  uaigh  i,  chuir  iad  poc'  oir  fuidh
'ceann,  's  poc'  airgid  fuidh  casan.  Thuirt  mise  rium  f  hein,  gu  'm
b'fhearr  sud  agam  fhdin,  nach  robh  e  gu  feum  sam  bith  dh'  ise.


SGEULACHD  CHO:^AIL  GHROBHIE.  I  39

"Nuair  a  thhinifj  an  oidliche  thill  mi  air  m'  ais  gus  an  uaigh,  'nuair
a  cliladhaich  mi  'n  uaigh,  's  a  bha  mi  tighinn  a  nios  leis  an  or  's  leis
an  airgiod,  rug  mi  air  a  chlach  a  bha  air  beul  na  h-uai^he.  Thuit  a
chlacli  a  nuas,  's  bha  mise  comhladh  ris  a  chailleach  niharbh  an  sin.
Air  do  laimhsa,  a  righ  Eirinn,  's  air  mo  liiimh-sa,  ge's  saor  e,  mur
robh  mi  ni  bu  chruaidh  comhladh  ris  a  chaillicli  na  tha  mi  'n  so  fo
t'iochn-sa,  's  diiil  ri  do!  as  agara.  "  Ha!  Ha  !  a  bheist  liath,  thainig
thu  as  an  sin,  ach  cha  te'id  thu  as  an  so."  "  Tlioir  dhomh  a  nis  liach  m'
ursgeul,"  arsa  Conal.  "  Gii  de  sin,"  thuirt  an  righ.  'Tha  mac  mor
righ  sliasuinn,  agus  nighean  mhbr  righ  Eirinn  a  bhi  air  am  pòsadli  ri
"cheUe,  agus  fear  do  na  h-oigeich  bhlara,  dhubha  na  thocharadh."
"  Gheibh  thu  sin,  thuirt  an  righ."  Chaidh  beireachd  air  Conal
Cròbhi,  's  ceangal  nan  tri  chaoil  a  chuir  air  i;u  daor  's  gu  dòtair,  's  a
thilgeil  an  ciiil  na  moine,  's  chaidh  banais  iichead  oidhche  's  iichead
latha  a  dhèanamh  do  'n  chhraid  òg.  'Nuair  a  bha  iad  sgith  an  sin  ag
itheadh  's  ag  òl,  thuirt  an  righ,  '' gu  'm  b'fliearr  fios  a  chuir  air  a
bheist  liatli,  's  gu  'n  innseadh  e  gu  de  mar  f  huair  e'  as  an  uagh."  Cha
bu  ruith  ach  leum  le  mac  meadhonach  an  righ  gu  dol  g'a  iaraidh.
Bha  e  cinuteach  gu  'faigheadh  e  posadh  dha  f  he'in,  mar  f  huair  e  d'a
bhrkthair.  Chaidh  e  sios  "s  thug  e  nios  e.  Thuirt  an  righ,  "  Thig  a
nios  's  innis  dhuinn  cionnas  a  f  huair  thu  as  an  uaigh."  "  Innsidh  mi
sin,"  thuirt  Conal  Crobhi,  "  ma  gheibh  mi  fiach  innseadh,  's  cha  'n  e
mo  cheann  fein,  na  ceann  h-aou  a  tha  sa  chuideachd."  "  Gheibh
thu  sin,"  thuirt  an  righ.

Bha  mise  an  sin  gus  an  latha.  Thainig  brathair  na  ban-oighre
dhachaidh,  's  dh' f  heumadh  e  sealladh  d'a  phinthar  fhaicinn  agus
dar  a  bha  iad  a  cladhach  na  h-uaighe,  ghlaodh  mise,  O  beir  air  Ihirah
orm !  'S  am  fear  nach  fanadh  ri  'bhogha  cha  'n  f  hanadh  ri  'chlaidheamh,
's  iad  a  glaodhaich  gu  'n  robh  am  fear  bu  mhiosa  an  siud,  's  bha  mise
cho  luath  ri  h-aon  aca  f  he'in.  Bha  mi  'n  sin  air  feadh  an  eilean  gu  'n
f  hios  de  'n  taobh  a  rachainn.  Thainig  mi  'n  sin  tarsuinn  air  tiiiiir
ghillean  òga,  's  iad  a  cuir  chrann.

Dh'  fheòraich  mi  dhiubh,  "De  a  bha  iad  a  deanamh  mar  siud."
Thuirt  iad  "  de  mo  ghnothuchsa  de  bha  iad  a  deanamh."  "  Hud  !
Hud  ! "  arsa  "  mi  f  hein,  innsidh  sibh  dhomh  de  tha  sibh  a  deanamh."
"  Mata,"  thuirt  iadsan,  "  thug  famhair  mor  air  falbh  ar  piuthar  's
tha  sinn  a  cuir  chrann  feuch  co  againn  a  the'id  sios  do  'n  toll
so  g'a  h-iarraidh."  Chuir  mise  crann  leo  's  cha  robh  ann  ach
gu'n  d'  thainig  an  crann  orm  fhe'in  gu  dol  sios  g'  a  h-iarraidh.
Leig  iad  sios  mi  ann  an  cliabh.  Bha  an  sin  an  aon  bhoirionnach
bu  bhòidhche  a  chunnaic  mi  riabh,  's  i  tochras  snath  òir  far
eachan   airgid.     "O!    tliuirt,"    ise  rium,  fhein,   "  de   mar   thainig


I  40  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

thusa  an  so  ?"  "  Thainig  mise  a  nuas  gu  d'  iarraidh  tha  do  thriiiir
bhriiithrean  a  feitheamh  ort  aig  bcul  an  tuill,  agus  cuiridli  sibh  a
nuas  an  cliabh  am  maiieacli  gu  m'  iarraidh-?a."  "  Ma  bhitheas  mi
beo  's  maith,  "s  mar  bi  cha  "u  "eil  atharrach  air."  Cha  robh  mi  ach
goiiid  ail  sin  a  nuair  a  chuala  mi  stairum  's  stararaich  a  tighinn
aig  an  fhamhair.  Cha  robh  fios  agam  caite  an  racliainn  am
falach ;  ach  chmmaic  mi  dun  oir  's  airpid  an  taobh  thall  uamh
an  fhamhair.  Smaoinich  mi  nach  robh  aiie  air  bliitli  a  b'  fhearr
dhomh  del  am  folacli  iia  'measg  an  oir.  Thainig  am  famhair  a
stigh,  's  cailleaeh  mharbh  slaodadh  ris  gach  barrall  broig'  aige.
Sheall  e  shios  's  slieall  e  shuas,  's  dar  nach  fac  e  ia'  air  tlioiseach
air,  leig  e  burrall  mòr  caoinicìh  as.  Thug  e  dathadh  air  na  cailJe-
achan  roimh  'n  ghealbhan  's  dh'  itb  e  iad.  Cha  robii  fhios  aig  an
f  liamhair  an  so  de  'n  rud  a  b'  f  hearr  a  chumadh  f  hadal  deth,  ach
smaointich  e  gu  "n  rachadh  ea  chunntas  a  chuid  oir  a's  airgid.  Cha
robh  e  ach  goirid  an  sin  'nuair  a  chuir  e  liimh  air  mo  cheann  f  hein.
"  A  Bheist !  "  tliuirt  am  famhair,  "  's  ioma  drocli  rud  a  rinn  thu  riamh
mu  "n  do  smaoinich  thu  tighinn  an  so  a  thoirt  air  falbh  a'  bhoirinnaich
bhoidheach  a  bli'  agani-sa."  "  Clia  'n'eil  feum  agarasa  ort  an  nochd,  ach
"s  tu  ghlanas  m'  f  hiaclan  moch  am  maireach.  Bha  a  bhc'ist  sgith  "s
chaidil  e  'n  deigh  na  caillich  itheadh.  Chunnaicmi  bior  mòr  feòla  ri
taobh  a  ghealbhain.  Chuir  mi  "n  leis-meadhoin  an  teine  am  bior  iar-
uinn,gusanrobhe  dearg.  Bham  famliair'natln-om  chadal,  's  abheul
fosgailte,  's  e  'riichdail  's  a  seideil.  Thug  mi  'm  bior  dearg  as  an  teine,
'  s  chuir  mi  sios  am  beul  an  f  hamhair  e.  Thug  e  grad  leum  gu  taobh
thall  na  h-uaimli,  's  bbuail  e  ceann  a  bhior  ris  a'  blialla  "s  chaidli
e  mach  roi  'n  clieann  eile.  Rug  mi  air  claidheamh  mòr  an
fhamliair,  agus  le  aon  bheum,  chuir  mi  "n  cear.u  dheth.  Air  an
latha  maireach,  thainig  an  clialjh  a  nuas  gu  m'  iarraidli  f  hi'in.  Acli
smaoinich  mi  gu  'n  lionainn  an  cliabh  do  dh'  or  's  do  dh'  airgiod  an
fhamhair,  's  dar  a  bha  e  'm  meadhon  an  tuill,  le  cudthrom  an  oir  's  an
airgid,  bhris  an  iris,  thuit  mi  nuas  a  measg  chlachan,  's  pliris,  's  dhris,
's  air  do  Ihimhsa,  a  righ  Eirinn,  's  air  mo  Ikimhs  ge  'saor  e,  blia  mi  'n
cks  bu  chruaidlie  na  tha  mi  nochd  fo  t'ioclidsa,  's  diiil  agam  ri  dol  as."
"  Ail !  a  blu'ist  liath,  tliiiinig  thu  as  an  sin,  ach  chat  cid  tliu  as  an  so,"
ars'  an  righ.  "  Tiioir  dhomh  a  nis  fiach  m'  ursgeul,"  arsa  Conal.  "  De
sin  ?  "  thuirt  an  r'lgh.  "  Tha  mac  nieadhonach  righ  sliasuinn  's  nighean
mheadhonacli  righ  Eirinn  a  blii  air  am  posadh  ri  'clicile  's  fear  do  na
h-òigeich  bhlàra,  dhubha  mar  thochradli."  "  Tachraidh  sin,"  thuirt
an  righ.  Chaidh  beireachd  air  Conal  Crobhi  's  a  cheangal  le  tri
oliinn  chaoil,  sa  thilgeadh  an  cuil  na  moine,  's  chaidh  banais  fichead
oidhclie  's  fichead  latha  a  dhòanamh  do  'n  chiiraid  big.     An  sin,  'nuair


SGEULACHD  CHOXAIL  CHROBHIE.  I4I

a  bha  iad  sgith  'g  itheadh  "s  ag  ol,  thuirt  an  righ,  "  gu  'm  b'fhearr
dhoibh  Conal  Cròbhi  a  tboirt  a  mos  gus  an  innseadh  e  cionnas  a  fhuair
e  nios  a  uamh  an  f  hamhair."  Cha  bu  ruith  ach  leum  le  mac  òg  an
iigh  dol  SÌOS  g'  a  iairaidh.  Bha  e  cinnteach  ^u  'faigheadh  e  matcha
dha  f  hein  mar  fhuair  e  do  chhch.  "  Thig  a  nios  an  so  a  bheist  liath,"
tliuirt  an  righ,  " 's  innis  duinn  ciamar  a  fhuair  thu  a  uaigh  an
f  hamhair."  "  Innsidh  mi  sin,  ma  gheibh  mi  tiach  innseadh,  's  cha  'n  e
mo  chpann  fhein  no  ceann  h-aon  do  na  'bheil  sa  chuideachd.'
"  Gheibh  thu  sin,''  thuirt  an  righ.  "  Tosd  !  thall  an  sin,  's  eisdeamaid
ri  sgeulachd  Chonail  Chrobhi,"  tliuirt  an  righ  !  (Well),  bha  mise  gu
h-iosal  an  sin,  's  mi  spaisdeireachd  air  m'  ais  's  air  m'  aghaidh.  Bha
mi  'dol  seachad  air  tigh  a  bha  'n  sin  's  chunnaic  mi  bean  an  sin,  's
leanabh  aice  sau  darna  laimh,  's  sgian  aice  san  laimh  eile,  's  i
'caoinneadh.  Ghlaodh  mi  fhein  rithe,  "Cum  air  do  lamh  a  bhean
de  tha  thu  dol  a  dhèanamh  mar  sin  ?"  "  0  !  "  thuirt  ise,  "  tha  mi  aig
tri  famhairean  an  so,  agus  dh'  iarr  iad  orm,  mo  leanabh  boidheach
a  bhi  marbh  's  air  a  bhruich  air  an  cionn  'nuair  a  thigeadh  iad
dhachaidh  gu  'n  dinneir.  Chi  mi,"  arsa  mise,  "  triiiir  dhaoine  crochta
air  croich  thall  an  siud,  blieir  sinn  a  uuas  fear  dhiubh,  agus  theid  mise
suas  na  aite,  's  deasaichidh  tu  esan  au  aite  do  leinibh."  Agus  a
nuair  a  thhinigna  famhairean  dhachaidh  gu  'n  dinneir,  theireadh  fear
dhiubh,  -"S  e  so  feoil  an  leinibh,  's  theireadh  fear  eile,"  cha  'n  e.
Thuirt  fear  dhiubh,  gu  'n  rachadh  e  a  thoirt  staoig  a  fear  do  na  bha
air  a  chroich,  agus  gu  'faiceadh  e  co  dhiu  's  e  feoil  an  leinibh  a  bha  iad
ag  itheadh.  'S  mi  fhein  a  cheud  f hear  a  thachair  orra,  's  air  do
laimh,  a  righ  Eirinn,  's  air  mo  laimhsa,  ge  saor  e,  mur  robh  mi  ann
an  cruaidh-chhs  ni  bu  mho  'nuair  a  bha  'n  staoig  a  tigliinn  asam,  na
tha  mi  noclid  fo  t'iochdsa  "s  diiil  ri  dol  as  agam."  "  A  bheist  liath,
thiiinig  thu  as  an  sin,  ach  cha  d'  tliig  thu  as  an  so,"ars'  an  righ.  "  Thoir
dhomii  a  nis  duais  m'  ursgeul."  "  Gheibh  thu  sin,"  ars'  an  righ.
"  'S  e  mo  dliuais,  mac  og  righ  Shasuinn,  's  nighean  og  righ  Eirinn  a
bhi  posda,  's  fear  do  na  h-oigeich  dhubha  mar  thochradh.  Chaidh
beireachd  air  Conal  Cròbhi,  'sa  cheangal  le  cinn  nan  tri  chaoile  gu
daor  's  gu  docair,  's  a  thilgeadh  sios  an  ciiil  na  mòine,  's  chaidh  banais
fichead  latha's  fichead  oidhche  a  dheanamh  do  'n  charaid  big.  'Nuair
a  bha  iad  spith  'g  itheadh 's  a  g'  ol,  thuirt  an  righ, "  gu  b'f  hearr  a  bheist
liath  ad  a  thoirt  a  nios,  a  dh'  innseadh  de  mar  thainig  e  bharr  na
croiche."  Thug  iad  an  so  a  nios  mi  fhein.  "  Thig  a  nios,  a  bheist
liath  an  so,  "s  innis  dhuinn  de  mar  fhuair  thu  bharr  na  Croiche."
'•Innsidh  mi  sin,"  arsa  mi  fhc^in,  "ma  gheibh  mi  duais  mhaith."
"Gheibh  thu  sin,"  thuirt  an  righ.  (Well)  a  nuair  a  ghabh  na
famhairean   an    dinneir   bha    iad   sgith,   's   thuit    iad   'nan   cadal.


I  42  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES.

'Nuair  a  chunnaic  mise  so,  tlihinig  mi  niias  "s  thug  a'  bhean  clhonili
daidheamh  mor,  lasrach  snluis  a  bha  aig  fear  do  na  famhairean,  s
cha  robh  mi  fada  a  tilgeadh  nan  ceann  do  na  famhairean.  Bha  mi
fhe'in  's  am  boirionnach  an  so  gun  fhios  againn  cionnas  a  gheibheamaid
a  nios  a'  uamh  an  f  hanib;iir.  Dh'  f  halbh  sinn  gu  ceann  shios  na
h-uaimh  's  lean  sinn  an  sin  rathad  cumhang  roi  clireag  gus  an  d'
thkinig  sinn  gu  solus  's  gu  bior-linn  luingeanach  an  fhamhair.
Smuainicli  mi  fhein  gum  pillinn  air  m'  ais  agus  gu  'n  luchd-
aichinn  a  bhior-linn  le  or 's  le  airgiod  an  fhamhair,  agus  mar  so
f  h(?in  rinn  mi.  Dh'  f  halbh  mi  leis  a  bhior-linn  fo  shèol  gus  an  d'
thhinig  mi  gu  h-eilean  nach  b'  aithne  dhomh.  Chaidh  an  long,  's  am
boirionach,  's  an  leanabh  a  thoirt  nam,  's  fagar  mise  an  sin  gu  tighin
dhachaidh  mar  a  b"f  hearr  a  dh'  f  haodainn.  Fhuair  mi  dhachaidh  aon
uair  eile  do  Shasunn,  ged  tlia  mi  'n  so  a  nochd.  Ghlaodh  boirionnach
a  bha  na  luidhe  san  t-seomar,  "  O  a  righ,  beiribh  air  an  duine  so."
"  Bu  mhise  am  boirionach  a  bha  'n  sin,  's  bu  tusa  an  leanabh."  'S  ann
an  so  a  bha  'm  measair  Conal  Crobhi, 's  thug  an  righ  dhaa  bhior-linn
Ian  oir  's  airgid  an  fhamhair 's  i-iun  e  rioghachd  Shasuinn  cho  beanach
's  a  bha  i  riamh.

Tliis  story  was  told  to  nie  at  Livcrary,  April  25,  1859,  by
Gillies.  It  was  tokl  with  the  air  of  a  man  telling  a  serious
story,  and  anxious  to  tell  it  correctly.  The  narrative  was  inter-
larded with  explanations  of  the  words  used,  and  the  incidents
described.  Those  who  sat  about  the  fire  argued  points  in  the
story.  These  were  John  MacKenzie,  fisherman  ;  John  Mac-
Donald,  travelling  tinker  ;  John  Clerk,  our  host,  formerly  miller
to  the  Duke  of  Argyle  ;  and  some  others,  whose  names  I  have
forgotten  The  story  is  very  correctly  written.  I  took  notes  at
the  time,  and  they  agree  with  the  Gaelic  as  written  by  Hector
Urquhart,  from  the  dictation  of  Gillies.


VIl.
THE  TALE  OF  CONNAL.

From  Kenneth  MacLennan,  Pool  Ewe.

rpHERE  was  a  king  over  Eirinn  once,  who  was  named
-'-  King  Cruachan,  and  he  had  a  son  who  was  called
Connal  MacRigh  Cruachan.  The  mother  of  Connal
died,  and  his  father  married  another  woman.  She  was
for  finishing  Connal,  so  that  the  kingdom  might  belong
to  her  own  posterity.  He  had  a  foster  mother,  and  it
Avas  in  the  house  of  his  foster  mother  that  he  made  liis
home.  He  and  his  eldest  brother  were  right  fond  of
each  other  ;  and  the  mother  was  vexed  because  Connal
Avas  so  fond  of  her  big  son.  There  was  a  bishop  in
the  place,  and  he  died ;  and  he  desired  that  his  gold
and  silver  should  be  placed  along  with  him  in  the
grave.  Connal  was  at  the  bishop's  burying,  and  he
saw  a  great  bag  of  gold  being  placed  at  the  bishop's
head,  and  a  bag  of  silver  at  his  feet,  in  the  grave.
Connal  said  to  his  five  foster  brothers,  that  they
would  go  in  search  of  the  bishop's  gold ;  and  when
they  reached  the  grave,  Connal  asked  them  which  they
Avould  rather  ;  go  down  into  the  grave,  or  hold  up  the
flagstone.  They  said  that  they  would  hold  up  the
flag.  Connal  Avent  down  ;  and  whatever  the  squeahng
was  that  they  heard,  they  let  go  the  flag  and  they  took
to  their  soles  home.      Here  he  Avas,  in  the   "rave   on


I  44  WEST  niGHLAXD  TALES.

top  of  the  bishop.  "N^Hien  tlie  five  of  foster  brothers
reached  the  house,  their  mother  was  somewhat  more
sorrowful  for  Conual  than  she  would  have  been  for  the
five.  At  the  end  of  seven  mornings,  there  went  a
company  of  young  lads  to  take  the  gold  out  of  the
bishop's  grave,  and  when  they  reached  the  grave  they
threw  the  flag  to  the  side  of  the  further  wall ;  Connal
stirred  below,  and  when  he  stirred  they  went,  and  they
left  each  arm  and  dress  they  had.  Connal  arose,  and
he  took  with  him  the  gold,  and  arms  and  dress,  and  he
reached  Ids  foster  mother  with  them.  They  were  all
merry  and  lighthearted  as  long  as  the  gold  and  silver
lasted.

There  was  a  great  giant  near  the  place,  who  had  a
great  deal  of  gold  and  silver  in  the  foot  of  a  rock  ;  and
he  was  promising  a  bag  of  gold  to  any  being  that
would  go  doivn  in  a  creel.  Many  were  lost  in  this
way  ;  when  the  giant  would  let  them  down,  and  they
woidd  fill  the  creel,  the  giant  would  not  let  down  the
creel  more  till  they  died  in  the  liole.

On  a  day  of  days,  Connal  met  with  the  giant,  and
he  promised  him  a  bag  of  gold,  for  that  he  should  go
down  in  the  hole  to  fill  a  creel  with  the  gold.  Connal
went  down,  and  the  giant  was  letting  him  down  with
a  rope  ;  Connal  filled  the  giant's  creel  with  the  gold,
but  the  giant  did  not  let  down  the  creel  to  fetch
Connal,  and  Connal  was  in  the  cave  amongst  the  dead
men  and  the  gold.

When  it  beat  the  giant  to  get  another  man  who
Avould  go  down  in  the  hole,  he  sent  his  own  son  down
into  the  hole,  and  the  sword  of  Hght  in  his  lap,  so  that
he  might  see  before  him.

When  the  young  giant  reached  the  ground  of  the
cave,  and  when  Connal  saw  Ifim  he  caught  the  sword
of  light,  and  he  took  off  the  head  of  the  voung  giant.


THE  TALE  OF  CONNAL.  I  45

Then  Connal  put  gold  in  the  bottom  of  the  creel,
and  he  put  gold  over  him  ;  and  then  he  hid  in  the
midst  of  the  creel,  and  he  gave  a  pull  at  the  rope.
The  giant  drew  the  creel,  and  when  he  did  not  see  his
son,  he  threw  the  creel  over  the  top  of  his  head.
Connal  leaped  out  of  the  creel,  and  the  black  back  of
the  giant's  head  (being)  towards  him,  he  laid  a  swift
hand  on  the  sword  of  light,  and  he  took  the  head
oflf  the  giant.  Then  he  betook  himself  to  his  foster
mother's  house  with  the  creel  of  gold  and  the  giant's
sword  of  light.

After  this,  he  went  one  day  to  hunt  on  Sliamh  na
leirge.  He  was  going  forwards  till  he  went  into  a
great  cave.  He  saw,  at  the  upper  part  of  the  cave,  a
fine  fair  woman,  who  was  thrusting  the  flesh  stake  at  a
big  lump  of  a  baby  ;  and  every  thrust  she  would
give  the  spit,  the  babe  would  give  a  laugh,  and  she
would  begin  to  weep.  Connal  spoke,  and  he  said, —
"  "Woman,  what  ails  thee  at  the  child  without  reason  ?"
"  Oh,  said  she,  "  since  thou  art  an  able  man  thyself,
kill  the  baby  and  set  it  on  tliis  stake,  till  I  roast  it  for
the  giant."  He  caught  hold  of  the  baby,  and  he  put  a
plaid  that  he  had  on  about  the  babe,  and  he  liid  the
baby  at  the  side  of  the  cave.

Then  were  a  great  many  dead  bodies  at  the  side  of
the  cave,  and  he  set  one  of  them  on  the  stake,  and  the
woman  was  roasting  it.

Then  was  heard  under  ground  trembhng  and  thun-
der coming,  and  he  would  rather  that  he  was  out.  Here
he  sprang  in  the  place  of  the  corpse  that  was  at  the  fire,
in  the  very  midst  of  the  bodies.  The  giant  came,  and
he  asked,  "  "Was  the  roast  ready  ? "  He  began  to  eat,
and  he  said,  "  Fin  fau  hoagrich  ;  it 's  no  wonder  that
thy  own  flesh  is  tough ;  it  is  tough  on  thy  brat."

"When  the  giant  had  eaten  that  one,  he  went  to  count

L


146  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

the  bodies  ;  and  the  way  he  had  of  counting  them  was,
to  catch  hold  of  them  by  the  two  smalls  of  the  leg,  and  to
to  toss  them  past  the  top  of  his  head  ;  and  he  counted
them  back  and  forwards  thus  three  or  four  times ;  and  as
he  found  Connal  somewhat  heavier,  and  that  he  was  soft
and  fat,  he  took  that  slice  out  of  him  from  the  back  of
liis  head  to  his  groin.  He  roasted  this  at  the  fire,  and  he
ate  it,  and  then  he  fell  asleep.  Connal  winked  to  the
woman  to  set  the  flesh  stake  in  the  fire.  She  did  tliis,
and  when  the  spit  grew  white  after  it  was  red,  he
tlirust  the  spit  tlu'ough  the  giant's  heart,  and  the  giant
was  dead.

Then  Connal  went  and  he  set  the  woman  on
her  path  homewards,  and  then  he  went  home  him-
self. His  stepmother  sent  him  and  her  own  son  to
steal  the  whitefaced  horse  from  the  King  of  Italy,
"  Eadailt ;"  and  they  went  together  to  steal  the  white-
faced  horse,  and  every  time  they  would  lay  hand  on
him,  the  whitefaced  horse  would  let  out  an  vdt  (neigh  ?).
A  "  company  "  came  out,  and  they  were  caught.  The
binding  of  the  three  smalls  was  laid  on  them  straitly
and  painfully.  "  Thou  big  red  man,"  said  the  king,
"  wert  thou  ever  in  so  hard  a  case  as  that  ?"  "  A
little  tightening  for  me,  and  a  loosening  for  my  com-
rade, and  I  will  tell  thee  that,"  said  Connal.

The  Queen  of  the  Eadailt  was  beholding  Connal.

Then  Connal  said  : —

"  Seven  morns  so  sadly  mine.
As  I  dwelt  on  the  Lisliop's  top,
That  visit  was  longest  for  me,
Though  I  was  the  strongest  myself.
At  the  end  of  the  seventh  morn
An  opening  grave  was  seen,
And  I  would  he  up  hefore
The  one  that  was  soonest  down.


THE  TALE  OF  CONNAL.  1  47

They  thought  I  was  a  dead  man,
As  I  rose  from  the  mould  of  earth ;
At  the  first  of  the  harsh  bursting
They  left  their  arms  and  their  dresses.
I  gave  the  leap  of  the  nimble  one,
As  I  was  naked  and  bare.
'T  was  sad  for  me,  a  vagabond,
To  enjoy  the  bishop's  gold."

"  Tigliten  well,  and  right  well,"  said  the  king  ;
"  it  was  not  in  one  good  place  that  he  ever  was  ;  great
is  the  ill  he  has  done."  Then  he  was  tightened  some-
what tighter,  and  somewhat  tighter  ;  and  the  king
said,  "  Thou  great  red  man,  wert  thou  ever  in  a  harder
case  than  that  ? "  "  Tighten  myself,  and  let  a  little
slack  Avith  this  one  beside  me,  and  I  will  tell  thee
that."

They  tUd  that.      "  I  Avas,"  said  he,

"  Nine  morns  in  the  cave  of  gold  ;
My  meat  was  the  body  of  bones,
Sinews  of  feet  and  hands.
At  the  end  of  the  ninth  morn
A  descending  creel  was  seen  ;
Then  I  caught  hold  on  the  creel,
And  laid  gold  above  and  below  ;
I  made  my  biding  within  the  creel ;
I  took  with  me  the  glaive  of  light.
The  luckiest  turn  that  I  did."

They  gave  him  the  next  tightening,  and  the  king
asked  him,  "  Wert  thou  ever  in  case,  or  extremity,
as  hard  as  that  ?  "  "A  little  tightening  for  myself,
:md  a  slack  for  my  comrade,  and  I  will  tell  thee  that."

They  did  this.

"  On  a  day  on  Sliabh  na  leirge,
As  I  went  into  a  cave,
I  saw  a  smooth,  fair,  mother-eyed  wife,
Thrusting  the  stake  for  the  flesh


148  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

At  a  young  unreasoning  child.    '  Then,'  said  I,

'What  causes  thy  grief,  oh  wife,

At  that  unreasoning  child  ?'

'  Though  he  's  tender  and  comely,'  said  she,

'  Set  this  baby  at  the  fire.'

Then  I  caught  hold  on  the  boy,

And  wrapped  my  '  maundal '  around  ;

Then  I  brought  up  the  great  big  corpse

That  was  up  in  the  front  of  the  heap  ;

Then  I  heard,  Turstar,  Tarsfar,  and  Turaraich,

The  very  earth  mingling  together  ;

But  when  it  was  his  to  be  fallen

Into  the  soundest  of  sleep,

There  fell,  by  myself,  the  forest  fiend  ;

I  drew  back  the  stake  of  the  roast,

And  1  thrust  it  into  his  maw."

There  was  the  Queen,  and  she  was  listening  to  each
thing  that  Connal  suffered  and  said  ;  and  when  she
heard  this,  she  sprang  and  cut  each  binding  that  was
on  Connal  and  on  his  comrade  ;  and  she  said,  "  I  am
the  woman  that  was  there  ;  "  and  to  the  king,  "  thou
art  the  son  that  was  yonder."

Connal  married  tlie  king's  daughter,  and  together
"they  rode  the  whitefaced  horse  home  ;  and  there  I  left
them.

From  Hector  Urquhart,  June  27,  1859.  Recited  by  Ken-
neth MacLennan  of  Turnaig,  I'ool  Ewe,  Eoss-shire,  aged  70,
who  learned  it  from  an  old  man  when  he  was  a  boy.


SGEULACHD  CHONAILL.

Bha  righ  air  Eirinn  aon  nair  da  'm  b-ainm  righ  Cniachan, '»  bha
mac  aige,  ris  an  abradh  iad  Conall,  mac  righ  Cruachan.  Chaocliail
mathair  Chonaill,  agus  phòs  athair  Lean  eile.      Bha  i  air  son  cu  r  as


SGEULACHD  CHONAILL.  I  49

do  Chonall,  chum  's  gu'm  biodh  an  rioghachd  aig  a  sliochd  fe'in.
Bha  muime  chiche  aige-san,  agus  's  ann  an  tigh  a  mhuime  bha  e
"dèanamli  a  dliachaidh.  Bha  e  thèin  's  a  bhràthair  bu  shine  ro
mheasail  aig  a'  cheile,  agus  bh.i  mhàthair  gamhlasach  air  son  gu  robh
Conall  cho  measail  aig  a  mac  mòr.  Bha  Easbuig  anns  an  kite,  agus
chaochail  e,  agus  dh'  iarr  e  'n  t-or  's  an  t-airgiod  aige,  a  chuir  cuide  ris
anns  an  uaigh.  Bha  Conall  aig  tiodhlacadh  an  Easbuig,  agus  chuu-
naic  e  poc  mòr  òir  a  dol  aig  ceann  an  Easbuig,  agus  pòc  airgid  aig  a
chasan  's  an  uaigh.  Thubhairt  Conall  ri  chuignear  chomh-dhaltan,
"  gni  'rachadb  iad  air  thòir  or  an  Easbuig,"  agus  nur  a  riiinig  iad  an
uaigh,  dh"  fheòraich  Conall  dhiubh-san.  "Co  b' f hearr  leo  dol  sios
do  'n  uaigh  na  'n  leac  a  cliumail  suas?"  Thuirt  iadsan  gu  cumadb
iad  an  leac  suas.  Chaidh  Conall  sios,  agus  ge  b'  e  sgiamhail  a  chual'
iadsan,  leig  iad  as  an  leac,  agus  thug  iad  na  buinn  asda  dhachaidh.
Blia  e  'n  so  's  an  uaigh  air  muin  an  Easbuig.  'Nuair  a  riiinig  na
cuiguear  bhraithrean  altrum  an  tigh,  bha  'm  mathair  ni  bu  bhronaiche
airson  Chonaill  na  bliitheadh  i  airson  a  Chiiigear.  An  ceann  seachd
traithean,  dh'  f  halbh  Cuideachd  do  ghillean  òga  a  thoirt  an  òir  a
uaigh  an  easbuig'  agus  nur  a  rainig  iad  an  uaigh,  thilg  iad  an  leac  ri
taobh  a  bhalla  thall.  Ghluais  Conall  shios,  agus  nur  a  ghluais,  dh'
f  halbh  iadsan  :  dh"  f  h"ag  iad  gach  arm  "s  aodach  'bha  aca  ;  dh'eirich
Conall,  's  thug  e  leis  gach  or,  's  gach  arm,  "s  gach  aodach,  's  rainig  e
mhuime  chiche  leis.  Bha  iad  uile  gu  subhach,  sòlasach,  cho  fad,  's  a
mhair  an  t-or  "s  an  t-airgiod.  Bha  famhair  mòr  dlìith  do'n  àite,  aig
an  robh  mòran  òir  "s  airgid  ann  an  Cois  Creige,  agus  bha  e  'gealltainn
poc  òir  do  neach  sam  bith  a  rachadh  sios  ann  an  cliabh.  Bha  moran
air  an  call  mar  so.  Nur  a  leigeadh  am  famhair  sios  iad,  's  a  lionadh
iad  an  Cliabh,  cha  chuireadh  am  famhair  sios  an  cliabh  tuillidh,  gus
am  b'asdicheadh  iadsan  'san  toll.  Latha  do  na  Taithean,  thachair
Conall  ris  an  f  hamhair,  agus  gheall  e  poc  òir  dha  airson  a  dhol  sios
do  "n  toll  a  Tionadh  cliabh  do'n  or.  Chaidh  Conall  sios,  agus
bha  'm  famhair  "ga  leigeil  sios  le  rop.  Lion  Conal  cliabh  an
f  hamhair  do  'n  or,  ach  cha  do  leig  am  famhair  sios  an  cliabh  air
thoir  Chonaill,  "s  bha  Conall  'san  uaigh  measg  nan  daoine  marbha,  "s
an  i)ir.  'Nuair  a  dh'  fhairslich  air  an  f hamhair  duine  tuillidh
f  haotainn  a  rachadh  sios  do  'n  toll,  chuir  e  'mhac  f  he'in  sios  do  "n
toll  "s  an  claidheamh  soluis  air  uchd,  chum  's  gu  'faiceadh  e  roimhe.
Nur  a  rainig  am  famhair  òg  grund  na  h-uaimh,  'sa  chunnaic  Conall
e,  rug  e  air  a  chlaidheamh  sholuis,  agus  thug  e  'n  ceann  do  'n  f  ham-
hair òg.  Chuir  ConaU  an  so  or  ann  am  miis  a'  chleibh,  agus  chuir
e  or  OS  a  cheann :  rinn  e  'n  so  f  halach  am  meadhon  a'  chle'ibh  :  thug
e  tarruing  air  an  rop ;  tharruing  am  famhair  an  cliabh,  agus  dur  nach


150  WEST  HlGHLAIsD  TALES.

fac  e  'mhac  'sa  cliliabh.  thilg  e  "n  cliabh  thar  muUach  a  cliinn.  Leum
Conall  as  a'  chliabh,  's  dubh  cbiil  cinn  an  f  hamhair  ris :  thug  e  grad
iamli  air  a'  chlaidheamh  sholuis,  agus  thug  e  "n  ceann  do  'n  f  hamhair.
Thug  e  'n  so  tigh  a  mhuime  chich'  air,  leis  a  chliabh  bir,  's  claidh-
earah  soluis  an  f  hamhair.  "Na  dheigh  so,  chaidh  e  latha  a  shealgdo
shliabh  na  leirge.  Bha  e  gabhail  air  adhart,  gus  an  deach  e  stigh,
do  dh'  uainih  mhor.  Chunnaic  e  'n  uachdar  na  h-uainih  bean  bhan,
bhrèagha  "s  i  putadh  bior  na  feola  ri  ultach  mor  do  leanabh,  's  ua  b-
uile  putadb  a  bba  ise  'toirt  do  'n  bbior,  dbèanadli  an  leanabh  gaire,
's  thhisicheadh  ise  air  caoineadh.  Labhair  Conall,  's  tbubbairt  e,
"  De  fath  do  bhroin,  a  bhean,  ris  an  òganacb  gun  chiall.'"  "  0 !"  os
ise,  "  bbo  'n  is  duine  tapaidh  thu  f  hein,  marbb  an  leanabh,  's  cuir  air  a
bbinr  so  e,  gus  an  roist  mi  e  do  "u  f  hamhair."  Rug  e  air  an  leanabh,
's  chuir  e  'n  cleòc  a  bha  air  mu  'n  leanabh,  's  dh'  f  bnluich  e  "n  leanabh
aui  taobh  na  b-uaimh.  Eha  moran  do  chuirp  mharbh'  an  taobh  na
h-uaimh,  's  chuir  e  fear  dhiubb  air  a'  bbior,  's  bha  'm  boirioiinach  'ga
rostadb.  Cbualas  fo  'n  talamh,  crith  's  toirm  a'  tighinn,  's  b"  f  hèarr
leis  gun  robh  e  'muigh :  leum  e  "n  so  an  aite  'chuirp  a  bha  ris  an  teine,
an  teis-meadhon  nan  Corp.  Thhinig  am  famhair  's  dh'  f  heoraich  e,
"  'n  robh  rosta  bruich."  Thòisich  e  air  itheadh,  's  thubhairt  e,  "fiu
fou !  hoagrich !  cha  'n  ioghnadh  feoil  righinn  a  bbi  ort  f  he'in,  's
righinn  air  d'iseau  i."  Dur  a  dh'  ith  am  famhair  am  fear  ud,  dh
fhalbh  e  chunntadh  nan  corp,  agus  se 'n  dòigb  chunntais  a  bh"  aig
orra,  'oeireachd  air  dhk  cbaol  cois'  orra,  agus  'gan  tillgeadh  seachad
thar  muUach  a  chinn,  agus  chnnnt  e  air  ais  's  air  ndliart  iad  mar  so
tri  no  ceithir  do  dh'uairean;  agus  bbo  m  a  f  huair  e  Conall  ni  bu
truinie,  'se  bog  reamhar,  thug  e  'n  stiall  ud  as  bho  chill  a  chinn  gu
mhanachan.  Roist  e  so  ris  an  teine,  's  dh'itb  e  i.  Thuit  e  'n  sin  'na
chadal.  Smèid  Conal  air  a  bhoirionnacb,  bior  na  feola  chuir  'san  teine.
Rinn  i  so,  agus  dur  a  dh'  fhas  am  bior  geal  an  de'igh  bhi  dearg,
shath  e  'm  bior  troi'  cbridhe  an  f  hamhair,  's  bha  'm  famhair  marbb.
Dh'  fhalbh  Conall  an  so,  's  chuir  e  'bhean  air  a  slighe  dhachaidh.
Chaidh  e  'n  so  dhachaidh  e  f  bc'in.  Chuir  a  mhuime  air  falbh  e  sa'
mac  f  hein  a  ghoid  a  Bhlar-aghan  bho  figh  na  b-Eadailt,  agus  dh'
halbh  iad  a  ghoid  a  bhlar-aghan  le  cheile,  agus  na  li-uile  uair,  a
chuireadh  iad  an  laimh  air  a  bbl'ar-aghan,  leigeadh  am  blkr-aghan
(ialt;  as.  Th'ainig  cuideachd  a  mach  's  chaidh  an  glacadh.  Chaidh
ceangal  nan  tri  chaoil  a  chuir  orra  gu  daor  's  gu  daingean.  "  Fhir
mhor  ruaidh,"  ars'  an  righ,  'n  robh  thu  'n  chs  riamli  cho  eruaidli
an  sin  ?"  "  Teanuachadh  beag  dliomh  f  hein,  agus  lasachadh  do  m'
chompanach  's  innsidh  mi  sin,"  arsa  Conall.  Bba  banrigh  na  h-
Eadailte  'ga  f  haicinn.    Thubhairt  Conall  an  sin.


SGEULACHD  CHON.ULL.  I  5  I

"Seachd  triith  gu  broil  ach  dhomh,

'S  mi  cliomhnuidh  air  muin  an  easbuig.

'Sann  leamsa  'b'  fhad'  a'  che'ilidh  sin,

Ged  'sann  leani  f  be'in  bu  treise.

An  ceann  na  Seachdamh  trktb,

Chunnacas  uaigli  'ga  fosgladh,

'S  ge  b'e  bo  hiaithe  bhiodh  a  nuas  aca,

'S  mise  a  bbiodh  suas  air  thoiseacb.

Sbaoil  leosan  gu  'm  bu  raharbban  mi,

Bbo  'n  uir  thalmhaidh  's  mi  'g  eiridb,

Ana  an  toiseacb  a  gbarbh-bhristidh,

Db'  f  hag  iad  an  airm  's  an  eudach,

Thug  mise  leum  an  Uisleagan,

'Smi  niisgte,  cochdta,

Bu  bhochd  dhomhsa  's  mi  'm  f  hogarrach,

Bbi  maitheadh  or  do  'n  Easbuig."
"  Teannaicliibh  e  gu  niaith  's  gu  vo  mbaith,"  ars'  an  figb,  "cha  b'
ann  r.n  aon  hitemaith  a  bhaeriamh, 's  mòr  an  t-olc  ariun  e."  Chaidh
an  sin  a  tbeannacliadh  ni  bu  teinne,  "s  ni  bu  teinne,  's  thubhalrt  an
righ,  "  Fbir  mhoir  ruaidh,  'n  robh  thu  'n  cas  riamh  bu  chruaidh  na
sin."  "  Teannaich  mi  f  h^in,  's  leig  lasachadh  do  'u  'f  hear  so  laimh
riam,  's  innsidb  mi  'n  sin."  Rinn  iad  so.  Bba  mise  os  esan.
"Naoi  tratha  ann  an  uainih  an  òir,

'Se  bu  bhiadh  domh  a'  cholainn  chnamb,

Feithean  chas  agus  lamh.

An  ceann  an  naoidlieadh  trath.

Chunnacas  cliabh  a'  tigbinn  a  mhhn;

Rug  mi  'd  sin  air  a'  chliabh,

'S  chuir  mi  or  fotham  's  or  tharam,

'S  rinn  mi  m'  f  holach  ann  sa  'cliliabh,

'S  thug  mi  learn  an  claidheamh  soluis

Tiirn  is  sona  rinn  mi  riamh."
Thug  iad  an  ath  theannacbadh  dha,  s'  dh'  f  boigbneachd  an  rigb
dhetb,  "An  robli  thu  'n  cas  na  h-eiginn  riamh  cho  chruaidh  'sin?'
"  Teannachadh  beag  dhomh  f  lie'in,  's  lasachadh  do  m'  chompanach,
s  innsidh  mi  'n  sin."    Rinn  iad  so.

"  Latha  air  sliabh  na  leirge  dhomh

'S  mi  dol  a  steach  do  dh'  uamh,

Chunnaic  mi  bean  mhin,  bhan,  mhathair-shuiieach

'Si  putadh  bior  na  feòla

Ri  òganach,  'se  gun  chiall.


I  5  2  WEST  niGHLAXD  TALES.

ThuLliairt  mise  an  sin,

De  fatli  do  bhroin,  a  bhean,

Ris  an  òganach  'snach  eil  ceillidh,

'  Oir  a  mhin  oir  a  mhaise,'  ars'  ise

'  Cuir  an  leanabh  so  ri  teallach '

Kng  mi  'n  sin  air  a  mhacan

'S  shuain  mi  mo  mlianndal  uime

'S  thug  mi  nios  an  rod  mor  colainn

A  blia  sliuas  an  tiis  na  tuime

Chuala  mi  'n  sin,  turtar,  tartur,  agus  turaraich

Fior  thalamli  del  am  measg  a  cheile

Acli  air  bliitli  dhasau  tuiteam

Anns  an  t-suain  cbadail

'S  an  do  thuit  fuathan  na  coille

Tliug  mi  tarruing  air  bior  an  ròstaidli

'S  sheol  mi  sud  ri  còrr  a  ghoile."
Bha  a'  bhanrigh  faicinn  's  ag  eisdeachd  gacli  ni  bha  Conall  a'
fulang  's  ag  radh,  agus  dur  a  cbual  i  so,  leiun  i  's  gbearr  i  gach
ceangal  a  bha  air  Conall  "s  air  a  cliompanacli,  agus  tbubhairt  i,  "  'S
mise  'm  boirionnach  a  bha  'n  sin,  agus  ris  an  righ  's  tusa  a  mac  a  bha
"n  siud."  Pliòs  Conall  nighean  an  righ,  's  mharcaich  iad  le  cheile  am
blàradhan  dachaidh.     'S  dh  f  hag  mise  ann  a  sin  iad.

Kecited  by  Kenneth  MacLenuan,  Turnaig,  Pool  Ewe,  Ross-shire.
Written  by  Hector  Urqubart,  June  27, 1859.

4.  Another  story,  which  seems  to  be  a  fragment  of  this  tale  made
reasonable,  forms  part  of  a  collection  very  well  written  in  the
Gaelic  of  Gearrloch,  Pioss-shire,  from  the  telling  of  okl  men,  by
Mr.  Thomas  Cameron,  schoolmaster,  at  the  request  of  Osgood  H.
MacKenzie,  Esq.,  July  1859.

Alexander  MacDonald,  Inverasdale,  tells  how  Uisdean
Mor  Macllle  Phadraig,  a  local  hero,  famous  for  slaying
"  Fuahthan  "  (bogles),  in  a  winter  that  was  very  cold,  on  a  day
of  hailing  and  snowing  (sowing  and  winnowing)  was  taking  the
way  of  "  A  Bhraighe  Mhoir  "  (the  great  top),  and  was  deter-
mined to  reach  as  far  as  Lochbhraoin.  Coming  through  a  place
called  Lead  leachacachan  mu  Thuath  (na  Fuath  ?),  he  fell  in  with
a  woman,  and  he  soon  fell  in  with  a  new-born  child.  No  house
was  near,  so  he  killed  his  horse,  put  the  mother  and  child  in-
side, and  left  them  in  the  snow.     He  went  for  help,  and  when


THE  TALE  OF  CONXAL.


53


he  came  back  he  found  them  warm  and  well.  He  took  care  of
them  till  the  woman  could  do  for  herself,  and  the  child  grew  to
be  an  able  lad.  He  was  named  "  MacMhuirich  a  curach  an
Eich,"  which  name  has  stuck  to  his  race  to  this  day.

After  this  Uisdean  came  to  poverty.  On  a  cold  winter's
night  of  hailing  and  snowing,  he  was  going  on  a  street  in  Dun
Edin  (Edinburgh),  a  woman  put  her  head  out  of  a  window  and
cried,  "  It  is  cold  this  night  on  Leathad  leacachan  mu  Thuath."
"  It  is,"  said  he.  When  she  heard  his  Gaelic,  she  thought  she
was  not  far  wrong,  and  asked  him  in.  "  What  is  the  hardest
'  Cath '  that  ever  befel  thee  ?  "  said  the  woman.  He  repeated  the
story,  and  ended  with, — "  And  though  I  am  this  night  in  Dun
Edin,  many  is  the  hard  tight  that  I  have  wrestled  with."  "  I  am
the  woman  that  was  there,  and  this  is  the  child,"  said  she ;  and
she  oflered  him  shelter  for  the  rest  of  his  days.

Surely  these  are  Connal,  the  robber ;  and  the  king  and  his
mother ;  and  the  king's  horse  put  to  a  new  use,  transferred  to
the  Cowgate  from  Eirinn  and  Lochlann,  and  the  forests  of  Ger-
many ;  brought  down  from  the  days  of  Sindbad,  or  of  Ulysses,
or  from  the  fifteenth  century,  from  the  age  of  romance  to  the
nineteenth  century  and  to  prose.

5.  I  have  another  version  of  this  story,  called  An  Gadaiche
DuBH,  The  Black  Eobber,  told  by  Alexander  MacNeill,  fisherman
in  Barra,  and  written  by  Hector  MacLean  in  August  1859.  It
varies  much  from  the  others.  The  outline  is  nearly  the  same,
but  the  pictures  are  different.      I  hope  to  find  room  for  it.

The  story  resembles —

1st.  The  Robber  and  his  Sons,  referred  to  in  Grimm's  third
volume,  as  taken  from  a  MS.  of  the  fifteenth  century.  An  old  rob-
ber desires  to  become  an  honest  man,  but  his  three  sons  follow
their  profession,  and  try  to  steal  the  queen's  horse.  They  are
caught,  and  the  old  robber  tells  three  stories  of  his  own  adven-
tures to  rescue  them.

In  the  first,  he  is  caught  by  a  giant  and  about  to  be  eaten,
but  escapes  by  putting  out  the  giant's  eyes  with  "  destructive  in-
gredients." He  gets  out  of  a  cave  by  putting  on  the  skin  of  a
sheep.  He  puts  on  a  gold  ring  which  the  giant  gave  him,  which
forces  him  to  call  out  "  here  I  am."  He  bites  ofi'  his  own  finger,
and  so  escapes.


I  5  4  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Nest— In  a  wilderness,  haunted  by  strange  creatures,  he  finds
a  woman  about  to  kill  ber  cbikl  as  a  dinner  for  some  wild  men.
He  makes  her  cook  a  banged  tbief  instead  ;  bangs  bimself  on  a
tree  in  place  of  the  cooked  tbief,  and  has  a  slice  cut  from  bis  side.

Lastly,  the  giants,  frightened  by  a  clap  of  thunder,  run  away  ;
he  returns  to  a  civilized  country,  and  the  queen,  as  a  reward  for
his  stories,  liberates  the  three  sons.

2d.  Part  of  this  is  manifestly  the  same  as  the  Adventures  of
Ulysses  in  the  Cave  of  the  Cyclop. — (Odyssey,  book  ix.)

3d.  And  the  adventure  of  Sindbad  with  the  giants  and
dwarfs,  on  bis  third  voyage  (Arabian  Nights).  The  Cat  adven-
ture, in  the  Islay  version,  may  be  compared  with  Sindbad's
meeting  with  the  serpents  and  with  the  elephants.     And

4th.  With  a  Highland  story,  of  some  laird  of  Rasa,  whose
boat  was  upset  by  a  company  of  cats,  headed  by  one  large  black
cat ;  supposed  to  be  a  troop  of  witches  headed  by  their  master.

6.  The  incident  of  being  buried  in  a  treasure  cave  with  the
dead,  is  common  to  the  Arabian  Nights.  See  Sindbad's  Fourth
Voyage,  and  Alladdin  ;  and  also,

7.  To  the  Deccameron,  second  day,  novel  5 ;  where  a  man,  after
a  number  of  adventures,  is  lowered  into  a  well  by  two  thieves.
He  is  hauled  up  with  a  wheel  and  a  rope  by  the  watch,  who  are
frightened  and  run  away,  leaving  their  arms.

The  three  meet  once  more  ;  go  to  the  cathedral,  and  raise  up
a  marble  slab  laid  over  the  grave  of  an  archbishop.  When
"  Andreuccio  "  has  gone  in  and  robbed  the  grave,  they  send  him
back  for  a  ring,  and  drop  the  slab.  The  priests  come  on  the
same  errand  as  the  thieves  ;  he  frightens  them,  gets  out  with  the
ring,  and  returns  to  Perugia  from  Naples — "  having  laid  out  his
money  on  a  ring,  whereas  the  intent  of  his  journey  was  to  have
bought  horses."

In  all  these,  Greek,  Italian,  Arabic,  German,  and  Gaelic,  there
is  a  general  resemblance,  but  nothing  more.

I  have  given  three  versions  of  the  same  story  together,  as  an
illustration  of  the  manner  in  which  popular  tales  actually  exist ;
and  as  specimens  of  language.  The  men  who  told  the  story  live
as  far  apart  as  is  possible  in  the  Highlands.  I  heard  one  of
them  tell  it ;  each  has  his  own  way  of  telling  the  incidents ;  and
each  gives  something  pecuhar  to  bimself,  or  to  his  locality,  which


THE  TALE  OF  COXNAL.  I  55

the  others  leave  out.  Ewan  MacLachlan,  in  discussing  the  MSS.
in  the  Advocate's  Library  in  1812,  referring  to  Dean  Mac-
Greggor's  MS.,  -written  about  1526,  says : — "  MacDougall  is
compared  to  MacEuslainn,  the  Polyphemus  of  our  winter  tales."
It  would  seem,  then,  that  this  story  has  been  long  known,  and  it
is  now  widely  spread  in  the  Highlands.

The  manners  and  customs  of  the  king  and  his  tenant  are  very
highland,  so  far  as  they  can  be  referred  to  the  present  day.  Pro-
bably they  are  equally  true  pictures  of  bygone  days.  The  king's
sons  probably  visited  their  vassals,  and  got  into  all  manner  of
scrapes.  The  vassals  in  all  probability  resented  insults,  and  re-
belled, and  took  to  the  wild  woods  and  became  outlaws.  So  the
mill  was  probably  the  resort  of  idlers  and  the  place  for  news,  as
it  still  is.  The  king,  in  all  likelihood,  lived  very  near  his  own
stable,  for  there  are  no  ruins  of  palaces  ;  and  it  seems  to  have
been  the  part  of  a  brave  man  to  submit  without  flinching,  to  have
his  wrists  and  ankles  tied  to  the  small  of  his  back,  and  be  "tight-
ened" and  tortured;  and  then  to  recite  his  deeds  as  an  Indian
brave  might  do.

It  seems,  too,  that  "Lochlann,"  now  Scandinavia,  was  once
within  easy  sail  of  England  and  Ireland  ;  and  that  the  King  of
Lochlann  knew  the  tenants  of  the  neighbouring  king.  From  the
history  of  the  Isle  of  Man,  it  appears  that  there  really  was  a  king
called  "  Crovan,"  who  is  also  mentioned  by  Warsaae  (page  287)
as  the  Norwegian  Godred  Crovan  who  conquered  Man,  a.d.,  1077.
And  in  this,  the  stories  are  probably  true  recollections  of  man-
ners and  events,  so  far  as  they  go.  \Vhen  it  comes  to  giants,  the
story  is  just  as  likely  to  be  true  in  the  same  sense.  There  pro-
bably was  a  race  of  big  man-eating  savages  somewhere  on  the
road  from  east  to  west,  if  not  all  along  the  route  ;  for  all  popular
tales  agree  in  representing  giants  and  wild  men  as  living  in
caves,  hoarding  wealth,  eating  men,  and  enslaving  women.

In  these  stories  the  caves  are  described  from  nature.  When
Conal  walks  along  the  top  of  the  high  shore,  "rough  with  caves
and  geos,"  and  falls  into  a  cave  which  has  an  opening  below,  he
does  that  which  is  not  only  possible  but  probable.  I  know  many
caves  on  the  west  coast,  where  a  giant  might  have  walked  in  with
his  goats  from  a  level  sandy  beach,  near  a  deep  sea,  and  some
where  a  man  might  fall  into  the  further  end  through  a  hole  in  a


1^6  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

level  green  sward,  and  land  safely ;  many  are  full  of  all  that  be-
longs to  a  sheep-fold,  or  a  shelter  used  by  goats  and  cattle,  and
by  the  men  who  take  care  of  them.

I  know  one  where  a  whole  whisky  distillery  existed  not  very
long  ago  ;  I  first  landed  in  it  from  a  boat  to  pick  up  a  wild
pigeon  ;  I  afterwards  scrambled  into  it  from  the  shore ;  and  I
have  looked  down  into  it  from  smooth  green  turf,  through  a  hole
in  the  roof,  into  which  there  flowed  a  little  stream  of  water.  An
active  man  might  drop  into  the  far  end  on  a  heap  of  fallen  earth.

And  here  again  comes  the  notion,  that  the  so-called  giants
had  swords  so  bright,  that  they  shone  in  the  dark  like  torches,
and  that  they  owned  riches  hid  underground  in  holes.

Perhaps  we  may  believe  the  whole  as  very  nearly  true.  It
may  be  that  there  really  were  such  people,  and  that  they  were
miners  and  shepherds  ;  when  those  who  now  tell  stories  about
them,  were  wandering  huntsmen  armed  with  stone  weapons.

The  third  version  is  remarkable  as  an  instance  of  the  way  in
which  poems  of  greater  merit  used  to  be  commonly,  and  still  are
occasionally  recited.  "  Cuchullin  "  was  partly  told,  partly  recited,
by  an  old  man  near  Lochawe,  within  the  memory  of  a  clergyman
who  told  me  the  fact.  I  heard  Patrick  Smith,  in  South  Uist,  and
other  men,  so  recite  stories  in  alternate  prose  and  verse,  in  1859;
and  it  appears  that  the  Edda  was  so  composed.  Poems  of  the
same  nature  as  "  the  poems  of  Ossian,"  if  not  the  poems  them-
selves, were  so  recited  by  an  old  man  in  Bowmore  more  than
sixty  years  ago,  when  my  friend  Mr.  John  Crawford,  late  Governor
of  Singapore,  and  a  well-known  linguist,  was  a  school  boy,  who
spoke  little  but  Gaelic  ;  and  when  it  was  as  rare  to  find  a  man
amongst  the  peasantry  in  Islay  who  could  speak  English,  as  it  is
now  remarkable  to  find  one  who  cannot.


VIII.
MUECHAG  A  'S  MIONACHAG.

From  Ann  Darroch,  James  Wilson,  Hector  MacLean,  Islay,
and  many  others  in  other  parts  of  the  Highlands.

lyrOOEACHUG  and  Meenachug  went  to  gather
■^^  fruit,  and  as  Moorachug  would  gather  Meenachug
would  eat.  Moorachug  went  to  seek  a  rod  to  lay  on
ISIeenachaig,  and  she  eating  his  share  of  fruit.

"What's  thy  news  to-day,  oh  Voorachai  ?"  said
the  rod.  "  'T  is  my  own  news,  that  I  am  seeking  a  rod
to  lay  on  Meenachug,  and  she  eating  my  share  of  fruit."

"  Thou  Wilt  not  get  me  until  thou  gettest  an  axe  that
will  reap  me."  He  reached  the  axe.  "  A\^iat  's  thy
news  to-day,  oh  Voorachai  ?"  "  'T  is  my  own  news
that  I  am  seeking  an  axe  to  reap  rod — rod  to  lay  on
^leenachug — and  she  eating  my  share  of  fruit."

"  Thou  wilt  not  get  me  until  thou  gettest  a  stone  to
smooth  me."  He  reached  a  stone.  "  What 's  thy
news  to-day,  oh  Voorachai  ?"  said  the  stone.  "  'Tis  my
own  news  that  I  am  seeking  stone  to  smooth  axe — axe
to  reap  rod — rod  to  lay  on  Meenachaig — and  she  eating
my  share  of  fruit."

"  Thou  wilt  not  get  me,"  said  the  stone,  "  till  thou
gettest  water  will  wet  me."  He  reached  the  water.
"What's  thy  news  to-day,  oh  Voorachai?"  said  the
water.  "  'T  is  my  own  news  that  I  am  seeking — water
to  stone — stone  to  smooth  axe — axe  to  reap  rod — rod


158  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

to  lay  on  Meenachaig — and  she  eating  my  share  of
fruit."

"  Thou  ivilt  not  get  me,"  said  the  water,  "  till  thou
gettest  a  deer  to  s\vim  me."  He  reached  the  deer.
"  What 's  thy  news  to-day,  oh  Yoorachai  Ì"  said  the
deer.  '"Tis  my  o-\\ti  news,  that  I  am  seeking — deer
to  swim  water — water  to  stone — stone  to  smooth  axe
— axe  to  reap  rod — rod  to  lay  on  Meenachaig — and  she
eating  my  share  of  fruit."

"  Thou  wilt  not  get  me,"  said  the  deer,  "  until
thou  gettest  a  dog  to  ?un  me."  He  reached  the  dog.
"  What 's  thy  news  to-day,  oh  Voorachai  ?"  said  the
dog.  "'Tis  my  own  news  that  I  am  seeking — dog  to
run  deer — deer  to  swim  water — water  to  stone — stone
to  smooth  axe — axe  to  reap  rod — rod  to  lay  on  Meen-
achaig— and  she  eating  my  share  of  fruit."

"  Thou  wilt  not  get  me,"  said  the  dog,  "  till  thou
gettest  butter  to  be  rubbed  to  my  feet."  He  reached
the  butter.  "  What's  thy  news  to-day,  oh  Voorachai  ?"
said  the  butter.  "  'T  is  my  own  news,  that  I  am  seek-
ing— butter  to  feet  of  dog — dog  to  run  deer — deer  to
swim  Avater —  water  to  stone — stone  to  smooth  axe —
axe  to  reap  rod — rod  to  lay  on  Meenachaig — and  she
eating  my  share  of  fruit."

"  Thou  \\dlt  not  get  me,"  said  the  butter,  "  till  thou
gettest  a  mouse  will  scrape  me."  He  reached  the
mouse.  "  What 's  thy  news  to-day,  oh  Voorachai  f
said  the  mouse.  "  'T  is  my  own  news,  that  I  am  seek-
ing— mouse  to  scrape  butter — butter  to  feet  of  dog —
dog  to  run  deer — deer  to  swim  water — water  to  stone
— stone  to  smooth  axe — axe  to  reap  rod — rod  to  lay  on
Meenachaig — and  she  eating  my  share  of  fruit."

"  Thou  wilt  not  get  me,"  said  the  mouse,  "  till  thou
gettest  a  cat  to  hunt  me."  He  reached  the  cat.
"  "WTiat  's  thy  news  to-da}-,   oh  Voorachai  ?"   said  the


JIURCHAG  A  S  MIONACHAG.  I  59

cat.  "'Tis  my  own  news,  that  I  am  seeking — cat  to
hunt  moi;se — mouse  to  scrape  butter — butter  to  feet
of  dog — dog  to  run  deer — deer  to  s^\^Jn  water — water
to  stone — stone  to  smooth  axe — axe  to  reap  rod — rod
to  lay  on  Meenachaig — and  she  eating  my  share  of
fruit."

"  Tliou  wilt  not  get  me,"  said  the  cat,  "  until  thou
gettest  milk  for  me."  He  reached  the  cow.  "  What 's
thj'^  news  to-day,  oh !  Voorachai  Ì "  said  the  cow.
"  'Tis  my  own  news,  that  I  am  seeking — milk  for
the  cat — cat  to  hunt  mouse — mouse  to  scrape  butter —
butter  to  feet  of  dog — dog  to  run  deer — deer  to  swim
water — water  to  stone — stone  to  smooth  axe — axe  to
reap  rod — rod  to  lay  on  Meenachaig — and  she  eating
my  share  of  fruit."

"  Thou  wilt  not  get  milk  from  me  till  thou  gettest
a  whisp  from  the  barn  gilHe."  He  reached  the  barn
gillie.  ""What's  thy  news  to-day,  oh  Voorachai?"
said  the  barn  gilHe.  "'Tis  my  own  news,  that  I  am
seeking — a  whisp  for  the  cow — a  cow  will  shed  milk
for  the  cat — cat  to  hunt  mouse — mouse  to  scrape  butter
— butter  to  feet  of  dog — dog  to  run  deer — deer  to  swim
water — water  to  stone — stone  to  smooth  axe — axe  to
reap  rod — rod  to  lay  on  Meenachaig — and  she  eating
my  share  of  fruit."

"  Thou  wilt  not  get  a  whisp  from  me,"  said  the
barn  gilUe,  "  tUl  thou  gettest  a  bonnach  for  me  from  the
laieading  wife."  He  reached  the  kneading  wife.
""WTiat's  thy  news  to-day,  oh  Voorachai?"  said  the
kneading  wife.  "'Tis  my  own  news,  that  I  am  seek-
ing— bonnach  to  the  barn  giUie — whisp  to  the  cow
from  tlie  barn  gillie — milk  from  the  cow  to  the  cat —
cat  will  hunt  mouse — mouse  ^Wll  scrape  butter — butter
to  feet  of  dog — dog  to  run  deer — deer  to  swim  water
— water  to  stone—  stone  to  smooth  axe — axe  to  reap


I  60  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.

rod — rod  to  lay  on  IMeenachaig — and  she  eating  my
share  of  fruit."

"  Thou  wilt  not  get  bonnach  from  me  till  thou
bringest  in  water  will  knead  it."

"  How  will  I  bring  in  the  water  ?  "  "  There  is
no  vessel  but  that  sowen's  sieve."

Moorachug  took  with  liim  the  sowen's  sieve.  He
reached  the  water,  and  every  drop  he  would  put  in  the
sowen's  sieve  it  would  go  through.  A  hoodie  came
over  his  head,  and  she  cried,  "  Gawr-rag,  gaAvr-rag,  Little
silly,  little  silly."  "Thou  art  right,  oh  hoodie,"  said
Moorachug.  "  Crèah  rooah  s'  còinneach,  crèah  rooah
s'  còinneach,"  said  the  hoodie.

Moorachug  set  crèah  rooah  s'  còinneach  brown  clay
and  moss  to  it,  and  he  brought  in  the  water  to  the
kneading  wife — and  he  got  bonnach  from  the  kneading
wife  to  barn  gilhe — whisp  from  the  barn  gilhe  to  the
cow — milk  from  the  cow  to  the  cat — cat  to  hunt  mouse
— mouse  to  scrape  butter — butter  to  feet  of  dog — dog
to  run  deer — deer  to  swim  water — water  to  stone —
stone  to  smooth  axe — axe  to  reap  rod — rod  to  lay  on
Meenachaig — and  she  eating  his  share  of  fruit.  And
•fl-hen  Moorachug  returned  Meenachag  had  just  burst.

This  is  the  best  known  of  all  Gaelic  tales.  It  is  the  infant
ladder  to  learning  a  chain  of  cause  and  effect,  and  fully  as  sensible
as  any  of  its  kind.  It  used  to  be  commonly  taught  to  children
of  five  or  six  years  of  age,  and  repeated  by  school  boys,  and  it  is
still  remembered  by  grown-up  people  in  all  parts  of  the  High-
lands. There  are  few  variations.  In  one  version  the  crow  was
a  little  bird  ;  in  another  a  gull  was  introduced,  which  advised  the
use  of  sand  to  stuff  the  riddle.

The  tale  has  sixteen  steps,  four  of  which  contain  double
ideas.  The  English  house  that  Jack  built  has  eleven.  The
Scotch  old  woman  with  the  silver  penny  has  twelve.  The  Norsk
cock  and  hen  a-nutting  twelve,  ten  of  which  are  double.  The
German  story  in  Grimm  has  five  or  six,  all  single  ideas.     All  these


MURCHADH  a's  MIONACHAG.  I  6  I

are  different.     In  Uist  the  actors  are  Biorachan  mor  agus  Bior-
chan  Beag;  in  Sutherland,  Morachan  agus  IMionachan.

The  speech  of  the  Hoodie  is  always  a  very  close  imitation  of
his  note.  In  another  version  she  says,  "  Cum  criadh  righin
EUADH  Ris — Put  tough  red  clay  to  it ;"  and  the  gull  said,  "  Cdir
I'OLL  BOG  RIS — Put  soft  mud  to  it ;"  which  is  rather  the  speech  of
some  other  bird.  There  are  several  rare  words  in  this  ;  for
example,  "  Gadhar,"  a  dog.


MURCHADH  A'S  MIONACHAG.

Dh  'fholbh  Murchadh  a's  Mionachag  a  bhuain  sugh,  's  mar  a
bhuaineadh  Murchadh  dh'  itheadh  Mionachag.  Dh  'fliolbh  Murchadh
a  dh'  iarraidh  slat  a  a  ghabhail  air  Mionach;iig  's  i  'g  itheadh  a  chuid
sugh— "De  do  naigheachd  an  diugh  a  Mhurchaidh?"  urs'  an
t-slat.  "  'Se  mo  naigheachd  fein  gu  'bheil  mi  'g  iarraidh  Slat  a
ghabhail  air  Mionachag  's  i  'g  itheadh  mo  chuid  sugh."  "  Cha  'n
fhaigh  thu  mise  gus  am  faigli,"  "  thu  tuagh  a  bhuaineas  mi."  Ehinig
e  'n  tuagh.  "  De  do  naigheachd  an  diugh  a  Mhurchaidh  ?  "  Se  mo
naigheachd  fein  gu  'bheil  mi  'g  iarraidh  Tuagh  a  bhuaineas  slat
Slat  a  ghabhail  air  Mionachaig  's  i  'g  itheadh  mo  chuid  sugh— "Cha
'n  fliaigh  thu  mise  gus  am  fhaigh  thu  clach  a  liobhas  mi."  "  Rkinig  e
'chlach.  De  do  naigheachd  an  diugh  a  Mhurchaidh  ?"  urs'  a'  chlach.
"  'Se  mo  naigheachd  fein  gu  'bheil  mi  'g  iarraidh  Clach  a  liobhadh
tuagh — Tuagh  a  bhuain  slat — Slat  a  ghabhail  air  lilionachaig  's  i  'g
itheadh  mo  chuid  sugh."  "  Cha  u  fhaigh  thu  mis',"  urs'  a'  chlach, "  gus
am  faigh  thu  uisge  a  fhliuchas  mi."  Eainig  e  'u  t-uisge — "  De  do
naigheachd  an  diugh  a  IMhurchaidh?  "  urs'  an  t-uisge.  'S  e  mo
naigheachd  fein  gu  bheil  mi  'g  iarraidh  Uisge  nia  chloich — Clach  a
liobhadh  tuagh — Tuagh  a  bhuain  slat— Slat  a  ghabhail  air  Jlionach-
aig  's  i  'g  itheadh  mo  chuid  sugh.  Cha  'n  fhaigh  thu  mis',  urs'  an
t-uisge,  gus  am  faigh  thu  fiadh  a  shnarahas  mi."  Eainig  e  'm  fiadh.
"  De  do  naigheachd  an  diu-h  a  Mhurchaidh?"  urs'  am  fiadh.  "  'Se
mo  naigheachd  fein  gu  'bheil  mi  'g  iarraidh  Fiadh  a  shuamh  uisg'.
Uisge  ma  chloich.  Clach  a  liobhadh  tuagh.  Tuagh  a  bhuain  .slat.
Slat  a  ghabhail  air  Mionachaig  's  i  'g  itheadh  mo  chuid  sugh."  "Cha
'n  fhaigh  thu  mis',"  urs'  am  fiadh,  "gus  am  faigh  thu  gadhar  a  ruith-
easmi."  Eainig  e 'n  gadhar.  "  De  do  naigheachd  an  diugh  a  Mhurch-


I  62  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

aidli?"  urs'  an  gadliar.  "'S  e  mo  naigheachd  fein  gu  'bheil  mi  'a
iarraidh  Gadhar  a  ruith  fiadh.  Fiadh  a  shnamh  uisg'.  Uisge  ma
chloich.  Clach  a  liobhadh  tuagh.  Tuagh  a  bhuain  slat.  Slat  a
ffhabhail  air  Mionacbaig  's  i  'g  itbeadh  mo  chuid  sugh."  "  Cha  'n
fhaigh  tliii  mis,"  urs'  an  gadhar,  "  gus  am  faigb  thu  im  a  robar  rim'
chasan."  Rainig  e  'n  t-im.  "  De  do  naigheacbd  an  diugh  a  Mhurcb-
aidh?"  urs'  an  t-im.  " 'Se  mo  naigbeachd  iV'in  gu  'bheil  mi  'g  iarr
raidh  Im  ehasa  gadhair.  Gadhar  a  ruith  fiadh.  Fiadli  a  shnàmh
uisg'.  Uisge  ma  chloich.  Clach  a  lioljhadh  tuagh.  Tuagh  a  bhuain
slat.  Slat  a  ghabhail  air  Mionacbaig  '.s  i  'g  itheadh  mo  chuid  sugh."
"  Cha  'n  fhaigh  thu  mis',''  urs'  an  t-im,  "  gus  am  faigh  thu  luch  a
sgriobas  mi."  "  Rhinig  e  'n  luch.  "  De  do  naigheachd  an  diugh  a
Murchaidh?"  urs' an  luch.  "  Se  mo  naigheachd  foin  gu  bheil  mi  "g  iar-
raidh. Luch  a  sgriobadh  im.  Im  chasa  gadhair.  Gadhar  a  ruith
fiadh.  Fiadh  a  shnamh  uisg'.  Uisge  ma  cloicli.  Clach  a  liobhadh
tuagh.  Tuagh  a  bhuain  slat.  Slat  a  ghabhail  air  Mionacbaig  's  i  'g
itheadh  mo  chuid  sugh."  "  Cha  'n  fhaigh  thu  mis',"  urs'  an  luch,  "  gus
am  faigh  thu  cat  a  shealgas  mi."  Rainig  e  'n  cat.  "  De  do  naigh-
eachd an  diugh  a  Mhurchaidh?"  urs'  an  cat.  "  'Se  mo  naigheachd  fein
gu  'bheil  mi  'g  iarraidh  Cat  a  shealg  luch.  Luch  a  sgriobadh  im.
Im  chasa  gadhair.  Gadhar  a  ruith  fiadh.  Fiadh  a;shnàmh  uisg'.
Uisge  ma  chloich.  Clach  a  liobhadli  tuagh.  Tuagh  a  bhuain  slat.
S'at  a  ghabhail  air  Mionacbaig  's  i  'g  itheadh  mo  chuid  sugh."  "Cha
'n  fhaigh  thu  mis',"  urs'  an  cat,  "gus  am  faigh  tliu  bainne  dliomh."
Rhinig  e  'Bho.  "De  do  naigheachd  an  diugh  a  Mhurchaidli?"  urs'
a'  bbò.  "  'Se  mo  naigheachd  fe'in  gu'  bheil  mi  'g  iarraidh  Bainne  do
'a  chat.  Cat  a  shealg  luch.  Luch  a  sgriobadli  im.  Im  chasa
gadhar.  Gadhar  a  ruith  fiadh.  Fiadh  a  shnamh  uisg'."  Uisge  ma
ciiloich.  Clach  a  liobhadh  tuagh.  Tuagh  a  bhuain  slat.  Slat  a
ghabhail  air  Mionacbaig 's  i  'g  itheadh  mo  chuid  sugh.  "Cha'n
fliaigh  thu  bainne  uamsa,  gus  am  faigh  thu  sop  o  'n  ghille  shabhaill.
Rainig  e  'n  gille  sabhaill.  "  De  do  naigheachd  an  diugh  a  Mhurch-
aidh ?"  urs'  an  gille  sabhaill.  "  'Se  mo  naigheachd  fein  gu  'bheil  mi  'g
iarraidh.  Sop  a  gheobh  bb.  Bo  bhligbeadh  bainne  do  'n  chat.  Cat  a
shealg  luch.  Luch  a  sgriobadh  im.  Im  chasa  gadhar.  Gadhar  a
ruith  fiadh.  Fiadh  a  slinamh  uisg'.  Uisge  nia  chloich.  Clach  a
liobhadh  tuagh.  Tuagh  a  bhuain  slat.  Slat  a  ghabhail  air  Mionacb-
aig 's  i  'g  itheadh  mo  chuid  sugh.  "  Cha  'n  fhaigli  thu  sop  uamsa,"
urs'  an  gille  sabhaill,  "  gus  am  faigh  thu  Bonnach  dhomh  o  'u  Bhean
fhuinne."  Rainig  e  'bhean  fhuiune.  "  De  do  naigheachd  an  diuch
a  Mhurchaidh  ?"  urs'  a'  bhean  fhuinne.  "  'Se  mo  naiglieaclid  fein  gu
'bheil  mi'  g  iarraidh  Bonnach  do  'n  ghille  shabhaill.     Sop  do  'u  Bho


MURCHADH  a's  MIONACHAG.  I  63

o  'n  Ghille  shabhaill.  Bainn'  o  'n  Bho  do  'n  chat.  Cat  a  shealgas
luch.  Luch  a  sgriobas  im.  Im  chasa  gadhair,  Gadhar  a  ruith
fiadh.  Fiadh  a  shnkmh  uisg'.  Uisge  ma  chloich.  Clach  a  liobliadh
tuagh.  Tuagh  a  bhuain  slat.  Slat  a  ghabhail  air  Miouacbaig  's
i  'g  itheadh  mo  cbuid  siigh.  "  Cha  'n  f liaigh  thu  bonnach  uamsa
mar  an  d'  their  thu  stigh  uisg'  a  dh'  fhainneas  e."  De  mar  a'  bheir
mi  stigh  an  t-Uisge?"  "Cha  'n  'eil  soitheach  ann  ach  an  Cria-
thar  Cabhrach  sin."  Thug  Murchadh  leis  an  Criathar  Cabhrach,  's
rainiic  e  n  t-uisge,  's  a  h-uile  deur  a  chuireadh  e  's  a'  Chriathar  Chabh-
rachrachadh  e  roimhe.  Thainig  Feannag  as  a  chionn  's  ghlaoidh  i
"  Gòrrag,  gòrrag."  "  Tha  thu  ceart  fheannag,"  ursa  Wurchadh.
"Crèadh  ruagh  's  còinneach,  crèadh  ruagh  's  còinneach."  Chuir
IMurchadh  crèadh  ruagh  's  cbinneach  ris,  's  thug  e  'stigh  an  t-Uisge,
"s  fhuair  e  Bonnach  0  'n  Bhean  fuinne  do  'n  Ghille  shabhaill.  Sop  o
'n  Ghille  shabhaill  do  'n  Bho.  Bainn'  o  'n  Bho  do  'n  chat.  Cat  a
shealg  luch.  Luch  a  sgriobadh  im.  Im  chasa  gadhair.  Gadhar
a  ruith  fiadh.  Fiadh  a  shnamh  uisg'.  Uisge  ma  chloich,  Clach  a
liobhadh  tuagh.  Tuagh  a  bhuain  slat.  Slat  a  ghabhail  air  Miona-
ohaig  's  i  'g  itheadh  a  chuid  sugh.  'S  nur  a  thill  Murchadh  bha
Mionachag  an  deigh  Sgaineadh  ! !


IX.

THE  BRO^VN  BEAR  OF  THE  GREEN  GLEN.

From  John  MacDonald   Travelling  Tinker.

n^HERE  was  a  king  in  Erin  once,  avIio  had  a  leash
-*-  of  sons.  John  was  the  name  of  the  youngest  one,
and  it  was  said  that  he  was  not  wise  enough ;  and
this  good  worklly  king  lost  the  sight  of  his  eyes,  and
the  strength  of  his  feet.  Tlie  two  eldest  brothers  said
that  they  woidd  go  seek  thi-ee  bottles  of  the  water  of
the  green  Isle  that  was  about  the  heaps  of  the  deep.*
And  so  it  was  that  these  two  brothers  went  away.  Now
the  fool  said  that  he  would  not  beUeve  but  that  he
himself  would  go  also.  And  the  first  big  town  he
reached  in  his  father's  kingdom,  there  he  sees  his  two
brothers  there,  the  blackguards  !  "  Oh !  my  boys,"  says
the  young  one,  "  is  it  thus  you  are  1 "  "  With  swift-
ness of  foot,"  said  they,  "  take  thyself  home,  or  we
will  have  thy  life."  "Don't  be  afraid,  lads.  It  is  no-
thing to  me  to  stay  with  you."  Now  John  went  away
on  his  journey  till  he  came  to  a  great  desert  of  a  wood.
"  Hoo,  hoo  !  "  says  John  to  himself,  "  It  is  not  canny
for  me  to  Avalk  this  wood  alone."  The  night  was  com-
ing now,  and  gro-ning  pretty  dark.  John  ties  the
cripple  white  horse  that  was  under  him  to  the  root  of
a  tree,  and  he  went  up  in  the  top  himseK.  He  was
but  a  very  short  time  in  the  top,  when  he  saw  a  bear
*  "Eilean  uaine  a  bha  'n  iomal  torra  domhain.


THE  BROWN  BEAR  OF  THE  GREEN  GLEN.     165

coming  with  a  fiery  cinder  in  his  mouth.  "  Come
down,  son  of  the  king  of  Erin,"  says  he.  "  Indeed,  I
won't  come.  I  am  thinking  I  am  safer  where  I  am."
"  But  if  thou  wilt  not  come  down,  I  will  go  up,"  said
the  bear.  "  Art  thou,  too,  taking  me  for  a-  fool  Ì "  says
John.  "  A  shaggy,  shambling  creature  Hke  thee,
climbing  a  tree  !"  "But  if  thou  wilt  not  come  down
I  will  go  up,"  says  the  bear,  as  he  fell  out  of  hand  to
climbing  the  tree.  "  Lord  !  thou  canst  do  that  same  V
said  John  ;  "  keep  back  from  the  root  of  the  tree,  then,
and  I  will  go  dowTi  to  talk  to  thee."  And  Avhen  the
son  of  Erin's  king  drew  down,  they  came  to  chatting.
The  bear  asked  him  if  he  was  hungry.  "  Weel !  by  your
leave,"  said  John,  "  I  am  a  Httle  at  this  very  same  time."
The  bear  took  that  wonderful  watchful  turn  and  he
catches  a  roebuck.  "  Now,  son  of  Erin's  king,"  says
the  bear,  "  whether  w'ouldst  thou  like  thy  share  of  the
buck  boiled  or  raw  ? "  "  The  sort  of  meat  I  used  to
get  would  be  kind  of  plotted  boiled,"  says  John ;  and
thus  it  fell  out.  John  got  his  share  roasted.  "Now,"
said  the  bear,  "  lie  down  between  my  paws,  and  thou
hast  no  cause  to  fear  cold  or  hunger  till  morning."
Early  in  the  morning  the  Maon  (bear)  asked,  "  Art
thou  asleep,  son  of  Erin's  king ? "  "I  am  not  very
heavily,"  said  he.  "  It  is  time  for  thee  to  be  on  thy
soles  then.  Thy  jom-ney  is  long — two  hundred
miles  ;  but  art  thou  a  good  horseman,  Jolin  ? "  "  There
are  worse  than  me  at  times,"  said  he.  "  Thou  hadst
best  get  on  top  of  me,  then."  He  did  this,  and  at  the
first  leap  John  was  to  earth.

"  Foil  !  foil !"  says  John.  "  AVhat !  thou  art  not  bad
at  the  trade  thyseK.  Thou  hadst  best  come  back  tUl
we  try  thee  again."  And  wT.th  nails  and  teeth  he
fastened  on  the  Mathon,  till  they  reached  the  end  of
the  two  hundred  miles  and  a  giant's  house.      "  Now,


I  66  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

John,"  said  the  Mathon,  "  thou  shalt  go  to  pass  the
night  in  this  giant's  house  ; "  thou  wilt  find  him
pretty  grumpy,  but  say  thou  that  it  was  the  brown
bear  of  the  green  glen  that  set  thee  here  for  a  night's
share,  and  don't  thou  be  afraid  that  thou  Avilt  not  get
share  and  comfort."  And  he  left  the  bear  to  go  to  the
giant's  house.  "Son  of  Ireland's  King,"  says  the
giant,  "  thy  coming  was  in  the  prophecy  ;  but  if  I  did
not  get  thy  father,  I  have  got  his  son.  I  don't  know
whether  I  will  put  thee  in  the  earth  with  my  feet,  or
in  the  sky  with  my  breath."  "  Thou  wilt  do  neither
of  either,"  said  John,  "  for  it  is  the  brown  bear  of  the
green  glen  that  set  me  here."  Come  in,  son  of  Erin's
king,"  said  he,  "  and  thou  shalt  be  well  taken  to  this
night."  And  as  he  said,  it  was  true.  John  got  meat
and  drink  without  stint.  But  to  make  a  long  tale
short,  the  bear  took  John  day  after  day  to  the  tliird
giant.  "  Now,"  says  the  bear,  "  I  have  not  much  ac-
quaintance with  this  giant,  but  thou  Avilt  not  be  long  in
his  house  Avhen  thou  must  wrestle  -with  him.  And  if  he
is  too  hard  on  thy  back,  say  thou,  '  If  I  had  the  brown
bear  of  the  green  glen  here,  that  was  thy  master.'  "
As  soon  as  John  went  in — Ai !  ai ! !  or  ee  !  ee  !  ! "  says
the  giant,  "  If  I  did  not  get  thy  father,  I  have  got  his
son;"  and  to  grips  they  go.  They  would  make  the
boggy  bog  of  the  rocky  rock.  In  the  hardest  place
they  would  sink  to  the  knee ;  in  the  softest,  up  to  the
thighs  ;  and  they  would  bring  wells  of  spring  water
from  the  fece  of  every  rock.  The  giant  gave  John  a
sore  wrench  or  two.  "  Foil !  foil ! !  "  says  he.  "  If  I
had  here  the  brown  bear  of  the  green  glen,  thy  leap
would  not  be  so  hearty."  And  no  sooner  spoke  he  the
word  than  the  worthy  bear  was  at  his  side.  "  Yes !  yes !  "
says  the  giant,  "son  of  Erin's  king,  now  I  know
thy  matter  better  than  thou  dost  thyself."     So  it  was


THE  BROWN  BEAR  OF  THE  GREEN  GLEN.     1 67

that  the  giaut  ordered  his  shepherd  to  bring  home  the
best  wether  he  had  in  the  hill,  and  to  throw  his  car-
cass before  the  great  door.  "Now,  John,"  says  the  giant,
"  an  eagle  will  come  and  she  will  settle  on  the  carcass  of
this  wether,  and  there  is  a  wart  on  the  ear  of  this  eagle
which  thou  must  cut  off  her  with  this  sword,  but  a  drop
of  blood  thou  must  not  draw."  The  eagle  came,  but  she
was  not  long  eating  when  John  drew  close  to  her,  and
with  one  stroke  he  cut  the  wart  off  her  without  draw-
ing one  drop  of  blood.  ("  Ocli !  is  not  that  a  fearful
lie  f  ")  "  Now,"  said  the  eagle,  "  come  on  the  root  of
my  two  Avings,  for  I  knoAv  thy  matter  better  than
thou  dost  thyself."  He  did  this  ;  and  they  were  now
on  sea,  and  now  on  land,  and  now  on  the  wing,  till
they  reached  the  Green  Isle.  "  Now,  John,"  says  she,
"  be  quick,  and  fill  thy  three  bottles  ;  remember  that
the  black  dogs  are  away  just  now."  ("  What  dogs  f  "
"  Blark  dogs  ;  dost  thou  not  hiow  that  they  always  had
black  dogs  chasing  the  Gregorach!")  "V\Qien  he
filled  the  bottles  with  the  water  out  of  the  well,  he
sees  a  little  house  beside  him.  John  said  to  himself
that  he  would  go  in,  and  that  he  would  see  what  was
in  it.  And  the  first  chamber  he  opened,  he  saw  a  full
bottle.  {"And  nliat  loas  in  it?"  "  What  should  he  in
it  hat  whisky")  He  filled  a  glass  out  of  it,  and  he
drank  it ;  and  when  he  was  going,  he  gave  a  glance,
and  the  bottle  was  as  full  as  it  was  before.  "  I  will
have  tliis  bottle  along  with  the  bottles  of  water,"
says  he.

Then  he  went  into  another  chamber,  and  he  saw  a
loaf ;  he  took  a  sHce  out  of  it,  but  the  loaf  was  as
whole  as  it  was  before.  "  Ye  gods !  I  won't  leave
thee,"  says  John.  He  went  on  thus  till  he  came  to
another  chamber.  He  saw  a  great  cheese  ;  he  took  a
sHce  ofi'  the  cheese,  but  it  was  as  whole  as  ever.      "  I


I  68  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

will  have  this  along  Avith  the  rest,"  says  he.  Then  he
went  to  another  chamber,  and  he  saw  laid  there  the
very  i:)rettiest  little  jewel  of  a  woman  he  ever  saw.
"  It  were  a  great  pity  not  to  kiss  thy  lips,  my  love,"
says  John.

Soon  after,  John  jumped  on  top  of  the  eagle,  and  she
took  liim  on  the  self  same  steps  till  they  reached  the
house  of  the  big  giant,  and  they  were  paying  rent  to
the  giant,  and  there  was  the  sight  of  tenants  and  giants
and  meat  and  drink.  "  Well  !  John,"  says  the  giant,
"  didst  thou  see  such  drink  as  this  in  thy  father's  house
in  Erin?"  "Pooh,"  says  John,  "  Hoo !  my  hero;
thou  other  man,  I  have  a  drink  that  is  unlike  it."
He  gave  the  giant  a  glass  out  of  the  bottle,  but  the
bottle  was  as  full  as  it  was  before.  "  AVell  !  "  said  the
giant,  "  I  will  give  thee  myself  two  hundred  notes,  a
bridle  and  a  saddle  for  the  bottle."  "  It  is  a  bargain,
then,"  says  John,  "  but  that  the  first  sweetheart  I  ever
had  must  get  it  if  she  comes  the  way."  "  She  will  get
that,"  says  the  giant ;  but,  to  make  the  long  story  short,
he  left  each  loaf  and  cheese  with  the  two  other  giants,
with  the  same  covenant  that  the  first  sweetheart  he
ever  had  should  get  them  if  she  came  the  way.

Now  John  reached  his  father's  big  town  in  Erin,
and  he  sees  his  two  brothers  as  he  left  them — the
"  blackguardan  !"  "  You  had  best  come  with  me,  lads,"
says  he,  "  and  you  will  get  a  dress  of  cloth,  and  a  horse
and  a  saddle  and  bridle  each."  And  so  they  did ;
but  when  they  were  near  to  their  father's  house,  the
brothers  thought  that  they  had  better  kill  him,  and  so
it  was  that  they  set  on  him.  And  when  they  thought
he  was  dead,  they  threw  him  behind  a  dike  ;  and  they
took  from  him  the  three  bottles  of  water,  and  they
went  home.  John  was  not  too  long  here,  Avhen  his
father's  smith  came  the  way  with  a  cart  load  of  rusty


THE  BROWN  BEAR  OF  THE  GREEN  GLEN.     1 69

iron.  Jolin  called  cut,  "  "Whoever  the  Christian  is  that
is  there,  oh !  that  he  should  help  liiiu."  The  smith
caught  him,  and  he  threw  John  amongst  the  iron ;
and  because  the  iron  was  so  rusty,  it  went  into  each
wound  and  sore  that  John  had ;  and  so  it  was,  that
John  became  rough  skinned  and  bald.  Here  we  will
leave  John,  and  we  will  go  back  to  the  pretty  httle
jewel  that  John  left  in  the  Green  Isle.  She  became
pale  and  heavy ;  and  at  the  end  of  three  quarters,  she
had  a  fine  lad  son.  "  Oh  !  in  all  the  great  world,"  says
she,  "  how  did  I  find  this  ?  "  "  Foil !  foil !"  says  the  hen-
wife,  "don't  let  that  set  thee  thinking.  Here's  for
thee  a  bird,  and  as  soon  as  he  sees  the  father  of  thy
son,  he  will  hop  on  the  top  of  his  head."  The
Green  Isle  w^as  gathered  from  end  to  end,  and  the
people  were  put  in  at  the  back  door  and  out  at  the
front  door  ;  but  the  bird  did  not  stir,  and  the  babe's
father  was  not  found.  Now  here,  she  said  she  would
go  through  the  world  altogether  till  she  should  find  the
father  of  the  babe.  Then  she  came  to  the  house  of
the  big  giant  and  sees  the  bottle.  "Ai !  ai !  ! "  said
she,  "  w'ho  gave  thee  this  bottle  ?  "  Said  the  giant,  "  It
was  young  John,  son  of  Erin's  king,  that  left  it."
"  Well,  then,  the  bottle  is  mine,"  said  she.  But  to
make  the  long  story  short,  she  came  to  the  house  of
each  giant,  and  she  took  with  her  each  bottle,  and  each
loaf,  and  each  cheese,  till  at  length  and  at  last  she  came
to  the  house  of  the  Idng  of  Erin.  Then  the  five-fifths
of  Erin  were  gathered,  and  the  bridge  of  nobles  of  the
people  ;  they  were  put  in  at  the  back  door  and  out  at
the  front  door,  but  the  bird  did  not  stir.  Then  she
asked  if  there  was  one  other  or  any  one  else  at  all  in
Erin,  that  had  not  been  here.  "  I  have  a  bald  rough-
skinned  gillie  in  the  smithy,"  said  the  smith,  "  but," —
"  Eough  on  or  ofi',  send  him  here,"  says  she.    No  sooner


170  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.

did  the  bird  see  the  head  of  the  bald  rough-skinned
gillie,  than  he  took  a  flight  and  settles  on  the  bald  top
of  the  rongh-skinned  lad.     She  caught  him  and  kisse
him.     Thou  art  the  father  of  my  babe.''

"  But,  John,"  says  the  great  king  of  Erin,  "  It  is
thou  that  gottest  the  bottles  of  water  for  me."  "  In-
deed, 't  -was  I,"  says  John.  "  "Weel,  then,  what  art  thou
willing  to  do  to  thy  two  brothers  Ì  "  "  The  very  thing
they  wished  to  do  to  me,  do  for  them  ;"  and  that
same  was  done.  John  married  the  daughter  of  the
king  of  the  Green  Isle,  and  they  made  a  great  rich
wedding  that  lasted  seven  days  and  seven  years,
and  thou  couldst  but  hear  leeg,  leeg,  and  beeg,  beeg,
solid  sound  and  peg  drawing.  Gold  a-crushing  from
the  soles  of  their  feet  to  the  tips  of  their  fingers,  the
length  of  seven  years  and  seven  days.


SGEULACHD  AIR  IMATH-GHAMHAIXN  DONN  A
GHLINN   UAIXXE.

15ha  righ  air  Eirinn  aon  uair,  aig  an  robh  triiiir  mhac,  's  b'  ainm  don
fhear  a  b'  òige  Iain,  's  bha  e  air  a  radh  nach  robh  e  glic  na  leoir,  agus
cbaill  an  righ  saoghalta  so  sealladh  a  shùilean,  's  Uigh  nan  cas.
Thubliairt  an  da  bhriitnair  bu  shine  giin  rachadh  iadsan  air  toir  tri
botuil  usige  do'n  eilean  uaine  a  blia  'n  iomall  torra  donihain,  agus  'se
bh"  ann  gun  d'  fhalbh  an  da  bliiklhair  so.  Thubhairt  an  t-aniadan
nach  ereideadb  e  fi'in  nach  falbhadh  e  cuideachd.agusa  cheud  bhaile-
mor  do  'n  d'  thiiing  e  ann  an  rioghachd  athar,  faiceara  dha  bhrathair
an  sin  'nam  blaigeartan  !  "  0  a  bhalacha  ! "  ars'  am  fear  òg,  "  an  ann
mar  so  a  tha  sibhse."  "Air  luathas  do  chas,"  ars'  iadsan,  "thoir  an
tigh  ort  air  neo  bithidh  do  bheatha  againn."  "  Xa  bithcadh  eagal
oirbh  romham  cha  'n  fliiach  leamsa  fanachd  maille  ril_/h."  D'flialbh
Iain  an  so  air  a  tlmrus,  gus  an  d'  thiiinig  e  gu  fhsacli  niòr  do  choille.
Hu!  Huth  !  ars'  Iain  ris  fe'in,  "Cha  'neil  e  cneasda  dhòmhsa  a'  choille
so  a  choiseachd  leam  fhein."    Bha  'n  oidhche  a'  tighinn  a  nb,  's  i


SGEULACHD  AIR  MATH-GHAMHAINN.  I  7  I

ftis  gu  math  dorcha.  Ceangailear  Iain  an  t-each  bacach,  biin  a  bha
foidhe  ri  bun  craoibhe  's  chaidh  e  fein  suas  'na  bhrr.  Cha  robh  e
ach  goirid  'na  biirr  gus  am  fac  e  math-ghamhainn  a'  tighinn  's  eibli-
leag  theine  na  bbeul.  "  Thig  a  nuas,  a  mhic  righ  Eirinn,"  ars'  esan.
"  Gu  deavbh,  cha  d'  thig,  tha  mi  smaointeachadh  gu'  bheil  mi  nis
tèaruinte  far  am  bheil  mi."  "  Ach  mur  d'  tliig  thusa  nuas  th(^id  mise
suas,"  arsa'm  math-ghamhainn.  "'M  bheil  thusa 'gam  ghabhail  'nam
amadan  cuideachd,"  thuirt  Jain.  Creutair  robagach,  liobarta  coltach
riutsa  a  streapadh  chraobh.  "Ach  mur  d'  thig  thusa  nuas,  theid  mise
suas,"  ars'  am  math-ghamhainn  's  e  'loirt  aghradlairah  air  streapadh
na  craoibhe.  "  'S  dia  ni  thu  sin  fhein,"  thuirt  Iain.  "  Fan  air  t'  ais  fo
bhun  na  craoibhe  mata,  's  theid  mi  sios  a  bhruidhinn  rint."  Agus  dur  a
theirinn  mac  righ  Eirinn  a  nuas,  tliKinig  iad  gu  cracaireachd.  Dh'
fheorich'a'  mhath-ghamhainn  dheth,  'an  robh  an  t-acras  air  ?  "  Uill
le  'r  cead,"  ars'  Iain,  "  tha  beagan  orm  dheth  'sa  cheart  am  so  fein."
Thug  am  math-ghamhaiun  an  sgiiob  uallach,  aighearach  'ud,  's
beirear  air  hoc  earba.  "  A  nis,  a  mhic  righ  Eirinn,"  arsa  am  math-
ghamhainn,  "Co 's  fearr  leat  do  chuid  do 'n  bhoc  bruich  na  amh."
"Anseòrsa  bìdh  a  b' àbhairt  dhòmhsa  fhaotainn,  bhitheadh  seòrsa
plotadh  bruich  air,"  ars'  Iain.  Agus  'sann  a  so  mar  thachair.
Fliuair  Iain  a  chuid  fhoiuròiste.  "  A  nis,"  arsa  'm  math-ghamhainn,
"  luidh  sios  eadar  mo  spogan-sa.'s  cha'n  eagal  fuachd  no  acrais  dhuit  gu
madainn."  j\Ioch  'sa  mhadainn,  dh'  fhoighneachd  am  math-ghamhainn,
"  Am  bheil  thu  'd  chadal,  a  mhic  righ  Eirinn."  "  Cha  'n  'eil  ana-
barrach  trom,"  thuirt  esan.  Tha'n  t-am  dhuit  a  bhi  air  do  bhuinn
mata,  tha  'n  t-astar  fada,  da  cheud  mile ;  ach  am  bheil  thu  'nad
'mharcaiche  math,  Iain?  "Thana  's  miosa  na  mi  air  amannan,"
thuirt  esan.  "'S  fearr  dhuit  tit;hinn  air  mo  mhuinn  mata."  Rinn  e
so,  agus  air  a  cheud  leum,  bha  Iain  ri  talamh.  "  Foil !  Foil !  "  ars'
Iain,  dè  'cha  'n  'eil  thu  fhein  dona  air  a  cheaird !  'S  fearr  dhuit
tighinn  air  t-ais  gus  amfeuch  sinn  a  rithist  thu;  's  leiongan  's  tiaclan
ghreimich  e  ris  a  mha'gban,  gus  an  d'  riiinig  iad  ceann  an  da  cheud
mile,  's  tigh  famhair.  "  Nis  Iain,"  arsa  'm  ma'ghan,  "  the'id  thu  chuir
seachad  na  h-oiuhche  ann  an  tigh  an  fhamhair  so."  Gh;ibh  thu  e  gu
maith  gnò,  ach  abair  thusa  gur  e  mathghanihainn  donn  a'  ghlinn
uaine,  a  chuir  thusa  an  so  air  son  cuid  oidhche,  agus  na  biodh  eagal
ort  nach  fhaigh  thu  cuid  'us  comhnadh.  'S  dh  'flihg  am  mathgham-
hainn  e 'dol  gu  tigh  an  fhamhair.  "A  mhic  righ  Eirinn,"  ars'  'am  famh
air,  bha  'san  targradh  thu  bhi  tighinn,  ach  mar  d'  fhuair  mi  t'  athair,
fhuair  mi  'inhac ;  cha  'n  'eil  fios  agam  co  dhiu  chuireas  mi  'san  talamh
thu  le  m'  chasan,  no  'san  adhar  le  m'anail."  "  Cha  dean  thu  aon  chuid
do  "n  da  cliuid,"  thuirt  Iain.  "  Oir  se  mathghamhainn  donn  a'  ghlinn
uaine  a  chuir  mise  'n  so."     "  Thig  a  stigh,  a  mhic  righ  Eirinn,"


I  7  2  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

thuirt  esan,  "'s  gheibh  thu  gabliail  agad  gu  maith  a  nochd  ; "  agas
mar  thubhairt  b  fliior.  Fhuair  Iain  biadh  's  deoch  gun  gliainne  ;  ach
gus  an  sgeulachd  fada  a  dheluiamh  goirid,  thug  am  mathgliamhainn
Iain  latha  an  deigh  latlia  gus  an  treas  famhair.  "  'A  nis,"  ars'  am
mathghamhainn,  "  cha  'n  'eil  moran  eòlais  agamsa  air  an  fhamhair  so,
ach  cha  bhi  thu  fada  'na  thigh  dar  a  dh'  fheumas  tu  dol  a  ghleachd
ris,  agus  ma  bhitheas  e  tuillidh  's  cruaidh  air  do  shon,  abair  thusa  na
'm  biodh  agamsa  ma'ghan  donn  a  ghlinn  uaiiie,  b'e  sin  do  maigh-
stir."  Co  luath  'sa  chaidh  Iain  a  stigh,  Ai !  Ai !  ars'  am  famhair
mòr,  mar  d'fhuair  mi  t'  athair,  fliuair  mi  'mhac,  agus  'sa  cheile  ghabh
iad  ;  's  dhèauadh  iad  a  bhogaa  don  chreagan — an  t-aite  bu  chruaidhe,
rachadh  iad  foidh  gu'n  gUiine.in,  san  t-aite  bu  bhuige  gu  'n  sleisdean,
's  bheireadh  iad  fuaranan  fior  uisge  a  h-aodann  gach  creagain.  Thug
am  famhair  fasgadh  goirt  na  dithis  do;dh'  Iain.  "Foil!  Foil!,"  thuirt
esan,  na'm  biodh  agamsa  an  so  mathghamhainn  donn  a'  ghlinn
uaine,  cha  bhiodh  do  leum  co  sunndach ; "  agus  cha  luaith  a  labhair
e  'm  facal  na  bha  am  ma'ghan  coir  ri  'thaobh.  "  Seadh  !  Seadh  !  ars'
am  famhair,  a  mhic  righ  Eirinn,  tha  fios  agam  a  nis  air  do  ghnoth-
ach  n'  is  fearr  na  tha  agad  fhein."  'Se  bh'  ann  gun  d-òrduich  am
famhair  do  'n  cliiobair  aige  am  molt  a  b"  fhearr  a  bha  'sa'  bheinn  a
thoirt  dhachaidh,  agus  a'  chlosach  a  thilgeadh  ma  choinneamh  an
doruis  mhoir.  "  A  nis,  Iain,  ars'  am  famhair,  thig  iolaire,  agus
luidhidh  i  air  closach  a  mhuilt  so,  agus  tha  foinneamh  air  cluais  na
h-iolaire  so,  a  dh'  flieumas  tusa  a  ghearradh  dhi  le  aon  bheum  leis  a'
chlaidheamh  so,  ach  deur  fola  cha  'n  'flieud  thu  tharruinn."  Thainig
an  iolaire,  's  cha  robh  i  fada  'g  itheadh  dar  a  theann  Iain  rithe,  's  le
aon  bheum  ght'arr  e  'm  f  >iuneamh  dhi  gun  aon  deur  fola  a  tharruinn.
"  Anis  arsa  'n  iolaire,  thig  air  bun  mo  dha  sgeithe,  bho  'n  a  tha  fios
agam  air  do  ghnothuch  n'  is  fearr  na  th'  agad  fein."  Kinn  e  so,  agus
bha  iad  uair  air  muir,  's  uair  airtalamh,  's  uair  air  an  sgiathan,  gus  an
d' ràinig  iad  an  t-Eilean  uaine.  '■  Nis  Iain,  ars' ise,  bi  ealamh, 's
lion  do  bhotuil ;  cuimhnich  gu  bheil  na  coin  dhubha  air  falbh  an
ceartair."  Xuair  a  lion  e  na  botuil  do  'n  uisge  as  an  tobar,  faicear
tigh  beag  laimh  ris.  Thuirt  Iain  ris  fein  gu'n  rachadh  e  stigh,  s  gu
'm  faiceadh  e  de  bh'  ann,  agus  a  cheud  sebmar  a  dh'  fhosgail  e,
chminaic  e  botuil  Ian  do  dh-uisge  beatha,  lion  e  gloinne  as,  's  dh'  61
e  'san  uair  a  dh'  ol,  thug  e  sail,  's  bha  'in  botuil  cho  lb,n  sa  bha  e
roimhe.  "  Bithidh  'm  botuil  so  agam  comhla  ris  na  botuil  uisge,"  ars'
esan.  Chaidh  e  'n  sin  a  stigh  do  sheomar  eile,  's  chunnaic  e  builionn  ;
thug  e  sliseag  as,  ach  bha  'm  builionn  cho  slan  sa  bha  e  roimhe.
"  S'  Dia  cha  'n  fhag  mi  thus',"  ars'  Iain.  Chaidh  e  air  aghaidh  mar
so  gus  an  d'  rainig  eseò  mar  eile;  chunnaic  e  mulachag  mhòr  chaise,
thug  e  sliseag  do  'n  mhulachaig,  ach  bha  i  cho  slan  sa  bha  i  roimhe.


SGEULACHD  AIB  MATH-GHAMHAINN.  I  7  3

"  Bithidh  so  agam  comhla  ri  each,"  ars'  esan.  Chaidh  e  'n  so  gu
seòmar  eile,  's  faicear  'na  luidhe  an  sin  an  t-aon  ailleagan  boirrionn-
aich  bu  bhùidche  a  chunnaic  e  riamh.  "  Bu  mhòr  am  beud  gun
phog  beoil  a  thoirt  dhuit,  a^ghaoil,"  ars'  Iain.  Beagan  'na  dheigh  so,
leum  Iain  air  muin  na  h-iolaire  's  thug  i  e  aira  chas  cheuni  cheudna,
gus  an  d-riiinig  iad  tigh  an  fhamhair  nihoir,  's  bha  iad  apaidheadh  a
mhail  do  'n  fanihair,  agus  's  ann  an  sin  a  bha  'n  sealladh  air  tuath-
anaich,  's  famliairean,  's  biadh,  's  deoch.  "  VV^l,  Iain,"  ars'  am  famhair,
"  am  foe  thu  'leithid  so  do  dheoeh  ann  an  tigh  t'  athar  an  Eirinn."
"  Puth !  ars'  Iain,  hu !  a  laochain,  a  dhuine  eile,  tha  deoch  agamsa
nach  ionann."  Thug  e  gloinne  do  'n  fhamhair  as  a  bhotul,  ach  bha
'm  botul  cho  Ian  'sa  bha  e  roimhe.  "  Mata,  ars'  am  fanihair,  bheir  mi
fhein  da  chèud  nott  dhuit  air  son  a'  bhotuil,  srian,  agus  diollaid."
"'S  bargain  e  mata,"  ars'  Iain,  "ach  gu  'feum  an  ceud  leannan  a  bha
agamsa  fhaotainn  ma  thig  i  'n  rathad."  "  Gheibh  i  sin,"  ars'  am
famhair,  "  ach  gus  an  sgeulaehd  fada  a  dheanamh  goirid,  dh'  fhàg  e
gach  builionn  's  gach  mulachag  aig  an  da  fhnmhair  eile,  ah:  a'
chumhnant  cheudna  gu'  faigheadh  an  ceud  leannan  bha  aige-san  iad
na  'n  d'  thigeadh  i  'n  rathad.  Eainig  Iain  an  so  baile  mòr  athar  ana
an  Eirinn,  's  faicear  a  dha  bhrathair  mardll'^fhàg  e  iad 'nam  blaig-
eartan.  "  'S  fearr  dhuibh  tighinn  dhachaidh  leamsa,'illean,"  ars'  esan,
's  gheibh  sibh  deis'  eudaich,  's  each,'s  diollaid,  's  srian  am  fear  ;  agus
mur  so  rinn  iad  ;  ach  dar  a  bha  iad  dlUth  do  thigh  an  athair,  smaoin-
ich  a  bhraithrean  gum  b'fhearr  dhoibh  a  mharbhadh,agus  's  e  bh'ann
gun  do  thoisich  iad  air, 's  dar  a  shaoil  leo  e  bhi  marbh,thilg  iad  e  air
cul  garraidh,  's  thug  iad  uaidh  .na  tri  botuil  uisge,  's'dh'fhalbh  iad
dhachaidh.  Cha  robh  Iain  ro  fhada  an  so,  nuair  a  thainig  an  gobha
aig  athair  an  rathad  le  Ian  cairt  do  dh'  iarunn  meirgeach.  Ghlaodh
Iain  a  mach  co  air  bith  an  criosduidh  tha  'n  sin,  O  !  e  dheanamh
cobhair  dhasan.  Rug  an  gobha  air,  's  thilg  e  Iain  am  measg  an
iaruinn,  agus  leis  cho  meirgeach  'sa  bha  'n  t-iarrunn,  chaidh  e
ann's  gach  lot  's  creuchd  a  bh'  air  Iain,  agus  's  e  bh'  ann,
gun  do  chinn  Iain  maol,  carrach.  Fagaidh  sinn  Iain  an  so,  agus
tillidh  sinn  ris  an  hilleagan  bhòidheach  a  dh'fliag  Iain  'san  eilean
uaine.  Chinn  i  'n  so  trom,  torrach,  breac,  ballach,  'san  ceann  tri  raith-
ean,  bha  mac  brèagh  giUe  aice.  '•  O  air  an  t-saoghail  mhbr,"  ars'
ise,  "ciamar  a  fhuair  mise  so?"  "Foil!  Foil!"  ars' a' chailleach
chearc, "  na  cuireadh  sin  smaointeach  ort ;  so  dhuit  eun,  agus  co  luath
i^a  chi  e  athair  do  mhic,  leumaidh  e  air  mullach  a  chinn.  Chaidh  an
t-eilean  uaine  a  chruinneachadh  bho  cheann  gu  ceann,  's  an  sluagh
a  chur  a  stigh  air  an  dorus  chuil  's  amach  air  an  dorus  bheoil,  ach
cha  do  ghluais  an  t-eun,  's  cha  d'  fhuaireadh  athair  an  leinibh.  Thubh-
ai:  t  i  "n  so  "gu  falbhadh  i  feadh  an  t-saoghail  gu  leir,  gus  am  faigheadh


I  7  4  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

i  athair  a  leinibh.  Thainig  i  'n  so  gu  tigh  an  fliamhair  mhoir,"  agus
faicear  ambotul.  "Ai!  Ai!  deir  ise,  co  thug  ilhuit  am  botul  so?"
Thuirt  am  famhair,  "  'se  lain  og  mac  righ  Eirinn  a  dk'  fhiig  e."
"  Mata  's  leamsa  am  botul,"  thuirt  ise,  ach  gu  an  sgeulachd  fad'  a
dheanamh  goirid,  thainig  i  gu  tigh  gach  famhair,  's  thug  i  leatha
gach  botul  's  gach  builionn  's  gach  mulachag  chaise:  Gus  ma  dheir-
eadh  thall,  thainig  i  gu  tigh  righ  Eirinn.  Chaidh  'n  so  cuig  cuig-
eamh  na  h-Eirinn  a  chruinneachadh  's  drochaid  cheudan  na  maith.
Chaidh  an  cur  a  stigh  air  an  dorus  chiiil,  's  a  mach  air  an  dorus  bhebil,
ach  cha  do  glihiais  an  t-eun.  "Dh'  fhebraich  i  'n  so,  an  robh  a  h-aon
na  h-aon  idir  eile  ann  an  Eirinn  nach  robh  'n  so  ?"  '•  Tha  gille  maol,
carrach  anris  a'  cheardach  agarasa,"  thuirt  an  gobba  ach  ; "  "  Car  air
na  dheth,  cuir  an  so  e,  deir  ise ;  's  cha  bo  luaithe  a  chunnaic  an  t-eun
ceann  a  ghille  niliaoil  charraich  na  'thug  e  iteag  's  luidliear  air  maol
mhullaich  a'  ghille  charrich.  Rug  i  air  's  phog  i  e."  "  'S  tusa  athair  mo
leinibh."  "Ach  Iain,"  arsa  ngh  mòr  Eirinn,"  's  tusa  a  fliuair  na  botuil
nisge  dhomhsa."  "  Ach  gu  dearbh  's  mi."  ars'  Iain.  "  Will,  mata,  dè
tha  thu  toileach  a  dheanamh  ri  'd'  dhithis  bhraithrean  V  "  "A  cheart
rud  a  bha  iadsan  toileach  a  dheanamh  ormsa,  cur  as  doibh  ;  "  agus  's
e  sin  fein  a  rinneadh.  Phos  Iain  's  nighean  righ  an  Eilean  Uaine,  '9
rinn  iad  banais  mhòr  ghreadhnach  a  mhair  seachd  lathan  's  seachd
bliadhna  's  cha  chluinneadh  tu  ach  lig,  lig,  's  big,  big,  fuaim  tail
's  tarruing  pinne,  or  'ga  phronnadh  bho  bhonn  an  coise  gu  barr  am
meòir  fad  sheaclid  bliadhna  's  slieachd  lathan.

Written  from  the  recitation  of  John  MacDoxald,  travelling
tinker.  He  wanders  all  over  the  Highlands,  and  lives  in  a  tent
witli  his  family.  He  can  neither  read  nor  write.  He  repeats
some  of  his  stories  by  heart  fluently,  and  almost  in  the  same
words.  I  have  followed  his  recitation  as  closely  as  possible,  hut
it  was  exceedingly  difficult  to  keep  him  stationary  for  any  length
of  time.  Hector  Urquhart.

The  tinker's  comments  I  got  from  the  transcriber.  John
himself  is  a  character ;  ho  is  about  fifty  years  of  age  ;  his  father,
an  old  soldier,  is  alive  and  about  eighty  ;  and  there  are  numerous
younger  branches  ;  and  they  were  all  encamped  under  the  root  of
a  tree  in  a  quarry  close  to  Inverary,  at  Easter  1859.

The  father  tells  many  stories,  but  his  memory  is  failing.  The
son  told  me  several,  and  I  have  a  good  many  of  them  written
down.  They  both  recite  ;  they  do  not  simply  tell  the  story,  but
act  it  with  changing  voice  and  gesture,  as  if  they  took  an  interest


THE  BROWN  BEAR  OF  THE  GREEN  GLEN.     I  7  5

in  it,  and  entered  into  the  spirit  and  fun  of  the  tale.  They  helong
to  the  race  of  "  Cairds,"  and  are  as  much  nomads  as  the  gipsies
are.

The  father,  to  use  the  son's  expression,  "  never  saw  a  school."
He  served  in  the  42d  in  his  youth.  One  son  makes  horn  spoons,
and  does  not  know  a  single  story ;  the  other  is  a  spoi'ting  cha-
racter, a  famous  fisherman,  who  knows  all  the  lochs  and  rivers  in
the  Highlands,  makes  flies,  and  earns  money  in  summer  by  teaching
Southerns  to  fish.      His  ambition  is  to  become  an  underkeeper.

This  bear  story  is  like  a  great  many  others  which  I  have  got
elsewhere  in  the  Highlands,  but  I  have  none  told  exactly  in  the
same  way.  It  should  be  much  longer,  but  the  wandering  spirit
of  the  man  would  not  let  him  rest  to  dictate  his  story.  They  had
to  move  to  an  outhouse  and  let  him  roam  about  amongst  the
shavings,  and  swing  his  arms,  before  this  much  was  got  out  of  him.

I  have  found  the  same  restlessness  amongst  wanderers  else-
where. I  could  never  get  Lapps  to  sit  still  lor  ten  minutes  when
I  tried  to  draw  them  ;  and  the  air  of  a  house  seemed  to  oppress
them.  I  have  hitherto  failed  in  catching  an  English  tinker,
whom  I  let  slip  one  day  in  London,  and  to  whom  I  promised  good
pay  if  he  would  come  and  dictate  a  story  which  he  had  told  me.
There  is  a  similar  wandering  jjopulation  in  Norway  and  Sweden.
They  own  boats  and  carts,  and  pretend  to  magic  arts ;  and  are
feared  and  detested  by  householders  as  wizards  and  thieves.  It
is  said  that  these  Norwegian  wanderers  hold  a  meeting  on  a  hill
near  Christiania,  once  a  year,  and  barter  and  sell,  and  exchange
whatever  they  may  have  acquired  in  their  travels.  I  have  heard
a  great  deal  about  them  from  peasants.  I  have  seen  them,  but
very  seldom  in  Noi'way.  I  once  met  a  party  in  the  gloaming  on
a  Swedish  road,  and  a  little  girl,  who  was  following  and  driving  a
gentleman  in  a  posting-cart,  when  she  met  them,  flogged  her
horse  and  galloped  for  dear  life.

There  is  a  similar  race  in  Spain,  and  though  they  are  not  all
gipsies,  they  are  classed  with  them.  The  history  of  these  wan-
derers would  be  curious  if  it  could  be  learned.  Borrow's  Bible  in
Spain  gives  some  insight,  but  there  is  still  much  to  be  known
about  them.  "  London  Labour  and  the  Poor,"  and  reports  on
"  Ragged  Schools,"  treat  of  similar  people.

This  story  may  be  compared  with  Grimm's  Water  of  Life.


THE  THEEE  SOLDIERS.

From  James  MacLaclilan,  servant,  Islaj.

rpHERE  was  before  a  regiment  in  Dublin  in
-■-  Erin,  and  it  was  going  a  long  journey.  There
was  a  sergeant,  a  cori^oral,  and  a  single  soldier,  who
had  sweethearts  in  the  town.  They  went  to  see  them
on  the  day  that  they  Avere  to  go,  and  they  stayed  too
long,  and  the  regiment  left  them  ;  they  followed  it,
and  they  were  going  and  going  till  the  night  came  on
them.  They  saw  a  light  a  long  way  from  them  ;  and
if  it  was  a  long  way  from  them,  it  was  not  long  they
were  in  reaching  it.  They  went  in,  the  floor  was
ready  swejit,  and  a  fire  on  it,  and  no  one  in ;  they
sat  at  the  fire  toasting  themselves  ;  they  were  not  long
there  when  the  single  soldier  rose,  to  whom  was  the
name  of  John,  to  look  what  was  in  the  chamber,  be-
cause there  was  a  light  in  it.  There  was  there  a  board
covered  with  every  sort  of  meat,  and  a  hghted  candle
on  it ;  he  went  up,  he  began  to  eat,  and  the  rest  be-
gan to  hinder  him,  for  that  he  had  no  business  with  it
When  they  saw  that  he  did  not  stop,  they  went  up
and  they  l^egan  themselves.  There  were  three  beds  in
the  chamber,  and  one  of  them  went  to  lie  in  each  bed  ;
they  had  not  laid  long  when  three  great  red  girls
came  in,  and  one  of  them  stretched  herself  near  each
one  of  the  beds ;  and  when  they  saw  the  time  fitting


THE  THREE  SOLDIERS.  177

in  the  morning,  they  rose  and  went  away.  When  the
girls  rose,  it  could  not  he  known  that  a  bit  had  ever
come  off  the  board.  They  sat  and  they  took  their
meat.  The  sergeant  said  that  they  had  better  folloAv
the  regiment ;  and  John  said  that  they  should  not  fol-
low it ;  as  long  as  he  coidd  get  meat  and  rest  that  he
would  not  go.  "When  dinner  time  came  they  sat  and
they  took  their  dinner.  The  sergeant  said  they  had
better  go  ;  and  John  said  that  they  should  not  go.
"When  supper  time  came  they  sat  and  they  took  their
supper  ;  after  supping  they  went  to  he  down,  each  one
to  his  own  bed.  The  girls  came  this  night  too,  and
went  to  he  do-mi  as  before.  In  the  morning  when
they  saw  the  time  fitting,  they  rose  and  they  went
away.  "When  the  lads  rose  the  board  was  covered,
and  it  could  not  be  known  that  a  bit  had  ever  come
off  it.  They  sat  and  they  took  their  meat ;  and  when
they  took  their  meat,  the  sergeant  said  that  they  xoould
go  at  all  events.  John  said  that  they  should  not  go.
They  took  their  dinner  and  their  supper  as  they  used ;
they  went  to  lie  down  ;  the  girls  came  and  they  lay
down  after  them.  In  the  morning  the  eldest  gave  the
sergeant  a  purse,  and  every  time  he  would  unloose  it,
it  would  be  full  of  gold  and  silver.

She  said  to  the  middle  one,  "  What  wilt  thou  give
to  thine  ? "  "I  wiH  give  him  a  towel,  and  every
time  he  spreads  it  it  will  be  full  of  every  sort  of  meat."
She  gave  the  towel  to  the  corporal ;  and  she  said  to
the  youngest,  "  "What  wilt  thou  give  to  thine  own  ? "
"  I  will  give  him  a  whistle,  and  every  time  he  plays
it  he  will  be  in  the  very  middle  of  the  regiment."  She
gave  him  the  whistle  ;  they  left  their  blessing  with
them,  and  they  went  away.  "  I  wont  let  it  rest
here,"  said  John  ;  "  I  will  know  who  they  are  before
I   go   further  forward."     He  followed  them,    and  he

N


lyS  WEST  HIGHLANT)  TALES.

saw  them  going  down  a  glen  ;  and  when  he  was  ahout
to  be  down,  they  came  to  meet  him,  crying.  "  "V^Tiat  is
the  matter  with  you  ? "  says  he.  "  Much  is  the  matter
■with  us,"  said  they,  "  that  we  are  under  charms,  till
we  find  three  lads  Avho  will  sjDend  three  nights  -ndth
us  without  putting  a  (question  to  us  ;  and  if  thou  hadst
stayed  without  following  us  we  were  free."  Is  there
any  way  that  you  can  get  free  but  that  Ì "  said  he.
"  There  is,"  said  they.  "There  is  a  tree  at  the  end  of
the  house,  and  if  you  come  at  the  end  of  a  day  and
year  and  pluck  up  the  tree,  we  were  free."  John
turned  back  where  the  rest  were,  and  he  told  them
how  it  happened  to  him ;  and  they  gave  this  ad-
vice to  each  other  that  they  should  return  back  to
Dublin  again,  because  it  was  not  worth  their  while
to  follow  the  regiment.  They  returned  back  to
Dublin.

Tliat  night  John  said, — "  I  had  better  go  to  see
the  king's  daughter  to-night."  "Thou  had'st  better
stay  in  the  house,"  said  the  rest,  "  than  go  there."
"  I  will  go  there,  at  all  events,"  says  he.  He  went,
and  he  reached  the  king's  house  ;  he  struck  at  the
door,  one  of  the  gentlewomen  asked  him  what  he
wanted  ;  and  he  said  that  he  wished  to  be  speaking
to  the  king's  daughter.  The  king's  daughter  came
where  he  was,  and  she  asked  what  business  he  had
with  her.  "  I  will  give  thee  a  whistle,"  said  he,  "  and
when  thou  playest  it  thou  wilt  be  in  the  middle  of
such  a  regiment."  When  she  got  the  whistle  she
drove  him  down  stairs,  and  she  shut  the  door  on  him.
"  How  went  it  with  thee  Ì "  said  they.  "  She
wheedled  the  whistle  from  me,"  said  he.  He  did
not  stop  till  he  had  beguiled  a  loan  of  the  purse  from
the  sergeant.  "I  had  better,"  said  he,  "go  to  see
the  king's  daughter  again."     He  went  away  and  he


THE  THREE  SOLDIERS.  179

reached  the  house ;  he  saw  the  king's  daughter  ;  she
wheedled  the  purse  from  him,  and  drove  him  down
stairs  as  she  did  before  ;  and  he  turned  back.  He  did
not  stop  till  he  beguiled  a  loan  of  the  towel  from  the
corporal.  He  went  again  where  the  king's  daughter
was.  "  "What  wilt  thou  give  me  this  journey  Ì  "  said
she.  "  A  towel,  and  when  it  is  opened  it  will  be  full
of  every  sort  of  meat."  "  Let  me  see  it,"  said  she.
"  We  will  spread  it  out,"  said  he.  He  spread  it  out,
and  there  was  a  corner  that  would  not  lie  right.  He
said  to  her  to  stand  on  the  corner  ;  she  stood  on  it ;
he  stood  himself  on  another  corner,  and  he  mshed  to
be  in  the  uttermost  isle  of  the  deep  ;  and  himself
and  the  king's  daughter,  and  the  towel,  were  in  it  in
five  minutes.  There  was  the  very  prettiest  island  that
man  ever  saw,  and  nothing  in  it  but  trees  and  fruits.
There  they  were,  going  through  the  island  backwards
and  forwards,  and  sleep  came  on  him.  They  came  to  a
pretty  little  hollow,  and  he  laid  his  head  in  her  lap  ;
and  he  took  a  death  grip  of  her  apron,  in  order  that
she  should  not  get  away  without  his  perceiving  her.
When  he  slept  she  loosed  the  apron  ;  she  left  him
there  ;  she  took  the  towel  with  her  ;  she  stood  on  it ;
she  mslied  herself  to  be  in  her  father's  house,  and  she
was  in  it.  When  he  awoke  he  had  notliing  to  get,  he  had
nothing  to  see  but  trees  and  birds  ;  he  was  then  keep-
ing himself  alive  with  the  fruits  of  the  island,  and  hit
upon  apples  ;  and  when  he  would  eat  one  sort  of  them
they  would  put  a  deer's  head  on  liim  ;  and  when  he
would  eat  another  sort  of  them,  they  would  put  it  off
him.

One  day  he  gathered  a  great  many  of  the  apples,
and  he  put  the  one  sort  in  the  one  end  of  the  pock,
and  the  other  sort  in  the  other  end.  He  saw  a  vessel
going  past,  he  waved  to   her  ;  a  boat  came  to  shore.


l8o  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

and  tliey  took  liim  on  board  Tlie  captain  took  him
down  to  meat,  and  he  left  the  pock  above.  The  sailors
opened  the  pock  to  see  what  was  in  it ;  when  they
saw  that  apples  were  in  it,  they  began  to  eat  them.
They  ate  the  sort  that  would  put  deers'  horns  on  them,
and  they  began  fighting  till  they  were  like  to  break
the  vessel.  "WTien  the  captain  heard  the  row,  he  came
up  ;  and  when  he  saw  them,  he  said,  "  Thou  bad  man,
what  hast  thou  done  to  my  men  now  ?"  "  "What,"
said  John,  "  made  thy  men  so  impudent  that  they
would  go  and  look  into  any  man's  pock  ?"  "  "WTiat
Avilt  thou  give  me,"  said  John,  "  if  I  leave  them  as
they  were  before  V  The  skipper  took  fright,  and  he
said  that  he  would  give  him  the  vessel  and  cargo  at
the  first  port  they  reached.  Here  he  opened  the  pock,
and  he  gave  them  the  other  sort,  and  the  horns  fell  ofi"
them.  It  was  a  cargo  of  gold  was  on  the  ship,  and
it  was  to  Dublin  she  was  going.  WTien  they  ar-
rived the  captain  said  to  him  to  be  taking  care  of  the
vessel  and  cargo,  that  he  was  done  with  it.  "  Be
patient,"  said  John,  "  till  we  see  how  it  goes  wdth  us
at  the  end  of  a  few  days."  He  went  away  on  the
morrow  to  sell  the  apples  about  the  town  -with  nothing
on  but  torn  clothes.  He  went  up  through  the  town,
and  he  came  opposite  the  king's  house,  and  he  saw  the
king's  daughter  with  her  head  out  of  the  window.  She
asked  that  a  pound  of  the  apples  should  be  sent  up  to
her.  He  said  she  should  try  how  they  would  agree
with  her  first.  He  threw  up  an  apple  to  her  of  the
sort  that  would  put  a  deer's  head  on  her  ;  when  she
ate  the  apple  there  came  a  deer's  head  and  horns  on
her.  The  king  sent  forth  word,  that  if  any  man  what-
soever could  be  found,  who  would  heal  his  daughter,
that  he  should  get  a  peck  of  gold,  and  a  peck  of  silver,
and  herself  to  marry.     She  was  thus  many  days,  and


THE  THREE  SOLDIERS.  I  6  I

no  man  coming  that  could  do  any  good  at  all.  John
came  to  the  door  with  the  torn  clothes,  asking  to  get
in  ;  and  when  they  saw  his  like,  they  would  not  let
him  in  ;  but  she  had  a  little  brother  who  saw  them
keeping  him  out,  and  he  told  it  to  his  lather  ;  and  his
father  said,  "  Though  it  were  the  beggar  of  the  green !"
Word  went  after  liim  that  he  should  return,  and  he
returned.  The  king  said  to  liim,  "  Could  he  heal  his
ilaughter  ?"  and  he  said  "  that  he  would  try  it."  They
took  him  up  to  the  chamber  where  she  was.  He  sat,
and  he  took  a  book  out  of  his  pocket,  with  nothing  in
it,  pretending  that  he  was  reading  it.  "  Didst  thou,"
said  he,  "  wheedle  a  whistle  from  a  poor  soldier ;  when
he  would  play  it,  it  would  take  him  to  the  middle  of
the  regiment  Ì"  "  I  wheedled,"  said  she.  "  If  that
is  not  found,"  said  he,  "  I  cannot  heal  thee."  "  It  is,"
says  she.  They  brought  the  whistle  to  him.  When
lie  got  the  whistle  he  gave  her  a  piece  of  apple,  and
one  of  the  horns  feU  off  her.  "  I  can't,"  said  he,  "  do
more  to-day,  but  I  will  come  here  to-morrow.  Then
he  went  out,  and  his  old  comrades  met  him.  The
trade  they  had  was  to  be  slaking  lime  and  dramng
water  for  stone  masons.  He  knew  them,  but  they  did
not  know  him  ;  he  noticed  nothing  at  all,  but  he  gave
them  ten  shillings,  and  he  said  to  them,  "  Drink  the
health  of  the  man  who  gave  them."  He  left  them
there,  and  he  returned  to  the  ship.  On  the  morrow
he  went  where  the  king's  daughter  was  ;  he  took  out
the  book,  and  he  said  to  her,  "  Didst  thou  Avheedle  a
purse  from  a  poor  soldier,  that  Avould  be  full  of  gold
and  silver  every  time  it  was  opened  ?"  "  I  wheedled,"
said  she.  "  If  that  is  not  found,"  said  he,  "  I  cannot
heal  thee."  "  It  is,"  said  she  ;  and  they  gave  him  tlie
purse.  AVhen  he  got  the  purse  he  gave  her  a  piece  of
the  apple,  and  another  horn  fell  off  her.      "  I  can  di)


102  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

no  more  to-day,"  said  he,  "  but  I  will  come  the  next
night."  He  went  where  his  old  comrades  were,  and
he  gave  them  other  ten  shillings,  and  he  said  to  them,
"  To  drink  the  health  of  the  man  who  gave  them."
Tlien  he  returned  to  the  vessel.  The  captain  said  to
him,  "  Was  he  going  to  take  charge  of  the  vessel
now  V  Said  he,  "  Catch  patience  till  the  end  of  a
day  or  two,  till  we  see  how  it  goes  with  us."  He  re-
turned the  next  night  to  see  the  king's  daughter.  He
gave  a  pull  at  the  book  as  he  used  to  do, — "  Didst
thou  wheedle,"  said  he,  "  a  towel  from  a  poor  soldier,
that  would  be  full  of  every  kind  of  meat  every  time  it
was  undone  1"  "  I  wheedled,"  said  she.  "  If  that
towel  is  not  to  be  found,  I  cannot  cure  thee,"  says  he.
"  It  is,"  says  she.  They  gave  it  to  him  ;  as  quick  as
he  got  it,  he  gave  her  a  whole  apple  ;  and  when  she
ate  it  she  was  as  she  was  before.  Here  he  got  a  peck
of  gold  and  a  peck  of  silver  ;  and  they  said  to  him
that  he  would  get  herself  to  marry.  "  I  will  come
to-morrow,"  said  he.  He  went  the  way  of  his  old
comrades  this  time  too  ;  he  gave  them  ten  shilHngs,
and  he  said  to  them,  "  To  drink  the  health  of  the  man
who  gave  them."  Said  they,  "  It  would  be  pleasing
til  us  to  know  what  kind  friend  is  giving  us  tlie  like  of
this  every  night."  "  Have  you  mind,"  said  he,  "  when
we  were  in  such  a  place,  and  that  we  promised  to  the
three  girls  that  we  would  go  there  again  a  year  from
the  time."  Then  they  knew  liim.  "That  time  has
gone  past  long  ago,"  said  they.  "  It  is  not  gone,"
said  he  ;  "  next  night  is  the  night."  He  returned
where  the  captain  was ;  he  said  to  him  that  himself
and  his  cargo  might  be  off ;  that  he  Avoald  not  be
troubling  liim  ;  that  he  had  enough.  On  the  morrow
he  went  past  the  king's  house,  and  the  king's  daughter
said   to  him,    "  Art  thou  going  to  marry  me  to-day  V


URSGEUL.  183

"  No,  nor  to-morrow,"  said  lie.  He  returned  where
the  rest  were,  and  he  began  to  set  them  in  order  for
going  where  they  promised.  He  gave  the  purse  to
the  sergeant,  the  towel  to  the  corporal,  and  the  whistle
he  kept  liimself.  He  bought  three  horses,  and  they
went  riding  with  great  haste  to  the  place  to  which
they  had  promised  to  go.  When  they  reached  the
house  they  caught  the  tree,  and  it  came  with  them  at
the  first  pull.  The  three  girls  came  so  white  and
smihng  where  they  were,  and  they  were  free  from  the
spells.  Every  man  of  them  took  liis  own  with  him  ;
they  came  back  to  Dublin,  and  they  married.


URSGEUL.

Bha  roimhe  so  reiseamaid  ann  am  Bailecliath  an  Eirinn,  's  blia  i
'folbh  air  turas  fada.  Bha  seirdsean,  coi-poral,  agus  saighdear  sin-
gilte  aig  an  robh  leannain  anns  a'  bhaile.  Chaidh  iad  a'm  faicinn  an
latha  bha  iad  ri  folbh,  's  dh'  fhan  iad  tuillidh  is  fada,  's  dh'  fhag  an
reiseamaid  iad.  Lean  iad  i  's  bha  iad  a'  folbh  's  a'  folbh  gus  an  d'
thàinig  an  oidhche  orra.  Chunnaic  iad  solus  fada  uatha,  's  ma  b'
fhada  uatha  cha  b'  fhada  bha  iadsan  'ga  ruigheachd.  Chaidh  iad  a
stigh.  Bha  'n  t-urlar  reidh,  sguabte,  's  gealbhan  air,  's  gun  duine
stigh.  Shuidh  iad  aig  a'  ghealbhan  'gan  garadh.  Cha  b'  fhada  'bha
iad  mursin  nur  a  dh'  eiridh  an  saighdear  singilte,  d' am  b'ainm  Iain,
a  dh'  amharc  de  'bha  'san  t-seombar,  a  thaobh  gun  robh  solus  ann.
Bha  'n  sin  bord  air  a  chiiirneachadh  leis  a'  h-uile  seòrsa  bìdh,  's
coinneal  laist'  air.  Chaidh  e  suas ;  thoisich  e  air  itheadh  ;  's  thoisich
each  air  a  bhacail,  0  nach  robh  gnothach  aige  ris.  Nur  a  chunnaic
iad  nach  do  stad  e,  chaidh  iad  suas,  's  thoisich  iad  fein.  Bha  tri  leap-
aicliean  anns  an  t-seombar,  's  chaidh  fear  dhiu  'laidhe  anns  gach
leaba.

Cha  b'  fhada  a  bha  iad  'nan  laidhe  nur  a  thainig  tri  nigheanan
mora  'ruagha  stigh,  's  shin  te  aca  i  fein  aig  beulthaobh  gach  te  de  na
leapaichean.'s  nur  a  chunnaic  iad  an  t-am  iomchuidh  anns  a'  mhaidinn
dh'  eiridh  iad,  agus  dh'  fholbh  iad.


i8.


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


Nur  a  dh'  tìiidh  na  saighdearan  cha  'n  aithnichte  gnn  d"  thainig
mir  bhar  a'  bliiiird  riarah.  Shuidh  iad,  's  phabli  iad  am  biadh.
Thuirt  an  seirdsean  gum  b'  fhearra  dhaibh  an  reiseamaid  aleantainn,
's  tliuiit  Iain  nach  leanadh.  Fhad  'sa  gheibheadh  e  bhiadh  'na
thamh  nach  folbhadh  e.  Nur  a  thkiiiig  an  t-am  dinnearach,  shuidh
iad  's  ghabh  iad  an  dinneir.  Thuirt  an  seirdsean  gum  b'  fliehrra
dhaibh  folbh,  's  thuirt  lain  nach  folbhadh.  Nur  a  thainig  am
sioparach,  shuidh  iad  's  ghabh  iad  an  siopair.  An  de'igh  an  sioparach
chaidh  iad  a  laidhe,  gach  fear  d'a  leaba  fein.

Thainig  na  nigheanan  an  oidhche  so  cuideachd,  s  chaidh  td  Taidhe
anns  a'  h-uile  leaba  dhiu.  Anns  a'  mhnidinn,  nur  a  chunnaic  iad  an
t-am  inmcbuidh,  dh'  eiridh  iad  's  dh'  fholbh  iad.

Nur  a  dh'  e'iridh  na  gillean  bha  'm  bord  cuirnichte,  's  cha  n  aith-
nichte gun  d'  thainig  mir  riamh  dheth.  Shuidh  iad  "s  ghabh  iad  am
biadh,  's  nur  a  ghabh  iad  am  biadh  thuirt  an  seirdsean  gum  folbhadh
iad  codhiu.  Thuirt  Iain  nach  folbhadh.  Ghabh  iad  an  dinneir
's  an  siopair  mur  a  b'  hbhaist.     Chaidh  iad  a  laidhe.

Thhinig  na  nigheanan  's  laidh  iad  as  an  deigh.  Anns  a'  mhaidinn
thug  an  te  'bu  shine  sporan  do  'n  t-seirJsean,  's  a'  h-uile  h-uaira  dh'
fhosgladh  i  e  bhiodh  e  Ian  òir  is  airgid.  Urs'  i  ris  an  te'  mheadhon-
aich,  '•  De  'bheir  thusa  do  t'  fhear  fein  ?"  "  Bheir  mise  dha  tuthailt,  "s
a'  h  uile  h-uair  a  sgaoileas  e  i  bidh  i  Ian  de  na  h-uile  selirsa  bidh."
Thug  i  'n  tuthailt  do  'n  chorporal.  's  thuirt  i  ris  an  te  b'  òige,  "  De
'bheir  thusa  do  t' fhear  fein?"  "Bheir  mi  dha  f  ideag, 's  a' h-uile
h-uair  a  sheinneas  e  i  bidh  e  'n  teis  meadhoin  na  reiseamaid."  Thug
i  dha  an  fhideag.     Uh'  fhag  iad  beannachd  aca  's  dh'  fholbh  iad.

"  Clia  leig  mi  leis  an  so  e,"  urs'  Iain,  '•  bidh  fliios  'am  co  iad  ma  'n
d'  the'id  mi  na  's  faide  air  m'  aghaidh."  Lean  e  iad,  's  chunnaic  e  iad
a'  dol  SÌ0S  le  gleann,  's  nur  a  bha  e  thun  a  bhi  shios  thainig  iad  'na
clioinneamh,  's  iad  a'  caoineadh.  "  De  th'  oirbh?"  urs'  esan.  " 'S
mor  a  th'  oirnn,"  urs'  iadsan  ;  "  tha  sinn  fo  gheasan  gus  am  faigh  sinn
tri  gillean  a  laidheas  leinn  tri  oidchean  gun  cheisd  a  chur  oirnn,  's  nam
fanadh  thusa  gun  ar  leantainn  bha  sinn  ma  8i;aoil."  "Am  bhdl
doigh  sam  bith  air  am  faigh  sibh  ma  sgaoil,"  urs"  esan,  "  ach  sin  ?  "
"  Tha,"  urs'  iadsan;  "  tha  craobh  aig  ceann  an  tighe,  's  na'n  d'  thigeadh
sibh,  an  ceann  la  is  bliadhna,  "s  a'  chraobh  sin  a  spionadli  bha  sinne
ma  sgaoil."

"  Thill  Iain  air  ais  far  an  robh  each ;  dh'  innis  e  dhaibh  mar  a
thachair  dha  ;  s  chuir  iad  an  comhairle  r'a  cheile  gun  tilieadh  iad  air
an  ais  do  Bhailecliath  a  rithisd,  chionn  nach  b'  fhiach  dhaibh  an
reiseamaid  a  leantainn.  Thill  iad  do  Bhailecliath  air  an  ais.  An
oidhche  sin  urs'  Iain,  "  'S  fhearra  dhomh  dol  a  dh'  amharc  nighean


URSGEUL.  I  8  5

ail  righ  nochd."  "  'S  fhearra  dhuit  fantainn  aig  an  tigh,"  arsa  each,
"  na  dol  aim."    "  Theid  mi  ann  codhin,"  urs'  esan.

Dh'  fholbli  e  's  rainig  e  tigh  an  righ.  Bliuail  e  aig  an  doriis.
Dh'  flieoraidh  h-aon  de  na  ninnathan  uaisle  de  'bha  dbith  air,  's  thuirt
e  gun  robh  toil  aige  'bhi  'bruidhinn  ri  nighean  an  righ.  Thàinig
nighean  an  righ  far  an  robh  e,  's  dh'  fheoraicli  i  de  'n  gnothuch  abh'
aige  rithe.  "  Bheir  mi  dhuit  f  ideag,"  urs'  esan,  "  's  nur  a  sheinneas
thu  i  bidh  thu  ann  am  meadhon  a  leithid  so  do  reiseamaid."  Nur  a
fhuair  ise  an  fhideag  bhreab  i  leis  an  staighir  e,  's  dhliinn  i  'n  dorus
air.  "  Demur  chaidh  dhuit  V"  urs'  iadsan.  "  Mheall  i  'n  fhideag  uam,"
urs'  esan.  Cha  do  stad  e  gus  an  do  mheall  e  coingheall  de  'n  sporan
o  'n  t-seirdsean.  "  'S  fhearra  dliorah,"  urs'  esan,  "  dol  a  dh'  fhaicinn
nighean  an  righ  'rithisd."

Dh'  fholbh  e  's  rainig  e  'n  tigh.  Chunnaic  e  nighean  an  righ  ;
mheall  i  'n  sporan  uaidhe ;  bhreab  i  leis  an  staighir  e  mar  a  rinn  i
roimhid ;  s  tliill  e  air  ais.  Cha  do  stad  e  gus  an  do  mheall  e  coin-
gheall de  "n  tutbailt  o  'n  chorporal.

Chaidh  e  'rithisd  far  an  robh  nighean  an  righ.  "  De  'bheir  thu
dhomh  air  an  t-siubhal  so  ?  "  urs'  ise.  "  Tuthailt,  's  nur  a  dh'  fhosg-
lar  i  bidh  i  Tan  de  na  h-uile  seòrsa  bidh."  "  Leig  fhaicinn  donih  i,"
urs'  ise.  "  Sgaoilidh  sin  a  mach  i,"  urs'  esan.  Sgaoil  e  much  i,  's
blia  oisean  di  nach  laidheadh  gu  ceart.  Thuirt  e  rithe  seasamh  air
an  oisean.  Sheas  i  air.  Sheas  e  ft'in  air  oisean  eile,  's  ghuidh  e  bhi
ann  an  eilean  ioraallach  na  doimhne.  'S  bha  e  fe'in,  is  nighean  an
righ,  's  an  tuthailt  ann  ann  an  coig  mionaidean.  Bha  'sin  an  aon
eilean  a  bu  bhoidhclie  a  chunnaic  duine  riamh,  's  gun  ni  ann  ach
craobhan  is  measan.  Bha  iad  an  sin  a'  folbh  feadh  an  eilean  air  an
ais  's  air  an  aghaidh,  's  thainig  an  cadal  airsan.  Thainig  iad  gu
lagan  boidheach,  's  chuir  esan  a  cheann  'na  h-uchdse,  's  rinn  e  greim
baisair  a  h-apran,  air  alt  's  nach  fhaigheadh  i  air  folbh  gun  e  mhoth-
chuinn  di.  Nur  a  chaidil  esan  dh'  fhuasgail  ise  an  t-apran  ;  dh'  fhag
i  'n  sin  e;  thug  è  leatha  an  tuthailt;  sheas  i  urra;  ghuidh  i  bhi  'n
tigh  a  h-athar ;  's  bha  i  ann.

Nur  a  dhuisg  esan  cha  robh  ni  ri  fhaotainn  aige,  's  cha  robh  ni  ri
fliaicinn  aige,  ach  craobhan  is  eunlaith.  Bha  e  'n  sin  a'  tighinn  beò
air  measan  an  eilean,  's  dh'  amais  ubhlan  air,  's  nur  a  dh'  itheadh  e
aon  seòrsa  dliiu  chuireadh  iad  ceann  feidh  air,  's  nur  a  dh'  itheadh  e
seòrsa  eile  dhiu  chuireadh  iad  deih  e.  Aon  latha  chruinnich  e  moran
de  na  h-ubhlan,  s  chuir  e  'n  darna  seorsa  ann  an  aon  cheann  do  'n
phoca,  's  an  seorsa  ^ile  anns  a'  cheann  eile.  Chunnaic  e  soitheach  a'
dolseachad;  chrath  e  rithe;  thainig  bata  gu  tir;  's  thug  iad  air
bord  e.     Thug  an  caibhtinn  sios  e  gu  biadh,  's  dh'  fhag  e  'm  poca  gu


I  86  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

h-ard.  Dh'  fhrsgaill  na  seoladairean  am  poca  a  dh'  amharc  de  'bh'
ann.  Nur  a  chunnaic  iad  gur  h-iibhlan  a  bh'  ann  tliòisich  iad  air  an
itheadh.  Dh'  ith  iad  an  sebrsa  'chuireadh  adhaircean  feidh  orra.
Chinn  adhaircean  feidh  orra,  's  thoisich  iad  air  leum  air  a  cheile  gus
an  robli  iad  a'  brath  an  soitheach  a  bhrisdeadh.  Nur  a  chuala  an  caibh-
tim  an  starum  thkinig  e  nios,  s  nur  a  chunnaic  e  iad  thuirt  e,  "  'Dhroch
dhuine  de  tha  thu  an  deigh  a  dheanadh  air  mo  dhaoine  nis?  "  "De,"
urs'  Iain,  "  a  chuir  do  dhaoine-sa  cho  miomhail  's  gun  rachadh  iad
a  dh'  fhaicinn  de  bhiodh  ann  am  poca  duine  sam  bith  ?  Debheir  thu
dhorah,"  urs'  Iain,  "  ma  dh"  fhagas  mi  iad  mur  a  bha  iad  roimliid  ?"
Ghabh  an  sgiobair  eagal,  's  thuirt  e  gun  d'  thugadh  e  dlia  an  saith-
each  agus  an  luchd  aig  a'  chiad  phort  a  ruigeadh  iad.  Dh"  fhosgail
e  'n  so  am  poca,  's  thug  e  dhaibh  an  seòrs'  eile,  s  thuit  na  h-adhair-
cean  diu.  'S  e  luchd  oir  a'  bh'  air  an  t-soitheach,  agus  's  ann  a
Bhailecliath  a  bha  i  'del.  Nur  a  rainig  iad  thuirt  an  caibhtinn  ris,  e
"bhi'gabhail  cUram  de 'n  t-soitheach 's  de  'n  luchd,  gun  robh  esan
re'idh  is  i,  "  Dean  faighidinn,"  ur-'  Iain,  "  gus  am  faic  sinn  demur  a
the'id  duinn  ann  an  ceann  beagan  Ihithean.

Dh'  fholbh  e  'n  la  'r  na  mhaireach  a  reic  nan  ubhlan  feadh  a'
bhaile, 'sgun  air  ach  aodach  srachdte.  Chaidh  e  suas  feadh  a'  bhaile,
's  thainig  e  ma  choinneamh  tigh  an  righ,  's  chunnaic  e  nighean  an
righ  's  a  ceann  a  mach  air  uinneig.  Dli'  iarr  i  punnd  de  na  h-ubhlan
a  chur  suas  a  'h-ionnsuidh.  Thuirt  esan  i  dh'  fheachainn  d^mur
a  chordadh  iad  rithe  an  toiseach.  Thilg  e  'suas  ubhal  urra
de  'n  t-seorsa  'chuireadh  ceann  feidh  urra.  Nur  a  dh'  ith  i  'n
ubhal  thhinig  ceann  feidh  is  cabair  urra.  Chuir  an  righ  fios
a  mach  nam  faighte  duine  sam  bith  a  leighsradh  a  nighean  gum
faigheadh  e  peic  oir  is  peic  airgid,  's  i  fe'in  r'a  posadh.  Bha  i  mur
sin  rabran  I'aithean,  's  gun  duine  'tighinn  a  bha  dèanadh  math  sam
bith.  Thainig  Iain  gus  an  dorusd  leis  an  aodach  shrachdie  g  iarr-
aidh  a  stigh,  's  nur  a  chunnaic  iad  a  choslas  cha  leigeadh  iad  a
Btigh  e,  ach  bha  brathair  beag  aicise  a  chunnaic  iad  'ga  chumail  a
mach  's  dh'  innis  e  d'a  athair  e,  's  thuirt  a  h-athair  ged  a  b'  e  bleidire
an  Ibin  a  bhiodh  ann  a  leigeil  a  stigh.  Chaidh  fios  as  a  dheigh  a
'thilleadh,  agus  thill  e.  Thnirt  an  righ  ris  an  k'ighseadh  e  'nighean,
's  thuirt  e  gum  feuchadh  e  ris.  Thug  iad  suas  e  do  'n  t-seombar  fa
an  robh  i.  Shuidh  e,  's  tliuge  'mach  leobhar  a  a  phbca  s  gun  ni  sam
bith  ann,  a'  leigeil  air  gun  robh  e  'ga  'leubhadh.  "  An  do  mheall
thusa,"  urs'  esan.  "fideag  o  shaighdear  bochd,  nur  a  sheinneadh  e  i
'bheireadh  e  gu  meadhon  a  reiseamaid."  "  Wheall,"  urs'  ise.  "  Mara'
bheil  sin  air  faotainn,"  urs'  esan,  "cha  'n  urrainn  mise  do  leigheas."
"  Tha,"  urs'  ise.     Thug  iad  a'  ionusuidh  an  f  hideag.     Nur  a  flmair  e


URSGEUL.  187

'n  fhìdeag  tbiig  e  dlii  piosa  de  dh'  ubhal,  s  thuit  fear  de  na  cabair  dhi
"Cha  'n  iirrainn  mi,"  urs'  esan,  "tuillidh  a  dhèanadh  an  diugb,  ach
tliignii  'm  mhireach."

Dh'  fholbb  e  '11  sin  a  mach,  's  tbacbair  a  sheana  cbompanaich  air,
's  e  cbeaird  a  bh'  aca  'bhi  buacadh  aoil,  's  a'  tarruinn  uisge  do
cblachairean.  Dh'  aitbnich  esan  iadsan,  ach  cha  d'  aithnich  iad^an
esan.  Cha  do  leig  e  rud  sam  bith  air,  ach  thug  e  dhaibh  deich  tasd-
ain,  's  thuirt  e  riu,  "  olaibh  deoch  slainte  an  fhir  a  thug  dhuibh  e."

Dbealaich  e  'n  sin  riu,  's  thill  e  gus  an  t-soitheacb.  An  la  'r  na
mhaireach  cbaidh  e  far  an  robli  nighean  an  righ.  Thug  e  mach  an
leabhar,  's  thuirt  e  rithe,  "  An  do  niheall  thusa  sporan  0  shaighdear
bochd  a  bhiodh  Ian  oir  is  airgid  h-uile  h-uair  a  dh' fhosgailt' e  ?  "
"  Mheall,'"  ars'  ise.  "  Mar  a"  bheil  sin  air  faotainn,"  urs'  esan,  "  cha  'n
urrainn  niise  do  leigheas."  "  Tha,"  urs'  ise,  " 's  thug  iad  dha 'an
sporan.  Nur  a  fhuair  e  e  thug  e  dhi  piosa  do  'n  ubhal,  's  thuit
cabar  eile  dhi.  Cha  'n  urrainn  mi  tuillidh  a  dhèanadh  an  diugh,'
urs'  esan,  "  ach  thig  mi  'n  ath  oidhche."

Chaidh  e  far  an  robh  'sheana  cbompanaich,  's  thug  e  dhaibh  deich
tasdain  eile,  's  thuirt  e  riu  deoch  slainte  an  fhir  a  thug  dhaibh  e  òl.
Thill  e  'n  sin  thun  an  t-soithich.  Thuirt  an  caibhtinn  ris  an  robh  e
'dol  a  ghabhail  curam  do  'n  t-soitheach  a  nis.  Thuirt  esan,  "  Glac
faighidinn  gu  ceann  latha  na  dlia  gus  am  faic  sinn  demur  a  the'id
duinn."  Thill  e  an  ath  oidhche  a  dh'  fhaicinn  nighean  an  righ.
Thug  e  tarruinn  air  a  leabhar  mar  a  b'  àbhaist  dha.  "An  do  mheall
thusa,"  urs'  esan,  "  tuthailt  o  shaighdear  bochd  a  bhiodh  Ian  de  na
h-uile  seorsa  bidb  a'  h-uile  h-uair  a  dh'  fhosgailt  i  ?  "  "  Mheall,"
urs' ise.  "  Mar  a' bheil  an  tuthailt  sin  air  faotainn  cha 'n  urrainn
mise  do  leigheas,"  urs'  esan.  "  Tha,"  urs'  ise.  Tliug  iad  dha  i.  Cho
luath  's  a  fhuair  esan  i  thug  e  ubhal  shlan  dhi,  's  nur  a  dh'  ith  i  1  bha
i  mar  a  bha  i  roimhid.  Fhuair  e  'n  sin  peic  oir  is  peic  airgid,  's
thuirt  iad  ris  gum  faiglieadh  e  i  fein  ri  'pòsadh.  "  Thig  mi  'm  mair-
each,"  urs'  esan.

Ghabh  e  rathad  a  sheana  chompanach  air  an  t-siubhal  so  cuid-
eachd  ;  thug  e  deich  tasdain  daibh ;  's  thuirt  e  riu  deoch  slainte  an
fhir  a  thug  dhaibh  e  61.  Urs'  iadsan,  "  Bu  mhail  leinn  fios  a  bhi
againn  co  an  caraid  caoimhneil  a  tha  'toirt  duinn  a'leithid  so  a'  h-uile
h-oicUiche  ?  "  "  Am  bheil  cuimhn'  agaibh,"  urs'  esan,  "  nur  a  bha  sinn
'na  leithid  so  do  dii'  kite,  's  a  fiheall  sin  do  na  tri  nigheanan  gun
rachamaid  ann  bliadhna  0  'n  am  sin  a  rithisd  ?  "  Dh'  aithnich  iad  an
sin  e.  "  Chaidh  an  iiine  sin  seachad  o  chionn  fada,"  urs'  iadsan.
"  Cha  deachaidh,"  urs'  esan ;  "'si  an  ath  oidhche  an  oidhche."
Thill  e  far  an  robh  an  caibhtinn,  's  thuirt  e  ris  gum  faodadh  e  fe'in  's


I  8  8  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

a  luclid  a  bhi  folbh,  nach  biodh  esan  a'  cur  dragh  air,  gun  robh  na
leoir  aige.

An  la  'r  na  mhaireach  chaidb  e  seachad  tigh  an  righ,  s  thuirt
nighean  an  righ  ris,  "  Am  bheil  thti  dol  am'  phòsadh  an  diutrli  ?  '
"  Cha  'n'  eil  na  'màireach,"  urs'  esan.  Thill  e  far  an  robh  each,  's
thòisìch  e  air  cur  an  ordugh  air  son  dol  far  an  do  gheall  iad.
Thug  e  "n  sporan  do  'n  seirdseau,  an  tuthailt  do  'n  chorporal,  's  ghleidh
e  fein  an  fhideag.  Cheannaich  e  tri  eich,  's  dh'  fholbh  iad  air
mbarcachd  ann  an  cabhaig  mhòir  do/n  aite  an  do  gheall  iad  dol.  !Nur
a  rainig  iad  an  tigh  rug  iad  air  a  chraoibh,  's  thainig  i  leo  air  a'  chiad
spionadh.  Thainig  na  tri  nigheanan  gu  geal,  gaireachdach  far  an
robh  iad,  's  bha  iad  saor  o  na  geasan.  Thug  a'  h-uile  fear  dhiu  leis
a  thò  fein,  's  thainig  iad  air  an  ais  do  Bhailecliath,  's  phbs  iad.

Got  this  tale  from  a  young  lad  of  the  name  of  James  M'Lach-
lin,  who  is  at  present  in  my  own  employment.  I  have  had  the
preceding  tale  from  him  also.  He  has  had  them  from  an  old
woman  that  lives  somewhere  up  the  way  of  Portaskaig,  who,  he
says,  can  repeat  several  more,  and  to  whom  1  intend  immediately
to  apply.

May  27,  I860. — After  speaking  to  the  old  woman  MacKerrol,
I  find  that,  from  age  and  loss  of  memory,  she  is  unable  now  to
tell  any  of  the  tales  she  was  wont  to  repeat.

Hector  MacLeas.

Another  version  of  this  has  bccm  sent  by  J[r.  Osgood  Mac
kenzie  from  Gairloch.  It  was  recited  by  Hector  Mackenzie  at
Dibaig,  who  learned  it  some  years  ago  from  Kenneth  Mac-
kenzie at  Dibaig;  and  it  was  written  by  Angus  ^IacRae  at
Dibaig.    This  Dibaig  version  tells  how —

1 .  There  was  a  soldier,  by  name  Coinneach  Buidhe,  Kenneth
the  Yellow,  in  the  army  of  old,  and  he  belonged  to  Alba.  He  de-
serted, and  his  master  sent  a  "  corpaileir"  after  him  ;  but  the
corporal  deserted  too  ;  and  so  did  a  third.  They  went  on  till
they  reached  the  "  yearly  wood,''  in  America.  After  a  time,
they  saw  on  a  certain  night,  a  light  which  led  them  to  a  large
house  ;  they  found  meat  and  drink,  and  all  that  they  could  desire.
They  saw  no  one  for  a  year  and  a  day,  except  three  maidens,  who


THE  THREE  SOLDIERS.  I  »9

never  spoke,  but  called   in  at  odd  times ;  and  as  they  did  not
speak,  the  soldiers  were  silent.

At  the  end  of  the  year  the  maidens  spoke,  and  praised  them
for  their  politeness,  explained  that  they  were  under  spells,  and
for  their  kindness,  gave  to  the  first  a  cup  that  would  be  ever  full,
and  a  lamp  of  light ;  to  the  second,  a  table-cover  on  which  meat
was  ever  ;  and  to  the  third,  a  bed  in  which  there  would  ever  be
rest  for  them  at  any  time  they  chose  ;  and  besides,  the  "  tiadh-
LAiL'EAN ''  would  make  any  one  who  had  them  get  anything  he
wished.  They  reached  a  certain  king,  whose  only  daughter  pre-
tended to  be  fond  of  Kenneth  the  Yellow,  and  wheedled  him  till
he  gave  her  the  tiadhlaicean,  when  she  ordered  him  to  be  put
in  an  island  in  the  ocean.  When  there  alone  he  grew  hungry,
and  ate  "abhlan,"  and  a  wood  like  thatch  grew  through  his
head,  and  there  remained  till  he  ate  "abhlan"  of  another  kind,
when  the  wood  vanished.  He  got  off  in  a  ship  with  "Abhlan''
of  each  sort,  and  reached  the  big  town  of  the  king  where  he  had
been  before,  where  he  set  up  a  booth.  On  a  certain  day  a  fair  lad
came  in  to  sell  abhlan,  and  through  him  the  other  kind  were  sold
to  the  king's  daughter,  and  a  wood  grew  on  her  head.  Kenneth
the  Yellow  got  back  the  tiadhlaicean,  and  found  his  two  com-
panions   AGUS    BHA    IAD    DILE    TUILLEADH   ANN    AM    MEAS    AGUS

soiRBHEACHADH  Gus  A  CHRiocH.     And  they  were  all  after  in  wor-
ship and  prosperousness  till  the  end.

This  is  manifestly  the  same  story  shortened,  and  made  rea-
sonable.    It  is  very  well  written,  and  spelt  according  to  rule.

3.  I  have  another  version  of  this  told  by  Hector  Boyd,  fisher-
man. Castle  Bay,  Barra,  who  says  he  learned  it  from  John  Mac-
Neill,  who  has  left  the  island  ;  and  from  Neill  MacKinnon,
Euagh  Lias.  In  this  the  three  soldiers  are  English,  Scotch,  and
Irish.  The  two  last  desert ;  and  the  first,  a  sergeant,  is  sent
after  them.  They  persuade  him  to  desert  also,  and  they  come
to  a  castle.  The  Irishman  acts  the  part  of  John  in  the  Islay  ver-
sion :  and  the  first  night  they  eat  and  go  to  sleep,  and  find
dresses  when  they  wake.  In  the  morning  they  get  up  and  put
on  their  dresses  ;  and  the  board  was  set  over  with  meat  and  with
drink,  and  they  took  their  tkath  madain,  breakfast.     They  went


190  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

to  take  a  walk  without.  The  Englishman  had  a  gun,  and  he
saw  three  swans  swimming  on  a  loch,  and  he  began  to  put  a
charge  in  his  gun.  The  swans  perceived  him,  and  they  cried  to
him,  and  they  were  sure  he  was  going  to  shoot  at  them.  They
came  on  shore  and  became  three  women.  "  How  are  these
dresses  pleasing  you?"  said  they.  "  The  like  will  be  yours  every
day  in  the  year,  and  your  meat  as  good  as  you  got ;  but  that  you
should  neither  think  or  order  one  of  us  to  be  with  you  in  lying
down  or  rising  up."  And  so  they  remained  for  a  year  in  the
castle.  One  night  the  Irishman  thought  of  the  swans,  and  in  the
morning  they  had  nothing  but  their  old  dresses.

They  went  to  the  loch ;  the  swans  came  on  shore,  became
women,  and  gave  a  purse  that  would  always  be  full  of  gold  and
jewels,  to  the  Englishman  ;  a  knife  to  the  Scotchman,  and  when-
ever it  was  opened  he  would  be  wherever  he  wished  ;  and  to  the
Irishman  a  horn,  and  when  he  blew  in  the  small  end  there  would
be  a  thousand  soldiers  before  him  ;  and  when  he  blew  in  the  big
end  none  of  them  would  be  seen.

They  go  to  a  big  town,  and  build  a  house  on  a  green  hill  with
money  from  the  purse  ;  and  when  the  house  was  built,  one  about
went  to  the  town  to  buy  meat.  The  Irishman  fell  in  love
with  the  king's  daughter,  and  was  cheated  out  of  his  magic  horn ;
borrowed  the  purse,  and  lost  that ;  and  then,  by  the  help  of  the
knife,  transported  himself  and  the  king's  daughter  to  an  island
which  could  hardly  be  seen  in  the  far  ocean.  And  there  they
were,  and  there  they  stayed  for  seventeen  days,  eating  fruits.
One  day  he  slept  with  his  head  on  her  knee,  and  she  looked  at  her
hands  and  saw  how  long  the  nails  had  grown  ;  so  she  put  her  hand
in  his  pocket  and  took  out  the  knife  to  pare  them.  "  Oh,"  said  she,
"  that  I  were  where  the  nails  grew  on  me,"  and  she  was  in  her
father's  house.  Then  he  found  red  apples  and  grey  apples  ;  and
no  sooner  had  he  eaten  some  of  the  red  apples  than  his  head  was
down,  and  his  heels  were  up,  from  the  weight  of  the  deer's  horns
that  grew  on  his  head.  Then  he  bethought  him  that  one  of  the
grey  apples  might  heal  him  ;  and  he  stretched  himself  out  with
his  head  downwards,  and  kicked  down  one  of  the  apples  with  his
feet,  and  ate  it,  and  the  horns  fell  off  him.  Then  he  made  bas-
kets, and  filled  them  with  the  apples  ;  climbed  a  tree,  saw  a
ship,  tore  his  shirt  and  waved  it  on  a  stick,  and  was  seen.


THE  THREE  SOLDIERS.  I9I

Tlie  skipper  was  under  an  oath  that  he  would  never  leave  a
man  in  extremity.  They  came  on  shore  for  him,  and  were  ter-
rified at  his  beard,  thinking  that  he  was  the  evil  spirit.  When  he
got  on  board,  a  razor  was  got,  and  (as  the  narrator  said)  shedbh-
AiG  E  he  was  shaved.  The  ship  sailed  straight  to  the  king's
house.  The  lady  looked  out  of  a  window.  He  sold  her  a  red
apple  for  a  guinea.  She  ate  it,  the  horns  grew,  and  there  were
not  alive  those  who  could  take  her  from  that.  They  thought  of
saws,  and  they  sent  for  doctors  ;  and  he  came,  and  then  there  is
a  scene  in  which  he  pretends  to  read  a  divining  book,  and  tries
saws  on  the  horns,  and  frightens  the  lady  and  recovers  the  lost
gifts.  Then  he  went  to  his  friends,  and  they  went  to  the  swans  ;
and  the  spells  went  oifthera,  and  they  married  them.

The  story  is  very  well  told,  especially  the  last  scene  ;  but  it
is  too  like  the  Islay  version  to  make  it  worth  translating  at  full
length.

4.  I  have  another  story,  from  a  Eoss-shire  man,  now  in  Glas-
gow, which  begins  in  the  same  manner,  but  the  incidents  are
very  different.

This  story  has  a  counterpart  in  German,  Der  Krautesel ;  and
it  has  a  very  long  pedigree  in  Grimm's  third  volume.  It  seems
to  be  very  widely  spread,  and  very  old,  and  to  belong  to  many
languages;  many  versions  are  given.  In  one  a  soldier,  one  of
three,  eats  apples  in  a  forest,  and  his  nose  grows  right  through
the  forest,  and  sixty  miles  beyond  it;  and  the  king's  daughter's
nose  is  made  to  grow,  exactly  as  horns  are  made  to  grow  on  the
princess  in  the  Highlands  ;  and  she  is  forced  to  give  up  the
things  which  she  had  got  from  the  soldiers  ;  and  which  arc  a
purse,  a  mantle,  and  a  horn  of  magic  power.

In  another  version,  it  is  a  young  huntsman  who  changes  a
witch  and  her  daughter  into  donkeys,  by  giving  them  magic  cab-
bages, which  had  previously  transformed  him.

The  swans  in  the  third  version  seem  to  belong  to  Sanscrit,  as
well  as  to  Norse  and  other  languages.  In  "  Comparative  Mytho-
looy>''  ^y  ^^"•-'^  Muller,  Oxford  Essays,  1856,  a  story  is  given
from  the  Bràhmana  of  the  Yagurveda,  in  which  this  passage
occurs — "  Then  he  bewailed  his  vanished  love  in  bitter  grief ;  and
went  near  Kurukshetra.     There  is  a  lake  there  called  Anyatah-


192  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

plaksha,  full  of  lotus  flowers  ;  and  while  the  king  walked  along
its  border,  the  fairies  were  playing  there  in  the  water  in  the
shape  of  Lii  ds  ;  and  Urvasi  discovered  him,  and  said,  '  That  is
the  man  with  whom  I  dwelt  so  long.'  Then  her  friends  said,  '  Let
us  appear  to  him,'  "  etc.,  etc.

The  rest  of  the  Eastern  story  has  many  Western  counterparts,
such  as  "  Peter  Wilkins  and  the  Flying  Ladies,"  and  a  story  which
I  have  from  Islay.  The  incident  of  birds  which  turn  out  to  be
enchanted  women,  occurs  in  a  great  many  other  Gaelic  stories  ;
and  is  in  Mr.  Peter  Buchan's  "  Green  Sleeves  ''  (see  introduc-
tion) ;  and,  as  I  am  told,  in  the  Edda.

Bailecliath  is  Dublin,  and  takes  its  Gaelic  name  from  a
legend.  The  name  should  be  Baile  ath  Cliath,  the  town  of
Wattle  Ford  ;  either  from  wattled  boats,  or  a  bridge  of  hurdles  ;
and  as  it  appears,  there  was  a  weaver,  or  tailor,  residing  at  Ath
Cliath,  Wattle  Ford,  who  got  his  living  by  making  creels  or
hurdles,  cliathan,  for  crossing  the  river.  There  was  a  fluent,
gabby  old  man,  who  was  a  friend  of  his  ;  and  from  his  having
such  a  tongue,  the  maker  of  the  creels  advised  him  to  become  a
beggar,  as  he  was  sure  to  succeed.  He  began,  and  got  plenty  of
money.  He  wore  a  cap  or  currachd,  and  all  the  coin  he  got  he
buried  under  a  stone,  at  the  end  of  the  wattle  bridge.  The  bridge
maker  died ;  the  beggar  got  ill  and  kept  his  cap  on,  and  never
took  it  off;  and  when  he  was  dying  he  asked  his  wife  to  bury
him  in  it  ;  and  he  was  buried  with  his  cap  on.  The  widow's  son
found  out  about  the  buried  treasure,  and  dug  it  up ;  but  the  beg-
gar's ghost  so  tormented  the  boy,  that  he  had  to  go  to  the  minis-
ter, who  advised  them  to  build  a  bridge  with  the  money  ;  so  they
built  Drochaid  ath  Cliath,  and  there  it  is  to  this  very  day.

I  do  not  know  which  of  the  Dublin  bridges  is  meant,  but  the
story  was  got  from  a  woman  at  Kilmeny  in  Islay,  and  this  is  a
mere  outline  of  it.  It  is  known  as  the  story  of  the  red-haired
beggar,  Am  Bochd  Euagh.

Bailecliath  is  a  great  place  in  Gaelic  songs.

The  story  of  the  Three  Soldiers  is  one  of  which  I  remember
to  have  heard  a  part  in  my  childhood.  I  perfectly  remember  con-
triving with  a  companion  how  we  would  have  given  the  cruel
princess  bits  of  diflerent  kinds  of  apples,  mixed  together,  so  as  to
make  the  horns  grow,  and  fall  off  time  about ;  but  I  cannot  re


THE  THREE  SOLDIERS.  1 93

member  who  told  me  tlie  story.  The  version  I  have  given
is  the  most  complete,  but  the  language  of  the  Barra  version  is
better.

There  are  one  or  two  inconsistencies.  They  travel  on  the
towel  which  had  the  commissariat,  and  do  not  use  the  locomotive
whistle  at  all.  But  there  are  touches  of  nature.  The  mason's
labourers  thought  the  time  had  passed,  but  the  adventurer  did  not
find  time  so  long ;  and  he  alone  remembered  the  day.


XL

THE  STOEY  OF  THE  WHITE  PET.

From  Mrs.  MacTavish,  widow  of  tLe  late  minister  of  Kildalton,
Islay.

rpHERE  was  a  farmer  before  now  who  had  a  White
-^  Pet  (sheep),  and  when  Christmas  was  drawing
near,  he  thought  that  he  would  kill  the  White  Pet.  The
White  Pet  heard  that,  and  he  thought  he  would  run
away  ;  and  that  is  what  he  did.

He  had  not  gone  far  when  a  bull  met  him.  Said
the  bull  to  him,  "  All  hail !  WTiite  Pet,  where  art
thou  going  ?"  "  I,"  said  the  White  Pet,  "  am  going
to  seek  my  fortune  ;  they  were  going  to  kill  me  for
Christmas,  and  I  thought  I  had  better  run  away."
"It  is  better  for  me,"  said  the  bull,  "to  go  with
thee,  for  they  were  going  to  do  the  very  same  with  me."

"  I  am  wiUing,"  said  the  White  Pet ;  "  the  larger
the  party  the  better  the  fun."

They  went  forward  tUl  they  fell  in  with  a  dog.

"  All  hail  !  White  Pet,"  said  the  dog.  "  All  hail !
thou  dog."     "  Where  art  thou  going  f  said  the  dog.

"  I  am  running  away,  for  I  heard  that  they  were
threatening  to  kill  me  for  Christmas."

"  They  were  going  to  do  the  very  same  to  me,"
said  the  dog,  "  and  I  will  go  with  you."  "  Come,
then,"  said  the  White  Pet.

They  went  then,  till  a  cat  joined  them.  "  All
hail  !  \yhite  Pet,"  said  the  cat.      "  All  hail  !  oh  cat."


THE  STORY  OF  THE  WHITE  PET.  195

"  "Where  art  tliou  going  ?"  said  the  cat.  "  I  am
going  to  seek  my  fortune,"  said  the  White  Pet,  "  be-
cause they  were  going  to  kill  me  at  Christmas."

"  They  were  tallying  about  kilhng  me  too,"  said
the  cat,  "  and  I  had  better  go  with  you."

"  Come  on  then,"  said  the  Wliite  Pet.

Then  they  went  forward  till  a  cock  met  them.
"  All  hail  !  Wliite  Pet,"  said  the  cock."  "All  hail  to
thyself !  oh  cock,"  said  the  White  Pet.  "  Where,"
said  the  cock,  "  art  thou  going  V  "  I,"  said  the
White  Pet,  "  am  going  (away),  for  they  were  threaten-
ing my  death  at  Christmas."

"They  were  going  to  kill  me  at  the  very  same
time,"  said  the  cock,  "  and  I  will  go  with  you."

"  Come,  then,"  said  the  White  Pet.

They  went  forward  till  they  fell  in  with  a  goose.
"  All  hail  !  White  Pet,"  said  the  goose.  "  All  hail  to
thyself !  oh  goose,"  said  the  White  Pet.  "  Wliere  art
thou  going  ?"  said  the  goose.

"  I,"  said  the  White  Pet,  "  am  running  away  be-
cause they  were  going  to  kill  me  at  Christmas."

"  They  were  going  to  do  that  to  me  too,"  said  the
goose,  "  and  I  will  go  with  you."

The  party  went  forward  till  the  night  was  draw-
ing on  them,  and  they  saw  a  little  light  far  away;  and
though  far  off,  they  were  not  long  getting  there.  When
^hey  reached  the  house,  they  said  to  each  other  that
they  would  look  in  at  the  window  to  see  who  was
in  the  house,  and  they  saw  thieves  counting  money  ;
and  the  \^''l^ite  Pet  said,  "  Let  every  one  of  us  call  his
own  call  I  will  call  my  own  call ;  and  let  the  bull
call  his  own  call  ;  let  the  dog  call  his  own  call  ;  and
the  cat  her  own  call  ;  and  the  cock  his  own  call ;
and  the  goose  his  own  call."  With  that  they  gave
out  one  shout — Gaire  !


196  WEST  IIIGHLAXD  TALES.

AVhen  the  tliieves  heard  the  shouting  that  was  with-
out, they  thought  the  mischief  was  there  ;  aud  they
fled  out,  and  they  went  to  a  wood  that  was  near  them.
When  the  "White  Pet  and  his  company  saw  that  the
house  was  empty,  they  went  in  and  they  got  the  money
that  the  thieves  had  been  counting,  and  they  divided
it  amongst  themselves  ;  and  then  they  thought  that
they  would  settle  to  rest.  Said  the  "White  Pet,
"  "\Vhere  wilt  tliou  sleep  to-night,  oh  buU  ?"  "  I  will
sleep,"  said  the  bull,  "  behind  the  door  where  I  used  "
(to  be).  "  "^^^lere  Avilt  thou  sleep  thyself,  AVhite
Pet  ?"  "  I  will  sleep,"  said  the  "White  Pet,  "  in  the
middle  of  the  floor  where  I  used  "  (to  be).  "  "Where
wilt  thou  sleep,  oh  dog  Ì"  said  the  "\ATiite  Pet.  "  I
mil  sleep  beside  the  fire  where  I  used  "  (to  be),  said
the  dog.  "  "N^liere  wilt  thou  sleep,  oh  cat?"  "I
will  sleep,"  said  the  cat,  "  in  the  candle  press,  where  I
like  to  be."  "  "Where  wilt  thou  sleep,  oh  cock  1"  said
the"Wlnte  Pet.  "  I,"  said  the  cock,  'Svill  sleep  on  the
rafters  where  I  used  "  (to  be).  "  Where  wilt  thou
sleep,  oh  goose  V  "1  will  sleep,"  said  the  goose,  "  on
the  midden,  where  I  was  accustomed  to  be."

They  were  not  long  settled  to  rest,  when  one  of
the  thieves  returned  to  look  in  to  see  if  he  could  per-
ceive if  any  one  at  aU  was  in  the  house.  All  things
were  still,  and  he  went  on  forward  to  the  candle  press
for  a  candle,  that  he  might  kindle  to  make  him  a
light ;  but  when  he  put  his  hand  in  the  box  the  cat
thrust  her  claws  into  his  hand,  but  he  took  a  candle
with  bim,  and  he  tried  to  liglit  it.  Then  the  dog  got
up,  and  he  stuck  his  tail  into  a  pot  of  water  that  was
beside  the  fire ;  he  shook  his  tail  and  put  out  the
candle.  Then  the  tliief  thought  that  the  mischief  was
in  the  house,  and  he  fled  ;  but  when  he  was  passing
the  "White  Pet,  he  gave  him  a  blow  ;  before  he  got


THE  STORY  OF  THE  WHITE  PET.  1 97

past  the  bull,  lie  gave  him  a  kick ;  and  the  cock  be-
gan to  crow  ;  and  when  he  went  out,  the  goose  began
to  belabour  him  with  his  wings  about  the  shanks.

He  went  to  the  wood  where  his  comrades  were,  as
fast  as  was  in  his  legs.  They  asked  him  how  it  had
gone  with  him,  "  It  went,"  said  he,  "  but  middling  ;
when  I  went  to  the  candle  press,  there  was  a  man  in
it  who  thrust  ten  knives  into  my  hand  ;  and  when  I
went  to  the  fireside  to  light  the  candle,  there  was  a
big  black  man  lying  there,  who  was  sprinkling  water
on  it  to  put  it  out ;  and  when  I  tried  to  go  out,  there
was  a  big  man  in  the  middle  of  the  floor,  who  gave  me
a  shove ;  and  another  man  behind  the  door  who  pushed
me  out ;  and  there  was  a  little  brat  on  the  loft  calling

out    CUIR-A-NEES-AN-SHAW-AY-S-FONI-MI-HAYN-DA Send

him  up  here  and  I'll  do  for  him ;  and  there  was  a
Gree-as-ich-e,  shoemaker,  out  on  the  midden,  be-
labouring me  about  the  shanks  vdth.  his  apron."

When  the  thieves  heard  that,  they  did  not  return
to  seek  their  lot  of  money  ;  and  the  Wliite  Pet  and
his  comrades  got  it  to  themselves  ;  and  it  kept  them
peaceably  as  long  as  they  lived.


SGEULACHD  A  PtlEATA  BHAIN.

Bha  Tuatliaiwch  ann  roimhe  so  aig  an  robh  Peafa  ban ;  agus  'n
uair  a  bha  an  Nollaig  a'  teannadli  air  sniuaintich  e  gu  'marbhabh  e
'm  Peata  ban.  Chuala  am  Peata  ban  sin  agus  sniuaintich  e  gun
teichadh  e,  agus  'se  sin  a  rinn  e.  Cha  deachaidh  e  fada  'n  uair  a  thach-
air  Tarbli  air.  Thubhairt  "n  tarbh  ris,  "  Failte  dhuitse  a'  pheata  bbàin  ;
c  ite  am  biieil  thusa  a'  dol  ?  "  "  Tha  mi,"  ais'  am  peata  ban,"  a't'albh
a  dh'  iarridh  an  fhortain,  bha  iad  a'  dol  a  m'  mharbbadh  a  dh'  ionnsuidh
na  Nollaig  agus  smuaintich  mi  gum  b'  fhearr  liomh  teicheadh."  "  S'
fearr  dommhsa  ars'  'n  Tarbh  falbh  leat :  oir  bha  iad  a'  dol  a  dhianadh  a
leithid  eile  ormsa."  "  Tha  mi  toileach,"  ars'  'm  Peata  bhn;  mar  is  mo
a'  chuideachd  'sann  is  fhearr  'n  Fan-aidhir."  Ghabh  iad  air  'n  aghaidh
gus  an  do  thachuir  Cii  orra.     "  Failte  dhuit  a  Pl-.eata  bhain,"  ars'  'n


198  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.

Cu,  "Failte  dhuit  fhc'  'choin."  "  Caite  'm  bheil  thu  a'  dol?"
ars'  m  Cu.  "  Tha  mi  aig  teicheadh  bho  'n  a  chuala  mi  gun
robh  iad  a'  brath  mo  mharbhabh  air  son  na  Nollaig."  Bha  iad  a'
dol  a  dhianadh  a  leithid  cheiidna  ormsa,"  ars'  an  Cu,  "  agus  falbhaidh
mi  leibh."  "  Thig,"  mata  ars'  am  peata  ban  ?  Dh'  fhalbh  iad  an  sin  gus
an  do  chomhlaich  Cat  iad  ?  "  Failte  dhuit  a  pheata  bhain  ars'  'n  cat.
Failte  dhuit  fhe"  a  Chait."  "  Caite  am  bheil  thu  a'  dol?"  ars'  an  Cat.
'•  Tha  mi  a'  dol  a  dh'  iarridh  an  fliortain,"  ars'  am  Peata  Ban,  "a
chionn  gu'ii  robh  iad  a'  dol  am'  mharbhadh  air  'n  Nollaig."  "  Bha
iad  aig  iomradh  air  mise  mharbhadh  cuideachd,"  ars  n  Cat,  "  agus
's  fearr  dhommh  falbh  leibh,  Thugainn  mata  ?  "  ars'  'm  peata  ban.
Ghabh  iad  an  sin  air  an  aghaidh  gus  an  do  choinnich  Coileach  iad.
"  Failte  dhuit  a  pheata  bhàin,"  ars'  an  Coileach.  "  Failte  dhuit  fhe',"
ars'  am  Peata  Bhn.  "  Caite,"  ars'  an  Coileach,  "  am  bheil  thu  a
dol?"  "Tha  mi,"  ars'  am  peata  ban,  "a' falbh'  0  'n  a  bba  iad  a
mòidheadh  mo  mharbabh  aig  an  Xollaig."  "  Bha  iad  a'  dol  am'
mharbhabh-sa  aig  an  am  cheu'lna,"  ars'  an  Coileach,  "  agus  theid
mi  leibh."  "  Thig  mata,"  ars'  am  Peata  Ban.  Ghabh  iad  air  an
aghaidh  gus  an  do  thachair  giadh  orra.  "  Failte  dhuit  a  pheata
bhain,"  ars'  an  gèadh.  "  Failte  dhuit  fhe'  agheoidh,"  ars'  am  Peata
Ban.  "Caite  am  bheil  thu  a  dol?"  ars'  an  gèadh.  "Tha  mise,"
ars"  am  peata  ban,  "  a'  teiehadh,  a  chionn  gu  'n  robh  iad  a  dol  am'
mharbhadh  aig  an  Nollaig."  "  Bha  iad  a  dol  a'  dhèanadh  sin  ormsa
cuideachd,"  ars'  an  Gèadh,  "  agus  falbhaidh  mi  leibh."  Ghabh  a'
chuideachd  air  an  aghaidh  gus  an  robh  an  oidhche  'teannadh  orra,
agus  'chunnaic  iad  solus  beag  fada  bhuatha  s  ge  b'  fhada  bhuatha  cha
bh'  fhada  'ga  ruigheachd.  An  uair  a  rainig  iad  an  tigh,  thubhairt
iad  ri  'cheile  gmi  ambairceadh  iad  a  stigh  air  an  uinneag  a  dh'
fhaicinn  co  a  bha  anns  an  tigh;  agus  chunnaic  iad  meairlich  a' cunn-
tas  airgid ;  agus  thubhairt  am  Peata  Ban.  "Glaoidhidh  na  uile
aon  aguiiin  a  ghlaodh  fein;  glaiodhidh  mise  mo  ghlaoidh  fein  ;  agus
glaoidhidh  an  Tarbb  a  ghlaodh  lein;  glaoidhidh  an  Cii  a  ghlaodh
fein  ;  agus  an  Cat  a  glaodh  fein ;  agus  an  Coileach  a  ghlaodh  fein  ;
agus  an  gùadh  a  ghlaodh  fein."  Leis  sin  thug  iad  aon  ghkir  asda.
An  uair  a  chuala  na  meairlich  a'  ghair  a  bha  muidh  ."ihaoil  iad  gun
robh  an  donas  ann,  agus  theich  iad  amach,  agus  dh'  falbh  iad  do
choille  a  bha  dliith  daibh.  An  uair  a  chunnaic  am  Peata  Ban  agus
a  chuideachd  gun  robh  n  tigh  falamli  'chaidh  iad  a  stigh,  agus  fhuair
iad  an  t-airgid  a  bha  aig  na  meairlich  'ga  chuimtas,  agus  roinn  iad
eatorrafein  e.  An  sin  smuaintich  iad  gun  gabhadh  iad  mu  thamh.
Thubhairt  am  Peata  Ban,  "Caite an  caidil  thus'  an  nochd  a  Thairbh."
"  Caldlidh  mise,"  ars'  an  tarbh,  "  ciil  an  doruis  far  an  àbhaist  dommh."


SGEULACHD  A  PHEATA  BHAIN.  I99

"  Caite  an  caidil  thu  fein  a  pheata  bhkin  ?  "  "  Caidlidh  mise,"  ars'
am  Peata  Ban  am  meadhan  an  iilair  far  an  kbhaist  domh."  "  Caite
an  caidil  thus'  a  choin?"  ars'  am  Peata  Ban.  "  Caidlidh  mise  taobh
an  teine  far  an  abhaist,  dommh,"  ars'  an  Cii,  "  Caite  an  caidil  thus'
a  chait  ?"  "  Caidlidh  mis',"  ars'  an  Cat,  "  ann  am  preass  nan  Coinn-
lean  far  an  toil  leam  a  bhith."  "  Caite  an  caidil  thus'  a  choilich?"
ars'  am  Peata  Ban.  "  Coidlidh  mise,"  ars'  an  Coileach, "  air  an  spàrr
far  an  abhaist  domh."  "  Caite  an  Caidil  thus  a  gheoidh  ?"  "  Caidlidh
mise,"  ars'  an  gèadh  air  an  dlinan  far  an  robh  mi  cleachte  ri  bhith."

Cha  robh  iad  fada  air  gabhail  mu  thamh  an  uair  a  thil!  fear  do  na
meairlich  a  dh'  amharc  a  stigh  feuch  am  mòicheadh  e  an  robh  aon  sa'
bith  'san  tigh.  Bha  na  uile  samhach  agus  dhealluith  e  air  aghaidhgu
preass  nan  coinnlean  airson  coinneal  a  lasadh  e  dheanadh  soluis  da,
ach  an  uair  a  chuir  e  làmh  'sa  bhocsa  shabh  'n  cat  mean  na  laimh,
ach  thug  e  leis  a'  choinneal  agus  dh'  fheuch  e  ri  'lasadh.  An  sin  dh'
eirich  an  cii  agus  chuir  e  earball  ann  am  poit  uisge  bha  aig  taobh  an
teine  ;  chrath  e  earball  agus  chuir  e  as  a  choinneal.  Shaoil  am  Meair-
leach  an  sin  gu  robh  an  donus  'san  tigh  agus  theich  e  ;  ach  an  uair
a  bha  e  dol  seachad  air  a'  pheata  bhan  thug  e  buille  dha ;  mun  d'  fhuar
e  seachad  air  an  tarbh  thug  e  breab  dlia ;  agus  thòisich  an  coileach
air  glaoidhich  ;  agus  an  uair  a  chaidh  e  mach  thòisich  an  geadh  air  a
ghreadadh  le  'sgiathan  mu  na  luirgneau.  Cliaidh  e  don  Choillidh  far
an  robh  a  chompanich  co  luath  'sa  bha  'na  chasan  dh'  fhebraich  iad
dheth  cia  mar  chaidh  dha.  "  Cha  deachaidh,"  ars'  esan,  "  ach  meadh-
onach  an  uair  a  chaidh  mi  gn  preass  nan  coinnlean  bha  fear  ann  a
shath  deich  sgeanan  ann  a'  m'  laimh,  agus  an  uair  a  chaidh  mi  gu
taobh  an  teine  a  lasadh  na  coinneal  bha  fear  mor,  dubh  'na  luidhe  ann
a  bha  spreadadh  uisge  urra  'ga  cuir  as,  agus  an  uair  a  thug  mi  lamli
air  do'amach  bha  fear  mor  am  meadhan  an  urlair  a  thug  utag  domh,
agus  fear  eil'  aig  ciil  an  doruis  a  phut  amach  mi,  agus  bha  ablach
beag  air  an  fharadh  aig  glaoidhich  amach,  "  cuir  an  nios  an  so  e  's
foghnaidhmifhein  dha  agus  bha  Griasaich  amach  air  an  diinan  'gam
ghreadadh  mu  na  casan  le  apran.  A  nuair  a  chual  na  meairlich  sin
cha  do  phill  iad  a  dh'  iarridh  an  cuid  airgid,  agus  t-fhuair  am  peata
ban  agus  a  chompanaich  dhaibh  fein  e,  agus  chum  e  socair  iad  am
feadh  'sa  bha  iad  beo.

Mrs.  MacTavish  got  this  story  from  a  young  girl  in  her
service,  November  1859,  who  learned  it  in  Oa,  a  district  of
Islay,  last  year,  when  she  was  employed  in  herding  cattle.

It  is  a  version  of  the  same  tale  as  Grimm's  "  Bremer  Stadt
Musikanten,"  which  appears  to  have  been  long  known  in  Ger.
many  in  various  shapes.


2O0  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

The  crowing  of  the  cock  is  imitated  in  Gaelic  and  in  Ger-
man. The  Gaelic  is  closer.  "  Bringt  mir  den  Schelm  her"  is
not  so  close  to  "kikeriki"'  as  the  Gaelic  words — which  I  have
tried  to  spell  phonetically — are  to  the  note  of  a  cock.  There  is
a  bull  in  the  Gaelic  tale,  instead  of  an  ass ;  and  a  sheep  and  a
goose,  in  addition  to  the  dog,  cat,  and  cock,  which  are  common
to  both.  There  are  six  creatures  in  the  one  tale,  commonly
found  about  the  Highland  cottage,  which  is  well  described  ;  -four
in  the  other,  common  about  Gci-man  cottages.  jNfy  own  opinion
is,  that  the  tale  is  common  to  both  languages  and  old,  but  it
might  have  been  borrowed  from  a  book  so  well  known  in  Eng-
land as  Grimm's  Stories  are.  It  is  worth  remark,  that  the  dog
and  the  cat  were  to  die  at  Christmas,  as  well  as  the  sheep  and
bull,  who  might  reasonably  fear  to  be  eaten  anywhere,  and  who
hare  been  sacrificed  everywhere  ;  the  goose,  who  is  always  a
Christmas  dish  in  the  Highlands  ;  and  the  cock,  who  should  die
last  of  his  family,  because  the  toughest.  The  dog  was  once
sacrificed  to  Hecate  on  the  30th  of  every  month  ;  and  there  was
a  dog  divinity  in  Egypt.  Cats  drew  the  car  of  Freya,  a  Norse
divinity  ;  they  were  the  companions  of  Scotch  witches,  and  did
wondrous  feats  in  the  Highlands.  See  "  Grant  Stewart's  High-
land Superstitions.  To  roast  a  cat  alive  on  a  spit  was  a  method
of  raising  the  fiend  and  gaining  treasure,  tried,  as  it  is  asserted,
not  very  long  ago.  I  myself  remember  to  have  heard,  with  horror,
of  a  cruel  boy,  who  roasted  his  mother's  cat  in  an  iron  pot  on  a
Sunday,  while  the  rest  were  at  church,  though  it  was  not  said  why
he  did  it.  A  cock  has  been  a  sacrifice  and  sacred  amongst  many
nations  ;  for  instance,  a  cock  and  a  ram's  head  were  emblems  of
x-Esculapius.  The  crowing  of  a  cock  is  a  terror  to  all  super-
natural, unholy  beings,  according  to  popular  mythology  every-
where. "V\Tien  the  mother,  in  these  stories,  sends  her  children
into  the  world  to  seek  their  fortune,  she  bakes  a  cake,  and  kills  a
cock.  A  fowl,  as  I  am  informed  by  a  minister  in  one  of  the
Orkneys,  is  still,  or  was  lately,  buried  alive  by  nurses  as  a  cure
for  certain  childish  ailments.  In  short,  the  dog,  the  cat,  and  the
cock  may  possibly  have  had  good  reason  to  fear  death  at  a  reli-
gious festival,  if  this  part  of  their  history  came  from  the  East
with  the  Celts.  The  goose  also  has  been  sacred  time  out  of
mind.  Bernacle  geese  are  supposed  to  be  hatched  from  a  sea-
shell.     The  goose  was  the  great  cackler  who  laid  the  egg  of  the


THE  STORY  OF  THE  WHITE  PET.  20I

world,  according  to  Egyptian  Inscriptions  on  coffins.  He  was
the  emblem  of  Seb  ;  be  is  sacred  at  the  present  day  in  Ceylon.
He  was  sacred  in  Greece  and  at  Eome ;  and  the  Britons  would
not  eat  bis  flesb  in  tbe  days  of  Csesar.  Perbaps  tbe  custom  of
eating  a  goose  at  Cbristmas,  wbich,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge,
is  peculiar  to  tbe  Scotch  Highlands,  may  be  a  custom  begun  by
the  first  British  Christians  to  mark  their  conversion,  and  carried
on.  ever  since.  Much  will  be  found  on  this  subject  in  "  Eawlin-
son's  Herodotus,"  p.  122,  etc.  ;  in  "  Jlills  and  Wilson's  History
of  British  India  ;"  and  in  books  on  Ceylon.  At  all  events,  this
Gaelic  story  is  well  known  in  Islay,  for  MacLean  writes  that  he
has  often  heard  it,  and  all  the  creatures  mentioned  in  it  have  had
to  do  with  mythology  at  some  period  somewhere.

I  suspect  that  it  is  one  of  the  class  given  in  "  Contes  et  Apo-
logues Indiens ''  (Paris,  I860),  a  class  which  includes ^such  well
known  stories  as  "  The  Goose  with  the  golden  -Eggs,"  as  a  man
who  cut  down  a  tree  to  get  at  the  fruit  (No.  45) ;  "  The  Belli/
and  the  3feinhers,'"  as  a  quarrel  between  the  head  and  tail  of  a
serpent  (No.  40),  a  story  which  somewhat  resembles  that  which
is  quoted  in  the  introduction,  as  "  llacLeod's  Fool,''  ','  Le  Sage
et  le  Fou''  (No.  18) ;  "The  two  Geese  that  carried  a  Tortoise"
(No.  14)  ;  "  Le  Jeune  Bramane  qui  c'  est  sali  le  Doight  "  (No.  64),
which  is  a  schoolboy  story  in  Scotland  in  another  shape  ;  "  The
Ass  in  the  Lion's  Skin"  (No.  59) ;  "  Les  Choses  impossibles  et  les
Reliques  du  Bouddha"  (No.  110),  which  has  a  parallel  in  Gaelic,
in  broad  Scotch,  and  in  Norse.  The  Gaelic  poet  describes  im-
possibilities, such  as  a  shell-fish  bringing  heather  from  the  hill,
and  the  climax  is  a  certain  great  laird  dressed  in  homespun.
The  Scotch  rhyme  came  to  me  from  a  little  boy  of  five  years  old,
and  is  called  "The  Mantle  Joe."  It  begins  "  'Twas  on  a  Mon-
day Mornin'  when  the  Cat  crew  Day ;''  There  are  "  Twenty-four
Weavers  riding  on  a  Paddock  ;"  "A  Hare  and  a  Haddie  racin'
owre  the  Lea,"  and  such  like;  and  it  ends,  "Frae  Beginning  to
the  End  it's  a'  big  Lees."  The  Norse  song  was  written  out  for
me  by  an  officer  on  board  a  steamer,  and  includes  "  Two  Squirrels
taming  a  Bear,"  and  other  such  events ;  and  the  Sanscrit,
which  Chinese  and  French  savants  have  translated,  names
similar  absurd  events  which  might  sooner  happen  than  the  dis-
covery of  the  reliques  of  Buddha.  In  short,  Euro[iean  stories  are  to
be  traced  in  the  east,  and  this  White  Pet  may  be  one  of  the  kind.


XII.
THE  DAUGHTEE  OF  THE  SKIES.

From  James  MacLauclilaD,  servant,  Islay.

r  I  THERE  was  there  before  now  a  farmer,  and  lie  had
-*-  a  leash  of  daughters,  and  much  cattle  and  sheep.
He  went  on  a  day  to  see  them,  and  none  of  them  were
to  be  found  ;  and  he  took  the  length  of  the  day  to
search  for  them.  He  saw,  in  the  lateness,  coming
home,  a  little  doggy  running  about  a  park.

The  doggy  came  where  he  was — "  A^Haat  wilt  thou
give  me,"  said  he,  "  if  I  get  thy  lot  of  cattle  and  sheep
for  thee  f  "  I  don't  know  myself,  thou  ugly  thing  ;
what  wilt  thou  be  asking,  and  I  will  give  it  to  thee  of
anything  I  have  ?"  "  Wilt  thou  give  me,"  said  the
doggy,  "  thy  big  daughter  to  marry  ?"  "  I  will  give
her  to  thee,"  said  he,  "if  she  will  take  thee  herself."

They  went  home,  himself  and  the  doggy.  Her
father  said  to  the  eldest  daughter,  "  Would  she  take
him?"  and  slie  said  she  would  not.  He  said  to  the
second  one,  "  Would  she  marry  him  ?"  and  she  said,
"  she  would  not  marry  him,  though  the  cattle  should  not
be  got  for  ever."  He  said  to  the  youngest  one,  "  Would
she  marry  him  1"  and  she  said,  "  that  she  would  marry
him."  They  married,  and  her  sisters  were  mocking
her  because  she  had  married  him.

He   took  her  with  liim  home  to  his  own  place.


THE  DAUGHTER  OF  THE  SKIES.  2O3

When  he  came  to  his  own  dwelling-place,  he  grew  into
a  splendid  man.  Tliey  were  together  a  great  time,  and
she  said  she  had  better  go  see  her  father.  He  said  to
her  to  take  care  that  she  should  not  stay  till  she  should
have  children,  for  then  she  expected  one.  She  said
she  would  not  stay.  He  gave  her  a  steed,  and  he  told
her  as  soon  as  she  reached  the  house,  to  take  the  bridle
from  her  head  and  let  her  away ;  and  when  she  wished
to  come  home,  that  she  had  but  to  shake  the  bridle,
and  that  the  steed  would  come,  and  that  she  would  put
her  head  into  it.

She  did  as  he  asked  her ;  she  was  not  long  at  her
father's  house  when  she  fell  ill,  and  a  child  was  born.
That  night  men  were  together  at  the  fire  to  watch.
There  came  the  very  prettiest  music  that  ever  was  heard
about  the  town ;  and  every  one  within  slept  but  she.
He  came  in  and  he  took  the  child  from  her.  He  took
himself  out,  and  he  went  away.  The  music  stopped,
and  each  one  awoke  ;  and  there  was  no  knowing  to
what  side  the  child  had  gone

She  did  not  tell  anything,  but  so  soon  as  she  rose
she  took  with  her  the  bridle,  and  she  shook  it,  and  the
steed  came,  and  she  put  her  head  into  it.  She  took
herself  off  riding,  and  the  steed  took  to  going  home  ;
and  the  swift  March  wind  that  would  be  before  her,
she  would  catch  ;  and  the  swift  March  wind  that
would  be  after  her,  could  not  catch  her.

She  arrived.  "  Thou  are  come,"  said  he.  "  I
came,"  said  she.  He  noticed  nothing  to  her  ;  and  no
more  did  she  notice  anything  to  him.  Near  to  the
end  of  three  quarters  again  she  said,  "  I  had  better  go
see  my  father."  He  said  to  her  on  this  journey  as  he
had  said  before.  She  took  with  her  the  steed,  and
she  went  away  ;  and  when  she  arrived  she  took  the
bridle  from  the  steed's  head,  and  she  set  her  home.


2  04  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

That  very  night  a  child  was  born.  He  came  as  he
did  before,  witli  music  ;  every  one  slept,  and  he  took
with  him  the  child.  When  the  music  stopped  they
all  awoke.  Her  father  was  before  her  face,  saying  to
her  that  she  must  tell  what  was  the  reason  of  the
matter.  She  would  not  tell  anything.  When  she
grew  well,  and  when  she  rose,  she  took  with  her  the
bridle,  she  shook  it,  and  the  steed  came  and  put  her
head  into  it.  She  took  herself  away  home.  When
she  arrived  he  said,  "  Thou  art  come."  "  I  came,"
said  she.  He  noticed  nothing  to  her ;  no  more  did
she  notice  anything  to  him.  Again  at  the  end  of  three
quarters,  she  said,  "  I  had  better  go  to  see  my  father."
"  Do,"  said  he,  "  but  take  care  thou  dost  not  as  thou
didst  on  the  other  two  journeys."  "  I  will  not,"  said  she.
He  gave  her  the  steed  and  she  went  away.  She
reached  her  father's  house,  and  that  very  night  a  child
was  born.  The  music  came  as  was  usual,  and  the
child  Avas  taken  away.  Then  her  father  was  before
her  face  ;  and  he  was  going  to  kill  her,  if  she  would
not  tell  what  was  happening  to  the  children  ;  or  what
sort  of  man  she  had.  With  the  fright  he  gave  her,
she  told  it  to  him.  "VMien  she  grew  well  she  took  the
bridle  with  her  to  a  hill  that  was  opposite  to  her,  and
she  began  shaking  the  bridle,  to  try  if  the  steed  would
come,  or  if  she  would  put  her  head  into  it  ;  and  though
she  were  shaking  still,  the  steed  Avould  not  come.
When  she  saw  that  she  was  not  coming,  she  went
out  on  foot.  When  she  arrived,  no  one  was  within
but  the  crone  that  was  his  mother.  "  Thou  art  with-
out a  houseman  to-day,"  said  the  crone  ;  "  and  if  thou
art  quick  thou  wilt  catcli  him  yet."  She  went  away,
and  she  was  going  till  the  night  came  on  her.  She
saw  then  a  light  a  long  way  from  her ;  and  if  it
was  a  long  way  from  her,  she  was  not  long  in  reach-


THE  DAUGHTER  OF  THE  SKIES.  205

ing  it.  Wlien  she  went  in,  the  floor  was  ready-
swept  before  her,  and  the  housewife  spinning  up  in
the  end  of  the  house.  "  Come  up,"  said  the  house-
wife, "  I  know  of  thy  cheer  and  travel.  Thou  art
going  to  try  if  thou  canst  catch  thy  man  ;  he  is  going
to  marry  the  daughter  of  the  King  of  the  Skies."  "  He
is  !"  said  she.  The  housewife  rose  ;  she  made  meat
for  her  ;  she  set  on  water  to  wash  her  feet,  and  she
laid  her  down.  If  the  day  came  quickly,  it  was
quicker  than  that  that  the  housewife  rose,  and  that
she  made  meat  for  her.  She  set  her  on  foot  then  for
going  ;  and  she  gave  her  shears  that  would  cut  alone  ;
and  she  said  to  her,  "  Thou  wilt  be  in  the  house  of
my  middle  sister  to-night."  She  was  going,  and
going,  till  the  night  came  on  her.  She  saw  a  light  a
long  way  from  her ;  and  if  it  was  a  long  way  from
her,  she  was  not  long  in  reaching  it.  AVhen  she
went  in  the  house  Avas  ready  swept,  a  fire  on  the
middle  of  the  floor,  and  the  housewife  spinning  at  the
end  of  the  fire.  "  Come  up,"  said  the  housewife,  "  I
know  thy  cheer  and  travel."  She  made  meat  for  her,
she  set  on  water,  she  washed  her  feet,  and  she  laid  her
doAvn.  N"o  sooner  came  the  day  than  the  housewife
set  her  on  foot,  and  made  meat  for  her.  She  said  she
had  better  go  ;  and  she  gave  her  a  needle  would  sew
by  itself.  "  Thou  wilt  be  in  the  house  of  my  youngest
sister  to-night,"  said  she.  She  was  going,  and  going,
till  the  end  of  day  and  the  mouth  of  lateness.  She
saw  a  light  a  long  way  from  her  ;  and  if  it  was  a  long
way  from  her,  she  was  not  long  in  reaching  it.  She
went  in,  the  house  was  swept,  and  the  housewife
spinning  at  the  end  of  the  fire.  "  Come  up,"  said  she,
"  I  know  of  thy  cheer  and  travel."  She  made  meat
for  her,  she  set  on  water,  she  washed  her  feet,  and  she
laid  her  do-\\Ti.       If  the   day   came  quickly,   it  was


206  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

quicker  than  that  that  the  housewife  rose  ;  she  set  her
on  foot,  and  she  made  her  meat ;  she  gave  her  a  clue
of  thread,  and  the  thread  would  go  into  the  needle  by
itself ;  and  as  the  shears  would  cut,  and  the  needle
sew,  the  thread  would  keep  up  with  them.  "  Thou
wilt  be  in  the  town  to-night."  She  reached  the  town
about  evening,  and  she  went  into  the  house  of  the
king's  hen  Avife,  to  lay  down  her  weariness,  and  she
was  warming  herself  at  the  fire.  She  said  to  the
crone  to  give  her  work,  that  she  would  rather  be
working  than  be  still.  "  No  man  is  doing  a  turn  in
this  town  to-day,"  says  the  hen  wife ;  "  the  king's
daughter  has  a  wedding."  "  Ud !"  said  she  to  the
crone,  "  give  me  cloth  to  sew,  or  a  shirt  that  will  keep
my  hand  going."  She  gave  her  shirts  to  make  ;  she
took  the  shears  from  her  pocket,  and  she  set  it  to
work  ;  she  set  the  needle  to  work  after  after  it ;  as  the
shears  would  cut,  the  needle  would  sew,  and  the  tliread
would  go  into  the  needle  by  itself.  One  of  the  king's
servant  maids  came  in ;  she  was  looking  at  her,  and  it
caused  her  great  Avonder  how  she  made  the  shears  and
the  needle  work  by  themselves.  She  went  home  and
she  told  the  king's  daughter,  that  one  was  in  the  house
of  the  hen  wife,  and  that  she  had  shears  and  a  needle
that  could  work  of  themselves.  "  If  there  is,"  said
the  king's  daughter,  "  go  thou  over  in  the  morning,
and  say  to  her,  '  what  will  she  take  for  the  shears.'  "  In
the  morning  she  went  over,  and  she  said  to  her  that
the  king's  daughter  was  asking  what  would  she  take
for  the  shears.  "  Nothing  I  asked,"  said  she,  "  but
leave  to  He  where  she  lay  last  night."  "  Go  thou
over,"  said  the  king's  daughter,  "  and  say  to  her  that
she  wiU  get  that."  She  gave  the  shears  to  the  king's
daughter.  When  they  were  going  to  lie  down,  the
king's  daughter  gave  him  a  sleep  drink,  so  that  he


THE  DAUGHTER  OF  THE  SKIES.  207

might  not  wake.  He  did  not  wake  the  length  of  the
night ;  and  no  sooner  came  the  day,  than  the  king's
daughter  came  where  she  was,  and  set  her  on  foot
and  put  her  out.  On  the  morrow  she  was  working
with  the  needle,  and  cutting  with  other  shears.
The  king's  daughter  sent  the  maid  servant  over,  and
she  asked  "  what  would  she  take  for  the  needle  ?"  She
said  she  would  not  take  anything,  but  leave  to  lie
where  she  lay  last  night.  The  maid  servant  told  this
to  the  king's  daughter.  "  She  will  get  that,"  said  the
king's  daughter.  The  maid  servant  told  that  she
would  get  that,  and  she  got  the  needle.  When  they
were  going  to  lie  down,  the  king's  daughter  gave  him
a  sleep  diink,  and  he  did  not  wake  that  night.  The
eldest  son  he  had  was  lying  in  a  bed  beside  them  ;  and
he  was  hearing  her  spealdng  to  him  through  the  night,
and  saying  to  him  that  she  was  mother  of  his  three
children.  His  father  and  he  himself  were  taldng  a
walk  out,  and  he  told  his  father  what  he  was  hear-
ing. This  day  the  Icing's  daughter  sent  the  servant
maid  to  ask  what  she  would  take  for  the  clue  ;  and
she  said  she  would  ask  but  leave  to  lie  where  she  lay
last  night.  "  She  will  get  that,"  said  the  king's
daughter.  This  night  when  he  got  the  sleep  drink,  he
emptied  it,  and  he  did  not  drink  it  at  all  Through
the  night  she  said  to  him  that  he  was  the  father  of  her
three  sons  ;  and  he  said  that  he  was.  In  the  morn-
ing, when  the  king's  daughter  came  down,  he  said  to
her  to  go  up,  that  she  was  his  wife  who  was  with  him.
When  they  rose  they  went  away  to  go  home.  They
came  home  ;  the  spells  went  off  him,  they  planted  to-
gether and  I  left  them,  and  they  left  me.


208  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


NIGHEAN  RIGH  NAN  SPEUE.

Bha  'siod  ann  roimhe  so  tuathanach,  's  bha  triiiir  nigheanan  aige,  's
mbraa  cruidh  is  chaorach.  Dh'  fholbh  e  la'  a'm  faicinn  's  cha  robh
gin  r'a  fhaotainn  dhiu,  's  thug  e  fad  an  latha  'gan  iarraidh.  Chunnaic
e,  anns  an  anamoch  a'  tighmn  dacliaidh,  cuilean  beag  a'  niith  feadh
pkirce.  Thainig  an  cuilean  far  an  robh  e,  "  De  bheir  thu  dhòmhs',"
urs'  esan,  "  ma  gheobh  mi  do  chuid  cruidli  is  caorach  dhuit  ?  "  "  Cha
'n  'eil  fhios  'am  fein  a  ruid  ghrannda.  "De  bhios  thu  'g  iarraidh?
's  bheir mise  dhuit  e  de  ni  sam  bith  a  th'  agam."  "An  d'  thoir  thu
dhomh,"  urs'  an  cuilean,  "  do  nighean  mhbr  r'a  pòsadh."  "Bheir
mise  dhuit  i,"  urs'  esan,  "  ma  ghabhas  i  fein  thu."  Chaidh  iad
dhachaidh,  e  fe'in's  an  cuilean.  Dh'  fhoiglmeachd  a  h-athair  d'a nighean
bu  shine  an  gabhadh  i  e,  's  thuirt  i  nach  gabhaJh.  Thuirt  e  ris  an
darna  te  am  pbsadh  ise  e,  's  thuirt  i  nach  posadh,  ged  nach  faighte  an
crodh  gu  briith.  Thuirt  e  ris  an  te  'b  bige  am  pbsadh  ise  e,  's  thuirt
i  gum  pbsadh.  Phbs  iad,  's  bha  'peathraichean  a'  magadh  urra
airson  gun  do  phbs  i  e.  Thug  e  leis  dhachaidh  i  d'a  aite  fein.  Nur  a
thainig  e  g' a  aite  cbmhnuidh  fein  dh'  fhas  e  'na  dhuine  ciatach.  Bha
iad  cbmhla  iiine  mhbr,  's  thuirt  ise  gum  b'  fhearra  dhi  dol  a  dh'
amharc  a  h-athar.  Thuirt  esan  rithe  i  thoirt  an  aire  nach  flianadh  i
gus  am  biodh  clann  aice.  Bha  i  torrach  'san  am.  Thuirt  i  nach
fanadh.  Thug  e  dhi  steud,  's  thuirt  e  rithe,  cho  luath  's  a  ruigeadh  i
'n  tigh  an  t-srian  a  thoirt  a  a  ceann,  's  a  leigeil  air  folbh,  's  uur  a
bhiodh  toil  aice  tighinn  dachaidh  nach  robh  aic'  ach  an  t-srian  a
chrathadh,  's  gun  d'  thigeadh  an  steud  's  gun  cuireadh  i  'ceann  innte.
Rinn  i  mar  a  dh'  iarr  e  urra.  Cha  robh  i  fad'  an  tigh  a  h-athar  nur  a
dh'  f  h'as  i  gu  bochd  'sa  chaidh  a  h-asaid.  An  oidhche  sin  bha  daoine
cruinn  aiga'  ghealbhan  'ga  'faire.  Thainig  an  aona  chebl  a  bu  bliinne
chualas  riamh  feadh  a'  bhaile,  's  chaidil  a'  h-uile  duine  stigh  ach  ise.
Thainig  esan  a  stigh  's  thug  e  uaithe  am  paisde.  Ghabh  e  'mach  "s
dh'  fholbh  e.  Stad  an  cebl,  's  dhuisg  gach  duine,  's  cha  robh  tios  de  'n
taobh  a  chaidh  am  paisde.  Cha  d'  innis  i  ni  sam  bith,  ach  cho  luath
's  a  dh'  'eiridh  i  thug  i  leatha  an  t-srian,  's  chrath  i  i,  's  thainig  an
steud,  's  chuir  i  'ceann  innte.  Ghabh  i  air  mharcachd  urra,  's  ghabh
an  steud  air  folbh  dhachaidh :  bheireadh  ise  air  a  ghaoith  luath  mhart
a  bh'  air  thoiseach  orra,  's  cha  bheiseadh  a  ghaoth  luath  mhart  a  bha
na  de'igh  orra.     Rkiuig  i.

"Thainig  thu,"  urs'  esan.  "  Thainig,"  urs' ise.  Cha  do  leig  e
rud  sam  bith  air  rithe,  's  cha  mhotha  leig  ise  rud  sam  bith  orra  risan.
Dliith  air  ceann  tri  raithean  a  rithisd  thuirt  ise,  "  'S  fhearra  dhomh


NIGHEAN  RIGH  NAN  SPEUR.  2O9

dol  a  dh'  amharc  m'  athar."  Thuirt  e  rithe  air  an  t-siubhal  so  mar
a  thuirt  e  roimhid.  Thug  i  leatha  an  steud 's  dh'fholbh  i.  Nur  a
rainig  i  thug  i  n  t-srian  a  ceann  na  steud,  's  leig  i  dhachaidh  i,  's  an
oidhche  sin  fein  chaidh  a  h-asaid.  Thiiinig  esan  mar  a  riun  e  roimhid
le  ceol.  Chaidil  a'  h-uile  duiue,  "s  thug  e  leis  am  pkisde.  Kur  a  stad
an  ceol  dhiiisg  iad  air  fad.  Bha  'h-athair  air  a  h-aodann  ag  rhdh
rithe  gum  feumadh  i  inuseadh  de  bu  chiall  de  'n  ghnothach.  Cha  'n
innseadh  ise  ni  sam  bith.  Nm-  a  dh'  fhhs  i  gu  math,  's  a  lih'  èiridli  i,
thug  i  leatha  an  t-srian,  chrath  i  i,  's  thainig  an  steud,  's  chuir  i
ceann  innte.  Ghabh  i  air  folbh  dhachaidh.  Nur  a  rainig  i  thuirt
esan.  "  Thkinig  thu."  "  Thainig,"  urs'  ise.  Oha  do  leig  e  rud  sam
bith  air  rithe,  's  cha  mhotha  'leig  ise  urra  risan.  An  ceann  tri
raithean  a  rithisd  thuirt  i,  "  'S  fhearra  dhomh  dol  a  dh'  amharc  m'
athar."  "  Dean,"  urs'  esan,  "  ach  thoir  an  aire  nach  dean  thu  mar  a
rinn  thu  an  da  shiubhal  roimhid."  "  Cha  dean,"  urs'  ise.  Thug  e
dhi  an  steud,  's  dh'  fholbh  i.  Rainig  i  tigh  a  h-athar,  's  dh'  asaid-
eadh  i  'n  oidhche  sin  fein.  Thainig  an  ceol  mar  a  b'  abhaist,  's
thugadh  am  paisd'  air  folbh.  Bha  'h-athair  air  a'h-aodann  an  sin,  's
e  "dol  a  'marbhadh  mar  an  innseadh  i  de''bha  tachairt  do  na  paisdean,
no  de  'n  seorsa  duine  a  bh'  aice.  Leis  an  eagal  a  chuir  e  urra
dh"  innis  i  dha  e.  Nur  a  dh'  fhas  i  gu  math,  thug  i  leatha  an
t-srian  gu  cnoc  a  bha  ma  'coinneamh,  's  thoisich  i  air  crathadh  na
sre'ine  feuch  an  u'thigeadh  an  steud,  na"n  cuireadh  i  'ceann  innte,  's
ged  a  bhiodh  i  'crathadh  fhathasd  cha  d'  thigeadh  an  steud.  Nur  a
chunnaic  i  nach  robh  i  'tighinn  ghabh  i  mach  'na  cois.  Nur  a  rainig
i  cha  robh  duine  stigh  ach  a'  chailleach  a  bu  mhathair  dha.  "  Tha
thusa  gun  fhear  tighe  an  diugh,"  urs'  a'  chailleach,  "  's  ma  bhios  thu
tapaidh  beiridh  thu  air  fhathasd."

Ghabh  i  air  folbh,  "s  bha  i  'folbh  gus  an  d'  thainig  an  oidhche  orra.
Chunnaic  i  'n  sin  solus  fada  uaithe,  's  ma  b'  fhada  uaithe  cha  b"  fhada
bha  ise  'ga 'ruigheachd.  Nur  a  chaidh  i  stigh  bha  urlar  reidh  sguabte
roimhpe,  's  bean  an  tighe  'sniomh  shuas  an  ceann  an  tighe.  "  Thig  a
mos,"  ursa  bean  an  tighe,  "  tha  fios  do  sheud  's  do  shiubhail  agamsa."
Tha  thu  folbh  feuch  am  heir  thu  air  t-fhear.  Tha  e  'folbh  a  phosadh
nighean  righ  nan  speur."  "Tha!"  urs'  ise.  Dh'  eiridh  bean  an
tighe  ;  rinn  i  biadh  dhi;  chuir  i  air  uisge  'ghlanadh  a  cas  ;  's  chuir  i
'laidhe  i.  Ma  bu  luath  a  thainig  an  latha  bu  luaithe  na  sin  a  dh'
e'iridh  bean  an  ti-he  'sa  rinn  i  biadh  dhi.  Chuir  i  air  a  cois  i  'n  sin
airson  folbh,  's  thug  i  dhi  siosar  a  ghearradh  leis  fe'in,  's  thuirt  i  rithe.
"  Bidh  thu  ann  an  tigh  mo  phiuthar  mheadhonachsa  nochd."  Bha  i
"folbh  's  a'  folbh,  gus  an  d'  thainig  an  oidhche  urra.  Chunnaic  i  solus
fada  uaithe,'  s  ma  b'  fhada  uaithe  cha  b'  fliada  bha  ise  'ga  ruigheachd.
P


2IO  WEST  HIGHL.VXD  TALES.

Nur  a  chaidh  i  stigh  bha  'n  tigh  reidh,  sguabte ;  gealbhan  air  meadh
on  an  urlair,  's  bean  an  tighe  "sniomh  an  ceann  a'  ghealbhain.
"  Thig  a  nios,"  ursa  bean  an  tighe.  "  tha  fios  do  sheud  's  do  shiubhail
agamsa."'  Rinn  i  biadh  c.hi ;  chiiir  i  air  uisge ;  ghlan  i  'casan  's
chuir  i  laidhe  i.  Cha  bii  luaithe  a  thainig  an  latha  na  'chuir
bean  an  tighe  air  a  cois  i,  's  a  rinn  i  biadh  dhi.  Thuirt  i  rithe
gum  b"  fhearra  dhi  folbh,  's  thug  i  dhi  snathad  a  dh'  fhuaigheadh
leatha  fein.  "  Bidh  thu  ann  an  tigh  mo  pheathar  is  oige  a  nuchd,''
UTS*  ise.

Bha  i  folbh  's  a'  folbh  gu  deireadh  latha  's  beul  anamoich.  Chun-
naic  i  solus  fada  uaithe,  's  ma  b"  fhada  uaithe  cha  b'  fhada  bha  ise  "ga
ruigheachd.  Chaidh  i  stigh.  Bha  'n  tigh  sguabte,  's  beau  an  tighe
'sniomh  os  ceann  a"  ghealbhain.  "  Thig  a  nios,''  urs"  ise,  '•  tha  tios  do
sheud  "s  do  shiubhail  agamsa."  Rinn  i  biadh  dhi ;  "  chi;ir  i  air  uisge ;
ghlan  i  'ca.san,  "s  chuir  i  laidhe  i.  Ma  bu  luath  a  thainig  an  latha,
bu  luaithe  na  sin  a  dh'  e'iridh  bean  an  tighe;  chuir  i  air  a  cois  i,  's
rinn  i  biadh  dhi.  Thug  i  dhi  ceairsle  shuatli,  's  rachadh  an  snath-
ainn  anns  an  t-sn'athad  leis  fein,  's  mur  a  ghearradh  an  siosar,  's  mur
a  dh'  fhuaigheadh  an  t-snathad,  chumadh  a  cheairale  snath  ruitha.
"  Bidh  thu  anns  a"  bhaile  nochd."

Ràinig  i  'm  baile  ma  fheasgar  's  chaidh  i  stigh  do  thigh  chailleach
chearc  an  ligh.  Shuidh  i  'leigeil  a  sgios ;  bha  i  ga  garadh  aig  a'
gheaU)han ;  tliuirt  i  ris  a'  chaillich  obair  a'  thoirt  dhi,  gum  b'  fhe'arr
leatha 'bhi  'g  obair  na  bhi  "na  thrah.  '•  Cha  "n 'eil  duine  dèanadh
turn  'sa'  bhaile  so  n  diugh,"  ursa  a'  chailleach ;  "  tha  pbsadh  aig  nigh-
eau  an  r'mh."  "  Ud  I "  urs'  ise  ris  a'  chaillich,  "  thoir  dhojnh  aodach  r'a
fhuaghal,  na  leine  'chumas  mo  lamh  air  folbh."  Thug  i  dhi  leintean
r'a  dhèanadh.  Thug  i  mach  siosar  a  a  poca ;  chuir  i  dh"  obair  e ;
chuir  i  'n  t -snathad  a  dh'  obair  as  a  dhe'igh.  Mara  ghearradh  an  siosar
dh'  fhuaigiieadh  an  t-sn'athad, 's  rachadh  an  snath  anns  an  t-snathaid
leis  fein.  Thainig  te  do  shearbhantan  an  ngh  stigh  ;  bha  i  'i:  amharc
urra;  's  bha  e  cur  ioghnadasraorurra  demur  a  bhai'toirt  airan  t- siosar
'sair  an  t-snathad  oibreachadh  leothafe'in.  Chaidh  i  dhacha'dh, 'sdh'
innis  i  do  nighean  an  riu'h  gun  robh  t^  ann  an  tigh  chailleach  nan
cearc,  's  gun  robh  siosar  agus  sn'athad  aice  a  dh'  oibreachadh  leotha
fein.  "  Ma  tha,"  ursa  nighean  an  righ,  "  theirig  thusa  nunn  anns  a'
mhaidinn,  's  abair  rithe  de  'ghabhas  i  air  an  t-siosar."  Anns  a'
mliaidinn  chaidh  i  'nunn,  's  thuirt  i  rithe  gun  robh  nighean  an  righ
a'  foighneachd  de'  ghabhadh  i  air  an  t-siosar.  "  Cha  "n  iarr  mi,"'  urs'
ise,  '•  ach  cead  laidhe  far  an  do  laidh  i  fe'in  an  rair."'  "  Theirig  thusa
nunn,"  ursa  nighean  an  r'lgh,  "  's  abair  rithe  gum  faigh  i  sin."'
Thug  i  'n  siosar  do  nighean  an  righ.


XIGHEAN  RIGH  NAN  SPEUR.  2  I  I

Nur  a  bha  iad  a'  dol  a  laidhe  thug  nighean  an  righ  deoch
chadail  diisaii,  air  alt  "s  nacli  diiisgeadli  e.  Cha  do  dliiiisg  e
fad  na  h-oidhche,  's  cha  bu  luaithe  a  thainig  an  latha  na  thkinig
nigheau  an  iii;h  far  an  robh  ise,  'sa  chuir  i  air  a  cois  i.  An  la  'r  na
mhiiireach  bha  i  'g  obair  leis  an  t-snathaid,  's  a'  gearradh  le  siosar
eile.  Chuir  nighean  an  righ  an  searbhanta  nunn  a  dh'  fhoighneachd
de  'ghabhadh  i  air  an  t-snathaid.  Thuirt  i  nach  gabhadh  ni  sam
bith  ach  cead  laidhe  far  an  do  laidh  i  rair.  Dh'  innis  an  searbhanta
so  do  nighean  an  righ.  "  Gheobh  i  sin,"  ursa  nighean  an  righ.  Dh'
innis  an  searbhanta  gum  faigheadh  i  siod,  's  fhuair  i  'n  t-snathad.
Nur  a  bha  iad  a'  did  a  laidhe  thug  nighean  an  righ  deoch  chadail  da,
's  cha  do  dhuisg  e  'n  oidhche  sin.  Bha  'm  mac  a  bu  shine  bh'  aige
ann  an  leaba  lamh  riutha,  's  bha  e  'ga  'cluinntinn  a'  bniidhinn  ris
feadh  na  h-oidhche,  's  agrlidh  risgunib'i  mathair  a  thriiiir  chloinn'  i.
Bha  athair  's  e  fein  a'  gabhail  sraid  a  mach,  's  dh'  innis  e  d'a  athair
de'  'bha  e  'cluinntinn.  An  latha  so  chuir  nighean  an  righ  an  searbh-
anta a  dh'  fheoraich  de  'ghabhadh  i  air  a'  cheairsle,  's  thuirt  i  rithe
nach  iarradh  i  ach  cead  laidhe  far  an  do  laidh  i  'n  rair.  "  Gheobh  i
sin,"  ursa  nii^hean  an  righ.  An  oidhche  so  nur  a  fhuair  e  "n  deoch
chadail  thaom  e  i,  's  cha  d'  ol  e  idir  i.  Feadh  na  h-oidhche  thuirt  ise
ris  gum  b'  e  athair  a  triiiir  mac,  's  thuirt  esan  gum  b'  e.

Anns  a  nihaidinn,  nur  a  thainig  nighean  an  righ  nuas,  thuirt  e
rithe  i  'dhol  suas,  gum  bi  'bhean  a  bha  leis.  Nur  a  dli'  eiridh  iad  dh'
fholbh  iad  airson  dol  dachaidh.  Thainig  iad  dachaidh ;  dh'  fholbh
na  geasan  deth.  Chuir  iad  còmhla  's  dhealaich  mise  riutha,  's  dheal-
aich  iadsan  riumsa.

This  is  but  another  version  of  No.  III.,  "The  Hoodie  ;"  but
it  has  certain  magic  gifts  which  I  have  not  found  in  any  other
Gaelic  story  ;  and  the  little  dog  who  goes  to  the  skies,  and  is
about  to  marry  the  daughter  of  the  king,  and  is  transformed  into
a  man  at  home,  may  turn  out  to  be  a  Celtic  divinity.  When  so
little  is  known  of  Celtic  mythology,  anything  may  be  of  use.  The
raven,  the  crow,  and  the  serpent,  have  appeared  as  transformed
beings  of  superior  power.  Now,  the  little  dog  appears,  and  there
are  mystic  dogs  elsewhere  in  Gaelic  stories,  and  in  other  Celtic
countries.  In  the  Isle  of  Man  is  the  well-known  "  Modey  dhu,"
black  dog  which  used  to  haunt  Peel  Castle,  and  frightened  a  sol-
dier to  death.

In  a  curious  book,  written  to  prove  Gaelic  to  be  the  original
language  (History  of  the  Celtic  Language,  by  L.  MacLean,  1840),


212  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

there  is  a  great  deal  of  speculation  as  to  the  Farnese  Globe  ;  and
the  dog-star  in  particular  is  supposed  to  have  been  worshipped  by
the  Druids.  Without  entering  into  such  a  wide  field,  it  is  worth
notice  that  "  Anubis,"  the  dog-star,  was  son  of  Osiris  and
Xephthys,  had  the  nature  of  a  dog,  and  was  represented  with  the
head  of  one.  He  was  a  celestial  double  deity,  and  watched  the
tropics.  The  servant  lad  who  told  this  story  ;  and  the  old  woman,
Mac  Kerrol,  from  whom  he  learned  it,  are  not  likely  persons
to  have  heard  of  Anubis,  or  the  Farnese  Globe  ;  so  anything  got
from  them  may  be  taken  at  its  value,  whatever  that  may  be.  The
opinion  that  Celts  came  from  the  East  by  way  of  Phcenicia,  has
been  held  by  many,  and  some  one  may  wish  to  follow  the  trail  of
the  little  dog  ;  so  I  give  his  history  as  it  came  to  me,  rather  than
fuse  it  into  one  story  with  the  Hoodie,  as  I  was  at  first  tempted  to
do  before  the  plan  of  this  work  was  decided  on .

The  beginning  of  this  tale  is  the  Gaelic  "  Once  upon  a  time."
Bha   siod       ann    roimhe  so.
Was  yonder  in  it   ere       this.

Trior  is  a  collective  noun  of  number  for  three,  and  answers  to
leash;  or  to  pair,  brace,  dozen,  for  two;  twelve.

Steud  is  clearly  the  same  word  as  steed.  It  is  commonly
used  in  these  stories,  and  I  have  never  heard  it  used  in  conversa-
tion. It  is  feminine,  like  falaire,  the  other  word  commonly
used  for  a  horse  in  stories  and  poetry;  and  hardly  ever  in
ordinary  speech.

Many  words  are  derived  fromsteud,  and  I  do  not  think  that  it
is  imported.


XIII.
THE  GIEL  AND  THE  DEAD  MAN".

From  Ann  Darrocli,  Islaj-

T^HERE  was  before  now  a  poor  woman,  and  she  had
-*-  a  leash  of  daughters.  Said  the  eldest  one  of  them
to  her  mother,  "  I  had  better  go  myself  and  seek  for
fortune."  "  I  had  better,"  said  her  mother,  "bake  a
bannock  for  thee."  When  the  bannock  was  ready,
her  mother  said  to  her,  "  Whether  wouldst  thou  like
best  the  bit  and  my  blessing,  or  the  big  bit  and  my
curse  V  "  I  would  rather,"  said  she,  "  the  big  bit  and
thy  curse."  She  went  away,  and  when  the  night  was
wreathing  round  her,  she  sat  at  the  foot  of  a  wall  to
eat  the  bannock.  There  gathered  the  sreath  chuilean-
ach  and  her  twelve  puppies,  and  the  little  birds  of
the  air  about  her,  for  a  part  of  the  bannock.  "  AVilt
thou  give  us  a  part  of  the  bannock,"  said  they.  "  I
won't  give  it,  you  ugly  brutes  ;  I  have  not  much  for
myself."  "  My  curse  will  be  thine,  and  the  curse  of
my  twelve  birds  ;  and  thy  mother's  curse  is  thy  worst
of  all."  She  rose  and  she  went  away,  and  she  had  not
half  enough  with  the  bit  of  the  bannock.  She  saw  a
little  house  a  long  way  from  her  ;  and  if  a  long  way
from  her,  she  was  not  long  reaching  it.  She  struck
in  the  door.  "  Who's  there  ?"  "  A  good  maid  seek-
ing a  master."     "We  want  that,"  said  they,  and  she


2  I  4  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

got  in.  She  had  now  a  peck  of  gold  and  a  peck  of
silver  to  get ;  and  she  was  to  be  awake  every  night  to
watch  a  dead  man,  brother  of  the  housewife,  who  was
under  spells.  She  had  besides,  of  nuts  as  she  broke,
of  needles  as  she  lost,  of  thimbles  as  she  pierced,  of
thread  as  she  used,  of  candles  as  she  burned,  a  bed  of
green  silk  over  her,  a  bed  of  green  silk  under  her,
sleeping  by  day  and  watching  by  night.  The  first
night  when  she  was  watching  she  fell  asleep  ;  the  mis-
tress came  in,  she  struck  the  magic  club  on  her,  she
fell  down  dead,  and  she  threw  her  out  at  the  back  of
the  midden.

Said  the  middle  one  to  her  mother,  "  I  had  better
go  seek  fortune  and  follow  my  sister."  Her  mother
baked  her  a  bannock  ;  and  she  chose  the  big  half  and
her  mother's  curse,  as  her  elder  sister  did,  and  it  hap-
pened to  her  as  it  happened  to  her  sister.

Said  the  youngest  one  to  her  mother,  "  I  had  bet-
ter myself  go  to  seek  fortune  too,  and  follow  my
sisters."  "  I  had  better  bake  a  bannock,"  said  her
mother.  "Whether  wouldst  thou  rather  the  little
bit  and  my  blessing,  or  the  big  bit  and  my  curse  Ì"
"  I  would  rather  the  little  bit  and  your  blessing."
She  went,  and  the  night  was  wreathing  round  her,  and
she  sat  at  the  foot  of  a  wall  to  eat  the  bannock.  There
gathered  the  sreath  chuileanach  and  the  twelve  pup-
pies, and  the  little  birds  of  the  air  about  her.  "  Wilt
thou  give  us  some  of  that  ?"  "  I  will  give,  you  pretty
creatures,  if  you  will  keep  me  company."  She  gave
them  some  of  the  bannock ;  they  ate  and  they  had
plenty,  and  she  had  enough.  They  clapped  their
wings  about  her  till  she  was  snug  witli  the  warmth.
She  went,  she  saw  a  little  house  a  long  way  from  her ;
and  if  it  was  a  long  way  from  her,  she  was  not  long
reacliini?    it.       She    struck    in    the    door.      "  Who 's


THE  GIRL  AND  THE  DEAD  MAN.  2  I  5

there  ?"  "  A  good  maid  seeking  a  master."  "  We
have  need  of  that."  The  wages  she  had  Avere  a  peck
of  gold  and  a  peck  of  silver ;  of  nuts  as  she  broke,  of
needles  as  she  lost,  of  thimbles  as  she  pierced,  of
thread  as  she  used,  of  candles  as  she  burned,  a  bed  of
the  green  silk  over  her,  and  a  bed  of  the  green  silk
under  her.  She  sat  to  watch  the  dead  man,  and  she
was  sewing  ;  on  the  middle  of  night  he  rose  up,  and
screwed  up  a  grin.  "  If  thou  dost  not  lie  down  properly,
I  will  give  thee  the  one  leathering  with  a  stick."  He
lay  doAvn.  At  the  end  of  a  while,  he  rose  on  one
elbow,  and  screwed  up  a  grin  ;  and  the  third  time  he
rose  and  screwed  up  a  grin.  When  he  rose  the  third
time,  she  stnick  him  a  lounder  of  the  stick ;  the  stick
stuck  to  the  dead  man,  and  the  hand  stuck  to  the
stick  ;  and  out  they  were.  They  went  forward  till
they  were  going  through  a  wood  ;  Avhen  it  was  low  for
her  it  Avas  high  for  him  ;  and  Avhen  it  Avas  high  for
him  it  Avas  Ioav  for  her.  The  nuts  Avere  knocking
their  eyes  out,  and  the  sloes  taking  their  ears  off,  till
they  got  through  the  wood.  After  going  through  the
wood  they  returned  home.  She  got  a  peck  of  gold
and  a  peck  of  silver,  and  the  vessel  of  cordial.  She
rubbed  the  vessel  of  cordial  to  her  two  sisters,  and
brought  them  alive.  They  returned  home ;  they  left
me  sitting  here,  and  if  they  Avere  well,  'tis  Avell ;  and
if  they  Avere  not,  let  them  be.


AN  NIGHINN  AGUS  AN  DUINE  MARBII.

Bha  bean  bhochd  ann  roimhe  so,  's  bha  triiiir  nighean  aice.  Thuirt
an  te  bu  shine  dhiu  r'a  mathair,  "  'S  fliearra  dhomh  flic'in  dol  a  dh'
iarraidh  an  fiiortain."  "  'S  fheàrra  dhòmhs,"  ursa  a  mathair,  "  bonn-
ach  a  dheasachadh  dhuit."    Nur  a  bha  'm  bonnach  reidh  thuirt  a


2l6  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

mathair  rithe,  cb'ca  's  fliearr  leat  a'  bhlaidh  bheag  "s  mo  bheannachd
na  'bhliddh  mhor  's  mo  mhollaclid."  "  'S  fhearr  learn,"  urs'  ise,  "  a'
bhlaidh  mbor  'a  do  mhollachd."  Dh"  fholbh  i.  Nur  a  bba  'n  oidhche
'casadh  urra  shuidh  i  'chois  garraidh  a  dh'  itheadh  a'  bhonnaich.
Niir  a  shuidh  i  'dh'  itheadh  a'  bhonnaich  chruinnich  an  t-sreath
chuileanacli,  's  a  da  chuilean  deug,  's  eoin  bheag  an  athar  timchioil
urra  airson  pairt  de  'n  bhonnacli.  "An  d'  thoir  thu  dhuinne  pairtde
'nbhonnach,"  urs'  iadsan.  "  Cha  d'  thobhair  a  bheathaichean  grannda;
cha  mhor  a  th'  agam  dhomh  fein.  "  Biodh  mo  mhollachds'  agadsa,
's  moUachd  mo  dha  eun  deug,  's  e  moUachd  do  mhathar  is  measa  dhuit
air  fad."

Dh'  eiridh  i  's  dh'  fholbh  i,  's  cha  robh  leith  a  leoir  's  a'  bhlaidh
bhonnaich.  Chunnaic  i  tigh  beag  fada  uaithe,  'g  ma  b'  fliada  uaithe
chab'fliadabha  ise'ga  ruigheiichd.  Bhuail  i 'san  dorusd.  "  Co  tha
siod?"  "  Searhhanta  math  aig  iarraidh  niaighstir."  "Tha  sin  a
dhith  oirnne,"  urs'  iadsan,  s'  fhuair  i  'stigh.  Bha  peic  oir  is  peic
airgid  aice  r'a  fhaotainn,  's  i  ri  aithreachach  a'  h-uile  h-oidhch'  a'
faire  duine  marbh,  brathair  do  bhean  an  tighe  'bha  fo  gheasan  Bha
aice  cuideaehd  dechnuthanmar  abhrisdeadh  i;  de  shniithadan  mar  a
chailleadh  i ;  's  do  mheurain  mar  a  tholladh  i ;  de  shnath  mar  a
chosdadh  i ;  de  choinnlean  mar  a  loisgeadh  i ;  leaba  do  n  t-siod'  uaine
thairte ;  leaba  de 'n  t-sioda  uaine  foiche ;  codal  'san  latha, 's  aith-
reachadh  'san  oidhche.

A'  chiad  oidhche,  nur  a  bha  i  'faire,  thuit  i  'na  cadal.  Thhinig  a
banamhaighstir  a  stigh;  bhuail  i  'n  slachdan  draoidheachd  urra;
thuit  i  SÌOS  marbh ;  's  thilg  i  mach  ciil  an  diinain  i.

Thuirt  an  tc  mheadhonach  r'a  mathair,  "  'S  fiiearra  domh  dol  a
dh'  iarraidh  an  fliortain,  's  mo  phuithar  a  Icantainn."  Dheasaich  a
mathair  bonnach,  's  roighnich  ise  an  leith  mhòi  is  nioliachd  a  mathar,
mar  a  rinn  a  piuthar  a  bu  shine.  Thachair  dhi  mar  a  thachair  d'a
piuthar.

Thuirt  an  te  b'  oige  r'a  mhtliair,  ""Sflieiirra  dhomh  fein  dol  a  dh'
iarraidh  an  fhortain  cuideaehd,  's  mo  pheathraichean  a  leantainn."
"  'S  fheàira  dhòmhsa  bonnach  a  dheasachadh,"  urs'  a  mhthair.
"  Co'ca  's  fhearr  leat  a'  bhlaidh  bheag  's  mo  bheannachd,  na  'bhlaidh
mhor 's  mo  mhollachd,  "  'S  flieiirr  leam  a  bhlaidh  bheag 's  bhur  beann-
achd."  Dh'  fholbh  i.  Bha'n  oidhche  'casadh  urra,  's  shuidh  i  'chois
gàrraidh  a  dh'  itheadh  a  bhonnaich.  Chruinnich  an  t-sreath  chuil-
eanach,  's  an  da  chuilean  dcw^,  's  eoin  bheag  an  athair  timchioil  urra.
"  An  d'  thobhair  thu  dhuinne  rud  dheth  sin  ?  "  "  Bheithir  a  bheath-
aichean bòidlieach,  ma  ni  .«ibli  comaith  rium  ft'in.  Thug  i  dhaibhrud
de  'n  bhonnach  ;  dh'  ith  iad  e ;  's  bha  na  leoir  acasan  's  na  leoir  aice


AN  NIGHINN  AGUS  AN  DUINE  MARBH.  2  I  7

fein.  Chlap  iad  an  sgiathaii  timcliioll  urra,  's  blia  i  'na  falas  leis  a'
bhlàthas

Dh'  fholbh  i.  Chunnaic  i  tigh  beag  fada  uaitlie,  's  ma  b'  fliada
uaithe  cha  b' f hada  'bha  ise 'ga 'ruiglieachd.  Bhuail  i  'san  dorus.
"  Co  siod  ?  "  "  Searbhanta  math  aig  iarraidh  maighstir."  "  Tha
sin  a  dliith  oiriine."  Se  '11  tuarasdal  a  bh'  aice  peic  òir  is  peic  air-
gid  ;  de  chuuthan  mar  a  bhrisdeadh  i ;  de  shnathadan  mar  a  chaill-
eadh  i;  de  mheuraiu  mar  a  tholladh  i;  de  shnath  mar  a  chosdadh  i;
de  choinnlean  mar  a  loisgeadh  i ;  leaba  de  n  t-siod'  uaine  thairte,  's
leaba  de  n  t-siod  uaine  folche.

Shuidli  i  'faire  an  duine  mliairbb,  's  bha  i  fuaghal.  Air  a'
mheadhon  oidhche  dh'  eiridh  esan,  's  chas  e  braoisg  air.  "Mar  an
laidh  thu  sios  mar  a  th'  agad  bheir  mise  aon  straoileadli  dhuit  de
bhata."  Laidh  e  sios.  Ann  ceann  tacan  beag  a  rithisd  dh'  eiridh  e
air  a  leitli-uilinn,  's  chas  e  braoisg  air,  's  an  treas  uair  dh'  eiridh
e  's  chas  e  braoisg  air ! !  "  Nur  a  dh'  eiridh  e  'n  treas  uair  bhuail
i  straoileadh  de  'n  bhat'  air.  Lean  am  bata  ris  an  duine  mharbh ;
lean  an  liimh  ris  a'  bhata !  's  a  mach  a  bha  iad.  Ghabh  iad  air
an  aghaidh  gus  an  robh  iad  a'  dol  romh  choille.  Mar  a  b'  iseal
dise  e  b'  ard  dhksan  e,  's  mar  a  b'  ard  dhàsan  e  b'  iseal  dise
e.  Bha  na  cnuthan  a'  toirt  nan  siil  asda,  's  na  h-kirnean  a'
toirt  nan  cluas  dhiutha,  gus  an  d'  fhuair  iad  romh  'n  choille.  An
de'igh  dol  romh  'n  choille  thill  iad  dachaidh.  Fhuair  i  peic  òir  is
peic  airgid,  'sam  ballan  locshlaint.  Rub  i  'm  ballan  locshlaint  r'a  da
phiuthar,  's  thug  i  beo  iad.  Thill  iad  dhachaidh.  Dh'  fhkg  iad  mise
a'm  'shuidhe  so,  's  ma  bha  iad  gu  math 's  math,  's  mar  an  robh  leigear
dhaibh.

This  story  has  some  relation  to  "  The  man  who  travelled  to
learn  what  fear  was  ;"  but  I  know  nothing  quite  like  it  in  Gaelic,
or  in  any  other  language.  Ann  Darrocb,  who  told  it  to  Hector
MacLean  in  May  1859,  learned  it  from  an  old  woman,  Margaret
Conal,  of  whom  MacLean  writes —

"I  have  some  recollection  of  her  myself;  she  was  wont  to
repeat  numerous  'ursgeuln'  (tales).  Her  favourite  resorts  were
the  kilns,  where  the  people  were  kiln-drying  their  corn  ;  and
whore  she  was  frequently  rewarded,  for  amusing  them  in  this
manner,  by  supplies  of  meal.  She  was  paralytic;  her  head  shook
like  an  aspen  leaf,  and  whenever  she  repeated  anything  that  was
very  exciting,  her  head  shook  more  rapidly  ;  which  imj^ressed
children  with  great  awe."


2  [  8  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.

Some  of  the  phrases  are  evidently  rememhered,  and  said  by
lieart ;  the  maid's  wages,  for  instance  ;  and  the  creatures  that
came  to  the  wandering  daughters.  The  vessel  of  Balsam  occurs
often  in  Gaelic  stories,  and  I  cannot  make  out  what  it  really
means.  Ballan  iocshlaint,  teat,  of  ichor,  of  health,  seems  to
be  the  meaning  of  the  words.

In  former  days  the  kilns  were  not  always  used  for  drying  corn.
It  is  related  tliat  one  of  the  first  excisemen  who  went  to  the
West,  found  and  caught  a  large  party  of  men  kiln-drying  malt.
He  made  a  seizure  of  course,  and  was  not  a  little  surprised  when
he  was  seized  himself,  and  his  arms  tied  fast  behind  him.  His
eyes  were  bound  also ;  and  then  he  was  led  to  the  kiln  and  set
down  near  the  fire  ;  and  they  gave  him  the  malt  to  smell  and
taste  ;  and  then  they  told  him  it  was  to  be  used  in  making
whisky ;  and  then  they  gave  him  a  drop,  and  then  a  dram,  till
the  gauger  was  so  drunk  that  they  left  him  there,  and  departed
with  their  malt  kiln-dried  and  ground.

This  I  have  heard  told  of  the  very  place  which  Margaret
Oonal  used  to  haunt,  and  of  a  time  when  she  might  have  been  a
little  girl ;  I  cannot  vouch  for  the  truth  of  my  story,  but  the  kiln
and  the  men  about  it  may  be  seen  now  ;  and  such  scenes  may  well
account  for  the  preservation  of  wild  stories.  A  child  would  not
easily  forget  a  story  learned  amongst  a  lot  of  rough  farmers,  seated
at  night  round  a  blazing  fire,  listening  to  an  old  crone  with  pal-
sied head  and  hands  ;  and  accordingly,  I  have  repeatedly  heard
that  the  mill,  and  the  kiln,  were  the  places  where  my  informants
learned  their  tales.

There  is  a  word  in  this  tale  which  the  narrator,  the  translator,
the  transcriber,  the  dictionary,  and  the  "  old  men,"  have  failed  to
explain.

Sreath  chuileanacii  means  some  kind  of  bird,  and  she  has
twelve  "  puppies,''  da  chuilean  deug.  The  narrator  maintains
that  the  words  are  right  as  she  heard  them.


XIV.

THE  KIXG  WHO  WISHED  TO  MAEEY
HIS  DAUGHTER

From  Ann  Darrocb,  Islay.

rPHEEE  was  a  king  before  now,  and  lie  married,  and
-*-  he  had  but  one  daughter.  When  his  wife  departed,
he  would  marry  none  but  one  whom  her  clothes  would
fit.  His  daughter  one  day  tried  her  mother's  dress  on,
and  she  came  and  she  let  her  father  see  how  it  fitted
her.  It  was  fitting  her  well.  AYhen  her  father  saw  her
he  would  marry  no  woman  but  her.  She  went,  crying
where  her  muime  was  ;  and  her  foster  mother  said  to
her,  "  AVhat  was  the  matter  with  her  f  She  said,
"  That  her  father  was  insisting  that  he  would  marry
her."  Her  muime  told  her  to  say  to  him,  "  Tliat  she
would  not  marry  him  till  he  should  get  her  a  gown  of
the  swan's  down."  He  went,  and  at  the  end  of  a  day
and  a  year  he  came,  and  the  gown  with  him.  She  went
again  to  take  the  counsel  of  her  muime.  "  Say  to
him,"  said  her  muime,  "  that  thou  w^ilt  not  marry  him
till  he  gets  thee  a  gown  of  the  moorland  canach."  She
said  tliis  to  him.  He  went,  and  at  the  end  of  a  day
and  year  he  returned,  and  a  gown  of  the  moorland
canach  with  him.  "  Say  now  to  him,"  said  her  muime,
"  that  thou  wilt  not  marry  him  till  he  brings  thee  a
gown  of  silk  that  will  stand  on  the  ground  with  gold


2  20  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

and  silver."  At  the  end  of  a  day  and  year  he  returned
with  the  gown.  "  Say  to  him  now,"  said  her  muime,
"  that  thou  wilt  not  marry  him  till  he  brings  thee  a
golden  shoe,  and  a  silver  shoe."  He  got  her  a  golden
shoe  and  a  silver  shoe.  "  Say  to  him  now,"  said  her
muime,  "that  thou  wilt  not  marry  him  unless  he
brings  thee  a  Idst  that  will  lock  without  and  within,
and  for  which  it  is  all  the  same  to  be  on  sea  or  on
land."  When  she  got  the  kist,  she  folded  the  best  of
her  mother's  clothes,  and  of  her  own  clothes  in  it.
Then  she  went  herseK  into  the  kist,  and  she  asked  her
father  to  put  it  out  on  the  sea  to  try  how  it  would
swim.  Her  father  put  it  out ;  when  it  was  put  out,
it  was  going,  and  going,  till  it  went  out  of  sight.

It  went  on  shore  on  the  other  side  ;  and  a  herd
came  where  it  was,  intending  to  break  it,  in  hopes  that
there  were  findings  in  the  chest.  When  he  was  going
to  break  it  she  called  out,  "  Do  not  so  ;"  but  say  to
thy  father  to  come  here,  and  he  mil  get  that  which
will  better  him  for  life."  His  father  came,  and  he  took
her  with  him  to  his  own  house.  It  was  with  a  king
that  he  was  herd,  and  the  king's  house  was  near  him.
"  If  I  could  get,"  said  she,  "  leave  to  go  to  ser\'ice  to
tliis  great  house  yonder."  "  They  want  none,"  said
the  herd,  "  unless  they  "vrant  one  under  the  hand  of
the  cook."  The  herd  went  to  spealc  for  her,  and  she
went  as  a  servant  maid  under  the  hand  of  the  cook.
When  the  rest  were  going  to  the  sermon  ;  and  when
they  asked  her  if  she  was  going  to  it,  she  said  that  she
was  not ;  that  she  had  a  little  bread  to  bake,  and  that
she  could  not  go  to  it.  When  they  went  away,  she
took  herself  to  the  herd's  house,  and  slie  put  on  a
go^^ai  of  the  down  of  the  swan.  She  went  to  the  ser-
mon, and  she  sat  opposite  the  king's  son.  The  king's
son  took  love  for  her.     She  went  a  while  before  the


THE  KING  WHO  WISHED  TO  MARRY  HIS  DAUGHTER.   22  1

sermon  skailed,  she  reached  the  herd's  house,  she
changed  her  clothes,  and  she  was  in  before  them.
"When  the  rest  came  home,  it  was  talking  about  the
gentleAvoman  that  Avas  at  the  sermon  they  were.

The  next  Sunday  they  said  to  her,  "  Was  she
going  to  the  sermon ;"  and  she  said,  "  Tliat  she  was
not,  that  she  had  a  httle  bread  to  bake."  When  they
went  away,  she  reached  the  herd's  house,  and  she  put
on  a  gown  of  the  moorland  canach  ;  and  she  went  to
the  sermon.  The  king's  son  was  seated  where  she  was
the  Sunday  before,  and  she  sat  opposite  to  him.  She
came  out  before  them,  and  she  changed,  and  she  was
at  the  house  before  them  ;  and  when  the  rest  came
liome,  it  was  talliing  about  the  great  gentlewoman
that  was  at  the  sermon  they  were.  The  third  Sunday,
they  said  to  her,  "  Was  she  going  to  the  sermon  ;"  and
she  said,  "  That  she  was  not,  that  she  had  a  little
bread  to  bake."  When  they  went  away,  she  reached
the  herd's  house  ;  she  put  on  the  gown  that  would
stand  on  the  ground  with  gold  and  silver,  and  the
golden  shoe  and  the  silver  shoe,  and  she  went  to
the  sermon.  The  king's  son  was  seated  where  she  was
the  Sunday  before,  and  she  sat  where  he  was.  A
watch  was  set  on  the  doors  this  Sunday.  She  arose,
she  saw  a  cranny,  and  she  jumped  out  at  the  cranny ;
but  they  kept  hold  of  one  of  the  shoes.

The  king's  son  said,  "  Whomsoever  that  shoe
would  fit,  she  it  was  that  he  would  marry."

Many  were  trying  the  shoe  on,  and  talcing  off  their
toes  and  heels  to  try  if  it  wotdd  fit  them  ;  but  there
were  none  whom  the  shoe  would  fit.  There  Avas  a
little  bird  in  the  top  of  a  tree,  always  saying  as  every
one  was  trying  on  the  shoe,  "  Beeg  beeg  ha  nan  doot
a  heeg  ach  don  tjay  veeg  a  ha  fo  laiv  a  hawchkare."
"  Wee  wee,  it  comes  not  on  thee  ;  but  on  the  wee  one


222  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

under  tlie  Land  of  the  cook."  When  he  could  get
none  whom  the  shoe  would  fit,  the  king's  son  lay-
down,  and  his  mother  went  to  the  kitchen  to  talk
over  the  matter.  "  Wont  you  let  me  see  the  shoe  ?"
said  she  ;  "I  will  not  do  it  any  harm  at  all  events."
"  Thou  !  thou  ugly  dirty  thing,  that  it  should  fit  thee."
She  went  down,  and  she  told  this  to  her  son.  "  Is  it
not  known,"  said  he,  "that  it  wont  fit  her  at  all
events  Ì  and  can't  you  give  it  her  to  please  her  ?"  As
soon  as  the  shoe  went  on  the  floor,  the  shoe  jumped
on  her  foot.  "  What  ynU.  you  give  me,"  said  she,  "  to
let  you  see  the  other  one  ?"  She  reached  the  herd's
house,  and  she  put  on  the  shoes,  and  the  dress  that
would  stand  on  the  floor  with  gold  and  silver.  AVhen
she  returned,  there  was  but  to  send  word  for  a  minis-
ter, and  she  herself  and  the  king's  son  married.


URSGEUL.


Bha  'siod  rigli  ann  roimhe  so,  's  pliòs  e,  's  cha  robh  aige  ach  an  aon
nighean.  Nur  a  shiubliail  a"  bhean  cha  phòsadhe  gin  ach  te  'fhreag-
radh  a  h-aodach  dhi.  Dh'  fheuch  a  nighean  latha  aodach  a  mhthar
urra, 's  thainig  i  's  leig  i  fhaicinn  d'ah-athair  mar  afhreagradii  e  dhi.
Bha  e  'freagairt  e  dhi.  Bha  e  'freagairt  dhi  gn  math.  Nur  a  chunn-
aic  a  h-athair  i,  cha  pljosadh  e  bean  ach  i.  Cliaidh  i  'caoineadh
far  an  robh  a  muiine,  's  thuirt  a  muirae  rithe  dè  bh'  urra.  Thuirt  i
gun  robh  a  h-athair  a'  cur  roimhe  gum  pòsadh  e  i.  Thuirt  a  muime
ritlie  'radh  ris  nach  posadh  e  i  gus  am  faigheadh  e  dhi  guthann  de
chloimhe  na  h-eala.

Dh'  fholbhe  's  an  ceann  la  is  bliadlma  thainig  e,  's  nn  guthann  leis.
Chaidh  i  'rithisd  a  ghabhail  conihairl'  a  muime.  "  Abair  ris,''  urs'  a
muime,  "  nach  pos  thu  e  gus  am  faigh  e  dhuit  guthann  de  chanach
an  t-sk'ibhe.  Thuirt  i  so  ris.  Dh'  fholbh  e,  's  an  ceann  la  is  bliadh-
na  thill  e  's  guthann  de  chanach  an  t-sleibhe  leis.  "  Abair  ris  a  nis,"
urs'  a  muime, "  nach  pos  thu  e  gus  an  d'  thnir  e  't'  ionnsuidh  guthann
siod'  a  sheasas  air  an  lar  le  h-òr  's  le  airgiod.  An  ceann  la  is  bliadhna
thill  e  leis  a  ghuthann.    "  Abair  ris  a  nis,"  urs'  a  muime,  "  nach  pos


URSGEUL.  223

tliu  e  gus  an  d"  thoir  e  't  'ionnsuidh  brbg  òir  is  brog  airgid."  Fhuair
e  dhi  bròjr  òir  is  bròg  airgid.  "  Abair  ris  a  nis,"  ursa  a  muime,
"  uach  pes  thu  e  mar  au  d'  thoir  e  't'  ionnsuidh  cisde  a  ghlaiseas
a  mach  's  a  stigh,  's  is  coingeis  leatlia  bhi  air  muir  na  air  tir.

Nur  a  fhuair  e  ehisde  phaisg  i  chuid  a  b'  fhearr  de  dh'  aodach  a
miithar  "s  d'a  h-aodach  fein  innte.  Chaidh  i  fe'in  an  sin  a  stigh  's  a'
ehisde,  's  dh'  iarr  i  air  a  h-athair  a  cur  a  mach  air  an  fhairge  feuch
demur  a  shnamhadh  i.  Chuir  a  h-athair  a  mach  i.  Nur  a  cliaidh  a
chisd'  a  mach,  bha  i  folbli  's  a'  folbh  gus  an  deach  i  as  an  t-sealladh.
Chaidh  i  air  fir  air  an  taobh  eile,  "s  thainig  buachaille  far  an  robh  i
airson  a  brisdeadh,  an  diiil  gun  robh  feudail  anns  a'  ehisde.  Nur  a
bha  e  'dol  a  'brisdeadh  ghlaoidli  ise,  "  Na  dean  ach  abair  ri  t'  athair
tigliiiin  an  so,  's  gheobh  e  na  "s  fheàird  e  1  'a  bheb.  Thhinig  'athair
's  thug  e  leis  g"a  thigh  fein  i.  'S  ann  aig  righ  bha  'm  buachaille,  's
bha  tigh  an  righ  dlhth  air.  "Nam  faigbinn,"  urs'  ise,  •' dol  ail'
fasdadh  do  'u  tigh  mhbr  so  thall."  "  Cha  'a  'eil  gin  a  dhith  orr',"  urs'
am  buachaille,  "  mar  am  bheil  te  dhitli  orra  fo  laimh  a' cbòcaire."
Chaidh  am  buachaille 's  bhruidhin  e  air  a  son,'s  chaidh  i  'na  searbhanta
fo  laimh  a'  ehòcaire.

Nur  a  bha  each  a'  dol  do  'n  t-seamioin,  's  a  dh'  fheòraidh  iad  dhise
an  robh  i  dol  ann,  thuirt  i  nach  robh  gun  robh  beagan  arain  aite  r"a
dheasachadh,  's  nach  b'  urrainn  i  dol  ann.  Nur  a  dh'  fholbh  iadsan
thug  i  urra  tigh  a'  bhuachaille,  "s  chuir  i  urra  guthann  de  chloimhe  na
h-eala.  Chaidh  i  do  'n  t-searmoin,  's  shuidh  i  ma  choinneamh  mac  an
righ.  Ghabh  mac  an  righ  gaol  urra.  Dh'  fliolbh  ise  tacan  ma'n  do
sgaoil  an  t-searmoin  ;  rainig  i  tigh  a'  bhuachaille ;  dh'  atharraich  i
h-aodach  ;  's  bha  i  stigh  rompa.  Nur  a  thainig  each  dhaehaidh  's  ann
aig  iomradh  air  a'  bhean  nasal  mhor  a  bha  *s  an  t-searmoin  a  bha
iad.  An  ath  dhomhnach  thuirt  iad  rithe,  an  robh  i  dol  do  'n  t-sear-
moin,'s  thuirt  i  nach  robh,  gun  rolih  beagan  arain  aice  r'a  dheasach-
adh. Nur  a  dh"  fholbh  iadsan  rainig  i  tigh  a'  bhuachaille.  's  chuir  i
urra  guthann  de  chanach  an  t-sle'ibhe,  's  chaidh  i  do  'n  t-searmoin.
Bha  mae  an  righ  "na  shuidhe  far  an  robh  ise  an  dorahnach  roimhid,
's  shuidh  ise  ma  choinneamh.  Thainig  i  mach  air  thoiseach  orra;
dh'  atharraich  i,  's  bha  i  aig  an  tigh  rompa;  's  nur  a  thainig
each  dhaehaidh  's  ann  aig  iomradh  air  a"  bhean  uasal  mhor  a  bha  'san
t-searmoin  a  bha  iad.  An  treas  dòmhnach  thuirt  iad  rithe  an  robh
i  dol  do  'n  t-searmoin,  's  thuirt  i  nach  robh  'gun  robh  beagan  arain
aiee  r"a  dheasachadh.  Nur  a  dh"  fholbh  iadsan  rainig  i  tigh  a  bhuach-
aille; ehuir  i  urra  an  guthann  a  sheasadh  air  an  lar  le  h-òr 's  le
h'  airgiod ;  "s  a'  bhrbg  bir  's  a'  bhrbg  airgid  ;  's  chaidh  i  'n  t-searmoin.
Bha  mac  an  righ  "na  shuidhe  for  an  robh  ise  an  dbmhnach  roimhid


224  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

's  shuidh  ise  far  an  robh  esan.  Chaidh  faire  'chur  air  na  dorsan  an
dòmhnach  so.  Dh"  diridh  ise.  Chunnaic  i  fruchag,  s'  leum  i  mach
air  an  fhrucliaig,  ach  ghleidli  iad  greim  air  te  de  na  brogait.  Thuirt
mac  an  righ  te  sam  bith  d'am  freagradh  a'  bhròg  gur  li'  i  'phòsadh
esan.  Bha  mòran  a'  feuchainn  na  bròig  orra,  's  a'  toirt  dhiii  nan  ladh-
aran  agus  nan  sailtean  feuch  am  freagradh  i  dhaibh,  acli  cha  robh
gin  d'an  robh  a'  bhrog  a'  freagairt.  Bha  eun  beag  am  bar  craoibhe,
's  e  daonnan  ag  radh,  h-uile  te  bha  feuchainn  na  bròig  urra.
"  Big,  big,  cha  'n  ann  duit  a  thig,  ach  do  'n  te  bhig  a  tha  fo
laimh  a'  chocaire."  Nur  nach  robh  iad  a'  faotainn  gin  d'am
freagradh  a'  bhrog  laidh  mac  an  righ,  's  chaidh  a'  mhathair  do  'n
chidsin  a  dh'  iomradh  air  a'  ghnothach.  "  Nacli  leig  sibh  fhaicinn
dbmhs'  a'  bhrog,"  urs'  ise ;  "  cha  dean  mi  coire  urra  co  dhiu."
"Thusa  a  ruid  ghrannda,  shalaich!  gum  freagradh  i  dhuitse!"
Chaidh  i  sios  's  dh'  innis  i  so  d'a  mac.  "  Nach  'eil  fhios,"  urs'  esan,
"nach  freagair  i  dhi  co  dhiu, 's  nach  fhaod  sibh  atoirtdhi  a  'toileach-
adh."  Clio  luath  's  a  chaidh  a'  bhrog  air  an  urlar,  leum  a'  bhrog  air
a  cois  I  "  De  'bheir  sibh  dhomhs',''  urs'  ise,  "  's  an  te  eile  'leigeil
fliaicinn  duibh."  Rainig  i  tigh  a  bhuachaille,  's  chuir  urra  na
brògan,  's  an  trusgan  a  sheasadh  air  an  Ikr  le  or  's  le  airgiod.  Nur
a  thill  i  cha  robh  ach  fios  a  chur  air  ministir,  's  phos  i  fein  is  mac  an
righ.

Ann  Darrocb  got  this  tale  from  Margaret  Connel.

The  chest  meant  by  the  narrator  of  this  version  is  clearly  the
kist,  which  every  well  provided  highland  lass  takes  to  service.
Such  kists,  and  such  lassies  seated  on  them,  may  be  seen  in
every  highland  steam -boat ;  and  still  finer  kists  may  be  seen  in
every  cottage  in  Norway,  where  wood  is  more  plentiful,  and  kists
are  on  a  larger  sc:ile.  The  contents  of  all  are  alike  ;  the  clothes
of  generations.  The  mother's  Sunday  dresses,  and  the  grand-
mother's, with  some  fine  shawl,  or_  cap,  or  bonnet,  or  something
hideous,  modern,  and  fashionable,  more  prized  by  far  than  the
picturesque  old  plaid,  or  bright  red  cloak  of  Scotch  women,  or
the  endless  Norse  costumes,  which  are  going  out  of  fashion  in
the  same  way.  The  little  bird's  note  is  imitated,  and  I  have
tried  to  spell  the  speech  in  English.

2d.  I  heard  a  version  of  this  in  the  island  of  South  Uist,
in  September  1859,  from  my  companion  MacCraw,  who  got
it    from    a   girl   then   in    the   inn   at  the   Sound  of  Benbecula,


THE  KING  VraO  WISHED  TO  MAURY  HIS  DAUGHTER.    2  2  5

MoRAG  A  CHOTA  Bhain,  Margery  White  Coats.  A  king  had  four
daughters,  and  his  wife  died,  and  lie  said  lie  would  marry  any
one  whom  his  dead  wife's  clothes  would  fit.  One  day  the
daughters  tried,  and  the  youngest  only  could  wear  them.  The
king  saw  them  from  a  window,  and  wished  to  marry  her,  and
she  went  for  advice  to  her  'mother's  brother.  He  advised  her  to
promise  to  marry  the  king  if  he  would  bring  her  a  gown  of  birds'
down,  and  a  gown  of  the  colours  of  the  sky,  woven  with  silver ;
and  when  he  got  that,  a  gown  of  the  colours  of  the  stars,  woven
with  gold,  and  glass  shoes.  When  he  had  got  them,  she  escaped
with  all  her  clothes,  by  the  help  of  her  uncle,  on  a  filly,  with  a
magic  bridle,  she  on  one  side,  and  her  chest  of  clothes  on  the
other.  She  rode  to  a  king's  palace,  hid  the  chest  in  a  hill  under
a  bush  of  rushes,  turned  the  filly  loose,  and  went  to  the  palace
with  nothing  on  but  a  white  petticoat  and  a  shift.  She  took
service  with  the  cook,  and  grew  dirty  and  ugly,  and  slept  on  a
bench  by  the  kitchen  fire,  and  her  work  was  'to  blow  under  the
great  caldron  all  day  long.  One'day  the  king's  son  came  home,
and  was  to  hold  a  feast ;  she  went  to  the  queen  and  asked  leave
to  go,  and  was  refused  because  she  was  so  dirty.  The  queen  had
a  basin  of  water  in  her  hand,  and  threw  it  at  her,  and  it  broke.
She  went  to  the  hill,  took  out  the  dress  of  down  and  silver,  and
shook  her  magic  bridle ;  the  filly  came,  and  she  mounted,  and
rode  to  the  feast.  "  The  king's  son  took  her  by  the  hand,  and
took  her  up  as  high  as  any  there,  and  set  her  on  his  own  lap  ;
and  when  the  feast  was  over,  there  was  no  reel  that  he  danced
but  he  gave  it  to  her."  He  asked  her  whence  she  came,  and  she
said,  from  the  kingdom  of  Broken  Basins  ;  and  the  prince  said
that  he  had  never  heard  of  that  land,  though  he  had  travelled  far.
She  escaped  and  returned  to  the  cook,  and  all  were  talking  about
the  beautiful  lady.  She  asked  about  her,  and  was  told  not  to
talk  about  what  she  did  not  understand,  "  a  dirty  little  wretch
like  her."  Then  the  prince  had  another  feast;  and  she  asked
leave  again,  and  the  queen  refused,  and  threw  a  candlestick  at
her,  and  it  broke,  and  she  did  as  before.  She  put  on  another
dress  and  went ;  the  king's  son  had  eight  men  on  each  side  of
the  door  to  catch  her.  The  same  scene  went  on,  and  she  said
she  came  from  the  country  of  Candlesticks — "  Tir  nan  Coil-
LEARAN,"  and  escaped,  leaving  a  glass  shoe.  Then  the  king's  sou
Q


226  WEST  niGHLAXD  TALES.

fell  sick  (of  coarse),  and  would  only  marry  the  woman  wliom  the
shoe  would  fit ;  and  all  the  ladies  came  and  cut  ofT  their  toes  and
heels,  but  in  vain.  Then  he  asked  if  there  was  none  other.
Then  a  small  creature  put  his  head  in  at  the  door  and  said,  "If
thou  didst  but  know,  she  whom  thou  seekest  is  under  the  cook."
Then  he  got  the  history  of  the  basin  and  candlestick  from  bis
mother.  The  shoe  was  tried  and  fitted,  and  he  was  to  marry
Morag.  All  were  in  despair,  and  abused  her ;  but  she  went  out
to  her  chest,  shook  the  magic  bridle,  and  arrayed  herself,  and
came  back  on  the  filly,  with  a  "  powney"  behind  with  the  chest.
Then  all  there  that  had  despised  her  fell  on  their  knees,  and  she
was  married  to  the  prince.  "  And  I  did  not  get  a  bit  there  at
the  wedding,"  said  the  girl.

This  was  told  as  we  walked  along  the  road,  and  is  but  a  short
outline  of  what  was  told  me,  written  from  notes  made  in  the
evening.  The  man  said  that  the  girl  told  it  with  a  great  deal  of
the  queer  old  language,  which  he  could  not  remember.

The  girl  and  her  chest  on  the  same  horse  may  be  seen  in  the
Highlands.  The  girl,  in  her  white  coats  and  short  gown,  may  be
seen  blowing  the  fire  in  highland  inns,  the  queen's  likeness
might  be  found;  and  the  feast  is  a  highland  ball;  the  filly  and
the  magic  bridle  are  common  in  other  stories ;  the  incidents  of
the  basin  and  candlestick  have  an  equivalent  in  Norse  ;  and  I
got  them  from  a  woman  at  the  Sound  of  Barra  afterwards,  in  an-
other story.  This  shows  what  may  be  lost  by  dignified  travelling.
While  the  man  was  enjoying  himself  in  the  kitchen,  the  employer
was  smoking  in  solitary  dignity,  up  stairs  in  his  bed-room,  writing
a  journal,  and  utterly  unconscious  that  the  game  he  pursued  was
so  near.

I  have  other  versions  of  this  tale  from  other  sources,  and  may
find  room  for  them  hereafter.

The  beginning  is  clearly  the  same  as  the  French  story  of
"  Peau  d'  Ane,"  and  the  end  of  it  is  the  same  as  the  Norse  "  Katie
Wooden  Cloak;"  that  is  the  same  as  Mr.  Peter  Buchan's  "  Piashen
Coatie "  (MSS.  collection) ;  and  that  again  has  something  of
"The  Sharp  Grey  Sheep"  in  Gaelic;  and  that  has  to  do  with
half  a  dozen  stories  in  Grimm ;  and  this  is  like  "  Cinderella,''
and  like  a  Scotch  story,  quoted  in  a  review  of  Chambers'  Nur-
sery Rhymes  in  Tait's  Edinburgh  Magazine.


THE  KIXG  WHO  WISHED  TO  MARRY  HIS  DAUGHTER.    227

In  fifteen  volumes  which  I  explored  one  fine  day,  to  see  if
Tail  could  account  for  highland  stories,  I  found  few  popular  tales  ;
and  of  these  taken  from  the  German,  which  I  did  find,  I  have
found  none  in  the  west,  so  far  as  I  can  remember.  Tail's  stories
are  polished,  but  in  some  of  the  original  poetry  legends  can  be
traced.

"  Finette  Cendron,"  in  the  collection  of  the  Contesse  d'
Aulnoy,  belongs  to  the  same  class  ;  and  the  story  exists  in  iStra-
parola,  a  book  which  is  now  very  little  known,  and  which  de-
serves to  be  forgotten,  but  which  contains  useful  information
nevertheless.  Those  who  hold  that  popular  tales  are  derived
from  books,  will  look  on  Straparola's  story  as  the  original.  It
was  printed  at  Venice  in  Italian  in  1567,  that  is  293  years  ago.
Those  who  hold  that  popular  tales  are  preserved  in  all  countries,
and  in  all  languages  alike,  will  hold  that  the  Italian,  German,
French,  Norse,  English,  and  Gaelic,  are  all  versions  of  the  same
story,  and  that  it  is  as  old  as  the  common  stock  from  which  all
these  races  sprang.

After  woi-king  for  a  year,  and  weighing  all  the  evidence  that
has  come  in  my  way,  I  have  come  to  agree  with  those  who  hold
that  popular  tales  are  generally  pure  traditions  ;  but  in  order  that
others  may  judge,  I  give  the  following  short  outline  of  the  story
in  Straparola.     Favola  iv.

Tebaldo,  prince  of  Salerno,  promises  to  his  dying  wife,  that
he  will  only  marry  another,  if  he  can  find  one  whom  a  certain
ring  will  fit.  After  a  time  the  promise  becomes  known,  and  it  is
noised  abroad  that  the  prince  wishes  to  marry  again.  Ladies
come  ;  but  the  ring  is  too  small  for  one,  too  large  for  another,  and
fits  no  one.  One  day,  Doralice,  the  daughter  of  Tebaldo,  tries  on
her  mother's  ring,  and  shows  her  father  that  it  fits,  and  then  the
same  strange  unnatural  wish  to  marry  his  daughter  seizes  the
Prince  of  Salerno  that  seizes  the  fathers  in  the  French  and  Gaelic
stories,  and  caused  the  Cenci  tragedy ;  but  the  French  and  Gaelic
stories  have  something  about  dresses,  which  the  Italian  has  not.

Doralice  goes  to  her  old  nurse  for  advice,  and  hides  herself  in
a  wardrobe  which  none  could  open  from  without  but  the  nurse,
who  puts  in  a  supply  of  a  certain  liquor  of  which  a  spoonful,
however  small,  would  keep  a  person  alive  for  a  long  time.  The
wardrobe  is  described,  and  it  is  such  a  one  as  would  be  found  in


228


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


aa  Italian  palace.  The  father,  having  missed  the  daughter,
cannot  abide  the  sight  of  the  wardrobe,  orders  it  to  be  carried
to  the  piazza  by  servants,  and  it  is  sold  to  a  Genoese  merchant.
He  carries  it  over  sea  in  a  ship  to  Britannia,  and  there  sells  it  to
the  king  "  Genese."

Here  let  me  remark  that  the  form  of  the  popular  tale  was
exactly  the  same  as  it  is  now,  nearly  three  hundred  years  ago.
The  scene  is  laid  somewhere,  a  long  way  oft';  the  names  are
those  which  the  narrator  happens  to  know,  misapplied;  the  orna-
ments are  those  about  him  ;  and  the  incidents,  within  a  certain
range,  are  preserved  entire.  The  story  is  an  old  play,  with  new
scenery,  and  decorations  in  every  country,  and  with  fresh  actors
in  every  age.

King  Genese  of  England  comes  on  board  the  ship,  and  is
taken  with  the  beauty  of  the  wardrobe,  buys  it,  and  has  it  taken
to  his  own  chamber.  The  hidden  lady  comes  out  when  she  is
left  alone,  adorns  the  chamber,  sweeps  it  and  keeps  it  neat,  and
at  last  she  is  discovered,  and  the  king  marries  her.

And  here  the  Italian  story  goes  off  on  quite  a  different  road.
it  does  as  popular  tales  seem  to  do  everywhere  else.  No  sooner
has  a  seeming  origin  been  discovered  for  one  bit,  than  the  whole
changes  into  something  else.  It  is  as  if  some  convulsion  were  to
overturn  the  Vatican,  and  break  the  statues  once  more,  and  some
future  antiquary  were  to  try  to  fit  the  heads,  legs,  and  anns  to  the
proper  bodies.  The  head  of  Apollo  would  not  do  for  the  Torso
Farnese,  but  it  might  seem  to  fit  some  strapping  Venus,  and  bur
arms  might  go  on  to  some  Apollino ;  and  so,  when  only  a  few
fragments  of  popular  tales  areknown,  it  is  perfectly  hopeless  to
try  to  restore  them.  If  all  the  fragments  of  all  the  statues  in  the
Vatican  were  gathered  together,  then  there  might  be  some  hope
of  mending  them  ;  but  some  are  strongly  suspected  not  to  wear
their  own  heads  even  now.  If  all  the  fragments  of  all  the  popu-
lar tales  in  the  world  were  gathered,  something  might  be  recon-
structed ;  hvA,  unless  each  collector  is  content  to  bring  bis  gather-
ings without  alteration,  the  restorer  will  have  hard  work.

But  to  return  to  Straparola.  The  king  marries  the  beautiful
lady  who  keeps  his  room  so  tidy  in  so  mysterious  a  manner,  and
they  have  two  sons.  The  wicked  Tebaldo,  wandering  over  the
world  in  disguise,  arrives  in  Britain,  knows  his  daughter,  obtains


THE  KING  WHO  WISHED  TO  MARRY  HIS  DAUGHTER.     229

access  to  tlie  palace,  murders  the  two  children,  and  leaves  a
bloody  knife  in  the  Queen's  possession.  An  astrologer  is  con-
sulted, tells  that  the  knife  will  be  found,  and  it  is  found  in  the
Queen's  keeping  ;  and  she  is  to  die.  The  astrologer,  who  knows
everything,  goes  off  to  the  old  nurse,  who  comes  at  once  to  Eng-
land, and  tells  the  king  all  that  has  happened.  Tebaldo  is
caught,  and  torn  to  pieces  by  four  horses,  and  his  flesh  given  to
rabid  dogs.

So  end  the  wicked  in  many  Gaelic  tales.  "  He  was  torn  be-
tween horses,  burned  amongst  fires,  and  his  ashes  let  fly  with
the  wind,"  is  the  end  of  one.

The  French  story,  "  Peau  d'  Ane,"  is  in  "  les  Contes  des  Fees
de  Charles  Perrault,"  the  wicked  father  was  sent  for  "Robes,"
"  Couleur  du  temps,''  "  Couleur  du  soleil,"  "  Couleur  de  la  Lune,"
and  got  them ;  and  then  for  a  donkey's  skin,  in  which  the  lady
disguised  herself.  But  then  the  French  story  goes  off  on  another
road,  for  the  donkey  was  precious  and  magical,  and  pieces  of  gold
were  found  in  his  stall ;  and  he  belongs  to  another  class  of  stories,
which  have  Gaelic  relations.     (Perrault  died  1703).

And  so  popular  tales  are  woven  together  in  a  network  which
seems  to  pervade  the  world,  and  to  be  fastened  to  everything
in  it.  Tradition,  books,  history,  and  mythology,  hang  together;
no  sooner  has  the  net  been  freed  from  one  snag,  and  a  mesh
gained,  than  another  mesh  is  discovered  ;  and  so,  unless  many
hands  combine,  the  net  and  the  contents  will  never  be  brought
to  shore.


XV.

THE  POOE  BEOTHEE  AND  THE  EICH.

From  Flora  MacTntyre,  Islay.

THERE  was  a  poor  brother  and  a  rich  brother  be-
fore now.  The  work  that  the  poor  one  had,  was
to  be  at  drains  ;  he  hired  a  gillie,  and  they  had
nothing  with  their  mealtime  but  to  take  it  without
sauce.  "  Hadn't  we  better,"  said  the  gilHe,  "  steal  a  cow
of  thy  brother's  lot  ?"     They  went  and  they  did  this.

The  rich  brother  was  taking  a  notion  that  it  was
they  who  stole  his  cow  ;  and  he  did  not  know  in  what
way  he  could  contrive  to  find  out  if  it  Avere  they  who
stole  her.  He  went  and  he  put  his  mother-in-law  in
a  kist,  and  he  came  to  seek  room  for  the  kist  in  his
brother's  house  ;  he  put  bread  and  cheese  with  the
crone  in  the  kist ;  and  there  was  a  hole  in  it,  in
order  that  she  might  find  out  everything.  The  gilHe
found  out  that  the  crone  was  in  the  kist ;  he  wetted
sacks  and  thrcAV  them  on  top  of  the  kist ;  the
water  was  streaming  out  of  the  sacks  on  the  crone,
and  she  was  not  hearing  a  word.  He  went,  in  the
night,  where  the  crone  was,  and  he  said  to  her,  "  Was
she  hearing f  "I  am  not,"  said  she.  "Art  thou
eating  a  few  ?"  "  I  am  not."  "  Give  me  a  piece  of
the  cheese,  and  I  will  cut  it  for  thee."  He  cut  the
cheese,  and  he  stuffed  it  into  her  throat  till  she  was
choked.  The  kist  was  taken  home,  and  the  dead  crone
in  it.  They  buried  the  crone,  and  they  laid  out  but
little  on  her.


THE  POOR  BROTHER  AND  THE  RICH.  2  3  1

In  the  night,  said  the  poor  man's  gillie  to  his
master,  "  Is  it  not  lamentable  that  such  and  such  linen
should  go  with  the  crone  to  the  cell,*  while  the  cliildren
are  so  much  in  want  of  shirts  ?"  He  went,  and  he
took  a  spade  with  him,  and  he  reached  the  church-
yard. He  dug  the  grave,  and  he  took  the  crone  from
the  cofìfìn  ;  he  took  off  her  the  tais  dress,  he  threw  her
on  his  back,  and  he  came  to  the  house  of  the  rich
brother  ;  he  went  in  Avith  her,  and  he  placed  her
seated  at  the  fireside,  and  the  tongs  between  her  two
feet.  When  the  maid  servant  rose  in  the  morning,
she  fell  in  a  faint  when  she  saw  the  crone  before  her.
The  rich  brother  thrashed  his  wife  because  of  her
mother  saying,  "  that  she  was  about  to  bring  him  to
bare  ruin."  He  went  to  the  house  of  his  poor  brother
and  told  that  the  crone  had  come  home.  "  Ah  ha  ! "
said  the  gillie,  "  because  thou  didst  not  spend  enough
on  her  living,  thou  wilt  spend  it  on  her  dead  ;  I  saw
the  Hke  of  this  before  ;  thou  must  lay  out  a  good  deal
on  her."

They  bought  a  good  lot  of  things  for  the  funeral,
and  they  left  the  one  half  of  it  in  the  house  of  the  poor
brother  and  they  buried  the  crone  again.  "Is  it  not
lamentable,"  said  the  poor  brother's  gillie  to  his  mas-
ter, "  that  such  a  lot  of  linen  should  go  on  the  crone,
wliile  thou  art  so  much  in  want  of  a  shirt  thyself  1"
He  went  to  the  cell  that  night  again,  he  raised  the
crone,  he  took  off  her  the  tais  clothes,  and  he  took  her
with  liim  on  his  back  ;  he  went  into  the  house  of  the
rich  brother,  as  was  usual,  and  he  set  the  crone  stand-
ing at  the  end  of  the  dresser,  with  her  claw  full  of
seeds  from  the  dish  of  sowens,  as  if  she  were  eating  it.
When  the  man  of  the  house  saw  her  back  in  the
morning,  he  thrashed  his  wife  soundly,  because  of  her
*  "  Kill,"  cell  a  small  church ;  hence  applied  to  church-yards.


232  AVEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

mother.  He  went  then  to  the  house  of  his  poor
brother,  and  he  told  that  the  crone  had  come  home
again.  "  Aha  !"  said  the  gillie,  "because  thou  didst  not
spend  money  on  her  living,  thou  wilt  spend  it  on  her
dead  ;  I  saw  the  like  of  tliis  before."  "  Go  thou,  then,
and  lay  out  a  good  deal  on  her,  for  I  am  tired  of  her,"
said  the  man.  He  bought  a  good  lot  for  the  crone's
funeral,  and  he  took  the  one  half  to  his  master's
house.  They  buried  the  crone.  Li  the  night,  said
the  gillie  to  his  master,  "  Is  it  not  lamentable  that
such  linen  should  go  -with  the  crone  to  the  cell,  while
I  myself  am  in  such  want  of  a  shirt."  He  took  him-
self to  the  cell,  he  raised  the  crone,  he  took  off  her  the
tais  dress,  he  put  her  on  top  of  him,  and  he  reached
the  rich  brother's  house.  He  did  not  get  in  this
journey,  so  he  went  with  her  to  the  stable,  and  he  tied
her  on  top  of  a  year-old  colt.  When  they  rose  in  the
morning,  they  were  well  pleased  when  they  did  not
see  the  crone  before  them.  He  was  going  from  home ;
he  went  out  to  the  stable,  and  he  took  the  mare  "with
him  ;  but  he  never  perceived  that  the  crone  was  on
top  of  the  year-old.  When  he  went  away  on  top  of
the  mare,  after  him  went  the  year-old  ■\\'ith  the  crone
clattering  on  top  of  him.  He  turned  back  when  he
saw  the  crone,  and  he  was  like  to  kill  his  Avife  tliis
time.  He  went  to  his  brother's  house  and  he  told
that  the  crone  had  come  Ijack  again.

"  As  thou  didst  not  spend  money  on  her  living,"
said  the  gillie,  "  thou  must  spend  it  on  her  dead."

"  Go  and  lay  out  as  thou  wilt  on  her,"  said  he  to
the  gillie,  "  but  keep  her  away."

He  went  this  time  and  he  bought  a  good  lot  for  the
crone's  funeral,  and  he  invited  every  one  in  the  place.
They  buried  the  crone  again ;  and  the  poor  brother
was  as  wealthy  as  the  other,  by  reason  of  the  funerals.


^33


URSGEUL.

Bha  brathair  bochd  agus  brathair  beairteach  aon  roimhe  so.  'Se  'n
obair  a  bh'  aig  an  fhear  bhochd  a  bhi  dèanadh  dhraintan.  Dh'
fliasdaidh  e  gille,  's  cha  robh  mir  aca  le  am  biadh  ach  'ga  'ghabhail
tur.  "Nach  fhearra  dhuinn,"  urs'  an  gille  ;  "  bo  dechuid  do  bhràthar
a  ghoid."  Dh"  fholbh  iad  agus  rinn  iad  so.  Bha 'm  brathair  beairt-
each a'  gabhail  amharuis  gur  h-iad  a  ghoid  a'  bhò,  's  cha  robh  fhios
aige  dè  'n  dòigh  a  dhcanadh  e  air  faotainn  a  mach  an  iad  a  ghoid  i.

Dh'  fholbh  e  '3  chuir  e  'mhathair  che'ile  ann  an  cisde,  's  thainig  e
dh'  iarraidh  rum  de  'n  chisde  ann  an  tigh  a  bhrathar.  Chuir  e  aran
is  caise  leis  a'  chaillich  anns  a'  chisde,  's  bha  toll  urra,  air  alt  gu'
mòchadh  ise  do  na  h-uile  gnothuch.  Mhothaich  an  gille  gun
robh  a'  chailleach  anns  a'  chisde.  Fhliuch  e  saic,  is  thilg  e  air  muinn
na  cisd'  iad.  Bha  'n  t-uisge  'sruthadh  as  na  saic  air  a'  chaillich,  '3
cha  robh  i  'cluinntinn  smid.  Chaidh  e  anns  an  oidhche  far  an  robh  a'
chailleach,  's  thuirt  e  rithe  an  robh  i  cluinntinn.  "  Cha  'u  'eil,"  urs'
ise.  "Am  bheil  thu  'g  itheadh  a'  bheag?  "  "  Cha  'n  'eil."  "  Thoir
dhòmhsa  piosa  de  'n  chaise  's  gearraidh  mi  dhuit  e."  Ghekrr  e  'n
ckise,  's  dhinn  e  'na  muineal  e  gus  an  do  thachd  e  i.  Chaidh  a'  chisde
'thoirt  dachaidh,  's  a'  chailleach  marbh  innte.  Thiolaic  iad  a'  chaill-
each, 's  cha  d'  rinn  iad  ach  cosdas  beag  urra.  Anns  an  oidhche  thuirt
gille  an  fhir  bhochd  r'a  mhaighstir,  "  Nach  deisneach  a  leithid  siod
de  dh'  anart  a  dhol  leis  a'  chaillich  do  'n  chill,  's  cho  feumail  's  a  tha
na  paisdean  air  leintean."

Dh'  fholbh  e  's  thug  e  leis  spàd ;  rainig  e  'n  clagh  ;  chladhaich  e
'n  uaigh ;  thug  e  'chailleach  as  a  chiste-luidh ;  thug  e  dhi  an  t-ais-aod-
ach  ;  thilg  e  air  a  mhuinn  i ;  's  thainig  e  gu  tigh  a*  bhràthair  bheairt-
each.  Chaidh  e  stigh  leatha,  's  chuir  e  i  'na  suidhe  aig  a'  ghealbhan,
's  an  clotha  eadar  a  da  chois.  Nur  a  dh'  eiridh  an  searbhanta  anns
a'  mhaidinn  thuit  i  ann  am  paiseanadh,  nur  a  chunnaic  i  'chailleach
roimpe.  Ghabh  am  brathair  bearteach  air  a'  bhean  airson  a  mathar
ag  radh  gun  robh  i  brath  a  sgrios.  Chaidh  e  gu  tigh  a'  bhrathair
bhochd,  's  dh'  innis  e  gun  d'  thainig  a'  chailleach  dhachaidh.  "A
ha !  "  urs'  an  gille,  "  0  nach  do  chosd  thu  r'a  beò  e  cosdaidh  thu  r'a
marbh  e  !  Chunnaic  mise  leithid  so  roimhid.  Feumaidh  tu  cosdas
math  a  dheanadh  urra."

Cheannaich  iad  cuid  mhath  de  ghnothuichean  airson  an  tòrraidh,
's  dh'  fhag  iad  an  darna  leith  dheth  ann  an  tigh  a'  bhrathair  bhochd.
Thiolaic  iad  a'  chailleach  a  rithisd.     "  Nach  deisneach,"  ursa  gille


234  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

■"bhrathair  bhochd  r'a  mhaighstir,  "  a  leithid  siod  do  dh'  anart  a  dhol
air  a'  chaillich,  's  cho  feumail  's  a  tha  thu  fein  air  Icine."

Chaidh  e  do  'n  chill  an  oidhcii°,  sin  a  rithisd.  Thog  e  'chailleach,
's  thug  e  dhith  an  t-ais-aodach,  's  thug  e  leis  air  a'  mhuinn  i.  Chaidh  e
stigh  do  thigh  a'  bhrathair  bheairtich  mar  a  b'  abhaist,  's  chuir  e
'chailleach  'na  seasamh  aig  ceann  an  dresseir,  's  a  crog  Ian  do  chaith
as  an  t-soitheach  chabhrach,  mar  gum  biodh  i  'ga  itheadh.  Nur  a
chunnaic  fear  an  tighe  air  a  h-ais  i  anns  a  mhaidinn,  ghabh  e  air  a'
bhean  gu  h-iomlan  airson  a  mathar.  Chaidh  e  'n  sin  do  thigh  a'
bhrathar  bhochd,  's  dh'  innis  e  gun  d'  thainig  a'  chailleach  dhach-
aidh  a  rithisd.  "  A  ha  ! "  urs'  an  gille,  '•  0  nach  do  chosd  thu  r'a
beò  e,  cosdaidh  thu  r'a  marbh  e."  Chunnaic  niise  'leithid  so  roimhid,
"  Folbh  thusa  mata  's  dean  cosdas  math  urra  chionn  tha  mise  sgitfa
dhi."

Cheannaich  e  cuid  mhath  thun  tòrradh  na  caillich,  's  thug  e  'n
darna  leith  thun  tigh  a'  mhaighstir.  Thiolaic  iad  a'  chailleach.  Anns
an  oidhche  urs'  an  gille  r'a  mhaighstir,  "  Nach  deisneach  a'  leithid
siod  do  dh'  anart  a  dhol  leis  a'  chaillich  do  'n  chill,  's  mi  fe'in  cho
feumail  air  leine."  Thug  e  'chill  air;  thog  e  chailleach;  thug  e  dhi
an  t-ais-aodach  ;  chuir  e  air  a  mhuinn  i ;  's  ràinig  e  tigh  a'  bhrathar
bheairteach.  C'lia  d'  fhuair  e  stigh  air  an  t-siubhal  so.  Chaidh  e
leatha  do  'n  sthbull,  's  cheangail  e  i  air  muinn  bliadhnach  eich.  Nur
a  dh'  eiridh  iad  's  a'  mhaidinn  bha  iad  gu  toilichte,  nur  nach  fhac  iad
a'  chailleach  romhpa.  Bha  esan  a'  dol  o'  n  tigh.  Chaidh  e  mach  do
'n  stàbull,  's  thug  e  leis  an  capull,  ach  cha  do  mhothaich  e  gim  robh
'chailleach  air  mviinn  a  bhliadhnaich;  nur  a  dh'  fliolbh  esan  air
muinn  a  chapuill,  as  a  dheigh  a  bha  'm  bliadhnach,  's  a'  chailleach  a'
glaigeileis  air  a  mhuinn.  Thill  e  air  ais  nur  a  chunnaic  e  chailleach,
's  theab  e  bhean  a  mharbhadh  air  an  uair  so.  Chaidh  e  do  thigh  a'
bhrathar,  's  dh'  innis  e  gun  d'  thainig  a'  chailleach  dhachaidh  a  rith-
isd. "O  nach  do  chosd  thu  r'a  beò  e,"  ars'  an  gille,  "feumaidh
tu  'chosd  r'a  marbh."  "  Theirig  agus  dean  do  rogha  cosdus  rithe,"
ars'  esan  ris  a'  ghille,  "  ach  cum  air  folbh  i."  Chaidh  e  air  an  t-
siubhail  so  agus  cheannaich  cuid  mhath  airson  tòrradh  na  caillich
'schuir'e  gach  duine  bha'san  aite.  Thiolaic  iad  a'  chailleach  a  rithisd,
's  bha  'm  brkthair  bochd  cho  beairteach  ris  an  fhear  eile  air  tailleabh
nan  torradh.


One  James  MacQueen,  who  lived  at  Tirneagan,  near  Kil-
meny,  but  who  is  not  living  now,  gave  this  to  one  Flora  Mac-
Intyre,  at  Kilmeny,  who  told  it  to  Hector  MacLean. — May  1869.


URSGEUL.  235

This  story  is  not  like  any  other  that  I  know.  It  is  one  of  a
kind  which  is  common,  in  which  mortals  alone  play  a  part.  Some
are  humorous,  and  some  free.  One  such  has  been  versified  by
Allan  Ramsay,  page  520,  vol.  2  ;  and  is  nearly  the  same  as  Tom
Totherhouse,  the  Norse  tale.

The  expensive  funeral  was  once  truly  highland  ;  and  the  invita-
tion to  all  the  world  characteristic.  It  used  to  be  told  of  one  such
funeral  party,  that  they  dropped  the  cofKn  out  of  a  cart  on  the
way  over  a  strand,  and  never  found  it  out  till  they  got  to  the
churchyard.  They  returned  and  finished  the  funeral,  but  went
home  afterwards  very  drunk;  the  sons  shouting  "  Horo  !  it's  the
carlin's  wedding."  The  funeral  dinner  was  within  my  memory,
and  still  may  be,  a  solemn  feast.  Such  toasts  as  "  Comfort  to
the  distressed,"  and  "The  memory  of  the  deceased,"  were  drank
in  solemn  silence  ;  and  the  whole  matter  was  conducted  with
gravity  and  decorum,  but  with  profuse  and  necessary  hospitality,
for  the  funeral  guests  had  often  to  travel  great  distances,  and  the
coffin  had  to  be  carried  many  miles.  No  Highlander,  if  his  friends
can  help  it,  is  buried  anywhere  but  at  home  ;  coffins  may  be  seen
on  board  the  steamers,  conveying  to  the  outer  islands  the  bodies
of  those  who  have  died  on  the  main  land.  It  is  a  poetic  wish  to
be  buried  amongst  friends,  and  one  that  is  in  full  force  in  the
Highlands  to  this  day.  The  curse  of  Scotland  may  occasionally
intrude  even  on  such  solemn  occasions  ;  but  a  funeral  is  almost
always  decorously  conducted.  In  some  places,  as  I  am  told,  a
piper  may  still  be  seen  at  the  head  of  the  funeral  procession,
playing  a  dirge.  There  is  no  want  of  reverence,  but  death  is
treated  as  an  ordinary  event.  I  have  seen  a  man's  tombstone,
with  a  blank  for  the  date,  standing  at  the  end  of  his  house,  while
he  was  quite  well.

It  was  lately  said  of  a  man  who  went  home  to  die,  "  He  took
his  own  body  home  ;''  and  so  he  did.

There  is  something  mythological  about  the  old  woman  who
will  not  rest,  because  enough  has  not  been  laid  out  on  her  funeral.
It  may  be  some  remnant  of  a  notion  of  purgatory  :  but  I  suspect
it  is  something  heathen.

Eomans  had  to  pay  their  passage,  perhaps  Celts  had  to  do  so
likewise.


XVI.

THE  KING   or  LOCHLIN'S  THEEE
DAUGHTERS.

From  Neill  Gillies,  fislierman,  near  Inverary.

THERE  was  a  king  over  Loclilin,  once  uj^on  a  time,
who  had  a  leash  of  daughters  ;  they  went  out  (on)
a  day  to  take  a  walk ;  and  there  came  three  giants,
and  they  took  with  them  the  daughters  of  the  king,
and  there  was  no  knowing  where  they  had  gone.
Then  the  king  sent  word  for  the  sheanachy,  and  he
asked  him  if  he  knew  where  his  lot  of  daughters  had
gone.  The  sheanachy  said  to  the  king  that  three
giants  had  taken  them  with  them,  and  they  were  in
the  earth  down  below  by  them,  and  there  was  no  way
to  get  them  but  by  making  a  ship  that  would  sail  on
sea  and  land  ;  and  so  it  was  that  the  king  set  out  an
order,  any  one  who  would  build  a  ship  that  would  sail
on  sea  and  on  land,  that  he  should  get  the  king's  big
daughter  to  marry.  There  was  a  widow  there  who  had
a  leash  of  sons  ;  and  the  eldest  said  to  his  mother  on
a  day  that  was  there,  "  Cook  for  me  a  bannock,  and
roast  a  cock ;  I  am  going  away  to  cut  wood,  and  to
build  a  ship  that  will  go  to  seek  the  daughters  of  the
king."  His  mother  said  to  him,  "  Which  is  better
with  thee,  the  big  bannock  with  my  cursing,  or  a
little  bannock  with  my  blessing  ?"     "  Give  me  a  big


THE  KING  OP  LOCHLINS  THREE  DAUGHTERS.       237

bannock,  it  "will  be  small  enough  before  I  build  a
sbip."  He  got  a  bannock  and  be  went  away.  He
arrived  wbere  there  was  a  great  wood  and  a  river,  and
there  he  sat  at  the  side  of  the  river  to  take  the  ban-
nock. A  great  Uruisg  came  out  of  the  river,  and
she  asked  a  part  of  the  bannock.  He  said  that  he
would  not  give  her  a  morsel,  that  it  was  little  enough
for  himself.  He  began  cutting  the  wood,  and  every
tree  he  cut  would  be  on  foot  again  ;  and  so  he  was  till
the  night  came.

When  the  night  came,  he  went  home  mournful,
tearful,  blind  sorrowful.  His  mother  asked,  "How
went  it  with  thee  to-day,  son  ?"  He  said  "  That  it
went  but  black  ill ;  every  tree  I  would  cut  would  be  on
foot  again."  A  day  or  two  after  this  the  middle
brother  said  that  he  himself  would  go  ;  and  he  asked
his  mother  to  cook  liim  a  cake  and  roast  liim  a  cock  ;
and  in  the  very  way  as  happened  to  his  eldest  brother,
so  it  happened  to  him.  The  mother  said  the  very
same  thing  to  the  young  one ;  and  he  took  the  little
bannock.  The  Uruisg  came,  and  she  asked  a  part  of
the  cake  and  the  cock.  He  said  to  her,  "  That  she
should  get  that."  When  the  Uruisg  had  eaten  her  own
share  of  the  cake  and  of  the  cock,  she  said  to  him
"  That  she  knew  what  had  brought  him  there  as  well
as  he  himself,  but  he  was  to  go  home ;  but  to  be  sure
to  meet  her  there  at  the  end  of  a  day  and  year  ;  and
that  the  ship  would  be  ready  at  the  end.

It  was  thus  it  happened  :  At  the  end  of  a  day
and  a  year  the  widow's  young  son  went,  and  he  found
that  the  Uruisg  had  the  ship  floating  on  the  river,  fuUy
equipped.  He  went  away  then  with  the  ship,  and  a
leash  of  gentlemen,  as  great  as  were  in  the  kingdom,
that  were  to  marry  the  daughters  of  the  king.  They
were  but  a  short  time  sailing  when  they  saw  a  man


238  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

drinking  a  river  that  was  there.  He  asked  him,
"  What  art  thou  doing  there  ?"  "  I  am  drinking  up
this  river."  "  Thou  hadst  better  come  with  me,  and  I
will  give  thee  meat  and  wages,  and  better  work  than
that."  "  I  will  do  that,"  said  he.  They  had  not
gone  far  forward,  when  they  saw  a  man  eating  a  stot
in  a  park.  "  Wliat  art  thou  doing  there  Ì"  said  he.
"  I  am  here  going  to  eat  all  the  stots  in  this  park."
"  Thou  hadst  better  go  with  me,  and  thou  wilt  get
work,  and  wages  better  than  raw  flesh."  "I  wiU  do
that,"  said  he.  They  went  but  a  short  distance  when
they  saw  another  man  with  liis  ear  to  the  earth.  "  What
art  thou  doing  there  ?"  said  he.  "  I  am  here  hearing
the  grass  coming  tlirough  earth."  '•  Go  with  me,  and
thou  wilt  get  meat,  and  better  wages  than  to  be  there
with  thy  ear  to  the  earth."  They  were  thus  sailing
back  and  forwards,  when  the  man  who  was  hstening
said,  "  That  this  was  the  place  ia  w^hich  were  the
king's  daughters  and  the  giants."  The  widow's  son,
and  the  three  that  had  faUen  in  wdth  them,  were  let
down  in  a  creel  in  a  great  hole  that  was  there.  They
reached  the  house  of  the  big  giant.  "  Ha  !  ha  !  "  said
he,  the  giant,  "  I  know  well  what  thou  art  seeking
here.  Thou  art  seeking  the  king's  daughter,  but  thou
wilt  not  get  that,  unless  thou  hast  a  man  that  will
drink  as  much  water  as  I."  He  set  the  man  who  was
drinking  the  river  to  hold  drinking  against  the  giant ;
and  before  he  was  half  satisfied  the  giant  burst.  Then
they  went  where  the  second  giant  was.  "  Ho,  both  !
ha,  hath  !"  said  the  giant,  "  I  know  well  what  sent
thee  here  ;  thou  art  seeking  the  king's  daughter  ;  but
thou  shalt  not  get  her,  if  thou  hast  not  a  man  who  wiU
eat  as  much  flesh  as  I."  He  set  the  man  who  was  eat-
ing the  stot  to  hold  the  eating  of  flesh  against  the
giant ;  but  before  he  was  half  satisfied  the  giant  burst.


THE  KING  OF  LOCHLIN  S  THREE  DAUGHTERS.       239

Then  he  went  where  the  third  giant  was.  "  Haio  !  "
said  the  giant,  "  I  know  what  set  thee  here ;  but  thou
wilt  not  get  the  king's  daughter,  by  any  means,  unless
thou  stayest  a  day  and  a  year  by  me  a  sgalag"  (slave,
servant).  "  I  will  do  that,"  said  he  ;  and  he  sent  up
in  the  basket,  first  the  tlrree  men,  and  then  the  king's
daughters.  The  three  great  men  were  waiting  at  the
mouth  of  the  hole  till  they  should  come  uj),  and  they
went  with  them  where  the  king  was ;  and  they  told
the  king  that  they  themselves  had  done  all  the  daring
deeds  that  there  were.

When  the  end  of  a  day  and  year  had  come,  he  said
to  the  giant,  "  That  he  was  going."  The  giant  said,
"  That  he  had  an  eagle  that  would  set  him  up  to  the
top  of  the  hole."  The  giant  set  the  eagle  away  with
him,  and  five  stots  and  ten  for  a  meal  for  her  ;  but  the
eagle  went  not  half  way  up  through  the  hole  when  she
had  eaten  the  stots,  and  she  returned  back  again.

Then  the  giant  said  to  him,  "  Thou  must  remain
by  me  another  day  and  year,  and  then  I  will  send  thee
away."  When  the  end  of  tliis  year  came  he  sent  the
eagle  away  with  him,  and  ten  stots  and  twenty.  They
went  this  time  well  further  on  than  they  went  before,
but  she  ate  the  stots  and  she  turned  back.  "Thou
must,"  said  the  giant,  "  stay  by  me  another  year,  and
then  I  will  send  thee  away."  The  end  of  this  year
came,  and  the  giant  sent  them  away,  and  three  score  of
stots  for  the  eagle's  meat ;  and  when  they  were  at  the
mouth  of  the  hole  the  stots  were  expended,  and  she
was  going  to  turn  back  ;  but  he  took  a  steak  out  of
his  own  tliigh,  and  he  gave  this  to  the  eagle,  and  with
one  spring  she  was  on  the  surface  of  the  earth.

At  the  time  of  parting  the  eagle  gave  him  a  whistle,
and  she  said  to  him,  "  Any  hard  lot  that  comes  on
thee,  whistle  and  I  will  be  at  thy  side."     He  did  not


240  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

allow  his  foot  to  stop,  or  empty  a  puddle  out  of  Ms
shoe,  till  he  reached  the  king's  big  town.  He  went
where  there  was  a  smith  who  was  in  the  tovm,  and  he
asked  the  smith  if  he  was  in  want  of  a  gillie  to  blow
the  bellows.  Tlie  smith  said  that  he  was.  He  was
but  a  short  time  by  the  smith,  when  the  king's  big
daughter  sent  word  for  the  smith.  "I  am  hearing,"  said
she,  "  that  thou  art  the  best  smitli  in  the  town  ;  but  if
thou  dost  not  make  for  me  a  golden  cro^\^a,  like  the
golden  crown  that  I  had  when  I  was  by  the  giant,  the
head  shall  be  taken  off  thee."  The  smith  came  home
sorro"n^ully,  lamentably ;  and  his  wife  asked  him  his
news  from  the  king's  house.  "Tliere  is  but  poor
news,"  said  the  smith  ;  "  the  king's  daughter  is  asking
that  a  golden  crown  shall  be  made  for  her,  like  the
crown  that  she  had  when  slie  was  under  the  earth  by
the  giant  ;  but  what  do  I  know  wdiat  likeness  Avas  on
the  crown  that  the  giant  had."  The  bellows-blowing
gillie  said,  "  Let  not  that  set  thee  thinking  ;  get  thou
for  me  enough  of  gold,  and  I  wiU  not  be  long  making
the  crown."  The  smith  got  of  gold  as  he  asked,  with
the  king's  order.  The  gillie  went  in  to  the  smithy,
and  he  shut  the  door ;  and  he  began  to  spHnter  the
gold  asunder,  and  to  throw  it  out  of  the  window.
Each  one  that  came  the  way  was  gathering  the  gold,
that  the  bellows  lad  was  hiu'hng  out.  Here,  then,
he  blew  the  wliistle,  and  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye
the  eagle  came.  "  Go,"  said  he  to  the  eagle,  "  and
bring  here  the  golden  crown  that  is  above  the  big
giant's  door."  The  eagle  went,  and  she  was  not  long
on  the  way,  and  the  crown  (was)  with  her.  He  gave
the  crown  to  the  smith.  The  smith  went  so  merrily,
cheerily  with  the  crown  where  the  king's  daughter
was.  "  WeU  then,"  said  she,  "  if  I  did  not  know  that
it  could  not  be  done,  I  would  not  beHeve  that  this  is


THE  KING  OF  LOCHLIN  S  THREE  DAUGHTERS.       2  4  I

not  the  crown  I  had  when  I  was  with  the  big  giant."
The  king's  middle  daughter  said  to  the  smith,  "  Thou
wilt  loose  the  head  if  thou  dost  not  make  for  me  a
silver  crown,  like  the  one  I  had  when  I  was  hy  the
giant."  The  smith  took  himself  home  in  misery  ;  but
Ms  wife  went  to  meet  him,  expecting  great  news  and
flattery ;  but  so  it  Avas,  that  the  gillie  said  that  he
would  make  a  silver  crown  if  he  could  get  enough  of
silver.  The  smith  got  plenty  of  silver  with  the  king's
order.  The  gillie  went,  and  he  did  as  he  did  before.  He
whistled  ;  the  eagle  came.  "  Go,"  said  he,  "  and  bring
hither  here  to  me,  the  silver  crown  that  the  king's
middle  daughter  had  when  she  was  by  the  giant."

The  eagle  went,  and  she  was  not  long  on  the
journey  with  the  silver  crown.  The  smith  went
merrily,  cheerily,  with  the  silver  crown  to  the  king's
daughter.  "  AVell,  then,"  said  she,  "  it  is  marvel-
lously like  the  crown  I  had  when  I  was  by  the  giant."
The  king's  young  daughter  said  to  the  smith  that
he  should  make  a  copper  crown  for  her,  like  the  cop-
per crown  she  had  when  she  was  by  the  giant.  The
smith  now  was  taking  courage,  and  he  went  home
much  more  pleasantly  this  turn.  The  gillie  began  to
splinter  the  copper,  and  to  throw  it  out  of  each  door
and  window  ;  and  now  they  were  from  each  end  of
the  town  gathering  the  copper,  as  they  were  gathering
the  silver  and  gold.  He  blew  the  whistle,  and  the
eagle  was  at  his  side.  "  Go  back,"  said  he,  "  and  bring
here  hither  to  me  the  copper  crown  that  the  Idng's
young  daughter  had  when  she  was  by  the  giant."  The
eagle  went,  and  she  was  not  long  going  and  coming.
He  gave  the  crown  to  the  smith.  The  .smith  went
merrily,  cheerily,  and  he  gave  it  to  the  king's  young
daughter.  "  "\Vell,  then  !"  said  she,  "  I  would  not
believe  that  this  was  not  the  very  crown  that  I  had


242  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

when  I  -was  by  the  giant  undergronnd,  if  there  were  a
way  of  getting  it."  Here  the  king  said  to  tlie  smith,
that  he  must  tell  him  where  he  had  learned  crown
making,  "  for  I  did  not  know  that  the  like  of  thee  was
in  the  kingdom."  "  Well,  then,"  said  the  smith,
"  with  your  leave,  oh  king,  it  was  not  I  who  made  the
crowns,  but  the  gillie  I  have  bloA^dng  the  bellows."
"  I  must  see  thy  gilHe,"  said  the  king,  "  till  he  makes
a  crown  for  myself."

The  king  ordered  four  horses  in  a  coach,  and  that
they  should  go  to  seek  the  smith's  gillie  ;  and  when
the  coach  came  to  the  smithy,  the  smith's  gillie  was
smutty  and  dirty,  blowing  the  bellows.  The  horse
gillies  came,  and  they  asked  for  the  man  who  was
going  to  look  on  the  king.  The  smith  said,  "  That
was  he  yonder,  blowing  the  bellows."  "Oov  !  oov  !  "
said  they  ;  and  they  (set)  to  catch  liim,  and  throw  him
head  foremost  into  the  coach,  as  if  they  had  a  dog.

They  went  not  far  on  their  jour-ney  when  he  blew
the  whistle.  The  eagle  was  at  his  side,  "  If  ever
thou  didst  good  for  me,  take  me  out  of  this,  and  fill  it
full  of  stones,"  said  he.  The  eagle  did  this.  The
king  was  out  waiting  on  the  coach  ;  and  when  the  king
opened  the  door  of  the  coach,  he  was  like  to  be  dead
with  the  stones  bouncing  on  top  of  him.  There  was
catching  of  the  horse  gillies,  and  hanging  them  for
giving  such  an  affront  to  the  king.

Here  the  king  sent  other  gillies  with  a  coach  ;  and
Avhen  they  reached  the  smithy,  "  Oov  !  oov ! "  said
they.  "  Is  this  the  black  thing  the  king  sent  us  to
seek  ?  They  caught  him,  and  they  cast  him  into  the
coach  as  if  they  had  a  turf  peat.  But  they  went  not
far  on  their  way  when  he  blew  the  whistle,  and  the
eagle  was  at  his  side  ;  and  he  said  to  her,  "  Take  me
out  of  this,    and  fill   it  with   every   dirt  thou  canst


THE  KING  OF  LOCHLIN  S  THREE  DAUGHTERS.        243

get."  "VVlien  the  coach  reached  the  king's  palace,  the
king  went  to  open  the  door.  Each  dirt  and  rubbish
fell  about  the  king's  head.  Then  the  king  was  in  a
great  rage,  and  he  ordered  the  horse  gillies  to  be  hanged
immediately.  Here  the  king  sent  his  own  confidential
servant  away  ;  and  when  he  reached  the  smithy,  he
caught  the  black  bellows-blowing  gillie  by  the  hand.
"  The  king,"  said  he,  "  sent  me  to  seek  thee."  "  Thou
hadst  better  clean  a  little  of  the  coal  off  thy  face."
The  gillie  did  this  ;  he  cleaned  himself  well,  and  right
well ;  and  the  king's  servant  caught  him  by  the  hand,
and  he  put  him  into  the  coach.  They  were  but  a  short
time  going,  when  he  blew  the  whistle.  The  eagle  came  ;
and  he  asked  her  to  bring  the  gold  and  silver  dress
that  was  by  the  big  giant  here  without  delay,  and  the
eagle  was  not  long  going  and  coming  with  the  dress.
He  arrayed  himself  with  the  giant's  dress.  And  when
they  came  to  the  king's  palace,  the  king  came,  and  he
opened  the  door  of  the  coach,  and  there  was  the  very
fi^nest  man  the  king  ever  saw.  The  king  took  him
in,  and  he  told  the  king  how  it  happened  to  him  from
first  to  last.  The  three  great  men  who  were  going  to
marry  the  king's  daughters  were  hanged,  and  the
king's  big  daughter  was  given  him  to  marry ;  and
they  made  them  a  wedding  the  length  of  twenty
nights  and  twenty  days  ;  and  I  left  them  dancing,  and
I  know  not  but  that  they  are  cutting  capers  on  the
floor  till  the  day  of  to-day.


SGEULACHD  AIR  NIGHEANAN  RIGH  LOCHLAINN.

Bha  righ  air  Lochlaina  aon  uair  aig  an  robli  triuir  nigheanan.  Chaidh
iad  a  mach  latha  ghabhail  srb,id,  agus  tliainig  tii  famhairean.  'a
thug  iad  lèo  nigheanan  an  righ,  's  cha  robh  fios  c'àite  an  deach  iad.


2  44  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Chuir  an  righ  fios  an  sin  air  an  t-seanachaidh  aige,  's  dli'  fheòr-
aich  e  dheth,  "An  robh  fios  aige  c'aite  an  deach  a  chuid  nigh-
eanan?"  Thuirt  an  seanachaidh  ris  an  righ  gu  'n  d-thug  tri  famh-
airean  leo  iad,  agus  gun  robh  lad  anns  an  talamh  gu  h-iosal  aca,  's
nach  robh  doigh  air  am  faotuinn,  ach  le  long  a  dhèanamh  a  sheoladh
air  muir  's  air  tlr."  Agus  'se  bha'nn  gun  do  chuir  an  figh  ordugh  a
mach,  "  Co  air  bith  a  thogadh  long  a  sheoladh  air  muir  's  air  tir,
gu'  faigheadh  e  nighean  mhòr  an  righ  ri  phosadh."  Bha  bantrach
an  sin  aig  an  robh  triiiir  mh:ic,  agus  thubhairt  am  fear  'bu  shine  ri
'mhathair  lathabha 'n  sin,  "Bruich  dhòmhsa  bonnach 's  ròi^t  coil-
each  ;  tha  mi  falbh  a  ghearradh  coille  's  a  thogail  long,  a  the'id  a  dh'
iarraidh  nigheanan  an  righ."  Thuirt  a  mhathair  ris,  "  Co'ca  s'  fehrr
leat  am  bonnach  mor  le  m'  mliallachd  na  'm  bonnach  beag  le  m'
bheannachd."  "  Thoir  dhòmhsa  'ra  bonnach  mor  ;  bithidh  e  beag  na
leòir  mu  'n  tog  mi  long."  Fhuair  e  'm  bonnach  's  dh'  flialbh  e.
Rainig  e  far  an  robh  coille  mhòr  agus  abhuinn.  Shuidh  e  an  sin  ri
taobh  na  h-abhunn  a  ghabhail  a'  bhonnaich.  Thainig  iiruisg  mhbr
a  mach  as  an  abhuinn,  agus  dh'iarr  i  pairt  do  'n  bhonnach.  Thubh-
airt esan  nach  d'  thugadh  e  mir  dhi,  gun  robh  e  beag  na  leoir  dha
fcin.  Thoisich  e  air  gearradh  na  coille,  's  na  h-uile  craobh  a  ghearr-
adh e,  bhiodh  i  air  a  bonn  a  rithist;  's  bha  e  mur  sin  gus  an  d'
thainig  an  oidhche.  Nuair  a  thainig  an  oidhche,  chaidh  e  dhach-
aidh  dubhach,  deurach,  dalla-bhronach.  D'  fhoighnichd  a  mhathair
dheth,  "  De  mar  a  chaidh  dhuit  an  diugh,  a  mhic."  Thubhairt  esan,
nach  deach  ach  gu  dubh  dona  "  Na  h-uile  craobh  a  sliearrainn,
bhiodh  i  air  a  bonn  a  rithist."  Latha  na  dha  an  de'igh  so,  thubhairt
am  hrathair  meadliouach,  "  gu'  falbhadh  e  fliein,  's  dh"  iarr  e  air  a
n-hathair,  bonnach  a  bhruich  s'  coileach  a  rostadh  ;  agus  air  a'  cheart
dbigh  mar  thachair  d'a  bhrathair  a  bu  shine,  thachair  dhasan.  Thubh-
airt a  mhathair  a'  cheart  ni  ris  an  fhear  òg,  agus  ghabh  e  'm  bonnach
beag.  Thainig  an  iiruisg,  s'  dh'iarr  i  pairt  do  'n  bhonnach  s'  do  'n
choileach.  Thubhairt  e  rithe,  "  Gu  'm  faigheadh  i  sin."  Nuair  a  dh'ith
an  iiruisg  a  cuid  fhein  do  'n  bhonnach  's  do  'n  choileach,  thubhairt  i
ris,  "  Gun  robh  fios  aice-se  de'  'thug  an  sud  e  co  maith  ris  fh^in,  ach
esan  a  dhol  dachaidli,  ach  a  bhi  cinnteach  ise  a  choinneachainn  an  sud
an  ceann  latha  's  bliadhna,  agus  gu  'm  bitheadh  an  long  deas  air  a
cheann."  'Sann  mar  so  a  thachair.  An  cenmi  latha  's  bliadhna  dh'
fhallih  mac  òg  na  bantraich,  agus  fhuair  e  'u  long  air  snamh  air  an
abhuinn  fuidh  Ian  uidlieam  aig  an  iiruisg.  Dh'  fhalbh  e  an  sin  leis
an  iuing,  agm  triiiir  dhaoine  uaisle  cho  mor  'sabha  'san  riòghachd,  a
bha  gu  ni,'heanan  an  righ  a  phosadh.  Cha  robh  iad  ach  goirid  a
soiMadh  an  uair  a  chunnaic  iad  fear  ag  ol  suas  abhuinn  a  bha  'sin


SGEULACHD  AIR  NIGHEAXAN  TxlGU  LOCHLAINN.     245

Dh' fheòraich  iad  dheth,  "  De 'tha  thu  deànamh  an  sin?"  "  Tha
ai?  Ò1  suas  na  h-aibhne  so."  "'S  feàrr  dhuit  falbh  learn  fhein, 's
bheir  mi  dhuit  biadh,  's  tuarasdal,  's  obair  a's  fearr  na  sin."  "  Ni  mi
sin,"  ars'  esan.  Cha  deachaidh  iad  fad  air  an  aghaidh  gus  am  fac  iad
fear  eile  ag  itheadli  dhamh  ann  am  pairc.  "  De  'tha  thu  deanamh  an
sin?"  Thubhairt  esan,  "Tha  mi  'n  so  a'  dol  a  dh'  itheadh  na  tha
dhaimh  anns  a'  phairc  so."  "  'S  fearr  dhuit  falbh  leam  fhe'in,  's  gheibh
thu  obair  "s  tuarasdal  a's  fearr  na  feoil  amh."  '•  Ni  mi  sin,"  thubhairt
esan.  Cha  deach  iad  ach  goirid  dar  *  a  chunnaic  iad  fear  eile  'sa'
chluas  ris  an  talamh.  "  De  tha  thu  deanamh  an  sin  ?  "  Thubhairt
esan,  "  Tha  mi  an  so  a'  cluintiun  an  fheoir  a'  tighinn  troi  'n  tal-
amh." "  Falbh  leam  fhe'in  "s  gheibh  thu  biadh 's  tuarasdal  a's  fearr
na  bhi  'n  sin,  '3  do  chluas  ris  an  talamh."  Bha  iad  mur  so  a'  seòladh
air  an  ais  s'  air  an  aghaidh  nuair  a  thubhairt  am  fear  a  bha'  g  eisteachd,
"  Gu  'm  be  sud  an  t-aite  anns  an  robh  nigheanan  an  righ  agus  na
famhairean."  Chaidh  mac  na  bantraich  agus  an  triliir  a  thachair  orra
a  leigeil  siòs  ann  an  cliabh,  ann  an  toll  mbr  a  bha  'n  sin.  Rainig  iad
tigh  an  fliamhair  mhoir.  "  Ha !  ha !  "  thuirt  esan,  "  tha  fios  agam  gu
niaith  de  'tha  thu  'g  iarraidh  an  so ;  tha  thu  'g  iarraidh  nighean  an
righ,  ach  cha  'n  'fhaigh  thu  sin  mar  'eil  fear  agad  a  dh'  bias  uiread
uisge  riumsa."  Chuiresan  am  fear  abhaag  61  na  h-aibhuea  chumail
Ò1  ris  an  fhamhair,  's  mun  robh  esan  leith  bhuidheach,  sgain  am
famhair.  Chaidh  iad  an  sin  far  an  robh  an  darna  famhair.  "  Ho  !
Hoth  !  Ha !  Hath  !  "  thubhairt  am  famhair,  "  tha  fios  agamsa  gu
maith,  de  chuir  an  so  thu  ;  tha  thu  'g  iarraidh  nighean  an  righ,  ach
cha  'n  fhaigh  thu  i  mar  'eil  fear  agad  a  dh'  itheas  uiread  feola  rium-
sa." Chuir  esan  am  fear  a  bha  'g'  itheadh  nan  damh  a  chumail
itheadh  feola  ris  an  fhamhair  so :  ach  mua  robh  esau  leith  bhuidheach ;
sgkin  am  famhair.  Chaidh  iad  an  sin  far  an  robh  an  treas  fiimhair.
"  Haio  !  "  ars'  am  famhair,  "  tha  fios  agamsa  de  chuir  an  so  thu,  ach
cha  'n  fhaigh  thu  nighean  an  righ,  idir  mar  fan  thu  agamsa  latha,  's
bliadhna  ann  a'd' sgalaig."  "Nimisin,"  thubhairt  esan.  Chuir  e
suas  ann  an  cliabh  an  toiseach  na  tri  daoine,  agus  an  sin  nigh-
eanan an  righ.  Bha  'n  triiiir  dhaoine  mora  aig  beul  an  tuill
a'  feitheamh  gus  an  d'  thigeadh  iad  a  nibs,  agus  dh'  fhalbh  iad  leo  far
an  robh  an  righ,  's  dh'  innis  iad  do  'n  righ  gu  'm  b'  iad  fe'in  a  rinn
gach  uile  thapachd  a  bha  ann.

"Nuair  a  thainig  ceann  latha  's  bliadhna,"  thubhairt  esan  ris  am
famhair,  "gun  robh  e  'falbh."  Thubhairt  am  famhair,  "  Gun  robh
fiolaire  aige-san  a  chuireadh  suas  e  gu  muUach  an  tuill."     Chuir  am

*  Dak.  from  an  trath,  the  time.


246  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

famhair  an  iolaire  air  falbh  leis,  agus  ciiig  daimh  dheug  air  son  Ion
dhi ;  ach  cha  deach  na  iolaire  leith  suas  troi  'n  toll,  nuair  a  dh'ith  i  na
daimh,  agus  thill  i  air  a  h-ais  a  rithist.  Thubhairt  am  famhair  ris  an
sin,  "Feumaidh  tu  fantainn  agamsa  latha  's  bliadhna  eile,  agus
cuiridh  mi  'n  sin  air  falbh  thu."  Nuair  a  thainig  ceaim  na  bliadhna
so,  chuir  e  air  falbh  an  iolaire  leis,  agus  deich  daimh  f  hichead.  Chaidh
iad  air  an  am  so  gu  maith  ni  b'  fhaide  air  an  aghaidh,  na  chaidh  iad
roirah,  ach  dh'ith  i  na  daimh,  's  thill  i  air  a  h-ais.  "  Feuma  tu,"
ars'  am  famhair,  "  fantainn  agamsa  bliadhna  eile,  agus  an  sin  cuiridh
mi  air  falbh  tliu."  Thainig  ceann  na  bliadhna  so,  agus  chuir  am
famhair  air  folbh  iad,  agus  tri-fichead  damh  air  son  biailh  do  'n  iolaire.
An  uair  a  bha  iad  aig  beul  ard  an  tuill,  theirig  na  daimh,  's  bha  i  'dol
a  thilleadh  ;  ach  thug  esan  staoig  as  a  leis  fhe'in,  's  thug  e  so  do  'n
iolaire,  agus  le  aon  leum  bha  i  air  uachdar  talamh.  An  am  deal-
achaidh  thug  an  iolaire  dha  feadag  agus  thubhairt  i  ris,  "  cruaidh-
chas  sara  bith  a  thig  ort,  leig  fead  agus  bithidh  mise  ri  d'  thaol  h."

Cha  do  leig  esan  stad  d'a  chois  na  lodan  as  a  bhroig  gus  an  d'
rain'g  e  baile  mòr  an  righ.  Chaidh  e  far  an  robh  gobhainn  a  bha
'sa'  bhaile,  's'  dh'  fhebraich  e  do  'n  ghoblia,  "An  robh  gille  a  dhith
air,  airson  seideadh  a'  bhuilg  ?"  Thubhairt  an  gobha  "  Gu'n  robh."
Cha  robh  e  ach  goirid  aig  a'  ghobha,  nuair  a  chuir  nighean  mhor  an
righ  fios  air  a'  ghobha.  "  Tha  mi  'cluintinn,"ars'  ise,  "  tur  tusa  gobh-
ainn a's  fearr  'sa'  bhaile  ;  ach  mur  dean  thu  dhomhsa  criin  òir  colt-
ach  ris  a'  chriin  oir  a  bh'  agam  nuair  a  bha  mi  aig  an  fliamhair,  theid
an  ceann  a  thoirt  dhiot."  Thainig  an  gobha  dhachaidh  gu  dubhach
brònach,  's  dh'  fhoighneachd  a  bhean  deth,  de  a  naigheachd  a  tigh
an  righ  ?  "  Cha  'n  'eil  ach  naigheachd  bochd,"  thuirt  an  gobha
"  Tha  'nighean  ag  iarraidh  crun  oir  a  dheanamh  dhi  coltach  ris  a
chriin  a  bha  aice  an  uair  a  bha  i  fo  'n  talamh  aig  an  fhamhair ;
ach  gu  de  'fios  a  tha  agamsa  de  'n  coslas  a  bha  air  a'  chriin
a  bha  aig  an  fhamhair."  Thubhairt  gille  seididh  a'  bhuilg,
"  Na  cuireadh  sin  smaontinn  ort.  Faigh  thusa  dhomhsa  nis  gu  leoir
do  dh'  or,  's  cha  bhi  mise  fada  a'  deànamh  a  chriiin."  Fhuairan  gobha
na  dh'  iarr  e  dh'  or  le  òrdugh  an  righ.  Chaidh  an  gille  stigh  do  'n
cheàrdaich,  's  dhiiin  e  'n  'dorus,  agus  thoisich  e  air  spealgadh  an  oir
as  a'  chcile,  'sa  thilgeadh  a  mach  air  an  uinneig.  Bha  gach  neach  a
thigeadh  an  rathad  a'  tional  an  oir  a  bha  gille  a'  bhuilg,  a'  smiiideadh  a
mach.  She'id  e  'n  so  an  flieadag,  agus  ann  am  prioba  na  siiil,  thainig
an  iolaire.  "  Falbh,"  thubhairt  esan  ris  an  iolaire,  "  agus  thoir  an  so  an
criin  oir  a  tha  fos  ceann  an  doruis  aig  an  fliamhair  mhor."  Dh'fhalbh
an  iolaire,  's  cha  b'  fhada  bha  i  air  a  turus,  'san  criin  aice.  Thug  e  'n
criin  do  'n  ghobhainn.    Dh'  fhalbh  an  gobhainn  gu  subhach,  sunnd-


SGEULACIID  AIR  NIGHEANAN  RIGH  LOCHLAINN.     247

ach  leis  a'  chriin  far  an  robh  nighean  an  righ.  "  IMata,"  thubhairt
ise,  "  mur  b'e  gum  blieil  fios  agam  nach  gabhadh  e  deanamh,  cha
chreidinn  nach  e  so  an  criin  a  bha  agam  an  uair  a  bha  mi  leis  an
fhamhair  mliòr."  Thubhairt  nighean  mheadhonach  an  righ  ris  a'
ghobhainn,  "  Caillidh  tu  'n  ceann  mar  dean  thu  criin  airgid  dhòmhsa
coltach  ris  an  fhear  a  bh'  agam  an  uair  a  bha  mi  aig  an  fhamhair."
Thug  an  gobha  an  tigli  air  fo  sprochd,  ach  chaidh  a  bhean  'na
choinneamh  an  diiil  ri  naigheachd  mòr  "s  brosguil ;  ach  'se  bh'  ann
gun  d'  thubhairt  an  gille,  "  gun  deanadh  esan  crhn  airgid,  na  'm
faighadh  e  na  leòir  do  dii'  airgiod."  Fhuair  an  gobba  ni's  leoir  do
dh'  airgiod  le  òrdugh  an  righ.  Chaidh  an  gille  's  rinn  e  mar  a  rinn
e  roimhe.  Leig  e  fead  ;  thainig  an  iolaire.  "  Falbh,"  thubhairt
esan,  "  agus  thoir  thugam-sa  an  so  an  criin  airgid  a  bha  aig  nighean
mheadlionacli  an  righ  an  uair  abhai  aig  an  fhamhair."  D'  fhalbh
an  iolaire,  's  cha  b'  fliada  bha  i  air  a  turns  leis  a'  chriin  airgid.
Dh'  fhalbh  an  gobhainn  gu  subhach,  sunndacli  leis  a'  chriin  airgid
gu  nighean  an  righ.  "Mata,"  thubhairt  ise,  "tha  e  anabnrrach
coltach  ris  a'  chrim  a  bh'  agam  dar  a  bha  mi  aig  an  fhamhair."
Thubhairt  nighean  òg  an  righ  ris  a'  ghobha,  "  E  a  dheanamh  crhn
copair  dh'  ise,  coltach  ris  a  chrun  chopair  a  bha  aice,  nuair  a  bha  i
aig  an  fhamhair."  Bha  'n  gobha  an  so  a'  gabhail  misnich,  's  chaidh
e  dhachaidh  mòran  ni  bu  toilichte  air  an  trò  so.  Thòisich  an  gille
air  spealgadh  a'  chopair,  's  air  a  thilgeadh  a  mach  air  gach  dorus  '3
uinneag.  Bha  iad  an  so  as  gach  ceann  do  'n  bhaile  a'  tion-
ail  a'  chopair  mar  a  bha  iad  a'  tionail  an  oir  's  an  airgid.
She'id  e  'n  fheadag,  's  bha  'n  iolaire  ri  'thaobh.  "  Rach  air
t'  ais,"  thubhairt  esan,  "  agus  thoir  an  so  thugamsa  an  criin  cop-
air  a  bha  aig  nighean  òg  an  righ  an  uair  a  bha  i  aig  an  fhamhair."
Dh'  fhalbh  an  iolaire,  's  cha  robh  i  fada  'dol  'sa'  tighinn.  Thug  e  'n
crim  do  'n  ghobhainn ;  dh'  fhalbh  an  gobhainn  gu  subhach,  sunnd-
acli, 's  thug  e  do  nighean  òg  an  righ  e.  "  Mata,"  thubhairt  ise,  "  cha
chreidinn  nach  b'e  so  an  dearbh  chriin  a  bha  agam  an  uair  a  bha  mi
aig  an  fhamhair  fo  'n  talamh,  na'ni  biodh  dòigli  air  fhaotainn."
Thubhairt  an  righ  an  so  ris  a'  ghobhainn,  "  Gu'  feuniadh  e  innseadh
dhasan,  caite  an  d'  ionnsaich  e  deanamh  nan  crhn,  rir  cha  robh  fios
agam  gun  robh  do  leithid  'san  rioghachd."  "  Mata,"  thubhairt  an
gobha,  "  le  'r  cead,  a  righ,  cha  mhise  a  rinn  na  criiin,  ach  an  gille
'tha  agam  a'  seideadh  a'  bhuilg."  "  Feumaidh  mi  do  ghill'  fliaicinn,"
thubhairt  an  righ,  "  giis  an  dean  e  criin  dhomh  fliein."  Dh'  ordaich
an  righ  ceithir  eich  ann  an  (coacha),  's  iad  a  dhol  a  dh'  iarraidh  gille
a'  ghobha.  An  uair  a  thainig  an  (coacha)  adh'  ionnsaidh  na  ceardach,
bha  gille  a'  ghobha  gu  dubh,  salach  a'  seideadh  a'  bhuilg.  Thainig  na


248  -WEST  niGHLAXD  TALES.

gillean  each,  's  dh'  f  heoraich  iad  air  son  an  duine  a  blia  'dol  a  shealU-
ainn  an  righ.  Tliubhairt  an  gobha  gu'm  b'e  sud  e  thall  a'  seid-
eadh  a'  bliuilg.  «'  Ubh  !  Ubh  !  "  thuirt  iadsan,  's  iad  a  beireachd  air,
's  'ga  thilgeadh  an  conibair  a  chinn  a  stigh  don  (choacha),  rnar  gum
bitheadh  cii  aca.  C!ia  deacli'  iad  fada  air  an  turns  dar  a  sheid  esan
an  fheadag.  Bha  'n  iolaire  ri  'thaobh.  "  Ma  rinn  thu  feum  riamh
dhomh,  tli<iir,niise  a  mach  as  so,  agus  lion  e  Ian  clilach,"  thubhairt
esan.  Rinn  an  iolaire  so.  Bha  'n  righ  a  mach  a  feitheadli  a  chòidse,
agus  an  uair  a  dh'  fhosgail  an  righ  dorus  a'  choidse,  theab  e  bhi
raarbh  leis  naclachan  a'  dbrtadh  air  a  mhuin.  Chaidh  beireachd  air
na  gillean  each,  'san  ciochadh  airson  a  leithid  do  thamailt  a  thabhairt
do  'n  righ.  Chuir  an  righ  an  so  air  falbh  gillean  le  còidse,  agus
an  uair  a  rainig  iad  a'  cheardach,  "  Ubh  !  Ubh  !  "  thuirt  iadsan,  "  n'e
so  an  rud  dubli  a  chuir  an  righ  sinn  a  dh'  iarraidh."  Rug  iad  air,  'a
thilg  iad  a  stigh  do  'n  choids'  e,  mar  gum  bitheadh  fòid  mòine  aca.
Ach  cha  deach  iad  fada  air  an  slighe,  nuair  a  shcid  esan  an  fheadag,
's  bha  'n  iolaire  ri  'thaobh,  's  thubhairt  e  rithe,  ''  Thoir  raise  as
a'  so,  agus  lion  e  do  ghach  salachar  a  gheibh  tliu."  Nuair  a  rainig
an  còidse  paileis  an  righ,  chaidh  an  righ  'dh'  fhosgladh  an  doruis.
Thuitgach  salachar  's  gach  baggaist  mu  cheann  an  righ.  Bha  fearg
ro  mhor  air  an  righ,  's  dh'  brdaich  e  na  gillean  each  a  bhi  air  an
crochadh  air  ball.  Chuir  an  righ  a'  ghille  cinnteach  fhc'in  air  falbh,
agus  an  uair  a  rainig  e  a'  cheardach,  rug  e  air  laimh  air  gille  dubh
seididh  a'  bhuilg.  "  Chuir  an  righ,"  thuirt  esan,  "  mise  gu  d'
iarraidh  s  'fearr  dhuit  beagan  do  'n  ghual  a  ghlanadh  dheth  t'  aodann."
Rinn  an  gille  so,  ghlan  e  e  fe'in  gu  maith  's  gu  ro  mhaith,  's  rug  gille
an  righ  air  laimh  air,  's  chuir  e  stigh  do  'n  choids'  e.  Cha  robh  iad
ach  goirid  airfaibh,  dar  a  she'id  e  'n  fheadag.  Thhinig  an  iolaire,  's
dh'  iarr  esan  oirre  an  deise  bir  's  airgid  a  bha  aig  an  fhamhair  mhòr  a
thoirt  an  sud  gun  diiil ;  's  cha  robh  an  iolaire  fada  'dol  'sa'  tighinn
leis  an  deise.  Sgeadaich  esan  e  fe'in  le  deise  an  fhamhair,  "s  an  uair
a  thainig  iad  gu  paileas  an  righ,  thainig  an  righ,  's  dh'  fhosgail  e  dorus
a  choidse 's  bha'n  fin  an  aon  duine  bu  bhrèagha  a  chunnaic  an  righ
riamh.  Thug  an  righ  stigh  e,  's  dh'  innis  e  do  'n  righ  mar  a  dh'
eirich  dha  fo  thus  gu  deireadh.  Chaidh  an  triiiir  dhaoine  mora  bha
'dol  a  phosadh  nigheanan  an  righ  a  chrochadh,  's  nighean  mhòr  an
righ  thabhairt  dhasan  ri  phosadh;  's  rinn  iad  banais  dhoibh  fad
fichead  oidhche  's  fichead  latha,  's  dh'  fhag  mise  a'  dannsa  iad,  's  cha
'n'eil  fios  agamsa  nach  'eil  iad  a'  cuir  nan  car  air  an  urlar  gus  an
latha  'n  diugh.


THE  KING  OF  LOCHLIN  S  THREE  DAUGHTERS.       249

This  story  was  written,  May  1859,  hy  Hector  Urquliart,  game-
keeper, from  the  dictation  of  Neill  Gillies,  a  fisherman  and  builder
of  stone  dykes,  who  lives  near  Inverary.  He  is  now  about  fifty-
five,  and  says  he  learned  the  story  from  his  father,  who  used  to
tell  it  when  he  was  about  sixteen  or  seventeen.

It  has  something  of  many  other  Gaelic  tales.  In  particular,
one  called  "  Bolgum  More,''  in  which  there  are  more  gifted  men.
It  has  some  resemblance  to  Fortunio  ;  and  the  part  which  goes  on
under  ground  resembles  part  of  many  other  popular  tales.  The
Three  Giants,  with  their  gold,  silver,  and  copper  crowns,  are  like
the  Gnomes  of  the  Mine.  Similar  Giants,  ruling  over  metals,  and
living  in  castles  made  of  gold,  silver,  and  copper,  are  men-
tioned in  a  story  from  South  Uist,  which  resembles  the  Sea
Maiden.

As  a  whole.  No.  16  is  unlike  anything  I  know,  but  nearly
every  incident  has  a  parallel  woven  in  with  something  else,  and  it
most  resembles  Grimm's  Golden  Goose.

The  Enchanted  Ship,  which  could  sail  on  sea  and  land,
belongs  to  Norse  tales  and  to  Norse  mythology.  The  gods  had
such  a  ship.

The  Eagle  is  peculiarly  eastern  :  he  is  but  a  genius  in  another
shape  ;  the  underground  treasures  are  also  eastern  ;  and  it  is
worth  remark,  that  two  of  the  daughters  are  not  provided  for  at
all.  The  three  gentlemen  were  hanged,  and  the  smith's  servant
married  the  eldest  princess  with  the  golden  crown,  so  the  two
youngest  remain  spinsters.  It  is  suggested  by  the  author  of
Norse  Tales,  that  similar  incidents  may  show  the  change  from
Eastern  to  Western  manners.  There  would  be  no  hitch,  if  it
were  lawful  to  marry  the  three  ladies  in  this  story  ;  and  in  the
Norse  story  of  Shortshanks,  it  is  suggested  that  the  second
brother  is  added,  to  make  all  things  proper.  In  No.  22,  a  man
marries  a  round  dozen.

The  clothes  of  these  giants  fit  the  lad,  so  they  were  but  under-
ground men.

There  is  the  usual  moral.  The  least  becomes  the  greatest ;
but  there  is  a  dash  of  character  in  the  pride  of  the  smith's  lad,  who
will  not  come  till  he  is  taken  by  the  hand  by  the  king's  own  con-
fidential servant.  And  this  is  characteristic  of  the  race.  A  Celt
can  be  led  anywhere,  but  he  will  not  be  driven.     The  king,  who


250  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

opens  his  own  coach  door,  is  somewhat  like  a  farmer.  The  coach
and  four  is  but  the  grandest  of  the  vehicles  seen  in  the  neighbour-
hood—one of  which  w-as  compared  by  a  friend  of  mine,  to  "a
packing  box  upon  wheels,  lined  with  an  old  blanket."  In  the
mouth  of  a  city  narrator,  it  would  have  been  a  lord  mayor's
coach,  and  it  probably  was  a  palanquin  at  some  time.

This  story  may  be  compared  with  "  The  Big  Bird  Dan,"
Norse  Tales,  No.  55.  Gifted  men  are  to  be  found  in  "  The  Master
Maid,"  No.  11.  Such  men  are  also  in  German,  "  How  sis  tra-
velled through  the  World ;"  and,  according  to  the  notes  in  the
third  volume  of  Grimm,  the  story  is  widely  spread,  and  common
to  Italian.


XVII.
MAOL    A  CHLIOBAIN.

From  Ann  MacGilvray,  Islay.

THERE  was  a  widow  ere  now,  and  she  had  three
daughters  ;  and  they  said  to  her  that  they  would
go  to  seek  their  fortune.  She  baked  three  bannocks.
She  said  to  the  big  one,  "  Whether  dost  thou  hke  best
the  half  and  my  blessing,  or  the  big  half  and  my
curse  ? '"  "I  like  best,"  said  she,  "  the  big  half  and
thy  curse."  She  said  to  the  middle  one,  "  Whether
dost  thou  like  best  the  big  half  and  my  curse,  or  the
little  half  and  my  blessing ? "  "I  like  best,"  said  she,
"  the  big  half  and  thy  curse."  She  said  to  the  little
one,  "  Whether  dost  thou  like  best  the  big  half  and
my  curse,  or  the  little  half  and  my  blessing  ?"  "  I  like
best  the  half  and  thy  blessing."  This  pleased  her
mother,  and  she  gave  her  the  two  other  halves  also.
They  went  away,  but  the  two  eldest  did  not  want  the
youngest  to  be  with  them,  and  they  tied  her  to  a  rock
of  stone.  They  went  on  ;  but  her  mother's  blessing
came  and  freed  her.  And  when  they  looked  behind
them,  whom  did  they  see  but  her  with  the  rock  on
top  of  her.  They  let  her  alone  a  tiu-n  of  a  while,  till
they  reached  a  peat  stack,  and  they  tied  her  to  the  peat
stack.  They  went  on  a  bit  (but  her  mother's  blessing
came  and  freed  her),  and  they  looked  behind  them,


252  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES,

and  whom  did  they  see  but  her  coming,  and  the  peat
stack  on  top  of  her.  They  let  her  alone  a  turn  of  a
while,  till  they  reached  a  tree,  and  they  tied  her  to  the
tree.  Tliey  went  on  a  bit  (but  her  mother's  blessing
came  and  freed  her),  and  when  they  looked  behind
them,  whom  did  they  see  but  her,  and  the  tree  on  top
of  her.

They  saw  it  was  no  good  to  be  at  her ;  they  loosed
her,  and  let  her  (come)  with  them.  They  were  going
till  night  came  on  them.  They  saw  a  light  a  long
way  from  them  ;  and  though  a  long  way  from  them,  it
was  not  long  that  they  were  in  reaching  it.  They
■went  in.  What  was  tliis  but  a  giant's  house  !  They
asked  to  stop  the  night.  They  got  that,  and  they  were
put  to  bed  with  the  three  daughters  of  the  giant.  (The
giant  came  home,  and  he  said,  "  The  smell  of  the
foreign  girls  is  within.")  There  were  twists  of  amber
knobs  about  the  necks  of  the  giant's  daughters,  and
strings  of  horse  hair  about  their  necks.  They  all  slept,
but  Maol  a  Cliliobain  did  not  sleep.  Through  the
night  a  thirst  came  on  the  giant.  He  called  to  his
bald,  rough-skinned  gillie  to  bring  him  water.  The
bald,  rough-skinned  gillie  said  that  there  was  not  a
drop  within.  "  Ivill,"  said  he,  "  one  of  the  strange
girls,  and  bring  to  me  her  blood."  "  How  will  I
know  them  Ì "  said  the  bald,  rough-skinned  gillie.
"  There  are  twists  of  knobs  of  amber  about  tlie  necks
of  my  daughters,  and  tmsts  of  horse  hair  about  the
necks  of  the  rest."

Maol  a  Chliobain  heard  the  giant,  and  as  quick  as
she  could  she  put  the  strings  of  horse  hair  that  were
about  her  own  neck  and  about  the  necks  of  her  sisters
about  the  necks  of  the  giant's  daughters  ;  and  the  knobs
that  were  about  the  necks  of  the  giant's  daughters
about  her  own  neck  and  about  the  necks  of  her  sisters  ;


MAOL  A  CHLIOBAIN.  253

and  slie  laid  down  so  quietly.  The  bald,  rougli-skinned
gillie  came,  and  lie  killed  one  of  the  daughters  of  the
giant,  and  he  took  the  blood  to  him.  He  asked  for
MORE  to  be  brought  him.  He  killed  the  next.  He
asked  for  more  ;  and  he  killed  the  third  one.

Maol  a  ChHobain  awoke  her  sisters,  and  she  took
them  vnth  her  on  top  of  her,  and  she  took  to  going.
(She  took  w4th  her  a  golden  cloth  that  was  on  the  bed,
and  it  called  out.)

The  giant  perceived  her,  and  he  followed  her.  The
sparks  of  fire  that  she  was  putting  out  of  the  stones
with  her  heels,  they  were  striking  the  giant  on  the
chin  ;  and  the  sparks  of  fire  that  the  giant  was  bring-
ing out  of  the  stones  with  the  points  of  his  feet,  they
were  striking  Maol  a  Cldiobain  in  the  back  of  the
head.  It  is  this  was  their  going  till  they  reached  a
river.  (She  plucked  a  hair  out  of  her  head  and  made
a  bridge  of  it,  and  she  run  over  the  river,  and  the
giant  could  not  follow  her.)  Maol  a  Chliobain  leaped
the  river,  but  the  river  the  giant  could  not  leap.

"  Thou  art  over  there,  Maol  a  Chliobain."  "  I  am,
though  it  is  hard  for  thee."  "  Thou  killedst  my  three
bald  brown  daughters."  "  I  killed  them,  though  it  is
hard  for  thee."  "  And  when  wilt  thou  come  again  ? "
"  I  will  come  when  my  business  brings  me."

They  went  on  forward  tiU  they  reached  the  house
of  a  farmer.  The  farmer  had  three  sons.  They  told
how  it  happened  to  them.  .  Said  the  farmer  to  Maol  a
Chliobain,  "  I  will  give  my  eldest  son  to  thy  eldest
sister,  and  get  for  me  the  fine  comb  of  gold,  and  the
coarse  comb  of  sdver  that  the  giant  has."  "  It  will
cost  thee  no  more,"  said  Maol  a  Chhobain.

She  went  away;  she  reached  the  house  of  the  giant;
she  got  in  imknown  ;  she  took  with  her  the  combs,
and  out  she  went.     Tlie  giant  perceived  her,  and  after


2  54  ^EST  niGHLAXD  TALES.

her  he  was  till  they  reached  the  river.  She  leaped  the
river,  hut  the  river  the  giant  coiild  not  leap.  "  Thon
art  over  there,  Maol  a  Chliohain."  "  I  am,  though  it
is  hard  for  thee."  "Tliou  killedst  my  three  bald
brown  daughters."  "  I  killed  them,  though  it  is  hard
for  thee."  "  Thou  stolest  my  fine  comb  of  gold,  and
my  coarse  comb  of  silver."  "  I  stole  them,  though  it
is  hard  for  thee."  "  "When  wilt  thou  come  again  ?"
"  I  will  come  when  my  business  brings  me."

She  gave  the  combs  to  the  farmer,  and  her  big
sister  and  the  farmer's  big  son  married.  "  I  will  give
my  middle  son  to  thy  middle  sister,  and  get  me  the
giant's  glave  of  light."  "  It  will  cost  thee  no  more,"
said  Maol  a  Chhobain,  She  went  away,  and  she
reached  the  giant's  house ;  she  went  up  to  the  top  of
a  tree  that  was  above  the  giant's  well  In  the  night
came  the  bald  rough-skinned  gillie  with  the  sword  of
light  to  fetch  water.  When  he  Ijent  to  raise  the  water,
Maol  a  Chliobain  came  down  and  she  pushed  him
down  in  the  well,  and  she  drowned  Imu,  and  she
took  with  her  the  glave  of  hght.

The  giant  followed  her  till  she  reached  the  river  ;
she  leaped  the  river,  and  the  giant  could  not  follow
her.  "  Thou  art  over  there,  Maol  a  Chliobain."  "  I
am,  if  it  is  hard  for  thee."  "  Thou  killedst  my  three
bald  brown  daughters."  "I  killed,  though  it  is  hard
for  thee."  "  Thou  stolest  my  fine  comb  of  gold,  and
my  coarse  comb  of  silver."  "  I  stole,  though  it  is
hard  for  thee."  "  Thou  killedst  my  bald  rough- skinned
gilUe."  "  I  killed,  though  it  is  hard  for  thee."  "  Thou
stolest  my  glave  of  light."  "  I  stole,  though  it  is  hard
for  thee."  "  "When  wilt  thou  come  again  Ì"  "I
will  come  when  my  business  brings  me."  She  reached
the  house  of  the  farmer  with  the  glave  of  hght  ;  and
her  middle  sister  and  the  middle  son  of  the  farmer


MAOL  A  CHLIOBAIN.  255

married.  "  I  will  give  thyself  my  youngest  son,"  said
the  farmer,  "and  bring  me  a  buck  that  the  giant  has."
"  It  will  cost  thee  no  more,"  said  Maol  a  Cliliobain.
She  went  away,  and  she  reached  the  house  of  the
giant ;  but  when  she  had  hold  of  the  buck,  the  giant
caught  her.  "  What,"  said  the  giant,  "  wouldst  thou
do  to  me  ;  if  I  had  done  as  much  harm  to  thee  as
thou  hast  done  to  me,  I  would  make  thee  burst  thy-
self with  milk  porridge  ;  I  would  then  put  thee  in  a
pock  ;  I  would  hang  thee  to  the  roof-tree ;  I  would
set  fire  under  thee  ;  and  I  would  set  on  thee  with
clubs  till  thou  shouldst  fall  as  a  faggot  of  withered
sticks  on  the  floor."  The  giant  made  milk  porridge,
and  he  made  her  drink  it.  She  put  the  milk  porridge
about  her  mouth  and  face,  and  she  laid  over  as  if  she
were  dead.  The  giant  put  her  in  a  pock,  and  he  hung
her  to  the  roof-tree  ;  and  he  went  away,  himself  and
liis  men,  to  get  wood  to  the  forest.  The  giant's  mother
was  within.  When  the  giant  was  gone,  Maol  a
Chliobain  began^ — "  'Tis  I  am  in  the  light  !  'Tis  I  am
in  the  city  of  gold  !"  "  Wilt  thou  let  me  in  V  said
the  carlin.  "  I  will  not  let  thee  in."  At  last  she
let  down  the  pock.  She  put  in  the  carlin,  cat,  and
calf,  and  cream- dish.  She  took  with  her  the  buck
and  she  went  away.  When  the  giant  came  -with  his
men,  himself  and  his  men  began  at  the  bag  with  the
clubs.  The  carlin  was  calling,  "  'Tis  myself  that's  in
it."  "  I  know  that  thyself  is  in  it,"  would  the  giant
say,  as  he  laid  on  to  the  pock.  The  pock  came  do^vn
as  a  faggot  of  sticks,  and  what  was  in  it  but  his  mother.
When  the  giant  saw  how  it  was,  he  took  after  Maol
a  Chliobain  ;  he  followed  her  till  she  reached  the
river.  ^laol  a  Chliobain  leaped  the  river,  and  the
giant  could  not  leap  it.  "  Thou  art  over  there,  Maol
a  ChUobain."     "  I  am,  though   it  is   hard  for  thee."


256  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  Thou  killedst  my  three  bald  brown  daughters."  "  I
killed,  though  it  is  hard  for  thee."  "  Thou  stolest
my  golden  comb,  and  my  silver  comb."  "  I  stole,
though  it  is  hard  for  thee."  "  Thou  killedst  my  bald
rough-skinned  gillie."  "I  killed,  though  it  is  hard
for  thee."  "  Thou  stolest  my  glave  of  light."  "  I
stole,  though  it  is  hard  for  thee."  "  Thou  killedst
my  mother."  "I  killed,  though  it  is  hard  for  thee."
"  Thou  stolest  my  buck."  "  I  stole,  though  it  is
hard  for  thee."  "  When  wilt  thou  come  again  ?"  "  I
will  come  when  my  business  brings  me."  "  If  thou
wert  over  here,  and  I  yonder,"  said  the  giant,
"whatwouldst  thou  do  to  follow  me  f  "I  would
stick  myself  down,  and  I  would  drink  till  I  should  dry
the  river."  The  giant  stuck  himself  down,  and  he
drank  till  he  burst.  INIaol  a  CliHobain  and  the  far-
mer's youngest  son  married.


MAOL  A  CHLIOBAIX.

Bha  bainnteach  ann  roimhe  so,  's  bha  tri  nigheanan  aice,  's  thuirt
iad  rithe  gun  rachadh  iad  a  dh'  iarraidh  an  fhortain.  Dheasaich  i
tri  bonnaicb.  Thuirt  i  ris  an  te  mbòir,  "  Cò'ca  's  flieàrr  leat,  an  leith
bheag  's  mo  bbeannachd,  na"n  leilh  mhor  's  mo  mhollaclid  ?"  "'S
fliearr  leam,"  urs'  ise,  "  an  leith  mhor  's  do  mhollachd."  Thuirt
i  ris  an  te  mheadlionaich,  "  Cò'ca  is  fhearr  leat  an  leitb  mhor  's
mo  mhollachd  na'n  leith  bheag  's  mo  bheannachd  '?  "  "  'S  fhearr
leam,"  urs'  ise,  "  an  leith  mlior  's  do  mhollachd."  Thuirt  i  ris  an  te
bhig,  "  Co'ca  is  fhearr  leat  an  leith  mhor  's  mo  mhollochd  n'an  leith
bheag  's  mo  bheannachd  ?"  'S  fhearr  leam  an  leith  bheag  's  do  bheann-
achd. Chord  so  r"a  mhthair,  's  thug  i  dhi  an  da  leith  eile  cuideachd.
Dh'  fholbh  iad,  ach  cha  robh  toil  aig  an  ditiiisd  abu  shine  an  te  b'
bige  'bhi  leo,  's  cheangail  iad  i  ri  carra  cloiche.  Ghabh  eud  air  an
aghaidh,  's  nur  a  dh'  amhairc  iad  as  an  deigh,  co  a  chunnaic  iad  ach
ise,  's  a'  chreag  air  a  muin.  Leig  iad  leatha  car  trcis  gus  an  d'  riiinig


^  MAOL  A  CHLIOBAIN.  257

iad  cruach  mhònadh,  's  cheangail  iad  i  ris  a'  chruaich  mhònadh.
Ghabh  iad  air  an  aghaidh  treis,  's  dh'  amhairc  iad  'nan  de'igh,  's  co  a
chunnaic  iad  ach  ise  a'  tighinn,  's  a'  chruach  mhònadh  air  a  muin.
Leig  iad  leatha  car  tacan  gus  an  d'  rainig  iad  craobh,  's  cheangail  iad
ris  a'  chraobh  i.  Ghabh  iad  air  an  aghaidh  treis,  's  nur  a  dh'  amhairc
iad  'nan  de'igh,  co  a  chunnaic  iad  ach  ise  a'  tighinn,  's  a'  chraobh  air
a  muin.  Chunnaic  iad  nach  robh  math  a  bhith  rithe.  Dh'  fhuasg-
ail  iad  i,  's  lig  iad  leo  i.  Bha  iad  a'  folbh  gus  an  d'  thainig  an
oidhche'orra.  Chunnaic  iad  solus  fada  uatha,  's  ma  b'fhada  uatha  cha
b'fhadaa  bha  iadsan  'ga  'ruigheachd.  Chaidh  iad  a  stigh.  De  a  bha
'so  ach  tigh  famhair.  Dh'  iarr  iad  fuireachd  'san  oidhche.  Fhuair  iad
sin,  's  chuireadh  a  laidhe  iad  le  tri  nigheanan  an  fhamhair.

Bha  caran  de  chneapan  òmbair  ma  mhuinealan  nigheanan  an
fhamhair,  agus  sreanganan  gaoisid  ma'm  muineilsan.  Chaidil  iad
air  fad,  ach  cha  do  chaidil  Maol  a'  chliobain.  Feadh  na  h-oidhche
thainig  paghadh  air  an  fhamhair.  Ghlaoidh  e  r'a  ghille  maol  carrach
uisge  thoirt  a  'ionnsuidh.  Thuirt  an  gille  maol,  carrach,  nach  robh
deur  a  stigh.  "  Marbh,"  urs'  esan,  "  te  de  na  nigheanan  coimheach,  's
thoir  a  m'  ionnsuidh  a  full."  "Demur  a  dh'  aitlmeachas  mi  eatorra  ?"
urs'  an  gille  maol,  carrach.  "  Tha  caran  de  chneapan  ma  mhuineal-
an mo  nigheanansa,  's  caran  gaoisid  ma  mhuineil  chaich."  Chuala
Maol  a'  chliobain  am  famhair,  's  cho  clis  's  a  b'urrainn  i,  chuir  i  na
sreangannan  gaoisid  a  bha  ma  'muineal  fe'in  's  ma  mhuineail  a  peath-
raichean  ma  mhuineil  nigheanan  an  fhamhair,  agus  na  cneapan  a
bha  ma  mhuineil  nigheanan  an  fhamhair  ma  'muineal  fein,  's  ma
mhuineil  a  peathraichean,  's  laidh  i  sios  gu  samhach.  Thainig  an  gille
maol  carrach,  's  mharbh  e  te  de  nigheanan  an  fhamhair,  's  thug  e'n
fhuil  a  'ionnsuidh.  Dh'  iarr  e  tuillidh  a  thoirt  a  'ionnsuidh.  Mharbh
e  an  ath  te.  Dh'  iarr  e  tuillidh,  's  mharbh  e  'u  treas  te.  Dhiiisg
Maol  a'  chliobain  a  peathraichean,  's  thug  i  leath'  air  a  muin  iad,  's
ghabh  i  air  folbh.     Mhothaich  am  famhair  di,  's  lean  e  i.

Na  spreadan  teine  a  bha  ise  cur  as  na  clachan  le  a  sàiltean,  bha
iad  a'  bualadh  an  fhamhair  'san  smigead ;  's  na  spreadan  teine  a  bha
"m  famhair  a'  toirt  as  na  clachan  le  barraibh  a  chas,  bha  iad  a'
bualadh  Mhaol  a'  chliobain  an  ciil  a'  chinn.  "  'Se  so  a  bu  dual  daibh
gus  an  d'rainig  iad  obhainn.  Leum  Maol  a  chliobain  an  obhainn,  s
cha  b'urrainn  am  famhair  an  obhainn  a  leum."  "  Tha  thu  thall  a
Mhaol  a  chliobain."  "  Tha  ma  's  oil  leat  e."  "  Blharbh  thu  mo  thri
nigheanan  maola,  ruagha."  "  Mharbh  ma  's  oil  leat  e."  "  'S  cuin  a
thig  thu  'rithisd  ?"     "  Thig  nur*  bheir  mo  ghnothach  mi."

•  NuK,  from  an  truth,  or  an  nair,  the  time.
S


258


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


Ghabh  iad  air  an  aghaidh  gus  an  d'  rkinig  iad  tigh  tuathanaich.
Bha  aig  an  tuatliaiiacli  tri  mic.  Dh'  innis  iad  mar  a  thachair  dhaibh.
Urs'  an  tuathanach  ri  Maol  a  chliobain,  "  Rheir  mi  mo  mhac  is  sine
do  'd'  phiuthar  is  sine,  's  faigh  dhomli  cir  nihm  oir  's  cir  gliarbh  airgid
a  tiia  aig  an  fhamhair."  "  Cha  chosd  e  tuillidh  dhuit,"  ursa  Maol  a
chliobain.  Dh'  fliolbh  i,  's  rainig  i  tigh  an  fhamhair.  Fhuair  i  stigh
gun  fhios.  Thug  i  leatha  na  cirean,  's  ghabh  i  'mach.  Mhothaich
am  famhair  di ;  is  as  a  deinh  a  bha  e  gus  an  d'  rainig  e  'n  obhainn.
Leum  ise  an  obhainn,  's  cha  b'urrainn  am  famhair  an  obhainn  a  leum.
"Tha  thu  thall  a  Mhaol  a  chliobain."  "  Tha  ma's  oil  leat  e."
"  Mharbh  thu  mo  thri  nigheanan  maola,  ruagha."  "INIharbh  ma's
oil  leat  e.  Ghoid  thu  mo  chir  mhin  oir  's  mo  chir  gharbh  airgid."
"  Ghoid  ma's  oil  leat  e."  "  Cuin  a  thig  thu  'rithisd  ?  "  "  Thig  nur
bheir  mo  ghnothach  mi."

Thug  i  na  cirean  thun  an  tuathanaich,  's  phos  a  piutbar  mhor  's
mac  mbr  an  tuathanaich.

"  Bheir  mi  mo  mhac  meadhonach  do  d'  phiuthar  mheadhonach,  "s
faigh  dhomh  claidheamh  soluis  an  fliamhair."  "  Cha  chosd  e  tuillidh
dhuit,"  ursa  Maol  a  chliobain.  Ghabh  i  air  folbh,  "s  rainig  i  tigh  an
fhamhair.  Chaidh  i  'suas  ann  am  biirr  craoibli'  a  bha  as  cionn  tobar
an  fhamhair.  Anns  an  oidhche  thainig  an  gille  maol,  carrach,  's  an
claidheamh  soluis  leis,  a  dh'  iarraidh  uisge.  Nur  a  chrom  e  'thogail  an
uisge  thhinig  Maol  a  chliobain  a  nuas,  's  phut  i  sios  'san  tobar  e,'s  bhath
i  e,  'sthug  i  leatha  an  claidheamh  soluisd.  Lean  am  famhair  i  gus
an  d'  rainig  i  an  obhainn.  Leum  i  an  obhainn,  's  cha  b'urrainn  am
famhair  a  leantainn.  "Tha  thu  thall  a  ]\Ihoal  a  chliobain.'"  "Tha
ma's  oil  leat  e."  "  Mharbh  thu  mo  thri  nigheanan  maola,  ruagha."
"  Mharbh  ma's  oil  leat  e."  "  Ghoid  tha  mo  chir  mhin  oir  's  mo  chir
gharbh  airgid."  "  Ghoid  ma's  oil  leat  e."  "  Mharbh  tha  mo  ghille
maol,  carrach."  "  Mharbh  ma's  oil  leat  e."  "  Ghoid  tha  mo  chlaidh-
eamh  soluis."  "  Ghoid  ma's  oil  leat  e."  "  Cuin  a  thig  thu
'rithisd."  "  Thig  nur  bheir  mo  ghnothach  mi."  Rkinig  i  tigh  an  tuath-
anaich leis  a'  chlaidheamh  sholuis,  's  phos  a  piuthar  mheadhonach,  's
mac  meadhonach  an  tuathanaich.

"  Bheir  mi  dhuit  fein  mo  mhac  is  (Mge,"  urs'  an  tuathanach,  's  thoir
am'  ionnsuidh,  '■  Boc  a  tha  aig  an  fliamhair."  "  Cha  chosd  e  tuillidh
dhuit,"  ursa  Maol  a'  chliobain.  Dii'  fliolbh  i  "s  rainig  i  tigh  an  fhamh-
air, ach  nur  a  bha  grt'im  aic'  air  a'  bhoc  rug  am  famhair  urra.
"  De,"  urs'  am  famhair,  "  a  dheanadh  thus'  ormsa  na'n  deknainn  uibhir
coir'  ort  's  a  rinn  tlius'  ormsa."  "  Bheirinn  ort  gu  'sgkineadh  thu
thu  fein  le  brochanbainne  ;  chuirinn  an  sin  ann  am  poc'  thu  ;  chroch-
ainn  thu  ri  driom  an  tighe;   chuirinn  teine  fodhad;   's  ghabhainn


MAOL  A  CHLIOBAIN.  259

duit  le  cabair  gus  an  tuiteadh  thu  'd'  chual  chrionaich  air  an  urlar.
Rinn  am  famhair  brochan  bainne,  's  thugr  ure'  ol.  Chuir  ise  am  broch-
an  bainne  nia'  beul  's  ma  b-aodam,  's  luidh  i  seachad  mar  gum  biodh
i  marbh.  Cbuir  am  famhair  am  poc'  i,  's  chrocb  e  i  ri  driom  an  tighe,
's  dh'  f holbh  e  fe'in  '3  a  dhaoine  a  db'  iarraidh  fiodh  do  'n  choille.  Bha
mathair  an  fbamhair  a  stigh.  Theireidb  Maol  a'  chliobain  nur  a  dh'
fholbh  am  famhair,  "  'S  mise  a  tha  ann  'san  t-solas  's  mise  a  tha  ann
'sa'  chathair  oir."  "An  leig  thu  mis'  ann,"  urs'  a'  chailleacli.  "  Cha
leig  gu  dearbh."  Ma  dbeireadh  leig  i  'nuas  am  poca ;  chuir  i  stigh  a'
chailleach,  is  cat,  is  laogh,  is  soitheach  uaclidair ;  thug  i  leatha  am
boc  ;  's  dh'  fholbh  i.  Nur  a  tbainig  am  famhair  thoisich  e  fe'in  's  a
dhaoine  air  a'  phoca  leis  na  cabair.  Bha  'chailleach  a'  glaodhach,
"  'S  mi  fe'in  a  th'  ann."  "  Tha  fios  agam  gur  tu  fein  a  th'  ann,"
theireadh  am  famhair,  's  e  'g  e'iridh  air  a'  phoca.  Tbainig  am  poca
'nuas  'na  chual  chrionaich,  's  de  'bha  ann  ach  a  mhathair.  Nur  a
chunnaic  am  famhair  mur  a  bha,  thug  e  as  deigh  Mhaol  a'  chliobain.
Lean  e  i  gus  an  d  rainig  i  'n  obhainn.  Leum  Maol  a'  chliobain  an
obhainn,  s  <  ha  b'urrainn  am  famhair  a  leum.  "Tha  thu  thall  a
Mhaol  a  chliobain."  "  Tha  ma  's  oilleat  e."  "Mharbh  thu  mo  thri
nigheanan  maola,  ruagha."  "  Mharbh  ma  's  oil  leat  e."  "  Ghoid  thu
mo  chir  mhin  oir  's  mo  chir  gharbh  airgid."  "  Ghoid  ma 's  oil  leat  e.''
"  Mharbh  thu  mo  ghille  maol,  carrach."  "  Mharbh  ma  's  oil  leat  e."
"  Ghoid  thu  mo  chlaidheamh  soluisd."  "  Ghoid  ma  's  oil  leat  e."
"  Mharbh  thu  mo  mhathair."  "  Mharbh  ma  's  oil  leat  e."  "  Ghoid
thu  mo  bhoc."  "  Ghoid  ma  's  oil  leat  e."  "  Cuin  a  thig  thu  rithisd."
"  Thig  nur  bheir  mo  ghnothach  mi."  "  Na'm  biodh  thusa  bhos  's  mise
thall,"  ursa  am  famhair,  "  de  'dheanadh  thu  airson  mo  leantainn  ?"
"  'Stopainn  mi  fein,  's  dh'  olainn  gus  an  traoighinn  an  obhainn."  Stop
am  famhair  e  fein,  's  dh'  61  e  gus  an  do  sgàinn  e.  Phòs  Maol  a  chliob-
ain mac  òg  an  tuathanaich.

This  story  came  to  me  from  four  sources.  First,  the  one
which  I  have  translated,  into  which  several  passages  are  intro-
duced (in  brackets)  from  the  other  versions.  This  was  written
down  by  Hector  MacLean.

2d.  A  version  got  by  the  same  collector  from  Flora  Macin-
tyre,  in  Islay  ;  received  June  16,  1859.  In  this  the  whole  of  the
first  part  is  omitted ;  it  begins  at  the  giant's  house.  The  inci-
dents are  then  nearly  the  same  till  she  runs  away,  when  she
leaps  the  river  with  her  sisters  under  her  arms.  The  farmer  or
king  is  omitted.     She  returns,  is  cauglit  by  the  giant,  tied  to  a


26o  WEST  niGHLAND  TALES.

peat-stack,  and  a  rock,  -which  she  takes  away,  and  she  makes
the  giant  kill  ;  the  three  cropped  red  girls :  and  she  kills  the
cropped  rough -skinned  gillie  :  she  steals  the  white  glave  of
light,  a  fine  comb  of  gold,  and  a  coarse  comb  of  silver.  She
makes  the  giant  kill  his  mother,  and  his  dog  and  cat  enticed  into
a  sack  ;  at  last  she  sets  the  giant  to  swill  the  river ;  he  bursts,  and
she  goes  home  with  the  spoil.  The  bit  about  the  sack  is  worth
quoting.  She  put  the  crone  in  the  pock,  and  a  cat,  and  a  dog,
and  a  cream-dish  with  her.  When  the  giant  and  his  men  came,
they  began  laying  on  the  pock.  The  crone  cried  out,  "It's  my-
self thou  hast ;"  and  the  giant  said,  "  I  know,  thou  she  rogue,
that  it's  thou.''  When  they  would  strike  a  stroke  on  the  dog,  he
would  give  out  a  sgol  ;  when  they  would  strike  a  stroke  on  the
cat,  he  would  give  out  a  Mioa ;  and  when  they  would  strike  a
stroke  on  the  cream-dish,  it  would  give  out  a  steall  (a  spurt).  I
have,

3rd.  A  version  very  prettily  told,  at  Easter  1859,  by  a  young
girl,  nursemaid  to  Mr.  Robertson,  Chamberlain  of  Argyll,  at  In-
verary.  It  was  nearly  the  same  as  the  version  translated,  but
had  several  phrases  well  worth  preservation,  some  of  which  will
be  found  in  brackets  ;  such  as,  "  but  her  mother's  blessing  came
and  freed  her."  The  heroine  also  stole  a  golden  cover  off  the
bed,  which  called  out ;  and  a  golden  cock  and  a  silver  hen,
which  also  called  out.  The  end  of  the  giant  was  thus :  At  the
end  of  the  last  scolding  match,  the  giant  said,  "  If  thou  wert  here,
and  I  yonder,  what  wouldst  thou  do  ?"  "  I  would  follow  thee  over
the  bridge,''  said  she.  So  Maol  a  chliobain  stood  on  the  bridge,
and  she  reached  out  a  stick  to  him,  and  he  went  down  into  the
river,  and  she  let  go  the  stick,  and  he  was  drowned.  "  And
what  became  of  ]\Iaol  a  chliobain?  did  she  marry  the  farmer's
youngest  son?  "  Oh,  no  ;  she  did  not  marry  at  all.  There  was
something  about  a  key  hid  under  a  stone,  and  a  great  deal  more
which  I  cannot  remember.  My  father  did  not  like  my  mother  to
be  telling  us  such  stories,  but  she  knows  plenty  more," — and  the
lassie  departed  in  great  perturbation  from  the  parlour.

The  4th  version  was  got  by  John  Dewar  from  John  Craw-
fort,  herring-fisher,  Lochlonghead,  Arrochar,  and  was  received
on  the  2d  of  February  1860.  Dewar's  version  is  longer  than  any,
but  it  came  too  late.      It  also  contains  some  curious  phrases


MAOL  A  CHLIOBAIN.  201

which  the  others  have  not  got,  some  queer  old  Gaelic  words,  and
some  new  adventures.  The  heroine  was  not  only  the  youngest,
but  "maol  carrach"  into  the  bargain,  and  the  rest  called  her
Maol  a  Mboibean  ;  but  when  they  went  on  their  travels  she  chose
the  little  cake  and  the  blessing.  The  others  tied  her  to  a  tree,
and  a  cairn  of  stones,  which  she  dragged  away.  Then  they
let  her  loose,  and  she  followed  them  till  they  came  to  a  burn.
"  Then  the  eldest  sister  stooped  to  drink  a  draught  from  the  burn,
and  there  came  a  small  creature,  named  Bloinigain,  and  he
dabbled  and  dirtied  the  burn,  and  they  went  on.  The  next
burn  they  came  to  the  two  eldest  sisters  stooped,  one  on  each
side  of  the  burn,  to  drink  a  draught ;  but  Bloinigain  came  and  he
dabbled  and  dirtied  the  burn  ;  and  when  they  had  gone  on
another  small  distance,  they  reached  another  burn ;  and  the
youngest  sister,  whom  the  rest  used  to  call  Maol  a  Mhoibean,
was  bent  down  drinking  a  draught  from  the  burn,  and  Bloinigain
came  and  stood  at  the  side  of  the  burn  till  she  had  drank  her
draught,  and  the  other  two  came  ;  but  when  they  stooped  to
drink  their  draught,  Bloinigain  dabbled  the  burn,  and  they  went
on  ;  and  when  they  came  to  another  burn,  the  two  eldest  were
almost  parched  with  thirst.  Maol  a  Mhoibean  kept  Bloinigain
back  till  the  others  got  a  drink  ;  and  then  she  tossed  Bloinigain
heels  over  head,  cab  a  mhoiltean,  into  a  pool,  and  he  followed
them  no  more."

This  Bloinigain  plays  a  great  part  in  another  story,  sent  by
Dewar;  and  his  name  may  perhaps  mean  "  fatty;"  Blonag,  fat,
suet,  lard  ;  Bloinigean-Garaidh,  is  spinnage.

The  next  adventure  is  almost  the  very  same.  The  giant's
three  red-haired  polled  daughters  had  paidireanan  of  gold  about
their  necks  (which  word  may  be  derived  from  imter,  and  a  name
for  a  rosary),  and  the  others  had  only  strings.

When  they  fled  they  came  to  a  great  eas,  cataract,  and  "  there
was  no  way  of  getting  over  it,  uuless  they  could  walk  on  two
hairs  that  were  as  a  bridge  across  the  cataract ;  and  their  name
was  Drochaid  an  da  roineag,  the  two-hair  bridge ;  and  Maol
a  Mhoibean  ran  over  the  eas  on  the  two  hairs  ;  but  her  sisters
could  not  walk  on  the  two  hairs,  and  Maol  a  Mhoibean  had  to
turn  back  and  carry  her  sisters,  one  after  one,  over  the  eas  on  the
two-hair  bridge."     The  giant  could  not  cross,  and  they  scolded


202  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.

each  other  across  the  river  as  in  the  other  stories.  The  giant
shouted,  "Art  thou  yonder,  Maol  a  Mhoibean  ?"  and  she  said
"  Air  mo  nodaig  tha  ;"  and  when  she  had  told  her  deeds,  she
said,  "I  will  come  and  go  as  my  business  brings  me  ;"  and  the
three  sisters  went  on  and  took  service  with  the  king.

This  two-hair  bridge  over  the  fall  may  possibly  be  a  double
rainbow  ;  many  a  time  have  I  sat  and  watched  such  abridge  over
a  fall ;  and  the  idea  that  the  rainbow  was  the  bridge  of  spirits,
is  old  enough.

"  Still  seem  as  to  my  childhood's  sight

A  midway  station  given,
For  happy  spirits  to  alight

Betwixt  the  earth  and  heaven."

The  Norse  gods  rode  over  the  bridge,  Bif-raust,  from  earth  to
heaven  ;  and  their  bridge  was  the  rainbow  which  the  giants  could
not  cros.s.  There  is  also  a  bridge,  as  fine  as  a  hair,  over  which
the  Moslem  pass  to  Paradise ;  and  those  who  are  not  helped,  fall
off  and  are  lost.

The  sisters  took  service  ;  one  was  engaged  to  sew,  the  other
to  mind  the  house,  and  the  youngest  said  she  was  good  at  run-
ning errands ;  so  at  the  end  of  a  day  and  year  she  was  sent  for
the  giant's  cabhean  full  of  gold,  and  cabhran  full  of  silver ;  and
when  she  got  there  the  giant  was  asleep  on  a  chest  in  which
the  treasure  was.

"  Then  Maol  a  Mhoibean  thought  a  while,  in  what  way  she
should  get  the  giant  put  off  the  chest ;  but  she  was  not  long  till
she  thought  on  a  way  ;  and  she  got  a  long  broad  bench  that  was
within,  and  she  set  the  bench  at  the  side  of  the  chest  where  the
giant  was  laid  ;  she  went  out  where  the  burn  was,  and  she  took
two  cold  stones  from  the  burn,  and  she  went  in  where  the  giant
was,  and  she  would  put  one  of  the  stones  in  under  the  clothes,
and  touch  the  giant's  skin  at  the  end  of  each  little  while  with  the
stone  ;  and  the  giant  would  lay  himself  back  from  her,  till  bit  by
bit  the  giant  went  back  off  the  chest  on  to  the  bench  ;  and  then
Maol  a  Mhoibean  opened  the  chest,  and  took  with  her  the  cabhran
of  gold,  and  the  cabhran  of  silver."  The  rest  of  the  adventure  is
nearly  the  same  as  in  the  other  versions ;  and  the  eldest  sister
married  the  king's  eldest  son.


MAOL  A  CHLIOBAIN.  263

The  next  was  tlis  Claidlieamb  Gcal  Soluis,  white  glave  of
light.

She  got  in  and  sat  on  a  rafter  on  a  bag  of  salt ;  and  as  the
giant's  wife  made  the  porridge,  she  threw  in  salt.  Then  the
giant  and  his  son  sat  and  supped,  and  as  they  ate  they  talked  of
how  they  would  catch  Maol,  and  what  they  would  do  to  her  when
they  had  her ;  and  after  supper  they  went  to  bed."  Then  the
giant  got  very  thirsty,  and  he  called  to  his  sou  to  get  him  a
drink  ;  and  in  the  time  that  the  giant's  son  was  seeking  a  cdman
(cup),  Maol  a  Mhoibean  took  with  her  the  fill  of  her  sguikd  (skirt)
of  salt,  and  she  stood  at  the  outside  of  the  door  ;  and  the  giant's
son  said  to  him  "  that  there  was  no  water  within  ;"  and  the
giant  said  "  That  the  spring  was  not  far  off,  and  that  be  should
bring  in  water  from  the  well ;"  and  when  the  giant's  son  opened
the  door,  Maol  a  Mhoibean  began  to  throw  salt  in  his  face  ;  and
he  said  to  the  giant,  "  That  the  night  was  dark,  and  that  it  was
sowing  and  winnowing  hailstones  (gdn  eobh  an  oidhche  dorcha
AGUS  CDE  s'  CABHADH  CLACH-A-MEALLAiN  an)  ;  and  the  giant
said,  "  Take  with  thee  my  white  glave  of  light,  and  thou  wilt  see
a  great  distance  before  thee,  and  a  long  way  behind  thee."

When  the  young  giant  came  out,  it  was  a  fine  night ;  and  he
went  to  the  well  with  the  bright  sword,  and  laid  it  down  beside
him  ;  while  he  stooped  to  take  up  the  water,  Maol  followed  him,
and  picked  up  the  sword,  and  sguids  i  a'n  oeann,  she  whisked
the  head  off  the  giant's  son.  Then  came  the  flight  and  pursuit,
and  escape,  and  scolding  match,  and  the  second  son  of  the  king
married  the  second  sister.

The  next  adventure  was  the  theft  of  Boc  cldigeanach,  the
belled  buck.  She  went  over  the  bridge  and  into  the  goats'  house,
and  the  goats  began  at  beochdaich,  roaring ;  and  the  giant  said,
"  Maol  a  Mhoibean  is  amongst  the  goats  ;"  and  he  went  out  and
caught  her  ;  and  he  said,  "  What  wouldst  thou  do  to  me  if  thou
shouldst  find  me  amongst  thy  goats,  as  I  found  thee  ?"  And  she
said,  "  It  is  (this)  that  I  would  kill  the  best  buck  that  I  might
have,  and  I  would  take  out  the  paunch,  and  I  would  put  thee  in
the  paunch,  and  I  would  hang  thee  up  till  I  should  go  to  the
wood  ;  and  I  would  get  clubs  of  elder,  and  then  I  would  come
home,  AGUS  shlac-ainn  gd  bas  thu,  and  I  would  belabour  thee
to  death.''     "  And  that  is  what  I  will  do  thee,"  said  the  giant.


264  ■"'EST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Then  comes  the  bit  which  is  common  to  several  other  stories,
in  various  shapes  ;  and  which  is  part  of  a  story  in  Straparola.

When  she  was  hung  up  in  the  goat's  paunch,  and  the  giant
gone  for  his  elder-wood  clubs,  Maol  a  Mhoibean  began  to  say  to
the  giant's  wife,  "  Oh  !  it's  I  that  am  getting  the  brave  sight !
Oh !  it's  I  that  am  getting  the  brave  sight !"  as  she  swayed
herself  backwards  and  forwards  ;  and  the  giant's  wife  would  say
to  her,  "  Wilt  thou  let  me  in  a  little  while  ?"  and  Maol  a  Mhoi-
bean would  say  (I  will)  not  let  (thee  in)  cha  leigh,  and  so  on  till
the  wife  was  enticed  into  the  paunch,  and  then  Maol  took  the
belled  buck  and  went  away  with  him.      "  Agds  an  daie  a'  b

AIRD  ISE  b'  isle    EASAN,  s'    AN   NUAIE   A  b'  AIRT)  ASAN  b'  ISLE  ISE  ;"

and  the  time  she  was  highest  he  was  lowest,  and  the  time  he  was
highest  she  was  lowest,  till  they  reached  the  two-hair  bridge.
The  giant  came  home  and  belaboured  his  wife  to  death,  and
every  blow  he  struck,  the  wife  would  say,  "  is  mi  fhein  a  tha
ANN,  o  s  MI  FHEIN  A  THA  ANN — It  is  mysclf  that  is  iu  it :  Oh  !  it
is  myself  that  is  in  it ;"  and  the  giant  would  say,  "  I  know  it  is
thyself  that  is  in  it.''

[And  in  this  the  giant  is  like  the  water-horse  in  another
story,  and  like  the  cyclop  in  the  Odyssey,  and  like  all  other
giants  throughout  mythology.  He  was  a  great,  strong,  blunder-
ing fool,  and  his  family  were  as  stupid  as  himself.]

Maol  married  the  king's  third  son,  and  the  king  said,  "  There
is  one  other  thing  yet  of  what  the  giant  has  that  I  want,  and
that  is,  A  SGiATH  bhallabiireac  agus  a  bhogh  s  a  dh'orlach —
his  lumpy  bumby  shield,  and  his  bow  and  his  quiver,  or  in  poeti-
cal language,  his  variegated  bossy  shield,  and  his  bow  and  quiver
— and  I  will  give  thee  the  kingdom  if  thou  wilt  get  me  them."
This  is  a  good  instance  of  what  may  happen  in  translating  Gaelic
into  English,  one  language  into  another,  which  is  far  removed
from  it,  both  in  construction  and  meaning.  Bhalabhreac
applies  to  almost  anything  that  is  round  or  spotted.  The  root  of
the  epithet  is  ball,  which,  in  oblique  cases,  becomes  bhall,  vail,
and  means  a  spot,  a  dot,  and  many  other  things.  It  is  the  same
as  the  English  word  ball.  A  shield  was  round,  and  covered  with
knobs  ;  a  city  wall  was  round,  and  it  was  the  shield  of  the  town  ;
an  egg  was  round,  and  the  shell  was  the  shield  or  the  wall  of  the
egg ;  a  skull  is  round,  and  the  shield  of  the  brain,  and  a  head  is


MAOL  A  CHLIOBAIN.  265

still  called  a  kuob  in  English  slang;  a  toad-stool  is  round, — and
so  this  word  ball  has  given  rise  to  a  succession  of  words,  which
at  first  sight  appear  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  each  other,  and
the  phrase  might  be  translated  speckled  wings.  The  epithet  is
applied  to  clouds  and  to  many  things  in  Gaelic  poetry,  and  has
been  translated  in  many  ways,  according  to  the  taste  of  each
translator.  Those  who  felt  the  beauty  of  the  passages  used  the
words  which  they  found  applicable.  Those  who  do  not,  may,  if
they  choose,  search  out  words  which  express  their  feeling ;  and
so  a  poem  which  stands  on  its  own  merit,  in  its  own  language,  is
at  the  mercy  of  every  translator ;  and  those  who  work  at  Gaelic
with  dictionaries  for  guides,  may  well  be  puzzled  with  the  multi-
tude of  meanings  assigned  to  words.

So  Maol  went,  and  the  giant's  dog  barked  at  her,  and  the
giant  came  out  and  caught  her,  and  said  he  would  cut  her  head
oif ;  and  she  said  she  would  have  done  worse  to  him ;  and  "  What
was  that  ?  "  "  Put  him  in  sack  and  roast  him  ;  "  so  he  said  he
would  do  that,  and  put  her  in,  and  went  for  wood.  She  got  her
hand  out,  untied  the  string,  and  put  in  the  dog  and  cat,  and  fled
with  the  arms,  and  the  giant  roasted  his  own  dog  and  cat,  agus

BHA    AM    MADADH    AN    'S    AN    SGALAILLE    AGUS   AN    GATE    AN    's   AN

SGiABnuiL— and  the  dog  was  in,  and  the  squalHng;  and  the  cat
(was)  in,  and  the  squealHng,  and  the  giant  would  say,  "  Fedch
KuiT  A  Nis — Try  thyself  now."  When  he  found  out  the  trick,  he
pursued,  and  when  they  got  to  the  bridge,  his  hand  was  on  her
back,  and  he  missed  his  step  and  fell  into  the  eas,  and  there  he
lay.  And  the  king's  son  and  Maol  a  Mhoibean  were  made  heirs
in  the  kingdom,  and  if  they  wanted  any  more  of  the  giant's
goods,  they  got  it  without  the  danger  of  being  caught  by  the
giant.

The  Gaelic  given  in  Dewar's  version  is  spelt  as  it  came,  and
is  somewhat  Phonetic.  The  writer  knows  his  own  language  well,
but  has  had  very  little  practice  in  writing  it.  As  he  spells  in
some  degree  by  ear,  his  phonetics  have  their  value,  as  they  have
in  his  English  letter  given  in  the  introduction.

5.  A  gentleman  at  the  inn  at  Inverary  remembei'ed  to  have
heard  a  similar  story  "long  ago  about  a  witch  that  would  be
running  in  and  out  of  a  window  on  a  bridge  of  a  single  hair."

6.  "  Kate  ill  Pratts  "  is  referred  to  in  a  review  of  Chambers'


S2


266  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Nursery  Ehymes,  at  page  117,  vol.  10;  1853 — Tait's  Edinburgh
Magazine.  The  story  is  mentioned  as  told  in  Perthshire,  and
seems  to  be  of  the  same  kind  ;  with  a  bit  of  Cinderella,  as  known
in  the  west,  with  the  advice  of  the  hoodie  in  Murchadh  and
Mionachag  put  in  the  mouth  of  a  little  bird —
"  Stuff  wi'  fog,  and  clem  wi'  clay,
And  then  ye  '11  carry  the  water  away."

These  sounds  are  not  imitations  of  any  bird's  note,  and  the
Gaelic  sounds  are;  so  I  am  inclined  to  think  the  Gaelic  older
than  the  low  country  version.

The  story  is  well  known  as  Little  Thumb.  It  is  much  the
same  as  Boots  and  the  Troll,  Norse  Tales,  p.  247.  It  is  some-
what like  part  of  Jack  and  the  Bean-stalk.  Part  of  it  is  like  Big
Peter  and  Little  Peter,  Norse  Tales,  p.  395 ;  and  that  is  like  some
German  Stories,  and  like  a  story  in  Straparola.  The  opening  is
like  that  of  a  great  many  Gaelic  Stories,  and  is  common  to  one
or  two  in  Grimm.

There  is  something  in  a  story  from  Polynesia,  which  I  have
read,  in  which  a  hero  goes  to  the  sky  on  a  ladder  made  of  a  plant,
and  brings  thence  precious  gifts,  much  as  Jack  did  by  the  help
of  his  bean-stalk.  In  short,  this  story  bcdongs  to  that  class  which
is  common  to  all  the  world,  but  it  has  its  own  distinctive  charac-
ter in  the  Highlands  ;  for  the  four  versions  which  I  have,  resemble
each  other  much  more  than  they  do  any  other  of  which  I  know
anything.


XVIIa.
FABLES.

1.  From  J.  MacLeod,  fisherman  on  the  Laxford,  Sutherland.

ONE  day  the  fox  succeeded  in  catcliing  a  fine  fat
goose  asleep  by  the  side  of  a  loch,  he  held  her  by
the  wing,  and  making  a  joke  of  her  cackling,  hissing
and  fears,  he  said, —

"  Now,  if  you  had  me  in  your  mouth  as  I  have  you,
tell  me  what  you  woidd  do  V

"Why,"  said  the  goose,  "that  is  an  easy  question.
I  would  fold  my  hands,  shut  my  eyes,  say  a  grace,  and
then  eat  you."

"  Just  what  I  mean  to  do,"  said  Rory,  and  folding
his  hands,  and  looking  very  demure,  he  said  a  pious
grace  with  his  eyes  shut.

But  while  he  did  this  the  goose  had  spread  her
wings,  and  she  was  now  half  way  over  the  loch  ;  so  the
fox  was  left  to  lick  his  lips  for  supper.

"  I  will  make  a  rule  of  this,"  he  said  in  disgust,
"  never  in  all  my  life  to  say  a  grace  again  till  after  I
feel  the  meat  warm  in  my  belly."  C.  D.

The  wild  goose  in  the  Highlands  has  her  true  character ;  she
is  one  of  the  most  wary  and  sagacious  of  birds,  and  a  Gaelic  pro-
verb says : —

Sealgair  thu  mar  a  mharbhas  thu  Gèadh  a's  Corr'  a's  Crotach.

Sportsman  thou,  when  killest  thou  goose,  and  heron,  and
curlew  ?


268  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Eory  is  a  corruption  of  a  Gaelic  proper  name,  which  means,
one  whose  hair  is  of  the  colour  of  the  fox  "  Euadh."  The  fox  is
called  by  various  descriptive  and  other  names.  Balgair,  he
with  the  "balg,"  bag  or  quiver,  from  which  the  shape  of  the
quiver  may  be  surmised  to  have  resembled  the  foxes'  brush.
Madauh  Ruadh,  the  red-brown  dog.  Git.le  Martdinn,  the
servant  of  Martin,  or  perhaps  the  Martinmas  lad,  but  the  true
Gaelic,  according  to  my  instructor,  a  Lorn  man,  is  Sioxnach,
pronounced  Shunach,  which  is  surely  the  same  as  the  Sanscrit
SvAN,  dog.     SuNUH  Shuni,  dog- bitch.

2.  From  John  Campbell,  piper;  and  many  other  sources  lately.
The  fox  is  mucli  troubled  by  fleas,  and  this  is  the
way  in  whicb  he  gets  rid  of  them.  He  hunts  about
till  he  finds  a  lock  of  wool,  and  then  he  takes  it  to  the
river,  and  holds  it  in  his  mouth,  and  so  puts  the  end
of  liis  brush  into  the  water,  and  down  he  goes  slowly.
The  fleas  run  away  from  the  water,  and  at  last  they
all  run  over  the  fox's  nose  into  the  wool,  and  then  the
fox  dips  his  nose  under  and  lets  the  wool  go  ofi"  with
the  stream.

This  is  told  as  a  fact.  The  place  where  an  "  old  grey  fellow  "
was  seen  performing  this  feat,  was  mentioned  by  one  of  my  in-
formants.    The  fox  was  seen  in  the  sea  near  the  Caithness  hills.

3.  "  Tha  biadh  a's  ceol  n  seo,"  as  the  fox  said  when
he  ate  the  pipe  bag.

This  saying  I  have  known  from  my  childhood,  and  the  story
attached  to  it  is  that  the  fox  being  hungry  one  day,  found  a  bag-
pipe, and  proceeded  Ui  eat  the  bag,  which  is  generally,  or  was  till
lately,  made  of  hide.  There  was  still  a  remnant  of  breath  in  the
bag,  and  when  the  fox  bit  it  the  drone  gave  a  groan,  when  the  fox
surprised  but  not  frightened  said  : —

"  Here  is  meat  and  music  !"

4.  From  D.  ^M.  and  J.  MacLeod,  Laxford,  Sutherland.
One  day  the  fox  chanced  to  see  a  fine  cock  and  fat
hon,off"which  he  much  wished  to  dine,  but  at  his  approach


FABLES.  269

they  both  jumped  up  into  a  tree.  He  did  not  lose
heart,  but  soon  began  to  make  talk  with  them,  inviting
them  at  last  to  go  a  little  way  with  him.  "  There  was
no  danger,"  he  said,  "  nor  fears  of  his  hurting  them,  for
there  was  peace  between  men  and  beasts,  and  among
all  animals."  At  last  after  much  parleying  the  cock
said  to  the  hen,  "My  dear,  do  you  not  see  a  couple  of
liounds  coming  across  the  field  ?  "

"  Yes,"  said  the  hen,  "  and  they  mil  soon  be
here."

"  If  that  is  the  case,  it  is  time  I  should  be  off,"  said
the  sly  fox,  "  for  I  am  afraid  these  stupid  hounds  may
not  have  heard  of  the  peace."

And  with  that  lie  took  to  his  heels  and  never  drew
breath  till  he  reached  liis  den.  C.  D.

This  fable  is  very  well  known,  and  is  probably  derived  from
^sop,  thougb  the  nai-rator  did  not  know  the  fact.  I  give  it
because  the  authority  cannot  be  impeached,  and  because  equally
well-known  fables  are  found  in  old  Chinese  books,  and  arc  supposed
to  be  common  property.  This  may  be  pure  tradition,  though  I
suspect  it  to  be  derived  indirectly  from  some  book.  I  myself  lately
told  the  fable  of  the  Monkey  and  the  Cats,  in  Gaelic,  to  a  high-
lander  who  was  going  to  law  ;  and  it  is  impossible  to  be  sure  of
the  pedigree  of  such  well-known  fables.

The  next  two  are  of  the  same  kind,  and  wei'e  new  to  me  when
they  arrived.

5.    THE    FOX    AXD    THE    FOX-HUNTER.

Once  upon  a  time  a  Tod-hunter  had  been  very
anxious  to  catch  our  friend  the  fox,  and  had  stopped
all  the  earths  in  cold  weather.  One  evening  he  fell
asleep  in  his  hut ;  and  when  he  cpened  his  eyes  he
saw  the  fox  sitting  very  demurely  at  the  side  of  the  fire.
It  had  entered  by  the  hole  under  the  door  provided  for
the  convenience  of  the  dog,  the  cat,  the  pig,  and  the
hen.


270  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"Oh!  ho!"  said  the  Tod- hunter,  "now  I  have
you."  And  he  went  and  sat  down  at  the  hole  to  pre-
vent Reynard's  escajie.

"  Oh  !  ho  !"  said  the  fox,  "  I  will  soon  make  that
stupid  fellow  get  up."  So  he  found  the  man's  shoes,
and  putting  them  into  the  fire,  wondered  if  that  would
make  the  enemy  move.

"  I  shan't  get  up  for  that,  my  line  gentleman,"  cried
the  Tod-hunter.

Stockings  followed  the  shoes,  coat  and  trousers
shared  the  same  fate,  but  still  the  man  sat  over  the
hole.  At  last  the  fox  having  set  the  bed  and  bedding
on  fire,  put  a  light  to  the  straw  on  which  his  jailor  lay,
and  it  blazed  up  to  the  ceiling.

"  No  !  that  I  cannot  stand,"  shouted  the  man,
jumping  up  ;  and  the  fox  taking  advantage  of  the
smoke  and  confusion,  made  good  his  exit.

Note  hy  the  Collector. — This  is  the  beginning  of  Eeineke
Fuchs  in  the  Erse.  I  cannot  get  any  one  to  write  them  down  in
Gaelic,  which  very  few  peojile  can  icrite.  Most  of  the  tales  are
got  from  my  guide,  the  gamekeeper  ;  but  I  have  got  them  from
many  others.  C.  D.

Having  told  this  story  to  a  man  whom  I  met  near  Oban,  as  a
bait,  I  was  told  the  following  in  return. — J.  F.  C.

C.  "  The  fox  is  very  wise  indeed.  I  don't  know
whether  it  is  true  or  not,  but  an  old  fellow  told  me
that  he  had  seen  him  go  to  a  loch  where  there  were
wild  ducks,  and  take  a  bunch  of  heather  in  his  mouth,
then  go  into  the  water,  and  swam  down  with  the  wind
till  he  got  into  the  middle  of  the  ducks,  and  then  he
let  go  the  heather  and  killed  two  of  them."

7.    THE    FOX    AND  THE    WHEKS.

A  fox  had  noticed  for  some  days,  a  family  of
wrens,    off  which    he    wished  to    dine.        He   might


FABLES.  271

have  been  satisfied  with  one,  but  he  was  determined  to
have  the  whole  lot, — father  and  eighteen  sons, —
and  all  so  like  that  he  could  not  tell  one  from  the
other,  or  the  father  from  the  children.

"  It  is  no  use  to  kill  one  son,"  he  said  to  himself,
"because  the  old  cock  will  take  warning  and  fly  away
with  the  seventeen.  I  wish  I  knew  which  is  the  old
gentleman."

He  set  his  vnts  to  work  to  find  out,  and  one  day
seeing  them  all  threshing  in  a  barn,  he  sat  down  to
watch  them ;  still  he  could  not  be  sure.

"  jN'ow  I  have  it,"  he  said ;  "  well  done  the  old
man's  stroke  !     He  hits  true,"  he  cried.

"  Oh  !"  replied  the  one  he  suspected  of  being  the
head  of  the  family,  "  If  you  had  seen  my  grand-
father's strokes,  you  might  have  said  that."

The  sly  fox  pounced  on  the  cock,  ate  him  up  in  a
trice,  and  then  soon  caught  and  disposed  of  the  eigh-
teen sons,  all  flying  in  terror  about  the  barn.

C.  D.

This  is  new  to  me,  but  there  is  something  Hke  it  in  the  Battle
of  the  Birds,  where  the  wren  is  a  farmer  threshing  in  a  barn.
Why  the  wren  should  wield  the  flail  does  not  appear,  but  I
suppose  there  was  some  good  reason  for  it  "once  upon  a  time."

J.  F.  C.

8.  From  John  Dewar,  Inveraray,  August  27,  1860.

A  fox  one  day  met  a  cock  and  they  began  talking.

"  HoAv  many  tricks  canst  thou  do  ?"  said  the  fox.

"  AYell,"  said  the  cock,  "  I  could  do  three;  how
many  canst  thou  do  thyself  ? "

"  I  could  do  three  score  and  thirteen,"  said  the  fox.

"  Wliat  tricks  canst  thou  do  Ì "  said  the  cock.

"  Well,"  said  tlie  fox,  "  my  grandfather  used  to
shut  one  eye  and  give  a  great  shout."


272  WEST    HIGHLAND    TALES.

"  I  could  do  that  myself,"  said  the  cock.

"  Do  it,"  said  the  fox.  And  the  cock  shut  one  eye
and  crowed  as  loud  as  ever  he  could,  but  he  shut  the
eye  that  was  next  the  fox,  and  the  fox  gripped  him  by
the  neck  and  ran  away  with  him.  But  the  wife  to
whom  the  cock  belonged  saw  liim  and  cried  out,  "  Let
go  the  cock;  he's  mine."

Say  thou  "  S'e  mo  choileach  fheix  a  tii'  .vxx"  (it
is  my  own  cock),  said  the  cock  to  the  fox.

Then  the  fox  opened  his  mouth  to  say  as  the  cock
did,  and  he  dropped  the  cock,  and  he  sprung  up  on  the
top  of  a  house,  and  shut  one  eye  and  gave  a  loud  crow ;
and  that 's  all  there  is  of  that  sgeulachd.

I  find  that  this  is  well-known  in  the  west.

9.   HOW  the  wolf  lost  his  tail.

One  day  the  wolf  and  the  fox  were  out  together,
and  they  stole  a  disli  of  crowdie.  Now  the  wolf
was  the  biggest  beast  of  the  two,  and  he  had  a  long  tail
like  a  greyhound,  and  great  teeth.

The  fox  was  afraid  of  him,  and  did  not  dare  to  say
a  word  when  the  wolf  ate  the  most  of  the  crowdie,  and
left  only  a  little  at  the  bottom  of  the  dish  for  him,
but  he  determined  to  punish  him  for  it ;  so  the  next
night  when  they  were  out  together  the  fox  said  :

"  I  smell  a  very  nice  cheese,  and  (pointing  to  the
moonshine  on  the  ice)  there  it  is  too."

"And how  -will  you  get  it?"  said  the  wolf.

"  Well,  stop  you  here  till  I  see  if  the  farmer  is
asleep,  and  if  you  keep  your  tail  on  it,  nobody  will  see
you  or  know  that  it  is  there.  Keep  it  steafly.  I  may
be  some  time  coming  back."

So  the  wolf  lay  down  and  laid  his  tail  on  the
moonshine  in  the  ice,  and  kept  it  for  an  hour  till  it  was
fast.      Tlien  the  fox,  who  had  been  watching  him,  ran


Fables.  273

in  to  the  farmer  and  said  :  "  The  wolf  is  there ;  he  will
eat  up  the  cliildren, — the  wolf !  the  wolf  ! "

Then  the  farmer  and  his  wife  came  out  with  sticks
to  kill  the  wolf,  but  the  wolf  ran  off  leaving  his  tail
behind  him,  and  that's  why  the  wolf  is  stumpy  tailed
to  tliis  day,  though  the  fox  has  a  long  brush.

C.  D.

This  is  manifestly  tlie  same  as  the  Norse  story, — "  Why  the
bear  is  stumpy  tailed?"  and  it  errs  in  ascribing  a  stumpy  tail
to  the  wolf.  There  was  not  time  for  the  "  Norse  Tales  "  to  become
known  to  the  people  who  told  the  story,  so  perhaps  this  may  be
a  Norse  tradition  transferred  from  the  bear  to  the  wolf.  There  is
another  wolf  story  in  Sutherland,  which  was  told  to  me  by  the
Duke  of  Sutherland's  head  forester  in  1848.  It  was  told  in
Gaelic  by  a  fine  old  bighlander,  who  is  now  dead,  flis  sons  have
succeeded  him,  and  will  probably  remember  this  story  which  I
ijuote  from  recollection.  J.  F.  C.

10.      HOW  THE  LAST  WOLF  WAS  KILLED  IN  SUTHERLAND.

There  was  once  a  time  when  there  were  wolves
iu  Sutherland,  and  a  woman  that  was  living  in  a
little  tovm  lost  one  of  her  children.  Well,  they  went
all  about  the  hills  looking  for  the  lad,  but  they  could
not  find  him  for  three  days.  VV^ell,  at  the  end  of  that
time  they  gave  up,  but  there  was  a  young  lad  coming
home  late  through  a  big  cairn  of  stones,  and  he  heard
the  crying  of  a  child,  and  a  kind  of  a  noise,  and  he
went  up  to  the  cairn,  and  what  should  he  see,  in  a
hole  under  a  big  stone,  but  the  boy  and  two  young
wolves  Anth  him.

Well  he  was  frightened  that  the  old  wolf  would
come,  so  he  went  home  to  the  town,  and  got  two  others
with  him,  and  in  the  morning  they  went  back  to  the
cairn  and  they  found  the  hole.

Well,    then,   one    of  the    lads   stopped  outside  to

T


274  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

watch,  and  the  other  t-\vo  went  in,  and  they  began  to
kill  the  young  wolves,  and  they  were  squealing,  and
the  old  one  heard  them,  and  she  came  running  to  the
place,  and  slipped  between  the  legs  of  the  lad  who  was
watching,  and  got  her  head  into  the  hole,  but  he  held
her  by  the  tail.

"  What,"  said  the  lad  who  was  inside  "  is  keeping
the  light  from  us."

Ma  bhrtsteas  bux  Fioxx  bithidh  fios  agad.

"  If  the  root  of  Fionn  (or  if  the  hairy  root)  breaks,
thou  wilt  linow,"  said  the  man  outside.

Well,  he  held  on,  and  the  lads  that  were  inside
killed  the  wolf  and  the  young  ones,  and  they  took  the
boy  home  to  his  mother,  and  his  family  were  alive  in
the  time  of  my  grandfather,  and  they  say  they  Avere
never  like  other  people.

This  is  manifestly  the  same  as  the  story  of  Eomulus  and
Remus,  but  it  appears  on  very  strong  evidence  tliat  wolves  really
carry  off  and  suckle  children  in  Oude  now,  and  that  these  children
grow  up  to  be  half  savages.  It  is  either  a  fact  in  natural  history,
or  a  tradition,  believed  to  be  a  fact  in  Sutiierland  and  in  Oude.
I  have  heard  the  same  story  told  in  the  Highlands  of  a  wild  boar,
but  the  boar's  tail  would  be  but  a  slippery  hold.  J.  F.  C.

According  to  Innes  (Scotland  in  the  Middle  Ages,  Pp.  125),
in  1283,  there  was  an  allowance  for  one  hunter  of  wolves  at
Stirling;  and  there  were  wild  boars  fed  at  the  King's  expense  in
1263,  in  Forfarshire.  There  are  plenty  of  wolves  now  in  Scandi-
navia, and  in  Brittany,  and  wild  boars  in  Germany,  and  elsewhere
in  Europe.  The  Gaelic  names  for  welfare  Madadh,  Alluidh,
commonly  used ;  Faol  Ciiu,  Alla  Mhadadh,  all  of  which  are
composed  of  an  epithet,  and  a  word  which  now  means  dog.  Die.
etc.     Mac  tike.  Earth's  Son  ;   Faol,  Armstrong.

A  Boar  is  Torc,  Cullach,  Fiadii  chullach.

The  Fox  appears  as  a  talking  creature  in  several  stories.  So
does  the  Bear  in  No.  IX.,  and  the  Wolf  and  Falcon,  No.  IV.
The  Dog  appears  in  No.  XII. ;  the  Sheep,  Cat,  Cock,  Goose,  Dog,


FABLES.  275

and  Bull,  in  No.  XI ;  the  Frog  in  No.  XXXIII ;  the  Cat  and  the
Mouse  in  No.  XLIX.  The  Rat  and  the  Lion,  and  the  Dove,
appear  in  a  story  to  which  I  have  referred  in  No.  IV.  Other
creatures,  also,  not  mentioned  in  stories,  are  gifted  with  speech,
but  their  speech  is  generally  but  a  translation  of  their  notes  into
Gaelic.

11.  Bi  Glic,  Bi  Glic,  Bee  Gleechk,  be  wise,  say  the
Oyster-catcliers,  when  a  stranger  comes  near  their
haunts.

12.  GÒRACH,  GÒRACH,  Gawrach,  "  silly,"  says  the
HoocUe,  as  he  sits  on  a  hillock  by  the  way  side  and
bows  at  the  passengers.

1 3.  Here  is  another  bit  of  crow  language, — a  con-
versation with  a  frog.  When  it  is  repeated  in  Gaehc
it  can  be  made  absurdly  like  the  notes  of  the  creatures.

"  GhiUe  criosda  mhic  DhughaU  cuir  a  nios  do
mhàg.

Ghille  criosda  mhic  Dhughail  cuir  a  nios  do
mliag."

Christ's  servant,  son  of  Dugald,  put  up  thy  paw.

"  Tha  eagal  orm,  tha  eagal  orm,  tha  eagal  orm."

I  fear.

"  Gheibh  thu  còta  gorm  a's  Icine.  Gheibh  thu
còta  gorm  a's  leine."

Thou  shalt  have  a  blue  coat  and  a  shirt.

Then  the  frog  put  up  his  hand  and  the  hoodie  took
him  to  a  hillock  and  began  to  eat  him,  saying,

"  Bian  dona  loni !  's  bu  dona  riabh  thu."

Bad  bare  meat  and  bad  wert  thou  ever.

"  Caite  bheil  do  ghealladh  math  a  nis  ? "  said  the
frog,  "where  is  thy  good  promise  now  ?"

"  Sann  ag  ol  a  bha  sinn  an  latha  sin.  Sann  ag  ol
a  bha  sinn  an  latha  sin."


276  WEST  niGHLAXD  TALES.

It  is  drinking  we  were  on  that  day.
"  Tol  ort  a  ruid  ghrannda  gur  beag  feola  tha  air
do  chramlian."

"  Tol  ort !"  said  the  hoodie.

A  hole  in  thee,  ugly  thing !  how  little  flesh  is  on
thy  bones.

"WTiy  the  frog  is  called  Gilchrist  MacDugald,  unless  the  story
was  made  to  fit  some  real  event,  I  do  not  know.  The  story  used
to  be  told  by  an  old  Islay  man,  Donald  Macintyre,  to  Hector  Mac-
Lean  ;  and  I  remember  to  have  heard  part  of  it  in  my  childhood.

The  Hoodie  has  appeared  in  many  places  already,  and  he  and
his  family,  the  Crows,  have  been  soothsayers  time  out  of  mind,
and  in  many  lands.  A  more  mischievous,  knowing  bird  does  not
exist,  or  one  that  better  deserves  his  character  for  wisdom.

The  old  fable  of  the  bird  which  dropped  a  tortoise  on  a  stone,
is  enacted  every  day  by  Hoodies.  Any  one  who  will  take  the
trouble  to  watch,  may  see  hoodies  on  the  shores  of  the  Western
Isles,  at  low  tide,  flying  up  into  the  air  and  dropping  down
again.

It  will  be  found  that  they  are  trying  to  drop  large  stranded
muscles  and  other  shells,  on  the  stones  on  the  beach  ;  and  if  left
to  their  own  devices,  they  will  go  on  till  they  succeed  in  cracking
the  shell,  and  extracting  the  inhabitant.

Keepers  who  trap  them  most  successfully,  do  it  by  beating
them  at  their  own  weapons.  They  put  a  bait  into  a  pool  of  water,
and  make  a  show  of  hiding  it,  and  set  the  trap  on  a  knoll  at  some
distance.  The  Hoodie  makes  a  gradual  approach,  reconnoitering
the  ground  as  he  advances,  and  settling  on  the  knolls  which
command  a  view,  perhaps  repeating  his  song  of  silly,  silly,  till  he
settles  on  the  trap,  and  next  morning  his  head  is  on  the  kennel
door  with  the  mortal  remains  of  other  oifenders.

I  suspect  that  the  Hoodie  was  made  a  soothsayer  because  of
his  natural  wisdom.

1 4.  The  Grouse  Cock  and  his  wife  are  always  disput-
ing and  may  be  heard  on  any  fine  evening  or  early
morning  quarrelling  and  scolding  about  the  stock  of  food.


FABLES.  277

This  is  what  the  hen  says, —
"  Faic  thusa  'n  la  ud  's  'n  la  vd  eilk."
And  the  cock,  with  his  deeper  voice,  repUes, —
"  Faic  thusa  'n  cnou  ud  's  'n  cnoc  ud  eile."
See  thou  yomider  day,  and  yon  other  day.
See  thou  younder  hill,  and  yon  other  hill.

Of  all  the  stories  I  liave  gathered  and  heard,  this  is  all
I  have  about  the  Grouse.  It  is  remarkable  ;  for  if  these  stories
were  home-made,  and  in  modern  times,  they  would  surely  treat  of
the  only  bird  whose  births,  deaths,  and  marriages  are  chronicled
in  the  newspapers, — and  which  is  peculiar  to  the  British  Isles.

15.  The  Eagle  and  the  Wren  once  tried  who  could
fly  highest,  and  the  victor  was  to  be  king  of  the  birds.
So  the  Wren  flew  straight  up,  and  the  Eagle  flew  in
great  circles,  and  when  the  Wren  was  tired  he  settled
on  the  Eagle's  back.

When  the  Eagle  was  tired  he  stopped  and

"  C  AITE  BHEIL  THU  DHREOLAIN  V    URs'  AN  lOLAIK.
"  ThA  MISE  N  so  OS  DO  CEANN,"  URs'  n'  DREOLAN.

"  Where  art  thou,  Wren  Ì "  said  the  Eagle.
"  I  am  here  above  thee,"  said  the  Wren.
And  so  the  Wren  won  the  match.

This  was  told  me  in  my  childhood,  I  think,  by  the  Eev.  Mr.
MacTavish.  There  is  a  much  better  version  of  the  story  in
Grimm's  "King  Wren,"  in  which  the  notes  of  many  creatures  are
made  into  German  ;  but  this  describes  the  flight  of  eagle  and
wren  correctly  enough.     I  lately,  Sept.  1860,  heard  it  in  Skye.

16.  Tha  Fios  Fithich  agud.  Thou  hast  ravens'
knowledge,  is  commonly  said  to  children  who  are
unusually  knowing  about  tilings  of  which  they  have  no
ostensible  means  of  gaining  knowledge.

Odin  had  two  ravens  who  names  meant  Mind  and  Memory,
which  told  him  everything  that  passed  in  the  world.


278  west  highland  tales.

17.  Nead  air   Bride.       Ubh  air  Inid  eun  air

CAISG  mar  am  BI  sin  AIG  AN  FhITHEACH  BITHIDH  AM  BAS.

Nest  at  Candlemas,  egg  at  inid,  bird  at  Pash.
If  that  hatli  not  the  Raven,  death  he  hath.

This  is  rather  a  bit  of  popular  natural  history  than  anything
else,  but  it  shews  that  the  raven  is  at  least  as  important  a  per-
sonage amongst  Celts  as  the  grouse  is  amongst  Saxons.

18.  S'    BIGEAD    THU    SIOD,    ARS    AN    DREOLAN    'n    UR

thdnn  e,  gob  ans  an  Fhairige.

Thou'rt  lessened  by  that,  said  the  Wren,  when  he
dipped  his  beak  in  the  sea.

There  are  a  great  number  of  similar  stories  current  in  the
islands,  but  it  is  very  hard  to  persuade  any  one  that  such  trifles
can  be  of  any  value.  I  have  lately  heard  of  a  number  of  stories
of  the  kind.     For  example —

19.  John  Mackinnon,  stable-boy  at  Broadford,  in
Skye,  tells  that  "  a  man  was  one  day  walking  along
the  road  with  a  creel  of  herrings  on  his  back,  and  two
foxes  saw  him,  and  the  one,  who  was  the  biggest,
said  to  the  other,  '  Stop  thou  here,  and  follow  the
man,  and  I  w-ill  run  round  and  pretend  that  I  am
dead.'  So  he  ran  round,  and  stretched  himself  on  the
road.  The  man  came  on,  and  when  he  saw  the  fox,
he  was  well  jjleased  to  find  so  fine  a  beast,  and  he
picked  him  up,  and  threw  him  into  the  creel,  and  he
walked  on.  But  the  fox  threw  the  herrings  out  of  the
creel,  and  the  other  followed  and  picked  them  up  ;
and  when  the  creel  was  empty,  the  big  fox  leaped  out
and  ran  away,  and  that  is  how  they  got  the  herrings.

Well,  they  went  on  together  till  they  came  to  a
smith's  house,  and  there  was  a  horse  tied  at  the  door,
and  he  had  a  golden  shoe,  and  there  was  a  name  on  it.

"  '  I  wiU  go  and  read  what  is  written  on  that  shoe,'


FABLES.  279

said  tlie  big  fox,  and  he  went  ;  but  tbe  horse  lifted
his  foot,  and  struck  a  kick  on  him,  and  drove  his
brains  out.

"  '  Ghiir  ghiir  ars  an  siunnach  beag  cha  sgolair  mi
s  cha  'n  ail  leaui  a  bhi. '

"  '  Lad,  Lad,'  said  the  little  fox,  '  no  scholar  me.
nor  wish  I  to  be ;"  '  and,  of  course,  he  got  the  herrings,
tliough  my  informant  did  not  say  so.

20.  A  boy,  Alexander  Mackenzie,  who  walked
with  me  from  Carbost,  in  Skye,  told  that  a  bee  seillean
met  a  mouse  and  said,

"  Teann  a  nail  'us  gun  deanamaid  tigh."
"  Come  over  till  we  make  a  house."
"  I  will  not,"  said  Luchag,  the  mousie.

Fear  dha  'n  dug  thusa  do  mhil  shamraidh
Deanadh  e  tigh  gheamhraidh  dhuit
Tha  tigh  agamsa  fo  thalamh
Xach  ruig  air  gallian  na  gaoith
Bith  tusa  an  ad  isean  pheallach
A  ruidh  air  barradh  nan  craobh.

He  to  whom  thou  gavest  thy  summer  honey,
Let  him  make  a  winter  house  for  thee  ;
I  have  a  little  house  under  the  ground.
That  can  reach  neither  cold  nor  breeze.
Thou  wilt  be  a  ragged  creature,
Running  on  the  tops  of  the  trees.

21.  The  same  boy  told  that  there  was  a  mouse  in
the  hill,  and  a  mouse  in  a  farm.

"  It  were  well,"  said  the  hill  mouse,  "  to  be  in  the
farm  where  one  might  get  things."

Said  the  farm  mouse,  "  S'  fhearr  an  t-sith."  Better
is  peace.


2  8o  WEST  HTGHLAXD  TALES.

"ii.  The  following  is  not  strictly  speaking  a  fable,
liut  it  is  a  sort  of  moral  tale,  and  may  be  classed  witli
fables.  It  seems  to  inculcate  a  lesson  of  seK-reliance  and
self-help.  I  in.-ote  it  in  English  from  the  Gaelic  repe-
tition of  John  Mackenzie  at  Inverary  in  1859,  and
made  him  repeat  it  in  1860,  when  I  made  np  several
omissions.  Other  versions  have  come  to  me  from  other
sources,  and  the  tale  seems  to  be  well  known  in  the
Highlands.  If  it  is  m  any  book,  I  have  not  been  able
to  find  it.  jMackenzie  says  he  learned  it  fi'om  a  native
of  Uist,  and  I  have  a  very  well  Avritten  version  of  it,
told  by  Maeintyre  in  Benbecula,  to  Mr.  Torrie.  It  is
called  the  "  Provost  of  London,"  and  begins  with  the
family  liistory  of  the  hero  of  the  tale.  A  great  lady
fell  in  love  wdth  a  poor  Higldand  lad,  and  he  was
ashamed  of  the  love  she  had  taken  for  liim,  and  went
away  to  an  uncle  who  was  a  colonel,  and  who  got  him
made  a  major.  The  lady  took  to  black  melancholy,  and
he  wa.s  sent  for,  and  they  maiTÌed.  He  went  to  the
wars,  bought  a  small  estate,  was  killed,  and  his  brother-
in-law  brought  up  his  son.  Then  comes  the  dream,
the  journey  for  three  years  in  Scotland,  Irelan(J,  and
England  ;  the  nu  eting  with  "  one  of  the  people  of
(,'ambridge,"  and  the  rest  of  the  incidents  nearly  as
they  were  told  to  me  by  Mackenzie,  but  in  different
Avords.


XVII  &.
BAILLIE  LUKJs^AIK

'J'olJ  by  Join  Mackenzie,  at  Inverary,   to  J.  F.  C.     August  1859
and  1860.

^I'^HEEE  were  at  some  time  of  the  world  two  brothers
-^  in  one  farm,  and  they  were  A'ery  great  friends,  and
they  had  each  a  son ;  and  one  of  the  brothers  flied,
and  he  left  his  brother  guardian.  Wlien  the  lad  was
near  to  be  grown  up,  he  was  keeping  the  farm  for  his
mother  almost  as  well  as  his  father  cordd  have  done.
One  night  he  saw  a  dream  in  his  sleep,  the  most  beauti-
ful lady  that  there  was  in  the  world,  and  he  dreamed
of  her  three  times,  and  he  resolved  to  marry  her  and
no  other  woman  in  the  world  ;  and  he  would  not  stay
in  the  farm,  and  he  grew  pale,  and  his  father's  brother
could  not  think  what  ailed  him  ;  and  he  was  always
asking  liim  what  was  wrong  with  him.  "  Well,  never
mind,"  one  day  he  said,  "  brother  of  my  father,  I  haA'e
seen  a  dream,  the  most  beatitiful  woman  that  there  is
in  the  world,  and  I  will  marry  no  other  but  she  ;  and
I  will  now  go  out  and  search  for  her  over  the  whole
world  till  I  fuid  her."

Said  the  imcle,  "  Son  of  my  brother,  I  ha^e  a
hundred  pounds  ;  I  will  give  them  to  thee,  and  go  :
and  when  that  is  spent  come  back  to  me,  and  I  will
give  thee  another  himdred."

So  the  lad  took  the  hunebed  pounds,  and  he  went


282


WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.


to  France,  and  then  he  went  to  Spain,  and  all  over  the
world,  but  he  could  not  find  the  lady  he  had  seen  in
his  sleep.  At  last  he  came  to  London,  and  he  had
spent  all  his  money,  and  liis  clothes  were  worn,  and  he
did  not  know  what  he  should  do  for  a  night's  lodging.

Well,  as  he  was  wandering  about  the  streets,  whom
should  he  see  but  a  quiet-looking  respectable  old
woman ;  and  he  spoke  to  her  ;  and,  from  less  to  more,
he  told  her  all  that  had  happened  to  him  ;  and  she
was  well  pleased  to  see  a  countrjTnan,  and  she  said,

"  I,  too,  am  a  Highland  woman,  though  I  am  in
this  to-wn."  And  she  took  liim  to  a  small  house  that
she  had,  and  she  gave  him  meat  and  clothes.

And  she  said,  "  Go  out  now  and  take  a  walk  ;
maybe  thou  mayest  see  here  in  one  day  what  thou
mightest  not  see  in  a  year."

On  the  next  day  he  was  out  taking  a  walk  about  the
town,  and  he  saw  a  woman  at  a  window,  and  he  knew
her  at  once,  for  she  was  the  lady  he  had  seen  in  his
sleep,  and  he  went  back  to  the  old  woman.

"  How  went  it  with  thee  this  day,  Gael  Ì "  said
she.

"  It  went  well,"  said  he.

"  Oh,  I  have  seen  the  lady  I  saw  in  my  sleep,"
said  he.     And  he  told  her  all  about  it.

Then  the  old  woman  asked  about  the  house  and  the
street ;  and  when  she  knew — "  Thou  hast  seen  her,"
said  she.  "  That  is  all  thou  vnlt  see  of  her.  That  is
the  daughter  of  the  Bailie  of  London  ;  but  I  am  her
foster  mother,  and  I  would  be  right  glad  if  she  would
marry  a  coiuitryman  of  my  own.  JN^ow,  do  thou  go
out  on  the  morrow,  and  I  -will  give  thee  fine  highland
clothes,  and  thou  wilt  find  the  lady  walking  in  such  a
street  ;  herself  and  three  maidens  of  company  -will  go
out  together ;  and  do   thou  tread   on  her  go-mi  ;  and


BAILLIE  LUNNAIN.  283

■when  she  turns  round   to   see  what  is  the  matter,  do
thou  speak  to  her."

"Well,  the  lad  did  this.  He  went  out  and  he
found  the  lady,  and  he  set  his  foot  on  her  dress,  and
the  gown  rent  from  the  band  ;  and  when  she  turned
round  he  said,  "  I  am  asking  you  much  grace — it  was
an  accident."

"  It  was  not  your  fault ;  it  was  the  fault  of  the
dressmaker  that  made  the  dress  so  long,"  said  she.

And  she  looked  at  him  ;  and  when  she  saw  how
handsome  he  was,  she  said,  "  "Will  you  be  so  kind  as
to  come  home  Avith  me  to  my  father's  house  and  take
something  ? "

So  the  lad  went  and  sat  down,  and  before  she
asked  him  anytliing  she  set  down  wine  before  him
and  said,  "  Quicker  is  a  di-iiik  than  a  tale."

"V\nien  he  had  taken  that,  he  began  and  he  told  her
all  that  happened,  and  how  he  had  seen  her  in  his
sleep,  and  when,  and  she  was  well  pleased.

"  And  I  saw  thee  in  my  sleep  on  the  same  night,"
said  she.

He  went  away  that  day,  and  the  old  woman  that
he  was  lodging  with  asked  him  how  he  had  got  on,
and  he  told  her  ever}i;hing  that  had  happened ;  and
she  went  to  the  Bailie's  daughter,  and  told  her  all  the
good  she  could  tliink  of  about  the  young  lad  ;  and
after  that  he  was  often  at  the  Bailie's  house  ;  and  at
last  the  daughter  said  she  would  marry  him.  "  But  I
fear  that  will  not  do,"  said  she.  "  Go  home  for  a  year,
and  when  thou  comest  back  I  will  contrive  to  marry
thee,"  said  she,  "  for  it  is  the  law  of  tliis  country  that
no  one  must  be  married  unless  the  Bailie  himself  gives
her  by  the  hand  to  her  bridegroom,"  said  she ;  and  she
left  blessing  with  him.

"Well,  the  lad  went  away  as  the  girl  said,  and  he


284  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

was  putting  everything  in  order  at  home  ;  and  he  told
his  father's  brother  all  that  had  happened  to  him ;  but
when  the  year  was  nearly  out  he  set  oif  for  London
again,  and  he  had  the  second  hundred  with  him,  and
some  good  oat-meal  cakes.

On  the  road,  whom  should  he  meet  but  a  Sassanach
gentleman  who  was  going  the  same  road,  and  they  be-
gan to  talk.

"  Where  art  thou  going  1"  said  the  Saxon.

"  Well,  I  am  going  to  London,"  said  he

"  A¥lien  I  Avas  there  last  I  set  a  net*  in  a  street,
and  I  am  going  to  see  if  it  is  as  I  left  it.  If  it  is
well  I  will  take  it  Avith  me  ;  if  not,  I  Avill  leave  it."

"  Well,"  said  the  other,  "  that  is  but  a  silly  thing.
How  can  lintseed  be  as  thou  hast  left  it  Ì  It  must  be
grown  up  and  trodden  down  by  ducks  and  geese,  and
eaten  by  hens  long  ago.  I  am  going  to  London,  too  ;
but  I  am  going  to  marry  the  Bailie's  daughter."

Well,  they  walked  on  together,  and  at  long  last  the
Saxon  began  to  get  hungry,  and  he  had  no  food  with
him,  and  there  was  no  house  near  ;  and  he  said  to  the
other,  "  Wilt  thou  give  me  some  of  thy  food  ?"

"  AYell,"  said  the  Gael,  "  I  have  but  poor  food —
oaten  bread ;  I  will  give  you  some  if  j^ou  will  take  it ;
but  if  I  were  a  gentleman  like  you  I  Avould  never  tra\-el
without  my  OAvn  mother."

"How  can  I  travel  with  my  mother]"  said  the
Saxon.  "  She  is  dead  and  buried  long  ago,  ami  rotting
in  the  earth  ;  if  not,  Avhy  should  I  take  her  with
me  ? "

And  he  tnok  the  oat  cake  and  ate  it,  and  they  went
on  their  way.

They  had  not  gone  far  Avhen  a  heavy  slioAver  came

*  To  set  a  net  and  to  sow  lint  are  expressed  by  the  same
words.


BAILLIE  LUNNAIN.  285

on,  and  the  Gael  had  a  rough  plaid  about  him,  but  the
Saxon  had  none  ;  and  he  said  to  the  other,

"  Wilt  thou  lend  me  thy  plaid  ?"

"  I  will  lend  you  a  part  of  it,"  said  the  Gael ;
"  but  if  I  were  a  gentleman  hke  you,  I  ^^rould  never
travel  -without  my  house,  and  I  would  not  be  indebted
to  any  one  for  faA'ours."

"Thou  art  a  fool,"  said  the  Saxon ;  "  my  house  is
four  storeys  high.  How  could  any  man  carry  a  house
that  is  four  storeys  liigh  about  with  him  Ì "

But  he  wrapped  the  end  of  the  Higlilander's  plaid
about  his  shoulders,  and  they  went  on.

Well,  they  had  not  gone  far  till  they  came  to  a
small  river,  and  the  water  was  deep  after  the  rain,  and
there  was  no  bridge,  for  in  those  days  bridges  were  not
so  plentiful  as  they  are  now  ;  and  the  Saxon  would  not
wet  his  feet,  so  he  said  to  the  Highlander,

"  Wilt  thou  carry  me  over?"

"  Well,"  said  the  Gael,  "  I  don't  mind  if  I  do  ;
but  if  I  were  a  gentleman  like  you,  I  would  never
travel  without  my  own  bridge,  and  I  would  not  be  in
any  man's  debt  for  favours."

"  Thou  art  a  silly  fellow,"  said  the  Saxon.  "  How
can  any  man  travel  about  Avith  a  bridge  that  is  made
of  stone  and  lime.  Thou  art  but  a  'burraidh,'  and
weighs  as  much  as  a  hoiise  Ì "

But  he  got  on  the  back  of  his  fellow-traA^eller
nevertheless,  and  they  travelled  on  till  they  got  to
London.  Then  the  Saxon  went  to  the  house  of  the
BaiUie,  and  the  other  went  to  the  Httle  house  of  his
old  countrywoman,  who  was  the  foster-mother  of  the
Bailie's  daughter.

Well,  the  Saxon  gentleman  began  to  tell  the
Bailie  all  that  had  happened  to  him  by  the  way  ;  and
he  said —


286  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  I  met  with  a  Gael  by  the  way,  and  he  was  a
perfect  fool — the  greatest  booby  that  man  ever  saw.
He  told  me  that  he  had  sown  lint  here  a  year  ago  in
a  street,  and  that  he  was  coming  to  fetch  it,  if  he  shoidd
find  it  as  he  left  it,  but  that  if  he  did  not,  he  would
leave  it ;  and  how  should  he  find  that  after  a  year  1
He  told  me  I  should  never  travel  Avithout  my  mother,
and  my  house,  and  my  bridge  ;  and  how  could  a  man
travel  with  all  these  things  ?  But  though  he  was
notliing  but  a  fool,  he  was  a  good-natured  fellow,  for
he  gave  me  some  of  his  food,  and  lent  me  a  bit  of  liis
plaid,  and  he  carried  me  over  a  river."

"  I  know  not  but  he  was  as  "wise  as  the  man  that
was  speaking  to  him,"  said  the  Bailie ;  for  he  was  a
wdse  man.     "  I'll  tell  you  what  he  meant,"  said  he.

"  Well,  I  Avill  shew  that  he  was  a  fool  as  great  as
ever  was  seen,"  said  the  Saxon.

"  He  has  left  a  girl  in  this  to-wn,"  said  the  Bailie,
"  and  he  is  come  to  see  if  she  is  in  the  same  mind  as
she  was  when  he  left  her  ;  if  so,  he  will  take  her  with
him,  if  not,  he  will  leave  her;  he  has  set  a  net,"  said  he.
"  Your  mother  nourished  you,  and  a  gentleman  like
you  should  have  his  oAvn  nourishment  wath  him.  Ho
meant  that  you  sliould  not  be  dependent  on  him.  It
was  the  booby  that  was  with  him,"  said  the  BaiUe.
"  A  gentleman  like  you  should  have  liis  own  shelter,
and  your  hoiuje  is  your  shelter  when  your  are  at  home.
A  bridge  is  made  for  crossing  a  river,  and  a  man
should  always  be  able  to  do  that  without  help  ;  and
the  man  was  right,  and  he  was  no  fool,  but  a  smart
lad,  and  I  should  like  to  see  him,"  said  the  Bailie  ;
"  and  I  would  go  to  fetch  him  if  I  knew  where  he
was,"  said  he.  According  to  another  version,  the  house
and  bridge  meant  a  coach  and  a  saddle-horse.

A\'^ell,  the  next  dav  the  Bailie  went  to  the  house


BAILLIE    LUNNAIN.  287

Avliere  the  lad  was,  and  he  asked  him  to  come  home  to
his  dinner  ;  and  the  lad  came,  and  he  told  the  Bailie
that  he  had  understood  all  that  had  been  said.

"  Kow,"  said  he,  "  as  it  is  the  law  that  no  man
may  be  married  here  unless  the  Bailie  gives  him  the
bride  by  the  hand,  will  you  be  so  kind  as  to  give  me
the  girl  that  I  have  come  to  marry,  if  she  is  in  the
same  mind  Ì     I  will  have  everything  ready."

And  the  Bailie  said,  "  I  will  do  that,  my  smart
lad,  to-morrow,  or  whenever  thou  dost  choose.  I
would  go  fai'ther  than  that  for  such  a  smart  boy,"
said  he.

"  Well,  I  Avill  be  ready  at  such  a  house  to-morrow,"
said  the  lad  ;  and  he  went  away  to  the  foster-mother's
house.

"When  the  morrow  came,  the  Bailie's  daughter  dis-
guised herself,  and  she  went  to  the  house  of  her  fostei'-
mother,  and  the  (uiel  had  got  a  churchman  there  ;  and
the  Bailie  came  in,  and  he  took  his  own  daughter  b}-
the  hand ;  but  she  would  not  give  her  hand  to  the
lad.

"  Give  thy  hand,  girl,"  said  the  Bailie.  "  It  is
an  honour  for  thee  to  marry  such  a  smart  lad."  And
he  gave  her  to  liim,  and  they  were  married  according
to  law.

Then  the  Bailie  went  home,  and  he  was  to  give
his  daughter  by  the  hand  to  the  Saxon  gentleman  that
day  ;  but  the  daughter  Avas  not  to  be  foimd  ;  and  he
was  a  widower,  and  she  was  keeping  the  house  for
him,  and  they  could  not  find  her  anywhere.

"  AVell,"  said  the  Bailie,  "  I  will  lay  a  wager  that
Gael  has  got  her,  after  all."  And  the  Gael  came  iii
with  the  daughter,  and  he  told  them  everything  just
as  it  had  happened,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end,
and  how  he  had  plenty  in  his  own  country.


2  88  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

And  the  BaiKe  said,  "  Well,  since  I  myself  have
given  thee  my  daughter  by  the  hand,  it  is  a  marriage,
and  I  am  glad  that  she  has  got  a  smart  lad  like  thee
for  a  husband."

And  they  made  a  wedding  that  lasted  a  year  and
a  day,  and  they  lived  happily  ever  after,  and  if  they
have  not  died  since  then  they  are  alive  vet.


XVII  c.
THE  SLIM  SWAETHY  CHAMPION.

From  James  Wilson,  blind  fiddler,  Islay,  1859.

T^HERE  was  a  poor  man  dwelling  in  Ard  na  n
-*-  Uamha,  and  a  son  was  born  to  him,  and  lie  gave
him  school  and  learning  till  he  was  fourteen  years  of
age.  When  he  was  fourteen  years  of  age,  he  said  to
his  father,

"  Father,  it  is  time  for  me  to  be  doing  for  myself,
if  thou  wouldst  give  me  a  fishing-rod  and  a  basket."

The  poor  man  found  every  chance  till  he  got  a
fishing-rod  and  a  basket  for  him.  When  he  got  the
fishing-rod  and  the  basket,  he  went  round  about  Loch
Aird  na  n  Uamha,  and  took  down  (by)  Loch  Thora-
bais  ;  and  after  he  had  fished  Loch  Thorabais  closely,
he  came  to  Loch  Phort  an  Eillean  ■*  and  after  he  had
fished  Loch  Phort  an  Eillean  before  him,  he  took  out
by  Loch  Allalaidh  He  stayed  the  night  in  Aird
Eileastraidh,  and  every  trout  he  had  left  with  a  poor
woman  that  was  there.

On  the  morrow  he  thought  that  he  would  rise  out,
and  that  he  would  betake  himself  to  Eirinn.  He
came  to  the  garden  of  Aird  Inneasdail,  and  he  plucked
with  liim  sixteen  apples,  and  then  he  came  to  Midi  of
Otha.t  He  threw  an  apple  out  into  the  sea,  and
*  The  lake  in  which  is  the  island  where  the  Lords  of  the  Isles
had  their  dwelling.

f  The  nearest  point  to  Ireland.
U


290  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

he  gave  a  step  on  it :  he  threw  the  next  one,  and  he
gave  a  step  on  it :  he  threw  thus  one  after  one,  until
he  came  to  the  sixteenth,  and  the  sixteenth  took  him
on  shore  in  Eirian

^AHien  he  was  on  shore  he  shook  his  ears,  and  he
thought  that  it  was  ia  no  sorry  place  he  would  stay.

"  He  moved  as  sea  heaps  from  sea  heaps,
And  as  playballs  from  plajballs —
As  a  furious  winter  wind —
So  swiftly,  sprucely,  cheerily,
Eight  proudly.

Through  glens  and  high-tops,
And  no  stop  made  he
Until  he  came

To  city  and  court  of  O'Domhnuill.
He  gave  a  cheery,  light  leap
O'er  top  and  turret
Of  court  and  city
Of  O'Domhnuill."*

O'Domhnuill  took  much  anger  and  rage  that  such
an  unseemlj'  ill  stripling  should  come  into  his  court,
while  he  had  a  doorkeeper  for  his  toAvn.

''  I  ^vill  not  beHeve,"  said  the  Champion,  but  "  that
thou  art  taking  anger  and  rage,  O'DomlmuilL"

"  Well,  then,  I  am,"  said  O'Domhnidll,  "  if  I  did
but  know  at  whom  I  should  let  it  out."

"  My  good  man,"  said  the  Champion,  "  coming  in
was  no  easier  for  me  than  going  out  again  would  be."

"  Thou  goest  not  out,"  said  O'Domlmuill,  "  until
thou  tellest  me  from  whence  thou  camest."

"  I  came  from  hurry-sturry.
From  the  end  of  endless  spring,

*  The  only  authority  for  writing  this  as  poetry  is  the  rhythm
and  alliteration  of  the  original.


THE  SLIM  SWARTHY  CHAMPION.  29  I

From  the  loved  swanny  glen —
A  night  in  Islay  and  a  night  in  Man,
A  night  on  cold  watching  cairns.
On  the  face  of  a  mountain
In  the  Scotch  king's  town
Was  I  born.

A  soiled,  sorry  Champion  am  I,
Though  I  happened  upon  this  town."
"  What,"  said    O'Doiuhniiill,  "  canst  thou  do,  oh
Champion  ?     Siu-ely,  Avith  all  the  distance  thou  hast
travelled,  thou  canst  do  something."

"  I  was  once,"  said  he,  "  that  I  could  play
a  harp."

"  Well,  then,"  said  O'Domlmuill,  "  it  is  I  myself
that  have  got  the  best  harpers  in  the  five-fifths  of
Eirinn,  or  in  the  bridge  of  the  first  of  the  people,  such
as — Euairidh  O'Cridheagan,  Tormaid  O'Giollagan,  and
Thaog  O'Chuthag."

"  Let's  hear  them  playing,"  said  the  Champion.

"  They  could  play  tunes  and  "  uirt  "  and  "orgain,"
Trampling  things,  tightened  strings,
Warriors,  heroes,  and  ghosts  on  their  feet,
Ghosts  and  spectres,  illness  and  fever,
They  'd  set  in  sound  lasting  sleep
The  whole  great  world.
With  the  sweetness  of  the  calming  tunes
That  the  harpers  could  play."
The    music    did    not    please   the   Champion.     He
caught  the  harps,  and  he  crushed  them  rmder  his  feet,
and  he  set  them  on  the  fire,  and  made  himself  a  warm-
ing, and  a  sound  warming  at  them.

O'Domlmuill  took  much  lofty  rage  that  a  man  had
come  into  his  court  who  should  do  the  like  of  this  to
the  harps.

"  My  good  man,  I  will  not  believe  that  thou  art
not  taking  anger,"  said  the  Champion.


29*  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  AVell,  then,  I  am,  if  I  did  but  know  at  whom  I
should  let  it  out."

"  Back,  my  good  man ;  it  was  no  easier  for  me  to
break  thy  harps  than  to  make  them  whole  again,"  said
the  Champion.

"  I  will  give  anj-thing  to  have  them  made  whole
again,"  said  O'DomhnuilL

"  For  two  times  five  marks  I  will  make  thy  harps
as  good  as  they  were  before,"  said  the  Champion.

"  Thou  shalt  get  that,"  said  O'Domhnuill.

O'Domhnuill  gave  him  the  marks,  and  he  seized
on  the  fill  of  his  two  palms  of  the  ashes,  and  he  made
a  harp  for  Euairidh  O'Cridlieagan ;  and  one  for  Tor-
maid  O'GioUagan  ;  and  one  for  Tliaog  O'Chuthag ;  and
a  great  choral  harp  for  himself

"  Let 's  hear  thy  music,"  said  O'Domhnuill.

"  Thou  shalt  hear  that,  my  good  man,"  said  the
Champion.

The  Champion  began  to  play,  and  och  !  but  he  was
the  boy  behind  the  harp.

"  He  could  play  tunes,  and  uikt  and  oegain
Trampling  things,  tightened  strings,
Warriors,  heroes,  and  ghosts  on  their  feet,
Ghosts  and  souls,  and  sickness  and  fever,
That  would  set  in  sound  lasting  sleep
The  whole  great  world
With  the  sweetness  of  the  calming  tunes
That  the  champion  could  play."

"  Thou  art  melodious,  oh  Champion ! "  said
O'Domhnuill.

When  the  harpers  heanl  the  Champion  playing,
they  betook  themselves  to  another  chamber,  and
though  he  had  followed  on,  still  they  had  not  come  to
the  fore.


THE  SLIM  SWARTHY  CHAMPION.  293

O'Domlimiill  went  away,  and  he  sent  a  bidding  to
meat  to  tlie  Champion.

"  Tell  the  good  man  that  he  will  not  have  that
much  to  gloom  on  me  when  I  go  at  mid-day  to-morrow,"
said  the  Champion.

O'Domhnuill  took  much  proud  rage  that  such  a
man  should  come  into  his  court,  and  that  he  would
not  take  meat  from  him.  He  sent  up  a  fringed  sloirt,
and  a  storm  mantle.

"Where  is  this  going*?"  said  the  Champion.

"  To  thee,  oh  Champion,"  said  they.

"  Say  you  to  the  good  man  that  he  will  not  have  so
much  as  that  to  gloom  on  me  when  I  go  at  mid-day
to-morrow,"  said  the  Champion.

O'Domlmuill  took  much  anger  and  rage  that
such  a  man  had  come  into  his  court  and  woidd  not
either  take  meat  or  dress  from  him.  He  sent  up  five
hundred  Galloglachs  to  watch  the  Champion,  so  that
O'Domlmuill  might  not  be  affronted  by  liis  going  out
by  any  way  but  by  the  door.

"  WTiere  are  you  going?"  said  the  Champion.

"  To  watch  thee,  Champion,  so  that  thou  shouldst
not  go  to  affront  O'Domhnuill,  and  not  to  let  thee  out
but  as  thou  shouldst,"  said  they.

"  Lie  down  there,"  said  the  Champion,  "  and  I  will
let  you  know  when  I  am  going."

TTiey  took  his  advice,  and  they  lay  down  beside
him,  and  when  the  dawn  broke,  the  Champion  went
into  his  garments.

"  Where  are  my  watchers,  for  I  am  going  ? "  said
the  Champion.

"  If  thou  shouldst  stir,"  said  the  great  Galloglach,
"  I  would  make  a  sharp  soiu*  slu'inking  for  thee  with
this  plough-board  in  my  hand."

The  Champion  leaped  on  the  point  of  his  pins,  and


294  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

he  ^yent  over  top  and  turret  of  court  and  city  of
O'DomhnuilL

The  Galloglach  tlirew  the  jDlough-board  that  was  in
his  hand,  and  he  slew  four  and  twenty  persons  of  the
very  people  of  O'DomhnuilL

Whom  should  the  Champion  meet,  but  the  track-
ing lad  of  O'Domhnuill,  and  he  said  to  him —

"  Here's  for  thee  a  little  soiu'  grey  weed,  and  go  in
and  rub  it  to  the  mouths  of  those  whom  it  killed  and
bring  them  alive  again,  and  earn  for  thyseK  twenty
cahdng  cows,  and  look  behind  thee  when  thou  partest
from  me,  whom  thou  shalt  see  coming."

When  the  tracking  lad  did  this  he  saw  no  being
coming,  but  he  saw  the  Champion  tliirteen  miles  on
the  other  side  of  Luimineach  (Limerick).

"  He  moved  as  sea-heaps  o'  sea-heaps,
And  as  playballs  o'  playhalls,
As  a  furious  winter  wind —
So  swifd}',  sprucely,  cheerily,
Eight  proudly.

Through  glens  and  high  tops.
And  he  made  no  stop
Until  he  reached
MacSeathain,*  the  Southern  Earl."

He  struck  in  the  door.  Said  MacSeathain,  the
southern  Earl,  "Who's  that  in  the  door?"

"  I  am  Duradan  o'  Diu'adan  Dust  of  Dust,"  said
the  champion.

"Let  in  Dust  of  Dust,"  said  MacSeathain,  the
southern  Earl  ;  "  no  being  must  be  in  my  door  with-
out getting  in."

They  let  him  in.

"  What  couldst  thou  do,  Diu'adan  o'  Duradan  Ì "
said  the  southern  Eail

*  Seathain  is  supposed  to  be  .John,  therefore  Johnson.


THE  SLIM  SWARTHY  CHAMPIOX.  295

"I  was  on  a  time,  and  I  could  play  a  juggle,"
said  he.

"Well,  then,  it  is  I  myself  that  have  the  best
juggler  in  the  five-fifths  of  Eiiinn,  or  the  bridge  of  the
lii'st  of  the  people,  as  is  Taog  Bratach  Mac  a  Cheallaich,
rascally  Taog,  the  son  of  Concealment."

They  got  up  the  juggler.

"  What,"  said  the  southern  Earl,  "  is  the  trick  that
thou  canst  do,  Dust  of  Dust?"

"  Well,  I  was  on  a  time  that  I  eould  bob  my  ear
off  my  cheek,"  said  he.

The  Champion  went  and  he  takes  the  ear  off  the
cheek.

Said  rascally  Taog,  the  son  of  Concealment,  "  I
could  do  that  myself"

He  went  and  he  took  down  his  ear,  antl  up  he
could  not  bring  it !  but  the  Champion  put  up  his  own
ear  as  it  was  before.

Tlie  Earl  took  much  anger  and  rage  that  the  ear
should  be  off  Ms  juggler.

"  For  five  merks  tAvice  over,"  said  the  Champion,
"  I  would  set  the  ear  as  it  was  before."

He  got  the  five  merks  twice  over,  and  he  put  the
ear  on  the  juggler  as  it  was  before.

"  I  see,"  said  the  Earl,  "  that  the  juggling  of  this
night  is  with  thee."

Rascally  Taog  went  away  ;  and  though  they  should
have  staid  there  the  length  of  the  night,  he  would  not
have  come  near  them.

Then  the  Champion  went  and  he  set  a  great  ladder
up  against  the  moon,  and  in  one  place  of  it  he  put  a
hound  and  a  hare,  and  in  another  place  of  it  he  put  a
carl  and  a  girl.  A  while  after  that  he  opened  first
where  he  had  put  the  hoimd  and  the  hare,  and  the
h(iiuid  was  eating  the  hare  ;  he  struck  him  a  stroke  of


296  WEST  HIGnLAND  TALES.

the  edge  of  his  pahn,  and  cast  his  head  oS.  Then  he
opened  again  where  were  the  carl  and  the  girl,  and  the
carl  was  kissing  the  girL  He  struck  him  a  stroke  of
the  edge  of  his  j^alm,  and  he  cast  his  head  off.

"  I  would  not  for  much,"  said  the  Earl,  "  that  a
hound  and  a  carl  should  be  killed  at  my  coiu't."

"  Give  five  merks  twice  over  for  each  one  of  them,
anil  I  "will  put  the  heads  on  them,"  said  the  Champion.

"  Thou  shalt  get  that,"  said  the  southern  Earl.

He  got  the  five  merks  twice  over,  and  he  put  the  head
on  tlie  hound  and  the  carl  as  they  were  before ;  and
though  they  should  be  alive  till  now,  the  hound  would
not  have  touched  a  hare,  nor  the  carl  a  girl,  for  fear
their  heads  should  be  taken  off.

On  the  morrow,  after  their  meat  in  the  morning,
he  went  lumting  Avith  the  EarL  "When  they  were
amongst  the  wood,  they  heard  a  loud  voice  in  a  knoll
(or  a  bush).

"Be  this  from  me,"  said  Dust  of  Dust,  "I  must  go
to  see  the  foot  of  the  carl  MacCeochd.    He  went  out—

.    *'  And  moved  as  sea-heaps  o'  sea-heaps,
And  as  playballs  o'  plavballs ;
As  a  furious  winter  wind —
So  swiftly,  sprucely,  cheerily,
Right  proudly,

Through  glens  and  high  tops,
And  no  stop  made  he
Until  he  reached
The  house  of  the  Carl  MacCeochd."

He  struck  at  the  door.  "  A\nio  's  that  ? "  said  the
carl  MacCeochd.

"  I,"  said  he,  "  am  the  leech's  lad."

"  Well,"  said  the  carl,  "  many  a  bad  black  leech
is  coming,  and  they  are  not  doing  a  bit  of  good  to  me."


THE  SLIM  SWARTHY  CHAMPION,  297

"  Give  word  to  the  carl  that  unless  he  ■\TÌ11  not  let
me  in,  I  -will  be  going,"  said  the  Chamjiion.

"  Let  in  the  leech's  lad  ;  perhaps  he  is  the  one  in
■whom  is  my  help,"  said  the  carl  MacCeochd.

They  let  liim  in.

"  Else  up,  carl  INIacCeochd,  thou  art  free  from  thy
sores,"  said  the  Champion.

Carl  MacCeochd  arose  up,  and  there  was  not  a  man
in  Eirinn  swifter  or  stronger  than  he.

"  Lie  down,  carl  MacCeochd,  thou  art  full  of  sores,"
said  the  Champion.

The  carl  MacCeochd  lay  down,  and  he  was  worse
than  he  ever  was.

"Thou  didst  iU,"  said  the  carl  MacCeochd,  "to
heal  me  and  sj^oil  me  again."

"  Thou  man  here,"  said  the  Champion,  "  I  was  but
shewing  thee  that  I  coiild  heal  thee."

"  I  have,"  said  the  carl  MacCeochd,  "  but  the  one
daughter  in  the  world,  and  thou  shalt  get  her  and  half
of  all  I  have,  and  all  my  share  when  I  go  way,  and
heal  my  leg."

"  It  shall  not  be  so,  but  send  word  for  every  leech
that  thou  hast  had,  that  I  might  get  talking  with
them,"  said  the  leech's  lad.

They  sent  word  by  running  lads  through  the  five-
fifths  of  Eirinn  for  the  leeches  that  were  waiting  on
the  carl,  and  they  came,  all  thinking  that  they  Avould
get  pay,  and  when  they  came  riding  to  the  house  of
the  carl,  the  Champion  went  out  and  he  said  to  them,

"  AMiat  made  you  spoil  the  leg  of  the  carl  Mac-
Ceochd, and  set  himself  thus  ?"

"  Well  then,"  said  they,  "  if  we  were  to  raise  the
worth  of  our  drugs,  without  coming  to  the  worth
of  our  trouble,  we  would  not  leave  him  the  worth  of
his  shoe  in  the  world


298  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.

Said  tlie  leech's  lad,  "  I  will  lay  you  a  wager,  and
that  is  the  full  of  my  cap  of  gold,  to  he  set  at  the  end
of  yonder  dale,  and  that  there  are  none  in  Eh'inn  that
will  be  at  it  sooner  tlian  the  carl  MacCeochd."

He  set  the  cap  full  of  gold  at  the  end  of  the  dale,
and  the  leeches  laid  the  wager  that  that  could  never
he.

He  went  in  where  the  carl  MacCeochd  was,  and
he  said  to  him,

"  Arise,  Carl  MacCeochd,  thou  art  whole  of  sores,
I  have  laid  a  wager  on  thee."

The  carl  got  up  whole  and  healthy,  and  he  went
out,  and  he  was  at  three  springs  at  the  cap  of  gold,  and
he  left  the  leeches  far  behind.

Then  the  leeches  only  avsked  that  they  might  get
their  Hves.  Promise  of  that  they  got  not,  (but)  the
leech's  lad  got  in  order.

He  snatched  his  holly  in  his  fist,  and  he  seized  the
grey  hand  plane  that  was  on  the  after  side  of  his
haunch,  and  he  took  under  them,  over  them,  through
and  amongst  them  ;  and  left  no  man  to  tell  a  tale,  or
earn  bad  tidings,  that  he  did  not  kill*

When  the  carl  was  healed  he  sent  word  for  the
nobles  and  for  the  great  gentles  of  Eirinn  to  the  wed-
ding of  his  daughter  and  the  Champion,  and  they  were
gathering  out  of  each  quarter.

"What  company  is  there  ?"  said  the  leeches'  lad.

"  There  is  the  company  of  thine  ovm  wedding,  and
they  are  gathering  from  each  half  and  each  side,"  said
the  carl  MacCeochd.

"  Be  this  from  me  !"  said  he  ;  "  O'Conachar  the
Shelly  (or  of  SHgo)  has  a  year's  service  against  me,"  and
he  put  a  year's  delay  on  the  wedding.

*  This  seems  like  mock  heroics,  an  imitation  of  such  tales  as
the  Kuisrht  of  the  Red  Shield  and  Murachadh  MacBrian.


THE  SLIM  SWARTHY  CHAMPION.  299

"  Out  he  went  as  Voorveel  o  Voorveel
And  as  Veerevuil  0  Veerevuill,
As  a  furious  winter  wind,
So  swiftly,  sprucely,  cheerily,
Right  proudly.

Through  glens  and  high  tops,
And  no  stop  did  he  make
Till  he  struck  in  the  door
Of  Conachar  of  Sligo."

"  Who's  that  ?"  said  O'Conachar  of  SUgo.

"I,"  said  he,  "Goodherd."

"  Let  in  Goodherd,"  said  O'Conachar  of  SHgo,  for
great  is  my  need  of  him  here."

They  let  Mm  in.

"  What  couldst  thou  do  here  Ì"  said  O'Conachar.

"  I  am  hearing,"  said  he,  to  O'Conachar  of  Sligo,
"  that  the  chase  is  upon  thee.  If  thou  wilt  keep  out
the  chase,  I  will  keep  in  the  spoil,"  said  Goodherd

"  Wliat  wages  -wilt  thou  take  1 "  said  O'Conachar
of  SHgo.

"  The  wages  I  will  take  is  that  thou  shoiddst  not
make  half  cups  with  me  till  the  end  of  a  day  and  year,"
said  Goodherd.

O'Conachar  made  this  covenant  with  him,  and  the
herdsman  went  to  herd

The  chase  broke  in.  on  O'Conachar  of  Sligo,  and
they  betook  themselves  to  where  the  herdsman  was,  to
lift  the  spoil  "WTien  the  herdsman  saw  that  they  had
broken  in,  he  took  the  holly  in  Ms  fist,  and  seized  the
grey  hand-plane  that  was  on  the  after  side  of  his
hamich,  and  left  no  man  to  tell  a  tale,  or  earn  bad
tidings,  that  he  did  not  kill  He  went  into  a  herd's
bothy,  and  he  (was)  hot,  and  he  saw  O'Conachar
SUgheach  just  done  drinking  a  boyne  of  milk  and
water.


300  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"Witness,  gotls  and  men,  that  tliou  hast  broken
thy  i)romise,"  said  Goodherd.

"That  fill  is  no  better  than  another  fill,"  said
O'Conachar  Sligheach.

"  That  selfsame  fill  thou  didst  promise  to  me,"
said  Goodherd.

He  took  anger  at  O'Conachar  Sligheach,  and  he
went  away,  and  he  reached  the  house  of  the  carl
MacCeochd.  The  daughter  of  the  carl  made  him  a
drink  of  green  ajiples  and  warm  milk,  and  he  was
choked.

And  I  left  them,  and  they  gave  me  butter  on  a
cinder,  porridge  kail  in  a  creel,  and  paper  shoes  ;  and
they  sent  me  away  with  a  big  gun  bullet,  on  a  road  of
glass,  till  they  left  me  sitting  here  within.


AN  CEATHAIRNEACH  CAOL,  RIABHACH.
Bha  duine  bochd  a  bha  ann  an  Aird  na  h-Uamha  a  chomhnuidh,
agus  rugadh  imc  dha,  's  thug  e  sgoil  a's  ionnsachadh  dha  gus  an
robh  e  ceithir  bliadhna  deug  a  dh'  aois  thuirt  e  r'a  athair,  "  Atliair,  's
mithidh  dhomhsa  'bhith  deanadh  air  mo  slion  fhèin;  na'n  dtliugadli
thu  dhomh  slat-iasgaidh  as  basgaid ;"  Fhuair  an  duine  bochd  a'
h-uile  cothrom  gus  an  d'  fhuair  e  slat-iasgaidh  as  basgaid  da.

Nur  a  fhuair  e'n  t  slat-iasgaidh  's  a  bhasgaid  chaidh  e  ma'n  cuairt
l.och  Aird  na  h-Uamha,  's  ghabh  e  'nuas  Loch  Thòrabais,  's  an  deigh
dha  Loch  Thòrabais  a  chliabairt  thainig  e  gu  Loch  Phort  an  Eilean,
's  an  deigh  dha  Loch  Phort  an  Eilean  iasgach  roimhe  ghabh  e  'mach
Loch  Allalaidh.  Dh'  fhan  e  'san  oidhche  'n  Aird  Eileastraidh,  's  a"
h-uile  breac  a  bh'  aige  dh'  fhkg  e  aig  boireannach  bochd  a  bha  'n  sin
eud.

An  la'r  na  mhàireach  smaointich  e  gun  togadh  e'  mach  agus  gun
d'  thugadh  e  Eirinn  air.  Thainig  e  gu  garradh  Aird  Inneasdail  agus
spion  e  leis  sè  ubhla  deug,  's  thhinig  e'n  sin  gu  Maol  na  h-Otha.
Thilg  e  ubhal  a  mach  's  an  fhairge  's  thug  e  ceum  urra.  Thilg  e  'n
ath  tè  agus  thug  e  ceum  eil'  urra.  Thilg  e,  mur  seo,  tè  an  deigh  te,
gus  an  d'  thainig  e  gus  an  t-sèathamh  te  deug,  's  thug  an  t-seatho
te  deug  air  tir  an  Eirinn  e.


AN  CEATHAIRNEACH  CAOL,  RIABHACH.  3OI

Nut  a  bha  e  air  tir  chrath  e  chluasan,  as  smaointich  e  nach  b'  ann
an  iiite  suarracli  a  dh'  fhanadh  e.

Ghluais  e  mar  mhuir-  mhill  o  mhuir-mhill,

'S  mar  mliire-bhuill  o  mhire-bhuill ;

Mar  ghaoith  ghailbheach  gheamhraidh,

Gu  sitheach,  sothach,  sanntach,

Sàr-mheamnach,

Trìd  ghleanntan  as  ard-mhullach;

'S  cha  d'  rinneadh  stad  leis

Gus  an  d'  tbainig  e

Gu  cuirt  Agns  cathair  O  Domhnuill.

Thug  e  leum  sunndach  soilleir

Thar  barr  agus  baideil

Cuirt  agus  cathair

0  Domhnuill.

Ghabli  0  DònilmuiU  mòran  feirg  agus  corruich  a  leithid  de  shru-
tha,  dhona,  ao-dhealbacli  a  thighinn  a  stigh  d'  a  chiiirt,  agus  dorsair
a  bhith  aige  fèin  r'a  bhaile.

"  Cha  chreid  mi  fe'in,"  ars'  an  ceathairneach,  "  nach  'eil  thu  'gabh-
ail  feirg  agus  corruich  O  Domhnuill  ?  "

"  Mata  tha,"  ors'  0  Dorahnuill,  "  na'm  biodh  fios  agam  co  ris  a
liginn  a  mach  e  ?  "

"  A  dhuine  mhath,"  ors'  an  Ceathairneach,  "  cha  b'  fhasa  dhomhsa
tighinn  a  stigh  na  dol  e  mach  a  ris."

"  Cha  d'  theid  thu  'mach,"  ors'  O  Domhnuill,  "  gus  an  innis  thu
dhomhsa  co  as  a  thainig  thu."

Thkinig  mi  0  ghriobhaill  0  ghrabhaill,

O  bhun  an  tobair  dhilinn,

0  ghleann  aluinn  ealaich ;

Oidhch'  an  He  's  oidhch'  am  Manainn  ;

Oidhch'  air  charna  fuara  faire ;

An  aodann  monaidh

Am  baile  righ  Alba

Rugadh  mi ;

Cearnach  suarrach,  salach  mi,

Gad  thàrladh  air  a'  bhaile  seo  mi.

"  De,"  urs'  0  Domhnuill,  "  a  cheathairnich  a  dhèanadh  thusa  ?   3
cinnteach,  's  na  'shiubhail  thu  'dh'  astar  gu'n  deanadh  thu  rudaigin."
"  Bha  mi  uair,"  urs'  esan,  "  agus  sheinninn  cruit."
"  Mata,"  urs'  0  Domhnuill,  "  's  ann  agam  fein  a  tha  na  cruitearan


302  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

a  's  fhehrr  ann  an  còig  chòigeamli  na  h-Eireann,  na'n  Drochaid-
cheuilan  na  Mith ;  mar  a  tha  Ruairidh  O  Cridheagan,  Tormaid  O
Giollogau,  agus  Taog  0  Chuthag."

"Cluinneam  a' seinn  eud,"  urs' an  Ceathairneach.  Thoisich  na
cliirsairean.

Sheinneadli  eud  puirt,  agus  uirt,  agus  urgain,
Nitheanna  tearmad,  teudan  tairteil ;
Curaidhean,  laoich,  as  aoig  air  an  casan ;
Aoig,  as  ainn,  as  galair,  as  fiabhrais ;
Chuireadh  eud  'nan  fion  sioram  suain
An  saoghal  mòr  gu  leir,
Le  binnead  nam  port  shiogaidh
A  sheinneadh  na  cliirsairean.
Cha  do  chord  an  cebl  ris  a'  Cheathairneach.     Rug  e  air  na  clàrs-
aichean,  's  plirann  e  fo  a  chasan  eud,  's  chuir  e  air  teinidla  eud,  's
rinn  e  gharadh,  's  a  chruaidh-gharadh  riu.

Ghabh  O  Domhnuill  mòran  ardain  gun  d'  thanaig  duine  stigh
do  'n  chuirt  aige  'dhèanadh  a  leithid  seo  air  na  clarsaichean.

"Cha  chreid  mi  fhe'in  a  dhuine  mhath  nach  'eil  thu 'gabhail corr-
uich,"  ars'  an  Ceathairneach.

"  Mata  tha,  nam  biodh  fhios'am  co  ris  a  liginn  a  mach  e."
"Air  'ur  n-ais  a  dhuine  mhath!      Cha  b'  fhasa  dhomhsa  do
chlarsaichean  a  bhrisdeadh  na'n  slanachadh  a  ris ! "  ars'  an  Ceath-
airneach.

"  Bheir  mi  ni  sam  bith  seachad  airson  an  sliinachadh  a  ris,"  ars'
O  DomhnuiU.

"  Air  chòig  nihairg  da  uair  ni  mise  do  chlarsaichean  cho  math  'sa
bha  eud  roinihid,"  urs'  an  Ceathairneach.
•'Gheibhthu  sin,"  ars'  0  Domhnuill.

Thug  0  Domhnuill  na  mairg  da  agus  rug  e  air  Ian  a  dha
bhoise  do  'n  luaith,  's  rinn  e  clarsach  do  Ruairidh  0  Cridheagan,  's
te'  do  Thormaid  O  Giollagan,  's  te  do  Thaog  0  Chuthag  agus  clars-
ach mhòr,  choirealach  da  flie.

"  Cluinneam  do  cheol,"  ars'  O  Domhnuill.
"  Cluinnidh  tu  sin  a  dhuine  mhath,"  urs'  an  Ceathairneach.
Thòisich  an  Ceathairneach  air  seinn,  as,  och !  b'  e  'm  balach  air
chill  na  clarsaich  e  I

Sheinneadh  e  puirt,  agus  uirt,  agus  orgain,
Nitheanna  tearmad  ;  teudan  tairteil ;
Curaidhean,  laoich,  as  aoig  air  an  casan  ;
Aoig,  as  iiinn,  as  galair,  as  tiabhrais.


AN  CEATHAIRNEACH  CAOL,  RIABHACH.  303

'S  gun  cuirte  "nan  sion  sioram  suain,
An  saoghal  mòr  gu  le'ir,
Le  binnead  a'  phuirt  shiogaidh,
A  sheinneadh  an  Ceathairneach.

"  'S  binn  thus'  a  Cheatbairnich,"  ars'  O  Domhnuill.

Nur  a  chuala  na  clarsairean  an  Ceathairneach  a'  seinn  thiig  end
seombar  'eil'  orra,  's  gad  a  leanadh  e  fhathasd  cha  d'  thigeadh  eud  an
lathair.

Dh'  fhalbb  0  Domhnuill  's  chuir  e  còmhnainn  bhidh  thun  a
Ceathairnich.

"Abraibh  ris  an  duine  mhath  nach  bi  'n  uibhir  sin  aige  r'a
rahuigheadh  ornisa  nur  a  dh'  fliolbhas  mi  air  a'  mheadhon  lath'  am
maireach,"'  urs'  an  Ceathairneach.

Ghabh  O  Domhnuill  moran  hrdain  a  leithid  de  dhuine  'thighinn
a  staigh  d'a  chiiirt,  's  naeh  gabhadh  e  biadh  uaidb.  Chuir  e  nios
lein'  air  ialtan  's  madal  donnain.  "  Ca'  'bheil  seo  a'  del  ?  "  urs'  an
Ceathairneach.  "  A  t'  ionnsuidh-sa,  'Cheathairneach,"  urs'  eudsan.
"Abraibh-se  ris  an  duine  mhath  nach  bi  'n  uibhir  sin  aige  r'a
mhiiigheadh  ormsa  nur  a  dh'  fholbhas  mi  air  a'  mheadhan  lath'  an
la'r  na  mhaireach,"  urs'  an  Ceathairheach.  Ghabh  O  Domhnuill
moran  feirg  agus  cormich,  a  leithid  de  dhuine  'thighinn  a  staigh  d'a
chùirt,  's  nach  gabhadh,  e  aona-chuid,  biadh  na  aodach  uaidh.  Chuir
e  'nios  còig  ciad  galloglach  a  dh'  fhaire  'Cheatbairnich,  air  alt 's  nach
biodh  masladh  air  a  thoirt  do  dh'  0  Domhnuill  le  e  'dhol  a  mach,
rathad  sam  bith,  ach  air  an  dorus."

"  Ca'  "bheil  sibhse  'del  ?"  ars"  an  Ceathairneach.

"  A  t'  fhaire-sa  "Cheathairnich,  air  alt 's  nach  fhalbh  thu,  'thoirt
masladh  do  dh'  O  Domhnuill,  gun  do  ligeil  a  mach  ach  mar  is  coir
duit,"  urs'  eudsan.

"  Laidhibh  sios  ann  an  sin,"  ars'  an  Ceathairneach,  "  's  nur  a
bhios  mise  'g  imeachd  bheir  mi  fios  duibh."

Ghabh  eud  a  chomhairle,  "s  laidh  eud  sios  Ikmh  ris,  's  nur  a
bhrisd  am  faire  chaidh  an  Ceathairnich  'na  e'ideadh.

"  Caite  'bheil  mo  luchd  faire-sa,  tha  mi  'g  imeachd,"  ars'  na
Ceathairneach.

"  Na  'n  carachadh  thu,"  urs'  an  gall-oglach  mor,  "  dhèanainn
crupan  geur,  goirt  dhiot  leis  a'  bhord-urcbair  so  a'm'  laimh."

Leum  an  Ceathairneach  air  barraibh  a  phuthag  's  chaidh  e  thar
barr  agus  baideil  ciiirt  agus  cathair  O  Domhnuill.  Thilg  an  gallog-
lach am  bòrd-urchair  a  bha  'na  laimh,  's  mharbh  e  ceithir  pearsanna
fichead  de  dh'  fhior-mhuinntir  0  Domhnuill.


304  WEST  HIGHL.VXD  TALES.

Co  'choinnich  an  Ceathairaeach  ach  gille-leantainn  O  Domhnuill,
's  thuirt  e  ris,  "  Seo  dhuit  luigh  bheag,  bhiorach,  ghlas,  's  theirig  a
staigb,  's  rub  ri  bilean  na  feadhnacb  a  mharbhadh  i,  's  thoir  beo  eud,
's  coisinn  duit  fhdin  fichead  mart  laoigh,  's  amhairc  as  do  dhdigh,  nur
a  dhealachas  tu  riumsa,  co  "chi  thu  teachd."

Nur  a  rinn  an  gille-leantainn  seo  cha  "n  fhac  e  neach  a'  teachd  ;
ach  chunnaic  e  'n  Ceathairneach  tri  mile  deug  an  taobh  thall  de
Luimineach.

Ghluais  e  mar  mhuir-mhill  0  mhuir-mhill,

'S  mar  mhire-bhuill  o  mhire-bhuill ;

Mar  ghaoith  ghailbheach  gheamhraidh,

Gu  sitheach,  sothach,  sanntach,

Sar-mheamnach,

Trid  ghleanntan  as  ard-mbullach  ;

'S  cha  d"  rinneadh  stad  leis,

Gus  an  d'  rainig  e

Mac  Seathain,  an  t-Iarl  deas.

Bhuail  e  anns  an  dornsd.  Thuirt  MacSeathain  an  t-Iarl  Deas  ris,
*'  Co  siod  'san  dornsd  ?"

"Tha  mise,  Diiradan  0  Diiradan,"  urs'  an  Ceathairneach.

Thuirt  MacSeathan,  an  t-Iarl  Deas,  "  Ligibh  a  staigh  Diiradan
O  Diiradan  ;  cha  'n  fhaod  neach  a  bhith  a'm'  dhornsd-sa  'bualadh  gun
faotainn  a  staigh."'

Lig  eud  a  staigh  e  "De  'dhèanadh  thusa' Dhuradain  O  Diiradan?"
ars'  an  t-Iarl  Deas.

"  Bha  mi  uair  's  dhèanainn  cleas,"  ars'  esan.

"  Mata  's  ann  agam  fbe'in  a  tha  'n  aona  chleasaiche  's  fheàrr  ann
an  còìg  chòigeamh  na  h-Eireann,  na  'n  Drochaid  cheudan  nam  Mith,
mar  a  tha  Taog  pratach  Mac  a  Cheallaich."

Fhuair  eud  a  nios  an  cleasaiche.  "  Dc',"'  ursa  "n  t-Iarl  Deas,  "  an
cleas  a  dhèanadh  thusa,  Dhuradain  O  Diiradan.

Mata  bha  mi  uair  's  bhogainn  a'  chluas  bhar  mo  leithcheinn,"
ars'  esan.

Dh'  fholbh  an  Ceathairneach  's  thugar  a'  chluas  bhar  a  leith-
cheinn.

Orsa  Taog  pratach  a'  Cheallaich,  "Dhèanainn  fhe'in  sin."

Dh'  fholbh  e  's  thug  e  'nuas  a  chluas,  's  a  suas  cha  d'  tbugadh  e
i!  ach  chuir  an  Ceathairneach  a  suas  a  chluas  fhe'in  mar  a  bha  i
roimhid  I

Ghabh  an  t-Iarla  mòran  feirg  agus  corruich  a'  chluas  a  bhith  d'a
chleasaiche.


AN  CEATHAIRNEACH  CAOL,  RIABHACH.  305

"  Air  chòig  mhairg  da  uair,"  ars'  an  Ceathaimeaeh,  "  chuirinn-sa
'chluas  mar  a  bha  i  roinihid."

Fliuair  e  na  chig  mhairg  da  uair,  's  chuir  e  'chluas  air"  a  chleas-
aiclie  mar  a  bha  i  roimhid.

"  Tha  mi  'faicinn,"  ars'  an  t-Iarla,  "  gur  leat  fhein  cleasachd  na
h-oidhche  'nochd."

Dh"  fholbh  Taog  pratach,  's  gad  a  dh'  fhanadh  eud  an  sin  fad  na
h-oidhche,  cha  d'  thigeadh  e  a  'n  coir.

Dh'  fliolbh  an  Ceathairneach  an  sin,  's  chiiir  e  dreumaire  m^r
suas  ris  a'  ghealaich  ;  's  chuir  e  ann  an  aon  kite  dheth  oil  agus  gearr-
aidh ;  's  chuir  e  ann  an  kite  eile  dheth  bodach  agus  caile.  Treis  as  a
dheigh  seo  dh'  fhosgail  e,  'n  toiseach,  far  an  do  chuir  e  'n  cii  agus  an
gearradh  ;  's  bha  'n  cii  'g  itheadh  a'  ghearraidh.  Bhuail  e  buille  de
dh'  oir  a  bhois'  oir  a'  chii,  's  thilg  e  'n  ceann  deth.  Dh'  fhosgail  e"
rithisd  far  an  robh  am  bodach  's  a'  chaile ;  's  bha  'm  bodach  a'  pòg-
adh  na  caile.  Bhuail  e  buille  de  dh'  oir  a  bhois'  air  's  thilg  e  'n
ceann  deth.

"  Cha  bu  gheamha  learn,"  ars'  an  t-Iarl,  "  air  moran,  cii  agus
bodach  a  bhith  air  am  marbhadh  ann  a'  m'  clmirt."

"  Thoir  còig  mhairg  da  uair  airson  gach  aon  diu  's  cuiridh  mise
na  cinn  orra  'rìs,"  urs'  an  Ceathairneach.

"  Gheibh  thu  sin,"  ars'  an  t-Iarl  Deas.

Fbuair  e  na  coig  mhairg  da  uair,  's  chuir  e  "n  ceann  air  a'  chii  's
air  a'  bhodach  mar  a  bha  eud  roimhid  ;  's  gad  a  bhiodh  eud  beò  gus
an  seo,  cha  d'  thugadh  an  cli  Ikmh  air  gearraidh,  na  'm  bodach  air
caile,  air  eagal  gun  tug-te  na  cinn  din.

An  la  'r  na  mhkireach,  an  deigh  am  bidh,  anns  a'  mhaidinn,
chaidh  e  'shealgaireachd  leis  an  larla.  Nur  a  bha  eud  feadh  na  coille
chual  eud  coireal  ann  an  tom.

"  Bhuam  seo,"  ursa  Diiradan  O  Diiradan  !  feumaidh  mi  dol  a  dh'
amharc  cas  a'  Bhodaich  'Ic  Ceochd.

Ghabh  e  'mach,

'S  ghluais  e  mar  mhuir-mhill  0  mhur-mhill,

'S  mar  mhire-bhuill  0  mhire-bhuill  ;

Mar  ghaoith  ghailbheach  gheamhraidh,

Gu  sitheach,  sothach,  sanntach,

Sar-mheamnach,

Trid  ghleanntan  as  ard-mhullach  ;

Agus  stad  cha  d'  rinneadh  leis,

Gus  an  d"  rainig  e,

Taigh  a'  Bhodaich  'Ic  Ceochd.


306  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Bhuail  e  anns  an  dorusd.  "  Co  siod  ?  "  urs'  am  Bodach  Mac  Ceochd.

"  Mis?"  urs'  esan,  "Gill'  an  Leigh."

"  Mata,"  urs'  am  bodach,  "  's  iomadh  le'igh  dugh,  dona  'tighinn,
"3  clia  'n  'eil  eud  a'  dèanadh  mir  feum  domhsa."

"  Thugaibh  fios  do  'n  bhodach,  mar  an  lig  e  'staigh  mi,  gu'm  bi
mi  'g  imeacad,"  ars'  an  Ceathairneach.

"  Ligibh  a  staigh  Gill'  an  Leigh,  cha  lughaide  gur  h-ann  ann  a-
tha  mo  chobhair,"  ars'  am  Bodach  Mac  Ceochd.

Lig  eud  a  staigh  e.

"  Eirich  suas  a  Bhodaich  'Ic  Ceochd,  Iha  thu  saor  o  chreuchdan,"
urs'  an  Ceathairneach.

Dh'  eiridh  am  Bodach  Mac  Ceochd  suas,  's  cha  robh  duin'  an
Eirinn  a  bu  luaithe  's  a  bu  laidireacha  na  e !

"  Laidh  BIOS  a  Bhodaich  'Ic  Ceochd  tha  thu  Ian  chreuchdan,"
ars'  an  Ceathairneach.  Laidh  am  Bodach  Mac  Ceochd  sios,  's  bha  e
na  bu  mhiosa  na  bha  e  riabh  !

"  'S  olc  a  rinu  thu,"  urs'  am  Bodach  Mac  Ceochd,  "  mo  leigheas
agus  mo  mhilleadh  a  rìs.''

"Adhuine  seo,"  ursa  Gill' an  Leigh;  "cha  robh  mi  ach  a' ligeil
fhaicinn  duit  gum  b'urrainn  mi  do  leigheas  !  "

"  Cha  'n  'eil  agam,''  urs'  am  Bodach  Mac  Ceochd,  "  ach  an  aon
nighean  ris  an  t-saoghal,  's  geobh  thu  i,  "s  leith  's  na  th'agam,  's  mo
chuid  air  fad  nur  a  shiubhlas  mi,  agus  leighis  mo  chas."

"  Cha'n  e  sin  mar  a  bhitheas,  ach  cuir  fios  air  a'  h-uile  Migh  a
bh'agad,  's  gum  faighinn-sa  'bhith  bruidhinn  riutha,"  arsa  Gill'  an
Le'igh !

Chuir  eud  fios  le  gillean-ruith,  feadh  choig  chaigeamh  na  h-
Eireann,  airson  nan  lighichean  a  bha  'feitheamh  air  a'  bhodach ;  's
thiiinig  eud  air  fad,  a  saoilsinn  gu'faigheadh  eud  paigheadh.  Agus
nur  a  thainig  eud,  a'  marcachd  gu  taigh  a'  Bhodaich,  chaidh  an
Ceathcurneach  a  mach  's  thuirt  e  riu.

"  De  'thug  dhuibhse  cas  a'  Bhodaich  'Ic  Ceochd  a  mhilleadh,  's  e
fhein  a  chur  fo  ainbheach  mur  seo  ?  "

"Mata,"  urs'  eudsan,  "na'n  togamaide  luach  ar  cungan,  gun
tiffhinn  air  luach  ar  saoithreach,  cha  'n  fhagamaid  luach  a  bhròg  aige
ris  an  t-saoghal."

Ursa  Gill'  an  Leigh !  "  Cuiridh  mi  geall  ruibh ;  agus  's  e  sin
Ian  mo  churraichd  do  dh'  or  a  chur  aig  ceann  na  dalach  ud  shuas,
's  nach  'eil  gin  an  Eirinn  a  bhioa  aige  na  's  luaithe  na'm  Bodach
Mac  Ceochd!"

Chuir  e'n  currachd  Ian  oir  aig  ceann  na  dalach;  's  chuir  na
leighean  geall  ris  nach  b'urrainn  siod  a  bhith.


AN  CEATHAIRNEACH  CAOL,  RIABHACH.  307

Chaidli  e  'staigh  far  an  robh  'm  Bodach  Mac  Ceochd,  's  thuirt  e  ris.

"  Eirich  a  Bhodaich  'Ic  Ceochd,  tha  thu  slàn  O  chreuchdan  !
Chuir  mi  geall  as  do  leith."  Dh'  eiridh  am  Bodach  Mac  Ceochd  gu
slan,  fallan,  s'  chaidh  e  mach,  's  bha  e  thri  Ceumannan  aig  a'  churr-
achd  ()ir,  's  dh'  fhhg  e  fad'  air  deireadh  na  leighean.

Clia  d'  iarr  na  leighean  an  seo  ach  na  'm  faigheadh  eud  am  beatha
leo  !  Gealladh  air  a'  siod  cha  d'  fhuair  eud  !  Chaidh  gill'  an  leigh
air  doigh  !

Spàrr  e  'chuilionn  'na  dhorn,  as  ghlac  e'n  lamh-lochdair  liatli  a
bh'  air  taobh  piar  a  thòine,  's  thug  e  fbcha  's  tharta,  's  frid  as
rompa ;  's  cha  d'  fhag  e  fear  innseadh  sgeoil  na  chosnadh  tuarasdail
nach  do  mharbh  e  !

Nut  a  bha  'm  bodach  leighiste  chuir  e  fios  air  maithibh  's  air  mòr-
uaislean  na  h-Eireann  thnn  banais  a  nighinn  's  a'  Cheathairnich,  'g
bha  eud  a'  cruinneachadh  as  gach  cehrn.

"  De  'chuideachd  a  tha  'n  siod  ?  "  arsa  Gill'  an  Leigh  !  "  Tha  'n
siod  cuideachd  na  bainns'  agad  fhein,  's  end  a  cruinneachadh  as
gach  leith  agus  as  gach  taobh,"  urs'  am  Bodach  Mac  Ceochd.
''  Bhuam  seo,"  ars'  esan,  "  tha  fasdadh  bliadhn'  aig  O  Conachar  an
Sligeach  orm ;  "  's  chuir  e  dail  bliadhna  's  a'  phòsadh.

Ghabh  e  'mach  mar  mhuir-mhill  0  mhuir-mhill,
'S  mar  mhire-bhuill  o  mhire-bhuill ;
Mar  ghaoith  srhailbheach  gheamhraidh;
Gu  sitheach,  sothach,  sanntach,
Skr-mheamnach,

Trid  ghleanntan  as  ard-mhullach ;
'S  cha  d'  rinneadh  stad  leis,
Gus  an  do  bhuail  e  ann  an  dornsd
O  Conachar  Sligeach.
"  Co  siod?  "  urs'  0  Conachar  Sligeach.

"  Mis',"  urs'  esan,  "  Buachaille  Math."    "  Ligibh  a  staigh  Buach-
aille  Math,"  ars'  0  Conachar  Sligeach  ;"chionn  tha  feum  mòr  agams'
air  anns  an  am  seo."
Lig  eud  a  staigh  e.

"De  'dheanadh  thusa  'Bhuachaill  ?"  ors'  O  Conachar  Sligeach.
"Tha  mi  'cluinntinn,"  ors'  e  ri  0  Conachar  Sligeach,  •'  };u  'bheil
an  toir  ort."  "  Tha,"  urs'  O  Conachar  Sligeach.  "  Ma  chumas  tusa
mach  an  toir;  cumaidh  mise  staigh  a'  chreach?"  arsa  Buachaille
Math !  "  De  'n  tuarasdal  a  ghabtias  tu  ?"  ars'  O  Conachar  Sligeach.
"  Se  'n  tuarasdal  a  ghabhas  mi,  nach  dean  thu  leath-chomaith
orm  gu  ceann  lath'  as  bliadhna,"  arsa  Buachaille  Math !


308  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

R!nn  0  Conachar  Sligeach  an  cUmlinanta  seo  ris.  Chaidh  am
buachaille  'bhuadiailleachd.

Bhrisd  an  tòir  a  staigh  air  0  Conachar  Sligeach,  's  thug  eud  orra
far  an  robh  'm  buachaill'  a  thogail  na  creiche.  Nur  a  chunnaic  am
buachaille  gun  do  bhrisd  eud  a  staigh,  ghabh  e  'chuilionn  'na  dhorn,
as  ghlac  e  'u  lamh-lochdair  liath  a  bh'  air  taobh  piar  a  thòine;  's
cha  d'  fliag  e  fear  innseadh  sgeoil  na  'chosnadh  tuarasdail  an  sin
nach  do  mharbh  e !  Chaidh  e  staigh  do  bhothag  airich,  agus  e  teith,
's  chunnaic  e  O  Conachar  Sligeach  an  deigh  miodar  biiirn  agus
bainne  'chriochanachadh  d'a  ol.

"  Fhiannis  air  dia  's  air  daoine  gu  "n  do  bhrisd  thii  do  ghealladh ! "
arsa  Buachaille  Math  !

"  Cha  'n  fhearr  an  Ian  'ud  na  Ian  eile,"  ars'  0  Conachar  Slig-
each.

"  An  liin  'ud  fhe'in  gheall  thu  dhomhsa,"  arsa  Buachaille  Math!

Ghabh  e  corrnich  ri  <)  Conachar  Sligeach,  's  db'  fholbh  e  's
ràinig  e  taigh  a'  Bhodaich  'Ic  Ceochd.  Rinn  nighean  a'  bhodaich
deoch  dha  de  fib'  ubblan  reim  's  de  bhainne  blkth,  's  thachdadh  e.

'S  dhealaich  mise  rin ;  's  thug  eud  dhomh  im  air  eibhleig,  's  broch-
an-càil  an  creileig,  's  bròga  paipeir,  's  chuir  eud  air  folbh  mi  le  peil-
eir  gunna-mhòir  'air  rathad-mòr  gloine  gus  an  d'  fhag  eud  a'm'
shuidhe  'staigh  an  seo  mi.


SECOND  VERSION.

THE  HISTOEY  OF  THE  CEABHAENACH.

From  John  Campbell,  Strath  Gearloch,  Eoss-shire.

ON  the  day  when  O'Donull  came  out  to  hold  right
and  justice,  he  saw  a  young  chap  coming.  His
two  shoulders  were  through  liis  old  Suainaiche  (sleep-
ing coat?)  his  two  ears  through  his  old  aide  hat,
his  two  squat  kick-er-ing  tatter-y-shoes  full  of  cold
roadway-ish  water,  three  feet  of  his  sword  sideways  on
the  side  of  his  haunch,  after  the  scabhard  had  ended.
He  blest  with  easy  true-wise  maiden's  words.


THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  CEABHARNACH.  309

O'Donull  blest  him  in  the  like  of  his  own  -words.

O'Donull  asked  liini  what  was  his  art  Ì

"  I  could  do  harping,"  said  the  Ceabharnach.

"  There  are  twelve  men  with  me,"  said  O'Donull,
"  and  wc  will  go  to  look  on  them."

"  I  am  willing  to  do  that,"  said  the  Ceabharnach.

AVhen  they  went  in  O'Donull  asked  them  to  begin.
"  Hast  thou  ever  heard  music,  oh  Ceabharnach,  finer
than  that?"

"  I  came  past  by  the  Isle  of  Cold,  and  I  did  not
hear  a  screech  in  it,  that  was  more  hideous  than  that."

"  Wouldst  thou  play  a  harp  thyself,  Ceabharnach  1 "
said  O'Donull.

"  Here  is  her  player,  and  who  should  not  play  ! "

"  Give  him  a  harp,"  said  O'Donull.

"  Well  canst  thou  play  a  harp,"  said  O'Donull.

"  It  is  not  as  thou  pleasest  but  as  I  please  myself,
since  I  am  at  work."

The  music  of  the  Ceabharnach  put  every  harper
O'Donull  had  asleep.

"  1  will  be  taking  fare  thee  well,"  said  the  Ceabhar-
nach to  O'Donull.

"  Thou  wait  not  do  that  to  me,"  said  O'Donull,
"  thou  must  awaken  my  men."

"  I  am  going  to  take  a  turn  through  Eirinn,"  said
the  Ceabharnach,  "  if  I  come  the  way  they  will  see,
and  if  I  come  not  they  will  be  thus  with  thee."

He  left  him,  and  he  met  with  one  herding.  "  Thy
master's  harpers  are  asleep,  and  they  will  not  wake  till
they  are  awakened.  Go  thou  and  awaken  them,  and
thou  wilt  get  what  -will  make  a  rich  man  of  thee  Ì "

"  How  shall  I  do  that?"  said  the  herd.

"  Take  a  tuft  of  that  grass  and  dip  it  in  water,  and
shake  it  on  them,  and  thou  wilt  awaken  them."

He  left  the  man  and  he  reached  Seathan  mor  mac


3iO  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

AN  Tasrle,  great  Seathan  the  son  of  the  Earl,  thirteen
miles  on  the  western  side  of  Lumraig.

He  saw  a  young  chap  coming,  his  two  shoulders
were  tlu'ough  his  old  coat,  his  two  ears  through  his  old
hat,  his  shoes  full  of  cold  roadway-ish  water,  three  feet
of  his  sword  sideways  on  the  side  of  his  haunch  after
the  scabbard  was  ended

He  asked  him  what  was  his  trade  ?  He  said  that
he  could  do  juggling.

"  I  have  jugglers  myself,  we  will  go  to  look  on
them."

"  I  am  Avilling  enough,"  said  the  Ceabharnach.

"Shew  thy  juggUng,"  said  the  great  Seathan,  "till
we  see  it."

He  put  tliree  straws  on  the  back  of  his  fist  and  he
blew  them  ofi"  it.

"  If  I  should  get  half  five  marks,"  said  one  of  the
king's  lads,  "  I  would  make  better  juggling  than  that."
"  I  Avill  give  thee  that,"  said  the  Ceabharnach.

He  put  three  straws  on  the  back  of  his  fist  and  the
fist  went  along  with  the  straws.

"  Thou  art  sore,  and  thou  wilt  be  sore,"  said  his
master  ;  "  my  blessing  on  the  hand  that  gave  it  to  thee."

"  I  will  do  other  juggles  for  thee,"  said  the  Ceabh-
arnach.

He  caught  a  hold  of  Ws  own  ear,  and  he  gave  a
pull  at  it.

"  If  I  could  get  half  five  marks,"  said  another  of  the
king's  lads,  "  I  would  make  a  better  juggle  than  that."

"  I  will  give  thee  that,"  said  the  Ceabharnach.

He  gave  a  pull  at  the  ear  and  the  head  came  away
with  the  ear.

"  I  am  going  away,"  said  the  Ceabharnach.

"  Thou  wilt  not  leave  my  set  of  men  so."

"  I  am  for   taking  a  turn   througli  Eirinn.      If  I


THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  CEABHARNACH.  3  I  I

come  the  way  I  will  see  them,  and  if  I  come  not  they
will  be  so  along  with  thee."

He  went  away,  and  he  met  with  a  man  threshing
in  a  barn.  He  asked  liim  if  his  work  could  keep  him
up.

"  It  was  no  more  than  it  could  do."

"  I,"  said  the  Ceabharnach,  "will  make  thee  a  free
man  for  thy  life.  There  are  two  of  thy  master's  lads,
one  with  his  fist  off,  and  one  with  his  head  off.  Go
there  and  put  them  on  again,  and  thy  master  will  make
thee  a  free  man  for  hfe."

"  With  what  shall  I  bring  them  ahve  ?"

"  Take  a  tuft  of  grass,  hold  it  in  water,  shake  it  on
them,  and  thou  wilt  heal  them."

He  went  away  and  he  came  to  Tear  chuigeamh
MUGHA,*  a  nasty  man  that  could  not  bear  a  man  to  go
the  way  of  his  house,  to  look  at  liim  when  he  was
taking  his  food  There  were  twelve  men  with  axes  at
the  outer  gate,  and  twelve  men  of  swords  on  the  inner
gate  ;  a  porter  at  the  great  door.

They  saw  a  young  chap  coming,  his  two  shoulders
through  his  old  coat,  liis  two  ears  tlirough  liis  old  hat,
his  two  squat  kick-ering  tatter-y  shoes  full  of  cold
roadway-ish  water.

He  asked  their  license  in  to  see  Fear  Chuigeamh
Mugha.

One  of  them  raised  his  axe  to  drive  his  head  off,
but  so  it  was  that  he  struck  it  on  his  own  comrade.

They  arose  on  each  other  till  they  killed  each  other ;
and  he  came  to  the  men  of  the  sword,  one  raised  his
sword  to  strike  off  his  head,  but  he  cut  the  head  off'  his
comrade  "with  it,  and  they  all  fell  to  slaying  each  other.

He  reached  the  porter  ;  he   caught    him    by  the
small  of  the  legs,  and  he  struck  his  head  on  the  door.
*  The  man  of  Munster,  Cuige  niumhe.


312  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

He  readied  the  great  man  as  lie.  sat  at  liis  dinner ;
he  .stood  at  the  end  of  the  board.

"  Oh  evil  man,"  said  the  king,  "  great  was  thy
loss  before  thou  camest  here,"  as  he  rose  to  catch  hold
of  his  sword  to  strike  liis  head  off.  His  hand  stuck  to
the  sword,  and  his  seat  stuck  to  the  chair,  and  he  could
not  rise  ;  no  more  could  his  wife  leave  her  own  place.
%Vhen  he  had  done  all  he  wished  he  went  away,  and
he  met  a  poor  man  that  was  travelling  the  world.

"  If  thou  wilt  take  my  advice,"  said  the  Ceabhar-
nach,  "  I  will  make  a  lucky  man  of  thee  as  long  as
thou  art  alive."

*'  How  wilt  thou  do  that  ?"  said  the  man.

"  The  king  and  the  queen  are  fast  in  their  chairs  ;
go  thou  and  loose  them,  and  the  king  will  make  a  great
man  of  thee."

"How  shall  I  loose  them  V

"  Shake  water  on  them  and  they  will  arise."

He  went  out  of  that,  and  he  reached  Eob  Mac-
Sheuic  Mhic  Lagaix  with  a  pain  in  his  foot  for  seven
years.

He  .struck  palm  to  bar.  The  porter  asked  "  Who
was  there  ?"

He  said  there  was  a  leech.

''  Many  a  leech  has  come,"  said  the  porter.  "  There
is  not  a  spike  on  the  town  without  a  leech's  head  but
one,  and  may  be  it  is  for  thy  head  that  one  is."

"It  might  not  be,"  said  the  Ceabharnach.  "Let
me  in."

"What  is  putting  upon  thee,  Hob?"  said  the
Ceabharnach.

"  My  foot  is  taking  to  me  these  seven  years.  She
has  beat  the  leech  and  leeches."

"  Arise  and  stretch  out  thy  foot  with  the  stitch,"
said  the   Ceabharnach  ;"  and   let's  try  if  thou  canst


TUE  HISTORY  OF  THE  CEABHARNACH.  3  I  3

catcli  the  twelve  leeches,  or  if  the  twelve  leeches  will
catch  thee."

He  arose,  no  man  could  catch  him  ;  and  he  liim-
self  coixld  catch  every  other  one.

"  I  have  but  one  begotten,  a  champion  of  a  girl,
and  I  will  give  her  to  thee  and  half  my  realm."

'•  Be  she  good  or  bad,"  said  the  Ceabharnach,  "  let
her  be  mine  or  thine."

An  order  was  made  for  a  wedding  for  the  Ceabh-
arnach ;  but  when  they  had  got  the  wedding  in  order,
he  was  swifter  out  of  the  town  than  a  year-old  hare.
He  came  to  Taog  0-Ceallaidh,  who  was  going  to
raise  the  spoil  of  Cailliche  Buidhxiche.

A  young  chap  was  seen  coming,  his  two  shoulders
tlu-ough  his  old  coat,  his  two  ears  through  his  old  hat,
his  two  squat  kick-ering  tatter-y  shoes  full  of  cold  road-
way-ish  Avater,  three  feet  of  his  sword  sideways  on  the
side  of  his  haunch  after  the  scabbard  Avas  ended.

"What's  this  that  puts  on  thee  ?"  said  the  Ceabh-
arnach.    "  Hast  thou  need  of  men  ?  "

"  Thou  wilt  not  make  a  man  for  me,"  said  0-Ceal-
laidh.

"Shall  I  not  get  a  man's  share  if  I  do  a  man's
share  ì "

"  VTlvAt  's  thy  name  Ì "  said  Taog.

"  There  is  on  me  (the  name  of)  Ceabharnach
Saothrach  Suarach  Siubhail — the  servile  sorry  stroUing
kern."

"  AMiat  art  thou  seeking  for  thy  service  ? "

"  I  am  but  asking  that  thou  shouldst  not  forget
my  di-mk."

"  "WQience  earnest  thou  1  "

"  From  many  a  place  ;  but  I  am  an  Albanach."

They  went  to  raise  the  raid  of  the  carlin.  They
raised  the  spoil,  but  they  saw  the  following  coming.


3  I  4  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  Be  stretching  out,"  said  great  Taog  to  the  Ceabh-
arnach,  "Thou  wilt  not  make  thy  legs  at  least.  Wliether
wouldst  thou  rather  turn  the  chase  or  drive  the  spoil
with  thy  set  of  men  Ì "

"  I  would  not  turn  the  chase,  but  if  the  chase
would  turn,  we  would  tbive  the  spoil  at  least."

The  Ceabharnach  cut  a  sharp,  hard  wliistle,  and  the
drove  lay  doAvn  on  the  road.

He  turned  to  meet  them.  He  caught  each  one  of
the  slenderest  legs,  and  the  biggest  head,  and  he  left
them  stretched  legs  on  head.  He  returned  after  the
spoil

"  Thyself  and  thy  lot  of  men  can  hardly  drive  the
spoil"

"  The  spoil  will  never  get  up,"  said  Taog.

He  cut  a  whistle  :  the  drove  got  u]),  and  he  di'ove
it  home.

It  happened  that  the  great  man  forgcjt  to  give  the
first  drink  to  the  Ceabharnach.

"  Mine  is  the  half  of  the  spoil,"  said  the  Ceabharn-
ach.

"  That  is  more  than  much  for  thee,"  said  the  king.

"  Many  a  time  was  I,"  said  the  Ceabharnach,  "  and
Murcha  MacBrian  hewing  shields  and  splitting  blades  ;
his  was  the  half  of  the  spoil,  and  mine  M^as  the  other
haK."

"  If  thou  art  a  comrade  of  that  man,  thou  shalt  have
half  the  spoil,"  said  Taog.

But  he  went  away,  and  he  left  themselves  and  the
spoil

"  Health  be  with  thee,  oh  Ceabharnacli.  Arise  not
for  ever."


EACHDRAIDH  A    CHE.VBHARNAICH.  J  I  5


EACHDRAIDH  A'  CHEABHARNAICH.

An  latha  "n  d'  thàinig  0  Domhnuill  a  mach  a  chumail  coir  agus
ceartais,  chunnaic  e  òglach  a*  tighinn.  Bha  'dha  ghuallainn  trid  a
sheann  suanaiche ;  a  dha  chluais  trid  a  sheann  aide ;  a  dha  bhròig
cheigeanach,  bhreabanach,  riobanach,  Ian  a  dh'  uisge  fuar  rodanacb  ;
tri  troidhean  dhe'n  chlaidheamh  air  an  taobh  siar  dhe  'thoin,  an  deigh
dh'an  scabard  teireachduinn.  Bheannaich  e  le  briathraibh  tarasda,
fior-ghlie,  mine,  maighdeana.  Bheannaich  0  Domhnuill,  dha  air
homain  a  bhriathraibh  fe'in.  Dh'  fbeòràich  0  Domhnmll  deth  ciod
bu  nòs  da.  "  Dhèanainn  clàrsaireachd,"  ars'  an  Ceabhamacb.  "  Tha
da  f hear  dheug  agam  fhein,"  ars'  O  Domhnuill,  "  's  theid  sinn  a
shealtainn  orra."  "Tha  mi  toileach  sin  a  dheananih,"  ars'  an
Ceabharnach.

An  uair  a  chaidh  lad  a  steach  dh  iarr  0  Domhnuill  orra  tòiseach-
adh,  's  thoisich  iad.  "  An  cual  thu  ceol  riamh,  a  Cheabharnaich  a
'3  brèagha  na  sin  ?  "  ars'  O  Domhnuill.  "  Thainig  mi  seachad  air
Ifrinn ;  's  cha  chuala  mi  sgread  innte  's  griiinnde  na  sin ! "  ars'  an
Ceabharnach.

"  An  seinneadh  tu  fein  cruit,  a  Cheabharnaich,"  ars'  O  Domh-
nuill.

"  So  a  sheinneadair  !  — agus  Co  nach  seinneadair! !  ars'  an  Ceabh-
arnach !

"  Thugaibh  cruit  dha,"  ars'  O  Domhnuill.

"  Is  math  a  sheinneas  tusa  cruit ! "'  ars'  O  Domhnuill.

"  Cha'n  anu  mar  thogras  tusa,  ach  mar  a  thogras  mi  fein ;  oir  is
mi  'tha  'g  obair,"  ars'  esan.

Chuir  ceol  a  Cheabharnaich  na-h-uile  clarsair  a  bh'  aig  O  Domh-
nuill 'na  chadal.

"Bithidh  mis'  a'  gabhail  slan  leat,"  ars  an  Ceabharnach  ri  O
DomhnuU.

"  Cha  dean  thu  sin  ormsa,"  ars'  O  Domhnuill  i  "  feumaidh  tu  mo
dhaoine  'dhùsgadh."

"  Tha  mi  'd  la  thoirt  sgriob  feadh  Eirinn,''  ars'  an  Ceabharnach ;
"  ma  thig  mi  "n  rathad  chi  iad,  agus  mur  d'  thig  biodh  iad  mar  sin
agad  fein."

Dh'  f  hag  se  e  agus  tliachair  e  air  fear  a  buachailleachd.

"  Tha  clhrsairean  do  mhaighstir  'nan  cadal,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach
ris  a'  bhuachaille,"  agus  cha  diiisg  iad  gus  an  duisgear  iad.  Falbli
thus'  agus  diiisg  iad,  's  gheibh  thu  na  ni  duine  beartach  dhiot "

"  Cionnus  a  ni  mi  sin  ?"  thuirt  am  buachaille.


3l6  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

"  Gabh  bad  de'ii  f  heur  sin,  agus  turn  ann  an  uisg'  e,  agus  crath
orr'  e,  's  diiisgidh  tu  iad,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach.  Dh'  f  hag  e'n  duine,
's  rainig  e  s  Seatlian  mor  Mac  an  laila,  tri  mile  deug  an  taobh  siar
de  Lumraig.

Chunnaic  e  oglacli  a'  ti^hinn.  Bha  'dha  gbualainn  tiiol  a  sheann
suanaichp,  a  dha  chluais  triol  a  sheann  aide,  a  dha  bhròi^  làn  a  dh'
uisge  fuar,  ròdanach,  tri  troidhean  dhe  'n  chlaidheamh  air  an  taobh
siar  dhe  thoin,  an  de'igh  dh'an  scabard  teireachdainn.

Dh'  f heoraich  e  dheth  ciod  bu  nòs  dha.  Thuirt  e  gun  dèanadh
e  cleasachd.

"  Tha  cleasaichean  agam  fein ;  theid  sinn  a  dh'  amharc  orra."

"  Tha  mi  gle  dheonach,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach.

"  Nochd  do  chleasachd,"  ars'  an  Seathan  mor,"  acham  faic  sinn  e.

Chuir  e  tri  strabhan  air  ctil  a  dhuirn  agus  shcid  e  dheth  iad.

"  Na  "m  faighinn-sa,"  orsa  fear  de  ghillean  an  righ,'"  leith  chiiig
mhairg,  dhèanainn  cleasachd  a  b'  f  hearr  na  sin.

"  Bheir  mise  sin  duit,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach.

Chuir  e  tri  straibhean  air  ciil  a  dhiiirn,  agus  dh"  f  halbh  an  dorn
maille  ris  na  straibhean.

"Tha  thu  goirt,  agus  bidh  tu  goirt,"  ars'  a  mhaighstir."  Mo
bheannachd  air  an  laimh  a  thui:  dhuit  e."

"  Ni  mi  cleasachd  eile  dhuit,"'  ars'  an  Ceabharnach.

Rug  e  air  a'  chluais  aige  fein,  agus  thug  e  farruinn  oirre.

"Na  'm  faighinn-sa  leith  chiiig  mheirg,"  aisa  feare'  de  ghillean"
an  righ,  "  dhèannain  cleasachd  a  b'  f  hearr  na  sin.

"  Bheir  mise  sin  duit,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach.

Thug  e  tarruinn  air  a  chluais,  "s  thainig  an  ceann  leis  a  chluais.

"  Tha  mi  'falbh,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach.

"  Cha  'n  fhag  thu  mo  chuid  daoine-sa  agam  mar  sin."

"  Tha  mi  'dol  a  thoirt  sgriob  feadh  Eirinn;  ma  thig  mi  'n  ratbad
chi  mi  iad,  agus  mar  d'  thig  biodh  iad  mar  sin  agad  fein,"'  ars'  an
Ceabharnach.

Dh'  fhalbh  e  agus  thachair  e  air  duine  "bualadh  aim  an  sabhal,
agus  dh'  fhebraich  e  dheth  am  b'  urrainn  'obair  a  chumail  suas.

"  Cha  mhor  nach  b'  uilear  dhomh  e,"  ar.s'  am  fear  bualaidh.

"  Ni  mis',"  ars  an  Ceabharnach,  "  duine  saor  dh'iot  ri  d'  bheo.
Tha  dithis  de  ghillean  do  mhaighstir,  's  fear  's  an  dorn  dheth,  agus
fear  eile  's  an  cean  deth  ;  falbh  thus'  agus  cuir  orr'  iad,  's  ni  do
mhaighstir  duine  saoibiiir  dhiot  ri  d'  bheo."

"  Co  leis  a  bheir  mi  beo  iad?"  ars'  am  fear  a  bha  'bualadii.

"  Gabh  bad  fodair  ;  tum  ann  an  uisg  'e,  crath  orr'  e,  agus  ni  thu
'n  leigheas,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach.


EACHDRAIDH  A    CHEABHARNAICH.  3  I  7

Dh'  fhalbli  e,  agus  thainig  e  gu  fear  chliigeamh  Mhumha,  duine
mosach  nath  fuilingeadh  do  dhuine  'dhol  rathad  a  tliaighe ;  gu  h-
àraid  an  uair  a  bliiodh  e  'gabhail  a  bhidhe.  Bha  dba  dheug  a  luchd
thuadhan  air  a"  gbeata  'muigh  ;  a  dlia  dheug  a  luchd  chiaidhean  air
a'  gheata  'staigh  ;  dorsair  air  an  dorus  nihor.

Chunnaic  iiid  oglach  a'  tighinn  ;  a  dha  ghualainn  trid  a  sheann
suanaiche  ;  a  dha  chluais  trid  a  sheann  aide  ;  a  dlia  bhroig  cheigean.
ach,  bhreabanach,  riobanach,  Ian  a  dh'  uisge  fuar,  rodanach.

Dh'  iarr  e  "chead  orra  'staigh  a  dh'  fhaicinn  Fear  Chuigeamh
Mhumha.  Thog  fear  dhiu  a  thuadh  gus  an  ceann  a  chur  dheth,  ach
's  ann  a  bhuail  e  air  a  chompanach  i.  Dh'  eirich  iad  air  a  cheile,
gus  an  do  mharbh  iad  a  cheile.  Thainig  e  gu  luchd  nan  cFaidhean.
Thog  fear  a  chlaidhe  gus  an  ceann  a  chur  dheth,  ach  ghearr  e  'n
ceann  d'a  chompanach,  agus  dh'  eirich  iad  uile  "mharbhadh  a  che'ile.
Rainig  e  'n  dorsair.  Rug  "e  air  chaol  chasan  air  agus  bhuail  e
cheann  ris  an  dorus.  Rainig  e  'n  Duine  mòr,  agus  e  'na  shuidhe
aig  a  dhithlt.     Sheas  e  aig  ceann  a'  bhiiird.

"  O'Dhroch  Dhuine  1 "  ars'  an  righ,  "  bu  mhòr  do  chall  mu  'n  d'
thainig  thu  'n  so  !  "  agus  e  'g  eiridh  's  a'  breith  air  a'  chlaidhe,  gus
a'  cheann  a  thoirt  deth.  Lean  a  lamb  ris  a  chlaidhe,  agus  lean  a
milks  ris  a'  chaithir,  agus  cha  b'  urrainn  a  bhean  a  h-kite  fein
fhkgail.

An  uair  a  rinn  e  na  h-uile  ni  'bu  mhiann  leis  dh'  fhalbh  e,  agus
thachair  e  air  duine  bochd  a  bha  "falbh  an  t-saoghail.  "  Ma  ghabhas
tu  mo  chomhairle-sa,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach  ris  an  duine  bhochd,  "  ni
mi  duine  sona  dhiot  fliad  's  is  beo  thu."

"  Cionnus  a  ni  thu  sin?"  ars'  an  duine  bochd.

"  Tha  'n  righ  agus  a'  bhan-righ  le  'm  niksan  ceangailte  ri  'n  caith-
richean  ;  falbh  thus'  agus  fuasgail  iad,  agus  ni  'n  righ  duine  mòr
dhiot,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach.

"  Cionnus  a  dh'  fhuasglas  mis'  iad?"  ars'  an  duicn  bochd.

"  Crath  uisg'  orra  agus  eiridh  iad,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach.

"  Dh'  flialbh  e  as  a'  sin,  agus  rainig  e  Rob  Mac  Shcoic  Mhic  a'
Lagain,  agus  e  fuidh  eucail  'na  chois  fad  sheachd  bliadhna.  Bhuail'
e  bas  ri  crann.  Dh'  fheoraich  an  dorsair  co  'bh'  ann.  Thuirt  esan
gu  'robh  leighiche.

"  'S  iomadh  leighiche  'thainig,"  ars'  an  dorsair ;  "  cha  'n  'eil
ceann  stob  's  a'  bhaile  gun  cheann  leighich'  ach  an  t-aon ;  agus,  dh'
fhaododh  e  "bhith  gur  h-ann  airson  do  chinn-sa  'tha  'm  fear  sinn."

"  Cha  'n  fhaodadh,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach  ;  "  leig  a  stigh  mi."

"Ciod  a  tha  'cur  ort  a  Rob  ?  "  ars'  an  Ceabharnach.

"  Tha,  mo  cbas  a'  gabhail  rium  0  cheann  sheachd  bliadhna.     Dh'


3l8  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.

fhairtlich  i  air  leigh  agus  leighichean,"  arsa  Rob  Mac  Sheoic  'Ic  a'
Lagain.

"  Sin  do  chas  uait,'"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach,  "  dh'  fheuchainn  am
beir  thu  air  an  da  leigh  dbeug,  no  'm  beir  an  da  leigh  dheug  ort."

Dh'  eirich  e.  Cha  bheireadh  duine  sam  bith  airsan,  agus  bheir-
eadh  e  fein  air  na  h-uile  fear  eile  I

"  Cha  'n  eil  agam  ach  aon-ghin  buadhach  nighinn,"  orsa  Rob,
"agus  bheir  midhuit  i,  agus  leith  mo  rioghachd."

"  Math  no  olc  i,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach,  "  bidh  agamsa  no  agad
fein."

Chaidh  ard  a  chur  air  banais  do  'n  Cheabhamach  ;  ach  'nuair  a
bha  ia'l  an  deign  a'  bhanais  ullachadh,  bu  luaith'  e  as  a'  bhaile  na
gekrr-bhliadhnach.  Thhinig  e  gu  Taog  mor  0  Ceallaidh,  agus  e
"dol  a  thogail  creach  na  bailliche  Buidhniche.

Chunncas  òglach  a'  tighinn,

A  dha  ghualainn  trid  a  sheann  suanaiche ;

A  dha  chluais  trid  a  sheann  aide  ;

A  dha  bhroig  cheigeanach,  bhreabanach,  riobauach,

Lkn  a  dh'  uisge  fuar,  rodanach;

Tri  troidhean  dhe  'n  chlaidheanih

Air  an  taobh  siar  d'a  dheireadh.

An  deigh  do  "n  truaill  teireachdainn.

"Ciod  so  'tha  'cur  ort?"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach  ri  Taog  mor  O
Ceallaidh,  •  Am  bheil  feum  dhaoin'  ort?"

"  Cha  dean  thusa  duine  dhomh,"  ars'  0  Ceallaidc.

"  Nach  faigh  mi  cuid  fir  ma  ni  mi  cuid  fir?"  ars"  an  Ceabh-
arnach.

"  C  ainm  a  th'  ort  ?  "  arsa  Taog.

"Tha  Ceabharnach  saothtacli,  suarach  siubhail  orm,"  ars'  esan.

"  Ciod  a  tha  thu  'g  iarraidh  airson  do  sheirbhis  ? "  arsa  Taog.
"  Cha  'n  'eil  ach  gun  thu  'dhèanamh  dearmad  dibh'  orm,"  ars'  an
Ceabharnach.

"  Co  as  a  thkinig  thu?"  arsa  Taog.

"  A  iomadh  ait',  ach  is  Albannach  mi,"  ars'  esan.

Dh'  fholbh  iad  a  thogail  creach  na  cailliche.  Thog  iad  a'  chreach,
ach  chunnaic  iad  an  toir  a'  tighinn.

"  Bi  's'lneadh  as,"  arsa  Taog  mbr  ris  a"  Cheabhamach.  "  Cha
dean  thusa  do  chasan  co-dhiu.  Co  'is  fèarr  leat  an  toir  a  philleadh
na  'chreach  iomain  le  d'  chuid  daoine."

"  Cha  phillear  an  toir  ach  na  'ni  pilleadh  an  toir  dh'  iom-
aineamaid  ;i"  chreach  co-dhiu."


EACHDRAIDH  A    CHEABHARNAICH.  3  I  9

Ghearr  an  Ceabharnacli  fead  cliaol,  chruaidh,  's  luidh  a  chreach
air  an  rathad-mhor.     Phill  e  'n  coinneamh  na  toir.

Eug  e  air  na  h-uile  fear  a  bu  chaoile  cas  agus  a  bu  mho  ceann,
's  dh'  fbag  e  iad  'nan  sineadh  cas  air  cheann.  Phill  e  "n  dt'idh  na
creiche.

"  Is  dona  'dh'  iomaineas  tu  fe'in  agus  do  chuid  daoine  chreach,"
ars'  an  Ceabharnach.

"  Cha  'n  eirich  a'  chreach  gu  brath,"  arsa  Taog.

Ghearr  e  fead,  's  dh'  eirich  a'  clireach,  's  dh'  ioinain  e  dhach-
aidh  iad.

Thachair  gu  'n  do  dhearmaid  an  Duine  mor  an  dibh  a  thoirt  air
tiis  do  'n  Cheabharnach.

"  Is  leamsa  leith  na  creiche,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach.

"  Tha  'n  sin  tuilleadh  a's  cus  duit  "  ars'  an  righ.

"  Is  minig  a  bha  mis',"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach,  "  agus  Murchadh
MacBrian  a'  gearradh  sgiath  's  a'  sgoltadh  lann  ;  bu  leis-san  leith
eile,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach.

"  Ma 's  companach  thu  do  'n  duine  sin  gheibh  thu  leith  na  creiche,"
arsa  Taog.

Ach  dh'  fhalbh  e,  's  dh'  fhag  e  iad  fein  agus  a'  chreach.

Slan  leat  a'  Cheabharnaich  ;  na  eirich  gu  brath.

3.  A  third  version  of  this  curious  tale  was  told  to  me  in  South
Uist,  by  MacPhie.  It  was  very  like  the  version  told  by  James
Wilson,  blind  fiddler  in  Islay.

It  is  evidently  a  composition  fallen  to  bits,  and  mended  with
prose,  and  it  is  equally  clear  that  it  points  to  Ireland,  though
the  hero  was  made  a  Scotchman  by  the  three  old  men.

As  a  picture  of  bygone  manners,  this  is  curious,  and  I  know
nothing  at  all  like  it  in  any  collection  of  popular  tales.

I  believe  it  to  be  some  bardic  recitation  half-forgotten.  It  is
said  that  in  the  mouth  of  one  reciter  in  Islay,  the  story  used  to
last  for  four  hours.

I  lately  (September  1860)  beard  MacPhie  repeat  his  version
in  part.  It  was  a  mixture  of  the  two  versions  here  given,  and  a
fifth,  Irish  grandee,  was  added.


XVII  rf.

THE  TALE  OF  THE  SHIFTY  LAD,
THE  WIDOW'S  SOK

From  John  Dewar,  Arrocliar,  June  18G0.

THERE  was  at  some  time  or  other  iDefore  now  a
widow,  and  she  had  one  son.  She  gave  him  good
schooHng,  and  she  was  wishful  that  he  should  choose
a  trade  for  himseK ;  hut  he  said  he  would  not  go  to
learn  any  art,  but  that  he  would  he  a  thief.

His  mother  said  to  him,  "  If  that  is  the  art  that
thou  art  going  to  choose  for  thine  ownself,  thine  end  is
to  he  hanged  at  the  bridge  of  Baile  Cliath,*  in  Eirinn.

But  it  was  no  matter,  he  would  not  go  to  any  art,
but  to  be  a  thief ;  and  his  mother  was  always  making
a  prophecy  to  him  that  the  end  of  him  would  be,
hanging  at  the  Bridge  of  Baile  Chath,  in  Eirinn.

On  a  day  of  the  days,  the  widow  was  going  to  the
church  to  hear  the  sermon,  and  was  asking  the  Shifty
Lad,  her  son,  to  go  with  her,  and  that  he  should  give
over  his  bad  courses  ;  but  he  would  not  go  with  her  ;
but  he  said  to  her,  "The  first  art  of  whicli  thou  hear-
est  mention,  after  thou  hast  come  out  from  the  sermon,
is  the  art  to  which  I  will  go  afterwards."

She  went  to  the  church  full  of  good  courage,
hoping  that  she  would  hear  some  good  thing.

«  DuMin.


THE  TALE  OF  THE  SHIFTY  LAD.  3  2  1

He  went  away,  and  he  went  to  a  tuft  of  wood  that
was  near  to  the  church ;  and  he  went  in  hiding  in  a
place  where  he  could  see  his  mother  when  she  should
come  out  of  the  church;  and  as  soon  as  she  came  out  he
shouted,  "  Thievery  !  thievery  !  thievery  ! "  She  looked
about,  but  she  could  not  make  out  whence  the  voice
was  coming,  and  she  went  home.  He  ran  by  the  way
of  the  short  cut,  and  he  was  at  the  house  before  her,
and  he  was  seated  -svithin  beside  the  fire  when  she
came  home.  He  asked  her  what  tale  she  had  got ;  and
she  said  that  she  had  not  got  any  tale  at  all,  but  that
"  thievery,  thievery,  thievery,  was  the  first  speech  she
heard  when  she  came  out  of  the  church."

He  said  "  That  was  the  art  that  he  would  have."

And  she  said,  as  she  was  accustomed  to  say,  "  Tliine
ending  is  to  be  hanged  at  the  bridge  of  Bade  Claith,
in  Eirinn."

On  the  next  day,  his  mother  herself  thought,  that
as  nothing  at  all  woidd  do  for  her  son  but  that  he
should  be  a  thief,  that  she  would  try  to  find  him  a
good  aid-to-learning ;  and  she  went  to  the  gadaiche
dubh  of  Aachaloinne,  the  black  gallows  bird  of  Aacha-
loinne,  a  very  cunning  thief  who  was  in  that  place ;  and
though  they  had  knowledge  that  he  was  given  to  steal-
ing, they  were  not  finding  any  way  for  catching  him.
The  widow  asked  the  Black  Eogue  if  he  would  take
her  son  to  teach  him  roguery.  The  Black  Eogue
said,  "  If  he  were  a  clever  lad  that  he  would  take  him,
and  if  there  were  a  way  of  making  a  thief  of  him  that
he  could  do  it ;  and  a  covenant  was  made  between  the
Black  Eogue  and  the  Shifty  LacL

'\^''hen  the  Shifty  Lad,  the  \A'idow's  son,  was  mak-
ing ready  for  going  to  the  Black  Eogue,  his  mother
was  giving  him  counsel,  and  she  said  to  him,  "  It  is
against  my  will  that  thou  art  going  to  thievery  ;  and  I

Y


322  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

was  telling  thee,  that  the  end  of  thee  is  to  be  hanged
at  the  bridge  of  Baile  Cliath,  Eirinn;"  but  the  Shifty
Lad  went  home  to  the  Black  Eogue.

The  Black  Eogue  was  giving  the  Shifty  Lad  every
knowledge  he  might  for  doing  thievery ;  he  used  to
tell  him  about  the  cunning  things  that  he  must  do,  to
get  a  chance  to  steal  a  thing ;  and  when  the  Black
Eogue  thought  that  the  Sliifty  Lad  was  good  enough
at  learning  to  be  taken  out  with  him,  he  used  to  take
him  out  with  him  to  do  steahug  ;  and  on  a  day  of
these  days  the  Black  Eogue  said  to  his  lad,

"  We  are  long  enough  thus,  we  must  go  and  do
something.  There  is  a  rich  tenant  near  to  us,  and  he
has  much  money  in  liis  chest.  It  was  he  who  bought
all  that  there  was  of  cattle  to  be  sold  in  the  country,
and  he  took  them  to  the  fair,  and  he  sold  them  ;  he
has  got  the  money  in  his  chest,  and  this  is  the  time  to
be  at  him,  before  the  people  are  paid  for  their  lot  of
cattle  ;  and  unless  we  go  to  seek  the  money  at  this
very  hour,  when  it  is  gathered  together,*  we  shall  not
get  the  same  chance  again."

The  Shifty  Lad  was  as  willing  as  himself ;  they
went  away  to  the  house,  they  got  in  at  the  coming  on
of  the  night,  and  they  went  up  upon  the  loft,-|-  and
they  went  in  hiding  up  there  ;  and  it  was  the  night  of
Samhain,  Halloween  ;  and  there  assembled  many
people  witliin  to  keej)  the  Savain  hearty  as  they  used
to  do.  They  sat  together,  and  they  were  singing  songs,
and  at  fun  burning  the  nuts ;  \  and  at  merry-making.

The   Shifty  Lad  was  wearying  that  the  company

*  Round  to  each  other.

t  The  loft  meant,  is  the  space  in  the  roof  of  a  cottage  which  is
above  the  rafters,  and  is  used  as  a  kind  of  store.

;  See  Dewar's  note  at  the  Gaelic  for  his  account  of  this.


THE  TALE  OP  THE  SHIFTY  LAD.  323

was  not  scattering ;  lie  got  up  and  he  went  clown  to
the  byre,  and  he  loosed  the  bands  off  the  necks  of  the
cattle,  and  he  returned  and  he  went  up  upon  the  loft
again.  The  cattle  began  goring  each  other  in  the  byre,
and  roaring.  All  that  were  in  the  room  ran  to  keep
the  cattle  from  each  other  till  they  could  be  tied  again ;
and  in  the  time  wliile  they  were  doing  tliis,  the  Shifty
Lad  went  down  to  the  room  and  he  stole  the  nuts  with
him,  and  he  went  up  upon  the  loft  again,  and  he  lay
down  at  the  back  of  the  Black  Eogue.

There  was  a  great  leathern  liide  at  the  back  of  the
Black  Eogue,  and  the  Shifty  Lad  had  a  needle  and
thread,  and  he  sewed  the  skirt  of  the  Black  Eogue's
coat  to  the  leathern  hide  that  was  at  his  back  ;  and
when  the  people  of  the  house  came  back  to  the  dwell-
ing room  again,  their  nuts  were  away ;  and  they  were
seeking  their  nuts  ;  and  they  thought  that  it  was  some
one  who  had  come  in  to  play  them  a  trick  that  had
taken  away  their  nuts,  and  they  sat  down  at  the  side
of  the  fire  quietly  and  silently.

Said  the  Shifty  Lad  to  the  Black  Eogue,  "  I  will
crack  a  nut."

"  Thou  shalt  not  crack  (one),"  said  the  Black
Eogue ;  "  they  will  hear  thee,  and  we  shall  be
caught."

Said  the  Shifty  Lad,  "  I  never  yet  was  a  Savain
night  without  cracking  a  nut,"  and  he  cracked  one.

Those  who  were  seated  in  the  dwelling-room  heard
him,  and  they  said,

"  There  is  some  one  up  on  the  loft  cracking  our
nuts,  we  will  go  and  catch  them."

TMien  the  Black  Eogue  heard  that,  he  sprang  oflF
the  loft  and  he  ran  out,  and  the  hide  dragging  at  the
tail  of  his  coat.  Every  one  of  them  shouted  that  there
was  the  Black  Eogue  stealing  the  hide  with  him.    The


324  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

Black  Kogue  fled,  and  the  people  of  the  house  after
him ;  and  he  was  a  great  distance  from  the  house  be-
fore he  got  the  hide  torn  from  him,  and  (was  able)  to
leave  them.  But  in  the  time  that  the  people  of  the
house  were  running  after  the  Black  Eogue,  the  Shifty
Lad  came  down  off  the  loft ;  he  went  up  about  the
house,  he  hit  upon  the  chest  where  the  gold  and  the
silver  was ;  he  opened  the  chest,  and  he  took  out  of  it
the  bags  in  which  the  gold  and  silver  Avas,  that  was  in
the  chest ;  and  he  took  with  him  a  load  of  the  bread
and  of  the  butter,  and  of  the  cheese,  and  of  everything
that  was  better  than  another  which  he  found  witliin  ;
and  he  was  gone  before  the  people  of  the  house  came
back  from  chasing  the  Black  Eogue.

When  the  Black  Eogue  reached  liis  home,  and  he
had  nothing,  liis  wife  said  to  him,  "  How  hast  thou
failed  this  journey  ?  "

Then  the  Black  Eogue  told  liis  own  tale  ;  and  he
was  in  great  fury  at  the  Shifty  Lad,  and  swearing  that
he  would  serve  liim  out  when  he  got  a  chance  at  him.

At  the  end  of  a  little  while  after  that,  the  Shifty
Lad  came  in  with  a  load  upon  him.

Said  the  wife  of  the  Black  Eogue,  "  But,  I  fancy
that  thou  art  the  better  thief  ! "

The  Black  Eogue  said  not  a  word  till  the  Shifty
Lad  shewed  the  bags  that  he  had  full  of  gold  and  sil-
ver ;  then,  said  the  Black  Eogue,  "  But  it  is  thou  that
wert  the  smart  lad  ! "

They  made  two  halves  of  the  gold  and  silver,  and
tlie  Black  Eogue  got  the  one  half,  and  the  Shifty  Lad
the  other  half.  AVhen  the  Black  Eogue's  wife  saw  the
share  that  came  to  them,  she  said,  "  Thou  thyself  art
the  worthy  thief ! "  and  she  had  more  respect  for  him
after  that,  than  she  had  for  the  Black  Eogue  himself.

At  the   end   of  a  few  weeks  after  that,  a  wedding


THE  TALE  OF  THE  SHIFTY  LAD.  325

was  to  be  in  the  neiglibourhood ;  and  it  was  the  cus-
tom of  the  country,  when  any  w  ho  were  well  off  were
asked,  that  they  should  send  some  gift  or  other  to  the
people  of  the  wedding.  There  was  a  rich  tenant,  and
he  was  asked  ;  and  he  desired  his  herd  to  go  to  the
mountain  moor  and  bring  home  a  wether  for  the  people
of  the  wedding.  The  herd  went  up  the  mountain  and
he  got  the  wether,  and  he  was  going  home  with  it  ;
and  he  had  it  on  his  back  when  he  was  going  past  the
house  of  the  Black  Eogue.

Said  the  Shifty  Lad  to  his  master,  "  What  wager
wilt  thou  lay  that  I  do  not  steal  the  wether  from  the
back  of  that  man  yet,  before  he  reaches  the  house."

Said  the  Black  Eogue,  "  I  will  lay  thee  a  wager  of
a  hundred  marks  that  thou  canst  not ;  how  shouldst
thou  steal  the  thing  that  is  on  his  back ! "

"  Howsoever  I  do  it,  I  -wUl  try  it,"  said  the  Shifty  Lad.

"  Well,  then,  if  thou  dost  it,"  said  the  Black
Rogue,  "  I  will  give  thee  a  hundred  marks."

"  It  is  a  bargain,"  said  the  Shifty  Lad  ;  and  with
that  he  went  away  after  the  herd.

The  herd  had  to  go  through  a  wood,  and  the  Shifty
Lad  took  the  ground  that  was  hidden  from  him  until
he  got  1)efore  him ;  and  he  put  some  dirt  in  his  shoe,
and  he  set  his  shoe  on  the  road  before  the  herd,  and
he  himself  went  in  liiding  ;  and  when  the  herd  came
forward,  and  he  saw  the  shoe,  he  said,  "  But  thou  art
dirty,  and  though  thou  art,  if  thy  fellow  w-ere  there  I
would  clean  thee  ; "  and  he  went  past.

The  Shifty  Lad  lifted  the  shoe,  and  he  ran  round
about  and  he  was  before  the  herd,  and  he  put  his  other
shoe  on  the  road  before  him.  AYhen  the  herd  came
forward  and  saw  the  other  shoe  on  the  road  before
him,  he  said  to  himself,  "  But  there  is  the  fellow  of  the
dirty  shoe."


326  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

He  set  the  wether  on  the  ground,  and  he  said  to
liiniself,  "  I  will  retiirn  back  now,  and  I  will  get  the  dirty
shoe,  and  I  will  clean  it,  and  I  shall  have  two  good
shoes  for  my  trouble  ;  and  he  ran  swiftly  back  again.

The  Shifty  Lad  ran  swiftly,  and  he  stole  with  him
the  wether,  and  he  took  with  him  the  two  shoes  ;  and
he  went  home  to  liis  master,  and  he  got  a  hundred
marks  from  his  master.

The  herd  went  home  and  he  told  his  own  master
himself  how  it  had  befallen  liim.  His  master  scolded
the  herd ;  and  the  next  day  he  sent  liim  again  up
the  mountain  to  seek  a  kid,  instead  of  the  wether  he
had  lost.

The  herd  went  away  to  the  hill  and  he  got  hold  of
a  kid,  and  he  tied  it ;  he  put  it  on  his  back,  and  he  went
away  to  go  home  with  it.  The  Shifty  Lad  saw  him,  and
he  went  to  the  Avood,  and  he  was  there  before  the  herd  ;
and  he  went  in  hiding,  and  he  began  at  bleating  like
the  wether.  The  herd  thought  that  it  was  the  wether
that  was  in  it ;  and  he  put  the  kid  off  him,  and  he
left  it  at  the  side  of  the  road,  and  he  went  to  seek  the
wether.  At  the  time  when  the  herd  was  seeking  the
wether,  the  Shifty  Lad  went  and  he  stole  the  kid  with
him,  and  he  went  home  with  it  to  the  Black  liogue.

When  the  herd  went  back  to  where  he  had  left
the  kid,  the  kid  was  gone,  the  kid  was  not  in  it ;  he
sought  the  kid,  and  when  he  could  not  find  the  kid,  he
went  home  and  he  told  his  master  how  it  had  befallen
him  ;  and  his  master  scolded  him,  but  there  was  no
help  for  it.

On  the  next  day  the  tenant  asked  his  herd  to  go  up
the  mountain  and  bring  home  a  stot ;  to  be  sure  that
he  did  not  lose  it.  The  herd  went  up  the  mountain,
and  he  got  a  good  fat  stot,  and  he  was  driving  it  home.
The  Shifty  Lad  saw  him,  and  he  said  to  the  Black  Kogue,


THE  TALE  OP  THE  SHIFTY  LAD.         327

"  Tugain,  come  along,  and  we  mil  go  and  try  to  steal
the  stot  from  the  herd  when  he  is  going  through  the
wood  with  it."

The  Black  Eogue  and  the  Shifty  Lad  went  away  to
the  wood  before  the  herd  ;  and  when  the  herd  was
going  through  the  M'ood  with  the  stot,  the  Black  Rogue
was  in  the  one  place  baa-ing,  and  the  shifty  lad  in
another  bleating  like  a  goat.  The  herd  heard  them,
and  he  thought  that  he  would  get  the  wether  and  the
kid  again.  He  tied  the  stot  to  a  tree,  and  went  all
about  the  wood  seeking  the  wether  and  the  kid,  and  he
sought  them  till  he  was  tired,  ^^"hile  he  was  seeking
the  wether  and  the  kid,  the  Shifty  Lad  went,  and  he
stole  mth  him  the  stot,  and  he  took  it  home  with  him
to  the  house  of  the  Black  Eogue.  The  Black  Rogue
went  home  after  him,  and  they  killed  the  stot,  and  they
put  it  in  liiding,  and  the  Black  Rogue's  wife  had  good
puddings  for  them  that  night.  When  the  herd  came
back  to  the  tree  where  he  had  left  the  stot  tied,  the  stot
was  not  there.  He  knew  that  the  stot  had  been  stolen.
He  went  home  and  he  told  his  master  how  it  had  hap-
pened, and  his  master  scolded  him,  but  there  was  no
help  for  it.

On  the  next  day  his  master  asked  the  herd  to  go
up  the  mountain  and  to  bring  home  a  wether,  and  not
let  it  come  off  his  back  at  all  till  he  should  come  home,
whatever  he  might  see  or  hear.  The  herd  went  away,
and  he  went  up  the  mountain  and  he  got  the  wether,
and  he  succeeded  in  taking  that  wether  home.

The  Black  Eogue  and  the  Shifty  Lad  went  on
stealing  till  they  had  got  much  money,  and  they  thought
that  they  had  better  buy  a  drove  (of  cattle)  and  go  to
the  fair  with  it  to  sell,  and  that  people  would  think  that
it  was  at  drovering  they  had  made  the  money  that  they
had  got.     The  two  went,  and  they  bought  a  great  drove


3^8  W'EST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

of  cattle,  and  they  -went  to  a  fair  that  was  far  on  the
Avay  from  them.  They  sold  the  drove,  and  they  got
the  money  for  them,  and  they  went  away  to  go  home.
"Wlien  they  were  on  the  way,  they  saw  a  gallows  on
the  top  of  a  hill,  and  the  Shifty  Lad  said  to  the  Black
Rogue,  "  Come  up  till  we  see  the  gallows  ;  some  say
that  the  galloAvs  is  the  end  for  the  theives  at  all
events."

They  went  up  where  the  gallows  was,  and  they
were  looking  all  about  it.  Said  the  Shifty  Lad,
"  Might  we  not  try  what  kind  of  death  is  in  the  gal-
lows, that  we  may  know  what  is  before  us,  if  we  should
be  caught  at  roguery.     I  will  try  it  myself  first."

Tlie  Sliifty  Lad  put  the  cord  about  his  own  neck,
and  he  said  to  the  Black  Eogue,  "  Here,  draw  me  up,
and  when  I  am  tired  above,  I  will  shake  my  legs,  and
then  do  thou  let  me  down.

The  Black  Eogue  drew  the  cord,  and  he  raised  the
Shifty  Lad  aloft  off  the  earth,  and  at  the  end  of  a  little
blink  the  Shifty  Lad  shook  his  legs,  and  the  Black
Eogue  let  him  down.

The  Shifty  Lad  took  the  cord  off  his  neck,  and  he
he  said  to  the  Black  Eogiie,  "  Thou  thyself  hast  not
ever  tried  anytliing  that  is  so  funny  as  hanging.  If
thou  wouldst  try  once,  thou  woulJst  liave  no  more  fear
for  hanging.  I  was  shaking  my  legs  for  delight,  and
thou  wouldst  shake  thy  legs  for  delight  too  if  thou  wert
aloft."

Said  the  Black  Eogue,  "  I  will  try  it  too,  so  that  I
may  know  what  it  is  like."

"  Do,"  said  the  Shifty  Lad  ;  "  and  wlien  thou  art
tired  above,  whistle  and  I  will  let  thee  down."

The  Black  Eogue  put  the  cord  about  his  neck,  and
the  Shifty  Lad  drew  him  up  aloft ;  and  when  the
Shifty  Lad  found  that  the  Black    Eogue   was    aloft


THE  TALE  OF  THE  SHIFTY  LAD.  329

agaiiist  the  gallows,  he  said  to  him,  "  Now,  when  thou
wantest  to  come  down,  whistle,  and  if  thou  art  well
pleased  where  thou  art,  shake  thy  legs."

When  the  Black  Rogue  was  a  little  blink  above,
he  began  to  shake  liis  legs  and  to  kick ;  and  the  Shifty-
Lad  would  say,  "  Oh  !  art  thou  not  funny  !  art  thou
not  funny !  art  thou  not  funny  !  TNHien  it  seems  to
thee  that  thou  art  long  enough  above  wliistle."

But  the  Black  Eogue  has  not  whistled  yet.  The
Shifty  Lad  tied  the  cord  to  the  lower  end  of  the  tree
of  the  gallows  tiE  the  Black  Eogue  was  dead  ;  then  he
went  where  he  was,  and  he  took  the  money  out  of  his
pouch,  and  he  said  to  liim,  "  Now,  since  thou  hast  no
longer  any  use  for  this  money,  I  will  take  care  of  it
for  thee."  And  he  went  away,  and  he  left  the  Black
Eogue  hanging  there.  Then  he  went  home  where  was
tlie  house  of  the  Black  Eogue,  and  his  wife  asked
where  was  his  master  ?

The  Shifty  Lad  said,  "  I  left  liim  where  he  was,
upraised  above  the  earth."

The  -wife  of  the  Black  Eogue  asked  and  asked  him
about  her  man,  till  at  last  ho  told  her,  but  he  said  to
licr,  that  he  would  marry  her  himself.  When  she
heard  that,  she  cried  that  the  Shifty  Lad  had  killed
his  master,  and  he  was  nothing  but  a  thief  When
the  Shifty  Lad  heard  that  he  fled.  The  chase  was  set
after  liim  ;  but  he  found  means  to  go  in  hiding  in  a
cave,  and  the  chase  went  past  him.  He  was  in  the
cave  all  night,  and  the  next  day  he  went  another  way,
and  he  found  means  to  fly  to  Eirinn.

He  reached  the  house  of  a  wright,  and  he  cried  at
the  door,  "  Let  me  in."

"  Who  art  thou  ?  "  said  the  wright.

"  I  am  a  good  wright,  if  thou  hast  need  of  such,"
said  the  Shifty  Lad.


330  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

The  "Wright  opened  the  door,  and  he  let  in  the
Shifty  Lad,  and  the  Shifty  Lad  began  to  work  at  car-
pentering along  with  the  wright.

When  the  Shifty  Lad  was  a  day  or  two  in  their
house,  he  gave  a  glance  thither  and  a  glance  hither
about  the  house,  and  he  said,  "  0  choin  !  what  a  poor
house  you  have,  and  the  Icing's  store-house  so  near
you."

"  "Wliat  of  that,"  said  the  wright.

"  It  is,"  said  the  Shifty  Lad,  "  that  you  might  get
plenty  from  the  king's  store-house  if  you  yourselves
were  smart  enough."

Tlie  wright  and  his  wife  would  say,  "  They  would
put  us  in  prison  if  we  should  begin  at  the  like  of
that."

Tlie  Shifty  Lad  was  always  saying  that  they  ought
to  break  into  the  king's  store-house,  and  they  would
find  plenty  in  it ;  but  the  wriglit  would  not  go  with
him ;  but  the  Shifty  Lad  took  with  liim  some  of  the
tools  of  the  wright,  and  he  went  himself  and  he  broke
into  the  king's  store-house,  and  he  took  with  him  a
load  of  the  butter  and  of  the  cheese  of  the  king,  and  he
took  it  to  the  house  of  the  wright.  The  things  pleased
the  wife  of  the  ^\Tight  well,  and  she  was  willing  that
her  own  husband  should  go  there  the  next  night.  The
wright  himself  went  with  his  lad  the  next  night,  and
they  got  into  the  storehouse  of  the  king,  and  they  took
with  them  great  loads  of  each  thing  that  pleased  them
best  of  all  tliat  was  within  in  the  king's  storehouse.

But  the  king's  people  missed  the  butter  and  the
cheese  and  the  other  things  that  had  been  taken  out
of  the  storehou.se,  and  they  told  the  king  how  it  had
happened.

The  king  took  the  counsel  of  the  Seanagal  about
the  best  way  of  catching  the  thieves   and  the  counsel


THE  TALE  OP  THE  SHIFTY  LAD.  33  I

tliat  the  Seanagal  gave  them  was  that  they  should  set
a  hogshead  of  soft  pitch  under  the  hole  where  they  were
coming  in.  That  was  done,  and  the  next  night  the
Sliifty  Lad  and  his  master  went  to  break  into  the  king's
storehouse.

The  Shifty  Lad  put  his  master  in  before  him,  and
the  master  went  down  into  the  soft  pitch  to  his  very
middle,  and  he  coidd  not  get  out  again.  The  Shifty
Lad  went  do^vn,  and  he  put  a  foot  on  each  of  his  mas-
ter's shoulders,  and  he  put  out  two  loads  of  the  king's
butter  and  of  the  cheese  at  the  hole ;  and  at  the
last  time,  when  he  was  coming  out,  he  swept  the  head
off  his  master,  and  he  took  the  head  with  him,  and  he
left  the  trunk  in  the  hogshead  of  pitch,  and  he  went
home  with  the  butter  and  with  the  cheese,  and  he  took
home  the  head,  and  he  buried  it  in  the  garden.

When  the  king's  people  went  into  the  storehouse,
they  found  a  body  without  a  head  in  the  hogshead  of
pitch  ;  but  they  could  not  make  out  who  it  was.  They
tried  if  they  could  find  any  one  at  all  that  could  know
him  by  the  clothes,  but  his  clothes  were  coA^ered  with
pitch  so  that  they  could  not  make  liim  out.  The  king
asked  the  counsel  of  the  Seanagal  about  it ;  and  the
counsel  that  the  Seanagal  gave  was,  that  they  should
set  the  trunk  aloft  on  the  points  of  the  spears  of  the
soldiers,  to  be  carried  from  town  to  town,  to  see  if  they
could  find  any  one  at  all  that  would  take  sorrow  for  it ;
or  to  try  if  they  could  hear  any  one  that  would  make
a  painful  cry  Avhen  they  should  see  it ;  or  if  they
should  not  see  (one  crying)  one  that  should  seem  about
to  make  a  painful  cry  when  the  soldiers  should  be  go-
ing past  -ndth  it.  The  body  was  taken  out  of  the  hogs-
head of  pitch,  and  set  on  the  points  of  the  spears  ;  and
the  soldiers  were  bearing  it  aloft  on  the  points  of  their
long  wooden  spears,  and  they  were  going  from  town  to


33-2  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.

town  with  it ;  and  when  they  were  going  past  the  house
of  the  Wright,  the  wright's  wife  made  a  tortured  scream,
and  swift  the  Shifty  Lad  cut  himself  wàth  the  adze  ;
and  he  kept  sajdng  to  the  -Wright's  wife,  "  The  cut  is
not  so  bad  as  thou  tliinkest."

The  commander-in-chief,  and  liis  lot  of  soldiers,
came  in  and  they  asked,

"  ^Yhat  ailed  the  housewife  ?"

Said  the  Shifty  Lad,  "  It  is  that  I  have  just  cut
my  foot  with  the  adze,  and  she  is  afraid  of  blood;"  and
he  would  say  to  the  wife  of  the  wright,  "  Do  not  be  so
much  afraid  ;  it  will  heal  sooner  than  thou  thinkest."

The  soldiers  thought  that  the  Sliifty  Lad  was  the
wright,  and  that  the  wife  whom  they  had  was  the  wife
of  the  Shifty  Lad  ;  and  they  went  out,  and  they  went
from  town  to  town  ;  but  they  found  no  one  besides,
but  the  wife  of  the  %vright  herself  that  made  cry  or
scream  when  they  were  coming  past  her.

They  took  the  body  home  to  the  king's  house ;
and  the  king  took  another  counsel  from  liis  Seanagal,
and  that  was  to  hang  the  body  to  a  tree  in  an  open
place,  and  soldiers  to  watch  it  that  none  should  take  it
away,  and  the  soldiers  to  be  looking  if  any  should
come  the  way  that  should  take  pity  or  grief  for  it.

The  Shifty  Lad  came  past  them,  and  he  saw  them ;
he  went  and  he  got  a  horse,  and  he  put  a  keg  of  whisky
on  each  side  of  the  horse  in  a  sack,  and  he  went  past
the  soldiers  -with  it,  as  though  he  were  hiding  from  them.
The  soldiers  thought  that  it  was  so,  that  he  had  taken
sometliing  away  from  them,  or  that  he  had  something
which  he  ought  not  to  have ;  and  some  of  them  ran  after
him  and  they  caught  the  old  horse  and  the  whisky  ;  but
the  Shifty  Lad  fled,  and  he  left  the  old  horse  and  the
whisky  with  them.  The  soldiers  took  the  horse  and
the  kegs  of  whisky  back  to  where  the  body  was  hang-


THE  T.VLE  OF  THE  SHIFTY  LAD.  333

ing  against  the  mast.  They  looked  what  was  in  the
kegs  ;  and  when  they  understood  that  it  was  whisky
that  was  in  them,  thoy  got  a  drinking  cup,  and  they
began  drinking  until  at  last  every  one  of  them  was
drunk,  and  they  lay  and  they  slept.  When  the  Shifty
Lad  saw  that,  that  the  soldiers  were  laid  down  and
asleep  and  drunk,  he  returned  and  he  took  the  body
off  the  mast.  He  set  it  crosswise  on  the  horse's  back,
and  he  took  it  home  ;  then  he  went  and  he  buried
the  body  in  the  garden  where  the  head  was.

When  the  soldiers  awoke  out  of  their  sleep,  the
body  was  stolen  away  ;  they  had  for  it  but  to  go  and
tell  it  to  the  king.  Then  the  king  took  the  counsel  of
the  Seanagal ;  and  the  Seanagal  said  to  them,  all  that
were  in  Ids  presence,  that  his  counsel  to  them  was,  to
take  out  a  great  black  pig  that  was  there,  and  that
they  should  go  with  her  from  town  to  town ;  and  when
they  should  come  to  any  place  where  the  body  was
buried,  that  she  would  root  it  up.  They  went  and
they  got  the  black  pig,  and  they  were  going  from  farm
to  farm  Avith  her,  trying  if  they  could  find  out  where
the  body  was  biuied.  They  went  from  house  to  house
■\nth  her  till  at  last  they  came  to  the  house  where  the
Shifty  Lad  and  the  wright's  widow  were  dwelling.
'\^Tien  they  arrived  they  let  the  pig  loose  about  the
grounds.  The  Shifty  Lad  said  that  he  himself  was  sure
that  thirst  and  hunger  was  on  them  ;  that  they  had
better  go  into  the  house  and  that  they  would  get  meat
and  drink  ;  and  that  they  should  let  their  weariness
from  off  them,  in  the  time  when  the  pig  should  be
seeking  about  his  place.

They  went  in,  and  the  Shifty  Lad  asked  the
Wright's  widow  that  she  should  set  meat  and  drink  be-
fore the  men.  The  widow  of  the  Tvright  set  meat  and
drink  on  the  board,  and  she  set  it  before  them  ;  and


334  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

in  the  time  while  they  were  eating  their  meat,  the
Shifty  Lad  went  out  to  see  after  the  pig  ;  and  the  pig
had  just  hit  upon  the  body  in  the  garden  ;  and  the
Shifty  Lad  went  and  he  got  a  great  knife  and  he  cut
the  head  off  her,  and  he  buried  herself  and  her  head
beside  the  body  of  the  wriglit  in  the  garden.

"When  those  who  had  the  care  of  the  pig  came  out,
the  pig  was  not  to  be  seen.  They  asked  the  Sliifty
Lad  if  he  had  seen  her ;  he  said  that  he  had  seen
(her),  that  her  head  was  up  and  she  was  looking  up-
wards, and  going  two  or  three  steps  now  and  again  ;
and  they  went  with  great  haste  to  the  side  where  the
Shifty  Lad  said  that  the  pig  had  gone.

When  the  Shifty  Lad  found  that  they  had  gone
out  of  sight,  lie  set  every  tiling  in  such  a  way  that  they
should  not  hit  upon  the  pig.  They  on  whom  the  care  of
the  pig  was  laid  went  and  they  sought  her  every  way
that  it  was  likely  she  might  be.  Then  when  they
could  not  find  her,  they  had  for  it  but  to  go  to  the
king's  house  and  tell  how  it  had  happened.

Then  the  counsel  of  the  Seanagal  was  taken  again ;
and  the  counsel  that  the  Seanagal  gave  them  was,
that  they  should  set  their  soldiers  out  about  the
country  at  free  quarters  ;  and  at  whatsoever  place  they
should  get  pig's  tlesh,  or  in  whatsoever  place  they  should
see  pig's  flesh,  unless  those  people  could  shew  how
they  had  got  the  pig's  flesh  that  they  might  have,  that
those  were  the  people  who  killed  the  pig,  and  that  had
done  every  evil  that  had  been  done.

The  counsel  of  the  Seanagal  was  taken,  and  the
soldiers  sent  out  to  free  quarters  about  the  country  ;
and  there  was  a  band  of  them  in  the  house  of  the
Wright's  -widow  where  the  Shifty  Lad  was.  The
Wright's  widow  gave  their  supper  to  the  soldiers,  and
some  of  the  pig's  flesh  was  made  ready  for  them  ;  and


THE  TALE  OF  THE  SHIFTY  LAD.  335

the  soldiers  were  eating  the  pig's  flesh,  and  praising  it
exceedingly.  The  Shifty  Lad  understood  what  was  the
matter,  but  he  did  not  let  on.  The  soldiers  were  set
to  He  out  in  the  barn ;  and  when  they  were  asleep  the
Shifty  Lad  went  out  and  he  killed  them.  Then  he
went  as  fast  as  he  could  from  house  to  house,  where
the  soldiers  were  at  free  quarters,  and  he  set  the
rumour  afloat*  amongst  the  people  of  the  houses,  that
the  sokhers  had  been  sent  out  about  the  country  to  rise
in  the  night  and  kill  the  people  in  their  beds  ;  and  he
found  (means)  to  make  the  people  of  the  country  believe
him,  so  that  the  people  of  each  house  killed  all  the  sol-
diers that  were  asleep  in  their  barns  ;  and  when  the  sol-
diers did  not  come  home  at  the  time  they  should,  some
went  to  see  what  had  happened  to  them  ;  and  Avhen  they
arrived,  it  was  so  that  they  found  the  soldiers  dead  in
the  barns  where  they  had  been  asleep  ;  and  the  people
of  each  house  denied  that  they  knew  how  the  soldiers
had  been  put  to  death,  or  who  had  done  it.

The  people  who  were  at  the  ransacking  for  the  sol-
diers, went  to  the  king's  house,  and  they  told  how  it
had  happened  ;  then  tlie  king  sent  word  for  the  Seana-
gal  to  get  counsel  from  him  ;  the  Seanagal  came,  and
the  king  told  how  it  had  happened,  and  the  king  asked
counsel  from  liim.  Tliis  is  the  counsel  that  the  Seana-
gal gave  the  king,  that  he  should  make  a  feast  and
a  ball,  and  invite  the  people  of  the  country  ;  and  if
the  man  who  did  the  eril  should  be  there,  that  he  was
the  man  who  would  be  the  boldest  who  would  be  there,
and  that  he  would  ask  the  king's  daughter  herself  to
dance  with  him.  The  people  were  asked  to  the  feast
and  the  dance  ;  and  amongst  the  rest  the  Shifty  Lad
was  asked.     The  people  came  to  the  feast,  and  amongst

*  Cuir  e  a  ceil.


336  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

the  rest  came  the  Shifty  Lad.  When  the  feast  was
past,  the  dance  began ;  and  the  Sliifty  Lad  went  and
he  asked  the  king's  daughter  to  dance  with  liim  ;  and
the  Seanagal  had  a  vial  full  of  black  stulF,  and  the
Seanagal  put  a  black  dot  of  the  stuff  that  was  in  the
vial  on  the  Shifty  Lad.  But  it  seemed  to  the  king's
daughter  that  her  hair  was  not  well  enough  in  order,
and  she  went  to  a  side  chamber  to  put  it  right  ;  and
the  Shifty  Lad  went  in  with  her  ;  and  when  she  looked
in  the  glass,  he  also  looked  in  it,  and  he  saw  the  black
dot  that  the  Seanagal  had  put  upon  him.  When  they
had  danced  till  the  tune  of  music  was  finished,  the
Shifty  Lad  Avent  and  he  got  a  chance  to  steal  the  vial
of  the  Seanagal  from  him  unknown  to  him,  and  he  put
two  black  dots  on  the  Seanagal,  and  one  black  dot
on  twenty  other  men  besides,  and  he  put  the  vial  back
again  where  he  found  it.

Between  that  and  the  end  of  another  while,  the
Shifty  Lad  came  again  and  he  asked  the  king's  daugh-
ter to  dance.  The  king's  daughter  had  a  vial  also,  and
she  put  a  black  dot  on  the  face  of  the  Shifty  Lad ;  but
the  Shifty  Lad  got  the  vial  whipped  out  of  her  pocket,
unknown  to  her  ;  and  since  there  were  two  black  dots
on  him,  he  put  two  dots  on  twenty  other  men  in
the  company,  and  four  black  dots  on  the  Seanagal.
Then  when  the  dancing  was  over,  some  were  sent  to
see  who  was  the  man  on  whom  were  the  two  black
dots.  When  they  looked  amongst  the  people,  they
found  twenty  men  on  whom  there  were  two  black  dots,
and  there  were  four  black  dots  on  the  Seanagal  ;  and
the  Sliifty  Lad  found  (means)  to  go  s\viftly  where  the
king's  daughter  was,  and  to  sHp  the  vial  back  again
into  her  pocket.  The  Seanagal  looked  and  he  had  his
black  vial  ;  the  king's  daughter  looked  and  she  had
her  own  vial ;  then  the   Seanagal  and   the  king  took


THE  TALE  OF  THE  SHIFTY  LAD.  337

counsel ;  and  the  last  counsel  that  they  made  was  that
the  king  should  come  to  the  company,  and  say,  that
the  man  who  had  done  every  trick  that  had  been  done,
must  be  exceedingly  clever  ;  if  he  would  come  forward
and  give  himself  up,  that  he  should  get  the  king's
daughter  to  marry,  and  the  one  half  of  the  kingdom
wliile  the  king  was  alive,  and  the  Avhole  of  the  king-
dom after  the  king's  death.  And  every  one  of  those
who  had  the  two  black  dots  on  their  faces  came
and  they  said  that  it  was  they  who  had  done  every
cleverness  that  had  been  done.  Then  the  king  and
his  high  council  went  to  try  how  the  matter  should
be  settled  ;  and  the  matter  wliich  they  settled  was,
that  all  the  men  who  had  the  two  black  dots  on
their  faces  should  be  put  together  in  a  chamber,  and
they  were  to  get  a  child,  and  the  king's  daughter  was
to  give  an  apple  to  the  child,  and  the  child  was  to  be
put  in  where  the  men  with  the  two  black  dots  on  their
faces  were  seated  ;  and  to  Avhatsoever  one  the  child
should  give  the  apple,  that  was  the  one  who  was  to
get  the  king's  daughter.

That  was  done,  and  when  the  child  went  into  the
chamber  in  which  the  men  were,  the  Shifty  Lad  had
a  shaving  and  a  drone  (sliseag  us  dranndan),  and  the
child  went  and  gave  him  the  apple.  Then  the  shav-
ing and  the  drone  were  taken  from  the  Shifty  Lad,
ami  he  was  seated  in  another  place,  and  the  apple
was  given  to  the  child  again  ;  and  he  was  taken  out
of  the  chamber,  and  sent  in  again  to  see  to  whom
lie  would  give  the  apple ;  and  since  the  Shifty  Lad
had  the  shaving  and  the  drone  before,  the  child  went
where  he  was  again,  and  he  gave  him  the  apple.
Then  the  Shifty  Lad  got  the  king's  daughter  to  marry.

And  shortly  after  that  the  king's  daughter  and  the
Shifty  Lad  were  taking  a  walk  to  Baile  Cliabli ;  and
z


338  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

when  they  were  going  over  the  bridge  of  Baile  Cliabh,
the  Shifty  Lad  asked  the  king's  daughter  what  was
the  name  of  that  place  ;  and  the  king's  daughter  told
liim  that  it  w-as  the  bridge  of  Baile  Chabh,  in  Eirinn  ;
and  the  Shifty  Lad  said —

"  Well  then,  many  is  the  time  that  my  mother
said  to  me,  that  my  end  would  be  to  be  hanged  at  the
bridge  of  Baile  Clialjh,  in  Eirinn  ;  and  she  made  me
tliat  prophecy  many  a  time  when  I  might  play  her  a
trick."

And  the  king's  daughter  said,  "  Well  then,  if
thou  thyself  shouldst  choose  to  hang  over  the  little
side  (wall)  of  the  bridge,  I  wall  hold  thee  aloft  a  little
space  with  my  pocket  napkin."

And  they  were  at  talk  and  fun  about  it ;  but  at
last  it  seemed  to  the  Shifty  Lad  that  he  w^ould  do  it  for
sport,  and  the  king's  daughter  took  out  her  pocket
napkin,  and  the  Shifty  Lad  went  over  the  bridge,  and
he  hung  by  the  pocket  napkin  of  the  king's  daugh
ter,  as  she  let  it  over  the  little  side  (waU)  of  the
bridge,  and  they  were  laugliing  to  each  other.

But  the  king's  daughter  heard  a  cry,  "  The  king's
castle  is  going  on  fire  ! "  and  she  started,  and  she
lost  her  hold  of  the  napkin  ;  and  the  Shifty  Lad  fell
down,  and  liis  head  struck  against  a  stone,  and  the
brain  went  out  of  him ;  and  there  was  in  the  cry  but
the  sport  of  children  ;  and  the  king's  daughter  was
oblicjed  to  go  home  a  widow.


SGEULACHD  A  GRILLE  CHARAICU  MAC  NA  BANTRACH.
Bha  uair  eigeinn  ann  roimh  so  Bantrach,  agus  blia  aona  mbac  aic.
Thug  i  d  a  sgoil  mhatli,  agiis  bha  i  bos  gu  'n  tagbadh  e  ceaird  air  a
shon  fein,  ach  thubbairt  esan,  nach  racbadh  e  a  db'  ionnsaidh  ealdh-
ain  air  bith,  ach  gn  'ni  bitbeadb  e  na  mbearlach.


A  GHILLE  CHARAICH  MAC  NA  BANTRACH.  339

Thubhairt  a  mhathair  ris,  "  Ma  is  è  sin  an  ealdhain  a  tha  thu  a  dol
a  thaghadh  dhuit  fein,  is  e  is  deireadh  dhuit,  a  bhi  air  do  chrocbadh
aig  drochaid  Bhaile-cliabh  an  Eirinu."  Ach  bu  cboma  cò  dhuibh,  cba
rachadb  esan  gu  ealdhain  air  bith,  ach  gu  a  bbith  ann  na  mhearlach.
Agiis  bhitheadb  a  mhathair  daonnan  a,  deaiiamh  faisinneachd  d  a,
gu  'm  e  bu  deireadh  dhasan  a  bbith  air  a  chrochadli  aig  drochaid
Bliaile-cliabh  an  Eirinn.  Eatha  do  na  laitbeanan  bha  a  Bhantrach
a  dol  do  'n  eaglais,  a  dh  eisdeacbd  searmoin,  agus  bha  i  ag  iarraidh
air  a'  gliille-charracli  a  mac  e  a  dhol  leatha,  'sea  thoirt  thairis  do  a
dhroch  stiiiireanan,  ach  cha  rachadh  e  leatha,  ach  thuirt  e  rithe.
"  Is  e  a  chiad  ealdhain  air  an  cluinn  thusa  iomradh,  an  deigh  dhuit
tighinn  a  mach  0  'n  t-searmoin,  an  ealdhaid  gu  's  an  teid  mise  a
rithis."

Dh  fhalbh  ise  do  'n  eaglais,  's  i  Ian  misnich  an  diiil  gii  'n  cluinn-
eadh  i  rud-eiginn  math.  Dh  fhalbh  easan  's  chaidh  e  do  bhad  coille,
a  bha  dliith  do  'n  eaglais,  's  chaidh  e  'm  fallach  ann  an  iiite  far  am
faiceadh  e  a  mhathair,  a  nuair  a  thigeadh  1  a  mach  as  an  eaglais.
Agus  cho  luath  is  a  thainig  i  a  mach,  ghlaodh  esan;  "Mèirle,  mèirle,
nièirle."  Sheall  ise  ma'n  cuairt,  ach  cha  b'  urrainn  di  aithneachadh  cia
as  a  bha  n  guth  a  tighinn,  's  dh  fhalbh  i  dachaidh.  Ruith  esan  rathad
ath-ghiorra,  's  bha  e  aig  an  tigh  air  thoiseach  oirre,  's  bhae  na  shuidh
e  a  stitih  taobh  an  teine  tra  a  thainig  i  dachaidh.  Dh  fharraid  e  di,
cia-de  an  sgeul  a  fhuair  i  ?  Thubhairt  ise,  nach  d-fhuair  i  sgeul  air
bitli,  ach  gu  'm  b'e  mèirle,  mèirle,  mèirle,  a'  chiad  chainnt  a  chual'  i
tra  thainig  i  a  mach  as  an  eaglais.  Thubhairt  esan,  gu  'm  b'e  sin  an
ealdhainn  a  bhitheadh  aigeasan,  s  thubhairt  ise  mar  a  b'  abhaist  di
a  ghradh.  "  Is  e  is  deireadh  dhuit  a  bhith  air  do  chrocbadh  aig  droch-
aid Bhaile-cliabh  an  Eirinn."  An  ath  latha  smnaintich  a  mhathair,
fhun  nach  deanadh  ni  air  bith  tuille  gnothach  le  a  mac,  ach  e  a  bhith
ann  na  mhèirlach,  gu  'm  feuchadh  i  ri  oide-ionnsaich  math  fliaotuinn
da.  Agus  chaidh  i  a  dh  ionnsaidh  gadaiche  dubh  Achalòine,  meirl-
each  anbharra  seolta,  a  bha  ann  'san  hite  sin.  Agus  ged  a  bha  fios
aca  gu  'n  robh  e  ri  goid,  cha  robh  iad  a  faotuinn  doigh  air  bith
air  beireachd  air.  Dh'  fharraid  a'  bhantrach  do  'n  ghadaiche  dhubh
an  gabhadh  e  an  gille-carrach  a  mac  gus  a  ghadachd  ionn^achadh
dha.  Thubhairt  an  gadaiche  dubh,  ma  bha  e  "na  ghille  tapaidh  gu  'n
gabhadh,  agus  ma  bha  doigh  air  rnèirleach  a  dheanamh  dheth,  gu
'n  deanadh  esan  e,  agus  chaidh  cumhnant  a  dheanamh  eadar  an
gadaiche  dubh,  a  's  an  gille-carrach.  Tra  bha  an  gille-carrach  mac  na
bantraich  a  deanamh  deis  gu  dol  chun  a'  ghaduiche  dhuibh,  bha  a
mhathair  a  toirt  chomhairlean  air,  agus  thuirt  i  ris.  "  Is  ann  an
aghaidh  mo  thoil-sa  a  tha  thu  a'  dol  thun  na  mèirle,  agus  tha  mi  ag


34°  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TxVLKS.

innse  dhuit,  gur  è  is  deireatlh  dhuit  a  bhith  air  do  chrochach  aig
drophaid  Bhaile-cliabh  an  Eirinn."  Acli  Chaidh  an  gille  carrach
dachaidh  thun  a'  gliadaiche  dhuibh.

Bha  an  gadaiche  dubh  a  tabhairt  na  h-uile  foghlum  a  dh  fhaodadh
e  do  'n  ghille-charradi  air  m^ rle  a  dheanamb.  Bhitheadh  e  ag  innse
dh'a  ma  'n  t-seolt^cbd  a  oil'  fheumadh  e  a  dheanamb,  gus  an
coram  fbaotuinn  air  rud  a  gboid.  Agus  tra  bha  leis  a'  ghadaicbe
dhubh,  gu  'n  robh  an  gille-carrach  gle  mbath  air  fhoghlum,  gu  e  a
bhith  air  a  thoirt  a  mach  leis,  bhitheadh  e  ga  thoirt  a  mach  leis  gu
goid  a  dheanamb.  Agus  latha  do  na  laithean  sin  thubhairt  an  gad-
uiche  dubh,  ri  a  gbille.

"  Tha  sinn  gle  fhada  mar  so,  is  fbeudar  duinn  dol  a  dheanamh
rudaiginn ;  tha  tuathanach  beartach  dliitb  dhuinn,  agus  tlia  moran
air^id  aige  'na  chiste,  is  e  a  cheannaich  na  bha  do  chrodh  ri  reic  ann
'san  duthaich,  agus  thug  e  chun  na  faidhir  iad,  's  chreic  e  iad,  tha  an
t-airsiod  aige  'na  chiste,  agus  'se  so  an  t-am  gu  bhith  aige,  ma'n  teid
na  daoine  a  phaidh  air  son  an  cuid  cruidh,  s  mar  teid  sinn  a  dh  iarr-
aidb  an  airgiod  an  ceart-uair,  tra  a  tha  e  cruinn  ri  cheile,  cha  'n  fhaigh
sinn  an  coram  ciadainn  a  rithis."

Bha  an  gille-carrach  oho  toileach  ris  fein.  Dh  flialbh  iad  chun  an
taigh  'us  fhuairiad  a  stiuh  aig  tighinn  na  h-oidhche,  agus  chaidh  iad
an  aird  air  an  fharadh,  's  chaidh  iad  am  fallach  gu  h-ard  ann  an  sin.
Agus  is  è  oidhche  shamhnadh  a  bha  'nn,  agus  chruinnich  moran  do
fheadhainn  a  stigh  a  ghleidheadh  na  samhuinn  gu  cridheil  mar  a  b"
abhaist  doibh.  Shuidh  iad  combla,  agus  bha  iad  a  seinn  oran,  a  's
ri  aighear,  agus  a'  losgadh  nan  cno,*  agus  ri  abhachd.

Bha  an  gille-carrach  a  gabhail  fadail  nach  robh  a  chuideachd  a
sgaoileadh,  dh'eirich  e  's  chaidh  e  sios  do'n  bhathaich,  's  dh  fhuasgail  e


•  One  of  the  amusements  wliich  highland  people  used  to  enter-
tain themselves  with,  is  what  they  call  burning  nuts  on  hallow-eve,
the  last  night  of  October.  A  party  of  young  people  would  collect  to-
gether in  one  house  for  to  make  merry  ;  one  of  their  amu.«ements  was,
they  would  propose  a  marriage  between  some  lad  and  lass,  and  they
would  name  a  nut  for  each  of  them.  The  two  nuts  would  be  placed
beside  each  other  in  the  fiie.  If  the  two  nuts  burned  together,  and
blazed  over  each  other,  tliat  was  called  a  good  omen ;  it  was  ij  sign
tliat  the  party  for  whom  the  nuts  was  named  were  to  be  married
ver,  and  live  happy  together;  Ijut  if  either  of  the  nuts  puffed,  or  flew
awaj",  that  was  a  sign  that  the  person  for  whom  that  nut  was  named
was  proud,  and  would  not  accept  of  the  otl:er  party.


A  GHILLE  CHARAICH  MAC  NA  BANTEACH.  34I

na  naisg  far  ainhaichean  a  chruidh,  's  thill  e  's  chaidli  e  air  an  fharadh
a  rithis.  Tlioisich  au  crodh  air  purradh  a  cheile  ann  'sa  bhathaicli,
's  air  raoiceadh,  riiidh  na  bha  ann  sa  chearnadh,  a  chumail  a'  chruidh
o  'oheile  gus  an  rachadh  an  ceangal  a  rithis.  An  tioin  a  bha  iadsan
a  deananih  sin,  chaidh  an  gille-carrach  sios  do  'n  chearnadh,  's  ghoid
e  leis  na  cno  'n,  's  chaidh  e  an  aird  air  an  fharadh  a  rithisd,  agus
luidh  e  air  ciilamh  a  ghadaiche  dhuibh.

Bha  seiche  mhor  leathraich  aig  ciilamh  a  ghadaiche  dhuibh,  's
bha  snathad  agus  snathainn  aig  a  ghille-cliarrach  agus  dh  fhuaigh  e
iomall  cota  a  ghadaiche  dhuibh,  ris  an  t-seiche  leathraich  a  bha
aig  a  chiilamh,  agus  tra  thainig  muinntir  an  taighe  air  an  ais  do  n
chearnadli  a  rithisd,  bha  na  cno  'n  aca  air  falbh,  agus  bha  iad  ag
iarraidh  nan  cno  'n,  agus  shaoil  iad  gu  'm  b'e  cuid-eiginn  a  thainig  a
stigh  a  dheanamh  chleas  orra,  a  thug  air  falbh  na  cno  'n,  agus  shuidh
iad  aig  taobh  an  teine  gu  sàmhach  tosdach.

Thubhairt  an  gille-carrach  ris  a  ghadaiche  dhubh,  "  Cnacaidh  mi
cno."

"  Cha  chnac,  thuirt  an  gadaiche-dubli,  cluiunidh  iad  thu  's  theid
beireachd  oirnn."

"  Thubhairt  an  gille-carrach,  cha  robh  mi-fein  riamh  roimh  oidh-
che  shamhnadh  gu  'n  chno  a  chnacadh."     Agus  clinachd  e  te.

Chualaan  fheadhainn  a  bha 'nan  suidhe  's  a  chearnadh  e,  's  thubh-
airt iad,  "  Tha  cuid-eiginn  gu  h-ard  air  an  fharadh,  a  cnacadh  nan
cno  'n  again,  theid  sinn  agus  beiridh  sinn  orra."

Tra  chuala  an  gadaiche  dubh  sin,  leum  e  far  an  fharaidh,  's  ruith
e  a  mach,  's  an  t-s-iche  an  slaodadh  ris.  Theich  an  gadaiche-dubh  's
muinntir  an  taighe  as  a  dheigh,  's  bha  e  astar  inor  o'n  tigh  ma'n  d'
fiiuair  e  an  t-seiche  a  reubadh  deth  agus  a  fagail.  Ach  an  tioni  a  bha
muinntir  an  taighe  a  ruith  a  ghadaiche-dhuibh,  thainig  an  gille-carr-
ach a  nuas  far  an  fharaidh,  chaidh  e  air  feadh  an  taighe,  dh'  amais  e
air  a  chiste  far  an  robh  an  t-or  's  ,an  t-airgiod  aig  an  tuathanach  ga
ghleidheadh  dh  fliosgail  e  a  chiste,  s  thug  e  a  mach  aiste  na  builg  ann
'san  robh  an  t-airgiod  a  bha  innte,  agus  thug  e  inute,  agus  thug  e  leis
eallach  do  'n  aran  's  do'n  im  's  do'n  chaise,  a's  dona  h-uilo  ni  a  b'  fhearr
na  cheile  a  fhuair  e  a  stigh.  Agus  bha  esan  air  falbh,  ma  'n  d'  thainig
muinntir  an  taighe  air  an  ais  o  bhith  a  ruith  a  ghadaiche  dhuibh.

Nuair  a  rainig  an  gadaiche-dubh  dachaidh,  's  nach  robh  m  air
bith  aige,  thubhairt  a  bhean  ris,  "  cia-mar  a  chaidh  fairsleachadh  ort
air  an  turus  so?"

An  sin  dh  innis  an  gadaiche-dubh  a  sgeul  fein,  agus  bha  fearg
mor air  ris  a  ghille-charrach,  'sea boideachadh,  gu 'n  deanadh  e dioltas
tra  gheibheadh  e  coram  air.    Aig  ceann  uine  ghoirid  na  dheigh  sin


342  WEST  niGHLAXD  TALES.

thainig  an  gille-carrach  a  stigh,  agus  eallach  air.  Thubhairt  bean  a
gliadaiche  dhuibh,  "  Ach  tha  duil  agara  gur  tusa  meirleach  is
fhearr."

Cha  dubhairt  an  gadaiche-dubh  diog,  gus  gu'n  do  leig  an  gille-
carach  fhaicinn  na  builg  a  bha  aige  Ian  do  or  s  do  airgiod,  an  sin
thubhairt  an  gadaiche-dubh  "  Ach  bu  tii  an  gille  tapaidh!"

Kinn  iad  da  leth  air  an  or,  's  air  an  airgiod,  's  fliuair  an  gadaiche
dubh  an  darna  leth,  agus  an  gille  carrach  an  leth  eile.  Tra  a  cliun-
naic  bean  a  ghadaiche  dhuibh  an  roinn  a  thainig  oirre  thubhairt  i,
"  Is  tu  t'ein  am  meirleach  fiachail,  "  s  bha  tiiille  meas  aic  air  na
Jheigh  sin  na  bha  aic  air  a  ghadaiche  dhubh  e  fein."

Aig  ceann  beagan  sheachdainnean  na  dheigh  sin,  blia  banais  gu
bhith  ann  sa  coinihearnachd  agus  b'  èfasan  na  duthcha,  tra  rachadh
feadhainn  a  bhitheadh  saoibhir  a  chuireadh.gu'n  cuireadh  iad  tabhart-
as  a  thaobhaiginn  adh  ionnsaidh  muinntirna  bainse.  Bha  tuathanach
beartach  ann  achaidh  a  chuireadh,  agus  dh'  iarr  e  air  a  bhuachaille  aige
e  a  dhol  ris  a  mhonadh,  'sea  thoirt  dachaidh  molt  air  son  muinntir
na  bainse.  Chaidh  am  buachaille  ris  a  mhonadh,  's  fbuair  e  am  molt
's  bha  e  a  del  dachaidh  leis,  's  e  aige  air  a  dhruim,  a  nuair  a  bha  e  a
dol  seachad  air  tigh  a  ghadaiche  dhuibh.  Thubhairt  an  gille  carrach,
ri  a  mhaighstir  "  Cia-de'  an  geall  a  chuireas  tu  nach  goid  mi  am  molt
far  druim  an  fhir  sin,  ma  'n  niig  e  an  tigh  fhathasd?"  Thubhairt  an
gadaiche  dubh,  "  Cuiridh  mi  geall  ciad  marg  nach  urrainn  duit,  cia-
raar  a  ghoideadh  tu  an  rud  a  tha  air  a  dhruim !"

"  Cia  air  bhith  mar  a  m  mi  e  feuchaidh  mi  ris,"  orsa  an  gille-
carrach.

"  Ma  ta  ma  ni  thu  a,  thuirt  an  gadaiche  dubh,  bheir  mise  dhuit
ciad  marg."  "  Is  bargain  e,"  orsa  an  gille  carrach,  a's  le  sin  dh  fhalbh
e  an  deigh  a  bhuachaille.  Bha  aig  a  bhuachaille  ri  doltroimh  choille,
agus  ghabh  an  gille  carrach  falacha-talmhainte  air,  gus  gu'n  d'  fhuair
e  air  thoiseach  air,  agus  shalaich  e  'na  bhroig,  's  chuir  e  a  bhròg  air
an  rathad  air  thoiseach  air  a  bhuachaille,  's  chaidh  e  fein  am  fall-
ach.  An  uair  a  tiiainig  am  buachaille  air  aghaidh,  a's  a  chunnaic  e  a
bhròg  thubhairt  e,  "  Ach  tha  thu  salach  's  ged  do  tha,  na  'm  bith-
eadh  do  leth-bhreac  aim  ghlanainn  thu,"  's  chaidh  e  seachad.

Thog  an  gille  carrach  a'  bhrog,  's  ruidh  e  ma  'n  cuairt,  's  bha  e  air
thoiseach  air  a'  bhuachaille,  's  chuir  e  bhrog  eile  air  an  rathad  air
thoiseach  air.  Thubhairt  e  ris  fhein,  "ach  tha  ann  an  sin  lethbhreac
na  broig  e  salache."

Chuir  e  am  molt  air  lar,  agus  thubhairt  e  ris-fein,  "  Tillidh  mi  an
nis  's  gheibh  mi  a  bhrog  shalach,  's  glanaidh  mi  i,  's  bithidh  da  bhroig
mhath  agam  air  son  mo  shaoireach," 's  ruith  e  guluathairais.  Ruith


A   GRILLE  CHARAICH  MAC  XA  BANTRACH.  343

an  gille-carrach  gu  luath  's  glioid  e  leis  am  molt,  's  thug  e  leis  an  an  da
bhroig,  's  chaidh  e  dachaidh  chun  a  mhaighistir,  s  fhuair  e  a  chiad  marg
o  a  mhaighistir.

Chaidh  am  buachaille  dachaidh,  's  dh'  innis  e  do  a  mhaighistir
fein  mar  a  thachair  da.  Throid  a  mhaigliistir  ris  a  bhuachaille.  An
ath  latha  chuir  an  tuathanach  a  rithis  ris  a  mhonadh  e  a  dh-ianaidh
eirionnach  an  aite  a  mhuilt  a  chaill  e.  Dh  fhalbh  am  buachaille  ris  a
mhonadh,  "s  fhuair  e  greim  air  eirionnach,  cheangail  se  e,  chuir  e  air
a  dhruim  e,  's  dh-fhalbh  e  gu  dol  dachaidh  leis.  Chunnaic  an  gille-
carrach  e,  's  chaidh  e  do'u  choille,  's  bha  e  an  sin  air  thoiseach  air  a
bhuachaille,  's  chaidh  e  am  falach,  's  thoisich  e  air  mèilich  coltach
ris  a'  mliolt.  Shaoil  am  buachaille  gu  'm  b'e  am  molt  a  bha  ann,  's
chuir  e  deth  an  t-eirionnach,  's  dh  fhag  se  aig  taobh  an  rathaid  e,  's
chaidh  e  a  dh  iarraidh  a  mhuilt.  An  tiora  a  bha  am  buachaille  ag
iarraidh  a'  mhoilt'  chaidh  an  gille  carrach  's  ghoid  e  leis  an  t-eir-
ionnach,  's  dh  fhag  se  aig  taobh  an  rathaid  e,  's  chaidh  e  dachaidh
li-ii  chun  a,  ghadaiche  dhuibh.  Tra  chaidh  am  buachaille  air  ais  far
an  d  fhKg  e  an  t-eirionnach,  bha  an  t-eirionnach  air  falbh,  cha  robh
an  t-eirionnach  ann,  dh  iarr  e  air  son  an  eirionnach  ann.  Dh  iarr  e  air
son  an  eirionnach,  's  a  nuair  nach  b'urrainn  d'a  an  t-eirionnach  fhaot-
uinn,  chaidh  e  dachaidh  's  dh  innis  e  do  a  mhaighistir  mar  a  dh  eirich
d'  a,  agus  throid  a  mhaighistir  ris,  ach  cha  robh  comas  air.  An  ath
latha  (ih  iarr  an  tuathanach  air  a  bhuachaille  aige,  e  a  dhol  ris  a
mhonadh,  agus  e  a  thoirt  dachaidh  damh,  e  a  bhith  cinnteach  nach
cailleadh  se  a.  Chaidh  am  buachaille  ris  a  mhonadh,  's  fhuair  e  damh
math  reamhar,  's  bha  e  ga  iomain  dachaidh.  Chunnaic  an  gille-
carrach  e,  s'  thubhairt  e  ris  a'  ghadaiche  dhubh,  "  Tiugainn,  's  theid
sinn  a  dh  fheuchainn  ris  an  damh  a  ghoid  o'n  bhuachaille,  tra  a
bhitheas  e  a  dol  troimh  an  choille  leis."

Dh'  fhalbh  an  gadaiche  dubh  as  an  gille-carrach  do  'n  choille  air
thoiseach  air  a  bhuachaille.  Agus  tra  bha  am  buachaille  a  dol  troirah
an  choille  leis  an  damh,  bha  an  gadaiche  dubh  an  aon  aite,  sea
raèailich,  "s  an  gille-carrach  an  kite  eile,  sea  niigeartaich  coltach  ri
gabhar.  Chuala  am  buachaille  iad,  's  shaoil  e  gu  'm  faigheadh  e  am
molt,  agus  an  t-eirionnach  a  rithisd.  Cheangail  e  an  damh  ricraoibh,
's  chaidh  e  air  feadh  na  coille,  ag  iarraidh  a'  mhuilt  agus  an  eirrionn-
aich.  S  dh  iarr  e  iad  gus  gu  'n  robh  e  sgith.  An  tiomsa  bha  esan  ag
iarraidh  a  mhuilt 's  an  eirionnaich,  chaidh  an  gille-carach  's  ghoid  e
leis  an  damh  's  thug  e  leis  dachaidh  e  chun  tigh  aghaduiche  dhuibh.
Chaidh  an  gaduiche  dubh  dachaidh  as  a  dheigh,  's  mharbh  iad  an
damh,  's  chub-  iad  am  fallach  e,  's  bha  maragan  math  aig  bean  a  ghad-
uiche  dhuibh  an  oidhche  sin.     Tra  thainig  am  buachaille  air  ais  thun


344  WEST  HIGHL.SND  TALES.

na  craoiljh,  far  an  d'  fhag  e  au  damh  ceaagailte,  cha  robh  an  damh
ann.  Dh'  aithnich  e  gu  'n  deach  an  damh  a  ghoid,  ch.iidh  e  dachaidh
's  dh  innÌ3  e  do  a  mhaighistir  mar  a  thachair,  agus  throid  a  mhaigh-
istir  ris,  ach  cha  rohh  comas  air.

An  ath  latha  dh'  iarr  a  mhaighistir  air  a  bhuachaille  aige  e  a
dhol  ris  a  mhonadh,  'sea  thoirt  dachaidh  molt,  's  gu  "n  e  ga  leigidh  far
a  dhruim  idir,  gus  gu  'n  tigeadh  e  dachaidh,  cia  air  bith  a  chitheadh
na  a  chluiuneadh  e.  Dh'  fhalbh  am  buachaille,  's  chaidh  e  ris  a
mhonadh,  's  fhuair  e  am  molt,  's  chaidh  aige  air  a  mholt  sin  a  thoirt
dachaidh.

Chabh  an  gadaiche-dubh  's  an  gille-carrach  air  an  aghaidh  ri  gold
gus  gu  'n  robh  moran  airgid  aca,  agus  smuaintich  iad  gu  'm  b'  fhearr
doibh  dròbh  a  cheannach,  's  dolchun  faidhir  leo  gu'n  creic,agus  gu  'n
saoileadh  feadhainn  gu'm  b'ann  air  an  drbbh  aireachd  a  rinn  iad  an
t-airgiod.  Chaidh  an  dithis  agus  cheannaich  iad  drobh  mor  cruidh.
Agus  chaidh  iad  a  dh'  ionnsaidh  faidhir  a  bha  fad  air  astar  leo.
Chreic  iad  an  drobh,  's  fhuair  iad  an  t-airgiod  air  an  son,  's  dh'
fhalbh  iad  gu  dol  dachaidh.  Tra  a  bha  iad  air  an  rathad,  chunnaic
iad  croich  air  mullach  cnoic  agus  thubhairt  an  gille-carach  ris  a'
ghadaiche  dhubh,  "  Tiugainn  an  aird  is  gu  'm  faic  sin  a'  chroich,  tha
feadhainn  ag  radh,  gur  h-i  a'  chroich  is  deireadh  do  na  mèirlich  co-
dhiubh."

Chaidh  iad  an  aird  far  an  robh  a'  chroich,  's  bha  iad  a'  sealltuinn  ma
'n-cuairt  oirre.  Thubhairt  an  gille-carach,  "  Nach  fhaodamaid  fheuch-
ainn  cia-de'  an  seòrsa  bais  a  tha  ann  sa'  chròchadh,  gu  m  bi  fios
againn  cia-de'  a  tha  ann  'sa  chròchadh,  gu  'm  bi  tios  againn  cia-de'  a
a  tha  ronihainn  ma  bheirear  oirnn  ri  gadachd;  feuchaidh  mi-fein  an
toiseach  e."

Chuir  an  gille-carach  an  cord  ma  amhaich  fein,  's  thubhairt  e  ris
a'  ghadaiche-dhubh.  "  So  tarruing  an  aird  mi,  's  tra  bhitheas  mi  sgith
gu  h-ard  crathaidh  mi  mo  chas  'n,  's  an  sin  leig  thusa  a  nuas  mi."

Tharruing  an  gaduiche-dubh  an  cord,  's  thog  e  an  gille-carach  an
aird  far  an  talmhainte,  agus  aig  ceann  seal  beag  chrath  an  gille
carach  a  chas'n,  's  leig  an  gaduiche-dubh  a  nuas  e.

Chuir  an  gille  carach  an  cord  far  amhaich,  's  thubhairt  e  ris  a'
ghadaiche-dhubh,  "  Cha  d'  fheuch  thu-fhein  m  riamh,  a  tha  cho  eibh-
inn  ris  a'  chrochadh,  na  'm  feuchadh  tu  aon  uair  e  cha  bhitheadh  eagal
ort  romh  'n  chrochadh  tuille,  bha  raise  a  crathaidh  mo  chasan  leis  an
oibhinneas  's  chrathadh  tusa  do  chasan  leis  an  aoibhneas  cuideachd
na  m  bithedh  tu  gu  li-ard."

Thuirt  an  gaduiche  dubh,  "  Feuchaidh  mise  e  cuideachd,  's  gu  'n
bith  fios  agam  co  ris  a"s  coltach  e."


A  GHILLE  CHARAICH  MAC  NA  BANTRACH,  345

"  Dean,"  orsa  gille-carach,  "  's  tra  a  bLitheas  tu  sgith  gu  h-ard,
(lean  fead  's  leigidh  mise  an  nuas  thu."

Chuir  an  gadaiche-dubh  an  cord  ma  anihaich,  's  tbarruing  an
gille-carach  an  aird  e,  's  tra  fhuair  an  gille-carach  gu  'n  robh  an
gaduiche-dubh  gu  h-ard  ris  a'  chroich,  thuirt  e  ris.  "  An  nis  tra
bbitheas  tu  ag  iarraidh  a  nuas  dean  fead,  's  ma  tha  thu  toilichte  far
am  bheil  thu,  crath  do  clias  'n."

Tra  a  bha  an  gadaiche  dubh  seal  beag  gu  h-ard,  thòisich  e  air  crath-
adh  a  chasan,  's  air  breabadh,  's  theireadh  an  gille-carach,  "  0  !  nach
aighearach  thu,  nach  aighearach  thu.  O,  nach  aighearach  thu,  tra
bhithis  leat  gu  'm  bheil  thu  gle  fhada  gu  h-ard  dean  fead."

Ach  cha  do  rinn  an  gaduiche-dubh  fead  fhathast;  cheangail  an
gille-carach  an  cord  ri  iochdar  crann  na  croiche,  gus  gu  'n  robh  an
gaduiche-dubh  marbh.  An  sin,  chaidh  an  gille-carach  far  an  robh
e,  's  thug  e  as  a  phbc  an  t-airgiod,  's  thubhairt  se  ris,  '  An  nis  fhun
nach  eil  feum  agadsa  air  an  airgiod  so  na  is  faide,  gabhaidh  mise
ciiram  deth  air  do  shon."  'S  dh  flialbh  e  's  dh  fhag  '^  an  gaduiche-dubh,
a  crochadh  ann  an  sin.  An  sin  chaidh  e  dachaidh  far  an  robh  tigh
a  ghaduiche  dhuibh.  S  dh'  fharraid  bean  a  ghaduiche-duibh  deth,
c'aite  an  robh  a  mhaighistir?  Thuirt  an  gille-carach,  "  Dh  fhag
mise  e  far  an  robh  e  air  ardachadh  os-ceann  an  talaimh.'  Dh  fharraid,
agus  dh'  fharraid  bean  a'  ghaduiche  deth  ma  dheidhinn  a  fir,  gus  ma
dheireadh  gu  'n  d'  innis  e  d'  i,  ach  thuirt  e  rithe  gu  'm  posadh  e-fhein
i.  Tra  chuala  ise  sin  ghlaodh  i  gu  'n  do  mharbh  an  gille-carach  a
mhaighistir  is  nach  robh  ann  ach  mearlach.  Tra  chuala  an  gille-
carach  sin  theich  e.  Chaidh  an  toir  a  chuir  air  a  dheigh,  ach  fhuair
esan  dol  am  falach  ann  an  uaimh,  's  chaidh  an  toir  seachad  air.  Bha
e  'san  uainih  fad  na  h-oidhche,  agus  an  ath  latha  chaidh  se  rathad
eile,  's  fhuair  e  teicheadh  do  dh'  Eirinn.

Rainig  e  tigh  saoir,  's  ghlaodh  se  aig  an  dorus,  "  Leigibh  a  stigh
mi."

"  Co  thusa?"  orsa  an  saor.

"  Tha  saor  math,  ma  tha  a  leithid  a  dtiith  ort,"  orsa  an  gille
carach.

Dh  fhosgail  an  saor  an  dorus  's  leig  e  a  stigh  an  gille-carach,  'n  s
thoisich  an  gille-carach  air  obair  air  an  t-saorsaineachd  comhla  ris
an  t-saor.

Tra  a  bha  an  gille-carach  latha  na  dhà  anns  an  tigh  aca,  thug  e
sealladh  a  null,  's  sealladh  an  nail  air  feadh  an  taighe  's  thubhairt  e,
"  0  chòin  is  bochd  an  tigh  agaibh  a's  tigh-taisg  an  righ  cho  dluth
oirbh."

"  Cia-de  dheth  sin?  "  orsa  an  saor.


34^  WEST  HIGHLAND  TA-LES.

"  Tha,''  arsa  an  gille  carach,  "  gu  'm  faodadh  sibh  am  pailteas
fhaotuinn  as  tigli  stòir  an  righ  na  'm  bitheadh  sibh  fein  gle  thapaidh."

Theireadh  an  saor's  a  bhean,  "  Chuireadh  iad  annpriosan  sinnna
'n  toisicheadh  sinn  air  a  leithid  sinn."

Bha  an  gille-carach  daonnan  ag  r;idli  gu  'm  bu  cbòir  dòibh  dol  a
bhristeadh  a  stigh  do  thigh-taisg  an  ligh,  's  gu  'm  faighcadh  iad  am
pailteas  ann,  ach  cha  rachadh  an  saor  leis.  Ach  thug  an  gille-carach
leis  pairt  do  dh'  aofhuinn  an  t-saoir,  a's  chaidh  e  fhein  is  bhrisd
e  a  stigh  do  thigh-taisg  an  righ,  's  tlum-  e  leis  ealach  do'n  ini  's  do  'n
chaise  aig  an  righ,  's  thug  e  do  thigh  an  t-saoir  e.  Thaitinn  na
gnothaiehen  gu  math  ri  bean  an  t-saoir,  's  bha  i  toileach  gu  'n  rachadh
am  fear  aic'  e  fhein  ann  an  ath  oidbche.  Chaidh  an  saor  e-fhein  le  a
ghille  an  ath  oidhche,  's  fhuair  iad  a  stigh  do  thigh-taisg  an  righ,  's
thug  iad  leo  eallachan  mora  do  gach  m  a  b'  fhearr  a  thaitinn  riu
do  na  bha  stigh  ann  an  tigh  taisg  an  righ.  Ach  dh'  ionndrainn
muinntir  an  righ  an  t-im  's  an  caise,  's  na  rudan  eile  a  chaidh  a
thoirt  as  an  tigh-thaisg,  's  dh  innis  iad  do  'n  righ  mar   a  thachair.

Ghabh  an  righ  comhairle  an  t-seanaghail  ma  'n  doigh  a  b'  fhearr
gu  beireachd  air  na  meirleich.  Agus  is  è  a  chomhairle  a  thug  an
seanghall  orra,  iad  a  chuir  togsaid  Ian  do  phic  bhog  fo'n  toll  far  an
robh  iad  a'  tighinn  a  stigh.  Chaidh  sin  a  dheanamh.  Agus  an  ath
oidhche  chaidh  an  gille-carach  's  a  mhaighistir  a  bhrisdeadh  a  stigh
do  thigh-taisg  an  righ.  Chuir  an  gille-carrach  a  mhaighistir  a
stigh  air  thoiseach  air.  Agus  chaidh  am  maighistir  sios  anns  a'
phic  bhog  gu  a  theis-meadhoin,  's  cha  n  fhaigheadh  e  as  a  rithisd,
Chaidh  an  gille  carach  sios,  's  chuir  e  cas  air  gach  gualann  aig  a
mhaighistir,  's  chuir  e  a  rnach  da  eallach  do  'n  im  's  do  "n  chaise  aig
an  righ  air  an  toll,  's  an  uair  ma  dheireadh  tra  a  bha  e  a  tighinn  a
macli  sgiull  e  an  ceann  far  a  mhaighistir,  's  thug  e  leis  an  ceann,  's
dh  fhag  e  a  cholunn  anns  an  togsaid  phic.  A's  chaidh  e  dachaich
leis  an  im  's  leis  a'  chaise,  agus  thug  e  dachaidh  an  ceann,  agus
dh'  adhlaic  e  anns  a  ghiirradh  e.

Tra  a  chaidh  muinntir  an  righ  a  stigh  do  'n  tigh-thaisg  fhuair  iad
colunn  gu  'n  cheann  anns  an  togsaid  phic.  Ach  cha  b'  urrainn  doibh
aithneachadh  co  e.  Dh'  flieuch  iad  am  faigheadh  iad  h-aon  air  bith
a  dh  aithneachadh  air  aodach  e,  ach  bha  aodach  comhdaichte  le  pic,
air  doigh  is  nach  b'  urrainn  doibh  aithneachadh.  Dh  fharraid  an  righ
comhairle  an  t-sheanghal  ma  dheidliinn.  Agus  ise  a  chomhairle  a
thug  an  seanaghall  orra  iad  a  chuir  na  coluinn  an  aird  air  bharr
shleaghan,  's  na  saiglidearan  gu  a  giullan  o  bhaile  gu  baile,  a  sheall
am  faiceadh  iad  h-aon  air  bith  a  ghabhadh  truadhas  deth,  na  a  dh'
fheuchainn  an  cluinneadh  iad  a  h-aon  air  bith  a  dheanamh  glaodh


A  GHILLE  CUARAICH  MAC  NA  BANTRACH.  347

gointe  tra  chitheadh  iad  e,  na  ged  nach  faiceadh,  gu  tn  biiheadh  iad
ealanih  gu  glaodh  gointe  a  dheanamh,  tra  bhitheadli  na  saighdearan  a
dol  seachad  leis.  Cliaidh  a  choluinn  a  thoirt  as  an  Togsaid  phic,  's  a
cuir  air  bharr  nan  sleagbaii,  's  bha  na  saighdearan  g'a  ghiiilan  an
aird  air  bharr  nan  sleagh;in  fada  crannach  aca,  's  iad  a  dol  0  bhaile  gu
baile  leis.  Agus  tra  bha  iad  a  dol  seach  tigh  an  t-saoir,  rinn  bean
an  t-saoir  sgreucli  ghointe,  agus  ghradi;hearr  an  gille-carach  e-fein
leis  an  tàl,  's  theireadh  e  ri  bean  an  t-saoir,  "  Cha  'n  'eil  an  gearradh
cho  dona  is  a  tha  thu  a  smuainteachadh."

Thainig  an  ceannard  's  cnid  do  na  saighdearan  a  stigh  agus  dh'
fharraid  iad,  "  Cia  de  a  dh  aithrich  bean  an  taighe."  Thubbairt  an
gille-carach,  "  Tha  gu  'm  bhei!  mise  air  gearradh  mo  choise  leis  an
tal,  agus  tha  eagal  aice  romh  fhuil."  Agus  theiridli  e  ri  bean  an  t-
saoir,  "  Na  bitheadh  na  h-uibhir  eagail  ort,  leigheisidh  e  na  is  luaith
na  tha  thu  a  smaointeachadh."

Shaoil  na  saighdearan  gu  'm  b'e  an  gille-carach  an  saor,  agus  gu
'ni  e  a  bhean  a  bha  aig  an  t-saor  bean  a  ghil'.e-charaich,  agus  dh'
fhabh  iad  a  mach,  's  chaidh  iad  0  bhaile  gu  balle,  ach  cha  d'  fhuair  iad
a  h-aon  tuille,  ach  banntrach  an  t-saoir  i  fhein  a  rinn  glaodh  na
sgreuch  tra  a  bha  iad  a  tighinn  seachad  orra.

Thug  iad  a  cholunn  dachaidh  chun  tigh  an  righ.  Agus  ghabh  an
righ  comhairle  eile  on  t-seanaghall  aige,  's  b'  e  in  a  cholunn  a  chroch-
adh  ri  cranu  ann  an  kite  follaiseach,  agus  saighdearan  a  chuir  a  thabh-
airt  aire  air  nach  tugadh  gin  air  falbh  e,  as  na  saighdeairean  gu  a
bhith  a  shealltinn,  an  tigeadh  feadhainn  air  bith  an  rathad  a  ghabh-
adh  truaigheas  na  doilghios  deth.

Thainig  an  gille-carach  seachad  orra,  agus  chunnaic  se  iad,  chaidh
e  agus  fhuair  e  each,  agus  chuir  e  buideal  uisge-bheatha,airgachtaobh
do  'u  each,  ann  an  sachd,  's  chaidh  e  seach  na  saighdearan  leis,  's  e
mar  gu  'm  bitheadh  e  a'  fuireachd  am  falach  orra.  Shaoil  na  saighd-
earan gu  'm  b'  ann  a  thug  se  rudaiginn  air  falbh  orra,  na  gu  'n  robh
rudaiginn  aige  nach  bu  choir  d'a  a  bhith  aige,  agus  ruith  cuid  diubh
air  a  dheigh,  's  bheir  iad  air  an  t-seann  each  s  air  an  uisge-bheatha,
ach  theich  an  gille-carach,  's  dh  fhag  e  an  seann  each  's  an  t  uisge-
beatha  aca.

Thug  na  saighdearan  an  t-each  's  na  buideail  uisge-bheath'  air
ais  far  an  robh  a'  choluim  an  crochadh  ris  a'  chrann.  Sheall  iad  cia-
de  a  bha  anns  na  buideail,  's  tra  thuig  iad  gur  ae  uisge-beatha  a
bha  ann  fhuair  iad  corn,  's  thi^ich  iad  air  ol,  gus  ma  dheireadh,  gu
'n  robh  na  h-uile  h-aon  diubh  air  mhisg,  's  luidh  's  ihaodil  iad.  Tra
chunnaic  an  gille-carach  gu  "n  robh  na  saighdeairean,  'nan  luidh  's  nan
cadal  air  a  mhisg,  thill  e  's  thug  e  a  nuas  a'  cholunn  far  a'  chroinn.


34^  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

chuir  e  crosgach  air  druim  an  eich  e  's  thug  e  dachaidh  e,  chaidh  e  an
sin  agus  dh'  adlilaic  e  a'  cholunn  aims  a  ghàradh  far  an  robh  an
ceann.

Tra  a  dhiiisg  na  saighdearan  as  an  cadal,  bha  a  cholunn  air  a  goid
air  falbh.  Cha  robh  aca  air  ach  dol  's  innse  do  'n  ligh.  An  sin  ghabh
an  righ  corahairle  an  t-seanaghal.  Agus  thubhairt  an  seanaghal
riutha,  na  bha  anus  an  lathair,  Gu  'm  b'-e  a  chomhairle  doibh,  iad  a
thoirt  a  mach  muc  mhor  dhubh  a  bha  an  siod,  "s  iad  a  dh'  fhalbh
leatha  o-bhaile  gu  baile,  agus  tra  thigeadh  iad  thun  an  aite  far  am
bitheadh  a'  cholunn  adhlaicte,  gu  m  buraicheadh  i  an  aird  è.  Chaidh
iad  's  fhuair  iada  mhuc  dhubh,  's  hha  iad  a  dol  o  bhaile  gu  baile
leatha,  a  dh'  feuchainn  am  faigheadh  i  am  mach  caite  an  robh  a'  cholunn
air  a  h-adhlac.  Chaidh  iad  o'  thigh  gu  tigh  leatha,  gus  ma  dheireadh
gu'n  d'  thainig  iad  gus  an  tigh  far  an  robh  an  gille-carach  agus  bann-
trach  an  t-saoir  a  chomhnuicli.  A  nuair  a  rainig  iad,  leig  iad  a
mhuc  mapsgaoil  air  feadh  an  talmhuinn.  Thubhairt  an  gille-carach
riutha,  gu  'n  robh  e-fein  cinnteach,  gu  'm  bitheadh  paghadh  's  acras
orra,  gu  "m  b'  fhearr  doibh  dol  a  stigh  do  'n  tigh,  's  gu'm  faigheadh  iad
biadh  's  deoch,  's  iad  a  leigeil  an  sgitheas  dhiubh,  an  tiom  a  bhitheadh
a  mhuc  ag  iarraidh  ma  thimchioll  an  aite  aige-san.  Chaidh  iadsan  a
stigth,  's  dh  iarr  an  gille  carach  air  bantrach  an  t-saoir  i  a  chur  biadh
's  deoch  air  beulamh  nan  daoine.  Chuir  bantrach  an  t-saoir  biadh  's
deoch  air  bòrd,  's  chuir  i  air  am  beulamh  e,  's  an  tiom  a  bha  iadsan
ag  itheadh  am  biadh,  chaidh  an  gille  carach  a  mach  a  shealltuinn  an
deigh  na  muice,  's  blia  a  mhuc  air  amas  air  a  choluinn  anns  a  gharradh,
's  chaidh  an  gille-carach  agus  fhuair  e  sgian  mhor,  agus  ghearr  e  an
ceann  di.  Agus  dh  adlilaic  e  i-fein  a  's  a  ceann,  lamh-ris  a  choluinn
aig  an  t-saor  anns  a  gharradh.  Tra  a  thainig  an  fheadhainn  air  an
robh  ciiram  na  mule'  a  macli,  cha  robh  a  mhuc  ri  fhaicinn.  Dli  fharraid
iad  do  'n  ghille-charach  am  faca  e  i.  Thubhairt  esan  gu  'm  faca,  gu
'n  robh  a  ceann  an  aird  agus  i  ag  amharc  suas,  agus  a  dol  da  na  tri
a  cheumannan  an  drasdais  a  rithisd.  Agus  dh  fiialbh  iadsan  le  cabh-
aig  mhoir,  an  taobh  a  thubhairt  an  gille-carach  a  chaidh  a'  mhuc.
Tra  fhuair  an  gille-carach  gu  'n  deach  iadsan  as  an  t-sealladh,  chuir  e
gach  ni  air  doigh  nach  amaiseadh  iadsan  air  a  mhuic.  Chaidh  an
flieadhainn  air  an  robh  curain  na  muic  e  agus  dh  iarr  iad  i  na  h-uile
rathad  anns  am  bu  coltach  i  a  bhith.  An  sin  tra  nach  b'  urrainn
doibh  a  faotuinn,  cha  robh  aca  air  ach  dol  gu  tigh  an  righ,  agus
innse  mar  a  thachair.

An  sin  chaidh  comhairle  an  t-seanaghail  a  ghabhail  a  rithisd,
Agus  is  e  a'  chomhairle  a  thug  an  seanaghal  orra,  iad  a  chuir  nan
saighdeirean  a  mach  air  feadh  na  duthcha  air  cheithearnan,  agus  cia


A  GHILLE  CHARAICH  MAC  NA  BANTRACII.  349

aite  air  bitli  am  faigheadh  iad  muic-fbeoil,  na  cia  aite  air  bith  am  faic-
eadh  iad  muic-fheoil  ;  mar  b'-urrainn  da  n  fhcadliinn  s>ìti,  a  leigeadh
fhaicinn  cia  mar  a  fhuair  iad  a  mhuic-flieoil  a  blntheadli  aca,  gu  'ra
V  iad  sin  an  fiieadhainn  a  mbarbh  a  nihuc  's  a  rinn  na  h-uile  cron  a
chaidh  a  dheanamh.  Cliaidh  comhairle  an  t-seanaghail  a  gbabhail  's
na  saighdearan  a  chuir  a  mach  air  cbeithearnan  air  feadb  na  duthcha»
's  bha  buidheann  diubb  ann  an  tigb  banntracli  an  t-saoir  far  an  robh
an  gille-carach.  Thug  banntrach  an  t-saoir,  an  t-suipeair  do  na
saighdearan,  's  bha  cuid  do  'n  rahuic-fheoil  air  a  deanamh  deas  doibh>
agus  bha  na  saighdearan  ag  itheadh  na  muicflieoil,  agus  ga  sar  mholadh.
Thuig  an  gille-carach  cia-de'  a  bha  air  an  aire,  ach  cha  do  leig  e
air.  Chaidh  na  saighdearan  a  chuir  a  luidh  a  mach  anns  an  t-sabhal,
agus  tra  bha  iad  'nan  cadal,  chaidh  an  gille-carach  a  mach  agus
mharbh  se  iad.  An  sin  chaidh  e  cho  luath  as  a  b'  urrainn  da  o  thigh
gu  tigh  far  an  robh  na  saighdeirean  air  cheithearnan,  agus  chuir  e  an
ceill  do  mhuinntir  nan  taighean,  gu  'm  b'  ann  a  cliaidh  na  saighdearan,
a  chuir  a  mach  air  feagh  na  duthcha,  gu  iad  a  dh'eiridh  air  feadh  na
h-oidhche,  agus  an  sluagh  a  mharbhadh  anns  na  leapaichean  aca,
agus  fhuair  e  a  thoirt  air  muinntir  na  duthcha  chreidsinn,  gun  do
mharbh  muinntir  gach  tighe,  na  bha  do  shaighdeirean  'nan  cadal  anns
na  sabhailean  aca.  Agus  an  uair  nach  d'  thainig  na  saighdeirean
dachaidh  aig  an  tiom  bu  choir  doibh,  chaidh  feadhainn  a  shealltuinn
cia-de  a  thainig  riutha.  Agus  tra  rainig  iadsan  is  ann  a  fhuair  iad
na  saighdeirean  marbh  anns  na  saibhlean,  far  an  robh  iad  'nan  cadal.
Agus  dh  aicheidh  muinntir  gach  tighe,  gu  'n  robh  fios  aca  cia  mar  a
chaidh  na  saighdeirean  a  chuir  gu  biis,  na  cò  a  rinn  e.

Chaidh  na  daoiiie  a  bha  ris  aa  rannsachadh  air  son  nan  saigh-
deirean gu  tigh  an  righ,  agus  dh'  innis  iad  mar  a  thachair.  An  sin
chuir  an  righ  fios  air  an  t-seanaghal,  a  dh'  fhaotuinn  comhairle
uaidh.  Thainig  an  seanaghal,  agus  dhinnis  an  righ  dhà  mar  a
thachair,  agus  dh'  iarr  an  righ  comhairle  air.  Agus  is  e  a  chomh-
airle  a  thug  an  seanaghal  air  an  righ,  e  a  dheanamh  cuirm  agus  iob-
dannsa  (a  ball)  's  e  chuireadh  sluagh  na  chithcha,  agus  nam  bitheadh
am  fear  a  rinn  an  cron  an  sin,  gu  'm  b'e  am  e  fear  bu  dana  a  bhithidh
an  sin,  agus  gun  iarradh  e  nighean  an  righ  fein  a  dhannsa  leis.
Chaidh  an  sluagh  iarraidh  a  chum  na  cuirm,  's  an  dannsaidh.  Agus
a  nieasg  chaich  chaidh  an  gille  carach  iarraidh.  Thainig  an  sluagh
a  chum  na  cuirm,  agus  a  measg  chaich  thainig  an  gille  carach.  Tra
a  bha  a'  chuirm  seachad  thòisich  an  dannsa,  agus  chaidh  an  gille-
carach  is  dh'  iarr  e  nighean  an  righ  gu  dannsa  leis,  agus  bha  searrag
liin  do  rud  dubh  aig  an  t-seanaghal,  agus  chuir  an  seanaghal  ball
dubh  de'n  rud  a  bha  anns  an  t-searrag  air  a  ghille-charach,  ach  bha


35°  WEST  HIGHLAXD  TALES.

le  nighean  an  righ  nach  robh  a  fait  gle  mhath  ann  an  òrdugh,  's
chaidh  i  do  sheòmar  taobhaidh  gus  a  chuir  ceart,  agus  chaidh  an
gille-carach  a  stigb  leatha,  's  tra  sheall  ise  anns  a  ghloine  sheall  easan
cuideachd  ann,  's  chunnaic  e  ann  ball  dubh  a  chuir  an  seanaghal  air.
Tra  dhainns  iad  gus  an  robh  am  port  ciuil  seachad  chaidh  an  gille
carach  agus  fhuair  e  cothrom  air  an  t-searag  aig  an  t-seanaghall-
ghoid  uaidh  gu  n  f  bios  d"a,  agus  chuir  esan  da  bhall  dubh  air  an  t
sheanaghal.  agus  aon  a  bhall  dubh  air  fichead  fear  eile  g'a  thuile,  's
chuir  e  an  t  shearag  air  ais  a  rithis  far  an  d'  fhuair  se  a.  Eadar  sin
's  ceann  a  ghreis,  thainig  an  gille-carach  a  rithis  's  dh  iarr  e  nighean
an  righ  gu  dannsa.  Bha  seurag  aig  nighean  an  righ  cuideachd,  's
chuir  i  ball  dubh  air  aodann  a  ghille-charaich  ach  fhuair  an  gille-
carach  an  t-searag  a  thiulpa  as  a  poca  gu  'n  f  hios  di,  agus  fun  a  bha
da  bhall  aire-san,  chuir  e  da  bhall  air  fichead  fear  eile  anns  a  chuid-
eachd,  agus  ceithir  buill  dhubli  air  an  t  seanaghal.  An  sin  tra  a
bha  an  dannsa  seachad,  chaidh  feadhainn  a  chuir  a  dh  fhaicin  cò  e
am  fear  air  an  robh  an  da  bhall  dhubh.  Tra  sheall  iad:<an  air  feadh
an  t  sluaigh  fhuair  iad  fichead  fear,  air  an  robh  da  bhall  dhubh,
agus  bha  ceithir  buill  dhubh  air  an  t  seanaghal,  's  fhuair  an  gille-
carach  ealadh  far  an  robh  nighean  an  righ,  agus  an  t-searag  a
thiulpa  na  poca  a  rithis,  sheall  an  seanaghal  agus  bha  searagan
diubh  aige,  sheall  nighean  an  righ  "s  bha  a  searaig  fein  aicse,  an  sin
ghabh  an  seanaghal  a's  an  righ  comhairle,  agus  is  e  a  chomhairle
sinn  a  rinn  iad,  an  Righ  a  thighinn  do  'n  chuideachd,  agus  e  agh-
radh  gu  'm  b'  anabharra  tapaidh  a  dh  fheumadh  am  fear  a  rinn  na
h-uile  cleas  a  chaidh  a  dheanamh  a  bhith,  na  n  tigeadh  e  air  aghaidh
s  e  fein  a  thoirt  suas,  gu  'ni  faighidh  e  nighean  an  righ  ri  phòsadh
agus  dariia  leth  na  rioghachd  an  neo  is  a  bhithidh  an  an  righ  beò,
agus  an  t  iomalain  do  n  rioghchd  an  deigh  has  an  righ.  Agus  thainig
na  h-uile  gin  do  n  fheadhainn  aig  an  robh  an  da  bhall  dhubh  air  an
aodann,  agus  thubhairt  iad  gu'm  b'  iadsan  a  rinn  na  h-uile  tapadh  a
chaidh  a  dheanamh.  An  sin  chaidh  an  righ  's  an  ard  chomhairle,  a
dh  fheuchainn  cia-mar  a  ghabhadh  a  chuis  soerachadh,  agus  is  è  a
chuse  a  shocruich  iad,  na  h-uile  fear  aig  an  robh  an  da  bhall  dubh
air  an  aodann,  a  chuir  comhla  ann  an  seomar,  agus  bha  iad  gu  piiisde
f  haotuinn,  agus  bha  nighean  an  righ  gus  ubhall  a  thoirt  do  n  pbàisde
agus  bha  am  pkisde  gus  a  chuir  a  stigh  far  an  rolili  nafir  aig  an  robh
na  buill  dhubh  air  an  aodann,  nan  suidh,  agus  ge  b-è  h-aon  air  bith  do
'n  tugadh  am  [liiisde  an  t-ubhall,  b-e  sin  an  t-aon  a  bha  gus  nighean
an  righ  f  haotuinn.

Chaidh  sin  a  dheanamh,  agus  tra  chaidh  am  piii-de  a  chuir  a  stigh
do  'n  t  seomar  anns  an  robh  na  fir,  bha    liseag  s  dranndan  aig  a


THE  TALE  OF  THE  SHIFTY  LAD.  35


ghille-charrach  's  chaidh  am  paisde  's  thug  se  an  t-ubhall  d'a.
Chaidh  an  sin  an  t-sliseag  's  an  dranniian,  a  thoirt  o  'n  gille-charach
agiis  a  chuir  na  shuidh  ann  an  aite  eile,  agus  chaidh  au  t-ubhall  a
thoirt  do  'n  phaisde  a  rithis,  agus  a  thoirt  a  mach  as  am  t-seomar,  's
a  chuir  a  stigh  a  rithis  a  sheall  co  dh"a  a  bheiridh  e  an  t-ubhall,  agus
fun  a  bha  an  t  sliseag  's  an  dranndan  aig  a  ghille-charach  a  roimh,
chaidh  am  paisde  far  an  robh  e  a  rithis,  s  thug  se  dh  a  an  t-ubhall.
Au  sin  f  huair  an  gille-carach  nighean  an  rigli  ri  phosadh.

Agus  goirid  na  dheigli  sin  bha  nighean  an  righ,  's  an  gille-carach,
a  ghabhail  sraide  do  Bhaile-cliabh,  auus  a  nuair  a  bha  iad  a  dol  tbair-
is  air  droehaid  Bhaile-chiabh,  dh'  fliarraid  an  gille  carach  de  nighean
an  righ,  cia  ainm  a  bha  air  an  aite  sin,  Agus  dh  innis,  nighean  an
righ  gun  robh  drochaidh  Baile-cliabh  ann  an  Eirinn,  Agus  thubhairt
an  gille-carach.

"  Ma  ta  is  trie  a  thubhairt  mo  mhathair  riumsa  gu  am  bu  e  bu
deireadh  dhomh  a  bhith  air  mo  chrochadh  aig  droehaid  Bhaile-cliabh
an  Eirinn,  's  rinn  i  an  f  haisineachd  sin  domh  iomadh  uair,  tra  bhithinn
a  deanin  phrat  oirre."

Agus  thubhairt  nighean  an  righ,  Mata  mo  shanntaich  tu  fein  cro-
chadh  thairis  air  taobhann  an  droehaid,  cumaidh  miss  an  aird  thu
tacan  beag  le  nio  napaigean  poca."

Agus  bha  iad  ri  cainnt  's  ri  aighear  ma  deidhinn,  ach  ma-dheireadh
bha  leis  a  ghille-charach  gu  'n  deanadh  se  a,  air  s  on  abhachd,  agus
thug  nighean  an  righ  a  mach  a  neapaigean  poca,  agus  chaidh  an
gille-carach  thair  an  droehaid,  agus  chroch  e  ri  neapaigean  poca
nighean  an  righ,  's  i  ga  leigeadh  fhein  thairis  air  taobhan  na  droeh-
aid, 's  iad  a  gairichdeich  ri  cheile.

Ach  chuala  nighean  an  righ  eubh,  "  Tha  caisteal  an  righ  a  dol
ri-theine,"  agus  chlisg  i,  agus  chaill  i  a  greim  air  an  neapaigean  agus
thuit  an  gille-carach  sios,  agus  bhuail  a  cheann  ri  cloich,  's  chaidh  an
eanchainn  as,  's  cha  robh  anns  an  eubh  ach  falrasg  claoine  's  b'  eiginn
do  nighean  an  righ  dol  dachaidh  na  banntraich.

From  Kate  Macfarlane,  in  or  near  the  year  1810;  A.  Campbell,
Roseneath,  18G0  ;  and  J.  M'Nair,  Clachaig,  1860.

Some  incidents  in  this  story  I  have  known  as  long  as  I  can
remember.  They  used  to  be  told  me  as  a  child  by  John  Camp-
bell, piper.  Some  of  them  were  told  me  in  1859  by  John  Mac-
kenzie at  Inverary,  who  said  they  were  part  of  a  long  story  of
which  he  could  not  repeat  the  rest.  Others  are  alluded  to  in
the    Sutherland    collection    as   known   in   that    county.       The


352  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES.

version  given  came  to  me  with  the  pedigree  given  above,  and
is  unaltered,  except  in  orthography  and  punctuation  here  and
there.

It  may  be  compared  with  a  very  great  many  stones  in  many
languages,  but  I  know  none  exactly  like  it,  (See  note  on  No.  40,
page  263,  vol.  ii.)

Some  of  the  incidents  are  very  like  part  of  the  story  of  Eamp-
sintus  (Rawlinson's  Herodotus,  vol.  ii.  p.  191),  which  were  told
to  Herodotus  more  than  two  thousand  years  ago  by  priests  in
Egypt,  and  the  most  natural  conclusion  to  arrive  at  is,  that  these
incidents  have  been  spread  amongst  the  people  by  those  members
of  their  families  who  study  the  classics  at  the  Scotch  universities,
and  who  might  well  repeat  what  they  had  learned  over  a  winter
fire  in  their  father's  cottages,  as  their  share  of  a  night's  enter-
tainment.

But  the  incidents  in  this  story,  which  resemble  the  classical
tale,  are  associated  with  a  great  many  other  incidents  which  are
not  in  Herodotus.  Some  of  these  have  a  resemblance  to  incidents
in  the  Norse  story  of  "  The  Master  Thief; "  and,  according  to  Mr.
Dasent's  Introduction,  these  have  a  resemblance  to  Sanscrit
stories,  which  are  not  within  my  reading.  They  have  a  relation
to  Italian  stories  in  Straparola,  and,  according  to  a  note  in
llawlinson's  Herodotus,  the  story  of  Eampsintus  "has  been
repeated  in  the  Pecorone  of  Ser  Giovanni,  a  Florentine  of  the
fourteenth  century,  who  substitutes  a  Doge  of  Venice  for  the
king.''

I  am  told  that  the  barrel  of  pitch  and  the  marks  on  the  men
are  introduced  into  an  old  German  story  ;  but  there  are  several
incidents  such  as  that  of  the  pig  which  was  to  discover  the  dead
body  as  pigs  now  do  truffles,  and  the  apple  which  as  usual  is  mys-
tical,  which  so  far  as  I  know  are  in  Gaelic  only.

On  the  whole,  then,  there  seems  to  me  nothing  for  it  but  to
admit  this  to  be  the  Gaelic  version  of  a  popular  tale,  traditionally
preserved  for  ages,  altering  as  times  roll  on,  and  suiting  itself  to
the  manners  of  the  narrators  and  of  the  time.

To  suppose  it  to  be  derived  from  books  is  to  suppose  that
these  books  have  all  been  read  at  some  time  so  widely  in
Scotland  as  to  have  become  known  to  the  labouring  popula-
tion who  speak  Gaelic,  and   so  long  ago  as  to  have  been  for-


THE  TALE   OF  THE  SHIFTY  LAD.  353

gotten  by  the  instructed,  who  speak  English  and  study  foreign
languages.

Either  this  is  a  traditional  popular  tale,  or  learning  must  have
been  much  more  widely  spread  in  the  west  at  some  former  period
than  it  is  at  present.

My  own  opinion  is  that  the  tale  is  traditional,  but  there  is
room  enough  for  speculation.  On  the  25th  and  27th  of  August,
I  heard  parts  of  the  story  told  by  Dewar,  and  MacNair,  and  John
Mackenzie.  Hector  Urquhart  told  me  that  his  father  used  to  tell
it  in  Eoss-shire  when  he  was  a  child.  In  his  version,  the  store-
house was  a  treasury  full  of  gold  and  silver,  and  the  entrance  a
loose  stone  in  the  wall ;  the  man  was  caught  in  "  cep,"  a  gin  for
catching  foxes.  The  pig  was  a  hungry  boar,  and  the  lad  killed  him
with  an  arrow.  Even  John  the  tinker,  who  was  present,  knew  the
story,  though  not  well  enough  to  repeat  it.  It  is  manifestly  widely
spread  in  the  Highlands.

The  Gaelic  is  somewhat  peculiar,  and  there  are  some  errors
in  it  which  have  not  been  corrected.


END  OF  VOL.   L


/-
