CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE FOUNDING OF THE THEORY OF TRANSFINITE NUMBERS
Georg Cantor (1845-1918)
Translated, with introduction and notes, by Philip E. B. Jourdain. Chicago and London: The Open Court Publishing Company, 1915. (Open Court Series of Classics of Science and Philosophy.)
Source scan: Internet Archive, identifier contributionstof00cantrich.
Prepared for the Tower of Babel library: scan artifacts trimmed and whitespace normalized per the VIEW TEXT standard. Public domain.

I

i

CONTRIBUTIONS TO

THE FOUNDING  OF  THE  THEORY  OF

TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS

/  Court  Series  of  Classics  of  Science  and
Thilosophy,  ,?(o.  i

TRIBUTIONS TO

INDING  OF  THE  THEORY  OF

Ik SFINITE NUMBERS

BY

GEORG CANTOR

TRANSLATED,  AND PROVIDED WITH AN INTRODUCTION
AND NOTES, BY

PHILIP E.  B.  JOURDAIN

M.  A.  (Cantab.)

CHICAGO AND LONDON
PEN  COURT  PUBLISHING  COMPANY
1915

G2

Copyright  in  Great  Britain  under  the  Act  of  igii

PREFACE

This  volume  contains  a  translation  of  the  two  very
iniportant  memoirs  of  Georg  Cantor  on  transfinite
numbers  which  appeared  in  the  Mathematische
Annalen  for  1895  ^^'^^  1897*  under  the  title:
''Beitrage  zur  Begriindung  der  transfmiten  Mengen-
lehre."  It  seems  to  me  that,  since  these  memoirs
are  chiefly  occupied  with  the  investigation  of  the
various  transfinite  cardinal  and  ordinal  numbers  and
not  with  investigations  belonging  to  what  is  usually
described  as  *'the  theory  of  aggregates"  or  "the
theory  of  sets  "  {Mengenlehre^  theorie  des  ensembles),
— the  elements  of  the  sets  being  real  or  complex
numbers  which  are  imaged  as  geometrical  "  points  "
in  space  of  one  or  more  dimensions, — the  title  given
to  them  in  this  translation  is  more  suitable.

These  memoirs  are  the  final  and  logically  purified
statement  of  many  of  the  most  important  results  of
the  long  series  of  memoirs  begun  by  Cantor  in  1870.
It  is,  I  think,  necessary,  if  we  are  to  appreciate  the
full  import  of  Cantor's  work  on  transfinite  numbers,
■'  ->  ^ave  thought  through  and  to  bear  in  mind  Cantor's

'  researches  on  the  theory  of  point-aggregates.

s in  these researches that the need for the

^ol,  xlvi,  1895,  pp.  481-512  ;  vol.  xlix,  1897,  pp.  207-246.

334640

vi  PREFACE

transfinite  numbers  first  showed  itself,  and  it  is  only
by  the  study  of  these  researches  that  the  majority
of  us  can  annihilate  the  feeling  of  arbitrariness  and
even  insecurity  about  the  introduction  of  these
numbers.  Furthermore,  it  is  also  necessary  to  trace
backwards,  especially  through  Weierstrass,  the
course  of  those  researches  which  led  to  Cantor's
work.  I  have,  then,  prefixed  an  Introduction  tracing
the  growth  of  parts  of  the  theory  of  functions  during
the  nineteenth  century,  and  dealing,  in  some  detail,
with  the  fundamental  work  of  Weierstrass  and  others.
and  with  the  work  of  Cantor  from  1870  to  1895.
Some  notes  at  the  end  contain  a  short  account  of  the
developments  of  the  theory  of  transfinite  numbers
since  1897.  I^  these  notes  and  in  the  Introduction
I  have  been  greatly  helped  by  the  information  that
Professor  Cantor  gave  me  in  the  course  of  a  long
correspondence  on  the  theory  of  aggregates  which
we  carried  on  many  years  ago.

The  philosophical  revolution  brought  at  out  by
Cantor's  work  was  even  greater,  perhaps,  than  the
mathematical  one.  With  few  exceptions,  mathe-
maticians joyfully  accepted,  built  upon,  scrutinized,
and  perfected  the  foundations  of  Cantor's  u  idying
theory;  but  very  many  philosophers  combaied  it.
This  seems  to  have  been  because  very  few  under-
stood it.  I  hope  that  this  book  may  help  to  make
the  subject  better  known  to  both  philosophcs  and
mathematicians.

The  three  men  whose  influence  on  moder;i  pure
mathematics — and  indirectly  modern  logic  and  the

PREFACE  vii

philosophy  which  abuts  on  it — is  most  marked  are
Karl  Weierstrass,  Richard  Dedekind,  and  Georg
Cantor.  A  great  part  of  Dedekind's  work  has  de-
veloped along  a  direction  parallel  to  the  work  of
Cantor,  and  it  is  instructive  to  compare  with  Cantor's
work  Dedekind's  Stetigkeit  unci  irrationale  Zahlen
ar^d  Was  sind  und  was  sollen  die  Zahlen  P,  of  which
excellent  English  translations  have  been  issued  by
the  publishers  of  the  present  book.  *

There  is  a  French  translation  f  of  these  memoirs  of
Cantor's,  but  there  is  no  English  translation  of  them.
For  kind  permission  to  make  the  translation,  1
am  indebted  to  Messrs  B.  G.  Teubner  of  Leipzig
and  Berlin,  the  publishers  of  the  Matheinatische
Annalen.

PHILIP  E.  B.  JOURDALN.

*  Essays  on  the  Theory  of  Numbers  (I,  Continuity  and  Irrational
Numbers;  II,  The  Nature  arid  Meaning- of  Numbers),  translated  by
W.  W.  Reman,  Chicago,  190T.  I  shall  refer  to  this  as  Essays  on
Number.

t  By  F.  Marotte,  Sur  les  fondements  de  la  theorie  des  ensembles
trans/mis,  Paris,  1899.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I'AGE

Preface v

Table  of  Contents ix

Introduction i

Contributions  to  the  Founding  of  the  Theory
OF  Transftnite  Numbers —

Article  I.  (1895) 85

Article  II.  (1897) -137

Notes 202

Index 209

CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE

FOUNDING  OF THE THEORY

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS

INTRODUCTION

I
If  it  is  safe  to  trace  back  to  any  single  man  the
origin  of  those  conceptions  with  which  pure  mathe-
matical analysis  has  been  chiefly  occupied  during
the  nineteenth  century  and  up  to  the  present  time,
we  must,  I  think,  trace  it  back  to  Jean  Baptiste
Joseph  Fourier  (1768- 1830).  Fourier  was  first  and
foremost  a  physicist,  and  he  expressed  very  defin-
itely his  view  that  mathematics  only  justifies  itself
.by  the  help  it  gives  towards  the  solution  of  physical
problems,  and  yet  the  light  that  was  thrown  on  the
general  conception  of  a  function  and  its  ''con-
tinuity," of  the  ''convergence"  of  infinite  series,
and  of  an  integral,  first  began  to  shine  as  a  result
of  Fourier's  original  and  bold  treatment  of  the
problems  of  the  conduction  of  heat.  This  it  was
that  gave  the  impetus  to  the  formation  and  develop-
ment of  the  theories  of  functions.  The  broad-
minded physicist will approve of this refining

1  INTRODUCTION

development  of  the  mathematical  methods  which
arise  from  physical  conceptions  when  he  reflects
that  mathematics  is  a  wonderfully  powerful  and
economically  contrived  means  of  dealing  logically
and  conveniently  with  an  immense  complex  of  data,
and  that  we  cannot  be  sure  of  the  logical  soundness
of  our  methods  and  results  until  we  make  every-
thing about  them  quite  definite.  The  pure  mathe-
matician knows  that  pure  mathematics  has  an  end
in  itself  which  is  more  allied  with  philosophy.  But
we  have  not  to  justify  pure  mathematics  here  :  we
have  only  to  point  out  its  origin  in  physical  con-
ceptions. But  we  have  also  pointed  out  that
physics  can  justify  even  the  most  modern  develop-
ments of  pure  mathematics.

II

During the nineteenth century, the two great
branches  of  the  theory  of  functions  developed  and
gradually  separated. The rigorous foundation of
the results of P^ourier on trigonometrical series,
which  was  given  by  Dirichlet,  brought forward  as
subjects  of  investigation  the  general  conception  of  a
(one-valued)  function  of  a  real  variable  and  the  (in
particular,  trigonometrical)  development  of  functions.
On th^  other  hand, Cauchy  was  gradually  led  to
recognize  the  importance  of  what  was  subsequently
seen  to  be  the  more  special  conception  of  function  of
a  complex  variable  ;  and,  to  a  great  extent  independ-
ently of  Cauchy,  Weierstrass  built  up  his  theory  of
analytic  functions  of  complex  variables.

INTRODUCTION  3

These  tendencies  of  both  Cauchy  and  Dirichlet
combined  to  influence  Riemann  ;  his  work  on  the
theory  of  functions  of  a  conaplex  variable  carried  on
and  greatly  developed  the  work  of  Cauchy,  while
the  intention  of  his  '' Habilitationsschrift  "  of  1854
was  to  generalize  as  far  as  possible  Dirichlet's  partial
solution  of  the  problem  of  the  development  of  a
function  of  a  real  variable  in  a  trigonometrical
series.

Both  these  sides  of  Riemann's  activity  left  a  deep
impression  on  Hankel.  In  a  memoir  of  1870,
Hankel  attempted  to  exhibit  the  theory  of  functions
of  a  real  variable  as  leading,  of  necessity,  to  the
restrictions  and  extensions  from  which  we  start  in
Riemann's  theory  of  functions  of  a  complex  variable  ;
and  yet  Hankel's  researches  entitle  him  to  be  called
the  founder  of  the  independent  theory  of  functions
of  a  real  variable.  At  about  the  same  time,  Heine
initiated,  under  the  direct  influence  of  Riemann's
'*  Habilitationsschrift,"  a  new  series  of  investigations
on  trigonometrical  series.

Finally,  soon  after  this,  we  find  Georg  Cantor
both  studying  Hankel's  me.moir  and  applying  to
theorems  on  the  uniqueness  of  trigonometrical  de-
velopments those  conceptions  of  his  on  irrational
numbers  and  the  'derivatives"  of  point-aggregates
or  number-aggregates  which  developed  from  the
rigorous  treatment  of  such  fundamental  questions
given  by  Weierstrass  at  Berlin  in  the  introduction  to
his  lectures  on  analytic  functions.  The  theory  of
point-aggregates  soon  became  an  independent  theory

4  INTRODUCTION

of  great  importance,  and  finally,  in  1882,  Cantor's
^'transfinite  numbers"  were  defined  independently
of  the  aggregates  in  connexion  with  which  they  first
appeared  in  mathematics.

Ill

The  investigations  *  of  the  eighteenth  century  on
the  problem  of  vibrating  cords  led  to  a  controversy
for  the  following  reasons.  D'Alembert  maintained
that  the  arbitrary  functions  in  his  general  integral
of  the  partial  differential  equation  to  which  this
problem  led  were  restricted  to  have  certain  pro-
perties which  assimilate  them  to  the  analytically
representable  functions  then  known,  and  which  would
prevent  their  course  being  completely  arbitrary  at
every  point.  Euler,  on  the  other  hand,  argued  for
the  admission  of  certain  of  these  "arbitrary"
functions  into  analysis.  Then  Daniel  BernouUi
produced  a  solution  in  the  form  of  an  infnite
trigonometrical  series,  and  claimed,  on  certain
physical  grounds,  that  this  solution  was  as  general
as  d'Alembert's.  As  Euler  pointed  out,  this  was  so
only  if  any  arbitrary  f  function  ^(;ir)  were  develops
able  in  a  series  of  the  form

*  Cf.  the  references  given  in  my  papers  in  the  Archiv  der  Matkematfk
liud  Physik,  3rd  series,  vol.  x,  1906,  pp.  255-256,  and  his,  vol.  i,
1914,  pp.  670-677.  Much  of  this  Introduction  is  taken  frorr.  my
account  of  "The  Development  of  the  Theory  of  Transfinite  Number-i"
in  the  above-mentioned  Archiv,  3rd  series,  vol,  x,  pp.  254-2S1  ;
vol.  xiv,  1909,  pp.  289-311;  vol.  xvi,  1910,  pp.  21-43;  vol.  j  tii,
1913,  pp.  1-21.

t  The  arbitrary  functions  chiefly  considered  in  this  connexio  i  by
Euler  were  what  he  called  "discontinuous"  functions.  This  ^/ord
does  not  mean  what  we  now  mean  (after  Cauchy)  by  it.  Cj\  my  paper
in  his,  vol.  i,  191 4,  pp.  661-703.

INTRODUCTION

vkx

That  this  was,  indeed,  the  case,  even  when  0(;f)
is  not  necessarily  developable  in  a  power-series,  was
first  shown  by  Fourier,  who  was  led  to  study  the
same  mathematical  problem  as  the  above  one  b}'
his  researches,  the  first  of  which  were  communicated
to  the  French  Academy  in  1807,  on  the  conduction
of  heat.  To  Fourier  is  due  also  the  determination
of  the  coefficients  in  trigonometric  series,

0(;ir)  =  J/^o  +  ^i  cos^'H-<^2  ^os  2;f+  .  .  .
-\-a^?A\-\  x-\-a^^^\\\2x-\-  .  .  .,
in  the  form

d^=-  I (l>{a)  cos  vada, «,.  =  —  I  0(a)  sin  vada.
it]  ttJ

-n  -7T

This  determination  was  probably  independent  of
Euler's  prior  determination  and  Lagrange's  analog-
ous determination  of  the  coefficients  of  a  Jinzte
trigonometrical  series.  Fourier  also  gave  a  geo-
metrical proof  of  the  convergence  of  his  series,
which,  though  not  formally  exact,  contained  the
germ  of  Dirichlet's  proof.

To  Peter  Gustav  Lejeune-Dirichlet  (1805-1859)
is  due  the  first  exact  treatment  of  Fourier's  series.*
He  expressed  the  sum  of  the  first  n  terms  of  the
series  by  a  definite  integral, and proved  that the

"'•  "Sur  la  convergence  des  series  trigonometriques  qui  servent  a
representer  une  fonction  arbitraire  entre  des  liniites  donnees,"y<?«;-«.
fur  Math.,  vol.  iv,  1829,  pp.  157-169;  Ges.  Werke^  vol.  i,
pp. 1 17-132,

6  INTRODUCTION

limit,  when  n  increases  indefinitely,  of  this  integral
is  the  function  which  is  to  be  represented  by  the
trigonometrical  series,  provided  that  the  function
satisfies  certain  conditions.  These  conditions  were
somewhat  lightened  by  Lipschitz  in  1864.

Thus,  Fourier's  work  led  to  the  contem.plation
and  exact  treatment  of  certain  functions  which
were  totally  different  in  behaviour  from  algebraic
functions.  These  last  functions  were,  before  him,
tacitly  considered  to  be  the  type  of  all  functions  that
can  occur  in  analysis.  Henceforth  it  was  part  of
the  business  of  analysis  to  investigate  such  non-
algebraoid  functions.

In  the  first  few  decades  of  the  nineteenth  century
there  grew  up  a  theory  of  more  special  functions  of
an  imaginary  or  complex  variable.  This  theory  was
known,  in  part  at  least,  to  Carl  Friedrich  Gauss
(1777-1855),  but  he  did  not  publish  his  results,  and
so  the  theory  is  due  to  Augustin  Louis  Cauchy
(1789- 1 857).*  Cauchy  was  less  far-sighted  and
penetrating  than  Gauss,  the  theory  developed
slowly,  and  only  gradually  were  Cauchy's  prejudices
against  ' '  imaginaries "  overcome.  Through  the
years  from  18 14  to  1846  we  can  trace,  first,  the
strong  influence  on  Cauchy's  conceptions  of  Fourier's
ideas,  then  the  quickly  increasing  unsusceptibility  to
the  ideas  of  others,  coupled  with  the  extraordinarily
prohfic  nature  of  this  narrow-minded  genius.  Cauchy
appeared  to  take  pride  in  the  production  of  memoirs

* Cf.  Jourdain,  "The  Theory  of  Functions  with  Cauchy  and  Gauss,"
Bibl.'Maih.  (3),  vol.  vi,  1905,  pp.  190-207.

INTRODUCTION  7

at  each  weekly  meeting  of  the  French  Academy,  and
it  was  partly,  perhaps,  due  to  this  circumstance  that
his  works  are  of  very  unequal  importance.  Besides
that,  he  did  not  seem  to  perceive  even  approximately
the  immense  importance  of  the  theory  of  functions
of  a  complex  variable  which  he  did  so  much  to
create.  This  task  remained  for  Puiseux,  Briot  and
Bouquet,  and  others,  and  was  advanced  in  the
most  striking  manner  by  Georg  Friedrich  Bernhard
Riemann  (1826-1866).

Riemann  may  have  owed  to  his  teacher  Dirichlet
his  bent  both  towards  the  theory  of  potential —
which  was  the  chief  instrument  in  his  classical
development  (185  i)  of  the  theory  of  functions  of  a
complex  variable — and  that  of  trigonometrical  series.
By  a  memoir  on  the  representability  of  a  function
by 'a  trigonometrical  series,  which  was  read  in  1854
but  only  published  after  his  death,  he  not  only  laid
the  foundations  for  all  modern  investigations  into  the
theory  of  these  series,  but  inspired  Hermann  Hankel
(1839- 1 873)  to  the  method  of  researches  from  which:
we  can  date  the  theory  of  functions  of  a  real  variable
as  an  independent  science.  The  motive  of  Hankel's
research  was  provided  by  reflexion  on  the  founda-
tions of  Riemann's  theory  of  functions  of  a  complex
variable.  It  was  Hankel's  object  to  show  how  the
needs  of  mathematics  compel  us  to  go  beyond  the
most  general  conception  of  a  function,  which  was
implicitly  formulated  by  Dirichlet,  to  introduce  the
complex  variable,  and  finally  to  reach  that  con-
ception from  which  Riemann  started  in  his  inaugural

8  INTRODUCTION

dissertation.  For  this  purpose  Hankel  began  his
'' Untersuchungen  liber  die  unendlich  oft  oscilli-
renden  und  unstetigen  Functionen  ;  ein  Beitrag  zur
Feststelkmg  des  Begriffes  der  Function  liberhaupt  "
of  1870  by  a  thorough  examination  of  the  various
possibihties  contained  in  Dirichlet's  conception.

Riemann,  in  his  memoir  of  1854,  started  from
the  general  problem  of  which  Dirichlet  had  only
solved  a  particular  case  :  If  a  function  is  developable
in  a  trigonometrical  series,  what  results  about  the
variation  of  the  value  of  the  function  (that  is  to  say,
what  is  the  most  general  way  in  which  it  can  become
discontinuous  and  have  maxima  and  minima)  when
the  argument  varies  continuously  ?  The  argument
is  a  real  variable,  for  Fourier's  series,  as  Fourier  had
already  noticed,  may  converge  for  real  x'<^  alone.
This  question  was  not  completely  answered,  and,
perhaps  in  consequence  of  this,  the  work  was  not
published  in  Riemann's  lifetime  ;  but  fortunately
that  part  of  it  which  concerns  us  more  particularly,
and  which  seems  to  fill,  and  more  than  fill,  the  place
of  Dirichlet's  contemplated  revision  of  the  principles
of  the  infinitesimal  calculus,  has  the  finality  obtained
by  the  giving  of  the  necessary  and  sufficient  condi-
tions for  the  integrability  of  a  function  f{x),  which
was  a  necessary  preliminary  to  Riemann's  investiga-
tion. Thus,  Riemann  was  led  to  give  the  process
of  integration  a  far  wider  meaning  than  that
contemplated  by  Cauchy  or  even  Dirichlet,  and
Riemann  constructed  an  integrable  function  which
becomes  discontinuous  an  infinity  of  times  between

INTRODUCTION  9

any  two  limits,  as  close  together  as  wished,  of  the
independent  variable,  in  the  following  manner  : — If,
where  ;r  is  a  real  variable,  (x)  denotes  the  (positive  or
negative)  excess  of  x  over  the  nearest  integer,  or
zero  if  x  is  midway  between  two  integers,  {x)  is
a  one-valued  function  of  x  with  discontinuities  at
the  points  ^=;^  +  i,  where  n  is  an  integer  (positive,
negative,  or  zero),  and  with  \  and  —  \  for  upper  and
lower  limits  respectively.  Further,  (la-),  where  v  is
an  integer,  is  discontinuous  at  the  points  vx=n-\-\

ox  x—-{7i-\-\). Consequentl}-,  the  series

l'=l  ^

where  the  factor  \\v^  is  added  to  ensure  convergence
for  all  values  of  ;r,  may  be  supposed  to  be  discon-
tinuous for  all  values  of  x  of  the  form  x=p\2n^
where/  is  an  odd  integer,  relatively  prime  to  ;^.  It
was  this  method  that  was,  in  a  certain  respect,
generalized  by  Hankel  in  1870.  In  Riemann's
example  appeared  an  analytical  expression — and
therefore  a  ''  function  "  in  Euler's  sense — which,  on
account  of  its  manifold  singularities,  allowed  of  no
such  general  properties  as  Riemann's  "  functions  of
a  complex  variable,"  and  Hankel  gave  a  method,
whose  principles  were  suggested  by  this  example,  of
forming  analytical  expressions  with  singularities  at
every  rational  point.  He  was  thus  led  to  state,  with
some  reserve,  that  every  ''function"  in  Dirichlet's
sense  is  also  a  "  function  "  in  Euler's  sense.

The greatest  influence  on  Georg  Cantor  seems,

10  INTRODUCTION

however,  not  to  have  been  that  exercised  by
Riemann,  Hankel,  and  their  successors — though
the  work  of  these  men  is  closely  connected  with
some  parts  of  Cantor's  work, — but  by  Weierstrass,
a  contemporary  of  Riemann's,  who  attacked  many
of  the  same  problems  in  the  theory  of  analytic
functions  of  complex  variables  by  very  different  and
more  rigorous  methods.

IV

Karl  Weierstrass  (i8i 5-1897)  has  explained,  in
his  address  delivered  on  the  occasion  of  his  entry
into  the  Berlin  Academy  in  1857,  that,  from  the
time  (the  winter  of  18  39- 1840)  when,  under  his
teacher  Gudermann,  he  made  his  first  acquaintance
with  the  theory  of  elliptic  functions,  he  was  power-
fully attracted  by  this  branch  of  analysis.  "  Now,
Abel,  who  was  accustomed  to  take  the  highest
standpoint  in  any  part  of  mathematics,  established
a  theorem  which  comprises  all  those  transcendents
which  arise  from  the  integration  of  algebraic  differ-
entials, and  has  the  same  signification  for  these  as
Euler's  integral  has  for  elliptic  functions  .  .  .  ;  and
Jacobi  succeeded  in  demonstrating  the  existence  of
periodic  functions  of  many  arguments ,  whose  funda-
mental properties  are  established  in  Abel's  theorem,
and  by  means  of  which  the  true  meaning  and  real
essence  of  this  theorem  could  be  judged.  Actually
to  represent,  and  to  investigate  the  properties  of
these  magnitudes  of  a  totally  new  kind,  of  which
analysis  has  las  yet  no  example,  I  regarded  as  one

INTRODUCTION  ii

of  the  principal  problems  of  mathematics,  and,  as
soon  as  I  clearly  recognized  the  meaning  and  sig-
nificance of  this  problem,  resolved  to  devote  myself
to  it.  Of  course  it  would  have  been  foolish  even
to  think  of  the  solution  of  such  a  problem  without
having  prepared  myself  by  a  thorough  study  of  the
means  and  by  busying  myself  with  less  difficult
problems. "

VV^ith  the  ends  stated  here  of  Weierstrass's  work
we  are  now  concerned  only  incidentally  :  it  is  the
means — the  ' '  thorough  study  "  of  which  he  spoke —
which  has  had  a  decisive  influence  on  our  subject  in
common  with  the  theory  of  functions.  We  will,
then,  pass  over  his  early  work — which  was  only
published  in  1894 — o^^  the  theory  of  analytic
functions,  his  later  work  on  the  same  subject,  and
his  theory  of  the  Abelian  functions,  and  examine
his  immensely  important  work  on  the  foundations
of  arithmetic,  to  which  he  was  led  by  the  needs  of
a  rigorous  theory  of  analytic  functions.

We  have  spoken  as  if  the  ultimate  aim  of  Weier-
strass's work  was  the  investigation  of  Abelian
functions.  But  another  and  more  philosophical
view  was  expressed  in  his  introduction  to  a  course
of  lectures  delivered  in  the  summer  of  1886  and
preserved  by  Gosta  Mittag-Leffler  *  :  '*  In  order  to
penetrate  into  mathematical  science  it  is  indispens-
able that  we  should  occupy  ourselves  with  individual

*  "  Sur  les  fondements  arithmetiques  cle  la  theorie  des  fonctions
d'apres  Weierstrass,"  Congees  des  Alath^ma/iques  ct  Shnk/iohn,
1909,  p.  10.

12  INTRODUCTION

problems  which  show  us  its  extent  and  constitution.
But  the  final  object  which  we  must  always  keep  in
sight  is  the  attainment  of  a  sound  judgment  on  the
foundations  of  science."

In  1859,  Weierstrass  began  his  lectures  on  the
theory  of  analytic  functions  at  the  University  of
Berlin.  The  importance  of  this,  from  our  present
point  of  view,  lies  in  the  fact  that  he  was  naturally
obliged  to  pay  special  attention  to  the  systematic
treatment  of  the  theory,  and  consequently,  to
scrutinize  its  foundations.

In  the  first  place,  one  of  the  characteristics  of
Weierstrass's  theory  of  functions  is  the  abolition  of
the  method  of  complex  integration  of  Cauchy  and
Gauss  which  was  used  by  Riemann  ;  and,  in  a
letter  to  H.  A.  Schwarz  of  October  3,  1875,
Weierstrass  stated  his  belief  that,  in  a  systematic
foundation,  it  is  better  to  dispense  with  integration,
as  follows  :—

''.  .  .  The  more  I  meditate  upon  the  principles
of  the  theory  of  functions, — and  I  do  this  incessantly,
— the  firmer  becomes  my  conviction  that  this  theory
must  be  built  up  on  the  foundation  of  algebraic
truths,  and  therefore  that  it  is  not  the  right  way  to
proceed  conversely  and  make  use  of  the  trans-
cendental (to  express  myself  briefly)  for  the  establish-
ment of  simple  and  fundamental  algebraic  theorems  ;
however  attractive  may  be,  for  example,  the  con-
siderations by  which  Riemann  discovered  so  many
of  the  most  important  properties  of  algebraic
functions, That  to  the  discoverer,  qud  discoverer.

INTRODUCTION  13

every  route  is  permissible,  is,  of  course,  self-evident  ;
I  am  only  thinking  of  the  systematic  establishment
of  the  theory. "

In  the  second  place,  and  what  is  far  more  im-
portant than  the  question  of  integration,  the
systematic  treatment,  ab  initio^  of  the  theory  of
analytic  functions  led  Weierstrass  to  profound  in-
vestigations in  the  principles  of  arithmetic,  and  the
great  result  of  these  investigations — his  theory  of
irrational  numbers — has  a  significance  for  all  mathe-
matics which  can  hardly  be  overrated,  and  our
present  subject  may  truly  be  said  to  be  almost
'wholly  due  to  this  theory  and  its  development  by
Cantor.

In  the  theory  of  analytic  functions  we  often  have
to  use  the  theorem  that,  if  we  are  given  an  infinity
of  points  of  the  complex  plane  in  any  bounded
region  of  this  plane,  there  is  at  least  one  point  of
the  domain  such  that  there  is  an  infinity  of  the
given  points  in  each  and  every  neighbourhood  round
it  and  including  it.  Mathematicians  used  to  express
this  by  some  such  rather  obscure  phrase  as  :  * '  There
is  a  point  near  which  some  of  the  given  points  are
lriHhil;ely  near  to  one  another."  If  we  apply,  for  the
proof  of  this,  the  method  which  seems  naturally  to
suggest  itself,  and  which  consists  in  successively
halving  the  region  or  one  part  of  the  region  which
contains  an  infinity  of  points,*  we  arrive  at  what  is
required, — namely,  the  conclusion  that  there  is  a
point  such  that  there  is  another  point  in  any  neigh-

*  This  method  was  first  used  by  Bernard  Bolzano  in  1817.

14  INTRODUCTION

bourhood  of  it,  that  is  to  say,  that  there  is  a  so-
called  "point  of  condensation," — when,  and  only
when,  we  have  proved  that  every  infinite  ''sum"
such  that  the  sum  of  any  finite  number  of  its  terms
does  not  exceed  some  given  finite  number  defines  a
(rational  or  irrational)  number.  The  geometrical
analogue  of  this  proposition  may  possibly  be  claimed
to  be  evident ;  but  if  our  ideal  in  the  theory  of
functions — which  had,  even  in  Weierstrass's  time,
been  regarded  for  long  as  a  justified,  and  even  as  a
partly  attained,  ideal — is  to  found  this  theory  on  the
conception  of  number  alone,*  this  proposition  leads  to
the  considerations  out  of  which  a  theory  of  irrational
numbers  such  as  Weierstrass's  is  built.  The  theorem
on  the  existence  of  at  least  one  point  of  condensa-
tion was  proved  by  Weierstsass  by  the  method  of
successive  subdivisions,  and  was  specially  emphasized
by  him.

Weierstrass,  in  the  introduction  to  his  lectures  on

/ analytic  functions,  emphasized  that,  when  we  have

admitted  the notion of  whole number, arithmetic

needs  no  further  postulate,  but  can  be  built  up  in  a

purely  logical  fashion,  and  also  that  the  notion  of  a

"  The  separation  of  analysis  from  geometry,  which  appeared  in  the
work  of  Lagrange,  Gauss,  Cauchy,  and  Bolzano,  was  a  consequence  of
the  increasing  tendency  of  mathematicians  towards  logical  exactitude
in  defining  their  conceptions  and  in  making  their  deductions,  and,  con-
sequently, in  discovering  the  limits  of  validity  of  their  conceptions  and
methods.  However,  the  true  connexion  between  the  founding  of
analysis  on  a  purely  arithmetical  basis — "  arithmetization,"  as  it  has  been
called — and  logical  rigour,  can  only  be  definitely  and  convincingly
shown  after  the  comparatively  modern  thesis  is  proved  that  all  the  con-
cepts (including  that  of  number)  of  pure  mathematics  are  wholly  logical.
And  this  thesis  is  one  of  the  most  important  consequences  to  which  the
theory  whose  growth  we  are  describing  has  forced  us.

INTRODUCTION  15

one-to-one  correspondence  is  fundamental  in  count-
ing. But  it  is  in  his  purely  arithmetical  introduction
of  irrational  numbers  that  his  great  divergence  from
precedent  comes.  This  appears  from  a  consideration
of  the  history  of  incomrtiensurables.

The  ancient  Greeks  discovered  the  existence  of  in-
commensurable  geometrical  magnitudes,  and  there-
fore grew to regard arithmetic and geometry as
sciences of which the analogy  had not a  logical
basis. This  view  was  also  probably  due,  in  part  at
least, to an  attentive  consideration of  the famous
arguments of Zeno. Analytical geometry practi-
cally identified  geometry  with  arithmetic  (or  rather
with arithmetica universalis)^ and, before Weier-
strass, the introduction of  irrational 'Miumber"
was, explicitly or implicitly, geometrical. The
view  that  number  has  a  geometrical  basis  was  taken
by  Newton  and  most  of  his  successors. To  come
to the nineteenth century, Cauchy explicitly
adopted  the  same  view. At  the beginning  of  his
Cours  d' analyse  of 1821, he  defined  a "  Hmit " as
follows: ''When the successive  values attributed
to a variable approach a fixed value indefinitely
so as to end by  differing from it as little  as is
wished,  this  fixed  value  is  called  the '  limit '  of  all
the  others  "  ;  and  remarked  that  "  thus  an  irrational
number  is  the  Hmit  of  the  various  fractions  which
furnish  more  and  more  approximate  values  of  it."
If we consider — as, however, Cauchy does not
appear  to  have  done,  although  many  others  have —
the lattei* statement as a definition, so that  an

1 6  INTRODUCTION

"irrational"  number  is  defined  to  be  the  limit  of
certain  sums  of  rational  numbers,  we  presuppose
that  these  sums  have  a  limit.  In  another  place
Cauchy  remarked,  after  defining  a  series  u^,  u^,
u^y  .  .  ,  to  be  convergent  if  the  sum  J„  =  2^0 +  ^1  +  ^2
+  .  .  .  +2^«-i,  for  values  of  n  always  increasing,
approaches  indefinitely  a  certain  limit  s,  that,  "by
the  above  principles,  in  order  that  the  series
^oj  ^^1'  ^'i^  '  '  '  ^^y  ^^  convergent,  it  is  necessary
and  sufficient  that  increasing  values  of  n  make  the
sum  s,,  converge  indefinitely  towards  a  fixed  limit
s  ;  in  other  words,  it  is  necessary  and  sufficient  that,
for  infinitely  great  values  of  n,  the  sums  s^,  j^^+i,
s,,^2y  '  •  '  differ  from  the  limit  s,  and  consequently
from  one  another,  by  infinitely  small  quantities."
Hence  it  is  necessary  and  sufficient  that  the  different
sums  u,,  +  u,,^i-{-  .  .  .  +2/,,+;;,,  for  different  m's,  end,
when  n  increases,  by  obtaining  numerical  values  con-
stantly differing  from  one  another  by  less  than  any
assigned  number.

If  we  know  that  the  sums  s,,  have  a  limit  s,  we
can  at  once  prove  the  necessity  of  this  condition  ;
but  its  sufficiency  (that  is  to  say,  if,  for  any  assigned
positive  rational  6,  an  integer  n  can  always  be  found
such  that

where  r  is  any  integer,  then  a  limit  s  exists)  re-
quires a  previous  definition  of  the  system  of  real
numbers,  of  which  the  supposed  limit  is  to  be  one.
For  it  is  evidently  a  vicious  circle  to  define  a  real

INTRODUCTION  17

number  as  the  limit  of  a  "convergent"  series,  as
the  above  definition  of  what  we  mean  by  a  ''con-
vergent "  series — a  series  which  Jias  a  Hmit — in-
volves (unless  we  limit  ourselves  to  rational  limits)
a  previous  definition  of  what  we  mean  by  a  "  real
number."  *

It  seems,  perhaps,  evident  to  "intuition"  that,
if  we  lay  off  lengths  j^,  j,,+i,  .  .  .,  for  which  the
above  condition  is  fulfilled,  on  a  straight  line,  that
a  (commensurable  or  incommensurable)  "limiting"
length  s  exists  ;  and,  on  these  grounds,  we  seem  to
be  justified  in  designating  Cauchy's  theory  of  real
number  as  geometrical.  But  such  a  geometrical
theory  is  not  logically  convincing,  and  Weierstrass
showed  that  it  is  unnecessary,  by  defining  real
numbers  in  a  manner  which  did  not  depend  on  a
process  of  "going  to  the  limit."

To  repeat  the  point  briefly,  we  have  the  following
logical  error  in  all  would-be  arithmetical  f  pre-
Weierstrassian  introductions  of  irrational  numbers  :
we  start  with  the  conception  of  the  system  of
rational  numbers,  we  define  the  "sum"  (a  limit  of
a  sequence  of  rational  numbers)  of  an  infijiite  series
of  rational  numbers,  and  then  raise  ourselves  to  the
conception  of  the  system  of  real  numbers  which  are
got  by  such  means.  The  error  lies  in  overlooking
the  fact  that  the  ' '  sum  "  {b)  of  the  infinite  series  of

*  On  the  attempts  of  Bolzano,  Hankel,  and  Stolz  to  prove  arithmetic-
ally, without  an  arithmetical  theory  of  real  numbers,  the  sufficiency  of
the  above  criterion,  see  Ostwald^s  A'iassiker,  No.  153,  pp.  42,  95,  107.

t  It  must  be  remembered  that  Cauchy's  theory  was  not  one  of  these,
Cauchy  did  not  attempt  to  define  real  numbers  arithmetically,  but
simply  presupposed  their  existence  on  geometrical  grounds.

2

V

>

ig  INTRODUCTION

rational  numbers  can  only  be  defined  when  we  have
already  defined  the  real  numbers,  of  which  b  is  one.
"  I  believe,"  said  Cantor,*  a propos  of  Weierstrass's
theory,  "that  this  logical  error,  which  was  first
avoided  by  Weierstrass,  escaped  notice  almost
universally  in  earlier  times,  and  was  not  noticed  on
the  ground  that  it  is  one  of  the  rare  cases  in  which
actual  errors  can  lead  to  none  of  the  more  important
mistakes  in  calculation."

Thus,  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  an  arithmetical
theory  of  irrationals  has  to  define  irrational  numbers
not  as  "limits"  (whose  existence  is  not  always
beyond  question)  of  certain  infinite  processes,  but
in  a  manner  prior  to  any  possible  discussion  of  the
question  in  what  cases  these  processes  define  limits
at  all.

With  Weierstrass,  a  number  was  said  to  be
"determined"  if  we  know  of  what  elements  it  is
composed  and  how  many  times  each  element
occurs  in  it.  Considering  numbers  formed  with
the  principal  unit  and  an  infinity  of  its  aHquot  parts,
Weierstrass  called  any  aggregate  whose  elements
and  the  number  (finite)  of  times  each  element
occurs  in  it  f  are  known  a  (determined)  "  numerical
quantity  "  {Zahlengrosse).  An  aggregate  consisting
of  a  finite  number  of  elements  was  regarded  as  equal
to  the  sum  of  its  elements,  and  two  aggregates  of  a
finite  number  of  elements  were  regarded  as  equal
when  the  respective  sums  of  their  elements  are  equal.

*  Math.  Ann.,  vol.  xxi,  1883,  p.  566.

t  It  is  not  implied  that  the  given  elements  are  finite  in  number.

INTRODUCTION  19

A  rational  number  r  was  said  to  be  contained  in
a  numerical  quantity  a  when  we  can  separate  from
a  a  partial  aggregate  equal  to  r.  A  numerical
quantity  a  was  said  to  be  ''finite"  if  we  could
assign  a  rational  number  R  such  that  every  rational
number  contained  in  a  is  smaller  than  R.  Two
numerical  quantities  <:^,  b  were  said  to  be  "equal,"
when  every  rational  number  contained  in  a  is  con-
tained in  b^  and  vice  versa.  When  a  and  b  are  not
equal,  there  is  at  least  one  rational  number  which
is  either  contained  in  a  without  being  contained  in
^,  or  vice  versa  :  in  the  first  case,  a  was  said  to  be
' '  greater  than  "  b  ;  in  the  second,  a  was  said  to  be
' '  less  than  "  b.

VVeierstrass  called  the  numerical  quantity  c  de-
fined by  {i.e.  identical  with)  the  aggregate  whose
elements  are  those  which  appear  in  a  or  ^,  each  of
these  elements  being  taken  a  number  of  times  equal
to  the  number  of  times  in  which  it  occurs  in  a
increased  by  the  number  of  times  in  which  it  occurs
in  b^  the  ''  stmi''  of  a  and  b.  The  ''product'"  of
a  and  b  was  defined  to  be  the  numerical  quantity
defined  by  the  aggregate  whose  elements  are  ob-
tained by  forming  in  all  possible  manners  the  product
of  each  element  of  a  and  each  element  of  b.  In  the
same  way  was  defined  the  product  of  any  finite
number  of  numerical  quantities.

The  "sum"  of  an  infinite  number  of  numerical
quantities  a,  ^,  .  .  .  was  then  defined  to  be  the
aggregate  {s)  whose  elements  occur  in  one  (at  least)
of  ^,  ^,  .  .  .,  each  of  these  elements  e  being  taken

20  INTRODUCTION

a  number  of  times  (;?)  equal  to  the  number  of  times
that  it  occurs  in  a,  increased  by  the  number  of  times
that  it  occurs  in  b^  and  so  on.  In  order  that  s  be
finite  and  determined,  it  is  necessary  that  each  of  the
elements  which  occurs  in  it  occurs  a  finite  number  of
times,  and  it  is  necessary  and  sufficient  that  we  can
assign  a  number  N  such  that  the  sum  of  any  finite
number  of  the  quantities  a,  b^  .  .  .  \s  less  than  N.
,  Such  is  the  principal  point  of  Weierstrass's  theory
y/of  real  numbers.  It  should  be  noticed  that,  with
Weierstrass,  the  new  numbers  were  aggregates  of
the  numbers  previously  defined  ;  and  that  this  view,
which  appears  from  time  to  time  in  the  better  text-
books, has  the  important  advantage  which  was  first
sufficiently  emphasized  by  Russell.  This  advantage
is  that  the  existence  of  limits  can  be  proved  in
such  a  theory.  That  is  to  say,  it  can  be  proved  by
actual  construction  that  there  is  a  number  which  is
the  limit  of  a  certain  series  fulfilling  the  condition
of  ' '  finiteness  "or  "  convergency. "  When  real
numbers  are  introduced  either  without  proper  defini-
tions, or  as  "creations  of  our  minds,"  or,  what  is
far  worse,  as  "signs,"*  this  existence  cannot  be
proved.

If  we  consider  an  infinite  aggregate  of  real
numbers,  or  comparing  these  numbers  for  the  sake
of  picturesqueness  with  the  points  of  a  straight
Hne,  an  infinite  "point-aggregate,"  we  have  the
theorem  :  There  is,  in  this  domain,  at  least  one  point
such  that  there  is  an  infinity  of  points  of  the  aggre-

* C/;  Juurdain,  Math.  Gazette,  ]iin.  1908,  vol.  iv,  pp.  201-209.

INTRODUCTION  21

gate  in  any,  arbitrarily  small,  neighbourhood  of  it.
Weierstrass's  proof  was,  as  we  have  mentioned,
by  the  process,  named  after  Bolzano  and  him,
of  successively  halving  any  one  of  the  intervals
which  contains  an  infinity  of  points.  This  process
defines  a  certain  numerical  magnitude,  the  ''point
of  condensation  "  {Hdufungss telle)  in  question.  An
analogfous  theorem  holds  for  the  two-dimensional
region  of  complex  numbers.

Of  real  numerical  magnitudes  x^  all  of  which  are
less  than  some  finite  number,  there  is  an  ''upper
limit,"  which  is  defined  as  :  A  numerical  magnitude
G  which  is  not  surpassed  in  magnitude  by  any  x  and
is  such  that  either  certain  x's  are  equal  to  G  or
certain  x's  lie  within  the  arbitrarily  small  interval
(G,  .  .  . ,  G  —  (5),  the  end  G  being  excluded.  Ana-
logously for  the  "  lower  limit  "^.

It  must  be  noticed  that,  if  we  have  ^  finite
aggregate  of  x's,  one  of  these  is  the  upper  limit,
and,  if  the  aggregate  is  infinite,  one  of  them  may
be  the  upper  hmit.  In  this  case  it  need  not  also,
but  of  course  may,  be  a  point  of  condensation.  If
none  of  them  is  the  upper  limit,  this  limit  (whose
existence  is  proved  similarly  to  the  existence  of  a
point  of  condensation,  but  is,  in  addition,  unique]
is  a  point  of  condensation.  Thus,  in  the  above
explanation  of  the  term  "upper  limit,"  we  can
replace  the  words  "either  certain  ,r's "  to  "being
excluded"  by  "  certain  ;r's  lie  in  the  arbitrary  small
interval  (G,  .  .  .,  G  —  S),  the  end  G  being  i^icluded.''

The theory  of the upper and  lower  limit  of  a

22  INTRODUCTION

(general  or  '' Dirichlet's ")  real  one-valued  function
of  a  real  variable  was  also  developed  and  emphasized
by  Weierstrass,  and  especially  the  theorem  :  If  G  is
the  upper  limit  of  those  values  o{  y=f{x)'^  which
belong  to  the  values  of  x  lying  inside  the  interval
from  a  to  h,  there  is,  in  this  interval,  at  least  one
point  ;i  =  X  such  that  the  upper  hmit  of  the  j's
which  belong  to  the  ;r's  in  an  arbitrarily  small
neighbourhood  of  X  is  G  ;  and  analogously  for  the
lower  limit.

If  the  j^-value  corresponding  to  ;r=X  is  G,  the
upper  limit  is  called  the  "maximum"  of  the  j^'s
and,  if  j?^=/"(-^)  is  a  continuous  function  of  x^  the
upper  limit  is  a  maximum  ;  in  other  words,  a  con-
tinuo2is  function  attains  its  upper  and  lower  limits.
That  a  continuous  function  also  takes  at  least  once
every  value  between  these  limits  was  proved  by
Bolzano  (1817)  and  Cauchy  (1821),  but  the  Weier-
strassian  theory  of  real  numbers  first  made  these
proofs  rigorous,  f

It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  realize  that,
whereas  until  Weierstrass's  time  such  subjects  as
the  theory  of  points  of  condensation  of  an  infinite
aggregate  and  the  theory  of  irrational  numbers,
on  which  the founding  of  the theory of  functions

*  Even  \i  y  is  finite  for  every  single  x  of  the  interval  a^x^b,  all
these  jj/'s  need  not  be,  in  absolute  amount,  less  than  some  finite  number
(for  example,  f{x)=\\x  for  jf>0, /(o)=o,  in  the  interval  o^  ^^i),
but  if  they  are  (as  in  the  case  of  the  sum  of  a  uniformly  convergent
series),  these  j/'s  have  a  finite  upper  and  lower  limit  in  the  sense  defined.

t  There  is  another  conception  (due  to  Cauchy  and  P.  du  Bois-
Reymond),  allied  to  that  of  upper  and  lower  limit.  _  With  every  infinite
aggregate,  there  are  (attained)  upper  and  lower  points  of  condensation,
which  we  may  call  by  the  Latin  name  "  Limites"

INTRODUCTION  23

depends,  were  hardly  ever  investigated,  and  never
with  such  important  results,  Weierstrass  carried
research  into  the  principles  of  arithmetic  farther
than  it  had  been  carried  before.  But  we  must  also
realize  that  there  were  questions,  such  as  the  nature  <
of  whole  number  itself,  to  which  he  made  no  valuable
contributions.  These  questions,  though  logically
the  first  in  arithmetic,  were,  of  course,  historically
the  last  to  be  dealt  with.  Before  this  could  happen,
arithmetic  had  to  receive  a  development,  by  means  ^y
of  Cantor's  discovery  of  transfinite  numbers,  into  a  ^
theory  of  cardinal  and  ordinal  numbers,  both  finite
and  transfinite,  and  logic  had  to  be  sharpened,  as
it  was  by  Dedekind,  Frege,  Peano  and  Russell — to
a  great  extent  owing  to  the  needs  which  this  theory
made  evident.  y

V

Georg  Ferdinand  Ludwig  Philipp  Cantor  was
born  at  St  Petersburg  on  3rd  March  1845,  ^"d
lived  there  until  1856;  from  1856  to  1863  he  lived
in  South  Germany  (Wiesbaden,  Frankfurt  a.  M.,
and  Darmstadt);  and,  from  autumn  1863  to  Easter
1869,  in  Berlin.  He  became  Privatdocent  at  Halle
a.  S.  in  1869,  extraordinary  Professor  in  1872,  and
ordinary  Professor  in  1879.*  When  a  student  at
Berlin,  Cantor  came  under  the  influence  of  Weier-
strass's teaching, and one of his first papers on

*  Those  memoirs  of  Cantor's  that  will  be  considered  here  more
particularly,  and  which  constitute  by  far  the  greater  part  of  his  writings,
are  contained  in  :  Journ.  fiir  Alath.^  vols.  Ixxvii  and  Ixxxiv,  1874  and
1878;  Math.  Ann.,  vol.  iv,  1871,  vol.  v,  1872,  vol.  xv,  1879,  vol.  xvii,
j88o,  vol.  XX,  1882,  vol,  xxi,  1883,

24  INTRODUCTION

mathematics  was  partly  occupied  with  a  theory  of
irrational  numbers,  in  which  a  sequence  of  numbers
satisfying  Cauchy's  condition  of  convergence  was
I  used  instead  of  Weierstrass's  complex  of  an  infinity
of  elements  satisfying  a  condition  which,  though
equivalent  to  the  above  condition,  is  less  convenient
for  purposes  of  calculation.

This  theory  was  exposed  in  the  course  of  Cantor's
researches  on  trigonometrical  series.  One  of  the
problems  of  the  modern  theory  of  trigonometrical
series  was  to  establish  the  uniqueness  of  a  trigono-
metrical development.  Cantor's  investigations  re-
lated to  the  proof  of  this  uniqueness  for  the  most
general  trigonometrical  series,  that  is  to  say,  those
trigonometrical  series  whose  coefficients  are  not
necessarily  supposed  to  have  the  (Fourier's)  integral
form.

In  a  paper  of  1870,  Cantor  proved  the  theorem
that,  if

a^,  a^,  .  .  .,  a^,  .  .  .  and  b^,  b.,  .  .  .,  b^,  .  .  .

are  two  infinite  series  such  that  the  limit  of

a^  sin  vx-{-b^,  cos  vx,

for  every  value  of  x  which  lies  in  a  given  interval
{a<x<b)  of  the  domain  of  real  magnitudes,  is  zero
with  increasing  v,  both  a^  and  b^  converge,  with
increasing  i/,  to  zero.  This  theorem  leads  to  a
criterion  for  the  convergence  of  a  trigonometrical
series

\b^^a^^\Xix^b^QO'6x-\- . . .  -\- a,,'=^\\\vx -\- b ^QO^vx -\-  .  .  .,

INTRODUCTION  25

that  Riemann  proved  under  the  supposition  of  the
integral  form  for  the  coefficients.  In  a  paper  im-
mediately following  this  one,  Cantor  used  this
theorem  to  prove  that  there  is  only  one  representation
oi  f{x)  in  the  form  of  a  trigonometrical  series  con-
vergent for  every  value  of  x,  except,  possibly,  a
finite  number  of  x's  ;  if  the  sums  of  two  trigono-
metrical series  differ  for  a  finite  number  of  ;tr's,  the
forms  of  the  series  coincide.

In  1 87 1,  Cantor  gave  a  simpler  proof  of  the
uniqueness  of  the  representation,  and  extended  this
theorem  to  :  If  we  have,  for  every  value  of  x,  a
convergent  representation  of  the  value  o  by  a
trigonometrical  series,  the  coefficients  of  this  re-
presentation are  zero.  In  the  same  year,  he  also
gave  a  simpler  proof  of  his  first  theorem  that,  if
lim  {a^  sin  vx-\-b^  cos  vx)  =  o  for  a<x<b,  then  both
lim  a^,  and  lim  b^  are  zero.

In  November  1871,  Cantor  further  extended  his
theorem  by  proving  that  the  convergence  or  equality
of  the  sums  of  trigonometrical  series  may  be  re-
nounced for  certain  infinite  aggregates  of  x's  in  the  /
interval  o  .  .  .  27r  without  the  theorem  ceasing  to
hold.  To  describe  the  structure  that  such  an
aggregate  may  have  in  this  case,  Cantor  began
with  "some  explanations,  or  rather  some  simple
indications,  intended  to  put  in  a  full  light  the
different  manners  in  which  numerical  magnitudes,
in  number  finite  or  infinite,  can  behave,"  in  order
to  make  the  exposition  of  the  theorem  in  question
as  short  as  possible.

26  INTRODUCTION

The  system  A  of  rational  numbers  (including  o)
serves  as  basis  for  arriving  at  a  more  extended
notion  of  numerical  magnitude.  The  first  general-
ization with  which  we  meet  is  when  we  have  an
infinite  sequence

(i)  «i,  a^,  .  .  .,  a,,  .  .  ,

of  rational  numbers,  given  by  some  law,  and  such
that,  if  we  take  the  positive  rational  number  e  as
small  as  we  wish,  there  is  an  integer  n^  such  that

(2)  I  a,,+,„-a,,  I  <e (^>^i),

whatever  the  positive  integer  m  is.*  This  property
Cantor  expressed  by  the  words,  ''the  series  (i)
has  a  determined  limit  ^,"  and  remarked  particularly
that  these  words,  at  that  point,  only  served  to
enunciate  the  above  property  of  the  series,  and,
just  as  we  connect  (i)  with  a  special  sign  d,  we
must  also  attach  different  signs  l?\  b'\  .  .  .,  to
different  series  of  the  same  species.  However,
because  of  the  fact  that  the  "limit"  may  be
supposed  to  be  previously  defined  as  :  the  number
(if  such  there  be)  d  such  that  \b  —  a,\  becomes  in-
finitely small  as  v  increases,  it  appears  better  to
avoid  the  word  and  say,  with  Heine,  in  his  ex-
position of  Cantor's  theory,  the  series  (a^)  is  a
''  number-series,"  or,  as  Cantor  afterwards  expressed
it,  (a^)  is  a  "fundamental  series."

*  It  may  be  proved  that  this  condition  (2)  is  necessary  and  sufficient
that  the  sum  to  infinity  of  the  series  corresponding  to  the  sequence  (l)
should  be  a  "  finite  numerical  mai^nitude  "  in  Weierstrass's  sense  ;  and
consequently  Cantor's  theory  of  irrational  numbers  has  been  described
as  a  happy  modification  of  Weierstrass's,

INTRODUCTION  27

Let  a  second  series

(i')  a\,  a\,  .  .  .,  a\,,  .  .  .

have  a  determined  limit  d\  we  find  that  (i)  and
(i')  have  always  one  of  the  three  relations,  which
exclude  one  another:  (a)  a„  —  a'„  becomes  infinitely
small  as  7i  increases  ;  (d)  from  a  certain  n  on,  it
remains  always  greater  than  e,  where  e  is  positive
and  rational  ;  (c)  from  a  certain  n  on,  it  remains
always  less  than  —e.  In  these  cases  we  say,
respectively,

/;  =  ^', /;>//, or /?<d'.

Similarly,  we  find  that  (i)  has  only  one  of  the
three  relations  with  a  rational  number  a  :  (a)  a,^  —  a
becomes  infinitely  small  as  n  increases  ;  (d)  from
a  certain  n  on,  it  remains  always  greater  than  e  ;
(c)  from  a  certain  n  on,  it  remains  less  than  —  e.
We  express  this  by

l?  =  a, d>a, or l?<a,

respectively.  Then  we  can  prove  that  /;  —  a„  becomes
infinitely  small  as  n  increases,  which,  consequently,
justifies  the  name  given  to  I?  of  ''limit  of  the
series  (i). "

Denoting  the  totality  of  the  numerical  magnitudes
d  by  B,  we  can  extend  the  elementary  operations
with  the  rational  numbers  to  the  systems  A  and  B
united. Thus  the  formulae

l?±d'  =  y\ bb'  =  b'\ b\b'  =  b"

28  INTRODUCTION

express  that  the  relations

lim  {a„^a  ,,  -  a" ,^  =  o, \\m  (a,,a  „  -  a" ,)  =  o,

hold respectively. We have similar definitions
when  one  or  two  of  the  numbers  belong  to  A.

The  system  A  has  given  rise  to  B  ;  by  the  same
process  B  and  A  united  give  rise  to  a  third  system
C. Let  the  series

(3)  K ^2. • • •' ^v, . . .

be  composed  of  numbers  from  A  and  B  (not  all
from  A),  and  such  that  |  b,,^„,  —  bn  \  becomes  in-
finitely small  as  n  increases,  whatever  in  is  (this
condition  is  determined  by  the  preceding  definitions),
then  (3)  is  said  to  have  '*a  determined  limit  ^."
The  definitions  of  equality,  inequality,  and  the
elementary  operations  with  the  members  of  C,  or
with  them  and  those  of  B  and  A,  are  analogous  to
the  above  definitions.  Now,  whilst  B  and  A  are  such
that  we  can  equate  each  <^  to  a  <^,  but  not  inversely,
we  can  equate  each  ^  to  a  <;,  and  inversely.  ' '  Although
thus  B  and  C  can,  in  a  certain  measure,  be  regarded
as  identical,  it  is  essential  in  the  theory  here  ex-
posed, according  to  which  the  numerical  magnitude,
not  having  in  general  any  objectivity  at  first,*  only
appears  as  element  of  theorems  which  have  a  certain
objectivity  (for  example,  of  the  theory  that  the
numerical  magnitude  serves  as  limit  for  the  corre-
sponding series),  to  maintain  the  abstract  distinction

*  This  is  connected  with  Cantor's  formalistic  view  of  real  numbers
(see  below).

INTRODUCTION  29

between  B  and  C,  and  also  that  the  equivalence  of
b  and  b'  does  not  mean  their  identity,  but  only
expresses  a  determined  relation  between  the  series
to  which  they  refer."

After  considering  further  systems  C,  D,  .  .  .,  L
of  numerical  magnitudes  which  arise  successively,
as  B  did  from  A  and  C  from  A  and  B,  Cantor  dealt
with  the  relations  of  the  numerical  magnitudes  with
the  metrical  geometry  of  the  straight  line.  If  the
distance  from  a  fixed  point  O  on  a  straight  line  has
a  rational  ratio  with  the  unit  of  measure,  it  is
expressed  by  a  numerical  magnitude  of  the  system
A  ;  otherwise,  if  the  point  is  known  by  a  con-
struction, we  can  always  imagine  a  series  such  as
(i)  and  having  with  the  distance  in  question  a
relation  such  that  the  points  of  the  straight  line  to
which  the  distances  a^^  a^^  ■  ■  -,  ^v,  •  •  •  refer
approach,  ad  infinitum^  as  v  increases,  the  point  to
be  determined.  We  express  this  by  saying  :  The
distance  from  the  point  to  be  determined  to  the
point  O  is  equal  to  b^  where  b  is  the  numerical
magnitude  corresponding  to  the  series  (i).  VVe  can
then  prove  that  the  conditions  of  equivalence,
majority,  and  minority  of  known  distances  agree
with  those  of  the  numerical  magnitudes  which
represent  these  distances.

It  now  follows  without  difficulty  that  the  numerical
magnitudes  of  the  systems  C,  D,  .  .  .,  are  also
capable  of  determining  the  known  distances.  But,
to  complete  the  connexion  we  observe  between  the
systems  of  numerical  magnitudes  and  the  geometry

30  INTRODUCTION

of  the  straight  line,  an  axiom  must  still  be  added,
which  runs  :  To  each  numerical  magnitude  belongs

falso,  reciprocally,  a  determined  point  of  the  straight
line  whose  co-ordinate  is  equal  to  this  numerical
magnitude.*  This  theorem  is  called  an  axiom,  for
in  its  nature  it  cannot  be  demonstrated  generally.
It  also  serves  to  give  to  the  numerical  magnitudes
a  certain  objectivity,  of  which,  however,  they  are
completely  independent.

We  consider,  now,  the  relations  which  present  them-
selves when  we  are  given  a  finite  or  infinite  system  of
numerical  magnitudes,  or  "points,"  as  we  may  call
them  by  what  precedes,  with  greater  convenience.

If  we  are  given  a  system  (P)  of  points  in  a  finite
interval,  and  understand  by  the  word  "  limit-point  "
{Grenzpunkt)  a  point  of  the  straight  line  (not
necessarily  of  P)  such  that  in  any  interval  within
which  this  point  is  contained  there  is  an  infinity  of
points  of  P,  we  can  prove  VVeierstrass's  theorem
that,  if  P  is  infinite,  it  has  at  least  one  limit-point.
Every  point  of  P  which  is  not  a  limit-point  of  P
was  called  by  Cantor  an  "  isolated  "  point.

Every  point,  then,  of  the  straight  line  either  is  or
is  not  a  limit-point  of  P  ;  and  we  have  thus  defined,
at  the  same  time  as  P,  the  system  of  its  limit-points,
which  may  be  called  the  "first  derived  system"
{erste  Ableitung)  V .  If  P'  is  not  composed  of  a
finite  number  of  points,  we  can  deduce,  by  the  same

*  To  each  numerical  magnitude  belongs  a  determined  point,  but  to
each  point  are  related  as  co-ordinates  numberless  equal  numerical
magnitudes.

INTRODUCTION  3I

process,  a  second  derived  system  P''  from  F  ;  and,
by  V  analogous  operations,  we  arrive  at  the  notion
of  a  i/th  system  P^"^  derived  from  P,  If,  for
example,  P  is  composed  of  all  the  points  of  a  line
whose  abscissae  are  rational  and  comprised  between
O  and  I  (including  these  limits  or  not),  P'  is  com-
posed of  all  the  points  of  the  interval  (o  .  .  .  i),
including  these  limits  ;  and  P',  P",  ...  do  not
differ  from  P.  If  P  is  composed  of  the  points  whose
abscissae  are  respectively

I, 1/2, 1/3, . , ., \\v  . . .,

P'  is  composed  of  the  single  point  o,  and  derivation
does  not  give  rise  to  any  other  point.  It  may
happen — and  this  case  alone  interests  us  here —
— that,  after  v  operations,  P^")  is  composed  of  a  finite
number  of  points,  and  consequently  derivation  does
not  give  rise  to  any  other  system.  In  this  case
the  primitive  P  is  said  to  be  of  the  ^^  vX\\  species
{Art);'  and  thus  Y\  P",  ...  are  of  the  (t/-i)th,
(i/— 2)th,  .  .  .  species  respectively.

The  extended trigonometrical theorem  is now  :
If  the  equation

0  =  J^Q  +  <a:j  sin. r -1-^1  cos  ^'+  .  .  . -\-a^^\\\vX

+  ^^cos  vx-\-  .  .  ,

is  satisfied  for  all  values  of  x  except  those  which
correspond  to  the  points  of  a  system  P  of  the  i/th
species,  where  v  is  an  integer  as  great  as  is  pleased,
in  the  interval  (o  .  .  .  27r),  then

b^  =  o, c\  =  b,  =  o.

32  INTRODUCTION

Further  information  as  to  the  conthiuation  of
these  researches  into  derivatives  of  point-aggregates
was  given  in  the  series  of  papers  which  Cantor
began  in  1879  under  the  title  "  Ueber  unendHche,
lineare  Punktmannichfaltigkeiten."  Although  these
papers  were  written  subsequently  to  Cantor's  dis-
covery (1873)  of  the  conceptions  of  "  enumerability  "
{Abzdhlbarkeit)  and  "power"  {Miichtigkeit),  and
these  conceptions  formed  the  basis  of  a  classification
of  aggregates  which,  together  with  the  classification
by  properties  of  the  derivatives  to  be  described
directly,  was  dealt  with  in  these  papers,  yet,  since,
by  Cantor's  own  indications,*  the  discovery  even  of
derivatives  of  definitely  infinite  order  was  made  in
1 87 1,  we  shall  now  extract  from  these  papers -the
parts  concerning  derivatives.

A  point-aggregate  P  is  said  to  be  of  the ''first
kind"  (Gattung)  and  i^th ''species"  if  P^''^  consists
of  merely  a  finite  aggregate  of  points  ;  it  is  said  to
be  of  the  ' '  second  kind  "  if  the  series
p' p"  p(..)

is  infinite.  All  the  points  of  P",  Y" ,  ...  are  always
points  of  P',  while  a  point  of  P'  is  not  necessarily  a
point  of  P.

*  In  1880,  Cantor  wrote  of  the  "  dialectic  generation  of  conceptions,
which  always  leads  farther  and  yet  remains  free  from  all  arbitrariness,
necessary  and  logical,"  of  the  transfinite  series  of  indices  of  derivatives.
"I  arrived  at  this  ten  years  ago  [this  was  written  in  May  1880]  ;  on
the  occasion  of  my  exposition  of  the  number-conception,  I  did  not
refer  to  it."  And  in  a  letter  to  me  of  31st  August  1905,  Professor
Cantor  wrote:  "Was  die  transfiniten  Ordnungszahlen  betriftt,  ist  es
mir  wahrscheinlich,  dass  ich  schon  1871  eine  Voistellung  vcn  ihnen
gehal:)t  habe.  Den  Begrifif  der  Abzahlbarkeit  bildete  ich  mir  erst
1873."

INTRODUCTION  33

Some  or  all  of  the  points  of  a  continuous  *  interval
(a  .  .  .  ^),  the  extreme  points  being  considered  as
belonging  to  the  interval,  may  be  points  of  P  ;  if
none  are,  ?  is  said  to  be  quite  outside  (a  .  .  .  /3).  If
P  is  (wholly  or  in  part)  contained  in  (a  .  .  .  0),  a
remarkable  case  may  present  itself  :  every  interval
(y  .  .  .  ^)  in  it,  however  small,  may  contain  points
of  P.  Then  P  is  said  to  be  '  *  everywhere  dense  "
in  the  interval  (a  .  .  .  fi).  For  example,  (i)  the
point-aggregate  whose  elements  are  all  the  points
of  (a  .  .  .  /3),  (2)  that  of  all  the  points  whose
abscissa?  are  rational,  and  (3)  that  of  all  the
points  whose  abscissae  are  rational  numbers  of  the
form  zL(2n-\-  i)/2"',  where  m  and  n  are  integers,  are
everywhere  dense  in  (a  .  .  .  ^)-  It  results  from  this
that,  if  a  point-aggregate  is  not  everywhere  dense
in  (a  .  .  .  ^),  there  must  exist  an  interval  (y  .  .  .  ^)
comprised  in  (a  .  .  .  /3)  and  in  which  there  is  no
point  of  P.  Further,  if  P  is  everywhere  dense
in  (a  .  .  .  /3),  not  only  is  the  same  true  for  P',
but  P'  consists  of  all  the  points  of  («  .  .  .  jS).  We
might  take  this  property  of  P'  as  the  definition
of  the  expression  :  * '  P  is  everywhere  dense  in
{a...,8y

Such  a  P  is  necessarily  of  the  second  kind,  and
hence  a  point-aggregate  of  the  first  kind  is  every-
where dense  in  no  interval.  As  to  the  question
whether inversely every point-aggregate of the

*  At  the  beginning  of  the  first  paper,  Cantor  stated:  "As  we  shall
show  later,  it  is  on  this  notion  [of  derived  aggregate]  that  the  simplest
and  completest  explanation  respecting  the  determination  of  a  continuum
rests  "  (see  below).

3

34  INTRODUCTION

second  kind  is  everywhere  dense  in  some  intervals,
Cantor  postponed  it.  y

Point-aggregates  of  the  first  kind  can,  as  we  have
seen,  be  completely  characterized  by  the  notion  of
derived  aggregate,  but  for  those  of  the  second  kind
this  notion  does  not  suffice,  and  it  is  necessary  to
give it an extension which presents itself as it
were  of  its  own  accord  when  we  go  deeper  into  the
question. It  may  here  be  remarked  that  Paul  du
Bois-Reymond  was  led  by  the  study  of  the  general
theory  of  functions  to  a  partly  similar  development
of  the  theory  of  aggregates,  and  an  appreciation  of
its  importance  in  the  theory  of  functions. In  1874,
he  classified  functions into  divisions, according  to
the  variations  of  the  functions  required  in  the  theory
of  series and integrals  which serve for  the repre-
sentation of "arbitrary" functions. He then
considered certain distributions of singularities.
An  infinite  aggregate  of  points  which  does  not  form
a  continuous  line  may  be  either such  that  in  any
line,  however  small,  such  points  occur  (like  the  points
corresponding  to  the  rational  numbers),  or  in  any
part,  a  finite  line  in  which  are  none  of  those  points
exists. In  the  latter  case,  the  points  are  infinitely
dense  on  nearing  certain  points  ; "for  if  they  are
infinite in number, all their distances cannot be
finite. But also not all their distances in an
arbitrarily small line can vanish  ; for, if  so, the
first  case  would  occur. So their  distances  can  be
zero only  in points, or, speaking more correctly,
in infinitely small lines." Here we distinguish:

INTRODUCTION  35

(i)  The  points  k^  condense  on  nearing  a  finite
number  of  points  k^  ;  (2)  the  points  k^  condense  at
a  finite  number  of  points  k^,  .  .  .  Thus,  the
roots  of  o  =  sin  i/jc  condense  near  x=o,  those  of
o  =  sin  I /sin  i/x  near  the  preceding  roots,  .  .  .
The  functions  with  such  singularities  fill  the  space
between  the  "  common  "  functions  and  the  functions
with  singularities  from  point  to  point.  Finally,
du  Bois-Reymond  discussed  integration  over  such
a  line.  In  a  note  of  1879,  he  remarked  that
Dirichlet's  criterion  for  the  integrability  of  a  function
is  not  sufficient,  for  we  can  also  distribute  intervals
in  an  everywhere  dense  fashion  {pantacJiiscJi)  ;  that
is  to  say,  we  can  so  distribute  intervals  D  on  the
interval  ( —  tt  .  .  .  +  tt)  that  in  any  connected
portion,  however  small,  of  (  — tt  .  .  .  +7r)  connected
intervals  D  occur.  Let,  now,  ^(,r)  be  o  in  these
D's  and  i  in  the  points  of  (  — tt  .  .  .  +7r)  not  covered
by  D's  ;  then  (^{x)  is  not  integrable,  although  any
interval  inside  ( —  tt  .  .  .  +  tt)  contains  lines  in
which  it  is  continuous  (namely,  zero).  *'To  this
distribution  of  intervals  we  are  led  when  we  seek
the  points  of  condensation  of  infinite  order  whose  ex-
istence i  announced  to  Professor  Cantor  years  ago."
Consider  a  series  of  successive  intervals  on  the
line  like  those  bounded  by  the  points  i,  1/2,  1/3,
.  .  .,  i/r,  .  .  .  ;  in  the  interval  (1/1/ .  .  .  i/(i/+ i))
take  a  point-aggregate  of  the  first  kind  and  j/th
species.  Now,  since  each  term  of  the  series  of
derivatives  of  P  is  contained  in  the  preceding  ones,
and  consequently  each  P^")  arises  from  the  preceding

36  INTRODUCTION

pC'^-i)  by  the  falling  away  (at  most)  of  points, — that
is  to  say,  no  new  points  arise, — then,  if  P  is  of  the
second  kind,  P'  will  be  composed  of  two  point-
aggregates,  Q  and  R  ;  Q  consisting  of  those  points
of  P  which  disappear  by  sufficient  progression  in
the  sequence  P',  P'',  .  .  .,  P^"),  .  .  .,  and  R  of  the
points  kept  in  all  the  terms  of  this  sequence.  In
the  above  example,  R  consists  of  the  single  point
zero.  Cantor  denoted  R  by  P(°°\  and  called  it
"the  derived  aggregate  of  P  of  order  oo  (infinity)."
The  first  derivative  of  P^°°)  was  denoted  by  p(~+i),
and  so  on  for

p(cxD+2) p(co+3) ^ ^ ^ p(o

+v)

Again,  P(~)  may  have  a  derivative  of  infinite  order
which  Cantor  denoted  by  P^^°°^ ;  and,  continuing
these  conceptual  constructions,  he  arrived  at  de-
rivatives which  are  quite  logically  denoted  by
p(woo+«)^  where  in  and  n  are  positive  integers.  But
he  went  still  farther,  formed  the  aggregate  of
common  points  of  all  these  derivatives,  and  got  a
derivative  which  he  denoted  p(°°'^),  and  so  on  without
end. Thus  he  got  derivatives  of  indices

S3

1^0^ +1^100 i- . . . -tv^^y  ... 00  ,  ... CO J  .  .  .

"Here  we  see  a  dialectic  generation  of  concep-
tions,* which  always  leads  yet  farther,  and  remains
both  free  from  every  arbitrariness  and  necessary
and  logical  in  itself."

*  To  this  passage  Cantor  added  the  note  :  "  I  was  led  to  this  genera-
tion ten  years  ago  [the  note  was  written  in  May  i88o],  but  when
exposing  my  theory  of  the  number-conception  I  did  not  refer  to  it."

. INTRODUCTION  37

We  see  that  point-aggregates  of  the  first  kind
are  characterized  by  the  property  that  P^~^  has  no
elements,  or,  in  symbols,

p(-)  =  o^

and  also  the  above  example  shows  that  a  point-
aggregate  of  the  second  kind  need  not  be  every-
where dense  in  any  part  of  an  interval.

In  the  first  of  his  papers  of  1882,  Cantor  extended
the  conceptions  "derivative"  and  "everywhere
dense "  to  aggregates  situated  in  continua  of  71
dimensions,  and  also  gave  some  reflexions  on  the
question  as  to  under  what  circumstances  an  (infinite)
aggregate  is  well  defined.  These  reflexions,  though
important  for  the  purpose  of  emphasizing  the
legitimacy  of  the  process  used  for  defining  P^°°^,
P^^~\  .  .  .,  are  more  immediately  connected  with
the  conception  of  "power,"  and  will  thus  be  dealt
with  later.  The  same  applies  to  the  proof  that  it  is
possible  to  remove  an  everywhere  dense  aggregate
from  a  continuum  of  two  or  more  dimensions  in
such  a  way  that  any  two  points  can  be  connected
by  continuous  circular  arcs  consisting  of  the  re-
maining points,  so  that  a  continuous  motion  may
be  possible  in  a  discontinuous  space.  To  this
Cantor  added  a  note  stating  that  a  purely  arith-
metical theory  of  magnitudes  was  now  not  onl}'
known  to  be  possible,  but  also  already  sketched  out
in  its  leading  features.

We  must  now  turn  our  attention  to  the  develop-
ment of the conceptions  of  "  enumerability "  and

38  INTRODUCTION

*' power,"  which  were  gradually  seen  to  have  a
very  close  connexion  with  the  theory  of  derivatives
and  the  theory,  arising  from  this  theory,  of  the
transfinite  numbers.

In  1873,  Cantor  set  out  from  the  question
whether  the  linear  continuum  (of  real  numbers)
could  be  put  in  a  one-one  correspondence  with  the
aggregate  of  whole  numbers,  and  found  the  rigorous
proof  that  this  is  not  the  case.  This  proof,  together
with  a  proof  that  the  totality  of  real  algebraic
numbers  can  be  put  in  such  a  correspondence,  and
hence  that  there  exist  transcendental  numbers  in
every  interval  of  the  number-continuum,  was
published  in  1874.

A  real  number  w  which  is  a  root  of  a  non-identical
equation  of  the  form

(4)  ^0^^^  +  ^!^""^+  •  •  • +^«  =  0'

where  n,  a^,  a^,  .  .  .,  a„  are  integers,  is  called  a  real
algebraic  number ;  we  may  suppose  n  and  a^  positive,
^0,  a^,  .  .  .,  a,,  to  have  no  common  divisor,  and  (4)
to  be  irreducible. The  positive  whole  number

N  =  ?2  -  I  -F  I  ^0  I  +  I  ^1  I  +  •  •  •  +  I  ^«  I
may  be  called  the  'Mieight"  of  w  ;  and  to  each
positive  integer  correspond  a  finite  number  of  real
algebraic  numbers  whose  height  is  that  integer.
Thus  we  can  arrange  the  totality  of  real  algebraic
numbers  in  a  simply  infinite  series

by arranging the numbers corresponding to the

INTRODUCTION  39

height N in order of magnitude, and then the
various  heights  in  their  order  of  magnitude.

Suppose,  now,  that  the  totahty  of  the  real
numbers  in  the  interval  (a  .  .  .  ,8),  where  a</3,
could  be  arranged  in  the  simply  infinite  series

(5)  ^1,  u.^,  .  .  .^u,,  .  .  .

Let  a',  /3'  be  the  two  first  numbers  of  (5),  different
from  one  another  and  from  a,  /3,  and  such  that
a  <^'  \  similarly,  let  a\  j^'\  where  a'</3'\  be  the
first  different  numbers  in  (a  .  .  .  /3'),  and  so  on.
The  numbers  a,  a" ■>  .  .  .  are  members  of  (5)  whose
indices  increase  constantly  ;  and  similarly  for  the
numbers  p\  ^'\  ...  of  decreasing  magnitude.
Each  of  the  intervals  (a  .  .  .  /3),  (a  .  .  .  /3'),
{a"  .  .  .  j3"),  .  .  .  includes  all  those  which  follow.
We  can  then  only  conceive  two  cases  :  either  {a)
the  number  of  intervals  is  finite  ; — let  the  last  be
{a^"^  .  .  .  /S^"^)  ;  then,  since  there  is  in  this  interval  at
most  one  number  of  (5),  we  can  take  in  it  a  number
rj  which  does  not  belong  to  (5)  ; — or  (d)  there  are
infinitely  many  intervals.  Then,  since  a,  a,  a\  .  .  .
increase  constantly  without  increasing  ad  infinituvi^
they  have  a  certain  limit  a^°°\  and  similarly  /3,  /3',
/3'',  .  .  .  decrease  constantly  towards  a  certain
limit  Z?^"').  If  a^°°)  =  /3(°°)  (which  always  happens
when  applying  this  method  to  the  system  (o))),  we
easily  see  that  the  number  ri  =  a^"'^  cannot  be  in  (5).*
If, on  the  contrary,  a^°'^<^''~\  every  number  tj  in

•■  For  if  it  were,  we  would  have  y}  =  up,  p  being  a  determined  index  ;
but  that  is  not  possible,  for  up  is  not  in  (a^^^  .  .  .  /S^-^^),  whilst  tj,  by
definition,  is.

v-^

40  INTRODUCTION

the  interval  {a^"^^  .  .  .  ^(">)  or  equal  to  one  of  its
ends  fulfils  the  condition  of  not  belonging  to  (5).

The  property  of  the  totality  of  real  algebraic
numbers  is  that  the  system  (co)  can  be  put  in  a  one-
to-one  or  (i,  i)-correspondence  with  the  system
(i/),  and  hence  results  a  new  proof  of  Liouville's
theorem  that,  in  every  interval  of  the  real  numbers,
there  is  an  infinity  of  transcendental  (non-algebraic)
numbers.

This  conception  of  (i,  i)-correspondence  between
aggregates  was  the  fundamental  idea  in  a  memoir
of  1877,  published  in  1878,  in  which  some  import-
ant theorems  of  this  kind  of  relation  between  various
aggregates  were  given  and  suggestions  made  of  a
classification  of  aggregates  on  this  basis.

If  two  well-defined  aggregates  can  be  put  into
such  a  (i,  i)-correspondence  (that  is  to  say,  if,
element  to  element,  they  can  be  made  to  correspond
completely  and  uniquely),  they  are  said  to  be
of  the  same  ' '  power "  {Mdchtigkeit  *)  or  to  be
' '  equivalent  "  {aequivalent).  When  an  aggregate
is  finite,  the  notion  of  power  corresponds  to  that  of
number  {Anzahl),  for  two  such  aggregates  have  the
same  power  when,  and  only  when,  the  number  of
their  elements  is  the  same.

A  part  {Bestandteil ;  any  other  aggregate  whose
elements  are  also  elements  of  the  original  one)  of  a
finite  aggregate  has  always  a  power  less  than  that

*  The  word  "power"  was  borrowed  from  Steiner,  who  used  it  in  a
quite  special,  but  allied,  sense,  to  express  that  two  figures  can  be  put,
element  for  element,  in  projective  correspondence.

INTRODUCTION  41

of  the  aggregate  itself,  but  this  is  not  always  the
case  with  infinite  aggregates,* — for  example,  the
series  of  positive  integers  is  easily  seen  to  have  the
same  power  as  that  part  of  it  consisting  of  the  even
integers, — and  hence,  from  the  circumstance  that
an  infinite  aggregate  M  is  part  of  N  (or  is  equiva-
lent to  a  part  of  N),  we  can  only  conclude  that  the
power  of  M  is  less  than  that  of  N  if  we  know  that
these  powers  are  unequal.

The  series  of  positive  integers  has,  as  is  easy  to
show,  the  smallest  infinite  power,  but  the  class  of
aggregates  with  this  power  is  extraordinarily  rich
and  extensive,  comprising,  for  example,  Dedekind's
'*  finite  corpora,"  Cantor's  ''systems  of  points  of
the  j/th  species,"  all  ;^-ple  series,  and  the  totality  of
real  (and  also  complex)  algebraic  numbers.  Further,
we  can  easily  prove  that,  if  M  is  an  aggregate  of
this  first  infinite  power,  each  infinite  part  of  M  has
the  same  power  as  M,  and  if  M",  M",  ...  is  a  finite
or  simply  infinite  series  of  aggregates  of  the  first
power,  the  aggregate  resulting  from  the  union  of
these  aggregates  has  also  the  first  power.

By  the  preceding  memoir,  continuous  aggregates
have  not  the  first  power,  but  a  greater  one  ;  and
Cantor  proceeded  to  prove  that  the  analogue,  with
continua,  of  a  multiple  series — a  continuum  of  many
dimensions — has  the  same  power  as  a  continuum  of

"  This  curious  property  of  infinite  aggregates  was  first  noticed  by
Bernard  Bolzano,  obscurely  stated  ("  .  .  .  two  unequal  lengths  [may
be  said  to]  contain  the  same  number  of  points")  in  a  paper  of  1864  in
which  Augustus  De  Morgan  argued  for  a  proper  infinite,  and  was  used
as  a  definition  of  "infinite"  by  Dedekind  (independently  of  Bolzano
and  Cantor)  in  1887.

42  INTRODUCTION

one  dimension.  Thus  it  appeared  that  the  assump-
tion of  Riemann,  Helmholtz,  and  others  that  the
essential  characteristic  of  an  ;2-ply  extended  con-
tinuous manifold  is  that  its  elements  depend  on  n
real,  continuous,  independent  variables  (co-ordin-
ates), in  such  a  way  that  to  each  element  of  the
manifold  belongs  a  definite  system  of  values  x^^  x^,
.  .  .,  ;ir„,  and  reciprocally  to  each  admissible  system
x^^  x^,  .  .  .,  x„  belongs  a  certain  element  of  the
manifold,  tacitly  supposes  that  the  correspondence
of  the  elements  and  systems  of  values  is  a  continuous
one.  *  If  we  let  this  supposition  drop,t  we  can  prove
that  there  is  a  (i,  i)-correspondence  between  the
elements  of  the  linear  continuum  and  those  of  a
n-p\y  extended  continuum.

This  evidently  follows  from  the  proof  of  the
theorem:  Let  x^^,  x^,  .  .  .,  x,,  be  real,  independent
variables,  each  of  which  can  take  any  value  o<x<  i  ;
then  to  this  system  of  n  variables  can  be  made  to
correspond  a  variable  /(o</<i)  so  that  to  each
determined  value  of  t  corresponds  one  system  of
determined  values  of  x^^,  x,^,  .  .  .,  x,„  and  via  versa.
To  prove  this,  we  set  out  from  the  known  theorem
that  every  irrational  number  e  between  o  and  i  can
be  represented  in  one  manner  by  an  infinite  con-
tinued fraction  which  may  be  written  :

(«!,  otg,  .  .  ., a^,  .  .  .)»

*  That  is  to  say,  an  infinitely  small  variation  in  position  of  the  element
imphes  an  infinitely  small  variation  of  the  variables,  and  reciprocally.

t  In  the  French  translation  only  of  this  memoir  of  Cantor's  is  added
here:  "and  this  happens  very  often  in  the  works  of  these  authors
(Riemann  and  Helmholtz)." Cantor  had  revised  this  translation.

INTRODUCTION  43

where  the  a's  are  positive  integers.  There  is  thus
a  (i,  i)-correspondence  between  the  ^'s  and  the
various  series  of  a's.  Consider,  now,  n  variables,
each  of  which  can  take  independently  all  the  ir-
rational values  (and  each  only  once)  in  the  interval
(o  .  .  . I):

^i  =  (ai,  1,  ai,  2j  ' • •,  cti,  ^,  . .  .),
^a~(^2,  1)  «2,  2>  •••)  a2,  I'j  •••))•• •)
^/;  =  (a„,  1,  a„,  2>  .  . •>  a«,  V,  .  . •)  5
these n irrational numbers uniquely  determine  a
(/^+  i)th  irrational  number  in  (o  .  .  . i),

^=(A,  ft,  .  .  .  ft,  .  .  .),

if  the  relation  between  a  and  /3  :

(6) ft.-i)«+A^  =  a^,v*  (m=  I,  2,  .  .  .,  n\  1^=1,  2,  .  .  .CO)

is  established.  Inversely,  such  a  ^t'  determines
uniquely  the  series  of  fts  and,  by  (6),  the  series  of
the  a's,  and  hence,  again  of  the  ^'s.  We  have  only
to  show,  now,  that  there  can  exist  a  (i,  i)-corre-
spondence  between  the  irrational  numbers  o<e<\
and  the  real  (irrational  and  rational)  numbers
o<^'<i.  For  this  purpose,  we  remark  that  all
the  rational  numbers  of  this  interval  can  be  written
in  the  form  of  a  simply  infinite  series

^1, 02J • • -J V-V) • • -t

*  If  we  arrange  the  n  series  of  o's  in  a  double  series  with  n  rows,
this  nieans  that  we  are  to  enumerate  the  a's  in  the  order  aj  ^  ^  a.,  ,  ^
.  .  .  a^,  J,  Oj  o,  a.,  o,  .  .  .  ,  and  that  the  ^th  term  of  this  series
is  /3r. '

t  This  is  done  most  simply  as  follows  :  Let  plq  be  a  rational  number
of  this  interval  in  its  lowest  terms,  and  put  /  +  ^  =  N. To  each  plq

44  INTRODUCTION

Then  in  (o  .  .  .i)  we  take  any  infinite  series  of
irrational  numbers  tji,  t]2y  -  -  -y  ^vy  •  -  •  (^o^  example,
tj^=  J  212"),  and  let  /i  take  any  of  the  values  of
O  .  .  . i)  except  the  0's  and  >/s,  so  that

and  we  can  also  write  the  last  formula :

Now,  if  we  write  a  Oo  d  for  ' '  the  aggregate  of  the  a's
is  equivalent  to  that  of  the  ^'s,"  and  notice  that  aooa,
a  c\j  3  and  d  cx)  c  imply  a  c\)  c,  and  that  two  aggre-
gates of  equivalent  aggregates  of  elements,  where  the
elements  of  each  latter  aggregate  have,  two  by  two,
no  common  element,  are  equivalent,  we  remark  that

and

X  cso  e.

A  generalization  of  the  above  theorem  to  the  case
of  x-^,  x.^,  .  .  .,  x^,  .  .  .  being  a  simply  infinite  series
(and  thus  that  the  continuum  may  be  of  an  infinity
of  dimensions  while  remaining  of  the  same  power
as  the  linear  continuum)  results  from  the  observa-
tion that,  between  the  double  series {a^^  „},  where

^;a  =  («^t,  1  , tt/x,  2, • . .  , a/x, «" • • •  ) ^^^' M  = I  J 2, ...  CO

belongs  a  determined  positive  integral  value  of  N,  and  to  each  such  N
belong  a  finite  number  of  fractions  />/(/.  Imagine  now  the  numbers //(^
arranged  so  that  those  which  belong  to  smaller  values  of  N  precede
those  which  belong  to  larger  ones,  and  those  for  which  N  has  the  same
value  are  arranged  the  greater  after  the  smaller.

*  This  notation  means  :  the  aggregate  of  the  a's  is  the  union  of  those
of  the  ^'s,  7;»''s,  and  (pyS  ;  and  analogously  for  that  of  the  ^'s.

INTRODUCTION  45

and  the  simple  series  {/3;y^},  a  (i,  i)-correspondence
can  be  established  *  by  putting

\=fj.-^{fj,^V-  l)(/x  +  j/-2)/2,

and  the  function  on  the  right  has  the  remarkable
property  of  representing  all  the  positive  integers,
and  each  of  them  once  only,  when  /x  and  v  inde-
pendently take  all  positive  integer  values.

''And  now  that  we  have  proved,"  concluded
Cantor,  "for  a  very  rich  and  extensive  field  of
manifolds,  the  property  of  being  capable  of  corre-
spondence with  the  points  of  a  continuous  straight
line  or  with  a  part  of  it  (a  manifold  of  points  con-
tained in  it),  the  question  arises  .  .  . :  Into  how
many  and  what  classes  (if  we  say  that  manifolds  of
the  same  or  different  power  are  grouped  in  the  same
or  different  classes  respectively)  do  linear  manifolds
fall  ?  By  a  process  of  induction,  into  the  further
description  of  which  we  will  not  enter  here,  we  are
led  to  the  theorem  that  the  number  of  classes  is  two  :
the  one  containing  all  manifolds  susceptible  of  being
brought  to  the  form  :  functio  ipsius  v,  where  u  can
receive  all  positive  integral  values  ;  and  the  other
containing  all  manifolds  reducible  to  the  ioxxn  functio
ipsius  ,r,  where  x  can  take  all  the  real  values  in  the
interval  (o  .  .  . i). "

In  the  paper  of  1879  already  referred  to,  Cantor

* Enumerate  the  double  series |a^^  ^,\ diagonally, that  is  to  say,
in  the  order

The term of this series whose index is (/i, v) is the Ath, where
A=I+2  +  3+ . . .+()U  +  l/-2)  +  /i  =  (/A  +  l'-2)(;i  +  |/-l)/2  +  /x.

46  INTRODUCTION

considered  the  classification  of  aggregates  *  both
according  to  the  properties  of  their  derivatives  and
according  to  their  powers.  After  some  repetitions,
a  rather  simpler  proof  of  the  theorem  that  the  con-
tinuum is  not  of  the  first  power  was  given.  But,
though  no  essentially  new  results  on  power  were
published  until  late  in  1882,  we  must  refer  to  the
discussion  (1882)  of  what  is  meant  by  a  "well-
defined  "  aggregate.

The  conception  of  power  f  which  contains,  as  a
particular  case,  the  notion  of  whole  number  may,
said  Cantor,  be  considered  as  an  attribute  of  every
"well-defined"  aggregate,  whatever  conceivable
nature  its  elements  may  have.  ' '  An  aggregate  of
elements  belonging  to  any  sphere  of  thought  is  said
to  be  '  well  defined '  when,  in  consequence  of  its
definition  and  of  the  logical  principle  of  the  excluded
middle,  it  must  be  considered  as  intrinsically  deter-
mined whether  any  object  belonging  to  this  sphere
belongs  to  the  aggregate  or  not,  and,  secondly,
whether  two  objects  belonging  to  the  aggregate
are  equal  or  not,  in  spite  of  formal  differences
in  the  manner  in  which  they  are  given.  In  fact,
we  cannot,  in  general,  effect  in  a  sure  and  precise
manner  these  determinations  with  the  means  at  our
disposal  ;  but  here  it  is  only  a  question  of  intrinsic
determination, from  which  an actual or extrinsic

"  Linear  aggregates  alone  were  considered,  since  all  the  powers  of
the  continua  of  various  dimensions  are  to  be  found  in  them.

t  "That  foundation  of  the  theory  of  magnitudes  which  we  may
consider  to  be  the  most  general  genuine  moment  in  the  case  of
manifolds."

INTRODUCTION  47

determination  is  to  be  developed  by  perfecting  the
auxiliary  means."  Thus,  we  can,  without  any
doubt,  conceive  it  to  be  intrinsically  determined
whether  a  number  chosen  at  will  is  algebraic  or
not  ;  and  yet  it  was  only  proved  in  1874  that  e  is
transcendental,  and  the  problem  with  regard  to  tt
was  unsolved  when  Cantor  wrote  in  1882.*

In  this  paper  was  first  used  the  word  **  enumer-
able "  to  describe  an  aggregate  which  could  be  put
in  a  (i,  i)-correspondence  with  the  aggregate  of
the  positive  integers  and  is  consequently  of  the  first
(infinite)  power  ;  and  here  also  was  the  important
theorem  :  In  a  ;/-dimensional  space  (A)  are  defined
an  infinity  of  (arbitrarily  small)  continua  of  11
dimensions  f  {a)  separated  from  one  another  and
most  meeting  at  their  boundaries  ;  the  aggregate  of
the  rt:'s  is  enumerable.

For  refer  A  by  means  of  reciprocal  radii  vectores
to  an  ;^-ply  extended  figure  B  within  a  («+  i)-
dimensional  infinite  space  /\',  and  let  the  points  of
B  have  the  constant  distance  i  from  a  fixed  point
of  A'.  To  every  a  corresponds  a  /^-dimensional
part  <^  of  B  with  a  definite  content,  and  the  ^'s  are
enumerable,  for  the  number  of  b's  greater  in  con-
tent than  an  arbitrarily  small  number  y  is  finite,  for
their  sum  is  less  than  2'V  +  (the  content  of  B).  §

*  Lindemann  afterwards  proved  that  it  is  transcendental.  In  this
passage,  Cantor  seemed  to  agree  with  Dedekind.

t  With  every  a  the  points  of  its  boundary  are  considered  as  belong-
ing to  it.

:;:  In  the  French  translation  (1883)  of  Cantor's  memoir,  this  num])er
was  corrected  to  Qw(m  I  lyg/F^fyr-MH/g).

§  When  n=i,  the  theorem  is  that  every  aggregate  of  intervals  on  a

2^ -i.  cf,M,.tt..A..n t^Zl ^.fT'^P,

r(^-r)

48  INTRODUCTION

Finally,  Cantor  made  the  interesting  remark  that,
if  we  remove  from  an  ;^-dimensional  continuum  any
enumerable  and  everywhere-dense  aggregate,  the
remainder  (21),  if  ^>2,  does  not  cease  to  be  con-
tinuously connected,  in  the  sense  that  any  two
points  N,  N'  of  51  can  be  connected  by  a  continuous
line  composed  of  circular  arcs  all  of  whose  points
belong  to  51.

VI

An  application  of  Cantor's  conception  of  enumera-
bility  was  given  by  a  simpler  method  of  condensation
of  singularities,  the  construction  of  functions  having  "
a  given  singularity,  such  as  a  discontinuity,  at  an
enumerable  and  everywhere-dense  aggregate  in  a
given  real  interval.  This  was  suggested  by  Weier-
strass,  and  published  by  Cantor,  with  Weierstrass's
examples,  in  1882.*  The  method  may  be  thus
indicated  :  Let  ^p{x)  be  a  given  function  with  the
single singularity  x—O, and (w^,) any enumerable

aggregate  ;  put

00

v  =  l

where  the  ^^'s  are  so  chosen  that  the  series  and
those  derived  from  it  in  the  particular  cases  treated
converge unconditionally and uniformly. Then

(finite  or  infinite)  straight  line  which  at  most  meet  at  their  ends  is
enumerable.  The  end-points  are  consequently  enumerable,  but  not
always  the  derivative  of  this  aggregate  of  end-points.

*  Inaletter  tome  of  29th  March  1905,  Professor  Cantor  said  :  "Atthe
conception  of  enumerability,  of  which  he  [Weierstrass]  heard  from  me  at
Berlin  in  the  Christmas  holidays  of  1873,  l^e  was  at  first  quite  amazed,
but  one  or  two  days  passed  over,  [and]  it  became  his  own  and  helped  him
to  an  unexpected  development  of  his  wonderful  theory  of  functions."

INTRODUCTION  49

f{x)  has  at  all  points  A'  =  a)^  the  same  kind  of  singu-
larity as  (^{x)  at;ir=o,  and  at  other  points  behaves,
in  general,  regularly.  The  singularity  at  x  =  {^^  is
due  exclusively  to  the  one  term  of  the  series  in
which  j/  =  /u  ;  the  aggregate  (co^)  may  be  any  enumer-
able aggregate  and  not  only,  as  in  Hankel's  method,
the  aggregate  of  the  rational  numbers,  and  the
superfluous  and  complicating  oscillations  produced
by  the' occurrence  of  the  sine  in  Hankel's  functions
is  avoided.

The  fourth  (1882)  of  Cantor's  papers  "  (Jeber
unendliche,  lineare  Punktmannichfaltigkeiten  "  con-
tained six  theorems  on  enumerable  point-aggregatfes.
H^an  aggregate  O  (in  a  continuum  of  n  dimensions)
is  such  tha't  none  of  its  points  is  a  limit-point,*  it  is
said  to  be  "  isolated."  Then,  round  every  point  of
O  a  sphere  can  be  drawn  which  contains  no  other
point  of  Q,  and  hence,  by  the  above  theorem  on
the  enumerability  of  the' aggregate  of  these  spheres,
is  enumerable.

Secondly,  if  P'  is  enumerable,  P  is. P'or  let

^(P,  P')^R,  P-R^O;t

then  O  is  isolated  and  therefore  enumerable,  and  R
is  also  enumerable,  since  R  is  contained  in  P' ;  so
P  is  enumerable.

The  next  three  theorems state that, if P<''\ or

*  Cantor  expressed  this  X'(Q>  Q')  — O-  Q-  Dedekind's  Essays  on
Nuf/iber,  p.  48.

t  If  an  aggregate  B  is  contained  in  A,  and  E  is  the  aggregate  left
when  B  is  taken  from  A,  we  write

E  =  A-B.

50  INTRODUCTION

P^«>,  where  a  is  any  one  of  the  ' '  definitely  defined
symbols  of  infinity  {bestimmt  definirte  Unendlich-
keitssymbole),''  is  enumerable,  then  P  is.

If  the  aggregates  1\,  V^,  .  .  .  have,  two  by  two,
no  common  point,  for  the  aggregate  P  formed  by
the  union  of  these  (the  ''  Vereinigungsmenge'')  Cantor
now  used  the  notation

P^P,  +  P2+.  ..
Now,  we  have  the  following  identity
P'^(P'-P")  +  (P"-P"0+  .  •  •  +(P(''-i)-P(''))+P^^^
and  thus,  since

p/_p// Y" —V" .  . p(''-i)  — p('')

are  all  isolated  and  therefore  enumerable,  if  P^'^^  is
enumerable,  then  P'  is  also.

Now,  suppose  that  P(~>  exists  ;  then,  if  any  par-
ticular point  of  P'  does  not  belong  to  P^°°),  there  is  a
first  one  among  the  derivatives  of  finite  order,  P^"^),
to  which  it  does  not  belong,  and  consequently  P^^-^)
contains  it  as  an  isolated  point.  Thus  we  can  write
P'^(P^_p-)  +  (p-_p-)+  .  .  . +(p(-i)-PM)

+  .  .  . +P(~);

and  consequently,  since  an  enumerable  aggregate  of
enumerable  aggregates  is  an  enumerable  aggregate
of  the  elements  of  the  latter,  and  P^"^^  is  enumerable,
then  P'  is  also.  This  can  evidently  be  extended  to
P^*^),  if  it  exists,  provided  that  the  aggregate  of  all
the  derivatives  from  P'  to  P^*^  is  enumerable.

The considerations which arise from the last

INTRODUCTION  51

observation  appear  to  me  to  have  constituted  the
final  reason  for  considering  these  definitely  infinite
indices  independently  *  on  account  of  their  con-
nexion with  the  conception  of  ''power,"  which
Cantor  had  always  regarded  as  the  most  funda-
mental one  in  the  whole  theory  of  aggregates.
The  series  of  the  indices  found,  namely,  is  such
that,  up  to  any  point  (infinity  or  beyond),  the
aggregate  of  them  is  always  enumerable,  and  yet
a  process  exactly  analogous  to  that  used  in  the
proof  that  the  continuum  is  not  enumerable  leads
to  the  result  that  the  aggregate  of  all  the  indices
such  that,  if  a  is  any  index,  the  aggregate  of  all  the
indices  preceding  a  is  enumerable,  is  not  enumer-
able, but  is,  just  as  the  power  of  the  series  of
positive  integers  is  the  next  higher  one  to  all  finite
ones,  the  next  greater  infinite  power  to  the  first.
And  we  can  again  imagine  a  new  index  which  is  the
first  after  all  those  defined,  just  as  after  all  the  finite
ones.  We  shall  see  these  thoughts  published  by
Cantor  at  the  end  of  1882.

It  remains  to  mention  the  sixth  theorem,  in
which  Cantor  proved  that,  if  P'  is  enumerable,  P
has  the  property,  which  is  essential  in  the  theory
of  integration,  of  being  "discrete,"  as  Harnack
called  it,  "  integrable,"  as  P.  du  Bois-Reymond  did,
'' unextended,"  or,  as  it  is  now  generally  called,
"  content-less."

*  When  considered  independently  of  P,  these  indices  form  a  series
beginning  with  the  finite  numbers,  but  extending  beyond  them;  so
that  it  suggests  itself  that  those  other  indices  be  considered  as  infinite
(or  transhnite)  tnanbers.

52  INTRODUCTION

VII

VVe  have  thus  seen  the  importance  of  Cantor's
"definitely  defined  symbols  of  infinity"  in  the
theorem  that  if  P^"^  vanishes,  P',  and  therefore  P,  is
enumerable.  This  theorem  may,  as  we  can  easily
see  by  what  precedes,  be  inverted  as  follows  :  If
P'  is  enumerable,  there  is  an  index  a  such  that  P^"^
vanishes.  By  defining  these  indices  in  an  inde-
pendent manner  as  real,  and  in  general  transfinite,
integers.  Cantor  was  enabled  to  form  a  conception
of  the  enumeral  *  {Anza/il)  of  certain  infinite  series,
and  such  series  gave  a  means  of  defining  a  series  of
ascending  infinite  "powers."  The  conceptions  of
"enumeral"  and  "power"  coincided  in  the  case  of
finite  aggregates,  but  diverged  in  the  case  of  infinite
aggregates  ;  but  this  extension  of  the  conception  of
enumeral  served,  in  the  way  just  mentioned,  to
develop  and  make  precise  the  conception  of  power
used  often  already.

Thus,  from  the  new  point  of  view  gained,  we  get
new  insight  into  the  theory  of  finite  number  ;  as
Cantor  put  it  :  "The  conception  of  number  which,
in  finito,  has  only  the  background  of  enumeral,
splits,  in  a  manner  of  speaking,  when  we  raise  our-
selves to  the  infinite,  into  the  two  conceptions  of
power  .  .  .  and  enumeral .  .  .  ;  and,  when  I  again
descend  to  the  finite,  I  see  just  as  clearly  and
beautifully  how  these  two  conceptions  again  unite
to  form  that  of  the  finite  integer."

*  I  have  invented  this  woid  to  translate  "  Anzahl,"  to  avoid  confusion
with  the  word  "  number"  [Zahl).

INTRODUCTION  53

The  significance  of  this  distinction  for  the  theor}'
of  all  (finite  and  infinite)  arithmetic  appears  in
Cantor's  own  work  *  and,  above  all,  in  the  later
work  of  Russell.

Without  this  extension  of  the  conception  of
number  to  the  definitely  infinite  numbers,  said
Cantor,  "  it  would  hardly  be  possible  for  me  to
make  without  constraint  the  least  step  forwards  in
the  theory  of  aggregates,"  and,  although  "I  was
led  to  them  [these  numbers]  many  years  ago,
without  arriving  at  a  clear  consciousness  that  1
possessed  in  them  concrete  numbers  of  real  signi-
ficance," yet  "  I  was  logically  forced,  almost  against
my  will,  because  in  opposition  to  traditions  which
had  become  valued  by  me  in  the  course  of  scientific
researches  extending  over  many  years,  to  the
thought  of  considering  the  infinitely  great,  not
merely  in  the  form  of  the  unlimitedly  increasing,
and  in  the  form,  closely  connected  with  this,  of
convergent  infinite  series,  but  also  to  fix  it  mathe-
matically by  numbers  in  the  definite  form  of  a
'completed  infinite.'  I  do  not  believe,  then,  that
any  reasons  can  be  urged  against  it  which  I  am
unable  to  combat."

The  indices  of  the  series  of  the  derivatives  can
be conceived as the series of finite numbers

I, 2, , followed  by  a  series  of  tra7isfiuite

numbers  of  which  the  first  had  been  denoted  b}-  the
symbol  "00." Thus,  although  there  is  no  greatest

*  C/:,  for  example,  pp.  1 1 3,  1 58-159  of  the  translations  of  Cantor's
memoirs  of  1895  and  1897  given  below.

U'

54  INTRODUCTION

finite  number,  or,  in  other  words,  the  supposition
that  there  is  a  greatest  finite  number  leads  to  con-
tradiction, there  is  no  contradiction  involved  in
postulating  a  new,  non-finite,  number  which  is  to  be
the  first  after  all  the  finite  numbers.  This  is  the
method  adopted  by  Cantor  *  to  define  his  numbers
independently  of  the  theory  of  derivatives  ;  we  shall
see  how  Cantor  met  any  possible  objections  to  this
system  of  postulation.

Let  us  now  briefly  consider  again  the  meaning  of
the  word  '■^  MannichfaltigkeitsleJire^'"  ^  which  is
usually  translated  as  "  theory  of  aggregates."  In  a
note  to  the  Gyundlagen^  Cantor  remarked  that  he
meant  by  this  word  ' '  a  doctrine  embracing  very
much,  which  hitherto  1  have  attempted  to  develop
only  in  the  special  form  of  an  arithmetical  or
geometrical  theory  of  aggregates  {Mengenlehre).
By  a  manifold  or  aggregate  I  understand  generally
any  multiplicity  which  can  be  thought  of  as  one
(jedes  Viele,  welches  sick  als  Eines  denken  lasst),  that
is  to  say,  any  totality  of  definite  elements  which
can  be  bound  up  into  a  whole  by  means  of  a  law."

*  "  Ueber  unendliche,  lineare  Punktmannichfaltigkeiten.  V."
[December  1882],  Math.  Ann.,  vol.  xxi,  1883,  pp.  545-591  ;  reprinted,
with  an  added  preface,  with  the  title  :  Griindlagen  einer  allgevieinen
Mamiichfaltigkeitslehre.  Ein  uiathematisch-philosophischer  Versiich  in
der  Lehre  des  Unendiichen,'Lit\\:>z\g,  1883  (page  n  of  the  Grnndlagenh
page  w  +  544  of  the  article  in  the  Math.  Ann.).  This  separate  publica-
tion, with  a  title  corresponding  more  nearly  to  its  contents,  was  made
"  since  it  carries  the  subject  in  many  respects  much  farther  and  thus  is,
for  the  most  part,  independent  of  the  earlier  essays"  (Preface).  In
Acta  Math.,  ii,  pp.  381-408,  part  of  the  Grundlagen  was  translated
into  French.  •

t  Or  •''  Manntgfaitigkeitslehre," or,  more  usually, "  Mengenlehre  "  ;  in
French,  ^^  th^orte  des  ensembles."  The  English  "  theory  of  manifolds"
has  not  come  into  general  usage.

INTRODUCTION  55

This  character  of  unity  was  repeatedly  emphasized
by  Cantor,  as  we  shall  see  later.

The  above  quotations  about  the  slow  and  sure
way  in  which  the  transfinite  numbers  forced  them-
selves on  the  mind  of  Cantor  and  about  Cantor's
philosophical  and  mathematical  traditions  are  taken
from  the  Grundlagen.  Both  here  and  in  Cantor's
later  works  we  constantly  come  across  discussions
of  opinions  on  infinity  held  by  mathematicians  and
philosophers  of  all  times,  and  besides  such  names  as
Aristotle,  Descartes,  Spinoza,  Hobbes,  Berkeley,
Locke,  Leibniz,  Bolzano,  and  many  others,  we  find
evidence  of  deep  erudition  and  painstaking  search
after  new  views  on  infinity  to  analyze.  Cantor  has
devoted  many  pages  to  the  Schoolmen  and  the
Fathers  of  the  Church.

The  Grundlagen  begins  by  drawing  a  distinction
between  two  meanings  which  the  word  "infinity"
may  have  in  mathematics.  The  mathematical
infinite,  says  Cantor,  appears  in  two  forms  :  Firstly,
as  an  improper  infinite  {Uneigentlich-Unendliches),
a  magnitude  which  either  increases  above  all  limits
or  decreases  to  an  arbitrary  smallness,  but  always
remains  finite  ;  so  that  it  may  be  called  a  variable
finite.  Secondly,  as  a  definite,  a  proper  infinite
{Eigentlich-Unendliches),  represented  by  certain
conceptions  in  geometry,  and,  in  the  theory  of
functions,  by  the  point  infinity  of  the  complex  plane.
In  the  last  case  we  have  a  single,  definite  point,
and  the  behaviour  of  (analytic)  functions  about  this
point  is  examined  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  it is

56  INTRODUCTION

about  any  other  point.*  Cantor's  infinite  real
integers  are  also  properly  infinite,  and,  to  emphasize
this,  the  old  symbol  '*  od  ,"  which  was  and  is  used  also
for  the  improper  infinite,  was  here  replaced  by  ''w."
To  define  his  new  numbers,  Cantor  employed  the
following  considerations.  The  series  of  the  real
positive  integers,

(I)  I,  2,  3, .  .  ., V, .  .  .,

arises  from  the  repeated  positing  and  uniting  of
units  which  are  presupposed  and  regarded  as  equal  ;
the  number  v  is  the  expression  both  for  a  definite
finite  enumeral  of  such  successive  positings  and  for
the  uniting  of  the  posited  units  into  a  whole.  Thus
the  formation  of  the  finite  real  integers  rests  on  the
principle  of  the  addition  of  a  unit  to  a  number
which  has  already  been  formed  ;  Cantor  called  this
moment  th^fiist principle  of  gene^'ation  {Erzeugungs-
princip).  The  enumeral  of  the  number  of  the  class
(I)  so  formed  is  infinite,  and  there  is  no  greatest
among  them.  Thus,  although  it  would  be  contra-
dictory to  speak  of  a  greatest  number  of  the  class  (I),
there  is,  on  the  other  hand,  nothing  objectionable
in  imagining  a  new  number,  w,  which  is  to  express
that  the  whole  collection  (I)  is  given  by  its  law  in
its  natural  order  of  succession  (in  the  same  way  as
V  is  the  expression  that  a  certain  finite  enumeral  of
units  is  united  to  a  whole),  f By  allowing  further

*  "The  behaviour  of  the  function  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
infinitely  distant  point  shows  exactly  the  same  occurrences  as  in  that
of  any  other  point  lying  iii  finito,  so  that  hence  it  is  completely  justified
to  think  of  the  infinite,  in  this  case,  as  situated  in  a  point."

t  "  It  is  even  permissible  to  think  of  the  newly  and  created  number

INTRODUCTION  57

positings  of unity to follow the positing of the
number o), we obtain with the help of the first
principle  of  generation  the  further  numbers  :
w+  I, (0+2, .  .  ., a)  +  j^, ...

Since  again  here  we  come  to  no  greatest  number,  we
imagine  a  new  one,  which  we  may  call  2a),  and  which
is  to  be  the  first  which  follows  all  the  numbers  v  and
o)  + 1^  hitherto  formed.  Applying  the  first  principle  re-
peatedly to  the  number  2co,  we  come  to  the  numbers  :

g^^ 2a)  +  I, 2a) +2, . . ., 2a) +i', ...

The  logical  function  which  has  given  us  the
numbers  a)  and  2a)  is  obviously  different  from  the
first  principle  ;  Cantor  called  it  the  second  principle
of  generation  of  real  integers,  and  defined  it  more
closely  as  follows  :  If  there  is  defined  any  definite
succession  of  real  integers,  of  which  there  is  no
greatest,  on  the  basis  of  this  second  principle  a  new
number  is  created,  which  is  defined  as  the  next  greater
number  to  them  all.

By the  combined application  of  both  principles
we  get,  successively,  the  numbers  :
30),  3a)  +  I ,  .  .  . ,  3a)  + 1/,  .  .  . ,  .  .  . ,  /xa),  .  .  . ,  //a)  +  j/,  .  .  .

w  as  the  li7nit  to  which  the  numbers  v  strive,  if  by  that  nothing  else  is
understood  than  that  «  is  to  be  the  first  integer  which  follows  all  the
numbers  v,  that  is  to  say,  is  to  be  called  greater  than  every  »/."  Cf.
the  next  section.

If  we  do  not  know  the  reasons  in  the  theory  of  derivatives  which
prompted  the  introduction  of  a>,  but  only  the  grounds  stated  in  the  text
for  this  introduction,  it  naturally  seems  rather  arbitrary  (not  apparently^
useful)  to  create  &j  because  of  the  mere  fact  that  it  can  apparently  be
defined  in  a  manner  free  from  contradiction.  Thus,  Cantor  discussed
(see  below)  such  introductions  or  creations,  found  in  them  the  dis-
tinguishing mark  of  pure  mathematics,  and  justified  them  on  historical
grounds  (on  logical  grounds  they  perhaps  seem  "to  need  no  justification).

58  INTRODUCTION

and,  since  no  number  fxw-\-v  is  greatest,  we  create
a  new  next  number  to  all  these,  which  may  be
denoted  by  oo^.  To  this  follow,  in  succession,
numbers  :

Xo)'^  +  fX(Jd  +  V,

and  further,  we  come  to  numbers  of  the  form

and  the  second  principle  then  requires  a  new  number,
which  may  conveniently  be  denoted  by

And  so  on  indefinitely.

Now,  it  is  seen  without  difficulty  that  the
aggregate  of  all  the  numbers  preceding  any  of  the
infinite  numbers  and  hitherto  defined  is  of  the
power  of  the  first  number-class  (I).  Thus,  all  the
numbers  preceding  w*^  are  contained  in  the  formula  :

where  /x,  i/q,  i/^,  .  .  . ,  i/^  have  to  take  all  finite,
positive,  integral  values  including  zero  and  exclud-
ing the  combination  v^  =  v^=  .  .  .  =v^=zO.  As  is
well  known,  this  aggregate  can  be  brought  into  the
form  of  a  simply  infinite  series,  and  has,  therefore,
the  power  of  (I).  Since,  further,  every  sequence
(itself  of  the  first  power)  of  aggregates,  each  of
which  has  the  first  power,  gives  an  aggregate  of  the
first  power,  it  is  clear  that  we  obtain,  by  the  con-
tinuation of  our  sequence  in  the  above  way,  only
such  numbers  with  which  this  condition  is  fulfilled.

INTRODUCTION  59

Cantor  defined  the  totality  of  all  the  numbers  a
formed  by  the  help  of  the  two  principles

(II) o),  CD+I,  .  .  .,  j.Qfo'^H-i/iw'^-H  .  .  .  +j/^_r+>,

such  that  all  the  numbers,  from  i  on,  preceding  a
form  an  aggregate  of  the  power  of  the  first  number-
class  (I),  as  the  ^^  second  number-class  (II)."  The
power  of  (II)  is  different  from  that  of  (I),  and  is,
indeed,  the  next  higher  power,  so  that  no  other
power  lies  between  them.  Accordingly,  the  second
principle  demands  the  creation  of  a  new  number  (Q)
which  follows  all  the  numbers  of  (II)  and  is  the
first  of  the  third  number-class  (III),  and  so  on.*

Thus,  in  spite  of  first  appearances,  a  certain
completion  can  be  given  to  the  successive  formation
of  the  numbers  of  (II)  which  is  similar  to  that
limitation  present  with  (I).  There  we  only  used
the  first  principle,  and  so  it  was  impossible  to
emerge  from  the  series  (I)  ;  but  the  second  principle
must  lead  not  only  over  (II),  but  show  itself  indeed
as  a  means,  which,  in  combination  with  the  first
principle,  gives  the  capacity  to  break  through  every
limit  in  the  formation  of  real  integers.  The  above-
mentioned  requirement,  that  all  the  numbers  to
be  next  formed  should  be  such  that  the  aggregate

^'  It  is  particularly  to  be  noticed  that  the  second  principle  will  lake
us  beyond  any  class,  and  is  not  merely  adequate  to  form  numbers  which
are  the  limit-numbers  of  some  enumerable  series  (so  that  a  "third
principle "  is  required  to  form  fl).  The  first  and  second  principles
together  form  all  the  numbers  considered,  while  the  "principle  of
limitation"  enables  us  to  define  the  various  number-classes,  of  un-
brokenly  ascending  powers  in  the  series  of  these  numbers.

6o  INTRODUCTION

of  numbers  preceding  each  one  should  be  of  a  certain
power,  was  called  by  Cantor  the  third  or  limitation-
principle  {Hemmungs-  oder  Beschrdnkungsprincip)*
and  which  acts  in  such  a  manner  that  the  class  (II)
defined  with  its  aid  can  be  shown  to  have  a  higher
power  than  (I)  and  indeed  the  next  higher  power  to
it.  In  fact,  the  two  first  principles  together  define
an  absolutely  infinite  sequence  of  integers,  while  the
third  principle  lays  successively  certain  limits  on
this  process,  so  that  we  obtain  natural  segments
{Absclmitte),  called  number-classes,  in  this  sequence.

Cantor's  older  (1873,  1878)  conception  of  the
''power"  of  an  aggregate  was,  by  this,  developed
and  given  precision.  With  finite  aggregates  the
power  coincides  with  the  enumeral  of  the  elements,
for  such  aggregates  have  the  same  enumeral  of
elements  in  every  order.  With  infinite  aggregates,
on  the  other  hand,  the  transfinite  numbers  afford  a
means  of  defining  the  enumeral  of  an  aggregate,  if
it  be  "well  ordered,"  and  the  enumeral  of  such  an
aggregate  of  given  power  varies,  in  general,  with
the  order  given  to  the  elements.  The  smallest
infinite  power  is  evidently  that  of  (I),  and,  now  for
the  first  time,  the  successive  higher  powers  also
receive  natural  and  simple  definitions  ;  in  fact,  the
power  of  the  yth  number  class  is  the  yth.

By  a "well-ordered"  aggregate,!  Cantor  under-

*  "This  principle  (or  requirement,  or  condition)  circuaiscribes
{limits)  each  number-class."

t  The  origin  of  this  conception  can  easily  be  seen  to  be  the  defining
of  such  aggregates  as  can  be  "enumerated"  (using  the  word  in  the
wider  sense  of  Cantor,  given  below)  by  the  transtinite  numbers.  In
fact,  the  above  definition  of  a  wejl-ordered  aggregate  simply  indicates

INTRODUCTION  61

stood  any  well-defined  aggregate  whose  elements
have  a  given  definite  succession  such  that  there  is
2.  first  element,  a  definite  element  follows  every  one
(if  it  is  not  the  last),  and  to  any  finite  or  infinite
aggregate  a  definite  element  belongs  which  is  the
next  following  element  in  the  succession  to  them
all  (unless  there  are  no  following  elements  in  the
succession).  Two  well-ordered  aggregates  are,  now,
of  the  same  enumeral  (with  reference  to  the  orders
of  succession  of  their  elements  previously  given  for
them)  if  a  one-to-one  correspondence  is  possible
between  them  such  that,  if  E  and  F  are  any  two
different  elements  of  the  one,  and  E'  and  F'  the
corresponding  elements  (consequently  different)  of
the  other,  if  E  precedes  or  follows  F,  then  E'
respectively  precedes  or  follows  F'.  This  ordinal
correspondence  is  evidently  quite  determinate,  if  it
is  possible  at  all,  and  since  there  is,  in  the  extended
number-series,  one  and  only  one  number  a  such  that
its  preceding  numbers  (from  i  on)  in  the  natural
succession  have  the  same  enumeral,  we  must  put  a
for  the  enumeral  of  both  well-ordered  aggregates,  if
a  is  infinite,  or  a—  I  if  a  is  finite.

The  essential  difference  between  finite  and  infinite
aggregates  is,  now,  seen  to  be  that  a  finite  aggregate
has  the  same  enumeral  whatever  the  succession  of

the  construction  of  any  aggregate  of  the  class  required  when  the  first
two  principles  are  used,  but  lo  generate  elements,  not  numbers.

An  important  property  of  a  well-ordered  aggregate,— indeed,  a
characteristic  property, — is  that  any  series  of  terms  in  it,  ^j ,  ao ,  .  .  .,
«^  ,  .  .  .,  where  «^+i  precedes  av  ,  must  be  finite.  Even  if  the  well-
ordered  aggregate  in  question  is  infinite,  such  a  series  as  that  described
can  never  be  infinite.

62  INTRODUCTION

the  elements  may  be,  but  an  infinite  aggregate  has,
in  general,  different  enumerals  under  these  circum-
stances. However,  there  is  a  certain  connexion
between  enumeral  and  power — an  attribute  of  the
aggregate  which  is  independent  of  the  order  of  the
elements.  Thus,  the  enumeral  of  any  well-ordered
aggregate  of  the  first  power  is  a  definite  number  of
the  second  class,  and  every  aggregate  of  the  first
power  can  always  be  put  in  such  an  order  that  its
enumeral  is  any  prescribed  number  of  the  second
class.  Cantor  expressed  this  by  extending  the
meaning  of  the  word  "enumerable"  and  saying:
Every  aggregate  of  the  power  of  the  first  class  is
enumerable  by  numbers  of  the  second  class  and  only
by  these,  and  the  aggregate  can  always  be  so
ordered  that  it  is  enumerated  by  any  prescribed
number  of  the  second  class  ;  and  analogously  for
the  higher  classes.

From his above remarks on the "absolute"*

*  Cantor  said  "that,  in  the  successive  formation  of  number-classes,
we  can  always  go  farther,  and  never  reach  a  limit  that  cannot  be  sur-
passed,— so  that  we  never  reach  an  even  approximate  comprehension
{Erfasseti)  of  the  Absolute,— I  cannot  doubt.  The  Absolute  can
only  be  recognized  {anerkannt),  but  never  apprehended  {erkannt),
even  approximately.  For  just  as  inside  the  first  number-class,  at  any
finite  number,  however  great,  we  always  have  the  same  '  power '  of
greater  finite  numbers  before  us,  there  follows  any  transfinite  number
of  any  one  of  the  higher  number-classes  an  aggregate  of  numbers  and
classes  which  has  not  in  the  least  lost  in  '  power  '  in  comparison  with  the
whole  absolutely  infinite  aggregate  of  numbers,  from  i  on.  The  state
of  things  is  like  that  described  by  Albrecht  von  Haller  :  '  ich  zieh'
sie  ab  [die  ungeheure  ZahlJ  und  I^u  [die  Ewigkeit]  liegst  ganz  vor  mir.'
The  absolutely  infinite  sequence  of  numbers  thus  seems  to  me  to  be,  in
a  certain  sense,  a  suitable  symbol  of  the  Absolute  ;  whereas  the  infinity
of  (I),  which  has  hitherto  served  for  that  purpose,  appears  to  me,  just
because  1  hold  it  to  be  an  idea  (not  presentation)  that  can  be  appre-
hended as  a  vanishing  nothing  in  comparison  with  the  former.  It  also
seems  to  me  remarkable  that  every  number-class — and  therefore  every

INTRODUCTION  63

infinity  of  the  series  of  ordinal  numbers  and  that  of
powers,  it  was  to  be  expected  that  Cantor  would
derive  the  idea  that  any  aggregate  could  be  arranged
in  a  well-ordered  series,  and  this  he  stated  with  a
promise  to  return  to  the  subject  later.*

The  addition  and  multiplication  of  the  transfinite
(including  the  finite)  numbers  was  thus  defined  by
Cantor.  Let  M  and  M^  be  well-ordered  aggregates
of  enumerals  a  and  ^,  the  aggregate  which  arises
when  first  M  is  posited  and  then  M^^,  following  it,
and  the  two  are  united  is  denoted  M  -f  M^  and  its
enumeral  is  defined  to  be  a-\- ^.  Evidently,  if  a
and  /3  are  not  both  finite,  a  +  /3  is,  in  general,
different  from  /^  +  a.  It  is  easy  to  extend  the  con-
cept of  sum  to  a  finite  or  transfinite  aggregate  of
summands  in  a  definite  order,  and  the  associative
law  remains  valid. Thus,  in  particular,

a  +  (/3  +  y)-(a+iS)  +  y.

If  we  take  a  succession  (of  enumeral  /3)  of  equal
and  similarly  ordered  aggregates,  of  which  each  is
of  enumeral  «,  we  get  a  new  well-ordered  aggregate,
whose enumeral  is  defined to be  the  product  y8a,

power — corresponds  to  a  definite  number  of  the  absolutely  infinite
totality  of  numbers,  and  indeed  reciprocally,  so  that  corresponding  to
any  transfinite  number  7  there  is  a  (7th)  power  ;  so  that  the  various
powers  also  form  an  absolutely  infinite  sequence.  This  is  so  much  the
more  remarkable  as  the  number  7  which  gives  the  rank  of  a  power
(provided  that  7  has  an  immediate  predecessor)  stands,  to  the  numbers
of  that  number-class  which  has  this  power,  in  a  magnitude-relation
whose  smallness  mocks  all  description, — and  this  the  more  7  is  taken  to
be  greater."

*  With  this  is  connected  the  promise  to  prove  later  that  the  power  c)f
the  continuum  is  that  of  (11),  as  stated,  of  course  in  other  words,  in  1878.
See  the  Notes  at  the  end  oi^  this  book.

^4  INTRODUCTION

where  ^  is  the  multiplier  and  a  the  multiplicand.
Here  also  /3a  is,  in  general,  different  from  a^  ;  but
we  have,  in  general,

a(,%)  =  (a/3)y.

Cantor  also  promised  an  investigation  of  the
''prime  number-property  "  of  some  of  the  transfinite
numbers  *  a  proof  of  the  non-existence  of  infinitely
small  numbers,!  and  a  proof  that  his  previous
theorem  on  a  point-aggregate  P  in  an  ^2-dimensional
domain  that,  if  the  derivate  P^'^^  where  «  is  any
integer  of  (I)  or  (11),  vanishes,  P',  and  hence  P,  is
of  the  first  power,  can  be  thus  inverted  :  If  P  is
such  a  point-aggregate  that  P'  is  of  the  first  power,
there  is  an  integer  a  of  (1)  or  (II)  such  that  P('^>  =  o,
and  there  is  a  smallest  of  such  a's.  This  last
theorem  shows  the  importance  of  the  transfinite
numbers  in  the  theory  of  point-aggregates.

Cantor's  proof  that  the  power  of  (II)  is  different
from  that  of  (I)  is  analogous  to  his  proof  of  the
non-enumerability  of  the  continuum.  Suppose  that
we  could  put  (II)  in  the  form  of  a  simple  series  :

(7)  ai,  02,  .  .  .,  a^,  .  .  .,

we  shall  define  a  number  which  has  the  properties
both  of  belonging  to  (II)  and  of  not  being  a  member
of  the  series  (7)  ;  and,  since  these  properties  are
contradictory  of  one  another  if  the  hypothesis  be
granted,  we  must  conclude  that  (II)  cannot  be  put

*  The  property  in  question  is:  A  "prime-number"  a  is  such  that
the  resolution  a.  =  ^y  is  only  possible  when  /8=  i  or  j8  =  a.
t  See  the  next  section.

INTRODUCTION  65

in  the  form  (7),  and  therefore  has  not  the  power  of
(I).  Let  a^  be  the  first  number  of  (i)  which  is
greater  than  ai, a^  the  first  greater than  a^ , and

i  2

so  on  ;  so  that  we  have

and

I  <  /Cg  <  /C3  < . .

ai<a^^<aK^<  .

and

au<a^^  if  v<kk'

Now  it  may  happen  that,  from  a  certain  number
a^ on,  all  following  it  in  the  series  (7)  are  smaller

than  it  ;  then  it  is  evidently  the  greatest.  If,  on
the  other  hand,  there  is  no  such  greatest  number,
imagine  the  series  of  integers  from  I  on  and  smaller
than  ai,  add  to  it  the  series  of  integers  ^a^  and
>  a„ ,  then  the  series  of  integers  >  a«  and  <  a^ ,  and
so  on  ;  we  thus  get  a  definite  part  of  successive
numbers  of  (I)  and  (II)  which  is  evidently  of  the
first  power,  and  consequently,  by  the  definition  of
(II),  there  is  a  least  number  jS  of  (II)  which  is
greater  than  all  of  these  numbers. Therefore  /3>  a^

and  thus  also  ^  >  a^,  and  also  every  number  /3'  <fi
is  surpassed  in  magnitude  by  certain  numbers  a^  .

If  there  is  a  greatest  Uk  =y,  then  the  number  y+  i
is  a  member  of  (II)  and  not  of  (7)  ;  and  if  there  is
not  a  greatest,  the  number  /3  is  a  member  of  (II)
and  not  of  (7).

Further,  the  power  of  (II)  is  the  7iext  greater  to
that  of  (I), so  that no other powers  lie between

5

66  INTRODUCTION

them,  for  any  aggregate  of  numbers  of  (I)  and  (II)
is  of  the  power  of  (I)  or  (II).  In  fact,  this  aggregate
Zj,  when  arranged  in  order  of  magnitude,  is  well-
ordered,  and  may  be  represented  by

(a/s), (/5  =  w,  o)  +  I ,  .  .  .  a,  .  .  . )

where  we  always  have  P<Q,  where  Q  is  the  first
number  of  (III);  and  consequently  (a^)  is  either
finite  or  of  the  power  of  (I)  or  of  that  of  (II),
quartuin  non  datur.  From  this  results  the  theorem  :
If  N  is  any  well-defined  aggregate  of  the  second
power,  M'  is  a  part  of  M  and  M''  is  a  part  of  M',
and  we  know  that  M''  is  of  the  same  power  as  M,
then  M'  is  of  the  same  power  as  M,  and  therefore
as  M'' ;  and  Cantor  remarked  that  this  theorem  is
generally  valid,  and  promised  to  return  to  it.*

Though  the  commutative  law  does  not,  in  general,
hold  with  the  transfinite  numbers,  the  associative
law  does,  but  the  distributive  law  is  only  generally
valid  in  the  form  :

(a  +  /3)y  =  ay  +  ^y,

where  a  +  ^,  a,  and  /3  are  multipliers,  ''as  we  im-
mediately recognize  by  inner  intuition."

The  subtraction,  division,  prime  numbers,  and
addition  and  multiplication  of  numbers  which  can
be  put  in  the  form  of  a  rational  and  integral  function
of  o)  of  the  transfinite  numbers  were  then  dealt  with

*  From  the  occurrence  of  this  theorem  on  p.  484  of  the  Math.  Ann.,
xlvi,  1895,  which  we  now  know  (see  the  note  on  p.  204  below)  to  have
been  a  forestalling  of  the  theorem  that  any  aggregate  can  be  well-ordered,
we  may  conclude  that  this  latter  theorem  was  used  in  this  instance.

INTRODUCTION  67

much  In  the  same  way  as  in  the  memoir  of  1897
translated  below.  In  the  later  memoir  the  subject
is|itreated  far  more  completely,  and  was  drawn  up
with  far  more  attention  to  logical  form  than  was  the
Grundlagen.

An  interesting  part  of  the  Grundlagen  is  the
discussion  of  the  conditions  under  which  we  are  to
regard  the  introduction  into  mathematics  of  a  new
conception,  such  as  w,  as  justified.  The  result  of
this  discussion  was  already  indicated  by  the  way  in
which  Cantor  defined  his  new  numbers  :  "  We  may
regard  the  whole  numbers  as  '  actual '  in  so  far  as|
they,  on  the  ground  of  definitions,  take  a  perfectly
determined  place  in  our  understanding,  are  clearly
distinguished  from  all  other  constituents  of  our
thought,  stand  in  definite  relations  to  them,  and
thus  modify,  in  a  definite  way,  the  substance  of
our  mind."  We  may  ascribe  *' actuality  "  to  them
''  in  so  far  as  they  must  be  held  to  be  an  expression
or  an  image  {Abbild)  of  processes  and  relations  in
the  outer  world,  as  distinguished  from  the  intellect."
Cantor's  position  was,  now,  that  while  there  is  no
doubt  that  the  first  kind  of  reality  always  implies
the  second,*  the  proof  of  this  is  often  a  most
difficult  metaphysical  problem  ;  but,  in  pure  mathe-
matics, we  need  only  consider  the  first  kind  of
reality,  and  consequently  "mathematics  is,  in  its
development, quite free, and only subject  to  the

*  This,  according  to  Cantor,  is  a  consequence  of  "the  unity  of  the
All,  to  which  we  ourselves  belong,"  and  so,  in  pu7'e  mathematics,  we
need  only  pay  attention  to  the  reality  of  our  conceptions  in  the  first
Sense,  as  stated  in  the  text.

68  INTRODUCTION

self-evident  condition  that  its  conceptions  are  both
free  from  contradiction  in  themselves  and  stand
in  fixed  relations,  arranged  by  definitions,  to
previously  formed  and  tested  conceptions.  In
particular,  in  the  introduction  of  new  numbers,  it
is  only  obligatory  to  give  such  definitions  of  them
as  will  afford  them  such  a  definiteness,  and,  under
certain  circumstances,  such  a  relation  to  the  older
numbers,  as  permits  them  to  be  distinguished  from
one  another  in  given  cases.  As  soon  as  a  number
satisfies  all  these  conditions,  it  can  and  must  be
considered  as  existent  and  real  in  mathematics.  In
this  I  see  the  grounds  on  which  we  must  regard  the
rational,  irrational,  and  complex  numbers  as  just  as
existent  as  the  positive  integers."

There  is  no  danger  to  be  feared  for  science  from
this  freedom  in  the  formation  of  numbers,  for,  on
the  one  hand,  the  conditions  referred  to  under  which
this  freedom  can  alone  be  exercised  are  such  that
they  leave  only  a  very  small  opportunity  for  arbi-
trariness ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  every  mathe-
matical conception  has  in  itself  the  necessary
corrective, — if  it  is  unfruitful  or  inconvenient,  it
shows  this  very  soon  by  its  unusability,  and  is
then  abandoned.

To  support  the  idea  that  conceptions  in  pure
mathematics  are  free,  and  not  subject  to  any
metaphysical  control.  Cantor  quoted  the  names
of,  and  the  branches  of  mathematics  founded  by,
some  of  the  greatest  mathematicians  of  the  nineteenth
century, among which an especially instructive

INTRODUCTION  69

example  in  Kummer's  introduction  of  his  *' ideal"
numbers  into  the  theory  of  numbers.  But  "  applied  "
mathematics,  such  as  analytical  mechanics  and
physics,  is  metaphysical  both  in  its  foundations
and  in  its  ends.  "  If  it  seeks  to  free  itself  of  this,
as  was  proposed  lately  by  a  celebrated  physicist,*
it  degenerates  into  a  'describing  of  nature,' which
must  lack  both  the  fresh  breeze  of  free  mathematical
thought  and  the  power  of  explanation  and  grounding
of  natural  appearances. "

The  note  of  Cantor's  on  the  process  followed  in
the  correct  formation  of  conceptions  is  interesting.
In  his  judgment,  this  process  is  everywhere  the  same  ;
we  posit  a  thing  without  properties,  which  is  at  first
nothing  else  than  a  name  or  a  sign  A,  and  give  it
in  order  different,  even  infinitely  many,  predicates,
whose  meaning  for  ideas  already  present  is  known,
and  which  may  not  contradict  one  another.  By
this  the  relations  of  A  to  the  conception  already
present,  and  in  particular  to  the  allied  ones,  are
determined  ;  when  we  have  completed  this,  all  the
conditions  for  the  awakening  of  the  conception  A,
which  slumbers  in  us,  are  present,  and  it  enters
completed  into  "existence"  in  the  first  sense;  to
prove  its  ' '  existence  "  in  the  second  sense  is  then
a  matter  of  metaphysics.

This  seems  to  support  the  process  by  which  Heine,

*  This  is  evidently  Kirchhoff.  As  is  well  known,  Kirchhoft"  pro-
posed ( Vorlesungen  iiber  mathemaiische  Physik,  vol.  i,  Mechanik,
Leipzig,  1874)  this.  Cf.  E.  Mach  in  his  prefaces  to  his  Mechanics
(3rd  ed.,  Chicago  and  London,  1907  ;  Supplementary  Volume,  Chicago
and  London,  191 5),  and  Popular  Scientijic  Lecitires,  3rd  ed.,  Chicago
and  London,  1898,  pp.  236-258.

70  INTR  OD  UCTION

in  a  paper  partly  inspired  by  his  discussions  with
Cantor,  defined  the  real  numbers  as  signs,  to  which
subsequently  various  properties  were  given.  But
Cantor  himself,  as  we  shall  see  later,  afterwards
pointed  out  emphatically  the  mistake  into  which
Kronecker  and  von  Helmholtz  fell  when  they  started
in  their  expositions  of  the  number-concept  with  the
last  and  most  unessential  thing — the  ordinal  words
or  signs — in  the  scientific  theory  of  number  ;  so  that
we  must,  I  think,  regard  this  note  of  Cantor's  as
an  indication  that,  at  this  time  (1882),  he  was  a
supporter  of  the  formalist  theory  of  number, — or  at
least  of  rational  and  real  non-integral  numbers.

In  fact,  Cantor's  notions  as  to  what  is  meant
by  ''existence"  in  mathematics — notions  which
are  intimately  connected  with  his  introduction  of
irrational  and  transfinite  numbers — were  in  substance
identical  with  those  of  Hankel  (1867)  on  "possible
or  impossible  numbers."  Hankel  was  a  formalist,
though  not  a  consistent  one,  and  his  theory  was
criticized  with  great  acuteness  by  Frege  in  1884.
But  these  criticisms  mark  the  beginning  of  the
logical  theory  of  mathematics,  Cantor's  earlier  work
belonging  to  Xh^  formal  stage,  and  his  later  work  to
what  may  be  called  the  psychological  stage.

Finally,  Cantor  gave  a  discussion  and  exact  de-
termination of  the  meaning  of  the  conception  of
''continuum."  After  briefly  referring  to  the  dis-
cussions of  this  concept  due  to  Leucippus,  Demo-
critus,  Aristotle,  Epicurus,  Lucretius,  and  Thomas
Aquinas,  and  emphasizing  that  we  cannot  begin,  in

INTRODUCTION  71

this  determination,  with  the  conception  of  time  or
that  of  space,  for  these  conceptions  can  only  be
clearly  explained  by  means  of  a  continuity-concep-
tion which  must,  of  course,  be  independent  of  them,
he  started  from  the  /^-dimensional  plane  aritJinietical
space  G,„  that  is  to  say,  the  totality  of  systems  of
values

in  which  every  x  can  receive  any  real  value  from
—  00  to  -f  00  independently  of  the  others.  Every
such  system  is  called  an  ''arithmetical  point"  of
G„,  the  "distance"  of  two  such  points  is  defined
by  the  expression

+  x/{(-^'i-n)'+(-^-'2-^.)'+  •  •  •  +(;^„-^,y),

and  by  an  ''arithmetical  point-aggregate"  P  con-
tained in  G„  is  meant  any  aggregate  of  points
G;,  selected  out  of  it  by  a  law.  Thus  the  investi-
gation comes  to  the  establishment  of  a  sharp  and
as  general  as  possible  a  definition  which  should
allow  us  to  decide  when  P  is  to  be  called  a  ' '  con-
tinuum."

If  the  first  derivative  P'  is  of  the  power  of  (I),
there  is  a  first  number  a  of  (I)  or  (II)  for  which
p(*)  vanishes  ;  but  if  P'  is  not  of  the  power  of  (I),
V  can  be  always,  and  in  only  one  way,  divided  into
two  aggregates  R  and  S,  where  R  is  "reducible,"
— that  is  to  say,  such  that  there  is  a  first  number  y
of  (I)  or  (II)  such  that

R(v)  =  o,—

72  INTRODUCTION

and  S  is  such  that  derivation  does  not  alter  it. Then

and  consequently  also

and  S  is  said  to  be  "perfect."  No  aggregate  can
be  both  reducible  and  perfect,  "but,  on  the  other
hand,  irreducible  is  not  so  much  as  perfect,  nor
imperfect  exactly  the  same  as  reducible,  as  we
easily  see  with  some  attention."

Perfect  aggregates  are  by  no  means  always  every-
where dense  ;  an  example  of  such  an  aggregate
which  is  everywhere  dense  in  no  interval  was  given
by  Cantor.  Thus  such  aggregates  are  not  fitted
for  the  complete  definition  of  a  continuum,  although
we  must  grant  that  the  continuum  must  be  perfect.
The  other  predicate  is  that  the  aggregate  must  be
connected  (zusaminenhdngend),  that  is  to  say,  if  t
and  f  are  any  two  of  its  points  and  e  a  given  arbi-
trarily small  positive  number,  a  finite  number  of
points  /j,  ^2?  •  •  •)  ^^  of  P  exist  such  that  the  dis-
tances /^i, t^t^^ .  .  .,  K^'  3.re  all  less  than  e.

"All  the  geometric  point-continua  known  to  us
are,  as  is  easy  to  see,  connected  ;  and  I  believe,
now,  that  I  recognize  in  these  two  predicates
'perfect'  and  'connected'  the  necessary  and  sufficient
characteristics  of  a  point-continuum."

Bolzano's  (185 1)  definition  of  a  continuum  is
certainly  not  correct,  for  it  expresses  only  07ie
property  of  a  continuum,  which  is  also  possessed  by

INTRODUCTION  73

aggregates  which  arise  from  G„  when  any  isolated
aggregate  is  removed  from  it,  and  also  in  those
consisting  of  many  separated  continua.  Also
Dedekind  *  appeared  to  Cantor  only  to  emphasize
rt;;/^///^;- property  of  a  continuum,  namely,  that  which
it  has  in  common  with  all  other  perfect  aggregates.

We  will  pass  over  the  development  of  the  theory
of  point-aggregates  subsequently  to  1882 — Ben-
dixson's  and  Cantor's  researches  on  the  power  of
perfect  aggregates.  Cantor's  theory  of  ' '  adherences  "
and  "coherences,"  the  investigations  of  Cantor,
Stolz,  Harnack,  Jordan,  Borel,  and  others  on  the
"content"  of  aggregates,  and  the  applications  of
the  theory  of  point-aggregates  to  the  theory  of
functions  made  by  Jordan,  Broden,  Osgood,  Baire,
Arzela,  Schoenflies,  and  many  others, — and  will  now
trace  the  development,  in  Cantor's  hands,  of  the
theory  of  the  transfinite  cardinal  and  ordinal  numbers
from  1883  to  1895.

VIII

An  account  of  the  development  that  the  theory
of  transfinite  numbers  underwent  in  Cantor's  mind
from  1883  to  1890  is  described  in  his  articles
published  in  the  ZeitscJirift  fiir  PJiilosophie  tmd
pJiilosophiscJie  Kritik  for  1887  and  1888,  and
collected  and  published  in  1890  under  the  title  Zur
Lehre  vojh  Transfiniten.  A  great  part  of  this  little
book  is  taken  up  with  detailed  discussions  about
philosophers'  denials  of  the  possibility  of  infinite
*  Essays  on  Number^  p.  U.

74  INTRODUCTION

numbers,  extracts  from  letters  to  and  from  philo-
sophers and  theologians,  and  so  on.*  "All  so-
called  proofs  of  the  impossibility  of  actually  infinite
numbers,"  said  Cantor,  "are,  as  may  be  shown  in
every  particular  case  and  also  on  general  grounds,
false  in  that  they  begin  by  attributing  to  the
numbers  in  question  all  the  properties  of  finite
numbers,  whereas  the  infinite  numbers,  if  they  are
to  be  thinkable  in  any  form,  must  constitute  quite
a  new  kind  of  number  as  opposed  to  the  finite
numbers,  and  the  nature  of  this  new  kind  of  number
is  dependent  on  the  nature  of  things  and  is  an  object
of  investigation,  but  not  of  our  arbitrariness  or  our
prejudice. "

In  1883  Cantor  had  begun  to  lecture  on  his  view
of  whole  numbers  and  types  of  order  as  general
concepts  or  universals  {unuvi  versus  alia)  which
relate  to  aggregates  and  arise  from  these  aggregates
when  we  abstract  from  the  nature  of  the  elements.
"  Every  aggregate  of  distinct  things  can  be  regarded
as  a  unitary  thing  in  which  the  things  first  mentioned
are  constitutive  elements.  If  we  abstract  both  from
the  nature  of  the  elements  and  from  the  order  in
which  they  are  given,  we  get  the  '  cardinal  number '
or  *  power '  of  the  aggregate,  a  general  concept  in
which  the  elements,  as  so-called  units,  have  so
grown  organically  into  one  another  to  make  a
unitary  whole  that  no  one  of  them  ranks  above  the
others.  Hence  results  that  two  different  aggregates
have  the  same  cardinal  number  when  and  only  when
* Cy.  §  VII,  near  the  beginning.

INTRODUCTION  75

they  are  what  I  call  '  equivalent  '  to  one  another,
and  there  is  no  contradiction  when,  as  often  happens
with  infinite  aggregates,  two  aggregates  of  which
one  is  a  part  of  the  other  have  the  same  cardinal
number.  I  regard  the  non-recognition  of  this  fact
as  the  principal  obstacle  to  the  introduction  of
infinite  numbers.  If  the  act  of  abstraction  referred
to,  when  we  have  to  do  with  an  aggregate  ordered
according  to  one  or  many  relations  (dimensions),  is
only  performed  with  respect  to  the  nature  of  the
elements,  so  that  the  ordinal  rank  in  which  these
elements  stand  to  one  another  is  kept  in  the  general
concept,  the  organic  whole  arising  is  what  1  call
'  ordinal  type,'  or  in  the  special  case  of  well-ordered
aggregates  an  'ordinal  number.'  This  ordinal
number  is  the  same  thing  that  I  called,  in  my
Grundlage7i  of  1883,  the  '  enumeral  (Anzahl)  of  a
well-ordered  aggregate.'  Two  ordered  aggregates
have  one  and  the  same  ordinal  type  if  they  stand
to  one  another  in  the  relation  of  'similarity,'
which  relation  will  be  exactly  defined.  These  are
the  roots  from  which  develops  with  logical  necessity
the  organism  of  transfinite  theory  of  types  and  in
particular  of  the  transfinite  ordinal  numbers,  and
which  I  hope  soon  to  publish  in  a  systematic  form."

The  contents  of  a  lecture  given  in  1883  were  also
given  in  a  letter  of  1884.  In  it  was  pointed  out
that  the  cardinal  number  of  an  aggregate  M  is  the
general  concept  under  which  fall  all  aggregates
equivalent  to  M,  and  that  :

"  One of  the most important problems of  the

^6  INTRODUCTION

theory  of  aggregates,  which  I  believe  I  have  solved
as  to  its  principal  part  in  my  Grundlagen^  consists
in  the  question  of  determining  the  various  powers
of  the  aggregates  in  the  whole  of  nature,  in  so  far
as  we  can  know  it.  This  end  I  have  reached  by
the  development  of  the  general  concept  of  enumeral
of  well-ordered  aggregates,  or,  what  is  the  same
thing,  of  the  concept  of  ordinal  number."  The
concept  of  ordinal  number  is  a  special  case  of  the
concept  of  ordinal  type,  which  relates  to  any  simply
or  multiply  ordered  aggregate  in  the  same  way  as
the  ordinal  number  to  a  well-ordered  aggregate.
The  problem  here  arises  of  determining  the  various
ordinal  numbers  in  nature.

When  Cantor  said  that  he  had  solved  the  chief
part  of  the  problem  of  determining  the  various
powers  in  nature,  he  meant  that  he  had  almost
proved  that  the  power  of  the  arithmetical  continuum
is  the  same  as  the  power  of  the  ordinal  numbers  of
the  second  class.  In  spite  of  the  fact  that  Cantor
firmly  believed  this,  possibly  on  account  of  the  fact
that  all  known  aggregates  in  the  continuum  had
been  found  to  be  either  of  the  first  power  or  of  the
power  of  the  continuum,  the  proof  or  disproof  of
this  theorem  has  not  even  now  been  carried  out,
and  there  is  some  ground  for  believing  that  it
cannot  be  carried  out.

What  Cantor,  in  his  Grundlagen^  had  noted  as  the
relation  of  two  well-ordered  aggregates  which  have
the  same  enumeral  was  here  called  the  relation  of
*' i?imilarity,"  and  in  the laws  of multiplication of

INTRODUCTION  77

two  ordinal  numbers  he  departed  from  the  custom
followed  in  the  Gnindlagen  and  wrote  the  multiplier
on  the  right  and  the  multiplicand  on  the  left.  The
importance  of  this  alteration  is  seen  by  the  fact
that  we  can  write  :  a^  .a^  =  a^^'^  ;  whereas  we  would
have  to  write,  in  the  notation  of  the Grundlagen  :

At  the  end  of  this  letter,  Cantor  remarked  that
a)  may,  in  a  sense,  be  regarded  as  the  limit  to  which
the  variable  finite  whole  number  v  tends.  Here  "  w  is
the  least  transfinite  ordinal  number  which  is  greater
than  all  finite  numbers  ;  exactly  in  the  same  way
that  J 2  \s  the  limit  of  certain  variable,  increasing,
rational  numbers,  with  this  difference  :  the  difference
between  J  2  and  these  approximating  fractions  be-
comes as  small  as  we  wish,  whereas  w  —  v  is  always
equal  to  w.  But  this  difference  in  no  way  alters  the
fact  that  0)  is  to  be  regarded  as  as  definite  and  com-
pleted as  J 2,  and  in  no  way  alters  the  fact  that  00
has  no  more  trace  of  the  numbers  v  which  tend  to  it
than  J 2  has  of  the  approximating  fractions.  The
transfinite  numbers  are  in  a  sense  new  h^rationalities,
and  indeed  in  my  eyes  the  best  method  of  defining
finite  irrational  numbers  is  the  same  in  principle  as
my  method  of  introducing  transfinite  numbers.  We
can  say  that  the  transfinite  numbers  stand  or  fall
with  finite  irrational  numbers,  in  their  inmost  being
they  are  alike,  for  both  are  definitely  marked  off
modifications  of  the  actually  infinite."

With  this  is  connected  in  principle  an  extract  from

78  INTRODUCTION

a  letter  written  in  1886:  ''Finally  I  have  still  to
explain  to  you  in  what  sense  I  conceive  the  minimum
of  the  transfinite  as  limit  of  the  increasing  finite.
For  this  purpose  we  must  consider  that  the  concept
of  '  limit '  in  the  domain  of  finite  numbers  has  two
essential  characteristics.  For  example,  the  number
I  is  the  limit  of  the  numbers  z^=\  —  \\v^  where  v  is
a  variable,  finite,  whole  number,  which  increases
above  all  finite  limits.  In  the  first  place  the
difference  \—z^  is  a  magnitude  which  becomes  in-
finitely small ;  in  the  second  place  i  is  the  least  of
all  numbers  which  are  greater  than  all  magnitudes  z^.
Each  of  these  two  properties  characterizes  the  finite
number  i  as  limit  of  the  variable  magnitude  z^ .
Now  if  we  wish  to  extend  the  concept  of  limit  to
transfinite  limits  as  well,  the  second  of  the  above
characteristics  is  used  ;  the  first  must  here  be
allowed  to  drop  because  it  has  a  meaning  only  for
finite  limits.  Accordingly  1  call  w  the  limit  of  the
increasing,  finite,  whole  numbers  v ,  because  to  is  the
least  of  all  numbers  which  are  greater  than  all  the
finite  numbers.  But  co  —  1/  is  always  equal  to  co,  and
therefore  we  cannot  say  that  the  increasing  numbers

V  come  as  near  as  we  wish  to  w  ;  indeed  any  number

V  however  great  is  quite  as  far  off  from  co  as  the  least
finite  number.  Here  we  see  especially  clearly  the
very  important  fact  that  my  least  transfinite  ordinal
number  (o,  and  consequently  all  greater  ordinal
numbers,  lie  quite  outside  the  endless  series  i,  2,  3,
and  so  on.  Thus  w  is  not  a  maximum  of  the  finite
numbers,  for  there  is  no  such  thing. "

INTRODUCTION  79

In  another  letter  written  in  1886,  Cantor  empha-
sized another  aspect  of  irrational  numbers.  In  all
of  the  definitions  of  these  numbers  there  is  used,
as  is  indeed  essential,  a  special  actually  infinite
aggregate  of  rational  numbers.  In  both  this  and
another  letter  of  1886,  Cantor  returned  in  great
detail  to  the  distinction  between  the  "potential"
and  "actual"  infinite  of  which  he  had  made  a  great
point  under  other  names  in  his  Gvundlagen.  The
potential  infinite  is  a  variable  finite,  and  in  order
that  such  a  variable  may  be  completely  known,  we
must  be  able  to  determine  the  domain  of  variability,
and  this  domain  can  only  be,  in  general,  an  actually
infinite  aggregate  of  values.  Thus  every  potential
infinite  presupposes  an  actually  infinite,  and  these
"domains  of  variability"  which  are  studied  in  the
theory  of  aggregates  are  the  foundations  of  arith-
metic and  analysis.  Further,  besides  actually  infinite
aggregates,  we  have  to  consider  in  mathematics
natural  abstractions  from  these  aggregates,  which
form  the  material  of  the  theory  of  transfinite
numbers.

In  1885,  Cantor  had  developed  to  a  large  extent
his  theory  of  cardinal  numbers  and  ordinal  types.

In  the  fairly  long  paper  which  he  wrote  out,  he
laid  particular  stress  on  the  theory  of  ordinal  types
and  entered  into  details  which  he  had  not  published
before  as  to  the  definition  of  ordinal  type  in  general,
of  which  ordinal  number  is  a  particular  case.  In
this  paper  also  he  denoted  the  cardinal  number  of

an aggregate M by M, and the ordinal type  of

8o  INTRODUCTION

M  by  M  ;  thus  indicating  by  lines  over  the  letter
that  a  double  or  single  act  of  abstraction  is  to
be  performed.

In  the  theory  of  cardinal  numbers,  he  defined  the
addition  and  multiplication  of  two  cardinal  numbers
and  proved  the  fundamental  laws  about  them  in
much  the  same  way  as  he  did  in  the  memoir  of
1895  which  is  translated  below.  It  is  characteristic
of  Cantor's  views  that  he  distinguished  very  sharply
between  an  aggregate  and  a  cardinal  number  that
belongs  to  it  :  "Is  not  an  aggregate  an  object  out-
side us,  whereas  its  cardinal  number  is  an  abstract
picture  of  it  in  our  mind  ?  "

In  an  ordered  aggregate  of  any  number  of
dimensions,  such  as  the  totality  of  points  in  space,
as  determined  by  three  rectangular  co-ordinates,  or
a  piece  of  music  whose  dimensions  are  the  sequence
of  the  tones  in  time,  the  duration  of  each  tone  in
time,  the  pitch  of  the  tones,  and  the  intensity  of  the
tones,  then  * '  if  we  make  abstraction  of  the  nature
of  the  elements,  while  we  retain  their  rank  in  all  the
n  different  directions,  an  intellectual  picture,  a  general
concept,  is  generated  in  us,  and  I  call  this  the  /^-ple
ordinal  type."  The  definition  of  the  "  similarity  of
ordered  aggregates  "  is  :

"Two  ;/-ply  ordered  aggregates  M  and  N  are
called  similar  if  it  is  possible  so  to  make  their
elements  correspond  to  another  uniquely  and  com-
pletely that,  if  E  and  E'  are  any  two  elements  of
M  and  F  and  F'  the  two  corresponding  elements  of
N,  then  for  i/=  i,  2,  . . .  n  the  relation  of  rank  of

INTRODUCTION  8i

E  to  E'  in  the  jyth  direction  inside  the  aggregate  M
is  exactly  the  same  as  the  relation  of  rank  of  F  to  F'
in  the  v\\\  direction  inside  the  aggregate  N.  We
will  call  such  a  correspondence  of  two  aggregates
which  are  similar  to  one  another  an  imaging  of  the
one  on  the  other."

The  addition  and  multiplication  of  ordinal  types,
and  the  fundamental  laws  about  them,  were  then
dealt  with  much  as  in  the  memoir  of  1895  which  is
translated  below.  The  rest  of  the  paper  was  devoted
to  a  consideration  of  problems  about  ;^-ple  finite
types.

In  1888,  Cantor,  who  had  arrived  at  a  very  clear
notion  that  the  essential  part  of  the  concept  of  number
lay  in  the  unitary  concept  that  we  form,  gave  some
interesting  criticisms  on  the  essays  of  Helmholtz  and
Kronecker,  which  appeared  in  1887,  on  the  concept
of  number.  Both  the  authors  referred  to  started
with  the  last  and  most  unessential  feature  in  our
treatment  of  ordinal  numbers  :  the  words  or  other
signs  that  we  use  to  represent  these  numbers.

In  1887,  Cantor  gave  a  more  detailed  proof  of  the
non-existence  of  actually  infinitely  small  magnitudes.
This  proof  was  referred  to  in  advance  in  the  Grund-
lagen,  and  was  later  put  into  a  more  rigorous  form
by  Peano.

We  have  already  referred  to  the  researches  of
Cantor  on  point-aggregates  published  in  1883  and
later  ;  the  only  other  paper  besides  those  already
dealt  with  that  was  published  by  Cantor  on  an
important question in the theory of transfinite

82  • INTRODUCTION

numbers  was  one  Ipublished  in  1892.  In  this  paper
we  can  see  the  origins  of  the  conception  of  '  *  cover-
ing" {Belegmig)  defined  in  the  memoir  of  1895  trans-
lated below.  In  the  terminology  introduced  in  this
memoir,  we  can  say  that  the  paper  of  1892  contains
a  proof  that  2,  when  exponentiated  by  a  transfinite
cardinal  number,  gives  rise  to  a  cardinal  number
which  is  greater  than  the  cardinal  number  first
mentioned.

The  introduction  of  the  concept  of  "covering"  is
the  most  striking  advance  in  the  principles  of  the
theory  of  transfinite  numbers  from  1885  to  1895,
and  we  can  now  study  the  final  and  considered  form
which  Cantor  gave  to  the  theory  in  two  important
memoirs  of  1895  ^"^  1897.  The  principal  advances
in  the  theory  since  1897  will  be  referred  to  in  the
notes  at  the  end  of  this  book.

CONTRIBUTIONS TO  THE
FOUNDING OF THE  THEORY  OF

TRANSFINITE NUMBERS

[48i] CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE
FOUNDING  OF  THE  THEORY  OF
TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS

(First  Article)

"  Hypotheses  non  fingo."

"  Neque  enim  leges  intellectui  aut  rebus  damus
ad  arl)itrium  nostrum,  sed  tanquam  scribal
fideles  ab  ipsius  naturae  voce  latas  et  prolatas
excipimus  et  describimus."

"Veniet  tempus,  quo  ista  quae  nunc  latent,  in
lucem  dies  extrahat  et  longioris  xvi  diligentia."

The  Conception  of  Power  or  Cardinal  Number

By  an  ^ '  aggregate  "  {Menge)  we  are  to  understand
any  collection  into  a  whole  {Zusaimnenfassung  zu
einem  Ganzen)  M  of  definite  and  separate  objects  ;;/
of  our  intuition  or  our  thought.  These  objects  are
called  the  ' '  elements  "  of  M.
In  signs  we  express  this  thus  :

(i)  M  =  {;;/}.

We  denote  the  uniting  of  many  aggregates  M,  N,
P,  .  .  .,  which  have  no  common  elements,  into  a
single  aggregate  by

(2)  (M,  N,  P,  .  .  .).

85

m THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

The  elements  of  this  aggregate  are,  therefore,  the
elements  of  M,  of  N,  of  P,  .  .  .,  taken  together.

We  will  call  by  the  name  "part"  or  "partial
3-ggi'egate  "  of  an  aggregate  M  any  other  aggregate
Mj  whose  elements  are  also  elements  of  M.

If  M2  is  a  part  of  M^  and  M^  is  a  part  of  M,  then
M2  is  a  part  of  M.

Every  aggregate  M  has  a  definite  "  power,"  which
we  will  also  call  its  "cardinal  number."

We  will  call  by  the  name  "  power"  or  "cardinal
number  "  of  M  the  general  concept  which,  by  means
of  our  active  faculty  of  thought,  arises  from  the
aggregate  M  when  we  make  abstraction  of  the
nature  of  its  various  elements  in  and  of  the  order
in  which  they  are  given.

[482]  We  denote  the  result  of  this  double  act  of
abstraction,  the  cardinal  number  or  power  of  M,  by

(3)  M.

Since  every  single  element  vi,  if  we  abstract  from
its  nature,  becomes  a  "unit,"  the  cardinal  number
M  is  a  definite  aggregate  composed  of  units,  and
this  number  has  existence  in  our  mind  as  an  intel-
lectual image  or  projection  of  the  given  aggregate  M.

We  say  that  two  aggregates  M  and  N  are  ' '  equi-
valent," in  signs

(4)  M  00  N or N  fV)  M,

if  it  is  possible  to  put  them,  by  some  law,  in  such  a
relation  to  one  another  that  to  every  element  of  each
onelof  them  corresponds  one  and  only  one  element

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS  87

of  the  other.  To  every  part  Mj  of  M  there  corre-
sponds, then,  a  definite  equivalent  part  N^  of  N,  and
inversely.

If  we  have  such  a  law  of  co-ordination  of  two
equivalent  aggregates,  then,  apart  from  the  case
when  each  of  them  consists  only  of  one  element,  we
can  modify  this  law  in  many  ways.  We  can,  for
instance,  always  take  care  that  to  a  special  element
in^  of  M  a  special  element  n^  of  N  corresponds.  For
if,  according  to  the  original  law,  the  elements  ni^
and  Uq  do  not  correspond  to  one  another,  but  to  the
element  m^  of  M  the  element  n^^  of  N  corresponds,
and  to  the  element  n^  of  N  the  element  in^  of  M
corresponds,  we  take  the  modified  law  according  to
which  m^  corresponds  to  n^  and  m^  to  n^  and  for  the
other  elements  the  original  law  remains  unaltered.
By  this  means  the  end  is  attained.

Every  aggregate  is  equivalent  to  itself :

(5)  M  00  M.

If  two  aggregates  are  equivalent  to  a  third,  they  are
equivalent  to  one  another  ;  that  is  to  say  :

(6)  from  M  00  P and N  00  P follows M  00  N.

Of  fundamental  importance  is  the  theorem  that
two  aggregates  M  and  N  have  the  same  cardinal
number  if,  and  only  if,  they  are  equivalent  :  thus,

(7)  from M  00  N we  get M  =  N,
and

(8)  from M  =  N we  get M  00  N.

Thus  the  equivalence  of  aggregates  forms  the  neces-

88 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE  THEORY

sary  and  sufficient  condition  for  the  equality  of  their
cardinal  numbers.

[483]  In  fact,  according  to  the  above  definition  of
power,  the  cardinal  number  M  remains  unaltered  if
in  the  place  of  each  of  one  or  many  or  even  all
elements  in  of  M  other  things  are  substituted.  If,
now,  M  00  N,  there  is  a  law  of  co-ordination  by
means  of  which  M  and  N  are  uniquely  and  recipro-
cally referred  to  one  another ;  and  by  it  to  the
element  in  of  M  corresponds  the  element  n  of  N.
Then  we  can  imagine,  in  the  place  of  every  element
m  of  M,  the  corresponding  element  /^  of  N  substi-
tuted, and,  in  this  way,  M  transforms  into  N  without
alteration  of  cardinal  number. Consequently

M  =  N.

The  converse  of  the  theorem  results  from  the  re-
mark that  between  the  elements  of  J^I  and  the
different  units  of  its  cardinal  number  M  a  recipro-
cally univocal  (or  bi-univocal)  relation  of  correspond-
ence subsists.  For,  as  we  saw,  M  grows,  so  to
speak,  out  of  M  in  such  a  way  that  from  every
element  ;;/  of  M  a  special  unit  of  M  arises.  Thus
we  can  say  that

(9)  M  00  M.

In  the  same  way  N  00  N.  If  then  M  =  N,  we  have,
by  (6),  M  00  N.

We  will  mention  the following theorem, which
results  immediately  from  the  conception  of  equival-

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS  89

ence.  If  M,  N,  P,  .  .  .  are  aggregates  which  have
no  common  elements,  M',  N",  P',  .  .  .  are  also  aggre-
gates with  the  same  property,  and  if

M  00  M', N  00  N; P  cv)  P^ .  .  . ,

then  we  always  have

(M,  N,  P,  .  .  .)  fNJ  (M;  N',  P;  .  .  .).

§2

*' Greater"  and  <*  Less  "  with  Powers

If  for  two  aggregates  M  and  N  with  the  cardinal
numbers  a=M  and  b  =  N,  both  the  conditions  :

{a)  There  is  no  part  of  M  which  is  equivalent  to  N,
{b)  There  is  a  part  N^  of  N,  suCh  that  N^  00  M,

are  fulfilled,  it  is  obvious  that  these  conditions  still
hold  if  in  them  M  and  N  are  replaced  by  two
equivalent  aggregates  M'  and  N'.  Thus  they  ex-
press a  definite  relation  of  the  cardinal  numbers
a  and b  to  one  another.

[484]  P'urther,  the  equivalence  of  M  and  N,  and
thus  the  equality  of  a  and  b,  is  excluded  ;  for  if  we
had  M  00  N,  we  would  have,  because  N^  f\j  M,  the
equivalence  N^  po  N,  and  then,  because  M  00  N,
there  would  exist  a  part  Mj  of  M  such  that  M^  oo  M,
and  therefore  wg  should  have  Mj  oo  N  ;  and  this
contradicts  the  condition  {a).

Thirdly,  the  relation  of  a  to  b  is  such  that  it
makes  impossible  the  same  relation  of  b  to  vi ;  for  if

90 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

in  ia)  and  {b)  the  parts  played  by  M  and  N  are
interchanged,  two  conditions  arise  which  are  con-
tradictory to  the  former  ones.

We  express  the  relation  of  a  to  b  characterized  by
{a)  and  ip)  by  saying:  a  is  "less"  than  b  or  b  is
"greater  "  than  a  ;  in  signs

(i)  a<b or \i>(x.

We  can  easily  prove  that,

(2)  if  a<b  and  b<c,  then  we  always  have  a<c.
Similarly, from the definition, it follows at  once
that,  if  ?i  is  part  of  an aggregate P,  from  a<Pi

follows  a  <  P  and  from  P  <  b  follows  P^  <  b.
We  have  seen  that,  of  the  three  relations

a  =  b,  (x<^,  \i<(x,

each  one  excludes  the  two  others.  On  the  other
hand,  the  theorem  that,  with  any  two  cardinal
numbers  a  and  b,  one  of  those  three  relations  must
necessarily  be  realized,  is  by  no  means  self-evident
and  can  hardly  be  proved  at  this  stage.

Not  until  later,  when  we  shall  have  gained  a
survey  over  the  ascending  sequence  of  the  transfinite
cardinal  numbers  and  an  insight  into  their  connexion,
will  result  the  truth  of  the  theorem  :

A.  If  a  and  b  are  any  two  cardinal  numbers,  then
either  a  =  b  or  a  <  b  or  a  >  b.

P>om  this  theorem  the  following  theorems,  of
which,  however,  we  will  here  make  no  use,  can  be
very  simply  derived  :

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS  91

B.  If  two  aggregates  M  and  N  are  such  that  M  is
equivalent  to  a  part  N^  of  N  and  N  to  a  part  Mj  of
M,  then  M  and  N  are  equivalent  ;

C.  If  Mj  is  a  part  of  an  aggregate  M,  Mg  is  a
part  of  the  aggregate  Mj,  and  if  the  aggregates
M  and  Mg  are  equivalent,  then  Mj  is  equivalent  to
both  M  and  Mg  ;

D.  If,  with  two  aggregates  M  and  N,  N  is
equivalent  neither  to  M  nor  to  a  part  of  M,  there  is
a  part  Nj  of  N  that  is  equivalent  to  M  ;

E.  If  two  aggregates  M  and  N  are  not  equivalent,
and  there  is  a  part  N^  of  N  that  is  equivalent  to  M,
then  no  part  of  M  is  equivalent  to  N.

[485]  §  3

The  Addition  and  Multiplication  of  Powers

The  union  of  two  aggregates  M  and  N  which
have  no  common  elemeijts  was  denoted  in  §  i,  (2),
by  (M,  N).  We  call  it  the  ''union-aggregate
( Vereinigungsinenge)  of  M  and  N. "

If  M'  and  N'  are  two  other  aggregates  without
common  elements,  and  if  M  00  M'  and  N  00  N',  we
saw  that  we  have

(M,  N)  00  (M',  N').
Hence  the  cardinal  number  of  (M,  N)  only  depends

upon  the  cardinal  numbers  M  =  a  and  N  =  b.

This  leads  to  the  definition  of  the  sum  of  vi  and  b.
We  put  '

(I)  a  +  b  =  (M7>^).

92 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

Since  in  the  conception  of  power,  we  abstract  from
the  order  of  the  elements,  we  conclude  at  once  that

(2)  a  +  b  =  b  +  a;

and,  for  any  three  cardinal  numbers  a,  b,  c,  we  have

(3)  a  +  (b  +  c)  =  (a  +  b)  +  c.

We  now  come  to  multiplication.  Any  element  vi
of  an  aggregate  M  can  be  thought  to  be  bound  up
with  any  element  n  of  another  aggregate  N  so  as
to  form  a  new  element  {m,  n)  ;  we  denote  by  (M  .  N)
the  aggregate  of  all  these  bindings  (w,  n)^  and  call
it  the  ''aggregate  of  bindings  {Verbindungsniejige)
ofMandN." Thus

(4)  (M.N)  =  {K;.)}.

We  see  that  the  power  of  (M  .  N)  only  depends  on

the  powers  M  =  a  and  N  =  b  ;  for,  if  we  replace  the
aggregates  M  and  N  by  the  aggregates

W  =  {m) and N'  =  {;/}

respectively  equivalent  to  them,  and  consider  in,  in'
and  ft,  n'  as  corresponding  elements,  then  the
aggregate

(M'.N')  =  {(^^/,  n))

is  brought  into  a  reciprocal  and  univocal  corre-
spondence with  (M .  N)  by  regarding  {in,  n)  and
{in' , n')  as  corresponding  elements. Thus

(5)  (m;no<^^(m.n).

We  now  define  the  product  vi .  b  by  the  equation

(6)  a.b  =  (M.N).

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS  93

[486]  An  aggregate  with  the  cardinal  number
a .  b  may  also  be  made  up  out  of  two  aggregates  M
and  N  with  the  cardinal  numbers  a  and  b  according
to  the  following  rule  :  We  start  from  the  aggregate
N  and  replace  in  it  every  element  n  by  an  aggregate
M„  fNJ  M  ;  if,  then,  we  collect  the  elements  of  all
these  aggregates  M„  to  a  whole  S,  we  see  that

(7)  S  ro  (M  .  N),
and  consequently

S  =  a.b.

For,  if,  with  any  given  law  of  correspondence  of  the
two  equivalent  aggregates  M  and  M,,,  we  denote
by  in  the  element  of  M  which  corresponds  to  the
element  m^  of  M„,  we  have

(8)  S^  {;;/.};

and  thus  the  aggregates  S  and  (M  .  N)  can  be  re-
ferred reciprocally  and  univocally  to  one  another  by
regarding  ni^  and  {in,  n)  as  corresponding  elements.
From  our  definitions  result  readily  the  theorems  :

(9)  a.b  =  b.a,

(10)  a.(b  .  c)  =  (a.  b).  c,

(11)  a(b  +  c)  =  ab  +  ac;
because  :

(M.N)r>o(N.M),

(M.(N.P))  00  ((M.N).  P),
(M  .  (N,  P))  fNj  ((M  .  N),  (M  .  P)).
Addition  and  multiplication  of  powers  arc  subject,

94 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE  THEORY

therefore,  to  the  commutative,  associative,  and  dis-
tributive laws.

§4
The  Exponentiation  of  Powers

By  a  "  covering  of  the  aggregate  N  with  elements
of  the  aggregate  M,"  or,  more  simply,  by  a  ''cover-
ing of  N  with  M,"  we  understand  a  law  by  which
with  every  element  n  of  N  a  definite  element  of  M
is  bound  up,  where  one  and  the  same  element  of  M
can  come  repeatedly  into  application.  The  element
of  M  bound  up  with  n  is,  in  a  way,  a  one-valued
function  of  n,  and  may  be  denoted  by  f{}i)  ;  it  is
called  a  ''  covering  function  of  n.''  The  correspond-
ing covering  of  N  will  be  called /(N).

[487]  Two  coverings /i(N)  and/2(N)  are  said  to
be  equal  if,  and  only  if,  for  all  elements  ;^  of  N  the
equation

(I)  /lW=/2(«)

is  fulfilled,  so  that  if  this  equation  does  not  subsist
for  even  a  single  element  n^n^,  f^{^)  and/2(N)  are
characterized  as  different  coverings  of  N.  For  ex-
ample, if  vi^  is  a  particular  element  of  M,  we  may
fix  that,  for  all  n'?>

f{n)  =  m^;

this  law  constitutes  a  particular  covering  of  N  with
M.  Another  kind  of  covering  results  if  ui^  and  m^
are  two  different  particular  elements  of  M  and  n^  a
particular  element  of  N,  from  fixing  that

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS  95

/(«o)  =  ^'^o

for  all  ;2's  which  are  different  from  n^.

The  totality  of  different  coverings  of  N  with  M
forms  a  definite  aggregate  with  the  elements /(N)  ;
we  call  it  the  **  covering-aggregate  (yBelegungsvienge)
of  N  with  M  "  and  denote  it  by  (N  |  M). Thus  :

(2)  (N  |M)={/(N)}.

If  M  00  M'  and  N  Oo  N',  we  easily  find  that

(3)  (N  I  M)  00  (N'  I  MO.

Thus  the  cardinal  number  of  (N  |  M)  depends  only
on  the  cardinal  numbers  M  =  a  and  N  =  b  ;  it  serves
us  for  the  definition  of  a*  :

(4)  a»  =  (N^r).

For  any  three  aggregates,  M,  N,  P,  we  easily  prove
the  theorems:

. (5) ((N  |M).(P|M))f\j((N,  P)|M),

(6)  ((P|  M).(P|N))<N;(P|(M.N)),

(7)  (P|(N|  M))'\^((P.N)|M),

from  which,  if  we  put  P  =  c,  we  have,  by  (4)  and  by
paying  attention  to  §  3,  the  theorems  for  any  three
cardinal  numbers,  a,  b,  and  c :

(8)

at.rt'  =  a''+^

(9)

a'.b^  =  (a.b)f,

(10)

(a*/ = '!'•'•

96 THE  POUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

[488]  We  see  how  pregnant  and  far-reaching
these  simple  formulae  extended  to  powers  are  by  the
following  example.  If  we  denote  the  power  of  the
linear  continuum  X  (that  is,  the  totality  X  of  real
numbers  x  such  that  x>^  and  <i)  by  0,  we  easily
see  that  it  may  be  represented  by,  amongst  others,
the  formula  :

(II)  r o  =  2^\

where  §  6  gives  the  meaning  of  Nq.  In  fact,  by  (4),
2^0  is  the  power  of  all  representations

(-) .=^+f>+...+f>+...

(where  f{v)  =  O  or  i )

of  the  numbers  x  in  the  binary  system.  If  we  pay
attention  to  the  fact  that  every  number  x  is  only
represented  once,  with  the  exception  of  the  numbers

x= <i,  which  are  represented  twice  over,  we

have,  if  we  denote  the  "enumerable"  totality  of
the  latter  by  {s^],

2«o  =  ({j4, X).

If  we  take  away  from  X  any  "  enumerable  "  aggre-
gate {t^}  and  denote  the  remainder  by  X^,  we  have  :

({sA,  X)=({^4,  {4},  X,),

so

Xco(K},  X),

OF  TRANSFINlTli  NUMBERS  97

and  thus  (§  i)

2^"  =  X  =  0.

From  (11)  follows  by  squaring  (by  §  6,  (6))

and  hence,  by  continued  multiplication  by  0,

(13)  o''=o,

where  v  is  any  finite  cardinal  number.

If  we  raise  both  sides  of  (11)  to  the  power*  ^j^
we  get  ^

But  since,  by  §  6,  (8),  No.^^o  =  ^^o,  we  have

(14)  o^''*°  =  o.

The  formulae  (13)  and  (14)  mean  that  both  the
jy-dimensional  and  the  {s?Q-dimensional  continuum  have
the  power  of  the  one-dimensional  continuum.  Thus
the  whole  contents  of  my  paper  in  Crelle's  Journal^
vol.  Ixxxiv,  i878,t  are  derived  purely  algebraically
with  these  few  strokes  of  the  pen  from  the  fundamental
formulae  of  the  calculation  with  cardinal  numbers.

[489]  §  5

The  Finite  Cardinal  Numbers

We  will  next  show  how  the  principles  which  we
have  laid  down,  and  on  which  later  on  the  theory
of  the  actually  infinite  or  transfinite  cardinal  numbers

*  [In  English  there  is  an  ambiguity.]
t  [See  Section  V  of  the  Introduction.]

98 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE  THEORY

will  be  built,  afford  also  the  most  natural,  shortest,
and  most  rigorous  foundation  for  the  theory  of
finite  numbers.

To  a  single  thing  e^,  if  we  subsume  it  under  the
concept  of  an  aggregate  Eo  =  (^o)'  corresponds  as
cardinal  number  what  we  call  ''one"  and  denote  by
I  ;  we  have

(1)  i  =  Eo.

Let  us  now  unite  with  E^  another  thing  e^,  and
call  the  union-aggregate  E^,  so  that

(2)  t:i  =  (Ko,  e^  =  {e^,  e^).

The  cardinal  number  of  E^  is  called  "two"  and  is
denoted  by  2  :

(3)  2=1,.

By  addition  of  new  elements  we  get  the  series  of
aggregates

E2  =  (Ei,  ^2)' E3  =  (E2,  ^3),  .  .  .,

which  give  us  successively,  in  unlimited  sequence,
the  other  so-called  ' '  finite  cardinal  numbers  "  de-
noted by  3,  4,  5,  .  .  .  The  use  which  we  here
make  of  these  numbers  as  suffixes  is  justified  by
the  fact  that  a  number  is  only  used  as  a  suffix
when  it  has  b"een  defined  as  a  cardinal  number.
We  have,  if  by  i/— i  is  understood  the  number  im-
mediately preceding  v  in  the  above  series,

(4)  j/  =  E,_i,

(5)  E,-(E,_i,  O  =  (^o'  ^D  •  •  •  ^^)'

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS  99

From  the  definition  of  a  sum  in  §  3  follows  :

(6)  E,-E,_i+i;

that  is  to  say,  every  cardinal  number,  except  i,  is
the  sum  of  the  immediately  preceding  one  and  i.

Now,  the  following  three  theorems  come  into  the
foreground  :

A.  The  terms  of  the  unlimited  series  of  finite
cardinal  numbers

are  all  different  from  one  another  (that  is  to  say,
the  condition  of  equivalence  established  in  §  I  is
not  fulfilled  for  the  corresponding  aggregates).

[490]  B.  Every  one  of  these  numbers  v  is  greater
than  the  preceding  ones  and  less  than  the  following
ones  (§2).

C.  There  are  no  cardinal  numbers  which,  in
magnitude,  lie  between  two  consecutive  numbers
V  and  J^+  I  (§  2).

We  make  the  proofs  of  these  theorems  rest  on
the  two  following  ones,  D  and  E.  We  shall,  then,
in  the  next  place,  give  the  latter  theorems  rigid
proofs.

D.  If  M  is  an  aggregate  such  that  it  is  of  equal
power  with  none  of  its  parts,  then  the  aggregate
(M,  e),  which  arises  from  M  by  the  addition  of  a
single  new  element  e^  has  the  same  property  of
being  of  equal  power  with  none  of  its  parts.

E.  If  N  is  an  aggregate  with  the  finite  cardinal
number  ^z, and N^  is  any  part of  N, the  cardinal

lOO THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

number  of  Nj,  is  equal  to  one  of  the  preceding
numbers  i,  2,  3,  .  .  . ,  ly—  i.

Pr^^/^/D.— Suppose  that  the  aggregate  (M,  e)
is  equivalent  to  one  of  its  parts  which  we  will  call
N.  Then  two  cases,  both  of  which  lead  to  a  con-
tradiction, are  to  be  distinguished  :

{(i)  The  aggregate  N  contains  e  as  element  ;  let
N  =  (Ml,  e)  ;  then  M^  is  a  part  of  M  because  N  is
a  part  of  (M,  e).  As  we  saw  in  §  i,  the  law  of
correspondence  of  the  two  equivalent  aggregates
(M,  e)  and  (M^,  e)  can  be  so  modified  that  the
element  e  of  the  one  corresponds  to  the  same
element  e  of  the  other  ;  by  that,  then,  M  and  M^
are  referred  reciprocally  and  univocally  to  one
another.  But  this  contradicts  the  supposition  that
M  is  not  equivalent  to  its  part  M^.

{U)  The  part  N  of  (M,  e)  does  not  contain  e  as
element,  so  that  N  is  either  M  or  a  part  of  M.  In
the  law  of  correspondence  between  (M,  e)  and  N,
which  lies  at  the  basis  of  our  supposition,  to  the
element  e  of  the  former  let  the  element  /  of  the
latter  correspond.  Let  N  =  (Mi,  /)  ;  then  the
aggregate  M  is  put  in  a  reciprocally  univocal  relation
with  Mj.  But  Ml  is  a  part  of  N  and  hence  of  M.
So  here  too  M  would  be  equivalent  to  one  of  its
parts,  and  this  is  contrary  to  the  supposition.

Proof  of  E. — We  will  suppose  the  correctness
of  the  theorem  up  to  a  certain  v  and  then  conclude
its  validity  for  the  number  v\-  i  which  immediately
follows,  in  the  following  manner  : — We  start  from
the  aggregate  E„  =  (^o.  ^1,  •  •  -,  ^.)  as  an aggregate

OF  TRANSFINITE  Ntl'MBERTy (ot

with  the  cardinal  number  v-\-\.  If  the  theorem  is
true  for  this  aggregate,  its  truth  for  any  other
aggregate  with  the  same  cardinal  number  v-\-\
follows  at  once  by  §  i.  Let  E'  be  any  part  of  E^  ;
we  distinguish  the  following  cases  :

{a)  E'  does  not  contain  e^  as  element,  then  E  is
either  E^_i  [491]  or  a  part  of  E^,_i,  and  so  has  as
cardinal  number  either  v  or  one  of  the  numbers
I,  2,  3,  .  .  .,  I/—  I,  because  we  supposed  our  theorem
true  for  the  aggregate  E^_i,  with  the  cardinal
number  v.

{b)  E'  consists of the single element ^„, then

E'=i.

ic)  E'  consists  of  e^  and  an  aggregate  E'',  so  that
E'  =  (E'',  e^,  E''  is  a  part  of  E^_i  and  has  there-
fore by  supposition  as  cardinal  number  one  of  the
numbers  i,  2,  3,  .  .  .,  1/— i.  But  now  E'  =  E''4-i,
and  thus  the  cardinal  number  of  E'  is  one  of  the
numbers  2,  3,  .  .  . ,  i/.

Proof  of  K. — Every  one  of  the  aggregates  which
we  have  denoted  by  E^  has  the  property  of  not
being  equivalent  to  any  of  its  parts.  Eor  if  we
suppose  that  this  is  so  as  far  as  a  certain  i/,  it  follows
from  the  theorem  D  that  it  is  so  for  the  immediately
following  number  v-\-\.  For  1/=  i,  we  recognize  at
once  that  the  aggregate  Ei  =  (^o,  e^  is  not  equivalent
to  any  of  its  parts,  which  are  here  {e^  and  {e^.
Consider,  now,  any  two  numbers  fx  and  v  of  the
series  1,2,  3,  .  .  .  ;  then,  if  jx  is  the  earlier  and  v
the  later, E^_i  is  a  part  of  E^_i. Thus  E^_i  and

i02TliE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

E^_i are not equivalent, and accordingly their

cardinal  numbers  ^=:E^_i  and  i/=E^_i  are  not
equal.

Proof  of  ^. — If  of  the  two  finite  cardinal  numbers
fj.  and  V  the  first  is  the  earlier  and  the  second  the
later,  then  fj.  <  v.  For  consider  the  two  aggregates
M  =  E^_i  and  N  =  E^,_i;  for  them  each  of  the  two

conditions  in  §  2  for  M  <  N  is  fulfilled.  The  con-
dition {a)  is  fulfilled  because,  by  theorem  E,  a  part
of  M  =  E^_i  can  only  have  one  of  the  cardinal
numbers  i,  2,  3,  .  .  .,  /x— i,  and  therefore,  by
theorem  A,  cannot  be  equivalent  to  the  aggregate
N=E^_i.  The  condition  (b)  is  fulfilled  because  M
itself  is  a  part  of  N.

Proof  of  C. — Let  a  be  a  cardinal  number  which
is  less  than  v-\-  i.  Because  of  the  condition  (b)  of
§  2,  there  is  a  part  of  E,,  with  the  cardinal  number
a.  By  theorem  E,  a  part  of  E^,  can  only  have  one
of  the  cardinal  numbers  i,  2,  3,  .  .  . ,  i/.  Thus  a  is
equal  to  one  of  the  cardinal  numbers  I,  2,  3,  .  .  .,  i/.
By  theorem  B,  none  of  these  is  greater  than  v.
Consequently  there  is  no  cardinal  number  a  which
is  less  than  v+  i  and  greater  than  v.

Of  importance  for  what  follows,  is  the  following
theorem  :

F.  If  K  is  any  aggregate  of  different  finite
cardinal  numbers,  there  is  one,  /c^,  amongst  them
which  is  smaller  than  the  rest,  and  therefore  the
smallest  of  all.

[492] Proof — The  aggregate K  either  contains

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 103

the  number  i,  in  which  case  it  is  the  least,  «:i=i,
or  it  does  not.  In  the  latter  case,  let  J  be  the
aggregate  of  all  those  cardinal  numbers  of  our  series,
I,  2,  3,  .  .  .,  which  are  smaller  than  those  occurring
in  K.  If  a  number  v  belongs  to  J,  all  numbers  less
than  V  belong  to  J.  But  J  must  have  one  element
i/j  such  that  J'l+i,  and  consequently  all  greater
numbers,  do  not  belong  to  J,  because  otherwise
J  would  contain  all  finite  numbers,  whereas  the
numbers  belonging  to  K  are  not  contained  in  J.
Thus  J  is  the  segment  {AbscJinitt)  (1,2,  3,  .  .  .,  j/j).
The  number  v^-\-\=k^  is  necessarily  an  element  of
K  and  smaller  than  the  rest.

From  F  we  conclude  :

G.  Every  aggregate  K={/c}  of  different  finite
cardinal  numbers  can  be  brought  into  the  form  of
a  series

such  that

K  =  (/Cp  /C2,  /C3, .  .  .)

/Ci  *^  /C9  "^  '^Sj  • •'  •

§6

The  Smallest  Transfinite  Cardinal  Number

Aleph-Zero

Aggregates  with  finite  cardinal  numbers  are  called
''finite  aggregates,"  all  others  we  will  call  "trans-
finite  aggregates "  and  their  cardinal  numbers
*'  transfinite  cardinal  numbers."

The  first  example  of  a  transfinite  aggregate  is
given  by  the  totality  of  finite  cardinal  numbers  v  ;

I04 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE  THEORY

we  call  its  cardinal  number  (§  i)  "  Aleph-zero  "  and
denote  it  by  j^q  ;  thus  we  define

(i)  5^0=  {i^}-

That  j^o  is  a  transfinite  number,  that  is  to  say,  is
not  equal  to  any  finite  number  /x,  follows  from  the
simple  fact  that,  if  to  the  aggregate  {v}  is  added  a
new  element  e^,  the  union-aggregate  ({i/},  e^  is
equivalent  to  the  original  aggregate  {j^}.  For  we
can  think  of  this  reciprocally  univocal  correspond-
ence between  them  :  to  the  element  e^  of  the  first
corresponds  the  element  i  of  the  second,  and  to  the
element  v  of  the  first  corresponds  the  element  v-\-\  oi
the  other. By  §  3  we  thus  have

(2)  ^?o+I=^^o•

But  we  showed  in  §  5  that  //  -f-  i  is  always  different
from  /x,  and  therefore  ^^  is  not  equal  to  any  finite
number  fx.

The  number  j^^  is  greater  than  any  finite  number  ix  :

(3)  So>M-

[493] This follows, if we  pay  attention to § 3,
from  the  three  facts  that  />t  =  (i,  2,  3,  .  .  .,  /x),  that'
no  part  of  the  aggregate  (i,  2,  3,  .  .  .,  ^)  is  equiva-
lent to  the  aggregate  {v},  and  that  (i,  2,  3,  .  .  .,  yu)
is  itself  a  part  of  {v}.

On  the  other  hand,  h^^  is  the  least  transfinite
cardinal  number.  If  a  is  any  transfinite  cardinal
number  different  from  i^^,  then

(4)  ^0<<'^'

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 105

This  rests  on  the  following  theorems  :

A.  Every  transfmite  aggregate  T  has  parts  with
the  cardinal  number  ^^Q.

Proof. — If,  by  any  rule,  we  have  taken  away  a
finite  number  of  elements  t^,  t^^  .  .  .,/,,_i,  there
always  remains  the  possibility  of  taking  away  a
further  element  t^.  The  aggregate  {/,,},  where  v
denotes  any  finite  cardinal  number,  is  a  part  of  T
with  the  cardinal  number  t^^,  because  {/^}f\j{i'}  (§  i).

B.  If  S  is  a  transfinite  aggregate  with  the  cardinal
number  j^^,  and  S^  is  any  transfinite  part  of  S,  then

Proof. — We  have  supposed  that  S  00  {v\.  Choose
a  definite  law  of  correspondence  between  these  two
aggregates,  and,  with  this  law,  denote  by  s^  that
element  of  S  which  corresponds  to  the  element  v  of
{i/},  so  that

The  part  S^  of  S  consists  of  certain  elements  s^
of  S,  and  the  totality  of  numbers  k  forms  a  trans-
finite part  K  of  the  aggregate  [v).  By  theorem  G
of  §  5  the  aggregate  K  can  be  brought  into  the
form  of  a  series

where

consequently  we  have

io6 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

Hence  follows  that Sj  oo  S,  and  therefore Si  =  j^o-
From  A  and  B  the  formula  (4)  results,  if  we  have

regard  to  §  2.

From  (2)  we  conclude,  by  adding  i  to  both  sides,

and,  by  repeating  this

(5)  ^*o  +  ^  =  «o-
We  have  also

(6)  «o  +  «o  =  ^*o-

[494]  For,  by  (i)  of  §  3,  No  +  «o  is  the  cardinal  number
({«J,  {by))  because

Now,  obviously

{.}=({2.-l},  {2.}),
({2.-  I}, {2.})00(K}, {b^\

and  therefore

The  equation  (6)  can  also  be  written

t^o- 2  =  ^^0  5 .
and, by adding j^q repeatedly  to both  sides, we
find  that

(7)  ^^o•^  =  I^•  «o  =  ^^o-
We  also  have

(8)  ^^o•No  =  ^^o•

OF  TRANSFIX/TIL  NUAIBFKS 107

Proof. — By (6) of § 3, Nq  •  t^o ^-^ ^^^^ cardinal
number  of  the  aggregate  of  bindings

{{p.,  y)],

where  ^  and  v  are  any  finite  cardinal  numbers  which
are  independent  of  one  another.  If  also  X  repre-
sents any  finite  cardinal  number,  so  that  {\},  (fj.),
and  {v)  are  only  different  notations  for  the  same
aggregate  o(  all  finite  numbers,  we  have  to  show
that

{(m,  ^)}fX^{X}.

Let  us  denote  ^  +  1/  by  p\  then  ^  takes  all  the
numerical  values  2,  3,  4,  .  .  .,  and  there  are  in  all
p—  I  elements  (/x,  v)  for  which  ^-|-j/  =  p,  namely  :

(1,^-1), (2,p-2),..  , (p-I, I).

In  this  sequence  imagine  first  the  element  (i,  i),
for  which  p=2,  put,  then  the  two  elements  for
which  p=3,  then  the  three  elements  for  which
p  =  4,  and  so  on.  Thus  we  get  all  the  elements
(juL,  p)  in  a  simple  series  :

(I,  i);(i,  2),(2,  i);(i,3),(2,  2),(3,  i);(i,4),(2,  3)

and  here,  as  we  easily  see,  the  element  {ju,  v)  comes
at  the  Xth  place,  where

(9)  X  =  /x+  2

The  variable  X  takes  every  numerical  value  i,  2,  3,
.  .  ., once. Consequently, by means of (9), a

To8 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

reciprocally  univocal  relation subsists  between  the
aggregates  {v}  and  {(/x,  v)}.

[495]  If  both  sides  of  the  equation  (8)  are  multi-
plied by  j^o>  we  get  ^^^  = 'i:^^^  =  ^^^  and,  by  repeated
multiplications  by  ^^^  we  get  the  equation,  valid
for  every  finite  cardinal  number  v  :

(lo)  ^^o"  =  «o•

The  theorems  E  and  A  of  §  5  lead  to  this  theorem
on  finite  aggregates  :

C.  Every  finite  aggregate  E  is  such  that  it  is
equivalent  to  none  of  its  parts.

This  theorem  stands  sharply  opposed  to  the
following  one  for  transfinite  aggregates  :

D.  Every  transfinite  aggregate  T  is  such  that  it
has  parts  T^  which  are  equivalent  to  it.

Pi'oof. — By  theorem  A  of  this  paragraph  there  is
a  part  S={^4  of  T  with  the  cardinal  number  «(,.
Let  T  =  (S,  U),  so  that  U  is  composed  of  those
elements  of  T  which  are  different  from  the  elements
C  Let  us  put  Si  =  {/,+i},  Ti  =  (Si,  U)  ;  then  T^  is
a  part  of  T,  and,  in  fact,  that  part  which  arises  out
of  T  if  we  leave  out  the  single  element  t^.  Since
S  00  Si,  by  theorem  B  of  this  paragraph,  and
UooU, we  have, by § i, T  rx;  T^.

In  these  theorems  C  and  D  the  essential  differ-
ence between  finite  and  transfinite  aggregates,  to
which  I  referred  in  the  year  1877,  in  volume  Ixxxiv
[1878]  of  Crelle's  Journal,  p.  242,  appears  in  the
clearest  way.

After we have introduced the least transfinite

OF  TR A XS FINITE  NUMJUIRS loo

cardinal  number  Nq  and  derived  its  properties  tliat
lie  the  most  readily  to  hand,  the  question  arises
as  to  the  higher  cardinal  numbers  and  how  they
proceed  from  h^^.  We  shall  show  that  the  trans-
finite  cardinal  numbers  can  be  arranged  according
to  their  magnitude,  and,  in  this  order,  form,  like
the  finite  numbers,  a  '*  well-ordered  aggregate"  in
an  extended  sense  of  the  words.  Out  of  ^^q  pro-
ceeds, by  a  definite  law,  the  next  greater  cardinal
number  j^^,  out  of  this  by  the  same  law  the  next
greater  n^j  ^'^'^^  so  o^"*-  ^^t  even  the  unlimited
sequence  of  cardinal  numbers

No'  «i'  «2'  •  •  •)  «.',  ...

does  not  exhaust  the  conception  of  transfinite
cardinal  number.  We  will  prove  the  existence  of
a  cardinal  number  which  we  denote  by  ^^^  and
which  shows  itself  to  be  the  next  greater  to  all
the  numbers  ^^  ;  out  of  it  proceeds  in  the  same
way  as  i^^  out  of  ^?  a  next  greater  ^,^+1^  ^^^^  ^^  o^''»
without  end.

[496]  To  every  transhnite  cardinal  number  a
there  is  a  next  greater  proceeding  out  of  it  accord-
ing to  a  unitary  law,  and  also  to  every  unlimitedly
ascending  well-ordered  aggregate  of  transfinite
cardinal  numbers,  {a},  there  is  a  next  greater  pro-
ceeding out  of  that  aggregate  in  a  unitary  way.

For  the  rigorous  foundation  of  this  matter,  dis-
covered in  1882  and  exposed  in  the  pamphlet
Grundlagen  einer  allgemeitjen  MannicJifaltigkeits-
lehre (Leipzig, 1883) and in volume xxi of the

110 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE  THEORY

MatJiematische  AnnaUn,  we  make  use  of  the  so-
called  "ordinal  types "  whose  theory  we  have  to
set  forth  in  the  following  paragraphs.

§  7

The  Ordinal  Types  of  Simply  Ordered
Aggregates

We  call  an  aggregate  M  "simply  ordered"  if  a
definite  "order  of  precedence"  {Rmigordnung)  rules
over  its  elements  m,  so  that,  of  every  two  elements
m^  and  ?;^2>  ^^^  takes  the  "  lower  "  and  the  other  the
' '  higher  "  rank,  and  so  that,  if  of  three  elements  ni^,
jn^,  and  Wg,  nt-^,  say,  is  of  lower  rank  than  z//^,  and
7n.2^  is  of  lower  rank  than  m^y  then  m^  is  of  lower
rank  than  m^.

The  relation  of  two  elements  ///j  and  ;;/^,  in  which
m^  has  the  lower  rank  in  the  given  order  of  pre-
cedence and  m^  the  higher,  is  expressed  by  the
formulae  :

(i)  m^  -<  m^, in^  >-  m^

Thus,  for  example,  every  aggregate  P  of  points
defined  on  a  straight  line  is  a  simply  ordered
aggregate  if,  of  every  two  points  /^  and  p^  belong-
ing to  it,  that  one  whose  co-ordinate  (an  origin  and
a  positive  direction  having  been  fixed  upon)  is  the
lesser  is  given  the  lower  rank.

It  is  evident  that  one  and  the  same  aggregate  can
be  "  simply  ordered  "  according  to  the  most  different
laws. Thus,  for  example,  witl^i the  aggregate  R  of

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS \  1 1

all  positive  rational  numbers//^  (where/  and  q  are
relatively  prime  integers)  which  are  greater  than  o
and  less  than  i,  there  is,  firstly,  their  "natural"
order  according  to  magnitude  ;  then  they  can  be
arranged  (and  in  this  order  we  will  denote  the
aggregate  by  Rq)  so  that,  of  two  numbers /^/^^  and
A/^-  for  which  the  sums  /i  +  ^i  and  p^  +  g^  have
different  values,  that  number  for  which  the  corre-
sponding sum  is  less  takes  the  lower  rank,  and,  if
A  +  ^i=/2  +  ^2'  then  the  smaller  of  the  two  rational
numbers  is  the  lower.  [497]  In  this  order  of
precedence,  our  aggregate,  since  to  one  and  the
same  value  oi  p-\-q  only  a  finite  number  of  rational
numbers//^  belongs,  evidently  has  the  form

-•^^0 \'l> '2' • • ■' «" • • '/ V2' 3' 4' ."' 5  J «» 5' 4' • • VJ

where

r,  <  /-,+!.

Always,  then,  when  we  speak  of  a  "simply
ordered "  aggregate  M,  we  imagine  laid  down  a
definite  order  or  precedence  of  its  elements,  in  the
sense  explained  above.

There  are  doubly,  triply,  j/-ply  and  a-ply  ordered
aggregates,  but  for  the  present  we  will  not  consider
them.  So  in  what  follows  we  will  use  the  shorter
expression  "ordered  aggregate"  when  we  mean
"simply  ordered  aggregate."

Every  ordered  aggregate  M  has  a  definite  "ordinal
type,"  or  more  shortly  a  definite  "type,"  which  we
will  denote  by

(2)  M.

112 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE  THEORY

By  this  we  understand  the  general  concept  which
results  from  M  if  we  only  abstract  from  the  nature
of  the  elements  in^  and  retain  the  order  of  precedence
among  them.  Thus  the  ordinal  type  M  is  itself  an
ordered  aggregate  whose  elements  are  units  which
have  the  same  order  of  precedence  amongst  one
another  as  the  corresponding  elements  of  M,  from
which  they  are  derived  by  abstraction.

We  call  two  ordered  aggregates  M  and  N
"similar"  {dhnlich)  if  they  can  be  put  into  a  bi-
univocal  correspondence  with  one  another  in  such
a  manner  that,  if  ?n-^  and  ni^  are  any  two  elements
of  M  and  n^  and  n^  the  corresponding  elements  of  N,
then  the  relation  of  rank  of  in^  to  m^  in  M  is  the
same  as  that  of  n-^  to  n^  in  N.  Such  a  correspond-
ence of  similar  aggregates  we  call  an  '*  imaging"
{Abbildimg)  of  thes'e  aggregates  on  one  another.  In
such  an  imaging,  to  every  part — which  obviously
also  appears  as  an  ordered  aggregate — M^  of  M
corresponds  a  similar  part  N^  of  N.

We  express  the  similarity  of  two  ordered  aggre-
gates M  and  N  by  the  formula  :

(3)  MooN.

Every  ordered  aggregate  is  similar  to  itself.

If  two  ordered  aggregates  are  similar  to  a  third,
they  are  similar  to  one  another.

[498]  A  simple  consideration  shows  that  two
ordered  aggregates  have  the  same  ordinal  type  if,
and  only  if,  they  are  similar,  so  that,  of  the  two
formula:

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 113

(4)  M  =  N, MOON,

one  is  always  a  consequence  of  the  other.

If,  with  an  ordinal  t}'pe  M  we  also  abstract  from
the  order  of  precedence  of  the  elements,  we  get  (§  i)
the  cardinal  number  M  of  the  ordered  aggregate  M,
which  is,  at  the  same  time,  the  cardinal  number  of
the  ordinal  type  M.  From  M  =  N  always  follows
M  =  N,  that  is  to  say,  ordered  aggregates  of  equal
types  always  have  the  same  power  or  cardinal
number  ;  from  the  similarity  of  ordered  aggregates
follows  their  equivalence.  On  the  other  hand,  two
aggregates  may  be  equivalent  without  being  similar.

We  will  use  the  small  letters  of  the  Greek  alphabet
to  denote  ordinal  types.  If  a  is  an  ordinal  type,
we  understand  by

(5)  «

its  corresponding  cardinal  number.

The  ordinal  types  of  finite  ordered  aggregates
offer  no  special  interest.  For  we  easily  convince
ourselves  that,  for  one  and  the  same  finite  cardinal
number  i/,  all  "simply  ordered  aggregates  are  similar
to  one  another,  and  thus  have  one  and  the  same
type.  Thus  the  finite  simple  ordinal  types  are
subject  to  the  same  laws  as  the  finite  cardinal
numbers,  and  it  is  allowable  to  use  the  same  signs
I,  2,  3,  .  .  .,  Vy  .  .  .  for  them,  although  they  are
conceptually  different  from  the  cardinal  numbers.
The  case  is  quite  different  with  the  transfinite
ordiiial types  ;  for to one and  the same  cardinal

8

114 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

number  belong  innumerably  many  different  types  of
simply  ordered  aggregates,  which,  in  their  totality,
constitute  a  particular  ' '  class  of  types  "  (  Typenclasse).
Every  one  of  these  classes  of  types  is,  therefore,
determined  by  the  transfinite  cardinal  number  a
which  is  common  to  all  the  types  belonging  to  the
class.  Thus  we  call  it  for  short  the  class  of  types  [a].
That  class  which  naturally  presents  itself  first  to  us,
and  whose  complete  investigation  must,  accordingly,
be  the  next  special  aim  of  the  theory  of  transfinite
aggregates,  is  the  class  of  types  [^^o]  which  embraces
all  the  types  with  the  least  transfinite  cardinal
number  ^^q.  From  the  cardinal  number  which
determines  the  class  of  types  [a]  we  have  to  dis-
tinguish that  cardinal  number  a'  which  for  its  part
[499]  ^^  determmed  by  the  class  of  types  [a].  The
latter  is  the  cardinal  number  which  (§  i)  the  class
[a]  has,  in  so  far  as  it  represents  a  well-defined
aggregate  whose  elements  are  all  the  types  a  with
the  cardinal  number  a.  We  will  see  that  a'  is
different  from  a,  and  indeed  always  greater  than  a.

If  in  an  ordered  aggregate  M  all  the  relations  of
precedence  of  its  elements  are  inverted,  so  that
' '  lower  "  becomes  ' '  higher  "  and  ' '  higher  "  becomes
' '  lower "  everywhere,  we  again  get  an  ordered
aggregate,  which  we  will  denote  by

(6)  *M

and call the "inverse" of M. We denote  the
ordinal  type  of  *M,  if  a=  M,  by

(7)

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 115

It  may  happen  that  *a  =  a,  as,  for  example,  in  the
case  of  finite  types  or  in  that  of  the  type  of  the
aggregate  of  all  rational  numbers  which  are  greater
than  o  and  less  than  i  in  their  natural  order  of
precedence.  This  type  we  will  investigate  under
the  notation  ;/.

We  remark  further  that  two  similarly  ordered
aggregates  can  be  imaged  on  one  another  either  in
one  manner  or  in  many  manners  ;  in  the  first  case
the  type  in  question  is  similar  to  itself  in  only  one
way,  in  the  second  case  in  many  ways.  Not  only
all  finite  types,  but  the  types  of  transfinite  "well-
ordered  aggregates,"  which  will  occupy  us  later
and  which  we  call  transfinite  "ordinal  numbers,"
are  such  that  they  allow  only  a  single  imaging  on
themselves.  On  the  other  hand,  the  type  ri  is
similar  to  itself  in  an  infinity  of  ways.

We  will  make  this  difference  clear  by  two  simple
examples.  By  o)  we  understand  the  type  of  a  well-
ordered  aggregate

in  which

and  where  p  represents  all  finite  cardinal  numbers  in
turn. Another  well-ordered  aggregate

with  the  condition

of  the  same  type  od  can obviously  only  be imaged

Ti6 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

on  the  former  in  such  a  way  that  e^,  and  /,  are
correspondhig  elements.  For  e^,  the  lowest  element
in  rank  of  the  first,  must,  in  the  process  of  imaging,
be  correlated  to  the  lowest  element /^  of  the  second,
the  next  after  e^  in  rank  {e^)  to/g,  the  next  after/^,
and  so  on.  [500]  Every  other  bi-univocal  corre-
spondence of  the  two  equivalent  aggregates  {e^}  and
{/,}  is  not  an  "imaging"  in  the  sense  which  we
have  fixed  above  for  the  theory  of  types.

On the other hand, let us take an ordered
aggregate  of  the  form

where  v  represents  all  positive  and  negative  finite
integers-,  including  o,  and  where  likewise

This  aggregate  has  no  lowest  and  no  highest
element  in  rank.  Its  type  is,  by  the  definition  of
a  sum  given  in  §  8,

It  is  similar  to  itself  in  an  infinity  of  ways.  For
let  us  consider  an  aggregate  of  the  same  type

where

Then  the  two  ordered  aggregates  can  be  so  imaged
on  one  another  that,  if  we  understand  by  vq  a
definite  one  of  the  numbers  /,  to  the  element  e,'  of

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS ti;

the  first  the  element /j,^,'_^_,/  of  the  second  corresponds.
Since  j/q'  is  arbitrary,  we  liave  here  an  infinity  of
imagings.

The  concept  of  ''ordinal  type"  developed  here,
when  it  is  transferred  in  like  manner  to  "multiply
ordered  aggregates,"  embraces,  in  conjunction  with
the  concept  of  "cardinal  number"  or  "power"
introduced  in  §  i,  everything  capable  of  being
numbered  {Anzahlmdssige)  that  is  thinkable,  and
in  this  sense  cannot  be  further  generalized.  It
contains  nothing  arbitrary,  but  is  the  natural  ex-
tension of  the  concept  of  number.  It  deserves  to
be  especially  emphasized  that  the  criterion  of
equality  (4)  follows  with  absolute  necessity  from
the  concept  of  ordinal  type  and  consequently
permits  of  no  alteration.  The  chief  cause  of  the
grave  errors  in  G.  Veronese's  Gnuidziige  der
Geoinetrie  (German  by  A.  Schepp,  Leipzig,  1894)
is  the  non-recognition  of  this  point.

On  page  30  the  ' '  number  {Anrjahl  oder  ZaJd)
of  an  ordered  group  "  is  defined  in  exactly  the  same
way  as  what  we  have  called  the  "ordinal  type  of
a  simply  ordered  aggregate "  {Ztir  Lehre  vorn
Transfiniten,  Halle,  1890,  pp.  68-75  i  reprinted
from  the  'ZeitscJir.  fiir  Pliilos.  und  philos.  Kritik
for  1887).  [501]  But  Veronese  thinks  that  he
must  make  an  addition  to  the  criterion  of  equality.
He  says  on  page  31:  "Numbers  whose  units
correspond  to  one  another  uniquely  and  in  the
same  order  and  of  which  the  one  is  neither  a  part
of  the  other  nor  equal  to  a  part  of  the  other  are

ii8 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

equal. "  *  This  definition  of  equality  contains  a
circle  and  thus  is  meaningless.  For  what  is
the  meaning  of  "not  equal  to  a  part  of  the
other"  in  this  addition?  To  answer  this  question,
we  must  first  know  when  two  numbers  are  equal
or  unequal.  Thus,  apart  from  the  arbitrariness
of  his  definition  of  equality,  it  presupposes  a
definition  of  equality,  and  this  again  presupposes
a  definition  of  equality,  in  which  we  must  know
again  what  equal  and  unequal  are,  and  so  on  ad
infinitum.  After  Veronese  has,  so  to  speak,  given
up  of  his  own  free  will  the  indispensable  foundation
for  the  comparison  of  numbers,  we  ought  not  to
be  surprised  at  the  lawlessness  with  which,  later
on,  he  operates  with  his  pseudo-transfinite  numbers,
and  ascribes  properties  to  them  which  they  cannot
possess  simply  because  they  themselves,  in  the
form  imagined  by  him,  have  no  existence  except
on  paper.  Thus,  too,  the  striking  similarity  of  his
' '  numbers  "  to  the  very  absurd  ' '  infinite  numbers  "
in  Fontenelle's  Geo7netrie  de  IFnfifii  (Paris,  1727)
becomes  comprehensible.  Recently,  W.  Killing
has  given  welcome  expression  to  his  doubts  con-
cerning the  foundation  of  Veronese's  book  in  the
Index  lectionuni  of  the  Miinster  Academy  for  1895-
i896.t

*  In  the  original  Italian  edition  (p.  27)  this  passage  runs  :  "  Numeri
le  unita  dei  quali  si  corrispondono  univocamente  e  nel  medesimo  ordine,
e  di  cui  1'  uno  non  e  parte  o  uguale  ad  una  parte  dell'  altro,  sono  uguali."

t  [Veronese  replied  to  this  in  Math.  Ann.,  vol.  xlvii,  1897,  pp.  423-
432. Cf.  Killing,  ibid.,  vol.  xlviii,  1897,  pp.  425-432.]

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 119

Addition  and  Multiplication  of  Ordinal  Types

The  union-aggregate  (M,  N)  of  two  aggregates
M  and  N  can,  if  M  and  N  are  ordered,  be  conceived
as  an  ordered  aggregate  in  which  the  relations  of
precedence  of  the  elements  of  M  among  themselves
as  well  as  the  relations  of  precedence  of  the  elements
of  N  among  themselves  remain  the  same  as  in  M
or  N  respectively,  and  all  elements  of  M  have  a
lower  rank  than  all  the  elements  of  N.  If  M'  and
N'  are  two  other  ordered  aggregates,  M  Oo  M'  and
N  fV)  N',  [502]  then  (M,  N)  cx>  (M^  N')  ;  so  the
ordinal  type  of  (M,  N)  depends  only  on  the  ordinal
types  M  =  a  and  N  =  /3. Thus,  we  define:

(1)  a  +  /3  =  (M,  N).

In  the  sum  ct  +  /3  we  call  a  the  ''augend  "  and  /3  the
"addend."

For  any  three  types  we  easily  prove  the  associa-
tive law  :

(2)  a  +  (/3  +  y)=:(a4./3)  +  y.

On  the  other  hand,  the  commutative  law  is  not
valid,  in  general,  for  the  addition  of  types.  We
see  this  by  the  following  simple  example.

If  o)  is the  type, already mentioned in § 7, of
the  well-ordered  aggregate

I20 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

then  I  +w  is  not  equal  to  (o+  i. For,  if/ is  a  new
element,  we  have  by  (i)  :

l+a)  =  (/E),
a,+  l=(E;7)-
But  the  aggregate

(/E)=(y;^i, ^2.  •  •-^.'•- •)

is  similar  to  the  aggregate  E,  and  consequently

I  +co  =  a).

On  the  contrary,  the  aggregates  E  and  (E,  f)  are
not  similar,  because  the  first  has  no  term  which  is
highest  in  rank,  but  the  second  has  the  highest
term /! Thus  coH-  i  is  different  from  a)=  i  +a).

Out  of  two  ordered  aggregates  M  and  N  with
the  types  a  and  /3  we  can  set  up  an  ordered
aggregate  S  by  substituting  for  every'  element  n  of
N  an  ordered  aggregate  M,,  which  has  the  same
type  a  as  M,  so  that

(3)  M,  =  a;
and,  for  the  order  of  precedence  in

(4)  S  =  {M„}

we  make  the  two  rules  :

(i)  Every  two  elements  of  S  which  belong  to
one  and  the  same  aggregate  M^,  are  to  retain  in
S  the  same  order  of  precedence  as  in  M,,  ;

(2)  Every  two  elements  of  S  which  belong  to  two
different  aggregates  M^^  and  M^,.^  have  the  same
relation  of  precedence  as  n^  and  71^  have  in  N.

OF  TRANSFfNITE  NUMBERS 121

The  ordinal  type  of  S  depends,  as  we  easily  see,
only  on  the  types  a  and  /5  ;  we  define

(5)  «./3  =  S.

[503]  In  this  product  a  is  called  the  "  multiplicand  "
and  /3  the  "  multiplier."

In  any  definite  imaging  of  M  on  M„  let  in^  be  the
element  of  M„  that  corresponds  to  the  element  m
of  M;  we  can  then  also  write

(6)  S  =  {/«„}.

Consider a third ordered aggregate V  =  [p] with
the  ordinal  type  P  =  y,  then,  by  (5),

a.(/5-y)  =  {^^')}.
But  the  two  ordered  aggregates  {(m,,)  }  and  {^^^(n.)}
are  similar,  and  are  imaged  on  one  another  if  we
regard  the  elements  (^z^^)  ^^^^  ?''^/«.\  as  correspond-
ing. Consequently,  for  three  types  a,  ^8,  and  y
the  associative  law

(7)  (a.^).y  =  a.(/5.y)

subsists. From  (i)  and  (5)  follows  easily  the  dis-
tributive law

(8)  a.(^-hy)  =  a./3-{-a.y;

but  only  in  this  form, where  the factor  with  two
terms  is  the  multiplier.

On  the  contrary, in  the  multiplication  of  types
as in  their addition, the commutative  law  is  not

\

122 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

generally  valid. For example, 2.0) and  w  .2 are
different  types  ;  for,  by  (5),

while

W. 2  =  {e^, ^2' • • •> ^.', ...; /l,/2, ••.,/',-. •)

is  obviously  different  from  o).

If  we  compare  the  definitions  of  the  elementary
operations  for  cardinal  numbers,  given  in  §  3,  with
those  established  here  for  ordinal  types,  we  easily
see  that  the  cardinal  number  of  the  sum  of  two
types  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  cardinal  numbers
of  the  single  types,  and  that  the  cardinal  number
of  the  product  of  two  types  is  equal  to  the  pro-
duct of  the  cardinal  numbers  of  the  single  types.
Every  equation  between  ordinal  types  which  pro-
ceeds from  the  two  elementary  operations  remains
correct,  therefore,  if  we  replace  in  it  all  the  types
by  their  cardinal  numbers.

[504]  §  9

The  Ordinal  Type  r]  of  the  Aggregate  R  of  all
Rational  Numbers  which  are  Greater  than
o  and  Smaller  than  i,  in  their  Natural
Order  of  Precedence

By  R  we  understand,  as  in  §  7,  the  system  of
all  rational  numbers  p\q  {p  and  q  being  relatively
prime)  which  >o  and  <  i,  in  their  natural  order
of  precedence, where  the  magnitude  of  a  number

}

/

OF  TRANSFINITR  NUMBERS 123

determines  its  rank.  We  denote  the  ordinal  t)'pe
of  R  by  >y  :

(1)  >/  =  R.

But  we  have  put  the  same  aggregate  in  another
order  of  precedence  in  which  we  call  it  Rq.  This
order  is  determined,  in  the  first  place,  by  the
magnitude  of  p-\-q,  and  in  the  second  place — for
rational  numbers  for  which  p -\- q  has  the  same  value
— by  the  magnitude  of  pjq  itself.  The  aggregate
Rq  is  a  well-ordered  aggregate  of  type  w  :

(2)  Ro  =  (>'i,  ^'2,  .  .  .,  i^.M  .  •  •), where r,<r,+i,

(3)  Ro  =  ^-

Both  R  and  Rq  have  the  same  cardinal  number
since  they  only  differ  in  the  order  of  precedence
of  their elements, and, since we obviously have

Ro  =  j^o'  ^^'^  ^^^°  \\di\^

(4)  R  =  7/  =  No-

Thus  the  type  ri  belongs  to  the  class  of  types  [^^o].

Secondly,  we  remark  that  in  R  there  is  neither
an  element  which  is  lowest  in  rank  nor  one  which
is  highest  in  rank.  Thirdly,  R  has  the  property
that  between  every  two  of  its  elements  others  lie.
This  property  we  express  by  the  words  :  R  is
"everywhere  dense"  {uberalldicht),

VVe  will  now  show  that  these  three  properties
characterize  the  type  >/  of  R,  so  that  we  have  the
following  theorem  :

124 THE  FOUNDING OF  THE THEORY

If  we  have  a  simply  ordered  aggregate  M  such
that _

{a)  M  =  «o;

{b)  M  has  no  element  which  is  lowest in  rank,

and  no  highest  ;
{c)  M  is  everywhere  dense  ;
then  the  ordinal  type  of  M  is  ^  :

Pjvof. — Because  of  the  condition  {a),  M  can  be
brought  into  the  form  [505]  ^^  ^  well-ordered
aggregate  of  type  w  ;  having  fixed  upon  such  a
form,  we  denote  it  by  Mq  and  put

(5)  Mo  =  (?//i,  Wg,  .  .  .,  ;//„,  .  .  .).
We  have  now  to  show  that

(6)  MooR;

that  is  to  say,  we  must  prove  that  M  can  be  imaged
on  R  in  such  a  way  that  the  relation  of  precedence
of  any  and  every  two  elements  in  M  is  the  same
as  that  of  the  two  corresponding  elements  in  R.

Let  the  element  7\  in  R  be  correlated  to  the
element  m^  in  M.  The  element  rg  h^s  a  definite
relation  of  precedence  to  7\  in  R.  Because  of  the
condition  {b),  there  are  infinitely  many  elements
vi^,  of  M  which  have  the  same  relation  of  precedence
in  M  to  m-^  as  r^^  to  7\  in  R  ;  of  them  we  choose
that  one  which  has  the  smallest  index  in  M^,  let  it
be  ifii  and  correlate  it to  r^. The  element  r,  has

in  R  definite  relations  of  precedence  to  i\  and  r^  ;
because of the conditions  (b)  and  (c)  there  is  an

OF  TRANSFINITIi  NUMBERS 125

infinity  of  elements  in^,  of  M  which  have  the  same

relation  of  precedence  to  m^  and  nii  in  M  as  rg  to  }\

and  r.y  to  R  ;  of  them  we  choose  that — let  it  be  ;;/,
z  5

— which  has  the  smallest  index  in  Mq,  and  correlate
it  to  Tg.  According  to  this  law  we  imagine  the
process  of  correlation  continued.  If  to  the  v
elements

^1' '''2' ^3) • • •  ) ^i'

of  R  are  correlated,  as  images,  definite  elements

m^,  nu,  in^,  .  .  .,  in,

which  have  the  same  relations  of  precedence  amongst
one  another  in  M  as  the  corresponding  elements  in
R,  then  to  the  element  ;v+i  of  R  is  to  be  correlated
that  element  ni,^  of  M  which  has  the  smallest
index  in  Mq  of  those  which  have  the  same  relations
of  precedence  to

;;/i,  m,^,  in,^,  .  .  . ,  m,^

in  M  as  r^+i  to  r^,  r^,  .  .  .,  r^  in  R.

In  this  manner  we  have  correlated  definite
elements  m.  of  M  to  all  the  elements  }\  of  R,  and
the  elements  m,^  have  in  M  the  same  order  of  pre-
cedence as  the  corresponding  elements  i\  in  R.  But
we  have  still  to  show  that  the  elements  m,^  include
all  the  elements  in^  of  M,  or,  what  is  the  same
thing,  that  the  series

I  ) '2' '3' • • •  ' ^f ' • • •

[506]  is  only  a  permutation  of  the  series
I,  2,  3,  ....',..  .

126 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE  THEORY

We  prove  this  by  a  complete  induction  :  we  will
show  that,  if  the  elements  m^,  m^,  .  .  .,  m^  appear
in  the  imaging,  that  is  also  the  case  with  the
following  element  m^+i.

Let  X  be  so  great  that,  among  the  elements

w,,  nil,  nil ,  .  .  .,  lUu,

■■■as  '^

the  elements

m^,  in,,  .  .  .,  ;;/,,

which,  by  supposition,  appear  in  the  imaging,  are
contained.  It  may  be  that  also  ?;/,,+i  is  found
among  them  ;  then  /;2^+i  appears  m  the  imaging.
But  if  /;^^+i  is  not  among  the  elements

m^,  in,,  m,,  .  .  .,  vi,^,

then  ///^+i  has  with  respect  to  these  elements  a
definite  ordinal  position  in  M  ;  infinitely  many
elements  in  R  have  the  same  ordinal  position  in  R
with  respect  to  i\,  rg,  .  .  . ,  r^,  amongst  which  let
/'x+a  be  that  with  the  least  index  in  Rq.  Then  ni^^i
has,  as  we  can  easily  make  sure,  the  same  ordinal
position  with  respect  to

m^,  m,,  m,,  .  .  .,  nh^^^_^
in  M  as  r^j^„  has  with  respect  to

^'d ''2) • • •) ^^A  +  a--l

in  R.  Since  in^,  in.^^,  •  •  • ,  ^f^u  have  already  appeared
in  the  imaging,  ni^^i  is  that  element  with  the  smallest
index  in  M  which  has  this  ordinal  position  with
respect  to

OF  TRANSFJNITE  NUMBERS 127
Consequently,  according  to  our  law  of  correlation,

''^^,+^  =  '^'^+1-

Thus,  in  this  case  too,  the  element  ;;/^.|.i  appears  in
the  imaging,  and  r^+^  is  the  element  of  R  which  is
correlated  to  it.

We  see,  then,  that  by  our  manner  of  correlation,
the  whole  aggregate  M  is  imaged  on  the  whole
aggregate  R  ;  M  and  R  are  similar  aggregates,
which  was  to  be  proved.

From  the  theorem  which  we  have  just  proved
result,  for  example,  the  following  theorems  :

[507]  The  ordinal  type  of  the  aggregate  of  all
negative  and  positive  rational  numbers,  including
zero,  in  their  natural  order  of  precedence,  is  r^.

The  ordinal  type  of  the  aggregate  of  all  rational
numbers  which  are  greater  than  a  and  less  than  b,
in  their  natural  order  of  precedence,  where  a  and  b
are  any  real  numbers,  and  a  <b,  is  rj.

The  ordinal  type  of  the  aggregate  of  all  real  alge-
braic numbers  in  their  natural  order  of  precedence  is  tj.

The  ordinal  type  of  the  aggregate  of  all  real  alge-
braic numbers  which  are  greater  than  a  and  less
than  b,  in  their  natural  order  of  precedence,  where
a  and  b  are  any  real  numbers  and  a<b,  is  ;/.

P^or  all  these  ordered  aggregates  satisfy  the  three
conditions  required  in  our  theorem  for  M  (see
CygWq' s  /ou7^nal,  vol.  Ixxvii,  p.  258).*

If  we  consider,  further,  aggregates  with  the  types
— according  to  the  definitions  given  in  §  8 — written

[* C/.  Section  V  of  the  Introduction.]

128 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

'/  +  ';,  nn^  (i+>7)'7,  ('?+i)'7.  (!+>?+ i>/,  we  find  that
those  three  conditions  are  also  fulfilled  with  them.
Thus  we  have  the  theorems  :

(7)

>;  +  ')  =  '?,

(8)

m  =  i>

(9)

(I  +,,),,  =  ,,,

(10)

(>;+  !)>;  =  >;,

(11)

(l+,,+  l)ri  =  >i.

The  repeated  application  of  (7)  and  (8)  gives  for
every  finite  number  u  :

(12)  t1'V  =  t1,

(13)  n"  =  ^-

On  the  other  hand  we  easily  see  that,  for  j/>  I,  the
types  1+^,  i]-^i,  v.r],  i+>?+i  are  different  both
from  one  another  and  from  t]. We  have

(14)  ;^+I+,y  =  ^,

but  r]  +  i/  +  t],  for  ^/>  I,  is  different  from  rj.
Finally,  it  deserves  to  be  emphasized  that

(15)  *>;  =  ';.

[508]  §  10

The  Fundamental  Series  contained  in  a
Transfinite  Ordered  Aggregate

Let  us  consider  any  simply  ordered  transfinite
aggregate  M.  Every  part  of  M  is  itself  an  ordered
aggregate. For the  study  of  the type  M, those

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 129

parts  of  M  which  have  the  types  w  and  *a)  appear  to
be  especially  valuable  ;  we  call  them  "  fundamental
series  of  the  first  order  contained  in  M,"  and  the
former — of  type  w — we  call  an  ''ascending"  series,
the  latter — of  type  *o) — a  * '  descending  "  one.  Since
we  limit  ourselves  to  the  consideration  of  funda-
mental series  of  the  first  order  (in  later  investiga-
tions fundamental  series  of  higher  order  will  also
occupy  us),  we  will  here  simply  call  them  ''funda-
mental series."  Thus  an  "ascending  fundamental
series  "  is  of  the  form

(i)  {a,}, where ^,<^,+i;

a  "  descending  fundamental  series  "  is  of  the  form

(2)  {b^}, where b^)^  b^+i.

The  letter  v,  as  well  as  /c,  X,  and  /x,  has  everywhere
in  our  considerations  the  signification  of  an  arbitrary
finite  cardinal  number  or  of  a  finite  type  (a  finite
ordinal  number).

We  call  two  ascending  fundamental  series  {a^}  and
{a\)  in  M  "coherent"  {zusammengehbrig),  in  signs

(3)  {^.}  11  {<})

if,  for  every  element  a^  there  are  elements  a\  such
that

and  also  for  every  element  a\  there  are  elements  a^
such  that

9

I30 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

Two  descending  fundamental  series  {by}  and  {b' ^
in  M  are  said  to  be  "coherent,"  in  signs

(4)  {K)  II  {b'.\.

if  for  every  element  b^  there  are  elements  b\  such
that

b.  >  b\,

and  for  every  element  b\  there  are  elements  b^j,  such
that

K  >  b,.

An  ascending  fundamental  series  {a^}  and  a
descending  one  {b^}  are  said  to  be  "coherent,"  in
signs

[509] (5)  WlllW,

if  (a)  for  all  values  of  v  and  /n

and  (<^)  in  M  exists  at  most  one  (thus  either  only
one  or  none  at  all)  element  m^^  such  that,  for  all  i/'s,

^.  <^  f^h  <  ^>"

Then  we  have  the  theorems  :

A.  If  two  fundamental  series  are  coherent  to  a
third,  they  are  also  coherent  to  one  another.

B.  Two  fundamental  series  proceeding  in  the
same  direction  of  which  one  is  part  of  the  other  are
coherent.

If  there  exists in M  an  element m^ which has

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 131

such  a  position  with  respect  to  the  ascending  funda-
mental series  [a^]  that  :
{a)  for  every  v

{b)  for  every  element  m  of  M  that  precedes  m^
there  exists  a  certain  number  vq  such  that

a„  >^  m, for v'^Vft,

then  we  will  call  iUq  a  "limiting  element  (Grenz-
element)  of  {^J  in  M  "  and  also  a  "  principal  element
{Haupt element)  of  M."  In  the  same  way  we  call
niQ  a  "principal  element  of  M  "  and  also  "  Hmiting
element  of  [b^  in  M"  if  these  conditions  are
satisfied  :

{a)  for  every  v

ip)  for  every  element  m  of  M  that  follows  m^
exists  a  certain  number  v^  such  that

b^  >^  m, for v^Vf^,

A  fundamental  series  can  never  have  more  than
one  limiting  element  in  M  ;  but  M  has,  in  general,
many  principal  elements.

We  perceive  the  truth  of  the  following  theorems  :

C.  If  a  fundamental  series  has  a  limiting  element
in  M,  all  fundamental  series  coherent  to  it  have  the
same  limiting  element  in  M.

D.  If  two  fundamental  series  (whether  proceeding
in  the  same  or  in  opposite  directions)  have  one  and
the  same  limiting  element  in  M,  they  are  coherent.

132 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

if  M  and  M'  are  two  similarly  ordered  aggregates,
so  that

(6)  M  =  M',

and  we  fix  upon  any  imaging  of  the  two  aggregates,
then  we  easily  see  that  the  following  theorems
hold:

[510]  E.  To  every  fundamental  series  in  M
corresponds  as  image  a  fundamental  series  in  M',
and  inversely  ;  to  every  ascending  series  an  ascending
one,  and  to  every  descending  series  a  descending
one  ;  to  coherent  fundamental  series  in  M  corre-
spond as  images  coherent  fundamental  series  in  M',
and  inversely.

F.  If  to  a  fundamental  series  in  M  belongs  a
limiting  element  in  M,  then  to  the  corresponding
fundamental  series  in  M'  belongs  a  limiting  element
in  M',  and  inversely  ;  and  these  two  limiting
elements  are  images  of  one  another  in  the  imaging.

G.  To  the  principal  elements  of  M  correspond  as
images  principal  elements  of  M',  and  inversely.

If  an  aggregate  M  consists  of  principal  elements,
so  that  every  one  of  its  elements  is  a  principal
element,  we  call  it  an  ''aggregate  which  is  dense
in  itself  {insichdichte  Mengey  If  to  every  funda-
mental series  in  M  there  is  a  limiting  element  in  M,
we  call  M  a  "closed  {abgeschlossene)  aggregate."
An  aggregate  which  is  both  "dense  in  itself"  and
"closed"  is  called  a  "perfect  aggregate."  If  an
aggregate  has  one  of  these  three  predicates,  every
similar aggregate has the same predicate  ; thus

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 133

these  predicates  can  also  be  ascribed  to  the  corre-
sponding ordinal  types,  and  so  there  are  "types
which  are  dense  in  themselves,"  "closed  types,"
"perfect  types,"  and  also  "everywhere-dense
types  "  (§  9).

For  example,  >;  is  a  type  which  is  "dense  in
itself, "  and,  as  we  showed  in  §  9,  it  is  also  ' '  every-
where-dense," but  it  is  not  "closed."  The  types
ft)  and  *ft)  have  no  principal  elements,  but  w-\-v  and
i/  +  *ft)  each  have  a  principal  element,  and  are
"closed"  types.  The  type  0^.3  has  two  principal
elements,  but  is  not  "closed";  the  type  w.3-f^
has  three  principal  elements,  and  is  "closed."

§11

The  Ordinal  Type  Q  of  the  Linear

Continuum  X

We  turn  to  the  investigation  of  the  ordinal  type
of  the  aggregate  X=  [x]  of  all  real  numbers  x,  such
that  x>^o  and  <  i,  in  their  natural  order  of  pre-
cedence, so  that,  with  any  two  of its elements  x

and  x\

x^x\ if x<x'.

Let  the  notation  for  this  type  be

(I)  x  =  e.

[511]  From  the  elements  of  the  theory  of  rational
and  irrational  numbers  we  know  that  every  funda-
mental series  {x^}  in  X  has  a  limiting  element  Xq  in
X, and  that  also,  inversely,  every  element  x  of  X

134 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

is  a  limiting  element  of  coherent  fundamental  series
in  X.  Consequently  X  is  a  "perfect  aggregate"
and  0  is  a  "perfect  type."

But  Q  is  not  sufficiently  characterized  by  that  ;
besides  that  we  must  fix  our  attention  on  the
following  property  of  X.  The  aggregate  X  contains
as  part  the  aggregate  R  of  ordinal  type  >]  investi-
gated in  §  9,  and  in  such  a  way  that,  between  any
two  elements  x^  and  x^  of  X,  elements  of  R  lie.

We  will  now  show  that  these  properties,  taken
together,  characterize  the  ordinal  type  Q  of  the  linear
continuum  X  in  an  exhaustive  manner,  so  that  we
have  the  theorem  :

If  an  ordered  aggregate  M  is  such  that  (a)  it  is
"perfect,"  and  {b)  in  it  is  contained  an  aggregate  S
with  the  cardinal  number  S  =  h?o  ^^^  which  bears
such  a  relation  to  M  that,  between  any  two  elements
Wq  and  m^  of  M  elements  of  S  lie,  then  M  =  0.

Proof. — If  S  had  a  lowest  or  a  highest  element,
these  elements,  by  {b),  would  bear  the  same  character
as  elements  of  M  ;  we  could  remove  them  from  S
without  S  losing  thereby  the  relation  to  M  ex-
pressed in  {b).  Thus,  we  suppose  that  S  is  without
lowest  or  highest  element,  so  that,  by  §  9,  it  has
the  ordinal  type  t].  ¥or  since  S  is  a  part  of  M,
between  any  two  elements  Sq  and  s^  of  S  other
elements  of  S  must,  by  {b),  lie.  Besides,  by  {b)  we
have  S  =  «o'  Thus  the  aggregates  S  and  R  are
"similar"  to  one  another.

(2)  S  ro  R.

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 135

We  fix  on  any  "imaging"  of  R  on  S,  and  assert
that  it  gives  a  definite  "  imaging  "  of  X  on  M  in  the
following  manner  :

Let  all  elements  of  X  which,  at  the  same  time,
belong  to  the  aggregate  R  correspond  as  images  to
those  elements  of  M  which  are,  at  the  same  time,
elements  of  S  and,  in  the  supposed  imaging  of
R  on  S,  correspond  to  the  said  elements  of  R.
But  li  Xq  is  an  element  of  X  which  does  not  belong
to  R,  Xq  may  be  regarded  as  a  limiting  element  of
a  fundamental  series  {x^]  contained  in  X,  and  this
series  can  be  replaced  by  a  coherent  fundamental
series  {r^J  contained  in  R.  To  this  [512]  corre-
sponds as  image  a  fundamental  series  [s-^^]  in  S  and
M,  which,  because  of  {a),  is  limited  by  an  element
niQ  of  M  that  does  not  belong  to  S  (F,  §  10).  Let
this  element  m^  of  M  (which  remains  the  same,  by
E,  C,  and  D  of  §  10,  if  the  fundamental  series
[x^}  and  [r^^]  are  replaced  by  others  limited  by  the
same  element  x^  in  X)  be  the  image  of  x^^  in  X.
Inversely,  to  every  element  m^  of  M  which  does  not
occur  in  S  belongs  a  quite  definite  element  x^  of  X
which  does  not  belong  to  R  and  of  which  m^  is  the
image.

In  this  manner  a  bi-univocal  correspondence
between  X  and  M  is  set  up,  and  we  have  now
to  show  that  it  gives  an  "imaging"  of  these
aggregates.

This  is,  of  course,  the  case  for  those  elements  of
X  which  belong  to  R,  and  for  those  elements  of  M

136  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS

which  belong  to  S.  Let  us  compare  an  element  r
of  R  with  an  element  x^  of  X  which  does  not  belong
to  R  ;  let  the  corresponding  elements  of  M  be  j
and  niQ.  If  r<XQ,  there  is  an  ascending  funda-
mental series  {r^,,},  which  is  limited  by  x^  and,  from

a  certain  v^  on,

r<r^^ for v^v^.

The  image  of  {r^J  in  M  is  an  ascending  funda-
mental series  {^a^}j  which  will  be  limited  by  an  uZq
of  M,  and  we  have  (§  lo)  s^^  ^  in^  for  every  j/,  and
•$■  <  ^K  f°^  '^^ ^0- Thus  (§  7)  J  <  m^.

U  r>XQ,  we  conclude  similarly  that  s  >-  7/1^.

Let  us  consider,  finally,  two  elements  Xq  and  x'q
not  belonging  to  R  and  the  elements  m^  and  m'^
corresponding  to  them  in  M  ;  then  we  show,  by
an  analogous consideration, that, if  Xq  <x'q, then

The  proof  of  the  similarity  of  X  and  M  is  now
finished,  and  we  thus  have

Halle,  March  1895.

[207] CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE
FOUNDING  OF  THE  THEORY  OF
TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS

(Second  Article)

Weil-Ordered  Aggregates

Among  simply  ordered  aggregates  "well-ordered
aggregates  "  deserve  a  special  place  ;  their  ordinal
types,  which  we  call  "ordinal  numbers,"  form  the
natural  material  for  an  exact  definition  of  the
higher  transfinite  cardinal  numbers  or  powers, — a
definition  which  is  throughout  conformable  to  that
which  was  given  us  for  the  least  transfinite  cardinal
number  Aleph-zero  by  the  system  of  all  finite
numbers  i/  (§  6).

We  call  a  simply  ordered  aggregate  F  (§  7)
"well-ordered"  if  its  elements /ascend  in  a  definite
succession  from  a  lowest  f^  in  such  a  way  that  :

I.  There  is  in  F  an  element /^  which  is  lowest  in
rank.

II.  If  F'  is  any  part  of  F  and  if  F  has  one  or
many  elements  of  higher  rank  than  all  elements
of  F',  then  there  is  an  element  /'  of  F  which
follows immediately after the totality F', so

137

138 THE  FOU AWING  OF  THE THEORY

that  no  elements  in  rank  between  f  and  F'  occur
in F.*

In  particular,  to  every  single  element  /  of  F,  if
it  is  not  the  highest,  follows  in  rank  as  next  higher
another  definite  element  f  ;  this  results  from  the
condition  II  if  for  F'  we  put  the  single  element  /
Further,  if,  for  example,  an  infinite  series  of  con-
secutive elements

e'  <  e"  <  e'"  <  .  .  .  <  e^^^  -<  ^(^+i) .  .  .

is  contained  in  F  in  such  a  way,  however,  that  there
are  also  in  F  elements  of  [2o8]  higher  rank  than  all
elements  e^"^,  then,  by  the  second  condition,  putting
for  F'  the  totality  {^^"^},  there  must  exist  an  element
f  sugh  that  not  only

f  >  e^^^

for  all  values  of  v,  but  that  also  there  is  no  element
g  in  F  which  satisfies  the  two  conditions

g  >  e"^

for  all  values  of  v.

Thus,  for  example,  the  three  aggregates
(^1,  a^,  .  .  .,  a^,  .  .  .),
(«i,  a^,  .  .  .,  a^,  .  .  .,  dj^,  i?2-  •  -y  ^fj^y  •  '  -^

where

*  This  definition  of  "well-ordered  aggregates,"  apart  from  the
wording,  is  identical  with  that  which  was  introduced  in  vol.  xxi  of  the
A/at/i.  Attn.,  p.  548  {Grundlas:en  einer  allgcfneinen  Maimichfaltig-
keitslehre,  p.  4). [See  Section  VII  of  the  Introduction.]

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 139

are  well-ordered.  The  two  first  have  no  highest
element,  the  third  has  the  highest  element  ^3;  in
the  second  and  third  b^  immediately  follows  all
the  elements  a^,  in  the  third  i\  immediately  follows
all  the  elements  a^  and  b'^.

In  the  following  we  will  extend  the  use  of  the
signs  -<  and  >^,  explained  in  §  7,  and  there  used
to  express  the  ordinal  relation  of  two  elements,  to
groups  of  elements,  so  that  the  formulae

M-<  N,
M>N

are  the  expression  for  the  fact  that  in  a  given  order
all  the  elements  of  the  aggregate  M  have  a  lower,
or  higher,  respectively,  rank  than  all  elements  of
the  aggregate  N.

A.  Every  part  F^  of  a  well-ordered  aggregate  F
has  a  lowest  element.

Proof. — If  the  lowest  element /^  of  F  belongs  to
Fj,  then  it  is  also  the  lowest  element  of  F^.  In
the  other  case,  let  F'  be  the  totality  of  all  elements
of  F""  which  have  a  lower  rank  than  all  elements  F^,
then,  for  this  reason,  no  element  of  F  lies  between
F'  and  F^.  Thus,  if/'  follows  (II)  next  after  F,
then  it  belongs  necessarily  to  I^  and  here  takes  the
lowest  rank.

B.  If  a  simply  ordered  aggregate  F  is  such  that
both  F  and  every  one  of  its  parts  have  a  lowest
element,  then  F  is  a  well-ordered  aggregate.

\20()\  Proof. — Since  F  has  a  lowest  element,
the  condition  I  is  satisfied. Let  F'  be  a  part  of  F

140 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

such  that  there  are  in  F  one  or  more  elements
which  follow  F' ;  let  F^  be  the  totality  of  all  these
elements  and  /'  the  lowest  element  of  F^,  then
obviously/'  is  the  element  of  F  which  follows  next
to  F'.  Consequently,  the  condition  II  is  also  satis-
fied, and  therefore  F  is  a  well-ordered  aggregate.

C.  Every  part  F'  of  a  well-ordered  aggregate  F
is  also  a  well-ordered  aggregate.

Proof. — By  theorem  A,  the  aggregate  F'  as  well
as  every  part  F''  of  F'  (since  it  is  also  a  part  of  F)
has  a  lowest  element  ;  thus  by  theorem  B,  the
aggregate  F'  is  well-ordered.

D.  Every  aggregate  G  which  is  similar  to  a  well-
ordered  aggregate  F  is  also  a  well-ordered  aggregate.

Proof. — If  M  is  an  aggregate  which  has  a  lowest
element,  then,  as  immediately  follows  from  the
concept  of  similarity  (§  7),  every  aggregate  N
similar  to  it  has  a  lowest  element.  Since,  now,
we  are  to  have  G  rsj  F,  and  F  has,  since  it  is  a
well-ordered  aggregate,  a  lowest  element,  the  same
holds  of  G.  Thus  also  every  part  G'  of  G  has  a
lowest  element  ;  for  in  an  imaging  of  G  on  F,  to
the  aggregate  G'  corresponds  a  part  F'  of  F  as
image, so  that

G'  00  F'.

But,  by  theorem  A,  F'  has  a  lowest  element,  and
therefore  also  G'  has.  Thus,  both  G  and  every
part  of  G  have  lowest  elements.  By  theorem  B,
consequently,  G  is  a  well-ordered  aggregate.

E.  If  in  a  well-ordered  aggregate  G,  in  place  of

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 141

its  elements  g  well-ordered  aggregates  are  sub-
stituted in  such  a  way  that,  if  F^^  and  F"^'  are  the
well-ordered  aggregates  which  occupy  the  places
of  the  elements  g  and  g'  and  g  -<^  g\  then  also
F^^  -<  F^^',  then  the  aggregate  H,  arising  by  com-
bination in  this  manner  of  the  elements  of  all  the
aggregates  F^,  is  well-ordered.

Proof. — Both  H  and  every  part  H^  of  H  have
lowest  elements,  and  by  theorem  B  this  characterizes
H  as  a  well-ordered  aggregate.  For,  if  g^  is  the
lowest  element  of  G,  the  lowest  element  of  F^  is
at  the  same  time  the  lowest  element  of  H.  If,
further,  we  have  a  part  Hj  of  H,  its  elements
belong  to  definite  aggregates  F^  which  form,  when
taken  together,  a  part  of  the  well-ordered  aggre-
gate {F^},  which  consists  of  the  elements  F^  and
is  similar  to  the  aggregate  G.  If,  say,  F^  is  the
lowest  element  of  this  part,  then  the  lowest  element
of  the  part  of  H^  contained  in  F^  is  at  the  same
time  the  lowest  element  of  H.  .

[210]  § 13

The  Segments  of  Well-Ordered  Aggregates

If  /  is  any  element  of  the  well-ordered  aggre-
gate F  which  is  different  from  the  initial  element y^^,
then  we  will  call  the  aggregate  A  of  all  elements
of  F  which  precede /"a  "  segment  {AbscJinitt)  of  F, "
or,  more  fully,  *'  the  segment  of  F  which  is  defined
by  the  element/" On  the  other  hand,  the  aggre-

142 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

gate  R  of  all  the  other  elements  of  F,  including  /,
is  a  ''remainder  of  F,"  and,  more  fully,  ''the
remainder  which  is  determined  by  the  element  /!"
The  aggregates  A  and  R  are,  by  theorem  C  of
§  12,  well-ordered,  and  we  may,  by  §  8  and  §  I2,
write  :

(1)  F  =  (A,  R),

(2)  R  =  (/,  R'),

(3)  A  <  R.

R'  is  the  part  of  R  which  follows  the  initial  element
/  and  reduces  to  o  if  R  has,  besides  /,  no  other
element.

For  example,  in  the  well-ordered  aggregate

the  segment

and  the  corresponding  remainder

(<^3, ^4, . . . «^  +  2, . . . ^1, <^2' • • •  ^H^ ' ' ' ^V ^2' ^'3)

are  determined  by  the  element  a^  ;  the  segment

(^1,  a^,  .  .  .,  a,,  .  .  .)
and  the  corresponding  remainder

{b^,  b^,  .  .  .,  b^,  .  .  .  q,  ^2,  ^3)

are  determined  by  the  element  b-^  ;  and  the  segment

(^1,  «2)  •  •  • .  ^^^»  .  .  .  b^,  b^,  ,  .  .,  b^,  .  .  .  q)

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 143

"remainder

and  the  corresponding  gogmcnt

by  the  element  c.^.

If  A  and  A'  are  two  segments  of  F,/and/'  their
determining  elements,  and

(4)  /'  </,

then  A'  is  a  segment  of  A. We  call  A'  the  ''  less,"
and  A  the  ''  greater  "  segment  of  F  :

(5)  A'<A.

Correspondingly  we  may  say  of  every  A  of  F  that
it  is  "  less  "  than  F  itself  :

A<F.

[211]  A.  If  two  similar  well-ordered  aggregates
F  and  G  are  imaged  on  one  another,  then  to  every
segment  A  of  F  corresponds  a  similar  segment  B  of
G,  and  to  every  segment  B  of  G  corresponds  a
similar  segment  A  of  F,  and  the  elements /" and  ^
of  F  and  G  by  which  the  corresponding  segments
A  and  B  are  determined  also  correspond  to  one
another  in  the  imaging.

Proof. — If  we  have  two  similar  simply  ordered
aggregates  M  and  N  imaged  on  one  another,  m  and
n  are  two  corresponding  elements,  and  M'  is  the
aggregate  of  all  elements  of  M  which  precede  m
and  N'  is  the  aggregate  of  all  elements  of  N  which
precede  n^  then  in  the  imaging  M'  and  N'  correspond
to  one  another.  For,  to  every  element  m'  of  M
that  precedes  in  must  correspond,  by  §  7,  an  element

144 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

n'  of  N  that  precedes  n^  and  inversely.  If  we  apply
this  general  theorem  to  the  well-ordered  aggregates
F  and  G  we  get  what  is  to  be  proved.

B.  A  well-ordered  aggregate  F  is  not  similar  to
any  of  its  segments  A.

Proof. — Let  us  suppose  that  F  oo  A,  then  we  will
imagine  an  imaging  of  F  on  A  set  up.  By  theorem
A  the  segment  A'  of  A  corresponds  to  the  segment
A  of  F,  so  that  A'  oo  A.  Thus  also  we  would  have
A'  rsj  F  and  A'<  A.  From  A'  would  result,  in  the
same  manner,  a  smaller  segment  A''  of  F,  such  that
A''  oo  F  and  A"  <  A' ;  and  so  on.  Thus  we  would
obtain  an  infinite  series

A>A'>A".  .  .  A(^)>A('^+i).  .  .

of  segments  of  F,  which  continually  become  smaller
and  all  similar  to  the  aggregate  F.  We  will
denote  by  /,  /',  f'\  .  .  . ,  /^"^  .  .  .  the  elements  of
F  which  determine  these  segments  ;  then  we  would
have

/>/'  >/"  >■■■  >/<-*  >  A+i) . . .

We  would  therefore  have  an  infinite  part

of  F  in  which  no  element  takes  the  lowest  rank.
But  by  theorem  A  of  §  12  such  parts  of  F  are  not
possible.  Thus  the  supposition  of  an  imaging  F  on
one  of  its  segments  leads  to  a  contradiction,  and
consequently  the  aggregate  F  is  not  similar  to  any
of  its  segments.

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 145

Though  by  theorem  B  a  well-ordered  aggregate
F  is  not  similar  to  any  of  its  segments,  yet,  if  F  is
infinite,  there  are  always  [212]  other  parts  of  F  to
which  F  is  similar. Thus,  for  example,  the  aggregate

F  =  (^i,  a^,  .  .  .,  «,,,  .  .  .)

is  similar  to  every  one  of  its  remainders

Consequently,  it  is  important  that  we  can  put  by  the
side  of  theorem  B  the  following  :

C.  A  well-ordered  aggregate  F  is  similar  to  no
part  of  any  one  of  its  segments  A.

Proof. — Let  us  suppose  that  F'  is  a  part  of  a
segment  A  of  F  and  F'  00  F.  We  imagine  an
imaging  of  F  on  F' ;  then,  by  theorem  A,  to  a
segment  A  of  the  well-ordered  aggregate  F  corre-
sponds as  image  the  segment  Y"  of  F'  ;  let  this
segment  be  determined  by  the  element  f  of  F'.
The  element  /'  is  also  an  element  of  A,  and  de-
termines a  segment  A'  of  A  of  which  F'"  is  a  part.
The  supposition  of  a  part  F'  of  a  segment  A  of  F
such  that  F'  00  F  leads  us  consequently  to  a  part  F"
of  a  segment  A'  of  A  such  that  Y"  00  A.  The  same
manner  of  conclusion  gives  us  a  part  Y'"  of  a
segment  A"  of  A'  such  that  F"'  00  A'.  Proceeding
thus,  we  get,  as  in  the  proof  of  theorem  B,  an
infinite  series  of  segments  of  F  which  continually
become  smaller  :

A>A'>A".  .  .  A(''>>A<''+i>.  .  .,

10

146 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

and  thus  an  infinite  series  of  elements  determining
these  segments  :

in  which  is  no  lowest  element,  and  this  is  impossible
by  theorem  A  of  §  12.  Thus  there  is  no  part  F'
of  a  segment  A  of  F  such  that  F'  00  F.

D.  Two  different  segments  A  and  A'  of  a  well-
ordered  aggregate  F  are  not  similar  to  one  another.

Proof. — If  A'<A,  then  A'  is  a  segment  of  the
well-ordered  aggregate  A,  and  thus,  by  theorem  B,
cannot  be  similar  to  A.

E.  Two  similar  well-ordered  aggregates  F  and  G
can  be  imaged  on  one  another  only  in  a  single
manner.

Proof. — Let  us  suppose  that  there  are  two  different
imagings  of  F  on  G,  and  let /be  an  element  of  F  to
which  in  the  two  imagings  different  images  g  and  g
in  G  correspond.  Let  A  be  the  segment  of  F  that
is  determined  by/,  and  B  and  B'  the  segments  of  G
that  are  determined  by  g  and  g .  By  theorem  A,
both  A  00  B  [213]  and  A  00  B',  and  consequently
BooB',  contrary  to  theorem  D.

F.  If  F  and  G  are  two  well-ordered  aggregates,
a  segment  A  of  F  can  have  at  most  one  segment
B  in  G.  which  is  similar  to  it.

Proof — If  the  segment  A  of  F  could  have  two
segments  B  and  B'  in  G  which  were  similar  to  it,  B
and  B'  would  be  similar  to  one  another,  which  is
impossible  by  theorem  D.

G.  If  A  and  B  are  similar  segments  of  two  well-

OP  TRANSFJNITR  NUMBERS 147

ordered  aggregates  F  and  G,  for  every  smaller
segment  A'<A  of  F  there  is  a  similar  segment
B'  <  ]^  of  G  and  for  every  smaller  segment  W  <  B  of
G  a  similar  segment  A'  <  A  of  F.

The  proof  follows  from  theorem  A  applied  to  the
similar  aggregates  A  and  B.

H.  If  A  and  A'  are  two  segments  of  a  well-
ordered  aggregate  F,  B  and  B'  are  two  segments
similar  to  those  of  a  well-ordered  aggregate  G,  and
A'<A,  then  B'<B.

The  proof  follows  from  the  theorems  F  and  G.

I.  If  a  segment  B  of  a  well-ordered  aggregate  G
is  similar  to  no  segment  of  a  well-ordered  aggregate
F,  then  both  every  segment  B'  >  B  of  D  and  G  itself
are  similar  neither  to  a  segment  of  F  nor  F  itself.

The  proof  follows  from  theorem  G.

K.  If  for  any  segment  A  of  a  well-ordered
aerereeate  F  there  is  a  similar  see^ment  B  of  another
well-ordered  aggregate  G,  and  also  inversely,  for
every  segment  B  of  G  a  similar  segment  A  of  F,
then  F  00  G.

Proof. — We  can  image  F  and  G  on  one  another
according  to  the  following  law  :  Let  the  lowest
element  f^  of  F  correspond  to  the  lowest  element  g^
of  G.  If  f^fi  is  any  other  element  of  F,  it
determines  a  segment  A  of  F.  To  this  segment
belongs  by  supposition  a  definite  similar  segment
B  of  G,  and  let  the  element  ^  of  G  which  determines
the  segment  B  be  the  image  of  F.  And  if  g  is  any
element  of  G  that  follows  g^,  it  determines  a
segment  B  of  G,  to  which  by  supposition  a  similar

148 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

segment  A  of  F  belongs.  Let  the  element /"which
determines  this  segment  A  be  the  image  of  ^.  It
easily  follows  that  the  bi-univocal  correspondence  of
F  and  G  defined  in  this  manner  is  an  imaging  in  the
sense  of  §  7.  For  if/  and/'  are  any  two  elements
of  F,  g  and  g'  [2 1 4]  the  corresponding  elements  of
G,  A  and  A'  the  segments  determined  by/  and  /',
B  and  B'  those  determined  by  g  and  g\  and  if,  say,

/'</-

then

A'<A.

By  theorem  H,  then,  we  have

B'<B,

and  consequently

L.  If  for  every  segment  A  of  a  well-ordered
aggregate  F  there  is  a  similar  segment  B  of  another
well-ordered  aggregate  G,  but  if,  on  the  other  hand,
there  is  at  least  one  segment  of  G  for  which  there  is
no  similar  segment  of  F,  then  there  exists  a  definite
segment  B^  of  G  such  that  B^OoF.

Proof. — Consider  the  totality  of  segments  of  G  for
which  there  are  no  similar  segments  in  F.  Amongst
them  there  must  be  a  least  segment  which  we  will  call
B^.  This  follows  from  the  fact  that,  by  theorem  A
of  §  12,  the  aggregate  of  all  the  elements  determin-
ing these  segments  has  a  lowest  element  ;  the
segment  B^  of  G  determined  by  that  element  is  the
least  of  that  totality. By  theorem  I,  every  segment

OF  JRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 149

of  G  which  is  greater  than  B^  is  such  that  no  segment
similar  to  it  is  present  in  F.  Thus  the  segments
B  of  G  which  correspond  to  similar  segments  of  F
must  all  be  less  than  Bj,  and  to  every  segment
B  <  B^  belongs  a  similar  segment  A  of  F,  because
Bj  is  the  least  segment  of  G  among  those  to  which
no  similar  segments  in  F  correspond.  Thus,  for
every  segment  A  of  F  there  is  a  similar  segment  B  of
B^,  and  for  every  segment  B  of  B^  there  is  a  similar
segment  A  of  F. By  theorem  K,  we  thus  have

FooB^.

M.  If  the  well-ordered  aggregate  G  has  at  least
one  segment  for  which  there  is  no  similar  segment
in  the  well-ordered  aggregate  F,  then  every  segment
A  of  F  must  have  a  segment  B  similar  to  it  in  G.

Proof. — Let  B^  be  the  least  of  all  those  segments
of  G  for  which  there  are  no  similar  segments  in  F.  *
If  there  were  segments  in  F  for  which  there  were  no
corresponding  segments  in  G,  amongst  these,  one,
which  we  will  call  A^,  would  be  the  least.  For
every  segment  of  Aj^  would  then  exist  a  similar
segment  of  B^^,  and  also  for  every  segment  of  B^^  a
similar  segment  of  A^.  Thus,  by  theorem  K,  we
would  have

B^  no  A^.

[215]  But  this  contradicts  the  datum  that  for  B^
there  is  no  similar  segment  of  F.  Consequently,
there  cannot  be  in  F  a  segment  to  which  a  similar
segment  in  G  does  not  correspond.

*  See  the  above  proof  of  L.

ISO THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

N.  If  F  and  G  are  any  two  well-ordered  aggre-
gates, then  either  :

{a)  F  and  G  are  similar  to  one  another,  or

{b)  there  is  a  definite  segment  Bj  of  G  to  which
F  is  similar,  or

(<:)  there  is  a  definite  segment  A^  of  F  to  which
G  is  similar  ;
and  each  of  these  three  cases  excludes  the  two  others.

Proof. — The  relation  of  F  to  G  can  be  any  one  of
the  three  :

(a)  To  every  segment  A  of  F  there  belongs  a
similar  segment  B  of  G,  and  inversely,  to  every
segment  B  of  G  belongs  a  similar  one  A  of  F  ;

{b)  To  every  segment  A  of  F  belongs  a  similar
segment  B  of  G,  but  there  is  at  least  one  segment
of  G  to  which  no  similar  segment  in  F  corresponds ;

{c)  To  every  segment  B  of  G  belongs  a  similar
segment  A  of  F,  but  there  is  at  least  one  segment  of
F  to  which  no  similar  segment  in  G  corresponds.

The  case  that  there  is  both  a  segment  of  F  to
which  no  similar  segment  in  G  corresponds  and  a
segment  of  G  to  which  no  similar  segment  in  F
corresponds  is  not  possible  ;  it  is  excluded  by
theorem  M.

By  theorem  K,  in  the  first  case  we  have

F  cNj  G.

In  the  second  case  there  is,  by  theorem  L,  a  definite
segment  V>^  of  B  such  that

BiOoF;

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 151

and  in  the  third  case  there  is  a  definite  segment  A^
of  F  such  that

Ai  fxj  G.

We  cannot  have  F  c\j  G  and  F  00  B^  simultaneously,
for  then  we  would  have  G  00  Bj,  contrary  to  theorem
B  ;  and,  for  the  same  reason,  we  cannot  have  both
F  rv)  G  and  G  00  A^.  Also  it  is  impossible  that
both  F  00  Bj  and  G  00  A^,  for,  by  theorem  A,
from  F  00  B^  would  follow  the  existence  of  a
segment  B'^  of  B^^  such  that  A^  00  B\.  Thus  we
would  have  G  00  B'j,  contrary  to  theorem  B.

O.  If  a  part  F'  of  a  well-ordered  aggregate  F  is
not  similar  to  any  segment  of  F,  it  is  similar  to  F
itself.

Proof. — By  theorem  C  of  §  12,  F'  is  a  well-ordered
aggregate.  If  F'  were  similar  neither  to  a  segment
of  F  nor  to  F  itself,  there  would  be,  by  theorem  N,
a  segment  F'^  of  F'  which  is  similar  to  F.  But  F'^
is  a  part  of  that  segment  A  of  F  which  [216]  is
determined  by  the  same  element  as  the  segment  F'^
of  F'.  Thus  the  aggregate  F  would  have  to  be
similar  to  a  part  of  one  of  its  segments,  and  this
contradicts  the  theorem  C.

§  14

The  Ordinal  Numbers  of  Weil-Ordered

Aggregates

By  §  7,  every  simply  ordered  aggregate  M  has  a
definite  ordinal  type  M  ;  this  type  is  the  general  con-

152 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

cept  which  results  from  M  if  we  abstract  from  the
nature  of  its  elements  while  retaining  their  order  of
precedence,  so  that  out  of  them  proceed  units
{Einsefi)  which  stand  in  a  definite  relation  of  pre-
cedence to  one  another.  All  aggregates  which  are
similar  to  one  another,  and  only  such,  have  one  and
the  same  ordinal  type.  We  call  the  ordinal  type  of
a  well-ordered  aggregate  F  its  "ordinal  number."

If  a  and  /3  are  any  two  ordinal  numbers,  one  can
stand  to  the  other  in  one  of  three*  possible  relations.
For  if  F  and  G  are  two  well-ordered  aggregates
such  that

F  =  a, G  =  /3,

then,  by  theorem  N  of  §  13,  three  mutually  ex-
clusive cases  are  possible  :

{a)  F  00  G ;

{b)  There  is  a  definite  segment  Bj  of  G  such  that

FooB^;
(c)  There  is  a  definite  segment  Aj  of  F  such  that

Goo  A^.

As  we  easily  see,  each  of  these  cases  still  subsists
if  F  and  G  are  replaced  by  aggregates  respectively
similar  to  them.  Accordingly,  we  have  to  do  with
three  mutually  exclusive  relations  of  the  types  a
and  )8  to  one  another.  In  the  first  case  a  =  /3;  in
the  second  we  say  that  a</5;  in  the  third  we  say
that  a>/3. Thus  we  have  the  theorem  :

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 153

A.  If  a  and  ^  are  any  two  ordinal  numbers,  we
have  either  a  =  l3  or  a<^  or  a> /3.

From  the  definition  of  minority  and  majority
follows  easily  :

B.  If  we  have  three  ordinal  numbers  a,  /5,  y,  and
if  a  <  18  and  ^  <y,  then  a  <  y.

Thus  the  ordinal  numbers  form,  when  arranged
in  order  of  magnitude,  a  simply  ordered  aggregate  ;
it  will  appear  later  that  it  is  a  well-ordered  aggre-
gate.

[217]  The  operations  of  addition  and  multipli-
cation of  the  ordinal  types  of  any  simply  ordered
aggregates,  defined  in  §  8,  are,  of  course,  applicable
to  the  ordinal  numbers.  If  a  =  F  and  /3  =  G,  where
F  and  G  are  two  well-ordered  aggregates,  then

(1)  a  +  /3  =  (F,  G).

The  aggregate  of  union  (F,  G)  is  obviously  a
well-ordered  aggregate  too  ;  thus  we  have  the
theorem  :

C.  The  sum  of  two  ordinal  numbers  is  also  an
ordinal  number.

In  the  sum  a  +  l3,  a  is  called  the  "augend"  and
^  the  ''addend."

Since  F  is  a  segment  of  (F,  G),  we  have  always

(2)  • a<a  +  /3.

On  the  other  hand,  G  is  not  a  segment  but  a  re-
mainder of  (F,  G),  and  may  thus,  as  we  saw  in
§ 13,  be  similar  to  the  aggregate  (F,  G). If  this

154 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

is  not  the  case,  G  is,  by  theorem  O  of  §  13,  similar
to  a  segment  of  (F,  G). Thus

(3)  ^<«+/3.

Consequently  we  have  :

D.  The  sum  of  the  two  ordinal  numbers  is  always
greater  than  the  augend,  but  greater  than  or  equal
to  the  addend.  If  we  have  a  +  ^  =  a  +  y,  we  always
have  ,8  =  y.

In  general  a-\-^  and  /3  +  a  are  not  equal.  On
the  other  hand,  we  have,  if  y  is  a  third  ordinal
number,

(4)  (a  +  ^)  +  y  =  a  +  (/3  +  y).

That  is  to  say  :

E.  In  the  addition  of  ordinal  numbers  the  associa-
tive law  always  holds.

If  we  substitute  for  every  element  g  of  the
aggregate  G  of  type  /3  an  aggregate  F^^  of  type  a,
we  get,  by  theorem  E  of  §  12,  a  well-ordered
aggregate  H  whose  type  is  completely  determined
by  the  types  a  and  /3  and  will  be  called  the  product

(5)  "  i^^^=«^

(6)  a.^  =  H.

F.  The  product  of  two  ordinal  numbers  is  also
an  ordinal  number.

In  the  product  a  .^8,  a  is  called  the  ''  multiplicand  "
and  /3  the  "multiplier."

In  general  a./^and  /S.aare  not  equal.  But  we
have  (§  8)

OF  TRANS  FINITE  NUMBERS 155

(7)  (a.^).y  =  a.(/3.y).

That  is  to  say  :

[218] G.  In  the  multipHcation  of  ordinal  numbers

the  associative  law  holds.

The  distributive  law  is  valid,  in  general  (§  8),
only  in  the  following  form  :

(8)  a.(/3  +  y)  =  a.^  +  a.y.

With  reference  to  the  magnitude  of  the  product,
the  following  theorem,  as  we  easily  see,  holds  :

H.  If  the  multipHer  is  greater  than  i,  the  product
of  two  ordinal  numbers  is  always  greater  than
the  multiplicand,  but  greater  than  or  equal  to  the
multiplier.  If  we  have  a.^  =  a.y,  then  it  always
follows  that  /8  =  y.

On  the  other  hand,  we  evidently  have

(9)  a  .  I  =  I  .  a  =  a.

We  have  now  to  consider  the  operation  of  sub-
traction. If  a  and  /3  are  two  ordinal  numbers,  and
a  is  less  than  /5,  there  always  exists  a  definite
ordinal  number  which  we  will  call  /3  —  a,  which
satisfies  the  equation

(10)  a  +  (/3-a)  =  ^.

For  if  G  =  ^,  G  has  a  segment  B  such  that  B  =  a  ;
we  call  the  corresponding  remainder  S,  and  have

G  =  (B,  S),

/3  =  a  +  S;

156 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

and  therefore

(ii)  /5-a  =  S.

The  determinateness  of  ^-a  appears  clearly  from
the  fact  that  the  segment  B  of  G  is  a  completely
definite  one  (theorem  D  of  §  13),  and  consequently
also  S  is  uniquely  given.

We  emphasize  the  following  formulae,  which
follow  from  (4),  (8),  and  (lo)  :

(12)  (7  +  /3)-(y  +  a)  =  ^-a,

(13)  y(/3-a)  =  y^-ya.

It  is  important  to  reflect  that  an  infinity  of
ordinal  numbers  can  be  summed  so  that  their  sum
is  a  definite  ordinal  number  which  depends  on  the
sequence  of  the  summands. If

is  any  simply  infinite  series  of  ordinal  numbers,  and
we  have

(14)  ^v=^v^

[219]  then,  by  theorem  E  of  §  12,

(15)  .G  =  (Gi, G2,  .  .  ., G^, .  .  .)

is  also  a  well-ordered  aggregate  whose  ordinal
number  represents  the  sum  of  the  numbers  /3,,.
We  have,  then,

(16)  A  +  ^2+  •  •  •  +A.+  .  .  .  =G  =  /3,

and,  as  we  easily  see  from  the  definition  of  a
product,  we  always  have

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 157

(17)  y.(/5i  +  ^,+  ...  +/'i+...)

If  we  put

(18)  «^^^^  +  /3^  +  .  .  . +/^^,
then

(19.)  a,  =  (Gi,  G2,  .  .  .  G,).

We  have

(20)  a.+i>a.,

and,  by  (10),  we  can  express  the  numbers  P^,  by
the  numbers  a^  as  follows  :

(21)  i^i=ai; /5^+i  =  a^+i  — a^.

The  series

«!,  aa,  .  .  .,  a^,  .  .  .

thus  represents  any  infinite  series  of  ordinal  numbers
which  satisfy  the  condition  (20)  ;  we  will  call  it  a
"fundamental  series"  of  ordinal  numbers  (§10).
Betw^een  it  and  ^  subsists  a  relation  which  can  be
expressed  m  the  following  manner  :

{a)  The  number  /5  is  greater  than  a,  for  every
J/,  because  the  aggregate  (G^,  Gg,  .  .  .,  G„),  whose
ordinal  number  is  a^,  is  a  segment  of  the  aggregate
G  which  has  the  ordinal  number  ^  ;

{b)  If  /3'  is  any  ordinal  number  less  than  ^,  then,
from  a  certain  v  onwards,  we  always  have

For, since S'  <  jS, there is a segment B' of the

158 THE  FOVNDING  OF  THE THEORY

aggregate  G  which  is  of  type  /3'.  The  element  of
G  which  determines  this  segment  must  belong  to
one  of  the  parts  G^ ;  we  will  call  this  part  G^,^.  But
then  B'  is  also  a  segment  of  (G^,  Gg,  .  .  .,  G^ ),  and
consequently  /3'  <  a^, . Thus

for  v^v^.

Thus  /3  is  the  ordinal  number  which  follows  next
in  order  of  magnitude  after  all  the  numbers  a^  ;
accordingly  we  will  call  it  the  "limit"  {Grenze)  of
the  numbers  a^  for  increasing  v  and  denote  it  by
Lim  a^,  so  that,  by  (i6)  and  (21)  :

(22)  Lim  a^  =  ai  +  («2  -  «!>  +  •"  •  •  +  (a^+i  -«.)  +  •  •  .

[220]  We  may  express  what  precedes  in  the
following  theorem  :

1.  To  every  fundamental  series  {a,J  of  ordinal
numbers  belongs  an  ordinal  number  Lim  a,,  which

V

follows  next,  in  order  of  magnitude,  after  all  the
numbers  a„ ;  it  is  represented  by  the  formula  (22).

If  by  y  we  understand  any  constant  ordinal
number,  we  easily  prove,  by  the  aid  of  the  formulae
(12),  (13),  and  (17),  the  theorems  contained  in  the
formulae  :

(23)  Lim  (y  +  a„)  =  y  +  Lim  a,  ;

V  V

(24)  Lim  y  .  ay  =  y  .  Lhn  a^.

V  V

We  have  already  mentioned  in  §  7  that  all  simply

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 159

ordered  aggregates  of  given  finite  cardinal  number
V  have  one  and  the  same  ordinal  type.  This  may
be  proved  here  as  follows.  Every  simply  ordered
aggregate  of  finite  cardinal  number  is  a  well-ordered
aggregate  ;  for  it,  and  every  one  of  its  parts,  must
have  a  lowest  element, — and  this,  by  theorem  B
of  §  12,  characterizes  it  as  a  well-ordered  aggregate.
The  types  of  finite  simply  ordered  aggregates  are
thus  none  other  than  finite  ordinal  numbers.  But
two  different  ordinal  numbers  a  and  ^  cannot  belong
to  the  same  finite  cardinal  number  v.  For  if,  say,
a</3  and  G  =  /3,  then,  as  we  know,  there  exists  a
segment  B  of  G  such  that  B  =  a.  Thus  the  aggre-
gate G  and  its  part  B  would  have  the  same  finite
cardinal  number  v.  But  this,  by  theorem  C  of  §  6,
is  impossible.  Thus  the  finite  ordinal  numbers
coincide  in  their  properties  with  the  finite  cardinal
numbers.

The  case  is  quite  different  with  the  transfinite
ordinal  numbers  ;  to  one  and  the  same  transfinite
cardinal  number  a  belong  an  infinity  of  ordinal
numbers  which  form  a  unitary  and  connected
system.  We  will  call  this  system  the  "number-
class  Z(a),"  and  it  is  a  part  of  the  class  of  types
[a]  of  §  7.  The  next  object  of  our  consideration  is
the  number-class  Z(h?Q),  which  we  will  call  "the
second  number-class."  For  in  this  connexion  we
understand  by  "the  first  number-class"  the  totality
[v]  of  finite  ordinal  numbers.

i6o THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE  THEORY
[221]  % 15

The  Numbers  of  the  Second  Number- Class  Z({^o)

The  second  number-class  Z(}^q)  is  the  totality  {a}
of  ordinal  types  a  of  well-ordered  aggregates  of
the  cardinal  number  «o  (§  6).

A.  The  second  number-class  has  a  least  number
0)  =  Lim  V.

V

Pi'oof. — By  o)  we  understand  the  type  of  the
well-ordered  aggregate

(1)  Fo  =  (/i,  /„  .  .  .,  /,,  .  .  .),

where  v  runs  through  all  finite  ordinal  numbers  and

(2)  /.-</.+i^
Therefore  (§  7)

(3)  w=Fo>

and  (§  6)

(4)  ^  =  f^o-

Thus  0)  is  a  number  of  the  second  number-class,
and  indeed  the  least.  For  if  y  is  any  ordinal
number  less  than  o),  it  must  (§  14)  be  the  type  of
a  segment  of  Fq. But  F^  has  only  segments

A  =  (/i,/2,  .  .  .,/.),
with  finite  ordinal  number  v. Thus  y  =  v. There-
fore there  are  no  transfinite  ordinal  numbers  which
are  less  than  w,  and  thus  w  is  the  least  of  them.
By the definition of Lim a^ given in §  14, we

V

obviously  have  a)=Lim  v.

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS i6i

B.  If  a  is  any  number  of  the  second  number-class,
the  number  a+i  follows  it  as  the  next  greater
number  of  the  same  number-class.

Proof. — Let  F  be  a  well-ordered  aggregate  of
the  type  a  and  of  the  cardinal  number  Nq  :

(5)  F  =  a,

(6)  a=No-

We  have,  where  by  g  is  understood  a  new  element,

(7)  a+i=(F,  ^).
Since  F  is  a  segment  of  (F,  g),  we  have

(8)  a+i>a.
We  also  have

a+i=a+i=No+i=«o  (§^)-

Therefore  the  number  a+i  belongs  to  the  second
number-class.  Between  a  and  a+i  there  are  no
ordinal  numbers  ;  for  every  number  y  [222]  which
is  less  than  a+  i  corresponds,  as  type,  to  a  segment
of  (F,  g),  and  such  a  segment  can  only  be  either
F  or  a  segment  of  F.  Therefore  y  is  either  equal
to  or  less  than  a.

C.  If  ai,  aa,  .  .  .,  a„  .  .  .  is  any  fundamental  series
of  numbers  of  the  first  or  second  number-class,  then
the  number  Lim  a,  (§  H)  following  them  next  in

V

order  of  magnitude  belongs  to  the  second  number-
class.

Proof. — By §  14 there results from the funda-

II

1 62 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY
mental  series  {a,,}  the  number  Lim  a^  if  we  set  up

V

another  series  ^j,  /^g,  •  .  .,  /8^,  .  .  .,  where

If,  then,  Gj,  Gg,  .  .  .,  G^,  .  .  .  are  well-ordered  aggre-
gates such  that

then  also

G  =  (^i)  ^2,  .  .  .,  G^,  .  .  .)

is  a  well-ordered  aggregate  and
Lim  a^  =  G.

V

It  only  remains  to  prove  that

Since  the  numbers  /^j, ^82,  .  .  .,  ft,  •  •  . belong to
the  first  or  second  number-class,  we  have

and  thus

G<h?o  •  No  =  ^^o-
But,  in  any  case,  G  is  a  transfinite  aggregate,  and
so  the  case  G<^?q  is  excluded.

We  will  call  two  fundamental  series  {a^}  and  {a^\
of  numbers  of  the  first  or  second  number-class  (§  lO)
"coherent,"  in  signs  :

(9)  {«.}  11  {«'.}.

if  for  every  v  there  are finite numbers  Xq and  ^^
such  that

(10)  aK>OLy, X>Xo>

OF  rRANSFINTTE  NUMBERS 163

and

(11)  a^>a\, At^Mo-

[223]  D.  The  limiting  numbers  Lim  a^  and  Lim  a\

V  V

belonging  respectively  to  two  fundamental  series
{ay}  and  [a\}  are  equal  when,  and  only  when,
{a.}  II  {«;}.

Proof.  —  For  the  sake  of  shortness  we  put
Lim a^,  =  /3, Lim a'^  =  y. We will first suppose

that  {a^  II  {a'4  ;  then  we  assert  that  /3  =  y.  For
if  /3  were  not  equal  to  y,  one  of  these  two  numbers
would  have  to  be  the  smaller.  Suppose  that  /8<y.
From  a  certain  v  onwards  we  would  have  a'v>/3
(§  14),  and  consequently,  by  (11),  from  a  certain
/x  onwards  we  would  have  a^>/5.  But  this  is
impossible because /3=Lim  a^. Thus for all ^'s

V

we  have  a^</3.

If,  inversely,  we  suppose  that  /3  =  y,  then,  because
oiv<y^  we  must  conclude  that,  from  a  certain  X
onwards,  a\>a^,  and,  because  a\<l3,  we  must
conclude  that,  from  a  certain  ^  onwards,  afj^>  a\.
That  is  to  say,  {aj  ||  {a\].

E.  If  a  is  any  number  of  the  second  number-
class  and  vq  any  finite  ordinal  number,  we  have
j/^-|-a  =  a,  and  consequently  also  a  —  VQ  =  a.

Proof. — We  will  first  of  all  convince  ourselves  of
the  correctness  of  the  theorem  when  a  =  no.  We
have

^0  =  Uv  <^2' • • •  <r  J'

1 64 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE  THEORY
and  consequently

But  if  a>a),  we  have

a  =  CO  +  (a  —  w),

i/Q  +  a  =  (I'o  +  w)  +  («  ""  w)  =  ^  +  («  ~  ^^  =  «•
F. If  j/Q is any  finite ordinal number,  we have

I/q . ft)  = ftj.

Ptoof, — In  order  to  obtain  an  aggregate  of  the
type  i/Q .  o)  we  have  to  substitute  for  the  single
elements  /,  of  the  aggregate  (/i,  Z^,  ...,/„...)
aggregates  {g,^  i,  ^v,  2>  •  •  •  >  gv,  v)  of  the  type  v^.  We
thus  obtain  the  aggregate

(^1. 1'  ^1, 2)  •  •  -5  S\,  V  ^2.  i»  •  •  • '  ^2,  "o'  •  •  • '  «^*'.  1'

which  is obviously  similar  to  the  aggregate  {/,}.
Consequently

I/q  .  0)  =  ft).

The  same  result  is  obtained  more  shortly  as  follows.
By  (24)  of  §  14  we  have,  since  ft)=Lim  j/,

1/q  0)=  Lim  j^Q  I/.
On  the  other  hand,

and  consequently

Lim  j/Qy=Lim  t/  =  ft)  ;
1/  I'

so  that

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 165

[224] G. We  have  always

(a  +  ^0)0)  =  aw,

where a  is  a  number  of the  second  number-class
d  i/q  a  number  of  1
Proof. — We  have

and  Vq  a  number  of  the  first  number-class.

Lim  i/  =  ft).

V

By  (24)  of  §  14  we  have,  consequently,

(a  +  i/o)a)  =  Lim  {a-\-v^v.

But

I  2  V

(a4-i/o>= (a  +  i/o)  +  («  +  »'o)+  •  •  •  +(«  +  t^o)
I  2  v—l

=  a  +  (^^o  +  «)  +  K  +  «)  •  •  •  (t^o  +  «)  +  ^'o
I 2  1/

=  a  +  a+...+a  +  i/o

=  aj/  +  i/q.

Now  we  have,  as  is  easy  to  see,

{av\-VQ}  II  {av},
and  consequently

Lim  (a  +  i^o)i/=  Lim  (ai^  +  i/o)  =  Lim  a»/  =  aaj.

V  V  V

H.  If  a  is  any  number  of  the  second  number-
class,  then  the  totality  {a]  of  numbers  a  of  the
first  and  second  number-classes  which  are  less  than
a  form,  in  their  order  of  magnitude,  a  well-ordered
aggregate  of  type  a.

1 66 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

Proof. — Let  F  be  a  well-ordered  aggregate  such
that  F  =  a,  and  let/^  be  the  lowest  element  of  F.  If
a  is  any  ordinal  number  which  is  less  than  a,  then,
by  §  14,  there  is  a  definite  segment  A'  of  F  such
that  _

A'  =  a,

and  inversely  every  segment  A'  determines  by  its
type  h!  =  0!  a  number  a  <a  of  the  first  or  second

number-class.  For,  since  F  =  ^?Q,  A'  can  only  be
either  a  finite  cardinal  number  or  ^q.  The  segment
A'  is  determined  by  an  element/' >^/i  of  F,  and
inversely  every  element/'  >-/i  of  F  determines  a
segment  A'  of  F.  If/'  and/"  are  two  elements  of
F  which  follow  /  in  rank,  A'  and  A"  are  the
segments  of  F  determined  by  them,  a  and  a'  are
their  ordinal  types,  and,  say/'  -</",  then,  by  §  13,
A'<A"  and  consequently  a' <  a".  [225]  If,  then,
we  put  F  =  (/,  F'),  we  obtain,  when  we  make  the
element/'  of  F'  correspond  to  the  element  a  of  {a'},
an  imaging  of  these  two  aggregates. Thus  we  have

R}^F'.

ButF'  =  a— I,  and,  by  theorem  E,  a— i=a.  Con-
sequently

{a)=a.

Since  a  =  «o,  we  also  have  {a'}  =  t^o;  thus  we  have
the  theorems  :

I. The aggregate {a'} of numbers a of the
first  and  second  number-classes  which  are  smaller

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 167

than  a  number  a  of  the second number-class  has
the  cardinal  number  j^^.

K.  Every  number  a  of  the  second  number-class
is  either  such  that  {a)  it  arises  out  of  the  next
smaller  number  a.^  by  the  addition  of  i  :

or  {ii)  there  is  a  fundamental  series  {a^  of  numbers
of  the  first  or  second  number-class  such  that

a  —  Lim  a^.

V

Proof. — Let  a  =  F.  If  F  has  an  element  g  which
is  highest  in  rank,  we  have  F  =  (A,  g),  where  A  is
the  segment  of  F  which  is  determined  by  g.  We
have  then  the  first  case,  namely,

a  =  A-f  i=a_iH-  I.

There exists, therefore, a next smaller number
which  is  that  called  %.

But  if  F  has  no  highest  element,  consider  the
totality  [a]  of  numbers  of  the  first  and  second
number-classes  which  are  smaller  than  a.  By
theorem  H,  the  aggregate  {a'},  arranged  in  order  of
magnitude,  is  similar  to  the  aggregate  F  ;  among
the  numbers  d,  consequently,  none  is  greatest.  By
theorem  I,  the  aggregate  {a\  can  be  brought  into
the  form  {ay\  of  a  simply  infinite  series.  If  we  set
out  from  a'l,  the  next  following  elements  ai^  a'3,  .  .  .
in  this  order,  which  is  different  from  the  order  of
magnitude,  will,  in  general,  be  smaller  than  a^  ;
but in every case, in the further course of the

1 68 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

process,  terms  will  occur  which  are  greater  than  a'^  ;

for a'l cannot be greater than all other terms,

because among the numbers {a'^} there is no

greatest. Let  that  number  a^  which  has  the  least

index  of  those  greater  than  a^  be  a'p. Similarly,

let  a  p  be  that  number  of  the  series  {a'^}  which  has  the

least  index  of  those  which  are  greater  than  a  ^ . By

proceeding  in  this  way,  we  get  ani  infinite  series  of

increasing  numbers,  a  fundamental  series  in  fact,

/ft  I

a  1,  Op^,  Qp^,  .  .  .,  Op^,  .  .  .

[226] We  have

I  <  /)2  <  Pa  <  •  •  '  <pv<  pv+i .  .  . ,
a\  <  a'p^  <  ap^  <  .  .  .  <  a^^  <  Up^^^  .  .  . ,

a\<ap^ always  if /ui<p,;

and  since  obviously  v  ^  p^,,  we  always  have

a,  <  a'p^.

Hence  we  see  that  every  number  a'^,  and  conse-
quently every  number  a  <a,  is  exceeded  by  numbers
a'p  for  sufficiently  great  values  of  v.  But  a  is  the
number  which,  in  respect  of  magnitude,  immediately
follows  all  the  numbers  a\  and  consequently  is  also
the  next  greater  number  with  respect  to  all  ap  .  If,
therefore,  we  put  a\  =  a-^,  Op^^^  =  «(,+!,  we  have

a=  Lim  a^.

V

From the theorems  B,  C,  .  .  .,  K  it is evident
that  the  numbers  of  the  second  number-class  result

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 169

from  smaller  numbers  in  two  ways.  Some  numbers,
which  we  call  "numbers  of  the  first  kind  {Art),''  are
got  from  a  next  smaller  number  a_i  by  addition  of  1
according  to  the  formula

a  =  a-i+  I  ;

The  other  numbers,  which  we  call  ' '  numbers  of  the
second  kind,"  are  such  that  for  any  one  of  them
there  is  not  a  next  smaller  number  a_i,  but  they
arise  from  fundamental  series  [a^]  as  limiting
numbers  according  to  the  formula

a=  Lim  a^.

V

Here  a  is  the  number  which  follows  next  in  order
of  magnitude  to  all  the  numbers  a^.

We  call  these  two  ways  in  which  greater  numbers
proceed  out  of  smaller  ones  ' '  the  first  and  the
second  principle  of  generation  of  numbers  of  the
second  number-class."*

§  16

The  Power  of  the  Second  Number- Class  is  equal
to  the  Second  Greatest  Transfinite  Cardinal
Number  Aleph-One

Before  we  turn  to  the  more  detailed  considera-
tions in  the  following  paragraphs  of  the  numbers  of
the  second  number-class  and  of  the  laws  which
rule  them, we  will  answ^er  the  question  as  to  the

*  [Cf.  Section  VII  of  the  Introduction,]

I/O THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

cardinal  number  which  is  possessed  by  the  aggregate
Z(h?o)={a}  of  all  these  numbers.

[227]  A.  The  totality  {a}  of  all  numbers  a  of
the  second  number-class  forms,  when  arranged  in
order  of  magnitude, a  well-ordered  aggregate.

Proof. — If  we  denote  by  A„  the  totality  of
numbers  of  the  second  number-class  which  are
smaller  than  a  given  number  a,  arranged  in  order
of  magnitude,  then  A„  is  a  well-ordered  aggregate
of  type  a  — o).  This  results  from  theorem  H  of  §  14.
The  aggregate  of  numbers  d  of  the  first  and  second
number-class  which  was  there  denoted  by  {a'},  is
compounded  out  of  {v]  and  A<^,  so  that

Thus
and  since
we  have

{a1  =  ({.},  A  J.
{7}  =  M  +  A,;

A„  =  a  —  w.

Let  J  be  any  part  of  {«}  such  that  there  are
numbers  in  {a}  which  are  greater  than  all  the
numbers  of  J.  Let,  say,  a  be  one  of  these  numbers.
Then  J  is  also  a  part  of  A^^+i,  and  indeed  such  a
part  that  at  least  the  number  a  of  A^^+i  is  greater
than  all  the  numbers  of  J.  Since  A^^+i  is  a  well-
ordered  aggregate,  by  §  12  a  number  d  of  A^^+i,
and  therefore  also  of  {a},  must  follow  next  to  all
the  numbers  of  J. Thus  the  condition  II  of  §  12  is

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 171

fulfilled  in  the  case  of  {a}  ;  the  condition 1 of  § 12
is  also  fulfilled  because  {a}  has  the  least  number  co.

Now,  if  we  apply  to  the  well-ordered  aggregate
{a}  the  theorems  A  and  C  of  §  12,  we  get  the
following  theorems  :

B.  Every  totality  of  different  numbers  of  the  first
and  second  number-classes  has  a  least  number.

C.  Every  totality  of  different  numbers  of  the  first
and  second  number-classes  arranged  in  their  order  of
magnitude  forms  a  well-ordered  aggregate.

We  will  now  show  that  the  power  of  the  second
number-class  is  different  from  that  of  the  first,  which

is  No-

D.  The  power  of  the  totality  {a}  of  all  numbers
a  of  the  second  number-class  is  not  equal  to  ^^q.

Proof. — If  {a}  were  equal  to  j^q,  we  could  bring
the  totality  {a}  into  the  form  of  a  simply  infinite
series

Vp  y2>  •  •  •>  y.^.  •  •  •

such  that  {y^}  would  represent  the  totality  of
numbers  of  the  second  [228]  number-class  in  an
order  which  is  different  from  the  order  of  magni-
tude, and  {y^}  would  contain,  like  {a},  no  greatest
number.

Starting  from  y^,  let  y^  be  the  term  of  the  series
which  has  the  least  index  of  those  greater  than  y^,
yp  the  term  which  has  the  least  index  of  those
greater  than  y^,  and  so  on.  We  get  an  infinite
series  of  increasing  numbers,

yi>  yp>  •  •  •'  ypv'  •  •  •>

1/2 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY
such  that

yi<yp.<yp.r  •  •  <rp„<rp,+i<  •  •  •>
r^  ^  yp,-

By  theorem  C  of  §  15,  there  would  be  a  definite
number  S  of  the  second  number-class,  namely,

^  =  Limy,^,

V

which  is  greater  than  all  numbers  y^  . Consequently

we  would  have

S>y.

for  every  v.  But  {y^}  contains  all  numbers  of  the
second  number-class,  and  consequently  also  the
number  S  ;  thus  we  would  have,  for  a  definite  v^,

^=yv

which  equation  is  inconsistent  with  the  relation
^  >  y^  .  The  supposition  {a}  =  t^o  consequently  leads
to  a  contradiction.

E.  Any  totality  {/3}  of  different  numbers  ^  of
the  second  number-class  has,  if  it  is  infinite,  either
the  cardinal  number  «(,  or  the  cardinal  number  {a}
of  the  second  number-class.

Proof. — The  aggregate  {^},  when  arranged  in  its
order  of  magnitude,  is,  since  it  is  a  part  of  the  well-
ordered  aggregate  {a},  by  theorem  O  of  §  13,
similar  either  to  a  segment  Aa  ,  which  is  the  totality

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 173

of  all  numbers  of  the  same  number-class  which  are
less  than  a©,  arranged  in  their  order  of  magnitude,
or  to  the  totality  {a}  itself.  As  was  shown  in  the
proof  of  theorem  A,  we  have

Thus  we  have  either  {^)—a^  —  w  or {/3}  =  {a},  and

consequently  {^}  is  either  equal  to  Qq  — w  or  {a).
But  oq  — ft)  is  either  a  finite  cardinal  number  or  is
equal  to  «o  (theorem  I  of  §  15).  The  first  case  is
here  excluded  because  {/3}  is  supposed  to  be  an
infinite  aggregate.  Thus  the  cardinal  number  {^}
is  either  equal  to  j^q  or  {a}.

F.  The  power  of  the  second  number-class  {a}  is
the  second  greatest  transfinite  cardinal  number
Aleph-one.

[229] Proof. — There is no cardinal number a

which  is  greater  than  n^  and  less  than  {a}.  For  if
not,  there  would  have  to  be,  by  §  2,  an  infinite  part

{/3}  of  {a}  such  that  {/3}=a.  But  by  the  theorem
E  just  proved,  the  part  {/3}  has  either  the  cardinal

number  js^q  or  the  cardinal  number  {a}.  Thus  the
cardinal  number  {a\  is  necessarily  the  cardinal
number  which  immediately  follows  «o  in  magnitude  ;
we  call  this  new  cardinal  number  «j.

In  the  second  number-class  Z(«o)  we  possess,
consequently,  the  natural  representative  for  the
second  greatest  transfinite  cardinal  number  Aleph-
one.

174 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

%  17

The  Numbers  of  the  Form  a)%  +  a)'""\+  .  .  .  +j/^.

It  is  convenient  to  make  ourselves  familiar,  in  the
first  place,  with  those  numbers  of  Z({^o)  which  are
whole  algebraic  functions  of  finite  degree  of  w.
Every  such  number  can  be  brought — and  brought
in  only  one  way — into  the  form

(I)  0  =  a,%  +  a)'^-V+  .  .  . +.^,

where  ;x,  v^  are  finite  and  different  from  zero, but
j^i,  1^2'  •  •  •>  '^i'*  "^^y  ^^  zero. This  rests  on  the  fact

4,  we

and,  by  theorem  E  of  §  15,

Thus,  in  an  aggregate  of  the  form

.  .  .  +w'^V  +  w^i/+  .  .  .,

all  those  terms  which  are  followed  towards  the  right
by  terms  of  higher  degree  in  «  may  be  omitted.
This  method  may  be  continued  until  the  form  given
in  (i)  is  reached. We  will  also  emphasize  that

that

(2)

of'v  -\r

Iffv  =  61)'

V,

if  m'</x

and

i/>0,  />o.

For,

by  (8)

of

have

iJd^  V

+  ^^^1/  =

i/{v^.

^^-^v\

(3)  w'^J/  +  ft)V  =  a)'^(t/  +  0-

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 175

Compare,  now,  the  number  0  with  a  number  \p-  of
the  same  kind:

(4)  V^  =  coVo  +  ^')^"Vi+  •  •  •  +P^'

If  yu  and  X  are  different  and,  say,  iu<Xy  we  have  by
(2)  0  +  \^  =  -v/r,  and  therefore  (p<\fr.

[230]  If  jUL  =  \,  vq,  and  Pq  are  different,  and,  say,
i'o<Poy  ^^^  h^^'^  t)y  (2)

0  +  (^Xpo-^o)  +  ^^"Vi+  •  •  •  +M  =  \^i
and  therefore

If,  finally,

/x  =  X, V(i  =  Po,  I'l  —  Pv  •  '  •  ^<T-l  =  PcT-l^ (rKfXy

but i;^ is different from p^  and, say, v^<p„, we
have  by  (2)

and  therefore  again

Thus,  we  see  that  only  in  the  case  of  complete
identity  of  the  expressions  ^  and  yp-  can  the  numbers
represented  by  them  be  equal.

The  addition  of  0  and  \/r  leads  to  the  following
result  :

{a)  If  ^<A,  then,  as  we  have  remarked  above,

{b)  If  ^  =  X,  then  we  have

176 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY
{c)  \i  fx>\  we  have

In  order  to  carry  out  the  multiplication  of  0  and  i/r,
we  remark  that,  if  p  is  a  finite  number  which  is
different  from  zero,  we  have  the  formula  :

(5)  ^yo  =  a)%/D  +  w'^-Vi+  ...  +1/^.

It  easily  results  from  the  carrying  out  of  the  sum
consisting  of  p  terms  0  +  ^+  .  .  .  +0.  By  means
of  the  repeated  application  of  the  theorem  G  of
§  15  we  get,  further,  remembering  the  theorem  F
of  §15,

(6)  0CO  =  ft)'^+S

and  consequently  also .

(7)  9^0)^  =  60^  +  ^.

By  the  distributive  law,  numbered  (8)  of  §  14,
we  have

0\/^  =  0a)^iOo  +  0w^'Vi+  •  •  •  +V^^Px-i  +  0/3a.

Thus  the  formulae  (4),  (5),  and  (7)  give  the  following
result  :

{a)  if  p;^  =  o,  we  have

{b)  If  Pa  is  not  equal  to  zero,  we  have

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 177

[231]  We  arrive  at  a  remarkable  resolution  of
the  numbers  0  in  the  following  manner. Let

(8.)  0  =  a)%  +  a)'^'/ci+  .  .  . -^(*r--K,,

where

and  /Cq,  /ci,  .  .  .,  act  3-re  finite  numbers  which  are
different  from  zero. Then  we  have

^  =  (co'^'/ci  +  w^^/ca  +  .  .  .  +  ur-^K,){s^^  -  '^•/f 0  +  I ).

By  the  repeated  application  of  this  formula  we  get

0  =  fo'^r/c^(w'"T-l-MT/f^_^+  l)(ft)'^T-2-'^T_l^^_2+  l). . .

(co'^-'^'/Co+l).
But,  now,

a)\+  I  =(co^+  l)/c,

if  /c  is  a  finite  number  which  is  different  from  zero ;
so  that :

. . . (ft)'^-'^'+I>o.

The  factors  0)^+  i  which  occur  here  are  all  irre-
soluble,  and  a  number  0  can  be  represented  in  this
product-form  in  only  one  way.  If  fXj  —  o^  then  0
is  of  the  first  kind,  in  all  other  cases  it  is  of  the
second  kind.

The  apparent  deviation  of  the  formulae  of  this
paragraph  from  those  which  were  given  in  Math.
Ann.,  vol.  xxi,  p.  585  (or  Grundlagen,  p.  41),  is
merely  a  consequence  of  the  different  writing  of  the
product  of two numbers  : we  now  put  the  multi-

12

178 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

plicand on the left and the multipHcator  on  the
right,  but  then  we  put  them  in  the  contrary  way.

§i8

The  Power  *  y*  in  the  Domain  of  the  Second
Number- Class

Let  ^  be  a  variable  whose  domain  consists  of  the
numbers  of  the  first  and  second  number-classes  in-
cluding zero.  Let  y  and  (5  be  two  constants  belong-
ing to  the  same  domain,  and  let

^>0, y>l.
We  can  then  assert  the  following  theorem  :

A.  There  is  one  wholly  determined  one-valued
function /(^)  of  the  variable  ^  such  that  :

{a)  /(o)  =  ^.

{b)  \i  ^'  and  ^'  are  any  two  values  of  ^,  and  if

then

/(f)</(f)-

[232] ic)  For  every  value  of  ^  we  have

/(#+i)=/(ar-

{d)  If  {^^}  is  any  fundamental  series,  then  {/(f^)}
is  one  also,  and  if  we  have

^=Lim  ^„

V

then

/(f)  =  Lini/(,^„).

V

*  [Here  obviously  it  is  Potenz  and  not  MdchHgkeit.'\

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 179

Proof. — By  {a)  and  {c),  we  have

/(l)  =  <5y, f{2)  =  Syy, f{z)  =  Syyy, .  .  .,
and,  because  5>0  and  y>  i,  we  have

/(l)</(2)</(3)<  .  .  .  </(„)</(.+  I)<  .  .  .

Thus  the  function  f{^)  is  wholly  determined  for  the
domain  $<w.  Let  us  now  suppose  that  the  theorem
is  valid  for  all  values  of  f  which  are  less  than  a,
where  a  is  any  number  of  the  second  number-class,
then  it  is  also  vaUd  for  f  <a.  For  if  a  is  of  the
first  kind,  we  have  from  {c)  :

/(a)=/(a-Oy>/(a.i);

SO  that  the  conditions  {b),  (c),  and  (d)  are  satisfied
for  f^a.  But  if  a  is  of  the  second  kind  and  {a^}  is
a  fundamental  series  such  that Lim  a^  =  a,  then  it

follows  from  (d)  that  also  {/(ay)]  is  a  fundamental
series, and  from  (d)  that /(a)  =  Lim /(a^). If  we

take  another  fundamental  series  {a^}  such  that
Lim  a\,  =  a, then, because of  (d), the two funda-

mental  series  {/(a,,)}  and  {/(a\)}  are  coherent,  and
thus  also /(a)  =  Lim /(a'„). The value  of /(«)  is,

consequently,  uniquely  determined  in  this  case  also.
If  a'  is  any  number  less  than  a,  we  easily  convince
ourselves  that  /(a) < /(a).  The  conditions  (d),  (c)y
and  (d)  are  also  satisfied  for  ^<'a.  Hence  follows
the  validity  of  the  theorem /<?r  all  values  of  ^.  For
if  there  were  exceptional  values  of  f  for  which  it
did  not  hold,  then, by  theorem B  of  §  16,  one  of

i8o THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

them,  which  we  will  call  a,  would  have  to  be  the
least.  Then  the  theorem  would  be  valid  for  f<a,
but  not  for  ^^a,  and  this  would  be  in  contradiction
with  what  we  have  proved.  Thus  there  is  for  the
whole  domain  of  f  one  and  only  one  function  /(f)
which  satisfies  the  conditions  {a)  to  {d).

[233]  If  we  attribute  to  the  constant  ^  the  value  i
and  then  denote  the  function  f{£)  by

we  can  formulate  the  following  theorem  :

B.  If  y  is  any  constant  greater  than  i  Which
belongs  to  the  first  or  second  number-class,  there
is  a  wholly  definite  function  y^  of  f  such  that  :

{a)  y«=i;

W  If  f  <rthen  y^'<y^";
{c)  For  every  value  of  f  we  have  y^+i  =  y^y  ;
id)  If {f^} is a fundamental series, then {y^"}
is such a series, and  we have, if  f=Lim  f^, the

V

equation

y^  =  Lim  y^".

V

We  can  also  assert  the  theorem  :

C.  If /(f)  is  the  function  of  f  which  is  characterized
in  theorem  A,  we  have

/(f) =V-

Proof. — If  we  pay  attention  to  (24)  of  §  14,
we  easily  convince  ourselves  that  the  function  ^y^
satisfies,  not  only  the  conditions  {a),  {b),  and  {c)
of  theorem  A, but also the condition {d)  of  this

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS i8i

theorem. On account of the uniqueness of  the
function /(f),  it  must  therefore  be  identical  with  ^y^.
D. If  a  and  ^  are  any  two  numbers  of  the  first
or  second  number-class,  including  zero,  we  have

y»+^  =  y*y^.

Proof.— W& consider the function 0(f)  =  y«+^.
Paying  attention  to  the  fact  that,  by  formula  (23)

of  §  14,

Lim  (a  +  f,)  =  a  +  Lim  f„

V  V

we  recognize  that  ^(f)  satisfies  the  following  four
conditions  :

{a)  0(0)  =  y*;

{b)  Iff  <r,  then  0(f)  <0(r);

{c)  For  every  value  of  f  we  have  V'(f  +  0  =  <^(f  )y  5

(d)  If {f } is a fundamental series such that
Lim  f  =  f ,  we  have

0(f)  =  Lim  0(f).

V

By  theorem  C  we  have,  when  we  put  (5  =  y^

0(a  =  yy-

If  we  put  f  =  ^  in  this,  we  have

E. If  a  and  /3  are  any  two  numbers  of  the  first  or
second  number-class,  including  zero,  we  have

[234] Proof. — Let us consider the function
■^(f)  =  y«f and remark that, by  (24) of  § 14, we

1 82 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY
always have Lim  af^  =  a  Lim  ^^, then  we can, by

V  V

theorem  D,  assert  the  following  :

{a)  iA(o)=i  ;

ib)  Iff<r,  thenV^(0<V^(r);

ic)  For  every  value  of  f  we  have  ^^(f  +  i )  =  V^(f)y*  ;

{d)  If  {^^}  is  a  fundamental  series,  then  {V^(^v)}  is
also  such  a  series,  and  we  have, if  ^=Lim^j,,  the

V

equation  '\/r(^)  =  Lim  ■^{^^.

V

Thus,  by  theorem  C,  if  we  substitute  in  it  i  for  (5
and  y*  for  y,

On  the  magnitude  of  y^  in  comparison  with  ^  we
can  assert  the  following  theorem  :

F. If  y  >  I,  we  have,  for  every  value  of  f,

Proof. — In  the  cases  ^  =  o  and  ^=  I  the  theorem
is  immediately  evident.  We  now  show  that,  if  it
holds  for  all  values  of  ^  which  are  smaller  than  a
given  number  a>  I,  it  also  holds  for  ^=a.

If  a  is  of  the  first  kind,  we  have,  by  supposition,

a_i<y«-S
and  consequently

«-iy  <  y''"'y  =  r''-

Hence

y'^>a_i  +  a_i(y-l).

Since  both  a_^  and  y—  i  are  at  least  equal  to  i,  and
a_i+  I  =a,  we  have

y"  >  a.

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 183

If,  on  the  other  hand,  a  is  of  the  second  kind  and
a  =  Lim  a„,

then,  because  a^,<a,  we  have  by  supposition

Consequently

Lim  a„  S.  Lim  y"",

V  V

that  is  to  say,

a  <  y*.

If,  now,  there  were  values  of  ^  for  which

one  of  them,  by  theorem  B  of  §  16,  would  have  to
be  the  least.  If  this  number  is  denoted  by  a,  we
would  have, for  ^<a,

[235]  i^y';

but

a>y%

which  contradicts  what  we  have  proved  above.
Thus  we  have  for  all  values  of  ^

§  19

The  Normal  Form  of  the  Numbers  of  the

Second  Number- Class

Let  a  be  any  number  of  the  second  number-class.
The power  00^  will  be,  for  sufficiently  great  values

1 84 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

of  ^,  greater  than  a.  By  theorem  F  of  §  i8,  this  is
always  the  case  for  f  >a  ;  but  in  general  it  will  also
happen  for  smaller  values  of  f.

By  theorem  B  of  §  i6,  there  must  be,  among  the
values  of  ^  for  which

d)^>  a,

one  which  is  the  least.  We  will  denote  it  by  /3,  and
we  easily  convince  ourselves  that  it  cannot  be  a
number  of  the  second  kind. If,  indeed,  we  had

/5  =  Lim  /5j,,

V

we  would  have,  since  ^^  <  /3,

CO  "  <  a,

and  consequently

Lim  0)^'  ^  a.

V

Thus  we  would  have

o)^  <  a,
whereas  we  have

Therefore  /3  is  of  the  first  kind.  We  denote  /3_i
by  Oq,  so  that  ^  =  ao+i,  and  consequently  can
assert  that  there  is  a  wholly  determined  number  a^
of  the  first  or  second  number-class  which  satisfies
the  two  conditions  :

(l)  (jo^<^a, o)'^o)>a.

From  the  second  condition  we  conclude  that

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 185

does  not  hold  for  all  finite  values  of  v,  for  if  it  did
we  would  have

Lim  a)%  =  co"«a)  <  a.

V

The  least  finite  number  v  for  which
{£)  ^v>  a

will  be  denoted  hy  kq-\-i.  Because  of  (i),  we  have
/Co  >  o.

[236] There  is, therefore, a  wholly  determined
number  k^  of  the  first  number-class  such  that

(2)  a)''oA:o< a, a)%(/Co  +  l)  >  a.
If  we  put  a  — a)%/co  =  a',  we  have

(3)  a  =  a)%/Co  +  a'
and

(4)  0<a'<a)%, 0</fo<a).

But  a  can  be  represented  in  the  form  (3)  under  the
conditions  (4)  in  only  a  single  way.  For  from  (3)
and  (4)  follow  inversely  the  conditions  (2)  and  thence
the  conditions  (i).  But  only  the  number  ao=|8_i
satisfies  the  conditions  (i),  and  by  the  conditions
(2)  the  finite  number  /Cq  is  uniquely  determined.
From  (i)  and  (4)  follows,  by  paying  attention  to
theorem  F  of  §  18,  that

a  <a, Oo^a.

Thus  we  can  assert  the  following  theorem  :

A. Every  number  a  of  the  second  number-class

1 86 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

can  be  brought,  and  brought  in  only  one  way,  into
the  form

a  =  w^o/Cq  +  a  ,
where

O  <.a'  <  co%, o  <  /Co  <  Wj

and  a is  always  smaller  than  a,  but  a^  is smaller
than  or  equal  to  a.

If  a  is  a  number  of  the  second  number-class,  we
can  apply  theorem  A  to  it,  and  we  have

(5)  a' =  coVi  +  a'',

where

0<^a <i>f-h 0<Ki<(j»,
and

ai  <  Oq, a^  <  a.

In  general  we  get  a  further  sequence  of  analogous
equations  :

(6)  a'  =  of-'^K2  +  a^'j

(7)  a'''  =  a)'^3/c3  +  a^\

But  this  sequence  cannot  be  infinite,  but  must
necessarily  break  off.  For  the  numbers  a,  a,  a\  .  .  .
decrease  in  magnitude  :

a>  a>  a'>  a"  .  .  .

If  a  series  of  decreasing  transfinite  numbers  were
infinite,  then  no  term  would  be  the  least  ;  and  this
is  impossible  by  theorem  B  of  §  i6.  Consequently
we  must  have,  for  a  certain  finite  numerical  value  r.

«^^+^;=o-

OF  TRANSFINITR  NUMBERS 187

[237]  If  we  now  connect  the  equations  (3),  (5),
(6),  and  (7)  with  one  another,  we  get  the  theorem  :

B.  Every  number  a  of  the  second  number-class
can  be  represented,  and  represented  in  only  one
way,  in  the  form

where  Oq,  ai  ,  .  .  .  a^  are  numbers  of  the  first  or
second  number-class,  such  that  :

a^  >  Oj  >  ag  >  .  .  .  >  ctj  ^  O,

while  /Co,  /ci,  .  .  .  /c^,  r+i  are  numbers  of  the  first
number-class  which  are  different  from  zero.

The  form  of  numbers  of  the  second  number-class
which  is  here  shown  will  be  called  their  ' '  normal
form "  ;  a^  is  called  the  ' '  degree "  and  a^  the
''exponent"  of  a.  For  t  =  o,  degree  and  exponent
are  equal  to  one  another.

According  as  the  exponent  a^  is  equal  to  or  greater
than  zero,  a  is  a  number  of  the  first  or  second  kind.

Let  us  take  another  number  ^  in  the  normal
form  :

(8)  ^  =  a)^«Xo  +  a)^'Xi+  .  •  . +co^'^Xa.
The  formulae  :

(9)  w'^'/c'  -I-  w'^'/c  =  w'^X'c'  +  /c),

(10)  ■ a)*"'/ +  co*V' =  w'^V, a  <d\

where  /c,  k\  k'  here  denote  finite  numbers,  serve
both for the  comparison  of  a  with  ^  and  for  the

1 88 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

carrying  out  of  their  sum  and  difference. Tiiese  are
generalizations  of  the  formulae  (2)  and  (3)  of  §  17.

For  the  formation  of  the  product  a^,  the  following
formulae  come  into  consideration  :

(11) aX  =  (o'^^X  +  w-^'/ci  +  .  .  . +w*X, 0<X<
(12)

Od  ,

=  /.>«o+l

aa)=  o)

(13)  aw^' =  a)'^o+^; /3'>0.

The  exponentiation  a^  can  be  easily  carried  out
on  the  basis  of  the  following  formulae  :

(14)  a^  =  a)*o%+  .  .  ., 0<X<a).

The  terms  not  written  on  the  right  have  a  lower
degree  than  the  first.  Hence  follows  readily  that
the  fundamental  series  {a^}  and  {co'"^^}  are  coherent,
so  that

(15)  a"  =  0)^0-, ao>0.

Thus,  in  consequence  of  theorem  E  of  §  18,  we
have  :

(16)  a"^'  =  w"''"^ ao>0, ^'>0.

By  the  help  of  these  formulae  we  can  prove  the
following  theorems  :

[238]  C.  If  the  first  terms  w^o/cq,  w^oXq  of  the
normal  forms  of  the  two  numbers  a  and  /3  are  not
equal,  then  a  is  less  or  greater  than  /3  according  as
a)«o/c-Q  is  less  or  greater  than  co^^Xq. But  if  we  have

and  if  w'^'^+Vp+i  is  less  or  greater  than  w^p-^\+i,  then
a  is  correspondingly  less  or  greater  than  ^.

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 189

D.  If  the  degree  a^  of  a  is  less  than  the  degree
i8o  of  ^,  we  have

a  +  /3  =  /3.
If  ao  =  /5o,  then

a  +  /3  =  a)^o(;,^  +  Xo)  +  a)^*Xi+  .  .  . +oAA,.
But  if

then

a  +  ^  =  w'^/CoH-  .  .  .  +a)"''/Cp  +  a)^«Xo  +  ^'^i+  •  •  •  +^"X^-

E.  If  ^  is  of  the  second  kind  (/3^>o),  then
a/3  =  (o'^o+^oXQ  +  a)«o+^^Xi+  .  .  . +  w'^o+^-X^  =  w*o/3  ;

But  if /3  is  of  the  first  kind  (/3,  =  o),  then

a^  =  (o«o+^oX(,  +  a)«^^+^^Xi+  .  .  .+co'^'>+^'--iX^_i  +  oj'^*'/CoX^

4-  w'^'/ci  +  .  .  .  +  o/^/c^.

F.  If  /3  is  of  the  second  kind  (/3<^>o),  then

But  if  (3  is of  the first  kind  (^^  =  0), and indeed
8  =  ^'  +  Xo-,  where  (3'  is  of  the  second  kind,  we  have:

G.  Every  number  a  of  the  second  number-class
can  be  represented,  in  only  one  way,  in  the  product-
form  :

a  =  a)V(w^'+  l)Kr-lW'+  l)/Cr-2  • • • (o)^"  +  iK,

and  we  have

70  =  «T)  yi  =  ar-i  — aT5  y2  =  Wr-2  — «T-1,  .  .  •>yT  =  «o'~«i'

190 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

whilst  /cq,  /cj,  .  .  .  K^  have  the  same  denotation  as
in  the  normal  form.  The  factors  (0"^+!  are  all
irresoluble.

H.  Every  number  a  of  the  second  kind  which
belongs  to  the  second  number-class  can  be  repre-
sented, and  represented  in  only  one  way,  in  the
form

a  —  L'd'^a  i

where  yo>o  and  a  is  a  number  of  the  first  kind
which  belongs  to  the  first  or  second  number-class.

[239]  I.  In  order  that  two  numbers  a  and  ^  of
the  second  number-class  should  satisfy  the  relation

it  is  necessary  and  sufficient  that  they  should  have
the  form

a  =  yyw, /3  =  yv^

where  /x  and  v  are  numbers  of  the  first  number-class.
K. In order that two  numbers  a  and  ^  of  the
second number-class, which are  both  of the first
kind,  should  satisfy  the  relation

it  is  necessary  and  sufficient  that  they  should  have
the  form

where  ^  and  v  are  numbers  of  the  first  number-class.

In  order  to  exemplify  the  extent  of  the  normal

form  dealt  with  and  the  product-form  immediately

connected with it, of  the  numbers of  the  second

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 191

number-class,  the  proofs,  which  are  founded  on
them,  of  the  two  last  theorems,  I  and  K,  may  here
follow.

From  the  supposition

a  +  /3  =  /3  +  a

we  first  conclude  that  the  degree  oq  of  a  must  be
equal  to  the  degree  ^^  of  ^.  For  if,  say,  Qq  </3o,  we
would  have,  by  theorem  D,

a  +  ^  =  A
and  consequently

which  is  not  possible,  since,  by  (2)  of  §  14,

Thus  we  may  put

a  =  (jo^fA  +  a', |8  =  M^'ov  + 13',

where  the  degrees  of  the  numbers  a  and  /3'  are  less
than  ao,  and  ju  and  v  are  infinite  numbers  which  are
different  from  zero. Now,  by  theorem  D  we  have

a  +  P  =  w''ifjL  +  v)  +  ^\ P  +  a-=co'^(^  +  p)  +  a,

and  consequently

(^''Klii  + 1/)  +  /3'  =  co'^ifjL  + 1/)  +  a.

By  theorem  D  of  §  14  we  have  consequently

13' =  a.
Thus  we  have

a  =  (jo"-"/ul  -\-a, 13  =  iff--v  +  a\

192 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

[240]  and  if  we  put

uf-''  +  a'  =  7
we  have,  by  (11):

a  =  y/x, /5  =  yv.

Let  us  suppose,  on  the  other  hand,  that  a  and  ^  are
two  numbers  which  belong  to  the  second  number-
class,  are  of  the  first  kind,  and  satisfy  the  condition

and  we  suppose  that

We  will  imagine  both  numbers,  by  theorem  G,  in
their  product-form,  and  let

where  a  and  /3'  are  without  a  common  factor  (besides
i)  at  the  left  end. We  have  then

a>/3\
and

All  the  numbers  which  occur  here  and  farther  on
are  of  the  first  kind,  because  this  was  supposed  of
a  and  /3.

The  last  equation,  when  we  refer  to  theorem  G,
shows  that  a  and  /3'  cannot  be  both  transfinite,
because,  in  this  case,  there  would  be  a  common
factor  at  the  left  end.  Neither  can  they  be  both
finite  ;  for  then  S  would  be  transfinite,  and,  if  k  is
the  finite  factor  at  the  left  end  of  S,  we  would  have

OP  TRANSPINITE  NUMBERS 193
and  thus

Thus  there  remains  only  the  possibility  that

a  >o), P'  <  CO.
But  the  finite  number  /3'  must  be  t  :

because  otherwise  it  would  be  contained  as  part  in
the  finite  factor  at  the  left  end  of  «'.

We  arrive  at  the  result  that  /3  =  (5,  consequently

a  =  (3a  ,

where  a  is  a  number  belonging  to  the  second
number-class,  which  is  of  the  first  kind,  and  must
be  less  than  a  :

a  <a.

Between  a  and  ^  the  relation

afi  =  l3a
subsists.

[241]  Consequently  if  also  a>l3,  we  conclude  in
the  same  way  the  existence  of  a  transfinite  number
of  the  first  kind  a'  which  is  less  than  a  and  such  that

a=Pa\ a '13  = /3a'.

If  also  a'  is  greater  than  (3,  there  is  such  a  number
a"'  less  than  a\  such  that

a =pa , a p  =  /5a ,

and  so  on.  The  series  of  decreasing  numbers,  a,  a',
a\ a"\  .  .  ., must, by  theorem B of  § 16, break

\

i3

194 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

off. Thus, for  a  definite  finite  index  ^q,  we  must
have

(p.  <

a^'^o

/3.

If

we  have

the  theorem  K  would  then  be  proved,  and  we  would
have

But  if

then  we  put

and  have

Thus  there  is  also  a  finite  number  p^  such  that

In  general,  we  have  analogously  :

and  so  on.  The  series  of  decreasing  numbers  /3i,
/^a,  I3q,  .  .  .  also  must,  by  theorem  B  of  §  i6,  break
off. Thus  there  exists  a  finite  number  k  such  that

If  we  put
then

OF  TRANSFTNITR  NUMBERS 195

where  /x  and  v  are  numerator  and  denominator  of
the  continued  fraction:

+-
p.

[242]  § 20

The  e-Numbers  of  the  Second  Number- Class

The  degree  a©  of  a  number  a  is,  as  is  immediately
evident  from  the  normal  form  :

(1)  a  =  w'^o/Cq  +  (o*i/Ci  +  .  .  . , «(,  >  ai  >  .  .  . , 0<k„<w,

when  we  pay  attention  to  theorem  F  of  §  18,  never
greater  than  a  ;  but  it  is  a  question  whether  there
are  not  numbers  for  which  a^  =  a.  In  such  a  case
the  normal  form  of  a  would  reduce  to  the  first  term,
and  this  term  would  be  equal  to  w*,  that  is  to  say,
a  would  be  a  root  of  the  equation

(2)  a,^  =  f.

On  the  other  hand,  every  root  a  of  this  equation
would  have  the  normal  form  w" ;  its  degree  would
be  equal  to  itself.

The  numbers  of  the  second  number-class  which
are  equal  to  their  degree  coincide,  therefore,  with
the  roots  of  the  equation  (2).  It  is  our  problem  to
determine  these  roots  in  their  totality.  To  dis-
tinguish them  from  all  other  numbers  we  will  call
them  the  "  f-numbers  of  the  second  number-class."

196 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE  THEORY

That there are such e-numbers results from the
following  theorem  :

A.  If  y  is  any  number  of  the  first  or  second
number-class  which  does  not  satisfy  the  equation
(2),  it  determines  a  fundamental  series  {y}  by  means
of  the  equations

71  =  ^^ y2  =  w^S •  •  'J y^  =  w^''"S .  .  •
The  limit  Lim  y^  =  E(y)  of  this  fundamental  series

V

is  always  an  e-number.

Proof. — Since  y  is  not  an  e-number,  we  have
a)>'>y,  that  is  to  say,  7i>y.  Thus,  by  theorem  B
of  §  1 8,  we  have  also  w'^'i  >  w'>',  that  is  to  say,  y2>yi  ;
and  in  the  same  way  follows  that  y3>y2,  and  so
on.  The  series  {y^}  is  thus  a  fundamental  series.
We  denote  its  limit,  which  is  a  function  of  y,  by
E(y)  and  have  :

^E(v)  _  Lin^  ^v^^  Lin^  y^^^  —  E(y).

V  V

Consequently  E(y)  is  an  e-number.

B.  The  number  eo  =  E(i)  =  Lim  w^,,  where

V

is  the  least  of  all  the  e-numbers.

[243] Proof. — Let  e  be  any  e-number,  so  that

Since  e'>w,  we  have  w''>w'",  that  is  to  say,  e  >  w^.
Similarly  t/xo'*'',  that  is  to  say,  e'xo^,  and  so  on.
We  have  in  general

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 197

and  consequently

e'>.Lim  a)„,

that  is  to  say,

Thus  eo  =  E(i)  is  the  least  of  all  e-numbers.

C. If  e'  is  any  e-number, e"  is  the  next  greater
e-number,  and  y  is  any  number  which  lies  between

them  :

e' <  y  <  e',
then  E(y)  =  e".
Proof. — From

e'  <  y  <:  e'
follows

that  is  to  say,

e'  <  yi  <  e' .

Similarly  we  conclude

e'  <  ya  <  e",
and  so  on. We  have,  in  general,

e  <  y,,  <  e'',
and  thus

e'<E(y)<e".

By  theorem  A,  E(y)  is  an  e-number.  Since  e'  is
the  e-number  which  follows  e'  next  in  order  of  mag-
nitude, E(y)  cannot  be  less  than  e",  and  thus  we
must  have

E(y)  =  e".

Since  e'+i  is  not  an  e-number,  simpl}-  because  all
6-numbers,  as  follows  from  the  equation  of  definition

198 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

i  =  w^,  are  of  the  second  kind,  e -{-  i  is  certainly  less
than  e\  and  thus  we  have  the  following  theorem  :

D.  If  e'  is  any  e-number,  then  E(e'+  i)  is  the  next
greater  e-number.

To  the  least  e-number,  €q,  follows,  then,  the  next
greater  one:

ei  =  E(eo+i),

[244] to  this  the  next  greater  number  :

^2  =  E(6i+l),

and  so  on.  Quite  generally,  we  have  for  the
(1/+  i)th  e-number  in  order  of  magnitude  the  formula
of  recursion

(3)  e,  =  E(e,_i-|-l).

But  that  the  infinite  series

^0' ^1) • • • 6,., . . .

by  no  means  embraces  the  totality  of  e-numbers
results  from  the  following  theorem  :

E.  If e, e', e', ... is any infinite series of
e-numbers  such  that

e<e'<e".  .  .  e^^^  <  e^-^+i^  <  .  .  .,

then Lim e^''^ is an  e-number, and, in fact, the

I'
e-number  which  follows  next  in  order  of  magnitude
to  all  the  numbers  eH
Proof.—

Lim  eW  . ,)

(0  " =  Lim  w* =  Lim  e^''^.

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 199
That Lim  e^''^  is  the  e-number  which  follows  next

V

in  order  of  magnitude  to  all  the  numbers  e^"^  results
from  the  fact  that  Lim  e^"^ is the number of  the

second  number-class  which  follows  next  in  order  of
magnitude  to  all  the  numbers  e^^^

F.  The  totality  of  e-numbers  of  the  second
number-class  forms,  when  arranged  in  order  of
magnitude,  a  well-ordered  aggregate  of  the  type  Vt
of  the  second  number-class  in  its  order  of  magnitude,
and  has  thus  the  power  Aleph-one.

Proof. — The  totaHty  of  e-numbers  of  the  second
number-class,  when  arranged  in  their  order  of  magni-
tude, forms,  by  theorem  C  of  §  16,  a  well-ordered
aggregate  :

(4) €q,  e^,  .  .  .,  e^,,  .  .  .  €0,+!,  .  .  .  ea'  .  .  .,

whose  law  of  formation  is  expressed  in  the  theorems
D  and  E.  Now,  if  the  index  a  did  not  successively
take  all  the  numerical  values  of  the  second  number-
class,  there  would  be  a  least  number  a  which  it  did
not  reach.  But  this  would  contradict  the  theorem
D,  if  a  were  of  the  first  kind,  and  theorem  E,  if  a
were  of  the  second  kind.  Thus  a  takes  all  numerical
values  of  the  second  number-class.

If  we  denote  the  type  of  the  second  number-class
by  Q,  the  type  of  (4)  is

w  +  Q  =  w  +  o.)2  +  (C2-w-^).

[245] But  since  a)  +  a)^  =  w^,  we  have

w  +  il  =  il\

200 THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE THEORY

and  consequently

o) + n = Q = ^^^.

G.  If  e  is  any  e-number  and  a  is  any  number  of
the  first  or  second  number-class  which  is  less  than  e  :

a<e,

then  e  satisfies  the  three  equations  :

a  +  e  =  e, a^  —  e^ a^  —  e.

Proof. — If  ao  is  the  degree  of  a,  we  have  ao^a,  and
consequently,  because  of  a<e,  we  also  have  ao<e.
But  the  degree  of  e  =  w^  is  e;  thus  a  has  a  less
degree  than  e.  Consequently,  by  theorem  D  of
§  19,

and  thus

On  the other  hand, we  have, by  formula  (13)  of

§  19,

ae  =  ao)"  =  isf-^^^  —  co^  =  e,
and  thus

a^e  =  €.

Finally, paying attention to  the formula (16)  of

§19,

.H. If  a  is  any  number  of  the  second  number-class,
the  equation

''=i

has  no  other roots than  the  e-numbers  which  are
greater  than  a.

OF  TRANSFINITE  NUMBERS 201
Proof. — Let  /3  be  a  root  of  the  equation

af  =  |.
SO  that

Then,  in  the  first  place, from  this  formula  follows
that

On  the  other  hand,  /3  must  be  of  the  second  kind,
since,  if  not,  we  would  have

Thus  we  have,  by  theorem  F  of  §  19,
and  consequently

[246] By  theorem  F  of  §  19,  we  have
and  thus

But  /3  cannot  be  greater  than  ao/3  ;  consequently

ao/3  =  ^,
and  thus

Therefore  ^  is  an  e-number  which  is  greater  than  a.
Halle,  March  1897.

NOTES

In  a  sense  the  most  fundamental  advance  made  in
the  theoretical  arithmetic  of  finite  and  transfinite
numbers  is  the  purely  logical  definition  of  the
number-concept.  Whereas  Cantor  (see  pp.  74,
86,  112  above)  defined  "cardinal  number"  and
'*  ordinal  type"  as  general  concepts  which  arise  by
means  of  our  mental  activity,  that  is  to  say,  as
psychological  entities,  Gottlob  Frege  had,  in  his
Grundlageti  der  Arithmetik  of  1884,  defined  the
"  number  {Anzahl)  of  a  class  u  "  as  the  class  of  all
those  classes  which  are  equivalent  (in  the  sense  of
PP-  75)  S6  above)  to  u.  Frege  remarked  that  his
"  numbers  "  are  the  same  as  what  Cantor  (see  pp.
40,  74,  86  above)  had  called  "powers,"  and  that
there  was  no  reason  for  restricting  "numbers"  to
be  finite.  Although  Frege  worked  out,  in  the  first
volume  (1893)  of  his  Grundgesetze  der  AritJunetik^
an  important  part  of  arithmetic,  with  a  logical
accuracy  previously  unknown  and  for  years  after-
wards almost  unknown,  his  ideas  did  not  become  at
all  widely  known  until  Bertrand  Russell,  who  had
arrived  independently  at  this  logical  definition  of
"cardinal  number,"  gave  prominence  to  them  in  his

NOTES  203

Principles  of  Mathematics  of  1903.*  The  two  chief
reasons  in  favour  of  this  definition  are  that  it
avoids,  by  a  construction  of  "numbers"  out  of  the
fundamental  entities  of  logic,  the  assumption  that
there  are  certain  new  and  undefined  entities  called
*' numbers";  and  that  it  allows  us  to  deduce  at
once  that  the  class  defined  is  not  empty,  so  that
the  cardinal  number  of  u  "exists"  in  the  sense
defined  in  logic  :  in  fact,  since  u  is  equivalent  to
itself,  the  cardinal  number  of  u  has  u  at  least  as  a
member.  Russell  also  gave  an  analogous  definition
for  ordinal  types  or  the  more  general  "relation
numbers. "  f

An  account  of  much  that  has  been  done  in  the
theory  of  aggregates  since  1897  ^n^y  t)e  gathered
from  A.  Schoenflies's  reports  :  Die  Entwickelung
der  Lehre  von  den  Pmiktmannigfaltigkeiten,  Leipzig,
1900;  part  ii,  Leipzig,  1908.  A  second  edition
of  the  first  part  was  published  at  Leipzig  and  Berlin
in  191 3,  in  collaboration  with  H.  Hahn,  under  the
title  :  Entwickelung  der  Mengenlehre  und  iJirer
Anwendungen.  These  three  books  will  be  cited
by  their  respective  dates  of  publication,  and,  when
references  to  relevant  contributions  not  mentioned
in  these  reports  are  made,  full  references  to  the
original  place  of  publication  will  be  given.

*  Pp.  519,  111-116.  Cf.  Whitehead,  Amer.  Jotirn.  of  Mai h.,  vol.
xxiv,  1902,  p.  378.  For  a  more  modern  form  of  the  doctrine,  see
Whitehead  and  Russell,  Frincipia  Mathetnatica^  vol.  ii,  Cambridge,
1912,  pp.  4,  13.

t  Principles,  pp.  262,  321  ;  and  Frtncipta,  vol.  ii,  pp.  330,
473-510.

204  NOTES

Leaving  aside  the  applications  of  the  theory  of
transfinite  numbers  to  geometry  and  the  theory  of
functions,  the  most  important  advances  since  1897
are  as  follows  :

(i)  The  proof  given  independently  by  Ernst
Schroder  (1896)  and  Felix  Bernstein  (1898)  of  the
theorem  B  on  p.  91  above,  without  the  supposition
that  one  of  the  three  relations  of  magnitude  must
hold  between  any  two  cardinal  numbers  (1900,  pp.
16-18; 1913,  pp.  34-41  ; 1908,  pp. 10-12).

(2)  The  giving  of  exactly  expressed  definitions
of  arithmetical  operations  with  cardinal  numbers
and  of  proofs  of  the  laws  of  arithmetic  for  them  by
A.  N.  Whitehead  {Ainej\  Journ.  of  Math.,  vol.
xxiv,  1902,  pp.  367-394).  Cf.  Russell,  Principles,
pp.  1 1 7- 1 20.  A  more  modern  form  is  given  in
Whitehead  and  Russell's  Principia,  vol.  ii,  pp.
66-186.

(3)  Investigations  on  the  question  as  to  whether
any  aggregate  can  be  brought  into  the  form  of
a  well-ordered  aggregate.  This  question  Cantor
{cf.  1900,  p.  49;  191 3,  p.  170;  and  p.  61  above)
believed  could  be  answered  in  the  affirmative.
The  postulate  lying  at  the  bottom  of  this  theorem
was  brought  forward  in  the  most  definite  manner
by  E.  Zermelo  and  E.  Schmidt  in  1904,  and
Zermelo  afterwards  gave  this  postulate  the  form  of
an  ''axiom  of  selection"  (1913,  pp.  16,  170-184;
1908,  pp.  33-36).  Whitehead  and  Russell  have
dealt  with  great  precision  with  the  subject  in  their
Principia, vol. i, Cambridge, 19 10, pp. 500-568.

NOTES  205

It  may  be  remarked  that  Cantor,  in  his  proof  of
theorem  A  on  p.  105  above,  and  in  that  of  theorem
C  on  pp.  1 6 1- 1 62  above,*  unconsciously  used  this
axiom  of  infinite  selection.  Also  G.  H.  Hardy
in  1903  (1908,  pp.  22-23)  used  this  axiom,  un-
consciously at  first,  in  a  proof  that  it  is  possible  to
have  an  aggregate  of  cardinal  number  j^^  in  the
continuum  of  real  numbers.

But  there  is  another  and  wholly  different  question
which  crops  up  in  attempts  at  a  proof  that  any
aggregate  can  be  well  ordered.  Cesare  Burali-Forti
had  in  1897  pointed  out  that  the  series  of  all  ordinal
numbers,  which  is  easily  seen  to  be  well  ordered,
must  have  the  greatest  of  all  ordinal  numbers  as  its
type.  Yet  the  type  of  the  above  series  of  ordinal
numbers  followed  by  its  type  must  be  a  greater
ordinal  number,  for  /3+  i  is  greater  than  f^.  Burali-
Forti  concluded  that  we  must  deny  Cantor's  funda-
mental theorem  in  his  memoir  of  1897.  A  different
use  of  an  argument  analogous  to  Burali-Forti's  was
made  by  Philip  E.  B.  Jourdain  in  a  paper  written  in
1903  and  published  in  1904  (Phitosophical  Magazine,
6th  series,  vol.  vii,  pp.  61-75).  The  chief  interest
of  this  paper  is  that  it  contains  a  proof  which  is
independent  of,  but  practically  identical  with,  that
discovered  by  Cantor  in 1895,  and  of  which  some

*  Indeed,  we  have  here  to  prove  that  any  enumerable  aggregate  of
any  enumerable  aggregates  gives  an  enumerable  aggregate  of  the
elements  last  referred  to.  To  prove  that  Xo-  Xo  =  Ko,  it  is  not  enough  to
prove  the  above  theorem  for  particular  aggregates.  And  in  the  general
case  we  have  to  pick  one  element  out  of  each  of  an  infinity  of  classes,
no  element  in  each  class  being  distinguished  from  the  others.

2o6  NOTES

trace  is  preserved  in  the  passage  on  p.  109  above
and  in  the  remark  on  the  theorem  A  of  p.  90.
This  proof  of  Cantor's  and  Jourdain's  consists  of
two  parts.  In  the  first  part  it  is  established  that
every  cardinal  number  is  either  an  Aleph  or  is  greater
than  all  Alephs.  This  part  requires  the  use  of
Zermelo's  axiom;  and  Jourdain  took  the  "proof"
of  this  part  of  the  theorem  directly  from  Hardy's
paper  of  1903  referred  to  above.  Cantor  assumed
the  result  required,  and  indeed  the  result  seems  very
plausible.

The  second  part  of  the  theorem  consists  in  the
proof  that  the  supposition  that  a  cardinal  number
is  greater  than  all  Alephs  is  impossible.  By  a  slight
modification  of  Burali-Forti's  argument,  in  which
modification  it  is  proved  that  there  cannot  be  a
greatest  Aleph,  the  conclusion  seems  to  follow  that
no  cardinal  number  can  be  other  than  an  Aleph,

The  contradiction  discovered  by  Burali-Forti  is
the  best  known  to  mathematicians  ;  but  the  simplest
contradiction  was  discovered  *  by  Russell  {Principles,
pp.  364-368,  101-107)  from  an  application  to  "the
cardinal  number  of  all  things  "  of  Cantor's  argument
of  1892  referred  to  on  pp.  99-100  above.  Russell's
contradiction  can  be  reduced  to  the  following  :  If
w  is  the  class  of  all  those  terms  x  such  that  x  is  not
a  member  of  x,  then,  if  21/  is  a  member  of  w^  it  is
plain  that  w  is  not  a  member  of  w  ;  while  if  w  is
not  a  member  of  w,  it  is  equally  plain  that  ze/  is  a
member  of  w. The  treatment  and  final  solution  of

*  This  argument  was  discovered  in  1900  (see  Monisf,  Jan.  1912).

NOTES  207

these  paradoxes,  which  concern  the  foundations  of
logic  and  which  are  closely  allied  to  the  logical
puzzle  known  as  "the  Epimenides,"  *  has  been
attempted  unsuccessfully  by  very  many  mathe-
maticians, f  and  successfully  by  Russell  {cf.  Principles,
pp. 523-528;  Principia,  vol.  i,  pp.  26-31,  39-90)-

The  theorem  A  on  p.  105  is  required  (see  theorem
D  on  p.  108)  in  the  proof  that  the  two  definitions
of  infinity  coincide.  On  this  point,  cf.  Principles,
pp.  1 21-123  ;  Principia,  vol.  i,  pp.  569-666;  vol.  ii,
pp. 187-298.

(4)  Investigation  of  number-classes  in  general,
and  the  arithmetic  of  Alephs  by  Jourdain  in  1904
and  1908,  and  G.  Hessenberg  in  1906  J  (191 3»
pp. 131-136; 1908, pp. 13-14)-

(5)  The  definition,  by  Felix  Hausdorff  in  1904-
1907,  of  the  product  of  an  infinity  of  ordinal  types
and  hence  of  exponentiation  by  a  type.  This
definition  is  analogous  to  Cantor's  definition  of
exponentiation  for  cardinal  numbers  on  p.  95
above. § Cf. 1913, pp. 75-80; 1908, pp. 4^-45-

(6)  Theorems due to J. Konig (1904) on the

*  Ephnenides  was  a  Cretan  who  said  that  all  Cretans  were  liars.
Obviously  if  his  statement  were  true  he  was  a  liar.  The  remark  of  a
man  who  says,  "  I  am  lying,"  is  even  more  analogous  to  Russell's  w.

t  Thus  Schoenflies,  in  his  Reports  of  1908  and  1913,  devotes  an
undue  amount  of  space  to  his  "solution  "  of  the  paradoxes  here  referred
to.  This  "  solution"  really  consists  in  saying  that  these  paradoxes  do
not  belong  to  mathematics  but  to  "philosophy."  It  may  be  remarked
that  Schoenflies  seems  never  to  have  grasped  the  meaning  and  extent  of
Zermelo's  axiom,  which  Russell  has  called  the  "multiplicative  axiom."

+  Just  as  in  the  proof  that  the  multiplication  of  Ny  by  itself  gives  Kq,
the  more  general  theorem  here  considered  involves  the  multiplicative
axiom.

§  Cf.  Jourdain,  Mess,  of  Math.  (2),  vol.  xxxvi,  May  1906,  pp.  1 3- 1 6.

2o8  NOTES

inequality  of  certain  cardinal  numbers ;  and  the
independent  generalization  of  these  theorems,
together  with  one  of  Cantor's  (see  pp.  81-82
above),  by  Zermelo  and  Jourdain  in  1908  (1908,
pp. 16-17; 1913, PP- 65-67).

(7)  Hausdorff's  contributions  from  1906  to  1908
to  the  theory  of  linear  ordered  aggregates  (19 13,
pp. 185-205  ; 1908,  pp.  40-71).

(8)  The  investigation  of  the  ordinal  types  of
multiply  ordered  infinite  aggregates  by  F.  Riess
in 1903, and  Brouwer  in 191 3  (191 3, pp. 85-87).

INDEX

Abel,  Niels  lienrike,  lO,
Abelian  functions,  lO,  ii.
Absolute  infinity,  62,  63.
Actuality  of  numbers,  67.
Addition  of  cardinal  numbers,  So,
91  ff.
of  ordinal  types,  81,  119  ff.
of  transfinite  numbers,  63,  66,
153  ff->  175  ff->  206.
Adherences,  73.

Aggregate,  definition of,  46,  47,
.54,  74,  85.
of  bindings,  92.
of  union,  50,  91.
Alembert,  Jean  Lerond  d',  4.
Algebraic  numbers,  38  ff. ,  127.
Aquinas,  Thomas,  70.
Aristotle,  55,  70.

Arithmetic,  foundations of, with
Weierstrass,  12.
with  Frege  and  Russell,  202,
203.
Arzela,  73.

Associative  law  with  transfinite
numbers,  92,  93,  119,  121,
154,  155.

Baire,  Rene,  ']t,.
Bendixson,  Ivar,  ']i.
Berkeley,  George,  55.
Bernoulli,  Daniel,  4.
Bernstein,  Felix,  204.
Bois-Reymond,  Pauldu,  22,34,51.
Bolzano,  Bernard, 13,  14,  17,  21,

22,41,  55.  72.
Borel,  Emile,  73.
Bouquet,  7.
Briot,  7.
Broden,  73.
Brouwer,  208.
Burali-Forti,  Cesare,  20s,  206,

Cantor,  Georg,  v,  vi,  vii,  3,  9,  10,
13,  18,  22,  24,  25, 26,  28,

29,  30,  32,  11.  34,  35,  36,
. 37,  38,  41,  42,  45,  46,  47,

48,  49,  51,  52,  53,  54,  55,
56,  57,  59,  60,  62,  63,  64,
68,  69,  70,  72,  73,  74,  76,
77, 79, 80, 81, 82,  202,
204,  205,  206,  208.
Dedekind  axiom,  30.
Cardinal  number  {see  also  Power),
74,  79  ff.,  85  ff.,  202.
finite,  97  ff.

smallest  transfinite,  103  ff.
Cardinal numbers, operations
with, 204.
series  of  transfinite,  109.
Cauchy,  Augustin  Louis,  2,  3,  4,  6,

8,  12,  14,  15,  16,  17,22,  24.
Class  of  types,  114.

Closed  aggregates,  T32.

types,  133.
Coherences,  73.
Coherent  series,  129,  130.
Commutative  law  with  transfinite
numbers, 66, 92, 93,
119  ff.,  190  ff.
Condensation  of  singularities,  3,

9,  48,  49.

Connected  aggregates,  72.

Content  of  aggregates,  ']1.

Content-less,  51.

Continuity  of  a  function,  i.

Continuous motion in discon-
tinuous space,  37.

Continuum,  33,  yj ,  41  ff.,  47,  48,

64,  70  ff.,  96,  205.
Contradiction,  Russell's,  206,  207.
Convergence  of  series, i, 15,  16,

17,  20,  24.
Cords,  vibrating,  problem  of,  4.

209

14

2IO

INDEX

D'Alembert {see Alembert,

J.  L.  d').
Dedekind, Richard, vii,  23,  41,

.  47,  49,  IZ-
Definition  of  aggregate,  37.
Democritus,  70.
De  Morgan,  Augustus,  41.
Density  in  itself,  132.
Derivatives of point- aggregates,

3,  3off-.,37.
Descartes,  Rene,  55.
Dirichlet,  Peter  Gustav  Lejeune,

2,  3,  5,  7,  8,  9,  22,  35,
Discrete  aggregates,  51.
Distributive law with  transfinite

numbers,  66,  93,  121,  155.

Enumerability,  32,  38ff.,47,  5ofif.,

62.
Enumeral,  52,  62.
Epicurus,  70.
Epimenides,  207.
Equivalence of aggregates, 40,

75,  86  ff.
Euler,  Leonhard,  4,  5,  9,  10.
Everywhere-dense  aggregates,  33,

35.  37,  123.
types,  133.
Exponentiation of transfinite

numbers,  82,  94  ff,,  207.

Fontenelle,  118.

Formalism  in  mathematics,  70,  81.

Fourier,  Jean Baptiste  Joseph,  I,

2,  5,  6,  8,  24.
Freedom  in  mathematics,  d']  ff.
Frege,  Gottlob,  23,  70,  202,
Function,  conception  of,  i.
Functions,  theory  of  analytic,  2,

6, 7, 10, II, 12, 13,  22,

73.
arbitrary,  4,  6,  34.
theory  of  real,  2,  8,  9,  73.
Fundamental  series,  26,  128  ff.

Gauss,  Carl  Friedrich,  6,  12,  14.
Generation,  principles  of,  56,  57.
Gudermann,  lO.

Hahn,  H.,  203.

Haller,  Albrecht  von,  62.

Hankel,  Hermann,  3,  7,  8,  9,  17,

49,  70.
Hardy,  G.  H.,  205,  206,
Harnack,  Axel,  51,  73.
Hausdorff,  Felix,  207 208.
Heine,  H.  E.,  3,  26,  69.
Helmholtz,  H.  von,  42,  70,  81.
Hessenberg,  Gerhard,  207.
Hobbes,  Thomas,  55.

Imaginaries,  6.

Induction,  mathematical,  207.

Infinite,  definition  of,  41,  61,  62.

Infinitesimals,  64,  81.

Infinity,  proper  and  improper,  55,

79-.

Integrability, Riemann's con-
ditions of,  8.
Integrable  aggregates,  51.
Inverse  types,  114.
Irrational  numbers,  3,  14  ff. ,  26  ff.
analogy  of  transfinite  numbers
with,  77  ft".
Isolated  aggregate,  49.
point,  30.

Jacobi,  C.  G.  J.,  10.
Jordan,  Camille,  73.
Jourdain,  Philip  E. B.,  4,  6,  20,
32,  52,  205,  206,  207,  208.

Killing,  W.,  118.

Kind  of  a  point-aggregate,  32.

Kirchhoff,  G. ,  69.

Konig,  Julius,  207.

Kronecker,  L.,  70,  81.

Kummer,  E.  E. ,  69.

Lagrange,  J.  L.,  5,  14.
Leibniz,  G.  W.  von,  55.
Leucippus,  70.
Limitation,  principle  of,  60.
Limiting  element  of  an  aggregate,

Limit-point,  30.

Limits  with transfinite  numbers,

77  ff.,  131  ff.,  58  ff
Liouville,  J.,  40.
Lipschitz,  R.,  6.
Locke,  J.,  55.
Lucretius,  70.

INDEX

Mach,  Ernst,  69.
Maximum  of  a  function,  22.
Mitlag-Leifler,  Gosta,  ii.
Mutliplication of cardinal num-
bers, 80,  91  ff.
of  ordinal  types  81,  119  ff,  154.
of  transfmite numbers,  63,  64,
66,  176  ff.

Newton,  Sir  Isaac,  15.
Nominalism,  Cantor's,  69,  70.
Number-concept,  logical  definition
of,  202,  203.

Ordinal number {see also
Enumeral),  75,  151  ff.
numbers,  finite,  113, 158,  159.
type,  75,  79  ff.,  no  ff.
type of aggregate of  rational

numbers,  122  ff. ,  202.
types  of  multiply  ordered  aggre-
gates, 81,  208.
Osgood,  W.  F.,  73.

Peano,  G.,  23.

Perfect  aggregates,  72,  132.

types,  133.
Philosophical revolution  brought

about by Cantor's work,

vi.
Physical  conceptions  and  modern

mathematics,  I.
Point-aggregates, Cantor's early

work  on,  v,  vi.
theory  of,  3,  20  ff.,  30  ff.,  64,

73-
Potential,  theory  of,  7.
Power,  second,  64  ff. ,  169  ff.
of an aggregate, 32, 37, 40,

52  ff.,  60,  62.
Prime  numbers,  transfinite,  64,  66.
Principal  element  of  an  aggregate,

131-
Puiseux,  v.,  7.

Reducible  aggregates,  71.
Relation  numbers,  203.
Riemann,  G.  F.  B.,  3,  7,  8,  9,  10,
12,  25,  42.

Riess,  F.,  208.

Russell,  Bertrand,  20,  23,  53,  202,
203,  204,  206,  207.

Schepp,  A.,  117.
Schmidt,  E.,  204.
Schoenflies,  A.,  73,  203,  207.
Schwarz,  8,  12.

Second number-class, cardinal
number  of,  169  ff.
epsilon-numbers  of  the,  195  ff.
exponentiation  in,  178  ff.
normal form  of  numbers  of,

183  ff
numbers  of,  160  ff.
Segment of a series, 60, 103,

141  ff.
Selections,  204  ff.
Similarity,  76,  112  ff.
Species  of  a  point-aggregate,  31.
Spinoza,  B. ,  55.
Steiner,  J.,  40.
Stolz,  O.,  17,  73.
Subtraction  of  transfinite  numbers,
66,  155,  156.

Teubner,  B.  G.,  vii.

Transfinite numbers, 4, 32, 36,

50  ff.,  52  ff
Trigonometrical  developments,  2,

3,4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  24ff,  31.

Unextended  aggregates,  51.
Upper  limit,  21.

Veronese,  G.,  117,  118.

Weierstrass,  Karl,  vi,  vii,  2,  3,  10,
II,  12,  13,  14,  17,  18,  19,
20,  21,  22,  23,  24,  26,  30,
48.

Well-ordered  aggregates,  60,  61,
75  ff,  137  ff.

Well-ordering,  204  ff.

Whitehead,  A.  N.,  203,  204.

Zeno,  15.

Zermelo,  E.,  204,  206,  207,  208.

Zermelo's  axiom,  204  ff.
