Modern Spiritualism: Its Facts and Fanaticisms (E. W. Capron, 1855)
===================================================================
E. W. Capron — The first published history of the Fox sisters' phenomena — the founding primary source on modern spiritualism. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (cu31924028954034) — 1855 first edition.

CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 

FROM 

Cornell University Library 
BF1241 .C25 

Modern spiritualism: Its facts and fanat 

olln 

3 1924 028 954 034 

Cornell University 
Library 

The original of tliis book is in 
tlie Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 

http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924028954034 

MODERN SPIRITUALISM; 

IIS 

FACTS AND FANATICISMS, 

IIS 

CONSISTENCIES AND CONTJUDICTIONS. 

WITH 

AN APPENDIX. 

BY 

E. W. CAPROr^. 

BOSTON: 

PUBLISHED BY BELA MARSH, 15 FRANKLIN ST. 

NEW YORK : 

PARTRIDGE AND BRITTAN. 

PHILADELPHIA: 

SOLD BY rOWLBES, WELLS & CO., 231 ARCH ST. 

1855. 

Entered according to Act of Congi-ess, in the year 1855, by 

E. W. CAPRON, 

In the Clerk's Office of the District Courfc for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania. 

SteroDtyped by 

HOBART & KOBBINS, 

Ifev England Tjpe and StoreotTpo FoUDdcrj, 

BOSTON. 

2to maj jFrfena, 
GEORGE ^VILLETS, 

ONE OF THB FIOHEEBS IN NATIONAL SPIRITUALISM, "WHO STOOD CALM AND FIRM 

IN THE FRONT RANKS OF TRUTH'S DEFENDERS WHEN OTHERS FALTERED ; "WHO HAS BBATKD 

THE SCORN AND CONTUMELY OF FRIENDS AND KINDRED, AND WHO HAS BEEN, IN MANY 

WATS THE WORLD KNOWS NOT OF, A MARTYR TO THE CAUSE OF TRUTIT, 

IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED. 

PHEFACE. 

We find "the world turned upside-down" by a new and 
strange class of manifestations called spiritual. Like most 
new thoughts of modern times, America gave it birth ; but 
it has since spread all over the globe, and awakened new and 
novel inquiries wherever man understands the means of 
communicating to his fellows the discoveries he has made. 

When, how, and by whom, did it begin ? How has it been 
conducted ? What are its just claims to respect ? To answer 
these questions is the object of this work. 

An attentive observer of its commencement and progress, 
the author has endeavored to be an impartial witness ; and, 
having enjoyed the personal acquaintance of its chief sup- 
porters, feels qualified to present the favorable and adverse 
facts relating to these strange phenomena. The advocates and 
opponents of the new doctrine could hardly difier more than 
they do, and it is not expected that a faithful history will, 
in all respects, please either party; but let the truth be 

boldly spoken, even though it ofiend both. 

•^ E. W. C. 

Philadelphia, Ootobee, 1854. 
1* 

CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER I. 

DJTRODCOTION — MAlUFESTAIIOllS IN ANCIENI AND MODERN TIMES THE 

WESLET FAMUT, ftO H 

CHAPTER II. 

FIKST DISTUBBANOES AT HTDESVILLE EVENTS PKEVIOUS TO THE SODNDS 

BEINQ HKAT1.D WITH THE FOX FAMILY TESTIMONY OF WITNESSES — 

FIKST MEDIUMS, &C. 40., 33 

CHAPTER III. 

FIEST tlANIFESTATIONS IN KOOHESTEE, N. Y. — ALARM OP THE FAMILY — 

OPPOSITION OF MR. CALVIN R. BROWN VIOLENT DEMONSTRATIONS — 

ENTHUSIASTIC AND FANATICAL BELIEVERS — ABSURD DIRECTIONS FOL- 
LOWED — DISAPPOINTMENT AND UNBELIEF PROOFS AND OASES STATED 

FIRST CASE OF TELEaRAPHINQ 87 

CHAPTER IV. 

SUSPENSION OF THE MANIFESTATIONS IN THE FOX FAMILY RETURN OP 

THE SPIRITS DIRECTIONS FOR PUBLIC INVESTIQATION THE FIRST 

MEETINGS EXCITEMENT ON THE REPORT OF COMMITTEES — RIOTOUS 

DEMONSTRATIONS — INCREASE OF MEDIA, FOR BAPPINO, WRITINQ, 40. 40., 

88 

Tin CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER V. 

MANIFBaiAIIONS IN AUBURN, N. Y. — VISIT OF OATHAMITE FOX — KEMAEK- 
ABLE TESTS AND PEOOFS OE SPIEIT POWBE — SLANDEK3 Off THE PEE3S — 
STRANGE DEMONSTRATIONS — A NEW MEDItTM, MBS. SARAH A. T AMT.T N — 
SPIRIT MUSIO, 101 

CHAPTER VI. 

CONTINUED MANIFESTATIONS AT AUBURN — THE "APOSTOUO CIRCLE" — 
THE MOUNTAIN COTE MOTBMENT — ITS POEMATION, PEOGEESS, AND DIS- 
SOLUTION — ASSUMPTION, FANATICISM AND FOLLY 113 

CHAPTER VII. 

MANIFESTATIONS AT STEATFOKD, CONN., IN THE HOUSE OP REV. ELLAKIM 
PHELPS, D. D. REMAKKABLE EXHIBITIONS OF POWER SINGULAR OC- 
CURRENCES IMAGE-MAKING — DESTRUCTION OF FURNITURE INCEN- 
DIARY SPIRITS — THE SPIRITS IDENTIFIED CNBLAPPY SPIRITS, FROM 

THE REMEMBRANCE OF WRONG DONE IN THIS WORLD WRONG-DOING 

REVEALED — DIRECTIONS GIVEN FOR RESTORING ILL-GOTTEN GAINS 

DISCONTINUANCE OF THE MANIFESTATIONS, 132 

CHAPTER VIII. 

MANIFESTATIONS IN NEW YORK CITY VISIT OP THE FOX FAMILY MEET- 
ING OF LITERATI THEIR REPORT OPPONENTS THE PRESS OF THE 

CITY — HORACE GREELEY EKi'UKN OF THE FAMILY TO ROCHESTER FORM- 
ATION OP CIRCLES IN NEW YORK CREDULITY MR. CHARLES PAR- 
TRIDGE OCCURRENCES AT HIS HOUSE EDWARD P. FOWLER CONFER- 
ENCE MEETING — MRS. BROWN — JUDGE EDMONDS, &C., &0 172 

CHAPTER IX. 

MANIFESTATIONS IN BOSTON THE FIRST MEDIUM — SPIRITUAL PHILOSOPHER 

POSITION OF THE PRESS LA ROY SUNDERLAND CREDULITY SHA- 

DRACH BARNES AND PHEEE NEWELL — REACTION STATEMENT OF EUFUS 

ELMER — EEV. WM. M. FERNALD ■ — JOHN M. SPEAR THE NEW MOTIVE 

POWER, 40., 204 

CHAPTER X. 

MANIFESTATIONS IN PROVIDENCE, E. I. — EARLY MANIFESTATIONS — ^IMPOR- 
TANT PHYSICAL MANIFESTATIONS IN PRESENCE OF MES. WILBOE, MEDIUM 

CONTENTS. IX 

STATEMENT OF " D. B. H." — FANATICISM — LETIEE3 OF MBS. BAEAH 
HELEN WHITMAN, 226 

CHAPTER XI. 

MANIFESTATIONS IN PHILADELPHIA' — JIEST ATTEMPTS TO OBTAIN KESP0N3E3 
— EEMASEABLE PERSEVERANCE AKD PATIENCE — DETAILS OF THE PRO- 
CEEDINGS IN THE FIRST CIRCLES — ORGANIZATION AND PROGRESS OP 
THE CAUSE — PUBLIC MEETINGS AND LECTURES, 251 

CHAPTER XII. 

MANIFESTATIONS AT TROT AND WATERFORD, N. Y. — EXCITEMENT AND 

VIOLENCE AT TROT ATTEMPT TO DESTROY THE LIFE OF THE MEDIUM 

INCREASE OP THE MANIFESTATIONS REMARKABLE CASES, &C., . . 270 

CHAPTER XIII. 

MANIFESTATIONS IN CINCINNATI VISIT OF MRS. BUSHNELL, THE MEDIUM — 

FIRST INVESTIGATIONS VISIT OF THE FOX FAMILY INCREASE OF BE- 
LIEVERS, 288 

CHAPTER XIV. 

MANIFESTATIONS IN BUFFALO, N. Y. THE EXPOSE OF THE UNIVERSITY 

PROFESSORS COUNTER STATEMENTS MRS. FISH'S LETTER,— DR. LEE TO 

THE TRIBUNE, AND THE EDITOR'S REMARKS EFFECTS OF THE EXPOSE, 

309 

CHAPTER XV. 

MANIFESTATIONS IN WASHINGTON, D. C. CONGRESSIONAL MEDIUMS WRIT- 

INO MEDIUMS VISIT OF THE POX FAMILY — GOV. TALLMADGE SINQU- 

LAE MANIFESTATIONS IN DRAWJNO — MEMORIAL TO CONGRESS — DEBATE 
IN THE SENATE, &C., 835 

CHAPTER XVI. 

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON THE SPIRITUAL JLANIFESTATIONS AND THE 
FBOORESS OF SPIRITUALISM, 376 

CONTENTS. 

APPENDIX. 

COMUENTS O; THE PRESS AT AVBUBN, N. T 883 

COMMENTS OF THE FBES3 AT EOCHESTEB, 886 

JOBN W. nUBN, EOOHESTEIl, 892 

BEY, DB. POTTS, 893 

BOCHESTEB AMEBICAIT, 893 

H. Y. COMMERCIAL ADVERTISEE 394 

THE NOBTHEBN CHEISTIAN ADTOCATE 396 

MAJOR M. M. KOAH, 396 

BET. A. H. JEBVIS 398 

KEV. JOHN M. AUSTIN, STATEMENT OF, 401 

HEW XORK TRIBUNE, 402 

J. STANLEY GRIMES, STATEMENT OF, 403 

KEPIT BY II. D. BARRON, 406 

THE NEW YORK EXPRESS 407 

T. S. ARTHUR AND HIS HOME GAZETTE 408 

THE BOSTON INVESTIGATOR, 409 

C. C. BURR AND HIS BROTHER HEMAN, 416 

PROF. HARE, OF PHILADELPHIA, 42-5 

HON. n. P. TALLMADGE AND THE NATIONAL INTELLIGENCER, 427 

LETTER OF HON. JOHN W. EDMONDS, 427 

CHAPTER I. 

INTRODUCTION. 

In searching out the history of Spiritual Manifestations, or 
occurrences analogous to what is now known as the modern mani- 
festations, the discovery is at once made that they date back to a 
period so remote that the history of no age or country is exempt 
from accounts of them. Histories dating back further than any- 
thing known or recorded in the Bible, are proof of their being 
known at a period beyond the compilation or writing of that book ; 
while the book itself contains so many evidences of precisely simi- 
lar occurrences; that the attentive reader cannot resist the convic- 
tion that the occurrences were the same in fact, whatever the 
people of that age may have thought of them, or however exag- 
gerated they made their importance in the record. By comparing 
the story of the Witch of Endor with any ordinary case of spirit- 
seeing clairvoyance of the present time, its wonder, mystery and 
sacredness, beyond that sacredness that truth should always com- 
mand, at once disappear. The spirit that passed before the face of 
Job, " in thoughts of the visions of night, when deep sleep falleth 
upon man," is no uncommon occurrence at the present day ; while 
the handwriting on the walls of Belshazzar's palace has its anal- 
ogy in hundreds of instances of modern spiritual manifestations. 

To come down to the more modern occurrences, which, however, 
reach still far enough back to be one of the numerous connecting 
links in the chain of events which bind the past to the present, 
it is only necessary to record the occurrences in the Wesley family 
in England, in the year 1716, which contain many features devel- 

12 INTKODTIOTION. 

oped in modern times, as a specimen of thousands of others. In 
compiling this whole history I entirely disclaim any desire to feed 
the popular credulity, or to excite the wonder-loving faculties of 
the ignorant and superstitious. They have already been made 
the prey of artful and designing men too long ; and I am more 
desirous of stripping nature of the wtpernaturalism which has 
been thrown around her by the crafty plunderers of the ignorant, 
than to have their superstitions wrought up to a still higher state 
of excitement. It is for this reason that I deem it important 
that a full explanation of the facts embodied in this work should 
be made, and a reasonable and natural explanation given of these 
phenomena, which shall satisfy all that those who have inves- 
tigated the most thoroughly have really the least fear and super- 
stitious feeling in regard to the matter. While they have thus, 
by investigation, divested themselves of all feeling of superstition, 
they have become fully satisfied of the importance of the mani- 
festations, as teaching the proximity of spirits, and their power 
to make themselves known to persons who still remain in the 
visible body. I disclaim, at the outset, all intentions of advocat- 
ing s^pernaturalism. I place too high an estimate on the perfect 
workings of the laws of nature, as set in motion by the " Great 
Spirit " which pervades, encompasses and governs all things, to 
attribute the beautiful and fast-spreading facts, proving a direct 
influx of spiritual influences into the world, to anything more or 
less than another link in the great chain of nature's law which is 
but just developing itself to man. The why of its appearance 
just at this time, or the reason why it has not become more exten- 
sively known before, it would be as impossible to tell as it would 
be to tell why all the great discoveries in science were not made 
known to man at once, instead of waiting the slow development 
of the intellect, and thus preparing him for the gradual reception 
of the mighty changes which have taken place from the early- 
stages of human development to the present time. As the earth 
was not formed in a few short years in its present state of geolog- 
ical development, so man has not all at once sprung to his pres- 

INTRODUCTIOIJ. 13 

ent state of refinement and knowledge. Gradual growth in the 
refining process seems to be the uniyersal law of nature. 

The entire separation, made by the o\^ philosophy and theology, 
between spirit and matter, has led thousands of philosophical 
minds to reject all idea of any existence of persons beyond the 
tangible form which men now occupy. They have failed entirely 
of obtaining, from old traditions, proof which looked rational to 
them of any such existence. The great difficulty in the way of 
such minds, as before intimated, is the great break in the chain 
between tangible and (to us) intangible substance. The fact that 
men could not, in a normal state, see the more refined substance 
to which we give the name spirit, has led theologians to declare 
that there was an existence, not only intangible, but absolutely 
something beyond, and entirely separate from, matter. 

Men of philosophical minds, not having positiveproof of spirif^- 
ual existence, have discovered this glaring inconsistency, and 
rejected every theory offered in favor of any existence beyond the 
decay of the visible body. But the developments of the last few 
years in clairvoyance and psychology have convinced many of the 
sceptics in regard to fiiture existence that there is a positive 
identity of spirits of persons who have passed on beyond this 
state of existence. 

As long ago as the year 1716, the Wesley family (father of 
John Wesley) were disturbed by sounds and rappings, with other 
occurrences, which in some respects equal, and in many resemble, 
the modern manifestations. Nine of that family testify to the 
truth of the statements, as well as others. This narrative may 
be found in a book called " Memoirs of the Wesley Family," by 
Adam Clakk, LL. D., F. A. S., second edition, 1846. 

NARRATIVE DRAWN UP BY ME. JOHN WESLEY, AND PUBLISHED BY 
HIM IN THE ARMINIAN MAGAZINE. 

" When I was very young, I heard several letters read, wrote 
to my elder brother by my father, giving an account of strange 
disturbances, which were in his house at Epworth, Lincolnshire. 
2 

14 INTRODUCTION. 

" When I went down thither, in the year 1720, I carefully in- 
quired into the particulars. I spoke to each of the persons who 
were then in the house, and took down what each could testify, 
of his or her own knowledge, the sum of which was this : — 

" On December 2nd, 1716, while Robert Brown, my father's 
servant, was sitting with one of the maids, a little before ten at 
night, in the dining-room which opened into the garden, they 
both heard one knocking at the door. Quickly it knocked again, 
and groaned. ' It is Mr. Turpine,' said Eobert ; ' he has the 
stone, and used to groan so.' He opened the door again twice or 
thrice, the knocking being twice or thrice repeated ; but stUl see- 
ing nothing, and being a little startled, they rose and went up to 
bed. When Eobert came to the top of the garret stairs, he saw 
a hand-mill, which was at a little distance, whirled about very 
swiftly. The next day he and the maid related these things to the 
other maid, who laughed heartily, and said, ' What a couple of 
fools you are ! I defy anything to frighten me.' After churning 
in the evening, she put the butter in the tray, and had no sooner 
carried it into the dairy, than she heard a knocking on the shelf 
where several puncheons of milk stood, first above the shelf, then 
below. She took the candle, and searched both above and below ; 
but being able to find nothing, threw down butter, tray and all, and 
ran away for life. The next evening, between five and six o'clock, 
my sister Molly, then about twenty years of age, sittbg in the din- 
ing-room reading, heard as if it were the door that led into the 
hall open, and a person walking in, that seemed to have on a silk 
night-gown, rustling and trailing along. It seemed to walk round 
her, then to the door, then round again ; but she could see nothing. 
She thought, ' It signifies nothing to run away ; for, whatever it 
is, it can run faster than me.' So she rose, put her book under 
her arm, and walked slowly away. After supper, she was sitting 
.yith my sister Sukey (about a year older than her), in one of 
the chambers, and telling her what had happened. She made 
quite light of it, telling her, ' I wonder you are so easily fright- 
ened; I would fain see what would frighten me,' Presently a 

INTRODUCTIOfl. 15 

knocking began under the table. She took the candle and looked, 
but could find nothing. Then the iron casement began to clatter, 
and the lid of a warming-pan. Next the latch of the door moved 
up and down without ceasing. She started up, leaped into the 
bed without undressing, pulled the bed-clothes over her head, and 
never ventured to look up till next morning. A night or two after, 
my sister Hetty, a year younger than my sister Molly, was waiting 
as usual, between nine and ten, to take away my father's candle, 
when she heard one coming down the garret stairs, walking slowly 
by her, then going down the best stairs, then up the back stairs, and 
up the garret stairs ; at every step it seemed as if the house shook 
from top to bottom. Just then my father knocked. She went 
in, took his candle, and got to bed as soon as possible. In the 
morning she told this to my eldest sister, who told her, ' You 
know I believe none of these things ; pray let me take away the 
candle to-night, and I will find out the trick.' She accordingly 
took my sister Hetty's place, and had no sooner taken away the 
candle than she heard a noise below. She hastened down stairs 
to the hall, where the noise was ; but it was then in the kitchen. 
She ran into the kitchen, where it was drumming on the inside 
of the screen. When she went round, it was drumming on the 
outside ; and so always on the side opposite to her. Then she 
heard a knocking at the back kitchen door. She ran to it, un- 
locked it softly, and, when the knocking was repeated, suddenly 
opened it ; but nothing was to be seen. As soon as she had shut 
it, the knocking -began again. She opened it again, but could 
see nothing. When she went to shut the door, it was violently 
thrust against her ; she let it fly open, but nothing appeared. 
She went again to shut it, and H was again thrust against her ; 
but she set her knee and her shoulder to the door, forced it to, 
and turned the key. Then the knocking began again ; but she 
let it go on, and went up to bed. However, from that time she 
was thoroughly convinced that there was no imposture in the 
afiair. 

" The next morning, my sister telling my mother what had 

16 fNTRODUCTION. 

happened, she said, = If I hear anything myself, I shall know 
how to judge.' Soon after, she begged her to come into the nur- 
sery. She did, and heard in the corner of the room, as it were, 
the violent rocking of a cradle ; but no cradle had been there for 
some years. She was convinced it was preternatural, and earnestly 
prayed it might iiot disturb her in her own chamber in the hours 
of retirement ; and it never did. She now thought it was proper 
to tell my father. But he was extremely angry, and said, ' Su- 
key, I am ashamed of you; these boys and girls frighten one an- 
other ; but you are a woman of sense, and should know better. 
Let me hear of it no more.' 

" At six in the evening he had family prayers as usual. When 
he began the prayer for the king, a knocking began all around 
the room; and a thundering knock attended the amen. The 
same was heard from this time every morning and evening while 
the prayer for the king was repeated. 

" Being informed that Mr. Hoole, the vicar of Haxey (an 
eminently pious and sensible man), could give me some further in- 
formation, I walked over to him. He said, ' Robert Brown came 
over to me, and told me your father desired my company. When 
I came, he gave me an account of all that had happened ; par- 
ticularly the knocking during family prayer. But that evening 
(to my great satisfaction) we had no knocking at all. But be- 
tween nine and ten a servant came in, and said, ' Old Jeffrey is 
coming (that was the name of one that died in the house), for I 
hear the signal.' This, they informed me, was heard every night 
about a quarter before ten. It was toward the top of the house, 
on the outside, at the north-east corner, resembling the loud 
creaking of a saw ; or rather that of a windmill, when the body 
of it is turned about, in order to shift the sails to the wind. We 
then heard a knocking over our heads ; and Mr. Wesley, catch- 
ing up a candle, said, ' Come, sir, now you shall hear for your- 
self." We went up stairs ; he with much hope, and I, to say 
the truth, with much fear. When we came into the nursery, it 
was knocking in the next room ; when we were there, it was 

INTRODUCTION. 17 

knocking in the nursery. And there it continued to knock, 
though we came in, particularly at the head of the bed (which 
was of wood), in which Hetty and two of her younger sisters lay. 
Mr. Wesley, observing that they were much afieoted, though 
asleep, sweating and trembling exceedingly, was very angry ; and, 
pulling out a pistol, was going to fire at' the place from whence 
the sound came. But I catched him by the arm, and said, ' Sir, 
you are convinced this is something preternatural. If so, you 
cannot hurt it; but you give it power to hurt you.' He then went 
close to the place, and said sternly, ' Thou deaf and dumb devil, 
why dost thou fright these children, that cannot answer for them- 
selves ? Come to me, in my study, that am a man.' Instantly it 
knocked his knock (the particular knock which he always used 
at the gate), as if it would shiver the board in pieces, and we 
heard nothing more that night.' Till this time, my father had 
never heard the least disturbances in his study. But the next 
evening, as he attempted to go into his study (of which none had 
any key but ^himself), when he opened the door, it was thrust 
back with such violence as had like to have thrown him down. 
However, he thrust the door open, and went in. Presently there 
was knocking, first on one side, then on the other ; and, after a 
time, in. the next room, wherein my sister Nancy was. He went 
into that room, and (the noise continuing) adjured it to speak ; 
but in vain. He then said, ' These spirits love darkness ; put out 
the candle, and perhaps it will speak.' She did so, and he re- 
peated his adjuration ; but still there was only knocking, and no 
articulate sound. Upon this he said, ' Nancy, two Christians are 
an overmatch for the devil. Go all of you down stairs ; it may 
be, when I am alone, he will have courage to speak.' When she, 
was gone, a thought came in, and he said, ' If thou art the spirit 
of my son Samuel, I pray knock three knocks, and no more.' 
Immediately all was silence ; and there was no more knocking at 
all that night. I asked my sister Nancy (then about fifteen years 
old) whether she was not afraid when my father used that ad- 
juration. She answered, she was sadly afraid it would speak 
2* 

18 INTRODUCTION. 

V, lien she put out the candle j but she was not at all afraid in the 
daytime, when it walked after her, as she swept the chambers, as 
it constantly did, and seemed to sweep after her ; only she thought 
he might have done it for her, and saved her the trouble. By 
this time all my sisters were so accustomed to these noises that 
they gave them little disturbance. A gentle tapping at their 
bed-head usually began between nine and ten at night. They 
then commonly said to each other, ' JeflFrey is coming ; it is time 
to go to sleep.' And if they heard a noise in the day, and said 
to my youngest sister, ' Hark, Kezzy, Jeffrey is knocking above,' 
she would run up stairs, and pursue it from room to room, saying 
she desired no better diversion. 

" A few nights after, my father and mother were just gone to 
bed, and the candle was not taken away, when they heard three 
blows, and a second, and a third three, as it were with a large 
oaken staff, struck upon a chest that stood by the bed-side. My 
father immediately arose, put on his night-gown, and, hearing 
great noises below, took the candle and went down ; my mother 
walked by his side. As they went down the broad stairs, they 
heard as if a vessel full of silver was poured upon my mother's 
breast, and ran jingling down to her feet. Quickly after, there 
was a sound as if a large iron ball was thrown among many bot- 
tles under the stairs ; but nothing was hurt. Soon after, our 
large mastiff dog came and ran to shelter himself between them. 
While the disturbances continued, he used to bark and leap, and 
snap on one side and the other, and that frequently before any 
person in the room heard any noise at all. But after two or 
three days, he used to tremble and creep away before the noise 
began ; and by this the family knew it was at hand j nor did 
ihe observation ever fail. A little before my father and mother 
came into the hall, it seemed as if a very large coal was violently 
ilirown upon the floor, and dashed all in pieces ; but nothing was 
bcen. My father then cried out, ' Sukey, do you not hear ? All 
tl.e pewter is thrown about the kitchen.' But when they looked, 
u.l the pewter stood in its place. There then was a loud knock- 

INIBODUCTION. 19 

ing at the back door. My father opened it, but saw nothing. It 
was then at the fore door. He opened that, but it was still lost 
labor. After opening first the one, then the other, several times, 
he turned and went to bed. But the noises were so violent all 
over the houssi that they could not sleep till four in the morning. 
" Several gentlemen and clergymen now earnestly advised my 
father to quit the house ; but he constantly answered, ' No ; let 
the devil flee from me ; I will never flee from the devil.' But he 
wrote to my eldest brother, at London, to come down. He was 
preparing so to do, when another letter came, informing him that 
the disturbances were over, after they had continued, the latter 
part of the time day and night, from the second of January to 
the end of January." 

The following are copied from the same work, which contains 
some twelve or fifteen letters that passed between difierent mem- 
bers of the family on the subject of these disturbances. 

LETTER m. EKOM ME. S. WDSLEY TO HIS MOTHBK. 

"Deak Mother: Those who are so wise as not to believe 
any supernatural occurrences, though ever so well attested, could 
find a hundred questions to ask about those strange noises you 
wrote me an account of; but, for my part, I know not what ques- 
tion to put which, if answered, would confirm me more in the 
belief of what you tell me. Two or three I have heard from 
others. Was there never a new maid or man in the house, that 
might play tricks? Was there nobody above, in the garrets, 
when the walking was there ? Did all the family hear it together 
when they were in one room, or at one time? Did it seem all to 
be in the same place, at the same time ? Could not cats, or rats, 
or dogs, be the sprites ? Was the whole family asleep when my 
father and you went down stairs ? Such doubts as these being 
replied to, though they could not, as Grod himself assures us, con- 
vince them who believe not Moses and the prophets, yet would 
Btrengthen such as do believe. As to my particular opinion con- 

20 INTRODUCTION. 

oerning the events foreboded by these noises, I cannot, 1 must 
confess, form any. I think, since it was not permitted to speak, 
all guesses must be in vain. The end of spirits' action is yet 
more hidden than that of men, and even this latter puzzles the 
most subtle politicians. . That we may be struck so as to prepare 
for any ill, may, it is possible, be one design *of Providence. It 
is surely our duty and wisdom to do so. 

" Dear mother, I beg your blessing on your dutiful and affec- 
tionate son. S. Wesley. 

"Jan. 19, 1716-17, Saturday, Dean's Yard, Westminster." 

LETTER IV. FROM MRS. WESLEY TO HER SON SAMUEL. 

" January 25 or 27, 1716-17. 

" Dear Sam. : Though I am not one of those that will believe 
nothing supernatural, but am rather inclined to think there would 
be frequent intercourse between good spirits and us, did not our 
deep lapse into sensuality prevent it ; yet I was a great while ere 
I could credit anything of what the children and servants re- 
ported concerning the noises they heard in several parts of our 
house. Nay, after I had heard them myself, I was willing to 
persuade myself and them that it was only rats or weasels that 
disturbed us ; and having been formerly troubled with rats, which 
were frighted away by sounding a horn, I caused a horn to be 
procured, and made them blow it all over the house. But from 
that night they began to blow, the noises were more loud and dis- 
tinct, both day and night, than before ; and that night we rose 
and went down, I was entirely convinced that it was beyond 
the power of any human creature to make such strange and 
various noises. 

" As to your questions, I will answer them particularly ; but 
withal, I desire my answers may satisfy none but yourself; for I 
would not have the matter imparted to any. We had both man 
iind maid new this last Martimas, yet I do not believe either of 
(hem occasioned the disturbance, both for the reason above-men- 
tioned, and because they were more frighted than anybody else. 

INTKODUCTION. 21 

Besides, we have often heard the noise when they were in the 
room by us ; and the maid, particularly, was in such a panic that 
ehe was almost incapable of all business, nor durst ever go from 
one room to another, or stay by herself a minute, after it began 
to be dark. 

" The man, Kobert Brown, whom you well know, was most 
visited by it, lying in the garret, and has been often frighted down 
barefoot, and almost naked, not daring to stay alone to put on his 
clothes ; nor do I think, if he had power, he would be guilty of 
such villany. When the walking was heard in the garret, 
Kobert was in bed, in the next room, in sleep so sounds that he 
never heard your father and me walk up and down, though he 
walked not softly I am sure. All the family has heard it 
together, in the same room, at the same time, particularly at 
family prayers. It always seemed to all present at the same place 
at the same time ; though often, before any could say it is here, 
it would remove to another place. 

" All the family, as well as Robin, were asleep when your 
father and I went down stairs, nor did they wake in the nursery 
when we held the candle close by them ; only we observed that 
Hetty trembled exceedingly in her sleep, as she always did before 
the noise awaked her. It commonly was nearer her than the rest, 
which she took notice of, and was much frightened, because she 
thought it had a particular spite at her. I could multiply par- 
ticular instances, but I forbear. I believe your father will write 
to you about it shortly. Whatever may be the design of Prov- 
idence in permitting these things, I cannot say. ' Secret things 
belong to God.' But I entirely agree with you that it is our duty 
to prepare seriously for all events. S. Wesley." 

The following is an extract from an account of one of the sis- 
ters (Nancy) to her brother Jack. It is testimony which goes to 
show that other things herein related were not entirely unknown 
to the " Wesley family." 

22 INTRODUCTION. 

« When five or six were sitting in the nursery together, a cradle 
would seem to be rocked in the room overhead, though no cradle 
had ever been there; One tiight she was sitting on the press bed, 
playing at cards with some of my sisters, when my sisters Molly, 
Hetty, Patty and Kezzy, were in the room, and Robert Brown. 
The bed on which my Mster Nancy sat was lifted up with her on 
it. She leaped down, and said, ' Surely, old Jeffrey would not 
run away with her.' However, they persuaded her to sit down 
again, which she had scarce done when it was again lifted up, 
several times successively, to a considerable height; upon which 
she left her seat, and would not be prevailed upon to sit there 
any more. 

" Whenever they began to mention Mr. S. it presently began 
to knock, and continued to do so until they changed the discourse. 
All the time my sister Sukey was writing her last letter to him 
it made a very great noise all round the room ; and the night 
after she set out for London it knocked till morning, with scarce 
any intermission. 

" Mr. Hoole read prayers once, but it knocked as usual at the 
prayers for the king and prince. The knockings at those prayers 
were only towards the beginning of the disturbances, for a week 
or thereabouts." 

Although the disturbances generally ceased after a few weeks 
at the house of the Wesleys, we have good evidence that it was 
manifested frequently in the presence of one of the daughters for 
thirty-four years, and how much longer the history does not in- 
form us. The following is a further extract on this subject : 

" But there is a fact of which all Mr. Wesley's biographers 
are ignorant ; namely, that Jeffrey, as the spirit was called, con- 
tinued to molest some branches of the family for many years. 
We have seen that Miss Emily Wesley was the first who gave it 
the name Jeffrey, from an old man of that name who had died 
there ; and that she was more disturbed by it than any of the 

INTRODUCTION. 23 

family. I have an original letter of hers to her brother John, 
dated February 16, 1750, thirty-four years after the time, as is 
generally supposed, that Jefifrey had discontinued his operations, 
in which he is named. Emily was now Mrs. Harper, having 
married a person of that name, an apothecary, who fii;st lived in 
Epworth, and afterwards in London, or near it ; and the letter is 
addressed to the Kev. Mr. John Wesley, Foundry. 

" ' Dear Brother : I want most sadly to see you, and talk 
some hours with you, as in times past. Some things are too hard 
for me ; these I want you to solve. One doctrine of yours, and 
of many more, namely, no happiness can be found in any or all 
things in this world j that, as I have sixteen years of my own 
experience which lie flatly against it, I want to talk with you 
about. Another thing is that wonderful thing called by us 
Jeffrey. Tou won't laugh at me for being superstitious, if I tell 
j'ou how certainly that something calls on me against any extraor- 
dinary new affliction ; but so little is known of the invisible world 
that I, at least, am not able to judge whether it be a friendly or 
an evil spirit. ***** Emilt Harper.' " 

The following remarks of Dr. Clark are so appropriate to this 
time and this subject that we give them in this place : 

" The story of the disturbances at the parsonage house in 
Epworth is not unique. I myself, and several others of my par- 
ticular acquaintance, were eye and ear witnesses of transactions 
of a similar kind, which could never be traced to any source of 
trick or imposture, and appeared to be the forerunners of two very 
tragical events in the disturbed family ; after which no noise or 
disturbance ever took place. In the history of my own life I 
have related the matter in sufficient detail. 

" Dr. Priestly, who first published the preceding papers, says 
of the whole story, that ' it is, perhaps, the best-authenticated and 
best-told story of the kind that is anywhere extant ; on which 
account, and to exercise the ingenuity of some speculative persons, 

24 INTKODDCTION. 

he thought it not undeserving of being published.' — Preface, p. 
xi. After this concession, he then enters into a train of arguing, 
to show Aat there could be nothing supernatural in it ; for Dr. 
P., as a materialist, could give no credit to any account of angels, 
spirits, &c., the existence of which he did not credit ; and because 
he could see no good end to be answered by it, therefore he thinks 
he may safely conclude no miracle was wrought. Such argument- 
ation can justify no man is disbelieving a story of this kind, told so 
circumstantially, and witnessed by such a number of persons, whose 
veracity was beyond doubt, and whose capability to judge between 
fact and fiction, trick and genuine operation, was beyond that of 
most persons, who, in any country or age, have come forward to 
give testimony on a subject of this nature. He at last gets rid of 
the whole matter thus : ' What appears most probable, at this 
distance of time, in the present case, is that it was a trick of the 
servants, assisted by some of their neighbors ; and that nothing 
was meant by it besides puzzling the family and amusing them- 
selves ; and that such a secret should be kept, so that the matter 
was never discovered, is not at all to be wondered at.' We can 
scarcely suppose that this mode of reasoning satisfied the mind of 
Dr. Priestly, else he must have been satisfied much more easily 
on a subject which struck at the vitals of his own system, than he 
would have been on any doctrine relative to philosophy and chem- 
istry. He had Mrs. Wesley's letter before him, which stated that 
the servants could not be employed in the work, for reasons which 
she there adduces; and especially because those very servants 
were often in the room with themselves when the disturbances 
were most rife. But all suppositions of this kind are completely 
nullified by the preceding letter of Mrs. Harper, formerly Emily 
Wesley, which states that even to thirty-four years afterward 
Jeffrey continued to molest her. Did her father's servants and 
the Epworth neighbors pursue her for thirty-four years through 
her various settlements from 1716 to 1750, and were even at that 
time playing their pranks against her in London ? How ridicu- 
lous and absurd ! And this is the very best solution of these facts 

IKTRODUCTION. 25 

that Dr. Priestly could arrive at in deference to his system of 
materialism ! The letter of Mrs. Harper I consider of vast im- 
portance, as it removes the last subterfuge of determinate incre- 
dulity and false philosophy on this subject. 

" A philosopher should not be satisfied with the reasons 
advanced by Dr. Priestly. He who will maintain his creed in 
opposition to his senses, and the most undisguised testimony of the 
most respectable witnesses, had better at once, for his own credit's 
sake, throw the whole story into the region of doubt, where all such 
relations, no matter how authenticated, 

' Upwhirled aloft. 
Fly o'er the back side of the world far off, 
Into a limbus large and broad ! ' 

And instead of 'its being called the paradise of fools, it may be 
styled the limbus of philosophic materialists, into which they 
hurl whatever they cannot comprehend, choose not to believe, or 
please to call superstitious and absurd. And they treat such 
matters so, because they quadrate not with principles unfounded 
on the divine testimony, feebly supported by true philosophy, and 
contradictory to the plain, unbiased, good common sense of nine- 
teen-twentleths of mankind. 

" But my business is to relate facts, of which the reader must 
make what use he chooses." 

Precisely similar occurrences took place in Winesburg, Ger- 
many, and other places, from the year 1825 to 1828, the authen- 
tic accounts of which are given in a work by Justinus Kerner, 
called "The Seeress of Provorst." 

The " Seeress " was a clairvoyant, and both saw and heard the 
spirits of various persons. 

From Mrs. Crowe's translation I" make the following extract. 
On page 63 the account says : 

" ' These spirits were audible to many and various people, but 
3 

26 INTRODUCTION. 

only accidentally; never when they were watched for. The 
sounds they made chiefly resembled slight knockings, as on the 
wall, table, bedstead, and sometimes in the air ; rustling as of 
paper, rolling of balls, and pattering of feet.' On page 72, in 
speaking of a particular spirit, he says : ' His appearance was 
always preceded by knockings on the walls, noises in the air, and 
other sounds, which were heard by many diflferent people, as can 
be testified to by more than twenty credible witnesses ; ' and on 
page 86 : ' We went to bed about ten, and remained awake until 
eleven, when I fell asleep. About twelve, Mrs. H. (the Seeress) 
asked for some broth, and I was awakened by her sister getting 
out of bed to give it to her. She was scarcely in bed again when 
we heard a strange crackling and shuffling on the floor ; then 
there was a knocking on the walls and Mrs. H.'s bed as with 
hammers. I watched Mrs. H. all the time. She lay quite quiet, 
with her hands on the coverlet ; presently she began to speak, but 
without sitting up. Her conversation seemed to be addressed to 
something near her bed, which I could not see. By and by, she 
said, " The spectre is gone, but will return anon ; " and then we 
again heard the sounds, and she spoke as before. Then I heard 
her say " Open it yourself; " and I saw, with an awe which I had 
not before felt, the cover of the book move as it lay on her bed, 
and it was opened by an unseen hand. I could not perceive the 
slightest motion on the part of Mrs. H. nor her bed.' " 

Many similar accounts are related in this work, and some very 
singular transactions are testified to by Councillor Hahn, as 
having taken place in the Castle of Slawensick, in Silesia, of which 
he was an eye and ear witness. 

Another incident, still later, was published in the Newark 
(N. J.) Daily Advertiser, in November, 1834, under the head of 
" Tale of the Marvel." It is as follows : 

" Rumor with one of her ten thousand tongues brought us a 
jnysterious story, yesterday, of a ' mysterious lady,' which so far 

INTRODUCTION. 27 

challenged credit, that we were induced to send a competent wit- 
ness in the afternoon to procure more particular information. Our 
agent, after the ftiUest opportunity of observation, has returned 
this morning, and communicates the following facts, which we give 
without embellishment as he relates them. On Monday night of 
last week the family of Mr. Joseph Barron, living in the town- 
ship of Woodbridge, about three ihiles from Kahway, in this 
county, were alarmed, after they had retired, by a loud thumping 
against the house. Mr. B.'s first impression was that some 
person was trying to break in ; but farther observation soon unde- 
ceived him. The thumping, however, continued at short intervals, 
untU the family became so alarmed that Mr. B. called in some 
of his neighbors, who remained up with the family until daylight,-- 
when the thumping ceased. The next evening, after nightfall, the 
noise recommenced, when it was ascertained to be mysteriously 
connected with the movements of a servant girl in the family, — a 
white girl, about fourteen years of age. While passing a window 
on the stairs, for example, a sudden jar, accompanied with an 
explosive sound, broke a pane of glass, the girl at the same time 
being seized with a violent spasm. This, of course, very much 
alarmed her ; and the physician. Dr. Drake, was sent for, came, 
and bled her (of course). The bleeding, however, produced no 
apparent efiect. The noise still continued as before, at intervals, 
wherever the girl went, each sound producing more or less of a 
spasm, and the physician, with all the family, remained up during 
the night. At daylight the thumping ceased again. In the 
evening the same thing was repeated, commencing a little earlier 
than before ; and so every evening since, continuing each night 
until morning, and commencing each night a little earlier than 
before, until yesterday, when the thumping began about twelve 
o'clock at noon. The circumstances were soon generally spread 
through the neighborhood, and have produced so much excite- 
ment that the house has been filled and surrounded from sunrise 
to sunset for nearly a week. Every imaginable means have been 
resorted to, in order to unravel the phenomenon. At one time 

28 INTEODUCTION. 

the girl would be removed from one apartment to another, but 
■without effect. Wherever she was placed, at certain intervals, the 
thumping noise would be heard in the room. She was taken to a 
neighboring house. The same result followed. When carried out 
of doors, however, no noise is heard. Dr. Drake, who has been 
constant in his attendance during the whole period, occasionally 
aided by other scientific observers, was with us last evening for 
two hours, when we were politely allowed a variety of experi- 
ments with the girl, in addition to those heretofore tried, to satisfy 
ourselves that there is no imposition in the case, and, if possible, 
to discover the secret agent of the mystery. The girl was in an 
upper room with a part of the family when we reached the house. 
The noise then resembled that which would be produced by a 
person violently thumping the upper floor with the head of an axe 
five or six times in succession, jarring the house, ceasing a few 
minutes, and then resuming as before. We were soon introduced 
into the apartment and permitted to observe for ourselves. The 
girl appeared to be in perfect health, cheerful and free from the 
spasms felt at first, and entirely relieved from everything like the 
fear or apprehension which she manifested for some days. The 
invisible noise, however, continued to occur as before, though 
somewhat diminished in frequency, while we were in the room. 
In order to ascertain more satisfactorily that she did not produce 
it voluntarily, among other experiments we placed her on a chair 
on a blanket in the centre of the room, bandaged the chair with a 
cloth, fastening her feet on the front round, and confining her 
hands together on her lap. No change, however, was produced. 
The thumping continued as before, except that it was not quite so 
loud — the noise resembling that which would be produced by 
stamping on the floor with a heavy heel ; yet she did not move a 
limb or muscle that we could discover. She remained in this 
position long enough to satisfy all in the room that the girl exer- 
cised, voluntarily, no sort of agency in producing the noise. It 
was observed that the noise became greater the further she was 
removed from any other person. We placed her in the doorway 

INTRODUCTION. 29 

of a closet in the room, the door being ajar to allow her to stand 
in the passage. In less than one minute the door flew open, as if 
violently struck with a mallet, accompanied by precisely such a 
noise as such a thump would produce. This was repeated several 
times with the same effect. In short, in whatever position she was 
placed, whether in or out of the room, similar results, varied a 
little perhaps by circumstances, were produced. There is cer- 
tainly no deception in the case. And now for conjecture. For 
ourselves we offer none ; but among other conjectures, which have 
been suggested by Dr. D. and others, is that the phenomr 
enon is electrical. ***** The noise was heard at 
least one hundred yards from the house." 

How long these sounds continued I am not informed, but it is 
stated that the family became'- so much annoyed that they were 
obliged to give notice that they would receive no more company 
unless they were professional men introduced by their physician. 

These accounts come down to us sustained by the most positive 
testimony, and are beyond dispute, to say nothing of the well- 
authenticated cases which are related by those whom we know, 
but who have been astamed to let the world know what they have 
themselves experienced, and so keep their secret until others, more 
daring, shall lay before the world similar fects, when they will 
step forward and add their mite to the testimony. 

There must certainly exist some natural cause, by which thecse 
sounds are made. By natural causes I do not mean that the 
cause is positively known to man at the present time, or that it is 
produced by machinery or collusion of any kind. I know this is 
7iot the case. But, as nothing can exist without a cause, and as 
the laws of nature are the most perfect of anything we can have 
any conception of; and as nothing of which man or any other 
production of these laws can conceive or recognize can be supe- 
rior or above these laws (unless it be the source from whence 
they originated), I speak of the laws which govern this commu- 
nication between inferior and superior intelligences as perfectly 
3* 

30 INTRODUCTION. 

KATURAL. I ask to be pointed to nothing superior to this in the 
investigation of the subject. 

Neither would I make the separation that some do between 
spirit and matter. I am convinced that no such separation exists. 
It is at the same time to assert that it is something and notMng. 
If it is not matter, it is nothing. It is the height of absurdity to 
assert that there is an absolute existence, and yet it is not matter, 
— it is nothing, yet to be talked of, to, and about. That there 
exists matter too refined, subtile and sublimated, for our vision in 
a normal state to observe, is undoubted ; and I have as little 
doubt of there being intelligent beings who, beyond our vision, 
still have an influence upon us, and are entirely capable of com- 
municating with us through sounds, impressions anS various other 
means. It is no more proof that they are not thus about us, 
because not seen, than that electricity, or the numerous animalculaj 
which we are constantly eating, drinking and breathing, although 
unseen, do not exist for the same reason. It may not be unprof- 
itable to go into the examination of the connection between spirits 
and other matter, in this connection, in order that the reader's 
mind may be prepared for the development of facts which may 
look still more strange than those already related. 

In regard to the rapping sounds, and other phenomena and their 
existence, there is no longer room for doubt. The tens of thou- 
sands of individuals who have heard them, and who have been in 
full possession of their senses, and not easily to be deceived, are 
abundant testimony on this point. 

The connection between spirit and other matter, or between the 
visible and invisible world of human beings, is at present little un- 
derstood. I am of the opinion that the connection is far more inti- 
mate than is generally believed. Of this fact there is the most pos- 
itive and convincing proof. Many may be so averse to receiving new 
truths, which set aside all their preconceived opinions, as to disre- 
gard the positive evidence of their senses. But most men are not 
willing to admit that they are so easily imposed upon, as many 
think, or pretend to think, they are themselves. 

INTROBUCTION. 31 

If men -would acquaint themselves with the process of the form- 
ation of the earth ; if they would observe how it gradually grew, 
through countless ages, to its present form and state of perfection ; 
if they would reflect that, instead of its always having been what 
it now is in size, shape" and substance, it was once a liquid mass, 
which gradually, by the action of natural causes, became solid in 
its essential parts and foundations ; that at one time vegetable life 
could not be found " on the face of the earth ; " if they would 
remember that at first the mineral productions were of the grossest 
kind, which have been constantly changing and refiningj that in 
the course of ages vegetable productions of the rankest kind ap- 
peared, and that, as the earth perfected, the more refined were the 
productions, and finally animal life appeared ; that these animals, 
like the vegetable productions, were of -the most imperfect nature ; 
and at last, after ages had rolled away, the earth was prepared for 
the production of man, the superior of all these as an intelligent, 
thinking being ; that he at first was a mere infant to what after 
ages developed him to be ; that he is still progressing onward and 
upward in knowledge and refinement, and exhibits a perfection of 
organization which is beyond the power of annihilation ; they would 
begin to form some idea of the great chain of progression which 
not only applies to things visible, but with equal force throughout 
the universe and to all stages of existence. 

Would it be reasonable to stop short at the decay of man's visi- 
ble organization, and deny the existence of any remaining intelli- 
gence that pertained to him, merely because we cannot see that 
existence ? No man will assert this to be a valid reason. In 
fact, from various proofs, or from the authority of others, the idea 
of a future existence has become almost universal ; and, whether 
these ideas have been philosophically formed or not, it would be 
useless in this place for us to inquire. 

It is said, and we think never disputed by men of science, that 
all space is filled with solid, fluid and imponderable substances, 
and that all objects, or any two, in space, let them be far off or 
near to each other, are necessarily connected by the various forms 

32 INTllODUCIION. 

or substances existing in the space which separates them. It is a 
matter, which has long been settled by men of philosophy and edu- 
cation, that all particles of matter, wherever situated, act upon 
and influence each other ; that each has an influence upon the 
other ; and that none exist or act without an absolute dependence 
upon the whole ; in a word, there is no such thing as absolute 
individual independence in the universe. 

The highest form of organization of which we have any concep- 
tion, and which probably is the highest, is that which manifests 
inteUiffence. The forms of intelligence, or their manifestations, 
are various, defined by some as instinct and reason. It is use- 
less to undertake the task of tracing them, through their different 
gradations, up to the highest developments of reason. There is in 
this, as in tracing the various forms of vegetable and animal life, 
a connection so intimate and perfect, that it is impossible to tell 
where the lower ends and the higher begins, so closely interwoven 
are the links of the great chain of which each is a part. 

May we not, then, safely calculate that man continues to pro- 
gress beyond his present state of existence, and that the change , 
which takes place at what is called death is not so vast and so 
sudden as the world has generally supposed ? — and that the day 
is not far distant when the whole phenomena recorded in the fol- 
lowing pages shall be looked upon as only the incidents in the 
development of a free and continued intercourse between the visible 
and invisible worlds ? 

CHAPTER II. 

PntSX BISTtJRBANOES AT HTDE3TILLB EVENTS PIIEVI0U3 TO THE S0UKD9 

EEINQ HEABD WITH THE FOX JAHILT — TE3TIH0NT Or 'WITHESSES — 
FIRST MEDIUMS, ETC. ETC. 

The house at which the manifestations first commenced, that 
have turned the eyes of the people of this generation to a more 
minute and careful investigation of spiritual phenomena than 
has characterized any preceding age, stands amcfng a cluster of 
houses known by the name of Hydesville, in the town of Arcadia, 
county of Wayne and state of New York. It is a small framed 
building, one and a half stories high, and, at the time of the occur- 
rences which have made it a matter of interest and curiosity to so 
many thousands, bore unmistakable evidences of age ; and had 
been the humble shelter of many a family previous to that of 
Mr. Fox. 

It has generally been supposed, and so published, in most of 
the accounts of the commencement of these phenomena, that the 
sounds were first hearcb when the house was occupied by a Mr. 
Weekman. This seems to be an error, as there are, at least, two 
witnesses, whose testimony is recorded in a small pamphlet, pub- 
lished by E. E. Lewis, Esq., at Canandaigua, N. Y., in 1848, 
who testify to the sounds being heard by a family who occupied 
the same house in 1844. These witnesses arc Mrs. Ann Pulver 
and Miss Lucretia Pulver. The former testifies as follows : 

" I was acquainted with Mr. and Mrs. (who occupied the 

house in 1844). I used to call on them frequently. My warping 
bars were in their chamber, and I used to go there to do my 
work. One morning when I went there Mrs. told me that 

34 FIKST DISl'UKBANCES AT HYDESVILLE. 

she felt very bad; that she had not slept much if any the night 
before. When I asked her what the matter was, slie said she 
did n't know but what it was the fidgets ; but she thought she 
heard somebody walking about from one room to another, and 

that she had Mr. get up and fasten down all the windows. 

She said she felt more safe after that. I asked her what she 
thought it was. She said it mighi be rats. I heard her speak 
about hearing noises after that which she could not account for.'" 

Miss Lucretia Pulver, in her testimony, says : " I liyed in this 

house all one winter, in. the family of Mr. . I worked for 

them part of the time, and part of the time I boarded and went- 
to school. I lived there about three months. During the latter 
part of the time that I was there I heard this knocking fre- 
quently, in the bedroom, under the foot of the bed. I heard it 
a number of nights, as I slept in the bedroom all the time that 
I staid there. One night I thought I heard a man walking in 
the buttery. This buttery is near the bedroom, with a stairway 
between. Miss Aurelia Lozey staid with me on that night ; she 
also heard the noise, and we were both much frightened, and got 
up, and fastened down the windows and fastened the door. It 
sounded as if a person walked through the buttery, down cellar, 
and part way across the cellar bottom, and there the noise would 
cease. There was no one else in the house at this time, except 
my little brother, who was asleep in the same room with us. 
This was about twelve o'clock, I should think. We did not go 
to bed until after eleven, and had not been asleep when we heard 

the noise. Mr. and Mrs. had gone to Loch Berlin, to be 

gone until the next day." 

It seems, then, that these noises had been common to the house 
for some years before the Pox family occupied it. In the year 
1847, it was occupied by Mr. Michael Weekman. Mr. Week- 
man and his family are not to be numbered among the supersti- 
tious and credulous ; at least, their neighbors never thought them 
so before they made their statements in regard to the occur- 
rences at their house. As it may be of importance, hereafter, to 

STATEMENT OP MRS. HANNAH WEEKMAN. 35 

have all the proofs in regard to the first introduotion of the mod- 
ern manifestations, I will here introduce the testimony of Mr. 
and Mrs. Weekman. The certificates are those originally given 
to E. E. Lewis, Esq., and published as before stated. 

STATEMENT OF MRS. HANNAH WEEKMAN. 

" We have lived in this place about five months. I have heard 
about the mysterious noises that have been heard in the house 
now occupied by Mr. Fox. "We used to live in the same house ; 
we lived there about a year and a half, and moved from there to 
the house we now occupy. About a year ago, while we were liv- 
ing there, we heard some one, as we supposed, rapping on the 
outside door. I had just got into bed, but my husband had not. 
He went and opened it, and said that there was no one there. 
He came back, and was about getting into bed, when we heard 
the rapping on the door again. He then went to the door and 
opened it, and said that he could see no one, although he stepped 
out a little way. He then came back and got into bed. He was 
quite angry ; he thought 't was some of the neighboring boys try- 
ing to disturb us, and said that ' they might knock away, but 
they would not fool him,' or something of that kind. The knock- 
ing was heard again ; and after a while he got up, and went to the 
door and went out. I told him not to go out doors, for perhaps 
somebody wanted to get him out and hurt him. He came back, 
and said he could see nothing. We heard a good deal of noise 
during the night ; we could hardly tell where it was : it sounded, 
sometimes, as if some one was walking in the cellar. But the house 
was old, and we thought it might be the rattling of loose boards, 
or something of that kind. 

" A few nights afterwards, one of our little girls, who slept in 
the bedroom where the noises are now heard, woke us all up by 
screaming very loud. My husband and I, and our hired girl, got 
up immediately to see what was the matter. She sat up in bed, 
crying and screaming, and it was some time before we could find 
out what the matter was. She said that something had been 

36 FIRST DISTUKBANCES AT UYDESVILLE. 

moving about, over her head and face — that it was cold, and she 
did not know what it was. She said that she felt it all over her, 
but she was most alarmed at feeling it on her face. She was 
very much frightened. This was between twelve and one o'clock 
at night. She got up and got into bed with us, and it was a 
long time before she could go to sleep. It was several days 
before we could get her to sleep in that room again. She was 
eight years old at that time. 

"Nothing else happened to me during the time that we lived 
there ; but my husband told me that one night he heard some one 
call him by name, somewhere in the house, — he did not know 
where, — but could never find out where or what it was. I was 
not at home that night. I was sitting up with a sick person. 
We did not think the house was haunted at that time. 

"I do not believe in spooks, or anything of that kind; but I 
hardly know what to say about it now ; so many have heard the 
noises that it seemed as if something was the matter. 

" (Signed,) Hannah Weekman. 

" Tuesday, April 11, 1848." 

STATEMENT OP MICHAEL WEEKMAN. 

'< I am the husband of Hannah Weekman. We used to live in 
the house now occupied by Mr. Fox, in which they say strange 
noises are heard. We lived there about a year and a half. One 
evening, about bed-time, I heard the rapping. I supposed it was 
some one knocking at the door, who wanted to come in. I did 
not bid him ' come in ' as I usually do, but went to the door. I 
did not find any one there ; but went back, and just as I was get- 
ting into bed, I heard the rapping again, and opened the door 
quick, but could see no one there. I stepped out a step or two, 
but could see no one about there. I then went back and got into 
bed. I thought some one was making game of me. After a few 
minutes I heard the knocking again, and after waiting a few 
minutes, and still hearing it, I got up and went to the door. This 
time I went clear out and looked around the house, but cou^ " 

STATEMENT 01? JANE C. LAPE. 37 

find no one. I then stepped back and shut the door, and held on 
to the latch, thinking that if there was any one there I would 
catch them at it. In a minute or two I heard the rapping again. 
My hand was on the door, and the knocking appeared to be on 
the door. I could feel it jar with the raps. I instantly opened 
the door, and sprang out ; but there was no one in sight. I then 
went round the house again, but could find no one, as before. My 
wife told me I had better not go out of doors, as it might be some 
one that wanted to hurt me. I did not know what to think of it, it 
seemed so strange and unaccountable." (He here relates the case 
of the little girl being frightened, as given above.) 

" One night after this, about midnight, I was awake, and heard 
my name called. It sounded as if it was on the south side of the 
room. I sat up in bed and listened, but did not hear it again. I 
did not get out of bed, but waited to see if it would be repeated. 
My wife was not at home that night. I told her of it afterwards, 
and she said she guessed I had been dreaming. My wife used to 
be frightened quite often by hearing strange noises in and about 
the house. 

" I have heard so much from men in whom I place confidence 
about these noises that are now heard, that, taken in connection 
with what I heard, I cannot account for it, unless it is a super- 
natural appearance. I am willing to make afiidavit to the above 
facts, if necessary. (Signed,) Michael Wbekman. 

" 11th AprU, 1848." 

Mrs. Jane C. Lape testified as follows : " I am the wife of 
Henry Lape, and am nineteen years of age. I lived with Mr. 
Weekman's folks, about a year and a half ago, when he occupied 
the house where Mr. Fox now lives. I staid there until the 
spring of 1847. One day, about two o'clock, p. m., while I was 
doinir my work in the kitchen, I saw a man in the bedroom 
adjoining the kitchen. The bedroom door was open and I saw 
the man distinctly. I was much frightened. I had been in the 
kitchen some time, at work, and knew no one had gone into that 
4 

38 FIRST BISTUUBANCES AT HYDESTILLB. 

room. There was only one door to the bedroom joining the 
kitchen. The man stood facing me when I saw him. Ho did not 
speak, nor did I hear any noise at the time like a person walking 
or moving about the room. He had on gray pants, black frock- 
coat, and black cap. He was about middling size, I should think. 
I knew of no person in that vicinity who wore a similar dress. 
Mrs. Weekman was in another part of the house at the time. I 
was very much frightened, and left the room, and when I returned 
with Mrs. "Weekman there was no one there. Sh5 thought it was 
some one who had been trying to frighten me ; but we were never 
able to ascertain who or what it was. I have always thought, 
and still do think, that it was a supernatural appearance. I never 
had been a believer in such things until I saw this. I am 
willing to testify to the above statement. 

" (Signed,) Jane C. Lape." 

We hear nothing more of Mr. Weekman being disturbed by 
the rapping or other manifestations, or there being anything of 
the kind, with that exception, until after the house was occupied 
by the family of Mr. John D. Fox. It was reserved to that family 
to be the instruments of communicating to the world, or to this part 
of it, this most singular afiair. They were the ones who first, as 
if by accident, found out that there was an intelligence manifested 
even in this rapping, which at first appeared nothing more than an 
annoying and unaccountable noise. 

The family of Mr. Pox were well known in the neighborhood 
where they resided. Mr. and Mrs. Fox were connected with the 
Methodist Episcopal church, of which they had for many years 
been exemplary members, and had sustained a character unim- 
peachable for truth and veracity. No one who knew them had 
the least suspicion of their honesty or truthfulness. At the time 
these occurrences first took place in the family there were living 
with the parents three daughters, the youngest about twelve years 
of age. 

There are, probably, few families in which such an occurrence 

STATEMENT OJ? MRS. MARGARET POX. 39 

could have taken place, where it would have created a greater , 
degree of surprise and fear than in this one. They were entirely 
unacquainted with the history of any similar occurrence in the 
world ; and, brought Tip in the conimon routine of religious belief, 
they were, as, in fact, most of the world really was, and still is, 
entirely unprepared for sudh a development of the power of 
spirits to make themselves known to us by sounds, or other tangi- 
ble means. 

The following statements, condensed from the pamphlet before 
alluded to, will give the account of the first disturbances at the 
house of Mr. Eox, in their own language. 

STATEMENT Of MRS. MARGARET FOX. 

" I am the wife of John D. Fox. We moved into this house on 
the 11th of December, 1847, and have resided here ever since. 
"We first heard this noise about a fortnight ago. It sounded like 
some one knocking in the east bedroom, on the floor. Sometimes 
it sounded as if a chair moved on the floor ; we could hardly tell 
where it was. This was in the evening, just after we had gone 
to bed The whole family slept in the room together, and 
all heard the noise. There were four of our family, and some- 
times five. The first night we heard the rapping we all got up, 
lit a candle, and searched all over the house. The noise continued 
while we were hunting, and was heard near the same place all the 
time. It was not very loud, yet it produced a jar of the bed- 
steads and chairs, that could be felt by placing our hands on the 
chairs, or while we were in bed. It was a feeling of tremulous 
motion, more than a sudden jar. It seemed if we could hear it 
jar while we were standing on the floor. It continued this night 
until we went to sleep. I did not go to sleep until nearly twelve 
o'clock. The noise continued to be heard every night. On Friday 
night, March' 31st, it was heard as usual, and we then, for the 
first time, called in the neighbors. Up to this time we had never 
heard it in the daytime, or, at least, we did not notice it at all 
during the day. 

40 riBST DISTDKBANCES AX HYDESVILLE. 

" On Friday night we concluded to go to bed early, and not let 
it disturb us ; if it came we thought we would not mind it, but 
try to get a good night's rest. My husband was here on all these 
occasions, heard the noise, and helped search. It was very early 
when we went to bed this night; hardly dark. We went to bed 
early, because we had been broken so. much of our rest that I was 
almost sick. 

" My husband had gone to bed when we first heard the noise this 
evening. I had just laid down when it commenced, as usual. I 
knew it from all other noises I had ever heard in the house. The 
girls, who slept in the other bed in the room, heard the noise, and 
tried to make a similar noise by snapping their fingers. The 
youngest girl is about twelve years old. She is the one who made 
her hand go. As fast as she made the noises with her hands or 
fingers, the sounds followed up in the room. It did not sound 
diiFereut at that time ; but it made the same number of raps the 
girl did. When she stopped the sounds would stop for a short 
time. The other girl, who is in her fifteenth year, then spoke, in 
sport, and said, ' Now do just as I do. Count one, two, three, 
four,' etc., at the same time striking one hand in the other. The 
blows which she made were repeated, as before. It appeared to 
answer her by repeating every blow she made. She' only did so 
once. She then began to be startled, and I said to the noise 
' Count ten,' and it made ten strokes or noises. Then I asked 
the ages of my difierent children successively, and it gave the 
number of raps corresponding to the ages of each of my children. 

" I then asked if it was a human being making the noise, and, 
if so, to manifest it by the same aaoise. There was no noise. I 
then asked if it was a spirit ? — if it was, to manifest it by two 
sounds. I heard two sounds as soon as the words were spoken. I 
then asked if it was an injured spirit, and, if so, to give me the 
sound ; and I heard- the rapping distinctly. I then asked if it 
was injured in this house, and the sounds were immediately made, 
distinctly ; — if the person was living that injured it, and got the 
same answer. I then ascertained, by the same method, that its 

STATEMENT OF MRS. MAKGARET POX. 41 

remains were buried under the dwelling, and how old it was. 
When I asked how many years old it was it rapped thirty-one 
times ; that it was a male ; that it had left a family of five chil- 
dren ; that it had two sons and three daughters, all living. I 
asked if it left a wife, and it rapped ; — if its wife was then 
living, and there was no rapping ; — if she was dead, and the rap- 
ping was distinctly heard ; — h'Ow long she had been dead, and it 
rapped twice. 

"About this time I asked, ' Will the noise continue if I call in 
some of the neighbors, that they may hear it too ?' It answered, 
as usual, by rapping. My husband went and called Mrs. Red- 
field, our next door neighbor. She is a very candid woman. 
The girls were then sitting up in bed, somewhat terrified, and 
clinging to each other. I was as calm, I think, as I am now. 
Mrs. Redfield came immediately. This was about half-past seven 
o'clock. She came in thinking to joke and laugh at the children ; 
but when she came she saw that we were all amazed like, and 
that there was something in it. I then asked a few questions, 
and they were answered as before ; and she was satisfied that 
there was something strange about it. It told her age exactly. 
She would then call her husband, and he came, and the same 
questions were asked over again, and the answers Were the same 
as before. It was then asked howloiig it had befin injwed, and 
the sound was repeated four times, at regular intervals, and then, 
after a short pause, once more ; the same being repeated every 
time the same question was asked. 

" Then Mr. Redfield called in Mr. Duesler andwife, and several 
others. A great many questions were asked over, and the same 
answers given as before. Mr. Duesler then called in Mr. and Mrs. 
Hyde; they came, and also Mr. and Mrs. Jewell. Mr. Duesler 
asked many questions, and got the answers. I then named over 
all the neighbors I could think of, and asked if any of them had 
injured it, and got no answer. Then Mr. Duesler asked it some 
questions, the same as I had, and got the same answers. He 
asked if it was murdered, and it answered in the usual way; — if 
4* 

42 FIRST DISTORBANCES AT HYDBSVILIiE. 

the murderer could be brought to justice, and there was no sound ; 
and then if he could be punished by law, and there was no rapping. 
He then asked, ' If this murderer cannot be punished by law, man- 
ifest it by the noise ? ' and the noise was repeated. In the same 
way Mr. Duesler ascertained that it was murdered in the bed- 
room about five years ago, and that the murder was committed by 

Mr. , on one Tuesday night, at twelve o'clock ; that it was 

murdered by having its throat cut with a butcher knife ; that the 
body did not remain in the room next day, but was taken down 
cellar, and that it was not buried until the next night ; that it was 
not taken down through an outside door, but through the buttery, 
down the stairway ; that it was buried ten feet below the surface 
of the ground. It was then asked if money was the object of the 
murderer ; and the rapping commenced. How much money was 
obtained? Was it one hundred dollars? two hundred? three 
hundred ? four hundred? No noise. Five hundred ? The usual 
rapping was heard. "We were all in the bedroom at the time. 

" Many called in that night, who were out fishing in the creek, 
and they all heard the same noise. The same questions were fre- 
quently repeated as others came in, and the same answers were ob- 
tained. Some of them staid here all night. I and my family all 
left the house but my husband. I went to Mrs. Eedfield's and staid 
all night ; my children staid at some of the other neighbors. My 
husband and Mr. Redfield staid in the house all night. 

" On the next day the house was fillgd to overflowing all day. 
This was on Saturday. There was no sound heard during the 
day ; but in the evening the sound commenced agaia. Some said 
that there were three hundred people present at this time. They 
appointed a committee, and many questions were asked. I did 
not know much what was done that night, only by hearsay, as I 
went to Mr. Duesler's to stay all night. 

" On Sunday morning, the second of April, the noise com- 
menced again, and was heard throughout the day by all who came 
there. On Saturday night they commenced digging the cellar 
and dug until they came to water, and then gave, it up. The 

STATEMENT OS WILLIAM DUESLBK. 43 

noise was not heard on Sunday evening, nor during the night. 
Stephen B. Smith and wife, and David S. Fox and wife, slept in 
the room this night. I have heard nothing since that_ time until 
yesterday. In the forenoon of yesterday there were several ques- 
tions answered in the usual way by rapping. I have heard the 
noise several times to-day. 

" I am not a believer in haunted houses or supernatural appear- 
ances. I am very sorry there has been so much excitement about 
it. It has been a great deal of trouble to us. It was our mis- 
fortune to live here at ^this time ; but I am willing and anxious 
that the truth should be known, and that a true statement should 
be made. I cannot account for these noises ; all that I know is, 
that they have been heard repeatedly, as I have stated. I have 
heard this rapping again this (Tuesday) morning, April 4th. My 
children also heard it. 

" I certify that the above statement has been read to me,-and 
that the same is true ; and I am willing to make oath to it if 
necessary. (Signed,) Margaket Fox. 

"April 11th, 1848." 

Mr. John D. Fox gives a certificate corroborating his wife's 
statement in every particular, and says : " I do not know in what 
way to account for these noises, as being caused by natural means. 
We have searched in every nook and corner in and about the 
house, at different times, to ascertain, if possible, whether 
anything or anybody was secreted there that could make the 
noise ; and^ave never been able to find anything that explained 
the mystery. It has caused us a great deal of trouble and 
anxiety. Hundreds have visited the house, so that it is impossi- 
ble to attend to our daily occupations ; and I hope, whether it be 
natural or supernatural, the means will be found out soon." 

statement op WILLIAM DTIESLEE. 

" I live in this place. I moved from Cayuga county here last 
October. I live within a few rods of the house in which these 
noises have been heard. The first I heard anything about them 

44 riKST DISTUKBANCES AT UyDESTILM). 

was one week ago last Friday evening (31st day of March). 
Mrs. Eedfield came over to my house to get my wife to go over to 
Mr. Fox's. ^Mrs. Eedfield appeared to be very much agitated. 
My wife wanted I should go with them, and I accordingly -went. 
When she told us what she wanted us to go over there for, I 
laughed at her, and ridiculed the idea that there was anything 
mysterious in it. I told her it was all nonsense, and that it could 
easily be accounted for. This was about nine o'clock in the even- 
ing. There were some twelve or fourteen persons there when I 
got there. Some were so frightened that they did not want to go 
into the room. I went into the room and sat down on the bed. 
Mr. Fox asked questions, and I heard the rapping, which they had 
spoken of, distinctly. I felt the bedstead jar when the sound was 
produced. 

" Mrs. Fox then asked if it would answer my questions if I 
asked any, and if so, rap. It then rapped three times. I then 
asked if it was an injured spirit, and it rapped. I asked if it had 
come to hurt any one who was present, and it did not rap. I then 
reversed this question, and it rapped. I asked if I or my father 
had injured it (as we had formerly lived in the house) ; there was 
no noise. Upon asking the negative of these questions, the rap- 
ping was heard. I then asked if Mr. (naming a person 

who had formerly lived in the house) had injured it, and if so, to 
manifest it by rapping ; and it made three knocks louder than 
common, and at the same time the bedstead jarred more than it 
had done before. I then inquired if it was murderedrfor money, 
and the knocking was heard. I then requested it to rap when I 
mentioned the sum of money for which it was murdered. I then 
asked if it was one hundred, two, three, or four, and when I came 
to five hundred the rapping was heard. All in the room said they 
heard it distinctly. I then asked the question if it was five hun- 
dred dollars, and the rapping was heard. 

" After this, I went over and got Artemas W. Hyde to come 
over. He came over. I then asked over nearly the same ques- 
tions as before, and got the same answers. Mr. Redfield went 

STATEMENT Or WILLIAM DUESLEE. 45 

after David Jewell and wife, and Mrs. Hyde also came. After 
they came in, I asked the same questions over again, and got 
the same answers. 

" Then I asked the question how it was murdered. I asked 
if it was murdered by being struck on the head, and there was no 
rap. I then reversed the question, and the rapping was heard. 
Then I asked if it was stabbed in the side, and there was no 
answer ; upon asking the negative of this, the rapping was heard. 
It usually rapped three times in answer to my questions. I then 
asked if it had its throat cut, and it rapped as usual. Then, if it 
was with a butcher-knife, and the rapping was heard. In the 
same way it was ascertained that it was asleep at the time, but 
was awakened when the knife entered the throat ; that it strug- 
gled and made some resistance and noise. Then I asked if there 
was any one in the house at the time but him, and it did not rap ; 
then, if they two were alone, and the rapping was heard. I then 
asked if Lucretia Pulver worked there at the time, and it answered 

by rapping ; if she and Mrs. were gone away that night, and 

the rapping was renewed. 

"There was rapping heard only when we asked questions. 
I asked if any one in Hydesville knew of the murder, except 

, and it rapped. Then I asked about a number of persons, 

if they knew it, and there was no rap until I came to Mrs. , 

and then the rapping was heard ; then, if any one but and 

wife knew it, and I got no rap ; then, if they were all that knew 
of the murder, and I got the rap. I asked if the body was put 
in the cellar, and it rapped. I then asked if it was buried in the 
different parts of the cellar, and to all my questions there was no 
rapping until I asked if it was near the centre, and the rapping 
was heard. 

" Charles Redfield then went down cellar with a candle. I told 
him to place himself in different parts of the cellar ; and, as he 
did so, I asked the question, if the person was over the place 
where it was buried, and I got no answer until he got over a cer- 
tain place in the cellar, when it rapped. He then stepped one 

46 FIKST DISTnEBANCES AT nyBESVILLE. 

side, and when I asked the question, there was no noise. This was 
repeated several times ; and we found that, whenever he stood over 
this one place, the rapping was heard, and whenever he moved 
away from that place there was no answer to my questions. Mr. 
Kedfield said he could hear the noise himself. I then asked which 
way it was carried down cellar; if round through the outside 
door, and there was no rapping ; then, if it was down through the 
buttery, by the inside stairWay, and the rapping was heard. I 
then asked it to rap my age — the number of years of my age. 
It rapped thirty times. This is my age, and I do not think any 
one about here knew my age except myself and family. I then 
told it to rap my wife's age, aiid it rapped thirty times, which is 
her exact age ; several of us counted it at the time. I then 
asked it to rap A. W. Hyde's age, and it rapped thirty-two, which 
he says is his age ; he was there at the time, and counted it with 
the rest of us. Then Mrs. A. W. Hyde's age, and it rapped 
thirty-one, which she said was her age ; she was also there at the 
time. I then continued to ask it to rap the age of different per- 
sons (naming them) in the room, and it did so correctly, as they 
all said. 

" I then asked the number of children in the different families in 
the neighborhood, and it told them correctly in the usual way by 
rapping. Also the number of deaths that had taken place in the 
families, and it told correctly. I then asked it to rap its own age, 
and it rapped thirty-one times distinctly. I then asked it if it 
left a family, and it rapped. I asked it to rap the number of 
children it left, and it rapped five times-; then the number of girls, 
and it rapped three; then the number of boys, and it rapped 
twice. Before this, I had asked if it was a man, and it answered 
by rapping it was ; if it was a pedler, and it rapped. 

" I then asked in regard to the time it was murdered, and in 
the usual way, by asking the different days of the week, and the 
different hours of the day ; that it was murdered on a Tuesday 
night, about twelve o'clock. The rapping was heard only when 
this particular time was mentioned. When it was asked if it was 

STATEMENT OF WILLIAM DUESLER. 47 

mvirdered on a Wediiesduy, or Thursday, or Friday night, &c., 
there was no rapping. I asked if it carried any trunk, and it 
rapped that it did. Then how rnany, and it rapped once. In the 
same way we ascertained that it had goods in the trunk, and that 

took them when he murdered him ; and that he had a 

pack of goods besides. 

" I asked if its wife was living, and it did not rap ; if she was 
dead, and it i-apped. I then asked it to rap the number of years 
the wife had been dead, and it rapped twice. In the same way I 
ascertained that its children were now living, — that they lived in 
this state ; and, after asking if in such and such county (naming 
over the different counties), at last, when I asked if they lived in 
Orleans county, the rapping was heard, and at no other time. 
This was tried over several times, and the result was always 
the same. I then tried to ascertain the first letters of its name 
by calling over the different, letters of the alphabet. I commenced 
with A, and asked if that was the initial of its first name ; there 
was no rapping. When I came to 0, the rapping was heard, and 
at no other letter in the alphabet. I then asked, in the same way, 
in regard to the initials of its surname ; and when I asked if it 
was E, the rapping commenced. We then tried all the other let- 
ters, but could get no answer by the usual rapping. I then asked 
if we could find out the whole name by reading over all the letters 
of the alphabet, and there was no rapping. I then reversed the 
question, and the rapping was heard. * * * * There were a 
good many more questions asked on that night, by myself and 
others, which I do not now remember. They were all answered 
readily in the same way. I stayed in the house until about twelve 
o'clock, and then came home. Mr. Kedfield and Mr. Fox stayed 
in the house that night. 

" Saturday night I went over again, about seven o'clock. The 
house was full of people when I got there. They said it had been 
rapping some time. I went into the room. It was rapping in 
answer to questions when I went in. I went to asking questions, 
and asked over some of the same ones that I did the night before. 

48 FIRST DISTUKBANCES AT nYDESVILM. 

and it answered me the same as it -did then. I also asked differ- 
ent questions, and it answered them. Some of those in the room 
wanted me to go out, and let some one else ask the questions. I 
did so, and came home. There were as many as three hundred 
people in and around the house at this time, I should think. 
Hiram Soverhill, Esq., and Volney Brown, asked it questions 
while I was there, and it rapped in answer to them. 

" I went over again on Sunday, between one and two o'clock, 
p. M. I went into the cellar with several others, and had them all 
leave the house over our heads ; and then I asked if there had 
been a man buried in the cellar, to manifest it by rapping, or any 
other noise or sign. The moment I asked the question, there was 
a sound like the falling of a stick, about a foot long and half an 
inch through, on the floor in the bedroom over our heads. It did 
not seem to bound at all ; there was but one sound. I then told 
Stephen Smith to go right up and examine the room, and see if 
he could discover the cause of the noise. He came back, and said 
he could discover nothing, — that there was no one in the room or 
in that part of the house. I then asked two more questions, and 
it rapped in the usual way. We all went up stairs and made 
a thorough search, but could find nothing. 

" I then got a knife and fork, and tried to' see if I could make 
the same noise by dropping them ; but I could not. This was all 
I heard on Sunday. There is only one floor, or partition, or 
thickness, between the bedroom and the cellar ; no place where 
anything could be secreted to make the noise. When this noise 
was heard in the bedroom, I could hear a slight tremulous motion 
or jar. 

" There was some digging in the cellar on Saturday night. They 
dug until they came to water, and then gave it up. The question 
had been previously asked whether it was right that they should 
dig on that night, and there was no rapping. Then, whether it 
was wrong, and the rapping was heard. Whether they should dig 
on Sunday ; no rapping. On Monday ; rapping commenced again. 

TESTIMONY OF WALTER SCOTTEN. 49 

However, some insisted on digging at this time, and dug accord- 
ingly ; but without success. 

" On Monday night, I heard this noise again, and asked the same 
questions I did before, and got the same answers. This is the last 
time I have heard any rapping. I can in no way account for this 
singular noise which I and others have heard. It is a mystery to 
me which I am wholly unable to solve. I am willing to testify 
under oath that I did not make the noises or rapping which I and 
others heard; that I do not know of any person who did or could 
have made them; that I have spent considerable time, since then, 
in order to satisfy myself as to the cause of it, but cannot account 
for it on any other ground than that it is supernatural. I lived 
in the same house about seven years ago, and at that time never 
heard any noises of the kind in and about the premises. I have 
understood from Johnson and others, who have lived there before 

moved there, that there were no such sounds heard 

there while they occupied the house. I never believed in haunted 
houses, or heard or saw anything but what I could account for 
before ; but this I cannot account for, 

" (Signed,) Wm. Duesler. 

" April 19, 1818." 

Mr. Walter Scotten, in his testimony, which speaks of his 
acquaintance with the Fox family, and commends them for honesty 
and integrity, corroborates the above statements, and adds : " The 
noise appeared, when we were in the cellar, to come from the 
ground. Some thought it was on one side, and some on the other. 
We could hardly tell what direction it came from. It did not 
sound like any noise that could be made by rapping or striking, 
either* on the floor, or on the ground. I have since tried to make 
the same noise in various ways, but have never succeeded in 
imitating it. Stephen Smith, my wife, Mrs. Eox, Mrs. Losey, Mr. 
Wm. D. Storer and two girls, were down in the cellar with me at 
"the time of which I have spoken. I was in the house but about 
half an hour, and then came right home. I have never heard 
5 

50 FIRST DISTURBANCES AT HYDESVILLE. , 

noises there any other time than this. There had been digging in 
the cellar at the time I was there. They had dug about two feet 
and a half, I should think. There was a good deal of water in 
the hole, which, they said, had prevented them from digging any 
more." 

Mrs. Elizabeth Jewel, in her testimony, says : " I never saw 
anything before which I could not account for in some way or 
other. This I am wholly at a loss to account for, unless it be a 
supernatural appearance. I have been acquainted with Mr. Fox and 
family some time, and cheerfully certify that I never saw anything 
in their conduct, or heard anything about them, that would lead 
me to suppose that they would be guilty of carrying on a trickery 
in order to deceive the public ; on the contrary, I have always 
looked upon them as honest, upright people, and good neighbors." 

Lorren Tenney says : — "I have heard Mr. Duesler's state- 
ment about what took place on that evening (31st of March), and 
the same is correct, so far as I know. I have no doubt but what 
Mr. Fox and family are honest, and will tell the truth about this 
matter. It makes a great deal of trouble for Mr. Fox and his 
family. They are thronged with visitors, and broken of their 
rest. The house has been searched from top to bottom, and 
nothing found that could make the noise. I did not go there 
believing that there was anything in it ; but supposed it was some 
trickery or deception." 

Mr. James Bridges, who was there on the same night, says : — 
" I cannot in any way imagine how these noises can be made by 
any human means. If it had been heard but on one or two occa- 
sions, I should not think it such a mystery, but should be satisfied 
that some one was cutting up a caper, in order to alarm Mr. Fox's 
people. But now 1 think that is impossible." 

Mr. David S. Fox gives a statement confirming the others 
heretofore recorded, and says, furthermore, that " There is no 
place about the house in which any person could be secreted so as 
to produce these sounds. There is only one floor between this 
bedroom and the cellar. * * * I was here (at the house) on 

CUARAOTEK OS THE TESTIMONY. 51 

Monday, the 3rd of April, and we commenced digging again in 
the cellar, and bailing out the water ; but we found it impossible 
to make much headway. On Tuesday evening they began digging 
again. I got a pump, and we took up the floor, and put it into 
the hole, and began to pump and bail out the water at the same 
tim«. We could not lower the water much, and had to give it up. 
The water is now in the hole, although it is lowering gradually." 
Such is the testimony — unimpeachable and conclusive — of 
the first occurrences at Hydesville. The witnesses establish, 
beyond the possibility of a doubt, the presence of some unseen 
and intelligent agency in producing these sounds. But this was 
not the only kind of evidence by which the invisible presence was 
to be proved. As the family and their friends became more 
familiar with the mysterious visitants, and could converse without 
alarm, other manifestations began to be made, exhibiting, in a more 
astonishing manner, the command of the communicators over the 
elements, by which was created at will any sound that might be 
desired. Thus, the intelligence claiming to be the spirit of the 
murdered man would produce a sound like the death struggle, the 
gurgling in the throat, &c., of a man whose throat was cut ; then 
the sound of dragging a lifeless body across the room, down the 
stairs, the feet striking on each step ; then a sound as if shoveling 
dirt in the cellar, the nailing of boards, and the filling up of the 
hastily-made grave, — all sounding as perfectly natural as if you 
had stood in the grave-yard, and heard the clods descend upon the 
last resting-place of the body of a friend. I have myself heard 
the same, and it was hard, indeed, to convince one's self that it 
was not a reality instead of a mere representation. Another 
sound was produced like that of pouring a quantity of clotted 
blood from a pail on to the floor. This sound would come suddenly, 
when the family, or some portion of it, sat in a room, not thinking 
of the manifestations; and the first thought would be that 
some one had poured down a whole pailful of something, that 
would fall like so much blood, or, as the family expressed it, 
" lobbered milk." 

52 riKST DISTtTEBANCES AT HTDESTILLE. 

It was some time before the spirits exhibited any preference for 
any one of the family, or seemed to require the presence of one 
more than the other, in order to produce the various sounds and 
movements. At length they discovered that Catharine, the young- 
est girl, seemed to be required in order to obtain the communica- 
tions. She was then in the twelfth year of her age. This was 
the first discovery of mediumship in that family. Indeed, it is 
the first cases, of acknowledged mediumship for sounds, so far as I 
am able to discover, that the world has been made acquainted with. 
There have been those who were undoubted mediums, and were 
attended by similar demonstrations ; but they have not been char- 
acterized by the intelligence that has uniformly attended this 
family. The exhibition of intelligence heretofore has been only in, 
rare cases, and for a short time, to disappear and remain a 
wonder to the recipients of the strange visitations. But here they 
have remained to explain themselves, and silence forever all doubts 
in regard to the power of unseen intelligences to communicate with 
the inhabitants of this visible world. 

It should be observed that the discovery of the intelligence in 
these sounds, or the source of them, was entirely accidental. Mrs. 
Fox asked the sounds to tell her the age of her children, after she 
had noticed the imitations of the number of sounds made by the 
girl's hands, and because she was confused, and did not know what 
else to say. They had tried all expedients to discover what the 
source or cause of the mystery was, but had thus far failed 
entirely. 

No family in the country could have been more amazed at the 
discovery of such a visitation, than were each and all the mem- 
bers of this one. They were not superstitious, and had never 
heard that the house in which they lived had been known as a 
" haunted house," or that any strange occurrences had taken place 
there. The families who had heretofore been disturbed had care- 
fully concealed the facts from the public and from all their neigh- 
bors. They were not, then, looking for any such manifestations. 
The facts in regard to the commencement of the sounds and the 

CHARACTER OS THE TESTIMONY. 53 

first discovery of intelligence most unmistakably indicate the 
surprise of the family, and the entirely accidental discovery of 
intelligence. 

The same will be noticed by reference to the manner in which 
the communication by alphabet was discovered. They were 
desirous of getting the name of the man purporting to have been 
murdered. After trying various expedients, David S. Fox asked 
if it would answer to the initial letter of the name if they would 
call the alphabet. This was answered in the affirmative, and tte 
letters were accordingly given. It is important that this fact 
be kept in view, that the reader may not be led to suppose that 
the whole was a preconcerted scheme, with all the details arranged 
beforehand. Another fact is, that, at that time, they had no idea 
of getting communications by alphabet, and it was not used for a 
long time after. They supposed that the name was all they could 
get by that means. 

There are many circumstances going to make up a case of cir- 
cumstantial proof that there was, at some time, a murder committed 
in the house. To this effect, so far as spiritual manifestations are 
concerned, is the testimony of Miss and Mrs. Pulver. There is, 
aside fi-om this, enough to establish very reasonable suspicions in 
regard to the transactions of a certain family who formerly occupied 
the house. 

In addition to this, it is a fact not generally known, that, in the 
summer of 1848, Henry Bush and Lyman Granger, of Rochester, 
and David S. Pox, an^ others, of Arcadia, recommenced digging 
in the cellar of the house ; and, after digging about five feet, came 
to a plank, through which they bored with an auger, which, on 
boring through (the auger being loose in the handle), fell through, 
out of sight. On digging further they found several human teeth, 
and a few bones, and some hair, which evidently came from a 
human head, although no connected bones or skull were found. 
They also found a quantity of charcoal at the same depth. This 
shows, most incontestably, that the ground, at some time, had been 
disturbed, and these things deposited. This, taken with the 
5* 

54 riKST DISTURBANCES AT HTDESVILLB. 

evidence of the family, on whom suspicion fell, having sundry 
articles, in a very mysterious way, about the time the murder was 
said to have been committed, is enough, at least, to give a shade 
of circumstantial evidence in favor of the truth of the allegation 
of the spirit in regard to the murder. 

Another curious feature in the early manifestations should not 
be lost sight of All the family, except Mr. Fox (who never was 
a medium), left the house, as appears by the testimony, during one 
night, and still the sounds were heard as usual. In their absence 
questions were answered as freely as when they were all present. 
It was not until after the confusion and excitement had subsided 
that the spirits seemed to select the two youngest girls, Catharine 
and Margaretta, and from that time they have continued 
"mediums;" and, so far as we are acquainted, they, with their 
sister, Mrs. Brown, formerly Mrs. Fish (who has since become a 
medium), have been the best mediums for sounds yet known to the 
public. I do not wish to be understood that they are superior 
in reliability to many others ; but, for a promiscuous company, 
the sounds are louder and more certain with them than any 
mediums I have ever known. There are several families, in the 
neighborhood of the old house at Hydesville, that now have occa- 
sional demonstrations ; and the family, whoever it may be, that 
occupies the house formerly occupied by the Fox family, is sure 
to be disturbed by occasional manifestations. 

Soon after the discovery that Kate was the medium, the family 
having become weary of the annoyance they had been subject to, 
sent her to Rochester, to reside with her sister, Mrs. Fish ; think- 
ing that by changing the locality she would avoid the dis- 
agreeable annoyance herself, and also prevent the demonstrations 
to the family. In this, however, they were mistaken; for, as 
soon as Kate left the family, the sounds commenced in the presence 
of Margaretta, the next older sister. She was at the house of her 
brother, Mr. David S. Fox, who lived about three miles from 
Hydesville, where the sounds originally commenced. Thus it 
will be seen, spirits were not to be baffled in their efforts to estab- 

CHAEACTEE OB THE TESTIMONY. 55 

lish an actual and convincing mode of communication with the 
inhabitants of this mundane sphere.. 

During the six years that have elapsed since the commencement 
of the manifestations at Hydesville, there have been few more 
singular, and no more convincing, proofs of the agency of spirits, 
than were given to the family of Mr. Eox. Almost every variety 
of the phenomena that have startled the world, since that time, were 
known to them, long before the public were made aware of the 
existence of such strange occurrences. _ They have had all the 
variety of sounds mentioned above ; had speaking in an audible 
voice, moving of furniture, touching, and writing by the spirits. 
Blocks of wood were thrown into the windows, when they were 
opened, with important directions written upon. Information was 
given to the family, which was of essential benefit, by writing on 
the floor of a room where it was known that no living, visible 
person had been. 

Notwithstanding all this, they sought to keep it from the public. 
They shrank from notoriety, and from having their names con- 
nected with such a strange and unpopular affair. Their efforts 
were rather to get rid of the trouble than to make themselves 
notorious by it. But in this they did not succeed. The unseen 
visitors were so entirely beyond their control, that the demonstra- 
tions would be made, and sounds be heard by all who visited them. 
Of course, under such circumstances, it soon became known 
throughout the neighborhood. 

As soon as this fact became established, persecutions com- 
menced, and they were denounced by the bigoted and superstitious 
as impostors ; or, if they could not dispute the facts, they were 
charged with being in league with the devil. Among other 
modes of persecution, the church, of which they were members, 
began its annoyance. 

A young student of material " divinity," a mere boy, was sent 
to lecture Mrs. Fox, whose years, at least, entitled her to be 
treated with due respect. Instead of this, however, impudence 
and arrogance were the chief arguments of this young man. Mrs. 

56 FIRST DISTUEBANCES AT HYDBSVILLE. 

Fox was required to give up that over which she had no control; 
and, instead of fairly undertaking the investigation, to see what 
they might discover, they steadily refused; but persevered in their 
annoyance, and insisted that the family should be condemned for 
hearing what was thrust upon them without their knowledge, and 
against their express wishes. Pursued by the relentless slanders 
of the minister and the church, who could find no point to make 
a charge against them, Mr. and Mrs. Fox withdrew from the con- 
nection, as they could not cling to a body that denied all tangible 
evidence of spiritualism, and openly avowed its adherence to a 
materialism, as full of mystery and dogmatism as the most blindly 
enthusiastic reveries of the veriest dreamer that ever imposed his 
dreams upon the world as a living reality. 

CHAPTER III. 

FIKST MANITESTATIOIIS IN ROOHESIEK, N. T. ALAKM OS' THE TAMIL-T 

OPPOSITION OF MK. CALVIN E. EKOWN VIOLENT DEM0N3TEATI0KS 

ENTHtrSIASTIC AND FANATICAL EELIEVEKS — ABSURD DIRECTIONS FOL- 
LOWED DISAPPOINTMENT AND UNBELIEF — PROOFS AND CASES STATED 

FIRST OASB OP TELEORAPHINa. 

It was mentioned, in the second chapter, that the youngest 
daughter of Mr. Fox — Kate — was taken to Kochester to live with 
Mrs. Fish, in the hope that this would terminate the disturbances. 
Kate alleged to Mrs. Fish that she heard the sounds on board the 
canal packet, while they were going from Newark to Eochester ; 
but her sister having never heard much of them, and being quite 
incredulous, disputed it, accounting for the sounds in some other 
way. But little was said on the subject, and their great anxiety 
was to be entirely rid of the matter. 

On their arrival at Eochester they rented a new house on 
Prospect-street. Mrs. Fish vejry innocently told the landlord that 
she wanted a house that had never been occupied ; giving him the 
reason, which was, that her sister and the family had been dis- 
turbed by strange occurrences. Into this house they moved in 
the month, of April, 1848. Before all their furniture was moved 
into the house, Kate and another girl, being together, heard the 
sounds, and received answers to many questions. While they 
were getting sounds out of the house, Mrs. Fish sat alone inside ; 
when, suddenly, she was aroused by that terrible sound of the 
pouring of a pail of coagulated blood upon the floor. It was 
repeated, in quick succession, three times. Frightened terribly, 
and hardly knowing what she did, she rushed from the room to 

58. FIEST MANITESTATIONS IN ROCHKSTJSR. 

find the girls. She met them in the yard, and, in their turn, they 
were horrified at the ashy paleness of Mrs. F., and inquired the 
cause before she had spoken. Her answer was, " 0, that dread- 
ful sound! What is it? What is it?" After becoming more 
calm, they returned to the house, but did not hear anything more 
until after they had retired for the night. Then the demonstra- 
tions commenced with more violence than usual. The goods, 
which were below the room in which they slept, and not yet 
arranged, were moved and tumbled violently about the room, to 
the great alarm and discouragement of the family. Previous, 
however, to the moving of furniture, or any other demonstration, 
about twelve o'clock at night, a heavy knock was heard at the 
outer door. There was a high flight of steps to ascend to get to 
the door, and, although they were all awake, they heard no one 
come up. The knocking ceased, and they waited to hear it 
repeated, or to hear some one go down the steps. They heard 
neither ; but soon a loud knocking commenced on the roof of the 
house. It came on at one end, advanced along the whole length 
of the roof, and finally was in the room where they slept. The 
sounds were loud and boisterous, and all of the family very much 
frightened. Calvin E.. Brown, who had lived in Mr. Fox's family 
for many years, was with them. He had not before heard the 
disturbances, having been in Rochester while they were in the 
excitement at Hydesville. He had no faith in their being spiritual, 
although he knew they were not produced by the family. He 
was much perplexed to know what it was. Kate and Elizabeth, 
the latter Mrs. Fish's daughter, then about twelve years old, slept 
together. Soon, they cried out that they were being touched — 
that a cold hand was laid on them, &o. Mrs. Fish had seen but 
little of the strange affair, and told the girls to keep still, for she 
did not believe it. The repeated screams and fright of the girls, 
however, convinced her that something was there which prevented 
them from sleeping, and at the same time frightened them terribly. 
Finally, she took them both into bed with her, one on each side, 
hoping thereby to put an end to the noise j but the touching con- 

ALARM OF THE ElSn FAMILY. 59 

tinued. Elizabeth had long been suffering from a spinal com- 
plaint, and had nearly lost the use of her limb, when these demon- 
strations commenced. The touches were invariably on the spot 
most tender and diseased. This caused her to jump and exercise 
herself, and finally worked an entire cure. At that time it was 
looked upon as very wonderful, but such cases of healing are now 
quite common. The night spoken of, — the first they had spent 
in the house, — they were not permitted to rest until three or 
four o'clock in the morning ; and they were obliged to make all 
their beds on the floor, as they were constantly raised up and 
shook about when they were on a bedstead. 

At this time Mrs. Fish was teaching music, and her only means 
of living was the pay from her pupils. She greatly feared that 
the disturbances would drive them away, either by fright or dis- 
gust at so strange and, to them, scandalous an affair. In a day 
or two the sounds com.menced in the daytime, and so greatly were 
they annoyed that, for all one day at least, they went without pre- 
paring or eating a meal. In great confidence Mrs. Fish finally 
told Mrs. Granger, one of her neighbors, of the terrible annoyances 
they were subject to. Mr. Granger and his family were Metho- 
dists, and looked upon it in a miraculous light. Mrs. Fish, at 
times when she was so disturbed, knelt down and prayed that this 
affliction might pass from them. During their praying the sounds 
would be more loud and boisterous than ever. It was impossible 
to conceal the facts, and soon several of the neighbors were ad- 
mitted to hear. They had meetings almost nightly ; and they 
were characterized by praying on the part of some of the visitors, 
and by most boisterous demonstrations by the spirits. Books, 
shells and other articles, were thrown with great violence about 
the room ; but although entirely in the dark, no shell or book 
that could injure would ever strike a person, while pamphlets and 
such articles as would do no harm would strike square in the 
face. These meetings were characterized by the wildest fanati- 
cism at times, and just in proportion to the ranting of the individr 
nals would be the violence of the manifestations. Thus, by fright 

60 FIRST MANIFESTATIONS IN EOCHESTER. 

and fanaticism, were the first spiritual communications received in 
Rochester. Several persons, composed mostly of " Christian Per- 
fectionists " and Methodists, concluded that it was a special mes- 
sage from the Lord, calling for speedy repentance. In all this 
wild excitement the Pox family did not join. They only prayed 
earnestly to be delivered from the, to them, terrible annoyance. 
But this was denied them. Time passed on, and the manifesta- 
tions continued. Fanaticism subsided, and the spirits were less 
boisterous, or, rather, a less boisterous class of spirits were attracted. 
With the mediums, tne whole phenomena became more orderly and 
more willing to grant their requests, in all but leaving them entirely. 
This they refused to do. 

At an early day the family were visited by a Methodist minis- 
ter, who proposed to exorcise the spirits. He said that, if the 
family would allow him to perform his incantations, they would 
hear no more of the disturbance, which he, of course, attributed 
to the devil. They gladly allowed him to make the attempt. He 
walked around the room, used certain formula supposed to be 
potently orthodox for the casting out of unclean spirits ; but, to 
his astonishment, all his mummery availed nothing, and the spirits 
did not obey his commands. He was much disappointed at the 
failure of his power over unseen intelligences. 

As a specimen of the credulity with which some persons received 
the phenomena, it may be well to relate, without giving the names, 
an occurrence which caused considerable excitement in Kochester 
and vicinity. In the month of July or August, 1848, a young 
man — a tobacco pedler — came into the city with his horses, 
put them up at the stable of a hotel, and very suddenly disap- 
peared. He was known to have had several hundred dollars with 
him, and his friends and the public were satisfied that he was 
murdered for sake of the money. Days and weeks elapsed, and 
no tidings of the missing man could be obtained. The authorities 
offered a large reward for the discovery of the body and detection 
of the murderers. The canal, the mill-races and by-plaoes were 
searched to no purpose. In the midst of the excitement, one of 

SPECIMEN OF CKEDULITY. 61 

the most enthusiastic spiritualists took up the subject, with the 
double hope of obtaining the reward and establishing the infalli- 
bility of spiritual communication. First a clairvoyant made a 
revelation of the murder, and where the body was deposited. It 
was said to be in the canal, and the place was pointed out. Of 
course, so positive a man as the one engaged in this hunt could 
get spirits enough to confirm his already settled convictions, and 
it was accordingly confirmed by the rappings. Then commenced 
the search. The canal was dragged at the places pointed out, 
but no body found. The oracles were again consulted, and 
now they were informed that the body had been removed to 
another place. That was searched with like results ; and, after 
a fruitless search, they were informed that it was again removed. 
The superintendent of canal repairs gave notice that, on a certain 
day, the water would be drawn out of the canal from near the 
Genesee Valley canal junction, in that city, to the Brighton lock. 
Immediately on this announcement being made, it was revealed 
that the body had been removed to a point below the Brighton 
lock ; and that the wife of the gentleman engaged in the search 
should go into the water, and also a little girl about twelve years 
old. It was said that they would be sure and find the body. The 
confiding man and wife, with the girl, repaired to the spot, and 
commenced the search in the water. The lady had a rope tied 
around her waist, and the husband held the other end, standing 
on a canal bridge. Once or twice the lady got beyond her depth, 
and was only saved from drowning by the precaution of having 
the rope around her, — which, by the way, the spirits had forbid- 
den her to use, — and the little girl cut her foot severely by a 
stone or shell on the bottom of the canal. After a long trial, the 
search was abandoned, and the body was not found. Probably 
the mystery would never have been revealed to this day, had not 
the supposed murdered man himself made the revelation. He was 
anxious to retain what money he had in his possession, and being 
willinw to be thought murdered, after leaving his team, had sud? 
denly departed for Canada. Thus ended this credulous reliance 
6 

62 FIRST MANIFESTATIONS IN ROCHESTER. 

on the infallibility of clairvoyanee and spiritual revelations. The 
eflfeet was to produce an entire reaction in the minds of those most 
concerned in the transaction, and they repudiated the whole afiair, 
for a year or two, as the work of Satan, although they are now 
believers again, having " learned wisdom from the things they 
have suffered," and become more cool and rational. The tried 
friends of spiritualism have witnessed much of this kind of " back- 
sliding" among persons who rushed into the belief with blind 
enthusiasm at the commencement, and were not grounded on rea- 
sonable investigation. With very few exceptions, they have, 
instead of looking calmly for the causes of false and unreliable 
directions, repudiated the whole as some deception beyond their 
knowledge to explain, or as emanating from the devil. 

Notwithstanding the facts were concealed from the public, it is 
worthy to be noted that, during the early part of the manifesta- 
tions at Rochester, many demonstrations were made which looked 
like a disposition to create disturbance, without any other appar- 
ent object than mischief. Mr. Calvin E.. Brown, before spoken 
of, was not, at first, particularly friendly to the spirits, and they 
seemed to reciprocate the feeling by constantly annoying him. 
The spirits would come to his bed, lift it up, shake it, seize his 
bed-clothes and carry them away, or whip him with them. At 
times he would seize the clothes, as they were going off, deter- 
mined to dispute the right of possession with the spirits. He 
would brace himself and pull with all his might; and, when 
exerting himself to the utmost, the spirit would mischievously let 
go suddenly, and Mr. Brown, of course, would be thrown over 
backwards. Sometimes Mr. Brown would suddenly let go, under 
like circumstances, and the clothes would fly to the other side of 
the room. At times a sheet would come up to his bed, as if held 
up by a person, and then drop down. 

One night the spirits came to his bed with a cane, and com- 
menced striking tremendous blows on the wall at the head of his 
bed, just missing his head and face. He seized the cane, and got 
possession of it. Soon they came with a broom-handle, to which 

OPPOSITION OF MR. BROWN. 63 

was attached the worn-out stump of the broom. With this they 
commenced striking, as before, until he seized that also. With 
these two sticks he made a kind of fender for his face, by placing 
one end of them on his head-board and the other on his breast. 
Then the spirit came with a strip of lath, and commenced beating 
the sticks directly over his face. He finally took this stick away 
and kept all of them where he could keep his hand upon them. 
The next salutation was an old iron candle-stick, thrown violently, 
and just grazing his upper lip so as to break the skin. At inter- 
vals, during all the time they were whipping him with the sticks, 
they would spell out, " Kneel down and ask our forgiveness." He 
had nothing to ask such favors for, and told them he would not 
do it if they strung him up between the heavens and earth. They 
would then renew hostilities. After cutting his lip all was silent, 
as though they felt that they had gone too far, or made a mistake. 
They never told him to ask forgiveness again. After a short time 
they began to throw balls of carpetrrags, from a basket in the 
room, some dozen or more of which hit him every one on the fore- 
head, in precisely the same spot. Some sixty in all were thrown. 
Many were the kinds of disturbance that Mr. Brown was sub- 
jected to before he became fully convinced that they were caused 
by spirits. 

The confusion became so great that, as was anticipated, Mrs. 
Fish's class in music was entirely broken up, and it was impossible 
to attend to the ordinary business of the household with any regu- 
larity. At the table the spirits were often boisterous in the ex- 
treme. By this time several neighboring families had been made 
acquainted with the strange occurrences. Wearied with the con- 
tinual annoyance, Mrs. Fish called on Isaac Post, an old friend 
of the family, to see if he could not solve the mystery. He went 
to her house, and, with the family, sat around the table and asked 
questions. Up to this time there never had been any communi- 
cations by alphabet, the only mode being by asking questions and 
getting, generally, three raps for an affirmative, and none for a 
negative. Thus the question would be asked, " Are you the spirit 

64 EIRST MANIFESTATIONS IN BOCHBSTEK. 

of a brother?" — no raps would be a negative. The question 
then being reversed thus, " Are you not ? " — three raps would be 
given to affirm the negative. During this visit of Mr. Post's, the 
rapping was very loud and continuous, as if constantly anxious to 
make something known. After trying various expedients, it was 
mentioned, incidentally, by Mrs. Fish, that her brother David had 
a name spelled out by the alphabet, at Hydesville, but that noth- 
ing had ever been obtained by that means, since, either at Hydes- 
ville or anywhere else. Mr. Post immediately asked if they had 
ever tried. Mrs. Pish answered that they never had thought of 
trying it, and asked if they wanted her to call the alphabet as 
her brother had done at Hydesville. Immediately there came a 
shower of heavy raps, and each person was touched on the feet 
and legs ; and the sounds died away to a light, pleasant rap ; \ 
they seemed really to evince joy at the suggestion, as much as to 
say, " Yes, yes, that is what we want, — call it.'' Mrs. Pish 
then very slowly called the alphabet. The spirits rapped prompt- 
ly, and spelled out the following message : "We are all your dear 
friends and relatives." Then the name of " Jacob Smith " was 
spelled out. This was the grandfather of Mrs. Pish. The whole 
family were overwhelmed with surprise at this message. It was 
a new and important discovery, and one which was made, as it 
were, by accident. It was, as they fully believed, a veritable 
telegraphic despatch from their departed friends, as it purported 
to be. The little message was copied and circulated amoug friends 
and neighbors, and a copy sent to the family at Hydesville. Not- 
withstanding the family had been familiar with the demonstrations 
there for several months, they had never received a message, or 
used the alphabet, since the spirit of the supposed murdered ped- 
ler had rapped to the letters of his name, nor had they, for a 
moment, supposed that any communication cauld be obtained in 
that way. On hearing what had happened, the family all started 
immediately for Eochester, to see the wonder for themselves, not- 
v/ithstanding they had the manifestations constantly with them at 
B, without- spelling messages. Such was the almost 

Hydesville, 

OPPOSITION OF Mlt. BROWN. 65 

accidental manner in which the mode of getting messages spelled 
out was made. It was as accidental here as at Hydesville, where it 
had never been used, on any occasion, except fbr spelling the name. 

After discovering the use of the alphabet, they were almost 
constantly beset by the spirits to call it and communicate. Espe- 
cially were they very clamorous for communications at the table. 
Mr. Brown was still annoyed by them, and desirous of being rid 
of their presence. At the table he would, at times, persuade the 
family to keep still and not call the alphabet. A constant and 
loud rapping would be heard, calling for the alphabet, growing 
louder the longer they delayed. When Mr. Brown asked them 
not to call it, the table would start from him, and he would be 
left with his knife and fork in his hands, but the table entirely 
out of his reach. He would seize it, and draw it back to its 
place, when it would either move away again, or tip up on one 
edge, so that whatever of liquid there-was on the table would slop 
over. Such demonstrations would continue until Mr. Brown 
would take his plate and go to another table, and Mrs. Fish, or 
some of the family, would call the alphabet, when all would be 
quiet again. When they could communicate they were satisfied. 
They would often tell them that, if they would only yield to 
their direction, they should be protected from harm and the dis- 
arrangement of their business, and all their excitement would 
eventuate in good for them. On the contrary, it was stated Ly 
them that, if they were continually repulsed, they would be undt.j.' 
the necessity of abandoning their attempts to communicate through 
them. Often did the whole family implore them to leave them ; 
but they persevered in uSng them, and the result has shown that 
the promises of protection and guidance have been fiilfiUed to the 
family, even under the most discouraging circumstances. 

As in everything else, practice in this mode of telegraphing 
suggested improvements. At one time Mrs. Eish asked if the 
spirits would give her a short signal which should always be un- 
derstood as a call for the alphabet. Five quick successive raps 
were given as that signal. It was a year or two after this that 
6* 

66 PIEBT MAOTFESIATIONS IN ROCHESTER. 

Mrs. Fish ascertained that a circle in New York city had arranged 
to get one rap for no, three for yes, and two for an indefinite an- 
swer, or to signify that the spirits could not answer at that time. 
This has greatly facilitated the mode of communicating. 

During the early part of the excitement, the family were much 
persecuted by persons who would not investigate, but " knew " it 
must all be a humbug. They were even threatened with violence, 
and went out of the house in the evening with fear. The spirits 
gave them a signal whereby they might know when danger was near, 
and promised them protection. Demonstrations were often made 
to them in the streets, and, on their asking if there was danger, 
the spirits would reply, " No ; we only wanted to let you know 
that we were with you." Hundreds and hundreds of evidences 
were presented to them of the fact that they were attended by 
unseen protectors. 

Hundreds now flocked to the house to see the wonders, and 
' the family was overrun with visitors. Often they were prevented 
from taking their meals from the time they ate their breakfast 
till after midnight. Day after day, week after week, and month 
after month, for two years from the commencement, did this con- 
stant calling continue without a charge of one cent for the time 
spent by the family ; and for the first year, or more, Mrs. Pish 
refused absolutely to take the compensation often volunteered 
by strangers, and it was not until necessity compelled her that 
she yielded to receive even voluntary contributions. 

Although the Fox family were the only ones known to the 
public, it is a fact worthy of note that about the time the sounds 
commenced with them in Kochester, they commenced in the family 
of Mr. Lyman Grranger, a wealthy member of the Methodist 
church, residing in that place. As with the Fox family, so in 
Mr. Gr.'s, they at first displayed no partiality for any particular 
member of the family. They would rap to Mr. Granger in the 
field; when entirely alone, and to most of the members of the 
family ; but finally they selected his daughter Elizabeth as a 
medium, and refused to manifest themselves to other members of 

CASE OF TELEttKAPHING. 67 

ijhe family unless she was present. It was in the month of Octo- 
ber, 1848, that the spirits, through the medium, spelled out a 
message to Mr. Granger, wherein it was stated that within one 
year from that time public meetings would be held in the city of 
Rochester, for the investigation of this subject, and that it would 
there and then be proved to be of spiritual origin. This was 
written on a slip of paper, and, being thrown by at the time, was 
forgotten. After the investigations at Kochester, Mr. Granger 
accidentally came across the paper, and, on looking at it, found 
that the investigations were held just one month less than a year 
from the date. 

About this time very powerful physical manifestations com- 
menced in the family of Deacon Hale, of Greece, a town adjoin- 
ing the city of Kochester. In this case the spirits evinced a 
remarkable degree of physical power, such as moving heavy stoves 
and other articles of furniture. 

The vibratory sounds were also produced in the family of Rev. 
A. H. Jarvis, a Methodist clergyman, residing in Rochester, soon 
after their commencement with' the Fox family. Substantially 
the same phenomena were observed in the other cases. Many 
very beautiful communications were given, containing in them- 
selves overwhelming testimony of spiritual power and foresight. 

The following letter from that gentleman to the author will 
give a strong case of telegraphing, at a very early period of the 
modern manifestations. 

" There are many facts which have come under my observation 
equally convincing of the intelligence and utility of the com- 
munications from these unseen agents, who, I now believe, are 
continually a,bout us, and more perfectly acquainted with all our 
ways, and even our thoughts, than we are with each other. 
But the fact, in reference to my friend Pickard, is what you 
desire. He was at my house on Friday afternoon, April 6th, 
1849. None of the Fox family were present. While at the tea- 
table we had free communications on different subjects. Pickard 

68 FIRST MANIFESTATIONS IN BOCHESTER. 

was requested to ask questions. He desired to know who it was 
that would answer questions. The answer was, ' I am your 
mother, Mary Pickard.' Her name or the fact of her death was 
not known to any of us. The next Monday evening he (Pickard) 
was at Mr. Gr — 's and tarried there over night. He there received 
a communication, purporting to be from his mother, saying, ' Your 
child is dead.' He came immediately to my place, and said he 
should take the stage for home (Lockport, sixty miles distant). 
He left in the stage at 8 or 9 a. m. At 12 m. I returned to 
my house, my wife meeting me with a telegraph envelope. I 
broke the seal and read mentally, first, as follows : 

' KoCHESTEK, April 10, 1849. 
' By telegraph from Lockport to Rev. A. H. Jarvis, No. 4 
West-street. Tell Mr. Pickard — if you can find him — his 
child died this morning. Answer ' K. Malloey.' 

" I then read it to my wife, and said ' This is one of the best 
and most convincing evidences of the intelligence of those in- 
visible agents ; ' and then I added ' God's telegraph has outdone 
Morse's altogether.' Yours truly, 

" To E. W. Gapron, Auburn. A. H. Jabvis." 

Mr. Jarvis also related the following to a company which was 
convened at his house, one of whom" was Prof. Jones, a gentleman 
who was then delivering a course of scientific lectures at Roches- 
ter. He was of the " New Church," or Swedenborgian faith : — 
" At one time we were getting communications from what pur- 
ported to be our son, who had been dead some ten years. He 
requested us to sing a hymn with the title ' Advice to seek the Lord.' 
I took a hymn-book, and was proceeding to look for the hymn, 
when the alphabet was called for, and he spelled ' Not that.' An- 
other was taken. Still it spelled ' Not that.' We had four 
hymn-books in the room that we knew of, and were told that it 
was not in any of them. I was about going up to my library, when 
ho spelled, - It is in this room — get the little book with a red 

STATBMENI OV QEOBQE WILLETS. 69 

cover.' After much search the book was found behind some 
ornaments on the mantel-piece, which was seldom used. A hymn 
was found wjth very near the title given, and we thought it must 
be the one ; when we were again told ' Not that.' On looking fur- 
ther we found a hymn with exactly the title named, and sang it 
while the sounds beat time." This is a most remarkable proof of 
the retention of memory in spirits after they escape from the body, 
and it was while this very fact was under discussion, that Mr. 
Jarvis related these facts. 

One of the most remarkable cases of a display of foresight, on 
the part of the spirits, is the case of George Willets, now resident 
of the city of Rochester. He has furnished the following statement 
of the case : 

"Deas Fkibnd, E. W. Oapron: It is with some reluctance 
that I furnish you with the following statement, — not that I am 
afraid to tell the truth, but that the world, as I conceive, is not 
ready to receive such truths yet. Ridicule probably will be 
heaped upon me ; but when I consider that it is the ignorant only 
who use that weapon, perhaps I can afford to stand up and say, 
' Let the storm come.' All who know me can say whether I have 
been truthful from my youth up, yea, or nay ; and the strongest 
language that I can use, is to say that the following statement is 
strictly and entirely true. 

" In the summer of 1848, 1 had concluded, from the best judg- 
ment that I could bring to my aid, that it was best for my family 
to remove somewhere among the wilds of the West. Accordingly 
I took a tour of observation, and finding some land in Michigan, 
that suited me better than any other, belonging to a gentleman 
living in Rochester, I stopped, on my return, in order, if possible, 
to negotiate for it. I staid with my friend and relative, Isaac 
Post, and while there he told me of certain sounds being heard in 
the city ; and that they displayed intelligence, and purported to 
be made by ' spirits,' or persons invisible to us. I was really 
sceptical about any such things, but at his solicitation went to 

70 FIRST MANIFESTATIONS IN EOCHESTBE. 

examine it. The persons with whom those sounds seemed to be, I 
never had heard of or seen before, and my friend was careful not 
to tell them who I was, or where I had been. It seems that the 
question was asked whether there was any communication for me, 
and the direction from the sounds was, that three persons be mag- 
netized, two of whom were present, and one was sent for from a 
neighboring family. I did not know the name of any person 
present ; and I was also certain that no one knew me. After the 
three persons were put in the clairvoyant state, one. of them said, 
' We have got to go to Michigan.' They all agreed that they had 
to go there, and on my account. They did seem all to go there, 
and began to describe places and things which I had seen, and at 
length came to a piece of land which they said was the place they 
came to look at. They then described the land so accurately, 
which I had stopped in Rochester to buy, that I began to wonder 
who had told them. They all with one accord then said, ' But 
he must not go there. His father says that he had better not go.' 
As they said this, there came a loud sound close to my chair, and 
I sat some distayvce from any other 'person. They spoke much of 
my father, and what his mind was, and at each time that same 
sound was heard, and the jar distinctly felt close by myself. 
They then said 'His mother thinks it not best.' As they spoke this 
a different sound, not quite so loud, was heard still close by me. 
Then that my sister said it was not best. Another and different 
sound still was heard. Up to this time I had not spoken a word, 
but found the big drops of perspiration starting from my face. I 
gathered courage, and thought I would dispel that illusion directly. 
I said, ' As you assume to know my father, and what his mind is 
concerning me, perhaps you can tell his name.' They all seemed 
to look steadily for some time, then comm'enced and spoke slowly and 
deliberatelythese letters: ' W-i-l-l-i-a-m W-i-l-l-b-t-s.' At each 
letter the loud sound that I first heard was again heard and felt 
immediately under my feet. I never was so astonished in my life, 
and involuntarily said, ' What does all this mean ? ' The sounds 
then said, by the alphabet being called over, that they had better be 

STATEMENT OF GEORGE WILLETS. 71 

awakened, and the first loud sound said, ' I will talk with George, 
and tell him all about it.' the direction was for Mr. Post, 
myself and a little girl, thirteen years old, to go by ourselves. 
And here I wish it distinctly understood, that all which I shall 
relate as obtained from those sounds, was ip the presence only of 
my friends, Mr. and Mrs. Post, myself and the little girl spoken 
of. As what follows all purported to be from my father, I will 
say that his name was William Willets, a member of the Society 
of Friends, widely known at Westbury, Lond Island, where he 
lived until near sixty years of age, and subsequently at Skene- 
ateles, Onondaga county, where he died in 1841. The communi- 
cation by sounds then went on to say, that it was my father that 
was present and talking with me ; and three hours were consumed 
at the first interview. In saying to me what his counsel was, it 
always assumed to counsel and advise, but never to dictate. He 
said that it was not best for us to go to Michigan, and gave vari- 
ous reasons, among which were, that we should not enjoy ourselves 
in a new country, and that my health would not be competent for 
the task of clearing up new land ; and that he foresaw, if we did 
go, that we should come back again, and would be less in number 
than when we went. I then asked what was best to do. Tho 
answer then was, ' Come to Eochester.' I replied that I knew of 
no business that I could do in Eochester. The sounds said, ' I 
will tell thee when thee comes.' I asked if I might know now. 
The answer was, ' No. I did not need any business until I came, 
and then he would tell me.' The sounds then said, that after a 
time it would be best for me to buy some land. I asked where. 
The sounds then spelled out the name of a man whom neither one 
present knew, and said that he owned fifty acres of land on such a 
street adjoining the city, and such a distance from the centre of 
the city ; that he would sell any part. I asked the price that 
would be asked. The sounds were heard and counted by three of 

uSj one hundred and fifty times in succession, — to tell us the 

number of dollars per acre that would be asked. The sounds said 
that we had better go the next day and see if this was so, and said 

72 PIRST MANIFESTATIONS IN ROCHESTER. 

that we should not see the man until ten o'clock, though we might 
look for him as early as we pleased. 

" In the morning I looked in the Directory and there found the 
name spelled out to us, and went to his residence at seven o'clock, 
and was informed that he was gone to a distant part of the city, 
and would not be home until twelve o'clock. We then went to 
find him, and had some difficulty to do so, but after talking with 
him five or sis minutes, looked at the time, and it was seven 
minutes past ten ! This person said that he owned fifty acres on 
the street told us by the sounds, and that he would sell any part. 
When I asked him the price, he showed me a map with the price 
of each lot marked, and taking the number of acres, said, by the 
sounds, to be best to buy, and averaging the price, it was the price 
told us within six one-hundredths of a dollar per acre. I then went 
home to my family and pondered over these strange things. 
Many were the conflicts in my own mind, and I heard the cry 
from all quarters of' humbug,' 'deception,' ' fraud; ' but I could 
not believe that I wanted to deceive myself Three months I 
thought of these things deeply, and I covM not go to Michigan. 
I concluded, if it was deception, it would do the world some good 
to find it out. The first of December, 1848, I moved from 
Waterloo to Eochester. A few days after getting here, the little 
girl spoken of came round to our house, and said that the ' spirit ' 
had directed her to come ; for what purpose she did not know ; we 
inquired what it was, and this was the communication : ' I told 
thee if thee would come to Eochester I would tell thee where thee 
could find employment ; in four days from this time I will tell 
thee. In the mean time the anti-slavery folks are going to hold 
their fair ; would it not be well for thee to help them ? ' No one 
was present at this time except my wife, the little girl and myself 
The four days went by, and again, without solicitation, and with- 
out thinking the time was up, the little girl came again. The 
communication was, ' Apply to William Wiley, Superintendent of 
the Auburn and Eochester Eailroad, to-morrow, at two o'clock at 
his office, for a situation, and thee will have one before this we^V ' 

STATEMENT OF OEORGE WILLETS. 73 

is out.' This was Thursday. I was a stranger to Mr. Wiley, and 
I called oa Mr. Post, and told him the direction, and asked him 
if the next day he would go with me. That evening he, happening 
to be at the dep6t, inquired if Mr. Wiley was at home, and was 
told that he was in Boston, and, by a letter just received, would 
not be at home till Friday night, I was told by the sounds on 
Wednesday to apply on Thursday at two o'clock. Thursday, at 
half-past one, instead of going to the railroad office, I went round 
where these sounds were heard, and said, ' How is this ? — I am told 
to apply to William Wiley, and he is in Boston.' The sounds 
said, ' Go to his office, — now he is there.' I called for Mr. Post 
and walked immediately there, and/oMM«Z Mr. Wiley m his office. 
He said that he had returned sooner than he expected to when he 
wrote the letter. Mr. Post said that I was a relative of his, and 
wished employment; and Mr. Wiley replied that they were all 
full, with abundant applications, and could give no encouragement 
whatever. We walked back, thinking deeply, and I went where 
the sounds were heard again. I inquired, 'How is this — Mr. Wiley 
has no place for me ? ' The answer was, ' Thee will have a place 
on the cars, and will know it before the. week is out.' 

" On Saturday night, at dark, I met Mr. Post, and he asked if 
I had heard anything from Mr. Wiley. I replied,.' Not a word.' 
At eight o'clock on that same evening Mr. Post called at my. 
house, and said that Mr. Wiley had just been at his store, and said 
that he had a place for me, and wished me to call at his office on 
Monday morning. As Mr. Wiley did not tell what place I was 
to fill, I again asked the sounds what it was; and they said it 
was to go as baggage-master between this place and Auburn. On 
Sunday morning I wrote to my friend, James Truman, of 
Waterloo, stating that I should pass through that place on Mon- 
day following, in the capacity above stated, before I knew from 
Mr. Wiley wliat place he wanted me to Jill; and he can probably 
testify to that fact. One month after I had been running on the 
cars, I learned that the person whose place I took had done things 
worthy of a dismissal, previom to my being directed to make apr 

74 PIUST MANIFESTATIONS IN UOCHESTEB. 

plication, and which did not come to Mr. Wiley's notice till the 
day on which I received the appointment. These things have only 
been known to a few friends ; you and the world now have them. 
I have many communications, penned down at the time they were 
received, purporting to be from my father, all of the most elevat- 
ing character, citing me to goodness, purity and honesty of heart, 
and ever pointing to the endless progression of man. In conclu- 
sion, I may say that I have examined the matter attentively for 
one year and a half, and have had abundant opportunities to do so, 
and am prepared to say, although the sounds may cease to-day, 
and never be heard again, ' They have displayed a remarkable 
degree of intelligence, and were nat made by any person visible to 
us.' Geokge Willets." 

Mr. Willets had other important directions, at that time, equally 
truthful and correct. No case in all the spiritual manifestations 
up to this day has been more remarkably fulfilled, and none more 
thoroughly fortified on all sides. It baffles all scepticism, let it 
turn which way it will. 

On the 23d of November, 1848, the author went from Auburn, 
where he then resided, to Rochester. He had previously heard of 
the " mysterious rapping," and concluded it to be a trick which 
would soon be found out and exposed, and made up his mind to 
attempt its solution, whenever an opportunity should offer j like 
many others, supposing that he had shrewdness enough to detect 
the trick, if allowed an opportunity. The following is an extract 
from his memorandum made at the time, or soon after : — 

" A friend of mine, John Kedzie, of Eochester, whom I had long 
known as a sceptic in regard to any such wonders, invited me to 
go with him to hear it. I accepted the invitation with a feeling 
that was far from serious apprehension of communicating with 
anything beyond my power to discover. 

" Before I heard the sound, we seated ourselves around a table. 
As soon as we got quiet, I heard a slight but distinct rapping on 
the floor, apparently on the under side. Although I concluded 

THE author's statement. 76 

that such a sound migU be made by machinery, I could see no 
possible motive in the family taking so much pains to deceive 
people, as they received nothing but annoyance and trouble in 
return for their pains. I proceeded to ask some questions, and 
they were answered very freely and correctly. I asked if it would 
rap my age. It was done correctly. I then took my memoran- 
dum-book from my pocket, and wrote my questions, so that no 
person could know the nature of the questions. I would write, 
' rap four times ; rap one ; rap seven ; ' and to each and every 
question I got a correct answer. I then laid aside my book, and 
proceeded to ask similar test questions mentally ; and, as before, 
received correct answers. 

" I could not believe that persons present had the power to dis- 
cern my thoughts, and make these sounds in answer, for the sounds 
have a peculiarity not easily imitated. To suppose this to be the 
case, would make the matter a still greater mystery. I knew they 
could not give those answers, for there were questions answered 
which they could not know anything about. 

" At another time, being present with Isaac Post, of Rochester, 
I tried the experiment of counting in the following manner. I 
took several shells from a card-basket on the table (small lake 
shells), closed my hand, and placed it entirely out of sight, and 
requested as many raps as there were shells. It was done cor- 
rectly. As I knew how many shells there were in my hand, I 
resolved to test it another way, to see if there was a possibility 
of my mind having any influence in the matter. I took a hand- 
ful of shells, without knowing how many I took myself. Still the 
answers were correct. I then requested Mr. Post, who sat by the 
table, to put his hand in the basket, take out some shells without 
knowing the number, and pass them into my hand, which I imme- 
diately closed and placed in a position where none could see it. 
The number was told as correctly as before. We continued this 
class of experiments for a long time, without the least failure in 
getting correct answers." 

There could be no mistaking these tests. They could not be 

76 PIBST MAMFISSTATIOJSS IN ROCHESTER. 

influenced by oiir minds, for we did not ourselves know what the 
answers should be. This places a quietus on its being anything 
governed by the minds- of those asking questions, or those who 
hear it most freely. The proof of getting answers, and correct 
ones, to mental questions, and to thoughts where questions are 
not asked, is as plain as even the rapping itself. 

On the 12th of January, 1849, H. D. Barron, then of Auburn, 
N. Y., called at the house of the Fox family, in Kochester, in 
company with James J. Owen, of that city. They were seated 
around the table in the day-time, and it moved about the distance 
of one foot. They then moved away from it, and it moved back 
and forth when no one touched it, and in full view, several times. 
No one was present escept the persons named, and Mrs. Fox and 
her three daughters. Mr. Owen then put down a number of fig- 
ures where none of the company could see them, and when he 
came to the ones which were the number of years of his age, there 
was rapping. Mr. Owen remarked that there was no one present 
who knew his age, and that the answer was correct. In the same 
way it told the number of months over the years. These were 
done at the request of one of the persons present. 

The next day (Sunday), H. D. Barron called at the house of 
the Fox family. After several questions had been answered, a 
spirit, purporting to be that of a relative, called for the alphabet, 
and spelled the following sentence : — " Henry, when you get home, 

B. will hand you a letter from ." On the following Tuesday 

morning he arrived in Auburn, and was handed a letter by R , 

mailed at New York, and received at Auburn on the Sunday that 
the communication was given in Rochester. The persons present 
at the time this communication was received were Mrs. Fox, her 
youngest daughter, Isaac Post, of Rochester, and the one to whom 
the communication was addressed. 

Judge Hascall, of LeRoy, related to the author a fact that 
came under his notice while examining into these phenomena in 
company with Mr. Summerfield, a lawyer of the same place, which 
strongly illustrates the power of spirits to produce any sound by 

TUB authoe's statement. 77 

their will. He (Judge H.) stated that they were at the house of 
the Fox family, and went into a dark room. They called for the 
sounds to be made like a band of martial music. As they re- 
quested, the sounds were produced in a most beautiful and thrill- 
ing manner. The playing of the instruments and the heavy 
beating of the bass drum were perfectly imitated, together with the 
sound of the roar of distant cannon. Both Mr. Summerfield and 
Judge Hasoall agreed in saying that the whole thing was so truth- 
ftilly and exactly imitated that the effect produced on the hearers 
was of the most thrilling character. 

In the month of November, 1849, Elias J. Doty, of Macedon, 
Wayne county, was at the house of Mr. Pierpont, of Eoohester, 
where two sisters who were mediums were present. They had 
seen the table move, and had other demonstrations while the young 
ladies were in the room. After they had left the room, Mr. Doty 
was standing a few feet from the table, and the other person still 
further from it, when he remarked that it would be a still greater 
proof to him' if it would move without the presence of the young 
ladies. As he said this, the table moved some distance, and only 
the three persons in the room, and those viot near the table. We 
state this on the authority of Mr. Doty, and none who know him 
need better evidence. 

The author has known several persons to be sitting around a 
table in conversation, and when they ceased the signal for the 
alphabet would be called for, and a sentence would be spelt like 
this : (naming one of the company), thinks so and so (men- 
tioning exactly what their thoughts were). At one time, several 
persons were present ; one wrote on a piece of paper to another 
something about two other members of the company, which, 
although unimportant, they did not wish the others to know ; but, 
as if to convince all of their power to tell their thoughts, the sig- 
nal was given for the alphabet, and the same spelled out that they 
had written. This has so often been the case, or similar occur- 
rences, that it is placed beyond dispute by those who have tried 
the experiment of getting answers to mental questions. The fol- 
7* 

78 FIRSI MANIFESTATIONS IN KOCITESTJSR. 

lowing is an extract from the original memorandum made by the 
author after many opportunities for investigation : — 

"At one of the first opportunities I had of investigating, I had 
the following proof, which appeared to be anything but evil to me, 
although the direction was about ' worldly matters.' 

" Myself and wife and a female friend of ours had been inves- 
tigating until a late hour, — nearly twelve o'clock at night, — and 
a violent storm had sprung up. It was necessary for us to go to 
another part of the city, and it was so late that the public convey- 
ances had all left their usual stand, and we were at a loss how to 
get a conveyance for the females. The direction was, ' Go to the 
corner of the street, and there you will find a conveyance.' I 
went as directed, but saw no carriage, and began to think I had 
been misdirected ; but, just as I was turning to go back, a sleigh 
came up the street, and, without my speaking, the driver hailed 
me, and inquired if I wanted a conveyance. I of course took it, 
and carried the females home. 

" On one occasion a gentleman of Kochester was indebted to a 
woman who was in great need of the money. The spirits directed 
her little sister to go at such a place in the street, at a certain hour 
in the day, and she would meet the man, who would pay her three 
dollars for her sister. The little girl did not know the man who 
owed the money, but went as directed. At the appointed time she 
met a man who said to her, ' Are you the girl that lives with 
• ? ' She replied in the aflarmative. ' Here are three 

dollars I wish you would take to her,' said the man, handing her 
a bill ; and passed on.'' 

The following is an extract from a letter to the author, received 
from Mrs. Sarah D. Fish, a lady well known in Rochester. It 
was published at the time of the transaction, about four years 
ago: 

" I watched with a sick friend about two years ago, and when 
all was still, and no one awake but myself, — at least, no one in 
the room except my sick friend, — I sat by the stove, and there 

LEl'TEIl FKOM JUDGE HASCALL. 79 

was a sudden loud rapping on the ■wood-work at my left hand. 
Coming in the stillnegs of the night, I was at first quite terrified, 
and stepped immediately to the bed where the sick person lay. 
My friend had heard it, and said, ' What rapping was that ? ' and 
asked for some drink. After I waited on her, I went to the 
watoh, and found it to be just two o'clock. I had become ex- 
hausted for the want of sleep ; I leaned my head back in my 
chair, and fell into a sweet sleep, from which I was awakened by 
a sudden rapping at my right hand (apparently) on the carpet. 
I stepped immediately to the watch, and it jvas precisely half-past 
two, — just the time at which she was to take her medichie" 

The following Tetter is from Judge Hascall, of Le Roy (since 
a member of Congress), who was one of the committee of investi- 
gation at Corinthian Hall, and who has taken abundant opportu- 
nity for inyestigation since that time, and whose honesty and 
powers for calm investigation will not be called in question by 
those who have any knowledge of the man. He is extensively 
known as a man eminent in his profession, and an upright and 
candid citizen. 

" Le EOT, 13th February, 1850. 

" Mk. E. W. Capeon, — Deab Sir : Yours of the 12th instant 
is just received, in which you requested me to send you a state- 
ment of what I have witnessed of the phenomenon known as the 
' Mysterious Eappings.' I should be pleased to give you a par- 
ticular account of my investigations in endeavoring to discover 
the cause of the mysterious sounds, but other engagements pre- 
vent, and you must be contend with a very imperfect sketch of 
them. As the committees appointed at public meetings at Co- 
rinthian Hall, to investigate and, if possible, detect and expose 
what was generally believed to be some ingenious device, had 
failed to ascertain the cause, and the persons who must be present 
when the rappings were made challenged further investigation, I 
concluded to inquire into this singular problem, and solve it if 
possible. Accordingly I visited the house where these young 
ladies reside, in company with several persons, and our efforts 

80 riRST MANIFESl'ATIONS IN EOCUJSSTEB. 

were attended with no better success than were those of the com- 
mittees whose investigations at other places had preceded ours. 
The experiment was repeated at the residences of several highly- 
respectable families in the city of Kochester, to which the young 
ladies were invited, and the same rappings were heard, appar- 
ently at different places in the room at the same time, and our 
efforts to detect the cause at these places were fruitless. Among 
the persons who were present with me on this occasion were 
members of the legal and medical profession, — men of science 
and skill, — and we entirely failed to discover any art or 
machinery, philosophical apparatus or means whatever, by which 
the sounds and other manifestations were produced. 

" I will not go into the particulars of the whole I witnessed 
during the investigations before referred to, but will state, gen- 
erally, that I have witnessed much of the phenomena which you 
have mentioned in the pamphlet recently published by you at 
Auburn. " Yours respectfully, 

"A. P. Hascall." 

The following statement we arc allowed to publish from John 
S. Clackner, of Ravenna, Ohio : 

" At your request I will write a few instances of the myste- 
rious agencies, alias spirits, in western New York, with which I 
was familiar previous to my removal to this place, and to which 
I auL willing to testify, if necessary. Dates, or times of occur- 
rences, I shall omit for brevity sake. I also wish it understood 
that in the following communications, when I say the spirits 
answered, that it was done by rapping and the use of the alphabet. 
This course I adopt in order to avoid a useless repetition of the 
words ' rapping ' and ' alphabet.' 

"My first interview with Mrs., Fish was at her residence, on 
Prospect-street, in Rochester. We were total strangers to each 
other, she supposing me from the country. After I got into the 
bouse, I remarked, it would be a gratification to me if the spirit 
would reveal my name to her, as I had been informed it had in 

STATEMENT 01? JOHN S. CLACKNEK. 81 

Other cases. She said, ' Spirit, do you know this gentleman ? ' 
As quick as thought she was answered by loud raps, when she 
again said, ' Will you tell his name by the alphabet ? ' She was 
answered in the affirmative. She then commenced calling the 
alphabet, and was stopped by the spirit rapping at every letter in 
my name. Then she pronounced it audibly, and was confirmed by 
the raps. Subsequently, one evening, it would not allow me to 
stay in the room, alleging as a reason that I had not fulfilled my 
engagement to bring with me my wife and son. Mrs. F. urged it 
to permit me to stay; but it continued to spell out, 'He must go.' 
After some further expostulation, she said, ' You may stay.' It 
immediately called out for the alphabet, and spelled, ' Leah has 
done wrong — he must go.' At other times it was free to con- 
verse with me, but this evening it would say nothing to me. At 
another time the spirit commenced rapping voluntarily for the 
alphabet, and spelled out, ' M. has done wrong.' M. answered, 
' Why, spirit, what have I done now that is wrong ? ' to which it 
answered, by the alphabet, ' You said I rapped this morning, at 
Andrew's ; I only gave you a sauiid.' * * 

" At another time the young ladies came to my house for 
advice upon domestic affairs. I proposed calling a meeting of 
friends on the subject. They consented, on condition that the 
spirits agreed thereto. They made several unsuccessful attempts 
in various places in that room for an answer from the spirits, 
until at length, at the front part of the house, it answered, and 
told them the reason of its silence in other places ; it was, that 
' there were eaves-droppers and enemies listening, and could hear.' 
It encouraged our project, and success crowned our efforts. * * 

" At one time it requested one man present to set a sum in 
addition, and let no man see his figures but himself. He then 
pointed to any figure he chose, and asked the spirit to give as 
many distinct single raps as it amounted to, which was promptly 
and correctly done ; also, the whole sum added up and proved, in 
the same way as learners in school do, with this difference only 
that it would instantly and deliberately rap the amount contained 

82 FIEST MANIFESTATIONS IN ROCHESTER. 

in each perpendicular row of figures, allowing no time for first 
enumerating. I could relate many circumstances relative to this 
mysterious agency. Let one more suffice, where it had a direct 
moral influence on a young man that I introduced to the family 
where these sounds are heard. His name was not mentioned at 
the time, until the spirit desired to communicate with him. He 
asked who wished to communicate with him. The answer was, 
' George Fox, the first Quaker.' ' What do you want to say to 
me ? ' said the youngster ; and was answered by the spirit, ' I want 
you to stay after the others go away.' The evening passed in 
getting answers, beating time with music, &c., until the spirit 
spelled ' Done.' When the company began to disperse, each bid- 
ding the spirit ' good-night,' the young man was proceeding to go, 
when the spirit rapped for the alphabet, and spelled out his name 
and ' stay,' upon which I remarked that I supposed I must leave 
him. It then told me to stay. The young man asked who 
wanted to communicate with him, and it answered, ' Your sister.' 
She had been dead some eighteen years. He was much affected, 
and asked if she would answer him mental questions, and was 
answered in the affirmative. He asked many ; we could hear the 
raps in answer, but did not know the nature of his questions. 
Prom that time a manifest change was perceptible in his conduct ; 
whether the same continues, I am unable to tell. 
" Respectfully yours, 

"John S. Clackner. 
" Eaveima, Portage Co., 0., Feb. 13, 1850." 

The following is the first case of spiritual telegraphing on 
record. They are at this time quite common. 

" The Rochester Daily Magnet of February 26, 1850, has the 
following new development. In alluding to it, the editor says, 
' The matter is one well worthy of investigation. The gentlemen 
whose names are attached to the marvellous statement, are not 
wont to engage in tricks or impositions, and the developments 
made are worthy of that credence which should be given to all 

SPIRITUAL TEXEQRAPHINO. 83 

new doctrines when well authenticated. Kead them calmly and 
dispassionately.' 

" To Messrs. Jervis, Willets, Jones, and others : 
" Gentlemen : As we are required by authority, that we think 
we have no right to disregard, to make public the extraordinary 
communications recently witnessed at my dwelling, it becorttes 
necessary to give you, and through you to the public, the facts 
which gave rise to the first interview, on Friday, the 16th inst. 
The novelty of the subject, and the' state of the public mind, are 
such, that I feel prompted to do this, not only correctly, but as 
minutely as possible. Circumstances had placed me in a way to 
witness those remarkable communications called the ' mysterious 
rappings,' from the time of their origin in this city in the sum- 
mer of 1848. After the severest tests, under a variety of cir- 
cumstances, and at various places, for about one year, incontesta- 
ble evidence addressed to my senses baffled my scepticism, and 
fully convinced me that they were the production of no human 
agencies. And as they profess to emanate from invisible intelli- 
gences called spirits, I had not allowed myself the liberty to 
attribute them to any other source, at least until some other 
origin could be detected. In hope of eliciting some further light 
on the mysterious subject, I proposed to a member of my family, 
who is susceptible to magnetic influence, to be put into a clair- 
voyant state, and see what might be presented in relation to it. 
§he complied, and for this purpose was magnetized on the evening 
of the 12th inst., and in the presence of no other persons. The 
questions and answers were as follows : Q. Do you see anything ? 
Am. I see a stranger that I never saw before. He is not pre- 
possessing in appearance, but is very elevated in his position, in 
a reflecting attitude, and is busily employed. Q. What is he 
doing? A. He is preparing work for you. Q. What is the 
nature of the work ? .4. He is establishing a line of communi- 
cation. Q. Ask him, ' Is it practicable to get communications 
between two distant points by means of these rappings ? ' A. 

84 EIEST MAMEESTATIONS IN ROCHESTEK. 

' To be sure,' he says. Q. Can you ascertain who this stranger 
is ? A. Benjamin (after a pause) Franklin. Q. Will you ask 
him to give you some signal by which we may know it is really 
Benjamin Franklin? After a silence of one or two minutes, a 
violent shock of her person induced me hastily to say, ' What is 
the matter — are you waking up ? ' A. No; you wanted a sig- 
nal, and I told him, if it was Dr. Franklin, he might electrize 
me, and he did it. B. Has it injured you? A. No, I feel bet- 
ter; my head is clearer — I can see plainer. Q. Will you ask 
him where communications between distant points at the same 
time can be tested. A. He says at your own house. Q. Is 
there anything required of us in the matter ? A. He says, ' Get 
two of those young ladies about whom there is so much excite- 
ment in your city, place them in extreme parts of two rooms, and 
you (meaning herself) be put in the same state in which you now 
are, and I will communicate with you.' Q. Who else may be in 
attendance? A. Mr. Jervis, and a few others who have been 
acquainted with this subject. Q. Will he direct as to time ? A. 
He says, ' Consult the convenience of those concerned, and I shall 
be advertised of it. * Q. Are there any further directions to be 
given at this time ? A. That is the end of the chapter. 

" In compliance with the above, the interview on Friday the 
fifteenth was called, you and others notified, and the attendance 
of the two young ladies, Margaretta and Catharine Fox, secured, 
from whom, for prudential reasons, the above facts and prelimi- 
naries were withheld. 

" Respectfully yours, 

"N. Dkapeii. 

" Pursuant to the notice, as above stated, we, the undersigned 
met at the house of Mr. Draper, dn Friday, the 15th inst., about 
four o'clock, V. M. We inquired for directions, and were answered 
by alphabet, ' Let Mrs. Draper be magnetized.' Through her 
the two young ladies were directed to retire to another room. 
The directions then were for Mr. Jervis, Mrs. Fox and Catharine 

SPIKITtTAL TELEGKAPHINO. 85 

Fox, to be placed in a room at the opposite end of the house, and 
for Mr. Jervis to take notes. Margaretta Pox should be with 
the company in the parlor, and Mr. Draper take notes. This 
was done. The sounds were then heard in both rooms, by either 
company, exactly similar to the sounds heard in the telegraph 
office. 

" Question to the Clairvoyant. What does that rapping mean, 
unlike any other sounds before heard by rapping ? Ans. He is 
trying the batteries. The signal for the alphabet was heard, 
and on calling the letters, was spelled, ' She must be waked in ten 
minutes.' A watch was placed on the table, after noting the 
time, and covered up, and the question asked, if we could have a 
signal by sounds at the exact time, and was answered affirma- 
tively. At the precise time the signal was heard. The question 
was then asked, J Who shall wake her ? ' and she was instantly 
awoke with an apparent electric shock. 

"At this point there was much interruption by persons coming 
into both rooms. The question was asked for further directions, 
and the answer was by alphabet, ' Things are not as I directed, 
therefore you cannot proceed at this time. There should be but 
four in each room.' Mr. Jervis and company came into the par- 
lor, and his notes read as follows : ' Things are not as I directed 
them, therefore you cannot proceed at this time.' Ques. Can we 
have another opportunity ? Ans. If I set the time and name the 
company, there shall be no fail. Q. Shall the appointment be 
now made ? Answered affirmatively. The following persons 
were then named by the alphabet : Mr. Jervis, Mr. Jones, Mr. 
Draper, Mr. Willets, Mrs. Jervis, Mrs. Draper, Mrs. Brown, Mrs. 
Fox, Margaretta Fox and Catharine Fox. Q. May we know the 
time? A. Wednesday next, at four o'clock, p. m. Q. The 
place? A. Here. 

" On the day appointed, Feb. 20th, the abovenamed persons 
convened ; some of the company were late, and as soon as order 
was observed, this question was asked : ' What are the directions 
of Benjamin Franklin ? ' A. Hurry ; first magnetize Mrs. Dra- 

86 riKST MANIFESTATIONS IN EOCHESTER. 

per. This was done, she immediately saying, ' He says we are 
behind the time, but he will forgive us this time ; we must do 
better in future.' The company were divided as follows : Mr. 
Jervis, Mr. Jones, Mrs. Fox, Mrs. Brown and Catharine Fox, in 
a retired room, with two doors closed between them. Mrs. Dra- 
per, Mrs. Jervis, Mr. Draper, Mr. Willets and Margaretta Fox, 
remained in the parlor. Sounds unusually loud were heard in 
each room by either company, as before, resembling the telegraph 
sounds. They were so unusual that Miss Fox became alarmed, 
and said, ' What does all this mean ? ' Mrs. Draper, while her 
countenance was irradiated with animation, replied, ' He is try- 
ing the batteries.' Soon there was the signal for the alphabet, 
and the following communication was spelled to the company in 
the parlor : ' Now I am ready, my friends. There will be great 
changes in the nineteenth century. Things that now look dark 
and mysterious to you will be laid plain before your sight. Mys- 
teries are going to be revealed. The world will be enlightened. 
I sign my name Benjamin Franklin. Do not go into the other 
room.' 

" After waiting a few minutes, Mr. Jervis came into the par- 
lor, saying that he was directed by the sounds to come and com- 
pare notes. They read as follows: Q. Are we all right? A. 
Affirmatively, signal for alphabet, and the following was spelled : 
' There will be great changes in the nineteenth century. Things 
that now look dark and mysterious to you will be laid plain be- 
fore your sightt Mysteries are going to be revealed. The world 
will be enlightened. I sign my name Benjamin Franklin, Go 
in the parlor and compare notes.' Mr. Jervis returned to his 
company, and by alphabet was spelled, ' Now all go into the par- 
lor.' The notes were then compared in presence of the whole 
coinpany. Q. Is there anything more from Dr. Franklin ? A. 
I think I have given tests enough for this day. Q. Will it not 
be better to keep this matter private ? .4. No ; they should be 
published. Q. In what paper. A. In the Bemocrat or Magnet. 
Q. Who shall prepare it for publication ? A. George Willets. 

SMIUTUAL TELEGKAPUINa. 87 

Time and place were tten designated for the same company to 
meet again, with two other persons added to the number. 

" We sign our names as no parties, but as witnesses. If our 
testimony is incredible, impeach and reject it. If admissible, 
hand it over to the judge and jurors, — the public, — and charge 
them that we claim no interest aside from their own in their 
verdict. 

Eev. Asahel Jervis, Nathaniel Dkaper, 
Edward Jones, Geoeab Willets, 

Rachel Draper, Mary Jervis, 

Mart Brown, Margaret Fox. 

"Rochester, Feb. 23, 1850." 

CHAPTER IV. 

SUSPENSION OP THE MANWESTATIONS IN THE POX PAIIILT RETUKN OP 

THE SPIRITS DIEEOTIOSS FOK PtTBIIO INVESTIGATION THE PIKST 

MEETINGS — EXCITEMENT ON THE EEPOB.T OP COMMITTED EIOTOUS 

DEMONSTUATIONS IN0KEA9E OP MEDIA FOE EAPPING, WEITIN6, &C. &0. 

The spirits had long been urging the mediums to allow the 
utmost facilities for investigating this subject ; but the aversion 
of the Eox family to the notoriety consequent upon such pub- 
licity was not easily 'overcome. Indeed, they resisted to the 
utmost all directions of that nature as much as possible. Direc- 
tions were often given, which the mediums obstinately refused to 
follow. Long-continued resistance against the wishes and direc- 
tion of the spirits came near stopping the communications 
altogether. The family were often urged on, and told that, if they 
refused to go forward and let the world hear, the matter would 
die with them, and be left for another generation to bring before 
the world. 

In the month of November, 1848, the spirits informed the 
family that they could not always strive with them ; that such 
was the mediums' continual disobedience to the spirits' requests, 
that they must leave them. To this the mediums made no objec- 
tion, but declared that nothing could please them more, and 
they hoped they waiM leave. Accordingly, while a few friends 
were present, among whom were George Willets, and Isaac Post, 
of Rochester, and Milton Arnold, of Seipio, N. Y., the spirits 
announced Ihat in twenty minutes they would bid them fare- 

SUSPENSION OF THE MANIl'ESTATIONS. 89 

well and discontinue their manifestations, as they wore unwilling 
longer to contend with such continued opposition. The friends 
conversed freely till the appointed time, when they spelled " We 
will now bid you all farewell." There were previously several 
messages of an affectionate character, and the whole scene was 
remarkably solemn and impressive. It was in vain that the 
friends urged them to give them some more pToofs of their pres- 
ence. They had departed, and silence prevailed. The mediums 
stoically declared that they were glad to be rid of them. They 
did not realize the fact, and had been so annoyed that they con- 
sidered it a relief. Some of their friends called each day to see 
if the sounds had not recommenced ; but the answer was " No." 
For the first three or four days the mediums continued their 
stoicism; but they soon began to realize their loss, and were 
affected even to tears when their friends called. They learned 
that they had lost friends that were exercising a constant guar- 
dianship over them, and ever ready to answer their inquiries. 

On the twelfth day after the discontinuance of the sounds, the 
author happened to be in Rochester on business, and went with 
Greorge Willets to call on Mrs. Pish and her sister Margaretta, 
who was with her ; Catharine being then on a visit to Auburn. 
On our opening the gate, they came to the door, and with sorrow- 
ful faces told us that the spirits had left them and they could get 
no rapping. We answered that perhaps they would rap for us, if 
not for them. We stepped into the hall of the house and asked 
if the spirits would rap for us ? Immediately we were greeted 
mth a perfect shower of raps on the floor, the walls and the ceil- 
ing. Had a long-lost friend suddenly returned, the two sisters 
could not have been more rejoiced. For twelve days they had 
been made lonely by their absence, and they could now appre- 
ciate them as they had returned. From the looks of sadness, their 
faces were turned to smiles and rejoicing. 

It was at this time that the first intimation was given us in 
regard to bringing the matter prominently before the public. They 
then proceeded to give their plan of the whole proceedings in 
8* 

90 riKST POBLIC INVESTIGATION. 

minute detail. The persons designated to bring the subject before 
the people were George Willets and E. W. Capron. This proposi- 
tion was met with an absolute refusal. We had no wish to expose 
ourselves to public ridicule, and had never sought any notoriety in 
the matter, — never had been conspicuous as its advocates, and 
never expected to be. It was a " call " which we had no disposi- 
tion to accept. On hearing of our refusal, an ambitious young 
man came forward and offered his services, urging his superior 
powers as an orator over the ones selected by the spirits ; but, for 
some reason, the invisible intelligences refused to accept his prof- 
fered services, and, soon after the investigations had taken place, 
he became a very violent opponent of that spiritualism of which 
he had urged himself as a most fitting advocate. 

The first message on this subject was given through the alpha- 
bet thus : " You all have a duty to perform. We want you to 
make this matter more public." We urged the awkwardness of 
the position we should be jlaced in, the ridicule that would be 
heaped upon us or any one who should attempt to lecture on this 
subject. The answer to this was : " That will be so much the 
better,. — your triumph will be so much the greater.'' 

The plan proposed by the spirits was as follows : Corinthian 
Hall should be hired ; Mrs. Fish and Margaretta should go there ; 
E. W. Capron should deliver the lecture, explaining the commence- 
ment of the sounds at Hydesville, and their progress up to that 
time, and George Willets should act as the business man, door- 
keeper, &o. At each meeting there must be a committee of five 
persons, appointed by the audience, to investigate the matter and 
report at the next meeting. The spirits promised to make sounds 
so loud as to be heard in all parts of the hall. The names of 
several persons were given to accompany Mrs. Pish and her sister 
on the platform. Among these were Amy Post, and one or two 
other ladies. Rev. A. H. Jervis, N. Draper, Esq., Lyman Gran- 
der, and other well-known citizens. The charge for admission was 
to be twenty-five cents. All these directions were given by using 
the alphabet, without a suggestion on our parts. To this plan we 

FIllSI MEETINGS. 91 

objected that Corinthian Hall, being the largest in the city, was 
larger than necessary, and too expensiye ; that people would not 
attend in numbers sufficient to pay expenses, and that we were not 
able to pay the bill ourselves. We were assured that we should 
have enough to pay expenses, and the end would be a complete 
triumph for all concerned. We were assured that it was the best 
course in order to silence all slanders and establish the truth ; and 
they declared that this would prepare the way for a more general 
development of spiritual communication which would take place at 
no distant day. 

After receiving so much of the directions, and still declining to 
go forward, the writer returned to Auburn. Catharine Eox was 
there with us, and through her the spirits urged us to do as we 
had been directed at Rochester. Finally, the spirits proposed that 
meetings should take place at private houses, where large parlors 
could be had, in order to test the ability of the spirits to make 
the sounds in the presence of a promiscuous assembly. My friends 
wrote me, urging the trial, at least, of that test. After much 
deliberation, we consented to make the trial, not without many 
misgivings as to the result. My friends at Auburn predicted a 
failure and disgrace for being engaged in so unpopular a cause ; 
but I had made up my mind to make the trial, testing every inch 
of ground to see whether the promises would be fulfilled. I went 
to Eochester and commenced the meetings in private houses. 
They were often crowded to a jam, but the spirits made their 
promise good. The rapping was loud and distinct in every 
instance. 

After testing the matter in this way for several nights, and 
receiving more minute directions and constant encouragement, we 
gave notice of a meeting to be held in Corinthian Hall, on the 
evening of the 14th of November, 1848. 

At the appointed time, an audience of some four hundred 
persons assembled to hear what might be said, and also to hoar 
the sounds, as the spirits had promised that they would produce 
the sounds sufficiently loud to be heard in all parts of the hall. 

92 FIRST PUBLIC INVESTIGATION. 

The lecture consisted of a simple and plain explanation of tlie 
whole matter, from its commencement to that time, carefully 
avoiding any assertion as to what it was; but merely stating, 
from well proved facts, what it was not. The audience listened 
with respectful attention, and at the close of the lecture appointed 
the following gentlemen as a committee of investigation, namely, 
A. J. Combs, Daniel Marsh, Nathaniel Clark, Esq., A. Judson and 
Edwin Jones. 

This was the first great step towards laying the whole matter 
before the world in a way that should either settle its falsity or 
establish its truth. The fact that the audience appointed an intel- 
ligent committee to investigate the subject was very freely com- 
mented upon in a tone of assurance that now a " fraud would be 
exposed." So sure were the editors of the Rochester Democrat, 
that this was the last of the rappings, that they wrote an article, 
and had it in type, saying that the whole thing was exploded. 
When the committee reported, they had the article suppressed. 
They were disappointed in a very important and interesting item. 
The committee reported, in substance, as follows : 

" That, without the knowledge of the persons in whose presence 
the manifestations are made, the committee selected the hall of 
the Sons of Temperance for investigation ; that the sound on the 
floor, near where the two ladies stood, was heard as distinctly as 
at other places, and that part of the committee heard the rapping 
on the wall behind them ; that a number of questions were asked, 
which were answered, not altogether right nor altogether wrong ; 
that in the afternoon they went to the house of a private citizen, 
and while there the sounds were heard on the outside (apparently) 
of the front door, after they had entered, and on the door of a 
closet. By placing the hand upon the door, there was a sensible 
jar felt when the rapping was heard. One of the committee placed 
one of his hands upon the feet of the ladies and the other on the 
floor, and though the feet were not moved, there was a distinct jar 
on the floor. On the pavement and on the groiond the same sound 

RErORTS OE COMMITTEES. 93 

was heard, — a kind of double rap, as a stroke and a rebound, 
wore distinguishable. When the ladies were separated at a dis- 
tance, no sound was heard ; but when a third person was inter- 
posed between them, the sounds were heard. The ladies seemed 
to give every opportunity to the committee to investigate the cause 
fully, and would submit to a thorough investigation by a commit- 
tee of ladies, if desired. They all agreed that the sounds were 
heard, but they entirely failed to discover any means by which it 
covld he done." 

Each one of the committee spoke for themselves, and they were 
well agreed as to the facts as stated. 

After this report, and some discussion on the subject, the audi- 
ence selected another committee, composed of the following per- 
sons : Dr. H. H. Langworthy, Hon. Frederick Whittlesey, D. C. 
McCoUum, William Fisher, of Rochester, and Hon. A. P. Has- 
call (late member of Congress), of Le Hoy. At the next lecture 
this committee reported that they went into the investigation at 
the office of Chancellor Whittlesey, and they heard the sound on 
the floor, on the wall and door ; that the ladies were placed in 
different positions, and, like the other committee, they were wholly 
unable to tell from what the sound proceeded, or how it was made ; 
that Dr. Langworthy made observations with a stethoscope to ascer- 
tain whether there was any movement with the lungs, and found 
not the least difference when the sounds were made ; and there 
was no kind of probability or possibility of their being made by 
ventriloquism, as some had supposed; and they could nx>t have 
been made by machinery. 

Much excitement was manifested by the audience at the an- 
nouncement of the second committee's failure to account for the 
sounds. Just in proportion as the honesty of the mediums were 
proved did the wrath of a portion of the community enkindle 
against them. The very fact that it was not a cheat seemed to 
annoy them. 

On the third evening, a much larger number were present, and 

94 FIRST PUBLIC INVESTIGATION. 

a portion seemed determined that it should be found out. Mr. 
W. L. Burtis declared that those girls would not have him on the 
committee for a hundred dollars, intimating that he was known to 
possess unusual facilities for the detection of such a fraud. He 
was immediately voted on to the committee, and then declared 
that, if he could not find it out, he would forfeit a new beaver hat. 
Mr. L. Kenyon declared that if he could not find out the trick, he 
would throw himself over Genesee Falls ; and he was straightway 
voted on to the committee. The other members of the committee 
were no more favorably disposed. The whole committee was com- 
posed of Dr. E. P. Langworthy, Dr. J. Gates, Wm. Fitzhugh, 
Esq., W. L. Burtis and L. Kenyon. This committee met at the 
rooms of Dr. Gates, at the Rochester House, and appointed a 
committee of ladies, who took the young women into a room, dis- 
robed them, and examined their persons and clothing, to be sure 
there were no fixtures about them that could produce the sounds. 
When satisfied on this point, the committee of ladies tried some 
other experiments, and gave the young ladies the following cer- 
tificate : 

" When they were standing on pillows with a handkerchief tied 
around the bottom of their dresses, tight to the ankles, we all 
heard the rapping on the wall and floor distinctly. 
"^Signed,) Mrs. Stone, 

Mks. J. Gates, 

Miss M. P. Lawkence." 

In the evening the committee, through their chairman. Dr. 
Langworthy, made a very full report of their examinations during 
the day. They reported that they excluded all friends of the two 
ladies from the committee room, and had the examination only in 
presence of the committee of gentlemen, and ladies chosen by 
them. Notwithstanding all this precaution, these sounds were 
heard when the ladies stood on large /eatAer pillows, vdthout shoes, 
and in other various positions, both on the floor and on the wall ; 

EIOTOUS PBOCBEDINGS. 95 

that a number of questions were asked, which, when answered, 
were generally correct. Each member of the committee reported 
separately, agreeing with and corroborating the first statements. 

None but those who were present can tell the inquisitorial trials 
that Mrs. Fish and Margaretta were forced to undergo during 
these three days of trial. Never were two persons more thor- 
oughly scrutinized, and never was triumph more complete. 

The report of the last committee was more full and complete 
than any of the former ones. Mr. Burtis, who was so sure that 
he could find out the whole thing, was honest enough to report 
fully and frankly in the ladies' favor ; and Mr. Kenyon did not 
throw himself over Genesee Falls, or explain how the sounds were 
made. 

The report seemed to work the rowdy portion of the audience, 
who evidently came there to make disturbance, into a perfect 
furor. Josiah Bissel, Esq., soon after the audience had assem- 
bled, passed out, and soon returned with his hands full of " tor- 
pedoes,'' which he distributed among the boys, old and young, to 
throw upon the floor, explode and make a noise. This gentle- 
man (?) was soon appointed " chairman of the meeting," by this 
gang of' riotous men and boys, although others had hired the hall 
and paid for it, not for the purpose of a riotous meeting, but to 
investigate this strange phenomenon according to certain rules. 
The prominent and leading men, in all this noisy and indecent con- 
duct, were, besides Mr. Bissel, ex-alderman Seeley and a couple 
of men by the name of Jerome, part proprietors or employees in 
the Baily American ofiice, and a Major Packard, cabinet- ware 
dealer. The latter made a speech, in which he pretended that 
the sounds were made by leaden balls fastened to the ladies' 
dresses ! Finding that all attempts to explain the matter further 
were useless, we left the hall in possession of the rowdies and the 
police, the chief of whom informed J. Bissel, Esq., that if any one 
was taken into custody it would be him. ■ 

Thus ended the public meetings ; but they had done their work, 
and set a ball in motion which has already rolled over the whole 

96 KIKST PUBLIC INVESTIGATION. 

Union, and much of the ciyilized world besides. The attention of 
the public was called to it. The press commenced its comments, 
generally in ridicule, but still in a way that aroused the curiosity 
of people to know what it was. 

During the investigation, the comments made by the press were 
various and conflicting. The Daily Democrat said, " There is some 
curiosity excited in this community, in regard to this thing, and it 
was decided (after the first committee's report) not to give it up 
so. These young women will have to be pretty smart, if they 
deceive everybody." 

The Rochester Dfflz'Zy News, edited by John W. Hurn, said, " If 
the parties concerned refused to submit to any investigation, we 
would be the first to scout them as humbugs ; but while they 
challenge scrutiny no man has a right to make any such charge. 
Even the vilest criminals are considered innocent until they are 
proved guilty, and surety an equal amount of charity (or justice) 
is due to persons who are, for aught that is known, among the most 
worthy and honest of our citizens." 

The Democrat suggested that the mayor or chief of police would 
be a very proper person to be at the head of an investigating com- 
mittee ; whereupon the abovenamed Daily News says, " If any one 
can prove this affair is an imposition, got up to defraud the public, 
we shall fully agree with the Democrat ; but we consider one proof 
of more importance than ten thousand assertions, and until such 
proof is adduced, we do not see the propriety of making indis- 
criminate charges of fraud and deception. The parties who bring 
this matter before the community offer every facility for investi- 
gation, and challenge the most searching scrutiny of which the 
keenest intellect is capable. Nothing more than this can be rea- 
sonably asked." 

During the first lecture, a second advent preacher arose, and 
advocated the punishment of the medium, as he had no doubt but 
these were familiar spirits, such as wo are forbidden by Scripture 
to consult. He was well satisfied that it was one of the devil's 

INTESTIOATIONS OP COMMITTEES. 97 

old tricks " in these latter days." He warned the people to have 
nothing to do with it. 

On Friday evening, after the lecture, three of the committee, 
namely, Hon. A. P. Basoall, D. C. McCoUum and Wm. Eisher, 
repaired to the house of a citizen, and pursued their investigations 
still further. There were nearly a score of persons present. The 
members of the committee wrote many questions on paper, which 
no person present knew the purport of, and they were answered 
correctly. At times they would ask mentally, and would receive 
the answers with equal correctness, and they were fully satisfied 
that there was something present manifesting intelligence beyond 
the persons visible. 

One of the committee tried the experiment of Standing the 
ladies on glass, and failed to get any sounds ; but the same was 
subsequently tried in presence of a large number of persons, 
and the sounds were as loud and distinct as before, on the floor, 
as usual. 

One member of the first committee stated that he asked the 
question, " Who is it that wishes to communicate with me ? " The 
answer was, " Your wife will talk." He evaded the answer, and 
gave the persons present to understand that he never had a wife. 
To use his own expression, when he gave his public report, he 
" braw-beat it down." He would not admit there was any truth 
in it until he reported in the evening — then he stated it correctly 
— he had lost his wife some time before. 

The committees were composed of men who, on any other sub- 
ject, would be trusted to investigate where life or property were 
at stake. No citizen of Monroe county would refuse to submit 
the justness of his cause, even were he tried for life, to such men 
as those who composed the committees during the three days they 
were engaged in trying every mode to ferret out the cause of these 
sounds ; and yet many persons persist in denouncing those, who 
even go to hear for themselves, as fools or knaves ! 

I insist upon it that those who were present at Corinthian Hall, 
and had a voice in the appointment of those committees, selected 
9 

98 riEST PUBLIC -INVESTiaATION. 

from the best and most reliable men of the city of Rochester, 
should of all men be the last to cry humbug or collusion. They 
must be aware that, in doing this, they impeach their committees, 
and indirectly accuse them of being ignoramuses and incapable of 
impartial investigation, or of being accessory to one of the most 
successful, wide-spread and long-continued impositions ever palmed 
oS on that or any other community. 

When we take into consideration the facts that this matter had 
then been spreading for two years ; that every means had been 
tried, in private circles and committees appointed by public meet- 
ings ; that all had failed to discover anything like collusion ; we 
may safely assert that, in regard to the sounds merely, the follow- 
ing facts were established beyond dispute, namely: That the 
sounds are heard in various places and at various times; that 
they are not produced by or under the control of any person or 
persons ; and that they evinced a remarkable degree of intelligence. 
From the day the public investigations ended, the excitement in- 
creased. It spread, by the press, from one end of the Union to 
the other, and was soon reechoed back from the other side of the 
Atlantic. The great majority of newspapers ridiculed it as a 
delusion,- or denounced the mediums as impostors. But the ball 
was in motion, and opposition and slander could not stay its 
progress. The promises and predictions of the spirits in regard 
to the effect of such an investigation were fulfilled to the letter. 

While these investigations were going on, the spirits would give 
information at night what kind of men were on the committee. 
They would say, " Such a man " — telling his name — " is a can- 
did man ; such a one is very sceptical, and hard to convince," 
&c. When the investigation came on, we would find that we had 
been told correctly about the character of the difierent individuals 
composing the committee. 

At one time, during the investigations, we were talking over 
the subject, telling how much ridicule would be heaped upon us 
for attempting to lay, this subject before the world, and have it 
fairly investigated, and we had this sentence spelled to us, by 

WRITING MEDIUMS. 99 

what purported to be the spirit of William Willets, father of 
George Willets : " Nbw don't get discouraged ; though the path 
may look foggy, there is a bright cloud a little beyond. Soon the 
firmament will brighten, and those people, who now insult and 
scandalize this work of the Almighty, will walk oif, hanging their 
heads, and saying, 'Well, we have investigated and proved naught 
against those insulted people ; here we stand, just as ignorant as 
when we first heard it. You, know that in all new sciences there 
is always something to contend with, and when things take a turn, 
and you know you have conquered, ' thou wilt feel thou art tread- 
ing on holy ground.' " We at first thought it strange that there 
should be so sudden a change from you, to thou, and it was ex- 
plained thus : " I made it ' holy,' instead of ' haunted.' " We 
then knew it to be a quotation from a song called, " The Haunted 
Grarnid," 

From time to time other mediums have made their appearance, 
not only for vibratory sounds, but for writing and other exercises 
supposed to be • induced by spirits. Among the most remarkable 
cases of writing mediums in that city, may be mentioned Charles 
Hammond, formerly a clergyman of the Universalist denomina- 
tion, and Isaac Post, a well-known and highly-esteemed citizen, 
for many years, and until his practical goodness outgrew them, a 
member of the Society of Friends. From an acquaintance of some 
years with Mr. Post, I can testify to his honesty and integrity. He 
is a man who would not knowingly deceive, and is not generally 
supposed to have an over-abundance of credulity. By his hand a 
book of some two hundred and fifty pages has been written, which 
he supposes to be entirely without any action of his mind. It con- 
sists of communications from the spirits of many distinguished 
statesmen and philanthropists ; many of the articles being charac- 
teristic in style of the alleged authors, beyond Mr. Post's power to 
indicate. Yet it cannot be denied that there is a very striking 
similiarity of sentiment in all the incongruous characters in the 
book, and , all assimilate to Mr. Post's particular views. I 
should rejoice to know that cdl of the spirits making those communi- 

100 riEST PUBLIC INTESTIQATION. 

cations are as really correct in their general views as Isaac 
Post. 

Mr. Hammond has produced three books in the same way. He 
also claims to be empowered or assisted by spirits to heal diseases, 
talk in unknown tongues, dance and perform various gymnastic 
exercises, such as shaking the arms and hands, perform Indian 
dances, whooping, &c. There are others of this kind of mediums 
in Eochester, as well as other places. How much is spiritual, and 
how much to be ascribed to other causes, is only to be determined 
by a careful examination of the facts. 

It will be found, without doubt, that there is much, not only in 
Rochester but in every place where these phenomena have pre- 
vailed to any great extent, that is the result rather of a peculiar 
nervous sensibility and susceptibility, than of any intelligent agency 
operating out of, or independent of, the individuals exercised in 
various ways, which a too credulous class of individuals have 
attributed to the influence of spirits. The scenes enacted in 
Hoohester, which are narrated in this chapter, are sufficient to 
show that great care should be exercised in the investigation of 
this subject, and, while all due weight is given to the claims and 
influences of superior intelligences, we should be cautious about 
adopting evegj? 'singular exercise of the nerves or body as an 
emanation from spirits. 

CHAPTER V. 

MANirESTATIONS IN AUEnKJT, N. T. VISIT OF OATIIAEINE FOX — EEMAKK- 

ABLE TESTS AND PKOOrS Or SPIKIT POTrEE SLANDEBS OF THE PEESS — 

STE-VNGE BEMONSTEATIONS — A HEW MEDIUM, MBS. SAEAH A. TAMLIN — 
SPIKIT MUSIC. 

After my investigations in Kochester, I was anxious to unravel 
the mystery, if possible, and obtain soine rational solution of what, 
in the first instance, I was very reluctant to believe anything of 
spiritual origin. With a view to satisfy myself in this respect,^! 
induced the parents of Catharine Fox, then about twelve years 
old, to allow her to come to Auburn, and spend several weeks in 
our family. 

It was here that we had the beat opportunity of seeing and 
hearing the manifestations in all their different phases. The 
medium was tested in every conceivable way. She slept with the 
ladies in the house, — different ones, — and was tested by them, 
as well without a dress as with. No kind of device was left 
untried to discover if there could be any trick, or any way of 
accounting for the strange occurrences on any known laws, applica- 
ble to mundane phenomena. It was at this time that the matter 
was forever settled, in my mind, in regard to the spiritual origin 
of the sounds. I, with all the family (the family of Capt. Gr. B. 
Beanet, with whom we boarded), had proofs that placed it beyond 
our ^^ower to doubt, if we wished to. Conviction from actual 
facts was forced upon us, and we could not resist. It was impos- 
sible to conceal the fact that such occurrences were taking place 
at our residence ; and the applications soon became very numer- 
ous to see and hear. In a few days, the only daily paper printed 
9* 

102 rmsT manifestations in auburn, n. y. 

in the city commenoed its scurrilous attacks on all who would not 
shut their eyes and ears to the whole matter. Of course this in- 
creased the curiosity and anxiety to hear. One of the first of 
these articles had the following remarkably sensible slander in it : 
" It will be recollected that its operations at Hydesville were 
carried on with much skill and success for several weeks, exciting 
a vast commotion in the region round about. But it was finally 
ascertained, by some prying individual, that Mr. Fox himself, at 
whose house the miracles were performed, had contrived the whole 
matter, and by an ingenious arrangement of springs, wires, &c., 
was enabled to make a grer variety of supernatural sounds, and 
to get up many wonderful sights, such as the locomotion of chairs, 
tables, books and other household fixtures. As soon as its opera- 
tions were discovered, it depLrted in disgust, and has remained in 
retirement until its present visit to Auburn." 

It is due to the present editor of the Auburn Daily Advertiser 
to state that Henry Montgomery was the editor when this false 
and stupid paragraph appeared. But such things awakened 
inquiry, and had an effect directly opposite to that intended by 
the author of the slander. This was not the only persecution to 
which the friends of an impartial investigation were subjected. 
Religious bigotry and rank scepticism united in their opposition, as 
if it were a crime to learn anything new. 

The manifestations were various and astonishing during this 
visit, and have scarcely ever been excelled. They consisted of 
rappings, touohings, moving various articles, and playing orCmusj?. 
cal instruments. I give a few extracts from my private journal, 
as written down at the time of the occurrences. 

At one time we had been discussing the subject of how much or^ 
how little reliance could be placed upon the directions received 
through this source, and we were directed to sit by the table to 
receive a message. We did so, and received the following, which, 
as usual, was received by using the alphabet: 

" Now all listen to what we say. We want you to be better. 

REMAEKABUS BEMONSTBATIONS. 103 

You have doubted our words ; you will see the time when you 
will be ashamed when you look back to the time when you said, 
'I don't know what to think — they are evil spirits — I doubt 
the truthfulness of it.' Now doubt no more, but all have sisterly 
and brotherly feelings ; this is a message from God." 

The conversation above alluded to was carried on while the me- 
dium, through which we received the communications, was out of 
the house visiting her friends, so that she had no knowledge of 
our conversation until this message was given us. I (and all who 
have taken pains to get at the facts ;f all these demonstrations) 
have frequently had a hand laid onnmy arms, shoulders or head, 
when no person would or could do it, having all their hands 
held by each other. These demons, ations, like the others, gen- 
erally leave a feeling of electricity where they touch. The hand 
feels much like one of a person who is in a magnetic sleep, being 
colder (generally) than the hand of persons in a normal state, and 
having a moisture like a cold perspiration upon it. There is not, 
usually, any feeling like that of a hard hand, or one made up 
with the usual amount of bones in it. It is generally soft and 
smooth, although, at our request, it will change both its tempera- 
ture and testure. It will in one instant feel as cold as ice and as 
warm a^ a common hand of flesh. 

So perfectly natural is the touch, when an arm is taken hold of 
by this invisible hand, or it touches in any other way, that, 
although you hold every hand* in the room, you can hardly believe 
it to be other than some of them. But the proof is positive and 
the witnesses are numerous. Then, too, just request a change 
from natural warmth to the coldness of ice, and you feel the 
change without the hand being removed. It is past the art of 
man thus to change the temperature of his body. 

We have taken a common pocket Bible, and have laid it on the 
table with the strap put through the loop, and have awaited in 
silence the result. Soon we would hear the leaves begin to turn, 
and finally it would spell " Get the light," and we would find the 

104 FIUST MANIlfESTATIONS IN AUBURN, N. Y. 

book laying open at some particular chapter, which generally had 
something to say about spirits. Other books have been opened, 
and appropriate poetry been pointed out. The phenomena of pull- 
ing the clothing, handling, moving tables, etc., often take place 
when none present are thinking of them, so that their 'frills do not 
influence the matter. 

" Sunday Eventng, October 7th. This evening we were directed 
to go into the hall, and take the guitar. We went, and while 
there the guitar was played by unseen hands, and played so exquis- 
itely, too, that it seemed more like far-distant music to one just 
aroused from midnight slumbers, than the music of an instrument 
a few feet from us. Several tunes were thus played, while not a 
person in the room knew how to play a tune on that or any other 
instrument. Witnesses present this evening at the house of Mr. 
Bennet, Mrs. Burton Straight, of Troy, Bradford County, Penu., 
Mrs. G. B. Bennet, R. M. C. Capron, E. W. Oapron, and H. D. 
Barron, of Auburn." 

" Tuesday Evening, October 16th. Several persons present at 
the house of D. C. Miller. We were directed to take the guitar 
into a dark room, and it would be played. We accordingly did 
so, and many tunes were played, and in such positions that we 
knew no one could do it if there had been any one present who 
knew how ; but there was not. There were none there who could 
play a tune in the light, much less in the dark, the owner not 
being there. Besides this, they (the spirits) moved books and 
other articles to dififerent parts of the room. A paper box was 
taken from the table, the contents wfere emptied into the cover and 
placed in the hands of H. D. Barron. After this a small book 
was taken from the same table and placed in the hands of the 
same individual. One of the company accidentally touched the 
hand of another, when he asked, • Did anybody touch my hand ? ' 
The alphabet was called for and the question answered, ' Yes, 
Oapron touched your hand.' So it will be seen that, although it 
may be dark, there is something present that can tell if any one 

KEMAEKABLE DEMONSTRATIONS. 105 

attempts a trick. One of the company was told to take off her 
ring. She did so, laid it in her hand, and it was taken away. 
We all sat still until directed to get the light ; when, upon look- 
ing a little, we found the ring with a girl's hair-band put through 
and pinned to the apron of the person who sat next to her, in such 
a manner that they were pinned together. This was done while 
we had hold of hands, and no possibility of its being done by the 
individuals present. The witnesses present were Justin Sturte- 
vant and wife, H. JST. Thompson, Mrs. Mary Miller, E. W. 
Capron, Mrs. S. A. Tamlin, Miss Amanda Hoskins, Henry D. 
Barron, Mrs. K. M. C. Capron, and Miss Catharine Fox. 

"SAinEDAT Evening, October 20th. This evening we had asked 
for some different demonstrations, and our request was complied 
with. We heard the sounds on the wall, bureau, table, floor, and 
other places, as loud as the striking with a hammer. The table 
was moved about the room, and turned over and turned back. 
Two men in the company undertook to hold a chair down, while, 
at their request, a spirit moved it, and, notwithstanding they 
exerted all their strength, the chair could not be held still by 
them. As we sat by the table the cloth was removed to a different 
part of the room. The combs of several ladies were taken from 
their heads and put into the heads of others, and afterwards the 
combs returned to their owners, and placed in the hair as before. 
There was a person present this evening who had been suspicious 
that the guitar was played a few nights before by some of the 
persons present. The first thing, when we came together was, for 
the alphabet to be called for by the spirits, who spelled, ' A. thinks 
E. and C. played the guitar ! ' Thus were her thoughts revealed 
before the company. At another meeting another person was 
told the same thing, although she had never expressed to any one 
her thoughts. Witnesses the same as the evening previous, except 
Mr. and Mrs. Sturtevant." 

During one of these evenings a wish was. expressed that we 
might see the hand that touched us. On looking towards the 

106 FIRST MANirESTATIONS IN AUBURN, N. T. 

window (the moon shining through the curtain), we saw a hand 
waved to and fro before, and near the top of it. '■ We could dis- 
cover no other part of a form. This we have witnessed many 
times ourselves, and several have discovered distinctly the features 
of persons whom they knew, and who had been dead for years. 

On one occasion, when several persons were present, the guitar 
was taken fromthe hands of those who held it (they taking hold 
of hands), and put in tune and commenced playing while it passed 
around the room above their heads. It was also taken from one 
person and passed to others in the room. In this way for nearly 
two hours it continued to play and keep time with the singing, 
and the guitar taken by this unseen power to different parts of 
the room while playing. The witnesses present at this time were 
James H. Bostwick, Esq., Police Justice, Miss Sarah Bostwick, 
Mrs. F. Smith, H. D. Barron, and R. M. C. Capron. 

One evening, while several ladies were present, some of them 
requested that the spirits would take their hair down. Accord- 
ingly it was done. One of them had her hair taken down and 
done up in a twist, and one of tiiem had hers braided in four 
strands. 

On one occasion we were getting the guitar played by these unseen 
musicians, and were directed to sing several different tunes, among 
which were " Get off the Track," and " The Old Granite State." 
The guitar was played, as the song went on, in company with the 
voices. While it was playing Dr. H. Eobinson passed his ■ hand 
over the whole length of the strings several times, within half an 
inch of them, to see if it was possible that any one present was 
playing it and trying to deceive. There was no difference when 
he passed his hand over. The following persons were present on 
this occasion : Dr. H. Robinson, M.' A. Hilman, Mr. Henry Shef- 
field, Westerly, R. I., 0. V. Woodward, Mary M. Bennet, E. W. 
Capron, E. A. Warden, P. M., Mrs. E. A. Warden, Lucie Gard- 
ner, E. M. C. Capron, and Gr. S. Wilson. 

After the first visit of Catharine Fox, Mrs. Sarah A. Tamlin, 
a lady about thirty-six years of age, and a respected member of 

A XEW MEDIUM MRS. TAMLIN. 107 

the Methodist Episcopal Church, became a medium ; aud through 
her there have been some of the most remarkable manifestations 
on record. She was also one of the most reliable mediums I have 
ever met with. The sounds were not, generally, as loud with her 
as with the Fox family, although they were as fully reliable. Mrs. 
Tamlin had, for some time, been a most excellent clairvoyant. 

The first knowledge we had of Mrs. Tamlin's mediumship was 
in this wise : several persons were occupying one room in the 
house of D. C. Miller, Mrs. Tamlin being among them. I, 
in company with two or three others, was with a clairvoyant — 
Miss Amanda Hoskins — in another room, witnessing her clair- 
voyant powers, when she suddenly exclaimed, " The spirits have 
rapped to Mrs. Tamlin ! " and ran to that room. We all followed, 
and, as we entered, they exclaimed, " The spirits have rapped to 
us ! " We then sat down and heard the sounds, but so low that 
they could only be heard by an effort. From that time they con- 
tinued, and increased in volume, as did all other kinds of mani- 
festations. 

On one or two occasions spirits have made themselves visible to 
persons in the circle at Auburn. We were at one time divided 
into two parties, in different rooms, as above related. In one 
room we were urging Miss Mary M. Bennet to be magnetized, as 
she was one of the most reliable and spiritual clairvoyants ever 
developed. For some reason she felt an aversion to it that even- 
ing, but was about to yield, when the face of her grandfather 
appeared before her, and whispered, " No, no, sweet one ! " and 
disappeared. She had not been thinking of her grandfather, and 
had never before seen a spirit in her normal state. She did not 
inform the company of this occurrence, but Mrs. Tamlin, being 
in a clairvoyant state, in the other room, told their company that 
Mary had seen a spirit. After this was told to us Mary informed 
the company of the circumstance. 

The demonstrations I shall hereafter mention will be mostly 
when she was present. 

108 MUST MAKIEJiSTATIONS IN AUBUBN, N. Y. 

" Wednesday Evening!, June 20th. Present six persons, and 
none of the family of Mr. Fox in town. The rapping was heard 
very freely by all. The table moved on the floor with no person 
touching it — moved to the distance of a foot or more and back, 
in various directions. At our request, the table (which was a 
very light one) was held down to the floor so that it required the 
whole strength-of a man to move it from its position. We also 
held one side, and requested, if there was power to do it, that it 
would be drawn away from us ; this was done, and our strength 
was not sufficient to hold it. On the light being taken out of the 
room (the , persons in the room placing themselves in a position 
where, each would know if any others moved), the table-cloth was 
taken from the table and very compactly stowed away under it, 
near one corner. A hat which was on the table was turned over 
the table-cloth, in a manner that nearly hid it from view. The 
table was then raised from the floor on one side, and there stood, 
although we used considerable strength to push it down. While 
the table stood in that position, by placing our hands upon it we 
would feel a quick, tremulous motion, like the action of a galvanic 
battery. The witnesses present at this time were Miss Mary M. 
Bennet, H. D. Barron, Mrs. Mary Miller, Miss Amanda Hos- 
kins, Mrs. Sarah A. Tamlin, and E. W. Capron." 

Mrs. Capron and Mrs. Tamlin were in Mr. Tamlin's house 
alone, when a rapping commenced and gave the signal for the 
alphabet. On repeating it over, the following sentence was spelled 
out : " Sarah (Mrs. Tamlin) is going to be sick." As she was 
then apparently as well as usual, they were somewhat surprised, 
and Mrs. Tamlin said, " Why ! not very sick, am I ? " The 
answer was, " Yes, very sick, and Rebecca had better not stay 
alone with you this afternoon." This was some time in the fore- 
noon. Mrs. C. went home at noon and returned about one o'clock 
and found Mrs. Tamlin vomiting severely. She soon fainted, and 
continued to have fainting fits of very long duration all the after- 
noon and through the night. Every time she was about to faint 

MRS. TAMLIN. 10 

we were told by the sound, which would sometimes spell out, 
^'Watch her." The same faithful guardian told us what medicine 
to administer — what to do — told when it would be safe for a 
part of the watchers to leave — told them (two hours before the 
time of leaving) just how many fits she would have during the 
night — when she would begin to recover, and when she would be 
well; and all was fulfilled to the letter. The persons present 
during part or alj of the time that these directions were being 
given, were Mrs. K. M. C. Capron, E. W. Capron, Mrs. Mary 
Miller, Miss S. A. Bennet, of Auburn, and Miss Mary H. Cooper, 
of WUliamson, N. Y. Directions have been given in numerous 
cases to the sick by this unseen agency. In this instance it pur- 
ported to be the spirit of Mrs. Tamlin's mother. 

On another occasion Mr. Tamlin arose before light in the morn- 
ing and went to the barn, where his team was kept, leaving a 
candle burning on the stand near the bed. Mrs. Tamlin was 
awakened from sleep by a loud rapping on the stand. She looked 
at the stand, and found that a spark from the wick of the candle 
had fallen down and caught to a paper which was on the stand, 
and was just about to communicate to the curtains of the bed. 
The timely warning saved the house, and, very probably, Mrs. 
Tamlin, from being consumed by the flames. 

At one time Mrs. Tamlin was at the house of Mr. G. B. Ben- 
net. They were told to go in the dark and take the guitar. They 
did so, and the strings vibrated two or three times, when they 
stopped, and the signal for the alphabet was given ; and, on calling 
over the letters, the following was spelled out : " Sarah (BTrs. 
Tamlin) is going to faint." It was totally dark in the room, and 
there was no means of any person's knowing the fact. A light 
was brought, but Mrs. T. had fainted before it arrived. The 
following persons were in the room, and can testify to the above 
statement. K. M. 0. Capron, Miss Mary M. Bennet, Mrs. S. A. 
Tamlin, S. N. Smith, dentist, Charles W. Bennet, G. S. Wilson, 
and A. L. Dibble. 

Mrs. Tamlin was, so far as I have been able to learn, the first 
in 

110 riRST MANIFESTATIONS AT AUBUKN, N. Y. 

medium in whose presence the guitar, or other musical instrument, 
was ever played, without visible contact, so as to recognize tunes. 
In her presence, it was played with all the exactness of an expe- 
rienced musician, although she is not acquainted with music, or 
able to play on any instrument. The tones varied from the most 
loud and vigorous, to the most refined touches of the strings that 
could be imagined. ' 

The most beautiful manifestation I have ever seen recorded, 
was also first noticed in the presence of this same medium. A 
circle, consisting of H. D. Barron, Mary M. Bennet, B. M. 0. 
Capron, Mrs. Tamlin, and perhaps one or two others beside 
myself, was sitting at Mrs. Tamlin's house. I had magnetized 
the medium, and, after various manifestations by the spirits, she 
said that they were about to do something new, which she did 
not understand. After sitting a few minutes we heard a low 
sound like the most distant sound of a locomotive whistle. I 
remarked that I thought it was the car whistle. Soon, however, 
the sound grew louder, and softened into the most exquisite music. 
One of the company was requested to sing, and, as she did so, the 
beautiful music accompanied. The sound was that of the most 
exquisite notes of an ^olian harp. An attempt at description 
would be useless, for it exceeded in beauty the highest ideal of 
heavenly harps, so often sung from the hymn-books, and preached 
from the pulpits, in seasons of religious excitement. After this 
we frequently had the same music in presence of Mrs. Tamlin and 
the same circle ; at times it would resemble the finest conceivable 
music of the human voice, and almost be recognized as divided 
into words. 

Another phase of this musical manifestation was the imitation 
of " Fabyan's horn." This was first manifested when Henry C. 
Wright, a well-known philanthropist, was at Rochester, N. Y., 
where Mrs. Tamlin was present. He called for the spirit of N. 
P. Bogers, and asked him to sound the horn ; when immediately 
a sound came like the winding of a horn, and its reverberation 
among the distant hills, echoing and reechoing for- a long time. 

THE " AUBURN CIRCLE." Ill 

Mr. Wrigkt had visited the White Mountains in company with 
N. P. Eogers and others, some years before, and heard Fabyan, 
the hotel-keeper, wind his horn, and admired the wonderful echoing 
among the Granite Hills of New Hampshire. It was this that 
was so exactly imitated, and a description of which was published 
by Mr. "Wright in a pamphlet. 

Soon after Mrs. Tamlin became a medium, the sounds com- 
menced in the family of Mr. D. D. T. Benedict, then visiting about 
a mile north of the city. The sounds were at first very low, but 
gradually increased in volume until they became as loud as those 
with Mrs. Tamlin. It was through her, as a medium, that the 
somewhat widely known " Auburn Circle," or " The Apostolic 
Circle," had its origin. 

As this has been a very singular movement, I occupy some 
space in giving the particulars of its origin. The nucleus around 
which it was formed was that of two or three men, who were 
strongly imbued with the second advent faith, and who first sought, 
by spiritual communications, to confirm their interpretation of 
certain portions of the Bible, supposed to be expressions in favor 
of the speedy termination of all mundane afiairs by a general con- 
flagration. So determined was one of the first of these men, in 
his sectarianism, that he declared, on his first visit to Catharine 
Fox, that unless the spirits answered in accordance with his views, 
he knew they were evil spirits, or no spirits at all. At this inter- 
view he obtained no satisfaction, and no confirmation of his theory. 
Soon after, he became acquainted with Mrs. Benedict, and adding 
one or two others of like faith, he commenced a circle. The com- 
munications obtained all partook of the nature of their minds. 
The peculiar phraseology of the second advent advocates pervaded 
the whole of them. It was not long after the formation of the 
circle before it was proclaimed that they received communications 
directly from the Apostles and Prophets, and, generally, no one 
else. They were directed to commence the publication of a series 
of " Scripture Expositions," which were to be given directly from 
the original authors of the different books. The persons named 

112 FIKST MANIFESTATIONS AT AUBUEN, N. Y. 

by the apostolic spirits as the publishers were Daniel D. T. 
Benedict, Ann Benedict, Edward H. Baxter, Moses Brown, 
Charles Coventry, and one or two others. The orthography of 
the apostles was sadly at fault; while the "interpretations" 
were remarkable for nothing but their weak and puerile contents. 
They were directed to be published in numbers, and the members 
of the circle were told that they would produce a great convulsion 
in the theological world, meet with an immense sale, and be no 
pecuniary loss, but a large profit to the publishers ; all of which 
proved to be a mistake ; for the theology of the world withstood 
the shock, the sales were very limited, the publishers lost nearly all 
the money invested ; and, finally, the publication was discontinued 
before a tithe of the work, at first laid out, was accomplished. 
Notwithstanding the failure in one enterprise, the apostolic circle 
continued to meet and have plans developed for them to follow, 
and were firm in the " apostolic " faith, until the migration of the 
faithful to Mountain Cove, in Virginia, of which a minute account 
will be found in a succeding chapter. 

CHAPTER VI. 

CONTIirUED MANIFESTATIONS AT AtJBUEN THE "APOSTOLIC CIRCLE" — 

THE MOUNTAIN COVE MOVEMENT ITS EOHMATION, FBOGKE33, AND BIS- 

SOLITTION ASSUMPTION, FANATICISM AND FOLLT. 

The number of mediums in Auburn, during the summer of 1850, 
increased very rapidly, until there were from fifty to one hundred 
in diiFerent stages of development. There were not as many 
developed as mediums for the rappings as for other varieties of the 
manifestation. In general, they would become possessed by the 
spirits, who would communicate their ideas by causing the feet 
or hands to rap on the floor or table ; or by using their organs 
of speech — the words coming from the mouth with a convulsive 
force ; or by writing with the hand. Many also became clair- 
voyants. By any of these means excellent tests were frequently 
obtained, as well as much discordance. 

It is necessary to say — in order to represent the manifestr.- 
tions at Auburn in their true light, and that they may be compared 
with those of other localities — that a great majority of the com- 
munications were narrowed down to the mental capacity of the 
mediums through whom they were received. In most instances — 
no difference who the spirit purported to be, or how high his 
literary character — the communication, when produced, was of 
no higher order, in points of orthography, or style of expression, 
than was that of the medium. To illustrate this a fact will be 
related, as follows : There was a young lady, named Laura Clau- 
dius, who was a clairvoyant medium, and through whom, also, 
the " sounds " were produced with remarkable freedom- and force. 
Many bona fide tests were given through her, both by means of 
10* 

114 CONTINnED MANIFESTATIONS AT AUBUEN. 

lier clairvoyant powers, and by the rappings ; yet no communica- 
tion was ever spelled through her by the sounds, or written by 
Ijer hands — the only reason for which appearing from her own 
ignorance of spelling. Through other mediums, also, the spelling 
was in precise accordance with their orthographical attainments. 
Yet, by all of these mediums, remarkable tests, and occasionally 
high degrees of intelligence, were received. 

Many were made to speak in what were called "unknown 
tongues," among which, it was claimed, were Hebrew, French, 
Italian, Chinese, German, Indian, and others. And it was said by 
some respectable people that some of these languages were proved 
to be Hebrew, French, etc., but I am not personally acquainted 
with such a case. 

One use to which conversations in "unknown tongues" by 
mediums were put, was claimed to be for the benefit of degraded 
spirits. It was said that multitudes of spirits, who had been for 
years, and even ages, in darkness, had now been granted the 
privilege of returning to the earth plane, where, by the aid of 
enlightened ones, who met them there, they were enabled to pro- 
gress in goodness. And, in this belief, many meetings were held 
by believers, at which it was claimed that innumerable spirits 
congregated, and were prayed for and addressed by some more 
elevated spirits, through the earthly mediums present. In this 
way spirits claimed that very many were redeemed from dark 
and unhappy conditions. 

Among the varieties of manifestations, purporting to be spirit- 
ual in this locality, there were often indications of pure diabol- 
ism ; one of the most remarkable instances of which was as fol- 
lows : In the spring of 1849, an individual by the name of Baham 
was hung at Auburn for the murder of a pedler named Adler. 
He was clearly proved guilty of the crime, but persisted to the 
last in asserting his innocence. During the last days of his 
earthly existence he manifested a very wicked spirit, cursing all 
who were instrumental in demonstrating his guilt — of whom was 
one of his brothers who was connected with him in the criminal 

INSTANCE OF DIABOLISM. 115 

affair ; and finally upon the scaffold, his last words were qualified 
by an oath. At the time of his execution, a seeing medium — 
a young lady — was rendered clairvoyant, that she might witness 
the operation, and, if possible, observe the separation of body 
and spirit, and the manifestation of the latter. The medium 
claimed to have witnessed the execution; and described the 
occurrences from stage to stage, until the final scene when the 
drop fell, which was so revolting and terrible in its appearance, 
that she fainted. Erom this time what purported to be the spirit 
of the executed man very often communicated through her. On 
these occasions the spirit uttered passionate maledictions against 
those whom he considered his enemies — declaring repeatedly that 
he would have revenge, and that he would ere long take the life of 
some of the Auburn people, all of whom he considered respon- 
sible in a degree for his unpleasant removal to the world of 
spirits. Thus matters went on, the spirit continually evincing 
the most fiendish and vindictive feelings, until in April, 1850, 
when he gained an opportunity of wreaking, to a considerable 
extent, his vengeance. The medium, above spoken of, one after- 
noon, used much freedom with this spirit, and received many 
manifestations from him by the violent movements of her arms. 
At length the spirit acquired so much control over her person 
that she was unable to guide her own movements, or to repel him ; 
and he continued, for a long time, to strike her arms back against 
her chair, until both arms from the elbows upward were bruised 
black, and ultimately almost into a pumice. This operation 
finally was superseded by others of a more serious nature, in 
proportion as the spirit gained increased control over her organ- 
ism. After various persecutions and tortures infiicted by the 
spirit upon th'e medium, he finally commenced strangling her, or 
at least so operated upon her as to produce the same efiects that 
would be produced by a rope drawn tightly around her neck, — 
declaring, at the same time, that lie would strangle her to death. 
His declarations were made through her mediumship and that of 
others who were present ; and it was asserted by other spirits 

116 CONTINUED SIANIFESTATIONS AT AUBTJKN. 

through other mediums who were in attendance, that Baham was 
fully determined, if possible, to carry his threat into execution, 
and that it was not in their power, with the attending conditions, 
to prevent him, because he had previously secured so much 
possession of her person. The strangulation increased until ■ the 
subject was unable to speak, or even to breathe without the utmost 
difficulty — making severe exertions, such as throwing up her 
hands, struggling, and uttering a peculiarly distressing noise in 
her efforts at inspiration. This state of the case continued for 
about thirty-six hours ; during which time the house was thronged 
by visitors and- friends, and every attempt possible was made to 
deliver her from her situation. Several strong and skil&l mag- 
netizers used their utmost exertions to dispossess her of the in- 
fluence, whatever it might be, but did not at all succeed ; physi- 
cians were called, both of the sceptical and the believing in spirit- 
ual matters, none of whom could aid her, or discover evidence of 
any bodily disease. In the mean time the body was suffering the 
severest agony, being entirely speechless, and her limbs and whole 
body were violently moved contrary to her own will and strenuous 
exertions ; and fears were continually entertained that her breath- 
ing would be entirely prevented, and death ensue. 

But now we come to the mode of her deliverance, which will 
introduce a manifestation of a decidedly opposite spiritual nature. 
As has been remarked, all the means which could be suggested 
by physicians, spiritual and anti-spiritual, friends and spectators 
of equally diverse opinions, the efforts of magnetizers and the 
various kinds of medicines which were administered — all and each 
produced no perceptible effect. But the manner of her relief was 
this : After she had been tortured for about a day and a half, an- 
other medium was sent to the house by spiritual direction. This 
medium, also a young lady, was a clairvoyant, rapping and writing 
medium ; and upon her arrival a spirit, purporting to be that of 
the apostle Paul, threw her into the clairvoyant state, and caused 
her to take hold of the hands of the afflicted person ; when with- 
in the space of five minutes she was entirely relieved of the per- 

THE APOSTOLIC MOVEMENT. 117 

nicious influence. And after keeping both mediums in the clair- 
voyant condition for a few minutes longer — during which time 
they were exceedingly happy, that which claimed to be the spirit 
of Paul brought them both into their normal states, perfectly 
well. And thus ended what was considered by many intelligent 
witnesses to be a case of pure diabolism.* 

It is to be remarked that, with the increase of mediums in 1850, 
in Auburn, there was apparently a decrease in reliability. And, 
although new investigators pretty generally received satisfactory 
evidence of spirituality, in the manifestations, there was less con- 
fidence reposed in the communications by those who were of more 
experience, except by those who were of the belief that apostles 
and prophets were manifesting themselves. And this brings us 
to a notice of the movement in its more public aspect. 

In the fall of 1849, Mrs. Benedict, above referred to, was used 
as a medium, through whom spiritual directions were given to 
James L. Scott, a Seventh-day Baptist minister of Brooklyn, 
for his removal to Auburn, to preach and otherwise operate as he 
might be called upon by the spiritual powers. The leader of the 
movement from the interior professed to be the apostle Paul, with 
the cooperation of the other apostles, the prophets, martyrs and 
many of Christian renown. Mr. Scott removed to Auburn, and 
there commenced preaching and devoting his energies to the suc- 
cess and spread of the Auburn circle, which assumed the title of 
" the Apostolic Movement." 

* It may be proper here to state that whatever may be the facts in regard 
to the wicked intent of .any spirits, there is danger of great annoyance, and 
even injury, resulting from free communications with spirits of a coarse 
and undeveloped character. Either ignorantly or wilfully — I am hardly 
able to decide which— they seek to get and keep control of the medium, 
making angular, discordant, and even vulgar and obscene communica- 
tions. When, therefore, such spirits seek to make manifestations, unless 
they are seeldng for information, and manifest due respect to the medium 
and those conversing, they should be repulsed with cahn, kind firmness, 
and not allowed to get possession of those over whom they may exercise an 
injurious influence. 

118 CONTINUED MANIFESTATIONS AT ADBDEN. 

Succeeding the removal of Mr. Scott to Auburn, Eev. T, L. 

Harris, of New York city, visited that place in accordance with 

the directions of the spiritual agents of the circle. From this 

' time forward, Messrs. Scott and Harris were the external leaders 

of the movement. 

In February, 1850, a publication was established, entitled 
" Disclosures from the Interior and Supepor Care for Mortals." 
It claimed to be " edited, superintended and controlled," by spirits 
out of the flesh, and to have for its object " the disclosure of truth 
from Heaven, guiding mankind into open vision of Paradise, open 
communication with spirits redeemed, and proper and progressive 
understanding of the Holy Scriptures, and of the merits of Jesus 
Christ, from whom they originated in inspiration absolute, and of 
whom they teach as the only Saviour of a dissevered and bewil- 
dered race." It asserted that " the circle of apostles and prophets 
are its conductors in the interior, holding control over its columns, 
and permitting no article to find place therein, unless originated, 
dictated or admitted by them, — they acting under the direction 
of the Lord Supreme." 

The matter contained in this publication was written by the 
hands of Mr. Harris and Mr. Scott, both of whom were declared 
by the " Paul " of the movement, through the mediumship of Mrs. 
Benedict, to be impressible writing mediums. The " conductors in 
the interior " by the rappings communicated that, by means of 
impressing the minds of these gentlemen, and then revising and 
confirming, through the rappings, what was thus written, they 
were able to present their spiritual messages to the world as per- 
fect as though they were themselves in the flesh to deliver them ; 
and that they were qualified by God to reveal the divine will in 
its plenitude ; thus claiming to give the world a full and perfect 
expression of the mind of the Deity, as it relates to the afliairs 
of men. 

After the establishment of this paper, Mr. Harris returned to 
New York, and held public meetings and circles, in which he 
oiEciated as a preacher, laboring for the success of the spiritual 

THE APOSTOLIC MOVEMENT. 119 

movement ■whose centre was in Auburn. He also continued to 
furnish those communications for the Disclosures, which appeared 
under the names of "John the Divine,'' "Daniel the Prophet," 
and all of the poetry claiming to be from " Coleridge," " Shel- 
ley," " Wadsworth," and others. 

Mr. Scott remained in Auburn, where the pap'er was printed, 
preaching two or three times a week under the inspiration of 
spirits, as was said. He also presided at most of the circles and 
evening meetings, and maintained a full control over the spiritual 
affairs of the whole circle of believers as a body. No advice, 
command, or doctrine, which was delivered to any individual 
through different mediums, was recognized by Scott as entitled to 
any regard until the same was confirmed, in his presence, through 
Mrs. Benedict, by the " Paul " of the movement, — any decision 
given under these auspices being considered final; for it was 
asserted that, by these means, no mistaken or evil communications 
were received, Mr. Soott professing to have a secret sign by which 
he knew " Paul " from any other spirit. In this and other simi- 
lar ways the whole authority of the movement was centred in 
one external agent, and everything which conflicted with this was 
promptly disowned and forbidden. 

The number of adherents to the cause during the year 1850 be- 
came quite numerous, several hundreds attending regularly upon the 
public meetings, and as many as two or three hundred openly iden- 
tifying themselves as supporters of the cause, among whom were 
some of the most respectable and intelligent people of Auburn. 
Indeed, the movement was in a very prosperous condition, and 
bid fair to become the largest of any of the religious denomina- 
tions in that place. And thus affairs continued until intimations 
of a change of location were manifested, which resulted in a 
removal to Mountain Cove, Va. 

In July of that year Mr. Scott related a vision or dream 
which he received during~the hours of night, which he interpreted 
as indicating a design on the part of the spiritual directors of 
the movement to change the location from Auburn to some 

120 CONTINUEB MANIFESTATIONS AT AUBUKN. 

other place. This interpretation was confirmed by subsequent 
visions, and by the rappings ; and about the first of October, Mr. 
Scott and Mrs. Benedict, in company with several others, set out, 
under spiritual direction, in search of the locality — it being un- 
derstood to be somewhere in Western Virginia. 

The company stopped at Moimtain Gove, Fayette Co., Va., 
upon being informed by the rappings that they were on the des- 
ignated spot. Here farms were purchased, the printing-press 
located, and plans formed for extensive operations. The place 
was called the " holy mountain," and was claimed to be then 
occupied as was prophesied by the prophet Isaiah. 

Other believers were then invited to the new location, and in 
the course of the succeeding winter there were nearly one hun- 
dred persons present. 

Here the spiritual aspect of afiairs became changed. Instead 
of Mrs. Benedict being considered, as before, the medium through 
whom, under the guardianship of Mr. Scott, " Paul " and other 
human spirits were consulted, Mrs. Benedict's services were dis- 
pensed with, and Mr. Scott asserted that he was divinely inspired 
and especially chosen of God as the instrument to reveal His 
plenary will, whether relating to moral, intellectual, social or 
temporal affairs. This claim was set forth by Mr. Scott, in what 
appeared to be an abnormal state, and will be more clearly shown 
by the following extract from his own words, spoken in his claimed 
inspired condition, and reported, verbatim, by two scribes : 

" Know, man, God purposeth to redeem, and proceedeth to 
the ixltimation ; nor hath error power to overcome ; for Heuvcu 
directeth redeeming energy upon the lost race, before which the 
powers of darkness, though they struggle hard — in their season 
appear to triumph — shall flee away. And know thou, that since 
Heaven 'hath chosen an external agent, especial [James L. Scott], 
for the Disclosures, thence ultimating in direct inspiration, t"Eat 
from Him who controlleth all things issueth that law which pro- 
hibiteth spiritual influx being concentrated from the interior, to 

THE APOSTOLIC MOVEMENT. 121 

affect unto interior impression and spiritual vision, upon James 
the chosen medium, without, in each case, direct permission from 
Him who ordereth this movement. Therefore, over him a holy 
angel hath been appointed, not especially for his sake, but for the 
harmony, truth and consummation perfect of the development. 
This law effecteth in the beings of the interior :' and the angel 
defending opposeth the power of darkness, or designing spirits, 
nor suffereth the spirits of the jtist to control unto utterance 
through him of their thoughts, save by permission. He it is de- 
creed — thus uttered — is the chosen medium for inspiration, and 
God protecteth and proceedeth to defend, as also Heaven pur- 
poseth to defend, all who shall be called unto like stations. Whoso 
seeketh the destruction of this medium, appointed of Heaven, 
opposeth direct the entire manifestation ; thence wareth with God, 
and not the medium.'' 

Parallel with the above is the following, spoken by Mr. Scott 
to a circle of believers, and the words taken down by a scribe, 
precisely as they were uttered. 

" I read, written in letters of fire : Dost thou believe ? And 
what dost thou believe ? Who, thinkest thou, called thee here ? 
Who, believest thou, appeareth to control? Who inspireth? 
Not an angel, for he is led ; not a seraph, for he is controlled ; 
7Wt created existence, for that is inspired. Who, then, thinkest 
thou, called thee to the mountain ? Who but a God inspireth ? 
Believest thou the indication of these questions ? Who is pre- 
pared for the coming of the Son of man? Who is it that hath 
consecrated and yielded themselves, severing therefrom every 
attachment to earth ? Who have submitted their dictation and 
design entirely to Him who ordereth this manifestation from the 
regions of intelligence perfected ? Who does not exercise exter- 
nal judgment, will and design ? Who doth not violate that law 
by which perfect redemption shall be accomplished in fallen man ? 
I AM THAT I AM inquircth now of thee ! And prepare to answer 
thou me! * * * None other than God, thy Redeemer, oall- 
11 

122 THE APOSTOLIC MOVEMENT. 

eth for thee. None other than He who hath the keys of death 
and hell addressetk you through one of your number ! " 

This claim, as clearly set forthj^was tacitly acknowledged, or 
enthusiastically supported, by most of the members of the circle ; 
and there was no opposition, for a time, to the decrees, directions 
and adyices, which were given by means of Mr. Scott, as the rules 
of action by the circle. And very soon requisitions were made 
which were well calculated to try the faith of the members. 
They were no less. than demands upon the believers to relinquish 
their possession and control of all pecuniary means to the direc- 
tion of what claimed to be God, through Mr. Scott. The follow- 
ing is a verbatim extract from the oracle which issued, through 
Mr. Scott, the above'-noticed requirement, and which was ad- 
dressed to believers in spiritualism everywhere : 

" * * But while spirits operate from the interior, man in 
clay demandeth external benefit ; and God supplieth by laws 
operating externally, and external means conducted by external 
stewards, chosen for external purposes. He hath, therefore, 
aforetime, committed to your charge, as His stewards, the means 
designed to be employed while conducting the external in the 
manifestation unto its consummation. And lo, now he cometh 
and calleth upon you, and requireth the charge committed, with 
its improvemervt. Whoso hath, and now consecrateth to this 
great work, to him shall be given, and he shall have more in 
abundance ; to him who holdeth in his hands the gifts of God, 
and hath not occupied for His glory, and is wanting in disposition 
to render back to the Author of all blessing, from him the spirit 
departeth, and shall be taken even that which he hath ; for the 
earth and the substance thereof is the Lord's, and in the redemp- 
tion He establishes thereon His kingdom. Hence, His will shall 
be done on earth as by angels in heaven. Come, then, to the 
mountain with thy substance. Give it to the Lord, who calleth 
thee ; for He now provideth a feast of fat things, which shall be 

THE APOSTOLIC MGYISMENT. 123 

unto all people, and proceedeth to remove, by the immortalizing 
procedure, the veil of mortality, cast, through sin, over all na- 
tions." 

In addition to this general requirement, there were several 
epistles to the same effect, issued especially to individuals in dif- 
ferent parts of the country, who were known by Mr. Scott to be 
favorable to the movement. And it was generally taught and 
understood that all who should become members of the commu- 
nity were to resign their stewardship into the hands of Deity, to 
be disposed of as should be dictated through Mr. Scott. 

While the claimed inspiration continued apparently consistent 
with itself, and maintained a character similar to that of the old 
prophets in the Bible, which it endeavored assiduously to imitate, 
believers in that place were pretty generally disposed to accede 
to its demands. But inconsistencies began to appear to a few, 
before the lapse of many weeks ; and, although a majority per- 
sisted in their faith, several individuals soon became firmly con- 
vinced of the falsity of the principal claims, and in about three 
months a number of families withdrew from the circle. One of 
the wealthiest of those who abandoned the cause had purchased 
a farm of six hundred acres, in pursflanoe of the directions given 
through Mr. Scott ; but when he discovered that he had been fol- 
lowing the dictation of an intelligence far from being divine, not 
yet having come into possession of the estate, he refused to com- 
plete the contract, and paid a large forfeit to be released from 
the engagement. Another individual, of more limited means, 
actually purchased and came into the possession of a farm before 
he became convinced that he had acted for a character undivine ; 
and, as the locality under its existing circumstances was very dis- 
tasteful, he determined to dispose of the property, — which he 
finally succeeded in doing at a large sacrifice, — the new pur- 
chaser being a believer in Mr. Scott's inspiration, and acting 
according to its dictation. Other members, at this period, hav- 
ing become fully conscious that they had been deceived by the 

124 THE APOSTOLIC MOVEMENT. 

intelligence (from whatever source) wHch guided the movement, 
withdrew from the locality, all of them with more or less pecuniary 
loss. Among those who removed was Mrs. Benedict. 

Mr. Scott, with some half a dozen families, still remained ; and 
in the spring of 1851 the community was augmented by a few 
families from different localities, among whom were Mr. Harris 
and lady. 

The following epistle -was issued by Scott and Harris at Moun- 
tain Cove, and sent to the circle in Auburn, N. Y. It will be 
seen that it sets up the claim of infallibility in pretty plain terms. 

" The Circle of Apostles and Prophets to the Auburn Circle of 
Disciples. 

" Deak Beethben : The especially appointed and commissioned 
spirits, through whom superior wisdom has approached and in- 
structed mortals, dictate unto you the present epistle in the light 
of understanding, in the purpose of counsel, and in the desire of 
harmonious interprocedure of love. They review their works, 
declare their directed purposes, and seek to guide your feet in the 
way of peace. 

" In the ninth month of the year 1850, common diurnal time, 
Ann, the medium for audible vibrations, journeyed from Auburn 
to Brooklyn, in obedience to our urgent and repeated directions, 
and was sent by us to the abode of James L. Scott. The pur- 
posed result of this mission was not permitted to be revealed to 
mortals, being hidden from all until disclosed by the fulfilment 
thereof. 

" Having conducted the medium to her appointed destination, 
and having given unto the mortals whom we were specially ap- 
point.ed to approach — namely, to James L. Scott and Thomas L. 
Harris — satisfactory evidence of our identity and appointment, 
we proceeded as messengers of the supreme spieit to communicate 
His will and purpose unto them, and this was a command requir- 
ing their consecration to the work of proclaiming divine truth as 

TUE APOSTOUC MOTEMBNT. 125 

disclosed in tlie Holy Scriptures, and now reaffirmed by the spirits 
of the redeemed in this their special reappearing. 

" This command was vouchsafed unto them in a two-fold form ; 
internally by an especial revelation and preparation of mind, and 
externally by communications given through the medium for 
audible vibrations. This command was issued conjointly to them, 
and not separately ; for they were called and prepared to act as 
instruments of light in continuous unity of one mind and heart. 

" Thus the Circle of Apostles and Prophets instrumentally gave 
to these their first commission, empowering them verbally to unfold 
the "Word ; and the spirit who called, assisted them in their infirm- 
ities, and in infinite mercy and condescension was pleased to 
accept their efibrts to proclaim His will. 

" In the twelfth month of the aforesaid year the Circle of 
Apostles and Prophets were commanded by Superior Wisdom to 
direct the minds aforesaid, together with the medium for vibra- 
tions, to a place of assemblage in Brooklyn. 

" Prompt obedience being rendered to their direction, these all 
met together at the place appointed, and when the Lord Creator 
proceeded to order those events which are written first in the Book 
of Records then directed to be made, and which were afterwards 
read to those chosen from the Auburn Circle, and confirmed in 
their hearing by the Prophetic and Apostolic circles through the 
Apostolic Messenger, and finally published in part by command in 
the introductory article to Disclosures from the Interior, beginning 
at the ninth paragraph thereof. 

" In these our dictated and recognized records, James L. Scott 
and Thomas L. Harris are styled vehicles of inspiration, provided 
for the transmission of truth from heaven to the external world. 
It is also written therein that these vehicles were specially pro- 
vided and prepared for this end ; that the apostles, martyrs and 
confessors, together with prophets, patriarchs and seers, lifted sup- 
plication for inspiration to pervade the chosen vehicles ; that their 
prayers received response loud from the angelic messengers ; that 
the glory of God filled the sanctuary, and that the voice of the 
11* 

126 THE APOSTOLIC MOVEMENT. 

Lord Creator was audible therein, and gave answer favoring the 
supplication. 

" Thus, be it known, a further commission was given unto the 
mortals aforesaid, constituting them in unity as the organ of in- 
spired communication from the celestial sphere. In order that 
this their work might be accomplished, their minds were blended 
by supernatural influence, and thus made one adapted vehicle for 
transmission of truth absolute, and light, in confirmation and ex- 
position of truth previously revealed from heaven to man. 

" Through these mediums, by a process which no mind uninspired 
can analyze, ' Disclosures from the Interior ' have begun, unfolded 
in ' Superior care for mortals,' and transmitted to the external 
world. So perfect has been the established union of the vehicles 
thus constituted, that external distance, however great, has never 
been sufficient to prevent their harmonious movement and coopera- 
tion. 

"Moreover, the Circle of Apostles and Prophets have had charge 
concerning them, and have instrumentally defended them against 
the influence of evil interior since the beginning of their labor to 
the present time. 

" All elements of truth published in said Disclosures have 
therefore been received from our minds by those appointed vehicles 
of inspiration ; the Circle of Apostles and Prophets having made 
use of the medium for vibratory sounds as an instrument of exter- 
nal aid and confirmation, and, as we from the beginning indicated, 
aid from vibrations decreased with the increase of inspiration, 
until vibratory sounds were used only for confirmation of wisdom 
revealed through the superior form. Thus_ the disclosures were 
given through . chosen mediums by inspiration, even as the divine 
counsel was received of old. 

" The Circle of Apostles and Prophets do finally declare that in 
the eighth month of the year 1851, common diurnal time, the 
word of the Lord came unto them, commanding disclosure of his 
most holy will concerning the establishment of terrestrial centre 

THE APOSTOLIC MOVEMENT. 127 

for the unfolding of his heavenly kingdom, and a refuge for his 
obedient people. 

" This disclosure was given by direction absolute from the 
interior through the appointed vehicles therefor, and is embraced 
in the ' Gall to the Mountain,' addressing first all of the obedient, 
and, second, the two united vehicles of inspiration, as the especially 
chosen, unto whom was given increase of direction, guiding them 
to the boundaries of the Land where the Lord established the 
reign of peace. 

" In obedience to our instructions, we guided James, the me- 
dium, unto the place appointed, and have established upon this 
mountain the standard of the cross, as a sign for the gathering of 
the obedient people. 

" In further fulfilment of our charge we have guided Thomas 
the medium, to the appointed place, and have disclosed unto his 
mind full evidence of his associate medium's faithfulness in all the 
work given unto him to do ; and also that all discord within the 
boundaries of the place appointed is caused by the presence of the 
unsanctified, and subsides with their removal therefrom. 

" Having thus guided the vehicles of communication to the 
place directed by His most holy will, and united them thereupon 
the Spirit, who deviseth and establisheth the Redeeming Procedure, 
issueth commandment unto us His messengers to resume the dis- 
closure of His truth without delay, that His name may thereby 
be glorified. His people instructed and comforted, and His compas- 
sionate and loving kindness, in accordance with the purpose in the 
consummation of His procedure, be manifest unto the earth and the 
inhabitants thereof. 

" Dictated at Mountain Cove, Fifth Month, 1852." 

I have endeavored, from every source, to obtain accurate infor- 
mation' and give an impartial history of this singular movement. 
From an acquaintance, who was induced to join the movement, and 
spent a long time at the Cove, I have received a statement, of 
which the following is ilie substance : 

128 

THE APOSTOLIC MOVJSMENT. 

Mr. Scott and others arrived ia Fayette county, Virginia, in 
the month of October, 1851, for the purpose of establishing the 
community of true believers in Spiritualism, with Scott at the 
head. It was stated and understood before any of the company 
left Auburn that the land, when purchased, would be sold in small 
quantities to all who wished to settle with them, and those unable 
to purchase house and land would be furnished by the association. 
They also were promised business, such as each was able and will- 
ing to perform, each family to be their own household governor 
and regulator as fully as out of the association. The labor per- 
formed was to be paid for at a fair remuneration. Schools were 
to be established, and different branches of business instituted, so 
that the company might manufacture and produce all that is neces- 
sary for their subsistence, comfort and happiness. It was also 
understood that there was to be no dictator in the movement ; but 
the whole was to be under direction of the spirits, and that all 
things should be governed on the principles of brotherhood, unity 
and equality. On the second day of December, 1851, — the day 
on which my informant arrived at Mountain Cove, Mr. Scott 
and some sixty others were on the ground. The information he 
received was that all was peace and harmony in the chosen moun- 
tain. He was told by Scott, who had somehow taken or been 
given the title of " doctor," that he was then receiving communi- 
cations direct from the Deity. Scott declared that he received 
these communications standing face to face with God ! and, strange 
as it may appear, most of the people there convened believed the 
story. Soon after this, Scott informed the people that he had 
been appointed by high spiritual power medium absolute, and that 
nothing but truth would or could be given through him j and that 
whatever was given through him must not be doubted, all doubt- 
ing being rank heresy. Soon after this, Scott informed Mr. H. 
(my informant) that there had been a serious quarrel among them 
before he (Mr. H.) arrived. To the question as to what was the 
cause of the quarrel, he replied that a certain individual had 
slandered his character in saying that he (Scott) was guilty of 

THE APOSTOLIC MOVEMENT. 129 

licentiousness and adultery. Mr. H. replied that the matter 
ought at once to be investigated. A meeting was accordingly 
called, professedly for that purpose. There were but few persons 
at the meeting, and, as soon as it was organized, Scott professed 
to pass into the " superior " or clairvoyant state, and said : " We 
(himself and his particular friends) must stand firm> and say noth- 
ing, unless the enemy makes the attack." And this ended the 
investigation into the charges of licentiousness against Rev. Mr. 
Scott. Those who had first made the charge continued it ; but 
no other " investigation " was ever instituted. Strife and conten- 
tion continued from this time to distract the " harmonious " 
mount. 

In February, 1852, the plantation originally purchased was 
returned to the person from whom it was bought, as the payments 
on it could not be met. At this time several families left the 
place on account of the contention and want of confidence in the 
movement. In this emergency a meeting was called, and Scott 
passed into the " superior " state, and received the following 
spiritual communication : " James -must go to New York, to seek 
new minds to carry on the Lord's work.'' The " James," of 
course, was himself. In accordance with his own direction — 
claiming to be spiritual — he went to the city of New York and 
Brooklyn, and, with the aid of Rev. Thomas L. Harris, suc- 
ceeded in inducing several persons of property to engage in the 
enterprise. Being thus provided with funds, and empowered so 
to do, Scott returned and repurchased the Cove property, which 
they had surrendered in February. About the first of May, 1852, 
T. L. Harris and family, and several other families, arrived at the 
new Jerusalem. It should be mentioned, in this place, that, as soon 
as Scott returned from his mission to New York, he assumed a 
tone of authority, and was very arbitrary in his orders, declaring 
that the people should work to the line and plummet ; and that 
those who were there and did not sympathize with his views 
should leave the place. This latter command was carried out, 
and the persons obnoxious to him were sent away — banished ! 

130 THE APOSTOLIC MOVEMENT. 

On the arrival of Mr. Harris a new era in the spiritual aflfaira 
of the community commeneed. It was announced that Harris 
and Scott were the chosen mediums through which the Lord would 
communicate to man on earth, and that all other mediums would be 
silenced, or would become the channels of commtmication for 
deceptive and lying spirits, claiming for themselves infallibility 
and " truth absolute " direct from heaven. (See letter of Harris 
and SSott to Auburn circle.) 

Harris declared that the house occupied by them (Harris and 
Scott) was "the house of God;" and that Mountain Cove was 
the " gate to heaven," and that there the redemption of man on 
earth would commence, and that all who opposed them — the two 
perfect prophets — would be driven from the mountain, from which 
there would be no redemption. 

Some time during the summer of 1852 it was declared that 
the spirits, through Harris and Scott, had announced to tlfe faith- 
ful that a certain piece of land, within a certain boundary, con- 
taining the Cove buildings, must be " leased to the Lord as his 
heritage." Accordingly, the " faithful " assembled, and the 
spirits (through Harris and Scott) directed the lease to be made 
in the name of J. L. Scott and T. L. Harris, as the Lord's chosen, 
and the lease was accordingly executed in their illustrious 
names. 

The "Lord and his chosen people" being secured in the lease, 
a series of persecutions were commenced against all who did not 
agree with the assumed " perfect mediums." Slander, discord and 
contention, were rife, and harmony was unknown among the 
" chosen " people. 

In the fall of 1852 Scott and Harris proclaimed that they 
were the two witnesses spoken of in the eleventh chapter of Rev- 
elation, and' that they possessed the power, in its fullest extent, 
as described in that chapter. 

Strange as it may appear, they found adherents and firm be- 
lievers in this declaration. The believers were kept in awe of 
these self-appointed " anointed of the Lord " by the constant 

THE APOSTOLIC MOVEMENT. 131 

asserting of this awful power. In one of his prayers, Mr. Harris 
says : " 0, Lord, thou knowest that we do not wish to destroy 
man voith fire from aur mouths ! " 

This state of discord continued, until one after another, becom- 
ing disgusted with the arbitrary assumption of power and holiness 
on the part of the dictators, left the Cove to the few fanatical and 
credulous dupes of designing men, until the final dispersion of the 
whole community a few months after. It adds another to the 
numerous wild schemes conceived in the spirit of religious fanat- 
icism, and born of the spiritual excitement which was made a 
convenient hobby for men who had graduated through the old 
forms of theological mysticism, until there was nothing new in 
that field to feed theii: love of leadership and pretence to special 
calls and inspiration. 

CHAPTER VII. 

MANIFESTATIONS AT STBATFOED, CONN., IN THE HOUSE Or KET. ELIAKIM 

PHELPS; D. D. KEMAEKAELE EXHIBITIONS 01? POWEK SINGITLAR 00- 

CTTEKENCES IMAGE-MAKING DESTRUCTION OF FUENIIUKE — INCEN- 

DIABT SPIKITS — THE SPIKITS IDENTIPIED UNHAPPY SPIEITS, PEOH 

THE KEMEMBKANCE OP WKONG DONE IN THIS WOULD -WKONa-DOINQ 

KEVEAIED — DIRECTIONS GIVEN FOR RESTORING ILL-GOTTEN GAINS 

DISCONTINUANCE OP THE MANIFESTATIONS. 

WnitE these strange occurrences were taking place at Eoches- 
ter and Auburn, and the press and people were busy in trying to 
account for them on strictly mundane principles, making all man- 
ner of insinuations against the character and motives of those who 
even dared to investigate for themselves, some manifestations took 
place at Stratford, Conn., which attracted attention to that quar- 
ter, as well on account of the character and standing of the gen- 
tleman at whose house they occurred, as the very strange, 
boisterous, and violent character of the manifestations. I have 
been allowed to examine all the records kept of the occurrences 
by Dr. Phelps, and shall be able, therefore, to present the history 
with more minuteness and accuracy than has ever before ap- 
peared. 

The first disturbances took place on the tenth day of March, 
1850, at the house of Rev. Eliakim Phelps, D. D. The house 
had been occupied by him from the 22d of February, 1848. It is 
a large and genteel country mansion, separated from the street by 
a fence forty-five feet in front of the house; which is thirty-two 
feet in front, and, including the piazza, seventy feet deep, with a 
hall thirteen feet wide, running through the whole depth of the 
building. Adjoining, and opening from this hall are two parlors 

OCCnRRENCES AT DR. PIIELPS' HOUSE. 133 

and a dining-room. On the second floor are five sleeping-rooms, 
and on the third floor two. The kitchen is in the basement. The 
house was built about the year 1829 or 30 by a Captain Dondall, 
who for several years commanded a vessel in the China trade, and 
who died in the bay of Canton within two or three years after his 
family had taken up their residence in the house. The property 
then passed into the hands of another sea-captain, by the name 
of Purcell, who, with his family, occupied it for several yffars. 
Capt. Purcell dying suddenly in New York, the family removed, 
and the house was occupied by an Episcopal clergyman for a 

school a year or more, and afterwards by a Mr. , also as 

a school for boys. 

None of the families who had thus far occupied the house had 
ever been disturbed, or witnessed anything aside from ordinary 
events. At the death of Capt. Purcell it became the property of 
the two daughters, of whom Dr. Phelps purchased it during the 
month of November, 1847. For two years previous to this it had 
been unoccupied. Dr. Phelps and family commenced their resi- 
dence therein on the 22d of February, 1848. Nothing occurred 
to excite the attention of the family out of the ordinary course 
of events until the tenth of March, 1850 ; and, as before stated, , 
nothing can be learned of any strange or unusual events occurring 
there previous to that time. It will be observed by the dates 
given that Dr. Phelps had occupied the house more than two 
years, had found it an agreeable and quiet place of residence — 
having never himself or any member of the family been disturbed 
or alarmed by unusual occurrences. On the tenth of March, as 
above stated, it being the Sabbath, Dr. Phelps and family, con- 
sisting of Mrs. Phelps, two daughters and two sons, the eldest a 
daughter aged sixteen, a son of twelve years, and a second 
daughter of six years, children of Mrs. Phelps by a former 
marriage, and another son of Dr. Phelps by the present marriage, 
not then three years old, all attended church; and an Irish servant 
girl, who had been employed in the family some six months, and had 
shown herself to be honest and trustworthy, had gone on that day 
12 

134 MANIFESTATIONS AT STRATFORD, CONN. 

to. Bridgeport, to attend the Catholic Church. On leaving the 
house in the morning it appears that the doctor had secured the 
chamber doors, and put the keys in his pocket ; those which could 
be were locked inside and the keys left in them. The only door 
by which the chambers could be entered was locked, and the key 
taken by Dr. Phelps. He also locked the front door inside, left 
the key in the lock, and, passing out at the back door, locked that 
and placed the key in his pocket. On returning from church at 
noon the front door was found standing open ; the chamber doors, 
which were left fastened, were now open; and in the nurs- 
ery the furniture was thrown about in disorder ; chairs on the 
bed, and thrown down upon the floor; the shovel, tongs and 
poker, with other things, were in unusual positions and places, 
everything showing unmistakable signs of the work of some rude 
hand making mischief in their absence. Upon discovering the 
disorder here Dr. Phelps passed into other rooms on the same 
floor, but could see no further evidence of intrusion. The first 
supposition was, very naturally, that some person or persons had 
entered and robbed the house. Search was immediately made in 
the closets where silver plate, spoons, forks, etc., were kept. All 
were found safe and undisturbed. A gold watch, left in an exposed 
place, remained there as left. The impression still remained that 
burglars had been in ; and, on examination of the windows, one 
was found that could be raised from the outside, and though there 
was no evidence of entrance having been made there, no doubt 
existed that this was the place of access. Thinking they might 
return during the afternoon. Dr. Phelps remained at home, the 
other members of the family going again to church. Being left 
alone the doctor aimed himself, and, selecting a secluded position, 
awaited the return of the burglars. There was no disturbance 
during the afternoon ; no sound of footfall ; all remained quiet. 
On the return of the family, after the service, usually closing at 
three o'clock, several other articles were found out of place, but 
not in a way to make it certain that they were not moved in the 
morning. Articles of kitchen furniture were changed about. A 

OCCUBRENCES AT DK. PUBLPs' HOUSE. 135 

teakettle, which had been used at dinner-time, was found hidden 
behind some boxes in the cellar. The bread, sugar-bowl, eggs, 
and numerous other things kept in the kitchen, were found where 
they did not belong, and where they had evidently been placed in 
some way which the family could not account for. Upon enter- 
ing the middle chamber, occupied as a sleeping-room, a sheet was 
found spread over the bed outside the counterpane, and beneath 
which was a nightgown and chemise laid out with the arms folded 
across the breast, with stockings placed in a position to represent, 
as it seemed, a corpse disposed as is usual before placing it in the 
coffin. On the wall were written characters resembling those, said 
by certain clairvoyants to belong to a spiritual language, but 
which none of the family were able to decipher. Whether they 
had any significance, or how they came there, was alike an 
unanswerable question by the family; they had not observed them 
before. Occurrences ceased for that day and night, yet, no one 
thinking of any mystery in the matter, they imputed it to roguLsh 
boys, or others, who had effected entrance with false keys, for 
mischief, rather than for robbery, and that the culprits would soon 
be detected. The next morning, March 11th, when the family 
went up stairs, after breakfast, the middle chamber had again been 
visited, exhibiting much the same scene of disorder presented 
the previous day. A sheet was spread out upon the floor, the 
wash-stand laid upon its back upon the sheet, a candle-stick set 
upon the stand, the wash-bowl placed upon one side, and the 
pitcher on the other. The nightgown "and chemise, used on the 
previous occasion to represent a dead body, were found one in the 
bowl, the other in the pitcher. It appears that these articles of 
clothing were not then in use ; they had been placed in a trunk 
which stood in a closet adjoining that room. They were replaced 
in the trunk when removed from the bed the day before. As 
they were conversing in relation to the disposition of the things 
as above stated, Mrs. Phelps looked under the bed, and discovered 
articles there, partially cdncealed by the bed, resembling those in 
question. They were taken out and pronounced to be the same. 

136 MANIPESTATlONS AT SIRATFOKD, CONN. 

Dr. Phelps had not before examined them, but then took them, 
noted the name and number on each, as they were marked, folded 
and placed them again in the trunk, remarking that he would put 
them where they would stay; did not lock the trunk, not having a 
key, but locked the closet and placed the key about his own per- 
son ; then requesting the family to all leave the room first, which 
they did, the doctor, following, locked the door of the room, and 
kept the key. Having observed that Mrs. Phelps seemed a little 
troubled as to the mystery, he thought to convince her that there 
was no mystery in the matter, and, having secured the closet and 
room, he descended to the rooms below, following them all. After 
the lapse of some fifteen minutes, some person spoke to the doctor, 
upon which he went up to the chambers. At the head of the 
stairs, out in the hall, he found the same articles which he had 
left as before stated. He examined them, and was positive they 
were the same. He went to the door; found it locked; entered by 
applying the key from his pocket ; went to the closet ; found it 
locked ; took the key from his pocket ; opened the door ; looked 
in the trunk ; and the articles were gone ! Dr. Phelps states 
that he was confident there was no deception in the case, and that 
he then, for the first, felt that there was a mystery about the 
affair. He had never believed in the appearing of ghosts, or 
departed spirits, warnings, or anything of that nature, and, at the 
age of three-score, had never seen or heard anything connected 
with that class of phenomena. The evidence upon which such 
superstitions, as he termed them, rest, he had never examined, and 
while he had no proof positive that they were impossible, and 
never did occur, he had no evidence to found a belief upon that 
they ever had. His idea of spiritual manifestations seems to 
have been that most, if not all, followed by a strict scrutiny, 
might be accounted for on natural or known principles, or some 
physical means, which would disrobe them of the mysterious alto- 
gether. But it was not to rest here. On the same day (March 
11th) the moving and throwing of furniture commenced. An um- 
brella, standing at the end of the hall, leaped, without visible 

OCCUEEENCES AT DK. PUEtPS' HOUSE. 137 

assistance, a distance of, at least, twenty-five feet. Dr. Phelps 
saw the movement, and knows there was no perceptible agency by 
which the motion was produced. A bucket, standing at the head 
of the stairs, was thrown into the entry below. Smaller articles, 
such as nails, forks, knives, spoons, bits of tin, iron and keys, 
were thrown from different directions about the house. He says, 
"There were times when they came from such directions that they 
might have been thrown by some person in the house," — at least, 
that may be admitted, — but in very many cases the motion and 
point of starting were such as to preclude all possibility of decep- 
tion on the part of persons in the rooms. During the afternoon 
Dr. and Mrs. Phelps had occasion to go to Bridgeport ; a distance 
of some three miles. During their absence the shovel and tongs, 
standing in the dining-room, were thrown violently down the base- 
ment stairs ; a piece of mourning crape fastened to the knocker 
of the back' door, and the mirrors in the front chambers covered 
with sheets and table-cloths, as is the custom in some parts of the 
country while a person lies dead in the house. The crape on the 
door Dr. Phelps did not see, but the covering on the mirrors he 
removed with his own hands. The position of the mirrors in one 
room was such that the coverings could not, without great diffi- 
culty, have been placed there by any person about the house. 
Various articles were said to have been thrown about the roou; — 
the phenomena continuing in his absence about the same as w'len 
he was present in the fore part of the day. Soon after sundown 
all was again quiet, and so continued through the night. 

The next morning (March 12,th) soon after the family were up, 
the same phenomena began again ; knives, forks, spoons, blocks of 
wood, nails, etc. etc., were thrown from different directions, and with 
increased frequency, attended by still stranger circumstances, and 
those of a still more mysterious character. Mrs. Phelps expressed 
some alarm, and a wish that some of the neighbors might be 
called in. Dr. Phelps called on a retired clergyman of Stratford, 
a man of extensive information, much experience and sound judg- 
ment, who was universally admitted to be capable of rendering 
12* 

138 MANIFESTATIONS AT STEATl'OllD, CONN. 

correct judgment and good advice in suchi a case. He requested 
him to call and spend an hour at the house, to which he cheerfully 
consented. Dr. P. told him that his family had been a little 
excited by some occurrences in the house, but did not state any 
of the details of the matter, but desired that he would sit with 
them for a short time and witness for himself. He remained all 
day, but was, at first, firmly of the opinion that the occurrences 
were produced, in-some w^, through the agency of the girl, or 
some other person about the house, and his main attention was 
directed to the girl in the kitchen, or the children, in the expec- 
tation that he should detect them in doing it. 

The door leading from the parlors to the kitchen was, by his 
request, locked, and all communication between it and the other 
parts of the house cut off; still, the throwing of articles went on 
as before. The children were sent out of the room, and the doors 
locked ; but this made no difference. He stayed through most of 
the day on Thursday, and returned soon after breakfast next 
morning, and remained most of the time for nearly three weeks. 
He became satisfied, before the close of the second day, that 
neither the girl in the kitchen nor the children had any agency 
iqi producing the strange movements. During the day (March 
12th) some of the neighbors were in the house, and small blocks 
of wood were seen to fall in different places in their presence ; 
but only one person noticed them in a way to excite inquiry, and 
that person was requested not to mention what she had seen. 

On Wednesday, March 13th, the manifestations commenced 
early in the morning, in Ae middle chamber, the room in which 
two children slept, and began while they were both asleep. A 
book, standing in the library, ten or twelve feet from the bed, 
leaped from the shelf into the middle of the room. The blower, 
which was in the grate, leaped out on the floor, a distance of at 
Iciist sis feet, the noise of which first awakened the children. At 
the breakfast-table several articles were thrown ; among them a 
large potato, which had been sent from Pennsylvania, and laid 
up in a closet in the east chamber, fell on the table directly by 

OCCUBRENCES AT DR. VUMLPS' HOUSE. 139 

the side of Dr. P.'s plate, in a manner that no person could have 
done it without instant detection. The doctor's curiosity was 
much excited, and he watched, with all the scrutiny he was capa- 
ble, every person in the room. He took up the potato and let it 
fall from different heights, in order to determine how far it must 
have fallen to have made the concussion that it did ; and it was 
adjudged by all that the distance could not have been more than 
twelve or fifteen inches. 

llev. Mr. came in soon after breakfast, and remained 

during the day. Several Bibles were opened at different passages, 
which seemed to be selected with a great deal of care, and indi- 
cated either by placing small pieces of paper on them or turning 
down a leaf. These things first occurred in the middle chamber 
where the library stood. While the family were at dinner similar 
things were done in the parlor adjoining the dining-room. Two 
Bibles and an Episcopal prayer-book were opened at different 
passages, chairs turned forward on the floor, two solar lamps 
placed on the floor, a hat and man's cap put one on each; nearly 
everything in the room had been moved, and in so short a time, 
that it seems wholly inadmissible that any person about the house 
could have done it; besides, the whole household were in the 
dining-room, all seated at the table, except the servant, and she 
was employed waiting on the table. 

In the afternoon the demonstrations were confined to the middle 

parlor. Dr. and Mrs. Phelps, and Mr. , and a part of the 

time the eldest daughter, being present; in the absence of the 
daughter the doors were locked, and the three first named only 
were present. 

The throwing of various things occupied the afternoon. The 
articles thrown were picked up and placed upon the mantle, and 
between the hours of one and four o'clock, the number amounted 
to forty-six ; among which were nails, bits of tin, iron, keys, and 
small blocks, all of which were gathered from different parts of 
the house ; most of them from closets on the second floor, and the 
chambers. At one time, while Mr. M was standing near the 

140 MANIFESTATIONS AT STBATrORD, CONN. 

centre of the room, a padlock, whiot was known to have been in 
the closet of the middle chamber, fell at his feet. He took it in 
his hand, letting it fall from different bights, to discover the 
probable distance it must have fallen to produce the concussion. 
After various trials it was judged to have fallen not more than 
two or two and a half feet. As Dr. P. was sitting, perhaps 
ten feet from the piano-forte, he saw a small toy-mouse, which 
was on the piano, arise as if tossed, and, describing a parabola as 
it came, fall at his side, so near that he took it from the floor 
without leaving his chair. This he speaks of seeing as distinctly 
as he ever saw anything, the whole being perfectly in his view. 
He also saw, in the same way, among other things, a nail, cotton- 
spool and key, arise from behind the sofa, which stood diagonally 
across the corner of the room. He arose, went to the sofa, look- 
ing behind and under it, but could discover nothing which might 
give impulse to the articles. While examining the carpet about 
the sofa to find if any other things were there, without success, as 
his eyes were directed to one spot, there arose from that very 
point a piece of cheese-rind, perhaps eight inches from the floor ; 
when he saw it first, it arose four or five feet, passed over the sofa, 
and fell on the floor. He is positive it was not there when he was 
looking at the carpet, and knows there were no visible means of its 
moving. 

Mr. M suggested, as he was about to leave on Wednesday 

night, that if the strange phenomena should return, he would like 
to have some other persons called in. Early the next morning, 
Thursday the 14th, the manifestations commenced about as they 
had on the previous day. Soon after breakfast a sheet was found 
spread upon the floor, several Bibles were opened at different 
places, the candlesticks, in a row, the highest in the middle, and 
covered with a sheet; other articles changed about the room, 
without any seeming design, more than to attract attention. Mr. 

M proposed that notes be despatched to Rev. Mr. W— .■ — , 

congregational minister, and Mr. Plant, a lawyer of high standing 
and respectability, which was accordingly done. Jt was at this 

OCCUEKENCES AT DK. PHELPS' HOUSE. 141 

time that ttey first began to hear rappirigs and heavy poundings. 
A loud sound, like some person striking the floor with some heavy 
substance, was heard, generally in the middle chamber. This was 
usually done when no one was in the chamber, and on any one 
entering all was still. In one instance a chair was seen to rise 
from the floor and beat down again, five or sis times, with a vio- 
lence which caused the house to tremble so as to be felt ia all the 
adjoining apartments. A large plated candlestick, standing on 
the mantle, was moved by some unseen power to the floor, and 
then rose up and down, beating the floor, until the candlestick was 
broken. This was the first article that was damaged about the 
house. Several times, during the day, loud noises, like some one 
pounding with an axe, or some heavy substance, on the floor, were 
heard in different parts of the house, and several times the loud 
poundings terminated with a frightful scream ; it was not a cry 
of distress, or anything that could be easily imitated, seeming 
like something between the cry of a cat and the bleating of a 
calf, but louder than either. These sounds occurred, in all, 
probably twenty times while the manifestations were going on. 
Sometimes the screams seemed to be in the third story, sometimes 
in the front-hall chamber, several times out in the yard, and occa- 
sionally in other places. There was, at no time, any audible 
expression of words. The sounds consisted of poundings, knock- 
ings, and screamings. On this day the first images were found, 
which will be spoken of more fully hereafter. 

In the evening of this day, just after some young ladies had 
called. Dr. P.'s daughter returned to the parlor, it being between 
nine and ten o'clock. After seeing the young ladies to the door, 
an iron stand, in which stood the fire-shovel, tongs and poker, 
leaped from the hearth, where it stood, into the middle of the floor, 
and rose up and beat the floor with a force that made a jar that 
could be felt, and the sound heard, in any part of the house. 
This was seen only by the daughter, but Dr. P. and wife heard 
the noise. The daughter ran through the dining-room to get up 
stairs, and, as she passed, a large table was standing, with tho 

142 MANIFESTATIONS AT STEATrORD, CONN. 

other furniture, arranged for breakfast the next morning. The 
table was three feet nine inches wide, and five feet three inches 
long, made of solid mahogany ; and when she entered the room it 
rose up and beat five or six times against the floor with a forcewhich 
made the house jar. The noise was heard by many persons in 
the house. Mrs. P. was alarmed, and screamed out, " 0, take 
me from this place ! " This happened between nine and ten 
o'clock, p. M. Previous to this time, all manifestations had 
ceased by sundown, or a little after. 

Soon after daylight on Friday, March 15th, movements similar 
to those on previous days commenced. Henry, a lad then eleven 
and a half years of age, attended the academy, and nothing had, 
thus far, ever occurred to connect these strange phtenomena with 
his presence. Dr. P. had never heard or thought of particular 
persons being " mediums." But on this day the remarkable 
occurrences seemed to be connected more or less with this boy. 
His cap was torn on his head, so as to be entirely destroyed. 
Another one which he put on was taken in the same way. First 
a small hole opened in the crown ; this gradually extended, and 
in a short time it was torn into many pieces. On another cap 
characters were made, apparently with chalk. They resembled 
those sometimes made by persons in the higher mesmeric state, 
describing them as characters of a spiritual language. 

Five or six of these characters were, at one time, made on the 
boy's cap. Others, supposed to constitute a sentence, were written 
on a red pocket-handkerchief; others on his pantaloons and coat, 
and on the inside of his sack-coat. Copies of these characters 
were taken with great care, and were preserved till September 
following, when they were mysteriously destroyed. From this 
time it became evident that some of the phenomena had some kind 
of connection with this boy. 

An umbrella, which he was carrying, was, in a mysterious man- 
ner, torn in several pieces. His pantaloons were torn from the 
bottom upwards, as high as the knee, and sometimes higher, and 
were literally torn to ribbons, an inch or more wide. This occurred 

OCCUBEENCES AT DR. PHELl'S' HOUSE. 143 

several times under the immediate inspection of Eev. Mr. M., 
which seems to fix the fact that, in those instances at least, no 
power visible did it. Thus it continued for several weeks, cloth- 
ing to the amount of twenty dollars being destroyed. At one 
time, while he was riding in a carriage with Dr. P., his cap on 
his head was torn in a mysterious manner, and his pants torn from 
the waistband to the bottom, in a way that no human power could 
have done. Dr. P. heard them torn, but could see nothing doing 
it, and knows the boy could not have done it himself. It was on 
this day, March 15th, that images, dressed in articles of clothing, 
were again seen ; only two or three appeared on that day. The 
most extraordinary occurrences of this kind took place on Satur- 
day, the 16th. Soon after breakfast two or three images appeared' 
in the middle chamber; soon again another, followed by others 
still, numbering in all eleven or twelve. They were formed of 
articles of clothing, found about the house, stuffed to resemble the 
human figure. A lady's dress would be stuffed in some cases with 
a muff; again with a pillow, and sometimes with other dresses; a 
bonnet and shoes were aptly placed to complete the figure. These, 
on this occasion, all but one, represented females in the attitude 
of devotion, some having Bibles or prayer-books placed before 
them. One, formed of Mrs. P.'s dress, so much resembled the 
real, that the little boy, scarce three years old, coming into the 
room with his sister, older, whispered, " Be still, ma is saying 
prayers." 

A portable writing-desk, usually standing on the secretary in 
the room, was taken and placed upon the floor, a towel spread 
over it, and the image of a child kneeling beside it. A Yankee 
clock was taken from the mantle in the nursery, and placed upon 
the floor in the middle room, a distance of twenty feet, and so 
carefully done that the clock was still going when discovered in 
its new place, though it stopped some time after. It does not 
appear that any of these images were, seen in the process of con- 
struction, or that the clothing, which was gathered from different 
localities, was seen in the act of moving. When persons entered 

144 MANIFESTATIONS AT STEATPORD, CONN. 

the room everything was still, the clothing about the floor, which, 
upon going again within a few minutes, were found wrought into 
forms. The marked rapidity of their construction, and the life- 
like appearance of them, seems to have been truly wonderful. 
During this day several others than members of the family were 
present. In several instances, when the rooms were closed and 
the doors guarded, so that no person could enter, the images 
were constructed. To one reading or listening to the relation of 
these facts, the mischief and cunning evinced will seem amusing as 
well as most wonderful ; but to the family who bore the annoyance 
and witnessed the terrifying demonstrations, it was a serious and 
trying affair. 

The reader will keep in mind that this was on Saturday of the 
first week of these strange proceedings, and many persons were 
still believing that they must be produced by some one in the 
house ; every member of the family therefore was subjected to the 
most rigid scrutiny, which makes it morally certain that no member 
of the household could have had any agency in the matter without 
being at once detected. Besides the neatness and despatch with 
which they were formed, the natural appearance of most of them 
must have required taste and skill beyond the conception of ordi- 
nary persons in the flesh. Mr. M. remained there throughout the 
day, Mr. W., Governor Plant and Captain S., a part of the day. 
During the day and evening various things were thrown in dif- 
ferent parts of the house. A brick-bat, which lay on the stairs 
leading to the third story, was thrown violently down stairs, pass- 
ing very near the head of the eldest daughter as she was descend- 
ing the stairs. A fire-shovel was also thrown near her, which she 
first saw high above her in a position to fall upon her head. She 
was several times constrained to cry out from fear, so much as to 
cause apprehension on her account. 

[I omit, in this place, at the request of Dr. Phelps, a minute 
account of occurrences in, which the medium seemed to be one 
who has now grown to be a young woman, and would feel 
a repugnance at having her name mentioned in connection with 

OCCURRENCES AT DR. PHELPS' HOUSE. 145 

the subject. At one time , a ribbon was tied around her neck, 
while she was sleeping, so tight as to cause a serious affection of 
the brain. Dr. Phelps was sitting in the room when it was done. 
Several other remarkable occurrences are omitted, on account of 
her connection with them. In the main they do not differ materi- 
ally in their nature from the occurrences herein related.] 

The hiding of hats, caps, clothing, &c., seems at this time to 
have become of common occurrence. On several occasions a hat 
was seen to go up stairs — not thrown, but seemed to be carried 
rapidly by unseen hands. For several days Dr. P. was forced to 
keep his hat under lock and key to prevent its disappearance, if 
left out as usual. Coats, hats and canes of gentlemen, who were 
strangers in the house, were spirited away ; the only object seem- 
ing to be the gratification of mischievous desires, with the excep- 
tion of a few instances. They were found sometimes in the chim- 
ney, under the bed, and in the bottom of trunks. The design 
seemed to be to detain the owners to witness further demonstra- 
tions. Two gentlemen from an adjoining town called, one of whom 
had expressed an earnest desire to witness the phenomena ; but 
having passed several hours, and seen nothing, they were about to 
leave, when the person who expressed the wish found himself 
minus a hat. A thorough searching followed, but no hat could be 
found, consequently the gentleman decided to remain until the 
next day. During the evening and night, phenomena transpired 
sufficient to gratify his most abundant desire. Similar cases, 
with like results, afterwards occurred. 

On the nineteenth and twentieth, little occurred to cause alnrm. 
Some of the family heard loud and frightful screams in an 
adjacent out-house, which must have been torturing to the feelings, 
much more so than the silent images. Small articles were also 
thrown about the house. Reports had now got abroad, and some 
excitement was being produced, as is always the case in country 
towns, where each person knows their neighbor's private business 
quite as well, and sometimes better, than those most interested. 
And in a matter of this kind all efforts to prevent publicity would 
13 

146 MANIFESTATIONS AT STRATPORD, COKN. 

prove unavailing. Curiosity and staring wonder would overstep 
all bounds of propriety and respect for the private rights and feel- 
ings of the family, forgetting that it is no slight thing for the 
harmony and quiet of a household to be invaded, each member 
being subjected to suspicion, ill-natured scrutiny, or careless 
reproach. On this subject I can speak from experience, having 
myself passed the ordeal. To persons of refined sensibility it is 
a trial indeed. In this case. Dr. P. adopted the rule of giving all 
who called an opportunity to investigate for themselves, and to 
this rule he adhered, notwithstanding the annoyance such a con- 
stant visitation must have occasioned. In one instance, while a 
rabble was gathered outside, a stranger, who came unintroduced 
by letter or otherwise, asked to spend the night, and was refused 
for obvious reasons. 

On Friday and Saturday, March 23d and 24th, the dis- 
turbances increased, and became still more annoying. Loud 
poundings and screams were heard in different places, and on 
Saturday evening, between sunset and dark, Harry was passing 
through the dining-room, and thought himself suddenly caught 
up by some unseen power from the floor, and supposed that 
he was about to be carried off through the ceiling. He was very 
much frightened, and screamed so as to alarm the family, and 
remained in a state of great nervous excitement for two or three 
hours, and the effects did not wholly wear off for more than a 
week. At times he was in such a state as to require two men to 
hold him. For several days after this, he spent Or portion of his 
time with one of the neighbors during the day ; but the disturb- 
ances continued the same at the house, although he appeared to 
be more or less the medium as long as the phenomena continued. 
At one time he was thrown into a cistern of water ; at another he 
was tied up and suspended from a tree, and several times was 
thrown into a state of apparent insensibility, in which he would 
remain from ten to fifty minutes, and for which no human cause 
could be assigned. 

Somewhere about the 20th or 22d of March-, Dr. P.'s attention 

OCCUEEENCES AT DK. PHELPS' HOUSE. 147 

was called to a pamphlet (Capron and Barron's), giving a history 
of the " mysterious noises " at Kochester and Auburn. Several 
persons who had read the same proposed to question the agents of 
these disturbances in the manner there recorded, and see if they 
could get answers to questions. To this the doctor objected, for 
reasoiis known to himself, but which may readily be imagined by 
those knowing his position in life, and his general opinions of such 
phenomena. 

On the 26th of March Anna left Stratford, and on the third of 
April Harry also left. No manifestations took place while both 
were away. Harry was absent a week, and Anna three weeks ; 
but the very day that Harry returned, the manifestations com- 
menced with greater power than ever. Even before he arrived at 
the house, a paper with som-e mysterious characters was dropped 
near the front door. These characters were interpreted by a 
clairvoyant * to read as follows : 

" Fear not wlien lie returns ; all danger is o'er. 
We came, we disturbed thy house ; but shall no more. 
Believe us not evU or good till we prove 
Our speech to humanity, our language of love." 

This was supposed to indicate that no further disturbance would 
be made ; but in the course of two or three hours another paper 
was found in the boy's hat in these words : 

" The good ones say that all is done, 
But the wicked ones say it has just begun." 

The " wicked ones," in this case, seemed to come nearer the 
truth than the " good ones," for, on the afternoon of the eighth 
of April, th« breaking of glass commenced for the first time 
by the breaking of a pane in a mysterious manner. In the 
evening of the same day another was broken during family 
prayers, some of the pieces falling inside and some outside. 
There were no indications of anything being thrown against it. 

» Andrew Jackson Davis. 

148 MANIFESTATIONS AT STRATFOKD, CONN. 

From this time forward for several weeks glass was broken almost 
daily, untU the whole number of panes broken amounted to 
seuerUy-one in the house and out-buildings. Most of them were 
broken by something being thrown against thiSm; among the 
articles were a brush, a shoe, a poker, a fire-shovel, a candlestick, 
a pair of snufiers, books, and numerous other things ; occasionally 
a stone or piece of brick, thrown from the outside. 

Dr. P. thinks it would have been possible, but not probable, 
that, in some of these cases, they might have been laroken by 
human agency, but he was an eye-witness in some twenty or thirty 
cases, and knows that they could not have been so done. He saw 
a brush, -which he knew to have been on a certain shelf but a 
moment before, and no person near the shelf, fly to the window, 
break out a glass, and fall down between the shutter and sash, 
where he knew, from the position, that no one could have thrown 
it. He saw a tumbler, which was standing on a bureau, rise from 
its place, fly to the window, and dash out the only pane remaining 
whole in the window, when no person was within twenty feet of it, 
and the only persons in the room were himself and Harry ,"the 
latter standing by the doctor's side in the doorway of the room — 
a position in which it was utterly impossible for him to have done 
it without detection. 

The mysterious visitors, whoever they were, seemed at times to 
be actuated by a spirit of sheer mischief in the destruction of 
property, particularly glass and crockery. Even the glass in the 
carriage-top was broken out. Pitchers of water were, on two or 
three occasions, poured into the beds, and the pitchers and other 
vessels thrown about the room and broken. The damage to fiir- 
niture during the whole time was nearly two hundred dollars. 
Sometimes there was a cessation of " hostilities " for two or three 
days ; but they would then return with additional violence ; in fact 
they increased gradually in violence from the beginning to the 
middle of April. On the evening of that day, and during the night, 
they were more violent and destructive than ever before. On the 
night of the thirteenth of April, loud pounding and beating, as with 

OCCUBEENCES AT DE. PHELPS' HOUSE. 149 

some hard substance, were frequent in the room adjoining that in 
which Dr. P. slept ; so loud and continued were they, that at 
one o'clock no person in the house had been able to sleep. Soon 
after, a small drawer was taken from a dressing-table, and beaten 
so violently against the bedstead as to break it into fragments, 
some of which were thrown against the windows, breaking two 
panes of glass. The knockings were now transferred to Mrs. P.'s 
room. She was pinched, pricked with pins, and otherwise annoyed 
in a manner beyond explanation, " on any known laws of matter 
or mind." Mr. W. C. was staying in the house that night. He 
went to the room by request, and proposed to interrogate them, as 
they were then doing at Kochester and other places in western 
New York. Being left to act his pleasure, he queried, and was 
replied to as follows : " Who are you? If a spirit, knock." Imme- 
diately there were heard on the head of the bed distinct knocks. 
Question. — "Are you a good or bad spirit? If good, knock." 
To this there was no answering sound. " If a bad spirit, knock." 
At once the same sounds as before were heard. Question. — "Will 
you spell your name if the alphabet is called?" Answer. — 
Bjiock. It was done ; and a name was spelled out, and a com- 
munication made of a most extraordinary character, detailing the 
particulars of a transaction in which a portion of the family were 
said to have been defrauded out of a large property. As this 
whole communication relates to a matter which may yet come 
before the tribunals of our country for adjudication, I am ex- 
pressly prohibited from making any extracts from this part of the 
journal. I regret this, more, as the facts in this case form one of 
the mx)st wonderful and unaccountable cases on record. 

The family concluded that, after these important disclosures 
were made, the disturbances would cease ; but they were doomed 
to be disappointed. The following night no communications 
were made, but the throwing of articles and breaking of windows, 
crockery, etc., were renewed with greater violence than before. 
Four ox five panes of glass were broken in one room in the space 
'of half an hour. While the family were together in the east 
13* 

150 MANIFESTATIONS AT SIEATFORD, CONN. 

cliamber, a small sauce-dish, with an iron handle, rose from the 
floor, under the wash-stand, and beat against the bedstead with 
such violence as to break the handle off, and was then thrown back 
from whence it started. It beat seven or eight times against the 
bedstead, producing a noise that could easily be heard twenty rods. 
A round of a chair was beaten against the bedstead, in the same 
manner, when there was no person within seven or eight feet of 
it. A lamp that was on the mantel leaped into the middle of the 
floor, and was extinguished. Being left thus suddenly in the 
dark, produced no little agitation, and Mrs. Phelps proposed that 
they should take the children and go into the street, rather than 
stay in the house that night. In a few minutes two gentlemen, 
who had appointed to spend the night with them, arrived, and 
the more violent of the manifestations ceased. 

About this time. Dr. P.'s attention was called to the fact that 
the demonstrations were much -more violent in the presence of 
some persons than of others. While some were present they 
would cease entirely, and commence as soon as they left with 
great vehemence. 

On the 17th the. communications were renewed, and from that 
time they had frequent communications, mainly respecting the 
property affair. At one time they asked how they should know 
that this was really from the spirit it purported to be, and re- 
quested ■ his signature ; when in less than four minutes a small 
piece of paper having on it an exact fac simile of his handwrit- 
ing was seen sticking to the wall — the writing apparently done 
with a pencil. Dr. Phelps still preserves the original paper with 
the name inked over. It was stuck to the wall by being made 
damp. 

It was now discovered that, in order to get the rapping, the 
presence of Henry was necessary. At one time a request was 
made by the rapping to send him to New York, and a threat 
that all the windows in the house would be broken, if they did not, 
was made ; but in a few minutes after, a small piece of paper 
was seen to fall, apparently from the ceiling, and on it written, 

OCCTIBEENCLS AT DU. PHBLPS' HOUSE. 151 

" Send him not to N. T. — evil will befall him." It was evident 
that there were two or more contending agencies engaged in the 
manifestations. It was not easy to define or imagine what their 
objects were. At times, when one was making a communication 
the other would rap, seemingly to make confusion. At other 
times, when a communication was being made by alphabet, a paper 
would be dropped down, and on it written, " It is all a lie ; don't 
believe what he says." Sometimes language the most profane, 
and occasionally, but rarely, obscene, would be written out in this 
way. Inquiry was made as to how these contradictory com- 
munications were to be accounted for, and the answer was that 
an opposing spirit was attempting to defeat the object of the first ; 
that this spirit was now one of hig tormentors ; that both were 
in a state of misery, and his suffering would be mitigated if the 
object of the first could be accomplished, although he would never 
go to a state of happiness. 

Among the spirits who communicated were two, who professed 
to be in a state of happiness, and three in a state of misery. One 
of the good spirits claimed to be a sister of him who made the 
first communication ; she communicated frequently, and constantly 
manifested herself in the morning and evening devotions of the 
family, and always gave two distinct knocks at the utterance of 
"Amen." Upon inquiry as to the meaning of these two knocks, 
the answer was given that it was a response, after the manner of 
the Episcopal service, signifying that she joined in the devotions. 

Much that was communicated after the first few days was of 
a trifling and childish character ; some, more like what would be 
received from street rowdies than anything else. To the question 
why they destroyed property, they replied, " For fun." It was 
asked of the opposing spirit what could be done to afford him 
relief; he answered that " The best thing they could do would be 
to give him a piece of pie." Sometimes letters would come, pur- 
porting to be from ministers of Philadelphia, giving accounts of 
conversions in their congregations and additions to their churches. 
These were addressed to the Dr. and indicated a knowledge of 

152 MANIFESTATIONS AT STKAirORD, CONN. 

things in Philadelphia to an astonishing degree. Some of the 
letters were addressed to Mrs. Phelps, signed, or rather purport- 
ing to be signed, by departed spirits of persons who had lived in 
Philadelphia, and all, or nearly all, who had lived in a single 
square, and were the acquaintances of Mrs. Phelps, during a resi- 
dence in that city, in the time of her former marriage. Senti- 
mental notes were also addressed to the daughter. These letters 
and billets were frequent, amounting in all to nearly one hundred, 
and were all written in one hand, though purporting to come from 
different persons. The fact was at one time referred to, and an 
explanation desired, to which the following was given : " We do 
not write with the hand, — do not touch the pencil ; we write 
with the will." At one time 9, paper was thrown down to Mrs. 
Phelps, while in the parlor with a number of ladies, having written 
on it, with a pencil, as follows : 

" Sir : Sir Sambo's compliments, and begs the laddyes to 
accept as a token of esteem." 

A lady in the family of Dr. Phelps had, in a humorous way, 
requested the spirits to write her a letter that she might send to 
a friend in Philadelphia. The spirit complied with the request 
by sending down the following : 

"Dear Maky : I have just time to write and tell you I am 
well. Give my love to Miss K. and her uncle. Also to Mrs. 
and Mr. D. Also to Sarah. Good-bye. H. P. Devil." 

The initials of the lady's name, who asked for the letter, 
were H. P. 

Papers were also thrown down, signed " Beelzebub," and " Sam 
Slick." Sometimes names of persons, whom the family had known 
in Philadelphia, but who had been dead several years, were signed 
to these papers. 

The following was in pencil, and seems to be written in the same 
hand as the other. It was superscribed " E. Phelps " : 

" If you promise not to write that I told you, I will not throw 
anything all this week." 

OCCURKENCES Al' DR. PHELPS' HOnSB. 153 

On the 28th of July, 1850, two singular letters were thrown 
down, addressed to Dr. Phelps. They were both in one hand- 
writing, but were signed by two different orthodox clergymen of 
Philadelphia. Their interest in religious movements, and their 
acquaintance with the phraseology of " revival " correspondence, 
are seen at a glance. " St. Peter's," in the second letter, is a 
Puseyite church. 

" Dbak Brother : The Lord is dealing bountifully .with his 
chosen people. Brother Barnes admitted to the church forty- 
nine last Sunday, and Brother Parker thirty-four to-day. Broth- 
er Converse has bad the cholera, and Brother Fairchild has grown 
so fleshy as scarcely to be recognized. Our friend Mr. Tarr has 
buried his wife. She died of consumption. E. Tarr is married. 
Brother Mahu, being suddenly inspired last Sunday, spoke so elo- 
quently and so loud, and used such majestic action, as to be quite 
done up for a while. He broke a blood-vessel. Old Tiers has 
gone crazy, and is shut up in a mad-house, or, rather, a hospital. 

The H 's have gone into the country to spend some time. 

That 's all the news. 

" Your faithful brother in Christ, 

" E. A." 

" Dear Bbothee : The millennium truly is coming. The day 
of the Lord is at hand. We are adding countless numbers to 
the altar of the Lord. Brother A became inspired last Sun- 
day, to such a degree, that his Boul took its flight to the regions 
above, and has not yet returned. The Catholic churches, St. Jo- 
seph's and St. Mary's, were burned down ; St. Peter's, also — I 
believe that is a Catholic church. Brother Mahu was preaching 
from the text, 'Resist the devil,' &o., when he was suddenly 
overturned by an invisible power, which frightened him so that 
his hair turned white in five minutes. 

" Brother Barnes, to render his church more attractive, is going 
to have opera singing and dancing, every Sunday p. m. Mrs. 
Alexander Tower, old Mr. Tiers, Brother Fairchild, and Mrs. 

154 MANirESIAIIONS AT STRATFORD, CONN. 

Somerville, are going to dance. I think- they will find it a very 
lucrative employment. Jane and Martha still progress in 
Hebrew. " Your affectionate brother, 

"M. E." 

On Sunday, April 27th, 1851, on returning from church, the 
family found the following characters written on the last leaf of a 
writing-book, lying on the hall floor, although it was known to be 
in the nursery previous to their going away. None of the family 
had any knowledge of how the book got into the hall. 

SPIRITUAL. 

^ X cv 

~~^l/y-=<//J)27j/=<:p-s-95-ist-2d. 
3ea (|/{i:<"Dj)<e-=yA(6th) 

SELAH 

H. 0. Gordon, a clairvoyant, interpreted the characters as fol- 
lows : The first line, 95th Psalm, 2d verse ; second line, 3d and 
6th verse j and the third line, tlie 10th verse. 

OCCUKRENCES AT DR. PHBLPS' HOUSE. 155 

The following cliaracters were found on the wall in the east 
chamber, on Sunday morning, May 4th, 1851. They were made 
with a candle on the wall near the south window. 

X LT G D 

This was translated to be, " Spirits of a higher order desire to 
communicate with you soon." 

Spirit-writing, without visible human agency, has never been a 
common mode of communicating, although it was among the early 
occurrences at Hydesville, Rochester and Auburn.* 

Sometimes these missives were enclosed in a book, and thrown 
down stairs or into the room ; sometimes wrapped about a key or 
nail, or anything that would give a momentum, and thrown into the 
room. Often they were seen to fall from above ; this occurring 
frequently when the doors were closed, and it was not possible for 
any visible agent to have been the cause. Writing would appear 
on the wall at times, made, as it appeared, with a pencil. On 
one occasion, Dr. Phelps was writing at his desk, and, turning his 
back for a few moments, without leaving his chair, turned again 
to his paper, where he found written in large letters, " Very nice 
paper and very nice ink for the devil." The ink was not yet dry, 
the desk was not two feet from him as he sat, and he was entirely 
alone in the room. 

About the first of May, Dr. Phelps, of Boston, brother of the 
Rev. Doctor, and Prof. Phelps, of Andover, a son of the Rev. 
Doctor, went to Stratford to " expose the humbug ; " and with a 
full belief that it was a trick of evil-minded persons, and that they 
should be able to detect and expose it without trouble ; and they 
were disappointed, as hundreds have been under like circum- 
stances. On Tuesday evening a loud rap was heard on the back 

* Mr. Sunderland, in his " Book of Human Nature," p. 280, says this was 
the first of the spirit-writing, but he is in error. The author of this work was 
acquainted with cases of this kind long before the disturbances at Stratford. 

156 MANIFESTATIONS AT STRATFORD, CONN. 

door, seeming to be made by the knocker, loud enough to be heard 
twenty rods distant. The servant went to the door, but no person 
was there. After the lapse of five or eight minutes, the rap was 
repeated. It was then supposed that some one had done it mis- 
chievously; but, on looking about, no person was discovered. It 
was in the shades of evening, but not dark enough to prevent any 
person being seen, who might have done it, as easily as at mid- 
day. The knocking came the third time, when Dr. Phelps — the 
visitor — placed himself in the hall, perhaps four feet from the 
door, and the Professor, of Andover, took a position on the steps 
without, each having full view of the door. The same loud raps 
were repeated on the door between them. The knocker did not 
move, nor could the eye detect any cause for what met the ear. 
The noise was heard throughout the house, and both the gentle- 
men were positive that no visible agent was employed to produce 
it. About bed-time, a loud pounding was heard on the chamber 
door. The gentlemen, each with a candle iu hand, stood on either 
side of the door, as the pounding, as though done with a heavy 
boot, was continued. The noise appeared to each to be on the 
side of the door opposite to him. On the following morning, as 
Dr. Phelps, of Stratford, was standing at the foot of the stairs 
leading to the third story, a noise as loud and much resembling 
the report of a pistol occurred apparently close to his ear. These 
boisterous sounds occurred at intervals during a great part of the 
time that the disturbance was continued. Sometimes for weeks 
they would not be heard ; and again for days they were heard 
every day. 

It would seem, from various occurrences, that the agents of 
these sounds, whoever they were, must have been human beinu-s, 
or, at least, possessed of all the leading characteristics of human- 
ity. They were evidently influenced by kindness or unkindness, 
by respect and confidence, as persons generally are in this life. 
Some instances, illustrating this, are given. One morning, during 
the breakfast hour, they would push the table suddenly, raise up 
one side and shake it in such a manner as to spill the coffee, and 

OCCUEKENCES AT DK. PHELPS' HOUSE. 157 

otherwise occasion serious inconvenience. A person at the table 
spoke to them in a tone of authority, commanding them to desist ; 
but the act was at once repeated. Again they were commanded 
to cease, but increased violence followed this command. This was 
five or six times repeated, and the shaking was each time renewed. 
At length another person at the table said, " I request you kindly 
to cease this annoyance, and allow us to take our breakfast qui- 
etly," and they ceased at once, without a repetition. It was found, 
from this time, that kindness had about the same effect upon them 
that it produces upon mankind at large. A lady, the wife of a 
clergyman, spent a few weeks in the family during the summer, 
who received many communications from them, would often, when 
the scissors, thimble, or things of that kind, were mislaid, say, " I 
will thank the spirits to return my thimble, scissors," or whatever 
was missing, and the article named would drop at her side, or in 
her lap, within p, minute. Things of this kind occurred very 
many times in course of the time that these phenomena were -con- 
tinued. If a key or knife, or anything of the kind, was mislaid, 
and any person was looking for it, frequently it would be thrown 
to them as though their wants were anticipated. Dr. Phelps was 
once with Harry in the stable, when the currycomb could not be 
found, and he asked Harry where it was ; to which Harry replied 
that he did not know. At that moment, the doctor saw it rise, 
as if thrown, from a point ten feet distant from them, and, describ- 
ing a parabola, fall within a short distance of the spot where they 
both were standing. 

About the middle of May, Dr. Phelps and Harry were riding 
to Huntington, a distance of seven miles. When they had pro- 
ceeded about one mile on the way, a stone, about the size of a 
hen's egg, was thrown into the carriage, and lodged on Dr. Phelps' 
hat. Soon another and another were thrown in. The carriage 
was a covered one, and the back curtain was down, and there was 
no way a stone could have been thrown in by ordinary means. 
At one house where they stopped, the moment the front door was 
opened, two stones were thrown, one of which entered the door as 
14 

158 MANIFESTATIONS AT STBATTOBD, CONN. 

it stood partly open, and tlie other hit one of the lights of glass, 
and broke it. Harry was standing on the door-steps at the time, 
and there was no one in the street who could have thrown them. 
Two stones were also thrown against another house where they 
stopped of an errand. Sixteen stones were thrown into the car- 
riage on the doctor's return, and, including those thrown against 
the two houses, twenty, in driving three or four hours. 

As it was now apparent that these strange things were in some 
way connected with Harry as a medium, it was thought best to 
separate him from the family. Accordingly board was obtained 
for him in a family some two miles distant. One day, when he 
came home, he told his mother, in great secrecy, that on the night 
previous he had been awakened from his sleep by some person 
dressed in white, whom he saw standing by his bedside. He was 
frightened, and was about to scream, when the person spoke and 
said, " Be not afraid, my son ; I am your father ; " and then 
placed in the boy's hand a silver watch, and told him to wear it 
for his sake. The boy affirms that he had the watch in his hand ; 
that it was not a dream ; and that he was entirely awake ; and 
that his father told him to tell no one of it but his mother and 
Dr. P. His mother told him it was. nothing but a dream, and 
turned it off as a light aflfair. 

It seems that a valuable silver watch had been left the boy by 
his father, which was not in use, but had been kept locked up in a 
drawer of a dressing-table, to which he (Harry) had no access. 
A member of the family, having occasion to look into the drawer, 
saw the watch, and knows it was there, and that the drawer was 
locked, and the key given to Mrs. P. A few minutes after the 
conversation with his mother about the apparition and the watch, 
the night previous, he came in from the yard with the watch in 
his hand ! He said his father had again appeared to him, and 
put the watch into his hand again, and said, " Wear this for my 
sake." He brought the watch into the house, and showed it to his 
mother, and said that his father said, " Tell your mother to look at 
the second-hand." The hand was off, and lay on the face of the 

OCCURRENCES AT DR. PHELPS' HOUSE. 159 

watch under the crystal. A credible person will make oath, if 
called upon, that she saw the watch in the drawer, where it was 
usually kept, not more than six or eight minutes before, and that 
she locked the drawer and gave the key to Mrs. Phelps. The 
key had been in possession of no other person, and Harry had not 
been in the room during the time. The watch was taken to Dr. 
P., and he tried to replace the second-hand, but could not succeed. 
He closed it, leaving the hand loose on the face, and passed it 
back to Harry, saying that he must take it to the watch-maker. 
When he took it in his hand, he exclaimed " Why, it 's on ! " 
They looked, and it was on and going. In a few minutes it was 
off again, and was put on a second time, all within a minute or 
two. The doctor aflirms that it was not out of his sight a mo- 
ment ; that he knows the watch was not opened, and that no 
visible power was employed in doing it. 

On one occasion the piano-forte was played while it is known 
that no person was in the room ; and, at another time, it was turned 
around, the front towards the wall, and so far removed from the 
side of the room as to allow the player room to sit next to the 
wall ; the stool was also appropriately placed. 

On several occasions, about this time, certain members of the 
family saw, or thought they did, visible appearances. Dr. P. did 
not give entire credit to these statements ; not but what he had 
full confidence in the honesty of the family, but the excited state 
in which some of them had been for a long time led him to think 
that they might imagine they saw what had no existence in fact. 
Towards the last of May, it was signified that one of the spirits 
who had communicated would appear visibly, — first to the 
daughter, then to Mrs. P., and then to the doctor himself. They 
asked in what manner he would appear, and the answer was, '' In 
a sheet." Between ten and eleven o'clock the same night, soon 
after the family had retired, Anna, who occupied the east bedroom, 
the door between her room and that where the doctor and his wife 
slept being open, and a lamp burning on a stand so placed as to 
light both rooms, called to her mother, and said, " There it is, in 

160 MANIFESTATIONS AT STKATI'OED, CONN. 

a sheet." Dr. P. asked where ; when she said it was in the door 
between the two rooms, coming from the room the doctor occu- 
pied , but the doctor saw nothing. The daughter was frightened, 
and covered up her head, and in a few minutes looked up and saw 
nothing. He was represented as moving slowly from one room to 
the other. ^ 

In about two minutes Mrs. Phelps exclaimed, " There it is," 
and drew the clothes over her head. Both the daughter and 
mother saw it at this time, but still the doctor saw nothing, al- 
though in as favorable position as either of the others. 

After two or three minutes had elapsed, the doctor ajso saw it. 
It appeared to him to move slowly from the hall chamber into his, 
and turn and move slowly back. It had the appearance of a very 
tall person with a sheet thrown around it ; he saw only the sheet. 
In about one minute, something was thrown on to the bed, which 
proved to be a sheet which had been taken from the wardrobe in 
the hall. Dr. Phelps declares that he was not frightened in the 
least, and could not have been mistaken in the appearance. Some 
two or three weeks subsequent to this a similar appearance was 
seen, and Dr. P. sprang out of bed, determined to seize hold of it 
if possible. It came part way into his room, and then moved 
slowly back. The daughter affirmed that the doctor was within 
two or three feet of it when it disappeared, and a sheet dropped 
into a chair. These were the only instances in which the doctor 
saw anything himself. Others of the family saw persons in a 
mysterious way several times. 

At one time, while Anna was in the dining-room, and a cousin 
of hers and some of- the' children in the front yard, her attention 
was arrested by some one entering the front parlor. She went in, 
and saw three gentlemen, — two of them sitting on the sofa, and 
one on a chair by the table, — all having their hats on, and drawn 
down over their eyes more than usual ; the one by the table had 
his feet upon the table, and was reading a paper. She was sur- 
prised that neither of them rose up, or looked at her as she entered 
the room ; and when she was within five or six feet of the one 

OCCUEKENCES AT DR. PHELPS' HOUSE. 161 

nearest her, he leaned over on one side and fell, chair and all, on 
the floor, and instantly all disappeared ! She was frightened, and 
ran to her cousin, who was near the front door. She came in ; but 
no persons were there, neither could they have entered without her 
seeing them. The chair was thrown down, but no person near 
who could have done it. 

A few other instances occurred in which appearances were sup- 
posed to have been seen ; but the circumstances were not of a 
character to put the matter beyond a doubt, therefore no record 
was kept of them. About the middle of May, Dr. Phelps spent 
some time with the Fox family in New York. He soon decided 
that the manifestations were essentially the same as those at his 
house, with a few points of difference. With them property was 
not destroyed, and they were not painfully annoyed. The sounds 
were different, it being with them a double or rolling sound, and 
at his house a single knock. They could call upon and receive 
answers from different spirits, or what claimed to be different ones. 
This could be done at his house. During the months of June and 
July the same general occurrences continued at Stratford. Some- 
times for two or three days there would seem to be an entire ces- 
sation of " hostilities." Then they would commence again with 
redoubled force. People from all parts of the country were visit- 
ing the house, to whom every facility was afforded to search into 
the cause. Newspaper discussions were going on, casting the most 
unjust and painful reflections, subjecting the family to suffering 
little short of martyrdom, while numberless other persons had as 
good an opportunity of explaining the matter as the persecuted 
family. In this aflBiction I can sympathize somewhat with Dr. 
Phelps and family. In the first days of these phenomena in west- 
ern New York; all persons who were involved with or interested 
in them were looked upon and treated at once as void of all com- 
mon feeling or sensibility, both privately and publicly ; their names 
passed about, coupled with opprobrious epithets ; their houses were 
entered without ceremony, and even in the face of direct request 
to the contrary ; their right to quiet and repose invaded, their 
14* 

162 MANIFESTATIONS AT STRATFORD, CONN. 

houses often being crowded with visitors, prompted by idle curios- 
ity and a malicious desire to torture, beyond the tnidnight hour ', 
still insisting to remain, and adding insult tg injury by declaring 
in your ears that it was an arrant cheat, — a grand humbug, — 
being carried on ; and all for — what ? And at the same time 
those whose ill-fortune it then seemed to be to have an identity 
with it were weeping and praying for the scourge to be removed 
from them ; for scourge it seemed, indeed, under such circum- 
stances. 

Dr. and Mrs. Phelps concluded, in August, as the demonstrations 
were then less frequent, on taking a short journey of three weeks. 
The disturbances were still more annoying in their absence than 
before ; and it was decided as best to close the house for the win- 
ter, and remain away. Accordingly, on the 11th of September, 
Harry left for Pennsylvania, and it was arranged that the other 
members of the family should follow within three weeks. It 
seems that, although the manifestations were connected more inti- 
mately with Harry, his presence was not all-important, as theydid 
not cease altogether when he left ; but communications were still 
made, though with less force and violence. The knockings were 
not as loud, and the communications less free or frequent. At one 
time a note was thrown into the room, while Dr. P. was writing 
at the desk, which contained the following : — " How soon do the 
family expect to go to Pennsylvania ? I wish to make some 
arrangements before they go. Please answer in writing." The 
doctor replied as desired, as follows, " About the first of Octo- 
ber,'' and placed the paper in a position where he had before 
put writings of the kind, and heard nothing further. 

Two or three days after this, a communication was given by 
use of the alphabet, saying that Root, a gentleman who had been 
in the house, had destroyed the doctor's book. He inquired 
" What book ? " and was answered " The big book." Yet he did 
not know what book was designated, and repeated the question, 
and received the answer, " The big book in the secretary." Still 
it was not understood. Again was spelled " Look and see ! " Dr^ 

OCCURBENCES AT DB. PHELPS' HOUSE. 163 

Phelps had in the secretary two blank books ; in the larger one 
he had written a full account of the mysterious manifestations, in 
the form of a diary, and, haying noted them as they occurred 
from day to day, they were recorded with more minuteness than 
could afterwards be done. Upon looking, it was discovered that 
every page that had been written upon was torn from the book 
and gone ! After a long search, the fragments of the leaves were 
found in the vault. Copies of the characters which the doctor 
had carefully taken, and felt anxious to preserve, were every scrap 
gone. There were, in a dressing-table drawer in the chamber, a 
great number of the notes sent. These were set on fire with a 
match and burned in the drawer. The fire was discovered by the 
smoke, but not until the papers were so far charred as to injure 
them beyond preservation. A few of these writings only are 
retained, which were in other places. The last of the annoyances 
was on the 25th of September, and was that of throwing ink 
upon the daughter's dress. She was standing on the piazza, near 
the front door ; the window of the front chamber was open, from 
which was thrown a small bottle of ink. The ink went over her 
dress in a way to entirely unfit it for further use. There was no 
person in the chamber who would have done such a thing for mis- 
chief; and, indeed, no person in the house who would have been 
guilty of it. 

The young lady was just setting out for a visit at New Haven, 
from which she was anticipating much pleasure, and I cannot 
conceive of any feeling, short of sheer malevolence, that would 
prompt such an act. 

On the second day of October the family, with the exception 
of Dr. Phelps and the cook, left Stratford to go to Pennsylvania. 
During their absence all demonstrations ceased, with what may 
be termed one exception. A letter, addressed by Dr. Phelps to 
Mrs. Phelps, contained, when it reached her, some of the spirit- 
writing in pencil, saying that '' her husband was sick and wished 
her to return if she expected to see him alive." He was then in 
good health ; but the next week was sick and confined to his bed 

164 MANIFESTATIONS AT STBATIOKD, CONN. 

two or three days. There may or may not have been some con- 
nection between the two occurrences. It was the design of Dr. 
Phelps to separate the family for a time, in order, if possible, to 
get rid of the annoyance ; and for the five weeks he remained at 
Stratford, after the family had left, no disturbances took place. 
Harry stayed in Bucks county (Pa.) all winter, and the other 
members of the family lived in Philadelphia. 

la the month of March the family returned to Stratford. The 
house had been closed and under the charge of a neighbor, and 
no sign of any disturbance was visible, as every article of furni- 
ture was found just as they left it. About the fourth or fifth 
day after their return slight rapping was heard as they sat at 
the tea-table. They affected not to notice it, and the next day it 
was repeated more distinctly, but no response was' made. Soon 
after, certain characters were found about the house, which were 
known, from the circumstances, to be of recent origin. Two or 
three days after, distinct communications were made by a spirit 
purporting to be Dr. Phelps' daughter, who died at the age of 
twelve years. On being questioned, this spirit could not give any 
evidence of identity. 

About the first of May several communications of a trifling 
character were given. On one occasion the doctor asked if they 
would be troubled any more as they had been, when they answered 
by rapping the following : 

" Be not afraid that they wiE trouble you more, 
Though we have not quitted Connecticut shore." 

At another time certain characters were given, which were 
interpreted by the rapping as follows : " Evil one has gone, and 
better one has come." No communications were made after the 
early part of May, but some things occurred indicating their 
presence and desire for mischief. 

At one time, on cutting a loaf of bread, there were found in it 
nails, pen-holders, small sticks and tin, under circumstances which 
showed that they must have been placed there after it was put 

OCCURRENCES AT DB. PUELPS' HOUSE. 165 

on the table and before the family were ready for tea. At one 
time Harry's hat was hid away, and then his cap, and then 
another hat. He took his brother's cap to use, and that was also 
taken away. On the evening of the 18th of July they set fire to 
some papers in the doctor's secretary, and some twenty papers 
and letters were burned before they were discovered. Fire was 
set at the same time to the papers in both the closets, under the 
stairs in the hall. They were discovered by the smoke. Two or 
three days after this, when some friends who had visited them 
were about to leave, their bonnets and some other articles could 
not be found, although search was made in every part of the 
house, until the train by which they were to go to New York had 
passed. They were at last found, locked into an enclosed wash- 
stand, in a way that made it morally certain that they could not 
have been placed there by human hands. 

On the 29th of July Harry left to spend some time at New 
Lebanon, N. Y.; and during his absence no manifestations were 
noticed, although they were constantly on the look-out for some- 
thing of the kind. Anna and her mother left for Philadelphia on 
the 25th of September, and they had been so long exempt from 
annoyances that they hoped they had ceased altogether. But 
Harry had the manifestations at New Lebanon, and there was first 
operated on, by invisible agency, to produce a magnetic sleep, into 
which he passed with a sudden shock. He had never been mag- 
netized before, although frequent attempts had been made to do 
so. In this state he evinced all the phenomena common to good 
clairvoyance. On his return to Stratford, on the 9th of October, 
the sounds accompanied him almost constantly ; but they seemed 
less inclined to mischief than formerly, because, as they said, 
'' Harry had passed to a higher state, where the low and ignorant 
spirits could not communicate with him." 

On several occasions characters of a unique description were 
made. The following were written early in April, 1851 : 

166 MANIFESTATIONS AT STBATBORD, CONN. 

This Harry interpreted to read : " "We are to take our leave of 
you soon." 

The following were .traced out with chalk on the piazza of the 
house, on the Slst of March, 1850 : 

These Harry interpreted to mean : " Ycni may expect good, 
spirits to come by and hy." The same characters had been said, 
by A. J. Davis, to read : '^ Our society desires throitgh various 
mediums to impart thoughts." The spirit that seemed to be most 
prominent in all these communications claimed to be Harry's 
father, and sometimes a sister of Dr. Phelps, who died about 
three years previous to this ; also a child of Dr. Phelps, who 
^died more than twenty-two years before. The communications 
seemed generally to come from the boy's father. On the 12th 
of October he passed into a mesmeric state, and wrote in these 
characters, 

L. 

L- 

X 

7 ^ 

^ 

^ 

// V'' 

J 

2 

which he translated as follows : 

"My dear children : I love you, and try to do everything that 
will do you good. Obey dear Mr. Phelps in everything, for he 
knows what is right and what is wrong. This is the advice of 
your spirit-father." 

On the same paper were written as follows: 

OCCURRENCES AT DR. PHELPs' UOUSE. 167 

Translation — " You were troubled once with evil spirits ; but 
now they are no more. They have bid adieu, and good spirits 
have come and are with you all the time.'' 

Again, occur the following : 

e 

Translation — "You must not fear, brother, that you will be 
troubled with evil spirits any more. No, brother ; no more. 

(Signed,) " Your spirit-sister, Bliss." 

The person here supposed to communicate is a sister of Dr. 
Phelps, a widow, who left the earth-sphere in 1848, and by whom 
several of the previous communications are said to have been made . 
Other characters, of the same general formation, were made at the 
same time, but were not then translated. 

On the evening of the 12th, Dr. Phelps, Harry and two 
younger children, were seated at a table ; responses were frequently 
given by raps under the table. Dr. Phelps inquired if it would 
accommodate them at all to have some substance to rap with ; to 
which they replied affirmatively. He threw down a table-knife ; 
the raps seemed immediately to be "made by striking the knife 
against the table-leaf, and soon it was tossed up on to the table. 
A small tea-bell was then placed under the table ; it was rung 
several times, and tossed on to the table as the knife had been. 
It was again put down, and returned as before ; the same being 
repeated several • times in succession. The light was then extin- 
guished, and the candle put under the table with a match-box 
containing matches, and the spirits requested to light it. They 
distinctly heard the match drawn upon the bottom of the box, 
which was prepared with sand-paper for that use. All saw the 
light ; but the first match went out. Again the scratching of the 
match was heard ; it ignited, the candle lighted, and was placed' 

168 MANIFESTATIONS AT STRATrORD, CONN. 

upon the table ! The experiment was repeated several times, with 
the same result ; every precaution being taken to prevent col- 
lusi6n in the matter. 

On a subsequent occasion a chair was placed upon the table 
by invisible power, and the two children, Ha.rry and Hannah, 
raised up and placed upon it ; they could neither of them tell 
how it was done. The sensation was that of some person plac- 
ing a hand under them and raising them up. Many of these 
things occurred when ttfe room was darkened, as has been the 
case in numerous other places, and for which explanations have 
been recorded, as given by the spirits. On the evening of the 
20th of October, the light being put out of the room, the bell was 
placed under the table, with a request that it should be rung, and 

■ placed in the doctor's hand. He was sitting by the table with 
both his hands lying on his lap open, with the palms upward. 

■ The bell rang several times with some violence, and then was 
placed in his left hand. This was repeated four or five times in 
succession. Dr. P. sat beyond the reach of any one, and the room 
was sufficiently light for him to have detected any movement on 
the part of persons present. He requested them to let him feel 
the hand that placed the bell in his. ' Very soon a hand came in 
contact with his, took hold of his fingers, shaking his hand, passed 
slowly over the back of his hand, then over the palm again, took 
hold of his fingers, and he felt what he is sure to have been a 
human hand. He describes it as being cold and moist, which 
accords with my own experience repeatedly, and that of my 
friends. They then took hold of his foot, shook it with much 
force, loosened the string, iook off the shoe, and placed it upon the 
table before him. At his request the shoe was replaced, the heel 
adjusted, and the strings drawn up, but not tied. 

On a subsequent occasion a large-sized tea-bell was rung under 
the table, then rose .up, passed round the room, ringing violently 
all the way, and fell upon the table. The candle was in the 
closet, but the room was sufficiently light to make it certain that 
no person left the table to convey it. It was manifest that from 

OCCDKRENCES AT DR. PUBLPS' HOUSE. 169 

the time Harry returned from New Lebanon the manifestations 
began gradually to subside. They were less frequent and less 
marked. It was arranged that he should accompany the family 
to Philadelphia, and go to a boarding-school at a town about 
twenty miles distant from the city. At difierent times he had 
been told that if he went there he would again be annoyed by bad 
spirits. The question was many times put, " Will you annoy him 
again if he goes to the school ? " Answer. — " We will not, but 
others will." — " What others ? " Answer. — " Those who were 
with him last summer.'' — " Will they disturb him if he stays here 
and goes to the academy in Stratford ? '\ — " No. They will not 
disturb him while he is with you." — " What will they do if he 
goes to Pennsylvania?" Atis. — "They will tear his clothes, 
destroy his books, and break his windows." — " Can you not control 
those bad spirits, and prevent their doing him any injury?" — 
"No." — " Will you do all you can ?" — "Yes." At another time 
Dr. Phelps inquired if they would not leave him, as his mother 
was so much opposed to the whole thing. '' Will you not, to 
oblige her, leave him, that he may be a medium no longer ? " said 
the doctor. The reply was, " If we leave him, evil spirits will 
get possession of him again." These communications were made 
by what purported to be the boy's father. For two weeks previ- 
ous to going to Philadelphia the manifestations had almost wholly 
subsided; perhaps only occurred when requested; and notwith- 
standing the repeated declarations that when he should leave for 
the school in Pennsylvania, the bad spirits would come in and 
make him trouble, it was determined to try the experiment, and 
on the eleventh of November the family set out for Philadelphia, 
where they were to spend the winter, while Harry was to go to 
school. He remained with the family in Philadelphia about a 
week, where a few communications were given to Dr. Phelps in 
private. The spirits said they would begin to annoy the boy on 
the cai'S, on his way to the school, would pinch him and tear his 
clothes, so that, when he got there, they would be found torn, and 
that the troubles would follow him in the school as long as he 
15 

170 MANIFESTATIONS AT STKATFORD, CONN. 

stayed there. Dr. Phelps, under all the circumstances, thought it 
best not to send him ; but on consultation it was decided to have 
him go, and on the nineteenth of Novembef he started for the 
school. Dr. P. went a mile or two with him, put him under the 
care of the conductor, and told him to report on his return if any- 
thing worthy of notice occurred on the way. In two days the 
doctor was sent for to come and take him away. He said that 
soon after his father left him on the cars, he was pinched, pricked 
with pins, and annoyed in various other ways until he reached his 
destination ; that, on his arrival there, he found that his panta- 
loons were torn, in fronts, between the waistband and the knees, in 
two places, several inches in length. He changed them for 
another pair, which were new, and made of very substantial mate- 
rial, and these were torn down in front, at least half a yard in 
length, before the doctor arrived there. The knockings had 
attended him in school and other places ; his books were torn and 
damaged to the amount of two dollars, which the doctor paid. 
The family where he was had become alarmed, and would not 
keep him, and he was taken away. The boy stated that on one 
of the evenings, while he was there, he was walking in the street, 
when his cap was mysteriously taken from his head and thrown 
upon the sidewalk. As he stooped to pick it up, he saw the flash 
of a gun at some distance, and a bullet passed over his back and 
struck a board fence near him. He was afterward informed by 
the rapping that, had he not stooped down, he would have been 
killed, and that his friendly spirit took this means to preserve 
him. 

Dr. P. now concluded to return with Harry to Stratford, and 
was told that the bad spirits would have no control over him there. 
The family in which they resided in Philadelphia had become 
alarmed at the strange occurrences, and finally they again returned 
to Stratford. From that time the disturbances began to subside, 
and by the fifteenth of December, 1851, they had ceased 
altogether. The family remained at Stratford till the spring of 
1852, when they returned to their former residence in the city. 

OCCUllRENCJSS AT Ml. PUELPS' HOUSE. 171 

The house at Stratford is occupied by another family, but no dis- 
turbances have ever occurred with the family which now occupy 
the house, and none with Dr. P.'s family since the above date. 

Thus ends one of the most remarkable histories in the whole 
course of modern spiritual manifestations. The authority on 
which it comes to the world is indisputable, and the characters of 
all concerned are beyond suspicion. It will be observed that 
generally the demonstrations, as in case of Mr. Calvin E. Brown, 
in the Fox family, were less boisterous after the family consented 
to hold communication with them. It seemed to be the desire of 
a spirit to communicate and set right a matter which was making 
him unhappy. This accomplished, the demonstrations ceased. 

From the foregoing narrative it will be seen that these phenom- 
ena do not attach to places, as some have supposed. It makes 
the fact equally clear that they do attach to persons, and that 
without certain media they cannot, to any extent, take place. If 
there is such a thing as " haunted houses," they must belong to 
another class of phenomena, or a very different phase of the_same, 
than those always depending on the presence of particular persons, 
as at the house in Stratford. 

Another fact seems also to be proved by the above narration, 
namely, that persons may be powerful mediums at one time and 
afterwards lose the power, for neither of the media of Dr. Phelps' 
famUy in Stratford have had any proof of mediumship for years. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

MANITESTATIONS IN NEW YORK CITY — VISIT OF THE TOX FAMILY — MEET- 

INO OF IITERATI THEIR REPORT OPPONENTS THE PRESS OF THE 

CITY HORACE QRBELEY RETURN OF THE FAMILY TO ROCHESTER — FORM- 
ATION OF CIRCLES IN KEW YORE CREDULITY — MR. CHARLES PAR- 
TRIDGE — OCCURRENCES AT HIS HOUSE EDWARD P. FOWLER CONFER- 
ENCE MEETISrO MRS. BROWN JUDOE EDMONDS, &0., &0. 

The advent of the manifestations in the city of New York was 
in the spring of 1850, when the Eox family went there and took 
rooms at Barnum's Hotel, where they were visited by hundreds 
of curious visitors, who had read and heard much of the strange 
phenomena with which the three sisters were attended. Their 
presence in the city called forth the criticisms of the press, and 
the editors were almost universal in their denunciations. One 
or two allowed both sides a hearing, while others, and far the 
greatest number, denounced the whole of the alleged phenomena 
as a deception, the mediums as wicked impostors, and all who 
believed them to be true to be idiots, lunatics, or knaves. But 
curiosity had so far obtained the mastery of bigoted opposition as 
to lead many of the most eminent men of the city to give the sub- 
ject a fair investigation. The result was, as elsewhere, the mak- 
ing of many converts, and these were not from among men of 
inferior intellects or of unbalanced minds. 

Not long after the arrival of the mediums a number of literary 
gentlemen assembled at the house of Kev. Dr. Griswold, an Epis- 
copal clergyman, in Broadway. Neither of the sisters Fox had 
ever been at the house before, and the meeting was called for the 
purpose of testing, as far as they were able, the validity of these 

MEETING OF LITEKAII. 173 

alleged manifestations. Among the company were J. Fennimoro 
Cooper, the novelist, Mr. G-eorge Bancroft, the historian, Kev. 
Dr. Hawks, Dr. J. W. Francis, Dr. Marcy, Mr. N. P. Willis, 
Mr. William CuUen Bryant, the poet, and Mr. Bigelow, of the 
Evening Post, Mr. Richard B. Kimball, Mr. H. Tuckerman, and 
Gen. Lyman. These gentlemen were well known throughout 
the country, and the report was well calculated to carry much 
weight with it, let it be on which side it would. The result was 
highly satisfactory to the mediums and their friends. 

On this occasion Mrs. Fox and her three daughters were pres- 
ent. Mr. Tuckerman was among the first to interrogate the 
spirits. Among his questions were the following in regard to an 
individual whose name he had not spoken, but had simply in his 
mind. 

" Did he live in New York ? " No answer. " In Baltimore ? 
in Cambridge ? in Boston ? " — three distinct raps, which is the 
sign of an affirmative answer. A negative reply is indicated by 
silence. Mr. T. continued, " Was he a lawyer ? a merchant ? a 
physician ? a clergyman ? " Knocks. " Was he an Episcopalian ? 
a Presbyterian ? a Unitarian ? " — going over the names of tbe 
principal sects. No answer. At the suggestion of a gent'lemau, 
Mr. T. asked, " Was he a Christian ? " Knocks. Mr. T. then 
asked the age of the person in a series of tens. " Was he 
twenty years old at the time of his death ? was he thirty ? fifty ? 
sixty ? " Knocks. " Has he left a family ? " Knocks. " Chil- 
dren?" Knocks. "Five? three? two?" Knocks. "Did 
he die in Boston ? in Philadelphia ? in Albany ? in Northamp- 
ton ? in Bennington ? " Knocks. " Did he die of consumption ? 
of fever ? of cholera ? of old age ? " Knocks. 

The person in Mr. Tuckerman's mind was the late Dr. Wil- 
liam EUery Channing, the eminent and liberal Unitarian divine. 
He lived in Boston, and died in Bennington, Vt., while on a 
journey. 

Dr. John Francis having fixed in his mind the name of an in- 
dividual, the "rapping" spelled out B-u-r — when several of the 
15* 

174 MANOESTATIONS IN NEW YORK CITY. 

company exclaimed, spontaneously, " Robert Burns." This was 
the true answer, and, after an interesting interview with the bard 
of Scotia, the doctor declined asking any more questions. 

Mr. Jas. Fennimore Cooper then asked, " Is the person I in- 
quire about a relative? " — " Yes" was at once indicated by the 
knocks. — '' A near relative ? " — " Yes." — ■' A man ? " No an- 
swer. " A woman ? " — "Yes." — " A daughter ? a mother ? a 
wife?" No answer. "A sister ?"—" Yes." Mr. C. then asked 
the number of years since her death. Fifty knocks were given, and 
the number unanimously so announced by the company. Mr. C. 
now asked, "Did she die of consumption ? " and naming several dis-. 
oases to which no answer was given. " Did she die by accident? " 
— "Yes." — " Was she killed by lightning ? was she shot? was 
she lost at sea ? did she fall from a carriage ? was she thrown 
from a horse ? " — " Yes." 

Mr. Cooper here discontinued his investigations, and informed 
the company that just fifty years ago that present month he had 
a sister thrown from a horse and killed, and that all the answers 
in regard to her were strictly correct. 

Mr. Ripley, one of the editors of the Tribune, a man of can- 
dor and great intelligence, drew up the report of the whole pro- 
ceedings, of which the above is but a short extract, and in con- 
clusion he says : 

"The evening was now far advanced, and it was not thought 
desirable to continue our colloquies any further. At the suggestion 
of several gentlemen, the ladies removed from the sofa, where 
they had sat during 'the evening, and remained standing in 
another part of the room. The knockings were now heard on the 
doors, at both ends of the room, producing a vibration on the 
panels which was felt by every one who touched them. Different 
gentlemen stood on the outside and inside of the door at the same 
time, when loud knookings were heard on the side opposite to 
where they stood. 

" The ladies were at such a distance from the door, in both 

OPPONENTS THE PRESS. 175 

cases, as to render no countenance to the idea that the sounds 
were produced by any direct communication with them. They 
now went into a parlor under the room in which the party was 
held, accompanied by several gentlemen, and the sounds were 
then produced with great distinctness, causing sensible vibrations 
in the sofa, and apparently coming from a thick hearth-rug before 
the fire-place, as well as from other quarters of the room. 

" Such are the most important facts which we can recall of the 
manifestations of the evening. We believe we have stated them 
without any coloring whatever, as they appeared to every one 
present, but, with regard to their origin or their nature, we are 
as much in the dark as any of our readers." 

Such candid statements, made on the authority of men eminent 
for their literary attainments and sense of honor, attracted very 
general attention, and it was hard to conceive how a whole com- 
pany of them could be deceived by a couple of girls. 

About this time the discussion of the subject by the newspaper 
press was at its height, and no day passed without some comment 
on the strange phenomena. As often as once a day some " ex- 
pose " appeared ; but the great difficulty seemed to be that each 
expose was contradicted by some other from a different quarter, 
so that the difierent exponents were more contradictory than the 
various communications from discordant spirits. 

Among the many persons who figured as the discoverers of 
fraud were Mr. John W. Hum, of Kochester, N. Y., John Stan- 
ley Grimes, a noted lecturer on phrenology, mesmerism, electro- 
psychology, &c., Eev. John M. Austin, of Auburn, N. Y, (Uni- 
versalist minister), a clerk in the New York custom-house, who 
wrote over the signature "Shadrach Barnes," and several other 
individuals. The most prominent of the newspapers which daily 
" exposed " the whole affair, were the New York Express, the 
Herald, the Commercial Advertiser, the Journal of Commerce, 
the Mornimj Star, the Day-BooJc, and some others ; and among 
the weeklies, the Police Gazette, the New York Observer (reli- 
gious), the Sunday Times (then edited by M. M. Noah, the Jew), 

176 MANUfJESTATIONS IN NEW YORK. CITY. 

and all the religious press without exception. In another part of 
this work, I propose to give the substance of the different objec- 
tions and pretended exposures, that they may be placed on record 
for future reference. 

Very frequently persons who visited the family at Barnum's 
Hotel gave short accounts of their interviews, which were rarely 
refused, when confined mostly to facts, a place in the Tribune. 
The following is one of that class : 

" Me. Bditoe : Permit me to state briefly my own experience 
in reference to the phenomena called the Mysterious Knockings. 
On Saturday last, being at Barnum's Hotel, in company with 
several others, I called on the celebrated ladies whose names are 
associated with the knockings. After several partial attempts at 
communications with spirits on the part of different members of 
the company, a gentleman present asked permission to question 
the spirits in his own way, which was granted. He commenced 
with the question. Will you hold communication with me to- 
day ? Ans. (Prompt, three loud raps) Yes. Q. Will the spirit 
of my mother answer me ? A. Yes. Q. Will the spirit answer 
me when I place my mind on the spot where my mother died ? 
A. Yes. (Correct.) Q. Will the spirit tell me the spot where her 
ashes now moulder, when my mind indicates it ? A. Yes. (Cor- 
rect.) Q. Is my mother happy ? Q. Am I happy ? A. (One 
loud rap.) No. Q. Which of the following situations in business 
will be the most eligible ? The answer here was very prompt, 
and was the truest answer that could be given. Q. Will 
either of the names in the following list ever become my wife ? 
A. Yes. Q. Will the spirit indicate which one ? A. Yes. Q. 
Will the spirit spell the lady's name when the letters are called ? 
A. Yes, — when the name of Miss was spelled for- 
ward and back, and every question answered in relation to her ; 
but if any other subject was named, the spirit would repeat, 
' Dpne,' and gave no other reply. In this case the questions 
were put mentally, and none could know their import, and, let 
the origin be what it may, the answers were correct, in every in- 

EXTKACTS BKOM THE N. Y. EXPJVESS. 177 

stance, when any answer could be given. And. although quite 
marvellous, I make this statement in good faith, and can only say 
I admit the existence of the phenomena, but know nothing of the 
nature of the sounds. S." 

Notwithstanding the violent opposition of the New York Ex- 
press, one of the reporters of that paper came out in an article 
at some length, and closed by saying that " those who accuse the 
ladies of making the rappings, or of being accessory to the mode 
of producing them, will be satisfied generally, in a short time, 
that such is not the case, as they are heard at so many different 
places at the same time, and in such different sounds also, that it 
would be impossible to produce them by any machinery. There 
does not seem to be any set time or place when they appear, as 
after the public interview was ended, and the ladies had gone into 
the public parlor, the noise was continued, sometimes under foot, 
and again upon the parlor door, where there could be no collusion, 
as both sides of it were watched. I can offer no explanation of 
these sounds; I believe them to be inexplicable. If any one 
thinks he can explain them, he had better see for himself before 
undertaking it. I do know that, when the rapping was heard 
near me, I felt a distinct jar or vibration, sometimes near my foot, 
and again over it.'' 

A correspondent of the same paper wrote as follows: "We 
have had our hour with the ' spirits,' and a very agreeable hour 
it was, too, so entirely different from anything we had anticipated, 
so perfectly free from any ' art or trickery,' that we feel bound 
to confess that we stood before these innocent, artless girls, over- 
whelmed with astonishment and utterly confounded. That we 
were in the presence of spirits willing to commune with us, was 
hard, very hard to believe. That anything but a spirit could 
have answered our questions so correctly, we do not believe ; for 
instance, after going through with the usual preliminaries, and 
finding that the spirits manifested a willingness to answer our 
interrogatories, we took from our pocket a card, on which were 

178 MANITESTAl'IONS IN NEW YOKK CITY. 

numbers, running from sixty down to thirty, omitting only our 
correct age, and requesting them to knock when we pointed to our 
age ; and after running over the card some three or four times 
we could get no answer. We then took another card, precisely 
similar, with the exception that our own age was on it, and the 
moment we pointed to it the answer was correctly given. We 
then requested that when we pointed to our age again, three dis- 
tinct raps should be given, and it was done. We then requested 
(mentally) that if they were spirits, they would manifest them- 
selves by rapping on the soles of our feet ; — they did so, and the 
feeling was as palpable as would be that of a small hammer, and 
the sound so loud as to be heard by all in the room. Now, is not 
this, to say the least, very strange ? " 

Many distinguished visitors waited upon the mediums, and a 
large proportion of them became converts to the spiritual theory. 
Yet they were very slow to avow their belief while it remained so 
unpopular, and whUe the press treated the subject with such uni- 
versal ridicule. However, there were not wanting men of moral' 
courage, who boldly advocated not only the total absence of all 
intentional fraud on the part of the ladies, but avowed their belief 
in the spirituality of the communications. In answer to the 
attacks of J. Stanly Grimes and others, William Eishbough, of 
Williamsburgh, wrote.a series of able articles in the Tribune, 
taking the spiritual side. 

During the time of the mediums' visit to the city, circles were 
formed by a number of individuals, who were determined to inves- 
tigate the matter to its fullest extent. Other mediums were soon 
ieveloped, and the investigations could be carried on without the 
presence of any of the family who had excited so much curiosity 
[ind angry newspaper discussion. 

It was after a visit of two months or more that th^Fox family 
left the city to return to their homes in Eochester. Some time 
previous to their leaving, they had left the hotel and visited pri- 
vate families, where better opportunities were afforded for investi- 
gation. Among the families visited wa's that of Horace Greeley, 

OPINIONS OP HORACE GREELEY. 179 

* 

editor of the Trilune, and, after their departure, he published the 
following in his paper, over his own initials : 

"THE MYSTERIOUS RAPPINGS. 

" Mrs. Fox and her three daughters left our city yesterday, on 
their return to Rochester, after a stay here of some weeks ; dur- 
ing which they have subjected the mysterious influence, by which 
they seem to be accompanied, to every reasonable test, and to the 
keen and critical scrutiny of hundreds who have chosen to visit 
them, or whom they have been invited to visit. The rooms which 
they occupied at the hotel have been repeatedly searched and 
scrutinized ; they have been taken without an hour's notice into 
houses they had never before entered ; they have been all uncon- 
sciously placed on a glass surface, concealed under the carpet, in 
order to interrupt electrical vibrations ; they have been disrobed 
by a committee of ladies, appointed without notice, and insisting 
that neither of them should leave the room until the investigation 
had been made, &c. &c. ; yet we believe no one, to this mo- 
ment, pretends that he has detected either of them in producing 
or causing the ' rappings,' nor do we think any of their contem- 
ners has invented a plausible theory to account for the production 
of. these sounds, nor the singular intelligence which (certainly at 
times) has seemed to be manifested through them. 

" Some ten or twelve days since, they gave up their rooms at the 
hotel, and devoted the "remainder of their sojourn here to visiting 
several families, to which they had been invited by persons inter- 
ested in the subject, and subjecting the singular influence to a 
closer, calmer examination than could be given to it at a hotel, 
and before casual companies of strangers, drawn together by vague 
curiosity more than rational interest, or predetermined and invin- 
cible hostility. Our own dwelling was among those they thus 
visited ; not only submitting to, but courting, the fullest and 
keenest inquiry with regard to the alleged ' manifestations ' from 
the spirit-world, by which they were attended. We devoted what 
time we could spare from our duties, out of three days, to this 

180 MANIFESTATIONS IN NEW YORK CITY. 

subject ; and it would be the basest cowardice not to say that we 
are convinced beyond a doubt, of their perfect integrity and good 
faith in the premises. Whatever may be the origin or, cause of 
the ' rappings,' the ladies in whose presence they occur do not 
make them. We tested this thoroughly and to our entire satis- 
faction. 

" Their conduct and bearing is as unlike that of deceivers as 
possible ; and we think no one acquainted with them could believe 
them at all capable of engaging in so daring, impious and shame- 
ful a juggle as this would be if they caused the sounds. And it 
is not possible that such a juggle should have been so long perpe- 
trated in public. A juggler performs one feat quickly, and hurries 
on to another ; he does not devote weeks after weeks to the same 
thing over and over, deliberately, in full view of hundreds who sit 
beside or confronting him in broad daylight, not to enjoy, but to 
detect his trick. A deceiver naturally avoids conversation on the 
subject of his knavery, but these ladies converse freely and fully 
with regard to the origin of these ' rappings ' in their dwellings, 
years ago, the various sensations they caused, the neighborhood 
excitement created, the progress of the developments, — what 
they have seen, heard and experienced from first to last. If all 
were false, they could not fail to have involved themselves ere 
this in a labyrinth of blasting contradictions, as each separately 
gives accounts of the most astonishing developments at this or that 
time. Persons foolish enough so to commit themselves without 
reserve or caution, could not have deferred a thorough self-exposure 
for a single week. 

" Of course, a variety of opinions of so strange a matter would 
naturally be formed by the various persons who have visited them, 
and we presume that those who have merely run into their room 
for an hour or so, and listened, among a huddle of strangers, to a 
medley of questions — not all admitting of very profitable an- 
swers — put to certain invisible intelligences, and answered by 
' rappings,' or singular noises on the floor, table, &o., as the alpha- 
bet was called over, or otherwise, would naturally go away, per- 

OPINIONS OF HORACE OEEELEY. 181 

haps puzzled, probably disgusted, rarely convinced. It is hardly 
possible that a matter, ostensibly so grave, could be presented 
under circumstances less favorable to conviction. But of those 
who have enjoyed proper opportunities for a full investigation, we 
believe that fully three fourths are convinced, as we are, that these 
singular sounds and seeming manifestations are not produced by 
Mrs. Fox and her daughters, nor by any human being connected 
with them. 

" How they are caused, and whence they proceed, are questions 
which open a much wider field of inquiry, with whose way-marks 
we do not profess to be familiar. He must be well acquainted 
with the arcana of the universe, who shall presume dogmatically 
to decide that these manifestations are natural or supernatural. 
The ladies say that they are informed that this is but the begin- 
ning of a new era, or economy, in which spirits clothed in the 
flesh are to be more closely and palpably connected with those 
who have put on immortality ; that the manifestations have 
already appeared in many other families, and are destined to be 
diffused and rendered clearer, until all who will may communicate 
freely with their friends who have ' shuffled off this mortal coil.' 
Of all this we know nothing, and shall guess nothing. But if we 
were simply to print (which we shall not) the questions we asked 
and answers we received, during a two hours' uninterrupted con- 
ference with the ' rappers,' we should at once be accused of having 
done so expressly to sustain the theory which regards these mani- 
festations as the utterances of departed spirits. 

"H. G." 

This testimony was due to the Fox family, and was honorable 
to the independent and high-minded editor, who dared to brave 
public opinion, and utter his convictions-, after a candid and patient 
investigation. Such a course presents a striking contrast to those 
lesser lights of the editorial profession who condemn without ever 
having investigated at all. 

On the return of the family from New York to their home in 
16 

182 

MANIFESTATIONS IN NEW YOEK CITY. 

Rochester, their house was thronged, and they found it utterly 
impossible to fulfil their intentions of remaining at home and 
retiring from all public observation. The only way left for them" 
seemed to be to make themselves servants of the public, and allow 
this strange matter to be fully investigated by all who wished, — 
the same public, who used their time, paying them for it, so that 
they might obtain the means of living. Many of their friends 
advised them to this course, as did also their invisible attend- 
ants. 

The fact of their taking pay for their time has often been used 
as an argument to prove that the whole was a mere money-making 
trick, and as prima, facie evidence of fraud. Why the preaching 
of tangible spiritualism should be subject to such an imputation, 
more than any other preaching, is not entirely plain, unless it be 
that the paying of one kind of preachers is an old custom, and 
those who conform to it do not feel willing to admit a new class 
of competitors into the field. We have never been able to com- 
prehend why one person should devote his or her time to the 
service of the public, — whether as preacher of religion, the de- 
monstrator of some new truth, or the gratifier of curiosity, — 
without compensation, more than another ; yet it seemed to be 
expected of the Pox family that they should give their time with- 
out compensation, or be accused of trickery — a rule which theo- 
logical teachers would deem very unjust when applied to them ; 
— and it is questionable whether they would make a greater 
sacrifice than did this same family to sustain their several 
religions. 

Finding themselves forced into a public position, they abandoned 
iill ideas of quiet, and made a tour to the west, where they created 
the same excitement as in othSr parts of the country ; and in the 
iiutumn of the same year- they made a second visit to New York. 
In the mean time, several other persons had become mediums for 
various manifestations in the city, and many distinguished men 
had become interested. Among the first concerted movements 
vraS the New York Circle, formed on the first of August, 1851, 

FANATICISM. 183 

consisting of the following members : Hon. J. W. Edmonds, 
Edward P. Fowler, Miss A. L. Fowler, Dr. J. B. Gray and lady. 
Dr. Hull, Charles Partridge, Mrs. S. A. Partridge, Dr. Warner, 
Dr. R. T. Halloek and lady, W. J. Baner and lady, and Robert 
T. Shannon. Occasionally, Professor George Bush, Hon. J. W. 
Edmonds, S. B. Brittan, Almon Roff, and others, met with them 
by invitation. These were the pioneer investigators of New York 
city. 

From that time circles were formed and new mediums were 
developed in rapid succession. In some circles the most ridicu- 
lous and fanatical scenes were enacted under direction of the 
invisible agencies, and men who were generally reasonable, when 
once they became possessed with the idea that they had discov- 
ered a perfect guide in the new and strange phenomena, seemed 
willing to merge their common sense in it, and be guided by all 
that the " spirits " told them, however at variance with sound 
reason or philosophy. Thus, we have an authenticated account 
of a circle of intelligent men who were told to " all lie down on 
the floor " in a dark room, and actually obeyed I There was no 
remarkable manifestation in this case except of the resignation of 
reason to an imknown but supposed superior power. Continued 
investigation revealed the fact that the spirits were, like mortals, 
liable to great mistakes in philosophy, facts and reasoning. Some 
bitter disappointments and mortifying experiences were necessary 
to stay the tide of fanatical belief in the perfection of all spir- 
itual communications ; and the experiences were abundant, and 
generally produced the desired effect. Learning that all was not 
perfectly reliable, they became prepared to find their true value 
by more careful investigation. 

While there were a large number of the above stamp, there 
were calm, sceptical, philosophical persons, who contested every 
inch of ground, and yielded to the spiritual theory when forced, 
by the most unmistakable evidence, to do so. The pioneer of this 
class of investigators was Mr. Charles Partridge, who for some 
time kept Margaretta and ■ Catharine Fox at his house, for the 

184 MANIFESTATIONS IN NEW YORK CITY. 

purpose of seeing the manifestations in every conceivable form. 
He had merely called on them when they were at Barnum's 
Hotel, during their first visit to New York, but without obtain- 
ing much satisfaction. On his return from a western journey, he, 
in company with his wife, called at the house of the Fox family, 
in Rochester, where he had a manifestation so remarkable as to 
be worthy of record ; especially as it was the first convincing 
proof to one who has since become one of the most eflfeotual 
champions of the spiritual cause in this country. 

When he visited the family at Rochester he was a stranger to 
them and in the city. Immediately after taking seats around the 
table the rapping commenced. Mr. Partridge asked if the spirit 
would rap if he would write the name it bore on earth. Ajis. 
" Yes." He then wrote down the names of some dozen persons, 
living and deceased, and raps were made while writing the names 
of his brother, who died in California, in September, 1849. To 
ascertain the month, he wrote down several months on a paper, 
and when he came to September there was a rap. In the same 
way the day of the month on which his spirit left the body was 
iodicated. Many other test questions were answered correctly, 
and some information spelled out by the alphabet which Mr. Par- 
tridge supposed was not correct, but which subsequently proved 
to be true. 

They left for their hotel, and returned about four o'clock, p. m., 
when, being again in communication, some twenty names were 
written down, to get the one communicating, about half of them 
being of persons living. Raps were made at the names of a 
deceased son, brother and cousin, and while pointing to them, 
with his arm resting on a heavy dining-table, it moved away from 
him some eighteen inches. He was somewhat astonished, and 
drew it back, and it moved away again. He then got up and 
made a minute examination of the floor and table, till he was 
convinced that no person touched it, and no machinery was 
attached to it. Soon after this a terrible preaking noise com- 
menced, like the laboring and creaking of a ship in a heavy sea, 

INVESIIOATIONS OP ME. C. PARTRIDSE. 185 

with an occasional dull, heavy sound, as if a wave had struck hev 
heavily on the side. This was continued ten or twelve minutes. 
Mrs. Fish remarked that it was an unusual sound, and she did 
not know what it meant. Mr. Partridge thought it resembled 
the creaking of the steamer Atlantic before her wreck on Fisher's 
Island, in November, 1846, when he was on board, and barely 
escaped with his life ; being the only one that escaped from the 
stern of the vessel. The representation brought to his mind a 
young lady who was under his care, and was lost, and on add- 
ing her name to the list a shower of raps was heard, apparently 
all over the table. Mrs. Fish asked if he knew what it all 
meant. He replied that he believed he did, but did not wish to 
tell her, as it would be an excellent test. He asked if the last 
name written by him was the one the spirit bore, and was 
answered by a shower of raps. To the question " How many 
years since your death ? " it replied by three fiiU and one partial 
rap, signifying three years and a fraction, which was correct. He 
then wrote down the months of the year, to ascertain when the 
occurrence took place, and the rapping came promptly on Novem- 
ber. He then commenced at one, and made figures denoting the 
days of the month, and the rapping came on 27 and 28, which 
was correct. Mrs. Fish thought it was wrong, and said she could 
not have died on two days, supposing that it was in regard to her 
death that she was answering ; but Mr. Partridge continued his 
questions .in regard to some other incidents, all of which were 
answered to his entire satisfaction. 

The extraordinary manifestation of sounds, like that of a ship 
laboring with a heavy sea, was so far from anything expected, and 
it was so palpably done without any mechanical means, so apt for 
the man and the occasion, and brought the whole of that terrible 
scene of danger and death so vividly before him, that it was not easy 
for him to escape conviction on the spot. But, strange and unac- 
countable as it was, his naturally sceptical mind waited for still 
more ample evidence, which he obtained only by a long course of 
16* 

186 MANIFBSIATIONS IN NEW YOEK CITY. 

rigid investigation, with the medium in his own house, and by 
attending circles organized for such investigation. 

A curious and convincing manifestation (among numerous 
others) took place at his house, with Catharine Fox as the me- 
dium, in presence of two of his neighbors, who had seen some- 
thing previously, but had expressed the opinion to Mr. Partridge 
that they were all deceived, and that the medium was an impostor, 
Mr. Partridge, being anxious to detect any trick, urged them to 
come again and assist him in proving their suspicions true, if 
they had any foundation. They finally came, with a confident 
expectation that they were, at last, to make the whole matter 
plain. After they were all seated by the table the alphabet was 
called for, and one of the visitors was asked by the spirits, 
" What will satisfy you ? " His answer was: " I will be satis- 
fied if I can see that lamp move about on the table without any 
person touching- it." They then spelled to the other visitor, 
" What will satisfy you ? " He replied : " To see the medium 
stand up in the chair so that we can see her feet, and then hear 
the rapping." The spirits then spelled, " Cathy (the medium), 
stand up in the chair." She stood up in the chair, and the rap- 
ping was made in various places, and in great abundance. She 
was then requested to sit down, which she did, when the lamp on 
the table was moved about, without any visible means, to the 
entire satisfaction of the sceptic. But the scene did not end 
here. The spirits requested the whole company to go and stand 
by the front window, some dozen feet from the table. They did 
so, leaving the chairs standing around the table, just as they had 
occupied them. After they had taken their places by the window 
the chairs at the end of the table moved, one to the right and 
the other to the left, forming an opening through which the table 
moved out slowly, and came to the place where they were all 
standing ! Here was a case so palpable that the two sceptics 
could not disbelieve, however much they might wish to ; for 
their senses could not be mistaken in such a case. It is need- 
less to say that they acknowledged themselves fully convinced 

AUIOGHAPHIC MANUSCRIPTS. 187 

that whatever the power was, it was not the medium that caused 
the extraordinary manifestations. 

One of the most remarkable manifestations on record, since the 
commencement of modern " miracles," is that which took place 
with Edward P. Fowler, in the production of autographic manu- 
scripts by the agency of spirits. At a meeting of the New York 
Cu-cle (before spoken of), held on the 11th of December, 1851, 
at the house of Charles Partridge, the subject of Kossuth's mis- 
sion to this country was incidentally introduced, when the spirits 
spelled to E. P. Fowler the following : 

" Edward, put a paper on your table, and we will write a sen- 
timent, and subscribe our names ; then you may all sign it too." 

In giving a precise statement of the occurrences,* Mr. Fowler 
states that the original paper containing the autographs was found 
on his table about three o'clock one afternoon, on his return from 
business ; the paper being drawing-paper which was incidentally 
left blank in his room on going away. This was taken to the 
circle, and the signatures of the members subscribed to it ; but 
they had omitted the history of the occurrence, and, there being 
some irregularity in fixing the signatures, the spirits told him 
(Edward) to " burn that, and we will write upon another." 

In accordance with this direction, a parchment was procured 
and placed on Edward's table, and the autographs were repro- 
duced during the night while he was in bed and asleep, and he 
most solemnly avers that with many of the signatures he was 
wholly unacquainted. Indeed, li would hardly be supposed that 
he was acquainted with the signatures of many who were never 
known in public life, and had passed from existence before he was 
born. There were also other writings of various oriental lan- 
guages found in his room, and in regard to all of them he says : 
" That these writings have not been imposed upon me I know, 
because I have seen some of them vrritten. I have seen them 

* See Eichmond and Brittan's Discussion, Letter I. 

188 MANIFESTATIONS IN NEW YORK CITY. 

written in the daytime as well as night ; and that I was in no 
abnormal condition I infer from the fact that my consciousness 
of the circumstances of outward life remained unimpaired. The 
ringing of fire-bells, moving of engines, tolling of the bells at the 
ferry, the paddling of the boat's wheels, and various other noises 
common to the city, were no less distinctly heard than at other 
times." 

Mr. Fowler had never seen any manuscript in the languages in 
which most of them were written, and there is an authentic chain 
of evidence to prove his entire innocence of fraud in the matter. 
On the paper above alluded to was written this sentiment : — 
" Peace, but not without freedom." To this was affixed the 
initials " B. P., Dec. 1851." Then followed the following sig- 
natures, being placed without any particular regard to order, but 
in exact fac similes of the handwriting of the persons they pur- 
ported to be : 

B. Franklin, John Hancock, B. West, Phil. Livingston, Jr., 
Roger Sherman, John Adams, Stephen Hopkins, George Wash- 
ington, J. , W. Kosuer, Samuel Adams, J. Q. Adams, 

Charles Carroll, Martha Washington, Rowland Ellis, Robert Mor- 
ris, Lewis Morris, Robert Fulton, W. H. Harrison, John Turn- 
bull, D. P. Madison, James K. Polk, Andrew Jackson, John 
Penn, William Penn, James Madison, H. Bell, John Fitch, 
Thomas Jefierson, James Monroe, T. Knox, Nathl. Green, Alex- 
ander Hamilton, John K. Paulding, Joseph C. Neal, John Moy- 
lan, Richard Henry Lee, Benj. Gray, G. Gray, J. Fennimore 

Cooper, Edgar A. Poe, Paul Jo»es, G. , Wm. Dickinson, 

J. Otis, P. Henry, Y. D. Sanford, Jas. N. Fowler, James Hull, 
S. Skinner, B. Partridge, J. Harris. 

I have in some instances examined the handwriting of the per- 
i^ons whose spirits are alleged to have been present to sign the 
above sentiment, and they were exact. Others are well known to 
the public, and they can judge of their correctness by referring to 
the /ac simile which may be found in Vol. I., No. 22, of the Spir- 
itual Telegraph, published in the city of New York. The original 

WEEKLY CONFEEENCES. 189 

parchment, as well as several of the original specimens of the 
oriental languages, are in possession of Charles Partridge, of the 
same place. 

At some of the sittings of this circle, Mr. Henry 0. Gordon, a 
mediiun, was taken up bodily, and conveyed about the room, with- 
out any visible power to support him. Sometimes his head and 
hands came in contact with the ceiling of the room, and he would 
float about the room in the air for several minutes. At the house 
of Dr. Gray, in Lafayette-place, he was thus carried through dif- 
ferent apartments for a distance of more than sixty feet. This is 
attested by many credible witnesses, among whom are Dr. Gray 
and Mr. Partridge. 

This is hardly more strange than the case related by Dr. Hal- 
lock, where the circle was sitting around a smooth mahogany table, 
which had on it loose papers, a lead pencil, two candles and a 
glass of water. The table was used by the spirits to make re- 
sponses, and when it was elevated to an angle of about thirty 
degrees, all the articles retained their places. The pencil and 
all other articles remained as if glued to the table. At the re- 
quest of some one of the circle, the pencil was detached, and 
rolled off, retaining everything else in its former position. The 
pencil was replaced, and they were requested to retain everything 
else but the glass tumbler, and let that slide off, which was done, 
no other article moving from its place. We have seldom, if ever, 
known a more astonishing exhibition of the power of these mani- 
festations than this, although it may at first look very simple. No 
ordinary and unintelligent power could be made to operate on the 
articles mentioned without bringing them all under the common 
laws of gravitation. When its complex character is considered, 
it will not often be surpassed even in this continual series of mar- 
vellous occurrences. 

One of the most important means of increasing the knowledge 
of these manifestations was the weekly conferences held at the 
house of Mr. Partridge. If we remember rightly, they were kept 
up for two years or more. Sometimes not less than a hundred 

190 MANIJESTATIONS IN NEW YOllK CITY. 

persons convened to hear what new developments had transpired 
during the week. 

As we look upon these as model meetings for those who are 
desirous of investigating similar, or any new subjects, we give a 
brief account of the way they were carried on. There was no 
organization other than a common intelligencej and courtesy, and 
respect for each other's rights, produced naturally and sponta- 
neously. There was no set form — no opening or closing cere- 
monies ; but all useless and cumbrous organization machinery 
was dispensed with. Each was free to speak his or her own 
thoughts without any dictation or fear of violating some written- 
rule or creed. The comBflon^ond_gf jbrothraigoi^fliiJi&^ompiQji 
wish to learnjproduoed^eaven's first, la w,-^::^order. It was very 
little given to theories and speculations ; but each one that had 
learned a new fact, or seen any strange manifestation during the 
week, here related it for the common good, and to increase the 
general store of knowledge. Those who were not members of 
circles came as listeners. At first, perhaps, many came from curi- 
osity ; but we venture the prediction that no meeting of similar 
numbers ever made so many converts from among so intelligent a 
class of people. Mr. Partridge being a man of wealth (though 
too independent and high-minded to be considered " fashionable "), 
many wealthy persons came to his house when they would not 
have subjected themselves to the ridicule consequent upon attending 
a place of public investigation. The consequence was the con- 
version of many of the most wealthy families of New York to 
spiritualism. 

Another great impulse was given to spiritual investigations by 
Mrs. Brown (formerly Mrs. Pish), who took up her permanent 
residence in the city, having two or three sittings daily, for the 
accommodation of the public. During the first year, her house 
was constantly thronged with visitors. Many of the physicians 
and scientific men of the city engaged an hour or two in each week 
to be devoted to their exclusive critical and scientific investigations. 
Some of these continued their examinations for a whole year, 

INVBSTiaATIONS AT MRS. BBOWN'S. 191 

universally resulting in conviction of the spirituality of the mani- 
festations. 

To attempt to record any considerable number of the astonish- 
ing occurrences at Mrs. Brown's would be useless ; for they were 
daily occurring. Many most beautiful and true communications 
I have seen spelled out to entire strangers. The following may 
serve as a specimen of some of them, which were given in my 
presence. They are given merely to show the tenor of many of 
the communications : 

A little girl was present with her father, and her hand was 
moved without her control, giving signs of becoming a writing- 
medium, when the following kind and rational advice was spelled 
out to the father : — "I feel deeply interested in your little 
daughter. I want you, therefore, to be led according to your own 
good judgment and reason in regard to taking her into promiscu- 
ous parties. She should not always be led by advice which she 
thinks comes from pure and elevated spirits. My dear David, I 
will give you a role by which you and Mary shall- always be 
guided, as you are responsible for the protection and elevation of 
your children. When a spirit assumes authority, in giving direc- 
tions, follow not such dictation. God made you a freeman, and 
he has given you light and liberty to act accordingly. When a 
spirit speaks unreasonable things, be kind to him, but maintain 
your own ground, and gently lead him along in the paths of pro- 
gression.'' 

In this case, the names of " David " and " Mary " were entirely 
unknown to the medium, or to any of the company present except 
the ones to whom the message was delivered. 

One evening, while I was visiting Mrs. Brown, two young men 
came in, who were from the State of Tennessee. One of them 
asked if a spirit would communicate with him, and was answered 
in the affirmative. " What spirit Is it ? " — " Your father." The 
young man then wrote down on a paper the following question : — 
" By what means did you die ? " Immediately the alphabet was 
called for, and the word " Poisoned " spelled out. The young man 

192 MANirESTATIONS IN NEW YORK CITY. 

started with evident astonishment, for he did not anticipate so 
prompt and correct a reply. He then asked if his father had 
anything to communicate to him, and received the following : 

"My son, lift your thoughts to God, and remember your wrongs 
no more. To dwell upon the past will retard your progress and 
blight your future prospects. Your path leads on to glory ; then 
labor to overcome evil with good, and a crown of righteousness 
will be yours in time and eternity. Tour affectionate father, 

" Henky Champion." 

The young man then detailed the facts that his father was mur- 
dered by poison administered by a brother, who had, as is too often 
the case in some of the south-western states, escaped the penalty 
of the law. The son declared that he had for years been deter- 
mined onrevenging his father's death. Unlike Shakspeare's Ham- 
let, the father advised him to dispel such feelings, and the son 
declared that from that hour his schemes of revenge would be 
given up. 

On a subsequent evening, seven young men from Georgia called 
on Mrs. Brown. They were total strangers. One of them asked 
if there was a spirit that would communicate with him. Imme- 
diately the alphabet was called, and the name " Laura " was spelled 
out. The young man looked conftised, and denied all knowledge 
of her. The spirit then spelled, " What ! don't you remember 
me ? " The young man became more agitated, but still denied 
ever having any knowledge of any person by that name. The 
glances cast from one to the other of his companions told plainly 
that they knew who Laura was, and that a tender chord had been 
touched. The spirit then spelled, " You all know who Laura 
was." Mrs. Brown's cm-iosity was excited, and she suggested that 
the young man ask what relation the spirit bore to him. He re- 
plied, " I never had any relative by that name." The alphabet 
was called for, and "What constitutes relationship?" spelled. 
The agitation of the young man was apparently almost beyond 

INVESTIGATIONS AT MKS. BROWN'S. 193 

endurance, and Mrs. Brown herself asked, "Was it a mother?" — 
"No "(by one rap). — "Was ita sister?" — "No." — "Was it an 
aunt?" — "No." — "Was it a wife?" No sound was heard. The 
young man could endure it no longer, and left the room, retired to 
the parlor, and paced the floor in agony of mind. One of his 
companions followed him out, and remained with him, and they 
did not return to the circle again. The whole thing was suf- 
ficiently explained by one of the young men, who remarked that 
" she (xught to have been his wife; and, if she had been, she would 
probably be alive now.'' 

On a subsequent occasion, I was present when one of the ladies 
asked, merntaUy, if her husband was present. The alphabet was 
called for, and the following reply given : 

" My dear, I am. I have tried to impress you with my pres- 
ence when you were alone. It is very delightful to be put in 
communication with those we love. All is well with me, my dear. 
There are new developments being made to the world, and all, 
from the least to the greatest, shall know the truth. Jacob." 

The lady was a total stranger, and she had not mentioned her 
husband, nor did she until his name was spelled out by what pur- 
ported to be his spirit. 

A gentleman present, an entire stranger, asked if the spirit of 
his mother-in-law had anything to say to him, and received the 
following answer through the alphabet : 

" Tell my dear Elizabeth I am her own mother. Tell her I 
have watched over her, and wept as angels weep over the sorrows 
of their children on earth. I love and bless you for your kind- 
ness to her. " Cathakine — s-." 

Her whole name was given, but I am not at liberty to publish 
it. None present, except the one asking the question, knew of 
any of the family circumstances, of which this was a correct in- 
17 

194 MANIFESTATIONS IN NEW YOKK CITY. 

dication. It was stated by the gentleman that unusual sorrow had 
fallen to the lot of his wife, and the whole message was appro- 
priate. 

Another gentleman was present, who had previously been prom- 
ised a communication. He asked for the spirit of his wife, and 
received, through the alphabet, the following : 

" My dear husband, I am ready to redeem my promise. .1 
have lingered all day long at your side, and our dear Julia is 
here to unite with me. May you be happy, my dear husband. 
When the spirits gather around you at twilight hour, then bend * 
your thoughts to God. When you retire at night, remember we 
draw near to comfort you; and when trouble assails, retire to 
your closet, where we can meet and join with you in prayer. 

" Frances." 

He then received the following : 

" My son, you have diligently sought for truth, and those who 
seek shall find their portion. You have guides who can lead your 
way, and throw out every block which has hitherto impeded your 
progress. Your Mother." 

The names " Frances " and " Julia " were not known to any 
person present except the gentleman to whom they were given. 

These communications show not only a knowledge far beyond 
the media, but breathe a spirit of goodness and rationality. The 
communications were not all of this beautiful character ; but 
under favorable circumstances, where an elevated circle was con- 
vened, it was far more common to get true than false communica- 
tions. Whatever may be the faults and errors of Mrs. Brown, — 
and ^he has no more than humanity in general, — she has borne 
herself nobly against persecution and abuse of the most bitter 
kind, and faithfully maintained what she honestly believes the 
one great truth, — the spirituality of these communications. If 
ever this proves a real and permanent blessing to all mankind, the 

HON. J. W. EDMONDS. 195 

name of Ann Leah Brown should stand conspicuous as one of 
the " heroines of history " who fought the battle against a world 
of opposition, while her younger sisters were the only media, and 
after she became so herself. 

On the 8th of May, 1852, Mr. Partridge commenced the pub- 
lication of the Spiritual Telegraph. It was edited by S. B. 
Brittan, a man of very critical and correct literary taste, and the 
most philosophical, cool and discriminating, of all our spiritual 
writers. The paper has been very successful, and has a great 
influence on the public mind. 

The number of media in the city for the various kinds of man- 
ifestations has increased to hundreds, and the believers are num- 
bered by tens of thousand^ An intelligent gentleman, who has 
kept the run of the matter, estimates the believers in the city, 
Brooklyn and Williamsburgh, at eorty thousand ; and, from what 
we know, we should say that the estimate was rather below than 
above the reality. 

Among the distinguished public men of New York who became 
converts to spiritualism, none elicited more comment than Hon. 
John W. Edmonds, one of the judges of the Court of Appeals, the 
highest tribunal in the State of New York. He had been in 
public life for many years ; had been a state senator from his 
district, and distinguished himself there on several important 
measures. He was known to the whole state and in other states. 
This fact made his public announcement of belief in spiritual 
manifestations the more notorious, and it was commented on with 
great severity by the press throughout the country. Falsehood, 
ridicule, and the cry of " insanity," were the cheap and ready 
weapons hurled at his devoted head. 

The first account of his " personal experiences " appeared in 
April, 1852.* He gives the following account of his first intro- 
duction to the mysteries of spiritualism : 

" It is now a little over a year since I was afflicted with the 

* Shekinah, vol. i., page 265. 

196 MANOEaiATIONS IN NEW YOEK CITY. 

loss of the one the most near and dear to me on earth. I was in 
great distress, yet I never entertained the idea of seeking con- 
solation in spiritual intercourse. Indeed, I knew not even of its 
existence. I had been for years a mere man of the world. I 
knew nothing of animal magnetism. I had once, and only once, 
— and then as a mere matter of curiesity, — seen a clairvoyant. 
The ' Kochester knockings ' I had heard of, but never witnessed ; 
and looked upon the matter, when I thought upon it at all, as one 
of the fancies of transcendentalism, which, like many others, would 
have its day and be forgotten. 

" At length, through the solicitation of a friend, and more to 
gratify her and while away a tedious hour than anything else, I 
was induced to witness an exhibition of, spiritual intercourse. 

" I saw much to surprise and interest me, and I gave to the 
subject all the attention I could spare, that I might thoroughly 
investigate it, and expose the deception, if there was one. I have 
now continued the investigation for more than a year, and have 
been careful to keep an accurate record of all I have witnessed. 

" As I have progressed, I have found that I was myself becom- 
ing, in some measure, a medium; and when alone by myself, 
without any medium near me, I was receiving communications 
that were to me, in an eminent degree, interesting. These come to 
me in different forms. One is, by seeing pictures painted to my 
mind's eye, as bright, as vivid, and as distinct, as any that my 
physical vision can convey to the mind." 

He proceeds to relate one of his earliest visions, which abounds 
in beauty and significance. They were continued in several of the 
first numbers of the Shekinah. Most men of generous or even 
honest minds will commend Judge E. for boldly espousing 
an unpopular cause, even while disagreeing with him-; and if a 
man who has attained to so many eiirthly honors from his fellow- 
men, by the spontaneous voice of the people, will dare thus to be 
honest, it is the surest guaranty that he is not the man to yield 
to blind impulse or party feeling in any of his acts ; yet it is but 

SOCIETY POR THE DIFFUSION OF SPIRITUALISM. 197 

yesterday, as it were, that his judicial character was called in 
question by a portion of the press for no other reason than his 
belief on a matter purely of a religious nature — the manner and 
facts of future existence — not questioning any decision, but de- 
claring that a man of such a religious belief could not properly 
adjudicate a case. 

It would be impossible to state particulars in regard to the 
spread of spiritualism in New York up to the present time. It 
has become diffused throughout the city, and has almost ceased 
to be a curiosity or a wonder to any. Public meetings are regu- 
larly held, and the investigation is constantly going on ; but the 
days of excitement on the subject have passed away, and all par- 
ties look upon it as, at least, something more than a mere trick. 
It is true that religious bigotry denounces it, but without disputing 
the occurrences, and occasionally a pretended exposd is made for 
purposes of speculation ; but the fact of spiritual intercourse has 
become an acknowledged fact in the empire city. 

The first regular organization of a society for the difiizsion of 
Spiritual Knowledge took place in New York on the 10th day 
of June, 1854. The history of the movement is somewhat pecu- 
liar. It purported to be a national organization ; but it was a 
singular fact that the time and place of meeting were kept a 
profound secret, except to a chosen few, who met and formed tho 
society. Even the editor of the Spiritual Telegraph, a paper that 
had been a pioneer in the spiritual movement, was not allowed to 
know of the meeting until the proceedings were published in tho 
New York Herald and other papers of the city. It is not my 
province to comment on the course taken by a small portion of the 
spiritualists thus to ursurp the authority to speak for the whole 
body, but to make a record of the facts. 

In the selection of officers there is a strange absence of names 
of old and tried friends, — the earliest and most experienced in 
the investigation, — and quite a display of learned professions 
and great names. 

17* 

198 MANirESIATIOKS IN NEW YOEK CITY. 

CHAKTBR OJ THE SOCIETY FOR THE miTUSION OF SPIRITUAL 
KNOWLEDGE. 

" The undersigned, being of full age, citizens of tlie United 
States, and a majority of whom being citizens of the State of New 
York, and being desirous to associate themselves for benevolent, 
charitable, and missionary purposes, have made, signed and 
acknowledged, the following certificate in writing, pursuant to the 
statute passed April 12, 1848 : 

" The undersigned therefore certify — 

" First. That the name or title by which the Society shall be 
known in law shall be ' The Society for the Diffusion of Spiritual 
Knowledge.' 

" SecoTidly, That the business and objects of the Society shall 
be — 

" 1. The diffusion of the knowledge of the phenomena and 
principles of Spiritualism. 

" 2. The defence and protection, of believers and inquirers in 
the freedom of thought and inquiry against all opposition and 
(Oppression. 

" 3. The relief of the suffering, the distressed, and the erring, 
so far as to enable them to lead pure and upright lives. 
" Thirdly. The number of Trustees shall be twelve ; and 
Nathaniel P. Tallmadge, Horace H. Day, 

Edward E. Bullard, George T. Dexter, 

Joshua F. Laning, Stephen M. Allen, 

Owen Gr. Warren, John W. Edmonds, 

Charles. G. Woodman, George H. Jones, 

Nathaniel E. Wood, Gilbert Sweet, 

shall be the Trustees for the first year. 

" All which we do hereby certify, pursuant to the statute in such 
case made and provided. 

N. P. Tallmadoe, J. W. Edmonds, 

Nathaniel E. Wood, George T. Dexter. 

E. E. Bullard, 
" New York, June 10, 1854." 

SOCIETY rOB THE DIMi'DSION OF SPIKIX0ALISM. 19'J 

ADDRESS OF THE SOCIETT FOR THE DIFFUSION OF SPIRITUAIi 
KNOWLEDGE, TO THE CITIZENS OF THE UNITED STATES. 

" But a few short years ago, in an obscure locality, and under 
circumstances which seemed to warrant the belief in an early ter- 
mination of the so-called dream, Spiritualism, in its present form, 
was born. Its few advocates, in the early days of its life, were 
looked upon as lunatic — were despised for their faith ; and men 
of respectability and standing in society could hardly be found 
who were willing to examine into the facts connected with the 
alleged phenomena, for fear of the reproach of the entire unbe- 
lieving community. Since that period. Spiritualism has extended 
with a rapidity unprecedented in the annals of the world, until, 
to-day, it has become a respectable power in society. Men whose 
education and whose genius have fitted them for occupying the 
highest stations, either in politics or in the church, have sacrificed 
all positions of earthly aggrandizement for the sake of what they 
believe to be the enjoyment of high and holy truth. Connected 
with that movement to-day are many hundreds and thousands of 
men who are respected by their neighbors for their integrity and 
worth, esteemed and loved by their friends for their many amiable 
qualities. The subject has arrested the attention of the learned 
all over this land, and in many other lands. It has produced 
books for and against. Many of the publications on both sides of 
the question are marked by ability and strength. 

" Within the last two years Spiritualism has increased in 
strength and stature with a growth unprecedented in the history 
of mental giants. If it be a lie, there is every prospect of its 
enveloping this world, and, by its weight, sinking this world one 
degree lower in the depth of degradation. If it be a lie, it has 
come in so lovely a garb, that men will seek it unless they be 
warned by a strong voice ; men will flee to it as though it were 
an angel sent from heaven, will become enveloped in its false 
light, and will be borne down to death" by the weight of its false 
glory. If it be a lie, ye men of America, who have one thought 
toward the good of your fellows, it is your duty to come forward 

200 MANIPBSTATIONS IN NEW lOBK CITY. 

as one man to tear the veil from the face of the lie, and expose 
it in all its hideousness. We challenge you as men — as earnest 
men, as men desiring the good of your fellows — to come forth 
and meet us in the fight, expose our errors, draw the shroud away, 
and enable the world to see us as we are. We challenge you to 
come and do that thing. 

" We believe that spirituality is a heaven-born truth. We pro- 
fess to know that angels from heaven — that the spirits of good 
men progressing toward perfection have come here upon the 
earth we stand on, and talked with us face to face, and uttered 
words to us bearing the impress of their divine origin. We sin- 
cerely believe this. We are respectable men ; we do not believe 
ourselves to be insane. We ask you to come and meet us, and 
discuss the question with us ; to examine these facts which we 
allege, and to prove, if you are able, either that these facts never 
did occur, or that their origin is other than that which it purports 
to be. 

" We come before you in this present shape to show you to what 
a height the giant has attained. We come to you in this present 
shape to show you who are spiritualists — who are the madmen in 
this world, who believe themselves to be the really clear-minded 
and sane men of this world. In this movement which we have 
commenced we believe we are the humble instruments in the hands 
of higher powers for the production of great results. We are 
proud of the posts we occupy. We are not ashamed to present 
our names for your consideration. We are not ashamed to meet 
you on an equal platform as men, and talk with you on this sub- 
ject. 

" Citizens of the United States ! we feel authority for saying 
that the day for raising the cry of humbug, chicanery, delusion, 
has passed away forever. You know — all of you who have 
reflective minds — that the application of these terms to this sub- 
ject can no longer produce results, but rather that these invectives, 
launched at your supposed enemies, will rebound upon yourselves, 
and cover you with weakness. Your professed teachers, your men 

SOCIETJ FOB. THE DIFFUSION OF SPIEITUALISM. 201 

in high places, the learned of your universities, the eloquent of 
your pulpits, have dealt in them long enough. And what results 
have they achieved? The theories which the universities sent 
forth to account for the alleged phenomena, as they were pleased 
to term them, have not only rendered their authors, but the uni- 
versities, ridiculous in the minds of intelligent men. All the 
theories which they reared have crumbled to the dust, and their 
authors cannot shake that dust from off their clothing. It will 
cling to them so long as they stand upon this earth, and longer 
still. 

" Your pulpits — and we speak kindly when we speak of them, 
for they have a holy office, whether they perform that office or 
no. — your pulpits have launched forth invectives. The cry of 
delusion and chicanery has been heard all over the land ; but that 
was some time ago. It produced no effect, except upon the 
churches themselves; and that course was abandoned. Policy 
was now adopted ; another plan was accepted as the true one for 
accounting for the spiritual manifestations, and which has been 
promulgated, not only from the pulpits, but by the religious press 
of this country, namely, that evil spirits have visited the earth 
still fiirther to delude deluded mortals. What pity ! what pity ! 
They have ascertained that ! Their sermons, their published com- 
munications, contain that assertion from their high dignitaries. It 
is very strange, if they believe this thing, — that evil spirits can 
come to do evil on this earth, — that good spirits will not be per- 
mitted by the good God also to come upon this earth to effect good 
purposes ! We profess to believe both these propositions. We 
leave you to examine the subject for yourselves. And we can 
tell you, one and all, if you will render your minds receptive to 
the truth, and will engage in the investigation of this subject, it 
will appear as clear as light in the noonday that spirits, both good 
and evil, do come here upon the earth, among their friends, and 
relatives, and acquaintances, and affinities, arid teach them good 
things and bad ; for this is true. We say, then, reflect, ponder on 

202 MANIFESTATIONS IN NEW YOKE CITY. 

these things ; investigate, and, as you shall decide, so shall be your 
progress here, and your everlasting progress hereafter. 

President. 

Grov. Nathaniel P. Tallmadge, Wisconsin. 

Vice-Presidents. 

Chief Justice Joseph Williams, Iowa. 
Judge Willie P. Fowlee, Kentucky. 
Judge E. P. Spaulding, Ohio. 
Judge Chlakles H. Lakrabeb, Wisconsin. 
HoKACE H. Day, New York. 
Hon. Waeken Chase, Wisconsin. 
Dr. David Coby, Illinois. 
Gen. Edward F. Bullakd, New York. 
Hon. Eichard D. Davis, New York. 
Dr. George T. Dexter, New ^ork. 
Major George W. Eainbs, U. S. A. 
E. W. Bailey, Pennsylvania. 
Phineas Ei Gay, Massachusetts. 

Secretaries. 
Owen G. Warren, Architect, New York. 
Selah G. Perkins, M. D., Vermont. 
Charles C. Woodman, Editor, New York. 

Treasurer. 
Nathaniel E. Wood, Chemist, New York. 

Board of Trustees. 
Nathamel p. Tallmadge, Counsellor at Law, Wisconsin. 
John W. Edmonds, Counsellor at Law, New York. 
Horace H. Day, Merchant, New York. 
Edward P. Bollard, Counsellor at Law, New York. 
George T. Dexter, Physician, New York. 
Joshua E. Laning, Merchant, Pennsylvania. 
Stephen M. Allen, Merchant, Massachusetts. 

SOCIETV rOU THE DIFIUSION OE SPIllITUALISM. 203 

Owen G. Wakiiek, Architect, New York. 
Chables C. Woodman, Editor, New York. 
George H. Jones, Merchant, New York. 
Nathaniel E. AVood, Chemist, New York. 
Gilbert Sweet, Merchant, New York. 

Board of Advisers. 
Harrison Bliss, Merchant, Massachusetts. 
Lyman L. Curtiss, Merchant, New York. 
C. C. Bristol, Editor, New York. 
Thomas G. Young, Editor, New York. 
E. A. King, Postmaster, Ohio. 
Benjamin Urner, Merchant, Ohio. 
Addison Smith, Merchant, Ohio. 
A. Miltenbergek, Merchant, Missouri. 
P. E. Bland, Counsellor at Law, Missouri. 
George Haskell, M. D., Illinois. 
John Howarth, Merchant, Massachusetts. 
Amos Rogers, Manufacturer, New York. 
John W. Fowler, Professor, New York. 
Cranstoun Laurie, City of Washington. 
John J. Viele, Counsellor at Law, New York. 
Elisha Waters, Merchant, New York. 
J. Tanner, Physician, Maryland." 

CHAPTER IX. 

MANIFESTATIONS IN BOSTON THE EIKST MEDIUM — SPIKITUAL PHILOSOPHER 

POSITION OF THE PEES3 LA ROT SUNDERLAND CEEDULITT SHA- 

DRAOH BARNES AND PHEBE NEWELL REACTION STATEMENT OF BUfUS 

ELMER — REV. TVM. M. FERNALD JOHN M. SPEAR THE NEW MOTIVE 

POWER, &0. 

The first we heard of the manifestations in Boston was at the 
house of a lady by the name of Lysene W. Dickinson, said to be 
of most excellent character and correct deportment. I learned 
little of the particular manifestations with her, but I am informed 
by the Spiritual Philosopher, vol. i.. No. 1, published in July, 
1850, that, the first Mrs. D. knew of it, the rapping commenced 
in their room, where no one was present but her daughter. They 
were both exceedingly frightened, and, after searching the room 
for the cause, Mrs. D. became impressed with the idea that it was 
spiritual, and entreated them to cease, which request they very 
kindly complied with. The raps were made on the doors, and on 
the sides of the room, in different parts of the house, and under 
circumstances which left no room to doubt but that the noises 
were caused by superhuman agency. Mr. Sunderland also men- 
tions that they were heard occasionally at other places in Boston 
at about the same time. 

The first medium that made any considerable excitement in 
Boston was a married daughter of Mr. Sunderland, Mrs. Margaretta 
S. Cooper. At first the sounds were very slight, and it was with 
considerable difficulty that people could" decide when they were 
really spiritual. They soon increased in volume, and many very 
singular and important manifestations occurred in her presence. 

SPIMTUAL PHILOSOPHHE. MR. SUNDERLAND. 205 

They commenced in June, 1850, and were not confined to rap- 
pings, but exhibited all the varied phenomena that had attended 
the other media. 

In the month of July, of the same year, Mr. Sunderland com- 
menced the publication of a paper called the " Spiritual Philos- 
OPHEK," -which very essentially aided in spreading a knowledge of 
what was passing on this subject in various parts of the country. 
The paper was not very well supported, and, after being published, 
with some interruptions, until December, 1851, its publication 
was suspended. 

In Boston, as in New York, the press was ready to denounce 
the whole thing as a vile imposture, and Mr. Sunderland, as well 
as all who were the friends of even an impartial examination of 
the subject, were denounced in the most bitter terms. Mr. Sun- 
derland very soon made arrangements for regular sittings, for the 
accommodation of all who wished to investigate the mysteries of 
the " rappings," and other manifestations. For a time he had 
many visitors, who were generally satisfied that Mrs. Cooper did 
not produce these phenomena, and many were as well satisfied that 
they emanated from spirits. 

Mr. Sunderland had long been known as a writer and lecturer 
on Pathetism and Human Magnetism, and a very successful oper- 
ator in both. This circumstance produced suspicion in the minds 
of many that magnetism, clairvoyance, or "pathetism," had some- 
thing to do, in his case, in producing these mysterious efiects ; but 
time and investigation, as well as the spread of media in Boston 
and vicinity, soon dissipated such suspicions. That he was an 
enthusiast, none can doubt who knows his temperament, and has 
kept an eye on his course for the last twenty years. His ardent 
temperament would hardly allow him to take a half-way, or even 
moderate, position on any subject. At first he was quite sure 
that all communications through his medium were from the true 
source. Time and experience taught him that they were not all 
good ; and, if I mistake not, his- extreme mind has now vibrated 
to the other extreme, and he thinks there is nothing good or 
18 

206 MANIFJiSTATIONS IN EOSTON. 

reliable. If I understand his position, as exhibited in his " Book 
of Human Nature,'' it is, that they are all insane or idiot, or a 
coarser and less spiritual grade, and there is no kind qf confidence 
to be placed in any of the communications. In order to give an 
idea of his position on this subject, I quote from some of his 
writings and experiences. I would not magnify any individual 
into importance ; but, for a time, Mr. S. occupied quite a con- 
spicuous place among the Boston spiritualists, and has written so 
much as to make his opinions a part of the spiritual history of 
the times. 

In July, 1850, he writes as follows : " In relation to communi- 
cations from the spirit-world, addressed to man's external senses, 
it is certain the present age will form an epoch in the history of 
the race. It is the period to which generations long since passed 
away had been reaching forward. ' Prophets and kings waited 
long, but died without the sight.' It is nature's approaching ma- 
turity ; the proximity of the human to the spiritual ; the transi- 
tion from the angular to the circular, from discord to concord, and 
from the spiritual to the celestial ! 0, heavenly thought ! Thus 
is man attracted from the low and earthly to the high and heaven- 
ly ; and be this our mission, to assist, as we may, in this great 
work of -human progress. To harmonize the discordant, to inspire 
love where there is hatred, to give light where there is darkness, 
to make smooth the rough places, and in man's organic, vital, and 
spiritual systems perfect that which is wanting, to make his labor 
light, and supply his mind with that without which his spirit can- 
not go ' on to perfection.' 

" Our columns shall ever be open for communications from the 
good and the true, of the different sects in religion, from every 
school in medicine, all parties in politics, and each world in the 
constitution of the universe. Especially shall they be open for 
the influx of goodness and truth from the spheres above, between 
which and our earth audible, tangible, ocular communications 
have now been commenced. And may we not hope that ' the day 
has now broken never to close? ' Henceforth, in a sense in which 

LA ROY SDNDERLAND. 207 

it never could be said before, ' the tabernacle of God is with men, 
and shall dwell with them.' Yes, O, yes, here in the midst of 
the spirits of the departed ! The good and the true, having cast 
off the outer form, the spirits of our brothers, our sisters, oui- 
fathers and mothers, our children, mingle in our presence, and 
attract us to the contemplation of those bright mansions where 
they exult in their beatific vision. Welcome, thrice welcome, 
happy, happy spirits ! As you attract us from discord, and. 
error, and evU, and death, we call on you to come ! As you 
instruct us into a knowledge of our future selves; as you aid us 
in comprehending our true manhood and destiny ; as you unite 
and harmonize us in the love of goodness and truth ; as you show 
us the nature of death, which we are not to fear, and the life we 
are yet to live, both in this sphere and the world above, we dedi- 
cate these columns to you ! * * * * Through these pages, 
then, shall congenial minds commune, and spirits mingle from the 
world above with their loved friends in the sphere below. And, 
beholding the leauty, the justice, the harmony and happiness, of 
the innumerable societies which make up the spheres above, we 
shall thus learn haw to arrange human society, haw to attract aR 
from, discord, oppression, evil, error, imperfection, and suffering, 
to a state on earth resembling that above, where there is suffi- 
ciency, health, unity, happiness, and heaven." * 

With so exalted an opinion as this of the manifestations, in 
their infancy, it would not be wonderful if Mr. Sunderland was 
somewhat misled, and much disappointed, at finding such a variety 
in the character and value of the communications ; although, in 
his paper, of the same date, he says he does not believe " that 
communications from disembodied spirits are truthful per se." 

Some time subsequent to this, in a letter written to the author, 
from Rochester, N. Y. (dated August 15th, 1850), he says, after 
speaking of his interview with the spirits at Auburn and Roches- 
ter, " Gracious God ! if it were for this only that I was born, I 

* Spiritual Philosopher, vol. i., No. 1. 

208 MANIFESTATIONS IN BOSTON. 

must bless thee for my existence ! * * * My heaven will 
be where such spirits are." It is not that Mr. Sunderland thought, 
for any great length of time, that all was truth, that I quote him 
60 much, but that his " Book of Human Nature" takes the extreme 
ground of a total want of reliability and identity. 

In September, 1850, he writes:* " I had frequently had Tnani- 
festations when alone, since last June, but no audible answers to 
questions till each member of my family happened to be present. 
Then, asking my children to respond, the oldest did so, audibly, for 
an hour or so, upon the cradle, around which the family circle was 
formed ! As if the precious spirit of our child, having left the 
cradle for the grave, would come back and announce his presence 
by a rap as upon the very place where his fond parents last gazed 
upon his infantile features, when smitten by the hand of death I 
The consolation thus afforded us may be imagined, but described 
it cannot be." 

I have, I think, sufficiently shown that Mr. Sunderland did 
then feel satisfied both of the identity and the goodness of the 
spirits he was in communication with. I might add that he often 
expressed himself as being surrounded by approving spirits whUe 
writing articles on spiritual subjects. The following is a speci- 
men : " We have been favored with spiritual manifestations, 
addressed to the sense of hearing and feeling, almost every day 
since the 14th of June last. ' Raps ' have been made, in our 
study at home and in our office in Boston, upon the sides of the 
room, and upon the back of our desk, where we are now writing. 
We had repeated ' raps ' while writing the article in our last num- 
ber, 'Historical and Explanatory,' approving of the views we 
gave of the philosophy of the spiritual communications, now in 
process of development, to man's external senses. We have had • 
some peculiar manifestations from the spirits of our children, 
during the night, which have brought us to consciousness from 
sound sleep. Manifestations have been made in our public lec- 
tures, though extended indiscriminately to the entire audience. 

* Spiritual Philosoplier, vol. i., No. 4. 

LA KOY SUNDEKLAND. 209 

" Then again, ' responses ' have been made to us, through our own 
family circle, not one of which ever saw or heard responses through 
any other person. All the other mediums, of which we have any 
knowledge, had the responses promised, by being put in personal 
oommunicatimi with the Fox family, or some one who had com- 
municated with that family."* In his first announcement of Mrs; 
Cooper's becoming a medium, he says : " And how gratifying, 
how pleasant, how heavenly, to find our own family thus taken 
possession of, as it were, by the Heavenly Hosts ! O, how insig- 
nificant is all earthly good, when compared to this privilege ! At 
our table, during meal times, by day and night, thus to be per- 
mitted to hold open communion with the spirit-world ! " t 

In the same paper, in an article full of high-sounding ecstatic 
words, under the head of " To my Spiritual Children,'' he speaks 
of his spirit being " swelled with emotions of satisfaction when 
I was told by ' hosts of spirits ' at Auburn (N. Y.), August 9, 
1850, that they had often been present at my lectures, in Boston,' 
Philadelphia, New York, Providence, and other places ; attracted 
by the approach of those spirits whom I had pathetized into a state 
of TKANCE. This state of trance {as I was assured by spirits of 
the upper spheres), that very state of trance, into which I had 
pathetized thousands who had attended my lectures in different 
parts of the country, was the nearest possible approach to the spirit- 
world." X I have also been present when Mr. Sunderland con- 
tended strongly that there was no kind of danger in being deceived 
as to identity of spirits, and when he even exhibited considerable 
vexation at being contradicted on this point. He was at that 
time trying to convince a lady of Providence that the spirit of 
her sister was communicating with her, when she could get no 
proof of such identity. 

At a still later date he gives a specific account of the kind of 
manifestations at his house as follows : 

" 1. The mysterious sounds have been made in nearly all the 

* Spiritual Philosopher, vol. i., p. 58. f Ibid. % Ibid. p. 59. 

18* 

210 MANISESTATIONS IN BOSTON. 

r joms o{ our house (some twenty), and have been heard at differ- 
ent times by different people. 

"2. They have been made, spontaneously, in all parts of the 
house often, by day and night. 

" 3. Articles ot furniture have been moved often, and at times 
with considerable force. 

" 4. The spirits have made musical sounds, which we have 
heard, and know were not made by any human power. 

" 5. The members of our family, and strangers present, have 
been often touched and handled (so to speak) by the spirits. 

" 6. Manifestations have been made by spirits to our sense of 
siffkt. 

" 7. The responses to questions are made freely, at our table, 
during meal times, which are thus prolonged often to an hour and 
a half by conversation with our heavenly visitants. When my 
family all become seated at our table, at meal times, the spirits 
' rap ' spontaneously, without being called upon, to let us know 
they are present. 

" 8. We have never asked for responses in our Family Circle 
without receiving them. They come through Mrs. Margaretta S. 
Cooper generally ; but we have had responses also through our 
second daughter, Sarah Mercena, and also through our grand- 
child, Mrs. Cooper's babe, only two months old. Taking the 
child in my arms, when no one else was near, we have had 
responses through it, and which the spirits themselves assured us 
were made through that medium. 

" 9. All the promises ever made to me by spirits (except one at 
Stratford made in jest), have been fulfilled. 

" 10. Communications have been vouchsafed to us, as we believe, 
from the higher spheres, giving important informaiion relating 
more or less to the Spiritual Dispensation now opening to the 
universe of human beings. 

****** 

"I can only say my heart is full, and had I ten thousand tongues 
it seems as if I could use them all in blessing the angelic hosts 

CEEDULIiy. 211 

who have thus taken possession of my earthly sphere ! I now 
enjoy a heaven far more real than any I had ever been taught to 
anticipate by the old and discordant theology out of which I am 
now conscious of being so completely redeemed." * 

Again: "The Spiritual Philosopher was originated in the 
spirit-world, and is conducted under the direct supervision and 
advice of hosts of friends in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, 
sixth and seventh spheres above. It belongs to the spirit-world, 
and is the first paper ever published, expressly designed for giving 
' responses ' from the higher spheres of intelligence above." t 

The consequence of such credulity, was, as might be expected, 
to lead the person possessing it into many disagreeable and embar- 
rassing positions, occasioning much ridicule of the whole spiritual 
theory, and making it even bear the color of design. Take the 
following as a prominent instance : A writer in the New York 
Express, calling himself Shadrach Barnes, in February, 1851, 
undertook the task of " exposing " the mysteries, and for that 
purpose set a trap into which Mr. Sunderland walked with all the 
simplicity of an unsophisticated boy. He wrote a letter, of which 
the following is a copy, verbatim, et literatim, et punctuatim. 

" respected sur I send one dollar if you please ut have some 
questions respecting of my daughter which departed this lif Jan- 
uary the 19, 1851 i brot her up from a child she was a daughter 
too me her name is mary ellen Perkins, and was 19 when she 
dide my mind is exercised very much in respect of her state of 
mind in a religious point of view which if you communion with 
Spirits in the other world she was flitey and out of her head as the 
poet sais afflictions soar long time she bore physician was in vain 
send me a letter i want to hear if her state of mind is happy no 
more at present. Phebe Newell. 

" new Yore sity feb, the 31st 1851. 
" mr laroy Sunderland " 

* Spiritual Philosopher, vol. i., p. 69. -f Ibid. 89. 

212 MANIFESTATIONS IN BOSTON. 

In this letter Shadrach enclosed a dollar to pay for the in- 
formation, and in due course of mail he received the following 
answer : 

" Eliot-stbeet, Boston, Mass. 
" Half-past ten o'clock, A. M., Feb. 15, 1851. 

"My Sister Dear: I have this moment laid your letter 
before the spirits, and received the following answer : ' Tell her 
Mary is happy, and with her dear mother Newell all the time. I 
watch over her for good ; and I love her now more than ever. I 
will be near her, and stand by her when she reads your answer. 
She must not grieve. I will soon make sounds in her presence 
when she is alone, which she can hear, when she will know it is 
me.' 

" And I understand the spirits to say that you are not her own 
mother, but she loved you as her own, and she said she came here 
to tell what to say to you when I answered your letter. In the 
sphere where Mary has gone none are miserable, but all are 
happy as they can be. Yours truly, 

" La Kot Sunderland. 

" P. S. — It is not often that I attempt an answer to letters 
like yours, but I suppose I was attracted to Mary's sweet spirit 
to gratify you. She has stood by me while writing, as I believe. 

"L. S." 

The discerning reader will have supposed by this time that 
" Phebe " was wholly a fictitious person, and the whole done to 
entrap Sunderland ; and it succeeded. The exultation of the 
opponents of spiritualism was almost beyond bounds ; the story was 
eagerly caught up by the press, and it had a great " run." It 
was in vain that it was attempted to be explained by the law of 
affinity, for Shadrach was not with the medium to call discordant 
spirits around. He was in New York, and Sunderland in Boston. 
It was a just cause of ridicule by the opponents, and they could 
not be blamed for the use they made of it. Mr. Sunderland's 
folly was in keeping the dollar and attempting an answer ; and his 

ME. LA KOY SUNDEKLANB. 213 

error probably was in supposing that he was aided and attended 
by tke sweet spirit of " Mary Ellen Perkins." He did not even 
pretend that he had a medium present, other than himself, and his 
anxiety, for some reason, to answer the good pious old lady favor- 
ably, produced an unfavorable effect on his imagination, leading 
Mm to imagine that the sweet spirit was with him, when there 
was really no such thing. This, at least, is the charitable con- 
struction, and I feel inclined, even in such a case, to " lean to the 
side of mercy," as the law expresses it. The reader can weigh 
the testimony, and judge whether this is a sufficient excuse for the 
extraordinary affair. 

It must not be inferred, from the above case, that Mr. Sunder- 
land had no genuine spiritual communications in his family. That 
he did have, and that some most remarkable proofs of spirit 
power took place with Mrs. Cooper as medium, I have abundant 
testimony from numerous and well-known individuals who visited 
him. This proof comes not only by published letters, but by 
private ones, which I have received from his visitors. In regard 
to his own impressions there is some little room to doubt. One of 
the most erroneous of these impressions was the idea he had fallen 
into that, with him, and his medium, no false answers were ever 
received. That this was his early impression the extracts abun- 
dantly show, and he so declared it in my presence and that of 
others. The above unfortunate affair was the result of such con- 
fidence. 

Another effect was that he vibrated to the other extreme, and 
lost confidence in the communications generally. He, however, 
investigated with much perseverance, even after he came to this 
conclusion, and gave the result of his opinions in a volume, con- 
taining much interesting matter on this and various subjects con- 
nected with the bodily and spiritual development of man.* I 
deem this work decidedly the closest criticism of the " spirits " 
that has yet appeared, characterized by some slight tinge of that 
bitterness of disappointment which appeared in some of his articles 

* Book of Human Nature. New York. Stearns & Co., 1853. 

214 MANIFESTATIONS IN BOSTON. 

in the " Philosopher," but less of jealousy and personal feeling 
than there exhibited. * 

But as Mr. S. and his family were the pioneers of spiritualism 
in Boston, I give some of the opinions of disinterested visitors and 
comments of the press on the occurrences at his house. The fol- 
lowing is from the Dmly Mail of Sept. 20th, 1850 : 

" JJSTERVIEW WITH SPIRITS. 

" Mr. Editor : Perhaps it will interest your readers if you 
will allow me to recount to them some of the wonders which I 
witnessed last week, in a series of interviews with what are 
claimed to be ' spirits.' On Wednesday evening I very gladly 
accepted an invitation from my friend, Mr. La Boy Sunderland, to 
witness the rappings at his office in Boston. After several gentle- 
men, who, with myself, were thorough unbelievers, had intimately 
examined every part of the room, furniture, &c., we were re- 
quested to form a circle round the table. Mr. Sunderland then 
stated that his daughter, through whom the spirits usually 
responded, was not present, and he should be obliged to put 
several of those around the table in a state of trance, and then see 
if he could get the spirits to communicate through them. This he 
accomplished, and they commenced calling the spirits of their de- 
parted friends. They were soon answered by the ' raps,' which I 
heard distinctly, and which appeared to be produced under the 
table, at different points. I placed my hands upon the table — 
being the only person who touched it at all, and felt the vibrations 
corresponding to the raps. Numerous questions were correctly 
answered. 

" Mr. Sunderland asked the spirit of his departed son, by my 
request, if the spirit of my daughter was present, and was answered 
that it was. This daughter was one at whose death a singular 
phenomenon was witnessed by several persons, and which I only 

*• See an article from Mr. S.'a own pen, signed F., in Spiritual Philoso- 
pher, T. ii., p. 168. Also p. 170. 

INTERVIEW WITH SPIRITS. 215 

allude to to recall it to the memory of tbose who knew of it at 
the time. It was some time before I could muster faith and cour- 
age enough to interrogate somebody who appeared to be nobody. 
I finally asked if the spirit of my daughter was present, and 
would respond to me, and was astonished to hear something 
respond promptly, with a diflFerent sound from any I had hitherto 
heard. I asked her several questions, which I very well knew no 
one present but myself knew how to answer, and was answered 
with uniform correctness. What purported to be the spirit of my 
daughter told me that the halo of light which filled the darkened 
room at the time of her death was spiritual maifestation. 

" On Thursday evening I visited Mr. Sunderland's house in 
Charlestown. Mr. S. was not at home, but his excellent family 
told me that, if I wished to hear the rappings, I could hear them. 
Mr. Sunderland's daughter, through whom the spirits respond, is a 
married lady, and was sitting by the cradle with a young child in 
her arms. 

" After I had examined the cradle, floor, &o., we formed a circle 
around the cradle. Some one asked if the spirits were present, 
and was immediately answered by the raps on the cradle, much 
louder than those I had heard the night before. During the even- 
ing we had many of the manifestations which have so frequently 
been described as having occurred at Eochester, Auburn, New 
Zork city, &c. 

" On Friday I called on Mr. Sunderland, at his office in 
Boston, and expressed a desire to test these things in the daytime. 
He very kindly accompanied me to his house, where he, his 
daughter and myself, seated ourselves around the cradle. After I 
had faithfully examined it, and everything about it, as well as 
everything about the room, the questions and responding com- 
menced. Mr. S. stated previously, however, that he would go into 
another room in the house, if it would be any more satisfactory, 
or to any room in any neighboring house ; but I was satisfied in 
regard to this. I put questions in every possible way, — ques- 

216 MANIFESTATIONS IN BOSTON. 

tions which I had fixed upon as tests, — all of which were promptly 
and correctly answered. 

" Having been placed in communication with what assumed to 
be the spirit of my daughter, I asked her to tell me how old she 
was when she died, and to signify the number when I mentioned 
it. I commenced and called the numbers above and below the 
real one, in every variety of manner, until, at last, calling the real 
one, the answer was made promptly. She also told me how old 
her brother was when he died. These two facts I knew were 
known to no one, within a hundred miles, except myself. Then 
the being who claimed to be the spirit of my daughter, by the 
use of the alphabet, spelled out, ' My father, Ilove you.' I asked 
her if she had any message to send to her mother. She replied 
in the same manner, ' TeU mother I am Mppy.' 

" Mr. Sunderland, being partially deaf,requested the spirit of his 
little son to rap louder. I then saw the cradle move some three 
inches, although no visible hand touched it. Mr. S. asked if his 
son would communicate by sight instead of sound, moving the 
cradle as the means, and was answered that he would. I took up 
the cradle, examined it and the floor in every possible way, with- 
out finding any apparent means by which it could be moved. I 
afterwards saw it move more than fifty times, and once at least 
six inches. 

" Now, as the preacher says, ' with a few remarks I close.' 
And, first, allow me to say that, as the fear or the odium of being 
considered a fanatic will not shock my nerves very much, I do not 
hesitate to say that there was no deception, fraud or trick, about 
the ' rappings ' I witnessed. I think I know Mr. Sunderland and 
his family to be truthful and worthy people ; and I do not believe, 
under the circumstances, that they could have deceived me, if they 
had attempted it. I do not Ictiow that these mysterious responses 
were spiritual ; but to' believe any explanation I have yet heard 
would require a larger tax upon my credulity than it would to 
beli«ve they are what they assume to be, I certainly have no 
objection to urge against the establishment of a telegraphic com- 

REV. WILLIAM M. TEKNALD. MRS. HAYDEN. 217 

munication between those in the body and those out of it ; for I 
have no religious creed, and belong to no party which would be 
likely to suffer from such a communication. It would clash with 
no article of my faith, nor would it effect me unpleasantly in any 
manner. 

"Mr. Sunderland is now perseveringly investigating this subject 
and giving the result of his investigations in his ' Spiritual Philos- 
opher.' He believes his children are all together, — four in the 
body and two out, — and that the latter are around him, touching 
him so that he can feel them, and communicating with him in a 
variety of ways. He says that he knows they thus communicate. 

" A word more. If what has been heard, seen and felt, be 
really produced by departed spirits, I see no reason for attempt- 
ing to build upon it a new system of theology, and for denying the 
truth of the Bible and everything we have heretofore considered 
sacred. ' Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, and see 
whether they be of God.' Kurus Elmer. 

" Springfield, Mass., Sept. 17, 1850." 

During the same month the Boston Pathfinder gave the 
details of a visit to Mr. Sunderland's, in which he folly sustains 
the other witnesses in the statement that there was evidently no 
fraud in the case. Be v. Wm. M. Femald, a Unitarian preacher of 
some note, became a convert from visiting Mr. Sunderland, and 
defended it through some of the daily papers of the city. He also 
wrote a good deal in the " Spiritual Philosopher," and distinguished 
himself as an advocate of Spiritualism, and for the numerous and 
very sudden changes of his opinions in regard to the subject of 
good and evil spirits, &c. 

Like all other places in the country, the number of media 
increased rapidly in Boston, and the manifestations assumed all 
the variety that had attended them elsewhere. Mrs. Hayden, 
wife of Wm. K. Hayden, Esq., editor of the "Star-Spangled Ban- 
ner," became a medium, and for a long time the meetings held at 
Mr. Hayden's were by confidential friends, and were not known to 
19 

218 MANIFESTATIONS IN BOSTON. 

the public. I have now in my possession letters from a distin- 
guished literary man of that city, who used to meet in that circle, 
and, although he is a full believer, it is not yet publicly known. 
He is now the editor of a daily political paper. Mr. Hayden and 
his wife have since made a tour to England, where they made many 
converts to spiritualism, and elicited much discussion on the subject. 

Still later, Rev. John M. Spear, a distinguished philanthropist 
and Universalist clergyman, became a medium for writing and im- 
pressions. Some of his impressions were very remarkable. One 
case, which has already been published, has scarcely a parallel in 
modern times. He was impressed to go to a place some twenty 
miles distant, to see a man who was a total stranger to him. He 
at first resisted the impression, when his hand moved and wrote 
the following : 

"You must go to Abington to-morrow night. You will be 
wanted there. Call on Mr. David Viney. Go with your horse 
and chaise, and leave Boston at two o'clock precisely. That 
will bring you where you will be wanted in season. Go by the 
way of A. Do not fear to do as you are guided. All will be 
well. Tell sister B. I will watch over -you while you are from 
home. She shall see good come of this direction, and will be 
satisfied with it when ypii get home from your . journey. I am 
your friend, and will protect you from all danger, and will lead 
you safely and pleasantly home. David Viney lives in Abing- 
ton. You do not know him. It is not your brother-in-law in H., 
of whom you have been thinking since you have been impressed 
to write this communication. He lives near D. H.'s house. I 
shall impress you again to-morrow to go. Go, — go, — go. 

" Oliver." 

The next day the injunction was repeated, with still more ear- 
nestness and assurance of being wanted there. He finally complied 
and started as directed. On arriving at A., and inquiring for 
Viney, be was told that such a man was living some three miles 
fironf tljgre. The next morjiing he found the man, who was sitting 

REV. JOHN M. SPEAIV. 219 

up, but suffering extremely, with his head and face bound up. 
The conversation very naturally turned on the complaint, and 
while the man was relating how he had suffered with neuralgia, 
and how he had been deprived of sleep for two weeks, Mr. 
Spear's hand was slowly and involuntarily raised to the sick man's 
face, and gently touched him vdth the tips of his fingers near the 
ear. The sick man started suddenly, and, raising his leg from the 
floor with both his hands, exclaimed : " What did you do to my 
leg, sir ? " 

"Nothing at all. I unconsciously touched your face, but can- 
not tell why ; but I certainly did "not touch your leg," said Mr. 
Spear. 

" But I am sure you did," replied Mr. Viney, " for I felt it all 
over me." 

" "Well," said Spear, "I guess it is all right, although there is 
some mystery about it. It is probably all for the best." 

Mr. Yiney then demanded of Mr. Spear who he was, and what 
he came for ; but the only reply was that his ' name was Spear, 
but he could not tell what he came for. Another involuntary 
touch from Mr. S.'s fingers produced another shock in the leg, 
and drove away all the pain. The family and the sick man him- 
self became alarmed, and, becoming sleepy, wished Mr. Spear to 
leave the house, so that he could go to sleep, as he dare not sleep 
while such a mysterious man was in his house. Mr. Spear, hav- 
ing nothing more to do, departed, and the man entirely recovered. 

Many other journeys of a like character were made by Mr. 
Spear with like success, seemingly guided by the healing angels to 
perform these works of goodness and kindness to his fellow-men. 
They certainly look like anything but the works of his Satanic 
Majesty. 

On the other hand, Mr. S. has written some things, claiming to 
be from the spirit of Dr. Eush, which are of the most puerile 
character, partaking almost of the ludicrous. Take for instance 
the following : 

220 MANIFESTATIONS IN BOSTON. 

" In speaking o£ the mortal body, it will be (all things con- 
sidered) wisest to commence at what (looking at all things) may 
be considered the most, or, more strictly speaking, the more im- 
portant part, and that is the head. 

" In the front part, just below the eyes, there is what is gen- 
erally called by the common people, a nose. And here it will be 
perceived are two apartments." * 

This is but a specimen of much that was written through this 
medium, and many other equally honest "media." I do not 
attempt to account for these puerile communications, coming 
through intelligent media, and jfurporting to come from great men. 
I only state the facts for the reflection of those who study the his- 
tory of these remarkable phenomena. 

Among some of the hasty conclusions to which many of the 
over-zealous friends of spiritualism have arrived, none seem to me 
to present a stronger case than that of what was termed the 
"new motive power." The reader will get some idea of its origin 
by the following account which appeared in the Boston " Ne* 
Era," June 29thrl854. The story is certainly a very singular 
one, and should not be varied from the way it was originally told. 
It is as follows : 

" 1. It was announced to Mrs. , by spiritual intelli- 
gence, several months since, that she would become a mother in some 
new sense ; that she would be ' the Mary of a new dispensation.' 
The announcement was given under circumstances the most im- 
pressive, and in connection with a most beautiful and instructive 
vision, in which was strikingly elucidated a most important 
spiritual lesson, namely, the true significance of the cross, as an 
emblem of spiritual advancement. All who were present on the 
occasion were deeply impressed with the superior capacities and 
exalted moral attainments of the intelligences communicating, as 
evidenced by the profound and comprehensive character of their 
teachings. Nevertheless, the prophecy or announcement spoken 

* I/Dotures, Ac. John M. Spear, medium. 

"NEW MOTIVE POWER." ,221 

of, though declared with marked emphasis, and directed to be put 
on record, was not believed to have any peculiar meaning. It 
was thought to refer possibly to the maternal feeling which she 
had felt toward individuals, who had, through her instrumentality, 
been instructed in the truths of the new philosophy. Least of all 
was there the slightest hint that it had any relation whatever to 
the mechanism then constructing at High Rock. No one con- 
nected with that enterprise was present, and nothing was known 
of this declaration by them until it was recalled by the events 
which subsequently transpired. 

" 2.- Previously to this, Mrs. had for some time experi- 
enced: certain sensations and agonies similar to those attendant upon 
gestation. Subsequently these indications gradually increased, 
until they at length became very marked and inexplicable, and 
presented some very singular characteristics. They were sup- 
posed, however, to be at least'partially indicative of disease ; but 
were not imagined to have the remotest connection with either the 
mechanism at High Rock, or with the prophecy which has been 
alluded to. As the crisis approached, a variety of singular 
events, from apparently independent causes (which cannot be nar- 
rated here), seemed to point to some unusual result, though all 
failed to give any person cognizant of them the slightest appre- 
hension of the nature of that result. 

" 3. At length a request came, through the instrumentality of J. 
M. Spear, that on a certain day she would visit the tower at High 
Rock. No one in the flesh — herself least of all — had any con- 
ception of the object of tl^is visit. When there, however (suitable 
preparations having been carefully made by superior direction, 
though their purpose was incomprehensible), she began to experi- 
ence the peculiar and agonizing sensations of parturition, differing 
somewhat from the ordinary experience, inasmuch as the throes 
were internal, and of the spirit rather than of the physical nature, 
but nevertheless quite as uncontrollable, and not less severe than 
those pertaining to the latter. This extraordinary physical phe- 
nomenon continued for about the space of two hours. Its purpose 
19* 

222 MANirESTATIONS IN BOSTON. 

and results were wholly incompreliensible to all but herself ; but 
her own perceptions were clear and distinct that in these agonizing 
throes the most interior and refined elements' of her spiritual 
being were imparted to, and absorbed by, the appropriate portions 
of the mechanism — its minerals having been made peculiarly recep- 
tive by previous chemical processes. This seemed no more absurd 
or unphilosophical than the well-known fact that a gold ring, or 
any other article worn about the person, becomes impregnated to 
a degree with spiritual emanations, or that the elements of one's 
being can be and are imparted to an autograph so fully that the 
character, capacities, &c., may be psychomtrized therefrom. 

" 4. The result of this phenomenon was, that indications of life 
or pulsation .became apparent in the mechanism ; first to her own 
keenly sensitive touch, and soon after to the eyes of all beholders. 
These pulsations continued to increase, under a process, which she 
was impelled to continue for some weeks, precisely analogous to 
that of nursing (for which preparation had previously been made 
in her own organization, while she was in utter ignorance of any 
such design), until at times a very marked and surprising motion 
resulted. 

"5. At every step in these singular transactions, Mrs. 

has been attended by angelic intelligences (whose presence is per- 
ceived by her own interior senses), who have from time to time 
explained the rationale of their proceedings and of her experi- 
ences,.^nd unfolded, in various departments of science, philosophy, 
and morals, principles and truths of the highest practical moment 
to us and to mankind. These teachings have been, to a great ex- 
tent, based upon, and elucidated by, the various experiences con- 
nected with that , mechanism ; and they have been not only pro- 
found and comprehensive, intellectually considered, but of the 
highest, purest, and most elevating moral and spiritual character. 
That these intelligences have infused into her spirit a most beauti- 
ful, harmonizing, celestial influence, has been perceived by all who 
have enjoyed communication with her, and none of these, I feel 

"NEW MOTIVE POWER." 223 

assured, will hesitate to indorse the admission that ' she gets a 
large influx of superior, saving, harmonizing truths.' 

" In order to a proper estimate of the peculiar experiences 
thus described, a large class of correlative physiological and psy- 
chological facts, which cannot be even hinted at here, need to be 
considered by the candid investigator ; but the foregoing state- 
ments are believed to embrace what is sufficient for the present 
purpose, namely, the correction of erroneous statements which 
have gone abroad. 

" With two or three remarks I conclude. 

" 1. As these experiences were wholly unexpected, and unim- 
agined by the subject of them, until they actually transpired, they 
could not have been ' psychologically produced.' Her mind did 
not act either in conjunction with other minds, or independent of 
them, to bring about these results. Theories must conform to 
facts. 

" 2. These experiences were not moulded into the peculiar form 
they took by any previous religious or theological impressions. 
Because, first, no impressions of this peculiar character had ever 
existed ; and whatever notions had once been entertained of the 
miraculous conception of Jesus, had long ago given place to more 
philosophical conclusions. Secondly. No idea of such results had 
ever been formed in the mind, and hence there existed nothing 
which could mould these results. 

" 3. As ' corrupt trees do not bring forth good fruit,' nor ' the 
same fountain send forth bitter waters and sweet,' it is diffi- 
cult to believe that an ' influx of superior, saving, harmonizing 
truths ' will flow from delusive or deceptive sources. 

" 4. Neither Mrs. nor myself can profess to have, as 

yet, any definite conception as to what this ' new-born child,' the 
so-called ' Electrical Motor,' is to be. However ' enthusiastic ' 
or ' extravagant ' may be the expectations of others, we do not 
know that we yet at all comprehend the ultimate designs of the 
intelligences engaged in it. Time will probably solve that matter, 
and we willingly abide the decision. But the incalculable benefits 

224 MANUTESIAl'IONS IN BOSTON. 

which have already accrued to us in the unfoldings of the inte- 
rior principles of physical and human science, and in leading to 
higher and purer moral and spiritual attainments, have over- 
whelmingly compensated for all that it has cost us, whether in 
means or reputation; and this consideration forces upon our 
minds and hearts a conviction of the probability, at least, that 
still further benefit may be realized from the same source. 

" Whatever may be the result, therefore, my position is such 
that neither disappointments nor regrets may ensue ; and the 

friends of Mrs. may be assured that her convictions of 

duty rest upon a basis which neither the opinions nor the ridicule 
of the uninformed can affect, while her spirit is serenely sustained 
against the shafts of calumny and detraction." 

Comment on the subject is hardly necessary. Quite a number 
of persons, of great intelligence, candor and unimpeachable charac- 
ter, fully believed in this second edition of the miraculous con- 
ception and birth, and the most unbounded enthusiasm was mani- 
fested by many. It was denominated " The New Motive Power, 
Physical Saviour, Heaven's Last Best Gift to Man, New Crea- 
tion, The Great Spiritual Kevelation of the Age, The Philosopher's 
Stone, The Art of all Arts, The Science of all Sciences," and 
various other extravagant epithets were applied to this wonderful 
new birth. Like many other productions of persons whose zeal 
outstrips their knowledge, the new-born miracle was not quite 
practical enough to suit this utilitarian age. Notwithstanding the 
labor and pains of parturition at and before its birth, a slight de- 
fect was discoverable. The new motor would not move to any 
purpose ! This was the only drawback on its great benefits to 
mankind. 

The machine itself was constructed at High Kock, Lynn, 
Mass. ; but several of the prominent accoiKheurs were residents 
of Boston, and the record is entitled to a place in the Boston 
chapter. 

Like New York and most other places, especially the large 

THE SPIRIinAL ERA. 225 

cities, the manifestations soon became too general to attempt any 
account of each particular medium, or to particularize the differ- 
ent forms of manifestations. The Spiritucd Era, a weekly paper, 
has thus far proved one of the most efficient publications among 
the numerous papers that have, from time to time, been started 
on this subject, and most of wljiich have ceased for want of sup- 
port. Public meetings are regularly held in Boston, and a read- 
ing-room is provided for strangers who may visit the city and are 
interested in the subject. The believers are numbered by thou- 
sands. 

CHAPTER X. 

MANIFESTATIONS IN PEOTIDENCE, B. I. — EARIY MANIFESTATIONS — IMPOB- 

TANT PHYSICAL lUNIFESTATIONS IN PKESENOE OF MKS. WlLTiTm, MEDIUM 

STATEMENT OF " D. JJ. H." — FANATICISM — LETTERS OP MRS. SARAH 
HELEN WHITMAN. 

The first effort to obtain manifestations in Providence was in 
September, 1850. It was at the house of D. B. Harris, and 
there were present Mrs. Sarah Helen Whitman, Clement Webster 
(editor of the Daily Post), Eev. Mr. Davis, Mrs. E. M. C. Ca- 
pron, E. W. Capron, Mr. and Mrs. Harris of Providence, and Wil- 
liam Fishbough, of Williamsburg, N. Y. The company formed a 
circle, and endeavored to get the sounds, or sound demonstrations 
of spiritual presence. This attempt was not successful, or at 
least no proof of any such influence was presented to the company, 
although one or two thought they felt the pressure as of hands 
upon them, as is frequently the case with persons who are in the 
circle when spirits are communicating. 

Towards the end of October of the same year, Mrs. Johnson, 
a sister of Mr. Webster, visited Mr. Sunderland in Boston, and 
had a long and interesting communication spelled out, which the 
spirits directed to be published in the Providence Post, at the 
same time promising that they would make demonstrations to Mr. 
W. while preparing the article for the press. Of this Mr. Web- 
ster was no way sanguine. The communications purported to 
come from their father. 

Mr. Webster obeyed the directions in regard to the article, 
and, while engaged in preparing it, he averred that faint but dis- 
tinct sounds were heard on his writing-table. They were quite 

EARLY MANIFESTATIONS. 227 

loud while his arm rested on the table, but perfectly distinct when 
his arm did not rest on the table at all. The sounds were re- 
peated at intervals of a few minutes until the article was finished. 

Mrs. J. (Mr. Webster's sister) soon after returned from Bos- 
ton, much interested in the subject, and being acquainted with a 
young girl, who was susceptible of mesmeric influence, and of the 
temperament most likely to become a medium, she invited her to 
spend the evening at the house of' Mr. Webster, without inform- 
ing her that she hoped to find her a medium. 

A circle was formed ; the " raps " were soon heard on the table 
where the girl was seated. Various questions were asked, to 
which intelligent answers were given. On asking if there was a 
medium present, a prompt affirmative was received, and, on call- 
ing the alphabet, " Harriet " was spelled out. The girl was much 
annoyed at the announcement, and it was with difficulty that she 
could be prevailed upon to remain in the house. After much 
persuasion, however, she was induced to remain, and became more 
quiet, and the company continued their investigations till near 
midnight. This girl's name was Harriet Thorp, who was the first 
medium known in Providence. 

Mr. Webster was for a long time a partial medium, or was, 
according to his own account, often visited by the sounds when 
entirely alone, and they were often heard on his hat as he was 
walking through the street. Aftisr a time they ceased with him, 
and he became sceptical as to their source, though not as to the 
facts of the occurrences. 

From this time circles were held almost daily in different fam- 
ilies, and mediums were rapidly developed. The next medium 
known to the public was Mrs. Anna A. Wilbur, wife of Mr. A. 
S. Wilbur, a respectable auctioneer. So far as I have been able 
to ascertain, she was one of the best and most reliable mediums 
known in Providence. 

The following communication was published in the Daily Post, 
and will give an idea of what was going forward in the spiritual 

228 MANIJESTATIONS IN PROVIDENCE, K. I. 

manifestations. It was written by D. B. Harris, at whose house 
many of the manifestations Occurred. 

" During the last three or four months I have been, as often as 
three evenings in each week, to witness what are popularly termed 
the ' spirit rappings.' I have heard these mysterious sounds, and 
seen articles of furniture moved about the room, in the presence 
of some sis or eight mediums, in various sections of the city. I 
have witnessed many true and beautiful, and some erroneous and 
ludicrous, responses to questions propounded by visitors, and once 
or twice have been startled by some sudden and unexpected, 
though perfectly harmless, demonstrations. 

" I have never thought it expedient, before, to make a statement 
through the press of the many unmistakable facts I have observed, 
or the conclusions I have drawn from them. But having recently 
been favored with some manifestations which transcended, by a 
few degrees, the extraordinary, I think your readers will be in- 
terested in a brief statement of them. 

" The medium through whom the following strange demonstra- 
tions were received is an intelligent marrie^ lady living on the 
west side of the river.* She had been obliged, on account of 
ill-health, to keep her room for the last two or three weeks, and 
was not able to leave it on Sunday evening last, when I called to 
see her. She was in a room adjoining that in which three per- 
sons beside myself were seated, the door communicating with hers 
being open. Without leaving our seats we requested the spirits 
to rap ; and they did rap promptly, and so loud that they might 
have been heard a hundred yards from the foot-board of the bed 
on which they were made. We then went into the room, closed 
the door so as to exclude the light, stood with our backs against 
the foot-board, and asked the spirits to strike or touch us. The 
raps came heavy and fast on the board against which we leaned, 
and the bed was pushed strongly against us three or four times. 

* Mrs. Anna A. Wilbur. 

PHYSICAL MANIFESTATIONS. 229 

Th.e rapping then ceased, and we heard a sound resembling the 
flapping of a small bird's wings upon the white counterpane of 
the bed. Then the counterpane was drawn, by some invisible 
agency, entirely off the bed, rolled up into a heap, and laid four 
feet off upon the floor. We then replaced the counterpane, and 
requested it to be thrown on a chair at the head of the bed. 
This was instantly doijje. We repeated this experiment some six 
or eight times. A chair-cushion, placed upon the foot of the bed, 
was repeatedly thrown upon the chair which stood at the head, 
or upon the floor. We next placed a book upon the bed, and 
asked the spirits to open it. This was also done on the instant, 
and was repeated several times, the leaves rustling as if turned 
by the thumb. The book was then thrown from the bed, and 
lodged on the bureau, some five feet distant. It was then hurled, 
at our request, so violently against the door, that, if the lat- 
ter had been made of plate glass, the book would have gone 
through it. 

" Our next experiment was with a palm-leaf fan. We placed 
the fan on the bed, and desired the spirits to fan us. The fan 
was immediately raised up, brought close to oar faces, and moved 
rapidly up and down, as if moved by a strong arm. This experi- 
ment we tried twice. A chair, which we laid upon the bed, was 
twice set down on the floor. We next put a broom in the same 
place, and asked the spirits to touch or strike us with it. They 
chose to do the latter. They smote us in right down earnest, 
striking us over the head and shoulders till we had enough of it. 
We then desired them to come into immediate contact with us — 
to touch or strike us with their hands, if they had any. We all 
sat a few minutes, holding each other by the hands, and then the 
blows came, much to our gratification and delight. They fell 
upon our backs and shoulders, and seemed something like those 
which might be made with an ordinary handkerchief, held by the 
four corners. This was the crowning experiment. It was more 
than we expected to get, although the spirits had* promised it 

months before. 

20 

230 MANIFESTATIONS IN PROVIDENCE, R. I. 

" Now, Mr. Editor, I solemnly assure your readers that the 
above is nothing more than a very brief statement of facts, in the 
order in which they occurred. Although there was but a dim 
twilight in the room, yet it was sufficiently light to see the out- 
lines of material forms. We saw the bed more distinctly than 
other objects, it being white. We saw each other ; we saw the 
fan, the broom, the book ; and there is tnot the least possible 
chance for mistake or deception. And, more than all, the four 
persons present knew each other to be truthful and sincere, and 
indisposed to, as well as incapable of, performing any kind of 
trick in legerdemain. B. B. H." 

The editor of the Post (Mr. Webster), in replying to some 
strictures on the manifestations made by a correspondent, says : 
- " In the presence of the medium to which we referred in the arti- 
cle from which he (the correspondent) has quoted, we have seen 
the table moved, without the medium's hands resting upon it, 
scores of times, and it has been seen by some of the most critical 
and sceptical of our citizens — by eminent lawyers, skilful 
mechanics, shrewd business men, and, indeed, by every class in 
the community. If 'P.' wants to see it done, why don't he go 
where we have advised him to, and not cavil about its not being 
done somewhere else ? " 

Mr. Webster does not assert that he believes them spiritual, 
but, in this article and others, he defends the mediums, as a class, 
from the charge of imposition and deception. 

Buring my residence in Providence, which commenced some 
time previous to the manifestations being heard there, and con- 
tinued for two years, I had frequent opportunity to witness the 
dijBferent manifestations. I found them essentially the same as 
those in western New York. I obtained the same signal, on 
some occasions, that had been given as my father's, in Rochester, 
two years before. The first time this occurred was at a sitting 
where Miss Thorp was the medium. Mrs. Sarah Helen Whit- 
man, C. Webster and others, were present. I asked for the sig- 

ENTHUSIASTIC SPIRITUALISTS. 231 

nal of my father, ■which no one else in the room had ever heard 
or had any idea of, as I had been but a short time in Providence 
and had but a very slight acquaintance with any of the company. 
The signal was given correctly. Wishing to make a still stronger 
test, if possible, I asked for the other signal he sometimes gave. 
Immediately there came a sound as of sawing and planing 
boards, apparently under the centre of the table and against the 
top. I had lately been informed of some diflSiculty in regard to 
the title to a certain house and lot, which we were interested in, in 
a distant city, and it had caused me no little uneasiness ; but no 
other person in Providence knew one word about it, as I had 
never mentioned it. On this occasion what purported to be the 
spirit of my father spelled out the following : " You have been 
much troubled about the lot, but it will all come out right." In 
some three or four days I received a letter saying that all was 
right in regard to the matter. This transaction was exactly on a 
parallel with those witnessed by hundreds in other places. 

In Providence there was an unusual number of fanatics on the 
subject of spiritualism, and I observed that the fanaticism took 
mostly a religious turn, and was exhibited by persons who had 
been over-zealous in religious enthusiasm. 

A friend in that city has kindly furnished me with the notes 
of a visit he, in company with a well-known literary lady, made 
to a family of these enthusiastic spiritualists. I insert it as a 
specimen of the folly of the early fanaticism of spiritualism. 

" Present some dozen persons, with long faces, who spoke in 
whispers. Joseph, the medium, was blindfolded, a piece of chalk 
put into his hand, and seated before a table painted black. Soon 
his hand began to move with great violence, and in a few minutes 
he wrote with great rapidity on the table. Generally his lines 
ran into each other, so that, at the conclusion of the sentence or 
communication, there was nothing distinguishable but a mass of 
chalk. He would then read or repeat what the spirit had written. 
Each sentence was taken down by a scribe for future meditation. 

232 MANIFESTATIONS IN PKOVIDENCE, K. I. 

Most of the comiQunicatioDS purported to come from the Saviour. 
The first sentence was as follows, and from the Saviour : 
' I see you all — do not start — 
God from his children never will depart.' 
" Then followed a communication in prose, as follows : ' Come 
to me all, for I am God, the Father Almighty.' 
" Spirit. ' Yes, the time will come 

When we will be united in one.' 
" L. (one of the circle.) ' That will be a glorious time, Mr.P.' 
" Spirit. ' Yes, my son, that will be. 

And stranger things you will see.' 
" Spirit. ' Kaise your thoughts to God on high. 

For he has the power ' — 
(The rhyme would n't come that time.) 
" Spirit. ' And if you will come to me. 
Stranger things you shall see. 
Then, like an angel, soar on high, 
To seek your God in heaven.' 
" Mrs. M. remarked, ' How beautiful ! ' 
" Spirit. ' You must trust in me, for I am the one to guide you.' 
"Mr.L. 'That 'sit.' 
" Spirit. ' Blessed are those that seek me in truth. 

For I have a power to heal all your wounds.' 
" Mr. H. ' I never met where there was such a heavenly influ- 
ence on me as there is here this evening.' 

" The spirit then drew something like a box, with a cross on 
the top of it, and wrote beneath, ' The altar of your God.' Then 
a tree, and wrote beneath, ' The tree of life,' These, the medium 
informed us, were done by Dr. Franklin. 
" Spirit of the Saviour. 

' Then call on me, 
And you shall see. 

That the power of God comes down free.' 
" Mr. L. ' Without money and without price.' - 
" Spirit. ' Your prayers are registered in the Book of Heaven : 
You can come in at the hour of eleven.' 

ENTHUSIASTIC SPIRITUALISTS. 233 

" Spirit. ' These things you shall see, for I have said in the 
Bible that strange things should come to pass. But these things 
are not strange for those who have a mind for God.' 

" Spirit. ' I am Christ, who was crucified, who died and bled 
for you. 

Then in turn give me all your heart, 
For Christ from goodness never will depart.' 
" Spirit. ' Then to all that heed. 

Your sorrows shall not make your hearts bleed.' 
" Spirit of Mr. L.'s father. 

' My sons, the altar shall be finished, and reveal 
The wounded hearts which no mortal on earth can heal.' 
•' Same Spirit. ' You wish me to explain — 
So I will. 
So be still. 
And I- will 
In time.' 
" Spirit of tlie Saviour. 'Have you ever seen these things as 
you all do now ? ' 

" The medium drew a cross with a scratch around it, and wrote 
beneath, ' The glory of God.' 
" Spirit of the Saviour. 

' You can be pure — that will attract 
The invisible power that will never go back. 
It continues to rap all over the world. 
And no being has power to control.' 
" Spirit. ' To ye poets, who love to hear. 

Give me your hearty, and do not fear. 
Compose of heaven, not of earth, 
For there are things will give ye mirth.' 
" Mrs. M. ' Is n't it beautiful ? ' 
" Spirit. ' Keep up your hearts, and do not sink, 

For you are on a heavenly brink.' 
" Mr. H. ' We must be on the verge of time.' 
20* 

234 MANIFESTATIONS IN PROVIDENCE, B. I. 

" Spirit. ' The stars of heaven do shine like the pure hearts of 
our poets.' 

" Mr. H. ' Have you not had an impression of a spiritual 
diamond on Joseph's breast? There is a bright diamond shining 
there.' 

" Spirit. ' Be ye all prepared in mind, 

For God may appear in a robe of light.' 

" Mrs. M. ' I wish we might see something to-night.' 

" Mr. L. ' We are not all prepared.' 

" Spirit. ' Be ye of open hearts to receive, and I will reveal to 
you unseen wonders.' 

" Mr. L. ' You may be assured, my friends, that this is the 
second coming of Christ.' " 

Eeligious cant and fanaticism arc exhibited in the whole pro- 
ceedings so exactly portrayed above. It may be a solution of 
the poetical turn given to the communications, that two of 
the spectators were known as poets of some eminence. This cir- 
cle seldom had any communications from any less source than the 
" Saviour," or the apostles ; but it was a singular fact that all the 
communications from this source were of the above puerile char- 
acter, and unworthy of the talents of a child of half-a-dozen 
years. What the true solution of such occurrences is, I will not 
undertake to say, more than to suggest that a circle of fanatical 
spirits in the flesh would, by the laws of affinity, attract the same 
class out of the flesh ; hence such folly, of which this is by no 
means a rare sample. I have never known an instance where a 
medium or circle claimed to have all the great dignitaries of 
church and state, and them only, for their instructors, that the 
communications did not consist of the most senseless twaddle, full 
of ranting and sheer nonsense. Whereas the mediums having a 
strong feeling of self-respect and common-sense, making no pre- 
tensions to being so highly favored, get some of the most beautiful 
and important demonstrations which have been given to the world. 

Among the friends of the spiritual cause in Providence no one 
has exhibited more firmness, and none more readiness to defend 

,MBS. SAKAH H. WHITMAN. 235 

in public and in private the spiritual theory of these manifesta- 
tions, than Mrs. Sarah Helen Whitman, the poetess. We cannot 
forbear, in this connection, saying a word as to her character, in 
this respect. It too often happens that a man or woman, who is: 
a genius, a poet, is so tinctured with imagination, and so wholly 
governed by fancy, that they are not good judges of plain com- 
mon-sense matters of fact. In Mrs. Whitman's case it is far 
different. She is not only a poet, but a sound philosopher and 
reasoner. Her conversation and her prose writing have a strength 
and solidity about them, which characterize very few persons, male 
or female, whether they soar, like her, into the beautiful regions 
of fancy, or continually plod on in their plain prosy reasoning. 
She always writes with vigor when reasoning on any subject, and 
does not forget to fortify herself with a strong array of facts. The 
following is an extract of one of her letters to Mr. Brittan, editor 
of the Spiriticai Telegraph. It has so much of the historical in it 
that nothing could be more appropriate to this place : 

" PnovrDENOE, July S, 1852. 
" S. B. Brtttan — Dear Sir : I learn with pleasure through 
your paper, and from other reliable sources, that manifestations 
of spiritual force and spiritual influence are attracting increasing 
attention from intelligent and enlightened observers in various 
parts of the country. In an able and highly complimentary re- 
view of Baron Keichenbach's work on Dynamics, published in the 
American Review for April, it is intimated that the great chemist 
is about to investigate the phenomena of electrical sounds heard 
in the presence of spiritual mediums, believing them to be in some 
way connected with the manifestations of odic light and odic force, 
in which he has made such important discoveries. In our part 
of the country public opinion is, I think, greatly changed in rela- 
tion to the spiritual phenomena within the last year. I meet with 
comparatively few persons now who are disposed to treat the sub- 
ject with levity. Much valuable testimony is rendered by persons 
who do not know what to make of the facts, and who arc unwilling 
to refer them to a spiritual influence. 

236 MANIFESTATIONS IN PEOVIDBNCE, ,E. I. 

" One evening, not long since, I was at a circle formed for 
investigation, when one of our most eminent physicians, who has 
long been a candid and dispassionate observer of the new phe- 
nomena, entered the room accompanied by a distinguished surgeon, 
who had often remonstrated with his friend for giving heed to this 
ridiculous imposture, for such he had assumed it to be. Knowing 
the scepticism of this gentleman, I was surprised to see him seat 
himself at flie table with an air of grave and earnest attention. 
Presently I heard him inquire for a signal from some anonymous 
friend, which, after a little delay, was, as he said, correctly given. 
On expressing my surprise to find him at an inquiry meeting of 
this character, he remarked that he had as yet arrived at no opin- 
ion on the subject, but that his attention had been arrested by 
some recent facts in his experience, which had completely baffled 
his philosophy. He had a short time before consented to accom- 
pany his friend, Dr. C ,* to one of these spiritual reunions, 

in the hope of detecting the imposture, or in some other way solv- 
ing the mystery without a recourse to the theory of supernatural 
agency. On this occasion he had received such evidence of the 
intervention of unknown power and intelligence, as to excite a 
lively interest in the subject, and induce him to pursue the inves- 
tigation. J F S , Esq., t the ex-senator, has for 

more than a year been a firm believer and fearless assertor of 
his belief in these wonderful truths. His experience in the mat- 
ter equals anything I have yet seen recorded. He is an able 
politician, and a man of such well-known shrewdness and sagacity 
in worldly affairs, that his authority, to a certain class of minds, 
carries with it immense weight. He believes that the moral influ- 
ence of these new experiences is in the highest degree ennobling 
and refining. He has made the subject a study, and the assur- 
ance acquired by a patient and unwearied examination of facts 
renders him indifierent to any temporary imputation of credulity 
or infatuation to which he may be subjected. There are few men 

* Dr. George Capron. t Hon. Jas. F. Simmons, Ex. U. S. Senator. 

MES. SARAH n. WUITMAN. 237 

of hia class who would haTe the courage to speak as openly and 
unreservedly as he has done. Clergymen are, for the most part, 
rather shy of the subject, as are in general all the more prudential 
and conventional sort of people. 

" ' The conventional habits of Society,' says Dr. Gregory, ' make 
us all more or less hypocrites. Men cannot yet worship truth as 
the best knowledge.' One or two distinguished clergymen of my 
acquaintance do not hesitate to avow their interest in" the subject. 
An evangelical divine — a dignitary of the Episcopal church — 
came recently to Providence, expressly to attend a circle formed 
for investigation. He was much perplexed by the occurrences of 
the evening. Not many days ago I was conversing with a lady . 
of superior intelligence and refinement, the wife of a Unitarian 
clergyman, then on a visit to our city. In referring to the recent 
death of a beloved relative, she spoke with such cheerful tranquil- 
lity, that I was induced to ask her if she was a believer in the fact 
of spiritual intercourse as indicated in the wonderful manifesta- 
tions of the day. She did not immediately answer me, and I 
began to fear, from, her silence, that my question was displeasing 
to her ; when she replied, that although the subject was one on 
which she had seldom spoken, she had, in her own family circle, 
received evidences of the truth of these things, so dear and sacred 
to them, that they had left no room for doubt in the hearts of 
those to whom they were accorded. She informed me that she 
had experienced such serenity of soul, so divine a consolation, in 
the assurance thus obtained of the tender love and sympathy of 
her departed friends, and of a progressive existence beyond the 
grave, that, in the midst of many trials, her heart had been filled 
with devout hope and grateful adoration. 

" I read with much interest the letters on Mesmeric Phenom- 
ena, published in some late numbers of the Telegraph. ' We are,' 
says Dr. Ashburnham, in his preface to Eeichenbach, ' but at the 
commencement of the wonders of clairvoyance, and are in no posi- 
tion to estimate the great fund of new truths that, by means of its 
cultivated agency, are in store for us. The researches into odic 

238 MANIFESTATIONS IN PKOVIDENCB, E. I. 

light, by the, baron, do not yet appear to belong immediately to 
cMi^oyance, and yet the links which connect these inquiries are 
not far off. Keichenbach's researches are but the commencement 
of a vast number of researches yet to be made, that will sooner or 
later establish the relations of light to the phenomena of the human 
mind,' — I should rather have said to the soul or life-principle. If 
I am not mistaken, Prof Bush conceived the idea of this relation 
before the facts of mesmerism had received much attention in this 
country. He introduced it, I think, in a course of lectures on the 
Mosaic records, and sought to illustrate it by reference to certain 
luminous appearances seen by the seers and clairvoyants of the 
olden time. I remember that, while he was delivering these lec- 
tures in our city, I received from Dr. Wm. Channing, of New 
York, a copy of the first English edition of Townshend's ' Facts in 
Mesmerism.' There were at the time but three copies of the work 
in the country. 

" Thinking Townshend's work might be interesting to Professor 
Bush, as reflecting light on the theory which he had advanced in 
his lectures, I lent him the volume, in which he became deeply 
interested. I believe this was his first introduction to the subject 
of mesmerism, which he has since so ably treated in its connection 
with Swedenborgianism. Some interesting facts on the subject 
of these luminous appearances, as connected with the human brain, 
are to be found in a series of articles published in the Dublin 
University MagaziTw, under the general head of ' Miscellanae 
Mystica.' They commenced, I think, in the volume for eighteen 
hundred forty-five, and were continued at intervals for several 
years. They contain some of the most remarkable physiological 
and psychical facts to be met with in any English or American 
work of the day. They are interesting as jjreceding by several 
years and remotely suggesting a philosophy of death and of the 
soul's transfiguration, similar to that so beautifully developed in 
one of Mr. Davis' recent works. The idea of an existing spirit- 
ual body enshrined within, and veiled by the material, has long 
attracted my attention. Dr. John Garth Wilkinson, the author 

MRS. SARAH n. WHITMAN. 239 

of the life of Swendonboi-g, and the translator of his scientific 
works, in his admirable treatise on ' The Human Body in its Con- 
nection with Man,' rejecting the sceptical theories of the more 
eminent physiologists of France, has boldly assumed, and most 
ingeniously illustrated, the idea of a spiritual body, infolded with- 
in and controlling the material. ' Could we,' he says, ' behold an 
apparition of the nervous spirit, waving and sweeping through the 
curves of the body, we should see that there are motions and 
mechanisms which transcend the mere external likeness and hab- 
itation of life, and should know, by solemn 'experiencej that our 
organization is an imperishable truth that derides the grave of 
the body.' 

"'We also afl£rm,' says Wilkinson, 'a nerve-spirit of the human 
race which is not man, but God in man ; a veritable revelation or 
word, a genuine influx. Man is in the leading-strings of God and 
Nature, and what is greater than himself, to the end of his career. 
It is said, in Psalms, that we are God's temples, and therefore the 
native land of hope, and the arena of miracles. Our pontiffs say 
that the age of miracles is past, but no New Testament ever told 
them so. Christianity, as we read it, was the institution of mira- 
cles as in the order of nature.' The author also hints at a scien- 
tific theory of the influx of ideas from other men, ' visible and 
invisible,' as an account of the outward supplies of life. ' It 
seems,' he says, ' indeed remarkable, that the influence of the veg- 
etable world upon climate, and of electricity upon the atmosphere, 
should be universally admitted, and no influence from the human 
world of a similar, but higher kind, be suspected. But the time 
is not yet for these and similar questions ; they are, however, as 
doves which float already in the poetic air, and the dry land of 
science is about to appear, on which they can alight.' 

" I have just heard of some interesting facts in connection with 
the strange and beautiful truths which have so enlarged the per- 
spective of the future, and made the present rich with significance 
and hope ; perhaps I may communicate them to you in a future 
letter. " Your friend, 

" Sakah H. Whitman." 

240 MANIFESTATIONS IN PROVIDENCE, K. I. 

The following" is an extract from a letter, by the same writer, to 
Mr. Greeley, editor of the New York Tribune : 

" An eminent clergyman of the Episcopal church said, not many 
days ago, to one of his communicants, who had unwittingly become 
a medium, ' When I talked with you, a year since, in relation to 
this matter, I was disposed to think that the whole thing might 
be resolved into a combination of mesmeric influence, imposition, 
collusion and credulity ; now I am constrained to adopt a very 
disagreeable alternative, and to believe that it is a device of the 
arch-enemy.' 

" As a sign of the times, I received yesterday from our friend 
Bronson Alcott, the eloquent Platonist of Concord, the prospectus 
of a course of lectures, the Dasmon, — using the word, I trust, in 
the good old Socratic sense, as A term for spiritual or immortal 
natures. Is it not Emerson that says, 

' Close, close above our heads 
The potent plain of Daemons spreads ; 
Stands to each human soul his own. 
For watch, and ward, and furtherance. 
***** 

* Sometimes the airy synod bends. 
And the mighty choir descends, 
And the brains of men thenceforth 
Teem with unaccustomed thoughts. 

" These lines, or something like them, I think, are in a poem on 
' The DEBmonic and Celestial Loves,' in which the word Daemon 
is applied to spiritual intelligences intermediate between merely 
human and purely celestial natures. 

" I learn by a paragraph in a late number of the Tribune, and 
also through various private sources, that experiments in what is 
regarded as the operation of' electric forces on matter, are becom- 
ing quite frequent among the curious. The theory of ' detached, 
vitalized electricity,' as propounded by Drs. Taylor, Eichmond, 
and others, has many adherents. ' Before we erect an altar to 

MRS. SAEAU 11. WHITMAN. 241 

this unknown God,' says one of the ablest writers on the new 
manifestations, ' it would be well carefully to test the rationality 
of our theory.' A very erudite and valuable work on 'The 
Spiritual Medium,' with the Greek title ' To Daimonion,' has 
been lately published, attributing all the mysterious phenomena 
of the present day to the abnormal excitement of the nervous 
principle, an agent intermediate between mind and matter, which 
may, indeed, be powerfully wrought upon by minds in the body, 
but which, since the days^of the apostles, has been hermetically 
sealed to the influence of all disembodied and spiritual intelli- 
gences. He accepts these wonders, because they rest on unim- 
peachable authority, but ascribes all to 'natural causes,' unmindful 
that a close and thoughtful study of natural science inevitably 
introduces the student into the domain of spiritual and occult 
forces. ' That which God has joined, can no man put asunder.' 
The author quotes largely from the ancients, and cites many 
learned authorities, which, however, often prove too much for his 
theory. He has brought together many valuable facts, but throws 
no new light on them by his speculations. He admits that the 
thoughts of absent persons seem often transmitted through the 
medium, but doubts if they be really so transmitted. He con- 
fesses to fears and trepidations, and his fears evidently falsify the 
report of his reason. He assumes that it is ' sinful and danger- 
ous to transcend the established sources of knowledge (?) granted 
us by our Creator — to get out of the path in which he has made 
us to walk.' He says, ' Let us leave these investigations to men 
trained to the work. Let a Pliny, an Agassiz, press forward to 
view this agitated Vesuvius, ere we trust our own feet on the 
quivering crust ! It may be that even they will peril themselves 
in the attempt. Certainly we shall peril ourselves.' 

"The author's whole argument is a special plea for the authority 
of the Bible, not only as the great central light, but as the only 
light that God ever did, or ever loill suffer to shine on his 
children. Forgetting ' that Light that lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world ' — that influence of the Spirit which 
21 

242 MANIFESTATIONS IN PROVIDENCE, B. I. 

shall yet be 'poured out on all nations,' — lie assumes that all 
' knowledge of the Spiritual World, of God, and of the prepara- 
tion we need for a future existence, must be gained, if gained at 
all, from sources outside of ourselves, from supernatural revela- 
tion,' — by which he means exclusively the revelations recorded 
in the Bible. ' All our personal knowledge,' he affirms, ' are 
the observation of material things by the senses, and the intui- 
tions or deductions of the reason as to spiritual things.' In sup- 
port of this materialistic philosophy, which would limit the 
powers of the soul to the observation and the understanding, he 
cites Plato, as reported in » Lectures on Theology, by Gr. C. 
Knapp, D. D., translated from the German by E.ev. Leonard 
Woods, Jr.' But if we, too, may be permitted to cite Plato, we 
would quote his beautiful creed, ' The world is good in a state of 
becoming.' Could we bear in mind this sublime truth, we should 
not so readily limit the powers of Nature and of the human soul 
to any fixed or arbitrary standard. 

" I would not undervalue the position of the men who regard 
these things with distrust and awe. Caution and calm self-pos- 
session are imperatively called for. Let the timid stand back and 
wait till the path is made smooth for their feet. For me, I 
would make many a costly sacrifice — I would peril all but faith 
in God and ' the fellowship of the Holy Ghost,' to gain a knowl- 
edge of the life that lies beyond the dark valley ; and this, not so 
much for the satisfaction of my own soul's thirst, as for the deso- 
late and doubting hearts that are ' without God and without hope 
in the world ' — they to whom the soul's future exists only as 

' A wild weird clime, 
Out of space — out of time.' 

But to me these experiences, so far from exercising a disturbing 
influence, have been fraught with benignity and beauty; they 
have taught me the great truth that a life beyond the grave is 
not merely a life of ecstatic reverie and devout abstraction ; that 
it is a)sp a life of development, of progress, of tender human 

MKS. SARAH H. WHITMAN. 248 

charities, of enlarged sympathies, of increasing susceptibilities to 
beauty and to love ; that it strengthens all inherent affinities, all 
pure and lofty relations of soul with soul. I have received from 
them the confirmation of every devout hope, of every heaven- 
ward aspiration. 

"Slinds predisposed to excitement, unaccustomed to reflect on 
the mysteries of life, and unsettled in their religious faith, will 
doubtless be thrown into confusion by these new truths. There 
are victims to every new discovery — every new conquest of the 
human mind. Hundreds of lives are yearly sacrificed through 
the application of steam-power to Marine and inland transporta- 
tion. Through the introduction of the various improvements in 
machinery and the mechanic arts, thousands are thrown out of 
employment, and die of poverty and starvation. 

" California was not settled without loss and danger. Many vic- 
tims lie at the foot of her golden mountains, and line the banks 
of her opulent rivers. The great reformers in science and reli- 
gion thought life and liberty of little moment when weighed in a 
balance with the truths they were born to utter. And shall we, 
to whom the veil is at last lifted — we, to whom the children of 
another sphere descend with messages of peace and love — shall 
we falter because some temporary evil attends the unfolding of 
this new dispensation ? Shall the pale horse of Death be over- 
thrown — shall ' the drear white steed ' be quelled without a 
conflict ? 

"The manifestations of our day are not fortuitous and abnormal. 
They indicate a law, to which by patient research we shall yet 
attain. God has not introduced phantasms into his universe to 
mislead and beguile us. All that exists by his permission is con- 
trolled by his providence. We must endeavor to distinguish 
between the use and the abuse of these mysterious agencies. An 
enlargement of the domain of thought or action always implies 
new responsibilities, and demands higher virtues from him who 
would use them wisely and beneficently. 

" New views of Nature are opening to us — wonderful glimpses 

244 MANIFESTATIONS IN PllOTIDENCiB, K. I. 

of her modes and methods of process and development. On one 
hand the marvel and the mystery of matter ia inciting to more 
accurate and curious researches in the department of physical 
science. On the other, the occult psychical energies that lie 
folded up within us are pointing to a rich and unexplored domain 
of our mysterious inner life ; and the knowledge of this winged, 
expansive nature, that has so long lain dimly dreaming within its 
chrysalis, is revealed to us pecisely at the epoch when the rapid 
process of physical science threatened to banish the last faint ves- 
tiges of our faith in spiritual causation and spiritual influence. 

" The mysterious phenomena of the present day came to us 
unsought and unlocked for. Immersed in materialism, and in the 
hurry and tumult of actual life, we are constrained to pause and 
regard with reverence and attention the evidence of a spiritual 
existence and an immortal destiny which are accorded to us. No 
partial result of observation or experience can decide for us the 
aim and tendency of this marvellous dispensation. We await the 
unfolding of God's benignant purpose in serenity and hope. 

" You may use, at your own discretion, what I have written. 
Your friend, Sarah Helen Whitman." 

The following letter from her, or part of a letter, gives some im- 
portant facts, which have been widely commented upon, from the 
prominence of the distinguished gentleman who was making the 
investigations. All who know Mr. Simmons, either as a public 
or private citizen — as a Senator in Congress, or a quiet business 
man of Providence — know him as a shrewd and sagacious man, 
who has keen penetration* and sound judgment to aid him in the 
investigation of any subject, however novel or seemingly mar- 
vellous. 

" Dear Sir : I have had no conversation with Mr. Simmons 
on the subject of your note until to-day. I took an early oppor- 
tunity of acquainting him with its contents, and this morning he 
called on me to say that he was perfectly willing to impart to 
ycu the particulars of his experience in relation to the mysterious 

PHENOMENON OF SPIEIT-WKITINa OBSERVED. 245 

writing performed under his very eyes in broad daylight, by an 
invisible agent. In the fall of 1850, several messages were tele- 
graphed to Mrs. Simmons through the electric sounds, purporting 
to come from her step-son, James D. Simmons, who died some 
weeks before in California ! 

" The messages were calculated to stimulate curiosity, and lead 
to an attentive observation of the phenomena. Mrs. S., having 
heard that messages in the hand-writing of deceased persons were 
sometimes written through the same medium, asked if her son 
would give her this evidence. She was informed (through the 
sounds) that the attempt should be made, and was directed to 
place a slip of paper in a certain drawer at the house of the me- 
dium, and to lay beside it her own pencil, which had been given 
her by the deceased. Weeks passed on, and, although frequent 
inquiries were made, no writing was found on the paper. 

" Mrs. Simmons, happening to call at the house one day, 
accompanied by her husband, made the usual inquiry, and received 
the usual answer. The drawer had been opened not two hours 
before, and nothing was seen in it but the pencil lying on the 
blank paper. At the suggestion of Mrs. S., however, another 
investigation was made, and on the paper were now found a few 
pencilled lines, resembling the hand-writing of the deceased, but 
not so closely as to satisfy the mother's doubts. Mrs. Simmons 
handed the paper to her husband. He thought there was a slight 
resemblance, but should probably not have remarked it had thu 
writing been casu.vly presented to him. Had the signature been 
given him he should at once have decided on the resemblance. 
He proposed, if the spirit of his son were indeed present, as 
alphabetical communications, received through the sounds, affirmed 
him to be, that he should then and there affix his signature to the 
suspicious document. 

" In order to facilitate the operation, Mr. S. placed the closed ' 
points of a pair of scissors in the hands of the medium, and 
dropped his pencil through one of the rings or bows, the paper 
being placed beneath. Her hand presently began to tremble, and 
21* 

246 MANIFESTATIONS IN PBOVIDENCU, K. I. 

it was with difficulty she could retain her hold of the scissors. 
Mr. Simmons then took them into his own hand, and again 
dropped his pencil through the ring. It could not readily be sus« 
tained in this position. After a few moments, however, it stood 
as if firmly poised and perfectly still. It then began slowly to 
Tnove. Mr. Simmons saw the letters traced heneath Ms eyes — the 
words J. D. Simmons were distinctly and deliberately written, 
and the hand-ivritinff was a fac simile of his son's signature. 
But what Mr. Simmons regards as the most astonishing part of 
this seeming miracle is yet to be told. 

"Bending down to scrutinize the writing more closely, he 
observed, just as the last word was finished, that the top of the 
pencil leaned to the right ; he thought it was about to slip 
through the ring, but, to his infinite astonishment, he saw the 
point slide slowly back along the word ' Simmons ' tUl it rested 
over the letter i, where it deliberately imprinted a dot. This was 
a punctilio utterly unthought of by him ; he had not noticed the 
omission, and was therefore entirely unprepared for the amend- 
ment. He suggested the experiment, and hitherto it had kept 
pace only with his will or desire ; but how will those who deny 
the agency of disembodied spirits in these marvels, ascribing all 
to the unassisted powers of the human will, or to the blind action 
of electricity — how will they dispose of this last significant and 
curious fact ? The only peculiarity observable in the writing was 
that the lines seemed sometimes slightly broken, as If the pencil 
had been lifted and then set down again. 

" Another circumstance I am permitted to relate, which is not 
readily to be accounted for on any other theory than that of spir- 
itual agency. Mr. Simmons, who had received no particulars of 
his son's death until several months after his decease, proposing 
to send for his remains, questioned the spirit as to the manner in 
which the body had been disposed of, and received a very minute 
and circumstantial account of the means which had been resorted 
to for its preservation, it being at the time unburied. 

"Improbable .as some of these statements seemed, they were, 

sniiiT-Music, ETC. 247 

after an interval of four months, confirmed as literally true by a 
gentleman, then recently returned from California, who was with 
young Simmons at the period of his death. Intending soon to 
return to San Francisco, he called on Mr. Simmons to learn his 
wishes in relation to the final disposition of his son's remains. 

" I took down the particulars in writing, by the permission of 
Mr. S., during his relation of the facts. I have many other nar- 
ratives of a like character from persons of intelligence and veraci- 
ty ; but they could add nothing to the weight of that which I have 
just reported to you. ***** 

"S. H. W." 

A writer, before alluded to,* in giving an account to the Daily 
Post (Providence), gives the following account of occurrences, most 
of which took place at his house. It is proper to state that I 
was present at the circle when many of these things took place. 
The writer says : 

" Four, and sometimes five, persons, besides the medium,! have 
been seated around a small table, in a darkened room, when the 
spirits have rapped out to us, ' Join hands and harmonize your 
minds.' We, of course, obeyed directions. Upon the floor, under 
the table, we had previously placed a guitar ; and on the table 
we had placed another guitar and a small house-bell. After sit- 
ting quietly a few moments, we inquired if the spirits would make 
music for us on the guitars. The answer came promptly in the 
affirmative, and the strings of the instrument which lay urider the 
table were struck as if by human fingers. The instrument was 
then drawn slowly out of its place and deposited near the centre 
of the room. The guitar which lay on the table was then lifted 
up and carried ofi' in the direction of the first. Both guitars then 
commenced playing in harmony, but only for a moment. They 
stopped suddenly, and one of the instruments flew up over our 
heads, playing some tune to us unknown. We asked the spirits 
to play some air familiar to our ears. They immediately struck 

♦ D. B. Harris, of Providence. t Mrs. Wilbur. 

i248 MANIJESTATIONS IN PROVIDENCE, K. I. 

up Yankee Doodle, occasionally knocking the guitar against the 
ceiling, and then bringing it down close to our heads, and around 
our ears. The spirits then played the accompaniments to several 
tunes sung by the company — the instruments moving, and some- 
times in double quick time, from one end of the room to the other. 

" Sometimes the guitar would fly from one side of the room to 
the opposite, and from the floor to the ceiling, and then back 
again ; now tapping on the window, and then on the door ; now 
glancing athwart our shoulders, and then patting us on our heads 
in the most familiar and loving manner. All this while our hands 
were firmly clasped, and our circle was kept unbroken. True we 
could see nothing ; but all I have stated we both heard and felt. 
After this had been going on an hour or more, we asked the spirits 
to ring the bell. The guitar they laid with considerable force upon 
the table; the bell was seized, almost with rudeness, and furious- 
ly rung all round the room, sometimes passing over our heads and 
sometimes near the floor; flying rapidly from one angle of the 
room to the opposite — one moment behind the chairs, and the 
next close to our noses. 

" When the spirits had rung the bell sufficiently they placed it 
on the table, took the guitar again, and recommenced the music, 
playing several lively and popular airs. To vary the experiments, 
we asked the spirits to open the backgammon-board, which lay in 
one corner of the room, and place the men ready for playing. 
The board opened instantly ; we heard it lifted from the floor and 
shaken violently, and the men, dice, and boxes, were tossed into 
the air and fell in a shower around the apartment. Another time, 
when we asked to hear the tread of feet, we heard, instead, the 
rustling of silk, as if a lady dressed in that material was gliding 
about the room. Books, dresses, shawls, fans, and other articles, 
■were brought, or thrown, from distant patts of the room, into the 
laps of some persons in the company. On one occasion the guitar 
was taken from the table, and stood, with a remarkable degree of 
care, upon the floor ; the large end resting against my own hand 
and arm, and the hand of the medium, which I held in mine. 

SPIKIT-MUSIC, ETC. 249 

After considerable fixing of the instrument in this inverted posi- 
tion the spirit began to entertain us by making sounds upon it. 
At first the wood part of the instrument was gently knocked by 
what seemed to us to be a common nail-hammer, growing louder 
and louder, until it blended into a sound like that of the end of a 
man's fingers drumming upon the wood. Then the sound changed 
to that of the knuckles, then of the fist, and back again to the 
hammer. These were succeeded by imitations, more or less cor- 
rect, of the sawing of boards, driving of nails, planing, boring, and 
filing. Then these were followed by imitating the singing of 
birds, and by sounds that I should suppose would resemble the 
splitting of guitar strings into innumerable fibres. After this 
curious demonstration, the instrument was carried by the spirits 
towards a window, through the upper part of which a dim moon- 
light shone ; and then we could see the guitar perfurm sundry faTi- 
tastic tricks for our amusement. It would move, sometimes 
horizontally and then vertically ; it would dance, and then remain 
at rest, dart back into the darkness, and then push forward into 
the dim moonlight, until we were perfectly satisfied with its lively 
performances ; when it was gently laid upon the table, as if the 
operator wished for further orders. But none being given, the 
spirits lifted the guitar off the table, turned the latter half way 
round, and opened and shut the leaves of a book some dozen 
times; and this could all be seen, though indistinctly. * * * 

" I have hardly given you a specimen of the occurrences that 
are taking place nightly in this city. At some future time, if you 
will permit me, I will tell you something more. Most of the per- 
sons who have sat in the circle with me have often felt spirits 
touch them. I have been particularly favored in this way. Many 
a time a human hand (to all appearance) has pressed my head, 
my shoulder, my knees, and my feet ; and I know, if I know 
anything, that it was done by no person (in the flesh) in the room, 
or in this world. D. B. H." 

I should add to this account the fact that, at one time, when 
Mrs. Wilbur, the medium in the cases cited above, had been ill 

250 MANIFESTATIONS IN PROVIDENCE, R. I. 

for some time, and was confined to her bed, she was, in presence 
of witnesses, raised up by some invisible power, clear from her 
bed ! A number of reliable witnesses, who were present at the 
time, have borne testimony to this fact. 

Another fact in regard to Providence is an unusual number of 
media in the families of wealthy and influential persons, who are 
extremely mortified to find themselves the " victims " of such 
annoyances. They are not so much disturbed at the manifesta- 
tions themselves, as by the fear that the facts may become public. 
It has been thus with some families from the early days of the 
demonstrations in that city. At some future time, if spiritualism 
should become popular, we may expect to see these persons crowd- 
ing to the front ranks, and claiming to have been pioneers in the 
cause ; but now the popular cry of humbug, or infidelity, proves 
an overmatch for their confidence in truth and an honest avowal 
of it. Some of the finest, perhaps the finest and most important 
communications ever given through " mediums," are yet firmly 
locked in the desks of the class of persons here alluded to, and in 
different parts of the country. 

CHAPTER XI. 

MANIFESTATIONS IN PHILADELPHIA FIEST ATTEMPTS TO OBTAIN KESP0NSE3 

REMARKABLE PERSEVERANCE AND PATIENCE DETAILS OE THE PRO- 
CEEDINGS IN THE FIRST CIRCLES — OROANIZATION AND PROGRESS OP 
THE CAUSE PUELIO MEETINGS AND LECTURES. 

TnE most minute account of the early manifestations in this 
city I find in a pamphlet published in 1851, and valuable for 
its historical rather than its philosophical information.* In his 
introduction the author says : 

" There are in this city between fifty and sixty circles, com- 
posed of Presbyterians, Quakers, Unitarians, Baptists, Methodists, 
Come-out-ers, Infidels, and Atheists, who are candidly and dispas- 
sionately investigating the subject, to endeavor to ascertain, from 
facts and phenomena developed, the laws which govern these mani- 
festations. The progress thus far has satisfied the honest inquirer 
in these circles that the rappings are produced by an agency in 
accordance with Nature's laws, hitherto not understood, and they 
feel confident they have not been deceived by trickery on the part 
of the mediums, or any one of their number ; and the phenomena 
attending the communications by the alphabet have been such as 
to convince them that an agency beyond the control of the medium 
operates on the finger. The productions, they believe, speak for 
themselves, and establish their own character ; they further be- 
lieve this science is but in its infancy, and is calculated, if invest- 
igated in the right spirit, to perform a great work in society, 
towards its progress in goodness and happiness." 

* A History of the recent Developments in Spiritual Manifestations, in the 
city of Philadelphia, by a member ef the first circle, instituted in the month 
of October, 1850. 

252 MANIFESTATIONS IN PHILADELPHIA. 

The following is the chapter which embraces the historical part 
of the commencement of circles and their success : 

" It was in an untrammeled state of mind that some ten or 
twelve individuals of both sexes, in the city of Philadelphia, 
agreed to enter upon an investigation of those phenomena, of which 
they had heard from diflferent sources, termed ' Rochester Knock- 
ings,' ' Spiritual Manifestations,' ' Mysterious Noises,' &c. Only 
two of the number had ever witnessed any demonstrations ; and, 
from what they had seen, were convinced that there was enough 
in the matter to justify an effort at investigation. The rest 
of the number were all, more or less, sceptical ; and none able 
fully to appreciate the greatness of the subject upon which they 
were about to enter, as manifested in the subsequent develop- 
ments. 

" Most of these individuals were intimate friends, each con- 
fiding in the other's integrity, — friends that had been before 
engaged together in other great moral and philosophical enter- 
prises. Their labors in this field of research were commenced 
under circumstances where deception, collusion or intrigue, were 
entirely out of the question. ' None desired to be deceived, none 
wished to deceive, but all were anxious to arrive at the truth. 

" Philadelphia was new ground ; neither the much-abused and 
injured Fox family, nor any other mediums, had ever visited the 
city in the capacity of mediums, nor had there ever been a single 
manifestation in the city that had come to the knowledge of 
one of the individuals concerned. The two gentlemen who had 
witnessed the phenomena visited the city of New York for that 
purpose. 

" Their means of acquiring instruction, in reference to the form- 
ation and management of a circle, were very limited, and many 
disadvantages arising from this cause were to be overcome by 
patience and perseverance. No foreign aid was obtained, the 
counsel of no experienced circle was made available ; but the work 
was undertaken with sincerity of purpose, and an entire reliance 

FIRST ATTEMFTS TO OBTAIN RESPONSES. 253 

on the honest endeavors of each individual to induce the proper 
conditioils. 

" Under these circumstances the work was commenced by hold- 
ing the first meeting on the ninth of October, 1850. 

"No_ regular organization was entered into for some time, but 
regular meetings were held every Sunday evening, and also during 
the week, at the houses of those interested. 

" One of the ladies engaged in the work had been for years a 
good clairvoyant, and when in the third state, condition or degree 
of mesmerism, — into which state she could often pass volunta- 
rily, — she would encourage the circle frequently in their labors, 
and often give important directions in reference to the conduct of 
the members. When in this third state she appeared to be so far 
removed from external influences and conditions, and so interior 
in her perception, as to be wholly unconscious of external cir- 
cumstances, and highly endowed with interior impressions. 
While in this state she would inform the circle of the presence 
of the guardian spirits of those present, and their willingness to 
communicate, as soon as favorable conditions could be induced, 
urging them to secure a greater degree of harmony, and encour- 
aging them to persevere, saying, ' You will get the responses 
soon.' 

" Thus, for four months, the meetings were held weekly, and 
often semi and tri weekly, without a single response. At each 
meeting the clairvoyant, when in the state, would be questioned, 
' Shall we have the responses to-night,? ' The answer was invari- 
ably ' No,' until the evening of February 10th, 1851, when, to 
the usual question, the answer was - Not many,' causing a gleam 
of hope to dart through the minds of all present. Almost imme- 
diately after this answer was given the clairvoyant became much 
agitated; and a lady sitting opposite to her started back in 
alarm, exclaiming, 'I felt something right under my hands!' 
One of the gentlemen, who had heard the sounds in New York, 
recognized them here ; they were also heard by all present. The 
gentleman said, joyfully : ' We have them with us ; calm your 
22 

254 MANIFESTATIONS IN PHILADELPHIA. 

excitement, and we can get responses.' All endeavored to obey 
the injunction, but with little success ; for, at each response to a 
question, the various feelings of the members would again rush 
forth. Each one present received answers to inquiries for guardian 
spirits, and satisfactory responses were received to a number of 
test questions. 

" The medium, — for such had the lady now become, — when in 
the interior condition, had, previously to this, frequently seen the 
spirits a great way off, and often had had communion with them. 
They would occasionally impress her with messages to the circle 
to be of good cheer — that we should have communications as soon 
as we were prepared for them. She also told them that there was 
no medium in the circle, but that she would be the first to become 
one. 

" At the time these first responses were heard the medium was 
in the interior condition ; after the manifestations had continued 
a short time she informed the circle that she would wake up, and 
the responses would continue. This proved to be correct, but the 
sounds were much lower. The meeting adjourned at a late hour, 
the members feeling that they had been richly repaid for the four 
months' preparation. What earthly treasures could have afforded 
a richer reward ? For the first time their ears had been saluted 
with sounds from the other world ; the dark and impenetrable 
gulf, hitherto existing between them and the eternal future, had 
been annihilated as if by magic ; that awful veil, through which 
their mental vision had never before penetrated, was at once with- 
drawn, and they were enabled to inhale through their physical 
senses sweet and soothing intelligence from the celestial spheres. 
Long absent friends stood in their midst, old associations were re- 
vived, and interesting conversations were held. Parents met 
children ; children met parents ; brothers and sisters, husbands 
and wives, after what they had supposed an eternal separation, 
greeted each other in sweet and holy communion, and seemed to be 
locked in long and fond embraces ; tears of joy at these happy 
meetings gushed freely from many eyes, and all hearts swelled 

riRST ATTEMPTS TO OBTAIN llESPONSES. 255 

with emotions of gratitude to the Supreme Euler of the Uni- 
verse, for having instituted laws by which these much desired, 
most desirable developments might be unfolded to his intelligent 
creation. 

" The sneering sceptic may laugh, the pious sceptic may sigh, 
at what they may term blind credulity ; but that will not do away 
with the facts as they existed, and continue to exist, nor oblit- 
erate the recollections of those delightful emotions that were 
excited on that memorable occasion. At this meeting an arrange- 
ment was made with the spirits, that one rap should signify no, 
three yes, and two a medium between yes and no — as perhaps, 
partially, &c., &c. 

" After this, the meetings were held nightly for a short time, 
during which the sounds increased in loudness and frequency ; 
but no communications by the alphabet had ' been received, 
neither had there been any physical demonstrations. The first 
cflFort at spelling was made on the evening of the 19th of Feb- 
ruary, 1851, which consisted of these words: 'You are to have 

the d ' The sentence was left thus unfinished, with a promise 

to complete it at the next meeting, should the conditions be more 
favorable. 

" On the 22d, the circle again met ; the responses were very 
good. The question was asked. Can you finish the sentence com- 
menced at last meeting ? To which a negative answer was obtained. 
Then the question was asked. Can you impress the medium with 
what you desired to communicate ? Answer — Yes. Will you 
please do it? ATiswer — Yes. The medium, being in the interior 
condition, presently became somewhat agitated, and in a few minutes 
observed, ' He was trying to tell you that you are to have the 
demonstrations more powerfully soon.' 

" On the evening of the 23d, after having had very good and 
satisfactory responses, the table around which the circle was 
seated was observed to be in a vibratory motion; this was 
succeeded by its being raised about one and a half inches 
from the floor, and moved backwards and forwards, and then 

256 MANIFESTATIONS IN I'HILADELPniA. 

settling to its place. This phenomenon was not observed to the 
satisfaction of all present ; a request was made to have it re- 
peated, which was done, in a minute or two, to the astonishment 
of all. 

" From this time almost every meeting, for some weeks, was vis- 
ited by physical demonstrations more or less violent. Sometimes, 
to the uninitiated and uneonfiding, they would have been terrific. 
Often a shudder of terror would pervade the most of the circle, 
until they could feel full confidence in the often-repeated assur- 
ances of the spirits that no personal injury should be sustained by 
any of the circle. 

'■ A description of the demonstrations is not deemed advisable, 
as the public credulity has already been taxed to quite as great 
an extent as can be borne. If the facts already set forth, or 
those that are to follow, are doubted, we advise the doubters 
to form circles amongst their friends, or in their families ; 
observe the directions hereafter given, and induce the proper 
conditions, and they can have them for themselves ; then there 
will be no danger of being deceived. Unless they are willing to 
comply with this requisition, and make an honest, persevering 
effort (which will certainly be crowned with success), their doubts 
and objections are of but little value either to themselves or 
others. 

" The question has many times been asked, "Why do spirits per- 
form such strange and antic capers ? If they are spirits that do 
these things, they must be bad spirits, &c. To this question we 
would answer, these demonstrations are necessary to induce the 
proper conditions, in the mediums and circles, for a higher order- of 
communications. If the why and wherefore are desired, we again 
repeat, form circles ; have them for yourselves, and a satisfactory 
explanation will attend them. 

" Those who first entered upon the investigation, having become 
so deeply interested in the subject, many of them could not resist 
the temptation of inviting their friends, occasionally, to visit the 
circle and witness the doings there ; by this means the meetings 

PROCEEDINGS IN THE HRST CIRCLES. 257 

would often be so large, that many could not be accommodated 
satisfactorily, and frequently the harmony of the circle would be 
disturbed by scurrilous remarks from some sceptical intruders, 
and the object of the meeting defeated. 

" The meetings having thus become very large, and often in- 
harmonious, and, the conditions necessarily more or less dis- 
turbed, it was thought best to organize a private circle, which 
was done on Monday evening, February 24th, 1851. Ten per- 
sons constituted the first regularly organized circle in this city } 
this number was subsequently increased, from time to time, to 
eighteen. The organization was called ' Philadelphia Harmonial 
Circle, A.' 

" It was at this meeting of the private circle where the power- 
ful demonstrations, above alluded to, commenced. The circle held 
their meetings strictly private, with occasionally rare exceptions, 
on Saturday, Sunday, and Wednesday evenings, at the houses of 
the members. After this change in the arrangements, the little 
gatherings became more and more intensely interesting, new 
developments were continually being made, and the progression 
was rapid. It became the policy of the members to say but very 
little, out of the circle, of what transpired within it. The minds 
of the people were known not to be prepared for the statements 
that might be made. No effort whatever was made to influence 
the public mind in favor of the subject. Strenuous eiTorts were 
made to preserve it from the public notice. The charges of self- 
ishness and exolusiveness were incurred to a great extent. Many 
minds, however, became honestly and anxiously interested in the 
matter ; as these were discovered, opportunities were given, at 
their requests, to be gratified by means of accommodation meet- 
ings. As the interest increased, these meetings became more and 
more frequent, sometimes amounting to two or three a week, for 
the accommodation of different companies. Frequently they were 
highly interesting, and occasionally favored with convincing phjsi- 
cal demonstrations. The circle mostly received kindness and 
hospitality from those strangers whose invitations they received ; 

258 MANIFESTATIONS IN PHILABEI.PUIA. 

occasionally, however, the treatment towards them was rude and 
indecorous ; this invariably came from invited guests, who, for 
once in their lives, had got into society who knew what civility 
was. 

" The deep and abiding interest, that had taken hold on the 
minds of many, moved them to action, and, nearly simultaneously, 
by them were instituted several new circles, some of which being 
composed of discordant elements soon disorganized and gave up 
the work, but most of them have persevered and are doing 
exceedingly well ; some have been favored with various manifest- 
ations in the way of preparing mediums, &c., and one of the new 
circles has already received several important communications. 

" Here again was a new field of labor opened for circle A. 
They were in almost every case, in the formation of a new circle, 
called upon to visit them, to aid them by their experience, and 
encourage them onward in their labors of love and goodness. 
The regular tri-weekly meetings of the circle, the frequent 
accommodation meetings, and the visiting of new circles, for 
weeks occupied all their leisure time, and in fact often drew 
largely on that portion of it devoted to business. Several after- 
noons were given to the gratification of honest and candid 
inquirers. Thus commenced and progressed the great work in 
the city of Philadelphia. 

" Shortly after the formation of circle A, several members com- 
menced being operated on by the spirits in the manner before 
described ; sometimes they would begin to be afi'ected immediately 
upon taking their seats at the table ; at other times they would 
remain seated some quarter or half an hour before the process 
commenced ; when this was the case, and conditions favorable, the 
responses would be free and loud ; but after the operations com- 
menced with the new or undeveloped mediums, no more answers 
to questions could be obtained during the continuance of the pro- 
cess. The first medium was also, at times, made the subject of 
exercises more or less severe. Upon one occasion, when she was 
being operated upon, and before the circle had become in a condi- 

PROCEEDINGS IN THE FIKST CIKCLES. 259 

tion to receive instructions in relation to the mediums, strong 
efforts were made to get responses to questions, but without 
effect. All this time a succession of raps was heard upon the 
table ; several questions were asked, with a view of ascertaining 
what was meant by them, but no answer was given. At length 
one asked, ' Is the alphabet desired ? ' To this there was an 
afiBirmative answer. One of the members commenced repeating 
it, when the following sentence was spelled out : ' You cannot 
have responses while we are operating on the mediums.' Shortly 
after another signal for the alphabet was given, when the follow- 
ing was communicated : ' Always let the medium repeat the 
alphabet.' This was the second effort at spelling, and was much 
more prompt than the first ; the sentences were spelled out by 
the spirit of the medium's mother. This occurred on the 8th of 
March, 1851. 

" At the next, meeting, Tield March 9th, the circle, unmindful 
of what had been told them, were again very solicitous of getting 
responses while the mediums were being acted on, when the 
following was spelled out in like manner : ' The medium is 
not in a condition to have good responses to-night.' Again : 
' They are preparing mediums for other circles.' After this 
efibrts were seldom made to get answers to questions while the 
mediums were under spiritual training. 

" This process of preparation consists of a kind of mesmeric 
condition, induced entirely by spiritual influence, which, as it 
progresses, carries the subject deeper and deeper into insensibil- 
ity. If it be not resisted or interfered with, it wUl generally pass 
off in from one to two hours. 

" Upon two or three occasions private meetings of the circle 
were held, and continued for two and a half hours, without a 
single response or manifestation, further than operating on the 
mediums ; the whole of the evening being consumed in that way." 

In this pamphlet I find the first account of communicating by 
the card, which is given as follows : 

260 MANIFESTATIONS IN PHILADELPIUA. 

" This mode of communication consists in the medium taking a 
card, when a communication is desired, and commencing by vol- 
untarily passing the hand over it, touching every letter with the 
fore-finger. Often the hand will be required to pass over it 
repeatedly before any unnatural sensation is experienced, when 
a feeling of numbness will begin to be perceived, which will 
increase, attended by a more or less convulsive motion. As the 
hand continues its exercises the movement becomes altogether 
involuntary ; the motion now becomes increased, and the hand is 
made to pass over the card with almost incredible rapidity, 
attended with convulsive jerkings more or less severe. Some- 
times it is very great, causing the hand to strike the card or the 
table upon which it lies with great violence. This is continued for 
some time, when the finger will be observed to rest on a certain 
letter, attended with a shoving or rubbing motion ; instantly it 
will be seen to fiy to another, and then another ; these letters 
taken down will be found to make words, and these words placed 
together make sentences. In this way long and highly interest- 
ing communications are spelled out with a rapidity, requiring a 
very expert penman to write them down as fast as they are given. 
The medium, or any other person, watches the finger and gives 
out the words as they are formed. The violence with which the 
hand is used becomes abated as the medium becomes more fully 
developed, and better control is got of its movements. At length 
no inconvenience is experienced, and words are spelled out with 
the utmost ease and comfort. This is a much more perfect mode 
of communication than the former, and is altogether more prefer- 
able. In this manner spirits are able to converse through 
mediums long before they can make the sounds. Thus important 
information is communicated to circles, and encouragement given 
to them for weeks before responses are heard. After the mediums 
become sufficiently developed to have the raps, and the conditions 
being favorable, every word that is pronounced from the card will 
be responded to ; thereby signifying its correctness. In this 
way, also, can familiar conversations be held with the spirits. 

PROCEEMNaS IN THE FIRST CIKCtES. 261 

questions answered, and explanations given in every case where 
they are wished, to the entire satisfaction of those desiring infor- 
mation, from the higher spheres, upon any subject, however 
important or trivial." 

The same pamphlet also gives the following brief account of the 
first writing media in that city : 

"The third mode,. though as yet but imperfectly developed, 
promises to be far superior even to the second. Two mediums 
belonging to the same circle (E) commenced communicating in 
this way, within twelve hours of each other, the last to commence 
not having seen the performance of the first. They had both 
been communicating by the card for some time previously ; and 
the only direction they had upon the subject was contained in the 
following sentence, spelled out by the card : ' Take the pencil in 
your hand.' This was done in the case of the first one, when the 
hand commenced violent convulsive motions, which continued for 
some time, when, by an involuntary motion of the hand over the 
paper, a short sentence was written, and with a rapidity exceed- 
ing five times the speed of her ordinary writing. The second 
medium was impressed to take the pencil, when the same invol- 
untary convulsive motion seized the hand, and continued for 
some time, when a short sentence was, in like manner with the 
first, written on the paper, with equal rapidity. This mode is 
also being practised by other mediums in this city and other 
places." 

Some of the communications given to the circles were intended 
for their instruction as they progressed in their investigation. I 
have selected a few from a number published in the pamphlet : 

" TWO COMMUNICATIONS, ACCOUNTING FOR CONTRADICTIONS. 

" 1. Given May ISth, in the afternoon, from a Father to his Son. 

" Mv DEAR Son : You were rather sceptical when you entered 

the room, but your mind is more favorably impressed now with 

262 MANIFESTATIONS IN PmLADELPHIA. 

these manifestations. Thus will it be with every one who inves- 
tigates them with candor. None shall go away many times 
unconvinced, if they come in a proper spirit. Those who do not 
are not generally convinced, for they are not prepared to receive 
the great truths we would utter. And we take no pains to con- 
vert them, for their minds would not bear what we would teach 
them. They must possess an honest, inquiring spirit, if they wish 
to learn the truth of us. If they do not they will rarely learn 
the truth of these manifestations, but denounce it as a deception, 
and one unworthy the attention of any. You have come in a dif- 
ferent spirit from this. And, therefore, when you hear the con- 
tradictory accounts given of our communications, think of what 
we.have here been able to tell you, and you will know the caufee 
and come to a correct conclusion. Now, my son, these are the 
words of your father; believe what he tells you, for he has 
learned more than it is possible for mortals to find out; and, 
therefore, is better able to guide in the way of truth. Done. 

" 2. To a Gentleman from his Sister, May l%th, in the evening. 

" My DEAR Bkother : You were sceptical when you came here, 
but you have changed your opinions now. No one, who -will 
come and ask us questions honestly and candidly, shall go away 
unsatisfied, if conditions are favorable for communications. We 
are anxious for all mankind to be convinced of the truth of spir- 
itual communications. But if persons come to the investigation 
of it determined to prove it deception, we will take no pains to 
satisfy them in their answers ; for a person possessing such a dis- 
position is not prepared to receive our instruction. He must go 
through some preparatory process .before he can receive our 
teachings. We want this well understood, so that the friends to 
the commimications will be able to account for the contradictory 
accounts given of our communications. They will tlien know the 
reason, and will not be troubled at it. Keep this before your 
mind, and when you hear such things said, remember what we 
have told you, and you will not be confused about it. 

PROrEEDINGS IN THE FinST CIUCLES. 263 

" Circle A made an agreement to meet the spirits £^t eight 
o'clock in the evening, and adjourn at half past ten. Sometimes, 
in the midst of most interesting responses and manifestations, 
they would rap off ' Done,' precisely at that hour. Under these 
circumstances an extension of time would be requested, which 
would sometimes be granted, after the following short communi- 
cation was received : 

" ' If you want an extension of time, at any meeting, you must 
apply for it before it is near out. It was your own proposal to 
close at that time, and now you must abide the result. We were 
willing to converse with you much longer, but you made 
objections. * G. D. H.' 

" A circumstance occurred in which one of the mediums was 
concerned. She and some friends bad been out one evening, and, 
on their return home, stopped at the house of another friend. 
The lady had no sooner taken a seat than she went into the mes- 
meric state, when raps were heard, giving the signal for the 
alphabet. It was repeated, when the following important sen- 
tence was spelled out by raps. This occurred previously to the 
discovery of any other mode of communicating : — 

" ' You must take care of to-night ; she is to fall out 

of the window, and kill herself She must remain where she is 
to-night.' 

" The spirits were asked if she should be informed of the fact 
when awake. The answer was, ' No.' 

" She was not informed of the communication, but yielded to the 
solicitations of her friends, and remained with the family during 
the night, and was secretly watched. She was observed in the 
night to get up, dress herself, and go down into the dining-room, 
in the second story, raise the blinds of a window, and attempt 
to raise the window, when she was taken hold of by those watch- 
ing, and prevented from proceeding further. She was in an 

264 MANIFESTATIONS IN PHILADELPHIA. 

unusually deep sleep, from which it was difficult to arouse her. 
This occurred in the presence of several persons of acknowledged 
veracity, — members of circle A, — who can testify to the facts. 

" The lady, for some years previously, had been subject to attacks 
of somnambulism, and once iDefore attempted to get out of a sec- 
ond-story window, but was prevented by a friend, who discovered 
her in time to avoid accident." 

Hitherto no attempt at organization of effort on the part of 
spiritualists had taken place, except the mere business of the 
circle. 

During the winter of 1851 the attention of the public was 
called by adv^tisement in the papers to some meetings instituted 
for the purpose of elucidating these mysterious problems. Those 
who called the meetings, and took charge of them, seemed, how-, 
ever, to be but little qualified for the purpose they had undertaken ; 
but as these meetings were attended by some spiritualists it was 
thought best to continue them. After making some change in the 
plan of the meetings, and also of some officers, they were so con- 
tinued, and on March 16th, 1852, a communication, substantially 
as follows, was received through one of the mediums : 

" The objects of the communications and manifestations now 
being made to the world by spirits are for the advancement of the 
human race. All who are so favored as to be enabled to hold 
communion with spirits are particularly called upon to labor for 
the temporal'and spiritual advancement of those who are dwelling 
in darkness. Those who receive instruction from us must expect 
to labor, and seek to alleviate the suffering existing in their midst. 
It will be well for you to meet once a week to consider Vhat you 
can best do to accomplish your object. The world now requires' 
your earnest efforts. In your very midst many are enshrouded in 
spiritual darkness, upon whom you must bestow light. Physical suf- 
fering has the effect of injuring the spirit, and you must, therefore, 
seek to alleviate the former. It would be well for you, when you 
meet, to appoint four or six of your number to inquire into the 

OKGANIZATION OF SPIRITUALISTS. 265 

condition of tte suffering in your immediate vicinity, and for them 
to report the result of their labors at the next meeting ; and we 
will instruct you in the course to pursue to insure their rapid 
advancement. You should request the cooperation of all who are 
interested in the subject, as well as of those whom you think 
would be willing to unite with you in your mission. The command 
which Jesus gave to his followers, to go into the market-places, 
and bid all to enter into his vineyard, is still binding upon those 
who earnestly desire to be followers of him." 

. In accordanceNvith this direction, the friends of the spiritual 
philosophy, which seeks rather to present its claims to the world 
as an active worker in this busy arena of antagonistic strife, than 
to fold its arm six days out of seven, at least so far as the ad- 
vancement of the soul's proper growth is concerned, and spending 
the other in trying to outdo the ancient mythologies in the vast- 
ness of its faith, — those friends met, and proceeded to eiFect an 
organization by the appointment of a committee to draft a pre- 
amble and constitution, setting forth the objects of the association, 
and presenting an outline of the rules by which the body was to 
be governed in future action. I cannot in any way set forth the 
nature of the organization better than by a synopsis of the pre- 
amble and laws as adopted by the meeting, upon the report of the 
committee, with some amendments. 

" PEEAMBLB. 

" Whereas, as all ages of the world and of man have given rise 
to special demands, meet for the requirements of the necessities 
of the race, so, too, has this, in which it is our province to move, 
also its demands. And as the institutions of the past and the 
present have well-nigh closed! their mission, and answered the pur- 
poses of their creation in the discipline of our minds and hearts, 
so are we looking for the advent of a diviner life and a better 
hope. In answer to this demand are the voices from the spirit- 
land, cheering us on in the work of human elevation and redemp- 
23 

266 MANIFESTATIONS IN PHILADELPHIA. 

tion in our spiritual, intellectual and social natures. In obedience 
to the directions of our spiritual guides do we hereby organize an 
institution whose object shall be the spiritual cultivation of man, 
and the alleviation of some of the many woes by which he is so sadly 
burthened. With no master but God, and no creed but humanity, 
do we enter the field of our labors, recognizing in man the latent 
germ of a divine nature, which, when duly cultivated, is the highest 
rule of right in human action. And we would, furthermore, seek 
to cultivate the radiant beauty of this faith in our intercourse 
with our fellow-men, as far as we are able so to do. 

" In the furtherance of these noble purposes do we ordain the 
following constitution : 

" Akt. 1. The title of this association shall be the Harmonial 
Benevolent Association of Philadelphia. 

"^2. The oSjectsoT ITiis association shall be those set forth in 
the preamble. 

" 3. The officers shall consist of a Circle of Directors, a Presi- 
dent and Vice-President, Kecording Secretary, Corresponding Sec- 
retary, Treasurer, Executive Committee and -two Ushers ; all of 
whom shall be elected semi-annually. 

" 4. The duties of the Circle of Directors shall consist in im- 
parting the principles of motion, life, sensation and intelligence, to 
the association ; to provide the instrumentalities of intellectual 
progress by procuring suitable persons to address the public meet- 
ings of the association ; to propose such means as will best secure 
pecuniary aid for the relief of the suffering; to organize and 
maintain an efficient choir for the meetings ; and to attend to such 
other affairs as the exigences of the occasion may require. 

" The duties of the President and Vice-President are to see that 
order and harmony prevail at all meetings of the association. 

" Of the Secretary, to keep the records of the association, and 
attend to such other duties as may pertain to his office. 

" Of the Treasurer, to receive all moneys of the association, and 
hold them subject to its regular orders. 

." Of the Executive Committee, to tender the sympathies and 

OKGANIZATION OF SPIRITUALISTS. 267 

assistance of the association to those who are sick, in trouble, or 
distress, and to extend the same to all human society, as far as 
possible, irrespective of sect, complexion, or country. 

" Of the Ushers, to make such arrangements as shall best con- 
tribute to the comfort and convenience of the members and visitors 
of the meeting. 

" 5. As it is the design of the association to promote its benign 
ends through the willing aid and cooperation of such persons as 
may by affinity be attracted toward us, it shall, therefore, be in 
order for any persons to become members of the institution by 
declaring their wish to that effect at a previous meeting to their 
signing the constitution ; provided that there shall be no objections 
on the part of a member. Should there be any objection, such 
objection shall be considered and disposed of by a vote of the mem- 
bers present, and the applicant admitted or rejected accordingly. 

" 6. All elections shall be by ballot.'' 

Some other articles follow, specifying the time and place of 
election, the mode of procedure in case of the alteration of the 
constitution, &c., not of interest to the general reader, and they 
are therefore omitted. 

It will now be perceived that the objects of the association are" 
two-fold. First, that of ministering to the physical needs of the 
down-trodden, the vicious and the diseased; and, second, the 
dissemination of the sublime and glorious light unfolded to us, 
teaching the true purposes of the present life, and the best means 
of developing the latent energies of the spirit, by which it shall 
be unfolded and fitted for the diviner joys of that life which is to 
come ; and also the nature of that future existence into which a 
thousand million of human souls will, in a few brief years, have i 
entered, and its sublime realities become part of their experience,/ 
and recorded upon the tablets of the inner shrine of the spirit. ' 

The association adopted the title of the Harmonial Benevolent 
Association at the suggestion of the spirits, and they have endeav- 
ored to act in accordance with, that title. It is true but little, 

268 MANIFESTATIONS IN PHILADELPHIA. 

comparatively, has been done. Nor is it to be expected that a 
few persons, with but limited resources, could stop the course of 
that mighty tide of sorrow and death, which sweeps over the land 
like some destroying angel, and which speaks too plainly of the 
terrible_^fractions of Jhose laws.jif_.order and harmonyj on the 
observance of which, the world's physical xedeiaptiQt.igBS9dai^ 
Nor is it to Jbe_expfictoithat_the bitter fruits of transgressiQA_£an 
cease to flow while the roots are deeply seated and hourij wa^gred 
and irrigated"^y'^n~inverted soraal Mder, tending ever^o.,the 
realization ^ of those T^rfol harvests which, like sonie mighty 
maelstrom, engulf their annual millions, and send them into ajiothet., 
sphere to learn "those Tessons of wisdom and ^goodness which~tllgX_ 
should have learned in this. What is done in this way is chiefly 
palliative, and tends somewhat to temper down the sorrows of 
life. It is not the purpose to boast of what is done, nor should 
I at this time mention the fact, were it not for the purpose of 
stating the nature and objects of the Philadelphia Harmonial 
Benevolent Association, and, with this brief narration, shall let 
this part of the subject pass. With the statement that it is the 
purpose of the association to continue to do the best they can, 
without parade or noise, or solicitation of foreign resources. 

It has been now nearly three years since the commencement of 
this movement, and, with but little interruption, there have been 
kept up in this city regular weekly meetings for the benefit of 
the public, to which they have been invited, free of expense, to 
hear lectures explanatory of the spiritual philosophy, so far as 
that matter was understood, and also public conference meetings, 
at which an immense amount and variety of phenomena were 
narrated, which occurred in the experience of individuals them- 
selves. It is a little more than two years since the public meet- 
ings have been held on each Sunday morning and evening at 
Franklin Hall. These meetings have been deemed of sufficient 
interest to ensure the regular attendance of large and intelligent 
audiences. Either the morning or evening is occupied by a lec- 
ture, the other meeting being a conference, where all spiritualists 

OKQANIZATION Or SPIBITUALISIS. 269 

have an equal opportunity for the occupancy of the speaker's 
stand. 

Aside from this association there have been several attempts to 
effect a general organization of the circles ; but, for some reason, 
these efforts have not been attended with much success. Indeed, 
even the circles themselves have no very effectual organization, 
owing, probably, to the continuous pressure from without of per- 
sons desirous of witnessing the manifestations, and the disposition 
of the members to afford all the opportunity in their power to 
inquirers. 

The history of spiritualism in this city is not, however, without 
some divisions of sentiment, and may be classed under two gen- 
eral heads. First, those who still cherish a sanctity for those 
early loves which, by education, become almost part of our nature, 
and who, hence, feel that there is a sacredness hovering around 
the Bible not attaching itself to other books. Also those who 
still cherish some of their 'former opinions in reference to the 
efficacy of prayer, the divinity of Jesus, &e. The second class is 
composed of those who feel cut loose from all authority of both 
Bible and church, and who seek to attain to a more perfect 
knowledge of both God and man by a study of the great book of 
Nature, as transmitted by the Creator to his children. Both these 
classes are doing an effectual work in the redemption of mind, 
since both are more liberal than before, and more reasonable in 
their differences with one another and the world without. Nor 
have we anything to fear from a difference of opinion, so long as 
reason is to be the arbiter. The only enemy spiritualism need 
have to dread will be the disposition to sectarize it, and to bind 
the minds of its recipients to some supposed authority or creed. 
23* 

CHAPTEE XII. 

MANIFESTATIONS AT TKOY AND WATERPOKD, K. Y. — EXCITEMENT AND 

VIOLENCE AT TKOT ATTEMPT TO DESTKOT THE LIFE OF THE MEDIUM 

INCREASE OF THE MANIFESTATIONS — BEMAEKABLE CASES, &0. 

The advent of the spiritual manifestations into Troy was at- 
tended with some remarkable displays i)f bigotry and violence, 
which should be recorded among the attendant circumstances of 
this new development. The first medium there was Miss Mar- 
garetta Pox. She went in the month of November, 1850, to 
the house of Mr. Bouton, where the friends were invited to hear 
the manifestations. 

From some cause which remains unexplained, a portion of 
the Irish Catholics became very much incensed against the " new 
doctrine," and evinced a determination to put it down by violence. 
They evidently supposed that, by destroying this medium, the 
whole matter would be put to rest. Accordingly she was watched 
and followed everywhere, so that it was not considered safe for 
her to leave the house unattended. Finally they became so de- 
termined that the house was attacked, but, being well prepared, 
the assassins were not successful. The following extract from a 
letter written by the gentleman with whom she was stopping, will 
throw more light upon the subject. It bears date of West Troy, 
November 13th, 1850. 

" We are endeavoring to make an arrangement for her (Mar- 
garetta) to go to another place. If she has mentioned the name 
to you, do not mention it to others, as you value her life. A 

EXCITI.MENT AND VIOLENCE. 271 

deep plot is laid to destroy her. My house is beset every night 
by assassins after her, and we guard her every moment. We 
think, if we can place her where we wish to, she will be safe. I 
shall defend her and her reputation at the risk of my fortune and 
my life. I will advise you of our progress. Suppress the 7iame 
of the place, if you can. I write with difficulty, not having 
rested for some nights. Five Irishmen, from some motive, are 
watching Margaretta ; we have seen them all together. She has 
never left my family without being attended, which has given 
them no opportunity yet. In returning from Troy, late night 
before last, with my family and Margaretta, in a coach, we came 
to the river, and found no boat. Five drunken Irishmen tried to 
persuade our driver to go to the long ' Troy Bridge,' a glorious 
place for murder. We did not go, but they followed us home, 
and, after we had retired, the Irishmen attempted to break into 
the room occupied by Margaretta and my sister-in-law. They 
were ftirious on being foiled, and threw stones against the house. 
I have prepared means of defence, and cannot sleep much, and 
my family less. I fear they will return again to-night ; but they 
wUl meet with a warm reception. Last night Mrs. B. and Mar- 
garetta went to the door of a shed together, and a stone was 
thrown at them. One man on the roof made an angry excla- 
mation on finding that the two were together, instead of Marga- 
retta alone. They were large, stout men.'' 

A postscript to this letter, dated the next day, the 14th, says : 

" Ab I feared, the Irishmen did return last night, and threw a. 
stone through the window, and broke into the house ; but we were 
prepared for them, and they did not effect anything. We would 
like to have you come here immediately, if you can." 

The mob continued to increase on Saturday night, and on Sun- 
day five telegraphic dispatches were sent to Mrs. Fish, at Koches- 
ter, to come to Troy. The purport of the messages was that 

272 MANIWDSTATIONS IN TROY AND WATEMOIID, N. Y. 

Margaretta was alive ; but they could not tell how long she would 
be. The next morning Mrs. F. started for Troy. After she had 
changed cars at Schenectady, and taken a seat in the Troy car, a 
large, animal-looking Irishman came to her, and asked where she 
was going. She replied to Troy. He then wanted to know if 
she had relatives there. Her replies gave them no clue to the 
house she expected to go to, as she had previously received a let- 
ter putting her on her guard. The man stepped to another part 
of the car, and held a close consultation with two others, also 
Irish, and then returned and took a seat by her side, although 
there were plenty of vacant seats, being only seven passengers in 
the car. He again commenced his impertinent questions, and 
finally Mrs. E. left and took another seat. He followed, and 
took a seat by her side. She then requested him to leave, which 
he refused to do. The conductor was called, and the Irishman 
was made to take another .seat. 

All this, as might have been expected, aroused her suspicions, 
and she feared that in some way they had anticipated her arrival, 
and intended to do her some violence. She was constantly 
watched by the three men, and they as continually consulted 
together, evidently about her. It had been arranged by her 
friends that she should stop at the Troy House, and when they 
arrived there, she arose with great fear, as it was eight o'clock in 
the evening and very dark. She stepped out on the platform of 
the car, and saw, by the lamp-light, a carriage standing in front 
of the Troy House, and supposed it to be for her, as arranged. 
Just then a small old gentleman stepped up and looked her in 
the face, and said, " I am all right". I know it is Leah, by 
Margaretta's looks — hush ! there 's the carriage ; " and another 
gentleman stepping to the other side, each with loaded pistols, 
guarded her to the carriage. As she was shown in, three pistols 
lay on the seat, the sight of whicl^ frightened her nearly as much 
as the ruffians. Although she had not been to Troy, and was not 
1 nown there, the whole crowd knew that she had been telegraphed 
ibr, affd was expected. The telegraph operator was supposed to 

EXCITEMENT AND VIOLENCE. 273 

have betrayed his trust, and communicated the fact to the crowd. 
A large number followed the carriage, and when they arrived at 
the house, the mob had collected in front of it to the number of 
some hundreds. She had been instructed that, when the carriage 
arrived, two or three chosen men would open the door and sud- 
denly rush out and carry her in. Accordingly, the instant the 
carriage stopped, this plan was faithfully put into execution. As 
she entered, she found Margaretta vomiting severely from the 
effects of fright and excitement, having part of the time, for the 
last forty-eight hours, been confined in a small room, for fear the 
house would be entered by the mob, who were assembling and 
prowling around the house, in defence of their religion, as they 
were constantly declaring. After all had arrived safely in the 
house, several shots were fired through the windows, and stones 
were thrown. The crowd made all manner of threats, and did 
what they could to put them into execution. They knew that the 
men inside were armed, and would meet violence with violence. 
This appeal to such a mode of defence, in such a cause, is to be 
regretted; but with such a crowd, urge"d on by more discreet, 
cowardly and " respectable " persons, it 4s doubtful if any other 
appeal is potent enough to be felt by them. They dispersed after 
a time, but the family and house were threatened until the " un- 
holy " guests had left. They were still determined to execute 
their plans, and, supposing Margaretta had returned to Roches- 
ter, those same three Irishmen found their way to the house of 
Mrs. Fish. They were foiled in this attempt, for she and Marga- 
retta were then staying at the Delevan House, in Albany. 

Such was the advent of the spiritual manifestations in Troy. 
I give a detailed account of the excitement, as many really fancy 
that it was a pleasant task, at that time, to go about the country 
preaching spiritual truth. It is only one of the many trying 
scenes of persecution that this family have passed through. I 
would by no means leave the impression that the Catholics were 
the only ones engaged in this crasade. It was abundantly proved 
that some of the prominent members of Protestant sects were 

274 MANIFESTATIONS IN TROY AND WATEHrORD, N. Y. 

engaged in pushing forward this demonstration of heat without 
light. 

From this time the demonstrations have continued more or less 
abundant in East and West Troy, and the neighboring village of 
Waterford. As these places are near together, and the circles of 
the two places frequently intermingle, I shall speak of both of 
them as the facts may present themselves. In both places they 
have rapping, writing, tipping and pantomimic mediums, — and 
through them some most wonderful, beautiful and truthful com- 
munications are made. With the exception of Mr. Boynton, of 
Waterford, I do not now remember the names of mediums at Troy 
or Waterford. 

As part of the history of the important events, I give the fol- 
lowing from the Troy Daily Post, of June, 1851 : 

" On the afternoon of Monday last, June 2d, Mr. N. E. White, 
a well-known spiritual medium of this city, being somewhat indis- 
posed, was mesmerized by Mr. K , and while thus paralyzed, 

spirits, purporting to be those of certain deceased friends of Mr. 
White and the family i!i which he boards, took that occasion to 
forewarn his friends that some events were to occur on the even- 
ing of the following Friday, which were to be imminently fearful, 
and perhaps fatal to the life of Mr. White ; and that, as a means 
of preventing the worst consequences, they (the invisibles) were 
particularly urgent that his friends should guard him with the 
utmost vigilance, promising at the same time all the aid it was in 
their power to render for his relief in the case. On the following 
Wednesday the patient was again put in a state of unconscious- 
ness, and the spirits communicated as follows : ' Eemember JPri- 
day night ; watch him close, or you will lose him ; we will do all 
we can, but can do but little.' Some half dozen of the personal 
friends of the family were duly notified of these facts, and being 
of those who are convinced of the verity of modern spiritual man- 
ifestations, all awaited the issue with apprehensions more or less 
fearful. 

CASE OF MB. N, E. WHITE. 275 

" It may be well, perhaps, in this connection, to state that Mr. 
White has, within a few months past, been several times paialyzed, 
as we suppose by spiritual influence, in which case he appears 
wholly insensible, his limbs fixed, and his muscles rigid and inac- 
tive ; and whether his condition is produced in this way, or by the 
ordinary process of mesmerizing, it is morally certain he has not 
the least recollection of anything which may have taken place 
during its continuance. His friends were, therefore, enabled to 
keep him wholly ignorant of the foreboding communications. Up 
to nine o'clock on Friday evening nothing worthy of note had 
transpired, except that he complained some that afternoon and 
evening of headache and dizziness. At about ten o'clock, feeling 
tarns of nausea at the stomach, he retired for the night. Scarcely 
had he laid down, before he was perceived to be in a paralyzed or 
magnetic state ; and the spirits announced that ' the crisis is now 
come ; he will die to-night, or be well to-morrow.' His feet and 
legs became cold, and his whole physical system was evidently 
sinking with fearful rapidity. The spirits directed his feet and 
limbs to be rubbed. 

" Ques. Shall we put them in warm water ? 

" Arts. (By the spirits.) No ; it will aifeot his head. 

" At this time the patient breathed with great irregularity, ■. — 
indeed, at times his breathing was almost or quite suspended, — 
his pulse extremely fluttering and fitful, gasping at times, accom- 
panied with gurgling in the throat, as if death had nearly done its 
work. 

" Q. What can we do ? 

" A. Rub his limbs thoroughly ; we will take care of his throat. 

" At this the patient's hand was moved in mesmeric passes 
over his throat and breast, which seemed in part to relieve his 
breathing. 

" Q. Shall we send for a physician ? 

"A. No. 

" Q. But will he not die on our hands 7 — the responsibility is 
more than we are willing to assume. 

276 MANirESTATIONS IN TROY AND WATElirORD, N. T. 

" A. If he has a physician he will surely die. 

" Q. Will you be able to carry him through ? 

" A. It is doubtful ; we fear we cannot save him. 

" Soon after this, however, in answer to inquiries, the promises 
were more encouraging ; and, in a few minutes more, the spirits 
expressed great confidence in their ability to restore his health, 
saying they ' must soon wake him up, and if he does not come out 
clear, we shall be obliged to paralyze him again.' The patient 
was soon restored to consciousness, but was unable to speak aloud, 
or to swallow water when put into his mouth with a teaspoon ; 
breathed with much difficulty, and at several different and difficult 
effijrts raised considerable quantities of blood. In whispers he 
expressed his belief that he was dying, and asked the opinion of 
his friends. Two hours had elapsed, in which the witnesses of 
this appalling scene had suffered with the most intense anxiety, 
and yet all was shrouded in mysterious and painful uncertainty. 

"After remaining conscious, but exceedingly prostrate, for about 
half an hour, he became again paralyzed and insensible, and some 
one put to the spirits the following : 

" Q. Why do you paralyze him when it is attended with such 
fearful consequences ? 

" A. It is not the sleep that injures him ; — we do it for his 
good. 

" He remained in this state some twenty or thirty minutes, dur- 
ing which the paroxysms were more distressing, more terribly 
_ frightful, than any that had preceded them ; and, judging from 
external appearances, the pulseless, breathless, ghastly and sunken 
aspect of the mortal organism, all present felt sure that it had 
passed the period of reanimation ; but, while in the bitter agonies 
of despair, they received the following spiritual communication : 

" ' Do not be frightened, it will do no good ; he is almost gone," 
but we think we can save him.' 

" In about ten miautes from this time he was restored to a con- 
scious state, and, though in considerable distress, was soon relieved 
by magnetic friction ; and after a swoon, which was of short dura- 

CASE OS ME. N. E. WHITE. 277 

tion, appeared more bright and cheerful than at any time for the 
three hours preceding. From then to the present time his recov- 
ery has been regular and rapids 

" Ailer all that has been said, in the condensed form in this 
article, it must necessarily be but a meagre outline, an abridg- 
ment, of the tiirilling incidents witnessed, in all their appalling 
details, by those in whose presence these singular and memorable 
occurrences took place. 

" Though not present on Friday night, the writer had been pre- 
viously notified of these spiritual predictions of an impending catas- 
trophe, the peculiarities of which were only to be developed in the 
denouement. He has, however, from his familiar acquaintance 
with most of the witnesses, no doubt of the correctness of their 
statement of facts, which are but feebly set forth in the above. 

" Welcome Whitakeb. 
" Troy, June 7th, 1851. 

" We, the undersigned, having been ' present at the house of 
Wood Babcock, in this city, on Tuesday night last, and then and 
there witnessing the scenes noted in the above statements, freely 
declare the same to be substantially correct, though falling far 
short of a full statement of all that transpired on that occasion. 
Wood Babcock, Sophia Babcock, 

Mahale Denison, J. H. Baint, 

Julia F. Sheldon." 

There are other published accounts of the manifestations in 
Troy, sometime previous to this — as early as the month of No- 
vember, 1850; but they contain no particulars of more interest 
than the above. 

Mr. D. B. King, who became interested in these manifestations 
at an early day, writes from Waterford to the Spirit World, un- 
der date of Feb. 6th, 1851, as follows : 

'' I was much gratified and instructed, on Monday evening last, 
while witnessing a few spiritual manifestations, while stopping at 
24 

278 MANIFESTATIONS IN TKOY AND WATERrORD, N. Y. 

Oohoes, N. Y. The medium was Mrs. T , an elderly lady. 

Before we were engaged making inquiries, Mrs. T read to 

US a communication, which was received from the spirit- world, on 
Monday afternoon, relative to us. The medium was advised that 
in our presence reliable responses would be made. 

" About seven o'clock in the evening a company of four, — 

myself, son, Mr. and Mrs. T , — gathered around the table. 

Mrs. T commenced making passes over the table, in order to 

establish a communication. Soon after, various raps were heard on 
the table. The following questions were offered, and answers 
received : 

" Ques. Have I a guardian angel present ? 

" Ans. Yes (by three raps). 

" Q. Will that guardian spirit communicate its name ? 

"A. Yes. 

" I commenced reading over the several names I had prepared, 
requesting the spirit to give his usual signal when the right name 
was pronounced. Repeating several names, Seth Y. Young was 
announced ; immediately three loud and distinct raps on the table 
saluted our ears, signifying that the last name mentioned was the 
name of my guardian angel. 

" Q. Have I more than one guardian ? 

"A. Yes. 

" Several names being called, VUo Lena responded to ns as the 
correct name. I had been familiar with these two names, for 
several years past, as those of my guardian spirits, having obtained 
this knowledge through previous revelations. 

" Q. Has the society of Shakers, at Watervliet, received 
responses from the spirit-world in the manner we receive them ? 

"A. Yes. 

" Q. How many — four times, three times, twice, once? 

"A. Yes (once). — Correct. 

" After I had received several responses, I called for the spirit 
of my mother. She was present, and her signal was given. 

" Q. How long have you been dead ? — No answer. 

COMMUNICATION HIOM " DAEIUS JAQUES.'' 279 

" Q. How long since you left the form ? ^.f 

"A prompt answer was given, spirits preferring the expression 
left the form to that of death. 

" Subsequently I received an incorrect answer to a question pro- 
posed, when I remarked rather severely as follows : ' I shall 
receive no communication whatever from any spirit that will tell 
lies. The spirits must answer me correctly, or not at all.' My 
guardian spirit then manifested himself, gave his signal, which 
was recognized by all in the room, and subsequent responses were 
correct. *****! proposed to the spirits to give us 
some tests of their power by manifesting some physical force on 
the table. Instantly raps in rapid succession were made, contin- 
ually louder and louder, resembling the combined raps of scores 
of spirits, and so frequently that it was impossible to number 
them or distinguish their signals. These sounds continued for 
about one minute, when the table moved about two inches. At 
the close the spirits spelled out the following : ' Be patient, we 
will do the best we can.' " 

I give the following, as a specimen of the communications they 
sometimes receive in that vicinity. It was originally published 
in the Spiritual Telegraph : 

" '-What spirit so influences me ? ' 

" ' Darius Jaques.' 

" ' What would Darius Jaques please ? ' 

" ' I want to have a talk.' 

" ' What would Darius Jaques please to talk about? ' 

" ' I want to talk about past things, present things, and 
things that are not yet. Of things past, I was. intimately 
acquainted with your parents, in Canada, when you were a child ; 
and before you were a child. I was subsequently acquainted with 
them in what was then called the Genesee country. I spent 
much time with them very agreeably. I suppose I saw you, but 
you were so young I have not much recollection about it. I, 
many years ago, left my earthly tenement, by a distressing dis- 

280 MANIFESTATIONS IN TE.OY AND WATEEEOED, N. T. 

ease in the head. Some called it dropsy in the head. I suppose 
it was caused by snuff-taking and other irregularities — violations 
of nature's laws — habits contracted in early life — that grew to 
be my masters, all my philosophy to the contrary notwithstanding. 

" ' During my earthly sojourn I was an attentive observer of 
men and things — an investigator of principles. I took an active 
part in the great political warfare that succeeded the adoption of 
the Constitution of the United States, so called. * * * 
Bat soon I bad the chagrin to find that good Democrats out of 
power were soon metamorphosed into Federalists in power. 
This, as might be expected, was a damper on my party zeal. 
From thence I became a looker-on, — a not always silent specta- 
tor of the miserable scrambles for power. The once significant, 
distinguishing cognomens — Federalist and Democrat — now had 
become meaningless ; or, if they meant anything. Democrat meant 
out af power ; Federalist, in power. All were clamorous for 
KiGHTS before election ; but if elected, they all acted very much 
alike — seeming to consider that power was safe enough in their 
hands, but 7wt safe in other people's. 

' ' ' This and other things set me to investigating the principles 
that govern the world — the springs to human action. 1 saw that 
men were monopolizers, — not in politics only, but in everything, 
— in money ; in land ; in power, — even in religion. 

" 'The Jews, as a nation, had scraped up into their heap the 
entire of Heaven's regards. Other nations did the same, though 
not all to the same degree. The Pharisees scraped up an extra 
heap on top of the national heap, regaiding the masses as of no 
account in the estimation of high Heaven. The disciples of the 
Nazarene considered their own dear selves the only " Simon 
Pures," and soon fell into a quarrel as to which of them should be 
the biggest bug. And this kind of quarrel has existed, more or 
less, among his professed followers, to this day. 

" ' The Nazarene was a plain practical man ; he was no monop- 
olizer ; he was strictly and radically, in all his doctrines, in his 
practices, a Democrat. He was, philosophically and truthfully 

COMMUNICATION FROM " DARIUS JAQUJIS." 281 

speaking, the great apostle of democracy. But no sooner did self- 
ish and designing men, by feigned humility, reach places of trust 
among his professed followers, than they commenced a series of 
operations, or machinations to centralize the powers, — individually 
to monopolize the rights that belonged to the whole, — to create in 
themselves a gigantic, irresponsible power, clothed with the dtead 
sovereignty of Heaven. Such has been, and still is, the tendency 
of what I should call the federal instincts of mortal men, in mat- 
ters of religion the same as in politics, — they are both one. 

" ' The Congregational platform is the only right principle for 
religious association ; but this cannot succeed well when the 
bond of ititegrity is wanting in the people, — hence it behoves 
all who are desirous of availing themselves of the benefits of 
religious association to commence the preparatory work by 
removing, each from his or her own midst, the monopolizing 
propensity ; or, as the Nazarene would say, " Deny self," — 
squaring themselves by the organic law of democracy. " All \ 
things whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye i 
even so to them," for this is the cardinal principle of true 
religion — of the true social state. This is the bond of integrity , 
that binds all heaven together. Consequently, we may put down 
on the records of eternal ages that whoever makes a requirement 
of others, save in accordance with this divine principle, is a mo- 
nopolist — an enemy to the rights of man. 

" ' As I have been an attentive observer of national afiairs, and 
of men, I deem it not amiss nor out of place here to say, that of 
those who have figured largely in national afiairs, John C. Cal- 
houn, aside from his being the personification of that most odious 
relic of barbarism — the " peculiar insiituiion " of the south — 
was as purely and as ably democratic as any man that has 
graced the halls of national legislation. 

" ' In matters of religious and social reform, the present genei'a-"^ ^^ 
tion of earth's inhabitants has many master minds, — giant advo- \ 
cates of the moral, political, social and religious rights of mau ; ' 
some of them already are known to the world ; some not so much 
24* 

282 MANITESTATIONS IN TROY AND WATEBIOKD, N. Y. 

knowB, and there are some who have not yet appeared in public. 
These are invigorated, and miraculously strengthened, by the 
cooperation of the dwellers in our spheres. For the democratic 
principle has able and powerful advocates here, who have pledged 
their sacred all in defence of the "Eternal Eight;" and this 
struggle between the two great antagonisms, right and wrong, 
liberty and oppression, is gaining increasing attention here, — 
and as the right gains the ascendency here, the influence will be 
felt by the dwellers in the first sphere ; for our interests are one ; 
our cause is one.' 

" ' Hold on, friend Jaques ! It seems to me you are mixing up 
things. You override the hitherto-recognized distinctions be- 
tween sacred and profane — mixing them all up together.' 

"'They ought to be — must, and will be, overrode, and 
trampled into fine dust ; and the breath of God, that is now shak- 
ing the dry bones, will drive it all away, and no more place will 
be found for it ; for those distinctions are based on false prin- 
ciples, or rather on no principles. They are based on ignorance, 
selfishness, and consequent superstition ; and as the living light 
— the light of life — of intelligent, intellectual and spiritual 
truth, advances,- — and it will advance, — these false distinctions 
must go down. 

" ' The designing and the ignorant being thereunto moved, and 
seduced by their own lusts for unhallowed power, and mere ani- 
mal enjoyments, have divided the days — which are in themselves 
all alike sacred and good — so as to call owe sacred and six pro- 
fane ; leaving to themselves six sevenths of the days, and aM of 
the nights, to act all manner of ways. In other things they have 
been no less liberal to their dear, unprogi-essed selves ; making 
attendance upon the altar sacred — all other concerns of life 
profane, irresponsible. 

" ' Some of the ancients made to themselves one great God, and 
a > host of little gods — a god to each inclination they wished to 
gratify. This theology they found quite convenient, for, let them 
do as they would, they were serving some one of the numerous 

COMMDJJIOAl'ION FROM " DABIUS JAQUES." 283 

! 

train of gods.. The modem theologians are, in effect, the same, 
though less consistent with theory. 

" ' But now, the life and light-giving spirit of God has begun to 
move on the waters. A separation will be made. The light will 
be divided from the darkness ; and here, between eight and wrong, 
the party-line mil he drawn. This will be the line between 
sacred and profane. All that is sacred will be on the right side 
of the line, — all that is profane, on the wrong. 

" ' And woe unto him that seeks again to commingle light and 
darkness — wrong and right — for, by so doing, he embodies in 
himself heresy, treason, fdony and all sin ; yea, verily I say unto 
you, woe unto him ; for he has the reward of his iniquity treas- 
ured up in his own soul ; and how shall he escape it ? None will 
run after him, to add to his affliction. They need not ; for, like 
the first Cain, his punishment will be greater than he can bear, 
and he will repent, or flee from the presence of the Lord, which 
shall beam forth in the countenances of the people ; for they will 
be moved with pity for the unfortunate offender — not with 
revenge. Then, indeed, may the swords be used for trimming 
trees, and the big guns be melted and come out cast-iron ploughs. 
The people may dispense with their salaried clergy, and gaudy 
temples ; with their judges, gallows and prisons ; with their prof- 
ligate masters, called public servants, and with their quarrelling, 
rowdying legislators. Great efforts are now in progress, in our 
sphere, and in the spheres above us, to accomplish this mighty end ; 
and no power of darkness, nor all the powers of ignorance and 
error combined, can arrest the car of progress ; for the Lord God 
omnipotent says, " Let there be light," and it vdll be so. 

" ' Now, my friend, I '11 stop for the present, — for I perceive 
you are wearied with the length of my communication, if not with 
the depth of it. I thank you for the opportunity here afforded 
me to communicate some of my views on this, to me, all-engross- 
ing theme. If anything here communicated will, in any way, 
contribute to the cause of common good, you will be paid for 
your trouble, — I am already paid.' " 

284 MANIFESTATIONS IN TUOY AND WATERFORD, N. T. 

At the present time they have many interesting and remark- 
able manifestations at the circles in both Troy and Waterford. 
One of the most remarkable cases is thus recorded by Mr. Elisha 
Waters, of Troy. He informed me of it soon after the occurrence, 
and afterward made the statement as follows in the Spiritual 
Telegraph : 

" Waterpoed, N. T., March 27th, 1853. 

" Mr. Brittan, — Dear Sir : At a circle held in this village 
on the 5th of this month, there were some ' manifestations ' which 
boar so directly on the dispute in regard to the cause of the strange 
pherunnena now so prevalent, that a brief account may not be 
uninteresting to your readers. 

Several mediums, in various stages of development, were pres- 
ent, and a great variety of manifestaitions were made, mainly in 
the form of ' possession.' In the course of the evening, Mr. John 
Prosser, a gentleman residing in Waterford, and subject to this 
possession in its most thorough form, was under the control of a 
spirit that announced that no one in the room ever knew or 
heard of him, but that he was drawn to the circle by strong 
attraction. He said he was over a hundred years old when he 
left the form ; was a soldier in the Revolutionary War, and had 
frequently seen Washington, of whom he spoke with great rever- 
ence. He told us, as the result of his long experience, to do our 
own thinking, and to read the great Book of Nature, for our guid- 
ance ; but that we should not 'fight ' the church or the clergy, for 
their struggles would injure themselves more than others, and 
only help forward their approaching and long fore- written doom. 
He added, that the truth of spiritualism would now shine out 
without any aid from iconoclastic zeal. I should, perhaps, to do 
justice, say that he spoke of the church as having accomplished a 
work, and as about to die a natural death after its great mis- 
sion had been fulfilled. 

" I will give his closing remarks verbatim et literatim. 

" ' Now, this is every word true I 'm telling ye. I '11 tell ye, 

" UNCLE JOHN CHAMBERLAIN." 285 

80 that if you 'ye a mind to take a little pains, you can find out 
that this is jest exactly as I tell it ye. I lived at Point Pleas- ■ 
ant, New Jersey, and if you want to know, you jest ask if old 
Uncle John Chamberlain did n't speak the truth.' 

" He stopped speaking, and the usual signs of a change of pos- 
session followed, when some one remarked that it was a pity he 
had not given more particulars, as it would have been, under the 
circumstances, so thorough a test. It soon became evident that 
Mr. Pressor's grandfather (who is, in a sense, his ' guardian ') had 
possession. He turned his face good-humoredly around the 
circle, and remarked, that, as he saw many were anxious to hear 
more from the ' old man,' he would come back for a little while. 
After a short interval of quiet, Mr. Pressor's whole manner 
changed to that which he had while the former speaker had pos- 
session, and these were his words : 

" ' My friends, I did not expect to speak with you again, but I 
want to give you this as a test. I died on Friday, the 15th day 
of January, 1847, and I was the father of eleven children. Now, 
if you 've a mind to take a little pains, you will find this is all 
jest as I tell it ye. I don't talk as you do, but if you like to 
hear an old man, I will come again. Grood-by, — .1 must go.' 

" It would be impossible to give an adequate notion of the 
plain, unvarnished truthfulness which shone out through every 
word and gesture of his discourse. Other ' manifestations,' of a 
similar character, followed, and the circle broke up. 

" On the following evening, a circle was held at another house, 
bat few of the members of the former circle being present, with 
some other persons. Mr. Pressor was the only medium present. Old 
Uncle John Chamberlain made his appearance again, and repeated 
the statistical part of his communication, when it was found that 
the scribe had written Pleasant Point, instead of Point Pleasant. 

" After finding out that there was such a post-office in New 
Jersey as the latter, and that the 15th of January did fall on 

286 MANUESTATIONS IN TROY AND WATEEFOED, N. T. 

Friday in the year 1847, we wrote to the postmaster, and were 
informed that the ' old man ' was strictly correct in his account 
of himself. We send you extracts from the letters received, 
which will suffice to show the remarkable fidelity of the spirit's 
statements to the facts of his personal history. 

" ' We, the undersigned, were present at the first circle, men- 
tioned above, and think th« account of it correct. We also affirm 
that we had never, to the best of our recollection, known or heard 
aught of John Chamberlain, or any of the facts connected with . 
his life or death ; nor did we know that there was such a place 
as Point Pleasant in New Jersey. 

John Prosser, E. Waters, 

Sarah S.. Prosser, N. F. White, 

Juliet E. Perkins, Mrs. N. D. Eoss, 

A. A. Thurber, N. D. Eoss, 

Letiy a. Botce, J. H. Eainey, 

Albert Kjindeick, Mrs. J. H. Eainey.' 

"LETTER TO THE POSTMASTER Or^OINT PLEASANT. 

" ' Trot, February 23d, 1853. 
" ' Dear Sir : Will you be kind enough to inform me if there has 
died in your town, within a few years, an aged man by the name 
of Chamberlain? If so, please give me the particulars of the 
time of his death, age, etc. ; also, give me the name of one of the 
family with whom I can correspond.* 

" ' Very truly yours, E. Waters.' 

" THE ANSWER. 

" ' E. Waters, — Friend : I received thy letter, dated 28th ult., 
requesting some information of John Chamberlain. With pleas- 

" * Feiend Brittan : After receiving the accompanying answer, I wrote 
again, making inquiry respecting the number of children he had, and re- 
ceived in reply that he had eleven ; that two died in infancy, and that the 
remaining nine lived to be of age. Truly yours." 

" UNCLE JOHN CHAMBBRtAIN." 287 

ure I will give thee a correct account, for I have known him well 
for fifty years, and lived a neighbor to him. He deceased Janu- 
ary 15th, 1847, aged one hundred and four years. He had seven 
children that lived to be married ; three of them have deceased 
and left children. He has four daughters living at this time ; 
three of them are neighbors to me ; the oldest daughter is a 
widow, seventy-eight years old; three have husbands; one of 
them lives twenty miles from me. As they have very little learn- 
ing, they request thee to correspond with me. With pleasure I 
will give thee every information that lays in my power. 
" ' Very truly, thine, 

" ' Thomas Cook. 
" ' Point Pleasant, 7th day March, 18'53. 

" 'P. S. — He was a Revolutionary soldier ; served in the war, 
and drew a small pension. T. C' 

I ) j> 

It would hardly be possible to state a stronger case than the 
foregoing, having a tendency to show, not only the fact of spirits 
communicating, but their absolute identity. But, as my business 
is to record facts, and not to form opinions, I leave the reader to 
judga of the legitimate conclusions to be drawn from these facts. 
Like all other places where the spiritual manifestations have been 
known, they have continued to spread and attract the attention 
of the citizens until it has ceased to be a matter of marvel that 
persons are found to believe in spiritual manifestations. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

MANIFESTATIONS IN CINCINNATI VISIT OF MRS. EUSHNELL, THE MEDIUM — 

MUST INVESTIGATIONS VISIT OF THE FOX FAMILY IMOKEASE OF BE- ' 

LIEVEES. 

I AVAIL myself of a pamphlet compiled byWm.T. Coggshall, 
of Cincinnati, in 1851, for a history of the first manifestations 
in that place. He makes the following statement : 

" On the evening of the 26th of September, 1850, we had the 
pleasure of meeting Mrs. Bushnell with a select party at the house 
of Prof. J. E. Buchanan, the well-known Neurologist and editor of 
the Journal of Man, published in this city. During the course of 
the evening, Mrs. B. was impressed by the professor. She made 
generally accurate phrenological examinations of several gentle- 
men present, whom she had never seen before that evening, and 
who sat, during the examination, at the opposite side of the room 
from her. When Dr. Buchanan was about to awaken her from the 
clairvoyant state, she bid him stop, and entered upon a description 
of the appearance and character of the doctor's father, many 
years deceased. She gave a very correct description of his per- 
sonal appearance, as compared with a portrait that was afterwards 
shown the company. After speaking of the doctor's father as 
spiritually present to her, she entered upon a lecture on spiritual 
conditions. We requested permission to ask the lady a few ques- 
tions. It was granted. We inquired if we had recently lost a 
relative. She said we had, — that it was a person heavier than 
we are, — that he was at a distance west, — that he was going 
further west, — that he resembled us very much, — that he must 

VISIT OF MRS. BBSIINELL, THE MEDIUM. 289 

be a brother, — that he died suddenly of a disease of the stomach. 
She described his appearance perfectly, gave the peculiarities of 
his mind, and stated that he was in pursuit of an object by which 
he hoped to ' shine in the world ; ' that when he died he ex- 
pressed many regrets ; and she described effects and mementos, 
which we know he had with him, aa perfectly as we could have 
done it. Her impressions of all the matters in reference to him, 
of which she spoke, were correct, as near as we can judge. 

" After this interview, we had several opportunities of testing 
Mrs. B.'s clairvoyant powers, and we became convinced that, in 
many respects, and for many purposes, they were remarkable. 
During the interviews we had with Mrs. B. for clairvoyant investi- 
gations, we learned from her that the ' mysterious noises ' had often 
been made in her presence, and that she had communicated with 
spirits by means of them. Our curiosity was excited, and we 
expressed a strong desire to witness the ' manifestations.' On two 
occasions the sounds were heard by Mrs. B. in our company, but 
were not communicative. The first positive ' manifestations ' were 
heard on the night of the 14th of October, at the house of a gen- 
tleman with whom Mrs. Bushnell was boarding. The only intel- 
ligible communication received at this time was the following : — 
' Your lattery is Tiot strong enough.' 

" The account of this demonstration having spread to some 
extent, there was much speculation in regard to it, and much 
interest manifested to call out farther demonstrations. The sup- 
position that these rappings are ' manifestations ' from the spirit- 
world, employed for the purpose of communicating messages to 
mortals, having excited great interest in them, and awakened 
intense curiosity wherever they have been heard, it is not strange 
that when it was reported they had been heard in Cincinnati, there 
was a multitude of people anxious to be among the favored who 
had opportunities to receive communications from friends that had 
passed through ' the dark valley and shadow of death.' 

« On Wednesday evening, October 16th, a number of persons 
had assembled for the purpose of receiving the benefit of Mrs. 
25 

290 MANIFESTATIONS IN CINCINNATI. 

Bushnell's medical examinations, -when the mysterious sounds were 
again heard. Questions were asked, and correct rapping replies 
were given to a number of interrogatories, which, we are informed, 
could not have been correctly answered by any mortal. The 
report of this meeting awakened intense curiosity, and on the fol- 
lowing evening, a larger company assembled at the same place. 
A circle was formed, and the rappings commenced. Among the 
gentlemen of this circle were Mr. Samuel Goodin, of Goodin's , 
building, Court-street ; G. W. Ball, stove-founder, of Covington, 
Ky. ; Dr. J. P. Gatohell, of the Eclectic Medical College ; Mr. 
Anson Atwood, of Troy, New York ; Mr. Augustus Wattles, of 
Kural, Ohio ; Dr. William Owens, of the Eclectic College ; Mr. 
Norton, stove-dealer, on Main-street ; and a number of other gen- 
tlemen, together with some ladies with whom we were not ac- 
quainted. 

" The alphabet was called by one of the gentlemen, who under- 
stood the modus operandi of communication, and the persons in 
the circle took turns in putting questions. It would not be proper 
to detail all the questions and answers ; many of them were unim- 
portant, and many, though, perhaps, important to the persons 
interested, are not worthy of public narration. When it came 
Mr. Goodin's turn to interrogate the spirits, he inquired : — 'Is 
there a spirit present that will communicate with me ? ' Rap. 

" ' Can I know what spirit answers ? ' Bap. 

"The alphabet was then called, and the following sentence 
spelled : 

" ' I am your own chUd.^ 

" ' The youngest ? ' inquired Mr. Goodin. No answer. 

" ' The second ? ' No sawnd. 

" ' The eldest ? ' Bap. 

" The alphabet was again called, and the following sentence 
spelled : 

" ' / hme you now as well as euer.' 

" ' Do you love your mother ? ' Rap. 

<• < Are you happy ? ' Rav. 

PmSI INVESTMATIONS. 291 

" ' Are your sisters with you ? ' Rap. 

" ' Are they happy 7 ' Eap. 

" ' Can I do anything to make you more happy ? ' Eap. 

" Again the alphabet was called, and the following sentence 
spelled : 

" ' Be patient, and don't fret about the calomel.' 

" A friend, at this communication, remarked, that ' Mr. Groodin 
reflected on himself in reference to the child's medical treatment 
during her sickness.' As if in response to this repeated raps 
were heard. 

" Mr. Goodin then inquired, — ' Did you die in consequence of 
taking calomel ? ' Eap. 

" After some further questions and replies of a private charac- 
ter, it came Mr. Augustus Wattles' turn to make interrogatories. 
He inquired, — ' Is there a spirit present that will converse with 
me ? ' Eup. 

" ' Can I know the person ? ' Eap. 

"' Will you spell the name ? ' No sound. 

" ' Will you give the initials 7 ' Eap. 

" The alphabet was then called, and ' W. W.' was designated. 

" ' Is it the spirit of my brother, William Wattles 7' Eap. 

" ' Do you intend that I should understand that my brother, 
William Wattles, is dead 7 ' Eap. 

" ' Did he die in California 7 ' JVb sound. 

" ' Did he die near California 7 ' Eap. 

" ' Were you well taken care of 7 ' Eap. 

" ' What disease did you die of 7 ' Alphabet called for by sev- 
eral quickly repeated j-ops, and the word ' Diarrhoea ' spelled. 

" ' When shall I hear of this in the common way 7 ' No sound. 

" ' Will it be within one year ? ' Eap. 

" ' Will it be within nine months 7 ' -Eap. 

" ' Will it be within six months 7 ' No sound. 

" A young man from Kentucky, whose name we did not learn, 
had now the opportunity of spiritual converse. 

" He inquired, ' Will any spirit converse with me ? ' Eap. 

292 MANIFESTATIONS IN CINCINNATI. 

" Alphabet called, and the following sentences spelled : 

" ^ I am your mother. Do ruit oppose him any more. He will 
be married.' 

" This communication excited quite a laugh at the young man's 
expense, and considerable discussion ensued, during which the rap- 
pings continued, as if to signify that there were more communica- 
tions to be made. The alphabet was again called, and the follow- 
ing sentence spelled : 

" ' It loiU aU come out right.' 

" Some one inquired, ' Is there any meaning to this ? ' 

" Mr. Ball answered, ' Yes, there is great meaning in it to us.' 

" Before the company dispersed, some one inquired if all the 
spirits in the room would rap on the table. In response, there 
was a great number of sounds made at the same moment upon the 
table, — some loud, some feeble, some sharp, and some prolonged. 

" During Friday and Saturday of this week most of the per- 
sons who visited Mrs. Bushnell for medical consultation, heard the 
mysterious sounds, and many astonishing communications were 
given, if the testimony of respectable persons is to be credited. 

" On Saturday evening, October 19th, we had an opportunity 
of hearing the wonderful demonstrations at the house of J. F. 
Taylor, the gentleman with whose family we make our home, — a 
man deeply interested in spiritual investigations, and in whose 
house there would be no deception allowed, under any circum- 
stances. 

" A company had been invited to hear Mrs. B. lecture on Spirit- 
ualism. Among the persons present were Major Gano, clerk of 
the Supreme Court of Cincinnati, Dr. J. S. Garretson, Dr. 
Wm. Owens, of the Eclectic College, Dr. Childs, of Walnut 
Hills, Mr. Augustus Wattles, Dr. I. Wilson, Botanic Physician, 
and many other gentlemen, whose names it is unnecessary to men- 
tion, together with a large number of ladies. There were three 
known clairvoyants in the company. While the lecture was pro- 
ceeding, the sounds were heard, apparently, under the floor, near 
the speaker. The clairvoyant spoke of the rappings, calling them 

PROCEEDINGS OF CIRCLES. 293 

electrical Tibrations, and said communications might be had from 
the spirit-world if a battery was formed. Inquiry was made how 
a battery could be formed. The reply was, ' By sitting around a 
table.' 

" The lecturer, with two other persons designated, seated them- 
selves together at one corner of the table. Sounds were distinctly 
heard under the floor, directly beneath these persons. The alpha- 
Bet was called, and the word Cornell was spelled, the sounds 
occurring as the letters were spoken in repeating the alphabet. 

" It was asked if it was the spirit of Mr. Cornell that commu- 
nicated ? Eap. 

" A few unimportant questions were asked, when a ' manifesta- 
tion ' that startled the entire company was made ; suddenly the 
left arm of one of the ladies at the table was drawn back with 
great force, as if it had been grasped between the elbow and the 
shoulder. Several persons undertook to relieve the arm by mag- 
netic passes, but without eiFeot. The inquiry was made — ' Is it 
the spirit of Mr. Cornell that affects the lady ? ' Rap. 

" ' Will the spirit relieve her ? ' No sound ; but suddenly the 
arm was thrown forward, and the lady was entirely relieved. 

" We had been conversing with the lady during the day, in 
reference to the manifestations, and we remarked to the company 
that she had observed that she would not believe the rappings 
were by spirits unless some spirits should take hold of her. At 
this there were several raps near the lady, as if to signify that the 
spirit had made an effort to convince her. 

" The question was put — ' Will the spirit take hold of the 
lady again ? ' No sound ; but the lady says that her fingers were 
pressed together, as if a powerful hand had grasped them. She 
describes the sensation on her arm as if it had been so vigorously 
grasped between the elbow and shoulder that she was unable to 
open or shut her hand. 

" We were satisfied at the time that this manifestation was not 
the effect of magnetism, as generally understood, because the 
25* 

294 MANIFESTATIONS IN CINCINNATI. 

liiuscles of the arm were not contracted ; the arm was merely 
drawn, or pulled back, as described. 

" When the alphabet was again called for and repeated, the fol- 
lowing sentences were spelled : 

" ' I will convince you all. Mrs. Busknell will be magnetized 
in one minute.^ 

" Several watches were immediately on the table. Mrs. Bushnell 
said she would not be magnetized, and was ridiculing the commu- 
nication, when, at the instant the minute expired, with a shock as 
if a dozen electric batteries had operated upon her, her eyes 
closed, and she became rigid. In another minute, with another 
shock, her eyes opened, and the rigidity passed off instantly. 

" Again the alphabet was called for, and the following sentence 
spelled — ' Go home.' 

" After some general conversation, and much speculation on the 
demonstrations of the evening, the company dispersed — many 
expressing themselves astonished, others posed, and some convinced 
that spirits do communicate with mortals. On this occasion the 
sounds could not have been produced, we are satisfied, by any sort 
of collusion among any of the company. If any were deceived, 
all were. The manifestations purported to be from only one 
spirit, that of John P. Cornell, a lawyer of some distinction, in 
Cincinnati, who died of cholera in the summer of 1849. 

" In this life, Mr. Cornell had carefully and extensively made 
clairvoyant investigations ; he was a firm believer in, and public 
advocate of, the doctrine that spiritual manifestations can be made 
through clairvoyants, and had been identified with a society organ- 
ized for the purpose of both physical and spiritual investigations, 
through clairvoyance. It is consistent, then, that on the occasion 
referred to, as there were several persons in the company who had 
been closely identified with him in this world, that his spirit should 
take advantage of circumstances and make astounding demonstra- 
tions. 

" On Monday afternoon, October 21st, in company with Mrs. 
Bushnell, the clairvoyant, and our ' better half,' we paid a visit 

PKOCEEDINGS OF CIRCLES. 295 

to the family of a well-known, eloquent temperance a^dvocate, 
residing several miles from the city. At the request of the gen- 
tleman, Mrs. Bushnell was thrown into the clairvoyant state, 
under our influence. She examined his head, giring, as far as we 
know his character, a very correct estimate. She was then 
requested to describe a lady, whose initials only were given. 
Neither Mrs. Bushnell, nor ourself, had ever heard of, or about, 
her. 

" According to the gentleman's acknowledgment she described 
the lady and her husband, and the lady's ailments perfectly. 
While Mrs. Bushnell was making this examination she began to 
speak of spiritual matters, as she is always prone to do in her 
clairvoyant state, and remarked that she saw a spirit which seemed 
to be the attendant angel of the household. She gave a descrip- 
tion of this spirit, which answered the description of the gentle- 
man's first wife, some three or four years deceased, and stated 
that this spirit wished to communicate with the family. 

" ' Why,' said Mrs. Bushnell, ' she is magnetizing Mrs. .' 

" The lady mentioned had been for several minutes much agitated, 
and was evidently under magnetic influence, and continued so for 
nearly half an hour. 

" At the supper-table, Mrs. Bushnell and this lady sat directly 
opposite each other. The mysterious rappings were heard under 
the table, very distinctly. A series of questions and rapping 
replies followed. 

" ' Will the spirit communicate ? ' Rap. 

" ' Shall the alphabet be called? ' Bap. 

" We repeated the letters of the alphabet, and the following sen- 
tence was spelled : 

" ' I am your friend, Louisa.' 

"We inquired of the gentleman, who, he supposed, was meant; 
and he answered that Louisa was the Christian name of his flrst 
wife. No one present but the members of the family was aware 
of this fact. They were all much astonished at the demonstration, 
and several were considerably alarmed. 

296 MANIFESTATIONS IN CINCINNATI. 

" The question was put — 'Are there any more communications 
to be made ? ' Eap. 

" The letters of the alphabet were repeated, and the following 
sentences spelled : 

■" ' I am happy — I am with you here often.' 

" The astonishment of the family was increased, and there was a 
general conversation in relation to the mysterious sounds, much 
of which was of a sceptical character, when again the raps were 
heard. ^ 

"' Shall the alphabet be called?' said one of the company. 
Eap. 

" The following sentence was spelled : 

" ' Will you be satisfied ? ' 

" No sounds were heard, after the communication of this sentence, 
until the ladies had retired from the supper-room and were gath- 
ered in the parlor. Here repeated raps were distinctly heard, but 
it was growing late, we had six miles to drive, and business to 
attend to in the city, and were obliged to forego the pleasure of 
further spiritual intercourse. 

" This was treating the spiritual communicants quite cavalierly, 
but our circumstances were such it could not justifiably have been 
avoided. 

" On Tuesday and Wednesday, the rappings were heard frequent- 
ly at the house where Mrs. Bushnell was stopping, and a large 
number of persons held conversations with the rappers. On 
Wednesday evening, Mrs. Bushnell met a select circle at the 
house of Professor J. K. Buchanan, and communications were 
received by raps from the father of Dr. Buchanan, many years 
deceased, and from Dr. T. V. Morrow, a few months deceased, 
formerly Dean of the Eclectic Medical College. 

" Circles were subsequently formed in various parts of the city, 
for the purpose of calling out the ' manifestations,' but no com- 
munications were received. 

" On Saturday, October 26th, Mrs. Bushnell left Cincinnati, on 
;i visit to her home, in the western part of New York, and did not 

OPINIONS lUlSPJiOTINa TIIE RAPPINQS. 297 

return for nearly four weeks. During her absence there were no 
rapping ' manifestations ' with which communication was had, 
although many clairvoyant investigations of deep interest were 
made, by means of several excellent subjects. 

" The substance of the history we have thus far detailed was 
published, from day to day, in the HaUy Times ; it excited great 
curiosity, and occasioned a great deal of speculation. 

" It is the nature of the subject. . Direct communication with the 
spirit-world is a matter on which there is so much scepticism — a 
matter so astonishing, judged by the common teachings on the 
subject, that it would be strange if articles detailing correspond- 
ence with spirits did not ' make talk.' Some persons treated 
the rappings with scorn ; some as a successful AMzraiM^f-wonder ; 
some denounced all who had any communication with tiiem as 
villains ; and some appeared to think that lying spirits do commu- 
nicate, and very piously affirmed that it is prophesied that in 'these 
latter days ' there shall be ' signs and wonders,' which, if it 
were possible, would deceive the ' very elect.' Many thought 
that Cincinnati had just been visited by a grand humhug which 
had ' run out ' at the eastern cities. A few were disposed to 
treat the mysterious matter candidly, and honestly investigate it. 
The press of the city generally ridiculed the whole affair, and two 
or three papers denounced the rappings as a decided and out- 
rageous humbug. They were alluded to in several sermons, but 
were only spoken of directly from an orthodox pulpit on one occa- 
sion. 

" On Sabbath evening, November 3d, Rev. C. B. Boynton, of the 
Vine-street Congregational church, lectured on spiritualism, with 
reference to the ' manifestations.' He considered them demon- 
strations literally. He traced through history many remarkable 
manifestations, which he ascribed to the same influences as those 
producing the ' rappings.' He expressed an opinion that the 
astrologers and magicians of olden time received their power of 
magic and divination from spirits — that is to say, wicked spirits ; 

298 MANIMSTATIONS IN CINCINNATI. 

jind the influences of the present day he judged to be from the 
same source. 

" Legions of demons encompass, in his opinion, the atmosphere 
about us, and have the power to make ' manifestations ' through 
man. They might enter man and personify other spirits — spirits 
of friends deceased, or of prophets or apostles. The Prince of 
Darkness had the power of the air ; and if a spirit should speak to 
him (Mr. B.), representing itself as the ethereal essence of his 
dearest departed friend, discrediting, in any particular, the doc- 
trines and prophecies of the Bible, as tiow understood, he shpuld 
believe it a lying spirit, assuming shapes that did not belong to it 
for evU. purposes. We must try the spirits by the teachings of 
Christ and his apostles. 

" If, from the demonstrations now being made, a sect of spiritu- 
alists should grow up that discredited established theology, and 
that sect should ' increase and multiply,' he should consider that 
the period was commencing, which he conceived to be foretold in 
the Bible, when the Prince of Darkness shall for a time have 
dominion, and the wicked shall triumph, prior to the winding up 
of terrestrial affairs, when the saints shall prevail, and Christ 
shall come in the clouds with his holy angels to judge the world. 

" A short time subsequent to this discourse. Professor Locke, of 
Cincinnati, in a lecture, introductory to a course before the Ohio 
Medical College, took occasion, as many people supposed, to 
expose the ' knocking humbug,' scientifically. The learned doc- 
tor declared the whole thing a well-played, juggling scheme, and 
to his own satisfaction described how magnets and wires might be 
so disposed upon the person of a woman that she could produce 
mysterious sounds at pleasure. The lecture was a great relief to 
a certain class of minds; and, as it did them no harm to be 
relieved, we are not sorry they found a doctor who could prescribe 
for their peculiar ailments. 

No further public attention was called to the ' Knockings,' 
except by us in the Daily Times, until about the middle of Decem- 
ber, when Professor Gatchell, of the Eclectic College, delivered 

OPINIONS RESPECTING THE KAPPINGS. 299 

"two lectures at the Hall of the Institute. He gave a sketch of 
spiritual manifestations in various ages of the world, and presented 
his views upon their philosophy. 

" On Sabbath evening, December 22d, Rev. J. P; Stuart, of 
the New Jerusalem Society (Swedenborgian), announced a course 
of lectures on ' the communications between men and spiritual 
beings in another sphere.' His introductory was reported in full, 
hy J. D. Taylor, editor of the Daily Times. 

" He commenced by referring to early biblical history for the 
first facts bearing on the subject. At the earliest period, angels 
and spirits appeared to men, and always excited fear and appre- 
hension. The presence of a spirit was a token of evil — voices 
speaking from the invisible world — visions of spiritual things 
filled the minds even of good men with calamitous forebodings, 
while the evil would be utterly overwhelmed. Belshazzar, while 
drinking wine from the sacred vessels brought from Jerusalem, 
with his wives and concubines, and praising their gods, witnessed 
the handwriting on the wall and trembled. When the Lord 
appeared to Adam in the garden, he was afraid. The usual com- 
mencement of the message of the angel of the Lord was, ' Fear 
not.' The word of the Lord came unto Abraham in a vision, say- 
ing, ' Eear not, I am thy shield,' &c. The angel of the Lord 
called to Hagar, and said unto her, ' Fear not, for the Lord hath 
heard the voice of the lad,' &c. The Lord appeared to Isaac and 
said, ' Fear not, for I am with thee,' &c. Moses said, ' Fear not, 
for God has come nigh to prove you,' &c. The angel of the Lord 
appeared to Gideon and said, ' Peace be with thee ; fear not, thou 
shalt not die,' &c. Gabriel appeared to Mary to make the annun- 
ciation, and said to her, ' Fear not, for thou hast found favor with 
God,' &e. Other passages, from the New Testament, were quoted, 
to prove the fact, as announced, that fear was common on the 
occasion of these communications. John of Patmos was so 
addressed : ' Fear not, I am the first and the last,' &c. Within 
the last hundred years this fear had vanished ; the visit of a spirit 
had now no terrors to any one ; it disturbed neither men, women, 

300 MANIFESTATIONS IN CINCINNATI. 

nor children. All this was well ; it showed at least that we arc 
not afraid. Whoever he is that speaks from the ' night-side of 
nature,' we are not afraid of his voice. Angel, spirit, or demon, 
let him speak, we neither hide our eyes, nor shudder at his pres- 
ence ; on the contrary, we seek them out — we say, give us the 
proof of their presence — let us hear their oracles, if they are 
divine, let us worship and adore — if they are miraculous, let us 
adore them — if magical or mesmeric, let us see them — if gal- 
vanic or electrical, let us demonstrate them. 

" The ambition of bold adventure in spiritual things character- 
ized the spiritual philosophers and their attendant disciples at the 
present day. The lecturer acknowledged the universal presence 
of the spiritual world, and declared his belief that communication 
with that world was neither impossible nor improbable. The 
apparitions of angels and spirits, the visions of prophets and apos- 
tles, and the coming of our Lord, were proofs of this communica- 
tion, and they were continued when any good and useful end might 
be gained by them. 

" The attention called to the ' manifestations,' by Mr. Stuart's 
lectures, led to a discussion at the Franklin rooms, corner of Vine 
and Ctentre streets. A large number of persons attended, showing 
that, with however much ridicule people may treat these subjects, 
they have deep interest in all that pertains to them. 

" The speakers on this occasion were Mr. J. B. Burns, phono- 
graphic teacher, and ourself, on the affirmative ; D. Keddington, 
homoeopathic physician, and Isaac Straub, machinist, on the nega- 
tive. The discussion was not one that elicited any new views. It 
was continued for several successive Sunday evenings with interest, 
and we presume with profit. Mr. Stuart's lectures were all lis- 
tened to with eager attention by very large audiences. 

" The details of no ' manifestations ' had been made public for 
some time, and the wise and w'itty were having rare sport at the 
expense of the ' humbug that had exploded.' Meantime, Mrs. 
Bushnell returned to the city. A few days after her arrival, 
sounds were heard in the house where she was stopping, but no 
communications were had, till one afternoon, Mr. James Goodin, 

FURTHER COMMUNICATIONS. 30l 

before referred to, and Dr. A. Curtis, of the Botanical Medical 
College, called upon her. Sounds were heard near the doctor's 
chair. He inquired — 

" ' Is there a spirit present that will communicate with me ? ' 
Rap. 

" The alphabet was called for by repeated sounds, and at the 
calling over of the letters, such were designated by raps as spelled 
the following words : ' It is your wife, H. A. 0. You know you 
thought I felt hard sometimes. I did not intend any harm. I 
am happy now, and with you. I am your guardian angel. I 
have been with you all the time. Good evening.' 

" Mr. Goodin then inquired — 

" ' Will any spirit communicate with me ? ' Rap. 

" The following communication was received by the usual 
method : 

" ' It is your daughter, Anna G . I love my dear father. 

You are most happy with me around the table. I answer for all 
our family. I am your guardian angel.' 

"On the evening following that on which these 'manifesta- 
tions ' were given, another party assembled at the same place. A 
young lady inquired if any spirit would communicate with her. 
Distinct raps were given, and the following communication made : 

" ' Be content at your present home. I am with you often. It 
is my pleasure to be with you. Be certain, my sister, we are all 
happy here. I have done as I agreed.' 

" On the announcement of the last sentence the young lady was 
startled, and she then told the company that she had been in 
Rochester with her sister when rapping ' manifestations ' were 
being made in the family of Mrs. Pish. They did not believe 
them to be spiritual ' manifestations ; ' and when they parted they 
mutually agreed that whichever died first should visit the other in 
spirit, and make raps, if it were possible. The sister went to 
Wisconsin, and died. She had come to her sister, in Ohio, in 
spirit, and fulfilled the promise made in the flesh. 

" Mr. Norton, before spoken of, was one of the circle. He 
26 

302 MANIFESIIONS IN CINCINNATI. 

inquired if any spirit would communicate with him ? Rap. The 
following communication was received : 

" ' I am your brother, David. My mission is to convince you 
that I exist in spirit. Never make a public demonstration of it, 
but publish the communications made in private circles. My dear 
brother, you may consider yourself a favored person, as, with a 
proper medium, you can communicate with me and others. Use 
no more means to settle my afifairs. All is done that can be done. 
I am satisfied with the course you adopted, and with the manner 
my business was closed by George. Be happy and contented — 
I am with you always. Good-evening.' 

" Other raps were now heard. The alphabet was called, and the 
following communication given to the same gentleman : 

" ' I am your father. I am here to communicate with you and 
the rest of! the folks, but I am not here often — my care is for 
your brother, Washington. No more to-night.' 

" These communications were exceedingly gratifying to this gen- 
tleman. He had been his brother's administrator. His own 
business had obliged him to give the settlement into a younger 
brother's hands. It was truly gratifying to learn that all had 
been arranged satisfactorily. 

" Other communications were had, but they were not of a char- 
acter proper for publication. At a meeting of a circle, subse- 
quent to both the above mentioned, a communication was made 
to a gentleman of our city, which was exceedingly important to 
him and friends. 

" As the particulars of these spiritual interviews became known 
the interest in them deepened, and we began to hear of demon- 
strations in various quarters of the city. Great curiosity was 
manifested by believers and unbelievers to meet Mrs. Bushnell, 
and hear the 'mysterious noises;' but, as yet, only a small por- 
tion of the carious in Cincinnati have been among the privileged. 

" About the first of December we heard of ' rappings ' in sev- 
eral portions of the city. A Miss B , on Cutter-street, had 

frequently heard them, but had never communicated with them, 

FUKTUEU COMMUNICATIONS. 803 

and her family considered them forerunners of calamity. A Miss 

M had heard the sounds repeatedly before Mrs. Bushnell 

visited the city. A Miss H had often heard them. They 

were first manifested about two years ago. They alarmed her 
father and mother. They endeavored to ascertain the cause, but 
without success, and could never understand them until they heard 
of the ' Rochester Knockings.' Dr. Wm. Owens, of the Eclectic 
Medical College, had frequently heard them, and had occasionally 
received answers to mental questions from the spirit of Dr. Mor- 
row. During the last week of November several persons held 
communication with the sounds, while consulting Mrs. Bushnell 
for medical purposes. Prof. B. E. Hill received, by means of 
raps, what he considers a very important communication in refer- 
ence to medical science. A lady, whose husband had been some 
months deceased, received a communication from him, in refer- 
ence to the settlement of business, and the deception of certain 
persons who were administering his estate, which has proved of 
great importance to her. A young man of this city informs us 

that his sister, a Miss J , who died a few months since, told her 

family on her death-bed, that if the ' rappings ' were not a delu- 
sion she would communicate with them. To her brother-in-law 
she said, ' I will visit you when I leave the body, if I can, and 
make a sound that you will recognize.' 

" A few weeks ago, a sister of this lady had an opportunity to 
hear the raps, and she received communications which convinced 
her that her sister, who had departed from this sphere, had ful- 
filled her promise. Thfe brother-in-law has heard sounds for which 
he cannot account. "We give this as told us, in good faith, by a 
respectable and responsible man — one who would not be likely 
to jest about the return of a departed sister, to his family, in 
such a manner that her presence was believed. 

" Dr. Silsbee, a gentleman of Cincinnati, who is much interested 
in the New-Light Philosophy, was, on one occasion, making clair- 
voyant examinations, in company with a friend, named Allen, 
when rapping communications were given him, purporting to come 

304 MANIFESTATIONS IN CINCINNATI. 

from his father. The character of the communications was such 
that he endeavored, subsequently, on several occasions, to get into 
a circle through which the sounds coiild be made. 

" He was, one afternoon, sitting in his office, in company with his 
brother, a lad about fourteen years of age, when he heard the 
sounds distinctly. He called his brother to the table at which 
he was writing, when the ' noises ' were manifested loudly. He 
requested that, if it were a spirit manifesting, it would make two 
raps. The sounds came so positively that he felt the vibration. 
He inquired if his brother was a medium, and if he would 
receive ' manifestations ' through him, and was answered by raps 
affirmatory ; after which he could call out no more sounds. 

" These ' manifestations ' induced the doctor to bring his brother 
into the company of a clairvoyant. He was told that the lad 
had often had ' manifestations ' — that he had heard sounds and 
seen lights, and that he was under the influence of the spirit of a 
lady who, in this sphere, had been an intimate friend of his 
family. The lad verified the clairvoyant's impressions by stating 
that he had often seen lights and heard what were called rap- 
pings. " 

" The names and references of all the persons alluded to in these 
communications are not given, because it would be improper to 
connect them or their affairs more intimately with the matter. 
We have the statements from reliable sources, or we should not 
refer to them ; and only do so at all to show that the ' mani- 
festations ' have not been confined to a particular individual in 
all respects. 

" On account of the ridicule thrown upon all who were in any 
way identified with the ' rapping manifestations,' and because 
the curiosity they excited brought so many persons to her house, 
that her business — making medical examinations — was mate- 
rially interfered with, Mrs. Bushnell decided, positively, about the 
first of December, that she would, under no circumstances, place 
herself in a circle for the purpose of receiving the ' manifesta- 

VISIT OF THE FOX FAMILY. 305 

tions.' With a few exceptions, of a private nature, she has 
maintained her position. " 

From this time the manifestations continued to spread in Cin- 
cinnati, accompanied by all the various phenomena occurring in 
other places. There is scarcely a place in the vfhole country 
where the manifestations and believers in spiritualism have in- 
creased with greater rapidity. I do not think any city of equal 
size contains a greater number of spiritualists. 

In the summer following Mrs. Bushnell's visit the Fox family 
visited Cincinnati, and during their stay all the various and 
marked phenomena that have attended them elsewhere were ob- 
served. They were visited by hundreds of curious and candid 
inquirers, who were astonished at the power of the manifestations. 
A writer in one of their city papers gives the following account 
of the progress of the cause in that vicinity. 

" In the private arteries of our city, coursing with steady but 
powerful motion, there is an influence which has assumed a most 
wonderful magnitude. The public mind discusses commercial poli- 
cies, or agitates questions of the church militant, and heeds not 
this secret movement. The press has been dumb, save in ridicule, 
and the great mass of the people little dream of the terrific 
social and moral volcanic eruption which will necessarily occur, 
ere long, from causes now fringing the combustible inental world. 
But a few years ago the subject of spiritual rappings was intro- 
duced into Cincinnati, and although it met with a cold reception, 
yet it made a deep impression on a few minds, and the seed has 
produced an immense yield. The human constitution seems prone 
to searching after the hidden truths of nature, and that, together 
with the marvellous curiosity connected with the rappings, has 
invested the investigation of the phenomena with a never-ceasing 
anxiety. 

" For some time after the introduction of the matter here, and 
when Coggshall's ' History of the Kappings in Cincinnati ' was 
published, there were but few believers in the spiritual theory 
26* 

306 MANIFESTATIONS IN CINCINNATI. 

and when Burr 'showed up the humbug,' many persons supposed 
that it was exploded. But the popular mind was not satisfied, 
and a yet greater number commenced inquiries. For a long time 
the Fox girls were the only persons here in whose presence the 
raps could be heard. Soon, however, mediums began to be devel- 
oped in different portions of the city, and spiritual investigations 
increased. Men and women became insane, but that, instead of 
allaying the excitement, had quite the contrary effect. People 
were anxious to learn what this great cause was which had the 
effect to unbalance mind ; and thousands, putting full confidence in 
their own mental stability, sought the witnessing of spiritual 
experiments. 

" The effect of this agitation has been most astonishing. We 
have taken careful notes of the present state of the movement, and 
the facts almost stagger belief. It has been quite impossible for 
us to obtain full information, for many circles we found embosomed 
in private limits, ^nd learned of their existence by accident only, 
and many, we have reason to suppose, are of this class. Our list, 
however, reaches fifty-nine organized circles, and these figures 
may, at least, be doubled, in arriving at the true number. This 
however, does not include, perhaps, hundreds of circles which are 
held occasionally, or by those who have just commenced experi- 
menting. The number of mediums, whose names we could obtain, 
is three hundred and ten, which does not include those partially 
developed. If this class were added, from information we have 
obtained, the number of mediums in Cincinnati would not be less 
than twelve hundred. 

" The circles are not confined to any particular class of society, 
but are formed on every street and square of the city. No par- 
ticular religious sect is more interested than another, but Christians, 
Jews and Infidels, are earnest in their inquiries. The number of 
investigators here can be estimated only by tens of thousands. 

" So great has been the demand for the publications touching 
this subject, that one book concern, that of F. Bly, the blind phre- 
nologist, has confined its business almost entirely to this class of 

PROQEESS OV THE CAUSE. 307 

books. The number which has been written, referring directly to 
the spiritual phenomena, is thirty-five, and near a dozen news- 
papers and periodicals, devoted to the investigation of the subject, 
are issued in different parts of the Union, all of which find many 
eager purchasers in our city. 

" In the progress of this movement, the old system of commu- 
nicating by raps has been superseded by yet stranger processes. 
In the beginning of the excitement it took a half hour to obtain 
anything like a complete sentence by the raps ; but then it was 
said that, in a few years, mediums would be developed who would 
talk and write under spiritual influence, and that period, it is 
alleged, has arrived. The raps are seldom heard, but physical 
demonstrations are frequently witnessed, which seem to indicate 
that the power of making noises and moving matter has not been 
abandoned. Numerous unquestionably authenticated occurrences 
of this character have recently taken place, which have had a ten- 
dency to draw several distinguished minds within the arena of 
spiritual investigation. We will mention a few of the most boldly 
defined cases of this class. 

" At a private circle in the western part of the. city the editor 
of a morning paper was carried, together with a table upon which 
he sat, several times across the room, without there being any 
visible moving cause. 

" A lady, residing on Seventh-street, whose daughter — a young 
lady — was sick with fever, called upon the spirits to cure her 
child, and desired that, to fully convince her of their power, the 
fever should leave one side at a time. The lady affirms that the 
right side of her daughter's face became pale and cold, while the 
left was burning with a raging fever ; but, after a few moments, 
it also was relieved. 

" An ex-judge, on Fourth-street, who had been ridiculing his 
wife, for convening circles at their house, was prevailed on one 
evening to remain in the circle. He had always considered the 
matter too foolish to investigate, and vauntingly remarked, during 
the evening, that if spirit-beings existed, he would like to see them 
try their power on the centre-table, around which the party were 

308 MANIFESTATIONS IN CINCINNATI. 

sitting. No sooner had the expression escaped his lips, than the 
top of the table was twisted from the column and rolled across 
the floor. 

" This gentleman, in a recent private note from Washington city, 
where he is now visiting, says that this subject is agitating our 
representatives. He writes of a circle, which he attended the 
evening previous, where Senator Chase and Thomas Corwin were 
present, and also Preston King, of New York, which latter gen- 
tleman was the medium. 

" But to the communications. These are now generally made by 
the medium's arm being spiritually magnetized, and becoming 
obedient to spiritual direction of writing, or in pointing out 
letters on a large alphabet ; or, as is more frequently the case, 
after a half-hour's quiet sitting in a circle of eight or a dozen 
persons, who form a battery by uniting their hands, the medium 
is magnetized, and, it is affirmed, taken possession of by the spirits, 
who use her organs of speech in talking to the company. These 
speeches are frequently of a most extraordinary character, repre- 
senting, as they do, to come from the spirits of great men who 
have passed from earth. w4>. blue-eyed girl of seventeen, for instance, 
rises, and, in a vigorous manner, discusses politics or religion with 
the logic of Henry Clay, or the pathos of James H. Perkins. A 
man of forty speaks for John Wesley and Pourier, using accurately 
the manner of speech of those persons. Or, perhaps, the medium 
assumes the character of a near relative of some one in the circle, 
and, although having been dead a great while, yet, by a familiar 
gesture, or may be an old by-word sentence, the idea of the loved 
one is brought vividly to mind. 

" The ' revelations ' through the mediums vary somewhat, yet all 
are of a radical character. They teach the overthrow of existing 
church organizations, and say that vital changes must be made in 
the social and commercial world. The belief in the spiritual 
agency of these teachings being quite general, and becoming more 
BO every day, the effect will be, as we previously stated, to form a 
great radical party, which will develop itself ere-long, and aston- 
ish the world by its strength." 

CHAPTER XIV. 

MAJriFESXATIONa IN BUFPAIO, N. Y. THE EXPOSE OF I'HB UNITEBSITT 

PROFESSORS CODNTER STATEMENTS MRS. FISH'S LETTER — DR. LEE TO 

THE TRLBUNE, AHD THE EDITOR'S EEMjLKKS EFFECTS OF THE EXPOSE. 

On several accounts Buffalo is one of the most noted places in 
the history of the early manifestations. It has not, so far as I 
have been able to learn, been remarkable for the number of its 
local media or manifestations ; but it was the starting-point of a 
theory in explanation of the sounds that, for a time, was quite 
popular among the opponents of the spiritual hypothesis and those 
who had never given it a fair investigation. I allude to the knee- 
joint theory, "which was started by three learned professors of the 
University of Buffalo ; and as the fame of that institution deserves 
to be perpetuated for having three such remarkably scientific pro- 
fessors connected with it, as well as the importance that was 
attached to it, I give the whole story, as it originated from them- 
selves an^ their friends. It took place while the Fox family, or 
Mrs. Fish and Margaretta, were at the Phelps House in that city, 
in the month of February, 1851, and after they had received many 
visitors, and many astonishing accounts had been published. The 
professors ranked, one as professor of Physiology, one of Materia 
Medica and one of the Principles and Practice of Medicine and 
Clinical Medicine. I wish to give them the full credit of all 
their titles, and put them fairly on record. 

The first announcement of this scientific " expose " appeared in 
the Buffalo Commercial Advertiser on the 18 th of February, 
1851, and reads as follows : 

310 MANIFESTATIONS IN BDl'FALO, N. Y. 

'' TO THE EDITOR OS THE COMMERCIAL ADVERTISEK. 

" Curiosity having led us to visit the room at the Phelps House 
in which two females from Kochester (Mrs. Fish and Miss Fox) 
profess to exhibit striking manifestations of the spiritual world, 
by means of which communion may be held with deceased 
friends, &c., and having arrived at a physiological explanation of 
the phenomena, the correctness of which has ^been demonstrated in 
an instance which has since fallen under our observation, we have 
felt that a public statement is called for, which may, perhaps, 
serve to prevent a further waste of time, money and credulity (to 
say nothing of sentiment and philosophy), in connection with this, 
so long successful imposition. 

" The explanation is reached, almost by a logical necessity, on the 
application of a method of reasoning much resorted to in the 
diagnosis of diseases, namely, the reasoning by exclusion. It was 
reached by this method prior to the demonstration which has sub- 
sequently occurred. 

" It is to be assumed, fiyst, that the manifestations are not to be 
regarded as spiritual, provided they can be physically or physio- 
logically accounted for. Immaterial agencies are not to be in- 
voked until material agencies fail. We are thus to exclude spirit- 
ual causation in this stage of the investigation. 

" Next, it is taken for granted that the rappings are not pro- 
duced by artificial contrivances about the persons of the females, 
which may be concealed by the dress. This hypothesis is excluded 
because it is understood that the females have been repeatedly and 
carefully examined by lady committees. 

" It is obvious that the rappings are not caused by machinery 
attached to tables, doors, &c., for they are heard in different 
rooms, and in different parts of the same room, in which the 
females are present, but always near the spot where the females 
are stationed. This mechanical hypothesis is then to be excluded. 

" So much for negative evidence ; and now for what positively 
relates to the subject. 

THE EXPOSE OF DNIVERSITY PROFESSOES. 311 

" On carefully observing the countenances of the two females, it 
was evident that the sounds were due to the agency of the younger 
sister, and that they involved an effort of the will. She evidently 
attempted to conceal any indications of voluntary effort; but in 
this she did not succeed ; a voluntary effort was manifested, and 
it was plain that it could not be continued very long without 
fatigue. 

" Assuming, then, this positive fact, the inquiry arises, how can 
the will be exerted to produce sounds (rappings) without obvious 
movements of the body? The voluntary muscles are the only 
organs (save those which belong to the mind itself) over which 
volition can exercise any direct control. But the contractions of 
the muscles do not, in the muscles themselves, occasion obvious 
sounds. The muscles, therefore, to develop audible vibrations, 
must act upon parts with which they are connected. Now, it was 
sufficiently clear that the rappings were not vocal sounds ; these 
could not be produced without movements of the respiratory 
muscles, which would at once lead to detection. Hence, excluding 
vocal sounds, the only possible source of the noises in question, 
produced, as we have seen they must be, by voluntary muscular 
contractions, is in one or more of the movable articulations of the 
skeleton. From the anatomical construction of the voluntary 
muscles, this explanation remains as the only alternative. 

" By an analysis, prosecuted in this manner, we arrive at the 
conviction that the rappings, assuming that they are not spiritual, 
are produced by the action of the will, through voluntary muscles, 
on the joints. 

" Various facts may be cited to show that the motion of the 
joints, under certain circumstances, is adequate to produce the 
phenomena of the rappings ; but we need not now refer to these. 
By a curious coincidence, after arriving at the above conclusion 
respecting the som-ce of the sounds, an instance has fallen under 
our observation, which demonstrates the fact that noises precisely 
identical with the spiritual rappings may be produced in the Icnee 
joints. 

312 MANIFESTATIONS IN BUFFALO, N. Y. 

" A Highly respectable lady of this city possesses the ability of 
(developing sounds similar, both in character and degree, to those 
professedly elicited, by the Kochester impostors, from the spirit- 
world. We have witnessed the production of the sounds by the 
lady referred to, and have been permitted to examine the mechan- 
ism by which they are produced. Without entering at this time 
into a very minute anatomical and physiological explanation, it is 
sufficient to state that the muscles inserted into the upper and 
inner side of the large bone of the leg {the tibia) near the knee 
joint, are brought into action so as to move the upper surface of 
the bone just named laterally upon the lower surface of the thigh- 
bone {the femur), giving rise, in fact, to a partial lateral disloca- 
tion* This is efifected by an act of the will, without any obvious 
movement of the limb, occasioning a loud noise, and the return 
of the bone to its place is attended by a second sound. Most of 
the Rochester rappings are also double. It is practicable, how- 
ever, to produce a single sound by moving the bone out of place 
with the requisite quickness and force, and allowing it to slide 
slowly back, in which case it is noiseless. 

" The visible vibrations of articles in the room, situated near the 
operator, occur, if the limb, or any portion of the body, is in eon- 
tact with them at the time the sounds are produced. The force 
of the semi-dislocation of the bone is sufficient to occasion distinct 
jarring of the doors, tables, &c., if in contact. The intensity of 

* This article was published in the " Buffalo Medical Journal," for March, 
1851, "with a note saying that the editor had taken, the liberty to ** correct an 
error in the account of the displacement of the joint which produces the 
sounds." That correction was of the sentence we have italicized, and the 
editorial correction reads as follows : '* Without entering, at this time, into 
minute anatomical and physiological explanation, it is sufficient to state that, 
owing to relaxation of tlie ligaments of the knee joint, by means of muscular 
action and pressure of the lower extremity against a point of resistance, the 
large bone of the leg (the tibia) is moved laterally upon the lower sur- 
face of the thigh bone (the femur), giving rise, in fact, to partial lateral dis- 
location." By comparing the portion italicized in this note especially, it will 
be seen that the doctors •' disagreed," very materially, making, in fact, two 
different statements. 

CAKD BY THE MISDIXTMS. 313 

the sound may be varied in proportion to the force of the mus- 
cular contractions, and this will render the apparent source of the 
rappings more or less distinct. 

" We have witnessed repetitions of experiments, in the case just 
referred to, sufficient to exhibit to us all the phenomena of the 
sounds belonging to the Rochester rappings, and, without further 
explanations at this time, we append our names in testimony of 
the facts contained in the foregoing hastily-penned exposition. 

Atjsiin Flint, M. D., ) University 
Chakles a. Lee, M. D., s of 

C. B. CovENTKY, M. D., ) Buffalo. 
" Feb. 17th, 1851." 

On the appearance of this manifesto, the ladies implicated 
caused the following card to be published in all the daily papers of 
the next day : 

"TO DOCTORS FLINT, COVENTRY AND LEE. 

" Gents : We observe, by a communication in the Commercial 
Advertiser, that you have recently made an examination of a 
' highly respectable lady of this city,' by which you have dis- 
covered the secret of the ' Eochester impostors.' As we do not 
feel willing to rest under the imputation of being impostors, we are 
very willing to undergo a proper and decent examination, pro- 
vided we can select three male and three female friends who shall 
be present on the occasion. 

" We can assure the public that there is no one more anxious 
than ourselves to discover the origin of these mysterious manifest- 
ations. If they can be explained on ' anatomical ' and ' physio- 
logical ' principles, it is due to the world that the investigation be 
made, and that the ' humbug ' be exposed. As there seems to be 
much interest manifested by the public on that subject, we would 
suggest that as early an investigation as is convenient would be 
acceptable to the undersigned. Ann L. Fish. 

Marqaretta Fox." 
27 

314 MANIFESTATIONS AT BUM'ALO, N, ¥. 

The learned professors, being thus challenged, could do no less 
than accept, and a meeting was arranged, which took place at the 
Phelps House. Several experiments were tried, and the result 
published in all the leading papers. We make the following 
extracts from the report : 

" The two females were seated upon two chairs placed near 
together, their heels resting on cushions, their lower limbs i 
extended, with the toes elevated and the feet separated from each 
other. The object of this experiment was to secure a position in 
which the ligaments of the knee joint should be made tense, and 
no opportunity offered to make a pressure with the foot. We 
were pretty well satisfied that the displacement of the bones 
requisite for the sounds could not be effected, unless a fulcrum 
were obtained by resting one foot upon the other, or on some 
resisting body. The company waited half an hour, Jaut no sounds 
were heard in this position. 

" The position of the younger sister was then changed to a sit- 
ting posture, with lower limbs extended on the sofa, the elder 
sister sitting, in the customary way, at the other extremity of the 
sofa. The 'spirits ' did not choose to signify their presence under 
these circumstances, although repeatedly requested so to do. The 
latter experiment went to confirm the belief that the younger sister 
alone produced the rapping. These experiments were continued 
until the females themselves admitted that it was useless to con- 
tinue any longer at that time, with any expectation of manifesta- 
tions being made. 

" In resuming the usual position on the sofa, the feet resting on 
the floor, the knocTcings soon began to be heard. It was then sug- 
gested that some other experiment be made. This was assented 
to, notwithstanding the first was, to our minds, amply conclusive. 
The experiment selected was, that the knees of the two females 
be firmly grasped, with the hands so applied that any lateral 
movement of the bones would be perceptible to the touch. The 
pressure was made through the dress. It was not expected to 

REPORT OP THE BUEFALO PROEESSOBS. 31f' 

prevent the sounds, but to ascertain if they proceeded from the 
knee joint. It is obvious that this experiment was far less demon- 
strative to an observer than the first, because, if the bones were 
distinctly felt to move, the only evidence of this fact would be the 
testimony of those whose hands Were in contact with them. The 
hands were kept in apposition for several minutes at a time, and 
the experiments repeated frequently, for the course of an hour or 
more, with negative results ; that is to say, there were plenty of 
raps when the knees were not held, and none when the hands were 
applied, save once ; as the pressure was intentionally somewhat 
relaxed (Dr. Lee being the holder), two or three faint single raps 
were heard, and Dr. Lee immediately averred that the motion of 
the bone was plainly perceptible to him. The experiment of seiz- 
ing the knees as quickly as possible, when the knockings first 
commenced, was tried several times, but always with the efi'ect^of 
putting an immediate quietus upon the demonstrations. 

" The proposition to bandage the knees was discussed. The 
experiment was objected to, on the part of the friends of the 
females, unless we would concede that it should be an exclusive 
test experiment. We were not prepared with appliances to render 
the limb immovable, and therefore declined to have it considered 
such a test. This was the experiment anticipated, and one which, 
we presume, the females thought would end in their triumph. A 
bandage applied above and below the patella, admitting of 
flexion of the limb, will probably prevent the displacement, as 
we have but little doubt had been ascertained by the Rochester 
females before an examination was invited. Should it become 
necessary to repeat experiments, in other places, in furtherance of 
the explosion of the imposition, we would suggest that the band- 
age be not relied upon. * * * * Had our experiments, 
which were first directed to this joint, failed, we should have pro- 
ceeded to interrogate, experimentally, other articulations. But 
the conclusion seemed clear that the Rochester hwckings emanate 
from the knee joint." 

816 MANIFESTATIONS AT BUMALO, N. T. 

The professors then state that they have tmard of several oases 
of knee-joint, ankle-joint, toe-joint, hip-joint and finger-joint crack- 
ing to produce these sounds, but have not had time or opportunity 
to examine any of them, and they very sagely add : " The expo- 
sure of the imposition opefts a new and curious field of physiologi- 
cal inquiry, and we would commend the subject to those who have 
leisure and facilities for prosecuting it. Articidar as well as 
articvlated sounds seem to claim an investigation which they have 
not heretofore received. Had the facts which the detection of 
this trick developed been contained in any anatomical or phys- 
iological treatise, the progress of the deception would have been 
arrested long ago. ****** That sounds so loud 
should originate in the way we have ascertained that they are 
produced would surprise even the medical listener, and perhaps 
seem almost incredible. It is readily conceivable how, to other 
than medical listeners, the phenomena should appear not only in- 
explicable, but in a high degree mysterious. The remark was 
made by many, after the explanation was published, that it re- 
quired almost as much stretch of imagination to believe that such 
sounds could be produced in joints, as that they involved a super- 
natural agency. The anatomical formation of the knee joint is 
evidently the most favorable to the production of loud sounds- by 
displacement. The broad articular surfaces ofier considerable 
space for lateral motion, provided the ligaments are sufficiently 
relaxed, and the requisite motor force is properly applied. The 
relative shortness of the outer condyl of the femur favors the out- 
ward displacement, and true dislocation in this direction would be 
likely to occur, were it not for the numerous strong ligaments 
which render this the strongest articulation in the body. * * 
The displacement occasioning the hnockings is sufficient to remove 
the ridge of bone which divides the two articular surfaces of the 
upper extremity of the tibia, from its •situation in the sulcus 
between the condyls of the femur, and to carry it, more or less, 
upon the surface of the outer condyl. This movement gives rise 
to the first sound ; and the return of the bone to its place causes 

REPORT OE THE BUFFALO PROFESSORS. 317 

the second sound, which, in the Rochester knockings, generally 
follows quickly on the first. We are unaMe to explain fully the 
precise inechanism by which the displacement is effected. In the 
case of the lady of this city, who reproduces the spiritual rap- 
pings, the bone slips outward, with very slight voluntary effort, and 
it is not easy, from her own account, or by manual exploration, to 
determine the particular muscles that are brought to bear on this 
joint. In this case the displacement occasionally occurs in bend- 
ing the limb, when no effort is made to produce it ; but under 
these circumstances it is not generally attended with much noise. 
* * * The lady just referred to is now able to produce the 
sounds in one knee only. In early life she had this power in both 
knees. From the number and volume of sounds produced, it is 
evident that both the knees of the Rochester rappers are endowed 
with sonorous powers. It might be supposed that the frequent 
repetitions of these displacements wotdd produce, after a time, 
irritation and disease within the joint. In the case of the lady 
of this city they are followed by some soreness; but in early life, 
when she was in the habit of practising them daily, more or less, 
she experienced no pain, nor any unpleasant consequences, and 
she was then able to develop louder sounds than she can atpreseut." 

The learned professors then proceed to account for the sounds 
being heard in different places about the room, and say that " iu 
the first place the sounds do not really come from a distance. It 
may seem that this is so, but it is a delusion arising from not 
appreciating correctly some of the laws of acoustics." The whole 
is summed up to be that the sounds never appear to be at any 
point unless the foot of the medium is in contact, conducting it 
to that point, or by imitation of distance in the difference of into- 
nation or loudness of the sounds. 

I have given all the principal arguments of the Buffalo profes- 
sors, as I wish them to be committed to impartial history on their 
own merits, that all the glory of their discovery may rest upon 
the legitimate authors. Dr. Lee wrote an account of the " dis- 
27* 

318 MANIFESTATIONS IN BUITALO, N. X. 

eovery " for the New York Tribune, to whioh the sagacious and 
candid editor of that paper appended a note, in which he says : 
" The doctors, as has already appeared in our columns, commenced 
with the assumption that the origin of the ' rapping ' sounds must 
be physical, and their primary cause the volition of the ladies 
aforesaid — in short, that these ladies were ' the Kochester im- 
postors.' They appear, therefore, in the above statement, as the 
prosecutors of an impeachment, and ought to have selected other 
persons as judges and reporters of the trial. Their statements 
may be ever so true, without carrying with them the force which 
would have properly belonged to them had others been the pros- 
ecutors, and they been called in as the umpires. It is quite prob- 
able that we shall have another version of the matter." 

The opinion of the professors was quoted very extensively, and 
the press very generally put it down as the "grand finale of the 
Rochester knockLngs." It will be noticed by the attentive reader 
that there are some great defects, not only in the science, but in 
the logic of the trio, and the whole process of " reasoning by way 
of exclusion " is well illustrated by the old anecdote of the sports- 
man who sold a dog as a good hunter of coons, and had him re- 
turned by the purchaser, who declared that he would not hunt 
coons at all. "Now," said the former owner, "that does beat 
all. I tried him for driving sheep, and cows, and hogs, and for 
hunting rabbits, and foxes, and birds, and rats, and everything but 
coons, and he was n't worth a cent for any of them, and so I con- 
cluded he must be good' for fhem." The sportsman had, like the 
learned doctors, reasoned by exclusion, and thought it perfectly 
safe to recommend his dog. 

My province, however, is not to argue the case, but to give the 
facts that have transpired in the progress of these manifestations. 
The report soon called forth replies and criticisms, and, instead 
of allaying the excitement in Buffalo and other places, it was 
grea,tly increased by the efforts of the professors. The rooms of 
the ladies were crowded with visitors, many of whom went to con- 
firm the theory of the University doctors, and many from a wish 

SITTING AT THE PHELPS HOUSE. 319 

to make a candid examination themselves. It is hardly necessary 
to state that the knee-joint theory was soon exploded in the minds 
of the investigators. Soon after the appearance of the manifesto, 
the following was published in one of the Buffalo papers : 

"ANOTHER SITTINQ AT THE PHELPS HOUSE. 

" A company, consisting of J. L. Reynolds, F. Rumsey, Dr. 
W. R. Scott, H. Cummings, Dr. Gr. E. Hayes, Capt. A. Walker, 
0. C. Bristol, James Dunkin and wife, J. S. Chadwick, S. Albro, 
and J. Stringham, met at the rooms of Mrs. Pish and Miss Fox, 
at seven-and-a-half o'clock last Monday evening. Two large 
hand-bells and one small one had been provided for spirits to 
manifest their presence with, if they should choose to make use 
of them. The bells were placed under the table, and the com- 
pany took seats. Rappings immediately commenced, manifesting 
the presence of the representatives of the spirit-country. We 
resolved to ask no questions, and wait for voluntary manifesta- 
tions. Alphabet called, spelling, ' Sit close, and you may see 
some new manifestations.' All drew near the table, and waited 
in silence. After waiting some time, the small bell commenced 
ringing. The mediums' feet had been placed in the custody of 
two gentlemen who had not been there before, and their hands 
were continually on the table. The largest bell now commenced 
ringing, and, whilst ringing, moved round, traversing the whole 
area under the table. Two bells rang at once. Afterwards, the 
whole three united in a kind of chime. The largest bell was 
placed on Dr. Hayes' foot, and bore on it with a pressure of six 
times its weight. He put his hand down and touched the bell. 
He received other manifestations of the presence of an active 
agent. The medium told him to ask if it was a spirit. He did 
so, and was answered by a pinch of his toe, signifying the affirm- 
ative. ' Is it the spirit of my brother ? ' Answer. ' Yes ' (the 
same signal). He wrote names of his deceased brothers, and it des- 
ignated its own name by pinching his toe. ' Does the spirit wish 
to communicate with me ? ' — -I will communicate with you at 

320 MANIFESTATIONS IN BUFFALO, N. Y. 

home, when all is calm.' Here silence prevailed for a time. The 
bells commenced ringing, and occasionally one would fall upon the 
floor. Alphabet called, spelling, 'Move back a little from the 
table.' All moved back except Capt. Walker, who made several 
efforts to obey, but found his chair fast. He looked to see if 
it was not fast in the carpet, and tried to raise it, but it refused 
to move upward, backward or forward. Alphabet called, spell- 
ing, ' Sit close to the table.' All drew their chairs close to the 
table, and Capt. Walker embraced the opportunity to see if the 
order had not loosened his chair : but he could not stir it. 

"Now the spirit commenced performances with bells; some- 
times ringing them all at once, and sometimes placing them on the 
feet of one and on the knees of another. Sometimes they would 
fall on the floor, and sometimes hit the under side of the table. 
This ceased, the alphabet was called, and the spelling was, ' Look.' 
We looked, and the three bells stood in a right line, about eighteen 
inches apart. We resumed our positions, and the operations of 
ringing, pressing feet and throwing down bells, went on again. 
Again we were called to ' look,' and the two large bells stood up- 
right, but the small one was missing, and could not be found. 
One of the company suggested that we look under the larger 
bells. The largest bell was lifted, and the missing one was found 
under it, standing erect. The play then went on, till we were 
again told to ' look,' and the small^bell was found under the large 
one, lying on its side. So it continued for some time, placing 
the bells in various positions, and calling on the company to 
' look.' 

" In answer to a question asked some days ago, ' What is the 
use of these demonstrations ? ' the spirits said, ' They are made 
to prove the mediums have no agency in it.' And the question 
asked by Mr. Stringham, ' May I leave the table whilst the others 
remain, that I may look under and see the bells ring ? ' was an- 
swered, ' What do you think we require you to sit close to the 
lable for? When spirits make these physical demonstrations 

BITIINQ AT THE PHELPS HOOSE. 321 

they are compelled to assume shapes which human eyes must not 
look upon.' 

"When the above performances were finished, loud concussions 
were heard and felt on the under side of the table. They became 
louder and louder, till the brass candlesticks were made to bound 
up six or eight inches from the table. The candles were repeat- 
edly thrown out of them, and we were compelled to hold them in 
our hands. These concussions were equal to those a man could 
make with a large nail-hammer, lying on his back and striking 
with all his strength. We expected the bed of the table to be 
split in pieces, and Mrs. Fish became alarmed, turned pale, and- 
begged us to leave the table. We did not comply, and the con- 
cussions were continued for full fifteen minutes. At the close of 
this very noisy ezhibition, the alphabet was called for, and the 
spelling was, ' We are all done for to-night.' They were not im- 
por^Jlned to continue the performances, and we arose from the 
table. The table was turned up to see what impressions were 
made, and a great number of deep indentations, in the hard cherry 
wood, manifested the force with which the middle-sized bell had 
been thrust against it. Dr. Hayes took the bell and struck the 
table with ^he battered iron point which comes through the 
wooden handle, and made like indentations, though nothing like 
60 deep as those made by the performers. Any one may examine 
the table, and find the evidence. One ot the Company." 

This, coming as it did from, and being endorsed by, respectable 
citizens, was a strong opposing argument to the knee-joint theory. 
Every one could see that either these persons had formed a con- 
spiracy to deceive the public, or the professors were proved to be 
the " humbugs " themselves. 

Still another report appeared in a few days, which rendered 
the explanation of the professors still more ridiculous. It was 
from the pen of a well-known citizen of Bufialo, who had been 
appointed by a company to prepare it. I give it as it appeared 
in one of the Buffalo papers. 

322 MANIFESTATIONS IN BTJFPALO, N. Y. 

" SPIEITnAL COMMUNICATION. 

" Mr. Matnard : Having been deputed by a select company, 
who visited the two sisters, Mrs. Fisb and Miss Fox, at their 
room in the Phelps House, on Friday evening last, to report what 
we there saw and heard, it becomes my duty to ask you to give 
place to this communication in your columns. 

" Permit me, before proceeding to the discharge of this assigned 
duty, to define my own position in relation to the subject. I am, 
as is well known to all my intimate acquaintances, constitution- 
ally sceptical. I never considered a belief of any averred fact 
an act of volition, but merely the effect of evidence which is satis- 
factory to the mind. Hence, I never claimed merit for my faith, 
nor held myself accountable for the want thereof. I had heard 
and read much of the ' Rochester Knockings,' as those reputed 
spiritual manifestations were familiarly called ; but, whilst I re- 
frained from applying to them the common epithet of Jmmbug, by 
which every blockhead hastens to put himself on record as a wise 
and far-seeing doubter of every newly-developed principle in the 
arcana of nature, I did not, because I could not, believe a word 
of it. Hearing much that was wonderful from the mouths of men 
of mind and integrity, who had visited the ' mediums,' I resolved 
to go and be satisfied by the test of my own senses. I went on 
the afternoon of Monday last, and was received with unceremo- 
nious civility and easy urbanity J)y the two presiding geniuses. 

" There was a company ready to be entertained, and I took a 
seat with them — all present, save myself, having been before. I 
was invited to call upon the spirit of some departed friend, — ask' 
for an interview with it. I called for the spirit of my mother, 
as the most reliable of all my friends who had emigrated to the 
spirit-land. Rapping immediately announced her presence, and " 
I inquired if she would converse with me. The response, which 
I received in the usual manner of spelling out by the alphabet, 
was as follows : ' Yes, my dear son, I am willing to give you evi- 
dence of the guardianship of those who cared for you in helpless 
infancy.' I then asked if it was the spirit of my mother ; which 

STATEMENT OF MK. ALBRO. 323 

was answered in the affirmative. The next question asked was, 
' What year was you born in ? ' Answer. '1745.' This was right. 
Next, ' How old was you when you died ? ' Answer. 'Sixty-two.' 
This I disputed, confidently believing her age to have been sixty- 
one. The discrepancy was not settled. ' How many brothers 
have I in the spirit-world ? ' Answer. ' Three.' This was true, 
and it was a truth not known to any person in Buffalo, save my- 
self and wife. ' What is the name of the one who died first ? ' 
Answer. ' John.' This no one present but myself could possibly 
have known. ' How old was he when he died ? ' Answer. ' Seven.' 
True again. So in relation to .the names, ages and deaths, of the 
other two deceased brothers. I asked the spirit of my father 
how, long ago he died. The answer came in twenty-seven distinct 
raps, and one which was barely audible. He died some time 
in the year 1823. ' What year was you born in ? ' I wrote a 
number of dates before I came to 1750. When I had written 

1749, and before I commenced 1750, the affirmative sounds were 
given. I then wrote 1750, and asked which was right. ' Is 
this ? ' pointing to 1749. No answer. ' Is this ? ' pointing to 

1750. The answer was affirmative. I asked, ' What month was 
you born in ? ' adding, ' I will commence at one, and write the 
numeral characters in their order, and you will please to rap 
when I come to the number which designates the month.' I'com- 
menced, and when I had got as^^ far as three a confused rapping 
was heard, which I was told was a command for me to desist. I 
obeyed, and immediately eleven distinct raps were heard, which 
indicated November. I am not sure that this is true, as the old 
family Bible, which contains the record, is in the hands of a dis- 
tant brother ; but I believe it to be the true answer. I asked 
many more questions, to which I received correct answers, and 
never an untrue one, excepting the above-named discrepancies. I 
detail these circumstances to show vrhy I was one of the com- 
pany who went there on Friday evening last. 

" The company consisted of Dr. Scott, C. C. Bristol, J. String- 
ham, F. Rumsey and lady, Mrs. Bradley, Mrs. Stevens and my- 

324. MANIFESTATIONS IN BUFFALO, N. T. 

self. When all had assembled, we took seats around the table. 
Mrs. Fish and Miss Fox, the two 'mediums,' were requested' to 
take seats on a sofa which stood between the table and the wall. 
Dr. Scott and myself were seated, by arrangement, on the right 
and left of these two ladies, and they were requested to put their 
feet on ours, and to keep them there, which they did. The pur- 
pose of this arrangement will be understood by the reader. 
When all was still the spirits (I use the term assentingly) com- 
menced such a clatter of rappings that there seemed to be quite 
a company of them. This, we were told, was to manifest their 
presence and their willingness to be consulted. 

" The confusion of sounds ceased, and the alphabet was called 
for by five distinct raps, which, it appears, is the invariable sig- 
nal. Mrs. Fish read the alphabet, and the letters designated by 
the rappings made the following words : ' Gret a better supply of 
paper before you get engaged, and let your minds run in one 
perfect channel. In that way you will soon be able to get satis- 
factory demonstrations.' A supply of paper was procured, and 
all were seated and still again. Two small bells had been placed 
under the table, one at each end. When all was quiet, the signal 
for the alphabet was given, and the spelling which followed was, 
' All sit close to the table and to each other. Move the bells.' 
The bells were then moved to near the centre of the table. Al- 
phabet called again, ' Put your hands on the table.' All obeyed 
the mandate, and immediately the bells commenced ringing. 
They rang for a few minutes, and again the alphabet was de- 
manded. The spelling was, ' You will perceive, by what you have 
already heard, that a great and mighty development is about to be 
made to mankind.' At this moment a rap was heard at the door, 
which was made by a gentleman who wished to come in, but who 
retired on being informed that it was a private party. Some 
remark was made by the younger of the two mediums, in relation 
to the interruption, which affected the other to tears. A consid- 
erable interval of silence followed, and we began to fear that our 
entertainment would not be resumed ; but the call for the alphabet 

STATEMENI OP MR. ALBRO. 325 

proved that we had not been deserted by our invisible friends. 
The spelling was : ' We want you to cheer up, dear children. 
All sit close. Hands on the table.' Now the bells commenced 
ringing again, moving all round under the table, giving forth tones 
the most musical, mellow and soothing. The ringing ceased, and 
the alphabet was called. The spelling was, ' This is done to har- 
monize you all.' Question by the acting medium. ' Do the 
spirits wish us to be in a happy state of mind ? ' ATiswer. 
' Yes.' Then followed, ' I want you all to reach out your feet, 
except the four on the sofa.' This was done, and immediately 
Mrs. Stevens said something had taken hold of her feet. She was 
directed to ask if it was a spirit, which she did, and received an 
aflSrmative answer. 'Is it the spirit of mj father?' 'Yes' 
was replied, and the respondent continued, ' We are glad you 
came here.' Following this was a harsh, grating sound, not 
unlike the friction of a saw which is pushed slowly through a 
board, and drawn back quickly. This was continued but a short 
time, when the alphabet was called for, and the spelling was, ' I 
breathed so when I was dying.' Then the same sound of grating 
heath was heard, and it continued like one laboring in the last 
moments of life. These breathings became shorter and further 
between, till a seemingly ineffectual attempt, like a hiccough, closed 
the drama, and the death-scene was complete. 

" Hereupon the alphabet was called for, and the following address 
was spelled : — ' Such is the end of man's existence on the earth ; 
but he suddenly awakes to a glorious immortality. This, my dear 
friends, is demonstrated to relieve mankind from the dread of 
changing esistence. The appearance of suffering is not real ; 
therefore I exhort you to look forward with joy for the happy 
transition from earth to heaven. You have need of great watch- 
fulness and care that you may be permitted to enter the society 
of the blest. Done.' 

" What was very remarkable in the delivery of this address, as 
the medium read the alphabet, the letters were designated some- 
times by raps, as usual, and sometimes by ringing of a bell. The 
28 

326 MANIFESTATIONS IN BUFFALO, N. Y. 

latter method was used, I think, quite as much as the former. 
During the whole delivery the feet of the lady-mediums rested 
entirely on Dr. Scott's feet and mine, and their hands constantly 
rested on the table. This, as it seems to me, puts to rest any 
question of their agency in producing the sounds. Mrs. Stevens, 
during the whole of the communication by ' spirits,' felt a pair 
of large and powerful hands grasping her knees, the pressure of 
which, she avers, was quite painful. She also felt a weight in her 
lap, which was equal to her father while living. His name was 
Asa Eanson. The female portrait which hangs in the Common 
Council room is that of his daughter, and a sister of Mrs. Stevens. 
The latter lady says that the death-scene which was enacted in our 
presence was a perfect representation of the reality which she wit- 
nessed. , 

"At the conclusion of the address, it was asked by the acting 
medium, ' Are the spirits all done ? ' No reply was made. It 
was then asked, ' If we put paper under the table, will the 
spirits write ? ' Answer by the alphabet. ' We will make 
marks on paper.' A piece of paper was then taken and passed 
around, to be examined by the company. All saw that it was 
without scratch or mark of any kind. A scratching sound was 
heard under the table, and also the sound that paper makes when 
it -is torn. The alphabet was called, and the spelling was, ' Look.' 
The paper was taken out, and found to be torn in pieces and 
scratched as with a nail, or some dull instrument. It was then 
asked, ' If we put paper and pencil under, will the spirits 
■ write ? ' Three raps were given as answer in the affirmative, and 
the alphabet was called. The spelling was, ' Keep your pencil.' 
Another piece of paper was then handed round. We all examined 
it closely, and foiJad it all fair and clean, without the least mark 
whatever. It was put under the table by the last examiner, and the 
scratching commenced. Directly the alphabet was called for, and 
' Look ' spelled out. The paper was taken out, and found to bo 
scratched as before, and torn a little ; but the spirit had fulfilled 
its promise. It had written — for the figure 7 in plain pencil-mark 

STATEMENT OF MR. ALBllO. 327 

stood on the untorn part of it. The figure was found to be just 
one inch long, and seemed as if made by the hand of a farmer, or 
mechanic, who aimed at plainness rather than elegance in his chi- 
rographical performances. I have the paper in my possession, and 
will exhibit it to any one who wishes to see it. 

" I had forgotten to mention that during the communications 
from Mrs.' Stevens' father, she read the alphabet part of the 
time, and received answers by a rap on her foot. She was too 
much excited to continue, and the alphabet was read by the 
medium. 

" When the last paper was brought out from under the table, 
we all expressed a desire to know what was meant by the 
character 7. Our deliberations on that subject were soon cut 
short by a call for the alphabet, and the meaning spelled out as 
follows : 

" ' Seven of this party will be mediums. Do not ask which. 
We are done for to-night.' Question. ' Will the spirits answer 
no more questions ? ' Answer. ' We are all done for to-night. 
Move away from the table.' 

" There were many other incidents during the sitting. The 
lady-medium who sat next to Dr. Scott had her dress pulled and 
held fast, and she invited the doctor to try and see if he could 
release it. He made a strong effort, but gave it up for fear of 
tearing it. Several others had their feet handled and their clothes 
pulled. I felt a palpable pressure against the inside of my leg, 
and a pinch of my ankle, whilst a bell was ringing close to my 
feet — no person being near me but Miss Fox, and she had both 
her feet on one of mine, and both her hands on the table. 

" This is a faithful statement of facts, for the truth of which, 
as far as they relate to the sitting on Friday evening, I refer the 
reader to all the names given above. I refrain from conclusions 
and comments, and close with the simple declaration that I am 
much puzzled and astonished. S. Albko." 

On the 14th of March, Mrs. Fish wrote a letter to the editor 

328 MANIFESTATIONS IN liOFFALO, N. Y. 

of the Commercial Advertiser, in vindication, which contains some 
important statements that have never been contradicted, and I 
deem it important that it should be placed on record as part of 
the controversy. It is as follows : 

" BuPFALO, March 14th, 1851. 
" To the Editor of the Commercial Advertiser : 

" I gladly avail myself of the privilege you have so courteously 
extended to me to defend myself through your columns against 
the aspersions which, if suffered to pass unheeded, might bring 
temporary disgrace upon the cause in which we are engaged as 
involuntary though willing instruments of a higher power. 

" Some time since, you gave place in the columns of your paper 
to a statement, made by Professors Lee, Flint and Coventry, which 
they put forth to the public as an exposition of the ' Eochester 
Knockings.' The positions which they assumed we knew to be 
fallacious and unsupportable, and we at once challenged a fair and 
impartial investigation, believing that it was not in the nature of 
these gentlemen to seek out conviction of fraud contrary to evi- 
dence which I knew must convince every candid mind. It is true 
that when our feet were placed on cushions stuffed with shavings, 
and resting on our heels, there were no sounds heard, and that 
sounds were heard when our feet were resting on the floor ; and 
it is just as true that if our friendly spirits retired when they wit- 
nessed such harsh proceedings on the part of our persecutors, it 
was not in our power to detain them. 

" Dr. Lee says he heard two sounds when he held Margaretta's 
knees. I counted five at one time during that operation, two at 
another, and three at another, — which made ten, instead of two. 
But I do not consider this circumstance of any importance what- 
ever. The spirit in which they engaged in the investigation was 
too palpable to be mistaken, — evincing too great a determination 
to carry their points to admit of the possibility of a conviction. 
They had heard sounds made by limber joints, and because one 
person could produce one kind of sounds, made by knee joints, 

LETTER OF MRS. FISH. 

329 

they would have the community believe that all the sounds heard 
in our presence for the last four years were produced by thumping 
or snapping the knee joints. As professional men, whose reputa- 
tion is dear to them, I would like to have them tell your readers 
what condition our poor joints would be iij by this time, after four 
years' constant service in this almost ceaseless operation. I will 
not call this quackery, but will be content to leave it to the pub- 
lic to pass judgment on their professional erudition. Two of the 
professors made very little or no investigation. They were in our 
room but a few minutes previous to the appearance of the article 
in your paper. 

" Professor Lee, however, was in to see us frequently, and, at 
several times, expressed great surprise, affirming, with great ap- 
parent candor, that the sounds were truly a.stonishing. He wit- 
nessed the answers that were received by Mr. Chase, which were 
all correct and very astonishing ; yet he did not attempt to account 
for them. Now, if Dr. Lee can account for the correct answers 
that are given, as well as how the sounds are produced, it will 
gratify me very much, and I will try to account for some of the 
large ones. Mr. Chase called again, a day or two after that, and 
could get no correct answers ; but this was no matter of surprise 
to me after his having been in close communion with Dr. Lee ; for 
we are taught to believe that spirits associate by affinity, and, if 
that bo true, he was no doubt led into a dififerent society of spirits 
by associating with him. I do not believe the spirits of my dear 
departed friends could manifest themselves in their presence, and 
I would not willingly call on them to mingle in such society. The 
word ' Impostor ' grated very harshly on my ears, and I struggle 
very hard to overcome the feelings which such a cruel charge will 
naturally excite in every human bosom where fionor finds a lodg- 
ment ; but, in spite of all my endeavors, I still feel like other 
mortals ; and this feeling prompts me to demand justice at the 
hands of a discerning public, and especially those who have wit- 
nessed the entire success of the same experiments which proved a 
total failure with our Esoulapian knee-buckles. 
28* 

330 MANirESTATlONS IN BCJiTALO, N. T. 

" The committees, which have frequently met since the affair 
with the M. D.s, have witnessed all the experiments they at- 
tempted, and can testify to their entire success. One day, in 
presence of a number of persons, the same cushions were brought 
out, and we took seats,, elevated, with our feet upon them, resting 
on our heels, when the sounds were distinctly heard by all present. 
Capt. Rounds and Judge Burroughs were present on that occa- 
sion. 

" Our feet were held from the floor by Dr. Grray and Mr. Clark, 
in presence of the whole committee, on the evening of the investi- 
gation made by the medical gentlemen (after they left), and the 
sounds were distinctly heard, which was allowed by the committee 
to be a far more satisfactory test, as they could distinctly hear the 
sounds under their feet, and feel the floor jar while our feet were 
held nearly or quite a foot from the floor. The whole committee 
consisted of Dr. Gray and lady, Mr. Clark and lady, Mr. Everit 
and lady, Mr. Stringham, Mr. Bristol, and two gentlemen invited 
by the professors. 

" Most of this committee were persons we had never seen before, 
but we are informed they are persons whose testimony can be 
relied upon. I would like to have Drs. Lee, Flint and Coventry, 
club their professional lore and perceptive acumen, and inform the 
public how bells are rung, and gongs made to ring out tunes, un- 
touched by human hands ; for, if you have any confidence in your 
own citizens, they can tell you what I now affirm is true. I will not 
be particular to mention the names of all the persons who have wit- 
nessed these striking phenomena, but I will refer you to the fol- 
lowing : C. C. Bristol, Mr. Gibson, Mr. Stringham, Mr. Stephen 
Dudley, Mr. L. Eamsey, Mr. Tows, Mr. Gould and Mr. Tallmadge, 
and they can refer you to dozens of other respectable persons, who 
have witnessed the same. While these manifestations were going 
on, many of the persons above-named have held us both so fast 
by the feet that we could not stir without their knowledge. They 
(the Drs.) have attempted to explain one of the least important 
points ; and, as we know, have signally failed. Now let them 

DR. LEB, AGAIN. 331 

proceed to the more difficult points, or manfully acknowledge their 
failure and our innocence of fraud. 

" As Dr. Lee is the editor of the Medical Journal which is 
published in this city, and as he saw iit to publish the injurious 
report against our moral integrity which was made by the visit- 
ing committee of M. D.s, we hope he will manifest the sense of 
honor which his standing in society warrants us in looking for, by 
publishing the contradiction, which must now be evident to him, 
and thereby make the reparation as apparent as the injury. This 
would be just, if not magnanimous. Yours, &c., 

"Ann L. Fish." 

On the 17th, Dr. Lee wrote to the New York Tribune as 
follows : 

" DK. LEE ON THE KNOCKINQS AGAIN. • 

" Brdhswick, Maine, Monday, March' 17. 
" To THE EoiTOK or THE Tkibjjnb : Several articles have ap- 
peared in your paper, purporting to be replies to my communica- 
tion of Feb. 25th, respecting the ' Rochester Knockers.' Two or 
more of these are from lecturers, whose pecuniary interest it is to 
keep up the delusion, and prevent any satisfactory explanation 
from being believed by the public. Their personalities shield 
them very cfiFeetually from any notice from me ; while, at the same 
time, they betray a bad temper and a worse cause. The exposi- 
tion, made by myself, in connection with my colleagues, Drs. Flint 
and Coventry, of Buffalo, in relation to the causes of these myste- 
rious 'rappings,' is true, and will bide the test of any investigation, 
properly conducted, that may be made, as it has those already 
made. If there are any individuals so simple as to swallow the 
other alleged ' phenomena,' of which the same party or others are 
the ' media,' such as the removal of tables, the wonderful an- 
swers to questions, etc., after we have satisfactorily demonstrated 
the principal phenomenon (the ' rappings ') an imposition and 
fraud, I think it as well to leave such persons in their simplicity ; 
for, in their anxious search after the marvellous and wonderful, 

332 MANIIESIATIONS IN BOFFALO, N. Y. 

I fear they would grasp at something still more absurd and 
ridiculous. 

" In regard to the ' Providence rappers ' and the ' infant me- 
dia ' of Mr. Bristow, I doubt not they will also be exorcised in 
due time, as the Rochester, and, as I am informed by Professor 
Knight, of New Haven, the Stratford rappers have already been. 
But don't hurry us too fast ; we have other business to attend to 
besides exposing ' spirit-knockings.' I hope the swindle, however, 
as it is now exposed, will be taken cognizance of by the local 
authorities in those places where the imposition may again be 
attempted. 

"Those who wish to see a full and accurate account of the man- 
ner in which these ' raps ' are produced, through the ' mediums ' of 
the different joints of the body, may consult with advantage the 
able article by Prof. Austin Flint, in the Buffalo Medical Jcm/nml 
(for March), and the same, with additions, published in pamphlet 
form, by Mr. G-eorge H. Derby, of that city. 

" Charles A. Lee." 

On the receipt of this letter, Mr. Grreeley, editor of the Trib- 
une, published the foregoing letter of Mrs. Pish, introducing it 
with the following remarks : 

" The above letter from Dr. Lee seems to require the publica- 
tion of the following from Mrs. Pish (the oldest of the three sis- 
ters) ; this being, so far as we are aware, the first and only com- 
munication ever addressed by one of them to the public. And 
we think it but fair to add that we have been present when ' rap- 
pings ' were made on tables, chairs, etc., not only in the presence 
of these, but of other alleged ' mediums,' when it was as certain 
as human eyesight could make it that tw person whatever was in 
contact with the article from which the sounds apjpeared, to come. 
'Ah!' says a doubter, 'you thought they proceeded from the 
table because you expected them there.' Well ; a little girl, less 
than two years old, who bad never before paid any attention to 

REMARKS OF MK. GREELEY. 33S 

this matter, was attracted to the vicinity of the table by the loud- 
ness of the ' rappings,' and stood near it for soma time, looking 
curiously first upon and then wider the table, palpably interested 
and puzzled by the hearing of sounds proceeding from a place where 
no known cause for sound existed. The table was a small, slight, 
plain one, without covering, and no chance for even a mouse to be 
within some feet of it unobserved. 

" Then the fact stated by Mrs. Fish, that the sounds heard in 
the presence of the same 'mediums' are of exceedingly various 
character, — not merely loud and low at the same time, but imi- 
tating sawing, planing, creaking, beating time, etc., etc., — and 
especially the fact that, when but a single ' medium ' is present, 
there often seemed to be a dozen invisibles 'rapping' at the same 
time — loud, low, quick, slower, etc., etc. — does not seem to be 
adequately accounted for by Dr. Lee's theory. 

" So much we feel impelled to say, no matter whether our sci- 
entific and philosophic correspondent is moved thereby to class us 
with impostors or (more charitably) with dupes. It does seem to 
us that Dr. Lee has disposed of the whole matter too summarily, 
and that, after having volunteered to enter the lists as an exposer 
of what he represents as a gross, impudent, pernicious swindle, he 
ought to have proceeded at least so far as to obtain a report or 
decision, by some impartial committee, that he has made good his 
assertions. " Ed. Trie." 

Such transactions, so well authenticated, had a tendency to 
shake the confidence of the public in the scientific: discovery of 
the university professors. Indeed, their "report," after going the 
rounds of the press, was soon looked upon as a desperate attempt 
to confirm an opinion they had previously formed. The lady of 
that city, who could make a slight noise with her knee joints, was 
much surprised at the use made of the fact by the professors. She 
had an interview with the two sisters, Mrs. Fish and Miss Fox, 
and declared that there was no resemblance in the sounds. 
When it is known that sounds are made on tables and floors, 

334 MANIJfESTATIONS IN EOTFALO, N. Y. 

as loud as a strong man could produce with a hammer, the 
story of their being produced by the knee will not find many 
believers. 

One fact should be noticed. The gentlemanly professors never 
speak of the two sisters as ladies, or women, but as " females," 
leaving the world in ignorance, but for the attending circumstances, 
whether they were females of the genus Homo, or some other part 
of animal creation. It was obviously meant as an insult, and was 
such as branded the authors with a total want of gentlemanly and 
dignified character. 

I have very little of the history of the manifestations in Buffalo 
since that exciting time. There are' but few mediums there, as 
far as I can learn. These are mostly writing mediums. If there 
are others, I have not succeeded in getting the information, but 
there are undoubtedly some. There are some of the best and most 
Steadfast friends of spiritualism in that city. 

CHAPTER XV. 

MANIFESTATIONS IN WASHINGTON, D. 0. C0NGBES3IONAL MEDIUMS WEIT- 

INQ MEDIUMS VISIT OP THE POX FAMILY GOV. TALLMADGE SINGU- 

LAK MANIFESTATIONS IN DRAWING — MEMOEIAL TO OONGBESS — DEBATE 
IN THE SENATE, 40. 

In the month of June, 1852, I visited the city of Washington, 
D. C, for the purpose of attending a convention.* During the 
week I spent there, I ascertained, from members of Congress and 
others, that frequent meetings or circles were held at different 
places, for the purpose of investigating the different phenom- 
ena classed under the head of spiritual manifestations. Their 
investigations had led to a conviction, in the minds of many, that 
some intelligence, which had the power of giving them information 
on a variety of subjects, and telling them occurrences of which they 
had no previous knowledge or thought, was the originator of these 
manifestations. 

One member of Congress, at least,t had become a writing me- 
dium, and, although the fact was known to but few, there was evi- 
dence, to his acquaintances, that some power beyond or aside 
from himself was operating upon him. He related one instance 
of independent writing, that is a most satisfactory evidence that, 
notwithstanding so many of the communications by writing are in 
exact accordance with the mind and talents of the medium, there 
are cases where the mind of the medium has no such control. He 
had been expecting to make some remarks on a certain subject ; 
and one evening, when alone in his room, took up a pen, and, for 

* The Industrial Congress. f Hon. A. P. Hascall, of Lo Roy, N. Y. 

336 MANIFESTATIONS IN WASHINGTON, D. C. 

curiosity, asked tlie spirits to write a speech for him. He had 
become so thoroughly satisfied that no certainty existed of get- 
ting anything correct or important from this source, that he was 
only prompted by curiosity to try this experiment. 

On taking the pen, his hand immediately began to write with 
unusual rapidity, in good language and quite logical, arguing 
from the premises assumed, but every sentiment utterly and 
entirely opposed to all his ideas on the subject, and directly oppo- 
site to the remarks he intended to make. He continued to write 
till a page was written down. His hand moved to turn over the 
paper; he remarked, " I '11 hear you through, but I don't believe a 
word you say." His hand only wrote the faster, until two or three 
pages were written. It was really a very fair speech, but directly 
opposite to all Mr. H.'s opinions. At the end it was signed 
" James O'Connor," a name Mr. Hascall had never before heard 
of. It is unnecessary to add that Judge H. followed iis own 
reason, instead of yielding to an intelligence of which he knew so 
little ; but the occurrence itself is a remarkable one. 

Judge H. also had some very singular experience, while in 
Washington, in regard to information being given him to the 
effect that some member of his family was sick or dead, and the 
most solemn assurance given of its truth ; when, on writing home, 
he ascertained that all was well, and the pretended information 
given was totally false. On the other hand, occurrences taking 
place at a distance, of which he had no knowledge, were told with 
the greatest accuracy and truth. Why these contradictions in the 
character of the communications, he could not tell; but both 
equally proved it to be entirely beyond the workings of his own 
mind, and that there was intelligence there, whether true or false. 
The experience of Judge H. has been singular, as that of many 
others ; but, aS I depend entirely upon memory, I cannot state it 
more minutely. I believe he has never made his experience pub- 
lic to any great degree. It will be remembered that he was on 
one of the first investigating committees in Rochester at the time 
the subject was first brought before the public. 

LETTER OF GOV. TALLMADOB. 337 

In the month of February, 1853, Mrs. Fox and her two young- 
est daughters, Margaretta and Catharine, visited Washington, by 
the request of a number of eminent men in Congress and out, who 
wished to see and know more of the manifestations. During their 
stay in the city they were visited by many eminent American 
statesmen, and distinguished men from Europe. Among others, 
Hon. N. P. Tallmadge, ex-governor of Wisconsin, Gen. Waddy 
Thompson, Gen. Hamilton, Hon. Kobert B. Campbell, and many 
others, I do not now remember, were almost constant in their at- 
tendance and investigations ; and, like most others, who have fairly 
tested it, they became satisfied of the intelligence, independent of 
the media, and all whose names I have mentioned fully believe the 
intelligence to emanate from spirits. 

Gov. Tallmadge openly and manfully braved public opinion, and 
has given his opinions to the world as freely as he would on any 
other subject. I cannot give a better idea of some of the trans- 
actions at Washington, than by giving a letter or two from his 
pen. The following, or so much of it as was written to Mr. Sim- 
mons in relation to the statements of Mrs. Whitman, touching the 
astonishing proofs of identity presented to Mr. S. (which is given 
in the chapter on Providence, K. I.), I saw long before it was 
published. The occasion that called it out is sufficiently explained 
in the letter of Gov. T. to the editors of the Intelligencer. 

" COLLAMOBE HoUSE.^NeW YOKK, 

April 30, 1853. 
" Messrs. Gales and Seaton : A friend has just called my 
attention to an article in the ' National Intelligencer ' of the 25th 
inst., headed ' Impostures and Delusions.' The article is not 
under the editorial head ; still, it is not marked as a communica- 
tion, and was considered by the gentleman who handed it to me, 
and would be considered by the generality of your readers, as an 
editorial. Be this, however, as it may, the article is published by 
you without any dissent from its views, and may therefore be 
taken by the uninformed as meeting your approbation. 
29 

338 MANIFESTATIONS IN WASHINOTON, D. C. 

" The writer alludes to the ' Salem Hangings,' and says, ' That 
there may yet arise, at future periods, similar or analogous dis- 
orders of the popular mind, invading and corrupting the whole 
body politic, which it may, in like manner, become necessary to 
suppress by the strong hand of the law. Indeed, we might 'pmmi, 
as already coming within this category, the Rochester Knock- 
ings, with their kindred train of rascalities and abominations.^ 

" A little further on, the writer adds : ' In like manner, it is 
the general opinion of well-informed and deep-thinking persons, 
that it is already high time to call in legislative aid, if the execu- 
tion of no existing statutes can reach the present evil, for this 
perilous imposture, or yet more perilous contagion of morbid 
minds.' 

" This is a sweeping denunciation of all who have investigated 
these ' spiritual manifestations,' and who have expressed a belief 
in their truth. And the spirit which pervades the whole article 
would not only recall the ' Salem Hangings,' but would also in- 
voke the ' fires of Smithfield.' I have no hesitation in saying, I 
am one ' coming within this category.' And, let me assure you, 
there are throughout this widely-extended country some of the 
brightest and most exalted intellects who have, from a thorough 
investigation of this matter, come to the same conclusion. Yet 
such men are to be thus denounced by a writer who is so far 
behind the intelligence of the age, that he includes in his denunci- 
ations mesmerism and clairvoyance, which are considered by intel- 
ligent and scientific men as well established as electricity and 
magnetism. If this were all, he would deserve simply to be 
laughed at. But, in regard to spiritualism, he probably never 
condescended to examine the subject, and yet assumes that he 
knows more about it by mere instinct than others of equal talent, 
to say the least, do by the most patient research and philosoph- 
ical investigation. 

" This article, I am persuaded, has been published by you with- 
out full examination or due reflection. It runs counter to all the 
principles of 'law and order' which have been so uniformly 

LETTEB OF GOT. TAILMADQE. 339 

enforced in the ' National Intelligencer.' And I regret extremely . 
that such disorganizing, such abominable, such flagitious senti- 
ments should, even indirectly, have the influence of your names. 
I feel myself as being included in these denunciations; for, 
although I do not obtrude my opinions or my facts on any one, 
still I have communicated freely with those who have voluntarily 
sought information on this subject. During the last winter at 
Washington, I conferred fiilly, and on their own solicitation, with 
some of the most distinguished men in the nation. I gave to 
them my own opinions, and the exalted communications and facts 
on which those opinions were founded. 

" Retired from public life, I have desired in this, as in all other 
matters, to avoid public observation. At the same time you have 
been acquainted with me well enough, and long enough, to know 
that, when I have deliberately formed an opinion on any subject,' 
I have that rare quality, called moral courage, which enables me 
to avow it either in private or in public. 

" So fiir as the public are concerned I have as yet endeavored 
to maintain a profound silence. But, considering myself as one 
of those so vindictively denounced in the article alluded to, further 
silence on my part would argue pusillanimity, and cease to be a 
virtue. I have not language to express my astonishment at the 
suggestions and doctrines there put forth ; doctrines which subvert 
the very principles of civil and religious freedom, guaranteed by the 
constitution under which we live. Who would have conceived 
that, at this advanced period of the nineteenth century, whilst we 
are surrounded by the multiplied evidences of the rapid progress 
in science and the arts, we should witness such evidences of 
bigotry and superstition, and such a retrogression, towards the 
' Cimmerian Darkness,' which spread like a pall over the ancient 
world ? If there was ever a monomania on any subject, it is on 
the part of those who have, without knowledge or investigation, 
denounced so madly these ' spiritual manifestations.' I find no 
fault with those who do not believe in them ; but I cannot with- 

340 MANIFESTATIONS IN WASHINGTON, D. C. 

hold an expression of my surprise that intelligent minds can be 
found to denounce those who do investigate them. 

" To vindicate myself, therefore, from these aspersions, I en- 
close you a copy of a letter which I wrote early last January to 
the Hon. James F. Simmons, former United States senator from 
Rhode Island. The letter was written in the confidence of private 
friendship, and not intended for the public eye. Such aa it is, 
however, I send it to you, and ask, as an act of justice, that you 
will publish it, together with this letter, in the ' National Intel- 
ligencer.' 

" You need not be told who James F. Simmons is. He occu- 
pied a seat for several years with me in the Senate of the United 
States; and, amongst all the members of that body, you did not 
number two better friends. We were both deemed capable at that 
time of examining satisfactorily any question of finance, or of polit- 
ical economy, on which we might be engaged. But now, because 
we have thoroughly investigated these ' spiritual manifestations,' 
and believe in their truth, we are included in the general, and 
Judge Edmonds in the particular, denunciations of this writer. I 
have given the character of Judge Edmonds in my letter to Mr. 
Simmons ; and I will only add here, in reference to the retailed 
slander and sneering remark of the writer in regard to his decis- 
ions, that, as a judge, he unites the qualities of two of the bright- 
est luminaries of the English bench, namely, the profundity of 
Bacon with the intuition of Mansfield. Very respectfully, yours, 

" N. P. Tallmabgb. 

"LETTER TO VIS.. SIMMONS. 

" Washington, January 10, 1853. 

" My dear Sir : I was pleased to see, in the January number 
of ' Putnam's Monthly,' a statement of your experience in ' spir- 
itual manifestations.' In our conversation at Washington, during 
the last session of Congress, you had stated the same to me. 

" My experience is probably more limited than yours ; but 

LBTTER TO HON. J. V. SIMMONS. 341 

yours has served, in some measure, to strengthen the impressions 
made on my own mind by the investigation I have given to this 
mysterious subject. 

" I had heard, for a long time, of the ' Rochester Knockings,' 
but had paid no heed to them ; on the contrary, had considered 
them a delusion, which would soon pass away. I continued under 
these impressions till some time last spring, when my attention 
was called to a newspaper attack on Judge Edmonds for being a 
believer in these ' spiritual manifestations.' I had known Judge 
Edmonds for thirty years ; had practised law in the same courts ; 
had served in the Senate of New York with him ; had been asso- 
ciated with him also as a member of the Court for the Correction . 
of Errors, the highest court in the state ; had known him since 
that time as a justice of the Supreme Court, and more recently 
as a judge of the Court of Appeals, where he holds a deservedly 
high and distinguished rank amongst his brethren, the able judges 
of that court of last resort in the state of New York. I also 
knew him as a gentleman of finished classical education, and as a 
lawyer of an acute mind, and a decided talent for investigation. 
And, above all, I knew him to be a man of unimpeachable in- 
tegrity. Knowing all these things, I concluded that if he had 
become a believer in ' spiritual manifestations,' it was at least a 
subject worthy of investigation. 

"Accordingly, I determined to investigate it, as opportunity 
should present. I thought I could bring to bear on it a pretty 
good share of common sense, and a reasonable talent for investi- 
gation. And knowing withal that I had not a great deal of 
enthusiasm in my composition, I believed Icould enter upon the 
investigation without much danger of being carried away by any 
delusion. 

" In this frame of mind I commenced the investigation of this 
subject ; being an entire unbeliever, but entering upon it with a 
sincere desire to ascertain the truth. I will not trouble you with 
the facts which were developed in the progress of my investiga- 
tion. SuflSce it to say, they were of the most astounding charac- 
29* 

342 MANIFESTATIONS IN WASHINGTON, D. C. 

tor. I soon became satisfied of two things: first, that the 
' medium ' did not know from whence the ' rap ' proceeded ; 
secondly, that she did not know from whence the communication 
came. Perhaps I ought in this connection to observe that, in 
pursuing this investigation, all my questions were propounded 
mentaUy. The medium did not and could not know what they 
were, and of course could not tell what answers to give, or what 
would be appropriate responses to the questions thus mentally 
propounded. 

" Objectors cannot deny that these answers come from an iritd- 
ligent source ; but they sometimes say that they are to be found 
in the mind of the interrogator. It is true that the interrogator 
oftentimes knows the answer to the question mentaUy propounded 
by him ; and it is equally true that he frequently does not know 
what the appropriate answer should be, but ascertains its truth 
afterwards. Neither can he in any way anticipate many com- 
munications which are made without any questions being asked. 
I have frequently received such communications of an elevated 
character, and far above the capacity of the medium. I conclude, 
therefore, they do not come from the medium, nor from the mind 
of the interrogator. 

" These communications, too, are perfectly characteristic of the 
individuals from whom they purport to come. I have had fre- 
quent communications, purporting to come from my old friend, 
John 0. Calhoun, which his intimate friends would pronounce 
perfectly characteristic of him ; and some of them, both in style 
and sentiment, worthy of him in his palmiest days in the Senate 
of the United States., I have had similar ones, purporting to oome 
from Henry Clay and Daniel Webster, of the same elevated order, 
and peculiarly characteristic of the individual. I can make the 
■ same remark of other individuals. 

" I have seen rapping mediums, writing mediums and speaking 
mediums, and have received communications through all of them. 
I have witnessed physical manifestations, such as the movement 
of tables, without any visible agency. These 'physical manifesta- 

I.BTTBB TO HON. J. P. SIMMONS. 343 

tions are more satisfactory to the mass of mankind, because they 
appeal directly to the senses. I am better pleased myself with 
the moral, if I may so call them, than the physical manifesta- 
tions. 

" The next question is, from ■whence do these manifestations, 
whether physical or moral, proceed ? Judge Edmonds was told 
that they were all according to natural laws, which would in due 
time be fully developed ; and he was directed to read Von Reich- 
enbach's Dynamics of Magnetism and Electricity (a book he had 
never heard of before), as a means of enabling him to understand 
these laws. I have read the book myself. The Writer proves 
conclusively the discovery of a new element, which he calls od, or 
the odio force. He proves that this element pervades not only 
the human system, but the material world and the whole universe. 
He finds it in the rays of the sun, moon and stars. Late English 
writers of high reputation consider the existence of the odic force 
as well established as that of magnetism and electricity. It com- 
bines many of the qualities of the two latter, and is antagonistic 
to some of them. It may be presumed, therefore, that this 
newly-discovered element enters, in some sort, into these mani- 
festations. It is said that this accounts for the physical manifest- 
ations. But no one can show Aow this force produces them. And, 
even if this were proved, it still remains to account for the intelli- 
gence in the communications which are received. That intel- 
ligence does not come from tables, or chairs, or other material ob- 
jects. It must come from mind, or from a spiritual source. This 
new element may be the medium of conveying it to us. To illus- 
trate, let me suppose that a friend in New York wishes to com- 
municate with me in Washington. He sends his communication 
to me through the electric telegraph. The communication is 
received and written down here the same as a communication is 
received and written down through the rapping medium. I ask 
how is that communication from my friend conveyed to me? The 
answer is, by the electric fluid. But does the electric fluid make 
the communication ? The answer is no ; the mind of my friend 

344 MANirESTATIONS IN WASHINGTON, D. C. 

does that. So in the case of the rapping medium, the communi- 
cation comes from some source of intelligence. The intelligence, 
as every one knows who has investigated these matters, does not 
come from the table that is moved by some invisible power, nor 
from the medium, nor from any one present. It is, therefore, to 
be inferred that it comes from a spiritual source ; and more 
especially when communications are received on subjects exclu- 
sively known to those communicating. 

" Some have attempted to account for all those things by mes- 
merism, clairvoyance and psychology. Let it be remembered that 
twelve or fifteen years ago, mesmerism, clairvoyance, &c., were 
as much denounced as ' spiritual rappings ' are now. They were 
called humbugs and jugglery then, as these manifestations are at 
this day. This pirejudice and denunciation continued in England 
till the publication of the philosophical treatise of the Rev. Mr. 
Townshend. which changed the whole cuiTent of public sentiment. 
There have been many able publications on these subjects since 
that time, and they are now considered as well established as 
magnetism or electricity. Suppose the denunciations had deterred 
philosophical minds from investigating them, how much light 
would have been lost to science and the world ! Now, all the 
magic, the mysteries, the witchcraft, the necromancy of the an- 
cient world, from the time of the Delphic Oracle, are explained 
by these modern investigations ; and all popular delusions, how- 
ever exaggerated, are now shown to have truth for their basis. 
I have read many of the ablest writers on these subjects ; but to 
my mind not one of them has been able to account for these 
' spiritual manifestations.' Hence the greater importance of 
continuing these investigations. To denounce, therefore, those 
engaged in them, is as unwise as it is unphilosophical ; and more 
especially if such denunciation come from those who never wit- 
nessed any of the facts and manifestations which have convinced 
the judgments of men equally intelligent, equally honest, and as 
little likely to be deluded as themselves. 

" But what is the objection to investigating this matter? Is it 

LEITEK TO HON. J. I?. SIMMONS. 345 

feaied that there may be some discrepancies between the religious 
sentiments communicated and the tenets of the different religious 
denominations amongst us ? Such discrepancies are heard every 
Sunday from our different pulpits throughout the land ; and still 
all denominations of Christians, though differing about particular 
tenets, maintain the great and leading doctrines of Christianity. 
And from the investigation I have given the subject, I agree with 
the Rev. Adin Ballou, who has written the most candid and sat- 
isfactory explanation I have seen, that ' whatever of divine fun- 
damental principle, absolute truth, and essential righteousness, 
there is in the Bible, in the papular religion, and in the estab- 
lished churches vnLl stand. It cannot be done away. On the 
corvtrary, it vjill be corroborated and fulfilled by spirit manifest- 
ations! . 

" It has been objected that there have been cases of derange- 
ment arising from these manifestations. If there be such cases, I 
apprehend they are less numerous than they have been repre- 
sented, and may have arisen from other causes than the one to 
■which they have been attributed. But, be that as it may, and 
be the number great or small, it has no possible bearing on this 
question. Derangement has often followed from religious excite- 
ment, and the over-excited passions of the human heart. Still, 
this is no objection to the investigation of the truths of religion, 
or of the emotions of our nature. Neither is it an objection to 
investigating the subject under consideration. Denunciations 
cannot stop it, but, on the contrary, tend to encourage it. But 
for the denunciation of Judge Edmonds, an old acquaintance and 
friend, I doubt whether my attention would have been called to 
it. If it be true, it should be known ; for great and mighty re- 
sults must follow. Already we hear of many who have been 
converted from infidelity, and now proclaim the immortality of 
the soul, and that ' death is' not ' an eternal sleep.' If it be not 
true, that can only be ascertained by investigation; and the 
sooner it be done the better. In either case, therefore, all good 
citizens, all intelligent minds, should unite in ascertaining the 

346 MANIFESTATIONS IN WASHINQION, D. C. 

truth or falsity of this the greatest phenomenon of the present or 
any preceding age. 

"It is understood to be a general belief, at this day, amongst all 
Christian denominations, that spirits visit this earth ; that they 
impress us, and thereby protect us^from accident and danger, 
Every one's own experience will confirm the truth of this observar 
tion. A communication to me, purporting to come from Mr. 
Calhoun, conveys the same idea, wherein he says, ' We, by our 
united will acting upon spirits clothed in flesh, influence them to 
perform duties which benefit mankind.' If, then, such be the 
general belief, is it any great stretch of that belief, after the as- 
tounding facts we have seen and heard, to suppose that there 
may have been discovered a mode by which spirits can now com- 
municate with us, in addition to attending and impressing us, and 
that they are permitted so to do ? To my mind, the conclusion 
is perfectly rational and philosophical. With all the evidences 
of progress which surround us here, how can we discard such 
evidences from the spirit-world, which is believed to be one of 
' everlasting progression ? ' 

" Many persons, unable to resist the evidence of the spiritual 
source of these communications, are finally compelled to admit 
them, and, as a last resort, charge them as emanating from evil 
spirits. I consider this as giving up the controversy. There 
Tnay be communications from evil spirits. But that does not 
conflict with the communications which bear internal evidence of 
coming from the ' spirits of just men made more perfect.' There 
is an abundance of communications purporting to come from such 
a source, and of the purest, most elevated, and most religious 
character. If the ' evil one' has prompted these, I confess I 
have heretofore formed a very wrong estimate of his character. 

" On the whole, the result of my investigations thus far is that 
the weight of evidence is in favor of the truth of these ' spiritual 
manifestations.' But I shall continue to investigate as oppor- 
tunity offers. And if, hereafter, the preponderance of evidence 

LETTER TO MRS. SARAH H. WHITMAN. 347 

shall incline to the other side, I shall as readily announce that 
result as I have above communicated the other. 

" In the mean time, let us exercise all possible charity for those 
who do not believe ; and especially those who denounce without 
investigation, and condemn without knowledge ; for they are those 
that most need it. 

" Excuse this desultory communication, and accept the assur- 
ance of the high respect and esteem with which I am, very truly, 
yours. 

"N. P. Tallmadqb. 

" Hon. James F. Simmons." 

letter number two. 

"Baltimoke, Tuesday, April 12, 1853. 

" Dear Madam : I seize a few moments, while detained here a 
short time on business, to give you a more extended account of 
the ' physical manifestations,' to which I alluded in a former let- 
ter. In this account I shall confine myself to those which pur- 
port to come from the spirit of John^C. Calhoun. 

" I have received numerous communications from him, from 
the commencement of my investigation of this subject down to the 
present time. Those communications have been received through 
rapping mediums, writing mediums, and speaking mediums. They 
are of the most extraordinary character. In style and sentiment 
they would do honor to him in his best days on earth. 

" After the arrival of the Misses Eox in Washington city, in 
February last, I called on them by appointment, and, at once, 
received a communication from Calhoun. 

" I then wrote down and propounded mentally the following 
question : 

" ' Can you do anything (meaning physical manifestations) to 
confirm me in the truth of these revelations, and to remove from 
my mind the least shadow of unbelief? ' 

" To which I received the following answer : 

348 MANIFESTATIONS IN WASHINGTON, T). C. 

',' ' I will give you a communication on Monday, at seven-and-a- 
half o'clock. Do not fail to be here. I will then give you an 
explanation. John C. Calhoun.' 

" It is proper here to remark that all communications, referred 
to in this letter, were nfade by Calhoun after a call for the alpha- 
bet, and rapped out, letter by letter, and taken down by me in 
the usual way. They were made in the presence of the Misses 
Eox and their mother. 

" I called on Monday, at the hour appointed, and received the 
following communication : 

" ' My friend, the question is often put to you, " What good 
can result from these manifestations ? " I will answer it : 

" ' It is to draw mankind together in harmony, and convince 
sceptics of the immortality of the soul. John C. Calhoun.' 

" This reminds me that, in 1850, at Bridgeport, in the presence 
of other mediums, among many questions put and answers re- 
ceived, were the following — the answer purporting to come from 
W. E. Channing. 

" Q. "What do spirits propose to accomplish by these new man- 
ifestations ? 

" A. To unite mankind, and to convince sceptical minds of the 
immortality of ' the soul.' 

" The coincidence in sentiment of the answer of J. C. Calhoun 
and of W. B. Channing, in regard to the object of these manifesta- 
tions, is remarkable, and worthy of particular notice. The con- 
currence of two such great minds, whether in or out of the body, 
on a subject so engrossing, cannot fail to command the attention 
of every admirer of exalted intellect and moral purity. 

" During the above communication of Calhoun, the table moved 
occasionally, perhaps a foot, first one way and then the other. 
After the communication closed, we all moved back from the 
table, from two to four feet, so that no one touched the table. 

LETTER TO MRS. SARAH H. WHITMAN. 349 

Suddenly the table moved from the position it occupied some three 
or four feet, rested a few moments, then moved back to its original 
position. Then it again moved as far the other way, and re- 
turned to the place it started from. One side of the table wa^: 
then raised, and stood for a few moments at an angle of about 
thirty -five degrees, and then again rested on the floor as usual. 

" The table was a large, heavy, round table, at which ten or a 
dozen persons might be seated at dinner. During aE these move- 
ments no 'person tcuched the table, nor was any one near it. 
After seeing it raised in the manner above mentioned, I had the 
curiosity to test its weight by raising it myself. I accordingly 
took my seat by it, placed my hands under the leaf, and exerted 
as much force as I was capable of in that sitting posture, and 
I could not raise it a particle from the floor. I then stood up, 
in the best possible position to exert the greatest force, took hold 
of the leaf, and still could not raise it with all the strength I 
could apply. I then requested the three ladies to take hold' 
around the table, and try all together to lift it. We lifted upon it 
until the leaf and top began to crack, and did not raise it a par- 
ticle. We then desisted, fearing we should break the table. I 
then said, ' Will the spirits permit me to raise the table ? ' I 
took hold alone, and raised it without difficulty ! 

" After this the following conversation ensued : 

" Q. — Can you raise the table entirely from the floor ? A. 
Yes. 

" Q. — Will you raise me witli it ? A. Yes ; get me the 
square table. 

" The square table was of cherry, with four legs, — a large-size 
tea-table. It was brought out, and substituted for the round one. 
The leaves being raised, I took my seat on the centre ; the three 
ladies sat at the sides and end, their hands and arms resting upon 
it. This, of course, added to the weight to be raised, namely, my 
own weight and the weight of the table. Two legs of the table 
were then raised about six inches from the floor ; and then the 
other two legs were raised to a level of the first, so that the whole 
30 

350 MANIEESTATIONS IN WASHINGTON, D. C. 

table was suspended in ike air about six inches above the floor. 
While thus seated on it, I could feel a gentle, vibratory motion, 
as if floating in the atmosphere. After being thus suspended: in 
the air for a few moments the table was gently let down again to 
the floor I 

" Some pretend to say that these physical manifestations are 
made by electricity ! I should like to know by what laws of elec- 
tricity known to us a table is at one time riveted, as it were, to the 
floor, against all the force that could be exerted to raise it, and 
at another time raised entirely from the floor with more than two 
hundred pounds' weight upon it ? 

" At a subsequent meeting, Calhoun directed me to bring three 
bells and a guitar. I brought them accordingly. The bells were 
of different sizes.; the largest like a small-sized dinner-bell. He 
directed a drawer to be put under the square table. I put under 
a bureau-drawer, bottom side up. He directed the bells to be 
placed on the drawer. The three ladies and myself were seated 
at the table, with our hands and arms resting on it. The bells 
commenced ringing in a sort of chime. Numerous raps were 
made, as if beating time to a march. The bells continued to ring 
and to chime in with the beating of time. The time of the march 
was slow and solemn. It was beautiful and perfect. The most 
fastidious ear could not detect any discrepancy in it. 

" The raps then ceased, and the bells rang violently for several 
minutes. A bell was then pressed on my foot, my ankle and my 
knee. This was at different times repeated. Knocks were made 
viost vehemently against the under side of the table, so that a 
large tin candlestick was, by every blow, raised completely from 
the table by the concussion ! 

" I afterward examined the under side of the table (which, it 
will be recollected, was of cherry), and found indentations in the 
wood, made by the end of the handle of the bell, which was tipped 
with brass. Could electricity make those violent knocks with the 
handle of the bell, causing indentations, and raising the candle- 
stick from the table at every blow ? Or was it done by the same 

LETTER TO MUS. SAKAH U. WHITUAN. 351 

invisible power that riveted the table to the floor, and again raised 
it, with all the weight upon it, entirely above the floor ? 

" Here the ringing of the bells ceased, and then I felt sensibly 
and distinctly the impression of a hand on my foot, ankle and 
knee. These manifestations were several times repeated. 

" I was then directed to put the guitar on the drawer. We 
were all seated, as before, with our Lands and arms resting on the 
table. 

" The guitar was touched softly and gently, and gave forth 
sweet and delicious sounds, like the accompaniment to a beautiful 
and exquisite piece of music. It then played a sort of symphony 
in much louder and bolder tones. And, as it played, these har- 
monious sounds, becoming soft, and sweet, and low, began to 
recede, and grew fainter and fainter, till they died away on the 
ear in the distance. Then they returned, and grew louder and 
louder and nearer, till they were heard again in full and gushing 
volume as when, they commenced. 

" I am utterly incapable of giving any adequate idea of the 
beauty and harmony of this music. I have heard the guitar 
touched by the most delicate and scientific hands, and heard from 
it, under such guidance, the most splendid performances. But 
never did I hear anything that fastened upon the soul like those 
prophet strains drawn out by an invisible hand from the spirit- 
world. While listening to it, I was ready to exclaim, in the lan- 
guage of the Bard of Avon, 

' That strain again, — it had a dying fall ; 
0, it came o'er toy ear like the sweet south, 
That breathes upon a hank of violets, 
Stealing and giving odor ! ' 

" After the music had ceased, the following communication was 
received : 

" ' This is my hand that touches you and the guitar. 

" ' John C. Calhoun.' 

352 MANIFESTATIONS IN WASHINGTON, D. C. 

" At another time, the following physical manifestation was 
made in the presence of Gen. Hamilton, Gen. Waddy Thompson, 
of South Carolina, and myself : — 

" We were directed to place the Bible on a drawer under the 
table. I placed it there, completely closed. It was a small 
pocket Bible, with very fine print. Numerous raps were then 
heard, beating time to ' Hail Columbia,' which had been called 
for. Soon the sounds began to recede, and grew fainter and 
fainter, till, like the music of the guitar, they died away in the 
distance. The alphabet was then called for, and it was spelled . 
out ' Look.' I looked on the drawer, and found the Bible open. 
I took it up, and carefully kept it open at the place as I found it. 
On bringing it to the light, I found it open at St. John's gospel, 
— chapter II. being on the left side, and chapter III. being on 
the right side. I said, ' Do you wish us to look at chapter II. ? ' 
Ans. ' No.' ' Do you wish us to look at chapter III.? ' A7is. 
' Yes.' And it was then said, ' Bead.' I commenced reading 
the chapter, and significant and emphatic raps were given at many 
verses ; at 8, 11, 19, 34, most vehement raps were given.* By look- 
ing at these verses, you will appreciate the significancy and intel- 
ligence of this emphatic demonstration. This manifestation pur- 
ported to come from Calhoun, who had previously invited us three 
gentlemen to be present at a particular hour. 

" In reflecting on the preceding manifestations, one cannot but 
marvel at the power by which they are made, and the intelligerice 
by which that power is directed. And it would seem impossible 
for one to doubt the source of that intelligence. If, however, 

» The yerses of Scripture here referred to read as follows : — 

Vs. 8. The wind bloweth wliere it will, and thou heaiest its voioe, but 
knowest not whence it cometh and whither it goeth ; so is every one that is 
born of the spirit. 

Vs. 11. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, we speak what we know, and testify 
what we have seen ; and ye receive not our testimony. 

Vs. 19. And this is the condemnation, that light has come into the world, 
and men love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil. 

Vs. Si. For he whom God hath sent speaketh the words of God ; for God 
giveth not the spirit by measure. 

LETTER TO MKS. SARAH H. WHITMAN. 353 

doubt should still remain on the mind of any one acquainted with 
similar manifestations, that doubt must be entirely dispelled by the 
account of the manifestations which follows : 

" I was present, by Calhoun's appointment, with the Misses 
Fox and their mother. We were seated at the table as heretofore, 
and our hands and arms resting upon it. I was directed to put 
paper and pencil on the drawer. I placed several sheets of un- 
ruled letter-paper, together with a wood pencil, on it. I soon 
heard the sound of the pencil on the paper. It was then rapped 
out, ' Get the pencil and sharpen it.' I looked under the table, 
but did not see the pencil. At length I found it lying diagonally 
from me, three or four feet from the table. The lead was broken 
off within the wood. I sharpened it, and again put it on the 
drawer. Again I heard the sound of the pencil on the paper. 
On being directed to look at the paper, I discovered pencil marks 
on each side of the outer sheet, but no writing. Then was re- 
ceived the following communication : 

" ' The power is not enough to write a sentence. This will 
show you that I can write. If you meet on Friday, precisely at 
seven, I will write a short sentence. John 0. Calhoun.' 

" We met pursuant to appointment ; took our seats at the table, 
our hands and arms resting on it as usual. I placed the paper 
with my silver-cased pencil on the drawer, and said, 

" ' My friend, I wish the sentence to be in your own hand- 
writing, so that your friends will recognize it.' He replied, ' You 
will know the writing.' 

" He then said, 

" ' Have your minds on the spirit of John C. Calhoun.' 

" I soon heard a rapid movement of the pencil on the paper, 
and the rustling of the paper, together with a movement of the 
drawer. I was then directed to look under the drawer. I looked, 
and found my pencil outside of the drawer, near my feet, but 
found no paper on the drawer where I placed it. On raising up 
30* 

354 MANIFESTATIONS IN WASHINQTON, D. C. 

the drawer, I discovered the paper all under it. The sheets were 
a little deranged, and, on examining, I found on the outside sheet 
these words : 

" ' I'm vdth you still,' 

" I afterward showed the ' sentence ' to G-en. James Hamilton, 
former Governor of South Carolina, G-en. Waddy Thompson, for- 
mer Minister to Mexico, Gen. Robt. B. Campbell, late Consul at 
Havana, together with other intimate friends of Calhoun, and 
also to one of his sons, ill of whom are as well acquainted with 
his hand-writing as their own, and they all pronounced it to be a 
Tpei&ict fac-simUe of the hand-writing of John C. Calhoun. 

" Gen. Hamilton stated a fact, in connection with this writing, 
of great significance. He says that Calhoun was in the habit of 
writing ' I 'm ' for ' I am,' and that he has numerous letters from 
him where the abbreviation is thus used. 

" Mrs. Gen. Macomb has stated the same fact to me. She says 
that her husband, the late Gen. Macomb, has shown to her Cal- 
houn's letters to him, where this abbreviation ' I 'm ' was used for 
' I am,' and spoke of it as a peculiarity of Calhoun. 

" How significant, then, does this fact become ! We have not 
only the most unequivocal testimony to the hand-writing itself, 
but, lest any sceptic should suggest the possibility of an imitation 
or a counterfeit, this abbreviation, peculiar to himself, and known 
only to his most intimate friends, and which^no imitator or coun- 
terfeiter could know, is introduced by way of putting such a sug- 
gestion to flight forever ! 

" This ' sentence ' is perfectly characteristic of Calhoun. It 
contains his terseness of style and his condensation of thought. 
It is a text from which volumes might be written. It proves, 

" 1. The immortality of tlie soul. 

" 2. The power of spirits to revisit the earth. 

" 3. Their ability to communicate with relatives and friends. 

" 4. The identity of the spirit to all eternity. 

" How one's soul expands with these sublime conceptions ! How 
resistless is this testimony of their truth ! How surprising that 

MANIFESTATIONS IN DRAWING, ETC. 355 

men can doubt, when this flood of living light is poured upon them 
by spirits who, in the language of Webster, ' revel in the glory of 
the eternal light of God.' 

" Very truly yours, 

" N. P., Tallmadqe. 
" ]Mrs. Sakah Heibn Whitman, Providence, K. I." 

Among the persons who visited the Misses Fox; at Washington, 
were Prof. Henry and Prof. Page, of the Smithsonian Institute. 
The former expressed great surprise, on his first visit, that he 
could not find out the source of the sounds. "It is true! " he 
exclaimed with surprise. He tried several experiments ; had the 
girls stand on a cloak with a silk lining, and, hearing no rapping, 
concluded it to be electricity, and published in one of the Wash- 
ington papers a card to that effect. 

Prof. Page has since published a pamphlet " expos^," in which 
he takes the ground that no well-educated, man will for a moment 
suppose the sounds to be electrical ; but that it is all sheer fraud 
and trickery ! He is even sure that this is the case, although he 
did not discover the trick. I shall notice this " expos(5 " more 
fully in the Appendix of this book. 

From the time of the first investigations in Washington, 
mediums were developed and the manifestations increased, until, 
at the present time, the number is as large as at any place of the 
size in the country. Conferences are held weekly, at which the 
public have an opportunity to hear and to discuss the subjects 
involved in the spiritual philosophy. These meetings are gen- 
erally well attended ; often by some of the most eminent men in 
the country. — 

Among the mediums developed in Washington are some of a 
very extraordinary character. The most interesting, as exhibiting 
the marvellous and the beautiful, are the mediums for producing a 
variety of drawings, evincing great skill and unprecedented rapid- 
ity in their production. The editor of the Spiritual Telegraph, 

356 MANIl'ESTATIONS AT WASHINGTON, D. C. 

writing from ■Washington, under date of March 29th, 1854, ^ves 
the following account of some of them : 

" I have conversed with seven mediums of this description, five 
of whom, if I am rightly informed, had not acquired the slightest 
skill in the art by any previous discipline ; but they are all at 
present employed as passive instruments in the ezecution of some 
very curious pictures, which, as the spirits distinctly affirm, are 
intended to represent the flowers, fruits, &c., of the higher spheres. 
These pictures do not, in all respects, conform to the accredited 
rules of art ; but it must be conceded that very many of them 
are well drawn, while the shading is often delicate and beautiful. 
I am indebted to the persons herein referred to for some interest- 
ing specimens of these drawings ; and a more explicit reference to 
particular examples will, I doubt not, interest the numerous 
readers of the Telegraph. 

" Mrs. Amelia J. Williams, of this city, was first made con- 
scious of being influenced by spirits on the third day of February 
last. While sitting in a circle, the spirits informed her that she 
would become a writing medium ; whereupon she took up a pencil, 
and a brief communication was written to the effect that she 
would also be developed as a drawing medium. Mrs. Williams 
had never received any instruction in the use of the pencil, but 
the invisible artists proceeded at once to redeem their promise. 
Her hand was freely moved by a foreign intelligent agency, and 
the immediate results were such as to greatly astonish herself and 
her friends. Up to yesterday (March 28) — less than eight 
weeks from the commencement of this interesting experience — her 
hand was moved to execute not less than one hundred and twenty 
pieces, chiefly plants and flowers, supposed to belong to the spirit- 
world. They are, for the most part, unlike anything I had seen 
elsewhere, and very few of them appear to admit of a classifica- 
tion. The style is peculiar, and some of them could only be 
copied at the cost of much care and labor. The whole of a pic- 
ture, even when it embodies every variety of shading, is invariably 

MANIFESTATIONS IN DKAWINO, ETC. 357 

drawn with a single pencil, and bo rapidly that the most expe- 
rienced draughtsman could not equal the facility displayed in the 
execution. The spirits were requested to give me a drawing of 
some celestial object; to which they promptly acceded, and in two 
hours executed the work. The design is quite as curious as the 
execution was rapid and successful. Mrs. Williams has, more- 
over, kindly presented me with several additional specimens of 
her drawings, which I regard as important contributions to my 
collection. I must not omit to mention in this place that the 
spirit, who guides the hand of Mrs. Williams, says he was an 
Italian peasant, and devoted a large portion of his earth-life to 
the study of botany. 

" Charles F., son of Mr. John S. and Mrs. Amelia J. Wil- 
liams, aged twelve years, also commenced drawing about two 
months since, and now executes architectural aiid other pieces in 
a rapid and apparently careless manner. But Master Charles is 
most remarkable as a musical medium. In the month of January 
last he was first influenced by a spirit claiming to be Paganini. 
While attempting to perform some simple air on the violin, he 
was suddenly controlled and went through with the ' Carnival of 
Venice.' The composition was rendered in a style which required 
the skill of a master. Since that time he has been impelled to 
play other difficult pieces, sometimes on a single string, and often 
with original and exquisite variations. The notes of several 
birds, and a variety of other sounds, are imitated on the strings 
of the viol in a most marvellous manner ; but the spirit often finds 
fault with the instrument — which is one of inferior tone — and in 
several instances has wrenched it from the boy's hands and hurled 
it across the room. The invisible teacher strenuously insists that 
Mr. Williams shall purchase a better instrument ; and Mr. Williams 
has at length resolved to comply with the demand of Paganini ; 
which we think is right, especially as the professor gives hia ser- 
vices in the capacity of teacher. 

" Mr. 0. Laurie, of this city, became a speaking medium early 
in January last, and soon after commenced drawing symbolical 

358 MANirESTATlONS AT WASHINGTON, D. C. 

pictures. He is not conscious of any mental impression respect- 
ing the objects to be represented ; but the hand is moved by a 
power foreign to himself, and with surprising precision. The 
spirits, through the hand of Mr. Laurie, furnished me with a 
remarkable specimen, which was elaborated in about three hours. 
It represents, on a surface less than, the size of an ordinary bank- 
note, a great number of animal forms, together with a variety 
of other objects, all distinctly drawn, and curiously combined 
within very narrow limits, yet without the least appearance of 
confusion. The piece is unique, and a decided curiosity. 

" On one occasion, Mr. Laurie, who had never before performed 
the simplest musical exercise on the piano, was impelled to go to 
the instrument, when, to his surprise and to the astonishment of 
his friends, he gave Mozart's Requiem, as we are credibly in- 
formed, in an exquisite and masterly manner. Since that time 
Mr. Laurie has repeatedly tried to summon the invisible agent of 
this musical inspiration ; but his efforts in this direction have 
been unavailing. 

" Mrs. Margaret A. Laurie, wife of the gentleman just referred 
to, is also a medium for several phases of the spiritual phe- 
nomena. She has been subject to visions from childhood. Early 
in January la;st she was developed as a drawing medium, since 
which she continues to draw flowers, &c.; some of the specimens 
executed under her hand evidently belong to the temperate lati- 
tudes of the earth-sphere, while others are not at all familiar, 
though they appear to have been drawn from objects really exist- 
ing. I am indebted to Mrs. Laurie for choice specimens, one of 
which was made visible to her while she was in a trance state, 
before the drawing was executed. The colors, which were dark 
green, purple and scarlet, were very brilliant. The piece was 
commenced and completed in some thirty minutes ; and it is believed 
that few persons experienced in pencil-drawing could copy it in 
three hours. 

" Miss Isabel C. Laurie, daughter of the above-named parties, 
became a rapping, tipping and writing medium in October last ; 

MEMORIAL TO CONGRESS. 359 

subsequently, in tlie month of March, she commenced drawing 
celestial landscapes, flowers, and fruits. Miss L. sees spirits 
when, to all outward appearance, she is in the ordinary state ; at 
other times she is made to improvise both words and music. 

" A. F. Cunningham, Esq., who was formerly associated with 
Theophilus Fisk in the proprietorship and management of the Old 
Dominion, is also numbered among the drawing media. He is 
by no means one of those passive raortals who do things accident- 
ally ; his intellect, naturally vigorous, has been sharpened by his 
pursuits, and his unusual executive power precludes the supposi- 
tion that he can be easily controlled. Yet, Mr. Cunningham has 
been made to yield to the influence of the spirits, and is now 
almost daily exercised in drawing fruits which are said to grow in 
the immortal spheres." 

I have had the pleasure of examining a large number of these 
drawings, and can fully endorse all that brother Brittan has stated 
in regard to their beauty of design and execution. I have also 
met with Mr. Laurie and his family, and witnessed some of the 
striking manifestations at his house. 

One of the events in the history of spiritual manifestations 
was the presentation of the following Memorial to the United 
States Senate, with thirteen' thousand signatures attached.' The 
name of ex-governor Tallmadge, of Wisconsin, was at the head of 
the list : 

"A MEMOKIAL 

"To the Honorable the Memhers of the Senate and House of Bep- 
resentatives of the United States, in Congress assemhled. 

"Tour memorialists, citizens of the Republic of the United 
States of America, most respectfully beg leave to represent before 
your honorable body, that certain physical and mental phenomena, 
of questionable origin and mysterious import, have of late occurred 
in this country, and in almost all parts of Europe, and that the 

360 MANirESTATIONS IN WASHINGTON, D. C. 

Bame are now so prevalent, especially in the nortiiern, middle and 
western sections of the Uniop, as to engross a large share of the 
public attention. The peculiar nature of the subject to whieh the 
memorialists desire to solicit the attention of your honorable 
body may be inferred from a partial analysis of its phenomenal 
aspects, which are imperfectly comprehended in the following brief 
generalization. 

" 1. An occult force, exhibited in sliding, raising, arresting, 
holding, suspending and otherwise disturbing, numerous ponderable 
bodies, apparently in direct opposition to the acknowledged laws 
of matter, and altogether transcending the accredited powers of 
the human mind, is manifested to thousands of intelligent and dis- 
criminating persons, while the human senses have hitherto failed to 
detect, to the satisfaction of the public, either the primary or 
proximate causes of these phenomena. 

"2. Lights of various forms and colors, and of different de- 
grees of intensity, appear in dark rooms, where no substances 
exist which are liable to develop a chemical action or phospho- 
rescent illumination, and in the absence of all the means and 
instruments whereby electricity is generated or combustion pro- 
duced. 

" 3. Another phase of the phenomena which we desire to bring 
to the notice of your august body, is presented in the variety of 
sounds which are now extremely frequent in their occurrence, 
widely diversified in their character, and more or less significant 
in their import. These consist in part of certain mysterious rap- 
pings, which appear to indicate the presence of an invisible intel- 
ligence ; sounds, such as are occasioned by the prosecution of 
several mechanical and other occupations, are often heard ; there 
are others which resemble the hoarse voices of the winds and waves, 
with which occasionally harsh creaking sounds are mingled, sim- 
ilar to those produced by the masts and rigging of a ship while 
it is laboring in a rough sea. At times powerful concussions 
occur, not unlike distant thunder or the discharge of artillery, 
accompanied by an oscillatory movement of surrounding objects, 

MEMOKIAL TO CONGRESS. 361 

and, in some instances, by a vibratory or tremulous motion of the 
floor of the apartment, or, it may be, of the whole house wherein 
the phenomena occur. On other occasions, harmonic sounds are 
heard, as of human voices, but more frequently resembling the 
tones of various musical instruments, among which those of the 
fife, drum, trumpet, guitar, harp and piano, have been mysteriously 
and successfully represented, both with and without the instru- 
ments, and, in either case, without any apparent human or other 
visible agency. These phenomena appear to depend, so far as 
regards the process of their production, on the acknowledged prin- 
ciples of acoustics. There is obviously a disturbance of the 
sensational medium of the auditory nerves, occasioned by an undu- 
latory movement of the air, though by what means these atmos- 
pheric undulations are produced does not appear to the satisfac- 
tion of acute observers. 

" 4. All these functions of the human body and mind are often 
and strangely influenced in what appear to be certain abnormal 
states of the system, and by causes which are neither adequately 
defined nor understood. The invisible power frequently inter- 
rupts what we are accustomed to denominate the normal operation 
of the faculties, suspending sensation and the capacity for volun- 
tary motion, checking the circulation of the animal fluids, and re- 
ducing the temperature of the limbs and portions of the body to a 
death-like coldness and rigidity. Indeed, in some instances, res- 
piration is entirely suspended for a season, — it may be for hours 
or days together, — after which the faculties of the mind and 
functions of the body are fully restored. It is, moreover, con- 
fidently asserted, that these phenomena have been succeeded, in 
numerous cases, by permanent mental and physical derangement; 
and it is as positively affirmed and believed that many persons, 
who were suffering from organic defects, or from protracted and 
apparently incurable diseases, have been suddenly relieved or 
entirely renovated by the same mysterious agency. 

" It may not be improper to observe, in this connection, that 
two general hypotheses obtain with respect to the origin of these 
31 

362 MANIFESTATIONS IN WASHINGTON, D. C. 

remarkable phenomena. The one ascribes them to the power and 
intelligence of departed spirits, operating on and through the siib- 
tile and imponderable elements which pervade and permeate all 
material forms ; and this, it should be observed, accords with the 
ostensible claims and pretensions of the manifestations themselves. 
Among those who accept this hypothesis will be found a large 
number of our fellow-citizens, who are alike distinguished for their 
moral worth, intellectual powers and attainments, as well as for 
their eminent social position and political influence. Others, not 
less distinguished in all the relations of life, reject this conclusion, 
and entertain the opinion that the acknowledged principles of 
physics and metaphysics will enable scientific inquirers to account 
for all the facts in a rational and satisfactory manner. While 
your memorialists cannot agree on this question, but have honestly 
arrived at widely different conclusions respecting the probable 
causes of the phenomena herein described, they beg leave most 
respectfully to assure your honorable body they" nevertheless most 
cordially concur in the opinion that the alleged pheTumiena do 
really occur, and that their mysterious origin, peculiar nature and 
important bearing on the interests of mankind, demand from them 
a patient, thorough, and scientific investigation. 

" It cannot reasonably be denied that the various phenomena to 
which the memorial refers are likely to produce important and 
lasting results, permanently affecting the physical condition, 
mental development and moral character, of a large number of the 
American people. It is obvious that these occult powers do in- 
fluence the essential principles of health and life, of thought, and 
action, and hence they may be destined to modify the conditions 
of our being, the faith and philosophy of the age, and the govern- 
ment of the world. Moreover, deeming it to be intrinsically 
proper, and, at the same time, strictly compatible with the 
cardinal objects and essential spirit of our institutions, to address 
the representatives of the people concerning any and every subject 
which may be fairly presumed to involve the discoyery of new 
principles, which must or may issue in momentous consequences 

DEBAIB ON TWBi MEMORIAL. 363 

to mankind, we, your fellow-citizens, whose names are appended 
to this memorial, earnestly desire to be heard on this occasion. 

" In pursuance, therefore, of the objects contemplated by the 
present memorialists, and in view of the facts and reasons herein 
contained or referred to, your fellow-citizens most respectfully 
petition your honorable body for the appointment of a Scientific 
Commission, to which this subject shall be referred, and for such 
an appropriation as shall enable the commissioners to prosecute 
their inquiries to a successful termination. Believing that the 
progress of science and the true interests of mankind will be 
greatly promoted by the proposed investigation, the undersigned 
venture to indulge the hope that their requests will be approved 
and sanctioned by the wisdom of your honorable body. And to 
this end the petitioners vrill ever pray." 

This memorial was presented, by Hon. James Shields, in the 
month of April, 1854. The following is the reported debate on 
the occasion : 

" Mr. Shields. — I beg leave to present to the Senate a petition, 
with some fifteen thousand names appended to it, upon a very sin- 
gular and novel subject. The petitioners represent that certain 
physical and mental phenomena of mysterious import have become 
so prevalent in this country and Europe as to engross a large 
share of public attention. A partial analysis of these phenomena 
attests the existence, 

" First. Of an occult force, which is exhibited in sliding, rais- 
ing, arresting, holding, suspending, and otherwise disturbing, pon- 
derable bodies, apparently in direct opposition to the acknowl- 
edged laws of matter and transcending the accredited powers of 
the human mind. [Laughter.] 

" Secondly. Lights of different degrees of intensity appear in 
dark rooms, where chemical action or phosphorescent illumina- 
tion cannot be developed, and where there are no means of gene- 
rating electricity or of producing combustion. 

" Thirdly. A variety of sounds, frequent in occurrence, and 

364 MANIFESTATIONS IN WASHINGTON, B. C. 

diversified in character, and of singular significance and import, 
consisting of mysterious rapping, indicating the presence of in- 
visible intelligence. Sounds are often heard like those produced 
by the prosecutor of mechanical operations, like the hoarse mur- 
murs of the winds and waves, mingled with the harsh, creaking 
noise of the masts and rigging of a ship laboring in a sea. Con- 
cussions also occur resembling distant thunder, producing oscilla- 
tory movements of surrounding objects, and a tremulous motion of 
the premises upon which these phenomena occur. Harmonious 
sounds, as that of human voices, and other sounds, resembling 
those of the fife, drum, trumpet, &c., have been produced without 
any visible agency. 

" Fourthly. All the functions of the human body and mind 
are influenced in what appear to be certain abnormal states of the 
system by causes not yet adequately understood or accounted for. 
The occult force or invisible power frequently interrupts the 
normal operation of the faculties, suspending sensation and volun- 
tary motion of the body to a deathlike coldness and rigidity, and 
diseases hitherto considered incurable have been entirely eradi- 
cated by this mysterious agency. 

" The petitioners proceed to state that two opinions prevail 
with respect to the origin of these phenomena : one ascribes them 
to the power and the intelligence of departed spirits operating 
upon the elements which pervade all material forms ; the other 
rejects this conclusion, and contends that all these results may be 
accounted for in a rational and satisfactory manner. The memo- 
rialists, while thus disagreeing as to the cause, concur in the opin- 
ion as to the occurrence, of the alleged phenomena, and, in view 
of their origin, nature, and bearing upon the interests of mankind, 
demand for them a patient, rigid, scientific investigation, and re- 
quest the appointment of a scientific commission for that purpose. 

" I have now given a faithful synopsis of this petition, 
which, however unprecedented in itself, has been prepared with 
singular ability, presenting the subject with great delicacy and 
moderation. I make it a rule to present any petition to the Senate 

DEIUIi: ON THE MEMORIAL. 365 

wbich is respeotfiil in its terms ; but, having discharged this duty, 
I may be permitted to say, that the prevalence of this delusion at 
this age of the world, among any considerable portion of our citi- 
zens, must originate, in my opinion, in a defective system of edu- 
cation, or in a partial derangement of the mental faculties, pro- 
duced by a diseased condition of the physical organization. I 
cannot, therefore, believe that it prevails to the extent indicated 
in 'this petition. DifiFerent ages of the world have had their 
peculiar delusions. Alchemy occupied the attention of eminent 
men for several centuries ; but there was something sublime in 
alchemy. The philosopher's stone, or the transmutation of base 
metals into gold, the elixir vita, or ' water of life,' which would 
preserve youth and beauty, and prevent old age, decay and death, 
were blessings which poor humanity ardently desired, and which 
alchemy sought to discover by perseverance and piety. Roger 
Bacon, one of the greatest alchemists and greatest men of the 
thirteenth century, while searching for the philosopher's stone, 
discovered the telescope,' burning-glasses and gunpowder. The 
prosecution of that delusion led, therefore, to a number of useful 
discoveries. In the sixteenth century flourished Cornelius 
Agrippa, alchemist, astrologer and magician, one of the greatest 
professors of hermetic philosophy that ever lived. He had all the 
spirits of the air and demons of ithe earth under his command. 
Paulus Jovius says that the devil, in the shape of a large black 
dog, attended Agrippa wherever he went. Thomas Nash says, at 
the request of Lord Surry, Erasmus and other learned men, 
Agrippa called up from the grave several of the great philoso- 
phers of antiquity — among others, TuUy, whom he caused to 
re-deliver his celebrated oration for Epscius. To please the 
Emperor, Charles the Fourth, he summoned King David and 
King Solomon from the tomb, and the emperor conversed with 
them long upon the science of government. This was a glorious 
exhibition of spiritual power compared with the insignificant 
manifestations of the present day. I will pass over the celebrated 
Paracelsus, for the purpose of making allusion to an Englishman 
31* 

366 MANIFESTATIONS IN WASHINGTON, D, C. 

■with whose veracious history every one ought to make himself ac- 
quainted. In the sixteenth century, Dr. Dee made such progress 
in the tailismanio mysteries that he acquired ample power to hold 
familiar conversation with spirits and angels, and to lea,rn from 
them all the secrets of the universe. On one occasion the Angel 
Uriel gave him a black crystal, of a convex form, which he had 
only to gaze upon intently, and by a strong effort of the will he 
could summon any spirit he wished to reveal to him the secrets 
of futurity. Dee, in his veracious diary, says, that one day while 
he was sitting with Albertus Laski, a Polish nobleman, there 
seemed to come out of the oratory a spiritual creature, like a 
pretty girl of seven or nine years of age, with her hair rolled up 
before and hanging down behind, with a gown of silk of change- 
able red and green, and with a train ; she seemed to play up and 
down, and to go in and out behind the books, and as she seemed 
to go between them, the books displaced themselves, and made 
way for her. This I call a spiritual manifestation of the most 
interesting and fascinating kind. Even the books felt the fasci- 
nating influence of this spiritual creature, for they displaced 
themselves and made way for her. Edward Kelley, an Irishman, 
who was present, and who witnessed this beautiful apparition, 
verifies the doctor's statement ; therefore it would be unreason- 
able to doubt a story so well attested, particularly when the wit- 
ness was an Irishman. [Laughter.] Doctor Dee was the dis- 
tinguished favorite of kings and queens — a proof that spiritual 
science was held in high repute in the good old age of Queen 
Elizabeth. But of all the professors of occult science, hermetic 
philosophy, or spiritualism, the Eosicrucians were the most ex- 
alted and refined ; with them the possession of the philosopher's 
stone was to be the means of health and happiness, an instrument 
by which man could command the services of superior beings, 
control the elements, defy the abstraction of time and space, and 
acquire the most intimate knowledge of all the secrets of the uni- 
verse. These were objects worth struggling for. The refined 
Kosiorucians were utterly disgusted with the coarse, gross, sensual 

DEBATE ON THE MEMOKIAL. 367 

spirits who had been in oommunieation with man previous to 
their day ; so they decreed the annihilation of them all, and sub- 
stituted in their stead a race of mild, beautiful and beneficent 
beings. The spirits of the olden time were a malignant race, and 
took especial delight in doing mischief; but the new generation is 
mild and benignant. These spirits, as this petition attests, in- 
dulge in the most innocent amusements and harmless recreations, 
such as sliding, raising, and tipping tables, producing pleasant 
sounds and variegated lights, and sometimes curing diseases which 
were previously considered incurable; and for the existence of this 
simple and benignant race, our petitioners are indebted to the 
brethren of the rosy cross. Among the modern professors of 
spiritualism, Cagliostro was the most justly celebrated. In Paris 
his saloons were thronged with the rich and the noble. To old 
ladies he sold immortality, and to young ones he sold beauty that 
would endure for centuries ; and his charming countess gained 
immense wealth by granting attending sylphs to such ladies as 
were rich enough to pay for their service. The ' Biographe des 
Contempores ' — a work which our present mediums ought to con- 
sult with care — says there was hardly a fine lady in Paris, who 
would not sup with the shade of Lucretius in the apartments of 
Cagliostro. There was not a military officer who would not dis- 
cuss the art of war with Alexander, Hannibal, or Cassar; or an 
advocate or counsellor who would not argue legal points with the 
ghost of Cicero. These were spiritual manifestations worth pay- 
ing for, and all our degenerate mediums would have to hide their 
diminished heads in the presence of Cagliostro. It would be a 
curious inquiry to follow this occult science through all its phases 
of mineral magnetism, animal mesmerism, etc., until we reach the 
present latest and slowest phase of all" spiritual manifestations ; 
but I have said enough to show the truth of Burke's beautiful 
aphorism : ' The credulity of dupes is as inexhanstifcle as the in- 
vention of knaves.' " 

" This speech was listened to with much attention, but frequently 
interrupted by laughter. 

368 MANIFESTATIONS IN WASHINGTON, D. C. 

"Mr. Weller. — What does the senator propose to do with the 
petition ? 

" Mr. Pettit. — Let it be referred to the three thousaad clergy- 
men. [Laughter.] 

" Mr. Weller. — I suggest that it be referred to the committee 
on foreign relations. [Laughter.] 

"Mr. Shields. — I am willing to agree to the reference. 

'- Mr. Weller. — It maybe that we may have to enter into for- 
eign relations with these spirits. [Laughter.] If so, it is a proper 
subject for the consideration of that committee. It may be neces- 
sary to ascertain whether or not Americans, when they leave this 
world, lose their citizenship. It may be expedient that all these 
grave questions should be considered by the committee on foreign 
relations, of which I am an humble member. I move its reference 
to that committee. 

"Mr. Mason. — I really think that it has been made manifest, 
by the honorable senator who has presented the petition, that he 
has gone further into the subject than any of us, and that his 
capacity to elucidate it is greater than that of any other senator. 
I would therefore suggest to him that it should either go to a 
select committee on his motion, or be referred to the committee 
on military affairs, of which he is chairman. Certainly the 
committee of foreign relations have nothing to do with it. 
Perhaps it would be better to allow the petition to lie on the 
table. 

"Mr. Shields. — This is an important subject, and should not be 
sneered away in this manner. [Laughter.] I .was willing to 
agree to the motion of the senator from California, but I do not 
wish to send the petition to the committee on foreign relations, 
unless the chairman of that committee is perfectly satisfied that 
he can do the subject, justice. I had thought of proposing to 
refer the matter to the committee on post-offices and post- 
roads, because there may be a possibility of establishing a spir- 
itual telegraph between the material and the spiritual world. 
[Laughter.] 

LETTER OF MK. TALLMADQE. , 369 

" Mr. Mason. — I move that the petition lie upon the table. 
Agreed to." 

The proceedings in the Senate called forth the following letter 
from ex-Governor Tallmadge, which appeared in the National 
IrtteUigeTwer, on the 18th of April : 

" Messrs. Gales and Seaton : My attention has been attracted 
to the proceedings of the Senate, published in the Intelligencer of 
this morning, on the presentation of a memorial by Gen. Shields, 
signed by myself and thirteen thousand citizens of the United 
States, on the subject of ' Spiritual Manifestations.' The memo- 
rialists ask Congress to appoint a scientific commission to investi- 
gate these extraordinary phenomena. Gen. Sliields has given a 
very good synopsis of the memorial ; and, had he stopped there, I 
should not have felt myself called upon for any remarks. But, 
contrary to my expectations, the general has attempted to ridicule 
a subject which appealed to his better judgment, and which, ac- 
cording to my understanding, was to receive very diiferent treat- 
ment at his hands. 

"When I first spoke to Gen. Shields about presenting this 
memorial to the Senate, he treated it with great courtesy, and ex- 
pressed his willingness to move its reference to a select committee. 
Without expressing any opinion in favor of the spiritual theory, 
he agreed with me that, whether spiritual or philosophical, it was 
worthy of investigation. After this understanding, I confess my 
surprise that he should have treated it as ho did ; that instead 
of an investigation by a select committee, of which, by parliament- 
ary usage, he would have been chairman, and where those who 
have investigated the subject could ^ have been heard, he should 
have given in advance a rehash of what has so often been said 
before by the opponents of spiritualism ! My habitual respect for 
the honorable body of which he is a member will cause me to fore- 
go any remarks upon the attempted criticisms of himself and others 
on this occasion. 

370 MANIBESTATIONS IN WASHINGTON, B. C. 

" The general is pleased to characterize these manifestations as 
a ' delusion.' Now, I do not pretend to any extraordinary power 
to understand a subject more than other men, whose position in 
life would indicate a talent equal, if not superior, to my own. 
Still, I do pretend, that, when I have investigated a subject which 
they have not, I am better capable than they of judging whether 
there is any ' delusion ' involved in the conclusion to which I have 
arrived, and I cannot consent to surrender my reason and the 
evidence of my own senses to their instinct. I have made it a 
rule of my life never to write or speak on a subject about which 
I knew nothing. That rule has saved me from much awkward- 
ness and embarrassment, as it would also save others were it 
adopted by them. 

" But if it be a ' delusion,' then the greater necessity of inves- 
tigating it and showing it to be such. I have as great an interest 
in ascertaining that fact as any other man. If it be ' spiritual,' 
there is much less necessity for its investigation, because its march 
will be onward, and no human power can resist it. Do away with 
the ' delusion,' if it be one,,and you do away the insanity which it 
is sometimes alleged is consequent upon it ; and. although the hon- 
orable gentleman's bill granting lands for insane asylums would 
still be necessary for the vast numbers rendered such by religious 
excitement, still they would have fewer inmates by reason of the 
humane principles adopted by this investigation, namely, of pre- 
venting instead ot curing ot pcdlifiting ihe disease. 

" I hope, therefore, that the ' lame and impotent conclusion ' to 
which the Senate arrived, of laying the memorial on the table, 
may be reconsidered, and that it may receive that consideration 
which its importance demands. 

" Respectfully yours, N. P. Tallmadqe. 

" Washington, April 18, 1854." 

On the day following, General Shields responded briefly, as 
follows : 

LETTERS OF MESSRS. SHIELDS AND TALLMADOE. 371 

" SENATOR SHIELDS IN SBLF-TINDICATION. 

"Washington, April 19, 1854. 
" To THE Editors op the National Intelligencer — Gentle- 
men : Hon. N. P. Tallmadge, in his letter in your paper of to-day, 
does me injustice, wkich I presume is unintentional. . When he 
requested me to present his petition, I assured him in a few words 
that I was no believer in ' the spiritual theory,' and, in addition, 
that I could not see upon what principle it could be either referred 
to or considered by a select committee. His earnestness on the 
subject was such as might easily have led him to misunderstand 
me on this point. I promised to present his petition, and I did so, 
and then took the liberty of giving my own views upon the sub- 
ject generally. " Eespectfully yours, 

"James Shields." 

" second letter trom mr. tallmadge. 

" Messrs. G-ales and Seaton : The note of Gen. Shields, in the 
Intellicjemzer of this morning, requires a few remarks from me. 
He assumes that there was a misunderstanding on my part as to 
his willingness to move the reference of the memorial to a select 
committee. Let your readers judge of this from the circumstances 
in the case. 

" The primary object was to have the memorial presented by a 
senator who would move a select committee, and who, of course, 
would be chairman of it, and by the very motion would signify 
his willingness to take charge of it. The subject was peculiarly 
one for a select committee, because there was no standing commit- 
tee to which it could be appropriately referred. There was no 
difficulty in finding a senator who was willing simply to present 
the memorial. Probably no senator in that honorable body 
would, on request, have refused an act of courtesy like that ; 
especially when the memorial, to use the honorable gentleman's 
own language, ' had been prepared with singular ability, present- 
ing the subject with great delicacy and moderation.' The very 

372 MANIFESTATIONS IN WASHINGTON, I). C. 

object, therefore, was to place it in the hands of a senator who 
would cheerfully perform that duty. I had spoken to only ono 
.senator on the subject, previ9us to my call on the honorable gen- 
tleman. That senator treated the matter with the utmost respect 
and kindness ; agreed that a select committee was the appropriate 
reference, but that he could not move it, because he would, of 
course, be chairman, and his other business was so burdensome 
that it would be impossible to give the subject that attention 
which it deserved. He then told me he thought Gen. Shields 
would be the best man to present the memorial and to' move the 
select committee, and that he would no doubt do it. 

" It was on the suggestion of this senator that I called on Gen. 
Shields. Impressed with the importance and the necessity of a 
select committee, can it be for one moment presumed that I-could 
misunderstand the honorable gentleman, and leave the memorial 
in his charge, when I knew the great object I had in view could 
not be accomplished? But the honorable gentleman says he 
' could not see upon what principle it could be either referred to 
or considered by a select committee.' Why, a senator of any 
experience would, I should suppose, have no doubt or difficulty on 
that subject. The gentleman, as the proceedings of the Senate 
show, was willing' to have it referred to the committee on foreign 
relations ; and if it was" proper to refer it to a standing committee, 
was it not equally proper to refer it to a select committee ? When 
I say equally proper, I mean so far as a mere reference and a con- 
sideration of the subject were concerned. What are the objects 
of a select committee ? They are two. First, where the subject, 
although appropriate to a standing committee, is of that magni- 
tude and importance to require the more deliberate and thorough 
investigation of a select committee, which is burdened with no 
other reference, and in the constitution of which the talent of the 
body best suited to the investigation may be combined ; secondly, 
where the subject is not appropriate to a standing committee, but 
is peculiarly appropriate to a Select committee. A memorial, 
therefore, coming within either of the objects mentioned, can ap- 

SECOND LETTER OF MR. lALLMADaE. 373 

propriately be referred to a select committee. The memorial 
under consideration came within the latter. If, then, it was 
proper to refer it to a standing committee, to which the honora^ 
ble gentleman very willingly agreed, it was equally proper to 
refer it to a select committee. From this conclusion there is no 
escape. Any doubt as to the power of Congress to grant the 
prayer of the memorialists in any case, is no objection to refer- 
ring the memorial itself either to a standing or a select commit- 
tee, because the committee can more deliberately examine and 
judge of that power than the body itself can on th.e hasty view 
taken of it on a mere motion of reference. On the coming in of 
the report of the committee, then, is the time to discuss the ques- 
tion of power. 

" The clear understanding, therefore, on my part, was that Gen. 
Shields would present the memorial and move its reference to a 
select committee. How could I understand it otherwise, when 
that was the very object of the application to him ? Any other 
conclusion would make me stultify myself. Neither can any un- 
prejudiced mind, in this view of the case, come to any other con- 
clusion. The honorable gentleman, therefore, must be laboring 
under some strange hallucination on this subject ; more strange, 
indeed, than the 'delusion' under which he, with so much delicacy 
and self-complacency, supposed these memorialists were laboring, 
because they had come to a conclusion different from his own on 
a subject which, from thorough investigation, they were presumed 
to understand, and which, for want of investigation, he was pre- 
sumed to know nothing about ! 

" But, again, if the honorable gentleman did not intend to move 
the select committee, why did he not indicate that intention in a 
manner that could not be misunderstood ? He knew perfectly 
well, or ought to have known, that the select committee was the 
great object I had in view ; and can he suppose that I would 
have placed the memorial in his hands, if I could have imagined 
that it was to receive the treatment it did ? Most assuredly not. 
Some two weeks elapsed between the time of delivering the memo- 
32 

374 MANIFESTATIONS IN WASHINGTON, X). C. 

rial to him, and its presentation by him to the Senate. During 
this time I saw him twice ; the last time was on Thursday evening 
preceding the Monday on which the memorial was presented; If 
he had made up his mind that he could not move a select com- 
mittee, but should feel bound to present his views against it, why 
did he not so inform me, and suggest that I place the memorial in 
other hands ? That is the course I should have pursued if I had 
been occupying, as I did for many years, a seat in that honorable 
body. Was not such a course due to me ? And, above all, was 
not such a course due to himself? Instead of that, and instead 
of pondering over these extraordinary phenomena set forth in the 
memorial, the most extraordinary in the history of the world, and 
which philosophy and science might have been proud to investi- 
gate, he seems to have been turning over the pages of some cyclo- 
pEedia to find materials for the luminious exhibition which he made 
before the Senate ! 

" This is not all. The honorable gentleman was not content to 
present his views in a grave and serious manner, becoming the 
subject, but he attempted to ridicule, not only the subject, but 
those who had memorialized .Congress in relation to it. The result 
will show whether the attempted ridicule will fall on them or react 
on himself. I will only add, that there are names on that memo- 
rial which do not shrink in comparison with any member of the 
honorable Senate, — names that have adorned the bar, the bench 
and the Senate-chamber ; names of the hardy sons of toil, whose 
brawny hands and stalwart arms have been thus fashioned by the 
industrial pursuits of life ; names the representatives of two mil- 
lions of believers in the United States ; names of those ' who know 
their rights, and, knowing, dare maintain ' them. These memori- 
alists, and those whom they represent, are not only entitled to 
respect, but they will command it. They are not to be put aside 
by any attempt to minister to a prejudiced public sentiment. This 
question is to be fairly met. The days of imposture and delusion, 
in relation to it, have gone by ; the honorable gentleman will no 
longer be able to protect himself by that senseless cry ; and when 

REMARKS OX THE MEMORIAL. 375 

he again has occasion to quote Burke's beautiful aphorism, as he 
terms it, that ' the credulity of dupes is as inexhaustible as the 
invention of knaves,' he may find in it a more extended applioaj 
tion than he at first supposed. KespeotfuUy yours, 

"N. P. Tallmadoe. 
" Washiiigton, April 20, 1854." 

Thus ended the first attempt to get a " scientific commission " 
appointed for the investigation of this subject, and the discussion 
it called forth. It was not, at that time, popular enough to get 
an advocate in the Senate, although some of that body knew that 
there was more in it than Gen. Shields or any of the body could 
account for. It is not probable that any of the memorialists ex- 
pected more favorable treatment than they received. The car- 
penters and fishermen of the world are the ones to investigate 
new truths, and make senates and crowns believe and respect 
them. It is in vain to look for the reception or respect of new 
truths by men in high places. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

GENEEAI 0BSEEVAI10N3 ON THE SPiniTUAI, MAJflFKSTATIONS AND THE 
PKOGKESS OP SPIBllnAMSM. 

In the foregoing chapters I have made a record of some of the early 
manifestations of the spirits within the last six years. I have not 
intended to bring the history down to very recent cases in the 
several' localities treated of in different chapters. To note the rise 
and progress of spiritualism in all the cities and towns of the 
United States, with a mere glance at the facts and occurrences, 
would make, of itself, a library of respectable size. But, in the 
first struggle to introduce it into the places mentioned, when it 
was not only a novelty, but a thing " everywhere spoken against," 
there were occurrences and trials which should be given to the 
world, to be read by future generations. The struggle has been 
brief; but the opposition as bitter as any new theory or facts 
ever encountered. That bitterness has been restrained by the 
more enlightened and liberal laws growing out of the progress of 
mankind, which, but a few generations back, would have subjected 
all engaged in the promulgation of the new truths to cruel torture 
and to death. That age has gone by, never to return, unless civil- 
ization relaxes again into barbarism. But there are various 
ways in which persecution may be carried on without fire and 
fagot, while its effects are almost as severe. I have seen men's 
business prospects blighted, and their families made to suffer, be- , 
cause they would not deny facts they had witnessed. I have seen 
men of high moral worth, sound health, vigorous minds, capable, 
honest, and trustworthy, refused employment because they were 

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS, ETC. 377 

spiritualists, and the avowal made boldly that that was the sole 
cause of the refusal. I have heard the character of persons, male 
and female, traduced in the pulpit, the lecture-room, and the draw- 
ing-room, because they could give a substantial reason for the 
hope that was in them, and because that reason and hope differed 
from the majority. More than this ; men have been seized, kid- 
napped, and conveyed to distant states, and incarcerated in lunatic 
asylums, and their property as nearly confiscated as grasping 
relatives could make it, for no other reason than that they believed 
in spiritualism. Women have been declared insane, and taken 
from their homes, when their insanity consisted in a knowledge be- 
yond the majority around them. These are some of the appliances 
now used to force conformity to the popular belief, and they 
appear to the enlightened mind as decidedly an outrage on the 
moral sense of this age, as savage for the present time, as the 
fagot and the " cat " were for the days in which they were used. 
This opposition is disappearing before the onward march of all 
powerful facts, which have so repeatedly occurred that they can- 
not be disputed. The angry and baffled theological dogmatists 
have become silent, save an occasional growl at the rapid spread 
of what they deem to be the great heresy of the age, but which 
threatens to overwhelm their castles which stand on a sandy foun- 
dation. In some parts of the country the belief in tangible spirit 
evidences has become so general that all excitement is past. From 
this circumstance some of the opponents imagine that it has " died 
out," mistaking the quiet of conviction for the loss of all interest 
in the subject. 

It would not be expected that, from the multitude of sects and 
opinions that have characterized the individuals who have inves- 
tigated and embraced the truths of spiritualism, they would 
be perfectly harmonious in their views. Accordingly, they rep- 
resent a great variety of opinions in theology and philosophy. 
Every shade of belief that characterized men before they became 
spirituajiists tinges their new faith. They have only added a 
proof of immortality to their theology, or philosophy, whatever it 
32« 

378 GBNBRAI, OBSERVATIONS, ETC. 

happened to be. The new manifestations cannot be said to have 
established any new theology, for the reason that no two spirits 
seem to agree as to what is the truth, any more than two mortals. 
The only thing, it seems, really learned by the spirits thus far, is, 
that man is immortal — that spirits can communicate with those 
left in the flesh, and that, by patient waiting and examination, we 
may yet be brought into closer communication and approximate 
nearer the truth. I am aware that persons are not wanting who 
declare that they have found the truth, and that good and enlight- 
ened spirits have confirmed all the views they promulgate. Here 
we are confused by a knowledge that various conflicting views are 
declared to emanate from the same high authority, even as old 
theological disputants declare that theirs is the true faith, and 
that no other has the sanction of the Bible. Already, in many 
localities, different divisions of spiritualists have exhibited not a 
little of that bitterness of feeling which has ever disgusted sensi- 
ble men with the contending religions of all times. 

Two general divisions are already seen among the spiritualists 
of our day. They may be characterized, in brief, as Bible and 
anti-Bible. Perhaps these terms do not sufficiently define what 
they are, but it is certain that one division are quite free to apply 
to the other anti-Bible, and that too in a way to imply reproach. 
They apply it to all persons who do not admit that a ray of infal- 
lible inspiration runs through the Bible, from one end to the other, 
and illumines every page. To believe that the Bible contains 
great beauty, truth, inspiration — records of wonderful and beau- 
tiful manifestations of spiritual power, interference, admonition, 
and warning — that the sublime precepts therein contained have 
never been improved upon by all the progress of ages, and may 
never be, because truth is one and eternal ; and, at the same 
time, that many things contained in it are records of vice, corrup- 
tion, sensuality, and sin, and that the pretended commands of God 
to commit certain acts of abominations, had their origin in the 
savage and inhuman customs of Jewish kings and patriarchal 
libertines, rather than in any being possessed of goodness, purity, 

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS, EIO. STO 

and wisdom; — to think thus, I say, subjects the ones entertaining 
such opinions to the charge of infidel and " anti-Bible," from 
another portion of spiritualists ; while some who entertain these 
latter views look upon those who, educated from infancy to place 
unbounded confidence in the authority of the Bible, have not 
changed their opinions, nor seen any reason to do so on embracing 
spiritualism, as bigots and extremely anti-progressive. These are 
the two extremes, between which all intermediate grades may be 
found which blend into each other so closely as to be hardly dis- 
tinguishable. As in most other things, this intermediate class 
forms the liberal and tolerant one in the new doctrine. Doubt- 
less, spiritualism will modify the theology of the world, and, by 
degrees, work an entire change in the religious opinions of Chris- 
tendom and the whole world. It has, undoubtedly, a tendency to 
liberalize and enlighten, and to bring together all minds on the 
one point of immortality. Thus united on one subject, so long 
enveloped in doubt and darkness, it will, almost of necessity, pro- 
duce, ultimately, more harmony than has heretofore existed in the 
liberal world. It is probable, too, that spirits will also improve 
on the mode of communication, which will give us more proofs of 
identity, and enable us to more clearly understand what they 
wish to convey to us. Now, as before stated, spirits confirm, or 
seem to, all the various opinions of individuals, except on some 
of the more tangible part of spirit existence. On the subject of 
the existence of a great first cause we have no new proofs or 
revelations. The probability is that spirits generally know but 
little, if any, more about how, where, or in what form the Deity 
exists, than we mortals. I see nothing in the new revelations 
that would, of necessity, lead an atheist to change his views. The 
most confirmed atheist may believe in immortality and be a refined 
spiritualist. More than this, he can get his views sanctioned by 
spirits as readily as the most devout believer in any of the thousand 
forms in which popular theology has clothed the Author of 
Nature. The anthropomorphism of the Jews, and most professing 
Christians, and the pantheism of the admirers of nature as God, 

380 GENEEAL OBSBRVAIIOSS, ETC. 

may all find spirits — good spirits, too — to agree with them. I 
say good spirits, for I would not sanction the folly of condemning 
spirits or men either for a difference of opinion, especially where 
no positive, tangible proof could be produced. Spiritualists, of 
all others, should avoid this imitation of venerable (by time) and 
gray-haired bigotry.- 

In the fanaticism which follows naturally where a certain class 
of minds embrace a new truth in morals, religion, or social 
science, it is not strange that practices, which do not show the 
good and purifying effects of their new conversion, should be 
found. In all new social agitations and movements especially, is 
there a tendency on the part of a class to make it responsible for 
teaching whatever their former inclination leads them to. Thus 
we have a class of spiritualists — or, more properly speaking, a 
few individuals — who seek to make spiritualism responsible for the 
doctrine and practice of what is known as Free Love — a philosophy 
originating in religious fanaticism before modern spiritualism was 
known. The same class of minds have followed in the footsteps 
of all new and exciting social movements. If any one reads the 
history of almost any new religious party, they will find the theory 
of spiritual-wifeism with it. The Second Adventists, Perfection- 
ists, Mormons and Spiritualists, are not alone followed by them. 
With the Mormons they triumphed ; with the others they have 
fallen into disrepute, and mostly died out or separated from the 
main body. The action of these few persons should not be allowed 
to condemn any whole body with whom some of their opinions 
are identical. They feed on excitement. Religious excitement 
begets excitements of a different nature, and it follows in the 
wake of revivals and camp-meetings as readily as in other popular 
agitations. There are too many examples of this to attempt, at 
this late day, to fasten it on spiritualism as a common belief or a 
result of their particular theory. Just now an attempt is being 
made to identify spiritualism with this theory of religious liber- 
tinism, and many of the editors of the country are horrified at it ; 
and some of them, while they meet in social circles, and hail as 

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS, ETC. 381 

their friends the great writers in favor of this free-love doctrine, 
recognizing them as part of the literati of New York, and worthy 
to associate with their wives, daughters and families. Let such 
cease to countenance the chiefs of " modern times " and the 
"Soft-downs," — who publish papers and write books, and, under the 
name of physiology and philosophy, openly advocate the abroga- 
tion of marriage ; or, still worse, the violation of the marriage 
obligation at the pleasure of either of the parties, and for the 
time being, — before they undertake to condemn a whole body of 
people — numbering two millions — on account of the theory or 
practice of a mere handful of the disciples of a Lazarus, a James, 
an Andrews or a Nichols. 

In the preceding pages I have glanced at the different phases 
as they came up in different localities. As the remarks apply to 
a very early period in most of the places, some of the different 
forms were not noticed at length. Most of the present readers 
know what they are. They do not vary in different localities. In 
most of the early cases the first intimations the mediums had 
were from the sounds and rappings, and moving of furniture 
without any person being in contact with it. The table-moving, 
assembling around it and placing the hands upon it, was not 
known until nearly or quite four years after the first demonstra- 
tions. Previous to that, all the moving was done without contact ; 
and it must be admitted that the movements, under such circum- 
stances, gave much less chance for suspicion. After the rapping 
and moving, followed pointing out the letters on a card by the 
involuntary movement of mediums' hand. Then came writing, 
speaking, drawing, painting, and various other forms. Many ways 
need the strictest scrutiny, as it is difl&cult to detect which is 
spiritual and which an emanation from the mind of the medium. 
This is particularly the case with writing and speaking. So much 
can be done by the human mind without the aid of spirits, when 
in certain peculiar conditions, that it is not safe ^o say that spirits 
are writing or speaking, without the most positive proofs. Such 
proofs have been abundant, and the tests satisfactory to thousands. 

382 GENJSKAL OBSERVATIONS, ETC. 

Still, much self-deception exists in regard to mediumship, and 
through this many have been deceived, and many, seeing no proof 
of spiritual power, have left the investigations in disgust, unwil- 
ling to spend their time where assertions were given instead of 
proof, and where a nervous action was claimed to be the work of 
spirits out of the flesh. Let none be deceived by mistaken 
mediums. The more common the belief in spiritualism becomes, 
the more danger of taking for granted without proof. " Try the 
spirits " and the mediums too. Let no false delicacy prevent any 
reasonable test. Let us never have the mortification of being 
believers on insufficient evidence ; for we are often called upon to 
state the facts of our experience. Let it be such that it cannot 
be doubted ! 

APPENDIX, 

THE CONTROVERSY OE SPIRITUALISM. 

EARLY COMMENTS OP THE PRESS. 

In the previous part of thia work I have had occasion, incidentally, 
to speak of the opposition encountered from the time the spiritual 
manifestations were first made public. It was veyy briefly noticed 
when the rappings first commenced in Hydesville, by The Wayne 
County Democrat, published at Newark, two miles from the residence of 
the Fox family. I never saw the notice, and think it was not copied by 
the press elsewhere. After the removal of the girls to Rochester, there 
wa? but little said of it, other than an occasional paragraph by the 
way of ridiculing the idea of anything spiritual. For many months 
this was all the information to be had on that subject through the 
newspapers. 

During Catharine Fox's visit to Auburn, in the summer of 1849, 
the Auburn Daily Advertiser attacked, with great virulence, all who 
had anything to do with investigating the subject. As mentioned in 
a former chapter, that paper first attempted to prevent an investiga- 
tion by publishing the falsehood that old Mr. Fox had been detected 
in making it by machinery. This charge was answered by Mr. H. D. 
Barron, who was a boarder in the house where Catharine was visiting, 
and knew the charges to be false. Considerable discussion was carried 
on for a few days, but the gross unfairness of the editor disgusted the 
friends, and all prospect of a fair hearing in that quarter was aban- 
doned. A small paper, edited by Thurlow W. Brown, called the 
Daily Bulletin, also had a few paragraphs of attempted wit on the 
subject, but made no attempt to impeach the honesty of persons en- 
gaged in the investigation. The Rochester Daily News, edited by John 
W. Hum, noticed the controversy going on in Auburn, and spoke 
very fairly on the subject. 

384 APPENDIX. 

The first articles, explaining at length the facts, as far as they had 
then transpired, were written by the author of this work, and pub- 
lished, in three letters, in the Boston Chronotype, in the month of July, 
1849. The first letter was introduced by Mr. Wright, the editor, by 
the following paragraph-: 

" The Other Woeld. — The following letter, from a highly respect- 
able source, gives the details of an affair which is beginning to get 
notoriety through the newspapers in Central New York. The writer 
refers us to a large number of gentlemen, most of whom are well 
known to us as men of intelligence and void of superstition, as wit- 
nesses of the singular noises of which he speaks. What theory will 
finally be confirmed by the facts, — whether that of mesmerism and 
clairvoyance, or that of Swedenborg, or that of the extreme liability 
of the senses to illusion, — we cannot distinctly predict. But the pop- 
ular excitement already existing brings the subject fairly within our 
newspaper range, and we thank our correspondent for his communica- 
tion. It is a blessed thought that nobody will be hanged for these 
noises, and we trust nobody will be seriously feightened." 

The letters briefly set forth the facts and actual occurrences, up to 
the time they were written, — the commencement with the Fox family ; 
its progress in Rochester, Auburn, and other places, and quoted largely 
from the memoirs of the Wesley family, to show that the same occur- 
rences were known in that family, and that Dr. Adam Clarke endorsed 
the narrative in that case, and added that he had frequently been cog- 
nizant of similar facts in other places and different families. They 
also briefly alluded to the several theories which were thus early ad- 
vanced to account for the phenomena, such as ventriloquism, machin- 
ery, electro-magnetism, &c. 

The articles were extensively noticed and commented upon, generally 
in the spirit of ridicule and derision, unless by some member of the 
religious press, who gravely pronounced it blasphemy. 

Very little real discussion was called out until the public investiga- 
tion in Rochester, in November, 1849, The first notice of those meet- 
ings was as follows : 

" WoNiiERFUL Phenomena, at Corinthian Hall, on Wednesday 
Evening, Not. 14. — The citizens of Rochester will have an opportu- 

APPENDIX. 385 

nity of hearing a full explanation of the nature and, history of the 
' mysterious noises ' supposed to be supernatural, which have caused 
so much excitement in this city and other places for the last two years. 
The whole directions, in regard to bringing it before the public, have 
been given by these ' mysterious agencies,' and they have promised to 
give the public an actual demonstration of the sounds, so that they 
may know that they are neither made nor controlled by human beings. 
Let the citizens of Rochester embrace this opportunity of investigating 
the whole matter, and see if those engaged in laying it before the pub- 
lic are deceived, or are deceiving others, and if neither, account for 
these truly wonderful manifestations. After the lecture, a, committee 
of Jive persons may be chosen by the audience to select any respectable 
and convenient room in the city, where the next day may be devoted 
to an examination of these manifestations, and report at the next even- 
ing's lecture whether there is collusion or deception. Come and inves- 
tigate." 

The Rochester Daily Advertiser gave the following notice of the call 
for the meeting : 

" Something New and Mtstekious. — It will be seen, by reference 
to our advertising columns, that Corinthian Hall is this evening to be 
the theatre of very new and startling developments, or the exposure of 
one of the most cunningly-devised and long-continued impositions ever 
practised in this or any other community. 

" There are but few persons in this city who have not heard of the 
'mysterious rappings,' although they have given heed to it only as 
' an idle tale, such as nurse.s frighten babes vrithal.' Some of the ' be- 
lievers ' have been ' directed by these agencies ' to expose it to a public 
audience at Corinthian Hall, and offer very fair chances for giving the 
matter a candid investigation. We hope our citizens will embrace the 
present opportunity of testing it, and exposing the fraud, if it be one, 
and if not be satisfied what it is. 

" "Whatever may be the facts in the case, there is certainly an ap- 
pearance of candor on the part of those who bring it before tha 
public." 

The proceedings at the meeting, and the comments, to some extent, 
I have o-iven in the chapter on Rochester, and need not repeat it in this 
33 

386 APPENMX. 

place. After the committees had failed to detect fraud, and so reported, 
the press in different parts of the country commenced a discussion — 
or generally an attack — on the subject. Some of these I propose to 
put on record for the purpose of showing how the advent of what now 
appears to be of great importance was received. 
From the Rochester Evening News : 

" Mr. Editor : — With your permission I would like to say a few 
words about the ghosts that have so startled our citizens from their 
propriety for a few nights past In the first place, I would say that I 
have no faith whatever m the * spiritual manifestations,' as they are 
called ; for I believe that those who have played their parts on the 
stage of mortality have more important offices to perform than rapping 
on the floor in answer to questions which the inquirers know more 
about than all the ghosts that people the invisible world. If they be 
spirits, and have power to move tables and perform other feats in 
mechanics, and desire that the community should know this, why do 
they not display said power in the public hall, so as to be seen and 
heard of all men ? This would settle the question forever, and if it 
can be done I would like to see it. 

" But, whether such things can be performed or not, I have no doubt 
whatever of the honesty of the parties concerned, and believe that the 
phenomena is a new fact in natural philosophy that deserves and de- 
mands the attention of scientific men. This is no common humbug, 
as the reports of the various committees testify, and I consider the 
conduct of the well-dressed rowdies who thronged the hall on Satur- 
day night a disgrace to our ci(y. Men of good standing in society. 
Majors and minors, acted as if they had never been in a civilized meet- 
ing before. I should not have been surprised at this if a cheat had 
been discovered and exposed : but I had no idea that a suspicion of 
fraud, which if true is of email consequence, would induce men who 
claim to be respectable to act towards women in an indecent and un- 
manly manner. T. H. R." 

From the Advent Harbinger (second advent), Nov. 24,.1849 : 

" Our city is all excitement about the mysterious rapping of the 
professed ghosts of the dead, of which we spoke some months since. 
Put little has been heard of the'matter for some time past, until a few 

APPENDIX, 387 

days since it was announced that public lectures, in one of the most 
spacious halls in the city, were to be given on the ' wonderful phe- 
nomena.' 

" Large numbers have attended, — lectures have been given, — the 
rappings have been heard by all. Committees of men of the highest 
standing have been appointed by the audience to solve the mystery ; 
but, as yet, their investigations have been in vain : they cannot tell 
from whence the noise comes, nor how it is made. And it is no 
marvel that they cannot, for the Bible is not their guide in this mutter. 
"Would they look into that neglected book, the mystery would at once 
be solved. They would learn that this spirit, which seems principally 
to be an associate of certain women, is of the same character of the 
familiar spirits so frequently spoken of and condemned in the Bible. 
The character and works of those, and of this, or these, are similar ; 
near enough alike to be of the same origin — viz. , of the devil. 

" Should the matter continue to spread, which it doubtless will (for 
this age of immortal soulism, belief in departed ghosts or spirits of the 
dead, a want of faith in the plain word of the Lord, and of mysticism, 
is rife for just such things) , then we may speak more in detail of this 
matter. 

" We most sincerely entreat all not to give heed to this ' seducing 
spirit and doctrine of devils,' which it teaches, but cleave to the word 
of the Lord, hear his voice, and follow him, and all will be well. But 
every other way leads down to the dark chambers of death." 

In a very short time communications began to appear from different 
quarters, giving well-authenticated accounts of rapping and other 
manifestations, at different periods, which had remained a secret, fear- 
ing the popular ridicule, until the public meetings and the investiga- 
tions at Rochester encouraged them to speak out. A great mass of 
facts soon came to light, by which people were made aware that these 
were not entirely new manifestations. 

In the following February the first pamphlet history appeared.* 
The facts contained in this little work gave a new impulse to the dis- 
cussion. The Tribune (New York) gave it a review of over two col- 
umns in small type, and a very candid notice, considering the times 
and the immense minority it was placed in by even allowing such a 

* Capron & Barron, Auburn, N. Y. 

388 

APPENDIX. 

matter a fair hearing. Other papers of New York city were most 
vehement in its denunciation. The same day that the New York 
Express published a notice of the pamphlet, it also published the fol- 
lowing " expose :" 

"The Rochester Spirits. — We have referred in our literary 
notices to various noises heard at Rochester, N. Y., and attributed to 
supernatural causes. In the New York Scientific American we find 
the following very plausible, very plain, and very simple explanation : 

" ' Supernatural KnocTcing. — A " knocking at the door " at nights, 
which has alarmed the good people of Rochester, who attributed it to 
spiritual agency, is explained in the American Journal of Science, by 
Professor Loomis, as the effect of the vibration of a dam over which 
the water falls. Professor Loomis describes this vibrating as pro- 
ducing sounds like a loud knocking on the doors and walls of buildings, 
and gives a particular account of the phenomena as observed at the 
dams of Cuyahoga Falls, Ohio ; East Windsor, Connecticut ; Spring- 
field, Massachusetts ; Northampton, Massachusetts ; Gardiner, Maine ; 
and Hartford, Connecticut. He attributes the vibrations to the fric- 
tion of the running water which falls over the dam, and shows how 
these sounds are transmitted to a distance by the earth, and produce 
that sudden and alarming knocking sound in dwellings. Professor 
Loomis has pointed out very simple and easy methods of checking this 
vibratory action in the dams ; and the people of Rochester, who have 
been troubled by an invisible spirit, will find it easily exorcised by 
mechanical means.' 

" ' philosophy and common sense, ye play the devil with theo- 
ries !' said one of the snarlers of the days of the Encyclopedia." 

The beauty of this was that Professor Loomis never uttered a word 
in regard to it. The article in relation to vibrations from water-falls 
was written years before, and was seized upon by the editors, who 
thought they could use it for this purpose. The Express was easily 
misled and hoaxed in regard to this matter. It received every theory 
that came along, and called it an " Explosion of the Rochester Knock- 
ings." This was about the first ; then it was taken in by the knee- 
pan theory ; then the toe-snapping, then electricity, and several other 
theories, and it endorsed them each as the explanation. 

APPEKDIX. 389 

OPINIONS OF PKOFESSOR DEWEY, OP ROCHESTER. 

Professor Dewey, of Rochester, is to be added to the long list of 
learned men -who gravely and quietly annihilated the whole phenomena. 
He did it, through the columns of the Rochester Advertiser, by taking 
Professor Loomis' dam theory, and adding his own theory of fraud, 
and that only as far as the Fox family were concerned. His cool and 
abusive letter was as follows : 

" Mtstekious Knockdigs. — It is not wonderful that these knockings 
attract attention from those at a distance. Here, they are too well 
understood to interest any but the credulous and the lovers of the 
marvellous. The three sisters, who perform to the amazement and 
delight of distant admirers, succeed admirably in keeping up the de- 
ception and gaining money from their visitors. True, they do not ash 
anything, but how can they refuse the money of one polite enough to 
pay for their time employed for their pleasure. 

" In volume 45 of Silliman's Journal, Professor Loomis has given a 
statement of the effects of vibrating dams on the houses in their vicinity. 
The facts presented by Prof. L. are very curious, but not very rare, as 
he gives seven cases, and they are scattered over the country. Many 
more could be mentioned. He proves that the dams vibrate from the 
friction of the running water, and that the variations depend upon 
accidental and obvious causes. At Springfield, Mass., the stone breast- 
work vibrates. 

" But the knockings are not dependent on any such cause, but on the 
voluntary efforts of bodies that are moved by the spirit in them, like 
all cases of human action. They move about with the three sisters to 
any part of the city, when the water in the river is high or low, cold 
or warm, running over the dams and falls or not. The imbelievers pres- 
ent are often sent out, as the spirit cannot perform in their presence. 
The gullible find ample satisfaction, and some of them pay handsomely. 

' ' It might be proper for the respectable papers in New York, Boston, 
&c., which have excited so much attention over the country, to give 
the true view of the case, and the general opinion of the intelligent 
citizens of Rochester in respect to this deception. C. D." 

This was replied to, the next day, by another correspondent, aa 
follows : 

33* 

390 APPENDIX. 

" The Mystekious Eappings. — Tour correspondent, C. D., admits 
that the theory of Professor Loomis, viz., ' the vibrations produced by 
vrater-falls,' does not explain the mysterious sounds heard in this city 
and vicinity. Any person who has heard these sounds must be aware 
that no such theory can explain them, for the obvious reason that the 
sounds are controlled by intelligence. There are evidences of intellect 
governing these sounds too strong to be resisted. How are the 
sounds made, and by what mind are they controlled ? These are the 
questions that many ' incredulous ' persons, and who are not ' lovers 
of the marvellous,' would like to have C. D. answer satisfactorily. 
True, he asserts that ' the three sisters, who perform to the amusement 
and delight of distant admirers, succeed admirably in keeping up the 
deception ;' but this is mere assertion, — let us have the proof. The 
assertions of ' so learned a Theban' as 0. B. will not pass for proof in 
this case. If this ' deception' is ' too well understood here to interest 
any but the credulous,' 0. D. owes it to the community that have 
cherished him, sustained him, and painted his portrait, to explain the 
deception and put a stop to the delusion. 

" 0. D. says the sounds ' move about to any part of the city with 
the three sisters. ' The same intelligent sounds have been heard here 
when the ' three sisters ' were not in the city, and are by no means 
confined to their presence. I have heard intelligent replies (by sounds) 
to questions when neither of the ' three sisters ' were present. The 
general opinion of the intelligent citizens of Boohester may be that 
these sounds are a ' deception ;' — so much the greater need that the 
ignorant and credulous should be enlightened by those by whom the 
deception is ' well understood.' Many very.honest, conscientious and 
pious people believe these sounds are produced by inhabitants of the 
spiritual world. Let the learned savans who arrogate exclusive knowl- 
edge of spiritual affairs, and are too disinterested (of course) to ask or 
receive money for their spiritual ministrations, show that the spirits 
they profess to believe in cannot commune with mortals, — exist at too 
remote a point to know aught of human affairs, — or are too intangi- 
ble to produce a concussion that may vibrate upon the human ear. 

"A. B." 

DR. LANGWOKTHY AMENDS HIS REPOET. 

On one of the committees of investigation at Rochester was a young 
ductur by the name of Langworthy. He was exceedingly chagrined 

APPENDIX. 391 

at being forced to acknowledge his total inability to find out the cause 
of the sounds, and being obliged to report to the audience that they 
were satisfied that the sounds were not made by the girls. (See re- 
port of committees in Chap. IV.) 

Fearing his popularity might be injured, or being ridiculed by some 
friend who wrote to him, he wrote a letter to an acquaintance in 
Michigan, which was published in various papers, as follows : 

" ' The committee appointed to inquire into the matter came to the 
conclusion to test the affair by placing the girls to whotn the knocking 
was always concomitant upon a table, and at the same time placing 
their hands (the committee's) on the young ladies' feet. Strange to 
say, whether animal magnetism were the cause or not, the knocking 
uniformly ceased, or rather, did not begin. A similar effect was pro- 
duced by tying a band around that portion of the ladies' dresses which 
corresponds with gentlemen's inexpressibles. There was not the slight- 
est doubt that if the young women had been examined by ' a jury of 
matrons,' and sans culottes, all would have been explained in the most 
satisfactory manner. The committee were, however, all men, and 
could not administer in extremis. A report to this effect was made to 
fifteen hundred citizens of Kochester, in public meeting, the result of 
which was the last public appearance of the supernaturals.' It is 
however said that there are still persons who have a faith in the mat- 
ter, and that at a certain domicil in Troup-street, — a rather suspicious 
neighborhood, if we remember correctly, — the knocking, with various 
other entertainments, is regularly repeated. Professor Loomis, it will 
be remembered, accounted for these noises by stating that it seemed to 
be a vibratory sound produced by the rush of water over a mill-dam ; 
but Mr. Langworthy is entitled to the palm. If this account be true, 
sundry of the mysticists of, the day should be turned over to the care 
of Dogberry, or some as sensible custodian of the public morals and 
peace." 

By turning to the report, the reader will see that there was a com- 
mittee of ladies who disrobed the two girls, and that this fact alone 
should be sufficient to answer his statements. Instead of his reporting 
to an audience of fifteen hundred, there were but two hundred and 
eighty persons in the hall the night his report were made, — which 
report was favorable to the girls, he saying, with his own mouth, that 

392 APPENDIX. 

" it could not be made by machinery." The real fact was that Dr. L. 
wrote to his friend, not expecting to be placed in the awkward position 
he was, by having it published ; but men seldom run a long career in 
trying to maintain two positions entirely opposite without exposure. 

JOHN W. HUKN. 

In the months of January and February, 1850, a number of articles 
from the pen of John W. Hum (then of Rochester) were published in 
the New Yoik,Tribune, in which he attacked the character of media, 
and all persons who had any connection with them. The chief points 
assumed were, that the sounds were electrical, and under the control 
of the media ; or that they were in some way connected with animal 
magnetism and clairvoyance. He averred that none but clairvoyants 
were mediums ; — that the Fox gi):ls never could get the sounds when 
they were completely isolated from the floor ; — that the moving of 
tables, and all phenomena commonly known as physical manifesta- 
tions, never occurred unless in the dark, and therefrom drew the infer- 
ence of fraud ; — that the " spirit claimed to know, at all times and 
seasons, what persons are thinking, writing, or doing, — what their 
names are, — how many children they have, — how many are dead, 
— whether they are single or married, — and how old they are." He 
then declares that nine times out of ten the answers are false, so far 
as his own experience is concerned ; and concludes thus : 

," In conclusion, I would remark that although there are some cir- 
cumstances connected with the subject which cannot be explained by 
any recognized laws of physiology or philosophy, yet the great pre- 
ponderance goes to prove the whole affair, from beginning to end, the 
most miserable imposition ever attempted to be palmed off upon. a 
civilized community. 

" There is prima facie evidence of fraud in the fact that when any- 
thing more than knocking is done, all daylight, or candle-light, is ex- 
cluded, and even the cracks of doors stuffed with rags." 

In this same letter he affirms that he knew of frauds practised by the 
media at the very time he was investigating and pretending to believe 
it. In a subsequent letter he declared that he had entered into a 
league with the Fox girls to procure some peculiar ink for the girls to 

APPENDIX. 393 

write on the wall, and have it appear after a short time. He also 
stated that he agreed to write for them, under pretence that it was 
spirits, to hand to some " victim ;" and agreed to hit some persons on 
the head, to make them believe it was done by spirits. I have been 
informed by the Fox family that Hum did offer to procure a writing 
compound, as he described, and that the offer was looked upon as a 
joke, and never noticed further, or attempted or expected to be put 
in execution. 

These letters were answered by the author and by Mr. George "Wil- 
lets, reviewing each point of his statements, and contradicting the un- 
generous insinuations, or bold charges of fraud, against the Fox family. 
At that time, all the vague statements of Mr. Hum were readily re- 
tailed out by the press, which generally took sides with any rumor or 
unfounded assertion, if it were only in opposition to the spirituality 
of the manifestations. 

EEV. DR. POTTS CRACKS HIS TOES. 

In the winter of 1850, Rev. Dr. Potts delivered a lecture before a 
literary association in Rochester, and there broached the toe-joint 
theory. He stood upon the stage in Corinthian Hall and cracked his 
toes, to the great delight of his literary audience. This, he gravely 
contended, was the explanation of the "Rochester Rapping." He 
was the first one who publicly exhibited that theory, and should not 
be robbed of the honor by a more noisy ex-Rev. in the person of C. C. 
Burr, who afterwards caught the idea, and lectured through the coun- 
try to establish the truth of it. 

THE ROCHESTER DAILY AMERICAN. 

About this time, the Rochester Daily American, edited by Alexander 
Mann, published an editorial article of two columns' length, the first it 
had written of any length on the subject. The editor evidently thought 
it time that he should have a " leader " on the subject, and record his 
wisdom, before he was in rear of all his brother editors. So he com- 
mences thus : 

" It is no part of our purpose to show, by argument, that the ' mys- 
terious knocking ' is not a spiritual manifestation. Those who could 

394 

APPENDIX. 

require reasoning upon such a subject are in a state of mind whioh 
renders them impregnable to logic. They are best left to the opera/- 
tions of returning common sense. We have not -witnessed the knock- 
ing. "We have not visited the house, or any place where it is heard. 
It was impossible for us to recognize any obligation to ' investigate ' a 
thing of this sort before pronouncing it an imposture. Any obloquy 
which we may thus have incurred at the hands of believers is easily 
borne, in comparison with the reflection that we could, even for a 
moment, have supposed such preposterous nonsense the result of spirit- 
ual agency, or a revelation from the unseen world." 

Mr. Mann closed his long and extremely wise article in the following 
profound manner : 

"We maybe asked how it is that so many people believe in the 
spirituality of the ' knocking.' We wish we could give a satisfaUory 
answer. That so large a portion of the community have suffered 
themselves to be humbugged, is more wonderful than any of the spirits' 
pretended performances. Something is due to the fact that some re- 
spectable gentlemen consented to act as a committee to witness the 
wonder. True, they did not profess any faith, but the mere connection 
of their names with the affair gave it a consequence which they neither 
intended nor expected. Journals at a distance, by treating with a 
show of respect the absurd pretensions of the ' ghost,' have done still 
more to mislead the public. But the eace or the ghost is nearly 
RUN. There must be a limit to credulity, and we think it is almost 
reached." 

Time has already shown how true a prophet held the place of editor 
of the American ; but he has the consolation of knowing that he erred 
with the majority. 

NEW YORK COMMERCIAL ADVERTISER. 

Here is the grave opinion of the editor of the New York Commercial 
Advertiser : 

" Those Rochester Knockings. — We perceive that a gentleman is 
in town lecturing on divers matters of inscrutable physiology, and en- 

APPENDIX. 395 

deavoring to establish soma connection between them and the ' rap- 
pings ' of the pretended spirits at Rochester, available for a satisfactory 
explanation of the latter. Wo are satisfied that, so far as the rappings 
are concerned, the gentleman may spare himself the trouble of dis- 
coursing on the subject. We have had a long and instructive conver- 
sation with a gentleman of intelligence, from the vicinity of Rochester, 
who has taken some trouble to acquaint himself with the facta of those 
mysterious rappings, since they have been so much talked of ; and his 
account makes it perfectly clear to our minds that the mystery is not 
only an imposture, but a very clumsy one, — indebted for its success, 
so far, entirely to the credulity of the auditors and spectators who are 
impressed by it. We say entirely to the credulity, for the clumsiness 
of the imposture is actually so great, there is so little art in the means 
adopted to avert detection, that people have literally to shut their eyes to 
avoid seeing. (/.') 

" The only point in which there is any successful trick is the manner 
by which the rapping is effected. It is easy enough to see, if people 
do not wUfally shut their eyes, that the girls' effect the rapping some- 
how. For instance, if they are prevented from placing themselves in 
close proximity to a door, a table, a piano, or some other object to rap 
on, the rapping very soon ceases ; — ' the spirits will not communicate 
any longer.' ^s for the moving of the table, anybody can see how that 
is done ; in fact, persons have been heard to acknowledge that they did 
it to carry on the joke. A slight impulse with the foot gives a move- 
ment to the table, which runs, very easily, on rollers ; and as the spec- 
tators are required to gather close round the table when it is to be 
moved, nothing can be easier than for one of them to give it a start 
with an imperceptible push merely of the toe of his boot. As for the 
other mysteries, — the hands applied to the faces, the playing of musi- 
cal instruments, taking combs out of ladies' hair, &c., — these are all 
done in the darlc. Of course it is easy to conceive who are the actors. 

" A sufficient explanation of the whole humbug is supplied by the 
fact that money is made by it, and that the money is shared by a con- 
siderable number of persons. The three girls and their mother are be- 
lieved to be in receipt of from fifty to one hundred dollars per diem from 
visitors. As they themselves say, the thing works very well. Mr. Ca- 
pron, who is or was a journeyman printer, sells his pamphlet as fast as 
it can be supplied. A young man, who officiates in some sort as director 
or manager of the girls, has talked quite freely about coming to New 

396 

APPENDIX. 

York with them, and making an engagement with ' Barnum,' saying 
that they could get fifty dollars each per week, but that they could do 
better than that, perhaps, by staying at Rochester. 

" In short, we are entirely satisfied, as we were in part by the letter 
in the Boston Transcript, that the mystery is a mere trick ; and we 
have no doubt that the girls could easily be induced, by a sufficient 
ofler, to own up the whole story, and tell how they have managed their 
part of the imposture." 

I immediately wrote to the editor of this journal to contradict the 
falsehoods. I informed him that I was not a printer, and had never 
set a line of type in my life ; and that this would probably satisfy the 
public as to the reliability of his information. This statement he re- 
fused to publish, and never did contradict the falsehood. Such was 
the fairness of a journal that claims to be the organ of piety and com- 
merce in the city of New York. 

MAJOR M. M. NOAH. 

Major M. M. Noah, of the Sunday Times, aimounced that " the 
wonder-swallowers must find new food for their credulity, for the 
Eochester mystery is exploded." The major has passed to the world 
of spirits, and hia name is forgotten by the great mass of those who 
knew him ; yet that which he pronounced " exploded " has overspread 
the civilized world, and is daily gaining converts. What a comment 
on the short-sightedness of -man ! 

NORTHERN CHRISTIAN ADVOCATE. 

The Northern Christian ^rfyocaie, published at Auburn, N. Y., one 
of the organs of the Methodist Episcopal Church, assailed aU who had 
anything to do with the investigation, in the following malicious 
article : 

" For the information of several friends at a distance, who have 
written to us to know about the strange noises which are heard in this 
city, we would say that we know nothing of the matter. Not being 
overstocked with gullibility, and having very little taste for the low 
marvels which furnish entertainment to some people, we have left the 

APPENDIX. 397 

thing to take care of its^. The class of persons -who chiefly deal in 
these mysteries — we mean the juggling, sight-seeing, and sceptical — 
makes all inquiry into the subject disgusting to a firm belicYer in 
revelation. It has been reported, for a few months past, that there 
are mysterious rappings at two or three places in town ; but whether 
these noises are natural or supernatural is unknown, except to the 
coterie of initiated wonder-workers. These affirm that, through their 
familiars, they have quite a ready access to the spiritual world, hold- 
ing converse with Wesley, Swedenborg, Paul, and other great names 
among the departed ; which is certainly a consolation, as the persons 
in question have very little intercourse with people of respectability in 
this world. We are pleased if they keep better company elsewhere. 

" The question, by itself, is one of gravest import. While we repel 
Mormonism in all its phases, and treat with merited contempt the 
profane mockeries of vulgar impostors, we acknowledge that a candid 
examination is due to whatever has any just claims to a supernatural 
character. The Scriptures are full on the point. No one can deny 
the possibility of our being visited by inhabitants of the invisible state. 
' The abstract possibility of such a thing, however, does not authorize 
us to lay aside our senses, and receive, as veritable communications 
from above or below, all that may be foisted upon us by the arts of 
deception. Both good and evil spirits have access to this lower world, 
and doubtless have much to do with the actions of men ; but their 
influence is ordinarily disguised ; they act upon our being, through 
the agency of another, as Satan did through the serpent, when he 
tempted Eve. They may act independently of all such agencies, and 
in that case we can only judge of their presence by the absence of 
other known or imaginable causes. We are to ' try the spirits,' — 
that is, bring tltfir character and pretensions to an unequivocal test, 
that we may not be the victims of human ignorance or Satanic artifice. 
If these knockings continue among us long enough to enlist a little 
more intelligence than has hitherto scanned them, the public will very 
likely be satisfied of their true character. We have thus far believed 
it to be sheer imposture, not worth going a rod to see, nor deserving 
the slightest notice from the press. Our principal reason for this 
opinion is, the extreme imbecility of everything connected with these 
revelations, and this, whether we consider the revelations themselves 
or the persons to whom they are made. The devil is not a fool, and 
if he is really the author — a fact we are not disposed to question — 
34 

398 APPENDIX. 

of these strange communications, we imagine«there is some interrening 
agency to share with him the guilt of such eilly falsehoods. 

" We have now pretty fully declared our sentiments, and shall not 
further trouble the reader, except it be to assure him that if there is 
any new light shed upon this mysterious subject, he shall be early 
apprized of the fact." 

Eev. A. H. Jervis, a Methodist clergyman of Rochester, wrote an 
answer and sent to this Christian Advocate ; but his brother ministers 
refused to let him defend himself in their columns. It appeared in 
the Cayvga Chief, published at the same place. It was as follows : 

" EocHESTEK, February 18th, 1850. 

" Mr. Editoe: — In your 46th No., for Feb. 13th, while looking 
over your valuable paper, I notice a caption, ' The Mysterious Knoch- 
ings.' On reading the article thereto appended, several points seemed 
to me to need, and even demand, some further notice, by way of candid 
reply. Now, Mr. Editor, and brother minister, let me ask, with all 
due respect, would not that honesty which is always the best policy, ■ 
when you were inquired of by your distant friends concerning a sub- 
ject which in your first sentence you say you ' know nothing of,' have 
prompted you to have directed their anxious inquiries after knowledge 
and truth to those who do know and are able to satisfy them by in- 
contestable facts ? By your voluntary and honest assertion of your 
entire ignorance of the whole matter, perhaps your reflecting ' distant 
inquiring friends ' will fully appreciate all you have said in your after 
remarks. But is it honorable to use all your sagacity and strength of 
mind to prejudice your friends against — you know not what — whether 
good or evil — and to thus assail the characters of your fellow-citizens 
and Christian brethren, because they happen to be in possession of pos- 
itive facts where you are willingly ignorant ? You say those who have 
investigated this matter are 'juggling and sceptical.' It is easy to 
ridicule what you have no knowledge of, or argument to meet ; but 
facts are stubborn things, and we may as well be willing to meet them 
first as last, for meet them we must. 

" You next affirm that the coterie, or club society, have professed to 
hold converse with the spirits pf those whose names ■were respected in 
this world. At this you are pleased, as they are persons who hold no 
respectable fellowship with society of the living. Now, I shall only 

APPENDIX. 399 

apeak for one in this matter, as I know for myself, and not another, 
what have been my principles in choosing my associates. I have 
chosen, for thirty-three years, to be a member of the Methodist Episco- 
pal Church, and for thirty years have held the relation of a minister in 
said church ; and wh^n I look at the list of names composing the pub- 
lishing committee of your paper, I see the iirst, third, fourth and fifth 
are among the men with whom I have enjoyed the warmest friendship 
and Christian sympathy, and I cannot now think they are men of little 
respectability in the world ; but still they are fallible, and may err in 
some points, but this does not destroy my regard and love for them. 
Again, it is stated that none who are engaged in this matter believe in 
the Scriptures, which are full on the point that the invisible inhabit- 
ants of the spirit-world have communicated with men on earth. At 
that I rejoice, for in that connection you enforce the duty to try the 
spirits. Yes, I say try the spirits, whether in the body or out of the 
body ; but how can we try them if we would not go a rod to ascertain 
the fact whether we may enjoy the blessed privilege of holding sweet 
communion with the saints in light, and our dear departed friends 
who may be sent forth as ministering spirits, to minister to us, if we 
are resolved to be heirs of salvation ? 

" Next, the imbecility of those engaged in the investigation of this 
subject has heretofore been your reason for not employing the press in 
scattering light on this matter ; but you hesitate not to employ the 
press, a tremendous engine, to assail character. Now, if the Rev. editor 
means to call us weak-minded who have examined for ourselves, and 
know what we have seen, and felt, and heard, and think the evidence 
of our senses and judgment may be depended upon, I, for one, am will- 
ing tq be considered such by him. If an honest inquiry as to what 
are my privileges here, and what my destiny hereafter, incur the 
charge of imbecility, I would ask the clerical gentleman if he considers 
all weak-minded whom he may have been instrumental in persuading 
to look into spiritual matters ? 

" In conclusion, I have been enjoying the best opportunity for calmly 
investigating, for almost two years, in company with judges, lawyers, 
doctors, and citizens of all professions and callings, as well as ministers 
and members of different churches, and infidels, of course, — for many 
of them have seemed to give the matter a more careful investigation 
than some rigid sectarians, — and the result has been salutary in many 

400 APPENDIX. 

instances.* I say, after all this privilege, and the positive knowledge 
I have, I am far, very far, from calling all ' sheer imposture.^ 

" I do not wish the editor to construe anything I have written as 
unkind or unfriendly; for even the angel, when conversing with a 
wrangling spirit, said, ' The Lord rebuke thee.' 

" ASAHEL H. JeBVIS." 

In speaking of a slight criticism on the course of that paper, which 
appeared in the second edition of the first history, this Christian Advo- 
cate made the following conclusive paragraph : 

" It is a thankless task to meddle with this rickety. supematuralism, 
as it seems to imply a sort of temerity. Many no doubt think it as 
presumptuous to speak freely of these bald impostures as they would 
to speak thus of the Bible, not remembering that the pretensions of 
the one are as different from the other as heaven is from hell. The 
disguises of infidelity are to be torn off, however reluctant those may 
be who wear them. These spirits have too much corporeity about 
them, — the spell is not well laid, — the trick is a failure. Thes authors 
may sell another thousand of their Kevelations, but the work will soon 
be as dead as the Univercoelum, or mesmeric revelations of A. J. Davis. 
It has ever been the policy of Satan to disparage the true revelation, 
by means of his own lying wonders. ' We are not ignorant of his 
devices.' The game is not new. Infidelity is at the bottom of this 
matter. Let our friends beware." 

This was written in 1849, and it is presumed that the editor is very 
much astonished that that which he pronounced a " rickety supernat- 
uralism' ' only five years before, should now have over a million of be- 
lievers, and become a theme of discussion in all the civilized world. 
It is a curious comment on the want of foresight among those who 
assume to be the religious guides of the age. 

ATIBUKN DACLY ADVERTISER. 

About the same time that the above appeared, the Auburn Daily 
Advertiser declared that " The mystery had pretty much ceased to 

* " I could write a volume of facts, but facts are not what you seem now 
to desire. You wish to wait until others have made it popular for you to 
fall in the rear and receive them." 

APPENDIX. 

401 

excite an interest in the minda of the few who have heretofore inclined 
to the belief that the noises were produced by a supernatural agency." 
The editor then announces himself a convert to the science oi toe-ology . 

REV. JOHN M. AUSTIN. 

On the 27th of March, 1850, Rev. John M. Austin, a Universalist 
clergyman of Auburn (now editor of the Christian Ambassador) , wrote 
a letter to the Tribune, which that paper headed "A Settler," putting 
himself on record, in regard to the matter. He had been three times 
to hear the sounds, and received no satisfactory answers to his ques- 
tions, although some of the spirits claimed to be apostles and prophets. 
On this small experience, it is no marvel that the testimony of so dis- 
tinguished a man should be taken negatively against all the positive 
facts that had been or could be stated by those who had investigated 
for two years nearly every day. Mr. Austin treated the subject very 
candidly, presenting a strange contrast to his more orthodox brethren 
of the cloth. Of the believers in the spirituality of the manifestations, 
he says : " This class is comparatively small in numbers. It is com- 
posed of persons of the various religious sects, and some who sympa- 
thize with no denomination. To the extent of my knowledge, they 
are an intelligent, upright and worthy class of people. I have no 
doubt of their perfect sincerity ; nor do I believe they would be.guilty 
of deception, or any dishonorable means, to propagate their views." 
He was about the first, or, so far as I am acquainted, the very first, 
opponent appearing in the public prints, who gave the friends of the 
unpopular truths any credit for honesty. He then states the particu- 
lars of the three interviews, and concludes by stating that he does not 
pretend to know what produces the sounds, but thinks it quite pos- 
sible that they may be made by human agency, either through 
electricity, clairvoyance, or some other manner. He further says : 
" Faithfulness to the public, however, compels me to add, that I have 
been repeatedly informed, by those whose veracity I cannot doubt, that 
there have been, and still are, persons in Auburn, who, without any 
movement the eye can detect, can make all these knockings with the 
cracking of the toe joints." He expresses a hope that he may be sat- 
isfied that spirits of the departed can communicate with mortals, and 
promises that he will make a frank avowal of it when convinced. As 
34* 

402 

APPENDIX. 

he has not yet made the avowal, it is probable that he still remains in 
ignorance of the fact. 

His letter was answered by the author of this volume, giving a state- 
ment of many facts, and naming witnesses to undisputed proofs of 
intelligence beyond any of the auditors, and showing the impossibility 
of any such phenomena being produced by clairvoyance or electricity. 

POSITION OF THE TRIBUNE. 

The reader will have observed, in several parts of thi? work, that 
the New York Tribune has been noticed as giving more space to the 
discussion of this subject than any other japer. As Mr. Greeley is one 
of the best abused men in the country, his enemies were glad to seize 
upon his exhibition of fairness in this matter, and put him down as a 
full believer, and an " advocate for the rappers." This was not true 
at any time during the first two years after the discussion commenced ; 
nor is it true, so far as I am informed, up to the present time, that he 
endorses the spirituality of the phenomena. Very soon after its com^ 
mencement at Auburn, I received a letter from Mr. Greeley, making 
inquiries in regard to it. From that time, a correspondence was kept 
up for two years or more, and his opinions were well known to me. 
He was not, I repeat, a believer in the spiritual theory. He was 
puzzled by the facts he had witnessed. At times he was staggered by 
some startling occurrence in his own family (when a medium was 
present) , and then perplexed by the want of candor and truth he would 
discover in some medium. Without ever admitting the spiritual hy- 
pothesis, he was ever willing and anxious to get important facts, and let 
the public weigh them with himself. I make this statement here be- 
cause I knew his position at that time, and knew that the charge of a 
too-ready credence to the claims of a spiritual intercourse was not true. 
I have never known a man, who had the same amount of evidence, to 
be so far from admitting what I conceive to be their true origin. His 
accusers were too anxious to make a case against him, to state his 
position fairly. 

ANKLE-SNAPPERS. 

. From the snapping of toes, in Auburn , in the vain attempt to imitate 
the "rapping," a clergyman of Rochester, knowing that the toes 

APPENDIX. 403 

could not perform all that was claimed and proved of the spirits, 
elevated the theory to the ankle joints ; and that had its brief run 
through the press, as the Simon Pure explanation. 

JOHN STANLEY GRIMES. 

The next great champion of material mysticism that appeared in 
public -was John Stanley Grimes, an itinerant lecturer, and exhibiter 
of phrenology, magnetism, psychology, &c. «fcc. His communications 
appeared in the Tribune. He details several interviews with mediums. 
His first statement was in regard to an interview " in one of the prin- 
cipal cities of western New York." The gist of his second letter (his 
first had no point) was the following fabricated story of his visit to the 
house of a Mr. Benedict, of Auburn : 

" In the course of the conversation one of the company mentioned 
that the hostess was a clairvoyant subject, and when mesmerized she 
could look into the spirit-world, and hold converse with its inhabit- 
ants. I therefore proposed to mesmerize her and try her powers. After 
some hesitation she consented, and was soon apparently asleep. 1 
asked her if she was -asleep. She said Yes. I asked her if she could 
look into the spirit-world. She said Yes. A great many questions 
were now put to her, most of which she answered with great ingenuity. 
But it was evident to me that the whole performance was a deception. 
I requested the company to leave the room a few moments, to give me 
an opportunity to make inquiries concerning some important private 
matters, which I wished to be kept secret. As soon as the company 
were gone, I said to the pretended sleeper, — ' I did not wish to expose 
you to the company, nor to injure your feelings ; but mesmerism is a 
subject that I am familiar with, and of course you cannot deceive me. 
Now, if you will own upto me frankly, I will not expose you to the 
company, nor to the citizens ; but if you do not, I shall explain the 
whole farce, not only in private but in my public lectures. I wUl 
admit that you have performed your part with wonderful adroitness 
and skill, — but don't carry the joke any further.' After a moment's 
silence, she acknowledged that it was all deception — that she was 
not susceptible to the mesmeric influence in any degree — that the 
knockings were made by various mechanical tricks, and by the aid of 
three confederates, one of whom was a young woman who lived at the 

404 APPENDIX. 

next house, and the other two were young men, her cousms. The 
knocking on the middle of the floor was caused by a board under the 
floor, poised like a lever, and so arranged that when she stood near the 
window she could step upon a peg, which was connected with one end 
of the leyer, and cause the other end to rise and knock against the 
middle of the floor. 

" The knocking on the table was produced in several ways ; some- 
times by one of the confederates, who had his hand or foot under the 
table, but in most instances it was done by a deception which is similar 
to that often practised by ventriloquists, — thus, the company, all sit- 
ting or-standing around the table, expecting a sound to proceed from 
it, will, most of them, believe that the sound actually does proceed 
from the table, although, in reality, it is produced by the rapping of 
a finger against a chair several feet from the table. If the leading 
persons present were shrewd and sceptical, and manifested a disposi- 
tion to scrutinize the proceedings too closely, the plan was for the 
spirits to refuse to answer until they were gone and their places sup- 
plied by auditors of a more credulous character. I asked the woman 
what induced her first to attempt such a deception. She said she had 
become acquainted with the women who practised the same deception 
in Eochester, and had learned the art from them. On her return 
home she tried her own skill, and succeeded perfectly. Her success 
astonished no one as much as herself. She declared that the credulity 
of so many sensible people was to her a matter of amazement. She 
had no idea at first of deceiving any one, except her own family circle, 
and intended, after having amused herself sufficiently, to explain to 
them how it was done ; but the very first experiment roused the whole 
neighborhood, and in a few days she found herself in such a position 
that she could not explain without disgrace, and she was, therefore, 
obliged to keep up the farce as well as she could." 

His third letter commenced as follows : 

" A neat, well-vrritten pamphlet upon this subject has been pub- 
lished in this city, the authors of which, Messrs. Capron & Barron, 
reside in Auburn. According to these statements, it would seem to 
be impossible for any man of common sense to give the matter a fair 
investigation vrithout being convinced. 

" A few months ago I happened to be in Auburn, and made the 

APPENDIX. 405 

acquaintance of these gentlemen ; and among many other courtesies for 
which I have to thank them, I enjoyed the privilege of being present 
with a small and select party, to witness the exhibition of the knock- 
ings. I asked a number of questions, and tested the spirits in the 
manner in which I was directed ; but I did not receive a single correct 
answer, and I was fully convinced that the knockings were made 
sometimes by one of the ladies, and at others by one of the gentlemen 
present, whose characters ought to have been a sufSoient guarantee 
against such a miserable artifice. Hundred of intelligent persons in 
Auburn were, however, converted by the same kind of evidence which 
seemed to me to be utterly worthless." 

During the whole controversy nothing was ever uttered more mali- 
ciously false than these extracts. When these letters appeared, I was 
editing the Providence Daily Mirror, and took immediate occasion to 
put the seal of falsehood upon so much as is related in the above 
extracts. In regard to the confession of the sounds being made by 
" mechanical tricks" by Mrs. Benedict (for he means no other place, 
she being the only medium besides Mrs. Tamlin, then in Auburn) , with 
boards under the floor of the house, I know that it was not so, for the 
floor was repeatedly searched by honest but sceptical men. A more 
potent fact is one well known by. the neighbors, that, let Mrs. B. go to 
any other house, and the sounds were the same. The story of the board 
and the peg was nothing more nor less than gross fabrication, — false- 
hood invented by some one. If any such confession was ever made, 

it was under the influence of that very mesmeric sympathy of which 
Mr. Grimes says so much. Equally unfortunate was the following 
falsehood : " She said she had become acquainted with the women 
who practised the same deception in Rochester, and had learned the 
art of them." A great " art," truly, to stick a peg in the floor, and 
place a board so that it could be moved ! The very absurdity of the 
statement stamped it with falsehood. But I have something still 
stronger. Up to the time of that visit of Grimes, Mrs. Benedict had 
never seen one of the Fox family (" the women of Eochester " spoken 
of) , nor had they any knowledge of her. This I know. I think they 
never have met even to this day. 

In regard to the insinuation contained in the second extract, I will 
only give the statement of Mr. Henry D. Barron, then a student in 

406 APPENDIX. 

the Law School at BallBton Spa, N. Y. He wrote to the Tributie, 
under date of July 15, 1850, aa follows : 

"In the summer of last year, a friend in Auburn informed me that 
Professor John Stanley Grimes wished to see me. I accordingly called 
upon him, when he informed me that I was familiar with a matter 
with which he would like to become acquainted, and he would like to 
have me accompany him to the house where ' those mysterious sounds' 
wejre heard. This I readily consented to do, being assured by my 
friend that Mr. Grimes was a man of science, truth and honesty, which 
I had no reason then to doubt, having never seen or been acquainted 
with him before. Upon our arrival at the house, we found the lady 
(Mrs. Tamlin) and Mr. and Mrs. Oapron there. We sat down to a 
table, as is customary on such occasions, and the sounds first directed 
me to ' ask questions,' which I accordingly did. The question was 
then asked if a spirit would converse with Mr. Grimes. The answer 
was that it would. He then asked several questions, which w^re an- 
swered by a rapping purporting to be that of the spirit of his wife, 
each one of us being ignorant of the fact that he had lost a wife, until 
he informed us that such was the case. After several times asking 
the sounds mentally to rap the number he thought of, he informed us 
that a part of the time the answers were correct. Mr. Capron then 
proposed that they take several pieces of money from their pockets, in 
their closed hands, and ask the sounds to rap the number of pieces in 
their hand. This was done, and several times correctly and several 
times incorrectly. This I know to be true, as I counted the raps and 
then the pieces. After these tests, and after some conversation upon 
various subjects, Mr. Grimes rose to go, said he was much interested, 
and asked permission to call again. 

" This is the only interview that Mr. Grimes ever had with these 
sounds in the presence of ' Messrs. Capron and Barron.' For the 
truth of my statement, I refer to Mrs. Tamlin, and Mr. and Mrs. 
Oapron, whose characters, where they are known, stand as high as he 
who has played priest, doctor, lawyer, and lecturer on mesmerism and 
phrenology, all for something more than ' one dollar,' which seems to 
be the ' knock-down argument ' against the honesty of the Fox family 
in his mind. I leave the public to compare the two statements of the 
matter, and then decide whether the arguments are for or against the 
truth of these manifestations. 

APPENDIX. 407 

" At Auburn Mr. Grimes met Mr. Capron and myself several times 
before his return, but never frankly told us that he thought one of us 
made these sounds ; and the only evidence of scepticism that I remem- 
ber of his evincing was in the assertion he made to an individual while 
there, which was in about these words : ' I can whip all of the spirits 
through hell that have ever rapped in Auburn.' 

" In a previous number of the Daily Tribune, Mr. Grimes gives an 
account of a visit to another family in Auburn, in whose presence the 
sounds were heard. I am informed, by a person of truth, that Mr. 
Grimes did visit another family, for the purpose of hearing the rapping, 
while in Auburn. Concerning the wonderful discoveries he there 
made, I shall speak in another letter. 

"Amidst the calumny and foul abuse heaped upon my friends and 
myself during the investigation of these developments, I have troubled 
the public with but one defence of the matter, and only then when the 
character of an absent friend was assailed from a source that demanded 
the reply. I have wished only for calm, cool investigation, knowing 
that, if false, time would expose it ; and if true, God would preserve 
and defend it. Had Mr. Grimes' statement been published in some 
common Switch or other Herald of falsehood, I should not have con- 
sidered it my daty to notice it ; but the respectability and influence of 
the journal in which his letters have appeared have been considered 
sufficient reason to call forth this true statement of the matter. 

"Your friend, H. D. Bakbon." 

«- 

The articles of Mr. Grimes were replied to at length by William 
Fishbough, who stated the chief facts narrated above, and successfully 
answered the various theories advanced by him. 

THE NEW YORK EXPRESS. 

The New York Express, commenting on the discussions on the sub- 
ject, profoundly and piously says : 

" That a pretext so preposterous as that the soul of a human being, 
gone to its account, can be called back to hold communion with the 
living, should be boldly made and confidently believed in, in these days 
of intellectual enlightenment, would surprise us more than it does, if it 
were not that there exists among us a latitudinarian fashion of view- 

408 APPENDIX. 

ing things hitherto inculcated and deemed sacred — the crying sin, aa 
we hold, of the times we live in. Socialism in science, laxity in relig- 
ious belief, easy credence of the marvellous, combine to form a very 
common class in these latter days ; — men and women, ' with itching 
ears,' prone to receive every new postulate as an axiom ; and always, 
like the Athenians in the time of Paul, inquiring, ' Who will show us 
some new thing?' * * *•« * * # »* 
" That the expoation of the trick by which the pretenders to com- 
munion with the other world, now playing their game in this city, 
continue to delude their dupes wiU, one day or other, be made as 
effectually as in the case of a hundred other such attempts at decep- 
tion, we have not the least doubt." 

All this the editor of the Express writes, to introduce an elaborate 
treatise on finger-snapping, by an anonymous correspondent, who 
contends that this is the chief mode of making the " rapping." He 
also gave a long dissertation on acoustics, to account for the sounds 
appearing in dififerent parts of the room. 

T. S. ARTHUE. 

T. S. Arthur, in his Home Gazette, puts himgelf on record, as fol- 
lows : 

" We believe that the ' spiritual rappisga,' so fashionable just now, 
are but consequences growing out of the weak, foolish, and often 
insane practice of mesmerism, which has so widely prevailed in this 
country during the last few years. The ' rappings ' are a lower, more 
sensible and tangible, manifestation of the elements at work in animal 
magnetism, and they startle and mystify just in proportion as men are 
ignorant of the laws that govern the spiritual world. As we believe 
that no positive good can come from the practice of mesmerism in any 
form, so do we believe that no good can result to any one from inter- 
course with these rapping spirits. All wise men will let them alone. 

" As to the many things alleged to be done in actual space, we do 
not believe a word. A spirit cannot infringe upon matter in the least 
degree. It cannot appear to the natural eye, nor speak to the natural 
ear, nor touch a natural object. Either the movement of articles said 
to have occurred, and the sounds heard, were the result of mortal 

APPENDIX. 409 

agencies, or the articles did not really move in space, nor did the sounds 
really vibrate in our natural atmosphere." 

Such is the bold assurance of one of the popular writers of our 
times, who speaks without any knowledge of the facts whatever. He 
is as wide of the truth in asserting that animal magnetism has done 
no good, as when he makes his dogmatical assertion in regard to 
articles moving and sounds being heard. 

THE BOSTON INVDSTIGATOK. 

Among the opposing papers, none in the country were more un- 
candid than that class known as the religious press, and among these 
I include the Boston Investigator. True, this is generally called an 
Infidel paper ; but the religion of annihilation is the great object and 
purpose of the Investigator. It is in sympathy with the other religious 
extreme represented by the New York Observer. The great difference 
between the two is, that while the Observer does not pretend to reason, 
the Investigator is generally a reasoning paper. The repeated attacks 
of the Investigator on the spiritualists induced the author to address 
the following letter to the editors of that paper, which was published, 
with the comments annexed : 

"Spirits and Spiritual Manifestations. — Mr. Editor: Were it 
not for the fact that your paper is devoted to the diffusion of universal 
mental liberty, and that you acknowledge the fact that free discussion 
is the most powerful means to be employed for such diffusion, I should 
not write you on a, subject upon which you and 1 differ so widely, 
while agreeing on almost every other. I will say, however, that I am 
not what may be properly called a believer ; for you know I bear the 
reputation, quite extensively, of being a most decided and heretical 
unbeliever. What I say about the fact of what is commonly called 
— although very improperly — the mysterious or Rochester knockings, 
I do not pretend to believe, but I know. It is a matter of just as 
absolute knowledge as that I now hold a pen in my hand ; and one is 
no more a psychological effect than the other. 

" I will make all due allowance for the false education and the 
gross superstition and entire want of good reasoning in all observers 
who think that because an ancient book, or a set of bigoted bool?- 
35 

410 APPENDIX. 

■worshippers declare that something can be nothing and nothing some- 
thing, that it therefore must he so. This man of straw, set up by 
bigots, and believed in by men calling themselves liberal, it is easy to 
demolish, — much easier than to meet facts candidly and fairly, 
especially when they clash with some dear and long-cherished super- 
stition, religious or anti-religious (for there are both). 

" What, then, do the believers in, or the knowers in, the ' mysterious ' 
noises mean by the word spirit ? Of course, I cannot speak for all ; 
but I venture to assert that I speak the sentiments of a vast majority 
when I say that they are entirely and wholly materialists in their ideas 
and rationalistic in their opinions. They have come to their present 
views of the matter by actual facts, and not by any favorable notions 
of the superstition so long fastened upon mankind by misguided and 
designing religionists. These persons can well afford to be called hon- 
est but deluded people by the surface observers who do not wish to 
penetrate beyond a preconceived opinion. The absolute superior 
knowledge they have of these things renders them so well established 
in the facts that no casual observer can move them, however many men 
of straw he may demolish. The word spirit is used by them to denote 
an absolute, material existence, and this nine out of ten of the writers 
in its favor have distinctly declared. They do not contend for an ex- 
istence that is — nothing ; and the benevolent soul who volunteers to 
enlighten these ' honest and well-meaning persons ' loses his labor 
entirely, as many others equally ignorant of what they were talking 
about have done. I pity this ' gullible 'class, who are so apt to think 
all persons ignorant and superstitious who differ from them, and that 
they are just the ones to enlighten them. 

" The whole question turns upon the point of whether there is any 
part of man which survives his present visible existence. Having 
satisfied myself on this point by actual demonstration, and by no other 
means, that some part does survive, I shall not argue that point, but 
simply say that this part is what I call spirit. Not a nonentity, but 
cin actual living, breathing, thinking being, — more refined in organi- 
;;ation, more expanded in intellect, and professing more power than 
before, both mental and physical. This is what I, and a majority of 
those who have investigated the ' rappings,' understand by spirit. I 
can see no likeness to the nothing and something spirit of the religion- 
ists in this. Most truly it is intangible to us in our normal state. So 
-are the myriads of animals we eat, drink and breathe. The fact that 

APPENDIX. 411 

we cannot see them is no argument against their existence. There is 
nothing of the supema^taxal wherewith to dislodge us here. The most 
that can be done is to ridicule and assert, of which arguments the 
Investigator has made ample use on this subject, having no clearer 
weapon to oppose to something that strikes at a cherished dogma. 
This continued existence of man is governed by the same laws, immu- 
table in nature, which govern the whole universe. There are no such 
existences as sttpematural ones. Nature produces all things, wherever 
or however they may exist. None of the senses are destroyed by this 
refining process. They exist in a, more perfect state. They have a 
superior mental power, and it requires no very great stretch of the 
imagination to suppose, especially if you have had the positive evidence 
that some have, that superior mental beings can use the ingredients of 
the atmosphere to make up forms out of the elements of which our 
bodies are formed by a little more roundabout process, and to let that 
combination be felt and heard by man when under certain circum- 
stances which permit such a communication. The same degree of 
mentality could produce sounds in various places by the use of the 
electrical ingredients of the atmosphere by which they are surrounded. 
We contend for nothing ' mysterious ' in this, and ask no sympathy 
from casual and ignorant observers. These believers, or rather know- 
ers, in the facts of the spiritual sounds never did pretend or believe 
that something can come of nothing ; and I here ask any man or 
woman, who, through ignorance or prejudice, has- made such false 
assertions, to show where it is done, and whom by. It is false so far as 
my experience goes, and I claim to have had a good deal of experience 
on the subject. Nor do I expect to be dislodged from my position by the 
vain speculation and surmises of those who are entirely ignorant of^the 
facts in the case. There is no pretension to anything miraculous in 
these sounds. Nothing of the kind. It has been the great objection 
on behalf of our religious brethren that we did not admit it to be 
miraculous or supernatural, and they have called us stubborn infidels. 
We are between two fires, both of the firers agreeing most cordially in 
denouncing us as fools or knayes. Strange to say, the ultra-Christians 
and the ultra-Infidels are bedfellows in this matter, and both equally 
candid. Both try to show that spirits are immaterial, and cannot 
■ operate on material things. The theology of both is touched in its 
tenderest points ; the religionists, because it strips the mystery from 
around the next sphere of existence, and makes priests useless ; and 

412 APPEND!:^. 

the infidels because many of them had firmly set their stake to the 
poiift that man had no kind of existence beyond this visible sphere. 
Our knowledge that it is all material, but beyond our vision, nettles 
the annihilationist, for he could get along, and make it appear as 
ridiculous as he pleased, if vro only held to immateriality. 

" When facts too strong to be otherwise disposed of have been 
brought up, biology, psychology, or some other ology, is thought of to 
account for them. That will not do. The person has not yet been 
found that could produce this effect on a miscellaneous audience of 
four hundred persons, or fifty, or twenty persons ; yet these sounds 
have been distinctly heard by audiences of all these numbers. Besides, 
it is a very easy matter for persons to decide whether they are biolo- 
gized when a table moves against them. Let them try the experiment 
of moving away from it, and let it follow them, having chalked the 
floor, and then call in all the persons from another room to see whether 
the furniture stands in its original place. I am for very material 
experiments, and have tried them enough to know how utterly and 
entirely the biological and mesmeric theory fails in accounting for 
the occurrences. 

" But, some surface-skimming observer will say, ' If there are spirits, 
they can as well communicate with me as anybody.' Well, sir, that 
is your assertion, and has no more proof than the rest of your sur- 
mises. If you will prove yourself to be of precisely the same electri- 
cal condition of the one or two hundred people in whose presence these 
things are heard and seen, you can be believed, and not without; It 
is a very foolish assertion. Spirits use means and natural laws as we 
do, and can only use such channels of communication as come within 
the law. You or I may not be in that state. There is a wide differ- 
ence in the temperament and susceptibility of persons ; and, unless you 
can prove all to be exactly alike, such claim — that all could have 
communication if one could — is the height of folly. The fact is (and 
it may as well be owned) , these opposers are obliged to use the weapons 
of religious superstition to defend themselves with, and they have been 
falsely educated by the same religion, and to think that if man does 
exist beyond this sphere, he is necessarily perfect in knowledge and 
power. This superstition extends to Infidel opponents, and continually 
misleads them. E. W. C. 

" By the foregoing it will be seen that our correspondent takes us 

APPENDIX. 413 

severely to task upou a point wherein we are open to censure, no 
doubt ; but we will show him, in all frankness, before we close, that 
there is a wide distinction between the case under discussion and every 
other case he has so broadly alluded to. 

" There are two classes of facts and of phenomena which fall within 
the range of man's perception and consciousness. They all, upon 
their first advent, seem like miracles, or impossibilities, because they 
precede the discovery of the law under which they exist. But when 
the law is made apparent, the phenomena become feed facts, and very 
common ones. It may be so with this spiritual existence, as our cor- 
respondent and Dr. Olcott contend ; and if it is demonstrable, why, 
we shall as frankly confess to our unphilosophical short-coming as we 
now confess our utter incredulity. There must be a little latitude 
given to us for the peculiar circumstances and relations under which 
these spirits have made their advent. Certainly they require the broad- 
est margin of faith from those who have not had the rapping rapped 
into their sceptical skulls. 

" All the speculations and doubts, queries and reflections, that arise 
upou so stupendous and infinitely mysterious a subject, are unanswered, 
unsatisfied in every way ; and the facts or phenomena that call for 
credence rest upon a method of introduction so ludicrous, and so at war 
with all induction upon the conclusions flowing from granting the first 
fact, a spirit, that we can hardly conceive faith possible even under the 
' rappings.' 

" Has ' E. W. C forgotten that human tradition is full of stories 
similar to those he has given the public, as well confirmed, as lustily 
sworn to, as indignantly defended, as these 7 And do not all now-a- 
days — heretics and believers — agree in regarding these reported 
phenomena as the cast-oif rags of a day of superstition and darkness ? 

" The most singular stories of witchcraft have been confirmed by 
evidence as strong as any we have seen for the Rochester spirits. The 
whole bundle of supernatural manifestations in Mrs. Crowe's ' Night 
Side of Nature ' has confirmation strong as ' Holy Writ,' — yet who 
believes them ? Only those who believed them all, and more too, even 
before they occurred. 

" Our correspondent should consider that this case is one beyond all 
known laws, and is demonstrable only to a few ; and that, having no 
other basis upon which to rest our credulity than the ground claimed 
35* 

414 APPENDIX. 

for all the ghost stories ever put in circulation, we are compelled to 
withhold it, much as we should like to have its truth confirmed. 

" The simple fact that a spirit has knocked on a material substance, 
and that sound has been made real to a material sense, has already 
grown to a wide field of fancy and dreamy exaggeration, as we believe. 
In the last number of the Spin* Messenger we see that ' H. D. B.' 
(H. D. Barron, E. W. O.'s copartner in the spirit-pamphlet, probably) 
gives an account of spirits taking room and extension ; that human 
faces appeared above them, seemingly shaped of white clouds, that 
gradually faded away ; and Mr. Sunderland even gives an engraving 
of some characters written by spirits on a turnip, and thrown against 
a window in Connecticut, which characters were translated into verses 
by A. J. Davis ; and it seems some of the spirits in Connecticut write 
notes in tolerable English upon tangible paper, with a worn-out lead- 
pencil, and sign them ' H. P. Devil,' the contents being as frivolous as 
the diplomatic correspondence of a faction o( infant scholars. 

" Mr. Sunderland says the spiritual hand of one of his children was 
placed upon his head, and kept moving about several minutes, to make 
him certain it was his son's hand. Our believing brethren will easily 
perceive many thousands of the very stubbornest questions which we 
could ask, and do not, and they will please give us credit for any given 
amount of forbearance. Certainly, what bantering we have indulged in 
is but a drop in the bucket to that which we repress from pure charity. 

" "We know, as well as any man knows himself, that we are not 
stubbornly dogmatic on annihilation of individual consciousness. How 
should we be, when the idea of spiritual eternity would be as pleasing 
to us as to any ? "We are.flesh and blood, endowed with the same love 
of life as any, and have as earnest a longing for immortality ; and the 
new dispensation comes in to render that immortality peculiarly pleas- 
ing, if true, because it assures us we can take an occasional peep at 
carnahdom, and see schemes mature which we apprehend we shall have 
to die and leave in an unfinished state. But we submit it to friend C, 
if we were to change places with him, if he could swallow, without any 
other evidence than a distant friend's ipse dixit, any of the wonderful 
stories afloat about the spirits, or even the fact upon which these stories 
are based ? 

" One of these rumors has just reached our sanctum. A family in 
Syracuse profess (as we hear) to have had communication with Abner 
Knceland, and Abner says he was mistaken about Jesus ! Then if he 

APPENDIX. 415 

was mistaken about Jesus, the inference is that we are all mistaken 
about Jesus ; the New Testament may be true, and if so, ITniversalism 
must be false ; the parable of Dives again begins to smell of sulphur, 
and this earth and its inhabitants are really subject to hell and damna- 
tion, per se, 

" So the consequences of admitting friend C.'s premises are some- 
what momentous, and the old Calvinistio argument, that we had bet- 
ter believe in hell, nolens volens, because faith in it will keep us out 
of it if true, and keep us out of mischief here if false, begins to 
assume a very hot significance. 

" But, really, we must ask to be excused for our incredulity until 
we have some evidence. To us there is none abroad that is not also 
abroad to prove- all the stories in Mrs. Crowe's book. Why are we to 
be assailed for ridiculing a story upon pretensions exactly of a piece 
with the pretensions of all other stories universally regarded as the 
exploded fancies of brain-sick women ? Brother C. says he knows. 
When we knoiv, there will be an end of ridicule and doubt. And as 
the spirits do not knock directly through Brother C. (as we have been 
told), it is as easy for us to know as for him. - 

" Dr. Olcott says he has seen the spirit leave the body at death ; so 
did A. J. Davis say so just before him. Davis required to be spir- 
itualized ; Olcott does not pretend to any such normalism. If Davis 
and Olcott saw this, it is demonstration to them ; but it is overween- 
ing arrogance in either of them to ask us to take their simple affirma- 
tion of this thing as true coin. Without meaning to impugn their 
veracity at all, we ask if they would take our word for it were we to 
change places (not characters) with them ? We know they would not, 
and we wiU not, — we cannot if we would. 

" The facts assumed are not demonstrable by any other facts we can 
be cognizant of, — are not within the reach of any of our faculties but 
a blind credulity, and to this we are not likely to fall a victim at pres- 
ent. If this spiritual life be a fact, it is to be demonstrated to the race 
(as they say it has been to them), or it is not. If 'it is to be demon- 
strated, we shall believe ; if it is not, we shall be pretty tolerably apt 
to continue in doubt ; and as many really scientific men have believed 
in ghosts and witches (and seen them after they began to believe) , we 
must continue to regard Sunderland, Barron, Capron and Co., aa 
either deceiving, or as falling within that indefinite category whore 
Boswell has loft Dr. Johnson and the Cock Lane Ghost. 

416 

APPENDIX. 

" We here close this article, but not our remarks. Spirit being 
material in itself, it begins to be material to our purpose ; and if it is 
a fact, it is a material fact, and should furnish material for our 
columns. If man has a spirit that retains his consciousness without 
his flesh, blood, bones and brains, then spirits are subjects that fall 
•within the range of our prospectus by pertaining to human welfare. 
We shall see — probably." 

EX-REV. C. C. BURR ANT) BROTHER. 

The next great effort that was, in the estimation of many, to be the 
grand and final explosion of all spiritual manifestations, was that of 
the Ex-Eev. 0. 0. Burr and his " brother Hcman " In this country 
and for the present time any record of the facts in their career of 
itineracy would not be needed ; but this is a record for other times, 
and it is well that no prominent actor should be left out of the 
account. 

If I remember correctly, the first announcement of Mr. Suit's 
astounding discoveries was made in December, 1850. In a letter to 
the New York Tribune, dated at Philadelphia, Jan. 2d, 1851, he 
speaks in the following confident manner of his discovery : 

" After a close examination of many ' mediums,' I not only discov- 
ered how the ' rappings ' are produced, but by much practice at leisure 
moments I found that I could produce them myself, even louder than 
I had ever before heard them, and in a manner that no person could 
detect, if I chose to impose upon his credulity. I have produced the 
' rappings ' so loud that they were distinctly heard in every part of a 
hall that was crowded with an audience of a thousand people. 

" But when it was demonstrated that the sounds could be produced 
by art, it still remained to be explained how the answers from the 
pretended spiritual world were, in some cases, so satisfactory and won- 
derful. And this I had already done in my Lectures on Imagination, 
Ghost-seeing and the Temperament of Genius. And I had seen my 
brother, Hemau Burr, in his remarkable experiments with mind, pro- 
duce far more wonderful effects upon the imagination than I had ever 
\vitnepsed in the phenomena of the ' rappings.' So that art and sci- 
ence together convinced me that the ' spirits ' belong, in a very mate- 
r-al way, to the physical world. You may believe it was a comfort for 

APPENDIX. 417 

me to understand this matter ; for I was, during some little time, pained 
by a kind of half belief that my sainted brother Edwin, who, in his 
lifetime, was a young man of the finest taste and of high poetical 
genius, had so far forgotten tlie natural dignity, and delicacy of his 
character as to come back to commune with me by making most vul- 
gar noises, rattling about under chairs and tables, and kicking over 
light-stands and bureaus in the dark, to excite my wonder and horror. 
In the short course of scientific lectures which I shall commence in 
Hope Chapel, on Monday evening, Jan. 13th, 1 shall not only show 
how these noises are produced, and how any one may infallibly detect 
their origin, and stop the ' spirits,' but the philosophy of the satisfac- 
tory answers from the ' spiritual world ' will, I think, be made plain to 
the humblest capacity ; and my brother will give illustrations of the 
new philosophy by experiments with the imagination of any number 
of gentlemen who come forward voluntarily out of the audience. 
These experiments did not, of course, originally belong to my Lectures 
on Imagination and Ghost-seeing, but they are appended as natural 
enough illustrations of my philosophy ; and they cannot fail to show 
any man, who is not already made crazy by the ' spirits,' that the 
whole phenomenon of the ' knockings ' is perfectly explained a good 
way this side of the other world. C. Chauncet Burk." 

This is a specimen of Mr. B.'s whole career throughout the coun- 
try. He was always going to show how he could expose the ' ' rapping " 
when people came to his lectures, which they could do by paying 
twenty-five cents. This letter was a capital "puff" for his forth- 
coming lectures. A portion of the New York press was taken with 
the bait, and the Express, Herald, and other papers, that have always 
been noted for their- easy assent to every passing theory, however 
ridiculous, that pretended to account, for the phenomena, seized upon 
this, and announced that " the Rochester knockings were now to be 
exposed to a certainty." 

The time arrived. Mr. Burr and his brother Ileman delivered their 
lectures, and performed their mountebank tricks, and — made a total 
failure of it, so far as proving anything in regard to the alleged fraud 
of the media. The Tribune declared that " the sounds were so far 
from being identical with the spiritual knockings, that we should be 
forced to tlw conclusion that they could not be made by the same 
means. We should as soon think of referring the notes of a flute and 

418 APPENDIX. 

a trumpet to the same instrument. If Mr. Burr's sounds are produced 
by the toe joints, the Rochester sounds are produced in some other way. 
There was a peculiar ring to those sounds which Mr. Burr did not pro- 
duce on the occasion, though he said he would be able to do so here- 
after." * 

This notice did not exactly satisfy the exhibitors, and " my brother 
Heman " published an explanatory note in the next day's paper, and 
with all the gravity of an owl, and about the same amount of wisdom, 
laid down the following " scientific " propositions : 

" There are at least five circumstances which vary the volume and 
tone'oi the sounds, although they are in all mediums produced in the 
same- way. 

" 1. The size and strength of the toe. 

" 2. The tightness of the shoe. 

"3. The thickness and dryness of the sole. 

"4. The moisture or dryness of the foot. 

" 5. The substance on which the rapper stands." 

The apparent confidence with which this statement was made would 
seem ludicrous in the extreme, were it not for the fact that it carried 
more evidence of knavery than folly when taken in connection with 
men of the Messrs. Burr's intelligence, and of their expressions to sun- 
dry individuals previously of an entirely different opinion of the origin 
of these sounds. The papers advertising for the exhibition (except 
the Tribune) all commended and endorsed Mr. Burr's expose, just as 
they had swallowed a dozen different exposes before it. The£xpress 
declared that they had " pricked the bubble, and it had burst, and 
gone off in mere vapor." Their lectures, however, grew less and less 
interesting to the public as the " humbug " of the two mountebanks 
became more palpable. 

As they ran out in one place they would go to another, and thus 
they made the tour of the northern, eastern and western states, visit- 
ing the principal places. At Providence, R. I., they concerted with a 
man to come upon the stage and have his name spelled out — they and 
he pretending that they did not know his name until they cracked it 

* This promise Mr. Burr never redeemed. 

APPENDIX. 419 

out by their toes. The prutence was that they did it by noticing hia 
change of countenance when they came to the light letter in calling 
the alphabet. The whole trick was detected, and their dishonesty 
exposed by the editor of a daily paper in that city. Trickery and dis- 
honesty, coupled with slander, defamation and bombast, were the 
chief ingredients that made up these lectures. 

At Cleveland, Ohio, C. 0. Burr was prosecuted for slander by Mrs. 
Pish (of the Fox family) , and held to bail to answer to the charge. 
Joel Tiffany, Esq., a lawyer, challenged him for a discussion, and it 
was held. The tone of the press of that city was decidedly against 
Burr. The Plaindealer said he was u, blackguard and a. slanderer. 
Indeed, there was no place where he went that he did not excite the 
contempt of those who knew anything of the subject, and the disgust 
of those opposed to spiritualism. 

Failing in his attempts to make much money by the " expose," he 
concluded to make a bold stroke for the utter annihilation of all 
media in general, and the Fox family in particular. In his peregrina- 
tions, he visited a Mrs. Culver, who lives in the town of Arcadia, N. 
Y., and is a distant relative (by marriage) of the Fox family. This 
woman was, for a long time, a bitter enemy of the part of the family 
to which the mediums belonged. Moreover, for some time after the 
Fox girls went to reside at Rochester, she was a medium herself, and 
had the " rappings " with her. She was a sympathetic clairvoyant, 
and a very susceptible subject, and, when in this state, could be made 
to say and do anything the operator pleased. With this woman Mr. 
Burr agreed, either for a consideration, or from motives of envy, jeal- 
ousy, or revenge, to make and publish a story which would forever put 
to rest this question, so far as the Fox family was concerned. Very 
naturally this piece of villany was first published in the New York 
Express, — a most fitting organ for such a man, — and its credulity, 
shown in swallowing all previous exposures, naturally turned Burr's 
attention to it as a fit subject to be again imposed upon by his unscru- 
pulous trickery. The statement obtained by this woman was as fol- 
lows ; and we give the solemn preface of the Express to make it more 

impressive 

"The Spiritual Kapping Impostube. — It is a melancholy com- 
mentary upon the intelligence of the age that so barefaced and impu- 

420 APPENDIX. 

dent an imposition as the so-called spiritual rappings are now shown 
to be, could ever have imposed upon the minds or perceptions of even 
the most ignorant or superstitious among us. And what is still more 
amazing is the fact that the swindle, gross as it was in some degree, 
has actually had — nay, is now having! — the countenance, if not the 
actual support, of sundry presses whose claim to influence and respect- 
ability ordinarily is entitled to acknowledgment. But bo it is. And 
such being the discreditable fact, is it any wonder that the foreign 
press abroad is taunting us as a people credulous and superstitious to 
an extent it is hard to reconcile with our general improvement and 
progress in all other respects ? The London Athenaum, for example, 
names, one of our city papers as an advocate and voucher of the 
' spirits,' and thereupon proceeds to enlarge upon this beautiful feature 
of a beautiful specimen of ' the American press.' Now, we do not 
care a feather about what the London AthencRum, or the London Times, 
or any other foreign journal, has to say of us ; but we cannot help 
lamenting the discreditable spectacle journalism is making of itself 
here at home, when its influence is thus, volunteered to strengthen or 
give encouragement to one of the most superlatively silly, dishonest, 
immoral, blasphemous impostures ever set up among men. Is it a 
wonder that we have so many ' wise ' madmen spring up among us, — 
so many new ' philosophers ' in morals, religion and politics, — when 
the press is thus prostituted and perverted ? 

" From the time that these ' rappings ' were first ' brought out ' 
at Rochester -down to their exhibitions in this city, and from that time 
to this, this journal has always maintained that collusion, dishonesty, 
falsehood, were at the bottom of their so-called manifestations. And 
we have, time and again, stated at length, and with the utmost pre- 
cision of detail, the grounds upon which that conviction was predicated. 
In the face of all this, however, there were still many believers and 
doubters. As we have now a full admission, from the lips of persons 
who acted as confederates of the Fox girls, that the whole affair was, 
as the Express said it was, an imposture of the most dishonest char- 
acter, we are hoping hereafter to hear that the humbug is repudiated 
everywhere and by everybody. Let those who have been the willing 
dupes of the ' rappings ' read the Burr statement we copy below, and 
be convinced of the impudent imposture of which they have been 
made the victims. 

APPENDIX. 421 

•"THE GHOSTS AT THE CONFESSIONAL. 

" ' Extract from the deposition of Mrs. Norman Culver, taken at Ar- 
cadia, N. Y., April 17, 1851. 

" 'I am, by marriage, a connection of the Fox girls ; their brother 
married my husband's sister. The girls have been a great deal at my 
house, and for about two years I was a very sincere believer in the 
rappings ; but some things which I saw, when I was visiting the girls 
at Rochester, made me suspect that they were deceiving. I resolved to 
satisfy myself in some way, and soon afterwa,rds 1 made a proposition 
to Catharine to assist her in producing the manifestations. I had a 
cousin visiting me from Michigan, who was going to consult the spirits, 
and I told Catharine that, if they intended to go to Detroit, it would 
be a great thing for them to convince him. I also told her that if I 
could do anything to help her, I would do it cheerfully ; that I should 
probably be able to answer all the questions he would ask, and I would 
do it if she would show me how to make the raps. She said that, as 
Margaretta was absent, she wanted somebody to help her, and that if 
I would become a medium, she would explain it all to me. She said 
that when my cousin consulted the spirit, I must sit next to her, and 
touch her arm when the right letter was called. I did so, and was 
able to answer nearly all the questions correctly. After I had helped 
her in this way a few times, she revealed to me the secret. The raps 
are produced with the toes. All the toes are used. After nearly a 
week's practice, with Catharine showing me how, I could produce them 
perfectly myself. At first it was very hard work to do it. Catharine 
told me to warm my feet, or put them in warm water, and it would 
then be easier work to rap ; she said that she sometimes had to warm 
her feet three or four times in the course of an evening. I found that 
heating my feet did enable me to rap a great deal easier. 

" ' Catharine told me how to manage to answer the questions. She 
said it was generally easy enough to answer right if the one who asked 
the questions called the alphabet. She said the reason why they asked 
people to write down several names on paper, and then point to them 
till the spirit rapped at the right one, was to give them a chance to 
watch the countenances and motions of the persons, and that in that 
way they could nearly always guess right. She also explained how 
they held down and moved tables. [Mrs. Culver gave us some illustra- 
tions of the tricks.] She told me that all I should have to do to make 
36 

422 

APPENDIX. 

the raps heard on the table would he to put my foot against the bottom 
of the table when I rapped ; and that, when I wished to make the raps 
sound distant on the wall, I must make them louder, and direct my 
own eyes earnestly to the spot where I wished them to be heard. She 
said, if I could put my foot against the bottom of the door, the raps 
would be heard on the top of the door. Catharine told me that, when 
the committee held their ankles in Rochester, the Dutch servant-girl 
rapped with her knuckles under the floor from the cellar. The girl 
was instructed to rap whenever she heard their voices calling the 
spirits. Catharine also showed me how they made the sounds of saw- 
ing and planing boards. [The whole trick was explained to us.] 
When I was at Rochester, last January, Margaretta told me that when 
people insisted on seeing her feet and toes, she could produce a few 
raps with her knees and ankles. 

"' Elizabeth Fish (Mrs. Fish's daughter), who now lives with her 
father, was the first one who produced these raps. She accidentally dis- 
covered the way to make them by playing with her toes against the 
foot-board while in bed. The whole secret was revealed to me, with 
the understanding that I should act as a medium when tlie girls were 
away. Catharine said that whenever I practised, I had better have my 
little girl at the table with me, and make folks believe that she was the 
medium, for she said they would not suspect so young a child of any 
trick. When she was instructing me how to be a medium, she told 
me how frightened they used to get in New York for fear somebody 
would -detect them, and gave me the whole history of all the tricks 
they played upon the people there. She said that once Margaretta 
spoke aloud, and the whole party believed it was a spirit. 

" ' Mks. Nobman Culveb.' 

" ' We hereby certify that Mrs. Culver is one of the most reputable 
and intelligent ladies in the town of Arcadia. We were present when 
she made the disclosures contained in the above paper ; we had heard 
the same from her before, and we cheerfully bear testimony that there 
cannot be the slightest doubt of the truth of the whole statement. 

" ' C. G. POMEROT, M. D. 

Rev. D. S. Chase.' 

" ' I have in my possession other depositions from persons residing 
in Rochester, who have been confederates of the Fox girls in the rap- 

APPENDIX. 423 

ping business, which, in due time and form, will be made public. The 
reign of those impostors is nearly at an end ; and the few editors who 
have been the means of deceiving the public in relation to their real 
character will, I trust, Jiave their reward in the deep indignation and 
scorn of those whose credulity has been abused. H. Burr.' 

" ' Pittsburg, May 20, 1851.' " 

The boldness of this statement was its only merit. It was an entire 
fabrication in all its essential statements. Being perfectly conversant 
with the investigation at Rochester, and knowing that part of the 
statement to be false, I sent the following brief reply to the Eocpress, 
which was published : 

" I notice in the Express of Saturday what pretends to be a state- 
ment of a confession (in ' extracts ' from an unsworn-to ' deposition ') 
made by Catharine Fox to Mrs. Norman Culver, of Arcadia, N. Y. 
Without noticing the loose and indefinite manner of the whole state- 
ment, I wish to call attention to the following extract : 

' ' ' Catharine told me that, when the committee held their ankles at 
Kochester, the Dutch servant-girl rapped with her knuckles under the 
floor from the cellar. The girl was instructed to rap whenever she 
heard their voices calling the spirits.' 

" As I was present during the investigations, and had an opportu- 
nity to know something of the circumstances, I will ask space to 
state, 

" 1st. That, during that investigation (which lasted three days, and 
was carried on by three different committees) , not one of the examina- 
tions took place in the house of the Fox family ; the first meeting of 
the committee being in the Hall of the Sons of Temperance, the second 
at the office of Vice-Chancellor Whittlesey, and the third at the rooms 
of Doctor Gates at the Eochester House. 

" 2d. There was no previous notice given to the family, and they 
did not know where they were to go until the committee called for 
them. 

" 3d. They did not have, and never had, a Dutch or other servant- 
girl in the family at Rochester up to the time of the investigation. 

" 4th. Catharine Fox was not in Rochester during any part of these 
investigations, but was at my house in Avhurn, seventy miles distant. 

424 

APPENDIX. 

" Any further comment on the above unsworn-' deposition ' would 
be superfluous, as the above serves to illustrate its character. 

"E. W. Oapkon." 

It may be well, in this place, to state some other facts in connection 
with this singular affair. The two persons — doctor and preacher — 
who gave the certificate of character to Mrs. Culver, were not neigh- 
bors, and knew very little about her, living as they did several miles 
distant. They were, moreover, bitter and unreasonable opponents of 
the manifestations. It will be observed by the careful reader, who 
has heard Burr lecture, or seen his position stated, that the " deposi- 
tion " is made, in every particular, to corroborate his theory. Every- 
thing was " exactly as he thought it would be," like the old lady 
who was told that the cow had eaten the grindstone. Her way of 
producing the sounds, of accounting for them in different places, of the 
sounds oh the wall, all was precisely as he had been stating in his 
lectures and writings. It was a great misfortune for Mr. Burr that he 
was not acquainted with the fact that Catharine did not attend the 
celebrated Eochester investigation, and that Mrs. Fish never had a 
Dutch servant, or any other, up to that time. Had he known this he 
would, no doubt, have fixed up a story that would have been more 
plausible. At it was, the Messrs. Burr and Mrs. Culver sank together, 
and their notoriety, as the exposers of spiritualism, ceased. 

I have not thought it necessary to follow the Burrs to every place, 
and give an account of their reception. In Pittsburg they made an 
indiscriminate attack on Mrs. Eish and the Fox family, Mr. Tiffany 
(who confronted them at Cleveland, and also acted as counsel for Mrs. 
Fish in her prosecution of C. C. Burr for slander), and a medium and 
other citizens of Pittsburg. He was completely answered and silenced 
by an article published in the Pittsburg Post of that city, in which 0. 
S. Fowler and others give certificates, completely overthrowing the 
slanderous assumptions of Burr. He was defended in character, 
talents and honesty, by Jane G. Swisshelm, editor of the Saturday 
Visitor. She has always opposed spiritual manifestations with what 
ability she had ; but was much more combative and flippant than p^•o- 
found. 

425- 

PROFESSOKS MATTISON AND PAGE. 

I think I have recorded pretty much all the diflferent kinds of news- 
paper exposures ; and it is only necessary to mention that, during the 
winter of 1852-3, a Methodist minister, who calls himself Rev. H. 
Mattison, A. M., delivered many lectures, pretending to expose the 
" rappings " (for which the press, in different places, accused him of 
obtaining money under false pretences) , but was so bold in his assert- 
ing that the things alleged never did happen, that he attracted little 
notice except as a pretender. He afterward published a book entitled 
" Spirit Rappings Overthrown," being a very feeble attempt at wit, 
and perfectly successful as a blackguard. In the summer of the same 
year one " Professor Charles G. Page," of "Washington, D. C, pub- 
lished a book (or pamphlet of ninety-six pages) , in which he said as 
near nothing as possible. It was truly " full of sound and fury, sig- 
nifying nothing." The nearest a, position he took was, that the 
sounds were produced by leaden balls tied to the toes ! The tables, &c. , 
never moved as pretended. This, I think, is a fair " table of contents " 
of these two books. They were both considered as the true " expose " 
by some newspaper editors, but the notices of them did not appear 
quite as confident as those of former exposures. The press seemed to 
be weary of so often endorsing any new pretender to exposures. 

PROFESSOR HARE. 

Professor Hare, one of the best electricians in the world, being called 
upon for an opinion in regard to electrical agency in table-moving, 
gave the following opinion in the Philadelphia Inquirer of July 28th, 
1853: 

" I am of opinion that it is utterly impossible for six or eight, or 
any number of persons, seated around a table, to produce an electrical 
current. Moreover, I am confident that if by any adequate mean? an 
electrical current were created, however forcible, it could not be pro- 
ductive of table-turning. A dry, wooden table is almost a non-con- 
ductor, but if forming a link necessary to complete a circuit betwc^iu 
the sky and earth, it might possibly be shattered by a stroke of liglit- 
ning ; but if the pov?er of all the galvanic apparatus ever made were to 
36* 

426 APPENDIX. 

be collected in one current, there would be no power to move or other- 
wise affect Buoh a table. 

" Friotional electricity, such as produced by electrical machines, 
must first be accumulated and then discharged, in order to produce 
any striking effect. It is in transitu that its power is seen and felt. 

" Insulated conductors, whether inanimate or in the form of ani- 
mals, may be electrified by the most powerful means, without being 
injured or seriously incommoded. Before a spark of lightning poises, 
every object on the terrestrial surface, for a great distance around, is 
subjected to a portion of the requisite previous accumulation. Yet it 
is only those objects which are made the medium of discharge that are 
sensibly affected. 

" Powerful galvanic accumulation can only be produced by those 
appropriate arrangements, which concentrate upon a comparatively 
small filament of particles their peculiar polarizing power ; but noth- 
ing.seems to me more inconsistent with experience than to suppose a 
table moved by any possible form or mode of galvanic reaction. 

" It was ascertained by Gaziot that one of the most powerful gal- 
vanic batteries ever made could not give a spark before contact to a 
conductor presented to it at the smallest distance which could be made 
by a delicate micrometer. 

" More than a month since, at the house of a friend, a number of 
respectable visitors were observing a charming young lady, who was 
under the impression that a table caused the movements which actually 
resulted from her touching it. I then stated that the subject was a 
physiological mystery, not a purely physical mystery. The only sub- 
ject for inquiry was, how people could so deceive themselves as to sup- 
pose that what they really moved, moved them. Putting my hand on 
the table, it displayed not the slightest tendency to motion. Yet, 
whatever an admiring youngster might do, who would suppose that a 
table would move more readily for a young lady than for an old man ? 
If there is any law * * * it is that inanimate matter cannot per se 
change its state as respects motion or rest. ' ' 

This was given while he was a most determined sceptic, but his 
knowledge of electricity made the very idea of such an agent, as the 
moving cause, preposterous to him. It is well known that his subse- 
quent experiments and investigations resulted in his conviction that 
the plionomena was the result of spiritual agency. 

427 

SENATORS, JUDGES, &C. 

Many excellent letters and communications have been written by 
men eminent for their scientific attainments, their statesmanship, and 
their distinguished position in society. Among these I have already 
mentioned ex-senator Simmons, of Rhode Island, Hon. N. P. Tall- 
madge, formerly U. S. senator and governor of Wisconsin, and Hon. 
John W. Edmonds, of the Supreme Court of the State of New York. 
In May, 1853, Mr. Tallmadge wrote a letter to the National Intelli- 
gencer, in reply to a communication against the spirituality of the 
manifestations. It was a bold and most able reply to the several ob- 
jections, as well as the aspersions on the judgment of some of the dis- 
tinguished friends of spiritualism. It very naturally attracted much 
attention, emanating, as it did, from one of our distinguished states- 
men. 

In the month of August, of the same year. Judge Edmonds made a 
statement to the public, in explanation of his position, and contradicting 
some of the slanders which had been circulated against him. His 
whole letter is eminently worthy of preservation, and contains much 
that should be carefully treasured up by every lover of truth. It is as 
follows : 

" TO THE PUBLIC. 

" On my return from an excursion into the country, I found that, 
during my absence, a decision, lately pronounced by me, had been 
seized upon as an occasion for an attack, in several quarters, on my 
religious belief. I was fully aware that that judgment, running 
counter as it would to popular sentiment, would subject my action to 
severe criticism ; but I confess I did not anticipate that thence would 
flow an assault upon my religious opinions. Were I a private citizen 
I should content myself with merely claiming the right which belongs 
to every one in this country of entertaining such faith on this — the 
most important of all topics — as my conscience might dictate. And 
as it is, I might perhaps rest satisfied with challenging those who 
assail me to point out a single article in my creed that aims at aught 
else than exalted private worth and public virtue. But as the position 
which I occupy renders the soundness as well as the integrity of my 
judgment a matter of public interest, I am bound to acknowledge the 

428 APPENDIX. 

right of others to question my faith, and my own obligation to defend 
it. 

"I acknowledge a still further obligation. And, inasmuch as I 
accepted my present position under the implied understanding, at 
least, that I believed in the Christian religion, and would administer 
our civil law according to the principles of the divine law, as it had 
been revealed to us, on which all our institutions were based, so I am 
bound to certify to those who have intrusted me with the divine attri- 
bute of administering justice among men, that my reverence for that 
revelation has not been shaken, nor my obedience to that moral law 
impaired. 

" I have not, however, waited for these assaults to be impressed with 
these obligations, but have already so far felt them that I have pre- 
pared to publish a volume on the subject, which, but for my other 
vocations, would, ere this, have been in the printer's hands. To that 
I must refer for much, in elucidation and proof of my belief, which the 
limits of this communication will not allow me to dwell upon, and con- 
tent myself on this occasion vrith such gerieral statements as may tend 
to give a correct idea of what it is that I believe or have done. Even 
this would not have been necessary if those who assail me had but 
done me the justice themselves to have published anything I have said 
or written on the subject. But hitherto I have been able to reach the 
public only through publications of very limited circulation, and the 
wildest and most erroneous notions have therefore been imbibed as to 
my belief, and the mischief has been increased by the recklessness 
with which erroneous statements have been fabricated by those who 
could not know them to-be true, but who could easUy have ascertained 
them to be false. . 

" Thus one writer,* with a want of feeling not perhaps surprising, 
speaks of my consulting my dead wife, in making up my decisions. 
Another says that it is ' rumored ' that I have consulted spirit mani- 
festations in regard to my decisions. Another, that my belief is ' at 
irreconcilable variance with aU divine revelation, and is fit for no other 
system than devil-worship ; ' and still another, that ' it constitutes an 
abandonment of all self-control, and a surrender of the supremacy of 
reason, as informed and enlightened by the senses, to the most nonsen- 
sical jugglery.' 

* Daily Chronicle^ of New Loudon. 

APPENDIX. 429 

"All these statements are as -wide aa they can be of truth, and I 
might, with some justice, complain at being subjected to such grievous ~ 
imputations merely because I had made a decision which was unac- 
ceptable to a portion of the community. But it is not for the purpose 
of complaining that I sit down to write. I am aware that it is not so 
much me, as it is the faith which I profess, which is the object of 
attack. It is ' the mighty theme, and not the inconsiderable advo- 
cate,' which offends. I am also aware why it is that so much error 
exists in the public mind on that subject, and my whole purpose is, so 
far as I am concerned, to correct that error ; to state truly, as far as I 
can in this connection, what it is that I do believe, and generally the 
grounds on which my belief is founded, that all who take interest 
enough in the matter to read what I may say, may have the means of 
judging for themselves as to what I really do believe, rather than what 
others erroneously impute to me as a belief. 

" I am sincerely grateful to my assailants for not imputing to me 
any unworthy or selfish motives ; for conceding that, as a private citi- 
zen, I ' stand exempt from f ublic criticism,' and that I am ' not a 
fool ;' and for confining themselves to the mere imputation that 1 am 
laboring under a delusion. It is, therefore, to that point I shall con- 
fine myself in what I have now to say. 

" It was January, 1851, that my attention was first called to the 
subject of ' spiritual intercourse.' I was at the time withdrawn from 
general society ; I was laboring under great depression of spirits. I 
was occupying all my leisure in reading on the subject of death, and 
man's existence afterward. 1 had, in the course of my life, read and 
heard from the pulpit so many contradictory and conflicting doctrines 
on the subject, that I hardly knew what to believe. I could not, if I 
would, believe what I did not understand, and was anxiously seeking 
to know, if, after death, we should again meet with those whom we 
had loved here, and under what circumstances. I was invited by a 
friend to witness the ' Rochester Knockings.' I complied, more to 
oblige her, and to while away a tedious hour. I thought a good deal 
on what I witnessed, and I determined to investigate the matter and 
find out what it was. If it was a deception, or a delusion, I thought 
that I could detect it. For about four months I devoted at least two 
evenings in a week, and sometimes more, to witnessing the phenomena 
in all its phases. I kept careful records of all I witnessed, and from 
time to time compared them with each other, to detect inconsistencies 

430 APPENDIX. 

and contradictions. I read all I could lay my hands on on the subject, 
and especially all the professed ' exposures of the humbug.' I went 
from place to place, seeing different mediums, meeting with different 
parties of persons, — often with persons whom I had never seen 
before, and sometimes where I was myself entirely unknown, — some- 
times in the dark and sometimes in the light, — often with inveterate 
unbelievers, and more frequently with zealous believers. In fine, I 
availed myself of every opportunity that was afforded, thoroughly to 
sift the matter to the bottom. I was all this time an unbeliever, and 
tried the. patience of believers sorely by my scepticism, my captious- 
ness, and my obdurate refusal to yield my belief. I saw around me 
some who yielded a ready faith on one or two sittings only ; others 
again, under the same circumstances, avowing a determined unbelief; 
and some who refused to witness it at all, and yet were confirmed un- 
believers. I could not imitate either of these parties, and refused to 
yield, unless upon most irrefragable testimony. At length the evi- 
dence came, and in such force that no s^ne man could withhold his 
faith. 

" Thus far, the question I was investigating was, whether what I 
saw was produced by mere mortal means, or by some invisible, un- 
known agency ; in other words, whether it was a deception, an imposi- 
tion, or, what it professed to be, the product o^some unknown, unseen 
cause. To detail what I witnessed, would far exceed the limits of this 
communication, for my records of it, for those four months alone, fill, 
at least, one hundred and thirty closely-written pages. I will, how- 
ever, mention a few things, which will give a general idea of that 
which characterized interviews now numbering several hundred. 
Most of them have occurred in the presence of others besides myself. 
I have preserved their names in my records, but do not give them to 
the world, because I do not desire-to subject them to the obloquy 
which seems most strangely to be visited upon all who look into the 
matter with any other feeling than a resolute and obstinate incredu- 
lity, whatever the evidence. But these considerations grow out of this 
fact : Ist. That I have thus very many witnesses, whom I can invoke 
to establish the truth of my statements ; and, 2d. That if I have been 
deluded, and have not seen and heard what I think I have, my delu- 
sion has been shared by many as shrewd, as intelligent, as honest and 
as enlightened people as are to be found anywhere among us. 

" My attention was first drawn to the intercourse by the rappinga, 

APPENDIX. 431 

then the moat common, but now the most inoonsiderablp, mode of 
communing. Of course, I was on the look-out for deception, and at 
first relied upon my senses and the conclusions which my reason might 
draw from their evidence. But I was at a loss to tell how the 
mediums could cause what I witnessed under these circumstances. 
The mediums walking the length of a suite of parlors, forty or fifty 
feet, and the rappings being distinctly heard five or six feet behind 
them, the whole distance,' backward and forward several times ; being 
heard near the top of a mahogany door, above where the medium 
could reach, and as if struck hard with a fist ; being heard on the bot- 
tom of a car when travelling on a railroad, and on the floor and the 
table, when seated' at lunch, at an eating-house, by the side of the 
road ; being heard at different parts of the room, sometimes several 
feet distant from the medium, and where she could not reach ; some- 
times on the table, and, immediately after, on the floor, and then at 
different parts of the table, in rapid succession, enabling us to feel the 
vibration, as well as hear the sounds ; sometimes when the hands and 
feet of the medium were both firmly and carefully held by some one of 
the party, and sometimes on a table when no one touched it. 

" After depending upon my senses, as to these various phases of the 
phenomenon, I invoked the aid of science, and, with the assistance of 
an accomplished electrician and his machinery, and eight or ten intel- 
ligent, educated, shrewd persons, examined the matter. We pur- 
sued our inquiries many days, and established, to our satisfaction, two 
things ; first, That the sounds were not produced by the agency of any 
person present or near us ; and, second. That they were not forthcom- 
ing at our will and,pleasure. 

" In the mean time another feature attracted my attention, and that 
was ' physical manifestations,' as they are termed. Thus, I have 
known a pine table, with four legs, lifted bodily up from the floor, in 
the centre of a circle of six or eight persons, turned upside down, and 
laid upon its top at our feet, thgn lifted up over our heads, and put 
leanino- ao-ainst the back of the sofa on which we sat. I have known 
that same table to be tilted upon two legs, its top at an angle with the 
floor of forty-five degrees, when it neither fell over of itself, nor could any 
person present put it back on its four legs. I have seen a mahogany 
table, having only a centre leg, and with a lamp burning upon it, 
lifted from the floor at least a foot, in spite of the efforts of those 
present, and shaken backward and forward as one would shake a gob- 

432 APPENDIX. 

let in his hand, and the lamp retain its place, though its glass pend- 
ants rang again. I have seen the same table tipped up with the lamp 
upon it, so far that the lamp must have fallen off unless retained there 
by something else than its own gravity ; yet it fell not, moved not. I 
have known a dinner-bell taken from a high shelf in a closet, rung 
over the heads of four or five persons in that closet, then rung around 
the room over the heads of twelve or fifteen persons in the back parlor, 
and then borne through the folding doors to the further end of the front 
parlor, and there dropped on the floor. I have frequently known 
persons pulled about with a force which it was impossible for them to 
resist, and once, when all my own strength was added in vain to that 
of the one thus affected. I have known a mahogany chair thrown on 
its side, and moved swiftly back and forth on the floor, no one touch- 
ing it, through a room where there were at least a dozen people sit- 
ting ; yet no one was touched, and it was repeatedly stopped within a 
few inches of me, when it was coming with a violence, which, if not 
arrested, must have broken my legs. 

" This is not a tithe, nay, not a hundredth part of what I have 
witnessed of the same character, but it is enough to show the general 
nature of what was before me. 

" At the same time, I have heard from others, whose testimony 
would be credited in any human transactions, and which I could not 
permit myself to disregard, accounts of still more extraordinary trans- 
actions ; for I have been by no means as much fiivored in this respect 
as some. 

" While these things were going on, there appeared in the news- 
papers various explanations and ' exposures of the humbug,' as they 
;were termed. 1 read them with care, in the expectation of being as- 
sisted in my researches, and I could not but smile at once at the rash- 
ness and the futility of the explanations. For instance, while certain 
learned professors in Buffalo were congratulating themselves on having 
detected it in the toe and knee joints, the manifestations in this city 
changed to ringing a bell placed under the table. They were like the 
solution lately given by a learned professor in England, who attributes 
the tipping of tables to a force in the hands which are laid upon it, 
overlooking the material fact that tables quite as frequently move when 
there is no hand upon them. 

" What I have thus mentioned has happened in the presence of 
others as well as myself. I have not alluded to any of the things 

APPENDIX. 433 

which have occurred to me when I have been alone ; for, as that would 
depend upon my testimony only, I have preferred not to subject my 
veracity to the rash and reckless contradictions of those who venture to 
denounce as an ' atrocious imposture ' that of which they are pro- 
foundly ignorant, and which has been examined, and is believed in, by 
thousands and tens of thousands of their fellow-citizens, who are, to 
say the least, every whit as honest and as intelligent as they are. Nor 
am I very anxious to submit my faith to the judgment of those who 
would have persecuted Galileo nigh unto death for discovering our 
planetary system, and have united in the cry of ' folly ' at the Fulton's 
steamboat, ' humbug ' at Morse's telegraph, and ' insanity ' at Gray's 
iron road. 

" Having thus, by a long series of patient inquiries, satisfied myself 
on this point, my next inquiry was. Whence comes the intelligence 
there is behind it aU ? For that intelligence was a remarkable feature 
of the phenomenon. 

" Thus I have frequently known mental questions answered, that 
is, questions merely framed in the mind of the interrogator, and not 
revealed by him or known to others. Preparatory to meeting a circle, 
I have sat down alone in my room, and carefully prepared a series of 
questions to be propounded, and I have been surprised to find my 
questions answered, and in the precise order in which I wrote them, 
without my even taking my memorandum out of my pocket, and when 
I knew that not a person present even knew that I had prepared ques- 
tions, much less what they were. My most secret thoughts, those 
which I have never uttered to mortal man or woman, have been freely 
spoken to as if I had uttered them. Purposes which I have privily 
entertained have been publicly revealed ; and I have once and again 
been admonished that my every thought was known to, and could be 
disclosed by, the intelligence which was thus manifesting itself. 

" I have heard the mediums use Greek, Latin, Spanish and French 
words, when I knew they had no knowledge of any language but their 
own ; and it is a fact, that can be attested by many, that often there 
have been speaking and writing in foreign languages and unknown 
tongues by those who are unacquainted with either. 

" Still the question occurred, may not all this have been, by some 

mysterious operation, the mere reflex of the mind of some one present? 

The answer was, that facts were communicated which were unknown 

then, but afterward found to be true ; like this, for instance : when I 

37 

434 

APPENDIX. 

waa absent last winter in Central America, my friaids in town heard 
of my whereabouts and of the state of my health seven times ; and, on 
my return, by comparing their information with the entries in my 
journal, it was found to be invariably correct. So, in my recent visit 
to the west, my whereabouts and my condition were told to a medium 
in this city, while I was travelling on the railroad between Cleveland 
and Toledo. So thoughts have been uttered on subjects not then in 
my mind, and utterly at variance with my own notions. This has 
often happened to me and to others, so as fully to establish the fact 
that it was not our minds that gave birth to or affected the communi- 
cation. 

"Kindred to this are two well-authenticated cases of persons who 
can read the thoughts of others in their minds. One is an artist of 
this.city, of high reputation, and the other the editor of a newspaper 
in a neighboring city. The latter vrrote me, that, in company with 
three friends, he had tried the experiment, and, for over forty succes- 
sive attempts, found he could read the secret thoughts of his com- 
panions as soon as they were formed, and without their being uttered. 
So, too, there is the instance of two persons, one of them also a resi- 
dent in this city, who can give a faithful delineation of the character 
and even the prevailing mood of mind of any person, however un- 
known to them, upon whom they fix their attention. 

" These are not apocryphal cases. The parties are at hand, and in 
our very midst, and any person that pleases may make the investiga- 
tion, as I have, and satisfy himself. 

" But all this, and much, very much more of a cognate nature, went 
to show me that there was a high order of intelligence involved in this 
new phenomenon ; an intelligence outside of and beyond mere mortal 
agency ; for there was no other hypothesis which I could devise or 
hear of that could at all explain that whose reality is established by 
the testimony of tens of thousands, and can easily be ascertained by 
any one who will take the trouble to inquire. 

" If these two points were established, — and there are now in these 
United States hundreds of thousands of sentient beings who have in- 
vestigated and believe they are, — then came this important question, 
cui bono ? To what end is it all ? For what purpose ? With what 
object? 

" To that inquiry I have directed my earnest attention, devoting to 
the task for over two years all the leisure I could command, and in- 

APPENDIX. 435 

creasing that leisure as far as I could by withdrawing myself from all 
my former recreations. I have gone from circle to circle, from medium 
to medium, seeking knowledge on the subject wherever I could obtain 
it, either from books or from observation, and bringing to bear upon 
it whatever of intelligence I have been gifted with by nature, sharp- 
ened and improved by over thirty years' practice at the bar, in the 
legislature and on the bench. 

" I found there were very many ways in which this unseen intelli- 
gence communed with us, besides the rappings and table-tippings, and 
that through those other modes there came very many communications 
distinguished for their eloquence, their high order of intellect, and 
their pure and lofty usual tone ; at the same time I discovered many 
inconsistencies and contradictions that were calculated to mislead. I 
saw many puerile and some very absurd statements, and many that 
were admirably calculated to make man better and happier ; and I set 
to work to see if I could not, out of this chaos, gather something that 
might be valuable. 

" I was satisfied that something niore was intended than the grati- 
fication of an idle curiosity ; something more than pandering to a 
diseased appetite for the marvellous ; something more than the pro- 
mulgation of oracular platitudes ; something more than the upsetting 
material objects to the admiration of the wonder-lover ; something 
more than telling the age of the living, of the dead, &c. 

" For that something I have industriously searched. I thought that 
was wiser than to condemn without investigation, and denounce with- 
out^ knowledge. "What I have discovered in that regard I have in- 
tended to give to the world, that all may judge for themselves whether 
there is anything in it worthy the attention of intelligent beings. It 
would have been done ere this if my leisure would have allowed me 
time to prepare my manuscript for the press. Now I expect that my . 
book will be published by the first of September, and to that I refer, 
as I have already said, for particulars. 

" In the mean time, it is due to myself and to others to say, that 
our feith, as growing out of these researches, is not ' at irreconcilable 
variance with revelation.' How little do they, who make such 
charges, know of»this matter! Misled by the credulities which alone 
are seen in the newspapers of the day, because the graver matters can- 
not find admission there, the idea is, I am aware, entertained by some 
that this new philosophy is at variance with the revelation through 

436 APPENDIX. 

Christ the Eedeemer. This is, indeed, a sad mistake, and one that 
believers would be too happy to correct, if only the opportunity could 
be afforded them. 

" So, too, is it a grievous error to suppose that it ' constilfates an 
abandonment of all self-control, and a surrender of the supremacy of 
reason, as informed and enlightened by the senses.' There was never 
yet, I venture to say, a religious creed promulgated among men which 
so entirely eschewed blind faith, and so fully and always demanded 
the exercise of the judgment and the supremacy of the reason. 

" Hence it is that we are taught that none of these extraordinary 
things which are witnessed by so many, are miraculous, or flow from 
any suspension of nature's laws, but are, on the other hand, in con- 
formity with and in execution of those laws ; that, like the steam engine 
and the magnetic telegraph, they are marvellous only to those who do 
not understand them, or are not familiar with them ; that those laws, 
and the means by which they produce such results, are as capable of 
being found out by human research ; that the knowledge is not con- 
fined to a few, but is open to all, rich or poor, high or low, wise or 
ignorant, who wUl wisely and patiently search for it ; and that, when 
it is attained, it cannot but work in the heart ' a closer walk with 
God,' and an intercourse with our fellow-men of a more elevated 
character, void of selfishness, and devoted to their absolute advance- 
ment in all knowledge and goodness, both in this world and in the 
world to come. 

" This is a part of the^something which I have found in my 
researches. But there is more yet. There is that which comforts the 
mourner, and binds up the broken-hearted ; that which smooths the 
passage to the grave, and robs death of its terrors ; that which enlight- 
ens the atheist, and cannot but reform the vicious ; that which cheers 
and encourages the virtuous amid all the trials and vicissitudes of life ; 
and that which demonstrates to man his duty and his destiny, leaving 
it no longer vague and uncertain. What that is I cannot in the 
limits of this letter explain, but, in due time, it will be forthcoming, 
and each one can judge for himself. 

" But now may I not ask if I overrate the importance of the subject 
of my inquiries ? Scarcely more than four years have elapsed since 
the ' Eochester KJuockings ' were first knovra among us. Then mediums 
could be counted by units, but now by thousands ; then believers could 
be numbered by hundreds, now by tens of thousands. It is believed by 

APPENDIX. 437 

the best-informed that the whole number in the United States must 
be several hundred thousands, and that in this city and its vicinity 
there must be from twenty-five to thirty thousand. There are ten or 
twelve newspapers and periodicals devoted to the cause, and the 
Spiritual Library embraces more than one hundred different publica- 
tions, some of which have already attained a circulation of more than 
ton thousand copies. Besides the undistinguished multitude, there are 
many men of high standing and talent, ranked among them, — doc- 
tors, lawyers and clergymen in great numbers, a Protestant bishop, 
the learned and reverend president of a college, judges of our higher 
courts, members of Congress, foreign ambassadors and ex-members of 
the United States Senate. 

" That which has thus spread with such marvellous celerity, in 
spite of the ridicule which has deterred so many from an open avowal, 
— that which has attracted the attention of so many of the best minds 
among us, — cannot be unworthy of my investigation, or that of per- 
sons far wiser and more reliable than I am. 

" It is now more than a year that my peculiar faith has been the 
subject of public comment. During it all I have been silent as to those 
attacks, content steadily to pursue my investigations until I could 
arrive at satisfactory results, Perhaps I have been silent too long, 
for, in the mean time, very erroneous notions as to that faith have been 
allowed to spring up. But I was unvrilling to speak until I was as sure 
as I could be that I was rightrleat I migWrnttef some crudity, which, 
by and by, I might regret, or commit some error, which I might find it 
difficult to correct, or, in fine, unhappily mislead in my ignorance, 
rather than vrisely guide by my knowledge. 

" I went into the investigation, originally thinking it a deception, 
and intending to make public my exposure of it. Having, from my 
researches, come to a different conclusion, I feel that the obligation to 
make known the result is just as strong. Therefore it is, mainly, that 
I give the result to the world. I say mainly, because there is another 
consideration which influences me, and that is, the desire to extend to 
others a knowledge which I am conscious cannot but make them 
happier and better. 

" If those vrho doubt this could but spend a few dayswithline in my 

library, and witness the calls I have from strangers from all parts of 

the country ; if they could but look over my portfolio, and read the 

letters which pour in upon me from all sections, and from persona 

37* 

438 APPENDIX. 

whom I have never seen and never may see, they would be able, from 
the evidence thus furnished of the good that has been done, to form 
Bome idea of what may yet be accomplished, and they would not 
wonder that I find a compensation for the obloquy that is so freely 
heaped upon me by the ignorant, in the grateful outpourings of hearts 
which have, by my means, been relieved. One of them says — and it 
is a fair specimen of the whole — ' You have acted the part of the 
good Samaritan, and poured oil into the wound of one like to die, and 
you will have rendered a death-bed, sooner or later, calm and hopeful, 
which might have been disturbed by doubts.' 

" This, then, is the offence for which I have been arraigned at the 
bar of the public with so unsparing a condemnation, declared 
unworthy of my high office, falsely accused of consulting aught else 
than the law of the land, and my ovm reason, in the judgments which 
I officially pronounce, and have had invoked against me ' the fires of 
Smithfield and the hangings of Salem.' From such a condemnation it 
is that I appeal to the calm, unbiased judgment of my countrymfc, 
with a firm reliance upon its justice. J. "W. Edmonds. 

" New York, August 1, 1853." 

CONCLUSION. 

It would be impossible to follow the subject through its various 
phases, and give any great portion of the articles for and against the 
spirituality of the manifestations, up to the present time. The days 
of angry disputation are passed. The frenzy of disturbed bigotry has 
subsided. The manifestations have become so common as to be no 
longer a wonder. The quiet of a calm conviction has settled upon a 
million of spiritualists ; and new converts, although daily added, cease 
to attract attention. The foundation on which belief rests is stub- 
born facts, and no religion ever spread with such unprecedented 
rapidity, and none has ever rested on such positive foundation. But 
six years have passed by since the humble dwelling at Hydesville was 
made the centre of attraction for a continent, and now the occurrences, 
then confined to that locality, are known thronghout the civilized 
world. The good it will accomplish, the design of its appearance, and 
the form in which it will continue, are all subjects for future history. 

/
