The Book of My Life (De Vita Propria Liber) (Girolamo Cardano (Jean Stoner, trans.), 1930)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1930 Dutton edition, translated by Jean Stoner (https://archive.org/details/GirolamoCardanoTheBookOfMyLifeDeVitaPropriaLiber). Cardano's Renaissance autobiography — the gambler-physician-mathematician's startlingly candid self-portrait.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 

(De Vita Propria Liber) 


BY 

JEROME CARDAN 


TRANSLATED FROM THE LATIN BY 

JEAN STONER 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE, COPYRIGHT, 
1930, BY E. P. DUTTON & CO., INC. 
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED :: PRINTED 
IN U. S. A. 


NEW YORK 

E. P. DUTTON & CO., INC. 










































HfERO- 
































































































































































































JEROME CARDAN 


liiiiiiui 


































INTRODUCTION 

At Pavia in 1501 the celebrated Milanese physician, Giro¬ 
lamo Cardano, was born. Benvenuto Cellini, the Floren¬ 
tine, was scarcely a year his senior. In the lusty society of 
sixteenth-century Italy both men lived vigorously, Cardano 
for seventy-five years, Cellini seventy-one; both men were 
widely known to their contemporaries to whom they ren¬ 
dered notable services in the arts and sciences; both, yield¬ 
ing to the autobiographical impulse, have left us vivid, 
intimate, and valuable records of their lives and times. 
While the Florentine has become a thoroughly familiar 
figure in the world of letters, and his autobiography as 
popular as a novel, to the memory of Jerome Cardan, as the 
Milanese is known in English, time has not been so gener¬ 
ous. Yet if no considerable interest in Cardan has survived, 
at least every generation has raised some slight literary 
memorial to his name; historians of mathematics, of 
esoteric philosophy and of the autobiography as a form 
have not been able to overlook him, for to these fields he 
made significant contributions. Nor has he lacked biog¬ 
raphers, especially among English men of letters. Than 
The Life of Girolamo Cardano of Milan, Physician, by 
Henry Morley, 1854,* certainly few more engaging bio¬ 
graphical writings have been made. Morley’s study is 
based upon the facts of Cardan’s life as the physician left 
them generously scattered throughout all his books; for 
the Vita, says Morley, “is no autobiography, but rather a 

*2 vols. Chapman & Hall, London, 1854. 

[vii] 



Vlll 


INTRODUCTION 


garrulous disquisition upon himself written by an old man 
when his mind was affected by much recent sorrow.” In 
1898 W. G. Waters, long known for his appreciative studies 
of the humanists and their day, brought out a life of Car¬ 
dan, which, if not so like a richly painted canvas of six¬ 
teenth-century life in Italy as Morley’s book, leaves the 
reader with a clearer picture of Cardan the scholar and 
the product of humanism.** 

Although Cardan’s Latin autobiography itself, De Vita 
Propria Liber, was translated into Italian in 1821 1 and into 
German in 1914, 2 no one has, previous to this, ventured to 
publish an English version, notwithstanding all who are 
acquainted with it, detractors and defenders alike, join in 
acknowledging that it is an uncommon document which 
stands almost alone among records of its class. Of this fact 
Anna Robeson Burr gives us ample assurance in her ex¬ 
haustive work, The Autobiography . 3 

“But when we turn to our great self-student, Jerome 
Cardan, we find a new force at work,” Mrs. Burr writes 
in the course of her discussion of the three great archetypes 
of the autobiographical form represented by Caesar, St. 
Augustine and Cardan, “a force which was neither the 
recording-historical impulse, nor the emotional-religious 
impulse, but the impulse we now call scientific. A great 

**Jerome Cardan, A Biographical Study, London: Lawrence & 
Bullen, Ltd., 1898. 

1 V. Montovani, Vita di Girolamo Cardano, Milanese, filosofo, 
medicoe litterato celebratissimo, Milan: Sonzogno, 1821. 

2 Hermann Hefele, Des Girolamo Cardano von Mailland Eigene 
Lebensbeschreibung, Jena: Eugen Diederichs, 1914. 

3 Anna Robeson Burr, The Autobiography, Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin Co., 1909. 



INTRODUCTION 


IX 


space of time had passed between the Confessions in 430 
a. d., and the De Vita Propria Liber in 1575. The ancient 
world had crumbled away, the Renaissance had risen; 
what we call the modern era had been born. During these 
eleven hundred and forty-five years, while the religious 
confession from Augustine to Paulinus of Pella, to Suso, 
to Guibert, and so following, had been abundant; while 
the historical memoir, following Caesar and Josephus, had 
come to establish itself firmly as a literary fashion; yet 
there is absolutely no trace of scientific self-study. This 
fact helps one to realize what a wholly fresh idea came to 
the Italian physician when he set to work examining him¬ 
self ‘as if he were a new species of animal which he never 
expected to see again.’ His Boof{... . was as much repro¬ 
bated as the Confessions of Rousseau, as much read and as 
much imitated. It stands in the pages of seventeenth and 
eighteenth ’century learning, mentioned by such men as 
Huet, Burton, Sir Thomas Browne, as among the great 
intellectual influences of their lives .... Cardan is among 
the first manifestations of what we term the scientific spirit; 
he is in the forefront of that new order which was to 
change the face of the universe. His influence on later 
minds and writings is a scientific influence. A second rea¬ 
son for analyzing the De Vita Propria Liber is the char¬ 
acter of the document itself. Its information, its attitude 
and its logic have been misread, misinterpreted, misunder¬ 
stood for four hundred years. As a study it is so far in 
advance of its time, that even one hundred years ago much 
of the matter would have been incomprehensible. Here is 
a scientist deeply interested in the brain and nervous sys¬ 
tem, and their relation to the physical and intellectual life, 



X 


INTRODUCTION 


and at a date when the existence of such a relation was by 
no means clearly established. His own brain and nervous 
system present a series of the most complicated problems 
before which he sits in clinic. If his deductions seem wild 
to us, let us not forget how absurd were his premises. The 
fact remains that here, in 1575, sits the first psychologist, 
minutely examining the only case at hand, a case which, 
fortunately for us, presents the most salient, individual and 
often abnormal features. It is not only that a scientist of 
the first order is examining this brain; but the brain itself 
is of the first order, presenting those definite characteristics 
and that high quality which makes its examination im¬ 
portant. ... Of perfect originality, this book contains 
psychological data which have awaited the birth and de¬ 
velopment of a special branch of science for their 
elucidation.” 

“Not tumultuous events” but the “many noteworthy ex¬ 
periences” of his career, Cardan explains in the prologue 
of the Vita, make up the substance of his autobiography. 
The ‘psychological data’ to which Mrs. Burr refers must be 
collected from the record of these noteworthy experiences 
wherein the real and the fanciful, the natural and the 
supernatural, the simple and the profound are so casually 
intermingled that men have long been swept from one 
extreme to the other in their estimate of the author: he has 
been called a scientific genius and a child, a madman or a 
philosopher. Perhaps in the light of modern psychology 
Jerome Cardan will appear more nearly the normally 
abnormal human being, simply and frankly recording his 
sensations and reactions. 

When from the vantage ground of seventy-four years 



INTRODUCTION 


XI 


Cardan wrote the Vita in 1575, no doubt the “events” of 
his career assumed their true place and proportion in his 
life. If he seems to have devoted a disproportionate 
amount of space to the wretched conditions of his birth 
and of his boyhood in Milan, it is because he recognized 
the profound influence these early experiences had upon 
his existence. His university life at Pavia and Padua and 
the degrees he won in medicine receive scant attention in 
his record compared to his reminiscences of those blissful 
years in the village of Sacco where he secured his first 
practice. At Sacco he scribbled, gambled, had the fever, 
debated in the tavern, married—in short, did everything 
except practice his profession and earn a living; he says he 
lived “on nothing a year” but acknowledges that it was 
one of the happiest periods of his life. 

That Cardan’s forty-year struggle with poverty, disgrace 
and ill health should have left a deeper mark upon the 
man than his swift rise to fame and affluence is natural. 
We are permitted to trace every step of the difficult road 
down to that nadir of need when Cardan “ceased to be 
poor” because he “had nothing left to lose,” but we are 
scarcely aware of the swift turns of success whereby, after 
1539, he became the most popular, fashionable and 
sought-after physician in North Italy. The post of lectur¬ 
ing publicly in Mathematics under the Plat Foundation at 
Milan was followed by admission to the College of Physi¬ 
cians of Milan. Some remarkably successful cures in the 
profession he was now legally permitted to practice in that 
city brought him renown. The long chapter in the Vita 
on “Successes in My Practice” is a record of some forty or 
fifty cases which Cardan treated with marked success; in 



Xll 


INTRODUCTION 


his autobiography these take the place of the descriptions 
in Cellini’s autobiography of the many exquisite creations 
which, as artist and jeweller, the Florentine took pleasure 
in recalling,-as he had found satisfaction in their pro¬ 
duction. 

He was called to a professorship at the University of 
Pavia, while he declined an offer of patronage from Pope 
Paul III, and rejected an opportunity to become court 
physician of Denmark. Meanwhile his books were being 
published. In 1545 the great algebra—Ars Magna—which 
was the masterpiece of his mathematical writings appeared, 
containing formulae and principles which to this day bear 
his name. The solution of equations of the third degree, 
known as Cardan’s Rule, was, however, the discovery of 
Niccolo Tartaglia of Brescia whose confidence Cardan 
betrayed in the interests of science.* 

In 1552 Cardan accepted an offer to go to Scotland to 
attend John Hamilton, Archbishop of St. Andrews and 
brother of the regent. From the Scottish court he proceeded 
to England to the court of Edward VI; while in London he 
stayed at the home of Sir John Cheke who “taught Oxford 
and King Edward Greek.” Cardan’s return through 
Europe was a triumphal progress; from all sides came 
offers, invitations and gifts, and abundant recognition of 
his genius and popularity. 

If Cardan does not give us too clear a picture of the high 
hour of his success, we are not spared a single detail of the 
calamitous event which ensued, the execution of the eldest 
of his three children for wife murder. Cardan never re- 


*See chapter 44, note 1. 



INTRODUCTION 


Xlll 


covered from the grief and horror of that day. He left 
Milan forever, unable to endure his familiar surroundings, 
and accepted a chair in medicine at the University of 
Bologna. After eight wretched years there he withdrew 
to Rome where he was imprisoned for a short time, pos¬ 
sibly on a charge of impiety, although after his release he 
was received into the College of Physicians at Rome, and 
protected by the Pope. 

DeThou tells us that he died in Rome September 20, 
1576. He was buried in the church of St. Andrews, but 
later his grandson removed his body to Milan, where he 
was laid beside his father Fazio in St. Mark’s. 

Cardan’s busy brain produced enough to fill seven thou¬ 
sand pages of folio. The great corpus of his medical writ¬ 
ings occupy four huge volumes of Spon’s 1663 folio edition 
of the Opera Omnia. With the exception of a few treatises 
in the vernacular, the entire body of his literary work is in 
Latin. Many of his books, such as De Subtilitate, which 
was something of a sixteenth-century outline-of-science, ran 
through six or seven editions. De Vita Propria Liber was 
first given to the press in Paris in 1643, when Gabriel Naude 
edited the book with a prefatory indicium which has long 
influenced every estimate and every picture posterity has 
held of the Milanese, for he implies that Cardan was a 
moral monster in general, and in particular superstition 
ridden and careless of the truth. In 1654 a second edition 
of the Vita was published at Amsterdam, and in Spon’s 
great ten tome edition of Cardan’s Opera Omnia, Lyons, 
1663, the Vita appeared for the last time in Latin. This 
translation is based on the text of the first and third edi¬ 
tions. Both abound in errors, imperfections and omissions 



XIV 


INTRODUCTION 


which have done their share to augment the labor of resur¬ 
recting Messer Girolamo Cardano from the dim under¬ 
world of sixteenth-century Latinity into the world of 
twentieth-century English. 



CHAPTER 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

Introduction .vii 

Prologue .xvii 

I. Native Land and Forebears . i 

II. My Nativity. 4 

III. Certain Traits of My Parents. 7 

IV. A Brief Narrative of My Life from the Be¬ 

ginning to the Present Day—Oct. 1575 . 9 

V. Stature and Appearance.19 

VI. Concerning My Health.21 

VII. Sports and Exercises.26 

VIII. Manner of Life.28 

IX. A Meditation on the Perpetuation of My 

Name.32 

X. Concerning My Course of Life.36 

XI. Prudence.42 

XII. Debating and Lecturing.44 

XIII. Customs, Vices, and Errors.49 

XIV. Virtues and Constancy.56 

XV. Concerning My Friends and Patrons ... 61 

XVI. Concerning My Enemies and Rivals ... 66 

XVII. Calumny, Defamations, and Treachery of My 

Unjust Accusers.67 

XVIII. Those Things in Which I Take Pleasure . . 72 

XIX. Gambling and Dicing.73 

XX. Dress.75 

XXI. My Manner of Walking and of Thinking . . 77 

XXII. Religion and Piety.78 

XXIII. My Own Particular Rules of Conduct 81 

XXIV. My Dwelling Places.85 

XXV. Poverty and Losses in My Patrimony ... 87 

XXVI. Marriage and Children.89 

XXVII. The Disasters of My Sons.92 

[XV] 






















XVI 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

XXVIII. Processes at Law.96 

XXIX. Journeys.97 

XXX. Perils, Accidents, and Manifold, Diverse and 

Persistent Treacheries.102 

XXXI. Happiness.119 

XXXII. Honors Conferred.124 

XXXIII. Dishonors. What Place to Dreams? The 

Swallow in My Coat-of-Arms . ... 133 

XXXIV. My Teachers ... .142 

XXXV. Wards and Students.143 

XXXVI. My Will.145 

XXXVII. Certain Natural Eccentricities and Marvels, 

Among Which, Dreams.147 

XXXVIII. Five Unique Characteristics by Which I Am 

Helped.163 

XXXIX. Erudition, or the Appearance of It . . . 168 

XL. Successes in My Practice.173 

XLI. Rare Circumstances of My Life.189 

The Avenging of My Son.189 

XLII. Power of Foreknowledge in My Art, and in 

Other Matters.199 

XLIII. Things Absolutely Supernatural .... 204 

XLIV. Things of Worth Which I Have Achieved in 

Various Studies.215 

XLV. Books I Have Written.220 

XLVI. Concerning My Own Existence.238 

XLVII. Guardian Angels.240 

XLVIII. Testimony of Illustrious Men Concerning Me 248 

XLIX. My Opinion Concerning Worldly Things . . 256 

L. Familiar Sayings.263 

LI. Things in Which I Feel I Have Failed . . 277 

LII. Change from Age to Age.280 

LIII. Quality of Conversation.285 

LIV. And This Is the Epilogue.290 

Notes.293 

Bibliography.327 

























PROLOGUE 


This Book of My Life I am undertaking to write after 
the example of Antoninus the Philosopher, 1 acclaimed 
the wisest and best of men, knowing well that no accom¬ 
plishment of mortal man is perfect, much less safe from 
calumny; yet aware that none, of all ends which man may 
attain, seems more pleasing, none more worthy than recog¬ 
nition of the truth. 

No word, I am ready to affirm, has been added to give 
savor of vainglory, or for the sake of mere embellishment; 
rather, as far as possible, mere experiences were collected, 
events of which my pupils, especially Ercole Visconte, 
Paulo Eufomia, and Rodolpho Selvatico 2 had some knowl¬ 
edge, or in which they took part. These brief cross-sections 
of my history were in turn written down by me in narra¬ 
tive form to become this, my book. 

Gaspare Cardano, a physician by profession, and one of 
my kinsmen and pupils, had attempted this very thing a 
few years ago, but, being overtaken by death, was unable 
to complete his work. Also a Jew, 3 a man without the 
justification of having been so much as a magistrate, felt 
at liberty to carry out the same idea, and did so without 
criticism. Accordingly, even if nothing of great moment 
has befallen me, I feel that I too have certainly had many 
noteworthy experiences. Nor has it escaped me that Galen 4 
endeavored to give us an account of his life. Owing to the 
fact that to himself it seemed more appropriate to reveal 
one incident and another here and there throughout his 

[ xvii ] 



XV111 


PROLOGUE 


works, it has happened that because of the indifference of 
students, no classic writer has even attempted to put it in 
order. My autobiography, however, is without any artifice; 
nor is it intended to instruct anyone; but, being merely a 
story, recounts my life, not tumultuous events. Like the 
lives of Sulla, of Caius Caesar, and even of Augustus, who, 
there is no doubt, wrote accounts of their careers and deeds, 
urged by the examples of the ancients, so, in a manner by 
no means new or originating with myself, do I set forth 
my account. 



THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 

(DE VITA PROPRIA LIBER) 



THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 

CHAPTER ONE 
Native Land and Forebears 

My native country is the Duchy of Milan; the town in 
which the family of the Cardani had its origins is twenty- 
four miles distant from the city. From Gallarate it is only 
seven miles. 

My father Fazio was a jurisconsult. My grandfather was 
Antonio, my great-grandfather another Fazio, my great- 
great-grandfather, Aldo. The first Fazio, my great-grand¬ 
father, had three sons: Giovanni, Aldo II and Antonio who 
became my grandfather. The sons of Antonio were Got- 
tardo, Paolo, a jurisconsult and prelate, Fazio, my father, 
and an illegitimate son named Paolo. Now there are alive, 
from the same family, almost thirty kinsmen. Whether, 
however, the family of the Cardani is a line in itself, or 
whether, as certain people think, it is a branch of the 
Castiglioni, surely it has been both noble and ancient. 
From the year 1189 a Milone Cardano was prefect of Milan 
for seven years and eight months by the ecclesiastical as 
well as the civil calendar. And he presided not only at 
civil suits, but even, like other Chiefs of State, at criminal 
trials; he had charge, also, of cases in other cities which 
were under Milanese jurisdiction; and cases throughout the 
whole region. Among these cities was Como. Milone had 
secured this high post of honor through the Archbishop 

[1] 



2 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


Crivelli when the latter had been hurriedly advanced to 
the Pontificate as Pope Urban III. 1 

There are those who would like to have it that Francesco 
Cardano, leader of the military troop of Matteo Visconti, 
belongs to our branch of the family. If we are a branch of 
the Castiglioni, however, we are still more illustrious be¬ 
cause of Pope Celestino IV 2 who sprang from this same 
stock. 

All our forebears have, moreover, been longevous. The 
sons of the first Fazio lived ninety-four, eighty-eight and 
eighty-six years. The two sons of Giovanni, my great- 
uncle, were Antonio, who lived eighty-eight years, and 
Angiolo who lived ninety-six years. As a boy I saw this 
decrepit old man. Giacomo, an only son of the second 
Aldo, passed seventy-two years. Gottardo, my paternal 
uncle, lived eighty-four years, and him also I saw. My 
father lived eighty years. That cousin Angiolo, the one 
who reached his ninety-sixth year, begot sons—infants 
feeble as if with their father’s senility—even when he him¬ 
self was in his eightieth year, and after his eightieth year he 
recovered his sight. The eldest of these sons has lived to be 
seventy, and I hear that some of his children became giants; 
indeed, I saw some of them long ago. 

There were, besides, from the family of the Micheri (my 
mother Chiara’s family), my grandfather Giacomo, who 
lived seventy-five years and his brother Angiolo who was 
in his eighty-fifth year when I was a little boy. He him¬ 
self told me so. 

Learning and a singular integrity of life were the com¬ 
mon characteristics of my father, my paternal uncle, and 
my mother’s father, while the last named and my own 



/ 


NATIVE LAND AND FOREBEARS 


3 


father were men gifted with great old age and exceptional 
skill in mathematics. This same grandfather was in prison 
at a slightly different age from my own when I was im¬ 
prisoned, although each of us was in his seventieth year. 

Five other branches of the family of the Cardani existed, 
coming from our Aldian stock: that of Antonio, dating 
from 1388; the Gasparini, from 1409; that of Rainieri, 1391; 
and Enrico’s, the oldest, dating from 1300, whose descend¬ 
ants, Berto and Giovanni Fazietto are about of equal age. 
There was also Guglielmo—it is not certain just when he 
flourished—and his sons, Zolo, Martino, and Giovanni, who 
lived at Gallarate. 



CHAPTER TWO 


My Nativity 

Although various abortive medicines—as I have heard— 
were tried in vain, I was normally born on the 24th day 
of September in the year 1500, when the first hour of the 
night was more than half run, but less than two-thirds. 1 

The most significant positions of the horoscope were as 
I have indicated in the eighth nativity of the supplement 
to the four sections of my Commentaries on Ptolemy. 2 I 
have taken into consideration, therefore, that both lumi¬ 
naries were falling in the angles, and neither was applying 
to the ascendant, inasmuch as they were posited in the 
sixth and twelfth houses. They might have been in the 
eighth house, subject to the same condition, for the latter 
house descends and is not an angular house; a planet there¬ 
in could rather be said to be falling from the angle. And 
although the malefics 3 were not within the angles, never¬ 
theless Mars was casting an evil influence on each luminary 
because of the incompatibility of their positions, and its 
aspect was square to the moon. 

Therefore I could easily have been a monster, except for 
the fact that the place of the preceding conjunction had 
been 29° in Virgo, over which Mercury is the ruler. 4 And 
neither this planet nor the position of the moon or of the 
ascendant is the same, nor does it apply to the second 
decanate of Virgo; consequently I ought to have been a 
monster, and indeed was so near it that I came forth 
literally torn from my mother’s womb. 

[ 4 ] 



MY NATIVITY 


5 


So I was born, or rather taken by violent means from 
my mother; I was almost dead. My hair was black and 
curly. I was revived in a bath of warm wine which might 
have been fatal to any other child. My mother had been 
in labor for three entire days, and yet I survived. 

Besides, to return to the horoscope, since the sun, both 
malefics, and Venus and Mercury were in the human signs, 
I did not deviate from the human form. Since Jupiter was 
in the ascendant and Venus ruled the horoscope, I was not 
maimed, save in the genitals, so that from my twenty-first 
to my thirty-first year I was unable to lie with women, and 
many a time I lamented my fate, envying every other man 
his own good fortune. Although Venus was, as I have 
said, ruler of the whole nativity, and Jupiter in the ascend¬ 
ant, unfortunate indeed was my destiny; I was endowed 
with a stuttering tongue and a disposition midway between 
the cold and the harpocratic—using Ptolemy’s classifica¬ 
tion—that is to say, gifted with a kind of intense and in¬ 
stinctive desire to prophesy. In this sort of thing—it is 
called prescience, to use a better expression—as well as in 
other methods of divining the future, I have been clearly 
successful at times. 

Because Venus and Mercury were beneath the rays of the 
sun, and to this luminary owing their combined strength, I 
could, accordingly, have escaped some of the consequences 
of entering my existence with a genesis—as Ptolemy calls 
it—so wretched and luckless, had the sun itself not been 
directly in its fall, cadent in the sixth house and removed 
from its own exaltation. 5 I was gifted, therefore, with a 
certain cunning only, and a mind by no means at liberty; 



6 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


my every judgment is, in truth, either too harsh or too 
forbidding. 

In a word, I shall say that I am a man bereft of bodily 
strength, with few friends, small means, many enemies—a 
very large part of whom I recognize neither by name nor 
by face—a man without ordinary human wisdom, inclined 
to be faulty of memory, though rather better in the matter 
of foreseeing events. Yet withal, my condition in life, to 
be deemed lowly if one considers my family and my bet¬ 
ters, is, for some unknown reason, regarded as honorable 
and worthy of emulation among these same. 

On my birthday Augustus was born long ago; 6 through¬ 
out the whole Roman Empire a new regime began. On 
my birthday also, Ferdinand, the most gracious King of 
Spain, and Isabel, his wife, first sent out to sea the fleet 
which discovered the whole occidental world. 7 



CHAPTER THREE 


Certain Traits of My Parents 

My father went dressed in a purple cloak, a garment 
which was unusual in our community; he was never with¬ 
out a small black skullcap. When he talked he was wont 
to stammer. He was a man devoted to various pursuits. 
His complexion was ruddy, and he had whitish eyes with 
which he could see at night; up to the very last day of his 
life he had no need to use glasses. This admonition was 
forever upon his lips: “Let every spirit praise the Lord, who 
is the source of all virtue.” Because of a wound received on 
the head in his youth, some pieces of bone had been re¬ 
moved, and he consequently could not remain long with¬ 
out his cap. From his fifty-fifth year on he lacked all his 
teeth. He was well acquainted with the works of Euclid; 
indeed, his shoulders were rounded from much study. My 
eldest son was much like my father in features, eyes, shoul¬ 
ders, and manner of walking; but the lad was quicker with 
his tongue, perhaps on account of his age. 

The only very intimate friend of my father’s, in spite of 
a decidedly different calling, was Galeazzo Rosso, this last 
being the family name. He died before my father. There 
was also the Senator Gianangelo Selvatico, a student and 
ward of my father’s. 

The former was a smith who became acquainted with 
my father through a certain community of habits and 

[ 7 ] 



8 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


similar intellectual pursuits. He it was who had discovered 
the screw of Archimedes before the works of Archimedes 
had been published. He invented a method of so temper¬ 
ing swords that they could be bent like lead, and yet would 
almost cut iron as if it were wood. What is more, he 
wrought steel breastplates which resisted the shots of the 
firearms which the regimental soldiers carried; one plate 
alone sufficed to withstand a blow of five times ordinary 
force, and suffered scarcely a dent. I myself was frequently 
an onlooker at this experiment when a young man. 

My mother 1 was easily provoked; she was quick of 
memory and wit, and a fat, devout little woman. To be 
hasty-tempered was a trait common to both parents; they 
were not consistent, even in love toward their child. Yet 
they were indulgent, to the extent that my father permitted 
me, indeed bade me, not to arise from my bed until after 
eight o’clock, a practice which greatly benefited my life 
and health. My father seemed better—if I dare say as 
much—and more loving than my mother. 


CHAPTER FOUR 


A Brief Narrative of My Life from the Beginning to 

the Present Day—That Is, the End of October, 1575 

If Suetonius by any chance could have noticed the 
method of this chapter, he might have added something to 
the advantage of his readers ; 1 for there is nothing, as the 
wise men say, which may not in some manner be unified. 

Having been born at Pavia, I lost, in the very first month 
of my life, my wet-nurse on the day when she fell ill, so 
they tell me, of the plague ; 2 and my mother returned to 
me. Five carbuncles came out on my face in the form of 
a cross, and there was one on the end of my nose; in these 
same spots as many swellings, commonly called variolas, 
appeared again after three years. 

When my second month was not yet run, Isidoro dei 
Resti, of Pavia, took me naked from a warm vinegar bath 
and gave me over to a wet-nurse. The latter carried me to 
Moirago, a village seven miles away from Milan in direct 
line from our town of Pavia, through the town of Binasco. 
There my body wasted, while the belly grew hard and 
swollen. When the reason was known—that my nurse was 
pregnant—I was transferred to a better nurse, who suckled 
me until I was three. 

In my fourth year I was taken to Milan. Here, although 
I received kindly treatment (except on occasions when I 
was unjustly whipped by both my father and my mother) 
at my mother’s hands and from my mother’s sister, my 

[ 9 ] 



10 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


Aunt Margherita—a woman, I think, without any real 
animosity—I was many times ill to the very verge of death. 
At length when I was just seven years old—my father and 
my mother were not living together then—and really justly 
deserved an occasional whipping, they decided to refrain 
from this punishment. 

My bad luck had by no means deserted me, but had sim¬ 
ply changed my misfortunes without removing them. 
Having rented a house, my father took me, my mother, 
and my aunt home with him; and, thereupon I was ordered 
to accompany him daily in spite of my tender age and frail 
little body; I was pushed from a very tranquil existence 
into a round of tiring and constant exertions. Consequently 
at the beginning of my eighth year I fell ill of a dysentery 
and fever. An epidemic of this disease, if not a very plague 
of it, was then abroad in our city; and I had, besides, eaten 
a quantity of green grapes. Barnabo Croce and Angelo 
Gira were summoned. Before I was pronounced out of 
danger both my parents and my aunt had wept over me as 
if I were actually dead. Thereupon my father, who was a 
man devout at heart, wished rather to seek the divine help 
of Saint Jerome, with a vow commending my welfare to 
him, than to call upon the demon which he openly con¬ 
fessed attended him as a familiar spirit , 3 a relationship the 
significance of which I steadfastly refrained from investi¬ 
gating. I was convalescing when the French, after the 
Venetians had been defeated in the region of the Adda, 
were celebrating a triumph , 4 which I was allowed to view 
from my window. On my recovery the duty of accom¬ 
panying my father and the constant tasks were given up. 

But the wrath of Juno was not yet satiated. I was not 



A BRIEF NARRATIVE OF MY LIFE 


II 


entirely well from my sickness when I fell down the stairs 
with a hammer while we were living in the Via dei Maini. 
The hammer struck the upper part of my forehead on the 
left side, and I was wounded with somewhat serious results 
to the skull; the scar I have to this very day, and shall have 
always. I was just getting over this, and was sitting in the 
doorway of my home, when a stone, as wide and as long as 
a nut, but thin like a slice of bark, came hurtling down 
from the top of a high house adjoining our own, wounding 
me again on the left side where my hair was quite thick. 

When I was about ten years old, my father moved from 
that apparently accursed house, and took another away 
from the immediate neighborhood but in the same street. 
There I remained three years. My luck had not yet 
changed, for again my father, stubbornly insistent, had me 
accompany him as his page. I shall not say that he acted 
with severity; this seemed to have been done rather be¬ 
cause it was divinely intended, than because of any fault of 
my father, as the reader may believe from events which 
ensued. Besides, my mother and my aunt heartily agreed 
that he should use me in this way. However, he dealt with 
me far more leniently than formerly; for during this 
period, he had with him two nephews, one after the other, 
because of whose services mine became so much lighter 
that it was not always necessary to accompany him, and 
the work was not so irksome when I did. Thereafter I was 
always his page. In the meantime we again moved, and at 
length, toward the end of my sixteenth year, we took up 
residence near the bake-shop of Bossi in the house of 
Alessandro Cardano. 

My father had two nephews, sons of his sister: one, 



12 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


Evangelista, belonging to the order of the Franciscans, and 
almost seventy years old; the other Ottone Cantoni, a col¬ 
lector of revenue and a rich man. The latter, before dying, 
had wished me to be the heir of his entire estate, but my 
father forbade it, saying the money was ill-gotten; and so 
the property was distributed at the discretion of the brother 
who survived him. 

At the end of my nineteenth year I went to the academy 
at Pavia, 8 in the company of Gian Ambrogio Targa; there 
I remained the following year also, but without a com¬ 
panion. When I was twenty-one I returned to Pavia with 
the same friend. In this year I debated in public, and gave 
instruction in Euclid at the Gymnasium. A few days after 
this I lectured on dialectics, and also in a course in elemen¬ 
tary philosophy: first for Fra Romolo Servita, and later in 
several classes for a certain physician named Pandolfo. 

During my twenty-second year I remained at home on 
account of the fighting which brought everything else to a 
standstill in our district. But shortly after the beginning 
of 1524 I went to Padua. 6 Luckily, towards the end of the 
year, that is, in the month of August, I went to Milan with 
Gianangelo Corio, where I found my father in the clutches 
of an acute sickness. He, anxious for my welfare rather 
than his own, ordered me to return to Padua, because he 
knew that I had received the Venetian degree in Arts, 7 the 
Baccalaureate, as they say. When I had returned, I re¬ 
ceived letters saying that my father had died, after he had 
abstained from food for nine successive days. He had 
begun to fast on August 20th, a Saturday, and died on 
the 28th. 

Toward the end of my 24th year I was made Rector of 



A BRIEF NARRATIVE OF MY LIFE 


13 


the College. 8 At the end of the following year, I was 
granted the degree of Doctor of Medicine. The first honor 
I secured by a majority of one, the ballots having twice been 
cast. As a candidate for the second I lost twice, since forty- 
seven votes were cast against me. The third trial was the 
last; I came out first place, since nine ballots were cast 
against me, exactly as many as had been for me in the 
previous elections, leaving forty-seven votes in my favor. 

I am not blind to the insignificance of these facts. I have 
simply put them down in the order in which they hap¬ 
pened, so that they may give satisfaction to me as I read 
them. I do not record such personal items for others’ eyes. 
At the same time, if there chance to be some who will even 
deign to read, may these note that the beginning and out¬ 
come of important events are not always evident; whether 
because they are such as commonly happen to others rather 
than ourselves, or to us when we are not aware of their 
occurrence. 

After my father’s death, when my term of office had been 
completed, I settled, early in my twenty-sixth year, in the 
town of Sacco, a village ten miles from Padua and twenty- 
five from Venice. This I did, acting upon the advice and 
suggestion of Francisco Buonafede, a physician of Padua. 
He was friendly to me out of the very abundance of his 
exceptional high character; for he had nothing to gain 
from his kindness to me, who had not even been attending 
his public lectures. 

I remained in Sacco while my country was being devas¬ 
tated by all manner of evils. A terrible plague visited it in 
1524, and twice the governorship changed hands. In 1526 
and in 1527 the crops were almost fatally scanty, so that 



14 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


scarcely with money could a signed requisition for grain 
be redeemed. The taxes were insupportable. In 1528 we 
were again besieged by disease and pestilence, which were 
fairly innoxious, as the country was already ravaged far 
and wide. 

I returned in 1529 to my native city, after the tumult of 
war had somewhat abated. There I was rejected by the 
College of Physicians; 9 nor was I able to make any head¬ 
way in my lawsuit with the Counts Barbiani. But, as my 
mother was bitterly depressed, I returned to my own little 
town of Sacco, scarcely in such good health as I had left it. 
For, what with sickness, hard work, anxieties, and pres¬ 
ently, added to these, a cough, loss of flesh, and empyema 
accompanied by loathsome discharges, I reached the point 
whence one scarcely dares hope to return to sound health. 
At length I was freed from my disorder under a vow to the 
Blessed Virgin, and toward the end of my thirty-first year 
I married Lucia Bandarini of Sacco. 

Four things, moreover, have I observed occurring to this 
very day: that enterprises I have undertaken before full 
moon have turned out successfully, although my act was 
not always premeditated; again, about the time when other 
men are wont to abandon hope of happiness I have entered 
into it; furthermore, as I have elsewhere said, Fortune, 
often on the very verge of desertion, has stood by me; 
finally, up to my sixtieth year nearly all my journeys were 
undertaken in the month of February. 

My wife, after a second miscarriage, bore me two sons, 
and, between them, a daughter. 

In the following year, toward the end of April, I moved 
to Gallarate where I lived nineteen months, during which 



A BRIEF NARRATIVE OF MY LIFE 


15 


time I was restored to good health. And I ceased to be 
poor because I had nothing left. At Milan, finally, through 
the kindness of the prefects of the great Xenodochium, 10 
and also by the aid of Filippo Archinto, vir illustris, and at 
that time an orator of merit, I began to lecture publicly in 
mathematics. That was when I was about thirty-four years 
old. Two years later I was invited to teach medicine at 
Pavia, an offer which I did not accept, for there seemed 
little hope of receiving pay for the work. 

In the year 1536 I went to Piacenza, summoned to the 
Pope by letters from the Prelate Archinto, 11 who had not 
yet been made priest; my journey bore no fruit. In addi¬ 
tion, the Viceroy of the French was urgently soliciting 
favor in my behalf at the instance, as I later heard, of the 
nobleman Louis Birague, Commander of the infantry of 
the French King in Italy. Since Viceroy Brissac was a 
man singular for his devotion to gallantry and to letters, he 
offered many inducements; but nothing came of it. 12 

The following year, 1537 ,1 again made application to the 
College of Physicians in Milan, and again was flatly re¬ 
jected. In 1539, however, I was, contrary to every expecta¬ 
tion, received; many had withdrawn their objections, and 
two excellent friends, Sfrondrato and Francesco della 
Croce 13 had come to my aid. 

Accordingly, from the year 1543 I lectured on Medicine 
in Milan; and the year after—the year in which my house 
collapsed—I lectured in Pavia, although the lectures were 
practically unattended. Since the stipends were not forth¬ 
coming, I discontinued these lectures in 1544. I remained 
at Milan with my eldest son who was at that time com- 



l6 THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 

pleting his eleventh year; my daughter was in her ninth 
year, and Aldo was a little two-year old. 

About that time, Cardinal Morone 14 —whom I name for 
honor’s sake—in the summer of 1546, made offers that 
could not reasonably be spurned. But I, who, as I have 
said, am gifted with foresight, said to myself, “The high 
pontiff 15 is in his dotage; he is practically a crumbling wall. 
Why should I leave certainties for uncertainties?” To be 
sure, I was not cognizant at that time of the high character 
of Morone, nor of the glories of the Farnesi. I had already 
from 1542 become involved in friendship with the Prince 
d’Iston, 16 who acted as my patron, and who would have 
given much more than I was willing to receive. But after 
this summer, 1546,1 returned to my task of lecturing. 

The next year through the instance of Andreas Vesalius, 17 
a man of highest standing, and my friend, an offer of 800 
gold crowns yearly was made to me by the King of Den¬ 
mark. This I was not eager to receive—although he even 
offered living expenses—not only on account of the severity 
of the climate in that region, but also because the Danes 
are given to another way of worship. I felt that perhaps I 
might not be very welcome there, or else might be forced 
to abandon the doctrines of my country and my forebears. 

In my fiftieth year, because the stipend from the Univer¬ 
sity of Pavia was not paid, I remained at Milan. During 
the month of February 1552, an occasion for going to Scot¬ 
land was offered me. 18 I received before departing 500 
gold crowns of France; and upon my return 1200. I was 
gone 311 days; and had I wished to remain in Scotland, I 
would have received a much larger sum. 

From January 1st, 1553 to October 1st, 1559, I continued 



A BRIEF NARRATIVE OF MY LIFE 17 

to be engaged at Milan. During this period I rejected some 
even more generous inducements, one of these being from 
the French king. But I feared to offend the house of the 
Caesars, because the latter were at war with the French. 19 
Shortly after my return to Milan, a second offer came—this 
from the Duke of Mantua, his uncle, Don Ferrando, being 
the intermediary. The Queen of Scotland 20 also sought me 
with promises munificent, but too remote for certainty. I 
had treated her half-brother, the state of whose health 
stood in some hope of betterment. After I had effected a 
cure upon him she had been influenced by my practice, and 
by esteem. 

Shortly after my return to Pavia in the year 1559, the oc¬ 
casion of my son’s death came about. 21 Thereafter I en¬ 
dured my very existence, until 1562, when, summoned to 
Bologna, 22 I went there and was in uninterrupted employ¬ 
ment until the year 1570. On the 6th of October of that 
year I was imprisoned. 23 There, beyond the fact that I had 
lost my liberty, I was civilly treated. On December 22, 
1570, at the same hour and on the same day in which I had 
been imprisoned—I think it was a Friday—about evenfall 
I returned to my home. But this place was as yet a prison 
to me. The first term of incarceration was seventy-seven* 
days, which, together with the eighty-six days in my own 
home, made in all 162 days. 

I stayed on in Bologna during 1571 until the end of my 
seventieth year, at the close of the month of September. 
Thence I came to Rome on the day of the celebrated victory 
against the Turks, October 7, 1571. 24 

*An error in computation; there are seventy-six days between 
dates. 



i8 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


At the present, to be exact, four years have passed since 
I entered the city, and five since my incarceration. I have 
passed my days as a private citizen, except for my reception 
by the College of Rome, on the 13th of September. The 
Pope is my patron in the matter of pension. 25 



CHAPTER FIVE 


Stature and Appearance 

I am a man of medium height; my feet are short, wide 
near the toes, and rather too high at the heels, so that I can 
scarcely find well-fitting shoes; it is usually necessary to 
have them made to order. My chest is somewhat narrow 
and my arms slender. The thickly fashioned right hand 
has dangling fingers, so that chiromantists have declared 
me a rustic; it embarrasses them to know the truth. The 
line of life upon my palm is short, while the line called 
Saturn’s is extended and deep. My left hand, on the con¬ 
trary, is truly beautiful with long, tapering, well-formed 
fingers and shining nails. 

A neck a little long and inclined to be thin, cleft chin, 
full pendulous lower lip, and eyes that are very small and 
apparently half-closed; unless I am gazing at something... 
such are my features. 1 Over the eyebrow of my left eye is 
a blotch or wart, like a small lentil, which can scarcely be 
noticed. The wide forehead is bald at the sides where it 
joins the temples. My hair and beard were blonde; I am 
wont to go rather closely clipped. The beard, like my chin, 
is divided, and the part of it beneath my chin always was 
thick and long, seeming to have a more abundant growth 
thereunder. Old age has wrought changes in this beard 
of mine, but not much in my hair. 

A rather too shrill voice draws upon me the censure of 
those who pretend to be my friends, for my tone is harsh 

[i9] 



20 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


and high; yet when I am lecturing it cannot be heard at 
any distance. I am not inclined to speak in the least 
suavely, and I speak too often. 

I have a fixed gaze as if in meditation. My complexion 
varies, turning from white to red. An oval face, not too 
well filled out, the head shaped off narrowly behind and 
delicately rounded, complete a picture so truly common¬ 
place that several painters who have come from afar to 
make my portrait 1 have found no feature by which they 
could so characterize me, that I might be distinguished. 
Upon the lower part of my throat is a swelling like a hard 
ball, not at all conspicuous, and coming to me as an in¬ 
heritance from my mother. 



CHAPTER SIX 


Concerning My Health 

My bodily state was infirm in many respects: by nature; 
as the result of several cases of disease; and in the symp¬ 
toms of weakness which displayed themselves. 

My head is afflicted with congenital discharges coming at 
times from the stomach, at times from the chest, to such 
an extent that even when I consider myself in the best of 
health, I suffer with a cough and hoarseness. When this 
discharge is from the stomach, it is apt to bring on a dysen¬ 
tery and a distaste for food. More than once I believed I 
had had a touch of poison, but I shortly and unexpectedly 
recovered. 

Another trouble was a catarrh or rheum of the teeth, 
through the effects of which I began to lose my teeth, sev¬ 
eral at a time, from the year 1563 on. Before that I had lost 
but one or two. Now I have fourteen good teeth and one 
which is rather weak; but it will last a long time, I think, 
for it still does its share. 

Indigestion, moreover, and a stomach not any too 
strong were my lot. From my seventy-second year, when¬ 
ever I had eaten something more than usual, or had drunk 
too much, or had eaten between meals, or eaten anything 
not especially wholesome, I began to feel ill. I have set 
forth a remedy for the foregoing in the second book of my 
treatise On Guarding the Health . 

In my youth I was troubled with congenital palpitation 

[21] 



22 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


of the heart, of which I was absolutely cured by medical 
skill. I had hemorrhoids, also, and the gout, from which 
I was so nearly freed that I was more frequently in the 
habit of trying to call it back when it was not present, than 
of getting rid of it when I had it. 

I ignored a rupture, another weakness, in its early stages; 
but later, from my sixty-second year on, I greatly regretted 
that I had not taken care of it, especially since I knew it to 
be an inheritance from my father. In the case of this rup¬ 
ture, something worthy of note occurred: the hernia had 
started from either side, and although it was neglected on 
the left side, was eventually healed completely in that part 
by natural processes. The right side, more carefully treated 
with ligatures and other attentions, grew worse. A cuta¬ 
neous itching annoyed me constantly, now in this part, 
now in that. 

In 1536 I was overtaken with—it scarcely seems credible 
—an extraordinary discharge of urine; and although for 
nearly forty years I have been afflicted with this same trou¬ 
ble, giving from sixty to one hundred ounces in a single 
day, I live well. Neither do I lose weight—that I wear the 
same rings is evidence of this; nor do I thirst inordinately. 
Many others, seized that same year by a similar disease, and 
who did not seek a remedy, held out much longer than 
those who sought medical aid. 

The tenth of these infirmities is an annual period of 
sleeplessness lasting about eight days. These spells come in 
the spring, in the summer, in the autumn, and in the win¬ 
ter; so that almost a whole month, rarely less, is spent 
yearly, and sometimes two. This I am wont to cure by 
abstaining from certain kinds of food, especially heavy 



CONCERNING MY HEALTH 


23 


food, but I do not diminish the quantity. This insomnia 
has never missed a year. 

Several actual cases of sickness overtook me during my 
life. In the second month of my life I had the plague. 
The next serious illness occurred in or about my eighteenth 
year; 1 1 do not recall the exact date, other than that it hap¬ 
pened in the month of August. I went almost three days 
without food, and spent the time wandering about the out¬ 
skirts of the town, and through the gardens. When I re¬ 
turned home at nightfall, I pretended that I had dined at 
the home of my father’s friend Agostino Lanizario. How 
much water I drank in those three whole days I cannot 
truthfully say. On the last day, because I was not able to 
sleep, my heart palpitated wildly and the fever raged. I 
seemed to be on the bed of Asclepiades 2 in which I was 
incessantly swung upward and downward until I thought 
I should perish in the night. When at length I slept, a 
carbuncle, which covered the upper false rib of my right 
side, broke, and from it, at first, there was a scanty black 
discharge. Luckily, owing to a dose of my father’s pre¬ 
scription which I swallowed four times a day, such a copi¬ 
ous sweat broke out upon me that it drenched the bed and 
dripped down from the boards to the floor. 

In my twenty-seventh year I was taken with the tertian 
fever. On the fourth day I was delirious, and on the 
seventh as well; on that day, also, I began to recover. Gout 
attacked me when I was at Pavia in my forty-fourth year, 
and when I was fifty-five I was troubled with daily fevers 
for forty days, at the crisis of which I was relieved of one 
hundred and twenty ounces of urine on October 13, 1555. 



24 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


In 1559, the year I returned to Pavia, I was taken with 
colic pains for two days. 

The symptoms of weakness which attended my state of 
health were varied. To begin with, from my seventh year 
until I was almost twelve, I used to rise at night and cry 
out vaguely, and if my mother and my aunt, between 
whom I used to sleep, had not held me I often should have 
plunged out of bed. Likewise, my heart was wont to throb 
violently, but calmed down soon under the pressure of my 
hand. To this was due the peculiarity of my breathing. 
Until I was eighteen, if I went out in the wind, particularly 
a cold wind, I was not able to breathe; but if I held my 
breath as soon as I became aware of the difficulty, normal 
respiration was quickly restored. During the same period, 
from the hour of retirement until midnight I was never 
warm from my knees down. This led my mother, and 
others as well, to say that I would not live very long. On 
some nights, however, when I had warmed up, I became 
entirely drenched with a sweat so abundant and hot that 
those who were told of it could scarcely believe it. 

When I was twenty-seven, I took double tertian fever, 
which broke on the seventh day. Later, I had daily fever 
for forty days when I was fifty-four years old. 3 

In November of my fifty-sixth year, from drinking a 
mild draught of squill wine, I was taken with dysuria, very 
acute in form. First I fasted thirty-four hours; later, twenty 
more. I took some drops of pine gum and cured myself. 

It was my custom—and a habit which amazed many— 
when I had no other excuse for a malady, to seek one, as 
I have said, from my gout. And for this reason I fre¬ 
quently put myself in the way of conditions likely to in¬ 
duce a certain distress—excepting only that I shunned 



CONCERNING MY HEALTH 


25 


insomnia as much as I could—because I considered that 
pleasure consisted in relief following severe pain. 4 If, there¬ 
fore, I brought on pain, it could easily be allayed. I have 
discovered, by experience, that I cannot be long without 
bodily pain, for if once that circumstance arises, a certain 
mental anguish overcomes me, so grievous that nothing 
could be more distressing. Bodily pain, or the cause of 
bodily distress—in which there is no disgrace—is but a 
minor evil. Accordingly I have hit upon a plan of biting 
my lips, of twisting my fingers, of pinching the skin of the 
tender muscles of my left arm until the tears come. Under 
the protection of this self-chastisement I live without dis¬ 
gracing myself. 

I am by nature afraid of high places, even though they 
are extensive; also, of places where there is any report of 
mad dogs having been seen. 

At times I have been tormented by a tragic passion so 
heroic 5 that I planned to commit suicide. I suspect that 
this has happened to others also, although they do not refer 
to it in their books. 

Finally, in my boyhood, I was afflicted for about two 
years with indications of cancer. There appeared, by 
chance, a start upon the left nipple. The swelling was red, 
dark, hard, and eating. Some swollen veins seemed to re¬ 
move this toward my young manhood, and in that period 
a palpitation of the heart—before mentioned—succeeded 
the varices. From this cancerous growth came blood- 
blisters, full of blood, and an itching and foulness of the 
skin; and subsequently I was healed, contrary to all hope 
of any relief, by a natural sloughing of the mass of diseased 
skin, although I had removed some of the affections by 
means of medication. 



CHAPTER SEVEN 


Sports and Exercises 

At a very early period in my life, I began to apply my¬ 
self seriously to the practice of swordsmanship of every 
class, until, by persistent training, I had acquired some 
standing even among the most daring. I used to exercise 
myself with the sword alone, or with sword and shields of 
various sizes and shapes—oblong, round, large or small; 
and I learned to handle as well, dagger, knife, spear, or 
lance. As a lad, also, with a sword on my hip and a cloak 
flung dashingly around me, I used to mount a wooden 
horse. 

Another feat I acquired was how to snatch an unsheathed 
dagger, myself unarmed, from the one who held it. I 
trained myself by running and jumping, for in these exer¬ 
cises I was reasonably strong. My arms were rather too 
thin for performances demanding much muscle. In rid¬ 
ing, in swimming, and in the use of firearms I had little 
confidence in myself; I actually feared the discharge of a 
gun as if it were the wrath of God; for timid by nature, 
I stimulated courage by an artificial show of bravery, and 
to that end had myself enrolled in a company of emergency 
troopers. 

By night, contrary even to the decrees of the Duke, I 
armed myself and went prowling about the cities in which 
I dwelt. During the day I walked abroad shod with 
sandals reinforced with lead and weighing about eight 

[26] 



SPORTS AND EXERCISES 


27 


pounds. At night I wore a black woolen hood to conceal 
my features, and put on shoes of sheep-pelt. On many a 
day, fully armed, I walked for exercise from mid-morning 
until evening, and often I wandered abroad throughout the 
night until day broke, dripping with perspiration from the 
exertion of a round of serenading on my musical instru¬ 
ments. 

When making professional calls as a Doctor of Medicine, 
I went mounted either on horse or mule, or, even more 
frequently, I went afoot. 

From the dinner hour on I am accustomed to wear 
lighter garments, but when driving I am always more 
heavily dressed. 



CHAPTER EIGHT 


Manner of Life 

It is my custom to remain in bed ten hours, and, if I am 
well and of fair and proper strength, to sleep eight hours; 
in periods of ill-health I can sleep but four or five hours. 
I arise at the second hour of the day. If insomnia troubles 
me, I get up, walk around the bed and count to a thousand 
many times. I also diet, cutting down on my food by more 
than half. At such times I make small use of medication 
beyond a little poplar ointment or bear’s grease or oil of 
water lilies. With this I anoint seventeen places: the 
thighs, the soles of my feet, the cervix, the elbows, the 
wrists, the temples, the regions of the jugular, heart, and 
liver, and last of all my upper lip.' I was especially troubled 
with early morning wakefulness. 

Breakfast was always a lighter meal than dinner. After 
my fiftieth year I was satisfied in the morning with bread 
steeped in broth, or even at first, with bread and water, 
and with those large Cretan grapes called Zibbibos or red 
raisins. Later in the day I followed a more varied menu, 
desiring for the midday meal simply an egg-yolk with 
two ounces of bread or a little more, and a mild draught 
of sweet wine, or none at all. Or if the day happen to 
be Friday, or Saturday, I try a small piece of meat with 
bread and cockle broth or crab soup. I consider nothing 
better than firm young veal, beaten tender with the back 
of a butcher knife and pot-roasted without any liquors save 

[28] 



MANNER OF LIFE 


29 


its own. In this dish I take great satisfaction; it has a way 
of drawing its own drippings, than which nothing is better; 
and thus the meat is far more juicy and much richer than 
meat roasted on a spit. 

For supper I order a dish of beets, a little rice, a salad of 
endive; but I like even better the wide-leafed spiny sow¬ 
thistle, or the root of the white endive. I eat more freely 
of fish than of meat, but only wholesome fresh fish. I love 
firm meat, the breast of veal or of wild boar roasted, and 
finely cut with sharp knives. And it seems good to me to 
eat my meal by the fire. At this repast I delight also in 
sweet new wine, about six ounces with double, or even 
more, the amount of water. I find especially good the 
wings, livers, and giblets of young fowl and pigeons. 

I am especially fond of river crabs, because, while my 
mother carried me, she ate so many of them. Likewise I 
delight in cockles and oysters. I prefer fish to meat, and eat 
them with much more benefit than the latter: sole, turbot, 
flatfish, gudgeon, land-turtles, chub, mullet, or red mullet, 
roach, sea bream, the merluce or seacod, the spigola or wolf¬ 
fish, tilefish, and grayling. 

Of the freshwater fish, I prefer pike, carp, perch, and 
both varieties of sargo. Also, I like loach, squalus, 1 tunny, 
and herrings, the latter fresh, salted, or best of all, dried. 
It is surprising that I eat cockles as a very agreeable dish, 
and turn away from the palatable conger eel, and the 
mussels as if they were poison, as I do from snails unless 
they are well cleaned. Fresh water crabs and other crusta¬ 
ceans please me; sea-crabs are too tough, and eels and frogs 
I find too disgusting, as is the case with fungi. 

I take great delight in honey, in cane sugar, dried grapes, 



30 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


ripe grapes, melons—after I learned of their medicinal 
properties—figs, cherries, peaches, and fruit syrup; nor do 
these cause me the least distress, even at my present age. 
Above all, I find olive oil delicious, mixed with salt and 
ripe olives. Garlic does me good; and bitter rue has always 
seemed to have special properties, both when I was a boy 
and since I am grown, of protecting my health and, be¬ 
sides, serving as an antidote against all poisons. By experi¬ 
ment I have found absinthium Romanum or wormwood, 
beneficial. 

I was never immoderately addicted to venery, nor have 
I been harmed much by excesses in this respect; now, how¬ 
ever, it plainly results in abdominal nervousness. 

The white meat of the smaller fishes, when they are 
fresh and tender and cooked on the grill, I enjoy and find 
beneficial. Nor do I turn up my nose at a good sheep- 
cheese. Above all eatables, I prefer a carp of from three to 
seven pounds, but of the choicest flesh. From the large 
fishes I remove the head and the entrails, and from the 
little ones the backbone and the tail. The head is always 
cooked in boiling water, and, in the case of the larger 
fishes, all remaining parts either fried or broiled on the 
gridiron. Small fishes may be fried until tender, or boiled 
not too much. 

Of the flesh of animals, the white meats are the better. 
The heart, liver, and kidneys are tougher than the lung, 
which is tender, although the lower parts of the latter offer 
little nourishment. In some animals the red meats, ex¬ 
cepting the heart, are tender, the white but indifferent, 
except the testes, which are tender. The bluish parts are 
less easily digested. 



MANNER OF LIFE 


31 


There are seven principal genera of things: air, sleep, 
exercise, food, drink, medication, and preservative. 

There are fifteen species: air, sleep, exercise, bread, meat, 
milk, eggs, fish, oil, salt, water, figs, bitter-rue, grapes, and 
strong onions. 

Preparatives are also fifteen: fire, ashes, the bath, water, 
the stew-pan, the frying-pan, the spit, the gridiron, the 
pestle, the blade of the knife and back of it, the grater, 
parsley, rosemary, and laurel. 

The exercises are turning the mill-wheel, walking, horse¬ 
back riding, playing ball, 2 carriage driving, fencing, riding, 
the saddle, sailing, the furbishing of plate, 3 massage or 
bathing—fifteen! 4 I have reduced the whole to a system 
as is the fashion in matters of theology, with much pro¬ 
found meditation and brilliant reasoning. 5 For without 
this illuminating logic, certain things, which are actually 
most clear, would seem not quite so evident to you! 

There are five things which may be partaken of in proper 
manner by all except old men: bread, fish, cheese, wine, 
and water. Two medicines are mastic and coriander; these 
should be highly sweetened. Two spices are saffron and 
salt, and this last is also an element. Four things must be 
used in moderation, for they are highly nourishing foods: 
meats, yolks of eggs, red raisins, and oil; the last is an 
unknown element which, when subjected to fire corre¬ 
sponds to the properties of the stars. 



CHAPTER NINE 


A Meditation on the Perpetuation of My Name 

Vowing to perpetuate my name, I made a plan for this 
purpose as soon as I was able to orient myself. For I under¬ 
stood, without any doubt, that life is twofold: the material 
existence common to the beasts and the plants, and that 
existence which is peculiar to a man eager for glory and 
high endeavor. In the former, I realized that nature had 
failed me, that my desire had been left ungranted; as for 
the latter, I knew there would be nothing by reason of 
which I would dare to hope—neither resources, nor 
power, nor firm health, nor strength, nor family, nor any 
special devotion to labor. I did not have a wide knowledge 
of the Latin tongue, nor friends, nor anything from my 
parents except an endowment of misery and scorn. 

After a few years I was inspired by a dream to a hope of 
attaining this second way of life—the way of fame. Only 
I did not clearly see how, except in so far as I was helped, 
as it were, by a miracle to the understanding of the Latin 
tongue. But in truth I was recalled by my sane reasoning 
from any great aspiration toward such fame, perceiving 
that nothing was emptier than that hope, not to mention 
my simple resolve. 

“How,” said I, “will you write what will be read ? And 
what remarkable facts do you know that readers care for ? 
In what style will you write, or with what choice of diction, 
so that you may hold the attention of those readers ? Can 

[32] 



A MEDITATION OF THE PERPETUATION OF MY NAME 33 

it be that any would read? May it not be that the course 
of ages will see such a constant accumulation of writings 
that those early books may be scorned, not to say, neg¬ 
lected? Will they endure for even a few years? How 
many—a hundred, a thousand, ten thousand? Show me 
a case; is there one such book among thousands? 

“And since all things will come to naught—even as there 
was a beginning will there be an end—even though, as the 
academic philosophers want to believe, the world may again 
be renewed, does it make any difference whether the end 
is after ten days, or after ten times countless thousands of 
years? None either way, and it is all one in eternity! 

“Meanwhile, will you torment yourself with hope, will 
you be tortured with fear, will you be exhausted by striv¬ 
ings? Whatever of sweet life is left, you will lose—oh 
excellent idea!” 

Yet did not Caesar, Alexander, Hannibal, Scipio, Curtius, 
and Herostratus 1 prefer this hope of enduring fame before 
all others, even at the risk of infamy, the price of torture, 
and the cost of very life itself? 

So it is; and though it be nothing, nevertheless they 
succeeded in large measure in realizing their ambitions. 
They did not glance at that philosophizing of the sages, 
much less adopted any of it; but they exerted themselves 
toward this one end—fame. 

And yet again who denies that it was absolute folly ? As 
such it is recognized by the judgment of Horace himself 
in Ode 29 of Book III: Tyrrhena regum progenies: 

Ille potens sui 

Laetusque deget: cui licet in diem 
Dixisse, vixi, eras vel atra 



34 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


Nube polum, pater occupato, 

Vel sole puro; non tamen irritum 
Quodcumque retro est efficiet, neque 
Diffinget, infectumque reddet. 

Quod fugiens semel hora vexit . 2 

He had come to the following conclusion, moreover, 
somewhat earlier saying: Quod adest memento componere 
eequus; that is to say, “You may profit more by accepting 
the present, than by making arrangements for the future.” 

Caesar, Hannibal, and Alexander had this design, to 
advance to distinction their own names at the cost of their 
lives, and at the same time the sacrifice of their families, 
their followers, and even of their city or their state, making, 
in the meantime, the most of their own positions. Sup¬ 
pose, then, that in this manner they achieved fame. To 
what end? Sulla destroyed the institutions all his pred¬ 
ecessors had labored to build; indeed, whatever was before 
his day, even things most admirable. All of his successors 
caused their families and their friends to perish. The whole 
Julian house was completely swept away by Commodus, 
during the period when that prince, adulterous and false at 
every turn, let his suspicions fall upon any legitimate de¬ 
scendant of that family. And in the same way he ruined 
his country. For where now is the Roman Empire? 
Absurdly and strangely enough—in Germany! 

How much better would it not have been for the illus¬ 
trious Julian house to have survived—the race of Tineas; 
for the Romans to have been the masters of the world than 
for hollow masks and stuffed effigies of men to be decorated 
with these empty names! And so, if the spirit is imperish¬ 
able, what is the use of vain names; if it is perishable, what 



A MEDITATION OF THE PERPETUATION OF MY NAME 35 

do they avail ? If a whole generation will pass away, will 
not all these glories come to an end, will they not perish, 
even as the hares and rabbits of the fields ? 

It is scarcely surprising, therefore, that I, urged on by 
love of fame, seek it; what is surprising is that I can still 
seek it, realizing all these matters which I have just con¬ 
sidered. But be that as it may, an unshakable ambition re¬ 
mains. It was, I grant, a fatuous purpose in Caesar and 
these others; yet my desire is for renown, so many things 
to the contrary, so many obstacles in my way; and it is a 
desire not so much foolish as stubbornly fixed. 

Yet have I never longed for praise and honors; indeed, 
quite the contrary, I have spurned them, wishing it to be 
known only that I had lived, and having no concern that 
it be known what manner of man I was. 3 

As for my descendants, I know how fraught with uncer¬ 
tainty this hope for fame may be, and I realize how little 
we may foresee its consequences. Therefore, I have lived 
my life as best I might; and in some hope of the future, I 
have scorned the present. If I must excuse my present 
manner of life let me say that I now continue to exist as 
well as I can. For this course seems but honorable; and 
even if any hope I have for fame should fail me, my ambi¬ 
tion is worthy of praise, inasmuch as longing for renown is 
but natural. 



CHAPTER TEN 


Concerning My Course of Life 

Guided by the foregoing philosophy, therefore, I deter¬ 
mined upon a course of life for myself, not such as I would 
have, but such as I could. Nor did I choose perhaps ex¬ 
actly what I should, but what I deemed would be better. 
And in this my purpose was not single or constant, since 
every course is full of danger and of hardship, and far 
from perfect. Accordingly I acted as seemed advantageous 
when each occasion arose; thus it has come about that I— 
by comparison with others—am considered an opportunist, 
and even, as I have said, by no means steadfast of purpose. 
For such men as have no sure procedure in life must, per¬ 
force, try many plans, and make progress through devious 
ways. And I, to the end that a certain continuity of aim 
might be gained, did not permit riches, nor ease, nor 
honors, nor magistrates, nor power, nor, in truth, this very 
ambition, nor good or evil vicissitudes, nor rivals, nor the 
exigency of the times, nor my own ignorance, to stand in 
my way; nor yet the fact that I had, obviously, no qualifica¬ 
tions for living aimfully. The very knowledge of astrology 
which I had at the time was, moreover, prejudicial, for it 
seemed to show me, and all my acquaintances declared, 
that I would not pass my fortieth year—that I surely would 
never live to be forty-five. 

Meanwhile, partly out of necessity, partly tempted by 
pleasure, I continued to transgress daily, even while I was 

[36] 



CONCERNING MY COURSE OF LIFE 


37 


deliberating upon how best to live my life. Neglecting my 
own best interest for a false hope, I deviated from my pur¬ 
pose of taking counsel concerning these interests, and I 
sinned more than once in deed. Finally it came to this, 
that the very year in which it was believed the end of my 
life was at hand, brought with it a beginning of living— 
and that was my forty-third year. That was the moment 
when, induced by my age, by my disposition, by the anxie¬ 
ties of the past and the opportunity of the present, I made 
a beginning, turning away from pleasure. 

In the morning, if I were teaching, as I was first at Milan, 
and later off and on for many years at Pavia, I delivered my 
lecture. That over, I went walking in the shade beyond 
the city walls, and later lunched, and enjoyed some music. 
In the afternoon, I went fishing near a grove or in a wood 
not far from the city. While there I also studied and wrote, 
and in the evening returned home. This period lasted six 
years; but alas —Fulsere quondam candidi tibi soles , 1 as the 
poet says. 

Thereafter I entered upon a long and honorable career. 
But away with honors and gain, together with vain dis¬ 
plays and unseasonable delights! I ruined myself! I per¬ 
ished! Difficulties and evils increased like the shadow of 
the yew-tree, as the saying goes. Now no solace remained, 
except the deadly way of destruction. But therein no bless¬ 
ing can be found; for otherwise despots, who are actually 
farthest from bliss, would be the most blessed. Just as the 
bull, raging ahead with fixed eyes, sweeping on in head¬ 
long career, must dash himself to ruin, so I sped precipit¬ 
ously to my downfall. For in the midst of things, and 



38 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


before these present events, the great disaster overtook my 
elder son. 

Certain members of the senate—I think they would 
scarcely wish it to be known about themselves—have 
actually confessed that they condemned him with the hope 
that I should die of grief, or go mad; and how near I came 
to either end, the gods alone know—and this I shall set 
forth in the proper place; but their purpose failed. I wish 
my reader to know—and for this purpose I digress—what 
were the iniquitous mores —how ungodly the times! For 
it is a truth that I never offended one of these men, not 
even by my shadow. I planned whatsoever defense I was 
capable of in behalf of my son; but who could have pre¬ 
vailed against the festered disaffection of certain of those 
senators ? 

I was shocked by the memory of my son’s despair, in con¬ 
sternation over the impending dangers, exhausted by all 
that had gone before, and fearful of what was to come. In 
such a state, however, I made my plea, calling attention to 
the high character and the equity of the senate, and men¬ 
tioning cases where mercy had been shown. I recalled the 
lenity, and at the same time, the act of Giampietro Solario, 
the notary, who, when he had charged his illegitimate son 
with attempting to poison two legitimate sisters for the sake 
of becoming the sole heir to his father’s property, con¬ 
sidered that the boy was sufficiently punished by being 
condemned to the galleys. 

Augustus w T as praised for this question when in an ex¬ 
amination he asked, “At least you have not killed your 
father?” What cruelty, then, to destroy an innocent and 
aged father through the person of his son! If the father is 



CONCERNING MY COURSE OF LIFE 


39 


taken into kindly consideration in the case of a man con¬ 
demned to the arena, how much more should he be favored 
in the case of any other condemnation ? Of what avail are 
the merits of humankind if so exceptional a virtue as in¬ 
nocence is so disastrously involved? 

And is it not worse for the father to be involved in the 
punishment of his son than in his own destruction? If I 
am killed, one man perishes—one about to die without 
another descendant; if you kill the son, you cut off all hope 
of succession. Imagine each one of all mankind pleading 
with you for his son, for whom he feels responsible, though 
he may be a youth of hasty temper, struggling with dif¬ 
ficulties, overtaken by the basest dishonor and deceived in 
a dowerless wife, having married against a father’s wish 
and knowledge, a worthless, shameless woman—what 
would you ? Is this not every man’s plea ? Does not every¬ 
one understand ? No one is so bitter an enemy of me or of 
my son who would not voluntarily grant life to him whose 
death would move even the iron gods of the underworld 
to pity! 

Although I brought forward these arguments and their 
like, it availed naught except in so far as it was decreed by 
the court that if I should be able to come to terms with 
those who had brought the charge against him, his life 
would be spared. But the very indiscretion of my son for¬ 
bade this; for he had boasted of riches which I did not 
possess, and the accusers tried to exact what did not exist. 

But no more of this! 

From my early youth I persistently held to this purpose— 
that I should make it my duty to care for human life. The 
study of medicine seemed to point more clearly to such a 



40 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


career than did the study of law, as being more appropriate 
to the end I had in view, and as of more common concern 
to all the world in every age. I deemed medicine a profes¬ 
sion of sincerer character than law, and a pursuit relying 
rather upon reason and nature’s everlasting law, than upon 
the opinions of men. 

Accordingly, I embraced this pursuit and not jurispru¬ 
dence. Thereupon, deliberately, I not only rejected the 
advances of friends engaged in the law, contemning riches, 
power, and honors, but even shunned these influences. 
My father actually wept in my presence when he learned 
that I had given over jurisprudence to follow the study of 
philosophy, and felt deeply grieved that I would not apply 
myself to his same interests. He considered jurispru¬ 
dence a more ennobling discipline—repeatedly he quoted 
Aristotle on this point—and a profession better adapted 
to the acquisition of wealth and influence, and to the im¬ 
provement of the family position. He realized that his 
office of lecturing in the law schools of the city, together 
with the honorarium of an hundred crowns which he had 
enjoyed for so many years, would not, as he had hoped, fall 
to me, but that another would succeed him in his post. 
Nor would that commentary of his ever be published, 
which I was to annotate. For not long before this there had 
dawned a faint hope that he might achieve some renown 
as the critic of The Commentaries of John, Bishop of Can¬ 
terbury, on Optics and Perspective. The following couplet 
had even been published for this work: 


Hoc Cardano viro gaudet domus: omnia novit 
Unus; habent nullum saecula nostra parem . 2 



. CONCERNING MY COURSE OF LIFE 41 

This might rather be considered in the manner of 
prophecy for one who was then about to set out upon his 
life’s labors, than as applying to my father himself, who, 
beyond the law—which, I understand, he practiced with 
extraordinary brilliance—had mastered only the elements 
of mathematics; he was in no wise given to original think¬ 
ing, nor had he availed himself of the resources of the Greek 
language. This situation came about, in his case, more be¬ 
cause of his many-sided interests, and his inconstancy of 
purpose, than because he was not naturally gifted, or be¬ 
cause of sloth or faulty judgment; for he was subject to 
none of these defects. However, because my will was 
firmly set to my purpose on account of the reasons which 
I have already advanced, together with other motives, I 
was not moved by my father’s advices, especially since I 
saw that he, although he had met with practically no 
reverses, had succeeded but indifferently. 



CHAPTER ELEVEN 


Prudence 

It is sometimes better to persist in a course elected, even 
when the course has not been too well considered, than to 
shift, in an effort to make a perfect choice, from course to 
course, albeit an intensity of zeal may importune, or the 
usual inconstant ebb and flow of mundane affairs may urge 
the change. Accordingly, when I had made a decision for 
myself in a most difficult matter, to the end that my action 
should be governed by wisdom as well as by my own pref¬ 
erences, I realized then that not only other things, but also 
this very business of remaining firm in my choice was made 
easier. Of first consideration are the various ends of action 
which lead each man to choose the one toward which his 
taste is most inclined. There are so many fashions in 
careers, so many chances, so many interests and so many 
opportunities, that no one may justly censure me unless it 
be one who confesses that he lives more in accordance with 
my plans and purpose than I myself—and this can in no 
wise be. 

All granted up to this point, the next question which 
arises concerns the best and most legitimate method of 
succeeding in a chosen career, or—of even greater moment, 
to my thinking—what is the most expedient? Having, 
then, once attained the goal in view, how to retain it, and 
how, finally, to draw just advantage from the end achieved, 
is important. 


[ 42 ] 



PRUDENCE 


43 


Now I have ever attested my insignificant powers in 
evPauAia 0 r qpgovrioig. If these terms signify merely pru- 
dentia, it is, nevertheless, the same as if we should say 
Humana prudentia, for nothing which we know, except 
man, possesses this good counsel. The deities have a greater 
gift—that is to say, direct knowledge or intuition, not a 
quality of other existing creatures. Intuitum is not an ex¬ 
pression identical with the harpocratic quality, since it 
differs in character from foreknowledge in that it partakes 
of the nature of prudentia. To some it presents one ap¬ 
pearance, to others another, as men are wont to estimate 
all things by their own slant. 

Truly of this sort of human refinement and sagacity I 
know I possess and have possessed very little, and what 
there was, indeed, those habits I have already mentioned 
have corrupted. 



CHAPTER TWELVE 


Debating and Lecturing 

As a lecturer and debater, I was much more earnest and 
accurate than in exercising prudence. While at the Univer¬ 
sity of Bologna, I usually lectured extempore. This habit 
always undermined the confidence of those with whom 
I argued. 

A three-day debate was instituted at Pavia with Camuzio, 
to be held in public before the Senate. My opponent was 
silenced, on the first day, in the first proposition, even in 
the judgment of all my rivals who were present. Certain 
memorials of this same event are graven in letters on the 
monument to Camuzio: 1 “This then, in truth, was known 
to all, that they debated not for a mere refutation of argu¬ 
ment, but with a power which seemed unassailable.” And 
I believe the memory of that debate lives to this day. 

Branda, who was, as I have stated, my preceptor, attrib¬ 
uted my powers to art and talent; my rivals said I was 
possessed; others, conjecturing much more accurately, 
claimed my powers were due to a certain superiority and 
perfection in the line of reasoning. For neither at Milan, 
nor at Pavia, nor in Bologna, nor in France or Germany, 
have I ever found a man who could successfully controvert 
or dispute me within the last twenty-three years. Yet I do 
not vaunt my powers on this account, for I think that, had 
I been made of stone, the same things would have come to 
pass. It is the result of the lack of clear thinking on the 

[44] 



DEBATING AND LECTURING 


45 


part of those who would challenge me, and no more a 
special dispensation to my own nature or to my own dis¬ 
tinction, than it can be counted glorious for the cuttlefish 
to eject the shadows of its inky humour about the dolphin 
and force it to flee; that is merely the result of being born 
a cuttlefish. 

Angelo Candiano in the presence of many scholars, when 
he had brought forward his proofs and I had answered, and 
wished him to take up the rebuttal in his turn, did not blush 
to say, “I stated that I wished to bring forward a proof, not 
to respond to your arguments.” Now he was a physician 
of great learning, who had filled high offices at the court of 
the Duke of Milan 2 and at the court of the Queen of 
Hungary in Belgium. 3 He was, besides, an authority in 
his profession, and, if it is of any consequence, very rich. 
Whereupon, when I confessed my inexperience and sim¬ 
plicity, many insisted, saying, on the one hand, “We know 
that you are speaking falsely and that you are experienced”; 
and, on the other hand, “We ask, since we cannot clearly 
see, why you have recourse to that expression about ‘inex¬ 
perience,’ especially strange on the lips of a man who has 
asseverated so many times that he never lies. As to your 
inimitable style of teaching, let us say that what is in the 
positive—as the grammarians say—ceases to arouse our 
admiration when the superlative itself becomes the com¬ 
mon thing. That these present have made no move to ex¬ 
press a desire to see a demonstration of it, is not significant. 
The sun does not cease to be because masses of clouds hide 
it from view. Nor should you be troubled because, though 
so many bright lamps of learning burn within your private 
chambers, those without your doors appear to refuse to see 



4 6 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


the radiance. There need be no fear, moreover, that an 
endowment so divine may come to naught. Flowers still 
adore the rising sun even while the Garamantes curse it. 4 
Over all not only is Divine Providence enthroned, but there 
shines, as well, an eternal light of wisdom.” 

Not only have I always distinguished myself, moreover, 
in this gift of easy delivery, but I have instructed others 
therein. Excellent as I may have appeared in these respects, 
I possessed neither grace in my manner of speech nor talent 
for making a clever conclusion. The result was that though 
you deemed me more than usually endowed on the one 
hand, on the other you would find me lacking. Finally, 
in disputation I was so exceptionally keen that all marveled 
at my exemplary skill, and avoided challenging me. For 
a long time, consequently, I lived free from the onus of 
debate, but not longer than the time when my opponents 
had unexpectedly seen two occasions of my skill. 

The first of these occasions was at Pavia. Branda Porro, 
formerly my master in philosophy, had interrupted the 
course of an informal debate which I was holding with 
Camuzio in philosophy; for, as I have said, they often 
dragged me into this field, thinking that in the province of 
medicine they had no further hope of forensic laurels. 
Branda was citing Aristotle as an authority, whereupon I, 
when he had quoted the words, said, “Take care; there is 
a non after album which you have forgotten to include, and 
which contradicts your proof.” Branda exclaimed loudly, 
“You don’t mean it!” I, clearing my throat of the phlegm 
which constantly collected therein, gently maintained my 
opposition, until he, thoroughly angered, sent for the codex, 
and upon my request, ordered the text to be put into my 



DEBATING AND LECTURING 


47 


hands. I read as it was written therein; but he, suspecting 
that I was falsely emending the text, snatched the book 
from my hands, cried out that I wanted to cheat the audi¬ 
ence, and himself began to read. As he came to the word 
in question, he read it and was silenced. All present were 
amazed and stared at me in wonder. 

It happened also during these same days that Branda 
went to Milan. The whole incident had been written to 
the Senate at Milan. The Senators asked if the story were 
true. Branda, a sincere and honest man said, “Surely it is 
true; only too true; I believe I was drunk on that occasion.” 
The senators, smiling, had nothing to say. 

The second occasion on which I was challenged was at 
Bologna, by Fracanziano, Professor of the Practice of 
Medicine. He was engaged in a discussion about the pas¬ 
sage of gall to the stomach, and was quoting from a Greek 
authority in the presence of the whole academy, for an 
anatomical dissection was then in progress. I said that ov 
was lacking in his citation. Whereupon it was not he, for 
a truth, as I quietly defended my correction, but the stu¬ 
dents, who cried out that some one should send for the 
codex. Fracanziano gladly sent, and it was brought at 
once. He read, and found that it was as I had said, to a 
hair. He was silenced, amazed, and filled with admira¬ 
tion; the students, who had literally dragged me forcibly 
to the place, marveled even more. 

From that day, the professor actually fled from any oc¬ 
casion for meeting me; and he even warned his servants 
that they indicate whenever they saw me coming, so that 
he might avoid an encounter in the street. And when once, 
for a joke, the medical students had fetched me into his 



4 8 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


presence when he was busily engaged in a lesson in anat¬ 
omy, he hurried away in such confusion that he stepped 
on his cloak, and fell headlong. All who witnessed this 
were bewildered at his action; and he himself shortly after¬ 
wards resigned as a professor, for he was at that time a man 
well along in years. 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 


Customs, Vices, and Errors 

An account of this nature is by its own character a most 
difficult thing to write, and so much the more for me as 
I reflect that those who have been wont to read the auto¬ 
biographical books of writers are not used to seeing such 
a straightforward narrative set down as I purpose to publish. 

Some have committed themselves to writing as they 
think they ought to be, like Antoninus; others have, in¬ 
deed, given true accounts, but with all their shortcomings 
carefully suppressed, as did Josephus. But I prefer to do 
service to truth, though well aware that he who trans¬ 
gresses the conventions cannot offer the same excuses as 
suffice for other mistakes. Yet who constrains me? Shall 
I not be, therefore, like that leper who, of the ten healed, 
alone returned to acknowledge the Lord? 

By this reasoning physicians and astrologers find the 
origins of our moral natures in our innate qualities, and of 
our voluntary acts in education, interests, and conversations. 
These all are present in every man, but peculiarly adapted 
to each appropriate epoch of his life, yet with variations, 
nevertheless, even in similar instances. It is necessary, con¬ 
sequently, to exercise choice, and to select with care from 
all these influences one principle whereby we may get 
understanding. For myself, as far as I could judge, the 
well known yvwfh aautov 1 seemed the best guide. 

My nature, as a result, has ever been manifest to me: 

[49 ] 



50 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


high-tempered, straightforward, and devoted to the pleas¬ 
ures of passion. From these beginnings, as it were, have 
issued bitterness, contentious obstinacy, lack of amenity, 
hasty judgment, anger, and an intense desire for revenge— 
to say nothing of headstrong will; that which many damn, 
by word at least, was my delight. “At vindicta bonum vita 
iucundius ipsa.” 2 On the whole I was not inclined to 
deviate from the ways of rectitude even though it is com¬ 
monly said, “Natura nostra prona est ad malum.” 3 

Yet I am a truthful man; I am mindful of benefits con¬ 
ferred, attached to my own people, a lover of justice, and a 
contemner of money. Zeal for undying fame has captured 
my devotion, and rendered me wont to despise mediocrity, 
to say nothing of petty concerns. Aware nevertheless, how 
greatly very insignificant matters affect any circumstance 
from its outset, I am accustomed to minimize no occasions. 
By nature I am prone to every vice and every evil save 
ambition; I recognize my shortcomings as well as anyone. 

For the rest, because of my veneration for God, and be¬ 
cause I clearly recognize how vain all these things are, I 
deliberately let pass many an offered opportunity for 
revenge. Timid of spirit, I am cold of heart, warm of 
brain, and given to never-ending meditation; I ponder over 
ideas, many and weighty, and even over things which can 
never come to pass. I am able to admit two distinct trains 
of thought to my mind at the same time. 

Any who cast aspersions upon the praises I have enjoyed 
by intimating that I am boastful and extravagant, accuse 
me of faults of others, for those sins are not mine. I resent 
such, and defend myself; I attack no one. Why then do I 
trouble to make this examination of myself when I have 



CUSTOMS, VICES, AND ERRORS 


51 


given testimony so many times of the emptiness of life? 
My excuse is the praise spoken by some, who think that a 
man who has attained so much distinction does not have 
his shortcomings. 

I have accustomed my features always to assume an ex¬ 
pression quite contrary to my feelings: thus I am able to 
feign outwardly, yet within know nothing of dissimulation. 
This habit is easy if compared to the practice of hoping for 
nothing, which I have bent my efforts toward acquiring for 
fifteen successive years, and have at last succeeded. And 
now, trained to pretenses of a sort, I sometimes go forth 
clad in rags, but just as often elegantly dressed; sometimes 
I am taciturn, and sometimes talkative; sometimes gay, 
sometimes sad. From these moods all things acquire double 
aspects. 

In youth I spent little and only occasional care upon the 
appearance of my head because of my eagerness to be at 
things I was more interested in. My movements are irreg¬ 
ular, now quick, now slow. At home I go about with my 
legs bare to the ankles. 

I am lacking in reverence and have a far from continent 
tongue; and I have such a quick temper that I am often 
shamed and embarrassed thereby. Though I may be led 
to repent, I have, nevertheless, paid heavy penalties, as I 
have elsewhere stated, for my sins; even so I atoned for the 
debaucheries of that Sardanapalian life I led the year I was 
rector of the University at Padua. Yet wisely and patiently 
to have carried and corrected one’s fault, is praise even in 
disgrace, and virtue even in sin. Necessity may pardon me 
for speaking thus in my own praise; yet even if I were 
inclined to pass over in silence the gifts of God toward me, 



52 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


I should be an ingrate indeed to complain of the loss which 
I suffered without acknowledging the kind of life I was 
leading at the time. Frankness is, moreover, the simpler 
course inasmuch as my personal affairs are not as highly 
esteemed as men commonly value their own interests— 
vain, empty affairs like those great clouds seen in the wake 
of the sunset which are meaningless and soon pass away. 
If anyone would like to pass unprejudiced judgment on 
these actions and to reflect how easy it is to yield, he will 
understand in what spirit of mind, and urged by what 
necessity, or by what occasion I acted, and with what great 
grief I was afflicted through those deeds of my youth. 

It is a fact that some, without scruple, are guilty of faults 
much worse than those; who, far from confessing them 
publicly, are silent even in private. They are people who 
are not mindful of benefits conferred upon them—who 
entirely forget that favors have ever been done them. 
Perhaps these people will be somewhat more charitable 
in judging me. 

But let us get on. This I recognize as unique and out¬ 
standing among my faults—the habit, which I persist in, 
of preferring to say above all things what I know to be 
displeasing to the ears of my hearers. I am aware of this, 
yet I keep it up wilfully, in no way ignorant of how many 
enemies it makes for me. So strongly are our natures 
fettered to long-standing habits! Yet I avoid this practice 
in the presence of my benefactors and of my superiors. 
It is enough not to fawn upon these, or at least not to 
flatter them. 

I used to be just as immoderate in living when I well 
knew what course was most expedient to follow, and what 



CUSTOMS, VICES, AND ERRORS 


53 


I ought to do; scarcely another man could be found so 
obstinate in a fault of the sort. 

I am alone as much as I can be, although I know that 
this way of living has been condemned by Aristotle. For 
he said, “Homo solitarius aut bestia aut deus.” But for 
this I have rendered an excuse. 4 

By a similar foolishness, and with no small loss to my¬ 
self, I retained those domestics whom I knew to be utterly 
useless to me, or even a cause for shame. I become the 
owner of all sorts of little animals that get attached to me: 
kids, lambs, hares, rabbits, and storks. They litter up the 
whole house. I have troubled myself with the poverty of 
friends, especially my faithful friends. 

And I have committed many, nay, numberless blunders, 
wherever I wished to mingle with my fellows; whatever 
these were, whether great or small, timely or untimely, I 
was conscious of them; and I even went so far as to wound 
those whom it had been my intention to praise. Among 
these was Aimar de Ranconet, 5 a president of the Parlia¬ 
ment of Paris, a most devoted scholar and a Frenchman. 
On this occasion I blundered, almost unavoidably, not 
solely because of lack of deliberation, and an ignorance of 
foreign manners and customs, but because I did not duly 
regard certain of those conventions which I learned about 
long afterwards, and with which cultivated men, for the 
most part, are acquainted. 

In deliberating, I am too precipitate, and therefore fre¬ 
quently make rash decisions. In any sort of transaction, I 
am impatient of delay. My rivals, observing that I was not 
easily taken in, if I had time to think, did their best to 
hurry me on. I detected them plainly enough, since I am 



54 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


on my guard against my competitors, and deem that I can 
justly hold them as my enemies. But if I had not been 
wont never to regret any action I voluntarily undertook, 
even something that came to a bad end, I should have lived 
most unhappily. 

Truly the cause of a great part of my misery was the 
stupidity of my sons, connected as it was with actual shame, 
the folly of my kinsfolk, and the jealousy existing among 
them, which was a vice peculiar to our family. Indeed, it 
is a fault common to many a group! 

From my youth, I was immoderately given to gambling; 
and in this way I became known to Francesco Sforza, a 
prince of Milan, and made many friendships for myself 
among the nobles. And since for many years—almost 
forty—I applied myself assiduously to gambling, it is not 
easy to say how greatly the status of my private affairs suf¬ 
fered, and with nothing to show for it. The dice turned 
out to be far worse, and once my sons were instructed in 
the attractions of games of chance, our home too frequently 
was thrown open to gamblers. For this gaming habit I 
have naught but a worthless excuse to offer—the poverty 
of my early life, a certain shrewdness in hazards, and some¬ 
thing of skill in play. 

This is mortal frailty, then, but some will not admit it; 
others are even intolerant of it. Are they better, or wiser ? 

What if one should address a word to the kings of the 
earth and say, “Not one of you but eats lice, flies, bugs, 
worms, fleas—nay the very filth of your servants!” With 
what an attitude would they listen to such statements, 
though they be truths? What is this complacency then 
but an ignoring of conditions, a pretense of not being aware 



CUSTOMS, VICES, AND ERRORS 


55 


of what we know exists, or a will to set aside a fact by 
force ? And so it is with our sins and everything else foul, 
vain, confused and untrue in our lives. On a rotting tree 
are rotten apples! It is nothing new that I proclaim; I 
merely lay bare the truth. 



CHAPTER FOURTEEN 


Virtues and Constancy 

Although there are many points on which men are con¬ 
fused, in none are they more deceived than in their con¬ 
ception of firmness of character or constancy. 

This confusion originates in the very nature of constancy, 
a characteristic which in one man may truly be an evidence 
of divine endowment; in another a trait, rather, significant 
of a small, unthinking mind. It is a trait which some one 
derided in Diogenes because under the summer sun he 
rolled himself in burning sands; in winter with bared body 
he embraced columns of ice. On the other hand, it was 
the high virtue of Bragadino, 1 the Patrician of Venice, to 
endure such trials as no man, not even one of the host of 
arrogant conquerors, was eager to administer, yet such 
trials as are worthy of an immortal name; for he was flayed 
alive. If it was nothing short of superhuman to endure 
such martyrdom, surely it was compatible with human 
longing for an immortality of fame to have willed to 
endure. 

And albeit a man may shine with serener soul in the 
midst of reverses, not infrequently he is given an oppor¬ 
tunity in the midst of prosperity to show himself worthy 
of admiration. Moreover, even if occasions to display their 
steadfastness may fail some men, not on this score ought 
they be deemed less constant. Since, then, it happens that 
we err in so many respects in the name of constancy, mere 

[56] 



VIRTUES AND CONSTANCY 


57 


endurance ought not to be thought a matter for glory, any 
more than lack of occasion to demonstrate our firmness of 
character ought to be thought reason for blame; nor should 
anyone hold us blameworthy for what nature has seen fit 
to deny us. 

Neither do I defend myself on the ground that opportuni¬ 
ties have in some degree been lacking. No one was ever 
so bitter against me, no judge so unjust, as not to admire 
my patience in adversity, and my restraint in prosperity, 
rather than criticize it, whether that virtue resided in my 
power to despise the attractions of joy, or in my courage to 
bear hardships. 

I name, among the trials of my life, the indulgence of 
the flesh, distracting entertainments, disease, impotency, the 
disparagements of my rivals, issues none too felicitous, law¬ 
suits, attacks, the threats of the powerful, the suspicion of 
certain men, the distractions of a family, the failure of 
many projects; and finally, the contrary advice either of 
true friends, or of men in the guise of friends, and the 
hazards which beset me on account of my many unorthodox 
views. 

Notwithstanding, whatsoever my good fortune, or how¬ 
ever many the happy issues that attended me, I have never 
modified my carriage, nor become more bitter or inordi¬ 
nately ambitious, nor more impatient, nor contemptuous 
of the poor, nor forgetful of my old friends, nor more 
abrupt in social intercourse, nor more boastful. My good 
fortune did not tempt me to adopt a more luxurious mode 
of dress than I felt was demanded by my professional rank, 
except in so far as it was necessary to replace with better 



58 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


the out-of-fashion garments my poverty had compelled me, 
from the beginning, to wear. 

In misfortune, however, I am by no means steadfast, since 
certain afflictions which I was forced to meet were more 
than I could bear. For these exigencies I overcame nature 
by a scheme of my own. In the moments when my spirit 
was afflicted with the most insupportable grief, I would 
strike my thighs with rods, or bite my left arm sharply and 
quickly. Often I fasted. I was relieved much by weeping, 
if weep I could, but very often I was unable. 

Moreover, I combated my sorrow with reason saying, 
“Nothing new has come to pass; my times have nearly 
changed and have hurried on apace. Might it not have 
been possible to escape forever this association with sorrow P 
Yet if I have been cheated for a few years, what portion of 
time is that measured by eternity ? I shall have lost a little, 
that is all, in the event that I have not long to live; but if 
a life lengthened by coming years will appear to be my 
allotted span, perhaps many opportunities may come where¬ 
by I may assuage my grief and of it make an eternal 
triumph. And yet, what if it had never come to pass! 
Truly I am not equal to this overpowering grief!” And yet, 
as I shall hereinafter show, I was consoled by a manifest 
miracle . 2 

To the duties of life I am exceptionally faithful, and par¬ 
ticularly in the writing of my books, to such an extent that 
even though the most attractive opportunities have been 
offered, I have not abandoned my undertaking, but con¬ 
tinued to adhere to my original purpose . 3 I had observed 
that my father’s habit of relinquishing one aim in life for 
another had been a mighty obstacle to his success. 



VIRTUES AND CONSTANCY 


59 


I do not think anyone would criticize me because, when 
I was appointed to the Accademia degli Affidati at Pavia 4 
in which there were not a few Princes and Cardinals of 
highest rank, causing me to hold back somewhat out of 
sheer pusillanimity, I neither disdained the offer by remain¬ 
ing away, nor did I excuse myself from the duties of my 
office. To be sure, when these men of rank, in full regalia, 
were presented to the King, I kept in the background, say¬ 
ing to myself that pomp of this sort in no manner be¬ 
came me. 

Concerning goodness, moreover, I can say nothing other 
than Horace: 

Virtus est vitium fugere . 5 

I have never broken a friendship; neither, if the relation¬ 
ship happened to be discontinued, have I divulged the 
secrets of my erstwhile friends, nor held those secrets 
against them. I have written nothing inconsistent with 
my principles. Aristotle was somewhat inclined to sin 
in that sort of thing, and Galen descended so far as to 
become involved in a disgraceful contention. In this mat¬ 
ter I yield to Plato alone. Vesalius, a man of decent 
restraint, gave proof of his attitude toward malignant con¬ 
troversy, for when he was stirred by Corti to engage in 
some insignificant dispute, he was not willing to mention 
his opponent’s name. 

In spite of the fact that I was envious of Corti’s 6 great 
love of letters—although not his erudition—it happened 
that when the board, upon his withdrawal from Pisa, in¬ 
quired of him whether I could qualify as a successor to his 
post, he replied, “No one would be better!” Now I had 



6o 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


been accused by Corti of the theft of a ring which I had 
retained as a pledge of money which he had made without 
a witness; and although the members of the board knew 
that we were not entirely reconciled on this score, they 
gave me the office of lecturer on his recommendation. 

These I deem ought to be accounted among my virtues— 
that I have never told a falsehood from my youth, 7 that I 
have borne poverty and disaster and all the pricks of adverse 
circumstances patiently; that no one has ever been able 
justly to charge me with ingratitude. But enough of this! 



CHAPTER FIFTEEN 


Concerning My Friends and Patrons 

First among the friends of my youth I count Ambrogio 
Varadei; together we played many a game of chess, and 
diverted ourselves with music or similar amusements. 
After him I name Prospero Marinone 1 of Pavia and Otta- 
viano Scotto 2 of Milan, who often helped me to a loan of 
money. Gasparo Gallarati was another. 

In the town of Sacco, I formed close friendships with 
Giammaria Morosini, a nobleman of Venice, and with 
Paolo Lirici, a pharmacist. After my return to Milan I 
found a patron in Filippo Archinto, Archbishop of Milan, 
through whom I became known to Lodovico Maggi whose 
aid I sorely needed and who gladly helped me. 

Among other friends I must name Girolamo Guerrino, 
a jeweller, from whom I learned many mysterious stories 
which I have rewritten in my books but with no idea of 
plagiarizing. Through him also I became involved in 
relations with Francesco Belloto, a Florentine. 

Francesco Croce, the jurisconsult, a noted man of high 
character and a skilled mathematician, rendered me valu¬ 
able service in my case with the College of Physicians at 
Milan. Through the efforts of Donato Lanza, a druggist, 3 
I was introduced to Francesco Sfondrato, a Senator of 
Cremona, 4 who afterwards became Cardinal. Sfondrato 
recommended me to a criminal judge, also a native of 
Cremona, Giambattista Speziano, a man of learning and of 

[61] 



62 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


singular moral quality. He it was who made me known 
to the great Alfonso d’ Avalos, Governor of the Province 
of Milan and Commander of the Emperor’s forces in the 
State. By the patronage of Sfondrato, also, I obtained the 
chair of medicine at the University of Pavia. 

At Pavia I was received into the friendship of Andrea 
Alciati , 5 that most celebrated of jurists, and a great teacher 
of oratory. His kinsman, Francesco Alciati , 6 who is now 
Cardinal, joined in this cordial relation. Two other cardi¬ 
nals, besides, I must include in my list of patrons: Giovanni 
Morone , 7 and Pietro Donato Cesio . 8 Under the protection 
of these three Maecenates my present circumstances stand 
assured. Together with these I must name a fourth, Cristo- 
foro Mandruzio of Trent. He is of a most illustrious family 
of nobility, and second to no one in his favors toward me 
and in his liberality toward all men. 

After acknowledging my indebtedness to these notables, 
let me return to those good friends among my equals. My 
association with Panezio Benvenuto of Arezzo, the best of 
men, gleams more richly than any gold, as it seems, an at¬ 
tachment enduring by the very virtue of its own noble 
nature. Again, there was the venerable Taddeo Massa, at 
Rome, a prelate, and a man of unique wisdom and probity. 
Long before this, however, I had secured the friendship of 
Giovanni Meone, from the Privy Council of the Governor 
of the Province, Fernando Gonzaga , 9 who was also Com¬ 
mander of the military forces of the Emperor. 

It would be too long a story to go into the details of my 
relations with Carlo Borromeo 10 and with Marc Antonio 
Amulio of Venice, both cardinals of the most exceptional 
character, and with a great number of other good men. 



CONCERNING MY FRIENDS AND PATRONS 63 

Certainly it was by the effort and influence of Borromeo 
and Alciati, when I came to Bologna appointed to lecture 
in Medicine there, that I obtained the favor of the whole 
illustrious senatorial assembly; for they are all patricians 
extraordinarily courteous, cultivated, experienced, and 
brilliant. 

Among the members of the medical profession I had two 
intimate friends, both men of blameless life, and of by no 
means mediocre erudition, and both natives of Modena: 
Camillo Montagnana and Aurelio Stagni. Besides these I 
must name Melchiorre della Valle of Milan and Tommaso 
Iseo of Brescia whom I sought after with a good-will 
unusual for me, but nothing came of the relation except a 
rather tense animosity. 

My friends among the high officials of the English Court 
were Sir John Cheke , 11 childhood tutor to King Edward 
VI, and Claude Lavalle, who was the ambassador of the 
French King to England, and Prince of Bois-Dauphin. 

Among my own fellow-citizens I owe not a little to 
Lodovico Taverna, Prefect of Milan, and a very sagacious 
man. 

I highly esteemed, among my professional associates, 
Francesco Vicomercato, a Milanese, and a professor of 
Philosophy; and Andrea Vesalius, the foremost exponent 
of his day of the science of anatomy. 

Two friends of my father, known from childhood, I con¬ 
tinued to cultivate: Agostino Lavizzario, clerk of petitions 
of the Senate of Como, and Galeazzo del Rosso, a black¬ 
smith, whom I have frequently mentioned. 

There was also Francesco Buonafede, a doctor of Padua, 
referred to on another occasion . 12 



6 4 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


I must pass over a description of many learned men and 
friends, because, even without formal mention, they are 
known for their erudition throughout the world. Yet, in 
order that you may actually know, since I have witnessed 
their favor to me, that I am not forgetful of them to whom 
as far as I am able, I am about to give lasting recognition 
by mention of their names and by this present testimony, I 
shall add the following names: Guillaume Duchoul , 13 a 
Prefect of Hautes Alpes in the region near Savoy and the 
Dauphine; Bonifazio Rodigino, a Doctor of Jurisprudence 
and a distinguished astrologer; Giorgio Porro, a Rhaetian; 
Luca Giustiniano of Genoa; Gabriello Aratore of Cara¬ 
vaggio, a noted arithmetician. 

I entertained a warm affection for Giampietro Albuzzo, 
a physician and professor of Milan , 14 for Marc Antonio 
Morago, and likewise for Mario Gesso of Bologna. The 
fidelity of Lorenzo Zehener, a doctor of Carinthia, and of 
Adrian, a Belgian, toward me was extraordinary, and their 
services and kindnesses manifold. 

Last of all, the patronage of the Prince of Matelica 15 was 
almost like divine protection, and greater than any which 
mere human devices would seem to be able to produce. 
I here barely touch upon the exceptional qualities of his 
soul, worthy, indeed, of a king; his knowledge of all sub¬ 
jects and of all teachings; the refinements of his spirit and 
his benignity. I but note in passing the vast accumulations 
of his wealth, the splendor of his father and his wisdom 
surpassing the peak of human attainment, and his memory 
for either favors or former associations. 

What was there in me that was able to attract the gentle 
company of such an one? No benefits could I confer; nor 



CONCERNING MY FRIENDS AND PATRONS 65 

was there any hope of something I might undertake for 
him, for I was an old man, bereft of fortune, despondent, 
and not especially gracious: It could have been nothing 
but his opinion of my character. Are you not inclined to 
deem such men god-like? They are those who devote as 
much energy to fostering love of study, to cultivating sim¬ 
plicity of living with a spirit gentle and true, to attempting 
and undertaking ventures worthy of praise, as almost every 
other man is wont to bestow upon the acquisition of power 
and favors and upon the nourishing of hope for the future, 
upon the daily round of custom and to the flattering of 
the great. 



CHAPTER SIXTEEN 


Concerning My Enemies and Rivals 

I shall not undertake the same lengthy account of my ^ 
enemies and rivals as I have just given of my friends. In 
this respect I think Galen erred not a little for he made 
the Thessalian, whose argument he took up, prominent by 
merely mentioning his name. 

And if a man be not a coward, better it is to be recon¬ 
ciled, if you have been sinned against; better not to take 
revenge. Or rather it is better to take revenge by outdoing 
them than by resorting to invective. Therefore I have 
learned not so much to despise my rivals as to have pity on 
their vain-glorying. They bear witness that those men are 
far baser who conduct themselves underhandedly in their 
charges than those who act openly, if there is any just 
right to make accusation . 1 


[66] 



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 


Calumny, Defamations, and Treachery of My Unjust 

Accusers 

There are two kinds of treachery: one which spreads its 
snares around our reputation and honors, concerning which 
I have here planned to write; and a second, about which 
I shall treat later. Now, therefore, I have decided to dis¬ 
cuss these perfidious designs, and especially secret designs; 
for no matter how treacherous such plots are, they have 
never been secret if the machinations are openly devised; 
if they are plots of any magnitude, they are, with difficulty, 
kept secret. 

A man is a fool who attaches too much meaning to insig¬ 
nificant events; wherefore I shall content myself with the 
account of but four incidents. 

The first of these befell me when I was summoned to 
Bologna . 1 The defamers of my name had sent a certain 
clerk to Pavia. This man, although he neither saw the 
inside of my lecture room, nor interviewed any of my 
students, managed somehow or other to write back to 
Bologna reports consisting of long tales which he had 
obtained from one who never thought the story would 
come out. The following is an extract: “Concerning this 
Girolamo Cardano I have learned that he lectures to the 
empty benches, since no students attend his classes; that he 
is a man of bad manners, disagreeable to all, and, in the 
main, a fool. He is given to disgraceful practices, and 

[67] 



68 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


does not show even tolerable skill in medicine, being so 
given to certain prejudices in this art that no one engages 
his services, and he accordingly has no practice.” 

These statements were read by the Intelligencer at 
Bologna in the presence of the Most High Cardinal Bor- 
romeo, Pontifical Legate of that city. Deliberations were 
afoot to pursue the matter no further, but when in the 
midst of the reading the committee had heard these words 
“he has no practice,” one man present said, “Ho, I know 
that’s a lie, for I have seen some very influential men who 
engaged his service, and although I myself am not a citizen 
of rank, I have consulted him.” 

The Papal Legate, Borromeo, thereupon, spoke up 
quickly, “I am abundantly able to testify,” he said, “that 
Cardano cured my mother when her condition was given 
up as hopeless by all who attended her.” 

Then the former rejoined that perhaps there was only 
as much truth in the other statements as appeared in this, 
to which the Cardinal agreed. The Intelligencer was 
silenced and had the grace to look ashamed. 

Consequently they came to this decision, that I should 
enter upon the office of professor for one year only, follow¬ 
ing the action of the committee; after that, quoting the 
terms, “if he will prove himself the sort of man described 
in the letter or otherwise unprofitable to the Academy and 
to the City of Bologna, let us suffer him to seek a post for 
himself elsewhere. But if we decide otherwise, the terms 
of the contract may later be confirmed, and the stipend 
established.” There was already a disagreement over the 
salary. The Pontifical Legate assented, and so the busi¬ 
ness was concluded. 



CALUMNY, DEFAMATIONS, AND TREACHERY 69 

Not content with this, the committee directed a delegate 
from the Senate to meet me for the purpose of discussing 
the conditions of our agreement. He was to secure a modi¬ 
fication of the terms already made, but I would not comply. 
He offered a smaller salary; no classroom for lecturing was 
definitely assigned; travelling expenses were not included. 
When he could get no satisfaction from me, he was forced 
to withdraw, and to return with all the original conditions 
stipulated in my contract. 

Although such treachery may seem an impediment, and 
calculated to thwart its object, this notion arises from a 
false idea of men, since all the ends of mortal activity can 
anticipate nothing more than a brief foreclosure, and are 
by no means as things everlasting. It is enough for the 
philosopher if he merely bears in mind the existence of 
such things and does not try to remedy them. The half 
of them amount to exactly nothing—not even the shadow 
of a dream, as anyone may observe and clearly see in his 
own actions; therefore they should not be taken seriously, 
since they have their limitations, and are precisely as signif¬ 
icant as the games boys play with nuts for each player. 
If the boy thinks the outcome of these childish contests has 
something to do with winning laurels, or civil honors, or 
even a kingdom which will come to him when he grows 
to be a man because of some connection such as cause or 
precedent—how can he be other than a great fool ? 

After the preceding events, when I had at length entered 
upon my professorship, my opponents managed to dis¬ 
possess me of my lecture room by this scheme: my lecture 
was scheduled for a period near the breakfast hour, and 
then the room allotted at that hour to another teacher. 



70 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


I offered three suggestions as against this vexation: that 
the other professor should begin and close his lecture 
earlier; or that he should give up the room entirely and 
permit me to be free to lecture in the room assigned; or 
else that he should use the room and I should be at liberty 
to choose another. When I saw that he was reluctant to 
take up with any of these propositions, I had it arranged 
at the next election that he should hold his classes else¬ 
where. 

Out of this arose trouble and tears; one case of accusation 
after another interrupted my work, since I frustrated their 
conspiracies, and they were forced to see a man whom 
they hated lecturing . 2 Eventually, toward the end of my 
contract, rumors were circulated and even deliberately car¬ 
ried to the ears of Cardinal Morone, to the effect that only a 
handful attended my classes. This was not at all true. In¬ 
deed, from the opening of the session until Lent, I had had 
many auditors. Consequently, assailed by so many envious 
rivals and surrounded by innumerable plots, I thought the 
greatest virtue lay, as they say, in yielding to the force of 
circumstances. 

Therefore, under the guise of consulting my honor, my 
enemies persuaded the Cardinal that I ought to resign 
voluntarily. They secured his action in the matter; and 
so the affair went through, more in compliance with the 
will of those who so urgently desired my removal, than in 
any wish for my happier lot. 

Henceforth I am determined to say nothing on the sub¬ 
ject of calumny and malicious slander; it is an evil so 
great, so persistent, and withal so contemptible and so 
irrational that it relies on nothing except far-fetched rumors 



CALUMNY, DEFAMATIONS, AND TREACHERY 71 

and hinted accusations. And perhaps it was more hurtful 
for my calumniators to have been tormented by their own 
guilty conscience than for me to have been thwarted. For 
truly, they have left me more time for collecting my literary 
works; they have increased my fame; they have lengthened 
my life in releasing me from labors beyond my strength; 
they have provided me with an opportunity to enjoy my¬ 
self, and devote myself to the investigation of many things 
not fully revealed to man. 

I am, therefore, in the habit of saying—nay, the word is 
ever in my mouth—that I do not hate them nor regard 
them as culpable because they had their evil way with me, 
but because it was their evil purpose to thwart me. 

What other bitter vicissitudes came down upon me, even 
before I was invited to Bologna, I shall set forth later in 
this account, in chapter thirty-three. 



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 


Those Things in Which I Take Pleasure 

Among the things which please me greatly are stilettos, 
or stili for writing; for them I have spent more than twenty 
gold crowns, and much money besides for other sorts of 
pens. I daresay the writing materials which I have got at 
one time and another could not be bought for two hundred 
crowns. Besides these, I take great pleasure in gems, in 
metal bowls, in vessels of copper or silver, in painted glass 
globes and in rare books . 1 

I enjoy swimming a little and fishing very much. I was 
devoted to the art of angling as long as I remained at Pavia 
and I am sorry I ever changed. 

The reading of history gives me extraordinary satisfac¬ 
tion, as well as readings in philosophy, in Aristotle and 
Plotinus, and the study of treatises on the revelations of 
mysteries, and especially treatises on medical questions. 

In the Italian poets, Petrarch and Luigi Pulci , 2 I find 
great delight. 

I prefer solitude to companions, since there are so few 
men who are trustworthy, and almost none truly learned. 
I do not say this because I demand scholarship in all men— 
although the sum total of men’s learning is small enough; 
but I question whether we should allow anyone to waste 
our time. The wasting of time is an abomination. 


[ 72 ] 



CHAPTER NINETEEN 


Gambling and Dicing 

Peradventure in no respect can I be deemed worthy of 
praise; for so surely as I was inordinately addicted to the 
chess-board and the dicing table, I know that I must rather 
be considered deserving of the severest censure. I gambled 
at both for many years, at chess more than forty years, at 
dice about twenty-five; and not only every year, but—I say 
it with shame—every day, and with the loss at once of 
thought, of substance, and of time . 1 

Nor was the smallest ground for defense left me. If, 
nevertheless, anyone may wish to rise in my defense, let 
him not say that I had any love for gambling, but rather 
that I loathed the necessities which goaded me to gambling 
—calumnies, injustices, poverty, the contemptuous behavior 
of certain men, the lack of organization in my affairs, the 
realization that I was despised by many, my own morbid 
nature, and finally the graceless idleness which sprang 
from all these. It is a proof of the foregoing assertion that 
once I was privileged to act a respectable part in life, I 
abandoned those low diversions. Accordingly it was not 
a love of gambling, not a taste for riotous living which 
lured me, but the odium of my estate and a desire to escape, 
which compelled me. 

Although I have expounded many remarkable facts in a 
book on the combinations in chess, certain of these com¬ 
binations escaped me because I was busy with other oc¬ 
cupations. Eight or ten plays which I was never able to 

[ 73 ] 



74 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


recapture, seemed to outwit human ingenuity, and ap¬ 
peared to be stalemates. 

I have added these remarks to advise any who may by 
chance happen upon the same extraordinary situations— 
and I hope somebody may- 1 —so that they may add their jot 
or tittle to the solution. 



CHAPTER TWENTY 


Dress 

Of myself I have the same opinion as Horace had of his 
Tigellius; rather I might have said Horace was then speak¬ 
ing of me in the character of Tigellius: 

Nil aequale homini fuit illi; saepe velut qui 
Currebat fugiens hostem; persaepe velut qui 
Junonis sacra ferret; habebat saepe ducentos, 

Saepe decern servos; modo reges, atque tetrarchas, 

Omnia magna loquens; modo, Sit mihi mensa tripes et 
Concha salis puri, et toga quae defendere frigus 
Quamvis crassa queat . 1 

You ask why this comparison; the reasons, forsooth, are 
ready. First, the variety of my interests and my habits 
coupled with the fact that I am ever solicitous for the 
health of my body. And since I have often moved from 
one country to another, I have found it necessary to make 
a change in the arrangement of my garments. This would 
leave on hand clothes which it did not seem desirable to 
sell on account of the loss involved, or to keep to no pur¬ 
pose. Accordingly, necessity dictated my practice in 
dressing. 

A second consideration no less important than the latter, 
though less urgent, is my own indifference towards 
domestic or personal matters in the interests of study, and 
the consequent neglect of the care of my clothes because 
of the remissness of my servants. In this way, a large ward- 

[ 75 ] 



7 6 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


robe is apt to be reduced by wear to a few rags before I 
notice it. 

Wherefore, I by no means disdain the advice of Galen, 
who taught that a man ought to be content with four sets 
of garments, or only two, if you do not count his under¬ 
shirts. However, I am of the opinion that such garments, 
after they have done their duty for a given occasion, may 
be interchanged, and indeed ought to be. 

I think four suits would be sufficient for any man of us, 
so that we could wear our choice of two heavy garments, 
one medium in weight, and the other very warm; and of 
two lighter, one, likewise, medium in weight, and one 
very thin. With these, fourteen combinations of apparel 
would be possible, not counting the arrangement by which 
all could be worn at once! 



CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE 


My Manner of Walking and of Thinking 

Because I think as I walk, my gait is uneven, unless some¬ 
body claims my attention. My feet are moved, and often 
my hands, even, make gestures at the bidding of my rest¬ 
less mind. The very diversity of my concerns, the circum¬ 
stances that befall me, nay, the very disposition of my body, 
influence my going. When I am well, when I am buoyant 
and not weary, I hasten along carefree and happy; con¬ 
trary circumstances retard my steps. My gait, therefore, 
is likely to resolve itself into a subject for comment—be¬ 
come a by-word—for I stagger along heedlessly, meditating 
on many a topic alien to my surroundings. 

In general, all things which a hard necessity controls are 
variable; yet an impulse of the mind governs each man, so 
that he can persist in what is good and be unwilling to 
hold to evil. This can be accomplished only by constant 
application of thought, though not necessarily always upon 
the same themes. Nevertheless, sustained thought takes 
such complete possession of me that I may neither eat, nor 
enjoy myself, nor even succumb to grief or sleep without 
attendant meditation. This, then, is a great good which 
may ward off evil and offer relaxation, and yet should it 
cease, I know not whether the result would be a help or 
a hindrance. 

For the rest, my walk is not quick, nor slow; now I 
proceed with head and shoulders erect, and again I go bent, 
differing little, and in this respect especially, from the man¬ 
ner of my gait in my youth. 

[ 77 ] 



CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO 


Religion and Piety 

Though I was born in most troublesome times , 1 and have 
been subjected to the influence of so many experiences; 
though in my many journeys I have met men not simply 
strangers to religion, but indeed the enemies of religion, I 
have not lost my faith; and this I must attribute more to a 
miracle than to my own wisdom; more to Divine Provi¬ 
dence than to my own virtue. Steadfastly, in fact from my 
earliest childhood, I have made this my prayer: “Lord God, 
in thine infinite goodness grant me long life, and wisdom, 
and health of mind and body.” Wherefore it is no marvel 
if I have ever been most devoted to religion and to the 
worship of God. 

Indeed, it seems that I have been the recipient of other 
gifts as well—such things, however, as are apparently more 
another’s needs than my own. At all times, I have enjoyed 
a certain health, in spite of my complaints. I have become 
more learned, so to speak, in matters to which I gave little 
study, and in which I had no schooling, than in subjects 
for which I had resorted to teachers. Where duty was con¬ 
cerned, I was somewhat more assiduous; I fought against 
my son’s death and that terrible grief; yet he was bound to 
die, and, in that same year, the infant he had left, came 
near to dying, so that my son would have had no issue, but 
my grandson—his child—lived and still lives. 

Yet why moan on ? Why compare mortal wretchedness 

[78] 



RELIGION AND PIETY 


79 


and pain to the joys of those who have won immortality ? 
If he had never existed at all! Or if he had not perished 
at that time, would he have lived forever? What dif¬ 
ference then, to me, if I have suffered some loss? Oh, 
senseless soliloquies of men! Oh, unutterable delirium! 

Not only do I keep ever in mind the divine majesty of 
God, but turn my meditation as well upon the Blessed 
Virgin Mary, and holy Saint Martin; for I had been warned 
in a dream that under his aegis I should lead a quiet exist¬ 
ence and enjoy long life. 

At one time I wrote a long essay which I here give in 
summary, on the theme that the evils of this life can in no 
manner be equal to that bliss which we trust is in store for 
us; that we find no difficulty at those times when unusual 
circumstances of a certain sort surround us, in being so 
moved that doubt is not possible, and we feel that every¬ 
thing is as it should be. But when these circumstances fall 
away, everything seems to be a dream. 

Oh, would that, had it so pleased God, this Charybdis of 
uncertainty might have given place to a sense of duty as 
great. For if men would have reverence for the commands 
of heaven, if they considered how richly they might enjoy 
the blessed satisfaction of having remembered to observe 
God’s will, they would live more devoutly and would lead 
exemplary lives. But I realize that I am laboring at an 
extremely unpopular task in wishing to ordain for mortals 
a commandment of wisdom. In this my devoutness sweeps 
me on, and sorrow for men of wretched estate. Accord¬ 
ingly, I consider that, in the number of those who have 
made their humble contributions to a discussion of the 
immortality of the soul, I have written quite naturally, and 



8o 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


in a manner by no means at variance with Plato, Aristotle, 
or Plotinus, and in no way opposed to reason or under¬ 
standing. 

Of Plato, moreover, a certain gravity is characteristic; 
Aristotle is gifted with logical or rhetorical division; in 
Plotinus one feels the lack of definition and applications. 
Of this last, however, I was not the discoverer, but cheer¬ 
fully ascribe the criticism originally to Avicenna 2 who is 
much like him among the philosophers. 



CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE 


My Own Particular Rules of Conduct 

In no respect have I shown myself more adept than in 
formulating my experiences, partly because of my long 
life, partly because of my numberless adversities. First, 
then, aside from those inept little prayers of my childhood 
when I was just beginning to learn, I have been in the 
habit of returning thanks to God for all that has happened 
to me. I have thanked him for the gracious favors he has 
bestowed; indeed I should consider anyone base and a 
brute who would not return gratitude even to man for 
such blessings. I have thanked him in adversity, and have 
accepted the light afflictions as admonitions wherefrom I 
might take warning. Oh, how many times, taught by my 
trials, have I avoided the most devastating calamities! 

For the barely tolerable troubles of my life—even to 
these I feel I am indebted—I return him thanks, because 
I believe that none of these things which time is wont to 
obliterate can be momentous; and I recognize that God is 
the dispenser of all my afflictions which, though they may 
have seemed oppressive at the time, I doubt not were very 
good in the great order of the universe. Granted that 
death is inevitable, a host of disasters may render it easier 
to bear. As ^Egineta 1 used to say: “He who passes a large 
stone from the bladder suffers less, by contrast with his 
preceding pains, than he who passes a small gravel, and he 
is less likely, therefore, to perish.” Even in the very ex- 

[ 81 ] 



82 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


tremity of my suffering I am persuaded that God did not 
forget me, and with this assurance I have fought off death— 
mirabile dictul —in the midst of death. 

My second noteworthy observation was that I ought ever 
to pray to know the purpose of God; even in accordance 
with the Scripture I invoke the spirit of high God, that he 
may teach me to do his will, because he is my God. Behold 
how good, how pleasant are his ways! I was sustained by 
threefold comfort in my calamity: for he gave before he 
took away; he kept me safe against the sweeping billows 
of life’s sea; he granted me a tranquil existence. 

A third rule was that when I had lost, I should not be 
content merely to redeem the loss, but should always obtain 
something in addition. I am, no less, one of few men who 
enjoy experimenting with life as well as acting from care¬ 
fully deliberated motives. 

In the fourth place, I made it a practice that I should 
take the most careful account of my time. As I rode or 
ate or conversed, or as I lay in bed sleepless, I was ever 
meditating upon something, for I had in mind that com¬ 
mon adage: “Multa modica faciunt unum satis.” That is, 
the many small things soon make one of size! 

Here I shall tell a brief tale, and a true one. While I 
was living in the Ranuzzi mansions in Bologna, there were 
two apartments, one of which was dingy but safe; the other 
was gorgeously decorated as to the walls, but over them 
hung a dilapidated ceiling, threatening momentarily to col¬ 
lapse. Parts of it had fallen while I was living there, with 
no little danger to my life, had I been underneath; and 
when finally a shower of fragments came down at once, I 
barely escaped, with my head intact, to safety . 2 



MY OWN PARTICULAR RULES OF CONDUCT 83 

By a fifth rule I observed that it was well to cultivate the 
society of elderly men and be with them frequently. 

A sixth practice was to observe all things, and not to 
think that anything happened fortuitously in nature; 
whereby it has come about that I am richer in the knowl¬ 
edge of Nature’s secrets than I am in money. 

Always to set certainties before uncertainties has been a 
seventh guiding principle; and as a result of this I have 
been so fortunate that I am persuaded I owe most of the 
events of lucky issue in my career to this resolution. 

My eighth axiom bids me never to be persuaded, for any 
reason whatever, to persist willingly in any course which is 
turning out for the worse; in this I pay tribute to experi¬ 
ence rather than to my own wisdom or to any over- 
confidence in my own skill; this is especially true in the 
cure of the sick; in other things I have been willing to 
intrust myself to chance. I do not regret what has once 
been done, saying as do many, “What if I had done thus 
and so ?” What is the good of this ? To question too much 
wherein lies the greater gain may prove no gain at all be¬ 
cause of expenditure of time. 

In caring for the sick you should never regard action as 
second to efficacy: that is, you should prefer an irrigation to 
an untreated fistula; you should not neglect the water of 
the intestines in a case of dropsy. When, after employing 
a rather more potent remedy, or one of the customary treat¬ 
ments, especially if it be one held in good repute, your re¬ 
sults are not what you expected, you should then proceed so 
much the more gently; for, as I have always maintained, all 
remedies should be suitable . 3 

Unless I am at leisure, I undertake no particularly di$.- 



8 4 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


putatious engagements, not only because it is more expedi¬ 
ent, but because in this way I do not waste time. 

I never slash at a friendship that has proved faithless; I 
gently ravel the threads that have woven our interests 
together. 

Shortly after I was seventy-five I expressed my unwilling¬ 
ness to be present for a fee at a consultation unless I knew 
how many or who my associates were to be. 

Flee any occasion to let familiarity breed contempt. 

As far as I have been able, I have trusted less to my 
memory, and more to the written word. 



CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR 


My Dwelling Places 

When I was a child my home was at Milan in the Via 
dell’ Arena by the Pavian Gate . 1 From there we moved 
to the Via dei Maini 2 which was in that part of the city 
near the castle, and later we rented a house of Lazzaro 
Soncino. That was when I was a small boy. 

During my youth we lived in the Via dei Rovelli in a 
house belonging to Girolamo Ermenolfo, and following 
that, in a property of the Cusani. In young manhood, up 
to my nineteenth year I lived in Alessandro Cardano’s 
house. 

At Pavia I occupied successively, a house near the church 
of San Giovanni in Burgo , 3 one near the church of Santa 
Maria di Venere 4 which belonged to the Catanei, and 
another near the church of San Gregorio in Monfalcono in 
Burgoliate. Later I moved to a place near the University 
halls, adjoining the residence of the deputy Ceranova, and 
shortly after bought a house of my own near the church of 
Santa Maria in Pertica . 5 

At Bologna I first took a place in the Via de Gombru , 6 
but left it for the Palazzo Ranuzzi in the Via del Galera. 
Later I purchased a property near the church of San 
Giovanni in Monte . 7 

At Rome I first had residence near the Porta del Populo 
in the square of San Girolamo hard by the Curia Savelli. 

[ 85 ] 



86 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


My next home in that city was in the Via Giulia near 
Santa Maria di Montserrato. 

Long before this I had once lived in a house my mother 
had bought in Milan adjoining the church of San Michele 
di Chiusa. Thence we went to the Porta Orientale; from 
there to the Via Cinque; and finally, from a rebuilt house 
which had once fallen down, I returned to the first, near 
San Michele. 



CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE 


Poverty and Losses in My Patrimony 

I was poor, yet not greedy for gain; nor did I strive after 
the vain and ostentatious grandeur of outward show. My 
domestic concerns suffered a fall because of war in my coun¬ 
try accompanied by excessive tax levies, and because I was 
almost never without a numerous household. I was ca- 
luminated by my bitter rivals; for a long time the College 
of Physicians at Milan refused to recognize me. I was 
more than once a heedless wastrel. My body was a weak 
thing, and my affairs tottered upon foundations under¬ 
mined by frauds. I spent money lavishly for books, and 
wasted much substance in moving so often, whether from 
city to city, or from one residence to another. 

The time I trifled away at Gallarate was profitless; in 
nineteen months I scarcely earned twenty-five crowns to¬ 
ward the rent of my house. In a turn of ill-luck at dicing, 
I put to pawn my wife’s jewelry and some of the furniture. 
And though it is confounding to admit that I was capable 
of squandering our very substance, it is more surprising 
that in my destitution I did not take to begging; stranger 
still, that I never even seriously considered that my course 
was an insult to my ancestors, to a decent standard of man¬ 
hood, and to the honors which I had achieved, and by 
virtue of which I was later to become prosperous. I went 
my reckless way serenely. 

This state of affairs left its imprint upon my career for the 

[ 87 ] 



88 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


next fifteen years, nor in this time did I exhibit any desire 
to profit by the offices of a practicing physician. 

“Indeed,” you will say, “how did you support yourself? 
Did you give private instruction?” “No, I did not.” 

“Did you accept a loan without security ?” “No.” 

“Did you not apply to some one for a gratuity?” “No. 
I doubted that I should get it, and I was ashamed.” 

“Perhaps you cut down on your living?” “Not that 
either.” 

“What then?” 

“I wrote almanacs; I lectured under the Plat Endowment 
in the public halls of instruction. I got together a little by 
practice of medicine; my several house-servants were re¬ 
sourceful. The family of Archinto patronized me at times 
with small donations, and I sold prescriptions. I kept my 
eyes open for all contingencies, and imitated the gleaners 
of the field. Upon fine clothes I steadfastly turned my 
back. 

“Thus I bore the fortune of those difficult days and pre¬ 
pared myself the better to play my part in the enjoyment 
of prosperity.” 



CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX 


Marriage and Children 

Many years ago I dwelt in the town of Sacco, a gay and 
happy young man, free, as freedom goes, from all cares, a 
mortal in the seats of the high gods as it were, or better 
said, in the realms of bliss. At the risk of being irrelevant 
I must at this point refer to a dream which is too appro¬ 
priate to my theme to pass over. On a certain night I 
seemed to be in a delightful garden of surpassing charm, 
gay with flowers and abounding in fruits of divers sorts; 
a gentle breeze was murmuring. No painter could have 
depicted anything more lovely, nor could Pulci, the poet, 
have captured it in song, nor the imagination have framed 
its like. 

At the entrance, moreover, of the garden, a gate stood 
open; a door facing it also opened, and lo, in my presence 
stood a girl dressed in shining white. I seemed to embrace 
her and kiss her, but at the first caress, a gardener imme¬ 
diately appeared and closed the door. Earnestly I began 
to plead with him to leave it open, but he would not. 
Sadly then, and clinging to the girl, I seemed to stand there, 
shut out. 

A few days after I had dreamed this, a house in the town 
burned, and I was roused up at night to go to the fire. I 
knew who owned the house—one Aldobello Bandarini , 1 an 
officer of the Venetian Militia levied in the country around 
Padua. I was not greatly concerned. I scarcely knew the 

[ 89 ] 



90 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


man by sight, but I was not at all pleased when, by a mere 
chance, he rented the house adjoining my own; he was not 
the sort of neighbor I would have desired, but what could 
Ido? 

Meanwhile, after an interval of some days I saw, from 
the street, a maiden who exactly resembled in face and 
fashion of dress the girl of my dream. “Oh,” said I, “what 
have I to do with this maiden? If I, a pauper, marry a 
wife who has no dot save a troop of dependent brothers and 
sisters, I’m done for! I can scarcely pay my expenses as it 
is! If I should attempt an abduction, or try to seduce her , 2 
there would be plenty to spy upon me. Her father, a 
fellow-townsman and an officer of militia, will never 
tolerate any violence of that sort, and, in any case, what 
course would I adopt to carry out such a design? Alas, 
for the affair to turn out well at all, I should be obliged 
to flee.” 

These considerations, and others like them, filled my 
mind as I examined every possibility; I felt it was better to 
die than to go on living thus. From that day, I ceased 
merely to love the girl; I was fairly consumed with passion. 
I knew how much I dared hope for from the reading of 
my dream; I knew I was free from the bonds of impotency . 3 
Nothing loath I married her, for she was willing too; her 
parents were even soliciting the match, and making offers 
of help, should any be needed, for help could do much for 
us just then . 4 

Truth to tell, the interpretation of my dream did not find 
its conclusion in the person of this girl, but revealed the 
full force of its meaning in my sons. For this unfortunate 
union was the cause of all the calamities which befell me 



MARRIAGE AND CHILDREN 


91 


throughout my whole life. Whether these ills were a dis¬ 
pensation of Divine Providence, or whether they were due 
me through my own or my forebears’ sins I know not. I 
only know that otherwise I have steeled myself to rise above 
any misfortunes which may overtake me. 



CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN 


The Disasters of My Sons 

It was in my sons that the full force of my dream was 
manifestly revealed. First, after having twice miscarried 
and borne two males of four months, so that I began to 
despair of issue, and at times suspected some malefic in¬ 
fluence at work, my wife brought forth my first born son— 
a child exactly resembling my own father in features. In 
his youth he showed himself good, kind, and simple- 
hearted. He was deaf in his right ear and had small, 
white, restless eyes. Two toes on his left foot, the third 
and fourth counting from the great toe, unless I am mis¬ 
taken, were joined by one membrane. His back was 
slightly hunched, but not to the extent of a deformity. The 
boy led a tranquil existence up to his twenty-third year. 
After that he fell in love, about the time he was granted 
his degree, and married a dowerless wife, Brandonia di 
Seroni. 

His mother, as I have said, had long since passed away; 
and much before that, even, his maternal grandfather, who, 
as a matter of fact, had survived my marriage to his daugh¬ 
ter but a few months. Only his mother’s mother, Taddea, 
was still alive. 

Then in truth came grief and tears! For in times past, 
while his mother lived, I had patiently suffered much, but 
these ills had finally had an end. I refer to the time when 
I was enduring the attacks of my enemies. My son, be- 

[ 92 ] 



THE DISASTERS OF MY SONS 


93 


tween the day of his marriage and the day of his doom, had 
been accused of attempting to poison his wife while she 
was still in the weakness attendant upon childbirth. On 
the 17th day of February he was apprehended, and fifty- 
three days'* after, on April 13th, he was beheaded in prison. 

And this was my supreme, my crowning misfortune; 
because of this, it was neither becoming for me to be re¬ 
tained in my office, nor could I justly be dismissed. I could 
neither continue to live in my native city with any peace, 
nor in security move elsewhere. I walked abroad an object 
of scorn; I conversed with my fellows abjectly, as one 
despised, and, as one of unwelcome presence, avoided my 
friends. 

What course to take failed to present itself; I had no 
place to withdraw; I know not whether I was more un¬ 
happy than hated. 

Hard upon this succeeded the folly, the ignominious con¬ 
duct, and violent actions of my younger son until nothing 
could have contributed to his further disgrace. I was 
obliged to have him imprisoned more than once, to con¬ 
demn him to exile, and to cut him off from his paternal 
inheritance; nor was there any property from his mother’s 
side. 

From my daughter alone have I suffered no vexations 
beyond the getting together of her dowry; but this obliga¬ 
tion to her I discharged, as was right, with pleasure. 

From my eldest son I took two grandchildren to rear, 
yet one house—mine—witnessed, within the space of a few 


*Cardan again makes an error in computation; there are fifty- 
five days between the dates. 



94 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


days, three funerals, that of my son, of my little grand¬ 
daughter, Diaregina, and of the baby’s nurse; nor was the 
infant grandson far from dying. In general, everything per¬ 
taining to my children had the worst possible issue. Even 
my daughter, in whom at least some hope of good had 
resided, married as she was to the prosperous and distin¬ 
guished young Bartolomeo Sacco, a citizen of Milan, was 
barren; thus the sole hope of succession rested in my 
grandson. 

I am by no means unaware that these afflictions may seem 
meaningless to future generations, and more especially to 
strangers; but there is nothing, as I have said, in this mortal 
life except inanity, emptiness, and dream-shadows. What 
is that basis on which, more than any other, all acts of 
mortals, all their affairs, their very life and their vicissitudes 
may find a firm foundation? But, as in Cranto, 1 Cicero, 
the father of eloquence, shows how he may find consola¬ 
tion in the death of his daughter, so, out of the greatest 
adversities of this sort, mortal things may find, now here, 
now there, new meaning and testify that they are destined 
for a purpose and a use not to be despised. 

For the rest, it is clear to me that only those things seem 
noteworthy which are generally recorded in books, such as 
a series of great events arising from the most insignificant 
beginnings. In recounting these the narration should move 
briskly and each incident be set forth with the most scrupu¬ 
lous order, so that the finished picture may be a fair repre¬ 
sentation of actual history. Or again, the portrayal of con¬ 
spicuous performances, which have come about through 
one man’s lofty character or another’s baseness, or by mere 



THE DISASTERS OF MY SONS 


95 


chance, should be told as succinctly as possible, unless a 
discussion of art, or philosophy is involved. 

But today—O tempora! O mores!—we write naught save 
servile flatteries. It is legitimate to extol those worthy of 
it on the score of high character and blameless life, as 
Pliny honored Trajan and Horace honored Maecenas. But 
we, stupidly, go about explaining how the thing should be 
done. If only a man could realize that this flattery is in no 
way praiseworthy, but rather most disgusting, like two 
mules who scratch each other. If, however, it is really de¬ 
served, then give it a word in passing, as if it were a well 
known fact, just as Pliny the Younger did when he referred 
to Martial. 

A book which is worth buying ought to seek perfection 
in wisdom as well as in art. That is a perfect book which, 
pursuing a single theme from the beginning, arrives thereby 
at a logical conclusion; it neither omits any relevant point, 
nor includes the irrelevant; it conforms to the rules of 
rhetorical division; it offers some explanation of recondite 
matters and gives evidence of the fundamental principles 
on which its argument is based; or it may be a work which 
accurately interprets a master of some art, as Vitruvius has 
been interpreted by Philandrier. 2 



CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT 


Processes at Law 

From the death of my father up to my forty-sixth year, 
that is, for twenty-three years, I was almost constantly en¬ 
gaged in suits at law. The first, with Alessandro Castiglione, 
called Gatico, was in connection with certain woodlands. 
This suit was afterwards continued with his kinsmen. The 
next litigation was with the Counts Barbiani; following 
that, with the College of Physicians at Milan, and finally 
with the estate and heirs of Dominico de Torris, who had 
held me at the baptismal fount. I won all these cases. 
It was a marvel that I should obtain a verdict against 
Alessandro Castiglione; his uncle was the presiding judge, 
and he himself had obtained a judgment against me which 
had been reversed in the process, in the language of juris¬ 
consults, and I forced him to pay all money due me. 

By a similar turn of fortune I was first considered as a 
candidate by the rectors of the college at Milan, and ex¬ 
cluded by a majority vote; my admission was then ratified 
at the final election, and I was made an associate, subject 
to the college. I was not, however, admitted on equal terms 
though eventually received full privileges in the face of a 
strong opposition. 

I came to an agreement with the Barbiani also, after long 
process, threats and other obstacles, and, having received 
the stipulated sum, was at last entirely free from the law- 
court. 


[ 96 ] 


CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE 


Journeys 

In the course of my many journeys I have visited almost 
the whole of Italy, excepting Naples, Apulia, and the 
regions neighboring these. Likewise I have seen Germany, 
especially lower Germany, Switzerland and Tyrol; besides 
these countries, I have been in France, England, and Scot¬ 
land; and I will tell how this happened. 

John Hamilton, 1 Archbishop of St. Andrews, was a chief 
of state in Scotland. He was natural brother to the regent, 
Pontifical legate and primate. He suffered with periodic 
attacks of asthma, recurring, in the beginning, at some¬ 
what lengthy intervals. When he had reached his fortieth 
year, the interval was reduced to eight days, and death 
seemed imminent, inasmuch as in twenty-four hours, he 
was eased by no, or at best by very slight, relief. He re¬ 
peatedly consulted, but in vain, the court physicians of 
Charles V, then Emperor, and of Henry, King of France. 
Finally, my name having come to his ears, he sent, through 
the intermediation of his own physician, two hundred 
crowns to me in Milan, to the end that I should proceed 
to Lyons, or to Paris at most, implying that he would come 
there. I, since I was not at that time engaged in lecturing, 
as I have explained above, willingly welcomed his terms. 

And so in the year 1552 on February 23, I was ready to 
set out upon my journey, crossing by way of Domo d’ 
Ossola, Sion, Geneva, and Mount Simplon; and, leaving 

[ 97 ] 



9 8 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


Lake Geneva behind, I arrived in Lyons on the 13th of 
March. It was during the Milanese carnival, on the sixth 
day, by common reckoning. 

There I tarried forty-six days, but not a glimpse of the 
Archbishop, nor the physician himself, whom I was await¬ 
ing. Meanwhile, my fees for services much more than paid 
my expenses. Lodovico Birague, the distinguished Milanese 
citizen, with whom I had long maintained an intimate 
friendship, was there, serving at that time as captain of the 
royal infantry. He went so far as to come to me with an 
offer of a yearly stipend of a thousand crowns if I would 
enter the service of Marshal Brissac. 2 During this time, 
William Casanate, physician to the Archbishop, arrived, 
bringing with him an additional three hundred crowns 
which he gave me in order that I might be encouraged to 
proceed to Scotland. He offered to defray all my traveling 
expenses thither, and made promises of additional liberal 
rewards. 

Accordingly I was conducted across the country, by way 
of the River Loire, to Paris. There I happened to see the 
great Orontius, 3 but he refused to visit me. 

Nicholas LeGrand 4 took me to see the private treasure 
vaults of the King of France at the church of St. Denis, a 
place of no very great fame, but rather the more note¬ 
worthy in my estimation especially because of the perfect 
horn of a unicorn preserved therein. 

Thereafter, a conference was held with the physicians to 
the King. We dined together, but they did not succeed in 
getting an expression of my views at table, because before 
the meal they had wished me to take precedence in ex¬ 
pressing my opinion. 



JOURNEYS 


99 


I continued my journey on the best of terms with Jean 
Fernel, Jaques de la Boe, 5 and another court physician, all 
of whom I left regretfully. I went on to Boulogne in 
France; whence, escorted by fourteen armed riders, and 
twenty soldiers, at the order of the Prince of Sarepont, I 
traveled on to Calais. There I saw the tower of Caesar still 
standing. 

Therefrom, having crossed an arm of the sea, I went to 
London. At length I came to Edinburgh, to the side of 
the Archbishop, on the 29th of June. I remained there 
until the 13th of September. For my services I received 
another 400 gold crowns, one neck-chain worth 25 crowns, 
a thoroughbred riding-horse, and many other gifts, so that 
not a single member of my party went away empty- 
handed. 

Returning, I came first to Brabant, and in the region 
about Tongres I visited Gravelines, Antwerp, Bruges, 
Ghent, Brussels, Louvain, Malines, Liege, Aix-la-Chapelle, 
Cologne, Coblenz, Kleve, Andernach, Mainz, Worms, 
Spires, Strasburg, Basle, Neustadt, Berne, Besan^on, cross¬ 
ing through the heart of the Tyrolese state, and visiting 
Chur and Chiavenna, cities of this region. Finally, cross¬ 
ing Lake Como, I reached Milan on January 3, 1553. 

Of all these places, I tarried only in Antwerp, Basle, and 
Besan^on. My friends in Antwerp made every effort to 
retain me. 

At London I was granted an audience with the King, 
and while there accepted one gift of an hundred crowns, 
and rejected another of five hundred—some say a thousand, 
the truth of which I am not able to ascertain—because I 
was not willing to give acknowledgment to a title of the 



100 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


king in prejudice to the Pope. 8 While in Scotland, I be¬ 
came an intimate friend of the Due du Cell, Viceroy of 
the French. 

At Basle I almost took lodging in a hostelry infested with 
the plague; and, indeed, would have done so, had I not 
been warned by Guglielmo Gratarolo. At Besan^on I was 
hospitably received by the Prelate of Lisieux, as I have al¬ 
ready noted; he presented me with gifts, as was the case 
elsewhere. 

Altogether, I have lived four years at Rome. I spent nine 
at Bologna, three at Padua, twelve at Pavia, four at Moirago 
—the first four of my life—and one at Gallarate. I was in 
the town of Sacco almost six years, and in Milan thirty-two. 
I made three successive moves within three years. 

Besides my long journey to Scotland, I went to Venice 
and Genoa, and visited the cities which are on the way— 
Bergamo, Crema, Brescia and others. I went, as well, to 
Ferrara and to Florence, and beyond Voghera and Tortona. 

Briefly, I may say I am familiar with nearly the whole 
of Italy excepting the Kingdom of Naples and states ad¬ 
joining, as the old Apulian region, ancient Latium, the 
Marches, Umbria, Calabria, ancient Magna Graecia and 
Lucania, and Abruzzi. 

But, you will ask, to what purpose is this account of all 
these cities? There is great value: for if you will look 
about you only a single day, according to the suggestion of 
Hippocrates, you will know what may be the nature of 
the place and the customs of the inhabitants, what section 
of the city it is better to choose, and what diseases are 
prevalent. We may also determine which of the regions we 
visit is more favorable, for at one time an entire district will 



JOURNEYS 


101 


prove scarcely habitable because of the cold, and again 
another district undesirable on account of troublesome 
times. 

An acquaintance with other lands is, besides, profitable 
for the better understanding of history, and especially help¬ 
ful to mathematicians writing treatises on geography, or to 
anyone interested in the nature and productive usefulness 
of plants and animals. Again it gives one a knowledge of 
the routes mainly traveled; and out of the experiences of 
travel many books on this subject are published in Italian, 
thus presenting additional information about things far 
distant. 



CHAPTER THIRTY 


Perils, Accidents, and Manifold, Diverse, and 
Persistent Treacheries 

The accidents which I am about to relate happened to 
me when I was residing in the house of the Catanei at Pavia. 
One morning I was going to the University halls. Snow 
lay upon the ground. I had paused to relieve myself beside 
a ruined wall on the right of the school premises; and 
therefrom, as I continued my way through the lower part 
of the passage, a loosened tile tumbled perpendicularly. 
I avoided this peril only because I could not walk through 
the snow which filled the upper pathway, next the wall, 
where my companion had urged me to go. 

In the following year, 1540, if I am not mistaken, when 
I was passing through the Via Oriental, it suddenly oc¬ 
curred to me, for no reason whatsoever, to cross from the 
left side to the right; and when I was once over, a great 
mass of cement fell from a very high cornice on the op¬ 
posite side, precisely such a distance ahead of me that cer¬ 
tainly, unless I had changed my course, it would have 
ground me to bits; thanks to God, I escaped. 

Shortly after, near the same place, I, riding a mule, passed 
near a large wagon. I wanted to proceed toward the right, 
for my business was urgent, and the delay was annoying. 
I said to myself, “What if this wain overturns!” And be¬ 
fore long, even as I was stopping there, it did fall, and 

[ 102 ] 



PERILS, ACCIDENTS, AND PERSISTANT TREACHERIES IO3 

there is no doubt that it almost crushed me. I suffered 
visible harm, and had run no small risk. 

It is not on account of this single incident that I marvel 
at the outcome; but because on so many occasions I have 
changed the direction of my going, always involuntarily, 
except in perils of this sort, or perhaps in other dangers I 
have not been aware of. Nevertheless, it is not the signif¬ 
icant event which ought to be wondered at, but rather the 
frequent recurrence of similar instances. 

When I was a boy of eleven, if I am not mistaken, I was 
entering the courtyard of Donato Carchani, a citizen of 
rank, when a small furry dog bit me in the abdomen. I 
was injured in five places, not seriously; but the wounds 
were blackish spots, and in this accident I can say nothing 
less than that I was exposed to I know not what dangers 
of rabies. If this had happened to an older person, what 
the bite had not done, fright would surely have finished 
completely. 

In 1525, the year in which I became rector, I was almost 
drowned in Lake Garda. Rather reluctantly I had boarded 
a craft which was transporting some horses for hiring. Dur¬ 
ing the crossing, the main mast, the rudder, and one of the 
two oars with which the boat was manned, were broken. 
The sail was rent, and even a smaller mast snapped off; 
and at length night overtook us. I reached Sirmione in 
safety after the other passengers had abandoned even their 
faintest hopes, and I was all but desperate. 

Had our embarkation been delayed but the fortieth part 
of an hour, we should have perished; for such a violent 
storm gathered that the iron bars of the window-shutters 
on the inn were bent. Though I had seemed thoroughly 





104 THE BOOK of my life 

uneasy from the first, I contentedly ate a hearty supper once 
an excellent pike appeared on the table. The rest of the 
passengers were not so calm, excepting the counsellor of 
our disastrous voyage, who had, however, done efficient 
service in the moment of our peril. 

Once when I was in Venice on the birthday of the Blessed 
Virgin, I lost some money while gambling; on the follow¬ 
ing day I lost the rest, for I was in the house of a profes¬ 
sional cheat. When I observed that the cards were marked, 
I impetuously slashed his face with my poniard, though not 
deeply. There were in the room two youths, the body- 
servants of my adversary; two lances were fastened to the 
beamed ceiling; the key was turned in the door. 

When, however, I had begun to win and had recovered 
all the money, his, as well as my own, and the clothes and 
rings which I had lost on a previous day, but from the 
beginning of the next day had won back from the start; 
and since I had earlier despatched these belongings to my 
lodging with my servant, I tossed a part of the money 
back, willing to make amends when I saw I had wounded 
him. Then I attacked the house-servants, but since they 
were unable to handle weapons, and were beseeching me 
to spare their lives, I let them off on the condition that 
they should throw open the door of the house. 

The master, seeing such a commotion and tumult in his 
household, and anxiously fearing every moment’s delay, I 
judge, because he had defrauded me in his own house with 
his marked cards, after making a rapid calculation of the 
slight difference between what he had to gain or what to 
lose, ordered the door to be opened; thus I escaped. 

On that same day about eight o’clock in the evening, 



PERILS, ACCIDENTS, AND PERSISTANT TREACHERIES IC >5 

while I was doing my best to escape from the clutches 
of the police because I had offered violence to a Senator, 
and keeping meanwhile my weapons beneath my cloak, I 
suddenly slipped, deceived in the dark, and fell into a canal. 
I kept my presence of mind even as I plunged, threw out 
my right arm, and, grasping the gunwale of a passing boat, 
was rescued by the passengers. When I scrambled aboard 
the skiff, I discovered in it, to my surprise, the Senator with 
whom I had just gambled. He had the wounds on his face 
bound up with a dressing; yet he willingly enough brought 
me out a suit of garments such as sailors wear. Dressed in 
these clothes, I traveled with him as far as Padua. 

Once in Antwerp when I went to a shop to purchase 
some gems, I stumbled into a pit, which was in the shop 
for some reason or purpose I did not understand, and hurt 
myself. My left ear was scratched, but I made light of the 
accident, for I suffered but an abrasion of the skin. 1 

In the year 1566 while in Bologna, I was thrown from a 
careening carriage which could not be checked. In this 
accident the ring-finger of my right hand was broken, and 
my arm so badly injured that I was not able to bend it 
backwards. The stiffness remained for some days, and 
then passed over to the left arm, while the right remained 
unimpaired—a rather remarkable circumstance. But what 
is still more surprising is that nine years later, this stiffness, 
for no manifest reason, but rather like an omen, returned 
again to the right side where it troubles me at present. The 
finger, however, although I gave it no special treatment, 
had so healed that I suffer no inconvenience from it and 
am no longer annoyed by the crook in it. 

What should I say about the risk I ran of plague in 



106 THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 

1541? I had been summoned to attend the servant of a 
colonel, a Genovese gentleman of rank from the Island. 
The servant was in the grip of the plague, for he had just 
come from Switzerland where he had slept between two 
men, both plague-stricken, who had later died of it. Un¬ 
aware of such serious circumstances, I bore, in my official 
capacity as Rector of the College of Physicians, the canopy 
of the Emperor on the occasion of his entry into Milan. 
When it was known that my patient at this very time had 
the plague, the colonel wanted to hide the evidence by 
hurriedly concealing the dead man—for he was considered 
as good as dead—in a place without the city. I was un¬ 
willing to give my assent to this concealment, fearing 
nothing more than to be the victim of a deception. But 
with the help of God the sick man recovered, contrary 
to all hope, and aided not a little by my almost fatherly care. 

I scarcely know how to relate the most amazing occur¬ 
rence which befell me in the year 1546. I was coming 
away, all care-free, from a house in which, on the previous 
day, a dog had snapped at me. He had not, however, 
actually bitten me to wound; but because he had sneaked 
upon me so slyly and quietly, I feared that he might have 
been a mad dog. Although he did not drink from a dish 
of water I set down for him, still, he did not flee from it, 
and he had eaten a chicken thigh which I had directed to 
be given him. 

Well then, to continue: as I was coming along, I saw a 
very large dog approaching me, but still at a distance. It 
was on the Feast of Santa Cruz, in the month of April, 
and I was riding through an exceedingly pleasant way, 
closed in on either side by greening hedges and trees. I 



PERILS, ACCIDENTS, AND PERSISTANT TREACHERIES IC>7 

said to myself, “What affair have I with dogs? A dog 
yesterday; a dog today! I have never entertained silly 
fears, but who knows whether this dog is really mad?” 

While I was considering these things the dog was loping 
along, straight for my mule’s head, so that I hardly knew 
what to do next; as soon as he was close enough, he sprang 
forward, ready to attack me. I was mounted on a small 
mule, but immediately the idea of making the only move 
that could help matters occurred to me: I bent my head 
low upon the mule’s neck, and the dog passed over my 
head, gnashing his teeth! He not only did not wound me, 
but did not even touch me—a fact which surely can be 
numbered among the miracles! 

If I had not committed this story to writing by frequent 
reference to it in many of my books, I should think I had 
dreamed it. Or I should even suppose that I had suffered 
an hallucination brought on by my meditation, had I not 
by chance observed, in looking behind me, that the dog was 
running back and leaping at a boy who was following me 
on the left near the hedge. I returned and questioned the 
boy. “Tell me, I beg you”—for the dog had now gone on 
in headlong course—“whether you saw what that dog did ? 
And has he injured you ?” 

“He did not hurt me in the least,” replied the boy, “but 
I certainly saw what the brute did to you.” 

“Tell me, I beg you, what he did,” I requested again. 

“He sprang directly toward your head, and when you 
bent your head, cleared you without hurting you.” 

Then I said to myself, “For a truth, I am not wandering 
in my mind.” 

Yet this incident still seems beyond credence to all. 



108 THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 

In general, then, I had four extremely perilous encount¬ 
ers. In a word, such hazards, that if I had not in some way 
circumvented them, it would have been a question of my 
life. The first was the danger of drowning; the second, 
mad dogs; the third and lesser because it was only an incip¬ 
ient danger, the falling mass of masonry; and last, the 
quarrel in the house of the Venetian noble. 

I was the victim of just as many great discouragements 
and obstacles in my life. The first was my marriage; the 
second, the bitter death of my son; the third, imprison¬ 
ment; the fourth, the base character of my youngest son. 
Thus systematically ought one’s life to be examined. 

I pass over the sterility of my daughter; the long strife 
with the College of Physicians; so many iniquitous, not to 
say actually unjust, implications brought against me; such 
vile uncertainty of bodily health and constant weakness; 
the fact that I had no associate whose friendship brought 
me good counsel and advantage. Had such a companion¬ 
ship not been lacking in my life, I might have been relieved 
in a large measure, and been saved the sting of many 
difficulties. 

Attend now, while I relate certain episodes which, mira - 
bile dictu, are concerned with a deadly plot; for it is, in 
truth, a curious story. 

In the course of my teaching at Pavia, I was used to 
reading at home. At that time I had in the house a woman 
who rendered irregular service, the youth Ercole Visconte, 
two young boys, and a man servant, I think. One of the 
boys was an amanuensis and a musician; the other, a 
foot-page. 

The year 1562 brought me to the place where I had deter- 



PERILS, ACCIDENTS, AND PERSISTANT TREACHERIES IO 9 

mined to leave Pavia, and resign my professorship. The 
Senate viewed this decision with manifest disfavor, as if the 
case involved a man acting in anger. Now it happened that 
there were two certain doctors in Pavia. One was my 
former pupil, a crafty man; the other, a professor extraor¬ 
dinary of medicine. He was a guileless man, and not 
such a one as I deem mischievous; yet, forsooth, what does 
greed for position and power not accomplish, especially 
when it is allied to a very genuine zeal for achievement? 
There was also, moreover, that illegitimate opponent. These 
rivals were striving their utmost to force me to quit the city, 
ready to adopt any measures for the sake of fulfilling their 
avowed purpose. Accordingly, when they despaired of 
getting rid of me because of the Senate’s objection, as 
against my own eagerness to withdraw, these adversaries 
plotted to murder me. This they arranged to do, not with 
a sword, for fear of scandal and the Senate, but by a deadly 
scheme. My competitor saw that it was impossible for him 
to be head unless I should withdraw. Therefore they went 
about their business indirectly. 

First they composed a letter in the name of my son-in- 
law—a most infamous and vile letter to which they did not 
neglect to add, as well, my own daughter’s name—declar¬ 
ing that he was ashamed of acknowledging our relation¬ 
ship; that, in behalf of the Senate and the College he was 
ashamed of me; and that he regarded the situation such 
that my colleagues ought to feel it a disgrace for me to 
continue to be a teacher, and should take action for my 
removal. 

I was aghast at the impudence of this bold attack from 



IIO THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 

my own children; I had no idea what I should do, or say, 
or reply. How could I interpret these statements? 

Now, however, it is clear that this so shameless and 
uncivil act had sprung from that nest of intrigue whence 
other similar plots were hatched; for within a few days a 
second letter appeared, signed by Fioravanti. This was the 
tenor of it: That he was ashamed of me for the sa\e of his 
country, the college, and the faculty; that the rumor was 
being circulated everywhere that I was using my boys for 
immoral purposes; and that not satisfied with one, I had 
added another to my household—a state of affairs absolutely 
unprecedented; he as\ed that in the name of many in¬ 
terested persons I should have regard for the notorious 
scandal 1 was causing, since nothing else was discussed in 
Pavia save these plans for ousting me; that houses of certain 
citizens where these infamies were being committed were 
to be publicly designated . 

When I had read these words I was dumbfounded, un¬ 
able to believe that this letter was his work—the work of 
a friend and a sober man. Yet the memory of that former 
letter from my son-in-law—as I supposed—still rankled. 
And now I gave up all idea that it was ever his composi¬ 
tion, that he had ever devised such a thing; since, from 
that time to this day, whatever his mood—amiable or 
vexed—he has been steadfastly devoted to me, nor ever 
shown a trace of any adverse attitude toward me, to say 
nothing of an absurdity like that letter. 

I pass over further consideration of why a man in other 
respects prudent should, even had he believed such tales, 
have committed them to a letter which might fall into the 
hands of any number of people; how he could have 



PERILS, ACCIDENTS, AND PERSISTANT TREACHERIES III 

charged his father-in-law with a crime, uncertain as he must 
have been of it at best, and a crime so filthy, so base and 
so certain to result seriously for him. 

I called for my cloak and went to Fioravanti. I ques¬ 
tioned him about the letter; he confessed that he had writ¬ 
ten it! Then was I even more astounded, for I had abso¬ 
lutely no suspicions of treachery, much less any reason for 
harboring such a thought. I began to urge him for his 
motives and to inquire where under heaven the so well- 
known designs for ejecting me were being concocted. At 
this he began to hesitate, and knew not what to respond. 
He could talk only vaguely about notoriety and the Rector 
of the Gymnasium; the latter was entirely in favor of 
Delfino. 

Nevertheless, when the latter perceived that the situation 
began to look as if he himself rather might be drawn into 
serious difficulty than I ensnared in a suspicion of crime, he 
changed his plans, and withdrew; for he well realized, for 
all his simplicity, in what a grave situation he was involved. 
Accordingly, from that day all these intrigues died away, 
and all their well-devised inventions tottered and fell. 

I may explain, in addition, since I discovered it after¬ 
wards, how the affair was concocted. The Wolf and the Fox 
had persuaded the Sheep 2 that if I had not been there the 
Senate by all means would have appointed him to a profes¬ 
sorship at Pavia; he stood second in line. My competitor 
was thereupon arrogating to himself, under a certain ancient 
and customary tradition of succession, the right of retain¬ 
ing the first place as his own—Fox that he was! And it 
did not turn out that way as later events were witness. 

The curtain having thus descended on the first act of the 



112 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


tragedy, the second was begun, in which some of the 
mysteries of the first were cleared. Above all, my enemies 
took care that the one who was destined to be such a dis¬ 
grace to his country, his family, the Senate, the medical as¬ 
sociations of Milan and Pavia, the faculty of professors, 
and finally to his pupils, should be invited to enter the 
Accademia degli Affidati at Pavia of which many learned 
theologians, two princes, the Duke of Mantua, and Marquis 
Pescara were already members. When my enemies observed 
that it did not please me to be thus drawn in, they en¬ 
deavored to inspire me with apprehension. What was I to 
do? Disheartened by the death of my son and tried by 
every adversity, I at length acquiesced, particularly since 
the Senate would free me within a period, already definitely 
determined, from my duty of teaching in the Pavian 
Gymnasium. Not even then was I aware of their trick, nor 
thought it strange that they should desire association with 
him whom all the powers not fifteen days earlier had 
wished to proscribe—the monstrous spouse of all young 
boys. . . . O faith of God! O savage hearts of mortals! 
O bitter hatred of infamous and false friends! O shame¬ 
less cruelty, more fell than many serpents! 

What more did they devise ? In the very entrance of the 
halls of the Accademia degli Affidati, I noticed a beam so 
placed that it would be easy for it to fall and kill anyone 
entering heedlessly. Whether this was done by chance or 
by purpose I know not; but it is certain that I invented 
excuses for appearing as seldom as possible at the Accad¬ 
emia, unless unseasonably or unexpectedly, like a mouse on 
the look-out for a trap. But nothing came of it, whether be¬ 
cause they deemed it unwise to perpetrate a foul deed so 



PERILS, ACCIDENTS, AND PERSISTANT TREACHERIES II3 

publicly, or because they had intended nothing at all by it, 
or because they had abandoned it for devising other 
schemes. 

For one thing, when, within a few days, I was called to 
attend the sick son of Pietro Marco Trono, a surgeon, they 
had hoisted above the doorway a lead weight which had 
been arranged to give the appearance of a device for hold¬ 
ing the reed-curtains back. However it may have been, or 
how, or by what art it was so suspended that it would 
fall, I never investigated. But it fell, and had it touched 
me, all would have been over with me. By what a narrow 
margin I escaped only God knows. From this time on I 
began to be filled with vague apprehensions, not knowing 
exactly what I had to fear, so greatly was I confounded. 

Now give ear to the third act wherein occurs the de¬ 
nouement. A short time had elapsed when that Sheep— 
Fioravanti—came to me asking whether I would be willing 
to permit the two boy musicians who lived with me to take 
a part in the celebration attending the singing of a new 
Mass. Now my tormentors, knowing that these boys were 
my cup-bearers and pregustators, had made arrangements 
with my maid-servant to give me poison. Shortly before 
this, in truth, they had asked Ercole whether he would be 
interested in taking a part in the celebration; and he, 
suspecting no evil, had promised; but when he saw that the 
boys also were being invited, he began to feel uneasy. 
Therefore he replied that only one of the boys was a musi¬ 
cian, not two. Fioravanti, accordingly, being a clumsy man 
and carried away with his zeal for getting the boys out of 
the house, said, “Give me both of them, for we know that 
he is a musician, and although he may be untrained, he will 



THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


II 4 

help with the others to fill the chorus of boys.” Ercole re¬ 
plied to the two who had come, “Permit me, sirs, to talk it 
over with the master.” 

Then he came in to me and exposed their designs, with 
an insight so clever, that, if I had not been a lunatic or a 
dolt, I should easily have divined what the villains were 
about, although until then I had not noticed. Upon Ercole 
Visconte’s advice, and after he had insisted that the one 
boy did not know even a note of music, I resolved not to 
let the boys go. 

Not two weeks later—perhaps a little longer—these same 
men had returned, and inquired whether I would like to 
give those boys permission to take a part in a comedy. It 
was at this time that Ercole hurried to me, saying, “Now 
the story is out; they wish to remove all your servants from 
your table in order to destroy you with poison. Not only 
must you keep alert and on the look-out for treachery of 
this sort, but you must look into every occasion, for there 
is no doubt that they are seeking earnestly for your 
destruction.” 

I said, “I think as much.” And yet I was not able to 
bring my mind to accept such a notion. “What reply shall 
I make?” I continued to Ercole. “Simply tell them that 
you cannot spare your servants.” I did so, and they went 
away. 

At length, I made guess that, after much deliberation, 
it was decided to do away with me entirely. 

On a Saturday—June 6th, if I am not mistaken—I was 
suddenly awakened from sleep near midnight. I found that 
a ring in which there was a setting of sapphire, was missing 
from my finger. I called the servant to rise and search, but 



PERILS, ACCIDENTS, AND PERSISTANT TREACHERIES II5 

he sought in vain. I myself rose and ordered him to fetch 
a light. He went to obey, but returned saying that there 
was no fire. I chided him severely, and ordered him to 
look again. Whereupon he came back, joyfully bearing 
fire in the tongs, or at least an ember which had remained 
red hot because of its size. Since he said there was no 
other, I said it would do; I ordered him to blow on it. He 
blew three times, but seeing no hope of getting flame, was 
taking the candle away from the coal when a tongue of 
flame leaped out and lighted the candle. 

“Did you notice that, Giacomo Antonio?” I cried, calling 
the lad by his full name. 

“Indeed I did,” he responded. 

“What exactly happened ?” I urged. 

“The candle took light, although the coal gave off no 
flame!” 

“Take care then,” said I, “lest it be extinguished. Let 
us seek the ring.” 

It was found on the floor directly under the middle of 
the bed, a point which it could scarcely have reached unless 
it had been flung against the wall with great force, and 
bounded back. 3 

I vowed that I would not set foot out of the house on the 
following day. Occasion favored my vow, for it was a holy 
day and I had no patient. But in the morning four or five 
of my pupils, accompanied by Zaffiro, appeared and invited 
me to be present at a supper at which all the professors of 
the Gymnasium and members of high rank in the Accad- 
emia were to be guests. I explained that I was unable; but 
they thought I was unwilling to make part of the company 
because, as they knew, I did not dine formally. So they 



Il6 THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 

said, “For your sake we have postponed the banquet to the 
supper hour.” 

Again I asserted, “I can by no means accept.” 

They asked my reason, and I told them of the portent 
and the vow, so that all were astonished. But two of them 
kept exchanging glances, and asked several times whether 
I would not be loath to mar the pleasure of the banquet by 
my absence. I replied that I would rather do that than 
break my vow. An hour later, they returned and pressed 
me somewhat more urgently; but I persisted in my refusal; 
for had I not decided not to leave the house at all ? How¬ 
ever, during the evening, although the sky was overcast, I 
went to attend a poor victualler who was sick, since my vow 
did not forbid a professional call. 

Thus I continued to live, vaguely confused until I went 
away from Pavia. Immediately it was discovered that the 
Fox, frisking and gloating because this had befallen, was 
promoted to the professorship by ruling of the Senate. But 
alas for mortal hopes! Not three or four times had he 
lectured before a disease attacked him which, according to 
the story which came to my ears, lasted about three months; 
and he died. He was utterly apprehensive because of his 
crime; for I understood afterwards that a certain one of 
his associates, as a material witness of his perfidious con¬ 
duct, had been destined for a poison potion at a banquet. 

Delfino died in that same year and Fioravanti shortly 
after. Nay, even in the machinations forged for my tor¬ 
ment at Bologna, a similar fate overtook a like number of 
physicians, though somewhat later. Thus all who sought 
my life perished. 

If, however, God had permitted me to be afflicted with 



PERILS, ACCIDENTS, AND PERSISTANT TREACHERIES 117 

so many calamities as a condition of the benefits which he 
has so unremittingly bestowed upon the human race, thus 
would my enemies have paid the reckoning. I had learned, 
moreover to keep at a distance from any chances of this 
sort, profiting by the fate of my uncle, Paolo, who had 
died of poisoning, and of my father who had twice drunk 
poison, and who, though he escaped, had lost his teeth. 

Close upon the foregoing agitations followed I know not 
what a host of troubles. In the month of July I was forced 
to undertake a journey on account of a serious ailment with 
which my infant grandson was suffering at Pavia, while I 
was at Milan. From the exertions of travel I fell ill of 
erysipelas, which settled in my face; this, followed by tooth¬ 
ache, put me on the verge of having myself bled, when the 
approaching new moon caused me to refrain. From the 
day of the new moon, I deemed myself much improved, 
and so escaped both the peril of death and the pain of 
treatment. Subsequently a servant threatened murder in 
an argument over some money; I forestalled his act only by 
a few hours. In the wake of these troubles a long and 
painful attack of gout bore down upon me. 

From the year 1572, I have suffered no slight risks of 
my life from lurking perils, since the streets of Rome are 
little short of a wilderness to me, and the behavior here so 
uncouth that many physicians more wary than I, and far 
more adroit in adjusting themselves to the customs, have 
found hereabout the origin of their deaths. 4 

Accordingly, when I observed how I was protected more 
by Divine Providence than by any wit of my own, I ceased 
to exercise any further anxiety for my safety in dangers. 
Who does not now perceive that all these things have been, 



n8 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


as it were, precursors of bliss about to be overtaken—a 
night-watch waiting for the dawn; just such a period as 
that which, in 1562, was followed by the professorship at 
Bologna, a post I held eight years, an honorable and useful 
work with a certain intermission from so many molesta¬ 
tions and labor, and accompanied by a somewhat more 
pleasant existence. 



CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE 


Happiness 

Although the name of happiness suggests a notion far 
from applicable to my nature, nevertheless I have chanced 
to attain in part, and have had a share in, that which is 
indeed very near felicity. 

In the first place I think I may lay a clear claim to 
happiness in that all events of my life have come and passed 
in an orderly fashion, as if by rule—if ever to any mortal 
such a lot may fall. Had this not been the case and had 
the numerous commencements of the succession of events 
begun a little too late, or a little too soon, or had the con¬ 
clusion been delayed, my whole career would have been 
subverted. 

Second, my happiness in any given period of time is 
merely comparative in relation to the whole; for instance, 
when I was living in the town of Sacco. Since among the 
giants one must necessarily be the smallest, and among the 
pigmies one must be the tallest, yet the giant is by no means 
little, nor yet the pigmy large; so, although while I was in 
Sacco I was comparatively happy, it does not follow that I 
was of a happy nature. I gambled, I entertained myself 
with music, I rambled about the country, I feasted, and, 
though I accomplished but little through devotion to my 
studies, yet I was never apprehensive, having neither anxie¬ 
ties nor fears. I was respected and not without opportunity 
to enjoy social intercourse with members of the Venetian 

[ 119] 



120 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


nobility. It was the very flower of all my time; nothing in 
my life has been happier than this pleasant existence which 
lasted five years and a half, from the month of September 
in 1526, to the month of February 1532. I used to exchange 
views with the mayor; the public house was a kingdom 
and a rostrum. That pleasant dreams now carry me back 
to those days is evidence of my erstwhile happiness which 
sprang from my sense of enjoyment, even though that time 
has long since vanished and the very memory of it shrunk 
to a slender thread. 

My third observation is more important than the others; 
for just as it makes for happiness to be what you can, 
when you cannot become what you would, so it makes for 
a more abundant happiness to be desirous of that which is 
best among all those things we long for. It is necessary, 
then, that we should recognize what we have at our com¬ 
mand, and make the most expedient selection of such 
faculties as are best for our purposes—choosing two or 
three from the number which are of a kind to claim our 
ardent affection and desire, so that we may possess them 
with the least possible disadvantage both for the purposes 
for which they were set apart and for other purposes as 
well. Finally, it is fitting that what we claim to possess, 
we possess with the best possible right. To possess is one 
thing; to possess what is best is another thing; while to 
hold unchallenged right to what one has is the perfection 
of possession. 

I do not overlook the fact that some who contemptu¬ 
ously regard these things as paradoxes will fail to agree; 
but to anyone contemplating the vanity of mortal con¬ 
cerns, and reviewing experience, it will be easy to under- 



HAPPINESS 


121 


stand that such things are far truer than we would like to 
have them. But if you should continue to disagree, reflect 
that time brings all things to light, and shows what estimate 
it puts upon them. Let us take, for the sake of example, 
Augustus, Marcus Scaurus, Seneca, and Acilius. 1 

Certainly Augustus was a man of abundant good fortune, 
and, in the judgment of men, happy. What now remains 
of him? His very stem and stock has passed out of ex¬ 
istence, his very memorials: all things Augustan, in short, 
have ceased to be—nay, his very bones. Who even wishes 
to be connected with him, to say nothing of being eager? 
Who becomes angry with anyone offering violence to his 
name? And were it even otherwise, what is it to him? 
Was he happy while he lived ? What more did he possess 
than his other associates of blessed memory, beyond the 
anxiety of constant thinking, wrath, madness, fears, and 
murder ? His house was full of tumult, his court rife with 
confusion, his intimates plotting against him. If he could 
not sleep he was miserable; if sleep he did, slumber over¬ 
came his vigilance, and vigilance is untrustworthy when 
sleep, which is heedless of mortal anxieties, is the stronger. 

There was Marcus Scaurus—what true felicity had he 
with all his great treasuries, with his public entertainments 
and lavish displays, of all of which not even a shadow of 
recollection remains ? In his lifetime did he not experience 
confusions, anxieties, the wakeful restlessness and toils of 
authors? Did not the great shows, the pomp and voluptu¬ 
ous pleasures of others afflict him ? 

What fair fortune attended Acilius when all his resources 
were swept away, when pain had advanced from below to 
take the place of pleasure, and dire poverty the place of 



122 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


riches? I shall not labor to show that Acilius was wretched; 
there is no stronger surety for an utterly unhappy life than 
to be reduced to misery after leading in bygone days a 
joyful and prosperous existence. 

What of Seneca’s heyday? Naught persists save an evil 
rumor. His soul cannot be happy even though he lived 
with a following of reeking youths, ate at tables of cedar- 
wood and of ivory, received interest on his profitable in¬ 
vestments from all Italy, and possessed so many gardens 
that their mention has passed to a very adage. Afterwards 
he was forced, because of fear of the poisoners of Nero, to 
live on bread and fruit alone, with water drawn from the 
fountains. In after years but a fraction of his great posses¬ 
sions sufficed a grandson accustomed to the very quintes¬ 
sence of luxury: all over and above contributed to excess, 
not to living, a fact which is evidence that the essentials 
of a happy existence are not actually lacking to any man. 

What further confirmation of my doctrine does the 
foolish pomposity of Lucius Sulla contribute ? Who, after 
Marius had been slain, ordered himself to be called Felix, 
when he was more than ever a contemptible old man, 
defiled with murders and proscriptions, with a host of 
enemies, and without the magisterial powers which he had 
cast aside. Wherefore, if it is legitimate to be happy under 
such conditions, I, lacking these, am so much the more 
worthy of that name. 

Let us live, therefore, cheerfully, although there be no 
lasting joy in mortal things, whose substance is evanescent, 
inane, and vacuous. But if there is any good thing by 
which you would adorn this stage of life, we have not of 
such been cheated—rest, serenity, modesty, self-restraint, 



HAPPINESS 


123 


orderliness, change, fun, entertainment, society, temperance, 
sleep, food, drink, riding, sailing, walking, keeping abreast 
of events, meditation, contemplation, education, piety, mar¬ 
riage, feasting, the satisfaction of recalling an orderly dis¬ 
position of the past, cleanliness, water, fire, listening to 
music, looking at all about one, talks, stories, history, liberty, 
continence, little birds, puppies, cats, consolation of death, 
and the common flux of time, fate, and fortune, over the 
afflicted and the favored alike. There is a good in the hope 
for things beyond all hope; good in the exercise of some 
art in which one is skilled; good in meditating upon the 
manifold transmutation of all nature and upon the magni¬ 
tude of Earth. 

What, then, is evil in the midst of so great an array of 
blessings and such a store of wisdom, that the universe 
abounds in hope! We do not actually live unhappily; and 
unless the general condition of mankind should be incon¬ 
sistent with it, I should dare to predicate abundant happi¬ 
ness—but an unseemly and futile design it is to beguile 
others into a deceptive expectation. 

If free choice of place should be given me, then, I should 
move my abode to Aquileia or Porto Venere as delightful 
places to live; or outside Italy, I should choose Eryx in 
Sicily or Dieppe on the Drudis River, 2 or Tempe’s Vale in 
Thessaly. For my age does not carry me as far as Cyrene’s 
shores, nor to Mount Zion in Judea; nor does it urge me 
to seek Ceylon’s Isle near India. These regions may bear 
happy men; they cannot make men happy. 



CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO 


Honors Conferred 

For honors I have neither been eager nor yet consumed 
with longings; neither was I much their lover, since I 
realized how much grief they brought into human exist¬ 
ence. Wrath is a great evil, but it passes; the misfortunes 
of high rank are never ending. First, a zeal for honors 
drains away our resources while we evade laborious effort; 
we exhaust remaining opportunities of gain while we spend 
lavishly for clothing, give rich banquets, and support a 
retinue of servants. Again, a zeal for honors urges us to the 
verge of death itself by ways too numerous to recall—duels, 
wars, quarrels, disgraceful litigation, attendance upon the 
favor of princes, indecorous feastings, intercourse with wife 
or woman. 

We challenge the seas, we profess to think it the honor¬ 
able thing to fight for one’s country. It was a characteristic 
of the Brutus family to devote themselves to death in battle; 
Scaevola burned his own right hand; Fabricius rejected the 
bribe. 1 The last was perhaps the act of a prudent man; 
the others were the deeds of foolish, not to say mad, men. 

There is no reason why one should vaunt his country. 
What is one’s country save a cabal of petty tyrants for the 
oppressing of the weak, the timid, and those who are gen¬ 
erally innocent? I refer particularly to the Romans, the 
Carthaginians, the Spartans, and the Athenians, who being 
unscrupulous and wealthy wished, under the pretext of 

[ 124] 



HONORS CONFERRED 


125 


such an agreement, to lord it over the honest and the poor. 
Oh, shameless mortals! You surely do not think those 
men so prodigal of life that they long to suffer death for 
their country for honor’s sake! 

The poor rustic, on the other hand, argues thus with 
himself: “Alas, what condition is more wretched than 
mine! But if I survive the struggle I may be numbered 
among the chiefs of the state; even as this or that man, I 
shall possess myself of the goods of others; yes, even as 
others now lay claim to my possessions. If I die, my 
descendants will be called from the plough to the chariot, 
and to triumphal pomp!” This was his love of country, 
his spur to honor! 

I do not wish to make subject to these indictments those 
cities which fight for civic liberty, nor those princes the 
sole guerdon of whose principate is to watch that justice 
be done, to encourage good men, to lighten the burdens of 
the poor, to cultivate the virtues, to reform their own con¬ 
nections, and to check those who have already obtained 
positions of great power. It is not a blemish on a city to 
wish to have dominion, nor a crime for the citizens to wish 
to emulate the natives of other cities; the very necessity of 
order brings about domination, and want of rectitude the 
despot’s sway. 

But let us return to the commonplace, for but few have 
true understanding of the things I have been discussing. 
Honors filch away time, while we are forced to give ear to 
so many men, to so many salutations. A desire for honors 
steals away our devotion to wisdom, man’s one divine en¬ 
dowment. Oh, how many mortals are leading unprofit¬ 
able lives—a heedless audience! Who if they would expend 



126 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


in study those two hours which they consume each day in 
combing and adorning themselves, in the course of two or 
three years might be able to speak authoritatively on some 
subject! Yet this very triviality is the prize and the dignity 
of honorable rank! 

Honors likewise interrupt the guidance of a family and 
of sons—and what is a greater folly? Honors subject us 
to envy; from envy spring hatred and rivalry, and from 
these, in turn, disrepute in the eyes of the people, con¬ 
tamination, accusations, deaths, loss of property, retribu¬ 
tion. When such disasters have come to pass we lose a 
great part of our freedom, if not the whole; and (if one 
is of a mind to agree with the popular sentiment) we lose 
whatever good is left in life—voluptuous pleasure itself. 
Along this path we advance, under honor’s auspices, to the 
most dangerous of evils—a craven spirit. Impudent youths 
enter upon this course, imperilling, thereupon, the very 
integrity of homes, and ruining them. 

All things men call good possess the essence of good, 
except ambition. Sons bring with them the hope of suc¬ 
cession; friendship forms no slight share in happiness; 
resources guarantee us all comforts; virtue becomes a solace 
in m isfortune and a distinction in felicity; associations and 
guilds are a great source of security, now, and always at 
other times. Ought we, consequently, strive to avoid high 
and lasting preferments, and to flee them? 

Certainly not! Primarily, since public honors increase 
one’s means, power, and profit, as in the case of officials, 
physicians, painters, and in the arts in general; whence it 
is customarily said that honors foster the arts. In the sec¬ 
ond place, honorable rank relieves a man from perils, as a 



HONORS CONFERRED 


127 


guild or association exerts itself in behalf of those who 
labor in the toils of harsh malice, in false calumnies, and 
preposterous charges. In the third place, honorable posi¬ 
tion adds power, and this is notably the case in the military 
profession and in certain magistracies, wherein the advance¬ 
ment rests upon an appointment to the office of adjutant, as 
they say, and thence through the successive degrees in order 
of rank. In general, a place of honor lends power for re¬ 
pairing conduct worn by ignominy and disgrace, which 
would appear the more indecorous by comparison with the 
honor; again, a place of honor lends power because of the 
very advantages which accompany the circumstances related 
to it; it is, besides, of benefit when one is engaged in places 
where he is not known. A fourth point is this: occasionally 
one may, without much trouble, make his honors do service 
in lieu of talent. 

In favors of this sort, then, chance has not been grudg¬ 
ing: as if in augury of my fortune, many used to offer me, 
Cardano’s boy, companionship, whenever I appeared 
where he was, and when I acquired some skill in Latin. 
I was known at once throughout my own city. Later 
when I went to Pavia, many sought my friendship volun¬ 
tarily; and an opportunity was presented, which, had I 
embraced it, would have opened the way to preferment, 
sooner or later, from Pope Pius IV. I debated with reason¬ 
able success, and Matteo Corti challenged me, honoris 
causa . I held a professorship for mathematics for one 
year only, as the academy was dissolved in 1536, and I 
was summoned to Pope Paul III. Then in 1546, after I 
had already been lecturing for the two years previous on 
mathematics—geometry, arithmetic, astrology and en- 



128 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


gineering—an occasion arose, through the instrumentality 
of the great Cardinal Morone, of lecturing at Rome with 
an honorarium from the Pope himself. 

In the following year, through Andreas Vesalius and the 
Danish Ambassador came a proposal, with a consideration 
of three hundred gold crowns yearly in Hungarian money, 
and six hundred in addition in impost-money, derived 
from the tax on skins of value. The latter revenues differ 
from the royal currency by an eighth part, and are collected 
somewhat more slowly; they are not even redeemable at 
par, and are in a measure subject to certain hazard. The 
consideration included living for myself, five body servants, 
and three horses. A third call came from Scotland. I 
blush to name the emolument offered, but it is enough to 
say that in a few years I should have been a very wealthy 
man. 

The first offer I rejected because the climate in that region 
was exceptionally cold and damp; the natives were clearly 
uncultivated; the ritual and doctrines of their religious 
observances were greatly at variance with those of the 
Roman Church. The second I also rejected because it was 
not permitted to effect an exchange of moneys through 
brokers and couriers into England, much less France or 
Italy. This was in 1552, in August. 

In the month of October the Prince of Bois-Dauphin 
and a confidential agent of the King of France, 2 Vilander, 
came to me with another proposition amounting to eight 
hundred crowns annually; and on the sole condition that 
I should be willing to kiss the royal hand, as the saying 
goes, and be off immediately ; 3 they included in their terms 
a heavy chain worth five hundred gold crowns as com- 



HONORS CONFERRED 


129 


pensation. Other agents were soliciting me in behalf of 
the Emperor who was besieging Metz. I was unwilling 
to come to an agreement with either party; with the latter 
because I realized that excessive hardships were involved 
in accepting the post—the Emperor had already lost the 
greater part of his army through cold and hunger; with 
the former because it was not meet that I should leave the 
domain of my sovereign, and transfer my allegiance to 
his enemy. 

When I journeyed from Antwerp to Basle, the illustrious 
Carolo Affaidato invited me to stay at his country home, 
and, quite against my wishes, tried his best to present me 
with an excellent mule, the value of which almost exceeded 
an hundred crowns. Affaidato was a singularly cultivated 
gentleman, very generous, and a lover of men known for 
their high character. 

On the same journey, a Genovese noble, Ezzelin, offered 
me an Asturian riding-horse; the English in their tongue 
call such an horse “Obin.” 4 A certain delicacy prevented me 
from accepting this gift; otherwise, I should have taken it, 
since nothing, according to my taste, more beautiful or 
more magnificent could have been desired; the creature 
was all white and sleek. There were, moreover, two horses 
exactly alike, and Ezzelin offered me my choice. 

The next year, Prince Don Ferrante, 5 as he was cus¬ 
tomarily called, offered me a consideration of thirty thou¬ 
sand crowns, to enter for life the service of his brother, the 
Lord of Mantua, as they call the Duke. They were ready 
to discharge a thousand crowns, among other things, on 
the first day; but it did not please me to accept. Don 
Ferrante was amazed and offended. He was the more 



i 3 ° 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


disposed to this attitude inasmuch as he had approached 
me with a proposition honorable, according to his standard, 
but to me not so. His persuasions were of no avail, and he 
was reduced to threats. Finally he came to understand why 
I preferred, like the ermine, to die rather than to be stained; 
and he had much greater respect for me from that day for¬ 
ward, an usual characteristic of men of magnanimous spirit. 

The sixth opportunity for preferment came in 1552 from 
Viceroy Brissac, who offered all sorts of inducements, in¬ 
fluenced as he was by Lodovico Birague, my illustrious 
fellow-townsman. Others, who had sought my services, 
had done so, desiring me in the capacity of a physician; 
Brissac wanted me as an engineer, but that was far removed 
from my wish. 

But before I turn away from this subject, I wish to show 
why so rich an emolument was offered by the King of 
Scotland, a very poor monarch, who has, according to re¬ 
port, an income of not more than forty thousand gold 
crowns annually. The chiefs—they say to the number of 
fourteen thousand, although I do not think there are that 
many—under allegiance to the royal power are obliged to 
rally to arms in camp for a period of three months, upon 
summons. And, when anyone of them dies, the King be¬ 
comes guardian of his sons—according to an old practice 
to which the King has ascribed this function—until the 
eldest son has attained his twenty-first year, or come to his 
full majority. In the meanwhile, living and clothing ex¬ 
cepted, all incomes are the guardian’s without any account 
rendered, for they come under the estate of the King. And 
what is more, whether the ward be male or female, the 
guardian has the right to contract a marriage for the ward 



HONORS CONFERRED 


131 

with anyone the guardian wishes, the only condition being 
that the man or woman to whom the ward is married 
must also be of noble birth. The ward is forced to accept 
a dowry not on his own terms, but on the terms of the 
King, acting as guardian. 

But to return to my own affairs: thrice I was engaged 
at Pavia, four times summoned by the Senate of Milan, 
and three times by the Senate at Bologna, although the 
last engagement was without advantage. 

On my return from Scotland, forty men of rank awaited 
me at Paris in order that they might gain some knowledge 
of my methods in the art of medicine, and one made me 
an offer of a thousand crowns merely on his own account. 
But I was scarcely able to cross France; indeed, I dared 
not. 6 Concerning this incident I have a letter from a high 
Parisian officer, Aimar de Ranconet, a man, as I have else¬ 
where noted, well versed in the classics. While I travelled 
from France to Germany I was received everywhere much 
as Plato was long ago at the Olympic games. 

I have repeated the testimonial, also, already mentioned, 
of the College at Padua to the Prefect of the city. An 
honor not unlike this came to me in Venice. It was an 
honor which could not be conferred unless all voting upon 
it were unanimously agreed. There were sixty votes; I 
obtained them all! 7 I had similar good fortune when I 
was elected by the senate of the College at Bologna. There 
were twenty-nine votes; I received twenty-seven, when by 
so small a margin as twenty-five I could not have suc¬ 
ceeded. Not only did my success reach every ear, but my 
name also was known to princes, kings, and emperors of 
the whole earth. And this cannot be denied, although it 



i 3 2 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


may seem too foolish and vain to mention, that even if 
one or another of these honors is made light of, the sum 
of them cannot be scorned as unworthy of regard: the 
knowledge of many facts, travel, acquaintance with danger, 
the offices which I have held, the offers of preferment which 
have come to me, the friendship of princes, my reputation, 
my books, remarkable cases of healing, and among other 
circumstances which came to pass, certain singular charac¬ 
teristics of a supernatural cast, a guardian spirit 8 besides, 
and that understanding born of a flash of intuition. I 
was a member of three Colleges of Physicians—at Milan, 
at Pavia, and at Rome. Of all these honors, moreover, I 
sought none, by so much as a word, excepting my admis¬ 
sion to the College of Physicians at Milan, into which I 
was admitted by election toward the end of August 1539, 
and my professorship at the University of Bologna. In 
both cases I was forced by necessity, not spurred by ambi¬ 
tion. The privilege of citizenship was also conferred upon 
me by the Senate of Bologna. 

In general, as I have said, desire for high honors is a dis¬ 
astrous ambition to mortals, but inasmuch as I am consider¬ 
ing the matter of honors, let me say that I have attained not 
merely something more, but indeed, much more than I had 
hoped, as, for instance, that title 9 \Vir Inventionum\. But 
let us take up a discussion of dishonor. 



CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE 


Dishonors. What Place to Dreams? The Swallow In 
My Coat-of-Arms 

One ought to construe the question of dishonor in terms 
vastly different from those of honor. It is, for instance, 
better for the majority to flee preferments; yet, of a truth, 
it is the accepted belief that to tolerate disesteem is advan¬ 
tageous to none, nor even respectable. There is an old 
saying: “Veterem ferendo iniuriam invitas novam.” 1 

For when one admits dishonors they will attack and ruin 
his career as a thing of no account; nor is this a concern 
merely of man’s early years, for boyhood is not open to dis¬ 
grace especially if one adopts that Horatian ideal regarding 
a parent’s part in the education of the child: 

Ipse mihi custos incorruptissimus omnes circum 
doctores aderat . 2 

Even as I have said, then, the toleration of disgraces and 
baseness begets, first of all, every detriment which honors 
breed, only greater. Such, especially, are the dealings of 
men in circumstances when women are concerned. Since, 
verily, dishonors as well as honors are double-faced, that 
fate of man is truly calamitous which depends on superficial 
honors. Inwardly, though, his lot is blighted with shame¬ 
ful conduct; he is acclaimed by fools, or by the crowd; 
superior men hold him in odium and the insolent ridicule 
him. 



134 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


On the contrary, those whose honors are not in evidence 
are lightly esteemed by society; their existence is safe and 
tranquil if they permit it to be, and in so far as they are 
contented with their condition. Those who are slighted 
and lacking on both counts are as the laborers and tillers 
in our midst, who if they live under just princes flourish 
well enough, especially if they unite their interests through 
a society. Those who for a surety enjoy both the inward 
and outward evidences of honors are acquainted with the 
bitters of calumny and with secret machinations; they 
stand greatly in the way of danger from accusations; from 
public trials they are safe because people stand in fear of 
hatred or danger to their lives in offending men so 
privileged. 

While I was at Bologna, when an agreement about my 
salary was still pending, two or three persons came to me 
by night and in the name of senators and judges sought 
that I should put my name to a petition to release a woman 
already condemned by the authority of the city magistrate 
and the pontifical power for impiety, magic, or sorcery. 
They tried to persuade me by reasoning that according to 
the philosophers there are no demons. They wished me 
to order freed from prison another woman, this one not 
yet sentenced by the judges, on the grounds that she was 
sick to the point of death under the treatment of other 
physicians. Besides this, they presented packages of horo¬ 
scopes asking that I should make some pronouncement 
upon these as if I were a soothsayer and prophet, and not 
in my capacity as professor of medicine. These men, 
nevertheless, got nothing for their pains save their fruitless 
endeavors, and an unsavory reputation with me. 



DISHONORS 


135 


However, to begin with, when I was twelve years old, 
and had discharged a rocket full of gunpowder, and the 
respectable wife of a musician had been hurt by a piece 
of the paper covering, I was struck so sharp a blow on my 
jaw that I reeled. 

A debate, held at Milan, was undertaken with insuf¬ 
ficient powers on my part, and turned out with little 
credit to me. Because of the violence of certain doctors, 
I was forced, in 1536 or 1537 to come to dishonorable terms 
of recognition with the College of Physicians; but, as I 
have elsewhere explained, sometime after, in 1539, this con¬ 
dition was revoked and I was restored to my full rights. 

In the year 1536, while I was attendant physician to the 
house of Borromei, I had a dream early one morning about 
a serpent of huge proportions by which I feared, in my 
dream, I would be destroyed. Not long after a messenger 
appeared to summon my services for the son of the so- 
called Count Camillo Borromeo, a man of note and rank. 
I went thither. The boy, who was seven years of age, 
seemed to be afflicted with some slight illness, but his pulse, 
according to my observations, regularly missed every fourth 
beat. His mother, the Countess Corona, asked me how the 
child was. I replied that he seemed to have but little fever, 
yet because the pulse failed at every fourth beat, I knew 
not exactly what to think of it. I did not have at that 
time Galen’s books on the Indications of the Pulses. When 
all his symptoms had remained the same for three days, I 
directed accordingly that he be given to drink small doses 
of a medicine which is called Diarob cum Turbit . 3 When 
I had written the prescription, and the messenger was 



136 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


already on his way to the pharmacist’s, I remembered my 
dream. 

“How do I know,” I questioned myself, “whether this 
lad may not die according to the symptom indicated?” 
And after the books were available it was found to be so. 
“These consulting physicians who are so hostile to me will 
lay the cause of his death to the medicine.” 

I called back the messenger who was not yet four paces 
from the door, and said there was some certain ingredient 
lacking which I wished to include in the prescription. 
Cautiously I tore up what I had first made out, and wrote 
another prescription of pearls, bone of unicorn, 4 and gems. 

The powder was given, and the boy vomited; all present 
knew his case was serious. Three leading physicians were 
summoned, but one of these was less unbending than the 
rest—he who had been present in the case of Sfondrati’s 
son. They saw the description of medicines, and asked, 
“What are you doing for him?” Although two of these 
hated me exceedingly, since it was not the will of God for 
me to be further assailed, they not only praised the medi¬ 
cine, but ordered it to be administered again. This done, 
I was saved. 

When I had visited the patient again at evening, I knew 
all; on the following morning I was summoned again at 
break of day. I saw the child was laboring in his last 
agonies and the father overcome with tears. 

“Look at him,” he cried, “you who said he was not seri¬ 
ously ill.” As if I had said this! “At least you will not 
go away while he still lives!’ 

I promised to stay. Thereupon I observed that the father 
was being restrained by two noblemen, and as, crying out, 



DISHONORS 


137 


he attempted to rise, they would not let him; yet he kept 
reiterating that I was to blame. What more ? If there had 
been any mention in the prescription of Diarob cum Turbit , 
which in truth was not safe, it would have been all over 
with me, since while the man lived he would have con¬ 
demned me so relentlessly that no one would have sought 
my services: as if Canidia would have breathed her worse- 
than-African-serpent breath upon me. 5 

Thus I escaped death, and transferred my loss from 
disgrace into zeal, lest in the future I should have occasion 
for regret. 

I shall not believe that dream, as well as other occur¬ 
rences narrated above, to have been fortuitous; it is plain 
to be seen that they were warnings, to be taken as such by 
a pious soul oppressed by many afflictions, whom God was 
not willing to forsake. But—although the vision fitted the 
occasion—I was excited by this stimulus: there was a house 
in the square of Santa Maria Podone entirely decorated 
with painted serpents after the fashion of crests which have 
joined adders as in the ancient coat-of-arms of the Borromei. 

We Cardani had for a crest a red castle with its towers; 
but the high turret in the midst is black, and the whole is 
against a white ground, so that the turret may be distin¬ 
guished from that of the Castiglione, whose illustrious name 
calls for a walled town with a lion. The Emperor, accord¬ 
ingly, added to the coat-of-arms of the Cardani an eagle, 
entirely black, except the beak, and with wings outspread 
upon a saffron field; some branches of the family depict 
the eagle with a single head, and others with a double or 
divided head. Likewise, certain members of the family 
color both fields saffron, while others, following the ancient 


138 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


practice, make the ground of the eagle saffron and the 
ground of the castle white. But I, from the day of my im¬ 
prisonment, added to my seal the image of a swallow sing¬ 
ing under the eaves of a barn. 

To reproduce these symbols was a most difficult matter 
on account of the variety of colors. I chose the swallow 
as in harmony, in a most extraordinary way, with my own 
nature: it is harmless to mankind; it does not shun associa¬ 
tion with the lowly, and is ever in contact with human¬ 
kind without becoming familiar. It changes its habitation 
with frequent goings and returnings; it is connubial, not 
solitary, yet not disposed to flock with others. It delights 
its host with a song; it ill endures the cage. To the swallow 
alone, if it be very young, eyes return after they have once 
been plucked out. The swallow bears in its belly certain 
exquisite gems. 6 It takes marvelous delight in the serenity 
and warmth of the skies; exceptionally skillful in construct¬ 
ing its nest, it yields honors in this art to the kingfisher 
alone among all the birds. Though white-breasted and 
white within the wing, the bird is dark on its outer parts. 
As if grateful and mindful, it returns to a hospitable home. 
No other bird, not even the bird of prey, pursues it; not 
one surpasses, much less equals it, in flight. 

But to return to my story. On two occasions in the town 
of Sacco, an attempt to cure turned out disastrously for me. 
A woman in the town, Rigona by name, from whose foot 
I had let blood on the sixth day, died on the seventh. 
Another patient, who was a poor fellow and who, as a 
patronalis of the church, as they call it, was accustomed to 
ring the bell or the campana, passed away that very night 
if I remember correctly, after I had given him medicine. 



DISHONORS 


139 


The cause was the same in either case: because the disease 
with which each labored was a malady I did not know. 
I was, in truth, on the verge of a disrepute which, had it 
increased, would have been my downfall and the ruin of 
all my career, private as well as public. 

The case of Vignano also turned out unfortunately—yet 
this side of death—and for this he withdrew from my care, 
although nine from his household had been restored to 
health through my efforts. 

Thrice, therefore, in the fifty-one years in which I have 
been practicing medicine, I have been in error; while Galen 
did not reproach himself as often as he erred, on the ground 
that the reproach is no extenuation for the mistake. And 
so I have never been exposed to any public disrepute; there 
have, to be sure, been occasional accusations with no con¬ 
firmation, specially at Milan and at Bologna—but nothing 
more; and I believe that they, there, would not have been 
so ungracious to a fellow-townsman. At Pavia, however, 
there was nothing of this sort, although I was indeed a 
citizen of that town, having been born in it and having 
found a residence there. 

Truly, as fever ends certain diseases and frees those sick 
with it, who could not otherwise be healed, from death, 
according to the teaching of Hippocrates in his Aphorisms / 
so prison, overwhelming the shoutings about my so many 
crimes, cancelled all, in such a way that no gleam of sus¬ 
picion appeared to reveal how potent a force envy may be. 

And you physicians: What have I done to you? All 
their infamies, thereafter, all their vituperation, found, as 
it were, an end in the event which they had hoped to make 
serve as a beginning. 



140 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


But let us lay aside these harangues about infamy and 
disrepute which at our age have more to do with the 
scandals of womenkind than of men. 

Was that not a remarkable fabrication at Bologna of a 
Dialog which was circulated in my name under the title 
Melanphronis —that is, in the name of recondite and black 
knowledge? But so crudely was it framed and so un¬ 
happily published, that the very trial of it showed that the 
author of the invention had no knowledge at all, either 
white or black! Consequently the publishers themselves 
were forced to destroy their work. 

But let us return to my own country where I was re¬ 
jected as professional attendant to the Hospital of St. 
Ambrose, a post which offered a yearly stipend of seven, 
not quite eight, crowns; and this occurred, if I am not 
mistaken, in my thirty-seventh year. Already, long before 
this, I had failed in my attempt, in my twenty-ninth year, 
to secure the practice in the village or town of Caravaggio, 
where the annual income did not reach eighty crowns— 
and regular horse’s work at that! 

At Magenta an agreement had already been contracted 
with me. The stipulation was in the neighborhood of fifty- 
five crowns; but on the very eve of settling there, I with¬ 
drew, and so barely escaped rotting away in the place, not 
to say that I could ever grow old there. 

Also, in my twenty-ninth year, although some friends 
were willing to intercede on my behalf, I did not accept 
the post of physician at Bassano with annual returns 
amounting to an hundred crowns. This town lies in the 
district of Padua. 

It was the gratuitous and able advice of Cesare Rincio, 



DISHONORS 


141 

one of the foremost medical men of our State, that I ought 
to be willing to take up a practice, at a stipend of twelve 
crowns a year, in a certain village in the district of Novara, 
fifty miles away from my own city of Milan! 

You will not be surprised then if I say that in the village 
of Sacco my fees amounted to nothing a year, and I per¬ 
severed five years. Moreover, Giampietro Pocobello at 
Mozzate and Giampietro Albuzzio at Gallarate were be¬ 
queathed incomes of about twenty crowns a year; this was 
the result of having married in the hope of an inheritance, 
although neither of them ever contracted another marriage, 
since the first wife survived in each case. 



CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR 


My Teachers 

My father, in my earliest childhood, taught me the rudi¬ 
ments of arithmetic, and about that time made me ac¬ 
quainted with the arcana; whence he had come by this 
learning I know not. This was about my ninth year. 
Shortly after, he instructed me in the elements of the 
astrology of Arabia, meanwhile trying to instill in me 
some system of theory for memorizing, for I had been 
but poorly endowed with ability to remember. After I 
was twelve years old he taught me the first six books of 
Euclid, but in such a manner that he expended no effort 
on such parts as I was able to understand by myself. 

This is the knowledge I was able to acquire and learn 
without any elementary schooling, and without a knowl¬ 
edge of the Latin tongue. 1 

I was almost twenty when I entered the University at 
Pavia. Towards the end of my twenty-first year, I held 
public debate with Corti, one of the heads of the faculty 
of medicine, who deigned to honor me by holding dis¬ 
putation with me, a thing for which I had by no means 
dared to hope from him. I attended the lectures of Branda 
Porro in philosophy, and at times listened to Francesco 
Teggo of Novara. In the year 1524, I again heard Corti 
at Padua, and Memoria in Medicine. At the same time, I 
saw Girolamo Accorombone in his capacity of Professor 
of the Practice of Medicine, as they say, while on the faculty 
were Toseto Momo and a Spanish philosopher of great 
name. 

[ 142 ] 



CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE 


Wards and Students 

The first of my pupils was Ambrogio Bigioggero who 
became pilot of a ship out of Epidauros. He was an in¬ 
genious and daring man. The second, Lodovico Ferrari 1 
of Bologna, who later became professor of mathematics at 
Milan and in his own city, excelled as a youth all my 
pupils by the high degree of his learning. Giambattista 
Boscano was a third pupil. He became receiver of petitions 
of the senate of the Emperor Charles V. A fourth was 
Gasparo Cardano, grandson of another Gasparo, a cousin 
of mine. This youth, became a physician and lectured 
publicly on medicine at Rome. A fifth pupil was Fabrizio 
Bozzi who took charge of the militia in the region of 
Turin although considered a Milanese. Giuseppi Amati, 
private secretary of the governor of our province, was a 
sixth. A seventh, Cristofero Sacco, was made notary pub¬ 
lic; while the eighth, Ercole Visconti, a charming and 
agreeable young man, was a musician. My ninth pupil was 
Benedetto Cattanei of Pavia who entered upon the practice 
of jurisprudence. Giampaolo Eufomia, the tenth, was a 
musician, and a man of no little erudition. Rodolpho 
Selvatico of Bologna became a physician, and even as I 
write these words, he is practicing medicine here at Rome. 
The twelfth of my pupils was Giulio Pozzo, a native of 
Bologna. This one alone failed to fulfill his contract. A 
thirteenth, Camillo Zanolini, likewise a Bolognese and a 

[ M3] 



144 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


musician, became a notary public, and a man exceptional 
in the elegance of his manners. Ottavio Pitti, from 
Calabria, and with me at present, is my fourteenth pupil. 

Of all these the most outstanding are the second, the 
fourth, and the eleventh; the first two, however, died while 
yet young; the second in his forty-third year, and the fourth 
when he had not yet entered his fortieth year. 

Immodicis brevis est aetas, et rara senectus; 

Quicquid amas cupias, non placuisse nimis . 2 



CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX 


My Will 

I have drawn many wills up to this day, which is the 
first of October of the year 1576.* The last was upon the 
advice of Jacopo Machelli and Tommaso Barbieri both of 
Bologna. I made others at Milan, Bartolomeo Sormano, 
Girolamo Amati, and Giangiacomo Crivelli being my 
various advisers. And now I have decided to draw another 
—my last, but I have appended codicils. 

The most important of all is that I should like to have 
my property pass to my son, if this be possible; but my 
younger son has shown himself a youth of such evil habits 
that I should prefer to have all I own pass to my grandson 
by my eldest son. 

The second is this: that all of my descendants remain 
under the care of the guardian as long as it is feasible, for 
certain reasons known to myself alone. 

The third: that my property be subject to entail, and that 
when my progeny shall fail, then I wish my bequest to pass 
to my kinsmen, in so far as this is possible, as a whole, 
in perpetuum. 

The fourth clause is this: that my books be collected and 
published, to the end that they may prove of such use to 
human kind as was the intention of their composition. 

The fifth clause: that the house at Bologna shall, when 


*Thus in the original; but Cardan died September 20, 1576. 

[ T 45 ] 



146 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


succession fail, become a college dedicated to the family of 
the Cardani, and any heirs who may not be in direct suc¬ 
cession are, nevertheless, to assume the family name. 

A sixth clause is added, giving authority for such changes 
as may be required by any conditions that may arise. 



CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN 


Certain Natural Eccentricities; and Marvels, Among 
Which, Dreams 

The first evidence of a nature, so to speak, anomalous, 
was the very fact of my being born with long, black curly 
hair: not, to be sure, a circumstance supernatural, but all 
the same, full of portent. And what is more extraordinary, 
I came into this world well-nigh suffocated. 

The second remarkable manifestation appeared in my 
fourth year, and lasted about three years. According to 
injunctions of my father I rested quietly in my bed until 
the third hour of the day; and as I lay awake awaiting the 
striking of the customary hour, I spent whatever time there 
was in the presence of an agreeable visitation. Nor was I 
ever foiled in my play and led to expect it vainly. For 
I used to vision, as it were, divers images of airy nothing¬ 
ness of body. They seemed to consist of very small rings 
such as compose vests of chain mail—although up to that 
time I had not yet seen a linked cuirass. These images 
arose from the lower right-hand corner of the bed, and, 
moving upward in a semicircle, gently descended on the 
left and straightway disappeared. They were images of 
castles, of houses, of animals, of horses with riders, of plants 
and trees, of musical instruments, and of theaters; there 
were images of men of divers costumes and varied dress; 
images of flute-players, even, with their pipes as it were, 
ready to play, but no voice nor sound was heard. Besides 

[ 147] 



148 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


these visions, I beheld soldiers, swarming peoples, fields, 
and shapes like unto bodies which even to this day I recall 
with aversion. There were groves, forests, and other 
phantoms which I no longer remember; at times I could see 
a veritable chaos of innumerable objects rushing dizzily 
along en masse, without confusion among themselves, yet 
with terrific speed. These images were, moreover, trans¬ 
parent, but not to such a degree that it was as if they were 
not, nor yet so dense as to be impenetrable to the eye; rather 
the tiny rings were opaque and the spaces transparent. 

I was not a little delighted with my vision, and gazed so 
wraptly upon these marvels, that my aunt on one occasion 
questioned me whether I saw aught. And I, though I was 
still a boy, took counsel with myself: “If I tell, she will be 
displeased at whatever causes the passage of this proud 
array, and she will do away with my phantom festival.” 
Even flowers of many a variety, and four-footed creatures, 
and divers birds appeared in my vision; but in all this 
exquisitely fashioned pageant there was no color, for the 
creations were of air. Accordingly I, who neither in youth 
nor yet in my old age have been given to falsehood, stood 
still for a long time before I replied. 

Thereupon she asked, “What makes you stare so in¬ 
tently?” I no more remember what I replied to her; I 
think I said, “Nothing.” 

A third peculiarity of mine was that following this 
period of visions, I scarcely ever, until nearly daybreak, 
had any warmth from my knees down. 

A fourth was that all at once, out of a profound sleep, 
I would find myself drenched in a warm, heavy sweat. 

The fifth evidence of my eccentric nature was the oft- 



CERTAIN NATURAL ECCENTRICITIES 


149 


repeated dream of a cock which I feared would address me 
in a human voice, and which, somewhat later, actually did 
this very thing. His utterances, moreover, were for the 
most part threatening, but I have not remembered what 
I heard on these many occasions. There was also a cock 
with crimson feathers with comb and wattles of the same 
hue, which I believe I saw in dreams more than one hun¬ 
dred times. 

After epochs of this sort, when I was approaching man¬ 
hood, although these visions ceased, two other illusions ap¬ 
peared which have remained with me almost constantly, 
and even now are present at times. To be sure, since I have 
written my Problemata and talked them over commonly 
with my friends, one of them has ceased to manifest itself 
so frequently: that is, that as often as I lift my eyes to 
heaven I see the moon; and truth to tell, I seem to see it 
placed directly in front and facing me, the cause of which 
I have explained in the treatise just mentioned. 

Another curious circumstance is the following: when I 
had happened to observe by mere chance, that whenever 
I became party to a brawl no blood was spilled nor anyone 
wounded, I purposely took part in several combats and 
riots, but not a wound was dealt to anyone involved! When 
I joined a hunting party, not a single beast was wounded 
either by a hunting-spear or by the dogs; this I have taken 
account of as many times—though seldom enough to be 
sure—as I have accompanied the hunt, and have never 
failed to exercise this faculty. 

On one occasion, indeed, when I was a member of the 
hunting party of Prince d’Iston to Vigevano, a hare had 
been run down, and, though retrieved in the teeth of the 



150 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


dogs, was found without a wound, to the no small surprise 
of those present. 

Only in voluntary blood-lettings and in the cases of those 
publicly punished, has this, which I may call my preroga¬ 
tive, been powerless. 

Once in the archway of the great church at Milan when 
some of his enemies had thrown a certain man to the 
ground, and had inflicted some wounds, one of them gave 
him, complaining loudly, a thrust; yet immediately, as they 
ran away, their victim rose and pursued them, so I cannot 
tell whether or not he was wounded by that last blow. 

An eighth curious characteristic is that on all occasions 
I have extricated myself when no other help seemed at 
hand. And although this may be natural, the same cir¬ 
cumstance, nevertheless, occurs so frequently and con¬ 
stantly, that it cannot be said or considered ordinary. 
Granted that to have seen that vision of the cock in dreams 
was natural, to have seen it so often and unremittingly in 
the same way may surely and justly be called a prodigy. 
Similarly, to throw in a fair game at hazards only three 
spots, when something great is at stake, or some business is 
the hazard, is a natural occurrence, and deserves to be so 
deemed; and even when they come up the same way for 
a second time, if the throw be repeated. If the third and 
fourth plays are the same, surely there is occasion for sus¬ 
picion on the part of a prudent man. Likewise, in the case 
of a happy issue, when a favorable turn breaks like the 
dawn only after all hope has been abandoned, this neces¬ 
sarily seems to be done entirely by the will of God. To 
demonstrate this point I shall narrate two happenings suffi¬ 
ciently illustrative. 



CERTAIN NATURAL ECCENTRICITIES 151 

It was in the year 1542 of our salvation, and summertime, 
when I was wont to go day by day to the home of Antonio 
Vicomercati, a patrician of our city, and there to spend 
the whole day at a game of chess. We played, moreover, 
for from one to three reals in a single game, and to the 
extent that, since I was in the habit of winning, I would 
take away with me nearly one gold crown every day, some¬ 
times more, occasionally less. His losses, in this manner, 
he accepted agreeably; for my part I found both his loss 
and the play itself to my liking. By this practice, I so 
degraded myself that for two whole years and a few 
months, besides, I had no concern for practicing my profes¬ 
sion, nor for my means of livelihood, all of which were lost 
except that which I have just mentioned. I had no thought 
for my reputation nor for my studies. 

On a certain day near the end of August, Vicomercati 
deliberately made a new resolution, either because he re¬ 
pented of his now almost steady losses, or because he 
deemed it just to me, that he would not be enticed by any 
reasoning or any oath or curse, and that he would even 
force me to swear never to return to his house, in the 
future, for the sake of gambling. I gave my oath, by all 
the gods; and that was the last day. Immediately I devoted 
myself to my studies. 

And, look you, in the beginning of the month of October 
when the University at Pavia had closed its doors because 
of the war, and all the professors had withdrawn to Pisa, 
the office of teaching in my own city was offered me. 
This opportunity, entirely unexpected, I embraced because 
it did not take me away from Milan; whereas had it been 



152 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


necessary for me to leave Milan, or to meet a competitor, 
I should by no means have accepted. 

Since I had never lectured except on mathematics, and 
then only on holidays, I would lose the stipend from the 
city for those days, and would be put to the inconvenience 
of moving my family and furniture, and would run some 
risk of endangering my reputation, in leaving Milan. 
When, for these reasons, in the following year I felt un¬ 
willing to withdraw from my city, on the night before the 
day on which the Senate sent a messenger to learn from 
me what decision I had reached, my whole house—it seems 
beyond belief—fell down from its very foundations, noth¬ 
ing more than the bed in which I, my wife, and children 
were sleeping, being saved from the ruin. And so what 
I should never have done voluntarily, nor have been able 
to do without some sign, circumstances forced me to ac¬ 
cept. All who heard of the event were dumbfounded. 

I shall relate another strange thing—my whole life has 
been filled with occurrences of this sort—but of a some¬ 
what different nature. I had, for a long time, been having 
trouble, almost to the point of despairing of my life, with 
a kind of spurious empyema, which I have mentioned be¬ 
fore. I had read in some notes collected by my father that 
if anyone at eight o’clock in the morning of the first day 
of April should, on bended knee, beseech the Holy Virgin 
that she might intercede for a legitimate petition, and if 
he add, as well, the Lord’s Prayer and the Hail, Mary, the 
petitioner would obtain the favor sought. I observed the 
day and the hour; I went through with the prayer, and 
forthwith, on Corpus Christi, in the same year, I was freed 
from my trouble. But on another occasion long after- 


CERTAIN NATURAL ECCENTRICITIES 


153 


wards, mindful of this healing, I said a prayer for my gout 
—and quite properly so, for my father had added two ex¬ 
amples of people who had been cured—and derived so 
much benefit that I was cured. But in this event I used 
the aids of my art. 

Now I shall narrate four examples or singular proofs of 
certain peculiar circumstances surrounding the life of my 
older son. One happened on the day of his baptism; a sec¬ 
ond in the last year he lived; a third, in the very hour in 
which he confessed the crime for which he died; a fourth 
which began on the day he was taken prisoner and lasted 
until the day of his death. 

He was born in the year 1534 on the fourteenth of May, 
and I feared for his life until the seventeenth of May. It 
was the Sunday on which the boy had been baptized. A 
brilliant sun was shining in the bedroom between eleven 
and twelve o’clock. All there, as was the custom, stood 
around the bed where the mother lay, with the exception 
of the houseboy. The linen curtain was drawn back from 
the window, and was clinging to the wall. A huge wasp 
flew into the room, and went winging around the baby. 
All who were there feared it, yet it harmed no one. Soon 
it became entangled in the curtain, where it buzzed with 
such a booming sound that you would have declared a drum 
was being beaten. We all ran thither, but found nothing. 
It could not have gone outside since we were all watching 
it so closely. This incident filled us all with premonition 
that something dire would eventually happen to the boy, 
but we imagined nothing so bitter as actually befell. 

In the year in which he died I had given him a new 
cloak of silk, the customary garb of the physician. Again 



i 54 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


it was Sunday; he went to the Porta Tosa where there was 
a butcher, and, as usual some pigs before the gate. One of 
these struggled up out of the mud, and so alarmed, soiled, 
and attacked my son—since it took not only my son’s ser¬ 
vant, but the butchers and neighbors to drive off the animal 
with staves—that the incident appeared to be a veritable 
portent. The pig, at length, wearied of the struggle and 
of pursuing my son as he fled, ceased. From this accident 
the boy came to me sadder than usual, and told me all 
about it, questioning what it might presage for him. I re¬ 
plied that he should have a care lest by leading the life of 
swine he might come to the same end. Yet except for love 
of gambling and of the delights of feasting he was an ex¬ 
cellent young man and led a life beyond reproach. 

Again, it was in the month of February, and the begin¬ 
ning of the following year. I was living and lecturing at 
Pavia, when by the merest chance, looking closely at my 
hands, I observed on the ring finger of the right one, at 
the root, the image of a bloody sword. Suddenly I felt sore 
afraid. What now? 

That evening a messenger appeared, afoot, bearing letters 
from my son-in-law, advising me that my son had been 
arrested and that I should come to Milan. I went the 
following day. 

For fifty-three days that sign gradually ascended my 
finger, extending from the base; and, lo, on the last day it 
reached the tip of my finger where it blazed a blood-red 
flame. I, who did not then anticipate what actually came 
to pass, terrified and beside myself, knew not what to do 
or say or think. At midnight my son was beheaded, and 



CERTAIN NATURAL ECCENTRICITIES 


155 


in the morning the portent had almost disappeared; on the 
second day following it had vanished. 

Before this, also, during the twenty days, more or less, 
in which my son had been detained in prison, while I was 
studying in a library, I heard a voice as of one hearing the 
confession of pitiable men soon to perish. At once my very 
heart was laid bare, torn and rent and fury-driven. I 
leaped from the spot into the court-yard where others of 
the family of the Palavicini, in whose home I was staying, 
were seated. Not unaware of how much I might intercede 
in the case of my son if he had not pled guilty to the 
crime, and if he were innocent of it, I cried out, “Alas, 
because he is party to his wife’s death, and has now con¬ 
fessed, he will be condemned on a capital charge and 
beheaded.” 

Thereupon I took my cloak from the servant and set 
forth to the market-place. Half-way there I encountered 
my son-in-law, whose countenance was most sad. He 
asked me where I was going. I replied, “I have a pre¬ 
monition that my son, having knowledge of the deed, has 
confessed all.” He replied, “It is so. He has but now 
confessed.” A messenger whom I had sent on ahead then 
came running up and recounted all that led up to the act. 

Among the qualities peculiar to me, according to my 
nature was this: my flesh gave off, somewhat, an odor of 
sulphur, incense, and other chemicals. This happened, for 
the most part, about my thirtieth year when I suffered with 
a serious illness. When I had been restored to health my 
arms seemed to smell strongly of sulphur. At that time 
also, I was afflicted with an itching of the skin, but this 
symptom has disappeared with the approach of age. 



156 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


Another extraordinary thing about me was that when I, 
free from all cares and with the help of masters, used to 
study Archimedes or Ptolemy, I understood neither of 
them; now, in the fullness of my days, although I have 
laid aside these works for perhaps thirty years, and although 
I am claimed by much business, beset by cares and without 
assistance, I follow either of them with full understanding. 

Dreams 

Does there not seem to be that about dreams—the fact 
that they have been so real—which can be worthy of ad¬ 
miration? I have no desire to dwell upon the insignif- 
icent features of dreams, (what would be the use?) but 
rather on those important aspects of dreams which seem 
to be the most vivid and determining. Here is an example: 
about the year 1534, when I had not yet come to any deci¬ 
sion about my life, and all things were going daily from 
bad to worse, in the gray of one morning, in a dream, I 
saw myself running along at the base of a mountain 
which rose on the right hand. Around me surged a 
thronging multitude of every station, sex, and age—women, 
men in their prime, old men, children, infants, poor and 
rich, in divers modes of raiment. I asked, thereupon, 
^=s3g4sther we were all running, and one of the throng replied: 
“ToDeadi.” I was dismayed by this, and since there seemed 
now to be a mountain on the left, I whirled about, so that 
I should have it at the right in order to grasp the vines 
which, on the mid-slope of the mountain, and at the very 
spot where I stood, were covered with withered leaves and 
entirely stripped of grapes, even as we are accustomed to 
see them in the autumn. I began to climb. At first this 


CERTAIN NATURAL ECCENTRICITIES 


157 


was arduous on account of the acclivity or slope of the 
hill which rose sheerly from the base; soon, however, hav¬ 
ing mounted above this, I climbed upward through the 
hills with ease. When I stood at length on the summit, 
I was about to pass, as it seemed, beyond the dictates of my 
volition; sheer, naked rock rose around me, and I seemed 
on the verge of plunging headlong into the depths of a 
hideous abyss and a dismal chasm. Forty years have passed 
away, but even yet the memory of that dream fills me with 
gloom and terror. 

And so I turned away to the right where a lonely plain 
stretched in view covered with heath. Thither, urged by 
my fear, I hastened, with never a thought of what the way 
might lead to. I perceived that I was near the entrance 
of a cottage belonging to some country estate, and thatched 
with straw, reeds, and rushes. I was holding a boy by the 
hand who, dressed in an ash colored suit, seemed to be 
about twelve years of age. At that point, I was aroused 
from my sleep and dream in the same instant. 

From this vision I read a manifest prophecy, pointing 
to the immortality of my name, to my arduous and never- 
ending labors, to my imprisonment, to the overwhelming 
fear and sadness of my life. In the flinty rocks I saw a 
forecast of my hard lot, and in the dearth of productive 
trees and useful vegetation, the emblem of my barren ex¬ 
istence, which eventually became happy, smooth, and easy. 
The dream pointed, also, to my lasting glory in the future, 
for year by year the vine renders its harvest. The boy, if 
he were indeed a good spirit, was an auspicious omen, for 
I held him closely. If he represented my grandson, the 
omen was less favorable. The little house in the solitary 



158 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


place was symbolic of some hope of tranquillity. But that 
overpowering horror at the edge of the abyss might have 
foreshadowed the ruin of my son—it is not becoming to 
believe that he would have been omitted in the omen—who 
married and came to a disastrous end. 

This dream I had, as it happehed, at Milan. 

I dreamed a second dream not long after while sojourn¬ 
ing in the same place. It seemed to me that my naked 
soul was in the Heaven of the Moon, liberated from my 
body and solitary, when, as I seemed to be lamenting on 
account of my state, I heard the voice of my father speak¬ 
ing to me: “I have been appointed guardian to you by 
God; all these spaces are filled with spirits, but you see 
them not, even as I am invisible to you, nor is it lawful for 
you to address them. You will remain in this Heaven 
seven thousand years, and the same number in star after 
star until you reach the eighth; after the eighth you will 
come into the Kingdom of God.” 

Of this dream I have made the following interpretation: 
the soul of my father is my tutelary spirit; what more 
loving or more gracious interpretation could there be ? The 
Moon signified grammar; Mercury, geometry and arith¬ 
metic; Venus, music, the art of divination, and poesy; the 
Sun, the moral life, and Jupiter, the natural. Mars repre¬ 
sented medicine, and Saturn, agriculture, knowledge of 
plants and of the remaining simple arts. The eighth orb 
stood for the final harvest of all understanding, for natural 
science and various studies. And after these things I shall 
rest serenely with my Prince, the Lord. 

This dream was, as it were, set forth—even though I 
did not notice it at the time—in the seven divisions of the 



CERTAIN NATURAL ECCENTRICITIES 


159 


Problemata, for which the time of completion for publica¬ 
tion was at hand. 

I seemed, also, in my dreams at times to recognize a 
youth who addressed me with flattering words, and whom 
I could not remember in the least when I was awake. When 
I asked him who he might be and whence he had come, 
he reluctantly responded: “Stephanus Da Mes.” This name 
has no significance as a Latin word beyond the fact that 
it has a foreign sound. I used to ponder thus: Steqpavog 
signifies crown and (reoog the middle or the midst. 

Another occurrence foreshadowed the life I was about 
to lead at Rome. In the year 1558 on the seventh of Janu¬ 
ary while I was living at Milan without any duties beyond 
my own private affairs, I seemed in a dream, to be in a 
certain city filled and adorned with many palaces. And, 
among other wonders, I spied a dwelling very like to a 
gilded house which I actually came upon sometime later 
when I was at Rome. It seemed to be, moreover, a feast 
day, and I was alone with my servant and mule. Both were 
well out of sight, around the corner of a house; yet I 
seemed to hear the voice of the servant from afar. Since 
in that locality but few passed in the street, I, full of 
curiosity, was trying to inquire from all who went along 
what the name of the city might be. Nobody could in¬ 
form me until a certain old woman said it was called 
Bacchetta, in Latin the virga or rod with which boys are 
usually punished; long ago it was called the ferule; 
Juvenal says: 

“Et nos ergo manum ferulas subduximus.” 1 

And so I went anxiously about seeking someone who 



l60 THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 

would tell me the true name of the city, for I reasoned 
thus with myself: “It is not this barbarous name; I have 
never known that there was such a city in Italy.” These 
remarks I addressed to the old crone. She went on, “In 
this city are five palaces”; to which I replied, “Yet I have 
seen more than twenty.” Thereupon she insisted, “But 
there are only five.” And with that, trying vainly to get to 
my servant and mule, I awoke. I have no certain theory 
which I may bring forth, about the meaning of this dream; 
only this was made evident: Rome was plainly the city of 
the dream, and I knew what that word Bacchetta meant. 
One man said it was a Neapolitan word. This vision came 
to pass under auspices or for reasons somewhat confused, 
or else by divine intention. 

I had a warning, also, in 1547, in the summer at Pavia 
while my younger son was sick, lying, as it were, at the 
point of death, that I should be bereft of the object of my 
affection. I was awakened, and straightway the nurse came 
running to me, saying: “Rise, sir, for I think Aldo is going 
to die!” 

“What is the matter ?” 

“His eyes are rolled back and he does not make a 
sound.” 

I rose immediately, administered a powder of pearls and 
gems in which I had faith. He vomited. Again I gave 
the powder, and this time he retained the dose, slept and 
perspired, and within three days he was well. 

It is not unmeet that men of conscientious conduct, firm 
in faith in God, discreet in judgment and in looking toward 
salutary ends should have such experiences: provident heads 
of families, as it were, taking advantage of every oppor- 



CERTAIN NATURAL ECCENTRICITIES l6l 

tunity for protecting, by a course especially consistent with 
medical science, the body and that vital principle mingled 
therewith. Others vainly attempting an imitation of such 
a course make of themselves a laughing stock, like empty 
prophets; for things of that kind cannot be reduced to an 
art. Here, however, it was a case of that undutiful son of 
mine who brought me so much trouble. 

Many amazing dreams, besides these, have I dreamed, 
strange beyond belief, which I do not wish to relate. 

These extraordinary experiences, then, have been mine: 
intellectual powers of differing character, and dreams, as 
well as four intuitive flashes or premonitions, three of 
which I have already set forth: one resulted in my sudden 
withdrawal from the contract I had made at Magenta; 
another came before the storm I experienced on the lake; 
a third was when my house fell to ruins. The fourth is 
the remarkable incident of my garter, concerning which I 
have written in another place. Therefore must I recognize 
these experiences as special dispensations from the Lord. 
Nor has anyone shown any inclination to ascribe whatever 
has happened to me of this sort, whether by chance, by 
dreams or by premonition, to any natural cause; if anyone 
should take such an attitude, he would be exceedingly, and 
even, perchance, gravely in error. Neither will anyone, 
much less, wish to ascribe these things to my own merit. 
They are rather gifts of a bountiful God, who is in debt 
to no one, much less to me. Those are even greatly mis¬ 
taken who attribute my experiences to my own diligence 
or efforts or zeal, which would scarcely have been able to 
effect a thousandth part. And farthest from right are those 
who have fancied that I have fabricated these things out 



162 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


of an empty ambition for glory; I shrink from the thought 
of it. Finally, why should I wish to mar by trifling sing¬ 
song and false representations that virtue not only natural 
to me, but which I know derives from God ? 



CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT 


Five Unique Characteristics by Which I Am Helped 

Up to this point I have discussed myself as an ordinary 
human being, so to speak, and as a man even somewhat 
lacking, in comparison to other men, in natural endow¬ 
ment and education. Now it is my purpose to give an 
account of a certain extraordinary characteristic of my own, 
one indeed which is the more unusual for the reason that 
I know it to be part of me, yet the essence of it I am not 
able to define. And it is myself, although I am not aware 
that such virtue has originated from myself. This power 
is present when needed, but not in evidence when I so will. 
What comes to pass as a result of it is something more than 
my natural powers could effect. This endowment was first 
observed toward the close of the year 1526 or at the begin¬ 
ning of the following year, so that more than forty-nine 
years have elapsed since I have been aware of it. 

I am conscious that some influence from without seems 
to bring a murmuring sound to my ear from precisely that 
direction or region where some one is discussing me. If this 
discussion be fair, the sound seems to come to rest on the 
right side; or, if perchance it approaches from the left, it 
penetrates to the right and becomes a steady hum. If, how¬ 
ever, the talk be contentious, strangely conflicting sounds 
are heard; when evil is spoken, the noise rests in the left 
ear, and comes from the quarter exactly whence the voices 
of my detractors are making disturbance, and, accordingly, 

[ 163] 



164 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


may approach from any side of my head. Frequently, 
when the discussion comes to an evil conclusion, the vibra¬ 
tion in my left ear is resumed in the very moment when 
it seems properly to be ended, and the sounds are multi¬ 
plied. Very often when the discussion about me has taken 
place in the same city, it has happened that the vibration 
has scarcely ceased before a messenger has appeared who 
addresses me in the name of my detractors. But if the con¬ 
versation has taken place in another state and the messenger 
should appear, one has but to compute the space of time 
which had elapsed between the discussion and the begin¬ 
ning of the messenger’s journey, and the moment I heard 
the voices and the time of the discussion itself will fall out 
the same. One may see, besides, that the decision was car¬ 
ried out in the manner which I had inferred from the char¬ 
acter of the noise in my ear. This manifestation lasted up 
to the year 1568 until about the period immediately fol¬ 
lowed by that conspiracy, 1 and I was surprised that it 
should cease. 

A few years later, eight perhaps, that is, about 1534, I 
began to see in my dreams the events shortly to come to 
pass. If these events were due to happen on the day fol¬ 
lowing the dream, I used to have clear and defined visions 
of them just after sunrise, so that even on one occasion I 
saw the motion for my admission to the College of Physi¬ 
cians straightway brought to vote, to a decision, and the 
motion lost. I dreamed, as well, that I was about to obtain 
my appointment to the professorship at Bologna. This 
manifestation by dreams ceased in the year just preceding 
the cessation of the former manifestation, that is, about 



FIVE UNIQUE CHARACTERISTICS 165 

1567, which was the year Paolo, one of my wards, went 
away. And so it had lasted about thirty-three years. 

A third peculiarity is an intuitive flash of direct knowl¬ 
edge. This I employed with gradually increasing advan¬ 
tage. It originated about the year 1529; its effectiveness 
was increased but it could never be rendered infallible, 
except toward the close of 1573. For a period between the 
end of August of that year and the beginning of Septem¬ 
ber 1574, and particularly, as it seems to me, now in this 
year 1575, I have considered it infallible. It is, moreover, 
a gift which has not deserted me, and it replaces the powers 
of those two latter faculties which did; it prepares me to 
meet my adversaries, and for any pressing necessity. Its 
component parts are an ingeniously exercised employment 
of the intuitive faculty, and an accompanying lucidity of 
understanding. An altogether pleasing faculty, it is far 
more profitable for my influence, my training, for gain, 
and for confirming the results of my studies than the other 
two special faculties together. It does not divert a man 
from his pursuits or from intercourse with his fellows; it 
renders him ready for every event; as an aid to the com¬ 
position of books it is invaluable. This faculty seems, as 
it were, the most elemental quality of my nature, for it 
exhibits at one and the same time the essence of all the 
qualities which compose my nature; and if it be not a 
divine endowment, it is certainly the most highly perfected 
faculty which man may cultivate. 

Meanwhile there was a fourth peculiarity which began 
to function in the year 1522 and which lasted through to the 
year 1570 or 1573. This was plainly enough given me, 
I believe, as a certain assurance; for after my life was saved, 



i66 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


when I had seemed past all hope, it came to confirm my 
faith and strengthen the conviction that I am God’s and 
that he is all in all to me, and to keep me from committing 
anything unworthy of so many benefits. And if anyone 
should ask why all men, or at least a few do not have these 
or similar experiences, my reply is, “How do we know but 
what many are aware of similar manifestations, or have 
spiritual experiences clear to themselves, although not so 
to us?” 

Again, “But what indication of loving favor toward you 
is that cruel death your son suffered?” “If anyone is able 
by any other way, without suffering, to gain immortal life, 
I claim that way; if not, what special dispensation should 
I receive ? For death is always bitter, and equally bitter is 
that daily and inevitable expectation of the end which is 
more than death’s counterpart, and almost death itself.” 

A fifth peculiar feature of my life, and one which has 
never ceased to attend me is this: whenever my personal 
affairs have been in a state nothing short of desperate, I 
have been swept up on a wave of fortune; these affairs had 
no sooner become fair and flourishing than I sank into deep 
waters. Even as galleys, tempest tossed, are driven now 
from the depths to the crest of the surge, now plunged 
from on high into the yawning gulf, so has it gone with 
me throughout my career. O, how often have I lamented 
my so wretched condition, not merely because everything 
went to ruin, and every hope of safety would be swept 
away, but because not even when I sought by thoughtful 
calculation to put my affairs in order, would I ever find a 
way out; then, with no effort or labors on my part, within 
two or three months I saw that all was changed, so that I 



FIVE UNIQUE CHARACTERISTICS 


167 


believed there were greater influences than my own will 
in the matter, and that whatever came to pass would be 
the result of an outer force; and this happened so many 
times that I am embarrassed to number them. By this 
vicissitude of fortune, also, it often happened that all things 
collapsed at the same time. 



CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE 


Erudition, or the Appearance of it 

The purpose of this chapter is to discover whether I 
actually know anything, or whether I only seem to know. 
Grammar I have never learned; likewise I have never 
learned the Greek, French or Spanish languages, but the 
ability to employ these has been given me; how, I cannot 
explain. I did not, furthermore, gain any acquaintance 
with rhetoric, nor indeed optics, nor the theory of equilib¬ 
rium, because I did not expend any amount of study on 
these subjects. Nor did I give any attention to astronomy 
because it seemed too difficult. On the other hand, though 
I had but meager talent as a musician, I was unequalled in 
the study of the theory. In geography, in philosophy based 
on controversy, in the doctrine of morals, in jurisprudence 
and in theology I have not exerted myself; for I considered 
their matter too comprehensive, not in accord with my 
purpose, and of such a nature as to claim a man’s undivided 
interest. 

Much less did I devote myself to any doctrine, evil, 
pernicious, or vain, such as chiromancy, the science of com¬ 
pounding poisons, or alchemy. To physiognomy, likewise, 
I gave no attention; for it is a long course and most dif¬ 
ficult, one which requires exceptional powers of memory 
and very ready perception, which I scarcely believe are my 
endowment. Nor did I study the art of magic which deals 

[168] 



ERUDITION, OR THE APPEARANCE OF IT 169 

with enchantments, nor yet have aught to do with sum¬ 
moning the spirits or the ghosts of the dead. 

Even to those subjects of more praiseworthy character I 
have given very little study. Faulty memory kept me from 
identifying the plants; I did not concern myself with agri¬ 
culture, for in that pursuit it is more necessary to practise 
than to know the theory. From anatomy many considera¬ 
tions frightened me away. 1 

I was not given to composing songs except when it could 
not be easily avoided, and, at that, I composed very little. 

Why, therefore, is it that so many have attributed to me 
interests on which I do not spend thought, unless it be that 
they may diminish my reputation in the art of medicine? 

Pluribus intentus minor est ad singula sensus . 2 

That branch of astrology which teaches the revealing of 
the future I studied diligently, and much more, indeed, than 
I should; and I also trusted in it to my own hurt. The 
part of astrology which is more of a natural science was 
not a subject in which I had practice, for it is but three 
years, that is, at about my seventy-first year, since I acquired 
any knowledge of it. 

I was versed, then, in geometry, in arithmetic, and in 
medicine—both in theory and in practice. In logic I had 
even more skill. Natural phenomena, as concerns the prop¬ 
erties of substances and things of their same nature, I 
studied; as, for instance, the fact that amber gives proof 
that heat was stored within it, and why; also, if it may be 
included, the technique of the game of chess. To this list 
I may add a practical knowledge of the Latin tongue and 
of certain others, and finally, the theory of music. 



THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


170 

Navigation, however, I never touched upon. As to mili¬ 
tary science, there is no reason why I should include it 
among the arts; and besides, owing to the great number 
of difficulties it presented, I was not in the least acquainted 
with it, as was the case also with architecture. 

There are also certain pseudo sciences, as the practice of 
symbolic writing, composition, and interpretation. 

In my own field I am destitute of any practice in surgery. 

If then you place the number of important branches of 
learning at thirty-six, from twenty-six of the studies and 
from any acquaintance with them I have refrained. To 
ten I devoted myself. 

Some have, moreover, thought my understanding and 
knowledge greater because of an outer expression of it. 
The latter is sustained by serious and lasting contempla¬ 
tion; by inferences from many facts well known; by the 
choice of better principles and not by a zeal for controversy, 
as in the case of Galen. It rests neither in notions too gen¬ 
eral in application, nor on assumptions in any degree false— 
though my devotion to truth permits me to digress in some 
points a trifle, not much, as some would have it, from the 
prevailing opinion—nor in imaginary assumptions, as with 
Plotinus. This outer expression consists, rather, in a nicety 
and stability of judgment, in experience of age, in fore¬ 
knowledge and in the exercise of those five means I have 
already so often said I use as aids. 

Let me add, indeed, to these ten branches of learning 
which I have mastered, the knowledge of many historical 
facts; though this information belongs properly to no par¬ 
ticular study, it adds much, nevertheless, to the embellish¬ 
ment and adornment of the facts treated in these studies. 



ERUDITION, OR THE APPEARANCE OF IT 171 

These suggestions I have wished to include for exhorting, 
as it were, each one that he rather—inasmuch as our life is 
brief and filled with obstacles and disadvantages—be will¬ 
ing to devote his energies to a few things than to many, 
and to these diligently and assiduously; that he should 
choose above all, pursuits useful to his fellowmen and, pri¬ 
marily, to himself; that he should accept inevitable infer¬ 
ences and true beginnings; nor in provocation, as it were, 
or for the sake of popularity, cast aside established good, 
but make trial of now this, now that, as one or the other 
means is better. 

If a care for fame leads you on, or if you dare to hope 
for some advantage from this, it is better to polish to a 
perfect finish one invention of the mind than to pursue a 
thousand purposes and overtake nothing. 

Saepius in libro memoratur Persius uno: 

Quam levis in tota Marsus Amazonide . 3 

In this respect we see Horace especially successful, owing 
to one composition, not a long one, to be sure, but carefully 
perfected and pure gold. And now, that the poet may 
make good his boast: Dum Capitolium scandet tacita cum 
virgine pontifex* that he would prevail over time by his 
writings, nor feel the Stygian wave’s compelling power, it 
has surely come to pass that though the Pontifices have 
ceased to make the ascent to the Capitolium, the fame of 
Horace still is flourishing. Painstakingly, then, I have 
advanced arithmetic, as a science, tenfold and medicine not 
a little. 

It is the part of a serious man to make haste to accom¬ 
plish what he would. And to this end a vast amount of 



172 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


reading is necessary; when I am devouring a mighty 
volume in three days of steady reading, some suggestion as 
to the contents is necessary, by indicating for omission parts 
very trite or of little use, or by placing a dagger to mark 
obscure passages which may then await an occasion for 
investigation. 

As to my arrangement in composition, it is my custom 
to preserve the same style for the end of a sentence as for 
the beginning of the next. I have the most inspired authors 
as authority for consistency of this sort. Let the writing be, 
also, polished, pure, coherent, unified, in the Latin tongue, 
and of a style guarded by propriety of diction; let the thread 
of the composition and of the sense be drawn from one 
source. Those arts which are, to be sure, not finite, as 
geometry and arithmetic, do not suffer adornment; others, 
contrarily, are rather subject to division and embellishment, 
such as astronomy and jurisprudence. 



CHAPTER FORTY 


Successes In My Practice 

i. In the summer of the year 1537 or 1538 a close friend¬ 
ship existed between me and Donato Lanza to whom I had 
been able to give relief for a spitting of blood with which 
he had been afflicted for many years. As he enjoyed the 
confidence of Senator Sfondrato, a private counsellor of the 
Emperor, he had often urged this nobleman to use my 
skill toward the curing of his elder son, a child suffering 
with puerile convulsions, and to be counted rather in the 
number of the dead than the living. He was imbecile, men¬ 
tally defective, and deformed as well, yet in spite of this 
weakness the child did eventually get well. 

Sfondrato’s other son, the younger, a baby in the ninth 
or tenth month, was taken with fever. Luca della Croce 
was treating him, and holding out hope for the child’s re¬ 
covery, as is the custom. Della Croce was Sfondrato’s inti¬ 
mate friend, inasmuch as he was a procurator of the College 
of Physicians of which Sfondrato was a patron, and the 
two were bound by ties of long association, and inter¬ 
changes of services and benefits. Suddenly very sharp con¬ 
vulsions, with continued high fever, seized the baby. Since 
with these symptoms the danger of death was plainly im¬ 
minent, della Croce urged that Ambrogio Cavenaga be 
summoned; while Sfondrato, mindful of Lanza’s recom¬ 
mendation, suggested me. We went into consultation at 
eight o’clock in the morning, together with the father of 

[ 173 ] 



174 the BOOK 0F MY LIFE 

the child. Thereupon della Croce briefly set forth the 
history of the case, because he knew Sfondrato to be a man 
of intelligence, and because he was himself sincere and 
learned. Cavenaga offered, meanwhile, no opinion, it being 
his place to speak last. 

Thereupon I said, “You observe that the child is suffering 
with opisthotonos.” At this term the senior physician look¬ 
ed startled, as if I had intended to confound him by the 
use of an obscure expression. But della Croce at once car¬ 
ried off the embarrassment by saying he understood that 
to be a nervous spasm in which the body is bent backward. 
I replied, “Precisely, and I shall now show what I mean.” 

Thereat I lifted the baby’s head which hung backward, 
a state which the doctors and others thought was due to 
an imbecility which caused the head to droop with its own 
weight. I ordered that the head be elevated to its former 
position, gently and gradually, however, for any other 
method would have been of no avail. All present looked 
on in admiration, and more particularly the father. Then 
della Croce suddenly uttered these words: “Horbon! Look 
you!” in the phrase of a man rousing someone, or of a 
person beginning an address. “In the diagnosing of dis¬ 
eases Don Girolamo has not an equal!” 

Sfondrato quickly spoke then, addressing me. “Since 
now you have recognized the disease can not something 
be effected by medication?” 

As the others were silent, lest I should impair the reputa¬ 
tion I had already gained by seeming to promise more 
than I could well carry to a successful end, I turned to my 
associates and said, “You know what Hippocrates says in 



SUCCESSES IN MY PRACTICE 


175 


regard to this: Febrem convulsioni” 1 And I cited the 
aphorism. 

Thereupon della Croce—who, with his characteristic 
sense of fitness was desiring to maintain a friendly spirit, 
if possible, so that, should the boy be cured, his aforetime 
favor might be maintained, or in case the child died, that 
he might not seem to have been envious of the reputation 
of a rival—assigned the case to me. The senior physician, 
Cavenaga, acquiesced, for they knew there was more to be 
anticipated from discreet praise than from disagreement. 

Thereupon I prescribed a fomentation of gauze moistened 
in linseed-oil, and in oil of water-lilies, to be applied, and 
gave directions that the baby be gently treated until his 
neck resumed its natural position; that the nurse should 
eat no meat and the child be given no food nor drink other 
than her milk, and not too much of that. I told them to 
put him in his cradle, keep him warm, and rock him 
easily until sleep should creep over him. 

When the other doctors had withdrawn I recollect how 
the parent of the boy said to me: “I give this child to you 
for your own son.” 

To which I replied, “You are not well mindful of his 
future in wishing to substitute a poor father for a rich one.” 

“But I know,” he went on, “that you have treated him as 
if he were your own, never fearing that in so doing you 
might give offense to those.” He meant the physicians. 

“On the contrary,” said I, “I am pleased to confer with 
them, and would be glad to have them for associates in all 
cases, and gain their support.” 

And I so combined my phrases as to give him to under¬ 
stand that while I did not despair altogether of the cure 



176 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


of his child, I was not overconfident; that I was more dis¬ 
creet than profoundly learned or able to be of any great 
service by way of knowledge gained from experience with 
the disease. The cure was successful, for as it happened 
the fever had been running for fourteen days, and the 
weather was warm; within four days the baby began to 
improve. 

It was in view of this—not so much because I diagnosed 
the disease, I conjecture, for my own particular experience 
might have helped therein; nor because his son was re¬ 
stored, for these things can be attributed to chance, but 
because the boy recovered in four days, whereas the doctors 
had tormented his brother for more than six months and 
in the end left him half dead—in view of this, it was, that 
he looked upon me with admiration and thereafter pre¬ 
ferred me to all others. It may be assumed, at least, that he 
had great respect for me because della Croce maintained 
an envious and unfriendly spirit toward me throughout his 
term as procurator of the College of Physicians; and he de¬ 
clared to Cavenaga, in the presence of my patient’s father 
that he could in honor say nothing more than he felt 
obliged to in praise of a man who did not enjoy amicable 
relations with the College. It was plain that jealousy and 
bitter rivalry and not the conditions of my birth stood in 
the way of my admission to the college. Sfondrato was so 
impressed with the case of his son that he told the whole 
story in the Senate, and used his persuasions upon the 
Governor of the State and other ministers and men in the 
purple robes of rank to such effect that a way into the 
College of Physicians, from which I had been rejected by 
so many votes, and finally on so many charges and excuses, 



SUCCESSES IN MY PRACTICE 


177 


was opened. He brought it about that I might be admitted 
to the post of lecturing publicly in the Academy, and even 
be recompensed with a gratuity, and be received by all. 

2. My next case was that of Archbishop Hamilton of 
Scotland, who, then in his forty-second year, had been for 
ten years suffering with asthma. Having tried first the 
physicians of the King of France, and after that the physi¬ 
cians of the Emperor Charles V, but to no effect, he sent 
for me at Milan, asking that 1 proceed to Lyons. Once 
there he sent an additional three hundred pounds, request¬ 
ing me to continue on my journey as far as Paris, and 
even, should he be prevented by the wars from meeting 
me there, on to Scotland. 

1 went. The Archbishop’s doctor was pursuing a course 
of treatment in accordance with the decisions of the Coun¬ 
cil of Parisian Physicians. That the patient did not mend 
gave cause for reproach, and I was finally obliged to express 
myself as to the reasons for his continued indisposition. 
Whereupon the Bishop vented his indignation upon his 
physician, and the latter upon me, because I had uncovered 
the trouble; and so 1 was in apprehension from the latter, 
and accused of procrastination by the former, the more so 
because when 1 had begun my treatment, the patient had 
improved. In the midst of such disturbing circumstances, 
I asked leave to withdraw, a favor which was not very gra¬ 
ciously granted. On leaving, I prescribed a regimen where¬ 
by he regained his health after two years. I tarried with him 
seventy-five days; and after he saw his expectation of being 
cured was in the process of realization, Michael, his lord 
chamberlain, was commissioned to offer me generous in¬ 
ducements to return as private physician to his household, 



178 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


but I did not accept. The Archbishop paid out for this at¬ 
tendance eighteen hundred crowns of gold, of which four¬ 
teen hundred came to me. 

3. In my own country, I cured of a cutaneous affection 
of two years’ standing, Francesco Gaddi, Prior of the Monks 
of St. Augustine. Within six months, he was sound; but 
this man and my preceding patient—Oh, wretched fate of 
humankind!—were freed from disease to perish ten years 
later, by violent death, as a result of political strife. 

4. Martha Motta was healed by my treatments in two 
years, although for thirteen years she had been confined 
to a chair and had never taken a step. Although in two 
similar cases, within about ten years, an attempt to cure 
had resulted in violent death, this woman, when I left 
Milan, had already lived twenty-three years; and, though 
in truth with a slight stoop, had been able to walk where 
she would throughout all this time. 

5. Giulio Gati I cured of consumption, and not long 
afterwards he became the childhood tutor of the Lord of 
Mantua. 

6. The son of Giammaria Astolfo I relieved of chronic 
fevers. 

7. Adriano, a Belgian, I cured of an empyema; and there¬ 
after he was grateful, devoted, and full of services toward 
me, to such an extent that I should like to have the same 
experience with an Italian. 

8. Again, Giampaolo Negroli, a merchant well known 
throughout the whole city, having sought a cure from all 
the leading physicians, was at length given up as hopelessly 
consumptive. My treatment of his case secured for me 
his firm friendship. 



SUCCESSES IN MY PRACTICE 


179 


9. Gasparo Rolla, a shop-keeper, who had already been 
for the period of a year but little better than a millstone, 
and plainly never able to make a move through his own 
efforts, I cured. He remained, however, twisted and wry- 
necked. 

10. What of the fact that I was not wont to lose a single 
fever patient, and of those sick of other ills, scarcely one 
in three hundred ? Proof of this are the statements accom¬ 
panying death certificates as preserved in the Public Health 
Records. This custom of the public officials is well known 
to every citizen. However, although this proof is not at 
hand, still I think it neither proper nor expedient to bring 
forward testimonials from other sources, nor to boast, espe¬ 
cially since physicians take little stock in these methods. 

11. I was also summoned from my professorial duties 
in the University of Pavia to attend professionally the 
Duke of Sessa. 2 I accepted as a fee one hundred gold 
crowns and a gift of silk. 

12. I was similarly called from Bologna to Modena to 
Cardinal Morone, from whom I was loath to take a fee; for 
1 was aware that I owed more to his patronage than he to 
my services. In these two illustrious men I found firm 
supporters and ready helpers, and I was sustained by their 
personal efforts in my behalf. 

Altogether I restored to health more than one hundred 
men given up as hopeless, at Milan, Bologna, and Rome. 
Nor should it seem a marvel for me to have shown myself 
so lucky and successful in the practice of therapeutics, since 
I claim for diagnostics a very special place in the field of 
medicine. 

Two offers which I made publicly at Bologna are evi- 



i8o 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


dence of my success; I said that I would cure every sick 
person who should come in time into my hands, who was 
not more than seventy years old, and not younger than 
seven (in my Prognosticorum, where I frequently men¬ 
tion this, seven should be read in place of five ); nor any¬ 
one with a disease pendent on procatarctic causes such as 
a wound, a blow, an accident, a fright, or poison; anyone 
(I emphasize this especially) in possession of his faculties, 
and not an invalid such as a consumptive, or with a scir¬ 
rhous liver or a deep ulcer in a dangerous place; or if with 
a very large stone in the bladder, or with epilepsy. 

The other offer—in which, however, I was free to take 
up the hazard or not—was that if anyone fell sick unto 
death, I would show where the seat of the disease was, and 
if, after the patient’s death, it was found that I was in 
error, I was to be held for a penalty of one hundred times 
the moneys taken in stake. Accordingly, very many, openly 
eager at first to be able to prove that I had been mistaken, 
had dissected bodies, as that of Senator Orsi, of Doctor 
Pellegrini, and of Giorgio Ghisleri. In the last case, does 
not my prediction that the source of the ailment would be 
in the liver seem astonishing, when the urine was in no 
way affected ? That the abdomen, which had pained con¬ 
stantly, would be unimpaired? After that, though they 
secretly examined many other cases, they never found me 
in error, nor did they dare to accept my challenge, nor 
recommend that it be accepted. 

13. But to return to my successful cures: At Bologna I 
restored to health Vincenzo Torrone who had been suffer¬ 
ing for the space of a year with an affliction of the hip. He 
had been confined constantly to his bed, a fact which had 



SUCCESSES IN MY PRACTICE l8l 

contributed in no way toward a cure, and had not even 
lessened his pain. 

14. From a similar disease I cured, in the dead of winter, 
the wife of Claudio, a merchant of the city. 

15, 16. Just so, at Rome, I attended professionally a noble 
lady, Clementina Massa, and also Giovanni Cesare Buon- 
tempo, a jurisconsult. Both had been sick for almost two 
years and were reduced to the most distressing circum¬ 
stances. They had tried all the more renowned physicians 
of the city, but I treated them so effectually that they are 
living yet today. 

In attending, furthermore, a community of Spanish peo¬ 
ple living at Milan I gave proof of some extraordinary facts: 
first, what of this, that no one was able to boast that he 
could heal anyone whom I had given up as incurable, al¬ 
though I restored a great number of patients given up as 
hopeless? And, note, as I have elsewhere declared, that 
chance has no place in art. Wherein should Fortuna attend 
the barber in order that he may shave, or a musician so that 
he may sing and strike the chords ? Similarly in medicine 
chance is not to be counted on, yet there are three respects 
in which medicine, setting aside any considerations of skill, 
seems to be subject to chance: first, the fact that all points 
of the medical art are not so simple and clear as in the art 
of a shoemaker or a barber. If any physician, then, has 
come, in his practice, upon a rather grave case, or met with 
a disease which is very complex or deep seated, and has 
not been able to offer much in the way of help, it is due not 
to the shortcomings of medical art, but to the inexperience 
of the one engaged in practicing the art. Medicine is, more¬ 
over, a many-sided art, to such an extent, indeed, that both 



182 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


at present and in the past it has been divided into the 
branches represented by surgeons, oculists, physicians, the 
druggists, those skilled in the knowledge and use of herbs, 
and the bone specialists. Each of these special fields is 
shared by many groups devoted to some particular phase 
of their specialty. Accordingly, if any doctor’s practice 
brings him in contact with a disease with which he has 
long been familiar, and has successfully treated, he can be 
called lucky; otherwise, it is just the contrary. The doctor, 
furthermore, must needs deal with medicaments, nurses, 
assistants, pharmacists, surgeons, and those who prepare the 
food, and see that all externals proceed without error. He 
must have a care for heat, water, the bedroom, sanitation, 
silence, and the patient’s friends. Fear, depression, or a fit 
of anger may bring about a patient’s death even though the 
disease of which the patient is suffering is curable. 

Yet withal, in short, since it is an art, medicine is not a 
subject of mere chance. In so far, however, as any art is 
many-sided, as medicine is, or results from many agencies 
working, together (as soldiering—which is, to be sure, of a 
single character, albeit of many agents of the same type) 
or is the product of the work of one agent (as the craft of 
the artificer of nails, or better, of bronzes, or as the labor of 
the plowman and the sower), that art is, accordingly, sub¬ 
jected to various vicissitudes. And the fact, too, that a 
doctor practices—as I have—in many localities may have 
some bearing on the element of chance in the art. Hippoc¬ 
rates avers that it has much to do with the matter. I prac¬ 
ticed first at Venice, after that in the region of Padua at 
the village, or commune, to use the Italian term, of Sacco; 
then at Milan, at Gallarate, at Pavia—though here but little 



SUCCESSES IN MY PRACTICE 183 

—at Bologna and at Rome. Abroad I practiced somewhat 
in France (Lyons), England, and Scotland. I keep up my 
practice even at this period of my life, and I am entering 
my seventy-fifth year, although Galen did not pass beyond 
his sixty-seventh, and Avicenna, that is Hossein, his fifty- 
seventh, and both spent their whole lives in travel. At least 
Galen traveled for twenty years, and Hossein always went 
from place to place. Aetius 3 traveled throughout his Epis¬ 
copate, Oribasius 4 was banished to Pontus, and Paul of 
Aigina was a wanderer. 

17. But to continue, let us relate the case of Giulio Ring- 
hieri, a young fellow-townsman. This man lived near the 
Church of San Giacomo on the street called San Donato in 
Bologna. On June 20th, 1567, when he had been lying for 
more than forty days with a very high fever accompanied 
by acute inflammation and delirium, I cured him, since 
with the customary formalities his case had been turned 
over to me. 

18. What need is there to mention Annibale Ariosto, a 
rich and aristocratic youth? He was troubled with an 
abscess in the chest which had become chronic, and because 
he had lost flesh, had had an accession of hectic fever, had 
discharged as much as two pounds of matter in a single 
day, and was suffering with insomnia, the doctors aban¬ 
doned him as an incurable consumptive, declaring his lungs 
hopelessly diseased. They isolated him lest the four young 
children of Michele Angeli, judge of Turin, should be 
touched by the contagion. This patient I restored to health 
in thirty days, and, what is more, he so put on flesh and 
gained in healthy color that the whole city was amazed. 



184 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


Nothing like these two miraculous cures was seen for fifty 
years at Bologna. 

19, 20. Likewise there were two young men living in 
adjoining houses near the gate which leads to Modena— 
Leonardo and Giambattista—who, sick with fever and 
dysentery yet not troubled with a cough or any difficulty of 
breathing, had lingered for eleven days, though they had 
been given up for as good as dead. I knew they were suf¬ 
fering from a congestion of the lungs, and asserted that 
both could be cured by so simple a means as a discharge of 
mucus from the lungs, a statement which amazed the doc¬ 
tors. Even as I had said, both, within twenty-five days from 
the start of the trouble, after they had discharged some¬ 
thing like a pound of mucus, recovered and were com¬ 
pletely well within four or five days. 

21. Not far from these two young men lived another, 
one Marco Antonio Felicino, who, as the result of an ex¬ 
tended illness, was not able to speak. He was, moreover, 
the grand-nephew of a senator of high rank, by reason of 
his very ancient family, as I learned. From a siege of un¬ 
interrupted fevers, during which he was unconscious, he 
escaped voiceless and weakened unto death. His case was 
given over by other physicians, since they acknowledged 
that they neither recognized the disease nor had seen its 
like. There were those who said the youth was reduced to 
such a pass from a draught of poison given him by his mis¬ 
tress. I restored him to self-control and speech four days 
after I had taken his case into my hands, and within another 
ten or twelve days I had cured him entirely. I believe he 
is still living. 

The physicians bore a grudge against me on this score, 



SUCCESSES IN MY PRACTICE 


185 


because, in the treatment of such cases, I had made no ex¬ 
planation of my diagnosis nor any exposition of my 
method. 

22. There was the cure of Agnese, wife of Claudio, a 
French merchant of our city for whom the foremost physi¬ 
cians had ceased to hold out any hope, saying she was 
moribund. And this they said with good reason, for cer¬ 
tainly, of all my patients, I never saved the life of anyone 
with greater efforts than I put forth on her behalf, though 
I have seen many nearer death. 

23. I remember cases which I have mentioned casually 
elsewhere—certain patients cured of mental unsoundness, 
of epilepsy, and of loss of sight; people suffering with 
dropsy, with humped backs, with failure of organic func¬ 
tions, and with lameness, were treated by me to the im¬ 
provement of their condition, such as (24) the sons of the 
woodworker who lived near the Tosa Gate. Why (25) 
go into detail about the little short of miraculous cure of 
Lorenzo Gaggi and of (26) the legate of the Prince of 
Mantua, or (27) about the really noteworthy healing of 
the illustrious Spaniard, Juara, and of all the Milanese 
Spaniards? Why need I more than mention the name of 
(28) Simone Lanza, of (29) De Mareschalchi, of (30) the 
daughter of Gianangelo Linato, of (31) Antonio Scazzoso? 
That case (32), finally, of the son of Martino the mer¬ 
chant is worthy of attention, and that (33) of the wife of 
the pharmacist of the Three Kings. Some (34) I relieved 
from inveterate complaints; (35) others from a bloody 
passage of urine. (36) From double quartan ague no one 
was dismissed from my care uncured. 

(37) Although summoned tardily I saved all the chil- 



i86 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


dren of the family of the Sirtori from poisoning, even after 
both parents had died. (38) For Agostino Fornari I treated 
a case of dropsy. (39) Why need I refer to that conten¬ 
tion with Cavenaga and Candiano in the cure of Octaviano 
Mariano? However, to omit the mention of an almost 
unbelievable number of examples is not to argue that my 
success diminished. (40) There was the unfortunate case 
of Antonio Maroraggio; yet over against that failure, the 
in-no-wise deceptive cures of fever, plague and gout. It 
was because of such a case as this that the physicians of 
Milan were wont to say that I happened to save my patients 
not because of the excellence of my art, but by mere good 
luck, inasmuch as the moribund came into their hands, 
while to me those came who were destined to be saved. 

May you not be amazed, O Reader, nor suspect me to be 
lying! All these facts are exactly as I have stated, and 
cases of exactly this sort have occurred, even of greater 
moment and in larger number than I have set down. I 
have not the exact record, but I judge the number would 
reach 180 and pass beyond that. Neither are you to mis¬ 
trust that I am indulging in vainglory, or falsely imagine 
that I desire or hope to be set above Hippocrates. 

In the first place, as concerns misrepresentation—why 
should I indulge in such folly? Let anyone look into my 
statements; should he detect me in a single falsehood, all 
I have written would be of no account. Again, why should 
I be charged with seeking glory and gain? Should more 
serious diseases present themselves to me, I should deem it 
nothing short of a misfortune, for I do not of a truth feel 
confident that I could depend on my past success. Pliny 
and Plutarch tell how Caesar, when he had for the fiftieth 



SUCCESSES IN MY PRACTICE 


187 


time contended victoriously against the enemy in open field, 
became less eager for battle lest he should mar and dishonor 
the glory gained. 5 How much more easily this might be 
my fate! 

Moreover, how dare I hope that great honor may spring 
from my daily round of professional visits? Only with a 
prince for patron may this come to pass if indeed any hope 
of it remain at all. 

Whatever in the physician’s work has glory for its end is 
not only much the lesser part—but, for a truth, is naught. 
Hippocrates is not illustrious because he healed so many, 
for by his own testimony, on one occasion twenty-five out 
of forty-two died and only seventeen were restored to 
health. But he is great because of his contributions to the 
theory and science of medicine. I, on the contrary, am 
doubly inferior in this respect: in the first place because that 
good fortune in my practice seemed to have come from 
divine help and not from my own great learning; so many 
propitious circumstances, moreover, have accompanied my 
successes in this respect that I entertain no hope that the 
future may bring results equal to my labors. And it is 
seldom proper to boast that anything has happened accord¬ 
ing to plan or design—although in deliberation I showed 
myself as efficient as I could. 

Yet the diseases which Hippocrates had to combat were 
of the most violent nature. Thessaly is a barren rocky land 
where the winds are biting, the wines are raw, the vege¬ 
tables lacking in succulence, and water is scarce. The mode 
of life is uncouth; remedies there are none, nor anything 
choice, and the exercises are so strenuous as to be deadly. 
Had I been there I surely should never have been able to 



i88 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


publish such extraordinary stories of success; had Hippoc¬ 
rates lived in peaceful times, in a clement region abounding 
in every comfort he might have practiced medicine with¬ 
out running on the rocks that beset a physician’s course. 

Let what I have Written, then, be my boast in the matter 
of my professional success; but let it have been within the 
limits of moderation—since the Lord, as I now feel, shows 
me his favor in so far as I render a true account. “What,” 
some one will say, “has he not in large measure—and not 
to say merely —given you satisfaction in your vain desire 
for success, even though he has deprived that flower of 
success of its fruit seeing that you have spent your career 
living in great poverty, with so many rivals, exposed to so 
many wrongs and afflicted with so many hardships!” 

Finally, I know that I have obtained whatever sum of 
renown is mine not only without being suspected of false 
pretenses, but even without bearing a grudge against any 
man. 



CHAPTER FORTY-ONE 


Concerning Natural Though Rare Circumstances of 

My Own Life. Concerning the Avenging of My Son 

Among the extraordinary, though quite natural circum¬ 
stances of my life, the first and most unusual is that I was 
born in this century in which the whole world became 
known; whereas the ancients were familiar with but little 
more than a third part of it. 

On the one hand we explore America—I now refer to 
the part peculiarly designated by that name—Brazil, a great 
part of which was before unknown, Terra del Fuego, 
Patagonia, Peru, Charcas, 1 Parana, 2 Acutia, 3 Caribana, 4 
Picora, 5 New Spain,, Quito, of Quinira 6 the more western 
part, New France and regions more to the south of this 
toward Florida, Cortereal, 7 Estotilant, 8 and Marata. 9 Be¬ 
sides all these, toward the East under the Antarctic we find 
the Antiscians 10 somewhat like Scythians, and some North¬ 
ern peoples not yet known, as well as Japan, 11 Binarchia, 12 
the Amazonas, and a region which is beyond the Island of 
the Demons, if these be not fabled islands—all discoveries 
sure to give rise to great and calamitous events in order 
that a just distribution of them may be maintained. 

The conviction grows that, as a result of these dis¬ 
coveries, the fine arts will be neglected and but lightly 
esteemed, and certainties will be exchanged for uncertain¬ 
ties. These things may be true sometime or other, but 
meanwhile we shall rejoice as in a flower-filled meadow. 

[ 189] 



190 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


For what is more amazing than pyrotechnics? Or than 
the fiery bolts man has invented so much more destructive 
than the lightning of the gods ? 

Nor of thee, O Great Compass, will I be silent, for thou 
dost guide us over boundless seas, through gloomy nights, 
through the wild storms seafarers dread, and through the 
pathless wilderness. 

The fourth marvel is the invention of the typographic 
art, a work of man’s hands, and the discovery of his wit— 
a rival, forsooth, of the wonders wrought by divine intelli¬ 
gence. What lack we yet unless it be the taking of Heaven 
by storm! 13 Oh, the madness of men to give heed to vanity 
rather than the fundamental things of life! Oh, what 
arrogant poverty of intellectual humility not to be moved 
to wonder! 

But to return to my theme. It was the 20th day of De¬ 
cember in the year 1557. All things seemed to be going 
well with me. I did not sleep until midnight, yet when 
the desire was about to overcome me, my bed suddenly 
seemed to tremble, and with it the whole bed-chamber. 
I thought: It is an earthquake! At length sleep stole over 
me. In the morning when day had dawned I asked Simon 
Sosia—he is now here at Rome with me—who slept in the 
low truckle-bed, whether he had been aware of anything 
unusual. He replied, saying that he had felt the room and 
bed vibrating. “At what hour?” I asked. “The sixth or 
seventh,” he said. When I betook myself to the public 
square, I asked any number of people whether they had 
felt the earthquake shock, but no one had. 

On my return to the house, my servant, with a sad counte¬ 
nance, came hurrying up to me and announced that Giam- 



RARE CIRCUMSTANCES OF MY OWN LIFE I9I 

battista had married'Brandonia di Seroni, a girl he indeed 
loved but who was utterly without dowry or recommenda¬ 
tion. Alas for grief, alas for tears! I found when I 
arrived that the marriage had indeed taken place. This, 
then, was the beginning of all manner of evils. 

I reflected that some messenger from no earthly regions 
had that night willed to give me warning of the event 
which he knew had come to pass in the same evening; 
indeed when day had come, before my son went out from 
the house I had approached him, saying—not so much 
at that moment warned by the portent, but because he 
seemed strangely unlike himself—“My son, have a care 
for yourself today that you bring not some disaster upon 
yourself.” I recall the very spot; I stood in the doorway. 
But I do not remember whether or not I referred to the 
portent. 

Not many days later I again felt the bedroom vibrating; 
feeling with my hand I detected a palpitation of my heart, 
perhaps because I was lying on my left side. When I sat up 
the tremor and the palpitation ceased at the same time. 
I lay back once more, and both returned; wherefore I knew 
the one was connected with the other. I even remembered 
that when the tremor had occurred on the previous occasion 
my heart had palpitated so as to seem a perfectly natural 
thing; yet at that time I did not realize how it had been 
affected. I noted only that there had been a double vibra¬ 
tion, one due to the palpitation of my heart, and another 
a spiritual reaction coming through the medium of the 
palpitation. I came to this explanation through a similar 
circumstance of a few years earlier. It used to be my wont 
in those days, if I was deserted by sleep in the small hours 



192 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


before the dawn, to be tossed and worried with the weight 
of my anxieties. Now, however, within the last few years, 
if I happen to be wakeful, I am not beset by cares. From 
this I judge that the insomnia may be merely an unwhole¬ 
some habit rather than a spiritual visitation. 

An incident of similar nature occurred in 1531 when a 
dog of the neighborhood, ordinarily a well-behaved beast, 
howled for hours without stopping—an extraordinary 
performance; ravens sat on the ridgepole, croaking with 
unwonted persistence; when the house-boy broke the 
kindling fagots, fiery sparks flew forth, and before I 
rightly knew what I was about, I found myself married! 
From that moment all sorts of adversities were my con¬ 
stant companions. Yet one must not jump at the con¬ 
clusion that all these omens were supernatural. Indeed, 
when I was all but thirteen years old, a raven flew at me 
in the Piazza de Sant ’Ambrogio and tore a strip from my 
garment; nor did the creature want to let me go even 
though I pushed and pulled at him violently. Yet for all 
this, nothing dire befell either me or any of mine for 
many years. 

Many a great sight have I seen, yet natural phenomena 
all: for one, when I was a lad I saw a star like to Venus 
shining so high in heaven at the twenty-second hour of 
the day that it could be seen from our whole city. There¬ 
after, I saw three suns in the year 1531 and all casting 
their broad beams across the eastern sky. This happened 
in the month of April, at Venice where, by chance, I then 
was. The spectacle lasted about three hours altogether. 

Now it happened that some time ago, about the year 
1512 in the territory around Bergamo near the Adda River, 



RARE CIRCUMSTANCES OF MY OWN LIFE 193 

more than a thousand stones are said to have fallen in one 
night, following the appearance, in the early evening, of a 
mighty fiery pennant which was borne upon the air in the 
likeness of a beam of amazing proportions. One of these 
stones I saw when I was a boy; it weighed somewhat over 
no pounds—I forget now whether common or the larger 
pound unit; for in of the larger unit are equal to 259 of 
the Milanese scale. I saw the stone in the home of Marc 
Antonio Dugano, which adjoins the sacred temple dedi¬ 
cated to St. Francis. It was of an irregular shape, broken 
off on every side so as to presuppose a fall. Of an ashy 
color and rather stained, it gave off when rubbed an odor 
of sulphur, and was much like a common whetstone. This 
might have been a misrepresentation, for everywhere such 
stones are unearthed, and throughout the city are referred 
to as whetstones.* 

I have volunteered this last information, inasmuch as 
neither in the works of Gaspare Bugatto nor of Francesco 
Sansovino, careful Italian historians of this whole period, 
do I find any mention of the shower of stones. Yet why 
should these good citizens have invented such a tale ? And 
indeed, other stones, though smaller, were shown here, 
there and everywhere. Nor was this phenomenon to be a 
favorable omen to the princes who were then reigning, for 
it is a fact that to men meditating sedition prodigies of this 
sort add animus for furthering their revolutionary designs, 
and perhaps are somewhat potent in this respect because 
they furnish an evident excuse. 


*The incredulity of the 18th century scientists regarding meteors 
was evidently well launched during the Renaissance. 



i 94 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


Be that, however, one way or the other, during those 
days it is well known that such a violent earthquake oc¬ 
curred in Venice that the chimes of the churches rang out 
spontaneously. This ominous event happened in 1511. 

In 1513 when Maximilian Sforza, Duke of Milan, the 
cause of the Principate utterly lost, was besieged at Novara 
by the French, the dogs of the French came into the city 
in a pack, licking and fawning upon the dogs of the Swiss. 
Jacob Motino of Altdorf, a tribune of the Swiss soldiery 
and a man who had taken part in many engagements, hav¬ 
ing observed the actions of the dogs, hastened to Sforza 
assuring him of a decisive victory. This was won the 
following day. 

Here I seem to have exceeded the limits of my theme, 
but it is pertinent to the present to show how I was born 
in an epoch in which I was privileged to see many marvels. 
When I was a young man, and even now, when I am 
abruptly aroused from sleep, everything in my bedchamber 
appears to be bathed in luminosity, but soon this force spent 
itself and faded. It is said that Tiberius had this same 
experience. 

When on the night preceding the 23d of January 1565— 
the day my man Cesio left and Crasso entered my service— 
my bed twice burst into flames, I predicted that I should 
not remain at Bologna. The first time I had occasion to 
depart, I resisted the desire; the second time, I found it 
impossible. 

In 1552 a gentle little house-dog which had been left at 
home jumped upon my writing board and tore to shreds 
my public lectures; the Book of Fate, which seemed more 
in the way of the creature, she left untouched. At the end 



RARE CIRCUMSTANCES OF MY OWN LIFE 


195 


of the year, quite unexpectedly I gave up public teaching 
and did not return to it for a period of eight years. 

It is ever legitimate to draw inferences from even the 
most insignificant events, when they are uncommonly per¬ 
sistent, since, as I have elsewhere declared, even as a net 
consists of meshes, all things in the life of man consist in 
trifles repeated and massed together now in one figure 
now in another like cloud formations. Not only through 
the very smallest circumstances are our affairs increased, 
but these small circumstances ought gradually to be 
analyzed into their infinitely minute components. And 
that man alone will be a figure in the arts, in display of 
judgment, or in civil life, and will rise to the top, who 
understands the significance of all these influences, and 
knows how to heed them in his business. Wherefore in 
any events whatsoever things are of apparently no signif¬ 
icance ought to be duly observed. 

On the day when Lodovico Ferrari came from Bologna 
with his cousin Luca, the blackbird in the courtyard kept 
up such an endless and altogether unwonted chattering 
that we were looking for someone to arrive. Now this was 
on the last day of November in 1536. Can it be that the 
latter had anything to do with the former? Not at all! 
How many times have such omens turned out vainly! 
By some—Augustus, for instance—forebodings have been 
observed to their advantage through some incalculable 
reasoning; by others—as Caesar and Sulla—they have been 
held in contempt. It is all like trying to calculate one’s 
chances in gambling: the system comes to naught or is 
ambiguous. Whatsoever things are above the natural do 
not subject themselves to natural laws, while such things 



196 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


as may be subjected to natural law contain nothing to 
excite the wonder of any save the ignorant. 

The premonition I had on the occasion when I almost 
drowned in Lake Garda was quite another matter; I had 
feared to embark, yet knew not why, so serene was the air. 

In this same year many extraordinary events occurred, 
some of which foreshadowed liberation, others catastrophe 
—as the breaking of the chain, for instance, by which an 
emerald had been suspended from my neck. But before 
that, three rings which I was wearing on my finger—a most 
amazing thing to be sure—fused into one. Thus the dis¬ 
union and the union were not a little worthy of admiration, 
more especially since both a liberation and a condemnation 
followed close upon these auguries. 

However, these dispensations are from God, and, as far 
as prodigies are concerned, are therefore no marvel. 

From my earliest childhood I seemed destined to an early 
death because of a laborious breathing, an intense cold¬ 
ness of my feet until midnight at least, a palpitation of the 
heart at that tender age, and profuse perspiration; the latter 
an uniformly copious discharge of urine carried off in later 
years. My teeth were few and weak to an exceptional 
degree; my right hand was not well knit; the life-line was 
very brief, irregular, interrupted and branching, and all the 
other principal lines were almost hair-fine or sadly awry. 
There were stars which threatened, from every aspect, my 
death, which all declared would be before my forty-fifth 
year—all vain findings, for I live, and I am in my seventy- 
fifth year! It is not the fallibility of the art; it is the inex¬ 
perience of the artificer. 

Verily, if indeed there be any such thing as an omen, it 


RARE CIRCUMSTANCES OF MY OWN LIFE 


197 


could not be more evident anywhere than in Aristotle; and 
in his works nothing of the kind is to be read. 

But let us proceed to the story qf my son which in some 
respects is more worthy of consideration. My son was slain. 
Within one hundred and twenty-one days Senator Falcuzio 
himself died exclaiming that he was perishing as a result 
of the cruel ignorance of a certain one who had persuaded 
him to vote for the death sentence of my son and had been 
opposed to leniency. Yet Senator Falcuzio was, in other 
respects, a man of high character. Him, Hala, who had 
sickened immediately after the condemnation of my son, 
followed to death. He was taken with consumption, and 
expired after having coughed up one of his lungs. The 
judge, Rigone, who had presided at the trial laid away his 
lawful wife without a candle to honor her burial—a thing 
to wonder at, yet true, for I heard it from many. It is 
also reported that the judge himself, though a man of 
good name, escaped, by death alone, an indictment which 
had been brought against him. Even his only son, a grow¬ 
ing boy, was swept away to death, so that one well might 
say that, so accursed, the whole house had fallen under 
a spell. Within a few days my son’s father-in-law, who had 
procured his death, was cast into prison; and finally, after 
he had lost his office of collector of debts, he had to beg. 
A son of his, one he especially favored, ended his life on 
the gallows, condemned, as I learned, in Sicily. 

Of all of those who brought accusation against my son 
not one escaped without some terrible calamity—being 
either smitten or destroyed. Nay even the ruler and prince, 
in most respects a magnanimous and gracious man, after 
he had become indifferent to my son’s cause, on account of 



198 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


some grudge he bore me, or because he was overwhelmed 
by the number of accusers, was assailed with all manner 
of evils: he suffered from 1 grave diseases; his granddaughter 
was murdered by her own husband; he became involved 
in burdensome litigations. On the heels of these trod pub¬ 
lic disgrace when the Island of Djerba was lost and the 
royal fleet put to rout. 

Hardly am I so immodest or mad as to think any of these 
events relates to my own concerns; yet men of the best 
intentions go down like the grain-fields in a storm, and 
fall in the times of great calamity when they are deprived 
of the protection of the most illustrious princes because the 
latter are involved in public or private misfortunes. For 
such occasions impious intriguers regularly wait, since 
nothing offers higher hope of gaining their nefarious ends. 



CHAPTER FORTY-TWO 


Power of Foreknowledge in My Art and in Other 
Matters 

Whatever cause—to pursue my story—brought me more 
of a reputation than I desired in this matter of foreknowl¬ 
edge, whether a divine afflatus, or my harpocratic turn of 
mind, or a certain perfection of judgment and intellect, I 
cannot precisely say. In the art of medicine my powers 
first became conspicuous in the treatment of Cecilia Maggi, 
in the cases of the son of Giangiacomo Resti, and of so 
many others, that for so long a period as I was successful 
no one was able to boast that he had had insight. Rather, 
even those who were endeavoring to disparage in other 
respects my methods of medical practice, in this question 
of discernment always left me first place, though I never 
claimed it for myself. 

Furthermore, passing over other considerations, did I not, 
while in Bologna, make an offer to the effect that if anyone 
should be willing to pay ten crowns on the part of a sick 
person, I would examine the patient carefully twice or 
thrice, or even but once, and, failing to make an accurate 
statement regarding the cause of his impending death, I 
would repay ten times my fee upon the confirmation of my 
error? Autopsies were held over a number of prominent 
men, first, to be sure, in my presence, but at length when 
it was seen that I was never in error, my opponents made 
secret examinations lest it should be their fate to blush too 

[ 199] 



200 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


often because of their ignorance. Not once in the eight 
years I was professor of medicine there did an occasion for 
diagnosis arise wherein the others dared contradict me or 
even voice their complaints, so fortunate have I been in 
this respect. 

Outside my professional skill in diagnosis, anyone might 
be amazed, surely, at the predictions I made in the con¬ 
sultation regarding Edward VI, King of England, 1 how I 
discerned what calamities, and from what quarter, were 
threatening. The foreknowledge of certain events which 
it is my wish to include in the Song of Lamentation for 
the death of my son, I pass over in silence, since the events 
themselves make reference to them impossible; 2 yet I deem 
it nearer to miracle than to oracle that I foresaw coming 
events as far in the future as the eighth year after his death. 

As I have reiterated, nevertheless, I do not count this 
prophetic power a tribute to my own glory, and I had 
rather it came to naught than that I should seek personal 
honors therefrom. From the beginning I declared Cyprus 
would be lost, 3 and I gave my reasons therefor. Even 
about the Citadel of Africa I was by no means uncertain. 4 
Yet I would not have anyone think that these things are 
far-fetched or of a demon, or of astrology, but they are 
based on Aristotle’s idea of prophecy. 5 True divination, 
says he, is an endowment of the prudent and the wise only. 

I was not in the habit of making any pronouncement 
or prediction before I had inquired into all things which 
bore upon the situation: I had first learned the nature of 
the places concerned, the customs of men, the outstanding 
character of their princes, their history and their noblemen, 
and had unraveled the negotiations of a great number of 



POWER AND FOREKNOWLEDGE,IN MY ART 


201 


their conclaves. From these data, and aided by a system 
of my own—which I shall not set forth—I was wont to 
make public my opinion. 

Hear, furthermore, what the principles of my system 
were and what their nature: doctrina crass a, dilemma, 
Tqojto^ amplificatio, my exceptional intuition and dialec¬ 
tics;* to these principles I have given long, painstaking and 
assiduous exercise, and meditation even greater than the 
exercise. 

Certain things have happened to me, for all that, of 
which I can render no adequate explanation. By no one 
had I, in my young manhood, been recommended as a 
chiromancer to a certain Giovanni Stefano BifH, yet he, 
nevertheless, requested me to make some predictions re¬ 
garding his life. I told him that his companions would 
play him false, and sought that he might pardon me if I 
predicted anything serious; whereupon I prophesied that 
he was threatened with the danger of being hanged shortly. 
Within a week he was arrested and subjected to tortures; 
he obstinately denied the charge, but in spite of his asser¬ 
tions of innocence ended his life on the gallows within six 
months, but not before his hand had been cut off by his 
inquisitors. 

What came to pass with Giampaolo Eufomia, a youth, 
and at one time my pupil, cannot claim so much from 
chance. All happened within a month; the chirograph is 
still at hand. He appeared to be perfectly sound when on 
a certain evening I directed that my tablet be brought out. 
Upon it I wrote that if he did not have a care he would 
shortly meet his death. Herein I had recourse to neither 
stars nor strategy. I rendered my reasons and submitted 



202 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


them. Within six or eight days he became sick and shortly 
after died. Such things seem little short of miraculous to 
those without understanding, whereas, if a wise man reads 
what I have written, he will say that I saw what was inevit¬ 
able, rather than that I miraculously revealed a hidden 
future. 

What of that affair at Rome? There are as many wit¬ 
nesses as there were guests at the banquet. I said, “Did I 
not think some of you would take it uneasily, I should 
make a statement.” One of the guests said, “Perhaps you 
would like to say that one of us is going to die.” “Yes,” 
I replied, “so it seems, and this year.” And on the first 
day of December one who was called Vergilio died. 

Our human concerns, furthermore, stand upon the most 
insignificant circumstances, and by these circumstances im¬ 
portant changes are wrought. I daresay such trifles, and 
even lesser, determine the course of our lives. I do not 
speak whereof I do not know. A Frenchman came to me 
while I lived in Rome at the Ranuzzi House and wished 
to speak to me in private. I said it ought to be enough if 
we were out of hearing of the others, and when I persisted 
he went away. Suspicious, I sent some men to seek him 
out, but no one was found who had seen him. What 
would you think of such an incident? That man was 
meditating an evil deed! 

Need I explain my predictions about Cyprus? More 
than once as I heard what were the respective equipment 
of the Turks and of the Christians, I declared we should 
have to fear lest we be vanquished. Cardinal Sforza 7 is 
a witness of this statement. I arrayed my reasons, and the 



POWER AND FOREKNOWLEDGE IN MY ART 


203 


outcome proved what I had said—that the island would be 
lost through violence and miscalculation. 

These things and things like them occur to the studious, 
the painstaking, and the knowing, not, however, without 
occasion and not under all circumstances; for those pre¬ 
dictions are most reasonable which concern the develop¬ 
ment of the arts, such as the craftsman’s art. 



CHAPTER FORTY-THREE 


Things Absolutely Supernatural 

This incident happened while I was studying in Pavia: 
On a certain morning before I was actually awake, I was 
aware of a knock upon the wall; the dwelling which ad¬ 
joined the place was vacant; as I was getting awake, and 
again, immediately after, I perceived another blow as of a 
hammer. Because at evening I learned that my excellent 
friend, Galeazzo del Rosso, had died at the same hour— 
about whom I have had so much to say—I do not ascribe 
this incident to a miracle. First, the whole matter, owing 
to the way one sound followed the other, may be ascribed 
to a dream. Again, it can easily have proceeded from some 
natural cause, as from a puff of steam. Third, when those 
I met saw that I was struck by the extraordinary incident 
and, anxious lest it portend evil, had remained at home 
the entire day, they made up the story of Galeazzo’s death 
at that hour, and although he had passed away much be¬ 
fore, placed it at daybreak of that day, an hour when few 
who are victims of disease are liable to die. Wherefore 
I do not place this token, which in so many ways fails 
to be convincing, among the miracles; but since similar 
incidents have happened, each person must decide con¬ 
cerning such an occurrence, what seems better, from his 
own point of view. 

In the year 1536, while I lived by the Porta Tosa, it 
happened that' in the month of July—unless I am mis- 

[204] 



THINGS ABSOLUTELY SUPERNATURAL 


205 


taken—as I was passing from the dining-room into the 
court-yard, I perceived a strong smell of candles but lately 
extinguished. Somewhat alarmed I summoned the boy, 
asking whether he noticed anything. He, since he under¬ 
stood that I was referring to a sound, said he did not; but 
when I made clear that I was not concerned about a sound 
but wished to know whether he smelled anything, he ex¬ 
claimed, “What a fearful odor of wax!” I said, “Be silent,” 
and when I questioned the maid and my wife, all showed 
themselves surprised except my mother, who sensed noth¬ 
ing, prevented, I believe, by a cold in the head. Asserting 
that by reason of this portent, a death was imminent, al¬ 
though I retired to my couch, I was unable to sleep. 

And, lo, another portent, still greater than the first. On 
the public street the sound of grunting swine, although 
none was there; and, thereafter, a similar case, quacking of 
ducks. What does this mean, I asked myself? Whence 
these many omens? And the ducks—why have they fore¬ 
gathered with these swine who have kept up their grunting 
the livelong night? 

In the morning, bewildered by these many portents, I 
knew not what to do. I took a walk beyond the city after 
breakfast, and as I was returning home I saw my mother 
who beckoned me to make haste, saying that my neighbor 
Giovanni, at one time overseer of the pest-house, had been 
struck by lightning. The rumor was that when he vacated 
this post twelve years earlier, because the plague was raging 
so violently, he had stolen many things. He kept a mis¬ 
tress, and he never went to confession; and no doubt he 
had committed other still more grievous sins. Still, he was 
my neighbor, as there was only a little shack of a house 



20 6 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


between his and mine; and when I saw and knew that he 
was indeed dead, I was, by his death, freed from the atten¬ 
tions which, as a neighbor, I had shown. You will ask 
how the event concerned me. I was spared; I might have 
been there myself, for, sometimes, though infrequently, I 
had happened to sit under his portico with him for the 
pleasure of chatting; it was a cool little nook. 

A second omen occurred while my mother lay in her 
last illness. I had been awakened, and though the sun, 
now well up, shone brightly and I could distinguish clearly, 
yet I saw nothing even while I heard fifteen beats—for I 
counted them—as of water falling drop by drop on the 
pavement. During the preceding night, moreover, I had 
counted about one hundred and twenty; but I had mis¬ 
givings, since I perceived the sound came from the right, 
that one of the domestics might be mocking me in my 
anxiety; or that the sounds by day would have passed un¬ 
noticed, whereas, occurring by night, they worked upon 
my credulity. Shortly after, I heard a thumping as of a 
wagon-load of boards being unloaded all at once above the 
ceiling, while the bedchamber trembled. My mother, as 
I said, died; what the noises signified, I know not. 

I shall not go into an incident which occurred about the 
middle of June 1570. I seemed to be up walking about 
in the night; the doors were closed and the windows 
barred; it seemed as if I sat down, whereupon there was a 
great cracking as if issuing from my strong-box. Perhaps 
this can be attributed to too much imagination. There was 
no one else whom I could question about the matter. 

Who was he that sold me that copy of Apuleius in 
Latin when I was in my twentieth year—if I’m not mis- 



THINGS ABSOLUTELY SUPERNATURAL 


207 


taken—and forthwith made off? I, who, for a truth, had 
been only once, up to this time, in an elementary school, 
and had no understanding of the Latin language, yet had 
had the folly to buy the book because of its gilded decora¬ 
tions, on the following day found myself as proficient in 
Latin as I am this very day. Almost at the same time I 
acquired Greek, Spanish, and French, but merely a read¬ 
ing knowledge; I was altogether ignorant of how to con¬ 
verse or carry on extended discourse in these languages, or 
of the rules of grammar. 

In the year 1560 in the month of May, when, on account 
of anguish for the death of my son, I had lost sleep little 
by little, and when neither fasting, nor the lashings with 
which I tortured my limbs by riding through the under¬ 
brush, nor chess, with which I whiled away the time in 
company with that agreeable youth Ercole Visconte—and 
even he was becoming exhausted with late hours—dis¬ 
tracted me from my grief, I besought the Lord to have 
pity upon me. For of these endless vigils it was inevitable 
that I should die or go mad, or at very least give over my 
professorship. And if I should resign, I had no means 
whereby I could earn an honorable living; if I became 
insane I would be an object of mockery to all, I should 
dissipate what remained of my patrimony, and not a gleam 
of hope would show a way by which I could hope to 
change my condition—for I was an old man. And so I 
prayed that I might die, for this is the ultimate fate of all; 
and with that I retired to my bed. The hour was late, 
and I was obliged to rise at four o’clock. I had been per¬ 
mitted to rest quietly in my bed scarcely two hours, when 
sleep swept me away, and I seemed suddenly to hear a 



208 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


voice drawing near through the shadows; yet whose it was, 
or who might be there, I could not distinguish because of 
the darkness. It was saying: “Why do you complain?” or 
“Why do you mourn?” Then, without waiting for a re¬ 
sponse, it went on: “Because of the death of your son?” 
To this I replied: “Can you doubt it?” Thereupon the 
voice said: “Place the gem which you have on a chain 
about your nec\ in your mouth, and as long as you \eep 
it there, you will not remember your son.” 

Awakened by this dream, I kept thinking: “What has 
this emerald to do with forgetfulness?” But after a time 
when there was no other hope of escaping my misery I 
called to mind that verse: Who in hope believed against 
hope ... and it was reckoned unto him for righteousness— 1 
speaking of Abraham. I placed the gem in my mouth, and 
lo, a thing occurred beyond all belief; for at once every 
memory of my son was lost in oblivion—first, at that time, 
when I was borne away as into a dream, and then during 
the future for a period of almost a year and a half, until I 
wrote the book Theognoston or the second Hyper- 
boreorum . 2 In the meantime, when I was eating or lectur¬ 
ing, since I could not conveniently benefit by the virtue of 
the emerald, I was tormented to a very sweat of death. 
Thus, gradually, I recovered once more the power to sleep 
and my wonted course of life, as it seemed to me. A 
feature of this extraordinary incident was, furthermore, 
that in changing from one condition to the other—from 
memory of my griefs to forgetfulness thereof—there never 
seemed to be an instant’s delay interposed. 

On the night before the 13th of August 1572, there was a 
light in my room, and I was wide awake. The second hour 



THINGS ABSOLUTELY SUPERNATURAL 


209 


of the night had barely passed, when lo, I became aware 
of a terrific noise from the right, as if someone were un¬ 
loading a wagonful of boards. I looked back quickly, 
for this was in the entrance of my bed chamber, or coming 
from the bedroom where my servant was sleeping; 
through the wide open doorway I saw a farmer entering 
the room. I kept looking at him intensely, for many rea¬ 
sons; and he, thereupon, when he was almost on the very 
threshold of the door uttered these words: Te sin casa; 
and having spoken, he vanished. I neither recognized his 
voice nor his features, nor was I able to interpret the mean¬ 
ing of what he said by means of any language whatsoever. 
Elsewhere I have replied to the question, as to why such 
things happen. Some one may bring up this objection, why 
marvels of this sort happen to so few ? And why, I reply, 
if thus it is, do men strive so zealously for governments 
and magistracies, or to realize their ambitions by so many 
abominable means? I aver that this is not the place for 
determining these matters, nor are my shoulders capable 
of bearing such a burden, but it should be turned over to 
the theologians. Let it be enough for me to have told the 
truth of my tale. 

I shall forbear to relate the incident of the thunder at 
Bologna which, because it reverberated above my bed¬ 
chamber without a tremor, was less foreboding—like that 
ever accursed clatter of boards. Yet after these alarms, no 
death ever followed, except my mother’s, but she was dying 
of disease, weakened by old age. 

Likewise, I may pass over the details of the obstinate con¬ 
duct of my clock. This can easily be explained by natural 
causes, as can the incident of the earth which, day after 



210 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


day, in October and November of 1559 was thrown out 
from beneath my hearth, almost in plain sight. This I 
saw with my own eyes, nor was I sleeping, for it happened 
in clear daylight. 

About the 25th of March 1570, I had written down a 
prescription for my patron, Cardinal Morone, and was 
annoyed to find that one page of this had fallen to the 
ground. I arose, accordingly, and even as I stood, that 
page lifted itself in the same moment, and passed across 
to the wainscoting where it clung to the panels in an up¬ 
right position. Moved to amazement, I summoned Rodolfo 
and showed him the marvel; but he, however, had not 
seen the peculiar movement of the paper, nor was I able 
to fathom the meaning of the portent, since I would not 
look for evil at every turn. It turned out that all my 
affairs were changed, and somewhat milder breezes blew. 

A month later—I believe in June—while I was writing 
to the same man, I was seeking my letter-sander. When 
I had hunted in every possible place for some time, I picked 
up the sheet of paper that I might gather a little earth with 
which to sand it; and thereupon I saw the sand box had 
been hiding under the paper—a little box only an inch and 
a quarter high, and round, so that the diameter would be 
but an inch. Yet how did it happen to be hiding from me 
under the very paper upon which I had been writing, as 
on a level? The incident had this effect upon me: it 
strengthened the confidence I had conceived in the philan¬ 
thropy and wisdom of my correspondent, which wisdom I 
trusted he would employ in my behalf with the most ex¬ 
cellent Pontiff 3 to the end that I should no longer be obliged 
to suffer such adversity in view of my long labors. 



THINGS ABSOLUTELY SUPERNATURAL 


211 


But what followed on the 9th of October of the same 
year made all things seem fair, plain, and clear. I had been 
imprisoned on the 6th, and had given bond, 1800 gold 
crowns. On the 9th, at the ninth hour of the day, the sun 
was shining brightly in the apartment in which I was 
imprisoned. When those who had arrested me had gone 
away, I bade Rodolfo Selvatico to fasten the door of the 
bedroom. This he was loath to do, and was exceedingly 
surprised at my absurd idea—whether because God so 
willed, or whether I was influenced by reason—that I, 
because I had been forced to endure the ignominy of incar¬ 
ceration, should show no willingness to mingle voluntarily 
with my jailers. However, he obeyed, and lo, the door 
of the chamber was no sooner closed than a terrific blow 
struck it, resounding near and far; the next instant, even 
as we were gazing, the shock leaped across to the window 
frame, on which the sun shone in a dazzling light, with a 
similar percussion, and there rattled against the window 
and the lattice, as if the fastenings were creaking. Then 
it ceased. 

When I had observed this portent, I began at once to 
lament my miserable fate, but it became evident that what 
I was interpreting as a sure sign of a wretched death, 
pointed toward life. Not long after I began to reason with 
myself in this manner: If so many princes, although young, 
strong, and happy, expose themselves to certain death for 
their kings, that they may win their favor, when they can 
hope for absolutely nothing from their dying, how is it 
possible for you, an old man, wasted, and almost dis¬ 
honored, to suffer, either for your sin, if they will judge you 
guilty of it, or for the injustice done you, if you be un- 



212 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


worthy of this evil in the eyes of God, who by his good¬ 
ness shows that all your affairs are under his care ? 

And thereupon I seemed safe from death which I had 
been fearing, and I led a pleasant existence in so far as our 
human nature permits. In this manner, then, I lived— 
though all was over, as it were, with my life—while I 
remembered that previously I had not been able to 
endure even a moment in confinement without seeming 
to suffocate. 

Rodolfo was, as I have said, present when this curious 
incident occurred. He took his degree the next year. 

Yet such unnatural occurrences have this effect, that 
while they are in the very act of happening or shortly 
before they come to pass, they make a great impression on 
a man, engaging his whole attention; when, however, the 
first heat of their influence has grown cool and the effect 
is diluted, unless you have made sure of their reality by 
nailing them, as it were, upon your consciousness, you 
almost doubt whether you have actually seen or heard any¬ 
thing. And this, I believe, happens for reasons even deeper 
than the gulf between our own natures and the causes 
which produce the phenomena. 

I know certain men who, in order to appear satirical, scoff 
and incite derision in regard to any such apparently super¬ 
natural occurrences. The prince of these is Polybius, the 
philosopher, without a philosophy, who did not know 
what the duty of an historian was, but, by going beyond 
his province, made himself ridiculous, although at times he 
is worthy of admiration as when he discussed the Achaeans 
in Book II of his Histories. 

What more? Tartaglia was right when he said nobody 



THINGS ABSOLUTELY SUPERNATURAL 


213 


knew everything; nay, that all those have not the begin¬ 
nings of understanding, who do not realize that they are 
ignorant on many points. Look at Pliny: although he pub¬ 
lished a very excellent history, he shows himself an ox 
when he treats of the sun and the stars. Is it surprising, 
then, that Polybius, inasmuch as he is concerned with 
loftier and diviner themes, so patently betrayed his crude¬ 
ness ? 

One thing alone is sufficient for me: to understand and 
grasp the meaning of all these wonders would be more 
precious to me than the everlasting dominion of all the 
universe; and this I swear by all that is holy. 

If I had wished, I might have included in this chapter the 
wonders which my parents used to relate to me in the like¬ 
ness of fables, and which then seemed worthy of a smile. 
Later, however, did I not realize all too surely that these 
very things might seem insignificant? For I have not 
dared to attribute so much to the wisdom and diligence of 
my elders that I could hope their accounts of marvels 
could be confirmed. 

In truth, I have this to give me assurance enough, that 
such wonders are unexpectedly seen in the presence of 
those about to die who have been signally good or evil. 
Wherefore, this being the case, these omens cannot be so 
much fortuitous, as natural or divine. For in the mind, 
which is neither paralyzed by fear nor unsettled by con¬ 
flicting emotions, violent spiritual stimuli, accompanied by 
demonstrations of a miraculous nature, undermine the 
foundations of false notions rather than increase them. . . . 
How would a miracle affect a girl praying to God at the 



214 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


bidding of her father, whom she thought ought to be 
freed P 4 

But enough of these matters! For I have indicated herein, 
as briefly as possible, simply when such incidents occurred, 
what was their nature—incidents from which, moreover, 
all suspicion of either error or fraud was absent. I have 
passed over a great host of others which were not 
sufficiently pertinent, although they were plainly manifest; 
I have omitted events of whose extraordinary character I 
am even more convinced, since they occurred in my pres¬ 
ence, yet were not so rich in testimonials of supernatural 
power. Everyone may learn these from my Commentaries. 

This alone I ask you, O reader, that when you peruse the 
account of these marvels that you do not set up for your¬ 
self as a standard human intellectual pride, but rather 
the great size and vastness of earth and sky; and, com¬ 
paring with that Infinity these slender shadows in which 
miserably and anxiously we are enveloped, you will easily 
know that I have related nothing which is beyond belief. 



CHAPTER FORTY-FOUR 


Things of Worth Which I Have Achieved in 
Various Studies 

Let me remind you, by way of preface, that there is 
practically no new idea which one may bring forward: 
In dialectics, although one system had been known—the 
Aristotelian—I have divided the system and the practice of 
it so that individual disciples may make a study of the 
precepts of dialectics according to Euclid, Ptolemy, Archi¬ 
medes, Hippocrates, Galen, and Scotus. In addition I have 
enlarged upon the practical application of dilemma, and, 
in like manner, of doctrina crassa, of the trope, of elabora¬ 
tion and analysis; by means of these doctrines very many 
men strive eagerly to discern the incorporeal form, and 
separate, as it were, the soul of things from the physical 
structure; putting thereby experiments in casuistry, which 
excite amazement, before true scientific knowledge, so that 
out of a limited field of experience they come to far-reach¬ 
ing conclusions. It is as if among mortals they would 
complete the cycle, and bring together beginnings to ends, 
even as it is with the immortals. Neither is it a part of their 
system to select figures or examples from readings—much 
less accurately copied references—so that they reduce the 
scholarly labors of many months to an hour’s argument. 

Even further does their superficiality go: the gift of extem¬ 
poraneous lecturing which at another time they made much 
of, now they cease to respect properly. And those men are 

[ 215 ] 



216 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


to be pardoned who lay such powers to the influence of 
an evil genius, since they recognize neither what is really 
a good, nor yet the favor of God. 

In arithmetic I advanced almost the whole field of the 
science including the sections treating, as they call it, of 
algebra; 1 my discoveries dealt also with properties of num¬ 
bers, especially of those having similar ratios between them¬ 
selves. I also expounded the numerical functions already 
discovered, showing either a simplified treatment or some 
uncommon formula method, or both. In geometry I dealt 
with confused and reflex proportions, and the treatment of 
infinity with finite numbers and through finite, although 
it was first discovered by Archimedes. In music I dis¬ 
covered new tones and new intervals, or rather brought 
back into practice and use such tones and intervals as were 
already found according to the treatises of Ptolemy and 
Aristoxenus. 

In natural philosophy I withdrew fire from the number 
of the elements and showed that all things were essentially 
cold; that the elements were not reciprocally changed; and 
I upheld the doctrine of palingenesis. I demonstrated that 
there were only two true qualities—heat and moisture. I 
set forth the essential qualities of salt and oil. I proved 
that the principle which underlies the generation of perfect 
creatures consists not in the act of coition unless that be 
attended by heat of atmospheric origin. 

I taught that God ought to be called infinite; that all 
things which possess differentiated and organized parts 
have a life-principle; that the existence of our own life- 
principle and its immortality is, according to the philoso¬ 
phers, real, not a shadowy dream; that all things go by 



THINGS OF WORTH WHICH I HAVE ACHIEVED 2IJ 

numbers—as, for instance, in one variety of plant there 
are the same number of leaves in a group and the same 
number of seeds. 

I demonstrated that the principle of analogy consists in a 
process active through one medium and one material, and 
that from this results so many varieties and so much beauty. 
The earth is a thing of itself and not, as it were, mingled 
with water, wherefore it happens that often the one thrusts 
itself out into the opposite lying parts of the other. Why 
is the East better than the West? Why, when the sun has 
turned back after the solstices, the extremes of temperature 
may be increased for many days ? What is Fate and how 
does it control human affairs? 

I have dealt with the causes of certain singular circum¬ 
stances, as why a thousand dice in a thousand throws, if 
the dice are not loaded, necessarily cast one ace. 2 

I have shown that from all leaf mould of plants, creatures 
of quite different genera are produced according to the 
nature of the leaf; that nature is of itself nothing, rather an 
imaginary and void conception, introduced, to become a 
beginning of many errors, by Aristotle, to the sole end that 
he might have the name of overthrowing the philosophy 
of Plato. 

Other doctrines too numerous to mention I have pro¬ 
pounded, but this especially: 

I have taught that a contemplation of the natural uni¬ 
verse leads to an artistic expression and to creative labor, 
although no others before my time have undertaken to 
offer such a suggestion. 

In the province of moral philosophy I have declared the 
equality of the condition of all beings, not only of all men 



2 l8 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


but of all living creatures; whence it is permissible to infer 
an equalizing of all activity by death; and among men the 
propriety of seeking advantage from adversity. I have in¬ 
quired also as to what way of life is best of all, and how 
that life can maintain an even tenor. There are three states 
in the realm of moral philosophy; to be ignorant of what 
good and evil is, when one is not aware of the significance 
of either, is frequently desirable in the common concerns 
of human existence. Again quite the contrary is true; 
under still other conditions it is a choice or question as to 
what constitutes good or favorable action in any given 
circumstances. An understanding of the mores of men 
in general is an important consideration; after that, an 
understanding of them according to racial traits, and any 
other characteristic, such as the customs, finally, peculiar 
to them generally or racially. 

To the art of medicine I have contributed the true reckon¬ 
ing of the duration of the crisis in diseases; a general relief 
for gout and for pestilential fevers; the manifold transmuta¬ 
tions in oils; how from medicines not purgative to prepare 
cathartics; a treatise on the special properties of waters. 3 
I have discovered many a useful method of preparing food; 
also a way to convert medicines of little medicinal value 
into useful and ready remedies, and such as are extremely 
distasteful into remedies easily administered. I have a 
remedy which so efficaciously relieves and strengthens a 
person suffering with dropsy that he may go about his busi¬ 
ness in the city on the same day. 

This likewise is my discovery, how from a comparison of 
the cures of one member and another, some understanding 
of the causes of the disease and method of treatment may 



THINGS OF WORTH WHICH I HAVE ACHIEVED 


219 


be deduced; and I have shown how in a repeated study of 
one book—three or four readings—an understanding and 
method of treatment of divers diseases may be obtained. 
The true and shorter procedure of operating for hernia 
was called back into common usage through my efforts. 
I wrote a trustworthy history of urinary diseases, since we 
possess only certain obscure remains of these studies. 4 

A commentary on the most difficult books of Hippocrates 
has been prepared by my hand, particularly of those books 
judged authentic. The work is not yet completed on this 
day in which I write these words, that is, November 16, 
* 575 - 

Besides these, I have collected a mass of material on the 
mal frangais, and brief results of experiments pertaining to 
several diseases very difficult to treat, epilepsy, insanity, 
blindness. My findings, for instance, concerning the use 
of equisetum for dropsy is included in this collection. I 
have elsewhere set down my numerous discoveries pertain¬ 
ing to scirrhosis, to excessive desire to urinate, to diseases 
of the joints, to gravel in the kidneys, to colic, haemor¬ 
rhoids, and other diseases—about five thousand suggestions 
for treatment, all told. Of problems solved or investigated 
I shall leave something like forty thousand, and of minutiae 
two hundred thousand, and for this that great light 5 of our 
country used to call me “The Man of Discoveries.” 



CHAPTER FORTY-FIVE 


Books Written by Me; When, Why and What 
Became of Them 

Published Worlds 
Treatises on Mathematics 

The Great Art. i Book 

On Proportions. i Book 

Regula Aliza. i Book 

On Astronomy 

Commentary on Ptolemy. 4 Books 

Selected Genitures. 1 Book 

On Interrogations. 1 Book 

On the Seven Planets. 1 Book 

On the Use of the Ephemerides. 1 Book 

On the Emendation of Stellar Movements and 

Recognition of the Planets. 1 Book 

Encomium of Astrology. 1 Book 

On Physics 

On Subtlety, with a Defense 1 . 22 Books 

On a Variety of Matters. 17 Books 

On the Immortality of the Soul. 1 Book 

Moral Discourses 

On the Uses of Adversity. 4 Books 

On Consolation. 3 Books 

An Exhortation to the Noble Arts. 1 Book 

[ 220 ] 



















BOOKS WRITTEN BY ME 221 

First Short Works on Various Subjects 

On My Own Books. i Book 

On Marvelous Cures. i Book 

In Praise of Nero. i Book 

In Praise of Geometry. i Book 

First Treatise on Hidden Knowledge. i Book 

On the Essence of One. i Book 

On Gems and Colors.. i Book 

On Death. i Book 

Tetim or On Mortal Condition. i Book 

On the Good in Small Things Near at Hand... i Book 

On the Summum Bonum. i Book 

Second Short Works on Various Subjects 

Dialectics. i Book 

Hyperschen 2 . i Book 

On the Zeal of Socrates 3 . i Book 

On Water. i Book 

On the Ether. i Book 

On Medicinal Potions. i Book 

Third Volume of Short Treatises on Medicine 
On Causes, Indications, and Seat of Diseases.... i Book 

Small Treatise on the Art of Healing. i Book 

First Book of Medical Advice. i Book 

On the Malpractices of Doctors. i Book 

Proof that No Uncompounded Medicament is 

Harmless. i Book 

Triceps 4 . i Book 

A Defense of the Physician of Thessaly. i Book 

A Defense of Camuzio. i Book 


























222 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


Commentaries on Medical Worlds 5 

On the Aphorisms. 7 Books 

On the Composition of the Air. 1 Book 

On Poisons. 3 Books 

Total. 11 Books 

On Prognostics. 4 Books 

On Seven-month Parturition. 1 Book 

Total. 5 Books 

On Air, Waters, and Localities. 8 Books 

Second Book Medical Advice. 1 Book 

Total. 9 Books 

On Nourishment. 1 Book 

Examination of Twenty-two Cases of Sickness 8 . 1 Book 

Total. 2 Books 

On Methods of Divination 

On Dreams. 4 Books 

Published Workj Not Included in the Above 

On Wisdom. 5 Books 

Antigorgias 7 . 5 Books 

In Praise of Medicine. 1 Book 

Supplement to the Almanac. 10 Books 

MANUSCRIPTS 8 

Mathematics 

New Geometry. 2 Books 





















BOOKS WRITTEN BY ME 


. 223 


On Whole Numbers. 1 Book 

On Fractions. 1 Book 

On the Properties of Numbers. 1 Book 

On Surds.. 1 Book 

On Imaginary Expressions. 1 Book 

On Music. 1 Book 


Physics 

On Nature. 1 Book 

Fourth Book on Hidden Knowledge. 1 Book 

Of the Hyperboreans. 2 Books 

On Morals 

On Morals. 3 Books 

On the Best Way of Life. 1 Book 

A Memoir 9 . 1 Book 

The Boo\ of My Life . 1 Book 

Medicine 

On the Urine. 4 Books 

On Living Conditions in Rome. 1 Book 

On the Teeth. 5 Books 

On Safeguarding the Health. 4 Books 

On the Indie Plague. 1 Book 

Third Book of Medical Advice. 1 Book 

Actus. 1 Book 

On the Contradictions of Doctors. 12 Books 

Handbook. 4 Books 

On the Treatise: Regimen in Acute Diseases.... 6 Books 

On the Ars Medica of Galen 10 . 1 Book 

Floridorum on Hasen’s Doctrines 11 . 2 Books 

On Epidemics of Hippocrates. 5 Books 




























224 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


Theological Works 
Hymn and Life of the Blessed Virgin 
Life of Saint Martin with notes 

On Various Arguments 

Paralipomena. 6 Books 

On the Books of Famous Men. i Book 

On Discoveries. i Book 

Problemata. i Book 

On Writing Books. i Book 

Proxeneta. i Book 

On Games of Chance. 2 Books 

Dialog on Imprisonment. 1 Book 

Flosculus, a Dialog. 1 Book 

On the Nodes. 1 Book 

Antigorgias: a Dialog 7 . 1 Book 

Encomium of Medicine. 1 Book 

Metoposcopy. 7 Books 

On Clever Devices. 1 Book 

On the Use of the Ephemeris 

or of New Discoveries. 1 Book 

Sacred Things. 1 Book 

The reason I was induced to take up writing I think you 
have already learned. I was, in fact, urged by a dream, and 
thereafter twice, thrice, and four and indeed many times 
the suggestion was thus presented, as I have elsewhere 
made known. But I was also urged by a great longing to 
have my name live. 

On two occasions, furthermore, I have lost a great mass 
of writings and a number of books. First, around my 
thirty-seventh year I burned about nine books because I 



















BOOKS WRITTEN BY ME 


225 


knew they were empty of content, and would never be of 
any use. I had accumulated, in the meanwhile, a hope¬ 
less farrago consisting of medical writings chiefly. I did 
not remove any parts from these books nor preserve any 
entire except the manuscript of the Boo\ on Poor Methods 
of Healing in Present Use , 12 from which I had begun the 
publication of a first edition, and the manuscript of the 
rudiments of arithmetic, from which I composed a small 
work on arithmetic. 13 Shortly after, about 1541 ,1 enlarged 
and published anew a little tract, a Supplement to the 
Almanacs, which I had already had printed once. In 
1573, when that disastrous occasion 14 had at length passed 
over, I burned another 120 books, but not as on the first 
occasion. For this time I selected and removed from the 
books whatver seemed worth anything to me, and in 
addition, I saved some entire, such as The Boo\ of Clever 
Devices from Narrative Writings and the Boo\ on the 
Writings of Famous Men. In other works I made changes 
like Diomedes who exchanged Xmjosa /a/Lxeicov^ sxatopPoi 
8 vvea| 3 oiov. , 15 

This I did because the latter continued in my favor; I 
destroyed the former because they displeased me, and the 
outcome was favorable to both courses. 

After I had been prompted by a recurring dream, I wrote 
my books On Subtlety which I enlarged after the first print¬ 
ing, and then, having included even more new material I 
had them sent to press for the third edition. From this I 
turned to the Boo\ of the Great Art 10 which I composed 
while Giovanni da Colla was contending with me, and also 
Tartaglia, from whom I had received the first chapter. 
He preferred to find in me a rival, and a better man at 



226 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


that, than an associate bound to him by gratitude, and of 
all men most devotedly his friend. 

While I was traveling down the Loire River and had 
nothing to do I wrote my Commentaries on Ptolemy in 
the year 1552, I added On Proportions and the Regula 
Aliza to the Ars Magna in 1568 and published the work. 
Following this I also corrected and had rewritten the 
Treatise on Arithmetic, two volumes entitled New Geom¬ 
etry , 17 and a work on Music , 18 but this last I corrected 
and revised six years later, that is in 1574. The several 
volumes On a Variety of Matters I published in 1558; they 
consisted of the remaining material of the work On Sub¬ 
tlety, which I was not able to put in order nor whip into 
shape on account of the host of cares which beset me. For 
my sons were little inclined to obedience, or conformity; 
my financial returns were next to nothing; the demands 
of reading gave me no respite; what with domestic arrange¬ 
ments, the practice of my profession throughout the city, 
prescriptions, letters and so many other distractions, there 
was not time to breathe, much less any opportunity for 
revision of my writings. 

On Consolation I published for the first time in the midst 
of the sorrows which beset me. Later I added On Wisdom, 
so that the whole might be printed for the second time 
in the year 1543. In the meanwhile I wrote those numer¬ 
ous short treatises, some of which are published, others not 
yet, and I also wrote the whole body of my medical works, 
four of which you see published— On the Aphorisms, On 
Nourishment, On Air, Water, and Places and On the Boo\s 
of Prognostics . Thus far there are ready two commen¬ 
taries entitled Floridorum, a commentary on the Ars 



BOOKS WRITTEN BY ME 


227 


Medica of Galen and the first and second parts of On 
'Epidemics of Hippocrates . 

When I came to Bologna On Dreams was published, a 
work destined to be useful no doubt to many men of under¬ 
standing, but perchance a source of detriment to the un¬ 
cultivated plebeian; but what is there which, if anyone use 
it wrongfully or inadvisedly, may not prove harmful? 
Horses, swords, arms, munitions in the hands of violent 
men are all terrible weapons; to good men such things are 
not so much conveniences as necessities. Any sort of 
division of my theme, as between profitable material, that 
not especially useful, and a third section to be read by the 
learned alone, offered difficulties. 

I wrote Dialectics in order that I might show how to 
give a material form to those shadowy precepts which 
underlie the abstractions of this doctrine. Gratified, then, 
with my own work, by reason of the pleasure it afforded 
me, I had it published, although it is, however, to be con¬ 
sidered neither complete nor even fully emended. 

My Small Treatise on the Art of Healing I gave out for 
public use when I noticed that the rest of my writings were 
coming forward rather slowly. The book On the Immor¬ 
tality of the Soul 19 I wrote more for the purpose of a study 
of the subject than as an expression of final opinion, and 
since this did not do justice to the great amount of ma¬ 
terial involved, the second book of Hyperboreans took the 
place of it. 

I composed the Dialogs, one for assuaging the pains of 
adversity which had overtaken me, the other for assailing 
the madness of men, so that by four contrary meditations 



228 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


I might ease the prick of grief, mad pleasure, stupid greed, 
and fear. 

ProxenetcP 0 was the result of an impulse to express my¬ 
self; in the writing of the Memoir I distinguished myself. 

Four volumes, in the nature of a compendium or the¬ 
saurus, include, with brief explanation, the flower and fruit 
of the whole medical art, so that you never need lack for 
want of a single point, and if you will have consulted earlier 
manuals rather than these books, your labor will be as good 
as lost. 

I wrote my commentaries On the Books on Regimen in 
Acute Diseases, so that, based on a trustworthy doctrine, the 
regimen of those who can be saved in acute attacks of dis¬ 
ease may be maintained. In curing diseases of this sort I 
have been, as I have said, exceptionally lucky. 

The Treatises on Urinary Diseases are not yet complete. 
These demonstrate the wonders of nature, since in a sub¬ 
ject so lightly esteemed, so many remarkable features are 
embraced; and so to the universe we must concede the 
wonders of its parts. The treatment of these books is, 
nevertheless, simple, and for this very reason they offer the 
greatest difficulty to imitators. The structure is well 
worked out, furthermore, and properly verified by many 
tried propositions. 

Since my books, On the Contradictions of Doctors, touch 
upon all the doubtful points of the profession, and, in so 
far as I was privileged to discredit them, assails doubtful 
practices, if the sentiment I expressed pleased, why should 
I condemn the work ? If I do not have faith in what I said, 
why did I set it forth? Why did I pass judgment? Why 
did I decide to do it in the first place ? 



BOOKS WRITTEN BY ME 


229 


The work Problemata was written with this in mind, as 
the saying goes: Et prodesse volunt et delectare poetce. 21 

The book On Games of Chance I also wrote; why should 
not a man who is a gambler, a dicer, and at the same time 
an author, write a book on gaming? And, peradventure, 
ex ungue leonem, as they say. 22 

Thirteen books of the Metoposcopy I condensed into 
seven; of this the treatise Physiognomy is a part. I am 
indebted to Girolamo Visconte for this. Suetonius exalts 
this art with extraordinary praises; I have discerned certain 
shadowy truths in it, but whether they are actually truths, 
or deceptions is very difficult to determine, for you will be 
caught by deceptions simply because of the host of men 
and impressions, and their never-ending mutations. 

The Paralipomend 23 as they stand at present are the frag¬ 
ments which I preserved from that earlier reorganization of 
my work in which I sacrificed much for no other reason, 
it must be supposed, than that I was not wont to pass ap¬ 
proval on writing exhibiting confusion and disorder. In 
assembling the Paralipomena no such choice was observed; 
worthless writing stands with that of highest order; the 
unseemly with the decent; the useful with the harmful, the 
carefully revised with the casual, the curious with the 
absurd—a great farrago. Nor had I hopes, even though I 
had made away with so many works, of being able to 
revise what remained and reduce it to one well-rounded 
whole. I have deemed it better, if, while all see and live 
and the circumstance is known to all, I should rather look 
to the interests of my friends and patrons; and what is 
more, and what entails an enormous saving of time, that 
it would be far better to be able to leave to posterity more 



230 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


works clearly and accurately written, than to make a show 
of all I have cast aside. 

For a man so to live that his fellows may feel no lack 
of those duties which he as a man of high character in his 
profession ought to discharge—this, I aver, is honor’s crown. 
Wherefore I wrote On Discovery, On Writing Boo\s and 
On the Boo\s of Famous Men so that, by the deed itself, 
I might confirm those things my words had praised. The 
Hymn and the Biographies I wrote in order to show myself 
grateful to those from whom I had received so many bless¬ 
ings. The Annotations I subjoined because I considered it 
of the utmost importance that precise care should not only 
be exercised in the biography, but I felt, indeed, that it 
was due from me. For as these attentions are the strength 
and beauty of even the greatest works, similarly errors neg¬ 
lected, and passages inaccurately written, shake the con¬ 
fidence of the readers’ minds, detract from the influence of 
the books themselves, and work harm to the common good. 
The examples of Aristotle and of Galen have revealed to 
me the possibility of accomplishing this perfection of execu¬ 
tion; to them this had been needful since they treated of 
themes of universal interest; for me it is a safe and proper 
policy, inasmuch as I, through careful attention to details, 
have taken the greatest pains, in proportion to my powers, 
in the book entitled On the Best Way of Life; since, than 
in such devotion to my work, I found no other avenue of 
escape from the memory of the past, the evil of the present 
and the lowering perils of the future. Without such an 
absorbing passion I question whether anyone in mortal life 
is able to think of himself as immortal; whether he can die 
without experiencing the sorrows of old age, and yet out- 



BOOKS WRITTEN BY ME 


23I 


live his youth; if in the eternal tumult of things he can find 
peace, and in the endless round of life’s vicissitudes, any¬ 
thing constant. 

With these four favors I should willingly be content, and 
should forebear to take into consideration the many calami¬ 
ties and other evils which are far more numerous in the 
life of every individual than these needful benefits. The 
greatest of all the calamities, utterly inevitable, which came 
to pass was the death of those dear to me. But I question 
whether that had to happen the way it did. Yet what mat¬ 
ters it ? Does not the same round of vicissitude come to all 
others? But it might have been deferred. What differ¬ 
ence, if it had to come sooner or later! 

There never has been, nor will there be, any rest for 
mortal man. Compare the trials which it has been your lot 
to endure to the disasters and the state of affairs in the time 
of Polybius: the present is a wreath of roses compared to 
the horrors of those times, which can truly be termed 
calamities. Nothing was safe to men then: murder in cold 
blood, slavery, and the loss of all men’s property to ruth¬ 
less spoilers was mere pastime. 

Another consideration is this: the contemplation of an 
eternal and blessed life known to us which was not a dis¬ 
pensation to those of other lands and times. What that can 
be called deplorable is able to overtake one whose thoughts 
are fixed upon this hope; the same origin, the same com¬ 
mon goal, and the same lot, all have shared, except that 
for us joy is the guerdon for death. Yet we are cheated, 
for a truth, out of the four favors I have mentioned above: 
first, because we believe that this existence offers something 
more tangible than is actually the case, even in the midst 



232 THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 

of its activities; second, because we fail to observe that there 
is nothing lasting, not to say eternal, in life; third, because 
we think the intellect ages even if the vital principle lives 
on, since we argue that what is common to the body must 
needs grow old with it. But I forthwith aver that no part 
of us grows old—not the life principle, if its medium and 
its motive force have permanence, as I now believe; not 
the body, because, according to the philosophers, especially 
the Platonic philosophers—as we read in Phcedo —it is not 
the chief part of man; not the active principle, which is 
the first and fundamental part of man, and is the sum of all 
perfection, although its operative force can be impeded, not 
because it lacks in some respect, for its powers are varied. 
The sun needs the air in order to shine; the air is the cause 
of the illumination of the sun, yet impurity of the air 
impedes the radiance of the sun. 

The preceding, therefore, was the summary of my counsel 
and the scope of my work. 24 

There is a second work called Memoralis, in which is 
brought together the sum of the teaching contained in the 
earlier book. In this second the material is so arranged 
and grouped according to topics that not only can you find 
comfort in it, but help for whatsoever condition you have 
fallen in with. 

The third work of this group 25 is a Handbook which sets 
forth not only sentiments on gain and honor, but also con¬ 
siders that it is a most excellent virtue to discharge the 
duties of piety and to fulfill one’s obligations, rather with 
this attitude, that one should recognize even how much 
more is required of one at the very point where others think 
their duty ends. If it is a pleasure to the architect to have 



BOOKS WRITTEN BY ME 


233 


built a house not aimlessly but upon a carefully drawn plan, 
how much more gratifying it is for a man to have been able 
to render just service to his fellow and recognize how much 
he can help him. 

The fourth book is this very conclusion of all my writ¬ 
ings , 28 composed for my own pleasure and out of a sense 
of duty; and, if I have wittingly violated this by any false¬ 
hood, in what attitude would you have me approach my 
God? Or what pleasure, think you, I should find in my 
work? Granted, of course, that my case is not the case of 
a man leading the existence of the brute beasts which take 
no delight in what is of good repute, but find gratification 
only in the things they are able to consume—as spiders 
flies and ostriches bits of iron! For with those who are 
highly regarded and wish, by a clever deception to appear 
to know more than others, when, upon being put to test, 
it is discovered that they are really ignorant of many things 
known to others, I am unconcerned. 

In the fifth place stands my work On Safeguarding the 
Health, and finally, sixth in order, stands the second volume 
of Hyperboreans. In the fifth work the third volume is 
complete in every detail, and in the sixth, the first volume. 

Except for this group of nineteen works I could desire 
that no other book of mine survive. Peradventure this may 
seem surprising to some; yet did not Vergil express a desire 
to have the ^Eneid destroyed—nay, it was his will and 
command—leaving only the Bucolics and Georgies ? And 
I, not however before having reviewed all my work, have 
adopted the same attitude. 

I completed the books On Nature the reason for which 
has been sufficiently discussed. 



2 34 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


Theognoston I wrote, taking in the Hyperboreans; On 
Morals was composed in imitation of Aristotle . 27 In his 
Republic 28 he estimates that the very longest sway of a 
tyranny scarcely covered one hundred years, although this 
is an error. 

The Boo\ of My Life I was moved to write, because this 
seemed meet, necessary, and in accord with the circum¬ 
stances. And it is not unpleasant for me so to review my 
days, if I may put any faith in the sentiments of Epicurus. 

On the Teeth was composed on the basis of methods I 
proposed as a cure for diseases of long standing by a relia¬ 
ble method, which was exactly the plan I followed in put¬ 
ting together the commentaries On Cases of Acute Dis¬ 
eases . 29 

On the Indie Plague was the result of what many had 
written to me on this subject, and I had condensed the 
whole confused mass into this treatise. 

My reasons for composing On Safeguarding the Health 
were many; in the first place Galen’s treatise is too pedantic, 
and, while he preserves a logical sequence, leaves, I regret 
to say, many points obscure, and many doubtful and unde¬ 
termined, inasmuch as in his discussion of massage and 
exercises he wanders from the point, goes far afield and 
lingers on irrelevancies. For example, although he had 
many a good opportunity throughout his numerous works, 
he neglects to point out what wine might properly be given 
to those in good health and to young people, but seems 
rather to have avoided the topic intentionally. I pass over 
the fact that neither the practice of the ancients nor of the 
Greeks, indeed, is suitable for Italians and for the present 
time, nor are the circumstances quite the same. He men- 



BOOKS WRITTEN BY ME 


235 


tions, for instance, in his second treatise on foods that the 
Arum is eaten in the country of Cyrene for turnip, without 
being in any way harmful. He was unacquainted with the 
process of distillation not yet discovered in that age. The 
authority, nevertheless, of him whose very high position 
and virtue have been conspicuous, has necessarily had great 
influence with me. 

The little volume called Actus I kept as a handbook in 
which I briefly jotted down ideas for further elaboration; 
it is to my thinking as the spark to the cannon. 

As for the rest, if anyone should wish to reduce all the re¬ 
maining books of mine to the norm of the first eighteen, 
by revising the points which lack coherence or which are 
indispensable—even as I have done in certain places of other 
works, for example in the De Varietate Rerum —he will 
find it worth his effort, and I shall be greatly in his debt. 

You will remember, moreover, that, since all books, at 
least all good books have been composed under the radiance 
of divine inspiration, this nevertheless has been the result 
of three influences. First, they have been written, as it 
were, in the light of that force which is common to all, for 
all wisdom is from God, the Lord, and, as the Platonists 
think, our intellect is united thereto through the agency 
of Eternal Good, becomes endowed with the faculty of 
understanding, and illuminates, besides, the transformed 
life. 

Another method is more manifest inasmuch as the in¬ 
spiration is imparted by degrees; on this point some 
Platonists have mistakenly been in doubt; my interpreta¬ 
tion of the rule offers no uncertainty, however, and such 
inspiration is bestowed upon all upright men. 



23 6 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


A third source of insight is that which is grasped when 
certain occasions arise, as that which, in my case, occurred 
on the 14th of March of this present year 1576 when I was 
writing, in the book on the care of the health, the history 
of ferula or fennel-giant, and was praising the use of 
fennel as an agreeable medicine. An old man, not decently 
clad but in rags, hurried up to me that day while I was in 
the vegetable market which is near the fish market. He 
dissuaded me from the use of fennel, saying: “It can, ac¬ 
cording to Galen’s opinion, destroy instantly, exactly as 
hemlock.” When I replied to this that I made a proper 
distinction between hemlock and fennel, he said, “Take 
care, I know what I’m talking about,” and he went away 
murmuring something about Galen. 

Having returned home I found a place which, on other 
occasions, I had not noted. Therefore, although the change 
did not amount to much, to be sure, I nevertheless altered 
my former statement, and added many exceptions: namely, 
the fact that the ferulaceous herbs (considered in my 
treatise) had been collected in Italy; that whether they were 
safe for use could be determined by an examination of the 
stems of these various species; also if they had not been 
frostbitten; I added that they could, as a natural remedy, 
though not commonly known, be used, but not abused; 
that they should be gathered in the early spring and not in 
the beginning of the hot weather, and in a place where 
clover is abundant; that if anyone felt any fear of this he 
should take beforehand some zedoary 30 or medicinal apple, 
bread baked with garlic, or else try some on the dog or 
the hen. 

Accordingly if anyone give heed to this third source of 



BOOKS WRITTEN BY ME 


237 


inspiration for writing he will cull no slight reward from 
everything he reads and will be grateful, as I have said 
from the first, to anyone offering a suggestion. And I beg 
men to offer corrections to my work—lege Augustana. 31 

My later works have all been written, as I have just said, 
with the same technique but not with the same care. 



CHAPTER FORTY-SIX 


Concerning My Own Existence 

To me meditating upon the foregoing themes and their 
like, this question occurred, which I feel can be justly put 
to me: that is, whether, in view of all the evil that has 
befallen me, all the good that has come my way, and all 
the ordinary events of every-day life, I am sorry to be alive 
or regret having lived? It would be foolish not to weigh 
carefully what one would say, and to one’s comments not 
add the reasons for expressing them. My misfortunes have 
been the death—bitterest of blows—the folly, or the sterility 
of my children; my own impotence, my never-ending 
poverty, conflict, and accusations; troubles, diseases, dan¬ 
gers; my imprisonment, and the injustice of tolerating 
casualties not deserved, so many in number and so often. 

But let us pass over the vicissitudes common to all. If 
he be not unhappy who has neither children nor honors 
nor resources, how does it stand with an old man who 
has some share in all of these ? Compare yourself to your 
origin and to those more wretched than yourself, and not 
to the more powerful only; when I thus remind myself I 
cannot rightly bemoan my condition; nay, I am rather for¬ 
tunate, in view of my exceptional and accurate understand¬ 
ing of many wonderful things, if we are to believe Aristotle. 
Yet I cla im I am happier for this very reason, because I am 
able like the Stoics, to despise the vicissitudes of mortal 
existence; and the fruit of this attitude I now realize to be 

[ 238 ] 



CONCERNING MY OWN EXISTENCE 


239 


bountiful indeed, so that I am not one who needs envy 
myself as I was in youth—infirm with age though now I be. 
Nor is my condition pitiable, inasmuch as I have been al¬ 
lotted the use of my physical senses and a share of the bene¬ 
fits of fortune, and by reason of my understanding. Nay, 
I shall say even more—that I am one of the most fortunate 
of men, since I know our own human nature partakes of 
divinity. 

If anyone should announce to a man overshadowed by 
death that he would survive for fifteen years, as even God 
to King Hezekiah, 1 will he not go his way more joyfully ? 
Or if from his thirty or even his hundred years he might 
pass on into a thousand with what boundless delight will 
he be affected? Will he not consign to oblivion all mortal 
joys? If this time were to be extended to ten or a hundred 
thousand years how will he control his ecstasy? But sup¬ 
pose then he be granted an eternity; what more will there 
be which he may seek or hope for ? But he who lives with¬ 
out this hope is deprived of a double and true good—that 
is, the hope itself and the rewards of it. If therefore it has, 
after this manner, been God’s pleasure to make us in our 
mortality, participants of immortality, it does not befit us to 
neglect his free gifts, nor to hold any other than a hopeful 
view of our condition. 



CHAPTER FORTY-SEVEN 


Guardian Angels 

Attendant or guardian spirits—the Greeks are wont to 
call these angels, nevertheless in Latin the word is spiritus 1 
—are recorded as having favored certain men constantly as 
I have elsewhere noted—Socrates, Plotinus, Synesius, Dio, 
Flavius Josephus—and I include myself. All, to be sure, 
lived happily save Socrates and me, yet even I, as I have just 
said, am favored with the best of circumstances. But Gaius 
Caesar the Dictator, Cicero, Antony, Brutus and Cassius, evil 
though dazzling fates attended. Glorious spirits, yet each 
fatal, followed Antony and Cicero. Josephus had a high 
spirit of exceptional nobility, which by virtue of his courage 
in war found him favor with Vespasian; and under Ves¬ 
pasian’s sons his life was eventful by reason of his wealth, 
deeds memorable in history, three sons, and that struggle 
with the great calamity of his people. His was a spirit, 
then, characterized by foresight which took into account 
the future, and by which he was rendered famous in cap¬ 
tivity, liberated from the insane exhortations of his own 
companions and saved from the depths of the sea. 2 Truly 
the guardian spirits have clearly been operative, and it has 
been my lot to be attended by a good and compassionate 
angel, I believe. 

This, I am persuaded, had long attended me, but how 
it apprized me of perils impending I did not realize until 
I had completed my seventy-fourth year of life and was in 

[ 240 ] 



GUARDIAN ANGELS 


24I 


the act of writing this autobiography. Then only was I able 
to grasp all. That the many threatening events, hovering 
as it were, on the very threshold were accurately and even 
for a long time beforehand known and truly foreseen, is 
more miraculous without divine aid, than when I take into 
consideration a guardian angel. The whole thing may be 
explained in a few words; for when the angel foresaw what 
was imminent in my affairs, as in the case of my son— 
who very likely had promised on that very evening that 
he would wed Brandonia di Seroni—about to marry the fol¬ 
lowing day, he sent me that palpitation of the heart after 
a manner peculiar to himself, so that it should assume the 
form of a tremor of my bedroom. Then this same warning 
came to the servant, and thus I and my servant felt earth 
tremors, which none of our fellow-citizens observed, be¬ 
cause there was no real earthquake. And had my son not 
married her—a thing which could not have happened with¬ 
out a great contention—I should not have felt mocked on 
this account, but rather should have deservedly prepared 
to render greater thanks, assuming that the angel had 
warned me to avoid the danger. And again, in prison, 
my guardian appeared to me and to my youthful associate 
—at God’s bidding, I believe—under the guise of those 
violent sounds, in order that he might confirm me in my 
hope of divine favor whereby I should escape death, and 
that all those trials which I was suffering should seem less 
hard to bear. 

I know that my angel was a spirit of power from these 
cases in which the manifestations were witnessed by others 
at the same time as myself, or in which two senses were 
engaged by the vision, as when the apparition said to me, 



242 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


Te sin casa. Likewise the manifestations of the year 1531— 
ravens, dogs, sparks of fire—came to pass because the spirit 
was able to work through the animate principle of beasts 
lacking reason, just as even men are overtaken by fear at 
shadows, or deluded in hope by a glittering thing like a 
gem or a scrap of metal. 

In general, the characters of these guardian spirits among 
the ancients have been manifold and divers. There have 
been restraining spirits, as that of Socrates; admonishing 
as that of Cicero, which appeared to him in death; there 
have been spirits instructing mortals in what was yet to 
come, through dreams, through the actions of the lower 
creatures, through fateful events; influencing us as to where 
we should go; luring us on; now appealing to one sense, 
now to several at the same time, and the more excellent for 
this; sometimes communicating through natural events, 
and finally through supernatural, which we deem the high¬ 
est of manifestations. Likewise there are good and evil 
spirits. 

Doubts arise as to why this special dispensation was 
granted to me and not to others, for I do not, as some 
think, excel in erudition, but rather the contrary. Was 
it my boundless love of truth and wisdom accompanied by 
a contempt of wealth even in my perpetual state of poverty; 
was it on the score of my great longing for justice, or be¬ 
cause I would attribute all to God and claim nothing for 
myself that I was guided by these mystic visitations? Or 
perhaps my angel was present with me for an end known 
to himself alone. 

Another question arises. Why does he not advise me 
openly of what he would have me know ? So I might wish, 



GUARDIAN ANGELS 


243 


but he points the way to one thing through others of an¬ 
other nature, as, for instance, through those confused 
noises, that I might have the confidence that all was clear 
to God though I might not see his messenger with my eyes. 
For the genius could warn me openly, through a dream, or 
through a manifestation even more evident, but the myste¬ 
rious warning perhaps was more powerfully indicative of 
divine protection, as were those even more startling warn¬ 
ings which came to pass: fears, hindrances, premonitions, 
and ominous sounds in fearful moments. But the mystic 
element is necessary that we may recognize the hand of 
God and be taught not to forbid its working. 

It is, accordingly, foolish to choose to be disquieted by 
things which must be revealed in this manner; it is more 
foolish still to wish for signs which are obstructed in so 
many respects by human purposes, thwarted through the 
commonplaceness of that to which we have long been used, 
and by our blind judgments. And if revelations through 
such channels would truly predict future events would you 
be able to profit thereby? And if falsely, what use are 
they? Yet these premonitions through the medium of my 
good genius are as gifts from liberal-hearted men, who are 
able to give many things which it is not lawful for us to 
receive. 

Again, what is the significance of certain manifestations 
which could not be understood, as: Te sin casa and 
Lamant, and that warning concerning four years of my 
life from the responses of an ape. What was the meaning 
of the worms which suddenly appeared on the salver ? 3 It 
is not likely that such things have happened by mistake, 
since a supernatural power does not partake of anything 



244 THE B00K 0F MY LIFE 

unseemly and every peculiar circumstance is known to it. 

And though I have no proof of what I am about to 
say, it is very possible, nevertheless, that this principle— 
that is, the principle of this spiritual manifestation—even 
as nature itself, is governed through certain laws, and just 
as monsters are begotten in the course of nature, through 
no error in the process, but because of the imperfection of 
the material, so here the same thing comes to pass. For I 
do not believe that this attendant spirit is of nobler char¬ 
acter than the intellect; it therefore errs through the fault 
of the medium, and on this ground must be considered an 
instrument. Accordingly, even as in certain years, many 
monstrosities are begotten because the life-giving powers of 
the sun have been checked, so, if the divine principle or 
instrument is thwarted by a certain earthly essence of the 
flesh, imperfections result, and a confusion of under¬ 
standing of future events is conveyed through the spirit’s 
manifestations. 

If you say that those faults of nature reside in the proc¬ 
ess of action through the medium, and in the latter case in 
the process of action through the will, I shall answer that 
because the spirit is immaterial, and a good derived from 
God, and is indeed what the theologians name it—a good 
angel—it manifests truly, therefore, what, according to the 
will of God, is to be, nor ever errs. Nature is likewise 
instructed ever to indicate through the living medium the 
truth with which it has been endowed by the spirit, but 
the instrument whereby it would teach is not always well 
prepared for receiving this truth. And whether this in¬ 
strument be but a breath of air, or something other, it 
thereupon assumes a form imperfect for its purpose, show- 



GUARDIAN ANGELS 


245 


ing no more than the spirit wills, or than nature can, and 
so the error or lack of understanding arises. The only 
difference is that among the philosophers lack of under¬ 
standing is said to arise from the gross medium not apt for 
receiving the imprint of truth, and among the theologians 
it is thwarted by sins in accordance with God’s will. 

Furthermore, I am not willing for many to be deceived 
regarding the character of my knowledge, concerning 
which I have spoken so often. I am aware, as it were, 
that I have received all things whatsoever I have known 
through the channels of the spirit. To what end then are 
my senses? Do I know everything? Then should I be as 
God; but my knowledge, forsooth, compared to the under¬ 
standing of immortals is as the tenuous shade of man com¬ 
pared to heavenly mansions without bound or limit. It is, 
however, an understanding threefold in nature. First, there 
is knowledge gained by my senses through the observing of 
innumerable things; and this the common run of people 
and the ignorant are wont to magnify in me. This aspect 
of my knowledge assumes two questions: What is it? 
Why is it? In most cases it is sufficient to know what a 
thing is, because I consider it a misplaced zeal to look into 
the cause of all these minutiae. 

Secondly, there is an understanding of higher things 
obtained through the examination of their beginnings and 
pursued by conforming to certain principles. This aspect 
of knowledge is called proof because it is derived from 
the effect based upon the cause. I employ it to pass on to a 
wider application of the subject under consideration, or to 
place it in a clearer light or to give a general application 
from the particular. However, in this field of understand- 



246 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


ing I have less rarely arrived at comprehension by a skillful 
treatment than I have been aided on many occasions by 
spiritual insight. This form of knowledge is pleasing to 
the erudite, for they think it proceeds from great learning 
and practice, and on this account very many have judged 
me to be deeply devoted to study and possessed of a good 
memory when nothing is less true. 

The third form of my knowledge is that of things in¬ 
tangible and immaterial, and by this I have come wholly 
as a result of the ministrations of my attendant spirit, 
through proof in its simplest aspect—that is, a simple state¬ 
ment of its origin, and the fact exists through the most 
infallible proof. However, on this point circumstances alter 
cases and frequently the argument leads to an absurdity. 
For considering the proposition that the exterior angle is 
equal to the sum of the two opposite interior angles—there 
is no reason why this should be so, but that it is so, is simply 
a fact. 

The sort of simple proof, therefore, to which I refer is 
that only which deals with material forms or immaterial 
and is concerned therefore with natural or divine philoso¬ 
phy. Mathematics, however, is, as it were, its own ex¬ 
planation; this, although it may seem hard to accept, is 
nevertheless true, for the recognition that a fact is so, is the 
cause upon which we base the proof. Propositions also and 
languages—although I am not therein conversant—are not 
of such a nature that they come of their own accord to 
anyone meditating upon them. 

The use of amplification and lucidity of understanding 
I have acquired partly from practice and partly at the in¬ 
spiration of my spirit, for I devoted myself persistently to 



GUARDIAN ANGELS 


247 


perfecting that intellectual flash of insight for more than 
forty years before I mastered it. 

And so the whole art of writing, and of extemporaneous 
lecturing has in my case been the result of spiritual inspira¬ 
tion and the effort I made to attain lucidity. Knowledge 
of this sort has, nevertheless, brought me more unpopularity 
than reputation among men, and more glory than profit. 
It has contributed rather to a pleasure by no means slight 
or commonplace and toward lengthening my active life; it 
has served me well as a source of solace in so many mis¬ 
fortunes, as a help in adversity and an advantage in the 
midst of difficulties and labors, to such an extent that it 
has embraced the best part of other greater branches of 
knowledge, and is necessary above all others for perfection 
and elegance. 

In general, when all is said and done, the above states 
my case; in points wherein I can fall into error, I betake 
myself to my intellectual betters, that is, to the theologians. 



CHAPTER FORTY-EIGHT 


Testimony of Illustrious Men Concerning Me 

From four enemies have come very excellent testimonies 
concerning me. The first came from Matteo Corti, 1 a man 
of the greatest reputation; when he was questioned by the 
Senate concerning his successor, he responded that I was 
the best man, and that for any duty or any requirement I 
was unequalled. A second was from Delfino 1 who was up 
for appointment as my associate in second place. He said 
in the presence of his pupils and openly in my presence 
to a certain man with whom he was talking that if I should 
withdraw, Montano 1 would come into the headship; and 
when I had interrupted, saying, “It would be rather hard 
for you, considering his success in winning favor with the 
students ,” he replied, “In the first place, I shall never yield 
my position to anyone, even if Galen himself should be 
lecturing. For my part 1 hold it more honorable if 1 am 
in second place with you than if 1 were elected to first place 
as associate of another. Nor do I deem that I should find 
it a more difficult matter with anyone else than with you; 
for with you as an associate, though 1 have as patrons some 
of the more prominent men in this whole city and in other 
circles of notable men, I have not been able to bring it to 
pass, even though exiles have been reinstated at my re¬ 
quest, that a third part of the students attend my lectures as 
resort to yours.” 

Camuzio, 1 another candidate for appointment, had a 

[248] 



TESTIMONY OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


249 


book printed in which he seriously complained that at 
Pavia and in other academies my name was cited over 
against that of Galen; the latter ought without hesitation 
be put first, he said, if for no other reason than that, since 
he had now been dead so long, any occasion for envy would 
be rightly or entirely quenched and also since so many 
authorities were subscribing to his doctrine. This book was 
up for sale everywhere. 

Sebastiano Giustiano, the Venetian Governor of Padua in 
the summer of the year 1524, was a very learned man, 
devoted to the cultivation of the humanities, of philosophy 
and theology; he had performed many diplomatic services 
for his country. On one occasion when he was present at 
a public debate in which, among others, Vincenzio Maggi 
of Brescia had argued—who shortly after was public lec¬ 
turer on philosophy at Ferrara—he heard me, among the 
other contestants, taking part in the discussion; he asked 
who in the world I might be. They told him I was a 
Milanese called Girolamo Cardano. When the debate was 
ended he ordered me to be summoned and in the presence 
of the whole assembled Academy said, “Be zealous, O 
young man, for you will surpass Camuzio!” And when 
I, astounded by such an unheard of thing, was silent, he 
broke forth again: “You have displayed understanding, O, 
young man; I tell you, study, for you will surpass 
Camuzio . wl 

All who heard were amazed, and especially since I was 
not only not a subject of their kingdom, but even from a 
city not altogether friendly on account of the state of war 
which had existed between those princes and our own, long 
and incessantly. But since I am aware that I have many 



250 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


other witnesses of my reputation in writings, I have con¬ 
sidered it worth while to add herewith the names of those 
in whose works I have been included with honorable men¬ 
tion, especially since these works, printed, are for sale 
everywhere. 

1. Adolphus Crangius in his Trithemius. 

2. Adrian Aleman in his treatise: Hippocrates de are, 
aquis et locis liber commentariis illustratus. 

3. Andreas Vesalius in his Apologia Contra Puteum which 
he published under the pseudonym, Gabriel, son of 
Zacharias. 

4. Andre Tiraqueau, a French jurist, in the essay, De 
Nobilitate, and in his book, De Legibus Connubialibus. 

5. Auger Ferrier in his book on syphilis. 

6. The Author of the Annotations to Hermes’ book, De 
Revolutionibus Nativitatum. 

7. Antoine Mizaud in his treatise on Sympathy and 
Antipathy. 

8. Amato the Portuguese in his Commentatio in Dio- 
scoridem. 

9. Andrea Baccio in his treatise, De Aquis Thermarum 
seu de Balneis. He mentioned me with some ill-will, 
as I in turn have referred to him. 

10. Andrea Camuzio, whom I have mentioned above, in 
debate. 

11. Antonio Maria, or, as he calls himself under an assumed 
name in his writings, Marcantonio Maioraggio, refers 
to me in his Antiparadoxon. 

12. Adrien Turnebe in the letter with which he prefaces 
his interpretation of Plutarch’s De Oraculorum Defectu, 



TESTIMONY OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


251 


makes derogatory mention of my name, whereby the 
fool indicts himself. 

13. Brodeau in his Miscellany. 

14. Buteo, a millstone who knows nothing and does not 
understand the art of teaching. 

15. Charles de l’Ecluse in his treatise, De Aromatibus 
India. 

16. The Spaniard Christoforo in his Itinerary of the Spanish 
Kings. 

17. In the Annals of Gaspare Bugatto, where he speaks of 
the Physicians and Professors. 

18. In the Appendix of the Annals of Sansovino under the 
Physicians and Professors cited. 

19. Konrad Gesner mentions me in various places. 

20. Conrad Lycosthenes: in his book on Prodigies. 

21. Constantine: in his book against Amatus, especially in 
the place where he treats of stones. 

22. Christof Clavius of Bamberg: in the third book of his 
Elementa. 

23. Daniele Barbaro, Patriarch of Aquileia: in the eighth 
chapter of the Tenth Book of his Commentarius in 
Vitruvium. 

24. Daniel Santberchius: in the seventh Book of his Prob- 
lemata Astronomica et Geometrica. 

25. Donato de Muti: in several Aphorisms. 

26. Epitome Bibliotheca. 

27. Francesco Alessandrino: in his Antidotarium. 

28. Francois de Foix, Count of Candale, whose censure I 
took for praise: in his Geometria. 

29. Francesco Vicomercati in his Commentarius in Libros 
Meteorologicorum Aristotelis. 



252 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


30. Fuchs in his medical Compendium. 

31. Caspar Peucer in his Commentarius de Preecipuis 
Divinationum Generibus . 

32. Gaudenzio Merula, a native of Novara, in his article 
De Bello Erasmicano; he was the first who ever men¬ 
tioned my name in a printed work. 

33. George Pictor, a physician, mentions me in his books; 
of this more later. 

34. Guglielmo Grattarolo of Bergamo, a physician. 

35. Gabriello Fallopio: in his Liber de Metallis et Fossilibus 
in which he freely contradicts me. 

36. Guillaume Rondelet: in his Historia Aquatilium . He 
mentions my name in derogatory manner. 

37. Gemma Frisius: in his Arithmetic . 

38. Girolamo Castiglioni in his Speech in Praise of the 
Fatherland. 

39. Hieronymus Tragus: in his Boo\ of Plants. 

40. Jerome Monteux, personal physician to the French king, 
referred to me in his writings. 

41. Jacques Peletier: in his Mathematical Wor\s. 

42. Jean Duchoul: in his Historia Quercus. 

43. Juan de Collado: in his Book, De Ossibus. 

44. Giambattista Plozio: in his Tractatus de in Litem 
furando. 

45. Johann Schoner: in his treatise, De Nativitatibus. 

46. Johann Cochlaus: in the introduction of his Historia. 

47. Joachimus Scelerus: in his introduction to the Wor\s of 
]uan of Seville. 

48. Johannes Ceredus: in his work, De Aquarum Elevatione. 

49. Johannes Stadius: in his Tabulce and Ephemerides. 



TESTIMONY OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 253 

50. The Portuguese, Joao de Barros: in the fourth Chapter 
of the first Decade of his History of the 'East Indies. 

51. Julius Caesar Scaliger: in his treatise, Exotericarum 
Exercitationum lib . xv de Subtilitate ad Hieronymum 
Cardanum. 

52. Jacques Charpentier: in his Epistola in Alcinoum. 

53. Ingrassias: in his book, De Tumoribus. 

54. Liber Aggregatus de Aquis. 

55. Liber Aggregatus Primus de Gallica seu Indica Lue. 

56. Livin Lemmens: in his book, De Naturae Secretis. 

57. Lorenzo Damiata: in his not yet published Geography. 

58. Leo Suavius: in his work, De Arsenico et Auripyg- 
mento. 

59. Luca Gaurico: in his Boo\ of Nativities; his reference 
to me is unfavorable. 

60. Mattheus Abel: in his book, De Situ Or bis. 

61. Martinus Henricus: in his Quaestiones Medicae and 
indeed in various places. 

62. Melanchthon: in the Introduction to his treatise, 
Doctrinae Physicae Elementa. 

63. Melchior Wieland, a Prussian. 

64. Michael Seifelius: in his Arithmetic. 

65. Michele Bombello: in his Algebra. 

66. Niccolo Tartaglia, who spoke evil of me and later, in 
Milan, was obliged to take it back publicly. 

67. Philandrier: in his Annotationes in Vitruvium. 

68. Pierre Pena and Matthias de Lobel: in their work. 
Stirpium Adversaria Nova, in the chapter, De Hora et 
Antithora. 

69. Reiner Solenander: in his treatise on warm waters. 



254 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


70. Severinus Bebelius: in the Second Book of his work 
called De Succino. 

71. Taddeo Duno: in his most important work. 

72. Valentin Naibod of Cologne, in Commentarius in 
Alchabitium . 

73. Vareus in his Materna Poesis. 


I know that many others, whose names I do not now 
recall, have made my name known in their writings. Of 
those who have spoken ill of me I am not aware that one has 
gone beyond the elements of grammar, and cannot under¬ 
stand by what impertinence they have managed to get 
themselves into the ranks of the learned. I refer to the 
following: 


Brodeau 

Fuchs 

Charpentier 

Turnebe 


Rondelet 

Buteo 

De Foix and 
Tartaglia 


Scaliger, Duno, Ingrassias, Gaurico, and Solenander con¬ 
tradicted me for the sake of making a reputation for 
themselves. 

Observe now other testimonials of men; for no one 
doubts that as regards commendatory reference in writing, 
neither to Galen nor perhaps to Aristotle while they lived 
was this accorded nearly as often as to me, acknowledging 
of course that it was my lot to profit by the art of printing. 
Andrea Alciati was the first, as I have elsewhere related, 
and whom I name, honoris causa, in addition to the fact 
that he was wont to call me the Man of Discoveries, and 
daily he turned the pages of my books, especially those 
which have been written on Consolation. Ambrogio 



TESTIMONY OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


255 


Cavenaga, the Emperor’s personal physician, used to call 
me the Man of Many Labors. Julius Caesar Scaliger ascribed 
more titles to me than I should have thought of arrogating 
to myself, calling me ingenium profundissimum, felicis- 
simum et incomparabile , 74 Nor was it possible for me to be 
treated so invidiously that my name be ignored in the class¬ 
rooms of Bologna, Pavia and elsewhere. Angelo Candiano 
and Bartolomeo Urbino, both illustrious men and famous 
doctors—O, how often have they been found, and they 
made no attempt to conceal it, with my books in their 
hands although they were not exactly my friends! 

But let us put an end to this, lest we seem to follow the 
wraith of a dream, for all mortal things are futile and 
praise of them is altogether empty. 



CHAPTER FORTY-NINE 


My Opinion Concerning Worldly Things 

There are two sources of very great unhappiness in 
mortals; one is, since all things are empty vanities, man 
seeks something which is ample and substantial. Who 
indeed does not think he lacks that tangible good? The 
sick man feels the lack of sound health; the poor man, of 
resources; the lonely man, of children, and the unhappy 
man, of friends. And while each seeks and finds not, he 
is tormented; when he at last finds, more and much more, 
he realizes that he has been deceived, for there is always 
something wanting; did not even Augustus complain that 
he lacked friends and bemoan the want of decency among 
his descendants? These mortals deceive themselves. 

Another source of unhappiness those experience who 
think they know what in truth they know not; such are 
also deceived and fool others as well. Still another group 
make pretenses and thereby fool their fellows. 

To the foregoing causes of misfortune two other acci¬ 
dents are to be added: to live in a place and at a time when 
the government is wrecked through revolution is unfor¬ 
tunate; for to have the will to resist at such periods is for 
the individual to encounter innumerable hardships, to suf¬ 
fer many anxious moments, and is, furthermore, folly; yet 
to sidestep the issue is none the less dangerous or foolish. 
For property and money are at the mercy of public calami¬ 
ties. A second accident is the constant ebb and flow 

[ 256 ] 



MY OPINION CONCERNING WORLDLY THINGS 257 

on which the numbered days of life are borne, so that 
many in their own struggle for life, and for the sake of 
another’s profit, perish. 

These things are hardships for all, and for old men, and 
for the incautious, they represent the greatest difficulties; 
to those untried or not on their guard they are insurmount¬ 
able; and they are made worse through the effects of an¬ 
other’s folly which, when coupled with ignorance of the 
outcome, renders evil men even baser, both of themselves 
and as regards others. 

Some, urged by misfortune, join themselves to protective 
societies; to others the idea of God and death must be pre¬ 
sented: God as one who is unerring; death as the last of 
evils, which, certain and about to put an end to evils, 
forces us to despise other unhappy conditions. Again, it 
is good that you should support your happiness by many 
interests lest, having but one which fails, either you fall, 
or you become the slave of your own misfortunes. Thirdly, 
you should not judge things by their quantity but by their 
quality, for humble beginnings of significant events ought 
to be preferred to imposing beginnings of lesser character. 
And though one may lack many things, and since all things 
may not be brought under man’s foot, we ought not to 
devote ourselves intemperately to any one pursuit, except 
in the measure which necessity or security may require. 
Therefore not equally, but proportionately, should we exert 
ourselves to acquire virtue, which should not be lacking in 
any, and property, which is a source of help to all. 

A sixth consideration is that training can do very much 
for children; but if they do not profit by their instructions, 
and they are evil by their very natures, or foolish, or 



258 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


insolent in their liberty, and, even after they have left their 
childhood behind them, are still mean-spirited, though a 
man have but one, and be burdened with years besides, 
this is the quintessence of all evils, counting even poverty, 
lawsuits, loss of patrimony and hard times, all of which 
have been my lot in addition to this last misfortune. 

Finally I declare that by the side of all that might still 
be said, there are actually some solaces at hand: one, you 
should reflect that if you possessed nothing you would lack 
still more; another, you should make haste to find a Scipio 
from among your friends, to find a daughter-in-law or a 
relative; in this it behooves you not to err, for therefrom 
you may with all your might, as if reborn after your follies, 
bend to your tasks anew. 1 

Well, then, to come to a brief conclusion, since all things 
are insignificant and vain, whatever indeed concerns our 
remaining activities depends thereafter upon even the most 
fleeting circumstances. In my own affairs particularly, by 
this one event, among many other examples, the foregoing 
truth is made plain. 

In the year 1562, on October 17th, if I am not mistaken, 
I was in Milan, and about to set out for Bologna. About 
six days earlier the brass tip had fallen from the garter by 
which I bound my hose to my doublet. I had neglected 
it because I was pressed for time with much business. How¬ 
ever, there were six sets of garters, purchased the day before 
the clasp had fallen off the old garter, which I had packed 
with the intention of taking with me to Bologna. The day 
and hour for my departure had come, when as usual, in 
the very instant I was about to mount the carriage, I felt 
a desire to relieve myself. This done, while trying to fasten 



MY OPINION CONCERNING WORLDLY THINGS 259 

the garter I kept fumbling until, thoroughly annoyed at 
the inconvenience, I went out to the shops which were 
around my house—there were three, I believe—to buy a 
garter, but I found none anywhere. Hesitating, then, as 
to what I should do, I remembered the sets of garters I had 
formerly purchased. I sent for the key from my son-in-law 
who returned it. I opened my chest, which, being of Ger¬ 
man construction, was unlocked with some difficulty. 
There I saw the sets of garters, and there, behold! my eyes 
fell upon the stacks of all the books I had written, and 
which I had laid away in the chest against my coming 
journey, so that I might transport them all with me. 

Obstipui, steteruntque comae et vox faucibus haesit. 2 

I took them all up and carried them along with me. 
I began my lectures. About the first of December letters 
came saying the chest had been broken open by night, and 
whatever was within had been stolen. If it had not been 
for my garter I should not have been able to give my lec¬ 
tures, I should have lost my post and gone begging, so many 
memoirs would have perished, and I should have died ere 
long of grief. And all this depended on an insignificant 
instant! Alas for the unhappy condition of mankind! 

To possess a truly discerning understanding of the mores 
of men you will look into their cultivation of instructive 
disciplines, and examine the degree of perfection attained 
through native character, law and custom. Uncultivated 
men are, accordingly, simple and indomitable; and con¬ 
sequently given to extremes. When they are good, they 
are the best of men, for they are not corrupted; when they 
are bad, they are the most evil of men, for they are bound 
by no reason nor moved by any persuasion: as to their lusts, 



26 o 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


abominable, and unseemly in their gluttony. They are 
bitter in their wrath, especially the poor, because of their 
greed, and the rich, who are ambition-mad. 

The slothful are both crude and invidious, and as such, 
evil-minded and even greedy. Those of them who live 
under a tyrannical government, if they have influence, use 
it to rob others of their property; if they are poor they 
cling tenaciously to what is their own. Both circumstances 
beget avarice; there is neither love nor trust nor mercy. 
Boldness, born of their bitterness, makes them cruel men; 
their slothful lives make them sordid, particularly when 
their idleness is accompanied by gluttony and lust. They 
are given to industry when necessity or social pressure de¬ 
mand, and make a display of cleverness when urged out of 
the jejuneness of their existence. If by law they are pro¬ 
hibited from instruction, and honors accrue to their handi¬ 
work, and ambition has a place—as when they are ruled 
by the aristocrats—they distinguish themselves through 
their devotion to the arts and crafts, especially if their region 
is one thriving by reason of a variety of industries. In a 
republic, or where wealth alone is sought, there is little 
regard for honor one way or another. 

I have given an example of the irony of human affairs; 
now I shall add an incident the like of which happened 
on innumerable occasions; you will laugh, and yet on no 
more than this, death or life depends: it happened only 
yesterday, that is April 28th, 1576. Since I wished to make 
my way to a jeweler through a narrow alley, I ordered 
the driver, a dolt of a fellow, to go on to the Campo Alto- 
vitaro. He said he would go, but understood me to say 
another place, whither he went. I returned to the place 



MY OPINION CONCERNING WORLDLY THINGS 


26x 


appointed after my transaction and found him not. I sus¬ 
pected he might have gone to the plaza of the warder of 
the castle. Thither I trudged, loaded down with cloaks— 
put on for warmth while driving—and in the course of my 
walk I met Vincenzio, a Bolognese and a musician who 
was my friend. He observed that I was without my car¬ 
riage. I went on but the carriage was not to be found. 
Suddenly the greatest anxiety swept over me, for I had to 
retrace my steps over the bridge although I was exhausted 
with weariness, hunger, and profuse perspiration. I might 
have asked for a carriage from the Lord of the Castle, but 
certain dangers involved in such a request restrained me 
from such a course. I commended myself to God and con¬ 
sidering that wisdom and patience were necessary I re¬ 
turned, but firmly minded neither to give out nor to take 
rest. Yet at the end of the bridge I betook myself to the 
Altovito Bank where, under the pretext of getting some 
information I desired about rates of exchange on Nea¬ 
politan money, I sat down. The agent was cheerfully mak¬ 
ing explanations when the Lord of the Castle entered, so I 
withdrew immediately, and there in the middle of the plaza 
I saw my carriage. The driver had been advised by my 
friend whom I had met; I mounted the carriage, doubtful 
whether to go on my way because I was so hungry, when 
in my pouch I found three raisin clusters. And so I fin¬ 
ished my round of calls safely and even with pleasure. 
Here you can see how many momentary sequences befell: 
first I met Vincenzio, then he and my driver met, followed 
by my plan of going into the money-changer’s and finding 
him free from pressing duties; then the Lord-governor 
came in and I went out, whereupon I ran across my driver 



262 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


and later discovered those raisins. There were seven inci¬ 
dents, a single one of which, had it happened either sooner 
or later by so much as the space required to utter two 
words, would either have been the end of me or brought 
me the greatest discomfort and annoyance. I do not deny 
that to others also such things occasionally happen, but 
rarely incidents that so hang upon the instant, and are so 
fraught with risks and involved in greatest difficulties of 
which they themselves are unaware. 



CHAPTER FIFTY 


Familiar Sayings 

Those things should be done the recollection of which 
it will never at any time be a matter of regret to summon; 
things, the aptitude for which desert a man sooner than the 
will, and things in the memory of which there is peace of 
mind; and better it is, even, if that memory seek to avoid 
any solicitude. 

When there is a choice between contrary courses, that 
ought to be held for best which in the long run brings the 
least evil. 

As Sorano used to say, it is honorable to accept from 
those bringing you offerings, but not to make exactions 
from those unwilling to give. 

In a doubtful choice, select what seems naturally the 
more favorable—the course which makes some show of 
good return; for if you choose that which is merely your 
preference, and no opportunity to retract is given, you are 
confounded by a questionable choice, and forfeit prestige 
as well. 

He who is unwilling to listen to reason is a brute; he is 
therefore either worthy of blows, or you must part company 
with him. Man alone conducts his affairs and looks out 
for his interest by talking them over. 

Men morose, obstinate, harsh and sluggish are useless on 
the principal count, as in many other points as well, and 
therefore to be avoided above all others. 

To the powerful especially, either of the following re- 

[263] 



264 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


bukes is sufficient, and neither forfeits the modesty a man 
should maintain: You have inflicted an injustice upon me, 
or: l am complaining because of an injustice done me. 
To those nearly related, as to heirs: After my death will it 
be your wish that my property had not been carefully 
protected? You will confound them thus. 

To one who was twitting me with the small number of 
my pupils I responded: More copies of Donat us 1 wor\s 
are sold than Vergil's. And, criticized because I stood alone 
in my opinions, I said: It is on this very count that the 
unicorn is worth so much. 

To a jurisconsult also twitting me about the paucity of 
my students I responded: Some students confer more dis¬ 
tinction by their presence than others dishonor by their 
withdrawal. 

To a doctor boasting that he had more patients than I, 
I replied: That is not the question, but rather how many 
of these are healed. To others I retorted more sharply: 
It is a disgrace for so many to perish in your hands. 

Exhorting a young man to shun the society of worth¬ 
less men I said I would show him the apple which cor¬ 
rupted the heap but I could not show him the heap which 
would restore the rotten apple. 

To those upbraiding me because I brought up so many 
boys I replied: My deserts in this are double: I do good, 
and hear evil of it. 

Wisdom, as many another priceless thing, must be dug 
from the very bowels of the earth. 

When a man was comparing me to other scholars I 
quoted this Vergilian verse: 

Quia si idem certet Phoebum superare canendo ? 2 



FAMILIAR SAYINGS 


265 


I have frequently bidden those about me to meditate on 
this especially, this alone: What is the greater, what the 
less? 

It is greatly indicative of prudence to have a distinguished 
friend. 

To a man who reproached me on the score of my old 
age I said: That man alone is old whom God has deserted. 

Friends are your support in adversity, flatterers bring you 
advice. 

Evil must be healed by good, not by evil. 

I know that the souls of men are immortal; the manner 
I know not. 

I owe more to bad doctors because they lost me my 
enemies, than to the good ones, although they were my 
friends. 

When some evil-minded men taunted me with having 
erred in a diagnosis while I was in the company of other 
evil and ignorant men I said that it had been a marvel if 
in such a company I should make a true prediction or in¬ 
deed do any other thing rightly! 

When you are about to do something, think ahead and 
see what your status will be when you will have done it— 
whether it will turn out as you hope or not. 

An illustrious man ought to live under the aegis of a 
prince. 

Receive your friends with a joyful countenance, as they 
have deserved that favor, and your enemies also, that you 
may prove the better man. 

Those who write uncouth verses are like those who de¬ 
vour raw food: for a slight pleasure subjecting themselves 
to serious troubles. 



266 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


You may measure the trustworthiness of men by what 
is expedient for them unless they be in every respect more 
magnanimous than faith itself. 

The greatest thing in human affairs is to determine the 
goal of one’s endeavors. 

The most cultivated men of our epoch, because they 
cleave only to material things of immediate import, are 
condemned in one breath of impiety, ingratitude and 
ignorance. 

Likewise, as I was about to dismiss a servant, I said: 
You give me satisfaction, but I do not please you, and on 
this account you force me to abandon you. 

When someone asked me: Why, when you are so wise, 
are your sons so foolish? I retorted, Because I am not so 
wise as they are foolish. 

Those who are well favored by the gifts of fortune are 
like small boys leaping down from the steps of a stairway: 
the more steps there are the happier they are, but they vie 
with greater danger to themselves and with greater loss. 

It is better to leave a hundred things unsaid than to utter 
one which should have been passed over in silence. 

School boys should be obliged to give ready responses, 
to the end that they may concentrate, and not simply for 
the purpose of giving an answer, in passing, to the ques¬ 
tions asked. 

To somone asking what went on at Rome I said: What 
goes on in the Queen of cities and of the affairs of men! 

And have you been in prison? I was asked. To one I 
said, And do you wish that you had been there also? To 
another, still more weak-minded, What have you done for 
which you fear arrest? 



FAMILIAR SAYINGS 267 

Those themes should not be introduced into books which 
are not pertinent to the end or not worth reading. 

When you say anything artfully malicious you ought to 
have a thick skin; when, then, you hear anything of the 
kind, consider that the speaker has a thick skin. 

In matters of business, in contrast to matters of theory, 
a certain acquaintance with the subject is of some help, but 
it is necessary to have quantitative knowledge. One can do 
good by offering rhubarb to a patient sick with tertian fever 
even if one does not know the exact quantity, but it is better 
to keep silent or not to visit a patient if one has not become 
acquainted with the manner of treatment to be employed. 

Tears are the medicine of grief, indignation of pity, and 
the inevitableness of both has been amply attested by 
history. 

In general, in all things it is good if one can sue for time. 

In your negotiations confront an offense with offensive 
measures; meet negligence with a lawsuit and exactions; 
meet obstinacy with irascibility, arrogance with harsh treat¬ 
ment and scanty fare, and those who deal with fists in 
place of words resist by making as if to send a hasty mes¬ 
sage to the authorities. 

When you wish to wash yourself first prepare a linen 
towel for wiping. 

When about to employ an old woman as a housemaid, 
ask whether she knows how to sew, wash, and bake bread; 
order her to hurry around and build a fire. You should 
complain also that some of your wine is lacking. Ask if 
she have any relatives or friends as if you had need of 
these; inquire under what circumstances she left her former 



268 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


master, how many husbands and children she has had. 
Then leave her to her devices, or at least take care to set 
a suitable watch upon her. 

To be quick to tell all you know is the worst of faults, 
yet in the course of events sometimes necessary; in delibera¬ 
tion there is need for moderation. 

Do not make demands upon another’s rights, above all 
from the lords of the earth; whatever is within your own 
right do not demand on condition, but use your judgment, 
nevertheless, with modesty. 

With men you may not say all you feel, but look well 
to whom you give much more than a loan. 

Time gives us but a shadowy image of the significance of 
God in eternity, and even this is imperfect on account of 
constant change. 

In perilous circumstances or those exposed to malicious 
report either as regards your affairs or yourself, if you be 
not certain that you are able to speak conclusively, it is 
better to let the matter pass; in this respect many are at 
fault since they are too ambitious for the reputation of 
knowing much or of having always been successful. 

Take care lest you give over your interests into the hands 
of one who enjoys your favor: will he make use of your 
property if you leave it with him? And if you would 
take it again, a danger arises that he may drag you into 
an odious relationship with himself, and he will surely hold 
you under obligation. 

See that a book fulfills its purpose, and that the purpose 
rounds out the book: such a book, and no other, is perfect. 

To one who said to me, I pity you, I replied, Without 
good right . 



FAMILIAR SAYINGS 


269 


Evil is but a lack of good, and good is of itself a virtue 
which is within our power to possess, or rather which is 
indispensable. 

If you have not riches, children, and friends, yet have 
other possessions, you are fortune; but if all other posses¬ 
sions are lacking, you are due to endure but a brief space. 

Although there are many arts, one is the master of all: 
that fundamental precision by means of which one may 
explain many things through a few cases, or render vague 
facts clear, or state in certain form facts formerly doubtful. 
However, there are three requirements: that all these gen¬ 
eral principles fall in with that one master theory, that they 
harmonize one with the other nicely, mutually inclusive 
and exclusive, and that each may be peculiarly adapted to 
its own special usage. Aristotle passes over this last alone 
on account of the limitations of science in those days. 
Remember also that it is legitimate to concede something 
to grace of style, as in the writing of stories. 

Many wrongfully complain about virtue saying it is in 
slavery to fortune; others deem it to be the mistress of 
happiness—words worthy in truth of a high-spirited man. 

Victrix fortunae sapientia, ducimus autem: 

Hos quoque felices, qui ferre incommoda vitae 

Nec iactare iugum didicere,. 3 


Yet he errs in double fold: first by teaching that under¬ 
standing (meaning our human understanding) is more 
potent than fortune, although our everyday experience is 
to the contrary. The reason is that fortune displays her 
whole aspect and lets loose all her powers in any circum- 




270 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


stance whatsoever, and we have only a small offshoot, 
very frail and slender, of understanding. Fate is not, there¬ 
fore, more powerful than understanding, yet by much less 
is our human understanding the Victor over Fate. Yet 
Fate yields to divine wisdom nor dares to set foot where 
she has perceived the very odor of Wisdom passing by. 
The expression of Brutus as he lay dying likewise hardly 
pleases: 

Infelix virtus, et solis provida verbis: 

Fortunam in rebus cur sequeris dominam , 4 

even though Plutarch brings forward Antony’s testimony 
about Brutus, that he alone slew Caesar because of the glory 
of the deed, the others because of envy. Perhaps this came 
about, however, as the result of other motives than any he 
expressed. For the following appears as Cicero’s testimony 
in his letters to Atticus: Brutus had resented bitterly many 
things which had happened and was grievously troubled 
about events which succeeded, a circumstance which would 
never have existed had the end of his action been glory! 

Unjustly, furthermore, Cicero complains because Antony, 
who had spent his whole life in the pursuit of arms, was 
preferred by Fortune to himself whose existence was more 
sheltered and actively devoted to oratory. 

The terms men use are stout, rude, and bristling: their 
meaning, however, is none the less vigorous; compare the 
references to Nero, who is the subject of the writings of 
Tacitus. How foolish, then, for Brutus to seek a place for 
noble virtue in the midst of his sedition. Since in a city 
besieged by an enemy host a happy man cannot be found, 
how much less in a city rife with revolt? And so happi- 



FAMILIAR SAYINGS 


271 


ness is not found in Fortune but in Goodness. Fortune, 
nevertheless, is able to offer more obstructions than Virtue 
can array herself against when Fortune is her adversary. 

Three things above all others change their ways: age, 
fortune, and married life—therefore take care. Associations 
with one’s fellows also change, and even as glowing iron, 
nothing touched by human hands is worse; yet that very 
iron beaten by hammer becomes a source of gain for the 
smith, and a useful article for others. 

A Lament on the Death of My Son 

Who has snatched thee away from me— 

O, my son, my sweetest son? 

Who had the power to bring to my age 
Sorrows more than I can count? 

Wrath in whose soul or what stern fate 
Willed to reap thy youth’s fair flower? 

Not Calliope, not Apollo, 

Served thee in thine hour of need! 

Cithara, now, and all song be still; 

Measures of threnodies shall renew 
Mourning and sighs for my dear son. 

—Strains of his singing haunt me still— 

Laurels, alas, in the healing art, 

Knowledge of things, and a facile gift 
Of Latin tongue—what profit these 
Labors long if they swifdy die? 

Service rendered Spanish prince, 

Duty done to the noblest of men 

Help thee naught if with these for thy judge 

Death with his scythe doth seek thy blood. 

What, ah me, shall I do? My soul 
Swoons to remember thee, gentle son; 



272 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


Silent, I brood on thy destiny grim; 

Tears that I dare not give to words, 

Shall I not shed for my stricken son? 

Lasting encomium had I reserved, 

Fitting reward to thine ashes paid; 

Silence—O shame—must my tongue now guard, 
Death unjust nor its cause announce. 

Grave are the ills thou hast borne, mild son. 
Prince and Senate and ancient law 
Ordered thy doom whilst thou in rash haste, 
Brought an adultress the wage of her crime. 

Safely adultery now in our homes 
Mocks and insults when punishment swift 
Stays the avenging right hand of the youth. 

Son—the reflection true of the good 
Strong in my father—worthy to live 
Long through the years—Alas, my beloved! 

Fates have forbidden and swept all that good 
Far past the stars, and removed from gray earth 
Every bright and illustrious thing. 

Hail thee, child, for thy spirit high! 

Clear is thy blood from ignoble stain; 

Honor of forefather’s hast thou sought. 

Far stands the king, and hope of safety, 

Phoebus denies the lands his beams, 

Light from Diana passes and dies, 

Stars in the calm sky glance no more 
Lest they look down on a palace foul, 

Stained with the reeking blood of the slain. 

Where lies my way? What land now claims 
Body and limbs disfigured by death? 

Son, is there naught but: this to return? 

Thee have I followed on sea and on land! 

Fix me—if mercy is anywhere found— 



FAMILIAR SAYINGS 


273 


Pierce me with weapons, O ye mad Gods! 

Take with thy first blow my dreary life. 

Pity me thou, oh great father of Gods, 

Thrust with thy spear my hated head 
Deep into Tartara; else am I bound 
Hardly to burst this life’s bitter chains. 

This, O my son, was not pledged to thy sire, 

Love so unholy to trust with thine all—* 

Love that has ruined thee, son of my heart! 

Wife of a memory blessed and true, 

Happy thy death, nor spared for this grief! 

I, through this crime, have myself brought disgrace, 

O son to our name, for by envy compelled, 

Homeland and Lares paternal I left. 

Death had I sought for my innocent soul, 

But surviving and living I vanquished my fate. 

Ages to come will know, son, thy name, 

Orient lands will hear of thy fame; 

Dead to us thou art indeed— 

Life hast thou won through all the earth! 

For all of us alike must die, and, as Horace says, naught 
remains but a glory which waits for its splendor upon the 
herald of our virtues, a bard, inspired and therefore famed 
afar; to this end Alexander kept longing for a Homer. 
History, moreover, diminishes glory by the illustrious deeds 
of succeeding generations. The poets relate their tales and 
are, accordingly but lightly esteemed therefor. The great 
marvel is the case of Horace who without writing an epic 
dared to maintain the perpetuation of his fame, since with¬ 
out historical poems men could not be entertained; of this 
Horace himself gives testimony: 

Lectorem delectando, pariterque monendo . 5 



274 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


But what would have been an obstacle to another—the 
swift decline of the purity of the Latin tongue—redounded 
to his popularity because his own purity of diction was so 
exceptional. 

The achievement of a glorious and celebrated deed should 
abide; the story should be composed and magnified with 
the imagery of poetry by the bard, because a bare narration 
might dispel its unity of atmosphere. Whence: 

Graiis dedit ore rotundo 
Musa loqui . 6 

The poet, furthermore, ought to be inspired to his task 
of adorning his writings, and every principle of composition 
should be observed which Aristotle strove to embrace within 
the limits of his trustworthy treatise. 7 When all these four 
precepts are observed at the same time a man may hope for 
an eternity of fame; otherwise not. 

But why all this discussion ? 

H.* In order that we may know what conditions are neces¬ 
sary for a happy life; and, since there is no true happi¬ 
ness in this existence, to keep us from rushing on in vain 
search of it, whereat we may be burdened with unhappi¬ 
ness. 

S.* Yet to tell the truth these philosophies are not enough. 
For it is as well our duty, as that of all other artificers, to 
know the final purpose of all we seek. The smith knows 
and teaches how to make nails, bars, anvils and sledges: 
the nails for the purpose of fastening together boards, the 
bars for bolting doors, the anvil for sustaining the blows 
of the sledges. “But you,” say the artisans, “give no instruc- 



FAMILIAR SAYINGS 


2 75 


tion like these practical teachings. It is not clear what 
happiness is, nor do you admit that it actually is. Nor do 
you state what the function of happiness may be; this is 
plainly very difficult because we do not know, with this 
inanity and vacuity of yours, whether you have, by your 
doctrine, advanced our understanding, or whether there 
be anything at all in your vain philosophy.” Wherefore 
they wish to hear what utility, if any, there is in your 
theory, or what purpose. For if there be no advantage, 
why write, teach, learn? 

H. There is a purpose, and there is not. First, this: we 
know, as I have said, that the sum of unhappiness is greater 
than happiness; the latter scarcely exists. And in all this 
emptiness there is sometimes some infinitesimal and fleeting 
good. All, nevertheless, amounts to nothing except as we 
have learned to appropriate at the right moment this brief 
good and to avoid misfortune; learned to thrust away and 
reduce to naught anything calamitous—provided only it be 
not the extremity of misfortune, by men’s comparisons, for 
such is possible; provided, I repeat, the evil be tolerable or 
even moderate, but by no means the most appalling of 
adversities; whereas, in ignorance of these attitudes your 
lot becomes wretched indeed. 

S. Therefore, as I see it, the advantage is fivefold. First, 
you may alleviate misfortune, provided it be not the ex¬ 
tremity. Second, that you may augment that moiety of 
happiness which is humankind’s portion. Third, that 
you may appropriate some infinitesimal blessings, and in a 
short time some degree of abundance will be found in the 
emptiness of your existence. Fourth, that we are to know 



276 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


there actually is some very small, ephemeral happiness, and 
that virtue is the only source of it, and it is not thwarted 
by even great detriments. Fifth, that such good fortune 
can be somewhat prolonged because the underlying causes 
of it and their functions can be extended in certain cases 
quite appreciably, especially in view of and in comparison 
with the brevity of human existence. But if the span of 
life should be five or six hundred years, all would end their 
lives in desperation; and this tenuous happiness would like¬ 
wise vanish. 

H. Well done! And I thank you because you have set 
forth my propositions much better than I should have 
known how to do it. I add simply this, notwithstanding, 
that this same good fortune, howsoever entirely insignifi¬ 
cant and slender it may be—indeed, to be frank, next to 
nothing at all—has yet four grades. First, when it is in the 
very act of coming to pass, a momentary condition, it seems 
to be something, but it is not. Proof of this is the consensus 
of the philosophers who call the sensation nothing but 
freedom from pain. 8 The second stage is when it has just 
passed over and the causes and effects of it still remain, so 
that it actually seems present. The third stage is when the 
time has passed yet the memory is still fresh, though 
shadowy and without substance. At the fourth stage no 
trace of all these states remains; they have become like to 
the casual events of every day, the memory of which has 
passed away; although we may still recollect, the recol¬ 
lection is without any effect. All of which goes to prove 
that it is enough to have traversed the span of mortal life 
without experiencing a calamity of any magnitude. 

*H. = Hieronymus; S. = Perhaps “a Scipio” whom Cardan 
chooses for his friend and interlocutor. 



CHAPTER FIFTY-ONE 


Things in Which I Feel I Have Failed 

Like the Trojans, who learned too late their folly, 1 some 
of us are slow to realize that it is impossible not to make 
mistakes. But it is inevitable that those err many a time 
who wish to be in service to pleasure. My most serious 
error was in the education of my sons, for a proper rear¬ 
ing can accomplish the most far-reaching results. But I 
lacked means, prudent sons, brothers, sisters, relatives and 
friends, resources, influences and faithful servants. I was 
able, however, to choose, had I been willing, to forego much 
of my writing, forcibly to curb my disposition, and to 
refrain from the pleasures of the flesh; and, had I wished, 
to be more assiduous in cultivating friendships, and to await 
the decree of the Senate of the University at Bologna; for, 
even as there was some advantage in not having solicited 
the post, how much more in not pressing my demands? 
A favorable occasion is of more avail in situations of this 
sort, when rivals are opposing you and the power of your 
friends falls short of your needs. 

My devotion to the game of chess was really not much 
of a vice; yet I cleave more to that sentiment of Horace: 

Vixi; eras vel atra 

Nube polum, Pater occupat'o , 2 

with this additional advice: let the past not stand in the way 
of your future welfare. 

Besides these shortcomings I applied less attention and 

[ 2 77 ] 



278 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


zeal than I should toward restraint in the matter of food 
and toward acquiring some grace in the art of conversa¬ 
tion. It was, therefore, not enough to have observed the 
seven axioms in my conduct as a whole, and what was the 
good? Although I gave myself over intemperately to the 
study of letters, the same steadfastness in the rest of my 
interests would have resulted in a less profitable devotion 
to literature. It was far in excess of enough to have lacked 
so many things—a good memory, a knowledge of the Latin 
tongue in my youth, unimpaired health, friends, a family 
prepared to offer some advantages, virility throughout a 
long period, a certain graciousness and winning manner, 
sons endowed with at least common sense. As against 
these, of timid heart I had a superfluity, and of endless 
lawsuits, morose-spirited elders, and years turbulent with 
wars and heresies. 

But, you may say, are you not able to help your condi¬ 
tion by means of the things you have learned ? The truth 
ought to be prejudicial to none: I have found that in large 
measure the things which others have discovered are 
erroneous, or else I have not known wherein even an un¬ 
profitable employment of the majority consisted. My own 
discoveries are more useful, but they came too late; had it 
been permitted to come in good time upon facts which I 
later had in my possession, or if the things sought by others 
had been recognized by me earlier, perchance I should not 
have found life so difficult. 

Nevertheless I still have so many blessings, that if they 
were another’s he would count himself lucky. I have the 
knowledge of many sciences; I have an heir of my line, of 
unblemished name, though shadowed by misfortune; I 



THINGS IN WHICH I FEEL I HAVE FAILED 279 

have books published, and many ready to be published; I 
have reputation, position, and substance honestly acquired; 
powerful friends; an understanding of many mysteries; 
and, what is best, a deep veneration for God. 

Yet, as I have so often said, the achievement of all things 
cannot fall to the lot of one man, nor can he excel in every 
field; nor can he, although he greatly excel in one particular 
only, even in this gain perfection. What, therefore ? Would 
you require in me that which is denied to every class of 
men? Would you wonder that I had made my mistakes 
since all other men miss the mark ? 



CHAPTER FIFTY-TWO 


Change from Age to Age 

The successive periods of our lives bring about changes 
in our customs, in the bodily form, in temperament and in 
appearance. I have heard it said that in childhood I was 
fat and rosy; in boyhood I was scrawny, with a long face, 
fair complexioned and flushed, and I grew so rapidly that 
by my sixteenth year I had almost completed my growth, 
and I seemed as tall as I am now; my disposition was in¬ 
clined to sadness. In youth I was sandy haired, in deport¬ 
ment and temper nothing unusual, cheerful, given to pleas¬ 
ures, especially to music. 

In the period of my life falling between my thirtieth and 
fortieth years there was little change. I had troubles which 
disturbed me—poverty, with a wife and children, an infirm 
state of bodily health, and rivals so bitter that when I cured 
Bartolommea Cribella, a noble lady, and following her, her 
brother, this same man, as he was convalescing, made mock 
of me. To him I said, “What would you all be doing ”— 
for others had joined his mockery —“if he had not been 
cured?” 

Was it not then to be expected that after all this—but 
not before my thirty-ninth year—I began to get my breath P 1 
Nevertheless, during the next four years, that is, from the 
first of September 1539 to the first of November 1543 ,1 did 
nothing else except strive, by private means and public 
measures, to the end that I might be freed from my em- 

[ 2 8° ] 



CHANGE FROM AGE TO AGE 


28 l 

barrassment and given the honor due me as a doctor. The 
first year of changed fortune was, accordingly, my forty- 
third. From that time up to my seventieth year almost 
twenty-seven years intervened—the duration of the Pelopon¬ 
nesian War—in which I composed all those books. From 
my seventy-first to my seventy-fifth year, four years have 
glided by during which I wrote twelve works, consisting 
of eighteen books. But the greater bulk of my literary 
labor will be that of my published writings consisting 
partly of old teachings, partly of new. 

During those early years I devoted seven years to pleas¬ 
ures—music and others—to gambling and to fishing, the 
latter especially. Later I trained myself for debate, and at 
the same time found myself still more lacking in bodily 
health. My teeth ached and a few of them fell out. Gout 
invaded me, but did not, however, torture me. The attack 
was generally of twenty-four hours’ duration, and what¬ 
ever pain remained tended toward a gradual moderation. 
Up to my sixtieth year my vitality did not diminish, so 
that it appears my strength failed rather because of mental 
anguish than because of my age. From that year on I have 
made it my business to attend to my domestic affairs, but 
so many discouragements have cast their baleful light upon 
me that it is a marvel that I have been able to live until 
the present. If anyone should enumerate my struggles, my 
anxieties, my bitterness and grief, my mistakes in con¬ 
ducting my life, the claims of my personal interests, fear of 
poverty, sleeplessness, intestinal trouble, asthma, skin dis¬ 
ease and even phtheiriasis, the inconstant character of my 
grandson, the sins of my son, would that man not be 
surprised that I still survive? Very many of my teeth have 



282 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


fallen out, so that but fifteen remain, and they are neither 
whole nor solid. 

So many the plots against me, so many the tricks to 
ennare; the thieving of my old housemaids, drunken coach¬ 
men, and all the lying, cowardly, faithless, arrogant crew 
that it has been my lot to deal with! I have had no one 
I could rely upon, not one who was half reliable. Six 
times, or thereabouts, I have firmly believed as I lay down 
to sleep that I should nevermore live to wake again because 
of my many burdens and the error of my ways. Twice, 
tormented by these, I thought I should die in the night. I 
have not yet drawn up the will which I wish to be my last. 

How, you will say, was it given you to struggle clear of 
so much trouble? Deep grief was griefs own medicine. 
I confronted disdain with righteous anger, and devoted 
myself to serious study as a counterpoise to an insane love 
for my children. My petty sorrows I dispelled by playing 
at chess, while to great afflictions I offered a show of false 
hopes and plans. I did not breakfast, but my appetite was 
so reduced that in the morning I was satisfied with a baked 
apple or with fifteen dried Cretan grapes, without wine, 
often without water, or at least very little of one or the 
other. Lately I have adopted a taste which is pleasing and 
I hope wholesome—the “white broth” of Galen with bread 
simply dipped therein, and nothing else besides. My supper 
is somewhat richer. 

In all vicissitudes, there runs through my mind recollec¬ 
tions from my book On the Best Way of Life . I keep 
thinking what happened to the son of Sulla whom Caesar 
ordered to be slain with his wife because she was Pompey’s 
daughter. 2 And what to Quintus Cicero? What to his 



CHANGE FROM AGE TO AGE 


283 


brother Marcus? His daughter died without an heir even 
while the father still lived, and for this he lost his reason. 
And although he had a surviving son, it was as though he 
had neither son nor daughter. And I remember unhappy 
Terentia, living on when all her loved ones had perished, 
with the memories of her hundred years , 3 and of her once 
so flowering married life. O, the irony of mortal vicissi¬ 
tude! What has become of the works of Theophrastus , 4 
so lovely and so useful ? 

After long experiment I have settled on a supper of 
good-sized fish, tender and properly prepared. To provide 
the most nourishment let them be gently boiled together 
and the firm parts be used for food. I usually select a 
carp, but here in Rome they are not to be had. In lieu 
of this I eat turbot, flatfish or a pike weighing from three- 
fourths to a pound and a half; also any tender, wide-bodied 
fish, or even mullet. For reasons I have elsewhere given I 
avoid pond carp—they call them Scardeas —but not brook 
carp. A good dish is broth of beets with garlic, or of 
cockles or crab or snails made with green bay leaves. In 
place of beets or sow-thistle or endive roots, fresh leaves of 
borage and radishes do for the salad course. Or in place 
of one of these, the yolks of eggs—fresh—with one of 
which I am often contented. I eat white meat, separated 
and well roasted, and calves’ feet, the liver of fowls and 
of pigeons, as well as the brain and any part of the giblets. 
Meat is good browned on the spit, then cut into fine or thin 
slices and beaten until tender with the back of the butcher- 
knife, after which it should again be turned over and over 
for some time in hot goat’s suet. I prefer to all other meat 
dishes, a pot roast in its own broth. 



284 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


When my feet are cold I wash them, for thus their 
warmth is restored again. Neither do I eat my food unless 
it is warmed and the dry parts moist. After breakfast I 
do not walk about, much less after supper. I become more 
tranquil in spirit and more courageous in proportion to my 
understanding and not by virtue of this regime. And 
since death seems to me rightly to be feared; therefore I 
hate it. Let us leave it to others who do not shudder at its 
coming, to run to meet death, after the fashion of Taurea 
of Campania , 5 if to await it is not enough. 

But I return to my subject—change from one age to 
another. Often I have observed in my personal affairs, even 
those most intimate, such a flux that you would be inclined 
to say there was an evil genius who made it his business 
to turn things topsy-turvy: my money has been swept away, 
then increased, then diverted into other channels. Lest you 
believe my tongue is well-oiled or that I have suffered a 
lapse of memory, hear what happened to me yesterday, the 
effects of which still persist. And I am well aware of how 
many of these moods are able to be laid at the door of 
this changing disposition. I had dined serenely, yet from 
dinner on, such an odium of all the books of others and of 
my own, which had been published, swept over me that I 
could not tolerate the thought of them, nor the sight of 
them. Reason remains, however; I recognize the cause to 
be like a seizure of melancholy—and especially since these 
books which continue to live are the best of books! 

But this affair of my moneys is another matter: it is 
neither trick nor madness; no one takes it away, there is 
no mistake; to what then is due that constant flux if not 
to some external confusion ? 



CHAPTER FIFTY-THREE 


Quality of Conversation 

In the art of conversation, for a number of reasons, and 
the more so at this time of my life, I realize that I possess 
little grace. First because I love solitude, and I am never 
more with those I love than when I am alone. For I love 
God and my good genius. Upon these, then, when alone, 
I meditate: the one who is Boundless Good, Eternal Wis¬ 
dom, the Source and Creator of pure light, our true Joy 
without danger of loss, the Foundation of Truth, Love 
freely given, the Creator of all things who in himself is 
blessed, the Guardian and the Deep Desire of all the 
Saints; the Depth and Height of Justice, watching over 
the dead nor unmindful of the living. The other is my 
familiar spirit sent by his command for my defense; com¬ 
passionate, my good adviser, my helper in adversity and 
my consolation. 

What man, then, of any condition whatsoever will you 
point out to me who does not always go about polluted as 
it were, with the burden of his own filth and defiled by his 
own water—nay impure to his very veins ? And not a few, 
although they may be more gracious, have, nevertheless, the 
belly full of worms; many of these, and many women also, 
whose wont it is to please—to give all things impartially 
their due—scratch their lice; some stink from their armpits, 
some from their feet and many more from their foul 
mouths. When I consider these facts, what mortal in the 

[285] 



286 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


world is there that I, regarding his body, may love? Nay 
the little puppy, the little kid will prove much purer and 
cleaner. 

But I turn my consideration to the souls of men; what 
animal do I find more treacherous, more vile, more deceit¬ 
ful than man ? I set aside those portions of his spirit which 
are subject to disorders, and would love his intellect alone. 
But what intelligence is sincerer than divine intelligence, 
or loftier, or more unassailable, or really capable of teaching 
truth? The libraries are stored with books, yet souls are 
impoverished for want of learning. Men copy; they no 
longer compose. Talent is not lacking, but something else. 
What is there, then, that I may hope for from the society 
of men? They are garrulous, greedy, false and scheming. 
Show me, even in this century so flourishing and with 
opportunity so useful as the invention of printing offers, 
one man who has discovered even a hundredth part of 
those things which Theophrastus discovered, and I give 
him my hand. Rather, by their trifles, their ov and their ov, 
they confound this fair and beautiful invention. 

But neither is this association with men profitable for 
these very ends, because inventions are the result of the 
tranquil life, free from annoyance and given to purposeful 
meditation as well as to experimentation. All of these are 
the product of solitude and not of the society of men, as we 
may read of Archimedes. Personally, of sixty discoveries 
I have made, perchance, I owe not even twenty to others, 
or to my associations. I would not wish to be branded for 
false should I say they were somewhat fewer. I confess 
that in mathematics I received a few suggestions, but very 
few, from brother Niccolo . 1 Yet how many have come to 



QUALITY OF CONVERSATION 


287 


naught! For a large number I am indebted to other 
sources; yet to this very day I owe much to that secret 
virtue of a Hash of intuition or to something even more 
potent. % 

What, therefore, have I to do with men? 

Another argument is this: fortunate men disdain my 
society; I myself have no need for the company of the 
wretched, for should I desire to offer them soothing words, 
I could not correct their condition; if I exhibit any irrita¬ 
tion, they take it amiss. Old men are, besides, morose, 
melancholy, complaining, and odious; what profit will 
accrue from the words of such as these? 

The brevity of our mortal life is also a claim. Our days 
are seventy years and among the stronger, eighty. As but 
little is left for trifles, what part of my day should I give 
to these ? Should I take the time of meditation ? A breach 
of right and duty! The time of writing? Foolish, to re¬ 
turn to concerns from which I had once been able to escape 
—the very murder of my leisure! Should I subtract the 
time from my bodily exercise, from sleep, from my domes¬ 
tic affairs? 

Then with whom should I spend this time? With 
friends? Useless, for they desire the product of my labors 
and not conversations! With others? If with the experi¬ 
enced, they will perchance think they know much more 
than I. And if indeed they do, there will be argument 
concerning definition. Suppose I should wish to learn 
their views? or to instruct them? Impudence and extrava¬ 
gance will it be to impart thus freely your knowledge that 
you may get in return nothing but hatred! 

Should I associate with one man alone or with many? 



288 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


If with many, to what end? If with one, think you that 
he will be your god? You will so move others to envy 
that you may be forced again to descend into the stormy sea 
of unpopularity. Many may address you at the same time, 
yet secretly they will deride you; you will expose yourself 
to many events with no profit to yourself. 

In the count of that which is of highest importance, 
charm is a requisite for social intercourse, a pleasing manner 
for conversation—and from both of these the nature and 
habits of an old man are far removed. For all of which 
I summon no other witness than Aristotle himself. For 
these reasons I have ever been difficult in conversation; and 
this in turn became one of my excuses for not attending 
banquets. I do not, none the less, thrust away from myself 
the good, the just, and particularly those who call on my 
pity or who deserve well from me, nor do I deny the wise. 

But, you will say, man is a social animal and what will 
you accomplish by renouncing the kingdom of this world 
in this manner? What can it do for you? You boast of 
having powerful friends, or is this but an empty vaunt, or 
wherein is it to your advantage ? For there are those who 
give pleasure to these same friends of yours by dining with 
them, by gaiety and mirth; why should they desert these 
to take up with you ? What benefits do your studies beget 
if others put no faith therein? 

Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter . 2 

Finally if these relationships so useful to human nature 
be absent, you will undergo many discomforts; this I know 
can be held against me. But it does not escape me that 
many conditions seem hard and untenable which appear 
quite different when we come to deal with them, as, on 



QUALITY OF CONVERSATION 289 

the contrary, others seem easy and profitable which are 
otherwise difficult and unreasonable. 

And since this amenity of life is generally maintained 
by me, that is all that is necessary, when those are taken 
into account whom I have said I admit to my friendship, 
for they are enough, and are both more useful than a host 
of acquaintances and also more trustworthy . 3 



CHAPTER FIFTY-FOUR 


And This Is the Epilogue 

Well, then, I am now no longer troubled by imputation 
of falsehood, and am as one who has grown old in the love 
of truth, with which the love of God, the hope of immortal 
life, the possession of so much distinction and the advantage 
of wisdom are closely joined: which united good I am loath 
to confound by one false move. Let us leave that to those 
who are deceived in their ignorance, who rejoice in lying 
words, who exaggerate all they have heard, read or even 
seen, hoping thereby to be able to deceive. But will they, 
relying on some hope, make question concerning those 
things to the evidence of which they will subscribe not one 
jot of credence—though there be a thousand testimonies 
of one good man, or a thousand bearing witness? 

Nothing, accordingly, save a love of truth influences me: 
but men clearly do not think alike. They differ even as 
birds: for there are carnivorous birds and others of foul 
habits, as ravens and crows, which are busy with their greed, 
plunder, tricks and cruelty; there are still others of some¬ 
what better breed, as the eagle or the hawk, and these are 
fired too vehemently with arrogance and passion. What 
wonder, then, if such men give no consideration to these 
truths, although of such examples of fidelity to the truth 
the books of all historians, sacred as well as profane, are 
full; and instead of upholding those who are our oppo¬ 
nents, God and his whole creation arrayed with the saints, 

[290] 



AND THIS IS THE EPILOGUE 


29I 


sides with those who have true wisdom—a host as against 
a handful, true men against liars and the wise fools. 

This one measure ought to be a concern of princes, that, 
in accordance with ancient precedent they should punish 
with just penalties those who inveigh against the just and 
the learned. If they have neglected this, one man from 
all and for all—setting aside the fact that their power may 
be overturned—may exact it. 

For this reason, then, and not for the sake of self-glory 
did I in an earlier chapter array those references to my art . 1 
Can it be that some think me so senseless as to wish by 
this means to return to the burden of my cares ? 2 I did 
it that men, in so far as they can seek out the truth, may 
know me for such as I am—in a word, a teller of the truth, 
an upright man, and indebted for my powers to a divine 
spirit. 

Furthermore, human affairs are accomplished through 
skill, reason, counsel, inspiration, or because of favorable 
opportunity, or on violent impulse or by mere chance: skill 
is that practical knowledge such as the smith possesses; 
counsel is subordinated to the decision of men, who if they 
be not friends can be moved neither by any kindnesses nor 
by any swift experiments in force. Inspiration is a rara 
avis, nor has it ever been to anyone a source of satisfaction 
in every respect. Opportunity, especially when forseen, is 
good but this does not always clearly appear. As reason 
is the safest guide on well-known ground, and tested as 
well, so chance is bad; violent impulse, because of which 
one is at times plunged into trouble, is the worst, because 
it is foolish. For rational concerns, my handbook Actus is 
my guide; in affairs of divine import there is that flash of 



292 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


intuition to which one may allude but which cannot be 
described; and for all things more than mortal there is my 
attendant spirit which can neither be described nor alluded 
to and is not under my control. 



NOTES 



NOTES 


PROLOGUE 

1. Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, to whose famous Meditations or 
De Rebus Suis Cardan has reference. 

2. For the careers of these men see Chapter 35 of the Vita, 

3. Probably Flavius Josephus to whose writings Cardan so fre¬ 
quently refers. His life was entitled ’IcoarjJtou ( 3 u)<;. 

4. Galen (Claudius Galenus, 131-201), the celebrated Greek 
physician who in 165 a. d. settled at Rome. Jerome Cardan 
liked to think he resembled Galen in many respects, and indeed 
he did. Both men were above the intellectual level around 
them; both were boasters, both believers in dreams and omens, 
both deficient in personal courage. Both sought to combat bad 
practice in medicine; both were devoted disciples of Hippocrates 
and wrote commentaries on the works of the Father of Medi¬ 
cine. Galen wrote two treatises on the books he himself had 
written and on the order in which they were to be taken. 
Those treatises he called De Libris Propriis, Cardan wrote 
three works of precisely the same kind, and gave them the 
same title. 


CHAPTER ONE 

1. Pope Urban III (1185-87) was Umberto, of the noble Milanese 
family of the Crivelli. He was created Cardinal by Lucius III 
in 1182 and Archbishop of Milan in 1185. On November 25, 
1185, Lucius died at Verona, and the Archbishop was elected 
to succeed him on the same day. He was crowned on Decem¬ 
ber first. This haste was probably due to fear of imperial 
interference. The Catholic Encyclopedia, 

2. Pope Celestine IV was Godfredo Castiglione, a native of Milan, 
and a nephew of Urban III. He was made Cardinal by Gregory 

[295] 



296 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


IX and succeeded him October 25, 1241, at the height of the 
papal warfare with the Emperor Frederick II. He died after a 
reign of fifteen days. Ibid . 

CHAPTER TWO 

1. Cardan in De Consolatione, Liber III, Opera, Tom. I, p. 619, 
says: “On the 24th day of September in the year /50/ I was 
brought forth half dead.” All editions of the Vita give 1500. 
In his horoscope Cardan gives the date and hour of his birth as 
September 24, 1501, at 6.40, the hora noctis prima being six 
o’clock according to the old Italian method of reckoning. 

2. Ptolemcei de Astrorum Indicium, etc., Critical Commentary on 
Ptolemy’s Treatise on the Heavenly Bodies, combined with 
Twelve Specimen Genitures, by Jerome Cardan. This work 
was published in four books, together with the twelve horo¬ 
scopes, the eighth of which is Cardan’s own. 

3. Mars and Saturn are the malefics. 

4. Virgo is a human sign. 

5. Cardan’s horoscope shows the Sun in Libra, in which position 
it is said to be in its fall. 

6. Augustus was born September 23, 63 b. c. In De Utilitate 
Cardan gives September 23 as his birthday, and by modern 
reckoning 6.40 p. m. would still be September 23, whereas 
under the old Italian style it would be the first hour of the 
following day, i. e., September 24. 

7. Cardan can scarcely be referring to any but Columbus’s first 
voyage (classem primum emiserunt) yet if this is the case, he 
has missed the date by more than seven weeks. Columbus set 
sail from Palos on August 3, 1492. 

CHAPTER THREE 

1. Chiara (Clara) Micheria: She was a young widow in her 
thirties with three children when she went to live with Fazio 
Cardano, who was fifty-six. They were not married for many 
years, if ever. Cardan gives no information regarding any 
marriage in the Vita, implying only that his parents, except for 



NOTES 


297 


one period of separation, maintained a home together until the 
father’s death. 


CHAPTER FOUR 

1. Cardan, about to set down an orderly and chronological account 
of his life, compares the method he has adopted with that of 
Suetonius, who does not follow the chronological order in his 
Lives, but groups facts according to their nature, Cardan’s own 
plan, to be sure, if the Vita be taken as a whole. His comment, 
therefore, must apply to this chapter only. 

2. The date of this event nearly corresponds with the date of a 
plague of syphilis which appeared in Naples in 1495 and swept 
all over Europe, invading court and camp alike. (See Fra- 
castoro’s poem, Syphilis ). Cardan’s description, however, of the 
effect the pestilence had on him corresponds more closely to the 
plague described in a work by Girolamo Mercuriale: De Peste 
in Universum prcesertim vero de Veneta et Patavina (On the 
Plague Generally and Especially in the Localities of Venice and 
Padua, Basle 1576). In Chapter Twenty-nine (De carhunculo 
pestilenti) Mercuriale mentions, among many other symptoms 
“carbuncles on all parts of the body,” and adds that “many of 
widely separated localities fell victims at the same time, German 
peoples at the same time as those of Italy in Venice, Padua, 
Milan and Calabria.” He does not, however, mention any 
plague in Milan in 1501, but says: “There was a great epidemic 
in 1528 when, according to the most noted writers, a third part 
of the people perished.” This plague Cardan mentions later in 
this same chapter. 

3. Old Fazio Cardan was wont to declare that he, like Socrates and 
others, was favored with the society and advice of a familiar 
spirit or demon which attended him for thirty-eight years. 

4. On May 14, 1509, the French defeated the Venetians near the 
River Adda, and celebrated their triumph in Milan. 

5. Accademia Ticinensis, now the University of Pavia. It was 
founded in 1361 on the site of an old and famous law school 
which had existed there from the 10th century. The present 



298 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


building dates from 1490, thirty years before Cardan entered, 
with considerable later additions. Columbus is said to have 
been a student at Pavia at one time. 

6. Padua was for centuries a center of culture, and its university, 
founded in 1222, rivaled that of Bologna in attracting students 
from all parts of Europe. Galileo was a teacher there in 
1592-1610. 

7. The Venetian Degree in Arts: This degree was not in high 
favor in Italy; it was sought by those who could not afford 
much expense for schooling. 

8. On many occasions and in many works Cardan affirms his 
rectorship, and just as often and in as many places he asserts 
his devotion to the truth, so the statement that he was rector 
must be accepted, although in the extant records of the Uni¬ 
versity of Padua there is no mention of his name in the lists 
of rectors. From 1508 to 1515 the University had been closed 
because of the wars. From 1515-25 no rectorships are recorded, 
and for 1526 only a pro-rector was appointed. Cardan’s term, 
then, must have been an irregular or pseudo rectorship not 
formally acknowledged. 

9. College of Physicians of Milan: i. e., Medical Association. 

10. Xenodochium: the poorhouse of the workhouse. An establish¬ 
ment whose doors were open to the houseless stranger, main¬ 
tained from religious motives by various communities in obedi¬ 
ence to admonition in Matthew 25:34-40. 

11. Prelate Archinto: Filippo Archinto, Cardan’s first patron, a 
young man of excellent birth and breeding, of wealth and 
wisdom. He was Cardan’s life-long friend. Later he became 
Bishop of Milan. 

12. Brissac, Marechal Cosse, high officer to the King of France. 
Some years later he offered Cardan a thousand crowns a year 
to become, ostensibly, his physician; but what he really sought 
to have at hand was the physician’s mathematical ingenuity. 
Brissac, albeit a gallant, had taste and scholarship, and quickly 
recognized Cardan’s talents. Lodovico (Louis) Birague was 
commander-in-chief of the forces of the French king in Italy. 



NOTES 


299 


13. Francesco della Croce: For his part in Cardan’s career see 
Chapter 40 of the Vita . 

14. Cardinal Morone: Cardan’s life-long friend and patron. He 
was a man of great learning, became Cardinal, stood in high 
favor with the Pope, and was in 1546 president of the Council 
of Trent, with which his name is famously connected. 

15. Pope Paul III, Alexander Farnese. As Cardinal he had begun 
to build the splendid Farnese Palace at Rome. 

16. Prince d’lston: Alphonso d’Avalos. He was a liberal patron of 
arts and letters, a noted gallant and a great dandy, and very 
popular as Governor of Milan. Cardan mentions him again as 
host to a hunting' party at which the physician was a guest. 

17. Vesalius: Andreas Vesalius, the founder of modern anatomy, 
and a pioneer of comparative anatomy and race craniology. He 
was born at Brussels in 1514, studied the classics at Louvain, 
and medicine at Cologne, Paris, Louvain and Padua whither he 
went attracted by the fresher and more liberal scientific spirit 
of North Italy. He lectured on anatomy at Louvain, Venice, 
and Padua, where he was Professor in 1537-44, and at Pisa and 
Bologna. In 1544 he was made physician-in-chief to Charles V 
and after the latter’s death, to Philip II at Madrid. After a pil¬ 
grimage to Jerusalem (undertaken at the Emperor’s suggestion 
to expunge some experimental indiscretions in anatomy!) he 
was invited to Padua to occupy again the chair of anatomy, but 
died on the way home of exhaustion following a shipwreck, in 
1564. 

18. To cure the asthma of John Hamilton, Archbishop of St. An¬ 
drews and brother to James Hamilton, Regent of Scotland. 

19. Henry II of France and Emperor Charles V were then at war. 
Cardan was a subject of the emperor. 

20. Cardan probably means Mary of Guise. 

21. Cardan’s son Giambattista was executed for murder. 

22. To become a member of the faculty of medicine at the Univer¬ 
sity of Bologna, reputed to be the oldest in Europe. 

23. Cardan does not tell us exactly why he was imprisoned, but it 
was probably on a charge of impiety. He had given bond to 



3 00 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


the extent of 1800 gold crowns as security for being his own 
jailer. 

24. Don John of Austria annihilated the Turkish fleet at Lepanto 
on October 7, 1571. 

25. Gregory XIII. 

CHAPTER FIVE 

1. There are two well known portraits of Cardan. The one found 
facing the title page of Spon’s great 1663 edition of Opera Omnia 
shows a man of pleasing and serene features, and answers rather 
well the description Cardan has left us of himself. It was made 
in his 68thi year. The other, a wood cut, which appears on the 
title page of Morley’s Life of Girolamo Cardano, shows a much 
younger man with a somewhat troubled countenance. Cardan 
was thirty-eight when this was made, and bitter because of the 
disesteem in which his scholarship was held. Around the me¬ 
dallion runs the legend: “In Patria Nemo Propheta Acceptus.” 
It was originally prefixed to his book, Practica Arithmetics . 

CHAPTER SIX 

1. Cardan omits the long illness in his eighth year which was 
caused by eating green grapes. See Chapter 4. 

2. Asclepiades, of Bithynia, was a physician at Rome in the 2d 
Century a. d. One of his treatments was to place the patient 
in a sort of huge cradle rocked up and down by slaves. 

3. A repetition of statements made earlier in this same chapter 
with slight variations of detail. 

4. Pleasure consists in the absence of pain, i. e., the indolentia of 
Cicero. 

5. Laboravi etiam amore heroico: perhaps Weltschmerzl 

CHAPTER EIGHT 

1. Squalus: a kind of ray fish not otherwise identified. 

2. Perhaps Cardan is referring to an Italian game of his own day, 
but remarking his devotion to everything Galen had to say, 
one is reminded of Galen’s II eg! tou 5 ia Mixgag Scpcugag 
Pupvacnou (On Ball-playing as an Exercise), a masterly state- 



NOTES 


3 °i 


ment of the true principles of exercise. The best of all exer¬ 
cises, he says in this treatise, are those which combine bodily 
exertion with mental reaction, such as hunting and ball-play. 
But ball-play has this advantage over hunting that its cheapness 
puts it within reach of the very poorest, while even the busiest 
man can find time for it. It exercises every part of the body, 
legs, hands, and eyesight alike, and at the same time gives pleas¬ 
ure to the mind. . . . There is no doubt that Cardan had this 
treatise in mind. 

3. It is not clear just what Cardan means by this “exercise” which 
he calls politura chcirtarum, and which Hefele translates “Das 
Polieren von Flatten” 

4. Cardan becomes so rashly enthusiastic about his system of 
fifteens that he neglects to take account! 

5. Henry Morley in his biography of Cardan says, “J erome amused 
himself with the manufacture of a little burlesque sketch of the 
philosophy of victuals, which may be taken as a satire upon 
some of his own graver generalizations.” The old physician 
was no doubt “writing after supper, with a twinkle in his eye.” 

CHAPTER NINE 

1. Herostratus, the Ephesian, who, in order to immortalize himself, 
set fire to the temple of Diana at Ephesus on the same night that 
Alexander the Great was born, b. c. 356. The Ephesians passed 
a decree condemning his name to oblivion, but this only in¬ 
creased his notoriety and certainty of obtaining his object. 

2. Horace, Odes III, 29, line 1 and lines 41-48. 

Tyrrhena re gum progenies: (Maecenas) “sprung from Tuscan 
kings,” is the first line of the ode. Dryden’s translation of lines 

41-48 is as follows: 

“Happy the man, and happy he alone, 

He who can call to-day his own: 

He who, secure within, can say, 

To-morrow do thy worst, for I have lived to-day! 

Be fair or foul, or rain or shine: 

The joys I have possessed, in spite of fate, are mine; 



3 02 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


Not Heaven itself upon the past has power, 

But what has been, has been, and I have had my hour.” 

3. “To be content that times to come should only know there was 
such a man, not caring whether they knew more of him, was a 
frigid ambition in Cardan.” Sir Thomas Browne: Urn Burial, 5. 

CHAPTER TEN 

1. Catullus, 8, 3: 

“So bright, so white, the suns that shone before ...” 

2. Boasts Cardan’s house of this great Cardan’s name, 

Whose wisdom wide surpasseth all his age for fame. 

CHAPTER TWELVE 

1. Andrea Camuzio, one of the most illustrious physicians of the 
period. 

2. Duke of Milan: Francesco Sforza II, the last of the Sforzas. 

3. Mary of Hungary, sister of the Emperor Charles V, Queen of 
the Netherlands and Ruler of the Low Countries. She was 
called to Belgium by her brother, where she reigned for over 
twenty-four years at Brussels with great intelligence and firm¬ 
ness. 

4. Garamantes: Herodotus, in Book IV, 183, where he describes 
the nation of the Garamantes, does not make this statement 
about them, but rather, in 184, about the Atarantes who “dwell 
ten days’ journey from the Garamantes.” His remark is, “These 
people (i. e., the Atarantes), when the sun is exceedingly hot, 
curse and most foully revile him, for that his burning heat af¬ 
flicts their people and their land.” 

CHAPTER THIRTEEN 

1. Tvw'&i o>e autov: “Know thyself,” the saying of Thales of Mi¬ 
letus, one of the seven wise men. 

2. “Yet vengeance is sweeter to me than life itself.” 

3. “Our nature is prone to evil.” 

4. Like many of the humanists and their disciples, Cardan knew 
Greek literature largely through Latin translations. It is doubt- 



NOTES 


303 


£ul whether he ever read Aristotle in the original, thoroughgoing 
student of Aristotle though he was. His citation of Aristotle in 
the Latin rather than the Greek seems to point to this fact: 
“Homo solitarius aut bestia aut deus” (The solitary man par¬ 
takes of the nature of the beasts or of the gods). In chapter 53 
he discourses on the reasons why he prefers solitude. 

5. Ranconet more than any* other Frenchman won Cardan’s deep¬ 
est affection, and he declared that this friendship alone made 
worth while his visit to France. 

CHAPTER FOURTEEN 

1. Marco Antonio Bragadino: a Venetian General (1520-1571). He 
was governor of Cyprus when the Turks besieged it. He made 
an extraordinary defense and when finally food gave out and 
only seven casks of powder were left, Bragadino surrendered, 
but obtained from Mustafa Pasha an agreement whereby the 
people of Cyprus were to retain their liberty. The garrison and 
leaders were to be sent to Venice, but Mustafa, breaking his 
word, took Bragadino to Constantinople, had him flayed alive 
and sent his skin to various cities in Asia Minor. This inhuman 
treatment is attributed to Bragadino’s unwillingness to abjure 
the Catholic faith. 

2. The grief to which Cardan is evidently referring here and in the 
following incoherent lament, is the profound despair which he 
suffered upon the execution of his eldest son, Giambattista. Mad 
with the pain of it, he was never able thereafter to refrain from 
including in almost everything he wrote wild expressions of his 
sorrow. 

The miracle of the emerald is recounted in Chapter 43 of 
the Vita. 

3. Cardan burned many books and monographs, left 138 printed, 
and 92 in manuscript, according to the Vita . 

4. In 1562 the Accademia degli Affidati was founded at Pavia, and 
at once became famous throughout all Italy. Within a few 
years its membership included the Cardinals of highest rank, 
some of the princes and kings of Europe, and the Emperor him¬ 
self, Philip II. 


304 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


5. Horace: Epistulae I, 1, 41: “To fly from vice is virtue.” 

6. Matteo Corti: Professor of the Theory of Medicine at Padua, 
1524-1530. He was Cardan’s teacher at one time, and encour¬ 
aged him constantly. He lectured also at Florence, Bologna and 
Pisa. 

7. It was to this statement that Gabriel Naude, Cardan’s arch-critic, 
and editor of the Vita, took such exception. De Vita Propria, 
however, seems to bear out the accuracy of Cardan’s declaration. 
Except for minor discrepancies, plainly accidental, he is utterly 
consistent. 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN 

1. A college friend of Cardan’s with whom he had been wont to 
discuss the possibility of a future existence. Years after Cardan 
declared that he enjoyed a spiritual visitation from this friend 
who had died while still a young man. 

2. Another college friend. While still a student Cardan had writ¬ 
ten some fifty sheets of mathematical commentaries, which this 
Ottaviano lost for him. Later Scotto, inheriting a printshop in 
Venice, became his first publisher. 

3. See Chapter 40 (1) of the Vita for an account of the cure of 
this man. 

4. Francesco Sfondrato: One of Cardan’s firmest and most power¬ 
ful friends. As senator he was influential with the Emperor 
and later became Governor of Sienna and Cardinal. For Car¬ 
dan’s account of the cure of his son see Chapter 40 (1) of the 
vita . Cardan forecast Sfondrato’s horoscope in “De Exemplis 
Centum Geniturorum LXXX.” See Opera Omnia. Tom. V, 
p. 495. 

5. Andrea Alciati: The great jurist of his age (1492-1550). In¬ 
troduced the study of Jurisprudence into France by a series of 
lectures at Bourges, 1528-32. He was one of the Professors at 
the University of Pavia when Cardan was summoned to the 
Chair of Medicine there. 

6. Francesco Alciati: Heir of the preceding. He secured Cardan’s 
appointment to the University of Bologna in 1562, and was faith- 



NOTES 


305 


ful to the end of Cardan’s life, to the close friendship existing 
between them. 

7. Giovanni Morone: One of the most notable men of Milan. His 
father had been chancellor to the last Sforzas, and later had dip¬ 
lomatically adjusted his relations to Bourbon. His son was Car¬ 
dinal Morone. See Chapter 4, Note 14. 

8. Pietro Donato Cesio: A patron of Cardan’s later life. He was 
his protector and supporter at Rome. 

9. Fernando Gonzaga: Successor to D’Avalos. He became Gover¬ 
nor of Milan in 1546, and, though a harsh man, was always 
friendly to Cardan. 

10. Cardinal Borromeo: One of the finest and most upright charac¬ 
ters in the church and state in the 16th Century. Cardan had 
cured his mother, and Borromeo never relaxed his kindly pro¬ 
tection over the physician. He was later canonized for his great 
virtue. See also “Eloges des Eveques,” Antoine Godeau, Paris, 
1665. Eloge 98. 

“It may be said of St. Carlo Borromeo that he was an abridge¬ 
ment of all the bishops given by the Lord to his church in the pre¬ 
ceding ages; and that in him were collected all the episcopal vir¬ 
tues that had been distributed among them.” 

11. Sir John Cheke (1514-1557) “taught Cambridge and King Ed¬ 
ward Greek.” Regius Professor of Greek at Cambridge in 1540. 
He was then Fellow of St. John’s, and afterwards Public Orator, 
and Provost of King’s. In 1542 Roger Ascham, writing on the 
flourishing state of classical studies in Cambridge, said, “it is 
Cheke’s labours and example that have lighted up and continue 
to sustain this learned ardour.” See Sandays: A History of 
Classical Scholarship . 

12. It was at Buonafede’s suggestion that Cardan established his 
first practice at Sacco. 

13. Guillaume Duchoul: French antiquarian of Lyons whose works 
on military engineering and discipline among the Romans, and 
on Roman religion were translated into Italian, Latin and 
Spanish. 


30 6 THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 

14. Giampietro Albuzzio: Fellow-professor with Cardan at Pavia. 
He had also, like Cardan, started his career at Gallarate; at the 
age of twenty-five he was invited to lecture on Rhetoric at Pavia, 
where he stayed for forty years, though he received many calls 
to other universities. He was a close friend in sorrow, for it 
was to Giampietro Albuzzio that Cardan poured out his grief 
after his son’s execution. To him also he dedicated a book, “De 
Morte,” a dialog upon a sorrowful theme. 

15. Matelica: one of the small states of the church. 

CHAPTER SIXTEEN 

1. “He had a rugged love of truth and justice; he remembered bene¬ 
fits, and when affronted could afford deliberately to abstain from 
seizing any offered opportunity of vengeance. He governed his 
pen better than his tongue, and carefully restrained himself from 
carrying into his books the heat he could not check in oral dis¬ 
putation. He left his enemies unnamed, and though he now 
and then is found devoting some impatient sentences to writ¬ 
ers who had treated his opinions rudely, yet it seems at first 
sight absolutely wonderful that a man so sensitive and so irasci¬ 
ble, so beset by harsh antagonists as the weak-bodied Jerome, 
should have filled so many volumes with philosophy and so few 
pages with resentment. The wonder ceases when a closer scru¬ 
tiny displays the difference in intellectual and moral weight be¬ 
tween Cardan and most of his opponents.” 

Henry Morley, Girolamo Cardano, i. 128. 

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 

1. University of Bologna: Said to have been originally founded in 
the 5th Century. It acquired a European reputation as a School 
of Jurisprudence under Irnerius who introduced the study of 
Roman Law in the nth Century, and attracted students from 
all Italy and western Europe, the enrollment being from three 
to five thousand. The study of medicine and philosophy was 
later introduced; a faculty of Theology was established by Pope 
Innocent VI. Anatomy of the human frame was first taught 
here in the 14th Century. Galvanism was discovered here by 



NOTES 


307 


Galvani in 1789. It is a remarkable fact that the University of 
Bologna has had several women professors. Laura Bassi lec¬ 
tured on mathematics and physics; Madame Manzolina on Anat¬ 
omy, and from 1 1794 to 1817 Clothilda Fambroni was professor 
of Greek. The present buildings, begun in 1562 when Cardan 
was invited to Bologna, were erected chiefly through the gener¬ 
osity of Cardinal Borromeo. They are still standing. 

2. “Certainly,” says Henry Morley in his biography of Cardan, 
“there was no lack of rivalry and heartburn among the profes¬ 
sors who were in too many cases emulous and envious of each 
other. Cardan had a great name and not a winning nature.” 
Vol. ii, p. 280. 

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 

1. Cardan’s reference to these examples of the jeweler’s art reminds 
one that though Cardan and Benvenuto Cellini were contempo¬ 
raries their paths apparendy never crossed. One would like 
to think Cardan’s jewels, and wrought gold and silver articles 
were the handiwork of the Florentine. 

2. Luigi Pulci, Florentine Poet: 1432-87, Cardan’s favorite. 

CHAPTER NINETEEN 

1. In Cardan’s Liber De Ludo Alece, a treatise on games of chance, 
he declares that the stake should be the only excuse for gam¬ 
bling; otherwise there is no compensation for loss of time, 
thought, etc., which could be far better engaged in other di¬ 
versions. 


CHAPTER TWENTY 

1. Horace, Satires: I, 3, 9-15. 

One mass of inconsistence, oft he’d fly 
As if the foe were following in full cry, 

While oft he’d stalk with a majestic gait, 

Like Juno’s priest in ceremonial state. 

Now he would keep two hundred serving men, 
And now a bare establishment of ten. 

Of kings and tetrarchs with an equal’s air 



3°8 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


He’d talk; next day he’d breathe the hermit’s prayer: 

“A table with three legs, a shell to hold 
My salt, and clothes, though coarse, to keep out cold.” 

CoNINGTON. 

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO 

1. In 1494 Charles VIII of France undertook a campaign against 
Naples, and thereby plunged the Italian states into a long series 
of wars. The Milanese territory was harassed by tumults and 
battles. In 1525 the battle of Pavia made the Emperor Charles 
V arbiter of the fortunes of Italy. These political vicissitudes, 
together with the vast upheaval of the Reformation, made up 
the troubled background of Cardan’s century. 

2. Avicenna: Abu Ali al Hosain Ibn Abdallah, called also Ibn 
Sina, and in Chapter 45 of the Vita Cardan calls him Hazen. 
Avicenna, the Arabian philosopher of the nth Century (980- 
1037) holds the foremost place in Arabian medicine. His “Book 
of the Canon of Medicine,” when translated into Latin, over¬ 
shadowed the authority of Galen himself for four centuries. He 
taught at Ispahan, combining instruction in medicine with the 
exposition of Aristotle. 

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE 

1. Paul of iEgina, a celebrated Greek physician and medical writer 
of the seventh century a. d. Few details of his life are known 
except that he traveled much, thereby acquiring the reputation 
of “medicus ambulans.” Of his works, one is extant: De Re 
Medica Libri VII. 

2. This story is supposed to illustrate his adage, “multa modica 
faciunt unum satis.” The crumbling bits of plaster brought on 
the collapse of the whole ceiling! 

3. The Latin texts are all very, obscure and very much confused at 
this point, and it is quite possible that the interpretation of the 
entire paragraph is therefore at fault. 

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR 

1. This street still bears the same name as in Cardan’s day, and 
may be found near the Porta Ticinese, 



NOTES 


309 


2. The Via dei Maini no longer exists. It was possibly in that 
region around the castle (seat of the Visconti and Sforza) which 
gave place to the park or the arena built by Napoleon I. 

3. Formerly in the southeast) quarter of the town of Pavia not far 
from the Arsenal. 

4. S. Maria di Venere: Possibly located on the site of an early 
temple of Venus, whose cult was popular in Pavia before the 
Christian Era. 

5. S. Maria in Pertica: in northeast quarter near the castle at Pavia. 

6. This may be the same as the present Via Gombruti, running 
north and south just west of the center of the city of Bologna. 

7. In southeast quarter of Bologna. 

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX 

1. A full account of Aldobello Bandarini, Cardan’s father-in-law, is 
found in Book iii of De Utilitate ex Adversis Capienda. He was 
an innkeeper, a man-about-town, something of a swashbuckler 
and military roustabout, and given to lavish, and perhaps noisy 
hospitality. This may account, perhaps, for Cardan’s misgivings 
when he saw mine host Bandarini and his numerous progeny 
moving in next door. 

2. This thought need not reflect too darkly upon Jerome’s character 
in view of the times. Compare the Autobiography of Benve¬ 
nuto Cellini (1500-1571) for the license of sixteenth century life 
in Northern Italy. 

3. “Mirum dictu ut flatim e gallinaceo factus sim gallus.” Cardan 
gives a full account of his experience in De Utilitate ex Adversis 
Capienda, Book ii, Chapter X: De Veneris Impotentia. Tom. 
II, p. 76 of the Opera Omnia . The citation given is from 
De Libris Propriis. 

4. Cardan’s views on marriage may be found in De Uxore Du- 
cenda. Chapter III of Book IV of De Utilitate ex Adversis 
Capienda . Tom. II, p. 237, Spon’s Edition. 

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN 

1. Crantor: a philosopher of Soli, among the pupils of Xenocrates, 
300 b. c. From one of his works, Ilepi Ilevfloug, Cicero 



3io 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


drew largely in writing the lost treatise, De Consolatione, on the 
death of his daughter Tullia. 

2. Philandrier: French architect, scholar and art critic, 1505-1565. 
The work referred to here is his Annotationes in Vitruvium. 

CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE 

1. John Hamilton, natural brother to Earl of Arran, James Hamil¬ 
ton, who was made regent of Scodand in 1543 to act during 
Mary’s minority. In 1547, this John Hamilton was appointed 
Archbishop of St. Andrew’s, and virtually manager of all that 
was difficult in Scottish affairs in that period. 

2. For Birague and Brissac see Chapter 4. In Chapter 32 Cardan 
says Brissac wanted to employ him, not as a physician but as 
a mathematician and engineer. 

3. Orontius: M. Fine, a noted French mathematician of the 16th 
century; known also as Or once, although the Latinized form of 
his name is more common. 

4. Legrand was one of the physicians of the French king; Cardan, 
Latinizing his name, calls him Magienus. 

5. Fernel was professor of medicine in Paris and' first court physi¬ 
cian. Jacques de la Boe was Vesalius’ teacher. Cardan calls 
them Pharnelius and Silvius. 

6. The title here referred to is Defender of the Faith, which Car¬ 
dan refused to acknowledge as a prerogative of Edward VI, in¬ 
asmuch as he himself was a faithful subject of the Pope. 

CHAPTER THIRTY 

1. Perhaps this made an impression on Cardan as the one humiliat¬ 
ing or embarrassing experience in his otherwise triumphal re¬ 
turn journey from Scotland to Milan, on which he had received 
highest honors at every turn. 

2. The Wolf: Possibly Delfino, “hie nothus.” 

The Fox: Cardan’s rival or concursor, the “vir callidus.”' 

The Sheep: Fioravanti, the tool of the other two. 

There is some confusion in Cardan’s application of these epi¬ 
thets, so that it is not strange Morley’s account does not seem 
accurate. 



NOTES 


3 11 

3. In a more elaborate account of this incident in his Parali- 
pomena, Liber III, Chap. VI, Cardan adds that the ring was 
squared so that it could not roll. (Opera Omnia, Tom. X, 
p. 459.) 

4. Rome was demolished by the Constable of Bourbon, May 6, 
1527. Within a year and a half, the Eternal City had lost two- 
thirds of its population. It was the remaining years of the cen¬ 
tury rebuilding, and through the successive efforts of Popes Paul 
III, Julius III, Paul IV and Pius IV rose again a new city, yet 
even while Cardan lived there, from 1570 to 1576, it must have 
presented many devious ways to the unwary. 

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE 

1. Marcus iEmilius Scaurus—became stepson of Sulla, known for 
the lavish entertainments he gave while Curule Aedile in Rome 
in 58 b. c. 

Seneca, the Philosopher, tutor and adviser to Nero. 

Manius Acilius Glabrio: judge who presided at impeachment 
of Verres in 70 b. c. Consul in 67, and subsequently the suc¬ 
cessor of L. Lucullus in command of the war against Mithrida- 
tes, in which he was superseded by Pompey. 

2. Diepam iuxta Drudim fluvium: 

If Cardan means Dieppe—though just why Dieppe is hard 
to say—there is something wrong with the geography, for the 
Arques near Dieppe was never, apparently, called the Drudis. 

CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO 

1. Referring to the illustrious records of various members of the 
Brutus family. Cf. the legend of Lucius Junius Brutus. 

Gaius Mucius Scaevola who burned his right hand in the 
flame in the presence of King Porsena by whom he was then 
freed for his firmness. 

Gaius Fabricius, surnamed Luscinus: sent as a legate by Ro¬ 
man Senate to King Pyrrhus in 281 b. c. to treat for terms. 
Pyrrhus is said to have endeavored to bribe him by large offers 
which Fabricius, poor as he was, rejected with scorn. 

2. Henry II, then at war with the Emperor Charles V. 



312 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


3. From the English court which Cardan was visiting (under no 
contract) at that time. The royal hand was that of Edward VI. 

4. Morley questions whether Cardan may not mean “Dobbin” 
when he says, “asturconem obtulit, Angli eum appellant patria 
lingua Obinum” 

5. Then Governor of Milan. 

6. Cardan was a subject of the Emperor then a t war with France. 

7. What honors these may have been—at Padua and at Venice—I 
have been unable to discover. 

8. Chapter 47 gives a full account of this “Spiritus” which Cardan 
claims attended him. 

9. In Chapter 48 Cardan says that Andrea Alciati was wont to call 
him Vir Inventionum. That is, possibly, the cognomen he is 
thinking of. 

CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE 

1. You invite new indignities by tolerating the old. 

2. Horace: Sermones I, 6, 81. (My father) himself, a guardian 
true and faithful, was at my side even in the presence of my 
teachers .... 

3. Diarob cum Turbith: Turpeth. 

4. For unicorn’s horn see Bestiary of Philip de Thaun, in which 
the unicorn received his due praises. In Vulgar Errors, Book 
III, 23, Sir Thomas Browne discusses the questionable virtues of 
the horn. 

5. Horace, Sermones II, 8, 95: 

u Velut illis Canidia adflasset peior serpentibus Afris” 

“As if Canidia’s mouth had breathed an air 
Of viperous poison on the whole affair.” 

Cardan has substituted me for illis in his version of the citation. 

6. Pliny, Nat. Hist. XI: “oculos . . . serpentium catulis et hirundi- 
num pullis, si quis eruat, renasci tradunt.” (It is said that if 
any one destroys the eyes of the young of serpents and of swal¬ 
lows, they grow again.) “in ventre hirundinum pullis lapilli 
candido aut rubenti colore, qui chelidonii vocantur . . . reperi- 
untur.” (In the crop of the young of swallows small stones are 



NOTES 


313 


found of a white or red color which are called swallow-gems.) 

7. Perhaps Cardan is thinking of the following Aphorism: “Fever 
supervening on painful affections of the liver removes the pain.” 

CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR 

1. Cardan, though he had some knowledge of Latin in his boy¬ 
hood, never learned to write in that language until he was nine¬ 
teen or twenty years old. 

CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE 

1. Lodovico Ferrari: For the romantic story of this young man’s 
career with its truly Italian flavor, see Morley’s Life of Cardan, 
Vol. II, 265-269. Cardan himself wrote a sketch of the young 
man’s life. It was published for the first time in his Opera 
Omnia, 1663. It may be found in Tom. IX along with the Life 
of Alciati. 

2. Brief is life, old age is rare 

To him who flings restraint away; 

Then pray that all you prize as dear 
May shun satiety’s dull day. 

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN 

1. Juvenal: Sat, I, 15. 

I then have withdrawn my hand from wielding the ferule. 

CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT 

1. To keep him from coming to Bologna; see Chapter 30. 

CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE 

1. The prejudices of the age against the newer methods of anatomy 
were violent, as the career of Andreas Vesalius testifies. His 
treatise The Fabric of the Human Body was attacked by all the 
conservatives in the field of medicine, and his practical experi¬ 
ments shocked society. 

2. Intellectual interest directed toward many points is less efficient 
for concentration on one or another single point. 

3. Martial: 4, 29, 8. 



3i4 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


“Persius’ one book’s more celebrated far 
Than Marsus’ bulky Amazonian War.” 

4. Horace: Odes III, 30. The word order demanded by the meter 
is . . . Scandet cum tacita virgine pontifex . Herbert Grant’s 
translation is as follows: 

“Long as the priest the Capitol ascends 
And her chaste steps the silent vestal bends.” 

CHAPTER FORTY 

1. II upetov sjti ajraapcp P&tiov ysveadai rj ajtaajiov ejti jtuQetcp. 

Convulsioni febrem advenire praestat quam convulsionem febri. 
It is better that a fever succeed to a convulsion than a convulsion 
to a fever. Hippocrates: Opera V, III, p. 715. 

2. Duke of Sessa, Gonsalvo Ferrante di Cordova, Governor of Mi¬ 
lan, appointed by Philip II to succeed Ferrante Gonzaga in 1558. 

3. Aetius, of Amida in Mesopotamia, a Greek physician of the sixth 
century a. d. who lived in Constantinople as imperial physician. 
He was the author of a great miscellany on pathology and diag¬ 
nosis in sixteen books. 

4. Oribasius, a native of Pergamum, and, in the fourth century 
A. d., physician and adviser of the Emperor Julian the Apos¬ 
tate. His medical works comprised seventy-two books of which 
twenty-two are preserved. He was banished by Valens in 363. 

5. Pliny, Natural History: 7, 25:25, f 92. 

CHAPTER FORTY-ONE 

1. Charcas: an early name for Bolivia. 

2. Parana: the region in central South America west of the Parana 
River, approximating the location of present day Matto Grosso. 
Cf. location of present state of Parana, Brazil. 

3. Acutia: name given to a region in central South America east of 
Parana River. Corresponds to present Goyaz or Minas Geraes. 

4. Caribana: on the Equator between Amazon and Orinoco Rivers, 
a little south of modern Guianas. Named from Indian tribes 
living there. 



5- Picora: a region south of the Amazon in the very heart of South 
America. 

6. Quiniram partem occidentaliorem: Can he mean Quivira? 
Bohun’s Geographical Dictionary of 1691 says: “Quivira is 
a province in North America between New Mexico, Mount 
Sual( P) and Florida, which was never conquered by any of the 
European nations, nor indeed thoroughly discovered. In Mer¬ 
cator’s Atlas (1633) Quivira Regnum is found on the west coast 
of North America about in the locality of present British Co¬ 
lumbia, which might account for the expression “partem occi¬ 
dentaliorem.” 

7. Cortereal: southern Labrador, named from Caspar Corterealis, a 
Portuguese gentleman supposed to have discovered this region 
about 1500. 

8. Estotilant: northern Labrador, which “seems to have derived its 
name from its lying more easterly than the rest of the province.” 
America by John Ogilby, 1671. 

9. Marata: a region, according to the Atlas of Mercator, in north¬ 
ern Mexico lying between Nova Granada and Nova Hispania. 

10. Antiscians: avttoxtoi: people on the other side of the equator, 
whose shadows are cast in the opposite direction. 

11. Laponiam: thus in all editions, yet I have taken the liberty of 
making it Iaponia, i. e., Japan, discovered in 1542. 

12. Binarchia: not known, unless the “double kingdom” may refer 
to China. 

13. An echo of the famous Ode (1:3) of Horace: 

nil mortalibus ardui est 
cadum ipsum petimus stultitia, neque 
per nostrum patimur scelus 
iracunda Jovem ponere fulmina. 

“Nay, scarce the gods, or heavenly climes 
Are safe from our audacious crimes: 

We reach at Jove’s imperial crown, 

And pull the unwilling thunder down.” 

/. Dry den. 



316 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


CHAPTER FORTY-TWO 

1. Returning from Scotland, through London in the summer of 
1552, Cardan waited on King Edward VI, whose horoscope he 
was professionally obliged to set down. The predictions therein 
failed for the most part, a fact which Cardan excused on the 
grounds that the state of affairs at the English Court, altogether 
involved in the insidious intrigues of Northumberland, had 
warned him that a mere perfunctory statement would be the 
only diplomatic move. 

2. For the Lament, see Chapter 50. 

3. Cyprus was lost to the Turks in 1570, an event which hastened 
the famous battle of Lepanto, 1571. 

4. Perhaps he refers to Tunis which in 1574 Don J°hn of Austria 
lost to the Turks. 

5. If I am reading the same treatise of Aristotle on the power of 
prevision to which Cardan refers, I find somewhat contradictory 
statements: “This power of prevision, then, occurs in any ordi¬ 
nary person, and not in the wisest.” Aristotle’s Psychology: 
On Divination: Chapter II. 

To this group of rhetorical “principles” or 
devices Cardan constandy refers. Of the first 
I have found no definition. Dilemma is the 
double proposition, or argument in which 
an adversary is pinned between two difficul¬ 
ties. The third is, of course, the same, trope . 
Amplificatio is Aristotle’s au§r)Tixd. Its ob¬ 
ject is to increase the rhetorical effect and 
importance of a statement by intensifying 
the circumstances of an object or action. Dia- 
lectica is, logical discussion by way of ques¬ 
tion or answer as in Aristotle. Splendor is 
a term of Cardan’s, possibly for intuition or 
direct insight. 

7. Alexander Sforza di Santafiore, uncle of Pope Paul III. Cardi¬ 
nal from 1565. 


6. doctrina crassa 
dilemma 
TQOJtog 
amplificatio 
splendor singularis 
dialectica 



NOTES 


317 


CHAPTER FORTY-THREE 

1. Romans 4: 18 and 22. 

2. Liber Quintus Theonoston , seu Hyperborarorum; the book is a 
dialogue, and, its theme is the life and happiness of souls after 
death. 

3. Pope Pius V. 

4. Not only is the Latin somewhat ambiguous at this point, but the 
example of a miraculous visitation is introduced in the form of 
a mere note, as if Cardan expected to expand further both the 
incident and the theme. 

CHAPTER FORTY-FOUR 

1. Cardan’s mathematical treatises are the only works out of the 
great bulk of his published writings that have enjoyed any last¬ 
ing attention. “Cardan’s Rule,” the general solution of the cubic 
equation, is mentioned—if not expounded—in modern algebras, 
and discussed by learned mathematical societies (e. g., Memoires 
de la Societe Royale des Sciences de Liege, 1900, contains a dis¬ 
cussion of “le cas irreductible de la formule de Cardan”). This 
“rule” was really the discovery of Niccolo Fontana, called Tar- 
taglia, but it was through Cardan’s efforts that it became a part 
of the body of mathematical science. Morley’s biography of Car¬ 
dan, chapters 12 and 13, tells a fascinating story of Cardan’s 
mathematical piracy. Professor Florian Cajori of the University 
of California gives us, however, a far less sentimental statement 
of the case in his History of Mathematics, an account which 
leaves Cardan rather in umbrage for his conduct in the trans¬ 
action. I fall rather between the two. “It was the practice in 
those days, and for two centuries afterward,” writes Mr. Cajori, 
“to keep discoveries secret, in order to secure by that means an 
advantage over rivals by proposing problems beyond their reach.” 
From this practice I find Cardan generally free, and he seems to 
have acted purely (if piratically) in the interests of science, 
whereas it was not to be expected that a man of Tartaglia’s 
rather crabbed nature would act thus disinterestedly. 

2. A most curious statement, if I have rightly interpreted “velut 



3i8 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


cur mille aleae in mille iactibus, si sint legitimae, necessario 
iaciunt monadem.” 

3. Liber de Aqua et AEthere. 

4. There exists a work supposedly of Galen entitled De Urinis, but 
it is of doubtful genuineness; also two other treatises, De Urinis 
Compendium, and De Urinis ex Hippocrate, Galeno et aliis 
quibusdam, which are spurious. 

5. Andrea Alciati; see Chapter 48 for this fact. 

CHAPTER FORTY-FIVE 

1. The Defense, entitled Actio Prima in Calumniatorem, was Car¬ 
dan’s reply to Julius Caesar Scaliger’s furious attack (in his Exer- 
citations ) upon De Subtilitate (see Introduction). Cardan never 
mentioned Scaliger’s name in his reply, the dignified and learned 
character of which gave him by far the best of the argument. 

2. Hyperchen\ The significance (overflow?) of this title is doubt¬ 
ful; the treatise is on an abstract philosophical theme. 

3. Cardan, in this essay on Socrates, appears to have taken the role 
of detractor, as if for the sake of an exercise in syllogizing, just 
as he espoused the cause of Nero in his Encomium Neronis. 

4. Oratio ad Cardinalem Alciatum, sive Tricipitis Geryonis, aut 
Canis Cerberi . 

5. The greater part of this commentary was on the medical works 
of Hippocrates. In Cardan’s opinion they were his best work, 
on which, together with his Arithmetic, he rested his assurance 
of lasting fame. He says he wrote them “to increase health 
among men.” 

6. Selected cases from those contained in Hippocrates’ Three Boo\s 
on Epidemics . The latter is now available in English in the 
Loeb translation, by W. H. S. Jones. 

7. Such a book does not appear in the Opera Omnia . There is, 
however, a dialogue entitled Antigorgias Dialogus seu De Recta 
Vivendi Ratione. It is a single writing, not in five parts as the 
list indicates, but there are five interlocutors: Socrates, Chaere- 
phon, Gorgias, Polus and Callicles. Opera Omnia Tom. I, 
p. 641. 



NOTES 


3*9 


8. Many of these manuscripts were printed for the first time in 
Spon’s edition of the Opera Omnia (Lyons 1663), and many of 
them are apparently lost. 

9. Memorialis is the title he gives the book, but it has apparently 
not been preserved, at least under that title. 

10. Ars Medica: Te^vr] ’IatQixf): of all of Galen’s works none was 
so much studied and commented upon as this; it was a general 
outline of Medicine. 

11. Hasen: Avicenna. 

12. De Malo Recentiorum Medicorum Medendi Uso: Cardan’s first 
published book. He said of it later: “I am ashamed to acknowl¬ 
edge that there are more than three hundred errors of my own 
making in the book, not counting the misprints.” 

13. Hieronimi C. Cardani Practica Arithmeticce et Mensurandi Sin¬ 
gulars. Printed by Bernardo Caluscho, Milan, 1539. A wood- 
cut of the author was prefixed with the legend “In Patria Nemo 
Propheta Acceptus,” and the work was prefaced by a verse about 
the book in alternate hexameters and pentameters as well as an 
advertising notice about himself to far-off scholars. This at¬ 
tracted the attention of Petreius of Nuremberg who subse- 
quendy printed Cardan’s Judicial Astronomy and his Algebra 
(Ars Magna), and reprinted his De Consolatione, through the 
courtesy of one Andrew Osiander who had taken an interest in 
Cardan’s work. 

14. Imprisonment in Bologna, perhaps for something he had written. 

15. Iliad VI, 236: “gold for bronze, the worth of an hundred oxen 
for the worth of nine.” 

16. Liber Artis Magnce sive de Regulis Algebraicis, 1545. 

17. The two books eventually grew to fifteen: Quindecim Libri 
Novce Geometrice. 

18. Musica: Divided into 5 Books: (1) General rules and principles; 
(2) Ancient music, rhythms, hymns, choruses and dances; (3) 
Music of Cardan’s own time; (4) Mode of composing songs and 
counterpoint; (5) Structure and use of musical instruments. The 
style is said to be individual and interesting. 

19. De Animi Immortalitate: “a collection of extracts from Greek 



3 20 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


writers which Julius Csesar Scaliger with justice calls a confused 
farrago of other men’s learning.” Waters says that it is the one 
work of Cardan’s in which materials for a charge of impiety 
might most easily be found. 

20. Proxeneta, seu de Prudentia civili . 

21. Horace: Ars Poetica, 333. “Poets wish to profit or to please.” 
Cardan has written et .. .et for aut ... aut. 

22. A favorite proverb of Cardan’s: “A lion is known by his claws.” 

23. Paralipomena: “things omitted.” This work Waters calls “the 
last fruit off an old tree.” Morley: “a final heaping up, before 
he died, of all the chips that remained in his workshop.” The 
collection included works on Algebra, Medicine, Natural His¬ 
tory, Mechanics and Speculative Philosophy. They fill almost 
the entire 10th volume of the Opera Omnia, and in that edition 
also appeared in print for the first time. 

24. Cardan apparently means his book On the Best Way of Life: 
De Optimo Vitce Genere, mentioned at the beginning of the 
above discussion. 

25. The group of his carefully written works. 

26. This book: the De Vita Propria Liber. 

27. The Ethics, probably. There is a break in the thought at this 
point and the Latin text offers considerable difficulty. Undoubt¬ 
edly some sentences or phrases are missing. 

28. The Politics, probably. 

29. The work of Hippocrates: Regimen in Acute Diseases . 

30. Zedoary: a medicinal substance obtained in the East Indies, hav¬ 
ing a fragrant smell, and a warm, bitter, aromatic taste. It is 
used in medicine as a stimulant. 

31. Lege Augustana: What sort of gentleman’s agreement this re¬ 
fers to I do not know. 

CHAPTER FORTY-SIX 

1. II Kings: 20: 6, “And I will add unto thy days fifteen years; and 
I will deliver thee and this city . . . . ” 

CHAPTER FORTY-SEVEN 
1. The classical Latin word would be genius. 



NOTES 


3 21 


2. Alluding to the excellent treatment Josephus received as a pris¬ 
oner, at the hands of Vespasian, Titus and Domitian, to his ex¬ 
perience with his fanatical fellow countrymen in the cave near 
Iotapata in Galilee, and to his shipwreck on the journey to 
Rome. 

3. Cardan tells the story of the mysterious visitant who addressed 
him with the words Te Sin casa in Chapter 43. What the other 
incidents and “Lamant” refer to I have not been able to discover. 

CHAPTER FORTY-EIGHT 

(The numbers from 2 on correspond to numbers of names in 

chapter. Names sufficiently explained in the text, or previously in 

the notes, are omitted.) 

1. Corti: See Chapter 14, note 6. 

1. Delfino: See Chapter 30. 

1. Montana: (Giambattista) famous Italian physician, 1498-1551. 

1. Camuzio (Andrea): See Chapter 12, note 1. 

1. Crangius: Not known. 

2. Aleman: French physician of 16th Century. 

5. Ferrier: French physician, 1513-1588. 

6. Hermes Trimaximus: Egyptian author of the 2nd Century a. d. 

7. Mizaud : French Astrologer, 1510-1578: Catalogi sympathies et 
antipathies rerum aliquot memorabilium, 

8. Amato: Joao Roderigo de Castello Branco: Portuguese physi¬ 
cian, 1510-1568. 

9. Andrea Baccio: Italian physician of 15th Century. 

11. Antonio Maria de Conti: Italian humanist, 1514-1555. 

12. Adrianus Turnebus: a French classical scholar, 1512-1565, and 
specialist in Greek; College de France “Royal Reader.” 

13. Jean Brodeau: a French scholar, 1500-1568, and author of a Dix 
Livres de Melanges ” 

14. Buteo: (Jean Borrel), French mathematician, 1492-1572. 

15. Charles de I’Ecluse: a noted French botanist, 1524-1609. The 
complete title of his treatise is Aromatum et Simplicium Aliquot 
Medicamentorum apud Indos Nascentium Historia . 

16. Uncertain. 

17. Bugatto: an Italian annalist of the 16th Century. 



3 22 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


18. Sansovino: (Francesco Tatti ), Italian scholar, 1521-1586. 

19. Gesner, the physician of Zurich, 1516-1565, author of Bibliotheca 
Universalis. Founder of modern study of Natural Science. 

20. Lycosthenes (Konrad Wolffhart ), German philological and theo¬ 
logical author, 1518-1561. The title of his work is Prodigiorum 
ac Ostentorum Chronicon . 

21. Robert Constantine: French physician and botanist, 1502-1603. 
He was a friend of Scaliger, and annotated one of the latter’s 
commentaries on the Works of Theophrastus. 

22. Christoph Clavius: 1537-1612, who took an active part in the 
Gregorian Calendar reform. 

24. Daniel Santberchius: a Dutch mathematician. 

25. Unknown. 

26. Unknown. 

27. Francesco Alessandri: Italian physician of the 16th Century. 

28. de Foix: French mathematician, 1502-1594. 

29. Vicomercati: Cardan’s good friend (see Chapter 15). He was 
an Italian scholar of the period. 

30. Fuchs (Leonhard): Professor of Medicine in University of Tu¬ 
bingen. 

31. Kaspar Peucer: German physician and historian. He was Me- 
lanchthon’s son-in-law. 

33. Pictorius: George Pictor, an Alsatian physician, contemporary of 
Cardan, and author of many medical works similar to Cardan’s. 

35. Gabriele Fallopio: a noted Italian anatomist, 1523-1562. 

36. Rondelet: French naturalist, 1507-1566. 

37. Frisius (Rainer ): a physician and mathematician of the Low 
Countries. His Arithmetic was called Methodus Arithmetical 
Practices. 

38. Castiglione: Girolamo, president of the Milanese Senate. 

39. Fragus=Buc\, a German botanist. His work was called Neues 
Kreutterbuch. 

40. Monteux: an illustrious French physician of the 16th Century, 
and personal physician to Henry II of France. 

41. Peletier: French poet and mathematician, 1517-1582. 

42. Jean Duchoul: French naturalist. 



NOTES 


323 


43. De Collado (Juan Luiz ): a Spanish physician of 16th Century, 
and personal physician to Philip II. He wrote a Commentary 
on Galen’s work. 

44. Plozio=de Plotis, an Italian jurist of the period. 

45. Johann Schoner: German astronomer and geographer, 1477-1547. 

46. Johann Cochlaus (Dobneck) was a German theologian and hu¬ 
manist. His Historia was called De Actis et Scriptis Luthericis . 

47. Scelerus seems to be unknown, but Juan de Seville was a Span¬ 
ish physician of the 15th Century. 

49. Stadius was a Belgian mathematician. He wrote Tabtilce 
/Equabilis et Apparentis Motus Corporum Ccelestuim and 
Ephemerides Astrologicce novce . 

50. Joao de Barros was a Portuguese writer on historical subjects. 
The work referred to is Quarta Decada da Asia . 

51. The great Scaliger, celebrated Italian scholar, 1494-1558. 

52. Charpentier: French philosopher and physician, 16th Century. 

53. Giovanni Filippo Ingrassian, a physician of Sicily, 16th Century. 

54. Unknown. 

55. Unknown. 

56. Lemmens: philosopher and naturalist of the Low Countries. His 
book was called De Occultis Naturce Miraculis. 

57. Unknown. 

58. Suavius (Jacques Gohary le Solitaire): French naturalist and 
poet. 

59. Gaurico: Italian mathematician and astrologer (1476-1558) who 
wrote a Tractatus Astrologicusi 

60. Unknown. 

61. Martinus Hemic us, author of Qucestiones Medicas et consilium 
de diabeto. Pavia, 1567. 

62. Philip Melanchthon: the celebrated German reformer, 1497-1560. 

63. Uncertain. 

64. Uncertain. 

65. Bombelli (Michael Raffaelle): an Italian mathematician, and 
specialist in algebra. 

66. Tartaglia: See Chapter 44. Niccolo Fontana . 

67. Philandrier (Guillaume): French scholar, 1505-1565. 



3^4 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


68. Pena: French physician of 16th Century. 

Lobel: French botanist. 

69. Solenander: a German physician, who wrote Tractatus de Causa 
Caloris Fontium Medicatorum Eorumque Temperatione. 

70. Uncertain. 

71. Duno: an Italian physician, 1523-1601. 

72. Valentin Naibod: mathematician of the 16th Century. 

73. Unknown. 

74. “A man of most profound, most favored and incomparable 
genius." 

CHAPTER FORTY-NINE 

1. This curious statement offers more difficulty in the matter of 
interpretation than translation. 

2. iEneid: Book II, 774: “I quailed, my hair rose and I gasped 
for fear.” 

CHAPTER FIFTY 

1. iElius Donatus, the grammarian and commentator on Vergil . 

2. Vergil: Eclogue V, 9: “Who cares if the fellow strive to rival 
Phoebus himself in song?” 

3. Juvenal XIII, 20-23: “Philosophy is the conqueror of fortune, 
but they too are to be deemed happy who have learned under 
the schooling of life to endure its ills without fretting against 
the yoke.” 

4. Oh, hapless Virtue, thou good of words alone, 

Why bendest thou thy course at Fortune’s high demands? 

5. Horace: Ars Poetica, 344: (A poet succeeds) “by pleasing and 
instructing his reader at the same time.” 

6. Ibid: 323, 324: “To the Greeks the Muse gave rounded phrase.” 

7. The Rhetoric. 

8. “freedom from pain,” i. e., indolentia . 

CHAPTER FIFTY-ONE 

1. Sero sapiunt Phryges: A proverb which originated with the 
Trojans who finally, after ten years, began to wish Helen and 
everything which had been stolen with her would return to the 
Greeks. 



NOTES 


325 


2. Horace: Odes III, 29, 43-44. 

“I rest well pleased with former days; 

Let God from Heaven to-morrow give 

Black clouds or sunny rays.” Sir John Beaumont . 

CHAPTER FIFTY-TWO 

1. Cardan was indeed thirty-nine years old before he overcame his 
earlier handicaps and began to live with some degree of comfort 
and prosperity. 

2. Faustus, son of the Dictator and his fourth wife, Caecilia Metella. 
He married Pompey’s daughter and sided with his father-in-law 
in the Civil War. He was murdered in Caesar’s camp, whither 
he had been taken as prisoner, by the soldiers in a tumult. 

3. Terentia is said to have lived to be 103 years old. 

4. The lost works of the Philosopher, no doubt. Of the extant 
work of Theophrastus many editions appeared during Cardan’s 
lifetime. Cardan’s enemy, J. C. Scaliger, was the most accurate 
and brilliant scholar who has contributed to the elucidation of 
Theophrastus. 

5. Jubellius Taurea, a Campanian of high rank and distinguished 
bravery in the second Punic war. He fought with Claudius 
Asellus in single combat in B. C. 215, and put an end to his 
own life on the capture of Capua by the Romans in B. C. 211. 

CHAPTER FIFTY-THREE 

1. Niccolo Fontana: Tartaglia, see Chapter 44. 

2. Persius, Sat. I, 27. “Your knowledge is for naught unless an¬ 
other knows you know.” 

3. This last sentence offers considerable difficulty of interpretation, 
owing to a slight textual difficulty. The variant readings are 
“servatur” and “servat ut,” neither of which is exactly the ex¬ 
pression for the place. 

CHAPTER FIFTY-FOUR 

1. Chapter 40, (t Felicitas in curando” 

2. To advertise himself as a physician again ready to engage in the 
active practice of medicine. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1. Bedingfield, T., Cardanus* Comforte (De Consolatione) trans¬ 
lated into Englishe, and published by commaundement of the 
right honorable the Earle of Oxenford. T. Marche: London, 
I573 * 

Same: Newly corrected and augmented. T. Marche, Lon¬ 
don, 1576. 

Same: Another translation, called: Cardan, his three boo\s 
of Consolation Englished . London, 1683. 

2. Burr, Anna Robeson, The Autobiography. Houghton Mifflin 
Company, 1909. 

3. Cantor, Moritz, Hieronymus Cardanus: Ein wissenschaftliches 
Lebensbild aus dem 16 Jahrhunderts: Neue Heidelberger Jahr- 
biicher XIII, 1901-5, vol. n-13. Mitteilung an den Historiker 
Kongress in Rom im 1903. 

4. Cardano, Girolamo, Opera Omnia Hieronymi Cardani, Medio - 
lanensis: 10 vols. Spon: Lyons, 1663. 

5. Crossley, J., The Life and Times of Cardan. London, 1836. 

6. De Thou, M., Histoire Universelle, Vol. 7, p. 361. 

7. Dunn, Waldo H., English Biography, Channels of English Lit¬ 
erature. J. M. Dent & Sons, London, 1916. 

8. Durey, Louis, La Medecine Occulte de Paracelse et de quel - 
ques autres Medecins Hermetistes: Arnault de Villeneuve, J. 
Cardan, Cornelius Agrippa . Vigot Freres: Paris, 1900. 

9. Firmiani, Girolamo Cardano, la vite e Vopere: Naples, 1904. 

10. Garnett, Richard, Jerome Cardan. Encyc. Brit, nth Edit. 

11. Gegenbauer, Leopold, Sur . . . le cas irreductible de la formule 
de Cardane: Soc. roy. d. sci. de Liege; mem. ser. 3. v. 2. Brux¬ 
elles, 1900. 

12. Hallam’s Literature of Europe, Vol. I, p. 395. 

13. Hefele, Hermann, Des Girolamo Cardano von Mailand (Biir- 

[ 329 ] 



330 


THE BOOK OF MY LIFE 


gers von Bologna) Eigene Lebensbeschreibung: Ubertragen und 
eingeleitet. Eugen Diederichs: Jena, 1914. 

14. Johnson, James C., Biography: The Literature of Personality . 
The Century Company, New York, 1927. 

15. Kortholt, Christian, De Tribus Impostoribus Magnis . . . et 
appendix, qua H. Cardani opiniones examinantur. J. Reuman- 
nus. Kiel, 1680. Hamburg, 1701. 

16. Lilly, Wm., The Astrologer s Guide, 1675. Choicest Aphor¬ 
isms of the Seven Segments of Jerome Cardan of Milan. G. Red- 
way, London, 1886. 

Same, Gnostic Press, San Diego, Calif. 1918. 

17. Mantovani, V., Vita di Girolamo Cardano, Milanese, filosofo, 
medico e letterato celebratissimo , scritta per lui medissimo in 
idioma latino e recanta nel italiano dal Sig. Dottore V. Manto¬ 
vani. G. B. Sonzogno. Milan, 1821. 

18. Morley, Henry, The Life of Girolamo Cardano of Milan, 
Physician .. 2 vols. Chapman & Hall, London, 1854. 

19. Naude, Gabriel, Hieronymi Cardani De Propria Vita Liber et 
G. Naudaei de Cardano Judicium . Villery: Paris, 1643, and 
Ravestein: Amsterdam, 1654. 

20. Parker, Samuel, Tractatus de Deo . 1678. (Includes Cardan 

among the Atheists.) 

21. Rixner & Siber, Leben und Lehrmeinungen berlihmter Physi\er 
am Ende des XVI und am Anfang des XVII Jahrhunderts . 
Vol. II. Sulzbach, 1820. 

22. Sardou, Victorien, Nouvelle biographie generale. Vol. 8. 

23. Scaliger, Julius Caesar, Exercitationum Esotericarum Libri xv. 
de Subtilitate ad H. Cardanum . Paris, 1554. 

24. Scaliger, J. C., Epistolae aliquot unc primum vulgatae, etc . 
R. Colomerii, Toulouse, 1620^ 

(N. B.—No. 23 is an attack upon Cardan; No. 24 an enco¬ 
mium of him.) 

25. Symonds, J. A., Renaissance in Italy . John Murray, London. 
Vol. 2. 1923. 

26. Tiraboschi, Letteratura Italiana, Tom. VII, Pt. 2, p. 623#. 
Venice, 1824 (?). 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


331 


27. Waters, W. G., Jerome Cardan, A Biographical Study. Law¬ 
rence & Bullen, Ltd. London, 1898. 

28. Waters, W. G., Pioneers in Humanism, Anglo-Italian Review, 
1919. Jan.-Apr. 

29. Articles by Argellati, Biblio. Mediolan.; Bayle; Butrini; Grasset, 
M. Joseph; Italian Literary Historians: Ancona, Bartoli, Settem- 
brini, Cantu; Lelut (Le Demon de Socrate); Leroux; Lombroso; 
Ribot (Psychologie des Sentiments), Retrospective Review; In¬ 
troductory notices to the De Vita Propria Liber. 

30. Cajori F., History of Mathematics , University of California 
Press, 1919. 

31. Guillaume Libri, Histoire des Sciences Mathematiques en Italic 
depuis la Renaissance. 1840. (Vol. 3, pp. 167-177.) 

32. Cossali, Storia dell'algebra. Tom. II, p, 337 et seq.