The French Revolution, Vol. 3: The Guillotine (Thomas Carlyle, 1837)
==========================================================
Completes Carlyle's Revolution: Terror and Thermidor as moral drama. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (frenchguillo03carluoft).

MICHAEUSHIO-

Pi


U4        In  memory  of
Ptrof.   D.J.   McDougai;
Z!  1983  _


IVIicrosoft  Corporation


METHUEN'S  STANDAKD   LIBRARY


THE    FRENCH    REVOLUTION


THE

FRENCH   REVOLUTION

A    HISTORY

IN  THREE   PARTS

I.     THB   BASTILLE ;      II.     THE   CONSTITUTION  ;
III.     THE   GUILLOTINE


BY

THOMAS   CARLYLE


A    NEW     EDITION,
WITH    AN    INTRODUCTION,    NOTES    AND    APPENDICES

BY   C.    R.    L.    FLETCHER,    M.A.

PKLLOW    AND   TUTOR    OK    MAGDALEN    COLLBGB,    OXFORD


IN   THREE   VOLUMES
VOL.  Ill


METHUEN     &     CO.

36  ESSEX  STREET  W.G.

LONDON

1902


CONTENTS   OF   VOLUME   THIRD


PART  III :    THE  GUILLOTINE
BOOK  III

THE  QIRONDINS

CH*I».  PAGE

1.  Cause  and  Effect i

II.  Culottic  and  Sansculottic 8

III.  Growing  shrill 14

IV.  Fatherland  in  Danger 19

V.  Sansculottism  accoutred 30

VI.  The  Traitor 36

VII.  In  Fight 41

VIII.  In  Death-Grips 45

IX.  Extinct 52

BOOK  IV

TERROR

I.  Charlotte  Corday 61

II.  In  Civil  War 72

III.  Retreat  of  the  Eleven 77

IV.  O  Nature 82

V.  Sword  of  Sharpness 88

VI.  Risen  against  Tyrants 92

VII.  Marie-Antoinette 98

VIII.  The  Twenty-Two 102

BOOK  V

TERROR  THE  ORDER  OF  THE  DAY

I.  Rushing  down 108

II.  Death 114

III.  Destruction I22


vi  CONTENTS

CHAP.  PAGE

IV.  Carmagnole  complete 134

V.  Like  a  Thunder-Cloud 143

VI.  Do  thy  Duty 149.

VII.  Flame-Picture 159

BOOK  VI

THERMIDOR

I.  The  Gods  are  athirst 167

II.  Danton,  no  Weakness 175

III.  The  Tumbrils 182

IV.  Mumbo-Jumbo     .         .         . 191

V.  The  Prisons 196

VI.  To  finish  the  Terror 200

VII.  Go  down  to 207

BOOK  VII

VENDEMIAIRE

I.  Decadent 217

II.  La  Cabarus 222

III.  Quiberon 228

IV.  Lion  not  dead 232

V.  Lion  sprawling  its  last 237

VI.  Grilled  Herrings           .         . 245

VII.  The  Whiff  of  Grapeshot 249

VIII.  Finis 258


Chronological  Summary 261

Appendices  : —

Justice,  Part  1 279

Justice,  Part  II 292

The  French  Army  in  the  Revolution 295

The  French  Navy  in  the  Revolution 310

La  Vendue      .        ; 318

The  Debt  and  Deficit  and  the  Financial  Conditions  of  France

1789-95 329

The  Civil  Constitution  of  the  Clergy 342

Index 347


MAP

VOL.  Ill
La  Vendee To  face  page  ^^^


THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

BOOK  III
THE  GIRONDINS

CHAPTER  I

CAUSE  AND  EFFECT

This  huge  Insurrectionary  Movement,  which  we  liken  to  a  break-
ing out  of  Tophet  and  the  Abyss,  has  swept  away  Royalty,
Aristocracy,  and  a  King's  life.  The  question  is.  What  will  it
next  do;  how  will  it  henceforth  shape  itself?  Settle  down  into
a  reign  of  Law  and  Liberty  ;  according  as  the  habits,  persuasions
and  endeavours  of  the  educated,  monied,  respectable  class  pre-
scribe ?  That  is  to  say :  the  volcanic  lava-flood,  bursting  up  in
the  manner  described,  will  explode  and  flow  according  to  Girondin
Formula  and  pre-established  rule  of  Philosophy  ?  If  so,  for  our
Girondin  friends  it  will  be  well.

Meanwhile  were  not  the  prophecy  rather,  that  as  no  external
force,  Royal  or  other,  now  remains  which  could  control  this
Movement,  the  Movement  will  follow  a  course  of  its  own ;  pro-
bably a  very  original  one  ?  Further,  that  whatsoever  man  or
men  can  best  interpret  the  inward  tendencies  it  has,  and  give
them  voice  and  activity,  will  obtain  the  lead  of  it  ?  For  the  rest,
that  as  a  thing  without  order,  a  thing  proceeding  from  beyond
and  beneath  the  region  of  order,  it  must  work  and  welter,  not  as
a  Regularity  but  as  a  Chaos ;  destructive  and  self-destructive  ;
always  till  something  that  has  order  arise,  strong  enough  to  bind
it  into  subjection  again  ?      Which  something,  we  may  further

VOL.    III.  1


2  THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

conjecture,  will  not  be  a  Formula,  with  philosophical  propositions
and  forensic  eloquence ;  but  a  Reality,  probably  with  a  sword  in
its  hand !

As  for  the  Girondin  Formula,  of  a  respectable  Republic  for
the  Middle  Classes,  all  manner  of  Aristocracies  being  now
sufficiently  demolished,  there  seems  little  reason  to  expect  that
the  business  will  stop  there.  Liberty,  Equality,  Fraternity,  these
are  the  words ;  enunciative  and  prophetic.  Republic  for  the
respectable  washed  Middle  Classes,  how  can  that  be  the  fulfil-
ment thereof.^  Hunger  and  nakedness,  and  nightmare  oppres-
sion lying  heavy  on  Twenty-five  million  hearts ;  this,  not  the
wounded  vanities  or  contradicted  philosophies  of  philosophical
Advocates,  rich  Shopkeepers,  rural  Noblesse,  was  the  prime
mover  in  the  French  Revolution  ;  as  the  like  will  be  in  all  such
Revolutions,  in  all  countries.^  Feudal  Fleur-de-lys  had  become
an  insupportably  bad  marching-banner,  and  needed  to  be  torn
and  trampled:  but  Moneybag  of  Mammon  (for  that,  in  these
times,  is  what  the  respectable  Republic  for  the  Middle  Classes
will  signify)  is  a  still  worse,  while  it  lasts.  Properly,  indeed,  it
is  the  worst  and  basest  of  all  banners,  and  symbols  of  dominion
among  men ;  and  indeed  is  possible  only  in  a  time  of  general
Atheism,  and  Unbelief  in  anything  save  in  brute  Force  and
Sensualism ;  pride  of  birth,  pride  of  office,  any  known  kind  of
pride  being  a  degree  better  than  purse-pride.  Freedom,  Equality,
Brotherhood:  not  in  the  Moneybag,  but  far  elsewhere,  will
Sansculottism  seek  these  things.

We  say  therefore  that  an  Insurrectionary  France,  loose  of
control  from  without,  destitute  of  supreme  order  from  within,
will  form  one  of  the  most  tumultuous  Activities  ever  seen  on  this
Earth ;  such  as  no  Girondin  Formula  can  regulate.  An  im-
measurable force,  made  up  of  forces  manifold,  heterogeneous,
compatible  and  incompatible.  In  plainer  words,  this  France
must  needs  split  into   Parties ;  each  of  which  seeking  to  make

1  [Carlyle  here  shows  himself  an  adherent  of  Lord  Bacon's  views,  who  in  his
essay  "  Of  Seditions  and  Troubles  "  declares  that  the  "  rebellions  of  the  belly  are
the  worst,"  but  we  may  well  doubt  whether  the  truer  view  be  not  that  of  Mr.
Herbert  Spencer  {vide  my  introduction).]


CAUSE  AND  EFFECT  3

itself  good,  contradiction,  exasperation  will  arise  ;  and  Parties  on
Parties  find  that  they  cannot  work  together,  cannot  exist
together.

As  for  the  number  of  Parties,  there  will,  strictly  counting,  be
as  many  Parties  as  there  are  opinions.  According  to  which  rule,
in  this  National  Convention  itself,  to  say  nothing  of  France
generally,  the  number  of  Parties  ought  to  be  Seven-hundred  and
Forty-nine ;  for  every  unit  entertains  his  opinion.  But  now,  as
every  unit  has  at  once  an  individual  nature  or  necessity  to  follow
his  own  road,  and  a  gregarious  nature  or  necessity  to  see  himself
travelling  by  the  side  of  others, — what  can  there  be  but  dissolu-
tions, precipitations,  endless  turbulence  of  attracting  and  repell-
ing ;  till  once  the  master-element  get  evolved,  and  this  wild
alchemy  arrange  itself  again  ?

To  the  length  of  Seven-hundred  and  Forty-nine  Parties,  how-
ever, no  Nation  was  ever  yet  seen  to  go.  Nor  indeed  much
beyond  the  length  of  Two  Parties  ;  two  at  a  time  ; — so  invincible
is  man's  tendency  to  unite,  with  all  the  invincible  divisiveness  he
has  !  Two  Parties,  we  say,  are  the  usual  number  at  one  time  :
let  these  two  fight  it  out,  all  minor  shades  of  party  rallying  under
the  shade  likest  them  ;  when  the  one  has  fought  down  the  other,
then  it,  in  its  turn,  may  divide,  self-destructive  ;  and  so  the
process  continue,  as  far  as  needful.  This  is  the  way  of  Re-
volutions, which  spring  up  as  the  French  one  has  done ;  when
the  so-called  Bonds  of  Society  snap  asunder;  and  all  Laws
that  are  not  Laws  of  Nature  become  naught  and  Formulas
merely.

But,  quitting  these  somewhat  abstract  considerations,  let  His-
tory note  this  concrete  reality  which  the  streets  of  Paris  exhibit,
on  Monday  the  2oth  of  February  179'^-  Long  before  daylight
that  morning,  these  streets  are  noisy  and  angry.  Petitioning
enough  there  has  been ;  a  Convention  often  solicited.  It  was
but  yesterday  there  came  a  Deputation  of  Washerwomen  with
Petition  ;  complaining  that  not  so  much  as  soap  could  be  had  ;
to  say  nothing  of  bread,  and  condiments  of  bread.     The  cry  of


4  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

women,  round  the  Salle  de  Manege,  was  heard  plaintive :  "  Du
pain  et  du  savon,  Bread  and  soap."  ^

And  now  from  six  o'clock,  this  Monday  morning,  one  perceives
the  Bakers'  Queues  unusually  expanded,  angrily  agitating  them-
selves. Not  the  Baker  alone,  but  two  Section  Commissioners  to
help  him,  manage  with  difficulty  the  daily  distribution  of  loaves.
Soft-spoken  assiduous,  in  the  early  candle-light,  are  Baker  and
Commissioners :  and  yet  the  pale  chill  February  sunrise  dis-
closes an  unpromising  scene.  Indignant  Female  Patriots,  partly
supplied  with  bread,  rush  now  to  the  shops,  declaring  that  they
will  have  groceries.  Groceries  enough :  sugar-barrels  rolled
forth  into  the  street,  Patriot  Citoyennes  weighing  it  out  at  a
just  rate  of  elevenpence  a  pound ;  likewise  coffee-chests,  soap-
chests,  nay  cinnamon  and  cloves-chests,  with  aquaviice  and  other
forms  of  alcohol, — at  a  just  rate,  which  some  do  not  pay ;  the
pale-faced  Grocer  silently  wringing  his  hands  !  What  help  ?
The  distributive  Citoyennes  are  of  violent  speech  and  gesture,
their  long  Eumenides-hair  hanging  out  of  curl ;  nay  in  their
girdles  pistols  are  seen  sticking :  some,  it  is  even  said,  have
beards y — male  Patriots  in  petticoats  and  mob-cap.  Thus,  in  the
street  of  Lombards,  in  the  street  of  Five-Diamonds,  street  of
Pulleys,  in  most  streets  of  Paris  does  it  effervesce,  the  livelong
day ;  no  Municipality,  no  Mayor  Pache,  though  he  was  War-
Minister  lately,  sends  military  against  it,  or  aught  against  it  but
persuasive-eloquence,  till  seven  at  night,  or  later.

On  Monday  gone  five  weeks,  which  was  the  twenty-first  of
January,  we  saw  Paris,  beheading  its  King,  stand  silent,  like
a  petrified  City  of  Enchantment :  and  now  on  this  Monday  it  is
so  noisy,  selling  sugar ;  Cities,  especially  Cities  in  Revolution,
are  subject  to  these  alternations ;  the  secret  courses  of  civic
business  and  existence  effervescing  and  efflorescing,  in  this  manner,
as  a  concrete  Phenomenon  to  the  eye.  Of  which  Phenomenon,
when  secret  existence,  becoming  public,  effloresces  on  the  street,
the  philosophical  cause  and  effect  is  not  so  easy  to  find.     What,

1  Moniteur,  &c.  (Hist.  Pari.  xxiv.  332-348).


CAUSE  AND  EFFECT  5

for  example,  may  be  the  accurate  philosophical  meaning,  and
meanings,  of  this  sale  of  sugar  ?  These  things  that  have  become
visible  in  the  street  of  Pulleys  and  over  Paris,  whence  are  they,
we  say  ;  and  whither  ? —

That  Pitt  has  a  hand  in  it,  the  gold  of  Pitt :  ^  so  much,  to  all
reasonable  Patriot  men,  may  seem  clear.  But  then,  through
what  agents  of  Pitt  ?  Varlet,  Apostle  of  Liberty,  was  discerned
again  of  late,  with  his  pike  and  red  nightcap.  Deputy  Marat
published  in  his  Journal,  this  very  day,  complaining  of  the  bitter
scarcity,  and  sufferings  of  the  people,  till  he  seemed  to  get
wroth :  '  If  your  Rights  of  Man  were  anything  but  a  piece  of
'  written  paper,  the  plunder  of  a  few  shops,  and  a  forestaller  or
'  two  hung  up  at  the  door-lintels,  would  put  an  end  to  such
'  things.'  2  Are  not  these,  say  the  Girondins,  pregnant  indica-
tions ?  Pitt  has  bribed  the  Anarchists  ;  Marat  is  the  agent  of
Pitt :  hence  this  sale  of  sugar.  To  the  Mother-Society,  again,  it
is  clear  that  the  scarcity  is  factitious ;  is  the  work  of  Girondins,
and  such  like  ;  a  set  of  men  sold  partly  to  Pitt ;  sold  wholly  to
their  own  ambitions,  and  hard-hearted  pedantries  ;  who  will  not
fix  the  grain-prices,  but  prate  pedantically  of  free-trade  ;  wish-
ing to  starve  Paris  into  violence,  and  embroil  it  with  the
Departments :   hence  this  sale  of  sugar.

And,  alas,  if  to  these  two  notabilities,  of  a  Phenomenon  and
such  Theories  of  a  Phenomenon,  we  add  this  third  notability.
That  the  French  Nation  has  believed,  for  several  years  now,  in
the  possibility,  nay  certainty  and  near  advent,  of  a  universal
Millennium,  or  reign  of  Freedom,  Equality,  Fraternity,  wherein
man  should  be  the  brother  of  man,  and  sorrow  and  sin  flee  away  .''
Not  bread  to  eat,  nor  soap  to  wash  with ;  and  the  reign  of
Perfect  Felicity  ready  to  arrive,  due  always  since  the  Bastille

1  [A  good  stock  '  cry. '  As  far  back  as  the  Bastille  day  the  '  gold  of  Pitt '  was  a
common  belief  in  France  :  even  Mercy  believed  that  Pitt  had  a  hand  in  the  troubles
of  July  '89,  and  the  Duke  of  Dorset  was  obliged  to  write  to  the  Constituent  Assembly
denying  the  charge  [see  Taine,  i.  126).]

2  Hist.  Pari.  xxiv.  353-356.  [Ami  du  Peuple ,  Feb.  25th.  Santerre  was  at
Versailles  on  that  day,  and  no  attempt  was  made  to  call  out  the  National  Guard
to  stop  the  pillage.]


6  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

fell !  How  did  our  hearts  burn  within  us,  at  that  Feast  of  Pikes,
when  brother  flung  himself  on  brother's  bosom  ;  and  in  sunny
jubilee.  Twenty-five  millions  burst  forth  into  sound  and  cannon-
smoke  !  Bright  was  our  Hope  then,  as  sunlight ;  red-angry  is
our  Hope  grown  now,  as  consuming  fire.  But,  O  Heavens,
what  enchantment  is  it,  or  devilish  legerdemain,  of  such  effect,
that  Perfect  Felicity,  always  within  arm's  length,  could  never
be  laid  hold  of,  but  only  in  her  stead  Controversy  and  Scarcity  ?
This  set  of  traitors  after  that  set !  Tremble,  ye  traitors  ;  dread
a  People  which  calls  itself  patient,  long-suffering ;  but  which
cannot  always  submit  to  have  its  pocket  picked,  in  this  way, —
of  a  Millennium  !

Yes,  Reader,  here  is  the  miracle.  Out  of  that  putrescent
rubbish  of  Scepticism,  Sensualism,  Sentimentalism,  hollow  Mac-
chiavelism,  such  a  Faith  has  verily  risen  ;  flaming  in  the  heart  of  a
People.  A  whole  People,  awakening  as  it  were  to  consciousness
in  deep  misery,  believes  that  it  is  within  reach  of  a  Fraternal
Heaven-on-Earth.  With  longing  arms,  it  struggles  to  embrace
the  Unspeakable  ;  cannot  embrace  it,  owing  to  certain  causes.
— Seldom  do  we  find  that  a  whole  People  can  be  said  to  have
any  Faith  at  all ;  except  in  things  which  it  can  eat  and  handle.
Whensoever  it  gets  any  Faith,  its  history  becomes  spirit-stirring,
noteworthy.  But  since  the  time  when  steel  Europe  shook  itself
simultaneously  at  the  word  of  Hermit  Peter,  and  rushed  towards
the  Sepulchre  where  God  had  lain,  there  was  no  universal  impulse
of  Faith  that  one  could  note.  Since  Protestantism  went  silent,
no  Luther's  voice,  no  Zisca's  drum  any  longer  proclaiming  that
God's  Truth  was  not  the  Devil's  Lie  ;  and  the  Last  of  the  Came-
ronians  (Ren wick  was  the  name  of  him  ;  honour  to  the  name  of
the  brave  !)  sank,  shot,  on  the  Castle-hill  of  Edinburgh,  there  was
no  partial  impulse  of  Faith  among  Nations. ^  Till  now,  behold,
once  more,  this  French  Nation  believes  !  Herein,  we  say,  in  that
astonishing  Faith  of  theirs,  lies  the  miracle.     It  is  a  Faith  un-


1  [James  Renvvick,  born  1662,  hanged  in  the  Grassmarket,  Edinburgh,  aged
26,  Feb.  17th  1688,  the  last  of  the  Martyrs  of  the  Covenant.  See  Diet.  Nat.
Biogr.,  sub  verb.  Renwick.]


CAUSE  AND  EFFECT  7

doubtedly  of  the  more  prodigious  sort,  even  among  Faiths ;  and
will  embody  itself  in  prodigies.  It  is  the  soul  of  that  world-
prodigy  named  French  Revolution  ;  whereat  the  world  still  gazes
and  shudders.

But,  for  the  rest,  let  no  man  ask  History  to  explain  by  cause
and  effect  how  the  business  proceeded  henceforth.  This  battle
of  Mountain  and  Gironde,  and  what  follows,  is  the  battle  of
Fanaticisms  and  Miracles  ;  unsuitable  for  cause  and  effect.  The
sound  of  it,  to  the  mind,  is  as  a  hubbub  of  voices  in  distraction  ;
little  of  articulate  is  to  be  gathered  by  long  listening  and  study-
ing ;  only  battle-tumult,  shouts  of  triumph,  shrieks  of  despair.
The  Mountain  has  left  no  Memoirs  ;  ^  the  Girondins  have  left
Memoirs,  which  are  too  often  little  other  than  long-drawn  Inter-
jections, of  Woe  is  me,  and  Cursed  be  ye.  So  soon  as  History  can
philosophically  delineate  the  conflagration  of  a  kindled  Fireship,
she  may  try  this  other  task.  Here  lay  the  bitumen-stratum,
there  the  brimstone  one  ;  so  ran  the  vein  of  gunpowder,  of  nitre,
terebinth  and  foul  grease  :  this,  were  she  inquisitive  enough.
History  might  partly  know.  But  how  they  acted  and  re-acted
below  decks,  one  fire-stratum  playing  into  the  other,  by  its
nature  and  the  art  of  man,  now  when  all  hands  ran  raging,  and
the  flames  lashed  high  over  shrouds  and  topmast :  this  let  not
History  attempt.

The  Fireship  is  old  France,  the  old  French  Form  of  Life ;  her
crew  a  Generation  of  men.  Wild  are  their  cries  and  their  ragings
there,  like  spirits  tormented  in  that  flame.  But,  on  the  whole,
are  they  not  gone,  O  Reader  ?  Their  Fireship  and  they,  frighten-
ing the  world,  have  sailed  away ;  its  flames  and  its  thunders
quite  away,  into  the  Deep  of  Time.  One  thing  therefore  History
will  do :  pity  them  all ;  for  it  went  hard  with  them  all .  Not
even  the  seagreen  Incorruptible  but  shall  have  some  pity,  some
human  love,  though  it  takes  an  effort.     And  now,  so  much  once

1  [This  is  not  strictly  true,  though  it  seemed  truer  when  Carlyle  wrote  than  it  is
now.  Bar^re  and  Barras  have  both  left  Mimoires,  though  utterly  untrustworthy  :
Levasseur's  spurious  Mimoires  were  about  the  only  Montagnard  ones  extant  in
Carlyle's  time;  but  P'ere  Duchesne  and  C Ami  du  Peuple,  as  well  as  Carnot  and
Couthon's  Correspondences,  are  Mdmoires  in  themselves.]


8  THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

thoroughly  attained,  the  rest  will  become  easier.  To  the  eye  of
equal  brotherly  pity,  innumerable  perversions  dissipate  them-
selves ;  exaggerations  and  execrations  fall  off,  of  their  own  ac-
cord. Standing  wistfully  on  the  safe  shore,  we  will  look,  and
see,  what  is  of  interest  to  us,  what  is  adapted  to  us.

CHAPTER  II

CULOTTIC  AND  SANSCULOTTIC
GiRONDE  and  Mountain  are  now  in  full  quarrel ;  ^  their  mutual
rage,  says  Toulongeon,  is  growing  a '  pale '  rage.  Curious,  lament-
able :  all  these  men  have  the  word  Republic  on  their  lips  ;  in  the
heart  of  every  one  of  them  is  a  passionate  wish  for  something
which  he  calls  Republic  :  yet  see  their  death-quarrel !  So,  how-
ever, are  men  made.  Creatures  who  live  in  confusion  ;  who,
once  thrown  together,  can  readily  fall  into  that  confusion  of  con-
fusions which  quarrel  is,  simply  because  their  confusions  differ
from  one  and  another  ;  still  more  because  they  seem  to  differ !
Men's  words  are  a  poor  exponent  of  their  thought ;  nay  their
thought  itself  is  a  poor  exponent  of  the  inward  unnamed  Mystery,
wherefrom  both  thought  and  action  have  their  birth.  No  man
can  explain  himself,  can  get  himself  explained ;  men  see  not
one  another,  but  distorted  phantasms  which  they  call  one
another  ;  which  they  hate  and  go  to  battle  with  :  for  all  battle
is  well  said  to  be  misunderstanding.

But  indeed  that  similitude  of  the  Fireship  ;  of  our  poor  French
brethren,  so  fiery  themselves,  working  also  in  an  element  of  fire,
was  not  insignificant.  Consider  it  well,  there  is  a  shade  of  the
truth  in  it.  For  a  man,  once  committed  headlong  to  republican
or  any  other  Transcendentalism,  and  fighting  and  fanaticising
amid  a  Nation  of  his  like,  becomes  as  it  were  enveloped  in  an
ambient  atmosphere  of  Transcendentalism  and  Delirium  :  his
individual  self  is  lost  in  something  that  is  not  himself,  but  foreign

i[The  strife  may  be  said  to  have  definitely  begun  with  Roland's  resignation
(Jan.  23rd),  if  not  with  Gensonn^'s  motion  on  20th  that  the  Minister  of  Justice  be
authorised  to  institute  proceedings  against  the  Septemberers.  This  was  carried  ;
but  repealed,  in  spite  of  a  solitary  protest  by  Lanjuinais,  on  Feb.  8th.]


CULOTTIC  AND  SANSCULOTTIC        9

though  inseparable  from  him.  Strange  to  think  of,  the  man's
cloak  still  seems  to  hold  the  same  man  :  and  yet  the  man  is  not
there,  his  volition  is  not  there  ;  nor  the  source  of  what  he  will
do  and  devise  ;  instead  of  the  man  and  his  volition  there  is  a
piece  of  Fanaticism  and  Fatalism  incarnated  in  the  shape  of
him.  He,  the  hapless  incarnated  Fanaticism,  goes  his  road  ;  no
man  can  help  him,  he  himself  least  of  all.  It  is  a  wonderful,
tragical  predicament  ; — such  as  human  language,  unused  to  deal
with  these  things,  being  contrived  for  the  uses  of  common  life,
struggles  to  shadow  out  in  figures.  The  ambient  element  of
material  fire  is  not  wilder  than  this  of  Fanaticism  ;  nor,  though
visible  to  the  eye,  is  it  more  real.  Volition  bursts  forth  involun-
tary-voluntary ;  rapt  along  ;  the  movement  of  free  human  minds
becomes  a  raging  tornado  of  fatalism,  blind  as  the  winds  ;  and
Mountain  and  Gironde,  when  they  recover  themselves,  are  alike
astounded  to  see  where  it  has  flung  and  dropt  them.  To  such
height  of  miracle  can  men  work  on  men  ;  the  Conscious  and  the
Unconscious  blended  inscrutably  in  this  our  inscrutable  Life ;
endless  Necessity  environing  Freewill !

The  weapons  of  the  Girondins  are  Political  Philosophy,  Re-
spectability and  Eloquence.  Eloquence,  or  call  it  rhetoric,
really  of  a  superior  order  ;  Vergniaud,  for  instance,  turns  a
period  as  sweetly  as  any  man  of  that  generation.  The  weapons
of  the  Mountain  are  those  of  mere  Nature  :  Audacity  and  Im-
petuosity which  may  become  Ferocity,  as  of  men  complete  in
their  determination,  in  their  conviction  ;  nay  of  men,  in  some
cases,  who  as  Septemberers  must  either  prevail  or  perish.  The
ground  to  be  fought  for  is  Popularity  :  further  you  may  either
seek  Popularity  with  the  friends  of  Freedom  and  Order,  or  with
the  friends  of  Freedom  Simple  ;  to  seek  it  with  both  has  unhappily
become  impossible.  With  the  former  sort,  and  generally  with  the
Authorities  of  the  Departments,  and  such  as  read  Parliamentary
Debates,  and  are  of  respectability,  and  of  a  peace-loving  monied
nature,  the  Girondins  carry  it.  With  the  extreme  Patriot  again,
with  the  indigent  Millions,  especially  with  the  Population   of


10  THE  FEENCH  EEVOLUTION

Pahs  who  do  not  read  so  much  as  hear  and  see,  the  Girondins
altogether  lose  it,  and  the  Mountain  carries  it.

Egoism,  nor  meanness  of  mind,  is  not  wanting  on  either  side.
Surely  not  on  the  Girondin  side ;  where  in  fact  the  instinct  of
self-preservation,  too  prominently  unfolded  by  circumstances,
cuts  almost  a  sorry  figure  ;  where  also  a  certain  finesse,  to  the
length  even  of  shuffling  and  shamming,  now  and  then  shows
itself.  They  are  men  skilful  in  Advocate-fence.  They  have
been  called  the  Jesuits  of  the  Revolution  ^  ;  but  that  is  too  hard
a  name.  It  must  be  owned  likewise  that  this  rude  blustering
Mountain  has  a  sense  in  it  of  what  the  Revolution  means  ;  which
these  eloquent  Girondins  are  totally  void  of.  Was  the  Revolu-
tion made,  and  fought  for,  against  the  world,  these  four  weary
years,  that  a  Formula  might  be  substantiated ;  that  Society
might  become  methodic,  demonstrable  by  logic ;  and  the  old
Noblesse  with  their  pretensions  vanish  }  Or  ought  it  not  withal
to  bring  some  glimmering  of  light  and  alleviation  to  the  Twenty-
five  Millions,  who  sat  in  darkness,  heavy-laden,  till  they  rose  with
pikes  in  their  hands  }  At  least  and  lowest,  one  would  think,  it
should  bring  them  a  proportion  of  bread  to  live  on  ?  There  is
in  the  Mountain  here  and  there ;  in  Marat  People's- Friend  ;  in
the  incorruptible  Seagreen  himself,  though  otherwise  so  lean  and
formulary,  a  heartfelt  knowledge  of  this  latter  fact ; — without
which  knowledge  all  other  knowledge  here  is  naught,  and  the
choicest  forensic  eloquence  is  as  sounding  brass  and  a  tinkling
cymbal.  Most  cold,  on  the  other  hand,  most  patronising,  un-
substantial is  the  tone  of  the  Girondins  towards  '  our  poorer
brethren  ; ' — those  brethren  whom  one  often  hears  of  under  the
collective  name  of  '  the  masses,'  as  if  they  were  not  persons  at
all,  but  mounds  of  combustible  explosive  material,  for  blowing
down  Bastilles  with  !  In  very  truth,  a  Revolutionist  of  this  kind,
is  he  not  a  Solecism  ?  Disowned  by  Nature  and  Art ;  deserving
only  to  be  erased,  and  disappear  !  Surely,  to  our  poorer  brethren
of  Paris,  all  this  Girondin  patronage  sounds  deadening  and  killing  :

1  Dumouriez,  Mdmoires,  iii.  314.


CULOTTIC  AND  SANSCULOTTIC      11

if  fine-spoken  and  incontrovertible  in  logic,  then  all  the  falser,
all  the  hatefuller  in  fact.

Nay  doubtless,  pleading  for  Popularity,  here  among  our  poorer
brethren  of  Paris,  the  Girondin  has  a  hard  game  to  play.  If  he
gain  the  ear  of  the  Respectable  at  a  distance,  it  is  by  insisting  on
September  and  such  like  ;  it  is  at  the  expense  of  this  Paris  where
he  dwells  and  perorates.  Hard  to  perorate  in  such  an  auditory  !
Wherefore  the  question  arises  :  Could  we  not  get  ourselves  out  of
this  Paris  ?  Twice  or  oftener  such  an  attempt  is  made.  If  not  we
ourselves,  thinks  Guadet,^  then  at  least  our  Suppleans  might  do  it.
For  every  Deputy  has  his  Suppleant,  or  Substitute,'^  who  will  take
his  place  if  need  be  :  might  not  these  assemble,  say  at  Bourges,
which  is  a  quiet  episcopal  Town,  in  quiet  Berri,  forty  good  leagues
off' }  In  that  case,  what  profit  were  it  for  the  Paris  Sansculottery
to  insult  us  ;  our  Supp/dans  sitting  quiet  in  Bourges,  to  whom  we
could  run  ?  Nay,  even  the  Primary  electoral  Assemblies,  thinks
Guadet,  might  be  reconvoked,  and  a  New  Convention  got,  with

i[May  i8th.]

2  [It  is  not  true  that  *  every  deputy  has  his  suppliant. '  In  Sept.  '92,  298  supplians
in  all  were  elected,  and  these  should  have  been  called  up  in  turn  to  fill  the  vacancies
happening  in  their  respective  deputations.  It  is  evident  however  that  a  fair  number
of  persons  elected  to  the  Convention  refused  to  sit,  or  never  sat ;  for  on  Sept.  ist
'93  a  member  complained  that  in  many  deputations  the  whole  list  of  supplians  had
been  called  up,  and  yet  these  deputations  were  not  full.  The  whole  system  shows
how  imperfectly  France  understood  the  parliamentary  idea  of  '  an  appeal  to  the
country  : '  any  appeal  to  the  provinces,  if  free  and  thorough,  would  have  been
answered  in  favour  of  Constitutional  Royalty,  and  it  is  very  doubtful  if  even  at  this
time  such  an  appeal  would  have  helped  the  Gironde  seriously.  As  it  was  the  Pro-
vinces were  utterly  without  leaders,  and  the  Jacobin  Clubs  were  almost  the  only
"  authorities  "  existing.  Still  out  of  the  supplians  170  were  at  one  time  or  another
called  up  :  on  Oct.  14th  '93  the  Convention  voted  that  no  suppliant  who  had  pro-
tested against  June  2nd,  or  had  been  suspended  from  any  office  by  a  Reprisentant
en  mission,  or  had  taken  part  in  any  '  liberticide  measures,'  should  be  allowed  to  sit.
On  Dec.  15th  the  names  of  all  the  supplians  were  '  pooled,'  irrespective  of  their
several  deputations,  and  names  to  fill  vacancies  drawn  by  lot,  subject  to  the  above
restrictions.  Not  till  Feb.  25th  1795  were  the  supplians  freely  admitted  in  turn  in
spite  of  their  opinions  {see  Guiffrey,  cap.  iii. ,  and  Rev.  de  la  R^v.  iv.  ii.  205-7).

What  Guadet  actually  proposed  (on  May  18th)  was  that  the  supplians  should
be  called  together  at  Bourges,  but  should  not  deliberate  till  they  had  actual  news
of  the  destruction  of  the  Convention  (which  he,  Guadet,  thought  imminent).
Vergniaud  supported  the  motion  ;  but  at  that  very  time  there  were  mdications  that
the  Montagne  would  not  have  it  all  their  own  way  ;  several  Sections  (notably
Tuileries,  Fraternity  and  Buttes  des  Moulins)  presented  addresses  of  moderate
temper,  and  Dutard  (vid.  Infr.  cap.  viii. )  had  hopes  from  addresses  drawn  up  at
Bordeaux,  which  the  Convention  had  ordered  to  be  printed  and  circulated,  and  so
Guadet's  motion  was  not  pushed.]


12  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

new  orders  from  the  Sovereign  People;  and  rightglad  were  Lyons,
were  Bourdeaux,  Rouen,  Marseilles,  as  yet  Provincial  Towns,  to
welcome  us  in  their  turn,  and  become  a  sort  of  Capital  Towns  ;
and  teach  these  Parisians  reason.

Fond  schemes  ;  which  all  misgo !  If  decreed,  in  heat  of  elo-
quent logic,  today,  they  are  repealed,  by  clamour  and  passionate
wider  considerations,  on  the  morrow.^  Will  you,  O  Girondins,
parcel  us  into  separate  Republics,  then  ;  like  the  Swiss,  like  your
Americans ;  so  that  there  be  no  Metropolis  or  indivisible  French
Nation  any  more  ?  Your  Departmental  Guard  seemed  to  point
that  way  !  Federal  Republic  ?  Federalist  ?  Men  and  Knitting-
women  repeat  Fed&raliste,  with  or  without  much  Dictionary-mean-
ing ;  but  go  on  repeating  it,  as  is  usual  in  such  cases,  till  the
meaning  of  it  becomes  almost  magical,  fit  to  designate  all  mystery
of  Iniquity  ;  and  Federaliste  has  grown  a  word  of  Exorcism  and
Apage-Satanas.'^  But  furthermore,  consider  what  '  poisoning  of
public  opinion  '  in  the  Departments,  by  these  Brissot,  Gorsas,
Caritat-Condorcet  Newspapers  !  And  then  also  what  counter-
poisoning,  still  feller  in  quality,  by  a  Pere  Duchesne  of  Hebert,
brutallest  Newspaper  yet  published  on  Earth ;  by  a  Rougiff  of
GuiFroy  ;  ^  by  the  '  incendiary  leaves  of  Marat  ! '  More  than  once,
on  complaint  given  and  effervescence  rising,  it  is  decreed  that  a
man  cannot  both  be  Legislator  and  Editor  ;  that  he  shall  choose

iMoniteur,  1793,  No.  140,  &c.

2  [That  the  accusation  of  '  Federalism  '  was  not  without  ground  may  be  gathered
from  several  passages  in  Mme  Roland  and  Buzot.  '  We  (meaning  her  friends  in
1792)  discussed  the  proposal  for  a  Republican  government  and  spoke  of  the  excellent
temper  of  the  cities  of  the  South'  (Mme  Roland,  249).  'The  French  Republic  is
only  possible  in  a  form  nearly  like  that  of  the  American '  (Buzot,  58).  The  Gironde
were  fond  of  harping  upon  the  excellencies  of  the  American  model.  But  it  suited
the  Montag7ie  to  treat  any  appeal  to  the  Provinces  against  Paris  as  treason,  and
'  Federalism '  was  a  convenient  name  to  give  it.  How  far  the  movement  of  the
summer  of  '93  in  Normandy  and  Provence  was  Girondin  is  difficult  to  say ;  Mallet
du  Pan  thought  it  merely  the  revolt  of  respectability  against  mob  rule,  and  that
it  might  be  utilised  for  the  restoration  of  Constitutional  Monarchy  (Corresp.  i.
392) ;  he  placed  even  more  confidence  in  it  than  in  La  Vendue,  which  he  regarded
as  having  risen  too  soon  and  too  much  for  the  Ancien  Rdgime  tout  pur. '\

^[Rougyff,  ou  le  Franc  en  vedette  (July  9th  '93 — May  29th  '94),  a  blasphemous
and  filthy  print  (with  a  motto  from  a  Eucharistic  hymn,  twisted  and  adorned  with
oaths  and  filth).  (Tourneux,  ii.  698.)  Guffroy,  a  savage  from  Arras,  born  1740,
sat  for  the  Pas-de-Calais  in  the  Convention.  He  sat  in  the  Comitdde  Siireti  Gdndrale
and  quarrelled  with  Robespierre  a  little  while  before  Thermidor  ;  denounced  all  his
former  associates,  and  died  a  clerk  in  the  Ministry  of  Justice.]


CULOTTIC  AND  SANSCULOTTIC      13

between  the  one  function  and  the  other.  ^  But  this  too,  which
indeed  could  help  little,  is  revoked  or  eluded ;  remains  a  pious
wish  mainly.

Meanwhile,  as  the  sad  fruit  of  such  strife,  behold,  O  ye  National
Representatives,  how  between  the  friends  of  Law  and  the  friends
of  Freedom  everywhere,  mere  heats  and  jealousies  have  arisen  ;
fevering  the  whole  Republic  !  Department,  Provincial  Town  is
set  against  Metropolis,  Rich  against  Poor,  Culottic  against  Sans-
culottic,  man  against  man.  From  the  Southern  Cities  come  Ad-
dresses of  an  almost  inculpatory  character ;  for  Paris  has  long
suffered  Newspaper  calumny.  Bourdeaux  demands  a  reign  of  Law
and  Respectability,  meaning  Girondism,  with  emphasis.  With
emphasis  Marseilles  demands  the  like.^  Nay,  from  Marseilles
there  come  two  Addresses  :  one  Girondin ;  one  Jacobin  Sans-
culottic.  Hot  Rebecqui,  sick  of  this  Convention- work,  has  given
place  to  his  Substitute,  and  gone  home  ;  where  also,  with  such
jarrings,  there  is  work  to  be  sick  of.

Lyons,  a  place  of  Capitalists  and  Aristocrats,  is  in  still  worse
state  ;  almost  in  revolt.  Chalier  the  Jacobin  Town-Councillor  has
got,  too  literally,  to  daggers-drawn  with  Nievre-Chol  the  Moderan-
iin  Mayor  ;  one  of  your  Moderate,  perhaps  Aristocrat,  Royalist  or
Federalist  Mayors  !  Chalier,  who  pilgrimed  to  Paris  '  to  behold
Marat  and  the  Mountain,'  has  verily  kindled  himself  at  their  sacred
urn  :  for  on  the  6th  of  February  last.  History  or  Rumour  has  seen
him  haranguing  his  Lyons  Jacobins  in  a  quite  transcendental
manner,  with  a  drawn  dagger  in  his  hand  ;  recommending  (they
say)  sheer  September-methods,  patience  being  worn  out ;  and
that  the  Jacobin  Brethren  should,  impromptu,  work  the  Guillo-
tine themselves !  One  sees  him  still,  in  Engravings  :  mounted
on  a  table  ;  foot  advanced,  body  contorted  ;  a  bald,  rude,  slope-
browed,  infuriated  visage  of  the  canine  species,  the  eyes  starting

1  Hist.  Pari.  xxv.  25,  &c.

-[Marseilles  began  to  show  signs  of  restlessness  as  early  as  April  22nd  ;  (Carlyle
has  got  dreadfully  ahead  of  his  subject  at  this  part  of  the  book,  and  his  chronology
becomes  wild,  and  never  quite  recovers).  It  was  levying  troops  of  its  own  accord  ;
the  Convention  sent  for  its  Maire,  and  forbade  the  levy  (Aulard,  Recueil,  ill.  382).]


14  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

from  their  sockets  ;  in  his  puissant  right-hand  the  brandished
dagger,  or  horse-pistol,  as  some  give  it ;  other  dog-visages  kindling
under  him  : — a  man  not  likely  to  end  well !  However,  the  Guil-
lotine was  not  got  together  impromptu,  that  day,  'on  the  Pont
Saint-Clair,'  or  elsewhere ;  but  indeed  continued  lying  rusty  in
its  loft :  ^  Nievre-Chol  with  military  went  about,  rumbling  cannon,
in  the  most  confused  manner  ;  and  the  '  nine-hundred  prisoners  '
received  no  hurt.  So  distracted  is  Lyons  grown,  with  its  cannons
rumbling.  Convention  Commissioners  must  be  sent  thither  forth-
with :  if  even  they  can  appease  it,  and  keep  the  Guillotine  in
its  loft  ?  2

Consider  finally  if,  on  all  these  mad  jarrings  of  the  Southern
Cities,  and  of  France  generally,  a  traitorous  Crypto- Royalist  class
is  not  looking  and  watching ;  ready  to  strike  in,  at  the  right  sea-
son !  Neither  is  there  bread ;  neither  is  there  soap :  see  the
Patriot  women  selling  out  sugar,  at  a  just  rate  of  twenty -two
sous  per  pound  !  Citizen  Representatives,  it  were  verily  well  that
your  quarrels  finished,  and  the  reign  of  Perfect  Felicity  began.

CHAPTER  HI

GROWING  SHRILL
On  the  whole,  one  cannot  say  that  the  Girondins  are  wanting  to
themselves,  so  far  as  good-will  might  go.     They  prick  assiduously
into  the  sore-places  of  the  Mountain ;  from  principle,  and  also
from  Jesuitism.

1  Hist.  Pari.  xxiv.  385-93 ;  xxvi,  229,  &c.

2  [The  first  Commissioners  of  the  Convention  to  Lyons  (of  whom  Boissy  d'Anglas
was  one)  had  to  deal,  after  Jan.  30th,  with  a  considerable  Royalist  reaction  there  ;
domiciliary  visits  were  instituted  and  over  300  persons  imprisoned.  Chalier  had
been  beaten  for  the  Mayoralty  by  Niviere-  (not  Nievre-)  Choi,  on  whose  resignation
another  Moderate  was  elected  ;  but  this  election  was  quashed  by  the  new  Convention
Commissioners,  Bar^re  and  Legendre  (who  arrived  in  March).  This  produced
great  rage  in  Lyons  among  all  but  the  few  extreme  Radicals.  More  Convention
Commissioners  were  sent,  including  Dubois-Cranc^,  but  failed  to  keep  the  Radicals
in  power  or  the  Moderates  in  check.  At  last  on  May  29th  the  so-called  '  Girondin '
Insurrection  in  Lyons  broke  out,  and,  on  the  news  of  June  2nd,  became  a  small
civil  war  {vid.  infr. ,  72  sqq. ).

In  Tallien's  report  to  the  Convention  on  the  commencement  of  troubles  in  Lyons,
read  on  Feb.  25th,  the  jealousy  of  starving  and  ruined  Paris  against  still  com-
paratively prosperous  Lyons  is  manifest  in  every  line  [see  Aulard,  Recueil,  ii.  198  ;
Mortimer-Ternaux,  vi.  250).]


GROWING  SHEILL  15

Besides  September,  of  which  there  is  now  little  to  be  made
except  effervescence,  we  discern  two  sore-places  where  the  Moun-
tain often  suffers  :  Marat,  and  Orleans  Egalite.  Squalid  Marat,
for  his  own  sake  and  for  the  Mountain's,  is  assaulted  ever  and
anon ;  held  up  to  France,  as  a  squalid  bloodthirsty  Portent,  in-
citing to  the  pillage  of  shops  ;  of  whom  let  the  Mountain  have  the
credit !  The  Mountain  murmurs,  ill  at  ease  :  this  '  Maximum  of
Patriotism,'  how  shall  they  either  own  him  or  disown  him  ?  ^  As
for  Marat  personally,  he,  with  his  fixed-idea,  remains  invulnerable
to  such  things  ;  nay  the  People 's-friend  is  very  evidently  rising  in
importance,  as  his  befriended  People  rises.  No  shrieks  now,  when
he  goes  to  speak  ;  occasional  applauses  rather,  furtherance  which
breeds  confidence.  The  day  when  the  Girondins  proposed  to  '  de-
cree him  accused '  (ddcriter  d' accusation,  as  they  phrase  it)  for  that
February  Paragraph,  of '  hanging  up  a  Forestaller  or  two  at  the
door-lintels,'  Marat  proposes  to  have  them  '  decreed  insane  ; '  and,
descending  the  Tribune-steps,  is  heard  to  articulate  these  most
unsenatorial  ejaculations :  "  Les  cochom;  les  imbdcil/es,  Pigs,  idiots  !  "
Oftentimes  he  croaks  harsh  sarcasm,  having  really  a  rough  rasping
tongue,  and  a  very  deep  fund  of  contempt  for  fine  outsides  ;  and
once  or  twice,  he  even  laughs,  nay  '  explodes  into  laughter,  rit  aux
Eclats,'  at  the  gentilities  and  superfine  airs  of  these  Girondin  "  men
of  statesmanship,"  with  their  pedantries,  plausibilities,  pusillani-
mities :  "these  two  years,"  says  he,  "you  have  been  whining
about  attacks,  and  plots,  and  danger  from  Paris  ;  and  you  have
not  a  scratch  to  show  for  yourselves."  ^ — Danton  gruffly  rebukes
him,  from  time  to  time  :  a  Maximum  of  Patriotism,  whom  one
can  neither  own  nor  disown !  ^

i[6>^  Danton's  speech,  Sept.  25th  '92  (Stephens'  Orators,  vol.  ii.),  in  which  he
avows  that  he  is  no  Maratist,  does  not  like  Marat,  and  compares  him  to  Royou
the  extreme  Royalist.  Robespierre  in  his  reply  to  Louvet  (Nov.  4th)  is  equally
careful  to  clear  himself  from  the  accusation  of  acquaintance  with  Marat.  The
'pillage  of  shops'  refers  to  the  article  in  L'Ami  of  Feb.  2Sth  {vid.  supr.,  p.  5).]

2  Moniteur,  Stance  du  20  Mai  1793.

^  [Danton's  position  was  becoming  an  awkward  one  ;  as  a  statesman  he  wished
for  order  and  peace,  but,  like  Mirabeau,  he  at  times  believed  himself  compelled  to
use  the  Marats  and  Huberts,  in  order  to  keep  his  popularity.  The  two  things  were
incompatible,  and,  while  he  was  hesitating,  more  violent  men  gradually  deprived
him  of  his  power  over  Paris.  He  left  Paris,  on  his  second  mission  to  Belgium,  Jan.
31st,  and  returned  on  Feb.  i8th.]


16  THE  FEENCH  EEVOLUTION

But  the  second  sore-place  of  the  Mountain  is  this  anomalous
Monseigneur  Equality  Prince  d' Orleans.  Behold  these  men,  says
the  Gironde  ;  with  a  whilom  Bourbon  Prince  among  them  :  they
are  creatures  of  the  D' Orleans  Faction  ;  they  will  have  Philippe
made  King ;  one  King  no  sooner  guillotined  than  another  made
in  his  stead !  Girondins  have  moved,  Buzot  moved  long  ago,
from  principle  and  also  from  Jesuitism,  that  the  whole  race  of
Bourbons  should  be  marched  forth  from  the  soil  of  France  ;  this
Prince  Egalite  to  bring  up  the  rear.  Motions  which  might  pro-
duce some  effect  on  the  public  ; — which  the  Mountain,  ill  at  ease,
knows  not  what  to  do  with.

And  poor  Orleans  Egalite  himself,  for  one  begins  to  pity  even
him,  what  does  he  do  with  them  }  The  disowned  of  all  parties,
the  rejected  and  foolishly  bedrifted  hither  and  thither,  to  what
comer  of  Nature  can  he  now  drift  with  advantage  ?  Feasible  hope
remains  not  for  him  :  unfeasible  hope,  in  pallid  doubtful  glimmers,
there  may  still  come,  bewildering,  not  cheering  or  illuminating,
— from  the  Dumouriez  quarter  ;  and  how,  if  not  the  timewasted
Orleans  Egalite,  then  perhaps  the  young  unworn  Chartres  Egalite
might  rise  to  be  a  kind  of  King  ?  Sheltered,  if  shelter  it  be,  in
the  clefts  of  the  Mountain,  poor  Egalite  will  wait :  one  refuge  in
Jacobinism,  one  in  Dumouriez  and  Counter- Revolution,  are  there
not  two  chances  ?  However,  the  look  of  him.  Dame  Genlis  ^  says,
is  grown  gloomy  ;  sad  to  see.  Sillery  ^  also,  the  Genlis's  Husband,
who  hovers  about  the  Mountain,  not  on  it,  is  in  a  bad  way.
Dame  Genlis  has  come  to  Raincy,  out  of  England  and  Bury  St.
Edmunds,  in  these  days ;  being  summoned  by  Egalite,  with  her
young  charge.  Mademoiselle  Egalite,^ — that  so  Mademoiselle  might
not  be  counted  among  Emigrants  and  hardly  dealt  with.     But  it

i[For  Madame  de  Genlis,  vid.  supr.,  i.  380,  in/r.,  iii.  38.]

2  [The  Comte  de  Genlis,  afterwards  Marquis  de  Sillery,  was  deputy  to  the  Con-
stituent and  Convention,  and  one  of  the  chief  of  the  so-called  '  Orl^anist '  party  in
the  former  ;  guillotined  Oct.  31st  '93.  He  was  separated  from  his  wife,  but  remained
upon  good  terms  with  her  till  this  period.]

3  ["  Mdlle  Egalite"  (or  rather  Princess  Adelaide  of  Orleans),  born  1777,  joined
her  brother  the  Due  de  Chartres  (afterwards  King  Louis-Philippe)  in  Switzerland
after  her  father's  death,  and  also  led  a  wandering  life ;  she  contributed  much  to
put  her  brother  on  the  throne  in  1830,  and  died  a  few  weeks  before  the  Revolution
of  1848  (vid.  in/r.,  iii.  38).]


GROWING  SHRILL  17

proves  a  ravelled  business  :  Genlis  and  charge  find  that  they  must
retire  to  the  Netherlands  ;  must  wait  on  the  Frontiers,  for  a  week
or  two  ;  till  Monseigneur,  by  Jacobin  help,  get  it  wound  up.
'  Next  morning,'  says  Dame  Genlis,  '  Monseigneur,  gloomier  than
*  ever,  gave  me  his  arm,  to  lead  me  to  the  carriage.  I  was  greatly
'  troubled  ;  Mademoiselle  burst  into  tears  ;  her  Father  was  pale
'and  trembling.  After  I  had  got  seated,  he  stood  immovable  at
'  the  carriage-door,  with  his  eyes  fixed  on  me  ;  his  mournful  and
'  painful  look  seemed  to  implore  pity  ; — "  Adieu,  Madame  !  "  said
'he.  The  altered  sound  of  his  voice  completely  overcame  me  ;
'  unable  to  utter  a  word,  I  held  out  my  hand  ;  he  grasped  it  close  ;
'  then  turning,  and  advancing  sharply  towards  the  postilions,  he
'gave  them  a  sign,  and  we  rolled  away.'  ^

Nor  are  Peace-makers  wanting  ;  of  whom  likewise  we  mention
two ;  one  fast  on  the  crown  of  the  Mountain,  the  other  not  yet
alighted  anywhere  :  Danton  and  Barr^re.  Ingenious  Barrere,
Old-Constituent  and  Editor,  from  the  slopes  of  the  Pyrenees,  is
one  of  the  usefullest  men  of  this  Convention,  in  his  way.  Truth
may  lie  on  both  sides,  on  either  side,  or  on  neither  side ;  my
friends,  ye  must  give  and  take  :  for  the  rest,  success  to  the  win-
ning side !  This  is  the  motto  of  Barrere.  Ingenious,  almost
genial  ;  quick-sighted,  supple,  graceful ;  a  man  that  will  prosper.
Scarcely  Belial  in  the  assembled  Pandemonium  was  plausibler  to
ear  and  eye.  An  indispensable  man  :  in  the  great  Art  of  Famish
he  may  be  said  to  seek  his  fellow.  Has  there  an  explosion  arisen,
as  many  do  arise,  a  confusion,  unsightliness,  which  no  tongue  can
speak  of,  nor  eye  look  on ;  give  it  to  Barrere  ;  Barrere  shall
be  Committee- Reporter  of  it ;  you  shall  see  it  transmute  itself  into
a  regularity,  into  the  very  beauty  and  improvement  that  was
needed.  Without  one  such  man,  we  say,  how  were  this  Conven-
tion bested  ?     Call  him  not,  as  exaggerative  Mercier  does,  '  the

*  Genlis,  M^moires  (London,  1825),  iv.  118.  [The  first  emigration  of  Mme  de
Genlis  with  the  Princess  was  Oct.  nth  '91  ;  they  returned  to  France  Nov.  '92.
Madame  does  not  give  the  exact  date  in  November  when  they  reached  Paris,  but
immediately  on  their  arrival  the  Duke  sent  them  off  to  Belgium,  where  they
remained  till  March  31st  '93  (at  Tournay),]
VOL.    III.  2


18  THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

greatest  liar  in  France  : '  nay  it  may  be  argued  there  is  not  truth
enough  in  him  to  make  a  real  lie  of.  Call  him,  with  Burke,
Anacreon  of  the  Guillotine,  and  a  man  serviceable  to  this
Convention.

The  other  Peace-maker  whom  we  name  is  Danton.  Peace,  O
peace  with  one  another !  cries  Danton  often  enough :  Are  we  not
alone  against  the  world  ;  a  little  band  of  brothers  ?  Broad  Danton
is  loved  by  all  the  Mountain ;  but  they  think  him  too  easy-
tempered,  deficient  in  suspicion  :  he  has  stood  between  Dumouriez
and  much  censure,  anxious  not  to  exasperate  our  only  General :
in  the  shrill  tumult  Danton' s  strong  voice  reverberates,  for  union
and  pacification.  Meetings  there  are  ;  dinings  with  the  Girondins :
it  is  so  pressingly  essential  that  there  be  union.  But  the
Girondins  are  haughty  and  respectable:  this  Titan  Danton  is
not  a  man  of  Formulas,  and  there  rests  on  him  a  shadow  of
September.  "  Your  Girondins  have  no  confidence  in  me : "
this  is  the  answer  a  conciliatory  Meillan  gets  from  him ;  to
all  the  arguments  and  pleadings  this  conciliatory  Meillan
can  bring,  the  repeated  answer  is,  "lis  nont  point  de  con-
Jiance."  ^ — The  tumult  will  get  ever  shriller ;  rage  is  growing
pale.

In  fact,  what  a  pang  is  it  to  the  heart  of  a  Girondin,  this  first
withering  probability  that  the  despicable  unphilosophic  anarchic
Mountain,  after  all,  may  triumph !  Brutal  Septemberers,  a  fifth-
floor  Tallien,  ^a  Robespierre  without  an  idea  in  his  head,*  as
Condorcet  says,  '  or  a  feeling  in  his  heart : '  and  yet  we,  the
flower  of  France,  cannot  stand  against  them ;  behold  the  sceptre
departs  from  us  ;  from  us  and  goes  to  them !     Eloquence,  Philo-


iM^moires  de  Meillan,  Reprdsentant  du  Peuple  (Paris,  1823),  p.  51,  [Meillan
was  deputy  for  the  Basses- Pyr^n^es,  proscribed  with  the  Girondins,  escaped  and  re-
appeared in  the  Convention  after  Thermidor.  His  '  M^moires'  are  specially  valuable
for  the  events  of  May  '93.  The  story  of  the  meeting  of  Danton  with  the  Girondin
leaders  at  Sceaux  in  Nov.  '92,  though  repeated  by  Mr.  Belloc  (198),  is  probably
apocryphal ;  Danton  would  possibly  have  welcomed  a  reconciliation  with  them  as
late  as  March  29th  ;  Madame  Roland,  in  every  line  of  whose  writings  bitter  hatred
of  Danton  is  visible,  no  doubt  did  much  to  keep  them  from  any  such  reconciliation  :
all  March  Danton  strove  for  strong  government,  while  the  Girondins,  to  keep  their
popularity,  tried  to  outdo  him  in  violent  motions,  instead  of  uniting  with  him,  and
on  April  ist  the  storm  broke  (see  Mortimer-Ternaux,  vii.  297;  vid.  in/r.,  iii.  42),]


FATHEELAND  IN  DANGER  19

sophism.  Respectability  avail  not :    '  against  Stupidity  the  very
gods  fight  to  no  purpose,

'  Mit  der  Dummheit  kdmpfen  Cotter  selbst  vergebens  !'
Shrill  are  the  plaints  of  Louvet ;  his  thin  existence  all  acidified
into  rage,  and  preternatural  insight  of  suspicion.  Wroth  is  young
Barbaroux ;  wroth  and  scornful.  Silent,  like  a  Queen  with  the
aspic  on  her  bosom,  sits  the  wife  of  Roland  ;  Roland's  Accounts
never  yet  got  audited,  his  name  become  a  byword.  Such  is  the
fortune  of  war,  especially  of  revolution.  The  great  gulf  of  Tophet,
and  Tenth  of  August,  opened  itself  at  the  magic  of  your  eloquent
voice  ;  and  lo  now,  it  will  not  close  at  your  voice  !  It  is  a  danger-
ous thing  such  magic.  The  Magician's  Famulus  got  hold  of  the
forbidden  Book,  and  summoned  a  goblin  :  Plait-il,  What  is  your
will  ?  said  the  goblin.  The  Famulus,  somewhat  struck,  bade  him
fetch  water :  the  swift  goblin  fetched  it,  pail  in  each  hand ;  but
lo,  would  not  cease  fetching  it !  Desperate,  the  Famulus  shrieks
at  him,  smites  at  him,  cuts  him  in  two;  lo,  two  goblin  water-
carriers  ply ;  and  the  house  will  be  swum  away  in  Deucalion
Deluges.

CHAPTER  IV

FATHERLAND  IN  DANGER
Or  rather  we  will  say,  this  Senatorial  war  might  have  lasted  long  ;
and  Party  tugging  and  throttling  with  Party  might  have  sup-
pressed and  smothered  one  another,  in  the  ordinary  bloodless
Parliamentary  way ;  on  one  condition :  that  France  had  been  at
least  able  to  exist,  all  the  while.  But  this  Sovereign  People  has
a  digestive  faculty,  and  cannot  do  without  bread.  Also  we  are
at  war,  and  must  have  victory ;  at  war  with  Europe,  with  Fate
and  Famine :  and  behold,  in  the  spring  of  the  year,  all  victory
deserts  us.

Dumouriez  had  his  outposts  stretched  as  far  as  Aix-la-Chapelle,
and  the  beautifullest  plan  for  pouncing  on  Holland,  by  stratagem,
flat-bottomed  boats  and  rapid  intrepidity ;  wherein  too  he  had
prospered   so    far ;    but   unhappily  could    prosper   no    further.


20  THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

Aix-la-Chapelle  is  lost :  Maastricht  will  not  surrender  to  mere
smoke  and  noise  :  the  flat-bottomed  boats  must  launch  themselves
again,  and  return  the  way  they  came.^  Steady  now,  ye  rapidly
intrepid  men  ;  retreat  with  firmness,  Parthian-like  !  Alas,  were
it  General  Miranda's  fault ;  were  it  the  War-minister's  fault ;
or  were  it  Dumouriez's  own  fault  and  that  of  Fortune  :  enough,
there  is  nothing  for  it  but  retreat, — well  if  it  be  not  even  flight ;
for  already  terror-stricken  cohorts  and  stragglers  pour  off,
not  waiting  for  order ;  flow  disastrous,  as  many  as  ten  thousand
of  them,  without  halt  till  they  see  France  again. ^  Nay  worse  :
Dumouriez  himself  is  perhaps  secretly  turning  traitor?  Very
sharp  is  the  tone  in  which  he  writes  to  our  Committees.  Com-
missioners and  Jacobin  Pillagers  have  done  such  incalculable
mischief;  Hassenfratz  sends  neither  cartridges  nor  clothing  ;
shoes  we  have,  deceptively  ^  soled  with  wood  and  pasteboard.'
Nothing  in  short  is  right.  Danton  and  Lacroix,  when  it  was
they  that  were  Commissioners,  would  needs  join  Belgium  to
France ; — of  which  Dumouriez  might  have  made  the  prettiest
little  Duchy  for  his  own  sacred  behoof!  With  all  these  things
the  General  is  wroth ;  and  writes  to  us  in  a  sharp  tone.^  Who
knows  what  this  hot  little  General  is  meditating  ?  Dumouriez
Duke  of  Belgium  or  Brabant;    and  say,  Egalite  the  Younger

^  [While  Dumouriez  was  preparing  to  advance  towards  Maestricht  the  situation
in  Belgium  was  becoming  desperate  ;  after  Jemappes  orders  had  been  issued  for  a
Belgian  National  Convention  ;  the  Montagnards  were  determined  that  this  should
never  meet ;  and,  by  their  commissioners,  they  jobbed  and  bullied  the  electors
accordingly.  This  was  bitter  for  Dumouriez,  who  honestly  wished  to  see  Belgium
free,  and  perhaps  drove  him  towards  his  treason;  but  his  resistance  was  in  vam,
and  the  union  of  the  various  Netherland  provinces  to  France  was  voted  by  the
French  Convention  early  in  March.

Meanwhile  the  Austrians  were  re-forming  on  the  lower  Rhine,  Catharine  of
Russia  was  coming  to  terms  as  to  Poland  with  Frederick  William,  whose  hands
would  soon  be  free  to  attack  France  again.  Dumouriez's  own  army  was  in  a
dreadful  condition,  the  reorganisation  beg^n  by  Dubois-Cranc^'s  measures  of
February  had  not  had  time  to  work ;  so  when  Dumouriez  crossed  the  Dutch
frontier  (Feb.  17th),  and  sent  Miranda  to  besiege  Maestricht,  he  was  unable  to
supply  any  siege  guns,  and  unable  himself  to  cross  the  Meuse.  On  March  8th  the
French  Government  ordered  him  to  retreat,  and  on  the  12th  Carnot  was  sent  as
Commissioner  to  his  army— a  mission  which  lasted  till  August.  Coburg  followed
up  the  French  retreat  hard  {vid.  infr.,  iii.  29).]

2  Dumouriez,  iv.  16-73.

•"[Dumouriez'  letter  of  March  12th  to  the  Convention  is  called  by  Sorel  (iii.  339)
'  a  manifesto  of  Civil  war. ']


FATHEELAND  IN  DANGER  21

King  of  France :  there  were  an  end  for  our  Revolution  ! — Com-
mittee of  Defence  gazes,  and  shakes  its  head :  who  except
Danton,  defective  in  suspicion,  could  still  struggle  to  be  of
hope  ?

And  General  Custine  is  rolling  back  from  the  Rhine  Country  ;  ^
conquered  Mentz  will  be  reconquered,  the  Prussians  gathering
round  to  bombard  it  with  shot  and  shell.  Mentz  may  resist.
Commissioner  Merlin,  the  Thionviller,  'making  sallies,  at  the
head  of  the  besieged ; ' — resist  to  the  death  ;  but  not  longer
than  that.2  How  sad  a  reverse  for  Mentz  !  Brave  Forster,  brave
Lux  planted  Liberty-trees,  amid  ga-ira-ing  music,  in  the  snow-
slush  of  last  winter,  there ;  and  made  Jacobin  Societies ;  and
got  the  Territory  incorporated  with  France  ;  they  came  hither
to  Paris,  as  Deputies  or  Delegates,  and  have  their  eighteen  francs
a-day:  but  see,  before  once  the  Liberty-tree  is  got  rightly  in
leaf,  Mentz  is  changing  into  an  explosive  crater ;  vomiting  fire,
bevomited  with  fire !

Neither  of  these  men  shall  again  see  Mentz  ;  they  have  come
hither  only  to  die.^  Forster  has  been  round  the  Globe  ;  he  saw
Cook  perish  under  Owyhee  clubs  ;  but  like  this  Paris  he  has  yet

1  [Dec.— April.  Custine  had  to  face  both  the  Prussians  under  Brunswick,  and  the
Austrians  under  Wiirmser  ;  his  army,  enriched  by  the  spoils  of  the  Palatinate,  had
become  a  horde  of  brigands.  On  Dec.  and  '92  Brunswick  retook  Frankfort.  In
March  he  crossed  the  Rhine  at  Bacharach  and  Lorch,  and  gradually  drove  Custine
out  of  all  the  Palatinate  strongholds.  Custine  retired  on  Landau  April  ist,  and  was
at  once  threatened  with  accusations  of  treason.  Robespierre,  however,  defended  him
for  the  time,  and  he  was  shortly  after  sent  to  replace  Dampierre  in  the  Army  of  the
North.]

2  [Dec. — July  23rd,]

^[The  Republic  of  Mainz  was  short-lived,  nor  was  Forster  by  any  means  a
typical  founder  of  it.  He  was  a  naturalist,  who  had  sailed  with  Captain  Cook,  and
afterwards  became  librarian  to  the  Elector  of  Mainz.  He  was  somewhat  more  of
a  German  patriot  than  the  majority  of  the  founders  of  the  "Jacobin  Club"  of
Mainz,  such  as  Boehmer,  Lux,  etc.  ;  even  of  these  only  the  very  smallest  (and
noisiest)  minority  had  desired  incorporation  with  France  ;  Forster  however  concluded
that  the  left  bank  of  the  Rhine  would  probably  fall  to  her.  The  Prussian  troops
began  a  slow  and  desultory  siege  of  Mainz  in  December  ;  the  place  was  defended
with  extreme  tenacity,  not  only  by  Merlin  and  Rewbell,  the  Convention  Commis-
sioners, but  by  Kl^ber,  d'Oyr^,  Meusnier,  Aubert-Dubayet  and  Marigny.  The
bombardment  began  in  June,  and  the  capitulation  was  signed  on  July  23rd,  after
extreme  privations  had  been  endured.  The  garrison  marched  out  with  the  honours
of  war,  and  engaged  not  to  serve  against  the  allies  again  for  a  year  ;  in  fulfilment
of  which  pledge  the  Convention  afterwards  sent  them  to  La  Vendue  (but  vld.  infr. ,
iii.  80).]


22  THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

seen  or  suffered  nothing.  Poverty  escorts  him  :  from  home  there
can  nothing  come,  except  Job's-news  ;  the  eighteen  daily  francs,
which  we  here  as  Deputy  or  Delegate  with  difficulty  '  touch,'  are  in
paper  assignats,  and  sink  fast  in  value.  Poverty,  disappointment,
inaction,  obloquy ;  the  brave  heart  slowly  breaking !  Such  is
Forster's  lot.  For  the  rest.  Demoiselle  Theroigne  smiles  on
you  in  the  Soirees  ;  'a  beautiful  brownlocked  face,'  of  an  exalted
temper ;  and  contrives  to  keep  her  carriage.  Prussian  Trenck,
the  poor  subterranean  Baron,  jargons  and  jangles  in  an  unmelo-
dious  manner.  Thomas  Paine's  face  is  red-pustuled,  'but  the
eyes  uncommonly  bright.'  Convention  Deputies  ask  you  to
dinner:  very  courteous;  and  'we  all  play  at  plumpsack.' ^  'It
'is  the  Explosion  and  New-creation  of  a  World,'  says  Forster  ;
'and  the  actors  in  it,  such  small  mean  objects,  buzzing  round
'  one  like  a  handful  of  jflies.' —

Likewise  there  is  war  with  Spain. 2  Spain  will  advance  through
the  gorges  of  the  Pyrenees ;  rustling  with  Bourbon  banners,
jingling  with  artillery  and  menace.  And  England  has  donned
the  red  coat ;  and  marches,^  with  Royal  Highness  of  York, —
whom  some  once  spake  of  inviting  to  be  our  King.  Changed
that  humour  now :  and  ever  more  changing ;  till  no  hatefuller
thing  walk  this  Earth  than  a  denizen  of  that  tyrannous  Island ;
and  Pitt  be  declared  and  decreed,  with  effervescence,  '  L'emiemi

1  Forster's  Briefwechsel,  ii.  514,  460,  631.

2  [The  Spanish  Nation  threw  itself  heartily  into  the  war  and  made  a  far  better
show  in  it  than  its  Government  had  expected.  Godoy  was  in  fact  carried  off  his
legs  by  a  wave  of  popular  feeling,  excited  by  the  priests  against  an  apostate  and
regicide  nation  :  Spanish  feeling  had  been  also  profoundly  excited  by  the  loose
talk  of  the  Jacobin  clubs  in  Perpignan  and  Bayonne,  who  coolly  prepared  measures
for  revolutionising  Spain.  Carnot  had  been  on  mission  to  the  Pyrenees  in  Dec.
and  Jan.,  but  without  much  success,  and  the  first  dlan  of  the  Spanish  armies
carried  them  up  to  the  walls  of  Bayonne  and  Perpignan  ;  Bellegarde  fell  (June  14th)
to  the  Spanish  General  Ricardos  \vid.  infr.,  iii.  153).]

3 [The  English  plans  were  simple  :  to  subsidise  Austria  and,  if  possible,  Prussia
also,  for  the  defence  of  Belgium  ;  to  subsidise  Portugal,  Spain,  Sardinia,  Naples;
to  utilise  the  Royalist  movements  in  the  South  ;  to  send  an  army  of  40,000  English
and  Hanoverians  to  advance  from  Holland,  by  the  coast  road,  on  Dunkirk,
Dunkirk  was  to  be  England's  Continental  share  of  the  spoil ;  for  the  rest  she
would  recoup  herself  in  the  West  Indies.  Tlie  advent  of  Thugut  to  power  in
Austria  (March  27th)  spoilt  these  plans,  for  Thugut  had  no  intention  of  really  de-
fending Belgium,  unless  it  could  be  increased  by  a  large  strip  of  French  Flanders  ;
with  Thugut' s  advent  also  vanished  the  last  shred  of  Austrian  interest  in  the  fate
of  Marie  Antoinette  and  her  children.]


FATHEELAND  IN  DANGER  23

du  genre  humain,^  The  enemy  of  mankind ; '  and,  very  singular
to  say,  you  make  order  that  no  Soldier  of  Liberty  give  quarter
to  an  Englishman.  Which  order,  however,  the  Soldier  of  Liberty
does  but  partially  obey.  We  will  take  no  Prisoners  then,  say
the  Soldiers  of  Liberty ;  they  shall  all  be  '  Deserters '  that  we
take. 2  It  is  a  frantic  order  ;  and  attended  with  inconvenience.
For  surely,  if  you  give  no  quarter,  the  plain  issue  is  that  you  will
get  none  ;  and  so  the  business  become  as  broad  as  it  was  long. —
Our  'recruitment  of  Three-hundred  Thousand  men,'  which  was
the  decreed  force  for  this  year,  is  like  to  have  work  enough  laid
to  its  hand.

So  many  enemies  come  wending  on ;  penetrating  through
throats  of  mountains,  steering  over  the  salt  sea ;  towards  all
points  of  our  territory  ;  rattling  chains  at  us.  Nay,  worst  of  all :
there  is  an  enemy  within  our  own  territory  itself.  In  the  early
days  of  March,  the  Nantes  Postbags  do  not  arrive  ;  ^  there  arrive
only  instead  of  them  Conjecture,  Apprehension,  bodeftil  wind  of
Rumour.  The  bodefullest  proves  true.  Those  fanatic  Peoples  of
La  Vendee  will  no  longer  keep  under :  their  fire  of  insurrection,
heretofore  dissipated  with  difficulty,  blazes  out  anew,  after  the
King's  Death,  as  a  wide  conflagration  ;  not  riot,  but  civil  war.
Your  Cathelineaus,  your  Stofflets,  Charettes,  are  other  men  than
was  thought :  behold  how  their  Peasants,  in  mere  russet  and
hodden,  with  their  rude  arms,  rude  array,  with  their  fanatic
Gaelic  frenzy  and  wild-yelling  battle-cry  of  God  and  the  King,
dash  at  us  like  a  dark  whirlwind ;  and  blow  the  best-disciplined
Nationals  we  can  get  into  panic  and  sauve-qid-peut !  Field  after
field  is  theirs ;  one  sees  not  where  it  will  end.  Commandant
Santerre  may  be  sent  there  ;  but  with  non-effect ;  he  might  as
well  have  returned  and  brewed  beer.

It  has  become  peremptorily  necessary  that  a  National  Conven-

i[It  was  on  Aug.  7th  that  this  remarkably  childish  decree  was  passed,  on  an
amendment  of  Couthon's  to  a  motion  that  Pitt  was  outside  the  pale  of  nations,  and
that  any  one  might  assassinate  him  (who  could).]

*See  Dampmartin,  Ev^nemens,  ii.  213-30.

3  [The  actual  news  of  the  insurrection  at  Machecoul  did  not  arrive  till  March
i8th.     (For  La  Vendue  see  Appendix. )]


24  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

tion  cease  arguing,  and  begin  acting.  Yield  one  party  of  you  to
the  other,  and  do  it  swiftly.  No  theoretic  outlook  is  here,  but
the  close  certainty  of  ruin ;  the  very  day  that  is  passing  over  us
must  be  provided  for.

It  was  Friday  the  Eighth  of  March  when  this  Job's-post  from
Dumouriez,  thickly  preceded  and  escorted  by  so  many  other  Job's-
posts,  reached  the  National  Convention.  Blank  enough  are  most
faces.  Little  will  it  avail  whether  our  Septemberers  be  punished
or  go  unpunished ;  if  Pitt  and  Cobourg  are  coming  in,  with  one
punishment  for  us  all ;  nothing  now  between  Paris  itself  and  the
Tyrants  but  a  doubtful  Dumouriez,  and  hosts  in  loose-flowing
loud  retreat ! — Danton  the  Titan  rises  in  this  hour/  as  always  in
the  hour  of  need.  Great  is  his  voice,  reverberating  from  the
domes : — Citizen-Representatives,  shall  we  not,  in  such  crisis  of
Fate,  lay  aside  discords  ?  Reputation  :  O  what  is  the  reputation
of  this  man  or  of  that  ?  "  Que  mon  nom  soil  Jl6tri ;  que  la  France
soil  libre  :  Let  my  name  be  blighted  ;  let  France  be  free  ! "  It
is  necessary  now  again  that  France  rise,  in  swift  vengeance,  with
her  million  right-hands,  with  her  heart  as  of  one  man.  Instan-
taneous recruitment  in  Paris ;  let  every  Section  of  Paris  furnish
its  thousands ;  every  Section  of  France !  Ninety-six  Commis-
sioners of  us,  two  for  each  Section  of  the  Forty-eight,  they  must
go  forthwith,  and  tell  Paris  what  the  Country  needs  of  her.  Let
Eighty  more  of  us  be  sent,  post-haste,  over  France ;  to  spread
the  fire-cross,  to  call  forth  the  might  of  men.  Let  the  Eighty
also  be  on  the  road,  before  this  sitting  rise.  Let  them  go,  and
think  what  their  errand  is.  Speedy  Camp  of  Fifty-thousand
between  Paris  and  the  North  Frontier ;  for  Paris  will  pour  forth
her  volunteers !  Shoulder  to  shoulder  ;  one  strong  universal
death-defiant  rising  and  rushing ;  we  shall  hurl  back  these  Sons
of  Night  yet  again  ;  and  France,  in  spite  of  the  world,  be  free  !  2

1  [March  8th.]

^Moniteur  (in  Hist.  Pari.  xxv.  6)  [i.e.,  Moniteur,  March  loth.  Danton  added
in  this  great  speech  some  partial  defence  of  Dumouriez :  '  It  is  not  all  his  fault,
'  you  promised  him  30,000  more  men  on  Feb.  ist,  but  not  a  man  has  reached  him  :
'  we  must  send  a  new  army  into  Belgium.  Dumouriez  has  his  faults,  but  he  is  dear
*  to  the  soldiers.'     Carlyle  mixes  up  some  phrases  from  Danton's  later  speech  of


FATHERLAND  IN  DANGER  25

— So  sounds  the  Titan's  voice  :  into  all  Section-houses ;  into  all
French  hearts.  Sections  sit  in  Permanence,  for  recruitment,
enrolment,  that  very  night.  Convention  Commissioners,  on
swift  wheels,  are  carrying  the  fire-cross  from  Town  to  Town,  till
all  France  blaze.

And  so  there  is  Flag  of  Fatherland  in  Danger  waving  from  the
Townhall,  Black  Flag  from  the  top  of  Notre-Dame  Cathedral ;
there  is  Proclamation,  hot  eloquence ;  Paris  rushing  out  once
again  to  strike  its  enemies  down.  That,  in  such  circumstances,
Paris  was  in  no  mild  humour  can  be  conjectured.  Agitated
streets  ;  still  more  agitated  round  the  Salle  de  Manege  !  Feuillans-
Terrace  crowds  itself  with  angry  Citizens,  angrier  Citizenesses  ;
Varlet  perambulates  with  portable  chair :  ejaculations  of  no
measured  kind,  as  to  perfidious  fine-spoken  Hommes  d'dtat,  friends
of  Dumouriez,  secret-friends  of  Pitt  and  Cobourg,  burst  from  the
hearts  and  lips  of  men.  To  fight  the  enemy  ?  Yes,  and  even  to
'  freeze  him  with  terror,  glacer  d'effroi : '  but  first  to  have  domestic
Traitors  punished  !  Who  are  they  that,  carping  and  quarrelling,
in  their  Jesuitic  most  moderate  way,  seek  to  shackle  the  Patriotic
movement  ?  That  divide  France  against  Paris,  and  poison  public
opinion  in  the  Departments  ?  That  when  we  ask  for  bread,  and
a  Maximum  fixed-price,  treat  us  with  lectures  on  Free-trade  in
grains  ?  Can  the  human  stomach  satisfy  itself  with  lectures  on
Free-trade ;  and  are  we  to  fight  the  Austrians  in  a  moderate
manner,  or  in  an  immoderate  ?     This  Convention  must  be  purged.^

"  Set  up  a  swift  Tribunal  for  Traitors,  a  Maximum  for  Grains  :  "
thus  speak  with  energy  the  Patriot  Volunteers,  as  they  defile
through  the  Convention  Hall,  just  on  the  wing  to  the  Frontiers  ;

April  with  those  of  this  earlier  one  {see  Stephens'  Orators,  Danton,  March  8th,
April  ist).

The  Sections  of  Paris  were  slow  to  respond  to  Danton' s  call ;  most  of  their
Revolutionary  Committees  were  entirely  "run"  by  the  fanatics  of  the  Commune,
and  indicated  that  they  were  more  afraid  of  domestic  traitors  than  of  the  Austrians
{i.e.,  wanted  to  make  a  new  September  massacre)  and  demanded  the  establish-
ment of  a  Tribunal  swifter  than  that  of  Aug.  17th.  This  naturally  led  to  the
imeute  of  March  loth  {see  Aulard,  Recueil,  ii.  284-6).]

i[The  extreme  Radicals  actually  issued  from  the  Jacobin  club  a  manifesto  on
March  9th,  fixing  5  a.m.  on  loth  for  the  commencement  of  the  Insurrection,  The
first  thing  to  be  attacked  was  the  Girondin  printing  presses  :  this  was  the  only  part
of  the  business  which  came  off  (Mortimer-Ternaux,  vi.  J84-5).]


26  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

— perorating  in  that  heroical  Cambyses'  vein  of  theirs  :  beshouted
by  the  Galleries  and  Mountain  ;  bemurmured  by  the  Right-side
and  Plain.  Nor  are  prodigies  wanting :  lo,  while  a  Captain  of
the  Section  Poissonniere  perorates  with  vehemence  about  Du-
mouriez,  Maximum  and  Crypto-Royalist  Traitors,  and  his  troop
beat  chorus  with  him,  waving  their  Banner  overhead,  the  eye  of
a  Deputy  discerns,  in  this  same  Banner,  that  the  cravates  or
streamers  of  it  have  Royal  fleurs-de-lys  !  The  Section-Captain
shrieks  ;  his  troop  shriek,  horrorstruck,  and  '  trample  the  Banner
under  foot : '  seemingly  the  work  of  some  Crypto-Royalist  Plotter  ?
Most  probable  :  ^ — or  perhaps  at  bottom,  only  the  old  Banner  of
the  Section,  manufactured  prior  to  the  Tenth  of  August,  when
such  streamers  were  according  to  rule  !  ^

History,  looking  over  the  Girondin  Memoirs,  anxious  to  dis-
entangle the  truth  of  them  from  the  hysterics,  finds  these  days
of  March,  especially  this  Sunday  the  Tenth  of  March,  play  a
great  part.  Plots,  plots ;  a  plot  for  murdering  the  Girondin
Deputies  ;  Anarchists  and  Secret- Royalists  plotting,  in  hellish
concert,  for  that  end  !  The  far  greater  part  of  which  is  hysterics.
What  we  do  find  indisputable  is,  that  Louvet  and  certain  Girondius
were  apprehensive  they  might  be  murdered  on  Saturday,  and  did
not  go  to  the  evening  sitting  ;  but  held  council  with  one  another,
each  inciting  his  fellow  to  do  something  resolute,  and  end  these
Anarchists  :  to  which,  however,  Petion,  opening  the  window,  and
finding  the  night  very  wet,  answered  only,  "  lis  neferont  rien,"
and  'composedly  resumed  his  violin,'  says  Louvet  ;3  thereby,
with  soft  Lydian  tweedledeeing,  to  wrap  himself  against  eating
cares.  Also  that  Louvet  felt  especially  liable  to  being  killed ;
that  several  Girondins  went  abroad  to  seek  beds  :  liable  to  being
killed ;  but  were  not.  Further  that,  in  very  truth,  Journalist
Deputy  Gorsas,  poisoner  of  the  Departments,  he  and  his  Printer

^Choix  des  Rapports,  xi.  277.     [March  12th.]

2  Hist.  Pari.  xxv.  72.

'Louvet,  M^m.  p.  74.  [^  II  pleuf,'  dit-il^  ^  il  n'y  aura  rien'  (I  can  find  no
mention  of  Petion's  violin  in  this  passage,  nor  in  Meillan,  with  whose  account  I
thought  at  first  Carlyle  might  have  confused  Louvet's),]


FATHERLAND  IN  DANGER  27

had  their  houses  broken  into  ^  (by  a  tumult  of  Patriots,  among
whom  redcapped  Varlet,  American  Fournier  loom  forth,  in  the
darkness  of  the  rain  and  riot)  ;  had  their  wives  put  in  fear  ;  their
presses,'^  types  and  circumjacent  equipments  beaten  to  ruin ;  no
Mayor  interfering  in  time ;  Gorsas  himself  escaping,  pistol  in
hand,  'along  the  coping  of  the  back  wall.'  Further  that  Sunday,
the  morrow,  was  not  a  workday ;  and  the  streets  were  more
agitated  than  ever:  Is  it  a  new  September,  then,  that  these
Anarchists  intend  ?  Finally,  that  no  September  came  ; — and  also
that  hysterics,  not  unnaturally,  had  reached  almost  their  acme.^

Vergniaud  denounces  and  deplores  ;  in  sweetly  turned
periods.*^  Section  Bonconseil,  Good-counsel  so-named,  not  Mau-
conseil  or  Ill-counsel  as  it  once  was, — does  a  far  notabler  thing  :
demands  that  Vergniaud,  Brissot,  Guadet,  and  other  denunciatory
fine-spoken  Girondins,  to  the  number  of  Twenty-two,  be  put
under  arrest !  Section  Good-counsel,  so  named  ever  since  the
Tenth  of  August,  is  sharply  rebuked,  like  a  Section  of  Ill-
counsel  :  ^  but  its  word  is  spoken,  and  will  not  fall  to  the
ground.

In  fact,  one  thing  strikes  us  in  these  poor  Girondins :  their
fatal  shortness  of  vision  ;  nay  fatal  poorness  of  character,  for  that
is  the  root  of  it.    They  are  as  strangers  to  the  People  they  would

1  [March  loth.J

2  [Gorsas'  printing  press  was  in  Rue  Tiquetonne ;  what  were  the  exact  further
designs  of  the  Insurgents  is  not  clear,  but  it  is  evident  there  was  an  attempt  at
surrounding  the  Convention,  such  as  was  successful  eleven  weeks  later.]

^  Meillan,  pp.  23,  24 ;  Louvet,  pp.  71-80.

•* [March  13th.  Carlyle  can  hardly  have  read  Vergniaud 's  speech  of  March  13th,
which  was  anything  but  '  sweetly  turned  periods,'  but  an  unusually  brave  and  out-
spoken outburst  against  the  Insurrectionists.  It  is  there  that  the  phrase  occurs  of  the
'  Revolution  devouring  its  own  children ; '  there  that  the  members  of  the  '  Committee
of  Insurrection '  are  denounced  by  name  and  a  demand  for  their  arrest  put  forward  ;
there  is  made  also  an  open  demand  that  the  minute  books  of  the  Cordeliers  and
Jacobins  be  produced  in  the  Convention  {see  Stephens'  Orators,  vol.  ii.).

Garat  was  forthwith  ordered  to  arrest  the  Committee  of  Insurrection,  and
weakly  replied  that  '  he  couldn't  find  any  Committee  so  called.'  The  Cafd  Corazza
all  through  March  was  the  centre  of  this  not  very  secret  committee,  whose  leaders
were  Collot,  Guzman,  Desfieux,  Proly,  Lazowski,  Chabot,  and  perhaps  Tallien
(three  of  these  were  foreigners).  This  Committee  transferred  its  sittings  to  the
old  Archevechd  in  April.  {See  Schmidt,  Tableaux,  i,  146  ;  Dauban,  Paris  en  1793,
p.  97. -f^?-)]

5  Moniteur  (Stance  du  12  Mars),  15  Mars.


28  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

govern ;  to  the  thing  they  have  come  to  work  in.  Formulas,
Philosophies,  Respectabilities,  what  has  been  written  in  Books,
and  admitted  by  the  Cultivated  Classes :  this  inadequate  Scheme
of  Nature's  working  is  all  that  Nature,  let  her  work  as  she  will,
can  reveal  to  these  men.  So  they  perorate  and  speculate  ;  and
call  on  the  Friends  of  Law,  when  the  question  is  not  Law  or
No-Law,  but  Life  or  No-Life.  Pedants  of  the  Revolution,  if  not
Jesuits  of  it !  Their  Formalism  is  great ;  great  also  is  their
Egoism.  France  rising  to  fight  Austria  has  been  raised  only  by
plot  of  the  Tenth  of  March,  to  kill  Twenty-two  of  them  !  This
Revolution  Prodigy,  unfolding  itself  into  terrific  stature  and
articulation,  by  its  own  laws  and  Nature's,  not  by  the  laws  of
Formula,  has  become  unintelligible,  incredible  as  an  impossibility,
the  'waste  chaos  of  a  Dream.'  A  Republic  founded  on  what  we
call  the  Virtues ;  on  what  we  call  the  Decencies  and  Respecta-
bilities :  this  they  will  have,  and  nothing  but  this.  Whatsoever
other  Republic  Nature  and  Reality  send,  shall  be  considered  as
not  sent ;  as  a  kind  of  Nightmare  Vision,  and  thing  non-extant ;
disowned  by  the  Laws  of  Nature,  and  of  Formula.  Alas !  dim
for  the  best  eyes  is  this  Reality ;  and  as  for  these  men,  they  will
not  look  at  it  with  eyes  at  all,  but  only  through  'facetted
spectacles  '  of  Pedantry,  wounded  Vanity  ;  which  yield  the  most
portentous  fallacious  spectrum.  Carping  and  complaining  for-
ever of  Plots  and  Anarchy,  they  will  do  one  thing ;  prove,  to
demonstration,  that  the  Reality  will  not  translate  into  their
Formula  ;  that  they  and  their  Formula  are  incompatible  with
the  Reality :  and,  in  its  dark  wrath,  the  Reality  will  extinguish
it  and  them  !  What  a  man  kens  he  cam.  But  the  beginning  of
a  man's  doom  is,  that  vision  be  withdrawn  from  him  ;  that  he
see  not  the  reality,  but  a  false  spectrum  of  the  reality ;  and
following  that,  step  darkly,  with  more  or  less  velocity,  down-
wards to  the  utter  Dark ;  to  Ruin,  which  is  the  great  Sea  of
Darkness,  whither  all  falsehoods,  winding  or  direct,  continually
flow!

This    Tenth    of  March   we   may   mark   as  an   epoch   in    the
Girondin  destinies ;  the  rage  so  exasperated  itself,  the  miscon-


FATHERLAND  IN  DANGER  29

ception  so  darkened  itself.^  Many  desert  the  sittings  ;  many  come
to  them  armed. 2  An  honourable  Deputy,  setting  out  after
breakfast,  must  now,  besides  taking  his  Notes,  see  whether  his
Priming  is  in  order.

Meanwhile  with  Dumouriez  in  Belgium  it  fares  ever  worse.
Were  it  again  General  Miranda's  fault,  or  some  other's  fault,
there  is  no  doubt  whatever  but  the  '  Battle  of  Nerwinden,'  on
the  1 8th  of  March,  is  lost ;  and  our  rapid  retreat  has  become
a  far  too  rapid  one.^  Victorious  Cobourg,  with  his  Austrian
prickers,  hangs  like  a  dark  cloud  on  the  rear  of  us :  Dumouriez
never  off  horseback  night  or  day ;  engagement  every  three
hours ;  our  whole  discomfited  Host  rolling  rapidly  inwards,  full
of  rage,  suspicion  and  sauve-qui-peut !  And  then  Dumouriez
himself,  what  his  intents  may  be  ?  Wicked  seemingly  and  not
charitable !  His  despatches  to  Committee  openly  denounce  a
factious  Convention,  for  the  woes  it  has  brought  on  France  and
him.  And  his  speeches — for  the  General  has  no  reticence !
The  execution  of  the  Tyrant  this  Dumouriez  calls  the  Murder
of  the   King.       Danton   and    Lacroix,    flying   thither   as  Com-


^  [March  loth  was  really  fatal  to  the  Gironde  because  of  the  support  which  most
of  its  leaders  gave  to  the  creation  of  the  Tribunal  Criminel  Extraordinaire  {vid.
infr.,  iii.  32) :  also  because  on  the  same  day  Danton's  motion  for  the  creation  of  a
strong  Committee  of  Government,  in  which  they  might  then  have  had  a  share,  was
shelved,  to  reappear  as  the  motion  for  the  Comitd de  Salut  Public  on  April  6th,  when
it  was  too  late  for  them.  The  '  authorities,'  so  called,  were  as  weak  now  as  in  Sept.
'92.  Garat,  the  new  Minister  of  the  Interior  on  whom  they  henceforward  relied
(March  14th — Aug.  15th),  was  a  weaker  edition  of  Roland.  He  was  born  1749,
had  been  Professor  of  History  at  the  LyUe,  deputy  to  States-General,  Minister  of
Justice  on  Danton's  resignation,  Oct.  '92,  was  afterwards  ambassador  to  Naples
'98,  Senator  and  Count  of  the  Empire,  died  1833.]

2Meillan,  M6m.  85,  24.  ['  The  Coti  Droit  was  deserted,  we  were  only  44  .  .  .
for  some  time  nearly  all  of  us  were  armed  with  sabres,  pistols,  etc'  This  refers
apparently  to  March  loth.]

3  [The  retreat  once  begun  had  been  a  disastrous  one  (March  8th — i8th) ;  the
army  was  thoroughly  dispirited  :  Dumouriez,  in  order  to  give  it  heart,  determined  to
risk  a  battle  for  which  his  numbers,  some  47,000,  were  not  too  small.  Coburg  how-
ever wisely  posted  himself  on  the  heights  of  Neerwinden ;  the  French  right  and  centre,
under  Valence  and  the  Due  de  Chartres,  charged  with  the  greatest  valour,  and
won  a  footing  on  the  heights,  but  Miranda  on  the  left  was  chased  from  the  field  by
the  young  Archduke  Karl ;  to  prevent  his  flank  being  uncovered  Dumouriez  had
to  withdraw  his  centre  and  left  again,  and  the  retreat  was  continued,  viA  Louvain
and  Brussels,  on  Valenciennes  (reached  March  27th).]


30  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

missioners  ^  once  more,  return  very  doubtful ;  even  Danton  now
doubts.

Three  Jacobin  Missionaries,  Proly,  Dubuisson,  Pereyra,  have
flown  forth ;  sped  by  a  wakeful  Mother  Society :  they  are  struck
dumb  to  hear  the  General  speak.  The  Convention,  according
to  this  General,  consists  of  three-hundred  scoundrels  and  four-
hundred  imbeciles :  France  cannot  do  without  a  King.  "  But
we  have  executed  our  King."  "And  what  is  it  to  me,"  hastily
cries  Dumouriez,  a  General  of  no  reticence,  "whether  the  King's
name  be  Ludovicus  or  Jacohus  ?  "  "  Or  Philippus  !  "  rejoins  Proly  ;
— and  hastens  to  report  progress.  Over  the  Frontiers  such  hope
is  there.  2

CHAPTER  V

SANSCULOTTISM  ACCOUTRED

Let  us  look,  however,  at  the  grand  internal  Sansculottism  and
Revolution  Prodigy,  whether  it  stirs  and  waxes :  there  and  not
elsewhere  may  hope  still  be  for  France.  The  Revolution
Prodigy,  as  Decree  after  Decree  issues  from  the  Mountain,  like
creative,  A«^*,  accordant  with  the  nature  of  the  Thing, — is  shaping
itself  rapidly,  in  these  days,  into  terrific  stature  and  articulation,
limb  after  limb.  Last  March,  1 792,  we  saw  all  France  flowing
in  blind  terror  ;  shutting  town-barriers,  boiling  pitch  for  Brigands  :
happier,  this  March,  that  it  is  a  seeing  terror ;  that  a  creative
Mountain  exists,  which  can  say  Jiat !  Recruitment  proceeds
with  fierce  celerity :  nevertheless  our  Volunteers  hesitate  to  set
out,  till  Treason  be  punished  at  home ;  they  do  not  fly  to  the
frontiers ;  but  only  fly  hither  and  thither,  demanding  and  de-
nouncing.    The  Mountain  must  speak  new^/iat,  and  new^ats.

^  [Danton's  third  mission  to  Belgium  ;  he  reached  Dumouriez  on  19th,  the  morn-
ing after  Neerwinden,  found  there  was  nothing  to  be  made  of  him,  and  returned
at  once  to  denounce  him.]

2 [Proly,  Pereira  and  Dubuisson  were  not  sent  to  Dumouriez — they  had  been
sent  to  revolutionise  Holland  (when  it  should  have  been  conquered)  and  met  the
General  on  their  return  from  this  fruitless  errand,  March  26th.  Danton  in  his
speech,  April  ist,  confirms  the  fact  of  Dumouriez's  excellent  criticism  on  the  com-
position of  the  Convention,  adding,  however,  that  he  had  not  heard  the  words
himself.]


SANSCULOTTISM  ACCOUTRED        31

And  does  it  not  speak  such  ?  Take,  as  first  example,  those
Comit&s  Revolution naires  for  the  arrestment  of  Persons  Suspect.
Revolutionary  Committee,  of  Twelve  chosen  Patriots,  sits  in
every  Township  of  France ;  examining  the  Suspect,  seeking
arms,  making  domiciliary  visits  and  arrestments  ; — caring,  gener-
ally, that  the  Republic  suffer  no  detriment.  Chosen  by  universal
suffrage,  each  in  its  Section,  they  are  a  kind  of  elixir  of  Jacobin-
ism ;  some  Forty-four  Thousand  of  them  awake  and  alive  over
France  !  ^  In  Paris  and  all  Towns,  every  house-door  must  have
the  names  of  the  inmates  legibly  printed  on  it,  *  at  a  height  not
exceeding  five  feet  from  the  ground ; '  every  Citizen  must
produce  his  certificatory  Carte  de  Civisme,  signed  by  Section-
President  ;  2  every  man  be  ready  to  give  account  of  the  faith
that  is  in  him.  Persons  Suspect  had  as  well  depart  this  soil  of
Liberty !  And  yet  departure  too  is  bad :  all  Emigrants  are
declared  Traitors,^  their  property  become  National ;  they  are
'  dead  in   Law,'  * — save   indeed  that  for  our  behoof  they  shall

i[The  Revolutionary  Committees  of  the  48  Sections  of  Paris  (and  of  each
Commune  of  France)  were  the  small  Committees  which  got  themselves  nominated
first  in  June,  July,  Aug.  '92  to  guide  the  Insurrection  against  the  Monarchy.
They  were  intended  to  be  temporary  in  character  ;  but  from  Jan.  '93  onwards  such
Committees  are  found  (apart  from  the  whole  body  of  their  sections)  presenting  peti-
tions, etc.  The  various  extreme  Revolutionary  measures,  such  as  raising  troops  for
the  levy  of  300,000  men  (Feb.  24th),  the  arrest  of  suspected  persons,  and  especially  the
granting  of  '  certificates  of  civism,'  were  put  into  their  hands  subject  always  to
appeal  to  the  Commune.  Each  Committee  was  ordered  to  correspond  with  the
Comity  de  Suretd  G^nirale  every  ten  days ;  and  the  members  received  three
francs  a  day  :  until  the  passing  of  the  '  law  of  the  40  sous '  (Sept.  4th  '93,  vid.
infr. ,  iii.  93)  the  Section  meetings  probably  consisted  of  few  people  besides  the
Revolutionary  Committees.  Dutard  [see  Schmidt's  Tableaux,  vol.  i.  passim)  con-
tinually speaks  of  these  meetings  as  being  the  source  of  all  disorder ;  '  if  the  Moderates
ever  get  the  upper  hand  in  any  section,  the  rowdy  men  come  over  from  the  next
section,  and  outvote  them.']

'^{Cartes  de  Civisme,  called  also  Cartes  de  SHret^,  were  enforced  by  an  order
of  the  Commune  April  29th  '93,  Garat  feebly  allowing  it.  They  were  made  out
by  the  Revolutionary  Committees  of  the  Section  to  which  the  man  belonged,  and
the  issue,  examination  and  revocation  of  these  certificates  became  the  principal
business  of  those  bodies  and  the  most  potent  agent  of  the  Terror.  Besides  the
signature  of  the  President  of  the  Section  that  of  two  other  witnesses  was  required,
who  had  to  testify  to  the  unspotted  Radicalism  of  the  applicant  ;  a  vote  given  for
a  Moderate  at  a  municipal  election,  an  expression  of  pity  for  '  the  Tyrant '  were
enough  to  dumn  him.  The  cards  had  to  be  presented  to  any  police  officer  who
asked  for  them,  and  even  in  the  queues  at  the  Bakers'  shops.  Perriere,  one  of
Garat's  spies,  speaks  of  the  extreme  difficulty  of  getting  his  carte  made  out  {see
Schmidt,  i.  156,  355  ;  ii.  79,  193).]

■■'[March  ist.]  *[Fid,  supr.,  ii.  190,  note.]


32  THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

Mive  yet  fitly  years  in  Law,'  and  what  heritages  may  fall  to
them  in  that  time  become  National  too !  A  mad  vitality  of
Jacobinism,  with  Forty-four  Thousand  centres  of  activity,  circu<-
lates  through  all  fibres  of  France.

Very  notable  also  is  the  Tribunal  Extraordinaire  :  ^  decreed  by
the  Mountain ;  ^  some  Girondins  dissenting,  for  surely  such  a
Court  contradicts  every  formula ; — other  Girondins  assenting,
nay  cooperating,  for  do  not  we  all  hate  Traitors,  O  ye  people
of  Paris  ? — Tribunal  of  the  Seventeenth,  in  Autumn  last,  was
swift ;  but  this  shall  be  swifter.  Five  Judges  ;  a  standing  Jury,
which  is  named  from  Paris  and  the  Neighbourhood,  that  there
be  not  delay  in  naming  it :  they  are  subject  to  no  Appeal ;  to
hardly  any  Law-forms,  but  must  '  get  themselves  convinced '  in
all  readiest  ways ;  and  for  security  are  bound  '  to  vote  audibly ; '
audibly,  in  the  hearing  of  a  Paris  Public.  This  is  the  Tribunal
Extraordinaire ;  which,  in  few  months,  getting  into  most  lively
action,  shall  be  entitled  Tribunal  Revolutionnaire ;  as  indeed  it
from  the  very  first  has  entitled  itself:  with  a  Herman^  or  a
Dumas*   for   Judge    President,    with   a   Fouquier-Tinville ^    for


1  Moniteur,  No.  70  (du  11  Mars),  No.  76,  etc.  [The  great  authority  on  the
Revolutionary  Tribunal  ( Tribunal  Revolutionnaire)  is  M.  Emile  Campardon.  The
Tributial oiAngnsl  17th — Nov.  29th  '92  was  only  a  temporary  one  {vid.  sup?-. ,  ii.  282).
The  new  Tribunal  Criminel  Extraordinaire  was  to  be  permanent,  and  to  take
account  of  all  cases  of  conspiracy  against  the  nation.  It  was  demanded  by  Carrier
(then  so  unknown  that  the  Journal  des  Dibats  calls  him  Cartier),  and  supported  by
Isnard  and  Danton  :  no  doubt  the  Gironde  hoped  to  use  it  to  put  down  the  Mon-
tagne  :  Lanjuinais  courageously  protested  against  its  creation.  On  July  31st  it  was
divided  into  two  courts ;  on  Sept.  14th  into  four ;  on  Oct.  29th  it  is  first  called  Tribunal
Revolutionnaire.  It  then  had  two  Presidents,  16  Judges  and  60  Jurors.  By  the '  law  of
22  Prairial'  (June  loth  '94)  it  could  judge  even  members  of  the  Convention  without  a
decree.  From  April— Nov.  '93  the  monthly  average  was  13  condemnations  to  death  ;
from  Nov.  '93 — March  '94,  65  ;  then  Ventose  (Feb.  19th — March  19th),  116  condem-
nations ;  Germinal  (March  20th— April  19th),  155  ;  Flordal  (April  20th— May  19th),
355  ;  Prairial  ist  to  22nd  (May  20th — June  loth),  281 ;  Prairial  23rd  to  9th  Thermidor
(June  nth— July  27th),  1,366  ;  July  27th  '94— Sept.  22nd  '95,  166,  nearly  all  these
last  being  victims  of  the  Thermidorian  reaction.]

2  [March  loth.]

3 [Herman  (or  Hermann),  one  of  Robespierre's  legal  friends  from  Arras,  born
1759,  first  President  of  Tribunal,  resigned  shortly  before  Thermidor  :  guillotined
with  Fouquier  May  7th  '95.]

4[R.  F.  Dumas,  another  close  follower  of  Robespierre,  Vice-President  of  Tri-
bunal; guillotined  with  Robespierre,  loth  Thermidor.]

5  [Antoine-Quentin  Fouquier-Tinville,  born  1746,  well  educated  by  a  rich  peasant
father,  called  to  the  Paris  bar  {Chdtclef)  1774,  married  and  had  children  (a  daughter
of  his  was  living  at  Vervins  in  1848) ;  in  1783  Fouquier  retired  from  practice  and


SANSCULOTTISM  ACCOUTRED        33

Attorney-General,  and  a  Jury  of  such  as  Citizen  Leroi,  who
has  surnamed  himself  Dix-AoHly  '  Leroi  August-Tenth,'  it  will
become  the  wonder  of  the  world.  Herein  has  Sansculottism
fashioned  for  itself  a  Sword  of  Sharpness :  a  weapon  magical ;
tempered  in  the  Stygian  hell-waters ;  to  the  edge  of  it  all
armour,  and  defence  of  strength  or  of  cunning  shall  be  soft ;  it
shall  mow  down  Lives  and  Brazen-gates ;  and  the  waving  of  it
shed  teiTor  through  the  souls  of  men.

But  speaking  of  an  amorphous  Sansculottism  taking  form,
ought  we  not,  above  all  things,  to  specify  how  the  Amorphous
gets  itself  a  Head  ?  Without  metaphor,  this  Revolution  Govern-
ment continues  hitherto  in  a  very  anarchic  state.  Executive
Council  of  Ministers,  Six  in  number,  there  is :  but  they,  espe-
cially since  Roland's  retreat,  have  hardly  known  whether  they
were  Ministers  or  not.  Convention  Committees  sit  supreme
over  them  ;  but  then  each  Committee  as  supreme  as  the  others  ;
Committee  of  Twenty-one,  of  Defence,  of  General  Surety :
simultaneous  or  successive,  for  specific  purposes.  The  Conven-
tion alone  is  all-powerful, — especially  if  the  Commune  go  with
it ;  but  is  too  numerous  for  an  administrative  body.  Wherefore,
in  this  perilous  quick-whirling  condition  of  the  Republic,  before
the  end  of  March  ^  we  obtain  our  small  Comity  de  Salut  Public ;
as  it  were,  for  miscellaneous  accidental  purposes  requiring  des-
patch ; — as  it  proves,  for  a  sort  of  universal  supervision,  and
universal  subjection.  They  are  to  report  weekly,  these  new
Committee-men ;  but  to  deliberate  in  secret.  Their  number  is
Nine,  firm  Patriots  all,  Danton  one  of  them ;  renewable  every
month ; — yet  why  not  re-elect  them  if  they  turn  out  well }
The  flower  of  the  matter  is,  that  they  are  but  nine  ;  that  they
sit  in  secret.  An  insignificant-looking  thing  at  first,  this  Com-
mittee ;  but  with  a  principle  of  growth  in  it !  Forwarded  by
fortune,   by  internal  Jacobin    energy,  it  will  reduce  all  Com-

his  history  is  obscure  till  Aug.  20th  '92,  when  he  wrote  to  C.  Desmoulins  asking
for  a  place.     Camille,  who  was  distantly  related  to  him,  got  him  named  Director  of
Juries  on  the   Tribunal  of  Aug.  17th.      He  became  Public  Accuser  to  the  new
Tribunal  at  this  date,  and  was  guillotined  May  7th  '95  (Campardon,  i.  13).]
1  [April  6th.]

VOL.    III.  3


34  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

mittees  and  the  Convention  itself  to  mute  obedience,  the
Six  Ministers  to  Six  assiduous  Clerks ;  and  work  its  will  on
the  Earth  and  under  Heaven,  for  a  season.  A  ^Committee
of  Public  Salvation/  whereat  the  world  still  shrieks  and
shudders.  1

If  we  call  that  Revolutionary  Tribunal  a  Sword,  which  Sans-
culottism  has  provided  for  itself,  then  let  us  call  the  '  Law  of
the  Maximum '  ^  a  Provender-scrip,  or  Haversack,  wherein,
better  or  worse,  some  ration  of  bread  may  be  found.  It  is  true,
Political  Economy,  Girondin  free-trade,  and  all  law  of  supply
and  demand,  are  hereby  hurled  topsyturvy :  but  what  help  ?
Patriotism  must  live ;  the  '  cupidity  of  farmers '  seems  to  have
no  bowels.  Wherefore  this  Law  of  the  Maximum,  fixing  the
highest  price  of  grains,  is,  with  infinite  effort,  got  passed  ;  ^  and

1  Moniteur,  No.  83  (du  24  Mars  1793),  Nos,  86,  98,  99,  loo.  {Vid.  supr.,  ii.  279.
It  was  during  the  debates  on  the  King's  trial  (Jan.  3rd,  on  Kersaint's  motion)
that  the  name  Comitd  de  Defense  Gdnlrale  was  first  given  to  the  revived  '•  Com-
mittee of  25.'  Three  members  were  to  be  elected  to  it  by  each  of  the  principal
Committees  of  the  Convention.  Its  business  was  the  War  and  all  measures  which
could  help  the  War.  Its  membership  was  divided,  during  the  months  of  Jan.,
Feb.,  March,  between  Montagnards  and  Girondists.  Now,  on  April  6th,  on
Isnard's  motion  it  was  reduced  to  9  members  (Danton,  Bar^re,  Cambon,  Delmas,
Brdard,  Guyton-Morveau,  Treilhard,  Lacroix,  Lindet),  and  its  debates  were  to  be
secret ;  Gasparin  and  Saint-Andr(5  joined  it  later.  This  Committee  was  re-elected
May  loth  and  June  loth.  It  was  entirely  under  Danton's  influence  and  it  represents
his  effort  to  govern  France.  There  exists  in  the  French  archives  (A.  F.  ii.  45-50)  a
series  of  registers  of  its  deliberations  :  Danton's  signature  is  comparatively  infre-
quent, Cambon,  Lindet,  Barere  and  Guyton-Morveau  are  the  most  regular  attend-
ants. This  bears  out  the  tradition  of  Danton's  laziness  [see  Mortimer- Ternaux,  vi.
10  ;  see  Aulard,  Recueil  des  Actes  et  Monuments  du  Comitd  de  Salut  Public  (Paris
1889 — 91),  ii.  83,  113  ;  and  (throughout)  Gros,  Le  Comitd  de  Salut  Public  (Paris,
1893),  vid.  infr.y  iii.  71).]

2  [May  3rd.]

3  Ibid,  (du  20  Avril,  &c.,  to  20  Mai  1793.)  {The  Maximum.  Carlyle  probably
here  refers  to  the  petition  of  the  Commune^  April  i8th  '93,  in  favour  of  a  fixed
price  for  all  necessaries  of  life,  which  had  been  hinted  at  by  Saint-Just  as  early  as
Nov.  20th  '92.  There  was  nothing  new  in  the  idea,  or  in  the  partial  or  municipal
enforcement  of  it.  The  harvest  of  '92  had  not  been  a  bad  one  (though  not  a  very
good  one),  and  the  Executive  Council  had,  on  Sept.  i6th,  issued  a  proclamation  that
all  owners  of  grain  stores  should  consider  themselves  simple  trustees,  that  a  register
was  to  be  kept  of  the  quantity  each  man  possessed,  and  requisitions  made  for  the
public  market  accordingly.  The  Convention  at  once  voted  20  millions  to  be  at
Roland's  disposal  for  the  supply  of  the  Paris  market,  and  that  bakers  were  to  sell  at
3  sous  the  lb.  (we  hear  no  more  of  the  4  lb.  loaf) ;  the  price  in  the  country  round  was
often  double  that.  Further  a  regular  open  account  was  to  be  kept  between  the  baker
and  each  of  his  customers,  weekly  inspected  by  the  Commissioners  of  the  Commune.
This  arrangement  lasted  until  May  3rd  '93,  and  Mortimer-Ternaux  (vi.  40)  calcu-
lates that  the  Commune  spent  12,000  fr.  a  day  in  '  keeping  prices  down.'     On  May


SANSCULOTTISM  ACCOUTEED        35

shall  gradually  extend  itself  into  a  Maximum  for  all  manner  of
comestibles  and  commodities :  with  such  scrambling  and  topsy-
turvying as  may  be  fancied !  For  now,  if,  for  example,  the
farmer  will  not  sell  ?  The  farmer  shall  be  forced  to  sell.  An
accurate  Account  of  what  grain  he  has  shall  be  delivered  in  to
the  Constituted  Authorities :  let  him  see  that  he  say  not  too
much  ;  for  in  that  case,  his  rents,  taxes  and  contributions  will
rise  proportionally :  let  him  see  that  he  say  not  too  little ;  for,
on  or  before  a  set  day,  we  shall  suppose  in  April,  less  than  one-
third  of  this  declared  quantity  must  remain  in  his  bams,  more
than  two-thirds  of  it  must  have  been  thrashed  and  sold.  One
can  denounce  him,  and  raise  penalties.

By  such  inextricable  overturning  of  all  Commercial  relations
will  Sansculottism  keep  life  in  ;  since  not  otherwise.  On  the
whole,  as  Camille  Desmoulins  says  once,  "  while  the  Sansculot-
tes fight,  the  Monsieurs  must  pay."  So  there  come  Impdis  Pro-
gressifs,  Ascending  Taxes ;  which  consume,  with  fast-increasing
voracity,  the  '  superfluous-revenue  '  of  men  :  beyond  fifty-pounds
a-year,  you  are  not  exempt ;  rising  into  the  hundreds,  you  bleed
freely ;    into  the  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands,  you  bleed

3rd  the  Maximum  was  actually  voted,  for  corn  only,  over  the  whole  of  France,  the
price  to  vary  according  to  the  condition  of  the  crops  and  stores  in  each  department
On  Sept.  17th  '93  it  was  voted  to  extend  the  principle  to  other  commodities  also,
and  to  enforce  it  at  once  in  the  matter  of  corn.  The  same  law  defines  the  crime
of  accaparement  as  the  "withdrawing  from  public  daily  sale  articles  of  prime
necessity  which  you  possess,  grow  or  manufacture."  The  crime  is  punishable  by
death  and  confiscation,  the  informer  receiving  one-third  of  the  goods  confiscated.
Further  no  miller  or  baker  may  abandon  his  craft,  or  sell  privately  ;  no  man  may
store  more  than  one  month's  provisions  for  his  family  ;  lands  left  uncultivated  shall
immediately  be  put  in  cultivation.  But  it  seems  that  little  was  done  to  enforce  all
this  as  yet.  In  Nov.  '93  a  table  of  prices  of  all  articles  of  necessity  was  to  be  pre-
pared in  each  Department,  and  these  tables  were  presented  to  the  Convention
in  a  report  of  Barere's,  in  Feb.  '94,  His  speech  on  that  occasion  (Feb.  22nd)  shows
that  the  basis  of  the  Maximum  was  taken  to  be  the  cost  of  production  in  1790  in-
creased by  one-third  to  allow  for  the  rise  in  the  price  of  everything,  plus  5  per  cent,
profit  for  the  wholesale,  plus  10  per  cent,  profit  for  the  retail  dealer.  The  tables  of
prices  so  prepared  needed  constant  revision  (I  have  quoted  one,  infr.,  iii.  164),  and
the  Maximum  was  in  fact  only  enforced  by  Terror  and  for  the  sake  of  Terror.  It
was  used  as  a  means  of  confiscating  the  property  of  the  agricultural  class  newly
enriched  by  the  Revolution  ;  and  a  very  large  proportion  of  the  victims  of  the
'  Red  Terror '  (May — July  '94)  were  peasant  proprietors,  who  suffered  for  evading
it.  {Cf.  Rev.  de  la  R6v.  viii.  162,  282,  336,  442  ;  Schmidt,  ii.  240,  254.)  The  Com-
mittee of  Public  Safety  constantly  evaded  it  for  the  needs  of  the  Armies  ;  Aulard's
Recueil  teems  with  orders  of  Committee  authorising  the  purchase  of  provisions,
equipments  and  munitions  of  War  at  prices  above  the  Maximum.'\


36  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

gushing.!  Also  there  come  Requisitions  ;  there  comes  '  Forced-
Loan  of  a  Milliard/  some  Fifty-Millions  Sterling ;  which  of
course  they  that  have  must  lend.  Unexampled  enough  ;  it  has
grown  to  be  no  country  for  the  Rich,  this  ;  but  a  country  for
the  Poor !  And  then  if  one  fly,  what  steads  it  ?  Dead  in  Law  ;
nay  kept  alive  fifty  years  yet,  for  their  accursed  behoof!  In
this  manner  therefore  it  goes  ;  topsyturvying,  qa-ira-m^  ; — and
withal  there  is  endless  sale  of  Emigrant  National-Property,  there
is  Cambon  with  endless  cornucopia  of  Assignats.  The  Trade  and
Finance  of  Sansculottism  ;  and  how,  with  Maximum  and  Bakers'-
queues,  with  Cupidity,  Hunger,  Denunciation  and  Paper-money,
it  led  its  galvanic-life,  and  began  and  ended, — remains  the  most
interesting  of  all  Chapters  in  Political  Economy  :  still  to  be
written.

All  which  things,  are  they  not  clean  against  Formula  }  O
Girondin  Friends,  it  is  not  a  Republic  of  the  Virtues  we  are
getting ;  but  only  a  Republic  of  the  Strengths,  virtuous  and
other!  2


CHAPTER  VI

THE  TBAITOR

But  Dumouriez,  with  his  fugitive  Host,  with  his  King  Ludoxicux
or  King  Philippus  ?  There  lies  the  crisis ;  there  hangs  the
question  :  Revolution  Prodigy,  or  Counter- Revolution  ? — One
wide  shriek  covers  that  North-east  region.  Soldiers,  full  of
rage,  suspicion  and  terror,  flock  hither  and  thither ;  Dumouriez,

1  [This  is  the  Impot  Progressif  oi  April  27th  (Danton's  proposal).  The  forced
loan  of  a  milliard  vfdis  on  May  20th.  The  details  were  not  finally  settled  till  June
22nd,  by  Ramel.  On  Sept.  3rd  it  was  added  that  a  jury  of  your  neighbours  should
assess  you  for  this  loan  (one  can  imagine  how  equitably  it  would  be  done).  We
hear  no  more  of  the  loan  or  tax  after  the  summer  of  '93  ;  the  Government  lived  by
confiscations  and  requisitions,  not  by  taxes.  {See  Appx.  on  Debt  and  Deficit ;
Mortimer-Ternaux,  viii.  333,  sqg.)]

2  [For  a  sensible  view  of  the  situation  see  the  letter  of  La  Coste  and  Saint-Andrd
to  Barere  (from  the  Department  of  the  Lot),  March  26th:  'Every  one,  rich  and
poor  alike,  is  weary  of  the  Revolution,  the  Municipal  authorities  are  hopelessly
against  us,  the  Convention  is  despised  and  the  cause  lost,  but  we  Conventionals
have  to  save  our  heads,  and  the  only  way  to  do  it  is  to  feed  the  poor  from  public
granaries  with  cheap  bread'  (Aulard,  Recueil,  ii.  533).]


THE  TRAITOR  37

the  many-counselled,  never  off  horseback,  knows  now  no  counsel
that  were  not  worse  than  none  :  ^  the  counsel,  namely,  of  join-
ing himself  with  Cobourg ;  marching  to  Paris,  extinguishing
Jacobinism,  and,  with  some  new  King  Ludovicus  or  King
Philippus,  restoring  the  Constitution  of  1791!^

Is  Wisdom  quitting  Dumouriez  ;  the  herald  of  Fortune  quit-
ting him  ?  Principle,  faith  political  or  other,  beyond  a  certain
faith  of  mess-rooms,  and  honour  of  an  officer,  had  him  not  to
quit.  At  any  rate  his  quarters  in  the  Burgh  of  Saint-Amand ;
his  headquarters  in  the  Village  of  Saint-Amand  des  Boues,  a
short  way  off, — have  become  a  Bedlam.  National  Representa-
tives, Jacobin  Missionaries  are  riding  and  running ;  of  the
'three  Towns,'  Lille,  Valenciennes  or  even  Conde,  which  Du-
mouriez wanted  to  snatch  for  himself,  not  one  can  be  snatched ;
your  Captain  is  admitted,  but  the  Town-gate  is  closed  on  him,
and  then  alas  the  Prison-gate,  and  '  his  men  wander  about  the
ramparts.'  Couriers  gallop  breathless ;  men  wait,  or  seem
waiting,  to  assassinate,  to  be  assassinated ;  Battalions  nigh
frantic  with  such  suspicion  and  uncertainty,  with  Viie-la-Ri-
publique  and  Sauve-qui-peut,  rush  this  way  and  that ; — Ruin  and
Desperation  in  the  shape  of  Cobourg  lying  entrenched  close  by.

Dame  Genlis  and  her  fair  Princess  d'Orleans  find  this  Burgh
of  Saint-Amand  no  fit  place  for  them ;  Dumouriez's  protection
is  grown  worse  than  none.  Tough  Genlis,  one  of  the  toughest
women ;  a  woman,  as  it  were,  with  nine  lives  in  her ;  whom
nothing  will  beat :  she  packs  her  bandboxes  ;  clear  for  flight  in
a  private  manner.  Her  beloved  Princess  she  will — leave  here,
with  the  Prince  Chartres  6galite  her  Brother.     In  the  cold  gray

1  [March  23rd— April  5th.]

'^  Dumouriez,  M^moires,  iv.  c.  7,  c.  10.  [His  plan  was  to  propose  to  Coburg
an  armistice  of  sufficient  duration  to  enable  him  to  go  to  Paris,  and  restore  the
Monarchy  (Louis  XVII.).  It  seems  incredible  that  such  an  astute  person  should
have  relied  on  the  good  faith  of  the  Austrian  Government — though  Coburg,  who
most  unwillingly  signed  the  agreement  with  him,  was  honourably  disposed  to
keep  it.  The  negotiations  between  them  lasted  from  March  23rd— April  5th,
Dumouriez  agreeing  to  put  the  frontier  fortresses  in  Coburg's  hands  as  a  guarantee
of  good  faith.  Meanwhile,  on  March  30th,  the  Convention  sent  to  summon
Dumouriez  to  the  Bar ;  the  Commissioners  sent  were  Beumonville  (the  War
minister)  and  four  deputies  {vid.  infr.,  iii.  39).]


38  THE  FRENCH  EEVOLUTION

of  the  April  morning,  we  find  her  accordingly  established  in
her  hired  vehicle,  on  the  street  of  Saint-Amand  ;  postilions  just
cracking  their  whips  to  go, — when  behold  the  young  Princely
Brother,  struggling  hitherward,  hastily  calling;  bearing  the
Princess  in  his  arms  !  Hastily  he  has  clutched  the  poor  young
lady  up,  in  her  very  night-gown,  nothing  saved  of  her  goods
except  the  watch  from  the  pillow:  with  brotherly  despair  he
flings  her  in,  among  the  bandboxes,  into  Genlis's  chaise,  into
Genlis's  arms :  Leave  her  not,  in  the  name  of  Mercy  and
Heaven  !  A  shrill  scene,  but  a  brief  one  : — the  postilions  crack
and  go.  Ah,  whither?  Through  by-roads  and  broken  hill-
passes  ;  seeking  their  way  with  lanterns  after  nightfall ;  through
perils,  and  Cobourg  Austrians,  and  suspicious  French  Nationals  :
finally,  into  Switzerland ;  safe  though  nigh  moneyless.^  The
brave  young  Egalite  has  a  most  wild  Morrow  to  look  for ;  but
now  only  himself  to  carry  through  it.

For  indeed  over  at  that  Village  named  of  the  Mudbat/is,  Saint-
Amand  des  Boues,  matters  are  still  worse.  About  four  o'clock  on
Tuesday  afternoon,  the  2d  of  April  1793,  two  Couriers  come
galloping  as  if  for  life  ;  Mon  General !  Four  National  Repre-
sentatives, War-Minister  at  their  head,  are  posting  hitherward
from  Valenciennes  ;  ^  are  close  at  hand, — with  what  intents  one
may  guess  !  While  the  Couriers  are  yet  speaking,  War-Minister
and  National  Representatives,  old  Camus  the  Archivist  for  chief
speaker  of  them,  arrive.  Hardly  has  Mon  G&n&ral  had  time  to
order  out  the  Hussar  Regiment  de  Berchigny  ;  that  it  take  rank
and  wait  near  by,  in  case  of  accident.  And  so,  enter  War-
Minister  Beurnonville,  with  an  embrace  of  friendship,  for  he  is
an  old  friend  ;  enter  Archivist  Camus  and  the  other  three  fol-
lowing him.

They  produce  Papers,  invite  the  General  to  the  bar  of  the  Con-

1  Genlis,  iv.  139.  [Madame  de  Genlis  and  the  Princess  quitted  Mons  in  Belgium,
April  13th,  and  drove  via  Wiesbaden  to  Switzerland,  where  they  established  them-
selves at  the  Convent  of  Bremgarten,  which  they  left  separately  in  May  '94,
Mademoiselle  to  join  her  brother,  and  Madame  for  Hamburg  (Genlis  in  loc.  cit.).\

2  [Beurnonville,  Minister  of  War ;  Camus,  Quinette,  Lamarque  and  BancaL]


THE  TRAITOR  39

vention  :  merely  to  give  an  explanation  or  two.  The  General
finds  it  unsuitable,  not  to  say  impossible,  and  that  "  the  service
will  suffer."  Then  comes  reasoning ;  the  voice  of  the  old  Ar-
chivist getting  loud.  Vain  to  reason  loud  w\th  this  Dumouriez  ;
he  answers  mere  angry  irreverences.  And  so,  amid  plumed  staff-
officers,  veiy  gloomy-looking  ;  in  jeopardy  and  uncertainty,  these
poor  National  messengers  debate  and  consult,  retire  and  re-enter,
for  the  space  of  some  two  hours  :  without  effect.  Whereupon
Archivist  Camus,  getting  quite  loud,  proclaims,  in  the  name  of
the  National  Convention,  for  he  has  the  power  to  do  it.  That
General  Dumouriez  is  arrested  :  "  Will  you  obey  the  National
mandate.  General  !  " — "  Pas  dam  ce  moment-ci,  Not  at  this  par-
ticular moment,"  answers  the  General  also  aloud  ;  then  glancing
the  other  way,  utters  certain  unknown  vocables,  in  a  mandatory
manner;  seemingly  a  German  word-of-command.^  Hussars
clutch  the  Four  National  Representatives,  and  Beurnonville  the
War-Minister ;  pack  them  out  of  the  apartment ;  out  of  the
Village,  over  the  lines  to  Cobourg,  in  two  chaises  that  very  night,
— as  hostages,  prisoners  ;  to  lie  long  in  Maestricht  and  Austrian
strongholds  !  ^     Jacta  est  alea.

This  night  Dumouriez  prints  his  '  Proclamation ; '  this  night
and  the  morrow  the  Dumouriez  Army,  in  such  darkness  visible,
and  rage  of  semi-desperation  as  there  is,  shall  meditate  what  the
General  is  doing,  what  they  themselves  will  do  in  it.  Judge
whether  this  Wednesday  was  of  halcyon  nature,  for  any  one  !
But  on  the  Thursday  morning,  we  discern  Dumouriez  with  small
escort,  with  Chartres  Egalite  and  a  few  staff-officers,  ambling
along  the  Conde  Highway  :  perhaps  they  are  for  Conde,  and
trying  to  persuade  the  Garrison  there  ;  at  all  events,  they  are
for  an  interview  with  Cobourg,  who  waits  in  the  woods  by  ap-
pointment, in  that  quarter.  Nigh  the  Village  of  Doumet,  three
National   Battalions,   a  set  of  men  always   full  of  Jacobinism,

1  Dumouriez,  iv.  159,  &c.

2 Their  narrative,  written  by  Camus  in  Toulongeon,  iii.  app.  60-87.  [^t  was
these  deputies  who  formed  the  subject  of  the  often  proposed  exchange  for  the
prisoners  in  the  Temple  ;  and  who  were  eventually  exchanged  for  the  sole  survivor
of  them,  Madame  Royale,  in  the  autumn  of  '95.]


40  THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

sweep  past  us  ;  marching  rather  swiftly, — seemingly  in  mistake,
by  a  way  we  had  not  ordered.  The  General  dismounts,  steps
into  a  cottage,  a  little  from  the  wayside  ;  will  give  them  right
order  in  writing.  Hark  !  what  strange  growling  is  heard  ;  what
barkings  are  heard,  loud  yells  of  "Traitors,"  oi" Arrest:"  the
National  Battalions  have  wheeled  round,  are  emitting  shot !
Mount,  Dumouriez,  and  spring  for  life  !  Dumouriez  and  Staff
strike  the  spurs  in,  deep;  vault  over  ditches,  into  the  fields,
which  prove  to  be  morasses  ;  sprawl  and  plunge  for  life  ;  be-
whistled  with  curses  and  lead.  Sunk  to  the  middle,  with  or
without  horses,  several  servants  killed,  they  escape  out  of  shot-
range,  to  General  Mack  the  Austrian's  quarters.  Nay  they  return
on  the  morrow,  to  Saint- Amand  and  faithful  foreign  Berchigny  ;
but  what  boots  it  }  The  Artillery  has  all  revolted,  is  jingling  off
to  Valenciennes  ;  all  have  revolted,  are  revolting  ;  except  only
foreign  Berchigny,  to  the  extent  of  some  poor  fifteen  hundred,
none  will  follow  Dumouriez  against  France  and  Indivisible  Re-
public :  Dumouriez's  occupation's  gone.^

Such  an  instinct  of  Frenchhood  and  Sansculottism  dwells  in
these  men  :  they  will  follow  no  Dumouriez  nor  Lafayette,  nor
any  mortal  on  such  errand.  Shriek  may  be  of  Sauve-qui-peui,
but  will  also  be  of  Vive-la-R&puhlique.  New  National  Represen-
tatives arrive  :  new  General  Dampierre,  soon  killed  in  battle  ;
new  General  Custine  :  the  agitated  Hosts  draw  back  to  some
Camp  of  Famars  ;  make  head  against  Cobourg  as  they  can.^

And  so  Dumouriez  is  in  the  Austrian  quarters  ;  his  drama
ended,  in  this  rather  sorry  manner.  A  most  shifty,  wiry  man  ;
one  of  Heaven's  Swiss  ;  that  wanted  only  work.  Fifty  years  of
unnoticed  toil  and  valour  ;  one  year  of  toil  and  valour,  not  un-
noticed, but  seen  of  all  countries  and  centuries  ;  then  thirty
other  years  again  unnoticed,  of  Memoir-writing,  English  Pension,

1  M^moires,  iv.  162-80.  [Dumouriez  escaped  with  great  difficulty ;  Colonel
Thouvenot,  who  was  with  him,  had  two  horses  shot  under  him  ;  and  Quentin,  his
Secretary,  was  taken  prisoner  (Carnot,  Corresp.  ii.  70).  Something  over  800  men
altogether  followed  Dumouriez,  but  most  of  them  deserted  the  allies  afterwards
(Mortimer-Ternaux,  vi.  458).]

2  [April  8th.]


IN  FIGHT  41

scheming  and  projecting  to  no  purpose  :  Adieu  thou  Swiss  of
Heaven,  worthy  to  have  been  something  else  !  ^

His  Staff  go  different  ways.  Brave  young  Egalite  ^  reaches
Switzerland  and  the  Genlis  Cottage  ;  with  a  strong  crabstick  in
his  hand,  a  strong  heart  in  his  body  ;  his  Princedom  is  now  re-
duced to  that.  Egalite  the  Father  sat  playing  whist,  in  his
Palais  Egalite,  at  Paris,  on  the  6th  day  of  this  same  month  of
April,  when  a  catchpole  entered  :  Citoyen  Egalite  is  wanted  at
the  Convention  Committee  !  ^  Examination,  requiring  Arrest-
ment ;  finally  requiring  Imprisonment,  transference  to  Marseilles
and  the  Castle  of  If !  Orleansdom  has  sunk  in  the  black  waters  ;
Palais  Egalite,  which  was  Palais  Royal,  is  like  to  become  Palais
National.

CHAPTER  VII

IN  FIGHT

Our  Republic,  by  paper  Decree,  may  be  *  One  and  Indivisible  ; '
but  what  profits  it  while  these  things  are  ?  Federalists  in  the
Senate,  renegadoes  in  the  Army,  traitors  everywhere  !  France,
all  in  desperate  recruitment  since  the  Tenth  of  March,  does  not
fly  to  the  frontier,  but  only  flies  hither  and  thither.  This  de-
fection of  contemptuous  diplomatic  Dumouriez  falls  heavy  on
the  fine-spoken  high-sniffing  Hommes  d'etat  whom  he  consorted
with  ;  forms  a  second  epoch  in  their  destinies.^

^  [Dumouriez  was  badly  received  at  the  Conference  of  the  Allies  at  Antwerp,
which  followed  immediately  on  his  flight  (April  8th)  ;  no  one  listened  to  him  ;  he
wandered  about  Europe  for  some  time,  and  finally  accepted  an  English  pension,
dying  at  Turville  near  Henley-on-Thames,  1823.]

2  [The  Due  de  Chartres  refused  to  serve  in  the  Austrian  ranks,  and  escaped  to
Zurich  (May  8th).  He  became  professor  of  mathematics  at  the  College  of
Reichenau  for  a  short  time,  then  wandered  over  Europe  till  1795,  finally  sailing
from  Stockholm  for  North  America  in  1796.  After  long  travel  in  America,  he
returned  to  Europe,  and  passed  seven  years  at  Twickenham  near  London.  In
1809  he  married  Marie  Amdlie,  daughter  of  Ferdinand  of  Sicily  ;  on  the  fall  of  the
Empire  he  returned  to  France  where  he  was  well  treated  by  both  Louis  XVHL  and
Charles  X.  :  finally  became  King  Louis-Philippe  1830,  and  died,  in  exile  again,  at
Claremont  1850.]

■''See  Montgaillard,  iv.  144.      [April  7th.]

■^[Danton,  in  the  midst  of  the  struggle  with  the  Gironde,  did  not  lose  heart  as
regards  the  National  defence.  On  April  13th  he  carried  a  decree  that  the  Republic
will  not  concern  itself  with  the  internal  affairs  of  other  nations,  but  will  bury  itself


42  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Or  perhaps  more  strictly  we  might  say,  the  second  Girondin
epoch,  though  little  noticed  then,  began  on  the  day  when,  in
reference  to  this  defection,  the  Girondins  broke  with  Danton.
It  was  the  first  day  of  April ;  Dumouriez  had  not  yet  plunged
across  the  morasses  to  Cobourg,  but  was  evidently  meaning  to  do
it,  and  our  Commissioners  were  off  to  arrest  him  ;  when  what
does  the  Girondin  Lasource  see  good  to  do,  but  rise,  and  jesuiti-
cally  question  and  insinuate  at  great  length,  whether  a  main
accomplice  of  Dumouriez  had  not  probably  been — Danton!
Gironde  grins  sardonic  assent ;  Mountain  holds  its  breath.  The
figure  of  Danton,  Levasseur  says,  while  this  speech  went  on,  was
noteworthy.  He  sat  erect  with  a  kind  of  internal  convulsion
struggling  to  keep  itself  motionless ;  his  eye  from  time  to  time
flashing  wilder,  his  lip  curling  in  Titanic  scorn. ^  Lasource,  in
a  fine-spoken  attorney-manner,  proceeds  :  there  is  this  proba-
bility to  his  mind,  and  there  is  that ;  probabilities  which  press
painfully  on  him,  which  cast  the  Patriotism  of  Danton  under  a
painful  shade  ; — which  painful  shade,  he,  Lasource,  will  hope
that  Danton  may  find  it  not  impossible  to  dispel.

"  Les  ScMerats  I "  cries  Danton,  starting  up,  with  clenched  right-
hand,  Lasource  having  done  ;  and  descends  from  the  Mountain,
like  a  lava-flood  ;  his  answer  not  unready.  Lasource's  proba-
bilities fly  like  idle  dust ;  but  leave  a  result  behind  them.  "  Ye
were  right,  friends  of  the  Mountain,"  begins  Danton,  "and  I
was  wrong  :  there  is  no  peace  possible  with  these  men.  Let  it
be  war  then  !  They  will  not  save  the  Republic  with  us :  it
shall  be  saved  without  them  ;  saved  in  spite  of  them."  Really
a  burst  of  rude  Parliamentary   eloquence  this  ;  which  is  still

in  ruins  before  allowing  other  nations  to  interfere  in  France.  On  30th  Cambon
carried  a  decree  for  the  establishment  of  eleven  armies  on  the  frontier,  and  the
raising  of  two  more  within  France  as  recruiting  depots  ;  with  each  army  there  were
to  be  permanent  Commissioners  of  the  Convention  with  unlimited  powers.  But
this  led  to  frequent  denunciations  of  Generals.  (Now  it  is  Kellermann  who  speaks
too  much  of  mon  armJe,  mes  soldats,  etc. ;  now  Custine  whose  '  liaisons  are  to  be
carefully  watched  ; '  now  all  the  staff  officers,  etc. ,  see  Aulard,  Recueil,  iii,  286. )  And
Beurnonville  was  replaced  at  the  War  Office  by  the  incapable  Bouchotte,  a  tool  of
Hubert  and  the  Cotmnune ;  meanwhile,  so  unpopular  had  the  Convention  Com-
missioners become,  that  the  Austrians  were  received  almost  as  liberators  in  Belgium.]
'  M^moires  de  Rend  Levasseur  (Bruxelles,  1830),  i.  164.


IN  FIGHT  43

worth  reading,  in  the  old  Moniieur.  With  fire-words  the  ex-
asperated rude  Titan  rives  and  smites  these  Girondins  ;  at
every  hit  the  glad  Mountain  utters  chorus  ;  Marat,  like  a
musical  bis,  repeating  the  last  phrase.^  Lasource's  probabilities
are  gone  ;  but  Danton's  pledge  of  battle  remains  lying.

A  third  epoch,  or  scene  in  the  Girondin  Drama,  or  rather  it  is
but  the  completion  of  this  second  epoch,  we  reckon  from  the
day  when  the  patience  of  virtuous  Petion  finally  boiled  over  ;
and  the  Girondins,  so  to  speak,  took  up  this  battle-pledge  of
Danton's,  and  decreed  Marat  accused.^  It  was  the  eleventh  of
the  same  month  of  April,  on  some  effervescence  rising,  such  as
often  rose ;  and  President  had  covered  himself,  mere  Bedlam
now  ruling ;  and  Mountain  and  Gironde  were  rushing  on  one
another  with  clenched  right-hands,  and  even  with  pistols  in
them ;  when,  behold,  the  Girondin  Duperret  drew  a  sword  !
Shriek  of  horror  rose,  instantly  quenching  all  other  effervescence,
at  sight  of  the  clear  murderous  steel ;  whereupon  Duperret  re-
turned it  to  the  leather  again  ; — confessing  that  he  did  indeed
draw  it,  being  instigated  by  a  kind  of  sacred  madness,  ^'  sainte
fureur,"  and  pistols  held  at  him  ;  but  that  if  he  parricidally  had
chanced  to  scratch  the  outmost  skin  of  National  Representation
with  it,  he  too  carried  pistols,  and  would  have  blown  his  brains
out  on  the  spot.^

But  now  in  such  posture  of  affairs,  virtuous  Petion  rose,  next
morning,  to  lament  these  effervescences,*  this  endless  Anarchy

1  Stance  du  ler  Avril  1793  (in  Hist.  Pari.  xxv.  24-35).  [The  gist  of  Danton's
speech,  in  reply  to  Lasource,  was  that,  when  in  Belgium  on  March  19th,  he  did
discover  something  of  Dumouriez's  treason  ;  but  that  if  any  attempt  had  been
made  to  seize  Dumouriez  there  and  then,  his  army  would  have  fallen  to  pieces,
and  the  Austrians  have  walked  into  France  unopposed.  He  concluded  by  de-
manding a  commission  of  inquiry  into  the  relations  between  the  Gironde  and
Dumouriez,  ]

•2  [It  was  the  speech  of  Vergniaud  on  loth  and  that  of  Guadet  on  the  nth
(partly  an  answer  to  some  vague  accusations  of  Robespierre  on  3rd  and  loth,
partly  a  clear  denunciation  of  the  violence  of  the  Commune)  that  gave  the  Con-
vention courage  to  accuse  Marat.]

3  Ibid.  xxv.  397.

■*  [This  seems  to  refer  to  Petion 's  denunciation  of  the  petition  of  the  Section
Halle-au-BU,  which  was  on  loth.  The  Section  Bonconseil  had  already  petitioned
against  the  Gironde  on  8th.     (Mortimer- Ternaux,  vii.  loi,  sqq.)'\


44  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

invading  the  Legislative  Sanctuary  itself;  and  here,  being  growled
at  and  howled  at  by  the  Mountain,  his  patience,  long  tried,  did,
as  we  say,  boil  over  ;  and  he  spake  vehemently,  in  high  key,  with
foam  on  his  lips ;  "  whence,"  says  Marat,  "  1  concluded  he  had
got  la  rage,"  the  rabidity,  or  dog-madness.  Rabidity  smites  others
rabid  :  so  there  rises  new  foam-lipped  demand  to  have  Anarchists
extinguished  ;  and  specially  to  have  Marat  put  under  Accusation.
Send  a  representative  to  the  Revolutionary  Tribunal  ?  Violate  the
inviolability  of  a  Representative  .''  Have  a  care,  O  Friends  !  This
poor  Marat  has  faults  enough ;  but  against  Liberty  or  Equality,
what  fault }  That  he  has  loved  and  fought  for  it,  not  wisely  but
too  well.  In  dungeons  and  cellars,  in  pinching  poverty,  under
anathema  of  men  ;  even  so,  in  such  fight,  has  he  grown  so  dingy,
bleared  ;  even  so  has  his  head  become  a  Stylites  one  !  Him  you
will  fling  to  your  Sword  of  Sharpness  ;  while  Cobourg  and  Pitt
advance  on  us,  fire-spitting  ?

The  Mountain  is  loud,  the  Gironde  is  loud  and  deaf;  all  lips
are  foamy.  With  ^Permanent-Session  of  twenty-four  hours,'
with  vote  by  rollcall,  and  a  deadlift  effort,  the  Gironde  carries  ^
it :  Marat  is  ordered  ^  to  the  Revolutionary  Tribunal,  to  answer
for  that  February  Paragraph  of  Forestallers  at  the  door-lintel,
with  other  offences  ;  and,  after  a  little  hesitation,  he  obeys. -^

Thus  is  Danton's  battle-pledge  taken  up  ;  there  is,  as  he  said
there  would  be,  '  war  without  truce  or  treaty,  ni  treve  ni  composi-
tion.' Wherefore,  close  now  with  one  another.  Formula  and
Reality,  in  death-grips,  and  wrestle  it  out ;  both  of  you  cannot
live,  but  only  one  !  *

^[The  figures  were  210  to  92.]  2  [April  12th.]

'  Moniteur  du  16  Avril,  1793,  ^^  ^^^^-  [This  is  inaccurate ;  Marat  refused  to  obey.
His  friends  smuggled  him  out  of  the  Hall  and  he  took  refuge  in  his  sewers  again  :
but  on  April  23rd  he  thought  better  of  it  and  gave  himself  up  at  the  Conciergerie.
He  was  immediately  sent  for  to  the  Tribunal  and  interrogated  [vid.  infr.,  iii.  46).]
*  [The  best  day  by  day  account  of  the  final  struggle  between  the  Gironde  and  the
Montagne  (April  and  May)  is  to  be  found  in  Schmidt's  Tableaux  de  la  R6v.,
which  are  virtually  police  reports  of  the  spies  of  Garat,  notably  those  of  a  highly  in-
telligent man  called  Dutard.  It  was  immediately  after  this  attack  of  Petion  (and
Guadet)  on  Marat  that  the  extremist  Sections  of  Paris  demanded  the  expulsion  of
the  22  Girondin  leaders  (April  8th  and  15th) ;  the  publication  of  Camille  Desmou-
lins'  '  Histoire  des  Brissotins  '  was  at  the  end  of  May.  [Vid.  i -fr.,  iii.  50.  Cf.
throughout  Mortiraer-Ternaux,  books  xxxv.-xxxviii.)]


IN  DEATH-GRIPS  45

CHAPTER  VIII

IN  DEATH-GRIPS

It  proves  what  strength,  were  it  only  of  inertia,  there  is  in
established  Formulas,  what  weakness  in  nascent  Realities,  and
illustrates  several  things,  that  this  death-wrestle  should  still  have
lasted  some  six  weeks  or  more.  National  business,  discussion  of
the  Constitutional  Act,  for  our  Constitution  should  decidedly  be
got  ready,  proceeds  along  with  it.  We  even  change  our  Locality  ;
we  shift,  on  the  Tenth  of  May,  from  the  old  Salle  de  Manege
into  our  new  Hall,  in  the  Palace,  once  a  King's  but  now  the
Republic's,  of  the  Tuileries.  Hope  and  ruth,  flickering  against
despair  and  rage,  still  struggle  in  the  minds  of  men.^

It  is  a  most  dark  confused  death-wrestle,  this  of  the  six  weeks.
Formalist  frenzy  against  Realist  frenzy ;  Patriotism,  Egoism,
Pride,  Anger,  Vanity,  Hope  and  Despair,  all  raised  to  the  frenetic
pitch :  Frenzy  meets  Frenzy,  like  dark  clashing  whirlwinds ;
neither  understands  the  other ;  the  weaker,  one  day,  will  under-
stand that  it  is  verily  swept  down  !  Girondism  is  strong  as
established  Formula  and  Respectability :  do  not  as  many  as
Seventy-two  of  the  Departments,  or  say  respectable  Heads  of
Departments,  declare  for  us  }  '^  Calvados,  which  loves  its  Buzot,
will  even  rise  in  revolt,  so  hint  the  Addresses  ;  Marseilles,  cradle
of  Patriotism,  will  rise  ;  Bourdeaux  will  rise,  and  the  Gironde
Department,  as  one  man ;  in  a  word,  who  will  not  rise,  were  our
Reprcseniation  Nationale  to  be  insulted,  or  one  hair  of  a  Deputy's
head  harmed !  The  Mountain,  again,  is  strong  as  Reality  and
Audacity.     To  the  Reality  of  the  Mountain  are  not  all  further-

1  [The  alterations  necessary  in  the  TMdtre  des  Tuileries  (or  Salle  des  Spectacles,
or  Salle  des  Machines,  as  it  was  sometimes  called)  had  taken  six  months  to  effect.
Dutard  regarded  the  move  as  a  good  one  for  the  cause  of  order  ;  '  on  the  narrow
terrace  of  the  Feuillans  it  was  easy  for  Revolutionary  groups  to  assemble  outside
the  Hall;  but  here  [i.e.,  on  the  Tuileries  terrace)  they  get  lost  in  the  crowd  of
peaceable  people.'  The  new  Hall  was  enormous,  but  badly  adapted  for  sound;
the  galleries  would  contain  2,000  persons.  (Dauban,  183  ;  Mortimer-Ternaux,
vii.  527.)]

2 [No  serious  movement  of  this  sort  took  place  till  after  June  2nd  (vid.  infr,,  iii.
61,  sqq.).'\


46  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

some  things  possible  ?     A  new  Tenth  of  August,  if  needful ;  nay
a  new  Second  of  September ! —

But,  on  Wednesday  afternoon,  Twenty-fourth  day  of  April,
year  1793,  what  tumult  as  of  fierce  jubilee  is  this?  It  is  Marat
returning  from  the  Revolutionary  Tribunal !  A  week  or  more
of  death-peril :  and  now  there  is  triumphant  acquittal ;  Revolu-
tionary Tribunal  can  find  no  accusation  against  this  man.  And
so  the  eye  of  History  beholds  Patriotism,  which  had  gloomed
unutterable  things  all  week,  break  into  loud  jubilee,  embrace  its
Marat ;  lift  him  into  a  chair  of  triumph,  bear  him  shoulder-high
through  the  streets.  Shoulder-high  is  the  injured  People's-friend,
crowned  with  an  oak-garland ;  amid  the  wavy  sea  of  red  night-
caps, carmagnole  jackets,  grenadier  bonnets  and  female  mobcaps  ;
far-sounding  like  a  sea !  The  injured  People's-friend  has  here
reached  his  culminating-point ;  he  too  strikes  the  stars  with  his
sublime  head.^

But  the  Reader  can  judge  with  what  face  President  Lasouree,
he  of  the  '  painful  probabilities,'  who  presides  in  this  Convention
Hall,  might  welcome  such  jubilee-tide,  when  it  got  thither,  and
the  Decreed  of  Accusation  floating  on  the  top  of  it !  A  National
Sapper,  spokesman  on  the  occasion,  says,  the  People  know  their
Friend,  and  love  his  life  as  their  own  ;  "  whosoever  wants  Marat's
head  must  get  the  Sapper's  first."  ^    Lasouree  answered  with  some

^[On  Marat  being  brought  before  the  Tribunal  certain  numbers  of  L'Ami  du
Peuple  were  put  in  evidence  against  him.  He  did  not  deny  the  authorship  of
the  passages,  but  asserted  that  they  had  been  mutilated  and  twisted  from  their  true
sense.  No  real  attempt  was  made  to  bring  witnesses  against  him,  and  the  whole
trial  was  held  with  a  mob  of  Marat's  friends  shouting  applause  at  every  word  he
spoke.     (Campardon,  i.  30-38.)

Dutard  saw  how  wrong  it  was  to  make  Marat  a  martyr,  '  let  Marat  live,  and  if
'  he  dies  create  another  Marat  to  show  the  bourgeoisie  what  anarchy  means'  (Schmidt,
i.  258).  .  .  .  '  Marat  is  the  hero  of  Saint-Antoine  because  (i.)  they  don't  believe
'  him  guilty  of  September,  or  if  they  do  they  sympathise  with  him  in  that,  (ii.)  his
'  hands  are  clean,  (iii.)  his  predictions  have  hitherto  always  been  verified,  (iv.)  he
'  speaks  logically  and  they  can  understand  him  ;  they  don't  understand  your  Ver-
'  gniauds,  etc.  :  nor  do  you  understand  the  people.'  (Dutard  to  Garat,  May  24th,
Schmidt,  i.  282.  Cf.  also  Dubois-Crancd's  prophetic  speech  quoted  in  Mortimer-
Ternaux,  vii.  141,  sqq.W

2  Stance  (in  Moniteur,  No.  116,  du  26  Avril,  An  ler.  [This  Sapper  was  Rocher,
who  had  been  on  guard  at  the  Temple,  and  amused  himself  by  puffing  smoke  into
the  faces  of  the  King  and  Queen  when  they  passed  him  on  the  stairs.  (Campardon,
i.  38  note.)]


IN  DEATH-GRIPS  47

vague  painful  mumblement, — which,  says  Levasseur,  one  could
not  help  tittering  at.^  Patriot  Sections,  Volunteers  not  yet  gone
to  the  Frontiers,  come  demanding  the  "purgation  of  traitors
from  your  own  bosom ; "  the  expulsion,  or  even  the  trial  and
sentence,  of  a  factious  Twenty-two.

Nevertheless  the  Gironde  has  got  its  Commission  of  Twelve  ;
a  Commission  specially  appointed  ^  for  investigating  these  troubles
of  the  Legislative  Sanctuary :  let  Sansculottism  say  what  it  will.
Law  shall  triumph.  Old-Constituent  Rabaut  Saint-Etienne  pre-
sides over  this  Commission :  "  It  is  the  last  plank  whereon  a
wrecked  Republic  may  perhaps  still  save  herself."  Rabaut  and
they  therefore  sit,  intent ;  examining  witnesses ;  launching
arrestments  ;  looking  out  into  a  waste  dim  sea  of  troubles, — the
womb  of  Formula,  or  perhaps  her  grave !  Enter  not  that  sea,
O  Reader !  There  are  dim  desolation  and  confusion ;  raging
women  and  raging  men.  Sections  come  demanding  Twenty-
two  ;  for  the  number  first  given  by  Section  Bonconseil  still  holds,
though  the  names  should  even  vary.  Other  Sections,  of  the
wealthier  kind,  come  denouncing  such  demand  ;  ^  nay  the  same
Section  will  demand  today,  and  denounce  the  demand  tomorrow,
according  as  the  wealthier  sit,  or  the  poorer.  Wherefore,  indeed,
the  Girondins  decree  that  all  Sections  shall  close  '  at  ten  in  the
evening ; '  ^  before  the  working  people  come  :  which  Decree
remains  without  eifect.  And  nightly  the  Mother  of  Patriotism
wails  doleful ;  doleful,  but  her  eye  kindling !  And  Foumier
I'Americain  is  busy,  and  the  two  banker  Freys,  and  Varlet
Apostle  of  Liberty ;  the  bull-voice  of  Marquis  St.-Huruge  is
heard.  And  shrill  women  vociferate  from  all  Galleries,  the
Convention  ones  and  downwards.     Nay  a  '  Central  Committee '

1  Levasseur,  M6moires,  i.  c.  6.

■^[May  2ist.  Boyer-Fonfrede,  Rabaut-Saint-Etienne,  Kervelegan,  Boileau,
Mollevault,  Lariviere,  Bergoeing,  Valogne,  Gommalre,  Bertrand,  Gardien,  Viger,
were  the  Commission  of  Twelve,  expressly  charged  to  investigate  the  recent  acts  of  the
Commune  -eLXid  Sections,  and  to  guard  against  conspiracies  against  the  Convention  ;
the  first  report  was  presented  by  Viger,  May  24th.    (Mortimer-Ternaux,  vii.  245-9. )]

2  [Tuileries,  Fraternity,  Buttes  des  Moulins  :  also  note  an  address  from  Bordeaux,
of  May  15th,  which  produced  great  discussion.    (Mortimer-Ternaux,  vii.  223,  sqq.)]

4  [May  24th.  j


48  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

of  all  the  Forty-eight  Sections  looms  forth  huge  and  dubious ;
sitting  dim  in  the  Archeveche,  sending  Resolutions,  receiving
them :  a  Centre  of  the  Sections ;  ^  in  dread  deliberation  as  to  a
New  Tenth  of  August !

One  thing  we  will  specify,  to  throw  light  on  many  :  the  aspect
under  which,  seen  through  the  eyes  of  these  Girondin  Twelve,
or  even  seen  through  one's  own  eyes,  the  Patriotism  of  the  softer
sex  presents  itself.  There  are  Female  Patriots,  whom  the  Giron-
dins  call  Megaeras,  and  count  to  the  extent  of  eight  thousand  ;
with  serpent-hair,  all  out  of  curl ;  who  have  changed  the  distaff
for  the  dagger.  They  are  of  'the  Society  called  Brotherly,'
Fratemelle,  say  Sisterly,  which  meets  under  the  roof  of  the
Jacobins.  'Two  thousand  daggers,'  or  so,  have  been  ordered, —
doubtless  for  them.  They  rush  to  Versailles,  to  raise  more
women ;  but  the  Versailles  women  will  not  rise.^

Nay  behold,  in  National  Garden  of  Tuileries, — Demoiselle
Theroigne  herself  is  become  as  a  brownlocked  Diana  (were  that
possible)  attacked  by  her  own  dogs,  or  she-dogs !  The  Demoi-
selle, keeping  her  carriage,  is  for  Liberty  indeed,  as  she  has  full
well  shown ;  but  then  for  Liberty  with  Respectability :  whereupon
these  serpent-haired  Extreme  She-Patriots  do  now  fasten  on  her,
tatter  her,  shamefully  fustigate  her,  in  their  shameful  way ;
almost  fling  her  into  the  Garden-ponds,  had  not  help  intervened.  ^
Help,  alas,  to  small  purpose.  The  poor  Demoiselle's  head  and
nervous-system,  none  of  the  soundest,  is  so  tattered  and  fluttered
that  it  will  never  recover ;  but  flutter  worse  and  worse,  till  it

1  [Nothing  is  more  bewildering  than  the  way  in  which  the  Sections  change  and
rechange  their  names.  The  Constituent  named  the  Sections  in  some  cases  after
the  old  Arrondissemertts,  in  some  cases  after  the  principal  buildings  in  them,  A
complete  list  of  Sections  and  their  changes  of  name  is  given  in  the  index  to  Schmidt's
Tableaux  de  la  Revolution.

This  central  Committee  of  Sections  at  the  old  Archeveche  is  first  mentioned  in
a  letter  of  Terrasson's  to  Garat  on  May  13th.  It  was  from  this  body  that  Dutard
expected  the  Insurrection  to  come  ;  Dobsen,  its  president,  was  imprisoned  by  order
of  the  Convention  on  26th  ;  the  Sections  demanded  other  things  besides  blood ;
under  pretence  of  equipping  Volunteers  for  the  front  they  plundered  the  treasury
to  a  fearful  extent.     ( Mortimer- Ternaux,  vii.  230.)]

^Buzot,  M^moires,  pp.  69,  84;  Meillan,  M^moires,  pp.  192,  195,  196.  Sec
Commission  des  Douze  (in  Choix  des  Rapports,  xii.  69-131).

'[May  15th.]


IN  DEATH-GRIPS  49

crack  ;  and  within  year  and  day  we  hear  of  her  in  madhouse  and
straitwaistcoat,  which  proves  permanent ! — Such  brownlocked
Figure  did  flutter,  and  inarticulately  jabber  and  gesticulate,  little
able  to  speak  the  obscure  meaning  it  had,  through  some  segment
of  the  Eighteenth  Century  of  Time.  She  disappears  here  from
the  Revolution  and  Public  History  forevermore.^

Another  thing  we  will  not  again  specify,  yet  again  beseech  the
Reader  to  imagine :  the  reign  of  Fraternity  and  Perfection.
Imagine,  we  say,  O  Reader,  that  the  Millennium  were  struggling
on  the  threshold,  and  yet  not  so  much  as  groceries  could  be  had,
— owing  to  traitors.  With  what  impetus  would  a  man  strike
traitors,  in  that  case  !  Ah,  thou  canst  not  imagine  it ;  thou  hast
thy  groceries  safe  in  the  shops,  and  little  or  no  hope  of  a  Mil-
lennium ever  coming  ! — But  indeed,  as  to  the  temper  there  was
in  men  and  women,  does  not  this  one  fact  say  enough :  the
height  Suspicion  had  risen  to  }  Preternatural  we  often  called  it ;
seemingly  in  the  language  of  exaggeration :  but  listen  to  the
cold  deposition  of  witnesses.  Not  a  musical  Patriot  can  blow
himself  a  snatch  of  melody  from  the  French  Horn,  sitting  mildly
pensive  on  the  housetop,  but  Mercier  will  recognise  it  to  be  a
signal  which  one  Plotting  Committee  is  making  to  another.
Distraction  has  possessed  Harmony  herself ;  lurks  in  the  sound  of
Marseillaise  and  Qa-ira.^  Louvet,  who  can  see  as  deep  into  a
millstone  as  the  most,  discerns  that  we  shall  be  invited  back  to
our  old  Hall  of  the  Manege,  by  a  Deputation ;  and  then  the
Anarchists  will  massacre  Twenty-two  of  us,  as  we  walk  over.  It
is  Pitt  and  Cobourg  ;  the  gold  of  Pitt.— Poor  Pitt !     They  little

1  Deux  Amis,  vii.  77-80  ;  Forster,  i.  514;  Moore,  i.  70.  She  did  not  die  till  1817  ;
in  the  Salpetribre,  in  the  most  abject  state  of  insanity  :  see  Esquirol,  Des  Maladies
Mentales  (Paris,  1838),  i.  445-50.  [Th^roigne  had  presented  herself  at  the  door
of  the  Convention  Hall  with  a  ticket  of  admission  to  the  galleries  (May  15th) :  a
strong  detachment  of  market  women  was  there  (evidently  posted  with  some  deliber-
ate intention),  who  prevented  the  entry  of  all  women  possessing  tickets  of  admission
(these  tickets  were  shortly  afterwards  abolished).  Cries  of  Brissotine  were  heard
as  Th^roigne  approached,  and  she  was  flogged.  She  did  not  lose  her  reason  till
about  October,  when  she  was  sent  to  an  asylum  in  Faubourg  Saint-Mar9eau,  thence
to  Hotel-Dieu,  and  thence  to  the  Salpetritre,  where  she  died  1817.  (Th^roigne  de  la
Mdricourt  par  M.  Pellet,  pp.  110-113  (Paris,  1886} ;  R6v.  de  Paris,  No.  201  (May
nth— i8th).)]

2  Mercier,  Nouveau  Paris,  vi.  63.

VOL.    III.  4


50  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

know  what  work  he  has  with  his  own  Friends  of  the  People;
getting  them  bespied,  beheaded,  their  habeas-corpuses  suspended,
and  his  own  Social  Order  and  strong-boxes  kept  tight, — to  fancy
him  raising  mobs  among  his  neighbours  !

But  the  strangest  fact  connected  with  French  or  indeed  with
human  Suspicion,  is  perhaps  this  of  Camille  Desmoulins.  Camille's
head,  one  of  the  clearest  in  France,  has  got  itself  so  saturated
through  every  fibre  with  Preternaturalism  of  Suspicion,  that
looking  back  on  that  Twelfth  of  July  1789,  when  the  thousands
rose  round  him,  yelling  responsive  at  his  word  in  the  Palais- Royal
Garden,  and  took  cockades,  he  finds  it  explicable  only  on  this
hypothesis.  That  they  were  all  hired  to  do  it,  and  set  on  by  the
Foreign  and  other  Plotters.  "It  was  not  for  nothing,"  says
Camille  with  insight,  "that  this  multitude  burst  up  round  me
when  I  spoke  ! "  No,  not  for  nothing.  Behind,  around,  before,
it  is  one  huge  Preternatural  Puppet-play  of  Plots ;  Pitt  pulling
the  wires.  1  Almost  I  conjecture  that  I,  Camille  myself,  am  a
Plot,  and  wooden  with  wires. — The  force  of  insight  could  no
further  go.

Be  this  as  it  will.  History  remarks  that  the  Commission  of
Twelve,  now  clear  enough  as  to  the  Plots ;  and  luckily  having
'got  the  threads  of  them  all  by  the  end,'  as  they  say, — are
launching  Mandates  of  Arrest  rapidly  in  these  May  days ;  and
carrying  matters  with  a  high  hand ;  resolute  that  the  sea  of
troubles  shall  be  restrained.  What  chief  Patriot,  Section-President
even,  is  safe  ?  They  can  arrest  him ;  tear  him  from  his  warm
bed,  because  he  has  made  irregular  Section  Arrestments !  They
arrest  Varlet  Apostle  of  Liberty. ^  They  arrest  Procureur-Substi-
tute  Hebert,  P^re  Duchesiie ;  a  Magistrate  of  the  People,  sitting

1  See  Histoire  des  Brissotins  par  Camille  Desmoulins  (a  pamphlet  of  Camille's,
Paris,  1793).  [It  was  on  May  19th  that  the  Jacobin  club  ordered  the  printing  of
this  pamphlet,  which  was  the  substance  of  two  speeches  delivered  by  Camille  there
on  2nd  and  19th.  Camille  afterwards  regretted  his  pamphlet,  and  believed  it  was
that  which  had  destroyed  the  Gironde.  it  is  hopelessly  dull  and  a  ludicrous  per-
version of  facts.  /.  P.  Brissot  dhnasqu^  (Feb.  ist  '93,  to  which  this  was  a  sequel)
is  equally  dull.     It  did  not  need  Camille  to  tell  us  that  Brissot  was  a  charlatan.']

2  [May  25th.]


IN  DEATH-GEIPS  51

in  Townhall ;  who,  with  high  solemnity  of  martyrdom,  takes
leave  of  his  colleagues ;  prompt  he,  to  obey  the  Law ;  and
solemnly  acquiescent,  disappears  into  prison.  ^

The  swifter  fly  the  Sections,  energetically  demanding  him
back ;  demanding  not  arrestment  of  Popular  Magistrates,  but  of
a  traitorous  Twenty-two.  Section  comes  flying  after  Section  ; —
defiling  energetic,  with  their  Cambyses-vein  of  oratory :  nay  the
Commune  itself  comes,  with  Mayor  Pache  at  its  head ;  and  with
question  not  of  Hebert  and  the  Twenty-two  alone,  but  with  this
ominous  old  question  made  new,  "  Can  you  save  the  Republic,  or
must  we  do  it  .^ "  To  whom  President  Max  Isnard  makes  fiery
answer :  If  by  fatal  chance,  in  any  of  those  tumults  which  since
the  Tenth  of  March  are  ever  returning,  Paris  were  to  lift  a  sacri-
legious finger  against  the  National  Representation,  France  would
rise  as  one  man,  in  never-imagined  vengeance,  and  shortly  'the
traveller  would  ask,  on  which  side  of  the  Seine  Paris  had  stood ! '  ^
Whereat  the  Mountain  bellows  only  louder,  and  every  Gallery ;
Patriot  Paris  boiling  round.

And  Girondin  Valaze  has  nightly  conclaves  at  his  house  ;  ^  sends
billets,  '  Come  punctually,  and  well  armed,  for  there  is  to  be  busi-
ness.' And  Megaera  women  perambulate  the  streets,  with  flags,
with  lamentable  alleleu.^  And  the  Convention-doors  are  obstructed
by  roaring  multitudes :  fine-spoken  Hommes  d'etat  are  hustled,
maltreated,  as  they  pass  ;  Marat  will  apostrophise  you,  in  such
death-peril,  and  say.  Thou  too  art  of  them.     If  Roland  ask  leave

i[Dutard  applauded  the  arrest  of  Hubert,  saying  that  his  party  was  strong
enough  to  raise  an  Insurrection,  '  but  I  doubt  if  they  will,  if  you  can  keep  him
locked  up '  (Schmidt,  i.  300).  This  is  a  shrewd  comment,  because,  when  Robes-
pierre arrested  Hubert  ten  months  later,  there  was  just  as  much  threat  of  Insurrec-
tion in  his  favour  (Hubert  being  Roi  de  la  Rue  in  a  sense  in  which  neither  Danton
nor  even  Marat  ever  were) ;  but  Robespierre  was  firmer  than  the  Gironde,  and  did
keep  Hubert  locked  up  and  cut  his  head  off.]

2  Moniteur,  Stance  du  25  Mai  1793.  [It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  every  one
of  the  fortnightly  elections  to  the  Presidency  in  April  and  May  went  in  favour  of
the  Gironde  (April  i8th,  Lasource;  May  2nd,  Boyer-Fonfrede;  May  i6th,  Isnard).
The  misfortune  of  Isnard's  speech  was  that  it  contained  a  threat  so  very  like  that
of  Brunswick  in  his  Manifesto  of  July  '92.]

3  [These  meetings  at  Valaz^'s  house  had  been  watched  by  the  police  of  the
Commune  since  the  end  of  January  ;  Valaz^  avowed  that  there  were  sometimes  30
or  40  people  present.     (Mortimer-Ternaux,  vii.  253-4.)]

•*  Meillan,  M^moires,  p.  195 ;  Buzot,  pp.  69,  84.


52  THE  FEENCH  EEVOLUTION

to  quit  Paris,  there  is  order  of  the  day.  What  help  ?  Substitute
Hubert,  Apostle  Varlet,  must  be  given  back  ;  to  be  crowned  with
oak-garlands.  The  Commission  of  Twelve,  in  a  Convention  over-
whelmed with  roaring  Sections,  is  broken ;  then  on  the  morrow,
in  a  Convention  of  rallied  Girondins,  is  reinstated.  Dim  Chaos,
or  the  sea  of  troubles,  is  struggling  through  all  its  elements ;
writhing  and  chafing  towards  some  Creation.  ^

CHAPTER  IX

EXTINCT

Accordingly,  on  Friday,  the  Thirty-first  of  May  1 793,^  there  comes
forth  into  the  summer  sunlight  one  of  the  strangest  scenes.  Mayor
Pache  with  Municipality  arrives  at  the  Tuileries  Hall  of  Conven-
tion ;  sent  for,  Paris  being  in  visible  ferment ;  and  gives  the
strangest  news.

How,  in  the  gray  of  this  morning,  while  we  sat  Permanent  in
Townhall,  watchful  for  the  commonweal,  there  entered,  precisely
as  on  a  Tenth  of  August,  some  Ninety-six  extraneous  persons  ;  who
declared  themselves  to  be  in  a  state  of  Insurrection  ;  to  be  pleni-
potentiary Commissioners  from  the  Forty-eight  Sections,  sections
or  members  of  the  Sovereign  People,  all  in  a  state  of  Insurrection  ;
and  further  that  we,  in  the  name  of  said  Sovereign  in  Insurrection,
were  dismissed  from  office.  How  we  thereupon  laid  off  our  sashes,
and  withdrew  into  the  adjacent  Saloon  of  Liberty.  How,  in  a
moment  or  two,  we  were  called  back  ;  and  reinstated  ;  the  Sove-

1  [The  release  of  Hubert  and  the  abolition  of  the  Commission  of  Twelve  were
carried  in  deference  to  the  petition  of  the  Commune  of  the  27th,  on  the  motion  of
Lacroix.  The  reinstatement  of  the  Conmiission  on  the  28th  was  on  the  motion  of
Lanjuinais,  the  only  Moderate  who  had  any  real  courage  (and  he  no  Girondist).
It  is  to  be  noticed  that  Danton  played  almost  no  part,  or  no  open  part,  in  the
Convention  in  these  days.  He  was  busy  in  the  Comitd  de  Salut  Public,  but  it  is
difficult  after  reading  the  Actes  of  the  Comiti  de  Salut  Public,  in  Aulard's  Recueil
(iv.  264,  aqq.),  to  acquit  that  body  of  sympathy  with  the  Commune.  As  early  as
20th  it  sent  for  Pache,  and  chose  to  believe  him  that  there  was  no  danger  of  dis-
turbance in  Paris  :  it  received  daily  reports  from  him  and  Garat  {vid.  infr.,  iii.  59).

Hubert  prudently  used  his  triumph  to  obtain  135,000  fr.  from  Bouchotte,  the
War  Minister,  to  cover  the  free  distribution  of  sundry  copies  of  Pere  Duchesne  to
the  Armies.     (Mortimer- Ternaux,  vii.  299.)]

2 [The  sitting  on  the  31st  lasted  from  6  A.M.-9.30  p.m.,  but  there  appears  to  have
been  no  debating,  merely  listening  to  petitions  from  the  Sections.]


EXTINCT  53

reign  pleasing  to  think  us  still  worthy  of  confidence.  Whereby,
having  taken  new  oath  of  office,  we  on  a  sudden  find  ourselves
Insurrectionary  Magistrates,^  with  extraneous  Committee  of  Ninety-
six  sitting  by  us  ;  and  a  Citoyen  Henriot,  one  whom  some  accuse
of  Septemberism,2  is  made  Generalissimo  of  the  National  Guard  ;
and,  since  six  o'clock,  the  tocsins  ring,  and  the  drums  beat :
— Under  which  pecuhar  circumstances,  what  would  an  august
National  Convention  please  to  direct  us  to  do  ?  ^

Yes,  there  is  the  question  !  "  Break  the  Insurrectionary  Autho-
rities," answer  some  with  vehemence.*  Vergniaud  at  least  will
have  "the  National  Representatives  all  die  at  their  post;"  this
is  sworn  to,  with  ready  loud  acclaim.  But  as  to  breaking  the
Insurrectionary  Authorities, — ^alas,  while  we  yet  debate,  what
sound  is  that  ?  Sound  of  the  Alarm-Cannon  on  the  Pont  Neuf ;
which  it  is  death  by  the  Law  to  fire  without  order  from  us !

It  does  boom  off  there,  nevertheless  ;  sending  a  stound  through
all  hearts.  And  the  tocsins  discourse  stern  music  ;  and  Henriot
with  his  Armed  Force  has  enveloped  us  !  ^  And  Section  succeeds
Section,  the  livelong  day ;  demanding  with  Cambyses-oratory,
with  the  rattle  of  muskets.  That  traitors.  Twenty-two  or  more,  be
punished  ;  that  the  Commission  of  Twelve  be  irrecoverably  broken.
The  heart  of  the  Gironde  dies  within  it ;  distant  are  the  Seventy-
two  respectable   Departments,   this  fiery   Municipality  is  near !

^[This  reinforcement  of  the  Cotntnune  arose  from  the  machinations  at  the
Archevechi :  on  the  night  of  28th  the  conspirators  assembled  there  (Tallien,  Varlet,
Collot,  Guzman,  Proly,  Desfieux,  etc. )  called  a  meeting  of  deputies  from  all  Sections
for  30th.  To  this  33  sections  sent  deputies  '  provided  with  full  powers  to  save  the
Republic  ; '  early  on  31st  these  persons  appeared  in  the  Hotcl-de-  Ville,  and  declared
the  power  of  the  Commune  suspended  ;  Pache  and  Chaumette  played  into  their
hands,  and  it  was  Chaumette  who  in  the  name  of  the  Commune  '  rendered  up  its
powers  to  the  Sovereign  people  ; '  which  gave  them  back,  as  Carlyle  states.  The
Commune,  thus  reinforced,  nominated  Hanriot  :  and  within  an  hour  Hanriot  was
drawing  up  his  forces,  (Schmidt,  i.  147,  323.)  The  legal  Commune  however  con-
tinued to  sit  till  the  new  elections  in  August.     (Mortimer-Ternaux,  vii.  473.)]

2[Fran9ois  Hanriot,  an  employ^  in  the  Octroi  of  Paris,  dismissed  for  deserting
his  post  when  the  barriers  were  burnt  in  July  '89,  joined  the  police,  was  imprisoned  for
theft,  served  the  Coimnune  as  a  Septemberer,  was  legally  confirmed  as  Commander
of  National  Guard  June  8th  '93,  was  suspected  of  H^bertist  leanings  in  March
'94,  but  was  probably  a  coward,  as  he  showed  then  and  at  Thermidor  ;  he  was
guillotined  with  Robespierre,]

^DfJbats  de  la  Convention  (Paris,  1828),  iv.  187-223  ;  Moniteur,  Nos.  152,  3,  4,
An  ler.

*[yiz.  Lanjuinais.]  ^  [40,000  men  in  all.]


54  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Barrere  is  for  a  middle  course ;  granting  something.  The  Com-
mission of  Twelve  declares  that,  not  waiting  to  be  broken,  it  hereby
breaks  itself,  and  is  no  more.  Fain  would  Reporter  Rabaut  speak
his  and  its  last-words ;  but  he  is  bellowed  off.  Too  happy  that
the  Twenty-two  are  still  left  unviolated ! — Vergniaud,  carrying
the  laws  of  refinement  to  a  great  length,  moves,  to  the  amazement
of  some,  that  '  the  Sections  of  Paris  have  deserved  well  of  their
country.'  ^  Whereupon,  at  a  late  hour  of  the  evening,  the  deserving
Sections  retire  to  their  respective  places  of  abode.  Barrere  shall
report  on  it.  With  busy  quill  and  brain  he  sits,  secluded  ;  for  him
no  sleep  tonight.    Friday  the  last  of  May  has  ended  in  this  manner.

The  Sections  have  deserved  well :  but  ought  they  not  to  de-
serve better?  Faction  and  Girondism  is  struck  down  for  the
moment,  and  consents  to  be  a  nullity  ;  but  will  it  not,  at  another
favourabler  moment  rise,  still  feller ;  and  the  Republic  have  to  be
saved  in  spite  of  it  ?  So  reasons  Patriotism,  still  Permanent ;  so
reasons  the  Figure  of  Marat,  visible  in  the  dim  Section- world,  on
the  morrow.  To  the  conviction  of  men  ! — And  so  at  eventide  of
Saturday,  when  Barrere  had  just  got  the  thing  all  varnished  by
the  labour  of  a  night  and  day,  and  his  Report  was  setting  off  in
the  evening  mail-bags,  tocsin  peals  out  again.  Generale  is  beating  ;
armed  men  taking  station  in  the  Place  Vendome  and  elsewhere,
for  the  night ;  supplied  with  provisions  and  liquor.  There,  under
the  summer  stars,  will  they  wait,  this  night,  what  is  to  be  seen  and
to  be  done,  Henriot  and  Townhall  giving  due  signal.^

i[They  had  also  not  done  badly  for  themselves,  the  new  Commune  having
voted  that  each  man  was  to  be  paid  40  sous  a  day  while  under  arms.  Vergniaud' s
cowardice  is  inexplicable;  '■  il  se  fait  un  Barere ;'  his  apologist,  M.  Vatel  (Ver-
gniaud, ii.  159,  sqq.),  vainly  endeavours  to  justify  him.  The  only  honourable  course
would  have  been  to  support  the  Commission  of  Twelve  through  thick  and  thin  ;
Guadet  and  Valaz6  saw  this  and  endeavoured  to  do  so.  [Cf.  Mortimer-Ternaux,
vii,  242.)]

2  [June  ist  was  quiet  till  7  p.  M.  The  Convention  met  at  10  A.  M.  and  listened  to
a  long  report  of  Barere,  drawn  up  no  doubt  at  the  Comitd  de.  Salut  Public,  which
concluded  nothing.  It  met  again  at  9  p.m.  but  was  very  thinly  attended,  and,
after  receiving  a  fresh  petition  from  the  Commune  for  the  impeachment  of  the
Gironde,  adjourned  at  midnight,  apparently  without  hindrance  from  the  armed
forces  outside.  It  was  Marat  who  definitely  called  on  the  Commune  to  force
the  thing  through  that  evening — he  rang  the  tocsin  with  his  own  hands.  (Dauban,
Paris  en  1793, 210-n,)]


EXTINCT  55

The  Convention,  at  sound  oi  g&n&rale,  hastens  back  to  its  Hall ;
but  to  the  number  only  of  a  Hundred ;  and  does  little  business,
puts  off  business  till  the  morrow.  The  Girondins  do  not  stir  out
thither,  the  Girondins  are  abroad  seeking  beds. — Poor  Rabaut,  on
the  morrow  morning,  returning  to  his  post,  with  Louvet  and  some
others,  through  streets  all  in  ferment,  wrings  his  hands,  ejaculat-
ing, "  Ilia  supretna  dies  ! "  ^  It  has  become  Sunday,  the  second  day
of  June,  year  1 793,  by  the  old  style  ;  by  the  new  style,  year  One
of  Liberty,  Equality,  Fraternity.  We  have  got  to  the  last  scene
of  all,  that  ends  this  history  of  the  Girondin  Senatorship.

It  seems  doubtful  whether  any  terrestrial  Convention  had  ever
met  in  such  circumstances  as  this  National  one  now  does.'^  Tocsin
is  pealing  ;  Barriers  shut ;  all  Paris  is  on  the  gaze,  or  under  arms.
As  many  as  a  Hundred  Thousand  under  arms  they  count :  Na-
tional Force  ;  and  the  Armed  Volunteers,  who  should  have  flown
to  the  Frontiers  and  La  Vendee ;  but  would  not,  treason  being
unpunished  ;  and  only  flew  hither  and  thither !  So  many,  steady
under  arms,  environ  the  National  Tuileries  and  Garden.  There
are  horse,  foot,  artillery,  sappers  with  beards :  the  artillery  one
can  see  with  their  camp-furnaces  in  this  National  Garden,  heating
bullets  red,  and  their  match  is  lighted.  Henriot  in  plumes  rides,
amid  a  plumed  Staff:  all  posts  and  issues  are  safe  ;  reserves  lie
out,  as  far  as  the  Wood  of  Boulogne  ;  the  choicest  Patriots  nearest
the  scene.  One  other  circumstance  we  will  note  :  that  a  careful
Municipality,  liberal  of  camp- furnaces,  has  not  forgotten  provision-
carts.  No  member  of  the  Sovereign  need  now  go  home  to  dinner ;
but  can  keep  rank, — plentiful  victual  circulating  unsought.  Does
not  this  People  understand  Insurrection  ?  Ye,  fiot  uninventive,
Gualches ! —

Therefore  let  a  National  Representation,  '  mandatories  of  the

1  Louvet,  M^moires,  p.  89.  [The  Gironde  held  a  meeting  late  at  night  on  1st,
at  Meillan's  house  in  the  Rue  des  Moulins  ;  at  which  Louvet  proposed  flight  in
order  to  raise  a  Departmental  Insurrection,  but  the  proposal  was  not  well  received.
(Mortimer- Ternaux,  vii.  372.)]

'•^[The  Convention  met  at  10.30  A.M.  on  2nd,  few  of  the  actual  leaders  of  the
Gironde  were  present :  many  of  them  remained  at  Meillan's  house.]


56  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Sovereign,'  take  thought  of  it.  Expulsion  of  your  Twenty -two,
and  your  Commission  of  Twelve  :  we  stand  here  till  it  be  done  !
Deputation  after  Deputation,  in  ever  stronger  language,  comes
with  that  message.  Barrere  proposes  a  middle  course  : — Will  not
perhaps  the  inculpated  Deputies  consent  to  withdraw  voluntarily  ;
to  make  a  generous  demission,  and  self-sacrifice  for  the  sake  of
one's  country  ?  Isnard,  repentant  of  that  search  on  which  river-
bank  Paris  stood,  declares  himself  ready  to  demit.  Ready  also  is
Te-Deum  Fauchet ;  old  Dusaulx  of  the  Bastille,  '  vieux  radoteur,
old  dotard,'  as  Marat  calls  him,  is  still  readier.  On  the  contrary,
Lanjuinais  the  Breton  i  declares  that  there  is  one  man  who  never
will  demit  voluntarily ;  but  will  protest  to  the  uttermost,  while
a  voice  is  left  him.  And  he  accordingly  goes  on  protesting  ;  amid
rage  and  clangour  ;  Legendre  crying  at  last :  "  Lanjuinais,  come
down  from  the  Tribune,  or  I  will  fling  thee  down,  oiije  tejette  en
has  !  "  For  matters  are  come  to  extremity.  Nay  they  do  clutch
hold  of  Lanjuinais,  certain  zealous  Mountain-men ;  but  cannot
fling  him  down,  for  he  '  cramps  himself  on  the  railing ; '  and  '  his
clothes  get  torn.'  Brave  Senator,  worthy  of  pity  !  ^  Neither  will
Barbaroux  demit ;  he  "  has  sworn  to  die  at  his  post,  and  will  keep
that  oath."  Whereupon  the  Galleries  all  rise  with  explosion ;
brandishing  weapons,  some  of  them;  and  rush  out,  saying  :  "  Allans,

^  Qean  Denis  Lanjuinais,  born  at  Rennes  1753,  practised  at  the  Breton  Bar,  and
drew  up  the  cahier  for  the  Tiers-Iitaf  of  Rennes,  for  which  he  sat  in  the  Constituent,
helped  to  found  the  Breton  club  in  Paris,  was  a  member  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Com-
mittee, sat  in  the  Convention  for  Ile-et-Vilaine,  repeatedly  endeavoured  to  save  the
King,  denounced  the  massacres  and  the  Tribunal  Rivolutionnah-e,  fought  almost
alone  against  all  the  violent  measures  from  Jan. — June  '93 :  was  proscribed,  escaped  to
Rennes  and  lay  hidden  in  a  loft  for  i8  months  :  returned  to  the  Convention  in  March
95,  went  en  mission  to  Brittany  and  helped  to  pacify  the  Chouans  ;  helped  also  to
draw  up  the  Constitution  of  the  year  III.  At  the  first  election  under  that  Constitution
he  was  elected  for  63  separate  Departments,  sat  in  the  Ancients,  and  after  Brumaire
in  the  Senate,  but  protested  both  against  the  Consulate  for  life  and  the  Empire :
became  a  peer  of  France  1814,  and  died  1827.  Though  throughout  his  life  an
ardent  politician,  and,  compared  to  many  of  the  men  of  '89,  an  advanced  Liberal,
Lanjuinais  was  never  a  party  man  and  was  a  consistent  lover  of  liberty.  Perhaps
no  character  in  the  whole  Revolution  appears  so  honourable,  pure  and  disinterested.

A  very  interesting  '  Examen  de  sa  conduite,'  written  by  himself  when  in  hiding,
is  published  in  the  Rev.  de  la  R^v.  (xi.  303  ;  xii.  157,  353,  528).]

2  [The  scene  made  by  Lanjuinais  is  wrongly  put  by  Carlyle  after  Isnard's
cowardly  surrender — it  followed  Barere's  speech.  Carlyle  might  also  have  quoted
Lanjuinais'  witty  reply  to  Legendre,  '  Get  a  decree  that  I  am  an  ox,  and  you  may. '
(Legendre  was  a  butcher.)]


EXTINCT  57

then ;  we  must  save  our  country ! "     Such  a  Session  is  this  of
Sunday  the  second  of  June.

Churches  fill,  over  Christian  Europe,  and  then  empty  them-
selves ;  but  this  Convention  empties  not,  the  while :  a  day  of
shrieking  contention,  of  agony,  humiliation  and  tearing  of  coat-
skirts  ;  ilia  suprema  dies  !  Round  stand  Henriot  and  his  Hundred
Thousand,  copiously  refreshed  from  tray  and  basket :  nay  he  is
^distributing  five  francs  apiece,'  we  Girondins  saw  it  with  our
eyes ;  five  francs  to  keep  them  in  heart !  And  distraction  of
armed  riot  encumbers  our  borders,  jangles  at  our  Bar ;  we  are
prisoners  in  our  own  Hall :  Bishop  Gregoire  could  not  get  out  for
a  besoin  actuel  without  four  gendarmes  to  wait  on  him  !  What  is
the  character  of  a  National  Representative  become  ?  And  now
the  sunlight  falls  yellower  on  western  windows,  and  the  chimney-
tops  are  flinging  longer  shadows ;  the  refreshed  Hundred  Thou-
sand, nor  their  shadows,  stir  not !  What  to  resolve  on  ?  Motion
rises,  superfluous  one  would  think,  That  the  Convention  go  forth
in  a  body ;  ascertain  with  its  own  eyes  whether  it  is  free  or  not.
Lo,  therefore,  from  the  Eastern  Gate  of  the  Tuileries,  a  distressed
Convention  issuing ;  handsome  Herault  Sechelles  at  their  head ;
he  with  hat  on,  in  sign  of  public  calamity,  the  rest  bareheaded, —
towards  the  Gate  of  the  Carrousel ;  wondrous  to  see :  towards
Henriot  and  his  plumed  staff*.  "  In  the  name  of  the  National
Convention,  make  way  ! "  Not  an  inch  of  way  does  Henriot
make :  "  I  receive  no  orders,  till  the  Sovereign,  yours  and  mine,
have  been  obeyed."  The  Convention  presses  on  ;  Henriot  prances
back,  with  liis  staiF,  some  fifteen  paces,  "  To  arms  !  Cannoneers,
to  your  guns  !  " — flashes  out  his  puissant  sword,  as  the  Staff  all
do,  and  the  Hussars  all  do.  Cannoneers  brandish  the  lit  match  ;
Infantry  present  arms, — alas,  in  the  level  way,  as  if  for  firing !
Hatted  Herault  leads  his  distressed  flock,  through  their  pinfold
of  a  Tuileries  again ;  across  the  Garden,  to  the  Gate  on  the
opposite  side.  Here  is  Feuillans-Terrace,  alas,  there  is  our  old
Salle  de  Manege  ;  but  neither  at  this  Gate  of  the  Pont  Tournant
is  there  egress.  Try  the  other  ;  and  the  other  :  no  egress  !  We
wander  disconsolate  through  armed  ranks ;   who  indeed  salute


58  THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

with  Live  the  Republic,  but  also  with  Die  the  Gironde.  Other  such
sight,  in  the  year  One  of  Liberty,  the  westering  sun  never  saw.

And  now  behold  Marat  meets  us ;  for  he  lagged  in  this  Sup-
pliant Procession  of  ours :  he  has  got  some  hundred  elect
Patriots  at  his  heels ;  he  orders  us,  in  the  Sovereign's  name,  to
return  to  our  place,  and  do  as  we  are  bidden  and  bound.  The
Convention  returns.  "Does  not  the  Convention,"  says  Couthon
with  a  singular  power  of  face,  "see  that  it  is  free," — none  but
friends  round  it  ?  The  Convention,  overflowing  with  friends  and
armed  Sectioners,  proceeds  to  vote  as  bidden.  Many  will  not
vote,  but  remain  silent ;  some  one  or  two  protest,  in  words,  the
Mountain  has  a  clear  unanimity.  Commission  of  Twelve,  and
the  denounced  Twenty-two,  to  whom  we  add  Ex-Ministers
Claviere  and  Lebrun :  ^  these,  with  some  slight  extempore
alterations  (this  or  that  orator  proposing,  but  Marat  disposing),
are  voted  to  be  under  '  Arrestment  in  their  own  houses.'  ^
Brissot,^  Buzot,  Vergniaud,  Guadet,  Louvet,  Gensonne,  Barba-
roux,  Lasource,  Lanjuinais,  Rabaut, — Thirty-two,  by  the  tale ;
all  that  we  have  known  as  Girondins,  and  more  than  we  have
known.  They,  ^  under  the  safeguard  of  the  French  People ; '
by  and  by,  under  the  safeguard  of  two  Gendarmes  each,  shall
dwell  peaceably  in  their  own  houses ;  as  Non-Senators  ;  till
further  order.  Herewith  ends  Seance  of  Sunday  the  second  of
June  1793.

At  ten  o'clock,  under  mild  stars,  the  Hundred  Thousand,
their  work  well  finished,  turn  homewards.  Already  yesterday.
Central  Insurrection  Committee  had  arrested  Madame  Roland ;

1  [Claviere  was  no  great  loss,  but  Lebrun  had  managed  Foreign  affairs  fairly  well,
and  was  entirely  at  the  disposal  of  Danton  ;  so  much  was  this  felt,  that  Lebrun  con-
tinued to  conduct  Foreign  affairs  in  confinement  till  June  2ist,  when  he  was  suc-
ceeded by  Deforgues  {a  nonentity) :  Lebrun  was  guillotined  Dec.  27th  '93.]

2  ['  Arrest  at  their  own  houses  under  the  safeguard  of  the  French  people,  the
National  Convention  and  the  loyalty  of  the  citizens  of  Paris  '  (Mortimer-Ternaux,
vii.  417).]

3[Brissot  was  not  arrested  till  June  20th  at  Villejuif  (near  Mouhns),  Vergniaud
not  till  24th.  By  that  date  (24ih)  15  of  the  Girondists  liad  succeeded  in  escaping
into  the  country  :  on  July  28th  these  were  declared  outlaws  in  accordance  with  Saint-
Just's  report  of  July  8th.  Many  were  not  arrested  till  long  after  ;  e.^. ,  Ducos,  Boyer-
Fonfrede,  Boileau  and  Viger  not  till  Amar 's  report  of  Oct.  3rd  {vid.  in/r.,  iii.  102).]


EXTINCT  59

imprisoned  her  in  the  Abbaye.^    Roland  has  fled,  no  man  knows
whither.

Thus  fell  the  Girondins,  by  Insurrection  ;  and  became  extinct
as  a  Party  :  not  without  a  sigh  from  most  Historians.  The  men
were  men  of  parts,  of  Philosophic  culture,  decent  behaviour ;
not  condenmable  in  that  they  were  but  Pedants,  and  had  not
better  parts ;  not  condemnable,  but  most  unfortunate.  They
wanted  a  Republic  of  the  Virtues,  wherein  themselves  should  be
head;  and  they  could  only  get  a  Republic  of  the  Strengths,
wherein  others  than  they  were  head.

For  the  rest,  Barrere  shall  make  Report  of  it.^  The  night
concludes  with  a  '  civic  promenade  by  torchlight : '  ^  surely  the
true  reign  of  Fraternity  is  now  not  far  ?  *

i[June  ist.]

2[Bar6re's  report,  read  on  7th  in  the  name  of  the  ComiU  de  Salut  Public  and
adopted  by  the  Convention,  is  a  masterpiece  of  shuffling.  Apart  from  the  some-
what humorous  suggestion  that  a  member  of  the  Convention  should  be  sent  as  a
hostage  to  each  of  the  Departments  whose  deputies  had  been  arrested,  it  evidently
indicated  the  wish  of  the  Committee  to  curb  the  Commune  as  far  as  it  dared,  and
to  prevent  the  recurrence  of  such  scenes,  yet  it  does  not  dare  openly  to  denounce
the  Cotnmune,  and  concludes  with  a  sort  of  judicious  flattery  all  round.  '  Every
'  one  has  deserved  well  of  every  one  else,  but  don't  do  it  again,'  is  the  keynote.
{See  Mortimer-Ternaux,  viii.  11,  sqq.)]

3  Buzot,  M6moires,  p.  310.  See  Pieces  Justificatives,  of  Narratives,  Comment-
aries, &c.  in  Buzot,  Louvet,  Meillan.  Documens  Complc^mentaires  in  Hist.  Pari,
xxviii.  1-78.  [The  minutes  of  the  proceedings  of  the  Convention  on  May  31st  and
June  2nd  were  not  printed,  so  the  Moniteur  remains  the  best  available  authority.
There  are  also  the  '  M^moires  de  Meillan,'  1823  (Berville  and  Barriere,  see  esp.  p.
48  sqq.),  and  'Souvenirs  sur  les  Journ^es  du  31  Mai  et  2  Juin,'  by  Dulaure,  the
author  of  the  History  of  Paris,  who  sat  in  the  Convention  and  escaped  to  Switzer-
land after  Jime  2nd.     {See  Lescure,  '  Journ6es  R6volutionnaires,'  ii.  278.)]

The  attitude  of  the  ComiU  de  Salut  Public  continues  suspicious  all  through  the
31st,  ist,  2nd  ;  at  its  evening  session  of  the  30th  it  is  voted  that  no  authority  is  to
disturb  the  measures  taken,  but  that  they  must  be  grandes,  sages  et  justes,  that
order  must  be  maintained  and  the  Convention  respected.  Danton  was  not  there  :
the  Session  lasted  all  night  and  ended  by  warning  the  members  of  the  Convention
to  be  early  in  their  places.  At  its  morning  session  on  31st  the  Committee  decreed
the  suppression  of  the  Commission  of  Twelve,  and  proposed  an  inquiry  into  the
conspiracies  against  the  Republic  :  Danton  was  there.  At  its  evening  session  on
31st  it  protested  against  the  Commune' s  threatened  arrest  of  Lebrun  (who  was  a
willing  servant  of  Danton's  in  Foreign  affairs).  On  ist  it  took  no  practical  steps
at  all,  but  received  several  deputations.  On  2nd  it  merely  wrote  to  the  22  Girondists
inviting  them  to  suspend  themselves,  but  that  was  the  day  on  which  it  received
news  of  the  insurrection  at  Lyons  on  May  29th,  and  sent  Lindet  to  try  and  suppress
it.    (.S^^  Aulard,  Recueil,  iv.  379,  388,  sqq.y^

*  [The  profit  of  the  insurrection  of  June  2nd  turned  all  to  the  strong  Radicals  of  the
Mountain,  among  whom  Danton  was  still  a  leading  figure.  Neither  Danton  nor
Robespierre  had  any  intention  of  letting  the  Commune  dominate  the  situation.    But


60  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

this  day  was  the  death  knell  of  the  Convention  as  a  power  :  it  never  raised  its  head
again  till  9th  Thermidor.  And  until  the  second  ComiU  de  Salut  Public  (inaugurated
July  loth,  but  not  complete  till  September  4th)  put  forth  all  its  powers,  the  period
was  very  critical.  As  Von  Sybel  (iii.  159  and  226)  well  puts  it,  four  great  questions
presented  themselves  :

(i)  Would  the  Army  obey  the  Clubs  or  the  Committees?

(2)  Would  the  Clubs  obey  the  Committees  ?

(3)  Would  the  people  of  the  Faubourgs  obey  the  Clubs,  or  the  Commune,  or  the
Committees  ?

(4)  Would  the  Commune  obey  the  Committees  ?

Much  valuable  light  upon  the  state  of  parties  in  France  may  be  gleaned  from
Mallet  du  Pan,  who  had  undoubtedly  shrewd  and  able  correspondents  in  Paris,
whose  names  have  not  transpired.  {See  the  first  part  of  the  2nd  vol.  of  his  Mimoires
(edn.  Sayous);  and  especially  ii.  ii.)]


61


BOOK  IV
TERROR

CHAPTER  I

CHARLOTTE  CORDAY

In  the  leafy  months  of  June  and  July,  several  French  Depart-
ments germinate  a  set  of  rebellious  paper-leaves,  named  Pro-
clamations, Resolutions,  Journals,  or  Diurnals,  '  of  the  Union  for
Resistance  to  Oppression.'  In  particular,  the  Town  of  Caen,  in
Calvados,  sees  its  paper-leaf  of  Bulletin  de  Caen  ^  suddenly  bud,
suddenly  establish  itself  as  Newspaper  there  ;  under  the  Editor-
ship of  Girondin  National  Representatives  !

For  among  the  proscribed  Girondins  are  certain  of  a  more
desperate   humour.       Some,    as    Vergniaud,    Valaze,    Gensonne,

*  arrested  in  their  own  houses,'  will  await  with  stoical  resignation
what  the  issue  may  be.  Some,  as  Brissot,  Rabaut,  will  take  to
flight,  to  concealment ;  which,  as  the  Paris  Barriers  are  opened
again  in  a  day  or  two,  is  not  yet  difficult.  But  others  there  are
who  will  rush,  with  Buzot,  to  Calvados ;  or  far  over  France,  to
Lyons,  Toulon,  Nantes  and  elsewhither,  and  then  rendezvous  at
Caen :  to  awaken  as  with  war-trumpet  the  respectable  Depart-
ments ;  and  strike  down  an  anarchic  Mountain  Faction  ;  at  least
not  yield  without  a  stroke  at  it.  Of  this  latter  temper  we  count
some  score  or  more,  of  the  Arrested,  and  of  the  Not-yet-arrested  :
a  Buzot,  a  Barbaroux,  Louvet,  Guadet,  Petion,  who  have  escaped
from  Arrestment  in  their  own  homes ;  a  Salles,  a  Pythagorean

1  [M.  Eugene  Hatin  in  his  '  Bibliographic  de  la  presse  p^riodique,'  Paris,  1866  (p.
240),  says  *  the  Bulletin  de  Caen  is  a  very  curious  journal  of  the  Girondists  who  had
'  taken  refuge  at  Caen  and  of  the  Federal  Army ;  I  only  know  of  one  perfect  copy,  in

*  the  Library  of  M.  de  la  Sicotiere. '  A  portion  of  it  is  however  published  at  the  end  of
Meillan's  M^moires  (pp.  241-270),  and  gives  an  account  of  the  events  of  June  22nd
and  23rd,  and  July  4th,  5th,  6th,  9th,  loth,  13th,  14th.]


62  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Valady,  a  Duchatel,  the  Duchatel  that  came  in  blanket  and
nightcap  to  vote  for  the  life  of  Louis,  who  have  escaped  from
danger  and  likelihood  of  Arrestment.  These,  to  the  number  at
one  time  of  Twenty-seven,  do  accordingly  lodge  here,  at  the
'  Intendance,  or  Departmental  Mansion,'  of  the  town  of  Caen  in
Calvados  ;  welcomed  by  Persons  in  Authority ;  welcomed  and
defrayed,  having  no  money  of  their  own.^  And  the  Bulletin  de
Caen  comes  forth,  with  the  most  animating  paragraphs:  How
the  Bourdeaux  Department,  the  Lyons  Department,  this  Depart-
ment after  the  other  is  declaring  itself;  sixty,  or  say  sixty-nine,
or  seventy-two  2  respectable  Departments  either  declaring,  or
ready  to  declare.  Nay  Marseilles,  it  seems,  will  march  on  Paris
by  itself,  if  need  be.  So  has  Marseilles  Town  said.  That  she  will
march.  But  on  the  other  hand,  that  Montelimart  Town  has  said.
No  thoroughfare  ;  and  means  even  to  ^bury  herself  ^  under  her
own  stone  and  mortar  first, — of  this  be  no  mention  in  Bulletin  de
Caen.

Such  animating  paragraphs  we  read  in  this  new  Newspaper ;
and  fervours  and  eloquent  sarcasm  :  tirades  against  the  Mountain,
from  the  pen  of  Deputy  Salles  ;  which  resemble,  say  friends,  Pas-
cal's Provincials.  What  is  more  to  the  purpose,  these  Girondins
have  got  a  General  in  chief,  one  Wimpfen,*  formerly  under
Dumouriez ;    also   a  secondary   questionable    General   Puisaye,^

i[The  Girondist  deputies  above  mentioned,  to  whom  we  may  add  Lesage,
arrived  at  Caen  successively  from  June  12th — July  loth,  but  the  insurrection  of
Calvados  had  been  proclaimed  independently  of  them,  and  Wimpfen  had  already
accepted  the  command  from  the  Municipal  authorities.  When  they  arrived  they
did  nothing  to  help  the  insurrection  (Bir6,  Legende,  357-8),  but  the  risings  were
undoubtedly  attributed  in  Paris  to  their  machinations,  and  as  a  consequence  of
this  Buzot  was  'decreed  accused.'     ( Mortimer- Ternaux,  viii.  48.)]

^Meillan,  pp.  72,  73;  Louvet,  p.  129.

■''[Montelimart  is  the  capital  of  a  district  in  the  Department  Drome,  and  had
been  the  scene  of  the  federation  of  the  National  Guards  of  the  Vivarais  and
Dauphin^  in  Dec.  '89.]

4[F61ix  Wimpfen,  an  Alsatian,  born  1744,  defended  Thionville  against  the  allies
in  1792,  was  accused  of  treason  for  that  deed  and  acquitted ;  appointed  Com-
mander of  the  Army  of  the  Cotes  de  Cherbourg  in  May  '93,  and  now  in  June
General  of  the  Army  of  I'Eure:  escaped  and  remained  in  hiding  after  July  13th,
died  a  Baron  of  the  Empire  1814.]

^[Joseph,  Comte  de  Puisaye,  born  1754,  served  in  the  old  Army,  sat  for  the
Noblesse  of  Perche  in  the  States-General :  became  chief  of  Wimpfen's  staff,  escaped
to  Brittany  and  organised  the  Chouans  there,  and  afterwards  commanded  the
Royalists  against  Hoche  at  Quiberon,  July  '95  {vid.  infr.,  iii.  75-6  and  232).]


CHARLOTTE  CORDAY  63

and  others ;  and  are  doing  their  best  to  raise  a  force  for  war.
National  Volunteers,  whosoever  is  of  right  heart :  gather  in,  ye
national  Volunteers,  friends  of  Liberty  ;  from  our  Calvados  Town-
ships, from  the  Eure,  from  Brittany,  from  far  and  near :  forward
to  Paris,  and  extinguish  Anarchy !  Thus  at  Caen,  in  the  early
July  days,  there  is  a  drumming  and  parading,  a  perorating  and
consulting :  Staff  and  Army  ;  Council ;  Club  of  Carnbots,^  Anti-
jacobin  friends  of  Freedom,  to  denounce  atrocious  Marat.  With
all  which,  and  the  editing  of  Bulletins,  a  National  Representative
has  his  hands  full.

At  Caen  it  is  most  animated  ;  and,  as  one  hopes,  more  or  less
animated  in  the  '  Seventy- two  Departments  that  adhere  to  us.'
And  in  a  France  begirt  with  Cimmerian  invading  Coalitions,  and
torn  with  an  internal  La  Vendee,  this  is  the  conclusion  we  have
arrived  at :  To  put  down  Anarchy  by  Civil  War !  Durum  el
durum,  the  Proverb  says,  non  faciunt  murum.  La  Vendue  burns :
Santerre  can  do  nothing  there ;  he  may  return  home  and  brew
beer.  Cimmerian  bombshells  fly  all  along  the  North.  That
Siege  of  Mentz  is  become  famed  ; — lovers  of  the  Picturesque  (as
Goethe  will  testify),  washed  country-people  of  both  sexes,  stroll
thither  on  Sundays,  to  see  the  artillery  work  and  counterwork ;
'you  only  duck  a  little  while  the  shot  whizzes  past.'  ^  Conde  is
capitulating  to  the  Austrians ;  Royal  Highness  of  York,  these
several  weeks,  fiercely  batters  Valenciennes.  For,  alas,  our
fortified  Camp  of  Famars  was  stormed ;  General  Dampierre  was


i[The  Carabots  existed  as  a  Sansculotte  club  in  several  Norman  towns,  the
members  wore  the  badge  of  a  death's  head  on  the  left  arm  of  their  coats;  they
appear  to  have  been  violent  Radicals,  and  to  have  been  won  over  by  some  of  the
moderates  to  enlist  in  Wimpfen's  little  army,  which  was  called  L'Armee  departe-
mentaie  de  V Eure.  There  are  several  explanations  of  the  etymology  of  the  word,
but  it  is  probably  connected  with  the  Norman  patois  word  '  Carabin,'  meaning  '  a
rook  '  and  (in  Paris  argot)  a  thief  or  scoundrel.  {Cf.  our  English  '  rook.')  Another
explanation  is  given  by  M,  Vaultier  in  his  '  Souvenirs  de  I'lnsurrection  Normande
en  1793'  (Caen,  1858),  pp.  9,  10,  viz.,  that  the  word  is  a  corruption  of  caporaux
(corporals)  derisively  applied  to  the  lower  ranks  of  the  National  Guard  at  Caen.
The  expression,  writes  M.  Tourneux,  whose  kindness  in  replying  to  the  question
I  here  acknowledge,  is  also  applied  to  the  labourers  in  the  ports  of  Havre  and
Rouen,  and  to  rogues  and  vagabonds  in  Cherbourg ;  but  he  too  is  unable  to  trace
the  etymology  of  the  word.  ]

2  Belagerung  von  Mainz  (Goethe's  Werke,  xxx.  278-334).


64  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

killed ;  General  Custine  was  blamed, — and  indeed  is  now  come
to  Paris  to  give  '  explanations.'  ^

Against  all  which  the  Mountain  and  atrocious  Marat  must  even
make  head  as  they  can.  They,  anarchic  Convention  as  they  are,
publish  Decrees,  expostulatory,  explanatory,  yet  not  without
severity ;  they  ray  forth  Commissioners,  singly  or  in  pairs,  the
olive-branch  in  one  hand,  yet  the  sword  in  the  other.  Commis-
sioners come  even  to  Caen ;  but  without  effect.  Mathematical
Romme,  and  Prieur  named  of  the  Cote  d'Or,  venturing  thither,
with  their  olive  and  sword,  are  packed  into  prison  :  there  may
Romme  lie,  under  lock  and  key,  '  for  fifty  days  ; '  ^  and  meditate
his  New  Calendar,  if  he  please.  Cimmeria,  La  Vendee,  and  Civil
War !     Never  was  Republic  One  and  Indivisible  at  a  lower  ebb. —

Amid  which  dim  ferment  of  Caen  and  the  World,  History  spe-
cially notices  one  thing :  in  the  lobby  of  the  Mansion  de  I'lnten-
dance,  where  busy  Deputies  are  coming  and  going,  a  young  Lady

1  [The  disasters  of  the  summer  followed  hard  on  that  of  Neerwinden.  Dampierre
(Army  of  the  North)  was  killed  May  ist,  and  Custine  replaced  him,  Houchard
replacing  Custine  (Army  of  Rhine).  The  Spaniards  forced  the  Pyrenees  and  the
Vend^ans  took  Fontenay  in  May.  The  impotence  of  the  Government  sought  its
revenge  in  attacking  the  Generals, whose  armies  they  left  without  supplies  or  weapons.
Custine,  Biron  and  Kellermann  were  successively  haled  to  the  bar  of  the  Convention
and  imprisoned,  and  this  condition  of  things  lasted  till  August.  Had  it  not  been  for
the  hopeless  discussions  of  the  allies,  France  might  have  &en  overrun  ;  (Cond^  fell
on  July  i2th,  Valenciennes  on  28th).  But  England  alone  was  in  earnest.  Coburg
dreaded  a  repetition  of  Brunswick's  misfortunes  of  1792,  and  even  refused  to  assist
York  in  the  siege  of  Dunkirk.  One  learns  from  Mercy  {see  Bacourt,  iii.  411,  426)
how  the  wisest  Austrian  statesmen  chafed  against  Thugut's  hesitating  policy.
But  with  the  exception  of  the  recapture  of  Mainz  the  Prussians  were  just  as  slack.
And  no  attention  was  paid  to  the  excellent  chance  for  the  allies  offered  by  La
Vendue  until  October,  when  England  made  an  attempt  to  induce  the  French  princes
to  join  a  descent  there  ;  which  the  princes  would  not  do.

Some  of  the  French  disasters  were  no  doubt  due  to  the  wretched  character  of
the  three  men  who  successively  held  the  War  Office,  Pache,  Beurnonville  and  Bou-
chotte  (the  latter  held  the  office  far  into  the  period  of  victory,  i.e.,  till  March  '94,
but  from  August  he  had  Carnot  to  keep  him  in  order).  The  state  of  the  Army  of
the  North  may  be  judged  from  some  passages  in  Carnot's  Correspondence.  In  one
garrison  (Douai)  he  found  350  men  and  3,000  women  lodged  in  barracks  :  "the  new
"  law  has  ordered  that  married  soldiers  may  be  lodged  in  barracks — by  their  own
"account  they  are  all  married"  (ii.  ii6).  ''  Pcrc  Duchesne  and  the  Petit  Rdpu-
blicain  are  distributed  gratis  to  the  soldiers,  and  are  full  of  attacks  on  their  Generals.'
Custine  complained  of  it  [ibid,  204).  There  was  a  constant  drain  of  men  for  La
Vendue  (by  order  of  May  4th  54  men  were  drafted  from  each  battalion  from  the
Armies  of  North  and  Ardennes  {ibid  245)).]

2  [Prieur  and  Romme  were  arrested  at  Caen  June  2nd,  and  released  July  23rd.]


CHARLOTTE  CORDAY  65

with  an  aged  valet,  taking  grave  graceful  leave  ^  of  Deputy  Barba-
roux.2  sj^e  jg  of  stately  Norman  figure  ;  in  her  twenty-fifth  year  ;
of  beautiful  still  countenance :  her  name  is  Charlotte  Corday,^
heretofore  styled  D'Armans,  while  Nobility  still  was.  Barbaroux
has  given  her  a  Note  to  Deputy  Duperret, — him  who  once  drew
his  sword  in  the  effervescence.*  Apparently  she  will  to  Paris  on
some  errand  ?  '  She  was  a  Republican  before  the  Revolution,  and
never  wanted  energy.'  A  completeness,  a  decision  is  in  this  fair
female  Figure  :  '  by  energy  she  means  the  spirit  that  will  prompt
one  to  sacrifice  himself  for  his  country.'  What  if  she,  this  fair
young  Charlotte,  had  emerged  from  her  secluded  stillness,  sud-
denly like  a  Star ;  cruel-lovely,  with  half-angelic,  half-daemonic
splendour ;  to  gleam  for  a  moment,  and  in  a  moment  be  extin-
guished ;  to  be  held  in  memory,  so  bright  complete  was  she,
through  long  centuries  ! — Quitting  Cimmerian  Coalitions  without,
and  the  dim-simmering  Twenty-five  millions  within.  History  will
look  fixedly  at  this  one  fair  Apparition  of  a  Charlotte  Corday ;
will  note  whither  Charlotte  moves,  how  the  little  Life  bums  forth
so  radiant,  then  vanishes  swallowed  of  the  Night.

With  Barbaroux's  Note  of  Introduction,  and  slight  stock  of  lug-
gage, we  see  Charlotte  on  Tuesday  the  ninth  of  July  seated  in  the
Caen  Diligence,  with  a  place  for  Paris.  None  takes  farewell  of
her,  wishes  her  Good-journey :  her  Father  will  find  a  line  left,
signifying  that  she  is  gone  to  England,  that  he  must  pardon  her,
and  forget  her.  The  drowsy  Diligence  lumbers  along ;  amid
drowsy  talk  of  Politics,  and  praise  of  the  Mountain ;  in  which
she  mingles  not:  all  night,  all  day,  and  again  all  night.  On
Thursday,^  not  long  before  noon,  we  are  at  the  bridge  of  Neuilly  ;
here  is  Paris  with  her  thousand  black  domes,  the  goal  and  purpose
of  thy  journey  !     Arrived  at  the  Inn  de  la  Providence  in  the  Rue

iQuly  9th.]  2Meillan,  p.  75  ;  Louvet,  p.  114.

■■'[Marie-Anne-Charlotte-Corday  d'Armans,  born  1768,  educated  at  a  convent  in
Caen,  where  she  met  and  fell  in  love  with  Colonel  de  Belzunce,  who  was  murdered
by  the  mob  of  Caen  in  1790.  (See  Campardon,  i.  62  note,  who  however  is  not
convinced  of  the  truth  of  the  story  that  it  was  revenge  for  his  murder  that  prompted
her  to  kill  Marat. )]

4[Duperret  was  one  of  the  still  unproscribed  Girondin  deputies.]

5 [July  nth.]

VOL.    III.  5


66  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

des  Vieux  Augustins,^  Charlotte  demands  a  room  ;  hastens  to  bed  ;
sleeps  all  afternoon  and  night,  till  the  morrow  morning.

On  the  morrow  morning,  she  delivers  her  Note  to  Duperret.
It  relates  to  certain  Family  Papers  which  are  in  the  Minister  of
the  Interior's  hand ;  which  a  Nun  at  Caen,  an  old  Convent-friend
of  Charlotte's,  has  need  of;  which  Duperret  shall  assist  her  in
getting :  this  then  was  Charlotte's  errand  to  Paris  ?  She  has
finished  this,  in  the  course  of  Friday  ; — yet  says  nothing  of  return-
ing. She  has  seen  and  silently  investigated  several  things.  The
Convention,  in  bodily  reality,  she  has  seen ;  ^  what  the  Mountain
is  like.  The  living  physiognomy  of  Marat  she  could  not  see  ;  he
is  sick  at  present,  and  confined  to  home.

About  eight  on  the  Saturday  morning,  she  purchases  a  large
sheath-knife  in  the  Palais  Royal ;  then  straightway,  in  the  Place
des  Victoires,  takes  a  hackney-coach  :  "  To  the  Rue  de  I'Ecole  de
Medecine,  No.  44."  ^  It  is  the  residence  of  the  Citoyen  Marat ! —
The  Citoyen  Marat  is  ill,  and  cannot  be  seen ;  which  seems  to
disappoint  her  much.  Her  business  is  with  Marat,  then  ?  Hap-
less beautiful  Charlotte  ;  hapless  squalid  Marat !  From  Caen  in
the  utmost  West,  from  Neuchatel  in  the  utmost  East,  they  two
are  drawing  nigh  each  other ;  they  two  have,  very  strangely,
business  together. — Charlotte,  returning  to  her  Inn,  despatches  a
short  Note  to  Marat ;  signifying  that  she  is  from  Caen,  the  seat
of  rebellion ;  that  she  desires  earnestly  to  see  him,  and  '  will  put
it  in  his  power  to  do  France  a  great  service.'  No  answer.  Char-
lotte writes  another  Note,  still  more  pressing  ;  sets  out  with  it  by
coach,  about  seven  in  the  evening,  herself.  Tired  day-labourers
have  again  finished  their  Week  ;  huge  Paris  is  circling  and  simmer-
ing, manifold,  according  to  its  vague  wont :  this  one  fair  Figure
has  decision  in  it ;  drives  straight, — towards  a  purpose.

It  is  yellow  July  evening,  we  say,  the  thirteenth  of  the  month  ;
eve  of  the  Bastille  day, — when  '  M.  Marat,'  four  years  ago,  in  the

1  [Now  Rue  d'Argout.]

2 [It  is  probable  that  she  had  intended  to  assassinate  Marat  in  the  Convention,
or  at  the  Fete  of  July  14th,  which  however  did  not  take  place  in  1793.]

'[The  Rue  de  I'Ecole  de  Medecine  was  then  called  Rue  des  Cordeliers,  and
Marat's  number  was  30.    (Campardon,  i.  31.)]


CHARLOTTE  CORDAY  67

crowd  of  the  Pont  Neuf,  shrewdly  required  of  that  Besenval
Hussar-party,  which  had  such  friendly  dispositions,  "  to  dismount,
and  give  up  their  arms,  then  ;  "  and  became  notable  among  Patriot
men.  Four  years :  what  a  road  he  has  travelled  ;— and  sits  now,
about  half-past  seven  of  the  clock,  stewing  in  slipper-bath ;  sore
afflicted ;  ill  of  Revolution  Fever, — of  what  other  malady  this
History  had  rather  not  name.  Excessively  sick  and  worn,  poor
man :  with  precisely  eleven-pence-halfpenny  of  ready  money,  in
paper ;  with  slipper-bath  ;  strong  three-footed  stool  for  writing
on,  the  while  ;  and  a  squalid — Washer  woman,  ^  one  may  call  her :
that  is  his  civic  establishment  in  Medical-School  Street ;  thither
and  not  elsewhither  has  his  road  led  him.  Not  to  the  reign  of
Brotherhood  and  Perfect  Felicity  ;  yet  surely  on  the  way  towards
that  .'* — Hark,  a  rap  again  !  A  musical  woman's  voice,  refusing  to
be  rejected :  it  is  the  Citoyenne  who  would  do  France  a  service.
Marat,  recognising  from  within,  cries.  Admit  her.  Charlotte
Corday  is  admitted.

Citoyen  Marat,  I  am  from  Caen  the  seat  of  rebellion,  and
wished  to  speak  with  you. — Be  seated,  mon  enfant.  Now  what
are  the  Traitors  doing  at  Caen  }  What  Deputies  are  at  Caen  } —
Charlotte  names  some  Deputies.  "Their  heads  shall  fall  within
a  fortnight,"  croaks  the  eager  People's-friend,  clutching  his  tablets
to  write :  Barbaroux,  Petion,  writes  he  with  bare  shrunk  arm,
turning  aside  in  the  bath  :  Petion,  and  Loiivef,  and — Charlotte  has
drawn  her  knife  from  the  sheath  ;  plunges  it,  with  one  sure  stroke,
into  the  writer's  heart.  "  J  moi,  Mre  amie,  Help,  dear  !  "  no  more
could  the  Death-choked  say  or  shriek.  The  helpful  Washerwoman
running  in,  there  is  no  Friend  of  the  People,  or  Friend  of  the
Washerwoman  left ;  but  his  life  with  a  groan  gushes  out,  indig-
nant, to  the  shades  below.^

1  [Nothing  is  known  of  the  origin  of  Simonne  Evrard,  who  passed  as  Marat's
mistress.  She  seems  to  have  made  his  acquaintance  early  in  the  Revolution  (about
May  '90,  says  Chevremont,  i.  255),  and  to  have  devoted  her  small  fortune  to  the
publication  of  L'Ami  du  Peuple :  the  sister  of  Marat  (vid.  tnfr.,  iii.  68)  recognised
her  devotion  to  her  brother,  and  took  her  to  live  with  her  after  his  death.  M.
Bougeart  weeps  hysterically  over  these  two  females  having  to  earn  their  living  and
finding  it  difficult  to  do  so.     [See  also  Cabanis,  Marat  Inconnu,  p.  261.)]

^Moniteur,  Nos.  197,  8,  9;  Hist.  Pari,  xxviii,  301-5;  Deux  Amis,  x.  368-74.


68  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

And  so  Marat  People's-friend  is  ended ;  the  lone  Stylites  has
got  hurled  down  suddenly  from  his  Pillar — whitherward  He  that
made  him  knows.  Patriot  Paris  may  sound  triple  and  tenfold,  in
dole  and  wail ;  re-echoed  by  Patriot  France  ;  and  the  Convention,
'  Chabot  pale  with  terror,  declaring  that  they  are  to  be  all  assassi-
*  nated,'  may  decree  him  Pantheon  Honours,  Public  Funeral,  Mira-
beau's  dust  making  way  for  him ;  and  Jacobin  Societies,  in
lamentable  oratory,  summing  up  his  character,  parallel  him  to
One,  whom  they  think  it  honour  to  call  'the  good  Sansculotte,'
— whom  we  name  not  here  ;  ^  also  a  Chapel  may  be  made,  for  the
urn  that  holds  his  Heart,  in  the  Place  du  Carrousel ;  and  new-
born children  be  named  Marat ;  and  Lago-di-Como  Hawkers  bake
mountains  of  stucco  into  unbeautiful  Busts  ;  and  David  paint  his
Picture,  or  Death-Scene ;  and  such  other  Apotheosis  take  place
as  the  human  genius,  in  these  circumstances,  can  devise :  ^  but
Marat  returns  no  more  to  the  light  of  this  Sun.  One  sole  cir-
cumstance we  have  read  with  clear  sympathy,  in  the  old  Moniteur
Newspaper :  how  Marat's  Brother  comes  from  Neuchatel  to  ask
of  the  Convention,  'that  the  deceased  Jean-Paul  Marat's  musket
be  given  him.'  ^  For  Marat  too  had  a  brother,  and  natural  affec-
tions ;  and  was  wrapt  once  in  swaddling-clothes,  and  slept  safe
in  a  cradle  like  the  rest  of  us.  Ye  children  of  men  ! — A  sister  of
his,  they  say,  lives  still  to  this  day  in  Paris.  ^

As  for  Charlotte  Corday,  her  work  is  accomplished ;  the  re-
compense of  it  is  near  and  sure.  The  chere  amie,  and  neighbours
of  the  house,  flying  at  her,  she  'overturns  some  movables,'  en-
trenches herself  till  the  gendarmes  arrive ;  then  quietly  surren-
ders ;  goes  quietly  to  the  Abbaye  Prison :   she  alone  quiet,  all

1  See  Eloge  funebre  de  Jean-Paul  Marat,  prononc6  k  Strasbourg  (in  Barbaroux,
pp.  125-131) ;  Mercier,  &c.

2 [Marat  was  deified  at  once:  on  July  14th  a  deputation  of  the  Section  Contrat
Social  came  to  the  Convention,  demanding  that  Charlotte  should  be  put  to  death
with  extraordinary  and  horrible  tortures  :  it  is  greatly  to  the  credit  of  the  Conven-
tion that  it  refused  this  demand :  the  funeral  of  Marat  was  organised  with  the  greatest
splendour  for  July  19th.]

3  Stance  du  16  Septembre  1793.

^[Albertine  Marat,  born  at  Paris  1757,  much  resembled  her  brother  in  personal
appearance,  and  was  a  devoted  sister.  She  earned  her  living  by  making  fine  springs
of  watches,  and  died  in  Paris  in  the  greatest  poverty  1841.     (Cabanis,  265,  sqq.)'\


CHARLOTTE  CORDAY  69

Paris  sounding,  in  wonder,  in  rage  or  admiration,  round  her.
Duperret  is  put  in  arrest,  on  account  of  her ;  his  Papers  sealed,
— which  may  lead  to  consequences.  Fauchet,  in  like  manner;
though  Fauchet  had  not  so  much  as  heard  of  her.  Charlotte,
confronted  with  these  two  Deputies,  praises  the  grave  firmness  of
Duperret,  censures  the  dejection  of  Fauchet.

On  Wednesday  morning,^  the  thronged  Palais  de  Justice  and
Revolutionary  Tribunal  can  see  her  face  ;  beautiful  and  calm :  she
dates  it '  fourth  day  of  the  Preparation  of  Peace.'  A  strange  mur-
mur ran  through  the  Hall,  at  sight  of  her  ;  you  could  not  say  of
what  character.'-^  Tinville  has  his  indictments  and  tape-papers :
the  cutler  of  the  Palais  Royal  will  testify  that  he  sold  her  the
sheath-knife  ;  "  All  these  details  are  needless,"  interrupted  Char-
lotte ;  "it  is  I  that  killed  Marat."  By  whose  instigation.? — "By
no  one's."  What  tempted  you,  then .''  His  crimes.  "  I  killed
one  man,"  added  she,  raising  her  voice  extremely  {extremement),
as  they  went  on  with  their  questions,  "  I  killed  one  man  to  save
a  hundred  thousand ;  a  villain  to  save  innocents ;  a  savage  wild-
beast  to  give  repose  to  my  country.  I  was  a  Republican  before
the  Revolution ;  I  never  wanted  energy."  There  is  therefore
nothing  to  be  said.  The  public  gazes  astonished :  the  hasty  lim-
ners sketch  her  features,  Charlotte  not  disapproving :  the  men  of
law  proceed  with  their  formalities.  The  doom  is  Death  as  a
murderess.  To  her  Advocate  she  gives  thanks  ;  ^  in  gentle  phrase,
in  high-flown  classical  spirit.  To  the  Priest  they  send  her  she
gives  thanks ;  but  needs  not  any  shriving,  any  ghostly  or  other
aid  from  him.*

On  this  same  evening  therefore,  about  half-past  seven  o'clock,

i[July  17th.]

2Proces  de  Charlotte  Corday,  &c.  (Hist.  Pari,  xxviii.  311-338).

3  [Charlotte  was  defended  by  Chauveau-Lagarde  :  she  had  written  to  ask  Pont6-
coulant  to  defend  her,  but  the  letter  did  not  reach  him  ;  Lagarde  made  no  attempt
to  disprove  the  facts.  The  interrogatory  began  on  i6th,  the  trial  was  on  17th.
(Campardon,  i.  70,  sqq. )  She  desired  to  be  painted,  but  the  request  was  refused  ;  she
had  intended  to  send  her  portrait  to  her  native  Department,  a  curious  instance  of
the  vanity  of  a  homicide  [ibid.  75).]

'*[We  have  no  evidence  of  Charlotte's  religious  feeling,  but  it  is  probable —
practically  certain — that  the  '  priest '  was  an  assermenie  and  therefore,  if  she  were  a
Catholic,  no  priest  to  her.]


70  THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

from  the  gate  of  the  Conciergerie,  to  a  City  all  on  tiptoe,  the  fatal
Cart  issues ;  seated  on  it  a  fair  young  creature,  sheeted  in  red
smock  of  Murderess  ;  so  beautiful,  serene,  so  full  of  life  ;  journey-
ing towards  death, — alone  amid  the  World.  Many  take  oif  their
hats,  saluting  reverently  ;  for  what  heart  but  must  be  touched  ?  ^
Others  growl  and  howl.  Adam  Lux,  of  Mentz,  declares  that  she
is  greater  than  Brutus ;  ^  that  it  were  beautiful  to  die  with  her  :
the  head  of  this  young  man  seems  turned.  At  the  Place  de  la
Revolution,  the  countenance  of  Charlotte  wears  the  same  still
smile.  The  executioners  proceed  to  bind  her  feet ;  she  resists,
thinking  it  meant  as  an  insult ;  on  a  word  of  explanation,  she
submits  with  cheerful  apology.  As  the  last  act,  all  being  now
ready,  they  take  the  neckerchief,  from  her  neck ;  a  blush  of
maidenly  shame  overspreads  that  fair  face  and  neck  ;  the  cheeks
were  still  tinged  with  it  when  the  executioner  lifted  the  severed
head,  to  show  it  to  the  people.  '  It  is  most  true,'  says  Forster,
'  that  he  struck  the  cheek  insultingly  ;  for  I  saw  it  with  my  eyes  :
'the  Police  imprisoned  him  for  it.'  ^

In  this  manner  have  the  Beautifullest  and  the  Squalidest
come  in  collision,  and  extinguished  one  another.  Jean- Paul
Marat  and  Marie-Anne  Charlotte  Corday  both,  suddenly,  are
no  more.  '  Day  of  the  Preparation  of  Peace } '  Alas,  how
were  peace  possible  or  preparable,  while,  for  example,  the
hearts  of  lovely  Maidens,  in  their  convent-stillness,  are  dream-
ing not  of  Love-paradises,  and  the  light  of  Life  ;  but  of  Codrus'-
sacrifices,  and  Death  well-earned  ?  That  Twenty-five  million
hearts  have  got  to  such  temper,  this  is  the  Anarchy ;  the  soul
of  it  lies  in  this ;  whereof  not  peace  can  be  the  embodiment !
The  death  of  Marat,  whetting  old  animosities  tenfold,  will  be

1  Deux  Amis,  x.  374-384,

2  [Adam  Lux,  born  1766,  was  one  of  the  deputies  for  the  '  Rhenish  Convention  '
of  Mainz,  who  came  to  Paris  to  arrange  for  the  incorporation  of  the  Electorate
with  France.  He  actually  placarded  the  walls  of  Paris  with  a  demand  that  a
statue  should  be  erected  to  Charlotte ;  he  was  arrested  July  28th,  guillotined  Nov.
4th  ;  Andr6  Ch^nier  also  celebrated  Charlotte  in  some  eloquent  verses.  (Mortimer-
Ternaux,  viii.  163.)]

3  Briefwechsel,  i.  508,  [The  executioner's  assistant  called  Legros  is  the  man  re-
ferred to.   (Campardon,  i.  81.)]


CHtIRLOTTE  COEDAY  71

worse  than  any  life.  O  ye  hapless  Two,  mutually  extinctive,
the  Beautiful  and  the  Squalid,  sleep  ye  well, — in  the  Mother's
bosom  that  bore  you  both !

This  is  the  History  of  Charlotte  Corday;  most  definite,
most  complete ;  angelic-daemonic :  like  a  Star !  Adam  Lux
goes  home,  half  delirious ;  to  pour  forth  his  Apotheosis  of  her,
in  paper  and  print ;  to  propose  that  she  have  a  statue  with
this  inscription.  Greater  than  Brutus.  Friends  represent  his
danger ;  Lux  is  reckless ;  thinks  it  were  beautiful  to  die  with
her.


[The  Epoch  of  the  death  of  Marat  is  also  that  of  the  creation  of  the  Final  or
•  Great'  Committee  of  Public  Safety  {vid.  supr.,  iii.  34).  This  Committee  was  to
pass  under  the  influence  of  Robespierre  almost  as  completely  as  that  of  April  6th  had
passed  under  that  of  Danton.  Its  members  (elected  July  loth  by  the  whole  Conven-
tion) were  Saint-Andr6,  Gasparin,  Couthon,  H6rault-S6chelles,  Prieur  de  la  Mama,
Saint-Just,  Lindet,  Thuriot,  Barere  ;  Gasparin  resigned  July  27th  and  was  replaced
by  Robespierre;  Thuriot  also  resigned,  H6rault  was  eliminated,  Dec.  '93.  Carnot
and  Prieur  de  la  Cote  d'Or  were  elected  Aug.  14th  ;  Collot  d'Herbois  and  Billaud-
Varennes  Sept.  6th.  All  Damon's  wise  plans  for  peace  and  moderation  vanished
with  the  creation  of  this  Committee.  The  report  of  the  outgomg  Committee  made
by  Cambon  on  July  nth  should  be  compared  with  that  of  the  incoming  one  made
by  Barere  Aug.  ist.     (Stephens'  Orators  of  the  Fr.  Rev.  i.  507  and  ii.  10.)

This  is  essentially  the  Government  of  the  Terror  :  but  not  all  its  members  were
equally  guilty  of  the  acts  of  terror.  The  real  workers  in  the  Committee,  the  "  men
who  saved  France"  (so  far  as  she  was  saved),  were  (besides  Carnot  and  Saint-
Andr6),  (i)  Prieur  de  la  Marne,  an  advocate,  deputy  for  Chalons  to  States-General
and  for  the  Marne  to  the  Convention,  President  of  the  Criminal  Tribunal  of  Paris
1791,  compromised  in  the  rising  of  Prairial  1795,  banished  1816,  died  at  Brussels
1827.

(2)  Prieur  du  Vernois  (de  la  C6te  d'Or),  born  1763,  Captain  in  the  Engineers
in  the  old  Army,  deputy  for  Cote  d'Or  to  Legislative  and  Convention,  member  of
Council  of  500,  Chef  de  Brigade  1801,  died  at  Dijon  1832.

{3)  Robert  Lindet,  born  1746,  an  advocate,  deputy  for  the  Eure  to  the  Legislative
and  Convention,  implicated  m  Prairial  and  in  Baboeuf's  plot,  finance  minister  for
a  short  time  in  the  last  days  of  the  Directory,  died  in  obscurity  1825.

It  is  extremely  difficult  to  pass  a  fair  judgment  on  the  acts  of  the  Committee  as  a
whole.  It  is  generally  understood  that  the  special  measures  of  '  Terror '  owed  their
origin  to  the  savage  character  of  Billaud  and  Collot  even  more  than  to  Robespierre,
Couthon  and  Saint-Just,  who  were  more  busy  scheming  against  their  private  enemies
both  within  and  without  the  Committee  (for  there  is  ample  evidence  of  fierce  quarrels
inside  it) ;  the  Navy  was  mainly  turned  over  to  Saint-Andr6,  the  Army  to  Carnot,
Lindet  and  Prieur  Cote  d'Or  ;  the  signatures  appended  to  the  Actes  in  Aulard's
vast  Recueil  are  sometimes  as  few  as  two  to  each,  and  Carnot  constantly  avowed
afterwards  that  he  often  signed  Actes  which  he  had  never  read,  being  far  too  busy
to  do  so.  No  Government  ever  disposed  so  absolutely  of  the  whole  resources  of  a
very  rich  country,  with  one  good  (1793)  and  one  splendid  (1794)  harvest  to  aid  it :
if  it  was  ultimately  victorious,  it  was  so  at  a  most  unheard-of  cost  of  treasure,  and
mere  bankruptcy  was  left  behind  it ;  at  a  most  unheard-of  cost  of  lives,  as  all  the
military  historians  bear  witness  ;  and,  worst  of  all  perhaps,  at  the  entire  cost  of  local
freedom,  such  as  might  have  taken  root  from  a  reconstruction  of  the  Ancien  Regime.
The  Committee  increased  ten-fold  the  despotism  of  the  old  Monarchy,  and  handed


72  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

it  on  to  Napoleon.  It  taught  once  more  to  all  local  authorities  the  lesson  to  look
to  the  centre  alone  for  the  initiative ;  in  so  doing  it  was  forced  to  over-burden  itself
with  details  to  a  ludicrous  extent.  Finally  one  is  tempted  to  conclude  that  even  its
working  members  were  industrious  and  resolute  men  indeed,  but  without  any  marked
talents  for  administration.

The  Subordinate  Committee  of  General  Security,  the  second  and  much  smaller
wheel  of  the  governmental  machine,  was  organised  on  June  i6th  '93,  and  recon-
stituted on  Sept.  14th.  It  was  mainly  concerned  with  matters  of  police,  and  became
in  the  end  more  specially  devoted  to  Robespierre  than  the  Greater  Committee.
Its  members  were  Vadier,  Amar,  Panis,  David,  Guffroy,  Lavicomterie,  Ruhl,  Vou-
land,  Bayle,  Lebas,  Lebon,  Louis.

For  the  methods  of  work  of  the  Committees,  vid.  infr.,  iii.  144.]


CHAPTER  II

IN  CIVIL  WAR

But  during  these  same  hours,  another  guillotine  is  at  work,  on
another :  Charlotte,  for  the  Girondins,  dies  at  Paris  today ;  ^
Chalier,  by  the  Girondins,  dies  at  Lyons  tomorrow.^

From  rumbling  of  cannon  along  the  streets  of  that  City,  it
has  come  to  firing  of  them,  to  rabid  fighting :  Nievre  Choi  and
the  Girondins  triumph ; — behind  whom  there  is,  as  everywhere,
a  Royalist  Faction  waiting  to  strike  in.  Trouble  enough  at
Lyons ;  and  the  dominant  party  carrying  it  with  a  high  hand  !
For,  indeed,  the  whole  South  is  astir ;  incarcerating  Jacobins ;
arming  for  Girondins :  wherefore  we  have  got  a  '  Congress  of
Lyons ; '  also  a  '  Revolutionary  Tribunal  of  Lyons,'  and  Anar-
chists shall  tremble.  So  Chalier  was  soon  found  guilty,  of
Jacobinism,  of  murderous  Plot,  '  address  with  drawn  dagger  on
the  sixth  of  February  last ; '  and,  on  the  morrow,  he  also  travels
his  final  road,  along  the  streets  of  Lyons,  '  by  the  side  of  an
ecclesiastic,  with  whom  he  seems  to  speak  earnestly,' — the  axe
now  glittering  nigh.  He  could  weep,  in  old  years,  this  man,
and  'fall  on  his  knees  on  the  pavement,'  blessing  Heaven  at
sight  of  Federation  Programs  or  the  like  :  then  he  pilgrimed
to  Paris,  to  worship  Marat  and  the  Mountain :  now  Marat  and
he  are  both  gone  ; — we  said  he  could  not  end  well.  Jacobinism
groans  inwardly,  at  Lyons ;  but  dare  not  outwardly.     Chalier,

1  [July  17th.]  2Quly  i6th.]


IN  CIVIL  WAR  73

when  the  Tribunal  sentenced  him,  made  answer :    "  My  death
will  cost  this  City  dear."  ^

Montelimart  Town  is  not  buried  under  its  ruins;  yet  Mar-
seilles 2  is  actually  marching,  under  order  of  a  '  Lyons  Congress  ; '
is  incarcerating  Patriots ;  the  very  Royalists  now  showing  face.
Against  which  a  General  Cartaux  fights,^  though  in  small  force  ;
and  with  him  an  Artillery  Major,  of  the  name  of — Napoleon
Buonaparte.  This  Napoleon,  to  prove  that  the  Marseillese
have  no  chance  ultimately,  not  only  fights  but  writes  ;  publishes
his  Supper  of  Beaucaire,  a  Dialogue  which  has  become  curious.*
Unfortunate  Cities,  with  their  actions  and  their  reactions !
Violence  to  be  paid  with  violence  in  geometrical  ratio ;  Royal-
ism  and  Anarchism  both  striking  in ; — the  final  net-amount  of
which  geometrical  series,  what  man  shall  sum  }

The  Bar  of  Iron  has  never  yet  floated  in  Marseilles  Harbour ;
but  the  Body  of  Rebecqui  was  found  floating,^  self-drowned  there.

^[On  July  3rd  the  Convention  ordered  the  Commissioners  who  were  with  the
Army  of  the  Alps  to  proceed  against  Lyons,  and  on  12th  proscribed  the  whole  of
the  Moderate  faction  of  that  city,  ordering  distribution  of  their  property  to  their
rivals.  Pre9y  became  commander  at  Lyons  on  14th,  Chalier  was  guillotined  on
i6th  ;  he  was  a  Piedmontese  by  birth.]

2  [The  preparations  of  Marseilles  for  resistance  were  more  noisy,  but  less  effica-
cious than  those  of  Lyons ;  it  expelled  its  Convention  Commissioners  (Bayle  and
Boisset),  named  a  central  committee  and  collected  Volunteers,  who  managed  to
cross  the  Durance  and  to  push  as  far  as  Orange,  hoping  to  join  with  the  insurgents
of  Nimes  :  but  they  retired  upon  Avignon  before  the  end  of  July.  (See  Mortimer-
Ternaux,  viii.  loi,  sqq.)]

^[Carteaux  was  detached  with  1,500  men  from  the  Army  of  the  Alps  (sent  against
Lyons)  by  order  of  the  Convention.  On  July  27th  he  drove  the  Marseillais  from
Avignon,  beat  them  at  Cadenet  and  Salon  in  August,  and  finally  entered  Marseilles
on  Aug.  25th  [vid.  infr.,  iii.  124).  No  serious  resistance  was  made  and  the  Terror
there  tegan  early  in  September.  Carteaux  had  been  in  the  old  Army,  but  had  re-
tired and  became  an  artist ;  he  had  also  served  on  Lafayette's  staff;  he  was  arrested
in  Dec.  1793,  and  imprisoned  till  after  Thermidor ;  died  1813.]

**  See  Hazlitt,  ii.  529-41.  [The  Souper  de  Beaucaire  has  been  republished  with
an  historical  introduction  by  M.  Charvet  (Avignon,  1881).  Napoleon  during  the
struggle  outside  Marseilles  happened  to  dine  at  Beaucaire  at  an  inn,  and  to  get  in
conversation  with  four  merchants  from  Nimes,  who  were  attending  the  fair  at  Beau-
caire (July  29th),  A  few  days  afterwards  he  published  at  Avignon  the  substance
of  the  conversation  (at  the  expense  of  the  Commune ;  Napoleon  was  very  poor  at
the  time).  Each  of  the  five  speakers  is  represented  as  having  a  separate  remedy
for  the  existing  evils  of  France  ;  but  the  gist  of  the  whole  is  that  the  Montagne  is
right  because  it  is  the  stronger  of  the  contending  factions.  Neither  Carlyle,  nor
Napoleon  himself  in  his  later  days,  could  have  contended  more  stoutly  than  the
young  author  that  Providence  is  on  the  side  of  the  big  battalions,]

^[May  3rd  '94.]


74  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Hot  Rebecqui,  seeing  how  confusion  deepened,  and  Respect-
ability grew  poisoned  with  Royalism,  felt  that  there  was  no
refuge  for  a  Republican  but  death.  Rebecqui  disappeared :  no
one  knew  whither;  till,  one  morning,  they  found  the  empty
case  or  body  of  him  risen  to  the  top,  tumbling  on  the  salt
waves ;  ^  and  perceived  that  Rebecqui  had  withdrawn  forever.
— Toulon  2  likewise  is  incarcerating  Patriots  ;  sending  delegates
to  Congress ;  intriguing,  in  case  of  necessity,  with  the  Royalists
and  English.  Montpellier,  Bourdeaux,  Nantes :  all  France,
that  is  not  under  the  swoop  of  Austria  and  Cimmeria,  seems
rushing  into  madness,  and  suicidal  ruin.  The  Mountain  labours  ;
like  a  volcano  in  a  burning  volcanic  Land.  Convention  Com-
mittees, of  Surety,  of  Salvation,  are  busy  night  and  day  :  Con-
vention Commissioners  whirl  on  all  highways ;  bearing  olive-branch
and  sword,  or  now  perhaps  sword  only.^  Chaumette  and  Muni-
cipals come  daily  to  the  Tuileries  demanding  a  Constitution  :
it  is  some  weeks  now  since  he  resolved,  in  Townhall,  that  a
Deputation  '  should  go  every  day,'  and  demand  a  Constitution,
till  one  were  got ;  ^  whereby  suicidal  France  might  rally  and
pacify  itself;   a  thing  inexpressibly  desirable.

This  then  is  the  fruit  your  Antianarchic  Girondins  have  got
from  that  Levying  of  War  in  Calvados  ?  This  fruit,  we  may
say;  and  no  other  whatsoever.  For  indeed,  before  either
Charlotte's  or  Chalier's  head  had  fallen,  the  Calvados  War  itself


1  Barbaroux,  p.  29.  [Rebecqui  had  resigned  his  seat  in  the  Convention  in  April,
and  so  does  not  figure  at  first  on  the  list  of  the  proscribed :  but  he  appears  in
Amar's  report  Oct.  3rd  :  he  remained  in  hiding,  and  drowned  himself  in  May
'94>]

2  [As  far  back  as  1789  Dr.  Rigby  (p.  139)  noticed  that  there  were  no  signs  of
rejoicing  at  the  Revolution  in  Toulon,  where  all  the  chief  people  were  in  Govern-
ment employment,  or  connected  with  the  dockyard  {vid.  in/r.,  iii.  89).]

2  [We  must  distinguish  between  the  three  Reprdsentants  en  mission  voted  to  be
perpetually  with  each  army  {^id.  supr.,  ii.  279),  and  the  Special  Commissions,  like
those  of  Saint-Just  to  Alsace,  Carrier  to  Nantes,  Couthon  and  Collot  to  Lyons,  Le
Bon  to  Arras,  Maignet  to  Orange,  etc.  It  is  these  last  who  get  the  nickname  of
'  proconsuls,' and  correspond  directly  with  the  Comitd  de  Salut  Public ;  they  take
their  orders  mainly  from  Billaud  and  Collot.]

*  Deux  Amis,  x.  345.  [It  is  obvious  that  the  loud  talk  about  a  new  Constitution
gave  an  excellent  breathing  space  to  the  Monfagne,  for  it  gave  Paris  the  needful
Ti  Kaivov  to  talk  about,  and  so  diverted  the  populace  from  the  fate  of  the  imprisoned
Conventionals.]


IN  CIVIL  WAE  75

had,  as  it  were,  vanished,  dreamlike,  in  a  shriek !  With
'  seventy-two  Departments '  on  our  side,  one  might  have  hoped
better  things.  But  it  turns  out  that  Respectabilities,  though
they  will  vote,  will  not  fight.  Possession  always  is  nine  points
in  Law ;  but  in  Lawsuits  of  tids  kind,  one  may  say,  it  is  ninety-
and-nine  points.  Men  do  what  they  were  wont  to  do ;  and
have  immense  irresolution  and  inertia  :  they  obey  him  who  has
the  symbols  that  claim  obedience.  Consider  what,  in  modern
society,  this  one  fact  means  :  the  Metropolis  is  with  our  enemies  !
Metropolis,  Mother'Ciiy ;  rightly  so  named  :  all  the  rest  are  but
as  her  children,  her  nurslings.  Why,  there  is  not  a  leathern
Diligence,  with  its  post-bags  and  luggage-boots,  that  lumbers
out  from  her,  but  is  as  a  huge  life-pulse  ;  she  is  the  heart  of
all.  Cut  short  that  one  leathern  Diligence,  how  much  is  cut
short ! — General  Wimpfen,  looking  practically  into  the  matter,
can  see  nothing  for  it  but  that  one  should  fall  back  on  Royalism  ;
get  into  communication  with  Pitt !  Dark  innuendos  he  flings
out,  to  that  effect :  whereat  we  Girondins  start,  horror-struck.
He  produces  as  his  Second  in  command  a  certain  '  Cidevanl,'  one
Comte  Puisaye  ;  entirely  unknown  to  Louvet ;  greatly  suspected
by  him.

Few  wars,  accordingly,  were  ever  levied  of  a  more  insufficient
character  than  this  of  Calvados.  He  that  is  curious  in  such
things  may  read  the  details  of  it  in  the  Memoirs  of  that  same
Cidevant  Puisaye,  the  much-enduring  man  and  Royalist :  How
our  Girondin  National  forces,  marching  off  with  plenty  of  wind-
music,  were  drawn  out  about  the  old  Chateau  of  Brecourt,  in  the
wood-country  near  Vernon,  to  meet  the  Mountain  National
forces  advancing  from  Paris.  How  on  the  fifteenth  afternoon
of  July,  they  did  meet ; — and,  as  it  were,  shrieked  mutually  and
took  mutually  to  flight,  without  loss.  How  Puisaye  thereafter, —
for  the  Mountain  Nationals  fled  first,  and  we  thought  ourselves
the  victors, — was  roused  from  his  warm  bed  in  the  Castle  of
Brecourt ;  and  had  to  gallop  without  boots ;  our  Nationals,  in
the  night-watches,  having  fallen  unexpectedly  into  sauve-qui-
peut : — and  in  brief  the  Calvados  War  had  burnt  priming ;  and


76  THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

the  only  question  now  was.  Whitherward  to  vanish,  in  what
hole  to  hide  oneself  I^

The  National  Volunteers  rush  homewards,  faster  than  they
came.  The  Seventy-two  Respectable  Departments,  says  Meillan,
'  all  turned  round  and  forsook  us,  in  the  space  of  four-and-twenty
'hours.'  Unhappy  those  who,  as  at  Lyons  for  instance,  have
gone  too  far  for  turning  !  '  One  morning/  we  find  placarded  on
our  Intendance  Mansion,  the  Decree  of  Convention  which  casts
us  Hors  la  lot,  into  Outlawry ;  placarded  by  our  Caen  Magis-
trates ; — clear  hint  that  we  also  are  to  vanish.  Vanish  indeed  :
but  whitherward  ?  Gorsas  has  friends  in  Rennes ;  he  will  hide
there, — unhappily  will  not  lie  hid.  Guadet,  Lanjuinais  are  on
cross  roads  ;  making  for  Bourdeaux.^  To  Bourdeaux  !  cries  the
general  voice,  of  Valour  alike  and  of  Despair.  Some  flag  of
Respectability  still  floats  there,  or  is  thought  to  float.

Thitherward  therefore  ;  each  as  he  can  !  Eleven  of  these  ill-
fated  Deputies,  among  whom  we  may  count  as  twelfth,  Friend
Riouffe  the  Man  of  Letters,  do  an  original  thing :  Take  the  uni-
form of  National  Volunteers,  and  retreat  southward  with  the
Breton  Battalion,  as  private  soldiers  of  that  corps.  These  brave
Bretons  had  stood  truer  by  us  than  any  other.  Nevertheless,  at
the  end  of  a  day  or  two,  they  also  do  now  get  dubious,  self-
divided  ;  we  must  part  from  them ;  and,  with  some  half-dozen


^  Mdmoires  de  Puisaye  (London,  1803),  ii.  142-67.  [This  refers  to  the  little
skirmish  known  as  the  '  combat  of  Vernon'  (in  the  Dept.  of  I'Eure),  on  July  13th,
where  the  little  army  of  Calvados  met  some  Parisian  volunteers  plus  the  National
Guards  of  Vernon  and  its  neighbourhood.  No  one  was  killed,  but  Puisaye's  troops
seem  to  have  run  away  the  faster :  when  the  news  reached  Caen,  the  Girondin
deputies  left  Caen  for  Quimper  and  Brest  to  take  ship  for  Bordeaux,]

2 [Bordeaux  would  not  have  been  of  much  use  if  they  had  reached  it:  on
the  news  of  June  2nd  the  Bordelais  declaimed  and  created  Committees,  but  levied
no  troops  and  manifested  no  enthusiasm  to  proceed  to  the  extremities  of  rebellion  ;
there  were  however  certain  popular  outbreaks  in  the  Department  of  the  Gironde,
and  the  Convention  Commissioners  (Treilhard  and  Mathieu)  were  unable  to  reach
Bordeaux :  on  Aug.  2nd  the  governing  Committee  of  Moderates  at  Bordeaux  dis-
solved itself,  but  the  Convention  spared  no  threats  of  vengeance  :  at  the  end  of
August  the  citizens  in  despair  prepared  for  resistance,  ejected  two  new  Convention
Commissioners,  who  had  managed  to  get  in,  and  who  retired  and  gathered  together
some  sort  of  Jacobin  army  outside  :  a  blockade  began  in  September  ;  the  city  sur-
rendered on  Sept.  19th,  but  the  Conventionals  dared  not  trust  themselves  inside
till  Oct.  i6th,  when  fresh  troops  had  been  moved  up.  Then  the  massacres  began
under  Ysabeau  and  Tallien.     (Mortimer-Ternaux,  viii.  116,  197,  sqq.^l


RETREAT  OF  THE  ELEVEN  77

as  convoy  or  guide,  retreat  by  ourselves, — a  solitary  marching
detachment,  through  waste  regions  of  the  West.^


[Roughly  speaking  there  were  three  serious  centres  of  resistance  to  the  Montagne
in  the  summer  of '93,  viz.,  (i. )  La  Vendue,  (ii.)  Normandy,  (iii.)  Lyons,  Marseilles
and  Toulon.  The  news  of  the  Southern  Insurrection  began  to  filter  into  Paris  in
the  first  week  in  June,  that  of  the  Northern  when  the  Convention  Commissioners
were  seized,  in  the  same  week.  Although  some  50  departments  gave  encouraging
answers  to  the  manifesto  from  Calvados,  yet  when  a  review  of  the  National  Guard
was  held  on  July  7th  at  Caen,  and  Volunteers  for  the  Civil  War  asked  for,  it  was
found  impossible  to  collect  any  serious  number.  The  flag  of  the  Moderate  Republic
was  in  fact  not  a  flag  at  all,  and  La  Vendue  had  the  only  flag  in  the  West  that  was
worth  raising.  Dutard  {see  his  letter  of  June  13th  in  Schmidt,  vol.  ii.)  evidently  ex-
pects the  Venddans  in  Paris,  and  thinks  the  Parisians  as  a  whole  will  be  pleased
with  their  coming.

The  Southern  Insurrection  was  more  serious  ;  help  for  that  might  be  expected
from  the  excellent  fighting  material  of  Piedmont  and  even  from  Switzerland.  This
danger  was  not  really  over  till  the  fall  of  Lyons  on  Oct.  9th ;  Lindet  (sent  to  Lyons
June  2nd)  was  soon  recalled  as  being  too  mild;  his  letter  of  June  9th  (Aulard,
Recueil,  iv.  497)  shows  the  deep  cleavage  l)etween  North  and  South.  He  was  soon
after  sent  as  Commissioner  to  his  native  Normandy,  where  he  succeeded,  as  no  one
else  could  have  done,  in  pacifying  the  province  almost  without  executions.  He
remained  there  till  Nov.  ist.j

CHAPTER  III

RETREAT  OF  THE  ELEVEN
It  is  one  of  the  notablest  Retreats,  this  of  the  Eleven,  that  His-
tory presents  :  The  handful  of  forlorn  Legislators  retreating  there,
continually,  with  shouldered  firelock  and  well-filled  cartridge-box,
in  the  yellow  autumn  ;  long  hundreds  of  miles  between  them
and  Bourdeaux  ;  the  country  all  getting  hostile,  suspicious  of
the  truth ;  simmering  and  buzzing  on  all  sides,  more  and  more.
Louvet  has  preserved  the  Itinerary  of  it ;  a  piece  worth  all  the
rest  he  ever  wrote.

O  virtuous  Petion,  with  thy  early-white  head,  O  brave  young
Barbaroux,  has  it  come  to  this  .^  Weary  ways,  worn  shoes,  light
purse  ; — encompassed  with  perils  as  with  a  sea  !  Revolutionary
Committees  are  in  every  Township ;  of  Jacobin  temper ;  our
friends  all  cowed,  our  cause  the  losing  one.  In  the  Borough  of
Moncontour,  by  ill  chance,  it  is  market-day :  to  the  gaping
public  such  transit  of  a  solitary  Marching  Detachment  is  suspi-
cious ;  we  have  need  of  energy,  of  promptitude  and  luck,  to  be
1  Louvet,  pp.  101-137;  Meillan,  pp.  81,  241-70.


78  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

allowed  to  march  through.  Hasten,  ye  weary  pilgrims !  The
country  is  getting  up  ;  noise  of  you  is  bruited  day  after  day,
a  solitary  Twelve  ^  retreating  in  this  mysterious  manner :  with
every  new  day,  a  wider  wave  of  inquisitive  pursuing  tumult  is
stirred  up,  till  the  whole  West  will  be  in  motion.  ^Cussy  is
tormented  with  gout,  Buzot  is  too  fat  for  marching.'  RioufFe,
blistered,  bleeding,  marches  only  on  tiptoe ;  Barbaroux  limps
with  sprained  ancle,  yet  ever  cheery,  full  of  hope  and  valour.
Light  Louvet  glances  hare-eyed,  not  hare-hearted  :  only  virtu-
ous Petion's  serenity  '  was  but  once  seen  ruffled.'  ^  They  lie  in
straw-lofts,  in  woody  brakes ;  rudest  paillasse  on  the  floor  of  a
secret  friend  is  luxury.  They  are  seized  in  the  dead  of  night
by  Jacobin  mayors  and  tap  of  drum  ;  get  off  by  firm  countenance,
rattle  of  muskets,  and  ready  wit.

Of  Bourdeaux,  through  fiery  La  Vendee  and  the  long  geo-
graphical spaces  that  remain,  it  were  madness  to  think :  well,  if
you  can  get  to  Quimper  on  the  sea-coast,  and  take  shipping  there.
Faster,  ever  faster !  Before  the  end  of  the  march,  so  hot  has  the
country  grown,  it  is  found  advisable  to  march  all  night.  They  do
it ;  under  the  still  night-canopy  they  plod  along  ; — and  yet  behold,
Rumour  has  outplodded  them.  In  the  paltry  Village  of  Carhaix
(be  its  thatched  huts  and  bottomless  peat-bogs  long  notable  to  the
Traveller)  one  is  astonished  to  find  light  still  glimmering  :  citizens
are  awake,  with  rushlights  burning,  in  that  nook  of  the  terrestrial
Planet ;  as  we  traverse  swiftly  the  one  poor  street,  a  voice  is  heard
saying,  "There  they  are,  Les  voild  qui  passent ! "  ^  Swifter,  ye
doomed  lame  Twelve  :  speed  ere  they  can  arm ;  gain  the  Woods
of  Quimper  before  day,  and  lie  squatted  there !

The  doomed  Twelve  do  it ;  though  with  difficulty,  with  loss  of
road,  with  peril  and  the  mistakes  of  a  night.  In  Quimper  are
Girondin  friends,  who  perhaps  will  harbour  the  homeless,  till  a
Bourdeaux  ship  weigh.  Wayworn,  heartwom,  in  agony  of  sus-
pense, till  Quimper  friendship  get  warning,  they  lie  there,  squatted

i[The  twelve  were,  according  to  Louvet,  himself,   Barbaroux,  Salles,   Buzot,
Cussy  {director  of  the  Mint  at  Caen  and  deputy  for  Calvados  to  the  Convention),
Lesage,  Bergoeing,  Giroust,  Meillan,  Girey-Dupr^,  Petion  and  Riouflfe.]
^Meillan,  pp.  119-137.  s  Louvet,  pp.  138-164.


RETREAT  OF  THE  ELEVEN  79

under  the  thick  wet  boscage  ;  suspicious  of  the  face  of  man.
Some  pity  to  the  brave  ;  to  the  unhappy !  Unhappiest  of  all
Legislators,  O  when  ye  packed  your  luggage,  some  score  or
two-score  months  ago,  and  mounted  this  or  the  other  leathern
vehicle,  to  be  Conscript  Fathers  of  a  regenerated  France,  and
reap  deathless  laurels, — did  ye  think  your  journey  was  to  lead
hither  ?  The  Quimper  Samaritans  find  them  squatted  ;  lift  them
up  to  help  and  comfort ;  will  hide  them  in  sure  places.  Thence
let  them  dissipate  gradually  ;  or  there  they  can  lie  quiet,  and
write  Memoirs,  till  a  Bourdeaux  ship  sail.

And  thus,  in  Calvados  all  is  dissipated  ;  Romme  is  out  of  prison,
meditating  his  Calendar  ;  ringleaders  are  locked  in  his  room.  At
Caen  the  Corday  family  mourns  in  silence :  Buzot's  House  is  a
heap  of  dust  and  demolition ;  and  amid  the  rubbish  sticks  a
Gallows ;  with  this  inscription.  Here  dwelt  tJie  Traitor  Btizot  who
conspired  against  the  Republic.  Buzot  and  the  other  vanished
Deputies  are  hors  la  loi,  as  we  saw  ;  their  lives  free  to  take  where
they  can  be  found.  The  worse  fares  it  with  the  poor  Arrested
visible  Deputies  at  Paris.  '  Arrestment  at  home '  threatens  to
become  *  Confinement  in  the  Luxembourg ; '  to  end :  wliere  ?  For
example,  what  pale-visaged  thin  man  is  this,  journeying  towards
Switzerland  as  a  Merchant  of  Neuchatel,  whom  they  arrest  in  the
town  of  Moulins  ?  ^  To  Revolutionary  Committee  he  is  supsect.  To
Revolutionary  Committee,  on  probing  the  matter,  he  is  evidently  :
Deputy  Brissot !  Back  to  thy  Arrestment,  poor  Brissot ;  or
indeed  to  strait  confinement, — whither  others  are  fated  to  follow.
Rabaut  has  built  himself  a  false -partition,  in  a  friend's  house  ;
lives,  in  invisible  darkness,  between  two  walls.  It  will  end,
this  same  Arrestment  business,  in  Prison,  and  the  Revolutionary
Tribunal.

Nor  must  we  forget  Duperret,  and  the  seal  put  on  his  papers
by  reason  of  Charlotte.  One  paper  is  there,  fit  to  breed  woe
enough  :  A  secret  solemn  Protest  against  that  suprema  dies  of  the

i[June20th.]


80  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Second  of  June !  This  Secret  Protest  ^  our  poor  Duperret  had
drawn  up,  the  same  week,  in  all  plainness  of  speech ;  waiting  the
time  for  publishing  it :  to  which  Secret  Protest  his  signature,  and
that  of  other  honourable  Deputies  not  a  few,  stands  legibly
appended.  And  now,  if  the  seals  were  once  broken,  the  Moun-
tain still  victorious?  Such  Protesters,  your  Merciers,  Bailleuls,
Seventy-three  by  the  tale,  what  yet  remains  of  Respectable
Girondism  in  the  Convention,  may  tremble  to  think ! — These  are
the  fruits  of  levying  civil  war.

Also  we  find,  that  in  these  last  days  of  July,  the  famed  Siege
of  Mentz  is  finished :  the  Garrison  to  march  out  with  honours  of
war  ;  not  to  serve  against  the  Coalition  for  a  year.^  Lovers  of  the
Picturesque,  and  Goethe  standing  on  the  Chaussee  of  Mentz,  saw,
with  due  interest,  the  Procession  issuing  forth,  in  all  solemnity  :

'Escorted  by  Prussian  horse  came  first  the  French  Garrison.
'  Nothing  could  look  stranger  than  this  latter  ;  a  column  of  Mar-
'  seillese,  slight,  swarthy,  parti-coloured,  in  patched  clothes,  came
'tripping  on  ; — as  if  King  Edwin  had  opened  the  Dwarf  Hill,  and
'sent  out  his  nimble  Host  of  Dwarfs.  Next  followed  regular
'troops;  serious,  sullen;  not  as  if  downcast  or  ashamed.  But
'  the  remarkablest  appearance,  which  struck  every  one,  was  that
'of  the  Chasers  {Chasseurs)  coming  out  mounted:  they  had  ad-
'vanced  quite  silent  to  where  we  stood,  when  their  Band  struck
'up  the  Marseillaise.  This  revolutionary  Te-Deum  has  in  itself
'  something  mournful  and  bodeful,  however  briskly  played  ;  but  at
'  present  they  gave  it  in  altogether  slow  time,  proportionate  to  the
'creeping  step  they  rode  at.  It  was  piercing  and  fearful,  and  a
'  most  serious-looking  thing,  as  these  cavaliers,  long,  lean  men,  of
'  a  certain  age,  with  mien  suitable  to  the  music,  came  pacing  on  ;

1  [The  protest  had  been  drawn  up  as  early  as  June  6th,  and  ought  to  have  been
published  at  once :  it  might  have  had  a  great  effect  on  the  Departmental  risings
{see  Deux  Amis,  x.  337).  The  terms  of  it  are  printed  by  Mortimer-Ternaux  (vii,  541),
who  mentions  three  other  collective  protests  (of  the  Departments  Seine,  Aisne,  and
Haute  Vienne),  and  a  good  number  of  individual  ones,]

2  [  Vid.  supr. ,  iii.  21.  It  is  hardly  fair  to  say  that  it  was  a  violation  of  the  terms
of  this  agreement  to  send  this  garrison  to  La  Vendue,  for  the  allies  had  as  yet  taken
no  notice  of  La  Vendue.  The  gallant  soldiers  of  K16ber  did  not  much  relish  their
new  task  of  civil  war,  as  may  be  gathered  from  Carnot's  Corresp.  (iii.  147),  in
which  it  appears  that  some  of  them  cursed  the  Republic  and  all  its  works  in  no
measured  terms.]


RETREAT  OF  THE  ELEVEN  81

'  singly  you  might  have  likened  them  to  Don  Quixote  ;  in  mass,
'  they  were  highly  dignified.

'  But  now  a  single  troop  became  notable  :  that  of  the  Commis-
'  sioners  or  RepHsentans.  Merlin  of  Thionville,  in  hussar  uniform,
'  distinguishing  himself  by  wild  beard  and  look,  had  another  per-
'  son  in  similar  costume  on  his  left ;  the  crowd  shouted  out,  with
'rage,  at  sight  of  this  latter,  the  name  of  a  Jacobin  Townsman
'  and  Clubbist ;  and  shook  itself  to  seize  him.  Merlin  drew  bridle ;
'  referred  to  his  dignity  as  French  Representative,  to  the  vengeance
'  that  should  follow  any  injury  done  ;  he  would  advise  every  one
'  to  compose  himself,  for  this  was  not  the  last  time  they  would  see
'  him  here.'  ^  Thus  rode  Merlin ;  threatening  in  defeat.  But
what  now  shall  stem  that  tide  of  Prussians  setting- in  through  the
opened  Northeast  ?  Lucky  if  fortified  Lines  of  Weissembourg,^
and  impassabilities  of  Vosges  Mountains  confine  it  to  French
Alsace,  keep  it  from  submerging  the  very  heart  of  the  country !

Furthermore,  precisely  in  the  same  days,  Valenciennes  ^  Siege
is  finished,  in  the  Northwest : — fallen,  under  the  red  hail  of  York  !
Conde  fell  some  fortnight  since.*  Cimmerian  Coalition  presses  on.
What  seems  very  notable  too,  on  all  these  captured  French  Towns
there  flies  not  the  Royalist  fleur-de-lys,  in  the  name  of  a  new
Louis  the  Pretender ;  but  the  Austrian  flag  flies ;  as  if  Austria
meant  to  keep  them  for  herself !  Perhaps  General  Custine,^  still
in  Paris,  can  give  some  explanation  of  the  fall  of  these  strong-
places  ?  Mother-Society,  from  tribune  and  gallery,  growls  loud
that  he  ought  to  do  it ; — remarks,  however,  in  a  splenetic  manner

1  Belagerung  von  Mainz  (Goethe's  Werke,  xxx.  315).

2 [It  was  Custine  who,  on  quitting  the  Rhenish  Electorates  early  in  the  year,
estabUshed  himself  in  the  lines  of  Weissembourg,  the  best  natural  defence  of
Alsace ;  they  were  not  forced  till  October,  long  after  Custine  had  been  recalled
[vid.  infr.,  iii.  155).]

3  [July  28th.  Valenciennes,  gallantly  defended  by  Ferraud,  was  besieged  from
June  14th— July  28th  by  Coburg  and  the  Duke  of  York.  It  is  an  important
fortress  commanding  the  upper  waters  of  the  Scheldt ;  it  was  retaken  by  Scherer
on  Aug.  27th  '94  :  Cond6  had  been  besieged  since  April,  but  more  languidly  :  it  was
retaken  Aug.  30th  '94  [yid.  infr.,  iii.  161).]

4  [July  i2th.]

'^  [Custine's  neglect  of  any  attempt  to  relieve  either  Mainz  or  the  two  Northern
fortresses  is  rather  inexplicable  ;  he  was  decreed  accused  July  29th,  and  guillotined
Aug.  28th  (yid.  infr.^  iii.  96).]

VOL.  HI.  6


82  THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

that  '  the  Monsieurs  of  the  Palais  Royal '  are  calling  Long-life  to
this  General.

The  Mother- Society,  purged  now,  by  successive  'scrutinies
or  epurations,'  from  all  taint  of  Girondism,  has  become  a  great
Authority :  what  we  can  call  shield- bearer,  or  bottle-holder,  nay
call  it  fugleman,  to  the  purged  National  Convention  itself.  The
Jacobins  Debates  are  reported  in  the  Moniteur,  like  Parliamentary
ones.

CHAPTER  IV
O  NATURE
But  looking  more  especially  into  Paris  City,  what  is  this  that
History,  on  the  1 0th  of  August,  Year  One  of  Liberty,  '  by  old-
style,  year  1793,'  discerns  there  ?     Praised  be  the  Heavens,  a  new
Feast  of  Pikes !

For  Chaumette's  '  Deputation  every  day '  has  worked  out  its
result :  a  Constitution.  It  was  one  of  the  rapidest  Constitutions
ever  put  together ;  made,  some  say  in  eight  days,i  by  Herault
Sechelles  and  others ;  probably  a  workmanlike,  roadworthy  Con-
stitution enough ; — on  which  point,  however,  we  are,  for  some
reasons,  little  called  to  form  a  judgment.  Workmanlike  or  not,
the  Forty-four  Thousand  Communes  of  France,  by  overwhelming
majorities,  did  hasten  to  accept  it ;  '^  glad  of  any  Constitution
whatsoever.  Nay  Departmental  Deputies  have  come,  the  vener-
ablest  Republicans  of  each  Department,  with  solemn  message
of  Acceptance ;  and  now  what  remains  but  that  our  new  Final
Constitution  be  proclaimed,  and  sworn  to,  in  Feast  of  Pikes  ?
The  Departmental  Deputies,  we  say,  are  come  some  time  ago ;  ^

1  [June  8th— 24th.]  2  [June  27th.]

3  [Aug.  6th.  The  new  Constitutional  Committee,  created  June  2nd,  comprised
Cambon,  Bar^re,  Guyton-Morveau,  Treilhard,  Danton,  Lacroix,  Berlier,  Delmas,
Lindet,  Hdrault-S^chelles,  Ramel,  Couthon,  Saint-Just,  Mathieu.  It  reported  on  June
loth,  and  the  Constitution  was  voted  on  24th — 27th  en  bloc.  But  the  substance  of  it
had  been  prepared  in  the  Jacobin  club  long  before  (Duvergier  de  Hauranne,  i.  273) ;
it  was  certainly  neither  '  workmanlike  '  nor  '  roadworthy '  (although  it  contains  the
remarkable  phrase  that  ' '  where  Government  violates  the  Rights  of  the  People,  In-
surrection becomes  the  most  sacred  of  rights  and  the  most  indispensable  of  duties  ").
It  is  difficult  to  believe  that  any  one  ever  seriously  contemplated  putting  it  in  force  :
by  it  each  Commune  is  almost  entirely  independent  of  any  central  authority ;  it


O  NATURE  83

Chaumette  very  anxious  about  them,  lest  Girondin  Monsieurs,
Agio-jobbers,  or  were  it  even  Filles  dejoie  of  a  Girondin  temper,
corrupt  their  morals.  ^  Tenth  of  August,  immortal  Anniversary,
greater  almost  than  Bastille  July,  is  the  Day.

Painter  David  has  not  been  idle.  Thanks  to  David  and  the
French  genius,  there  steps  forth  into  the  sunlight,  this  day,  a
Scenic  Phantasmagory  unexampled : — whereof  History,  so  occu-
pied with  Real  Phantasmagories,  will  say  but  little.

For  one  thing.  History  can  notice  with  satisfaction,  on  the
ruins  of  the  Bastille,  a  Statue  of  Nature ;  ^  gigantic,  spouting  water
from  her  two  mammelles.  Not  a  Dream  this  ;  but  a  fact,  palpable
visible.  There  she  spouts,  great  Nature ;  dim,  before  daybreak.
But  as  the  coming  Sun  ruddies  the  East,  come  countless  Multi-
tudes, regulated  and  unregulated  ;  come  Departmental  Deputies,
come  Mother-Society  and  Daughters  ;  comes  National  Convention,
led  on  by  handsome  Herault ;  soft  wind-music  breathing  note  of
expectation.  Lo,  as  great  Sol  scatters  his  first  fire-handful,
tipping  the  hills  and  chimney-heads  with  gold,  Herault  is  at
great  Nature's  feet  (she  is  Plaster  of  Paris  merely) ;  Herault
lifts,  in  an  iron  saucer,  water  spouted  from  the  sacred  breasts ;
drinks  of  it,  with  an  eloquent  Pagan  Prayer,  beginning,  "O
Nature ! "  and  all  the  Departmental  Deputies  drink,  each  with

remained  however  an  ideal  and  a  useful  watchword  for  the  extreme  Robespierrists,
although  it  was  suspended  almost  as  soon  as  issued  {vid.  infr.,  iii.  88).  It  was
worshipped  in  the  distance,  and  there  is  a  copy  of  it,  said  to  be  bound  in  human  skin,
in  the  Musie  Carnavalet.  A  summary  of  it  may  be  read  in  Mortiraer-Ternaux,
viii.  (Bk.  xlii.)  in  Dauban  (Paris  en  1793).  p.  325,  and  it  may  be  read  at  length  in
H61ie,  Constitutions  de  la  France  (i.  376).

Meanwhile,  though  Danton's  motion  of  Aug.  2nd,  that  the  Comiti  de  Salut
Public  be  openly  recognised  as  the  Provisional  Government,  was  lost,  the  second
half  of  the  motion,  that  50  millions  be  paid  at  once  to  it  '  for  extraordinary  ex-
penses,' was  carried.  Into  this  50  millions  however  every  one  dipped  a  hand,  and
the  Commune  began  to  get  a  million  a  week  allotted  for  the  purchase  of  food  for
Paris.]

1  Deux  Amis,  xi.  73.  [Deux  Amis  in  loc.  cit.  say  nothing  of  '  Girondin  temper,'
but  in  David's  preliminary  announcement  of  the  ritual  of  the  Fete  order  is  given  that
'  our  brothers '  are  not  to  be  '  lodged  in  the  houses  of  aristocrats,'  and  Chaumette's
order  to  the  Garde  de  Surveillance  at  the  barriers  (both  quoted  in  Dauban,  Paris  en
1793,  p.  312  sqq.)  warns  the  deputies  against  being  corrupted  by  the  'filles  de
mauvaise  vie.'  The  deputies  from  the  Departments  presented  an  address  to  the
Convention  on  8th.]

2  [Called  also  the  '  Fountain  of  Regeneration ; '  beautifully  got  up  inscriptions
were  found  on  the  stones  of  the  Bastille,  indicating  the  sufferings  of  the  prisoners
of  former  days  (Dauban,  3x8).]


84  THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

what  best  suitable  ejaculation  or  prophetic-utterance  is  in  him  ;
— amid  breathings,  which  become  blasts,  of  wind-music ;  and
the  roar  of  artillery  and  human  throats ;  finishing  well  the  first
act  of  this  solemnity.  1

Next  are  processionings  along  the  Boulevards  :  Deputies  or
Officials  bound  together  by  long  indivisible  tricolor  riband  ;
general  'members  of  the  Sovereign'  walking  pell-mell,  with
pikes,  with  hammers,  with  the  tools  and  emblems  of  their
crafts  ;  among  which  we  notice  a  Plough,  and  ancient  Baucis  and
Philemon  seated  on  it,  drawn  by  their  children. ^  Many-voiced
harmony  and  dissonance  filling  the  air.  Through  Triumphal
Arches  enough :  at  the  basis  of  the  first  of  which,  we  descry —
whom  thinkest  thou  ?  ^ — the  Heroines  of  the  Insurrection  of
Women.  Strong  Dames  of  the  Market,  they  sit  there  (Theroigne
too  ill  to  attend,  one  fears),  with  oak-branches,  tricolor  bedizen-
ment ;  firm  seated  on  their  Cannons.  To  whom  handsome
Herault,  making  pause  of  admiration,  addresses  soothing  elo-
quence ;  whereupon  they  rise  and  fall  into  the  march.

And  now  mark,  in  the  Place  de  la  Revolution,  what  other
august  Statue  may  this  be  ;  veiled  in  canvass, — which  swiftly  we
shear  off  by  pulley  and  cord  }  The  Statue  of  LiheHy  !  She  too
is  of  plaster,  hoping  to  become  of  metal ;  stands  where  a  Tyrant
Louis  Quinze  once  stood.  '  Three  thousand  birds '  are  let  loose,
into  the  whole  word,  with  labels  round  their  neck,  We  are  free  ;
imitate  us.  Holocaust  of  Royalist  and  ci-devant  trumpery,  such  as
one  could  still  gather,  is  burnt ;  pontifical  eloquence  must  be
uttered,  by  handsome  Herault,  and  Pagan  orisons  offered  up.

And  then  forward  across  the  River ;  where  is  new  enormous
Statuary ;  enormous  plaster  Mountain ;  Hercules-Pez^/j/e,  with
uplifted  all-conquering  club  ;  '  many-headed  Dragon  of  Girondin
Federalism  rising  from  fetid  march  : ' — needing  new  eloquence

1  [David  had  intended  the  Marseillaise  to  be  chanted  here  :  but  it  was  not
(Dauban,  319).]

2  [And  a  printing  press,  '  this  formidable  yEgis  against  tyrants,'  with  the  inscrip-
tion "without  this  no  hberty"  {i.e.,  presumably  without  P^re  Duchesne  and
IJAvti  du  Peuple)  {ibid.  320).]

^[On  the  Boulevard  Poissonni^re  :  Herault  made  no  less  than  six  speeches  that
day  (Mortimer-Ternaux,  viii,  357).]


O  NATURE  85

from  Herault.1  To  say  nothing  of  Champ-de-Mars,^  and  Father-
land's Altar  there  ;  with  urn  of  slain  Defenders,  Carpenter's-
level  of  the  Law ;  and  such  exploding,  gesticulating  and  perorat-
ing, that  Herault's  lips  must  be  growing  white,  and  his  tongue
cleaving  to  the  roof  of  his  mouth. ^

Towards  six  o'clock  let  the  wearied  President,  let  Paris  Patriot-
ism generally  sit  down  to  what  repast,  and  social  repasts,  can  be
had  ;  and  with  flowing  tankard  or  light-mantling  glass,  usher  in
this  New  and  Newest  Era.  In  fact,  is  not  Romme's  New  Calendar
getting  ready  ?  On  all  housetops  flicker  little  tricolor  Flags,  their
flagstaffa  Pike  and  Liberty-Cap.  On  all  house-walls,  for  no  Patriot,
not  suspect,  will  be  behind  another,  there  stand  printed  these
words  :  Republic  one  and  indivisible,  Liberty,  Equality,  Fraternity,  or
Deaths

As  to  the  New  Calendar,  we  may  say  here  rather  than  elsewhere
that  speculative  men  have  long  been  struck  with  the  inequalities
and  incongruities  of  the  Old  Calendar  ;  that  a  New  one  has  long
been  as  good  as  determined  on.  Marechal  the  Atheist,  almost  ten
years  ago,  proposed  a  New  Calendar,  free  at  least  from  supersti-
tion :  this  the  Paris  Municipality  would  now  adopt,  in  defect  of
a  better ;  at  all  events,  let  us  have  either  this  of  Marechal' s  or
a  better, — the  New  Era  being  come.^  Petitions,  more  than  once,
have  been  sent  to  that  effect ;  and  indeed,  for  a  year  past,  all

1  [On  the  Place  des  Invalides :  the  Statue  of  the  People  bore  the  inscription,
L Aristocratie  a  pris  cent  formes  diverses ;  le  Peuple  tout  puissant  I'a  partout
terrassde.  ]

2 [The  object  of  going  to  the  Autel  de  la  Patrie  was  to  deposit  there  the
registers  of  acceptances  of  the  new  Constitution  by  the  primary  Assemblies  of
France  [ibid.  323).]

3  Choix  des  Rapports,  xii.  432-42.

^[When  the  Constitution  was  accepted  by  France,  the  Convention  ought  of
course  to  have  at  once  dissolved  itself :  a  roundabout  motion  to  that  effect  was
made  by  Lacroix  on  Aug.  nth  ;  but  the  Mountain  had  no  difficulty  in  shelving  it,
and  the  real  answer  to  it  was  the  decree  of  the  Levde  en  masse  on  23rd.]

'^[The  Almanack  des  honnetes  gens  of  Pierre  Sylvain  Mardchal  (1788)  was
not  exactly  a  new  calendar,  but  a  suggestion  for  making  one,  and  replacing  the
names  of  the  Saints'  days,  etc.,  with  the  names  of  persons  celebrated  in  History  :  it
was  sufficiently  blasphemous  to  secure  his  imprisonment.  He  was  born  1750  and
died  1803 ;  his  best  known  work  is  the  '  Dictionnaire  des  Ath^es,'  but  he  contributed
to  Prudhomme's  Revolutions  de  Paris,  and  was  the  author  of  the  ludicrous  farce
(?)  called  '  Le  Dernier  Jugement  des  Rois,'  printed  in  Moland,  Thd&tre  de  la  Riv.'\


86  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Public  Bodies,  Journalists,  and  Patriots  in  general,  have  dated
First  Year  of  the  Republic.  It  is  a  subject  not  without  difficulties.
But  the  Convention  has  taken  it  up  ;  and  Romme,  as  we  say,  has
been  meditating  it ;  not  Marechal's  New  Calendar,  but  a  better
New  one  of  Romme's  and  our  own.  Romme,  aided  by  a  Monge,
a  Lagrange  and  others,  furnishes  mathematics ;  Fabre  d' Eglan-
tine furnishes  poetic  nomenclature :  and  so,  on  the  5th  of
October  1793,  after  trouble  enough,  they  bring  forth  this  New
Republican  Calendar  of  theirs,  in  a  complete  state  ;  and  by  Law,
get  it  put  in  action.

Four  equal  Seasons,  Twelve  equal  Months  of  Thirty  days  each ;
this  makes  three  hundred  and  sixty  days  ;  and  five  odd  days
remain  to  be  disposed  of.  The  five  odd  days  we  will  make  Fes-
tivals, and  name  the  five  Sansculottides,  or  Days  without  Breeches.
Festival  of  Genius  ;  Festival  of  Labour ;  of  Actions  ;  of  Rewards  ;
of  Opinion  :  these  are  the  five  Sansculottides.  Whereby  the  great
Circle,  or  Year,  is  made  complete :  solely  every  fourth  year,  whilom
called  Leap-year,  we  introduce  a  sixth  Sansculottide  :  and  name  it
Festival  of  the  Revolution.  Now  as  to  the  day  of  commencement,
which  offers  difficulties,  is  it  not  one  of  the  luckiest  coincidences
that  the  Republic  herself  commenced  on  the  21st  of  September ;
close  on  the  Vernal  Equinox  }  Vernal  Equinox,  at  midnight  for
the  meridian  of  Paris,  in  the  year  whilom  Christian  1792,  from
that  moment  shall  the  New  Era  reckon  itself  to  begin.  Vend&mi-
aire,  Brumaire,  Frimaire  ;  or  as  one  might  say,  in  mixed  English,
Viniagearious,  Fogarious,  Frostarious  :  these  are  our  three  Autumn
months.  Nivose,  Pluviose,  Ventose,  or  say,  Snorvous,  Rainous,  Windous,
make  our  Winter  season.  Germinal,  Floreal,  Prairial,  or  Buddal,
Floweral,  Meadowal,  are  our  Spring  season.  Messidor,  Thermidory
Fructidor,  that  is  to  say  (dor  being  Greek  for  gift)  Reapidor,  Heati-
dor,  Fruitidor,  are  Republican  Summer.  These  Twelve,  in  a
singular  manner,  divide  the  Republican  Year.  Then  as  to  minuter
subdivisions,  let  us  venture  at  once  on  a  bold  stroke  :  adopt  your
decimal  subdivision  ;  and  instead  of  the  world-old  Week,  or  Se' en-
night,  make  it  a  Tennight,  or  Ddcade  ; — not  without  results.  There
are  three  Decades,  then,  in  each  of  the  months ;  which  is  very


O  NATURE


87


regular  ;  and  the  Decadi,  or  Tenth-day,  shall  always  be  the  '  Day
of  Rest.'  And  the  Christian  Sabbath,  in  that  case  ?  Shall  shift
for  itself!

This,  in  brief,  is  the  New  Calendar  of  Romme  and  the  Conven-
tion ;  calculated  for  the  meridian  of  Paris,  and  Gospel  of  Jean
Jacques  :  not  one  of  the  least  afflicting  occurrences  for  the  actual
British  reader  of  French  History  ; — confusing  the  soul  with  Messi-
dors,  Meadowals ;  till  at  last,  in  self-defence,  one  is  forced  to
construct  some  ground-scheme,  or  rule  of  Commutation  from
New-style  to  Old-style,  and  have  it  lying  by  him.  Such  ground-
scheme,  almost  worn  out  in  our  service,  but  still  legible  and
printable,  we  shall  now,  in  a  Note,  present  to  the  reader.  For
the  Romme  Calendar,  in  so  many  Newspapers,  Memoirs,  Public
Acts,  has  stamped  itself  deep  into  that  section  of  Time  :  a  New
Era  that  lasts  some  Twelve  years  and  odd  is  not  to  be  despised.^
Let  the  Reader,  therefore,  with  such  ground-scheme,  help  himself
where  needful,  out  of  New-style  into  Old-style,  called  also  '  slave-
style,  siile-esclave  ;  ' — whereof  we,  in  these  pages,  shall  as  much
as  possible  use  the  latter  only.^


1  September  22d  of  1792

is  Vend^miaire  ist  of  Year  One,  and  the  new  months

are  all  of  30  days  each  ;  therefore  :

ADD

a

DAYS

j3

Vend^miaire  .

.    21

>-.

September    .

.         30

Brumaire

.    21

-o

October

31

i

Frimaire

.    20

1)

November    .

.        30

•0

^

^

Nivose  .

.    20

"B

December    .

•         31

^

Pluviose

.    19

u

January

•         31

0

Ventose .

.    18

i^

February

.         28

1

Germinal

.    20

S
c

March  .

•         31

i

Flor^al  .

.    19

r-j

April    .

.        30

Xi

Prairial .

.    19

S

May     .

•         31

♦3
0

Messidor

.    18

1

June     .

•        30

h

Thermidor     .

.    18

^

July      .         .        .

.         31

Fructidor

•    17

^

August

•        31

There  are  5  Sansculottides,  and  in  leap-year  a  sixth,  to  be  added  at  the  end  of
Fructidor.

The  New  Calendar  ceased  on  the  ist  of  January  1806.    See  Choix  des  Rapports,
xiii.  83-99 ;  xix.  199.

2  [The  names  first  proposed  in  this  calendar  of  Romme's  were  simply  numeral  for
months  as  well  as  for  the  days,  but  from  the  latter  part  of  Oct.  the  '  nature  names '


88  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Thus  with  new  Feast  of  Pikes,  and  New  Era  or  New  Calendar,
did  France  accept  her  New  Constitution :  the  most  Democratic
Constitution  ever  committed  to  paper.  How  it  will  work  in
practice  ?  Patriot  Deputations,  from  time  to  time,  solicit  fruition
of  it ;  that  it  be  set  a-going.  Always,  however,  this  seems  ques-
tionable ;  for  the  moment,  unsuitable.  Till,  in  some  weeks,
Salut  Public,  through  the  organ  of  Saint  Just,  makes  report,^  that,
in  the  present  alarming  circumstances,  the  state  of  France  is
Revolutionary  ;  that  her  '  Government  must  be  Revolutionary
till  the  Peace  ! '  Solely  as  Paper,  then,  and  as  a  Hope,  must
this  poor  new  Constitution  exist ;  ^ — in  which  shape  we  may  con-
ceive it  lying,  even  now,  with  an  infinity  of  other  things,  in  that
Limbo  near  the  Moon.  Further  than  paper  it  never  got,  nor
ever  will  get.

CHAPTER  V
SWORD  OF  SHARPNESS
In  fact  it  is  something  quite  other  than  paper  theorems,  it  is  iron
and  audacity  that  France  now  needs.

Is  not  La  Vendee  still  blazing  ; — alas  too  literally  ;  rogue  Ros-
signol  burning  the  very  corn-mills  .'*  General  Santerre  could  do
nothing  there  ;  General  Rossignol,  in  blind  fury,  often  in  liquor,
can  do  less  than  nothing.  Rebellion  spreads,  grows  ever  madder.
Happily  those  lean  Quixote-figures,  whom  we  saw  retreating  out

begin  to  be  used.  The  Comity  de  Salut  Public  begins  to  date  its  acts  in  the  new  style
from  Oct.  6th,  but  the  usage  is  irregular  and  intermittent  at  first.  [See  Aulard,  Re-
cueil,  vii.  245. )  The  Ddcadi  is  to  be  spent  in  each  Commune  of  France  in  a  patriotic
service  of  hymns  before  the  Autel  de  la  Patrie,  the  reading  of  a  report  on  the  State
of  the  Republic,  in  martial  exercises  and  public  dances  [ibid.  viii.  312) ;  the  keeping
of  Sunday  is  not  prohibited  anywhere  that  I  can  find,  but  it  is  of  course  discouraged,
and  no  Sundays,  holidays  or  religious  observances  are  allowed  for  men  engaged  in
making  arms  or  munitions  of  war  {ibid.  viii.  292).  As  late  as  Dec.  6th  liberty  of
worship  is  enjoined  by  the  Convention,  and  several  representatives  are  scolded  for
forcibly  shutting  churches ;  probably  nothing  provoked  more  sullen  resistance  to
the  proconsuls  than  the  attempt  to  establish  the  ddcadi  [ibid.  xi.  356).  The
Calendar  is  not  at  all  an  unreasonable  one,  as  Sept.  22nd  is  the  first  day  of
Autumn,  and  is  the  ancient  Egyptian  and  Babylonian  New  Year's  Day.]

i[Oct.  loth.]

2 [This  suspension  of  the  '  Constitution  of  the  year  I,'  before  it  had  been  put  in
force,  was  further  made  clear  by  a  formal  decree  on  Dec.  4th,  putting  the  Ministers
under  direct  control  of  the  Committee.]


SWORD  OF  SHARPNESS  89

of  Mentz,  '  bound  not  to  serve  against  the  Coalition  for  a  year/
have  got  to  Paris.  National  Convention  packs  them  into  post-
vehicles  and  conveyances  ;  sends  them  swiftly,  by  post,  into  La
Vendee.  There  valiantly  struggling,  in  obscure  battle  and
skirmish,  under  rogue  Rossignol,  let  them,  unlaureled,  save  the
Republic,  and  'be  cut  down  gradually  to  the  last  man.'  ^

Does  not  the  Coalition,  like  a  fire-tide,  pour  in  ;  Prussia  through
the  opened  Northeast ;  -^  Austria,  England  through  the  Northwest  ?
General  Houchard  ^  prospers  no  better  there  than  General  Custine
did  :  let  him  look  to  it !  Through  the  Eastern  and  the  Western
Pyrenees  Spain  has  deployed  itself ;  spreads,  rustling  with  Bour-
bon banners,  over  the  face  of  the  South.  Ashes  and  embers  of
confused  Girondin  civil  war  covered  that  region  already.  Mar-
seilles is  damped  down,  not  quenched ;  to  be  quenched  in  blood.
Toulon,  terrorstruck,  too  far  gone  for  turning,  has  flung  itself,  ye
righteous  Powers, — into  the  hands  of  the  English  !  On  Toulon
Arsenal  there  flies  a  flag,"* — nay  not  even  the  Fleur-de-lys  of  a
Louis  Pretender  ;  there  flies  that  accursed  St.  George's  Cross  of
the  English  and  Admiral  Hood  !  What  remnant  of  sea-craft,
arsenals,  roperies,  war-navy  France  had,  has  given  itself  to  these
enemies  of  human  nature,  '  ennemis  du  genre  humain.'  Beleaguer
it,  bombard  it,  ye  Commissioners  Barras,  Freron,  Robespierre
Junior  ;  thou  General  Cartaux,  General  Dugommier  ;  above  all,
thou  remarkable  Artillery- Major,  Napoleon  Buonaparte  !  Hood
is  fortifying  himself,  victualling  himself ;  means,  apparently,  to
make  a  new  Gibraltar  of  it.^

1  Deux  Amis,  xi.  147  ;  xiii.  160-92,  &c.

^\_Sic ;  presumably  for  East  and  North-East  respectively.]

3  [Houchard,  born  1740,  had  served  in  the  old  army  (in  the  Seven  Years'  War  and
m  Corsica),  became  Colonel  in  Custine's  army  and  succeeded  to  the  command  suc-
cessively of  the  Armies  of  the  Rhine,  Moselle,  and  North  {vid.  infr.,  iii.  121).]

4  [Aug.  28th.]

^[The  immediate  cause  of  the  insurrection  of  Toulon  (July  26th)  is  attributed  by
Barras  and  Freron  to  the  demand  of  the  dockyard  workmen  to  be  paid  in  cash
instead  of  in  Assignats  (see  Aulard,  Recueil,  v.  382).  The  Sections  of  Toulon  de-
manded in  August  that  the  Comte  de  Provence  should  come  and  take  the  Regency
there  in  the  name  of  Louis  XVII.  He  did  in  fact  start  from  Hamm  in  Westphalia,
where  he  then  was,  and  travelled  slowly  towards  Turin  ;  but  the  English  ministry,
in  spite  of  the  representations  of  Gilbert  Eliot,  preferred  to  recognise  no  authority
but  that  of  Louis  XVII. ,  and  professed  to  hold  Toulon  for  the  King  of  France


90  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

But  lo,  in  the  Autumn  night,  late  night,  among  the  last  of
August,!  what  sudden  red  sunblaze  is  this  that  has  risen  over
Lyons  City  ;  with  a  noise  to  deafen  the  world  ?  ^  It  is  the  Powder-
tower  of  Lyons,  nay  the  Arsenal  with  four  Powder-towers,
which  has  caught  fire  in  the  Bombardment ;  and  sprung  into  the
air,  carrying  '  a  hundred  and  seventeen  houses '  after  it.  With  a
light,  one  fancies,  as  of  the  noon  sun ;  with  a  roar  second  only  to
the  Last  Trumpet !  All  living  sleepers  far  and  wide  it  has
awakened.  What  a  sight  was  that,  which  the  eye  of  History
saw,  in  the  sudden  nocturnal  sunblaze  !  The  roofs  of  hapless
Lyons,  and  all  its  domes  and  steeples  made  momentarily  clear ;
Rhone  and  Saone  streams  flashing  suddenly  visible ;  and  height
and  hollow,  hamlet  and  smooth  stubblefield,  and  all  the  region
round ;  —  heights,  alas,  all  scarped  and  counterscarped,  into
trenches,  curtains,  redoubts ;  blue  Artillery-men,  little  Powder-
devilkins,  plying  their  hell-trade,  there  through  the  not  ambrosial
night !  Let  the  darkness  cover  it  again ;  for  it  pains  the  eye.
Of  a  truth,  Chalier's  death  is  costing  the  City  dear.  Convention
Commissioners,  Lyons  Congresses  have  come  and  gone  ;  and
action  there  was  and  reaction ;  bad  ever  growing  worse  ;  till  it
has  come  to  this;  Commissioner  Dubois -Crance,  'with  seventy-
thousand  men,  and  all  the  Artillery  of  several  Provinces,'  bom-
barding Lyons  day  and  night.

Worse  things  still  are  in  store.  Famine  is  in  Lyons,  and  ruin
and  fire.    Desperate  are  the  sallies  of  the  besieged  ;  brave  Precy,^

•  until  the  peace : '  the  flag  hoisted  was  the  white  flag  of  Louis  XVII.  and  that
only :  the  Austrians  promised  to  send  6,000  troops  from  Italy,  but  did  not  send
them.     {See  R6v.  Fr.  xxxiii.  39,  sgq.  ;  vid.  infr.^  iii.  130.)]
i[Aug.  24th.]

2  [Mortimer-Ternaux(viii.  230)  says  the  Lyons  Arsenal  was  fired  by  Jacobins  inside
the  town  :  the  siege  began  on  8th  under  Kellermann  ;  but  he  had  not  enough  troops
to  invest  so  large  a  city,  and  on  22nd  Dubois-Crancd,  the  Convention  Com-
missioner, resorted  to  bombardment ;  Kellermann  was  called  off  to  face  the  Pied-
montese,  who  were  invading  Savoy  ;  the  bombardment  lasted  for  45  days  and  some
quarters  of  the  town  were  reduced  to  ruins  ;  famine  began  to  be  serious  about  Sept.
17th,  more  troops  were  brought  by  Couthon,  Maignet,  and  Chateauneuf-Randon,
and  at  last  there  were  50,000  men  round  the  city ;  by  the  end  of  September  the
outworks  were  stormed  (vid.  infr.,  iii.  125),]

3  [The  Comte  de  Pr^cy,  born  1742,  served  in  the  Seven  Years'  War  and  in
Corsica,  Lieut. -Colonel  1788,  served  in  the  defence  of  the  Tuileries  Aug.  loth,
undertook  the  defence  of  Lyons  in  the  Royalist  interest,  but  opinions  were  too
much  divided  inside  the  town  to  allow  much  weight  to  this  [vid.  in/r.,  iii,  125).]


SWOED  OF  SHAEPNESS  91

their  National  Colonel  and  Commandant,  doing  what  is  in  man  :
desperate  but  ineffectual.  Provisions  cut  off;  nothing  entering
our  city  but  shot  and  shells  !  The  Arsenal  has  roared  aloft ;  the
very  Hospital  will  be  battered  down,  and  the  sick  buried  alive.
A  black  flag  hung  on  this  latter  noble  Edifice,  appealing  to  the
pity  of  the  besiegers  ;  for  though  maddened,  were  they  not  still
our  brethren  ?  In  their  blind  wrath,  they  took  it  for  a  flag  of
defiance,  and  aimed  thitherward  the  more.  Bad  is  growing  ever
worse  here  :  and  how  will  the  worse  stop,  till  it  have  grown
worst  of  all  ?  Commissioner  Dubois  will  listen  to  no  pleading,
to  no  speech,  save  this  only.  We  surrender  at  discretion.  Lyons
contains  in  it  subdued  Jacobins ;  dominant  Girondins ;  secret
Royalists.  And  now,  mere  deaf  madness  and  ciinnon-shot  envelop-
ing them,  will  not  the  desperate  Municipality  fly,  at  last,  into  the
arms  of  Royalism  itself?  Majesty  of  Sardinia  was  to  bring  help,
but  it  failed.  Emigrant  d'Autichamp,  in  name  of  the  Two  Pre-
tender Royal  Highnesses,  is  coming  through  Switzerland  with
help  ;  coming,  not  yet  come  :  Precy  hoists  the  Fleur-de-lys  !

At  sight  of  which,  all  true  Girondins  sorrowfully  fling  down
their  arms  : — Let  our  Tricolor  brethren  storm  us,  then,  and  slay
us  in  their  wrath  ;  with  you  we  conquer  not.  The  famishing
women  and  children  are  sent  forth :  deaf  Dubois  sends  them
back  ; — rains  in  mere  fire  and  madness.  Our  '  redoubts  of
cotton-bags '  are  taken,  retaken  ;  Precy  under  his  Fleur-de-lys  is
valiant  as  Despair.  What  will  become  of  Lyons  }  It  is  a  siege
of  seventy  days.^

Or  see,  in  these  same  weeks,  far  in  the  Western  waters :
breasting   through    the    Bay    of   Biscay,    a   greasy   dingy   little

iDeux  Amis,  xi.  80143.  {{Vid.  infr.^  iii.  125.)  This  story  of  the  white  flag  Dubois-
Crane^  skilfully  and  industriously  circulated  ;  and  one  day,  before  the  investment
was  complete,  some  countrymen,  thinking  to  please  the  Lyonnais,  arrived  at  the  gates
with  white  cockades,  but  were  at  once  arrested.  There  is  in  fact  no  evidence  that
Pr6cy  ever  raised  the  white  flag  at  all — no  doubt  he  would  have  liked  to  do  so,  but
it  would  have  been  a  hopeless  move.  {See  Balleydier,  Hist,  du  peuple  de  Lyon
pendant  la  R6v.  (Paris,  1845),  i,  362.)  The  phrase  "we  conquer  not  with  you"
probably  refers  to  the  cowardly  flight  of  the  two  Girondin  deputies,  Biroteau  and
Chasset,  immediately  on  the  arrival  of  the  Republican  forces  ;  Biroteau  was  arrested
as  he  left  Lyons,  and  sent  to  the  guillotine  at  Bordeaux  (Oct.  24th) ;  Chasset  escaped
to  Switzerland.]


92  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Merchant-ship,  with  Scotch  skipper  ;  under  hatches  whereof  sit,
disconsolate, — the  last  forlorn  nucleus  of  Girondism,  the  Deputies
from  Quimper  !  Several  have  dissipated  themselves,  whitherso-
ever they  could.  Poor  RioufFe  fell  into  the  talons  of  Revolu-
tionary Committee  and  Paris  Prison.  The  rest  sit  here  under
hatches;  reverend  Petion  with  his  gray  hair,  angry  Buzot,
suspicious  Louvet,  brave  young  Barbaroux,  and  others.  They
have  escaped  from  Quimper,  in  this  sad  craft ;  are  now  tacking
and  struggling :  in  danger  from  the  waves,  in  danger  from  the
English,  in  still  worse  danger  from  the  French ; — banished  by
Heaven  and  Earth  to  the  greasy  belly  of  this  Scotch  skipper's
Merchant-vessel,  unfruitful  Atlantic  raving  round.  They  are  for
Bourdeaux,  if  peradventure  hope  yet  linger  there.  Enter  not
Bourdeaux,  O  Friends !  Bloody  Convention  Representatives,
Tallien  and  such  like,  with  their  Edicts,  with  their  Guillotine,
have  arrived  there  ;  Respectability  is  driven  under  ground ;
Jacobinism  lords  it  on  high.  From  that  Reole  landing  place,  or
Beak  of  Ambes,  as  it  were,  pale  Death,  waving  his  Revolutionary
Sword  of  Sharpness,  waves  you  elsewhither !

On  one  side  or  the  other  of  that  Bee  d' Ambes,  the  Scotch
Skipper  with  difficulty  moors,  a  dexterous  greasy  man ;  with
difficulty  lands  his  Girondins ; — who,  after  reconnoitring,  must
rapidly  burrow  in  the  Earth ;  and  so,  in  subterranean  ways,  in
friends'  back-closets,  in  cellars,  barn-lofts,  in  Caves  of  Saint-
^milion  and  Libourne,  stave  off  cruel  Death,  i  Unhappiest  of  all
Senators  I

CHAPTER  VI

RISEN  AGAINST  TYRANTS
Against  all  which  incalculable  impediments,  horrors  and  dis-
asters, what  can  a  Jacobin  Convention  oppose  ?  The  uncalcu-
lating  Spirit  of  Jacobinism,  and  Sansculottic  sans-formulistic
Frenzy  !  Our  Enemies  press-in  on  us,  says  Danton,  but  they
shall  not  conquer  us,  "  we  will  burn  France  to  ashes  rather,  nous
bmierom  la  France."

1  Louvet,  pp.  180-199.


RISEN  AGAINST  TYRANTS  93

Committees,  of  SHreU,  of  Salut,  have  raised  themselves,  '  d  la
hauteur,  to  the  height  of  circumstances.'  Let  all  mortals  raise
themselves  d  la  hauteur.  Let  the  Forty-fom*  thousand  Sections
and  their  Revolutionary  Committees  stir  every  fibre  of  the
Republic ;  and  every  Frenchman  feel  that  he  is  to  do  or  die.
They  are  the  life-circulation  of  Jacobinism,  these  Sections  and
Committees :  Danton,  through  the  organ  of  Barrere  and  Salut
Public,  gets  decreed.  That  there  be  in  Paris,  by  law,  two  meetings
of  Section  weekly ;  i  also,  that  the  Poorer  Citizen  be  paid  for
attending,  and  have  his  day's- wages  of  Forty  Sous.'-^  This  is  the
celebrated  '  Law  of  the  Forty  Sous  ; '  fiercely  stimulant  to  Sans-
culottism,  to  the  life  circulation  of  Jacobinism.

On  the  twenty -third  of  August,  Committee  of  Public  Salvation,
as  usual  through  Barrere,  had  promulgated,  in  words  not  unworthy
of  remembering,  their  Report,  which  is  soon  made  into  a  Law,  of
Levy  in  Mass.^  '  All  France,  and  whatsoever  it  contains  of  men
or  resources,  is  put  under  requisition,'  says  Barrere ;  really  in
Tyrtaean  words,  the  best  we  know  of  his.  '  The  Republic  is  one
vast  besieged  city.'  Two-hundred  and  fifly  Forges  shall,  in  these
days,  be  set  up  in  the  Luxembourg  Garden,  and  round  the  outer
wall  of  the  Tuileries  ;  to  make  gun-barrels  ;  in  sight  of  Earth  and
Heaven  !  From  all  hamlets,  towards  their  Departmental  Town  ;
from  all  Departmental  Towns,  towards  the  appointed  Camp  and
seat  of  war,  the  Sons  of  Freedom  shall  march ;  their  banner  is  to
bear :  '  L^  Peuple  Franqais  dehout  contre  les  Tyrans,  The  French
'  People  risen  against  Tyrants.  The  young  men  shall  go  to  the
'  battle  ;  ^  it  is  their  task  to  conquer  :  the  married  men  shall  forge

i[Sept.  5th.]

2  Moniteur,  Stance  du  5  Septembre  1793.  [For  Danton's  speech  on  the  Forty
Sous  see  Stephens'  Orators  (ii.  262).  The  same  speech  supported  the  motion  of
Billaud  for  the  creation  of  a  Revolutionary  Army  {vid.  infr.,  iii.  95).  The  law  of
\h&fo7-ty  sous  was  repealed  Aug.  22nd  '94  :  complaint  was  made  that  even  workmen
earning  X^nx^^ francs  a  day  had  taken  advantage  of  the  law.  {See  Schmidt,  ii.  192. )
Danton  left  Paris  Oct.  12th  and  was  away  till  Nov.  21st.]

3  [Aug.  i6th  and  23rd.]

^[The  Levde  en  masse  {vid.  supr.,  ii.  234,  and  iii.  24)  must  be  distinguished  from
the  later  Conscription  which  was  decreed  by  the  Council  of  Ancients  on  the  motion
of  Jourdan  in  1798.  In  spite  of  Danton's  appeal  in  Sept.  '92,  the  total  number
of  men  with  the  colours  at  the  beginning  of  '93  was  only  228,000  :  on  Feb.  24th  a
new  levy  of  300,000  was  decreed,  but  the  Convention  allowed  the  men  requisitioned


94  THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

'  arms,  transport  baggage  and  artillery  ;  provide  subsistence  :  the
'  women  shall  work  at  soldiers'  clothes,  make  tents ;  serve  in  the
'  hospitals  :  the  children  shall  scrape  old-linen  into  surgeon's-lint :
'  the  aged  men  shall  have  themselves  carried  into  public  places  ;
'  and  there,  by  their  words,  excite  the  courage  of  the  young ;
'  preach  hatred  to  Kings  and  unity  to  the  Republic'  ^  Tyrtaean
words  ;  which  tingle  through  all  French  hearts.

In  this  humour,  then,  since  no  other  serves,  will  France  rush
against  its  enemies.  Headlong,  reckoning  no  cost  or  conse-
quence ;  heeding  no  law  or  rule  but  that  supreme  law.  Salvation
of  the  People  !  The  weapons  are,  all  the  iron  that  is  in  France  ;
the  strength  is,  that  of  all  the  men,  women  and  children  that  are
in  France.  There,  in  their  two-hundred  and  fifty  shed-smithies,
in  Garden  of  Luxembourg  or  Tuileries,  let  them  forge  gun-barrels,
in  sight  of  Heaven  and  Earth.

Nor  with  heroic  daring  against  the  Foreign  foe,  can  black  ven-
geance against  the  Domestic  be  wanting.  Life-circulation  of  the
Revolutionary  Committees  being  quickened  by  that  Law  of  the
Forty  Sous,  Deputy  Merlin,  not  the  Thionviller,  whom  we  saw
ride  out  of  Mentz,  but  Merlin  ^  of  Douai,  named  subsequently
Merlin  Suspect, — comes,  about  a  week  after,  with  his  world-
famous  Law  of  the  Suspect :  ordering  all  Sections,  by  their
Committees,  instantly  to  arrest  all  Persons  Suspect ;  and  explain-
ing withal  who  the  Arrestable  and  Suspect  specially  are.  '  Are
'  suspect,'  says  he,  '  all  who  by  their  actions,  by  their  connexions,

to  find  substitutes — and  with  the  worst  results.  The  present  movement  came  from
the  deputies  of  the  provincial  Communes,  who  had  come  to  Paris  for  the  fete  oi  Aug.
loth  :  they  demanded  an  universal  levy,  and  presented  a  petition  to  that  effect  to
the  Convention,  which  adopted  the  principle  on  Aug.  i6th.  Carnot  then  worked
out  the  details.  {See  Gros,  '  Comit6  de  Salut  Public,'  p.  226. )  All  between  18  and  25
were  to  be  called  out  except  those  in  the  Civil  Service  of  the  State  :  this  levy  got
the  name  of  ih&Jirst  requisition  and  produced  450,000  men,  and  the  total  figures
with  the  colours  at  the  end  of  1793  were  569,000.    (Sorel,  iii.  538.)]

^  D6bats,  Stance  du  23  AoM  1793.

2  [Philippe  Antoine  Merlin  was  a  celebrated  jurist,  born  1754,  deputy  for  Douai
to  States-General  and  for  the  Department  of  Nord  to  the  Convention  ;  was  one  of
the  leading  law  reformers  in  the  former  Assembly  ;  a  fierce  Montagnard  in  '93 — 4,
rallied  to  the^  Thermidorians,  became  Minister  of  Justice  in  '95,  a  Director  after
the  Coup  (Vlliat  of  Fructidor,  and  one  of  the  principal  authors  of  the  Code ;  a
Count  of  the  Empire,  exiled  at  the  Restoration,  returned  1830,  died  1838,]


RISEN  AGAINST  TYRANTS  95

'speakings,  writings  have* — in  short  become  Suspect. ^  Nay
Chaumette,  illuminating  the  matter  still  further,^  in  his  Municipal
Placards  and  Proclamations,  will  bring  it  about  that  you  may
almost  recognise  a  Suspect  on  the  streets,  and  clutch  him  there,
— off  to  Committee,  and  Prison.  Watch  well  your  words,  watch
well  your  looks :  if  Suspect  of  nothing  else,  you  may  grow,  as
came  to  be  a  saying,  '  Suspect  of  being  Suspect ! '  For  are  we
not  in  a  State  of  Revolution  }

No  frightfuller  Law  ever  ruled  in  a  Nation  of  men.  All  Prisons
and  Houses  of  Arrest  in  French  land  are  getting  crowded  to  the
ridge-tile  :  Forty-four  thousand  Committees,  like  as  many  com-
panies of  reapers  or  gleaners,  gleaning  France,  are  gathering
their  harvest,  and  storing  it  in  these  Houses.  Harvest  of  Aristo-
crat tares !  Nay  lest  the  Forty-four  thousand,  each  on  its  own
harvest-field,  prove  insufficient,  we  are  to  have  an  ambulant
*  Revolutionary  Army : '  ^  six-thousand  strong,  under  right  captains,
this  shall  perambulate  the  country  at  large,  and  strike  in  wherever
it  finds  such  harvest- work  slack.  So  have  Municipality  and
Mother-Society  petitioned ;  so  has  Convention  decreed.*  Let
Aristocrats,  Federalists,  Monsieurs  vanish,  and  all  men  tremble  :
'  the  soil  of  Liberty  shall  be  purged,' — with  a  vengeance  !  ^

Neither  hitherto  has  the  Revolutionary  Tribunal  been  keeping
holyday.     Blanchelande,*^  for  losing  Saint-Domingo ;  '  Conspira-

1  Moniteur,  Stance  du  17  Septembre  1793.  [The  '  Law  of  the  Suspect '  had  its
origin  in  a  petition  of  the  Commune  that  a  hst  of  suspected  persons  might  be  drawn
up  (Sept.  i2th)  ;  Merlin's  '  Law '  defined,  vaguely  it  is  true  but  very  widely,  the
twelve  classes  into  which  *  suspects '  fell ;  the  law  was  not  repealed  until  the  end
of  the  Convention  :  practically  it  put  all  power  in  the  hands  of  the  Revolutionary
Committees  of  Sections,  who  were  authorised  to  draw  up  the  lists  of  the  suspects,
and  send  them  to  the  ComiU  de  Sureti  Gindrale.'\

2  [Sept.  17th.]  3  [Sept.  5th.]
"*  Ibid.,  Stances  du  5,  9,  11  Septembre.

^ [The  Revolutionary  Army  was  to  be  at  the  requisition  of  the  Municipal  authorities
of  any  Commurie  of  France.  It  was  often  accompanied  by  a  portable  guillotine,
and  was  entirely  dominated  by  the  H^bertists :  it  was  chiefly  instrumental  in  smashing
church  furniture  during  the  autumn  and  winter  of  '93 — 4 ;  it  was  disbanded  on  the
fall  of  the  H6bertists,in  March  '94;  Ronsin  was  its  general.  {Vid.  infr.,  iii.  122  ;
see  Wallon,  La  Terreur,  i.  282,  sqq.)^^

6  [Blanchelande  had  been  successively  governor  of  Tobago  and  Dominica,  and
in  1789  was  Lieut. -Governor  of  San  Domingo ;  Campardon  gives  the  date  of  his
execution  as  April  15th  '93.  When  the  rising  of  the  negroes  finally  threatened  the
French  planters  with  destruction,  they  applied  for  assistance  to  Lord  Effingham,  the


96  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

tors  of  Orleans/  for  'assassinating/  for  assaulting  the  sacred
Deputy  Leonard  Bourdon  :  ^  these  with  many  Nameless,  to  whom
life  was  sweet,  have  died.  Daily  the  great  Guillotine  has  its  due.
Like  a  black  Spectre,  daily  at  eventide,  glides  the  Death-tumbril
through  the  variegated  throng  of  things.  The  variegated  street
shudders  at  it,  for  the  moment ;  next  moment  forgets  it :  The
Aristocrats  !  They  were  guilty  against  the  Republic  ;  their  death,
were  it  only  that  their  goods  are  confiscated,  will  be  useful  to  the
Republic  ;  Vive  la  R^publique  !

In  the  last  days  of  August  fell  a  notabler  head :  2  General  Cus-
tine's.  Custine  was  accused  of  harshness,  of  unskilfulness,  perfi-
diousness  ;  accused  of  many  things  :  found  guilty,  we  may  say,  of
one  thing,  unsuccessfalness.  Hearing  his  unexpected  Sentence,
'  Custine  fell  down  before  the  Crucifix,'  silent  for  the  space  of  two
hours  :  he  fared,  with  moist  eyes  and  a  look  of  prayer,  towards  the
Place  de  la  Revolution ;  glanced  upwards  at  the  clear  suspended
axe ;  then  mounted  swiftly  aloft,^  swiftly  was  struck  away  from

governor  of  Jamaica,  and  he  sent  three  frigates,  which  saved  a  great  number  of
people  :  the  English  occupied  many  parts  of  the  island,  but  did  not  take  possession
of  Port-au-Prince  till  June  ist  '94  (Lecky,  v.  567).  Mahan  (i.  112)  criticises  the
policy  of  the  British  Government  in  occupying  and  garrisoning  the  vi^rong  ports  ;
it  was  vain  for  them  to  hope  to  hold  the  whole  island.  In  1798  they  finally
abandoned  the  island  to  Toussaint  I'Ouverture  the  negro.]

i[July  13th.  Leonard  Bourdon,  a  schoolmaster  and  barrister,  born  1758,  deputy
to  Convention  for  the  Loiret,  a  leading  Montagnard,  was  passing  through  Orleans  on
a  mission  to  the  Jura  on  March  15th  '93,  and  was  slightly  wounded  in  a  street  row,
which  one  of  his  companions  provoked,  on  his  way  home  from  the  Jacobin  Club  in
that  city.  He  made  immense  capital  out  of  this,  representing  himself  as  a  second
Lepelletier.  The  Convention,  on  Barere's  motion,  voted  a  fierce  decree  against
the  city  of  Orleans :  thirteen  of  its  citizens  were  sent  to  the  Tribunal  Rdvolutionnaire  at
Paris  for  the  "  assassination,"  and  nine  of  them  were  condemned  to  death,  four  being
acquitted.  (Campardon,  i.  56.)  If  the  story  from  Prudhomme,  quoted  by  Campar-
don,  be  true,  Leonard  Bourdon  must  have  been  disappointed  at  the  smallness  of
the  vengeance,  as  he  told  the  surgeon  who  dressed  his  wound  that  he  would  have
twenty-five  heads  for  it ;  he  was  humourously  known  as  Liopard  Bourdon  after
this  bloodshed.  He  assisted  Barras  on  the  night  of  9th  Thermidor,  became  a
leading  Thermidorian,  and  a  member  of  the  Council  of  500,  disappeared  from
politics  under  the  Consulate  and  died  1815.]

2  [Aug.  28th.  Custine's  trial  lasted  thirteen  days,  and  created  great  excite-
ment. His  confessor,  the  Abb6  Lothringer,  was  afterwards  examined  at  length
to  try  and  extort  from  him  some  of  the  secrets  of  the  confession;  Custine's  guilt
is  not  improbable,  for  he  had  undoubtedly  entered  into  secret  negotiations  with
Prussia  on  his  own  account,  but  the  accusation  that  he  wished  to  make  Brunswick
King  of  France  appears  to  rest  on  no  ground  of  fact :  rather,  like  Dumouriez,  he
probably  clung  to  the  idea  of  separating  Prussia  from  the  cause  of  the  Allies.  {See
Campardon,  i.  88,  sqq.Y^

3  Deux  Amis,  xi.  148-188.


EISEN  AGAINST  TYEANTS  97

the  lists  of  the  Living.  He  had  fought  in  America ;  he  was  a
proud,  brave  man ;  and  his  fortune  led  him  hither.

On  the  2d  of  this  same  month,  at  three  in  the  morning,  a
vehicle  rolled  off,  with  closed  blinds,  from  the  Temple  to  the
Conciergerie.i  Within  it  were  two  Municipals ;  and  Marie-An-
toinette, once  Queen  of  France  !  There  in  that  Conciergerie,  in
ignominious  dreary  cell,  she,  secluded  from  children,  kindred,
friends  and  hope,  sits  long  weeks  ;  expecting  when  the  end  will
be.2

The  Guillotine,  we  find,  gets  always  a  quicker  motion,  as  other
things  are  quickening.  The  Guillotine,  by  its  speed  of  going,  will
give  index  of  the  general  velocity  of  the  Republic.  The  clanking
of  its  huge  axe,  rising  and  falling  there,  in  horrid  systole-diastole,
is  portion  of  the  whole  enormous  Life-movement  and  pulsation  of
the  Sansculottic  System! — 'Orleans  Conspirators'  and  Assaulters
had  to  die,  in  spite  of  much  weeping  and  entreating ;  so  sacred  is
the  person  of  a  Deputy.  Yet  the  sacred  can  become  desecrated  :
your  very  Deputy  is  not  greater  than  the  Guillotine.  Poor  Deputy
Journalist  Gorsas :  we  saw  him  hide  at  Rennes,  when  the  Calvados
War  burnt  priming.  He  stole,  afterwards,  in  August,  to  Paris ;
lurked  several  weeks  about  the  Palais  ci-devant  Royal ;  was  seen
there,  one  day ;  was  clutched,  identified,  and  without  ceremony,
being  already  '  out  of  the  Law,'  was  sent  to  the  Place  de  la  Revo-
lution. He  died,  recommending  his  wife  and  children  to  the  pity
of  the  Republic.  It  is  the  ninth  day  of  October  179^.  Gorsas
is  the  first  Deputy  that  dies  on  the  scaffold ;  he  will  not  be  the
last.

Ex-Mayor  Bailly  is  in  Prison ;  Ex-Procureur  Manuel.     Brissot

1  [The  Conciergerie  dates  from  the  13th  century,  and,  as  its  name  indicates,
was  the  '  Servants'  Hall '  of  the  old  Royal  Palace.  Its  first  storey  was  in  1793  a
row  of  shops  for  the  sale  of  articles  de  Paris  :  the  cells  were  mostly  underground,
and,  though  much  improved  in  Louis  XVI. 's  reign,  were  damp  and  unwholesome.
Richard,  the  gaoler,  and  his  wife  were  humane  persons,  and  the  latter,  if  tradition
may  be  trusted,  was  specially  kind  to  the  Queen.  The  Queen's  cell  is  still  to  be
seen  :  it  was  on  the  ground  floor,  and  its  window  gave  on  to  the  '  Courtyard  of  the
Women,'  but  owing  to  its  proximity  to  the  river  it  was  very  damp.  Louis  XVIII.
placed  in  it  an  altar  and  a  Latin  inscription  (not,  one  is  afraid,  the  first  elegantice
lie  had  written  about  his  sister-in-law).     (Dauban,  Les  Prisons,  p.  136  sqq.)\

2  See  Mt^moires  Particuliers  de  la  Captivity  a  la  Tour  du  Temple  (by  the
Duchesse  d'Angouleme,  Paris,  21  Janvier  1817).

VOL.    III.  7


98  THE  FRENCH  EEVOLUTION

and  our  poor  Arrested  Girondins  have  become  Incarcerated  In-
dicted Girondins ;  universal  Jacobinism  clamouring  for  their
punishment.  Duperret's  Seals  are  broken  I  Those  Seventy-three
Secret  Protesters,  suddenly  one  day,  are  reported  upon,  are  de-
creed accused  ;  the  Convention-doors  being  '  previously  shut,'  that
none  implicated  might  escape.  They  were  marched,  in  a  very
rough  manner,  to  Prison  that  evening. i  Happy  those  of  them  who
chanced  to  be  absent !  Condorcet  has  vanished  into  darkness  ;
perhaps,  like  Rabaut,  sits  between  two  walls,  in  the  house  of  a
friend.

CHAPTER  VII

MARIE-ANTOINETTE

On  Monday  the  Fourteenth  of  October  1793,^  a  Cause  is  pending
in  the  Palais  de  Justice,  in  the  new  Revolutionary  Court,  such
as  these  old  stone-walls  never  witnessed :  the  Trial  of  Marie-
Antoinette.  The  once  brightest  of  Queens,  now  tarnished,  de-
faced, forsaken,  stands  here  at  Fouquier-Tinville's  Judgment-bar  ;
answering  for  her  life.  The  Indictment  was  delivered  her  last
night. 3  To  such  changes  of  human  fortune  what  words  are
adequate  ?     Silence  alone  is  adequate.

There  are  few  Printed  things  one  meets  with,  of  such  tragic,

1  [Oct,  3rd.]

2  [It  was  on  Aug.  ist  that  the  trial  of  Marie  Antoinette  was  decreed,  on  the
motion  of  Barere,  Ilfautfrapper  I' A  utriche  et  VA  utrichienne  ;  on  the  same  day  the
Convention  decreed  the  violation  of  the  Royal  tombs  at  Saint-Denis  and  the  depor-
tation of  all  living  Bourbons  except  the  children  of  Louis  XVI.  Nothing  whatever
was  done  by  Austria  in  favour  of  the  Queen  of  France  even  by  way  of  protest.
Mercy,  Fersen  and  La  Marck,  her  truest  friends,  implored  the  Governments  of  the
Allies  in  vain :  up  till  the  end  of  June  they  had  placed  some  confidence  in  Danton,
who  had  showed  some  disposition  to  make  the  deliverance  of  the  Queen  a  possible
overture  for  peace.  [See  Fersen's  Journal  et  Corresp.  ii.,  May — Aug.  '93  ;  vid.  infr. ,
iii.  190).

The  Queen  was  interrogated  on  Sept.  4th  by  Amar  and  some  others  in  the
Conciergerie.  The  interrogations  of  the  children  in  the  Temple  by.H^bert,  Pache,
Chaumette  and  Simon  (vid.  infr.,  iii.  190)  took  place  on  Oct.  6th.  On  Oct.  loth
Fouquier  wrote  to  Committee  that  all  the  documents  were  ready  ;  and  on  12th  the
Queen  was  again  interrogated  by  Herman.  The  Counsel  assigned  to  her  were
Tronson-Ducoudray  and  Chauveau-Lagarde ;  after  their  first  conversation  with
her  these  men  were  arrested  and  examined  as  to  what  she  had  '  confessed.'    They

f)ractically  said  she  had  given  them  no  confidence,  and  were  at  once  liberated.
Campardon,  i.  106,  sqq.)]

3  Proems  de  la  Reine  (Deux  Amis,  xi.  251-381).


MARIE-ANTOINETTE  99

almost  ghastly,  significance  as  those  bald  Pages  of  the  Bulletin  du
Tribunal  Revolutionnairc,  which  bear  title,  Trial  of  the  Widow  Capet.
Dim,  dim,  as  if  in  disastrous  eclipse ;  like  the  pale  kingdoms  of
Dis !  Plutonic  Judges,  Plutonic  Tinville  ;  encircled,  nine  times,
with  Styx  and  Lethe,  with  Fire-Phlegethon  and  Cocytus  named
of  Lamentation  !  The  very  witnesses  summoned  are  like  Ghosts  .
exculpatory,  inculpatory,  they  themselves  are  all  hovering  over
death  and  doom  ;  they  are  known,  in  our  imagination,  as  the  prey
of  the  Guillotine.  Tall  ci-devant  Count  d'Estaing,^  anxious  to
show  himself  Patriot,  cannot  escape  ;  nor  Bailly,  who,  when  asked
If  he  knows  the  Accused,  answers  with  a  reverent  inclination
towards  her,  ''  Ah,  yes,  I  know  Madame."  Ex-Patriots  are  here,
sharply  dealt  with,  as  Procureur  Manuel ;  Ex-ministers,  shorn  of
their  splendour.  We  have  cold  Aristocratic  impassivity,  faithful
to  itself  even  in  Tartarus ;  rabid  stupidity,  of  Patriot  Corporals,
Patriot  Washerwomen,  who  have  much  to  say  of  Plots,  Treasons,
August  Tenth,  old  Insurrection  of  Women.  For  all  now  has
become  a  crime,  in  her  who  has  lost.^

^[The  Comte  d'Estaing,  born  1729,  served  first  in  the  Army  and  then  in  the
Navy,  fought  in  the  Seven  Years'  War  and  the  War  of  American  independence ;
became  Admiral  in  1792  ;  as  Commander  of  the  National  Guard  of  Versailles,  he
had  tried  to  protect  the  Royal  Family  on  Oct.  5th  '89 ;  guillotined,  April  28th  '94.]

2[Fouquier's  indictment  began  with  a  comparison  between  the  Queen  and  all
the  wicked  Queens  of  History,  and  the  technical  charges  brought  were  : —

(i)  Plundering  the  French  exchequer  for  the  benefit  of  Austria  before  1789.

(2)  Producing  famine.

(3)  Designing  a  Coup  d Atat  on  Oct.  4th  '89.

(4)  Instigating  the  Flight  to  Varennes.

(5)  Instigating  the   '  massacre '   of  the  Champ-de-Mars,  the   meetings  of  the

"  Austrian  Committee,"  the  Vetos,  the  declaration  of  War.

(6)  Betraying  the  French  plan  of  campaign  to  the  Allies.

(7)  The  "conspiracy"  of  Aug.  loth  against  the  Nation.

(8)  Incestuous  intercourse  with  her  son.

The  witnesses  called  were  Lecointre  to  the  affair  of  Oct.  4th  '89  ;  La  Pierre  (an
adjutant  general)  to  the  events  of  June  20th  '91 ;  Roussillon  to  the  events  of  Aug.  loth;
Hubert  to  the  deposition  in  the  matter  of  incest ;  Terrasson  to  the  fact  that  the  Queen
on  June  26th  looked  fiercely  at  the  National  Guard  (whence  resulted  the  '  massacre '
of  July  17th) ;  Manuel  to  certain  pretended  intrigues  in  the  Temple  (but  he  gave  no
evidence  and  was  reprimanded) ;  Millot,  a  female  servant,  to  the  sending  of  money
to  Austria  (she  deposed  also  that  the  Queen  tried  to  assassinate  d' Orleans) ;  Simon
to  her  attempts  to  corrupt  the  warders  in  the  Temple ;  Tissot  (a  police  spy,  and
author  of  the  '  Eloge  de  La  Sainte  Dame  Guillotine ')  to  her  attempts  to  defraud
the  Civil  List  for  the  benefit  of  the  Ii,migrds  ;  D'Estaing  deposed  to  nothing  but
that  the  Queen  had  prevented  him  from  being  created  a  Marshal ;  Bailly  seems
only  to  have  been  called  to  give  a  handle  against  himself,  he  deposed  to  nothing  ;
there  were  several  more  witnesses  of  no  importance  (as  to  the  Queen's  influence


100        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Marie-Antoinette,  in  this  her  utter  abandonment,  and  hour  of
extreme  need,  is  not  wanting  to  herself,  the  imperial  woman.
Her  look,  they  say,  as  that  hideous  Indictment  was  reading,  con-
tinued calm ;  '  she  was  sometimes  observed  moving  her  fingers,
as  when  one  plays  on  the  Piano.'  You  discern,  not  without
interest,  across  that  dim  Revolutionary  Bulletin  itself,  how  she
bears  herself  queenlike.  Her  answers  are  prompt,  clear,  often
of  Laconic  brevity  ;  resolution,  which  has  grown  contemptuous
without  ceasing  to  be  dignified,  veils  itself  in  calm  words.  "  You
persist  then  in  denial  ?  " — "  My  plan  is  not  denial :  it  is  the  truth
I  have  said,  and  I  persist  in  that."  Scandalous  Hebert  has  borne
his  testimony  as  to  many  things  :  as  to  one  thing,  concerning
Marie-Antoinette  and  her  little  Son, — wherewith  Human  Speech
had  better  not  further  be  soiled.  She  has  answered  Hebert ;  a
Juryman  begs  to  observe  that  she  has  not  answered  as  to  this.
"I  have  not  answered,"  she  exclaims  with  noble  emotion,
"  because  Nature  refuses  to  answer  such  a  charge  brought  against
"a  Mother.  I  appeal  to  all  the  Mothers  that  are  here."  Robes-
pierre, when  he  heard  of  it,  broke  out  into  something  almost  like
swearing  at  the  brutish  blockheadism  of  this  Hebert ;  ^  on  whose
foul  head  his  foul  lie  has  recoiled.  At  four  o'clock  on  Wednesday
morning,  after  two  days  and  two  nights  of  interrogating,  jury-
charging,  and  other  darkening  of  counsel,  the  result  comes  out :
sentence  of  Death.  "  Have  you  anything  to  say  .'* "  The  Ac-
cused shook  her  head,  without   speech.     Night's   candles   are

over  the  King  in  the  matter  of  places  and  pensions,  etc.).  Then  the  goods  taken
from  the  Queen  at  the  Temple  were  brought  in,  and  she  was  examined  as  to  their
several  uses.  She  attempted  no  cross-examination  of  witnesses,  but  was  herself
cross-examined  the  whole  time  as  to  their  evidence.  She  concluded  by  saying :
'  Yesterday  I  knew  not  who  were  to  give  evidence  against  me,  or  of  what  I  was  to
be  accused.  No  one  has  proved  any  positive  fact  against  me.  I  was  the  King's
wife  and  had  to  obey  him.'  Fouquier  then  spoke  again,  and  the  two  counsel  for
the  defence  made  a  formal  attempt  to  disprove  some  of  the  evidence,  but  cross-
examined  no  witnesses,  and  called  none  of  their  own.  Herman  summed  up  without
the  least  pretence  at  impartiality,  inculpating  the  accused  of  everything  (except  the
incest,  which  charge  he  passed  over  in  silence).  The  jury  were  away  one  hour  and
found  the  Queen  guilty  on  all  counts.  The  trial  terminated  at  4.30  A.M.  on  i6th.
(Campardon,  i.  106,  sgg.)']

iVilate,  Causes  secretes  de  la  Revolution  de  Thermidor  (Paris,  1825),  p.  179.
[This  was  at  a  dinner  given  by  Barere  the  next  day.  Vilate  is  a  professional  liar,
but  there  is  nothing  improbable  in  the  story.]


MARIE-ANTOINETTE  101

burning  out ;  and  with  her  too  Time  is  finishing,  and  it  will  be
Eternity  and  Day.  This  Hall  of  Tinville's  is  dark,  ill-lighted
except  where  she  stands.  Silently  she  withdraws  from  it,  to
die.

Two  Processions,  or  Royal  Progresses,  three-and-twenty  years
apart,  have  often  struck  us  with  a  strange  feeling  of  contrast.  The
first  is  of  a  beautiful  Archduchess  and  Dauphiness,  quitting  her
Mother's  City,  at  the  age  of  Fifteen  ;  towards  hopes  such  as  no
other  Daughter  of  Eve  then  had  :  '  On  the  morrow,'  says  Weber,
an  eye-witness,  'the  Dauphiness  left  Vienna.  The  whole  city
'  crowded  out ;  at  first  with  a  sorrow  which  was  silent.  She  ap-
*  peared :  you  saw  her  sunk  back  into  her  carriage  ;  her  face
'  bathed  in  tears  ;  hiding  her  eyes  now  with  her  handkerchief,
'  now  with  her  hands  ;  several  times  putting  out  her  head  to  see
'yet  again  this  Palace  of  her  Fathers,  whither  she  was  to  return
'  no  more.  She  motioned  her  regret,  her  gratitude  to  the  good
'  Nation,  which  was  crowding  here  to  bid  her  farewell.  Then
'arose  not  only  tears  ;  but  piercing  cries,  on  all  sides.  Men  and
'  women  alike  abandoned  themselves  to  such  expression  of  their
'sorrow.  It  was  an  audible  sound  of  wail,  in  the  streets  and
'avenues  of  Vienna.  The  last  Courier  that  followed  her  dis-
'  appeared,  and  the  crowd  melted  away.' ^

The  young  imperial  Maiden  of  Fifteen  has  now  become  a  worn
discrowned  Widow  of  Thirty-eight ;  gray  before  her  time  :  this  is
the  last  Procession:  *Few  minutes  after  the  Trial  ended,  the
'  drums  were  beating  to  arms  in  all  Sections  ;  at  sunrise  the  armed
'  force  was  on  foot,  cannons  getting  placed  at  the  extremities  of
'  the  Bridges,  in  the  Squares,  Crossways,  all  along  from  the  Palais
'de  Justice  to  the  Place  de  la  Revolution.  By  ten  o'clock,
'  numerous  patrols  were  circulating  in  the  Streets  ;  thirty  thou-
'  sand  foot  and  horse  drawn  up  under  arms.  At  eleven,  Marie-
'  Antoinette  was  brought  out.  She  had  on  an  undress  of  piqu&
'  blanc :  she  was  led  to  the  place  of  execution,  in  the  same  manner
'  as  an  ordinary  criminal ;  bound,  on  a  Cart ;  accompanied  by  a

1  Weber,  i.  6.


102        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

*  Constitutional  Priest  in  Lay  dress ;  escorted  by  numerous  de-
'tachments  of  infantry  and   cavalry.      These,   and  the  double

*  row  of  troops  all  along  her  road,  she  appeared  to  regard  with
'indifference.  On  her  countenance  there  was  visible  neither
'abashment  nor  pride.  To  the  cries  of  Five  la  Republique  and
'  Down  with  Tyranny,  which  attended  her  all  the  way,  she  seemed

*  to  pay  no  need.  She  spoke  little  to  her  Confessor.  The  tricolor
'  Streamers  on  the  housetops  occupied  her  attention,  in  the  Streets
'  du  Roule  and  Saint- Honore ;  she  also  noticed  the  Inscriptions

*  on  the  house  fronts.  On  reaching  the  Place  de  la  Revolution,
'  her  looks  turned  towards  the  Jardin  National,  whilom  Tuileries  ;
'her  face  at  that  moment  gave  signs  of  lively  emotion.  She
'  mounted  the  Scaffold  with  courage  enough  ;  at  a  quarter  past
'  Twelve,  her  head  fell ;  the  Executioner  showed  it  to  the  people,
'amid  universal  long-continued  cries  of  Vive  la  Republique.'  ^


CHAPTER  VIII
THE  TWENTY-TWO
Whom  next,  O  Tinville  !  The  next  are  of  a  different  colour  :  our
poor  Arrested  Girondin  Deputies.  What  of  them  could  still  be
laid  hold  of ;  our  Vergniaud,  Brissot,  Fauchet,  Valaze,  Gensonne  ;
the  once  flower  of  French  Patriotism,  Twenty-two  by  the  tale  ;
hither,  at  Tinville's  Bar,  onward  from  '  safeguard  of  the  French
People,'  from  confinement  in  the  Luxembourg,  imprisonment  in
the  Conciergerie,  have  they  now,  by  the  course  of  things,  arrived.
Fouquier-Tinville  must  give  what  account  of  them  he  can.^

^  Deux  Amis,  xi.  301.  [On  being  taken  back  to  the  Conciergerie  the  Queen
breakfasted  calmly  and  wrote  to  her  sister-in-law  (Mme  Elisabeth).  She  was
offered  a  "Constitutional  Curd"  but  replied  'There  are  no  curds  left  in  Paris.'
(M.  Campardon  neither  accepts  nor  rejects  M.  de  Beauchene's  statement  that  area!
priest  was  secretly  admitted.  See  Beauchdne's  Louis  XVII. ,  ii.  129. )  The  ' '  Consti-
tutional Cu7'd"  accompanied  her  to  the  scaffold,  but  she  never  looked  at  nor  spoke
to  him ;  she  was  overwhelmed  with  outrages  by  the  mob  the  whole  way.  (Cam-
pardon,  i.  147-151.)  In  Dauban's  Paris  en  1793  (frontispiece)  is  a  rough  drawing
by  David,  of  the  Queen  in  the  cart  going  to  the  scaffold.]

2  [This  was  in  consequence  of  a  report  of  Amar  on  October  3rd  :  when  a  decree
had  been  passed,  repeating  the  outlawry  of  the  15  escaped  Girondists  {vid.  supr.,  iii.
98),  and  ordering  the  arrest  of  the  75  Conventionals  who  had  protested  against  June
2ncl.     Altogether  by  Amar's  report  129  persons  (deputies  or  ex-deputies)  were  in-


THE  TWENTY-TWO  103

Undoubtedly  this  Trial  of  the  Girondins  is  the  greatest  that
Fouquier  has  yet  had  to  do.  Twenty-two,  all  chief  Republicans,
ranged  in  a  line  there  ;  the  most  eloquent  in  France  ;  Lawyers
too ;  not  without  friends  in  the  auditory.  How  will  Tinville
prove  these  men  guilty  of  Royalism,  Federalism,  Conspiracy
against  the  Republic  ?  Vergniaud's  eloquence  awakes  once
more  ;  '  draws  tears,'  they  say.  And  Journalists  report,  and  the
Trial  lengthens  itself  out  day  after  day  ;  '  threatens  to  become
eternal,'  murmur  many.  Jacobinism  and  Municipality  rise  to  the
aid  of  Fouquier.  On  the  28th  of  the  month,  Hebert  and  others
come  in  deputation  to  inform  a  Patriot  Convention  that  the
Revolutionary  Tribunal  is  quite  ^  shackled  by  Forms  of  Law  ; '
that  a  Patriot  Jury  ouglit  to  have  '  the  power  of  cutting  short,
of  terminer  les  d&bats,  when  they  feel  themselves  convinced.'
Which  pregnant  suggestion,  of  cutting  short,  passes  itself,  with
all  despatch,  into  a  Decree.  ^

Accordingly,  at  ten  o'clock  on  the  night  of  the  30th  of  October,
the  Twenty-two,  summoned  back  once  more,  receive  this  informa-
tion. That  the  Jury  feeling  themselves  convinced  have  cut  short,
have  brought  in  their  verdict ;  that  the  Accused  are  found  guilty,
and  the  Sentence  on  one  and  all  of  them  is,  Death  with  confisca-
tion of  goods.

criminated,  several  miscellaneous  persons  being  added  to  the  original  victims  of
June  2nd,  e.g.,  Egalit^,  who  had  been  in  prison  since  April,  Rebecqui  and  Kersaint,
who  had  resigned  their  seats  before  June  2nd.  The  report  was  read  with  locked
doors  so  that  no  one  could  escape  (Bir6,  L^gende,  380).

The  Girondists  brought  to  trial  on  24th  were  twenty-one  in  number :
Brissot,  Vergniaud,  Gensonn^,  Duperret,  Carra,  Gardien,  Valaz6,  Duprat,  Sillery,
Fauchet,  Ducos,  Boyer-Fonfrede,  Lasource,  Beauvais,  Duchatel,  Mainvielle,  Lacaze,
Le  Hardy,  Boileau,  Antiboul,  Viger.  The  seat  of  honour  at  the  Tribunal  was  re-
served for  Brissot  not  Vergniaud,  for  Brissot  had  been  the  real  working  head  of  the
party  (Bir6,  L^gende,  36).  The  accused  did  not,  according  to  Campardon,  conduct
themselves  with  any  particular  heroism  ;  even  Vergniaud  only  found  his  tongue
for  a  few  minutes,  but  they  cross-examined  their  witnesses  with  some  skill,  and  gen-
erally tried  to  prove  themselves  Montagtmrds.    (Campardon,  i.  152,  sqq.)'\

i[It  was  Fouquier's  letter  to  the  Convention,  stating  that  the  trial  had  now  lasted
five  days  and  that  only  nine  witnesses  had  been  heard,  "  each  of  whom  wishes  to
give  the  whole  history  of  the  Revolution,"  that  led  to  the  decree  of  29th,  which
was  proposed  by  Robespierre,  that  after  three  days  of  a  trial  the  President  of  the
Tribunal  may  ask  the  jurors  if  they  are  convinced  ;  if  they  reply  '  no,'  the  trial  may
continue  ;  if  they  reply  '  yes,'  verdict  and  judgment  may  be  delivered  at  once.  At
the  same  time  the  title  of  the  Tribunal  was  changed  from  Tribunal  Criminel
Extraordinaire  to  Tribunal  Rdvolutionnaire  {ibid. ),]


104        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Loud  natural  clamour  rises  among  the  poor  Girondins  ;  tumult ;
which  can  only  be  repressed  by  the  gendarmes.  Valaze  stabs  him-
self ;  falls  down  dead  on  the  spot.  The  rest,  amid  loud  clamour
and  confusion,  are  driven  back  to  their  Conciergerie  ;  Lasource
exclaiming,  "  I  die  on  the  day  when  the  People  have  lost  their
reason  ;  ye  will  die  when  they  recover  it."  ^  No  help !  Yielding
to  violence,  the  Doomed  uplift  the  Hymn  of  the  Marseillese  ;
return  singing  to  their  dungeon.

Riouffe,  who  was  their  Prison-mate  in  these  last  days,  has
lovingly  recorded  what  death  they  made.  To  our  notions,  it  is
not  an  edifying  death.  Gay  satirical  Pot-pourri  by  Ducos ;  ^
rhymed  Scenes  of  Tragedy,  wherein  Barrere  and  Robespierre
discourse  with  Satan  ;  death's  eve  spent  in  '  singing  '  and  '  sallies
of  gaiety,'  with  '  discourses  on  the  happiness  of  peoples  : '  these
things,  and  the  like  of  these,  we  have  to  accept  for  what  they  are
worth.  It  is  the  manner  in  which  the  Girondins  make  their  Last
Supper.  Valaze,  with  bloody  breast,  sleeps  cold  in  death  ;  hears
not  the  singing.  Vergniaud  has  his  dose  of  poison  ;  but  it  is  not
enough  for  his  friends,  it  is  enough  only  for  himself ;  wherefore
he  flings  it  from  him  ;  presides  at  this  Last  Supper  of  the  Giron-
dins, with  wild  coruscations  of  eloquence,  with  song  and  mirth.
Poor  human  Will  struggles  to  assert  itself ;  if  not  in  this  way,
then  in  that.^

^  Ar}iJ.o(rd4vovs  clir6uTos,  ^ATroKTcvovai  <re  'A6-qua7oi,  ^cokiwv  •  *Av  ixavSxfiv,  elirf,
(Tt  S',  eoj'  auxppovujai. — Plut.  0pp.  t.  iv.  p.  310,  ed.  Reiske,  1776.

2  [A  few  days  before  his  death,  on  the  news  of  the  arrest  of  his  friend  Bailleul  at
Provins,  Ducos  composed  this  pot-pourri  beginning  with  the  words

'  Un  jour  de  cet  automne

De  Provins  revenant '
set  to  a  well-known  air.  It  is  really  (for  a  French  Revolution  skit)  almost  humorous,
and  may  be  read  at  length  in  the  Appx.  to  Riouffe's  M6moires  (M6m.  sur  les  Prisons,
278  sgq. ).  There  is  no  mention  in  Riouffe  of  the  '  rhymed  tragedy  '  wherein  Bar^re
and  Robespierre  discourse  with  Satan,  but  there  were  several  such  skits  put  out  in
the  period  after  Thermidor,  which  were  very  likely  composed  in  the  prisons,
notably  the  '  Dialogue  des  Morts  '  composed  at  La  Force — the  '  Club  Infernal '  of
'Pilpay'  (gn  III.),  etc.  Possibly  the  reference  is  to  the  poem  of  Taschereau-
Fargues,  A  Maximilien  Robespierre  aux  en/ers  (twenty  stanzas  of  twelve  lines
each),  in  British  Museum,  935,  b.  17.]

3  M^moires  de  Riouffe  (in  M^moires  sur  les  Prisons,  Paris,  1823),  pp.  48-55.  [Did
Carlyle  know  Charles  Nodier's  book,  published  1831,  '  Le  Dernier  Banquet  des
Girondins,'  afterwards  dramatised  by  Dumas  in  '  Le  Chevalier  de  Maison  Rouge  ? '
For  Riouffe,  who  speaks  (in  loc.  cii.)  much  of  their  gaiety  and  courage,  and  men-


THE  TWENTY-TWO  105

But  on  the  morrow  morning  all  Paris  is  out  ;  such  a  crowd  as
no  man  had  seen.  The  Death-carts,  Valaze's  cold  corpse  stretched
among  the  yet  living  Twenty-one,  roll  along.  Bareheaded,  hands
bound  ;  in  their  shirt-sleeves,  coat  flung  loosely  round  the  neck  :
so  fare  the  eloquent  of  France  ;  bemurmured,  beshouted.  To  the
shouts  of  Vive  la  R&publique,  some  of  them  keep  answering  with
counter-shouts  of  Vive  la  lUpublique.  Others,  as  Brissot,  sit  sunk
in  silence.  At  the  foot  of  the  scaffold  they  again  strike  up,  with
appropriate  variations,  the  Hymn  of  the  Marseillese.  Such  an  act
of  music  ;  conceive  it  well !  The  yet  Living  chant  there  ;  the
chorus  so  rapidly  wearing  weak  !  Samson's  axe  is  rapid  ;  one
head  per  minute,  or  little  less.  The  chorus  is  wearing  weak  ;
the  chorus  is  worn  out; — farewell  forevermore,  ye  Girondins.
Te-Deum  Fauchet  has  become  silent ;  Valaze's  dead  head  is
lopped :  the  sickle  of  the  Guillotine  has  reaped  the  Girondins
all  away.  '  The  eloquent,  the  young,  the  beautiful  and  brave  ! '
exclaims  Riouffe.  O  Death,  what  feast  is  toward  in  thy  ghastly
Halls  ?  1

Nor,  alas,  in  the  far  Bourdeaux  region  will  Girondism  fare
better.  In  caves  of  Saint-Emilion,  in  loft  and  cellar,  the
weariest  months  roll  on ;  apparel  worn,  purse  empty  ;  wintry
November  come  ;  under  Tallien  and  his  Guillotine,  all  hope  now
gone.  Danger  drawing  ever  nigher,  difficulty  pressing  ever
straiter,  they  determine  to  separate.  Not  unpathetic  the  fare-
well ;  2  tall  Barbaroux,  cheeriest  of  brave  men,  stoops  to  clasp  his
Louvet :  "  In  what  place  soever  thou  findest  my  Mother,"  cries
he,  "  try  to  be  instead  of  a  son  to  her  :  no  resource  of  mine

tions  Vergniaud's  dose  of  poison,  says  not  a  word  of  the  banquet.  On  the  face
of  it  the  story  of  Nodier,  as  repeated  by  Thiers,  Michelet  and  Lamartine,  is
ridiculous,  for  an  expensive  banquet  in  the  Conciergcrie  is  about  the  last  thing
the  Government  would  allow.  There  is  no  reason  why  they  should  not  have
supped  together,  but  had  the  supper  been  of  the  kind  to  have  earned  the  fame  that
has  grown  up  about  it,  Riouffe  would  certainly  have  mentioned  it.  (Bir6,  L^gende,
418-21.)  As  a  matter  of  fact  seven  of  them  confessed  to  the  Abb6  Lothringer  (and
Fauchet,  who  was  one  of  these,  received  the  confession  of  another,  Sillery),  and
four  to  the  Abb6  Lambert  {ibid.).'\

1  [The  execution  lasted  only  38  minutes,  which  speaks  well  for  the  adroitness  of
the  executioners  {ibid.  423).]

2  [June  17th  '94.]


106        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

but  1  will  share  with  thy  Wife,  should  chance  ever  lead  me  where
she  is."  ^

Louvet  went  with  Guadet,  with  Salles  and  Valadi ;  Barbaroux
with  Buzot  and  Petion.  Valadi  soon  went  southward,  on  a  way
of  his  own.  The  two  friends  and  Louvet  had  a  miserable  day
and  night ;  the  14th  of  the  November  month,  1793.  Sunk  in
wet,  weariness  and  hunger,  they  knock,  on  the  morrow,  for  help,
at  a  friend's  country-house  ;  the  fainthearted  friend  refuses  to
admit  them.  They  stood  therefore  under  trees,  in  the  pouring
rain.  Flying  desperate,  Louvet  thereupon  will  to  Paris.  He
sets  forth,  there  and  then,  splashing  the  mud  on  each  side  of
him,  with  a  fresh  strength  gathered  from  fury  or  frenzy.  He
passes  villages,  finding  ^  the  sentry  asleep  in  his  box  in  the  thick
rain ; '  he  is  gone,  before  the  man  can  call  after  him.  He  bilks
Revolutionary  Committees  ;  rides  in  carriers'  carts,  covered  carts
and  open  ;  lies  hidden  in  one,  under  knapsacks  and  cloaks  of
soldiers'  wives  on  the  Street  of  Orleans,  while  men  search  for
him ;  has  hairbreadth  escapes  that  would  fill  three  romances  :
finally  he  gets  to  Paris  to  his  fair  Helpmate  ;  gets  to  Switzerland,
and  waits  better  days.

Poor  Guadet  and  Salles  were  both  taken,  ere  long  ;  they
died  by  the  Guillotine  in  Bourdeaux  ;  ^  drums  beating  to  drown
their  voice.  Valadi  also  is  caught,  and  guillotined.  Barbaroux
and  his  two  comrades  weathered  it  longer,  into  the  summer  of
1794  ;  but  not  long  enough.  One  July  morning,  changing  their
hiding-place,  as  they  have  often  to  do,  'about  a  league  from
Saint-Emilion,  they  observe  a  great  crowd  of  country-people  : '
doubtless  Jacobins  come  to  take  them  ?  Barbaroux  draws  a
pistol,  shoots  himself  dead.  Alas,  and  it  was  not  Jacobins  ;  it
was  harmless  villagers  going  to  a  village  wake.  Two  days  after-
wards, Buzot  and  Petion  were  found  in  a  Corn-field,  their  bodies
half-eaten  by  dogs.^

1  Louvet,  p.  213.  2 1- June  19th  '94.]

^Recherches  Historiques  sur  les  Girondins  (in  M6m.  de  Buzot),  p.  108.    ,
[Carlyle's  chronology  is  wild  :  Salles  and  Guadet  were  arrested  at  Saint-Emilion
on  June  17th  '94  and  executed  at  Bordeaux  on  19th  (?  or  20th).     It  was  on  the  day
of  their  arrest  that  Barbaroux  joined  Petion  and  Buzot  in  the  open  country :  the


THE  TWENTY-TWO  .    107

Such  was  the  end  of  Girondism.  They  arose  to  regenerate
France,  these  men  ;  and  have  accomplished  this.  Alas,  whatever
quarrel  we  had  with  them,  has  not  their  cruel  fate  abolished  it  ?
Pity  only  survives.  So  many  excellent  souls  of  heroes  sent  down
to  Hades  ;  they  themselves  given  as  a  prey  of  dogs  and  all  manner
of  birds !  But,  here  too,  the  will  of  the  Supreme  Power  was  ac-
complished. As  Vergniaud  said  :  ^  '  the  Revolution,  Uke  Saturn,
is  devouring  its  own  children.'

place  where  they  were  seen  by  the  villagers  was  Saint-Magne  de  Castillon,  near
Saint-Emilion.  Barbaroux  did  not  shoot  himself  dead,  but  lived  to  be  executed
at  Bordeaux  on  June  25th,  though  in  a  horribly  mutilated  state.

It  was  on  June  26th  that  the  bodies  of  Buzot  and  Petion  were  found  in  a  state
of  decomposition  in  the  same  CommuTic  of  Saint-Magne  ;  this  warrants  the  sup-
position that  they  shot  themselves  about  a  week  before.     (Bir6,  L^gende,  428-30.)

Louvet  reached  Paris  Dec.  6th,  and  left  Feb.  6th  '94  (in  disguise  of  course).  (See
Louvet,  273,  295.)]

1  [March  13th  '93.]


108


BOOK  V
TERROR  THE  ORDER  OF  THE  DAY

CHAPTER  I

RUSHING  DOWN

We  are  now,  therefore,  got  to  that  black  precipitous  Abyss ;
whither  all  things  have  long  been  tending ;  where,  having  now
arrived  on  the  giddy  verge,  they  hurl  down,  in  confused  ruin ;
headlong,  pellmell,  down,  down ; — till  Sansculottism  have  con-
summated itself;  and  in  this  wondrous  French  Revolution,  as  in
a  Doomsday,  a  World  have  been  rapidly,  if  not  born  again,  yet
destroyed  and  engulfed.  Terror  has  long  been  terrible  :  but  to
the  actors  themselves  it  has  now  become  manifest  that  their
appointed  coiu*se  is  one  of  Terror ;  and  they  say.  Be  it  so.
"  Que  la  Terreur  soil  d  rordre  du  jour."  ^

So  many  centuries,  say  only  from  Hugh  Capet  downwards,
had  been  adding  together,  century  transmitting  it  with  increase
to  century,  the  sum  of  Wickedness,  of  Falsehood,  Oppression  of
man  by  man.  Kings  were  sinners,  and  Priests  were,  and  People.
Open  Scoundrels  rode  triumphant,  bediademed,  becoronetted,
bemitred ;  or  the  still  fataller  species  of  Secret- Scoundrels,  in
their  fair-sounding  formulas,  speciosities,  respectabilities,  hollow
within :  the  race  of  Quacks  was  grown  many  as  the  sands  of  the
sea.  Till  at  length  such  a  sum  of  Quackery  had  accumulated
itself  as,  in  brief,  the  Earth  and  the  Heavens  were  weary  of.
Slow   seemed  the  Day   of  Settlement ;  coming   on,    all  imper-

1  [The  decree  that  '  Terror  is  the  Order  of  the  Day '  is  in  one  of  Harare's  rhodo-
montades  (Sept.  5th) :  it  was  followed  by  a  series  of  decrees  against  strangers  residing
in  France,  and  for  the  rigorous  treatment  of  the  conquered  countries — decrees
which,  it  is  almost  needless  to  point  out,  completely  give  the  lie  to  the  earlier
principles  of  the  Revolution.    (Sorel,  iii.  475,  sqq.)]


RUSHING  DOWN  109

ceptible,  across  the  bluster  and  fanfaronade  of  Courtierisms,
Conquering-Heroisms,  Most  Christian  Grand  Monarque-isms,
Well-beloved  Pompadourisms  :  yet  behold  it  was  always  coming ;
behold  it  has  come,  suddenly,  unlooked  for  by  any  man !  The
harvest  of  long  centuries  was  ripening  and  whitening  so  rapidly
of  late  ;  and  now  it  is  grown  while,  and  is  reaped  rapidly,  as  it
were,  in  one  day.  Reaped,  in  this  Reign  of  Terror  ;  and  carried
home,  to  Hades  and  the  Pit ! — Unhappy  Sons  of  Adam :  it  is
ever  so ;  and  never  do  they  know  it,  nor  will  they  know  it.
With  cheerfully  smoothed  countenances,  day  after  day,  and
generation  after  generation,  they,  calling  cheerfully  to  one  an-
other, Well-speed-ye,  are  at  work,  .solving  the  7vind.  And  yet,
as  God  lives,  they  shall  reap  the  whirlnmid :  no  other  thing,  we
say,  is  possible, — since  God  is  a  Truth  and  His  World  is  a
Truth.

History,  however,  in  dealing  with  this  Reign  of  Terror,  has
had  her  own  difficulties.  While  the  Phenomenon  continued  in
its  primary  state,  as  mere  '  Horrors  of  the  French  Revolution,'
there  was  abundance  to  be  said  and  shrieked.  With  and  also
without  profit.  Heaven  knows,  there  were  terrors  and  horrors
enough  :  yet  that  was  not  all  the  Phenomenon ;  nay,  more  pro-
perly, that  was  not  the  Phenomenon  at  all,  but  rather  was  the
shadow  of  it,  the  negative  part  of  it.  And  now,  in  a  new  stage
of  the  business,  when  History,  ceasing  to  shriek,  would  try
rather  to  include  under  her  old  Forms  of  speech  or  speculation
this  new  amazing  Thing  ;  that  so  some  accredited  scientific  Law
of  Nature  might  suffice  for  the  unexpected  Product  of  Nature,
and  History  might  get  to  speak  of  it  articulately,  and  draw  in-
ferences and  profit  from  it ;  in  this  new  stage.  History,  we  must
say,  babbles  and  flounders  perhaps  in  a  still  painfuller  manner.
Take,  for  example,  the  latest  Form  of  speech  we  have  seen
propounded  on  the  subject  as  adequate  to  it,  almost  in  these
months,  by  our  worthy  M.  Roux,  in  his  Histoire  Parlemenlaire,
The  latest  and  the  strangest :  that  the  French  Revolution  was  a
dead-lift  effiart,  after  eighteen  hundred  years  of  preparation,  to


no        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

realise — the  Christian  Religion  !  ^  Unity,  Indivisibility,  Brother-
hood or  Death,  did  indeed  stand  printed  on  all  Houses  of  the
Living ;  also,  on  Cemeteries,  or  Houses  of  the  Dead,  stood
printed,  by  order  of  Procureur  Chaumette,  Here  is  Eternal  Sleep  :  ^
but  a  Christian  Religion  realised  by  the  Guillotine  and  Death-
Eternal  '  is  suspect  to  me,'  as  Robespierre  was  wont  to  say,  '  m'est
sicspecte.'

Alas,  no,  M.  Roux  !  A  Gospel  of  Brotherhood,  not  according
to  any  of  the  Four  old  Evangelists,  and  calling  on  men  to  repent,
and  amend  each  his  own  wicked  existence,  that  they  might  be
saved ;  but  a  Gospel  rather,  as  we  often  hint,  according  to  a  new
Fifth  Evangelist  Jean-Jacques,  calling  on  men  to  amend  each  the
whole  world's  wicked  existence,  and  be  saved  by  making  the  Con-
stitution. A  thing  different  and  distant  toto  ccelo,  as  they  say  :
the  whole  breadth  of  the  sky,  and  further  if  possible  ! — It  is
thus,  however,  that  History,  and  indeed  all  human  Speech  and
Reason  does  yet,  what  Father  Adam  began  life  by  doing :  strive
to  ?iame  the  new  Things  it  sees  of  Nature's  producing, — often
helplessly  enough.

But  what  if  History  were  to  admit,  for  once,  that  all  the
Names  and  Theorems  yet  known  to  her  fall  short  ?  That  this
grand  Product  of  Nature  was  even  grand,  and  new,  in  that  it

1  Hist.  Pari,  (Introd.),  i.  i  ei  seqq.  [The  Histoire  Parlementaire  de  la  R^v.  Fr,,
ou  journal  des  Assemblies  Rationales  depuis  1789  jusqu'a  1815,  by  P.  J.  B.  Buchez
(sometime  Maire  of  Paris,  deputy  for  Paris  after  the  Revolution  of  '48,  died  1865)
and  P.  C.  Roux-Lavergne,  was  first  published  in  40  volumes  at  Paris,  1834 — 48.
A  second  edition  was  begun  in  1846  but  only  seven  volumes  appeared.

M.  Aulard,  quoted  in  Tourneux,  i.  23,  calls  it  '  a  gigantic  work  without  propor-
tions, plan  or  style,  but  containing  a  mass  of  documents,  the  reprint  of  a  part  of
the  iMoniieur,  of  numberless  newspaper  articles,  pamphlets  and  Mdmoires.'  The
authors  are  interesting  people,  as  they  were  both  apostles  of  Carbonarism,  Saint-
Simonism  and  what  is  now  called  "  Christian  Socialism."  Both  had  the  bitterest
experience,  in  the  Chamber  of  1848,  of  Democracy  as  it  really  is ;  and  Roux-Lavergne
ended  by  becoming  a  priest.  The  passage  referred  to  by  Carlyle  is  the  opening
sentence,  "the  French  Revolution  is  the  last  and  most  advanced  product  of  modern
civilisation,  and  modern  civilisation  is  the  child  of  the  Gospel."]

2  Deux  Amis,  xii.  78.  [Deux  Amis  (in  loc.  cit.)  says  the  inscription  suggested  by
Chaumette  was  '■  L  ho mme  juste  tie  meurt  pas,  il  vit  dans  la  tndmoire  de  ses  con-
citoyens : '  but  the  inscription  over  cemeteries  '  here  is  eternal  sleep  '  was  often  to
be  found  in  the  Provinces.  Nor  is  anything  said  in  the  passage  cited  about  the  in-
scriptionson  houses  (but  see  Deux  Amis,  xii.  157).  Fouch^  did  actually  order  thewords
'  Death  is  an  eternal  sleep  '  to  be  inscribed  on  all  graveyards  in  the  Departments  of
the  West  while  he  was  en  mission  there  (m  the  Nievre  ;  see  his  letter  of  Oct.  loth,
quoted  in  Rev.de  la  R6v.  ii.  ii,  56).]


RUSHING  DOWN  111

came  not  to  range  itself  under  old  recorded  Laws  of  Nature  at
all,  but  to  disclose  new  ones  ?  In  that  case,  History  renouncing
the  pretension  to  name  it  at  present,  will  look  honestly  at  it,  and
name  what  she  can  of  it !  Any  approximation  to  the  right  Name
has  value :  were  the  right  Name  itself  once  here,  the  Thing  is
known  henceforth  ;  the  Thing  is  then  ours,  and  can  be  dealt  with.

Now  surely  not  realisation,  of  Christianity,  or  of  aught  earthly,
do  we  discern  in  this  Reign  of  Terror,  in  this  French  Revolution
of  which  it  is  the  consummating.  Destruction  rather  we  discern,
— of  all  that  was  destructible.  It  is  as  if  Twenty-five  millions,
risen  at  length  into  the  Pythian  mood,  had  stood  up  simultane-
ously to  say,  with  a  sound  which  goes  through  far  lands  and
times,  that  this  Untruth  of  an  Existence  had  become  insupport-
able. O  ye  Hypocrisies  and  Speciosities,  Royal  mantles,  Cardinal
plush-cloaks,  ye  Credos,  Formulas,  Respectabilities,  fair-painted
Sepulchres  full  of  dead  men's  bones, — behold,  ye  appear  to  us  to
be  altogether  a  Lie.  Yet  our  Life  is  not  a  Lie  ;  yet  our  Hunger
and  Misery  is  not  a  Lie !  Behold  we  lift  up,  one  and  all,  our
Twenty-five  million  right-hands ;  and  take  the  Heavens,  and  the
Earth  and  also  the  Pit  of  Tophet  to  witness,  that  either  ye  shall
be  abolished,  or  else  we  shall  be  abolished !

No  inconsiderable  Oath,  truly  ;  forming,  as  has  been  often
said,  the  most  remarkable  transaction  in  these  last  thousand
years.  Wherefrora  likewise  there  follow,  and  will  follow,  results.
The  fulfilment  of  this  Oath ;  that  is  to  say,  the  black  desperate
battle  of  Men  against  their  whole  Condition  and  Environment, —
a  battle,  alas,  withal,  against  the  Sin  and  Darkness  that  was  in
themselves  as  in  others :  this  is  the  Reign  of  Terror.  Transcen-
dental despair  was  the  purport  of  it,  though  not  consciously  so.
False  hopes,  of  Fraternity,  Political  Millennium,  and  what  not,
we  have  always  seen:  but  the  unseen  heart  of  the  whole,  the
transcendental  despair,  was  not  false ;  neither  has  it  been  of  no
effect.  Despair,  pushed  far  enough,  completes  the  circle,  so  to
speak  ;  and  becomes  a  kind  of  genuine  productive  hope  again.

Doctrine  of  Fraternity,  out  of  old  Catholicism,  does,  it  is  true,
verj^  strangely  in  the  vehicle  of  a  Jean-Jacques  Evangel,  sud-


112        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

denly  plump  down  out  of  its  cloud-firmament ;  and  from  a
theorem  determine  to  make  itself  a  practice.  But  just  so  do  all
creeds,  intentions,  customs,  knowledges,  thoughts  and  things,
which  the  French  have,  suddenly  plump  down ;  Catholicism,
Classicism,  Sentimentalism,  Cannibalism :  all  isms  that  make  up
Man  in  France,  are  rushing  and  roaring  in  that  gulf;  and  the
theorem  has  become  a  practice,  and  whatsoever  cannot  swim
sinks.  Not  Evangelist  Jean-Jacques  alone ;  there  is  not  a
Village  Schoolmaster  but  has  contributed  his  quota :  do  we  not
thou  one  another,  according  to  the  Free  Peoples  of  Antiquity  }
The  French  Patriot,  in  red  Phrygian  night-cap  of  Liberty,
christens  his  poor  little  red  infant  Cato, — Censor,  or  else  of
Utica.  Gracchus  has  become  Baboeuf,^  and  edites  Newspapers ;
Mutius  Scaevola,  Cordwainer  of  that  ilk,  presides  in  the  Section
Mutius-Scaevola  :  ^  and  in  brief,  there  is  a  world  wholly  jumbling
itself,  to  try  what  will  swim.  4^

Wherefore  we  will,  at  all  events,  call  this  Reign  of  Terror  a
very  strange  one.  Dominant  Sansculottism  makes,  as  it  were,
free  arena ;  one  of  the  strangest  temporary  states  Humanity  was
ever  seen  in.  A  nation  of  men,  full  of  wants  and  void  of  habits  !
The  old  habits  are  gone  to  wreck  because  they  were  old :  men,
driven  forward  by  Necessity  and  fierce  Pythian  Madness,  have,
on  the  spur  of  the  instant,  to  devise  for  the  want  the  way  of
satisfying  it.  The  Wonted  tumbles  down ;  by  imitation,  by
invention,  the  Unwonted  hastily  builds  itself  up.     What  the

1  [F.  N.  Babeuf,  born  1764,  founded  a  violent  newspaper  at  Amiens  called  Le
Correspondent  Pi  card  Sind  was  indicted  for  it  (1790).  He  held  various  Municipal
appointments  in  his  Department  during  the  Revolution — was  tried  for  forgery,  but
acquitted.  In  July  '94  he  began  to  publish  in  Paris  his  Tribun  du  peuple,
preaching  community  of  goods  and  absolute  socialism.  He  is  best  known  as  the
author  of  a  violent  plot  against  Society  and  the  Directory  in  '97,  for  which  he  was
condemned  to  death.  A  great  number  of  the  old  Septemberers  and  Jacobins  were
involved  in  the  plot  and  many  of  them  were  transported  for  it.  In  the  Tribun
Baebeuf  took  the  name  of  '  Caius  Gracchus ; '  it  is  believed  that  the  Tribun  had
much  to  do  with  the  insurrections  of  '  Germinal '  and  '  Prairial '  in  the  spring  of
'95- 1

2  [Between  Sept.  and  Nov.  '93  the  Section  Luxembourg  got  itself  called  '  Mutius
Scaevola  ;'  the  president  of  this  Section  at  the  beginning  of  '94  was  one  Rocher,
perhaps  the  sapper  who  carried  Marat  in  triumph  {vid.  supr. ,  iii.  46,  and  Campardon,
i.  38  note).  But  I  have  been  unable  to  trace  any  person  taking  the  name  of
'  Mutius  Scaevola.*]


RUSHING  DOWN  113

French  National  head  has  in  it  comes  out :  if  not  a  great  result,
surely  one  of  the  strangest.

Neither  shall  the  Reader  fancy  that  it  was  all  black,  this
Reign  of  Terror :  far  from  it.  How  many  hammermen  and
squaremen,  bakers  and  brewers,  washers  and  wringers,  over  this
France,  must  ply  their  old  daily  work,  let  the  Government  be
one  of  Terror  or  one  of  Joy !  In  this  Paris  there  are  Twenty-
three  Theatres  nightly ;  some  count  as  many  as  Sixty  Places  of
Dancing.  1  The  Play-wright  manufactures, — pieces  of  a  strictly
Republican  character.^  Ever  fresh  Novel-garbage,  as  of  old,
fodders  the  Circulating  Libraries.^  The  'Cesspool  of  Agio,'  now
in  a  time  of  Paper  Money,  works  with  a  vivacity  unexampled,
unimagined  ;  exhales  from  itself  '  sudden  fortunes,'  like  Aladdin-
Palaces  :  *  really  a  kind  of  miraculous  Fata-Morganas,  since  you
can  live  in  them,  for  a  time.  Terror  is  as  a  sable  ground,  on
which  the  most  variegated  of  scenes  paints  itself.  In  startling
transitions,  in  colours  all  intensated,  the  sublime,  the  ludicrous,
the  horrible  succeed  one  another  ;  or  rather,  in  crowding  tumult,
accompany  one  another.

Here,  accordingly,  if  anywhere,  the  '  hundred  tongues,'  which

^  Mercier,  ii.  124.

2  [Abundant  evidence  is  at  hand  of  the  extreme  dulness  of  these  '  Republican '
pieces  at  the  theatres,  which  were  under  the  strict  surveillance  of  the  Comiti  de
Salut  Public  and  naturally  fell  to  CoUot's  imagination  to  regulate.  One  Agent
National,  who  seems  to  have  possessed  a  sense  of  humour  rare  in  his  kind,  writes
to  the  Committee  that  he  thinks  it  a  pity  to  substitute  Citoyen  and  Citoyenne
for  Monsieur  and  Madame  in  all  pieces,  and  also  to  decorate  Jupiter  or  Armida
with  the  tricolor  cockade  (May  3rd  '94 ;  Schmidt,  ii.  203).  Perri^re  in  Sept.
'93  finds  all  the  big  theatres  except  that  of  the  Ripublique  to  be  anti-Revolu-
tionary— the  Feydeau  and  the  Franfais  the  worst.  The  TMdtre  Franfais  was
accordingly  closed  on  Sept.  3rd,  the  author  of  the  piece  then  being  played
(Pamela)  and  all  the  actors  arrested,  and  free  weekly  performances  of  Republican
tragedies,  such  as  'Brutus,' '  William  Tell '  and  '  Caius  Gracchus,'  ordered  (Aulard,
Recueil,  vi.  236).

Your  Parisian  will  of  course  dance  and  go  to  the  theatre  if  he  can,  but  Dutard's
evidence  (Schmidt,  ii.  passim)  is  rather  to  the  effect  that  the  respectable  bourgeoisie,
during  the  Terror  and  the  famine,  avoided  all  public  places  of  amusement,  in  the
same  way  as  they  avoided  politics.]

^  Moniteur  of  these  months,  passim.

■*  [The  rage  for  gambling  on  the  Stock  Exchange,  which  had  been  growing  ever
since  the  times  of  Law  and  the  Regent,  probably  reached  its  height  after  Thermidor,
but  we  have  plenty  of  evidence  that  it  was  active  in  '93 — 4,  although  the  Bourse  was
legally  shut ;  also  of  the  existence  of  numberless  small  '  gaming  hells '  which  at-
tracted the  very  poorest  class  ;  see  especially  the  report  of  Latour-Lamontagne  to
Garat,  June  i6th  '93  (Schmidt,  ii.  58).]

VOL.    III.  8


114        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

the  old  Poets  often  clamour  for,  were  of  supreme  service !  In
defect  of  any  such  organ  on  our  part,  let  the  Reader  stir  up
his  own  imaginative  organ :  let  us  snatch  for  him  this  or  the
other  significant  glimpse  of  things,  in  the  fittest  sequence  we
can.

CHAPTER  II

DEATH

In  the  early  days  of  November,  there  is  one  transient  glimpse  of
things  that  is  to  be  noted :  the  last  transit  to  his  long  home  of
Philippe  d' Orleans  ^galite.  Philippe  was  decreed  accused,'
along  with  the  Girondins,  much  to  his  and  their  surprise ;  but
not  tried  along  with  them.  They  are  doomed  and  dead,  some
three  days,  when  Philippe,  after  his  long  half-year  of  durance
at  Marseilles,  arrives  in  Paris.  It  is,  as  we  calculate,  the  third
of  November  1793.

On  which  same  day,  two  notable  Female  Prisoners  are  also  put
in  ward  there :  Dame  Dubarry,  and  Josephine  Beauharnais.^
Dame  whilom  Countess  Dubarry,  Unfortunate-female,  had  re-
turned from  London ;  they  snatched  her,  not  only  as  Ex-harlot
of  a  whilom  Majesty,  and  therefore  suspect ;  but  as  having
'furnished  the  Emigrants  with  money.'  Contemporaneously
with  whom  there  comes  the  wife  Beauharnais,  soon  to  be  the
widow :  she  that  is  Josephine  Tascher  Beauharnais ;  that  shall
be  Josephine  Empress  Buonaparte, — for  a  black  Divineress  of
the  Tropics  prophesied  long  since  that  she  should  be  a  Queen
and  more.  Likewise,  in  the  same  hours,  poor  Adam  Lux,  nigh
turned  in  the  head,  who,  according  to  Forster,  '  has  taken  no  food
these  three  weeks,'  marches  to  the  Guillotine  for  his  Pamphlet  on
Charlotte  Corday  ;  he  '  sprang  to  the  scaffold  ; '  said  '  he  died  for

1  [Madame  Dubarry,  vid.  supr. ,  i,  5.  Josephine  Beauharnais  was  arrested  on  April
20th  '94,  on  presenting  herself  at  her  Section  to  demand  a  passport  to  leave  Paris,  and
released  on  Aug.  6th  (ten  days  after  Thermidor),  at  Mme  de  Fontenay's  intercession.
She  was  confined  at  the  Carmes,  where  Coittant  saw  her  and  said  she  was  much
liked.  (Coittant's  Journal  in  M6m.  sur  les  Prisons,  quoted  in  Dauban,  Prisons,  p.  375 ;
Aubenas,  Hist,  de  Josephine,  Paris,  1857,  i.  241 ;  Fr^d^ric  Masson,  Josephine  de
Beauharnais,  Paris,  1899,  p.  240.)]


DEATH  115

her  with  great  joy.'  ^  Amid  such  fellow-travellers  does  Philippe
arrive.  For,  be  the  month  named  Brumaire  year  2  of  Liberty,
or  November  year  1793  of  Slavery,  the  Guillotine  goes  always.
Guillotine  va  toujours.

Enough,  Philippe's  indictment  is  soon  drawn,^  his  jury  soon
convinced.  He  finds  himself  made  guilty  of  Royalism,  Conspiracy
and  much  else ;  nay,  it  is  a  guilt  in  him  that  he  voted  Louis's
Death,  though  he  answers,  "  I  voted  in  my  soul  and  conscience."
The  doom  he  finds  is  death  forthwith  ;  this  present  sixth  dim  day
of  November  is  the  last  day  that  Philippe  is  to  see.  Philippe,
says  Montgaillard,  thereupon  called  for  breakfast :  sufficiency  of
'  oysters,  two  cutlets,  best  part  of  an  excellent  bottle  of  claret ; '
and  consumed  the  same  with  apparent  relish.  A  Revolutionary
Judge,  or  some  official  Convention  Emissary,  then  arrived,  to
signify  that  he  might  still  do  the  State  some  service  by  revealing
the  truth  about  a  plot  or  two.  Philippe  answered  that,  on  him,
in  the  pass  things  had  come  to,  the  State  had,  he  thought,  small
claim ;  that  nevertheless,  in  the  interest  of  Liberty,  he,  having
still  some  leisure  on  his  hands,  was  willing,  were  a  reasonable
question  asked  him,  to  give  a  reasonable  answer.  And  so,  says
Montgaillard,  he  leant  his  elbow  on  the  mantel-piece,  and  con-
versed in  an  undertone,  with  great  seeming  composure ;  till  the
leisure  was  done,  or  the  Emissary  went  his  ways.^

At  the  door  of  the  Conciergerie,  Philippe's  attitude  was  erect
and  easy,  almost  commanding.  It  is  five  years,  all  but  a  few  days,
since  Philippe,  within  these  same  stone  walls,  stood  up  with  an
air  of  graciosity,  and  asked  King  Louis,  "  Whether  it  was  a  Royal
Session,  then,  or  a  Bed  of  Justice  ? "  O  Heaven  ! — Three  poor
blackguards  were  to  ride  and   die  with  him :    some  say,  they

i[Nov.  4th.]

2[D'Orl6ans  had  been  sent  to  Chateau  d'lf,  at  Marseilles,  on  April  7th  '93  :  he
was  now  transferred  to  the  Conciergerie,  and  brought  before  the  Tribunal  on  Nov,  6th.
He  was  chiefly  incriminated  as  regards  his  relations  with  Dumouriez,  and  as  to  a
journey  to  England  to  see  his  daughter.     (Campardon,  i.  167.)]

^[This  story  occurs  only  in  Montgaillard  (of  contemporary  authorities),  who
says  ' '  he  cannot  give  the  name  of  the  member  of  the  Tribunal  who  received  the
"  last  rtz//j- of  the  Duke  because  (1827)  the  man  is  still  ahve."  Toulongeon  does
not  mention  it,  nor  does  Vautibault  (Les  d'Orl^ans) ;  but  the  story  is  repeated,
apparently  from  Montgaillard,  in  M.  Tournois,  Hist,  de  L.  P.  J.  Due  d'Orl6ans
(Paris,  1842),  vol.  ii.  p.  387.]


116        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

objected  to  such  company,  and  had  to  be  flung  in,  neck  and  heels  ;  ^
but  it  seems  not  true.  Objecting  or  not  objecting,  the  gallows-
vehicle  gets  under  way.  Philippe's  dress  is  remarked  for  its
elegance  ;  green  frock,  waistcoat  of  white  piqu6,  yellow  buckskins,
boots  clear  as  Warren :  his  air,  as  before,  entirely  composed,
impassive,  not  to  say  easy  and  Brummellean-polite.  Through
street  after  street ;  slowly,  amid  execrations ; — past  the  Palais
I^galite,  whilom  Palais  Royal !  The  cruel  Populace  stopped  him
there,  some  minutes :  Dame  de  Buffon,  it  is  said,  looked  out  on
him,  in  Jezebel  headtire ;  along  the  ashlar  Wall  there  ran  these
words  in  huge  tricolor  print,  Republic  one  and  indivisible  ;
Liberty,  Equality,  Fraternity  or  Death  :  National  Froperty,
Philippe's  eyes  flashed  hellfire,  one  instant ;  but  the  next  instant
it  was  gone,  and  he  sat  impassive,  Brummellean-polite.  On  the
scaffold,  Samson  was  for  drawing  off"  his  boots :  "  Tush,"  said
Philippe,  'Hhey  will  come  better  off"  after ;  let  us  have  done,
d&pechons-nous .' "  ^

So  Philippe  was  not  without  virtue,  then  ?  God  forbid  that
there  should  be  any  living  man  without  it !  He  had  the  virtue
to  keep  living  for  five-and-forty  years  ; — other  virtues  perhaps
more  than  we  know  of.  But  probably  no  mortal  ever  had  such
things  recorded  of  him :  such  facts,  and  also  such  lies.  For  he
was  a  Jacobin  Piince  of  the  Blood ;  consider  what  a  combination  !
Also,  unlike  any  Nero,  any  Borgia,  he  lived  in  the  Age  of
Pamphlets.  Enough  for  us :  Chaos  has  reabsorbed  him ;  may
it  late  or  never  bear  his  like  again! — Brave  young  Orleans
^galite,  deprived  of  all,  only  not  deprived  of  himself,  is  gone

1  Forster,  ii.  628  ;  Montgaillard,  iv.  141-57.  [Carlyle  quotes  Forster  in  the  Leip-
zig edition  1829.  "The  three  poor  blackguards"  were  the  Deputy  Coustard,  a
nobleman  called  Laroque,  Pierre  Gondier  a  stockbroker,  and  Anioine  Brousse  a
locksmith  (really  four).  According  to  Montgaillard  it  was  the  last  who  objected  to
go  in  the  same  cart  with  the  infdme  sceUrat  d' Orleans.  D'Orl^ans  certainly
confessed  to  the  Abb6  Lothringer,  and  confessed  especially  the  sin  of  having  helped
to  the  King's  death.  [See  the  letter  written  by  the  Abb6  quoted  in  Cam  pardon,  i.
168  note. )

According  to  Dauban  (who  however  does  not  give  his  authority,  Paris  en  1793,
p.  501)  it  was  Laroque  who  declared  it  humiliated  him  to  go  to  death  in  the  same
cart  with  d'Orl6ans.  Forster  calls  the  fellow  prisoners  a  '  couple  of  labouring  men  '
and  only  says  they  jeered  d'Orl^ans  on  his  arrival  at  the  scaffold  (in  loc,  cif.).^

2  [This  part  of  the  story  is  confirmed  by  Gazeau  de  Vautibault,  Les  d'Orl^ans
(Paris,  1889),  p.  88.]


DEATH  117

to  Coire  in  the  Grisons,  under  the  name  of  Corby,  to  teach
Mathematics.  The  Egalite  Family  is  at  the  darkest  depths  of
the  Nadir.

A  far  nobler  Victim  follows ;  one  who  will  claim  remembrance
from  several  centuries:  Jeanne-Marie  Phlipon,  the  Wife  of  Ro-
land.i  Queenly,  sublime  in  her  uncomplaining  sorrow,  seemed
she  to  RioufFe  in  her  Prison.  '  Something  more  than  is  usually
'found  in  the  looks  of  women  painted  itself,'  says  Riouife,^  'in
*  those  large  black  eyes  of  hers,  full  of  expression  and  sweetness.
'  She  spoke  to  me  often,  at  the  Grate :  we  were  all  attentive
'round  her,  in  a  sort  of  admiration  and  astonishment;  she
'expressed  herself  with  a  purity,  with  a  harmony  and  prosody
'  that  made  her  language  like  music,  of  which  the  ear  could  never
'have  enough.  Her  conversation  was  serious,  not  cold  ;  coming
'  from  the  mouth  of  a  beautiful  woman,  it  was  frank  and  courage-
'ous  as  that  of  a  great  man.'  'And  yet  her  maid  said  :  "Before
'  you,  she  collects  her  strength ;  but  in  her  own  room,  she  will
'  sit  three  hours  sometimes  leaning  on  the  window,  and  weeping."'
She  has  been  in  Prison,  liberated  once,  but  recaptured  the  same
hour,  ever  since  the  first  of  June :  in  agitation  and  uncertainty ;
which  has  gradually  settled  down  into  the  last  stern  certainty,
that  of  death.  in  the  Abbaye  Prison,  she  occupied  Charlotte
Corday's  apartment.  Here  in  the  Conciergerie,  she  speaks  with
RioufFe,  with  Ex- Minister  Claviere  ;  calls  the  beheaded  Twenty-
two  '' Nos  amis,  our  Friends," — whom  we  are  soon  to  follow.
During  these  five  months,  those  Memoirs  of  hers  were  written,
which  all  the  world  still  reads.

;  •  But  now,  on  the  8th  of  November,  '  clad  in  white,'  says  Riouffe,
'  with  her  long  black  hair  hanging  down  to  her  girdle,'  she  is
gone  to  the  Judgment-bar.  She  returned  with  a  quick  step ;
lifted  her  finger,  to  signify  to  us  that  she  was  doomed :  her  eyes
seemed  to  have  been  wet.    Fouquier-Tinville's  questions  had  been

1  [For  my  judgment  on  Mme  Roland  v/d.  snpr. ,  i.  406 .  She  was  transferred  to
the  Concicrgetic  on  Nov.  ist ;  she  was  twice  interrogated  before  her  trial  and  con-
demned on  the  usual  charge  of  complicity  with  the  deputies  at  Caen.  ( Dauban,  Etude,
239 -f^^-)]

2  M^moires  (Sur  les  Prisons,  i.),  pp.  55-7.


118        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

'  brutal ; '  offended  female  honour  ^  flung  them  back  on  him,  with
scorn,  not  without  tears.  And  now,  short  preparation  soon  done,
she  too  shall  go  her  last  road.  There  went  with  her  a  certain
Lamarche,  '  Director  of  Assignat-printing  ; '  whose  dejection  she
endeavoured  to  cheer.  Arrived  at  the  foot  of  the  scaffold,  she
asked  for  pen  and  paper,  "to  write  the  strange  thoughts  that
were  rising  in  her :  "  ^  a  remarkable  request ;  which  was  refused.
Looking  at  the  Statue  of  Liberty  which  stands  there,  she  says
bitterly :  "  O  Liberty,  what  things  are  done  in  thy  name  ! "
For  Lamarche's  sake,^  she  will  die  first ;  show  him  how  easy
it  is  to  die  :  "  Contrary  to  the  order,"  said  Samson. — "  Pshaw,
you  cannot  refuse  the  last  request  of  a  Lady ; "  and  Samson
3delded.

Noble  white  Vision,  with  its  high  queenly  face,  its  soft  proud
eyes,  long  black  hair  flowing  down  to  the  girdle  ;  and  as  brave  a
heart  as  ever  beat  in  woman's  bosom !  Like  a  white  Grecian
Statue,  serenely  complete,  she  shines  in  that  black  wreck  of
things ; — long  memorable.  Honour  to  great  Nature  who,  in
Paris  City,  in  the  Era  of  Noble-Sentiment  and  Pompadourism,
can  make  a  Jeanne  Phlipon,  and  nourish  her  to  clear  perennial
Womanhood,  though  but  on  Logics,  Encyclopedies,  and  the  Gospel
according  to  Jean- Jacques  !  Biography  will  long  remember  that
trait  of  asking  for  a  pen  "  to  write  the  strange  thoughts  that  were
rising  in  her."  It  is  as  a  little  light-beam,  shedding  softness,
and  a  kind  of  sacredness,  over  all  that  preceded :  so  in  her  too
there  was  an  Unnameable ;  she  too  was  a  Daughter  of  the
Infinite ;  there  were  mysteries  which  Philosophism  had  not
dreamt  of ! — She  left  long  written  counsels  to  her  little  Girl ;
she  said  her  Husband  would  not  survive  her.

1  [The  reference  to  '  offended  female  honour '  refers  to  some  question  asked  her
by  David,  at  the  Tribunal,  with  reference  to  her  private  relations  with  some  of  the
incriminated  deputies  :  she  avoided  a  direct  answer,  and  merely  said  she  had  known
them  with  her  husband  and  through  her  husband.  Her  first  interrogatory  was  on
Nov.  ist,  her  second  on  3rd;  her  trial  was  on  8th.     (Campardon,  i.  191,  sqq.)]

2M6moires  de  Madame  Roland  (Introd.),  i.  68.

3  [Simon  Fran9ois  Lamarche,  Director- General  oi  Assignats.  Dauban  (244)
calls  him  Lamarque.  He  was  condemned  for  the  "conspiracy  of  Aug.  loth."
Both  Campardon  and  Dauban  say  just  the  reverse  about  the  order  of  dying — to
soothe  Lamarche  she  let  him  die  first.     (Campardon,  i.  174  ;  Dauban,  242.)]


DEATH  119

Still  crueller  was  the  fate  of  poor  Bailly,^  First  National  Presi-
dent, First  Mayor  of  Paris :  doomed  now  for  Royalism,  Fayettism  ;
for  that  Red-flag  Business  of  the  Champ-de-Mars  ; — one  may  say
in  general,  for  leaving  his  astronomy  to  meddle  with  Revolution.
It  is  the  10th  of  November  1793,  a  cold  bitter  drizzling  rain,  as
poor  Bailly  is  led  through  the  streets  ;  howling  Populace  covering
him  with  curses,  with  mud ;  waving  over  his  face  a  burning  or
smoking  mockery  of  a  Red  Flag.  Silent,  unpitied,  sits  the  inno-
cent old  man.  Slow  faring  through  the  sleety  drizzle,  they  have
got  to  the  Champ-de-Mars :  Not  there!  vociferates  the  cursing
Populace ;  such  Blood  ought  not  to  stain  an  Altar  of  the  Father-
land :  not  there  ;  but  on  that  dung-heap  by  the  River-side  !  So
vociferates  the  cursing  Populace  ;  Officiality  gives  ear  to  them.
The  Guillotine  is  taken  down,  though  with  hands  numbed  by  the
sleety  drizzle  ;  is  carried  to  the  River-side  ;  is  there  set  up  again,
with  slow  numbness ;  pulse  after  pulse  still  counting  itself  out  in
the  old  man's  weary  heart.  For  hours  long ;  amid  curses  and
bitter  frost-rain  !  "  Bailly,  thou  tremblest,"  said  one.  "  Man
ami,  it  is  for  cold,"  said  Bailly,  "cest  de  froid."  Crueller  end
had  no  mortal.  2

Some  days  afterwards,  Roland,  hearing  the  news  of  what  hap-
pened on  the  8th,  embraces  his  kind  Friends  at  Rouen,  leaves
their  kind  house  which  had  given  him  refuge ;  goes  forth,  with
farewell  too  sad  for  tears.  On  the  morrow  morning,  l6th  of
the  month,  'some  four  leagues  from  Rouen,  Paris-ward,  near
'  Bourg-Baudoin,  in  M.  Normand's  Avenue,'  there  is  seen  sitting
leant  against  a  tree  the  figure  of  a  rigorous  wrinkled  man ;  stiff
now  in  the  rigour  of  death  ;  a  cane-sword  run  through  his  heart ;

i[Nov.  nth.]

2  Vie  de  Bailly  (in  M6m.  i.),  p.  29.  [Campardon  (i.  179)  adds  that  Bailly  was
himself  compelled  to  carry  some  of  the  planks  of  the  scaffold  from  the  Champ-de-
Mars  to  the  dung-heap,  and  that  he  fainted  under  the  heavy  load.

Bailly  had  retired  into  private  life  in  Sept.  '91  and  had  gone  to  live  near  Nantes,
but  after  Aug.  loth  he  wrote  to  a  friend  who  lived  at  Melun  to  ask  whether  he  could
find  him  a  quiet  retreat  there.  This  friend  (M.  Laplace)  offered  to  share  his  house
with  him,  but  just  as  Bailly  arrived  at  Melun  he  was  arrested  by  one  of  those  am-
bulatory '  Revolutionary  Armies,'  which  were  scattering  themselves  over  France,
authorised  or  unauthorised,  in  the  autumn  of  '93.  While  in  prison  he  addressed  an
appeal,  printed  in  the  Appx.  to  the  first  vol.  of  his  M^moires,  /.  5.  Bailly  a  ses
Concitoyetis,  and  also  wrote  the  M^moires  themselves  from  notes  in  his  possession.]


120        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

and  at  his  feet  this  writing  :  '  Whoever  thou  art  that  findest  me
'  lying,  respect  my  remains :  they  are  those  of  a  man  who  con-
'  secrated  all  his  life  to  being  useful ;  and  who  has  died  as  he
'lived,  virtuous  and  honest.'  'Not  fear,  but  indignation,  made
*  me  quit  my  retreat,  on  learning  that  my  Wife  had  been  murdered.
'  I  wished  not  to  remain  longer  on  an  Earth  polluted  with  crimes.'  ^

Barnave's  appearance  at  the  Revolutionary  Tribunal  ^  was  of
the  bravest ;  but  it  could  not  stead  him.  They  have  sent  for  him
from  Grenoble ;  to  pay  the  common  smart.  Vain  is  eloquence,
forensic  or  other,  against  the  dumb  Clotho-shears  of  Tinville.
He  is  still  but  two-and-thirty,  this  Barnave,  and  has  known  such
changes.  Short  while  ago,  we  saw  him  at  the  top  of  Fortune's
wheel,  his  word  a  law  to  all  Patriots :  and  now  surely  he  is  at
the  bottom  of  the  wheel ;  in  stormful  altercation  with  a  Tinville
Tribunal,  which  is  dooming  him  to  die  !  ^  And  Petion,  once  also
of  the  Extreme  Left,  and  named  Petion  Virtue,  where  is  he  ?
Civilly  dead ;  in  the  Caves  of  Saint-Emilion ;  to  be  devoured
of  dogs.  And  Robespierre,  who  rode  along  with  him  on  the
shoulders  of  the  people,  is  in  Committee  of  Salut ;  civilly  alive  :
not  to  live  always.  So  giddy -swift  whirls  and  spins  this  im-
measurable tormentum  of  a  Revolution  :  wild-booming  ;  not  to  be
followed  by  the  eye.  Barnave,  on  the  scaffold,  stamped  with  his
foot ;  ^  and  looking  upwards  was  heard  to  ejaculate,  "  This  then
is  my  reward  }  "

Deputy  Ex-Procureur  Manuel  is  already  gone ;  ^  and  Deputy
Osselin,  famed  also  in  August  and  September,  is  about  to  go  :  ^
and  Rabaut,  discovered  treacherously  between  his  two  walls,^
and  the   Brother  of  Rabaut.^     National    Deputies  not  a  few !

^Mdmoires  de  Madame  Roland  (Introd.),  i-  88.

2  [Nov.  27th.  Barnave  was  tried  vi^ith  Duport-du-Tertre  :  their  trial' lasted  two
days.  Barnave  conducted  his  own  case  with  great  eloquence  ;  he  had  been  under
arrest  at  Grenoble  since  Aug.  31st  '92.]

3  Forster,  ii.  629.  ^  [Nov.  28th.]  ^[Nov.  14th.]
6 [June  26th  ('94).]                     '[Dec.  5th  '93.]

8  [Manuel  was  really  condemned  for  having  behaved  too  humanely  to  the
prisoners  in  the  Temple,  and  especially  to  the  Queen  (Cam pardon,  i.  179,  sqq.).  He
had  resigned  his  seat  in  the  Convention  after  the  King's  death  and  retired  to  Mon-
targis  ;  he  was  only  arrested  on  Nov.  12th.  He  seems  to  have  been  a  strange
mixture  of  violence  and  humanity  ;  a  Septemberer,  he  yet  saved  numerous  friends


DEATH  121

And  Generals :  the  memory  of  General  Custine  cannot  be  de-
fended by  his  Son ;  his  Son  is  already  guillotined.  ^  Custine
the  Ex- Noble  was  replaced  by  Houchard  the  Plebeian  :  ^  he  too
could  not  prosper  in  the  North ;  for  him  too  there  was  no  mercy ;
he  has  perished  ^  in  the  Place  de  la  Revolution,  after  attempting
suicide  in  Prison.  And  Generals  Biron,*  Beauharnais,^  Brunet/
whatsoever  General  prospers  not ;  tough  old  Liickner,  with  his
eyes  grown  rheumy  ;  Alsatian  Westermann,  valiant  and  diligent
in  La  Vendee ;  none  of  them  can,  as  the  Psalmist  sings,  his  soul
from  death  deliver  J

How  busy  are  the  Revolutionary  Committees ;  Sections  with
their  Forty  Halfpence  a-day !  Arrestment  on  arrestment  falls
quick,  continual ;  followed  by  death.     Ex- Minister  Claviere  has

from  the  massacres  ;  but,  when  bribed  to  save  Mme  de  Lamballe,  took  the  bribe
and  did  nothing  to  save  her  (ibid.  184).  Osselin  had  been  one  of  the  judges  of  the
August  Tribunal  QXid.  deputy  for  Paris  to  Convention  :  in  Nov.  '93  he  was  condemned
to  transportation,  but  on  June  26th  '94  guillotined  instead.  Rabaut-Saint-Etienne
and  his  brother  Rabaut-Pommier  had  been  hidden  in  the  Faubourg  Poissonni^re,
in  the  house  of  Madame  Peyssac  (who  with  her  husband  was  executed  for  hiding
them,  June  25th  '94),  but  both  were  discovered  and  sent  to  prison.  But  Rabaut-
Poramier  was  forgotten  in  prison  and  lived  to  sit  in  the  Council  of  500.  (Campardon,
i.  184-199.)]

i[Jan.  3rd  '94.]

2  [Houchard  had  been  the  first  General  to  reassume  the  offensive  against  the
Allies  after  the  failure  of  Custine  to  relieve  Cond6  and  Valenciennes.  Carnot
ordered  him  to  fight  a  battle  to  deliver  Dunkirk  :  but  he  advanced  somewhat  tenta-
tively, and  the  victory  of  Hondschoote,  Sept.  6th— 8th,  is  attributed  not  so  much  to
the  General  as  to  his  lieutenants,  Jourdan  and  Vandamme,  and  to  the  lucky  sortie
of  the  garrison  of  Dunkirk  directed  by  Hoche.  Moreover  Houchard  omitted  to
follow  up  his  success  ;  and,  though  he  beat  the  Dutch  troops  a  few  days  afterwards
at  Menin,  he  was  unable  to  prevent  Coburg  from  taking  Quesnoy  (Sept.  nth).
Houchard  was  immediately  deprived  of  his  command  (which  was  given  to  Jourdan,
Sept.  22nd),  and  accused  of  treason  by  Robespierre  at  the  Jacobins,  in  a  speech
which  was  a  mere  tissue  of  lies.  Houchard's  condemnation  was  perhaps  as  in-
famous as  any  act  of  the  Tribunal  Rdvolutionnaire  ;  he  was  guillotined  Nov.  17th.
(See  Carnot's  Corresp.  iii.  199  ;  vid.  infr.,  iii.  153,  for  Hondschoote).]

3  [Nov.  17th  '93.]

^[The  Due  de  Biron,  born  1747,  entered  the  army  at  the  age  of  14  and  rose
steadily,  was  deputy  to  States-General  for  the  Noblesse  of  Quercy,  commanded  Army
of  Rhine,  July  '92  ;  of  Italy,  Dec.  '92  ;  of  Rochelle,  May  '93  ;  arrested  June  i6th  '93  ;
guillotined  Dec,  31st  '93.  He  was  one  of  the  very  few  leading  soldiers  who  heartily
accepted  the  Republic ;  Carnot's  early  letters  cannot  praise  his  patriotism  enough.]

^  [The  Vicomte  de  Beauharnais,  born  in  Martinique  1760,  deputy  to  States-General
for  Nobless,'  of  Blois  ;  General  of  Division,  March  '93 ;  guillotined,  July  23rd  '94.]

^[Brunet,  an  artillery  officer  in  the  old  army  on  the  retired  list,  rejoined  Sept.  '92  ;
General  of  Army  of  Italy,  April  25th  '93  ;  arrested  Sept.  loth  ;  guillotined  Nov.  14th

'93-]

'[Luckner,  vid.  supr.,  ii,  2  ;  Westermann,  vid.  supr.,  ii.  251.]


122        THE  FEENCH  EEVOLUTION

killed  himself  in  Prison. ^  Ex-Minister  Lebrun,  seized  in  a  hay-
loft,2  under  the  disguise  of  a  working  man,  is  instantly  conducted
to  death. 3  Nay,  withal,  is  it  not  what  Barrere  calls  'coining
money  on  the  Place  de  la  Revolution  ? '  For  always  the  '  pro-
perty of  the  guilty,  if  property  he  have,'  is  confiscated.  To
avoid  accidents,  we  even  make  a  Law  that  suicide  shall  not
defraud  us !  that  a  criminal  who  kills  himself  does  not  the  less
incur  forfeiture  of  goods.  Let  the  guilty  tremble,  therefore,  and
the  suspect,  and  the  rich,  and  in  a  word  all  manner  of  Culottic
men !  Luxembourg  Palace,  once  Monsieur's,  has  become  a  huge
loathsome  Prison  ;  Chantilly  Palace  too,  once  Conde's : — And
their  Landlords  are  at  Blankenberg,  on  the  wrong  side  of  the
Rhine.  In  Paris  are  now  some  Twelve  Prisons ;  *  in  France  some
Forty-four  Thousand :  thitherward,  thick  as  brown  leaves  in
Autumn,  rustle  and  travel  the  suspect ;  shaken  down  by  Revolu-
tionary Committees,  they  are  swept  thitherward,  as  into  their
storehouse, — to  be  consumed  by  Samson  and  Tinville.  'The
Guillotine  goes  not  ill,  La  Guillotine  ne  va  pas  mal.'

CHAPTER  III

DESTRUCTION

The  suspect  may  well  tremble ;  but  how  much  more  the  open
rebels  ; — the  Girondin  Cities  of  the  South  !  Revolutionary  Army
is  gone  forth,  under  Ronsin  the  Playwright ;  ^  six  thousand  strong ;

1  [Dec.  8th.]  2  [Dec.  26th.]

^Moniteur,  ii,  30  D^cembre  1793;  Louvet,  p.  287.

^[On  the  Prisons,  vid.  supr.,  ii.  291.]

5 [Ronsin,  one  of  the  worst  of  Hubert's  satelUtes,  had  been  a  private  in  the  old
army,  then  a  poetaster  and  dramatic  author :  he  served  in  the  Ministry  of  War  for
a  short  time,  and  re-entered  the  army  in  1793.  When  made  General  of  the  Revolu-
tionary Army  [vid.  supr. ,  iii.  95)  in  Sept.  '93  he  took  a  part  of  it  to  La  Vendue,  where
he  played  into  the  hands  of  Rossignol  {vid.  supr. ,  ii.  290).  He  was  guillotined  March
24th  '94.  Ph^lippeaux,  the  Representant  en  mission  in  La  Vendue,  never  ceased
denouncing  the  luxury,  corruption  and  brutality  of  the  Paris  battalions  {i.e.,  of  the
Revolutionary  Army)  employed  under  Rossignol ;  as  early  as  July  31st  he  contrasts
their  behaviour  with  that  of  the  milder  Vend^ans  (Aulard,  v.  432).  At  the  end  of  Aug.
Bourdon  de  I'Oise  suspended  Rossignol  for  various  acts  of  theft  from  his  lodgings,
and  for  arrant  cowardice  in  the  field  ;  but  he  was  defended  by  Tallien  in  the  Con-
vention, and  reinstated.  On  Jan.  7th  '94  Ph^lippeaux  again  denounced  Rossignol
and  Ronsin ;  but  covertly  alluded  to  the  fact  that  CoUot  and  Billaud  were  pro-
tecting them  {ibid.  x.  106,  221).]


DESTRUCTION  123

'in  red  nightcap,  in  tricolor  waistcoat,  in  black-shag  trousers,
'black-shag  spencer,  with  enormous  moustachioes,  enormous
'  sabre, — in  carmagnole  complete  ;  '  ^  and  has  portable  guillotines.
Representative  Carrier  has  got  to  Nantes,  by  the  edge  of  blaz-
ing La  Vendee,  which  Rossignol  has  literally  set  on  fire :  Carrier
will  try  what  captives  you  make ;  what  accomplices  they  have.
Royalist  or  Girondin :  his  guillotine  goes  always,  va  toujours ;
and  his  wool-capped  'Company  of  Marat.'  Little  children  are
guillotined,  and  aged  men.  Swift  as  the  machine  is,  it  will  not
serve ;  the  Headsman  and  all  his  valets  sink,  worn  down  with
work ;  declare  that  the  human  muscle?;  can  no  more.^  Where-
upon you  must  try  fusillading ;  to  which  perhaps  still  frightfuUer
methods  may  succeed.

In  Brest,  to  like  purpose,  rules  Jean- Bon  Saint- Andre ;  with
an  Army  of  Red  Nightcaps.  In  Bourdeaux  rules  Tallien,  with
his  Isabeau  and  henchmen  ;  Guadets,  Cussys,  Salleses,  many  fall ;
the  bloody  Pike  and  Nightcap  bearing  supreme  sway  ;  the  Guillo-
tine coining  money.  Bristly  fox-haired  Tallien,  once  Able  Editor,
still  young  in  years,  is  now  become  most  gloomy,  potent ;  a  Pluto
on  Earth,  and  has  the  keys  of  Tartarus.  One  remarks,  however,
that  a  certain  Senhorina  Cabarus,^  or  call  her  rather  Senhora  and

iSee  Louvet,  p.  301.  [The  Carmagnole  is  a  Southern  name  for  a  particular
kind  of  long  waistcoat,  such  as  that  worn  by  the  Marseillais  Fidiris  in  Aug.  '92.
The  song  beginning  '  Madame  Veto  avait  promis  de  faire  dgorger  tout  Paris  '  got
the  name  Carmagnole  from  the  circumstances  and  date  (Aug.  loth)  in  which  it
was  composed ;  and  the  dance  got  the  name  from  the  song.  Louvet  uses  the  phrase
in  the  passage  cited  to  describe  the  disgfuise  in  which  he  made  his  escape  from
Charenton,  on  Feb.  7th  '94,  adding  that  it  was  the  'costume  of  all  good  patriots
of  the  time. ']

2  Deux  Amis,  xii.  249-51.  [Carrier  was  sent  to  Nantes  Sept.  29th.  His  pro-
consulate has  attained  a  fame  above  that  of  all  the  others  not  only  on  account  of
his  own  trial,  but  of  that  of  the  remnants  of  the  132  Nantese  whom  he  sent  in
January  '94  to  Paris  to  be  tried,  and  whose  trial  began  in  the  first  tide  of  reaction
in  the  following  September.  There  all  the  facts  about  Carrier  came  out :  the  history
of  no  other  proconsulate  was  ever  quite  so  fully  disclosed.  The  order  constituting
the  '  Company  of  Marat '  and  defining  its  duties  is  printed  in  Campardon  (ii.  50).
It  is  dated  Oct.  28th  '93,  and  signed  '  Francastel  and  Carrier.']

3  [Tallien  had  been  sent  to  Bordeaux  in  Sept.  '93.  Th^r^se  de  Cabarrus,  born
at  Saragossa  1775,  was  the  daughter  of  the  Spanish  Minister  of  Finance,  and  had
married  at  sixteen  the  Marquis  de  Fontenay.  She  was  arrested  at  Bordeaux ,  to-
gether with  her  husband,  on  her  way  to  Spain  ;  Tallien  allowed  Fontenay  to  escape
on  condition  of  Theresa  becoming  his  mistress.  Her  return  with  him  to  Paris
excited  Robespierre's  suspicion.  She  was  arrested  again  in  Paris,  March  22nd  '94,
and  no  one  owed  her  deliverance  to  the  Revolution  of  Thermidor  so  completely  as


124        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

wedded  not  yet  widowed  Dame  de  Fontenai,  brown  beautiful
woman,  daughter  of  Cabarus  the  Spanish  Merchant, — has  softened
the  red  bristly  countenance ;  pleading  for  herself  and  friends ;
and  prevailing.  The  keys  of  Tartarus,  or  any  kind  of  power,
are  something  to  a  woman  ;  gloomy  Pluto  himself  is  not  insensible
to  love.  Like  a  new  Proserpine,  she,  by  this  red  gloomy  Dis,  is
gathered ;  and,  they  say,  softens  his  stone  heart  a  little.

Maignet,^  at  Orange  in  the  South ;  Lebon,  at  Arras  in  the
North,  become  world's  wonders.  Jacobin  Popular  Tribunal,
with  its  National  Representative,  perhaps  where  Girondin  Popular
Tribunal  had  lately  been,  rises  here  and  rises  there  ;  wheresoever
needed.  Fouches,  Maignets,  Barrases,  Frerons  scour  the  Southern
Departments ;  like  reapers,  with  their  guillotine-sickle.  Many
are  the  labourers,  great  is  the  harvest.  By  the  hundred  and  the
thousand,  men's  lives  are  cropt ;  cast  like  brands  into  the  burning.

Marseilles  is  taken,  and  put  under  martial  law :  lo,  at  Mar-
seilles, what  one  besmutted  red-bearded  corn-ear  is  this  which
they  cut ; — one  gross  Man,  we  mean,  with  copper-studded  face  ;
plenteous  beard,  or  beard-stubble,  of  a  tile-colour  .'*  By  Nemesis
and  the  Fatal  Sisters,  it  is  Jourdan  Coupe-tete  !  Him  they  have
clutched,  in  these  martial-law  districts ;  him  too,  with  their
'national  razor,'  their  rasoir  national,  they  sternly  shave  away.
Low  now  is  Jourdan  the  Headsman's  own  head ; — low  as  Des-
huttes's  and  Varigny's,  which  he  sent  on  pikes,  in  the  Insurrection
of  Women !  No  more  shall  he,  as  a  copper  Portent,  be  seen
gyrating  through  the  Cities  of  the  South ;  no  more  sit  judging,
with  pipes  and  brandy,  in  the  Ice-tower  of  Avignon.  The  all-
hiding  Earth  has  received  him,  the  bloated  Tilebeard :  may  we

she.  {See  Von  Sybel,  iv.  192-3.)  She  married  Tallien  on  Dec.  26th  '94,  brought  him
four  children,  divorced  him  in  1802  and  married  the  Comte  de  Caraman,  afterwards
Prince  de  Chimay,  in  1805  ;  she  died  1835.  {See  Arsene  Houssaye,  Notre  Dame
de  Thermidor,  Paris  1867.)]

1  [Maignet  '  proconsul '  in  the  Bouches-du-Rh6ne  and  Vaucluse,  had  a  turn  at
Marseilles  before  going  to  Orange  ;  on  Feb.  13th  '94  he  writes  to  apologise  for  the
executions  going  on  so  slowly  (only  13  that  day) ;  but  says  he  has  invented  a  plan
by  which  the  judges  will  be  able  to  condemn  men  in  batches.  '  There  are  only
'  1,500  people  arrested  here  as  yet,  and  in  a  city  of  such  a  size,  there  must  be  more
'jCounter-Revolutionists  than  that ;  and  I  am  going  to  find  them  '  ( Aulard,  Recueil,
xi.  34) :  on  Feb.  28th  he  has  '  finished  off  43  scoundrels  who  have  left  the  Republic
heir  to  30  millions  '  {ibid.  xi.  472).]


DESTRUCTION  125

never  look  upon  his  like  again !  ^ — Jourdan  one  names  ;  the  other
Hundreds  are  not  named.  Alas,  they,  like  confused  faggots,  lie
massed  together  for  us ;  counted  by  the  cart-load :  and  yet  not
an  individual  faggot-twig  of  them  but  had  a  Life  and  History ;
and  was  cut,  not  without  pangs  as  when  a  Kaiser  dies !

Least  of  all  cities  can  Lyons  escape.  Lyons,  which  we  saw  in
dread  sunblaze,  that  Autumn  night  when  the  Powder-tower  sprang
aloft,  was  clearly  verging  towards  a  sad  end.  Inevitable :  what
could  desperate  valour  and  Precy  do ;  Dubois-Crance,'^  deaf  as
Destiny,  stern  as  Doom,  capturing  their  '  redoubts  of  cotton-bags  ; '
hemming  them  in,  ever  closer,  with  his  Artillery-lava  ^  Never
would  that  ci-devant  D'Autichamp  arrive ;  never  any  help  from
Blankenberg.3  The  Lyons  Jacobins  were  hidden  in  cellars ;  the
Girondin  Municipality  waxed  pale,  in  famine,  treason  and  red
fire.  Precy  drew  his  sword,  and  some  Fifteen  Hundred  with
him ;  sprang  to  saddle,  to  cut  their  way  to  Switzerland.**  They
cut  fiercely  ;  and  were  fiercely  cut,  and  cut  down  ;  not  hundreds,
hardly  units  of  them  ever  saw  Switzerland.^  Lyons,  on  the  9th
of  October,  surrenders  at  discretion  ;  it  is  become  a  devoted  Town.

i[May  28th  '94.  Poor  Maignet  was  in  sad  trouble  when  he  found  that  old
Revolution  hero  Jourdan  '  acting  without  orders  at  Avignon  '  and  becoming  a
terror  to  the  country,  and  even  had  to  recommend  his  being  removed  from  the  post
of  Chef  d" Escadron  of  National  Guard  [ibid.  xi.  708  ;  vid.  supr.,  i,  171).  Jourdan
was  sent  to  Paris  and  brought  before  the  Tribunal  Rivolutionnaire ,  May  27th  '94,
and  guillotined  next  day.  ]

2  [Dubois-Cranc^,  who  had  borne  the  brunt  of  the  fighting  before  Lyons,  was  re-
called Oct.  6th  ;  Couthon  arrived  Oct,  3rd.]

^[Blankenberg,  viz.,  the  castle  of  that  name  in  the  Duchy  of  Brunswick,  where
the  Comte  de  Provence  was  then  residing.  Neither  Forneron  nor  Sorel  mentions
Autichamp's  help,  and  Carlyle  takes  it  from  Deux  Amis  (xi.  134),  where  it  is  expressly
said  Autichamp  arrived  in  Switzerland  as  an  agent  of  the  Princes,  to  stir  up  the
Swiss  Government  to  help  Lyons.  Pr^cy  in  a  long  letter  written  just  after  his
escape  does  not  mention  it  [see  Metzger,  Lyon  en  1793  (Lyons,  n.  d.)),  but  Balley-
dier  (Hist,  du  Peuple  de  Lyon  pendant  la  R^v.  (Paris,  1845),  ii.  p.  79)  expressly  says
that,  early  in  Sept. ,  Pr^cy,  seeing  that  the  mod'ere  cause  was  lost,  called  a  council  of
war,  and  presented  to  it  an  agent  of  d'Artois,  who  had  arrived  that  day  (which
day?),  and  who  went  away  again  charged  with  a  particular  mission.]

*[Oct,  9th.  Pr^cy,  thinking  further  defence  hopeless,  as  the  outposts  of  the  de-
fenders were  already  in  the  hands  of  the  Republicans,  cut  his  way  out  with  some
2,000  men,  escaped  to  Piedmont,  and  afterwards  to  England.  He  returned  to
France  1810,  and  commanded  the  Royalist  National  Guard  at  Lyons  1814;  died
1820,]

5  Deux  Amis,  xi.  145.


126        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Abbe  Lamourette,  now  Bishop  Lamourette,i  whilom  Legislator,
he  of  the  old  Baiser-l' Amourette  or  Delilah- Kiss,^  is  seized  here  ;
is  sent  to  Paris  to  be  guillotined :  '  he  made  the  sign  of  the  cross/
they  say,  when  Tinville  intimated  his  death-sentence  to  him  ;  and
died  as  an  eloquent  Constitutional  Bishop.  But  wo  now  to  all
Bishops,  Priests,  Aristocrats  and  Federalists  that  are  in  Lyons !
The  manes  of  Chalier  are  to  be  appeased  ;  the  Republic,  maddened
to  the  Sibylline  pitch,  has  bared  her  right  arm.  Behold !  Re-
presentative Fouche,  it  is  Fouche  of  Nantes,^  a  name  to  become
well  known ;  he  with  a  Patriot  company  goes  duly,  in  wondrous
Procession,  to  raise  the  corpse  of  Chalier.  An  Ass  housed  in
Priest's  cloak,  with  a  mitre  on  his  head,  and  trailing  the  Mass-
Books,  some  say  the  very  Bible,  at  its  tail,  paces  through  Lyons
streets :  escorted  by  multitudinous  Patriotism,  by  clangour  as  of
the  Pit ;  towards  the  grave  of  Martyr  Chalier.  The  body  is  dug
up,  and  burnt :  the  ashes  are  collected  in  an  Urn ;  to  be  worshipped
of  Paris  Patriotism.  The  Holy  Books  were  part  of  the  funeral
pile ;  their  ashes  are  scattered  to  the  wind.  Amid  cries  of
"  Vengeance  !  Vengeance  ! " — which,  writes  Fouche,  shall  be
satisfied.^

Lyons  in  fact  is  a  Town  to  be  abolished  ;  not  Lyons  henceforth,
but  *  Commune  Affranchie,  Township  Freed : '  the  very  name  of  it
shall  perish.^  It  is  to  be  razed,  this  once  great  City,  if  Jacobinism
prophesy  right ;  and  a  Pillar  to  be  erected  on  the  ruins,  with  this
Inscription,  Lyons  rebelled  against  the  Republic ;  Lyons  is  no  more.
Fouche,   Couthon,  Collot,  Convention    Representatives   succeed

^[Jan.  nth.]  2  j^Por  Lamourette,  vid.  supr.,  ii.  157.]

3  [Joseph  Fouche,  born  at  Nantes  1754,  became  an  Oratorian,  but  put  off  his
orders  in  1790,  deputy  for  the  Loire  to  the  Convention,  served  on  various  missions,
but  this  to  Lyons  was  his  most  important  one.  He  seems  to  have  been  driven
into  opposition  to  Robespierre  as  early  as  May  '94.  He  vi^as  excluded  from  the
Jacobins  in  June  ;  thereupon  he  commenced  secretly  to  pull  the  wires  of  the  opposi-
tion, which  resulted  in  Thermidor.  Fouch6's  close  connection  with  Collot  involved
him  in  some  suspicion  in  '94 — 5,  and  he  hardly  resumed  his  public  position  till  he
had  betrayed  Babeuf  to  Barras  in  '97.  He  was  then  sent  as  ambassador  to  the
Cisalpine,  and  to  Holland  ('98—9) ;  and  in  July  '99  became  for  the  first  time  Minister
of  Police,  which  office  he  held  under  every  successive  government  till  1810  (he  was
created  Duke  of  Otranto  in  1809).  Twice  more  in  1815  he  held  the  same  office,  but
only  for  a  short  while  on  each  occasion.  In  1816  he  left  France,  and  died  at
Trieste  1820.]

*  Moniteur  (du  17  Novembre  1793),  &c.  '^[Oct.  12th.]


DESTRUCTION  127

one  another :  there  is  work  for  the  hangman ;  work  for  the
hammerman,  not  in  building.  The  very  Houses  of  Aristocrats,
we  say,  are  doomed.  Paralytic  Couthon,  borne  in  a  chair,  taps
on  the  wall,  with  emblematic  mallet,  saying,  "  La  Loi  tefrappe,
The  Law  strikes  thee  ; "  ^  masons,  with  wedge  and  crowbar,  begin
demolition.  Crash  of  downfal,  dim  ruin  and  dust-clouds  fly  in
the  winter  wind.  Had  Lyons  been  of  soft  stuff,  it  had  all  vanished
in  those  weeks,  and  the  Jacobin  prophecy  had  been  fulfilled.  But
Towns  are  not  built  of  soap-froth ;  Lyons  Town  is  built  of  stone.
Lyons,  though  it  rebelled  against  the  Republic,  is  to  this  day.

Neither  have  the  Lyons  Girondins  all  one  neck,  that  you  could
despatch  it  at  one  swoop.  Revolutionary  Tribunal  here,  and
Military  Commission,  guillotining,  fusillading,  do  what  they  can  :
the  kennels  of  the  Place  des  Terreaux  run  red  ;  mangled  corpses
roll  down  the  Rhone.  CoUot  d'Herbois,  they  say,  was  once
hissed  on  the  Lyons  stage  :  but  with  what  sibilation,  of  world-
catcall  or  hoarse  Tartarean  Trumpet,  will  ye  hiss  him  now,  in
this  his  new  character  of  Convention  Representative, — not  to
be  repeated !  Two  hundred  and  nine  men  are  marched  forth
over  the  River,  to  be  shot  in  mass,  by  musket  and  cannon,  in
the  Promenade  of  the  Brotteaux.  It  is  the  second  ^  of  such  scenes ;
the  first  was  of  some  Seventy.  The  corpses  of  the  first  were
flung  into  the  Rhone,  but  the  Rhone  stranded  some  ;  so  these
now,  of  the  second  lot,  are  to  be  buried  on  land.  Their  one  long
grave  is  dug ;  they  stand  ranked,  by  the  loose  mould -ridge  ;  the
younger  of  them  singing  the  Marseillaise.      Jacobin  National

^  [Couthon  was  scolded  by  the  Comitd  de  Salut  Publiciox  not  being  severe  enough,
and  a  military  commission  of  five  was  appointed  to  judge  the  Lyonnais  (Aulard,
Recueil,  vii.  376).  Fouch6  and  Collot  were  sent  on  Oct.  30th  ;  on  Nov.  23rd  CoUot
writes  to  Robespierre  of  the  awful  difficulty  of  '  regenerating '  Lyons.  He  wishes  to
deport  100,000  individuals  from  it  into  the  Interior  of  France  '  where  they  may  learn
patriotism,'  and  admits  that  no  one  of  his  colleagues  is  bloodthirsty  enough  to
satisfy  him  {ibid.  viii.  668).  Fouch6  however  must  soon  have  given  satisfaction,  for
on  Dec.  20th  he  writes,  apropos  of  the  fall  of  Toulon, '  with  tears  of  joy  in  his  eyes  .  .  .
'  we  have  only  one  method  of  celebrating  the  victory  here,  viz.,  sending  this  evening
'  two  hundred  and  thirteen  rebels  to  be  shot  in  a  batch. '  The  same  day  a  deputation
of  Lyonnais  appeared  at  the  bar  of  the  Convention  to  protest  against  these  cruelties
{ibid.  ix.  556) ;  but  the  Convention  turned  a  deaf  ear,  and  voted  entire  approval  of
Collot  and  Fouchd  The  destruction  of  the  houses  in  the  Place  Bellecour  began
Oct.  26th,  and  cost  400,000  fr.  per  decade. '\

2  [Dec.  5th.]


128        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Guards  give  fire  ;  but  have  again  to  give  fire,  and  again  ;  and  to
take  the  bayonet  and  the  spade,  for  though  the  doomed  all  fall,
they  do  not  all  die  ; — and  it  becomes  a  butchery  too  horrible  for
speech.  So  that  the  very  Nationals,  as  they  fire,  turn  away  their
faces.  Collot,  snatching  the  musket  from  one  such  National,
and  levelling  it  with  unmoved  countenance,  says,  "  It  is  thus  a
Republican  ought  to  fire."

This  is  the  second  Fusillade,  and  happily  the  last  :  it  is  found
too  hideous  ;  even  inconvenient.  There  were  Two-hundred  and
nine  marched  out ;  one  escaped  at  the  end  of  the  Bridge  :  yet
behold,  when  you  count  the  corpses,  they  are  Two-hundred  and
ten.  Rede  us  this  riddle,  O  Collot  ?  After  long  guessing,  it  is
called  to  mind  that  two  individuals,  here  in  the  Brotteaux  ground,
did  attempt  to  leave  the  rank,  protesting  with  agony  that  they
were  not  condemned  men,  that  they  were  Police  Commissaries  :
which  two  we  repulsed,  and  disbelieved,  and  shot  with  the  rest !  ^
Such  is  the  vengeance  of  an  enraged  Republic.  Surely  this,  ac-
cording to  Barrere's  phrase,  is  Justice  "  under  rough  forms,  sous
des  formes  acerbes."  But  the  Republic,  as  Fouche  says,  must
''march  to  Liberty  over  corpses."  Or  again,  as  Barrere  has  it :
"  None  but  the  dead  do  not  come  back,'-^  //  ny  a  que  les  morts  qui
ne  reviennent  pas."  Terror  hovers  far  and  wide  :  'The  Guillotine
goes  not  ill.'

But  before  quitting  those  Southern  regions,  over  which  History
can  cast  only  glances  from  aloft,  she  will  alight  for  a  moment,
and  look  fixedly  at  one  point :  the  Siege  of  Toulon.  Much  batter-
ing and  bombarding,  heating  of  balls  in  furnaces  or  farm-houses,

1  Deux  Amis,  xil.  251-62.  [The  first  fusillade  or  mitrailladc  took  place  Dec.
4th,  when  64  were  killed ;  the  second  Dec.  5th,  when  209  were  killed  ;  the  third
Dec.  8th,  when  68  were  killed.  No  more  dates  are  given,  but  from  Dec.  4th  to
April  '94,  1,682  persons  were  put  to  death  at  Lyons.  (Balleydier,  Hist,  du  peuple
de  Lyon,  vol.  i.  p.  253,  sqq.)\

2  [This  remark  of  Barere  occurs  in  a  speech  of  his  in  the  Convention  on  May
28th  '94.  It  is  not  applied  to  the  victims  of  the  Revolution,  but  to  the  English
soldiers,  whom,  he  says,  Houchard  ought  to  have  exterminated  after  raising  the  siege
of  Dunkirk  ;  '  then  England  would  not  have  come  back  this  year  to  insult  our
'frontiers:  it  is  only  the  dead  who  return  not;  but  Kings  and  their  slaves  are  in-
'  corrigible  and  they  must  disappear'  {i.e.,  presumably  no  prisoners  must  be  made)
'  if  you  wish  a  durable  peace  and  the  maintenance  of  your  liberty,'  {See  1  )isodes  et
Curiosit6s  R6v.  par  L.  Combes,  Paris,  1872.)]


DESTRUCTION  129

serving  of  artillery  well  and  ill,  attacking  of  Ollioules  Passes,
Forts  Malbosquet,  there  has  been  :  as  yet  to  small  purpose.  We
have  had  General  Cartaux  ^  here,  a  whilom  Painter  elevated  in
the  troubles  of  Marseilles  ;  General  Doppet,  a  whilom  Medical
man  elevated  in  the  troubles  of  Piemont,  who,  under  Crance,
took  Lyons,  but  cannot  take  Toulon.  Finally  we  have  General
Dugommier,  a  pupil  of  Washington,  ^  Convention  Repr&sentans
also  we  have  had ;  Barrases,  Salicettis,  Robespierres  the  Younger  :
— also  an  Artillery  Chef  de  brigade,  of  extreme  diligence,  who
often  takes  his  nap  of  sleep  among  the  guns  ;  ^  a  short,  taciturn,
olive-complexioned  young  man,  not  unknown  to  us,  by  name
Buonaparte  ;  one  of  the  best  Artillery-officers  yet  met  with.  And
still  Toulon  is  not  taken.  It  is  the  fourth  month  now ;  De-
cember in  slave-style  ;  Frostarious  or  Frimaire,  in  new-style  :
and  still  their  cursed  Red-Blue  Flag  flies  there.  They  are  pro-
visioned from  the  Sea  ;  they  have  seized  all  heights,  felling
wood,  and  fortifying  themselves  ;  like  the  coney,  they  have
built  their  nest  in  the  rocks.

Meanwhile,  Frostarious  is  not  yet  become  Snorvous  or  Nivose,
when  a  Council  of  W^ar  is  called  ;  Instructions  have  just  arrived
from  Government  and  Sahit  Public.  Camot,  in  Salut  Public,  has
sent  us  a  plan  of  siege  :  on  which  plan  General  Dugommier  has
this  criticism  to  make.  Commissioner  Salicetti  has  that ;  and
criticisms  and  plans  are  very  various  ;  when  that  young  Artillery-
Officer  ventures  to  speak  ;  the  same  whom  we  saw  snatching

^  [Carteaux  had  about  4,000  men  when  he  began  to  advance  against  Toulon  :  he
was  joined  by  another  division  of  the  Army  of  Italy  under  La  Poype,  with  whom
were  Barras  and  Fr^ron  ;  but  nothing  very  serious  could  be  attempted  till  the  fall
of  Lyons  (Oct.  9th) ;  Carteaux  was  then  replaced  by  Doppet,  and  he  by  Dugommier,
who  at  the  time  got  the  principal  credit  of  the  final  success.]

2 [I  can  find  no  reason  for  calling  Dugommier  a  'pupil  of  Washington. '  He
was  born  at  Guadaloupe  1738,  and  served  in  the  Seven  Years'  War,  both  in  Europe
and  West  Indies;  during  the  American  War  he  vainly  solicited  employment,  as  he
had  retired  in  1763  and  was  living  on  his  plantation  in  Guadaloupe.  See  Guadaloupe,
Ses  enfants  c^lebres — Dugommier,  by  Vauchelet  (Montreuil,  1899).]

3  [Napoleon  was  not  Major  (as  Carlyle  several  times  calls  him),  but  Captain
[capitaine  en  premier,  8th  March  '93)  in  the  4th  Regiment  of  Artillery ;  on  Sept.
26th  Saliceti,  one  of  the  Convention  Commissioners  employed  before  Toulon,
writes  that  Citizen  Bonaparte,  capitaine  instruit,  has  been  appointed  to  command
the  Artillery  in  the  place  of  Dommartin  who  had  been  wounded.  Napoleon  was
then  on  his  wav  to  join  the  Army  of  Italy.  (Aulard,  Recueil,  vii.  79.)  He  reached
Toulon  Sept.  i6th.]

VOL.    III.  9


130        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

sleep  among  the  guns,  who  has  emerged  several  times  in  this
History, — the  name  of  him  Napoleon  Buonaparte.  It  is  his
humble  opinion,  for  he  has  been  gliding  about  with  spy-glasses,
with  thoughts.  That  a  certain  Fort  I'Eguillette  can  be  clutched,
as  with  lion-spring,  on  the  sudden  ;  wherefrom,  were  it  once  ours,
the  very  heart  of  Toulon  might  be  battered ;  the  English  Lines
were,  so  to  speak,  turned  inside  out,  and  Hood  and  our  Natural
Enemies  must  next  day  either  put  to  sea,  or  be  burnt  to  ashes.
Commissioners  arch  their  eyebrows,  with  negatory  sniff:  who  is
this  young  gentleman  with  more  wit  than  we  all  ?  Brave  veteran
Dugommier,  however,  thinks  the  idea  worth  a  word  ;  questions
the  young  gentleman  ;  becomes  convinced  ;  and  there  is  for  issue.
Try  it.

On  the  taciturn  bronze -countenance  therefore,  things  being
now  all  ready,  there  sits  a  grimmer  gravity  than  ever,  compressing
a  hotter  central-fire  than  ever.  Yonder,  thou  seest,  is  Fort  I'Eguil-
lette ;  a  desperate  lion-spring,  yet  a  possible  one  ;  this  day  to  be
tried  ! — Tried  it  is  ;  and  found  good.  By  stratagem  and  valour,
stealing  through  ravines,  plunging  fiery  through  the  fire-tempest.
Fort  TEguillette  is  clutched  at,  is  carried  ;  the  smoke  having
cleared,  we  see  the  Tricolor  fly  on  it :  the  bronze-complexioned
young  man  was  right.  Next  morning.  Hood,  finding  the  interior
of  his  lines  exposed,  his  defences  turned  inside  out,  makes  for  his
shipping.  Taking  such  Royalists  as  wished  it  on  board  with  him,
he  weighs  anchor  ;  on  this  1 9th  of  December  1793,  Toulon  is  once
more  the  Republic's  !

Cannonading  has  ceased  at  Toulon  ;  and  now  the  guillotining

and  fusillading  may  begin.     Civil  horrors,  truly  :  but  at  least  that

infamy  of  an  English  domination  is  purged  away.^     Let  there  be

Civic  Feast  universally  over  France  :  so  reports  Barrere,  or  Painter

^  David ;  and  the  Convention  assist  in  a  body.  2     Nay,  it  is  said,

i["  Here  we  are  shooting  rebels  in  force  ...  all  the  naval  officers  have  already
been  shot  .  .  .  the  Republic  shall  be  avenged  in  a  manner  worthy  of  it. "  (The  irony
of  this  phrase  seems  to  be  unconscious  :  see  the  letter  of  the  proconsuls  at  Toulon
to  the  Committee  ;  Aulard,  Recueil,  ix.  559,  Dec.  20th.  A  few  days  later  they  write
'  800  have  already  been  put  to  death  ; '  ibid.  x.  79. )]

2  Moniteur,  1793,  Nos.  loi  (31  Ddcembre),  95,  96,  98,  &c.


DESTRUCTION  131

these  infamous  English  (with  an  attention  rather  to  their  own
interests  than  to  ours)  set  fire  to  our  store-houses,  arsenals,  war-
ships in  Toulon  Harbour,  before  weighing  ;  some  score  of  brave
war-ships,  the  only  ones  we  now  had  !  However,  it  did  not
prosper,  though  the  flame  spread  far  and  high  ;  some  two  ships
were  burned,  not  more ;  the  very  galley-slaves  ran  with  buckets
to  quench.  These  same  proud  Ships,  Ship  I'Dnent  and  the  rest,
have  to  carry  this  same  young  Man  to  Egypt  first :  not  yet  can
they  be  changed  to  ashes,  or  to  Sea-Nymphs ;  not  yet  to  sky-
rockets, O  ship  r  Orient ;  nor  become  the  prey  of  England, —
before  their  time  I  ^

And  so,  over  France  universally,  there  is  Civic  Feast  and  high-
tide  :  and  Toulon  sees  fusillading,  grapeshotting  in  mass,  as  Lyons
saw ;  and  '  death  is  poured  out  in  great  floods,  vomie  d  grands
jiots ;  '  and  Twelve-thousand  Masons  are  requisitioned  from  the
neighbouring  country,  to  raze  Toulon  from  the  face  of  the  Earth.
For  it  is  to  be  razed,  so  reports  Barrere ;  all  but  the  National
Shipping  Establishments ;  and  to  be  called  henceforth,  not
Toulon,  but  Port  of  the  Mountain.  There  in  black  death-cloud  we
must  leave  it ; — hoping  only  that  Toulon  too  is  built  of  stone  ;  that
perhaps  even  Twelve-thousand  Masons  cannot  pull  it  down,  till
the  fit  pass.

One  begins  to  be  sick  of  'death  vomited  in  great  floods.'
Nevertheless,  hearest  thou  not,  O  Reader  (for  the  sound  reaches
through  centuries),  in  the  dead  December  and  January  nights,
over  Nantes  Town, — confused  noises,  as  of  musketry  and  tumult,
as  of  rage  and  lamentation  ;  mingling  with  the  everlasting  moan
of  the  Loire  waters  there  ?  Nantes  Town  is  sunk  in  sleep  ;  but
Representant  Carrier  is  not  sleeping,  the  wool-capped  Company  of
Marat  is  not  sleeping.  Why  unmoors  that  flatbottomed  craft,
that  gabarre ;  about  eleven  at  night ;  with  Ninety  Priests  under
hatches  ?  They  are  going  to  Belle  Isle  ?  In  the  middle  of  the
Loire  stream,  on  signal  given,  the  gabarre  is  scuttled  ;  she  sinks
with  all  her  cargo.     'Sentence  of  Deportation,*  writes  Carrier,

1  ['  They '  (the  English)  on  Dec.  i8th  '  blew  up  the  Th^mistocle,  burnt  nine  and
towed  away  three  ships  of  war,  leaving  15  uninjured  '  (Aulard,  Recueil,  ix.  557).]


132        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

'  was  executed  vertically.'  The  Ninety  Priests,  with  their  gabarre-
coffin,  lie  deep  !  It  is  the  first  of  the  Noyades,  what  we  may  call
Drownages,  of  Carrier  ;  which  have  become  famous  forever.  ^

Guillotining  there  was  at  Nantes,  till  the  Headsman  sank  worn
out :  then  fusillading  '  in  the  Plain  of  Saint-Mauve  ; '  ^  little  chil-
dren fusilladed,  and  women  with  children  at  the  breast ;  children
and  women,  by  the  hundred  and  twenty  ;  and  by  the  five  hundred,
so  hot  is  La  Vendee :  till  the  very  Jacobins  grew  sick,  and  all
but  the  Company  of  Marat  cried.  Hold  !  Wherefore  now  we  have
got  Noyading  ;  and  on  the  ^^th  night  of  Frostarious  year  2,  which
is  14th  of  December  1793,  we  have  a  second  Noyade  ;  consisting
of  'a  Hundred  and  Thirty-eight  persons.'  ^

Or  why  waste  a  gabarre,  sinking  it  with  them  ?  Fling  them
out ;  fling  them  out,  with  their  hands  tied  :  pour  a  continual  hail
of  lead  over  all  the  space,  till  the  last  struggler  of  them  be  sunk  !
Unsound  sleepers  of  Nantes,  and  the  Sea- Villages  thereabouts,
hear  the  musketry  amid  the  night-winds  ;  wonder  what  the
meaning  of  it  is.  And  women  were  in  that  gabarre  ;  whom  the
Red  Nightcaps  were  stripping  naked  ;  who  begged,  in  their
agony,  that  their  smocks  might  not  be  stript  from  them.  And
young  children  were  thrown  in,  their  mothers  vainly  pleading  :
"  Wolflings,"  answered  the  Company  of  Marat,  "  who  would  grow
to  be  wolves."

By  degrees,  daylight  itself  witnesses  Noyades :  women  and
men  are  tied  together,  feet  and  feet,  hands  and  hands  ;  and  flung
in :  ^  this  they  call   Manage  Republicain,  Republican   Marriage.

1  [Carrier's  idea  was  not  original.  Legendre  had  suggested  it  at  the  Jacobin  Club
as  far  back  as  May  '92  ;  see  Bir^,  L6gende  (quoting  journal  of  the  Jacobins  May  15th
'92),  p.  78.  There  seem  to  have  been  many  Noyades— nsn^Wy  at  night — the  first
one,  Nov.  i6th  '93(90  priests) ;  the  second,  Dec.  9th  (58  priests)  ;  the  third,  Dec.  14th
(130  persons) ;  no  exact  dates  are  given  for  the  rest,  but  on  one  occasion  as  many
as  800  were  drowned.    [See  Gu6pin,  Hist,  de  Nantes  (1839),  p.  460  sqq.)

Carrier  in  his  letter  to  the  Comitd  de  Salut  Public,  Nov.  17th,  describing  the  first
Noyade  seems  almost  to  pretend  that  it  was  an  accident.  "  An  event  of  another
kind  has  just  diminished  the  number  of  priests.  .  .  .  Ninety  of  them  were  shut  up
in  a  boat  in  the  Loire,  and  I  have  just  learned  that  they  have  all  been  drowned."
(Aulard,  Recueil,  viii.  505.)]

2  [  Viz. ,  La  Prairie  de  Mauves.  ]

^  Deux  Amis,  xii.  266-72  ;  Moniteur,  du  2  Janvier  1794.

*  [The  evidence  for  this  and  other  horrors  is  given  in  the  trial  of  the  Revolutionary
Committee  of  Nantes.    (Carapardon,  ii.  42,  sqq.)]


DESTEUCTION  133

Cruel  is  the  panther  of  the  woods,  the  she-bear  bereaved  of  her
whelps  :  but  there  is  in  man  a  hatred  crueller  than  that.  Dumb,
out  of  suffering  now,  as  pale  swoln  corpses,  the  victims  tumble
confusedly  seaward  along  the  Loire  stream  ;  the  tide  rolling
them  back  :  clouds  of  ravens  darken  the  River  ;  wolves  prowl  on
the  shoal-places  :  Carrier  writes, '  Quel  torrent  rdvo/utionnaire,  What
a  torrent  of  Revolution  ! '  ^  For  the  man  is  rabid  ;  and  the  Time  is
rabid.  These  are  the  Noyades  of  Carrier ;  twenty  five  by  the  tale,
for  what  is  done  in  darkness  comes  to  be  investigated  in  sun-
light:^ not  to  be  forgotten  for  centuries. — We  will  turn  to  another
aspect  of  the  Consummation  of  Sansculottism  ;  leaving  this  as  the
blackest.

But  indeed  men  are  all  rabid  ;  as  the  Time  is.  Representative
Lebon,  at  Arras,  dashes  his  sword  into  the  blood  flowing  from  the
Guillotine  ;  exclaims,  "  How  I  like  it !  "  Mothers,  they  say,  by
his  order,  have  to  sbind  by  while  the  Guillotine  devours  their
children :  a  band  of  music  is  stationed  near  ;  and,  at  the  fall  of
every  head,  strikes  up  its  ^a-ira.^  In  the  Burgh  of  Bedouin,  in
the  Orange  region,  the  Liberty-tree  has  been  cut  down  overnight.
Representative  Maignet,  at  Orange,  hears  of  it ;  burns  Bedouin
Burgh  to  the  last  dog-hutch ;  guillotines  the  inhabitants,  or
drives  them  into  the  caves  and  hills. '^  Republic  one  and  In-
divisible !  She  is  the  newest  Birth  of  Nature's  waste  inorganic
Deep,  which  men  name  Orcus,  Chaos,  primeval  Night ;  and  knows
one  law,  that   of  self-preservation.      Tigresse  Nationale  :  meddle

1  [The  words  actually  occur  in  a  letter  of  Carrier  to  the  Committee  (Aulard,  ix.
316) :  on  Feb.  8th  '94  the  Committee  became  alarmed  at  Carrier's  methods,  "  which
cause  the  national  authority  not  to  be  loved,"  and  he  was  scolded ;  and,  when  a
little  later  he  maltreated  Robespierre's  pet  spy  Jullien,  his  recall  was  ordered  {ibid.
X.  777),  but  he  did  not  come  :  fresh  hints  against  too  great  severity  were  gently
given  in  March  (xi.  571).]

2  Proems  de  Carrier  (4  tomes,  Paris,  1795).

^  Les  Horreurs  des  Prisons  d' Arras  (Paris,  1823).  [I  have  been  unable  to  identify
any  separate  edition  of  this  work,  but  it  is  printed  in  vol.  ii.  of  M6m.  sur  les  Prisons,
p.  335  sqq.  The  Arras  story  is  by  '  Citoyens  Poirier  and  Mongey  ;  '  Lebon's
massacres  did  not  begin  till  Jan.  '94.  I  do  not  however  find  in  this  pamphlet  the
quotation  Carlyle  gives  about  Lebon  and  his  sword,  which  comes  from  Prudhomme
(vi.  380).  I  suspect  that  Carlyle,  while  working  through  the  M6m.  sur  les  Prisons,
often  touched  them  up  with  a  few  of  Prudhomme' s  least  traceable  but  most  picturesque
lies.]

■*  Montgaillard,  iv.  200.


134        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

not  with  a  whisker  of  her  !     Swift-rending  is  her  stroke  ;  look
what  a  paw  she  spreads  ; — pity  has  not  entered  into  her  heart.

Prudhomme,  the  dull-blustering  Printer  and  Able  Editor,  as
yet  a  Jacobin  Editor,  will  become  a  renegade  one,  and  publish
large  volumes,  on  these  matters.  Crimes  of  the  Revolution  ;  adding
innumerable  lies  withal,  as  if  the  truth  were  not  sufficient.  We,
for  our  part,  find  it  more  edifying  to  know,  one  good  time,  that
this  Republic  and  National  Tigress  is  a  New-Birth  ;  a  Fact  of
Nature  among  Formulas,  in  an  Age  of  Formulas  ;  and  to  look,
oftenest  in  silence,  how  the  so  genuine  Nature-Fact  will  demean
itself  among  these.  For  the  Formulas  are  partly  genuine,  partly
delusive,  supposititious :  we  call  them,  in  the  language  of  meta-
phor, regulated  modelled  shapes  ;  some  of  which  have  bodies  and
life  still  in  them  ;  most  of  which,  according  to  a  German  Writer,
have  only  emptiness,  'glass-eyes  glaring  on  you  with  a  ghastly
'  affectation  of  life,  and  in  their  interior  unclean  accumulation  of
'  beetles  and  spiders  ! '  But  the  Fact,  let  all  men  observe,  is  a
genuine  and  sincere  one ;  the  sincerest  of  Facts ;  terrible  in  its
sincerity,  as  very  Death.  Whatsoever  is  equally  sincere  may
front  it,  and  beard  it ;  but  whatsoever  is  not  ? —


CHAPTER  IV

CARMAGNOLE  COMPLETE

Simultaneously  with  this  Tophet-black  aspect,  there  unfolds  it-
self another  aspect,  which  one  may  call  a  Tophet-red  aspect,  the
Destruction  of  the  Catholic  Religion ;  and  indeed,  for  the  time
being,  of  Religion  itself.  We  saw  Romme's  New  Calendar  estab-
lish its  Tenth  Day  of  Rest ;  and  asked,  what  would  become  of  the
Christian  Sabbath  ?  The  Calendar  is  hardly  a  month  old,  till  all
this  is  set  at  rest.  Very  singular,  as  Mercier  observes  :  last  Corpus-
Christi  Day  1 792,  the  whole  world,  and  Sovereign  Authority  itself,
walked  in  religious  gala,  with  a  quite  devout  air  ; — Butcher  Legen-
dre,  supposed  to  be  irreverent,  was  like  to  be  massacred  in  his  Gig,
as  the  thing  went  by.  A  Gallican  Hierarchy,  and  Church,  and
Church  Formulas  seemed  to  flourish,  a  little  brown-leaved  or  so,


CARMAGNOLE  COMPLETE  135

but  not  browner  than  of  late  years  or  decades  ;  to  flourish  far  and
wide,  in  the  sympathies  of  an  unsophisticated  People ;  defying
Philosophism,  Legislature  and  the  Encyclopedic.  Far  and  wide,
alas,  like  a  brown-leaved  Vallorabrosa  :  which  waits  but  one  whirl-
blast  of  the  November  wind,  and  in  an  hour  stands  bare  !  Since
that  Corpm-Christi  Day,  Brunswick  has  come,  and  the  Emigrants,
and  La  Vendee,  and  eighteen  months  of  Time  :  to  all  flourishing,
especially  to  brown-leaved  flourishing,  there  comes,  were  it  never
so  slovly,  an  end.^

On  the  7th  of  November,  a  certain  Citoyen  Parens,  Curate  of
Boissise-le-Bertrand,  writes  to  the  Convention  that  he  has  all  his
life  been  preaching  a  lie,  and  is  grown  weary  of  doing  it ;  where-
fore he  will  now  lay  down  his  Curacy  and  stipend,  and  begs  that
an  august  Convention  would  give  him  something  else  to  live  upon.
'Mention  honorable,'  shall  we  give  him?  Or  'reference  to  Com-
mittee of  Finances  ? '  Hardly  is  this  got  decided,  when  goose
Gobel,  Constitutional  Bishop  of  Paris,  with  his  Chapter,  with
Municipal  and  Departmental  escort  in  red  nightcaps,  makes  his
appearance,  to  do  as  Parens  has  done.'^  Goose  Gobel  will  now  ac-
knowledge '  no  Religion  but  Liberty ; '  therefore  he  doffs  his
Priest-gear,  and  receives  the  Fraternal  embrace.  To  the  joy  of
Departmental  Momoro,  of  Municipal  Chaumettes  and  Heberts,  of
Vincent  and  the  Revolutionary  Army !  Chaumette  asks.  Ought
there  not,  in  these  circumstances,  to  be  among  our  intercalary
Days  Sans-breeches,  a  Feast  of  Reason  ?  ^  Proper  surely  !  Let
Atheist  Marechal,  Lalande,  and  little  Atheist  Naigeon  rejoice ;  *
let  Clootz,  Speaker  of  Mankind,  present  to  the  Convention  ^  his

1  \Fete-Dieu  was  however  celebrated  in  1793,  and  reverently  by  the  respectable
classes  in  Paris  {see  Dutard  to  Gar  at,  in  Schmidt,  i.  347),  but  there  was  no  official
recognition  of  it,  and  Dutard  writes  on  June  6th  that  the  bourgeoisie  were  very
angry  at  this.  "The  people  will  have  their  religious  festivals:  you  ought  to
make  a  religion  ;  Chaumette  understands  the  value  of  this."  Chaumette  apparently
acted  on  the  hint  in  the  following  November.  ]

2  [Nov.  7th.]

^Moniteur,  Stance  du  17  Brumaire  (7th  November),  1793.

^[For  Marechal,  vid.  supr.,  iii.  85.  Lalande  was  an  astronomer,  rather  mad,
who  is  supposed  to  have  been  in  the  habit  of  eating  live  spiders,  and  a  collaborator
of  Marechal  in  the  '  Dictionnaire  des  Ath^es '.  Naigeon  was  the  editor  of  Diderot's
works  and  author  of  '  La  Th^ologie  portative'  (1768).]

5  [Nov.  17th.]


136        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Evidences  of  the  Mahometan  Religion,'^  a  work  evincing  the  nullity
of  all  Religions/ — with  thanks.  There  shall  be  Universal  Re-
public now,  thinks  Clootz ;  and  '  one  God  only,  Le  Peuple.'

The  French  Nation  is  of  gregarious  imitative  nature  ;  it  needed
but  a  fugle-motion  in  this  matter ;  and  goose  Gobel,  driven  by
Municipality  and  force  of  circumstances,  has  given  one.  What
Cure  will  be  behind  him  of  Boissise  ;  what  Bishop  behind  him  of
Paris  ?  Bishop  Gregoire,  indeed,  courageously  declines ;  to  the
sound  of  "  We  force  no  one  ;  let  Gregoire  consult  his  conscience  ; "
but  Protestant  and  Romish  by  the  hundred  volunteer  and  assent.^
From  far  and  near,  all  through  November  into  December,  till  the
work  is  accomplished,  come  Letters  of  renegation,  come  Curates
who  ^are  learning  to  be  Carpenters,'  Curates  with  their  new-
wedded  Nuns :  has  not  the  day  of  Reason  dawned,  very  swiftly,
and  become  noon  ?  From  sequestered  Townships  come  Addresses,
stating  plainly,  though  in  Patois  dialect.  That  '  they  will  have  no
more  to  do  with  the  black  animal  called  Curay,  animal  noir  appeU
Cur  ay.'  ^

Above  all  things,  there  come  Patriotic  Gifts,  of  Church-furni-
ture. The  remnant  of  bells,  except  for  tocsin,  descend  from  their
belfries,  into  the  National  meltingpot  to  make  cannon.  Censers
and  all  sacred  vessels  are  beaten  broad  ;  of  silver,  they  are  fit  for
the  poverty-stricken  Mint ;  of  pewter,  let  tliem  become  bullets,
to  shoot  the  '  enemies  du  genre  humain.'  Dalmatics  of  plush  make
breeches  for  him  who  had  none  ;  linen  stoles  will  clip  into  shirts
for  the  Defenders  of  the  Country :  old-clothesmen,  Jew  or
Heathen,  drive  the  briskest  trade.  Chalier's  Ass-procession,  at
Lyons,  was  but  a  type  of  what  went  on,  in  those  same  days,  in  all

^  ['  La  Certitude  des  preuves  du  Mahom6tisme '  was  published  in  1780.]
2  [Laloi,  the  President  of  the  Convention  on  the  7th,  gave  a  doubtful  ansvi^er,to  the
Gobel-Chaumette  movement,  but  Thomas  Lindet,  '  Constitutional  Bishop '  of  Evreux
and  two  more  '  Bishops,'  several '  priests '  and  one  Protestant  pastor,  being  members
of  Convention,  at  once  followed  Gobel's  example.  Gregoire  only  entered  while  these
abdications  were  going  on,  and  at  once  spoke  out  {Moniteur  in  loc.  cit.) :  Siey^s
abjured  on  Nov.  loth,  not  his  priestly  office,  for  he  had  given  that  up  long  ago,  but
his  faith  (Dauban,  304).]

^  Analyse  du  Moniteur  (Paris,  1801),  ii.  280.  [This  is  a  wrong  reference,  nor  can
I  find  anywhere  among  the  numerous  petitions  of  Communes,  given  in  the  Moniteur
itself,  anything  of  the  kind.  The  petition  most  likely  to  contain  it  is  that  of  Clamars,
Nov.  18th.]


CAEMAGNOLE  COMPLETE  137

Towiis.  In  all  Towns  and  Townships  as  quick  as  the  guillotine
may  go,  so  quick  goes  the  axe  and  the  wrench  :  sacristies,  lutrins,
altar-rails  are  pulled  down ;  the  Mass- Books  torn  into  cartridge-
papers  :  men  dance  the  Carmagnole  all  night  about  the  bonfire.
All  highways  jingle  with  metallic  Priest- tackle,  beaten  broad  ;
sent  to  the  Convention,  to  the  poverty  stricken  Mint.  Good
Sainte  Genevieve's  ^  Oiasse  is  let  down  :  alas,  to  be  burst  open,  this
time,  and  burnt  on  the  Place  de  Greve.  Saint  Louis's  Shirt  is
burnt ; — might  not  a  Defender  of  the  Country  have  had  it  }  At
Saint-Denis  Town,  no  longer  Saint-Denis  but  Franciade,  Patriot-
ism has  been  down  among  the  Tombs,  rummaging  ;  ^  the  Revolu-
tionary Army  has  taken  spoil.  This,  accordingly,  is  what  the
streets  of  Paris  saw  :

'  Most  of  these  persons  were  still  drunk,  with  the  brandy  they
'  had  swallowed  out  of  chalices  ; — eating  mackerel  on  the  patenas  !
'  Mounted  on  Asses,  which  were  housed  with  Priests'  cloaks,  they
'  reined  them  with  Priests'  stoles ;  they  held  clutched  with  the
'  same  hand  communion-cup  and  sacred  wafer.  They  stopped  at
'  the  doors  of  Dramshops  ;  held  out  ciboriums  :  and  the  landlord,
'stoop  in  hand,  had  to  fill  them  thrice.  Next  came  Mules  high-
'  laden  with  crosses,  chandeliers,  censers,  holy-water  vessels,  hys-
'  sops  ; — recalling  to  mind  the  Priests  of  Cybele,  whose  panniers,
'  filled  with  the  instruments  of  their  worship,  served  at  once  as
'storehouse,  sacristy  and  temple.  In  such  equipage  did  these
'  profaners  advance  towards  the  Convention.  They  enter  there,
'  in  an  immense  train,  ranged  in  two  rows  ;  all  masked  like  mum-
*  mers  in  fantastic  sacerdotal  vestments  ;  bearing  on  hand-barrows
'their  heaped  plunder, — ciboriums,  suns,  candelabras,  plates  of
'gold  and  silver.'  ^

^  [Nov.  7th.  The  Church  of  Sainte-Genevi^ve,  patron  saint  of  Paris,  who  died  in
512,  is  not  to  be  confused  with  the  Abbey  of  Sainte-Genevi^ve  beside  Saint-Etienne
du  Mont ;  it  dated  from  the  12th  century.  Her  relics  were  enclosed  in  a  magnificent
shrine  and  were  now  taken  down  and  burnt  on  the  Place  de  Greve,  the  gold  work
of  the  shrine  melted  down  :  the  church  was  destroyed  in  1807.]

2  [On  Aug.  ist  '93  the  Convention  decreed  the  destruction  of  the  Royal  Tombs  at
Saint- Denis  within  eight  days :  the  bodies  were  to  be  thrown  into  a  common  grave :  on
Oct.  i2th — 25th  the  destruction  was  carried  out  by  a  Paris  mob,  not  without  protest
from  the  inhabitants  of  Saint-Denis  :  Henri  IV. 's  body  was  found  almost  entire,]

3  Mercier,  iv.  134.     See  Moniteur,  Stance  du  10  Novembre.


138        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

The  Address  we  do  not  give ;  for  indeed  it  was  in  strophes,
sung  vivd  voce,  with  all  the  parts  ; — Danton  glooming  considerably,
in  his  place  ;  ^  and  demanding  that  there  be  prose  and  decency  in
future. 2  Nevertheless  the  captors  of  such  spolia  opima  crave,  not
untouched  with  liquor,  permission  to  dance  the  Carmagnole  also
on  the  spot :  whereto  an  exhilarated  Convention  cannot  but  ac-
cede. Nay  '  several  Members,'  continues  the  exaggerative  Mer-
cier,  who  was  not  there  to  witness,  being  in  Limbo  now,  as  one  of
Duperret's  Seventy-three,  'several  Members,  quitting  their  curule
'  chairs,  took  the  hand  of  girls  flaunting  in  Priests'  vestures,  and
*  danced  the  Carmagnole  along  with  them.'  Such  Old-Hallowtide
have  they,  in  this  year,  once  named  of  Grace  1 793.

Out  of  which  strange  fall  of  Formulas,  tumbling  there  in  con-
fused welter,  betrampled  by  the  Patriotic  dance,  is  it  not  passing
strange  to  see  a  new  Formula  arise  ?  For  the  human  tongue  is
not  adequate  to  speak  what  '  triviality  run  distracted '  there  is  in
human  nature.  Black  M  umbo- J  umbo  of  the  woods,  and  most
Indian  Wau-waus,  one  can  understand :  but  this  of  Procureur
Anaxagoras,  whilom  John-Peter,  Chaumette  ?  We  will  say  only  :
Man  is  a  born  idol- worshipper,  A-zgA^  worshipper,  so  sensuous -
imaginative  is  he  ;  and  also  partakes  much  of  the  nature  of  the  ape.

For  the  same  day,^  while  this  brave  Carmagnole-dance  has

1  [Nov.  26th.]

2 See  also  Moniteur,  Stance  du  26  Nov.  [Robespierre  also  'gloomed,'  and  be-
fore Danton,  e.g. ,  in  his  report  on  the  State  of  the  Nation,  Nov.  17th ;  and  at  the
Jacobins  on  Nov.  21st  he  denounced  the  whole  Atheistical  movement.  This  union
of  Danton  and  Robespierre  led  to  the Jirsi  arrest  of  the  H(5bertist  'tail'  (Vincent,
Ronsin,  etc.)  on  Dec.  17th.  But  Robespierre  wavered,  and  CoUot,  returning  from
Lyons  on  Dec.  20th,  made  a  temporary  alliance  with  the  H6bertists  and  procured
their  release  {vid.  infr.  iii.  169).  The  Committee  as  a  whole  were  decidedly  averse
to  the  worship  of  Reason  ;  they  had  subsidised  Phe  Duchesne  (5,400  fr.  a  month),
just  as  they  subsidised  the  Jacobin  Club  (100,000  fr.  a  month),  but  they  prohibited
a  piece  by  Leonard  Bourdon  called  Le  Totnheau  dcs  Itnposteurs,  Dec.  22nd.
(Aulard,  Recueil,  viii.  389,  432;  ix.  582.)]

3  [The  chronology  is  all  wrong :  the  Fete  of  Reason  on  Nov.  loth  preceded  by
16  days  the  protest  of  Danton  against  these  disgraceful  scenes  in  the  Convention  re-
corded above.  The  name  of  the  Goddess  of  Reason  on  loth  is  variously  given  as
Mdlle  Aubry  (Stephens'  Orators,  ii.  267),  Mdlle  Maillard  (Martin,  ii.  150  ;  Dauban,
p.  505),  and  by  Carlyle  here  as  Mdlle  Candeille  ;  Challamel  in  the  '  Dictionnaire  de  la
R6v,'  speaks  (in  two  different  places)  both  of  Mdlle  Aubry  and  Mdlle  Maillard  as
having  been  the  Goddess  of  Reason  on  this  occasion  :  Carlyle's  authority,  Mercier,
was  in  prison  at  the  time.]


CARMAGNOLE  COMPLETE  139

hardly  jigged  itself  out,  there  arrive  Proeureur  Chaumette  and
Municipals  and  Departmentals/  and  with  them  the  strangest
freightage :  a  New  Religion !  Demoiselle  Candeille,  of  the
Opera  ;  a  woman  fair  to  look  upon,  when  well  rouged  ;  she,  borne
on  palanquin  shoulderhigh  ;  with  red  woollen  nightcap  ;  in  azure
mantle ;  garlanded  with  oak  ;  holding  in  her  hand  the  Pike  of
the  Jupiter-Peuple,  sails  in :  heralded  by  white  young  women  girt
in  tricolor.  Let  the  world  consider  it !  This,  O  National  Con-
vention wonder  of  the  universe,  is  our  New  Divinity  ;  Goddess  of
Reason,  worthy,  and  alone  worthy  of  revering.  Her  henceforth  we
adore.  Nay,  were  it  too  much  to  ask  of  an  august  National  Repre-
sentation that  it  also  went  with  us  to  the  ci-devant  Cathedral  called
of  Notre- Dame,  and  executed  a  few  strophes  in  worship  of  her  }

President  and  Secretaries  give  Goddess  Candeille,  borne  at  due
height  round  their  platform,  successively  the  Fraternal  kiss ;
whereupon  she,  by  decree,  sails  to  the  right-hand  of  the  President
and  there  alights.  And  now,  after  due  pause  and  flourishes  of
oratory,  the  Convention,  gathering  its  limbs,  does  get  under  way
in  the  required  procession  towards  Notre-Dame  ;  ^ — Reason,  again
in  her  litter,  sitting  in  the  van  of  them,  borne,  as  one  judges,  by
men  in  the  Roman  costume ;  escorted  by  wind-music,  red  night-
caps, and  the  madness  of  the  world.  And  so,  straightway.  Reason
taking  seat  on  the  high-altar  of  Notre-Dame,  the  requisite  wor-
ship or  quasi-worship  is,  say  the  Newspapers,  executed  ;  National
Convention  chanting  'the  Hymn  to  Liberty ,  words  by  Chenier,^
music  by  Gossec'  It  is  the  first  of  the  Feasts  of  Reason;  first
communion-service  of  the  New  Religion  of  Chaumette.

'The  corresponding  Festival  in  the  Church  of  Saint-Eustache,'

i[Nov.  loth.]

2  [It  was  on  the  motion  of  Thuriot  that  the  Convention  decided  to  go  to  Notre-
Dame  to  chant  the  hymn  :  only  a  few  out  of  the  small  number  of  members  actually
present  went.  Gr^goire  protested  again,  but  there  was  no  debate  in  the  Conven-
tion, Thuriot 's  motion  being  carried  by  acclamation.     (Rev.  de  la  R6v.  vi.  91.)]

^{I.e.,  Marie- Joseph  (not  Andr6)  Ch^nier :  the  words  of  the  hymn  (which  is  a
very  beautiful  one)  are  printed  in  Dauban,  pp.  508-9.     It  begins  :
Descends  6  Libert^  !  fille  de  la  Nature,
Le  peuple  a  reconquis  son  pouvoir  immortel ;
Sur  le  pompeux  debris  de  I'antique  imposture
Ses  mains  relevent  ton  autel.  1


140        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

says  Mercier,  'offered  the  spectacle  of  a  great  tavern.  The
'interior  of  the  choir  represented  a  landscape  decorated  with
'cottages  and  boskets  of  trees.  Round  the  choir  stood  tables
'  overloaded  with  bottles,  with  sausages,  pork-puddings,  pastries
'and  other  meats.  The  guests  flowed  in  and  out  through  all
'  doors :  whosoever  presented  himself  took  part  of  the  good
'things:  children  of  eight,  girls  as  well  as  boys,  put  hand  to
'  plate,  in  sign  of  Liberty ;  they  drank  also  of  the  bottles,  and
'their  prompt  intoxication  created  laughter.  Reason  sat  in
'azure  mantle  aloft,  in  a  serene  manner.  Cannoneers,  pipe  in
'mouth,  serving  her  as  acolytes.  And  out  of  doors,'  continues
the  exaggerative  man,  'were  mad  multitudes  dancing  round
'  the  bonfire  of  Chapel-balustrades,  of  Priests'  and  Canons'  stalls  ;
'and  the  dancers, — I  exaggerate  nothing, — the  dancers  nigh
'  bare  of  breeches,  neck  and  breast  naked,  stockings  down,  went
'  whirling  and  spinning,  like  those  Dust-vortexes,  forerunners  of
'  Tempest  and  Destruction.'  ^  At  Saint-Gervais  Church,  again,
there  was  a  terrible  '  smell  of  herrings  ; '  Section  or  Municipality
having  provided  no  food,  no  condiment,  but  left  it  to  chance.
Other  mysteries,  seemingly  of  a  Cabiric  or  even  Paphian  char-
acter, we  leave  under  the  Veil,  which  appropriately  stretches
itself  '  along  the  pillars  of  the  aisles,' — not  to  be  lifted  aside  by
the  hand  of  History.

But  there  is  one  thing  we  should  like  almost  better  to  under-
stand than  any  other  :  what  Reason  herself  thought  of  it,  all  the
while.  What  articulate  words  poor  Mrs.  Momoro,  for  example,
uttered ;  when  she  had  become  ungoddessed  again,  and  the
Bibliopolist  and  she  sat  quiet  at  home,  at  supper  ?  For  he  was
an  earnest  man.  Bookseller  Momoro ;  and  had  notions  of  Agra-
rian Law.  Mrs.  Momoro,  it  is  admitted,  made  one  of  the  best
Goddesses  of  Reason ;  though  her  teeth  were  a  little  defec-
tive.— And  now  if  the  Reader  will  represent  to  himself  that
such  visible  Adoration  of  Reason  went  on  'all  over  the  Republic,'
through  these  November  and  December  weeks,  till  the  Church
woodwork  was  burnt  out,  and  the  business  otherwise  completed,

^Mercier,  iv.  127-146.     [Mercier  in  prison  at  the  time.]


CAEMAGNOLE  COMPLETE  141

he  will  perhaps  feel  sufficiently  what  an  adoring  Republic  it  was,
and  without  reluctance  quit  this  part  of  the  subject.^

Such  gifts  of  Church-spoil  are  chiefly  the  work  of  the  Armde
RSvolutiojinaire ;  raised,  as  we  said,  some  time  ago.  It  is  an
army  with  portable  guillotine :  commanded  by  Playwright
Ronsin  in  terrible  moustachioes  ;  and  even  by  some  uncertain
shadow  of  Usher  Maillard,  the  old  Bastille  Hero,  Leader  of  the
Menads,  September  Man  in  Gray  !  Clerk  Vincent  of  the  War-
Office,  one  of  Pache's  old  Clerks,  '  with  a  head  heated  by  the
ancient  orators,'  had  a  main  hand  in  the  appointments,  at  least
in  the  staff-appointments.-

But  of  the  marchings  and  retreatings  of  these  Six-thousand  no
Xenophon  exists.  Nothing,  but  an  inarticulate  hum,  of  cursing,
and  sooty  frenzy,  surviving  dubious  in  the  memory  of  ages !
They  scour  the  country  round  Paris  ;  seeking  Prisoners ;  raising
Requisitions ;  seeing  that  Edicts  are  executed,  that  the  Farmers
have  thrashed  sufficiently ;  lowering  Church-bells  or  metallic
Virgins.  Detachments  shoot  forth  dim,  towards  remote  parts  of
France  ;  nay  new  Provincial  Revolutionary  Armies  rise  dim,  here
and  there,  as  Carrier's  Company  of  Marat,  as  Tallien's  Bourdeaux
Troop ;  like  sympathetic  clouds  in  an  atmosphere  all  electric.
Ronsin,  they  say,  admitted,  in  candid  moments,  that  his  troops

^  [The  organisation  of  the  ceremonies  in  honour  of  '  Reason '  was  energetically
pushed  on  by  the  Commune  :  on  Nov.  24th  it  ordered  all  the  churches  of  Paris  to  be
closed,  and  priests  to  be  held  responsible  for  any  troubles  which  might  ensue :  every
one  demanding  the  opening  of  a  church  to  be  treated  as  a  suspect ;  and  a  petition  was
presented  to  the  Convention  to  exclude  all  priests  from  public  functions.  The  Con-
vention took  no  notice  of  this  petition,  and  looked  coldly  on  the  whole  thing ;  yet
within  20  days  2,436  churches  in  France  were  turned  into  'Temples  of  Reason.'
It  depended  on  the  views  of  the  various  Reprisentants  en  mission  whether  or  no  the
people  in  the  provinces  were  forced  to  dance  to  this  tune.  Aulard's  Recueil  teems
with  letters  from  them  on  the  subject,  seldom  answered  by  the  Committee.  {See
also  R^v.  Fr.  xxxi.  9  ;  Rev.  de  la  R6v.  vi.  91,  sqq.)  Among  the  minor  results  of  the
movement  it  is  worth  while  to  notice  the  certificate  of  value  given  by  Hubert  to  the
Christian  Religion  :  '  I  declare, '  said  he,  *  that  in  my  newspaper,  Ptre  Duchesne^  I
'  preach  that  one  ought  to  read  the  Gospel.  This  moi  al  book  appears  to  me  excel-
'  lent,  and  one  must  follow  its  maxims  if  one  is  to  be  a  good  Jacobin.  Christ
*  seems  to  me  to  be  the  founder  of  popular  societies'  (Dec.  nth).  This  was  of  course
a  mere  sop  to  Robespierre  [see  R6v.  Fr.  xxxi.  44-5).  J

2  [We  gather  that  bands  of  ruffians  went  about  France  on  their  own  business,
calling  themselves  Armies  Rivolutiotinaires,  from  the  fact  that  on  Dec.  17th  '93
the  Convention  issued  a  decree  which  disbands  all  such  unauthorised  '  armies  '
under  pain  of  death.]


142        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

were  the  elixir  of  the  RascaUty  of  the  Earth.  One  sees  them
drawn  up  in  market-places ;  travel-splashed,  rough-bearded,  in
carmagnole  complete:  the  first  exploit  is  to  prostrate  what  Royal
or  Ecclesiastical  monument,  crucifix  or  the  like,  there  may  be  :
to  plant  a  cannon  at  the  steeple ;  fetch  down  the  bell  without
climbing  for  it,  bell  and  belfry  together.  This,  however,  it  is
said,  depends  somewhat  on  the  size  of  the  town :  if  the  town
contains  much  population,  and  these  perhaps  of  a  dubious  choleric
aspect,  the  Revolutionary  Army  will  do  its  work  gently,  by  ladder
and  wrench ;  nay  perhaps  will  take  its  billet  without  work  at
all ;  and,  refreshing  itself  with  a  little  liquor  and  sleep,  pass  on
to  the  next  stage. ^  Pipe  in  cheek,  sabre  on  thigh ;  in  Carma-
gnole complete !

Such  things  have  been ;  and  may  again  be.  Charles  Second
sent  out  his  Highland  Host  over  the  Western  Scotch  Whigs ;
Jamaica  Planters  got  Dogs  from  the  Spanish  Main  to  hunt  their
Maroons  with :  France  too  is  bescoured  with  a  Devil's  Pack,  the
baying  of  which,  at  this  distance  of  half  a  century,  still  sounds  in
the  mind's  ear.

1  Deux  Amis,  xii.  62-5.  [E'g-,  at  Auxerre  they  did  nothing  because  one  brave
man  threatened  to  shoot  the  first  man  of  them  '  who  even  frowned. '  (Deux  Amis
in  loc.  cii.)]


[By  a  decree  of  Sept,  i8th  '93  all  the  salaries  of  clergy  above  the  rank  of  Curds
were  reduced  and  called  '  pensions,'  because,  in  the  words  of  Cambon,  it  would  not
do  to  let  them  pose  as  functionaries  of  the  State.  On  Nov.  6th  the  Convention
decreed  that  any  Commune  wishing  to  get  rid  of  its  Curd  might  do  so.  Then  came
the  abdications  described  by  Carlyle  :  on  Nov. nth  the  Convention  voted  pensions
to  all  abdicating  '  priests, '  and  authorised  all  constituted  authorities  to  receive  such
abdications.  This  is  what  M.  Aulard  (R6v.  Fr.  xxx.  492)  calls  ' '  establishing  complete
liberty  of  worship. "  Rather  it  was  a  deliberate  attempt  to  decatholicise  France.
No  law  was  passed  enjoining  the  continuance  of  salaries  to  non-abdicating  '  priests,'
in  spite  of  a  strong  remonstrance  from  Danton  (Nov.  26th,  see  Stephens'  Orators,
ii.  265) :  and  as  the  salaries  were  supposed  to  be  paid  by  the  departmental  authorities
they  were  practically  not  paid  at  all.  Cambon  in  a  speech,  Sept.  i8th  '94,  admits
this  fact,  and  adds  that  most  of  the  churches  were  shut  after  Nov.  '93.  At  that  date
(Sept.  '94)  the  Convention  refused  any  longer  to  recognise  any  form  of  religion,  but
promised  to  pay  pensions  to  all  '  priests,'  abdicated  or  not,  who  had  been  in  service
before  that  date,  and  this  was  confirmed  by  the  law  of  Feb.  21st  '95.

Carnot,  himself  a  fierce  and  rather  gloomy  Republican,  had  long  ago  seen  to
what  all  this  was  tending  ;  he  speaks  on  Jan.  12th  '93  (Corresp.  i.  342)  of  the  new
spirit  '  as  a  new  set  of  prejudices  which  will  soon  take  the  place  of  the  old  ;  one  sees
'citizens  who  pride  themselves  on  their  intolerance  and  sternness,  who  treat  as
*  enemies  of  the  Revolution  all  those  who  find  friendship  or  domesticity  attractive
' .  .  .  who  instruct  their  children  to  judge  of  a  man's  patriotism  only  by  the  terror  he
'  inspires  ...  a  disastrous  impression  which  will  soon  make  the  French  a  nation  of


LIKE  A  THUNDER-CLOUD  143

'  savages.'  The  Ape,  however,  was  never  far  from  the  Tiger  in  the  Revolutionist ;  the
Convention  on  Jan.  14th  '94  had  to  listen  to,  and  make  honourable  mention  of,  a
letter  from  one  Ehrmann  to  the  effect  that  '  he  once  loved  a  young  Republicaness,
'who  married  some  one  else;  and  as  she  didn't  think  it  right  under  the  circum-
'  stances  to  keep  a  watch  and  chain  which  he  had  given  her,  he  begged  to  offer  them
'  as  a  wedding  gift  to  the  most  constant  and  faithful  of  all  mistresses,  the  French
'  Republic'  (Aulard,  Recueil,  x.  251.)  Note  also  the  solemn  execution  by  a  police
commissary  of  the  dog  of  M.  de  Saint-Prix,  a^  an  accomplice  of  his  master,  who
had  been  condemned  for  correspondence  with  Emigres,  Nov.  17th  '93  (Campardon,
i.  186-7).]

CHAPTER  V
LIKE  A  THUNDER-CLOUD
But  the  grand,  and  indeed  substantially  primary  and  generic
aspect  of  the  Consummation  of  Terror  remains  still  to  be  looked
at ;  nay  blinkard  History  has  for  most  part  all  but  oy^rlooked
this  aspect,  the  soul  of  the  whole  ;  that  which  makes  it  terrible
to  the  Enemies  of  France.  Let  Despotism  and  Cimmerian  Coali-
tions consider.  All  French  men  and  French  things  are  in  a
State  of  Requisition ;  Fourteen  Armies  are  got  on  foot ;  Patriot-
ism, with  all  that  it  has  of  faculty  in  heart  or  in  head,  in  soul  or
body  or  breeches-pocket,  is  rushing  to  the  Frontiers,  to  prevail
or  die !  Busy  sits  Camot,  in  Saliit  Public ;  busy,  for  his  share,
in  ^organising  victory.'  Not  swifter  pulses  that  Guillotine,  in
dread  systole-diastole  in  the  Place  de  la  Revolution,  than  smites
the  Sword  of  Patriotism,  smiting  Cimmeria  back  to  its  own
borders,  from  the  sacred  soil.

In  fact,  the  Government  is  what  we  can  call  Revolutionary  ;  and
some  men  are  '  d  la  hauteur^  on  a  level  with  the  circumstances  ;
and  others  are  not  a  la  hauteur, — so  much  the  worse  for  them.
But  the  Anarchy,  we  may  say,  has  organised  itself:  Society  is
literally  overset ;  its  old  forces  working  with  mad  activity,  but
in  the  inverse  order  ;  destructive  and  self-destructive. ^

1  [The  most  potent  agent  of  despotism  and  centralisation  yet  contrived  was  the
celebrated  '  Law  of  the  14th  Frimaire'  (Dec.  4th) :  it  was  the  first  stroke  of  power
of  the  Committee  against  the  Commune.  The  discussion  on  it  had  lasted  since  Bil-
laud's  first  proposal  of  it  on  Nov.  21st,  and  on  Dec.  4th  it  was  carried.

(i.)  It  created  the  Bulletin  des  Lois,  a  daily  publication  which  has  gone  on  ever
since  (the  mere  publication  of  a  law  in  this  Bulletin  now  gives  that  law  validity).

(ii.)  It  created  the  Agents  Nationaux,  as  direct  delegates  of  the  two  great
Committees,  to  replace  the  local  authorities  {Procureurs  and  Conseils  Gdneraux  of
Departments,  which  were  suppressed).

(iii.)  It  put  all  remaining  constituted  authorities  directly  under  the  two  great
Committees,


144        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Curious  to  see  how  all  still  refers  itself  to  some  head  and
fountain ;  not  even  an  Anarchy  but  must  have  a  centre  to  re-
volve round.  It  is  now  some  six  months  since  the  Committee  of
Salut  Public  came  into  existence  ;  some  three  months  since  Danton
proposed  that  all  power  should  be  given  it,  and  '  a  sura  of  fifty
millions/  and  the  '  Government  be  declared  Revolutionary.'  He
himself,  since  that  day,  would  take  no  hand  in  it,  though  again
and  again  solicited  ;  but  sits  private  in  his  place  on  the  Mountain.
Since  that  day,  the  Nine,  or  if  they  should  even  rise  to  Twelve,
have  become  permanent,  always  re-elected  when  their  term
runs  out ;  Salut  Public,  SHrete  G&nerale  have  assumed  their
ulterior  form  and  mode  of  operating.

(iv.)  It  compelled  the  Revolutionary  Committee  of  Sections  of  Paris  to  correspond
directly  with  the  Comity  de  SCtreU  Gdndrale  and  forbade  them  to  correspond  with
the  Commune.     It  forbade  all  Central  Committees  of  these  Sections.

(v. )  It  forbade  all  local  authorities  to  levy  rates  or  taxes.

(vi.)  It  forbade  all  public  meetings.

(vii.)  It  compelled  the  Reprisentants  en  mission  \.o  correspond  every  ten  days
with  the  Comitd  de  Salut  Public,  forbade  them  to  dismiss  any  General  except  pro-
visionally, and  ordered  them  to  inform  the  Committee  of  such  dismissal  within  24
hours.

In  short,  it  showed  that  the  men  who  were  now  grasping  the  reins  of  government
had  thoroughly  learned  the  lesson  that  local  self-government  was  at  present  im-
possible ;  the  Ancien  Rdgime  was  restored  in  its  procedure,  though  without  its
practical  alleviations  of  despotism.  Chaumette  was  alarmed  and  attempted  for  a
moment  to  rouse  the  sections  of  Paris  on  Dec.  4th,  but  his  or  their  courage  failed
and  nothing  came  of  it.  Even  the  Convention  was  alarmed,  and  on  12th  Bourdon
plucked  up  spirit  to  demand  fresh  elections  to  the  Committee,  which  would  then
probably  have  been  filled  with  Dantonists,  but  on  13th,  on  the  motion  of  Cambacdr^S,
the  existing  Committee  was  continued,  Robespierre  having  a  majority  in  the  Centre
of  the  Convention.  {See  Gros,  Le  Comity  de  Salut  Public,  p.  81  sqq.  ;  Aulard,
Recueil,  ix.  351.)

The  analysis  of  the  methods  of  work  of  the  Committee  {vid.  supr.^  iii.  72)  has
been  admirably  done  by  M.  Gros  ;  it  sat  in  the  former  petits  appaj-tements  du  Roi,
Pavilion  de  Flore,  ground  floor,  guarded  on  both  sides  with  cannons  and  matches
burning ;  several  rooms  adjoining  contained  its  agents  and  subordinates.  The
Committee  met  at  10  a.m.,  and  again  at  8  p.m.  There  was  no  President  nor  order
of  deliberation,  but  there  were  six  Sections  of  it  for  working  purposes,  (i.)  Corres-
pondance  Gindi-alc  :  Billaud  arid  CoUot ;  (ii. )  Foreign  :  Barere  (but  this  was  a
sinecure :  we  have  abundant  evidence  that  the  ministers  resident  abroad  received
neither  pay  nor  instructions  during  the  height  of  the  Terror,  see  Sorel,  iii.  527) ;
(iii.)  War  :  Carnot,  Lindet,  Prieur-Cote-d'Or;  (iv.)  Admiralty  :  Saint-Andr^,  Prieur-
Marne  ;  (v.)  Interior  (meaning  police) :  Robespierre,  Couthon,  Samt-Just ;  (|vi. )  Rd-
clamations  {i.e.,  to  receive  petitions)  :  two  members  in  turn.  The  morning  session
was  unimportant,  and  was  chiefly  occupied  in  the  opening  of  letters  and  distributing
work  to  the  sections.  The  evening  session  received  reports  from  the  Sections,  and
decided  what  decrees  were  to  be  dictated  to  the  Convention  ;  once  a  week  the  Comild
de  Salut  Public  met  the  Coniiti  de  Sfiretd  Ghidrale  (which  usually  sat  in  the  Rue
de  Varennes)  in  a  '  General  Session. '  It  must  be  remembered  that  many  members
of  both  Committees  were  often  absent  for  long  periods  en  missio7i  (Saint-Andr6  and
Lindet  nearly  always,  Saint-Just  and  CoUot  at  critical  times).]


LIKE  A  THUNDEE-CLOUD  145

Committee  of  Public  Salvation,  as  Supreme  ;  of  General  Surety,
as  subaltern :  these,  like  a  Lesser  and  Greater  Council,  most  har-
monious hitherto,  have  become  the  centre  of  all  things.  They
ride  this  Whirlwind  ;  they,  raised  by  force  of  circumstances,
insensibly,  very  strangely,  thither  to  that  dread  height ; — and
guide  it,  and  seem  to  guide  it.  Stranger  set  of  Cloud-Compel-
lers  the  Earth  never  saw.  A  Robespierre,  a  Billaud,  a  Collot,
Couthon,  Saint-Just ;  not  to  mention  still  meaner  Amars,i  Vadiers,^
in  Silrete  G&nerale :  these  are  your  Cloud-Compellers.  Small
intellectual  talent  is  necessary :  indeed  where  among  them,
except  in  the  head  of  Carnot,  busied  organising  victory,  would
you  find  any  ?  The  talent  is  one  of  instinct  rather.  It  is  that
of  divining  aright  what  this  great  dumb  Whirlwind  wishes  and
wills ;  that  of  willing,  with  more  frenzy  than  any  one,  what
all  the  world  wills. ^  To  stand  at  no  obstacles  ;  to  heed  no  con-
siderations, human  or  divine,  to  know  well  that,  of  divine  or
human,  there  is  one  thing  needful.  Triumph  of  the  Republic,
Destruction  of  the  Enemies  of  the  Republic !  With  this  one
spiritual  endowment,  and  so  few  others,  it  is  strange  to  see  how
a  dumb  inarticulately  storming  Whirlwind  of  things  puts,  as  it
were,  its  reins  into  your  hand,  and  invites  and  compels  you  to
be  leader  of  it.

Hard  by,  sits  a  Municipality  of  Paris  ;  all  in  red  nightcaps
since  the  fourth  of  November  last :    a  set  of  men  fully  '  on  a

i[Amar,  born  at  Grenoble  1750,  deputy  to  Convention  for  Is^re,  the  leading
member  of  the  SHreU  Gdn^rale ;  3.  ferocious  Jacobin,  but  took  a  strong  line  against
Robespierre  in  Thermidor  :  was  accused  in  Sept.  '94  of  having  been  Robespierre's
accomplice,  and  again  after  the  insurrection  of  Germinal  of  having  been  the
accomplice  of  Collot.  This  time  he  was  imprisoned  but  released  by  the  amnesty
of  Brumaire— retired  from  public  life,  and  died  18 15.]

2  [Vadier  was  one  of  the  very  few  Revolutionists  who  had  passed  their  50th  year,
born  1736,  sat  in  the  Constituent  for  Foix,  and  in  the  Convention  for  Ari^ge  ;
member  of  the  Sutefd  Ginirale,  and  often  President  of  it :  played  first  into  the  hands
of  Robespierre  and  then  into  those  of  the  Thermidorians  :  sentenced  to  exile  after
Germinal,  with  Billaud  and  Collot,  he  escaped  by  hiding  till  1798,  when  he  was
arrested  as  a  Babouviste,  but  again  escaped.  In  1816  was  exiled,  and  died  at
Brussels  in  1828  at  the  age  of  92.  ]

2 [This  is  obviously  an  utter  mistake.  The  '  great  dumb  whirlwind'  (if  by  that
Carlyle  means  the  French  people)  wanted  peace  and  an  end  to  the  Terror  as  the  first
thing  necessary  to  the  re-establishment  of  Constitutional  Monarchy.  The  '  cloud
compellers'  in  question  were  determined  not  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  the  people,
one  of  the  earliest  of  whose  articulate  cries  would  have  been  for  their  heads.]
VOL.    III.  10


146        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

level  with  circumstances/  or  even  beyond  it.  Sleek  Mayor
Pache,  studious  to  be  safe  in  the  middle ;  Chaumettes,  Heberts,
Varlets,  and  Henriot  their  great  Commandant ;  not  to  speak  of
Vincent  the  War-clerk,  of  Momoros,  Dobsents  and  such  like  :
all  intent  to  have  Churches  plundered,  to  have  Reason  adored,
Suspects  cut  down,  and  the  Revolution  triumph.  Perhaps  carry-
ing the  matter  too  far  ?  Danton  was  heard  to  grumble  at  the
civic  strophes ;  and  to  recommend  prose  and  decency.  Robes-
pierre also  grumbles  that,  in  overturning  Superstition,  we  did
not  mean  to  make  a  religion  of  Atheism.  In  fact,  your  Chau-
mette  and  Company  constitute  a  kind  of  Hyper-Jacobinism,  or
rabid  '  Faction  des  Enrages  ;  '  which  has  given  orthodox  Patriot-
ism some  umbrage,  of  late  months.  To  ^  know  a  Suspect  on  the
streets ; '  what  is  this  but  bringing  the  haw  of  the  Suspect  itself
into  ill  odour  ?  Men  half-frantic,  men  zealous  overmuch, — tliey
toil  there,  in  their  red  nightcaps,  restlessly,  rapidly,  accomplish-
ing what  of  Life  is  allotted  them.

And  the  Forty-four  Thousand  other  Townships,  each  with  Re-
volutionary Committee,  based  on  Jacobin  Daughter-Society  ;  en-
lightened by  the  spirit  of  Jacobinism ;  quickened  by  the  Forty
Sous  a-day ! — The  French  Constitution  spurned  always  at  any-
thing like  Two  Chambers  ;  and  yet  behold,  has  it  not  verily  got
Two  Chambers  ?  National  Convention,  elected,  for  one  ;  Mother
of  Patriotism,  self-elected,  for  another !  Mother  of  Patriotism
has  her  debates  reported  in  the  Moniteur,  as  important  state-pro-
cedures ;  which  indisputably  they  are.  A  Second  Chamber  of
Legislature  we  call  this  Mother- Society  ; — if  perhaps  it  were  not
rather  comparable  to  that  old  Scotch  Body  named  Lords  of  the
A/iicles,  without  whose  origination,  and  signal  given,  the  so-
called  Parliament  could  introduce  no  bill,  could  do  no  work  ?
Robespierre  himself,  whose  words  are  a  law,  opens  his  incor-
ruptible lips  copiously  in  the  Jacobins  Hall.  Smaller  Council
of  Salut  Public,  Greater  Council  of  Surete  G&nerale,  all  active
Parties,  come  here  to  plead  ;  to  shape  beforehand  what  decision
they  must  arrive  at,  what  destiny  they  have  to  expect.  Now  if
a  question  arose,  Which  of  those  Two  Chambers,  Convention,  or


LIKE  A  THUNDER-CLOUD  147

Lords  of  the  Articles,  was  the  stronger  9     Happily  they  as  yet  go
hand  in  hand.

As  for  the  National  Convention,  truly  it  has  become  a  most
composed  Body.^  Quenched  now  the  old  effervescence ;  the
Seventy-three  locked  in  ward ;  once  noisy  Friends  of  the  Giron-
dins  sunk  all  into  silent  men  of  the  Plain,  called  even  '  Frogs  of
the  Marsh,'  Crapauds  du  Marais  !  Addresses  come.  Revolutionary
Church-plunder  comes ;  Deputations,  with  prose  or  strophes  :
these  the  Convention  receives.  But  beyond  this,  the  Convention
has  one  thing  mainly  to  do :  to  listen  what  Salut  Public  proposes,
and  say.  Yea.

Bazire  followed  by  Chabot,  with  some  impetuosity,  declared,
one  morning,  that  this  was  not  the  way  of  a  Free  Assembly.
"There  ought  to  be  an  Opposition  side,  a  Cdte  Droit,"  cried
Chabot  :  "if  none  else  will  form  it,  I  will.  People  say  to  me,
You  will  all  get  guillotined  in  your  turn,  first  you  and  Bazire,
then  Danton,  then  Robespierre  himself."  ^  So  spake  the  Dis-
frocked, with  a  loud  voice :  next  week,  Bazire  and  he  lie  in  the
Abbaye  ;  wending,  one  may  fear,  towards  Tinville  and  the  Axe ;
and  '  people  say  to  me  ' — what  seems  to  be  proving  true  !  Bazire's
blood  was  all  inflamed  with  Revolution  Fever  ;  with  coffee  and
spasmodic  dreams.^  Chabot,  again,  how  happy  with  his  rich
Jew- Austrian  wife,  late  Fraulein  Frey !  But  he  lies  in  Prison ;
and  his  two  Jew-Austrian  Brothers-in-Law,  the  Bankers  Frey,
lie  with  him  ;  waiting  the  urn  of  doom.  Let  a  National  Conven-
tion, therefore,  take  warning,  and  know  its  function.  Let  the
Convention,  all  as  one  man,  set  its  shoulder  to  the  work  ;  not
with  bursts  of  Parliamentary  eloquence,  but  in  quite  other  and
serviceabler  ways  !

i[*  A  pack  of  trembling  cowards,'  as  Madame  Roland  said  long  ago  (p.  292) :
she  was  right  for  once.  There  were  at  this  time  hardly  ever  200  members  present
at  the  debates  :  the  one  aim  of  a  '  respectable '  member  was  to  get  put  on  to  a  sub-
ordinate Committee  which  would  keep  him  at  work,  and  so  obviate  the  necessity  of
voting  or  being  sent  on  a  ?mssion.  ]

2  D^bats,  du  10  Nov.  1793.  [Fo'^  Chabot  and  Bazire,  vid.  supr.^  ii.  153 ;  they
were  arrested  Jan.  i6th  '94  ;  this  probably  refers  to  Bazire's  opposition  to  the  motion
of  Nov.  loth,  that  members  of  the  Convention  should  give  an  account  of  their  in-
comes.    {See  Moniteur,  Nov.  12th.)]

3  Dictionnaire  des  Hommes  Marquans,  i.  115.


148        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Convention  Commissioners,  what  we  ought  to^call  Representa-
tives, '  Repr&sentans  on  mission/  fly,  like  the  Herald  Mercury,  to
all  points  of  the  Territory  ;  carrying  your  behests  far  and  wide.
In  their  '  round  hat,  plumed  with  tricolor  feathers,  girt  with  flow-
'  ing  tricolor  taffeta  ;  in  close  frock,  tricolor  sash,  sword  and  jack-
'  boots,'  these  men  are  powerfuller  than  King  or  Kaiser.  They  say
to  whomso  they  meet,  Do ;  and  he  must  do  it :  all  men's  goods
are  at  their  disposal ;  for  France  is  as  one  huge  City  in  Siege.
They  smite  with  Requisitions,  and  Forced-loan ;  they  have  the
power  of  life  and  death.  Saint-Just  and  Lebas  order  the  rich
classes  of  Strasburg  to  '  strip  off  their  shoes,'  and  send  them  to
the  Armies,  where  as  many  as  '  ten-thousand  pairs '  are  needed.
Also,  that  within  four-and- twenty  hours,  '  a  thousand  beds  '  be  got
ready  ;  ^  wrapt  in  matting,  and  sent  under  way.  For  the  time
presses  !  — Like  swift  bolts,  issuing  from  the  fuliginous  Olympus
of  Salut  Public,  rush  these  men,  oftenest  in  pairs ;  scatter  your
thunder-orders  over  France  ;  make  France  one  enormous  Revolu-
tionary thunder-cloud.

^  Moniteur  du  27  Nov,  1793.  [The  Mission  of  Saint-Just  and  Lebas  to  Alsace
lasted  Oct.  17th — Dec.  28th.  The  Revolutionary  army  and  Revolutionary  Tribunal
there  had  already  been  established  before  their  arrival  (with  Euloge  Schneider  in
the  place  of  Fouquier-Tinville).  Saint- Just  quarrelled  vi^ith  Schneider  in  Dec.  and  had
him  sent  to  the  Tribunal  aX  Paris  (April  ist  94),  which  quickly  despatched  him.
Before  the  end  of  November  Saint-Just  had  levied  three  compulsory  loans  on  the
Department  of  the  Bas-Rhin,  two  of  4  and  one  of  9  millions,  and  requisitioned  all
the  shoes,  cloaks  and  beds  in  the  city  of  Strasburg.  "All  the  aristocrats,"  wrote
Saint-Just  to  Robespierre,  "of  the  Municipality,  the  Law  Courts  and  the  Regi-
ments, have  been  put  to  death"  (Robespierre  in  Jacobins,  Nov.  21st).  "  Sainte
Guillotine  is  in  the  most  brilliant  activity,  the  masterful  b — h,"  writes  another
Strasburg  Jacobin  (Von  Sybel,  iii.  232).

Saint-Just  then  went  to  the  Army  of  the  North,  Jan.  26th — Feb.  20th.]


[Carlyle  makes  the  great,  but  natural,  mistake  if  not  of  attributing  the  Victories
to  the  Terror,  yet  of  attributing  the  Terror  and  the  Victories  to  the  same  source.
It  is  the  greatest  Service  to  History  of  the  greatest  of  modern  French  Historians
(M.  Sorel)  to  have  proved  that  the  Victories  were  in  spite  of  and  not  because  of  the
Terror.  In  spite  of  all  the  horrors  of  Paris,  in  spite  of  the  abject  condition  of  the
cowering  '  Sovereign  '  Convention,  the  great  heart  of  France  was  beating  soundly
with  one  impulse,  namely,  to  drive  back  the  enemy.  If  you  were  at  the  front,  you
might  hide  or  forget  the  fact  that  you  were  fighting  for  the  most  bloodstained  set
of  rascals  that  ever  called  themselves  a  government ;  you  could  not  doubt  that  you
were  fighting  for  France.  Meanwhile  the  very  Terror  itself,  by  reflex  action,
turned  all  activity  towards  the  frontiers :  where  the  Terror  and  the  Defence  met
the  former  thwarted  the  latter  far  more  than  it  helped  it ;  e.g. .  the  Repr^sentant  en
mission  at  Bordeaux  seized  the  supplies  which  were  on  their  way  to  the  Army  of  the
Pyrenees,  to  feed  the  Sansculottes  of  Bordeaux  with,  '  otherwise  the  Counter-Revolu-
tion  would  have  triumphed  there : '  his  colleagues  at  Perpignan  were  naturally  furious


DO  THY  DUTY  149

with  him.  ( Aulard,  Recueil,  vii.  476. )  The  incessant  denunciations  of  the  Generals
by  the  Proconsuls,  if  here  and  there  they  succeeded  in  removing  a  feeble  or  traitorous
personality,  must  in  the  long  run  have  hampered  the  general  scheme  of  the  Defence  :
e.g.,  when  Houchard  (afterwards  himself  a  victim)  reached  the  Army  of  the  North,
as  successor  to  Custine,  he  learned  that  Billaud  had  just  arrested  the  whole  of
his  Staff.  The  denunciations  were  not  always  well  received  by  the  ComiU  de
Salut  Public,  but  too  often  were  :  yet  the  acts  and  orders  of  the  Committee  were
very  often  set  at  naught  by  the  Proconsuls.  On  Sept.  15th  '93  we  have  an  important
decree,  on  the  motion  of  Saint- Andr^,  that  the  Generals  of  the  Republic  '  renouncing
the  idea  of  making  foreigners  feel  the  value  of  liberty  '  are  henceforward  to  exercise
the  ordinary  laws  of  war  in  all  conquered  countries,  though  the  '  ordinary  laws  of
war  '  are  somewhat  liberally  interpreted  by  an  order  of  the  Committee  to  its
Generals  to  seize  and  drive  off  into  the  interior  of  France  all  sheep,  beasts  and  pigs
in  that  part  of  the  Palatinate  which  is  in  French  hands  {ibid.  x.  413,  Jan.  24th  "94).
That  the  Terror  was  not  established  in  the  most  Republican  provinces  with  any
ease  is  manifest  from  the  constant  recriminations  of  Refrisentants  en  mission  against
each  other.  At  Rochefort  there  might  for  once  be  a  brisk  competition  for  the  post
of  public  executioner  [ibid.  viii.  280) ;  but  one  only  needs  to  look  at  the  despairing
letters  even  of  the  most  savage  Proconsuls,  e.g.,  Lebon,  Nov.  8th,  Collot,  Nov.  23rd,
all  complaining  of  constant  and  hopeless  overwork  and  of  failing  health.  '  Jurors
of  sufficient  bloodthirstiness  cannot  be  found  to  serve  at  Arras '  (xi.  124),  '  the  local
administrations  are  always  hostile  and  must  be  renewed  en  bloc  ;^  '  this  is  difficult
as  the  only  real  patriots  are  those  who  cannot  write  or  read '  (xi.  207) ;  a  roving
commission  has  to  be  given  to  a  spy  called  JuUien  (July  '93),  to  visit  the  missions
all  round  Western  France,  to  be  in  fact  a  spy  on  spies  (vi.  397) ;  and  this  leads  to
the  creation  of  Agents  Nationaux  (a  further  wheel  to  the  overladen  coach  of
Officialdom),  who  are  to  be  peripatetic,  each  in  a  district.  One  representative
humourously  complains  that  it  '  is  not  fitting  that  his  whole  time  should  be  taken
up  in  marrying  priests  at  the  foot  of  the  tree  of  liberty '  (viii.  152).  Collot  describes,
as  far  back  as  April  22nd  '93,  a  scene  in  the  department  of  the  Nievre  :  '  We  had
'  the  guillotine  set  up  in  all  pomp  here,  and  the  executioner  performed  on  five  lay
'  figures  representing  Dumouriez,  etc.,  there  were  tremendous  cheers  as  each  head
'  fell.  Then  we  burned  all  the  ancient  title  deeds  we  could  find  ;  the  executioner
'  spat  on  these  papers  and  smote  his  rump  over  them.  These  acts  of  contempt
•  were  most  suitable,  and  the  people  returned  vowing  tyrants  and  despots  to  the
'  execration  of  posterity '  (iii.  198).  We  may  doubt  whether  such  scenes  as  this
had  much  to  do  with  the  Victories  ;  they  were  the  very  life  and  soul  of  the  Terror.]


CHAPTER  VI

DO  THY  DUTY

Accordingly,  alongside  of  these  bonfires  of  Church-balustrades,
and  sounds  of  fusillading  and  noyading,  there  rise  quite  another
sort  of  fires  and  sounds :  Smithy-fires  and  Proof-volleys  for  the
manufacture  of  arms.

Cut  off  from  Sweden  and  the  world,  the  Republic  must  learn
to  make  steel  for   itself  ;i  and,  by  aid  of  Chemists,   she  has

^  [Carnot  calculated  at  the  end  of  August  (Corresp.  iii.  455,  sqq.),  to  be  able  to  turn
out  1,000  muskets  a  day  when  his  machinery  should  be  in  full  work  ;  but  Sweden
was  one  of  the  very  few  countries  from  which  the  Repubhc  was  not  cut  off.  The
Regent  of  Sweden  was  only  too  anxious  to  break  off  all  the  designs  of  his  pre-


150        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

learnt  it.  Towns  that  knew  only  iron,  now  know  steel :  from
their  new  dungeons  at  Chantilly,  Aristocrats  may  hear  the  rustle
of  our  new  steel  furnace  there.  Do  not  bells  transmute  them-
selves into  cannon ;  iron  stancheons  into  the  white-weapon  {arme
blanche),  by  sword-cutlery  }  The  wheels  of  Langres  scream,  amid
their  sputtering  fire-halo ;  grinding  mere  swords.  The  stithies
of  Charleville  ring  with  gun-making.  What  say  we,  Charleville  ?
Two-hundred  and  fifty-eight  Forges  stand  in  the  open  spaces  of
Paris  itself ;  a  hundred  and  forty  of  them  in  the  Esplanade  of
the  Invalides,  fifty-four  in  the  Luxembourg  Garden :  ^  so  many
Forges  stand  ;  grim  Smiths  beating  and  forging  at  lock  and
barrel  there.  The  Clockmakers  have  come,  requisitioned,  to  do
the  touch-holes,  the  hard-solder  and  file-work.  Five  great  Barges
swing  at  anchor  on  the  Seine  Stream,  loud  with  boring;  the
great  press-drills  grating  harsh  thunder  to  the  general  ear  and
heart.  And  deft  Stock-makers  do  gouge  and  rasp ;  and  all  men
bestir  themselves,  according  to  their  cunning  : — in  the  language
of  hope,  it  is  reckoned  that  '  a  thousand  finished  muskets  can  be
delivered  daily.^  Chemists  of  the  Republic  have  taught  us
miracles  of  swift  tanning  :  ^  the  cordwainer  bores  and  stitches  ; —
not  of  '  wood  and  pasteboard,'  or  he  shall  answer  it  to  Tinville  !
The  women  sew  tents  and  coats,  the  children  scrape  surgeons'-
lint,  the  old  men  sit  in  the  marketplaces  ;  able  men  are  on
march  ;  all  men  in  requisition :  from  Town  to  Town  flutters,  on
the  Heaven's  winds,  this  Banner,  The  French  People  risen
AGAINST  Tyrants.

All  which  is  well.  But  now  arises  the  question  :  What  is  to  be
done  for  saltpetre  }     Interrupted  Commerce  and  the  English  Navy

decessor  Gustavus  III.,  and  hoped  to  renew  the  old  subsidy  treaty  with  France,  for
which  he  was  prepared  to  pay  with  the  neutrality  of  his  country,  though,  if  possible,
not  with  her  active  alliance.  The  Baron  de  Stael  was  sent  back  to  Paris  at  the
beginning  of  March  '93,  and  was  well  received  by  Lebrun,  who  hoped  to  induce
the  Swedes  to  invade  Russia,  or  even  Prussia  :  a  subsidy  treaty  was  actually  drawn
up  in  May ;  but,  after  June  2nd,  the  Regent  confined  himself  to  neutrality,  and
Robespierre,  when  in  power,  suspended  the  negotiations  ;  commercial  relations  how-
ever continued  between  France  and  Sweden  (Sorel,  iii.  305,  399,  527  ;  iv.  65).]

1  [Add  sixty-six  forges  in  the  Place  de  la  Revolution  ;  Charleville  (in  the  Ardennes
Department)  had  been,  previous  to  the  Revolution,  the  seat  of  the  largest  gun
manufactory.]

2  Choix  des  Rapports,  xiii.  189.  ^  ibjfj.  xv.  360.


DO  THY  DUTY  151

shut  us  out  from  saltpetre ;  and  without  saltpetre  there  is  no
giinpowder.  Republican  Science  again  sits  meditative  ;  discovers
thfct  saltpetre  exists  here  and  there,  though  in  attenuated  quantity  ;
that  old  plaster  of  walls  holds  a  sprinkling  of  it ; — that  the  earth
of  the  Paris  Cellars  holds  a  sprinkling  of  it,  diffused  through  the
common  rubbish ;  that  were  these  dug  up  and  washed,  saltpetre
might  be  had.  Whereupon,  swiftly,  see  !  the  Citoyens,  with  up-
shoved  bonnet  rouge,  or  with  doffed  bonnet,  and  hair  toil-wetted  ;
digging  fiercely,  each  in  his  own  cellar,  for  saltpetre.  The  Earth-
heap  rises  at  every  door ;  the  Citoyennes  with  hod  and  bucket
carrying  it  up ;  the  Citoyens,  pith  in  every  muscle,  shovelling
and  digging :  for  life  and  saltpetre.  Dig,  my  braves  ;  and  right
well  speed  ye  !  What  of  saltpetre  is  essential  the  Republic  shall
not  want.i

Consummation  of  Sansculottism  has  many  aspects  and  tints  ;
but  the  brightest  tint,  really  of  a  solar  or  stellar  brightness,  is
this  which  the  Armies  give  it.  That  same  fervour  of  Jacobinism,
which  internally  fills  France  with  hatreds,  suspicions,  scaffolds
and  Reason-worship,  does,  on  the  Frontiers,  show  itself  as  a
glorious  Fro  patria  mori.  Ever  since  Dumouriez's  defection,  three
Convention  Representatives  attend  every  General.  Committee
of  Saiut  has  sent  them  ;  often  with  this  Laconic  order  only :  "  Do
thy  duty.  Pais  ton  devoir."  It  is  strange,  under  what  impedi-
ments the  fire  of  Jacobinism,  like  other  such  fires,  will  bum.
These  Soldiers  have  shoes  of  wood  and  pasteboard,  or  go  booted
in  hay-ropes,  in  dead  of  winter ;  they  skewer  a  bast  mat  round
thsir  shoulders,  and  are  destitute  of  most  things.  What  then  ?
It  is  for  Rights  of  Frenchhood,  of  Manhood,  that  they  fight :  the
un^juenchable  spirit,  here  as  elsewhere,  works  miracles.     "With

^[The  making  of  gunpowder  had,  previous  to  the  Revolution  been  a  monopoly  of
the  4gence  des  Poudres  et  des  Salpetres,  established  at  Saint-Denis.  The  monopoly
was  abolished  in  1791  :  with  the  result  that  in  '93  saltpetre  had  to  be  imported  from
abrcad  :  in  Sept.  '93  all  materials  requisite  for  the  manufacture  of  saltpetre  were
put  in  requisition  ;  on  Feb.  ist  '94  a  speech  of  Barere's  in  the  Convention  led  to
the  pulling  down  of  old  walls  and  houses  here  described  by  Carlyle,  and  to  the
establishment  of  raffineries  for  extracting  saltpetre  ;  all  through  '94  the  Com-
mittee had  been  busy  trying  to  increase  the  quantity,  and  had  sent  chemists  to  the
Indre-et-Loire  and  to  Vaucluse,  to  set  up  raffineries  there.  (Boursin  and  Chal-
larae.  (Art.  Poudre) ;  Moniieur,  Feb.  3rd  and  4th  '94.)]


152        THE  FKENCH  REVOLUTION

steel  and  bread,"  says  the  Convention  Representative,  "  one  may
get  to  China."  ^  The  Generals  go  fast  to  the  guillotine  ;  justly
and  unjustly.  From  which  what  inference  ?  This,  among  others  :
That  ill-success  is  death  ;  that  in  victory  alone  is  life  !  To  con-
quer or  die  is  no  theatrical  palabra,  in  these  circumstances,  but
a  practical  truth  and  necessity.  All  Girondism,  Halfness,  Com-
promise is  swept  away.  Forward,  ye  Soldiers  of  the  Republic,
captain  and  man!  Dash,  with  your  Gaelic  impetuosity,  on
Austria,  England,  Prussia,  Spain,  Sardinia ;  Pitt,  Cobourg,  York,
and  the  Devil  and  the  World  !  Behind  us  is  but  the  Guillotine  ;
before  us  is  Victory,  Apotheosis  and  Millennium  without  end  !

See,  accordingly,  on  all  Frontiers,  how  the  Sons  of  Night,
astonished  after  short  triumph,  do  recoil ; — the  Sons  of  the  Re-
public flying  at  them,  with  wild  Qa-ira  or  Marseillese  Aux  caineSf
with  the  temper  of  cat-o'-mountain,  or  demon  incarnate ;  vhich
no  Son  of  Night  can  stand  !  Spain,  which  came  bursting  through
the  Pyrenees,  rustling  with  Bourbon  banners,  and  went  conquer-
ing here  and  there  for  a  season,  falters  at  such  cat-o'-mountain
welcome  ;  draws  itself  in  again ;  too  happy  now  were  the
Pyrenees  impassable.  Not  only  does  Dugommier,  conqueror  of
Toulon,  drive  Spain  back  ;  he  invades  Spain.  General  Dugom-
mier invades  it  by  the  Eastern  Pyrenees  ;  General  Miiller  shall
invade  it  by  the  Western.  Shall,  that  is  the  word :  Committee
of  Solid  Public  has  said  it ;  Representative  Cavaignac,  on  mission
there,  must  see  it  done.  Impossible  !  cries  Miiller. — Infallible  !
answers  Cavaignac.  Difficulty,  impossibility,  is  to  no  purpose.
^'The  Committee  is  deaf  on  that  side  of  its  head,"  answers
Cavaignac,  "nentend  pas  de  cette  oreille  Id.  How  many  w^ntest
thou,  of  men,  of  horses,  cannons  .''  Thou  shalt  have  them.  Con-
querors, conquered  or  hanged,  forward  we  must."  ^  Which  things
also,  even  as  the  Representatives  spake  them,  were  done.     The

i[' With  steel  and  bread  to  China.'  Hoche's  words  (which  are  probably  tiose
to  which  Carlyle  here  refers,  though  Hoche  was  not  a  Representative  but  a  General)
occur  in  a  letter  to  Desaix,  afterwards  the  hero  of  Marengo,  Dec.  27th  1793  :
"With  bayonets  and  bread  we  can  conquer  all  the  brigands  of  Europe."  (See
Vie  de  L,  Hoche  par  A,  Rousselin  (Paris,  1798),  ii.  42.)]

2  There  is,  in  Prudhomme,  an  atrocity  a  la  Captain-Kirk  reported  of  this  Civai-
gnac  ;  which  has  been  copied  into  dictionaries,  of  Hommes  Marquans,  of  Biogrcphie


DO  THY  DUTY  153

Spring  of  the  new  Year  sees  Spain  invaded :  and  redoubts  are
carried,  and  Passes  and  Heights  of  the  most  scarped  description  ;
Spanish  Field-officerism  struck  mute  at  such  cat-o'-mountain  spirit,
the  cannon  forgetting  to  fire.^  Swept  are  the  Pyrenees  ;  Town
after  Town  flies  open,  burst  by  terror  or  the  petard.  In  the  course
of  another  year,  Spain  will  crave  Peace  ;  acknowledge  its  sins
and  the  Republic ;  nay,  in  Madrid,  there  will  be  joy  as  for  a
victory,  that  even  Peace  is  got.^

Few  things,  we  repeat,  can  be  notabler  than  these  Convention
Representatives,  with  their  power  more  than  kingly.  Nay  at
bottom  are  they  not  Kings,  Able-men,  of  a  sort ;  chosen  from  the
Seven-hundred  and  Forty-nine  French  Kings ;  with  this  order,
Do  thy  duty  ?  Representative  Levasseur,  of  small  stature,  by
trade  a  mere  pacific  Surgeon-Accoucheur,  has  mutinies  to  quell ;
mad  hosts  (mad  at  the  Doom  of  Custine)  bellowing  far  and  wide  ;
he  alone  amid  them,  the  one  small  Representative, — small,  but
as  hard  as  flint,  which  also  carries  fire  in  it !  So  too,  at  Hond-
schooten,^  far  in  the  afternoon,  he  declares  that  the  Battle  is  not

Universelle,  &c. ;  which  not  only  has  no  truth  in  it,  but,  much  more  singular,  is
still  capable  of  being  proved  to  have  none.  [Cavaignac,  born  1762,  deputy  to  Con-
vention for  Haute-Garonne,  en  mission  in  La  Vendue  and  with  army  of  West
Pyrenees  ;  a  leading  Thermidorian,  and  defender  of  the  Convention  in  Prairial  and
Vend^miaire,  died  in  exile  1829  :  was  the  father  of  General  Cavaignac  of  1848  fame
and  of  Mrs.  Carlyle's  friend  Godefroi  Cavaignac.  The  atrocity  referred  to  in
Prudhomme  (vi.  222)  is  that  Cavaignac  promised  to  save  a  certain  M.  Labarrere
at  the  price  of  his  daughter's  honour,  and  then  sent  him  to  the  scaffold  after  all.
'  Capable  of  being  disproved,'  i.e.,  upon  evidence  which  came  out  when  Cavaignac
was  tried  for  a  Jacobin  rising  in  1834,  and  was  defended  by  M.  Etienne  Arago.]

^  Deux  Amis,  xiii.  205-30  ;  Toulongeon,  &c.

2  [Two  of  the  fourteen  armies  of  the  Republic  were  directed  against  Spain  :  (i. )
That  of  the  Eastern  Pyrenees,  successively  under  Dagobert  (May  '93) ;  Barbantane
(Aug.);  Thureau  (Sept.);  Doppet  (Oct./;  and  Dugoramier  (Jan.  '94);  the  war
continued  on  the  whole  favourable  to  France,  but  it  was  not  till  Sept  i8th  '94  that
the  Spaniards  evacuated  Bellegarde,  which  they  had  held  since  June  '93  :  on  Nov.
i8th  '94  Dugommier  was  killed  in  battle,  and  was  succeeded  by  Scherer  (March
3rd  '95),  and  he  by  Moncey,  as  general  of  both  armies  East  and  West,  who  ended
the  war  by  taking  Bilbao.

(ii. )  That  of  the  Western  Pyrenees  :  the  Spaniards  were  besieging  St.  Jean-Pied-
de-Port  in  July  and  Aug.  '93.  The  Generals  for  France  were  successively  d'El-
becq,  Dumas,  Miiller  and  Moncey ;  it  was  the  last  who  in  the  summer  of  '94
really  turned  the  tide  of  Spanish  successes  by  the  storming  of  the  lines  of  Fontarabia
and  Ernani.

Peace  with  Spain  was  signed  at  Bale  July  22nd  '95  {vid.  in/r.,  iii,  231).]

^  [Sept  6th — 8th  '93.  The  accounts  of  Levasseur's  bravery  are  fully  confirmed
by  Carnot  (Corresp.  G6n.  iii.  115) ;  for  Leva.sseur  vid.  supr.,  ii.  328  ;  for  the  victory
oi  Hondschooie  vid.  su/>r.,  iii.  121.]


154        THE  FEENCH  EEVOLUTION

lost ;  that  it  must  be  gained  ;  and  fights,  himself,  with  his  own
obstetric  hand  ; — horse  shot  under  him,  or  say  on  foot,  '  up  to  the
haunches  in  tide-water  ; '  cutting  stoccado  and  passado  there,  in
defiance  of  Water,  Earth,  Air  and  Fire,  the  choleric  little  Repre-
sentative that  he  was  !  Whereby,  as  natural.  Royal  Highness  of
York  had  to  withdraw, — occasionally  at  full  gallop ;  like  to  be
swallowed  by  the  tide  :  and  his  Siege  of  Dunkirk  became  a  dream,
realising  only  much  loss  of  beautiful  siege-artillery  and  of  brave
lives.  1

General  Houchard,^  it  would  appear,  stood  behind  a  hedge  on
this  Hondschooten  occasion ;  wherefore  they  have  since  guillo-
tined him.  A  new  General  Jourdan,^  late  Sergeant  Jourdan,
commands  in  his  stead :  he,  in  long-winded  Battles  of  Watigny,
'murderous  artillery-fire  mingling  itself  with  sound  of  Revolu-
'  tionary  battle-hymns,'  forces  Austria  behind  the  Sambre  again  ;
has  hopes  for  purging  the  soil  of  Liberty.*  With  hard  wrestling,
with  artillerying  and  ga-ira-ing,  it  shall  be  done.  In  the  course
of  a  new  Summer,  Valenciennes  will  see  itself  beleaguered ;
Conde  beleaguered ;  whatsoever  is  yet  in  the  hands  of  Austria
beleaguered  and  bombarded :  nay,  by  Convention  Decree,  we
even  summon  them  all  '  either  to  surrender  in  twenty- four  hours,
or  else  to  be  put  to  the  sword ; ' — a  high  saying,  which,  though
it  remains  unfulfilled,  may  show  what  spirit  one  is  of.

1  Levasseur,  M^moires,  ii.  c.  2-7.  [The  great  importance  of  raising  the  siege  of
Dunkirk  is  again  and  again  noticed  by  Carnot  [see  esp.  Corresp.  iii.  55  and  114)1;
it  was  the  first  step  towards  clearing  the  enemy  out  of  Maritime  Flanders.]

2[Houchard,  vid.  supr.,  iii,  121.]

3  [Jourdan  was  the  son  of  a  surgeon,  born  1762  ;  entered  the  army  as  a  private
and  retired  early,  went  into  trade  in  Limoges  1784  ;  served  in  the  National  Guard
1789,  and  rejoined  the  army  as  a  volunteer  1792  ;  commanded  the  Army  of  the
Ardennes,  Sept.  nth  ;  North,  Sept.  22nd  '93  ;  Moselle,  March  20th  '94;  Sambre-
et-Meuse,  June  13th  '95  ;  was  on  the  whole,  after  Hoche,  the  most  distinguished
of  the  early  Republican  soldiers.  Napoleon  always  dreaded  him,  though  he  was
one  of  the  first  Generals  created  a  Marshal  of  the  Empire.  At  the  Restoration
he  became  a  Peer  of  France  and  died  as  Governor  of  the  Invalides,  1833.]

4  [Oct.  i6th  '93.  Carnot  paid  two  short  visits  at  this  time  to  the  Army  of  the
North  (Sept.  25th— 28th,  and  Oct.  6th— 20th),  and  sketched  out  Jourdan' s  course  for
him.  Maubeuge  was  being  besieged  by  Coburg ;  Jourdan  advanced  from  Guise
50,000  strong :  the  battle  began  on  15th,  on  i6th  the  position  of  Wattignies  was
carried,  whereon  the  enemy  withdrew,  and  raised  the  siege  of  Maubeuge  that  night.
Carnot  wanted  Jourdan  to  press  on  after  Wattignies  and  prevent  the  re-junction  of
York  and  Coburg,  but  this  was  not  done.  {See  Carnot's  Corresp.  iii.  315  and  the
interesting  fragment  there  quoted  from  Jourdan's  unpubUshed  Mimoires.)\


DO  THY  DUTY  155

Representative  Drouet,  as  an  Old-dragoon,  could  fight  by  a
kind  of  second  nature :  but  he  was  unlucky.  Him,  in  a  night-
foray  at  Maubeuge,  the  Austrians  took  alive,  in  October  last^
They  stript  him  almost  naked,  he  says  ;  making  a  show  of  him,
as  King-taker  of  Varennes.  They  flung  him  into  carts ;  sent
him  far  into  the  interior  of  Cimmeria,  to  '  a  Fortress  called  Spitz-
berg  '  on  the  Danube  River ;  and  left  him  there,  at  an  elevation
of  perhaps  a  hundred  and  fifty  feet,  to  his  own  bitter  reflections.
Reflections  ;  and  also  devices  !  For  the  indomitable  Old-dragoon
constructs  wing-machinery,  of  Paperkite ;  saws  window  bars ;
determines  to  fly  down.  He  will  seize  a  boat,  will  follow  the
River's  course ;  land  somewhere  in  Crim  Tartary,  in  the  Black-
Sea  or  Constantinople  region  :  a  la  Sindbad  !  Authentic  History,
accordingly,  looking  far  into  Cimmeria,  discerns  dimly  a  pheno-
menon. In  the  dead  night-watches,  the  Spitzberg  sentry  is  near
fainting  with  terror: — Is  it  a  huge  vague  Portent  descending
through  the  night-air  ?  It  is  a  huge  National  Representative
Old-dragoon,  descending  by  Paper-kite  ;  too  rapidly,  alas  !  For
Drouet  had  taken  with  him  'a,  small  provision-store,  twenty
pounds  weight  or  thereby  ; '  which  proved  accelerative  :  so  he  fell,
fracturing  his  leg ;  and  lay  there,  moaning,  till  day  dawned,  till
you  could  discern  clearly  that  he  was  not  a  Portent  but  a  Repre-
sentative. ^

Or  see  Saint-Just,  in  the  Lines  of  Weissembourg,^  though  phy-
sically of  a  timid  apprehensive  nature,  how  he  charges  with  his
'  Alsatian  Peasants  armed  hastily '  for  the  nonce ;  the  solemn
face  of  him  blazing  into  flame ;  his  black  hair  and  tricolor  hat-
taffeta  flowing  in  the  breeze  !  These  our  Lines  of  Weissem-
bourg  were  indeed  forced,  and  Prussia  and  the  Emigrants  rolled
through :    but   we  re-force  ^   the  Lines  of  Weissembourg ;    and

1  [Oct.  2nd.]  2  His  Narrative  (in  Deux  Amis,  xiv.  177-86).

3[(  Vid.  supr. ,  iii.  81.)  Since  the  loss  of  Mainz  the  two  Armies  of  the  Moselle  and
the  Rhine  had  been  greatly  disorganised,  Commander  after  Commander  being  dis-
missed by  Bouchotte  to  please  the  Paris  Radicals  ;  Wiirmser  had  forced  the  lines
of  Weissembourg  on  Oct.  13th,  while  the  Prussians  had  advanced  as  far  as  Worth  ;
Strasburg  was  thus  in  great  danger.]

*  [Dec.  26th  '93.]


156        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Prussia  and  the  emigrants  roll  back  again  still  faster, — hurled
with  bayonet-charges  and  fiery  ga-ira-ing.

Ci-devant  Sergeant  Pichegru,  ci-devant  Sergeant  Hoche,i  risen
now  to  be  Generals,  have  done  wonders  here.  Tall  Pichegru
was  meant  for  the  Church ;  was  Teacher  of  Mathematics  once,
in  Brienne  School, — his  remarkablest  Pupil  there  was  the  Boy
Napoleon  Buonaparte.  He  then,  not  in  the  sweetest  humour,
enlisted,  exchanging  ferula  for  musket ;  and  had  got  the  length
of  the  halberd,  beyond  which  nothing  could  be  hoped ;  when
the  Bastille  barriers  falling  made  passage  for  him,  and  he  is  here.
Hoche  bore  a  hand  at  the  literal  overturn  of  the  Bastille  ;  he  was,
as  we  saw,  a  Sergeant  of  the  Gardes  Frangaises,  spending  his  pay
in  rushlights  and  cheap  editions  of  books.  How  the  Mountains
are  burst,  and  many  an  Enceladus  is  disemprisoned  ;  and  Captains
founding  on  Four  parchments  of  Nobility  are  blown  with  their
parchments  across  the  Rhine,  into  Lunar  Limbo !  ^

What  high  feats  of  arms,  therefore,  were  done  in  these  Four-
teen Armies ;  and  how,  for  love  of  Liberty  and  hope  of  Promotion,
lowborn  valour  cut  its  desperate  way  to  Generalship ;  and,  from
the  central  Camot  in  Salut  Public  to  the  outmost  drummer  on  the

^  [For  Hoche  vld.  supr.,  i.  218.  Pichegru,  a  rus^  peasant,  born  1761  ;  joined
the  Artillery  1783,  after  teaching  mathematics  at  Brienne  ;  became  Colonel  of  a
battalion  of  Volunteers  (Gard),  1792  ;  General  of  Division  in  Army  of  Rhine  in
summer  of  '93,  and  now  its  Commander-in-Chief;  on  the  arrest  of  Hoche  he
received  from  Saint-Just  the  command  of  the  two  Armies  united,  and  later  in  the  year
'94  was  sent  to  command  the  Army  of  the  North,  with  which  he  delivered  Valen-
ciennes and  Cond^,  and  finally  overran  the  Netherlands  and  conquered  Holland
(Jan.  19th  '95).  He  put  down  the  insurrection  of  Germinal  successfully,  and  then
began  to  think  of  '  playing  Monk,'  intrigued  with  Cond6,  etc.  He  was  disgraced
and  retired  ;  elected  to  the  Council  of  500  he  continued  his  intrigues,  was  arrested
in  '98  and  transported  to  Cayenne :  escaped  to  England,  organised  Cadoudal's
conspiracy,  was  arrested  in  Paris,  and  was  mysteriously  "found  strangled"  in
prison,  April  5th  1804,  probably  a  victim  to  Napoleon's  jealousy.]

2  [Pichegru  was  sent  to  the  Army  of  the  Rhine  Oct.  2nd,  Hoche  to  that  of  the
Moselle  Oct.  22nd  ;  their  first  task  was  to  relieve  Landau,  which  was  besieged  :  in
November  Hoche  pushed  Brunswick  back  to  Kaiserslautern,  but  had  to  retire  from
before  his  lines  (Nov.  30th)  ;  Pichegru  spent  October  and  November  hardening  his
army  with  sallies  from  under  the  walls  of  Strasburg  ;  in  the  latter  half  of  December
the  two  Generals  acting  in  concert  succeeded  in  driving  back  Wiirmser  with  some
very  bloody  fighting  ;  and,  as  Brunswick  was  unable  to  come  to  their  assistance,  the
Austrians  were  at  last  driven  from  Weissembourg  Dec.  26th  ;  Landau  was  relieved
thereby,  and  Strasburg  freed  from  all  immediate  danger  ;  the  Prussians  took  winter
quarters  at  Neustadt,  and  the  Austrians  at  Philipsburg  (beyond  the  Rhine).]


DO  THY  DUTY  157

Frontiers,  men  strove  for  their  Republic,  let  Readers  fancy.  The
snows  of  Winter,  the  flowers  of  Summer  continue  to  be  stained
with  warlike  blood.  Gaelic  impetuosity  mounts  ever  higher  with
victory ;  spirit  of  Jacobinism  weds  itself  to  national  vanity :  the
Soldiers  of  the  Republic  are  becoming,  as  we  prophesied,  very
Sons  of  Fire.  Barefooted,  barebacked :  but  with  bread  and  iron
you  can  get  to  China  !  It  is  one  Nation  against  the  whole  world  ;
but  the  Nation  has  that  within  her  which  the  whole  world  will
not  conquer.  Cimmeria,  astonished,  recoils  faster  or  slower;  all
round  the  Republic  there  rises  fiery,  as  it  were,  a  magic  ring  of
musket- volleying  and  ga-ira-ing.  Majesty  of  Prussia,^  as  Majesty
of  Spain,2  will  by  and  by  acknowledge  his  sins  and  the  Republic  ;
and  make  a  Peace  of  Bale.

Foreign  Commerce,  Colonies,  Factories  in  the  East  and  in  the
West,  are  fallen  or  falling  into  the  hands  of  sea-ruling  Pitt,  enemy
of  human  nature.  Nevertheless  what  sound  is  this  that  we  hear,
on  the  first  of  June  1794';  sound  as  of  war-thunder  borne  from
the  Ocean  too,  of  tone  most  piercing  .-^  War-thunder  from  off
thejBrest  waters :  ^  Villaret-Joyeuse  and  English  Howe,  after  long
manoeuvring,^  have  ranked  themselves  there  ;  and  are  belching
fire.^  The  enemies  of  human  nature  are  on  their  own  element ;
cannot  be  conquered  ;  cannot  be  kept  from  conquering.     Twelve

1  [April  5th  '95.]  2 [juiy  22nd  '95.]

^  [The  Committee  had  gigantic  and  far-reaching  plans  for  Naval  construction :  on
May  loth  orders  were  given  to  lay  down  100  ships  of  the  line  and  160  frigates,  but
meanwhile  not  to  compromise  the  small  fleet  that  France  possessed,  unless  it  were
by  a  projected  descent  on  the  Channel  Islands,  which  was  being  prepared  in  great
secrecy  at  Saint-Malo  from  Jan.  '94 ;  the  only  effect  of  this  project  seems  to  have
been  to  ruin  the  Saint-Malo  fishermen,  who  were  forbidden  to  go  out  at  night  lest
they  should  betray  the  secret :  it  had  to  be  given  up  owing  to  the  profound
disaffection  of  the  town  and  the  rotten  state  of  the  roads  leading  to  it.  (See  Aulard,
Recueil,  x.  562;  xi.  87,  etc.)]

^  [Saint-Andr^  and  Villaret  were  ordered  to  go  out  from  Brest  to  convoy  a  fleet  of
merchant  vessels  coming  from  America  with  wheat :  in  this  they  were  successful,  in
spite  of  the  defeat  of  the  French  fleet  (R6v.  Fr.  xxxii.  428).  The  French  fleet  which
went  out  from  Brest,  May  i6th,  comprised  23  of  the  line  and  was  subsequently
raised  to  26  ;  Howe  left  Spithead  with  34  of  the  line  and  18  frigates  on  May  2nd,
but  he  detached  8  of  the  line  to  convoy  some  merchantmen  :  he  did  not  find  the
French  fleet  till  May  28th,  and  the  fight  began  that  night ;  Mahan.  while  admirmg
Howe's  tactics  in  the  preliminary  manoeuvres,  criticises  some  part  of  the  final  action
on  June  ist ;  at  any  rate  too  many  of  the  French  ships  were  allowed  to  escape.
(Mahan,  i.  146,  S(/g.)]

°[May  28th— June  ist.]


158        THE  FRENCH  EEVOLUTION

hours  of  raging  cannonade ;  sun  now  sinking  westward  through
the  battle-smoke :  six  French  Ships  taken,  the  Battle  lost ;  what
Ship  soever  can  still  sail,  making  off!  But  how  is  it,  then,  with
that  Vengeur  Ship,  she  neither  strikes  nor  makes  off?  She  is
lamed,  she  cannot  make  off;  strike  she  will  not.  Fire  rakes  her
fore  and  aft  from  victorious  enemies  ;  the  Vengeur  is  sinking.
Strong  are  ye,  Tyrants  of  the  sea ;  yet  we  also,  are  we  weak  ?
Lo !  all  flags,  streamers,  jacks,  every  rag  of  tricolor  that  will  yet
run  on  rope,  fly  rustling  aloft :  the  whole  crew  crowds  to  the
upper  deck  ;  and  with  universal  soul-maddening  yell,  shouts  Vive
la  Republique, — sinking,  sinking.  She  staggers,  she  lurches,  her
last  drunk  whirl ;  Ocean  yawns  abysmal :  down  rushes  the  Vengeur,
carrying  Vive  la  Republique  along  with  her,  unconquerable,  into
Eternity.^  Let  foreign  Despots  think  of  that.  There  is  an
Unconquerable  in  man,  when  he  stands  on  his  Rights  of  Man :
let  Despots  and  Slaves  and  all  people  know  this,  and  only  them
that  stand  on  the  Wrongs  of  Man  tremble  to  know  it. — So  has
History  written,  nothing  doubting,  of  the  sunk  Vengeur.^

Reader !  Mendez  Pinto,  Miinchausen,  Cagliostro,  Psalma-

nazar  have  been  great ;  but  they  are  not  the  greatest.  O  Barrere,
Barrere,  Anacreon  of  the  Guillotine  !  must  inquisitive  pictorial
History,  in  a  new  edition,  ask  again, '  How  is  it  with  the  Vengeur,'
in  this  its  glorious  suicidal  sinking  ;  and,  with  resentful  brush,  dash
a  bend-sinister  of  contumelious  lampblack  through  thee  and  it  ?
Alas,  alas  !  The  Vengeur,  after  fighting  bravely,  did  sink  alto-
gether as  other  ships  do,  her  captain  and  above  two-hundred  of
her  crew  escaping  gladly  in  British  boats  ;  and  this  same  enormous
inspiring  Feat,  and  rumour  '  of  sound  most  piercing,'  turns  out  to
be  an  enormous  inspiring  Non- entity,  extant  nowhere  save,  as
falsehood,  in  the  brain  of  Barrere  !     Actually  so.^     Founded,  like

1  Compare  Bar^re  (Choix  des  Rapports,  xiv.  416-21) ;  Lord  Howe  (Annual
Register  of  1794,  p.  86),  &c.

2  [The  next  paragraph  does  not  appear  in  the  ist  edition  of  Carlyle's  French
Revolution.  It  was  a  letter  written  by  Admiral  Griffiths  to  the  Sun  newspaper
in  Nov.  1838,  and  copied  into  other  papers,  giving  the  true  details  of  the  sinking  of
the  Vengeur  that  led  Carlyle  to  add  it  {see  his  article  on  it  in  Erasers  Magazine  for
July  1839,  now  reprinted  in  his  Miscellanies).]

'Carlyle's  Miscellanies,  §  Sinking  of  the  Vengeur.  [The  Vengeur  had  collided
with  the  Driinswick,  and  remained  locked  with  her  for  three  hours,  during  which


FLAME-PICTURE  159

the  World  itself,  on  Nothing ;  proved  by  Convention  Report,  by
solemn  Convention  Decree  and  Decrees,  and  wooden  '  Model  of
the  Ve7igeur;'  believed,  bewept,  besung  by  the  whole  French
People  to  this  hour,  it  may  be  regarded  as  Barrere's  masterpiece  ;
the  largest,  most  inspiring  piece  of  blague  manufactured,  for  some
centuries,  by  any  man  or  nation.  As  such,  and  not  otherwise,  be
it  henceforth  memorable.


[If  it  be  asked  how  could  such  a  bankrupt  Government  live  and  feed  its  armies,
the  answer  is  not  so  difficult  as  it  might  seem,  and  is  briefly  this.  The  Committee
possessed  unlimited  power  of  taking  by  force  everything  that  it  required  from  any
one  who  had  it  :  it  paid,  even  after  the  creation  of  the  Grand  Livre  in  Sept.  '93,  no
interest  to  the  fundholders  who  had  not  within  a  limited  time  inscribed  their  claims
to  such  payment ;  practically  no  rich  people  dared  to  inscribe  such  claims  (and
before  '89  the  national  debt  was  held  largely  by  persons  in  at  least  easy  circum-
stances) :  it  threw  all  the  expenses  of  local  Administration  on  the  Departments :
it  possessed  the  plunder  of  the  provinces  occupied  in  1792  (the  riches  of  Belgium
had  been  immense)  :  every  fresh  execution  or  confiscation  threw  more  and  more
property  into  its  hands;  for  small  transactions,  and  to  feed  Paris,  the  Maximum
really  did  work,  at  least  after  the  commencement  of  1794  ;  Switzerland,  the  United
States,  and  the  traitorous  little  states  of  Germany  poured  goods  into  France  to
take  advantage  of  the  high  prices.  If  we  consider  all  these  things  it  is  hardly  an
exaggeration  to  say  that  the  Committee  disposed  of  more  resources  than  the  Allied
Sovereigns  combined.  Von  Sybel  however  points  out  (iii.  310)  how  enormously
wasteful  its  expenditure  was  :  the  mere  wages  of  the  Rev.  Committees  (3  fr.  a  day
per  man)  came  to  590  millions  a  year  (a  trifle  more  than  a  whole  budget  of  xS\&  Ancien
Regime).  The  Army  cost  200  millions  a  month  :  the  purchase  of  corn  for  Paris  cost
enormous  sums  :  all  taxes  and  rates  passed  through  the  hands  of  the  Revolutionary
Committees,  and,  in  spite  of  the  law  of  14th  Frimaire,  were  shorn  on  their  way  to  meet
local  needs,  such  as  free  theatres  andytV<?j.]

CHAPTER  VII

FLAME-PICTURE

In  this  manner,  mad-blazing  with  flame  of  all  imaginable  tints,
from  the  red  of  Tophet  to  the  stellar-bright,  blazes  off  this  Con-
summation of  Sansculottism.

But  the  hundredth  part  of  the  things  that  were  done,  and  the
thousandth  part  of  the  things  that  were  projected  and  decreed  to
be  done,  would  tire  the  tongue  of  History.     Statue  of  the  Peuple

time  the  Brunswick  as  well  as  the  Vengeur  lost  heavily  in  men,  and  had  23  of
her  guns  dismounted  :  some  400  of  the  Vengeur' s  crew  were  saved,  but  the  last
cries  of  those  who  were  drowned  were  Vive  la  Republiqiie.  But  the  captain
Renaudin  had  already  struck  his  flag  and  signalled  for  assistance,  which  the  English
ships  hastened  to  give ;  Mr.  Stephens  in  the  'Orators'  (ii.  95)  suggests  that  it  was
Renaudin's  account  of  the  event  on  which  Barere  grafted  his  stupendous  lie.  [See
Mahan,  i.  143-4,)]


160        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Souverain,'^  high  as  Strasburg  Steeple  ;  which  shall  fling  its  shadow
from  the  Pont  Neuf  over  Jardin  National  and  Convention  Hall ; —
enormous,  in  Painter  David's  Head !  With  other  the  like  enor-
mous Statues  not  a  few :  realised  in  paper  Decree.  For,  indeed,
the  Statue  of  Liberty  herself  is  still  but  Plaster,  in  the  Place  de
la  Revolution.  Then  Equalisation  of  Weights  and  Measures,
with  decimal  division ;  Institutions,  of  Music  and  of  much  else  ;
Institute  in  general ;  School  of  Arts,  School  of  Mars,  Eleves  de  la
Patrie,  Normal  Schools :  amid  such  Gun-boring,  Altar-burning,
Saltpetre -digging,  and  miraculous  improvements  in  Tannery  !  ^

What,  for  example,  is  this  that  Engineer  Chappe  is  doing,  in
the  Park  of  Vincennes  ?  In  the  Park  of  Vincennes ;  and  onwards,
they  say,  in  the  Park  of  Lepelletier  Saint -Fargeau  the  assassinated
Deputy  ;  and  still  onwards  to  the  Heights  of  Ecouen  and  farther,
he  has  scaffolding  set  up,  has  posts  driven  in ;  wooden  arms  with
elbow  joints  are  jerking  and  fugling  in  the  air,  in  the  most  rapid

1  [See  Moniteur,  Nov.  9th  and  Nov.  17th  1793 ;  on  Nov.  6th  David  proposed
to  erect  a  monument  to  the  Sovereign  People  on  the  Pont-Neuf,  the  pedestal  to  be
composed  of  the  ruins  of  all  the  Royal  statues,  to  which  Leonard  Bourdon  added
'  and  all  the  ecclesiastical  monuments '  (carried).  It  was  to  be  the  Image  du
peuple  g^ant,  du  peuple  FraiK^ais,  and  to  have  the  club  of  Hercules  in  hand.  The
final  decree  was  Nov.  17th :  nothing  was  said  about  the  '  height  of  Strasburg  steeple '
(nor  can  I  find  any  reference  to  that),  but  it  was  to  be  '  colossal '  and  the  figure  was
to  be  15  metres  (49^  English  feet)  high.  It  was  to  be  at  West  point  of  the  Island  :
and  artists  were  invited  to  send  designs,]

2  [The  decree  for  the  equalisation  of  Weights  and  Measures  was  on  Aug.  ist
1793-  On  April  7th  1795  the  date  for  the  coming  into  force  of  the  new  system
was  fixed  to  be  Dec.  22nd  '95.

The  InstitiU  National  was  founded  by  decree  of  the  Convention  Oct.  25th  '95
(its  last  sitting  but  one),  the  first  meeting  of  the  Institut  was  held  Dec.  6th  '96  (it
must  be  remembered  that  the  Convention  had,  on  Aug.  8th  '93,  suppressed  all
Academies  and  literary  societies  whatsoever  which  had  any  connection  with  the
State,  or  ever  had  had  any).

The  Acole  de  Mars  on  the  plain  of  Sablons  was  a  military  school  created  by
decree  of  Convention  June  ist  '94  and  dissolved  soon  after  its  creation  :  it  was  a
Robespierrist  job  :  the  ^cole  Polytechnique  dates  from  Sept,  21st  '94 ;  the  ^cole
Normale  (to  teach  the  art  of  teaching)  Oct.  30th  '95.

The  Acoles  des  Enfants  de  la  patrie  were  a  design  of  Leonard  Bourdon's  for
the  education  of  the  sons  of  soldiers  who  fell  in  the  war ;  they  were  supposed  to
exist  in  each  section  of  Paris,  and  were  combined  with  creches  for  infants.  [See
note  at  end  of  chapter. )

These  great  works  (to  which  Carlyle  might  have  added  the  Foundation  of  the
Archives  Nationales,  Feb.  '93  ;  the  attempt  at  Consolidation  of  the  Public  Debt  in
the  Grand  Livre  by  Cambon,  Sept.  '93  ;  the  first  sketch  of  the  Code  Civil,
presented  by  Cambac^r^s,  Oct.  '93)  were  carried  on  during  '93,  '94,  '95  by  the  really
useful  and  working  members  of  the  Convention  in  its  smaller  Committees ;  in
which  work  such  men  found  a  refuge  from  the  horrors  enacted  around  them.  ]


FLAME-PICTURE  161

mysterious  manner !  Citoyens  ran  up,  suspicious.  Yes,  O  Cito-
yens,  we  are  signalling  ;  it  is  a  device  this,  worthy  of  the  Republic  ;
a  thing  for  what  we  will  call  Far-writing  without  the  aid  of  post-
bags  ;  in  Greek  it  shall  be  named  Telegraph.  ^ — Tel&graphe  xacr4  !
answers  Citoyenism :  For  writing  to  Traitors,  to  Austria  ? — and
tears  it  down.  Chappe  had  to  escape,  and  get  a  new  Legislative
Decree.  Nevertheless  he  has  accomplished  it,  the  indefatigable
Chappe :  this  his  Far-writer,  with  its  wooden  arms  and  elbow-joints,
can  intelligibly  signal ;  and  Unes  of  them  are  set  up,  to  the  North
Frontiers  and  elsewhither.  On  an  Autumn  evening  of  the  Year
Two,  Far- writer  having  just  written  that  Conde  Town  has  sur-
rendered to  us,  we  send  from  the  Tuileries  Convention- Hall  this
response  in  the  shape  of  Decree  :  '  The  name  of  Conde  is  changed
'to  Nord-Libre,  North-Free.^  The  Army  of  the  North  ceases  not
'to  merit  well  of  the  country.* — To  the  admiration  of  men  !  For
lo,  in  some  half  hour,  while  the  Convention  yet  debates,  there
arrives  this  new  answer ;  '  I  inform  thee,  je  t'annonce,  Citizen
'President,  that  the  Decree  of  Convention,  ordering  change  of
'  the  name  Conde  into  North-Free  ;  and  the  other,  declaring  that
'  the  Army  of  the  North  ceases  not  to  merit  well  of  the  country  ;
'are  transmitted  and  acknowledged  by  Telegraph.  I  have  in-
'structed  my  Officer  at  Lille  to  forward  them  to  North-Free  by
'express.     Signed,  Chappe.'  ^

^[Aug.  30th  '94.  The  brothers  Claude  and  Ignace  Chappe,  born  1763  and  1760,
both  mechanical  engineers,  were  the  creators  of  the  semaphore  system  of  telegraphs.
The  scheme  was  presented  to  the  Legislative  Assembly,  March  22nd  '92  ;  on  April
4th  '93  the  Convention  voted  a  sum  of  money  for  experiments,  and  on  Aug.  4th
ordered  the  establishment  of  a  line  from  Paris  to  Lille  (Aulard,  Recueil,  v.  471).  For
the  outcry  against  the  invention  (there  is  no  word  of  "  tearing  anything  down  ")  see
the  Report  of  the  Committee  of  public  mstruction  by  Lakanal,  July  26th  '93.]

2  [The  first  place  actually  to  change  its  name  seems  to  have  been  Bar-le-Duc  to
Bar-sur-Ornain  in  Oct.  '92.  In  the  5th  vol,  of  the  Rev.  de  la  R^v.  M.  Gustave
Bord  gives  long  lists  of  places  which  changed  their  names,  amounting  in  all  to  over
1,000.  The  new  names  show  little  inventive  power,  and  the  practice  became  a
nuisance  :  the  Committee  issued  a  circular  requesting  that  in  all  cases  the  old  name
of  the  place  should  be  given  (in  correspondence)  as  well  as  the  new  (Aulard,,  Recueil,
xi.  584).  The  best  known  changes  are  Dunquerque  to  Dunelibre  ;  Saint-Etienne  to
Armes-Commune ;  Havre  de  Grace  to  Havre-Marat  ;  Compi^gne  to  Marat-sur-
Oise  ;  Toulon  to  Port  de  la  Montague.  Marseilles  however  stoutly  resisted  being
called  '  Sans-Nom '  and  prevailed,  the  Committee  writing  that  the  "glorious
souvenirs  of  loth  Aug.  forbade  it  "  {ibzJ.  x.  403).]

^Choix  des  Rapports,  xv.  378,  384.

VOL.    III.  11


162        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Or  see,  over  Fleurus  in  the  Netherlands,  where  General  Jour-
dan,  having  now  swept  the  soil  of  Liberty,^  and  advanced  thus
far,  is  just  about  to  fight,^  and  sweep  or  be  swept,  hangs  there  not
in  the  Heaven's  Vault,  some  Prodigy,  seen  by  Austrian  eyes  and
spy-glasses :  in  the  similitude  of  an  enormous  Windbag,  with
netting  and  enormous  Saucer  depending  from  it?  A  Jove's
Balance,  O  ye  Austrian  spy-glasses  ?  One  saucer-scale  of  a  Jove's
Balance  ;  your  poor  Austrian  scale  having  kicked  itself  quite  aloft,
out  of  sight  ?  By  Heaven,  answer  the  spy-glasses,  it  is  a  Mont-
golfier,  a  Balloon,  and  they  are  making  signals !  Austrian
cannon-battery  barks  at  this  Montgolfier ;  harmless  as  dog  at  the
Moon :  the  Montgolfier  makes  its  signals  ;  detects  what  Austrian
ambuscade  there  may  be,  and  descends  at  its  ease.^ — What  will
not  these  devils  incarnate  contrive  ?

1  [The  Campaign  of  1794,  which  cleared  France  from  the  Allies,  drove  them
through  and  from  Belgium,  and  ended  by  the  Conquest  of  Holland  in  Jan.  '95,
was  fought  upon  plans  drawn  up  by  Carnot.  The  greatest  danger  France  had  to
fear  was  the  execution  of  the  treaty  of  the  Hague  of  April  '94,  by  which  Prussia
agreed  to  help  in  the  defence  of  the  Netherlands  :  but  Thugut  was'  most  unwilling
that  Belgium  should  be  saved  in  this  way,  and  Thugut' s  diplomacy  was  in  the
ascendant,  and  besides,  as  affairs  developed  in  Poland,  Prussia  not  only  refused  to
come  to  help  the  Netherlands,  but  would  hardly  stay  on  the  Rhine  :  it  was  therefore
with  a  half-hearted  Austrian  and  a  whole-hearted  English  defence  alone  that
France  had  to  deal ;  it  is  indeed  open  to  doubt  whether  the  rapid  '  scuttling '  of
Austria  out  of  Belgium  was  due  more  to  political  or  to  military  reasons.  [See  Sorel,
vol.  iv.  cap.  iii.)

When  the  Campaign  opened  Coburg  was  in  command  of  the  Allies  (some
140,000  Austrians  and  English)  between  the  Sambre  and  the  sea,  and  was  aiming
at  the  capture  of  Landrecies  and  Guise  on  the  road  to  Paris.  Pichegru  faced  him
with  130,000,  but  was  unable  to  prevent  Landrecies  falling,  April  20th,  while  the
French  left  under  Souham  and  Moreau  was  more  successful,  and  was  advancing
towards  Ghent  :  Carnot  thereon  resolved  to  denude  the  army  of  the  Rhine  and
bring  all  available  troops  to  Pichegru,  risking  the  chance  that  Mollendorf  with  a
large  Prussian  army  might  advance  into  France,  either  by  the  gate  of  Lorraine  or
the  gate  of  Burgundy.  The  result  was  the  victory  of  Tourcoing,  May  i8th,  won  by
Souham  and  Moreau,  and  the  capture  of  Ypres  by  Pichegru,  June  17th.  Mean-
while Jourdan  (the  French  right)  after  six  failures  contrived  to  force  the  passage  of
the  Sambre  (June  3rd),  and  75,000  men  were  united  under  his  command  with  the
name  of  the  Army  of  'Sambre  et  Meuse.'  He  captured  Charleroy,  to  succour
which  Coburg,  with  far  inferior  forces,  fought  and  lost  the  battle  of  Fleurus,  June
26th  ;  Pichegru  was  then  able  to  advance  by  Ghent  on  Brussels,  Jourdan  by  way
off  Mons  driving  the  Austrians  back  on  Louvain  and  Li^ge  :  the  English  retired  to
cover  Holland  via  Malines  and  Antwerp.     (Sorel,  iv.  77,  sqq.)'\

2  [June  26th  94.]

^June  26th  '94;  see  'Rapport  de  Guyton-Morveau  sur  les  Aerostats,'  in  the
Moniteur  of  6  Vend^miaire,  an  H.  [Gu)^on-Morveau,  who  had  long  studied
aerostatics  in  company  with  his  friend  Carnot,  was  the  experimentalist  with  the
balloon  at  the  battle  of  Fleurus  [see  Carnot,  Corresp.  i.  381).     He  was  born  1737,


FLAME-PICTURE  163

On  the  whole,  is  it  not,  O  Reader,  one  of  the  strangest  Flame-
Pictures  that  ever  painted  itself ;  flaming  off  there,  on  its  ground
of  Guillotine-black  ?  And  the  nightly  Theatres  are  Twenty-
three  ;  and  the  Salons  de  danse  are  Sixty ;  full  of  mere  Egalite,
Frateniite  and  Carmagnole.  And  Section  Committee-rooms  are
Forty-eight ;  redolent  of  tobacco  and  brandy :  vigorous  with
twenty-pence  a-day,  coercing  the  Suspect.  And  the  Houses  of
Arrest  are  Twelve,  for  Paris  alone ;  crowded  and  even  crammed.
And  at  all  turns,  you  need  your  '  Certificate  of  Civism ; '  be
it  for  going  out,  or  for  coming  in ;  nay  without  it  you  cannot,
for  money,  get  your  daily  ounces  of  bread.  Dusky  red-capped
Bakers' -queues ;  wagging  themselves  ;  not  in  silence  !  for  we
still  Hve  by  Maximum,^  in  all  things ;  waited  on  by  these  two.
Scarcity  and  Confusion.  The  faces  of  men  are  darkened  with
suspicion ;  with  suspecting,  or  being  suspect.  The  streets  lie
unswept ;  the  ways  unmended.  Law  has  shut  her  Books  ;  speaks
little,  save  impromptu,  through  the  throat  of  Tinville.  Crimes
go  unpunished ;  not  crimes  against  the  Revolution. ^  '  The  number
of  foundling  children,'  as  some  compute,  'is  doubled.'

How  silent  now  sits  Royalism  ;  sits  all  Aristocratism ;  Respec-
tability that  kept  its  Gig  !  The  honour  now,  and  the  safety,  is  to
Poverty,  not  to  Wealth.  Your  Citizen,  who  would  be  fashionable,
walks  abroad,  with  his  Wife  on  his  arm,  in  red  wool  nightcap,
black-shag  spencer,  and  carmagnole  complete.  Aristocratism
crouches  low,  in  what  shelter  is  still  left ;  submitting  to  all  re-
quisitions, vexations ;  too  happy  to  escape  with   life.      Ghastly

avocat-gdniral  at  Dijon,  deputy  for  Cote-d'Or  to  Legislative  and  Convention,
member  of  the  first  Comitd  de  Salut  Public  and  afterwards  of  the  Council  of  500,
died  1816.  The  project  for  a  war  balloon  was  first  brought  before  the  Committee
by  Guyton-Morveau,  July  '93  (Aulard,  Recueil,  v.  414).]

1  [Paris  was  supplied  with  food  by  '  requisitions  '  from  the  surrounding  districts  :
regular  boundaries  within  which  these  were  to  be  levied  were  mapped  out ;  a  list  is
given  in  Aulard  (Recueil,  viii.  220).  This  practice  led  to  bitter  hostility  between  the
Capital  and  the  neighbouring  Communes,  and  led  to  such  scenes  of  pillage  as  are
described  in  Dauban  (Paris  en  1794,  p.  245).]

2  Mercier,  v.  25  ;  Deux  Amis,  xii.  142-199.  [Many  letters,  but  especially  one  of
Dubois-Cranc6,  March  9th  '94,  complain  of  the  fact  that  there  are  50,000  or  60,000
men  wandering  over  France,  pretending  to  be  on  their  way  to  join  the  different
armies  :  they  draw  pay  (of  3  sous  a  league)  on  this  pretence,  but  never  do  join  the
armies,  and  only  pillage  and  rob  everywhere  (Aulard,  Recueil,  xi.  615).]


164        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

chateaux  stare  on  you  by  the  wayside ;  disroofed,  diswindowed ;
which  the  National  Housebroker  is  peeling  for  the  lead  and
ashlar.  The  old  tenants  hover  disconsolate,  over  the  Rhine
with  Conde ;  a  spectacle  to  men.  Ci-devant  Seigneur,  exquisite
in  palate,  will  become  an  exquisite  Restaurateur  Cook  in  Hamburg ;
Ci-devant  Madame,  exquisite  in  dress,  a  successful  Marchande  des
Modes  in  London.  In  Newgate-Street,  you  meet  M.  le  Marquis,
with  a  rough  deal  on  his  shoulder,  adze  and  jack-plane  under  arm  ;
he  has  taken  to  the  joiner  trade  ;  it  being  necessary  to  live  (faui
vivre).^ — Higher  than  all  Frenchmen  the  domestic  Stock-jobber
flourishes, — in  a  day  of  Paper-money.  The  Farmer  also  flourishes  :
'  Farmers'  houses,'  says  Mercier,  '  have  become  like  Pawnbrokers'
shops  ; '  all  manner  of  furniture,  apparel,  vessels  of  gold  and  silver
accumulate  themselves  there :  bread  is  precious.  The  Farmer's
rent  is  Paper-money,  and  he  alone  of  men  has  bread :  Farmer  is
better  than  Landlord,  and  will  himself  become  Landlord. 2

And  daily,  we  say,  like  a  black  Spectre,  silently  through  that
Life-tumult,  passes  the  Revolution  Cart ;  writing  on  the  walls  its
Mene,  Mene,  Thou  art  weighed,  and  found  wanting/     A  Spectre

1  See  Deux  Amis,  xv.  189-192  ;  M^moires  de  Genlis ;  Founders  of  the  French
Republic,  &c.  &c.

2  [Carlyle's  imagination,  powerful  as  it  was,  never  led  him  to  conceive  any  agri-
cultural conditions  other  than  those  of  his  own  country  ;  it  is  doubtful  if  he  had
ever  realised  the  existence  of  a  peasant  proprietary  in  old  France  ;  a  rent-paying
farmer  is  to  him  the  normal  cultivator.  The  prosperity  of  the  Agricultural  class  in
1794,  so  far  as  it  is  not  a  myth,  rests  entirely  on  the  fact  of  the  splendid  harvest  of  that
year,  and  the  extremely  early  and  beautiful  spring.  But  the  enforcement  of  the
Maximum  (where  it  was  enforced,  vid.  supr.,  iii.  35),  more  than  counteracted  this,
and  the  state  of  the  roads,  which  were  not  repaired  at  all  during  the  anarchic
period,  w§,s  as  disastrous  to  agriculture  as  to  industry.  And  all  the  industries  in
France  were  ruined  {see  the  figures  collected  in  Rev.  de  la  R^v,  vii.  85,  210,  256) :
in  which  case  how  could  the  '  Farmer  flourish  ? '  It  is  of  course  quite  true  that  a
great  number  of  peasant  proprietors  acquired  more  land,  but  it  is  also  clear  that
the  actual  number  of  landowners  did  not  increase,  and  that  by  far  the  greater  part
of  the  confiscated  property  was  bought  by  speculators  who  did  nothing  to  cultivate
it  during  the  anarchic  period.  The  interference  with  freedom  was  perhaps  most
startlingly  manifested  by  the  order  of  the  Committee,  May  31st  '94,  to  all  agricultural
labourers  to  work  at  the  coming  harvest  at  wages  fixed  by  their  several  Municipalities.
The  lowest  rate  of  wages  which  I  have  come  across  is  one  fixed  in  the  poor  district
of  Morlaix  in  Brittany  (as  far  back  as  Oct.  '93,  but  to  last  till  Sept.  '94),  viz.,  i  fr,
2S.  6d.  a  day :  the  same  table  fixes  the  following  among  other  Maximum  prices  ;
prime  beef  12  sous  the  lb. ,  mutton  8,  pork  12,  butter  12,  salt  cod  12,  red  wine  15  the
bottle,  live  cattle  from  350  to  100  fr.  according  to  sex  and  age  [not  according  to
weight  or  condition),  sheep  at  10  fr.  (I  confess  that  some  of  these  figures,  especially
the  last,  seem  to  me  absolutely  unintelligible).     {See  Rev.  de  la  R6v.  viii.  345.)]


FLAME-PICTURE  165

with  which  one  has  grown  familiar.  Men  have  adjusted  them-
selves :  complaint  issues  not  from  that  Death-tumbril.  Weak
women  and  ci-devants,  their  plumage  and  finery  all  tarnished,  sit
there ;  with  a  silent  gaze,  as  if  looking  into  the  Infinite  Black.
The  once  light  Up  wears  a  curl  of  irony,  uttering  no  word ;  and
the  Tumbril  fares  along.  They  may  be  guilty  before  Heaven,  or
not ;  they  are  guilty,  we  suppose,  before  the  Revolution.  Then,
does  not  the  Republic  '  coin  money  *  of  them,  with  its  great  axe  }
Red  Nightcaps  howl  dire  approval :  the  rest  of  Paris  looks  on ;
if  with  a  sigh,  that  is  much :  Fellow-creatures  whom  sighing
cannot  help ;  whom  black  Necessity  and  Tinville  have  clutched.

One  other  thing,  or  rather  two  other  things,  we  will  still  men-
tion ;  and  no  more :  The  Blond  Perukes ;  ^  the  Tannery  at  Meudon.
Great  talk  is  of  these  Ferruques  blondes  :  O  Reader,  they  are  made
from  the  Heads  of  Guillotined  women !  The  locks  of  a  Duchess,
in  this  way,  may  come  to  cover  the  scalp  of  a  cordwainer  ;  her
blonde  German  Frankism  his  black  Gaelic  poll,  if  it  be  bald.  Or
they  may  be  worn  affectionately,  as  relics ;  rendering  one  suspect  ?  ^
Citizens  use  them,  not  without  mockery ;  of  a  rather  cannibal
sort.

Still  deeper  into  one's  heart  goes  that  Tannery  at  Meudon;
not  mentioned  among  the  other  miracles  of  tanning !  '  At
'Meudon,'  says  Montgaillard  with  considerable  calmness,  'there
'was  a  Tannery  of  Human  Skins;  such  of  the  Guillotined  as
'  seemed  worth  flaying :  of  which  perfectly  good  wash-leather
'  was  made  ; '  for  breeches,  and  other  uses.  The  skin  of  the  men,
he  remarks,  was  superior  in  toughness  (comistance)  and  quality  to
shamoy ;  that  of  the  women  was  good  for  almost  nothing,  being
so  soft  in  texture !  ^ — History   looking  back  over   Cannibalism,

i[Vilate  (p.  243)  is  the  only  other  authority  for  the  'perruques  blondes'  story,
and,  as  I  have  already  said,  he  is  a  professional  liar.]

2  Mercier,  ii.  134.

3  Montgaillard,  iv.  320.  [The  old  Ch&teau  and  Park  of  Meudon  were  by  order
of  the  Committee,  Oct.  20th  1793,  put  at  the  disposal  of  certain  engineers  for  ex-
periments in  military  science  ;  the  workmen  were  all  lodged  within  the  walls,  and
were  under  strict  surveillance,  lest  the  secret  (whatever  it  was)  should  leak  out ;  it
was  almost  certainly  connected  with  military  ballooning  {see  Aulard,  Recueil,  vii.

513)-

The  fable  of  the  tannery  of  human  skins  was  widespread,  but  appears  to  have


166        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

through  Purchass  Pilgrims  and  all  early  and  late  Records,  will
perhaps  find  no  terrestrial  Cannibalism  of  a  sort,  on  the  whole,
so  detestable.  It  is  a  manufactured,  soft-feeling,  quietly  elegant
sort ;  a  sort  perfide !  Alas  then,  is  man's  civilisation  only  a
wrappage,  through  which  the  savage  nature  of  him  can  still  burst,
infernal  as  ever  ?  Nature  still  makes  him  ;  and  has  an  Infernal
in  her  as  well  as  a  Celestial.

only  legendary  foundation.  It  is  mentioned  by  Georges  Duval  in  his  '  Souvenirs
sur  la  Terreur,'  as  a  matter  of  common  belief,  that  Billaud  appeared  at  the  Fete  of
2oth  Prairial  in  breeches  of  human  leather.  M.  Wallon  in  Rev.  dela  R6v.  (ix.  178,
sqq.)  says  that  experiments  in  such  tannery  were  made  in  the  reign  of  Louis  XV.,
and  at  Meudon,  simply  from  scientific  curiosity  ;  and  this  perhaps  gave  rise  to  the
fable.  The  Convention  declined  to  discuss  the  matter  v^^hen  it  was  reported  to
it  March  2nd  '95.  In  the  Archives  (A.  F.  ii.  ;  Carton  136)  is  an  actual  letter  from
a  firm  at  Strasburg,  Ziegler  and  Mauss,  breeches-makers,  addressed  to  Garnerin,
an  agent  of  the  Committee  in  Alsace,  proving  that  they  had  tanned  human  skin
and  made  breeches  out  of  it,  and  were  prepared  to  do  it  again.  Garnerin  laid  the
letter  before  the  Committee,  which  prohibited  it  altogether.]


[The  originator  of  the  system  of  schools  in  France  had  been  the  Abb^  Lasalle,
at  the  end  of  the  17th  century  ;  and  before  '89  the  majority  of  parishes  contained  a
primary  school.  The  overwhelming  majority  of  the  cahiers  demand  the  establish-
ment of  such  schools  in  every  parish  under  the  superintendence  of  the  parish  Clergy.
None  of  the  cahiers,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  put  forward  any  demand  for  the  modern
idea  of  "  Secularisation  of  Education,"  which  is  wholly  a  tradition  of  the  attempt  to
decatholicise  France  in  the  Revolution.  The  increase  of  the  salaries  of  the  school-
masters and  the  provision  of  more  schoolmistresses  for  girls  are  both  demanded  by
XXiQ  cahiers.  The  Revolution,  in  sweeping  away  the  church,  swept  away  all  the
parish  schools  with  it ;  and,  although  many  projects  for  replacing  them  were  mooted
in  the  Constituent,  no  law  on  the  subject  was  passed  until  Oct.  '93,  when  in  conse-
quence of  a  report  by  Lakanal  in  the  name  of  the  '  Committee  of  Instruction,'
June  26th  '93,  the  Convention  created  three  grades  of  schools  with  free  instruction,
'  primary,'  *  secondary'  and  '  normal.'  There  was  to  be  a  primary  school  wi,th  a
schoolmaster  and  mistress  for  every  1,000  inhabitants.  [See  Alfred  Babeau,  L'Ecole
de  Village  pendant  la  Revolution  (Paris,  1881),  and  an  article  in  Rev.  des  Deux
Mondes  (1881)  on  the  same  subject.]


167


BOOK  VI
THERMIDOR

CHAPTER  I

THE  GODS  ARE  ATHIRST

What  then  is  this  Thing,  called  La  Revolution,  which,  like  an
Angel  of  Death,  hangs  over  France,  noyading,  fusillading,  fighting,
gun-boring,  tanning  human  skins  ?  La  Revolution  is  but  so  many
Alphabetic  Letters ;  a  thing  nowhere  to  be  laid  hands  on,  to  be
clapt  under  lock  and  key  :  where  is  it  ?  what  is  it  ?  It  is  the
Madness  that  dwells  in  the  hearts  of  men.  In  this  man  it  is,
and  in  that  man ;  as  a  rage  or  as  a  terror,  it  is  in  all  men.  In-
visible, impalpable ;  and  yet  no  black  Azrael,  with  wings  spread
over  half  a  continent,  with  sword  sweeping  from  sea  to  sea,  could
be  a  truer  Reality.  ^

To  explain,  what  is  called  explaining,  the  march  of  this  Re-
volutionary Government,  be  no  task  of  ours.  Man  cannot  explain
it.  A  paralytic  Couthon,  asking  in  the  Jacobins,  '  What  hast  thou
done  to  be  hanged  if  Counter- Revolution  should  arrive  ? '  a  sombre
Saint-Just,2  not  yet  six-and-twenty,  declaring  that '  for  Revolution-

^  [F61ix  Rocquain  (L' Esprit  Rdvolutionnaire  avant  La  Revolution)  explains  the
deification  of  La  Revolution  ;  from  1751  onwards,  says  he,  it  was  in  every  one's
thoughts  and  the  word  was  in  most  people's  mouths  ;  D' Argenson  continually  speaks
of  La  Rdvolution  as  if  it  was  a  perfectly  well  known  thing.  Voltaire  seems  never  to
have  regarded  it  from  a  political  point  of  view,  but  only  as  an  abstraction,  a  Revolution
in  thought :  in  1770  he  says  '  it  is  already  accomplished  and  has  even  gone  too  far.'
(Rocquain,  183,  279,  289.)

We  might  look  forward  100  years  and  say  that  La  Revolution  is  regarded  by
many  Frenchmen  as  not  yet  accomplished :  she  is,  and  probably  will  remain,  a
Goddess  to  whom  a  thousand  altars  smoke.]

2  [From  the  fall  of  Danton  Saint-Just  begins  to  appear  as  the  leader  of  the  Con-
vention (though  not  of  the  Committees).  He  had  a  real  scheme  for  regenerating
France,  whose  inhabitants  were  to  be  forced  to  return  to  the  two  primitive  occupa-
tions of  the  savage  freeman,  war  and  agriculture ;  the  State  was  to  educate  the  young
from  the  tenderest  years  on  the  Spartan  plan  ;  marriage  was  to  be  controlled  by  the


168    -   THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

ists  there  is  no  rest  but  in  the  tomb  ; '  ^  a  seagreen  Robespierre
converted  into  vinegar  and  gall ;  much  more  an  Amar  and  Vadier,
a  Collot  and  Billaud  :  to  inquire  what  thoughts,  predetermination
or  prevision,  might  be  in  the  head  of  these  men  !  Record  of  their
thought  remains  not ;  Death  and  Darkness  have  swept  it  out
utterly.  Nay,  if  we  even  had  their  thought,  all  that  they  could
have  articulately  spoken  to  us,  how  insignificant  a  fraction  were
that  of  the  Thing  which  realised  itself,  which  decreed  itself,  on
signal  given  by  them  !  As  has  been  said  more  than  once,  this
Revolutionary  Government  is  not  a  self-conscious  but  a  blind  fatal
one.  Each  man,  enveloped  in  his  ambient-atmosphere  of  revolu-
tionary fanatic  Madness,  rushes  on,  impelled  and  impelling ;  and
has  become  a  blind  brute  Force  ;  no  rest  for  him  but  in  the  grave  !
Darkness  and  the  mystery  of  horrid  cruelty  cover  it  for  us,  in
History ;  as  they  did  in  Nature.  The  chaotic  Thunder-cloud,  with
its  pitchy  black,  and  its  tumult  of  dazzling  jagged  fire,  in  a  world
all  electric  :  thou  wilt  not  undertake  to  show  how  that  comported
itself, — what  the  secrets  of  its  dark  womb  were  ;  from  what  sources,
with  what  specialities,  the  lightning  it  held  did,  in  confused  bright-
ness of  terror,  strike  forth,  destructive  and  self-destructive,  till  it
ended  ?  Like  a  Blackness  naturally  of  Erebus,  which  by  will  of
Providence  had  for  once  mounted  itself  into  dominion  and  the
Azure :  is  not  this  properly  the  nature  of  Sansculottism  consum-
mating itself  ?  Of  which  Erebus  Blackness  be  it  enough  to  discern
that  this  and  the  other  dazzling  fire-bolt,  dazzling  fire-torrent,
does  by  small  Volition  and  great  Necessity,  verily  issue, — in  such
and  such  succession  ;  destructive  so  and  so,  self-destructive  so  and
so :  till  it  end.

Royalism  is  extinct,  'sunk,'  as  they  say,  'in  the  mud  of  the
Loire  ; '    Republicanism   dominates  without   and   within :    what.


State  (which  is  to  exercise  its  judgment  in  sexual  selection) ;  property  was  to  be
annually  redistributed.  No  one  really  supported  these  chimerical  views,  but
Robespierre,  Couthon  and  Lebas  gave  them  apparent  support  [cf.  Stephens'  Orators,
ii.  418  ;  Gros,  107  ;  Von  Sybel,  iv.  15,  16).]

1  [The  quotation  from  Saint-Just  here  given  is  in  Montgaillard  (iv.  244) ;  he  assigns
no  date  or  place  to  the  remark.]


THE  GODS  ARE  ATHIRST  169

therefore,  on  the  15th  day  of  March  179^,  is  this  ?  ^  Arrestment,
sudden  really  as  a  bolt  out  of  the  Blue,  has  hit  strange  victims :
Hebert  P^re  Duchesne,  Bibliopolist  Momoro,  Clerk  Vincent,
General  Ronsin ;  high  CordeUer  Patriots,  redcapped  Magistrates
of  Paris,  Worshippers  of  Reason,  Commanders  of  Revolutionary
Army  !  Eight  short  days  ago,  their  Cordelier  Club  was  loud,
and  louder  than  ever,  with  Patriot  denunciations.  Hebert  P^re
Duchesne  had  "  held  his  tongue  and  his  heart  these  two  months,
at  sight  of  Moderates,  Crypto- Aristocrats,  Camilles,  Sc&Urats  in
the  Convention  itself :  but  could  not  do  it  any  longer  ;  would,  if
other  remedy  were  not,  invoke  the  sacred  right  of  Insurrection."
So  spake  Hebert  in  CordeUer  Session  ;  with  vivats,  till  the  roofs
rang  again.-  Eight  short  days  ago  ;  and  now  already !  They
rub  their  eyes  :  it  is  no  dream  ;  they  find  themselves  in  the
Luxembourg.  Goose  Gobel  too  ;  and  they  that  burnt  Churches  !
Chaumette  himself,  potent  Procureur,  Agent  National  as  they  now
call  it,  who  could  *  recognise  the  Suspect  by  the  very  face  of
them,'  he  lingers  but  three  days  ;  on  the  third  day  he  too  is  hurled

1  [March  14th.  The  chronology  of  this  and  the  succeeding  pages  is  wild.  The  dates
are  these  :  Nov.  17th  '93,  first  arrest  of  Hubert's  '  tail '  (at  instance  of  Robespierre) ;
early  in  December  gradual  attack  of  Dantonists,  especially  Ph^lippeaux,  (i.)  on
CoUot's  cruelty  at  Lyons,  (ii.)  on  the  horrors  committed  in  La  Vendue,  especially  on
Turreau,  Ronsin,  Rossignol  (the  Vieux  Cordelier  is  a  move  in  this  direction) ;
Dec.  2oth,  return  of  Collot  from  Lyons  ;  end  of  Dec.  and  all  January,  struggles  in
Jacobin  Club,  Robespierre  turning  more  and  more  against  Danton ;  Feb.  and,
release  of  Hubert's  tail ;  Feb.  20th,  return  of  Saint-Just  from  the  North  ;  Feb.  26th,
his  resolve  to  act  against  both  H^bertists  and  Dantonists ;  March  14th,  arrest  of
Hubert  and  all  his  party  (this  at  first  favourable  to  Danton  {vid.  infr.,  iii.  175))  ;
then  ten  days  of  great  danger  from  the  Coimnune,  which  would  like  to  make  an
Insurrection  to  save  Hubert ;  March  24th,  execution  of  Hubert  and  his  party ;
March  31st,  arrest  of  Dantonists  ;  April  5th,  their  execution.]

2  Moniteur  du  17  Ventose  (March  7th)  1794.  [Carlyle  mixes  them  all  up.  The
'  H^bertists '  brought  to  trial  on  March  21st  were  not  all  H6bertists  proper,  e.g. ,
Clootz  was  not  strictly  of  that  party  as  Carlyle  rightly  says  below  (vid. ,  iii.  173)  ;
and  not  all  the  H^bertists  or  even  their  leaders  were  of  that  fournde,  which  com-
prised of  them  only  Hubert,  Ronsin,  Momoro,  Vincent,  Kock,  Proly,  Desfieux,
Pereira  and  Dubuisson.

Chaumette  was  not  arrested  till  April  4th  and  was  brought  to  trial  on  loth  ;  with
him  were  Gobel,  the  widows  of  Desmoulins  and  Hubert,  Dillon ,  etc.  ( Vid.  infr. ,  iii.
182  ;  and  see  Cam  pardon,  i.  234,  295.)

The  mistake  in  mixing  Chaumette  and  Hubert's  gang  here  is  a  very  unfortunate
one,  because  Chaumette  was  still  Procureur  of  the  Commune  when,  on  March  6th,
the  Section  of  the  Cordeliers  came  to  the  Commune  declaring  itself  to  be  in
Insurrection  {i.e.,  in  favour  of  Hubert),  and  Chaumette  rebuked  them  for  this  and
also  for  veiling  the  Rights  of  Man,  thus  separating  his  cause  from  that  of  his  old
ally  Hubert.     (Martin,  ii.  176.)]


170        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

in.i  Most  chopfallen,  blue,  enters  the  National  Agent  this  Limbo
whither  he  has  sent  so  many.  Prisoners  crowd  round,  jibing  and
jeering  ;  "  Sublime  National  Agent/'  says  one,  "  in  virtue  of  thy
immortal  Proclamation,  lo  there  !  I  am  suspect,  thou  art  suspect,
he  is  suspect,  we  are  suspect,  ye  are  suspect,  they  are  suspect !  "  ^

The  meaning  of  these  things  ?  Meaning  !  It  is  a  Plot ;  Plot
of  the  most  extensive  ramifications  ;  which,  however,  Barrere  holds
the  threads  of.  Such  Church-burning  and  scandalous  masque-
rades of  Atheism,  fit  to  make  the  Revolution  odious :  where
indeed  could  they  originate  but  in  the  gold  of  Pitt  ?  Pitt  in-
dubitably, as  Preternatural  Insight  will  teach  one,  did  hire  this
Faction  of  Enragh,  to  play  their  fantastic  tricks  ;  to  roar  in  their
Cordeliers  Club  about  Moderatism  ;  to  print  their  Pere  Duchesne  ;
worship  skyblue  Reason  in  red  nightcap ;  rob  all  Altars, — and
bring  the  spoil  to  us  !

Still  more  indubitable,  visible  to  the  mere  bodily  sight,  is  this  :
that  the  Cordeliers  Club  sits  pale,  with  anger  and  terror  ;  and  has
'  veiled  the  Rights  of  Man,' — without  effect.^  Likewise  that  the
Jacobins  are  in  considerable  confusion  ;  busy  '  purging  themselves,
s'epurant,'  as  in  times  of  Plot  and  public  Calamity  they  have  re-
peatedly had  to  do.  Not  even  Camille  Desmoulins  but  has  given
offence  :  nay  there  have  risen  murmurs  against  Danton  himself ;
though  he  bellowed  them  down,  and  Robespierre  finished  the
matter  by  '  embracing  him  in  the  Tribune.'  ^

1  [April  4th.]

2  [This  is  from  the  '  Journal  de  la  prison  du  Luxembourg,'  p.  148.]

'^  [March  4th.  Carlyle  ignores  the  danger  which  this  implied.  The  Commune,  so
far  as  it  had  any  opinion  other  than  desire  for  plunder  for  each  of  its  members,  was
solidaire  for  Hubert.  Pache  the  Maire  undoubtedly  inclined  to  him.  Bouchotte
at  the  war  office  had  always  played  into  the  hands  of  this  party,  and  all  the
antecedents  of  Hanriot  looked  the  same  way  :  finally  the  lowest  type  of  gaol-bird
and  gutter-bird,  the  Septembrisers  and  the  foreigners  attracted  to  Paris  for  plunder,
were  all  in  that  interest.  M.  Dauban  in  his  Paris  en  1794  (204-288)  has  collected  a
mass  of  evidence  pointing  to  the  gravity  of  the  crisis.  Yet  now  for  the  first  time
the  Government,  i.e.,  the  Committee,  triumphed  over  an  Insurrection,  and  without
the  threatened  whiff  of  grapeshot.  We  learn  from  Schmidt  (ii.  141)  how  very
nearly  Pache,  Bouchotte,  Hanriot  and  Santerre  were  sacrificed  at  the  same  time  ;
but  they  probably  turned  government  evidence,  and  were  able  to  prove  gigantic
peculation  against  the  H^bertists.  The  joy  at  Hubert's  execution,  even  among
those  who  had  hung  on  his  words  most,  was  universal  [ibid.  142-3).]

^[The  ^puration  at  the  Jacobin  Club  began  in  the  middle  of  November.
Every  member's  name  was  brought  up,  and  the  question  of  his  '  pure  patriotism  '


THE  GODS  ARE  ATHIRST  171

Whom  shall  the  Republic  and  a  jealous  Mother-Society  trust  ?
In  these  times  of  temptation,  of  Preternatural  Insight !  For  there
are  Factions  of  the  Stranger,  '  dc  I'etranger,'  Factions  of  Moderates,
of  Enraged  ;  all  manner  of  Factions  :  we  walk  in  a  world  of  Plots  ;
strings  universally  spread,  of  deadly  gins  and  falltraps,  baited
by  the  gold  of  Pitt !  Clootz,  Speaker  of  Mankind  so-called,  with
his  Evidences  of  Mahometan  Religion,  and  babble  of  Universal  Re-
public, him  an  incorruptible  Robespierre  has  purged  away.  Baron
Clootz,  and  Paine  rebellious  Needleman  lie,  these  two  months,  in
the  Luxembourg ;  limbs  of  the  Faction  de  H  stranger.  Represen-
tative Phelippeaux  is  purged  out :  he  came  back  from  La  Vendee
with  an  ill  report  in  his  mouth  against  rogue  Rossignol,  and  our
method  of  warfare  there.  ^  Recant  it,  O  Phelippeaux,  we  entreat
thee  !  Phelippeaux  will  not  recant ;  and  is  purged  out.^  Re-
presentative Fabre  d';^glantine,  famed  Nomenclator  of  Romme's
Calendar,  is  purged  out ;  nay,  is  cast  into  the  Luxembourg  :  *
accused  of  Legislative  Swindling  'in  regard  to  moneys  of  the
India  Company.'  There  with  his  Chabots,  Bazires,  guilty  of  the
like,  let  Fabre  wait  his  destiny.  And  Westermann  friend  of
Danton,  he  who  led  the  Marseillese  on  the  Tenth  of  August,  and
fought  well  in  La  Vendee,  but  spoke  not  well  of  rogue  Rossignol,
is  purged  out.  Lucky,  if  he  too  go  not  to  the  Luxembourg.  And
your  Prolys,  Guzmans,  of  the  Faction  of  the  Stranger,  they  have
gone ;  Pereyra,  though  he  fled,  is  '  taken  in  the  disguise  of  a
Tavern  Cook.'  I  am  suspect,  thou  art  suspect,  he  is  suspect  ! —
The  great  heart  of  Danton  is  weary  of  it.     Danton  is  gone  to

was  discussed.  Danton  was  '  tried '  on  Dec.  3rd,  and  only  escaped  being  purged
because  Robespierre  supported  him.  Camille  was  tried  and  also  escaped  purging
(Dec.  14th)  by  the  same  protection.  It  was  the  publication  cf  the  Vieux  Cordelier,
No,  4,  that  led  to  Camille  being  cited  again  by  the  Club,  and  an  inquiry  being
made  into  his  conduct,  together  with  that  of  Phelippeaux  and  Fabre:  again  on
Jan.  7th  he  was  jtist  saved  from  purgation  by  Robespierre,  but  gravely  blamed
and  ceased  to  attend  the  Club.  Robespierre  also  was  absent  from  the  Club  Feb.
15th — March  13th.]

^[Dec.  24th.]

2  [Phelippeaux  was  deputy  for  the  Sarthe  to  Convention,  a  staunch  friend  of
Danton  and  one  of  the  most  humane  and  sensible  of  the  Refrisentants  en  mission  (in
La  Vendee  1793).  His  complaints  of  the  cruelties  exercised  there  by  the  Republican
Generals  begin  as  early  as  Aug.  30th  '93,  and  increase  in  fierceness  till  December,
when  he  returned  to  Paris.     (Aulard,  Recueil,  viii.  ix.  x.  passim.)]

'Qan.  1 2th.]


172        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

native  Arcis,  for  a  little  breathing-time  of  peace :  ^  Away,  black
Arachne-webs,  thou  world  of  Fury,  Terror  and  Suspicion ;  welcome,
thou  everlasting  Mother,  with  thy  spring  greenness,  thy  kind
household  loves  and  memories  ;  true  art  thou,  were  all  else  untrue !
The  great  Titan  walks  silent,  by  the  banks  of  the  murmuring
Aube,  in  young  native  haunts  that  knew  him  when  a  boy  ;  wonders
what  the  end  of  these  things  may  be.

But  strangest  of  all,  Camille  Desmoulins  is  purged  out. 2
Couthon  gave  as  a  test  in  regard  to  Jacobin  purgation  the  ques-
tion, ^What  hast  thou  done  to  be  hanged  if  Counter- Revolution
'  should  arrive  ? '  Yet  Camille,  who  could  so  well  answer  this
question,  is  purged  out !  The  truth  is,  Camille,  early  in  Decem-
ber last,  began  publishing  a  new  Journal,  or  Series  of  Pamphlets,
entitled  the  Vieux  Cordelier,  old  Cordelier.  Camille,  not  afraid
at  one  time  to  '  embrace  Liberty  on  a  heap  of  dead  bodies,'  begins
to  ask  now,  Whether  among  so  many  arresting  and  punishing
Committees,  there  ought  not  to  be  a  '  Committee  of  Mercy  ? '
Saint-Just,  he  observes,  is  an  extremely  solemn  young  Republican,
who  '  carries  his  head  as  if  it  were  a  Saint-Sacrament,'  adorable
Hostie,  or  divine  Real- Presence !  Sharply  enough,  this  old
Cordelier, — Danton  and  he  were  of  the  earliest  primary  Cor-
deliers,— ^shoots  his  glittering  war-shafts  into  your  new  Cordeliers,
your  Heberts,  Momoros,  with  their  brawling  brutalities  and
despicabilities  ;  say  as  the  Sun-god  (for  poor  Camille  is  a  Poet)
shot  into  that  Python  Serpent,  sprung  of  mud.

Whereat,  as  was  natural,  the  Hebertist  Python  did  hiss  and
writhe  amazingly  ;  and  threaten  '  sacred  right  of  Insurrection  ; ' —
and,  as  we  saw,  get  cast  into  Prison.  Nay,  with  all  the  old  wit,
dexterity  and  light  graceful  poignancy,  Camille,  translating  'out
of  Tacitus,  from  the  reign  of  Tiberius,'  pricks  into  the  Law  of  the
Suspect  itself ;  making  it  odious  !  Twice,  in  the  Decade,  his  wild
Leaves  issue  ;  full  of  wit,  nay  of  humour,  of  harmonious  ingenuity
and  insight, — one  of  the  strangest  phenomena  of  that  dark  time  ;
and  smite,  in  their  wild-sparkling  way,  at  various  monstrosities,

i[Not  now,  but  Oct.  12th— Nov.  21st  '93.]    2[No  ;  vid.  supr.,  note  on  iii.  171.]


THE  GODS  AEE  ATHIRST  173

Saint-Sacrament  heads,  and  Juggernaut  idols,  in  a  rather  reckless
manner.  To  the  great  joy  of  Josephine  Beauhamais,  and  the
other  Five-thousand  and  odd  Suspect,  who  fill  the  Twelve  Houses
of  Arrest ;  on  whom  a  ray  of  hope  dawns  !  Robespierre,  at  first
approbatory,  knew  not  at  last  what  to  think  ;  then  thought,  with
his  Jacobins,  that  Camille  must  be  expelled.  A  man  of  true  Re-
volutionary spirit,  this  Camille  ;  but  with  the  unwisest  sallies  ;
whom  Aristocrats  and  Moderates  have  the  art  to  corrupt !  Jaco-
binism is  in  uttermost  crisis  and  struggle  ;  enmeshed  wholly  in
plots,  corruptibilities,  neck-gins  and  baited  falltraps  of  Pitt  Ennemi
du  Genre  Humain.  Camille's  First  Number  begins  with  '  0  Pitt ! —
his  last  is  dated  1 5  Pluviose  Year  2,  3d  February  1 794" ;  and  ends
with  these  words  of  Montezuma's, '  Les  dietuo  ont  soif]  The  gods  are
athirst.'  ^

Be  this  as  it  may,  the  Hebertists  lie  in  Prison  only  some  nine
days.  On  the  24th  of  March,  therefore,  the  Revolution  Tumbrils
carry  through  that  Life-tumult  a  new  cargo :  Hebert,  Vincent,
Momoro,  Ronsin,  Nineteen  of  them  in  all ;  with  whom,  curious
enough,  sits  Clootz  Speaker  of  Mankind.  They  have  been  massed
swiftly  into  a  lump,  this  miscellany  of  Nondescripts  ;  and  travel

1  [ '  That  bloodstained  Goddess,  whose  high  priests,  Hubert  and  Momoro,  etc, ,
dare  to  demand  a  temple  built  of  the  bones  of  three  million  citizens,  like  that  of
Mexico  ;  men  who  incessantly  say  to  the  Jacobins,  the  Commune,  the  Cordeliers,
as  the  Spanish  priests  said  to  Montezuma,  '  the  Gods  are  athirst. '  (Desmoulins,
CEuvres,  i.  242.)  But  Camille  misquotes  his  authority  (Raynal,  iii.  390,  ed.  1780)
as  Carlyle  misquotes  Camille.  The  text  of  Raynal  is  "  Quand  lapaix  avait  durd
quelque  temps,  les  pretres  faisaient  di7'e  a  V empereur  que  les  Dieux  avaientfaim
(the  Gods  were  hungry),  et  dans  la  seule  vue  defaire  des prisonniers  on  recommenfait
la  guerre.^'

In  the  ist  number  of  the  Vieiix  Cordelier  (Dec.  5th)  Camille  ridicules  the
Commune:  the  3rd  (Dec.  15th)  denounces  in  fiery  language  the  Noyades  and
Mitraillades,  the  news  of  which  was  every  day  reaching  Paris  ;  the  4th  (Dec.  20th)
is  the  one  which  demands  a  Committee  of  Mercy  ;  the  5th  (Dec.  25th)  gently  rallied
Bar^re  as  a  weathercock,  and  openly  attacked  the  Hebertists,  calling  Hubert  an
infamous  scoundrel  and  thief ;  the  6th  number  continues  in  the  same  strain  ;  it  was
these  two  last  which  Robespierre  proposed  at  the  Jacobins  to  burn,  although  he
himself  had  been  steadily  flattered  throughout  the  paper:  'Fire  is  no  answer,'
returned  Camille.  The  7th  number,  of  which  M.  Henri  Martin  (ii.  173)  said  that
it  will  ever  remain  one  of  the  immortal  monuments  of  French  thought,  spared  no
one ;  Robespierre,  Committee  men,  and  Hebertists  alike  are  attacked.  The
publisher  dared  not  publish  it,  but  it  is  contained  in  the  '  CEuvres  de  DesmouHns '
(vol.  i.)  together  with  fragments  of  an  8th  number.  It  is  the  7th  which  contains  the
dialogue  between  two  old  Cordeliers ,  ending  with  the  words  '  les  Dieux  ont  Soif.^'\


174        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

now  their  last  road.  No  help.  They  too  must  '  look  through  the
little  window  ; '  they  too  must '  sneeze  into  the  sack/  Memuer  dans
le  sac  ;  as  they  have  done  to  others,  so  is  it  done  to  them.  Sainie-
GuiUotine,  meseems,  is  worse  than  the  old  Saints  of  Superstition  ;
a  man-devouring  Saint  ?  Clootz,  still  with  an  air  of  polished  sar-
casm, endeavours  to  jest,  to  offer  cheering  'arguments  of  Material-
ism ; '  he  requested  to  be  executed  last,  '  in  order  to  establish
certain  principles,' — which  hitherto,  I  think.  Philosophy  has  got
no  good  of.  General  Ronsin  too,  he  stills  looks  forth  with  some
air  of  defiance,  eye  of  command  :  ^  the  rest  are  sunk  in  a  stony  pale-
ness of  despair.  Momoro,  poor  Bibliopolist,  no  Agrarian  Law  yet
realised, — they  might  as  well  have  hanged  thee  at  Evreux,  twenty
months  ago,  when  Girondin  Buzot  hindered  them.  Hebert  Pei^e
Duchesne  shall  never  in  this  world  rise  in  sacred  right  of  insurrec-
tion ;  he  sits  there  low  enough,  head  sunk  on  breast ;  Red  Night-
caps shouting  round  him,  in  frightful  parody  of  his  Newspaper
Articles,  "  Grand  choler  of  the  Pere  Duchesne !  "  Thus  perish
they  ;  the  sack  receives  all  their  heads.  Through  some  section  of
History,  Nineteen  spectre -chimeras  shall  flit,  squeaking  and  gib-
bering ;  till  Oblivion  swallow  them.

In  the  course  of  a  week,  the  Revolutionary  Army  itself  is  dis-
banded ;  2  the  General  having  become  spectral.  This  Faction  of
Rabids,  therefore,  is  also  purged  from  the  Republican  soil  ;  here
also  the  baited  falltraps  of  that  Pitt  have  been  wrenched  up  harm-
less ;  and  anew  there  is  joy  over  a  Plot  Discovered.  The  Revolu-
tion then  is  verily  devouring  its  own  children  ?  All  Anarchy,  by
the  nature  of  it,  is  not  only  destructive  but  ;?e//-destructive.

^  [Ronsin  of  the  true  H^bertist  gang  alone  behaved  with  courage.  Clootz  was
a  fanatic  and  a  madman,  but  undoubtedly  brave  :  but  he  was  no  H6bertist.
Hubert  was  insensible  with  terror.     (Campardon,  i.  247.)]

'^  [March  31st.]


DANTON,  NO  WEAKNESS  175

CHAPTER  II

DANTON,  NO  WEAKNESS

Danton,  meanwhile,  has  been  pressingly  sent  for  from  Arcis  :  ^
he  must  return  instantly,  cried  Camille,  cried  Phelippeaux  and
Friends,  who  scented  danger  in  the  wind.  Danger  enough !  A
Danton,  a  Robespierre,  chief-products  of  a  victorious  Revolution,
are  now  arrived  in  immediate  front  of  one  another  ;  must  ascertain
how  they  will  live  together,  rule  together.  One  conceives  easily
the  deep  mutual  incompatibility  that  divided  these  two  :  with
what  terror  of  feminine  hatred  the  poor  seagreen  Formula  looked
at  the  monstrous  colossal  Reality,  and  grew  greener  to  behold
him  ; — the  Reality,  again,  struggling  to  think  no  ill  of  a  chief-
product  of  the  Revolution ;  yet  feeling  at  bottom  that  such  chief-
product  was  little  other  than  a  chief  windbag,  blown  large  by
Popular  air ;  not  a  man,  with  the  heart  of  a  man,  but  a  poor
spasmodic  incorruptible  pedant,  with  a  logic-formula  instead  of
heart ;  of  Jesuit  or  Methodist- Parson  nature  ;  full  of  sincere-cant,
incorruptibility,  of  virulence,  poltroonery  ;  barren  as  the  eastwind  !
Two  such  chief-products  are  too  much  for  one  Revolution.

Friends,  trembling  at  the  results  of  a  quarrel  on  their  part,
brought  them  to  meet.  "  It  is  right,"  said  Danton,  swallowing
much  indignation,  "  to  repress  the  Royalists  :  but  we  should  not
strike  except  where  it  is  useful  to  the  Republic ;  we  should  not

1  [Danton  left  Paris  Oct.  12th  and  returned  Nov.  21st  '93 ;  it  is  a  pity  to  re-
present his  return  as  connected  with  the  events  of  March  '94.  It  seemed  as  if  a
current  was  setting  in  his  favour  at  the  date  of  the  arrest  of  the  H^bertists,  for
on  March  i8th  Tallien  was  elected  President  of  the  Convention,  and  Legendre  of
the  Jacobins  ;  and  on  the  same  day,  on  the  demand  of  Bourdon  de  I'Oise,  H6ron,  a
favourite  spy  of  Robespierre's,  was  arrested.  But  on  20th  H^ron  was  liberated
again.  It  was  not  perhaps  Robespierre  who  made  up  his  mind  to  kill  Danton  :  it
was  Billaud  who  in  the  Committee  first  said  '  ilfaut  tuer  Danton,'  and  it  was  on
the  night  of  March  23rd — 24th  that  Robespierre  at  last  gave  way  to  Billaud  and
Saint-Just  (Gros,  p.  98).  It  was  on  the  night  of  30th— 31st  that  Saint-Just  read  his
report  against  the  Dantonists  (which  he  was  to  deliver  in  the  Convention  the  next
day)  to  the  two  Committees  in  united  session.  All  signed  this  report  except  Lindet
and  Ruhl  (Robinet,  Frocks  des  Dantonists,  123).  The  trial  has  been  minutely
described  by  Dr.  Robinet.  M.  Sorel  however  to  my  mind  sees  the  true  greatness
of  Danton  better  than  this  professional  apologist.  Dr.  Robinet  is  too  ardent  a
believer  in  the  entire  '  legend  of  the  Revolution,'  and  too  unreasoning  a  hater  of
all  forms  of  religion  to  be  able  to  be  quite  fair  ;  but  his  condemnation  of  the
'  retrograde  movement,'  after  April  5th  '94,  is  excellent.]


176        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

confound  the  innocent  and  the  guilty." — "  And  who  told  you/'  re-
plied Robespierre  with  a  poisonous  look,  "that  one  innocent
person  had  perished  ?  " — "  Quoi,"  said  Danton,  turning  round  to
Friend  Paris  self-named  Fabricius,  Juryman  in  the  Revolutionary
Tribunal :  "  Quoi,  not  one  innocent  ?  What  sayest  thou  of  it,
Fabricius !  "  ^ — Friends,  Westermann,  this  Paris  and  others  urged
him  to  show  himself,  to  ascend  the  Tribune  and  act.  The  man
Danton  was  not  prone  to  show  himself ;  to  act,  or  uproar  for  his
own  safety.  A  man  of  careless,  large,  hoping  nature  ;  a  large
nature  that  could  rest:  he  would  sit  whole  hours,  they  say,
hearing  Camille  talk,  and  liked  nothing  so  well.  Friends  urged
him  to  fly  ;  his  Wife  urged  him  :  "  Whither  fly  .^  "  answered  he  :
"  If  freed  France  cast  me  out,  there  are  only  dungeons  for  me
elsewhere.  One  carries  not  his  country  with  him  at  the  sole  of
his  shoe !  "  The  man  Danton  sat  still.  Not  even  the  arrest-
ment of  Friend  Herault,  a  member  of  Salut,^  yet  arrested  by
Salut,  can  rouse  Danton. — On  the  night  of  the  30th  of  March
Juryman  Paris  came  rushing  in  ;  haste  looking  through  his  eyes  :
A  clerk  of  the  Salut  Committee  had  told  him  Danton' s  warrant
was  made  out,  he  is  to  be  arrested  this  very  night !  Entreaties
there  are  and  trepidation,  of  poor  Wife,  of  Paris  and  Friends  :
Danton  sat  silent  for  a  while  ;  then  answered,  "  lis  noseraient,
They  dare  not ;  "  and  would  take  no  measures.  Murmuring
"  They  dare  not,"  he  goes  to  sleep  as  usual. ^

And  yet,  on  the  morrow  morning,*  strange  rumour  spreads
over  Paris  City:  Danton,  Camille,  Phelippeaux,  Lacroix  have
been  arrested  overnight !  ^     It  is  verily  so  :  the  corridors  of  the

1  Biographic  des  Ministres,  §  Danton,  Brussels  1826.  [The  tradition  of  this
meeting  at  Charenton  comes  from  Lacretelle,  and  is  not  confirmed  elsewhere  ;  the
Biographie  des  Ministres  places  it  after  the  arrest  of  Fabre  (Jan.  13th).]

2 [Herault  had  resigned  his  place  in  the  Committee  Dec.  29th  '93:  he  was
arrested  March  ic;th.]

3[Carlyle  mixes  up  Piris  with  Panis  the  old  Septemberer.  It  was  Pan  is  who
came  to  Danton' s  lodging  late  on  30th,  and  urged  him  to  fly.  Lindet  also  sent
him  warning  (evidently  direct  from  the  Committee-meeting,  see  Robinet,  125).  Fdix
P^ris  had  been  one  of  Danton's  subordinates  in  Belgium  :  he  got  leave  to  change
his  name  to  Fabricius  after  the  assassination  of  Lepelletier  by  Paris.  He  escaped
during  the  Terror,  and  became  ^^(S^gr  of  Tribunal  in  Jan.  '95.]

•1  [March  31st.]

;^[The  warrant  declares  these  four  to  be  arrested  as  accomplices  of  Fabre
d'Eglantine  (ibid.  124,  vid.  next  page).]


DANTON,  NO  WEAKNESS  177

Luxembourg  were  all  crowded,  Prisoners  crowding  forth  to  see
this  giant  of  the  Revolution  enter  among  them.  "  Messieurs/'
said  Danton  politely,  "  I  hoped  soon  to  have  got  you  all  out  of
this  :  but  here  I  am  myself;  and  one  sees  not  where  it  will  end."
— Rumour  may  spread  over  Paris :  the  Convention  clusters  itself
into  groups  ;  wide-eyed,  whispering,  "  Danton  arrested  !  "  Who
then  is  safe  ?  Legendre,  mounting  the  Tribune,  utters,  at  his
own  peril,  a  feeble  word  for  him  ;  moving  that  he  be  heard  at
that  Bar  before  indictment ;  but  Robespierre  frowns  him  down  :
"  Did  you  hear  Chabot,  or  Bazire  ?  Would  you  have  two  weights
and  measures  ?  "  Legendre  cowers  low :  Danton,  like  the  others,
must  take  his  doom.^

Danton's  Prison-thoughts  were  curious  to  have  ;  but  are  not
given  in  any  quantity :  indeed  few  such  remarkable  men  have
been  left  so  obscure  to  us  as  this  Titan  of  the  Revolution.  He
was  heard  to  ejaculate :  "  This  time  twelvemonth,  I  was  moving
the  creation  of  that  same  Revolutionary  Tribunal.  I  crave  pardon
for  it  of  God  and  man.  They  are  all  Brothers  Cain  ;  Brissot
would  have  had  me  guillotined  as  Robespierre  now  will.  I  leave
the  whole  business  in  a  frightful  welter  (gdchis  epouvantahle)  :
not  one  of  them  understands  anything  of  government.  Robes-
pierre will  follow  me ;  I  drag  down  Robespierre.  O,  it  were
better  to  be  a  poor  fisherman  than  to  meddle  with  governing  of
men."  ^ — Camille's  young  beautiful  Wife,  who  had  made  him  rich
not  in  money  alone,  hovers  round  the  Luxembourg,  hke  a  dis-

^[Legendre's  motion  was  not  put  to  the  vote,  as  Robespierre  spoke  most
furiously  against  Danton,  and  Barere  followed  on  the  same  side.  Saint-Just  then
began  to  read  his  report,  which  he  had  read  to  the  Committee  the  night  before:
it  was  a  long  string  of  supposed  crimes,  for  which  Robespierre  had  given  him  notes  ;
one  is  amazed  that  the  Convention  listened  to  such  absurdities  {see  Stephens'  Orators,
ii.  253,  sg^.),  but  (i.)  the  Centre  was  paralysed  by  fear,  and  Robespierre  was  posing
as  its  protector  against  the  Montagnards,  (ii. )  the  Centre  also  probably  regarded
Danton,  Robespierre,  Saint-Just,  Billaud  and  Barere  with  equal  horror,  and  thought
the  sooner  they  massacred  each  other  the  better.]

2  [Dr.  Robinet  rejects  the  story  of  his  having  asked  pardon  of  God  and  man  for
creating  the  Tribunal :  but  Campardon  (ii.  260)  accepts  it,  and  places  it  at  the
Conciergerie,  not  at  the  Luxembourg.  We  learn  from  the  '  M^moires  sur  les  Prisons  '
(ii.  152)  that  Camille  brought  with  him  to  the  Luxembourg  two  English  books,
Young's  Night  Thoughts  and  Hervey's  Meditations,  and  from  the  same  source
that  Danton  spoke  kindly  to  Tom  Paine  in  English  (Tom  Paine  being  one  of  the
first  people  he  met  in  the  prison  ;  ibid.  154).]
VOL.    III.  12


178        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

embodied  spirit,  day  and  night.  Caraille's  stolen  letters  to  her
still  exist ;  stained  with  the  mark  of  his  tears.  ^  "  I  carry  my
head  like  a  Saint-Sacrament  ? "  so  Saint-Just  was  heard  to  mutter  :
"perhaps  he  will  carry  his  like  a  Saint-Denis."

Unhappy  Danton,  thou  still  unhappier  light  Camille,  once
light  Procut^eur  de  la  Lanterne,  ye  also  have  arrived,  then,  at  the
Bourne  of  Creation,  where,  like  Ulysses  Polytlas  at  the  limit
and  utmost  Gades  of  his  voyage,  gazing  into  that  dim  Waste
beyond  Creation,  a  man  does  see  the  Shade  of  his  Mother,  pale,
ineffectual ;  2 — and  days  when  his  Mother  nursed  and  wrapped
him  are  ail-too  sternly  contrasted  with  this  day !  Danton,
Camille,  Herault,  Westermann,  and  the  others,  very  strangely
massed  up  with  Bazires,  Swindler  Chabots,  Fabre  d' Eglantines,
Banker  Freys,  a  most  motley  Batch,  '  Fournee'  as  such  things
will  be  called,  stand  ranked  at  the  Bar  of  Tinville.  It  is  the  2d
of  April  1 794.  Danton  has  had  but  three  days  to  lie  in  Prison  ;
for  the  time  presses.^

What  is  your  name }  place  of  abode  }  and  the  like,  Fouquier


lAperpus  sur  Camille  Desmoulins  (in  Vieux  Cordelier,  Paris,  1825),  pp.  1-29.
[The  letter  never  reached  Lucile — Camille  gave  it  to  Beaurepaire  before  leaving
the  Luxe7nbourg,  with  instructions  to  send  it  on.  Lucile  was  guillotined  before  this
could  happen,  and  Beaurepaire  gave  the  letter  to  Jules  Par6,  in  whose  possession  it
remamed  (Campardon,  ii,  254).

The  Apergus  are  a  reprint  m  Berville  and  Barriere  (1825)  of  the  first  28  pages  of
the  Vieux  Cordelier,  and  the  remark  of  Saint-Just  is  given  in  a  note  on  p.  19,  and  is
said  to  have  been  in  answer  to  a  letter  of  Camille' s  to  a  friend,  which  was  printed
and  hawked  in  the  streets,  in  which  he  said  that  Saint-Just  carried  his  head  as  if
it  were  the  Host.]

2['^HA0e  5'  eTTt  if/ux'^  /xrjTphs  KaTaredvrfvlr]s  (Odyssey,  xi.  84).]

'^  [Fabre  had  been  arrested  on  Jan.  12th,  and  was  at  the  Luxembourg.  On  March
19th  the  Convention  ordered  him  to  be  sent  to  the  Tribunal  Rdvolutionnaire,  and
on  March  26th  the  act  of  accusation  was  made  out  against  him,  Chabot,  Bazire,
Julien  and  Delaunay,  alleging  a  conspiracy  to  destroy  the  Republic.  (Robinet,
Frocks,  125.)  Westermann  was  not  arrested  till  April  2nd,  and  did  not  appear
before  the  Tribunal  UW  3rd  [ibid.  361).  Delaunay,  Julien  and  the  Abb^  L'Espagnac
were  condemned  for  corruption,  agiotage  and  forgery,  Chabot  for  manipulating  the
shares  of  the  Compagnie  des  Indes  and  for  wholesale  peculation,  Bazire  for  com-
plicity in,  or  at  least  silence  about,  the  same ;  Dr.  Robinet  considers  the  guilt  of
most  of  these  persons  proved,  but  is  more  doubtful  about  the  brothers  Frey,  who
had  been  army  contractors  in  Belgium  and  who  were  accused  of  being  foreign
spies.  It  is  obvious  that  this  whole  batch  was  brought  together  in  order  to  discredit
Danton,  and  to  colour  the  charge  of  venality,  which  was  pushed  home  against  him
{ibid.  2>9^sqq.).'\


DANTON,  NO  WEAKNESS  179

asks  ;  according  to  formality. ^  "  My  name  is  Danton/'  answers
he;  "a  name  tolerably  known  in  the  Revolution:  my  abode
will  soon  be  Annihilation  {dans  le  Ndant) ;  but  I  shall  live  in  the
Pantheon  of  History."  A  man  will  endeavour  to  say  something
forcible,  be  it  by  nature  or  not !  Herault  mentions  epigram-
matically  that  he  "  sat  in  this  Hall,  and  was  detested  of  Parle-
menteers."  Camille  makes  answer,  "My  age  is  that  of  the  hon
Sansculotte  J&sus ;  an  age  fatal  to  Revolutionists."  O  Camille,
Camille !  And  yet  in  that  Divine  Transaction,  let  us  say,  there
did  lie,  among  other  things,  the  fa  tallest  Reproof  ever  uttered
here  below  to  worldly  Right-honourableness  ;  '  the  highest  fact,'
so  devout  Novalis  calls  it,  ^in  the  Rights  of  Man.'  Camille's
real  age,  it  would  seem,  is  thirty-four.  Danton  is  one  year  older.
Some  five  months  ago,  the  Trial  of  the  Twenty-two  Girondins
was  the  greatest  that  Fouquier  had  then  done.  But  here  is  a
still  greater  to  do;  a  thing  which  tasks  the  whole  faculty  of
Fouquier ;  which  makes  the  very  heart  of  him  waver.  For  it  is
the  voice  of  Danton  that  reverberates  now  from  these  domes  ;  in
passionate  words,  piercing  with  their  wild  sincerity,  winged  with
wrath.  Your  best  Witnesses  he  shivers  into  ruin  at  one  stroke.
He  demands  that  the  Committee-men  themselves  come  as  Wit-
nesses, as  Accusers  ;  he  "  will  cover  them  with  ignominy."  He
raises  his  huge  stature,  he  shakes  his  huge  black  head,  fire  flashes
from  the  eyes  of  him, — piercing  to  all  Republican  hearts  :  so  that
the  very  Galleries,  though  we  filled  them  by  ticket,  murmur
sympathy  ;  and  are  like  to  burst  down,  and  raise  the  People,  and
deliver  him !  He  complains  loudly  that  he  is  classed  with
Chabots,  with  swindling  Stockjobbers ;  that  his  Indictment  is  a
list  of  platitudes  and  horrors.  2     "Danton  hidden  on  the  10th  of

1  [April  2nd  was  entirely  taken  up  with  swearing  in  the  jury  and  reading  the
act  of  accusation  :  it  was  on  the  3rd  that  Danton's  famous  answer  was  made  as  to
his  name,  and  his  defence  begun  and  cut  short.]

2  [The  heads  of  the  accusation  may  be  roughly  summed  up  : —
(i)  Venality  to  the  Court,  by  the  channel  of  Montmorin.

(2)  Peculation  of  the  monies  granted  for  his  mission  to  Belgium.

(3)  Participation  in  Dumouriez's  treason.

(4)  Hostility  to  May  31st  and  June  2nd.

(5)  Complicity  with  the  Baron  de  Batz  (!).

His  defence  is  weakest  on  No.  2.     On  No.  4  he  hardly  cares  to  defend  himself  at
all.     (Robinet,  189  .f^^.)]


180        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

August  ?  "  reverberates  he,  with  the  roar  of  a  lion  in  the  toils  :
"  where  are  the  men  that  had  to  press  Danton  to  show  himself,
that  day?  Where  are  these  high-gifted  souls  of  whom  he
borrowed  energy  ?  Let  them  appear,  these  Accusers  of  mine :
I  have  all  the  clearness  of  my  self-possession  when  I  demand
them.  I  will  unmask  the  three  shallow  scoundrels,"  les  trois  plats
coquins,  Saint- Just,  Couthon,  Lebas,  "who  fawn  on  Robespierre,
and  lead  him  towards  his  destruction.^  Let  them  produce  them-
selves here ;  I  will  plunge  them  into  Nothingness,  out  of  which
they  ought  never  to  have  risen."  The  agitated  President  agitates
his  bell ;  enjoins  calmness,  in  a  vehement  manner  :  "  What  is  it  to
thee  how  I  defend  myself  ?  "  cries  the  other  :  "  the  right  of  doom-
ing me  is  thine  always.  The  voice  of  a  man  speaking  for  his
honour  and  his  life  may  well  drown  the  jingling  of  thy  bell ! "
Thus  Danton,  higher  and  higher  ;  till  the  lion-voice  of  him  '  dies
away  in  his  throat : '  ^  speech  will  not  utter  what  is  in  that  man.
The  Galleries  murmur  ominously  ;  the  first  day's  Session  is  over.

0  Tinville,  President  Herman,  what  will  ye  do  ?  They  have
two  days  more  of  it,  by  strictest  Revolutionary  Law.  The  Galleries
already  murmur.  If  this  Danton  were  to  burst  your  meshwork  !
— Very  curious  indeed  to  consider.  It  turns  on  a  hair :  and  what
a  Hoitytoity  were  there,  Justice  and  Culprit  changing  places  ;  and
the  whole  History  of  France  running  changed !  For  in  France
there  is  this  Danton  only  that  could  still  try  to  govern  France.
He  only,  the  wild  amorphous  Titan ; — and  perhaps  that  other
olive- complexioned  individual,  the  Artillery- Officer  at  Toulon,
whom  we  left  pushing  his  fortune  in  the  South  ?

On  the  evening  of  the  second  day,^  matters  looking  not  better
but  worse  and  worse,  Fouquier  and  Herman,  distraction  in  their
aspect,  rush  over  to  Salut  Public.  What  is  to  be  done  ?  Salut
Public   rapidly  concocts   a  new   Decree ;   whereby  if  men    '  in-

1  [Bulletin  du  Tribunal  Rdvolutionnaire,  p.  281  sqq.  Carlyle  does  not  mention
that  Danton's  defence  was  stopped  by  Herman  on  3rd  under  pretext  that  there
wouldn't  be  time  to  hear  the  other  prisoners.  It  was  resumed  on  4th  but  he  said
little,  and  that  day  was  mainly  taken  up  with  the  defences  of  Camille  and  H^rault.J

2[Campardon  (ii.  269)  says  that  Danton's  voice  rang  so  loud  that  it  was  heard
by  the  crowd  outside,  and  even  across  the  river.]
3  [April  4th.]


DANTON,  NO  WEAKNESS  181

suit  Justice/  they  may  be  'thrown  out  of  the  Debates.'  For
indeed,  withal,  is  there  not  'a  Plot  in  the  Luxembourg  Prison?'
Ci-devant  General  Dillon,  and  others  of  the  Suspect,  plotting  with
Camille's  Wife  to  distribute  assignats ;  to  force  the  Prisons,  over-
set the  Republic  ?  Citizen  Laflotte,  himself  Suspect  but  desiring
enfranchisement,  has  reported  said  Plot  for  us : — a  report  that
may  bear  fruit !  Enough,  on  the  morrow  morning,  an  obedient
Convention  passes  this  Decree.  Salui  rushes  off  with  it  to  the
aid  of  Tinville,  reduced  now  almost  to  extremities.^  And  so,  Hors
de  Ddbats,  Out  of  the  Debates,  ye  insolents  !  Policemen  do  your
duty !  In  such  manner,  with  a  dead-lift  effort,  Salut,  Tinville,
Herman,  Leroi  Dix  AoiU,  and  all  stanch  jurymen  setting  heart
and  shoulder  to  it,  the  Jury  becomes  'sufficiently  instructed;'
Sentence  is  passed,  is  sent  by  an  Official,  and  torn  and  trampled
on:  Death  this  day.  It  is  the  5th  of  April  1794'.  Camille's  poor
Wife  may  cease  hovering  about  this  Prison.  Nay,  let  her  kiss  her
poor  children  ;  and  prepare  to  enter  it,  and  to  follow  ! —

Danton  carried  a  high  look  in  the  Death-cart.  Not  so  Camille  :
it  is  but  one  week,  and  all  is  so  topsyturvied ;  angel  Wife  left
weeping ;  love,  riches.  Revolutionary  fame,  left  all  at  the  Prison-
gate  ;  carnivorous  Rabble  now  howling  round.  Palpable,  and  yet
incredible ;  like  a  madman's  dream !  Camille  struggles  and
writhes  ;  his  shoulders  shuffle  the  loose  coat  off  them,  which  hangs
knotted,  the  hands  tied  :  "  Calm,  my  friend,"  said  Danton  ;  "  heed
not  that  vile  canaille  {laissez  Id  cette  vile  canaille)."  At  the  foot  of
the  Scaffold,  Danton  was  heard  to  ejaculate :  "  O  my  Wife,  my
well-beloved,  I  shall  never  see  thee  more  then !  " — but,  interrupt-
ing himself:  "Danton,  no  weakness!"  He  said  to  Herault-
Sechelles  stepping  forward  to  embrace  him :  "  Our  heads  will
meet  there,"  in  the  Headsman's  sack.     His  last  words  were  to

1  [April  5th.  Fouquier  and  Herman  did  not '  rush  over,'  but  wrote  a  letter  which
is  printed  in  Robinet  (p.  177) ;  it  calls  the  prisoners  forcen^s ;  it  was  Saint-Just
who  read  the  letter  to  the  Convention,  and  tacked  on  to  it  the  story  about  the
'plot  in  the  prison.'  Billaud  followed,  with  Laflotte's  denunciation  of  the  same
imaginary  plot.  The  decree  of  the  Convention  was  passed  without  a  dissentient
voice  and  brought  to  Fouquier  by  Amar  on  the  evening  of  the  4th.  It  was  at  a  fresh
session  on  the  morning  of  the  5th  that  the  decree  was  notified  to  the  prisoners  and
the  verdict  given  (Robinet  in  loc.  cii.).]


182        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

Samson  the  Headsman  himself:  "Thou  wilt  show  my  head  to
the  people  ;  it  is  worth  showing."

So  passes,  like  a  gigantic  mass,  of  valour,  ostentation,  fury,
affection  and  wild  revolutionary  force  and  manhood,  this  Danton,
to  his  unknown  home.  He  was  of  Arcis-sur-Aube ;  bom  of  '  good
farmer- people '  there.  He  had  many  sins  ;  but  one  worst  sin  he
had  not,  that  of  Cant.  No  hollow  Formalist,  deceptive  and  self-
deceptive,  ghastly  to  the  natural  sense,  was  this  ;  but  a  very  Man  :
with  all  his  dross  he  was  a  Man ;  fiery-real,  from  the  great  fire-
bosom  of  Nature  herself.  He  saved  France  from  Brunswick  ;  he
walked  straight  his  own  wild  road,  whither  it  led  him.  He  may
live  for  some  generations  in  the  memory  of  men.^

CHAPTER  III

THE  TUMBRILS

Next  week,  it  is  still  but  the  10th  of  April,  there  comes  a  new
Nineteen  ;  Chaumette,  Gobel,  Hebert's  Widow,  the  Widow  of  Ca-
mille :  these  also  roll  their  fated  journey ;  black  Death  devours
them.  Mean  Hebert's  Widow  was  weeping,  Camille's  Widow
tried  to  speak  comfort  to  her.  O  ye  kind  Heavens,  azure,  beauti-
ful, eternal  behind  your  tempests  and  Time -clouds,  is  there  not
pity  in  store  for  all !  Gobel,  it  seems,  was  repentant ;  he  begged
absolution  of  a  Priest ;  died  as  a  Gobel  best  could. ^  For  Anaxa-
goras  Chaumette,  the  sleek  head  now  stript  of  its  bonnet  rouge,
what  hope  is  there  ?  Unless  Death  were  '  an  eternal  sleep } '
Wretched  Anaxagoras,  God  shall  judge  thee,  not  I.

Hebert,  therefore,  is  gone,  and  the  Hebei-tists  ;  they  that  rob-
bed Churches,  and  adored  blue  Reason  in  red  nightcap.  Great
Danton,  and  the  Dantonists ;  they  also  are  gone.     Down  to  the

1  [Morris  to  Washington  (April  i8th) :  '  The  fall  of  Danton  seems  to  terminate
•  the  idea  of  a  triumvirate '  {which  Morris  had  expected  as  a  step  to  Dictatorship).
'  The  chief,  who  would  have  been  in  such  case  one  of  his  colleagues,  (Robespierre)
'  has  wisely  put  out  of  the  way  a  dangerous  competitor.  Hence  it  seems  that  the
'  way  must  be  through  the  ComiU  de  Salut  Public,  unless  indeed  the  Army  should
'  interfere  ;  but  as  to  the  Army  no  character  seems  as  yet  to  have  appeared  with
'any  prominent  feature.']

2  [This  is  confirmed  in  Campardon  (i.  393),  as  is  also  the  firmness  of  Lucile
Desmoulins.]


THE  TUMBRILS  183

catacombs  ;  they  are  become  silent  men  !  Let  no  Paris  Munici-
pality, no  Sect  or  Party  of  this  hue  or  that,  resist  the  will  of
Robespierre  and  6^/^/.  Mayor  Pache,  not  prompt  enough  in
denouncing  these  Pitt  Plots,  may  congratulate  about  them  now.
Never  so  heartily ;  it  skills  not !  His  course  likewise  is  to  the
Luxembourg.  We  appoint  one  Fleuriot-Lescot  Interim- Mayor  in
his  stead :  an  '  architect  from  Belgium,'  they  say,  this  Fleuriot ;
he  is  a  man  one  can  depend  on.  Our  new  Agent- National  is
Payan,  lately  Juryman ;  whose  cynosure  also  is  Robespierre.^

Thus  then,  we  perceive,  this  confusedly  electric  Erebus-cloud
of  Revolutionary  Government  has  altered  its  shape  somewhat.
Two  masses,  or  wings,  belonging  to  it ;  an  over-electric  mass  of
Cordelier  Rabids,  and  an  under-electric  of  Dantonist  Moderates
and  Clemency- men, — these  two  masses,  shooting  bolts  at  one
another,  so  to  speak,  have  annihilated  one  another.  For  the
Erebus-cloud,  as  we  often  remark,  is  of  suicidal  nature ;  and,  in
jagged  irregularity,  darts  its  lightning  withal  into  itself.  But
now  these  two  discrepant  masses  being  mutually  annihilated,  it  is
as  if  the  Erebus-cloud  had  got  to  internal  composure ;  and  did
only  pour  its  hellfire  lightning  on  the  World  that  lay  under  it.
In  plain  words.  Terror  of  the  Guillotine  was  never  terrible  till
now.  Systole,  diastole,  swift  and  ever  swifter  goes  the  Axe  of
Samson.  Indictments  cease  by  degrees  to  have  so  much  as
plausibility  :  Fouquier  chooses  from  the  Twelve  Houses  of  Arrest
what  he  calls  Batches,  '  Foum&es,'  a  score  or  more  at  a  time ;  his

1  [May  loth.  The  Coinynune  had  lost  all  its  force  with  the  fall  of  Chaumette  and
the  H6bertists  ;  the  new  members  were  entirely  creatures  of  Robespierre,  and  only
lifted  their  head  for  a  moment  when  he  was  attacked  at  Thermidor :  even  to  his
voice  the  Commune  was  deaf  at  times,  e.g.,  when,  at  the  end  of  Messidor,  he
persuaded  Fleuriot  to  call  a  meeting  of  Section  Committees,  contrary  to  the  law  of
14th  Frimaire  ;  the  Committee  prohibited  it  and  the  Commune  yielded.

Fleuriot-Lescot,  born  at  Brussels  1761,  had  been  one  of  Fouquier's  substitutes
on  the  Tribunal  Rivolutionnaire  :  nominated  Maire,  to  replace  Pache,  May  loth,
executed  loth  Thermidor.

Payan,  born  1766,  had  been  also  a  judge  in  the  Tribunal ;  was  executed  loth
Thermidor,  Shortly  before  this  time  (April  ist)  the  Executive  Council  (and  there-
with the  corrupt  War  Office)  had  been  suppressed,  and  was  replaced  (April  20th)
by  twelve  ' '  Executive  Commissions  "  of  Government,  more  absolutely  at  the  dis-
posal of  the  Committee ,than  the  Council  had  been  :  their  heads  were  mere  nonentities,
and  Masson  (Affaires  Etrangeres,  312)  quotes  an  excellent  story  of  how  Buchot,  the
soi-disant  head  of  the  new  Foreign  Office,  had  to  be  fetched  from  a  neighbouring
billiard-caf6  when  there  were  any  papers  to  sign,]


184        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Jurymen  are  charged  to  make  feu  dejile,  file -firing  till  the  ground
be  clear.  Citizen  Laflotte's  report  of  Plot  in  the  Luxembourg  is
verily  bearing  fruit !  If  no  speakable  charge  exist  against  a  man,
or  Batch  of  men,  Fouquier  has  always  this :  a  Plot  in  the  Prison.
Swift  and  ever  swifter  goes  Samson ;  up,  finally,  to  three  score
and  more  at  a  Batch.  It  is  the  highday  of  Death :  none  but  the
Dead  return  not.

0  dusky  D'Espremenil,  what  a  day  is  this,  the  2 2d  of  April,
thy  last  day  !  The  Palais  Hall  here  is  the  same  stone  Hall,  where
thou,  five  years  ago,  stoodest  perorating,  amid  endless  pathos  of
rebellious  Parlement,  in  the  gray  of  the  morning  ;  bound  to  march
with  D'Agoust  to  the  Isles  of  Hieres.  The  stones  are  the  same
stones :  but  the  rest.  Men,  Rebellion,  Pathos,  Peroration,  see !  it
has  all  fled,  like  a  gibbering  troop  of  ghosts,  like  the  phantasms
of  a  dying  brain.  With  D'Espremenil,  in  the  same  line  of  Tum-
brils, goes  the  mournfullest  medley.  Chapelier  goes,  ci-devant
popular  President  of  the  Constituent ;  whom  the  Menads  and
Maillard  met  in  his  carriage,  on  the  Versailles  Road.^  Thouret
likewise,  ci-devant  President,  father  of  Constitutional  Law-acts ;
he  whom  we  heard  saying,  long  since,  with  a  loud  voice,  "  The
Constituent  Assembly  has  fulfilled  its  mission !  "  And  the  noble
old  Malesherbes,  who  defended  Louis  and  could  not  speak,  like  a
gray  old  rock  dissolving  into  sudden  water :  he  journeys  here  now,
with  his  kindred,  daughters,  sons  and  grandsons,  his  Lamoignons,
Chateaubriands  ;  ^  silent,  towards  Death. — One  young  Chateau-
briand alone  is  wandering  amid  the   Natchez,^  by  the  roar  of

1  [It  is  of  d'Epr^mesnil  and  Chapelier  (the  extreme  partisan  of  the  Ancien  Rdgitne
and  the  advanced  liberal  of  '89  respectively)  that  the  fine  story  is  told  by  Rioufife
(p.  86)  how^,  as  they  were  going  to  execution,  the  latter  asked  the  former  "  Which
of  us  is  the  crowd  hissing?  "  and  d'Epr^mesnil  rightly  answered  '  Both.']

2  [The  Parlementeers  were  guillotined  in  consequence  of  a  secret  protest,  signed
by  a  g^eat  number  of  members  of  the  old  Parlements,  and  deposited  in  the  hands  of
Rosambo  (President  of  the  Chambre  de.s  Vacations),  against  the  decree  of  Oct.  4th
'90,  which  abolished  the  Parlefnents.  This  paper  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Comity  de
SHreU  Gdndrale  when  Rosambo  was  denounced  by  his  Section.  The  amnesty  of  Sept.
14th  '91  ought  to  have  covered  it ;  it  had  been  invoked  to  pardon  the  Chateau- Vieux
Swiss  and  the  massacres  of  Avignon,  but  the  Radicals  naturally  did  not  allow  such
justice  to  their  enemies.  Twenty-six  persons  were  executed  for  it  on  April  20th  ;
Malesherbes  and  his  kindred  two  days  afterwards ;  d'Epr^mesnil  had  not  signed
the  protest  {vid.  Mortimer-Ternaux,  i.  301,  sqq.;  Campardon,  i.  305).]

3  [Fran9ois  Auguste,  Comte  de  Chateaubriand,  born  1768,  came  to  Paris  to  begin
ja  literary  career,  1790 ;  went  to  America  Jan.  '91 ;  returned  at  the  date  of  the


THE  TUMBRILS  185

Niagara  Falls,  the  moan  of  endless  forests :  Welcome  thou  great
Nature,  savage,  but  not  false,  not  unkind,  unmotherly ;  no
Formula  thou,  or  rabid  jangle  of  Hypothesis,  Parliamentary
Eloquence,  Constitution-building  and  the  Guillotine  ;  speak  thou
to  me,  O  Mother,  and  sing  my  sick  heart  thy  mystic  everlasting
lullaby-song,  and  let  all  the  rest  be  far ! —

Another  row  of  Tumbrils  we  must  notice :  that  which  holds  Eliza-
beth, the  Sister  of  Louis. ^  Her  Trial  was  like  the  rest ;  for
Plots,  for  Plots. 2  She  was  among  the  kindliest,  most  innocent  of
women.  There  sat  with  her,  amid  four-and-twenty  others,  a  once
timorous  Marchioness  de  Crussol ;  courageous  now ;  expressing
towards  her  the  liveliest  loyalty.  At  the  foot  of  the  Scaffold,
Elizabeth  with  tears  in  her  eyes  thanked  this  Marchioness ;  said
she  was  grieved  she  could  not  reward  her.  "  Ah,  Madame,  would
your  Royal  Highness  deign  to  embrace  me,  my  wishes  were  com-
plete ! " — "  Rig'it  willingly.  Marquise  de  Crussol,  and  with  my
whole  heart."  ^  Thus  they :  at  the  foot  of  the  Scaffold.  The
Royal  Family  is  now  reduced  to  two :  *  a  girl  and  a  little  boy.

King's  suspension  after  Varennes,  July  1791  ;  emigrated  to  serve  with  the  Prussian
army,  and  was  wounded  at  the  siege  of  Thionville  ;  retired  to  England  and
lived  m  great  want  till  1797,  when  he  published  his  '  Essay  on  Revolutions,'  the
first  note  towards  his  more  famous  '  G^nie  du  Christianisme '  (1802).  He
returned  to  France  1801 ;  became  secretary  of  the  embassy  at  Rome  under  the
Consulate,  resigned  on  the  news  of  d'Enghien's  murder  ;  wandered  all  over  the
near  East  till  1814,  when  he  aided  the  Restoration  of  Louis  XVIII.  He  refused  to
serve  the  Monarchy  of  1830,  died  in  1848.

He  was  thus  certainly  not  "wandering  amid  the  Natchez"  at  the  date  of
Malesherbes'  execution.]

1  [Madame  Elisabeth  was  the  youngest  child  of  the  Dauphin,  born  1764.  There
was  at  one  time  a  talk  of  her  marriage  with  an  Infante  of  Portugal,  at  another  to
the  Due  d'Aosta,  at  another  to  Joseph  II.  ;  in  1781  the  King  presented  her  with
the  little  estate  of  Gu^m^n^e  in  Versailles,  and  she  spent  most  of  her  days  there,
largely  occupied  with  charitable  work,  returning  to  sleep  at  the  Chateau.  She
accompanied  the  Royal  Family  with  the  most  faithful  devotion  in  all  the  troubles
of  '89,  '90,  '91,  '92,  '93.  In  the  Temple  she  at  first  shared  a  room  with  Mme  de
Tourzel :  on  Oct.  26th  '92  she,  with  the  Queen  and  the  children,  was  transferred
to  the  Great  'lower.  That  she  and  the  Queen  sometimes  disagreed  is  not  unlikely,
but  has  never  been  proved,  and  to  her  the  last  and  most  affectionate  ,letter  of  the
Queen  was  written  on  the  morning  of  her  death.  {See  Vie  de  Mme  Elisabeth,  by
M.  de  Beauchesne,  Paris,  1869  ;  La  Vraie  Marie  Antoinette,  by  M.  de  Lescure,  Paris,
1863  ;  Campardon,  i.  314.)]

'-^[May  loth.]

'  Montgaillard,  iv.  200.  [The  Marquis  de  Crussol  (of  the  Vivarais)  was  of  the
s^me  family  as  the  great  house  of  Uzes.  His  wife  was  executed  with  Madame
Elisabeth,  and  he  on  July  26th  (the  eve  of  Thermidor).]

^^See  ftote  at  end  of  chapter,  J


186        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

The  boy,  once  named  Dauphin,  was  taken  from  his  Mother  while
she  yet  lived ;  and  given  to  one  Simon,  by  trade  a  Cordwainer,
on  service  then  about  the  Temple- Prison,  to  bring  him  up  in
principles  of  Sansculottism.  Simon  taught  him  to  drink,  to  swear,
to  sing  the  carmagnole.  Simon  is  now  gone  to  the  Municipality :
and  the  poor  boy,  hidden  in  a  tower  of  the  Temple,  from  which
in  his  fright  and  bewilderment  and  early  decrepitude  he  wishes
not  to  stir  out,  lies  perishing,  'his  shirt  not  changed  for  six
months ; '  amid  squalor  and  darkness,  lamentably, ^ — so  as  none
but  poor  Factory  Children  and  the  like  are  wont  to  perish,  and
7iot  be  lamented !

The  Spring  sends  its  green  leaves  and  bright  weather,  bright
May,  brighter  than  ever:  Death  pauses  not.  Lavoisier,  famed
Chemist,  shall  die  and  not  live  :  ^  Chemist  Lavoisier  was  Farmer-
General  Lavoisier  too,  and  now  'all  the  Farmers -General  are
arrested  ; '  all,  and  shall  give  an  account  of  their  moneys  and  in-
comings ;  and  die  for  '  putting  water  in  the  tobacco '  they  sold.
Lavoisier  begged  a  fortnight  more  of  life,  to  finish  some  experi-
ments :  but  "  the  Republic  does  not  need  such  ; "  the  axe  must  do
its  work. 3  Cynic  Chamfort,  reading  these  inscriptions  of  Brother-
hood or  Death,  says  "it  is  a  Brotherhood  of  Cain :  "  arrested,  then
liberated ;  then  about  to  be  arrested  again,  this  Chamfort  cuts
and  slashes  himself  with  frantic  uncertain  hand  ;  gains,  not  with-
out difficulty,  the  refuge  of  death.*  Condorcet  has  lurked  deep,
these  many  months  ;  Argus-eyes  watching  and  searching  for  him.
His  concealment  is  become  dangerous  to  others  and  himself;  he
has  to  fly  again,  to  skulk,  round  Paris,  in  thickets  and  stone-
quarries.     And  so  at  the  Village  of  Clamars,  one  bleared  May  ^

1  Duchesse  d' Angouleme,  Captivity  a  la  Tour  du  Temple,  pp.  37-71.

2  [May  8th.]

'Trib.  R6v.  du  8  Mai  1794,  Moniteur  No.  231,  [There  were  two  'batches'  of
Farmers-General  ;  Lavoisier  was  in  the  first  with  27  others.  It  was  Coffinhal,  the
President  of  the  Tribunal  ^i  Lavoisier's  trial,  who  answered  him  that  "  the  Republic
had  no  need  of  chemists."  It  was  neither  witty  nor  true,  for  the  Convention
Committees  were  exhausting  all  their  energy  to  find  men  of  science  to  serve  them,
e.g.,  in  the  making  of  gunpowder  {vid,  supr.,  iii.  151).]

^  [April  13th.]

^  [Condorcet's  arrest  was  ordered  Aug.  loth  '93  ;  but  he  escaped  and  remained
hid  in  Paris,  which  he  had  only  left  a  few  days  before  he  was  taken  at  Clainars


THE  TUMBEILS  187

morning,  there  enters  a  Figure,  ragged,  rough-bearded,  hunger-
stricken  ;  asks  breakfast  in  the  tavern  there.  Suspect,  by  the
look  of  him  !  "  Servant  out  of  place,  sayest  thou  ?  "  Committee-
President  of  Forty-Sous  finds  a  Latin  Horace  on  him :  "  Art  thou
not  one  of  those  Ci-devants  that  were  wont  to  keep  servants  ?
Suspect  I "  He  is  haled  forthwith,  breakfast  unfinished,  towards
Bourg-la-Reine,  on  foot :  he  faints  with  exhaustion ;  is  set  on  a
peasant's  horse  ;  is  flung  into  his  damp  prison-cell :  on  the  morrow,
recollecting  him,  you  enter ;  Condorcet  lies  dead  on  the  floor.  ^
They  die  fast,  and  disappear:  the  Notabilities  of  France  dis-
appear, one  after  one,  like  lights  in  a  Theatre,  which  you  are
snuffing  out.

Under  which  circumstances,  is  it  not  singular,  and  almost
touching,  to  see  Paris  City  drawn  out,  in  the  meek  May  nights,
in  civic  ceremony,  which  they  call  '  Souper  Fratemel,'  Brotherly
Supper?  Spontaneous,  or  partially  spontaneous,  in  the  twelfth,
thirteenth,  fourteenth  nights  of  this  May  month,  it  is  seen.  Along
the  Rue  Saint- Honore,  and  main  Streets  and  Spaces,  each  Citoyen
brings  forth  what  of  supper  the  stingy  Maximum  has  yielded  him,
to  the  open  air ;  joins  it  to  his  neighbour's  supper ;  and  with
common  table,  cheerful  light  burning  frequent,  and  what  due
modicum  of  cut-glass  and  other  garnish  and  relish  is  convenient,
they  eat  frugally  together,  under  the  kind  stars.  ^  See  it,  O
Night !  With  cheerfully  pledged  wine-cup,  hobnobbing  to  the
Reign  of  Liberty,  Equality,  Brotherhood,  with  their  wives  in  best
ribands,  with  their  little  ones  romping  round,  the  Citoyens,  in
frugal  Love-feast,  sit  there.  Night  in  her  wide  empire  sees
nothing  similar.     O  my  brothers,  why  is  the  reign  of  Brotherhood

March  27th  (not  May),  going  by  the  name  of  Pierre  Simon.  During  his  captivity
he  wrote  his  '  Tableau  des  Progr^s  de  1' Esprit  humain  '  (Rev.  de  la.  R6v.  x.  ii.
103).]

1  [April  9th.]

2  Tableaux  de  la  Revolution,  §  Soupers  Fraternels  ;  Mercier  ii.  150.  [The  origin
of  these  seems  to  have  been  in  the  Repas  Civique  held  on  Aug.  loth  '93,  designed
to  win  over  the  Fddirh  who  had  come  to  Paris  to  accept  the  Constitution.
These  fraternal  banquets  seem  to  play  no  great  part  in  the  history  of  the  streets,
they  degenerated  into  drunken  orgies,  and  were  suppressed  at  the  end  of  the
Terror.  {See  Dauban,  Paris  en  1793  (306),  where  a  contemporary  engraving  repre-
senting one  is  given. )]


188        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

not  come ;  It  is  come,  it  shall  have  come,  say  the  Citoyens
frugally  hobnobbing. — Ah  me !  these  everlasting  stars,  do  they
not  look  down  'like  glistening  eyes,  bright  with  immortal  pity,
over  the  lot  of  man  ! ' —

One  lamentable  thing,  however,  is,  that  individuals  will  attempt
assassination — of  Representatives  of  the  People.  Representative
Collot,  Member  even  of  Salut,  returning  home,  '  about  one  in  the
morning,'  ^  probably  touched  with  liquor,  as  he  is  apt  to  be,  meets
on  the  stairs  the  cry  "  Scelerat  !  "  and  also  the  snap  of  a  pistol :
which  latter  flashes  in  the  pan ;  disclosing  to  him,  momentarily,
a  pair  of  truculent  saucer-eyes,  swart  grim-clenched  countenance  ;
recognisable  as  that  of  our  little  fellow-lodger,  Citoyen  Amiral,
formerly  '  a  clerk  in  the  Lotteries  ! '  Collot  shouts  Murder,  with
lungs  fit  to  awaken  all  the  Rue  Favart ;  Amiral  snaps  a  second
time ;  a  second  time  flashes  in  the  pan ;  then  darts  up  into  his
apartment ;  and,  after  there  firing,  still  with  inadequate  effect,
one  musket  at  himself  and  another  at  his  captor,  is  clutched  and
locked  in  Prison.  ^  An  indignant  little  man  this  Amiral,  of
Southern  temper  and  complexion,  of '  considerable  muscular  force.'
He  denies  not  that  he  meant  to  "  purge  France  of  a  Tyrant ;  "  nay
avows  that  he  had  an  eye  to  the  Incorruptible  himself,  but  took
Collot  as  more  convenient !

Rumour  enough  hereupon ;  heaven-high  congratulation  of  Col-
lot, fraternal  embracing,  at  the  Jacobins  and  elsewhere.  And  yet,
it  would  seem,  the  assassin  mood  proves  catching.  Two  days
more,  it  is  still  but  the  23d  of  May,  and  towards  nine  in  the
evening,  Cecile  Renault,  Paper-dealer's  daughter,  a  young  woman
of  soft  blooming  look,  presents  herself  at  the  Cabinet-maker's  in
the  Rue  Saint- Honore ;  desires  to  see  Robespierre.  Robespierre
cannot  be  seen ;  she  grumbles  irreverently.  They  lay  hold  of
her.     She  has  left  a  basket  in  a  shop  hard  by :  in  the  basket  are

i  [May  23rd.  ]

2  Riouffe,  p.  73  ;  Deux  Amis,  xii.  298-302.  [Collot  lived  in  Rue  Favart,  No.  4.
Amiral  declared  at  his  interrogatory  that  he  had  been  at  the  Convention  that
morning  with  intent  to  assassinate  Robespierre  (Campardon,  i.  351).  He  was  four
times  interrogated,  and  brought  to  trial  with  a  large  batch  June  17th.  J


THE  TUMBRILS  189

female  change  of  raiment  and  two  knives  !  Poor  C^cile,  examined
by  Committee,  declares  she  "wanted  to  see  what  a  tyrant  was
like :  "  the  change  of  raiment  was  "  for  my  own  use  in  the  place
I  am  surely  going  to." — "What  place?" — "Prison;  and  then
the  Guillotine,"  answered  she.  Such  things  come  of  Charlotte
Corday ;  in  a  people  prone  to  imitation,  and  monomania  !  Swart
choleric  men  try  Charlotte's  feat,  and  their  pistols  miss  fire ;  soft
blooming  young  woman  try  it,  and,  only  half-resolute,  leave  their
knives  in  a  shop.^

0  Pitt,  and  ye  Faction  of  the  Stranger,  shall  the  Republic
never  have  rest ;  but  be  torn  continually  by  baited  springes,  by
wires  of  explosive  spring-guns  ?     Swart  Amiral,  fair  young  Cecile,

•and  all  that  knew  them,  and  many  that  did  not  know  them,  lie
locked,  waiting  the  scrutiny  of  Tinville.

1  [Cecile  Renault  was  only  21 ;  she  was  interrogated  on  24th  ;  her  words  above
•quoted  were  '  I  desire  a  King,  because  I  prefer  one  tyrant  to  50,000 ;  and  I  only
went  to  see  Robespierre  in  order  to  see  what  a  tyrant  was  like ; '  the  knives  were
found  on  her  person,  the  raiment  in  a  basket  at  the  shop  ;  she  owned  to  no  con-
nection with  Amiral,  and  none  is  probable,  but  she  knew  him  by  sight ;  out  of  the
two  "assassinations"  the  Government  made  a  vast  plot,  and  52  persons  were
brought  to  trial  on  June  17th,  among  them  some  of  Batz's  subordinates,  in  the  hope
that  they  would  betray  their  chief.

It  was  after  this  trial  that  the  symptoms  of  discontent  in  the  respectable  parts
of  Paris  caused  the  transference  of  the  Guillotine  to  the  East  end  ( Place  du  Trone)
{vid.  iftfr.,  iii.  195),  but  already,  on  the  Fete  of  January  21st,  1794,  the  oxen  yoked
to  one  of  the  allegorical  cars  had  refused  to  draw  their  load  past  the  place  where  the
guillotine  was  wont  to  stand,  though  it  had  been  removed  for  the  day  and  all  traces
of  blood  washed  away.     {See  A.  Houssaye,  Notre  Dame  de  Thermidor,  p,  320.)]


[Note  on  "  the  Royal  Family  is  now  reduced  to  two  "  {supra,  iii.  185).

The  Dauphin,  or  Louis  XVII. ,  was  the  second  son  of  Louis  XVI.  {vid.  note  supr. ,
i.  41).  There  is  a  most  interesting  letter  from  the  Queen  to  Mme  de  Tourzel  written
in  July  '89,  when  the  prince  was  four,  pointing  out  the  merits  and  defects  of  his
i:haracter,  his  extreme  sensitiveness,  backwardness  at  lessons,  childish  pride  and
gaiety,  but  somewhat  delicate  health,  for  which  she  recommends  constant  play  in
the  open  air  (La  Vraie  Marie  Antoinette,  Lescure,  95  sq^.).  Arthur  Young  saw  the
boy  gardening  in  the  Tuileries,  Jan.  1790.  The  Dauphin  shared  the  fortunes  of
his  family  down  to  the  separation  in  the  Temple.  His  father  made  kirn  swear,  the
other  members  of  the  family  only  promise,  that  they  would  not  seek  to  avenge  his
death.  He  was  proclaimed  King  of  France  by  the  Comte  de  Provence  in  Jan.
1793,  ^""^  by  ^^^  English  at  Toulon  in  the  following  August :  on  July  3rd  he  was
■separated  from  his  mother  and  given  to  Simon  and  his  wife  (a  working  cobbler
and  an  uneducated  domestic  servant,  who  had  been  neighbours  and  protdgis  of
Marat).  Many  stories  were  current  about  the  plots  for  the  liberation  of  the
Temple  prisoners,  and  as  many  of  Simon's  stupid  brutality  towards  the  young
prince.  It  seems  to  have  been  the  object  of  the  Government  that  the  boy  should
•die  a  «a^«ra/ death  as  soon  as  possible.  He  waited  on  Simon  as  a  servant,  was
often  cruelly  beaten  and  was  accustomed  to  hear  filthy  songs  and  language.  On
Oct.  6th  1793,  after  a  heavy  drugging  with  brandy,  his  signature  was  obtained  to  the


190        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

accusation  of  indecency  which  the  leaders  of  the  Commune  (Hubert  in  particular)
wished  to  bring  against  his  mother  at  her  trial ;  again  on  Oct.  26th  to  a  similar
accusation  against  his  aunt  {vid.  supr.,  iii.  99).  Illness  began  to  appear  in  the  boy
in  September  '93,  somnambulism  and  '  night  terrors  '  in  the  winter,  Simon  wearied
of  the  job,  and  resigned  his  charge  in  Jan.  '94.  From  that  time  till  9th  Thermidor
(6  njonths)  no  guardian  was  appointed,  and  the  child  was  in  solitary  confinement
in  a  ground-floor  room,  without  light  and  oftenest  without  fire:  his  meals  were
passed  in  to  him  by  a  grating  :  he  was  supposed  to  remove  his  own  ordures  and
pass  them  out  by  the  same  grating,  but  appears  to  have  been  too  feeble  to  do  so.
He  was  occasionally  visited  by  Convention  Commissioners  with  the  sole  motive  of
seeing  that  he  was  alive.  After  Thermidor  he  at  once  obtained  better  treatment ;
a  respectable  guardian  called  Laurent  was  appointed,  who  found  the  child  covered
with  sores  and  vermin,  the  odour  of  the  cell  pestilential,  and  the  only  answer  given,
"  /e  veux  mourir."  He  was  now  removed  to  a  better  apartment  and  allowed  to
take  the  air.  In  November  another  guardian  was  appointed  for  the  Prince  and  his
sister  (who  however  were  kept  entirely  apart).  The  Prince  often  asked  to  see  his
mother,  but  no  one  dared  to  tell  him  the  truth.  Lasne  succeeded  Laurent  as
guardian  March  '95,  and  the  boy  spoke  much  more  to  Lasne  than  he  had  done  to
any  one  else.  Early  in  May  he  was  very  ill,  and  M.  Dusault,  a  leading  doctor,
was  sent  to  attend  him.  He  found  rickets,  incipient  scrofula  and  mere  exhaustion.
Dusault  died  suddenly  and  Pelletan  the  new  doctor  immediately  demanded  extra
advice.  Dumangier  was  named  to  assist  Pelletan  :  nothing  could  however  be  done
and  the  child  died  in  Lasne's  arms  at  2.15  A.M.  on  June  loth  ;  his  last  words  being
that  he  "  heard  heavenly  music  and  the  voice  of  his  mother  ;  did  Lasne  think  his
"  sister  could  hear  it?  "

The  Princesse  Marie  Th^r^se  Charlotte,  aftepyards  Duchess  of  AngoulSme,  was
not  quite  so  badly  treated.  After  Madame  Elisabeth's  death  she  continued  to
occupy  alone  the  room  she  had  shared  with  her  aunt.  Somewhat  similar  endeavours
were  made  to  obtain  indecent  evidence  from  her  (a  girl  of  15),  but  were  quite
unsuccessful.  In  Nov.  '94  she  was  found  to  be  without  shoes  and  stockings,  and
her  linen  was  very  scanty.  After  her  brother's  death  a  lady  (Mme  Bocquet  de
Chantereine)  was  appointed  to  attend  on  her,  and  she  was  allowed  to  walk  in  the
garden.  On  Nov.  27th  '95  the  Directory  ordered  her  exchange  for  some  Republican
prisoners  detained  in  Austria,  and  on  Dec.  i8th  she  departed  incognito  for  Basle.
In  1808  the  tower  of  the  Temple  in  which  the  Royal  family  had  been  confined  was
pulled  down  by  Napoleon's  order.

It  is  noticeable  that  Austria  [i.e.,  Thugut)  had  several  times  been  approached
on  the  subject  of  an  exchange,  and  shown  herself  by  no  means  eager  for  it.  To
avoid  recognising  any  successor  to  Louis  XVI.  seems  to  have  been  Thugut's  aim.
The  only  real  friends  of  the  Royal  family  outside  France,  Fersen,  Mercy,  and  La
Marck  moved  Heaven  and  Earth,  and  even  appealed  to  Danton  ;  but  the  names
of  the  Queen  of  France  and  her  children  are  never  mentioned  in  the  deliberation  of
the  Allies,  except  occasionally  by  the  Courts  of  Spain  and  Naples.  Spain  once
(Oct.  '94)  proposed  that  Louis  XVII.  should  be  recognised  as  King  of  Navarre;
and  she  continued  to  demand  the  extradition  of  the  children  as  a  preliminary  to
peace.  [See  Sorel,  iii.  369,  424,  469,  472  ;  iv,  146,  321,  348  ;  and  de  Beauchesne,  Vie
de  Louis  XVII.,  Paris,  1853.)]


MUMBO-JUMBO  191

CHAPTER  IV

MUMBO-JUMBO

But  on  the  day  they  call  D&cadi,  New-Sabbath,  20  Prairial,^  8th
June  by  old  style,  what  thing  is  this  going  forward  in  the  Jardin
National,  whilom  Tuileries  Garden  ?

All  the  world  is  there,  in  holyday  clothes :  ^  foul  linen  went
out  with  the  Hebertists ;  nay  Robespierre,  for  one,  would  never
once  countenance  that ;  but  went  always  elegant  and  frizzled,
not  without  vanity  even, — and  had  his  room  hung  round  with
seagreen  Portraits  and  Busts.  In  holyday  clothes,  we  say,  are
the  innumerable  Citoyens  and  Citoyennes :  the  weather  is  of  the
brightest ;  cheerful  expectation  lights  all  countenances.  Juryman
Vilate  gives  breakfast  to  many  a  Deputy,  in  his  official  Apartment,
in  the  Pavilion  ci-devant  of  Flora ;  rejoices  in  the  bright-looking
multitudes,  in  the  brightness  of  leafy  June,  in  the  auspicious
D&cadi,  or  New- Sabbath.  This  day,  if  it  please  Heaven,  we  are
to  have,  on  improved  Anti-Chaumette  principles  :  a  New  Religion.

Catholicism  being  burned  out,  and  Reason-worship  guillotined,
was  there  not  need  of  one  ?  Incorruptible  Robespierre,  not
unlike  the  Ancients,  as  Legislator  of  a  free  people,  will  now  also
be  Priest  and  Prophet.  He  has  donned  his  sky-blue  coat,  made
for  the  occasion  ;  white  silk  waistcoat  broidered  with  silver,  black
silk  breeches,  white  stockings,  shoe-buckles  of  gold.  He  is  Pre-
sident of  the  Convention ;  he  has  made  the  Convention  decree,  so
they  name  it,  decreter  the  '  Existence  of  the  Supreme  Being,'  and

1  [The  Fi'fe  had  its  origin  in  a  report  read  by  Robespierre  on  May  7th  on  the
necessity  of  organising  National  Fetes :  this  was  followed  by  a  decree,  in  15
articles,  "  recognising  the  Supreme  Being"  and  appointing  first-class  Fe/es  on  the
great  Revolutionary  epochs  (July  14th,  Aug,  loth,  Jan.  21st,  May  31st),  together
with  thirty-six  second-class  Fefes,  one  for  each  decade  of  the  year ;  the  Moniteur
of  June  13th  gives  a  most  glowing  account  of  this  (first  of  the  second-class  Fetes)  ;
the  Provinces  followed  the  example  of  Paris,  and  there  were  Fetes  of  the  Supreme
Being  all  over  France.  It  is  unfortunate  that  Vilate  is  almost  the  only  independent
authority  on  it,  for  the  impression  it  made  abroad  was  considerable  ;  e.g.,  Mallet  du
Pan  thought  that  it  would  be  the  inauguration  of  Robespierre's  dictatorship.
(Corresp.  ii.  102,  note.)]

2  Vilate,  Causes  Secretes  de  la  Revolution  du  9  Thermidor  [p.  196].


192        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

likewise  '  ce  principe  consolateur  of  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul.'  ^
These  consolatory  principles,  the  basis  of  rational  Republican
Religion,  are  getting  decreed ;  and  here,  on  this  blessed  Decadi,
by  help  of  Heaven  and  Painter  David,  is  to  be  our  first  act  of
worship.  *

See,  accordingly,  how  after  Decree  passed,  and  what  has  been
called  '  the  scraggiest  Prophetic  Discourse  ever  uttered  by  man,'  2
— Mahomet  Robespierre,  in  sky-blue  coat  and  black  breeches,
frizzled  and  powdered  to  perfection,  bearing  in  his  hand  a  bouquet
of  flowers  and  wheat-ears,  issues  proudly  from  the  Convention
Hall ;  Convention  following  him,  yet,  as  is  remarked,  with  an
interval.  Amphitheatre  has  been  raised,  or  at  least  Monticule  or
Elevation ;  hideous  Statues  of  Atheism,  Anarchy  and  such  like,
thanks  to  Heaven  and  Painter  David,  strike  abhorrence  into  the
heart.  Unluckily,  however,  our  Monticule  is  too  small.  On  the
top  of  it  not  half  of  us  can  stand  ;  wherefore  there  arises  indecent
shoving,  nay  treasonous  irreverent  growling.  Peace,  thou  Bourdon
de  rOise ;  peace,  or  it  may  be  worse  for  thee  !

The  seagreen  Pontiff  takes  a  torch.  Painter  David  handing  it ;
mouths  some  other  froth-rant  of  vocables,  which  happily  one
cannot  hear ;  strides  resolutely  forward,  in  sight  of  expectant
France ;  sets  his  torch  to  Atheism  and  Company,  which  are  but
made  of  pasteboard  steeped  in  turpentine.  They  burn  up  rapidly ;
and,  from  within,  there  rises  'by  machinery,'  an  incombustible
Statue  of  Wisdom,  which,  by  ill  hap,  gets  besmoked  a  little ;  but
does  stand  there  visible  in  as  serene  attitude  as  it  can.^

And  then  ?  Why,  then,  there  is  other  Processioning,  scraggy
Discoursing,  and — this  is  our  Feast  of  the  Etre  Supreme ;  our  new

i[May  7th.]

2  [^See  Stephens'  Orators  (ii.  418).  It  is  a  rdchauffi  of  Rousseau's  '  Confession
of  a  Savoyard  Vicar,'  and  quite  the  dullest  even  of  Robespierre's  own  speeches.]

^^[Carlyle's  topography  is  vague:  one  v^'ould  gather  from  him  that  the  whole
thing  took  place  in  the  Tuileries  garden,  whereas  really  there  was  a  procession
from  that  garden  to  the  Chainp  de  Mars,  where  the  Monticule  was  erected  ;
the  Statue  of  '  Wisdom  obscured  by  Atheism  '  was  in  the  Tuileries  garden  ;  and  the
burning  took  place  before  the  procession  to  the  Champ  de  Mars  {see  Dauban,  Paris
en  1794,  p.  385  sijf^. ;  Rev.  de  la  Rdv.  viii.  i,  sqq.  ;  d'H^ricault,  La  Revolution  de
Therraidor  (Paris,  1878),  p.  212).]


MUMBO-JUMBO  193

Religion,  better  or  worse,  is  come  ! — Look  at  it  one  moment,  O
Reader,  not  two.  The  shabbiest  page  of  Human  Annals :  or  is
there,  that  thou  wottest  of,  one  shabbier  ?  Mumbo-Jumbo  of  the
African  woods  to  me  seems  venerable  beside  this  new  Deity  of
Robespierre  ;  for  this  is  a  conscious  Mumbo-Jumbo,  and  knows  that
he  is  machinery.  O  seagreen  Prophet,  unhappiest  of  windbags
blown  nigh  to  bursting,  what  distracted  Chimera  among  realities
art  thou  growing  to !  This  then,  this  common  pitch-hnk  for
artificial  fireworks  of  turpentine  and  pasteboard :  this  is  the
miraculous  Aaron's  Rod  thou  wilt  stretch  over  a  hag-ridden
hell-ridden  France,  and  bid  her  plagues  cease  ?  Vanish,  thou
and  it ! — "  Avec  ton  Etre  Supreme,"  said  Billaud,  "  tu  commences
a  m'embcter :  With  thy  Etre  Supreme  thou  beginnest  to  be  a  bore
to  me."  1

Catherine  Theot,  on  the  other  hand,  '  an  ancient  serving-maid
seventy-nine  years  of  age,'  inured  to  Prophecy  and  the  Bastille
from  of  old,  sits  in  an  upper  room  in  the  Rue  de  Contrescarpe,
poring  over  the  Book  of  Revelations,  with  an  eye  to  Robespierre  ;
finds  that  this  astonishing  thrice-potent  Maximilien  really  is  the
Man  spoken  of  by  Prophets,  who  is  to  make  the  Earth  young
again.  With  her  sit  devout  old  Marchionesses,  ci-devant  honour-
able women;  among  whom  Old-Constituent  Dom  Gerle,  with
his  addle  head,  cannot  be  wanting.  They  sit  there,  in  the  Rue
de  Contrescarpe  ;  in  mysterious  adoration :  Mumbo  is  Mumbo,
and  Robespierre  is  his  Prophet. ^     A  conspicuous  man  this  Robes-

1  See  Vilate,  Causes  Secretes.  (Vilate's  Narrative  is  very  curious  ;  but  is  not  to
be  taken  as  true,  without  sifting  ;  being,  at  bottom,  in  spite  of  its  title,  not  a
Narrative  but  a  Pleading.)  [C/.  also  the  remark  of  a  Sansculotte,  quoted  in  Gros
(p.  107),  "  Le  b — ,  dit-il,  il  n'est  pas  content  d'etre  maitre,  il  lui  faut  etre  Dieu.'^
The  Fete  in  fact  was  a  dismal  failure  from  beginning  to  end.  Among  those  whose
jeers  were  openly  heard  by  the  crowd  were  Bourdon,  Merlin,  Ruamps  and  Lecointre.
It  is  probable  that  Robespierre  himself  heard  many  of  them  (Gros,  107).

Vilate,  born  1768,  a  juryman  of  the  Tribiaial  R^volutionnairc,  took  the  name  of
'  Sempronius  Gracchus :  '  after  Thermidor  he  was  denounced  by  Legendre  as  a  spy
of  the  Committee,  and  tried  to  excuse  himself  by  writing  this  book  ;  executed  May
7th  '95.]

2  [Catherine  Th^ot  had  been  in  the  Bastille  as  a  lunatic,  April  12th — May  29th
1779  ;  she  seems  to  have  fancied  herself  enceinte  by  heavenly  agencies  :  she  held
regular  seances  with  Gerle  acting  as  priest ;  she  was  arrested  June  17th  by  order
of  the  Comitd  de  SCirett!  Ginirale^  and  died  in  prison  in  the  following  September.
It  seems  probable  that  Robespierre  had  only  attended  one  or  two  sdances  out  of
curiosity.     For  Dom  Gerle,  vid.  supr.,  i.  398.]

VOL.    III.  13


194        THE  FEENCH  EEVOLUTION

pierre.  He  has  his  volunteer  Bodyguard  of  Tappe-durs,  let  us
say  Strike-sharps}  fierce  Patriots  with  feruled  sticks  ;  and  Jacobins
kissing  the  hem  of  his  garment.  He  enjoys  the  admiration  of
many,  the  worship  of  some ;  and  is  well  worth  the  wonder  of
one  and  all.

The  grand  question  and  hope,  however,  is :  Will  not  this
Feast  of  the  Tuileries  Mumbo-Jumbo  be  a  sign  perhaps  that
the  Guillotine  is  to  abate  ?  Far  enough  from  that !  Precisely
on  the  second  day  after  it,  Couthon,  one  of  the  '  three  shallow
scoundrels,'  gets  himself  lifted  into  the  Tribune ;  produces  a
bundle  of  papers.  Couthon  proposes  that,  as  Plots  still  abound,
the  Imw  of  the  Suspect  shall  have  extension,  and  Arrestment  new
vigour  and  facility.  Further  that,  as  in  such  case  business  is  like
to  be  heavy,  our  Revolutionary  Tribunal  too  shall  have  extension ;
be  divided,  say,  into  Four  Tribunals,  each  with  its  President,
each  with  its  Fouquier  or  Substitute  of  Fouquier,  all  labouring
at  once,  and  any  remnant  of  shackle  or  dilatory  formality  be
struck  off:  in  this  way  it  may  perhaps  still  overtake  the  work.
Such  is  Couthon's  Decree  of  the  Twenty -second  Prairial,  famed  in
those  times. 2  At  hearing  of  which  Decree,  the  very  Mountain
gasped,  awestruck ;  and  one  Ruamps  ventured  to  say  that  if  it
passed  without  adjournment  and  discussion,  he,  as  one  Repre-
sentative, "would  blow  his  brains  out."  Vain  saying!  The
Incorruptible  knit  his  brows ;  spoke  a  prophetic  fateful  word  or
two :  the  La7v  of  Prairial^  is  Law  ;  Ruamps  glad  to  leave  his  rash

1  [The  question  of  Robespierre's  '  bodyguard  '  has  often  been  raised,  but  is
hardly  solved,  as  Campardon  regards  it  to  be,  by  the  letter  written  by  Girard  to
the  Comiti  de  Surety  Gindrale  (Aug.  i8th  '94).  That  letter  however  says  that
Robespierre  used  to  be  accompanied  to  and  from  the  Convention  and  the  Jacobins
by  a  number  of  his  friends  and  that  he,  Girard,  was  sometimes  invited  to  serve
Robespierre  in  this  way  :  most  of  these  men  were  jurors  or  judges  of  the  Tribunal,
Nicolas,  Chretien,  Garnier-Launay,  etc.  (Campardon,  i.  342).]

2  [June  loth.]

'  [The  law  of  the  22nd  Prairial  was  presented  to  the  Convention  by  Couthon
and  Robespierre  alone,  without  previous  consultation  with  the  other  members  of
the  Committee  ;  Billaud  furiously  accused  them  of  this  the  next  day.  Carlyle
misses  the  points  of  the  law  which  are  contained  in  its  eighth,  ninth  and  tenth
articles,  viz.,  (i.)  that  'evidence  may  be  taken  from  any  sort  of  document,  material
'or  moral,  verbal  or  written,  which  could  naturally  convince  a  just  and  reasonable
'  mind  ; '  (in  other  words  the  whole  existing  formulae  of  the  law  of  evidence  are
annulled),     (ii. )  '  Any  citizen  has  the  right  to  seize  and  bring  before  the  magistrates


MUMBO-JUMBO  195

brains  where  they  are.  Death  then,  and  always  Death  !  Even
so.  Fouquier  is  enlarging  his  borders  ;  making  room  for  Batches
of  a  Hundred  and  fifty  at  once  ; — getting  a  Guillotine  set  up  of
improved  velocity,  and  to  work  under  cover,  in  the  apartment
close  by.  So  that  Sa/ut  itself  has  to  intervene,  and  forbid  him  :
"Wilt  thou  demoralise  the  Guillotine,"  asks  Collot,  reproachfully,
"  demoraliser  le  supplice  ! "

There  is  indeed  danger  of  that ;  were  not  the  Republican
faith  great,  it  were  already  done.  See,  for  example,  on  the
17th  of  June,  what  a  Batch,  Fifty-four  at  once!  Swart  Amiral
is  here,  he  of  the  pistol  that  missed  fire  ;  young  Cecile  Renault,
with  her  father,  family,  entire  kith  and  kin ;  the  Widow  of
D'Espremenil ;  old  M.  de  Sombreuil  of  the  Invalides,  with
his  Son, — poor  old  Sombreuil,  seventy-three  years  old,  his
Daughter  saved  him  in  September,  and  it  was  but  for  this.
Faction  of  the  Stranger,  fifty-four  of  them  !  In  red  shirts  and
smocks,  as  Assassins  and  Faction  of  the  Stranger,  they  flit
along  there ;  red  baleful  Phantasmagory,  towards  the  land  of
Phantoms.

Meanwhile  will  not  the  people  of  the  Place  de  la  Revolution,
the  inhabitants  along  the  Rue  Saint-Honore,  as  these  continual
Tumbrils  pass,  begin  to  look  gloomy }  Republicans  too  have
bowels.  The  Guillotine  is  shifted,  then  again  shifted ;  finally
set  up  at   the  remote    extremity   of  the    Southeast:    Suburbs

'  any  conspirator,  and  is  bound  to  denounce  such.'  (iii.)  '  No  one  can  be  handed
'  over  to  the  Tribunal  Rdvolutionnaire  except  by  the  Convention,  the  two  great  Com-
'  mittees,  the  R^presentants  en  mission  and  the  Accuser  Public'  This  last  destroyed
the  last  feeble  protection  which  the  members  of  the  Convention  enjoyed,  that  of  not
being  decreed  accused  except  by  the  Convention  itself.  It  was  this  which  provoked
Bourdon,  Ruamps,  etc.,  to  protest ;  with  the  result  that  this  obnoxious  clause  was
repealed  next  day  on  the  motion  of  Merlin-Thionville  ;  and  on  the  12th  Robespierre
and  Couthon  tried  to  explain  that  they  had  never  intended  to  include  Conventionals
(but  this  was  not  believed).  The  rest  of  the  clauses  became  law.  Further  the  law
removed  the  privilege  of  having  Counsel  except  from  "  calumniated  patriots  ;  "  and
suppressed  the  previous  interrogatories  (Arts,  xii.,  xvi.).

The  law  is  printed  i7i  extenso  in  Campardon  (i.  328)  together  with  the  speeches
of  Couthon  in  introducing  it  and  of  Robespierre  in  forcing  it  through  ;  the  author
however  points  out  that  its  effect  was  not  so  great  as  might  be  supposed  :  there
were  a  few  moderate  judges  removed  to  make  way  for  bloodier  ones  ;  but  Dumas
and  Coffinhall  had  already  been  Presidents  ;  and  the  fourndes  and  feu  de  file
had  gone  on  for  some  time :  still  the  numbers  of  the  condemned  increased
enormously,  an  average  of  29  persons  per  day  being  executed  between  the  passing
of  the  law  and  Thermidor  9th.]


196        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Saint- Antoine  and  Saint  Marceau,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  if  they  have

bowels,  have  very  tough  ones.^

1  Montgaillard,  iv.  237  [vid.  supr.,  iii.  189,  note.  The  Place  du  Trdne  is  some
way  outside  the  Porte  Saint- Antoine  on  the  Vincennes  road:  in  the  adjoining
Convent  of  Picpus  most  of  the  victims  of  the  Red  Terror,  as  these  47  days  are
called,  are  buried,]

[The  remains  of  all  parties  gradually  coalesced  against  Robespierre,  Couthon  and
Saint- Just ;  we  may  doubt  if  the  theories  of  these  fanatics  were  ever  considered  by
the  hard-working  members  of  the  Committee,  but  Robespierre  in  particular
must  have  wasted  a  lot  of  its  time.  From  January  onwards  we  get  an  endless
number  of  circulars  issued  by  the  Committee  to  the  constituted  authorities  all  over
France,  and  bearing  evident  marks  of  having  been  drawn  up  by  Robespierre  him-
self ;  they  are  generally  quite  vague,  and  end  with  injunctions  to  embrace  all  round
at  the  foot  of  the  tree  of  liberty  [see  especially  Aulard,  Recueil,  x.  679).  Moreover  we
know  that  Carnot  and  Saint-Just  used  to  have  fierce  quarrels  in  the  Committee-room  :
and  as  the  days  went  on  the  tension  between  the  three  dreamers  and  the  practical  men
grew  continually  greater.  Robespierre's  power  rested  (i.)  on  Hanriot  (a  forgiven
H^bertist,  remember),  and  his  armed  force ;  (ii. )  on  Fleuriot,  Payan,  Coffinhall,  at
the  Mairie  and  Hotel-de-  Ville ;  (iii. )  on  his  own  pet  spies  in  the  police,  such  as
H^ron  and  JuUien  (but  these  were  in  daily  quarrel  with  the  Surety  Gdnirale  and
alienated  many  of  its  members  from  Robespierre) ;  (iv.)  on  four  votes  in  the  two
great  committees  {viz. ,  Saint-Just  and  Couthon  ;  David  and  Lebas) ;  (v. )  on  the
majority  in  the  Jacobins  after  the  ^puration  of  Nov.  and  Dec.  '93  ;  (vi. )  on  the
claque  in  the  galleries  of  the  Convention  led  by  Nicolas  and  Duplay,  Robespierre's
landlord  ;  (vii.)  but  most  of  all  on  the  Marais  in  the  Convention,  as  whose  friend  he
had  always  posed  {vid.  infr.,  iii.  202,  208  ;  cf.  Gros,  p.  107  ;  Von  Sybel,  iv.  15,  16).]

CHAPTER  V

THE  PRISONS

It  is  time  now,  however,  to  cast  a  glance  into  the  Prisons.
When  Desmoulins  moved  for  his  Committee  of  Mercy,  these
Twelve  Houses  of  Arrest  held  five-thousand  persons.  Continu-
ally arriving  since  then,  there  have  now  accumulated  twelve-
thousand.  They  are  Ci-devants,  Royalists  ;  in  far  greater  part,
they  are  Republicans,  of  various  Girondin,  Fayettish,  Un-Jacobin
colour.  Perhaps  no  human  Habitation  or  Prison  ever  equalled
in  squalor,  in  noisome  horror,  these  Twelve  Houses  of  Arrest.
There  exist  records  of  personal  experience  in  them,  Memoires
sur  les  Prisons ;  ^  one  of  the  strangest  Chapters  in  the  Biography
of  Man.

2 [The  Memoires  sur  les  Prisons,  in  2  vols.,  in  MM,  Berville  and  Barriere's
Collection  (1823)  begin  with  the  celebrated  Mdmoires  d'un^DHenu  {i.e.,  Riouffe) ;
and  contain,  besides,  L Humanitd  Mdconnue  by  Paris  de  I'Epinard  (which  describe
\hs.Abbaye,  Conciergerie,  Hotel-Dieu^^vech^,  College  du  Plessis) ;  V Incarceration  de
Beaumarchais  (which  however  refers  wholly  to  the  eve  of  the  September  massacres
in  '92) ;   Tableau  Historique  de  la  Maison  Lazare  (describing  the  Maison  d'arrH  in


THE  PRISONS  197

Very  singular  to  look  into  it :  how  a  kind  of  order  rises  up  in
all  conditions  of  human  existence  ;  and  wherever  two  or  three
are  gathered  together,  there  are  formed  modes  of  existing
together,  habitudes,  observances,  nay  gracefulnesses,  joys !
Citoyen  Coittant  will  explain  fully  how  our  lean  dinner,  of  herbs
and  carrion,  was  consumed  not  without  politeness  and  place-aux-
dames :  how  Seigneur  and  Shoeblack,  Duchess  and  Doll-Tear-
sheet,  flung  pell-mell  into  a  heap,  ranked  themselves  according
to  method :  at  what  hour  '  the  Citoyennes  took  to  their  needle-
work ; '  and  we,  yielding  the  chairs  to  them,  endeavoured  to
talk  gallantly  in  a  standing  posture,  or  even  to  sing  and  harp
more  or  less.  Jealousies,  enmities,  are  not  wanting ;  nor  flirta-
tions, of  an  effective  character.

Alas,  by  degrees,  even  needlework  must  cease  :  Plot  in  the
Prison  rises,  by  Citoyen  Laflotte  and  Preternatural  Suspicion.
Suspicious  Municipality  snatches  from  us  all  implements ;  all
money  and  possession,  of  means  or  metal,  is  ruthlessly
searched  for,  in  pocket,  in  pillow,  in  paillasse,  and  snatched
away :  red-capped  Commissaries  entering  every  cell.  Indigna-
tion, temporary  desperation,  at  robbery  of  its  very  thimble,  fills
the  gentle  heart.  Old  Nuns  shriek  shrill  discord ;  demand  to
be  killed  forthwith.  No  help  from  shrieking !  Better  was  that
of  the  two  shifty  male  Citizens,  who,  eager  to  preserve  an  imple-
ment or  two,  were  it  but  a  pipe-picker,  or  needle  to  darn  hose
with,  determined    to  defend   themselves :    by  tobacco.      Swift

the  Rue  de  Sevres,  Picpus,  Saint-Lazare,  which  last  was  only  opened  as  a  prison  on
Jan.  9th  '94) ;  Maison  (V arret  de  Port  Libre  (Coittant's  journal,  describing  Porte
Libre  and  the  C amies) ;  Le  L7/xembour^  {sLnonymous,  though  Dauban  (Les  Prisons,
234)  says  that  the  facts  related  correspond  so  exactly  with  Beaulieu's  journal  of  the
Luxembourg  that  one  would  be  inclined  to  attribute  it  to  him  were  not  the  spirit
altogether  different) ;  Precis  Historique  sur  la  Maison  d' arret  de  la  Rue  de  Sivres
(also  anonymous) ;  Madelonnettes  (anonymous,  but  known  to  be  by  Coittant) ;  La
Mairie,  La  Force  et  le  College  du  Plessis  (anonymous,  by  an  old  soldier).  They
also  contain  the  Voyage  des  132  Natttais,  Les  Horreurs  des  Prisons  d' Arras  and  the
account  of  the  priests  on  board  ship  at  Rochefort.

Some  of  these  accounts  were  published  in  the  Almanack  des  Prisons  of  the  year
III.  ;  and,  in  a  larger  work  by  Nougaret,  Hist,  des  Prisons  de  Paris  et  des
D^partements  (1797);  others  are  reproduced  in  Dauban,  Les  Prisons  (1870),  and
Wallon,  La  Terreur,  vol.  ii.  The  registers  of  several  of  the  prisons,  notably  of  the
Abhaye  and  La  Force  at  the  date  of  the  massacres,  and  of  the  Conciergerie,  were
dest-oyed  by  the  Commune  in  1871  (Wallon,  ii.  3,  note) ;  and  all  attempt  to
estimate  accurately  the  number  of  prisoners  at  any  given  time  must  be  abandoned.]


198        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

then,  as  your  fell  Red  Caps  are  heard  in  the  Corridor  rummaging
and  slamming,  the  two  Citoyens  light  their  pipes,  and  begin
smoking.  Thick  darkness  envelops  them.  The  Red  Nightcaps,
opening  the  cell,  breathe  but  one  mouthful ;  burst  forth  into
chorus  of  barking  and  coughing.  "  Quoij  Messieurs,"  cry  the  two
Citoyens,  "  you  don't  smoke  }  Is  the  pipe  disagreeable  ?  Est-
ce  que  vous  nefumez  pas  ?  "  But  the  Red  Nightcaps  have  fled,
with  slight  search  :  "  Vous  naimezpas  la  pipe?"  cry  the  Citoyens,
as  their  door  slams-to  again.^  My  poor  brother  Citoyens,  O
surely,  in  a  reign  of  Brotherhood,  you  are  not  the  two  I  would
guillotine !

Rigour  grows,  stiffens  into  horrid  tyranny  ;  Plot  in  the  Prison
getting  ever  rifer.  This  Plot  in  the  Prison,  as  we  said,  is  now
the  stereotype  formula  of  Tinville :  against  whomsoever  he
knows  no  crime,  this  is  a  ready-made  crime.  His  Judgment-
bar  has  become  unspeakable ;  a  recognised  mockery ;  known
only  as  the  wicket  one  passes  through,  towards  Death.  His
Indictments  are  drawn  out  in  blank  ;  you  insert  the  Names  after.
He  has  his  moutons,  detestable  traitor  jackals,  who  report  and
bear  witness  ;  that  they  themselves  may  be  allowed  to  live, —
for  a  time.  His  Fournees,  says  the  reproachful  Collot,  '  shall  in
no  case  exceed  threescore  ; '  that  is  his  maximuvi.  Nightly  come
his  Tumbrils  to  the  Luxembourg,  with  the  fatal  Roll-call ;  list
of  the  Fournee  of  tomorrow.  Men  rush  towards  the  Grate  ;  listen,
if  their  name  be  in  it  ?  One  deep-drawn  breath,  when  the  name
is  not  in  ;  we  live  still  one  day  !  And  yet  some  score  or  scores
of  names  were  in.  Quick  these,  they  clasp  their  loved  ones  to
their  heart,  one  last  time ;  with  brief  adieu,  wet-eyed  or  dry-
eyed,  they  mount,  and  are  away.  This  night  to  the  Concier-
gerie  ;  through  the  Palais  misnamed  of  Justice,  to  the  Guillotine,
tomorrow.

Recklessness,  defiant  levity,  the  Stoicism  if  not  of  strength
yet  of  weakness,  has  possessed  all  hearts.  Weak  women  and
Ci-devants,  their  locks  not  yet  made  into  blond  perukes,  their

1  Maison  d'ArrSt  de  Port- Libre,  par  Coittant,  &c.  (M6moires  sur  les  Prisons,  ii.)
[pp.  101-2].


THE  PRISONS  199

skins  not  yet  tanned  into  breeches,  are  accustomed  to  'act  the
Guillotine '  by  way  of  pastime.  In  fantastic  mummery,  with
towel- turbans,  blanket- ermine,  a  mock  Sanhedrim  of  Judges
sits,  a  mock  Tinville  pleads ;  a  culprit  is  doomed,  is  guillotined
by  the  oversetting  of  two  chairs.  Sometimes  we  carry  it
further :  Tinville  himself,  in  his  turn,  is  doomed,  and  not  to  the
Guillotine  alone.  With  blackened  face,  hirsute,  horned,  a  shaggy
Satan  snatches  him  not  unshrieking ;  shows  him,  with  out-
stretched arm  and  voice,  the  fire  that  is  not  quenched,  the  worm
that  dies  not ;  the  monotony  of  Hell-pain,  and  the  What  hour  ?
answered  by.  It  is  Eternity.^

And  still  the  Prisons  fill  fuller,  and  still  the  Guillotine  goes
faster.  On  all  high  roads  march  flights  of  Prisoners,  wending
towards  Paris.  Not  Ci-devants  now ;  they,  the  noisy  of  them,
are  mown  down  ;  it  is  Republicans  now.  Chained  two  and  two
they  march ;  in  exasperated  moments  singing  their  Marseillaise.
A  hundred  and  thirty-two  men  of  Nantes,  for  instance,  march
towards  Paris,  in  these  same  days :  Republicans,  or  say  even
Jacobins  to  the  marrow  of  the  bone ;  but  Jacobins  who  had  not
approved  Noyading.^  Vive  la  R6publique  rises  from  them  in  all
streets  of  towns  :  they  rest  by  night  in  unutterable  noisome  dens,
crowded  to  choking ;  one  or  two  dead  on  the  morrow.  They
are  wayworn,  weary  of  heart ;  can  only  shout :  Live  the  Republic  ;
we,  as  under  horrid  enchantment,  dying  in  this  way  for  it !

Some  Four-hundred  Priests,  of  whom  also  there  is  record,  ride
at  anchor,  '  in  the  roads  of  the  Isle  of  Aix,'  long  months  ;  looking
out  on  misery,  vacuity,  waste  Sands  of  Oleron  and   the  ever-

1  Montgaillard,  iv.  218  ;  Riouffe,  p.  273.  [A  wrong  reference ;  Riouffe,  in  the
supplement  to  his  Mhnoires  quoted  in  Dauban  (Prisons,  p.  126),  gives  the  story  of
this  taking  place  in  the  Conciergerie,  cell  No.  13.  In  the  M^moires  d'un  Detenu,
i.e.,  the  first  edition  of  Riouffe  (Paris,  I'An  III.),  the  story  is  told  on  pp.  151-3,
but  it  is  not  in  Berville  and  Barri^re's  edition,  which  Carlyle  generally  used,]

2  Voyage  de  Cent  Trente-deux  Nantais,  Prisons,  ii.  288-335.  [There  are  two
accounts  of  this  journey  given,  the  first  written  at  Paris  and  signed  by  '  ten  citizens  : '
it  is  dated  in  the  Mimoires  sur  les  Prisons  '  30  Thermidor  '  (Aug,  17th) ;  but  the  last
two  pages  are  a  postscript,  and  Campardon  (ii,  245)  restores  the  real  date,  '  ist
Messidor '  (June  29th).  The  second  account,  of  only  a  few  pages  (Prisons,  ii,  328),
is  by  Citizen  Desbouchauds.  The  132  Nantais  left  Nantes  Nov,  27th  '93,  and
reached  Paris  Jan.  5th  '94,  reduced  to  97,  They  were  lodged  at  the  Mairie  and
in  two  days  transferred  to  the  Conciergerie  {vid.  infr.,  iii.  220).]


200        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

moaning  brine.  Ragged,  sordid,  hungry ;  wasted  to  shadows :
eating  their  unclean  ration  on  deck,  circularly,  in  parties  of
a  dozen,  with  finger  and  thumb  ;  beating  their  scandalous  clothes
between  two  stones ;  choked  in  horrible  miasmata,  closed  under
hatches,  seventy  of  them  in  a  berth,  through  night ;  so  that  the
'aged  Priest  is  found  lying  dead  in  the  morning,  in  the  attitude
of  prayer ! '  i — How  long,  O  Lord  !

Not  forever ;  no.  All  Anarchy,  all  Evil,  Injustice,  is,  by  the
nature  of  it,  dragons-teeth  ;  suicidal,  and  cannot  endure.

CHAPTER  VI

TO  FINISH  THE  TERROR  2
It   is  very    remarkable,    indeed,    that    since    the    Etre-Supr&me
Feast,  and  the  sublime  continued  harangues  on  it,  which  Billaud

1  Relation  de  ce  qu'ont  souffert  pour  la  Religion  les  pretres  Franfais  inserment^s,
d6port6s  en  1794,  dans  la  rade  de  I'ile  d'Aix  (Prisons,  ii.  387-485).  [The  Isle  of
Aix  is  off  the  mouth  of  the  Charente  near  Rochefort.  The  anonymous  author  says
that  three-fourths  of  the  priests  died  in  eleven  months  (from  Feb.  '94  to  Jan.  '95).]

2  [The  best  and  clearest  account  of  Thermidor  is  to  be  found  in  M.  d'H^ricault's
La  Revolution  de  Thermidor  (Paris,  1878).  It  is  based  on  a  great  many  contem-
porary works,  notably  on  the  really  trustworthy  memoirs  of  three  members  of
the  marais,  Daunou,  Thibaudeau  and  Durand-Maillane  (afterwards  leaders  in  the
Convention),  on  the  evidence  which  came  out  at  the  subsequent  state  trials,  on
researches  in  the  Archives,  as  well  as  on  the  less  trustworthy  Rapport  of  Courtois
on  the  events  of  9th  Thermidor,  and  his  two  (mutilated)  reports  of  the  papers  found
at  Robespierre's  house;  on  the  Hist,  de  la  Conjuration  de  M.  Robespierre,  by
Montjoie  (an  IV.);  on  the  Crimes  de  sept  inembres  des  Anciens  Comitis,  by
Lecointre,  and  the  answers  of  those  members  to  Lecointre ;  on  the  Report  of
Saladin,  in  the  name  of  the  Committee  of  21  {i.e.^  the  report  against  Billaud,  CoUot
and  Bar^re,  March  '95) ;  and  on  Dussault's  Fragment  pour  servir  a  VHistoire  de
la  Conv.  Nat.  (an  III.).

M.  d'H^ricault  admits  the  difficulty  of  reconciling  the  various  stories  (even  the
exact  course  of  events  on  July  27th  is  difficult  to  ascertain),  but  I  think  that
he  explains  many  of  the  difficulties.  Carlyle  appears  to  have  relied  largely  on
the  Moniteur,  Vilate  and  the  Continuators  of  Deux  Amis.

The  threads  of  the  combination  of  the  remnants  of  the  other  parties  against
Robespierre  are  not  easy  to  unravel ;  and  perhaps  in  such  a  state  of  society,  where
no  man  could  trust  nnother,  one  ought  not  to  speak  of  parties  at  all,  but  at  most  of
groups  of  individuals.  Each  of  the  Montagnards  had  his  own  personal  reasons  for
hatred  or  for  fear ;  but  undoubtedly  the  coalition  of  Billaud  and  CoUot  with  the
Dantonists  comes  as  a  surprise  to  us  ;  it  is  probable,  however,  as  I  have  stated
below,  that  they  expected  to  dominate  the  Jacobin  Club  in  place  of  Robespierre  when
he  should  be  overthrown.  The  game  of  the  old  Septemberers  and  Hdbertists  had
been  entirely  checked  by  Robespierre,  and  some  of  them  may  have  looked  to  revive
it  under  the  leadership  of  Billaud  ;  some  of  them  again,  especially  Panis,  were
attached  to  the  memory  of  Danton.  But  the  real  explanation  may  after  all  be
best  sought  in  the  peculiar  talents  of  Fouch^  for  every  kind  of  dark  intrigue  and
combination  ;  the  materials  he  had  to  work  upon  being  cupidity,  fear  and  hatred,
he  might  be  trusted  to  make  an  effective  use  of  them.]


TO  FINISH  THE  TERROR  201

feared  would  become  a  bore  to  him,  Robespierre  has  gone  little
to  Committee:  but  held  himself  apart,  as  if  in  a  kind  of  pet.i
Nay  they  have  made  a  Report  on  that  old  Catherine  Theot,^
and  her  Regenerative  Man  spoken  of  by  the  Prophets ;  not  in
the  best  spirit.  This  Theot  mystery  they  affect  to  regard  as
a  Plot ;  but  have  evidently  introduced  a  vein  of  satire,  of
irreverent  banter,  not  against  the  Spinster  alone,  but  obliquely
against  her  Regenerative  Man !  Barrere's  light  pen  was  perhaps
at  the  bottom  of  it :  read  through  the  solemn  snuffling  organs  of
old  Vadier  of  the  SHretd  G&nerale,  the  Theot  Report  ^  had  its
effect ;  wrinkling  the  general  Republican  visage  into  an  iron
grin.     Ought  these  things  to  be  .'*

We  note  further,  that  among  the  Prisoners  in  the  Twelve
Houses  of  Arrest,  there  is  one  whom  we  have  seen  before.  Sen-
hora  Fontenai,  bom  Cabarus,  the  fair  Proserpine  whom  Represen-
tative Tallien  Pluto-like  did  gather  at  Bourdeaux,  not  without
effect  on  himself!  Tallien  is  home,  by  recall,  long  since,  from
Bourdeaux  ;  and  in  the  most  alarming  position.  Vain  that  he
sounded,  louder  even  than  ever,  the  note  of  Jacobinism,  to  hide
past  shortcomings  :  the  Jacobins  purged  him  out  *  ;  two  times  has

1  [Robespierre's  position  became  more  and  more  awkward  through  June  and  July  ;
he  was  hated  and  despised  by  his  colleagues  in  the  Committee  ;  he  bored  them  to
extinction  as  well,  but  his  prestige  in  the  Convention  and  at  the  Jacobins  was  useful
to  them.  What  faculty  of  decision  he  ever  possessed  he  appears  to  have  lost  in
this  period  of  loneliness.  He  desired  to  govern  ?  Yes,  but  he  desired  far  more  to
head  the  opposition  to  government :  he  knew  enough  of  the  foul  mob  which  he
had  idolised,  to  know  that  the  man  in  opposition  always  has  the  hearts  of  the
"  people."  And  if  it  came  to  governing  he  probably  found  in  himself  no  faculty
for  it  {c/.  Gros,  p.  8i):  d'H^ricault  thinks,  probably  with  truth,  that  he  did  not
wish  to  be  dictator  in  name,  and  did  not  want  a  new  May  31st,  but  did  want  a
gradual  elimination  of  all  persons  hostile  to  himself  in  the  Convention  and  the
Committees  :  he  would  preserve  a  phantom  Convention  and  a  phantom  Committee
to  veil  his  own  real  power  (d'H^ricault,  p.  49).

Too  much  has  been  made  of  the  story  of  his  retirement :  he  signed  many  acts  of
Committee  during  the  alleged  period  of  retirement ;  but  only  once  (July  22nd)
attended  a  meeting  of  the  two  Committees  united :  probably  he  used  to  come  to
the  Sa/uf  only  late  at  night,  and  when  there  were  only  one  or  two  members  there
(d'Hdricault,  p.  252  j^^.).]

2  [June  15th,]

^  [The  Report  was  undoubtedly  a  feeler  in  the  direction  of  inculpating  Robes-
pierre, but  he  came  to  the  Committee,  and  with  some  difficulty  succeeded  in
preventing  the  accused  persons  (5  in  number)  from  being  sent  to  the  Tribunal,  and
in  stifling  all  further  inquiry  as  to  their  accomplices  (d'H^ricault,  p.  248).]

4Qune  14th.]


202        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Robespierre  growled  at  him  words  of  omen  from  the  Convention
Tribune.  And  now  his  fair  Cabarus,  hit  by  denunciation,  Hes
Arrested,  Suspect,  in  spite  of  all  he  could  do  ! — Shut  in  horrid
pinfold  of  death,^  the  Senhora  smuggles  out  to  her  red-gloomy
Tallien  the  most  pressing  entreaties  and  conjurings :  Save  me  ;
save  thyself.  Seest  thou  not  that  thy  own  head  is  doomed  ;  thou
with  a  too  fiery  audacity  ;  a  Dantonist  withal ;  against  whom  lie
grudges  ?  Are  ye  not  all  doomed,  as  in  the  Polyphemus  Cavern  :
the  fawningest  slave  of  you  will  be  but  eaten  last ! — Tallien  feels
with  a  shudder  that  it  is  true.  Tallien  has  had  words  of  omen,
Bourdon  has  had  words,  Freron  is  hated  and  Barras ;  each  man
'  feels  his  head  if  it  yet  stick  on  his  shoulders.'

Meanwhile  Robespierre,  we  still  observe,  goes  little  to  Conven-
tion, not  at  all  to  Committee ;  speaks  nothing  except  to  his
Jacobin  House  of  Lords,  amid  his  body-guard  of  Tappe-durs.
These  '  forty-days,'  for  we  are  now  far  in  July,  he  has  not  showed
face  in  Committee ;  could  only  work  there  by  his  three  shallow
scoundrels,  and  the  terror  there  was  of  him.^  The  Incorruptible
himself  sits  apart ;  or  is  seen  stalking  in  solitary  places  in  the
fields,  with  an  intensely  meditative  air  ;  some  say,  '  with  eyes
red-spotted,'  ^  fruit  of  extreme  bile :  the  lamentablest  seagreen
Chimera  that  walks  the  Earth  that  July  !  O  hapless  Chimera ;
for  thou  too  hadst  a  life,  and  heart  of  flesh, — what  is  this  that
the  stern  gods,  seeming  to  smile  all  the  way,  have  led  and  let
thee  to !     Art  not  thou  he,  who,  few  years  ago,  was  a  young

^[Vid.  supr.,  iii,  123.]

2[Couthon  was  less  present  (owing  to  his  ill  health)  than  any  other  member  of
the  Committee  :  Saint- Just  and  Lebas  were  absent  (with  the  Army  of  the  North)
from  April  29th  to  June  29th  (except  for  five  days  in  Prairial).  There  had  already
been  two  outbursts  in  the  Committee  against  Robespierre,  one  on  the  part  of
Carnot  against  his  secret  police,  who  had  arrested  two  of  Carnot's  clerks,  and  one
on  the  part  of  Billaud  about  the  law  of  Prairial  {vid.  supr.,  iii.  194).  Messidor  (June
19th — July  i8th)  was  quiet,  except  for  Jourdan's  victories  in  the  Netherlands  and
the  increasing  rapidity  of  the  guillotine,  but  towards  the  end  of  that  month  Fouch6,
the  real  wire-puller,  began  to  organise  his  party,  always  keeping  himself  out  of  sight.
The  two  Committees,  if  united,  might  have  struck  the  blow  themselves,  but  they
were  not  united  ;  many  of  them  were  cowards,  and  many  of  them  feared  that,
on  the  overthrow  of  the  system  of  Terror,  they  themselves  would  be  called  to
account.  Hence  the  lead  fell  to  the  Montagnards  outside  the  Committees,  and
these  had  no  choice  but  to  win  over  the  marais,  which  on  this  occasion  Robespierre
omitted  to  conciUate  (d'H^ricault,  p.  271  sqq.).]

3  Deux  Amis,  xii.  347-73.


TO  FINISH  THE  TERROR  203

Advocate  of  promise ;  and  gave  up  the  Arras  Judgeship  rather
than  sentence  one  man  to  die  ? —

What  his  thoughts  might  be  ?  His  plans  for  finishing  the
Terror?  One  knows  not.  Dim  vestiges  there  flit  of  Agrarian
Law ;  a  victorious  Sansculottism  become  Landed  Proprietor ;  old
Soldiers  sitting  in  National  Mansions,  in  Hospital  Palaces  of
Chambord  and  Chantilly ;  peace  bought  by  victory ;  breaches
healed  by  Feast  of  Eti-e  Supreme  ; — and  so,  through  seas  of  blood,
to  Equahty,  Frugality,  worksome  Blessedness,  Fraternity,  and
Republic  of  the  virtues.  Blessed  shore,  of  such  a  sea  of  Aristocrat
blood :  but  how  to  land  on  it  ?  Through  one  last  wave :  blood
of  corrupt  Sansculottists ;  traitorous  or  semi-traitorous  Conven-
tionals,  rebellious  Talliens,  Billauds,  to  whom  with  my  Eire
Supreme  I  have  become  a  bore  ;  with  my  Apocalyptic  Old  Woman
a  laughing-stock ! — So  stalks  he,  this  poor  Robespierre,  like  a
seagreen  ghost,  through  the  blooming  July.  Vestiges  of  schemes
flit  dim.  But  7vhat  his  schemes  or  his  thoughts  were  will  never
be  known  to  man.

New  Catacombs,  some  say,  are  digging  for  a  huge  simultaneous
butchery.  Q)nvention  to  be  butchered,  down  to  the  right  pitch,
by  General  Henriot  and  Company  :  Jacobin  House  of  Lords  made
dominant ;  and  Robespierre  Dictator.  ^  There  is  actually,  or  else
there  is  not  actually,  a  List  made  out ;  which  the  Hairdresser  has
got  eye  on,  as  he  frizzled  the  Incorruptible  locks.  Each  man  asks
himself.  Is  it  I  ?

Nay,  as  Tradition  and  rumour  of  Anecdote  still  convey  it,  there
was  a  remarkable  bachelor's  dinner,  one  hot  day,  at  Barrere's.
For  doubt  not,  O  Reader,  this  Barrere  and  others  of  them  gave
dinners ;  had  '  country-house  at  Clichy,'  with  elegant  enough
sumptuosities,  and  pleasures  high-rouged.^  But  at  this  dinner
we  speak  of,  the  day  being  so  hot,  it  is  said,  the  guests  all  stript

1  Deux  Amis,  xii.  350-8.

2  See  Vilate  [p.  184.  The  story  of  Barere's  Maison  de  Plaisance  at  Clichy,  to
which  Voulland  and  Vadier  had  the  entrie  and  to  which  Bar^re  retired  twice  in  the
decade,  is  not  in  itself  improbable,  but  rests  solely  on  Vilate.  Macaulay  in  his
famous  Essay  on  Barere  says  it  has  '  often  been  repeated,'  but  I  know  of  no  good
authority  for  it.]


204        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

their  coats,  and  left  them  in  the  drawing-room:  whereupon
Camot  ghded  out ;  groped  in  Robespierre's  pocket ;  found  a  hst
of  Forty,  his  own  name  among  them  ;  and  tarried  not  at  the
wine-cup  that  day ! — Ye  must  bestir  yourselves,  O  Friends ;  ye
dull  Frogs  of  the  Marsh,  mute  ever  since  Girondism  sank  under,
even  you  now  must  croak  or  die  !  Councils  are  held,  with  word
and  beck ;  nocturnal,  mysterious  as  death.  Does  not  a  feline
MaximiUen  stalk  there ;  voiceless  as  yet ;  his  green  eyes  red-
spotted  ;  back  bent,  and  hair  up  ?  Rash  Tallien,  with  his  rash
temper  and  audacity  of  tongue  ;  he  shall  hell  the  caO  Fix  a  day  ;
and  be  it  soon,  lest  never !

Lo,  before  the  fixed  day,  on  the  day  which  they  call  Eighth  of
Thermidor,  26th  July  1794,  Robespierre  himself  reappears  in
Convention ;  mounts  to  the  Tribune !  The  biliary  face  seems
clouded  with  new  gloom :  judge  whether  your  Talliens,  Bour-
dons, listened  with  interest.  It  is  a  voice  bodeful  of  death  or  of
life.  Long-winded,  unmelodious  as  the  screech-owl's,  sounds
that  prophetic  voice  :  Degenerate  condition  of  Republican  spirit ;
corrupt  Moderatism ;  SUreU,  Salut  Committees  themselves  in-
fected ;  back-sliding  on  this  hand  and  on  that ;  I,  Maximilien,
alone  left  incorruptible,  ready  to  die  at  a  moment's  warning.
For  all  which  what  remedy  is  there  ?  The  Guillotine  ;  new  vigour
to  the  all-healing  Guillotine  ;  death  to  traitors  of  every  hue  !    So

i[The  struggle  really  entered  its  final  stage  on  July  19th  (ist  Thermidor)  with
the  arrest  of  Vilate  and  Naulin  (juror  and  judge  of  Tribunal  Rdvolutionnaire),  on  a
report  of  Barere's,  and  with  the  acquittal  of  Rousselin  (an  enemy  of  Robespierre)  at
the  Tribunal.  On  20th  there  was  a  meeting  of  the  two  Committees  united,  the  result
of  which  seems  to  have  been  unfavourable  to  Robespierre  :  but  on  22nd  at  a  similar
meeting,  at  which  Robespierre  was  present,  the  ^'a/z^/P/fif/^/zV  reconciled  itself  with  him
to  the  prejudice  of  the  Sdi-etd  Gdndrale :  it  was  at  this  meeting  that  Saint-Just  proposed
a  practical  dictatorship  in  Robespierre's  hands,  and  the  Committees  did  not  dare
to  oppose  ;  Saint-Just  was  intrusted  with  the  drawing  up  of  a  report  on  the  State  of
the  Nation,  which  should  include  some  such  proposal  (d'H6ricault,  p.  340  se/q. ).  Ac-
cording to  Billaud  {Rlponse  a  Lecointre),  Robespierre  named  thirty  members  of  the
Convention  who  must  die  at  once.  The  StireU  Ginirale  was  terrified  at  the  result,
and  so  were  the  Montagnards.  On  24th  Carnot  adroitly  got  a  number  of  the
cannons  belonging  to  the  Sections  of  Paris  sent  to  the  front  (and  thus  deprived
Hanriot  of  a  good  deal  of  material  for  a  new  May  31st),  but  this  was  angrily  criticised
at  the  Jacobins  as  an  '  insult  to  Paris.'  Also  on  24th  there  was  a  meeting  of  the
two  Committees,  but  the  secret  of  their  deliberations  has  never  transpired.  On
the  25th  there  was  a  petition  of  the  Jacobins  to  the  Convention  denouncing  the
enemies  of  Robespierre  ;  but  not  naming  any  leaders  ;  CoUot  (President  of  the
Convention  that  day)  and  Harare  promised  them  satisfaction  (ibid,  352  sqq.W


TO  FINISH  THE  TERROR  205

sings  the  prophetic  voice ;  into  i^s  Convention  sounding-board.^
The  old  song  this :  but  today,  O  Heavens !  has  the  sounding-
board  ceased  to  act  ?  There  is  not  resonance  in  this  Convention  ;
there  is,  so  to  speak,  a  gasp  of  silence  ;  nay  a  certain  grating  of
one  knows  not  what ! — Lecointre,  our  old  Draper  of  Versailles,
in  these  questionable  circumstances,  sees  nothing  he  can  do  so
safe  as  rise,  '  insidiously '  or  not  insidiously,  and  move,  according
to  established  wont,  that  the  Robespierre  Speech  be  *  printed  and
sent  to  the  Departments.'  ^  Hark  :  gratings,  even  of  dissonance  !
Honourable  Members  hint  dissonance ;  Committee-Members,
inculpated  in  the  Speech,  utter  dissonance,  demand  'delay  in
printing.'  Ever  higher  rises  the  note  of  dissonance ;  inquiry
is  even  made  by  Editor  Freron :  "  What  has  become  of  the
Liberty  of  Opinions  in  this  Convention  ?  "  The  Order  to  print
and  transmit,  which  had  got  passed,  is  rescinded.  Robespierre,
greener  than  ever  before,  has  to  retire,  foiled  ;  discerning  that  it
is  mutiny,  that  evil  is  nigh  !

Mutiny  is  a  thing  of  the  fatallest  nature  in  all  enterprises
whatsoever ;  a  thing  so  incalculable,  swift-frightful :  not  to  be
dealt  with  in  fnght.  But  mutiny  in  a  Robespierre  Convention,
above  all, — it  is  Hke  fire  seen  sputtering  in  the  ship's  powder-
room  !  One  death-defiant  plunge  at  it,  this  moment,  and  you
may  still  tread  it  out :  hesitate  till  next  moment, — ship  and  ship's
captain,  crew  and  cargo  are  shivered  far ;  the  ship's  voyage  has
suddenly  ended  between  sea  and  sky.  If  Robespierre  can,
tonight,  produce  his  Henriot  and  Company,  and  get   his   work

1  [It  is  impossible  to  make  much  of  this  speech  of  Robespierre  [see  Stephens'
Orators,  i.  423,  where  it  occupies  43  pages),  but  note  that  he  says,  (i.)  all  the  surviv-
ing members  of  Danton's  and  Hubert's  factions  are  being  '  caressed  by  some  people '
{i.e. ,  the  Committees) ;  (ii.)  he  does  mention  one  or  two  names,  Cambon,  Mallarm^,
Ramel ;  (iii. )  he  says  that  '  the  splendid  victories  of  which  you  are  being  told  in
splendid  language  '  (one  for  Barere) '  are  a  myth,  the  Army  is  really  being  betrayed  '.]

2  [Here  Carlyle  is  wrong ;  the  printing  was  all  that  Lecointre  moved  '  without
sending  to  the  Committee  to  be  examined  : '  it  was  Couthon  who  moved  the  sending
to  all  Departments ;  this  re-provoked  the  discussion,  and  the  vote  was  rescinded.
Vadier  then  attacked  Robespierre,  followed  by  Andr6  Dumont,  Billaud,  Panis  and
Charlier  in  the  same  direction  ;  Freron  made  the  last  and  boldest  speech  and
demanded  the  repeal  of  the  law  of  22nd  Prairial ;  the  Convention  rose  at  5  P.M.
(d'H^ricault,  p.  376^^^.).]


206        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

done  by  them,  he  and  Sansculottism  may  still  subsist  some  time ;
if  not,  probably  not.  Oliver  Cromwell,  when  that  Agitator
Sergeant  stept  forth  from  the  ranks,  with  plea  of  grievances,  and
began  gesticulating  and  demonstrating,  as  the  mouthpiece  of
Thousands  expectant  there, — discerned,  with  those  truculent  eyes
of  his,  how  the  matter  lay ;  plucked  a  pistol  from  his  holsters  ;
blew  Agitator  and  Agitation  instantly  out.^  Noll  was  a  man  fit
for  such  things.

Robespierre,  for  his  part,  glides  over  at  evening  to  his  Jacobin
House  of  Lords  ;  unfolds  there,  instead  of  some  adequate  resolu-
tion, his  woes,  his  uncommon  virtues,  incorruptibilities  ;  then,
secondly,  his  rejected  screech-owl  Oration ; — reads  this  latter
over  again ;  and  declares  that  he  is  ready  to  die  at  a  moment's
warning.  Thou  shalt  not  die  !  shouts  Jacobinism  from  its  thou-
sand throats.  "  Robespierre,  I  will  drink  the  hemlock  with
thee,"  cries  Painter  David,  "  Je  boirai  la  cigue  avec  toi;" — a  thing
not  essential  to  do,  but  which,  in  the  fire  of  the  moment,  can  be
said.

Our  Jacobin  sounding-board,  therefore,  does  act !  Applauses
heaven-high  cover  the  rejected  Oration  ;  fire-eyed  fury  lights  all
Jacobin  features  :  Insurrection  a  sacred  duty  ;  the  Convention  to
be  purged ;  Sovereign  People  under  Henriot  and  Municipality ;
we  will  make  a  new  June-Second  of  it :  To  your  tents,  O  Israel !
In  this  key  pipes  Jacobinism  ;  in  sheer  tumult  of  revolt.  Let
Tallien  and  all  Opposition  men  make  off,  CoUot  d'Herbois,
though  of  the  supreme  Salut,  and  so  lately  near  shot,  is  elbowed,
bullied ;  is  glad  to  escape  alive.  Entering  Committee-room  of
Salut,  all  dishevelled,  he  finds  sleek  sombre  Saint- Just  there,
among  the  rest ;  who  in  his  sleek  way  asks,  "  What  is  passing  at
the  Jacobins  ? " — "  What  is  passing  ?  "  repeats  Collot,  in  the
unhistrionic  Cambyses'  vein :  ^'  What  is  passing  }  Nothing  but
revolt  and  horrors  are  passing.     Ye  want  our  lives  ;  ye  shall  not

^  [This  probably  refers  to  the  execution — after  trial  by  Court-Martial  and  not  by
Oliver's  own  hand — of  Arnald  at  Corkbush  field,  Nov.  15th  1647  (Carlyle,  Cromwell,
i.  266).  There  is  no  evidence  for  Cromwell  having  shot  any  one  himself,  but
"  Cromwell  rode  along  the  ranks  .  .  .  dashed  among  the  mutineers  with  his  sword
drawn."    {See  Gardiner,  Hist,  of  the  Great  Civil  War,  iii.  254.)]


GO  DOWN  TO  207

have  them."  Saint- Just  stutters  at  such  Cambyses-oratory  ;  takes
his  hat  to  withdraw.  That  Report  he  had  been  speaking  of,
Report  on  Republican  Things  in  General  we  may  say,  which  is
to  be  read  in  Convention  on  the  morrow,  he  cannot  show  it  them,
at  this  moment :  a  friend  has  it ;  he,  Saint-Just,  will  get  it,  and
send  it,  were  he  once  home.  Once  home,  he  sends  not  it,  but  an
answer  that  he  will  not  send  it ;  that  they  will  hear  it  from  the
Tribune  to-morrow.  ^

Let  every  man,  therefore,  according  to  a  well-known  good-
advice,  '  pray  to  Heaven,  and  keep  his  powder  dry  ! '  Paris,  on
the  morrow,  will  see  a  thing.  Swift  scouts  fly  dim  or  invisible,
all  night,  from  Silrete  and  Saliit ;  from  conclave  to  conclave  ;
from  Mother-Society  to  Townhall.  Sleep,  can  it  fall  on  the  eyes
of  Talliens,  Frerons,  Collots  ?  Puissant  Henriot,  Mayor  Fleuriot,
Judge  Coffinhal,  Procureur  Payan,  Robespierre  and  all  the  Jaco-
bins are  getting  ready.

CHAPTER  Vn

GO  DOWN  TO

Tallien's  eyes  beamed  bright,  on  the  morrow,  ninth  of  Thermidor  ^
'about  nine  o'clock,'  to  see  that  the  Convention  had  actually  met.
Paris  is  in  rumour :  but  at  least  we  are  met,  in  Legal  Convention
here  ;  we  have  not  been  snatched  seriatim  ;  treated  with  a  Pride  s
Purge  at  the  door.^  "  Allons,  brave  men  of  the  Plain,"  late  Frogs
of  the  Marsh !    cried  Tallien  with  a  squeeze  of  the  hand,  as  he

i[The  Committee  met  at  lo  P.M.  and  sat  till  5  A.M.  on  the  night  26th — 27th;
Carlyle  is  correct  about  the  quarrel  between  Saint-Just  and  Collot  at  i  a.m.  ;  how-
ever Saint-Just  did  not  go  out,  but  went  on  quietly  writing  his  speech  for  the  next
day  (d'H^ricault,  p.  397  sqq.).

Fr6ron  vainly  endeavoured,  with  Lecointre  and  Cambon,  to  get  into  the  Com-
mittee room  to  urge  the  arrest  of  Hanriot.]

2  [July  27th.  Tallien,  Barras  and  Fr^ron  dined  with  Mme  St.  Brice  on  26th  and
swore  on  a  bottle  of  champagne  that  they  would  lead  the  attack  next  day(d'H^ricault,
P-  391)-]

3  [Both  the  Committee  and  the  Convention  met  at  10  A.M.  on  27th  ;  the  heat
was  intense,  and  members  walked  up  and  down  in  the  corridors  to  get  cool ;  it  was
from  outside  that  Tallien  perceived  Saint-Just  in  the  Tribune,  and  cried  '  Voild  /  il
faut  en  j^nir,'  and  then  the  members  crowded  in.     Robespierre  (who  was  dressed

in  his  Etre-Supreme  clothes)  was  sitting  at  the  foot  of  the  Tribune  to  show  that  he
had  broken  with  the  Montagne ;  Collot  was  in  the  chair  (d'Hericault,  p.  401  sqq.)."]


208        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

passed  in ;  Saint- Just's  sonorous  voice  being  now  audible  from
the  Tribune,  and  the  game  of  games  begun.

Saint-Just  is  verily  reading  that  Report  of  his ;  green  Venge-
ance, in  the  shape  of  Robespierre,  watching  nigh.  Behold,
however,  Saint-Just  has  read  but  few  sentences,  when  interrup-
tion rises,  rapid  crescendo  ;  when  Tallien  starts  to  his  feet,  and
Billaud,  and  this  man  starts  and  that, — ^and  Tallien,  a  second
time,  with  his :  "  Citoyens,  at  the  Jacobins  last  night,  I  trembled
for  the  Republic.  I  said  to  myself,  if  the  Convention  dare  not
strike  the  Tyrant,  then  I  myself  dare  ;  and  with  this  I  will  do  it,
if  need  be,"  said  he,  whisking  out  a  clear-gleaming  Dagger,  and
brandishing  it  there  ;  the  Steel  of  Brutus,  as  we  call  it.  Whereat
we  all  bellow,  and  brandish,  impetuous  acclaim.  "  Tyranny  !
Dictatorship  !  Triumvirate ! "  And  the  Salui  Committee-men
accuse,  and  all  men  accuse,  and  uproar,  and  impetuously  acclaim.
And  Saint-Just  is  standing  motionless,  pale  of  face  ;  Couthon
ejaculating,  "Triumvir?"  with  a  look  at  his  paralytic  legs.  And
Robespierre  is  struggling  to  speak,  but  President  Thuriot  is
jingling  the  bell  against  him,  but  the  Hall  is  sounding  against
him  like  an  ^Eolus-Hall :  and  Robespierre  is  mounting  the
Tribune-steps  and  descending  again  ;  going  and  coming,  like  to
choke  with  rage,  terror,  desperation : — and  mutiny  is  the  order
of  the  day.i

O  President  Thuriot,  thou  that  wert  Elector  Thuriot,  and  from
the  Bastille  battlements  sawest  Saint-Antoine  rising  like  the
Ocean-tide,  and  hast  seen  much  since,  sawest  thou  ever  the  like
of  this  ?  Jingle  of  bell,  which  thou  jinglest  against  Robespierre,
is  hardly  audible  amid  the  Bedlam-storm ;  and  men  rage  for  life.
"  President  of  Assassins,"  shrieks  Robespierre,  "  I  demand  speech
of  thee  for  the  last  time ! "  It  cannot  be  had.  "  To  you,  O
virtuous  men  of  the  Plain,"  cries  he,  finding  audience  one  moment,
"  I  appeal  to  you  !  "  The  virtuous  men  of  the  Plain  sit  silent  as
stones.  And  Thuriot's  bell  jingles,  and  the  Hall  sounds  like
bolus's  Hall.  Robespierre's  frothing  lips  are  grown  '  blue  ; '  his
tongue  dry,  cleaving  to  the  roof  of  his  mouth.  "  The  blood  of
1  Moniteur,  Nos.  311,  312 ;  D^bats,  iv.  421-42 ;  Deux  Amis,  xii.  390-411.


GO  DOWN  TO  209

Dantou  chokes  him,"  cry  they.  "  Accusation  !  Decree  of  Accusa-
tion !  "  Thuriot  swiftly  puts  that  question.  Accusation  passes  ;
the  incorruptible  Maximilien  is  decreed  Accused.

"  I  demand  to  share  my  Brother's  fate,  as  I  have  striven  to
share  his  virtues,"  cries  Augustin,  the  Younger  Robespierre  :
Augustin  also  is  decreed.  And  Couthon,  and  Saint-Just,  and
Lebas,  they  are  all  decreed ;  and  packed  forth, — not  without
difficulty,  the  Ushers  almost  trembling  to  obey.  Triumvirate  and
Company  are  packed  forth,  into  Salut  Committee-room  ;  their
tongue  cleaving  to  the  roof  of  their  mouth.  You  have  but  to
summon  the  Municipality  ;  to  cashier  Commandant  Henriot,  and
launch  arrest  at  him ;  to  regulate  formalities ;  hand  Tinville  his
victims.  It  is  noon;  the  iEolus-Hall  has  delivered  itself;  blows
now  victorious,  harmonious,  as  one  irresistible  wind.^

And  so  the  work  is  finished  ?  One  thinks  so  :  and  yet  it  is  not
so.  Alas,  there  is  yet  but  the  first-act  finished ;  three  or  four
other  acts  still  to  come  ;  and  an  uncertain  catastrophe  !  A  huge
City  holds  in  it  so  many  confusions :  seven  hundred  thousand
human  heads  ;  not  one  of  which  knows  what  its  neighbour  is
doing,  nay  not  what  itself  is  doing. — See,  accordingly,  about
three  in  the  afternoon.  Commandant  Henriot,  how  instead  of
sitting  cashiered,  arrested,  he  gallops  along  the  Quais,  followed
by  Municipal  Gendarmes,  '  trampling  down  several  persons  ! '  For
the  Townhall  sits  deliberating,  openly  insurgent :  Barriers  to  be
shut ;  no  Gaoler  to  admit  any  Prisoner  this  day  ; — and  Henriot  is
galloping  towards  the  Tuileries,  to  deliver  Robespierre.  On  the
Quai  de  la  Ferraillerie,  a  young  Citoyen,  walking  with  his  wife,

1  [Billaud  and  the  rest  of  the  Committee  hurried  in  at  once  as  soon  as  they  heard
that  Saint-Just  was  in  the  Tribune  ;  and  to  Billaud  fell  the  honour  of  first  denouncmg
Robespierre  by  name  "as  beinga  woc/tW  (d'H^ricault,  p.  409) ;  but  his  attack  was
weak,  and  it  was  Tallien's  second  speech  that  roused  the  Convention.  S dance per-
manente  was  decreed  on  his  motion.  Couthon  and  Saint-Just  lost  their  nerve  quite  as
much  as  Robespierre,  and  sat  silent  all  day  at  the  foot  of  the  Tribune.  At  2  p.m.  came
the  cry  for  Barere,  and  Barere  moved  the  suppression  of  the  office  of  Commander  of
National  Guard  (Hanriot),  and  spoke  covertly  against  Robespierre.  At  2.30  Thuriot
succeeded  CoUot  in  the  chair  and  took  care  that  no  Robespierrist  should  speak.
At  4  Louchet  demanded  a  decree  of  accusation  against  Robespierre,  and  the  Right
and  Centre  rose  as  one  man ;  Robespierre  was  taken  out  of  the  Convention  in
custody  a  little  after  4  p.m.  At  5  it  seemed  all  over  and  many  members  left  the
Convention  {ibid.  412  sqq.).'\

VOL.    III.  14


210        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

says  aloud :  "  Gendarmes,  that  man  is  not  your  Commandant ;
he  is  under  arrest."  The  Gendarmes  strike  down  the  young
Citoyen  with  the  flat  of  their  swords.^

Representatives  themselves  (as  Merlin  the  Thionviller),  who
accost  him,  this  puissant  Henriot  flings  into  guardhouses.  He
bursts  towards  the  Tuileries  Committee-room,  "to  speak  with
Robespierre ; "  with  difficulty,  the  Ushers  and  Tuileries  Gen-
darmes, earnestly  pleading  and  drawing  sabre,  seize  this  Henriot ;
get  the  Henriot  Gendarmes  persuaded  not  to  fight ;  get  Robes-
pierre and  Company  packed  into  hackney-coaches,  sent  off*  under
escort,  to  the  Luxembourg  and  other  Prisons.  This  then  is  the
end  }  May  not  an  exhausted  Convention  adjourn  now,  for  a  little
repose  and  sustenance,  '  at  five  o'clock  ? '

An  exhausted  Convention  did  it ;  and  repented  it.^  The  end
was  not  come  ;  only  the  end  of  the  second-act.  Hark,  while  ex-
hausted Representatives  sit  at  victuals, — tocsin  bursting  from  all
steeples,  drums  rolling,  in  the  summer  evening :  Judge  Coffinhal
is  galloping  with  new  Gendarmes,  to  deliver  Henriot  from  Tuile-
ries Committee-room  ;  and  does  deliver  him  I  Puissant  Henriot
vaults  on  horseback  ;  sets  to  haranguing  the  Tuileries  Gendarmes  ;
corrupts  the  Tuileries  Gendarmes  too ;  trots  off"  with  them  to
Townhall.^  Alas,  and  Robespierre  is  not  in  Prison :  the  Gaoler
showed  his  Municipal  order,  durst  not,  on  pain  of  his  life,  admit
any  Prisoner  ;  the  Robespierre  Hackney-coaches,  in  this  confused
jangle  and  whirl  of  uncertain  Gendarmes,  have  floated  safe — into

1  Precis  des  6v6nemens  du  Neuf  Thermidor  ;  par  C.  A.  M6da,  ancien  Gendarme
(Paris,  1825).

2 [The  ease  of  the  victory  nearly  lost  it  all  again,  for  the  Convention  left  the
Comtnune  time  to  act.  Though  the  orders  for  the  arrest  of  Robespierre's  friends
arrived  one  by  one  at  iheHotel-de-Ville,  theyiwere  not  quickly  obeyed,  and  Hanriot
was  actually  not  arrested  till  7.30  P.M.  (d'H^ricault  427).]

3  [The  accused  wei'e  all  arrested,  and  sent  to  various  prisons  ;  Robespierre  v^^as
taken  to  the  Luxembourg  ax  5  p.m.,  where  the  gaoler  refused  to  receive  him,  and
from  thence  to  the  Mairie,  where  the  police  officials  greeted  him  with  acclaim  (8.30
P.M.) ;  from  that  hour  till  11  p.m.,  when  he  arrived  at  the  H6tel-de-  Ville,  we  know
nothing  of  what  he  was  doing  :  probably  he  was  hesitating  to  "  disobey  the  orders
of  justice,"  lest  he  should  be  outlawed  by  the  Convention.  At  the  Mairie  he  was
a  prisoner,  but  was  among  friends,  and  would  be  let  go  any  moment  he  chose
(d'H^ricault,  p.  458  sqq.).  At  length  at  11  P.M.,  after  repeated  entreaties,  on  hear-
ing the  Commune  had  organised  a  good  Insurrection  in  his  favour,  he  yielded  and
went  to  the  H6tel-de-ViUe.'\


GO  DOWN  TO  211

the  Townhall !  There  sit  Robespierre  and  Company,  embraced
by  Municipals  and  Jacobins,  in  sacred  right  of  Insurrection ;
redacting  Proclamations  ;  ^  sounding  tocsins  ;  corresponding  with
Sections  and  Mother-Society.  Is  not  here  a  pretty  enough  third-
act  of  a  natural  Greek  Drama ;  catastrophe  more  uncertain  than
ever  ?

The  hasty  Convention  rushes  together  again,  in  the  ominous
nightfall :  President  Collot,  for  tlie  chair  is  his,  enters  with  long
strides,  paleness  on  his  face  ;  claps-on  his  hat ;  says  with  solemn
tone :  "  Citoyens,  armed  Villains  have  beset  the  Committee-rooms,
and  got  possession  of  them.  The  hour  is  come,  to  die  at  our
post ! "  "  Oui"  answer  one  and  all :  "  We  swear  it !  "  It  is  no
rhodomontade,  this  time,  but  a  sad  fact  and  necessity ;  unless  we
do  at  our  posts,  we  must  verily  die.  Swift  therefore,  Robespierre,
Henriot,  the  Municipality,  are  declared  Rebels  ;  put  Hors  la  Loi,
Out  of  Law.  Better  still,  we  appoint  Barras  Commandant  of  what
Armed -force  is  to  be  had  ;  send  Missionary  Representatives  to  all
Sections  and  quarters,  to  preach,  and  raise  force ;  ^  will  die  at
least  with  harness  on  our  back.

What  a  distracted  City  ;  men  riding  and  running,  reporting  and
hearsaying ;  the  Hour  clearly  in  travail, — child  not  to  be  named
till  bom !  The  poor  Prisoners  in  the  Luxembourg  hear  the
rumour ;  tremble  for  a  new  September.     They  see  men  making

1  [The  Commune  were  the  better  prepared  to  act,  for  it  is  certain  that  from  the
night  of  26th  they  had  prepared  a  general  attack  on  the  Convention  under  Hanriot.
Hanriot  was  delivered  from  prison  at  9  p.m.,  and  everything  looked  favourable  for
Robespierre.  The  tocsin  was  rung  from  6  till  10,  and  by  10  P.M.  a  large  number  of
Hanriot's  men  had  assembled  on  the  Grtve,  seventeen  out  of  forty-eight  Sections
sending  pretty  well  their  full  complement  of  men.  The  Commune  ordered  the  arrest
of  the  two  Great  Committees  and  of  all  the  leaders  of  the  Montagne :  if  Hanriot
had  advanced  on  the  Convention,  say  at  10  P.M.,  he  would  have  won  ;  but  Robes-
pierre's arrival  was  really  fatal  to  his  cause  :  even  at  that  hour  he  dreaded  Hanriot
and  militarism.  Saint-Just  and  Lebas  were  the  last  to  arrive  at  the  H6tel-de-  Ville
(shortly  before  midnight) ;  by  that  time  it  had  begun  to  rain  and  the  Sections  were
getting  weary  of  being  under  arms  (d'H^ricault,  p.  462  sqq.W

2  [The  Convention,  (remember  a  fair  number  were  left  to  keep  Siance  perma-
nente),  met  in  force  again  at  7  P.M.  :  at  10  Barras  had  been  appointed  Commander
and  had  ridden  out  with  only  twelve  followers  to  rally  respectable  Paris  to  the  de-
fence of  the  Convention.  The  rain  increased,  and  at  midnight  it  was  pouring  in
torrents,  but  by  i  A.M.  Barras  had  collected  some  6,000  men  on  the  Carrousel,
chiefly  from  Sections  Tuileries,  Halles,  Picques^  and  Filles  St.  Thomas ;  at  mid-
night the  decree  outlawing  Robespierre  had  been  published  in  the  streets  {ibid.  470
^qq.).^


212        THE  FRENCH  EEVOLUTION

signals  to  them,  on  skylights  and  roofs,  apparently  signals  of
hope ;  cannot  in  the  least  make  out  what  it  is.^  We  observe,
however,  in  the  eventide,  as  usual,^  the  Death-tumbrils  faring
Southeastward,  through  Saint- Antoine,  towards  their  Barrier  du
Trone.  Saint- Antoine' s  tough  bowels  melt;  Saint- Antoine  sur-
rounds the  Tumbrils ;  says.  It  shall  not  be.  O  Heavens,  why
should  it!  Henriot  and  Gendarmes,  scouring  the  streets  that
way,  bellow,  with  waved  sabres,  that  it  must.  Quit  hope,  ye  poor
Doomed  !  ^     The  Tumbrils  move  on.

But  in  this  set  of  Tumbrils  there  are  two  other  things  notable :
one  notable  person ;  and  one  want  of  a  notable  person.  The
notable  person  is  Lieutenant -General  Loiserolles,  a  nobleman  by
birth  and  by  nature ;  laying  down  his  life  here  for  his  son.  In
the  Prison  of  Saint- Lazare,  the  night  before  last,  hurrying  to  the
Grate  to  hear  the  Death-list  read,  he  caught  the  name  of  his  son.
The  son  was  asleep  at  the  moment.  "  I  am  Loiserolles,"  *  cried
the  old  man  :  at  Tinville's  bar,  an  error  in  the  Christian  name  is
little ;  small  objection  was  made. — The  want  of  the  notable  person,
again,  is  that  of  Deputy  Paine  !  Paine  has  sat  in  the  Luxem-
bourg since  January ;  and  seemed  forgotten ;  but  Fouquier  had
pricked  him  at  last.  The  Turnkey,  List  in  hand,  is  marking  with
chalk  the  outer  doors  of  to-morrow's  Founi&e.^     Paine's  outer  door

1  M6moires  sur  les  Prisons,  ii.  277.  ^j-^  p.m.]

3  [Forty-five  persons  were  in  that  day's  batch  :  in  one  of  the  depositions  against
Fouquier  in  May  '95  it  is  stated  that  a  letter  was  written  to  him  suggesting  that,
as  there  were  troubles  in  Paris,  it  would  be  better  to  defer  execution  ;  Fouquier
answered  'Nothing  must  interrupt  the  course  of  justice.'  But  the  same  day
Dumas  was  arrested  on  the  seat  of  judgment  (Campardon,  i.  419-20).]

^  [Loizerolles  was  guillotined  on  26th,  not  on  27th.  M.  Campardon  is  obliged
to  spoil  the  pretty  story,  though  not  wholly.  It  was  Loizerolles  pei-e  who  was  de-
nounced by  spies  as  being  a  "  conspirator  in  the  prison"  (of  Saint- Lazare),  and  it
was  he  who  was  sent  for  on  26th  :  but  the  turnkey  when  asked  for  the  register  gave
the  name,  age  and  quality  of  the  son  instead,  and  these  appeared  on  the  indictment :
being  a  manifest  error  they  were  changed  by  the  President  of  the  Tribunal  (Coffin-
hall)  to  those  of  the  father,  whose  person  had  been  sent  to  the  Conciergerie,  though
under  the  description  of  his  son.  The  son  afterwards  believed  that  his  father  had
sacrificed  himself  for  him,  and  gave  evidence  to  that  effect  at  Fouquier's  trial ;  but
Fouquier  was  able  to  prove  the  denunciation  of  the  father  by  his  spies,  and  so  to
clear  the  Tribunal  of  the  worst  part  of  the  charge  (Campardon,  i.  414  ;  ii,  182).]

^  [I  find  no  accurate  confirmation  of  this  story  ;  Paine  was  arrested  Dec.  28th
'93,  and  liberated  Nov.  6th  '94  (M.  D.  Conway,  Life  of  Tom  Paine,  104,  151).  Mr.
Conway  repeats  the  story  (pp.  131-2),  but  derives  it  from  an  old  life  of  Paine  by  J.
Cheethara  (London,  1817),  pp.  159-60  (whence  Carlyle  probably  took  it,  for  it  is  not


GO  DOWN  TO  213

happened  to  be  open,  turned  back  on  the  wall ;  the  Turnkey
marked  it  on  the  side  next  him,  and  hurried  on :  another  Turn-
key came,  and  shut  it ;  no  chalk-mark  now  visible,  the  Foum&e
went  without  Paine.     Paine's  life  lay  not  there. —

Our  fifth-act  of  this  natural  Greek  Drama,  with  its  natural
unities,  can  only  be  painted  in  gross  ;  somewhat  as  that  antique
Painter,  driven  desperate,  did  the  foam.  For  through  this  blessed
July  night,  there  is  clangour,  confusion  very  great,  of  marching
troops  ;  of  Sections  going  this  way.  Sections  going  that ;  of  Mis-
sionary Representatives  reading  Proclamations  by  torchlight ;
Missionary  Legendre,  who  has  raised  force  somewhere,  emptying
out  the  Jacobins,  and  flinging  their  key  on  the  Convention  table :
"  I  have  locked  their  door  ;  ^  it  shall  be  Virtue  that  reopens  it."
Paris,  we  say,  is  set  against  itself,  rushing  confused,  as  Ocean-
currents  do ;  a  huge  Mahlstrom,  sounding  there,  under  cloud  of
night.  Convention  sits  permanent  on  this  hand ;  Municipality
most  permanent  on  that.  The  poor  prisoners  hear  tocsin  and
rumour  ;  strive  to  bethink  them  of  the  signals  apparently  of  hope.
Meek  continual  Twilight  streaming  up,  which  will  be  Dawn  and
a  Tomorrow,  silvers  the  Northern  hem  of  Night ;  it  wends  and
wends  there,  that  meek  brightness,  like  a  silent  prophecy,  along
the  great  ring-dial  of  the  Heaven.  So  still,  eternal !  and  on
Earth  all  is  confused  shadow  and  conflict ;  dissidence,  tumultuous
gloom  and  glare  ;  and  '  Destiny  as  yet  sits  wavering,  and  shakes
her  doubtful  urn.'

About  three  in  the  morning,  the  dissident  Armed  Forces  have
met.  Henriot's  Armed  Force  stood  ranked  in  the  Place  de  Greve  ;
and  now  Barras's,  which  he  has  recruited,  arrives  there  ;  and  they

in  Mhnoires  sur  les  Prisons).  Two  separate  accounts  are  given  in  these  books,  (i.)
that  Paine  used  to  tell  the  story  of  the  chalk  mark  in  later  years,  saying  that  he
knew  nothing  of  it  till  afterwards,  (ii.)  that  "  in  a  letter  to  Washington  "  (Conway
(p.  132)  gives  no  date  or  verification  of  this)  Paine  attributed  his  being  passed  over
to  a  violent  fever  from  which  he  suffered  at  the  time :  the  first  thing  he  heard  on
his  recovery  was  the  fall  of  Robespierre,  but  he  had  '  good  reason  to  believe '  that
he  was  included  in  a  list  of  200  proscribed,  etc.  The  best  evidence  adduced  in
favour  of  the  story  is  that  Barere  had  evidently  signed  some  sort  of  warrant  against
Paine,  for  he  apologised  to  him  for  it  afterwards  {ibid.  p.  134).]

'^{Vid.  infr.,  iii.  221.  The  Jacobins  were  in  Stance permanente,  but  their  Hall
was  not  crowded,  when  Legendre  appeared  with  two  pistols  and  ten  followers ;
Vivier,  who  was  presiding,  was  one  of  the  first  to  run  away  (d'  H^ricault,  505).]


214        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

front  each  other,  cannon  bristling  against  cannon.  Citoyens !
cries  the  voice  of  Discretion  loudly  enough.  Before  coming  to
bloodshed,  to  endless  civil-war,  hear  the  Convention  Decree  read  :
'  Robespierre  and  all  rebels  Out  of  Law  ! ' — Out  of  Law  ?  There
is  terror  in  the  sound.  Unarmed  Citoyens  disperse  rapidly  home.
Municipal  Cannoneers,  in  sudden  whirl,  anxiously  unanimous,  range
themselves  on  the  Convention  side,  with  shouting.  At  which  shout,
Henriot  descends  from  his  upper  room,  far  gone  in  drink  as  some
say  ;  finds  his  Place  de  Greve  empty  ;  the  cannons'  mouth  turned
towards  him  ;  ^  and  on  the  whole, — that  it  is  now  the  catastrophe  !
Stumbling  in  again,  the  wretched  drunk-sobered  Henriot  an-
nounces:  "All  is  lost!"  "Miserable,  it  is  thou  that  hast  lost
it  I "  cry  they ;  and  fling  him,  or  else  he  flings  himself,  out  of
window :  far  enough  down  ;  into  masonwork  and  horror  of  cess-
pool;  not  into  death  but  worse.  Augustin  Robespierre  follows
him ;  with  the  like  fate.  Saint- Just,  they  say,  called  on  Lebas
to  kill  him ;  who  would  not.  Couthon  crept  under  a  table ;
attempting  to  kill  himself;  not  doing  it. — On  entering  that
Sanhedrim  of  Insurrection,  we  find  all  as  good  as  extinct ;  undone,
ready  for  seizure.  Robespierre  was  sitting  on  a  chair,  with  pistol-
shot  blown  through  not  his  head  but  his  under- jaw  ;  the  suicidal
hand  had  failed.  ^  With  prompt  zeal,  not  without  trouble,  we
gather  these  wrecked  Conspirators ;  fish  up  even   Henriot  and

i[At  2  A.M.  the  police  officers  in  the  Mairie  were  arrested,  and  shortly  after-
wards the  decree  outlawing  the  Robespierrists  was  read  to  Hanriot's  troops.
Meanwhile  Barras'  troops  had  advanced  to  the  Greve  in  two  lines  (by  the  Quais
and  by  the  Rue  Saint-Honor^),  had  fraternised  with  and  overpersuaded  Hanriot's
men,  already  half-hearted.  At  2.30  p.m.,  there  being  still  about  40  members  of  the
Commune  sitting,  the  cannons  were  pointed  at  the  H6tel-de-  Ville :  then  the  Com-
munards either  tried  to  kill  themselves,  or  awaited  their  arrest  passively  (d'H^ricault,
p.  491  .r^^.).]

2  M6da,  p.  384.  (M^da  asserts  that  it  was  he  who,  with  infinite  courage,  though
in  a  lefthanded  manner,  shot  Robespierre.  M6da  got  promoted  for  his  services  of
this  night ;  and  died  General  and  Baron.  Few  credited  M^da,  in  what  was  other-
wise incredible.)

[There  is  no  possibility  of  ascertaining  exactly  what  happened  in  the  upper
room  of  the  Hoiel-de- Ville.  A.  C.  M^da,  or  rather  Merda  (killed  in  Russia
1812,  a  Colonel  not  General),  was  a  young  man  of  19  who  had  served  in  the  paid
National  Guard  of  Paris  and  then  entered  the  service  of  the  Committee  ;  he  after-
wards became  a  brave  soldier,  but  was  extremely  vain  and  boastful ;  there  is  no
reliance  to  be  placed  on  the  tract,  and  attempted  suicide  is  the  more  probable
explanation  of  Robespierre's  wound  ;  Courtois,  who  at  least  is  no  worse  witness
than  Merda,  affirmed  that  he  saw  him  shoot  himself  (Cam pardon,  i.  423  ;  d'H^ricault,


GO  DOWN  TO  215

Augustin,  bleeding  and  foul ;  pack  them  all,  rudely  enough,  into
carts ;  and  shall,  before  sunrise,  have  them  safe  under  lock  and
key.     Amid  shoutings  and  embracings.

Robespierre  lay  in  an  anteroom  of  the  Convention  Hall,^  while
his  Prison-escort  was  getting  ready  ;  the  mangled  jaw  bound  up
rudely  with  bloody  linen :  a  spectacle  to  men.  He  lies  stretched
on  a  table,  a  deal-box  his  pillow  ;  the  sheath  of  the  pistol  is  still
clenched  convulsively  in  his  hand.  Men  bully  him,  insult  him :
his  eyes  still  indicate  intelligence  ;  he  speaks  no  word.  '  He  had-
'  on  the  sky-blue  coat  he  had  got  made  for  the  Feast  of  the  Eire
'  Supreme  ' — O  Reader,  can  thy.  hard  heart  hold  out  against  that  ?
His  trousers  were  nankeen ;  the  stockings  had  fallen  down  over
the  ankles.     He  spake  no  word  more  in  this  world.

And  so,  at  six  in  the  morning,  a  victorious  Convention  adjourns.
Report  flies  over  Paris  as  on  golden  wings  ;  penetrates  the  Prisons  ;
irradiates  the  faces  of  those  that  were  ready  to  perish  :  turnkeys
and  moutotis,  fallen  from  their  high  estate,  look  mute  and  blue.
It  is  the  28th  day  of  July,  called  10th  of  Thermidor,  year  1794-.

Fouquier  had  but  to  identify  ;  his  Prisoners  being  already  Out
of  Law. 2  At  four  in  the  afternoon,  never  before  were  the  streets
of  Paris  seen  so  crowded.  From  the  Palais  de  Justice  to  the
Place  de  la  Revolution,  for  thither  again  go  the  Tumbrils  this
time,  it  is  one  dense  stirring  mass  ;  all  windows  crammed ;  the
very  roofs  and  ridge-tiles  budding  forth  human  Curiosity,  in
strange  gladness.  The  Death-tumbrils,  with  their  motley  Batch
of  Outlaws,  some  Twenty-three  or  so,  from  Maximilien  to  Mayor
Fleuriot  and  Simon  the  Cordwainer,  roll  on.     All  eyes  are  on

p.  497).  L.  Bourdon  however  presented  Merda  to  the  Convention  on  28th  as  the
hero  of  the  day.  The  tract  is  in  Berville  and  Barriere's  collection  ;  it  was  written
an  IX.,  but  not  published  until,  by  them,  in  1825.]

1  [Robespierre  was  made  a  sort  of  show  of  on  the  long  journey  from  the  HStel-
de-Ville  to  the  Tuileries  ;  he  reached  the  Tuileries  at  3.30  A.M.  ;  his  wounds  were
dressed  at  5  A.M.  :  he  was  sent  to  the  Concicrgerie  just  after  10  A.M.  {ibid.  501
sqq.).^

2  [Scellier  presided  at  the  identification ;  Fouquier  and  his  substitute  Liendon
appeared  for  the  Government :  twenty-one  persons  in  all  were  condemned  to  death  ;
the  next  day  (29tb)  sixty-two  ;  and  on  30th  twelve  ;  total  of  the  "tail"  of  Robes-
pierre 95  (Campardon,  i.  429).  Coffinhall  was  the  only  one  who  succeeded  in
escaping,  by  hidings  till  Aug.  4th,  when  he  was  given  up  by  a  friend  and  executed
on  5th.]


216        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

Robespierre's  Tumbril,  where  he,  his  jaw  bound  in  dirty  linen,
with  his  half-dead  Brother,  and  half-dead  Henriot,  lie  shattered  ;
their  '  seventeen  hours  '  of  agony  about  to  end.  The  Gendarmes
point  their  swords  at  him,  to  show  the  people  which  is  he.  A
woman  springs  on  the  Tumbril ;  clutching  the  side  of  it  with  one
hand  ;  waving  the  other  Sibyl-like ;  and  exclaims :  "  The  death
of  thee  gladdens  my  very  heart,  m'enivre  de  joie  ;  "  Robespierre
opened  his  eyes  ;  ''  Sc&Urat,  go  down  to  Hell,  with  the  curses  of
all  wives  and  mothers  ! " — At  the  foot  of  the  scaffold,  they
stretched  him  on  the  ground  till  his  turn  came.  Lifted  aloft,
his  eyes  again  opened  ;  caught  the  bloody  axe.  Samson  wrenched
the  coat  off  him ;  wrenched  the  dirty  linen  from  his  jaw :  the
jaw  fell  powerless,  there  burst  from  him  a  cry ; — hideous  to  hear
and  see.     Samson,  thou  canst  not  be  too  quick  !

Samson's  work  done,  there  bursts  forth  shout  on  shout  of  ap-
plause. Shout,  which  prolongs  itself  not  only  over  Paris,  but  over
France,  but  over  Europe,  and  down  to  this  generation.  Deservedly,
and  also  undeservedly.  O  unhappiest  Advocate  of  Arras,  wert
thou  worse  than  other  Advocates .?  Stricter  man,  according  to
his  Formula,  to  his  Credo  and  his  Cant,  of  probities,  benevolences,
pleasures-of-virtue,  and  such  like,  lived  not  in  that  age.  A  man
fitted,  in  some  luckier  settled  age,  to  have  become  one  of  those
incorruptible  barren  Pattern- Figures,  and  have  had  marble-tablets
and  funeral-sermons.  His  poor  landlord,  the  Cabinet-maker  in
the  Rue  Saint-Honore,  loved  him;i  his  Brother  died  for  him.
May  God  be  merciful  to  him,  and  to  us !

This  is  the  end  of  the  Reign  of  Terror ;  new  glorious  Revolution
named  of  Thermidor  ;  of  Thermidor  9th,  year  2  ;  which  being  in-
terpreted into  old  slave-style  means  27th  of  July  1794.  Terror
is  ended;  and  death  in  the  Place  de  la  Revolution,  were  the
'  Tail  of  Robespierre '  once  executed  ;  which  service  Fouquier  in
large  Batches  is  swiftly  managing.

^  [The  whole  family  of  the  Duplays  were  imprisoned  at  Thermidor  in  Sainte-
Pilagie,  and  Mme  Duplay  hanged  herself  there  on  July  29th  ;  Duplay  had  been
made  a  juror  of  the  Tribunal  Rdvohitionnaire  by  Robespierre.  There  is  a  notice
of  the  Duplays  in  prison  in  Dauban  (Les  Prisons,  381).  Duplay  was  acquitted
by  the  Tribunal  May  6th  '95  (Campardon,  ii.  210).]


217


BOOK  VII
VENDEMIAIRE

CHAPTER  I

DECADENT
How  little  did  any  one  suppose  that  here  was  the  end  not  of
Robespierre  only,  but  of  the  Revolution  System  itself !  Least  of
all  did  the  mutinying  Committee-men  suppose  it ;  who  had
mutinied  with  no  view  whatever  except  to  continue  the  National
Regeneration  with  their  own  heads  on  their  shoulders.  ^  And
yet  so  it  verily  was.  The  insigniificant  stone  they  had  struck
out,  so  insignificant  anywhere  else,  proved  to  be  the  Keystone  ;
the  whole  arch-work  and  edifice  of  Sansculottism  began  to  loosen,
to  crack,  to  yawn  ;  and  tumbled  piecemeal,  with  considerable
rapidity,  plunge  after  plunge  ;  till  the  Abyss  had  swallowed  it
all,  and  in  this  upper  world  Sansculottism  was  no  more.

For  despicable  as  Robespierre  himself  might  be,  the  death  of
Robespierre  was  a  signal  at  which  great  multitudes  of  men,  struck
dumb  with  terror  heretofore,  rose  out  of  their  hiding-places  ;  and,

1  [Parties  were  fairly  equally  balanced  in  the  Convention,  but  we  may  distinguish
three  groups  of  leaders  in  the  months  immediately  following  9th  Thermidor,  (i. )  the
Terrorists,  Billaud,  Collot  and  Barere  ;  (ii.)  the  Montagnards  now  more  generally
called  Thermidorians,  Legendre,  Lecointre,  Tallien,  Fr^ron  ;  (iii. )  the  Moddris,
Boissy  d'Anglas,  Durand-Maillane.  The  two  latter  gradually  coalesced  against  the
Terrorists,  but  the  preponderance  tended  more  and  more  to  rest  in  the  Moderate
section  of  the  group,  and  new  leaders  such  as  Merlin  and  Sieyes  appear  at  its  head  ;
some  few  Montagnards^  e.g.,  Cambon,  were  inclined  to  coalesce  rather  with  the
Terrorists ;  all  this  while  public  opinion  was  becoming  more  and  more  Constitutional-
royalist,  and  not  only  the  Thermidorians  but  the  Convention  itself  was  becoming
more  and  more  hateful  to  the  mass  of  the  Parisians.

Carlyle  had  evidently  got  so  tired  of  his  task  by  this  time  that  he  runs  everything
together  in  a  few  short  (but  very  brilliant)  chapters.  Yet  one  of  the  most  interest-
ing points  in  the  '  Natural  History  of  Revolutions,'  of  which  the  earlier  part  of  his
book  is  such  a  brilliant  study,  is  the  gradual  establishment  of  the  old  order  in  new
forms  ;  and  in  spite  of  the  social  disturbances  of  '95  it  is  to  '95  quite  as  much  as  to
the  Consulate  and  the  Empire  that  we  ought  to  look  for  the  consolidation  of  the
'legal  conquests  of  the  Revolution:'  while,  from  the  point  of  view  of  foreign
politics,  the  years  '94  and  '95  are  of  transcendent  importance.]


218        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

as  it  were,  saw  one  another,  how  multitudinous  they  were ;  and
began  speaking  and  complaining.  They  are  countable  by  the
thousand  and  the  million  ;  who  have  suffered  cruel  wrong.  Ever
louder  rises  the  plaint  of  such  a  multitude  ;  into  a  universal  sound,
into  a  universal  continuous  peal,  of  what  they  call  Public  Opinion.
Camille  had  demanded  a  '  Committee  of  Mercy,'  and  could  not
get  it ;  but  now  the  whole  Nation  resolves  itself  into  a  Com-
mittee of  Mercy  :  the  Nation  has  tried  Sansculottism,  and  is
weary  of  it.  Force  of  Public  Opinion  !  What  King  or  Conven-
tion can  withstand  it .''  You  in  vain  struggle  :  the  thing  that  is
rejected  as  'calumnious'  today  must  pass  as  veracious  with
triumph  another  day :  gods  and  men  have  declared  that  Sans-
culottism cannot  be.  Sansculottism,  on  that  Ninth  night  of
Thermidor  suicidally  '  fractured  its  under-jaw  ; '  and  lies  writhing,
never  to  rise  more.

Through  the  next  fifteen  months,  it  is  what  we  may  call  the
death-agony  of  Sansculottism.  Sansculottism,  Anarchy  of  the
Jean- Jacques  Evangel,  having  now  got  deep  enough,  is  to  perish
in  a  new  singular  system  of  Culottism  and  Arrangement.  For
Arrangement  is  indispensable  to  man ;  Arrangement,  were  it
grounded  only  on  that  old  primary  Evangel  of  Force,  with
Sceptre  in  the  shape  of  Hammer !  Be  there  method,  be  there
order,  cry  all  men  ;  were  it  that  of  the  Drill-sergeant !  More
tolerable  is  the  drilled  Bayonet-rank,  than  that  undrilled
Guillotine,  incalculable  as  the  wind. — How  Sansculottism,
writhing  in  death-throes,  strove  some  twice,  or  even  three
times,  to  get  on  its  feet  again  ;  but  fell  always,  and  was  flung  re-
supine,  the  next  instant ;  and  finally  breathed  out  the  life  of  it,  and
stirred  no  more  :  this  we  are  now,  from  a  due  distance,  with  due
brevity,  to  glance  at ;  and  then — O  Reader ! — Courage,  I  see  land !:

Two  of  the  first  acts  of  the  Convention,  very  natural  for  it
after  this  Thermidor,  are  to  be  specified  here :  the  first  is,
renewal  of  the  Governing  Committees. ^     Both  Silreie  Gendrale

^  [There  was  a  tierce  debate  on  July  29th — 31st  on  the  subject  of  the  renewal  of
the  ComiU  de  Salut  Public;  but  the  first  actual  victory  of  the  Thermidorians  over
the  Committee  men  was  the  suspension  of  Tribunal  Rivolutionnaire^  carried  on


DECADENT  219

and  Salut  Public,  thinned  by  the  Guillotine,  need  filling  up  :  we
naturally  fill  them  up  with  Talliens,  Frerons,  victorious  Thermi-
dorian  men.  Still  more  to  the  purpose,  we  appoint  that  they
shall,  as  Law  directs,  not  in  name  only  but  in  deed,  be  renewed
and  changed  from  period  to  period  ;  a  fourth  part  of  them  going
out  monthly.!  The  Convention  will  no  more  lie  under  bondage
of  Committees,  under  terror  of  death  ;  but  be  a  free  Convention  ;
free  to  follow  its  own  judgment,  and  the  Force  of  Public  Opinion.
Not  less  natural  is  it  to  enact  that  Prisoners  and  Persons  under
Accusation  shall  have  right  to  demand  some  '  Writ  of  Accusa-
tion,' and  see  clearly  what  they  are  accused  of.  Very  natural
acts  :  the  harbingers  of  hundreds  not  less  so.

For  now  Fouquier's  trade,  shackled  by  Writ  of  Accusation,
and  legal  proof,  is  as  good  as  gone ;  effectual  only  against
Robespierre's  Tail.'^  The  Prisons  give  up  their  Suspect ;  emit
them  faster  and  faster.  The  Committees  see  themselves  besieged
with  Prisoners'  friends ;  complain  that  they  are  hindered  in
their  work :  it  is  as  with  men  rushing  out  of  a  crowded  place  ;
and  obstructing  one  another. ^     Turned  are  the  tables  :  Prisoners

July  29th,  to  date  a  fortnight  later  (on  motion  of  Br^ard),  in  the  teeth  of  Billaud.
The  power  of  the  Committee  would  legally  expire  on  Aug.  8th,  and  Barere  proposed,
as  a  via  media,  the  choice  of  three  Thermidorians  to  fill  up  the  places  of  Robes-
pierre, Couthon  and  Saint-Just.  At  last,  after  a  fierce  attack  of  the  Moddris  on  the
whole  constitution  of  the  Committee,  it  was  carried  to  renew  it  by  quarters  monthly  :
the  first  six  members  elected(July  31st)  were  Br^ard,  Eschass^riaux,  Laloi,  Thuriot,
Treilhard,  Tallien  (nearly  all  Dantonists) ;  these  filled  the  places  of  H^rault  (dead)
J.  Bon-Saint-Andr6,  Prieur  de  la  Marne  (absent  e7i  mission),  and  of  the  three  dead
Terrorists.  During  the  month  of  August  the  powers  of  the  Committee  were  very
much  curtailed  by  various  votes  of  the  Convention.  Any  member  might  be  re-
elected to  it  after  a  month's  exclusion,  and,  during  the  remaining  life  of  the  Con-
vention, we  find  some  sixty  persons  altogether  having  seats  in  it  at  different  times :
but  those  most  often  re-elected  were  Merlin  of  Douai,  Cambac^res,  Br6ard,  Delmas,
Fourcroy,  Treilhard,  Sieyes,  Rewbell,  Boissy  d'Anglas,  Tallien,  Debry,  Aubry,
Dubois-Cranc6.  Carnot  is  the  only  member  of  the  Great  Committee  who  was  ever
re-elected  (Nov.  5th  '94 — March  '95)  {see  Gros,  121  sqq.).']


1  [July  31st.]

2[/


2  [Aug.  loth.  Fouquier  had  been  decreed  accused  on  Aug.  ist  on  Frt^ron's
motion,  and  the  Tribunal  Rivolution?iaire  was  suspended  on  13th  :  Fouquier  gave
himself  up  at  the  Conciergerie ;  he  demanded  to  be  heard  at  the  bar  of  the  Convention
(to  reveal  important  secrets),  and  was  heard  on  Aug.  8th  ;  he  had  nothing  to  reveal,
and  was  sent  back  to  prison  (Campardon,  i.  431,  sqq.).  This  was  followed  by  a
proposition  of  Merlin  of  Douai  to  continue  the  Tribjinal,  but  with  a  completely
new  set  of  judges  and  jurors,  and  to  repeal  the  law  of  22  Prairial  (carried).]

3 [There  were  still,  says  Aulard  (Lavisse  et  Rambaud,  Hist.  G6n.  viii.  216)  5,261
prisoners  on  Sept.  6th,  and  4,445  on  Oct.  7th,  but  these  were  principally  royalists  :
as  the  Mod^rds  gained  power  during  the  year  III.  nearly  every  one  was  let  out.]


220        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

pouring  out  in  floods  ;  Jailors,  Moutons  and  the  Tail  of  Robes-
pierre going  now  whither  they  were  wont  to  send ! — The  Hun-
dred and  thirty-two  Nantese  Republicans,  whom  we  saw  marching
in  irons,  have  arrived ;  shrunk  to  Ninety-four,  the  fifth  man  of
them  choked  by  the  road.  They  arrive :  and  suddenly  find
themselves  not  pleaders  for  life,  but  denouncers  to  death.  ^
Their  Trial  is  for  acquittal,  and  more.  As  the  voice  of  a  trum-
pet, their  testimony  sounds  far  and  wide,  mere  atrocities  of  a
Reign  of  Terror.  For  a  space  of  nineteen  days  ;  with  all  solem-
nity and  publicity. 2  Representative  Carrier,  Company  of  Marat ;
Noyadings,  Loire  Marriages,  things  done  in  darkness,  come  forth
into  light :  clear  is  the  voice  of  these  poor  resuscitated  Nantese  ;
and  Journals,  and  Speech,  and  universal  Committee  of  Mercy
reverberate  it  loud  enough,  into  all  ears  and  hearts.  Deputation
arrives  from  Arras  ;  denouncing  the  atrocities  of  Representative
Lebon.  A  tamed  Convention  loves  its  own  life  :  yet  what  help  ?
Representative  Lebon,  Representative  Carrier  must  wend  towards
the  Revolutionary  Tribunal ;  ^  struggle  and  delay  as  we  will,  the
cry  of  a  Nation  pursues  them  louder  and  louder.  Them  also
Tinville  must  abolish ; — if  indeed  Tinville  himself  be  not
abolished.

We  must  note  moreover  the  decrepit  condition  into  which
a  once  omnipotent  Mother- Society  has  fallen,  Legendre  flung
her  keys  on  the  Convention  table,  that  Thermidor  night ;  her
President  was  guillotined  with  Robespierre.  The  once  mighty
Mother  came,  some  time  after,  with  a  subdued  countenance,

i[Carlyle  makes  a  strange  mistake  :  they  arrived  in  Paris  on  Jan.  '94  and  were
not  brought  to  trial  till  Sept.  7th  ;  why  they  were  kept  in  prison  so  long  is  a
mystery,  but  we  know  that  the  Committee  had  been  discontented  with  Carrier  (z/?</.
supr. ,  iii.  133)  ;  Fouquier  asserted  at  his  own  trial  that  the  depositions  of  accusation
sent  with  these  men  appeared  to  him  insufficient,  and  that  he  had  wished  to  save
their  Hves.     (Campardon,  ii.  13.)]

2  [The  trial  lasted  three  weeks.  Carrier  was  called  as  a  witness,  but  was  practic-
ally put  upon  his  own  trial  {see  especially  the  dialogue  between  him  and  Ph^lippes,
quoted  in  Campardon  (ii.  21)).  It  was  followed  by  the  trial  of  the  Revolutionary  Com-
mittee of  Nantes,  Oct.  i6th  ;  of  whom  two  were  condemned  to  death,  and  thirty
acquitted  :  but  these  were  re-imprisoned  immediately  afterwards.  During  the  trial
of  the  Revolutionary  Committee  Carrier  was  brought  to  trial  also  (Nov.  27th),  after
a  report  by  a  Committee  of  21  members  of  the  Convention,  and  on  Dec.  i6th
he  was  executed.]

'[Lebon  was  not  brought  before  the  Tribunal  Rdvolutioymaire  at  all,  but  before
the  Criminal  Tribunal  of  his  Department  at  Amiens,  and  executed  Oct.  i8th  '95.]


DECADENT  221

begging  back  her  keys :  the  keys  were  restored  her ;  ^  but  the
strength  could  not  be  restored  her ;  the  strength  had  departed
forever.  Alas,  one's  day  is  done.  Vain  that  the  Tribune  in
mid-air  sounds  as  of  old :  to  the  general  ear  it  has  become
a  horror,  and  even  a  weariness.  By  and  by,  Affiliation  is  pro-
hibited :  2  the  mighty  mother  sees  herself  suddenly  childless  ;
mourns  as  so  hoarse  a  Rachel  may.^

The  Revolutionary  Committees,  without  Suspects  to  prey
upon,  perish  fast ;  as  it  were,  of  famine.  In  Paris  the  old  Forty-
eight  of  them  are  reduced  to  Twelve ;  their  Forty  sous  are
abolished  :  yet  a  little  while,  and  Revolutionary  Committees  are
no  more.*  Maximum  will  be  abolished ;  let  Sansculottism  find
food  where  it  can.  Neither  is  there  now  any  Municipality  ;  any
centre  at  the  Townhall.  Mayor  Fleuriot  and  Company  perished ;
whom  we  shall  not  be  in  haste  to  replace.  The  Townhall  re-
mains in  a  broken  submissive  state ;  knows  not  well  what  it  is
growing  to ;  knows  only  that  it  is  grown  weak,  and  must  obey.
What  if  we  should  split  Paris  into,  say,  a  Dozen  separate
Municipalities  ;  incapable  of  concert !  The  Sections  were  thus
rendered  safe  to  act  with : — or  indeed  might  not  the  Sections
themselves  be  abolished.''  You  had  then  merely  your  Twelve
manageable  pacific  Townships,  without  centre  or  subdivision,^
and  sacred  right  of  Insurrection  fell  into  abeyance  !

1  [Aug.  4th.]  2[0ct.  i6th.]

3  [The  Jacobins  were  allowed  to  sit  again  on  Aug.  4th,  the  Thermidorians  hoping
to  dominate  them  after  an  dpuration ;  but  Billaud  and  Collot,  especially  the
former,  at  once  found  support  in  the  Club ;  and  so,  after  a  report  on  Oct.  i6th,  all
affiliation  of  clubs,  and  all  street  placards  signed  by  Clubs  were  prohibited,  all  existing
Clubs  were  ordered  to  send  in  a  list  of  their  members,  and  on  Nov.  12th  the  Jacobin
Club  was  finally  closed.  Some  of  the  old  members  of  the  club  formed  themselves
into  the  SocWi  du  Panthdon,  and  for  a  short  time  in  '95  actually  met  in  the  old
Jacobin  Convent.     ^See  Aulard  in  R^v.  Fr.  xxvi.  392  ;  Schmidt,  ii.  234.)]

•*  Dec.  24th  1794  ;  Monileur,  No.  97.  [The  Law  of  the  40  sous  was  repealed
Aug.  22nd,  Cambon  having  reported  that  many  people  drew  their  pay  without
attending.  When  the  Revolutionary  Committees  were  reduced  to  12,  the  Section
Assemblies  were  also  reduced  to  one  per  decade  (Schmidt,  ii.  228  and  254).  Schmidt
collects  a  lot  of  opinion  expressed  in  the  streets  for  and  against  the  abolition  of
the  Maxim7im  (chiefly  in  favour  of  abolition),  all  tending  to  show  how  great  was  the
scarcity  of  food,  wood  and  coal  {idid.  257).]

5  October  1795  (Dulaure,  viii.  441-2).  [From  July  27th — Aug.  31st  '94  there  was  no
Municipal  organisation  of  Paris,  and  only  a  provisional  police  :  on  Aug.  31st  twelve
commissions  of  Municipal  Government  were  created,  the  members  of  which  were
nominated  by  the  Convention  {i.e. ,  by  the  Committee) ;  {see  R€v.  Fr.  xxxiii.  253,
sqq.).^


222        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

So  much  is  getting  abolished  ;  fleeting  swiftly  into  the  Inane.
For  the  Press  speaks,  and  the  human  tongue ;  Journals,  heavy
and  light,  in  Philippic  and  Burlesque :  a  renegade  Fr^ron,  a
renegade  Prudhomme,  loud  they  as  ever,  only  the  contrary  way.
And  Ci-devants  show  themselves,  almost  parade  themselves ;
resuscitated  as  from  death- sleep ;  publish  what  death-pains  they
have  had.  The  very  Frogs  of  the  Marsh  croak  with  emphasis.
Your  protesting  Seventy-three  shall,  with  a  struggle,  be  emitted
out  of  Prison,^  back  to  their  seats ;  your  Louvets,  Isnards,
Lanjuinais,  and  wrecks  of  Girondism,  recalled  from  their  haylofts,
and  caves  in  Switzerland,  will  resume  their  place  in  the  Conven-
tion :  natural  foes  of  Terror !  ^

Thermidorian  Talliens,  and  mere  foes  of  Terror,  rule  in  this
Convention,  and  out  of  it.  The  compressed  Mountain  shrinks
silent  more  and  more.  Moderatism  rises  louder  and  louder :  not
as  a  tempest,  with  threatenings ;  say  rather,  as  the  rushing  of  a
mighty  organ-blast,  and  melodious  deafening  Force  of  Public
Opinion,  from  the  Twenty-five  million  windpipes  of  a  Nation  all
in  Committee  of  Mercy  :  which  how  shall  any  detached  body  of
individuals  withstand  }


CHAPTER  II
LA  CABARUS

How,  above  all,  shall  a  poor  National  Convention  withstand  it }
In  this  poor  National  Convention,  broken,  bewildered  by  long
terror,  perturbations  and  guillotinement,  there  is  no  Pilot,  there
is  not  now  even  a  Danton,  who  could  undertake  to  steer  you  any-

i[Dec.  8th.]

2  Deux  Amis,  xiii.  3-39.  [March  8th  '95.  This  measure  divided  the  Convention
more  sharply  than  before.  Tallien  had  no  principles,  but  Merlin  and  the  true
Montagnards  naturally  disliked  a  disavowal  of  May  31st ;  the  restoration  of  the
Gironde  however  turned  the  balance  completely  in  favour  of  the  Modirh.  In  all,
15  Girondists  and  Lanjuinais  (whom,  as  I  have  said,  one  must  not  label  as  a
Girondist)  were  restored  on  March  8th :  among  the  73  the  most  notable  were
Saladin,  Mercier  and  Daunou.

Much  more  to  the  point  was  the  restoration  of  the  older  administrators  in  the
government  offices  (many  of  whom  had  been  in  prison),  not  merely  the  men  of
1791,  but  of  the  Ancien  Rdgime :  e.g.,  Mallet  hears  in  November  that  Rayneval,
one  of  Montmorin's  best  Foreign-Office  clerks,  is  likely  to  be  made  Foreign
Minister  (Mallet,  ii.  118).]


LA  CABARUS  223

whither,  in  such  press  of  weather.  The  utmost  a  bewildered
Convention  can  do,  is  to  veer,  and  trim,  and  try  to  keep  itself
steady ;  and  rush,  undrowned,  before  the  wind.  Needless  to
struggle  ;  to  fling  helm  a-lee,  and  make  'bout  ship  !  A  bewildered
Convention  sails  not  in  the  teeth  of  the  wind  ;  but  is  rapidly
blown  round  again.  So  strong  is  the  wind,  we  say;  and  so
changed ;  blowing  fresher  and  fresher,  as  from  the  sweet  South-
west ;  your  devastating  Northeasters,  and  wild  Tornado-gusts  of
Terror,  blown  utterly  out !  All  Sansculottic  things  are  passing
away  ;  all  things  are  becoming  Culottic.^

Do  but  look  at  the  cut  of  clothes ;  that  light  visible  Result,
significant  of  a  thousand  things  which  are  not  so  visible.  In
winter  1 793,  men  went  in  red  nightcap ;  Municipals  themselves
in  sabots  ;  the  very  Citoyennes  had  to  petition  against  such  head-
gear. But  now  in  this  winter  1 794^,  where  is  the  red  nightcap  ?
With  the  things  beyond  the  Flood.  Your  moneyed  Citoyen
ponders  in  what  elegantest  style  he  shall  dress  himself ;  whether
he  shall  not  even  dress  himself  as  the  Free  Peoples  of  Antiquity.
The  more  adventurous  Citoyenne  has  already  done  it.  Behold  her,
that  beautiful  adventurous  Citoyenne  :  in  costume  of  the  Ancient
Greeks,  such  Greek  as  Painter  David  could  teach  ;  her  sweeping
tresses  snooded  by  glittering  antique  fillet ;  bright-dyed  tunic  of
the  Greek  women ;  her  little  feet  naked,  as  in  Antique  Statues,  with
mere  sandals,  and  winding-strings  of  riband, — defying  the  frost !

There  is  such  an  effervescence  of  Luxury.  For  your  Emigrant
Ci-devants  carried  not  their  mansions  and  furnitures  out  of  the
country  with  them ;  but  left  them  standing  here :  and  in  the
swift  changes  of  property,  what  with  money  coined  on  the
Place  de  la  Revolution,  what  with  Army-furnishings,  sales  of
Emigrant  Domains  and  Church  Lands  and  King's  Lands,  and

1  [Carlyle  has  drawn  much  of  the  rest  of  his  book  from  Mercier  (born  1740,  died
1814),  of  whom  there  is  an  excellent  appreciation  in  the  Rev.  de  la  R6v.  (xiv.  223),
pointing  out  his  colossal  vanity,  his  contempt  for  the  past,  his  cynical  effrontery,  his
careful  concealment  of  what  principles  he  possessed :  yet  the  man  had  wit  and  courage,
and  showed  the  latter  in  voting  against  the  King's  death  and  protesting  against
June  2nd.  He  had  already  written  the  '  Tableau  de  Paris,'  and  now,  when  restored
to  the  Convention,  he  immediately  set  to  work  to  make  what  a  modern  journalist
would  call  "  copy  "  out  of  the  Revolution  with  '  Le  Nouveau  Paris '.]


224        THE  FEENCH  EEVOLUTION

then  with  the  Aladdin's-lamp  of  Agio  in  a  time  of  Paper-money,
such  mansions  have  found  new  occupants.  Old  wine,  drawn
from  Ci-devant  bottles,  descends  new  throats.  Paris  has  swept
herself,  relighted  herself;  Salons,  Soupers  not  Fraternal,  beam
once  more  with  suitable  effulgence,  very  singular  in  colour.  The
fair  Cabarus  is  come  out  of  Prison  wedded  to  her  red-gloomy
Dis,i  whom  they  say  she  treats  too  loftily  :  fair  Cabarus  gives  the
most  brilliant  soirees.  ^  Round  her  is  gathered  a  new  Republican
Army,  of  Citoyennes  in  sandals ;  Ci-devants  or  other :  what
remnants  soever  of  the  old  grace  survive  are  rallied  there.  At
her  right-hand,  in  this  cause,  labours  fair  Josephine  the  Widow
Beauhamais,  though  in  straitened  circumstances  :  intent,  both  of
them,  to  blandish  down  the  grimness  of  Republican  austerity,
and  recivilise  mankind.

Recivilise,  even  as  of  old  they  were  civilised :  by  witchery  of
the  Orphic  fiddle-bow,  and  Euterpean  rhythm ;  by  the  Graces,
by  the  Smiles  !  Thermidorian  Deputies  are  there  in  those  soirees  :
Editor  Freron,  Orateur  du  Peuple  ^  ;  Barras,  who  has  known  other
dances  than  the  Carmagnole.  Grim  Generals  of  the  Republic
are  there ;  in  enormous  horse-collar  neckcloth,  good  against
sabre-cuts ;  the  hair  gathered  all  into  one  knot,  '  flowing  down
behind,  fixed  with  a  comb/  Among  which  latter  do  we  not
recognise,  once  more,  that  little  bronze-complexioned  Artillery-
Officer  of  Toulon,  home  from  the  Italian  Wars  !  Grim  enough  ;
of  lean,  almost  cruel  aspect :  for  he  has  been  in  trouble,  in  ill
health  ;  also  in  ill  favour,  as  a  man  promoted,  deservingly  or  not,
by  the  Terrorists  and  Robespierre  Junior.  But  does  not  Barras
know  him  }  Will  not  Barras  speak  a  word  for  him  }  Yes, — if
at  any  time  it  will  serve  Barras  so  to  do.  Somewhat
forlorn    of   fortune,     for    the    present,    stands    that    Artillery-

i[Dec.  26th.]

2  [The  ease  with  which  the  Moddris  triumphed  over  the  Thermidorians  proper
is  well  illustrated  by  the  case  of  Tallien,  who,  though  lending  all  his  influence  to
the  outcry  against  the  Terrorists  and  being  re-elected  to  the  Committee  in  April  '95,
never  possessed  any  power  in  it.  His  day  was  over  when  he  returned  from  a  mission
to  Quiberon,  where  he  had  persuaded  Hoche  to  have  the  royalist  prisoners  mas-
sacred, July  '95  {vid.  infr.,  iii.  231-2).     'La  Cabarrus'  divorced  him  in  i8o2.[

•■'[The  Orateur  du  Peuple  {vid.  supr.,  i.  384)  was  resumed  by  Fr6ron  Sept.  nth
and  continued  to  Aug.  12th  '95.]


LA  CABARUS  225

Officer ;  looks,  with  those  deep  earnest  eyes  of  his,  into  a  future
as  waste  as  the  most.  Taciturn ;  yet  with  the  strangest  utter-
ances in  him,  if  you  awaken  him,  which  smite  home,  like  light
or  lightning  ; — on  the  whole,  rather  dangerous  ?  A '  dissocial '
man?  Dissocial  enough;  a  natural  terror  and  horror  to  all
Phantasms,  being  himself  of  the  genus  Reality !  He  stands
here,  without  work  or  outlook,  in  this  forsaken  manner  ; — glances
nevertheless,  it  would  seem,  at  the  kind  glance  of  Josephine
Beauharnais  ;  and,  for  the  rest,  with  severe  countenance,  with
open  eyes,  and  closed  lips,  waits  what  will  betide.^

That  the  Balls,  therefore,  have  a  new  figure  this  winter,  we
can  see.  Not  Carmagnoles,  rude  '  whirlblasts  of  rags,*  as  Mercier
called  them,  '  precursors  of  storm  and  destruction : '  no,  soft
Ionic  motions ;  fit  for  the  light  sandal,  and  antique  Grecian
tunic !  Efflorescence  of  Luxury  has  come  out :  for  men  have
wealth ;  nay  new-got  wealth ;  and  under  the  Terror  you  durst
not  dance,  except  in  rags.  Among  the  innumerable  kinds  of
Balls,  let  the  hasty  reader  mark  only  this  single  one :  the  kind
they  call  Victim  Balls,  Bals  a  Victime.  The  dancers,  in  choice
costume,  have  all  crape  round  the  left  arm :  to  be  admitted,  it
needs  that  you  be  a  Victime  ;  that  you  have  lost  a  relative  under
the  Terror.  Peace  to  the  Dead  ;  let  us  dance  to  their  memory !
For  in  all  ways  one  must  dance.

1  [Napoleon  was  created  Brigadier-General  of  Artillery,  Dec.  22nd  '93,  in  re-
cognition of  his  services  at  Toulon.  Augustin  Robespierre  recommended  his  case
particularly  to  the  Committee  in  April  '94,  and  he  was  invited  to  draw  up  a  plan  of
campaign  for  Italy  ;  was  sent  to  Genoa  in  July  '94,  with  a  view  to  concerting  plans  for
the  seizure  of  Piedmont  ;  on  his  return  to  Nice  at  the  end  of  July,  he  learned  the
fall  of  Robespierre,  and  Saliceti,  one  of  his  previous  patrons,  accused  him  of  being
le  faiseur  des  plans  dii  dictateur ;  he  was  deprived  and  imprisoned  Aug.  12th —
29th  '94 ;  on  Sept.  14th  his  rank  of  General  was  restored  to  him,  and  he  was  at-
tached to  a  corps  destined  for  the  reconquest  of  Corsica  from  the  English.  This
failing,  he  was  out  of  employment  and  came  to  Paris  May  loth  '95.  At  the  end  of
the  month  he  was  attached  as  supernumerary  to  the  Army  of  the  West  {i.e.,  to
finish  off  La  Vendue).  It  was  then  that  Barras  and  Fr^ron,  who  had  known  him
before  Toulon,  began  to  patronise  him  again,  and  saved  him  from  having  to  go  to
the  West  in  a  subordinate  capacity.  Yet  this  again  brought  (Sept.  15th  '95)  his  de-
privation of  rank,  and  it  was  not  till  Oct.  4th  that  Barras  was  able  to  give  him  the
post  of  second  in  command  of  the  Army  of  the  Interior.  It  is  pretty  certain  that,
before  the  stroke  of  luck  which  came  to  him  in  Vend^miaire,  Napoleon  was  not
thinking  of  Josephine  at  all,  but  of  D6sir6e  Clary,  afterwards  Queen  of  Sweden.
(Fournier,  Nap.  ler,  i,  50-71.)]

VOL.  in.  15


226        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

It  is  very  remarkable,  according  to  Mercier,  under  what
varieties  of  figure  this  great  business  of  dancing  goes  on.  '  The
'  women/  says  he,  '  are  Nymphs,  Sultanas ;  sometimes  Minervas,
'  Junos,  even  Dianas.  In  lightly-unerring  gyrations  they  swim
'  there  ;  with  such  earnestness  of  purpose  ;  with  perfect  silence,
'so  absorbed  are  they.  What  is  singular,'  continues  he,  Hhe
'  onlookers  are  as  it  were  mingled  with  the  dancers ;  form,  as  it
'were,  a  circumambient  element  round  the  different  contre-
'  dances,  yet  without  deranging  them.  It  is  rare,  in  fact,  that
'a  Sultana  in  such  circumstances  experiences  the  smallest  col-
*  lision.  Her  pretty  foot  darts  down,  an  inch  from  mine  ;  she  is
'  off  again  ;  she  is  as  a  flash  of  light :  but  soon  the  measure  recalls
'  her  to  the  point  she  set  out  from.  Like  a  glittering  comet  she
'  travels  her  ellipse  ;  revolving  on  herself,  as  by  a  double  effect  of
'gravitation  and  attraction.'  ^  Looking  forward  a  little  way,  into
Time,  the  same  Mercier  discerns  Merveilleuses  in  'flesh-coloured
drawers '  with  gold  circlets  ;  mere  dancing  Houris  of  an  artificial
Mahomet's-Paradise :  much  too  Mahometan.  Montgaillard,
with  his  splenetic  eye,  notes  a  no  less  strange  thing ;  that  every
fashionable  Citoyenne  you  meet  is  in  an  interesting  situation.
Good  Heavens,  every  ?  Mere  pillows  and  stuffing !  adds  the
acrid  man ; — such  in  a  time  of  depopulation  by  war  and  guillo-
tine, being  the  fashion. 2     No  further  seek  its  merits  to  disclose.

Behold  also,  instead  of  the  old  grim  Tappe-durs  of  Robespierre,
what  new  street-groups  are  these }  Young  men  habited  not  in
black-shag  Carmagnole  spencer,  but  in  superfine  habit  carre,  or
spencer  with  rectangular  tail  appended  to  it ;  '  square-tailed
coat,'  with  elegant  anti-guillotinish  speciality  of  collar ;  '  the
hair  plaited  at  the  temples,'  and  knotted  back,  long-flowing,  in
military  wise :  young  men  of  what  they  call  the  Muscadin  or
Dandy  species !  Freron,  in  his  fondness,  names  them  Jeunesse
Doree,  Golden  or  Gilt  Youth.  They  have  come  out,  these  Gilt
Youths,  in  a  kind  of  resuscitated  state ;  they  wear  crape  round
the  left  arm,  such  of  them  as  were  Victims.  More,  they  carry
clubs  loaded  with  lead  ;  in  an  angry  manner  :  any  Tappe-dur,  or

^  Mercier,  Nouveau  Paris,  iii.  138,  153.  ^  Montgaillard,  iv.  436-42.


LA  CABARUS  227

remnant  of  Jacobinism  they  may  fall  in  with,  shall  fare  the
worse.  They  have  suffered  much :  their  friends  guillotined ;
their  pleasures,  frolics,  superfine  collars  ruthlessly  repressed:
'ware  now  the  base  Red  Nightcaps  who  did  it !  Fair  Cabarus
and  the  Army  of  Greek  sandals  smile  approval.  In  the  TheMre
Feydeau,  ^  young  Valour  in  square-tailed  coat  eyes  Beauty  in
Greek  sandals,  and  kindles  by  her  glances  :  Down  with  Jacobin-
ism !  No  Jacobin  hymn  or  demonstration,  only  Thermidorian
ones,  2  shall  be  permitted  here  :  we  beat  down  Jacobinism  with
clubs  loaded  with  lead.

But  let  any  one  who  has  examined  the  Dandy  nature,  how
petulant  it  is,  especially  in  the  gregarious  state,  think  what  an
element,  in  sacred  right  of  insurrection,  this  Gilt  Youth  was !
Broils  and  battery ;  war  without  truce  or  measure  !  Hateful  is
Sansculottism,  as  Death  and  Night.  For  indeed  is  not  the  Dandy
culoftic,  habilatory,  by  law  of  existence ;  '  a  cloth-animal ;  one
that  lives,  moves  and  has  his  being  in  cloth  ? '

So  goes  it,  waltzing,  bickering ;  fair  Cabarus,  by  Orphic
witchery,  struggling  to  recivilise  mankind.  Not  unsuccessfully,
we  hear.  What  utmost  Republican  grimness  can  resist  Greek
sandals,  in  Ionic  motion,  the  very  toes  covered  with  gold  rings  ?  '
By  degrees  the  indisputablest  new-politeness  rises ;  grows,  with
vigour.  And  yet,  whether,  even  to  this  day,  that  inexpressible
tone  of  society  known  under  the  old  Kings,  when  Sin  had  '  lost
all  its  deformity'  (with  or  without  advantage  to  us),  and  airy
Nothing  had  obtained  such  a  local  habitation  and  establishment

1  [The  TM&tre  de  la  Rue  Feydeau  was  the  rallying  place  of  the  Royalist  reaction-
aries ;  it  was  the  predecessor  of  the  Opdra  Comique,  and  the  most  fashionable
theatre  of  Paris  in  the  ensuing  period.  It  was  the  representation  of  a  Republican
piece  called  the  Concert  de  la  Rue  Feydeau,  at  the  Thdatre  Audinot,  early  in
Feb.  '95,  which  provoked  the  first  riots  of  the  Jeunesse  dorie  against  the  Govern-
ment.    (5^^  Schmidt,  ii.  280,  sqq.)\

2  [Especially  the  celebrated  Reveil  du  peuple  (words  by  Souriguieres  de  Saint-
Marc,  music  by  Gaveaux)  beginning

'  Peuple  Fran9ais,  peuple  des  freres,
Peux-tu  voir,  sans  frdmir  d'horreur,
Le  Crime  arborer  les  bannieres
Du  carnage  et  de  la  terreur  ? ']
'  Ibid. ,  Mercier  {ubi  suprd).


228        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

as  she  never  had, — be  recovered  ?  Or  even,  whether  it  be  not
lost  beyond  recovery  ■?  ^ — Either  way,  the  world  must  contrive  to
struggle  on.

CHAPTER  III

QUIBERON
But  indeed  do  not  these  long-flowing  hair-queues  of  a  Jeunesse
Doree  in  semi-military  costume  betoken,  unconsciously,  another
still  more  important  tendency  ?     The  Republic,  abhorrent  of  her
Guillotine,  loves  her  Army.

And  with  cause.  For,  surely,  if  good  fighting  be  a  kind  of
honour,  as  it  is  in  its  season ;  and  be  with  the  vulgar  of  men,
even  the  chief  kind  of  honour ;  then  here  is  good  fighting,  in
good  season,  if  there  ever  was.  These  Sons  of  the  Republic,  they
rose,  in  mad  wrath,  to  deliver  her  from  Slavery  and  Cimmeria.
And  have  they  not  done  it  ?  Through  Maritime  Alps,  through
gorges  of  Pyrenees,  through  Low  Countries,  Northward  along
the  Rhine-valley,  far  is  Cimmeria  hurled  back  from  the  sacred
Motherland.  Fierce  as  fire,  they  have  carried  her  Tricolor  over
the  faces  of  all  her  enemies  ; — over  scarped  heights,  over  cannon-
batteries,  it  has  flown  victorious,  winged  with  rage.  She  has
'  Eleven  hundred-thousand  fighters  on  foot,'  this  Republic :  '  at
one  particular  moment  she  had,'  or  supposed  she  had, '  Seventeen-
hundred  thousand.'  ^  Like  a  ring  of  lightning,  they,  volleying
and  qa-ira-'mg,  begirdle  her  from  shore  to  shore.  Cimmerian
Coalition  of  Despots  recoils,  smitten  with  astonishment  and  strange
pangs.

Such  a  fire  is  in  these  Gaelic  Republican  men ;  high-blazing ;
which  no  Coalition  can  withstand  !  Not  scutcheons,  with  four
degrees  of  nobility ;  but  ci-devant  Sergeants,  who  have  had  to

1  De  Stael,  Considerations,  iii.  c.  lo,  &c.

2Toulongeon,  iii.  c.  7  ;  v.  c,  10  (p.  194).  [Sorel  well  points  out  (iv.  131)  that
the  Government  could  not  afford  to  disband  the  armies,  as,  if  it  did,  itself  and  the
Convention  would  probably  be  overthrown  by  some  victorious  general— the  continu-
ance of  the  war  then  became  a  necessity,  when  the  desire  of  every  one  except  the
Government  was  really  for  peace.  Von  Sybel  (iii.  316)  gives  the  figures  at  871,000
in  all,  690,000  effective.     But  cf.  Appx.  on  Army.]


QUIBEEON  229

clutch  Generalship  out  of  the  cannon's  throat,  a  Pichegru,  a
Jourdan,  a  Hoche  lead  them  on.^  They  have  bread,  they  have
iron  ;  '  with  bread  and  iron  you  can  get  to  China.' — See  Pichegru's
soldiers,  this  hard  winter,  in  their  looped  and  windowed  destitu-
tion, in  their  '  strawrope  shoes  and  cloaks  of  bast-mat,'  how  they
overrun  Holland,  like  a  demon-host,  the  ice  having  bridged  all
waters  ;  and  rush  shouting  from  victory  to  victory  !  Ships  in  the
Texel  are  taken  by  hussars  on  horseback :  fled  is  York ;  fled  is
the  Stadtholder,  glad  to  escape  to  England,  and  leave  Holland
to  fraternise.^  Such  a  Gaelic  fire,  we  say,  blazes  in  this  People,
like  the  conflagration  of  grass  and  dry -jungle  ;  which  no  mortal
can  withstand — for  the  moment.

And  even  so  it  will  blaze  and  run,  scorching  all  things ;  and,
from  Cadiz  to  Archangel,  mad  Sansculottism,  drilled  now  into
Soldiership,  led  on  by  some  '  armed  Soldier  of  Democracy '  (say,
that  monosyllabic  Artillery-Officer),  will  set  its  foot  cruelly  on
the  necks  of  its  enemies ;  and  its  shouting  and  their  shrieking
shall  fill  the  world ! — Rash  Coalised  Kings,  such  a  fire  have  ye
kindled  ;  yourselves  fireless,  your  fighters  animated  only  by  drill-
sergeants,  mess-room  moralities,  and  the  drummer's  cat !  How-
ever, it  is  begun,  and  will  not  end :  not  for  a  matter  of  twenty
years.  So  long,  this  Gaelic  fire,  through  its  successive  changes
of  colour  and  character,  will  blaze  over  the  face  of  Europe,  and

^[Carlyle  does  not  mention  the  fact  of  Hoche's  arrest  (April  8th  '94),  and  dehver-
ance  at  Thermidor.  It  is  usually  to  Saint-Just  that  the  arrest  is  attributed,  but  Car-
not,  who  was  angry  with  Hoche  for  not  seizing  Trier  and  for  not  squeezing  the
population  of  the  Rhenish  Electorates  more,  cannot  be  exonerated.  {See  Chuquet,
Hoche  et  la  lutte  pour  1' Alsace  (Paris,  1893),  p.  233.)]

2  January  19th  1795  (iMontgaillard,  iv.  287-311).  [When  the  general  retirement
of  the  Allies  took  place  in  the  four  months  following  Jourdan's  victory  of  Fleurus,
it  became  manifest  that  Holland  was  at  the  mercy  of  the  French  Republic.  The
English  garrison  was  profoundly  unpopular,  and  the  little  Dutch  army  of  30,000
as  good  as  useless.  Pichegru  took  Bois-le-Duc  Oct.  loth,  and  Nymwegen  Nov.
3rd,  caressed  the  republican  party  (already  strong  there  and  bitterly  hostile  to
England),  promising  them  independence  and  a  French  alliance.  The  English
troops  having  left  Holland,  the  Stadtholder  at  the  begmning  of  Dec.  approached
the  French  Government  with  proposals  of  peace.  These  were  badly  received,  as  the
Committee  was  quite  determined  to  revolutionise  Holland.  The  early  frost  (Dec.
2oth)  destroyed  the  natural  defences  of  the  country.  Pichegru,  who  feared  to  be  cut
off  by  a  thaw,  hesitated,  but  was  compelled  by  the  RepHsentants  en  mission  to  go
on,  Dec.  27th.  On  Jan.  25th  the  submission  of  Holland  was  announced  in  the
Convention :  the  Stadtholder  escaped  to  England  on  18th  (Sorel,  iv.  164, 197  sqq.\^


230        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

afflict  and  scorch  all  men  : — till  it  provoke  all  men  ;  till  it  kindle
another  kind  of  fire,  the  Teutonic  kind,  namely ;  and  be  swallowed
up,  so  to  speak,  in  a  day  !  For  there  is  a  fire  comparable  to  the
burning  of  dry -jungle  and  grass ;  most  sudden,  high-blazing :
and  another  fire  which  we  liken  to  the  burning  of  coal,  or  even
of  anthracite  coal ;  difficult  to  kindle,  but  then  which  no  known
thing  will  put  out.  The  ready  Gaelic  fire,  we  can  remark  further,
— and  remark  not  in  Pichegrus  only,  but  in  innumerable  Voltaires,
Racines,  Laplaces,  no  less  ;  for  a  man,  whether  he  fight,  or  sing,
or  think,  will  remain  the  same  unity  of  a  man, — is  admirable  for
roasting  eggs,  in  every  conceivable  sense.  The  Teutonic  anthra-
cite again,  as  we  see  in  Luthers,  Leibnitzes,  Shakespeares,  is
preferable  for  smelting  metals.  How  happy  is  our  Europe  that
has  both  kinds  ! —

But  be  this  as  it  may,  the  Republic  is  clearly  triumphing.  In
the  spring  of  the  year,  Mentz  Town  again  sees  itself  besieged ;
will  again  change  master :  did  not  Merlin  the  Thionviller, '  with
wild  beard  and  look,'  say  it  was  not  for  the  last  time  they  saw
him  there  ?  The  Elector  of  Mentz  circulates  among  his  brother
Potentates  this  pertinent  query.  Were  it  not  advisable  to  treat  of
Peace  ?  Yes  !  answers  many  an  Elector  from  the  bottom  of  his
heart.  1  But,  on  the  other  hand,  Austria  hesitates  ;  finally  refuses,
being  subsidied  by  Pitt.  As  to  Pitt,  whoever  hesitate,  he,  sus-
pending his  Habeas-corpus,  suspending  his  Cash-payments,  stands

1  [There  was  no  fresh  siege  of  Mainz,  because  none  was  needed  :  the  Prussians
delivered  their  last  blows  on  the  Rhine  at  Kaiserslautern  in  Oct.  '94,  and  were
then  withdrawn  :  the  whole  left  bank  was  open.  In  the  same  month  a  Provisional
Government  was  established  at  Aix-la-Chapelle  for  all  countries  between  the  Meuse
and  the  Rhine,  which  proceeded  to  plunder  the  rich  inhabitants  without  mercy  (Sorel,
iv.  162).  The  most  influential  party  in  the  French  Government  got  firmly  hold  of  the
principle  of  "  natural  frontiers,"  and  the  limits  of  old  Gaul  (Rhine,  Alps,  Pyrenees) ;
and  this  meant  the  absorption  of  the  greater  part  of  the  electorates  of  Mainz,  Trier
and  Koln.  In  the  state  to  which  they  were  reduced  the  Rhenish  populations  of  the
left  bank  would  have  welcomed  this  solution ;  the  peace  of  Bale  (April  5th  '95)  took
away  from  the  Governments  of  these  countries  all  hope  of  protection  except  from
Austria  (and  they  knew  that  not  much  hope  could  be  placed  in  her) ;  the  two  Land-
graves of  Hesse  showed  themselves  disposed  to  negotiate  before  the  end  of  April,
though  the  Elector  of  Mainz  wrote  of  '  defending  himself  to  the  last '  unless  France
renounced  the  Rhine  frontier,  April  15th  [ibid.  301).  Carlyle  probably  refers  here
to  the  proposal  of  the  Elector  of  Mainz  to  the  Diet  of  the  Empire  that  the  Kings  of
Denmark  and  Sweden  should  be  arbitrators  between  France  and  the  Empire.  (Von
Sybel,  iv.  130.)]


QUIBERON  231

inflexible, — spite  of  foreign  reverses  ;  spite  of  domestic  obstacles,
of  Scotch  National  Conventions  and  English  Friends  of  the  People,
whom  he  is  obliged  to  aiTaign,  to  hang,  or  even  to  see  acquitted
with  jubilee :  a  lean  inflexible  man.  The  Majesty  of  Spain,  as
we  predicted,  makes  Peace ;  ^  also  the  Majesty  of  Prussia :  and
there  is  a  Treaty  of  Bale.'^  Treaty  with  black  Anarchists  and
Regicides !  Alas,  what  help  ?  You  cannot  hang  this  Anarchy  ;
it  is  like  to  hang  you :  you  must  needs  treat  with  it.

Likewise,  General  Hoche  has  even  succeeded  in  pacificating
La  Vendee.  Rogue  Rossignol  and  his  '  Infernal  Columns '  have
vanished :  by  firmness  and  justice,  by  sagacity  and  industry.
General  Hoche  has  done  it.  Taking  '  Movable  Columns,'  not
infernal ;  girdling-in  the  Country ;  pardoning  the  submissive,
cutting  down  the  resistive,  limb  after  limb  of  the  Revolt  is
brought  under.  La  Rochejacquelin,  last  of  our  Nobles,  fell  in
battle  ;  Stofflet  himself  makes  terms  ;  Georges-Cadoudal  is  back
to  Brittany,  among  his  Chouans :  the  frightful  gangrene  of  La
Vendee  seems  veritably  extirpated.  It  has  cost,  as  they  reckon
in  round  numbers,  the  lives  of  a  Hundred-thousand  fellow -
mortals ;  with  noyadings,  conflagratings  by  infernal  column,
which  defy  arithmetic.     This  is  the  La  Vendee  War.^

Nay  in  few  months,  it  does  burst  up  once  more,  but  once  only  ;
— blown  upon  by  Pitt,  by  our  Ci-devant  Puisaye  of  Calvados,

^  [After  the  capture  of  Fontarabia  and  Saint-S^bastien  (early  in  August),  the  re-
capture of  Bellegarde  (Sept.  17th)  and  the  invasion  of  the  Basque  provinces  which
followed,  the  Spanish  Government  had  no  resource  but  to  sue  for  peace  :  the
negotiations  were  slow,  but  they  were  conducted  with  great  skill  by  Barth^lemy  at
Bale;  and  the  death  of  Louis  XVII.  (whom  the  Spanish  Government  honourably
refused  to  forsake)  brought  about  the  conclusion  of  the  Treaty,  July  22nd,  France
giving  up  all  her  conquests,  and  contenting  herself  with  the  illusory  cession  of  the
Spanish  half  of  San  Domingo  (Sorel,  iv.  369).]

2  April  5th  1795  ;  Montgaillard,  iv.  319.  [By  the  treaty  of  Bale,  April  5th,  (i.)
the  French  troops  are  to  evacuate  the  Prussian  possessions  on  the  right  bank  of  the
Rhine,  but  to  continue  to  occupy  those  on  the  left ;  (ii.)  all  engagements  as  to  the
final  settlement  of  the  left  bank  are  to  be  avoided  until  the  general  peace  with  the
Empire;  (iii.)  Prussia  will  undertake  nothing  against  Holland  or  any  of  the  States
conquered  by  France ;  (iv. )  North  Germany  is  to  be  neutral  behind  a  '  line  of
demarcation'  under  the  guarantee  of  the  King  of  Prussia  (Sorel,  iv.  285).]

3  Hist,  de  la  Guerre  de  la  Vendue,  par  M.  le  Comte  de  Vauban  ;  M^moires  de
Mme  de  la  Rochejacquelin,  etc.  {See  Appx.  on  La  Vendue.  The  execution  of
Stofflet,  Feb.  25th  1796,  and  Charette,  March  29th,  must  be  taken  as  the  final  dates
of  the  pacification,  although  a  few  bands  under  Auticharap,  Sc^peaux  and  Sapinaud
kept  the  field  a  few  weeks  longer.]


232        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

and  others.  In  the  month  of  July  1 795,  English  Ships  will  ride
in  Quiberon  roads.  There  will  be  debarkation  of  chivalrous
Ci-devants,  of  volunteer  Prisoners -of- war — eager  to  desert ;  of
fire-arms.  Proclamations,  clothes-chests,  Royalists  and  specie.
Whereupon  also,  on  the  Republican  side,  there  will  be  rapid
stand-to-arras ;  with  ambuscade  marchings  by  Quiberon  beach,
at  midnight ;  storming  of  Fort  Penthievre ;  war-thunder  mingling
with  the  roar  of  the  nightly  main  ;  and  such  a  morning  light  as
has  seldom  dawned :  debarkation  hurled  back  into  its  boats,  or
into  the  devouring  billows,  with  wreck  and  wail ; — in  one  word,
a  Ci-devant  Puisaye  as  totally  ineffectual  here  as  he  was  in
Calvados,  when  he  rode  from  Vernon  Castle  without  boots.  ^

Again,  therefore,  it  has  cost  the  lives  of  many  a  brave  man.
Among  whom  the  whole  world  laments  the  brave  Son  of  Som-
breuil.  Ill-fated  family  !  The  father  and  younger  son  went  to
the  guillotine  ;  the  heroic  daughter  languishes,  reduced  to  want,
hides  her  woes  from  History :  the  elder  son  perishes  here ;  shot
by  military  tribunal  as  an  Emigrant ;  Hoche  himself  cannot  save
him.  If  all  wars,  civil  and  other,  are  misunderstandings,  what
a  thing  must  right-understanding  be  !

CHAPTER  IV

LION  NOT  DEAD

The  Convention,  borne  on  the  tide  of  Fortune  towards  foreign
Victory,  and  driven  by  the  strong  wind  of  Public  Opinion  towards
Clemency  and  Luxury,  is  rushing  fast ;  all  skill  of  pilotage  is
needed,  and  more  than  all,  in  such  a  velocity.

Curious  to  see,  how  we  veer  and  whirl,  yet  must  ever  whirl

1  Deux  Amis,  xiv.  94-106  ;  Puisaye,  M^moires,  iii.-vii.  [The  project  of  a  descent
on  Brittany  was  first  suggested  to  Pitt  in  Sept.  '94,  and  Puisaye  was  entrusted
with  the  task  of  recruiting  Afnigr^s  :  the  Comte  d'Artois  was  invited  to  take  part ;
on  June  27th  3,600  men  were  disembarked  at  Quiberon  {^^migrh  and  French
prisoners  who  had  become  Royahsts  to  escape  from  English  prisons),  with  munitions
of  war  for  6,000  men  ;  4,000  or  5,000  Venddans  joined  them  :  but  the  Committee
sent  off  Tallien  and  Blad  as  Commissioners  extraordinary  to  the  army  of  the  West ;
on  July  20th  Hoche  annihilated  the  whole  Amigr^-  Vendian  force,  and  took  6,000
prisoners,  of  whom  1,000  were  P.migrds  :  690  of  these  were  shot,  against  the  will  of
Hoche,  by  the  orders  of  the  Convention  conveyed  by  Tallien.   (Sorel,  iv.  365,  sqq.^^


LION  NOT  DEAD  233

round  again,  and  scud  before  the  wind.  If,  on  the  one  hand,
we  re-admit  the  Protesting  Seventy-three,  we,  on  the  other  hand,
agree  to  consummate  the  Apotheosis  of  Marat ;  Uft  his  body
from  the  Cordehers  Church,  and  transport  it  to  the  Pantheon  of
Great  Men, — flinging  out  Mirabeau  to  make  room  for  him.  To
no  purpose :  so  strong  blows  PubHc  Opinion  !  A  Gilt  Youthhood,
in  plaited  hair-tresses,  tears  down  his  Busts  from  the  Theatre
Feydeau ;  tramples  them  under  foot ;  scatters  them,  with  voci-
feration, into  the  Cesspool  of  Montmartre.^  Swept  is  his  Chapel
from  the  Place  du  Carrousel ;  the  Cesspool  of  Montmartre  will
receive  his  very  dust.  Shorter  godhood  had  no  divine  man.
Some  four  months  in  this  Pantheon,  Temple  of  All  the  Im-
mortals ;  then  to  the  Cesspool,  grand  Cloaca  of  Paris  and  the
World !  '  His  Busts  at  one  time  amounted  to  four  thousand.'
Between  Temple  of  All  the  Immortals  and  Cloaca  of  the  World,
how  are  poor  human  creatures  whirled  !

Furthermore  the  question  arises.  When  will  the  Constitution
of  Ninety-three,  of  179'^,  come  into  action?  Considerate  heads
surmise,  in  all  privacy,  that  the  Constitution  of  Ninety-three  will
never  come  into  action.  Let  them  busy  themselves  to  get  ready
a  better.

Or,  again,  where  now  are  the  Jacobins  ?  Childless,  most  de-
crepit, as  we  saw,  sat  the  mighty  Mother ;  gnashing  not  teeth,
but  empty  gums,  against  a  traitorous  Thermidorian  Convention
and  the  current  of  things.  Twice  were  Billaud,  Collot,  and
Company  accused  in  Convention,  by  a  Lecointre,  by  a  Legendre ;
and  the  second  time,  it  was  not  voted  calumnious.  Billaud  from
the  Jacobin  tribune  says,"^  "  The  lion  is  not  dead,  he  is  only  sleep-

1  Moniteur,  du  25  Sept.  1794,  du  4  F^vrier  1795.  [On  Sept.  21st  '94  Marat  was
transferred  to  the  Pantheon  {vid.  supr. ,  ii.  79 ;  iii.  68) ;  but  on  Feb.  27th  '95  his  bones
were  removed  to  the  neighbouring  cemetery  of  S/e  Genevitue  (Cabanas,  256  sqq.).~\

2 [Nov.  3rd.  The  first,  but  futile,  denunciation  of  Billaud,  Collot,  and  Bar^re
by  Lecointre  was  Aug  29th  ;  the  words  of  Billaud  at  the  Jacobins  on  Nov.  3rd  were
used  in  consequence  of  the  Convention  decreeing  an  inquiry  into  the  conduct  of
Carrier,  whom  the  Club  protected,  and  the  speech  led  to  the  closing  of  the  Club
already  described.  The  second  denunciation  led  to  the  appointment  of  a  com-
mittee of  21  to  examine  the  conduct  of  Collot,  Billaud,  Barere,  Vadier,  Dec.  27th,
which  reported  (by  Saladin)  March  i8th  '95.  In  Dec.  '94  Lecointre  published  his
book  '  Les  Crimes  de  sept  membres  des  Anciens  Comit^s,'  which  was  printed  by
order  of  the  Convention.     Aulard  in  his  introduction  to  '  Recueil  des  Actes  du


234        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

ing."  They  ask  him  in  Convention,  What  he  means  by  the
awakening  of  the  Hon  ?  And  bickerings,  of  an  extensive  sort,
arose  in  the  Palais-EgaUte  between  Tappe-durs  and  the  Gilt
Youthhood ;  cries  of  "Down  with  the  Jacobins,  the  Jacoquins,"
coquiii  meaning  scoundrel !  The  Tribune  in  mid-air  gave  battle-
sound  ;  answered  only  by  silence  and  uncertain  gasps.  Talk
was,  in  Government  Committees,  of  ^suspending'  the  Jacobin
Sessions.  Hark,  there ! — it  is  in  AUhallow-time,  or  on  the  Hal-
low-eve itself,  month  ci-devant  November,  year  once  named  of
Grace  1794,  sad  eve  for  Jacobinism, — volley  of  stones  dashing
through  our  windows,  with  jingle  and  execration !  The  female
Jacobins,  famed  Tricoteuses  with  knitting-needles,  take  flight ;
are  met  at  the  doors  by  a  Gilt  Youthhood  and  ^mob  of  four
thousand  persons ; '  are  hooted,  flouted,  hustled ;  fustigated,  in
a  scandalous  manner,  cotillons  retrousses ; — and  vanish  in  mere
hysterics.  Sally  out,  ye  male  Jacobins !  The  male  Jacobins
sally  out ;  but  only  to  battle,  disaster  and  confusion.  So  that
armed  Authority  has  to  intervene :  and  again  on  the  morrow  to
intervene ;  and  suspend  the  Jacobin  Sessions  forever  and  a  day.^
— Gone  are  the  Jacobins  ;  into  invisibility  ;  in  a  storm  of  laughter
and  howls.  Their  Place  is  made  a  Normal  School,  the  first  of
the  kind  seen ;  it  then  vanishes  into  a  '  Market  of  Thermidor
Ninth  ; '  into  a  Market  of  Saint-Honore,  where  is  now  peaceable
chaffering  for  poultry  and  greens.  The  solemn  temples,  the
great  globe  itself ;  the  baseless  fabric !  Are  not  we  such  stuff,
we  and  this  world  of  ours,  as  Dreams  are  made  of  ?

Maximum  being  abrogated.  Trade  was  to  take  its  own  free

Comit6  de  Salut  Public '  enumerates  seven  answers  to  this  book  published  by  the
Committee  men,  while  the  working  members  of  the  old  Committee,  Carnot,  C.  A.
Prieur,  Lindet  all  replied  in  their  places  in  the  Convention.  Early  in  Jan.  '95  also
Courtois  issued  his  "  Report  on  the  papers  found  in  Robespierre's  house,"  which
inculpated  many  of  the  Terrorists.  But  this  was  not  a  complete  report  ;  nor  even
was  the  second  edition  of  it  (with  additions),  published  in  1828,  complete  (Aulard,
Recueil,  Introduction).  Two  other  pamphlets  of  immense  effect  were  Morellet's  '  Le
Cri  des  Families '  (Dec.  '94) ;  and  *  La  Cause  des  Peres '  (May  '95),  which  led, to  the
partial  restoration  of  the  property  of  the  victims  of  the  Terror  (Lavergne,  Econo-
mistes  Fran9ais,  370-2).]

1  Moniteur,  Stances  du  10-12  Novembre  1794 ;  Deux  Amis,  xiii.  43-49.     [Nov.
lath.]


LION  NOT  DEAD  235

course.  1  Alas,  Trade,  shackled,  topsyturvied  in  the  way  we  saw,
and  now  suddenly  let-go  again,  can  for  the  present  take  no  course
at  all ;  but  only  reel  and  stagger.  There  is,  so  to  speak,  no
Trade  whatever  for  the  time  being.  Assignats,  long  sinking,
emitted  in  such  quantities,  sink  now  with  an  alacrity  beyond
parallel.  "  Comhien  ?  "  said  one,  to  a  Hackney-coachman,  "  What
fare  ?  "  "  Six  thousand  livres,"  answered  he  :  some  three  hun-
dred pounds  sterling,  in  Paper-money.^  Pressure  of  Maximum
withdrawn,  the  things  it  compressed  likewise  withdraw.  'Two
ounces  of  bread  per  day '  is  the  modicum  allotted  :  ^  wide-waving,
doleful  are  the  Bakers'  Queues ;  Farmers'  houses  are  become
pawnbrokers'  shops.

One  can  imagine,  in  these  circumstances,  with  what  humour
Sansculottism  growled  in  its  throat,  "La  Cabarm;"  beheld  Ci-
devants  return  dancing,  the  Thermidor  effulgence  of  recivilisa-
tion,  and  Balls  in  flesh-coloured  drawers.  Greek  tunics  and
sandals  ;  hosts  of  Muscadins  parading,  with  their  clubs  loaded
with  lead ; — and  we  here,  cast  out,  abhorred,  '  picking  offals
from  the  street ; '  ^  agitating  in  Baker's  Queue  for  our  two  ounces
of  bread !  Will  the  Jacobin  lion,  which  they  say  is  meeting
secretly  '  at  the  Archeveche,  in  bonnet  rouge  with  loaded  pistols,'
not  awaken  .'*  Seemingly,  not.  Our  Collot,  our  Billaud,  Barrere,
Vadier,  in  these  last  days  of  March  1795,^  are  found  worthy  of
D&poriation,  of  Banishment  beyond  seas ;  and  shall,  for  the  present,
be  trundled  off  to  the  Castle  of  Ham.  The  lion  is  dead  ; — or
writhing  in  death-throes !

i[The  decree  of  April  27th  '95,  allowing  free  export  of  gold  and  silver,  practic-
ally reopened  the  Botirse :  but  for  the  moment  sent  up  the  prices  of  everything
(remember  this  came  between  the  Insurrections  of  Germinal  and  Prairial).  (Schmidt,
ii.  326.)]

2  Mercier,  ii.  '94  ('  ist  Feb.  96  ;  at  the  Bourse  of  Paris,  the  gold  louis  of  20  francs
in  silver  costs  5,300  francs  in  assignats,'  Montgaillard,  iv.  419).  [Cf.  Schmidt,  ii.
327,  where  a  gold  louis  is  offered  for  sale  for  goo /ra?ics  in  the  Palais  Royal  (April

■9s)-]

'  [This  is  a  well-known  story  :  but  the  lowest  figure  quoted  by  Von  Sybel,  generally
an  extremely  accurate  authority  on  economics  (iv.  309),  is  just  before  the  Insurrec-
tion of  Prairial,  i.e.,  half  a  pound  of  bread  and  half  a  pound  of  rice.  This  is  not
enough  to  keep  life  in  ;  and  there  was  an  enormous  floating  population  not  domiciled
and  so  not  entitled  to  a  place  in  the  queues.'\

■*  Fantin  Desodoards,  Histoire  de  la  Revolution,  vii.  c.  4.

'^  [April  ist.]


236        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

Behold,  accordingly,  on  the  day  they  call  Twelfth  of  Germinal
(which  is  also  called  First  of  April,  not  a  lucky  day),  how  lively
are  these  streets  of  Paris  once  more  !  Floods  of  hungry  women,
of  squalid  hungry  men ;  ejaculating :  "  Bread,  Bread,  and  the
Constitution  of  Ninety-three  ! "  Paris  has  risen,  once  again,
like  the  Ocean-tide ;  is  flowing  towards  the  Tuileries,  for
Bread  and  a  Constitution.  Tuileries  Sentries  do  their  best ;  but
it  serves  not :  the  Ocean-tide  sweeps  them  away ;  inundates
the  Convention  Hall  itself ;  howling,  "  Bread  and  the  Constitu-
tion !  "  1

Unhappy  Senators,  unhappy  People,  there  is  yet,  after  all  toils
and  broils,  no  Bread,  no  Constitution.  "  Du  pain,  pas  tant  de  longs
discours,  Bread,  not  bursts  of  Parliamentary  eloquence  ! "  so  wailed
the  Menads  of  Maillard,  five  years  ago  and  more ;  so  wail  ye  to
this  hour.  The  Convention,  with  unalterable  countenance,  with
what  thought  one  knows  not,  keeps  its  seat  ^  in  this  waste  howling
chaos ;  rings  its  storm-bell  from  the  Pavilion  of  Unity.  Section
Lepelletier,  old  Filles  Saint-  Thomas,  who  are  of  the  money-chang-
ing species  ;  these  and  Gilt  Youthhood  fly  to  the  rescue  :  sweep
chaos  forth  again,  with  levelled  bayonets.  Paris  is  declared  '  in
a  state  of  siege.'  Pichegru,  Conqueror  of  Holland,  who  happens
to  be  here,  is  named  Commandant,  till  the  disturbance  end.  He,
in  one  day  so  to  speak,  ends  it.  He  accomplishes  the  transfer  of
Billaud,  Collot  and  Company  ;  dissipating  all  opposition  '  by  two
cannon-shots,'  blank  cannon-shots,  and  the  terror  of  his  name ;
and  thereupon,  announcing,  with  a  Laconicism  which  should  be


1  [It  must  be  thoroughly  understood  that  the  Insurrection  of  i2th  Germinal  was
a  social  and  economic  movement,  not  a  political  one  ;  it  was  utilised  by  some  of  the
Mo7itagnards  (furious  at  the  restoration  of  the  relics  of  the  Girondist  party,  which
was  on  March  8th)  for  political  ends,  but  the  question  in  the  minds  of  the  insurgents
was  simply  the  price  of  bread  ;  one  particular  decree  of  the  Convention,  that
citizens  who  had  no  fixed  domicile  in  Paris,  but  only  lodgings,  should  not  be
entitled  to  the  regulation  number  of  ounces  of  bread  per  day,  excited  popular  rage  :
had  the  Convention  been  able  to  keep  to  its  promise  of  March  13th,  of  i  lb.  per  day
per  man,  there  would  have  been  no  disturbance ;  on  19th  the  unstable  Lecointre,
who  had  gone  over  to  the  Terrorists  again,  demanded  the  putting  in  force  of  the
Constitution  of  '93 :  on  21st  the  Convention  voted  that  if  it  was  disturbed  by  in-
surrection it  would  migrate  to  Chalons  :  and  further  voted  to  proceed  to  the  drawing
up  of  a  new  Constitution.     (Schmidt,  ii.  307-12  ;  Von  Sybel,  iv.  552,  sqq.)\

2 [For  four  hours.]


LION  SPRAWLING  ITS  LAST        237

imitated,  "  Representatives,  your  decrees  are  executed,"  ^  lays
down  his  Commandantship.^

This  Revolt  of  Germinal,  therefore,  has  passed,  like  a  vain  cry.
The  Prisoners  rest  safe  in  Ham,  waiting  for  ships  ;  some  nine-
hundred  '  chief  Terrorists  of  Paris  '  are  disarmed.^  Sansculottism,
swept  forth  with  bayonets,  has  vanished,  with  its  misery,  to  the
bottom  of  Saint-Antoine  and  Saint- Marceau. — Time  was  when
Usher  Maillard  with  Menads  could  alter  the  course  of  Legis-
lation; but  that  time  is  not.  Legislation  seems  to  have  got
bayonets  ;  Section  Lepelletier  takes  its  firelock,  not  for  us  !  We
retire  to  our  dark  dens  ;  our  cry  of  hunger  is  called  a  Plot  of  Pitt ;
the  Saloons  glitter,  the  flesh-coloured  Drawers  gyrate  as  before.
It  was  for  "  The  Cahanis  "  then,  and  her  Muscadins  and  Money-
changers that  we  fought  ?  It  was  for  Balls  in  flesh-coloured
drawers  that  we  took  Feudalism  by  the  beard,  and  did,  and  dared,
shedding  our  blood  like  water  ?  Expressive  Silence,  muse  thou
their  praise ! —

CHAPTER  V

LION  SPRAWLING  ITS  LAST

Representative  Carrier  went  to  the  Guillotine,  in  December
last ;  protesting  that  he  acted  by  orders.  The  Revolutionary
Tribunal,  after  all  it  has  devoured,  has  now  only,  as  Anarchic
things  do,  to  devour  itself.  In  the  early  days  of  May,  men  see
a  remarkable  thing  :  Fouquier-Tinville  pleading  at  the  Bar  once
his  own.  He  and  his  chief  Jurymen,  Leroi  August-Tenth,  Jury-
man Vilate,  a  Batch  of  Sixteen ;  pleading  hard,  protesting  that
they  acted  by  orders :  but  pleading  in  vain.  Thus  men  break
the  axe  with  which  they  have  done  hateful  things  ;  the  axe  itself
having  grown  hateful.     For  the  rest  Fouquier  died  hard  enough  :  ^

1  Moniteur,  Stance  du  13  Germinal  (2d  April),  1795.

2 [April  3rd.]

^[Sixteen  other  Jacobin  leaders  were  arrested,  Choudieu,  Chasles,  Leonard
Bourdon,  Duhem,  Ruamps,  Amar,  Cambon,  Thuriot,  Maignet,  Levasseur,  Le-
cointre,  Granet,  Hentz,  Bayle,  Crassous,  Foussedoire.  ]

*[Fouquier's  trial  may  be  read  at  length  in  Campardon,  ii.  (151  sqq.).  It  began
March  28th  and  ended  May  6th.     Twenty-four  judges  and  jurors  of  the  Tribunal


238        THE  FRENCH  EEVOLUTION

"Where  are  thy  Batches?"  howled  the  people. — "Hungry
canaille,"  asked  Fouquier,  "is  thy  Bread  cheaper,  wanting
them  ? "

Remarkable  Fouquier ;  once  but  as  other  Attorneys  and  Law-
beagles,  which  hunt  ravenous  on  this  Earth,  a  well-known  phasis
of  human  nature  ;  and  now  thou  art  and  remainest  the  most  re-
markable Attorney  that  ever  lived  and  hunted  in  the  Upper  Air !
For,  in  this  terrestrial  Course  of  Time,  there  was  to  be  an  Avalar
of  Attorneyism  ;  the  Heavens  had  said.  Let  there  be  an  Incarna-
tion, not  divine,  of  the  venatory  Attorney-spirit  which  keeps  its
eye  on  the  bond  only ; — and  lo,  this  was  it ;  and  they  have  attor-
neyed  it  in  its  turn.  Vanish,  then,  thou  rat-eyed  Incarnation  of
Attorneyism ;  who  at  bottom  wert  but  as  other  Attorneys
and  too  hungry  sons  of  Adam !  Juryman  Vilate  had  striven
hard  for  life,  and  published,  from  his  Prison,  an  ingenious  Book,
not  unknown  to  us ;  but  it  would  not  stead :  he  also  had  to
vanish ;  and  this  his  Book  of  the  Secret  Causes  of  Thermidor,  full
of  lies,  with  particles  of  truth  in  it  undiscoverable  otherwise,  is
all  that  remains  of  him.

Revolutionary   Tribunal   has   done ;    but   vengeance    has   not

done.      Representative  Lebon,  after  long  struggling,   is  handed

over  to   the  ordinary    Law  Courts,  and   by  them  guillotined.^

Nay  at  Lyons  and  elsewhere,  resuscitated   Moderatism,    in   its

vengeance,  will  not  wait  the  slow  process  of  Law ;  but  bursts

into  the  Prisons,  sets  fire  to  the  Prisons :  burns  some  threescore

imprisoned  Jacobins  to  dire  death,  or  chokes  them  'with  the

smoke  of  straw.'  ^     There  go  vengeful  truculent  '  Companies  of

Jesus,'   '  Companies  of  the   Sun ; '    slaying  Jacobinism  wherever

they  meet  with  it ;    flinging  it  into  the    Rhone-stream ;   which

once  more  bears  seaward  a  horrid  cargo.  ^     Whereupon,  at  Toulon,

Rdvolutionnaire  were  brought  to  trial  with  him  :  and  of  these  there  were  condemned
to  death  himself,  Foucault,  Scellier,  Gamier- Launay,  Leroy-Dix-Ao<it,  Renaudin,
Prieur,  Vilate,  Chatelet,  Girard,  Boyaval,  Benott,  Lanne,  Verney,  Dupannier  and
Herman.  They  were  executed  on  May  7th.  It  was  the  last  serious  work  of  the
Tribunal,  which  held  its  last  sitting  on  May  17th,  and  was  abolished  on  31st,  its
business  being  transferred  to  the  ordinary  Criminal  Tribunals  in  each  department.]
1  [Oct.  i8th '95.]  2[May  5th '95.]

^Moniteur,  du  27  Juin,  du  31  AoM  1795  ;  Deux  Amis,  xiii.  121-9.     [This  refers
to  the  so-called  '  White  Terror '  of  which  Lyons,  Toulon,  Marseilles,  Avignon,


LION  SPRAWLING  ITS  LAST       239

Jacobinism  rises  in  revolt ;  ^  and  is  like  to  hang  the  National
Representatives.  2 — With  such  action  and  reaction,  is  not  a  poor
National  Convention  hard  bested  ?  It  is  like  the  settlement  of
winds  and  waters,  of  seas  long  tornado-beaten  ;  and  goes  on
with  jumble  and  with  jangle.  Now  flung  aloft,  now  sunk  in
trough  of  the  sea,  your  Vessel  of  the  Republic  has  need  of  all
pilotage  and  more.

What  Parliament  that  ever  sat  under  the  Moon  had  such  a
series  of  destinies  as  this  National  Convention  of  France  ?  It
came  together  to  make  the  Constitution ;  and  instead  of  that,  it
has  had  to  make  nothing  but  destruction  and  confusion  :  to  bum
up  Catholicisms,  Aristocratisms  ;  to  worship  Reason  and  dig  Salt-
petre ;  to  fight  Titanically  with  itself  and  with  the  whole  world.
A  Convention  decimated  by  the  Guillotine  ;  above  the  tenth
man  has  bowed  his  neck  to  the  axe.  Which  has  seen  Car-
magnoles danced  before  it,  and  patriotic  strophes  sung  amid
Church-spoils ;  the  wounded  of  the  Tenth  of  August  defile  in
handbarrows ;  and,  in  the  Pandemonial  Midnight,  Egalite's
dames    in   tricolor   drink    lemonade,    and    spectrum   of   Sieyes

Orange,  Aix  and  Aries  were  the  principal  centres.  Few  of  the  actual  '  Red '
Terrorists  in  these  cities  had  been  arrested,  and,  although  there  were  undoubtedly
Royalist  agencies  mixed  up  in  the  movement  that  now  followed,  at  bottom  personal
revenge  was  the  cause  of  the  murders.  During  the  early  months  of  '95  several
armed  bands  were  formed  in  Lyons,  from  whence  the  movement  spread  to  other
cities  of  the  South,  the  victims  being  principally  the  members  of  the  old  Revolu-
tionary Committees,  or  the  executioners  employed  by  the  proconsuls  in  '93 — 4.
The  outbreak  of  May  5th  was  simply  a  horrible  piece  of  lynch  law  ;  one  of  CoUot's
old  spies  was  being  tried  for  his  life  and  the  mob  broke  in  to  the  Tribunal,  murdered
the  man,  rushed  to  the  prisons,  and  killed  97  imprisoned  Terrorists.  The  Con-
vention sent  in  haste  a  special  Commission,  which  included  Isnard,  to  maintain
order,  but  its  members  seem  to  have  sympathised  with  the  assassins.  Thirty
Terrorists  were  murdered  at  Aix  on  May  nth,  and  it  was  this  that  led  to  the  rising
of  some  Jacobin  ouvriers  at  Toulon,  prepared  to  march  on  Marseilles.  The  last
of  these  massacres  took  place  at  Marseilles,  June  5th  ;  but  isolated  murders  of
Terrorists  occurred  from  time  to  time  during  the  next  two  or  three  years.  (Von
Sybel,  iv.  307-8.)]

^  [May  17th.]

2  [It  is  curious  that  Toulon,  which  had  never  been  Jacobin  before,  should  have
turned  Jacobin  at  the  date  of  the  White  Terror,  but  the  explanation  must  be  sought
in  the  number  of  workmen  thrown  out  of  employment  by  the  utter  ruin  of  the
French  Marine,  which  followed  the  victories  of  England,  and  the  devastation
of  the  city  by  the  Jacobins  at  the  beginning  of  '94.  One  of  the  Convention
Commissioners  shot  himself,  another  escaped  on  board  the  fleet  (which  was  being
prepared  for  an  attack  on  Corsica) ;  it  needed  all  the  vigour  of  Isnard  and  some
9,000  men  (mostly  detached  from  the  Army  of  Italy)  to  defeat  the  Insurrection
(May  31st).     (Von  Sybel,  iv.  315-6.)]


240        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

mount,  saying,  Death  sans  phrase.  A  Convention  which  has
effervesced,  and  which  has  congealed ;  which  has  been  red  with
rage,  and  also  pale  with  rage  ;  sitting  with  pistols  in  its  pocket,
drawing  sword  (in  a  moment  of  effervescence)  :  now  storming
to  the  four  winds,  through  a  Danton-voice,  Awake,  O  France,
and  smite  the  tyrants  ;  now  frozen  mute  under  its  Robespierre,
and  answering  his  dirge-voice  by  a  dubious  gasp.  Assassinated,
decimated ;  stabbed  at,  shot  at,  in  baths,  on  streets  and  stair-
cases ;  which  has  been  the  nucleus  of  Chaos.  Has  it  not  heard
the  chimes  at  midnight  ?  It  has  deliberated,  beset  by  a  Hundred-
thousand  armed  men  with  artillery-furnaces  and  provision-carts.
It  has  been  betocsined,  bestormed  ;  overflooded  by  black  deluges
of  Sansculottism  ;  and  has  heard  the  shrill  cry.  Bread  and  Soap.
For,  as  we  say,  it  was  the  nucleus  of  Chaos  :  it  sat  as  the  centre
of  Sansculottism  ;  and  had  spread  its  pavilion  on  the  waste  Deep,
where  is  neither  path  nor  landmark,  neither  bottom  nor  shore.
In  intrinsic  valour,  ingenuity,  fidelity,  and  general  force  and
manhood,  it  has  perhaps  not  far  surpassed  the  average  of
Parliaments ;  but  in  frankness  of  purpose,  in  singularity  of
position,  it  seeks  its  fellow.  One  other  Sansculottic  submersion,
or  at  most  two,  and  this  wearied  vessel  of  a  Convention  reaches
land.i

Revolt  of  Germinal  Twelfth  ended  as  a  vain  cry ;  moribund
Sansculottism  was  swept  back  into  invisibility.  There  it  has
lain  moaning,  these  six  weeks :  moaning,  and  also  scheming.
Jacobins  disarmed,  flung  forth  from  their  Tribune  in  mid-air,
must  needs  try  to  help  themselves,  in  secret  conclave  under
ground.  Lo  therefore,  on  the  First  day  of  the  month  Prairial,
20th  of  May  17.95,  sound  of  the  generate  once  more;  beating
sharp,  ran-tan.  To  arms.  To  arms !

Sansculottism  has  risen,  yet  again,  from  its  death-lair ;  waste,

1  [Of  the  782  members  17  refused  to  sit,  35  voluntarily  resigned  their  seats  during
the  sessions,  19  died  natural  deaths,  9  were  killed  in  battle,  4  were  kept  in
Austrians  prisons,  73  died  on  the  scaffold  or  by  murder,  26  were  deported  or  in-
carcerated for  long  periods  ;  very  rarely  had  the  Convention  sat  over  350  strong  ;
from  June  2nd  '93  seldom  more  than  200  [see  Guiffrey,  cap.  iii.).]


LION  SPRAWLING  ITS  LAST       241

wild-flowing,  as  the  unfruitful  Sea.  Saint-Antoine  is  afoot :  ^
"  Bread  and  the  Constitution  of  Ninety-three,"  so  sounds  it ;
so  stands  it  written  with  chalk  on  the  hats  of  men.  They  have
their  pikes,  their  firelocks  ;  Paper  of  Grievances  ;  standards  ;
printed  Proclamation,  drawn  up  in  quite  official  manner, —
considering  this,  and  also  considering  that,  they,  a  much-en-
during Sovereign  People,  are  in  Insurrection ;  will  have  Bread
and  the  Constitution  of  Ninety-three.  And  so  the  Barriers  are
seized,  and  the  genSrale  beats,  and  tocsins  discourse  discord.
Black  deluges  overflow  the  Tuileries ;  spite  of  sentries,  the
Sanctuary  itself  is  invaded :  enter,  to  our  Order  of  the  Day,
a  torrent  of  dishevelled  women,  wailing,  "  Bread !  Bread  ! "
President  may  well  cover  himself;  and  have  his  own  tocsin
rung  in  '  the  Pavilion  of  Unity ; '  the  ship  of  the  State  again
labours  and  leaks  ;  overwashed,  near  to  swamping,  with  un-
fruitful brine.

What  a  day,  once  more  !  Women  are  driven  out :  men  storm
irresistibly  in  ;  choke  all  corridors,  thunder  at  all  gates.  De-
puties, putting  forth  head,  obtest,  conjure  ;  Saint-Antoine  rages,
"Bread  and  Constitution."  Report  has  risen  that  the  'Conven-
tion is  assassinating  the  women  ; '  crushing  and  rushing,  clangor
and  furor !  The  oak  doors  have  become  as  oak  tambourines,
sounding  under  the  axe  of  Saint-Antoine  ;  plaster- work  crackles,
wood- work  booms  and  jingles  ;  door  starts  up  ; — bursts-in  Saint-
Antoine  with  frenzy  and  vociferation ;  with  Rag-standards,  printed
Proclamation,  drum-music  :  astonishment  to  eye  and  ear.  Gen-
darmes, loyal  Sectioners  charge  through  the  other  door ;  they
are  recharged ;  musketry  exploding :  Saint-Antoine  cannot  be
expelled.  Obtesting  Deputies  obtest  vainly  :  Respect  the  Pre-
sident ;  approach  not  the  President !  Deputy  Feraud,^  stretching
out  his  hands,  baring  his  bosom  scarred  in  the  Spanish  wars,
obtests  vainly  ;  threatens  and  resists  vainly.  Rebellious  Deputy
of  the  Sovereign,  if  thou  have  fought,  have  not  we  too  }  We
have  no  Bread,  no  Constitution !  They  wrench  poor  Feraud ;
they  tumble  him,  trample  him,  wrath  waxing  to  see  itself  work  :
i[May  20th.]  ^j^F^raud,  vid.  supr,^  ii.  328],

VOL.    III.  16


242        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

they  drag  him  into  the  corridor,  dead  or  near  it ;  sever  his  head,
and  fix  it  on  a  pike.  Ah,  did  an  unexampled  Convention  want
this  variety  of  destiny,  too,  then  ?  Feraud's  bloody  head  goes
on  a  pike.  Such  a  game  has  begun ;  Paris  and  the  Earth  may
wait  how  it  will  end.^

And  so  it  billows  free  through  all  Corridors ;  within  and  with-
out, far  as  the  eye  reaches,  nothing  but  Bedlam,  and  the  great
Deep  broken  loose  !  President  Boissy  d'Anglas  sits  like  a  rock  :
the  rest  of  the  Convention  is  floated  '  to  the  upper  benches ; '
Sectioners  and  Gendarmes  still  ranking  there  to  form  a  kind  of
wall  for  them.  And  Insurrection  rages ;  rolls  its  drums ;  will
read  its  Paper  of  Grievances,  will  have  this  decreed,  will  have
that.  Covered  sits  President  Boissy;  unyielding;  like  a  rock
in  the  beating  of  seas.  They  menace  him,  level  muskets  at  him,
he  yields  not ;  they  hold  up  Feraud's  bloody  head  to  him,  with
grave  stern  air  he  bows  to  it,  and  yields  not.

And  the  Paper  of  Grievances  cannot  get  itself  read  for  uproar  ;
and  the  drums  roll,  and  the  throats  bawl ;  and  Insurrection,  like
sphere-music,  is  inaudible  for  very  noise :  Decree  us  this.  Decree
us  that.  One  man  we  discern  bawling  ^  for  the  space  of  an  hour
at  all  intervals,'  "  Je  demande  l' arrestation  des  coquins  et  des  laches."
Really  one  of  the  most  comprehensive  Petitions  ever  put  up ;  ^

1  ['  The  people  were  in  a  state  of  starvation  all  the  month  of  May — one  meets  men
'  dropping  of  inanition  in  the  streets.  .  .  .  the  rentiers  almost  as  badly  off  as
*  the  ouvriers  .  .  .  numbers  of  households  live  by  selling  off  their  furniture  .  .  .'
(Schmidt,  ii.  333).  The  Insurrection  of  Prairial  was  also  entirely  a  social  one  like
that  of  Germinal,  but  it  was  carefully  prepared ;  regular  programmes  of  it  were
distributed  and  even  sold  in  the  Faubourg  St.  Antoine  {ibid.  338).  Endless
additional  'grievances'  had  been  added  to  the  Terrorists  since  Germinal,  e.g.,  the
disarming  of  all  persons  who  had  taken  part  in  the  bloodshed  of  the  I'error,  (April
loth) ;  the  new  organisation  of  the  National  Guard  putting  it  once  more  in  the
hands  of  the  bourgeoisie  ;  the  repeal  of  the  law  of  14th  Frimaire  against  the  local
authorities  of  districts  and  Departments ;  above,  all  the  law  of  May  3rd  restoring
all  property  confiscated  since  May  31st  '93  to  the  families  of  the  victims  of  the
Terror.  Thuriot  and  Cambon  had  escaped  from  prison,  and,  with  Goujon  and
Bourbotte,  seem  to  have  been  the  principal  organisers  of  the  Insurrection.  The
Session  of  the  Convention  began  at  11  A.M.  ;  it  was  interrupted  from  the  first  by
women  in  the  galleries,  but  the  actual  arrival  of  the  armed  insurgents  in  the  Hall
was  not  till  4  P.  M. ,  when  F6raud  was  murdered  by  a  pistol  shot  in  trying  to  protect
the  President,  Boissy  d'Anglas.    (Von  Sybel,  iv.  310  sqq.).']

2  [This  charming  story  is  actually  in  the  Moniteur  for  May  24th  (except  that  it
is  half  an  hour,  not  an  hour) :  and  one  man  did  even  better  for  he  shouted  a  de-
mand for  the  "arrest  of  every  one"  L' arrestation  de  tous !  {ibid.)  referring  of
course  to  the  members  of  the  Convention.]


LION  SPRAWLING  ITS  LAST       243

which  indeed,  to  this  hour,  includes  all  that  you  can  reasonably
ask  Constitution  of  the  Year  One,  Rotten-Borough,  Ballot-Box,  or
other  miraculous  Political  Ark  of  the  Covenant  to  do  for  you  to
the  end  of  the  world  !  I  also  demand  arrestment  of  the  Knaves  and
Dastards,  and  nothing  more  whatever. — National  Representation,
deluged  with  black  Sansculottism,  glides  out ;  for  help  elsewhere,
for  safety  elsewhere  ;  here  is  no  help.

About  four  in  the  afternoon,  there  remain  hardly  more  than
some  Sixty  Members :  mere  friends,  or  even  secret-leaders ;  a
remnant  of  the  Mountain-crest,  held  in  silence  by  Thermi-
dorian  thraldom.  Now  is  the  time  for  them ;  now  or  never
let  them  descend,  and  speak !  They  descend,  these  Sixty,  in-
vited by  Sansculottism :  Romme  of  the  New  Calendar,  Ruhl  of
the  Sacred  Phial,  Goujon,  Duquesnoy,  Soubrany,  and  the  rest.
Glad  Sansculottism  forms  a  ring  for  them ;  Romme  takes
the  President's  chair;  they  begin  resolving  and  decreeing.
Fast  enough  now  comes  Decree  after  Decree,  in  alternate  brief
strains,  or  strophe  and  antistrophe, — what  will  cheapen  bread,
what  will  awaken  the  dormant  lion.  And  at  every  new  de-
cree, Sansculottism  shouts  "  Decreed,  decreed ! "  and  rolls  its
drums.

Fast  enough ;  the  work  of  months  in  hours, — when  see,  a
Figure  enters,  whom  in  the  lamp-light  we  recognise  to  be
Legendre ;  and  utters  words :  fit  to  be  hissed  out !  And  then
see.  Section  Lepelletier  or  other  Muscadin  Section  enters,  and
Gilt  Youth,  with  levelled  bayonets,  countenances  screwed  to
the  sticking-place !  Tramp,  tramp,  with  bayonets  gleaming  in
the  lamp-light :  what  can  one  do,  worn  down  with  long  riot,
grown  heartless,  dark,  hungry,  but  roll  back,  but  rush  back,  and
escape  who  can  ?  The  very  windows  need  to  be  thrown  up,
that  Sansculottism  may  escape  fast  enough.  Money-changer
Sections  and  Gilt  Youth  sweep  them  forth,  with  steel  besom,
far  into  the  depths  of  Saint- An toine.  Triumph  once  more !
The  Decrees  of  that  Sixty  are  not  so  much  as  rescinded  ;  they
are  declared  null  and  non-extant.  Romme,  Ruhl,  Goujon  and
the    ringleaders,    some  thirteen   in   all,  are  decreed  Accused.


244        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

Permanent-session  ends  at  three  in  the  morning.^    Sanseulottism,
once  more  flung  resupine,  lies  sprawling ;  sprawling  its  last.

Such  was  the  First  of  Prairial,  20th  of  May  1795.2  Second
and  Third  of  Prairial,  during  which  Sanseulottism  still  sprawled,
and  unexpectedly  rang  its  tocsin,  and  assembled  in  arms,  availed
Sanseulottism  nothing.^  What  though  with  our  Romraes  and
Ruhls,  accused  but  not  yet  arrested,  we  make  a  new  '  True  Na-
tional Convention '  of  our  own,  over  in  the  East ;  and  put  the
others  Out  of  Law  ?  What  though  we  rank  in  arms  and  march  ?
Armed  Force  and  Muscadin  Sections,  some  thirty-thousand  men,
environ  that  old  False  Convention :  we  can  but  bully  one  another ;
bandying  nicknames,  "  Muscadins,"  against  "  Blood-drinkers,
Buveurs  de  Sang."  Feraud's  Assassin,  taken  with  the  red  hand,
and  sentenced,  and  now  near  to  Guillotine  and  Place  de  Greve,
is  retaken ;  is  carried  back  into  Saint -Antoine  : — to  no  purpose.
Convention  Sectionaries  and  Gilt  Youth  come,  according  to
Decree,  to  seek  him  ;  nay  to  disarm  Saint- Antoine !  And  they
do  disarm  it :  by  rolling  of  cannon,  by  springing  upon  enemy's
cannon ;  by  military  audacity,  and  terror  of  the  Law.  Saint-
Antoine  surrenders  its  arms ;  Santerre  even  advising  it,  anxious
for  life  and  brewhouse.  Feraud's  Assassin  flings  himself  from  a
high  roof:  and  all  is  lost.^

1  Deux  Amis,  xiii.  129-46.  [Boissy  did  not  leave  the  chair  till  9  p.m.,  when  the
Montagnard  deputies  forced  Vernier  into  it ;  then  the  '  patriotic  '  motions  were  made
by  Goujon,  Romme  and  Soubrany  ;  by  11  P.M.  the  respectable  Sections  of  the
National  Guard  had  appeared  with  Legendre,  Ch^nier  and  other  Thermidorians  at
their  head.  They  quickly  cleared  the  Hall,  and  Boissy  was  back  in  the  chair  before
midnight.  Thirteen  of  the  leading  Montagnard  deputies  were  arrested  (Von  Sybel,
iv.  312).]

2  [Early  the  next  morning  news  was  brought  that  a  '  Convention  of  the  Sovereign
People '  was  assembling  at  the  Hotel-de-  Ville,  but  by  midday  it  had  retreated  to
Saint- A  ntoine.  Two  attempts  were  made  during  the  day  to  force  a  passage  into  the
Faubourg,  but  the  second  of  these  under  General  Kilmaine  was  driven  back  by  the
mob  to  the  very  gates  of  the  Tuileries.  The  Convention  had  spent  the  day  in  great
trepidation,  passmg  conciliatory  votes  about  hastening  up  corn  supplies,  and  hasten-
ing on  the  New  Constitution  (it  even  had  the  feebleness  to  repeal  its  laws  opening
the  Bourse  and  restoring  the  confiscated  property) ;  but  meanwhile  it  was  sending
expresses  everywhere  for  troops,  and  3,000  cavalry  of  the  Army  of  the  North  were
galloping  towards  Paris  ;  late  at  night  on  21st  a  deputation  of  the  Insurgents  was
received  in  the  Convention  and  beguiled  with  fair  words.  By  the  next  night,  22nd,
there  were  enough  troops  to  force  Saint- Antoine  under  a  threat  of  bombardment  to
yield.  There  was  no  bloodshed  in  the  reprisals  on  Saint- Antoine  :  only  the  assassin
of  F^raud  was  condemned  to  death  (Von  Sybel,  313-4).]

3  [May  2ist — 22nd.]  ^Toulongeon,  v.  247;  Moniteur,  Nos.  244,  5,  6.


GRILLED  HERRINGS  245

Discerning  which  things,  old  Ruhl  shot  a  pistol  through  his
old  white  head  ;  dashed  his  life  in  pieces,  as  he  had  done  the
Sacred  Phial  of  Rheims.  Romme,  Goujon  and  the  others  stand
ranked  before  a  swiftly-appointed,  swift  Military  Tribunal.
Hearing  the  sentence,  Goujon  drew  a  knife,  struck  it  into  his
breast,  passed  it  to  his  neighbour  Romme ;  and  fell  dead.^
Romme  did  the  like  ;  and  another  ail-but  did  it ;  Roman-death
rushing  on  there,  as  in  electric-chain,  before  your  Bailiffs  could
intervene  !     The  Guillotine  had  the  rest.^

They  were  the  Ultimi  Romanomm.  Billaud,  Collot  and  Com-
pany are  now  ordered  to  be  tried  for  life  ;  but  are  found  to  be
already  off,  shipped  for  Sinamarri,  and  the  hot  mud  of  Surinam.
There  let  Billaud  surround  himself  with  flocks  of  tame  parrots  ;
Collot  take  the  yellow  fever,  and  drinking  a  whole  bottle  of
brandy,  burn  up  his  entrails. ^  Sansculottism  sprawls  no  more.
The  dormant  lion  has  become  a  dead  one ;  and  now,  as  we  see,
any  hoof  may  smite  him.

CHAPTER  VI

GRILLED  HERRINGS

So  dies  Sansculottism,  the  body  of  Sansculottism  ;  or  is  changed.
Its  ragged  Pythian  Carmagnole-dance  has  transformed  itself  into
a  Pyrrhic,  into  a  dance  of  Cabarus  Balls.  Sansculottism  is  dead ;
extinguished  by  new  isms  of  that  kind,  which  were  its  own  natural
progeny ;  and  is  buried,  we  may  say,  with  such  deafening  jubila-
tion and  disharmony  of  funeral-knell  on  their  part,  that  only  after
some  half-century  or  so  does  one  begin  to  learn  clearly  why  it
ever  was  alive.

And  yet  a  meaning  lay  in  it :  Sansculottism  verily  was  alive,  a
New-Birth  of  Time  ;  nay  it  still  lives,  and  is  not  dead  but  changed.

i[June  17th,]

2 [A  special  commission  tried  Ruhl,  Romme,  Du  Roy,  Goujon,  Forestier,  Albitte,
Bourbotte,  Duquesnoy,  Soubrany,  Prieur  (de  la  Marne),  and  Peyssard  for  abetting
the  Insurrection.  Peyssard  and  Forestier  were  acquitted,  Albitte  and  Prieur
escaped ;  Ruhl  committed  suicide  before  the  trial ;  the  rest  were  condemned  to
death  :  even  Carnot  and  Lindet  were  in  danger  for  some  days.]

3  Dictionnaire  des  Hommes  Marquans,  §§, Billaud,  Collot,.


246        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

The  soul  of  it  still  lives ;  still  works  far  and  wide,  through  one
bodily  shape  into  another  less  amorphous,  as  is  the  way  of  cun-
ning Time  with  his  New-Births  : — till,  in  some  perfected  shape,
it  embrace  the  whole  circuit  of  the  world !  For  the  wise  man
may  now  everywhere  discern  that  he  must  found  on  his  manhood,
not  on  the  garnitures  of  his  manhood.  He  who,  in  these  Epochs
of  our  Europe,  founds  on  garnitures,  formulas,  culottisms  of  what
sort  soever,  is  founding  on  old  cloth  and  sheepskin,  and  cannot
endure.  But  as  for  the  body  of  Sansculottism,  that  is  dead  and
buried, — and,  one  hopes,  need  not  reappear,  in  primary  amorphous
shape,  for  another  thousand  years.

It  was  the  frightfullest  thing  ever  born  of  Time  }  One  of  the
frightfullest.  This  Convention,  now  grown  Antijacobin,  did,  with
an  eye  to  justify  and  fortify  itself,  publish  Lists  of  what  the  Reign
of  Terror  had  perpetrated :  Lists  of  Persons  Guillotined.  The
Lists,  cries  splenetic  Abbe  Montgaillard,  were  not  complete.
They  contain  the  names  of.  How  many  persons  thinks  the
Reader  } — Two-thousand  all  but  a  few.  There  were  above  Four-
thousand,  cries  Montgaillard :  so  many  were  guillotined,  fusilladed,
noyaded,  done  to  dire  death  ;  of  whom  Nine-hundred  were  women.  ^
It  is  a  horrible  sum  of  human  lives,  M.  TAbbe  : — some  ten  times
as  many  shot  rightly  on  a  field  of  battle,  and  one  might  have  had
his  Glorious- Victory  with  Te  Deum.  It  is  not  far  from  the  two-
hundredth  part  of  what  perished  in  the  entire  Seven- Years  War.
By  which  Seven- Years  War,  did  not  the  great  Fritz  wrench
Silesia  from  the  great  Theresa  ;  and  a  Pompadour,  stung  by  epi-
grams, satisfy  herself  that  she  could  not  be  an  Agnes  Sorel .''  The
head  of  man  is  a  strange  vacant  sounding-shell,  M.  TAbbe ;  and
studies  Cocker  to  small  purpose.

But  what  if  History  somewhere  on  this  Planet  were  to  hear
of  a  Nation,  the  third  soul  of  whom  had  not,  for  thirty  weeks
each  year,  as  many  third-rate  potatoes  as  would  sustain  him  ?  ^
History,  in  that  case,  feels  bound  to  consider  that  starvation  is
starvation ;  that  starvation  from  age  to  age  presupposes  much  ;

1  Montgaillard,  iv.  241.

2  Report  of  the  Irish  Poor-Law  Commission,  1836,


GRILLED  HERRINGS  247

History  ventures  to  assert  that  the  French  Sansculotte  of
Ninety-three,  who,  roused  from  long  death-sleep,  could  rush  at
once  to  the  frontiers,  and  die  fighting  for  an  immortal  Hope  and
Faith  of  Deliverance  for  him  and  his,  was  but  the  second-miser-
ablest  of  men !  The  Irish  Sans-potato,  had  he  not  senses  then,
nay  a  soul !  In  his  frozen  darkness,  it  was  bitter  for  him  to  die
famishing ;  bitter  to  see  his  children  famish.  It  was  bitter  for
him  to  be  a  beggar,  a  liar  and  a  knave.  Nay,  if  that  dreary
Greenland-wind  of  benighted  Want,  perennial  from  sire  to  son,
had  frozen  him  into  a  kind  of  torpor  and  numb  callosity,  so  that
he  saw  not,  felt  not, — was  this,  for  a  creature  with  a  soul  in  it,
some  assuagement ;  or  the  cruellest  wretchedness  of  all  ?

Such  things  were  ;  such  things  are ;  and  they  go  on  in  silence
peaceably  : — and  Sansculottisms  follow  them.  History,  looking
back  over  this  France  through  long  times,  back  to  Turgot's  time
for  instance,  when  dumb  Drudgery  staggered  up  to  its  King's
Palace,  and  in  wide  expanse  of  sallow  faces,  squalor  and  winged
raggedness,  presented  hieroglyphically  its  Petition  of  Grievances  ;
and  for  answer  got  hanged  on  a  'new  gallows  forty  feet  high,' —
confesses  mournfully  that  there  is  no  period  to  be  met  with,  in
which  the  general  Twenty-five  Millions  of  France  suffered  less
than  in  this  period  which  they  name  Reign  of  Terror !  ^  But  it
was  not  the  Dumb  Millions  that  suffered  here  ;  it  was  the  Speak-
ing Thousands,  and  Hundreds  and  Units ;  who  shrieked  and
published,  and  made  the  world  ring  with  their  wail,  as  they
could  and  should:  that  is  the  grand  peculiarity.  The  fright-
fullest  Births  of  Time  are  never  the  loud-speaking  ones,  for  these
soon  die ;  they  are  the  silent  ones,  which  can  live  from  century
to  century !  Anarchy,  hateful  as  Death,  is  abhorrent  to  the
whole  nature  of  man ;  and  so  must  itself  soon  die.

Wherefore  let  all  men  know  what  of  depth  and  of  height  is
still  revealed  in  man;  and,  with  fear  and  wonder,  with  just
sympathy  and  just  antipathy,  with  clear  eye  and  open   heart,

i[The  presumption  that  the  Twenty-five  Millions  were  better  off  during  the
anarchic  period  than  ever  before  is  of  course  a  mere  assumption,  which  all
evidence  utterly  refutes  ;  but  it  is  an  assumption  which  underlies  the  whole  of  Carlyle'5
book.]


248        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

contemplate  it  and  appropriate  it ;  and  draw  innumerable  in-
ferences from  it.  This  inference,  for  example,  among  the  first :
That  '  if  the  gods  of  this  lower  world  will  sit  on  their  glittering
'thrones,  indolent  as  Epicurus'  gods,  with  the  living  Chaos  of
'  Ignorance  and  Hunger  weltering  uncared-for  at  their  feet,  and
'smooth  Parasites  preaching.  Peace,  peace,  when  there  is  no
'  peace,'  then  the  dark  Chaos,  it  would  seem,  will  rise  ; — has  risen,
and  O  Heavens !  has  it  not  tanned  their  skins  into  breeches  for
itself?  That  there  be  no  second  Sansculottism  in  our  Earth  for
a  thousand  years,  let  us  understand  well  what  the  first  was ;  and
let  Rich  and  Poor  of  us  go  and  do  otherwise. — But  to  our  tale.

The  Muscadin  Sections  greatly  rejoice  ;  Cabarus  Balls  gyrate  :
the  well-nigh  insoluble  problem.  Republic  without  Anarchy,  have  we
not  solved  it  ? — Law  of  Fraternity  or  Death  is  gone  :  chimerical
Ohtain-who-need  has  become  practical  Hold-who-have,  To  anarchic
Republic  of  the  Poverties  there  has  succeeded  orderly  Republic
of  the  Luxuries  ;  which  will  continue  as  long  as  it  can.

On  the  Pont  au  Change,  on  the  Place  de  Greve,  in  long  sheds,
Mercier,  in  these  summer  evenings,  saw  working  men  at  their
repast.  One's  allotment  of  daily  bread  has  sunk  to  an  ounce
and  a  half  '  Plates  containing  each  three  grilled  herrings,
'sprinkled  with  shorn  onions,  wetted  with  a  little  vinegar;  to
'  this  add  some  morsel  of  boiled  prunes,  and  lentils  swimming
'  in  a  clear  sauce :  at  these  frugal  tables,  the  cook's  gridiron
'  hissing  near  by,  and  the  pot  simmering  on  a  fire  between  two
'  stones,  I  have  seen  them  ranged  by  the  hundred ;  consuming,
'without  bread,  their  scant  messes,  far  too  moderate  for  the
'keenness  of  their  appetite,  and  the  extent  of  their  stomach.'  ^
Seine  water,  rushing  plenteous  by,  will  supply  the  deficiency.

O  Man  of  Toil,  thy  struggling  and  thy  daring,  these  six  long
years  of  insurrection  and  tribulation,  thou  hast  profited  nothing
by  it  then?  Thou  consumest  thy  herring  and  water,  in  the
blessed  gold-red  evening.  O  why  was  the  Earth  so  beautiful,
becrimsoned  with  dawn  and  twilight,  if  man's  dealings  with  man

iNouveau  Paris,  iv.  ii8.


THE  WHIFF  OF  GRAPESHOT       249

were  to  make  it  a  vale  of  scarcity,  of  tears,  not  even  soft  tears  ?
Destroying  of  Bastilles,  discomfiting  of  Brunswicks,  fronting  of
Principalities  and  Powers,  of  Earth  and  Tophet,  all  that  thou
hast  dared  and  endured, — it  was  for  a  Republic  of  the  Cabarus
Saloons  ?  Patience ;  thou  must  have  patience :  the  end  is  not
yet.

CHAPTER  VII

THE  WHIFF  OF  GRAPESHOT

In  fact,  what  can  be  more  natural,  one  may  say  inevitable,  as  a
Post-Sansculottic  transitionary  state,  than  even  this  ?  Confused
wreck  of  a  Republic  of  the  Poverties,  which  ended  in  Reign  of
Terror,  is  arranging  itself  into  such  composure  as  it  can.  Evangel
of  Jean-Jacques,  and  most  other  Evangels,  becoming  incredible,
what  is  there  for  it  but  return  to  the  old  Evangel  of  Mammon  ?
Contrat- Social  is  true  or  untrue.  Brotherhood  is  Brotherhood  or
Death ;  but  money  always  will  buy  money's  worth :  in  the
wreck  of  human  dubitations,  this  remains  indubitable,  that
Pleasure  is  pleasant.  Aristocracy  of  Feudal  Parchment  has
passed  away  with  a  mighty  rushing ;  and  now,  by  a  natural
course,  we  arrive  at  Aristocracy  of  the  Moneybag.  It  is  the
course  through  which  all  European  Societies  are,  at  this  hour,
travelling.  Apparently  a  still  baser  sort  of  Aristocracy }  An
infinitely  baser  ;  the  basest  yet  known.

In  which,  however,  there  is  this  advantage,  that,  like  Anarchy
itself,  it  cannot  continue.  Hast  thou  considered  how  Thought  is
stronger  than  Artillery-parks,  and  (were  it  fifty  years  after  death
and  martyrdom,  or  were  it  two  thousand  years)  writes  and  un-
writes  Acts  of  Parliament,  removes  mountains ;  models  the
World  like  soft  clay  }  Also  how  the  beginning  of  all  Thought,
worth  the  name,  is  Love  ;  and  the  wise  head  never  yet  was,
without  first  the  generous  heart  ?  The  Heavens  cease  not  their
bounty ;  they  send  us  generous  hearts  into  every  generation.
And  now  what  generous  heart  can  pretend  to  itself,  or  be
hoodwinked  into  believing,  that  Loyalty  to  the  Moneybag  is  a


250        THE  FRENCH  EEVOLUTION

noble  Loyalty  ?  Mammon,  cries  the  generous  heart  out  of  all
ages  and  countries,  is  the  basest  of  known  Gods,  even  of  known
Devils.  In  him  what  glory  is  there,  that  ye  should  worship  him  ?
No  glory  discernible ;  not  even  terror :  at  best,  detestability,
ill-matched  with  despicability ! — Generous  hearts,  discerning,  on
this  hand,  wide-spread  Wretchedness,  dark  without  and  within,
moistening  its  ounce-and-half  of  bread  with  tears ;  and,  on  that
hand,  mere  Balls  in  flesh-coloured  drawers,  and  inane  or  foul
glitter  of  such  sort, — cannot  but  ejaculate,  cannot  but  announce  :
Too  much,  O  divine  Mammon  ;  somewhat  too  much  ! — The  voice
of  these,  once  announcing  itself,  carries  fiat  and  pereat  in  it,  for
all  things  here  below.

Meanwhile  we  will  hate  Anarchy  as  Death,  which  it  is ;  and
the  things  worse  than  Anarchy  shall  be  hated  more.  Surely
Peace  alone  is  fruitful.  Anarchy  is  destruction ;  a  burning  up,
say,  of  Shams  and  Insupportabilities ;  but  which  leaves  Vacancy
behind.  Know  this  also,  that  out  of  a  world  of  Unwise  nothing
but  an  Unwisdom  can  be  made.  Arrange  it,  constitution-build
it,  sift  it  through  ballot-boxes  as  thou  wilt,  it  is  and  remains  an
Unwisdom, — the  new  prey  of  new  quacks  and  unclean  things,
the  latter  end  of  it  slightly  better  than  the  beginning.  Who
can  bring  a  wise  thing  out  of  men  unwise  ?  Not  one.  And  so
Vacancy  and  general  Abolition  having  come  for  this  France,
what  can  Anarchy  do  more  ?  Let  there  be  Order,  were  it  under
the  Soldier's  Sword ;  let  there  be  Peace,  that  the  bounty  of  the
Heavens  be  not  spilt ;  that  what  of  Wisdom  they  do  send  us
bring  fruit  in  its  season  ! — It  remains  to  be  seen  how  the  quellers
of  Sansculottism  were  themselves  quelled,  and  sacred  right  of
Insurrection  was  blown  away  by  gunpowder ;  wherewith  this
singular  eventful  History  called  French  Revolution  ends.

The  Convention,  driven  such  a  course  by  wild  wind,  wild  tide,
and  steerage  and  non-steerage,  these  three  years,  has  become
weary  of  its  own  existence,  sees  all  men  weary  of  it  ;  and  wishes
heartily  to  finish.  To  the  last,  it  has  to  strive  with  contradictions :
it  is  now  getting  fast  ready  with  a  Constitution,  yet  knows  no


THE  WHIFF  OF  GEAPESHOT       251

peace.     Sieyes,  we  say,  is  making  the  Constitution  once  more ;
has   as  good  as  made  it.^     Warned  by  experience,  the  great

1  [Siey^s'  share  in  the  Constitution  of  the  year  III.  was  in  fact  far  less  than  in  that
of  1791  ;  yet  this  seems  to  be  the  place  to  attempt  some  further  summary  of  his  posi-
tion during  the  Revolution.  While  almost  every  other  great  figure  of  the  Revolution
has  its  monograph,  Sieyes  has  had  none  or  as  gqod  as  none  devoted  to  him,  for  his
own  *  Notice  sur  la  Vie  et  les  Travaux  de  Sieyes,  Ecrite  par  lui-meme '  (Messidor,  I'an
II. )  is,  from  its  date,  necessarily  incomplete.  Now  Sieyes  seems  to  be  one  of  the  most
important  persons,  yet  his  personality  escapes  one.  To  him  more  than  to  any  one
else  is  due  the  tabula  rasa  made  of  the  past,  the  contempt  for  the  realities  of  history,
yet  to  him  also  many  of  the  Civil  Institutions  which  remain  till  to-day.  To  him
too  came  the  decision  at  several  critical  moments,  e.g.^  his  pamphlets  of  1788  ;  June
17th  '89;  June  23rd  '89;  Jan.  21st  '93  (for  it  is  most  probable  that  the  Marais
would  have  followed  him,  had  he  voted  against  the  King's  death)  ;  to  him  perhaps
a  little  of  this  Directorial  Constitution,  and  the  decrees  of  August '95  ;  finally  to
him  the  acceptance  of  the  Coup  d Atat  of  Brumaire  and  most  of  the  Constitution
of  the  year  VIII.  Yet  withal,  the  man  does  not  seem  real ;  he  is,  as  M.  Aulard
wittily  says,  "  an  incomplete  syllogism  :  "  all  men  are  to  him  ciphers,  'economic
men,  whose  passions  need  not  be  taken  into  account ;  when  for  a  while  they  get  out
of  hand  and  refuse  to  listen  to  his  oracles,  sua  virtute  se  involvit,  and  feels  sure  that
they  will  ask  his  counsel  by  and  by.  Napoleon,  in  whose  government  he  entirely
acquiesced,  found  out  his  weak  point,  avarice  ;  but  lauded  his  probity.  ^  He  had
probably  committed  enough  infamy  during  the  early  years  of  the  Revolution,  if  the
reports  (consistent  but  not  entirely  confirmed)  are  true  that  he  backed  up  Brissot
and  Mme  Roland  in  the  summer  of  '92  {see  Von  Sybel,  L  378-9),  or  that  he  gave
much  secret  counsel  to  Robespierre  during  the  Red  Terror  :  see  Dropmore  papers
(Hist.  MSS.  Commission,  14th  Report,  Appx.  Part  v.  1894).  Cf.  also  my  note
supra,  i.  148.

The  Constitutional  Committee  was  formed  on  April  23rd  in  consequence  of  a
report  of  Cambac^res  on  i8th  on  the  means  of  carrying  out  the  resolution  of  March
2ist  (fzV/.  jz^/r.,iii.236).  Three  of  those  elected  on  it  (Sieyes,  Cambac^res,  and  Merlin
of  Douay)  refused  to  sit ;  and  the  Committee  comprised  Thibaudeau,  Larevelliere,
Lesage,  Boissy  d'Anglas,  Creuze-La-Touche,  Louvet,  Daunou,  Berlier,  Lanjuinais,
Durand-Maillane,  Baudin  :  of  these  some  four  were  really  Royalists  at  heart,  and
would  have  liked  to  put  Louis  XVII.  in  the  Presidential  chair  of  a  nominal  Re-
public ;  but  the  boy's  death  prevented  that,  and  no  serious  schemes  were  pro-
pounded till  the  end  of  June,  when  on  23rd  Boissy  d'Anglas  brought  forward  the
first  report.  The  debate  on  this  report  lasted  three  weeks.  The  main  principles
may  thus  be  summed  up  : —

(i.)  Separation  of  executive  and  legislative  to  be  complete.

(ii.)  Property  qualification  for  franchise  and  for  all  offices.

(iii. )  Simplification  of  local  government  by  abolishing  districts  and  (except  in
purely  rural  localities)  cantons ;  the  Department  to  be  the  mainspring,  and  the
Commune  to  be  subordinated  entirely  to  that;  much  greater  centralisation  of
power  than  in  1791.

(iv.)  Two  chambers  each  with  an  age  qualification  :  the  Council  of  Five  Hundred
one  of  30  years,  the  Council  of  '  Ancients '  one  of  40.

(v.)  Quadrennial  Chambers,  renewable  by  halves  every  two  years.

(vi.)  Executive  of  five  elected  by  the  Chambers.

The  principal  discussions  took  place  on  the  shape  of  the  Executive  power  ;  the
Royalists  would  all  have  preferred  a  President  to  the  five  directors  ;  but  Sorel  (iv.
37S)  well  points  out  that  the  Directory  was  the  natural  child  of  the  ComiU  de  Salut
Public :  it  was  the  making  of  that  Committee  into  a  permanent  Executive.  The
great  difference  however  between  the  Constitution  of  the  Year  III.  and  the  previous
efforts  Ues  in  the  careful  safeguards  provided  here  for  individual  rights  and  opinions
and  properties  ; — as  we  should  say  in  England,  the  distinction  is  drawn  for  the  first
time  between  "Common-law  rights"  and  "Political  rights."     The  best  criticism


252        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Architect  alters  much,  admits  much.  Distinction  of  Active  and
Passive  Citizen,  that  is,  Money-quaUfication  for  Electors :  nay
Two  Chambers,  '  Council  of  Ancients,'  as  well  as  '  Council  of
Five-hundred ; '  to  that  conclusion  have  we  come !  In  a  like
spirit,  eschewing  that  fatal  self-denying  ordinance  of  your  Old
Constituents,  we  enact  not  only  that  actual  Convention  Members
are  re-eligible,  but  that  Two-thirds  of  them  must  be  re-elected.^
The  Active  Citizen  Electors  shall  for  this  time  have  free  choice
of  only  One-third  of  their  National  Assembly.  Such  enactment,
of  Two-thirds  to  be  re-elected,  we  append  to  our  Constitution ;
we  submit  our  Constitution  to  the  Townships  of  France,  and  say.
Accept  both,  or  reject  both.  Unsavoury  as  this  appendix  may
be,  the  Townships,  by  overwhelming  majority,  accept  and  ratify.
With  Directory  of  Five ;  with  Two  good  Chambers,  double-
majority  of  them  nominated  by  ourselves,  one  hopes  this  Con-
stitution may  prove  final.  March  it  will ;  for  the  legs  of  it,  the
re-elected  Two-thirds,  are  already  here,  able  to  march.  Sieyes
looks  at  his  paper- fabric  with  just  pride.^

But  now  see  how  the  contumacious  Sections,  Lepelletier  fore-
most, kick  against  the  pricks !     Is  it  not  manifest  infraction  of

of  the  Constitution  is  to  be  found  in  Duvergier  de  Hauranne,  vol.  i.  cap.  vi.  :  and
the  Constitution  may  be  seen  at  length  in  H^lie,  Les  Constitutions  de  la  France,
vol.  i.  p.  436.  On  Aug,  17th  the  Constitution  was  read  over  a  second  time  and
pronounced  complete  ;  the  subsequent  discussions  were  all  on  the  time  and
method  of  bringing  it  into  force.]

^  [Aug.  22nd — 30th.  It  was  in  Baudin's  report  on  Aug.  i8th  that  the  proposal
was  made  that  two-thirds  of  the  new  Chambers  should  be  chosen  from  the  Con-
vention ;  after  a  debate  of  four  days,  as  to  whether  this  choice  should  be  made  by
lot,  or  by  vote  of  the  Convention,  or  by  a  special  Commission,  or  by  the  PClectors,
it  was  decided,  on  Aug.  22nd,  that  it  should  be  done  by  the  Electors.  This  was
ratified  on  Aug.  30th,  and  these  are  the  two  celebrated  'decrees  of  Fructidor,'
against  which  the  insurrection  of  13th  Venddmiaire  took  place.  It  is  obvious  that
such  measures  were  simply  dictated  in  the  interest  of  the  lives  or  property  of  the
Republican  majority  of  the  Convention.  France  was  royalist  in  spite  of  the
Afnigr^s,  and  free  elections  would  have  been  followed  by  some  sort  of  restoration  of
Monarchy.  It  is  interesting  to  compare  with  these  decrees  the  proposal  of  Sir
Henry  Vane's  committee  in  the  Long  Parliament,  first  mooted  in  1650,  that  new
elections  should  be  made  to  the  vacant  seats  only,  but  that  the  sitting  members
should  retain  their  seats.  Cromwell  proved  in  the  spring  of  1653  more  fortunate
against  this  parliamentary  tyranny  than  the  insurgents  of  Vend^miaire  against  the
similar  proposal  of  the  Conventions.

2  [On  Sept.  23rd  the  Convention  registered  the  acceptance  of  the  Constitution  by
914,000  votes  out  of  958,000  given  in  the  Primary  Assemblies;  but  the  "decrees
of  the  two-thirds  "  were  only  accepted  by  167,000  out  of  263,000,  a  significant  drop
in  the  "government  majority."    (Sorel,  iv.  438.)]


THE  WHIFF  OF  GRAPESHOT       253

one's  Elective  Franchise,  Rights  of  Man,  and  Sovereignty  of  the
People,  this  appendix  of  re-electing  ymir  Two-thirds  ?  Greedy
tyrants  who  would  perpetuate  yourselves ! — For  the  truth  is,
victory  over  Saint- Antoine,  and  long  right  of  Insurrection,  has
spoiled  these  men.  Nay  spoiled  all  men.  Consider  too  how
each  man  was  free  to  hope  what  he  liked  ;  and  now  there  is  to
be  no  hope,  there  is  to  be  fruition,  fruition  of  this.

In  men  spoiled  by  long  right  of  Insurrection,  what  confused
ferments  will  rise,  tongues  once  begun  wagging !  Journalists
declaim,  your  Lacretelles,  Laharpes  ;  Orators  spout.  There  is
Royalism  traceable  in  it,  and  Jacobinism.^  On  the  West  Frontier,
in  deep  secrecy,  Pichegru,  durst  he  trust  his  Army,  is  treating
with  Conde :  in  these  Sections,  there  spout  wolves  in  sheep's
clothing,  masked  Emigrants  and  Royalists.  ^  All  men,  as  we
say,  had  hoped,  each  that  the  Election  would  do  something  for
his  own  side  :  and  now  there  is  no  Election,  or  only  the  third  of
one.  Black  is  united  with  white  against  this  clause  of  the
Two-thirds ;  all  the  Unruly  of  France,  who  see  their  trade
thereby  near  ending.

Section  Lepelletier,  after  Addresses  enough,  finds  that  such
clause  is  a  manifest  infraction ;  that  it,  Lepelletier,  for  one,  will

1  [We  must  carefully  distinguish  between  the  moderate  Royalism  of  the  central
Sections  of  Paris,  a  Royalism  entirely  opposed  to  all  the  plans  of  the  llmigrds,  and
to  the  non-possumus  attitude  of  Louis  XVIII.,  and  the  schemes  of  Pichegru
mentioned  in  the  next  note  which  were*to  promote  an  unconditional  restoration  of
the  exiled  King,  which  at  this  time  would  simply  have  meant  the  Ancien  Rigime,
and  unlimited  vengeance.  The  misfortune  of  the  first  kind  of  Royalism,  led  by  such
men  as  Dupont  de  Nemours  and  Morellet  outside,  and  by  Boissy  d'Anglas  inside
the  Convention,  was  that  they  had  no  King  to  bring  forward  :  they  were  therefore
willing  to  accept  any  form  of  government  freely  chosen  by  the  people  of  France,
provided  honourable  men  were  in  the  van  of  it,  and  to  live  in  hopes  that  Louis
XVIII.  would  change  his  mind,  throw  over  the  lijnigrds,  and  accept  a  constitution  at
no  very  distant  date.  But  the  decrees  of  Fructidor  showed  the  manifest  intention
of  the  Republican  majority  to  prevent  this  at  all  costs.]

2  Napoleon,  Las  Cases  (in  Choix  des  Rapports,  xvii.  389-411).  [Pichegru,  cun-
ning and  mistrustful,  undecided  and  yet  obstinate,  allowed  himself  to  be  led,  from
merely  sordid  motives,  by  the  stupidest  of  the  Royalist  agents.  It  was  Fauche-
Borel  who  proposed  to  him  the  union  of  his  army  with  that  of  Cond^  for  the
restoration  of  Louis  XVIII.  Pichegru,  however,  insisted  upon  an  autograph  letter
from  Cond6,  whose  movements  were  as  keenly  watched  by  the  Austrians  as  Piche-
gru's  were  by  the  Republicans  of  Alsace.  The  threads  of  the  whole  scheme  fell
into  the  hands  of  Wiirmser,  who  informed  Thugut,  who  most  characteristically
betrayed  Pichegru  to  the  French  Directory,  which  deprived  him  of  his  command.
(Forneron,  ii.  205,  sqq.)}


254        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

simply  not  conform  thereto ;  and  invites  all  other  free  Sections
to  join  it,  '  in  central  Committee/  in  resistance  to  oppression.^
The  Sections  join  it,  nearly  all ;  strong  with  their  Forty- thousand
fighting  men.  The  Convention  therefore  may  look  to  itself!
Lepelletier,  on  this  12th  day  of  Vendemiaire,  4th  of  October
1795,  is  sitting  in  open  contravention,  in  its  Convent  of  Filles
Saint-Thomas,  Rue  Vivienne,  with  guns  primed.  The  Convention
has  some  Five-thousand  regular  troops  at  hand ;  Generals  in
abundance ;  and  a  Fifteen-hundred  of  miscellaneous  persecuted
Ultra-Jacobins,  whom  in  this  crisis  it  has  hastily  got  together
and  armed,  under  the  title  Patriots  of  Eighty-nine.  Strong  in
Law,  it  sends  its  General  Menou  to  disarm  Lepelletier.^

General  Menou  marches  accordingly,  with  due  summons  and
demonstration ;  with  no  result.  General  Menou,  about  eight  in
the  evening,  finds  that  he  is  standing  ranked  in  the  Rue  Vivienne,
emitting  vain  summonses ;  with  primed  guns  pointed  out  of
every  window  at  him  ;  and  that  he  cannot  disarm  Lepelletier.
He  has  to  return,  with  whole  skin,  but  without  success ;  and  be
thrown  into  arrest,  as  'a.  traitor.'  Whereupon  the  whole  Forty-
thousand  join  this  Lepelletier  which  cannot  be  vanquished :  to
what  hand  shall  a  quaking  Convention  now  turn?  Our  poor
Convention,  after  such  voyaging,  just  entering  harbour,  so  to
speak,  has  struck  on  the  bar  ; — and  labours  there  frightfully,  with

1  Deux  Amis,  xiii.  375-406.

2  [The  Convention  showed  the  weakness  of  its  position  early  in  August  by  draw-
ing to  Paris  detachments  from  all  the  armies :  preparing  in  fact  to  defend  its
Coup  cVAtat  by  force,  as  it  had  been  beheved  that  the  Court  had  prepared  in  July  '89  :
as  early  as  Aug.  28th  petitions  had  been  presented  to  the  Convention  against  the
increase  of  troops.  The  troops  were  to  be  depended  upon  just  so  much  as  they
believed  the  Insurgents  to  be  pure  Royalists  and  in  league  with  the  Amigrds :  they
had  fought  under  the  Tricolor,  and  were  by  this  time  attached  to  the  name  of
'  Republic ' — but  not  by  any  means  attached  to  the  Convention  :  the  Insurrection
actually  began  on  Oct.  3rd,  when  the  Section  Lepelletier  summoned  a  meeting  of
all  the  Sections,  and,  on  the  morning  of  4th,  44  out  of  the  48  sections  were  in  full
revolt  against  the  decrees  of  Fructidor,  disposing  in  all  of  some  30,000  National
Guards,  but  without  artillery.  The  Baron  de  Menou,  an  officer  of  the  old  army,
who  had  sat  in  States-General  for  the  Noblesse  of  Touraine  (and  who  subse-
quently served  every  Government  till  his  death,  1810,  even  becoming  a  Mussulman,
at  the  close  of  the  expedition  to  Egypt),  was  not  a  traitor  at  all ;  but  he  shrank  from
the  task  of  shooting  down  the  respectable  citizens  of  Paris.  It  was  Barras  who
suggested  calling  on  the  dregs  of  the  Terrorists  or  "  Patriots  of  '89  "  (the  true
patriots  of  '89  were  all  on  the  other  side),  which  of  course  only  made  the  respectable
Sections  determined  to  fight  to  the  death.]


THE  WHIFF  OF  GRAPESHOT       255

breakers  roaring  round  it,  Forty-thousand  of  them,  like  to  wash
it,  and  its  Siey^s  Cargo  and  the  whole  future  of  France,  into  the
deep !     Yet  one  last  time  it  struggles,  ready  to  perish.

Some  call  for  Barras  to  be  made  Commandant ;  he  conquered
in  Thermidor.  Some,  what  is  more  to  the  purpose,  bethink
them  of  the  Citizen  Buonaparte,  unemployed  Artillery-Officer,
who  took  Toulon.  A  man  of  head,  a  man  of  action  :  Barras  is
named  Commandant's -CI  oak ;  this  young  Artillery-Officer  is
named  Commandant.  He  was  in  the  Gallery  at  the  moment,
and  heard  it;  he  withdrew,  some  half-hour,  to  consider  with
himself:  after  a  half-hour  of  grim  compressed  considering,  to
be  or  not  to  be,  he  answers   Yea.

And  now,  a  man  of  head  being  at  the  centre  of  it,  the  whole
matter  gets  vital.  Swift,  to  Camp  of  Sablons ;  to  secure  the
Artillery,  there  are  not  twenty  men  guarding  it !  A  swift
Adjutant,  Murat  is  the  name  of  him,  gallops;  gets  thither  some
minutes  within  time,  for  Lepelletier  was  also  on  march  that
way :  the  Cannon  are  ours.  And  now  beset  this  post,  and  beset
that ;  rapid  and  firm :  at  Wicket  of  the  Louvre,  in  Cul-de-sac
Dauphin,  in  Rue  Saint-Honore,  from  Pont-Neuf  all  along  the
north  Quays,  southward  to  Pont  ci-devanl  Royal, — rank  round
the  Sanctuary  of  the  Tuileries,  a  ring  of  steel  discipline ;  let
every  gunner  have  his  match  burning,  and  all  men  stand  to
their  arms !  ^

Thus  there  is  Permanent -session  through  the  night ;  and  thus
at  sunrise  of  the  moiTow,  there  is  seen  sacred  Insurrection  once
again :  vessel  of  State  labouring  on  the  bar ;  and  tumultuous
sea  all  round  her,'^  beating  generate,  arming  and  sounding, — not

1  [The  Convention  appointed  a  Commission  of  five  members  to  concert  plans
for  its  defence,  of  whom  Barras  was  one  (night  of  Oct.  4th— 5th) ;  but  Barras  had
already  on  the  night  of  3rd  sent  for  Buonaparte  to  come  to  see  him  early  on  4th.
Napoleon  afterwards  told  a  beautifully  circumstantial  lie  on  the  subject  to  Mme
de  R^musat  {see  her  M^moires,  i.  269),  attributing  his  selection  to  chance  (or,  as  he
would  have  it,  'to  his  star  of  destiny')  on  the  early  morning  of  5th  ;  but  there  is
no  foundation  for  this  [see  Fournier,  i.  66).  Nor  is  there  any  better  foundation  for
the  story,  repeated  by  Carlyle  from  the  Memorial  de  Saint- H^lene,  that  he  hesitated
for  half  an  hour  before  accepting.  'I'he  story  of  Murat  fetching  the  cannon  is,  how-
ever, true ;  the  cannon  were  at  Meudon  (Fournier,  i.  67).]

2[Oct.  sth.]


256        THE  FEENCH  EEVOLUTION

ringing  tocsin,  ^  for  we  have  left  no  tocsin  but  our  own  in  the
Pavilion  of  Unity.  It  is  an  imminence  of  shipwreck,  for  the
whole  world  to  gaze  at.  Frightfully  she  labours,  that  poor
ship,  within  cable-length  of  port ;  huge  peril  for  her.  However,
she  has  a  man  at  the  helm.  Insurgent  messages,  received  and
not  received ;  messenger  admitted  blindfolded ;  counsel  and
counter- counsel :  the  poor  ship  labours! — Vendemiaire  13th,
year  4:  curious  enough,  of  all  days,  it  is  the  fourth  day  of
October,  eve  of  the  anniversary  of  that  Menad-raarch,  six  years
ago ;  by  sacred  right  of  Insurrection  we  are  got  thus  far.

Lepelletier  has  seized  the  Church  of  Saint- Roch ;  has  seized
the  Pont-Neuf,  our  piquet  there  retreating  without  fire.  Stray
shots  fall  from  Lepelletier ;  rattle  down  on  the  very  Tuileries
Staircase. 2  On  the  other  hand,  women  advance  dishevelled,
shrieking.  Peace ;  Lepelletier  behind  them  waving  its  hat  in
sign  that  we  shall  fraternise.  Steady!  The  Artillery-Officer
is  steady  as  bronze  ;  can,  if  need  were,  be  quick  as  lightning.
He  sends  eight-hundred  muskets  with  ball-cartridges  to  the
Convention  itself;  honourable  Members  shall  act  with  these  in
case  of  extremity :  whereat  they  look  grave  enough.  Four  of
the  afternoon  is  struck.  ^  Lepelletier,  making  nothing  by  mes-
sengers, by  fraternity  or  hat-waving,  bursts  out,  along  the
Southern  Quai  Voltaire,  along  streets  and  passages,  treble-quick,
in  huge  veritable  onslaught !  Whereupon,  thou  bronze  Artillery-
Officer —  ?  "  Fire  !  "  say  the  bronze  lips.  And  roar  and  thunder,
roar  and  again  roar,  continual,  volcano-like,  goes  his  great  gun,
in  the  Cul-de-sac  Dauphin  against  the  Church  of  Saint- Roch ;
go  his  great  guns  on  the  Pont- Royal ;  go  all  his  great  guns ; —
blow  to  air  some  two-hundred  men,  mainly  about  the  Church
of  Saint- Roch !      Lepelletier  cannot  stand  such  horse-play ;  no

1  [The  Sectionaries  had  chosen  an  incapable  General,  Danican,  to  command
them,  and  it  had  been  a  fatal  mistake  on  their  part  not  to  advance  on  the  night  of
4th  ;  when  they  did  advance  on  the  afternoon  of  5th  it  was  too  late.  (Von  Sybel,  iv.
423-4-)]

2  [No  one  knows  who  fired  the  first  shots :  it  is  more  probable  that  they  came
from  the  Convention  side,  as  the  Sectionaries  had  no  need  to  fire  while  they  could
advance  unchecked.     (Von  Sybel,  iv.  424. )]

5  Moniteur,  Stance  du  5  Octobre  1795.


THE  WHIFF  OF  GRAPESHOT       257

Sectioner  can  stand  it ;  the  Forty-thousand  yield  on  all  sides,
scour  towards  covert.  '  Some  hundred  or  so  of  them  gathered
'about  the  Theatre  de  la  Republique;  but/  says  he,  'a  few
'shells  dislodged  them.     It  was  all  finished  at  six.'

The  Ship  is  over  the  bar,  then  ;  free  she  bounds  shoreward, —
amid  shouting  and  vivats !  Citoyen  Buonaparte  is  '  named
General  of  the  Interior,  by  acclamation  ; '  quelled  Sections  have
to  disarm  in  such  humour  as  they  may :  sacred  right  of  Insurrec-
tion is  gone  forever  !  The  Sieyes  Constitution  can  disembark
itself,  and  begin  marching.  The  miraculous  Convention  Ship
has  got  to  land  ; — and  is  there,  shall  we  figuratively  say,  changed,
as  Epic  Ships  are  wont,  into  a  kind  of  Sea  Nymph,  never  to  sail
more ;  to  roam  the  waste  Azure,  a  Miracle  in  History !

'It  is  false,'  says  Napoleon,  'that  we  fired  first  with  blank
'  charge  ;  it  had  been  a  waste  of  life  to  do  that.'  Most  false  :
the  firing  was  with  sharp  and  sharpest  shot :  to  all  men  it  was
plain  that  here  was  no  sport ;  the  rabbets  and  plinths  of  Saint-
Roch  Church  show  splintered  by  it  to  this  hour. — Singular :  in
old  Broglie's  time,  six  years  ago,  this  Whiff  of  Grapeshot  was
promised ;  but  it  could  not  be  given  then ;  could  not  have
profited  then.i  Now,  however,  the  time  is  come  for  it,  and  the
man ;  and  behold,  you  have  it ;  and  the  thing  we  specifically
call  French  Revolution  is  blown  into  space  by  it,  and  become  a
thing  that  was  ! — ^

i[This  again  is  an  assumption  which  underlies  the  whole  of  Carlyle's  book,  and
one  which  I  entirely  decline  to  accept.]

2['  C(fsar  viendra,'  wrote  the  great  Catherine  as  far  back  as  1791.  *  //  vietidra,
gardez-vous  d^en  dotiter  ; '  and  in  1794  she  wrote,  "  If  France  escapes  from  this  "  (the
Terror)  "  she  will  be  more  vigorous  than  ever  ;  and  as  obedient  as  a  lamb,  if  she
"can  find  some  man  of  genius  and  courage,  a  head  and  shoulders  above  his  con-
"  temporaries,  above  his  century.  Is  he  born  yet?"  (Cath.  Corresp.  avec  Grimm,
Jan.  '91,  Feb.  '94,  quoted  in  Sorel,  iv,  472.)

And  M.  Sorel's  own  great  work  ends  with  the  words,  "  The  Convention,  in  its
fears  of  raising  up  a  Cromwell,  or  paving  the  way  for  a  Monk,  marked  out  the
path  for  a  Caesar."     Veritably  Napoleon  was  "  Ni  Monk,  ni  Cromwell,  C^sar."\


VOL.    III.  17


258        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

CHAPTER  VIII

FINIS

Homer's  Epos,  it  is  remarked,  is  like  a  Bas-Relief  sculpture  :  it
does  not  conclude,  but  merely  ceases.  Such,  indeed,  is  the  Epos
of  Universal  History  itself.  Directorates,  Consulates,  Emperor-
ships, Restorations,  Citizen- Kingships  succeed  this  Business  in
due  series,  in  due  genesis  one  out  of  the  other.  Nevertheless
the  First-parent  of  all  these  may  be  said  to  have  gone  to  air  in
the  way  we  see.  A  Baboeuf  Insurrection,  next  year,  will  die  in
the  birth ;  stifled  by  the  Soldiery.  A  Senate,  if  tinged  with
Royalism,  can  be  purged  by  the  Soldiery ;  and  an  Eighteenth
of  Fructidor  transacted  by  the  mere  show  of  bayonets.^  Nay
Soldiers'  bayonets  can  be  used  a  posterioii  on  a  Senate,  and
make  it  leap  out  of  window, — still  bloodless ;  and  produce  an
Eighteenth  of  Brumaire.^  Such  changes  must  happen  :  but  they
are  managed  by  intriguings,  caballings,  and  then  by  orderly  word
of  command ;  almost  like  mere  changes  of  Ministry.  Not  in
general  by  sacred  right  of  Insurrection,  but  by  milder  methods
growing  ever  milder,  shall  the  events  of  French  History  be
henceforth  brought  to  pass.

It  is  admitted  that  this  Directorate,  which  owned,  at  its  start-
ing, these  three  things,  an  '  old  table,  a  sheet  of  paper,  and  an
inkbottle,'  and  no  visible  money  or  arrangement  whatever,  ^  did
wonders :  that  France,  since  the  Reign  of  Terror  hushed  itself,
has  been  a  new  France,  awakened  like  a  giant  out  of  torpor ;
and  has  gone  on,  in  the  Internal  Life  of  it,  with  continual  pro-
gress. As  for  the  External  form  and  forms  of  Life,  what  can
we  say,  except  that  out  of  the  Eater  there  comes  Strength ;  out
of  the  Unwise  there  comes  not  Wisdom  ! — Shams  are  burnt  up  ;
nay,  what  as  yet  is  the  peculiarity  of  France,  the  very  Cant  of
them  is  burnt  up.     The  new  Realities  are  not  yet  come  :  ah  no,

1  Moniteur,  du  4  Septembre  1797.

29th  November  1799  (Choix  des  Rapports,  xvii.  1-96).

3  Bailleul,  Examen  critique  des  Considerations  de  Madame  de  Stael,  ii.  275.


FINIS  259

only  Phantasms,  Paper  models,  tentative  Prefigurements  of  such  !
In  France  there  are  now  Four  Million  Landed  Properties ;  ^  that
black  portent  of  an  Agrarian  Law  is,  as  it  were,  realised.  What
is  still  stranger,  we  understand  all  Frenchmen  have  '  the  right
of  duel ; '  the  Hackney-coachman  with  the  Peer,  if  insult  be
given  :  such  is  the  law  of  Public  Opinion.  Equality  at  least  in
death !  The  Form  of  Government  is  by  Citizen  King,  frequently
shot  at,  not  yet  shot.

On  the  whole,  therefore,  has  it  not  been  fulfilled  what  was
prophesied,  ex-post  facto  indeed,  by  the  Arch-quack  Cagliostro,
or  another?  He,  as  he  looked  in  rapt  vision  and  amazement
into  these  things,  thus  spake  :  ^  '  Ha  !  What  is  this  ?  Angels,
'  Uriel,  Anachiel,  and  ye  other  Five ;  Pentagon  of  Rejuvenes-
'  cence ;  Power  that  destroyedst  Original  Sin ;  Earth,  Heaven,
'  and  thou  Outer  Limbo,  which  men  name  Hell !  Does  the
'Empire  of  Imposture  waver!  Burst  there,  in  starry  sheen
'  updarting.  Light-rays  from  out  of  its  dark  foundations ;  as  it
'rocks  and  heaves,  not  in  travail-throes  but  in  death  -  throes  ?
'Yea,  Light-rays,  piercing,  clear,  that  salute  the  Heavens, — lo,
'  they  kindle  it ;  their  starry  clearness  becomes  as  red  Hellfire  !

'  Imposture  is  in  flames.  Imposture  is  burnt  up :  one  red  sea
'  of  Fire,  wild-bellowing,  enwraps  the  World  ;  with  its  fire-tongue
'  licks  at  the  very  Stars.  Thrones  are  hurled  into  it,  and  Dubois
'  Mitres,  and  Prebendal  Stalls  that  drop  fatness,  and — ha  !  what
'  see  I  ? — all  the  Gigs  of  Creation  :  all,  all !  Wo  is  me  !  Never
'since  Pharaoh's  Chariots,  in  the  Red  Sea  of  water,  was  there
'  wreck  of  Wheel-vehicles  like  this  in  the  Sea  of  Fire.  Desolate,
'  as  ashes,  as  gases,  shall  they  wander  in  the  wind.

'  Higher,  higher  yet  flames  the  Fire-Sea ;  crackling  with  new
'  dislocated  timber ;  hissing  with  leather  and  prunella.  The
'  metal  Images  are  molten ;  the  marble  Images  become  mortar-
'  lime ;  the  stone  Mountains  sulkily  explode.  Respectability,
'  with  all  her  collected  Gigs  inflamed  for  funeral  pyre,  wailing,

i[As  we  have  seen,  there  were  about  the  same  number  before  the  Revolution.]
2  Diamond  Necklace  (Carlyle's  Miscellanies).


260        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

'  leaves  the  Earth :  not  to  return  save  under  new  Avatar.  Im-
'  posture  how  it  bums,  through  generations  :  how  it  is  burnt  up ;
'  for  a  time.  The  World  is  black  ashes  ; — which,  ah,  when  will
'  they  grow  green  ?  The  Images  all  run  into  amorphous  Corinthian
'  brass ;  all  Dwellings  of  men  destroyed ;  the  very  mountains
'  peeled  and  riven,  the  valleys  black  and  dead :  it  is  an  empty

'  World  !     Wo  to  them  that  shall  be  bom  then  ! A  King,  a

'  Queen  (ah  me !)  were  hurled  in ;  did  rustle  once ;  flew  aloft,
'  crackling,  like  paper-scroll.  Iscariot  Egalite  was  hurled  in ;
'  thou  grim  de  Launay,  with  thy  grim  Bastille ;  whole  kindreds
'  and  peoples  ;  five  millions  of  mutually  destroying  Men.  For  it
'is  the  End  of  the  dominion  of  Imposture  (which  is  Darkness  and
'  opaque  Firedamp) ;  and  the  burning  up,  with  unquenchable  fire,
'of  all  the  Gigs  that  are  in  the  Earth.'  This  Prophecy,  we  say,
has  it  not  been  fulfilled,  is  it  not  fulfilling  ?

And  so  here,  O  Reader,  has  the  time  come  for  us  two  to  part.
Toilsome  was  our  journeying  together  ;  not  without  offence  ;  but
it  is  done.  To  me  thou  wert  as  a  beloved  shade,  the  disembodied
or  not  yet  embodied  spirit  of  a  Brother.  To  thee  I  was  but  as  a
Voice.  Yet  was  our  relation  a  kind  of  sacred  one ;  doubt  not
that !  For  whatsoever  once  sacred  things  become  hollow  jargons,
yet  while  the  Voice  of  Man  speaks  with  Man,  hast  thou  not  there
the  living  fountain  out  of  which  all  sacrednesses  sprang,  and  will
yet  spring?  Man,  by  the  nature  of  him,  is  definable  as  'an
incarnated  Word.'  Ill  stands  it  with  me  if  I  have  spoken  falsely  :
thine  also  it  was  to  hear  truly.     Farewell.


261


CHRONOLOGICAL  SUMMARY

OP

THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

[Drawn  up  by  "Philo,"  for  Edition  1857]

PART  I :  THE  BASTILLE

(May  lOtk,  1774!— October  5th,  1789)

1774

Louis  XV.  dies,  at  Versailles,  May  lOth,  1774 ;  of  small-pox,  after  a
short  illness :  Great-grandsou  of  Louis  XIV.  ;  age  then  64 ;  in  the
59th  year  of  his  nominal  'reign.'  Retrospect  to  1774:  sad  decay  of
'  Realised  Ideals,'  secular  and  sacred.  Scenes  about  Louis  XV. 's  death-
bed. Scene  of  the  Noblesse  entering,  '  with  a  noise  like  thunder,'  to
do  homage  to  the  New  King  and  Queen.  New  King,  Louis  XVI.,
was  his  Predecessor's  Grandson  ;  age  then  near  20, — born  August  23d,
1754.  New  Queen  was  Marie  Antoinette,  Daughter  (8th  daughter,
12th  child)  of  the  great  Empress  Maria-Theresa  and  her  Emperor
Francis  (originally  '^  Duke  of  Lorraine,'  but  with  no  territory  there)  ;
her  age  at  this  time  was  under  19  (born  November  2d,  1775).  Louis
and  she  were  wedded  four  years  ago  {May  16th,  1770)  ;  but  had  as  yet
no  children  ; — none  till  1778,  when  their  first  was  born  ;  a  Daughter
known  long  afterwards  as  Duchess  d'Angouleme.  Two  Sons  followed,
who  were  successively  called  '^  Dauphin  ;"  but  died  both,  the  second
in  very  miserable  circumstances,  while  still  in  boyhood.  Their  fourth
and  last  child,  a  Daughter  (1786),  lived  only  11  months.  These  two
were  now  King  and  Queen,  piously  reckoning  themselves  "  too  young
to  reign."


262        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

December  IQth,  1773,  Tea,  a  celebrated  cargo  of  it,  had  been  flung
out  in  the  harbour  of  Boston,  Massachusetts  :  June  7th,  1775,  Battle  of
Bunker's  Hill,  first  of  the  American  War,  is  fought  in  the  same  neigh-
bourhood,— far  over  seas.

1774—1783

Change  of  Administration.  Maurepas,  a  man  now  73  years  old  and
of  great  levity,  is  appointed  Prime-Minister ;  Vergennes  favourably
known  for  his  correct  habits,  for  his  embassies  in  Turkey,  in  Sweden,
gets  the  Department  of  Foreign  Afiairs.  Old  Parlement  is  reinstated  ;
''  Parlement  Maupeou,"  which  had  been  invented  for  getting  edicts,
particularly  tax-edicts,  '  registered,'  and  made  available  in  law,  is  dis-
missed. Turgot,  made  Controller-General  of  Finances  (*^  Chancellor
of  the  Exchequer"  and  something  more),  August  24cth,  1774,  gives
rise  to  high  hopes,  being  already  known  as  a  man  of  much  intelligence
speculative  and  practical,  of  noble  patriotic  intentions,  and  of  a  probity
beyond  question.

There  are  many  changes  ;  but  one  steady  fact,  of  supreme  signifi-
cance, continued  Deficit  of  Revenue, — that  is  the  only  History  of  the
Period.  Noblesse  and  Clergy  are  exempt  from  direct  imposts  ;  no  tax
that  can  be  devised,  on  such  principle,  will  yield  due  ways  and  means.
Meanings  of  that  fact ;  little  surmised  by  the  then  populations  of
France.  Turgot,  aiming  at  juster  principles,  cannot ;  ^  Corn-trade '
(domestic)  '  made  free,'  and  many  improvements  and  high  intentions  ;
— much  discontent  at  Court  in  consequence  ;  famine-riots  withal,  and
^  gallows  forty  feet  high.'  Turgot  will  tax  Noblesse  and  Clergy  like  the
other  ranks  ;  tempest  of  astonishment  and  indignation  in  consequence  :
Turgot  dismissed.  May  1776.  Flat  snuiF-boxes  come  out,  this  summer,
under  the  name  of  Turgotines,  as  being  "  platitudes  "  (in  the  notion  of
a  fashionable  snuffing  public),  like  the  plans  of  this  Controller.  Necker,
a  Genevese  become  rich  by  Banking  in  Paris,  and  well  seen  by  the
Philosophe  party,  is  appointed  Controller  in  his  stead  (1776) ; — and
there  is  continued  Deficit  of  Revenue.

For  the  rest.  Benevolence,  Tolerance,  Doctrine  of  universal  Love
and  Charity  to  good  and  bad.  Scepticism,  Philosophism,  Sensualism  :
portentous  ^Electuary,'  of  sweet  taste,  into  which  '^Good  and  Evil,'
the  distinctions  of  them  lost,  have  been  mashed  up.  Jean-Jacques,
Contrat-Social :  universal  Millennium,  of  Liberty,  Brotherhood,  and
whatever  is  desirable,   expected  to  be  rapidly  approaching  on  those


CHRONOLOGICAL  SUMMARY       263

terms.  Balloons,  Horse-races,  Anglomania.  Continued  Deficit  of
Revenue.  Necker's  plans  for  *  tilling  up  the  Deficit '  are  not  approved
of,  and  are  only  partially  gone  into  :  Frugality  is  of  slow  operation  ;
curtailment  of  expenses  occasions  numerous  dismissals,  numerous  dis-
contents at  Court :  from  Noblesse  and  Clergy,  if  their  privilege  of
exemption  be  touched,  what  is  to  be  hoped  ?

American-English  War  (since  April  1775)  ;  Franklin,  and  Agents  o*'
the  Revolted  Colonies,  at  Paris  (1776  and  afterwards),  where  their
Cause  is  in  high  favour.  Treaty  with  Revolted  Colonies,  February
&h,  1778  ;  extensive  Official  smugglings  of  supplies  to  them  (in  which
Beaumarchais  is  much  concerned)  for  some  time  before.  Departure  of
French  ^'^ volunteer "  Auxiliaries,  under  Lafayette,  177B.  "Volun-
teers" these,  not  sanctioned,  only  countenanced  and  furthered,  the
public  clamour  being  strong  that  way.  War  from  England,  in  con-
sequence ;  Rochambeau  to  America,  with  public  Auxiliaries,  in  1780 :
— War  not  notable,  except  by  the  Siege  of  Gibraltar,  and  by  the
general  result  arrived  at  shortly  after.

Continued  Deficit  of  Revenue  :  Necker's  ulterior  plans  still  less  ap-
proved of ;  by  Noblesse  and  Clergy,  least  of  all.  January  1781,  he
publishes  a  Compte  Rendu  {'  Account  Rendered,'  of  himself  and  them),
'  Two  hundred  thousand  copies  of  it  sold  ; ' — and  is  dismissed  in  the
May  following.  Returns  to  Switzerland  ;  and  there  writes  New  Books,
on  the  same  interesting  subject  or  pair  of  subjects.  Maurepas  dies,
November  21s/,  1781:  the  essential  "Prime-Minister"  is  henceforth
the  Controller-General,  if  any  such  could  be  found  ;  there  being  an
ever-increasing  Deficit  of  Revenue, — a  Millennium  thought  to  be  just
coming  on,  and  evidently  no  money  in  its  pocket.

Siege  of  Gibraltar  {September  I3th,  to  middle  of  November  1782) :
Siege  futile  on  the  part  of  France  and  Spain  ;  hopeless  since  that  day
{Sept.  13th)  of  the  red-hot  balls.  General  result  arrived  at  is  important :
American  Independence  recognised  {Peace  of  Versailles,  January  20thy
1783).  Lafayette  returns  in  illustrious  condition  ;  named  Scipio  Ameri-
canus  by  some  able-editors  of  the  time.

1788—1787

Ever-increasing  Deficit  of  Revenue.  Worse,  not  better,  since
Necker's  dismissal.  After  one  or  two  transient  Controllers,  who  can
do  nothing,  Calonne,  a  memorable  one,  is  nominated,  November  1783.
Who  continues,  with  lavish  expenditure  raised  by  loans,  contenting  all


264        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

the  world  by  his  liberality,  '  quenching  fire  by  oil  thrown  on  it ; '  for
three  years  aud  more.  "All  the  world  was  holding  out  its  hand,  I
held  out  my  hat."  Ominous  scandalous  Aifair  called  of  the  Diamond
Necklace  (Cardinal  de  Rohan,  Dame  de  la  Motte,  Arch-Quack  Cagliostro
the  principal  actors),  tragically  compromising  the  Queen's  name  who
had  no  vestige  of  concern  with  it,  becomes  public  as  Criminal-Trial,
1785  ;  penal  sentence  on  the  above  active  parties  and  others.  May  21st,
1786 :  with  immense  rumour  and  conjecture  from  all  mankind.  Calonne,
his  borrowing  resources  being  out,  convokes  the  Notables  (First  Convo-
cation of  the  Notables)  February  22d,  1787,  to  sanction  his  new  Plans
of  Taxing  ;  who  will  not  hear  of  him  or  them  :  so  that  he  is  dismissed,
and  ^exiled,'  April  Sth,  1787.  First  Convocation  of  Notables, — who
treat  not  of  this  thing  only,  but  of  all  manner  of  public  things,  and
mention  States-General  among  others, — sat  from  February  22d  to  May
25th,  1787.

1787

Cardinal  Lomenie  de  Brieune,  who  had  long  been  ambitious  of  the
post,  succeeds  Calonne.  A  man  now  of  sixty  ;  dissolute,  worthless  ; —
devises  Tax-Edicts,  Stamptax  (^dit  du  Timbre,  July  6th,  1787)  and
others,  with  ^  successive  loans,'  and  the  like  ;  which  the  Parlement,
greatly  to  the  joy  of  the  Public,  will  not  register.  Ominous  condition
of  the  Public,  all  virtually  in  opposition  ;  Parlements,  at  Paris  and
elsewhere,  have  a  cheap  method  of  becoming  glorious.  Contests  of
Lomenie  and  Parlement.  Beds-of-Justice  (first  of  them,  August  Gth,
1787) ;  Lettres-de-Cachet,  and  the  like  methods :  general  '  Exile '  of
Parlement  {Aug.  15th,  1787),  who  return  upon  conditions,  September
20th.  Increasing  ferment  of  the  Public.  Lomenie  helps  himself  by
temporary  shifts  till  he  can,  privately,  get  ready  for  wrestling  down
the  rebellious  Parlement,

1788  Januarij — September

Spring  of  1788,  grand  scheme  of  dismissing  the  Parlement  altogether,
and  nominating  instead  a  ^'  Plenary  Court  (Cour  Pleniere),"  which  shall
be  obedient  in  '  registering '  and  in  other  points.  Scheme  detected
before  quite  ripe  :  Parlement  in  permanent  session  thereupon  ;  har-
anguing all  night  (May  8d)  ;  applausive  idle  crowds  inundating  the
Outer  Courts  :  D'Espremenil  and  Goeslard  de  Monsabert  seized  by
military  in  the   gray  of  the  morning  {May  4th),  and  whirled   oft"  to


CHRONOLOGICAL  SUMMARY       265

distant  places  of  imprisonment :  Parlement  itself  dismissed  to  exile.
Attempt  to  govern  (that  is,  to  raise  supplies)  by  Royal  Edict  simply, —
"  Plenary  Court "  having  expired  in  the  birth.  Rebellion  of  all  the
Provincial  Parlements  ;  idle  Public  more  and  more  noisily  approving
and  applauding.  Destructive  hailstorm,  July  13th,  which  was  remem-
bered next  year.  Royal  Edict  {August  Sth),  That  States-General,
often  vaguely  promised  before,  shall  actually  assemble  in  May  next.
Proclamation  {A  ug.  Wth),  That  *  Treasury  Payments  be  henceforth  three-
fifths  in  cash,  two-fifths  in  paper,' — in  other  words,  that  the  Treasury
is  fallen  insolvent.  Lomenie  thereupon  immediately  dismissed ;  with
immense  explosion  of  popular  rejoicing,  more  riotous  than  usual.
Necker,  favourite  of  all  the  world,  is  immediately  {Aug.  24tth)  recalled
from  Switzerland  to  succeed  him,  and  be  "  Saviour  of  France."

1788  November,  December

Second  Convocation  of  the  Notables  {November  6th — December  12th),
by  Necker,  for  the  purpose  of  settling  how,  in  various  essential  particu-
lars, the  States-General  shall  be  held.  For  instance.  Are  the  Three
Estates  to  meet  as  one  Deliberative  Body  ?  Or  as  Three,  or  Two  ?  Above
all,  what  is  to  be  the  relative  force,  in  deciding,  of  the  Third  Estate  or
Commonalty.'*  Notables,  as  other  less  formal  Assemblages  had  done
and  do,  depart  without  settling  any  of  the  points  in  question  ;  most
points  remain  unsettled, — especially  that  of  the  Third  Estate  and  its
relative  force.  Elections  begin  everywhere,  January  next.  Troubles
of  France  seem  now  to  be  about  becoming  Revolution  in  France.  Com-
mencement of  the  "  French  Revolution," — henceforth  a  phenomenon
absorbing  all  others  for  mankind,  — is  commonly  dated  here.

1789  Mai/,  June

Assembling  of  States-General  at  Versailles  ;  Procession  to  the  Church
of  St.  Louis  there.  May  ith.  Third  Estate  has  the  Nation  behind  it ;
wishes  to  be  a  main  element  in  the  business.  Hopes,  and  (led  by
Mirabeau  and  other  able  heads)  decides,  that  it  must  be  the  main
element  of  all, — and  will  continue  '^  inert,'  and  do  nothing,  till  that
come  about :  namely,  till  the  other  Two  Estates,  Noblesse  and  Clergy,
be  joined  with  it ;  in  which  conjunct  state  it  can  outvote  them,  and
may  become  what  it  wishes.  '  Inertia,'  or  the  scheme  of  doing  only
harangues  and  adroit  formalities,  is  adopted  by  it ;  adroitly  persevered
in,  for  seven  weeks :  much  to  the  hope  of  France  ;  to  the  alarm  of
Necker  and  the  Court,


266        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Court  decides  to  intervene.  Hall  of  Assembly  is  found  shut  {Satur-
day, June  20th) ;  Third-Estate  Deputies  take  Oath,  celebrated  "  Oath
of  the  Tennis-Courtj"  in  that  emergency.  Emotion  of  French  mankind.
Monday,  June  22^,^Court  does  intervene,  but  with  reverse  effect :  Seance
Royale,  Royal  Speech,  giving  open  intimation  of  much  significance,
"  If  you.  Three  Estates,  cannot  agree,  I  the  King  will  myself  achieve
the  happiness  of  my  People."  Noblesse  and  Clergy  leave  the  Hall
along  with  King ;  Third  Estate  remains  pondering  this  intimation.
Enter  Supreme-Usher  de  Br6ze,  to  command  departure ;  Mirabeau's
fulminant  words  to  him  :  exit  de  Breze,  fruitless  and  worse,  '  amid  seas
of  angry  people. '  All  France  on  the  edge  of  blazing  out :  Court  recoils  ;
Third  Estate,  other  Two  now  joining  it  on  order,  triumphs,  successful
in  every  particular.  The  States-General  are  henceforth  '^National
Assembly  ; "  called  in  Books  distinctively  '^  Constituent  Assembly  ;  "
that  is.  Assembly  met  ^^  to  make  the  Constitution," — perfect  Constitu-
tion, under  which  the  French  People  might  realise  their  Millennium.

1789  Jtme,  July

Great  hope,  great  excitement,  great  suspicion.  Court  terrors  and
plans :  old  Marechal  Broglio, — this  is  the  Broglio  who  was  young  in
the  Seven- Years  War ;  son  of  a  Marshal  Broglio,  and  grandson  of
another,  who  much  filled  the  Newspapers  in  their  time.  Gardes  Fran-
gaises  at  Paris  need  to  be  confined  to  their  quarters ;  and  cannot  (June
26th).  Sunday,  July  12th,  news  that  Necker  is  dismissed,  and  gone
homewards  overnight :  panic  terror  of  Paris,  kindling  into  hot  frenzy  ;
— ends  in  besieging  the  Bastille  ;  and  in  taking  it,  chiefly  by  infinite
noise,  the  Gardes  Frangaises  at  length  mutely  assisting  in  the  rear.
Bastille  falls,  '  like  the  City  of  Jericho,  by  sound,'  Tuesday,  July  \4:th,
1789.  Kind  of  'fire-baptism'  to  the  Revolution;  which  continues  in-
suppressible  thenceforth,  and  beyond  hope  of  suppression.  All  France,
'  as  National  Guards,  to  suppress  Brigands  and  enemies  to  the  making
of  the  Constitution,'  takes  arms.

1789  August — October

Scipio  Americanus,  Mayor  Bailly  and  ' Patrollotism  versus  Patriotism'
{August,  September).  Hope,  terror,  suspicion,  excitement,  rising  ever
more,  towards  the  transcendental  pitch  ;  continued  scarcity  of  grain.
Progress  towards  Fifth  of  October,  called  here  '  Insurrection  of  Women.'
Regiment  de  Flandre  has  come  to  Versailles  {Sept.  23d)  ;  OflScers  have


CHRONOLOGICAL  SUMMARY       267

had  a  dinner  {Oct.  8d),  with  much  demonstration  and  gesticulative
foolery,  of  an  anti-constitutional  and  monarchic  character.  Paris,  semi-
delirious,  hears  of  it  {Sunday,  Oct.  4th),  with  endless  emotion  ;  —next
day,  some  ^  10,000  women  '  (men  being  under  awe  of  '  Patrollotism  ')
march  upon  Versailles  ;  followed  by  endless  miscellaneous  multitudes,
and  finally  by  Lafayette  and  National  Guards.  Phenomena  and  procedure
there.  Result  is,  they  bring  the  Royal  Family  and  National  Assembly
home  with  them  to  Paris ;  Paris  thereafter  Centre  of  the  Revolution,
and  October  Five  a  memorable  day.

1789  October — December

'  First  Emigration,'  of  certain  higher  Noblesse  and  Princes  of  the
Blood  ;  which  more  or  less  continues  through  the  ensuing  years,  and
at  length  on  an  altogether  profuse  scale.  Much  legal  enquiring  and
procedure  as  to  Philippe  d'C)rl6ans  and  his  (imaginary)  concern  in  this
Fifth  of  October ;  who  retires  to  England  for  a  while,  and  is  ill  seen  by
the  polite  classes  there.


268


PART  II :  THE  CONSTITUTION

(Jatmajy  1790 — August  12th,   1792)

1790

Constitution-building,  and  its  difficulties  and  accompaniments.  Clubs,
Journalisms  ;  advent  of  anarchic  souls  from  every  quarter  of  the  world.
February  4th,  King's  visit  to  Constituent  Assembly  ;  emotion  there-
upon and  National  Oath,  which  flies  over  France.  Progress  of  swearing
it,  detailed.  General  "  Federation,"  or  mutual  Oath  of  all  Frenchmen,
otherwise  called  ^  Feast  of  Pikes '  {July  lUh,  Anniversary  of  Bastille-
day),  which  also  is  a  memorable  Day.  Its  effects  on  the  Military,  in
Lieutenant  Napoleon  Buonaparte's  experience.

General  disorganisation  of  the  Army,  and  attempts  to  mend  it.
Affair  of  Nanci  (catastrophe  is  August  31s^) ;  called  '^Massacre  of
Nanci : "  irritation  thereupon.  Mutineer  Swiss  sent  to  the  Galleys ;
solemn  Funeral-service  for  the  Slain  at  Nanci  {September  20th) ,  and
riotous  menaces  and  mobs  in  consequence.  Steady  progress  of  disor-
ganisation, of  anarchy  spiritual  and  practical.  Mirabeau,  desperate
of  Constitution-building  under  such  accompaniments,  has  interviews
with  the  Queen,  and  contemplates  great  things.

1791   April— July

Death  of  Mirabeau  {April  2d)  :  last  chance  of  guiding  or  controlling
this  Revolution  gone  thereby.  Royal  Family,  still  hopeful  to  control
it,  means  to  get  away  from  Paris  as  the  first  step.  Suspected  of  such
intention  ;  visit  to  St.  Cloud  violently  prevented  by  the  Populace
{April  ISHh).  Actual  Flight  to  Varennes  {June  20th)  ;  and  misventures
there ;  return  captive  to  Paris,  in  a  frightfully  worsened  position,  the
fifth  evening  after  {June  25th).  "^Republic"  mentioned  in  Placards,
during  King's  Flight ;  generally  reprobated.  Queen  and  Barnave.  A
Throne  held  up  ;  as  if  'set  on  its  vertex,'  to  be  held  there  by  hand.


CHRONOLOGICAL  SUMMARY       269

Should  not  this  runaway  King  be  deposed  ?  Immense  assemblage,
petitioning  at  Altar  of  Fatherland  to  that  effect  (Sunday,  July  Vlth),
is  dispersed  by  musketry,  from  Lafayette  and  Mayor  Bailly,  with  ex-
tensive shrieks  following,  and  leaving  remembrances  of  a  very  bitter
kind.

1791   August

Foreign  Governments,  who  had  long  looked  with  disapproval  on  the
French  Revolution,  now  set  about  preparing  for  actual  interference.
Convention  of  Pilnitz  (August  25th-27th)  :  Emperor  Leopold  II.,  Fried-
rich  Wilhelm  II.  King  of  Prussia,  with  certain  less  important  Poten-
tates, and  Emigrant  Princes  of  the  Blood,  assembling  at  this  Pilnitz
(Electoral  Country-House  near  Dresden),  express  their  sorrow  and
concern  at  the  impossible  posture  of  his  now  French  Majesty,  which
they  think  calls  upon  regular  Governments  to  interfere  and  mend  it :
they  themselves,  prepared  at  present  to  '^  resist  French  aggression "
on  their  own  territories,  will  cooperate  with  said  Governments  in
"interfering  by  effectual  methods."  This  Document,  of  date  Aug.
27th,  1791,  rouses  violent  indignations  in  France  ;  which  blaze  up
higher  and  higher,  and  are  not  quenched  for  twenty-five  years
after.  Constitution  finished  ;  accepted  by  the  King  (September  14:th).
Constituent  Assembly  proclaims  'in  a  sonorous  voice'  (Sept.  SOth),
that  its  Sessions  are  all  ended  ; — and  goes  its  ways  amid  '  illumina-
tions.'

1791   October — December

Legislative  Assembly,  elected  according  to  the  Constitution,  the  first
and  also  the  last  Assembly  of  that  character,  meets  October  1st,  1791  :
sat  till  September  2lst,  1792  ;  a  Twelvemonth  all  but  nine  days.  More
republican  than  its  predecessor ;  inferior  in  talent ;  destitute,  like  it,
of  parliamentary  experience.  Its  debates,  futilities,  staggering  parlia-
mentary procedure  (Book  V.  cc.  1-3).  Court  '  pretending  to  be  dead,'
— not  'aiding  the  Constitution  to  march.'  Sunday,  October  16th,
L'Escuyer,  at  Avignon,  murdered  in  a  Church  ;  Massacres  in  the  Ice-
Tower  follow.  Suspicions  of  their  King,  and  of  each  other  ;  anxieties
about  foreign  attack,  and  whether  they  are  in  a  right  condition  to  meet
it ;  painful  questionings  of  Ministers,  continual  changes  of  Ministry, —
occupy  France  and  its  Legislative  with  sad  debates,  growing  ever  more
desperate  and  stormy  in  the  coming  months.     Narbonne  (Madame  de


270        THE  FEENCH  REVOLUTION

Stael's  friend)  made  War-Minister,  December  7th  ;  continues  for  nearly
half  a  year ;  then  Servan,  who  lasts  three  months ;  then  Dumouriez,
who,  in  that  capacity,  lasts  only  five  days  (had,  with  Roland  as  Home-
Minister,  been  otherwise  in  place  for  a  year  or  more) ;  mere  '  Ghosts  of
Ministries.'

1792  February — April

Terror  of  rural  France  {February -March)  ;  Camp  of  Jales ;  copious
Emigration.  Feb.  7th,  Emperor  Leopold  and  the  King  of  Prussia,
mending  their  Pilnitz  oiFer,  make  public  Treaty,  That  they  specially
will  endeavour  to  keep  down  disturbance,  and  if  attacked  will  assist
one  another.  Sardinia,  Naples,  Spain,  and  even  Russia  and  the  Pope,
understood  to  be  in  the  rear  of  these  two.  April  20th,  French  Assembly,
after  violent  debates,  decrees  War  against  Emperor  Leopold.  This  is
the  first  Declaration  of  War  ;  which  the  others  followed,  pro  and  contr^,
all  round,  like  pieces  of  a  great  Firework  blazing  out  now  here  now
there.  The  Prussian  Declaration,  which  followed  first,  some  months
after,  is  the  immediately  important  one.


1792  June

In  presence  of  these  alarming  phenomena,  Government  cannot  act ;
will  not,  say  the  People.  Clubs,  Journalists,  Sections  (organised
population  of  Paris)  growing  ever  more  violent  and  desperate.  Issue
forth  {June  20th)  in  vast  Procession,  the  combined  Sections  and  leaders,
with  banners,  with  demonstrations  ;  marching  through  the  streets  of
Paris,  ^^To  quicken  the  Executive,"  and  give  it  a  fillip  as  to  the  time
of  day.  Called  ^Procession  of  the  Black  Breeches'  in  this  Book.
Immense  Procession,  peaceable  but  dangerous ;  finds  the  Tuileries
gates  closed,  and  no  access  to  his  Majesty ;  squeezes,  crushes,  and  is
squeezed,  crushed  against  the  Tuileries  gates  and  doors  till  they  give
way  ;  and  the  admission  to  his  Majesty,  and  the  dialogue  with  him,
and  behaviour  in  his  House,  are  of  an  utterly  chaotic  kind,  dangerous
and  scandalous,  though  not  otherwise  than  peaceable.  Giving  rise  to
much  angry  commentary  in  France  and  over  Europe.  June  twenty
henceforth  a  memorable  Day.  General  Lafayette  suddenly  appears  in
the  Assembly ;  without  leave,  as  is  splenetically  observed  :  makes
fruitless  attempt  to  reinstate  authority  in  Paris  {June  28th) ;  withdraws
as  an  extinct  popularity.


CHRONOLOGICAL  SUMMARY       271


1792  July

July  &h,  Reconciliatory  Scene  in  the  Assembly,  derisively  called
Baiser  L' Amourette.  'Third  Federation/  Jiily  14:th,  being  at  hand, —
could  not  the  assembling  '  Federates '  be  united  into  some  Nucleus  of
Force  near  Paris  ?  Court  answers,  No  ;  not  without  reason  of  its  own.
Barbaroux  writes  to  Marseilles  for  ^'  500  men  that  know  how  to  die  ; "
who  accordingly  get  under  way,  though  like  to  be  too  late  for  the
Federation.  Sunday,  July  22d,  Solemn  Proclamation  that  the  "  Country
is  in  Danger."

July  2Uh,  Prussian  Declaration  of  War ;  and  Duke  of  Brunswick's
celebrated  Manifesto,  threatening  France  '  with  military  execution '  if
Royalty  were  meddled  with  :  the  latter  bears  date,  Cobleiitz,  July  27th,
1792,  in  the  name  of  both  Emperor  and  King  of  Prussia.  Duke  of
Brunswick  commands  in  chief:  Nephew  (sister's  son)  of  Frederick  the
Great ;  and  Father  of  our  unlucky  '  Queen  Caroline  : '  had  served,  very
young  in  the  Seven-Years  War,  under  his  Father's  Brother,  Prince
Ferdinand  ;  often  in  command  of  detachments  bigger  or  smaller ;  and
had  gained  distinction  by  his  swift  marches,  audacity  and  battle-spirit :
never  hitherto  commanded  any  wide  system  of  operations ;  nor  ever
again  till  1806,  when  he  suddenly  encountered  ruin  and  death  at  the
very  starting  (Battle  of  Jena,  October  \Uh  of  that  year).  This  pro-
clamation, which  awoke  endless  indignation  in  France  and  much
criticism  in  the  world  elsewhere,  is  understood  to  have  been  prepared
by  other  hands  (French-Emigrant  chiefly,  who  were  along  with  him  in
force),  and  to  have  been  signed  by  the  Duke  much  against  his  will.
'  Insignc  vengeance,'  '  military  execution,'  and  other  terms  of  overbear-
ing menace :  Prussian  Army,  and  Austrians  from  Netherlands,  are
advancing  in  that  humour.  Marseillese,  'who  know  how  to  die,'
arrive   in  Paris  {July  29th) ;    dinner-scene  in  the  Champs  Ely  sees.

1792  August

Indignation  waxing  desperate  at  Paris :  France,  boiling  with  ability
and  will,  tied  up  from  defending  itself  by  "  an  inactive  Government "
(fatally  unable  to  act).  Secret  conclaves,  consultations  of  Municipality
and  Clubs ;  Danton  understood  to  be  the  presiding  genius  there.
Legislative  Assembly  is  itself  plotting  and  participant ;  no  other  course
for  it.  August  lOth,  Universal  Insurrection  of  the  Armed  Population
of  Paris ;  Tuileries  forced,  Swiss  Guards  cut  to  pieces.     King,  when


272        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

once  violence  was  imminent,  and  before  any  act  of  violence,  had  with
Queen  and  Dauphin  sought  shelter  in  the  Legislative-Assembly  Hall.
They  continue  there  till  Aug.  ISth  (Friday-Monday),  listening  to  the
debates,  in  a  reporter's  box.  Are  conducted  thence  to  the  Temple
''as  Hostages," — do  not  get  out  again  except  to  die.  Legislative
Assembly  has  its  Decree  ready.  That  in  terms  of  the  Constitution  in
such  alarming  crisis  a  National  Convention  (Parliament  with  absolute
powers)  shall  be  elected  ;  Decree  issued  that  same  day,  Aug.  10th,
1792.  After  which  the  Legislative  only  waits  in  existence  till  it  be
fulfilled.


273


PART  III  :  THE  GUILLOTINE

(August  \Oth,  179^— October  4>th,  1795)

1792  August — September

Legislative  continues  its  sittings  till  Election  be  completed.  Enemy
advancing,  with  armed  Emigrants,  enter  France,  Luxembourg  region  ;
take  Longwy,  almost  without  resistance  {August  'I'Sd)  ;  prepare  to  take
Verdun.  Austrians  besieging  Thionville  ;  cannot  take  it.  Dumouriez
seizes  the  Passes  of  Argonne,  Aug.  29th.  Great  agitation  in  Paris.
Sunday,  September  2d  and  onwards  till  Thursday  Qth,  September
Massacres :  described.  Book  I.  cc.  4-6.  Prussians  have  taken  Verdun,
Sept.  2d  {Sunday J  while  the  Massacres  are  beginning) :  except  on  the
score  of  provisions  and  of  weather,  little  or  no  hindrance.  Dumouriez
waiting  in  the  passes  of  Argonne.  Prussians  detained  three  weeks
forcing  these.  Famine,  and  torrents  of  rain.  Battle  or  Cannonade  of
Valmy  {Sept.  20th) :  French  do  not  fly,  as  expected.  Convention  meets,
Sept.  22d,  1792  ;  Legislative  had  sat  till  the  day  before,  and  now  gives
place  to  it :  Republic  decreed,  same  day.  Austrians,  renouncing
Thionville,  besiege  Lille  {Sept.  28th — October  8th) ;  cannot :  '  fashion-
able shaving-dish,'  the  splinter  of  a  Lille  bombshell.  Prussians,
drenched  deep  in  mud,  in  dysentery  and  famine,  are  obliged  to  retreat :
Goethe's  account  of  it.     Total  failure  of  that  Brunswick  Enterprise.

1792  December — 1793  January

Revolutionary  activities  in  Paris  and  over  France ;  King  shall  be
brought  to  "trial."  Trial  of  the  King  {Tuesday,  December  Wth —
Sunday  I6th).  Three  Votes  {January  I5th-l7th,  1793)  :  Sentence,
Death  without  respite.  Executed,  Monday,  Jan.  2\st,  1793,  morning
about  10  o'clock.  English  Ambassador  quits  Paris  ;  French  Ambassador
ordered  to  quit  England  {Jan.  24:th).  War  between  the  two  countries
imminent.

VOL.    III.  18


274        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION


17P3  February

Dumouriez^  in  rear  of  the  retreating  Austrians,  has  seized  the  whole
Austrian  Netherlands,  in  a  month  or  less  {November  4ith — 2d  December
last) ;  and  now  holds  that  territory,  February  Isf,  France  declares
War  against  England  and  Holland ;  England  declares  in  return,
Feb.  11th:  Dumouriez  immediately  invades  Holland;  English,  under
Duke  of  York,  go  to  the  rescue  :  rather  successful  at  first.  Committee
of  Salut  Public  (instituted  January  21st,  day  of  the  King's  Execution)
the  supreme  Administrative  Body  at  Paris.

17.93  March— July

Mutual  quarrel  of  Parties  once  the  King  was  struck  down  :  Girondins
or  Limited  ''  legal "  Republicans  versus  Mountain  or  Unlimited  :  their
strifes  detailed.  Book  HI.  cc.  3,  7-9.  War  to  Spain,  March  7th.  Three
Epochs  in  the  wrestle  of  Girondins  and  Mountain  :  first,  March  lOth,
when  the  Girondins  fancy  they  are  to  be  '  Septembered '  by  the  anarchic
population  :  anarchic  population  does  demand  "Arrestment  of  Twenty-
two,"  by  name,  in  return.  Revolutionary  Tribunal  instituted,  Danton's
contrivance,  that  same  day  {March  10th).  Battle  of  Neerwinden  in
Holland  {March  ISth)  ;  Dumouriez,  quite  beaten,  obliged  to  withdraw
homewards  faster  and  faster.  Second  Girondin  Epoch,  April  1st,  when
they  broke  with  Danton.  General  Dumouriez,  a  kind  of  Girondin  in
his  way,  goes  over  to  the  Enemy  {April  3d).  Famine,  or  scarcity  in
all  kinds :  Law  of  Maximum  (fixing  a  price  on  commodities).  May
20th.  Third  Girondin  Epoch,  'ilia  suprema  dies,"  Convention  begirt
by  Armed  Sections  under  Henriot  {Sunday,  June  2d)  ;  Girondins,  the
Twenty-two  and  some  more,  put  "under  arrest  in  their  own  houses  ;"
— never  got  out  again,  but  the  reverse,  as  it  proved.

1793  July

Revolt  of  the  Departments  in  consequence,  who  are  of  Girondin
temper  ;  their  attempt  at  civil  war.  Comes  to  nothing  ;  ends  in  '  a
mutual  shriek '  (at  Vernon  in  Normandy,  July  15th) :  Charlotte  Corday
has  assassinated  Marat  at  Paris  two  days  before  {Saturday,  July  13th).
Great  Republican  vengeances  in  consequence ;  Girondin  Deputies,
Barbaroux,  Petion,  Louvet,  Guadet,  &c.,  wander  ruined,  disguised  over
France  ;   the  Twenty-two,  Brissot,  Vergniaud,  &c.,  now  imprisoned,


CHRONOLOGICAL  SUMMARY       275

await  trial ;  Lyons  and  other  Girondin  cities  to  be  signally  punished.
Valenciennes,  besieged  by  Duke  of  York,  since  May,  surrenders,  July
2&h.

1793  August — October

Mountain,  victorious,  resting  on  the  '  Forty-four  thousand  Jacobin
Clubs  and  Municipalities  ; '  its  severe  summary  procedure  rapidly
developing  itself  into  a  "Reign  of  Terror."  Law  of  the  Forty  Sous
(Sectioners  to  be  paid  for  attending  meetings),  Danton's  Contrivance,
August  5th.  Austrians  force  the  Lines  of  Weissembourg,  penetrate
into  France  on  the  East  side  :  Dunkirk  besieged  by  Duke  of  York
{A  ug.  22d) :  Lyons  bombarded  by  Dubois-Crauc6  of  the  Mountain,
Powder-Magazine  explodes  ;  Harare's  Proclamation  of  Levy  in  Mass,
^'^  France  risen  against  Tyrants  "  (Aug.  2Sd).  *  Revolutionary  Army  '
(anarchic  Police-force  of  the  Mountain),  September  5th-llth.  Law  of
the  Suspect,  Sept.  17 th.  Lyons,  after  frightful  sufferings,  surrenders
to  Dubois-Cranc6  (October  9th)  :  "To  be  rased  from  the  Earth."  Same
day  Gorsas  at  Paris,  a  Girondin  Deputy,  captured  in  a  state  of  out-
lawry, is  '  immediately  guillotined '  (Oct.  9th) :  first  Deputy  who  died
in  that  manner.  Execution  of  the  Queen  Marie-Antoinette,  Wednes-
day, Oct.  ICith.  Execution  of  the  Twenty-two,  after  trial  of  some
length,  ^Marseillaise  sung  in  chorus'  at  the  scaffold  (Oct.  'Slst). —
General  Jourdan  has  driven  Cobourg  and  the  Austrians  over  the  Sambre
again,  Oct.  16th  (day  of  the  Queen's  death)  ;  Duke  of  York  repulsed
from  Dunkirk,  ^  like  to  be  swallowed  by  the  tide,'  a  month  before.

1 793  November — December

Reign  of  Terror,  and  Terror  the  Order  of  the  Day.  Execution  of
d'Orl6ans  Egalit6,  November  6th;  of  Madame  Roland,  Nov.  8th;  of
Mayor  Bailly,  Nov.  10th.  Goddess  of  Reason  (first  of  them,  at  Paris)
sails  into  the  Convention,  same  day  (Nov.  10th)  :  Plunder  of  Churches  ;
^Carmagnole  complete.'  Convention  "Representatives  on  Mission:"
Saint-Just  and  Lebon,  at  Strasburg,  "  Strip  off  your  shoes  ;  10,000  pairs
wanted  ;  likewise  1000  beds, — under  way  in  24  hours "  (Nov.  27th).
Spanish  War,  neglected  hitherto,  and  not  successful ;  may  become
important  ?  Toulon,  dangerously  Girondin  in  dangerous  vicinity.  Hood
and  the  English  and  even  ^'^  Louis  XVIL"  there  ;  is  besieged,  Napoleon
serving  in  the  Artillery  ;  is  captured,  December  19th :  "  To  be  rased
from  the  Earth."  Carrier  at  Nantes:  Noyadings  by  night,  second  of
them  Dec.  lUh ;  become  "  Marriages  of  the  Loire,"  and  other  horrors.


276        THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Lebon  at  Arras.  Maignet  at  Orange.  ^  Death  poured  out  in  great
floods  (vomie  a  grands  flots). '  Lines  of  Weissembourg  ^  retaken  by
Saint-Just  charging  with  Peasants '  {mds  the  Year).

1794

*  Revolution  eating  its  own  children  : '  the  Hebertists  guillotined,
Anacharsis  Clootz  among  them,  March  24th  ;  Danton  himself  and  the
Dantonists  (April  8d),  which  is  the  acme  of  the  process.  Armies  suc-
cessful :  Pichegru  in  the  Netherlands  ;  defeat  of  Austrians,  at  Moneron,
April  29th  ;  of  Austrian  Emperor  at  Turcoing,  May  ISth  :  successes  of
Dugommier  against  Spain  (May  2Sd),  which  continue  in  brilliant  series,
till  the  business  ends,  and  he  ends  '  killed  by  a  cannon-shot,'  six  months
hence.  June  1st,  Howe's  Sea-victory  ;  and  Fable  of  the  Vengeur,
General  Jourdan  :  Battle  of  Fleurus,  sore  stroke  against  the  Austrian
Netherlands  (June  2mh).

Conspiracy  of  Mountain  against  Robespierre  :  Tallien  and  others
desirous  not  to  be  ^ eaten.'  Last  scenes  of  Robespierre:  July  28th
(10  Thermidor,  Year  2),  guillotined  with  his  Consorts  ; — which,  un-
expectedly, ends  the  Reign  of  Terror.  Victorious  French  Armies  :
enter  Cologne,  October  6th  ;  masters  of  Spanish  bulwarks  (Dugommier
shot),  Oct.  Vjth :  Duke  of  York  and  Dutch  Stadtholder  in  a  ruinous
condition.  Reaction  against  Robespierre  :  ^  whole  Nation  a  Committee
of  Mercy.'  Jacobins  Club  assaulted  by  mob  ;  shut  up,  November  10th-
12th.  Law  of  Maximum  abolished,  December  2Uh.  Duke  of  York
gone  home  ;  Pichegru  and  70,000  overrun  Holland  ;  frost  so  hard,
'hussars  can  take  ships.'

1795
Stadtholder  quits  Holland,  January  19th;  glad  to  get  across  to
England  :  Spanish  Cities  '  opening  to  the  petard '  (Rosas  first,  Jan.  5th,
and  rapidly  thereafter,  till  almost  Madrid  come  in  view).  Continued
downfall  of  Sansculottism.  EiFervescence  of  luxury  ;  La  Cabarrus  ;
Greek  Costumes;  Jeunesse  Doree;  balls  in  flesh-coloured  drawers.  Sans-
culottism rises  twice  in  Insurrection  ;  both  times  in  vain.  Insurrection
of  Germinal  ('12  Germinal,'  Year  3,  April  1st,  1795);  ends  by  'two
blank  cannon-shot '  from  Pichegru.

1795  Ayril — October

Prussia  makes  peace  of  Bdle  (Basel),  April  5th ;  Spain,  Peace  of  Bdle
a  three  months  later.     Armies  everywhere  successful :  Catalogue  of


CHRONOLOGICAL  SUMMARY       277

Victories  and  Conquests  hung  up  in  the  Convention  Hall.  Famine  of
the  lower  classes.  Fouquier-Tinville  guillotined  (May  8th).  Insurrec-
tion of  Prairial,  the  Second  attempt  of  Sansculottism  to  recover  power
{'  1  Prairial,'  May  20th) ;  Deputy  Feraud  massacred  : — issues  in  the
Disarming  and  Finishing  of  Sansculottism.  Emigrant  Invasion,  in
English  ships,  lands  at  Quiberon,  and  is  blown  to  pieces  (July  loth-20th)  :
La  Vendee,  which  had  before  been  three  years  in  Revolt,  is  hereby
kindled  into  a  '  Second  '  less  impoi*tant  '  Revolt  of  La  Vendee,'  which
lasts  some  eight  months.  Reactionary  "  Companies  of  Jesus,"  ''  Com-
panies of  the  Sun,"  assassinating  Jacobins  in  the  Rhone  Countries  (July-
A  Hgust).  New  Constitution  :  Directory  and  Consuls, — Two-thirds  of
the  Convention  to  be  reelected.  Objections  to  that  clause.  Section
Lepelletier,  and  miscellaneous  Discontented,  revolt  against  it :  Insurrec-
tion of  Vend6miaire,  Last  of  the  Insurrections  ('  13  Vendemiaire,  Year
4,'  October  Uh,  179o) ;  quelled  by  Napoleon.  On  which  "The  Re-
volution," as  defined  here,  ends, — Anarchic  Government,  if  still  anarchic,
proceeding  by  softer  methods  than  that  of  continued  insurrection.


279


APPENDIX

JUSTICE

PART  I

By  Richard  Lodge,  M.A.,  Professor  of  History  in  the  Uni-
versity OF  Edinburgh.

References  :  Dareste  de  la  Chavanne,  Histoire  de  rAdministration  en  France
(Paris,  1848) ;  A.  Ch^ruel,,  Histoire  de  I'Administration  Monarchique  en  France
(Paris,  1855) ;  Boiteau,  L'Etatde  France  en  1789  (Paris,  1861) ;  Babeau,  Le  Village
sous  I'Ancien  Regime  (Paris,  1878) ;  Ch.  V.  Langlois,  Textes  relatifs  k  1' Histoire  du
Parlement  depuis  les  Origines  jusqu'en  1314  (Paris,  1888) ;  F6V\x  Aubert,  Le  Par-
lement  de  Paris  de  Philippe-le-Bel  a  Charles  VH  (Paris,  1886) ;  and  Histoire  du
Parlement  de  Paris  de  I'Origine  a  Franfois  I  (Paris,  1894) ;  Bastard  d'Estang,  Les
Parlements  de  France  (Paris,  1858) ;  Charles  Desmaze,  Le  Parlement  de  Paris
(Paris,  i860),  and  Le  Chatelet  de  Paris  (Paris,  1870);  Alphonse  Callery,  Histoire
des  Attributions  du  Parlement,  de  la  Cour  des  Aydes  et  de  la  Chambre  des  Comptes
depuis  la  Feodalit^  jusqu'^  la  Revolution  Fran9aise  (Paris,  1880) ;  F.  M^rilhou,  Les
Parlements  de  France  :  leur  caract^re  politique  depuis  Philippe-le-Bel  jusqu'en
1789  (Paris,  1863) ;  E.  Glasson,  Le  Parlement  de  Paris,  son  role  politique  depuis
le  regne  de  Charles  VH  jusqu'a  la  Revolution  (Paris,  1901).  Gasquet,  Precis  des
Institutions  de  I'ancienne  France,  gives  a  useful  summary  ;  and  reference  may
conveniently  be  made  on  particular  topics  to  Ludovic  Lalanne,  Dictionnaire
Historique  de  la  France  (Paris,  1877),  which  contains  a  very  good  article  s.  v.
Parlement ;  and  to  Ch^ruel,  Dictionnaire  Historique  des  Institutions  de  la  France
(Paris,  1884).

A.  Central  jurisdiction.

In  the  tenth  century,  when  Western  Francia  or  France  was  finally  severed
from  the  other  dominions  of  the  Karolings  and  became  a  separate  state,  the
power  of  the  monarchy  was  extremely  weak  and  inefficient.  The  early  Cape-
tian  kings  were  lords  of  Paris  and  of  the  He  de  France,  but  outside  their  own
domain  they  could  exercise  very  little  authority.  Within  the  various  duchies
and  counties  of  which  their  kingdom  was  made  up,  the  territorial  lords  were
practically  supreme.  For  the  next  five  centuries  the  history  of  France  is  the
history  of  the  growth  of  the  French  monarchy,  and  under  its  guidance  France
was  enabled  to  play  a  prominent,  in  some  ways  the  most  prominent,  part
among  the  states  of  Europe  during  the  sixteenth,  seventeenth  and  eighteenth
centuries.  Although  the  religious  wars  in  the  later  part  of  the  sixteenth  cen-
tury rendered  it  necessary  to  do  some  of  the  work  afresh,  the  substantial
victory  of  the  monarchy  over  opposing  forces  may  be  considered  to  have
been  woo  i"  the  previous  century  in  the  reigns  of  Charles  VII.  and  Louis  XI,


280  APPENDIX

In  the  history  of  the  growth  of  royal  authority  we  may  note  three  chief
processes:  (i)  the  great  fiefs  were  gradually  absorbed  by  conquest,  inheri-
tance or  escheat,  in  the  royal  domain,  so  that  the  king  became,  not  merely
the  suzerain  of  his  great  vassals,  but  the  direct  lord  of  all  his  subjects ;  (2)
the  royal  administration  and  especially  the  royal  jurisdiction  was  extended
over  the  whole  of  France  and  territorial  or  seigneurial  justice  was  either
abolished  or  else  reduced  to  insignificance ;  (3)  the  mutual  jealousy  of  the
classes  or  estates  was  encouraged,  and  the  monarchy  was  enabled  to  play  off
one  class  against  the  other  and  so  to  abase  each  in  turn  before  itself.  It  is
the  second  of  these  processes  which  gave  rise  to  the  judicial  system  of  France
under  the  Ancien  Regime.

The  early  Capetian  kings  had  a  double  jurisdiction  :  (i)  within  their  own
domain  they  had  the  same  authority  as  any  other  great  lord,  and  were  aided
in  its  exercise  by  a  court  or  council,  consisting  of  the  immediate  tenants  on
the  domain ;  (2)  as  suzerains,  they  were  from  time  to  time  called  upon  to
decide  disputes  between  the  great  tenants-in-chief,  and  by  the  essential
principles  of  feudalism  these  could  only  be  submitted  to  the  judgment  of
their  equals,  per  judicium  parium  suorum.  For  their  trial,  therefore,  the  king
had  to  call  together  some  of  his  tenants-in-chief,  and  thus  to  constitute  what
came  to  be  known  as  the  "court  of  peers."  Both  these  bodies,  the  domain
court  and  the  court  of  peers,  are  indiscriminately  called  in  contemporary
documents  the  curia  regis  or  cour  du  roy.  And  under  Philip  Augustus  and
his  successors  the  distinction  between  the  two  courts,  never  very  distinct,
became  more  and  more  slight.  The  domain  court  could,  at  need,  be  trans-
formed into  a  court  of  peers  by  the  addition  to  it  of  some  of  the  great  vassals
of  the  crown.  But  the  efficient  members  of  the  court  were  the  trained  lawyers,
both  clerks  and  laymen,  who  were  introduced  by  Louis  IX.,  and  as  the  judicial
system  became  more  technical  and  elaborate,  the  unlearned  barons  found
themselves  more  and  more  unable  to  hold  their  own  with  their  professional
colleagues.  The  court  of  the  king,  thus  organised,  resembled  the  English
curia  regis  of  the  reign  of  Henry  II.  Its  business  was  to  aid  and  advise  the
king  in  all  the  functions  of  government,  administrative,  judicial  and  financial.

The  work  of  the  court  was  enormously  increased  in  the  thirteenth  century,
partly  by  the  annexation  of  great  provinces,  such  as  Normandy  and  Langue-
doc,  and  partly  by  such  deliberate  encroachments  upon  feudal  independence
as  the  encouragement  of  appeals  from  the  seigneurial  courts  to  the  king,  and
the  reservation  of  certain  cas  royaux,  which  had  to  be  brought  in  the  first
instance  for  royal  decision.  To  cope  with  this  increased  mass  of  business,
the  principle  of  the  division  of  labour  was  perforce  adopted.  In  England
the  cicria  gradually  split  into  a  concilitim  ordinarium,  a  court  of  king's
bench  and  of  common  pleas,  and  a  court  of  exchequer.  So  in  France  the
cour  du  roy  split  into  three  subdivisions,  (i)  a  co7iseil,  or  general  advising
body ;  (2)  a  judicial  court,  to  which  the  name  parlement  (originally  applied
to  any  meeting  or  discussion)  came  in  time  to  be  exclusively  applied ;  and
(3)  a  financial  court,  the  chamhre  des  comptes.  There  is  no  precise  date
to  be  given  to  this  differentiation,  either  in  France  or  in  England,  In  both
countries  the  change  was  gradual  and  due  to  the  pressure  of  practical  needs,
and  in  both  countries  the  division  was  very  imperfect.  The  functions  of  the
different  bodies  overlapped  and  the  same  persons  often  belonged  to  more
than  one  division  at  the  same  time.

The  great  organiser  of  the  administrative  system  of  France  was  Philippe
le  Bel  (1285-13 14),  and  it  is  to  his  reign  that  we  may  attribute,  not  exactly
the  creation,  but  the  final  sub-division  of  the  three  original  courts,     From


APPENDIX  281

the  beginning  of  the  fourteenth  century  is  to  be  traced  the  separate  history
of  the  most  famous  court  of  justice  in  Europe,  the  parlement  du  roy,  or,  as
it  came  to  be  called  from  its  fixed  home,  the  Parlement  de  Paris.  Just  as
the  court  of  common  pleas  was,  for  the  convenience  of  suitors,  fixed  at
Westminster,  so  the  parlement,  instead  of  following  the  king  as  the  earlier
curia  had  done,  was  stationed  in  Paris.  There  it  took  up  its  abode  in  the
old  royal  palace,  which  was  vacated  in  its  favour  when  the  kings  in  the
fifteenth  century  quitted  the  island  of  the  Cite  for  a  more  luxurious  abode  on
the  right  bank  of  the  Seine.  And  Philippe  le  Bel  must  be  credited,  not  only
with  the  severance  of  the  parlement  from  the  other  parts  of  the  central
administration,  but  also  with  its  first  subdivision  into  chambers  with  separate
functions.  In  an  ordinance  of  his  later  years  (see  Langlois,  Textes  relatifs
a  I'Histoire  du  Parlement,  p.  178)  we  find  three  such  subdivisions:  (i)  the
Parliament  proper,  or  grande  chamhre,  containing  two  bishops  and  two
counts,  and  under  them  eleven  clerks  and  eleven  laymen  ;  (2)  a  chambre  des
enquetcs,  consisting  of  two  bishops  and  seven  other  members  ;  and  (3)  two
chambres  des  reqitetes,  four  members  for  the  Langue  d'oc,  and  seven  for  the
Langue  d'oil  or  Langue  fran<?aise.  But  the  parlement  was  not  yet  a  per-
manent body :  it  met  twice  a  year,  at  Easter  and  All  Saints,  each  session
lasted  only  two  months,  and  the  members  of  the  court  were  nominated  for
each  session.  It  was  not  till  1345  that  sittings  became  continuous  and  life-
membership  became  the  rule.

By  the  reign  of  Louis  XI.  the  parlement  had  become  the  supreme  court
of  justice  in  France,  and  territorial  independence  had  ceased  to  be  a  source
of  danger  to  the  authority  of  the  King.  All  the  great  provinces  except
Brittany  had  fallen  in  to  the  monarchy,  and  the  absorption  of  Brittany  was
close  at  hand.  The  enormous  growth  of  the  central  jurisdiction  neces-
sitated a  double  process  of  specialisation.  The  work  of  the  Court  had  to  be
curtailed  by  the  creation  of  provincial  parliaments  {see  below),  which  were
modelled,  both  in  composition  and  powers,  upon  the  parent  court.  The
area  within  which  the  parlement  of  Paris  was  active  was  still  extensive,
as  it  included  the  Ile-de-France,  Picardy,  Champagne,  Brie,  Maine,  Anjou,
Touraine,  Poitou,  Angoumois,  Berry,  with  the  districts  of  Bourbon,  Niver-
nais,  Lyonnais,  Auvergne,  Macon  and  Auxerre.  And  while  the  territorial
limits  of  the  parlement's  jurisdiction  were  restricted,  the  number  of  its
members  and  its  divisions  for  special  work  were  increased.  It  is  needless  to
trace  in  detail  the  various  changes  made  from  time  to  time  in  its  organisation.
In  the  eighteenth  century  there  were  no  less  than  nine  chambers  or  com-
mittees sitting  for  the  discharge  of  judicial  duties.

The  grande  chambre  was  by  far  the  largest  and  most  important  of  these
divisions,  and  is  often  spoken  of  as  if  it  were  the  whole  parlement.  It  was
in  this  chamber  that  the  peers  retained  the  right  of  sitting  (only  exercised  on
formal  occasions)  which  had  descended  to  them  from  their  membership  of
the  original  cour  du  roy.  A  throne  was  reserved  for  the  king,  whose  dele-
gated authority  was  exercised  by  the  parlement  when  he  was  not  present  in
person,  but  who  could  in  theory  resume  at  any  moment  the  judicial  power
which  was  his  by  right.  Its  ordinary  members  were  the  senior  judges,  who
had  passed  through  the  work  of  the  lower  chambers.  Just  before  its  sup-
pression the  chamber  was  composed  of  a  premier  president,  nine  presidents
d  mortier  (so-called  because  they  wore  a  velvet  cap  shaped  like  an  inverted
mortar),  and  thirty-seven  counsellors,  of  whom  twenty-five  were  laymen  and
twelve  clerks.  But  the  following  had  also  a  right  to  sit :  princes  of  the  blood
and  peers ;  the  chancellor  and  the  garde  des  sceaux  with  all  conseillcrs  d'etat ;


282  APPENDIX

four  maitres  des  requetes  de  V hotel  du  roi  {see  below) ;  the  Archbishop  of
Paris  and  the  Abbot  of  Cluny.  Before  the  grande  chamhre  came  all  appeals
of  importance  from  the  local  courts ;  charges  of  High  Treason ;  and  cases
of  first  instance  concerning  the  regale  and  other  crown  rights,  the  peers,  the
great  officers  of  the  crown,  the  university  and  hospitals  under  royal  protec-
tion, etc.

At  one  time  there  were  as  many  as  five  chambres  des  enquetes,  but  two
were  suppressed  in  1756.  The  three  which  remained  at  the  outbreak  of  the
Revolution  were  each  composed  of  two  presidents  and  twenty-four  coun-
sellors. The  chief  business  of  these  courts  was  to  conduct  a  preliminary
enquiry  into  all  appeals  sent  up  to  the  Parlement.  The  lesser  cases  were
settled  in  the  enquetes,  but  those  of  importance  were  simply  prepared  and
reported  upon  for  the  consideration  of  the  grande  chamhre.

Until  the  suppression  of  the  parlement  by  Maupeou  in  1770  {see  below),
there  were  two  chambres  des  requetes,  but  only  one  was  restored  in  1774.  It
contained  two  presidents  and  fourteen  counsellors  called  maitres  des  requetes.
This  court  decided  the  lesser  cases  of  first  instance  which  came  before  the
parlement.

During  the  annual  vacation  from  September  to  Martinmas  the  general
business  of  the  parlement  was  continued  in  a  chamhre  des  vacations.  The
first  appointment  of  this  chamber  was  in  1405,  and  it  was  confirmed  in  1499
and  1519.  It  was  not  really  a  permanent  division  of  the  parlement^  as  its
members  were  appointed  annually  from  the  grande  chamhre  and  the  enquetes.
In  the  eighteenth  century  it  usually  consisted  of  a  president  and  twenty-
four  counsellors.

The  origin  of  the  tournelle,  or  criminal  court  of  the  parlement,  is  obscure.
From  a  very  early  date  it  was  a  custom  to  hand  over  criminal  cases  to  a
small  number  of  judges  from  the  grande  chamhre,  and  they  were  tried  in  the
tournelle,  or  small  tower  in  the  palace.^  There  are  several  references  to
such  a  practice  from  1436  onwards.  But  its  final  organisation  seems  to
belong  to  the  reign  of  Francis  I.  At  the  time  of  the  Revolution  the  tour-
nelle contained  five  presidents,  twelve  counsellors  from  the  grande  chambre,
and  four  from  each  chamhre  des  enquetes.

The  chamhre  de  la  maree  was  a  small  committee,  consisting  of  a  president
and  two  counsellors,  with  cognisance  of  all  cases  connected  with  the  fishing
industry.

Connected  with  the  parlement  by  their  ordinary  duties,  though  not  by
membership,  were  all  the  numerous  followers  of  the  various  branches  of  the
legal  profession.  The  procureur  general,  whose  office  dates  back  to  the
thirteenth  century,  was  an  official  of  immense  importance  in  the  criminal
jurisdiction  of  France.  He  was  not  only  a  public  prosecutor,  but  was  also
charged  with  the  superintendence  of  the  police  system  and  of  prisons,  with
the  protection  of  the  royal  domain,  the  maintenance  of  ecclesiastical  disci-
pline, etc.  During  a  vacancy  he  acted  as  prevot  of  Paris.  Even  more
important  in  relation  to  the  parlement  was  the  avocat  general,  who  ranked
as  chief  of  the  gens  du  roi,  and  had  often  to  act  as  intermediary  between  the
crown  and  the  contumacious  judges.  T\\&avocats,  who  pleaded  cases  before
i\\G parlement,  constituted  an  exclusive,  privileged  and  dignified  body,  like  the
bar  in  England,  though  they  had  not,  as  in  England,  the  prospect  of  promotion
to  the  bench  to  stimulate  their  eloquence.     Below  them  were  the  notaries,

1  An  absurd  derivation  of  the  name  has  been  suggested,  viz.,  that  it  arose  from
the  alternation  of  the  members,  who  were  chosen  tour  a,  totir  from  the  other
chambers  for  three  or  six  months  at  a  time-


APPENDIX  283

ushers,  clerks  and  other  officials.      The  bazoche  was  a  famous  and  often  a
turbulent  association  of  the  clerks  oi  \h&  palais  de  justice.

If  the  Parlement  of  Paris  had  been  nothing  but  a  great  court  of  justice,
this  brief  sketch  of  its  organisation  and  functions  might  suffice.  But  its
peculiar  and  unique  prominence  in  French  history  is  due  to  the  fact  that  it
claimed  to  be  far  more  than  a  court  of  justice,  and  though  its  powers  never
equalled  its  pretensions,  it  actually  was  for  two  centuries  the  only  public
corporation  which  ventured  to  offer  open  and  resolute  opposition  to  the
despotism  of  the  crown.  To  understand  this  it  is  necessary  to  examine  with
some  attention  (i)  the  manner  of  appointment  of  members  oi  the  parlement,
and  (2)  the  claim  advanced  by  a  corporation  of  judges  to  have  any  voice  in
political  affairs.

(i)  In  the  middle  ages  the  judges  in  France,  as  in  England,  were  appointed
by  the  crown,  at  first  for  temporary  sessions,  and  then  for  life  or  during  the
royal  pleasure.  But  in  the  fifteenth  century  we  find  a  marked  and  curious
divergence  between  the  history  of  the  two  countries.  In  England,  where  the
monarchy  was  never  so  strong  as  it  became  in  France,  the  crown  retained  the
right  both  of  appointing  and  (until  1701)  of  dismissing  judges.  In  the  great
struggles  of  the  seventeenth  century  the  control  thus  exercised  over  the  bench
was  perhaps  the  strongest  weapon  in  the  hands  of  the  Stuart  kings.  In
France,  on  the  other  hand,  the  crown  lost,  first  the  right  of  dismissal,  and
then  the  power  of  free  selection.  This  was  due  to  a  practice  which  is  at  the
bottom  of  many  peculiarities  in  French  history,  the  sale  of  offices  {la  vcnalite
des  charges).  This  practice,  so  fatal  in  many  ways  to  the  interests  of  the
monarchy,  was  gradually  introduced,  for  financial  reasons,  just  at  the  time
when  the  monarchy  seemed  to  have  won  its  greatest  victory,  in  the  reigns  of
Charles  VII.,  Louis  XL,  Charles  VIII.  and  Louis  XII.  It  was  in  the  last  of
these  reigns  that  this  ruinous  method  of  raising  money  became  a  regular
practice  and  was  extended  to  membership  of  the  parlement  and  the  other
sovereign  courts.  This  had  a  double  result.  In  the  first  place  it  was  necessary
to  give  security  of  tenure  (inamovibilite).  No  man  would  pay  a  large  sum  for  an
office  from  which  he  might  be  dismissed  at  any  moment,  and  so  the  king,  in
order  to  increase  the  value  of  his  saleable  appointments,  had  to  resign  the  power
of  dismissal  and  to  grant  a  life-tenure  to  the  judges.  In  the  second  place  it  was
desirable  to  make  the  offices  more  attractive  by  increasing  the  pay.  Hitherto
the  judges  had  a  salary  {gages)  from  the  crown.  To  increase  this  would
constitute  a  new  charge  upon  the  revenue,  and  would  be  giving  back  with  one
hand  what  had  been  received  by  the  other.  But  there  was  a  cheaper  way  of
achieving  the  same  end.  There  had  often  been  an  informal  custom  by  which
the  suitors,  and  especially  victorious  suitors,  gave  presents  either  in  money  or
kind  to  the  judges.  Such  presents,  at  a  time  when  special  value  was  attached
to  the  rare  and  expensive  products  of  the  east,  were  called  epices.  This  practice
the  better  and  wiser  kings  had  endeavoured  to  check  or  even  to  prohibit
altogether,  so  as  to  give  their  subjects  the  boon  of  gratuitous  justice.  But  in
the  fifteenth  century  these  payments  became  practically  compulsory,  and  in
the  seventeenth  century  they  were  formally  regulated  as  a  normal  system,
suitors  being  taxed  in  proportion  to  the  length  of  procedure  and  the  value  of
the  property  at  stake.  From  these  two  changes  arose  two  important  charac-
teristics of  French  justice  before  the  Revolution.  It  was,  on  the  whole,
impartial  and  fair,  except  where  the  prejudices  or  interests  of  the  judges
themselves  were  concerned.  On  the  other  hand  it  was  extremely  expensive
and  dilatory,  and  this  was  a  frequent  cause  of  grumbling  and  at  times  of
formal  complaint.     The  gages  or  salaries  from  the  crown  remained  stationary,


284  APPENDIX

and  it  was  the  epices  of  the  suitors  which  furnished  the  greater  part  of  the
incomes  which  made  the  office  of  judge  worth  purchasing  for  a  considerable
sum.

In  the  sixteenth  century  seats  in  the  parlemcnt  and  other  sovereign  courts
were  sold  to  the  highest  bidder  on  each  vacancy.  As  a  financial  expedient
this  had  the  defect  of  bringing  to  the  exchequer  occasional  windfalls  rather
than  a  steady  revenue.  Sully,  the  most  conservative  of  reformers,  sought  to
remedy  the  result  without  altering  the  cause.  In  1604  the  existing  office-
holders were  allowed  to  hold  their  seats  as  private  property,  to  transmit  them
to  their  heirs  or  to  sell  them  for  their  own  benefit,  on  condition  of  paying  a
droit  annuel  or  paulette  (so-called  from  Charles  Paulet,  who  is  said  to  have
suggested  the  scheme,  and  who  certainly  farmed  the  proceeds  for  the  first  few
years).  Attempts  were  more  than  once  made  to  abolish  the  pmilette,  but
they  always  met  with  the  energetic  and  successful  resistance  of  the  official
classes.  Thus  the  parlement  became  a  small  judicial  oligarchy,  a  hereditary
corporation  of  judges,  who  could  only  be  removed  by  violent  or  revolutionary
means.  The  acquisition  of  hereditary  right  gave  to  the  members  of  the
sovereign  courts  the  rank  and  privileges  of  nobility.  They  became  the
noblesse  de  la  robe  as  distinguished  from  the  older  noblesse  de  V'epee.  And
they  shared  with  the  other  members  of  their  class  that  exemption  from  ordi-
nary taxation  which  became  in  the  eighteenth  century  the  most  cherished
badge  of  noble  rank.  Von  Sybel  is  not  far  from  the  truth  when  he  says  that
the  French  judges  were  paid  by  privileges.  And  it  was  their  interest  in  de-
fending their  privileges  which  made  them  the  resolute  opponents  of  all  serious
attempts  to  introduce  financial  reform.

(2)  That  so  anomalous  a  body  as  the  Parlemcnt  of  Paris  could  claim  a
voice  in  the  government  of  France  was  due  to  the  custom  v/hich  imposed  upon
the  parlement  the  task  of  registering  all  public  documents,  royal  edicts,  treaties
of  peace,  etc.  This  originated  at  a  time  when  the  parlement  was  still  the
submissive  agent  of  the  monarchy,  and  was  certainly  then  regarded  as  a  duty
rather  than  a  right.  Yet  the  fact  that  such  registration  was  in  most  cases  ne-
cessary to  give  to  an  edict  the  force  of  law  could  not  but  suggest  the  possibility
of  remonstrance,  or  even  refusal,  if  the  measure  was  in  any  way  repugnant
to  the  members  of  the  court.  The  kings  themselves  did  not  hesitate  to
encourage  such  a  practice  when  it  suited  their  own  ends.  Thus  Louis  XI.
revoked  the  Pragmatic  Sanction  of  Bourges  and  the  parlement  refused  to
register  the  decree,  thus  enabling  the  king,  to  his  own  profit,  to  withhold
from  the  pope  the  concession  he  had  proffered.  So  Francis  I.  used  the  opposi-
tion of  the  parlement  as  a  pretext  for  evading  the  humiliating  treaty  of
Madrid.  There  seemed  little  reason  to  dread  the  resistance  of  a  body  which
had  no  armed  strength  behind  it,  and  could  be  easily  coerced.  If  the  par-
lement opposed  any  measure,  the  king  could  send  lettres  de  jiission  ordering
it  to  proceed  to  registration.  If  these  were  disobeyed,  the  final  expedient
was  a  lit  de  justice.  This  was  a  formal  session  of  the  parlemcnt^  at  which
the  king  appeared  in  person,  and  resumed  the  powers  which  he  had  delegated
to  the  court :  adveniente  rege  cessat  magistratus.  Registration  was  ordered
by  the  king,  and  all  that  the  parlement  could  do  was  to  add  a  note  that  its
action  had  been  contraint  et  force.

Yet  in  spite  of  its  apparent  impotence,  the  opposition  of  the  parlement  to
the  crown  became  a  matter  of  very  considerable  importance  in  the  seventeenth
and  eighteenth  centuries.  The  last  meeting  of  the  States-General  before
1789  was  held  in  1614,  and  with  them  perished  any  semblance  of  national
control  over  the  administration.      The   absence   of  regular   constitutional


APPENDIX  285

machinery,  added  to  the  greater  independence  conferred  by  the  droit  annuel,
impelled  the  parlement  to  advance  pretensions  which,  in  view  of  its  composi-
tion and  functions,  seem  ludicrous  to  Englishmen,  and  to  claim  a  decisive
veto  upon  all  acts  of  the  government.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the
similarity  of  name  with  the  English  Parliament,  then  beginning  its  great
struggle  with  the  Stuarts,  encouraged  the  French  institution  to  believe  that
it  could  discharge  similar  functions.  Richelieu,  with  characteristic  thorough-
ness, met  these  pretensions  by  the  edict  of  1641,  which  ordered  the  parlement
to  confine  itself  to  its  judicial  functions  and  to  abstain  from  all  intervention
in  affairs  of  State.  His  death  was  followed  by  the  disorders  of  the  Fronde,
when  the  parlement  and  the  nobles  made  a  last  effort  to  free  themselves  from
the  yoke  that  had  been  imposed  upon  them  by  the  monarchy.  Louis  XIV,
never  forgave  the  parlement  for  its  share  in  these  disturbances,  and  a  series
of  restrictive  edicts  in  his  reign  culminated  in  that  of  1673,  which  forbade
the  parlement  to  offer  any  remonstrance  until  after  the  registration  of  an
edict.

With  the  death  of  Louis  XIV.  in  1715  there  set  in  a  few  years  of  reaction-
ary administration  under  the  regency  of  Orleans.  For  his  own  purposes
Orleans  used  the  parlement  to  annul  the  will  of  the  late  king,  and  he  rewarded
it  by  restoring  the  right  of  remonstrance.  This  rendered  possible  a  long  and  at
times  envenomed  contest  between  the  court  and  the  parlement,  which  assumes
a  somewhat  wearisome  prominence  in  the  reign  of  Louis  XV.  All  sorts  of
expedients,  lits  de  justice,  exile  to  Pontoise,  threats  of  wholesale  dismissal,
were  vainly  employed  to  intimidate  the  judges.  At  last  in  1770  the  Chancellor
Maupeou  determined  to  take  a  final  step.  The  Parlement  de  Paris  was
abolished,  and  in  its  place  was  created  a  court  of  seventy-five  members,
nominated  by  the  king  and  holding  office  at  his  pleasure,  while  their  salary
was  to  be  adequate  for  their  dignity  and  epices  were  to  be  abolished.  The
provincial  parlements  were  also  suppressed,  and  their  duties  entrusted  to
reconstituted  courts  (1771).  The  change,  if  accomplished  at  another  time
and  by  other  hands,  might  have  been  both  beneficial  and  popular.  But  the
ministry  was  discredited  and  detested :  the  new  court,  nicknamed  the  Par-
lement Maupeou,  never  gained  the  confidence  of  the  people,  who  had  regarded
with  approbation  the  almost  heroic,  if  somewhat  selfish  and  short-sighted,
resistance  of  the  dispossessed  judges.  It  was,  accordingly,  an  extremely
popular  act  of  the  young  king,  Louis  XVI.,  when,  on  his  accession  (1774),  he
restored  the  parlements  to  their  former  power  and  organisation,  although
shrewd  observers,  like  Voltaire,  saw  that  they  were  more  likely  to  be  the
champions  of  privilege  and  reaction  than  of  any  real  measures  of  reform.
This  was  soon  discovered  when  the  National  Assembly  set  to  work  to  form
a  new  constitution,  and  the  old  judicial  system  of  France,  with  all  its  ano-
malies and  not  a  few  merits,  was  swept  away  in  1790.

The  Parlement  de  Paris  was  so  much  the  most  prominent  and  picturesque
part  of  the  judicial  system,  that  it  requires  and  receives  more  detailed  con-
sideration than  any  other  court.  The  twelve  provincial  parlements  may  be
more  briefly  dismissed.  In  a  literal  sense,  they  may  be  looked  upon  as
local  courts,  but  in  a  truer  sense  they  were  fragments  or  delegated  commis-
sions of  the  central  judicature  which  were  stationed,  for  administrative  con-
venience, in  local  centres.  Although  we  find  traces  at  times  of  rivalry  and
ill-feeling  between  the  Parlement  of  Paris  and  the  parlements  de  province,
yet  on  the  whole  they  were  united  by  the  defence  of  common  interests  and
may  be  regarded  as  forming  one  great  corporation.  The  oldest  and  most
influential  of  the  local  Parlements  was  that  of  Toulouse,  for  the  province


286  APPENDIX

of  Languedoc.  Originally  instituted  in  1302,  it  was  reunited  with  the  Parle-
ment  de  Paris  in  13 12,  and  was  not  revived  till  the  reign  of  Charles  VII.
(1443).  In  the  eighteenth  century  it  was  divided  into  a  grande  chambre,  a
tournelle,  three  chambers  of  enquetes,  and  one  of  requetes.  The  energy  and
self-confidence  of  its  members  were  shown  in  the  vigorous  resistance  which
they  offered  to  the  decrees  of  the  national  assembly  in  1790.  At  Grenoble
a.  parlcment  was  instituted  by  the  dauphin  Louis  in  1451  and  confirmed  by
Charles  VII.  in  1453.  Similar  courts  were  created  at  Bordeaux  for  Guienne
in  1462 ;  at  Dijon  for  the  duchy  of  Burgundy  in  1477 ;  at  Rouen  for  Nor-
mandy in  1499  ;  at  Aix  for  Provence  in  1501  ;  at  Rennes  for  Brittany  in
1553  ;  at  Pau  for  Beam  and  French  Navarre  in  1620;  at  Metz  for  the  Three
Bishoprics  in  1633  ;  at  Tournay  for  Flanders  in  1668  (transferred  in  1688
to  Douay) ;  at  Besan^on  for  Franche-Comte  (taking  the  place  of  an  earlier
parliament  at  Dole)  in  1676 ;  and  at  Nancy  for  Lorraine  after  the  annexa-
tion of  that  province  in  1769,  There  were  also  four  conseils-sonverains  in
outlying  provinces :  at  Ensisheim  (1657)  and  after  1698  at  Colmar  for  Alsace ;
at  Perpignan  for  Roussillon  (1660)  ;  at  Arras  for  Artois  (restored  in  1677) ;
and  in  Corsica  (1770).  All  of  these  were  supreme  courts  in  their  respective
districts.

While  the  parlenients  were  the  chief  agents  in  the  central  administration
of  justice,  there  were  other  sovereign  courts  which  possessed  independent
fragments  of  jurisdiction,  especially  in  matters  of  finance.  The  chamhre
des  comptes  was,  like  the  Parlement  de  Paris,  an  original  subdivision  of  the
cour  du  roy,  and  its  separate  existence  dates  from  the  reign  of  Philip  IV.
Its  primary  function  was  to  look  after  the  royal  domain,  which  at  the  time
of  its  origin  was  the  sole  source  of  royal  revenue.  It  received  and  audited
the  accounts  of  local  collectors ;  settled  all  disputes  as  to  what  was  due  from
those  who  had  to  pay  to  the  crown ;  and  kept  a  careful  register  of  all  edicts
concerning  the  domain,  of  all  transfers  of  property,  and  oilcttres  d'anoblisse-
ment.  The  chamber  was  made  stationary  in  Paris  in  1319,  and  the  appoint-
ment of  its  members  followed  the  same  changes  as  have  been  traced  in  the
case  of  the  Parlcment  de  Paris.  Though  far  less  prominent  in  history  than
the  latter  court,  the  chamhre  des  comptes  was  enabled  by  the  practice  ot
registration  to  advance  similar  claims  to  a  right  of  remonstrance  and  from
time  to  time  to  oppose  the  monarchy.  In  the  fifteenth  century  it  obtained
a  sepsira.te  procureur-general  and  avocat-general,  and  in  the  eighteenth  century
it  was  composed  of  a  premier  president,  twelve  presidents,  seventy-eight
mattres  des  comptes,  thirty-eight  correcteurs,  and  eighty-two  auditeurs.  Its
jurisdiction  had,  however,  been  limited  by  the  creation  of  provincial  chamhres
des  comptes  at  Rouen,  Grenoble,  Nantes,  Aix,  Dole,  Blois,  Pau,  Metz,  Dijon
and  Montpellier.

In  1355  and  1356,  when  the  English  War  had  involved  France  in  grave
financial  difficulties,  the  States-General  sought  to  add  to  the  revenue  from
domain  by  the  institution  of  indirect  taxes,  a  tax  upon  salt  and  upon  the
sale  of  certain  commodities.  The  levy  of  these  new  impositions,  collectively
known  as  aides,  required  a  new  machinery  in  addition  to  the  chamhre  des
comptes.  Hence  arose  the  cour  des  aides,  which  became  a  permanent  court
under  Charles  V.  Its  functions  with  regard  to  the  indirect  taxes  were  similar
to  those  discharged  by  the  chamhre  des  comptes  in  connection  with  the  domain.
It  consisted  in  1789  of  a  first  and  nine  other  presidents  and  fifty-four  coun-
sellors, and  a  proctireur  general  and  three  avocats-generaux  were  attached  to
it.  Most  of  the  provinces  which  had  a  local  chamhre  des  comptes  had  also
a  local  cour  des  aides.     In  some  the  two  courts  were  combined  together,  or


APPENDIX  287

one  or  other  was  attached  to  the  provincial  parliament.  [On  the  difficult
question  as  to  the  precise  limits  of  the  financial  jurisdiction  of  parlementy
chambre  dcs  comptes  and  cour  dcs  aides,  see  Gallery,  Histoire  des  Attributions
du  Parlement,  de  la  Cour  des  Aydes,  et  de  la  Chambre  des  Comptes  depuis
la  Feodalite  jusqu'a  la  Revolution  Frangaise  (Paris,  1880),]

In  the  fourteenth  century  the  French  kings  gained  an  important  victory
for  centralisation  by  establishing  the  principle  that  coinage  was  a  royal  right.
Hitherto  questions  pertaining  to  the  currency  had  concerned  only  the  domain
and  came  before  the  chambre  des  comptes.  In  1358  a  separate  cour  des
monnaies  was  created,  and  in  155 1  it  was  made  a  cotir  sonverain,  its  members
taking  rank  immediately  after  those  of  the  cour  des  aides.  Its  jurisdiction
included  all  charges  against  officials  and  workmen  of  the  mints,  money-
changers, jewellers,  and  generally  all  concerned  with  manufacture  or  trade  in
precious  metals.  It  consisted  at  the  time  of  its  abolition  in  1790  of  a  premier
president,  eight  presidents,  and  thirty-five  conseillcrs.  From  1704  to  1771
there  was  a  separate  conr  des  monnaies  at  Lyons.

Jurisdiction  in  the  department  of  eaux  ^^/or^is,  originally  belonging  to  the
parlement,  was  given  in  1558  to  a  court  in  Paris  known  as  the  table  de
marbre.  Similar  courts  were  created  locally  in  connection  with  the  provincial
parlements.  These  bodies,  though  they  had  a  large  amount  of  business  in
hearing  appeals  against  the  action  of  local  officers,  never  attained  to  the
dignity  of  sovereign  courts.

The  chdtelct  was  geographically  a  central  court,  and  it  is  of  great  pro-
minence in  the  history  of  France.  But  in  strict  theory  it  is  the  local  court
of  the  prevote  of  Paris,  and  only  differs  from  the  courts  of  other  prevotes  on
account  of  its  position  in  the  capital  and  the  consequent  importance  of  its
functions.

The  institutions  enumerated  above  constitute  the  normal  machinery  of
central  jurisdiction  in  France  before  the  Revolution.  But  side  by  side  with
them  there  existed  what  was,  in  origin  and  theory,  an  exceptional  jurisdiction,
and  this  was  in  practice  almost  as  active  and  important  as  the  work  of  the
ordinary  courts.  An  illustration  from  English  history  will  serve  to  make  the
matter  clear.  In  England  the  ordinary  exercise  of  royal  jurisdiction  was
delegated  in  the  thirteenth  century  to  the  great  courts  of  King's  Bench,
Common  Pleas  and  Exchequer.  But  the  king  did  not  surrender  his  judicial
power,  and  as  time  went  on  he  was  called  upon  to  exercise  it  more  and  more.
Hence  arose,  side  by  side  with  the  ordinary  courts,  the  jurisdiction  of  the
concilium  ordinarium  or  Privy  Council,  and  of  its  numerous  oif-shoots  such
as  the  Court  of  Chancery,  the  Star  Chamber,  the  High  Commission,  etc.  In
France  we  can  trace  a  similar  course  of  events.  The  king  never  abdicated  his
judicial  power.  He  could,  if  he  chose,  preside  in  the  Parlement  de  Paris,
when  the  session  became  a  lit  de  justice  and  the  personal  authority  of  the
king  overrode  the  power  of  the  ordinary  counsellors.  He  had  the  right  of
evocation,  i.e.,  he  could  transfer  a  suit  from  any  court  to  another  or  to  his  own
council.  He  could  appoint  special  judicial  commissions  for  the  trial  of  any
particular  case.  He  could,  of  course,  grant  a  pardon  from  any  sentence,  and
he  possessed  a  power  of  arbitrary  imprisonment  by  lettres  de  cachet.

In  the  exercise  of  his  judicial  authority  the  king  was  aided,  as  in  the  other
work  of  government,  by  his  conseil.  So  burdensome  did  this  judicial  work
become  that  it  was  found  necessary  in  1497  to  create  a  new  court,  the  grand
conseil,  which  bears  in  its  origin  the  same  relation  to  the  conseil  du  roy  as
the  English  Chancery  Court  bore  to  the  concilium  ordinarium.  But  the
French  court,  though  it  was  recognised  as  a  cour  souveraine,  never  played  so


288  APPENDIX

important  a  part  as  its  English  analogue.  Its  jurisdiction  was  mainly  con-
cerned with  disputes  connected  with  administration,  and  with  cases  touching
ecclesiastical  temporalities,  though  questions  as  to  the  regale  were  specially
reserved  for  the  grande  chambre  of  the  Paris  parlement.  The  grand
conseil  was  less  independent,  or  at  any  rate  less  obstructive  than  the  parle-
ment. Dubois,  when  he  quarrelled  with  the  parlement  about  the  Bull
'  Unigenitus,''  tried  to  humiliate  his  opponents  by  extending  the  powers  of  the
grand  conseil,  and  even  had  the  Bull  registered  by  it.  In  1753,  with  the
same  object,  Louis  XV.  handed  over  all  ecclesiastical  questions  to  the  more
submissive  court.  In  1771  Maupeou  abolished  the  grand  conseil,  not  because
it  had  given  any  offence,  but  because  he  wished  its  members  to  fill  the  new
courts  which  he  was  forming  to  take  the  place  of  the  dissolved  parlement.
But  in  1774  the  old  judicial  machinery  was  restored,  and  the  grand  conseil
continued  to  exist  till  1790.  It  was  composed  in  its  last  days  of  z.  premier
president,  four  presidents  a  mortier,  and  forty-eight  counsellors.  Its  sessions
were  held  in  the  Louvre.

In  spite  of  the  creation  of  this  court,  the  judicial  work  of  the  royal
council  continued  to  be  very  heavy,  and  in  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth
centuries  we  find  it  in  the  hands  of  a  regular  committee  of  the  council,
called  the  conseil  des  parties,  which  sat  under  the  presidency  of  the
Chancellor.  In  some  ways  this  was  the  most  important  and  efficient  court
in  France,  because  it  represented  an  omnipotent  executive  authority,  and
also  because  its  special  duty  was  to  facilitate  and  strengthen  the  work  of
administration.  Its  nearest  equivalent  in  English  History  is  the  Court  of
Star-Chamber  under  the  Tudors.  Before  it  were  brought  most  of  the  suits
which  were  "evoked"  by  royal  authority  from  the  lower  courts,  important
cases  affecting  officers  of  the  crown,  and  appeals  against  the  action  of  the
local  intendants.

The  preparation  of  cases  for  the  consideration  of  the  conseil  des  parties
was  in  the  hands  of  a  body  of  men  known  as  the  maitres  des  requetes  de
Vhotel  du  roi.  These  are  to  be  carefully  distinguished  from  the  maitres  des
requetes  du  parlement,  though  at  an  early  period  the  distinction  was  by  no
means  clearly  marked.  These  men,  who  were  under  the  control  of  the
Chancellor,  were  not  unlike  the  English  clerks  in  Chancery  in  the  Middle
Ages.  They  acted  as  rapporteurs  to  the  royal  council.  All  administrative
appeals,  all  demands  for  the  evocation  of  suits  or  for  the  quashing  of  judicial
decisions,  came  in  the  first  instance  before  them.  They  prepared  all  docu-
ments for  the  great  seal.  There  were  about  eighty  of  these  officials,  but
only  half  of  them  were  in  attendance  on  the  council  for  alternate  periods  of
three  months.  The  other  half  formed  a  judicial  court,  called  les  requetes  de
Vhotel,  which  was  the  court  of  first  instance  for  suits  in  which  persons  were
involved  who  had  letters  of  committimus.  These  letters,  which  were  granted
to  nearly  all  members  of  the  official  and  privileged  classes  in  France,
exempted  the  holders  from  ordinary  jurisdiction  and  entitled  them  to  bring
their  cases  before  the  hotel  du  roi.  This  system  of  droit  administratif  {see
Dicey,  Law  of  the  Constitution,  xii.),  by  which  servants  of  the  state  are
protected  from  the  rules  of  ordinary  law  as  enforced  in  the  ordinary  courts —
a  system  for  which  there  is  no  name  in  English — is  one  of  the  dominant
features  of  the  judicial  administration  of  France.  It  undoubtedly  lent  itself
to  serious  abuses  under  the  Ancien  Regime,  but  the  system  was  so  deeply
rooted  in  the  French  mind  that  the  Revolution  not  only  failed  to  effect  its
destruction,  but  systematised  it  and  gave  it  a  definite  procedure  and  termin-
ology which  it  had  not  possessed  before.


APPENDIX  289

The  mattres  des  requetes  de  Vhotel  formed  the  great  nursery  of  French
administrators.  Most  of  the  prominent  ministers  of  the  eighteenth  century
began  their  official  career  as  members  of  this  body,  from  which  were  usually
chosen  the  intendants^  the  conseillers  d'etat,  and  the  secretaries  of  state.


B.  Local  Jurisdiction.

The  local  administration  of  justice  in  France  is  rendered  obscure,  partly
because  the  monarchy  retained,  in  order  to  make  money  by  their  sale,  a  number
of  offices  which  were  practically  obsolete,  and  partly  because  judicial  functions
were  never  sharply  divided  from  financial  and  general  business.  The  earliest
royal  officials  under  the  Capet  kings  were  the  prevots  of  the  original  duchy
of  Paris.  They  were  busied  with  all  branches  of  administration,  and  looked
after  all  the  interests  of  the  King  in  his  domain.  By  far  the  most  important
of  the  prevots  was  the  prevot  of  Paris,  whose  court  came  to  be  known  as  the
chutelet  from  the  ancient  fortress,  part  of  which  dated  back  to  Roman  times,
in  which  it  sat.  In  later  days  it  was  split  into  three  chambers,  in  which
were  respectively  judged  civil  suits,  criminal  cases,  and  appeals  from  lesser
courts.  The  importance  of  the  chutelet,  as  the  chief  criminal  court  in  the
capital,  may  be  measured  by  the  fact  that  in  1771  there  were  more  than
1,550  of  its  agents  at  work  in  Paris.

As  the  royal  domain  increased,  and  especially  after  the  great  acquisitions
of  Philip  Augustus,  the  number  of  the  prevots  was  increased  until  it  became
inconveniently  large.  To  simplify  and  centralise  the  administration,  new
officials,  called  baillis,  were  appointed  in  the  thirteenth  century,  and  their
district,  which  was  larger  than  a  prcvote,  was  called  a  hailliage.  In  Langue-
doc,  after  its  annexation,  similar  officers  were  created,  but  they  were  called
senechaux,  and  their  districts  senechaussees.  The  baillis  and  senechaux,  to
whom  the  prevots  became  subordinate,  may  be  compared  with  the  English
sheriffs  in  the  Norman  and  Plantagenet  times.  Like  the  sheriffs  they
superintended  within  their  district  justice,  finance  and  military  organisation.
Like  the  sheriffs  they  were  first  employed  and  promoted  as  royal  officers,
and  then  regarded  by  their  employer  with  jealousy  and  suspicion.  Gradually
their  powers  were  taken  away  or  carefully  restricted.  Their  financial  ad-
ministration was  carefully  supervised  by  the  chambre  des  comptes,  and  many
of  their  functions  in  this  department  were  in  the  fourteenth  century  handed
over  to  the  elus.  The  command  of  the  local  troops  was  taken  from  them
and  entrusted  to  special  military  officers.  Their  jurisdiction,  once  very
extensive,  was  subordinated  by  the  encouragement  of  appeals  to  the  parlement,
and  was  practically  annihilated  by  the  creation  of  presidiaux  in  the  sixteenth
century.  Thus,  again  like  the  English  sheriffs,  the  baillis  sunk  to  the  posi-
tion of  purely  ornamental  officials,  with  no  important  function  at  all.  Their
district,  the  bailliage  or  senechaussee,  became  as  obsolete  as  their  powers,
until  it  was  revived  in  1789  as  an  electoral  division  for  the  choice  of  deputies
to  the  States-General.

There  were  a  number  of  local  officials  whose  functions  were  mainly
financial,  but  who  had  judicial  duties  in  connection  with  finance.  The  chief
of  these  were  (i)  the  tresoriers,  who  collected  the  dues  from  the  domain  and
accounted  for  them  to  the  chambre  des  comptes;  (2)  the  elus,  who  were
originally  appointed  by  the  States-General  of  1356  in  connection  with  the
new  taxes  or  aides  which  were  then  imposed  (their  district  was  called  an
election,  and  they  were  subordinated  to  the  coiir  des  aides) ;  (3)  the  receveurs-

VOL.    III.  19


290  APPENDIX

generaux  created  in  the  sixteenth  century.  An  edict  of  1577  divided  France
into  sixteen  districts,  in  each  of  which  was  appointed  a  bureau  des  finances.
Each  bureau  contained  two  tresoriers,  two  receveurs-generaux,  and  three
other  members.  These  districts  were  called  generalites,  and  by  1789  their
number  had  grown  from  sixteen  to  thirty-three.  The  elections  in  those  pro-
vinces in  which  they  existed  (there  were  179  elections  in  the  eighteenth
century)  were  now  subdivisions  of  the  generalite,  and  the  elus  were  sub-
ordinated to  the  control  of  the  bureaux.  The  generalite,  originally  instituted
for  financial  reasons,  remained  until  the  Revolution  the  chief  administrative
division  of  France.

The  most  important  judicial  change  of  the  sixteenth  century  was  the
creation  of  a  court  midway  between  the  parlements  and  the  courts  of  the
bailliages.  This  was  the  presidial,  composed  of  nine  judges  who  tried  with-
out appeal  all  civil  cases  in  which  property  not  exceeding  250  livres  in  value
was  involved.  From  250  to  500  livres,  they  could  try  the  case,  but  subject  to
appeal  to  a  parlement.  They  had  also  a  criminal  jurisdiction  similiar  to  that
of  the  baillis,  whom  they  practically  superseded.  The  nuniher  of  presidiaux
was  originally  thirty-two,  but  was  afterwards  increased  to  a  hundred.

By  the  eighteenth  century  most  of  the  presidiaux  had  fallen  into  such
decay  that  seats  in  them  were  hardly  saleable.  The  chief  causes  of  this  were,
(i)  the  old  money  limits  were  retained  though  the  value  of  money  had
enormously  decreased ;  and  (2)  the  number  of  persons  who  had  letters  of
committimus  had  been  lavishly  multiplied.  Thus  most  of  the  local  courts
had  hardly  any  work  to  do,  and  their  profits  were  proportionately  small.

Another  cause  of  the  declining  importance  of  local  jurisdiction  was  the
appointment  of  the  most  famous  and  influential  agents  of  the  central  ad-
ministration, the  intendants.  In  the  sixteenth  century  it  was  a  not  uncommon
practice  to  send  out  maitres  des  requetes  de  Vhotel  into  the  provinces  with
special  commissions.  Richelieu  appointed  similar  officials  and  made  them
permanent.  Their  full  title  was  Intendants  of  justice,  police  and  finance,
and  their  district  was  the  generalite.  Their  posts  were  never  sold,  and  they
could  be  dismissed  at  pleasure.  They  were  thus  completely  under  the  con-
trol of  the  central  government,  and  there  was  never  any  attempt  on  their  part
to  obtain  independence.  From  the  first  they  were  regarded  with  bitter
jealousy  both  by  the  nobles  and  by  the  parlements.  One  of  the  earliest  demands
of  the  Fronde  was  for  their  suppression,  and  an  edict  to  that  effect  was
actually  extorted  by  the  Parlement  de  Paris  (July  13th,  1648).  But  the
failure  of  the  Fronde  was  followed  by  the  revival  of  the  intendants,  and
the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.  witnessed  their  establishment  in  every  generalite  and
an  enormous  increase  in  their  powers.  Each  intendant  had  a  subdelegue,
nominated  by  himself.

The  intendant  was  not  primarily  a  judicial  officer,  any  more  than  the
conseil  du  roi  was  primarily  a  court  of  justice.  But  the  conseil  was  a  court
of  justice,  and  the  intendant  had  a  dominant  voice  in  controlling  local  juris-
diction. In  fact  the  manifold  functions  of  the  intendant  may  be  best  grasped
by  regarding  him  as  the  agent  and  representative  of  the  dominant  council.
And  his  influence  was  the  greater  because  it  was  from  his  reports  and  those
of  his  colleagues  that  the  council  received  the  information  and  the  sugges-
tions upon  which  the  royal  edicts  were  based.  The  efficient  government  of
France,  apart  from  the  carrying  on  of  routine  duties,  was  in  the  hands  of  the
council  and  its  trusted  agents.  As  De  Tocqueville  says  (p.  130  of  the  Eng-
lish translation),  "  the  administrative  engine  built  up  was  so  vast,  so  compli-
cated, so  clumsy,  and  so  unproductive,  that  at  last  it  was  left  swinging  on


APPENDIX  291

in  space,  while  a  more  simple  and  handy  instrument  of  government  was
framed  beside  it ;  and  this  really  performed  the  duties  which  these  innumer-
able officials  were  supposed  to  be  doing."

One  great  object  of  the  local  administration  which  the  central  government
built  up  in  France  had  been  to  supplant  or  destroy  the  territorial  power  of
the  nobles  and  especially  the  seigneurial  right  of  justice.  This  object  had
been  satisfactorily  achieved  long  before  the  Revolution.  In  the  Middle
Ages  the  feudal  lords  had  enjoyed  very  extensive  power,  haute,  moyenne,
or  basse  justice  according  to  their  rank  and  influence.  Haute  justice  included
criminal  cases,  and  its  holder  could  erect  a  gallows  and  a  pillory.  But  these
distinctions  had  long  disappeared  before  1789.  It  is  true  that  seigneurial
justice  remained,  but  it  had  been  immensely  curtailed,  and  it  had  lost  all  real
independence.  The  surviving  rights  were  valued,  not  as  a  basis  of  power,
but  as  a  source  of  revenue.  The  lord  no  longer  took  any  personal  part  in
jurisdiction,  and  his  authority  consisted  merely  in  the  right  to  appoint  a
judge  to  represent  him.  And  even  in  this  the  government  stepped  in  to
direct  his  choice.  A  series  of  edicts  prescribed  a  number  of  qualifications
for  the  seigneurial  judges,  with  the  result  that  the  office  was  usually  en-
trusted to  educated  and  capable  men,  instead  of  to  mere  tools  of  the  lord.
And  their  functions  were  narrowly  limited.  Ever  since  the  thirteenth
century  a  number  of  cases,  such  as  treason,  sedition,  false  coinage,  etc.,
had  been  reserved,  as  cas  royaux,  to  the  justice  of  the  king,  and  the  number
of  these  cases  had  been  steadily  increased.  Also  appeals  from  the  decisions
of  the  seigneurial  courts  to  the  parlements  had  been,  first  allowed,  and  then
encouraged.  In  this  we  see  the  constant  policy  of  the  French  government
to  gain  the  favour  of  the  people  by  protecting  them  against  arbitrary
oppression  on  the  part  of  the  nobles.  One  benefit,  however,  they  failed  to
grant,  in  local  as  in  central  administration,  viz.,  gratuitous  justice.  The
seigneurial  judges  were  ill-paid,  and  they  gained  their  income  by  exacting
contributions  from  the  suitors.  The  less  they  had  to  do,  the  higher  their
charges  became.  It  was  as  necessary  to  pay  the  local  judges  for  the  decision
of  a  petty  case,  as  it  was  to  pay  the  grande  chambre  for  the  settlement  of  an
important  appeal.  The  multiplicity  of  local  tribunals  in  the  provinces,
where  the  seigneurial  judges  sat  side  by  side  with  the  royal  presidiaux  and
prevots,  with  the  intendants  and  sub-delegates,  constituted  a  serious  burden
upon  the  people.  But  it  had  one  beneficial  result.  It  spread  through
France  a  number  of  trained  and  educated  lawyers,  familiar  with  local  needs
and  capable  of  giving  expression  to  them.  This  serves  in  some  measure  to
explain  the  marked  ability  shown  in  many  of  the  electoral  assemblies  in  1789.
It  was  these  trained  lawyers  who  drew  up  the  cahiers  of  grievances,  often
admirable  both  in  matter  and  style,  and  it  was  from  among^them  that  were
chosen  many  of  the  most  competent  delegates  of  the  Tiers-Etat  in  the  States-
General.


292


JUSTICE

PART  II

By  The  Editor

The  judicial  changes  made  by  the  Revolution  were  not  by  any  means  so
absurd  as  the  administrative  changes :  there  were  many  good  lawyers  in  the
Constituent,  and  although  the  codification  of  law  was  not  begun  before  the
Committee  of  the  Convention,  appointed  for  that  purpose  in  the  summer  of
1793,  and  although  it  was  not  completed  till  1804,  it  was  evident  from  the
first  that  the  droit  coutumier  would  get  the  better  of  the  droit  ecrit,  in  spite
of  the  protests  of  the  Southern  lawyers.

In  the  meantime,  with  the  abolition  of  the  provinces,  all  provincial  privi-
leges and  customs,  legal  as  well  as  administrative,  were  swept  away,  and
yet  no  one  system  of  law  was  substituted  for  the  old  diversities  :  until  the
end  of  the  Convention,  it  was  impossible  to  say  M^hat  law  any  one  judge —
departmental  or  district — was  administering.

The  reorganisation  of  justice  is  heralded  in  a  law  of  Oct.  ist,  1789,  which
(Helie,  Les  Constitutions  de  la  France,  i.  p.  45)  asserts  the  strange  principle
of  election  of  judges,  and  declares  that,  though  in  the  name  of  the  King,  justice
must  be  administered  by  legally  established  tribunals  according  to  the  prin-
ciples of  the  Constitution.  The  first  actual  blow  at  the  Parlements  was
dealt  on  Nov.  3rd,  1789,  on  the  motion  of  Lameth,  that  for  the  moment
the  legal  business  of  the  country  was  to  be  transacted  by  the  Chambres  de
Vacation  only.  Meanwhile  the  amount  of  compensation  for  the  judicial
offices  to  be  abolished  was  fixed  at  350  millions.  On  August  i6th — 24th,  1790,
further  and  more  detailed  legislation  was  carried,  which  (Helie,  i.  146,  sqq.)
abolished  sale  of  office  and  made  justice  gratuitous ;  all  judges  were  made
elective ;  the  form  of  election  was  through  the  "  secondary  electors,"  and
office  was  tenable  for  six  years,  when  a  judge  might  be  re-elected.  Thouret's
committee  proposed  that  the  King  should  have  the  power  of  selecting  the
judge  from  candidates  proposed  by  the  electors,  and  this  proposal  was  only
lost  by  53  votes,  a  fact  which  shows  that  the  assembly  was  alive  to  the
dangers  of  an  elective  magistracy  (Helie,  i.  159).  Once  elected,  a  judge
might  be  shifted  from  one  court  to  another  without  the  necessity  of  re-
election (Helie,  i.  159).  The  King  had  to  confirm  elections  and  hand  over
the  patents  to  the  judges,  but  he  had  no  power  to  refuse  them.  A  judge
had  to  be  thirty  years  old  or  more,  and  either  to  have  practised  at  the  bar  or
sat  on  the  bench  for  five  years  previous  to  election  :  judges  were  not  to  legis-
late or  make  reglements,  but  to  refer  to  the  assembly  if  a  law  required
interpretation  or  if  a  new  law  was  wanted.  The  legislative,  judicial  and
administrative  bodies  were  specifically  separated.  To  all  citizens  was  given
the  right  to  plead  their  own  causes  either  verbally  or  in  writing.     There


APPENDIX  293

were  to  be  Elective  Juries  of  at  least  twelve  for  criminal  cases,  and  the
prisoner  was  to  have  the  right  of  challenging  twenty  jurors  without  cause
assigned  ;  juries  in  civil  cases  were  rejected  after  some  discussion  ;  much
encouragement  was  given  to  arbitration  ;  privileged  justice  was  abolished :
causes  were  not  to  be  delayed,  but  to  come  up  in  their  regular  order ;
measures  were  to  be  taken  for  the  simplification  of  civil  procedure  ;  the
criminal  code  to  be  subject  to  perpetual  revision.

A  juge  dc  pttix  and  two  prudhommcs  (assessors),  to  be  elected  biennially  by
the  "  primary  electors  "  in  each  canton,  and  in  each  town  of  over  2,000  inhabi-
tants, had  jurisdiction  in  matters  concerning  personal  property  only,  without
an  appeal  where  the  property  involved  was  of  less  than  50  liv.  in  value ;  these
courts  also  dealt  with  cases  of  local  disputes,  slanders,  ?ssault  and  battery
and  the  like,  when  not  coming  within  the  cognisance  of  the  Criminal  Courts :
appeals  from  the  Juges  de  Paix  lay  to  ih&juges  de  district.  In  each  district
there  was  to  be  a  Civil  Tribunal  of  five  judges  (and  four  siipplcants) — in  cases
where  there  was  a  town  in  the  district  of  50,000  inhabitants  or  upwards,  six
judges  sitting  in  two  courts — they  were  to  have  jurisdiction,  in  addition  to
appeals  from  the  Juges  de  Paix,  in  all  personal  property  cases,  except  such  as
were  cognisable  by  the  jfuges  de  Paix  and  also,  excepting  affaires  de  commerce,
in  districts  where  there  were  Tribnnaux  dc  Commerce  {vide  infra) ;  the  limit  was
an  involved  value  of  100  liv.  personalty,  and  for  real  property  50  liv.  Appeals
from  these  tribunals  were  much  discouraged,  but  an  arrangement  was  intro-
duced by  which  parties  could  agree  to  appeal  to  any  district  tribunal  in
France.

The  District  Tribunals  constituted  by  this  new  law  were  far  too  numerous ;
there  were  544  Tribunals  in  all,  and  the  result  was  that  the  judges  were  both
idle  and  inexperienced.  (The  Constitution  of  the  year  III.  saw  this,  and  sub-
stituted Departmental  Tribunals ;  an  error  in  the  opposite  direction  (Helie,  i.
454,  474).)  Some  of  the  commissaires  du  roi  were  to  practise  in  each  court:
their  duties  were  to  insist  on  the  enforcement  of  laws  which  concern  public
order  :  to  see  that  the  interests  of  absent  parties  were  not  neglected  :  they  were
to  insist  on  the  observance  of  the  regular  forms  and,  after  judgment,  on  the
execution  of  the  laws.  To  the  innumerable  Municipalities  was  unfortun-
ately given  the  entire  system  of  police,  with  only  an  ill-defined  appeal  to
the  district  tribunals.

Commercial  courts  of  five  judges  each  were  established  in  commercial
centres :  they  had  the  final  decision  in  commercial  cases  where  not  more  than
1,000  liv.  were  involved:  as  these  judges  were  elected  by  an  assembly  of
merchants,  bankers,  etc.,  they  would  probably  be  local  and  experienced
business  men.  On  Sept.  nth,  1790,  regular  "  Administrative  Tribunals  "  were
established  to  have  cognisance  of  matters  concerning  tax-collecting,  public
works,  high  roads,  police.

Paris,  that  is  the  City  and  Department,  was  (by  the  law  of  Aug.  25th,
1790)  to  have  six  civil  Tribunals  each  with  five  juges,  four  suppliants  and  a
commissaire  du  roi :  and  (by  the  law  of  Sept.  25th,  1790)  (Helie,  i.  168)  a
yuge  de  Paix  in  each  section.

By  a  decree  of  Nov.  27th,  1790,  the  new  judicial  system  was  augmented
by  the  establishment  of  a  Cour  de  Cassation  (Helie,  i.  185,  sqq.)  which  had
jurisdiction  over  all  the  lower  courts  except  the  juges  de  paix  when  judging
en  dernier  ressort ;  but  the  decisions  of  this  court  were  restricted  to  the
annulling  of  previous  judgment  on  account  of  bad  law,  errors  in  procedure,
etc.  ;  it  could  not  pronounce  a  judgment  of  its  own.  The  judges  of  the  Cour
de  Cassation  were  elected  by  the  departmental  authorities,  forty-two  at  a  time


294  APPENDIX

for  four  years ;  forty-two  departments  being  drawn  to  elect  at  the  first  elec-
tion, the  remaining  forty-one  electing  at  the  next.

By  laws  of  Jan.  20th,  and  Feb.  25th,  1791,  a  Criminal  Tribunal  was  estab-
lished in  each  department, — a  presidentnamed  by  the  electors  of  the  department,
and  three  judges  chosen  to  serve  every  three  months  from  the  District  Tribunals
(this  was  the  only  point  in  which  the  legislators  condescended  to  copy  old
French  Law) :  also  a  public  accuser  elected  by  the  department  for  six  years ;
this  last  is  a  very  curious  item,  as  it  shows  how  profound  was  the  mistrust  of
the  executive :  the  public  accuser  is  in  fact  '  the  voice  of  common  fame  : '  the
executive  might  arrest  a  man  suspected  of  crime  but  it  might  not  bring  him
to  judgment.  Small  criminal  cases  were  cognisable  by  Juges  de  Paix ;  but
there  was  to  be  a  King's  Commissary  in  each  tribunal  and  the  accuser  might
hear  what  he  had  to  say.

Finally,  on  May  15th,  1791,  a  High  Court  was  established  at  Orleans  for
trying  persons  accused  of  treason  (lese-natioii) ;  four  judges  and  a  jury  of
twenty-four,  the  latter  chosen  from  a  list  of  persons  elected,  two  by  each
department,  biennially :  they  can  only  act  on  accusations  made  by  the  Legis-
lative Assembly :  royal  pardon  is  no  bar  to  an  impeachment  before  this  court :
the  four  judges  are  chosen  by  lot  from  the  Cour  de  Cassation :  it  is  usually
said  that  the  judges  in  this  court  were  nominated  by  the  King:  the  text  of
the  constitution,  as  printed  by  M.  Helie,  expressly  says  the  reverse  (pp.  290
and  230).

It  is  probable  that  if  the  old  judicial  system  was  too  complicated,  the  new
one  reproduced  that  error :  Mirabeau  (writing  to  la  Marck,  Bacourt,  i.  437)
says  that  the  new  system  was  far  too  complicated.

Again,  if  the  new  system  was  less  expensive,  it  was  certainly  less  pure :
we  have  seen  that  the  judges  of  the  Ancien  Regime  were  at  least  independent
and  in  practice  irremovable ;  the  elective  judges  of  the  new  regime  were
under  the  most  direct  control  of  the  new  mob-sovereign,  and  to  expect  pure
justice  from  a  bench  so  constituted  was  foolish.  At  the  same  time  there
was  much  that  was  good  in  the  new  judicial  system ;  it  is  at  any  rate  less
easy  to  point  out  in  it  glaring  absurdities  than  in  the  new  administrative
system.


295


THE  FRENCH  ARMY  IN  THE  REVOLUTION

By  Christopher  T.  Atkinson,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Exeter  College,

Oxford

Authorities  :  Hauterive,  L'Arm^e  sous  la  Revolution  [Paris,  1894  :  especially
good  for  the  attitude  of  the  troops  towards  the  Ancien  Rdgime  and  towards
the  Revolution,  but  gives  practically  no  references  and  no  statistics] ;  Duruy,
L'Arm^e  Royale  en  1789  [Paris,  1888  :  careful  and  fairly  complete,  but  gives
more  about  the  organisation  and  administration  of  the  Army  than  about  its  ten-
dencies, ideas  and  sympathies];  Chuquet,  Les  Guerres  de  la  Revolution  [Paris:
a  series  published  at  various  dates  and  dealing  in  great  detail  with  the  campaigns
of  1792-3:  Vols.  i.  ("La  Premiere  Invasion  Prussienne "),  ii.(  "Valmy"),  iii.
("  La  Retraite  de  Brunswick  ")  give  a  complete  account  of  the  first  campaign  in  the
East  of  France,  with  copious  references,  etc.  :  vol.  xi.  brings  the  series  down  to
"  Hondschoote  "  ;  the  chapters  in  vol.  i.  on  the  French  and  Prussian  armies  are  of
great  value]  ;  Dubail,  Precis  de  I'Histoire  Militaire  [Paris,  1879  :  gives  a  few  par-
ticulars as  to  the  organisation,  tactics,  etc.,  of  the  Republican  armies]  ;  and  other
works.

The  great  victories  won  by  French  arms  between  1792  and  1815  have  not
always  been  assigned  to  their  true  causes.  The  ardent  patriotism  and  fervid
enthusiasm  with  which  Frenchmen  rallied  to  repel  the  invasion  of  1792,  the
great  organising  genius  of  Carnot  and  of  Bonaparte,  the  new  spirit  of  Liberty,
Fraternity  and  Equality,  of  which  Valmy  and  Jemmappes  are  said  to  be  the
first-fruits,  these  and  other  reasons  are  often  given,  but  one  hears  very  little
about  the  reforms  by  which  the  War  Ministers  of  the  Ancien  Regime  between
1763  and  1789  had  laid  the  foundation  for  subsequent  successes.  It  would  be
a  great  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  work  of  Choiseul,  of  Saint-Germain  and
of  Segur  had  entirely  perished  with  the  Monarchy  which  they  served,  or  to
overlook  the  fact  that  the  Army  which  checked  Brunswick  and  saved  the
Republic  in  1792  was  only  the  old  Army  of  the  Bourbon  Monarchy  in  a
slightly  different  aspect.

In  1789  the  "paper  strength"  of  the  French  Army  was  some  180,000,
besides  55,000  Militia  as  a  reserve.  [N.B. — The  various  estimates  differ
between  160,000  and  180,000,  but  Duruy  ("  L'Armee  Royale  en  1789,"  pp.  7-9)
gives  iSi,ooo.]  Of  these  the  Maison  du  Roi  accounted  for  8,000,  one  half
belonging  to  the  Gardes  Frangaises,  the  regiment  which  was  soon  to  earn
an  unenviable  notoriety  for  ill-discipline  by  being  the  first  in  which  serious
disorders  occurred,  while  the  faithful  but  unfortunate  Swiss  amounted  to
1,000.  But  the  Maison  du  Roi  was  no  longer  the  magnificent  force  which
had  decided  the  day  at  Steenkirk  and  won  such  fame  under  Louis  XIV. ;  it
had  not  been  in  action  since  Fontenoy  and  had  lost  much  of  its  old  prestige.
Indeed  it  was  felt  that  it  was  "  under  a  King  like  Louis  XVI.  merely  a  costly
anachronism  "  (Duruy,  p.  49),  as  was  shown  by  the  disbanding  of  several
corps,  amongst  others  the  Grenadiers  a  Cheval  and  the  Mousquet aires,  and


296  APPENDIX

the  reduction  of  the  strength  of  the  rest  in  1775.  But  a  more  important
change  had  been  effected  among  the  infantry  of  the  line.  Hitherto  regiments
had  differed  in  organisation,  in  establishment,  in  pay,  in  privileges,  in  their
relations  to  the  general  administration  of  the  Army,  according  as  they
belonged  to  the  Vieux  (the  oldest  regiments  in  the  Army,  tracing  their
descent  from  the  handes  raised  by  Francis  I.,  the  senior  of  which  was  the
regiment  de  Picardie),  to  the  Petits  Vieux  {e.g.,  the  Auvergne,  which
dated  back  to  Henry  IV.),  or  were  regiments  royaux  (g  in  number),
regiments  des  princes  (10),  regiments  a  prevote  {i.e.,  free  from  the  Provost
Marshal's  jurisdiction  and  forming  their  own  courts-martial),  regiments  de
gentilshommes,  regiments  des  provinces,  or  regiments  fournis  de  Vustensile
(i.e.,  provided  with  baggage  and  camp  equipment  by  the  King)  (Duruy,
pp.  51-53).  This  chaos  was  now  reduced  to  order,  and  practical  uni-
formity in  organisation  and  equipment  introduced,  each  regiment  having
a  definite  establishment  of  two  battalions  each  of  ten  companies,  one  being
a  grenadier  company  and  one  light  infantry.  The  Regiment  du  Roi,  which
had  four  battalions,  and  the  12  regiments  of  light  infantry,  which  had  only
one  apiece,  were  the  only  exceptions  to  this  rule.  Of  foreigners  there  were
23  regiments  of  infantry  of  the  line,  11  being  Swiss,  8  German,  3  Irish
and  I  Italian,  while  in  May  1778  to  each  of  the  78  ordinary  regiments  of  the
line  was  attached  a  battalion  of  militia  (known  as  garrison  battalions)
to  serve  as  depot  in  case  of  war.  The  Militia  also  included  3  regiments
of  royal  grenadiers  and  14  regiments  provinciaux,  7  of  them  being  artillery,
5  pioneers  and  2  gendarmerie  for  Corsica  and  Paris,  and  were  raised  by
ballot  in  a  manner  which  bore  very  heavily  on  the  classes  subjected  to  it,
as  exemptions  were  readily  obtained  even  by  the  lesser  bourgeoisie.  This
service  was  exceedingly  unpopular,  as  in  case  of  war  the  militiamen  were
not  discharged  when  their  nominal  period  of  6  years'  service  expired,  and
were  even  drafted  without  their  consent  into  the  Regulars  to  fill  up  the  gaps
{cf.  Duruy,  pp.  141-149).  Another  reform  was  the  large  increase  in  light
troops  after  the  Seven  Years'  War  (Duruy,  p.  55),  the  light  infantry  and
light  cavalry  being  increased,  while  the  comparatively  useless  heavy  cavalry
were  reduced,  6  regiments  being  disbanded  and  the  rest  cut  down  from  4
squadrons  apiece  to  3.  There  were  in  1789  24  regiments  of  "  cavalry,"  2  of
"carabineers,"  18  of  "dragoons"  (all  these  counted  as  "heavies"),  12  of
chasseurs  and  6  of  "hussars"  (these  "light  cavalry"  had  4  squadrons
per  regiment),  a  total  of  204  squadrons,  averaging  perhaps  150  strong.  The
artillery  included  7  regiments  each  of  two  battalions,  besides  6  companies  of
miners  and  10  of  pioneers,  the  engineers  having  no  rank  and  file  but  only
some  300  officers.  In  these  "  scientific  arms "  France  was  well  ahead  of
all  other  powers  (Duruy,  p.  158),  the  reforms  of  Valliere  and  Gribeauval,
the  latter  the  greatest  artillerist  of  the  age,  having  had  great  results.  An
uniform  standard  of  construction  had  been  introduced  at  the  different  arsenals,
together  with  many  technical  improvements  in  manufacture  of  the  greatest
importance  (Duruy,  pp.  162,  163),  the  multiplicity  of  types  prevailing  among
the  guns  in  use  had  been  reduced,  and  while  the  24-pounders  and  i6-pounders
had  been  relegated  to  the  siege-train,  lighter  pieces,  which  could  co-operate
freely  with  the  other  arms,  had  taken  their  place.  In  a  word,  the  way  had  been
paved  for  the  great  achievements  of  the  French  artillery  under  the  Revolution
and  the  Empire.  Similarly  it  was  universally  acknowledged  that  the  French
engineers  were  unequalled  in  the  other  Armies  of  Europe,  for  even  in  the
days  of  Frederick  II.  the  Prussian  Army  had  been  distinctly  weak  in  this
branch,  weaker  far  than  the  Austrians,  who,  in  their  turn,  had  to  own  the


APPENDIX  297

superiority  of  the  French  (Duruy,  pp.  175-184).  In  administration  the
French  Army  left  more  to  be  desired :  the  Supply  Department  had  been
efficient  enough  under  Louis  XIV.,  but  had  broken  down  under  the  different
conditions  which  prevailed  in  the  more  distant  campaigns  of  1741-1748  and
1757-1762.  Choiseul  and  Saint-Germain  had  tried  hard  to  effect  reforms,  but
maladministration,  extravagance  and  inefficiency  seemed  too  deeply  rooted
to  be  easily  dislodged  ;  the  contractors  continued  to  flourish  and  grow  rich.
Nevertheless  in  the  Medical  Department  and  in  the  hospitals  a  series  of
reforms  had  made  France  well  ahead  of  Europe  in  1789  [cf.  Duruy,  p.  200),
and  the  reorganisation  of  the  Supply  Department  in  March  1788  might  have
been  equally  successful  had  it  only  had  time  to  get  into  working  order  {ibid.,
p.  196).  In  like  manner  the  careful  and  systematic  division  of  the  country
into  17  cotnmandements  en  chef  (March  loth,  1788),  and  the  formation  of
permanent  divisions  and  brigades  {cf.  Duruy,  pp.  60-64),  ^^^  overthrown
before  it  had  had  a  fair  chance,  but  the  influence  of  the  tactical  teaching  of
Guibert,  who  died  in  1791  at  the  early  age  of  47,  can  be  clearly  traced  in  the
wars  of  the  Republic  {cf.  Duruy,  pp.  250-254).  Such  work  as  fell  to  the  lot
of  the  French  Army  in  the  war  of  1778-1783  was  done  in  a  fashion  which
testified  to  the  improvements  effected,  and  as  the  chief  obstacles  to  these
and  wider  reforms  lay  in  those  privileges  and  vested  interests  on  which  the
Revolution  declared  war,  it  is  not  wonderful  that  when  the  Army  fell  into
the  strong  hands  of  Carnot  success  should  have  crowned  the  efforts  of
France.  The  Revolution  inherited  from  the  Ayicien  Regime  an  Army  with
great  possibilities ;  while  it  wrecked  the  Navy  it  only  purged  the  Army  and
made  it  capable,  now  that  it  was  freed  from  the  incubus  of  Court  favour  and
of  privilege,  of  profiting  by  the  improvements  which  the  last  years  of  the
Ancien  Regime  had  introduced.  If  the  Revolution  had  had  to  create  an
entirely  new  Army  all  the  fervour  and  "patriotism"  of  the  volunteers  of
1791  and  1792  could  hardly  have  saved  it  even  from  the  mild  attacks  of  the
Coalition ;  it  was  the  Army  of  the  Monarchy  transformed  into  the  Army  of
the  Revolution  which  preserved  the  Republic.

It  is  in  the  conditions  of  service  prevailing  in  the  Army  of  the  Monarchy
and  in  the  relations  of  officers  to  men  that  one  must  seek  for  the  explanation
of  this  change,  and  for  the  reason  why  the  effect  of  the  Revolution  on  the
Army  was  so  much  less  disastrous  than  its  influence  on  the  Navy  of
France.  The  officers  must  be  taken  first.  From  the  standpoint  of  pro-
fessional attainments  they  certainly  left  a  good  deal  to  be  desired:  brave,
adventurous  and  high-spirited  almost  to  a  fault,  they  were  for  the  most  part
ignorant  of  the  military  art,  neglectful  of  their  duties,  idle,  quarrelsome
and  overbearing  towards  civilians.  But  there  was  practically  no  incentive
to  make  an  officer  devote  himself  to  the  study  of  his  profession.  Promotion
and  the  giving  of  appointments  and  places  went  almost  entirely  by  favouritism
{cf.  Duruy,  pp.  76-78 ;  Hauterive,  p.  25).  Court  favour,  the  friendship  of
a  Royal  mistress  or  favourite,  family  influence,  money,  were  all  more
powerful  than  merit.  The  majority  of  the  regimental  officers  were  drawn
from  the  lesser  noblesse,  who,  in  common  with  the  bourgeoisie,  had  little
chance  of  obtaining  advancement ;  indeed,  while  a  bourgeois  might  buy  his
promotion,  the  provincial  noble  was  too  poor  for  that.  It  is  true  that  the
purchase  of  commissions  was  in  1789  almost  extinct,  thanks  to  the  ordinance
of  1776  on  the  subject  {cf.  Duruy,  p.  74) — the  Ancien  Regime  v^diS,  in  this
respect  almost  a  hundred  years  ahead  of  England — but  the  absence  of  a  regular
system  of  promotion  and  the  glut  of  officers,  especially  in  the  higher  ranks
(there   were  over   2,000  officers   of  the  rank   of  Colonel   or  higher,   and


298  APPENDIX

the  Staff  of  the  Army  mustered  1,159,  mainly  holders  of  sinecures,  in  1789),
were  most  unfavourable  to  efficiency.  When  young  nobles  in  their  cradles
received  the  command  of  regiments  over  grizzled  veterans  without  influence
at  Court,  when  there  were  36,000  officers,  only  13,000  of  whom  were  actually
with  the  colours,  in  an  Army  of  180,000  (Hauterive,  p.  26),  the  rest  merely
holding  commissions  because  they  obtained  in  this  way  that  State  sup-
port which  every  nobleman  considered  his  due  (ibid.),  when  out  of  a
military  budget  of  91,000,000  livres  47,000,000  were  devoted  to  the  payment
of  the  officers,  when  these  officers  were,  in  Saxe's  words,  "  mal  instruits,
plus  mal  exerces,  ne  connaissant  pas  le  soldat,  a  peine  connus  de  lui  en
temps  de  guerre,  jamais  en  temps  de  paix,"  when  Belleisle  was  forced  to
complain  of  the  want  of  subordination  among  the  junior  officers,  who,  as
nobles,  felt  themselves  the  social  equals  of  their  superiors  {cf.  Duruy,  pp.
91-93),  when  as  a  rule  the  officers  were  completely  out  of  touch  with  their
men  and  left  nearly  all  the  work  to  the  non-commissioned  officers  (Hauterive,
pp.  8-15),  it  is  not  wonderful  that  M.  Chuquet  goes  to  the  length  of  calling
the  emigration  "  a  blessing  in  disguise  "  (La  Premiere  Invasion  Prussienne,
pp.  67-69).  The  fact  that  even  under  the  Monarchy  the  sous-officiers  had
done  the  greater  part  of  the  work  of  regimental  administration  goes  far  to
explain  the  readiness  with  which  they  filled  the  vacancies  left  by  the
emigres ;  they  were  on  the  whole  a  good  set  of  men,  old  soldiers  who  had
seen  service  and  who  embodied  the  regimental  traditions  and  feeling  (Duruy,
p.  126 ;  cf.  Hauterive,  p.  19).  Saint-Germain  had  tried,  though  without  success,
to  open  the  commissioned  ranks  to  them,  but  the  ordinance  of  July  ist  1788,
which  forbade  the  promotion  of  privates  to  be  corporals,  or  of  corporals  to
be  sergeants  without  due  examination,  bears  out  the  statement  that  one
result  of  the  American  War  had  been  to  attract  to  the  Army  young  men
of  a  rather  higher  class  and  of  better  education,  among  whom  were  Hoche,
Jourdan  and  Marceau  (Duruy,  pp.  127-130).  Not  divided  from  the  rank
and  file,  as  the  noble  officers  were,  by  prejudice  and  caste-feeling,  the  sous-
officiers  seem  as  a  whole  to  have  enjoyed  the  confidence  of  the  men  and  to
have  been  in  touch  with  them.  "  Nowhere,  "  says  M.  Hauterive  (p.  i),  "  was
the  gulf  between  nobles  and  people  so  widely  felt  as  in  the  Army  .  .  .
there  was  between  the  officers  and  the  men  a  world  of  prejudices."  More-
over, in  zeal  and  in  professional  attainments  the  sous-officiers  seem  to  have
surpassed  the  officers.  They  had  nothing  but  their  own  ability  to  which  to
look  for  promotion.  Achille  Duchatelet  said  that  the  officers  were  to  the
sergeants  as  amateurs  to  professionals  {cf.  Chuquet,  i.  67),  and  he  is  sup-
ported by  the  testimony  of  many  other  witnesses,  among  them  Bouille  and
Lafayette.

In  theory  the  rank  and  file  were  raised  by  voluntary  enlistment,  and  the
employment  of  force  or  false  pretences  was  strongly  discouraged,  but  in
practice  fraud  and  deception  played  a  large  part  in  the  recruiting  system,
which  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  "crimps"  of  a  low  class,  ruffians  who
found  ready  victims  among  ne'er-do-weels,  runaway  apprentices,  lackeys
out  of  place,  loafers  and  "  broken  men  "  of  every  description,  to  whom  the
Army  was  as  a  rule  a  refuge  from  destitution  or  from  justice  (Duruy,  pp.
26-29).  Soldiers  of  fortune,  they  had  the  virtues  and  the  vices  of  their  class,
turbulent,  drunken,  dissolute,  needing  a  strong  hand  to  keep  them  within
bounds,  but  brave,  spirited  in  attack,  stubborn  in  defence,  and  ready,  if  well
led,  to  follow  anywhere.  Between  an  Army  composed  of  such  materials  and
the  soldier-politicians  of  the  New  Model  there  is  little  in  common ;  the
French  rank  and  file  of  1789  were  not  the  sort  of  men  to  trouble  about


APPENDIX  299

principles  and  theories  of  government,  to  care  for  the  "  Rights  of  Man  "  or
to  be  influenced  by  Constitutionalist  or  Republican  leanings.  People  often
talk  as  if  the  regiments  which  had  seen  service  in  America  had  returned
to  France  ardent  Republicans  to  a  man,  to  serve  as  the  leaven  with  which
the  whole  French  Army  was  to  be  leavened,  until  the  troops  were  all
adherents  of  4th  of  July  doctrines ;  but  this  view  does  not  seem  to  be  sup-
ported by  the  facts,  and  it  ignores  the  practical  difficulty  of  the  mere  difference
in  language  which  must  have  made  communication  between  the  soldiery
and  the  colonists  anything  but  easy.  Not  every  man  in  the  Auvergne  or
the  Royal  Deux-Ponts  was  a  Lafayette,  and  it  is  interesting  to  notice  that
the  Deux-Ponts  was  one  of  the  regiments  which  is  reported  to  have  been
loyal  and  in  good  order  as  late  as  the  autumn  of  1790,  which  hardly  looks  as
if  Republicanism  had  gained  much  hold  over  its  ranks  {cf.  Hauterive,  p.  130).

The  truth  of  the  matter  seems  to  be  that,  like  the  English  sailors  in  1642,
the  rank  and  file  of  the  French  Army  were  influenced  by  strictly  practical
questions :  the  Monarchy  was  to  them  associated  with  the  hardships  of  their
lot,  they  looked  to  the  Revolution  as  a  chance  of  improving  their  conditions.
It  is  true  that  judged  by  the  "standard  of  comfort"  of  the  classes  from
which  they  came  the  soldiers  were  by  no  means  badly  off  for  food  and
lodging,  and  that  both  in  these  matters  and  as  regards  the  enforcement  of
discipline  their  lot  compared  very  favourably  with  that  of  the  Prussian  or
Austrian  private  {cf.  Duruy,  p.  137).  Nominally  the  terms  of  service  were
not  less  than  8  years  or  more  than  12  (Duruy,  p.  32),  but  it  seems  probable
that  men  often  found  it  a  little  difficult  to  obtain  their  discharge  when  it
became  due ;  if  time-expired  Militiamen  were  compelled  to  continue  in  the
ranks,  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  equal  pressure  was  not  put  on  their
Regular  comrades.  Desertion  was  rampant :  men  who  had  been  entrapped
into  enlisting  were  not  likely  to  remain  in  the  ranks  when  they  found  that
the  promises  made  to  them  were  not  kept :  enlistment  was  a  contract,  why
should  the  soldier  fulfil  his  share  of  the  bargain  ?  Indeed  the  gentle  treat-
ment meted  out  to  deserters  (Hauterive,  pp.  6-7  ;  cf.  Duruy,  p.  230)  looks  as
if  it  was  considered  a  very  natural  step  on  the  part  of  the  private.  One  may
perhaps  form  some^dea  of  the  position  of  the  soldier  from  a  memorandum
addressed  to  the  Etats-Generaux  by  the  officers  of  the  garrison  of  Lille
(quoted  by  Hauterive,  pp.  75-76,  cf.  pp.  45-46,  on  the  demands  relating  to  the
Army  in  the  Cahiers).  It  draws  attention  especially  to  the  inadequate  pay
and  heavy  duties  of  the  soldiers,  the  exclusions  and  humiliations  inflicted  on
the  troops,  the  absolute  lack  of  incentive  or  encouragement,  "  le  soldat  ne
gagne  rien  a  rester  au  service.  On  ne  lui  permet  de  se  retirer  que  lorsqu'il
est  incapable  de  faire  quoi  que  ce  soit.  S'il  est  reforme  par  accident  ou  par
maladie  il  n'a  aucun  moyen  de  vivre."  One  may  compare  with  this  the
declaration  of  a  veteran  captain  of  the  6e  Infanterie  to  Lafayette,  that  he  did  not
love  the  Revolution,  but  that  he  fought  for  it  because  it  gave  him  the  pension
which  the  Ancien  Regime  denied  him  (Lafayette's  Memoirs,  iii.  297  ;  cf.
Chuquet's  summary  of  what  the  Revolution  had  done  for  the  troops,  i.  57).

Had  Louis  XVI.  made  a  firm  stand  in  defence  of  his  threatened  prerogative
and  position,  and  had  he  taken  the  necessary  precaution  of  conceding  the
claims  of  the  troops,  and  by  improving  their  material  position  taken  away
the  inducement  which  led  them  to  favour  the  Revolutionary  movement,
he  could  have  relied  on  the  Army  to  follow  him.  The  officers  were
loyal  and  the  men,  once  their  own  grievances  had  received  attention,
would  not  have  been  deterred  from  doing  their  duty  by  constitutionalist
scruples.    Some  sympathy  between  the  troops  and  the  mob  there  undoubtedly


300  APPENDIX

was :  in  the  summer  of  1789  one  finds  the  regiment  Saint-Remi  fraternising  with
the  rioters  at  Bordeaux  and  teaching  them  how  to  handle  arms ;  at  Rennes
the  regiments  oi  Artois  and  Lorraine  refused  to  fire  on  a  disorderly  crowd,  to
disperse  which  they  had  been  called  out,  and  swore  never  to  imbrue  their
hands  in  French  blood ;  but  of  adherence  to  the  doctrines  of  philosophers  and
economists  there  are  practically  no  traces.  The  disorders  in  the  Army  in
the  course  of  1789  afford  evidence  rather  of  insubordination  and  of  the  neglect
of  the  officers  to  keep  a  proper  control  over  their  men  than  of  political  dis-
affection. M.  Hauterive  sums  up  the  matter  by  saying  (p.  99,  cf.  pp.  56-65)
"toutesces  insurrections  eurent  la  debauche  comme  principe."  The  out-
break of  the  Gardes  Fran^aises  at  the  Palais  Royal  on  June  27th,  1789,  is
perhaps  the  most  typical  of  these  disturbances,  and  it  shows  clearly  that  all
the  men  wished  for  was  to  escape  from  the  bonds  of  discipline  and  to  indulge
freely  in  the  wildest  orgies.

One  may  perhaps  sum  up  the  situation  existing  in  1789  by  saying  that  the
Army,  though  somewhat  out  of  hand  and  to  some  extent  affected  by  the
prevalent  unrest,  was  as  yet  loyal  on  the  whole.  The  most  serious  feature
was  that  the  officers,  who  should  have  formed  a  link  between  the  King  and
the  rank  and  file,  had  quite  lost  touch  with  their  men  and  had  lost  their
authority  over  them  also.  Thus  while  material  interests  induced  the  men  to
favour  res  novas,  the  loyalty  of  the  officers  was  no  guarantee  for  that  of
the  men,  nor  was  there  any  tradition  of  victory  or  other  sentimental  links  to
bind  the  rank  and  file  to  the  Ancien  Regime.  Rossbach  and  Minden  had
not  been  effaced  by  the  exploits  of  the  small  contingent  which  had  served  in
America,  and  the  disastrous  effects  on  discipline  of  the  defeats  of  the  Seven
Years'  War  {cf.  Duruy,  pp.  209-216  :  the  bad  example  of  self-indulgence  set
by  those  in  command  had  had  a  very  bad  effect)  had  not  been  overcome  by
the  efforts  of  Rochambeau  and  Saint-Germain.  Indeed  the  very  severity  of
the  military  code  tended  to  defeat  its  own  ends,  since  it  was  enforced  with
such  laxity  as  to  be  merely  an  empty  threat.

Still  the  elements  for  a  successful  resistance  to  the  rising  tide  of  revolution
were  not  lacking,  had  there  only  been  a  man  capable  of  doing  justice  to  them.
Indeed  it  might  be  said  that  the  Monarchy  of  Louis  XVI.  fell  for  want  of
any  real  effort  to  save  it.  Louis  XVI.  was  in  himself  the  most  unsuitable
champion  of  a  theoretically  indefensible  position :  "  benevolent  "  he  certainly
was,  but  nobody  could  have  been  less  of  a  "  despot."  Thus  where  a  stronger
man,  unhampered  by  Louis'  scruples  and  his  desire  to  do  the  best  for  France,
might  have  made  a  firm  stand  and  so  given  the  Army  the  lead  which  above
all  things  it  needed,  Louis  XVI.  fell  through  sheer  helplessness.  Philo-
sophers might  condemn  a  system  devoid  of  moral  justification,  over-burdened
tax-payers  might  grumble  and  murmur,  the  peasantry  might  meet  and  even
proceed  to  violence,  but  as  long  as  the  Army  remained  loyal  the  Monarchy
was  secure.  And  grave  as  was  the  state  of  the  Army  in  1789,  the  lesson  of
the  events  of  the  next  three  years  would  seem  to  be  that  discipline  and  the
habit  of  obedience  had  still  so  strong  a  hold  on  the  troops  that  vigorous  and
decisive  action  on  the  part  of  the  authorities,  coupled  with  due  attention  to
the  complaints  of  the  soldiery,  might  have  saved  the  Monarchy.  The  Army
did  not  really  cease  to  be  the  Army  of  the  King  rather  than  the  Army  of  the
French  nation  until  the  flight  to  Varennes  proved  to  it  that  the  assertions  of
the  agitators  were  true,  and  that  the  King,  rather  than  rely  on  the  nation,  was
looking  to  the  foreigner  for  help  against  his  own  subjects  (cf.  Hauterive,  p.
232).  M.  Hauterive  takes  June  20th,  1791,  as  the  date  which  marks  "the
change  of  the  Army  of  the  Monarchy  into  the  Army  of  the  Revolution  "


APPENDIX  301

(p.  163),  but  it  would  be  a  grave  misconception  to  look  on  this  change  as
other  than  a  very  gradual  process,  and  an  investigation  of  the  course  of  events
must  show  how  slowly  the  Army  drifted  away  from  the  cause  of  Royalty,
and  how  discipline  and  military  subordination  retained  a  hold  on  the  troops
in  the  face  of  the  most  adverse  circumstances.

When  troubles  first  broke  out  in  1789,  the  troops  on  the  whole  did  their
duty  admirably,  any  popular  leanings  they  may  have  entertained  being  quite
overpowered  by  the  habit  of  obedience.  Corn  riots  and  incendiarism  found
them  loyal,  and  though  in  some  cases  they  displayed  reluctance  or  even
refused  to  fire  on  crowds  which  had  assembled  for  political  purposes,  there
was  little  hesitation  when  they  were  called  upon  to  protect  convoys  of  grain
or  to  suppress  riots  or  attacks  on  property  [cf.  Hauterive,  pp.  52-53  and
71-73).  Discipline,  though  somewhat  relaxed,  might  easily  have  been  restored
hy  the  tonic  of  firmness,  but  this  was  not  forthcoming,  and  the  failure  of  the
authorities  to  punish  the  leaders  of  the  outbreak  of  the  Gardes  Frattgaises
had  the  effect  of  encouraging  similar  occurrences  in  other  regiments,  the  bad
example  of  impunity  being  irresistible.  However,  the  first  really  serious
blow  to  discipline  was  given  by  the  surrender  of  the  King  to  the  Parisian
rabble  on  Oct.  6th ;  his  ignominious  return  to  Paris  seems  to  have  shattered
his  prestige  in  the  eyes  of  the  soldiery.  How  could  a  King  who  obeyed  the
mandates  of  a  mob  expect  to  retain  the  respect  of  his  Army  ?  {cf.  Hauterive,

P-85.)

From  this  point  one  may  date  the  steady  decay  of  discipline.  During  the
winter  of  1789-1790  the  troops  were  restrained  from  active  insubordination
by  being  constantly  occupied  against  marauders  and  rioters,  but  the  "  Federa-
tion "  movement,  which  was  now  rampant,  did  not  fail  to  affect  the  Army,
and  its  progress  went  hand  in  hand  with  the  decline  of  discipline.  The
Revolutionary  propagandists  knew  the  importance  of  gaining  the  support  of
the  Army,  and  left  no  stone  unturned :  bit  by  bit  the  soldiers  were  taught  to
look  upon  themselves  as  the  soldiers  of  France  and  not  of  the  King,  as
citizens,  not  as  a  caste  apart,  to  suspect  their  officers  as  reactionaries,  to  take
a  share  in  the  "  union  of  the  nation  "  {cf.  Hauterive,  p.  88,  etc.).  It  was  in
vain  that  the  officers  sought  to  regain  the  confidence  of  their  men,  and  to
recover  the  touch  which  they  had  lost  (cf.  Hauterive,  p.  74) :  these  belated
efforts  were  bound  to  fail.  And  while  the  great  majority  of  the  officers  were
ardently  attached  to  the  Monarchy,  there  was  even  among  them  an  influential
minority  who  were  in  sympathy  with  the  new  ideas,  and  one  cannot  help
suspecting  that  in  these  officers  and  in  the  non-commissioned  officers  of  the
type  of  Souham  (an  ex-soldier  of  the  Royal  Cavalerie)  and  Oudinot  (a
sergeant  in  the  Medoc)  the  Revolutionary  clubs  and  societies  must  have
found  agents  ready  to  further  their  designs  on  the  loyalty  of  the  troops.
These  "pro-Revolutionary"  officers,  says  M.  Chuquet  (i.  p.  59;  cf.  Hauterive,
p.  91),  formed  "an  influential  party"  ;  all  the  young  and  ambitious  men
who  had  nothing  to  lose  and  everything  to  gain  from  the  Revolution  were
devoted  to  its  cause.  Practically  all  the  non-noble  officers  and  some  of  the
nobles  who  saw  the  chance  of  rising  which  they  could  not  hope  to  gain  by
remaining  loyal,  those  who  had  no  influence  at  Court,  those  who  were
conscious  of  their  capacities  and  only  wanted  a  fair  opening,  were  all  on  the
side  of  the  Revolution.  Though  a  minority,  they  were  formidable  by  their
quality,  including,  as  subsequent  years  were  to  show,  many  men  of  great
military  talent.

Meanwhile  the  uncertain  attitude  of  the  King  greatly  weakened  his  hold
over  the  troops.     Had  he  done  what  his  enemies  alleged  he  intended  to  do,


302  APPENDIX

and,  after  incurring  unpopularity  by  collecting  the  foreign  regiments,  on
whom  he  could  most  rely,  round  Paris,  used  them  to  reassert  his  authority,
the  troops  would  at  least  have  been  given  a  clear  lead,  but  it  could  not  be
expected  that  they  should  of  their  own  accord  rally  round  a  King  who  did
not  seem  to  know  whether  he  wanted  to  be  defended.  Thus  the  soldiers,  at
first  mere  spectators  of  the  "federations,"  gradually  came  forward  to  take
the  oath  themselves  when  they  realised  that  the  nation  was  proclaiming  its
unity  and  was  anxious  for  them  to  throw  down  the  barriers  which  had
hitherto  kept  Army  and  people  apart  (Hauterive,  p.  no).  One  can  see
how  the  foundations  of  discipline  were  being  sapped,  and  how  the  new  ideas
were  steadily  making  progress,  when  one  finds  the  regiment  of  the  Vexin
refusing  to  quit  Marseilles  (Aug.  1790),  and  carrying  its  point  by  the  aid  of
the  townsfolk  (Hauterive,  p.  120),  when  one  reads  of  the  demands  of  the
troops  that  the  regimental  accounts  should  be  submitted  to  their  inspection,
when  one  finds  them  accusing  their  officers  of  robbing  them  of  their  due  and
falsifying  the  regimental  books.  The  great  mutiny  at  Nancy  (Aug.  1790)  of
the  regiments  Chdteauvieiix  (Swiss  foot),  Mestre  du  Camp  (cavalry)  and  du
Roi  (French  foot)  rose  out  of  the  demand  of  the  Chdteauvicux  that  they
should  be  shown  their  books,  but  this  mutiny,  though  a  very  serious  affair,
ended  in  a  triumph  for  reaction,  as  Bouille  was  able  to  collect  a  large  force
and  to  repress  the  rising,  the  bulk  of  the  disaffected  regiments  taking  no
part  in  the  proceedings.

The  fete  of  July  14th,  1790,  is  another  of  the  important  epochs  in  the
transition  of  the  Army's  allegiance:  in  Bouille's  words  "it  poisoned  the
troops"  (Hauterive,  p.  113).  Delegates  from  every  regiment  were  present,
and  the  leaders  of  the  advanced  party  took  this  opportunity  of  instilling
among  them  distrust  and  suspicion  of  their  officers,  alleging  that  they  were
about  to  use  the  troops  to  support  the  cause  of  reaction.  The  delegates
were  cajoled,  flattered  and  bribed  :  they  returned  to  their  regiments  full  of
the  new  ideas,  and  from  that  moment  independence  and  insubordination
increased  greatly.  The  officers  felt  that  their  authority  was  being  under-
mined, they  had  by  now  realised  the  danger,  and,  full  of  disgust  at  seeing  the
King  ordered  about  by  the  dregs  of  the  nation,  were  preaching  to  the  soldiers
that  the  authority  of  the  King  was  superior  to  that  of  the  nation  (Hauterive,
p.  115).  There  was  a  struggle  between  the  old  ideas  and  habits  of  discipline
and  military  obedience  and  the  new  spirit  of  independence  and  democratic
equality  so  sedulously  fostered  by  the  extremists.  Gradually  one  finds  the
men  slipping  over  to  the  side  of  the  Revolution,  while  emigration  begins  to
drain  the  country  of  those  who  ought  to  have  rallied  round  the  King,  and  not
to  have  given  colour,  by  taking  refuge  with  the  foreigner,  to  the  allegations  of
those  who  identified  the  Monarchy  with  the  hated  Austrians  and  Prussians
{cf.  Hauterive,  p.  156).

The  growth  of  the  Revolutionary  clubs  and  societies  during  the  autumn
and  winter  of  1790  marks  yet  another  stage  in  the  process.  It  was  when
the  men  began  to  attend  the  meetings  of  the  clubs  and  to  demand  a  voice  in
the  administration  of  their  regiments,  when  the  clubs  applied  themselves  to
undermining  the  authority  of  the  officers  and  tried  to  interfere  in  such  matters
as  the  movement  of  the  troops  from  one  garrison  to  another  (Hauterive,  pp.
142-148),  that  it  became  clear  that  the  Army  had  got  out  of  hand.  Yet  even
now  there  was  in  Bouille's  army  a  strong  minority  of  Royalists,  including
the  foreign  regiments  and  most  of  the  cavalry  (cf.  Hauterive,  pp.  130- 131 :
the  Lauzun  regiment  of  cavalry  cried  au  diable  la  nation).  The  first
success  for   the  reactionaries  would   probably  have   decided  numbers  of


APPENDIX  303

waverers,  but  it  was  just  at  this  time  that  the  failure  of  the  flight  to  Varennes
(July,  1791)  dealt  the  Monarchy  a  fatal  blow.  While  the  rank  and  file  saw
in  it  a  complete  confirmation  of  the  accusations  which  the  agitators  had
levelled  against  the  Monarchy,  the  officers  hailed  it  as  giving  them  leave  to
abandon  a  distasteful  and  hopeless  struggle  against  the  rising  tide  of  dis-
affection. Once  the  King  had  set  the  example  of  emigrating,  the  officers
were  practically  released  from  their  oaths  and  were  free  to  follow  his  pre-
cedent. *'  The  flight  of  the  King,  which  did  more  for  the  Revolution  than
any  other  event,  was  the  proof  by  which  the  Revolution  recognised  that  it
could  count  on  the  Army  ...  it  marks  the  transformation  of  the  Army  of
the  Monarchy  into  the  Army  of  the  Revolution  "  (Hauterive,  p.  i6i).

Emigration  on  a  large  scale  now  set  in  and  was  accelerated  by  the  action
of  the  Assembly,  which  administered  to  the  Army  an  oath  of  fidelity  to  the
nation  and  to  the  Constitution  which  it  should  decree.  Far  more  than  the
rank  and  file  the  officers  felt  themselves  bound  to  the  King's  cause.  "  The
nation  "  was  nothing  to  them.  Drawn  mainly  from  the  noblesse,  they  were
attached  to  the  Monarchy  by  birth,  by  caste-feeling,  by  family  and  professional
traditions,  by  caste  prejudices  and  by  the  training  they  had  received.  Senti-
ment and  not  interest  was  the  foundation  of  their  loyalty,  for  the  lesser
noblesse,  who  provided  the  majority  of  the  regimental  officers,  stood  little
chance  of  promotion  or  distinction.  Equally  with  the  bourgeoisie  they  found
themselves  sacrificed  to  those  who  could  invoke  Court  favour  on  their  behalf,
but  their  loyalty  was  proof  even  against  neglect,  and  up  till  July,  179 1,  it  had
not  been  the  lesser  but  the  greater  nobles  who  had  been  foremost  in  deserting
the  post  of  danger.^  But  after  the  King's  return  to  Paris  the  regimental
officers  also  began  to  emigrate.  In  some  regiments  the  soldiers  compelled
officers  who  had  refused  the  oath  to  quit  the  service,  sous-officiers  and  privates
formed  committees  to  expel  officers  suspected  of  incivisme — a  serious  blow  to
discipline  (Hauterive,  p.  160).  Whole  regiments  were  left  without  officers,
the  236  Infanterie  had  only  i  captain  at  the  beginning  of  1792.  To  meet  this
emergency  the  Assembly  declared  all  emigres  to  be  deserters,  and  proceeded  to
fill  up  the  vacancies  by  the  promotion  of  those  officers  and  sous-officiers  who
remained  faithful.  Then  began  the  meteoric  rise  of  men  like  Kleber  and
Houchard,  who  rushed  with  extraordinary  rapidity  up  from  the  lower  grades  :
Ronsin,  a  captain  on  July  ist,  1793,  was  a  General  of  Division  by  Oct.  5th,
which  would  appear  to  be  the  "record"  {cf.  Hauterive,  p.  294).  Ambitious
men  saw  their  chance,  the  old  officers  gave  place  to  sous-officiers,  insubordina-
tion, fanned  by  local  clubs,  grew  more  rampant,  and  by  the  beginning  of  1792
6,000  officers  out  of  9,000  had  emigrated.

The  events  of  the  spring  and  summer  of  1792,  the  declaration  of  war  on
Austria,  Brunswick's  manifesto,  the  outbreak  of  Aug.  loth,  the  advance  of
the  Allies  and  the  establishment  of  the  Republic  only  serve  to  show  how

^  N.B. — The  return  of  1788  proves  clearly  that  in  the  higher  ranks  of  the  Army
the  vast  majority  of  the  officers  were  nobles  :  all  the  Marshals  (11),  Lieutenant-
Generals  (196),  all  but  136  of  the  770  Mar^chaux  de  Camp,  all  but  6  of  the  109
Colonels  of  infantry  were  titled,  and  even  of  the  Brigadiers — a  rank  created  by
Turenne  mainly  to  enable  non-noble  officers  of  ability  to  rise  {cf.  Duruy,  p.  79)
— 123  out  of  180  were  of  noble  blood.  S^gur's  ordinance  of  May  22nd,  1781,  seems
to  have  been  intended  to  provide  employment  for  the  great  number  of  nobles  of
poor  but  old  families,  to  whom  no  other  avocation  save  the  Church  was  open,  and
one  object  of  it  was  to  prevent  the  sale  of  certificates  of  noble  birth  to  the  bourgeoisie,
who,  despite  all  attempts  to  check  them,  were  steadily  buying  their  way  into  the
Army  (Duruy,  p.  83) ;  for  the  Artillery  and  Engineers  no  certificate  of  nobility  was
required,  and  these  corps  suffered  much  less  from  emigration  than  any  other.


304  APPENDIX

completely  the  Army  had  changed  since  1789.  The  determined  stand
which  might  have  saved  the  situation  a  little  earlier  was  not  forthcoming.
Lafayette's  half-hearted  Royalism  failed  to  awake  any  answering  chord
among  the  soldiery,  he  saw  that  his  men  were  not  with  him  and  fled  across
the  frontier  (Aug.  i6th,  1792).  One  or  two  regiments,  the  6th  Hussars  and  the
Chdteauvieux  (Swiss  foot),  followed  his  example  and  a  great  many  officers,
Moderate  Royalists  and  Constitutionalists,  who  had  hitherto  remained  at
their  posts,  now  abandoned  the  hopeless  struggle.  There  was,  however,  no
general  movement,  the  Army  had  made  its  decision  and  had  thrown  in  its
lot  with  the  nation  ;  a  Monarchy  which  had  displayed  its  want  of  confidence
in  its  Army  by  appealing  to  the  foreigner  for  assistance  in  a  domestic  crisis
could  hardly  expect  the  Army  to  adhere  to  it  in  time  of  need.  Yet  even  so
the  Army  was  rather  Modere  than  Montagnard ;  despite  all  the  efforts  of
the  Assembly  to  imbue  the  troops  with  Republican  principles  (Hauterive,  pp.
255-257)  the  troops  of  the  line  seem  to  have  been  but  little  affected  by
political  sympathies.  They  acquiesced  in  the  death  of  the  King  but  do  not
seem  to  have  been  anxious  for  it ;  when  the  news  of  his  execution  arrived
there  were  no  manifestations  either  of  sympathy  or  disapproval,  the  men
remained  calm  and  indifferent  (Hauterive,  p.  258).  Their  task  was  to
defend  France  against  the  foreigner,  the  trial  and  death  of  the  King  were
matters  in  which  they  did  not  feel  themselves  immediately  concerned.

That  the  great  upheaval  which  had  taken  place  in  France  since  1789,  and
by  which  the  Army,  like  every  other  institution  in  France,  had  been  so  much
influenced,  must  have  greatly  affected  its  capacity  for  carrying  out  its  proper
function  of  defending  the  country  is  obvious.  The  Constituent  Assembly  had
introduced  certain  reforms,  regulating  the  promotion  of  officers  (one-fourth  of
the  vacancies  were  in  future  to  be  filled  from  the  ranks ;  up  to  the  grade  of
captain  promotion  was  to  be  by  seniority,  afterwards  by  selection),  substituting
numbers  for  the  names  by  which  the  regiments  had  hitherto  been  known ;
thus  the  Auvergne  became  the  17^  Infanterie,  the  Chartres  Dragoons  the
I4«  Dragoons,  the  famous  Cuirassiers  of  Louis  XIV.,  which  had  been  so
prominent  at  the  passage  of  the  Rhine  in  1672,  veiled  its  identity  in  the  title
of  8«  Cavalerie,  while  the  io«  Cavalerie  were  the  old  Royal  Cravate.  A
more  important  step  was  the  abolition  of  the  Militia,  a  step  due  no  doubt
to  the  unpopularity  of  that  force  among  the  classes  liable  to  serve  in  its
ranks,  but  one  of  which  the  wisdom  was  at  least  open  to  question.  The
force  ought  to  have  been  so  organised  as  to  be  a  link  between  the  regiments
of  the  line  and  the  districts  from  which  the  Militia  were  recruited,  and  so  it
might  have  been  a  valuable  portion  of  a  '•  territorial  system."

During  the  summer  and  autumn  of  1789  there  had  been  formed  spon-
taneously all  over  the  country  local  forces  for  local  purposes,  to  keep  order
and  preserve  the  peace.  These  National  Guards  were  independent  bodies
of  armed  citizens,  unconnected  with  the  central  military  organisation  or  with
the  similar  forces  in  other  localities.  With  the  possible  exception  of  those
of  Paris,  in  whose  ranks  there  were  a  large  number  of  soldiers,  who  had
deserted  from  the  Regulars,  attracted  by  the  laxer  discipline  and  easier  terms
of  service  which  prevailed  in  these  new  forces,  the  National  Guards  were
soldiers  only  in  name,  with  not  much  more  organisation,  cohesion  or  discipline
than  the  "  brigands,"  to  repress  whom  they  were  raised  (Hauterive,  p.  78).  It
can  be  easily  understood  that  they  added  little  to  the  military  power  of  the
country ;  indeed  they  seriously  weakened  the  Army,  not  only  by  inviting  de-
sertion— the  Paris  National  Guard  is  said  to  have  included  16,000  ex-soldiers


APPENDIX  305

— but  by  competing  with  it  in  the  recruit-market.  Thus  while  discipline  and
military  subordination  were  being  attacked  and  undermined,  the  ranks  of  the
Army  were  being  thinned  by  desertion,  the  flow  of  recruits  had  practically
ceased,  and  absolute  chaos  seems  to  have  prevailed  in  the  administrative  de-
partments. There  was  an  atmosphere  of  suspicion  within  and  without :  the
troops  expected  their  officers  to  desert  to  the  foreigner  at  any  minute,  while
the  Extreme  Left,  looking  upon  the  Army  as  Monarchical  and  Royalist,  lost
no  opportunity  of  attacking  it  or  of  comparing  it  with  the  National  Guards,
to  the  advantage  of  the  latter.  Indeed  it  is  rather  remarkable  that  the  Army
continued  to  exist  at  all :  not  only  was  its  organisation  completely  thrown
out  of  gear  by  the  emigration  of  so  many  officers,  but  the  unceasing  inter-
ference of  the  Legislative  Assembly  with  every  detail  of  discipline  or  ad-
ministration made  it  impossible  for  such  officers  as  were  left  to  retain  any
vestige  of  control  or  authority  over  their  men.  It  was  only  the  war  of  1792
which  could  cure  the  disorders  by  which  the  Army  was  being  ruined :  dis-
cipline regained  its  hold  over  the  troops  when  the  activity  of  the  field  of  war
replaced  the  idleness  of  the  garrison,  when  the  soldiers  resumed  their  true
work  and  had  one  pre-occupation  only,  war  (Hauterive,  p.  175).

After  the  flight  to  Varennes,  when  matters  appeared  to  be  approaching
a  crisis,  the  Constituent  lAssembly  had  decided  to  augment  the  "  squeezed
lemons"  of  the  Regular  Army  by  levying  169  battalions  of  Volunteers  from
among  the  National  Guards.  These  battalions,  each  composed  of  nine  com-
panies, with  a  nominal  establishment  of  574  men,  did  not  at  first  display  many
military  qualities.  Ideas  of  independence  and  equality  did  duty  for  discipline,
their  officers,  elected  by  the  rank  and  file,  had  practically  no  control  over
their  men,  though  it  must  be  admitted  that  they  were  for  the  most  part
chosen  from  ex-soldiers  of  the  Army  or  Militia  (Chuquet,  i.  72),  and  the  first
exploits  of  these  new  forces  were  disorderly  outbreaks  and  political  demon-
strations. They  included,  however,  a  great  deal  of  good  material,  and  active
service  in  the  end  made  good  soldiers  of  them  {cf.  Chuquet,  i.  70-71),  but
their  movement  to  the  frontier  in  1791  was  marked  by  rioting  and  by  mal-
treatment of  the  unfortunate  inhabitants  among  whom  they  were  quartered,
especially  in  Alsace  (Hauterive,  pp.  181  ff.).

At  this  time  the  Army  of  the  line  was  50,000  below  its  established  strength,
and,  the  influx  of  recruits  having  been  entirely  diverted  into  the  Volunteers,
was  dwindling  daily.  The  Assembly  in  July,'i79i,  had  voted  the  increase  of
each  battalion  of  infantry  to  750  and  every  squadron  of  cavalry  to  170
(Chuquet,  i.  29),  but  so  far  from  these  numbers  being  attained,  no  infantry
regiment  seems  to  have  been  able  to  produce  more  than  one  of  its  two
battalions  for  field  service,  and  the  cavalry  regiments  likewise  had  to  leave
one  squadron  behind  them  to  act  as  a  depot.  Even  then  Lajard  and  others
were  advising  that  the  already  existing  forces  should  be  brought  up  to  full
strength  before  new  corps  were  raised  (Chuquet,  i.  31),  and  Narbonne  at  Kel-
lermann's  advice  proposed  to  incorporate  the  Volunteers  in  the  line  (ibid.),
but  the  jealousy  which  the  Left  entertained  of  the  Army  prevented  the
adoption  of  this  salutary  measure,  and  the  confusion  continued  to  increase.
Luckner,  in  order  to  keep  his  line  regiments  up  to  strength,  was  forced  to
release  from  prison  600  men  convicted  of  crimes  against  discipline  [ibid.,

J-  33].

The  levy  of  the  169  "  battalions  of  1791 "  had  not  yet  been  completed,
indeed  only  83  of  them  were  fit  even  for  garrison  duty  when  the  Assembly,
on  the  outbreak  of  war  in  1792,  decreed  the  formation  of  yet  another  45
battalions.      As   M.  Chuquet  says,  "  the  Legislative  Assembly  aimed  at

VOL.    III.  20


306  APPENDIX

nothing  but  numbers  and,  believing  that  any  mob  will  make  an  army,  kept
on  voting  new  levies  without  deigning  to  estimate  the  cost,  or  vote  the
necessary  funds."  These  "  Volunteers  of  1792  "  were  even  more  disorderly,
more  political  and  less  soldierly  than  their  predecessors  of  1791,  who,  by  the
summer  of  1792,  were  beginning  to  acquire  some  degree  of  discipline  and
efficiency,  and  to  learn  that  patriotism  cannot  by  itself  compensate  for  the
absence  of  military  training  and  habits.  "  Plus  embarrassants  qu'utiles,
plus  redoutes  que  desires  par  les  officiers-generaux  "  is  Biron's  description
of  the  new  levies  (Chuquet,  i.  71).

The  campaign  of  1792  opened  with  an  advance  into  Belgium,  which
broke  down  mainly  owing  to  the  indiscipline  of  the  Volunteers,  though  the
condition  of  the  Regulars  was  little  better.  In  May  Rochambeau  declared
that  he  could  do  nothing  with  an  army  "  indisciplinee  et  mefiante  a  I'exces."
Indeed  the  whole  force  was  in  an  incredible  condition.  Chaos  reigned
supreme  in  the  administration ;  supplies,  arms,  ammunition  were  wanting
in  some  places  and  exceeded  all  needs  at  others,  suspicion  and  insubordina-
tion were  universal.  Regulars  and  Volunteers  were  at  bitter  feud  and  even
amongst  the  Regulars  regiments  were  continually  fighting  one  another
{cf.  Chuquet,  i.  44).  Bad  as  were  the  Regulars,  the  Volunteers  were  worse.
Many  of  them  had  availed  themselves  of  the  permission  given  them  by  the
Assembly  to  return  home  at  the  end  of  the  campaign,  which  was  taken
to  be  the  ist  of  December  in  each  year.  Had  the  Allies  been  ready  to  take
the  field  in  June,  had  their  troops  been  reasonably  efficient,  had  their
co-operation  been  sincere,  and  had  Brunswick  possessed  a  tithe  of  the  military
capacity  of  his  great  kinsman  Ferdinand,  the  campaign  might  have  proved
the  "  walk  over  "  so  many  people  anticipated.  But  though,  if  one  considers
the  condition  of  the  French  Army  only,  it  must  seem  remarkable  that  any
attempt  at  resistance  was  made  at  all  and  positively  miraculous  that  this
resistance  was  successful,  this  apparent  miracle  can  be  explained  by  the
condition  of  the  Prussian  army,  which,  if  not  as  unsoldierly  as  the  French,
was  quite  as  unfitted  for  practical  warfare.  Frederick  II. 's  system  had  be-
come fossilised,  pipe-clay  and  parade  were  all-important,  and  the  portentous
baggage-train,  the  obsolete  and  inefficient  administration  would  have
hampered  the  most  energetic  and  capable  of  organizers  and  generals.
When,  however,  the  unthinking  precipitation  of  Frederick  William  II.  was
combined  with  the  lethargic  movements,  the  irresolution  and  the  hesitation
of  Brunswick,  the  result  was  not  likely  to  be  a  conspicuous  success.

It  was  during  the  months  of  July  and  August,  1792,  that  France  was  being
saved,  not  indeed  by  the  Assembly  which  declared  la  patrie  in  danger,
which  voted  the  levy  of  yet  another  42  battalions  of  volunteers  and  authorised
the  formation  of  various  motley  gangs  of  pseudo-warriors,  compagnies /ranches,
legion  Allobroge  (Savoyards),  legion  Batave  (Dutch  exiles),  compagnies  de
chasseurs  nationaux,  while  Servan  decided  on  the  formation  of  a  camp  of
20,000  men  to  be  drawn  in  fives  from  each  canton,  the  famous  federes  of
the  camp  at  Soissons,  but  by  Dumouriez,  Lafayette,  Kellermann  and  the
other  commanders  of  the  forces  in  the  field  who  seem  to  have  met  with
some  success  in  their  eiforts  to  establish  discipline,  notably  among  the  old
regiments  of  the  line,  and  by  accustoming  their  men  to  the  sight  of  an  enemy
in  various  petty  skirmishes  {cf.  Chuquet,  i.  63-66)  gradually  restored  them  to
a  condition  of  efficiency.  '•  La  vie  des  camps,"  says  Chuquet,  "avait  exerce
sa  bienfaisante  influence  sur  les  soldats.  Les  desordres  causes  par  les  clubs
avaient  cesse."

The  popular  legend  which  ascribes  the  credit  for  the  repulse  of  Brunswick


APPENDIX  307

and  for  the  victories  of  Jemmappes  and  Fleurus  to  the  Volunteers,  the  Sans-
culottes, the  uncertain  "  heap  of  shriekers,"  is  absolutely  unfounded,  and  the
belief  based  upon  this  legend  in  the  inherent  superiority  of  democratic  freedom
and  enthusiasm  over  discipline  and  professional  skill  rests  on  equally  theoretical
foundations.  The  figures  given  by  Chuquet  (ii.  i6i)  as  to  the  composition
of  the  troops  engaged  in  the  "  affair  "  of  Valmy — from  the  military  point  of
view  it  hardly  deserves  to  be  described  as  a  "battle" — perhaps  afford  the
best  clue  to  an  estimate  of  the  relative  shares  of  credit  to  be  ascribed
to  Regulars  and  to  Volunteers.  Dumouriez  had  under  his  command  i8
regiments  of  cavalry  (regulars),  12  of  infantry  of  the  line,  2  battalions  of
light  infantry,  6  of  grenadiers  detached  from  line  regiments  and  16  battalions
of  Volunteers  of  1791.  Kellermann's  corps  included  4  regiments  of  cavalry,
6  of  infantry  of  the  line,  2  battalions  of  detached  grenadiers  and  i  of
detached  light  infantry,  the  only  Volunteers  being  12  battalions  of  1791,  a
total  in  round  numbers  of  7,500  cavalry,  18,000  regular  infantry  and  14,000
Volunteers  of  1791 — not  any  of  the  levies  of  1792  ;  besides  which  the  artillery,
who  practically  decided  the  day,  were  all  regulars,  and  were  the  arm  of  the  ser-
vice which  had  lost  fewest  officers  through  the  emigration,  and  which  had
probably  been  least  influenced  by  the  events  of  1789- 1792.  "  Ce  ne  sont  pas
les  volontaires  de  1792  qui  triompherent  a  Valmy  et  a  Jemmappes,"  is  M.
Hauterive's  conclusion  (p.  246) ;  "  ce  furent  nos  vieilles  troupes  de  ligne.
.  .  .  Nos  premiers  succes  sont  dus  a  notre  ancienne  armee,  comme  nos
premiers  revers  sont  la  consequence  de  I'indiscipline  des  volontaires."  M.
Chuquet  is  no  less  emphatic  (ii.  243) :  he  ascribes  the  credit  for  the  success
— more  moral  than  material  it  is  true,  but  still  sufficient  to  give  the  battle  an
importance  which  as  a  military  event  it  cannot  claim — to  the  old  Army  of
the  Monarchy  supported  by  those  of  the  Volunteers  of  179 1  who,  from  associa-
tion with  the  Regulars  and  by  experience  of  active  service,  had  acquired
something  of  discipline  and  soldierly  qualities.  The  experience  then  of  the
campaign  of  1792  can  hardly  be  said  to  confirm  the  Carmagnole  theory  ;
it  rather  shows  that  the  unregulated  and  unchastened  *'  patriotism  "  of  the
volunteers,  devoid  of  that  cohesion  and  solidarity  which  in  the  end  they
received  from  being  amalgamated  with  the  professional  soldiery  of  the  old
Army,  was  more  dangerous  to  France  than  to  the  foreigner,  that  outbursts
of  frenzied  enthusiasm  will  not  suffice  to  defend  a  country  by  themselves,
that  a  rampant  democracy  unrestrained  by  discipline  is  a  double-edged  mili-
tary weapon.

But  even  after  Valmy  and  Jemmappes  all  did  not  go  well.  The  disorders
from  which  the  French  Army  was  suffering  were  too  deeply  rooted  to  be
cured  in  a  moment.  The  defeat  of  Neerwinden  lost  much  of  the  ground
that  had  been  gained  just  at  the  time  (March,  1793)  when  the  outbreak  of
the  insurrection  in  La  Vendee  had  added  a  new  trouble  to  the  difficulties
of  France,  while  Custine  and  the  Army  of  the  Rhine  were  being  forced  to
retire  behind  that  river.  The  desertion  of  Dumouriez  (April)  seemed  to  be
the  prelude  to  a  complete  collapse.  The  Army  appeared  to  be  quite  de-
moralised and  disorganised,  the  troops  were  practically  a  banditti  and  the
officers  were  worth  little  more  than  the  men  (Hauterive,  p.  270) ;  desertion,
pillage  and  misconduct  of  every  kind  were  rampant,  "  an  alarming  lack  of
discipline  was  combined  with  an  even  greater  cowardice  "  (ibid.).  A  little
activity  on  the  part  of  the  Allies  and  such  troops  would  hardly  have  proved
an  effectual  barrier  on  the  road  to  Paris.  Two  things  only  saved  France.
Even  at  this  moment  the  troops  of  the  Line  retained  some  cohesion  and
were  more  or  less  in  hand.     Their  officers  were  still  able  to  exercise  a  control


308  APPENDIX

over  them  (Hauterive,  p.  273,  cf.  p.  277 :  '*  on  peut  dire  qu'a  ce  moment  ou
le  desordre  le  plus  affreux  mena9a  de  dissoudre  les  bataillons  des  volontaires,
c'est-a-dire  la  partie  la  plus  nombreuse  de  nos  forces,  les  soldats  de  I'ancienne
armee,  les  vrais  ceux-la,  conserverent  plus  d'unite,  plus  de  discipline,  et,
malgre  nos  echecs  de  I'ete,  sauverent  la  France  de  I'invasion  ").  Secondly,
the  reins  of  government  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety,
a  body  whose  rule  was  certainly  not  lacking  in  vigour  or  in  efficiency,  and
in  that  Committee  the  Republic  found  a  master,  while,  in  place  of  corrupt
and  inefficient  administrators  like  Pache,  Carnot  proved  himself  to  be  a
capable  Director  of  the  War,  and  utilised  to  the  fullest  extent  the  nucleus  of
good  material  which  the  relics  of  the  old  Army  of  the  Monarchy  provided.
Even  Carnot  could  hardly  have  welded  the  undisciplined  Volunteers  into
an  efficient  Army.  Notwithstanding  the  bitter  hostility  of  journalists,  of
popular  societies  and  commissioners  of  the  executive,  who  lost  no  chance  of
attacking  the  Army,  of  accusing  it  wholesale  of  incivisme,  and  of  denouncing
all  the  officers  as  aristocrats,  it  formed  the  leaven  with  which  the  chaotic
armed  forces  of  the  Republic  were  worked  up  into  that  magnificent  military
machine  which  Napoleon  was  to  lead  to  victory.  The  Terrorists,  whatever
their  faults,  deserve  the  greatest  credit  for  the  steps  which  they  took  to  re-
store discipline  and  to  infuse  energy  into  the  Army :  during  the  summer  and
autumn  of  1793  representants  of  the  Committee  succeeded  in  putting  down
most  of  the  disorders  which  were  threatening  to  dissolve  the  Army,  in
restoring  discipline  and  establishing  order  in  the  administrative  services.
It  is  true  that  in  many  cases  they  neutralised  the  good  they  had  done  by
ill-advised  and  officious  interference  with  the  work  of  the  generals,  by
attempting  to  decide  questions  of  tactics  and  strategy,  and  that  many  of
them  repeated  the  mistake  which  the  Volunteers  had  made  of  imagining
that  demonstrative  "patriotism"  could  compensate  for  ignorance  and  in-
experience, but  on  the  whole  they  did  good  work  and  among  the  results  oi
the  year  1794  must  be  set  down  the  restoration  of  discipline  and  the  infusion
of  energy  into  the  Army  which  soon  manifested  itself  in  the  suppression
of  the  Vendeens,  in  the  repulse  of  the  Allies,  the  recapture  of  Toulon,  and
the  conquest  of  Belgium  and  the  frontier  of  old  Gaul.

The  date  which  one  may  take  as  marking  the  close  of  the  "  Revolution  "
period  in  the  history  of  the  French  Army  is  the  reorganisation  effected  in
the  spring  of  1794.  As  long  ago  as  Jan.  1792  it  had  been  proposed  to  draft
the  Volunteers  into  the  line,  and  in  the  campaign  of  1792  Dumouriez,  fol-
lowing the  example  of  Lafayette,  had  brigaded  line  and  Volunteers  together
(Chuquet,  i.  76),  not  actually  incorporating  the  two  classes  of  troops  in  one
force  but  practically  uniting  them.  Thus  the  17^  Infanterie  (ex-Auvergne)
was  brigaded  with  the  ist  battalion  of  Volunteers  of  the  Meurthe  and  the  2«  de
Saone-et-Loire,  the  2ge  {ex-Dauphine)  served  alongside  of  the  i«  de  VAllier
and  i«  de  la  Charente,  the  99^  (ex-Deux-Ponts)  with  the  2^  de  la  Marne  and
3«  dti  Nord  {ibid.).  In  June,  1793,  in  response  to  the  advice  of  the  Repre-
sentants (Hauterive,  p.  273)  this  temporary  arrangement  received  official
sanction  as  the  authorised  organisation,  though  it  was  not  till  Jan.  1794  that
it  was  carried  out.  By  this  time  two  years  of  active  service  and  the  zeal
with  which  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety  had  enforced  discipline  had  had
good  effects  even  on  the  Volunteers  of  1792  and  the  Requisitionnaires,  and
had  turned  them  into  real  soldiers :  the  Volunteers  of  179 1  had  done  well  in
1792  {cf.  Chuquet,  i.  pp.  70-78)  and  together  with  the  regulars  were  by  now
veterans.  By  the  decree  of  Nivose  19th  (Jan.  8th,  1794)  the  infantry  were
organised  in   brigades,  each  consisting  of  one  regiment  of  regulars  and


APPENDIX  309

four  battalions  of  volunteers  or  requisitionnaires,  these  brigades  being
in  turn  divided  into  demi-brigades  (one  battalion  Regulars  and  two  of
auxiliaries)  to  each  of  which  six  guns  were  attached  (in  the  Napoleonic
era  these  demi-brigades  appear  as  regiments,  usually  consisting  of  three
battalions,  occasionally  of  two).  At  the  same  time  the  cavalry  were  re-
organised, the  heavy  cavalry  being  formed  into  regiments  of  four  squadrons,
the  light  cavalry  having  six  squadrons  to  each  regiment.  Other  reforms
followed  {cf.  Dubail,  Precis  de  I'Histoire  Militaire,  p.  51  ff.),  but  this  date
— 1794 — may  be  taken  as  marking  the  close  of  that  period  of  transition
which  saw  the  Army  of  the  Bourbon  Monarchy  transformed,  while  preserv-
ing the  continuity  of  its  existence,  into  the  Army  of  Republican  France.

Still  one  may  trace  in  the  Armies  of  the  Republic  and  Empire  the  influence
of  this  time  of  storm  and  stress,  of  upheaval  and  disturbance.  The  fighting
capacities  of  the  French  troops  of  the  Napoleonic  period  were  marvellous,
but  their  discipline  failed  to  keep  pace  with  their  other  military  virtues ;
insubordination  was  checked,  but  it  could  never  be  said  of  the  armies  ot
Napoleon,  as  it  was  of  the  troops  of  Rochambeau,  that  "  France  could  offer
to  the  world  the  spectacle  of  an  Army  in  which  there  has  not  been  a  single
act  of  plundering  or  disorder"  (Duruy,  p.  221).  The  special  circumstances
of  the  occasion  may  perhaps  account  for  the  want  of  discipline  which  made
the  French  Army  in  1815  so  untrustvvorthy  and  so  incapable  of  standing  the
shock  of  defeat  {cf.  H.  Houssaye,  "  1815,"  p.  83),  but  the  taint  of  the
excesses  of  1789- 1793  adhered  to  the  French  throughout  the  period,  and  the
habits  of  plundering  and  pillaging,  which  made  it  so  easy  to  trace  their  career
of  conquest  through  Italy  and  through  Germany,  were  another  legacy  from
those  times  of  license  and  disorder.  Indeed  one  may  look  upon  the  principle
of  '•  making  war  support  war  "  as  the  official  adoption  of  the  private  plunder-
ing which  went  on  wherever  French  armies  found  their  way :  and  if  it  is  true
that  one  reason  for  Napoleon's  failure  in  Spain  and  in  Russia  was  that  in
countries  so  poor  this  system  of  dealing  with  the  question  of  supplies,  so
successful  in  more  fertile  lands,  broke  down,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that
the  robberies  and  devastations  of  the  French  armies  played  no  small  share
in  arousing  that  violent  antipathy  to  Napoleon  and  his  system  which  aroused
Europe  in  1813  and  1814  (cf.  Thiebault's  Memoirs,  especially  vol.  ii.).


310


THE  FRENCH  NAVY  IN  THE  REVOLUTION

By  Christopher  T.  Atkinson,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Exeter  College,

Oxford.

Authorities  :  E,  Chevalier,  La  Marine  Francaise  sous  la  premiere  R^publique
(quoted  as  Chevalier  ii.,  being  sequel  to  a  vv'ork  on  the  American  War),  Paris,
1886 ;  La  Marine  Fran9aise  sous  le  Consulat  et  la  premiere  Empire  (quoted  as
Chevalier  iii.),  Paris,  1886;  L.  Gu^rin,  Histoire  Maritime  de  la  France,  vol.  iii.,
Paris,  1849;  William  James,  Naval  History  of  England,  vol.  i.,  London  (stereo-
typed edition) ;  Maurice  Loir,  La  Marine  Royale  en  1789,  Paris,  1892 ;  A.  T.
Mahan,  Influence  of  Sea  Power  on  the  French  Revolution  and  Empire,  London,
1893.  Besides  these  Troude  (Batailles  Navales  de  la  France,  vol.  iii.)  and  Jurien  de
la  Graviere  (Guerres  Maritimes  de  la  France)  are  also  useful.  Of  the  above  works
Chevalier  is  much  less  biassed  than  Gu6rin  and  embodies  the  fruits  of  considerable
researches.

It  is  a  somewhat  remarkable  fact  that  the  Revolution,  which  breathed  a
new  vigour  and  a  new  spirit  into  the  Armies  of  France,  and  launched  them
on  the  paths  which  were  to  lead  to  Marengo,  to  Austerlitz  and  to  Jena,
should  have  been  for  the  French  Navy  a  season  of  disaster  after  disaster,
culminating  in  the  Nile  and  Trafalgar.  The  contrast  moreover  is  accentu-
ated when  one  reflects  that  the  last  campaigns  on  a  considerable  scale  in
which  the  French  Army  had  taken  part  were  those  of  Rossbach  and  Minden,
while  in  the  American  War  of  1778-1783,  if  the  Navy  had  not  actually
succeeded  in  wresting  from  the  British  Navy  the  command  of  the  seas,  it
had  at  any  rate  been  nearer  to  success  than  ever  before.

It  is  in  the  peculiar  character  of  naval  war  and  in  the  special  qualities
needed  in  it  that  the  explanation  of  this  fact  is  to  be  found.  It  is  far  harder
to  create  a  Fleet  than  to  raise  an  Army,  a  seaman  takes  longer  to  train  than
a  hussar  or  even  an  artilleryman.  It  is  because  a  Navy  employs  machines
as  well  as  men  that  the  untrained  enthusiasm  and  courage  of  Revolutionary
France  failed  to  achieve  at  sea  results  commensurate  with  those  it  accom-
plished on  land.  The  naval  officer  has  to  handle  his  ship  as  well  as  to  fight
her,  and  so  neither  the  soldier,  unused  to  the  sea,  however  brave,  nor  the
merchant-seaman,  a  skilful  navigator  but  unaccustomed  to  discipline  and
unacquainted  with  tactics,  could  take  the  place  of  the  trained  naval  officer,
at  once  navigator  and  fighting  man.  The  fiery,  undisciplined  spirit  of  the
Revolution  was  out  of  its  element  at  sea ;  there  organisation  and  experience
are  the  moftt  essential  of  all  things,  and  without  them  courage  can  do  little.
"  Since  his  Majesty,"  wrote  Villeneuve,  when  stung  to  action  by  Napoleon's
reproaches,  "  thinks  that  nothing  but  audacity  and  resolve  are  needed  to
succeed  in  the  naval  officer's  calling,  I  shall  leave  nothing  to  be  desired"
(Troude,  iii.  390).  In  failing  to  appreciate  what  qualities  are  really  needed
in  the  Navy,  Napoleon  was  only  following  in  the  steps  of  the  Convention  :
Jean  Bon-Saint-Andre  had  looked  forward  hopefully  to  the  day  when  *'  dis-
daining skilful  evolutions  our  seamen  will  think  it  more  fitting  and  useful  to
try  those  boarding-actions  in  which  the  French  were  always  conquerors"
(Chevalier,  ii,  49) ;  and  the  only  qualifications  required  for  the  command  of  a


APPENDIX  311

ship  of  war  had  been  certificates  of  patriotism  and  civisme  from  the
"  Society  of  Adorers  of  Liberty  and  Equality"  of  Toulon  (Guerin,  iii.  240).

The  naval  revival  in  France,  begun  by  Choiseul  by  1761  and  continued
by  de  Praslin  (Minister  of  Marine  1766-1771),  de  Sartines  (1774-1780),  and
de  Castries  (1780- 1787),  had  resulted  in  raising  the  French  Navy  to  a  condi-
tion of  great  efficiency,  when  the  outbreak  of  the  Revolution  brought  a
complete  reorganisation  in  its  train.  Up  to  1791  the  officers  of  the  French
Navy  had  been  almost  exclusively  drawn  from  the  ranks  of  the  nobility,
especially  from  that  of  Brittany  and  Provence.  In  addition  to  this
aristocratic  corps,  so-called  Rouges  from  the  colour  of  their  breeches,
there  had  existed  for  many  years  a  subordinate  class  of  officers,  drawn  from
the  merchant-service  and  other  non-noble  sources  and  known  as  Bleus,
on  whom  had  devolved  an  undue  share  of  the  drudgery  of  the  service  with  a
disproportionate  quota  of  rewards.  In  1786,  owing  partly  to  the  deficiency
in  the  lower  ranks  of  officers  shown  to  exist  by  the  events  of  the  American
War  (Chevalier,  ii.  20),  a  complete  reorganisation  had  taken  place.  The
Gardes  de  la  Marine,  established  in  1689  by  Colbert,  now  became  Sieves
de  la  marine,  who,  after  six  years  of  systematic  training  both  practical  and
theoretical,  took  rank  as  lieutenants  de  vaisseau,  nobles  alone  being
eligible.  At  the  same  time  the  sons  of  privateer  and  merchant  captains,  of
ship-owners  and  other  non-noble  persons,  were  admitted  as  "  volontaires,"
being  appointed  sons-lieutenants  de  vaisseau  after  passing  certain  examina-
tions and  serving  at  sea  for  a  specified  time.  Beyond  this  rank,  however,
they  could  not  advance  unless  promoted  for  specially  distinguished  services.

Bent  on  attacking  privilege  wherever  it  was  found,  the  Constituent
Assembly  abolished  the  exclusively  noble  character  of  the  naval  profession
and  opened  its  ranks  to  everybody.  The  schools  at  Alais  and  Vannes  were
done  away  with.  Hives  and  volontaires  disappeared.  A  competitive
examination  was  held  annually  for  youths  of  from  15  to  20,  the  successful
candidates  passing  three  years  on  ships  of  war  as  aspirants  learning  their
duties.  At  the  end  of  this  time,  however,  they  received  no  preference  over
any  one  else  of  from  18  to  30  years  of  age  who  had  four  years'  experience
at  sea,  and  could  pass  the  examination  for  the  rank  of  enseigne.  En-
seignes,  though  all  alike  ranked  by  seniority,  were  of  two  classes,  entre-
tenus,  those  actually  serving  on  ships  of  war,  and  non-entretenus,  who
returned  to  the  merchant-service.  Both  classes  were  eligible  up  to  the  age  of
40  to  pass  as  lieutenants,  but  at  40  a  man  had  to  choose  definitely  between
the  Navy  and  the  merchant-service.  All  lieutenants  were  "entretenus"
and  from  among  them  captains  were  chosen,  half  by  seniority,  half  by
selection,  though  enseignes  non-entretenus  of  over  40  years  of  age  and
with  8  years'  sea-experience  might  be  specially  promoted  captains  for
distinguished  services.  By  practically  identifying  the  junior  ranks  of
the  Navy  and  the  Merchant-Marine,  this  system  struck  a  deadly  blow  at
the  efficiency  of  the  Navy.  Officers  who  fluctuated  in  this  fashion  as  in-
clination or  interest  dictated  between  the  two  services,  could  not  devote
themselves  to  the  careful  study  of  the  naval  profession.  Malouet  pleaded
before  the  Assembly  that,  if  distinctions  could  exist  in  the  Army  between  the
training  of  the  artillery,  cavalry,  engineers  and  infantry,  the  Navy  might
without  any  injury  to  civic  Hberty  and  equality  be  permitted  to  have  officers
of  its  own  (Chevalier,  ii.  p.  26).  His  entreaties  proved  vain.  Blind  to
the  special  needs  of  the  naval  service,  ignoring  the  necessity  that  the  officers
should  devote  themselves  exclusively  to  it,  the  Constituent  Assembly  in  its
zeal  for  the  abolition  of  privileges  was  undermining  the  foundations  of  the


312  APPENDIX

efficiency  of  the  Navy.  Though  the  officers  of  the  old  Navy  were  not
actually  dismissed  they  soon  found  it  impossible  to  retain  their  commissions.
As  nobles  and  as  Royalists  they  could  hardly  regard  the  new  conditions
with  anything  but  disfavour :  their  esprit  de  corps  was  outraged  by  the
reorganisation,  and  the  utter  decay  of  discipline  and  the  demoralisation
of  the  whole  service  soon  produced  their  natural  effects.  The  sailors  were
contaminated  by  the  prevailing  spirit  of  lawlessness,  mutiny  followed  mutiny.
The  failure  of  the  executive  to  restore  order  or  to  check  the  spread  of
anarchy  was  quickly  followed  by  the  disappearance  of  the  old  corps  of
officers.  In  July  lygi  three-fourths  of  them  had  quitted  a  service  in  which
neither  their  honour  nor  their  persons  were  any  longer  safe.  By  March
1792,  out  of  an  establishment  of  170  captains  there  were  but  42,  and  390
lieutenants  out  of  750.  Not  only  was  the  quantity  deficient,  but  the  quality
had  deteriorated  sadly.  "  The  meanest  officer  of  the  merchant-service,"
says  Guerin  (iii,  135),  "  pretended  rashly  that  there  was  no  difference  between
the  management  of  a  merchantman  and  a  warship,  between  a  flotilla  of
fishing-boats  and  a  naval  armament,  and  that  the  man  fit  to  command  one
was  fit  to  command  the  other.  No  account  was  taken  of  instruction  and
theory  ;  practice  in  handling  warships,  manoeuvring  and  tactics  were  looked
upon  as  prejudices  and  abuses.  Every  master  of  a  fishing  smack,  nay,
every  seaman  considered  himself  fit  to  be  an  admiral."  Before  long  the
dearth  of  officers  was  so  great  that  the  Legislative  Assembly  had  to  lower
the  qualifications  for  commissions  in  the  hope  of  thereby  filling  the  ranks,
and  the  Convention  had  to  go  still  further.  The  period  of  service  as  captain
qualifying  for  flag-rank  was  reduced  to  one  year,  all  lieutenants  were  eligible
for  post-rank,  as  were  also  merchant-captains  of  five  years'  experience.
Finally  in  July,  1793,  the  Convention  directed  that  all  vacancies  should  be
filled  without  regard  to  the  existing  laws  (Troude,  ii.  260).  All  that  was
needed  was  a  certificate  of  civisme  from  the  local ,  Republican  clubs,  and
the  Society  Les  adorateurs  de  la  Liberie  et  de  UEgalite  of  Toulon  drew
up  lists  of  men  who,  as  being  "  excellent  patriots,"  were  therefore  eminently
fitted  for  the  command  of  warships.  Was  it  surprising  that  Villaret-Joyeuse
should  have  written  to  the  Minister  of  Marine  in  January  1793,  "  I  cannot
hide  from  you,  and  the  representatives  of  the  people  will  not  conceal  from  the
Committee  of  Public  Safety,  that  we  have  a  set  of  captains  who  do  not  even
attain  to  mediocrity"  ?  (Chevalier,  ii,  168.)  From  the  fact  that  of  the  three
French  admirals  on  June  ist,  1794,  two  had  been  lieutenants  in  1791  and
one  a  sub-lieutenant,  one  may  form  some  idea  of  the  breach  in  continuity
between  the  Navy  of  the  American  War  and  that  of  the  Revolution.  Of
the  captains  three  had  been  lieutenants  in  1791,  eleven  sub-lieutenants  {i.e.,
Bleus),  nine  in  the  merchant-service,  one  a  boatswain  and  one  an  ordinary
sailor  (Guerin,  iii.  411).  The  reports  of  the  courts-martial  held  after  that
action  {cf.  Chevalier,  ii.  153-164)  are  an  instructive  commentary  on  the
possibility  of  substituting  mere  patriotism  and  courage  for  experience  and
skill,  and  on  the  wisdom  of  replacing  a  corps  of  well-trained  professional
officers  by  merchant-captains  and  ordinary  sailors.  Courage  indeed  was
never  wanting  in  the  French  Navy,  but  courage  and  devotion,  unsupported
by  experience,  formed  a  poor  equipment  with  which  to  face  men  trained  in
the  schools  of  Jervis  and  Nelson.

The  men  were  on  a  level  with  the  officers.  In  the  American  War  France
had  owed  much  to  possessing  a  highly  efficient  corps  of  trained  gunners,
the  bombardiers  tnarins.  In  the  reorganisation  of  1786  this  force  had
become    the    canonniers   matelots    (seamen    gunners),    composed    of   nine


APPENDIX  313

divisions  amounting  in  all  to  5,400  men,  recruited  by  voluntary  enlistment
and  kept  on  a  permanent  footing  during  peace  (Loir,  p.  150).  But  despite
the  great  services  and  the  efficiency  of  this  corps,  it  was  disbanded  by  the
Constituent  Assembly,  and  for  it  was  substituted  a  corps  of  marine  artillery
commanded  by  artillery  officers,  a  step  which  could  not  but  lead  to  friction
with  the  naval  officers.  "  One  would  have  thought,"  says  Chevalier,  "  that
there  was  nothing  left  to  be  done  towards  ruining  the  Navy  after  the  Con-
stituent and  Legislative  Assemblies  had  had  their  way.  It  was  reserved  for
the  Convention  to  go  yet  further  "  (p.  125).  In  the  existence  of  regiments  of
marine  artillery  and  infantry  Jean  Bon-Saint-Andre  discovered  a  new  and
scandalous  abuse.  That  there  should  be  troops  enjoying  the  exclusive
privilege  of  defending  the  Republic  at  sea  appeared  to  him  monstrous.  It
was  the  right  of  every  patriot.  "Are  we  not  all,"  he  asked,  "called  upon
to  fight  for  liberty  ?  Why  should  not  the  victors  of  Landau  and  Toulon  go
on  board  our  fleets  to  display  their  courage  to  Pitt  and  to  lower  the  flag
of  George  ? "  (Chevalier,  ii.  126.)  •  Accordingly  the  marines  disappeared,
and  it  was  decided  that  detachments  of  National  Guards  should  be  embarked
in  their  place  to  whom  should  be  entrusted  the  service  of  the  artillery.
"Thus,"  says  Chevalier  (ii.  126),  "a  marine-artilleryman,  a  soldier  trained
in  the  difficult  art  of  naval  gunnery  and  specially  told  off  to  this  service,
became  a  sort  of  aristocrat."  Henceforward  perfect  equality  in  serving  at
sea  prevailed  among  all  patriots,  greatly  to  the  advantage  of  the  enemies
of  the  Republic  (cf.  Jurien  de  la  Graviere,  i.  p.  138).

The  disbanding  of  the  marines,  practically  the  only  permanent  part  of  the
naval  rank  and  file,  and  the  force  on  whom,  as  in  the  English  Navy,  the
maintenance  of  discipline  principally  depended,  did  for  the  lower  ranks  what
the  reorganisation  and  emigration  had  done  for  the  officers.  "  The  war-
navy,"  says  Loir  (p.  148),  "had  no  sailors  of  its  own,  in  case  of  need  it
borrowed  them  from  the  merchant-marine."  Thus,  although  under  the
system  of  conscription  introduced  by  Colbert  in  1665,  and  somewhat  modi-
fied by  de  Sartines  in  1784,  the  sailor  had  always  been  at  the  beck  and  call
of  the  State,  he  was  not  in  permanent  service.  Ill-paid  and  that  irregularly,
ill-lodged  and  ill-fed,  he  was  always  liable  to  be  called  out  for  service  and
could  never  feel  himself  his  own  master.  The  oppressiveness  and  unfairness
of  the  system  was  great,  discipline  was  harsh,  the  service  unhealthy  and
unpopular.  What  wonder  if  desertion  was  frequent  and  that  the  discipline
of  the  crews  disappeared  completely  under  the  influences  of  the  Revolution  ?

In  the  last  months  of  the  year  1789  the  disorder  which  had  invaded  every
other  branch  of  the  public  service  penetrated  on  board  the  fleet.  At  the
chief  naval  ports  serious  outbreaks  occurred.  On  the  one  hand,  the  workmen
at  the  arsenals,  ill-paid  and  in  arrears,  provided  a  fruitful  source  of  riot  and
sedition,  while,  on  the  other,  the  local  civil  authorities  showed  themselves
only  too  ready  to  encourage  any  disobedience  to  the  naval  officers  and  to
interfere  in  the  affairs  of  the  fleet.  The  naval  officers,  finding  themselves
unsupported  by  the  central  government,  could  do  little  to  stem  the  rising
tide  of  mutiny :  unable  to  resist  they  had  to  make  concessions  which  only
added  fuel  to  the  flames  of  disorder.  At  Toulon  the  mob  espoused  the
cause  of  two  petty  officers  dismissed  their  ship  for  inciting  the  crews  to
mutiny :  d'Albret  de  Rions,  after  vainly  attempting  to  conciliate  the  rioters,
was  dragged  off  to  prison,  the  marines  being  powerless  to  save  him,  and  the
National  Guard,  which,  contrary  to  all  rules,  was  largely  recruited  from  the
dockyard  labourers,  looked  on  favourably  at  the  proceedings  of  the  mob.
The  National  Assembly  investigated  the  affair,  but  its  fatuous  verdict  is  an


314  APPENDIX

eloquent  testimony  to  the  disappearance  of  discipline.  "  The  National
Assembly,  taking  a  favourable  view  of  the  motives  which  actuated  M.
d'Albret  de  Rions,  the  other  naval  officers  involved,  the  municipal  officers
and  the  National  Guards  of  Toulon,  declares  that  there  is  no  occasion  to
blame  any  one"  (Moniteur,  Jan.  17th,  1790).  The  successor  of  de  Rions,
M.  de  Glandeves,  was  also  attacked  by  the  mob,  seized  and  thrown  into
prison,  for  which  he  could  obtain  no  redress  from  the  Assembly.  At  Brest,
in  Sept.  1790,  de  Rions  found  himself  involved  in  fresh  disturbances,  even
more  formidable  from  the  fact  that  they  were  the  work  of  the  crews  them-
selves and  not — as  those  at  Toulon  had  been — of  the  dockyardmen  and
the  mob.  An  attempt  to  punish  a  sailor  of  the  Leopard  for  insulting  one
of  the  Patriate' s  officers  roused  the  crew  of  the  Patriate  to  take  up  the
sailor's  cause,  the  mutiny  spread  through  the  whole  squadron  and  was
only  appeased  by  the  intervention  of  the  Society  of  Friends  of  the  Con-
stitution and  of  some  commissioners  from  the  National  Assembly.  In  the
following  years  things  grew  steadily  worse ;  the  last  vestiges  of  discipline
vanished  :  at  Toulon,  in  Sept.  1792,  Rear-Admiral  de  Flotte  was  murdered  by
some  convicts  employed  in  the  dockyard,  under  the  eyes  of  a  detachment
of  marines  who  did  not  stir  to  save  him,  nor  was  he  the  only  officer
murdered.  The  seamen  refused  to  obey  orders  and  presumed  to  direct  the
movements  of  the  fleet.  In  1797  the  English  mutineers  at  Spithead  declared
themselves  ready  to  return  to  duty  should  the  enemy's  fleet  put  to  sea ;  but
in  May,  1793,  it  was  only  by  the  aid  of  the  "  Friends  of  Liberty  and  Equality  "
that  the  Brest  fleet  could  be  induced  to  put  to  sea  at  all,  and  Morard  de
Galle  found  himself  powerless  to  prevent  a  return  to  Brest  when  the  news
of  the  surrender  of  Toulon  to  the  EngUsh  filled  the  crews  with  apprehensions
for  the  security  of  Brest.  But  the  most  remarkable  incident  of  all  was  the
demand  of  the  crew  of  the  £ole  whose  captain  had  been  seized  by  the
Assembly  of  Cap  Fran9ais  in  San  Domingo,  that  he  should  be  turned  over
to  them,  "  since  they  alone  had  the  right  to  take  cognisance  of  and  pronounce
verdict  on  his  behaviour  "  (Guerin,  iii.  195).

Not  until  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety  succeeded  in  restoring  some
degree  of  order  to  the  administration,  and  in  imparting  vigour  and  decision
into  the  executive,  was  discipline  restored,  and  the  excesses  of  revolutionary
equality  and  Hberty  curtailed.  But  by  that  time  anarchy  had  done  its  work,
the  old  Navy  of  France  was  a  thing  of  the  past,  and  the  history  of  the  war  is
a  long  record  of  the  inefficiency  of  the  makeshift  crews  which  had  replaced
it.  Seamanship  they  had  none :  the  simplest  manoeuvres  were  beyond  them.
Even  in  good  weather  accidents  were  numerous.  In  June,  1793,  Morard  de
Galle  wrote,  "I  have  sailed  in  the  most  numerous  squadrons,  but  never
in  a  year  did  I  see  so  many  collisions  as  in  the  month  this  squadron  has
been  together."  On  the  celebrated  "winter-cruise"  of  the  Brest  fleet  in
December,  1794,  and  Jan.  1795,  no  less  than  five  ships  perished  and  three  others
were  within  an  ace  of  sharing  their  fate  (Chevalier,  ii.  166-167).  Gunnery
was  on  a  par  with  seamanship.  There  was  hardly  a  single  ship  action
between  vessels  of  equal  force  in  which  the  French  loss  did  not  far  exceed  the
English.  The  Alexander,  a  British  74,  which  was  taken  by  a  squadron
of  four  ships  of  the  line  in  Nov.  1794,  inflicted  as  heavy  a  loss  on  each  of
her  three  principal  opponents  as  she  herself  suffered.  The  frigate  Phoebe
of  44  guns  only  lost  2  killed  and  12  wounded  in  taking  the  Africaine  of  the
same  force,  which  lost  no  fewer  than  127  killed  and  176  wounded  (Chevalier,
iii.  48).  In  the  action  ofl"  Isle  Groix  (June  23rd,  1795)  the  eight  British
vessels  engaged  had  144  killed  and  wounded,  the  nine  French  vessels  which


APPENDIX  315

escaped  had  220  between  them,  the  three  which  were  taken  having  respec-
tively 130,  220  and  320.  At  the  Nile  the  British  had  220  killed  and  680
wounded,  the  French — excluding  the  Orient  which  blew  up  with  nearly
all  hands — 980  killed  and  1,500  wounded.  The  French  officers  themselves
were  among  the  first  to  admit  the  inferiority  of  their  gunnery.  "  You  need
trained  gunners  to  serve  guns  at  sea,"  wrote  Admiral  Kerguelen ;  "the
experience  of  the  late  actions  should  teach  you  that  our  gunners  are  inferior
to  those  of  the  enemy"  (Jurien  de  la  Graviere,  i.  p.  138).  Something
may  perhaps  be  attributed  to  the  French  preference  for  firing  at  the  masts
so  as  to  disable  the  enemy  and  permit  their  fleet  to  withdraw  at  leisure,  and
the  loss  of  the  Africaine  elicited  from  Bonaparte  a  letter  to  the  Minister
of  Marine,  bidding  him  "  call  the  attention  of  officers  to  the  inconvenience
of  always  trying  to  dismast,  and  point  out  the  truth  of  the  principle  that,
under  all  circumstances,  one  should  do  as  much  harm  to  the  enemy  as
possible"  (Chevalier,  iii.  49).

The  ships  of  the  French  Navy  did  not  escape  the  fate  of  the  crews.  The
dockyardmen  were  too  much  occupied  with  politics  and  with  riots  to  attend
to  the  needs  of  the  fleet,  and  in  the  hands  of  incompetent  officers  and  in-
efficient crews  the  ships  rapidly  deteriorated.  Not  the  least  of  the  mistakes
of  the  Legislative  Assembly  was  to  deprive  the  naval  officers  of  all  control
of  the  management  of  the  dockyards,  in  which  civilians  replaced  them
(Guerin,  iii.  154).  But  even  had  the  administration  been  good  and  the  crews
capable,  they  would  have  found  the  task  of  keeping  the  ships  efficient  very
difficult.  France  was  even  more  dependent  than  was  Great  Britain  on
foreign  naval  stores  (Loir,  p.  210),  and  the  British  control  of  the  seas  soon
cut  her  oft'  from  her  sources  of  supply.  Once  the  stock  of  spare  stores  was
exhausted  it  could  not  be  replenished,  for  the  dockyards  could  not  create
out  of  nothing  the  hemp,  timber,  pitch  and  other  necessary  materials.  By
Jan.  1799  French  commerce  had  vanished  off  the  seas  (Moniteiir,  An.  VIL
478);  and  by  classing  "naval  stores"  as  contraband  of  war,  England  pre-
vented neutrals  from  filling  the  empty  storehouses  of  Brest  and  Toulon.
Thus  when  the  Brest  fleet  put  to  sea  for  its  "winter  cruise"  in  December,
1794,  many  ships  had  not  repaired  the  injuries  received  on  June  ist  (Chevalier,
ii.  165) ;  and  when  Villaret-Joyeuse  put  to  sea  in  June,  1795,  out  of  the  twenty
or  thirty  ships  of  the  line  in  the  Biscay  ports  only  twelve  could  take  the  sea,
and  these  were  in  bad  condition  and  short  of  men  (Chevalier,  ii.  201).  The
very  strategy  which  partly  from  necessity,  partly  from  choice,  the  French
had  adopted,  tended  still  further  to  reduce  the  efficiency  of  their  Navy.  No
longer  risking  any  fleet  actions,  they  lay  snugly  in  port  until  bad  weather
should  drive  the  English  away  from  blockading  the  ports  and  permit  them
to  slip  out  unperceived.  It  was  the  traditional  French  naval  policy  of
"ulterior  objects,"  which  sought  to  gain  its  ends  by  evasion  rather  than  as
the  result  of  victory  in  a  pitched  battle ;  which  failed  to  see  that  the  truest
way  to  evade  the  enemy  is  to  place  one's  self  alongside  him  and  render
him  incapable  of  further  mischief.  Such  a  policy  could  not  but  have  a  fatal
etfect  on  the  morale  of  those  who  adopt  it :  crews  trained  to  avoid  battle
cannot  face  it,  when  it  can  be  put  off  no  longer,  with  the  same  confidence
as  those  who  have  been  taught  to  seek  it  above  all  things.  Further,  by
abandoning  the  seas  to  their  enemies,  the  French  were  cutting  themselves
off  from  the  only  drill-ground  where  a  Navy  can  be  trained  and  where  a
collection  of  individual  ships  can  be  welded  together  into  the  harmonious
whole  which  deserves  to  be  called  a  '*  fleet."

As  to  the  strength  of  the  French  Navy  statistics  differ.     Louis  XVL  in


316  APPENDIX

1786  had  fixed  the  establishment  at  8i  ships  of  the  Une  (Loir,  p.  i) ;  but  in
1788  financial  reasons  had  caused  the  proportion  maintained  in  readiness
for  sea  to  be  fixed  at  seven-ninths.  For  1789  Loir  (p.  56)  gives  78  ships  of
the  line  as  available,  Guerin  (iii.  65)  gives  81.  For  1792  Guerin  gives  74
ships,  but  in  the  detailed  list  given  by  James  (vol.  i.  appendix  3),  which  is
on  the  whole  to  be  accepted,  there  appear  eight  three-deckers,  ten  8o-gun
ships  and  sixty-four  74's,  a  total  of  82,  of  which  two  are  described  as
"  unserviceable,"  and  seven  old  vessels,  which  had  served  under  Suffren  and  de
Grasse,  were  soon  afterwards  cut  down  and  employed  on  other  services,
leaving  serviceable  73  ships  in  all.  At  the  same  time  England  had  115  ships
of  the  line:  {Loir  (p.  4)  says  118,  Guerin  (iii.  65)  135,  but  James'  figures  are
based  on  exhaustive  research  and  can  be  relied  upon) ;  Spain  had  76,  of
which  56  were  in  good  condition ;  Holland  49,  many  of  which  were  lighter
and  smaller  than  those  of  other  countries ;  Denmark  38 ;  Portugal  6,  and
Naples  4.  As  a  rule  the  French  ships  were  larger  and  more  heavily  armed
than  English  vessels  of  the  same  nominal  strength ;  indeed  a  French  "  80  "
fired  a  greater  weight  of  metal  than  an  English  "98,"  and  James  calculates
that  in  aggregate  weight  of  broadside  (the  fairest  method  of  calculation)
England  had  only  a  superiority  of  6  to  5,  89,000  lb.  as  against  the  French
74,000  lb.

To  trace  the  strength  of  the  French  Navy  during  the  war  is  very  difficult,
as  with  each  change  of  government  the  names  of  the  ships  were  altered  to
reflect  the  political  complexion  of  the  party  in  power.  Thus  the  overthrow
of  the  Monarchy  saw  the  Bretagne  become  the  Revolutionnairc  and  the
Auguste  the  jfacohin.  The  fine  three-decker  Etats  de  Bourgogne  was  the
Cote  d'Or  in  1793,  the  Montagne  in  1794,  the  Peuple  in  1795,  and  finally
became  the  Ocean  in  1796.  The  Dauphin  Royal,  after  figuring  for  a  period
as  the  Sans-Culottes,  perished  at  the  Nile  as  the  Orient.  The  Barras,
launched  in  1794,  was  successively  the  Pegase  and  the  Hoche.  The  Lan-
guedoc  figured  as  Anti-federaliste  and  Victoire.  A  name  appears  in  one
year  and  is  then  heard  no  more :  the  same  ship  makes  the  next  campaign
under  a  new  title.  Thus  of  the  73  serviceable  ships  of  1793,  forty-two
(including  three  three-deckers,  seven  8o's  and  thirty-two  74's)  had  been  lost
before  the  Peace  of  Amiens,  sixteen  reappear  after  the  outbreak  of  hostilities
in  1803,  and  fifteen  (two  8o's  and  thirteen  74's)  cannot  be  traced.  During
these  years  the  names  of  thirty-two  ships  not  mentioned  in  1793  appear ;
four  of  them  were  taken  from  England,  two  were  handed  over  by  Spain,
twelve  at  least  seem  to  have  been  new  ships.  Whether  the  remainder  are
identical  with  some  of  the  fifteen  "missing"  ships  of  the  list  of  1793  is  a
matter  of  conjecture,  but  it  is  probable  that  at  least  some,  if  not  all,  are  so.
Nine  of  these  thirty-two  were  lost  before  1801,  eleven  reappear  in  1803,
leaving  twelve  unaccounted  for.

Thus  the  Revolution,  by  destroying  the  organisation,  traditions  and  esprit
de  corps  of  the  old  Royal  Navy  of  France,  rendered  it  inevitable  that  in  the
struggle  for  the  mastery  of  the  seas  France  should  be  worsted.  The  emigra-
tion of  the  old  officers,  the  disbanding  of  the  seamen-gunners,  the  deterioration
of  the  ships,  due  to  the  impossibility  of  obtaining  naval  stores  in  the  face  of
the  vigilant  British  cruisers,  the  inevitable  loss  of  prestige  and  spirit  involved
in  the  mistaken  policy  of  evasion  and  skulking  in  harbour,  form  a  partial
explanation  of  the  paradoxical  difference  in  the  effects  of  the  Revolution  on
the  French  Army  and  Navy.  But  in  justice  to  the  British  Navy  one  must
not  exaggerate  or  unduly  insist  upon  the  deterioration  of  the  French.  In
the  words  of  Captain  Mahan  :  "The  elder  Pitt  had  not  to  contend  with  such


APPENDIX  317

a  Navy  as  confronted  his  son  at  the  outbreak  of  the  French  Revolution.  The
French  Navy  had  received  great  and  judicious  care  throughout  the  reign  of
Louis  XVI. ;  it  had  a  large  and  splendid  body  of  ships  in  1793,  and,  although
its  efficiency  was  fatally  affected  by  the  legislation  of  the  National  Assembly
and  by  the  emigrations,  it  was  still  an  imposing  force"  (ii.  387).  It  was
because  the  Navy  and  the  admirals  of  England  were  enemies  of  a  very
different  order  to  those  whom  the  French  Army  had  to  face,  that  the  Republic's
record  at  sea  was  one  of  continued  disasters :  and  it  was  only  because  the
English  Navy  was  well  led,  and  was  thoroughly  efficient,  that  it  was  capable
of  seizing  the  opportunities  which  the  demoralisation  of  its  enemy  presented
to  it.


318


LA  VENDEE

By   Christopher  T.   Atkinson,   M.A.,  Fellow   of  Exeter
College,  Oxford

Authorities  :  M^moires  pour  servir  k  I'Histoire  de  la  Vendue  par  le  G^n^raJ
Turreau,  2me  Edition  (Berville  et  Barriere),  Paris,  1824;  M^moires  sur  la  Vendue
comprenant  les  m^moires  in^dits  d'un  ancien  administrateur  des  Armies  R^publi-
caines,  et  ceux  de  Mme  de  Sapinaud  (Berville  et  Barriere),  Paris,  1823  ;  M^moires
de  Mme  de  la  Rochejacquelin,  5me  Edition  (Berville  et  Barriere),  Paris,  1821 ;
Guerres  de  la  Vendue  et  des  Chouans  contre  la  R^publique  Fran9aise  (Baudouin
freres),  Paris,  1824  ;  Mdmoires  pour  servir  k  I'Histoire  de  la  guerre  de  la  Vendue
par  M.  le  Comte  de  .  .  .,  Paris,  1806,

Although  the  romantic  interest  of  the  insurrection  in  La  Vendee  has  made
it  one  of  the  most  famous  passages  in  the  history  of  the  French  Revolution,
it  is  owing  to  this  atmosphere  of  romance  that  the  real  truth  as  to  the  rising
has  been  obscured  by  semi-legendary  versions  of  the  episode.  It  is  not
uncommon,  for  example,  to  find  the  peasants  represented  as  having  been
actuated  merely  by  a  desire  to  avenge  their  murdered  King,  a  view  which
lays  an  undue  stress  upon  one — and  that  not  the  most  important — of  the
various  motives  for  the  insurrection.

It  does  not,  indeed,  appear  that  in  the  year  1789  the  peasants  of  La
Vendee  were  distinguished  from  those  of  other  provinces  by  any  devoted
attachment  to  the  existing  order  of  things,  or  by  any  special  adherence  to
monarchical  and  feudal  principles.  Though  they  were  not,  as  to  some  extent
the  Alsatian  peasants  were,*in  a  condition  of  serfdom,  and  though  the  propor-
tion of  residents  among  the  nobles  of  the  province  was  somewhat  larger
than  was  general,  the  Noblesse  of  La  Vendee  did  include  many  absentees
and  frequenters  of  the  Court,  who  communicated  with  their  tenants  merely
through  agents  and  bailiffs.  Thus,  while  there  was  in  1789  nothing  of  the
nature  of  general  jfacquerie  in  the  district,  there  do  seem  to  have  been
troubles,  especially  one  rising  against  the  feudal  "  agents  "  at  Maulevrier
(Mdmoires  pour  servir  pour  I'histoire  de  La  Vendee,  i.  39).  Still,  one  may
say  that  in  La  Vendee  there  was  less  antagonism  between  nobles  and
peasants  than  there  was  in  provinces  where  the  nobles  were  richer  and  more
closely  connected  with  the  Court.  The  Vendeen  nobles  were  as  a  rule  very
poor,  and  many  lived  on  their  own  estates  all  the  year,  spending  their  time
mainly  in  hunting  and  shooting,  diversions  in  which  the  peasantry  to  some
extent  shared.  But  the  nobles  had  little  influence  over  the  peasants,  and
though  after  1789  they  seem  to  have  tried  to  ingratiate  themselves  with
them  (M^m,  i.  34),  it  was  not  to  the  seigneur  but  to  the  cure  that  the  peasant
turned  for  guidance  at  every  juncture.

Ignorant,  knowing  little  and  caring  little  as  to  what  happened  outside
their  own  province  (Martin,  "  France  depuis  1789,"  i.  442),  credulous  and


APPENDIX  319

intensely  superstitious,  the  peasants  of  La  Vendue  followed  their  priests  with
an  obedience  as  unquestioning  as  that  which  their  ancestors,  the  Veneti,  had
paid  to  the  Druids.  "The  nobles,"  says  one  writer,  "had  only  threats
and  menaces  with  which  to  influence  the  peasantry,  the  priests  had  at  their
disposal  the  keys  of  Heaven  and  Hell "  (Mdm.  i.  32).  In  the  sixteenth  century,
when  Calvinism  had  found  many  adherents  among  the  clergy  of  Lower  Poitou,
the  peasantry  had  followed  their  pastors  against  the  forces  of  Catholicism  as
readily  and  as  unthinkingly  as  more  than  two  centuries  later  they  charged
up  to  the  muzzles  of  Republican  cannon  in  the  cause  of  that  same  Catholic
faith.  "  A  Christian  people,"  Montaigne  has  called  them,  '*  having  churches
and  altars,  but  at  bottom  so  simple  that  of  the  religion  which  they  observe
so  scrupulously  they  do  not  understand  a  single  word."  Superstition,  indeed,
rather  than  devotion  was  their  dominant  characteristic,  and  one  can  observe
in  their  ideas  and  practices  no  slight  traces  of  the  pagan  faith  and  rites  of
their  ancestors.  Though  the  fertility  of  the  country  enabled  it  to  support  a
somewhat  unusually  dense  population,  the  district  was  purely  agricultural ;
manufactures,  except  for  home  consumption,  hardly  existed,  the  towns  were
few  in  number,  small  and  far  apart,  and  took  but  a  small  share  in  an  insur-
rection from  which  they  were  in  the  end  the  heaviest  sufferers.  Such,  indeed,
was  the  antagonism  between  the  townsfolk  and  the  peasants  that  Mme  de
Sapinaud  relates  (Mdmoires  de  Mme  de  Sapinaud,  p.  81)  that  some  country
youths  who  had  come  in  to  Chollet  to  draw  their  lots  in  the  requisition  were
attacked  and  ill-treated  by  the  citizens.

The  execution  of  Louis  XVL  does  not  appear  to  have  been  the  real
motive  which  induced  the  peasants  to  take  arms  against  the  Republic.  Such
hopes  as  the  Revolution  may  have  aroused  within  them  had  been  disappointed ;
it  had  not  benefited  them  very  much,  it  certainly  had  not  produced  the
millennium,  but  it  had  brought  with  it  the  Civil  Constitution  of  the  Clergy
against  which  their  priests  never  ceased  to  inveigh.  As  early  as  April  1791,
there  had  been  disturbances  at  La  Roche-sur-Yon,  and  Gallais  and  Gensonne,
the  commissioners  sent  down  to  hold  an  inquiry,  reported  to  the  National
Assembly  that  they  were  caused  by  the  Civil  Constitution  of  the  Clergy,
before  which  La  Vendee  had  been  quiet  (M6m.  i.  45).  During  the  next  two
years  the  priests  kept  on  stirring  up  their  flocks  against  the  "  atheistical "
government,  forbade  them  to  recognise  the  "  constitutional "  clergy  and  put
every  possible  obstacle  in  the  path  of  these  backsliding  cures.  Thus,  though
when  once  the  standard  of  insurrection  had  been  raised  Royalists  and  reac-
tionaries flocked  to  it  in  numbers  which  made  the  Royalist  the  preponderating
element,  the  origin  of  the  insurrection  was  not  Royalist,  but  religious.  "  We
do  not  care  about  the  nobles,"  a  peasant  on  guard  over  the  prisoners  at
Chollet  admitted  to  one  of  his  captives,  the  President  of  the  local  tribunal,
"  we  do  not  ask  for  a  King,  but  we  do  want  our  good  priests  and  you  do  not
love  them  "  (Mem.  i.  84).  Carefully  watched  as  they  were  by  the  local
Republicans,  the  nobles  had  taken  no  part  in  organising  the  revolt ;  that
was  the  work  of  the  priests  (M^m.  i.  39),  but  in  the  spring  of  '93  they
hastened  to  put  themselves  at  the  head  of  the  movement  and  to  make  the
restoration  of  the  Monarchy  an  object  equal  in  importance  to  the  liberation
of  the  Church.

It  is  hardly  an  exaggeration  to  call  La  Vendee  a  district  which  affords
almost  unparalleled  facilities  for  guerilla  warfare  and  for  a  protracted  popular
revolt.  Fertile  enough  to  support  a  large  population,  it  combines  in  striking
fashion  the  fens,  forests  and  mountains,  which  are  the  usual  homes  of  long
and  desperate  resistance  to  superior  forces.     The  Vendeens,  no  less  than  the


320  APPENDIX

Scottish  Highlanders  or  such  semi-legendary  heroes  as  Robin  Hood  and
Hereward  the  Wake,  owed  much  to  the  character  of  the  country  in  which  it
was  their  lot  to  fight :  it  was — to  quote  Turreau's  words  (p.  169) — "  very  much
cut  up,  although  there  are  no  large  rivers,  very  uneven,  although  there  are
no  mountains,  very  much  wooded,  although  there  are  no  forests."  Bounded
on  the  North  by  the  Loire  and  on  the  West  by  the  Bay  of  Biscay,  La  Vendee
included  those  portions  of  Brittany  and  Anjou  which  lie  to  the  South  of  the
Loire,  as  well  as  the  North  and  North- Western  districts  of  Poitou.  To  East
and  South  its  limits  are  harder  to  fix ;  a  line  drawn  from  Saumur  to  Niort
through  Thouars  might  be  taken  as  its  Eastern  boundary,  one  following  the
course  of  the  Sevre  Niortaisefrom  Niort  to  Le  Pertuis  Breton  as  the  Southern  :
the  whole  area  being,  roughly  speaking,  rather  smaller  than  Yorkshire.

The  principal  watershed  of  the  country  is  formed  by  a  cluster  of  hills  in
the  S.E.  around  Les  Herbiers  and  Fontenay,  from  which  one  range  branches
off  N.E.  towards  the  Loire,  forming  a  natural  frontier  in  that  direction,  while
another  runs  almost  due  from  S.E.  to  N.W.  along  the  course  of  the  Sevre
Nantaise.  This  river,  which  divides  the  country  into  the  two  districts  of
Upper  and  Lower  Vendee  is  one  of  the  several  small  streams  which  flow  from
these  hills,  some  Northward  to  the  Loire,  some  Westward  to  the  Atlantic.
Another  division,  based  on  the  natural  features,  distinguished  the  hilly
and  well-wooded  "  Bocage  "  in  the  S.E.  from  the  "  Plaine,"  otherwise  called
'*  Loroux"  (Turreau,  p.  161),  along  the  left  bank  of  the  Loire,  and  this  again
from  the  marshy  district  along  the  coast,  called  the  "  Marais,"  which  is  much
intersected  by  canals  and  streams.  In  addition  to  these  natural  difficulties
of  swamp,  stream,  hill  and  wood,  the  country  was  cut  up  in  every  direction
by  stout  banks,  thick  hedges  and  stone  walls,  often  as  much  as  five  feet  in
height,  to  prevent  the  cattle  (cattle-rearing  was  one  of  the  chief  occupations
of  the  inhabitants)  from  straying  on  to  the  wrong  lands.  The  roads  were
few  and  bad  in  winter,  often  indeed  impassable  quagmires,  while  the  high-
ways were  so  much  shut  in  by  hedges  as  to  afford  splendid  shelter  for
ambushes  (Turreau,  p.  i6g).  "  A  deep  and  obscure  labyrinth  in  which  one
can  only  grope  one's  way"  Kleber  called  it  (Mem.  i.  18),  and  it  was  indeed
admirably  calculated  to  assist  nimble  irregulars  to  defy  their  enemies.  In
its  recesses  cavalry  were  almost  useless  and  artillery  a  hindrance  :  cohesion
was  impossible  and  the  rigid  tactics  of  the  parade-ground  a  positive  peril.
The  Vendeens  had  the  same  advantages  over  the  Repubhcans  as  the  Afridis
of  the  North-Western  Frontier  enjoy  against  their  British  enemies,  and
they  were  more  fortunate  inasmuch  as  most  of  their  opponents  hardly  merited
the  name  of  "  soldiers  ".

The  tactics  of  the  Vendeens  were  admirably  adapted  to  make  the  most  of
the  conditions  under  which  they  fought.  By  careful  skirmishing  they  felt
the  pulse  of  their  adversaries,  attacking  or  withdrawing  as  circumstances
dictated.  The  best  shots — and  there  were  among  them  poachers,  smugglers
and  gamekeepers  in  plenty — formed  the  wings  which  were  thrust  forward,
like  the  "horns  "  of  a  Zulu  "  impi,"  to  get  in  touch  with  the  enemy  ;  the
main  body,  the  "  chest "  of  the  army,  being  "  refused,"  so  that  it  need  not
be  committed  to  a  pitched  battle,  should  the  skirmishers  find  the  enemy  too
strong  to  be  attacked  with  a  reasonable  prospect  of  success.  Thus,  while
to  the  Republicans'  defeat  usually  spelt  complete  disaster,  loss  of  guns,
muskets  and  ammunition,  a  victory  meant  little  more  than  the  occupation  of
the  field  of  battle  from  which  their  slippery  adversaries  had  retired.  The
skirmishers,  so  skilful  and  so  agile  that,  as  Turreau  describes,  they  could
load  when  on  the  move,  would  gather  on  their  enemy's  flanks,  threaten  his


APPENDIX  321

rear  and  shake  his  confidence  by  their  well-sustained  and  well-directed  fire,
which  paved  the  way  for  the  headlong  charge  of  the  main  body ;  while,  like
all  irregulars,  the  Vendeens  had  no  prestige  to  lose,  no  organisation  to  be
upset,  no  cohesion  and  no  discipline  to  be  ruined  by  a  retreat,  however
precipitous.

The  match  which  fired  the  train  of  insurrection  was  the  law  of  Feb.  23rd,
1793,  which  ordered  all  unmarried  men  between  the  ages  of  18  and  40  to
hold  themselves  in  readiness  to  be  called  out  for  service  to  complete  the
levy  of  300,000  men  to  repel  the  threatened  Austro-Prussian  attack.  Military
service  had  never  been  popular  with  the  Vendeens,  and  now,  abetted  and
incited  by  the  priests,  they  took  arms  against  their  country  to  avoid  having
to  take  arms  to  defend  her  frontiers.  On  March  14th  several  thousand
peasants,  with  Barbotin,  a  priest,  and  Stofflet,  a  peasant,  at  their  head,  came
rushing  into  Chollet  and  made  themselves  masters  of  the  town.  All  over
the  district  simultaneous  risings  took  place  according  to  a  preconcerted  plan.
The  authority  of  the  Republic  was  swept  away,  little  resistance  was  offered,
and,  where  it  was,  it  only  served  to  enrage  the  peasants  whose  reply  took
the  form  of  ill-treating  and  even  massacring  their  prisoners.

That  the  insurrection  would  be  opened  by  Vendeen  successes  might  have
been  prophesied  by  any  one  acquainted  with  the  quality  of  the  forces  brought
against  them.  The  outbreak  found  the  West  of  France  all  but  denuded  of
regular  troops,  for  the  danger  on  the  Eastern  frontier  had  withdrawn  all  the
effective  forces  to  defend  the  Moselle  and  the  Rhine.  Composed  for  the
most  part  of  hommes  dc  la  requisition,  raw  levies  equally  devoid  of
discipline,  zeal  and  experience,  the  isolated  columns  which  entered  La
Vendee  about  the  middle  of  April  met  with  almost  uniform  disaster.  In
reply  to  the  frantic  appeals  of  the  defeated  Republicans,  reinforcements  from
the  Armies  of  the  North  and  of  the  Ardennes  were  dispatched  to  Orleans  to
form  the  nucleus  of  a  fresh  army  of  10,000  men,  but  before  this  corps  could
be  organised  the  Vendeens  had  taken  the  offensive,  Thouars  (May  5th),
Parthenay  and  Fontenay  (30th)  fell  into  their  power  one  after  another ;  and
then,  driving  before  them  a  division  posted  at  Doue  to  cover  Saumur,  they
fell  upon  that  town,  drove  the  garrison  out  headlong  with  great  loss  (June
9th)  and  thus  possessed  themselves  of  an  access  to  the  right  bank  of  the
Loire.  The  utmost  consternation  prevailed  in  all  the  country  round.  Angers,
Tours,  Niort  and  La  Rochelle  all  trembled  at  the  prospect  of  receiving  the
next  attack.  It  was  indeed  suggested  that  the  insurgents  should  advance  on
Paris,  but  it  was  to  the  Westward  that  they  turned.  By  Angers  and  Ancenis
they  moved  to  Nantes,  expecting  the  co-operation  of  Charette  and  the  insur-
gents from  Lower  Vendee  in  an  attack  on  that  town.  It  was  the  critical
moment  of  the  rising.  Had  Nantes  fallen,  in  all  probability  the  insurrection
would  have  spread  all  over  Brittany,  and  Brest,  the  headquarters  of  the
Atlantic  fleet  of  France,  would  have  been  cut  off  from  Paris  and  exposed  to
an  English  attack.  But  though  the  garrison  was  outnumbered  by  nearly
four  to  one,  though  the  hastily  improvised  defences  were  of  the  weakest,  they
proved  sufficient.  The  brave  defence  of  the  passage  of  the  Erdre  at  Nort
retarded  the  advance  of  the  insurgents  and  prevented  proper  co-operation
between  Cathelineau  and  Charette :  the  attack,  being  delayed  till  broad  day-
light, was  repulsed  with  the  loss  of  Cathelineau  and  many  others,  and  the
insurgents  were  forced  to  retire  (June  28th,  29th).

Thus,  while  the  Vendeens  had  shown  themselves  capable  of  defending
their  own  country,  they  had  failed  to  press  their  successes  any  further.
Between  achieving  isolated  successes  of  considerable  importance  and  the

VOL.   III.  21


322  APPENDIX

sustained  conduct  of  a  protracted  campaign  there  is  a  great  gulf,  which  it  is
hard  for  the  bravest  army  of  mere  irregulars  to  cross.  And  in  the  case  of
the  Vendeens  it  must  be  admitted  that  their  successes  were  in  large  measure
due  to  the  nature  of  their  country,  an  advantage  upon  which  they  could  no
longer  count  when  they  issued  out  to  meet  the  enemy  on  ground  more  of  his
own  choosing.  Moreover,  the  petty  quarrels  and  jealousies  of  their  leaders
frittered  away  their  strength,  and  the  inactivity  which  resulted  allowed  the
Republican  commander  Biron  to  devote  his  undisturbed  energies  to  the
reorganisation  of  his  troops,  a  difficult  task,  which  was  not  made  more  easy
by  the  presence  (in  the  double  capacity  of  spies  on  the  generals  and  of
amateur  strategists)  of  Representatives  of  the  Convention  and  of  the  Com-
mittee of  Public  Safety.  Not  only  did  these  gentlemen  interfere  with  every
detail  (Mem.  i.  311),  and  interpose  between  the  commander  and  his  sub-
ordinates, but  they  even  gave  orders  on  their  own  initiative  (Mem.  i.  132),  so
that  their  presence  was  a  powerful  auxiliary  on  the  side  of  the  insurgents
{c/.  Biron's  dispatches,  June,  1793,  Mdm.  i.  282).  When  at  length  Biron  so
far  succeeded  in  restoring  the  discipline  of  his  demoralised  troops  as  to
venture  on  renewing  the  attack  (July),  the  rashness  of  Westermann  and  the
failure  of  the  other  columns  to  act  in  concert  only  resulted  in  fresh  disasters.

But  the  Vendeens  were  in  no  condition  to  improve  their  victory,  the
necessity  of  carrying  on  the  usual  autumn  agricultural  work  drew  off  large
numbers  of  men  and  left  d'Elbee  too  weak  to  take  the  offensive.  Biron's
failure  caused  him  to  be  superseded  in  favour  of  a  new  general,  Rossignol
(July  27th),  and  towards  the  end  of  August  the  Republicans  were  reinforced
by  the  arrival  at  Nantes  of  the  garrisons  of  Mainz  and  Valenciennes,  which
had  capitulated  (July),  on  parole  not  to  serve  against  the  Allies  for  a  year,
but  which  were  available  for  service  in  La  Vendee.  At  the  beginning  of
September  a  joint  advance  was  made  from  Nantes,  Saumur,  Fontenay  and
Lufon.  But  the  defeat  of  Beysser  at  Montaigu  (Sept.  i8th)  neutralised  the
earlier  successes  of  the  troops  from  Mainz,  the  rout  of  two  of  Rossignol's
divisions  at  Coron  (18th)  and  Saint-Lambert  (19th)  threw  away  the  fruits  of
Turreau's  success  at  Doue  and  of  the  repulse  of  the  Vendeen  leader  Lescure
from  Thouars  (14th)  and  once  again  the  attempt  was  given  up.  ^

After  yet  another  reorganisation  and  change  of  generals,  L'Echelle  being
the  new  commander  of  the  united  Armies  of  Nantes  and  Saumur,  in  October
a  fresh  move  was  made,  and  this  time  the  concentration  was  carried  out
successfully.  The  ex-garrison  of  Mainz  moved  by  Montaigu  and  Mortagne
(Oct.  15th)  on  Chollet,  pushing  the  Vendeens  before  it;  at  Tiffauge  it  was
joined  by  a  division  from  Lu9on,  at  Chollet  (17th)  by  columns  from  Doue,
Thouars  and  La  Chataignerie,  which  had  united  at  Bressuire  under  Chalbos
and  had  repulsed  a  Vendeen  attack  (Oct.  nth).  On  the  18th  over  40,000
Vendeens  hurled  themselves  in  desperation  on  the  united  forces  of  the
Republic  near  the  little  town  of  Chollet.  For  a  time  the  issue  was  in  doubt,
but  Kleber  rallied  his  wavering  left,  Marceau  with  the  centre  beat  off  a
dangerous  attack  and  the  fall  of  d'Elbee  and  de  Bonchamps  decided  the  day
in  favour  of  the  Republicans.

But  though  Barere  now  said  in  the  Convention  "  nous  pouvons  dire  qu'il
n'existe  plus  de  Vendee  "  (M^m.  ii.  287)  the  war  was  not  over  yet.  Many  of
the  peasants  dispersed  to  their  homes,  but  over  20,000  men,  including  all  the
non-Vendeens,  crossed  the  Loire  at  Saint-Florent,  and  marched  northward  on
Laval.  So  unutterly  unexpected  was  this  desperate  stroke  that  no  prepara-
tions had  been  made  to  dispute  their  passage,  and  it  was  some  few  days
before  a  pursuit  was  begun,  mistakes  which  lost  the  fruits  of  the  victory  of


APPENDIX  323

ChoUet.  Even  then  L'fichelle's  blunder  in  making  the  whole  army  advance
along  one  road  when  two  were  available  resulted  in  a  sharp  check  for  the
Republicans  at  Entrames  (Oct.  27th),  and  they  fell  back  behind  the  Oudon  for
a  rest  and  the  usual  "  reorganisation."  The  Vendeens,  hampered  by  the
great  train  of  baggage  and  non-combatants  which  accompanied  their  march,
moved  forward  by  Mayenne  (Nov.  ist),  Dol,  Fougeres  and  Avranches  (12th)
to  Granville,  which  they  attacked  (Nov.  13th),  hoping  by  taking  it  to  place
themselves  in  easy  communication  with  their  English  well-wishers  in  the
Channel  Islands.  But  once  again,  as  at  Nantes,  the  fortifications,  weak  as
they  were,  proved  sufficient  to  defy  them,  and  the  attack  was  repulsed  with
heavy  loss.  It  was  a  fatal  blow  to  their  hopes,  but  without  a  siege  train  or
scaling  ladders  the  attempt  was  bound  to  fail.  The  Vendeens  had  made  a
bad  mistake  in  attempting  Granville ;  they  would  have  done  better  to  move
by  Saint-Brieuc  and  Dinan  into  Lower  Brittany,  where  they  would  have  found
a  friendly  population,  a  country  well-adapted  for  defence  and  within  easy
reach  of  England ;  even  if  they  had  pushed  on  into  the  Cotentin,  taken  Cher-
bourg in  rear  where  it  had  no  fortifications,  and  held  the  neck  of  the  peninsula
against  their  pursuers  {cf.  report  of  d'Obenheim,  M^moires,  ii.  347),  they
might  have  resisted  till  aid  from  England  arrived.  But  the  nearness  of
Granville  to  the  Channel  Islands  was  a  fatal  attraction.

Meanwhile  the  eloquence  of  Jean  Bon-Saint-Andre,  who  had  been  sent
to  "  electrify "  the  Army  of  the  West,  and  the  possibly  more  effective
efforts  of  Marceau  and  Kleber  had  so  far  restored  the  discipline  and  the
tone  of  that  force  that  preparations  were  made  to  block  the  retreat  of
the  insurgents  towards  La  Vendee  by  occupying  Pontorson.  Yet  the
galvanising  process  had  not  instilled  enough  courage  into  Tribout's  division
to  enable  it  to  stand  firm  against  the  Vendeen  rush ;  it  was  driven  headlong
from  its  post,  and  the  Vendeens  made  their  way  to  Dol  (Nov.  i8th).
Another  attempt  to  check  them  ended  in  another  reverse,  owing  to  Wester-
mann's  impetuosity  and  neglect  of  orders,  which  resulted  in  the  defeat  of  his
own  division  and  left  that  of  Marceau  unsupported  so  that  it  also  was  beaten
back.  In  great  confusion  the  Republicans  fell  back  on  Rennes,  leaving  the
way  to  the  Loire  open  to  the  insurgents.  But  these  were  in  too  bad  a
plight  to  profit  by  the  discomfiture  of  their  adversaries ;  "  a  wild  boar
wounded  to  the  death,  and  only  able  to  injure  the  clumsy  hunters  who  cross
his  path  "  one  writer  calls  them  (M^m.  ii.  351) :  the  sufferings  and  privations
of  their  march  were  terrible,  disease  was  raging  among  them,  many  perished
of  cold  and  hunger  (cf.  M^m.  ii.  338-341) ;  an  attempt  on  Angers  (Dec.  3rd)
was  repulsed  with  loss  and  at  Le  Mans  (12th)  they  were  overtaken  by  Marceau,
the  commander  for  the  time  being  of  the  ever-reorganised  Army  of  the  West,
which  had  been  reinforced  by  10,000  men  from  that  of  the  Western  Pyre-
nees. Once  again  they  had  to  resume  their  march  with  the  Republicans
pressing  close  upon  them.  Stofflet  and  La  Rochejaquelin  managed  to  cross
the  Loire  on  the  i6th,  but  Marceau's  prompt  pursuit  forced  the  main  body
to  continue  its  flight  westward,  where  it  hoped  to  find  help  and  succour  in
the  disaffected  district  of  Morbihan.  But  they  never  reached  the  Vilaine,  for,
on  Dec.  22nd,  Marceau  and  Kleber  overtook  them  at  Savenay  and  a  desperate
battle  ended  in  the  annihilation  of  the  Vendeen  army.  Only  a  few  escaped,
many  perished  in  trying  to  cross  the  Loire,  the  rest  fell  either  on  the  battle-
field or  at  the  hands  of  the  brutal  Carrier.

In  La  Vendee  itself  matters  had  somewhat  quieted  down  since  the  main
body  of  the  insurgents  had  crossed  the  Loire :  Charette  was  still  carrying  on
operations  in  Lower  Vendue,  but,  had  a  general  amnesty  been  issued,  the


324  APPENDIX

peasants  in  all  probability  would  have  submitted  (M6m.  ii,  484,  cf.  iii.  28,
45).  As  it  was,  the  massacres  perpetrated  by  Carrier  and  the  barbarous
system  adopted  by  Turreau,  the  new  commander  in  La  Vendee,  goaded  the
peasants  to  desperation,  and  La  Rochejaquelin,  Stofflet  and  Charette  found
themselves  once  more  at  the  head  of  a  considerable  force  (Feb.  and  March,
1794).  The  system  of  wholesale  slaughter  and  destruction  inaugurated  by
Turreau  surpassed  in  its  brutality  and  stringency  even  the  ferocious  decree
of  Aug.  ist,  1793  (cf.  M^m.  iii.  49).  Columns  swept  the  country  in  all
directions  with  fire  and  sword  giving  no  quarter,  sparing  neither  people,
animals,  crops,  nor  houses  {cf.  Aulard,  x.  384).  But  this  policy,  for  which
Turreau  must  be  held  responsible,  despite  his  efforts  to  pose  as  the  "  agent
passif  des  volontds  du  corps  l^gislatif "  (cf.  M^m.  iii.  38-41),  proved  almost
as  futile  as  it  was  brutal.  The  Vendeens  took  arms  once  more  and  carried
on  a  guerilla  warfare  with  no  little  success,  answering  massacre  with  massacre,
outrages  with  outrages.  Turreau,  his  boasted  successes  and  his  brutality
notwithstanding,  was  forced  to  confess  that  the  insurrection  was  not  over
yet  (Mem.  iii.  in) ;  and  his  failure  to  prevent  the  escape  of  Charette  drew
down  on  him  a  savage  rebuke  from  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety  (Aulard,
Recueil,  xi.  75).  The  Republican  troops  had  suffered  greatly  from  the  hard-
ships of  the  winter  campaign  :  they  were  without  shoes,  uniforms  or  proper
equipment :  their  pay  was  in  arrears,  their  discipline  left  much  to  be  desired,
no  ambulances  were  forthcoming  and  the  transport  service  was  practically
non-existent  (M6m.  iii.  137).  Thus  the  war  lingered  on,  while  in  Brittany
the  Chouans,  gangs  of  smugglers,  deserters,  fugitive  Vendeens  and  other
"broken  men,"  "brigands  rather  than  political  insurgents"  (Martin,  ii.  137),
were  daily  becoming  a  more  serious  danger.  Even  after  Turreau's  recall,
his  successor  Vimeux  failed  to  bring  the  struggle  to  a  close,  and  the  fear
that  England  would  come  to  the  aid  of  the  insurgents  and  use  La  Vendue  as
she  had  used  Toulon,  finally  led  to  the  despatch  of  Hoche,  the  best  general
of  the  Republic,  to  take  his  place  (Nov.  1794).  Systematic  and  well-
organised  measures  soon  showed  the  insurgents  that  they  had  a  capable
man  to  deal  with :  a  strong  cordon  of  posts  surrounded  the  disaffected
districts,  flying  columns  harassed  the  insurgents  and  kept  them  on  the
move,  but  severity  was  tempered  with  clemency  and  humanity,  outrages
were  repressed  and  discipline  maintained.  The  Vendeens  were  weary  of  the
struggle  and  reahsed  that  they  had  little  to  gain  by  protracting  their  resistance.
The  Convention,  now  under  the  milder  sway  of  the  Thermidorians,  had  aban-
doned the  system  of  Terror  and  was  anxious  to  be  rid  of  a  tiresome  and
unprofitable  affair,  and  so  set  its  hands  free  for  greater  efforts  on  the  Rhine
and  in  Italy,  and  in  February,  1795,  a  treaty  was  concluded  at  La  Jaunaye,
by  which  the  Vendeens,  in  return  for  an  amnesty  and  a  guarantee  of  liberty
of  worship,  undertook  to  lay  down  their  arms  and  recognise  the  Republic.

But,  though  the  insurrection  was  for  the  moment  at  an  end,  and  though
the  Vendeens,  tired  of  bloodshed  and  sick  of  the  aimless  struggle,  had  little
wish  to  take  up  again  the  arms  they  had  once  laid  down,  it  was  different
with  the  Chouans.  Having  suffered  but  slightly  they  took  advantage  of
the  peace  to  reorganise  themselves  and  to  prepare  for  a  new  encounter,
only  waiting  for  aid  from  England  as  the  signal  for  a  new  rising.  Negotia-
tions between  the  Chouan  leaders  and  the  English  Government  were  carried
on  through  the  Comte  de  Puisaye,  a  Royalist  refugee,  and  in  June  1795,
a  squadron,  under  Sir  John  Borlase  Warren,  escorted  fifty  transports  carry-
ing about  4,000  Frenchmen  with  arms  and  other  supplies  in  large  quantities
to  Quiberon  Bay.     Numbers  of  the  Chouans  flocked  to  join  them,  but  the


APPENDIX  325

arrest  of  Bois-Hardi  and  Cormatin  (May)  had  deprived  them  of  their  chiefs ;
the  leaders  of  the  insurrection  were  at  odds  with  one  another ;  the  Chouans
fell  out  with  the  Emigres ;  the  French  prisoners  of  war,  who  had  somewhat
unwisely  been  drafted  into  the  expeditionary  force,  took  every  opportunity
of  deserting  to  the  Republicans,  and  the  inevitable  disaster  overtook  the
expedition  on  July  21st.  Barely  1,000  Emigres  and  2,000  peasants  succeeded
in  regaining  the  British  ships,  the  rest  were  taken  or  killed  to  a  man  [cf.
James,  Naval  History  of  England,  i.  278-280).

Meanwhile  Charette  and  Stotflet,  encouraged  by  the  news  of  the  arrival  of
de  Puisaye  at  Quiberon,  had  once  more  taken  arms  in  La  Vendue,  though
the  enthusiasm  of  the  peasants  for  the  Royalist  cause  was  but  a  shadow
of  its  former  self.  Hoche,  after  his  victory  at  Quiberon,  moved  into  La
Vendue  with  an  overwhelming  force,  posted  a  cordon  of  troops  all  along  the
sea-coast,  and  thus  prevented  any  communication  between  the  insurgents  and
the  4,000  English  and  ^migris  under  the  Comte  d'Artois,  whom  Warren's
squadron  had  disembarked  on  the  He  de  Yeu  (October).  Finding  that  nothing
could  be  done  the  English  withdrew  their  forces  (Nov.),  and  Charette  found
himself  left  to  his  own  resources.  With  Carnot  at  the  Ministry  of  War
Hoche  had  no  longer  any  cause  for  complaint  against  the  support  he  received :
the  Armies  of  Brest,  of  Cherbourg  and  of  the  West  had  by  this  time  been
united  under  his  command,  and  his  clemency  and  humanity  were  worth
another  Army  by  themselves.  Stofflet's  efforts  to  rouse  the  peasants  ended
in  his  capture  and  execution  (Jan.  1796),  and  a  few  weeks  later  Charette
shared  his  fate.  "  With  him,"  says  Martin  (i,  444),  "  the  war  in  La  Vendue
began,  with  him  it  ended."  This  remarkable  man  indeed  is  the  most
striking  figure  of  the  insurrection.  Unscrupulous,  cruel,  passionate,  pleasure-
loving  and  violent,  he  resembles  nothing  so  much  as  one  of  the  buccaneers
of  the  West  Indies.  As  a  partisan  chief  he  can  hardly  have  ever  been
equalled :  time  after  time  he  evaded  the  net  in  which  the  Republicans
sought  to  catch  him.  But  if  typical  of  the  Vend^ens  in  his  adventures  and
his  successes,  he  was  no  less  typical  of  them  in  his  failures.  He  was  in-
capable of  co-operating  with  his  fellow  insurgents,  and,  though  the  quarrel
over  some  booty,  which  caused  him  to  be  absent  when  d'Elbee  was  beaten
at  Chollet,  kept  him  out  of  the  desperate  move  across  the  Loire  and  enabled
him  to  maintain  for  another  year  his  skilful  resistance  in  the  Marais,  he
was  bound  to  fail  sooner  or  later.  Refusing  all  overtures  towards  an
accommodation  he  perished  as  he  had  lived,  the  typical  guerilla.

Were  the  memoirs  and  journals  of  the  insurgents  and  their  friends  the
only  authorities  available  for  the  history  of  the  Vendeen  risings,  one  would
be  at  a  complete  loss  to  understand  how  it  was  that  the  insurrection  was
not  subdued  in  a  couple  of  months :  while  if  one  had  only  the  letters  and
reports  of  the  Republican  generals  and  commissioners  to  draw  upon,  it
would  not  be  the  successes  but  the  defeats  of  the  Vendeens  which  would
appear  remarkable.  Without  effective  support  from  abroad,  without  disci-
pline, without  organisation,  without  any  definite  plan,  directed  by  leaders  of
little  military  skill  and  bitterly  jealous  of  each  other,  the  Vendeens  could  not
have  existed  for  so  long  a  time  had  there  been  opposed  to  them  an  efficient
force  in  capable  hands.  Their  enthusiasm  and  their  almost  fanatical  courage
made  them  formidable  opponents;  but  enthusiasm,  religious  zeal  and  the
most  daring  courage  did  not  save  the  Irish  insurgents  of  1798  from  a  com-
plete and  speedy  overthrow  at  the  hands  of  a  somewhat  indifferent  force  of
English  militia  and  yeomanry.  The  forces  which  the  Republic  opposed
to  the   Vendeeyis  were  composed  of  raw  recruits,  as  undisciplined  and  as


326  APPENDIX

unskilled  as  themselves,  but  without  their  devotion  and  zeal.  The  columrts
which  entered  La  Vendee  in  April,  1793,  were  mainly  composed  of  so-called
"  volunteers,"  the  bataillons  de  requisition,  middle-aged  peasants  dragged
from  the  plough  against  their  will  to  serve  in  a  cause  for  which  they  had  no
enthusiasm,  and  far  more  anxious  to  get  home  to  their  farms  and  their
families  than  to  stand  up  to  the  fierce  rush  of  the  fanatical  Vendeem.  As
a  rule  they  fled  at  the  first  shot,  divesting  themselves  of  arms  and  equip-
ment with  all  possible  speed,  and  leaving  the  small  party  of  gendarmes
or  regulars,  who  served  as  the  nucleus  of  the  column,  to  be  overwhelmed
and  cut  to  pieces.  Chalbos,  it  is  true,  on  one  occasion  gained  a  slight
success  by  posting  his  gendarmes  in  rear  of  his  volunteers,  who,  finding
flight  impossible,  of  necessity  took  heart  and  beat  off  their  assailants,  but
the  expedient  shows  the  quality  of  the  average  "  volunteer."  Berruyer
wrote  to  the  Minister  of  War  to  declare  that  without  regular  troops  it  would
be  impossible  to  bring  the  war  to  an  end  (Turreau,  p.  169) :  the  Army,  he
wrote,  was  without  a  staff,  without  supplies  and  without  discipline,  and  the
cavalry  were  of  no  use  in  "a  country  as  bad  as  Corsica."  In  May,  1793,
Biron,  Chief  of  the  Staff  to  Canclaux,  complained  that  it  was  not  National
Guards,  hastily  raised  and  without  experience  or  discipline  that  were  wanted
in  La  Vendee,  but  light  infantry  who  would  not  let  themselves  be  surprised
and  who  would  not  give  way  to  panic  (Mem.  i.  186).  It  was  indeed  not
uncommon  for  a  whole  battalion  to  depart,  declaring  that  their  time  was  up
and  that  they  had  served  enough  (Mdm.  i.  128).

Nor  was  there  less  jealousy  and  discord  among  the  generals  of  the  Re-
public than  among  the  insurgent  leaders,  and  the  Republicans,  moreover,
were  hampered  by  the  inefficiency  of  the  Ministry  of  War  in  Paris,  and  by
the  presence  of  the  "  Representatives,"  deputies  and  other  interfering  civilians.
Sound  Radical  views  rather  than  an  acquaintance  with  tactics  or  strategy
was  the  chief  claim  for  selection  to  a  command,  and  it  was  not  according  to
success  and  failure  but  to  party  influence  that  rewards  and  punishments  were
meted  out.  The  knife  of  the  guillotine  was  permanently  suspended  over
every  Republican  general's  head,  and  it  was  not  so  much  on  those  who  de-
served it  as  on  those  who  had  no  influence  with  the  Committee  of  Public
Safety  that  it  descended.  Biron,  who  was  guillotined,  was  a  capable  com-
mander compared  with  the  incapable  Rossignol,  whose  influence  in  high
places  saved  him.  To  the  intrigues  which  paralysed  the  Republican  armies
and  to  the  perpetual  reorganisations  which  these  underwent  the  insurgents
owed  no  small  share  of  their  success,  and  even  at  the  time  of  these  successes
the  Vend6ens  met  with  several  important  checks  when  they  left  the  rough
country,  which  so  much  favoured  them,  and  ventured  to  accept  battle  on
ground  where  artillery  could  operate  easily  and  where  a  cavalry  charge  was
possible.  Thus  it  was  the  Republican  cavalry  to  whom  is  due  the  credit  of
the  Vendien  repulse  at  Fontenay  on  May  16,  1793  (Memoires  of  Mme  de
Sapinaud,  p.  86),  and  the  victory  of  Chollet  was  in  a  large  measure  their
work  {ibid.,  p.  93).  Against  fortifications  the  Vcndeens  were  almost  uniformly
unsuccessful :  at  Nantes,  at  Angers  and  at  Granville  they  failed  before  the
weakest  of  defences ;  and  Les  Sables  d'Olonne,  though  often  cut  off,  defied
the  insurgents  of  the  Marais  throughout  the  war.  But  if  sieges  and  pitched
battles  on  level  country  were  foreign  to  their  genius,  in  guerilla  warfare,  in
surprises  and  in  ambushes  they  had  few  superiors :  in  such  encounters  they
could  make  the  best  of  their  agility  and  their  local  knowledge,  and  it  was  in
the  sudden  swoop  down  upon  some  column  hampered  by  a  convoy  and
harassed  by  sharpshooters,  throughout  a  long  march,  almost  to  the  breaking


APPENDIX  327

point,  that  the  dash  and  reckless  zeal  of  the  VencUens  was  most  terrible.
In  the  tactics  of  the  Napoleonic  era  one  sees  a  growing  tendency  to  break
away  from  the  merely  mechanical  rigidity  into  which  the  traditions  of
Frederick  the  Great's  system  of  drill  had  degenerated,  some  movement
towards  making  the  light-infantry  man  the  ideal  soldier.  Would  it  be
fanciful  to  trace  in  the  clouds  of  skirmishers,  which  paved  the  way  for  the
attack  of  Napoleon's  massive  columns,  the  lessons  which  the  Vendiens  may
have  taught  to  Marceau  and  Kleber  ?  Thus  the  Vendien  on  his  native
heath  had  an  advantage  even  over  the  trained  soldier,  and  his  opponents
had  neither  that  superiority  in  weapons,  nor — as  regards  the  greater  part  of
them — in  discipline,  on  which  the  regular  can  usually  rely  to  give  him  victory
over  superior  numbers  of  irregulars.  Moreover,  they  were  generally  handled
in  a  miserable  fashion ;  of  the  Republican  generals,  only  two,  Marceau  and
Kleber,  can  be  said  to  have  acquitted  themselves  with  credit,  and  they  were
hampered  by  being  in  subordinate  positions.  Want  of  co-operation  was  the
most  striking  feature  of  the  Republican  operations,  due  sometimes  to  mere
carelessness  and  slovenliness,  but  at  times  rising  to  criminal  negligence :
every  new  general  started  with  an  infallible  scheme  which  must  reduce  the
rebels  to  subjection  in  a  few  weeks,  but  every  new  plan  came  to  hopeless
grief  owing  to  insubordination  and  indiscipline,  not  only  in  the  non-com-
missioned but  even  in  the  commissioned  ranks.  Want  of  organisation,
especially  in  the  supply  departments,  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  in  the
disorganised  condition  of  all  the  departments  of  Government,  but  it  is
noticeable  that  not  until  October,  1793,  were  the  hitherto  separate  armies  of
Brest  and  La  Rochelle  united  in  one  command  as  the  Army  of  the  West.

After  their  failure  to  take  Nantes  the  Vendieiis  ceased  to  be  a  very  serious
danger  to  the  Republic :  the  repulse  broke  the  spell  of  their  successes  and,
though  it  did  not  end  the  insurrection,  it  checked  its  further  spread,  and
showed  that  the  Vendeen  on  the  strategical  offensive  was  a  less  formidable
foe  than  the  Vendeen  defending  his  own  country.  The  move  across  the
Loire  after  Chollet  was  never  more  than  the  despairing  effort  of  a  beaten
Army,  and  what  little  chance  of  success  it  ever  possessed  was  thrown  away
when  the  march  was  directed  on  Granville  instead  of  upon  Lower  Brittany.

One  subject  remains  that  should  perhaps  be  discussed — England's  failure
to  aid  the  Vendiens.  If  England  could  lend  a  helping  hand  to  French
Royalists  as  far  away  as  Toulon,  surely  she  might  have  done  more  for  the
Vendeens  at  her  very  doors.  On  the  face  of  it,  it  does  seem  that  an  oppor-
tunity was  cast  away.  That  England's  honour  was  in  any  way  concerned
is  not  suggested ;  she  had  not  urged  them  to  rise  or  pledged  them  her  sup-
port ;  her  failure  to  aid  them  was  not  a  repetition  of  Bolingbroke's  treatment
of  the  Catalans  in  1713;  but  just  as  the  European  powers  had  used  the
Jacobites,  whenever  they  could,  as  a  means  towards  annoying  the  Hanoverian
Government  in  England,  so  England  might  have  used  the  Vendeens  to
weaken  the  French  Republic.  But  it  must  be  remembered  that  in  1793  the
Army  of  Great  Britain  was  on  a  peace  establishment  and  quite  inadequate
to  face  a  European  war.  Not  only  had  England  not  got  the  troops  to  spare
— there  was  in  January,  1793,  only  barrack  accommodation  for  20,000  men —
but  the  tone  of  the  Army  had  been  seriously  affected  by  the  failures  of  the
American  War  ;  the  organisation  was  corrupt  and  inefficient,  the  regiments
were  little  more  than  skeletons,  and  the  story  of  the  Duke  of  York's  campaigns
in  the  Netherlands  is  a  sufficient  proof  that  England  would  have  been  ill
fitted  to  embark  on  a  campaign  in  La  Vendee.  Moreover  there  is  nothing
more  dangerous  than  to  send  a  contingent  to  support  a  political  insurrection


328  APPENDIX

in  a  foreign  country :  in  the  words  of  Captain  Mahan  (Influence  of  Sea
Power  upon  the  French  Revolution,  i.  97),  "  The  natives  of  the  soil,  among
whom  such  a  force  appears,  either  view  it  with  suspicion  or  expect  it  to  do
all  the  work;  not  unfrequently  are  both  jealous  and  inactive.  It  is  well
then  to  give  malcontents  all  the  assistance  they  require  in  material  of  war,
to  keep  alive  as  a  diversion  every  such  focus  of  trouble  .  .  .  but  it  is  not  safe
to  reckon  on  the  hatred  of  the  insurgents  for  their  own  countrymen  out-
weighing their  dislike  for  the  foreigner.  It  is  not  good  policy  to  send  a  force
that  is  incapable  of  successful  independent  action,  relying  on  the  support
of  the  natives  in  a  civil  war."  England  might  certainly  have  done  more  in
supplying  the  Vend6ens  with  munitions  of  war,  a  light  squadron  off  the
mouth  of  the  Loire  might  have  cut  the  communication  by  sea  between
Nantes  and  La  Rochelle,  reduced  Les  Sables  d'Olonne  and  Noirmoutier,
and  kept  open  a  means  of  retreat,  though  in  1793  the  command  of  the  sea
had  not  yet  been  assured  to  England  by  a  pitched  battle  and  the  great  Brest
fleet  was  intact :  but  the  failure  of  the  Vendeens  was  due  to  their  want  of
something  England  could  never  have  given,  unity  and  discipline.


329


THE  DEBT  AND  DEFICIT  AND  THE  FINANCIAL
CONDITIONS  OF  FRANCE  1789-95

By  J.  R.  Moreton-Macdonald,  M.A.

It  is  a  common  fallacy  to  trace  the  outbreak  of  the  Revolution  to  one  main
cause,  the  financial  collapse  of  the  Ancien  Rigime.  To  quote  only  the  most
recent  authority,  Mr.  J.  E.  Bodley  (France,  ed.  1899,  p.  77)  argues  that
"  It  (the  Revolution)  was  inevitable  because  of  the  immense  misery  and
"discontent  caused,  first  by  the  mismanagement  of  the  public  finances,
"  together  with  the  extravagance  of  the  Government  and  the  Court,  and
"  secondly  by  the  ever  increasing  multitude  of  privileged  persons,  whose
"  exemption  from  taxation  threw  the  burden  more  grievously  on  the  poorest
"portion  of  the  population."

Now  this  conclusion  has  just  so  much  truth  in  it  (i.)  that  the  States-
General  were  summoned  primarily  to  consider  the  financial  crisis,  and,  in
the  eyes  of  Necker  and  the  King  at  least,  to  consider  very  little  else  ;  (ii.)  that
a  great  radical  change  in  the  incidence  and  method  of  collecting  the  taxes
was  necessary.  It  does  not  however  follow  that  a  remedy  for  this  financial
crisis  could  not  have  been  found  by  the  Monarchy  (whether  with  or  without
the  aid  of  States-General),  without  recourse  to  so  violent  a  method  as  a
complete  political  and  social  Revolution.

Ever  since  the  close  of  Louis  XIV.'s  reign  the  annual  expenditure  had
exceeded  the  income,  and  things  had  consequently  been  going  from  bad  to
worse.  Louis  XV. 's  reign  is  marked  by  five  compulsory  reductions  of  the
interest  on  the  National  Debt,  or  operations  of  a  similar  nature  (1715,  1721,
1726,  1759,  1770),  the  most  complete  of  which  was  the  last,  carried  out  by
Terrai :  and  one  after  another  of  the  finance  ministers  in  Louis  XV. 's  and
Louis  XVI. 's  time  had  been  driven  to  extremities  by  the  increase  of  the
deficit.  Still  Louis  XVI.  was,  to  use  an  expression  of  Mirabeau's,  "  King  of
the  richest  Kingdom  in  Europe  :  "  the  riches  of  the  kingdom  increased  by
leaps  and  bounds  during  his  reign  ;  and,  considering  these  riches,  the  ex-
penditure on  government  was  not  excessive.

The  fact  was  that  the  best  use  was  not  made  of  the  resources  of  the
nation:  owing  to-the  number  of  privileges  and  exemptions,  vast  numbers
of  the  wealthier  inhabitants  escaped  taxes  altogether  or  paid  an  insufficient
proportion  ;  ^  the  mediaeval  and  unequal  methods  of  collection,  most  cumber-
some and  costly  in  themselves,  were  rendered  worse  owing  to  the  arbitrary
divisions  of  the  country  for  taxative  purposes ;  while  the  leakage   in  the

^  Dupont  de  Nemours  put  the  situation  epigrammatically,  though  he  overstated
it,  in  the  Cahier  of  the  Bailliage  of  Nemours  :  "  One  will  hardly  believe  that  in  order
"  to  become  noble,  it  is  sufficient  to  become  rich  ;  and  to  cease  to  pay  taxes  it  is
' '  sufficient  to  become  noble.  So  there  is  only  one  way  of  escaping  taxation  and  that
"  is  to  make  a  fortune."


330  APPENDIX

process  of  collection  was  enormous,  amounting  to  sometimes  half  the  total
revenue  collected.^  Reforms  which  would  have  simplified  the  collection,
suppressed  all  privileges  and  exemptions,  and  abolished  some  of  the  more
obnoxious  indirect  taxes  (especially  the  gahelle)  would  most  certainly  have
restored  a  credit  balance  to  the  Government,  and  lightened  the  burden  of
the  taxpayer ;  nor  were  such  reforms  beyond  the  capacity  of  such  ministers
as  Turgot  or  even  Necker,  had  they  been  allowed  a  few  years  of  office  and
backed  by  the  steady  support  of  the  King.  Turgot,  Necker  and  Calonne  did
indeed  each  contribute  much  in  their  respective  short  terms  of  office  towards  the
amendment  of  the  financial  status ;  Turgot  by  the  suppression  of  the  Corvee
Royale,  and  (far  more)  by  the  abolition  of  Contraintes  Solidaires  for  the
Taille  and  Vingtiemes ;  Necker  by  valuable  and  drastic  reforms  in  the  adminis-
tration of  the  Taille,  and  Calonne  by  his  proposals,  made  to  the  Notables,  to
abolish  all  exemptions  and  introduce  an  equitable  land  tax.  Each  of  these
men  may  have  failed  for  a  particular  reason  to  stave  off  the  Revolution :
Turgot  both  because  of  a  certain  rigidity  of  mind  and  want  of  tact  in  dealing
with  men,  and  because  his  free  trade  ideas  were  very  unpopular;  Necker
from  indecision  and  shiftiness  of  policy ;  and  Calonne  because  he  was  not
believed  to  be  sincere  ;  but  all  three  failed  mainly  because  of  Louis'  downright
stupidity  and  inability  to  see  that  the  situation  was  serious :  never  setting
his  face  seriously  to  grapple  with  any  problem,  ever  ready  to  take  (without
listening  to)  a  new  adviser,  the  King  was  content  with  his  own  good  inten-
tions, and  at  last  agreed  to  trust  himself  on  the  unknown  sea  of  a  States-
General,  without  a  course  charted  out  or  a  firm  hand  at  the  helm.

It  is  in  fact  true  that  all  the  changes  in  taxation  demanded  by  the  "  men  of
1789  "  had  been  attempted  by  some  minister  of  the  Ancien  Regime,  ilgalite
devant  Vltnpot  was  not  a  new  cry  invented  by  the  Constituent  or  the
Convention ;  it  had  been  accepted  in  principle  by  the  Notables  in  1787
as  well  as  by  all  the  Provincial  Assemblies ;  and  in  an  overwhelming  majority
of  the  Cahiers  of  the  Noblesse  the  pecuniary  exemptions  and  privileges  are
expressly  resigned.  The  Impot  fancier  of  the  Constituent  (1790)  was  closely
modelled  on  the  land  tax  proposed  by  Calonne  to  the  Notables,  and  this
again  was  derived  from  Turgot  and  the  Economists :  when  the  Revolution
attempted  to  strike  out  a  path  of  its  own,  as  in  the  Assignats  and  forced
loans,  it  merely  landed  itself  in  bankruptcy ;  and  even  the  one  financial
reform  generally  believed  to  be  great  and  good,  the  Gratid  Livre  of  Cambon
in  1793,  has  now  been  proved  to  be  a  worthless  sham.

The  Provincial  Assemblies  in  the  last  year  before  the  Revolution  had
already  successfully  tackled  the  question  of  the  assessment  of  direct  taxes  by
elective  assemblies  (Stourm,  ii.  479),  and  invented  the  system  of  porteurs
de  contraintes,  by  which  at  the  present  day  the  government  recovers  its
taxes  in  disputed  cases.  They  had  further  laid  down  the  principle  that
the  revenu  net  not  the  revenu  brxit  was  in  all  cases  to  be  the  basis  of
taxation.  The  arbitrary  increase  of  the  Taille  upon  particular  provinces,
without  a  general  edict  touching  the  whole  kingdom,  had  been  impossible
since  Necker's  great  reform  of  1780 :  the  contraintes  solidaires  had  already
been  abolished  by  Turgot.  The  corvees,  after  two  attempts  and  two
restorations,  had  been  definitely  condemned  by  the  Notables  in  1787.  The
absurd  liberality  of  the  Crown  towards  individuals,  in  the  shape  of  pensions,^

1  Cf.  Revue  de  la  Revolution,  xiii.  124,  which  gives  the  approximate  figures  for
1787.

2 The  pension  list  was  valued  by  Necker  in  1789  at  25  millions,  but  the  Com-
mittee of  the  Assembly  put  it  in  Dec.  1789  at  31.      If  the  working  expenses  of


APPENDIX  331

croupes  (gifts  out  of  the  taxes)  and  exchanges  of  demesne  lands,  had  been
stopped  by  Necker  and  his  successors.  The  indirect  taxes  remained  to  be
reformed,  but  both  Necker  and  Calonne  (to  the  Notables)  presented  schemes
for  the  reform  of  the  worst  of  these,  the  gahelle.  Both  Turgot  and  Necker
ardently  desired  the  abolition  of  the  douanes  inUrieures,  though  the  latter
wished  to  keep  the  regulation  of  the  corn  trade  in  the  hands  of  the  Govern-
ment. Calonne's  commercial  treaty  with  England  seemed  to  be  the  herald
of  the  new  system  of  frontier  tariffs  prepared  and  warmly  supported  in  the
Notables.  Calonne  began  the  regular  payment  of  the  interest  of  the  debt
on  the  half-yearly  day  on  which  it  fell  due,  and  established  a  perfectly  sound
sinking  fund  which  would  have  paid  off  700  millions  in  25  years ;  and  another
scheme  for  repaying  the  principal,  which  would  have  knocked  off  another
500  millions  in  the  same  time :  his  recoinage  of  Oct.  1785  established  for
the  first  time  the  proportionate  equality  between  gold  and  silver;  and  he
paid  in  full  the  sufferers  by  Terrai's  bankruptcy  of  1770  (Stourm,  i.  238).

Well  does  Dupont  de  Nemours  say  (M^moire  sur  la  Vie  de  Turgot)  •'  It
is  inconceivable  that  an  Empire  so  powerful  and  so  enlightened,  whose
prosperity  was  increasing  every  year,  whose  agriculture,  manufactures  and
commerce  were  growing  every  day,  whose  population  had  increased  by  4
millions  in  27  years,  should  have  been  overthrown  for  52  miserable  millions
of  livres.  The  king  and  France  might  have  been  saved  in  ten  perfectly
simple  ways."  Well,  too,  does  Leonce  de  Lavergne  remark  that  France
made  more  progress  in  the  ideas  of  justice,  equality  and  liberty  in  the  15
years  of  Louis  XVI. 's  reign  (up  to  Aug.  1789)  than  in  the  25  years  from
1789  to  1815.

Let  us  try  then  to  consider  the  subject  under  the  following  heads : —
(i.)  The  debt  and  deficit.

(ii.)  The  taxes  of  the  Ancien  Regime.

(iii.)  The  taxative  legislation  of  the  Revolution.

(iv.)  The  Assignats  and  forced  loans.

The  leading  authorities  on  whom  I  have  relied  are :  (i)  Rene  Stourm,
Les  Finances  de  I'Ancien  Regime  et  la  Rev.  (Paris,  1885) ;  (2)  Viihrer,  His-
toire  de  la  Dette  publique  de  la  France  (Paris,  1886) ;  (3)  Gomel,  Les  Causes
Financieres  de  la  Rev.  Fr.  (Paris,  1893) ;  (4)  Bailly,  Hist.  Financiere  de  la
France  (Paris,  1830).

To  these  add  some  smaller  works,  reports,  etc.,  the  most  important  of
which  is  Montesquiou's  report  to  the  Constituent  in  Nov,  1789.

I.  The  Debt  and  Deficit.  One  is  confronted  at  the  beginning  with  the  most
extraordinary  diversity  of  figures  ;  and  one  of  the  worst  faults  of  the  Ancien
Regime  was  its  utterly  unsystematic  way  of  keeping  accounts.  Necker
perhaps  "  knew  the  ropes  "  better  than  any  one  else,  but  even  Necker  often
confesses  how  difficult  it  is  to  present  the  ^tats  au  Vrai  in  an  intelligible
light  {Compte  Rendu  of  1781  and  L^ Administration  des  Finances,  1784,
passim).

Roughly  speaking,  the  interest  on  most  of  the  interminable  loans  may  be
said  to  have  been  about  5  per  cent. ;  and  this  on  an  admitted  debt  of  2^
milliards  in  1789  would  give  interest  of  125  millions  a  year  (Stourm,  ii.
276).  But  this  is  but  slightly  in  excess  of  the  debt  at  the  close  of  the
Seven  Years'  War  (2,360  millions).     Yet  enormous  sums  were  added  to  the

the  government  be  estimated  at  350,  this  gives  something  of  the  same  proportion
(7  per  cent.)  that  is  given  by  the  modern  French  pension  list  of  150  to  working
expenses  of  1,900  millions.  Of  these  31,  M.  Stourm  thinks  that  some  7  millions
were  "abusive"  pensions,  i.e.,  not  conferred  for  real  service  to  the  State  (ii.  138).


332  APPENDIX

debt  between  those  years  (certainly  over  2  milliards).  The  answer  to  this
seeming  puzzle  is  (i.)  that  a  great  deal  of  the  old,  and  some  of  the  new  debt
also,  was  held  in  tontines,  terminable  annuities  and  "lottery  loans;"  that
Turgot  paid  off  large  sums  without  contracting  new  debts,  and  Necker  and
Calonne  did  the  same  while  contracting  new  debts.  Again,  one  must  not
be  surprised  to  find  that  at  the  final  bankruptcy  (Faillite  du  Tiers  Consolide,
Sept.  1797)  the  interest  dealt  with,  i.e.,  the  interest  on  the  remaining  debt
of  the  Ancien  Regime  is  only  119  millions,  in  spite  of  the  vast  extravagance
of,  and  vaster  debt  created  by,  the  Revolution  (none  of  which  was  ever
paid  at  all).  The  comparative  persistence  of  this  exact  figure  of  119  (Turgot's
calculation,  1774;  see  Viihrer,  i.  258)  is  very  remarkable:  and  it  must  be
remembered  that  such  an  annual  payment  (under  5  millions  sterling)  was
a  drop  in  the  bucket ;  ^  especially  when  one  estimates  that  the  interest  on
the  contemporary  debt  of  Great  Britain,  with  something  over  half  the  popula-
tion of  France,  and  at  a  lower  rate  of  interest,  would,  if  reduced  to  livres,  be
equivalent  to  about  175  millions.

This  then  is  more  or  less  the  state  of  the  permanent  debt.^  But  it  must
always  be  remembered  that  the  charges  in  respect  of  the  debt  in  1789  con-
siderably exceeded  this  125  or  iig  millions.  There  were  a  great  number  of
annuities  and  tontines,  and  these  were  estimated,  together  with  the  floating
debt,  in  1789  at  almost  100  millions  more.  It  was  obvious,  however,  that
charges  like  these  would  soon  terminate.  Are  we  then  to  seek  in  the  deficit
the  really  serious  crisis  ?  or  in  the  anticipations  of  next  year's  revenue,  some-
times as  high  as  150  millions  ?  The  deficit  was  of  course  nothing  short  of  a
scandal,  i.e.,  it  was  scandalous  that  such  a  rich  government  should  have  lived
in  such  a  haphazard  way  as  not  to  have  wiped  it  out  long  ago.  Only  once  in
the  eighteenth  century,  viz.,  in  1738,  in  Fleury's  ministry,  did  the  Government
really  manage  to  balance  its  books.  Terrai  on  his  resignation  acknowledged
a  deficit  of  27  millions  ;  ^  Bailly  (ii.  190-2)  says  that  he  underestimated  it  and
that  it  was  really  41 ;  Turgot  had  no  time  to  tackle  it  seriously,  and  his  suc-
cessor Clugny  acknowledged  the  same  figure  as  Terrai.  Under  Necker  it
seems  to  have  averaged  about  40  millions  a  year,  although  Calonne  in  his
famous  controversy  with  Necker  claims  to  have  inherited  a  deficit  of  80.
One  cannot  help  blushing  a  little  for  the  good  Necker  when  one  finds  him
resorting  to  lottery  loans  and  tontines  and  the  like,'*  yet  so  great  was  the

^  The  American  War  seems  to  have  cost  something  between  1,200  and  1,400
millions.  Necker  borrowed  at  easy  rates  530  millions  ;  Joly  de  Fleury  and
d'Ormesson  (May,  1781-Nov.  1783)  400 ;  Calonne  (Nov.  1783-Feb.  1787)  700 ;
Fourqueux  and  Lom^nie  (Feb.  1787-Aug.  1788)  320 ;  total  since  1777  something
under  2  milliards.

2  In  1815  the  interest  of  the  French  debt  was  198  millions ;  in  1848,  230 ;  in
1871  (before  the  war  indemnity),  687  ;  in  1872,  1,132  ;  in  1889,  1,330  (capital  value
of  debt  31  milliards).  Rev.  de  la  R^v,  xiv.  281.  At  the  present  day  there  is  an
annual  deficit  varying  from  4,000,000  to  6,000,000  sterling  (thus  about  equal  to
the  highest  estimated  deficit  of  the  old  Monarchy) ;  and  this  with  a  population  at
least  stationary,  if  not  decreasing,  and  every  source  of  revenue  apparently  taxed  up
to  the  extremest  possible  limit.

^  This  in  spite  of  his  conversion  of  tontines  into  life  annuities,  his  reduction  of
interest  by  50  per  cent,  on  many  of  the  loans,  his  suspension  of  promised  repay-
ments of  capital  and  his  appropriation  of  the  sinking  fund.  Remember,  however,
that  Calonne  paid  all  the  Terrai  creditors  in  full.

*  Necker,  in  spite  of  his  supposed  genius  for  banking,  really  shines  far  more  as
an  economic  administrator,  a  reformer  of  methods  of  collection,  than  as  a  power  in
credit ;  his  system  of  loans  was  old-fashioned  and  hand-to-mouth.


APPENDIX  333

riches  of  the  kingdom,  so  great  the  quantity  of  capital  seeking  investment,^
that  neither  Necker  nor  his  successors  had  any  difficulty  in  getting  almost
any  loan  subscribed.  Still  more,  however,  is  one  compelled  to  blush  for  him
when  one  reads  his  Compte  Rendu  of  1781,  in  which  he  tried  to  prove  that  in
an  ordinary  year  there  would  be  a  surplus  of  10  millions.  This,  it  is  to  be
feared,  was  only  due  to  his  desire  to  stand  well  with  the  financiers  and  to  be
able  to  borrow  easily.  M.  Stourm  (ii.  186)  seems  to  me  to  take  an  unaccount-
ably lenient  view  of  this  conduct  of  Necker :  and  Calonne  was,  I  think,
essentially  right  when  he  threw  the  blame  of  the  increasing  deficit  on  this
policy  {cf.  Viihrer,  i.  263).  But  Calonne  kept  on  paying  off  some  and  borrow-
ing more  and  feeling  the  pulse  of  the  Bourse  just  as  Necker  had  done :  he
would  have  appeared  more  honest  in  the  eyes  of  posterity  had  his  proposals
of  1787  come  three  years  earlier ;  and  he  left  a  deficit  probably  at  least  twice
as  great  as  that  which  he  inherited — a  deficit  which  he  avowed  to  be  115  and
which  his  successor  Lomenie  put  at  1^0  plus  anticipations  of  255.  In  spite
of  the  partial  suspension  of  cash  payments  (which  lasted  just  a  month)  made
by  Lomenie  on  Aug.  i6th,  1788,  his  Compte  Rendu  avowed  a  great  increase  in
the  deficit  during  his  short  ministry  (160  millions  in  all)  :  and  Necker,  whose
second  ministry  was  inaugurated  on  Sept.  14th,  1788,  by  the  resumption  of
cash  payments,  must  therefore  have  been  deliberately  concealing  the  truth
when  he  asserted  at  the  meeting  of  the  States- General  that  the  deficit  was
only  57  millions.  The  real  figure  was  nearer  to  Lomenie's  i6o  with  arrears
of  175  (Stourm,  ii.  274).  Yet  Necker  was  right  when  he  declared  that  this
deficit  "  which  has  made  such  a  noise  in  Europe  "  could  be  made  to  disappear
without  fresh  taxes  "  et  avec  des  simples  objets  inaper^us"  {ibid.,  ii.  247).
All  that  was  needed  was  a  readjustment  of  the  system  of  collection  and  of
incidence,  and  these  reforms  had  already  been  begun.

Necker  then  came  into  office  pledged  to  remove  this  deficit  with  the  help
of  the  States-General :  the  suggestions  which  he  made  for  its  gradual  ex-
tinction were  good  and  sensible,  and  he  was  probably  the  right  man  in  the
right  place  had  he  been  given  free  hand  and  firm  support.  The  minute
reforms  of  system  which  he  proposed  for  this  end  were,  however,  entirely
distasteful  to  the  Constituent  Assembly,  which,  after  its  victories  of  June
and  July,  1789,  proposed  to  reconstruct  the  entire  financial  system  of  France
defond  en  comhle  (Stourm,  ii.  247,  sqq.).  All  the  ministerial  proposals  were  re-
jected and  after  attempting  to  carry  through  two  abortive  loans  in  the  autumn
of  1789,2  Necker  looked  on  in  impotent  protest  at  the  commencement  of  the
paper  monty  regime  till  his  own  retirement,  Sept.  3rd,  1790.  The  first  year  of
the  Revolution  closed  with  a  deficit  of  177  millions,  and  the  last  three  months
of  1790  alone  added  go  millions  to  this.  By  the  end  of  1790  there  was  a
deficit  of  350  with  arrears  of  268.  No  serious  attempt  whatever  to  deal
with  the  "  debt  and  deficit "  question  was  made  till  Cambon's  famous  Grand
Livre  of  Aug.  24th,  1793,  concerning  which  M.  Stourm  remarks  (ii.  334)
that  it  was  really  the  herald  of  a  bankruptcy,  that  it  did  nothing  to  con-
solidate the  debt  except  to  impose  a  tax  of  ^  per  cent,  on  all  arrears  due  to

1  It  is  calculated  that  the  ordinary  revenue  had  increased  by  130  millions  in  the
13  years  preceding  the  Revolution  (the  Ferme  Gindrale  whose  contracts  were
renewed  every  six  years  showed  an  enormous  increase  on  each  contract)  (Stourm,  ii,
232,  i.  19,  etc.).  But  the  expenses  of  government  increased  out  of  proportion  to
this  increase.

2  What  a  shock  the  events  of  June  and  July  had  given  to  credit  may  be  gathered
from  the  fact  that  even  Necker  {ministre  ndorS)  was  unable  to  get  his  two  trifling
loans  subscribed  in  the  autumn  of  1789.


334  APPENDIX

creditors,  and  another  tax  on  all  transference  of  rentes,  amounting  in  all  to  2
per  cent. :  it  did  indeed  enumerate  the  claims  of  the  State  creditors,  but  only
as  a  merchant  about  to  fail  schedules  his  debts.  The  "  colossal  bankruptcy,"
which  alone  could  wipe  out  the  milliards  of  debt  created  by  the  Revolution,
together  with  the  trifling  arrears  of  the  Ancien  Regime,  did  not  come  till
1797  (Law  of  demonetisation  of  Assignais,  Feb.  4th,  and  faillite  dti  tiers
consolide,  Sept.  30th).  Two-thirds  of  the  rentes  were  then  struck  off  the
Grand  Livre  and  paid  in  paper  of  practically  no  value  at  all,  which  was
equivalent  to  a  bankruptcy  of  63  per  cent. :  the  amount  of  the  debt  of  the
Ancien  Regime  then  and  there  accounted  for  was  1,900  millions ;  the  rest
of  the  35  milliards  of  these  two  bankruptcies  was  the  debt  of  the  Revolution
alone !

II.  We  must  now  go  back  and  examine  the  system  of  taxes  in  use  in  old
France.  The  direct  taxes  were  the  Taille,  Capitation  and  Vingtiemes.  Of  these
the  Taille  was  by  far  the  largest  and  oldest.  It  had  originally  been  a  levy  on
the  Royal  Domain,  but  had  in  the  fifteenth  century  become  a  general  tax  in
lieu  of  military  service,  a  fact  which  exempted  the  clergy  wholly  and  the
noblesse  partially  from  its  incidence.  In  the  Pays  d'Etat  the  Taille  was  a
direct  land  tax  assessed  by  a  committee  of  the  local  estates  and  paid  through
them  into  the  Treasury.  In  the  Pays  d'Elections  there  were  two  tailles,  one
"real"  the  other  "accessory,"  and  the  amount  of  the  latter  up  to  the  year
1780  varied  from  year  to  year  and  from  district  to  district  according  to  the
needs  of  the  government  and  the  reports  sent  in  by  the  Intendants  of  the
ability  of  their  districts  to  bear  the  tax.  The  repartition  {i.e.,  distributive
assessment)  was  deputed  to  the  Intendants,  who  appointed  "  collectors  "  from
among  the  richer  peasants  for  the  unpleasant  task  of  valuing  and  assessing
the  property  of  their  neighbours,  these  collectors  being  themselves  responsible
for  the  total  to  be  collected  from  each  parish.  This  contrainte  solidaire  was
abolished  by  Turgot  (Stourm,  i.  51-2;  Gasquet,  Precis,  i.  335,  sqq.;  Adam
Smith,  bk.  v.  cap.  ii.).  The  nobles  were  obliged  to  pay  taille  in  the  Pays  de
droit  Ecrit — Languedoc,  Provence,  Dauphine,  part  of  Guyenne,  Burgundy,
Alsace,  Flanders,  Artois  and  Quercy — on  all  their  lands  held  by  non-noble
tenure,^  while  in  the  Pays  de  droit  coutumier  they  paid  on  nearly  all  the
lands  farmed  by  themselves.  But  there  were  numerous  exemptions  even  to
these  rules,  and  the  nobles  were  in  a  position  to  compound  very  favourably
for  all  direct  taxes.  Many  efforts  were  made  to  equalise  the  burden  of  the
taille,  e.g.,  by  Turgot,  who,  during  his  Intendance  in  the  Limousin  ^  made
a  valuation  of  all  properties  and  a  register  of  the  due  arnounts  of  payment ;
cadastres  on  this  model  were  introduced  into  the  Pays  d'Etat.  Necker  made
an  attempt  to  supplant  the  collectors  by  regular  paid  officials,  but  made  it
optional  to  retain  the  old  system :  and  in  1780  he  laid  down  that  the
"  accessory "  taille  could  never  be  increased  except  by  a  general  edict
common  to  the  kingdom.  In  the  few  years  immediately  preceding  the
Revolution,  this,  the  principal  direct  tax  of  France,  amounted  to  about  91
millions  on  the  average  (Necker,  L' Administration  des  Finances,  1784).

1  The  Marquis  de  Mirabeau  in  1779  paid  400  livr.  iail/e  on  one  of  his  non-noble
fiefs.  See  Lora^nie,  Las  Mirabeau  (ii.  93),  for  this  and  a  general  refutation  of  the  view
that  the  nobles  were  wholly  exempt  {see  also  Gomel,  iii.  82).  Remember  always
that  service  and  taxes  were  paid  by  the  land  whoever  owned  it.  There  was  constant
buying  and  sale  of  land  going  on,  and  innumerable  cases  of  rohiriers  becoming
possessed  of  fiefs  by  mere  purchase,  and  of  nobles  becoming  possessed  of  lands
owing  taille  "real."

2  Turgot  found  that  in  some  parishes  the  taille  was  as  low  as  i  sou  in  the  livre,
in  others  as  high  as  6  (Lavergne,  Les  Econ.  Fr.  228).


APPENDIX  335

The  Capitation  dated  from  1695  and  was  of  the  nature  of  a  hearth  tax  plus
a  poll  tax,  and  there  were  supposed  to  be  no  exemptions  from  it,  not  even  for
the  clergy ;  but  these  compounded  for  it  immediately,  and  the  composition
which  they  made  formed  part  of  their  don  gratuit  which  on  the  eve  of  the
Revolution  amounted  to  18  millions,  and  this  only  paid  quinquennially.  The
nobles  too,  though  nowhere  getting  exemption  on  any  large  scale,  seem  al-
ways to  have  been  able  to  compound  favourably.^

The  idea  of  an  Itnpot  General  or  Impot  Unique,  proportional  on  all  revenues,
was  Vauban's  :  it  was  adopted  in  principle  by  Desmarets  at  the  end  of
Louis  XIV. 's  reign,  but  so  far  from  being  "unique"  was  made  additional  to
the  other  taxes  :  it  was  called  a  Vingtieme,  and  was  several  times  suppressed
and  renewed ;  a  second  Vingtieme  was  added  in  1756,  and  a  third  in  1783  to
meet  the  expenses  of  the  American  War.  Here  again  exemptions  and  com-
positions stepped  in  ;  but  Gasquet  (i,  343)  says  that  the  Vingtiemes  touched
the  upper  classes  much  more  than  the  Capitation,  because  there  was  but  one
assessment  roll  for  each  province.  Although  intended  to  be  levied  on  both
personal  and  real  property,  the  Vingtiemes,  like  the  English  "  land  tax,"  fell
almost  wholly  on  land  (out  of  76,000,000  in  1785  only  2,500,000  fell  on  per-
sonal property,  Stourm,  i,  61).

If  we  turn  to  the  indirect  taxes  we  find  (Stourm,  i.  295,  sqq.,  Gomel,  i.
cap.  ii.)  the  Gabelle,  Aides,  Traites,  Octrois,  and  Tahac  together  with  several
smaller  ones  such  as  the  Stamp  Tax.

For  the  Gabelle  or  Salt  Tax  France  was  divided  into  six  divisions,  or  pro-
vinces :  (i.)  des  grandes  gabelles,  (ii.)  des  petitcs  gabelles,  (iii.)  de  saline,  (iv.)
/ranches,  (v.)  redimees,  (vi.)  de  quart  bouillon.  In  each  of  these  divisions  the
gabelle  differed,  and  the  price  of  salt  varied  accordingly .2  Necker  in  his
Administration  des  Finances  (ii.  57)  calculates  that  300  men  were  sentenced
every  year  to  the  galleys  for  smuggling  salt.  The  tax  was  farmed  by  the
corporation  of  Farmers-General  and  one  could  only  buy  salt  from  their  maga-
zines :  moreover  every  family  was  obliged  to  buy  a  fixed  quantity  in  pro-
portion to  its  numbers,  or  be  reputed  to  smuggle  it.  An  equal  tax  on  salt,
say  15  livr.  per  quintal,  would  probably  have  brought  in  a  larger  aggregate
revenue  to  the  government  than  this  absurd  system.  Even  the  Constituent
hesitated  to  abolish  the  gabelle  altogether,  and  (March  30th,  1790)  attempted
to  substitute  for  it  an  impot  de  remplacement  to  produce  50  millions :  but
this,  like  all  other  taxes  of  the  Revolution,  simply  remained  unpaid  (Stourm,

i-  317)-'

Aides  (or  Excise)  were  levied  on  all  fermented  liquors,  gold  and  silver
work,  iron,  starch.  Wines  paid  \  when  sold  wholesale  and  another  \  when
sold  retail.  No  very  great  complaint  is  made  of  this  tax,  but  like  the
gabelle  it  was  worked  on  a  very  complicated  system.^

Traites  (or  Customs)  were  exacted  at  the  douanes  interieures  or
barriers  between  the  three  "  custom-house  "  divisions  of  France,  i.e.,  between
the   central   provinces   (or  pays   de  cinq  grosses  fermes)  and  the  pays  r'e-

1  Necker  gives  the  capitation  as  producing  42  millions.

2  From  62  livres  the  quintal  in  the  provinces  des  grandes  gabelles  to  2  livres  in
the  provinces /ra«cA(?i'.

3  Necker  estimates  the  produce  of  the  gabelle  at  52  millions.

4  The  most  curious  part  of  which  was  that  the  aides  proper  were  only  levied
within  the  jurisdiction  {ressort)  of  the  Parlements  of  Paris  and  Rouen,  i.e.  some
two-fifths  of  the  kingdom  ;  nevertheless  they  produced  from  50  to  60  millions
(Stourm,  i.  325,  sqq.).  (The  Parlement  of  Paris  had  jurisdiction  over  10  million
persons,  that  of  Rouen  over  2  millions.)


336  APPENDIX

putes  etrangers  (the  next  outer  ring  comprising  those  provinces  reunited  to
the  Crown  in  the  later  Middle  Ages)  and  again  between  these  and  the  pays
etrangers,  Alsace,  Flanders,  Lorraine,^  as  well  as  at  all  the  maritime  ports ;
but  between  the  pays  etrangers  and  Germany  and  Netherlands  there  were
no  custom  houses  at  all.  These  douanes  interieures  and  their  tariffs  were
no  doubt  often  worked  in  the  interest  of  keeping  the  price  of  corn  level  in
the  different  parts  of  the  kingdom,  but  Turgot,  Necker  and  Calonne  were  at
one  in  desiring  their  removal,  although  free  trade  in  corn  was  the  most
unpopular  idea  imaginable  in  old  France ;  and  perhaps  the  greatest  blessing
the  Revolution  brought  was  the  sweeping  away  of  these  barriers,  from  which
removal,  after  the  anarchic  period,  perfect  internal  free  trade  arose.  In  1787
a  scheme  was  presented  in  the  Notables  for  new  custom  houses  at  the  frontier
only,  based  upon  a  low  tariff:  the  privileged  provinces  however  made  a  good
deal  of  resistance.

Of  the  lesser  indirect  taxes  the  Tobacco  Monopoly  produced  about  30
millions  ;  L'Enregistrement,  La  Controle  and  Le  Centihne  Denier  (taxes
on  conveyances  and  successions)  produced  41,  the  stamp  tax  6,  hall  marks
on  gold  and  silver  plate  2  ;  excise  on  oil  and  soap,  messageries,  paper  tax,
and  duty  on  playing  cards,  somewhat  lesser  sums  ;  the  total  of  indirect  taxes
being  not  much  over  200  millions  (say  215).  Besides  these  resources  the
Government  laid  hands  on  half  the  Octroi  of  Paris  and  some  other  large
towns — say  20  millions ;  the  post  office  brought  in  15  ;  the  "  woods  and
forests"  (Royal  Domain)  50.  That  br>gs  us  to  300  millions  without  the
direct  taxes,  and  if  we  accept  Necker's  figures  quoted  above  these  will  amount
to  209.  Total  509  millions.  But  we  must  beware  of  too  great  definiteness.
So  carelessly  were  the  accounts  kept  that  even  such  auditing  as  there  was
was  not  unfrequently  eight  or  nine  years  in  arrear  ;  Turgot  however  we
know  estimated  the  ordinary  revenue  at  377  in  his  ministry,  and  our  previous
estimate  of  increase  (130  in  the  last  13  years  before  the  Revolution)  would  just
about  bring  the  sum  right.  All  the  indirect  taxes  of  course  hit  the  upper
classes  as  well  as  the  lower,  and  of  the  direct  taxes  von  Sybel  calculates  (i.
44)  that  the  noblesse  should  have  paid,  supposing  perfect  equality  of  taxation,
from  33  to  36  millions  more  than  they  did.

The  expenses  of  the  Government  are  however  perfectly  impossible  to
ascertain ;  guesses  can  be  made,  e.g.,  working  expenses  350  to  400,  interest
on  loans  terminable  and  interminable  200,  pensions  30  and  the  like ;  but
there  will  still  remain  a  huge  deficit  unaccounted  for.  It  is  practically
certain  that  600  to  650  is  a  moderate  estimate  of  the  whole,  although  Necker
was  probably  not  too  sanguine  in  telling  the  States-General  that  he  hoped  that
the  expenses  of  the  four  years  following  1789  would  not  amount  to  above  530
a  year  (Stourm,  ii.  429) ;  for,  as  we  have  said,  he  was  the  man  for  economies.

III.  The  Constituent  however  would  have  nothing  to  say  to  Necker's  plans,
and  their  own  budgetary  legislation  was  of  the  wildest ;  in  consequence  of
which,  deficit,  arrears  and  capital  of  debt  increased  at  the  most  alarming
rate  :  a  rate  moreover  which  no  one  in  the  Assembly  dared  to  avow.

No  actual  estimate  was  ever  made  of  the  expenses  of  1789-90,  but  on  Aug.

^  Pays  de  cinq  grosses  fennes  where  Colbert's  tariff  of  1664  prevailed,  viz..  Isle
de  France,  Orl^annais,  Burgundy,  Berri,  Poitou,  Normandy,  Picardy  :  pays  riputds
strangers,  under  the  tariff  of  1667,  Limousin,  Auvergne,  Lyonnais,  Dauphin^,  Pro-
vence, Languedoc,  Guienne,  Xaintonge,  Brittany  and  Franche-Comt6.  The  pays
itrangers  also  included  one  or  two  little  islets  of  territory  or  privileged  cities,  e.g.,
Bayonne,  Marseilles,  Gex  (Stourm,  i.  471).  Traites  amounted  to  about  20  millions,
some  six  of  which  only  came  from  the  douanes  inUrieures.


APPENDIX  337

i8th,  1790,  the  Comite  de  V Imposition  printed  a  report  giving  580  as  the
probable  normal  expenses  of  central  government,  adding  60  for  departmental
and  76  for  extraordinary  expenses  (Gomel,  iii.  39,  124,  239  ;  von  Sybel,  i.  254).
On  Feb.  iSth,  1791,  a  still  more  optimistic  report  was  drawn  up  giving  the  pro-
bable expenses  of  that  year  at  520  and  the  probable  receipts  at  580  (Stourm,
ii.  296),  whereas  it  was  already  notorious  that  neither  old  nor  new  taxes
were  being  paid.  These  estimates  were  considerably  below  those  of  the
expenses  of  the  Ancien  Regime;  the  Committees  dared  not  avow  that  the
new  government  was  far  more  costly,  while  the  "  liquidation  "  of  the  Ancien
Regime  alone  {i.e.,  the  payment  of  pensions  to  the  holders  of  suppressed
offices,  or  the  capitalisation  of  such  pensions)  was  estimated  to  cost
1,300,000,000.  Yet  this  second  estimate,  says  Stourm,  is  the  only  thing
approaching  a  budget  which  any  Revolution  Assembly  has  left  us.  A  rough
estimate  of  the  expenses  of  1792  was  made  in  the  Legislative  by  Laffon  de
Ladebat  in  Dec.  1791,  which  gives  expenses  650,  receipts  511,  deficit  139 :  but
in  Feb.  1792  Cambon,  who  had  already  stepped  upon  the  scene,  raised  the
expenses  to  821,  while  in  May  he  declared  that  550  was  the  most  that  could
be  expected  in  the  most  prosperous  year.  The  commencement  of  the  war  at
about  the  time  of  this  pronouncement  of  Cambon's  renders  further  researches
into  budgets  somewhat  ludicrous ;  from  Oct.  ist,  1792,  to  June,  1793,  the
total  expenditure  seems  to  have  reached  1,900  millions,  while  the  total
revenue  collected  in  1792  probably  did  not  exceed  300  and  that  of  1793  did  not
exceed  80  millions  (Stourm,  ii.  416,  sqq.).  With  one  more  calculation  of  Cam-
bon's we  may  leave  this  part  of  the  subject ;  on  Sept.  ist,  1793,  he  estimated
that  since  May  5th,  1789,  6  milliards  odd  had  been  spent,  of  which  i  milliard
and  three  hundred  millions  had  gone,  as  we  have  seen,  to  the  liquidation  of  the
Ancien  Regime,  although  he  put  this  a  little  lower.  The  Ancien  Regime,  re-
formed on  Necker's  valuation  of  530  odd  millions  a  year,  would  have  spent
in  the  same  time,  including  the  liquidation,  something  over  3  milliards  for
the  4J  years  ;  the  new  Government  was  thus  over  2J  thousand  millions  of
livres  more  expensive  than  the  old  would  have  been  :  a  milliard  more  than
the  preceding  four  years  had  been.

We  may  say  at  once  that  with  the  exception  of  the  colossal  blunder  of
the  Assignats  the  Constituent  may  fairly  be  acquitted  of  all  blame  except
for  timidity  in  this  matter.  It  found  itself  at  once  compelled  to  accept  vast
responsibilities  entailing  vast  expenditure  in  every  direction — though  chiefly
in  the  direction  of  Revolutionary  propaganda.  It  was  all  very  well  for
Montesquiou  in  Nov.  1789  to  talk  of  "  economies  to  the  extent  of  119  millions,"
but  there  was  Paris  to  be  fed,  National  Guards  to  be  equipped,  fetes  to  be
organised  ;  and  all  this  by  the  hands  of  incompetent  and  insatiable  municipal
officers  who  simply  revelled  in  the  opportunity  of  boundless  expenditure  of
other  people's  money.  To  meet  this  demand  there  were  with  regard  to
taxation  two  policies  which  the  Assembly  might  pursue  :  (1.)  either  retain  the
old  taxes,  gradually  eliminating  the  hardships  and  inequalities  from  them,  (ii.)
or  make  a  tabula  rasa  of  the  old  system  and  levy  new  taxes  with  a  strong  hand.
The  Assembly  did  neither.

On  Dec.  14th,  1789,  a  mdmoire  was  received  declaring  it  to  be  impossible  in
many  places  to  collect  any  taxes  at  all :  the  same  on  Jan.  2nd  and  Aug.  loth
and  i8th,  1790  (Gomel,  iii.  543  ;  iv.  30,  235).  Yet  the  Assembly  maintained  the
old  taxes  until  they  were  compelled  reluctantly  to  drop  them  one  by  one  by
the  outcry  of  the  mob.^     When  these  were  dropped  it  was  not  ready  with

^Gadel/e  was  not  abolished  till  March  30th,  1790;  Aides  not  till  March  2nd,
1791.

VOL.    III.  22


338  APPENDIX

anything  new,  and  no  new  taxes  came  into  force  till  Sept.  1791  ;  by  which
time  people  had  become  but  too  much  habituated  to  paying  nothing  at  all.
The  period  between  the  dropping  of  the  old  and  the  institution  of  the  new
taxes  was  tided  over  by  little  loans  (which  were  hardly  subscribed  at  all),  "  pat-
riotic gifts,"  "patriotic  income  tax"  and  the  commencement  of  the  ^ssi^na^
When  the  scheme  of  taxation  was  produced  the  Committee  recommended  the
sweeping  away  of  all  indirect  taxes,  and  hence  they  are  credited  with  an
attempt  to  live  up  to  the  physiocratic  ideal  in  which  many  of  them  believed.
But  as  a  matter  of  fact  only  those  indirect  taxes  which  principally  affected
the  lower  class  were  abolished,  while  the  stamp  tax  and  registration  dues
were  retained  ^  (von  Sybel,  i.  257).  The  sale  of  patents,  a  sensible  innovation,
was  calculated  to  produce  22  millions,  a  poll  tax  60,  and  the  Impot  Fonder,
falling  on  all  landowners  equally  (not  on  occupiers),  300.  The  basis  of  its
levy  was  to  be  the  average  net  produce  of  the  land  for  the  last  15  years ;
and  it  was  not  to  exceed  i  of  this  (Stourm,  i.  124,  315).  This  tax  came  into
force  Nov.  23rd,  1790,  and  would  obviously  have  been  a  fairly  heavy  burden  :
the  difficulty  of  collecting  it  however  was  enormously  enhanced  by  the  im-
possibility of  calculating  the  average  product  for  the  past  15  years.

The  indirect  taxes  which,  in  spite  of  the  "  ideal,"  were  retained  to  supple-
ment this  system  consisted  chiefly  of  a  new  tarif  des  douanes  for  new
custom  houses  (on  the  frontiers  only),  copied  from  that  of  1787,  which,
with  an  increase  in  the  stamp  tax,  would,  it  was  hoped,  bring  in  no
millions  (Gomel,  iii.  345).^

The  manifest  failure  of  this  Impot  Foncier  led,  on  Jan.  13th,  1791,  to  its
being  supplemented  by  an  Impot  Mobilier  (Stourm,  i.  328),  under  which
head  was  then  lumped  the  poll  tax  (3  days'  wages  at  rate  current  in  district)
from  every  "active  citizen,"  an  inhabited  house  duty,  a  tax  on  salaries  of
officials,  and  an  "  inland  revenue "  duty  on  horses,  mules  and  domestic
servants.  But  it  is  distinctly  not  an  income  tax ;  the  Assembly  considered
that  the  rentiers  were  sufficiently  touched  by  its  details.

But  what  was  the  use  of  a  new  tax  if  it  could  never  be  collected  ?
Claviere  in  a  report,  Feb.  ist,  1793,  declared  that  in  1791  only  half  the  Impot
Foncier  due  had  been  paid,  in  1792  nothing  at  all  (Gomel,  iv.  567).  How
then  did  the  Revolution  Governments  live  ?  One  great  windfall  was  granted
them,  the  Biens  Nationaux ;  let  us  see  what  use  they  made  of  them.

IV.  The  Biens  Nationaux  included  not  only  the  real  and  personal  property
of  the  clergy  taken  over  by  the  State  in  Nov.  1789,^  but  the  Crown  lands  also,
and,  from  1792,  a  steady  increase  in  the  confiscated  property  of  Emigrds]a.nd
condemned  persons.  I  shall  make  an  attempt  below  to  estimate  the  total
value  of  the  riches  thus  acquired ;  in  the  meantime  let  us  consider  the  use
made  of  them  by  the  successive  Governments.  There  was  a  dispute  at  the
outset  between  the  Comitc  des  Finances,  as  represented  by  Montesquiou
and  backed  up  by  Mirabeau,  and  its  critics  led  by  Dupont  de  Nemours
(supported  by  Necker  outside),  as  to  whether  paper  money  guaranteed  by
the  State  should  be  issued  directly  by  the  Treasury  on  the  security  of  these
lands,  or  notes  should  be  issued  by  the  Caisse  d'Escompte  as  the  specie

1  These  were  of  course  just  as  irritating  to  the  genuine  physiocrat  as  Gazelles  or
Aides.

2  The  more  ordinary  indirect  taxes  remained  in  abeyance  till  the  Empire,  when
they  were  reimposed  on  liquors  1804,  salt  1806,  tobacco  1808  (Stourm,  i   301).

3  Remember  that  the  debt  of  the  clergy  was  taken  over  also,  and  that  the
"expenses  of  worship"  (salaries  of  bishops,  priests,  etc.)  far  exceeded  the  most
optimistic  estimate  of  the  income  derivable  from  the  church  lands  {see  Appx.  on
Civil  Constitution  of  the  Clergy).


APPENDIX  339

from  the  sale  of  these  lands  came  in  (Gomel,  iii,  478) ;  obviously  Dupont
was  right  in  supporting  the  latter  view ;  and  it  is  pathetic  to  think  that  Necker,
when  he  became  at  last  the  advocate  of  a  really  sound  scheme  which  he
thoroughly  understood,  should  have  so  far  lost  all  his  former  influence  as
to  be  unable  to  prevent  the  commission  of  one  of  the  greatest  financial
blunders  known  to  history. ^  The  whole  wretched  history  of  the  Assignat
proves  the  wisdom  of  their  criticism :  the  biens  were  not  immediately
realisable,  and  they  were  therefore  not  a  legitimate  security  for  the  issue
even  of  a  limited  paper  money.

Still  less  for  an  unlimited  issue.  At  first  a  guarantee  was  given  that
there  should  never  be  more  than  1,200  millions  of  Assignats  in  circulation,
and  that  as  these  returned  to  the  Treasury  they  should  be  destroyed ;
holders  of  Assignats  were  to  have  a  premiere  hypotheque  on  the  Biens
Nationaux  (Gomel,  iv.  269).  Even  the  Constituent  exceeded  the  promised
limit  by  600  millions,  and  that  with  its  eyes  open,  from  a  cowardly  resolve  not
to  risk  its  popularity  by  taxing  the  nation  adequately,  or  enforcing  the
taxes  it  ordered.  After  its  close  issue  followed  issue  with  startUng  rapidity,
and  on  April  27th,  1792,  the  Legislative  deliberately  abandoned  all  principle  of
limitation.  By  the  summer  of  1793  there  were  4,320  millions  in  circulation
and  Assignats  were  issued  for  sums  as  low  as  10  sous.  In  its  latter  days  the
Convention  went  on  with  feverish  haste  in  the  same  direction,  the  workmen
engaged  in  making  assignats  were  kept  at  work  daily  from  6  a.m.  till  8  p.m.  ;
and  at  last  the  issues  were  voted  by  the  Committees  and  kept  secret  from  the
Convention  itself.

The  Directory  increased  the  pace  a  hundredfold,  and  after  a  final  issue  of
12  milliards,  destroyed  the  die  of  the  Assignats,  but  immedialely  replaced
them  by  Mandats  Territoriaux  which  rapidly  followed  the  same  course.  In
Feb.  1797,  when  the  astounding  figure  of  47^  milliards  of  paper  money  had
been  issued,  the  State  demonetised  the  whole  quantity  then  in  circulation,
i.e.,  failed  for  some  35  milliards  (Stourm,  ii.  325,  sqq.).^

The  steady  depreciation  of  this  paper  money  ^  may  be  understood  from
the  following  table  given  by  Stourm  (ii.  311): —

In  Jan.  '90  the  Assignat  of  100  livr.  was  worth  96
»     '91  .,  M  »  91

„     '92  ,,  „  ,,  72

.,     '93  »  ..  ,.  51

M  '94  »  M  ».  40

,.     '95  M  »  »  18

June  '95  „  „  „  2-973

The  only  remarkable  fluctuation  in  the  table  (which  I  have  not  given  in
full)  is  between  July,  1793  (when  they  were  down  to  23)  and  Jan,  1794  (when
they  were  up  to  40  again),  but  this  is  accounted  for  by  the  fierce  measures
taken  by  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety  against  persons  who  refused  to

1  Dupont  [see  Lavergne,  Econ.  Fr.  403)  put  the  case  against  Montesquiou  with
his  usual  clearness,  "  Toute  rente  de  terres  demande  un  temps  moral  pour  etre
"effective:  aucun  papier  ne  peut  remplir  I'office  de  monnaie  si  les  porteurs  ne
"  sont  k  chaque  instant  maitres  de  le  changer  centre  la  monnaie."  See  also
Gomel  (iii.  493  ;  iv,  128,  259,  310)  for  Dupont' s  arguments  on  various  occasions.

2  The  Constituent  had  created  1,800  millions,  the  Legislative  added  900  millions,
the  Convention  a  mere  trifle  of  7,000  millions.  The  rest  of  the  issue  is  to  be
ascribed  to  the  Directory  !  (35,000  millions),

3  The  lowest  quotation  is  the  100  franc  note  at  6  sous  (shall  we  say  twof>ence
halfpenny?)  in  Feb.  1796.


340  APPENDIX

accept  the  notes  at  par,  especially  by  the  law  of  Sept.  5th,  1793  (six  months  im-
prisonment for  the  first  offence,  20  years  for  the  second,  and,  if  the  intention
of  the  refuser  were  inciviqtie, — death  !).  No  power  on  earth  however  could
long  check  depreciation :  and  the  bankruptcy  was  foreseen  at  least  as  early
as  July,  1793,  when  all  those  Assignats  bearing  the  old  royal  stamp  were  de-
monetised ;  ^  while  on  a  proposal  by  Vernier  that  one  half  the  nominal  value
should  be  paid,  every  one  was  delighted  at  the  idea  of  the  State  paying  its
creditors  ten  shillings  in  the  pound  (Stourm,  ii.  321-2) !  But  nothing  of  the
kind  was  done.  Yet  it  was  continually  urged  by  those  who  were  responsible
for  the  issue  that  there  really  was  a  sound  basis  for  the  Assignats;  Cambon,
for  instance,  as  late  as  Feb.  1795,  declared  that  "  the  Nation  was  under  great
obligation  to  the  Constituent  for  their  creation."  Let  us  examine  what
truth  there  is  in  the  "  sound  basis"  theory,  to  what,  supposing  all  the  Biens
Nationaux  to  have  been  sold,  would  their  capitalised  value  amount  ?  {see  von
Sybel,  i.  164 ;  Gomel,  iv.  275  ;  Stourm,  ii.  145.)  The  accounts  of  contempor-
aries vary  considerably,  but  the  report  of  Montesquiou  at  the  end  of  the  Con-
stituent (Sept.  9th,  1791)  gives  a  total  capitalised  value  of  Church  and  Crown
lands  at  3,500,050,000  livres,  of  which  900  millions  are  Crown  lands — say
roughly  3^  milliards ;  Lavoisier  on  Jan.  ist,  1792,  put  it  somewhat  lower,  at
2,800,000,000 ;  Cambon,  Oct.  17th,  1792,  put  it  at  3,310,000,000.  It  is  not  these
original  JBiens  Nationaux  that  are  so  difficult  to  value,^  but  the  subsequent
confiscations.  Already  in  Jan.  and  Feb.  1793,  Roland  and  Cambon  put  these  at
4,800  and  4,000  millions  respectively.  Johannotin  areport  of  April,  1795,  puts
them  at  9J  milliards  (it  was  the  object  of  these  gentlemen  to  exaggerate  the
advantages  derived  from  them  by  the  State).  But  these  figures  are  quite
upset  by  the  calculation  made  by  Charles  X.'s  government  in  1825  with  a
view  to  restoring  some  of  the  confiscated  property.  The  figures  then  were
put  at  2,500,000,000,  giving,  with  the  total  of  Church  and  Crown  lands  above
mentioned,  a  grand  total  of  6  milliards.  And  this  was  the  sum  on  the
security  of  which  the  Revolution  issued  paper  up  to  47J  milliards !

The  only  other  financial  experiment  of  the  Revolution  is  the  graduated
income  tax  and  forced  loan  of  the  summer  of  1793  {see  Helie,  i.  359)  to  fall
on  all  incomes  above  1,000  livres  for  bachelors  and  above  1,500  livres  for
married  men,  increasing  by  ^  on  every  1,000  livres  above  that  amount.
In  this  scheme  the  tax  started  at  10  per  cent,  on  your  first  1,000  livres,
and  increased  in  geometrical  progression  until  9,000  livres  was  reached,  on
which  you  would  be  paying  4,500  (50  per  cent.) ;  above  9,000  the  tax  was
100  per  cent.,  i.e.,  confiscation  of  your  entire  income  above  that  maximum  ;  a

1  558  millions  bearing  the  King's  head  were  then  demonetised,  but  the  State
agreed  to  receive  such  notes  in  payment  of  debts  due  to  it  till  Jan.  ist,  1794  :  and  354
millions  were  so  paid  over  (probably  holders  of  these  notes  suddenly  bethought
them  of  the  civic  duty  of  paying  some  taxes) ;  so  only  204  millions  became  waste
paper  at  the  moment  (Stourm,  ii.  324),  a  "superb  experience"  as  Cambon
called  it.

2  Nor  indeed  is  this  vast  resumption  of  lands  held  in  mortmain  anything  so  very
iniquitous,  provided  the  salaries  of  clergy  were  adequately  secured  out  of  them.
It  was  however  calculated  that  2,310  millions  of  clerical  property  would  yield  70
millions  a  year  and  would  sell  at  32  years'  purchase.  This  is  ludicrous  when  we
reflect  on  the  effect  of  throwing  a  great  deal  of  land  on  the  market  at  once.  That
so  much  was  actually  sold  is  evidence  of  the  great  prosperity  of  France  in  1789-90.
Besides,  much  of  this  clerical  property  was  not  lands  at  all,  but  mortgages  and
rents  :  twenty  millions  belonged  to  schools  and  hospitals  not  confiscated ;  and  finally
the  sum  for  the  expenses  of  worship  worked  out  at  134  millions,  nearly  double  the
amount  of  the  confiscated  income  !


APPENDIX  341

man  then  whose  nominal  income  was  100,000  livres  would  enjoy  less  than  ^  of
it.  This  wild  proposal  was  the  work  of  Cambon,  R^al  and  Ramel,  and  Danton
supported  them ;  it  was  thoroughly  to  the  taste  of  Cambon,  whose  historical
position  as  a  financier  is  due  to  the  fact  that  by  hook  or  crook  he  did  manage
to  tide  over  the  dreadful  years  of  1793  and  1794.  But  it  also  explains  the  great
outcry  for  his  head  in  1795,  which,  as  he  was  not  a  particularly  bloodthirsty
man,  is  otherwise  rather  unintelligible  {see  Stourm,  ii.  369).  Lanjuinais
made  his  usual  protest  against  this  tax,  but  in  vain  ;  but  we  do  not  hear  of  it
after  the  autumn  of  1793,  and  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety  in  its  later  days
simply  took  from  private  individuals  any  property  that  it  required.

Nothing  but  bankruptcy  could  end  this  state  of  things  ;  it  cost  you  800
francs  to  drive  across  Paris  and  1,000  francs  to  get  a  decent  meal  at  a
restaurant.  But  the  double  bankruptcy  of  1797  (Feb.  4th  and  Sept.  30th)
was  made  in  the  most  cynical  manner.  First,  as  we  have  seen,  the  law  of
Feb.  4th  demonetised  35  milliards  of  notes  which  the  State  had  expressly
pledged  itself  to  redeem  in  cash  (Stourm,  ii.  327) ;  then  the  Faillite  du  Tiers
Consolide  consummated  the  ruin  of  the  hapless  creditor  who  had  carefully
preserved  his  credentials  of  shares  in  the  National  Debt :  for  the  119  millions
then  inscribed  on  the  Grand  Livrc  (so  called)  of  1793,  the  Directory  simply
took  its  bill  and  wrote  43,  thus  striking  out  an  annual  debt  of  76  or  a  capital
of  1,500  millions.  By  the  same  law  of  Sept.  30th  the  annuities  and  pensions
were  also  reduced  by  ^  and  thereby  400  millions  added  to  the  bankruptcy.
Thus  in  the  spring  France  failed  for  thirty-five  milliards  and  in  the  autumn
for  almost  two  milliards  more.


342


THE  CIVIL  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  CLERGY

By  The  Editor

The  Law  of  July  12th,  1790,  founding  the  Civil  Constitution  of  the  Clergy,
is  divided  into  four  "  Titles  "  and  may  be  summarised  thus: —

Title  I.  (a)  The  reduction  of  the  bishoprics  to  83,  each  diocese  to  be
conterminous  with  a  department.

{/3)  No  foreign  bishop  or  metropolitan  has  any  jurisdiction  in  France.^

(7)  Appeals  lie  from  the  diocesan  synod  to  the  metropolitan  synod.^

(5)  A  complete  rearrangement  of  the  parishes  of  the  kingdom  is  to  be
made  on  the  basis  of  one  parish  for  each  6,000  souls.

(e)  All  chapters,  etc.,  are  swept  away,  but  there  is  to  be  a  number  of
"vicars"  attached  to  each  cathedral  for  the  maintenance  of  the  services  and
for  the  instruction  of  candidates  for  the  ministry,^  and  to  form  a  permanent
consultative  council  or  synod  to  the  bishop.

Title  II.  (a)  Both  bishops  and  ciiris  are  to  be  elected,  the  former  by  the
secondary  electors,  the  latter  by  the  primary :  the  departmental  authorities
are  to  conduct  the  former  elections,  the  municipal  the  latter ;  but  the
elections  are  to  be  in  the  cathedral  and  parish  churches  respectively,  after
the  celebration  of  mass  at  which  all  the  electors  must  be  present,^

(/3)  A  bishop  must  have  been  in  the  exercise  of  priestly  functions  for  at  least
fifteen  years  and  have  served  some  office  in  the  Church  for  that  time.  Within
one  month  from  his  election  he  must  apply  to  his  metropolitan  for  institution :
the  metropolitan  to  the  next  oldest  bishop  in  his  diocese.  If  the  metropolitan
thinks  fit  to  refuse  institution  he  must  state  his  reasons  in  writing  and  the
case  may  then  be  referred  to  the  civil  courts :  the  elected  bishop  must  before
institution  take  an  oath  that  he  professes  the  Catholic,  Apostolic  and  Roman
religion.     No  confirmation  by  the  Pope  is  necessary  or  permissible,-^  but  a

1  This  was  perhaps  not  intended  to  be  aimed  at  the  Holy  See,  but  at  the  Great
German  archdioceses,  which  extended  far  into  the  newly  conquered  provinces  of
Flanders,  Alsace,  Lorraine,  Franche-Comtd,  etc.  It  was  one  of  the  causes  of
complaint  made  at  the  Diet  by  the  Ecclesiastical  Electors.

2  Here  it  is  not  so  clear  that  appeals  to  Rome  were  not  intended  to  be  forbidden.
M.  H6lie  in  his  Commentary  on  the  Law  (Constit.  de  la  Fr.  i.  136)  thinks  that
this  did  not  aim  at  the  destruction  of  the  Pope's  jurisdiction  over  metropolitans  in
the  matters  of  faith  or  discipline.

'In  each  diocese  there  is  to  be  a  seminary  of  instruction  presided  over  by  a
"  Vicar  Superior. "

*  It  is  true  of  course  that  this  would  exclude  all  honest  non-Catholics,  but  it  would
not  legally  exclude  any  one  possessing  the  electoral  qualifications  (which  are  the
same  as  those  for  municipal  and  parliamentary  office),  whether  he  were  Protestant,
Jew,  Turk  or  Infidel.

^  It  is  here  that  we  have  the  definite  breach  with  the  Papacy  ;  yet  a  breach  that
might  have  been  conceivably  bridged  over,  for  the  King  had  nominated  before,  and


APPENDIX  343

letter  notifying  the  election  shall  be  sent  to  him,  "in  proof"  of  the  unity  of
the  faith  and  communion  which  the  elected  bishop  holds  with  him.  The
oath  of  fealty  to  the  Nation,  the  Law  and  the  King,  and  another  oath  to
maintain  with  all  his  might  the  Constitution  (which  was  to  be)  decreed  by  the
National  Assembly,  must  be  taken  before  consecration.

(7)  A  cure  to  be  eligible  for  a  parish  must  have  been  employed  in  some
vicarial  function  (at  the  cathedral  or  in  some  hospital  or  charitable  institution)
for  at  least  5  years.  The  institution  and  oaths  of  the  cure  correspond  exactly
to  those  of  the  bishop  :  and  neither  bishop  nor  cur6  may  enter  upon  his  office
till  he  have  taken  the  said  oaths.

Title  III.  (a)  Residence  and  salary,  varying  in  the  case  of  the  bishops
from  6,000  to  50,000  livres,  and  in  the  case  olcur^s  from  6,000  to  12,000,  is  to
be  provided  by  the  State,  the  salary  is  to  be  paid  quarterly,  and  a  small
pension  is  provided  for  cures  past  work.

()8)  No  fees  of  any  sort  may  be  charged  for  any  episcopal  or  priestly
functions.

Title  IV.  (a)  Residence  is  obligatory,  though  bishops  and  cures  are
allowed  a  fortnight's  consecutive  holiday  in  the  year.

()8)  Bishops,  curis  and  vicars  may  enjoy  the  full  municipal  and  parliament-
ary franchise,  both  primary  and  secondary,  and  may  sit  in  the  Legislative
Assembly  or  in  the  Conseils-GeMraux  of  their  commune,  district  or  depart-
ment, but  may  not  be  maires  or  members  of  departmental  directories.

Such  was  the  Civil  Constitution  of  the  Clergy  of  which  the  chief  drafts-
men were  the  members  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Committee  nominated  on  Aug.
20th,  1789,  and  shortly  afterwards  reinforced.  It  comprised  two  bishops  (those
of  Clermont  and  Lugon) ;  three  cur6s,  one  of  whom  was  the  "  pious  "  Gr^goire
of  Embermdsnil  (one  of  the  most  fanatical  revolutionists  in  France  who
afterwards  sat  in  the  Convention  and  desired  leave  to  record  his  vote  for  the
King's  death  even  though  absent) ;  Lanjuinais  and  Durand-Maillane,  two
scholars  in  Canon  law;  Camus,  a  fanatical  Jansenist;  Dom  Gerle,  a  Carthusian
monk,  who  then  or  afterwards  was  mad  and  became  the  dupe  of  two  suc-
cessive "prophetesses";  Talleyrand  and  Montesquiou  (two  free-thinking
abbes  of  wholly  secular  life) ;  Treilhard,  an  avowed  Voltairean  ;  the  eminently
respectable  Due  de  la  Rochefoucauld- Liancourt,  and  Dupont  de  Nemours.

Now  every  one  will  admit  that  the  riches  of  the  old  Church  of  France  were
far  too  great,  and  too  unequally  distributed.  There  were  134  bishopricks
ranging  from  that  of  Strasburg  with  an  income  of  half  a  million  down  to
little  sees  of  scarce  6,000  livres  per  annum.  There  were  large,  rich  and  powerful
chapters  attached  to  these  bishopricks,  there  were  some  800  monasteries  and
some  300  collegiate  churches.  That  religion  was  "  right  well  kept,"  as  Henry
VIII.  said,  in  all  these  rich  foundations  is  not  probable ;  but  we  have  every
reason  to  believe  that  the  Church  of  France  as  a  whole  was  in  a  sound
condition,  that  its  hold  on  the  nation  at  large  was  enormous  and  practically
unshaken  by  the  assaults  of  the  philosophers.  There  had  certainly  been  a
falling  off  in  the  number  of  professed  monks  and  nuns,  but  the  best  tendency

it  might  fairly  be  argued  that  the  change  was  a  mere  transference  of  power  from
the  Sovereign  King  to  the  Sovereign  People.  It  might  be  argued  that  the  secular
tribunal  which  would  decide  in  the  last  resort  as  to  the  confirmation  of  the  election  was
usurping  little  more  power  than  the  old  law  courts  had  exercised  by  their  entertain-
ment of  appeals  comtne  d'abus,  by  which  they  had  always  resisted  the  encroach-
ments of  Rome.  But  a  nominal  confirmation  by  the  Pope  had  in  all  cases  been  a
necessity,  and  it  was  grossly  impolitic  to  refuse  it  so  bluntly.  Further  notice  that
the  words  "  ordination  "  or  "  orders  "  are  never  mentioned  in  speaking  of  the  person
eligible  for  bishopricks  and  parishes.


344  APPENDIX

of  the  age  was  towards  an  active  and  practical  rather  than  an  ascetic  and
devotional  form  of  religion.  The  cahiers  had  energetically  demanded  reform
in  many  of  the  Church  questions,  such  as  pluralities,  non-residence  and  abbeys
held  in  commendam ;  but  these  and  many  other  abuses  might  have  been
rooted  out  without  an  open  declaration  of  war  upon  the  Catholic  Church  and
its  head.

Was  the  Civil  Constitution  such  an  attack  ?  There  have  been  two  views
held  on  the  subject ;  and  the  first  is  that  the  Church  had  such  a  hold  on  the
nation  that  the  Revolution  could  not  help  tackling  the  question  in  some
shape  or  other  ;  that  it  could  not  sever  the  Church  from  the  State  altogether,^
as  perhaps  from  the  point  of  view  of  modern  radicalism  would  have  seemed
to  be  the  natural  course  (hardly  a  voice  however  was  raised  for  the  favourite
theory  of  the  nineteenth  century) ;  and  that  therefore  the  only  course  which  the
Revolution  had  open  to  it  was  that  of  bending  the  Church  to  its  will,  making
the  Church  its  servant  or  partner  in  some  way  or  other.  There  was  much  to
be  said  for  such  a  course,  and  especially  this,  that  the  large  majority  of  the
curis  in  the  States-General  were  upon  the  side  of  the  liberals  until  the  Church
was  touched.  Further  it  has  been  argued  that  the  Civil  Constitution  did  not
touch  any  doctrinal  question,  that  it  merely  rearranged  the  disciplinary  system
of  the  Church,  that  this  was  little  more  than  an  extension  of  the  principle
of  the  pragmatic  sanction  of  St.  Louis  and  the  "  Articles  of  the  Gallican
Church  "  of  1682,  and  that  the  Pope's  opposition  was  little  more  than  plenty
of  kings  had  beaten  down.  These  views  were  put  forward  by  Treilhard  in
the  debates  of  May,  1790.

The  other  view,  to  which  most  modern  writers,  and  some  distinctly  not  on
the  Catholic  side,  such  as  M.  Aulard,  have  subscribed,  is  that  the  Civil  Con-
stitution was  the  great  mistake  of  the  Revolution — a  view  which  has  behind
it  the  great  names  of  de  Tocqueville,  Taine,  von  Sybel  and  Sorel.  Sorel  ^
boldly  saj'S  that  the  ecclesiastical  committee  "  sinned  against  light  with  their
eyes  open,  and  were  prepared  to  let  the  schism  come  if  it  liked  to  come :
that  the  only  thing  wanting  to  it  was  a  respectable  number  of  schismatics"
(but  this  is  an  exaggeration,  for  a  considerable  minority  of  the  cures  did  take
the  oath  at  one  time  or  another,  though  most  of  them  retracted  it  afterwards).
That  it  was  absolutely  certain  to  drive  the  King  into  final  hostility  to  the
Revolution  seems  either  not  to  have  occurred  to  its  supporters  or  to  have
been  ignored  by  them.  The  reasonable  proposal  of  an  appeal  to  a  council  of
the  Gallican  Church  (the  Pope's  permission  for  which  might  have  been  ob-
tained), a  proposal  supported  not  only  by  the  Archbishop  of  Aix  and  d'^prd-
mesnil  but  also  by  Gobel  afterwards  "  Constitutional  Archbishop  "  of  Paris,
was  scouted  by  the  Assembly,  whose  majority  cried  out  for  the  bill,  the  whole
bill  and  nothing  but  the  bill.

And  so  the  bill  was  carried.  No  sort  of  attempt  was  made  to  manage  the
Pope,  who  was  allowed  to  learn  from  the  newspapers  the  whole  of  the  anti-
clerical legislation  of  the  Assembly.  The  King's  position  was  now  a  most
painful  one ;  the  Pope  (Pius  VI.),  far  away  and  a  man  of  most  autocratic
nature,  did  not  appreciate  his  difficulties.  His  two  ecclesiastic  ministers,  Cice
and  Pompignan,  gave  Louis  little  help,  and  Bernis,  his  minister  at  Rome,  was
red  hot  against  the  Assembly  and  all  its  works.     On  ist  Aug.  therefore  Louis

^  Lafayette,  a  most  nobly  tolerant  man  in  religious  matters,  whose  own  family
steadily  refused  communion  with  the  Civil  Church,  and  who  acknowledges  the  brutal
fierceness  of  the  mob  against  the  true  priests,  really  seems  to  have  wished  the
severance  of  Church  and  State  {see  his  M6m.  and  Corresp.  iii.  59).

2  See  L' Europe  et  la  R6v.  Fr.  ii,  115-128.


APPENDIX  345

weakly  threw  on  the  Pope  the  responsibility  of  refusing  assent  to  the  decrees,
and  on  26th  he  accepted  them  himself.  The  bishops  were  firmer :  in  October
they  published  a  vigorous  protest  against  all  the  ecclesiastical  legislation  of
the  Assembly  ("  Exposition  des  principes  de  la  Constitution  Civile  du  Clerge  ")
drawn  up  by  Boisgelin  (Abp.  of  Aix)  and  signed  by  thirty  bishop-deputies.^
A  motion  of  Voidel's  on  Nov,  26th  to  compel  the  clergy  to  take  the  prescribed
oath  led  to  a  fierce  debate,  which  prolonged  itself  till  the  end  of  December,
and,  the  motion  being  carried,  the  King  had  the  incredible  weakness  of
mind  to  sanction  this  also  (Dec.  26th).  This  must  be  taken  as  the  point  at
which  he  definitely  declared  war  on  the  Revolution,  for  no  more  popular
plank  of  resistance  could  have  been  found  than  this.  In  February,  1791,  Bernis
resigned  his  mission  at  the  Court  of  Rome,'^  to  die  three  years  later  in
poverty.  Strongly  opposed  as  the  shrewd  little  man  had  been  to  the  whole
business,  he  did  his  best  to  persuade  the  Pope  to  temporise  and  to  find  a
via  media,  but  Pius  would  none  of  it  and  on  April  13th,  1791,  he  launched
the  brief  Charitas,  which  declared  that  the  Civil  Constitution  meant  nothing
less  than  the  ruin  of  religion  in  France.  On  May  30th  the  Papal  Nuncio
left  Paris  and  the  schism  was  complete.  It  would  be  difficult  to  condemn
too  strongly  the  attitude  taken  by  Mirabeau  on  the  whole  question ;  while
incessantly  urging  the  Court  to  make  a  plank  of  popularity  by  secretly
undermining  the  Civil  Constitution,  he  continued  to  declaim  in  the  Assembly
in  the  strongest  language  against  the  refractory  clergy  and  the  Exposition  of
the  Bishops.^

While  I  feel  little  doubt  that  M.  Sorel's  view  is  the  true  one,  yet  I
think  that  the  Constituent  as  a  whole  must  be  cleared  of  the  charge  of  im-
piety or  anti-Christianism,  I  think  with  M.  Duvergier  de  Hauranne  (i.  i6i
sqq.)  that  many  of  the  members  did  regard  the  Civil  Church  as  a  development
of  the  anti- Roman  Legislation  of  the  Monarchy,  and  that  the  idea  of  a  schism
was  repugnant  to  most  of  their  minds.  Moreover  I  think  the  Constituent
must  be  cleared  of  the  charge  of  persecution  ;  it  seems  to  have  done  its  feeble
best  to  protect  the  non-juring  priests  during  the  last  six  months  of  its  exist-
ence (the  only  months  of  its  office  during  which  that  question  was  a  burning
one).  But  it  had  got  itself  into  an  exceedingly  awkward  dilemma;  and
no  condemnation  can  be  too  strong  for  the  gravest  mistake  in  the  Civil
Constitution  itself,  viz.,  the  application  of  the  principle  of  election  on  muni-
cipal lines  to  the  parish  clergy  and  bishops.

The  oath  was  taken  by  four  occupants  of  French  sees  and  three  persons
in  episcopal  orders  ;  of  whom  the  only  well-known  names  are  those  of  Talley-
rand, Gobel  and  Lom^nie  de  Brienne.  There  was  much  difficulty  in  filling
up  the  (seventy  odd)  vacant  sees ;  still  greater  difficulty  in  getting  consecra-
tion of  the  new  "bishops."  The  first  nominated  was  the  Abb6  Expilly  to
the  diocese  of  Finisterre,  and  he  had  the  honour  of  being  "  consecrated  "  by
Talleyrand  and  Gobel !

The  persecution  of  the  non-jurors  began  almost  immediately  on  the  meet-
ing of  the  Legislative  Assembly,  and  may  be  thus  briefly  tabulated : —

(i)  Decree  of  Nov.  29th,  1791,  ordering  all  ecclesiastics  who  had  not  taken
the  oath  to  take  it  within  eight  days,  or  be  deprived  of  salary  and  rendered
'*  suspect."

(2)  Decree  of  May  27th,  1792  (vetoed  by  Louis  but  re-enacted  immediately

1  The  exposition  was  signed  by  130  of  the  134  French  bishops.
^  See  Cardinal  de  Bernis  depuis  son  ministere  (edn.  Masson).    See  especially
pp.  479-494-

3  See  Bacourt,  ii.  355-60.


346  APPENDIX

after  the  fall  of  the  Monarchy,  Aug.  26th),  ordering  all  non-juring  priests  to
quit  the  kingdom  within  a  fortnight  or  to  be  deported  to  Cayenne.

(3)  Decrees  of  Aug.  17th  and  i8th,  1792,  dissolving  all  the  religious  houses
and  turning  out  all  the  professed  rehgious  who  had  remained  in  them  in  spite
of  the  abolition  of  vows  and  monasticism  decreed  on  Feb.  13th,  1790  ;^  abolish-
ing and  making  illegal  the  monastic  dress,  and  allotting  a  pension  only  to
such  of  them  as  would  take  the  oath.

(4)  This  was  re-enacted  more  stringently  on  April  24th,  1793.

(5)  Decree  of  Aug.  12th,  1793,  sanctioning  marriage  of  clergy  (a  good  many
constitutional  "  priests  "  and  even  a  "  bishop  "  had  married  already).

With  the  autumn  of  1793  the  persecution  came  to  include  the  Constitutional
"  Church  "  also  :  and  the  only  later  law  which  draws  any  distinction  between
jurors  and  non-jurors  is  that  of  April,  1794,  which  adds  to  the  penalty  of  depor-
tation that  of  death  if  found  in  hiding,  and  that  of  death  to  any  one  conceal-
ing a  non-juring  priest.

The  persecution  no  doubt  produced  innumerable  instances  of  martyrdom
bravely  suffered  for  the  Catholic  faith,  but  it  was  disastrous  to  the  religious  life
of  the  country.  It  uprooted  the  Church  from  the  soil  of  France,  and  all  subse-
quent Governments  have  either  not  dared  or  not  cared  to  replant  it  deeply
enough.  The  restored  Church  having  no  longer  roots  in  its  own  country
was  forced  to  lean  upon  Rome,  and  upon  Rome  it  has  leaned  till  this  day.
But  the  schism  did  more  than  this;  friends  and  foes  alike  agree  that  it
wrecked  the  Revolution  ;  the  "  men  of  1789  "  may  have  been  driven  into  in-
tolerance against  their  wills,  but  they  were  driven  thither  ;  to  the  men  of  1792
and  1793  intolerance  was  the  very  breath  of  their  nostrils.  And  it  was  intoler-
ance that  ruined  the  Revolution :  yet  one  has  only  to  consider  the  methods  of
Government  of  the  Third  Republic  towards  the  Church  to  see  how  deeply
the  idea  is  rooted  in  France  that  intolerance  is  a  necessary  and  laudable  com-
plement of  democracy.  So  loudly  do  modern  French  "  statesmen  "  proclaim
this  creed  that  one  is  often  tempted  to  take  them  at  their  word,  and  to  be-
lieve it  to  be  true.

1  The  ordinary  date  given  for  the  dissolution  of  the  monasteries  is  this  earlier
one,  but  all  that  was  then  done  was  to  annul  the  obligation  of  vows,  and  to  disperse
the  monks  to  "  houses  which  shall  be  allotted  to  them,"  and  to  leave  such  nuns
as  wished  to  stay  where  they  were.  The  law  of  August,  1792,  forcibly  broke  up
all  religious  associations  and  confiscated  their  property  ;  including  that  of  the
charitable  corporations,  hospitals,  etc.


347


INDEX


[Books  quoted  in  the  notes  are  only  mentioned  once  in  the  Index]

Aachen,  tomb  of  Charlemagne  at,  I.,  ii  n. ;  Dumouriez  proposes  to  seize,

III.,  19,  20 ;  Provisional  Government  at.  III.,  230  n.
Abbaye,  prison  of  the,  Gardes-Fran^aises  imprisoned  at,  I.,  219;  murder  of

Swiss  officers  at,  II.,  262  n. ;  massacres  at,  303  n.,  304  and  n.
Academie  des  Sciences,  investigates  mesmerism,  I.,  67  and  «.
Academic  Frangaise,  Voltaire's  reception  at,  I.,  53  n. ;  attacked  by  Marat,  II.,

40.
Academies,  suppressed  by  Convention,  III.,  160  n.
Accaparement,  defined,  III.,  35  n.
Actes  des  Apotres,  I.,  121  n.,  II.,  289  n.
Adelaide,  Mme,  daughter  of  Louis  XV.  {see  also  '  Mesdames  de  France '),

notice  of,  I.,  23  and  n. ;  favours  Maurepas,  I.,  39  n. ;  distrusts  the  Queen,

41  n. ;  escapes  from  France,  II.,  60,  61.
Adelaide  of  Orleans,  Princess,  III.,  16  and  n.,  38  and  n.
Adelung,  *  Geschichte  der  menschlichen  Narrheit,'  I.,  64  n.
Administrative  system,  reconstructed,  I.,  361  and  n.
Administrative  tribunals.  III.,  293.
Aetius,  II.,  333.

Africaine,  French  frigate.  III.,  314-5.
Agents  Nationaux,  III.,  143  n.,  149  n.
Agiotage  {see  also  Stock  Exchange),  I.,  88  ;  *  Mirabeau's  Denonciation  de  VA.y

92,  95  ;  during  Terror,  113  and  «. ;  after  Thermidor,  223-4.
Agoult,  Marquis  d',  I.,  129,  131  and  n. ;  II.,  96  «.
Aides,  account  and  amount  of.  III.,  335  and  n. ;  abolition  of,  337  «.
Aides,  Cour  des,  registers  edicts  under  protest,  I.,  112  «. ;  its  duties.  III.,  286-7,

289.
Aiguillon,  Armand,  Due  d',  Minister  of  Louis  XV.,  in  troubles  in  Brittany,  I.,

4,  5,  6  and  n.
Aiguillon,  Armand,  Ducd',  son  of  the  above,  against  Feudal  Rights,  I.,  271  n.
Aire,  river,  II.,  119  n.  and  sqq,

Aisne,  protest  of  Department  of.  III.,  80  n.  ,

Aix-en-Provence,  Parlement  of,  L,  74'.  Mirabeau  represents  Tiers-Etat  of,

riots  at,  Garde  Boiirgeoise  at,    158   and  n. ;    Mirabeau   pleads  before

Parlement  of,   175;  riots  at  (1791),  II.,  53;    'White  Terror 'at,  III.,

239  n. ;    Parlement  and   Chambre  des  Comptes   of,  286 ;    Intendant  of,

288  n. ;  Archbishop  of,  344.
Aix,  tie  d',  *  Relation  de  ce  qu'ont  souffert  pour  la  Religion  les  pretres  dans

I'ile  d'A.',  III.,  200  and  n.
Aix-la-Chapelle.     See  Aachen.
Alais,  naval  college  at.  III.,  311.
Albignac,  General  d',  puts  down  second  Federation  of  Jales,  I.,  363  n. ;  II.,

187  n.


348  INDEX

Albitte,  A.  L.,  tried  for  his  conduct  in  Prairial,  III.,  245  n.

Alembert,  J.   le  R.  d',  philosophe,  hails  the  'Golden  Age,'  I.,  39;  favours

Lomenie,  99.
Alen9on,  petition  for  King's  deposition  from,  II.,  243.
Alexander,  British  ship.  III.,  314.

Aligre,  E.  F.  d'.  President,  I.,  105  n.,  107  ».,  131  ».,  132  n.
Allier,  Claude,  Cure  of  Chambonas,  I.,  363  n. ;  and  his  brother  Dominique,

II.,  187  n.
Allies,  dissensions  of  the,  III.,  64  n.
Alsace,  chateaux  burnt  in,  I.,  280;  Pichegru's  treason  in,  III.,  253  n. ;  taille

in,  334 ;  German  archdioceses  in,  342.
Amar,  J.  P.  A.,  reports  on  Girondists,  III.,  58  n.,  102  n. ;  in  Comite  de  Surete

Generale,  72  n.  ;  interrogates  Queen,  98  n. ;  notice  of,  145  and  n. ;  brings

Fouquier  a  letter,  181 ;  is  arrested,  237  n.
Amari,  '  Storia  della  Guerra  del  Vespro  Siciliano,'  II.,  318  n.
Ambigu,  L\  skit  of  Peltier,  II.,  289  11.
America,  revolts  from  England,  helped  by  France,  I.,  54-57  and  nn. ;  remains

at  peace  with  France,  II.,  402  w.;  federalism  in,  III.,  12  n. ;  wheat  sent

from,  157  n. ;  pours  goods  into  France,  159  n. ;  French  Army  in,  299,

300;  French  Navy  in,  310.
Ami  des  Citoyens  (Tallien's  paper),  I.,  373  n. ;  II.,  183  and  n.
Ami  des  Lois,  riot  at  performance  of,  II.,  361  n.,  385  and  n.
Ami  des  Soldats,  II.,  39  n.
Ami  du  Peuple,  account  of,  I.,  290  n. ;  on  Mirabeau  and  the  Court,  II.,  57  n. ;

suspects  the  King's  circular,  89  n. ;  called  journal  de  la  Republique,  281

and  n. ;  is  '  Memoire '  in  itself.  III.,  7  n. ;  used  in  evidence  against  Marat,

46  M.
Ami  du  Roi,  I.,  291  and  n.  ;  II.,  92,  183.
Amiens,  Lebon  tried  at,  III.,  220  n. ;  peace  of,  316.
Amiral  (or  Admiral),  H.,  attempts  to  kill  Collot,  III.,  188  and  n. ;  execution

of,  195.
Ampoule,  Riihl  smashes  the,  II.,  154  and  n.
Anaxagoras,  II.,  361  and  n.

Andoins,  d'.  Captain  in  Royal  Allemand,  II.,  114  sqq.
Angers,  will  help  Rennes,  I.,  156  and  n.  ;  threatened  by  Vendeans,  III.,  321,

323*  326.
Angerville,  continuator  of  Bachaumont,  I.,  73  n.
Angouleme,  Duchesse  d'.     See  Marie-Therese-Charlotte.
Anisson-Duperron,  Director  of  I mprimerie  Nationale,  II.,  281  n.
Anjou,  threatens  to  join  Brittany,  I.,  120  n.
Annales  Patriotiques  et  Litteraires,  I.,  291  and  n.

Annales  Politiques,  Carra's  newspaper,  approves  the  massacres,  II.,  372  m.
Annee  Litteraire,  I.,  384  n.
Annonay,  balloons  at,  I.,  66.

Anselme,  J.  B.  M.,  General,  takes  Nice,  II.,  345  ».
Antiboul,  trial  of.  III.,  103  n.  sqq.
Antraigues,  Comte  d',  pamphleteer,  notice  of,  I.,  147-8  and  n.  ;  at  Versailles.

183  and  n.
Antwerp,  conference  of  Allies  at,  II.,  41  n.  ;  English  driven  back  on,  162  ».
Aragon,  Mme  d',  niece  of  Mirabeau,  II.,  57  n.
Arblay,  Mme  d',  diary  of,  I.,  169  n.
Archeveche,  Committee  of  Districts  at  the,  I.,  288  n.  ;  Assembly  sits  for  three

weeks  in,  356  and  n. ;  Committee  oi  Sections  at.  III.,  27  n.,  48  and  n.,

53  and  n.  ;  secret  meetings  of  Jacobins  at,  235.


INDEX  349

Archives  Nationales,  III.,  i6o  n.

Arcis-sur-Aube,  Necker  nearly  stopped  at,  II.,  30;  Danton  in  retirement  at,
II.,  136  w. ;  III.,  172.

Ar9on,  engineer,  at  siege  of  Gibraltar,  I.,  59  n.

Aremberg.     See  Lamarck.

Argenson,  Marquis  d',  on  'La  Revolution,'  III.,  167  n.

Argonne,  strategic  importance  of,  II.,  293  ».,  297  and  n.,  330.

Arlandes,  Marquis  d',  aeronaut,  I.,  66  n.

Aries,  special  representation  of,  in  States-General,  I.,  152  n.  ;  Archbishop  of,
198  n. ;  riots  at,  II.,  159  ;  secret  society  at,  165  ;  '  White  Terror '  at.  III.,
239  n.

Armagnacs,  massacres  in  Paris  by  the,  II.,  319  and  n.

Army,  bad  condition  of  the,  II.,  184-5  and  n. ;  figures  of,  in  1795,  III.,  228  n. ;
history  of,  during  the  Revolution,  295  sqq.

Arnald,  'agitator,'  shot  in  England,  1647,  III.,  206  n.

Arnay-le-Duc,  '  Mesdames  de  France'  stopped  at,  II.,  61.

Arneth,  Ritter  von,  et  Geoffroy,  '  Correspondance  Secrete  entre  Marie-Th^rese
et  le  Comte  de  Mercy-Argenteau,'  I.,  42  n. ;  '  Maria  Theresia  und
Josef  II.,'  etc.,  56  n.

Arras,  Robespierre  born  at,  I.,  177 ;  Robespierre  educated  and  employed  at,
192  and  n. ;  *  Les  Horreurs  des  Prisons  d'A.,'  III.,  133  n. ;  Lebon  at,  ibid. ;
Conseil-Souverain  at,  286.

Arrondissements  of  Paris,  III.,  48  n.

Arsenal,  no  arms  found  at  the,  I.,  228  ;  Section  of  the,  II.,  237  n.

Artaud,  editor  of  Courrier  d' Avignon,  I.,  147  w.

Artillery,  state  of  the.  III.,  296,  303  «.

Artois,  taille  in  the  province  of.  III.,  334.

Artois,  Charles-Philippe,  Comte  d',  makes  the  Court  laugh,  I.,  33 ;  his  duel
with  Due  de  Bourbon,  his  wonderful  breeches,  notice  of,  42-3  and  n. ;  at
siege  of  Gibraltar,  59 ;  his  racing  stable,  employs  Marat,  64 ;  in  Notables,
92,  102;  comes  to  expunge  protest  of  Parlement,  112;  remonstrates
with  Queen,  139 ;  signs  memorial  to  King,  149  and  n.  ;  is  supposed  to
set  on  the  '  Brigands,'  160 ;  member  of  '  Court  Triumvirate,'  elected  to
States-General,  does  not  sit,  199 ;  his  colours  rejected  by  mob,  228  ;
emigrates,  252  and  n.  ;  mentions  the  '  Cause  of  Kings,'  343  n. ;  expected
to  help  Southern  Royalists,  363  n. ;  expected  to  invade  France,  40a  ;
kisses  Maury,  II.,  180;  sends  commission  to  Jales,  187;  supposed  to  be
in  Paris,  January,  1793,  393  ;  sends  an  agent  to  Lyons,  III.,  125  n.  ;  at
I'ile  d'Yeu,  232  «.,  325.

Artois,  Regiment  d\  refuses  to  obey  orders.  III.,  300.

Ashbee,  H.  S.,  '  Marat  en  Angleterre,'  I.,  68  n.

Aspirants,  naval  cadets.  III.,  311.

Assembly,  National  Constituent,  takes  its  title,  I.,  204  n. ;  appoints  com-
mittees, 205  and  n. ;  takes  oath  in  Tennis  Court,  207  and  n. ;  declares
itself  inviolable,  212;  petitions  on  behalf  of  mutineers,  220  ». ;  demands
withdrawal  of  troops,  regrets  Necker,  decrees  Seance  Permanente,  232-3  ;
receives  King  well,  250;  sends  deputation  to  Paris,  251  andw.  ;  method
of  its  work,  268  n. ;  attitude  of,  on  Oct.  5th,  313  ;  receives  deputation
of  women,  319  ;  is  invaded  by  women,  325  ;  question  of  its  loyalty,  327  n. ;
discusses  penal  code,  332  ;  adjourns,  333 ;  resolves  to  follow  King  to
Paris,  342-3 ;  diplomatic  committee  of,  358  n. ;  '  heavy-laden,'  363  ;
King  visits,  394 ;  renews  Tennis-Court  oath,  395  ;  sanctions  plan  for
Federation,  409 ;  at  the  Federation,  423  ;  wears  black  for  Franklin,  425  ;
decrees  new  military  oath,  II.,  5  ». ;  appoints  Inspectors  of  Regiments,


350  INDEX

lo  n.,  14 ;  prohibits  clubs  in  Army,  14 ;  orders  mutineers  to  submit,  i8,  19  ;
desires    King  to    change    Ministry,   30   n.  ;    debate   on   emigration   of

*  Mesdames  de  France,'  61 ;  Comitc  de  Surveillance  of,  85  n. ;  takes  away
King's  right  of  pardon,  gi  n. ;  votes  at  news  of  King's  flight,  103  and  n.,
104,  128  ;  not  RepubHcan  in  June,  lygi,  131  and  n. ;  votes  on  the  King's
enlevement,  133  and  n. ;  amnesty  at  end  of,  136-7  and  w.,  140  ;  dissolution
of,  144  ;  its  mistaken  votes  on  the  Army,  III.,  304-5  ;  its  mistaken  votes  on
the  Navy,  311,  314 ;  its  financial  mistakes,  333,  337 ;  refuses  to  listen  to
Necker,  336 ;  exceeds  promised  limit  of  Assignats,  339  and  n. ;  its
Ecclesiastical  Committee,  343 ;  cleared  from  charge  of  impiety  or
persecution,  345.

Assembly,  Legislative,  elections  to,  II.,  142 ;  to  begin  at  once,  144 ;  suffers
from  the  '  self-denying  ordinance,'  148  ;  composition  of,  149  and  n. ;  de-
nounces Ministers,  156 ;  Diplomatic  Committee  of,  171  n. ;  Comite  de
Sxirveillance  of,  176  n. ;  votes  to  print  Lafayette's  letter,  213  n. ;  sends
deputation  to  King,  218  ;  receives  Lafayette  well,  221  n. ;  declares  Patrie
en  danger,  226  n. ;  acquits  Lafayette,  232  n.,  245 ;  orders  Tuileries
Garden  to  be  opened,  238 ;  thinly  attended  on  Aug.  loth,  252-3  and  «.,
266  n. ;  King  flies  to  the,  257  and  n. ;  at  mercy  of  Commune,  276  ;  dis-
solves Commune,  but  reinstates  it,  288  n. ;  does  nothing  to  stop
massacres,  314,  324  n. ;  mismanages  Army,  III.,  306  ;  continues  destruc-
tion of  Navy,  312;  puts  dockyards  under  civilians,  315;  increases  out-
put of  Assignats,  339  ;  persecutes  priests,  345-6.

Assignats,  first  appearance  of,  I.,  360  and  n. ;  fresh  creation  of,  II.,  30  n. ;
forgery  of,  182  and  n. ;  over-issue  of,  184 ;  state  of,  October,  1792,
358  n. ;  Belgium  flooded  with,  368  w. ;  ludicrous  depreciation  of,  III.,
235  and  «.,  339,  340-1 ;  demonetisation  of,  334,  339,  340-1.

AstrcBa  Redux,  Dryden's  poem,  I.,  35  n.

Atheism,  statue  of,  burnt.  III.,  192  «.

Attila,  II.,  274,  333.

Aubenas,  '  Histoire  de  Josephine,'  III.,  114  n.

Aubert,  F.,  '  Le  Parlement  de  Paris  de  Philippe-le-Bel  a  Charles  VII.,
'  Histoire  du  Parlement  de  Paris  de  I'Origine  a  Fran9ois  ler,'  HI.,
279.

Aubert-du-Bayet,  J.  B.  A.,  defends  Mainz,  III.,  21  n.

Aubriot,  orderly  of  the  Due  de  Choiseul,  II.,  124.

Aubry,  Colonel,  breaks  up  the  camp  of  Jales,  II.,  187.

Aubry,  F.,  in  Comite  de  Salut  Public,  1795,  HL,  219  ».

Aubry,  Mdlle,  '  Goddess  of  Reason,'  HI.,  138  w.

Auckland,  Lord,  on  situation  in  July,  1789, 1.,  227  n. ;  promises  English  help
to  Holland,  II.,  401  n.

Augeard,  J.  M,,  Royalist  plotter,  I.,  366.

Auguie,  Mme,  arrested  for  having  assisted  Queen,  II.,  266  n.

Auguste,  French  ship,  renamed  jacobin,  HI.,  316.

Aulard,  F.  A.,  '  Orateurs  de  I'Assemblee  Constituante,'  I.,  178  «. ;  '  Orateurs
de  la  Legislative  et  de  la  Convention,'  294  n. ;  '  La  Societe  des  Jacobins,'
389  n. ;  '  Recueil  des  documents  relatifs  au  Club  Jacobin,'  II.,  16  n. ;

•  Recueil  des  Actes  et  Monuments  du  Comite  de  Salut  Public,'  279  n. ;
'  fitudes  sur  la  Revolution,'  325  n. ;  his  strange  ideas  on  liberty  of
worship,  HI.,  142  ;  on  Civil  Constitution  of  Clergy,  344.

Aumale,  residence  of  Due  de  Penthievre,  II.,  108  n.

Aumont,  le  Due  d',  refuses  proffered  command  of  National  Guard,  I.,  227  n.
Austria,  fears  expressed  of,  II.,  14 ;  France  declares  war  on,  204-5  ;  means
to  keep  Conde  and  Valenciennes,  III.,  81 ;    fails  to  help   England  at


INDEX  351

Toulon,  go  n. ;  utterly  ignores  French  Royal  Family,  98  n. ;  evacuates

Belgium,  162  n. ;  will  continue  to  fight,  230  and  n.
•Austrian  Committee,'  II.,  85,  156,  176  and  «.
Autel  de  la  Patrie,  I.,  410  n.,  421  sqq. ;  II.,  134-5  >  ^m  85  and  n.
Autichamp,  J.  F.  Marquis  d',  expected  to  send  help  to  Lyons,  III.,  gi  and  w.,

125  and  n.
Autichamp,  C.  Comte  d',  son  of  the  above,  holds  out  in  Vendee,  III.,  231  n.
Autun,  Dampmartin  at,  II.,  41.

Auvergne,  Regiment  d\  in  America,  III.,  299  ;  becomes  I7nie  Infanterie,  304.
Auxerre,  Revolutionary  Army  frightened  at,  III.,  142.
Avenel,  G.,  'A.  Clootz,  I'orateur  du  genre  humain,'  I.,  379  «.
Avignon,  civil  war  in,  I.,  363  ;  riots  at,  II.,  53  ;  union  with  France,  143,  161 ;

account  of,   143  n. ;    civil  war  in,   159  and  n.  and  sqq. ;    amnesty  to

murderers  at,  164-5  andn. ;  Jourdan  continues  his  career  at.  III.,  125  n. ;

the  '  White  Terror  '  at,  238  n.
Avocat-General,  III.,  282.
Avocats,  Corporation  of,  III.,  282.

Babeau,  A.,  '  L'Ecole  pendant  la  Revolution,'  III.,  166  n. ;  '  Le  Parlement  de
Paris  a  Troyes,'  I.,  no  n. ;  '  Le  Village  sous  I'Ancien  Regime,'  I.,  18  n.

Baboeuf,  F.  N.,  notice  of.  III.,  112  and  n.

Bacharach,  Brunswick  crosses  Rhine  at.  III.,  21  n.

Bachaumont,  '  Memoires  Secrets,'  on  Turgot,  I.,  38  n. ;  account  of,  73  and  n.

Bacon,  Lord,  '  Essay  of  Seditions  and  Troubles,'  III.,  2.

Bacourt,  '  Correspondance  entre  le  Comte  de  Mirabeau  at  le  Comte  de  la
Marck,'  I.,  371  n.

Bacs  {see  also  Feudal  Rights),  I.,  276  n.

Baden,  Margraf  of,  complains  to  Diet,  II.,  179  n.

•  Badinguet,'  nickname  of  Napoleon  III.,  I.,  119  n.

Bagatelle,  d'Artois'  villa,  I.,  253.

Bailie,  P.,  his  epigram,  II.,  197.

Bailleul,  J.  C,  one  of  the  '  Seventy-three  protesters,'  III.,  80.

Bailliages,  or  Electoral  districts,  I.,  153  and  n. ;  origin  of,  III.,  289.

Bailliages,  Grands,  to  be  substituted  for  Parlements,  I.,  125  sqq. ;  complete
failure  of,  132,  134.

Baillis,  origin  and  history  of  the,  III.,  289-90.

Bailly,  A.,  '  Histoire  Financiere  de  la  France,'  III.,  331.

Bailly,  Jean  Sylvain,  reports  against  Mesmer,  I.,  67  and  n. ;  conduct  in
office,  155  n. ;  alters  arrangement  of  Hall  of  States-General,  166  n. ;
likes  costume  of  Tiers-^tat,  167  n. ;  notice  of,  i8i  and  n.  ;  on  Petition,
195  «. ;  to  be  President  of  National  Assembly,  204 ;  in  Tennis  Court,
206  sqq. ;  eloquence  of,  213  ;  anxiety  of,  222-3  nn. ;  to  be  Maire  of  Paris,
251 ;  resigns  and  resumes  office,  259,  260 ;  on  '  Rights  of  Man,'  270  n. ;
his  gilt  coach,  287;  on  Oct.  5th,  315;  harangues  the  King,  347;  seals
up  door  of  Parlement,  361;  unwilling  to  use  ^  Loi  Martiale,''  370-1;
swears  in  the  multitude,  395  ;  at  work  on  Champ-de-Mars,  417 ;  re-
elected Maire,  429  w. ;  at  funeral  mass  of  Bouille's  troops,  II.,  29;
demands  change  of  Ministry,  58  ;  is  informed  of  escape  of  King,  96  n. ;
at  '  massacre '  of  Champ-de-Mars,  136  and  n. ;  his  farewell  speech  as
Maire,  195  and  n.,  196;  in  prison.  III.,  97  and  n. ;  called  as  witness  on
Queen's  trial,  99  and  n. ;  execution  of,  119  and  n.

Bale,  Bishop  of,  complains  to  Diet,  II.,  179  n. ;  Treaties  of  Peace  signed  at,
III.,  153  and  «.,  157  and  n.,  230  n.,  231  and  n.

Balleydier,  '  Histoire  du  peuple  de  Lyon,'  III.,  91  n.


352  INDEX

Balloons,  invention  and  use  of,  i,  66  and  n. ;  at  battle  of  Fleurus,  III.,  162

and  n.
Banalites  {see  also  Feudal  Rights),  I.,  276  n.
Bancal  des  Issarts,  J.  H.,  sent  to  arrest  Dumouriez,  arrested  himself,  III.,

38-9  nn.
Bankruptcy,  probable  in  1783,  I.,  85 ;  colossal  in  1797,  III.,  341.
Bannes,  Castle  of,  surrendered,  II.,  187  n.
Baptiste,  turnkey  at  Abbaye,  II.,  309.
Barbantane,  P.  F.  H.  Puget  Marquis  de,  General  in  Eastern  Pyrenees,  III.,

153  «.

'  Barbarossa,'  Frederick,  buried  at  Salzburg,  I.,  11  n.

Barbaroux,  C.  J.  M.,  Marat's  remark  to,  notice  of,  I.,  369  and  n. ;  comes  to
Paris,  II.,  165-6  and  n.;  discusses  resistance,  213  ;  sends  for  Marseillais,
214 ;  his  plans  for  attack  on  Tuileries,  231  w.,  240  and  n, ;  Marat  appeals
to,  238-9  and  w.;  a  Republican,  265  w. ;  in  the  Convention,  327;  on
departmental  guard,  354 ;  denounces  Robespierre,  357 ;  votes  death  of
King,  391  n. ;  is  miserable  and  angry,  III.,  19  ;  is  proscribed,  58  ;  escapes,
61 ;  sees  C.  Corday,  65  ;  Marat  condemns  him  to  death,  67 ;  in  flight,
77  sqq. ;  at  sea,  92  ;  last  days  of,  105-6-7  and  n.

Barbotin,  Vendean  priest.  III.,  321.

Bardy,  I'Abb^  Louis,  massacred,  II.,  309.

Barentin,  C.  L.  F.  de  P.,  garde-des-sceaux,  I.,  143  n. ;  against  double  Tiers-
Etat,  152  n. ;  speech  at  opening  of  States- General,  189  and  n. ;  to  preside
over  conferences  of  Orders,  203  ;  chagrin  of,  208  ;  at  Seance  Royale,  his
controversy  with  Necker,  209  and  n. ;  in  hiding,  II.,  50  n.

Barere,  or  Barrere,  Bertrand,  edits  Point-du-Jotir,  I.,  201  n. ;  journalist,  291
and  n. ;  notice  of,  384  w. ;  in  Convention,  II.,  348  ;  on  first  Constitutional
Committee,  349  n. ;  commences  weathercock,  371 ;  presides  at  King's
interrogatories,  377  and  n. ;  his  '  Memoires,'  III.,  7  w. ;  sent  to  Lyons,
14  n. ;  peacemaker  and  liar,  17,  18 ;  on  first  Comite  de  Salut  Public,
34  «. ;  on  Maximum,  35  n. ;  reads  report  on  June  ist,  54  n. ;  suggests
withdrawal  of  Girondin  leaders,  56 ;  reads  report  of  June  2nd,  59  n. ;  on
second  Comite  de  Salut  Public,  71  «. ;  on  second  Constitutional  Com-
mittee, 82  n.  ;  on  Levee-en-masse,  93  ;  moves  trial  of  Queen,  98  n. ;
declares  '  Terror '  the  order  of  the  day,  108  n.  ;  his  bon  mot  about
'coining  money,'  122  ;  on  the  advantage  of  killing  prisoners,  128  and
n. ;  reports  fall  of  Toulon,  130;  on  saltpetre,  151  n. ;  on  the  Vengeur,
158  and  n. ;  is  rallied  by  Desmoulins,  173  n. ;  against  Danton,  177  n. ;
draws  report  on  C.  Th^ot,  201  and  n. ;  at  Clichy,  203  and  n. ;  moves
arrest  of  Vilate,  204  n. ;  wavering  on  9th  Thermidor,  209  n. ;  apologises
to  Paine,  213  n. ;  remains  Terrorist,  217  n. ;  proposes  to  fill  up  Comite,
219  n. ;  denunciation  of,  233-4  ^'  j  transportation  of,  ordered,  235-6-7 ;
on  extinction  of  La  Vendee,  322.

Barnave,  A.  P.  J.  M.,  Secretary  to  jfacobins,  notice  of,  I.,  133  and  n. ;  his
vehemence,  179,  197 ;  his  mot  on  Berthier,  259 ;  trenchant  speaker,
356-7 ;  moves  home-rule  for  San  Domingo,  364  n. ;  at  jfacobins,  389,
II.,  42  ;  in  Assembly,  46  ;  fights  duel,  49  and  n. ;  forms  Feuillants  Club,
85  n. ;  appointed  to  escort  king  to  Paris,  128  sqq. ;  opposes  Robespierre,
131  w. ;  on  Committee  of  Revision,  138  and  n. ;  will  stay  in  Paris,  147  ;
sneers  at  new  Assembly,  149  ;  advises  King  to  stick  by  Constitution,  171 ;
urges  King  to  establish  Maison  Civile,  192 ;  retires  to  Grenoble,  203  ;
imprisoned  there,  282  n. ;  his  '  treason '  revealed  by  Iron  Press,  374 ;
execution  of,  III.,  120  and  n.

Barras,  family  of,  I.,  189  n.


INDEX  353

Barras,  P.  F.  Comte  de,  notice  of,  II.,  329 ;  supports  war  of  propaganda,
383  n. ;  his  *  Mdmoires,'  III.,  7 ;  at  siege  of  Toulon,  8g,  129  n. ;  his
savagery,  124 ;  in  danger,  202 ;  swears  to  attack  Robespierre,  207  n.  ;
on  gth  Thermidor,  2u  sqq.  nn.;  leader  of  new  Society,  224;  relations
with  Napoleon,  225  and  n.  ;  at  Vendemidire,  254-5  and  n.

Barras,  French  ship  renamed  Pegase  and  Hoche,  III.,  316.

Barriers  of  Paris,  burnt,  I.,  227  and  w. ;  shut  after  Aug.  loth,  II.,  283  and  n.

Barthelemy,  E.,  •  Mesdames  de  France  filles  de  Louis  XV,'  I.,  23  n.

Barthelemy,  F.,  twice  offered  the  Foreign  Office,  II.,  170  n. ;  ambassador  in
Switzerland,  402  n. ;  negotiator  at  Bslle,  III.,  231  «.

Bassompierre,  Mar^chal  de,  I.,  377.

'  Bastide,'  corruption  of  the  name  into  Bastille,  I.,  165  n.

Bastide-de-Malbos,  Royalist  leader  in  South,  I.,  363  n.

Bastide,  Abbe  de  la,  nephew  of  above,  I.,  363  n. ;  II.,  187  n.

Bastille,  notice  of,  I.,  165  and  n. ;  talk  of  demolishing,  201  n. ;  authorities
for  siege  of,  221-2  n. ;  siege  of,  239  sqq.  and  nn. ;  surrendered  on  parole,
245  ;  "  heroes  "  of,  247  ;  prisoners  of,  248  ;  demolition  ordered,  251  n. ;
carried  out,  260  n. ;  dances  on  ruins  of,  Cagliostro's  •  prophecy '  of,
426  n. ;  a  dancing  ground,  II.,  62.

Bastille  devoilee  (Linguet),  I.,  73.

Batz,  Baron  J.  de,  his  plot  for  rescuing  King,  notice  of,  II.,  397  n. ;  some  of
his  agents  caught,  III.,  189  n.

Baudin,  P.  C.  L.,  on  Constitutional  Committee  of  1795,  III.,  251  «.,  252  n.

Bayle,  M.,  in  Comite  de  Surete  Generale,  III.,  72  n. ;  expelled  from  Marseilles,
73  n.

Bayonne,  Revolutionary  Army  at,  III.,  22  n.

Bayou,  or  Baillou,  aide-de-camp  to  Lafayette,  II.,  105  ».,  125  n.

Bazire,  C,  attorney,  I.,  374  ;  notice  of,  II.,  153  and  n. ;  proposes  an  Opposi-
tion, III.,  147  and  n. ;  in  prison,  171 ;  Danton  treated  as  accomplice  of,
178.

Bazoche,  account  of,  I.,  log  n.;  rejoices  over  Lom^nie's  fall,  142 ;  clerks  of  the,
237  ;  Roi  de  B.,  II.,  129  and  n. ;  corporation  of,  III.,  283.

Beaucaire,  camp  proposed  at,  II.,  165  ;  petition  for  King's  deposition  from,
243  ;  Le  SoHper  de  B.    See  Napoleon.

Beauchesne,  M.  de,  'Vie  de  Louis  XVII,'  III.,  102  n. ;  'Vie  de  Mme  Elisa-
beth,' 185  n.

Beauharnais,  Alexandre  Vicomte  de,  at  work  on  Champ-de-Mars,  I.,  417 ;
presides  at  Fete-Dieu,  II.,  104  n. ;  execution  of,  notice  of,  III.,  121  and  n.

Beauharnais,  Hortense  de,  pupil  of  Mme  Campan,  I.,  16  n.

Beauharnais,  Josephine  de,  in  prison,  III.,  114  n. ;  in  Society,  224-5  ^^^  ^•

Beaujolais,  chateaux  burnt  in  the,  I.,  280.

Beaulieu,  A.  F.,  his  journal.  III.,  197  n.

Beaumarchais,  P.  A.  Caron  de,  notice  of,  I.,  54  and  n. ;  his  '  Mariage  de
Figaro,' 77-8 ;  imports  arms  from  Holland,  II.,  284;  imprisoned,  290;
escapes,  reimprisoned,  292 ;  'L'Incarceration  de  B.,'  III.,  196  n.

Beaumetz,  B.  A.  B.  Chevalier  de,  on  Committee  of  Revision,  II.,  138  «.

Beaumont,  Christophe  de,  Archbishop  of  Paris,  I.,  22  and  n.,  24,  48.

Beaurepaire,  N.  J.,  Commander  at  Verdun,  II.,  286  and  n. ;  suicide  of,  294
and  n.,  295.

Beauvais,  B,  Lesterp,  tried  with  other  Girondins,  III.,  103  n.

Bee  d'Ambes,  III.,  92.

Bedouin,  town  burnt  by  Maignet,  III.,  133.

Belfort,  Necker's  reception  at,  I.,  284;  riots  at,  II.,  53;  'gate  of  B.,'  II.,
109.
VOL.  III.  23


354  INDEX

Belgium,  Leopold  suppressing  revolt  in,  II.,  14  n. ;  revolutionary  propaganda
in,  53  n. ;  Convention  Commissioners  sent  to,  368  and  n. ;  union  with
France  voted,  III.,  20  n, ;  immensity  of  spoils  from,  159  n.

Bellegarde,  taken  by  Spain,  III.,  22  n. ;  retaken,  153  h.,  231  n.

Bellevue,  residence  of  '  Mesdames  de  France,'  II.,  60.

Belloc,  Hilaire,  •'  Danton  :  a  study,"  I.,  294  n.

Belzunce,  Colonel  de,  killed  at  Caen,  III.,  65.

Benoit,  P.  G.,  executed.  III.,  238  n.

Bentham,  J.,  naturalised,  II.,  278.

Bequart,  an  Invalide  at  Bastille,  I.,  244  n. ;  massacred,  246  n,

Berchigny,  Regiment  de,  III.,  38-40.

Bergasse,  Nicolas,  believes  in  Mesmer,  I.,  67  and  n. ;  in  first  Constitutional
Committee,  262  n. ;  contributor  to  Actes  des  Apotres,  II.,  289  n.

Bergoeing,  F.,  on  Commission  of  Twelve,  III.,  47  n. ;  in  flight  to  the  West,
78  sqq.  and  n.

Berlier,  T.,  on  second  Constitutional  Committee,  III.,  82  n. ;  on  Constitu-
tional Committee,  1795,  251  n.

Berlin,  Mirabeau's  journey  to,  I.,  191  n. ;  treaty  of,  II.,  179  n.

Berline,  the  coach  in  which  the  royal  family  fled,  II.,  96  sqq.  and  nn.

Bernard,  C,  notice  of,  II.,  396  n.

Bernay  (Bernaie),  Momoro  nearly  hanged  at,  II.,  279  n.

Bernis,  F.  J.  Cardinal  de,  '  Memoires'  of,  I.,  27  and  n. ;  his  hostility  to  the
Revolution,  III.,  344-5.

Berruyer,  Republican  Commander  in  Vendee,  III.,  326.

Berthier  (or  Bertier),  de  Sauvigny,  L.  B.  F.,  Intendant  of  Paris,  notice  of,  I.,
87  and  n. ;  massacred,  258-9.

Berthier,  P.  A.  (afterwards  Marshal),  at  Versailles,  II.,  61  and  n.

Berthollet,  C.  L.  Comte  de,  chemist,  I.,  67.

Bertin,  G.,  '  Mme  de  Lamballe  d'apres  des  documents  inedits,'  II.,  108  n.

Bertrand-l'Hodiesniere,  C.  A.,  member  of  Commission  of  Twelve,  III.,  47  n.

Bertrand-Molevile,  A.  F.  de,  '  Memoires  Particuliers,'  I.,  60  n. ;  Intendant
of  Brittany,  132-3  and  n. ;  counterfeits  La  Sentinelle,  385  and  n. ;  on
'Austrian  Committee,'  arrests  Carra,  II.,  85  n. ;  denounced  by  Brestois,
170;  notice  of,  171  and  n. ;  his  schemes,  172-3  nn.;  on  d'Orleans,  174;
his  hostility  to  Narbonne,  193  n. ;  faces  the  Assembly,  194-5  5  secret
adviser  of  King,  213 ;  on  King's  hesitation,  224  n. ;  at  last  levee,  244 ;
decreed  accused,  282-3  nn. ;  on  the  weather,  288 ;  his  schemes  revealed,
375  n. ;  writes  a  defence  of  King,  378  n.

Besan9on,  Parlement  of,  I.,  74,  134,  156;  III.,  286.

Besenval,  P.  V.  Baron  de,  his  'Memoires,'  I.,  4  n. ;  on  Louis  XV.'s  death,
24,  32 ;  and  funeral,  33 ;  finds  the  Court  triste,  notice  of,  83-4  n. ;  on
Calonne,  94-5,  97  ;  conversation  with  Queen,  120-1 ;  bitter  against  Court,
124;  anxious  about  treasury,  138;  on  Necker,  140- 1 ;  as  Commandant
of  Paris,  143 ;  on  '  Brigands,'  160  and  n. ;  employs  force  at  Reveillon
riot,  162  sqq. ;  awkward  position  on  '  Bastille  days,'  217  sqq.  \  leaves
Paris,  249  ;  his  story  of  King's  impatience,  276.

Bessieres,  J.  B.,  officer  in  Volunteers,  II.,  185  n.

Bethune,  bread-riot  at,  I.,  218.

Beugnot,  J.  C,  in  Legislative  Assembly,  II.,  149  ».

Beurnonville,  J.  P.,  Minister  of  War,  II.,  358  n. ;  arrested  by  Dumouriez,
III.,  38-9  nn. ;  replaced  by  Bouchotte,  42  n. ;  his  bad  administration,
64  n.

Beysser,  J.  M.,  General,  defeated  by  Vendeans,  III.,  322.

Bibliotkeque-du-Roi,  at  Paris,  I.,  12 ;  Section  of.  Royalist,  II.,  237  n.


INDEX  355

Bicetre,  I.,  8  and  n. ;  massacres  at,  II.,  303  and  n.

Biens  Nationaux,  III,,  338.

Bilbao,  Fall  of,  III.,  153  n.

Billaud-Varennes,  J.  N.,  notice  of,  II.,  195  ;  in  jfacobin  Club,  igg ;  welcomes
the  Marseillais,  243  ;  on  Aug.  loth,  249,  250  n.;  prepares  the  massacres,
300;  encourages  the  murderers,  315;  in  Convention,  327  n. ;  proposes
new  Great  Seal,  338  n. ;  on  King's  trial,  382  ;  in  Comite  de  Salut  Public,
III.,  71 ;  his  duties  there,  74  n. ;  moves  for  a  Revolutionary  Army,  93  n.;
protects  Ronsin  and  Rossignol,  122  «.;  'cloud-compeller,'  145;  arrests
Houchard's  staff,  149  n.  ;  his  breeches,  i66  n. ;  against  Danton,  175  n. ;
on  'plot  in  prisons,'  181  n. ;  finds  Robespierre  a  bore,  193  ;  his  attitude
at  Thermidor,  200  n.,  204-5  ».,  209  n. ;  remains  Terrorist,  227  n. ;  opposes
abolition  of  Tribunal,  219  w. ;  expects  to  dominate  Jacobins,  221  n. ;
denunciation  of,  233  and  n. ;  transportation  and  end  of,  235-6-7  and  n.,
245.

Bimbenet,  '  Fuite  de  Louis  XVI  a  Varennes  d'apres  des  documents  judi-
ciaires,'  II.,  90  n.

*  Biographic  des  Ministres,*  II.,  184.

'  Biographic  Univcrselle,'  notice  of,  I.,  45  n. ;  Nouvelle  Biographie  Generale,
ibid.

Bire,  E.,  '  Legende  des  Girondins,'  II.,  155  n.

Birmingham,  Priestley  riot  at,  II.,  178.

Biron,  L.  A.  de  G.  Due  de,  Mar^chal,  Commandant  of  Paris,  dies,  I.,  144
and  n.

Biron,  A.  L.  de  G.  Due  de,  nephew  of  the  above,  accompanies  Talleyrand
to  London,  II.,  146  ;  occupies  Quievrain  and  retreats,  209  n. ;  denounced
in  Convention,  III.,  64  n. ;  executed,  notice  of,  121  n. ;  on  bad  quality
of  Volunteers,  306 ;  his  success  in  La  Vendee,  322 ;  his  opinion  on  La
Vendee,  326.

Biroteau,  J.  B.,  sent  to  Chartres,  II.,  362  n. ;  refugee  in  Lyons,  III.,  91  n.

Bishops,  numbers  of.  III.,  342,  3  ;  election  of,  342  and  sqq.

Bitche,  mutiny  of  garrison  at,  II.,  13.

Blad,  Convention  Commissioner  at  Quiberon,  III.,  232  n.

Blanc-Gilli,  on  the  Marseillais,  II.,  229  and  n.

Blanchelande,  P.  F.  R.,  General,  guillotined.  III.,  95.

Blankenberg,  Chateau  de,  III.,  122,  125  n,

Blcus,  in  old  Royal  Navy,  III.,  311.

Blois,  a  Chambre  des  Comptes  at.  III.,  286.

Boarhounds  (sec  also  Vautrait),  suppressed,  I.,  83  and  n.,  120.

Bocage,  in  Vendee,  III.,  320.

Bodley,  J.  E.  C,  '  France,'  III.,  329.

Boehmer,  a  Mainz  Radical,  III.,  21  n.

Bohmer  et  Bassange,  Court  jewellers,  I.,  75  n.

Boileau,  J.,  votes  King's  death,  II.,  391  n. ;  on  Commission  of  Twelve,  III.,
47  n.  ;  arrest  of,  58  and  n.  ;  trial  of,  103  n.

Boishardi,  Chouan  chief,  arrested,  III.,  325.

Bois-le-Duc,  Pichegru  takes.  III.,  229  n.

Boisset,  S.  de.  Convention  Commissioner,  expelled  from  Marseilles,  III.,

73  «.

Boissy  d'Anglas,  F.  A.,  'Vie  de  Malesherbes,'  I.,  48  ;  notice  of,  123  and  n. ;
Convention  Commissioner  to  Lyons,  III.,  14  n.  ;  re-elected  on  Comite  de
Salut  Public,  219  n.  ;  firmness  on  ist  Prairial,  242,  244  n.  ;  on  Constitu-
tional Committee  of  1795,  251  n.

Boiteau,  •  Etat  de  France  en  1789,'  III.,  279.


356  INDEX

BoUer^don,  M.,  denounces  a  manufacturer  of  false  Assignats,  II.,  182  n.

Bollman,  Dr.,  assists  at  escape  of  Narbonne,  II.,  288  and  n.

Bombardiers  Marins,  III.,  312.

Bonaparte,  Louis,  shares  Napoleon's  room  at  Auxonne,  II.,  9  and  n.

Bonaparte,  Napoleon.     See  Napoleon.

Bonchamp,  C.  M.  A.  de,  Vendean  leader,  II.,  285  ;  killed  at  Chollet,  III.,
322.

Bonconseil  {see  also  Mauconseil),  Section  of,  III.,  27  and  ».,  43  and  ».,  47.

Bondet,  Capitaine,  at  Pont-Sommevesle,  II.,  109  n.

Bondy,  first  stage  out  of  Paris,  II.,  100  and  n.,  109  n.

Bon-Homme-Richard,  privateer,  I.,  378.

Bonnemere,  Aubin,  at  siege  of  Bastille,  I.,  240;  saves  a  lady,  242.

Bonne-Savardin,  Royalist  plotter,  I.,  366.

Bonnet-Rouge,  origin  of  the,  I.,  423  n. ;  II.,  204,

Bon-Saint-Andre.     See  Saint-Andre.

Bordeaux,  Parlement  of,  I.,  134,  III.,  286;  address  to  Convention  from,
III.,  II  n. ;  signs  of  revolt  in,  13,  45;  in  favour  of  Girondists,  47  n. ;
insurrection  at,  62,  74,  76  n. ;  triumph  of  Convention  at,  92  ;  Terror
thwarting  victory  at,  148  ».

Bosc,  editor  of  Mme  Roland's  M^moires,  I.,  404  n.

Boston,  '  tea  party'  at,  I.,  11.

Bouche  de  Fer,  Fauchet's  paper,  II.,  44  n.

Bouchotte,  J.  B.  N.,  as  War  Minister,  III.,  52  n.,  64  ». ;  disorganises  armies,
155  ». ;  a  H^bertist,  170  n.

Bougeart,  '  Vie  de  Marat,'  I.,  67  ;  '  Vie  de  Danton,'  294.

Bouille,  Charles,  son  of  the  Marquis,  in  command  at  Varennes,  II.,
119  n. sqq.

Bouille,  F.  C.  A.  Marquis  de,  in  American  War,  I.,  5j  n.;  '  Memoires  sur
la  Revolution  Fran^aise,'  182  n. ;  suspected  by  mob,  300-1 ;  King  thinks
of  flight  to  his  Army,  393  ;  notice  of,  II.,  i  n. ;  opinions  of,  2-3  ;  on
effect  of  Feast  of  Pikes  on  Army,  11-12  ;  faces  and  puts  down  mutiny  at
Nancy  and  elsewhere,  16  sqq.  and  nn.  ;  returns  to  Metz,  33  ;  on  chances  of
King's  escape,  53  «.,  58-60;  at  Mirabeau's  funeral,  79;  correspondence
with  King,  84,  90  n.  ;  his  action  at  the  period  of  the  flight,  94  sqq.  and  nn. ;
emigrates,  126;  to  be  prosecuted,  131  n. ;  assists  Brunswick  in  planning
campaign,  209  n.  ;  on  the  effect  of  the  Federations,  III.,  302.

Bouille,  Louis,  son  of  the  Marquis,  *  Memoire  sur  le  depart  de  Louis  XVI,'
II.,  90  n.

Bourbon,  L.  J.  Due  de,  afterwards  Prince  de  Conde,  fights  duel  with  d'Artois,
I.,  43  and  n.

Bourbon,  Louise  Duchesse  de,  wife  of  the  above,  duel  about  her,  I.,  43  and  n.

Bourbons,  genealogical  table  of  the,  I.,  25  ;  proposed  proscription  of  all  the,
II.,  307;  III.,  98  n.

Bourbotte,  P.,  organiser  of  insurrection  of  Prairial,  III.,  242  n.  ;  execution
of,  245  n.

Bourdon,  F.  L.  (de  I'Oise),  attorney,  I.,  374  ;  suspends  Rossignol,  III.,  122  n. ;
has  H^ron  arrested,  175  «.  ;  grumbles  at  Robespierre,  192 ;  protests
against  Law  of  22nd  Prairial,  195  n. ;  in  danger,  202.

Bourdon,  Leonard,  on  Aug.  loth,  II.,  250  n. ;  notice  of.  III.,  96  and  n. ;
•  Le  Tombeau  des  Imposteurs,'  138  «. ;  demands  renewal  of  Comite,
144  n. ;  proposes  national  orphanages,  160  n.  ;  presents  Merda  to  Con-
vention, 215  n.  ;  arrested,  237  n.

Bourg-Baudoin,  Roland  found  dead  at.  III.,  119.

Bourg-la-Reine,  Condorcet  taken  to,  III.,  187.


INDEX  357

Bourgeoisie,  cowardice  of  the,  III.,  130  n.

Bourges,  suppleans  to  meet  at,  III.,  11  and  n, ;  pragtrtatic  sanction  of,  284.

Bourget,  Le,  II.,  loi  and  w.

Bourgoing,  J.  F.  de,  French  ambassador  in  Spain,  II.,  313  n.,  402  «.

Bournon,  F.,  '  La  Bastille,  Hist,  et  description  de  ses  batiments,'  I.,  165  w.

Bourse,  situation  of  the,  I.,  88  «. ;  closed  during  Terror,  III.,  113  n. ;  re-
opened, 235  and  «. ;  closed  again  in  Prairial,  244  n.

Boursin  et  Challamel,  '  Dictionnaire  de  la  Revolution,'  I.,  8  n.

Bouthillier,  victim  of  mutiny  at  Nancy,  II.,  27  n.

Bouvard  de  Fourqueux,  Controller-General,  I.,  98  and  n.

Bouze,  Suzanne  Le,  '  prophetess,'  I.,  398  and  71.

Boyaval  or  Boyenval,  P.  J.,  execution  of.  III.,  238  n.

Boyer,  Spadassinicide,  II.,  52.

Boyer-Fonfrede,  J.  B.,  notice  of,  I.,  403  and  n. ;  votes  King's  death,  II.,
391  «. ;  on  Commission  of  Twelve,  III.,  47  n.  ;  President  of  Convention,
51  and  w. ;  arrest  of,  58  and  n. ;  trial  of,  103  n.  sqq.

Bras  d'Or,  tavern  at  Varennes,  II.,  120-1.

Bread,  price  of,  L,  45  «.,  155  w.,  285  n.  ;  III.,  34  n. ;  quantity  allotted  per
day.  III.,  235-6  nn. ;  riots  about,  I.,  215  n.,  278,  287-8 ;  II.,  360  and  n.

Brdard,  J.  J.,  on  first  Comite  de  Salut  Public,  III.,  34  n. ;  re-elected  after
Thermidor,  219  n.

Brecourt,  chdteau  of.  III.,  75.

Bremgarten,  convent  of.  III.,  38  n.

Bremond,  undertakes  to  raise  defenders  for  Tuileries,  II.,  244  n.

Brennus,  II.,  353.

Bressuire,  Republican  place  of  concentration  in  Vendee,  III.,  322.

Brest,  mutiny  of  galley  slaves  at,  I.,  365  ;  insurrection  at,  II.,  32  ;  galley
slaves  at,  II.,  170;  Jacobin  club  of,  206;  Saint-Andre  at.  III.,  123;
fleet  sails  from,  157  n. ;  naval  riots  at,  314;  winter  cruise  from,  315  ;  in
danger  from  La  Vendee,  321.

Bretagne,  French  ship,  renamed  RCvolutionnaire,  III.,  316.

Breteuil,  L.  A.  le  T.  Baron  de,  Minister,  222-3  n.  ;  notice  of,  97-8  and  n. ;
beautifying  Paris,  126;  closes  clubs,  133;  'home  secretary,'  203;
hovering  on  frontier,  II.,  3 ;  is  King's  agent  to  Leopold,  53-4  n. ;  in-
triguing on  frontier,  177;  is  against  Calonne,  235  n.

Breton  Club  {see  also  Jacobin  Club),  I.,  132,  133  «.,  197,  202.

Briangon,  petition  for  King's  deposition  from,  II.,  243.

Bridges,  of  Paris,  being  built  and  altered,  I.,  126  and  w.

Brienne,  Chateau  de,  I.,  136;  Napoleon  studying  at,  ibid.;  Lom6nie  dc,
See  Lomenie.

Brigades,  of  Volunteers  and  Regulars,  III.,  308-9.

'Brigands,'  rumours  of,  I.,  159,  160,  255;  II.,  64;  the  B.  of  Avignon,  159
sqq. ;  amnesty  to  the,  164  n.,  165.

Brissac,  L.  H.  T.  Due  deCoss^,  Commander  of  Garde-Constitutionelle,
II.,  66  «.,  139 ;  accused  of  making  cartridges  secretly,  191  n.,  196 ;
massacre  of,  321-2  wn.

Brissot,  J.  P.,  editor  of  Courrier  de  VEurope,  I.,  73  «. ;  notice  of,  170  and
n. ;  acquainted  with  Mirabeau,  191  n. ;  busy,  288 ;  B.  and  Les  Amis  des
Noirs,  364 ;  in  Genevese  politics,  376  n. ;  in  Municipality,  382 ;  in
Cercle  Social,  II.,  44 ;  becomes  Republican  as  soon  as  he  dares,  107  n. ;
in  Legislative  Assembly,  151 ;  on  Diplomatic  Committee,  171  n.  ;
accused  by  Bertrand  of  taking  bribes,  173  n. ;  in  favour  of  war,  185
and  n. ;  on  denunciation,  194  and  n. ;  mocked  by  Desmoulins,  199,
200  n. ;    his   head   getting  turned,   202   and  n. ;    his   name   given   to


358  INDEX

children,  208  n. ;  attacks  King,  226  and  n.  ;  attacks  Lafayette,  232 ;
hissed,  233 ;  in  favour  of  Regency,  243 ;  attacks  Lafayette  again,
245  ;  complains  of  Commune,  276-7  ;  sits  in  the  Commission  of  Twenty-
five,  279  n. ;  on  first  Constitutional  Committee,  349  n. ;  on  King's  trial,
382  «. ;  supports  v/ar  of  propaganda,  383  n. ;  votes  King's  death  and
respite,  391  n. ;  arrested,  IIL,  58  and  n. ;  hides  and  escapes,  61  ;  seized
at  Villejuif,  79  ;  in  prison,  97  ;  trial  of,  102  sqq.  mi.

Brissotine,  bad  name  applied  to  Theroigne,  IIL,  49  n.

Brittany,  disturbances  in,  1762-8,  L,  4  ». ;  revolt  in,  19;  disturbances  in,
1788,  120  and  M. ;  nursery  of  naval  officers,  IIL,  311.

Broc,  Vicomte  de  '  L'Ancien  Regime,'  L,  29  «.

Broglie,  A.  Due  de,  '  Frederic  II  et  Louis  XV,'  L,  7  m.  ;  '  Maurice  de  Saxe,'
10  ». ;  '  L'Alliance  Autrichienne,'  27  n. ;  '  Secret  du  Roi,'  27  n.

Broglie,  V,  F.  Due  de,  declines  to  sit  in  Cour  Pleniere,  I.,  134  ;  appointed
to  command  home  district,  200  and  n. ;  as  war- god,  205;  Minister  of
War,  217;  emigrates,  252;  at  Coblentz,  IL,  2;  not  to  have  a  hand  in
King's  flight,  94 ;  his  failure  compared  to  Bouill^'s,  127.

Brousse,  A.,  locksmith,  executed  with  d'Orleans,  IIL,  116  n.

Browning,  O.,  '  The  Flight  to  Varennes  and  other  Essays,'  II.,  90  »• ;  *  Lord
Gower's  despatches,'  268  n.

Brunet,  G.  J.  B.,  General,  notice  of,  IIL,  121  and  n.

Brunet,  J.  C.,  bibliographer,  his  monograph  on  Pere  Duchesne,  IL,  39  n.

Brunier,  Mme,  Queen's  attendant,  IL,  100  n.

Brunout,  '  Bastille  Volunteer '  on  Oct.  5th,  L,  323.

Brunswick,  C.  G.  F.  Duke  of  B.-Luneburg,  Mirabeau  mistakes  him,  L,
191  n. ',  suggested  as  French  Commander,  IL,  185  n.  ;  is  busy  drilling,
208-9  and  w. ;  on  the  march,  227  and  ».,  234-5  >  manifesto  of,  235  and  n. ;
advancing  into  France,  270,  295  ;  finds  Argonne  blocked,  330 ;  retreat
of,  339  and  n. ;  bad  commissariat  of,  341  n. ;  drives  Custine  out  of  Pala-
tinate, IIL,  21  n.

Brunswick,  English  ship,  collides  with  Vengeur,  IIL,  158-9  n.

Brussels,  Dumouriez  retreats  on,  IIL,  29  n. ;  Pichegru  advances  on,  162  n.

Buchez,  P.  S.  B,,  notice  of,  IIL,  no  n.

Buchot,  L'Abb6  P.,  new  head  of  Foreign  Office,  IIL,  183  n.

Budgets,  guesses  at  those  of  Ancien  Regime  and  of  1789-90-91,  IIL,  336-7.

Buffon,  Mme  de,  mistress  of  d'Orleans,  L,  58  w.,  118;  III.,  116.

Bulletin  des  Lois,  foundation  of  the,  IIL, 143  n.

Bunkers  Hill,  battle  of,  I.,  11.

Bureaux  des  Finances,  origin  of,  IIL,  290.

Burgundy,  taille  in,  IIL,  334.

Burke,  Edmund,  Mirabeau  sees,  in  England,  I.,  191  n. ;  objects  to  Tom
Paine,  377;  denounces  the  Revolution,  IL,  334;  'Reflexions  on  the
French  Revolution,'  401  n.

Buttes  des  Moulins,  Section  of,  IIL,  47  n.

Buzot,  F,  N.  L.,  friend  of  the  Rolands,  IL,  107 ;  on  Committee  of  Revision,
138  n. ;  his  '  Memoires,'  he  saves  Momoro,  279  and  ». ;  in  Convention,
326 ;  attacks  Tallien  and  Chabot,  380-1 ;  votes  King's  death,  391  n.  ;
leans  to  Federalism,  IIL,  12  n. ;  moves  to  transport  Bourbons,  16  ;
arrest  of,  58 ;  escapes,  61 ;  in  flight  to  the  West,  78  n.  and  sqq. ;  his
house  razed,  79 ;  at  sea,  92  ;  end  of,  106  and  n.

Cabanes,  Dr.,  '  Marat  inconnu,'  I.,  67  n.

Cabanis,  P.  J.  G.,  friend  and  physician  of  Mirabeau,  II.,  76-7  ;  attempts  to
carry  on  Mirabeau's  schemes,  84  n.


INDEX  359

Cabarrus,  or  Cabarus,  Therese  de,  intercedes  for  Josephine  Beauharnais,  III.,
114  M. ;  notice  of,  123  and  w.  ;  calls  on  Tallien  for  help,  201-2  ;  marries
Tallien,  224 ;  her  influence  on  society,  227.

Cabriolets,  Louis  XV.  on,  I.,  29  and  n.

Cachet,  Lettres  de,  I.,  8  and  w.,  102,  109,  ng,  175,  190;  III,,  287.

Cadastre  introduced  by  Turgot  in  Limousin,  III.,  334.

Cadoudal,  G.,  Chonan  leader,  IIL,  231.

Cadran  Bleu,  dinner  at  the,  II.,  240.

Caen,  insurrectionary  movements  at,  I.,  255  ;  II.,  168  ;  massacres  at,  320  n. ;
Bulletin  de  C,  III.,  61  n.,  62  ;  Girondin  deputies  leave,  76.

*  Caesar,'  expected  soon,  III.,  257  n.

Cafe  Corazza,  Committee  of,  insurrection  at,  IIL,  27  n.

Cafe  de  Foy,  I.,  219,  222-3,  292,  298,  305.

Cafe  de  Procope,  L,  380  and  n. ;  II.,  58  and  n.

Cafe  de  la  Re  gene  e,  I.,  65.

Cafe  de  Valois,  II.,  56,  66,  171,  203.

Cagliostro,  J.  B.,  '  Comte '  de,  and  the  Diamond  Necklace,  L,  74-5 ;  on  the
future  of  the  Bastille,  426  and  n.

Cahier-de-Gerville,  B.  C,  takes  Ministry  of  Interior,  II.,  170  ». ;  notice  of,
193  n.

Cahiers,  I.,  153  «.,  154  w.,  156-7  «. ;  question  of  deputy  being  bound  by  his,
196  M. ;  general  attitude  on  Church  questions,  IIL,  344.

Caillet,  '  L'Administration  de  Richelieu,'  L,  258  n.

Cailly,  signatory  of  the  massacre  circular,  II.,  320  n.

Qa-ira,  authorship  of  the  song,  I.,  193  and  «.

Caisse  d'Escompte,  d'Ormesson  borrows  from  the,  I.,  84 ;  Lomenie  uses
notes  of,  account  of,  Necker  borrows  from,  I.,  138  «. ;  might  have  been
used  to  issue  sound  paper  money,  IIL,  338.

Caisse  Patriotique,  L,  296;  IIL,  338.

Calendar,  the  new,  IL,  284  n. ;  IIL,  85  sqq.  nn.

Callery,  A.,  '  Histoire  des  attributions  du  Parlement  et  de  la  Cour  des  Aides,'
IIL,  279.

Calonne,  C.  A.  de,  Controller-General,  L,  86-7-8  and  n. ;  notice  of,  86  n. ;
dealings  with  notables,  gi  sqq.  and  nn. ;  proposes  reform,  93  and  n. ;
issues  Requete  au  Roi,  94  and  n.  ;  caricature  on,  96  and  n. ;  dismissed,
97  and  n. ;  vilified  and  flattered  by  Mirabeau,  191  n. ;  hovering  on
frontier,  IL,  3,  177,  180;  his  hotel,  201-2;  decreed  accused,  204  n.;
removed  from  Council  of  Princes,  235  n. ;  his  financial  reforms  discussed,
IIL,  330  sqq.

Calvados,  civil  war  in,  IIL,  45,  62  n.,  74-5-6  and  n.

Cambac^res,  J.  J.  R.  de,  presents  first  sketch  of  Code  Civil,  IIL,  160  n. ;
on  Comite  de  Salut  Public,  219  n. ;  refuses  to  sit  on  Constitutional
Committee  of  1795,  251  n.

Cambon,  J.,  notice  of,  IL,  153-4  and  n. ;  demands  accounts  from  Commune
and  Roland,  358  n.  ;  his  decree  of  Dec.  15th,  1792,  383  n. ;  on  first
Comite  de  Salut  Public,  IIL,  34  m.  ;  his  cornucopia  of  Assignats,  36;
his  decree  of  eleven  armies,  42  n. ;  his  report  on  outgoing  Comite,  71  n. ;
sits  on  second  Constitutional  Committee,  82  n. ;  gets  salaries  of  '  priests  '
reduced,  142  n. ;  the  Grand  livre  his  doing,  160  «.,  330,  333-4 ;  de-
nounced by  Robespierre,  205  «. ;  leans  to  the  Terrorists,  217  n. ;  reports
against  Law  of  Forty  Sous,  221  n. ;  arrested,  escapes  and  organises
Prairial,  237  n.,  242  n. ;  his  budgetary  estimates,  337,  340-1.

'  Camp  of  twenty  thousand,'  IL,  210  and  n.

Campan,  Mme,  notice  of,  criticism  of  her  M^moires,  I.,  16  n. ;  on  Louis


360  INDEX

XV.,  death,  33  n. ;  on  coming  States-General,  137 ;  her  husband  usher
at  Tuileries,  II.,  55;  rudely  handled  by  mob,  88;  buys  clothes  for
Queen,  93  ;  on  King's  humiliation,  140  n. ;  not  massacred,  263.

Campardon,  E.,  '  Le  Tribunal  R^volutionnaire,'  L,  5  ». ;  '  Marie  Antoinette
et  le  proces  du  collier,'  75  n.

Camus,  A.  G.,  archivist,  notice  of,  II.,  155  andw. ;  at  opening  of  Convention,
337  ;  sent  to  arrest  Dumouriez,  arrested  himself.  III.,  38-9  and  nn. ;  on
Ecclesiastical  Committee  of  Constituent  Assembly,  343.

Canclaux,  J.  B.  C,  republican  commander  in  Vendee,  III.,  326.

Candeille,  Mdlle,  actress,  II.,  345  n. ;  Goddess  of  Reason,  III.,  138  n.,  139.

Candide,  Mme  Roland's  favourite  work,  I.,  406  n.

Canonniers  Matelots,  III.,  312-3.

Cap  Fran^ais,  in  ashes,  II.,  169 ;  assembly  of,  III.,  314.

Capitatio7i,  account  and  amount  of,  III.,  335  and  ».

Capucins,  Trees  of  Liberty  planted  in  garden  of  the,  II.,  217.

Carabineers,  Regiment  of,  at  Luneville,  II.,  22  sqq.

Carabots,  III.,  63  and  n.

Cardine,  a  National-guardsman  stabbed  at  Versailles,  I.,  335.

Carhaix,  the  Girondin  fugitives  at,  III.,  78.

Caricature,  Musee  de  la,  I.,  96  n.

Carlyle,  T.,  Miscellaneous  Essays,  '  The  Diamond  Necklace,'  and  '  Count
Cagliostro,'  I.,  76  «. ;  '  Letters  and  Speeches  of  Oliver  Cromwell,'  II.,
365  «.

Carmagnole,  origin  of  the  name.  III.,  123  and  n.

Carnot,  L.  N.  M.  [otherwise  J.  F.  C.  (Lalanne)], '  Correspondance  Generale,'
I.,  361  w. ;  notice  of,  II.,  151;  '  Memoires  sur  C.,'  152  «. ;  demands
pikes  for  volunteers,  234  n. ;  in  Convention,  327  n. ;  votes  death,  391  n. ;
at  Army  of  North,  III.,  20  n.,  154  n. ;  on  state  of  army,  64  n. ;  on
second  Comite  de  Salut  Public,  71  n. ;  on  the  levee-en-masse,  94  n. ;
sends  plans  for  siege  of  Toulon,  129 ;  on  the  savagery  of  the  period,
142-3  w. ;  busy  providing  muskets,  149  and  n. ;  his  plans  for  1794,
162  n. ;  his  quarrels  with  Saint-Just,  190  n. ;  angry  with  Robespierre,
202  n. ;  gets  cannons  out  of  Paris,  204  n. ;  twice  re-elected  on  Comite,
219  n. ;  to  blame  for  Hoche's  arrest,  229  n. ;  answers  Lecointre,  234  n. ;
in  danger  after  Prairial,  245  n. ;  a  capable  director  of  war,  308 ;  supports
Hoche,  325.

Carpentras,  set  against  Avignon,  I.,  363  n. ;  against  union  with  France,
143  71.,  160,  161  n.

Carra,  J.  L,,  journalist,  notice  of,  I.,  291  and  n. ;  denounces  'Austrian
Committee,'  II.,  85  n. ;  at  Committee  of  Sections,  237 ;  intriguing
against  King,  242,  243  71.  ;  a  Republican,  265  n. ;  elected  to  Convention,
327  ;  votes  King's  death,  391  n. ;  trial  of.  III.,  103  n.  sqq.

Carreau,  Julie,  wife  of  Talma,  II.,  345  n.

Carrier,  J.  B.,  attorney,  I.,  374;  notice  of,  II.,  327;  proposes  Tribunal
Revolutionjiaire,  III.,  32  n.  ;  proconsul  at  Nantes,  74  ».,  123  and  n. ;
his  massacres,  13 1-2-3  3^"^  n. ;  trial  of,  220  and  n.  ;  protected  by
Jacobins,  235  w. ;  guillotined,  237  ;  avenging  La  Vendee,  323-4.

Carrousel,  Place  de,  Royal  Family  escapes  by,  II.,  98-9;  on  Aug.  loth,
258  and  n.,  261 ;  chapel  for  Marat's  heart  in,  III.,  68,  233  ;  Barras
gathers  troops  on,  211  n.

Carteaux,  J.  F.,  General,  at  siege  of  Lyons,  notice  of,  III.,  73  and  n. ;  at
siege  of  Toulon,  89,  129  and  n.

Cartes  de  Civisme,  III.,  31  and  n.

Cos  Royaux,  III.,  280,  291.


INDEX  361

Casano,  battle  at  bridge  of,  I.,  174.

Cassagnac,  G.  de,  *  Histoire  des  Massacres  de  Septembre,'  II.,  306  n.

Cassation,  Cour  de,  III.,  293-4.

Castries,  C.  E.  G.  Marquis  de,  Minister  of  Marine,  his  reforms,  III.j  311^

Castries,  A.  C.  A.  Due  de,  son  of  the  above,  sack  of  his  hotel,  I.,  256  11.  ;

II.,  51  ;  fights  duel,  50;  emigrates,  51 ;  at  Coblentz,  180.
Cathelineau,  J.,  notice  of,  II.,  167  «. ;  Vendean  leader,  186;  III.,  23 ;  death

of,  321.
Catherine  II.,  Empress  of  Russia,  II.,  97  «.,  180,  209  n. ;  III.,  20  n.,  257  n.
Cavaignac,  J.  B.,  with  army  of  Western  Pyrenees,  III.,  152;  notice  of,  153

and  n.
Cayenne,  priests  to  be  transported  to,  II.,  190  n.
Cazales,  J.  A.  M.  de,  notice  of,  I.,  178  n, ;  in  favour  of  two  chambers,  272 ;

remains  at  his  post,  343  ;  his  speeches,  356  ;  II.,  30  n. ;  fights  duel,  49  ;

in  danger  in  June,   1791,   105 ;    conciliatory   to   the  Left,   131  n.  ;   at

Coblentz,  180-1.
Cazotte,  J.,  Royalist  intriguer,  II.,  203  ;  notice  of,  ibid.  n. ;  imprisoned,  290 ;

spared  at  massacres,  condemned  by  Tribunal,  306.
Cens  Ccnsive  {see  also  Feudal  Rights),  I.,  276  «.
Cent-Suisses,  at  Versailles,  I.,  300;  on  guard  at  Tuileries,  II.,  103  n. ;  Salle

des,  278,  338  M.
Centieme  Denier,  III.,  336.

Centre-Grenadiers,  I.,  314,  332,  337 ;  II.,  88,  139  and  n.
Cercle-Social,  II.,  43-44  and  n.
Chabot,  F.,  notice  of,  II.,  153  and  ji. ;  welcomes  Marseillais,  243  ;  abjures

Kings,  276;  accuses  Mme  Roland,  385-6  and  n. ;   on   Committee  of

Insurrection,  III.,  27  n. ;  frightened  at  Marat's  death,  68 ;  proposes  an

Opposition,  147  and  n. ;  in  prison,  171 ;  Danton  treated  as  accomplice

of,  178.
Chabray,  Louison  [Pierrette],  at  Versailles,  I.,  322  and  n.,  323  ;  sent  to  Paris,

328,  333.
Chabroud,  C,  deputy  to  States-General,  I.,  344.
Chaillot,  Bailly's  house  at,  I.,  223  «. ;  promenaders  from,  in  Tuileries  garden,

224  ;  march  of  the  women  through,  312.
Chaintrix,  stage  on  journey  to  Varennes,  II.,  109  m.
Chalbos,  F.,  Republican  Commander  in  Vendee,  III.,  326.
Chalier,  M.  J.,  Jacobin  at  Lyons,  III.,  13,  14  and  n. ;  execution  of,  72-3  and

M. ;  funeral  of,  126.
Challamel,  '  Les  Clubs  Contre-R^volutionnaires,'  I.,  392  n.
Chalons-sur-Marne,  on  road  to  Varennes,  II.,  105  n.,  109  w.  sqq.,  128  w. ;

Attila's  battlefield,  333  and  n. ;  Convention  will  migrate  to.  III.,  236  n.
Chalotais,  L.  R.  de  C.  de  la,  Procureur  at  Rennes,  I.,  4  and  w.
Chamb^ry,  occupied,  II.,  345  n.
Chambon,  N.,  elected  Maire,  II.,  360-1  n. ;  brings  King  to  Convention,  377

and  n. ;  crushed  at  riot,  385  and  n.
Chambonnas,  N.  Marquis  de.  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs,  II.,  212  n.
Chambors,  Comte  de,  sits  for  Tiers-Etat,  I.,  158  w.

Champ-de-Mars,  Besenval  encamped  on,  I.,  226,  232  ;  site  of  Paris  Federa-
tion, 405  sqq. ;  topography  of,  410  «, ;  funeral  mass  for  Bouille's  soldiers

at,  II.,  29 ;  '  massacre '  of,  foreshadowed,  36 ;  rioters  shot  at,  135-6  and

w. ;  convocation  of  citizens  at,  298  and  «.,  299  ;  Fete  of  Aug.  loth  at,  III.,

85  andw.;  Bailly's  death  at,  119  ;  Fete  of  Eire  Supreme  at,  192  and  n.
Champagne,  road  to  Metz  through,  II.,  no;  Prussian  advance  on,  209  n.;

C.  Pouilleuse,  297,  330.


362  INDEX

Champcenetz,  Le  Chevalier  de,  contributor  to  Actes  des  Apotres,  II.,  289  n.
Champfort  (or  Chamfort),  S.  R.  N.,  philosophe,  I.,  39,  147;  notice  of,  147
n. ;  his  work  on  '  Tableaux  de  la  Revolution,'  236  n. ;  suicide  of.  III.,  186.
Championnet,  J.  E.,  officer  in  Volunteers,  II.,  185  n.
Champollion-Figeac,  •  Les  Etats  du  Dauphine  et  la  Revolution,'  I.,  120  n.
Champs-lklysees,  march  of  women  through,  31 1-2  ;  dances  in,  426.
Chancellor,  duties  of  the,  III.,  281,  288.
Channel  Islands,  proposed  French  descent  on.  III.,  157  n.
Chant  du  Coq,  placarded  newspaper,  II.,  183  and  n.
Chantilly,  turned  into  a  prison.  III.,  122.

Chappe,  the  brothers  C.  and  J.,  telegraphists.  III.,  160,  161  and  «.
Chapt-Rastignac,  I'Abb^,  massacred,  II.,  307.
Charavay,  E.,  '  Correspondance  de  Carnot,'  II.,  152  n.

Charenton,  supposed  meeting  of  Robespierre  and  Dan  ton  at.  III.,  176  and  n.
Charette,  F.  A.,  Vendean  leader,  II.,  285  ;  III.,  23  ;  execution  of,  231  n.  ;

his  operations  in  Vendee  traced,  321  sqq.
Charitas,  the  Papal  brief  entitled.  III.,  345.

Charlemagne,  tomb  of,  I.,  11  and  n. ;  hangs  4000  Saxons,  II.,  54.
Charleroi,  Jourdan  captures,  III.,  162  n.
Charles,  the  '  Bold,'  death  of,  at  Nancy,  II.,  28.

Charles-Edward  (Stuart)  acquainted  with  Robespierre's  father,  I.,  177.
Charles  Martel,  I.,  11.
Charles  V.,  designer  of  Bastille,  I.,  165  n.
Charles  X.,  estimate  of  confiscated  property  made  by.  III.,  340.
Charles  I.  of  England,  trial  of,  II.,  365-6  and  w.
Charles  IV.  of  Spain,  powerless,  II.,  402  n.
Charles,  J.  A.  C,  aeronaut,  I.,  66.
Charleville,  arms  sent  for  from,  I.,  228,  231,  235  and  71.  \  massacre  at,  320

n. ;  gun  manufactory  at.  III.,  150  and  n.
Charlier,  C,  attacks  Robespierre,  III.,  205  n.
Charolais,  le  Comte  de,  anecdote  of,  I.,  17.
Chartres,  Sieyes  a  canon  at,  I.,  148  ;  Maire  of,  II.,  362  and  w.
Chartres,  Louis-Philippe,  Due  de.     See  Louis-PhiHppe.
Chartres,  Louis  Philippe  Joseph,  Due  de.     See  Orleans.
Chartres-Dragons,  becomes  14016  Dragons,  III.,  304.
Chartreux,  Convent  of,  searched  for  arms,  I.,  231.
Chasles,  L.,  arrested,  III,,  237  n.
Chasse  {see  also  Feudal  Rights),  I.,  276  n.
Chasset,  C.  A.,  Girondin  refugee  at  Lyons,  III.,  91  n.
Chasseur s-N ationaux.  III.,  306.
Chasseur s-N ormandie,  Regiment  of,  I.,  226.
Chateaubriand,  F.  A.  Comte  de,  notice  of,  III.,  184  and  n.
Chateauneuf-Randon,  A.  Comte  de,  at  siege  of  Lyons,  III.,  90  n.
Chateauroux,  M.  A.  de  Mailly  Duchesse  de,  mistress  of  Louis  XV.,  I.,  7,  10;

friend  of  Richelieu,  24  n. ;  nicknames  Maurepas,  51.
Chateau-Thierry,  II.,  128  n.
Chdteau-Vieux,  Regiment  de,  in  mutiny,  II.,  15  sqq.  and  nn.  ;  galley  slaves  of,

170 ;  fete  of  liberation  of,  198,  206-7  and  n. ;  the  mutiny  of,  III.,  302  ;

emigration  of  whole  regiment,  304.
Chdtelct,  Le,  dominates  old  Municipality  of  Paris,    I.,   221  n. ;    prisoners

attempt  escape  from,  229 ;  holds  inquiry  into  events  of  Oct.  5th,  344

and  ». ;  issues  warrants  against  agitators,  382 ;  Jourdan  escapes  from,

II.,  159  and  n. ;  massacres  at  prison  of,  303  ;  functions  of  the  Court  of,

III.,  287-9.


INDEX  363

Chatelet,  A.  de,  placards  walls  of  Paris,  II.,  105-6;  his  criticism  on  the
officers  of  Army,  III.,  290.

Chatelet,  C.  L.,  juryman,  executed.  III.,  238  n.

Chatelet,  L.  M.  F.  Due  de,  suggested  for  the  Ministry,  I.,  142  n. ;  colonel
of  Gardes-Frangaises,  218  n.

Chatellherault,  address  from  club  of,  II.,  373  and  n.

Chatillon-sur-Sevre,  in  Vendee,  II.,  285-6.

Chaumette,  P.  G.,  notice  of,  I.,  372-3  w. ;  street  orator,  286-7  ;  signs  petition
for  King's  deposition,  II.,  135  ;  welcomes  Marseillais,  243  ;  on  Aug.
loth,  249  ;  in  Commune,  280 ;  procureur  syndic,  361  and  «.  ;  accom-
panies King  to  Convention,  377  and  n.  ;  gives  King  bread,  378-9 ;  plays
into  hands  of  insurrection,  III.,  53  n. ;  demands  a  Constitution,  74;  is
anxious  about  morals  of  Fi-deres,  83  and  n.  ;  interrogates  the  Royal
children,  98  n. ;  his  inscription  on  cemeteries,  no;  inaugurates  worship
of  Reason,  135  and  n.,  138,  141  and  w. ;  attempts  to  rouse  Commune
against  Comite,  144  «.,  146 ;  arrest  of,  169  and  n. ;  death  of,  182.

Chaussee  d'Antin,  Mirabeau's  house  in,  I.,  359  and  w.

Chauveau-Lagarde,  C.  F.,  defends  C.  Corday,  III.,  69  and  «. ;  defends
Queen,  98  and  w.

Chauvelin,  F.  B.,  Marquis  de,  ambassador  to  London,  II.,  146  and  n.  ;  dis-
missed, 401  and  n.

Chavanne,  D.  de  la,  '  Histoire  de  I'Administration  en  France,'  III.,  279.

Cheetham,  J.,  '  Life  of  T.  Paine,'  III.,  212  w.

Chef-de-Gobelet,  a  Court  official,  I,,  137.

Chenier,  Andre  M.,  notice  of,  II.,  199  n. ;  '  lambe  sur  la  Fete  des  Suisses,'
206-7  ?i.  ;  Ode  to  '  C.  Corday,'  III.,  70  n.

Chenier,  Marie-Joseph,  brother  of  the  above,  notice  of,  II.,  198-9,  206  ;  '  Hymn
to  Reason,'  III.,  139  and  n. ;  saves  Convention  in  Prairial,  244  w.

Chenier,  Louis,  no  relation  to  above,  pamphleteer,  I.,  218  n.  ;  II.,  39.

Ch^py,  a  'judge'  in  the  Abbaye,  II.,  310.

Cherbourg,  in  danger  from  Vendeans,  III.,  323.

Cherest,  A.,  '  La  Chute  de  I'Ancien  Regime,'  I.,  6i  n.

Ch^ruel,  A.,  ♦  Dictionnaire  des  Institutions  de  la  France,'  I.',  8  n. ;  '  Histoire
de  I'Administration  Monarchique,  I.,  13  w.

Chesnaye,  La,  colonel  in  National  Guard,  II.,  252  n.

Chesnaye,  Baudin  de  la,  massacred,  II.,  309.

Chesterfield,  Earl  of,  on  symptoms  of  Revolution,  I.,  21.

Chevaliers  du  Poignard,  II.,  87.

Chevalier,  E., '  La  Marine  Fran9aise  sous  la  premiere  Republique,' '  La  Marine
Fran9aise  sous  le  Consulat  et  le  premier  Empire,'  III.,  310.

Chevremont,  '  Vie  de  Marat,'  I.,  67  n.

Chiers,  river  at  Longwy,  II.,  286  n.

Childeric,  King,  II.,  102.

Chlotaire,  King,  I.,  31.

Choiseul,  E.  F.  Due  de.  Minister  of  Louis  XV.,  I.,  5 ;  dismissed,  6  and  n. ;
his  agents  in  America,  55  n. ;  his  reforms  in  Army,  III.,  295,  297 ;  his
reforms  in  Navy,  311.

Choiseul,  C.  A.  G.  Due  de,  nephew  of  the  above,  '  Relation  du  depart  de
Louis  XVI,'  II.,  90  w. ;  notice  of,  95  n. ;  his  mistakes  criticised,  112  w. ;
his  trial  unfinished,  137  n.

Choiseul-Gouffier,  M.  G.  F.  Comte  de,  Foreign  Office  offered  to,  II.,  170  w.

Choisi,  General,  sent  to  keep  order  in  Avignon,  II.,  163-4.

Choisy,  journey  of  Court  to,  I.,  33.

Cholat,  wine  merchant,  I.,  241.


364  INDEX

ChoUet,  in  La  Vendee,  fighting  at,  III.,  319,  321-2,  326.

Chouans  in  arms  in  Brittany,  II.,  285;  III.,  231,  324;  get  on  badly  with
Emigres,  325.

Choudieu,  P.,  arrested.  III.,  237  n.

Chretien,  one  of  Robespierre's  bodyguard.  III.,  194  n.

Chrimhilda,  Queen,  II.,  93.

Chronique  de  Paris,  Condorcet's  paper,  partially  approves  massacres,  II.,
372  ».

Chuquet,  '  La  Jeunesse  de  Napoleon,'  II.,  9 ;  '  Les  Guerres  de  la  Revolu-
tion,' III.,  295  ;  '  La  Premiere  Invasion  Prussienne,'  II.,  185  n. ;  '  Hoche,
et  la  Lutte  pour  I'Alsace,'  III.,  229.

Cice,  J.  M.  Champion  de,  Archbishop  of  Bourdeaux,  Physiocrat,  I.,  190  n. ;
in  first  Constitutional  Committee,  262  n. ;  in  favour  of  going  to  Paris,
318  n. ;  in  the  Ministry,  357  n. ;  gives  King  little  help.  III.,  344.

'  Citoyen'  substituted  for  ^Monsieur,''  II.,  284  and  n.

Citoyens  actifs  and  Electoral  system,    I.,  382-3  and  n.

Civil  List,  II.,  104  n.,  139  and  n.

Clamars,  petition  from  Commune  of,  III.,  136  n. ;  Condorcet  arrested  at,  186.

Clamart,  Cimetiere  de,  II.,  317.

Claretie,  J.,  '  Camille  DesmouHns,  Lucile  Desmoulins,  etc.,'  I.,  173  «.

Clary,  Mdlle  Desiree,  sweetheaic  of  Napoleon,  afterwards  Queen  of  Sweden,
III.,  225  «.

Claviere,  fi.,  notice  of,  I.,  171  and  w. ;  Mirabeau's  friendship  for,  191  n. ;
writes  in  Courtier  de  Provence,  201  n. ;  comes  to  Paris,  376  and  n. ;
visited  by  Mirabeau  (?),  II.,  57 ;  first  Ministry  of,  201-2 ;  second
Ministry  of,  267  and  m.  ;  arrest  of,  III.,  58  and  n. ;  in  prison,  117;
suicide  of,  122  ;  on  failure  of  revenue,  338.

Claye,  second  stage  out  of  Paris,  II.,  100  n.,  108,  109  n.

Clerfait,  Le  Comte  de,  besieging  Thionville,  II.,  186 ;  advancing,  293.

Clergy,  Actes  of,  I.,  48  w. ;  stimulates  Court  to  tackle  Voltaire,  53  w. ;
Assembly  of,  136  and  w. ;  '  Civil  Constitution  '  of,  362  and  n.,  381 ;  III.,
319,  338  n.,  342  sqq. ;  at  Versailles,  Cahiers  of,  composition  of  Order  of,
I.,  185-6  and  M. ;  begins  to  join  Tiers-Etat,  204-5  nn.  ;  lands  of,  con-
fiscated, 360  and  w. ,  III.,  338,  340  and  n.

Clermont-en-Argonne,  stage  on  journey  to  Varennes,  II.,  109  n.  sqq. ;
expects  vengeance,  295  ;  pass  of,  297  n. ;  Vache  de,  331.

Clermont-en-Auvergne,  Bishop  of,  on  Ecclesiastical  Committee,  III.,  343.

Clermont-Tonnerre,  Stanislas  Comte  de,  in  first  Constitutional  Committee,
I.,  262  n. ;  composer  of  Raynal's  letter  to  Assembly,  289  n, ;  resigns  his
seat,  soon  returns,  343  and  n. ;  on  Committee  of  Revision,  II.,  138  w. ;
urges  King  to  fly,  224  n. ;  murder  of,  252  n.

Clermontais,  night  of  spurs  in  the,  II.,  117  sqq. ;  National  Guards  of,  125.

Cl^ry,  J.  B.  Hanet,  called  C,  valet  to  King,  II.,  268  n. ;  '  Journal  de  ce  qui
s'est  passe  a  la  Tour  du  Temple,'  etc.,  notice  of,  395  n.

Clichy,  Barriere  de,  II.,  100;  Barere's  villa  at.  III.,  203  and  n.

Clootz,  J.  B.,  Baron  de,  notice  of,  I.,  379  and  n. ;  at  Jacobins,  389 ;  '  orator
of  human  race,'  409,  411,  413;  answers  Burke,  II.,  177;  naturalised,
278  n. ;  defends  the  massacres,  325  n. ;  in  Convention,  327 ;  talks  of
Universal  Republic,  360 ;  leader  in  Atheist  movement,  III.,  135  ;  '  La
Certitude  des  preuves  de  Mahometisme,'  136  and  n. ;  not  a  H^bertist,
169  ;  trial  of,  171  ;  end  of,  173-4.

Cloquet,  '  Souvenirs  sur  la  vie  privee  du  General  Lafayette,'  II.,  288  n.

Clovis,  King,  I.,  14.

Clubs,  origin  of,  I.,  133  ;  stringent  regulations  of,  221  and  n. ;  in  Army,  302.


INDEX  365

Club,  des  Cordeliers  {see  Cordeliers) ;  des  Feuillants  {see  Feuillants) ;  des
Enrages,  I.,  147  and  ».,  202 ;  des  Impartiaux,  I.,  392  and  ». ;  Infernal,
III.,  104 ;  des  yacohins  {see  yacobi?i  Club) ;  des  Monarchiens,  L,  392
and  n. ;  Politique,  I.,  133  n. ;  des  Trente,  I.,  133  n.,  147  n. ;  de  Viroflay
{see  Viroflay) ;  de  1789,  II.,  85  n.

Clugny-de-Nuis,  F.  de,  Controller-General,  I.,  59.

Cobenzl,  Dumouriez  corresponds  with,  II.,  204.

Coblentz,  advice  to  King  from,  II.,  171 ;  Emigres  at,  179  «.,  180-1 ;  Prussian
retreat  on,  339  n. ;  Prussians  occupy,  346  n.

Coburg,  Le  Prince  de  Saxe-,  follows  up  Dumouriez,  III.,  20  «.,  29  and  «. ;
negotiates,  37  n.  ;  supposed  plots  of,  49 ;  refuses  to  assist  York,  64  w. ;
takes  Quesnoy,  121  n. ;  besieges  Maubeuge,  154  n. ;  commands  the
Allies,  162  n.

Cockers,  of  Paris,  the,  I.,  29  n.

Cockades,  black,  a  myth,  I.,  301  ».

Code  Civil,  first  sketch  of.  III.,  160  n.

Coffinhal,  P.  A.,  President  of  Tribunal,  III.,  186  «.,  195  n.  ;  will  support
Robespierre,  196  ».,  207 ;  executed,  215  n.

Coigny,  M.  F.  A.  Due  de,  nearly  quarrels  with  King,  I.,  83,  85,  120.

Coittant,  his  journal  in  '  Memoires  sur  les  prisons,'  III.,  114;  '  Mai  son
d'arret  de  Porte-Libre,'  197  n.

•  Col  d' Argent,'  Mirabeau's  grandfather,  L,  174,  189  n.

Colbert,  J.  B.,  his  system  of  naval  conscription.  III.,  313 ;  his  tariffs,
336  «.

College  de  Quatre-Nations,  II.,  399.

Collenot-d'Angremont,  guillotined,  II.,  282.

Collot-d'Herbois,  J.  M.,  editor  of  *  L'Almanach  du  Pere  Gerard,*  I.,  180  n. ;
notice  of,  373  and  n. ;  on  sugar,  II.,  170 ;  pleads  for  the  Swiss  convicts,
199,  206,  207  n. ;  in  Convention,  327  and  n. ;  proposes  abolition  of
monarchy,  338  and  n. ;  defends  the  massacres,  355  «. ;  wishes  to  record
vote  for  King's  death,  390  n. ;  on  Committee  of  insurrection,  III.,  27  n.,
53  n. ;  in  second  Comite  de  Salut  Public,  71  n. ;  directing  proconsuls,
74  n. ;  his  proconsulate  at  Lyons,  74  n.,  126  sqq.  nn. ;  theatrical  censor,
113  n. ;  protects  Hebertists,  122  «.,  138  «. ;  occasionally  absent  from
Paris,  144  n. ;  'cloud-compeller,'  145  ;  failing  health  of,  149  n. ;  return
from  Lyons,  169  n. ;  attempted  assassination  of,  188  and  n. ;  on  the
guillotine,  195 ;  his  attitude  in  Thermidor  surprising,  200  n.  sqq. ;
hustled  at  Jacobins,  206  ;  his  quarrel  with  Saint-Just,  206-7 ;  in  the
President's  chair,  207  sqq.  nn. ;  remains  Terrorist,  217  n. ;  hopes  to
dominate  Jacobins,  221  n. ;  denounced,  233-4  n. ;  transportation  of,
235-6-7;  end  of,  245.

Colmar,  a  Conseil-Sotivcrain  at.  III.,  286.

Colombier  {see  also  Feudal  Rights),  I.,  276  n.

Comedie  Franqaise,  Voltaire's,  reception  at,  I.,  53  n.

Comite  de  Defense  Generale,  II.,  279  n..  III.,  34  «.

Comite  de  Salut  Public  (not  to  be)  confused  with  C.  de  Surveillance,  II.,
278  and  n. ;  origin  of,  279  n. ;  the  first.  III.,  33,  34  n. ;  evades
law  of  Maximum,  35  n. ;  its  action  towards  Girondists  in  May,  52  n.,
59  n. ;  the  Second  or  '  Great,'  71  n. ;  scolds  Carrier,  133  n. ;  hostile
to  Worship  of  Reason,  138  n. ;  its  methods  of  work  analysed,  144  n.,
145  ;  receives  denunciation  of  Generals,  149  n, ;  its  plans  for  the  Navy,
157  n. ;  its  unlimited  power,  159  n. ;  fixes  wages,  164  n. ;  Law  of
Prairial  not  debated  in,  194  n. ;  bored  by  Robespierre,  196  n. ;  on  eve
of  Thermidor,  201-2  and  «,,  204  n. ;  its  meetings  with  Surete  Generale,


366  INDEX

204  n. ',  its  composition  after  Thermidor,  218-g  n. ;  effect  of  its  vigour  on
Army,  308  ;  rebukes  Turreau,  324.

Comite  de  Surete  Generate  established,  III.,  72  n.  ;  manages  Law  of  Sus-
pects, 95  n. ;  manages  Sections,  144  n. ;  its  methods  of  work,  144  ».,
145 ;  much  aHenated  from  Robespierre,  196 ;  its  meetings  with  Salut
Public,  204  n. ;  its  renewal  after  Thermidor,  218.

Comite  de  Surveillance  {see  also  Commune),  II.,  278-9  and  n. ;  manages
passports,  283  n. ;  orders  domiciliary  visits,  287  n. ;  plans  the  massacres,
299, 302  n. ;  issues  the  Circular,  319-20  and  n. ;  its  accounts  demanded,  358.

Comites  Revolutionnaires  {see  also  Sections),  III.,  31  and  n.

Commandements-en-chef,  France  divided  into  seventeen.  III.,  297.

Commissaires  du  Rot,  III.,  293.

Commission  of  Twelve,  III.,  47  and  n.,  52  and  ».,  59  n.

Commission  of  Twenty-five,  II.,  279  n.

Commissions  in  Army,  prohibition  of  purchase  of.  III.,  297.

Committee  of  Insurrection,  III.,  27  n.

Committee  of  Twenty-one,  III.,  220  n.

Committimus,  Lettres  de.  III.,  288,  290.

Commune,  the  Provisionary  {see  also  Municipality),  I.,  428  n.

Commune,  the  legal  C,  I.,  428-9  n. ;  sits  permanent,  II.,  103  and  w. ;  pro-
claims martial  law,  136  n. ;  hostile  to  Departmental  authorities,  167  n. ;
plays  into  the  hands  of  insurrection,  215  sqq. ;  sits  permanent,  226  n. ;
admits  Committee  of  Sections  to  Hotel-de-Ville,  237;  petitions  for
King's  deposition,  243  ;  is  superseded  by  the  Insurrectionary  C,  249.

Commune,  the  first  Insurrectionary  C,  II.,  249-50  n. ;  guards  the  Temple,
268  n. ;  dominates  the  Assembly,  270 ;  Conseil- General  of,  Comite
de  Surveillance  of,  278  and  n. ;  shuts  its  eyes  to  massacres,  324  n.,
326  n. ;  repudiates  Comite  de  Surveillance,  354  ;  new  elections  to,  361  n. ;
regulates  queues,  362  n. ;  its  cruelty  to  Royal  Family,  379  n.  ;  shuts
churches,  384  w. ;  controls  Sections,  etc.,  III.,  31 ;  petitions  for  the
Maximum,  34  n. ;  demands  arrest  of  Twenty-two,  51  and  n.

Commune,  the  Second  Insurrectionary  C,  fuses  with  the  first,  III.,  52-3  and  n. ;
demands  a  Constitution,  74  ;  annexes  money,  83  «. ;  supports  Worship
of  Reason,  135,  141;  'sits  in  red  nightcaps,'  145;  danger  of  fresh
insurrection  from,  169  n. ;  solidaire  for  Hebert,  170  n. ;  quite  chap-
fallen,  183  and  n. ;  will  support  Robespierre,  210-11  and  «. ;  over-
powered, 214  and  n. ;  abolished,  221  n.

Commune  of  1871  destroys  records  of  its  predecessor's  doings,  197  n.

Compagnie  des  hides.  III.,  178  n.

Compiegne,  Mirabeau  suggests  King's  going  to,  II.,  71 ;  becomes  Marat-
sur-Oise,  III.,  161  n.

Compte  Rendu  of  Necker,  III.,  333.

Comptes,  Chambre  de,  registers  edicts  under  protest,  I.,  112  n. ;  its  duties,
III.,  280  sqq.

Conciergerie,  prison  of,  massacres  at,  II.,  303  and  n. ;  account  of.  III.,  97  n.,
198.

Conde,  Dumouriez'  designs  on,  III.,  37 ;  fall  of,  63,  64  n.,  81  and  «. ;  re-
captured, 81  and  n.,  161  and  n. ;  siege  of,  154  ;  name  changed  to  Nord-
Libre,  161  and  n.

Conde,  L.  J.  Prince  de  {see  also  Bourbon),  at  death  of  Louis  XV.,  I.,  23  ;
at  siege  of  Gibraltar,  59 ;  duel  with  d'Agoult,  129 ;  member  of  Court
Triumvirate,  notice  of,  199  and  n. ;  emigrates,  252  and  n. ;  his  forest
uncultivated,  282  n. ;  goes  to  Ettenheim,  II.,  181  n. ;  his  dealings  with
Pichegru,  III.,  253  and  n.


INDEX  367

CondeenSy  name  for  Emigres,  I.,  366  «. ;  II.,  181  n.

Condorcet,  J.  A.  N.  de  Caritat  Marquis  de,  'Vie  de  Turgot,'  I.,  38  «. ;
notice  of,  171  and  n. ;  busy,  258 ;  in  Cercle  Social,  II.,  44  «. ;  suggests
a  'mechanical  king,'  107  n. ;  in  Legislative,  151 ;  at  Baiser  Lamourette,
157 ;  Bertrand's  opinion  of,  173  n. ;  denounces  ministers,  194 ;  on
Commission  of  Twenty-five,  279  «. ;  on  first  Constitutional  Committee,
349  n. ;  his  vote  on  King's  trial,  391  n. ;  his  comment  on  Robespierre,
III.,  18  ;  in  hiding,  98  ;  end  of,  186-7  and  n.

Conscripti9n  of  1798,  III.,  93  n.

Conseil  d'Etat,  I.,  258  «. ;  III.,  280  sqq.

Conseil  des  parties,  III.,  288.

Conseils-Generaux  of  Departments,  III.,  243.

Conseils-Souverains,  III.,  286.

Conseillers  d'Etat  in  Parlement,  III.,  281.

Constitution  of  1791,  first  Committee  on,  I.,  262  «. ;  Carlyle's  indifference
to,  266  n. ;  Committee  of  Revision  of,  II.,  138  and  n. ;  accepted  by  King,
140  and  n.

Constitution  of  1793,  Committee  to  draw  up,  II.,  349  and  n. ;  outcry  for  it,
III.,  74  and  n. ;  completed,  82  and  n. ;  suspended,  88  and  n. ;  demanded
in  Pr atrial,  241.

Constitution  of  1795,  III.,  251-2-3  and  nn.

Constitutional  Association  of  London,  sends  Deputies  to  Paris,  I.,  377.

Conti,  L.  F.  J.  Prince  de  {see  also  Bourbon),  notice  of,  I.,  199  and  n.

Contraintes  solidaires  abolished,  III.,  330,  334.

Contrat-Social,  Section  of,  demands  torture  of  C.  Corday,  III.,  68  and  n.

Contrex^ville,  Besenval  at  waters  of,  I.,  140.

Controle,  La,  III.,  336.

Convention,  The  National,  first  idea  of  calling,  II.,  191  n. ;  to  be  summoned,
267;  elections  to,  277  n.,  278,  286,  326;  first  sessions  of,  337-8;  com-
position of,  338  and  n.  ;  '  Bulletin  de  la  Convention  Nationale,'  '  Proces-
verbal  de  la  Convention  Nationale,'  338  n. ;  its  fortunes  traced,  351-2  ;
parties  in,  353  n. ;  its  struggle  with  Commune,  354  and  w. ;  fixes  rations
of  bread,  362  ». ;  its  decrees  of  propaganda,  ^8^  and  «. ;  not  free  at  date
of  King's  trial,  389  and  n. ;  parties  in.  III.,  3  sqq. ;  Committees  of,  33 ;
summons  Dumouriez  to  bar,  37  «. ;  sends  to  arrest  him,  38  and  n. ;
sends  commissioners  to  armies,  42  n. ;  thin  attendance  at,  54  n. ;  on
June  2nd,  55  sqq.  and  nn. ;  sends  against  Lyons,  73  n. ;  second  Consti-
tutional Committee  of,  82  n. ;  at  Fete  of  Aug.  loth,  83  sqq. ;  atheist
movement  in,  135,  139  and  n. ;  utterly  cowed,  147  and  n. ;  gut-
laws  Danton,  181  and  n. ;  claque  in  galleries  of,  190  n. ;  at  Fete  of  Etre
Supreme,  192 ;  its  members  exempted  firom  Law  of  Prairial,  195  n. ;
at  Thermidor,  209  sqq.  nn. ;  parties  in,  after  Thermidor,  217-8-9  n. ;  is
obliged  to  continue  war,  228  n. ;  submission  of  Holland  announced  in,
229  n. ;  at  Germinal,  236  n. ;  decimation  of  its  members,  239,  240
and  n. ;  at  Prairial,  241-2-3-4  ;  publishes  lists  of  victims  of  Terror,  246  ;
decrees  of  Fructidor  in,  252  and  n.,  253  ;  in  Vendemiaire,  254  sqq.  nn. ',
completes  ruin  of  Navy,  312 ;  carries  on  ruin  of  finances,  339  and  n.

Conway,  M.  D.,  '  Life  of  Tom  Paine,'  I.,  377  n.

Conzie,  L.  de.  Bishop  of  Arras,  I.,  192  n.

Cook,  Captain,  to  be  treated  as  friend  by  La  Peyrouse,  I.,  40;  Forster  sails
with,  III.,  21  and  n.

Corbeil,  flour  mills  at,  I.,  9  «.,  155  n. ;  boat  from,  305.

Corday,  M.  C.  C.  d'Armans,  notice  of.  III.,  65  and  n. ;  murder  of  Marat  by,
execution  of,  66  sqq.  nn. ;  imitators  of,  189.


368  INDEX

Cordelier,  Le  Vieux,  I.,  173  n. ;  III.,  i6g  «.,  171  «.,  172-3.

Cordeliers,  district  of,  defends  Danton,  I.,  382.

Cordeliers,  district  and  Club  of,  I.,  391  and  n. ;  deputation  from,  examines
sewers,  415 ;  elixir  of  Jacobinism,  II.,  42 ;  demands  universal  suffrage,
71  n. ;  denounces  King,  II.,  87,  105  and  n.,  133  and  n.  ;  its  minutes
demanded,  27  n. ;  its  Hebertism,  i6g  «.,  170.

Cordeliers,  church  of,  Marat  buried  in,  III.,  233.

Cormatin,  Chouan  leader.  III.,  325.

Corny,  L.  D.  Ethys  de,  Procureiir  du  Roi,  I,,  236,  254.

Coron,  Vendean  victory  at.  III.,  322.

Correspondance  Frangaise  ou  Tableau  de  VEurope  (Peltier),  II.,  289  n.

Corsica,  designs  of  France  on,  III.,  225  «. ;  a  Conseil-Sotwerain  in,  286.

Corvee  Royale,  I.,  18;  to  be  suppressed,  104;  abolished.  III.,  331.

Corvee  Seigneiiriale  {see  also  Feudal  Rights),  I.,  276  n.

Coulombeau,  accompanies  King  to  Convention,  II,,  377  n.

Coupe-Tete,  a  nickname,  I.,  321  n.

Cour-du-Roy,  III.,  280.

Cour-Pleniere,  to  be  substituted  for  Parlement,  I.,  125  ;  failure  of,  132  and
n.,  134  ;  skit  on  the,  134  and  n.

Courbevoie,  Swiss  regiment  at,  II.,  244  and  n.

Courrier  des  Departements  (Gorsas)  approves  massacres,  II.,  372  and  n.

Courrier  de  Lyons,  Mme  Roland  contributes  to,  I.,  405.

Courrier  de  Provence,  Mirabeau's  paper,  I.,  201  n.

Courrier  de  Versailles  h  Paris,  I.,  201  n.

Court,  Chevalier  de,  conceals  a  dagger,  II.,  66.

Court-martial,  Naval,  III.,  312.

Courtois,  E.  B.,  Reports  on  Robespierre's  papers.  III.,  200  n.,  214  n.,  234  n.

Coustard,  A.  P.,  executed  with  d'Orleans,  III.,  116  n.

Couthon,  G.,  notice  of,  II.,  153  and  n. ;  at  opening  of  Convention,  338 ;  his
motion  against  Pitt,  III.,  23  n. ;  on  June  2nd,  58 ;  in  Second  Comite  de
Salut  Public,  71  n.  ;  proconsul  at  Lyons,  74  n.,  \ib-']  and  n. ;  on  second
Constitutional  Committee,  82  n. ;  at  siege  of  Lyons,  90  ». ;  '  cloud-
compeller,'  145 ;  his  mot  about  hanging,  167 ;  supports  Saint-Just's
views,  168  n.  ;  moves  law  of  22nd  Prairial,  194  and  n. ;  all  parties
coalesce  against,  196  n. ;  at  Thermidor,  205  sqq.  nn.  ;  death  of,  215-6.

Crassous,  J.  F.,  arrest  of.  III.,  237  n.

Crawford,  Mr.,  friend  of  Fersen's,  II.,  100  n.

Creuze-La-Touche,  A.  J.,  on  Constitutional  Committee,  1795,  III.,  251  n.

Crillon-Mahon,  Due  de,  fails  at  Gibraltar,  I,,  59,

Crime,  growth  of  violent,  during  the  Revolution,  II.,  62  n.

Croe-en-Combrailles,  Parlementeers  banished  to,  I.,  6,  38.

Cromwell,  O.,  and  the  'Agitators,'  III.,  206  «. ;  and  the  Long  Parliament,
252  and  n.

Crown  lands,  taken  over  by  State,  III.,  338-340.

Crussol,  Marquise  de,  guillotined.  III.,  185  and  n.

Cuirassiers,  become  8we  Cavalerie,  III.,  304.

Cuissa,  victim  of  September  massacre,  II.,  308.

Curtius,  seller  of  images,  I.,  223.

Cussy,  Girondin,  in  flight,  III.,  78  sqq.  and  n.

Custine,  A.  P.  Comte  de,  negotiating  at  Berlin,  II.,  305  n. ;  invades  Ger-
many, 345  and  n. ;  notice  of,  346  n. ;  Dumouriez  jealous  of,  368  n. ;
driven  back  on  Landau,  III.,  21  and  m.  ;  goes  to  Army  of  North,  40;
suspect  to  the  radicals,  42  ». ;  denounced  in  Convention,  64  n. ;  his
failure,  81  and  n. ;  trial  and  death  of,  96  and  n.


INDEX  369

Custine,  R.  P.,  son  of  the  above,  negotiates  with  Brunswick,  II.,  185  n. ;
executed.  III.,  121.

Dagobert,  L,  S.  A.,  General,  in  Eastern  Pyrenees,  III.,  153  n.

Damas,  J.  F.  L.  Comte  de,  •  Rapport  sur  I'affaire  de  Varennes,'  II.,  90  w. ;
on  the  flight  to  Varennes,  no  sqq. ;  his  trial  unfinished,  137  n.

Damiens,  R.  F.,  his  attempt  to  assassinate  Louis  XV.,  I.,  7.

Dampierre,  A.  H.  Marquis  de,  in  command  of  Army  of  North,  III.,  21  w.,
40  ;  killed,  63-4  and  n.

Dampierre,  Marquis  de,  murdered  in  King's  presence,  II.,  128  w.

Dampmartin,  A.  H.  Vicomte  de.  Captain,  notice  of,  I.,  161  n. ;  at  Reveillon
riot,  163  and  n. ;  his  books  '  Evenemens  qui  se  sont,'  etc.,  '  Le  Pro-
vincial a  Paris,'  etc.,  ibid. ;  his  Strasburg  friend  exhausted  by  the
gaieties  of  Paris,  427 ;  on  the  Edict  requiring  noblesse  for  office  in
army,  II.,  6 ;  on  failing  discipline,  8 ;  his  difficulties  at  Strasburg,  13  ;
is  stopped  on  high  road,  41 ;  sent  to  Avignon,  163-4  >  sees  the  Mar-
seillais,  230.

Danican,  A.,  General  in  Vendemlaire,  III.,  256  n.

Danton,  G.  J.,  at  Versailles  (?),  I.,  172  ;  at  Cordeliers  district,  293,  305,  391  ;
notice  of,  294  w. ;  his  arrest  ordered,  382  ;  suggests  oath  to  Constitution,
395  ;  hatred  of  Mme  Roland  for,  406  n. ;  elected  to  be  Procureur-
Substitut,  429  and  n. ;  demands  change  of  ministry,  II.,  58 ;  his  steps
in  Municipal  office,  70  n. ;  denounces  Lafayette,  105  n. ;  for  a  Republic,
132 ;  his  share  in  the  Cordelier  petition,  133  n. ;  escapes,  136  and  n. ;
sends  Talleyrand  to  London,  146  n. ;  compared  to  Mirabeau,  150 ;
accused  of  taking  bribes,  173-4  and  nn. ;  in  Jacobins,  199 ;  organises
insurrection,  237,  243 ;  does  not  trust  Petion,  249  and  «. ;  responsible
for  Mandat's  murder,  252  n. ;  accused  by  Gironde  of  cowardice,  265  n. ;
Minister  of  Justice,  267  and  n. ;  on  Comitc  de  Defense  Generale,  279  n. ;
demands  domiciliary  visits,  287  and  n. ;  on  Sept.  2nd,  298  ».,  299  and
». ;  possibly  robs  the  Garde-Meuble,  316  n. ;  saves  Duport,  321  «. ;  his
responsibility  for  massacres,  323,  325  n. ;  in  Convention,  327  and  ».,
338 ;  on  first  Constitutional  Committee,  349 ;  hatred  of  Mme  Roland
for,  360 ;  desires  to  limit  propaganda,  363  n. ;  plunders  Belgium,  368
and  w. ;  defends  Robespierre,  370,  371  n. ;  in  Belgium,  376;  gets
Lanjuinais'  motion  rejected,  377  w. ;  his  return  from  Belgium,  388  ;
his  mot  on  King's  death,  402  ;  reljukes  Marat,  III.,  15  ;  peacemaker,  15,
18  n. ;  in  Belgium,  20  and  n. ;  his  speech  of  March  loth,  24  and  n. ;
calls  on  Paris,  25  and  n. ;  moves  for  a  Cotnite  de  Salut  Public,  29  n. ;
in  Belgium  again,  30  and  n. ;  supports  motion  for  Tribunal,  32  n. ;  on
first  Comite  de  Salut  Public,  34  «. ;  proposes  Impot  progressif,  36  n.,  341  ;
his  breach  with  Gironde,  41-2-3  and  n. ;  his  attitude  to  Gironde,  52  n.,
59  ». ;  uses  Lebrun,  58-9  and  w. ;  his  plans  for  peace,  71  n. ;  on  second
Constitutional  Committee,  82  «. ;  moves  for  a  provisional  government,
83  n. ;  his  courage,  92 ;  carries  Law  of  Forty  Sous,  93  and  n. ;  leaves
Paris,  93  M. ;  hopes  for  Queen  from,  98  m.  ;  opposes  atheist  movement,
138  M. ;  pleads  for  liberty  of  worship,  142 ;  gets  50  millions  for  Salut
Public,  144;  'tried'  by  Jacobins,  171  and  n. ;  his  absence  from  Paris,
172 ;  his  awkward  position  in  1794,  175  n. ;  arrest,  trial  and  death  of,
176  sqq.  nn.

Dauban,  C.  A.,  '  La  D^magogie  a  Paris  en  1793,'  *  La  Demagogic  a  Paris  en
1794,'  I.,  285  n. ;  '  fitude  sur  Mme  Roland,'  406  n. ;  his  edition  of  Mme
Roland's  M^moires,  ibid. ;  '  Les  Prisons  de  Paris  sous  la  Revolution,'
II.,  291  n.

VOL.  III.  24


370  INDEX

Daudet,  Ernest,  '  Les  Conjurations  Royalistes  du  Midi,'  I.,  363  n.

Daunou,  P.   C.  F.,  '  M^moires  de,'  III.,  200  n. ;   restored  to  Convention,

222  n. ;  on  Constitutional  Committee,  1795,  251  n.
Dauphin,  Louis-Joseph  (the  first  Dauphin),  I.,  41  n. ;  death  of,  187  and  w.,

204  n. ;  deputation  introduced  to  his  corpse,  211.
Dauphin,  Charles  Louis,  Due  de  Normandie,  Dauphin  1789,  otherwise  called
Louis  XVIL,  L,  41  n. ;  salutes  a  Federe,  420;  expected  to  be  carried
off,   IL,  60 ;    at  flight  to  Varennes,   loi   sqq. ;    possible   Regency  for,
133  n.,  243;  in  the  hall  of  the  Assembly,  257;  Dumouriez  intends  to
crown,  IIL,  37  n. ;  horrible  treatment  of,  notice  of,  189  n. ;  Spain  refuses
to  forsake  cause  of,  231  n. ;  fatal  results  of  his  death,  251  n.
Dauphin,  Cul-de-Sac  D.,  IIL,  255-6.
Dauphin- Royal,  French  ship  renamed  Sansculottes  and  then  Orient,  IIL,

316.
Dauphin^,  disturbances  in,  meeting  of  Estates  of,  L,  119  n. ;  chateaux  burnt
in,  280 ;  brigands  hung  by  Prevot  of,  283 ;  Mounier  retires  to,  343  n.  ;
taille  in,  IIL,  334.
Daverhoult,  J.  A.,  Royalist  in  Legislative  Assembly,  IL,  149  n.
David,  J.  L.,  notice  of,  IL,  328  and  n, ;  paints  the  death  scene  of  Marat,
IIL,  68  ;  in  Comite  de  Surete  Generale,  72  n. ;  at  fete  of  Aug.  loth,  83
sqq.  nn. ;  draws  the  Queen  on  her  way  to  scaffold,  102  n.  ;  interrogates
Mme  Roland,  n8  n. ;  suggests  fete  for  fall  of  Toulon,  130;  suggests
statue  of  Sovereign  People,  160  and  n. ;  at  fete  of  Atre  Supreme,  192  ;
will  support  Robespierre,  196  and  n. ;  introduces  Greek  costumes,  223.
Davoust,  L.  N.,  officer  in  Volunteers,  IL,  185  n.
Dayot,  A.,  *  La  Revolution  Fran<?aise  apres  des  peintures,'  L,  410  n.
Deane,  Silas,  American  agent  in  France,  L,  55  and  n.
Debry,  J.  A.,  moves  to  accuse  Lafayette,  IL,  232  m.  ;  re-elected  on  Comite

de  Salut  Public,  IIL,  219  n.
Debt,  the  National,  IIL,  329  sqq.

Defenseur  de  la  Constitution  (Robespierre's  paper),  IL,  199  n.
Deficit,  increasing,  1781,  L,  84;    increasing,  1787,  114;    increasing,  1789,

360  and  n. ;  increasing  continually,  IIL,  329  sqq.
Deforgues,  signatory  of  September  circular,  IL,  320.
Deforgues,  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs,  III.,  58.
Delaunay,  J.,  condemned  with  Danton,  IIL,  178  n.

Delessart,  A.  de  V.,  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs,  IL,  170  ».,  193  n. ;  answers
Kaunitz,  180  ;  notice  of,  193  n. ;  denounced  by  Brissot,   194  n. ;  reads
Kaunitz'  note,  197  n. ;  decreed  accused,  205  n. ;  massacred,  321  and  n.
Delmas,  J.  F.  B,,  on  first  Comite  de  Salut  Public,  IIL,  34  «. ;    on  second

Constitutional  Committee,  82  n. ;  re-elected  on  Salut  Public,  219  n.
Delorme,  P.,  architect  of  Tuileries,  I.,  355.
'  Demarcation,  Line  of,'  in  Germany,  IIL,  231  n.
Denmark,  proposed  arbitration  of,  IIL,  230  n. ;  naval  strength  of,  316.
Denoue,  Colonel  oi  Chdteau-Vieux,  IL,  18  sqq.  nn.
Department  of  Seine,  authorities  of,  try  to  keep  order,  IL,  207  n.,  215  sqq.  nn,,

220  n. ;  are  hissed,  232  n. ;  protest  against  June  2nd,  IIL,  80.
Departments,  introduction  of  system,  L,  361  and  n. ;    proposed  guard  for
Convention  from  the,   IL,  354-5   and  ».,  356 ;    insurrectionary  move-
ments in  the,  61-2;  tribunals  established  in  the,  IIL,  293-4.
Desaix,  L.  C.  A.,  officer  in  Volunteers,  IL,  185  ». ;  Hoche's  letter  to,  IIL,

152  n.
Desbouchauds,  one  of  the  authors  of  the  *  Voyage  des  132  Nantais,'  IIL,
199  ».


INDEX  371

Deseze,  R.,  defends  King,  notice  of,  II.,  380-1  andw. ;  pleads  for  respite,  391.

Desfieux,  F.,  on  Committee  of  Insurrection,  III.,  27  ».,  53  n. ;  brought  to
trial,  169  n.

Deshorties,  Mdlle,  Robespierre's  cousin,  I.,  193  n.

Deshuttes,  a  bodyguard,  massacred  and  beheaded  by  mob,  I.,  335,  337;
notice  of,  338  n.

Desilles,  Le  ChevaHer,  Captain  in  Roi,  tries  to  prevent  meeting,  killed,
II.,  27.

Desmarets,  N.,  adopts  principle  oilmpot  unique,  III.,  335.

Desmaze,  C,  '  Le  Parlement  de  Paris,'  '  Le  Chatelet  de  Paris,'  III.,  279.

Desmoulins,  Camille,  at  Versailles  (?),  notice  of,  I.,  172-3  and  ».  ;  in  Palais
Royal,  222  sqq. ;  Procureur-Ghieral  de  la  Lanterne,  291-2 ;  *  La
Lanterne  aux  Parisiens,'  297  n. ;  snubbed  by  Mirabeau,  ibid. ;  on  in-
surrection of  October,  309,  310;  visits  Mirabeau  at  Versailles,  suggests
march  from  Paris,  344  n.  ;  '  wittier  than  ever,'  385  ;  suggests  federation
of  editors,  417 ;  is  '  wide  awake,'  II.,  37  ;  on  d'Orleans,  47  ;  on  sack  of
Castries'  house,  51 ;  in  favour  of  Republic,  132  ;  escapes,  136;  answers
Burke,  177 ;  ridicules  Brissot,  199,  200  n.  ;  at  Committee  of  Sections,
237;  intrigues  against  King,  242;  in  Convention,  327  and  ».;  on
making  rich  persons  pay.  III.,  35  ;  '  Histoire  des  Brissotins,'  44,  50  n. ;
•J.  P.  Brissot  demasque,'  50  «. ;  'tried'  by  Jacobins,  170-1  n.,  172-3;
urges  Danton  to  act,  175 ;  arrest,  trial  and  death  of,  176  sqq.  nn. ',
'  Aper<?us  sur  C.  D.,'  178  «.

Desmoulins,  Lucile,  wife  of  the  above,  her  trial.  III.,  169  n. ;  outside  the
Luxembourg,  177  ;  arrest  of,  178  and  n. ;  death  of,  182  and  n.

Dessein,  bookseller,  his  shop  full  of  pamphlets,  I.,  202.

'  Deux-Amis  de  la  Libert^,'  '  Histoire  de  la  Revolution  Frangaise,  par,'  I.,
17  n.  ;  little  use  made  by  Carlyle  of  vol.  iv.,  355  n.

Devaux,  J.  L.  M.,  secretary  to  Batz,  II.,  397.

^Dialogue  desMorts,'  III.,  104  n.

Dicey,  A.  V.,  '  Law  of  the  Constitution,'  III.,  288.

•  Dictionnaire  des  hommes  marquants   du  xviiime  Siecle,*  I.,  45  n.

'  Dictionnaire  de  Parlementaires  Fran9ais,'  II.,  48.

Diderot,  D.,  philosophe,  hails  'Golden  Age,'  I.,  39;  contributes  to  Raynal's
book,  73  and  n. ;  imprisoned  at  Vincennes,  II.,  62.

Diet  of  Holy  Roman  Empire,  II.,  53  n. ;  Conclusum  of,  179  n. ;  proposals  for
peace  at,  III.,  230  Ji.  ;  complaints  of  Ecclesiastical  Electors  to,  342  n.

Dietrich,  P.  F.  Baron  de,  notice  of,  L,  284  and  n.

Dijon,  Parlement  of,  I.,  134;  III.,  286;  Mirabeau  imprisoned  in  castle  of,
I.,  190  n.

Dillon,  A.,  following  up  Brunswick,  II.,  339;  brought  to  trial,  III.,  169  n. ;
accused  of  a  plot  in  the  prison,  i8i.

Dillon,  T.,  massacred,  II.,  208  w.

Dillon,  Captain,  finds  relics  of  La  Peyrouse's  squadron,  1826,  I.,  58  n.

Dilworth,  compiler  of  arithmetic  book,  I.,  383  and  n.

Directory,  natural  child  of  Comite  de  Salut  Public,  III.,  251  n.,  252  ;  increases
Assignats,  III.,  339-40.

Districts  {see  also  '  Departments '),  civil  tribunals  of.  III.,  293.

Districts  of  Paris,  the  sixty,  I.,  154  ;  Committee  of,  atArcheveche,  288  n.

Dobsent,  C.  E.  in  Committee  of  Insurrection,  HI.,  48  «. ;  in  Commune  146  n,

Dodd,  Dr.,  English  adventurer,  notice  of,  I.,  64  and  n.

Dog,  solemn  execution  of  a.  III.,  143  n.

Dol  (Brittany),  Vendcen  retreat  on.  III.,  323.

Dole  (Franche  Comte),  formerly  a  Parlement  at,  III.,  286.


372  INDEX

Domiciliary  visits,  II.,  287  and  n.

Dommartin,  General  E.  A.,  wounded  at  Toulon,  III.,  129  n.

Don  Patriotique,  I.,  296  and  n. ;  III.,  338.

Doppet,  F.  A.,  besieges  Toulon,   III.,   129  and  n. ;   in   Eastern  Pyrenees,

153  n.
Dormans,  royal  family  sleep  at,  II.,  128  7z.
Dorset,  the  Duke  of,  on  Bastille  day,  I.,  221  n. ;  denies  the  story  of  the

'  Gold  of  Pitt,'  III.,  5  w.
Douai,  riots  at,  II.,  53 ;  soldiers  in  barracks  at.  III.,  64  «.
Douanes  Interieures,  III.,  336  and  n.
Doue,  Vendeen  victory  at.  III.,  321-2.
Draguignan,  Federation  of^  I.,  403.

Drapeau  Rouge,  symbol  of  martial  law  {see  also  '  Loi  Martiale'),  I.,  370-1.
Dreux-Breze,  H.  E.,  Marquis  de,  I.,  166 ;  anecdote  and  notice  of,  200  and  n. ;

as  'Mercury,'  205-6-7;  at  Seance-Roy  ale,  210-1.
Droit-Administratif,  III.,  288.
Droit-Ecrit  and  Droit-Coutumier,  III.,  292.
Dropmore  papers,  the.  III.,  251  n.
Drouet,  J.  B.,  of  Saint-Menehould,  notice  of,  acts  of,  II.,  114  and  n.  sqq.;

reward  given  to,  143  n. ;  elected  to  Convention,  295 ;  taken  prisoner,

III.,  155.
Droz,  F.  X.  J.,  '  Histoire  du  regne  de  Louis  XVI,'  I.,  122  n.
Dubail,  '  Precis  de  I'Histoire  militaire,'  III.,  295.
Dubarry,  J.  Vaubernier  Comtesse,  mistress  of  Louis  XV.,  I.,  4,  5  and  n.  ;

takes  leave  of  court,  30;  visits  Versailles,  31  and  n. ;  imprisonment  of,

III.,  114  and  n.
Dubois,  Cardinal,  notice  of,  I.,  362  and  n. ;   uses  Grand  Council  against

Parlement,  III.,  288.
Dubois,  Le  Chevalier,  Captain  of  the  Watch,  I.,  141 ;  charges  the  rioters,

144.
Dubois-Crance,  E.  L.  A.,  presents  petitions  against  Austrian  troops,  II.,

14  n. ;  moves  to  brigade  volunteers  with  regulars,  185  n. ;  Convention

Commissioner  to  Lyons,  III.,   14  n. ;   at  siege  of  Lyons,  90  and  n. ;

recalled,  125  «. ;  complains  of  malingerers,  163  n. ;  re-elected  on  Salut

Public,  219  n.
Dubuisson,  P.  U.,  sent   to    Holland,   meets   Dumouriez,  III.,  30  and  n. ;

brought  to  trial,  169  n.
Duchatel,  G.,  absent  from  Convention,  II.,  388 ;  escapes  from  arrest,  III.,

62 ;  trial  of,  103  n.,  sqq.
Duclos,  C.  P.,  '  Memoires  Secrets,'  I.,  28  n.
Ducos,  J.  F.,  notice  of,  II.,  150  and  n. ;  votes  King's  death,  391  n. ;  arrested,

58  and  ». ;  trial  of,  103  n.  sqq. ;  pot-pourri  composed  by,  104  and  w.
Duels,  between  members  of  Assembly,  II.,  48,  49,  50.
Duffort,  signatory  of  September  circular,  II.,  320  n.
Dufourny,  L.  P.,  Italian  agitator,  I.,  376.
Dugommier,  J.  F.  C,  at  siege  of  Toulon,  III.,  89;  in  Eastern  Pyrenees,

152-3  ».

Duhamel,  national  guardsman  murdered  by  Marseillais,  II.,  242.

Dulaure,  J.  A.,  'Histoire  de  Paris,'  I.,  7  w. ;  Carlyle's  trust  in,  22  n. ;
♦  Histoire  des  Environs  de  Paris,'  II.,  62  w. ;  '  Physionomie  de  la  Con-
vention,' II.,  353  n. ;  •  Souvenirs  sur  les  journees  du  31  Mai  et  2  Juin,'
III.,  59  n.

Dumas,  A.  D.,  General,  in  Pyrenees,  III.,  153  n.

Dumas,  Mathieu  Comte,  on  Lafayette's  conduct,  I.,  333  n. ;  notice  of,  II.,  152.


INDEX  373

Dumas,  R.  F.,  notice  of,  III.,  32  n. ;  President  of  Tribunal,  195  ». ;  arrested
on  judgment  seat,  212  n.

Dumolard,  escapes  from  Assembly  Hall,  245  and  n.

Dumont,  A.,  attacks  Robespierre,  III.,  285  n.

Dumont,  fi.,  'Souvenirs  sur  Mirabeau,'  I.,  92  n.  ;  at  ruins  of  Bastille,  260;
story  of  a  postillion,  274 ;  on  Mirabeau's  popularity,  297  n.  ;  comes
from  Geneva,  376  n. ;  on  Mirabeau's  activity,  II.,  74 ;  lie  with
Girondists,   199.

Dumouriez,  C.  F.,  his  return  from  Corsica,  I.,  5  ;  *  La  Vie  et  Memoires  du
General  Dumouriez,'  ibid.  n. ;  comes  to  Paris,  notice  of,  374-5  and  n. ;
in  Brittany,  II.,  gi-2 ;  harangues  mob  at  Nantes,  106;  sent  for  by
Narbonne,  186 ;  becomes  Minister,  199  and  n.  ;  his  vigour,  204-5  n. ;
resigns  office,  goes  to  Army,  212  and  n. ;  refuses  to  obey  Luckner,  227 ;
in  command  of  Army  of  5s^orth,  269  and  n. ;  prepares  to  resist  Bruns-
wick, 293  and  M. ;  calls  Council  of  War,  296  ;  seizes  passes  of  Argonne,
330 ;  rallies  at  Grand-Pre,  332  ;  follows  up  Brunswick,  339  and  n.,  358  ;
visits  Paris,  344  and  n. ;  at  Jemappes,  367-8  and  n. ;  visits  Paris  again,
386  and  «. ;  suspected  by  Convention,  400 ;  protected  by  Danton,  III.,
18  ;  his  failure  on  Dutch  frontier,  19,  20  and  n. ;  in  danger,  24  and  n. ;
disastrous  retreat  of,  29  and  n. ;  excellent  criticism  of  Convention  by,
30  and  w. ;  negotiations  and  treason  of,  37  sqq.  nn. ;  guillotined  in
effigy,  149  n.  ;  saves  France,  306-7.

Dun,  village  beyond  Varennes,  II.,  124-5  ^"^  ^•

Dunkirk,  the  objective  of  England,  III,,  22  and  «. ;  siege  of,  121  n. ;  siege
raised,  154  and  n.  ;  becomes  Dunelibre,  161  n.

Dupannier,  execution  of,  III.,  238  n.

Duperret,  draws  a  sword  in  Convention,  III.,  43  ;  C.  Corday  is  introduced
to,  65  and  «.,  66 ;  his  arrest,  69 ;  the  protest  found  at  his  house,  79-80;
trial  of,  103  n.  sqq.

Duplain,  signatory  of  September  circular,  II.,  287  n.,  320  n.

Duplay,  Robespierre's  landlord,  III.,  196  n.,  216  and  n.

Dupont,  Jacob,  notice  of,  II.,  383-4  and  n.

Dupont  (de  Nemours),  P.  S.,  secretary  to  Turgot,  edits  his  works,  I.,  38  n. ;
secretary  to  Notables,  notice  of,  92  and  n. ;  at  dinners  in  Palais  Royal,
147 ;  '  Memoire  au  Roi  sur  les  Municipalit^s,'  192  n. ;  in  favour  of  two
Chambers,  272  n. ;  proposes  to  confiscate  lands  of  Church,  360  n. ;
opposes  Assignats,  II.,  30  «. ;  leans  to  a  Republic  (?),  131  n. ;  argues
against  the  Swiss  convicts,  206 ;  presents  the  •  petition  of  Twenty
thousand,'  220  n. ;  attacks  Petion,  223  n. ;  royalist  in  1795,  253  n. ;  on
privilege  and  taxes,  III.,  329  n.  ;  on  insignificance  of  deficit,  330  ;  resists
policy  oi  Assignats,  338-9  and  n. ;  on  Ecclesiastical  Committee,  343.

Duport,  Adrien,  believer  in  Mesmer,  I.,  67 ;  leading  Parlementeer,  notice  of,
81  and  n.,  105  and  n.,  123  ;  leader  of  Club  des  Trente,  133  n.  ;  busy  at
legal  reform,  357,  361 ;  in  Assembly,  II.,  46 ;  opposes  Robespierre,
131  n.  ;  on  Committee  of  Revision,  138  and  n. ;  will  stay  in  Paris,  147 ;
saved  by  Danton,  321  n.

Duport-du-Tertre,  M.  L.  F.,  Minister  of  Justice,  1791,  II.,  58  and  n. ;  uses
Great  Seal  without  King's  orders,  105  n. ;  imprisoned,  282  n. ;  executed,
III.,  120  n.

Duportail,  L.  L.,  Minister  of  War,  II.,  58  and  n.,  94;  imprisoned,  282  n.

Duprat,  J.,  trial  of.  III.,  103  n.  sqq.

Duquesnoy,  E.  D.  E.,  insurgent  in  Prairial  executed,  III.,  243-4-5  and  «.

Durand-Maillane,  P.  T.,  '  Memoires  de,'  III.,  200  n. ;  on  Constitutional
Committee,  1795,  251  n.  ;  on  Ecclesiastical  Committee,  343.


374  INDEX

Duranton,  N.,  Minister  of  Justice,  II.,  212.

Duras,  Marquis  de,  gives  tickets  of  entry  to  Tuileries,  II.,  64 ;  his  letter  to
Lafayette,  68  n.

Durosoy  [or  de  Rozoi],  B.  F.,  journalist,  II.,  40,  183,  281-2.

Duroveray,  Genevese  friend  of  Mirabeau,  I.,  igi,  201  n.,  376.

Duruy,  '  L'Armee  Royale  en  1789,'  III.,  295.

Dusaulx,  J.,  sent  to  investigate  massacres,  II.,  314,  324  n. ;  ready  to  with-
draw, III,,  56.

Dussault,  F.  J.,  •  Fragments  pour  servir  a  I'Histoire  de  la  Convention
Nationale,'  III.,  200  n.

Dutard,  on  Marat,  I.,  290  «. ;  III.,  46  n.  ;  notice  of,  III.,  11  «.,  44  «. ;  on
Section  Committees,  31  n. ;  on  the  move  to  the  Tuileries,  45  n. ;  on
Hebert,  51  n. ;  on  the  bourgeoisie,  113  n.;  on  religion  and  Chaumette,

135  «•
Duval,  G.,  '  Souvenirs  sur  la  Terreur,'  III.,  166,
Duvergier  de  Hauranne, '  Histoire  du  gouvernement  Parlementaire  en  France,'

I.,  209  n.

fichass^riaux,  elected  on  Comite  de  Salut  Public,  III.,  219  n.

Echelle,  Republican  commander  in  Vendee,  III.,  323.

Echevins  of  Paris  {see  also  Municipality),  I.,  221  and  n.

Ecole  de  Mars,  III.,  160  and  ».

Ecole  Militaire,  Besenval's  headquarters,  I.,  236  ;  overlooks  Champ-de-Mars,

410  and  ».,  414  sqq.,  421.
Ecole  Normale,  III,,  160  and  n. ;  on  site  of  Jacobin  club,  234.
ficole  Polytechnique,  III.,  160  and  n.
ficouen,  telegraph  at.  III.,  160.

Ecuries  de  la  Reine  at  Versailles,  cannons  at,  I.,  215.
Edgeworth,  Abbe,  at  King's  death,  II.,  394  and  n.
Effingham,  Lord,  Governor  of  Jamaica,  III.,  95  n.
figalite.     See  Orleans,
figalite  fils.     See  Louis  Philippe.
Eguillette,  Fort  1',  outside  Toulon,  III.,  130.

Ehrmann,  presents  his  watch  and  chain  to  the  Republic,  III.,  143.
Elbecq,  General  d',  in  Western  Pyrenees,  III.,  153  n.
Elbde,  G.  d',  Vendcen  leader,  killed  at  Chollet,  III.,  322.
Elections,  origin  of  the,  III.,  289-90.

Electoral  System,  for  States-General,  described,  I.,  152  n.,  153.
Electorate  of  France  under  new  Regime,  I.,  383  n.
Electors  of  Germany,  prepared  for  peace.  III.,  230  and  n.
Electors   of  Paris,   I.,   220    sqq    and   nn. ;    declare   themselves   provisional

Municipality,  227  and  n. ;  meet  for  last  time  on  July  15th,  251.
Eleves  de  la  Marine,  III,,  311,
filie,  Capitaine,   at  Versailles  (?),   I.,   171  ;   on  Bastille  day,  I.,  240  sqq. ;

notice  of,  241  n.
Eliot,  General,  afterwards  Lord  Heathfield,  his  defence   of  Gibraltar,   I.,

59  «.
Eliot,  Gilbert,  afterwards  Lord  Minto,  and  his  brother  Hugh,  schoolfellows

of  Mirabeau,  L,  190-1  n. ;  gives  advice  to  Pitt  about  Toulon,  III.,  89.
filisabeth,  P,   H.  M,  de  France,  Madame  E,,  sister  of  Louis  XVI.,  takes

refuge  in  King's  room,  I.,  336  n. ;    accompanies   King  to  Paris,  345  ;

escapes  to  Varennes,  II.,  96  and  n.  sqq. ;  on  June  20th,  218 ;  on  Aug.

loth,  254,  256  ;  execution  of,  185  ;  notice  of,  ibid.  n.
Bins,  origin  of  the,  III.,  289,


INDEX  375

Emigration,  the  first,  I.,  252;  for  many  the  only  safety,  281  n.;  of  par-
tridges, 285  ;  the  second,  343 ;  of  army  officers,  II.,  38 ;  debate  on
liberty  of,  61  ».,  65  n. ;  sets  in  again  after  Varennes,  133.

Emigres,  King  and  Queen  averse  from  plans  of,  53  n.,  94  n. ;  at  declaration
of  Pillnitz,  178-9  and  n. ;  dispersed  from  Coblentz,  180-1  and  n. ;  laws
against,  veto  on,  190  and  n. ;  their  contingent  in  Allied  Army,  209  n. ;
cross  the  frontier,  235  n. ;  on  retreat  of  Prussians,  344 ;  laws  of  1793
against.  III.,  31  and  «. ;  have  to  learn  trades,  164 ;  at  Quiberon,  232
and  M.,  325 ;  a  fatal  bar  to  restoration  of  Monarchy,  253  n. ;  Emigre
officers  proclaimed  deserters,  303  ;  confiscated  property  of  the,  338,  340.

Empire,  Holy  Roman,  disgraceful  neutrality  of  smaller  states  of,  II,,  209  n.

En/ants  de  la  Patrie,  Ecole  des,  III.,  160  and  n.

Engineers,  before  1789,  III.,  296;  suffer  little  by  emigration,  303  n.

England,  Danton  escapes  to,  II.,  136  n. ;  not  likely  to  help  allies,  179  n. ;
Dumouriez  negotiates  with,  199  n. ;  remonstrates  in  favour  of  King,
384 ;  war  declared  on,  401  ;  her  plans  for  the  war,  III.,  22  n. ;  her  flag
[not]  hoisted  at  Toulon,  89,  90  and  n.  ;  her  blunders  in  San  Domingo,
96  n. ;  her  zeal  to  save  Belgium,  162  «. ;  her  naval  strength,  316;
and  La  Vendee,  324-5,  327-8.

Enquetes,  Chambre  d\  in  Parletnent,  more  violent  than  Grand  Chambre,  I.,
108  n. ;  its  duties.  III.,  281  sqq.

Enrages,  faction  of  the,  III.,  146.

Enregistrement,  L\  III.,  336.

Enseignes,  new  naval  officers,  III.,  311.

Ensisheim,  a  Conseil-Souverain  at.  III.,  286.

Eole,  extraordinary  demand  of  the  crew  of  the  ship,  III.,  314.

£on  de  Beaumont,  C.  G.  L.  Chevalier  d',  of  doubtful  sex,  notice  of,  I.,  64
and  n.

fipee,  L'Abbe  de  1',  teacher  of  deaf  and  dumb,  II.,  290  n.

fipernay,  II.,  128  n.

Ephemerides  du  Citoyen,  Physiocratic  journal,  I.,  190  n.

Apices,  profits  of  the  judges.  III,,  283.

fipr^mesnil  or  Espremenil,  J.  J.  Duval  d',  believer  in  Mesmer,  I,,  67  ;  notice
of,  81  and  «. ;  leader  in  Parlement,  105  and  n.,  108,  114,  117  and  n.,
122  and  n.,  127-8  ;  arrested  and  sent  to  fortress,  131 ;  at  Versailles,  184  ;
fervour  of,  in  Assembly,  200,  212,  272,  367;  a  'chevalier  du  poniard,'
II.,  68 ;  guillotined.  III.,  184  and  n. ;  his  widow  guillotined,  195  ;  his
proposed  Council  of  Gallican  Church,  344.

Erdre,  passage  of  the  river.  III,,  321.

Ernani,  storming  of  the  lines  of.  III.,  153  n.

Escuyer,  L',  Avignonese  radical  murdered,  II.,  161-2  and  n.

Eslon,  Capitaine  d',  II.,  124-5  ^^m  126.

Espagnac,  L'Abbe,  condemned  with  Danton,  III,,  178  n.

Esquirol,  J.  E.  D.,  '  Des  maladies  mentales,'  III.,  49  n.

Estain,  Prussian  retreat  on,  II,,  342.

Estaing,  C.  H.  Comte  d',  conversation  with  Lafayette,  I.,  300  ;  at  Versailles
in  October,  318,  322,  325,  332  ;  notice  of,  III.,  99  and  n.

Estang,  B,  d',  '  Les  Parlements  de  France,'  III.,  279.

Esterhazy,  Regiment  d\  drawn  up  at  Versailles,  I.,  214.

fitampes,  riots  at,  II,,  168,  207,

Etats-de-Bourgogne,  French  ship  renamed  Cote-d'or,  Montague,  etc..  III.,
.      316.

Etoges,  stage  on  journey  to  Varennes,  II.,  109  ?j,

fitoile,  Federation  of,  I,,  401,


376  INDEX

Atoile,  Barriere  de  l\  II.,  128  n.

Etre  Supreme^  Fete  of,  III.,  191  sqq.  nn.

Ettenheim,  Conde  established  at,  II.,  181  n.

Eure,  insurrection  in  Department  of  the,  III.,  63  and  h.

Evocation,  Droit  d\  III.,  287.

fivrard,  S.,  mistress  of  Marat,  II.,  239  n. ;  notice  of,  III.,  67  and  n.

Executive  Commissions,  twelve  created,  III.,  183  n.

Expilly,  L.  A.,  consecrated  '  Bishop,'  III.,  345.

Exposition  des  principes  de  la  Constitution  Civile  du  Clerge,  III.,  345.

Fabre,  A.,  '  fitudes  Historiques  sur  les  clercs  de  la  Bazoche,'  I.,  109  n.
Fabre  d'Eglantine,   P.   F.    N.,  on  Aug.   loth,  II.,  249 ;    at   Garde-Meuble,

316  ». ;    on  massacres,  320  n.  ;    in   Convention,  327;    helps  to  make

Calendar,  III.,  86  ;  purged  bom  jfacobin  Club,  171 ;  Danton  arrested  as

accomplice  of,  176  n.,  178.
Faillite  du  Tiers  Consolide,  III.,  332,  334.
Falkland  Islands,  in  dispute,  I.,  6  n.
Famars,  storming  of  camp  of,  III.,  63.
Famine  in  Paris,  1795,  III.,  235  sqq.  nn.
Fantin  Desodoards,  '  Histoire  de  la  Revolution,'  III.,  235  n.
Fare,  M.  de  la.  Bishop  of  Nancy,  preaches  at  opening  of  States-General,  I.,

188  n. ;  Mirabeau  criticises,  201  n.
Farmers-General,  execution  of  the.  III.,  186  and  n. ;  rise  in  price  of  their

contract,  333  n.
'  Faublas,'  *  Les  aventures  du  Chevalier  F.,'  filthy  novel,  I.,  78  and  n. ;  Mme

Roland's  favourite  v/ork,  406  n.
Fauche-Borel,  L.,  gets  hold  of  Pichegru,  III.,  253  n.
Fauchet,  Claude,  I'Abbe,  at  Bastille  siege,  I.,  242 ;  blesses  Tricolour,  286-7 ;

preaches  on  Franklin,  425  ;  in  Cercle  Social,  notice  of,  II.,  43-4  and  «. ;

in  Legislative  Assembly,  150 ;  proposes  camp  at  Beaucaire,  165  ;  accused

of  venality,  173  n. ;  has  spies  in  the  Tuileries,  176  n. ;  discards  religious

dress,  192  ;  at  King's  death,  400  ;  ready  to  withdraw.  III.,  56  ;  arrested,

69 ;  trial  of,  102  n.  sqq. ;  confession  of,  105  n.
Faucigny-de-Lucinge,  le  Comte  de,  proposes  to  kill  the  leaders  of  the  Left,

II.,  48  and  n.
Fauconnerie,  suppressed,  I.,  83  n.

Favras,  T.  M.  Marquis  de,  Royalist  plotter,  executed,  I.,  366-7  and  n.
Federalism,  accusation  of,  brought  against  Girondists,  III.,  12  and  n.
Federation,  rage  for,  I.,  402 ;  Fete  of  the,  409  sqq. ;  Fete  of  1792,  II.,  225-6,

231-2  and  n. ;  loyalty  of  Army  sapped  by  Fete  of.  III.,  301-2.
Federes,  arriving  in  Paris,  I.,  419-20;  of  1792,  II.,  226;  the  Brest  F.,  239

and  n. ;  F.  to  accept  Constitution  of  1793,  III.,  82  sqq.  nn.
Federes-du-Dix-Aout,  incorporated  in  National  Guard,  I.,  216  n.
F^nelon,  desired  States-General,  I.,  145  and  n.
Feraud  or  Ferraud  (Conventional),  notice  of,  II.,  328  and  n. ;  murder  of,

III.,  241-2 ;  death  of  his  assassin,  244  and  n.
Ferney,  Voltaire's  residence,  I.,  376  and  n.
Ferraud,  an  Invalide  on  Bastille  Day,  I.,  244  n.
Ferrieres,  C.   E.   Marquis  de,  his  '  Memoires,'  I.,  271  n. ;    his  dread  of  a

'  peerage,.'  272  n. ;  his  opinion  of  Mirabeau,  II.,  83.
Fersen,  Count  Axel,  II.,  53  n. ;  initiated  into  secret  of  the  flight,  90  n. ;  his

share  in  the  flight,  95  sqq.  nn. ;  notice  of,  95  n. ;  his  efforts  to  save  the

Queen,  his  'Journal  et  Correspondance,'  III.,  98  w. ;    his  despairing

efforts  for  Queen,  190  «.


INDEX  377

Ferte-sous-Jouarre,  La,  II.,  109  ».,  128  n.

Fetes  of  the  Revolution,  Catholic  character  of  the  earlier,  I.,  408  n. ;  regular

series  of,  III.,  191  n.
Fete  of  Aug.  loth,  1793,  II.,  397  n. ;  III.,  83  sqq.  nn.
Fete   of  Chdteauvieux  galley  slaves,   bonnet-rouge   first  worn   at   {see  also

Chdteauvieux),  I.,  423  n.
Fete-Dieti,oi  1791,  II.,  97  ;  of  1792,  210;  of  1793,  III.,  134-5  ^^^  **•
Fete  oi  UEtre-Stipreme,  III.,  191  sqq.  nn.

Fete  of  the  Federation,  called  Fete  des  Piques.     See  Federation.
Fete  de  la  Loi,  II.,  207  and  n.
Fetes  of  Reason,  III.,  138-9,  140-1  and  nn.

Feudal  Rights,  account  of  those  existing  in  France,  I.,  274-5  n. ;  Committee
of  Assembly  on,  ibid. ;  effect  of  Aug.  4th  on,  ibid. ;  action  of  Legisla-
tive and  Convention  on,  ibid. ;  compensation  to  German  princes  for  loss
of,  II.,  179  n.
Feuillants,  convent  and  club  of,  I.,  391-2  n. ;  II.,  42,  85,  132,  141 ;  church  of,

262  n. ;  terrace  of,  III.,  45.
Feuille  Villageoise,  Rabaut's  paper,  I.,  179 ;  approves  massacres,  II.,  372  n.
Feuillet  des  Conches,  '  Lettres  et  documents  inedits,'  I.,  347  n.
F^vrier's  Restaurant,  II.,  393.
Feydeau  '  Concert  de  la  Rue,'  III.,  227  n.
Filles-Saint-Thomas,  Section  of,  II.,  2ii,  237  n.,  241-2  and  n.,  245  ;  III.,  211,

236;  convent  of,  III.,  254.
*Fils  Adoptif,'  '  Memoires  de  Mirabeau,'  etc.  [Lucas  de  Montigny],  I.,  46.
Finisterre,  Department  of,  II.,  239  n.
Flachslanden,  le  Bailli  de,  sits  for  Tiers-^tat,  I.,  158  n.
Flahaut,  A.  Filleul  Comtesse  de,  saves  Bertrand-Moleville,  II.,  233  n.
Flammermonth,  J.,  '  fitudes  critiques  sur  les  Sources  de  I'Hist.  du  XVII Ime
Siecle,'  I.,  16  n.  ;  •  Deux  relations  in^dites  de  la  Prise  de  la  Bastille,'
221  n. ;  '  Le  14016  Juillet,'  ibid.
Flanders,  richest  province  of  France,  I.,  282 ;  coveted  by  Austria,  II.  339  n.,
III.,  22  n. ;   being  cleared  of  enemy,  154  n.;  tattle  in,  334;   dioceses
of,  342.
Flandre,  Regiment  de,  summoned  to  Versailles,  I.,  300  and  n.  ;  banquets
given  to  and  by,  305  sqq. ;  repentant  (?),  318  ;  v/ill  not  fight,  324;  grown
'  patriotic,'  330  ;  in  the  procession  to  Paris,  346.
Flesselles,  J.  de,  Prevot  des  Marchands,  I.,  221 ;  joins  electors  unwillingly,
227  and  n. ;  promises  arms,  228 ;  suspected  by  mob  of  doing  his  duty,
231,  235  and  n. ;  terrified,  241 ;  murdered,  247  and  n.
Fleuriot-Lescot,  J.  B.  E,,  Maire  of  Paris,  II.,  361  n. ;  notice  of.  III.,  183

and  n. ;  will  support  Robespierre,  196  n.,  207  ;  guillotined,  215.
Fleurus,  battle  of.  III.,  162  and  n.,  307.

Fleury,  Joly  de,  Controller-General,  I.,  84  and  n. ;  his  loans.  III.,  332  n.
Flinval,  halting-place  of  mutineers  outside  Luneville,  II.,  22.
Flotte,  Admiral  de,  murdered  at  Toulon,  III.,  314.
Foncin,  '  Essai  sur  le  ministere  Turgot,'  I.,  30  n.
Fontanges,  M.  de,  Archbishop  of  Toulouse,  I.,  371  n.
Fontarabia,  storm  of.  III.,  153  n.,  231  n.

Fontenay-le-Comte,  taken  by  the  Vendeans,  III.,  64  m.,  320-1-2,  326.
Fontevraud,  Princesses  educated  at  convent  of,  I.,  22  n.
Force,  prison.     See  La-Force.
Forestier,  J.  E.,  tried  after  Prairial,  III.,  245  «.
Forges-les-eaux,  II.,  393  n.
Forneron,  '  Histoire  Generale  des  fimigrds,'  I.,  43  «.


378  INDEX

Forster,  G.,  •  Briefwechsel,'  II.,  346  n. ;  notice  of,  III.,  21  and  «.,  22  ;  on  C.

Corday,  70.
*  Forty-soM5,'  Law  of  the,  III.,  93  and  n.,  94 ;  repealed,  221  and  n.
Foucault,  E.,  guillotined,  III.,  238  n.

Foucault,  or  Foucauld,  Marquis  de,  presents  protest  against  the  King's  sus-
pension, II.,  48  n.
Fouche,  J.,  his  inscription  on  graveyards.  III.,  124;  'wakes'  Chalier,'  126;

notice  of,  ibid.  n. ;  his  proconsulate,  127  ;  real  wire-puller  of  Thermidor,

200  n.,  202  n.
Foulon,  J.  F,,  notice  of,  I.,  87;  *  dme-damnee  of  Parlement,^  116;  intrigues

for  the  ministry,  142  and  n. ;  proposed  for  ministry,  222  ;  reported  dead,

253  ;  discovered  and  murdered,  256-7.
Fouquier-Tinville,  A.  Q.,  attorney,  I.,  374 ;  at  jfacobins,  389 ;  notice  of.  III.,

32  ». ;  at  Queen's  trial,  98-9  and  n. ;  at  trial  of  Girondists,  103  sqq.  nn. ;

offends  Madame  Roland's  sense  of  honour,  118  ;  at  Danton's  trial,  179

sqq.  nn. ;  enlarges  his  borders,  194-5  '>  his  mock  trial  of,  in  prison,  199

and  w. ;  at  Thermidor,  212  n. ;  finishes  off  Robespierre's  '  tail,'  215-6 ;

his  own  trial,  219  n. ;  why  he  had  spared  the  Nantais,  220  n. ;  his  death,

237-8  and  n.
Fourcroy,  A.  F.,  re-elected  on  Comite  de  Salut  Public,  III.,  219  n.
Fournees,  wholesale  executions,  III.,  183,  212  and  n.,  215  n.
Fournel,  •  Les  hommes  du  14106  Juillet,'  I.,  216  n.
Fournier,  Dr.  A.,  '  Napoleon  ler,  II,,  259  n.
Fournier,   C,   called  U Americain,   I.,  378;  on  June  20th,  II.,  219  n. ;  at

Committee  of  Sections,  237  ;  conducts  massacre  at  Versailles,  321-2  and

n. ;  agitating  against  the  Gironde,  III.,  27,  47.
Fournier,  '  L'Esprit  dans  I'Histoire,'  I.,  13  n.
Fox,  C.  J.,  his  quarrel  with  Burke,  II.,  401  n.
Franc-alleu  (see  also  Feudal  Rights),  I.,  275  n.
Francastel,  assistant  of  Carrier  at  Nantes,  III.,  123  n.
Franc-fief  {see  also  Feudal  Rights),  I.,  275  n.
Franche-Comte,  dioceses  in.  III.,  342.

Francis  I.,  organises  La  Tournelle,  III.,  282;  evades  treaty  of  Madrid,  284.
Francis  II.,  Emperor,  war  declared  on,  II.,  205  n. ;  slow  to  move,  208-9  nn.
Francois,  a  baker,  murdered  by  mob,  I.,  370  and  n.
Frankfort-on-the-Main,  held  to  ransom  by  Custine,  II.,  346  n. ;  occupied  by

Prussians,  III.,  21  n.
Franklin,  Benjamin,  American  agent  in  France,  I.,  55  and  n. ;  death  of  and

mourning  for,  425  ;  his  bust  in  jfacobins,  II.,  198.
Fraternite,  Section  of.  III.,  47  n.

Fredegonda  and  Brunhilda,  Merovingian  Queens,  I.,  11.
Frederick  I.,  of  Prussia,  tries  to  commit  suicide,  I.,  342.
Frederick  II.,  of  Prussia,  called  '  the  Great,'  his  calumnies,  I.,  27  n. ;  his

seizure    of  Saxony,    28   n. ;  visited  by   Mirabeau,  191    «. ;   bullies  his

soldiers,  386 ;  slighted  by  Prussians  in  1792,  II.,  341  n.
Frederick  William  II.,  of  Prussia,  prospects  of  King's  flight  concern,  II.,

54  n. ;  at  declaration  of  Pillnitz,  178-9  n. ;  preparing  for  war,  185  n. ;

puts  on  his  greatcoat,  337-9  and  n. ;  alienated  from  England,  401.
Freron,  L.   S.,  journalist,   I.,  384  and  n. ;  in  Convention,  II.,  327  n. ;   at

siege  of  Toulon,  III.,  89,  124,  129  n. ;  in  danger,  202 ;  at  Thermidor,

205  and  n. ;  urges  arrest  of  Hanriot,  207  n. ;  Thermidorian  leader,  217  ». ;

[not]   elected  to    Salut  Public,  219   and  n. ;   renegade,   222 ;   resumes

Orateur  du  Peuple,  224  and  n. ;  his  relations  with  Napoleon,  225  and  n. ;

his  jfeunesse  doree,  226,


INDEX  379

Freteau  de  Saint-Just,  a  leading  Parlementeer,  I.,  8i  and  n. ;  applauded,
io8;  at  Seance  Royale,  117;  exiled,  ng  ;  returns,  123.

Frey,  the  brothers,  notice  of,  I.,  376  and  n. ;  intriguing  against  Girondists,
III.,  47 ;  in  prison,  147;  Danton  treated  as  accomplice  of,  178  and  n.

Frimaire,  Law  of  14th  F.,  III.,  143-4  n. ;  repealed,  242  n.

Fronde,  the,  I.,  17;  III.,  285.

Frouarde,  Bouille's  halting  place  outside  Nancy,  II.,  24.

Fructidor,  'decrees  of,'  III.,  252  n.,  253  n.

Funck-Brentano,  '  Legendes  et  archives  de  la  Bastille,'  I.,  165  n.

Fusillades  at  Lyons,  III.,  127-8  and  n. ;  at  Toulon,  131 ;  at  Nantes,  132.

Gabelle,  hardships  of  the,  I.,  18  n. ;  to  be  alleviated,  104 ;  abolished,  271 ;

account  and  amount  of.  III.,  335  and  n. ;  abolition  of,  337  n.
Gages,  salaries  of  judges.  III.,  283.
Gaillon,  Castle  of,  II.,  244.
Galiani,  I'Abbe,  opponent  of  Turgot,  I.,  45  n. ;    opponent  of  physiocrats,

190  «.
Gallais,  sent  en  mission  to  La  Vendee,  III.,  319.
Gallican  Church,  Council  of,  suggested,  III.,  344.
Gamain,  F.,  locksmith,  teaches  Louis  XVI.  lockmaking,  I.,  40  n. ;  betrays

iron  press,  II.,  374-5  and  n.
Garat,  D.  J.,  Minister  of  Justice,  II.,  358  n. ;  has  to  inform  King  of  his  death

sentence,  392  ;  ordered  to  arrest  Committee  of  Insurrection,  III.,  27  n. ;

notice  of,  29  n.  ;  his  spies,  44  n. ;  his  reports,  52  n.
Gard,  Department  of,  II.,  187  «.
Garde-Bourgeoise.     See  National  Guards.
Garde-Meuhle,  arms  at  the,  I.,  228  ;  plunder  of,  II.,  316  n.
Gardcs-Constitutionnelles,  II.,  66  and  n.,  139,  140 ;  disbanded,  191  n.,  196.
Gardes-du  Corps,  at  Versailles,  I.,  300  sqq.  and  nn. ;  disbanded  and  gone,

11.,  56.
Gardes-de-la-Marine,  III.,  311.
Gardes-des-Sceaux,  in  Parlement,  III.,  281.
Gardes-Fran(;aises,  employed  against  Par/^m^n^,  I.,  I2g  sqq. ;  at  Reveillon  riot,

162-3  '»  occupy  Salle-des-M enus,  206  ;  mutinous,  211,  218-9,  220  and  n. ;

account   of  the   regiment,   218  n. ;    incorporated   in    National    Guard,

216  n. ;  fire  on  Lambesc,  225  ;  refuse  to  march,  230 ;  at  siege  of  Bastille,

241  sqq. ;  to  be  called  *  Centre  Grenadiers,'  248  ;  account  of.  III.,  295  ;

outbreak  of,  300-1.
Gardes- Nationales.     See  National  Guards.
Gardes-Suisses,  employed  against  Parlement,  I.,  129  sqq. ;  at  Reveillon  riot,

163 ;  at  Versailles,  300 ;  accompany  King  to  Paris,  346 ;   on  guard  at

Tuileries,  II.,  103  n. ;  their  bravery  on  Aug.  loth,  258  sqq.  nn. ;  their

massacre,  261  sqq.,  304.
Gardien,  J.  F.  M.,  on  Commission  of  Twelve,  III.,  47  n. ;  trial  of,  103  5^^^.  n.
Gardiner,  S.  R.,  'History  of  the  Great  Civil  War,'  III.,  206  n.
Garnerin,  agent  of  the  Comite  de  Salut  Public  in  Alsace,  III.,  166  n.
Garnery,  'Vie  de  Jeanne  de  Saint-Remy  ecrite  par  elle-meme,'  II.,  191  n.
Garnier-Launay,  in  Robespierre's  bodyguard.  III.,  194  n.
Gasparin,  T.  A.,  in  Comite  de  Salut  Public,  III.,  71  n.
Gasquet,  '  Precis  des  Institutions  de  I'Ancienne  France,'  I.,  18  n.
Gaul,  limits  of  old  G.  claimed  by  France,  II.,  363  n. ;  III.,  230  n.
Gendarmerie,  III.,  296.
Generalite,  the  district  managed  by  an  Intendant,  I.,  258  n.  ;  origin  of.  III.,

290.


880  INDEX

Geneva,  Garde-Bourgeoise  at,  I.,  216  n. ;  influence  of  refugees  from,  376  n. ;
recruiting  ground  for  Chdteau-Vieux,  II.,  4.

Genlis,  Felicite  Comtesse  de,  mistress  of  d'Orleans,  I.,  58  n.,  381  and  n. ;
returns  to  France,  III.,  i6 ;  leaves  again,  17  and  n. ;  quits  Belgium,
37-8  and  n.

Genoa,  Napoleon's  mission  to,  III.,  225  and  n.

Gensonne,  A.,  notice  of,  II.,  150  and  n. ;  sent  to  La  Vendee,  168 ;  on  Diplo-
matic Committee  of  Legislative,  171  n. ;  on  Aug.  loth,  265  n. ;  on  Com-
mission of  Twenty-five,  279  n. ;  on  September  massacres,  325  n. ;  on
first  Constitutional  Committee,  349  n. ;  votes  King's  death,  391  n. ;
moves  to  prosecute  massacrers.  III.,  8 ;  arrest  of,  58,  61 ;  trial  of,  102
sqq.  nn.  ;  on  mission  to  La  Vendee,  319.

Geoflfroy,  '  Gustave  III  et  la  Cour  de  France,'  I.,  147  n.

Georgel,  I'Abbe  J.  F.,  at  Louis  XV.'s  death,  I.,  31.

Georget,  sailor,  at  siege  of  Bastille,  I.,  241.

Gerard,  M.  (Pere  Gerard),  deputy  for  Rennes,  almanach  dii,  I.,  i8o  and  n.

Gerbier,  P.  J.  B.,  his  pamphlet  against  privileges,  I.,  93  n.

Gerle,  Dom  C.  A.,  Carthusian  monk,  addle-headed,  I.,  398  and  n. ;  mixed  up
with  C.  Theot,  III.,  193  and  n.;  on  Ecclesiastical  Committee,  343.

Germany,  weakness  of  her  Western  States,  II.,  345  n. ;  treachery  of  her  little
States,  III.,  159  n. ;  her  archdioceses,  342  n.

Germinal,  insurrection  of.  III.,  336  and  n.

Ghent,  advance  on,  III.,  162  n.

Gibbon,  his  flirtation  with  the  future  Mme  Necker,  I,,  60  and  n. ;  on
Necker's  position,  284.

Gilbert,  N.  G.  L.,  called  Sansculotte,  poet,  notice  of  him  and  his  works,  II.,
56  and  n.

Gilds,  system  of,  I.,  69  n. ;  patriotism  of,  70  n.

Girard,  P.  F.,  guillotined.  III.,  238  ».

Girey-Dupr^,  J.  M.,  in  flight  to  the  West,  III.,  78  sqq.  and  n.

Girondistes,  11.,  150  ;  the  name,  155  n. ;  on  June  20th,  219  n. ;  on  Aug.  loth,
265  w. ;  on  war,  363  n.,  382  n. ;  on  d'Orleans,  367-8  and  n. ;  on  King's
trial,  369  and  n.,  389,  391  ;  on  massacres,  372  and  n. ;  hostile  to
jfacobins,  373  ;  on  referendum,  387  n. ;  their  Memoires,  III.,  7  ;  'Jesuits
of  the  Revolution,'  10;  their  heads  demanded,  25  and  n. ;  attitude  of
the  Departments  to,  45 ;  retreat  of  the  Eleven  G.,  76  sqq. ;  trial  of,
102  sqq.  nn.;  '  Le  Dernier  Banquet  des,'  104  and  n.;  confessions  of,
105  n.  ;  restoration  of  survivors,  222  and  n.

GiroUvSt,  J.,  in  flight  to  West,  III.,  78  sqq.  and  n.

Gisors,  massacre  of  Rochefoucauld  at,  II.,  320  and  n.

Givet,  fortified  camp  atG.  suggested,  I.,  115  n.

Glaciere  of  Avignon,  massacre  at  the,  II.,  163  and  n.

Glandeves,  M.  de,  imprisoned  by  molj  at  Toulon,  III.,  314.

Glasson,  '  Le  Parlement  de  Paris,  son  role  politique,'  I.,  114  n.

Gobel,  J.  B.  J.,  Constitutional  "Archbishop"  of  Paris,  notice  of,  I.,  357  and
w. ;  his  episcopal  utterance  on  Mirabeau,  probably  a  satire,  II. ,  78  and  n. ;
excommunicated  by  Pope,  92  n. ;  renounces  faith,  III.,  135  ;  arrest  of,  169
and  ». ;  execution  of,  182  and  n. ;  takes  oath  to  Civil  Constitution,  345.

Godoy,  '  Prince  of  the  Peace,'  Minister  in  Spain,  II.,  402  n. ;  III.,  22  and  n.

Goeslard  de  Monsabert,  leader  in  Parlement,  I.,  126,  128;  arrested,  131.

Goethe,  '  Campagne  in  Frankreich,'  II.,  334  and  n. ;  '  Der  Gross  Cophta,'
'  Der  Biirger-General,'  '  Hermann  und  Dorothea,'  337  and  n. ;  on  the
Prussian  retreat,  341-2  ;  *  Belagerung  von  Mainz,'  III.,  63  n. ;  sees  French
garrison  leave  Mainz,  80.


INDEX  381

Goezman,  L.  V.,  his  lawsuit  with  Beaumarchais,  I.,  54-5  and  n.

Goguelat,  officer  in  Engineers, '  Memoire  sur  les  dvenemens  relatifs  au  voyage
de  Louis  XVI,'  II.,  90  n. ;  his  share  in  flight  to  Varennes,^  95  sqq.  nn.,
112  ». ;  his  trial  unfinished,  137  n. ;  carries  despatches  to  Emigres,  172,
186,  203.

Gomel,  '  Les  Causes  Financieres  de  la  Revolution  Fran9aise,'  III.,  331.

Gommaire,  on  the  Commission  of  Twelve,  III.,  47  «.

Goncourt,  E.  de,  '  Les  Maitresses  de  Louis  XV,'  I.,  5  n.

Gondier,  P.,  stockbroker,  executed  with  d'Orleans,  III.,  116  n.

Gondran,  Captain  in  Centre  Grenadiers  at  Versailles,  I.,  337-9.

Gorsas,  A.  J.,  editor  oi  Courrierde  Versailles  a  Paris,  I.,  201  n.\  journalist,  II.,
39  ;  accompanies  Saint-Huruge,  92  ;  pleads  for  the  Swiss  convicts,  261 ;
a  Republican,  265 ;  in  Convention,  327 ;  flies  to  Rennes,  III.,  76 ;
execution  of,  97.

Gossec,  F.  T.,  musical  composer.  III.,  139.

Goujon,  C.  A.,  organises  Prairial,  III.,  242  n.,  243;  executed,  245.

Goupil  de  Pr^feln,  notice  of,  II.,  46  and  n. ;  for  a  Republic,  132.

Gournay,  physiocrat,  I.,  190  n.

Gouvion,  J.  B.  de,  notice  of,  I.,  309  and  w. ;  gathers  troops,  314;  expected
to  succeed  Lafayette,  II.,  8g ;  on  guard  at  Tuileries,  96 ;  sends  for
Lafayette,  98  and  n. ;  examined  by  Assembly,  103  ;  his  death,  209.

Government,  timidity  of,  I.,  18  ;  poverty  of,  20  ;  absence  of  policy  of,  149  ;
to  blame  in  matter  of  Avignon,  II.,  161  n.

Gower,  Lord,  English  Minister,  quits  Paris,  notice  of,  II.,  268  ;  recalled  from
France,  401  n.

Grand'  Chambre  in  Parlement,  III.,  281  sqq.

Grand-Co7iseil,  origin  of,  III.,  287-8.

Grand-Livre,  III.,  159  w.,  i6o  n.

Grand-Monarque,  inn  at  Varennes,  II.,  119  n.

Grand-Pre,  pass  in  Argonne,  II.,  297  w.,  322.

Granet,  F.  O.,  arrested  after  Prairial,  III.,  237  n.

Grangeneuve,  J.  A.,  appears  in  Assembly  in  bonnet-rouge,  I.,  423  n.

Granville,  Vendean  advance  on,  III.,  323,  326.

Grave,  P.  M.  Marquis  de,  notice  of,  II.,  201  and  n. ;  emigration  of,  205.

Graviere,  Jurien  de  la,  '  Guerres  Maritimes  de  la  France,'  III.,  310.

Gregoire,  I'Abbe  H.,  notice  of,  I.,  185  w. ;  joins  Tiers-^tat,  200;  presents
Jacob  to  Assembly,  414  n. ;  his  '  Essai  Historique  sur  les  arbres  de  la
Liberte,'  423  n. ;  preaches  at  Fete  of  Federation,  II.,  232  «. ;  in  Con-
vention, 326,  338  and  n. ;  on  kings  in  general,  365  and  n. ;  absent,  but
wishes  to  record  vote  for  King's  death,  390  n. ;  in  difficulties  in  Con-
vention, III.,  57 ;  refuses  to  abjure  faith,  136  and  n. ;  on  Ecclesiastical
Committee,  343.

Grenadiers  a  Cheval,  disbanded.  III.,  295.

Grenoble,  Parlement  of,  I.,  109  w.,  119  n. ;  III.,  286;  Chambre  des  Comptes
of,  286  ;  Barnave  arrested  at,  120  n.

Gribeauval,  J.  B.  V.  de,  his  reforms  in  the  Artillery,  III.,  296.

Griffiths,  Admiral,  disposes  of  legend  of  Vengeur,  III.,  158  n.

Grimm,  F.  M.  Baron  de,  hails  new  era,  L,  380.

Grisons,  musician,  probable  author  of  air  oi  Marseillaise,  II.,  230  n.

Gros,  Le  Comite  de  Salut  Public,  III.,  34  n.

Gros-Caillou,  IL,  136.

Groix,  He,  naval  action  off.  III.,  314.

Guadet,  M.  E.,  notice  of,  II.,  150  and  n. ;  accused  of  venality,  173  n. ;  de-
nounces Ministers,  194;  inculpates  Lafayette,  221;  in  fear  for  Assembly,


382  INDEX

265  n. ;  votes  King's  death,  391  n.  ;  moves  for  suppleans  to  meet  at
Bourges,  III.,  11  ». ;  his  speech  of  April  nth,  43  n.;  shows  courage,
54  n. ;  arrested,  58  ;  escapes,  61,  76  ;  end  of,  106  and  n.

Gueft'rier,  bookseller,  II.,  191  n.

Guepin,  '  Histoire  de  Nantes,'  III.,  132  n.

Guerin,  L.,  •  Histoire  Maritime  de  la  France,'  II.,  174  n.

Guffroy,  A.  B.  N.,  in  Convention,  II.,  327  n. ;  notice  of,  III.,  12  and  n. ;
in  Cotnite  de  Surete  Generate,  72  n.

Guibert,  J.  A.  H.,  tactical  lessons  of,  III.,  297.

Guiche,  le  Due  de,  Commander  of  Gardes-du-Corps,  I.,  300,  318  n. ;  con-
cerned in  plot  to  save  King,  II.,  397  n.

Guienne,  taille  in.  III.,  334.

Guiffrey,  J.,  '  Les  Conventionnels,'  II.,  327  n.

Guilhermy,  le  Baron  de,  sits  for  Tiers-Etat,  takes  off  hat  to  King,  I.,  158  n.

Guillaume,  municipal  officer  at  Saint  Menehould,  III.,  115  sqq.

Guillotin,  Dr.  J.  J.,  his  cahier  for  Paris,  I.,  158-9,  160;  his  report  on  penal
code,  notice  of  him,  180;  his  beheading  machine,  181  ;  on  a  deputation
to  King,  319,  327.

Guillotine,  set  up,  II.,  282  n. ;  •  Eloge  de  la  Sainte  Dame  G.,'  III.,  99  n. ;
called  'La  Sainte,'  148  n. ;  moved  to  Place  du  Trone,  III.,  189  w.,  195-6.

Guise,  Jourdan  advancing  from,  III.,  154  n. ;  threatened  by  Coburg,  162  n.

Gunnery,  French  contrasted  with  British,  III.,  314-5-6.

Gunpowder,  manufactory  of.  III.,  151  and  n.

Gustavus  III.  of  Sweden,  notice  of,  II.,  95  and  n. ;  meditating  Crusade,  178
».,  180 ;  his  policy  reversed.  III.,  150  n.

Guyton-Morveau,  military  balloonist,  I.,  66  n. ;  on  first  Comite  de  Salut
Public,  III.,  34  n. ;  on  second  Constitutional  Committee,  82  n.  ;  at
Fleurus  in  balloon,  162  n.

Guzman,  Spanish  agitator,  I.,  375 ;  on  Committee  of  Insurrection,  III.,  27
«•»  53  »• ;  in  prison,  171.

Hague,  Treaty  of  the.  III.,  162  n.

Hailstorm  of  1788,  I.,  136  and  n.

Haiti,  '  a  monition  to  the  world,'  II.,  170.

Halle-aux-hles,  receives   corn,    I.,    229;    Cercle   Social   meets   at,    II.,  43;

section  of.  III.,  43  n.
Halles,  being  extended,  I.,  126  n.  ;  '  Bulletin  des  Halles,'  304  n. ;  section  of,

III.,  211  n.
Ham,  Louis-Napoleon  in  prison  at,  I.,  119  n. ;  Polignac  in  prison  at,  277;

Billaud  and  Collot  sent  to,  235  w.
Hamburg,  Mme  de  Genlis  goes  to.  III.,  38  n.
Hamel,  E.,  '  Histoire  de  Robespierre,'  I.,  193  n. ;  '  Histoire  de  Saint-Just,'

II.,  328  n.
Hamm,  in  Westphalia,  Monsieur  at,  III.,  89  n.
Hanriot,  F.,  Commander  of  National  Guard,  I.,  216  n.,  374;  notice  of.  III.,

53   and  n. ;   lie  with  Commune,   146 ;    H^bertist,  170  n. ;   will  support

Robespierre,  196  n. ,  203,  207,  209  sqq. ;  tries  to  commit  suicide,  214  n.
Hardy,  diarist,  on  price  of  bread,  I.,  155  n.
Harvelay,  Mme  de,  marries  Calonne,  I.,  97  n.
Harvest,  of  1792,  II.,  360  n.  ;  III.,  34  n. ;  of  1794,  III.,  164  n.
Hassenfratz,  J.   H.,  notice  of,  II.,  359  and  «. ;  peculations  of,  366,  368;

attacked  by  Dumouriez,  386  and  n.
Hatin,  E.,  '  Bibliographie  de  la  Presse  Periodique,'  III.,  61  «.
Haugwitz,  Count,  in  Prussian  retreat,  II.,  343.


INDEX  383

Hausser,  *  Deutsche  Geschichte  seit  vom  Tod  Friedrichs  des  Grossen,'  II.,
197  n.

Hausset,  Mme  du,  '  Memoires,'  I.,  29  n.

Haussonville,  M.  le  Comte  d',  '  Le  Salon  de  Mme  Necker,'  I.,  60  n.

Hauterive,  '  L'Arm^e  sous  la  Revolution,'  III.,  295.

Haute- Vienna,  Department  of,  protests  against  June  2nd,  III.,  80  n.

Havre-de-Grace,  becomes  Havre-Marat,  III.,  161  n.

Hazlitt,  '  Life  of  Napoleon,'  II.,  10  n.

Hubert,  J.  R.,  journalist,  I.,  374  ;  II.,  36  ;  notice  of,  36  n. ;  at  Cordeliers,  42  ;
signs  petition  for  King's  deposition,  135  ;  municipal  Commissioner  at
Temple,  268  n. ;  assists  at  massacres  in  La  Force,  304  n. ;  responsible  for
massacres,  325  n. ;  deputy  ProcureurSyndic,  361  n. ;  arrested  by
Commission  of  Twelve,  III.,  50-1  and  n. ;  released,  52  and  n. ;  interro-
gates Royal  children,  98  n. ;  gives  evidence  at  Queen's  trial,  99  n.,  100 ;
pushes  on  the  work  of  Tribunal,  103  ;  leader  of  atheists,  135  ;  first
arrest  of  his  *tail,'  138  n. ;  upholds  the  morality  of  the  Gospel,  141  n. ;
in  Commune,  146 ;  arrest,  trial  and  execution  of,  169  sqq.  nn. ;  his  wife's
trial  and  death,  169  w.,  182  n.  ;  abused  by  Desmoulins,  173-4  and  n.

Helie,  '  Les  Constitutions  de  la  France,'  I.,  266  n.

H^nault,  President,  on  Louis  XV.,  notice  of,  'Abreg^  Chronologique '  of,  I.,
3  and  n. ;  defends  sale  of  offices,  no.

Henri  IL,  added  to  Bastille,  I.,  165  n.

Henri  IV.,  I.,  14  ;  his  cradle,  134  ;  his  sword,  228 ;  Section  of,  II.,  237  «. ;  his
statue  pulled  down,  267  ;  his  body  dug  up.  III.,  137.

Henriot,  D.,  his  house  sacked,  I.,  164  n.

Henriot,  F.     See  Hanriot.

Hentz,  C,  arrest  of,  III.,  237  n.

H6rault-Sechelles,  M.  J.,  notice  of,  II.,  350  and  n. ;  absent,  wishes  to  record
vote  for  King's  death,  390  n.  ;  puts  on  his  hat.  III.,  57  ;  on  Second
Comite  de  Salut  Public,  71  n. ;  at  Fete  of  Aug.  loth,  83  sqq.  nn. ;
arrest  of,  176  ;  in  prison,  178  ;  end  of,  i8i.

Herbiers,  Les,  in  La  Vendee,  III.,  320.

Hericault,  C.  d',  '  La  Revolution  de  Thermidor,'  III.,  192  n.

H^ritier,  J.  1',  national  guardsman  shot  at  Versailles,  I.,  335-6,  339.

Hermann,  A.  M.  J,,  notice  of,  III.,  32  n. ;  interrogates  Queen,  98  n. ;  sums
up  at  her  trial,  100  n. ;  presides  at  Danton's  trial,  180-1  and  n. ;  executed,
238  M.

H6ron,  pet  spy  of  Robespierre,  III.,  175  and  n.,  196  and  n.

Hervilly,  L.  C.  Comte  d',  transmits  King's  orders  to  Swiss,  II.,  261  n.

Hesdin,  mutiny  at,  II. ,  13.

Hesse-Darmstadt,  Landgraf  of,  complains  to  Diet,  II. ,  179  n. ;  will  join  Hesse-
Cassel  in  negotiation.  III.,  230  n.

Hessian  Contingent  in  Allies  army,  II. ,  209  n.

'  Histoire  Parlementaire,'  I.,  141 ;  value  of  the  book  estimated.  III.,  109-110.

Hoche,  L.,  sergeant  in  Gardes-Frangaises,  notice  of,  I.,  218;  leads  sortie
from  Dunkirk,  III.,  121  n. ;  his  mot  about  '  bread  and  steel,'  152  and  n. ;
arrest  of,  156  and  «. ;  at  Quiberon,  224  «.,  232  and  n. ;  victories  of,
229  n. ;  pacifies  La  Vendee,  231,  324;  his  social  position,  298.

Hohenlohe,  Prince,  assisting  Brunswick,  II.,  209  n.

Holbach,  P.  H.  T.  Baron  d',  on  atheism,  I.,  48.

Holland,  loss  of  French  influence  in,  Prussian  invasion  of,  I.,  114-5  n.\
Mirabeau  seeks  employment  in,  192  n. ;  exiles  in  Paris  from,  II.,  368  n. ;
danger  of,  401  n. ;  III.,  162  n. ;  conquest  of,  229  and  n. ;  naval  strength
of,  316.


384  INDEX

Hondschoote,  battle  of,  III.,  121  n.,  153-4  ^^

Hood,  Admiral,  defends  Toulon,  III.,  89  and  n. ;  retires  from  Toulon,  130-1.

Hotel-de-Ville,  Electors  meet  at,  I.,  221 ;  mob  swarms  into,  308  n.,  309  sqq. ;

in  danger  of  fire,  310;   black  flag  on,  II.,  233-4;    tocsin   from,  248;

Sections  at,  249;   Robespierre  at,  III.,  210;  Convention  of  Sovereign

mob  at,  244  w.
Houchard,  J.  N.,  sent  to  Army  of  Rhine,  III.,  64  n. ;  notice  of,  89  n. ;  death

of,  121  and  n.,  154  and  n. ;  rapid  promotion  of,  303.
Houssaye,  A.,  '  Notre  Dame  de  Thermidor,'  I.,  373  n.
Houssaye,  H.,  '  1815,'  III.,  309,
Howe,  Admiral,  revictuals  Gibraltar,  I.,  59  «. ;  wins  battle  of  June  ist,  III.,

157  n.
Hozier,  d',  Parlementeer  of  Rouen,  I.,  398-9.
Hua,  E.  A,,  in  Legislative  Assembly,  II.,  149  n.
'  Hudibras  '  quoted,  II.,  93.
Hu6,  F.,  valet  to  Louis  XVI.,  II.,  395  n.
Huguenin,  notice  of,  II.,  193  and  w. ;  on  June  20th,  217  ;  welcomes  Marseillais,

243  ;  on  Aug.  loth,  249-50  n. ;  in  Commune,  265.
Hulin,  Capitaine,  at  Versailles,  (?)  I.,  171 ;  on  Bastille  day,  notice  of,  I.,  241

and  M.
Hussars,  6th  Regiment  of,  emigrates  whole.  III.,  304.

If,  Chateau  d\  Mirabeau  in  prison  at,  I.,  175,  190  n.

Impot,  fonder,  III.,  330,  338 ;  mobilier,  338 ;  progressif,  III.,  35-6  n. ;
unique.  III.,  335.

Incomes,  tax  on,  III.,  340-1.

Indre-et-Loire,  Department  of.  III.,  151.

Inisdal,  le  Comte  d',  plans  King's  escape,  II.,  55.

Innocents,  cemetery  of  the,  cleared  away,  I.,  126  n.

Insurrection  of  June  20th,  II.,  215  sqq, ;  of  Aug.  loth,  255,  263  n. ;  threat-
ened in  March,  1793,  III.,  25  ;  oi  La  Vendee,  321 ;  of  provinces  in  1793,
III.,  77  n.  {see  also  Germinal,  Prairial,  Vendemiaire).

Institut-N ational.  III.,  160  n.

Inteyidants,  urged  to  moderation,  I.,  36  n. ;  account  of  the,  258  n. ;  III.,  288,
290,  334-

Invalides,  the,  rather  insubordinate,  I.,  233  ;  two  hanged  by  mob,  II.,  134  ». ;
Hotel  des  /.,  muskets  at,  I.,  233  and  w.,  236 ;  spectators  of  Federation
from  roof  of,  422.

Islettes,  village  of,  II.,  331.

Isnard,  M.,  notice  of,  I.,  403  and  n.  ;  in  Legislative  II.,  150;  accused  of
venality,  173  n. ;  denouncing  Ministers,  194 ;  will  '  seek  equality  in
tomb,'  214;  rages  against  Lafayette,  232;  votes  King's  death,  391  n. ;
supports  Tribiinal,  III.,  32  n. ;  president  of  Convention,  51  and  n. ;
ready  to  withdraw,  56  and  m.  ;  restored  to  Convention,  222 ;  sent  to
Lyons  and  Toulon,  239  n.

Jacob,  J.  C,  eldest  of  human  race,  on  show,  I.,  413-4  and  n.

Jacobin  Club  {see  also  Breton  Club),  origin  of,  I.,  133  and  ». ;  affiliates
daughter  clubs,  356  and  n. ;  activity  of,  385  «. ;  numbers  and  progress
of,  389-90  n. ;  newspaper  of,  site  of,  390  and  n. ;  oaths  taken  to  it  at
Federation,  403  ;  foments  discord  in  Army,  II.,  15-6  and  n. ;  its  power
increasing,  42-3  ;  expects  King's  escape,  59 ;  denounces  expected  flight
of  King,  85  ;  demands  amnesty  for  Avignon  murderers,  164 ;  denounced
by  Kaunitz,  197  and  n. ;  aspect  of  Hall,  198 ;  receives  Mme  Lavergne,


INDEX  385

287  and  n. ;  dominates  elections  to  Convention,  327  n. ;  sends  Marat  to
threaten  Dumouriez,  345  and  n. ;  defends  massacres,  355  n. ;  receives
addresses  from  branches,  373 ;  attacks  Dumouriez,  386  and  n. ;  at  Le-
pelletier's  funeral,  400 ;  Vergniaud  demands  minutes  of.  III.,  27  and  n. :
orders  printing  of  Desmoulins'  pamphlet,  50 ;  growls  at  Custine,  81 ;
epurations  of,  82,  170  and  n. ;  subsidised  by  Salut  Public,  138  n. ;  acts
as  a  second  chamber,  146;  Robespierre  dominant  in,  194  n.,  ig6  «.,
206-7  i  iri  Seance  permanente,  closed,  213  and  n. ;  end  of,  220, 221  and  n. ;
may  rise  again,  233  ;  club  house  sacked,  234.

Jacquerie  in  South-east  and  in  North,  I.,  280-1  and  nn.

Jales,  castle  of,  belongs  to  Suffren,  I.,  58;  camp  of  Federation  at,  363  n.,
II.,  159,  165  ;  second  Federation  of,  186-7  ^"^^  "•

James,  W.,  Naval  History  of  England,  III.,  310.

yardin-des-Plantes,  Section  of,  II.,  237  n.

Jaucourt,  A.  F.  Comte  de,  notice  of,  II.,  152:  advising  the  King,  171;
escape  of,  289  n.

Jaunaye,  Treaty  of  La,  III.,  324.

Jay,  Mme  Le,  Mirabeau's  publisher  and  (?)  mistress,  I.,  201  n.,  384,  359.

Jay,  John,  'American  Diplomatic  Correspondence,'  I.,  229  n.

Jefferson,  Thomas,  'American  Diplomatic  Correspondence,'  I.,  229  n.

Jemappes,  battle  of,  II.,  367-8  and  n. ;  III.,  307.

yeunesse  Doree,  III.,  226-7  and  n. ;  fling  out  Marat's  bones,  233.

Joanna  I.  of  Naples  and  Avignon,  II.,  159  n.

Jockeys  in  France,  a  symptom  of  Anglo-mania,  I.,  63-4.

Johannot,  J.,  estimates  biens-nationaux,  III.,  340.

Johnson,  Dr.  Samuel,  anxious  to  save  Dr.  Dodd,  I.,  64  n.

Joly,  of  Dole,  publishes  Napoleon's  '  letter,'  II.,  9.

Jones,  Paul,  Scottish  pirate,  I.,  56  and  n. ;  notice  of,  378-9,  410;  death  of,
II.,  232-3.

Joseph  II.,  Kaiser,  refuses  to  visit  Voltaire,  I.,  53;  his  visit  to  Paris  and
Versailles,  his  mot  on  American  revolt,  I.,  56  and  n. ;  snubs  d'Artois,

343  «•
Jourdan,  J.  B.  (afterwards  Marshal),  officer  in  Volunteers,  II.,  185  ;  in  Army

of  North,  III.,  121  n. ;  notice  of,  154  and  n. ;  wins  Fleurus,  162  and  «. ;

victories  of,  229  and  n. ;  his  social  position,  298.
Jourdan,  M.  J.,  at  Versailles  (?),  notice  of,  I.,  171  and  n. ;  [not]  at  Versailles

in  October,  321  sqq.  and  n. ;  escapes  from  Chdtelet,  363  ;  at  Avignon,

II.,  159  sqq.  ;  amnestied,  164  n. ;  guillotined,  III.,  124-5  and  n.
Jourdeuil,  D.,  in  Comite  de  Surveillance,  II.,  287  n. ;  signatory  of  September

circular,  320  n.
Jourgniac-de-Saint-Meard,  notice  of,  II.,  290  and  «.,  304 ;  '  Mon  agonie  de

38  heures,'  307  and  n.
jf  ournal-Affiche,  new  kind  of  newspaper,  I.,  385.
Journal  des  Amis  de  la  Constitution,  Jacobitis  newspaper,  I.,  148  n. ;  390

and  n.
Journal  de  la^Cour  et  de  la  Ville,  II.,  312.

Journal  des  Etats-Generaux,  Mirabeau's  paper,  suppressed,  I.,  201  and  n.
Journal  de  Versailles,  I.,  201  n.
Journal  Logographique  (Le  Hodey),  II.,  264  n.
Joux,  Mirabeau  imprisoned  in  chateau  of,  I.,  175,  190  n.
Judicial  system  reconstructed,  I.,  361  and  «. ;  appendix  on.  III.,  2yg  sqq.
Juigne,  A.  E.  Le  Clerc  de.  Archbishop  of  Paris,  restrains  the  clergy,  I.,  200;

cannot  restrain  them,  205 ;   notice  of,  212  and  n. ;    at  Te-Deum,  251 ;

hissed,  253  n.
VOL.  Ill,  25


386  INDEX

Julien,  J.  (de  Vaugirard),  II.,  297.

Julien  (de  Toulouse),  condemned  with  Danton,  III.,  176  h.

Jullien,  M.  A,  (de  Paris),  pet  spy  of  Robespierre,  III.,  133  «.,  149  ».,  196  n.

jfurandes  et  maitrises.     See  Gilds.

Juries,  origin  of.  III.,  293.

yussion,  Lettres  de,  III.,  284.

justice  Seigneuriale  {see  also  Feudal  Rights),  I.,  276  n. ;  III.,  291.

Kaiser slautern,  Brunswick  fights  at.  III.,  156  n. ;  last  fighting  at,  230  n.

Karl,  Archduke,  at  Neerwinden,  III.,  29  n.

Kaunitz,  Prince,  political  correspondence  of,  I.,  27  n. ;    supports  German

princes,  II.,  180 ;  denounces  Jacohins,  197  n. ;  Dumouriez'  firmness  to,

204.
Kellermann,  F.  C,  succeeds  Luckner,  II.,  293  n. ;  joins  Dumouriez,  ihid.  n.  ;

notice  of,  335  ».,  336-7 ;  follows  up  Brunswick,  339 ;  suspected  by  the

Radicals,  III.,  42  «. ;  denounced  in  Convention,  64  n. ;  begins  siege  of

Lyons,  90  n. ;  saves  France,  305-6.
Keppel,  Admiral,  victor  at  Ushant,  I.,  57-8  and  n.
Kerguelen,  Admiral  Y.  J.  de,  on  naval  gunnery,  III.,  315.
Kersaint,  G.  P.  Comte  de,  proposes  Comite  de  Defense  Generale,  III.,  34  n. ;

proscribed,  103  n.
Kervelegan,  G.  de,  on  Commission  of  Twelve,  III.,  47  w.
Kilmaine,  General,  III.,  244  n.
King,  derivation  of  the  word  discussed,  I.,  13  and  n. ;  'cause  of  all,'  II.,

178-9.
Kl^ber,  J.  B,,  defends  Mainz,  III.,  21  n.,  80  n. ;  his  rapid  promotion,  303 ;

his  Vendean  victories,  320,  322-3,  327.
Klinckowstrom,  '  Fersen  et  la  Cour  de  France,'  II.,  95  n.
Klopstock,  naturalised  by  vote  of  Legislative  Assembly,  II.,  277.
Knox,  John,  in  French  galleys,  II.,  31.

Koch,  C.  G.  de,  on  Diplomatic  Committee  of  Legislative,  II.,  171  «.
Kock,  C.  H^bertist,  brought  to  trial.  III.,  169  n.
Koln,  Elector  of,  complains  to  Diet,  II.,  179  n. ;  at  mercy  of  French  Army,

346  n.
Korff,  Baroness  de,  II.,  97.
Kosciusko,  naturalised  by  vote  of  Legislative  Assembly,  II.,  278  n.

Lab^dolliere,  'Histoire  de  la  Garde  Nationale,'  I.,  216  n.

Laborie,  Lanzac  de,  'Vie  de  Mounier,'  I.,  134  n.

Lacaze,  J.,  trial  of,  III.,  103  n.  sqq.

Laclos,  Choderlos  de,  notice  of,  I.,  148  and  n. ;  question  of  his  influence  on

Bastille  day,  255 ;  henchman  of  d'Orleans,  344  n. ;  II.,  47.
Lacoste,  J.  Baron  de.  Minister  of  Marine,  II.,  212  n.

Lacoste,  J.  B.,  his  letter  on  the  situation  of  France  in  March,  1793,  III.,  36  n.
Lacretelle,  J.  C.  D.  (le  jeune), '  Histoire  de  France  pendant  le  XVIIIme  Siecle,'

I.,  17  ». ;  'declaiming'  in  1795,  III.,  253.
Lacroix,  J.  F.  de,  notice  of,  II.,  153  and  n. ;  Convention  Commissioner  in

Belgium,  III.,  20  and  «. ;    on  first  Comite  de  Salut  Public,  34  ». ;  on

second  Constitutional  Committee,  82  n. ;    moves  for  a  dissolution  of

Convention,  85  n. ;  arrest  of,  176.
Lacroix,  obscure  author  of  pamphlet  against  Mirabeau,  I.,  358  n.
Lacu^e,  G.  J.  Comte  de  Cessac,  his  letter  to  Bourgoing,  II.,  363  n.
Ladr^,  claims  to  be  the  author  of  Qa-Ira,  I.,  393  and  n.
Lafayette,  M.  J.  P.  R.  Y.  G.  Motier  Marquis  de,  volunteer  in  American  war,


INDEX  387

I.,  57  M. ;  his  bust  in  Hotd-de-Ville,  59;  his  '  M^moires  et  Correspon-
dance,'  90  n. ;  his  opinion  of  Lom^nie,  99  n. ;  denounces  Lettres  de
cachet,  proposes  National  Assembly,  102 ;  on  Lom^nie's  plans,  126  n. ;
joins  Breton  Club,  133  ;  on  coming  States-General,  145  n.;  on  prospects
of  Parlement,  146  n. ;  reactionary  cahler  of,  153  n. ;  notice  of,  183  n. ;
nickname  of,  184 ;  moderation  of,  200  ;  Commander  of  National  Guard,
216  «.,  227  and  n. ;  Vice-President  of  Assembly,  233  ;  presides  at  Seance
permanente,  249;  his  difficulties  in  National  Guard,  251,  256  ».,  257;
resigns  and  resumes  his  office,  259,  260 ;  criticises  action  of  Assembly,
262  n. ;  on  Rights  of  Man,  270  n. ;  absent  on  Aug.  4th,  271  n. ;  in  favour
of  two  Chambers,  272  n. ;  another  nickname  of,  287  ;  his  vigorous  system
of  patrols,  289-90,  298-9;  expects  King  to  escape,  300-1  «. ;  on  'duty
of  insurrection,'  306-7 ;  his  action  on  Oct.  5th  and  6th  criticised,  308
sqq.  nn. ;  did  he  go  to  bed  ?  333  and  n. ;  reasons  of  his  distrust  of
Mirabeau,  345  n. ;  guards  Tulleries,  352  ;  attempts  to  popularise  royalty,
353-4  and  n. ;  his  severe  criticism  of  King  and  Queen,  ibid,  n ;  '  waters
the  plant  of  Constitutional  royalty,'  369 ;  in  Feuillants  Club,  391 ;  at
Fete  of  Federation,  402-3,  422  sqq. ;  moves  abolition  of  titles,  412 ;  at
work  in  Champ-de-Mars,  417 ;  gives  dinner  parties,  420 ;  corresponds
with  Bouill^,  II.,  3  ;  at  funeral  mass  for  Bouille's  soldiers,  29  ;  on  causes
of  Necker's  resignation,  30  n. ;  his  disillusionment  foreshadowed,  37 ;
attacked  by  Marat,  40-1  ;  powerless  at  sack  of  Hotel  Castries,  51 ;  hate-
ful to  Queen,  53 ;  his  spies,  58,  63  ;  at  the  sack  of  Vincennes,  62  «.,  64
sqq. ;  disarms  the  Chevaliers  du  Poi^nard,  67-8  and  tm. ;  his  dangerous
position,  69 ;  at  the  riot  of  April  i8th,  87-8-9  and  nn. ;  forms  *  Club  of
1789,' 89  and  n. ;  arrives  at  Tuileries  on  June  21st,  98;  his  action  at
news  of  King's  flight,  102-5  and  nn. ;  leans  towards  a  Republic,  131  «. ;
his  spies  in  July,  134;  clears  the  Champ-de-Mars,  136  n. ;  moves  for  an
amnesty,  140,  143 ;  will  support  Constitution,  141  ;  refuses  to  bind  pos-
terity, 142  n. ;  resigns  the  command  of  National  Guard,  147  and  n. ;
watches  frontier,  184 ;  Robespierre's  distrust  of,  185  n. ;  the  Court  sup-
ports Petion  against,  195 ;  is  to  seize  Flanders,  208 ;  denounces
Jacobins  Club,  209  ;  effect  of  his  letter  to  Assembly,  213  and  n. ;  his  visit
to  Paris,  219-22  and  nn. ;  suspicious  movements  of,  227 ;  his  accusation
rejected  by  Assembly,  232  and  n. ;  arrests  Commissioners  of  Assembly,
268-9  and  n.\  emigrates,  269  «.;  his  purity  proved,  375  ».;  on  hardships
of  soldiers.  III.,  298-9;  his  emigration,  304;  saves  France,  306;  is  in
favour  of  severing  Church  from  State,  344  n.

Laffon  de  Lad^bat,  A.  D.,  estimates  expenses  of  1792,  III.,  337.

Laflotte,  prison  spy,  III.,  181  and  »,,  197.

La-Force,  prison  of,  broken  open,  I.,  229  ;  massacres  at,  II.,  303-4  and  n.

Lagache,  quarter-master  oi  Royal-Dragons,  II.,  no  and  n.  sqq.

Lagrange,  J.  L.,  helps  to  make  new  Calendar,  III.,  86.

Laharpe,  J.  F.  de,  'declaiming'  in  1795,  III.,  253.

Laignelot,  J.  F.,  in  Convention,  II.,  327  n.

Lais,  opera  singer,  doorkeeper  at  Jacobins,  I.,  390.

Lajard,  P.  A.  de,  Minister  of  War,  II.,  212  n. ;  on  reinforcement  of  army,
III.,  305.

Lakanal,  J.,  reporter  of  Comite  de  VInstruction  Publique,  III.,  161  n.

Lalande,  J.  J.,  atheist,  eats  live  spiders,  III.,  135  and  n.

Lalanne,  L.,  '  Dictionnaire  de  la  France,'  III.,  279.

Lally-Tollendal,  T.  A.  Baron  de,  judicially  murdered  1766,  sentence  re-
versed, I.,  III.

Lally-Tollendal,  T.  G.  Marquis  de,  son  of  the  above,  real  author  of  Weber's


388  INDEX

'  M^moires,'  I.,  32  and  n.  ;  notice  of,  183  and  n. ;  action  on  July  15th,
251 ;  in  first  Constitutional  Committee,  262  n. ;  in  favour  of  two
Chambers,  272  n.  ;  his  '  Mdmoires,'  331  «, ;  resigns  his  seat,  343  and  n, ;
urges  King  to  fly,  224  n. ;  escape  of,  289  n. ;  writes  to  defend  King,
378  n.

Laloi,  P.  A.,  President  of  Convention,  III.,  136  n. ;  on  Comite  de  Salut
Public,  219  n.

Lamarche,  S.  F.,  director  o£  Assignafs,  executed.  III.,  118  and  n.

Lamarck,  A.  M.  R.  d'Aremberg  Comte  de,  '  Correspondance  entre  le  Comte
de  Mirabeau  et  le  Comte  de  Lamarck'  (Bacourt),  I.,  igi  n.;  how  far
he  trusted  Mirabeau,  192  m.,  201  n. ;  accounts  for  Mirabeau  on  Oct.  5th,
344  n.  ;  notice  of,  371  n. ;  introduces  Mirabeau  to  Queen,  IL,  57  «. ;
is  interested  in  French  mines,  75  n. ;  attempts  to  carry  on  Mirabeau's
schemes,  84  w.  ;  on  '  Austrian  Committee,'  85  n. ;  draws  up  form  for
King's  acceptance  of  Constitution,  140  n. ;  his  efforts  to  save  Queen,
98  «.,  190  n.

Lamarque,  F.,  sent  to  arrest  Dumouriez,  is  arrested,  III.,  38-9  and  nn.

Lamballe,  M.  T.  L.  de  Savoie-Carignan  Princesse  de,  friend  of  Queen,
notice  of,  I.,  41  and  n. ;  visits  La  Motte  in  prison,  89  n. ;  escapes  in
1791,  II. ,  108  and  n. ;  intriguing,  176,  203  ;  imprisoned,  291 ;  murdered,
305  and  n.,  306  ;  Manuel  in  vain  bribed  to  save  her,  121  n.

Lambert,  L'Abbe,  receives  confessions  of  Girondists,  III.,  105  n.

Lambesc,  C.  E.  de  Lorraine-d'Elboeuf  Prince  de,  in  Tuileries  garden,  makes
a  quasi-charge,  I.,  224-5  5  departs,  226.

Lameth,  the  three  brothers,  volunteers  in  America,  I.,  57  n. ;  notice  of  the
three,  183  n.  ;  refund  their  mother's  pension,  357.

Lameth,  Alexandre  Comte  de,  '  Histoire  de  I'Assemblee  Constituante,'  I.,
no  M. ;  secretary  of  Breton  club,  133  n. ;  at  Versailles,  moderate  views
of,  200;  moves  abolition  of  titles,  412;  at  jfacobins,  II. ,  42;  in  As-
sembly, 46;  rallies  to  crown,  131  and  n.;  on  Committee  of  Revision,
138 ;  sneers  at  Legislative,  149 ;  his  criticism  on  Montgaillard,  266  n. ;
his  escape  with  Lafayette,  269  and  n. ;  decreed  accused,  282  n.

Lameth,  Charles  Comte  de,  his  duel  with  Castries,  I.,  357 ;  II.,  50  and  n. ;
rallies  to  crown,  131  and  n. ;  will  stay  in  Paris,  147.

Lameth,  Theodore  Comte  de,  notice  of,  II.,  152.

Lamoignon,  C.  F.  de,  L,  81 ;  Parlementeer,  yet  against  Parlement,  96  and  n. ;
against  Calonne,  becomes  Garde-des-Sceaux,  97-8  ;  [not]  conciliatory  to
Parlement,  116-7  ;  proposes  abolition  of  Parlements,  125  ;  resigns  office,
142 ;  burnt  in  effigy,  and  dies,  143  and  n.

Lamotte,  J.  de  Saint  R.  Comtesse  de,  and  the  Diamond  Necklace,  I.,  75
and  n. ;  escapes  from  Salpetriere,  89  and  n. ;  escapes  to  England,  her
'Memoires,'  121;  her  Memoires  burnt  at  Sevres,  II.,  191  and  «. ;  her
husband  in  prison,  290,  308 ;  her  end,  290  and  n.

Lamourette,  A.,  notice  of,  II.,  152  and  n. ;  kiss  of,  157  and  w.,  223  ;  captured
at  Lyons,  III.,  126.

Landau  occupied  by  Custine,  II.,  346  n. ;  relief  of.  III.,  156  n.

Landrecies  threatened  by  Coburg,  III.,  162  n.

Langlois,  C.  V.,  'Textes  relatifs  a  I'Histoire  du  Parlement,'  III.,  279.

Langres,  Besenval  finds,  in  tumult,  I.,  140;  steel-works  at,  III.,  150.

Languedoc,  French  ship,  renamed  Anti-federaliste  and  Victoire,  III.,  316.

Languedoc,  Estates  of,  Lom^nie  leader  in,  I.,  99  n. ;  old  form  of  meeting  of,
120  n. ;  taille  in,  III.,  334.

Lanjuinais,  J.  D.,  his  motion  against  ministers  having  seats,  I.,  358  n. ;
tries  to  save  King,  II.,  377  n.,  391  n. ;  instances  of  his  courage.  III.,  8  ;


INDEX  389

protests  against  creation  of  Tribunal,  32  n. ;  defends  Gironde,  52  n.,  53
n. ;  notice  of,  56  and  n. ;  proscribed,  58 ;  escapes,  76 ;  restored,  222  ;
on  Constitutional  Committee  1795,  251  n. ;  on  Ecclesiastical  Committee,

343.
Lanne,  M.  E.  J.,  executed,  III.,  238  n.
Lannes,  J.,  officer  in  Volunteers,  II.,  185  n.
Lapeyrouse,  navigator,  the  King's  interest  in  his  voyage,  I.,  40  w.,  58  n. ;  his

fate,  58  n. ;  Calonne  favours  his  voyage,  95.
Lapierre,  Adjutant-General,  witness  at  Queen's  trial,  III.,  99  m.
Laplace,  P.  S.,  typical  of  Gaelic  spirit,  III.,  230.
Laporte,  A.  de,  Intendant  of  Civil  List,  II.,  104  w.,  191  n. ;  death  of,  notice

of,  282  and  n.
Lapoule,  deputy  to  States-General,  absurd  credulity  of,  I.,  17.
Larevelliere  de  Lepeaux,  L.  M.  de,  II.,  383  n. ;  III.,  251  n.
Larivi^re,  Henri  de,  on  Commission  of  Twelve,  III.,  47  n.
Lariviere,  J.  B.  E.  de,  Juge  de  Paix,  II.,  223-4.
Larochejacquelin,  H.  du  V.  Comte  de,  Vendeen  leader,  II.,  285  ;  III.,  323-4;

death  of,  231.
Larochejacquelin,  Mme  de,  sister-in-law  of  the  above,  Memoires  de,  III.,  213.
Laroque,  M.  de,  executed  with  d'Orleans,  III.,  116  m.
Lasalle,  suggested  as  Commander  of  National  Guard,  I.,  227  n.
Lasalle,  L'Abbe  J.  B.  de,  his  system  of  schools.  III.,  166  «.
Lasource,  M.  D.  A.,  attacks  Robespierre,   II.,  371  n.  ;   absent,  wishes  to

record  vote  for  King's  death,  390  n. ;  accuses  Danton,  III.,  42-3  and  ji. ;

President  of  Convention,  46,  51  n. ;  arrest  of,  58 ;  trial  of,  III.,  103  n.

sqq. ;  quotes  Plutarch,  104.
Lataille,  Keeper  of  Tennis  Court,  II.,  143-4  and  «.
La-Tour-du-Pin,  J.  F.  de.  Minister  for  War,  II.,  17  n,,  18  sqq. ;  his  dismissal

demanded  by  mob,  30-1.
La-Tour-La-Montagne,  spy,  on  agiotage,  III.,  113  w.
La-Tour-Maubourg,  M.  C.  F.  Comte  de,   in  King's  escort  on  return  from

Varennes,  II.,  128.
Launay  (or  Launey),  B.  R.  J.  Marquis  de.  Governor  of  Bastille,  I.,  234

sqq.  and  ««. ;  his  murder,  246  and  n.
Lautrec,  M.  de,  hunchback,  challenges  Charles  Lameth,  II.,  50.
Lauzun,  Regiment  de,  loyalty  of.  III.,  302.
Lavergne,  L.  F.  C,  surrenders  Longwy,  II.,  285 ;  wife  of,  at  yacobins  Club,

287  and  n.
Lavergne,  Ldonce  de,  •  Les  Economistes  Fran9ais  du  XVII I™e  Siecle,  I.,  16

n. ;  '  Les  Assemblies  Provinciales,'  103  n.
Lavicomterie,  L.  de,  in  Convention,  II.,  327  n. ;  in  Comite  de  Surete  Generale,

III.,  72  n.
Lavoisier,  A.  L.,  chemist,  I.,  67;  attacked  by  Marat,  II.,  40;  executed,  III.,

186  and  n.  ;  his  estimate  of  the  value  of  biens  nationaux,  340.
Lazowski,  C,  insurrectionist  on  June  20th,  II.,  218  «. ;  notice  of  him  and

his  brother,  321  and  n. ;  on  '  Committee  of  Insurrection,'  III.,  27  n.
Lebas,  P.  F.  J.,  in  Convention,  II.,  327  «. ;  in  Comite  de  Surete  Generale,

III.,  72  n. ;  en  mission  to  Alsace,  148  and  n. ;  supports  Saint-Just's  views,

168  n. ;  will  support  Robespierre,  196  n. ;  his  long  absence,  202  n. ;  end

of,  209  sqq.  nn.
Leblanc,  innkeeper  at  Varennes,  II.,  120-1  ;  expects  vengeance,  295  ;  his

wife  in  hiding,  331.
Lebon,  J.,  notice  of,  II.,  327  n. ;  in  Comite  de  Surete  Generale,  III.,  72  n.  \

proconsul  at  Arras,  74  n.,  124,  149  n. ;  trial  and  death  of,  220  w.,  238.


390  INDEX

Lebrun,  P.  H.  T.,  protege  of  Dumouriez,  II.,  199  n. ;  gives  a  strange  bap-
tismal name  to  his  daughter,  208  n. ;  Foreign  Minister,  267  n.,  359  n. ;
arrest  of,  III.,  58  and  n. ;  execution  of,  122 ;  had  hoped  for  help  from
Sweden,  150  n.

Lebrun,  P.  D.  E.,  poetaster,  II.,  366  n.

Lebrun,  distributor  of  forged  Assignats,  II.,  182,  186.

Lechapelier,  I.  R.  G.,  secretary  of  Jacobins,  I.,  133  n. ;  notice  of,  197  and  n. ;
on  Constitutional  Committee,  262  n. ;  guillotined.  III.,  184  n.

Lecky,  W.  E.  H.,  '  History  of  England  in  the  Eighteenth  Century,'  I.,  55  n.

Lecointre-Puyraveau,  M.  M.,  sent  to  Chartres,  II,,  362  n.

Lecointre,  L.,  of  Versailles,  notice  of,  I.,  172  n. ;  Major  of  National  Guard  at
Versailles,  302,  304 ;  his  action  on  Oct.  5th,  318  sqq. ;  in  Legislative^As-
sembly,  II.,  154;  witness  at  Queen's  trial,  III.,  99  n. ;  at  Fete  of  Eire
Supreme,  193  n. ;  on  8th  Thermidor,  205  n. ;  *  Crimes  de  Sept  Membres
des  Anciens  Comites,'  200  w.,  233  n. ;  at  Germinal,  236  n. ;  arrested,  237  n.

Lefebvre,  F.  J.,  officer  in  Volunteers,  II.,  185  n.

Lefebvre  (or  Lefevre),  L'Abb^,  at  H6tel-de-Ville,  I.,  247,  251,  261 ;  nearly
hanged  by  mob,  310-1.

Lefranc,  leader  of  insurrection  on  Aug.  loth,  II.,  258  n.

Legendre,  L.,  at  Fete-Dieu,  II.,  210;  notice  of,  211  n. ;  on  June  20th,  217  ;
shelters  Marat,  238  and  n. ;  in  Convention,  327  ;  hears  Federes  denounce
Marat,  355  n. ;  at  Lyons,  III.,  14  n. ;  suggests  noyades,  132  n. ;  at  Fete-
Dieu,  134  ;  defends  Danton,  177  and  w. ;  at  Thermidor,  213  and  «.,  217  n.,
220  ;  at  Prairial,  244  n.

Legion  Allobroge,  Legion  Batave,  III.,  306.

Legislature,  future  shape  of,  discussed,  I.,  272  n.

Legrand,  proposes  the  name  Assemblee  Nationale,  I.,  204  n.

Legris-Duval,  R.,  offers  himself  as  Confessor  to  King,  II,,  394  n.

Lehardy,  P.,  trial  of.  III,,  103  n.  sqq.

Le-Hodey,  E.,  journalist,  II.,  264  «.

Leibnitz,  typical  of  Teutonic  spirit.  III.,  230.

Leiningen,  Prince  of,  complains  to  Diet,  II.,  179  n.

Leleu,  the  brothers,  corn  merchants,  I.,  9  n.,  45  n.,  155  n.

Lenfant,  signatory  of  September  circular,  II.,  320  n.

L'Enfant  (or  Lenfant),  I'Abb^,  against  the  Protestant  edict,  I.,  122  and  «. ;
massacred,  II.,  307,

Le-N6tre,  'Jean  de  Batz,'  II.,  397  n.

Leonard,  perruquier,  on  flight  to  Varennes,  II.,  95  sqq.  nn.

Leopard,  mutiny  on  board  the  ship.  III.,  314.

Leopold,  Kaiser,  releases  Theroigne,  I.,  170;  requests  leave  to  march  some
troops  through  French  territory,  II.,  14  and  n. ;  becoming  anxious,  53  «.,
54  n. ;  at  the  declaration  of  Pillnitz,  178-9  n. ;  death  of,  197  n. ;  his
attitude  to  England,  401  n.

Lepelletier,  Section,  III.,  236-7,  243-4,  253  and  n.  sqq.

Lepelletier,  F.,  'Vie  de  Michael  Lepelletier,'  II.,  393  n.

Lepelletier-Saint-Fargeau,  Michael,  leading  Parlementeer,  I.,  81 ;  proposes
annual  legislatures,  297  n. ;  moves  abolition  of  titles,  412 ;  gives  large
dinners,  notice  of,  420  and  n. ;  in  Convention,  329,  330 ;  votes  King's
death,  389 ;  his  murder,  393  and  n. ;  his  funeral,  400.

Leroi-Dix-A6ut,  juryman  of  Tribunal,  III.,  33,  181 ;  death  of,  237-8  and  n.

Leroux,  eldest  deputy  in  Tiers  t.tat,  I.,  197  n.

Lesage,  J.  H.,  votes  King's  death,  II.,  391 ;  escapes  to  Caen,  III.,  62  n. ;  in
flight  to  the  West,  78  sqq.  and  n. ;  on  Constitutional  Committee,  1795,
251  ».


INDEX  391

Lescure,  '  Rivarol  et  la  Soci6t6  Frangaise  pendant  rfimigration,'  I.,  121  n. ;
'La  Princesse  de  Lamballe,'  II.,  305  m.  ;  '  Journ^es  R^volutionnaires,'
III.,  59  w. ;  '  La  Vraie  Marie  Antoinette,'  185  n.

Lesourd,  royalist  national  guardsman,  his  Souvenirs,  II.,  254  n.

Leszczynski.     See  Marie  and  Stanislas.

Levasseur,  R.,  notice  of,  II.,  328  n. ;  his  '  M^moires,'  III.,  7  n. ;  on  Danton's
speech,  42  ;  at  Hondschoote,  153  and  n. ;  arrested,  237  n.

Levee-en-Masse,  III.,  85  n.,  93  and  n.

Leyde  {see  also  Feudal  Rights),  I.,  276  n.

Leyde,  '  Gazette  de,''  I.,  73  n.

Lhuillier,  J^acobin,  on  Aug.  loth,  II.,  250  n. ;  jfacohin  candidate  for  Maire,
361  n.

'  Liaisons  Dangereuses,'  '  Les,'  a  novel  by  Choderlosde  Laclos,  I.,  148  and  n.

Liancourt,  F.  A.  Due  de  la  Rochefoucauld-L.,  notice  of,  I.,  63  n. ;  at  Ver-
sailles, 183 ;  moderate  liberal,  notice  of,  200  and  n.  ;  awakes  King  on
night  of  Bastille  riot,  250 ;  takes  refuge  in  King's  room,  336  n. ;  offers
to  take  King  to  Normandy,  II.,  224  and  n. ;  on  Ecclesiastical  Com-
mittee, III.,  343.

Liberty,  statue  of,  on  Place  de  la  Revolution,  III.,  84.

Libourne,  Girondists  in  hiding  at.  III.,  92.

Librairie,  Directeur-G eneral  de  la,  I.,  121  n,

Liege,  arms  for  Emigres  at,  II.,  181 ;  Austrians  driven  back  to.  III.,  162  «.

Liendon,  Fouquier's  substitute,  III.,  215  n.

Lieutenants-de-Vaisseau,  III.,  311.

Ligne,  C.  J.,  Prince  de,  notice  of,  II.,  331  and  n.

Ligne,  C.  J.  E.,  Prince  de,  son  of  above,  killed  at  Grand  Pt6,  II.,  331  and  n.

Ligonnet,  catches  Jourdan,  II.,  164.

Lille,  stampede  at,  II.,  208-9  n. ;  siege  of,  339-40-41  and  nn. ;  Dumouriez'
designs  on,  III.,  37;  line  of  telegraph  to,  161  and  n.  ;  memorial  from
garrison  of,  299.

Limoges,  Turgot  Intendant  at,  I.,  38  n. ;  III.,  334.

Limon,  G.  de,  writes  Brunswick's  manifesto,  II.,  235  n.

Lindet,  R.,  on  first  Comite  de  Saint  Public,  III.,  34  n. ;  sent  to  Lyons,  59  n. ;
notice  of,  71  «. ;  sent  to  Normandy,  77  n. ;  on  second  Constitutional
Committee,  82  «. ;  seldom  in  Paris,  144  n.  ;  warns  Danton,  176  ;  answers
Lecointre,  234  n. ;  in  danger,  245  n.

Lindet,  T.,  "  Bishop  "  of  Evreux,  proposes  secular  Fetes,  I.,  408  n.

Lindsay,  Charge  d  Affaires  for  England,  II.,  268  w.

Linguet,  S.  N.  H.,  notice  of,  I.,  73  «. ;  hxsAnnales  Politiques,  121 ;  at  Ver-
sailles (?),  170;  at  bar  of  Assembly,  II.,  192.

Loans,  I.,  115,  n6  «.,  296  and  n. ;  forced  loan  of  1793,  III.,  340-1.

Lodge,  Professor  R.,  '  Close  of  the  Middle  Ages,'  II.,  159  n.

Lods-et-Ventes  {see  also  Feudal  Rights),  I.,  276  w.

Loi-Martiale,  I.,  370  and  n.,  371 ;  II.,  135-6,  168.

Loir,  M.,  '  La  Marine  Royale  en  1789,'  III.,  310.

Loire,  river,  noyades  in,  III.,  13 1-2-3  ^^^  w"-  \  Vendeans  make  for,  322.

LoizeroUes,  J.  S.  de,  and  his  son.  III.,  212  n.

Lombard,  Prussian  diplomat,  II.,  339  n.

Lomenie-de-Brienne,  E.  C.  Cardinal  presents  Actes  of  clergy,  notice  of,
I.,  48  and  w. ;  leads  Opposition  to  Calonne,  91-3  n. ;  designs  on  Con-
trollership,  95  and  w. ;  becomes  Controller-General,  99  and  n.  ;  called
'  Ministre-principal,'  100  and  n. ;  once  a  scholar  in  Sorbonne,  attitude  to
Parlement,  113-4;  anxious  about  Seance  Royale,  117;  diseases  of,  122;
courage  of,  124 ;  plans  abolition  of  Parlements,  125 ;  imprisons  Breton


392  INDEX

deputation,  132 ;  worn  out,  136 ;  announces  States-General,  137 ;  in-
vites Necker's  help,  138 ;  makes  partial  suppression  of  cash  payments,
138-9  and  It. ;  resigns,  139  ;  his  end,  140  ;  is  burnt  in  effigy,  141-3  ;  his
mot  on  the  chapter  of  accidents,  150  ;  his  additions  to  debt,  III.,  332-3  ;
his  oath  to  Civil  Constitution,  345.

Lomenie-de-Brienne,  A.  L.  M.,  brother  of  the  above.  War  Minister,  I.,  139 ;
obliged  to  retire,  142.

Lomenie,  Louis  de,  '  Beaumarchais  et  son  Temps,'  I.,  54  n. ;  '  Las  Mirabeau,'
I.,  86  n.

Longchamp,  Abbey  of,  I.,  62  and  n.

Longwy,  fall  of,  announced,  II.,  283,  286-7  and  nn.

Lorch,  Brunswick  crossing  Rhine  at.  III.,  21  n.

'  Lords  of  the  Articles,'  jfacobin  Club  compared  to  the.  III.,  146.

'  Loroux,'  district  in  Vendee,  III.,  320.

Lorraine,  not  so  '  illumined,'  as  old  France,  II.,  15  ;  the  '  gate  of,'  no,  209  n.

Lorraine,  Regiment  de,  officers  get  up  a  subscription  for  Jacob,  I.,  414  n. ;
refuses  to  fire  on  a  mob,  III.,  300.

Losme,  Major  de,  murdered  after  surrender  oi  Bastille,  I.,  246.

Loth,  A.,  '  Le  Chant  de  la  Marseillaise,  son  veritable  auteur,'  II.,  230  n,

Lothringer,  L'Abbe,  receives  confessions,  of  Custine,  III.,  96  n. ;  of  Girondins,
105  n. ;  of  d'Orleans,  116  n.

Louchet,  L.,  moves  to  decree  Robespierre  accused,  III.,  209  n.

Louis  IX.     See  Saint-Louis.

Louis  XL,  his  cruelty  and  superstition,  L,  14;  uses  Vincennes  as  a  prison,
IL,    62  M. ;  Avignon  and,  159;  his  use  of  Parlement,  III.,  281,  284.

Louis  XII.,  sorrow  for  his  death,  II.,  77.

Louis  XIV.,  his  mot  on  sovereignty,  I.,  13  and  n. ;  and  Parlement,  116 ;  his
bust  in  Rue  de  la  Vannerie,  259  ;  his  laws  against  Protestants,  II.,  190  n. ;
the  *  sovereign  mob  '  compared  to,  216  ». ;  his  statue  pulled  down,  267  ;
uses  the  tongs,  352;  forbids  remonstrances  oi  Parlement,  III.,  285..

Louis  XV.,  le  Bien-Aime,  sickness  of,  I.,  3  and  «. ;  dismisses  Choiseul,  6
and  n. ;  at  Fontenoy,  10  n. ;  and  Charolais,  17  w. ;  fables  about,  19  and  «. ;
dying,  20  ;  dread  of  death,  26  ;  anecdote  of,  27  ;  and  Austrian  Alliance,
28  n. ;  immorality  of,  28 ;  recorded  sayings  of,  29 ;  confession  of,
Turgot's  opinion  of,  30  and  n. ;  death  of,  32-3  ;  funeral  of,  33-4 ;  his
statue,  II.,  262  n.,  397  n. ;  his  use  oi  Grand-Conseil,  III.,  288.

Louis  XVI.,  accession  of,  L,  33;  character  at  accession,  40;  distrusts  his
wife,  41  n. ;  and  Guerre  des  Farines,  45  n. ;  called  le  Desire,  51 ;  dis-
misses Turgot,  will  not  see  Voltaire,  53  and  7i. ;  unfitness  to  govern,  82  ;
fails  to  support  Calonne,  93  n.,  97  n. ;  Mercy's  opinion  of,  99  n.  ;  holds
Session  of  Notables,  100;  holds  Seance  of  Parlement,  116;  his  reply  to
d'Orleans,  118;  decides  on  Versailles  for  States-General,  152  «. ;  well
received  at  opening  of  States-General,  187  ;  his  speech,  189  and  n. ;  at
Seance  Roy  ale,  209,  210  mi. ;  will  temporise,  213  ;  awaked  by  Liancourt,
visits  Assembly,  250;  visits  Paris,  253  and  nn.;  called  'Restorer  of
French  Liberty,'  254  ;  takes  up  the  tongs,  276-7 ;  and  '  Rights  of  Man,'
270  n.,  300,  328;  fetched  home  from  shooting,  317;  promises  to  come
to  Paris,  331  n.,  341  and  w. ;  intercedes  for  bodyguards,  338;  comes  to
balcony  of  chateau,  340-1  and  n. ;  had  better  abdicate,  342 ;  comes  to
Paris,  345-6-7 ;  in  Tuileries,  352-3 ;  can  get  no  sport,  354  and  «. ;
deterioration  of  character,  354  n. ;  mistrusts  Mirabeau,  372  n. ;  not
without  hope,  393 ;  visits  Assembly,  well  received,  394  and  n. ;  at
Federation  in  Champ-de-Mars,  ^ly  sqq.;  helplessness  of,  II.,  52  ;  plans
for  flight,  53  and  n. ;  bids  his  friends  disarm,  67  and  n. ;  wavers  hope-


INDEX  393

lessly,  72 ;  sends  to  inquire  after  Mirabeau,  76 ;  his  attempt  to  go  to
Saint-Cloud,  87  sqq.  nn. ;  his  circular  to  European  Courts,  8g  n. ;  his
right  of  pardon  taken  away,  91  w. ;  his  escape  from  Tuileries  ,  98  sqq.  nn. ;
his  manifesto,  103-4  ^"^  n. ;  his  statues  pulled  down,  105  ;  petition  for
his  deposition,  133  ».,  226-7 ;  inquiry  into  his  enlevemeyit,  137  n. ;
accepts  Constitution,  140  and  n. ;  drives  in  Champs-Ely sees^  141 ;  his  title
in  Legislative  Assembly,  156  and  n. ;  at  Baiser-Lamonrette,  157  n. ;  his
visits  to  Assembly,  172 ;  never  answers  letters,  193  n.  ;  declares  war,
204;  vetos  'camp  of  20,000,'  211 ;  his  bravery  and  stupidity,  217  sqq. ;
his  rudeness  to  Petion,  218  n. ;  loyal  addresses  to,  220  and  n. ;  hopes  of
escape,  224  n. ;  at  Fete  of  Federation  1792,  226,  231  and  n. ;  his  last  levee,
244  and  n.  ;  fresh  petitions  for  his  deposition,  243 ;  on  Aug.  loth,
253  sqq.  nn. ;  flies  to  Assembly,  257  ;  sent  to  Temple,  268  and  «.,  364-6  ;
what  to  do  with  him,  362-3  and  n. ;  compared  to  Charles  L,  365-6
and  n.  ;  at  bar  of  Convention,  377  and  n. ;  heads  of  charge  against  him,
378  and  n. ;  separated  from  family,  379  and  n. ;  again  at  bar  of  Con-
vention, 380-1  ;  voting  on  life  of,  387  sqq.  nn. ;  condemned  to  death,
390 ;  asks  for  respite  and  confessor,  392 ;  takes  leave  of  family,  395 ;
plot  for  saving  him,  397  n. ;  conflicting  stories  as  to  death  of,  398-9
and  nn. ;  restores  ParUments,  III.,  285,  288  ;  fails  to  conciliate  Army,
299,  300-2  ;  fixes  strength  of  Navy,  315-6  ;  his  reason  for  calling  States-
General,  329 ;  riches  of  his  kingdom,  329 ;  stupidity  of,  330 ;  progress
during  his  reign,  331 ;  vacillation  over  religious  question,  345.

Louis  XVn.     See  Dauphin.

Louis  XVIIL     See  Provence,  Comte  de.

Louis-Philippe,  Due  de  Chartres,  doorkeeper  at  jfacobitis,  L,  390 ;  bravery
at  Valmy,  IL,  337;  at  Jemappes,  367;  his  chance  of  the  Crown,  400;
IIL,  16,  17;  at  Neerwinden,  29  n.;  his  history  after  Dumouriez'  treason,
38-41  and  n. ;  teaches  mathematics  in  Switzerland,  117.

Louis-le-Grand,  College  de,  Desmoulins  educated  at,  L,  173  n. ;  Robespierre
educated  at,  177.

Louis,  J.  A.  (du  Bas-Rhin),  on  Comite  de  Surete  Generale,  IIL,  72  n.

Louis,  coachmaker,  II.,  96  n.

Loustalot,  E.,  edits  '  Revolutions  de  Paris,'  I.,  201  n. ;  notice  of,  290  and  h.  ;
on  patriotic  harangues,  299  ;  dying,  385.

Louvain,  Dumouriez  retreats  upon,  IIL,  29  w. ;  Austrians  driven  back  to,  162  n.

Louvet,  J.  B,,  author  of  '  Faublas,'  notice  of,  I.,  78-9  and  n. ;  at  Versailles  (?),
170;  edits  Sentinelle,  385  and  w. ;  advises  abstinence  from  sugar,  170;
hostile  to  Robespierre  at  Jacobins,  199,  203  ;  on  Mme  Roland,  202  n. ;
a  Republican,  265  «. ;  elected  to  Convention,  327  ;  attacks  Robespierre,
370-1  and  n. ;  attacks  Tallien  and  Chabot,  380-1 ;  votes  King's  death
and  a  respite,  391  and  m.  ;  goes  in  fear  for  his  life,  IIL,  26  and  n. ;  on
plots,  49 ;  at  June  2nd,  55  and  n. ;  proscription  of,  58 ;  escapes,  61 ;
Marat  denounces,  67 ;  his  flight,  77  sqq. ;  at  sea,  92 ;  his  wanderings,
106,  107  and  n. ;  on  the  Carmagnole  dress,  123  n. ;  restored  to  Convention,
222  ;  on  Constitutional  Committee  of  1795,  251  n.

Louvre,  Palace  of,  I.,  355 ;  Marat  steals  printing  presses  from,  281  and  n. ;
Section  of,  IL,  326 ;  wicket  gate  of,  IIL,  255.

Lowenstein,  Prince  of,  complains  to  Diet,  II. ,  179  n.

Luckner,  Marechal,  notice  of,  IL,  2  and  n. ;  watches  frontier,  184,  209;  ad-
vises Lafayette  not  to  go  to  Paris,  219  «. ;  suspicious  movements  of,  227  ;
assents  to  Republic,  269  and  n. ;  fated  to  guillotine,  IIL,  121.

Lu^on,  in  Vendee,  IIL,  322.

Luechesini,  Russian  diplomat,  IL,  339  n.


394  INDEX

Lune,  tavern  of  La,  at  Valmy,  II.,  336-7.

Luther,  typical  of  Teutonic  spirit,  III.,  230.

Lux,  Adam,  III.,  21  and  n. ;  notice  of,  70  and  n. ;  goes  mad  over  C.  Corday,
71 ;  execution  of,  114.

Luxembourg,  Le  Due  de,  speaker  for  Noblesse  in  conferences,  I.,  198  n.

Luxembourg,  palace  of  the,  residence  of  '  Monsieur,'  II.,  61-2  n. ;  seals
placed  on,  103  n. ;  proposal  to  send  royal  family  to,  267  ;  forges  in
garden  of.  III.,  93-4,  150 ;  becomes  a  prison,  122 ;  Danton  in,  177  and
». ;  imaginary  plot  in,  181;  in  '  M ^moires  sur  les  prisons,'  197  n. ;
Robespierre  sent  to,  210  and  n. ;  Paine  forgotten  in,  212-3  and  n.

Luxembourg,  Section  of,  II.,  326  n.

Luxemburg,  Austrian  troops  in,  II.,  14  n.

Luxeuil,  Federation  of,  L,  401  n.

Luynes,  C.  A.  Ducjde,  '  M^moires  sur  la  Cour  de  Louis  XV,'  L,  7  n.

Luzerne,  C.  G.  de  la,  Bishop  of  Langres,  in  favour  of  two  Chambers,  I.,  198
«.,  272  w. ;  Vice-President  of  Assembly,  319.

Lyonnais,  chateaux  burnt  in,  I.,  280.

Lyons,  insurrectionary  movements  at,  I.,  255  ;  federation  of,  404  ;  the  Rolands
at.  Dr.  Rigby  on,  404  n. ;  fall  in  trade  at,  II.,  166  n. ;  shuts  its  shops,
229 ;  massacres  at,  1792,  320  and  n. ;  signs  of  revolt  in,  III.,  13,  14  n. ;
news  of  revolt  received  in  Paris,  59  n. ;  insurrection  in,  62,  72  sqq.  nn. ;
siege  of,  90-1  and  nn. ;  surrender  of,  125  ;  called  Commune  affranchie,
126  n. ;  to  be  razed,  127  ;  fusillades  at,  127-8 ;  the  '  White  Terror '  at,
238  and  n. ;  a  Cour-des-Monnaies  at,  287.

Mably,  I'Abb^  de,  opponent  of  physiocrats,  I.,  190  n. ;  his  influence  on  Sieyes,

262  n. ;  card-castles  of,  266.
Machault,  J.  B,  de,  considered  for  the  Ministry,  I.,  39  n.
Machecoul,  news  of  insurrection  at,  III.,  23  n.
Mack,  Austrian  General,  receives  Dumouriez,  III.,  40.
Mackau,  Mme  de,  sous-gouvernante,  I.,  336  n.
Mackefer,  Petrouille.     See  Mere  Duchesne.
Mackintosh,  Sir  J.,  defends  Peltier,  II.,  289  and  n.
Macon,  Electoral  Committee  of,  hangs  brigands,  I.,  283.
M^connais,  chateaux  burnt  in  the,  L,  280.
Madame  Royale.     See  Marie-Therese-Charlotte.
*  Madelonnettes,  Les,""  in  •  Memoires  sur  les  Prisons,'  III.,  197  n.
Madrid,  Parlement  refuses  to  register  Treaty  of,  III.,  284.
Maes,  barber  of  Lille,  II.,  341  and  n.
Maestricht,  Dumouriez  fails  to  take.  III.,  20  and  n.

Mahan,  '  Influence  of  sea  power  on  French  Revolution  and  Empire,'  III.,  310.
Mai.     See  Trees  of  Liberty.
Maignet,  E.  C,  in  Convention,  II.,  327  n. ;  his  proconsulate  at  Orange,  III.,

74  n.,  124-5  n.,  133  ;  at  siege  of  Lyons,  90  n.  ;  his  arrest,  237  n.
Mailhe,  J.  B.,  reports  on  '  crimes'  of  Louis  XVI.,  II.,  368,  369  n.
Maillard,  S.,  notice  of,  I.,  171  and  n.  ;  at  Bastille  siege,  243  sqq.  ;  on  Oct.  5th

and  6th,  309  sqq. ;  signs  petition  for  King's  deposition,  II.,  135  ;  enlists

trained  murderers,  229  n.  ;  presides  in  September  massacres,  303  sqq.

nn. ;   gets  money  from  Secret  Service  fund,  359  n. ;  in  Revolutionary

Army,  III.,  141.
Maillard,  Mdlle,  '  Goddess  of  Reason,'  III.,  138  n.
Maillebois,  Y.  M.  D.  Comte  de,  royalist  plotter,  I.,  366.
Mailly,  A.  J.  de,  Marquis  d'Haucourt,  Mar^chal,  notice  of,  II.,  2;  defends

Tuileries,  246,  248,  253  ;  spared  by  the  mob,  262  ;  his  end,  311.


INDEX  395

Maine,  Sir  H.  S.,  on  the  spirit  of  democracy,  I.,  193  n.

Mainmorte  {see  also  Feudal  Rights),  I.,  275  n.

Mainvielle,  P.,  trial  of,  III.,  103  n.  sqq.

Mainz,  Elector  of,  II.,  179  ;  taken  by  Custine,  republic  of,  346  and  ».  ;  siege
of,  III.,  21  and  n.,  63,  64  n.  ;  fall  of,  80 ;  garrison  of,  sent  to  La  Vendee,
80  ».,  89  ;  falls  to  France  again,  230  and  n.  ;  garrison  of,  322.

Mairie,  Chambre  d' Arret  at  the,  II.,  302  n. ;  III.,  197  n.,  210  n.

Mairobert,  continuator  of  Bachaumont,  I.,  73  n.

Maison  du  Roi,  troops  of  the.  III.,  295.

Maitres  des  Requetes  de  VHotel  du  Roi,  III.,  282,  288,  290.

Maitres  des  Requetes  du  Parlement,  III.,  282,  288.

Maitrise,  Lettres  de,  I.,  69  n.

Malbosquet,  fort  outside  Toulon,  III.,  129.

Maldent,  M.  de,  bodyguard,  on  flight  to  Varennes,  II.,  98  n.  sqq.;  his  trial
unfinished,  137  n.

Malesherbes,  C.  G.  Lamoignon  de,  Minister  of  Louis  XVI.,  I.,  8  n.,  39  n. ;
notice  of,  81  and  ». ;  on  contest  with  Parlement,  112;  his  second
Ministry,  113  and  «. ;  foretells  conflagration,  114;  as  press-censor,
121  w. ;  physiocrat,  190  n. ;  defends  King,  II.,  379-80;  pleads  for  delay,
391  ;  his  last  relations  with  King,  395  n. ;  execution  of.  III.,  184  and  n.

Malines,  English  driven  back  on.  III.,  162  n.

Malisset,  La  Societe,  I.,  9  n.

Mallarm^,  F.  R.  A.,  denounced  by  Robespierre,  III.,  205  n.

Mallet-du-Pan,  J.,  editor  of  Merctire  Britannique,  I.,  73  n. ;  ♦  M^moires  et
Correspondance,'  I.,  112  n. ;  on  Protestant  edict,  117  n.;  on  proposed
abolition  of  Parlement,  125  n. ;  editor  of  Mercure,  I.,  343  m.,  376  n.,
387  n.  ;  threatened  by  deputation  of  citizens,  II.,  58  n.  ;  sent  to  Leopold
notice  of,  172  and  n. ;  on  Brunswick's  manifesto,  235  w. ;  on  revolt  of
provinces,  III.,  12  «. ;  his  correspondents  in  Paris,  60  n. ;  on  Fete  of
Eire  Supreme,  191  n. ;  on  restoration  of  order,  222  w.

Malmesbury,  Earl  of,  'Letters  and  Diaries  of,'  I.,  115  n.

Malouet,  P.  V.,  '  M6moires,'  I.,  73  n. ;  on  Lomenie's  ministry,  140  n. ;  on
Necker,  141  n. ;  on  cahicrs,  153  n. ;  notice  of,  178-9  n. ;  attempts  to
relieve  deadlock,  196-7  nn. ;  his  plan  for  two  Chambers,  198  n. ;  on
Mirabeau's  foresight  and  wickedness,  201  n. ;  is  hissed,  203  n. ;  opposes
Sieyes,  204  n. ;  dates  the  '  Terror,'  250  n. ;  trained  as  Intendant,  258  n. ;
protests  against  '  Rights  of  Man,'  270  n. ;  his  friendship  with  Raynal,
289  n. ;  on  Lafayette's  responsibility,  333  «. ;  remains  at  his  post,  343
n. ;  on  Mirabeau's  diseases,  II.,  77  n. ;  on  '  Austrian  Committee,'  85  n. ;
protests  against  Seance  permanente,  103  n. ;  visits  King,  130  n. ;  proposes
that  Constitution  should  be  provisional,  142  n. ;  on  Baiser-Lamourette,
157  n. ;  introduces  Mallet  to  King,  173  and  n. ;  continues  to  advise
King,  213 ;  at  insurrection  of  June  20th,  219  n. ;  urges  flight,  224  n. ;
writes  a  defence  of  King,  378  n. ;  opposes  foolish  naval  policy  of
Assembly,  III.,  311.
Malseigne,  G.  de,  Inspector  at  Nancy,  I.,  448  sqq. ;  notice  of,  II.,  19  n. ;  at

Coblentz,  180.
Mandar.     See  Meillar,
Mandat,  J.  A.  G.  Marquis  de.  Commander  of  National  Guard,  I.,  216  ».,

II.,  246  sqq.  nn. ;  murder  of,  251-2  and  n.
Mandats-Territoriaux  replace  Assignats,  III.,  339.
Mandel,  Colonel  oi  ^  Royal -All  emand,^  II.,  126  n.

Manege,  Assembly  sits  in,  I.,  356;  badly  constructed,  ibid.  n. ;  invaded  by
mob,  216  and  n. ;  Convention  in,  338  and  n.


396  INDEX

Manuel,  P.  L.,  elected  Procureur,  I.,  429  n. ;  notice  of,  II.,  195 ;  denounces
Ministers,  199 ;  suspended  by  King,  reinstated  by  Assembly,  220  n.,  223
n. ;  supports  insurrection,  237 ;  withdraws  Mandat's  cannons,  253  ;  in
Commune,  280 ;  Mme  de  Stael  pleads  with,  288 ;  proposes  Convocation
at  Champ-de-Mars,  298  and  n. ;  at  massacres,  310,  315  ;  responsible  for
massacres,  325  n. ;  elected  to  Convention,  327  and  n. ;  votes  against
King's  death,  389;  in  prison.  III.,  97;  called  in  evidence  against  Queen,
99  and  n. ;  execution  of,  120  and  n.

Marais,  in  the  Convention,  III.,  147  and  ».,  177  n.,  202  n.,  204,  207,  222,

Marais,  in  Vendee,  III.,  320.

Marat,  Albertine,  sister  of  the  following,  notice  of,  III.,  67-8  and  nn.

Marat,  J.  P.,  called  'horseleech,'  I.,  64;  notice  of,  67-8-9  n.;  his  works
'  Chains  of  Slavery,'  '  Discourse  to  the  English,'  etc.,  '  Essay  on  the
Human  Soul,'  '  Philosophical  Essay  on  Man,'  '  Mdmoire  sur  I'Electricit^
Mddicale,'  '  Offrande  a  la  Patrie,'  68  n. ;  on  Gilds,  70  n. ;  at  Versailles  (?),
172 ;  his  pamphlet  of  July  ist,  221  and  n. ;  on  Bastille  day,  243  ;  '  Ami
du  Peuple,'  290  and  n. ;  arrested,  299 ;  visits  Versailles,  305 ;  his
'  practical  suggestion,'  368-9 ;  nickname  of,  369 ;  arrested  again,  382
and  n. ;  croaks  out  truth,  385  ;  detects  symptoms  of  aristocracy,  412 ;
criticises  funeral  mass  for  Bouill^'s  soldiers,  II.,  29;  on  the  political
situation,  40-1 ;  demands  a  Dictator,  107  n.  ;  cries  for  a  Republic,  132  ;
goes  into  hiding,  136 ;  his  bust  in  jfacobin  Club,  198  ;  did  he  hide  on
Aug.  loth  ?  238-9  and  n. ;  rings  tocsin,  248  ;  accused  of  hiding,  265  n. ;
co-opted  to  Commune,  280  and  n. ;  steals  royalist  presses,  281  and  n. ;
in  Comite  de  Surveillance,  299,  300  and  w. ;  organises  massacres,  315,  320
n. ;  signatory  of  September  circular,  320  and  n.,  325  n. ;  in  Convention,
327  and  n. ;  accuses  Dumouriez,  344-5  and  n. ;  uses  oaths  in  Convention,
353  ;  denounced  by  Girondists,  355  and  n. ;  demands  heads  in  large
numbers,  356-7  and  n. ;  gets  money  from  Secret  Service  fund,  359  n. ;
Robespierre  disclaims  relations  with,  371  n. ;  his  *  erasure '  demanded,
373  and  n. ;  takes  to  his  bed,  386 ;  preaches  riot  and  murder.  III.,  5  ;
wishes  to  feed  *  People,'  10 ;  denounced  by  Girondists,  15  and  n. ;
decreed  accused,  43  andw.,  44;  arrested  and  interrogated,  44  ;  acquitted,
46;  abuses  Girondists,  51;  plans  the  insurrections  of  May  31st  and
June  2nd,  54  and  n. ;  drives  Convention  back  to  its  Hall,  58  ;  denounced
by  Carabots,  63-4  ;  assassination  of,  66  sqq.  and  nn. ;  apotheosis  of,  68
and  n. ;  Chalier  comes  from  Lyons  to  see,  72  ;  a  special  company  of
murderers  named  after,  123  and  «.,  131-2  ;  riot  over  his  bones,  233  and  n.

Marbre,  Table  de,  '  Woods  and  Forests'  office,  III.,  287.

Marc  d' Argent,  law  of  the,  I.,  382-3  n,

Marceau,  F.  S.  D.,  officer  in  Volunteers,  II.,  185  n. ;  victorious  at  ChoUet,
III.,  322-3  ;  learns  tactics  in  Vendee,  327.

Marcel,  E.,  insurrection  of,  I.,  227  n.

Marchand,  J.,  '  Un  Intendant  sous  Louis  XIV,'  I.,  258  n.

Marechal,  P.  S.,  new  Calendar  proposed  by.  III.,  85  ;  notice  of,  ibid.  n. ;
'  Dictionnaire  des  Athees,'  135  n.

Marechaussee,  I.,  46,  283  ;  II.,  59.

Maree,  Chambre  de  la.  III.,  282.

Maret,  H.  B.,  reporter  on  staff  of  Moniteur,  I.,  171  w. ;  quits  England,  II.,
401  n.

Maria-Theresa,  Empress-Queen,  favours  Lomenie,  I.,  99  n.

Mariages-Republicains  at  Nantes,  III.,  132.

Marie-Antoinette,  avoids  Mme  Dubarry,  I.,  31  w. ;  becomes  Queen,  33;
character  of,  40-1-2,  82 ;  hatred  of  courtiers  for,  41  n. ;  unpopularity  of,


INDEX  397

51 ;  thinks  of  sending  for  Voltaire,  53 ;  the  diamond  necklace  affair,  75
and  n. ;  against  Calonne,  97  and  n. ;  against  States-General,  137 ;  on
Necker  s  weakness,  141  n. ;  in  favour  of  double  Tiers-Etat,  152  n. ;
badly  received  at  opening  of  States-General,  187  and  n. ;  at  banquet  of
Gardes-du-Corps,  303 ;  bravery  of,  on  Oct.  5th  and  6th,  332 ;  her  grave
danger,  336,  340,  341  and  nn. ;  angry  with  d'Artois,  343  n. ;  sets  out  for
Paris,  345 ;  her  alleged  speech  to  market  women,  346-7  and  n. ;  dis-
comforts at  Tuileries,  352  n. ;  silence  of  people  towards,  353 ;  her
"business  with  the  children,"  355;  trusted  Mirabeau,  372  n. ;  Mme
Roland's  hatred  of,  406  n. ;  preparing  for  flight,  II.,  55  ;  her  interview
with  Mirabeau,  57  and  n.  ;  her  danger  at  the  sack  of  Vincennes,  64 ;
*  Lettres  authentiques  de  la  Reine,'  72  n. ;  the  '  Austrian  Committee '
and,  85  n. ;  prepares  for  flight,  93-4  and  n. ;  on  flight  to  Varennes,  98-9
sqq.  nn. ;  goes  to  opera,  141 ;  loneliness  and  perplexity  of,  172 ;  on
June  2oth,  218,  219  ;  denounced  at  Fete  of  Federation,  232  n. ;  inspires
Brunswick's  manifesto,  235  n.  ;  on  Aug.  loth,  254  sqq. ;  has  her  watch
and  purse  stolen,  266  n. ;  in  Temple,  364 ;  proposal  to  bring  her  to
trial,  369  n.  ;  at  King's  last  hours,  396 ;  plots  to  save  her  from  Temple
and  Conciergerie,  397  n. ;  completely  neglected  by  allies.  III.,  22  n. ;
sent  to  Conciergerie,  97  n. ;  trial  and  death  of,  98  sqq.  nn. ;  her  marriage
and  death  contrasted,  loi.

Marie-Christine,  sister  of  above,  Regent  in  Belgium,  II.,  94  n.,  340,

Marie-Leszczyska,  Queen  of  Louis  XV.,  I.,  3  n.

Marie-Th^rese-Charlotte,  •  Madame  Royale,'  afterwards  Duchesse  d'Angou-
leme,  birth  of,  I.,  41  n. ;  at  flight  to  Varennes,  II.,  loi ;  '  Mdmoires
particuliers  de  la  Captivity  a  la  Tour  du  Temple,'  III.,  97  n. ;  notice  of,
190  n.

Marignane,  M.  E.  de  Covet,  heiress  of  the  house  of,  wife  of  Mirabeau,  I.,  igon.

Marines,  disbandment  of  the.  III.,  313,

Marius,  overthrower  of  Nobles  at  Rome,  I.,  157.

Marly,  King  in  retirement  at,  I.,  206.

Marmontel,  J.  F.,  Philosophe,  I.,  39;  notice  of,  133  n. ;  disgusted,  289,  380.

Marsal,  Regiment  de  Salm  cantoned  at,  II.,  17.

Marseillais,  their  success  at  Aries,  II.,  167  ». ;  start  for  Paris,  228;  their
subsequent  history,  229  n. ;  on  the  march,  239,  240  ;  street  rows  with,
241 ;  attack  Tuileries,  258  5^^. :  are  the  chief  murderers  in  September
massacres,  303  n. ;  get  Secret  Service  money,  359  n.

Marseillaise,  the  song,  II.,  230  and  n. ;  sung  at  Jemappes,  367;  in  the
streets,  377 ;  by  Girondists,  III.,  105.

Marseilles,  riots  at,  Garde-Bourgeoise  at,  I.,  158  ».,  215  and  n. ;  Conti  in-
terned at,  199  n. ;  set  against  Toulon,  363  ;  sends  deputation  in  favour
of  Republic,  II.,  133  ;  riots  at,  159 ;  against  Aries,  165  and  n. ;  account
of,  228  «. ;  signs  of  uneasiness  in.  III.,  13  and  n. ;  prospects  of  revolt
at,  48 ;  will  march  on  Paris,  62 ;  civil  war  at,  73  and  n.  ;  fall  of,  124 ;
resists  being  called  Sans-Nom,  161  n. ;  the  '  White  Terror  '  at,  238  and  n.

Martin,  H.,  *  Histoire  de  France,'  I.,  5  «. ;  '  Histoire  de  France  depuis  1789,'
18  ».

Martin  d'Auch,  refuses  Tennis-Court  oath,  I.,  208  and  n.

Massena,  A.,  officer  in  Volunteers,  II.,  185  n.

Masson  et  Biagis,  '  Napoldon  Inconnu,'  II.,  260  n.

Masson,  F.,  '  Le  Departement  des  Affaires  fitrangeres  pendant  la  Revolu-
tion,' I.,  341  n. ;  '  Josephine  de  Beauharnais,' III.,  114  n.  ;  '  Cardinal  de
Bernis  depuis  son  Ministere,'  345.


398  INDEX

Mathieu,  J.  B.,  on  mission  to  Bordeaux,  III.,  76  ». ;  on  second  Constitu-
tional Committee,  82  n.
Maton  de  la  Varenne,  in  prison,  II.,  290  and  n. ;  '  Les  Crimes  de  Marat  ou

ma  Resurrection,'  307  n.
Maubeuge,  Gouvion's  death  at,  II,,  209;  siege  of,  raised,  III.,  154  and  n.\

Drouet  taken  at,  155.
Mauconseil,  Section  of,  II.,  237  n.,  243.
Maulde,  Dumouriez'  camp  at,  II.,  269,  293.
Maulevrier,  riot  at,  III.,  318.
Maupeou,  R.  N.  C.  A.  de.  Chancellor,  I.,  4 ;  dealings  with  Parletnent,  notice

of,  6  and  «.,  37-8 ;  regretted,  125 ;  his  suppressions  of  judicial  bodies,

III.,  282,  285,  288.
Maupeou,  Parlement.     See  Parletnent  Maupeou.
Maure,  deputy  to  Convention,  sent  to  Chartres,  II.,  362  n.
Maurepas,  J.  F.  Ph^lippeaux  Comte  de,  becomes  Minister,  notice  of,  I.,  38

and  n. ;    his  frivolity,   40,   56,    61;   his  nickname,    51-2;    hostility  to

Austrian  alliance,  56  w. ;  death  of,  82.
Maury,  L'Abbe  J.  S.,  notice  of,  I.,  185 ;  ambition  of,  186  ;  possible  rival  of

Mirabeau,    272 ;    proposes   quadrennial   legislatures,    297   n. ;    tries   to

emigrate  but  returns,  343  ;  his  speeches,  356  ;  a  '  symbol  of  faith,'  362  ;

his  toughness,  367  ;  pulls,  in  effigy,  on  Champ -de-Mars,  417  ;  confesses

himself  powerless,  II.,  47;  on  sack  of  Castries'  house,  51 ;  at  Coblentz,

146,  180-1.
Mauves,  Prairie  des,  outside  Nantes,  III.,  132  and  n.
Mauvillon,  Major,  hack  writer  for  Mirabeau,  I.,  191  n.
Maximum,  law  of  the.  III.,  34-5  and  n. ;  in  partial  working,  159  n. ;  table

of,  164  n. ;  abolition  of,  221  and  n.
Mazaroz,  J.  P.,  '  Histoire  des  Corporations  des  Arts  et  Metiers,'  I.,  70  n.
Meaux,  stage  on  journey  to  Varennes,  II.,  109  «.,  128  n. ;  massacres  at,

320  n.
Mege,  '  Correspondance  de  Couthon,'  II,,  153  n.
M^h^e  La  Touche,  J.  C.  H.,  •  La  Y6nt6  tout  entiere  sur  les  vrais  auteurs  de

la  journee  du  2  Sept.,  1792 ' ;  II.,  302  n.
Meillan,  notice  of,  '  M^moires  de,'  III.,  i8  and  n. ;  Girondist  meetings  at  his

house,  55  ;  on  failure  in  Calvados,  76  ;  in  flight  to  the  West,  ySsqq.  and  n.
Meillar  (?  Mandar)  visits  Besenval,  I.,  236  and  n.
Melon,  Le  Chevalier  de,  royalist  agent  in  South,  II.,  187  n.
Melun,  Bailly  arrested  at.  III,,  119  n.

Memmay,  Seigneur  of  Quincey,  accident  at  his  chateau,  I.,  283  and  n.
*  M^moires  sur  les  Prisons,'  II.,  292  n.
'  Memorial  de  Saint-H^lene,'  III.,  255  n.
Menou,  J.  F.  Baron  de.  President  of  Jacobins,  I.,  133  n. ;  unable  to  defend

Convention  in  Vendemiaire,  III.,  254  and  n.
Mentis-Plaisirs,  Salle  des,  meeting-place  of  States-General,  I.,  161 ;  account

of,  166  and  «. ;  deputies  assemble  in,  189  ;  closed,  206.
M^ot,  royalists  at  his  restaurant,  II.,  56,  203.
Mercier,  L.  S.,  '  Tableau  de  Paris,'  I.,  29  n. ;  '  Le  Nouveau  Paris,'  I.,  42  n. ;

Maury's  remark  to,  186 ;   declares  a  revolt  of  Paris  impossible,  217 ;

joins  Carra  as  journalist,  291  and  n. ;  on  the  procession  to  Paris,  346 ;

in  Convention,  IL,  327;   on  September  massacres,  318;  on  the  Lille

Barber,  341 ;   on  King's  death,   390 ;    on  plots,  III.,  49 ;    one  of  the

protesters,  80 ;   on  FHe-Dieu,  134 ;  on  Fetes  of  Reason,  137  sqq. ;  on

wealth  of  farmers,  164 ;  restored  to  Convention,  222  n. ;  Carlyle's  debt

to,  notice  of,  223  n.


INDEX  399

Mercy-Argenteau,  Le  Comte  de,  notices  of  his  correspondence  with  the
Austrian  Court,  his  importance  at  Versailles,  I.,  41,  42  nn.  ;  his  friend-
ship for  Vermond,  95  n. ;  his  opinion  on  the  financial  question,  138  n. ;
on  Necker,  141  m.,  199  n. ;  on  failure  of  Seance  Roy  ale,  213  «. ;  on  the
Queen,  214  «.,  253  n. ;  on  Bastille  Day,  221  n. ;  on  d'Artois,  343  n. ;
letters  of,  to  the  Queen,  352  n. ;  transferred  to  Hague,  352  n. ;  on  anarchy,
356  n. ;  requests  permission  for  Austrian  troops  to  move,  II.,  14  n. ;  on
Leopold  and  the  Queen,  53  n. ;  on  '  Austrian  Committee,'  85  n. ;  chafes
against  Thugut,  III.,  64  n. ;  his  vain  efforts  to  save  Queen,  98  w.,  190  n.

Merda,  A.  C,  'Precis  des  fivenemens  du  Neuf  Thermidor,'  III.,  210  n. ;
notice  of,  214  and  n.

Mere- Duchesne,  II.,  373  and  n.

Mere-Duchesse,  at  King's  trial,  II.,  384,  390.

Mdrilhou,  F.,  '  Les  Parlements  de  Paris,  leur  caractere  politique,'  III.,  279.

Merlin  (de  Thionville),  A.  C,  contributes  to  '  Revolutions  de  France  et  de
Brabant,'  I.,  292  n. ;  notice  of,  II.,  153  and  n. ;  tears  his  papers,  192 ;
wishes  to  record  his  vote  for  King's^eath  in  absence,  390  n. ;  defends
Mainz,  III.,  81 ;  grumbles  at  Fete  of  Etre  Supreme,  193  n. ;  against  Law
of  Pr atrial,  195  ;  seized  by  Hanriot  on  9th  Thermidor,  210.

Merlin  (de  Douai),  P.  A.,  notice  of.  III.,  94  and  ». ;  a  Modere  after  Ther-
midor, 217  n. ;  elected  on  Comite  de  Salut  Public,  219  n. ;  dislikes
restoration  of  Girondists,  222  n. ;  refuses  to  sit  on  Constitutional  Com-
mittee, 251  n.

Merveilleuses,  III.,  226.

Mesdames  de  France,  daughters  of  Louis  XV.,  I.,  22  n. ;  their  nicknames,
23  ;  notice  of,  23  n. ;  patrons  of  Beaumarchais,  54 ;  on  Lafayette,  332 ;
their  escape  from  France,  II.,  60-1  and  n.

Mesmer,  F.  A.,  charlatan,  I.,  67  and  n.

Mestre-du-Camp,  Regiment  de,  mutiny  of,  II.,  15  «.,  18  sqq. ;  III.,  302.

Metra,  I.,  387  and  n.

Metrical  system,  the  new.  III.,  160  and  n.

Metternich,  Dumouriez  corresponds  with,  notice  of,  204  and  n.

Metz,  sickness  of  Louis  XV.  at,  I.,  3,  7  n. ;  specially  represented  in  States-
General,  152  n.  ;  disorder  at,  280 ;  King  contemplates  flight  to,  300-1,
325,  327;  II.,  I,  2;  mutinous  movements  of  garrison  of,  11  sqq.;
Romoeuf  rides  towards,  108 ;  failure  of  scheme  of  flight  to,  127 ;
Parlement  of.  III.,  286.

Metzger,  '  Lyon  en  1793,'  III.,  125  n.

Meudon,  march  of  women  through,  I.,  312;  tannery  at.  III.,  165  and  n. ;
cannons  fetched  from,  255.

Meusnier,  J.  B.  M.,  defends  Mainz,  III.,  21  n.

Militia,  burden  of  the,  I.,  18  n. ;  III.,  296,  304.

Millot,  female  servant,  witness  at  Queen's  triail,  III.,  99  n.

Milton,  quotation  from,  II.,  298  and  n.

Minden,  bad  traditition  of.  III.,  300.

Ministers,  question  of  their  seats  in  Assembly,  I.,  358  and  n.

Ministry,  King's  right  to  change,  II.,  30  n.  ;  demands  for  change  of,  58
and  n. ;  difficulty  of  choosing  a,  170  «.,  193  n. ;  a  Girondist  Ministry
chosen,  199  and  n. ;  ejected,  212  n. ;  a  Lafayettist  Ministry,  213  n. ;
resigns,  a  Royalist  Ministry  chosen,  225  n. ;  the  Girondist  Ministry
recalled,  267  and  n. ;  does  nothing  to  stop  massacres,  314,  324  n. ;  Ex-
ecutive Council  of,  347,  358-9 ;  III.,  33  ;  suppression  of,  183  n.

Miomandre,  body-guardsman,  rescued  from  mob,  I.,  335  ;  saves  the  Queen,
336;  only  wounded,  337  ;  emigrates,  II.,  56.


400  INDEX

Mirabeau,  notice  of  the  family  of,  I.,  173  sqq.,  189  sqq.  n.

Mirabeau,  V.  Marquis  de  ;  on  the  peasantry,  I.,  46-7,  279  ;  family  troubles
of,  74;  notice  of,  175,  190  n.  ;  his  works,  'Testament  Politique,'
•  Utility  des  Etats  Provinciaux,'  '  Ami  des  Hommes,'  '  Th^orie  de  I'lm-
pot,'  igo  n. ;  his  death,  234  ;  his  taille.  III.,  334.

Mirabeau,  H.  G.  Comte  de,  son  of  the  above,  on  French  alliance  with
America,  I.,  56  n.  ;  early  escapades  of,  74;  conduct  towards  Calonne,
86  n. ;  in  Berlin,  '  Sur  la  Monarchie  Prussienne,'  on  Cagliostro,  his
return  home,  '  D^nonciation  de  I'Agiotage,'  90-1-2  ;  final  return  to
Paris,  114;  on  coming  States-General,  137  w. ;  at  dinners  in  Palais-
Royal,  147 ;  his  electoral  campaign  in  Provence,  155  n.,  157-8  and  nn. ;
on  arrangements  of  Salle-des-Menus,  166  n.  ;  on  costume  of  Tiers-lktat,
167  n. ;  notice  of,  173  sqq.,  igo  n. ;  '  Lettres  a  Sophie,'  '  Essai  sur  le
Despotisme,' '  Sur  la  Monarchie  Prussienne,' '  Sur  les  Lettres-de-Cachet,'
'  Ddnonciation  de  I'Agiotage,'  igo  sqq.  n. ;  speech  of  May  i8th,  196,
198  nn.  ;  '  Lettres  du  Comte  M.  a  ses  commettans,'  201  n. ;  speech  of
May  27th,  203,  204  n. ;  on  name  of  Assembly,  204  n.  ;  on  Seance  Royale,
209  n.,  210,  211  n. ;  speech  of  July  8th,  215  n.,  proposes  Garde-Bour-
geoise,  216  n.  ;  on  Bastille  Day,  234  and  n.,  255  ;  at  ruins  of  Bastille,
260 ;  criticises  attitude  of  Assembly,  262  n. ;  on  *  Rights  of  Man,'  270
n. ;  on  abolition  of  Feudal  Rights,  271  n.  ;  on  d'Orl^ans,  272 ;  his  power
in  Assembly,  273  ;  finds  Assembly  dull,  274  ;  on  deficit  and  veto,  297
and  n.  ;  on  Oct.  5th,  313,  325,  328  n.,  330,  332  ;  question  of  his  com-
plicity, 344  and  n.  ;  reasons  of  his  hatred  for  Lafayette,  345  and  n. ;
supposed  to  be  cooling,  357 ;  Grande  trahison  du,  358  and  nn. ;  suggests
lists  of  Ministers,  ibid.  n. ;  debating  power  of,  relations  with  Court,
luxury  of,  359,371  n.  ;  onlandsof  clergy,  360  w. ;  relations  with  Monsieur,
367  n.,  371  n. ;  his  newspaper,  384  ;  a.tjfacoblns,  38g  ;  on  King's  visit  to
Assembly,  394  n.  ;  on  titles  of  Noblesse,  412 ;  on  reconstruction  of
Army,  IL,  10  ;  on  prospects  of  Civil  War,  29  and  «. ;  on  Assignats  and
change  of  Ministry,  30  and  n. ;  attacked  by  Marat,  40-1 ;  hostile  to
Jacobins,  46  ;  contempt  for  d'Orldans,  ibid. ;  challenges  sent  to  him,
49 ;  recommends  flight  to  Normandy,  53  n.,  58  n. ;  interview  with  and
opinion  of  Queen,  57  and  n.,  72  and  n.  ;  on  change  of  Ministry,  58  n.  ;
defends  liberty  of  emigration,  61  n.,  65  and  «.  ;  in  Directory  of  Depart-
ment of  Seine,  70 ;  scheme  for  re-establishing  royal  authority,  71  ;
President  of  Assembly,  75  ;  last  illness  and  death  of,  76  sqq. ;  grief  of
Paris  for,  77  ;  funeral  of,  79-80;  removal  of  bones  from  Pantheon,  79  n.,
80,  in.,  233;  complains  of  King's  want  of  confidence,  II.,  84;  his
attitude  on  clerical  questions,  ibid,  n.,  on  prospects  of  revision  of  Con-
stitution, 138  «. ;  his  bust  in  jfacobins,  198;  his  'treason'  revealed  by
Iron  Press,  374  ;  his  bust  smashed,  375 ;  on  the  judicial  system.  III.,
297  ;  on  riches  of  France,  329  ;  supports  Assignats,  338  ;  on  Civil  Con-
stitution of  Clergy,  345.

Mirabeau,  Vicomte  de,  younger  brother  of  above,  his  nickname,  I.,  184;  his
fervour,  200,  272 ;  breaks  his  sword,  213  ;  '  probably  in  liquor,'  367 ;
emigration  and  death  of,  II.,  82  ;  contributor  to  Actes  des  Apotres,  289  n.

Mirabeau,  le  BailH  de,  uncle  of  the  above,  his  nephew's  ingratitude  to,  I.,
189  n.,  igo  n. ;  death  of,  II. ,  82.

Mirabeau,  Section,  II.,  237  n.

Miranda,  F.  de,  engineer,  I.,  375;  fails  to  take  Maestricht,  III.,  20  ». ;
driven  back  at  Neerwinden,  29  n.

Mirom^nil,  A.  T.  Hu^  de,  Garde-des-Sceaux,  against  Calonne,  I.,  95;
dismissed,  97.


INDEX  401

Moland,  '  Theatre  de  la  Revolution,'  II.,  385  n.

Molay,  Jacques,  Grandmaster  of  Templars,  II.,  268.

MoUendorf,  new  Prussian  commander  on  Rhine,  III.,  162  n.

Mollevault,  E.,  on  Commission  of  Twelve,  III.,  47  n.

Momoro,   A.    F.,   notice  of,  373   and   n. ;    at   Cordeliers,  II.,  42 ;   hints  at

'agrarian  law,'  279;  leader  of  atheist  movement.  III.,  135  ;  his  wife  as

'  Goddess  of  Reason,'  140 ;  in  Commune,  146 ;  arrest  of,  169  and  n. ;

end  of,  173-4.
Monarchy,  timidity  of,  I.,  36  n. ;  new  style  and  title  of,  I.,  272  n. ;  practically

lost,  II.,  84  ;  ^faisant  la  mort,^  go;  abolished,  338  and  n.
Monasteries,  numbers  of.  III.,  343  ;  dissolution  of,  346  and  n.
Monceaux,  palace  of  d'Orl^ans,  I.,  58  n.,  237  n.
Monccy,  B.  A.  J.,  General  of  united  armies  of  Pyrenees,  III.,  153  n.
Monciel,  A.  M.  R.  Terrier  de,  becomes  Minister,  II.,  212  n. ;  remains  in

office,  225  n.  ;  tries  to  raise  defenders  for  Tuileries,  244  n.
Moncontour,  the  Girondists  escaping  to.  III.,  77.
Monge,  G.,  Minister  of  Marine,  II.,  267  and  n. ;  helps  to  make  Calendar,

III.,  86.
Monin,  "  £tat  de  Paris  en  1789,"  I.,  108  n.
Moniteur,  newspaper,  I.,  151;    notice  of,  171  n. ;    Rabaut,  first  editor  of,

179  n.,  384;  suspects  Montmorin's  circular,  II.,  89  n. ;  approves  mas-
sacres, 372  n. ;  '  analyse  du  Af.,'  III.,  136  n.
Monnaies,  Cour  des,  III.,  287.
Monnier,  Mme  Sophie,  Mirabeau  seduces,  I.,  175.
Mons,  Fersen  escapes  to,  II.,  loi  n. ;  Dumouriez  occupies,  308  n. ;  Jourdan

advances  on.  III.,  162.
'  Monsieur  '  {see  Provence) ;  Regiment-Monsieur,  II.,  117  n.
Monsigny,  Mdlle,  mob  tries  to  burn  alive,  I.,  242  and  n.
Montaigne,  M.  E.  de,  on  the  Vendeen  peasants.  III.,  319.
Montaigu,  Vendeen  victory  at.  III.,  322.
Montelimart,  Federation  of,  I.,  401  and  n.,  412 ;  will  resist  Marseilles,  III.,

62  and  «.,  73.
Montesquieu,  C.  de  S.  Baron  de,  his  one  great  error  borrowed  by  Sieyes,  I.,

262  «. ;  '  card-castles '  of,  266  ;  •  Esprit  des  Lois,'  II.,  279.
Montesquiou,  A.  P.  Marquis  de,  takes  Savoy,  notice  of,  II.,  345  and  n.
Montesquiou,  F.  X.  Abb6  de,  on  Finance  Committee,  III.,  331,  337-8-9 ;  on

Ecclesiastical  Committee,  343.
Montezuma,  III.,  343.
Montgaillard,  I'Abb^,  '  Histoire  de  France  depuis  la  fin  du  regne  de  Louis

XVI.,'  I.,  91  n.;  much  founded  on  Sallier's  Annales,  103  n. ;  nature  of

his  book,  II.,  266  n. ;  on  tannery  of  human  skins,  III.,  165  ;  on  victims

of  Terror,  246.
Montglat,  Marquis  de,  '  M^moires,'  I.,  13  «.
Montgolfier,  brothers,  inventors  of  balloons,  I.,  66.
Montjoie,  '  JHistoire  de  la  Conjuration  de  M.  Robespierre,'  III.,  200  n.
Montmartre,  entrenchments  at,  I.,  214;  relief  works  at,  287  and  n.,  293;

spectators  of  Federation  at,  422  ;  fortifications  at,  II.,  284  and  n. ;  cess-

pool  of,  III.,  233.
Montm^di,  Bouill6's  troops  waiting  at,  II.,  no  sqq.
Montmirail,  stage  on  journey  to  Varennes,  II.,  109  n.

Montmorin-Saint-Herem,  A.   M.   Comte   de,  Minister  for   Foreign  Affairs,

notice  of,  I.,  98-9  and  n. ;  powerless  to  save  Holland,  114  and  n. ;  holds

conferences  with  Necker  and  Malouet,  196  n. ;  in  favour  of  King  going

to  Paris,  318  «.,  341  n. ;  on  King's  weakness,  354  n. ;    relations  with

VOL.  III.  26


402  INDEX

Mirabeau,  372  n. ;  allows  Austrians  to  march,  II.,  14  n. ;  sole  practical
Minister,  58  n. ;  sends  circular  to  all  European  Courts,  89  n.,  94;  gives
passports  to  Mme  de  Korff,  97  n. ;  continues  provisionally  in  office,
170  n. ;  informs  Assembly  of  complaints  of  German  princes,  179  n. ;
resigns  office,  193  n. ;  urges  King  to  fly,  224  n. ;  imprisoned,  282  «. ;
his  brother  massacred,  282  n. ;  his  ov^^n  massacre,  321  and  n.

Montpellier,  riots  at,  II.,  159;  in  insurrection,  III.,  74;  a  Chambre  des
Comptes  at,  286.

Montreuil,  Lafayette  halts  at,  I.,  330.

Montrouge,  cemetery  of,  II.,  317.

Mont-Saint-Michel,  castle  of,  I.,  119.

Montserrat,  taken  from  England  by  Bouilld,  II.,  3.

Moore,  Dr.,  'Journal  during  a  residence  in  France,'  II.,  260  n. ;  eye-witness
of  massacres,  305  ;  relations  of  his  '  Journal '  to  the  Moniteur,  357.

Morande,  C.  Th^venot  de,  notice  of,  I.,  73  ». ;  at  Versailles  (?),  170 ;  in
prison,  II.,  290.

Morarde  de  Galle,  J.  B.,  Admiral,  III.,  314.

Morbihan,  disturbances  at,  II.,  91 ;   Vendeen  retreat  on.  III.,  323.

More,  Hannah,  sees  d'Orl^ans  in  England  (?),  I.,  381  and  n. ;  letter  to  Jacob
Dupont,  II.,  384  n.

Moreau,  J.  V.,  leader  of  Tiers-J^tat  at  Rennes,  I.,  120  n. ;  officer  in  Volunteers,
II.,  185  n. ;  advances  on  Ghent,  III.,  162  n.

Moreau-de-Saint-M6ry,  M.  L.  E.,  leading  Paris  elector,  I.,  221  n. ;  names
Lafayette  to  command  National  Guard,  227  n. ;  presides  at  meeting  of
electors,  notice  of,  249  and  n. ;  receives  King,  254  ;  becomes  deputy  for
San  Domingo,  347 ;  wounded  in  street  row,  II.,  242.

Morellet,  I'Abb^,  philosophe,  I.,  39;  notice  of,  113  and  «. ;  favours  Lom^nie,
122,  136  ;  at  dinners  in  Palais-Royal,  147  ;  physiocrat,  190  n. ;  frightened
at  course  of  events,  380 ;  *  Le  Cri  des  families,'  III.,  234  n. ;  his  royalism
in  1795,  253  M.

Morlaix,  table  of  maximum,  from  district  of,  III.,  164  n.

Morris,  G.,  American  Ambassador,  •  Diary  and  Letters  of,'  I.,  164  n. ;  on
opening  of  States-General,  187,  189  nn. ;  on  Seance  Royale,  213  n. ;  on
horrors  of  July,  255  n. ;  on  partridge  hunting,  285  n. ;  on  wickedness  of
Paris,  370  M. ;  on  Mirabeau,  II.,  83  n. ;  on  flight  of  King,  130  n. ;  on
excellent  eff'ect  of  firmness,  136  n. ;  on  King's  humiliation,  140  n. ;  on
Volunteers,  185  n. ;  on  state  of  Kingdom,  188  n. ;  on  plans  for  King's
escape,  224  n. ;  raises  defenders  for  Tuileries,  244  w. ;  on  Brunswick's
advance,  270;  on  the  infant  Republic,  355  ».;  on  King's  death,  398-9  w.;
on  Danton  and  Robespierre,  III.,  182  n.

Mortier,  E.  A.  C.  J.,  officer  in  Volunteers,  II.,  185  n.

Mortimer-Ternaux,  '  Histoire  de  la  Terreur,'  I.,  155  ».

Moton,  watchmaker,  II.,  302.

Motteville,  Mme  de,  '  M^moires,'  I. ,  13  n.

Moucheton,  body-guardsman,  his  horse  killed,  I.,  324 ;  and  eaten,  326.

Moudon,  I'Abb^,  Confessor  of  Louis  XV.,  I.,  30-1.

Mounier,  J.  J.,  leader  of  Estates  of  Dauphin^,  I.,  119  n. ;  notice  of,  '  Expose
de  ma  conduite,'  133  n. ;  '  experienced,'  178,  197  ;  proposes  Tennis-Court
oath,  207  n. ;  demands  withdrawal  of  troops,  215  n. ;  on  first  Constitu-
tional Committee,  262  n. ;  in  favour  of  two  chambers,  '  Nouvelles  obser-
vations sur  les  fitats-G^n^raux,'  272  n. ;  on  Mirabeau  and  Desmoulins,
297  M. ;  his  action  on  Oct.  5th  and  6th,  313  sqq.  nn. ;  resigns  seat  and
emigrates,  343  n.

Mountain,  party  of  the,  in  Legislative,  II.,  153  ;  origin  of  name,  155  n. ;


INDEX  403

desires  to  plunder  Belgium,  344  n. ;  views  on  King,  363  n. ;  saves
d'Orl^ans,  368  n. ;  leaves  few  '  Mcmoires,^  III.,  7  and  n.

Mousquetaires,  suppressed,  I.,  83  ;  III.,  295.

Moustier,  E.  F.  E.  Marquis  de,  Foreign  Office  offered  to,  II.,  170  n.

Moustier,  M.  de,  bodyguard,  assists  at  flight  to  Varennes,  II.,  100  n.,  137  n.

Muscadins,  III.,  226-7.

Muette,  La,  balloon  ascent  from,  I.,  66  n.

Miiller,  J.  L.,  General,  in  West  Pyrenees,  III.,  152-3  and  n.

Municipalities  {see  also  Communes)  and  National  Guards,  I.,  216  «.,  235  n.

Municipality  of  Paris  {see  also  Commune),  the  old,  I.,  221  n. ;  the  Provisional,
I.,  251,  256  «.,  288  n. ;  the  first  new  legal,  428-9  71. ;  closes  churches,
II.,  87  w. ;  asks  Sections  an  ironical  question,  89  w. ;  Commissions  of
Government  replace.  III.,  221  and  n.

Murat,  J.,  fetches  cannons,  III.,  255  and  n.

Musee  Carnavalet,  III.,  83  n.

Mutius-Sccevola,  Section,  III.,  112  and  n.

Naigeon,  J.  A.,  atheist,  I.,  380,  408;  'Adresse  a  I'Assembl^e  Nationale,'
408  «. ;  at  the  atheistic  movement.  III.,  135  and  n.

Nancy,  garrison  of,  Municipality  of,  jfacobin  Club  of,  II.,  15  and  n. ;
Federation  at,  situation  of,  16 ;  mutiny  at,  I.,  364  n. ;  II.,  17  sqq.  nn. ;
mutiny  contrasted  with  Fete  of  Federation,  32 ;  "  massacre "  of,  206 ;
Parlement  of,  III.,  286;  mutiny  of,  302.

Nantais,  "  Voyage  des  132  N.,"  III.,  132-3  and  n.,  197  n.,  199  and  n. ;  their
trial,  220  and  n,

Nantes,  deputies  to  States-General  from,  master  wigmakers  of,  I.,  180;
frightened  at  King's  flight,  II.,  106 ;  mails  interrupted  from.  III.,  23  ;
insurrection,  74 ;  Bailly  in  hiding  near,  119  m.  ;  under  Carrier,  123  and  n. ;
noyades  at,  13 1-2-3  ^^^  nn.;  Chambres  des  Comptes  at,  286;  Vendeans
at,  321,  326.

Naples,  occasionally  intercedes  for  Dauphin,  III.,  190  m.  ;  her  naval  strength,
316.

Napoleon,  studying  at  Brienne,  I.,  136;  sub-lieutenant  in  La  Fere,  II.,  8;  at
Auxonne,  his  letter  to  Buttafuoco,  his  radical  views,  9  and  n. ;  rescues
a  member  of  his  mess,  10  ;  gone  to  Corsica,  55  ;  at  Aug.  loth,  259,  260  «. ;
pulls  down  Tour  du  Temple,  268  n. ;  requests  liberation  of  Lafayette,
269  n. ;  writes  '  Souper  de  Beaucaire,'  III.,  73  n. ;  at  Toulon,  89,  129
sqq.,  nn. ;  learns  mathematics  from  Pichegru,  156  ;  his  awkward  position
in  1794-5,  224-5  and  n. ;  in  Vendemiaire,  255  and  w.,  256-7  and  n. ;
indiscipline  in  his  armies,  309 ;  criticises  naval  tactics,  315.

Napoleon,  Louis-,  afterwards  Napoleon  III.,  I.,  119  ».

Narbonne,  Louis  Comte  de,  lover  of  Mme  de  Stael,  I.,  169  n. ;  escorts
Mesdames  de  France,  II.,  60-1  and  w. ;  escorts  Mme  de  Stael  on  pro-
menades, 141 ;  sends  Talleyrand  to  England,  146 ;  becomes  War
Minister,  notice  of,  175  and  n.  ;  cannot  manage  his  office,  184  ;  suggests
the  employment  of  Brunswick,  185  «. ;  sends  for  Dumouriez,  i86 ;
hostile  to  Bertrand,  193  w. ;  resigns,  201 ;  escapes  from  France,  288  and
n. ;  proposes  to  incorporate  volunteers  and  regulars.  III.,  305.

Nassau,  Prince  of,  complains  to  Diet,  II.,  179  «.

National-Guard,  account  of,  I.,  216  «. ;  growing  in  numbers,  230;  at
Federation,  401  sqq. ;  at  Nancy,  21  sqq. ;  at  riot  of  April  i8th,  88 ;  on
guard  at  Tuileries,  103  and  n. ;  at  King's  return  from  Varennes,  128  n. ;
at  July  17th,  136  n. ;  unsatisfactory  as  police,  139  and  n. ;  changes  in
N.  G.  after  Lafayette's  resignation,  147  and  n. ,  196  ». ;  staff  of  N.  G.
disbanded,  210;   reorganised  after  Thermidor,  III.,  242  n.\   competes


404  INDEX

in  recruiting-market  with  army,  304-5 ;  to  be  employed  on  shipboard,

313-

Nature,  statue  of,  on  ruins  of  Bastille,  III.,  83  and  ».

Naulin,  M.  C,  judge  on  Tribunal,  arrest  of,  III.,  204  n.

Navy,  Louis  XV.  on  French,  I.,  29  ;  emigration  of  officers  of,  II.,  170  ;  plans
of  Comite  for  reorganising.  III.,  157  n. ;  appendix  on,  310  sqq.

Necker,  J.,  opposes  Turgot,  •  Sur  la  legislation  des  grains,'  I.,  45  n. ;  notice
of,  his  first  Ministry,  opinions  on,  60  and  n. ;  '  Compte  rendu,'  '  Ad-
ministration des  Finances,'  61  and  n.,  88-g ;  dismissal,  61  n. ;  suppresses
sinecures,  82 ;  his  quarrel  with  Calonne,  88-9 ;  grants  demands  of
Dauphine,  119,  n. ;  refuses  to  help  Lom^nie,  138 ;  his  second  Ministry,
141  and  n. ;  his  Rapport  au  Roi,'  wants  to  hold  States  General  at
Paris,  152  and  n. ;  his  speech  at  opening  of  States-General,  189  and  n. ;
criticised  by  Mirabeau,  201  n. ;  opponent  of  physiocrats,  190  n. ;  Mira-
beau's  hatred  for,  192,  n. ;  conferences  with  Malouet  and  Montmorin,
196  n. ;  begins  to  look  blue,  199  ;  interview  with  Mirabeau,  201  n. ;
proposals  for  conferences  of  the  Orders,  203-4;  absent  from  Seance
Roy  ale,  209,  n. ;  rumours  of  his  dismissal,  21 1-2 14  and  nn. ;  dismissed,
222  sqq. ;  his  bust  carried  about,  224  ;  his  third  Ministry,  252 ;  trium-
phant return,  277,  284  and  n. ;  waning  of  his  influence,  286  n. ;  failure
of  his  two  loans,  296  and  n. ;  supports  veto  suspensif,  297  n. ;  at
Chateau,  Oct.  6th,  318  sqq.,  336  n. ;  at  wit's  end,  360  n. ;  Ministre  adore,
363 ;  his  Genevese  connection,  376  n. ;  hopelessness  of  his  position,
resignation  of,  II.,  30  and  n. ;  writes  a  defence  of  King,  378  n. ;  his
reasons  for  calling  States-General,  III.,  329  ;  his  financial  reforms,  330-

1-2-3,  336.  338-9.

Necker,  Mme,  her  salon  at  Paris,  I.  60  n.

Necklace,  the  Diamond,  I.,  74-5  and  w.,  89.

Neerwinden,  battle  of.  III.,  29  and  n.,  307.

Nehra,  Mme  de,  mistress  of  Mirabeau,  I.,  191  n.

Nemours,  cahier  of  the  Bailliage  of,  I.,  276  n,

Nesle,  la  Tour  de,  Mme  de,  I.,  11.

Neufchatel,  Mirabeau  in  exile  at,  I.,  191.

Neuilly,  bridge  of,  III.,  65.

Neustadt,  Prussian  winter  quarters  at,  III.,  156  ».

Neuville,  Mme,  Queen's  attendant,

Neville,  candidate  for  Ministry,  I.,  100  n.

Nevis  taken  from  England  by  Bouilld,  II.,  3.

Nice,  conquest  and  incorporation  of,  II.,  345  n.

Nicolas,  L.,  one  of  Robespierre's  bodyguard.  III.,  194  n. ;  leads  claque  in
Convention,  196  n.

Nicolas,  artist's  model,  1.,  321.

Nievre,  ludicrous  scene  in  Department  of  the.  III.,  149  n.

Nimes,  district  of,  ruined  by  winter  of  1788,  I.,  159  n. ;  riots  at,  363  n. ;  II.,
53,  159 ",  the  Marseillais  hope  to  reach.  III.,  73  n.

Niort,  Dumouriez  at,  II.,  168,  186;  in  danger  from  Vendeans,  III.,  321.

Niviere-Chol,  Maire  of  Lyons,  III.,  13  n.,  72.

Noailles,  L.  M.  Vicomte  de,  leader  of  Assembly,  Aug.  4th,  I.,  2^71  n.

Noblesse,  privileges  of,  I.,  17 ;  list  of  those  who  sat  for  Tiers-Etat,  158  n. ;
ordered  to  join  Tiers-Etat,  213  ;  abolition  of  titles  of,  412  ;  Noblesse  de
la  Robe,  III.,  284 ;  as  qualification  for  Army  officers,  303  and  n. ;  for
naval  officers,  311 ;  renounces  pecuniary  exemptions,  330.

Nodier,  C,  '  Le  Dernier  Banquet  des  Girondins,'  III.,  104  n.

Noirmont,  Dunoyer  de,  '  Histoire  de  la  Chasse  en  France,'  I.,  83  w.


INDEX  405

Noirmoutier,  He  de,  England  might  have  reduced,  III.,  312.

Nonjuring  priests,  II.,  52.

Nootka  Sound  (Vancouver),  fear  of  war  about,  I.,  358  n.

Normandy,  the  revolt  of  1793  in,  III.,  12  n.

Nort,  on  the  river  Erdre,  III.,  321.

Norvins,  *  Histoire  de  Napoleon,'  II.,  10  n.

Notables,  the  first  Assembly  of,  I.,  go,  91  sqq.  nn. ;  and  Calonne,  Seance
Royale  in,  100 ;  dismissed,  loi  and  n. ;  Lafayette  demands  National
Assembly  in,  102  ;  second  Assembly  of,  150-1  and  nn.

Notre-Dame,  Fete  of  Reason  at.  III.,  139  and  n.

Nottingham,  Priestley  riot  suppressed  by  dragoons  from,  II.,  178  «.

Nougaret,  '  Histoire  des  prisons  de  Paris  et  des  ddpartements,'  III.,  197  n.

Nouvelle-France,  barracks  of,  II.,  240.

Noyades  at  Nantes,  III.,  131-2-3  and  nn.

Nuns,  flogged  by  radical  mob,  II.,  86  and  n.

Nuncio,  the  Papal,  leaves  Paris,  III.,  345.

Nymwegen,  Pichegru  takes,  III.,  229  n.

Oath,  of  Tennis  Court,  I.,  207  sqq.  and  n. ;  of  Feb.  4th,  1790,  395  ;  of
Federation,  423  sqq.

(Eil-de-bauf,  an  apartment  at  Versailles,  I.,  22  and  n.  ;  distant  view  of,  317.

Oge,  v.,  Creole  insurrection  of,  II.,  169.

Oliva,  Mdlle  Guay  d',  Paris  courtesan,  I.,  75  n.

OUioules,  pass  outside  Toulon,  III.,  129.

Olmiitz,  Lafayette  in  prison  at,  II.,  269  n.

Opera,  Salle  de  /',  at  Versailles,  banquet  in,  I.,  303.

Orange,  the  Marseillais  reach.  III.,  73  n. ;  the  'White  Terror'  at,  239  n.

Orangerie,  at  Versailles,  I.,  247,  249.

Orateur-du-Peuple,  Freron's  paper,  I.,  384  n. ;  on  Mirabeau's  relations  with
Court,  II.,  57  n. ;  resumed.  III.,  224  and  n.

Orbeval,  Choiseul's  error  of  judgment  at,  II.,  112  n.

Orient,  the  ship,  at  Toulon,  III.,  131 ;  her  loss,  315.

Orleans,  High  Court  of  Justice  at,  II.,  109  n.,  189  and  n.,  190,  193  n. ;  III.,
294 ;  its  abolition,  II.,  267  n. ;  its  prisoners  massacred  at  Versailles,
321-2  and  «. ;  citizens  of  O.  executed.  III.,  96  ». ;  reinforcements  for
Republicans  gathered  at,  321.

Orleans,  Philippe,  the  Regent,  his  use  of  the  Parlement,  III.,  285.

Orleans,  Louis  Due  de,  son  of  the  Regent,  religious  maniac,  I.,  26.

Orleans,  Louis  Philippe  Due  de,  son  of  the  above,  at  Louis  XV.'s  death-
bed, I.,  23.

Orleans,  Louis  Philippe  Joseph  Due  de,  at  Louis  XV.'s  death,  I.,  23 ;  his
early  career,  57-8  and  n. ;  his  riches,  64  ;  and  debauchery,  65  ;  witnesses
balloon  ascent,  66;  in  Notables,  92,  117,  118;  meets  Besenval,  97;
exiled,  118;  returns,  123;  gives  advice  to  Electors,  148  and  n. ;  'sets
on  Brigands,'  160 ;  his  influence  on  Reveillon  riot,  164  and  n. ;  at  open-
ing of  States-General,  183  and  n.  ;  King  angry  with,  187  and  n. ;  cut
adrift  from  Court,  200;  joins  Tiers-J^tat,  213;  his  bust  carried  about,
224 ;  his  influence  on  Bastille  day,  255  ;  not  an  Orleaniste,  273  ;  his
influence  on  Oct.  5th,  344  and  «.,  381  and  n. ;  sent  to  England,  345  n.  ;
Mirabeau's  relations  with,  371  and  n. ;  return  from  England  and  re-
ception of,  381  and  n. ;  his  schemes,  II.,  46  ;  extravagance,  47  ;  influence
on  Vincennes  riot,  6g ;  member  of  yacobin  club,  107  «. ;  possibly  con-
sidered for  crown,  131 ;  at  King's  levee,  174  and  n. ;  sits  for  Paris  in
Convention,  327  n.,  330  w. ;  takes  name  of  figalite,  330  n. ;  in  danger,


406  INDEX

367  and  n.  ;  votes  King's  death,  389  ;  his  mistresses,  390 ;  votes  against
respite,  392  ;  present  at  King's  murder,  397,  399  ;  denounced  by  Gironde,
III.,  15  and  «.,  16 ;  arrested  and  sent  to  If,  41 ;  proscribed,  103  n. ;  end
of,  1 15-6.

Ormesson,  H.  F.  Le  Fevre  d',  Controlter-General,  I.,  84  and  n. ;  holds  office
again  in  1792,  II.,  212  n. ;  elected  Maire  of  Paris,  refuses  office,  361  n.

Ormesson,  L.  F.  d',  father  of  the  above,  President  a  Mortier,  I.,  107  n. ;
conciliatory  towards  Lomdnie,  113  n. ;  against  States-General,  123.

Orvilliers,  L.  G.  Comte  d',  admiral,  defeated  at  Ushant,  I.,  58  n.

Osselin,  C.  N.,  judge  of  Tribunal,  his  death.  III.,  120-1  and  n.

Oudinot,  C.  N.,  officer  in  Volunteers,  II.,  185  n. ;  his  origin,  III.,  301.

Oudon,  Republican  Army  reorganised  at.  III,,  323.

Pache,  J.  N.,  notice  of,  I.,  376  and  «. ;  friend  of  Mme  Roland,  II.,  212  n.  ;
Minister  of  War,  358  and  n. ;  Maire  of  Paris,  361  n. ;  plays  into  hands
of  Commune,  384  n. ;  Dumouriez  complains  of,  386 ;  fails  to  suppress
riot.  III.,  4  ;  demands  Hubert's  liberation,  51 ;  sent  for  by  Comite,  52  n. ;
helps  insurrection,  53  «. ;  his  corruption  at  War  Office,  64  n.,  308;
interrogates  royal  children,  98  n. ;  in  Commune,  146  ;  a  H^bertist,  170  n. ;
imprisoned,  183.

Pacte-de-Famine ,  myth  of,  I.,  9  n.

Padua,  Leopold  at,  II.,  54  w.

Paine,  T.,  notice  of,  I.,  377  and  n. ;  placards  walls  of  Paris,  II.,  105  ;  answers
Burke,  177  ;  naturalised  a  Frenchman,  278  ;  in  Convention,  327  «.,  329  ;
on  first  Constitutional  Committee,  349  n.,  350  ;  his  spotty  face.  III.,  22  ;
in  prison,  171,  177  n. ;  his  curious  escape,  212-3  and  n.

Palais-de-yustice,  I.,  106  ;  III.,  281.

Palais-Royal,  account  of,  the  foyer  of  the  Revolution,  I.,  65  and  n.  ;  dema-
gogues orate  in,  202,  216,  386  ;  names  of  moderates  placarded  in,  204,
n.  ;  mutineers  welcomed  at,  219  ;  tumult  in,  222  ;  auto-da-fe  in,  II.,  92-3  ;
becomes  Palais-National,  III.,  41  ;  or  Palais-Egalite,  234.

Palatinate,  to  be  stripped  of  live-stock  by  French  armies,  III.,  149  n.

Palloy,  ^  Le  Patriote^  charged  with  demolition  of  Bastille,  I.,  260  «. ;
commander  of  Parisian  volunteers,  murderer,  II.,  345  n.

Pamela,  supposed  daughter  of  d'Orleans,  I.,  381  and  n.

'  Pamela  ',  theatrical  piece,  prohibited.  III.,  113  n.

Panis,  fi.  J.,  member  of  Commune,  I.,  429  n. ;  on  Conseil-General  of  Com-
mune, II.,  167  n.  ;  distributes  cartridges  to  radicals,  246  n.  ;  on
Aug.  loth,  249  ;  in  Commune,  280  ;  on  Comite  de  Surveillance,  287  n. ;
prepares  the  massacres,  300  ;  his  complicity  in  robbery  of  Garde-Meuhle,
316  n.  ;  signatory  of  circular,  320  «.,  325  n. ;  supports  Robespierre  against
Barbaroux,  357  n. ;  in  Comite  de  Surete  Generale,  III.,  72  «. ;  urges
Danton  to  fly,  176  and  n. ;  attached  to  Danton's  memory,  200  n. ;
attacks  Robespierre,  205  n.

Pantheon,  Voltaire's  remains  at,  I.,  53  n.  ;  decrees  of  Assembly  and  of  Con-
vention respecting,  II.,  79  n.  ;  Lepelletier's  funeral  at,  400  ;  Marat's
funeral  at.  III.,  68  ;  Societe  du  P.,  221  n. ;  Marat's  bones  removed  from,
233  and  M.

Paoli,  General,  in  Corsica,  II.,  55.

Parc-aux-Cerfs,  myth  of,  I.,  21  n.

Parens,  Cure  of  Boisisse-le-Bertrand,  III.,  135.

Paris,  attitude  to  Louis  XV.  in  1744,  L,  3  ;  in  1774,  4 ;  as  '  Lutetia,'  its
growth,  12  ;  riots  in,  19  and  n.  ;  population  of  estimated,  108  and  n. ;
special  representation  in  States-General  of,  152  n. ;  franchise  in,  154  and


INDEX  407

n.  ;  elections  at,  i6i  n. ;  cahier  of,  201 ;  colours  of,  228  and  n. ;  to  form  a
separate  Department,  361  n. ;  desperate  wickedness  of,  370  n.  ;  Sections
to  replace  districts  of,  382  ;  attitude  at  King's  flight,  II.,  103,  107  n.,
128-9  ;  to  be  '  blasted  asunder,'  236  ;  fortifications  of,  284  and  n. ;  deputies
to  Convention  for,  327  and  n.  ;  churches  closed  by  order  of  Commune^
III,,  141-2  and  tin.  ;  fed  by  requisitions,  163  n.  ;  judicial  system  of,  293  ;
Vendeens  expected  at,  321.

Paris,  F.,  called  '  Fabricius,'  III.,  176  and  n.

P^is,  P.  N.  M.  de,  murders  Lepelletier,  II.,  393  and  n.

Paris-Duvernier  (or  Duverney,  or  Montmartel),  Court  banker,  I.,  54.

Paris  I'j^pinard,  '  L'Humanite  M^connue,'  III.,  196  n.

Parish,  the  basis  of  the  Electoral  system,  I.,  153  n.

Parlements,  the  recall  of  a  mistake,  I.,  36,  38,  125  and  n. ;  as  safety-valves,
80;  analysis  of  their  leaders,  81.

Parlement  of  Paris,  makes  common  cause  with  that  of  Rennes,  I.,  5  n. ;
opposes  Lom^nie,  105  ;  analysis  of,  105  w. ;  declares  itself  incompetent
to  register  financial  edicts,  107;  is  banished  to  Troyes,  no;  returns,
114  ;  Seance  Royale  in,  n6  sqq. ;  will  not  register,  119;  refuses  to  give
up  two  Councillors,  128 ;  Seance  of  thirty  hours,  129-31  and  n. ;  lits
de  justice  in,  132;  declares  for  old  form  of  States-General,  146  and  n. ;
loses  its  popularity,  ibid.  n. ;  Chamhre  des  Vacations  of,  end  of,  361 ;
old  members  of,  guillotined.  III.,  184  and  «. ;  its  functions  and  duties,
280  sqq.

Parlements,  the  Provincial,  109  and  n.,  123  and  n. ;  exiled,  133;  lettres  de
cachet  against,  134 ;  their  functions  and  duties,  285  sqq.

Parlement  Maupeou,  I.,  4,  7  n.,  37-8,  57,  8i ;  III.,  285.

Paroy,  le  Marquis  de,  officer  in  bodyguards,  his  letters,  I.,  318  sqq.  nn.

Parthenay,  captured  l)y  Vendeans,  III.,  321.

Partridge,  almanack  maker,  I.,  368.

Pas-de-Calais,  deputies  to  Convention  for  Department  of,  XL,  327  n.

Pasquier,  £.,  '  Mdmoires  de,'  I.,  423  n.

Passports,  difficulties  of  getting,  II.,  283  n.

Passy,  promenaders  from,  in  Tuileries  Gardens,  I.,  224 ;  barrier  of,  253.

Pastoret,  C.  E.  J.,  notice  of,  II.,  152  and  n. ;  at  Baiser-Lamotirette,  157.

Patents,  sale  of.  III.,  338.

Patrie-en-d anger,  proclamation  of,  II.,  228  and  n.,  233-4,  298;  III.,  25.

Patriate,  mutiny  on  board  the  ship.  III.,  314.

Patriote-Frang ais,  Brissot's  paper,  I.,  171  n.

Patrols,  Lafayette's  system  of,  I.,  298-9.

Patrouillotisme  chassant  le  Patriotisme,  caricature  of,  I.,  299.

Pau,  in  quasi-rebellion,  I.,  134 ;  Parlement  and  Chamhre-des-comptes  at,
III.,  286.

Paul  et  Virginie,  I.,  78  and  n.

Paulet,  C,  inventor  of  the  Paulette,  III.,  284.

Pavillon-de-Flore  in  Tuileries,  III.,  144  ».

Payan,  C.  F.,  notice  of.  III.,  183  and  n.;  will  support  Robespierre,  196  n.,  207,

Pays  de  Cinq  Grosses  Fermes,  III.,  335-6.

Pays  de  Droit  ^crit  and  Pays  de  Droit  Coutumier,  III.,  334.

Pays  d^Elections,  Intendants  assess  taille  in,  I.,  258 ;  III.,  334.

Pays  d'Etat,  III.,  334.

Pays  Etrangers  and  Pays  Reputes  Etrangers,  III.,  336  and  n.

Pays  de  Vaud,  recruiting  ground  for  Chdteau-Vieu^,  II.,  4,

Peages  {see  also  Feudal  Rights),  I.,  276  n.

Peasants,  condition  of  before  1789,  I.,  18  n.


408  INDEX

*  Peers  of  France,'  d'Aiguillon  tried  before,  I.,  5  n. ;  mistake  to  add  them  to

Parlement,  105  «.,  106.
Pekin,  books  pretending  to  be  printed  at,  I.,  73.
Pellenc,  secretary  to  Mirabeau,  II.,  74-5  n.,  84  n.
Pellet,  '  Th^roigne  de  Mericourt,'  III.,  49  n.
Peltier,  J.  G.,  journalist,  II.,  40  ;  on  the  Queen,  254  ;  escape  and  career  of,

288-9  and  n. ;  •  Tableau  de  Paris,'  289  n.
Pensions,  relative  amount  of.  III.,  330  n.
'  Pentecost'  (Aug.  4th  and  5th),  L,  271.
Penthievre,  storming  of  Fort  P.,  III.,  232.
Penthievre,  L.  J.  M.,  de  Bourbon,  Due  de,  father-in-law  of  d'Orleans  and

of  Mme  de  Lamballe,  I.,  64  ;  II.,  108  «.

*  People,'  statue  of  the  *  Sovereign  P.,'  III.,  84-5  and  n.,  160  and  n.
Pepin,  the  bow-legged,  I.,  11.

Pere  Duchesne,  account  of,  II.,  39-40  and  «. ;  a  *  Memoire  '  in  itself,  III.,  7  ». ;
poison  of,  12;  distributed  to  soldiers,  52«.,  64  «.;  subsidised  by  Comife,  i^Sn.

Pereyra,  J.,  natural  son  of  Kaunitz,  I.,  375  ;  Commissioner  to  Belgium,  II.,
368 ;  to  Holland,  meets  Dumouriez,  III.,  30  and  n. ;  brought  to  trial,
169  «.,  171.

Perpignan,  riots  at,  II.,  53,  168 ;  revolutionary  clubs  at.  III.,  22  «. ;  a
Conseil-Souverain  at,  286.

Perriere,  spy  of  Garat's,  III.,  31  «.,  113  n.

Perrtiques-hlondes,  story  of.  III.,  165.

Pestalozzi,  naturalised  a  Frenchman,  II.,  278  n.

Petion,  J.,  notice  of,  I.,  179  n. ;  a  Republican,  195  n. ;  invokes  the  principle
of  the  referendum,  297  n. ;  presents  petition  against  bodyguards,  313  n.  ;
dull  speaker,  356 ;  elected  Maire  vice  Bailly,  429  n. ;  II.,  70  n. ;  at
Jacobins,  42 ;  in  Assembly,  46 ;  saves  d'Epr^mesnil,  68 ;  friend  of
Roland,  107  ;  escorts  King  to  Paris,  128  sqq.  and  nn. ;  on  Committee  of
Revision,  138  n. ;  carried  home  with  vivats,  144 ;  visits  London,  146 ;
Maire  of  Paris,  195-6,  206-7  and  n. ;  on  June  20th,  215  sqq.  nn. ;  his
suspension  and  reinstatement,  220  w.,  223  and  n. ;  at  Fete  of  Federation,
231-2;  supports  insurrection,  237;  welcomes  Marseillais,  240;  petitions
for  King's  deposition,  243 ;  hinders  defence  of  Tuileries,  244 ;  at  Aug.
loth,  246  sqq.  nn. ;  cannot  stop  massacres,  315,  324  n. ;  his  anxiety  to
recover  crown  diamonds,  316  w. ;  in  Convention,  326,  338;  on  first
Constitutional  Committee,  349  n.  ;  re-elected  Maire,  refuses  office,
360-1  n. ;  votes  for  King's  death,  391  n. ;  plays  violin  (?),  III.,  26  andn. ;
tries  to  pose  as  peacemaker,  43  ;  escapes  from  arrest,  61 ;  is  marked  for
death  by  Marat,  67  ;  in  flight,  77  sqq. ;  at  sea,  92  ;  end  of,  106,  120.

'  Petion-National-Pique,'  II.,  208  and  n.

Petit,  Doctor,  announces  death  of  Mirabeau,  II.,  77.

Petit-Jean,  Parlementeer  of  Rouen,  imprisoned,  I.,  398-9  and  n.

Petit-Republicain,  newspaper  distributed  to  soldiers.  III.,  64  n.

Petitioners,  the  8,000,  II.,  210  n. ;  the  20,000,  220  and  n.

Petrarch  and  Laura,  at  Avignon,  II.,  159.

*  Peuple,'  '  La  Passion,  la  Mort,  et  Resurrection  du,''  a  skit,  its  authorship,  I.,

134  and  n.
Peyssac,  Mme  de,  executed  for  concealing  Rabaut,  III.,  121  n.
Peyssard,  J.  P.  C,  tried  for  the  Insurrection  of  Prairial,  acquitted,  III.,  245  n.
Pezay,  le  Marquis  de,  friend  of  Necker,  I.,   61.
Phdippeaux  (or  Philippeaux),  P.,  Convention  Commissioner  in  La  Vendee,

III.,  122  n. ;  attacks  H^bertists,  169  n. ;  notice  of,  171  and  n. ;  urges

Danton  to  act,  175  n. ;  arrested,  176.


INDEX  409

Philippe  II.  creates  baillis,  III.,  289.

Philippe  IV.,  organiser  of  administrative  system,  III.,  280-1.

Philipsburg,  Austrians  in  winter  quarters  at,  III.,  156.

Philosophes  hail  golden  age,  I.,  39.

Phoebe,  British  frigate,  III.,  314.

Picardie,  Regiment  de,  mutinous,  but  penitent,  II.,  11.

Pichegru,  C,  notice  of,  III.,  156  and  n. ;  his  victories,  229  and  n.  ;  saves

Convention,  236-7  ;  his  treason,  253  and  n.
Picpus,  convent  of,  III.,  196  n.
Picques,  Section  of.  III.,  211  n.
Piedmont,  expected  to  help  Lyons,  III.,  77  n.,  91;  designs  of  France  on,

225  n.
Pigott,  Robert,  vegetarian,  I.,  170  n.
Pilatre  de  Rozier,  aeronaut,  I.,  66  and  n.
Pillnitz,  declaration  of,  II.,  178,  179  n.,  180.
Pitt,  William,  first  Earl  of  Chatham,  fond  of  posing,  I.,  190  n.
Pitt,  William,  the  younger,  Talleyrand  sent  to  intrigue  against,  II.,  146  n. ;

watches   events,  180 ;   anxious   for  peace,  401  n. ;    the  "  gold  of  P.,"

III.,  5  «.,  49-50 ;  declared  '  enemy  of  human  race,'  22-3  and  ». ;  is  '  ruler

of  the  sea,'  157  ;    continues  to  subsidise  Austria,  230  and  n. ;    organises

descent  on  Quiberon,  231-2  and  n.
Place-d'Armes,  at  Versailles,  I.,  207.
Place-Bellecour,  at  Lyons,  III.,  127  n.
Place-de-Greve,   outside    Hotel-de-Ville   at    Paris,    I.,    227,    230;     Sainte-

Genevieve's  relics  burnt  on.  III.,  137  n. ;  Hanriot's  troops  on,  III.,  211  n. ;

Barras'  troops  on,  213-4  n.
Place-Louis  XV,  troops  assembled  in,  I.,  222-3  ^"<^  ^-  '■>  becomes  Place  de  la

Revolution,  II.,  397  sqq. ;  statue  of  Liberty  on.  III.,  84  ;  iron  forges  in,

150  «. ;  Robespierre  executed  on,  215-6.
Place-des-Terreaux,  at  Lyons,  III.,  127.
Place-du-Trone,  III.,  196  n.
Place-Vendome,  Sections  assemble  in,  III.,  54.
Plaine,  La,  in  Vendee,  III,,  320.
Point  du  your,  Barere's  paper,  I.,  201  n.,  291  and  n.
Poissonniere,  Section,  III.,  26 ;  boulevard,  84  n.
Poland,  partition   of,    II.,   180,   296;    Frederick   William's   eyes   fixed   on,

,339w.
Police,  wholly  in  hands  o{  Communes,  III.,  293.
Polignac,  J.  Due  de,  surrenders  his  ofifice,  I.,  83,  120;  emigrates,  252  ;  meets

Necker,  277.
Polignac,  Y.  M.  G.  Duchesse  de,  wife  of  above,  friend  of  Queen,  I.,  41

and  n. ;  witnesses  balloon  ascent,  66.
Polignac,  A.  J.  Due  de,  son  of  above,  Minister  of  Charles  X.,  I.,  277.
Poll-tax,  III.,  338.
Pompadour,  J.  A.  Poisson   Marquise   de,  mistress  of    Louis  XV.,   I.,  7;

myths  of  Maria  Theresa's  letter  to,  27  n. ;  reason  of  her  long  tenure  of

favour,  30  «.
Pompignan,  J.  G.  Lefranc  de,  Archbishop  of  Vienne,  President  of  Assembly,

I.,  213  n.,  233;    Minister  of  Louis  XVI.,  ibid,   n.,    277,   357  w. ;   at

Versailles  in  October,  318.
Pompignan,   J.  J.   Lefranc   Marquis   de,  brother  of  above,  litterateur,  I.,

233  and  «.
Pondich^ry,  Bouill^'s  expedition  against,  planned,  II.,  3.
Poniard,  Chevaliers  du,  II.,  66-7,


410  INDEX

Ponf-au-Change,  corpses  heaped  on,  II.,  317  ;    grilled  herrings  eaten  on,

III.,  248.
Pont-Louis  XVI,  I.,  126  n. ;  II.,  62.
Pont-N euf yhXzck  flag  on,  II.,  233-4;  cannons  on,  246;  III.,  53 ;  statue  of

'  People  '  on,  160  n. ;  at  Vendemiaire,  255-6.
Pont-Royal,  Queen  crosses  by  mistake,  II.,  99;  in  Vendemiaire,  III.,  256.
Pont-Saint-Louis,  I.,  126.

Pont-Sommevesle,  stage  on  journey  to  Varennes,  II.,  109  n.  sqq.
Pontarlier,  Mirabeau  in  jail  at,  I.,  175.

Pontdcoulant,  L.  G.  D.  de,  C.  Corday  expects  to  be  defended  by.  III.,  6g  n.
Pontorson,  Comte  de,  sits  for  Tiers-Etaf,  I.,  158  n.
Pontorson,  Vendean  retreat  to,  III.,  323.

Pope,  excommunicates  Talleyrand  and  Gobel,  II.,  92  and  n. ;  Civil  Constitu-
tion a  blow  at,  III.,  342  sqq.
Porteurs  des  Contraintes,  III.,  330.
Portugal,  naval  strength  of.  III.,  316.
Post  Office,  unsafe  during  Revolution,  I.,  356  n.
Prairial,  Insurrection  of  ist  P.,  III.,  240  sqq.  nn. ;  law  of  22nd  P.,  III.,  32  n.,

194  and  n.
Praslin,  C.  G.  Comte  de  Choiseul-P.,  his  reforms  in  Navy,  III.,  311.
Pr^cy,  L.  F.  P.  Comte  de,  in  command  at  Lyons,  III.,  73  n.,  90-1  and  nn. ;

escapes  from  Lyons,  125  and  n.
Prdfontaine,  M.  de,  resident  at  Varennes,  II.,  120  n.
Presidents  du  Parlement,  III.,  281  sqq.
Press,  censorship  of,  I.,  121  n.

Prevote  de  Paris,  the  Chdtelet  the  Court  of.  III.,  287.
Prevot  des  Marchands,  I.,  69  n.,  221  n.
Prcvots,  origin  of  the.  III.,  289.
Priestley,  J.,  sack  of  his  house  at  Birmingham,  II.,  178  and  n. ;  naturalised

a  Frenchman,  277 ;  refuses  to  sit  in  Convention,  329.
Priests,  nonjuring,  flogged,  II.,  86  ;  laws  against,  189  ;  III.,  345-6  ;  ill-treated,

II.,  225 ;  massacred,  302 ;   burned  alive,  320  n. ;  drowned.  III.,  121-3

and  nn.
Prieur,  J.  L.,  juryman  of  Tribunal,  executed,  III.,  238  n.
Prieur  de  la  Marne,  notice  of,  III.,  71  n. ;  absent  at  Thermidor,  219  n. ;  tried

for  Prairial,  escapes,  245  n.
Prieur-du-Vernois,  C.  A.  (de  la  Cote  d'Or),  arrested  at  Caen,  III.,  64  n. ;

notice  of,  71  n. ;  answers  Lecointre,  234  n.
Princes,  'the  Possessioned,'  of  the  Empire,  II.,  53  n.,  179  and  «. ;  'of  the

Blood,'  III.,  281.
Prisons,  necessity  of  providing  fresh,  II.,  62  and  n. ;  filled  before  the  massa-
cres, 288;    of  Paris,  291  n. ;    of  Paris  and  France,  III.,  122  n.,  190;

registers   of    destroyed,    'Almanach    des    P.,'    197   n. ;    emptied    after

Thermidor,  219  and  n.
Proconsuls,  III.,  74  n.
Procureur-General,  III.,  282.
Procureurs  of  Departments,  III.,  143  n.
Proly,  P.  J.,  a  Flemish  adventurer,  I.,  376  and  n. ;  Commissioner  to  Belgium,

II.,  368;    on    Committee   of  Insurrection,    III.,    27  n.,   53  n.;    meets

Dumouriez,  30  and  w. ;  brought  to  trial,  169  «.,  171.
Protestants,  edict  for  emancipation  of,  I.,  115-6  and  n.,  119,  122-3.
Provence,  riots  in,  I.,  157  n. ;  revolt  in.  III.,  12  n. ;  nursery  of  naval  officers,

311 ;  taille  in,  334.
Provence,  Louis  Stanislas  Xavier  Comte  de,  known  as  '  Monsieur,'  brother


INDEX  411

to  Louis  XVI.,  notice  of,  I.,  42  and  ». ;  in  Notables,  92;  comes  to  ex-
punge protests  in  Parlemcnt,  112  and  «. ;  takes  refuge  in  King's  room,
Oct.  6th,  336  n. ;  his  connection  with  Favras,  Mirabeau's  idea  of  using
him,  367  and  «.,  371  and  n. ;  playing  whist  in  Tuileries,  II.,  55  ;  hides  (?)
in  cellar  at  Luxemburg,  61-2  and  n. ;  looks  out  of  window,  88 ;  escapes
from  Paris,  108  and  n. ;  assumes  Regency  at  Coblentz,  179  n. ;  ordered
to  return  to  France,  i8g-go ;  allies  refuse  to  recognise  as  Regent,
235  n. ;  invited  to  Toulon,  III.,  89  n. ;  as  Louis  XVIII.  puts  up  inscrip-
tion in  Conciergerie,  97  n. ;  resides  at  Blankenberg,  125.

Providence,  Auherge  de  la,  C.  Corday  stays  at.  III.,  66.

Provincial  Assemblies,  I.,  103  and  n. ;  one  at  San  Domingo,  364  and  n. ;
reform  assessment  of  taxation.  III.,  330.

Prudhomme,  L.  M.,  proprietor  of '  Revolutions  de  Paris,'  I.,  290  and  n.,  373,
385  ;  his  printers  at  the  Federation,  417  ;  advertises  Spadassinicides,  II.,
52 ;  on  effect  of  King's  death,  399  and  n. ;  '  Crimes  de  la  Revolution,'
III.,  133  M.,  134,  222.

Prudhommes,  Assessors  to  yuges-de-Paix,  III.,  293.

Prussia,  negotiations  with,  II.,  199  n.,  205  n. ;  III.,  96  n. ;  advance  and
strength  of,  II.,  283  and  n. ;  wretched  condition  of  P.  Army,  341  n. ;
III.,  306;  her  eyes  fixed  on  Poland,  162  n. ;  peace  of  Bale  with,  231
and  n.

Puhlicole,  La  Societe,  I.,  147.

Puisact,  T.  de,  'Journal  de'  ('Documents  inedits  sur  1*  Emigration '),  II.,
19  n.

Puisaye,  J.  Comte  de,  notice  of.  III.,  62  n. ;  at  Vernon,  75-6  and  n. ;
'  Memoires  de,'  76  n. ;  at  Quiberon,  231-2  and  n.,  324.

Quatremere,  architect  of  Pantheon,  II.,  79  n.

Quatre- Nations,  Section  of,  II.,  305  n.

Quentin,  secretary  to  Dumouriez,  III.,  40  n.

Quercy,  taille  in,  III.,  334.

Qu^ret-Demery,  letter  discovered  in  Bastille  from,  I.,  248.

Quesnay,  F.,  leader  of  the  physiocrats,  I.,  38  n.,  190  n.

Quesnoy,  fall  of,  III.,  121  n.

Queues,  first  mention  of,  I.,  285  and  n. ;  description  of,  II.,  362  and  n. ;

agitation  of,  III.,  235  sqq.
Quiberon,  English  expedition  to.  III.,  232  and  n. ;  massacre  of  royalists  at,

224  n. ;  arrival  of  Puisaye  at,  325.
Quimper,  the  Girondists  at,  III.,  78,  92.
Quinette,  N.  M.  de,  sent  to  arrest  Dumouriez,  arrested  himself.  III.,  38-9

and  n.
Quinze-Vingts,  Section  of,  II.,  287  n.

Rabaut-Pommier,  J.  A.,  proposes  smaller  municipalities,  II.,  350  «. ;  [not]
executed.  III.,  121  n.

Rabaut-Saint-fitienne,  J.  P.,  brother  of  the  above,  editor  of  Moniteur,  I.,
171  n. ;  notice  of,  179  n. ;  his  fervour,  197  ;  proposes  conference  of  the
three  orders,  198  n. ;  on  second  Constitutional  Committee,  262  n. ;
invokes  principle  of  referendum,  297  ». ;  dull  speaker,  356 ;  in  Conven-
tion, II.,  326 ;  on  Commission  of  Twelve,  III.,  47  and  n. ;  bellowed
down  in  Convention,  54-5  ;  arrested,  58 ;  in  hiding,  61,  98 ;  execution
of,  120-1  and  n.

Racine,  typical  of  Gaelic  spirit,  III.,  230.

Raigecourt,  C.  de,  '  Expos6  de  la  Conduite  de  M.  Charles  de  Raigecourt  a


412  INDEX

I'affaire  de  Varennes,'  II.,  go  n. ;  his  share  in  the  failure,  iig  «.,   122

n.
Raincy,  d'Orl^ans'  palace  of,  I.,  58  n.,  123;  II.,  102.
Ramainvilliers,  M.  de,  in  command  of  National  Guard,  II.,  318  n.
Rambouillet,  bodyguard  ordered  to  withdraw  to,  I.,  331  n.,  332.
Ramel-de-Nogaret,  J.,  arranges  details  of  taxation,  III.,  36  n. ;  on  second

Constitutional  Committee,  82  n. ;   denounced  by  Robespierre,  205  n. ;

supports  graduated  income-tax,  341.
Raymond  de   Carbonnieres,   L.    F.  Baron,   in   Legislative   Assembly,  II.,

149  M.
Raynal,   I'Abb^,    'philosophe,'    etc.,    I.,    39;    notice    of,    73    n.  ;    '  Histoire

Philosophique  des  ^tablissements  des  Europeens  dans  les  deux  Indes,'

73.  77 ;   his  letter  to  the  Assembly,  terrified  at  course  of  events,  289

and  n. ;  misquoted  by  Desmoulins,  III.,  173  n.
Rayneval,  J.  M.  G.  de,  candidate  for  Foreign  Office,  III.,  222  n.
R^al,  G.  A.,  supports  graduated  income-tax.  III.,  341.
R^al,  P.  F.,  deputy  procureur-syndic,  II.,  361  n.
Reason,  FStes  of,  Goddesses  of.  III.,  135,  139,  140,  141  n.
Rebecqui,   F.   T.,  notice  of,  II.,  165   and  n. ;  at  Jales,  187 ;   Republican,

265  n. ;  in  Convention,  327;   against  Robespierre,  357  and  n.,  371  w. ;

votes  King's  death,  391  n. ;  resigns  seat.  III.,  13  ;  drowned,  73-4  and  «.
Recevetirs-Generaux,  III.,  289-90.
Reding,  Swiss  officer,  massacred,  II.,  307.
Referendum,  principle  invoked,  II.,  387  and  n.
Regale,  III.,  282.

Regency,  suggested,  II.,  226,  265  n.

Regiments,  classes  of.  III.,  296 ;  territorial  names  abolished  for,  304.
Reglemeni-Royal  foT  States-General,  I.,  152  andn. ;  R.  Supplementaire,  153  n.
Regnauld  de  Saint  Jean  d'Angely,  M.  L.  E.,  editor  of  Journal  de  Versailles,

I.,  201  n. ;  on  'Austrian  Committee,'  II.,  85  n.
Relief-works,  I.,  160  «.,  287  and  n.

R^musat,  Mme  de,  on  Napoleon's  story  of  Vendemiaire,  III.,  255  n.
Remy,  cornet  in  Regiment-Monsieur,  II.,  117  n.,  118.
Renaudin,  J.  F.,  captain  of  Vengeur,  III.,  159  n.
Renaudin,  L.,  juryman  of  Tribunal,  executed.  III.,  238  n.
Renault,  Cecile,  attempts  to  kill  Robespierre,  III.,  189  and  n.
R^n^,  of  Provence  and  Avignon,  II.,  159  and  n.
Rennes,  Parlement  of,  I.,  4  «.,  109  «.,  120  «. ;  III.,  286;  Civil  War  at,  I.,

132,   156  and  n. ;   insurrection  at,  255;   Gorsas  in  hiding  at,  III.,  97;

Republican  retreat  on,  323.
R^ole,  III.,  92.
Representants-en-mission,  II.,  279  n. ;  III.,  64  and  w.,  74  and  n.,  144  n.,  148

and  «.,  149  w.,  308.
Republic,  experiment  in,  II.,  131  n. ;  welcomed  (?),  347-8 ;  little  sympathy

for  idea  of,  304.
Repuhlicain,  Le,  Condorcet's  paper,  II.,  107  and  n.
Requefes,  Chamhre  des,  III.,  281  sqq.
Requisitionnaires,  III.,  309.
Resnier,  V.,  Mme  Lavergne,  II.,  287  n.
Resson,  coffee-house  keeper,  II.,  221-2.
Retz,  Cardinal  de,  Mirabeau  compared  to,  II.,  73.
Reveil  du  peuple,  III.,  227  n.
R^veillon,  paper  manufacturer,  I.,  66  ;  his  house  sacked  in  a  riot,  161  sqq.

and  nn.


INDEX  413

Revenue,  fall  of,  after  1789,  III.,  337.

Revolution,  La,  where  is  it  ?  I.,  262  sqq. ;  deification  of.  III.,  167  and  n.

•  Revolution  Frangaise,  La,  Revue  Historique,'  I.,  5  n.

Revolutions  de  France  et  de  Brabant  (Desmoulins'  paper),  I.,  173  ».,  292
and  n.

Revolutions  de  Paris  (Prudhomme's  paper),  I.,  201  «. ;  290  and  n.

Revolutionary-Army,  III.,  95  and  n. ;  in  La  Vendee,  122  n. ;  smashes  church
furniture,  141  and  n.

Revue  des  deux  mondes,  I.,  60  n.

Revue  de  la  Revolution,  I.,  8  w.

Rewbell,  J.  F,,  witnesses  a  mutiny  at  Bitche,  II.,  13 ;  defends  Mainz,  III.,
21  M. ;  on  Comite  de  Salut  Public,  219  n.

Rhd,  Mirabeau  in  prison  in  Isle  of,  I.,  175.

Rheims,  massacres  at,  II.,  320  and  n.

Rhone,  convoys  of  grain  on  the  river,  I.,  401  and  n. ;  full  of  corpses,  III.,
127.

Ricardos,  Spanish  general.  III.,  22  n.

Richard,  gaoler  at  Conciergerie,  III.,  97  n.

Richaud,  Maire  of  Versailles,  attempts  to  save  Orleans  prisoners,  II.,  323  n.

Richelieu,  Cardinal  de,  builder  of  Sorbonne,  I.,  15  n. ;  used  Bastille  as  a
prison,  165  n. ;  suspends  political  functions  of  Parlement,  III.,  285 ;
fixes  office  of  Intendants,  290.

Richelieu,  L.  F.  A.  du  Plessis  Due  de,  notice  of,  I.,  24  and  n. ;  at  Louis
XV.'s  deathbed,  32;  his  death,  144.

Rigby,  Doctor,  '  Letters  from  France '  in  1789,  I.,  18  n. ;  on  siege  oi  Bastille,
222  sqq.  nn. ;  on  prosperity  of  Northern  France,  282  n. ;  on  good  roads,
II.,  102  n. ;  on  state  of  Toulon,  III.,  74  n.

'  Rights  of  Man,'  I.,  270  «.,  313,  328;  II.,  177-8.

Riom,  cahier  of  Noblesse  of,  I.,  153  n.

Rions,  F.  H.  d'Albert  Comte  de,  at  Toulon,  III.,  313-4  ;  at  Brest,  314.

Riouffe,  H.,  accompanies  the  flight  of  the  Girondists,  III.,  76  n.,  78  sqq.  nn.  ;
arrested,  92  ;  '  Memoirs  d'un  detenu,'  104  and  n. ;  sees  Mme  Roland  in
prison,  117.

Riqueti,  family  name  of  Mirabeau,  I.,  174,  189  n.

Rivarol,  A.  Comte  de,  '  Actes  des  Apotres,'  I.,  121  n. ;  '  Journal  Politique
National,'  ibid,  n,  ;  '  Nouveau  Dictionnaire  de  la  langue  Fran^aise,'
ibid.  n.  ;  and  the  '  edict  concerning  payments,'  138  ;  his  dread  of
'peerage,'  272  n. ;  sold  and  not  paid,  359  ;  hires  journalists  for  Court,  II.,
173 ;  his  '  staff  of  geniuses,'  183-4  ;  contributor  to  Actes  des  Apotres,
289  n.

Rivoli,  Rue  de,  runs  over  the  site  of  the  Jacobins,  I.,  390.

Robert,  P.  F.  J.,  deputy  for  Paris  to  Convention,  II.,  327  n.

Robespierre,  A.  B.  J.,  at  College-Louis-le-Grand,  I.,  177  ;  before  Toulon,  III.,
129  ;  at  Thermidor,  209  sqq.  ;  patron  of  Napoleon,  255  n.

Robespierre,  M.  M.  L,  elder  brother  of  above,  disciple  of  Rousseau,  I.,  71  n. ;
notice  of,  177-8,  192-3  n.  ;  his  first  motion  in  States-General,  203  ;  on
method  of  law-making,  Mirabeau  on,  273  ;  speaks  against  Raynal's
letter,  289  n.  ;  looks  at  Maury,  367  ;  at  the  jfacobins,  389  ;  II.,  42;  in
Assembly,  46  ;  silenced  by  Mirabeau,  65  ;  elected  public  prosecutor,  70 ;
true  leader  of  Left,  71  n.  ;  frightened  at  King's  flight,  106  and  107  n.  ;  for
a  Republic,  130-1-2  ;  has  last  word  in  Constituent,  142  n.  ;  self-denying
ordinance  carried  by,  143  and  «. ;  carried  home  with  vivats,  144  ;  finally
domiciled  in  Paris,  146  ;  against  war,  185  and  n.  ;  his  dull  speeches,  199  ;
his  newspaper,  200  n.  ;  [not]  in  hiding  on  Aug.  loth,  248  and  n.,  265


414  INDEX

and  n. ;  in  Commune^  267-280 ;  on  Comite  de  Defense  Generate,  279  n. ;
moves  for  a  Tribunal  Criminel  Extraordinaire,  281  and  n. ;  refuses  a
judgeship,  282  «. ;  defends  Commune,  288  n.  ;  demands  arrest  of  Giron-
dins,  325  n. ;  in  Convention,  326-7  n.  ;  accused  of  dictatorship,  356  ;
denounces  Girondins,  357  n.  ;  attacked  by  Louvet,  370,  371  and  n.  ;  on
King's  trial,  376  ;  R.  and  the  referendum,  387  and  n.  ;  votes  King's
death,  389  ;  thinks  d'Artois  is  in  Paris,  393  ;  wishes  to  feed  people,  III.,
10  ;  disowns  Marat,  15  n. ;  defends  Custine,  21  n.  ;  accuses  Girondists,  43
n.  ;  at  fall  of  Gironde,  59  n.  ;  in  second  Comite  de  Salut  Public,  71  n.  ;
curses  Hubert,  100  and  n.  ;  opposes  atheist  movement,  138  n.  ;  reads  a
letter  from  Saint-Just,  148  n.  ;  drops  negotiations  with  Sweden,  150  n.  ;
supports  Saint-Just's  views,  168  n. ;  resolves  to  strike  against  Hebert  and
Danton,  169  n.  ;  purging  Jacobin  club,  171  and  n.  ;  is  well  spoken  of  by
Desmoulins,  172  and  n.  ;  speaks  against  Danton,  poses  as  protector  of
Marais,  177  «. ;  dominates  Commune,  183  and  n.  ;  R.  and  Cdcile  Renault,
189  and  n.  ;  at  Fete  of  UEtre  Supreme,  191  sqq.  nn. ;  begins  to  bore  Terror-
ists, 193  ;  his  relations  with  C.  Thdot,  193-4  ^^^  ^'  '■>  his  bodyguard,  194
and  n. ;  all  parties  coalescing  against,  196  n.  ;  his  partial  retirement,  201
and  n. ;  his  last  struggle,  207  sqq.  nn. ;  decreed  accused,  209  ;  his  action
on  9th  Thermidor,  209  sqq.  nn.  ;  his  attempted  suicide,  214  ;  his  end,
215-6  and  n.  ;  his  death  the  end  of  Terror,  217.

Robinet,  Dr.,  '  Danton,  Homme  d'Etat';  'Danton,  Memoire  sur  sa  vie
priv^e';  'Danton,  Emigre ';  '  Le  Proces  des  Dantonistes,'  I.,  294  n.;
'  Le  Mouvement  Religieux  pendant  la  Revolution,'  410  n.

Robiquet,  '  Le  Personnel  Municipal  de  Paris,'  1.,  221  w.

Rochambeau,  J.  B.  D.  de  Vimeur  Comte  de,  in  American  war,  L,  57  n. ;
in  command  of  an  army  corps,  IL,  2 ;  watching  frontier,  184 ;  his
clutch  at  Flanders,  208 ;  resigns  his  command,  209  ;  zeal  for  army
reform  of,  IIL,  300;  perfect  discipline  of  his  troops  in  America,  309.

Roche-Aymon,  Cardinal  de,  L,  22,  31,  69.

Rochefort,  competition  for  post  of  hangman  at,  IIL,  149  w.

Rochefoucauld,  L.  A.,  Due  de  la  Roche-Guyon  et  de  la,  notice  of,  L,  63  n.  ;
at  Versailles,  183  ;  leans  towards  a  republic,  IL,  131  n. ;  President  of
Directory  of  Department  of  Seine,  167  «.,  224  ;  Lafayette  visits,  221  n. ;
massacred  at  Gisors,  320-1  and  n.

Rochefoucauld-Liancourt.     See  Liancourt.

Rochejacquelin.     See  Larochejacquelin.

Rochelle,  in  danger  from  Vendeans,  IIL,  321.

Rocher,  sapper,  carries  Marat,  III.,  46  and  n. ;  President  of  Section  Luxem-
bourg, 112  n.

Rochereuil,  Mdlle,  femme-de-chambre  in  Tuileries,  IL,  96  n.,  97.

Roche-sur-Yon,  riot  at,  IIL,  319.

Rocquain,  F.,  '  L'Esprit  Revolutionnaire  avant  la  Revolution,'  L,  6  n.

Rodney,  Admiral,  captures  '  Ville-de-Paris,'  L,  58 ;  destroys  Spanish
squadron  at  Gibraltar,  59.

Roederer,  P.  L.,  Procureur-Syndic  of  Department  of  Seine,  II. ,  167 ;  notice
of,  215  and  n. ;  his  '  Chronique  de  Cinquante  Jours,'  217  ;  inculpates
Petion,  220  n. ;  his  hesitation,  245  and  n.,  248  n. ;  on  Aug.  loth,  246
sqq. ;  suggests  to  King  to  go  to  Assembly.

Rohan,  family  of,  own  Ettenheim,  IL,  181  n.

Rohan,  L.  R.  E.  Cardinal  de,  L,  69;  and  the  Diamond  Necklace,  74-5  and
n. ;  in  exile,  89 ;  early  patron  of  Robespierre,  177,  192  n. ;  emigrates,
362.

Rohrig,  Lieutenant  in  Hussars  at  Varennes,  IL,  120  «.,  123  n.,  125  n.


INDEX  415

Roi,  Regiment  du,  mutinous,  II.,  15  sqq.  and  nn. ;  III.,  302.

Roi-dc-Sicile,  Section  of,  II.,  237  n.

Roland  de  la  Platiere,  J.  M.,  inspector  at  Lyons,  I.,  404 ;  notice  of,  406  n. ;
dishonourable  conduct  as  Minister,  385  w. ;  comes  finally  to  Paris,  II.,
166  and  n. ;  becomes  Minister  of  Interior,  201  and  n. ;  his  dishonourable
conduct,  202  n. ;  his  '  Letter  to  the  King,'  210 ;  discusses  resistance
with  Barbaroux,  213  ;  his  second  Ministry,  267  and  n. ;  his  complaints
of  Commune,  276-7  ;  his  anxiety  to  recover  Crown  diamonds,  316  and  n. ;
pays  expenses  of  Fournier,  323  n. ;  cannot  stop  massacres,  314,  325  n. ;
his  accounts  demanded,  358 ;  gets  Pache  made  Minister,  359 ;  accused
of  accaparement,  360  n. ;  his  difficulties  in  finding  bread,  362  ;  complains
of  anarchy,  370;  his  'Report  on  State  of  Paris,'  371  n. ;  manipulates
the  papers  found  in  Iron  Press,  374-5  and  n. ;  grows  more  querulous,
386  ;  resigns,  399  and  n. ;  III.,  8  «. ;  is  refused  leave  to  quit  Paris,  51-2  ;
his  flight,  59  ;  his  suicide,  119.

Roland,  M.  J.  Mme,  on  the  King's  geographical  knowledge,  her  '  M^moires,'
I.,  40  M. ;  at  the  Lyons  Federation,  404 ;  notice  of,  406  n. ;  in  Paris  in
1791,  II.,  107  and  n.  ;  at  epoch  of  Varennes,  133;  on  cowardice  of
Convention,  147  n.  ;  her  relations  with  Barbaroux,  166  and  «. ;  her  new
hotel,  201  and  n. ;  her  evil  influence  on  Ministry,  202  and  n. ;  writes
Roland's  '  Letter  to  King,'  211,  212  n. ;  gives  dinner  party  on  night  of
massacres,  325  n. ;  feels  uneasy,  360  ;  at  bar  of  Convention,  385-6  and  n. ;
leans  to  Federalism,  III.,  12  n. ;  keeps  Girondists  from  reconciliation
with  Danton,  18  n. ;  is  silent,  19 ;  is  arrested,  58 ;  executed,  117  and  n.,
118  and  n.

Rollo  of  Normandy,  I.,  11.

Romainville,  Besenval  rides  to,  I.,  97.

Romans,  Assembly  of,  I.,  120  n.

Romilly,  Sir  S.,  Mirabeau  visits,  in  England,  I.,  191  n.

Romme,  G.,  President  of  Tennis-Court  Club,  I.,  410  n. ;  notice  of,  II.,  327  n. ;
arrested  at  Caen,  III.,  64  and  n. ;  released,  79  ;  new  Calendar  of,  85  sqq. ;
at  Prairial,  243-4  ^^- 1  stabs  himself,  245  and  «.

Romoeuf,  aide-de-camp  to  Lafayette,  II.,  105  n.,  107,  125  and  n.

Ronsin,  C.  P.,  I.,  374;  notice  of,  III.,  122  and  w. ;  arrested  and  released,
138  n. ;  in  the  Revolutionary  Army,  141 ;  arrest  of,  169  and  n. ;  end  of,
173-4;  his  rapid  promotion,  303.

Rosambo,  L.  L.,  President  oi  Chambre  des  Vacations,  III.,  184  and  n.

Rosny,  Danton  escapes  to,  II.,  136  n.

Rossbach,  battle  of,  I.,  8,  27 ;  bad  tradition  of,  III.,  300.

Rossignol,  J.  A.,  374;  on  June  20th,  II.,  219  n. ;  notice  of,  290  and  n. ;  in
massacres  at  La  Force,  304  n.,  his  failure  in  Vendee,  III.,  88-9;  his
brutality  there,  122  n.,  123  ;  attacked  by  Phelippeaux,  169  n. ;  vanishes,
231  ;  in  Vendee,  322,  326.

Rostaing,  Le  Marquis  de,  sits  for  Tiers-ktat,  I.,  158  n.

Rouen,  Parlemeyit  of,  on  the  corn  trade,  I.,  9  «. ;  Parlement  of,  rebellious,
134 ;  disorder  at,  280 ;  plot  for  carrying  King  to,  II.,  55  ;  hopes  of  flight
to,  84,  244 ;  Parlement  and  Chambre  des  Comptes  at,  III.,  286.

Rouges,  in  Royal  Navy,  III.,  311.

Rouget  de  Lisle,  C.  J.,  notice  of,  II.,  230  and  n.

Rougyff,  ou  le  Franc  en  vedette,  Guffroy's  paper.  III.,  12  and  n.

Rousseau,  J.  J.,  knocked  down  by  dog,  I.,  29  «. ;  Turgot's  hostility  to,  38  n. ;
hails  approaching  revolution,  39  ;  '  Contrat  Social,'  '  fimile,'  71  and  n. ;
his  remains  to  Pantheon,  II.,  80  and  «. ;  statue  erected  to,  143  ;  '  Con-
fessions of  a  Savoyard  Vicar,'  III.,  192  n.


416  INDEX

Rousselin,  A.,  '  Vie  de  Hoche,'  III.,  152  n.

Roussiere,  expert  swordsman,  imprisoned  at  Nancy,  II.,  17-8.

Roussillon,  witness  at  Queen's  trial,  III.,  99  n.

Roux,  J.,  renegade  priest,  II.,  39  n.,  396  n.

Roux-Lavergne,  P.  C,  author  of '  Histoire  Parlementaire,'  III.,  no  and  n.

Rouy,  '  Recit  Authentique,'  etc.,  III.,  399  n.

Royal-Allemand,  Regiment,  drawn  up  at  Versailles,  I.,  214,  220 ;  leaves  Paris,

249  ;  looks  disconsolate,  II.,  4  ;  at  Montm^dy,  94  ;  emigrates,  181.
Royal-Cravate,  Regiment,  becomes  lome  Cavalerie,  III.,  304.
Royal-Deux-Ponts,  Regiment,  in  America,  III.,  299.
Royal-Dragons,  Regiment,  II.,  no  sqq,
Royou,  I'Abbe,  journalist,  I.,  291  and  n.,  384;  II.,  40;  burnt  in  effigy,  92;

writes  'Ami  du  Roi,'   183; ^croaks,  238;  imprisoned,  281.
Ruamps,  grumbles  at  Fete  of  VEtre  Supreme,  III.,  193-4;  protests  against

law  of  Prairial,  195  n. ;  arrested,  237  n.
Rueil,  d'Aiguillon's  house  near  Paris,  I.,  30.
Ruhl,  P.  J.,  notice  of,  II.,  154  and  n. ;  in  chair  at  first  session  of  Convention,

338  ». ;  his  decree  of  Nov.  19th,  383  n. ;  in  Comite  de  Surete  Generate,

III.,  72  n. ;  at  Prairial,  243  ;  shoots  himself,  245.

Sabatier  de  Cabre,  I'Abbe,  leading  Parlementeer,  I.,  81  and  «.,  108,  117;

exiled,  119;  returns,  123.
Sables  d'Olonne,  Les,  resists  Vendeans,  III.,  326,  328.
Sablons,  plain  of.  III.,  160  «.,  255.

Sagnac,  '  La  Legislation  Civile  de  la  Revolution  Fran^aise,'  I.,  276  n.
Saillant,  le  Comte  de,  at  Jales,  II.,  187  n.
Saint-Amand,  Dumouriez  at.  III.,  37.
Saint-Ambroix,  royalists  attack  town  of,  I.,  363  n.
Saint-Andre,  town  of,  burnt,  II.,  187  ».

Saint-Andre,  J.  Bon,  notice  of,  II.,  382  and  n. ;  in  second  Comite  de  Salut

Public,  III.,  71  n.;  seldom  in  Paris,  144  m.  ;  moves  for  the  'ordinary

laws  of  war,'  149  n. ;  on  'First  of  June,'  157  n. ;  absent  at  Thermidor,

219  n. ;  gets  marines  disbanded,  313  ;  with  Army  of  West,  323.

Saint-Aulaire,  le  Comte  de,  his  deposition  on  events  of  Oct.  5th  and  6th,

I.,  323  n.
Saint-Bartholomew,  massacre  of,  I.,  355  ;  II.,  319.
Saint-Brice,  Mme  de  Tallien  dines  with.  III.,  207  n.
Saint-Brieuc,  assembly  of  Breton  Noblesse  at,  I.,  156  n.
Saint-Cloud,  march  of  women  through,  I.,  312;  Mirabeau  meets  Queen  at,

II.,  57  and  n. ;  King  attempts  to  go  to,  87-g  and  nn.
Saint-Cyr,  J.  F.,  officer  in  volunteers,  II.,  185  nn.

Saint-Denis,  funeral  of  Louis  XV.  at,  I.,  33-4 ;  Gardes-Francaises  refuse  to
march  to,  230;  Maire  of,  hanged  by  mob,  288;  fortifications  at,  II.,
284  and  n. ;  cannons  fetched  from,  384  «.,  387  ;  violation  of  tombs  at,
III.,  98».,  137  n.  ;  called  '  Franciade,'  137  n. ;  gunpowder  manufactured
at,  151  n.
Saint-Emilion,  Girondists  in  hiding  at.  III.,  92,  105 ;  Girondists  found  dead

near,  106-7  ^^^  w*
Saint- fitienne,  is  called  ^  Armes-Commune,'  III.,  161  «.
Saint-Etienne-du-Mont,  Cure  of,  I.,  236.
Saint-Eustache,  funeral  oration  of  Mirabeau  in  church  of,  II.,  79 ;  Fete  of

Reason  at.  III.,  139.
Saint-Florent,  Vendeens  pass  Loire  at,  III.,  222.
Saint-Gaudens,  tree  of  liberty  planted  by  Cure  of,  I.,  423  w.


INDEX  417

Saint-Germain,  C.  L.  Comte  de,  War  Minister,  I.,  83  and  n.  ;  III.,  295,
297-8,  300.

Saint-Germain-l'Auxerrois,  tocsi7i  from  church  of,  II.,  248.

Saint-Gervais,  Fite  of  Reason  at  church  of,  III.,  140.

Saint-Huberti,  Mdlle,  celebrated  actress,  I.,  147  n.

Saint-Huruge,  Marquis  de,  demagogue,  notice  of,  I.,  254  and  n. ;  bellows,
293,  297 ;  imprisoned,  298 ;  at  Versailles,  321 ;  burns  effigy  of  Pope,
II.,  92;  on  June  20th,  215-6;  on  King's  trial,  384;  agitating  against
Gironde,  III.,  47.

Saint-Jacques-de-la-Boucherie,  tocsin  from  church  of,  II.,  248.

Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port,  besieged,  III.,  153  n.

Saint-Just,  L.  A.  de,  notice  of,  II.,  328  and  n. ;  his  ideas,  350  «. ;  on  King's
trial,  376;  suggests  law  of  Maximum,  III.,  34  n. ;  on  Girondists,  III.,
58  n. ;  in  second  Comite  de  Salut  Public,  71  n.  ;  proconsnl  in  Alsace,
74  n. ;  on  second  Constitutional  Committee,  82  n. ;  moves  suspension
of  Constitution,  88;  his  absences,  144  «. ;  'cloud-compeller,'  145;  in
Alsace,  148  and  ». ;  at  Weissembourg,  155  ;  leader  of  Convention,  167 ;
returns  from  North,  169  n. ;  ridiculed  by  DesmouHns,  172,  178  n. ;
against  Danton,  175  n.,  177  «. ;  his  quarrels  with  Carnot,  196  n. ;  absent
in  summer  of  1794,  202  n. ;  proposes  dictatorship,  204  n. ;  his  quarrel
with  Collot,  206-7  and  n. ;  at  Tlieriuidor,  207  sqq. ;  his  death,  215-6 ;
to  blame  for  Hoche's  arrest,  239  n.

Saint-Lambert,  Vendean  victory  at,  III.,  322.

Saint-Lazarc,  Maison  de,  account  of,  I.,  229  n. ;  '  Tableau  Historique  de  la
Maison  Lazare,  III.,  196  n.

Saint  Louis  (Louis  IX.)  and  his  barons,  I.,  125;  his  shirt  burnt.  III.,  137;
introduces  lawyers  to  Parlement,  280  ;  his  pragmatic  sanction,  344.

Saint-Louis,  Church  of,  at  Versailles,  I.,  167-8,  209  and  «.,  332.

Saint-Louis,  Croix  de,  insulted,  I.,  163  ;  members  of,  at  Versailles,  301.

Saint-Magne-de-Castillon,  dead  Girondists  found  at.  III.,  106-7  "•

Saint-Malo,  proposed  descent  on  Jersey  from.  III.,  157  n.

Saint-Menehould,  stage  on  journey  to  Varennes,  II.,  109  n.  sqq. ;  Prussian
Uhlans  at,  286  ;  expects  vengeance,  295  ;  on  day  of  Valmy,  335.

Saint-Pierre,  J.  H.  Bernardin  de,  author  of '  Paul  et  Virginie,'  I.,  78  and  «.

Saint-Priest,  F.  E.  G.  Comte  de.  Minister,  King  wishes  to  dismiss,  I.,  214  n. ;
against  going  to  Paris,  318  n.

Saint-Remi.     See  Lamotte.

Saint-Remi,  Regiment,  III.,  300.

Saint-Roch,  church  of,  tocsin  at,  II.,  232,  248 ;  at  1  endemiaire,  III.,  256-7.

Saint-Sebastien,  capture  of,  III.,  231  n.

Saint-Vincent,  Robert  de,  leader  in  Parlement,  I.,  105  w.

Sainte-Claude,  Abbaye  de,  I.,  275  n.

Sainte-Croix,  Bigot  de,  royalist  Minister,  II.,  225  n. ;  *  Histoire  de  la  Con-
spiration du  10  Aout,'  244  n.

Sainte-Genevieve,  her  shrine,  I.,  32;  III.,  137  and  w. ;  processions  to  it,  I.,
256,  286 ;  her  church  turned  into  Pantheon,  II.,  79  and  «. ;  church
and  abbey  of.  III.,  137  and  n. ;  cemetery  of,  233  and  n.

Sainte-Madeleine,  cemetery  of,  II.,  264.

Saintes,  escapade  of  Mirabeau  at,  I.,  175.

Saladin,  J.  B.  M.,  reporter  of  Committee  of  Twenty-one,  III.,  200  n. ;  re-
stored to  Convention,  222  n. ;  reports  on  Billaud,  etc.,  233  n.

Saliceti,  C,  before  Toulon,  III.,  129  and  «. ;  patronises  and  then  denounces
Napoleon,  225  n.

Salis-Samade,  Regiment  de,  drawn  up  at  Versailles,  I.,  214,  220.
VOL.  IIL  kl


418  INDEX

Salles»  J.  B.,  escapes  arrest,  III.,  6i ;  flies  to  West,  78  n. ;  end  of,  106-7  and  n.

Sallier,  G.  M.,  '  Annales  Fran(;aises,'  I.,  96  n. ;  notice  of,  103  n.

Salm,  Regiment  de,  mutinous,  II.,  11  5^^.

Salpetriere,   asylum   and   prison,   I.,    170  and  n. ;  massacres   at,   II.,  303 ;

Th^roigne  at.  III.,  49  and  n.
Saltpetre,  difficulty  of  getting.  III.,  151  andw.
Salzburg,  tomb  of  Barbarossa  at,  I.,  11  w.
Sambre,  Austrians  driven  over  the  river.  III.,  154  ;  Jourdan  forces  passage  of,

162  ».
San-Domingo,  mulatto  and  servile  insurrection  at,  I.,  364  and  «. ;  in  ashes,

II.,   169 ;  coveted  by  England,  401  n. ;  lost,  HI.,  95  and  n. ;  Spanish

half  of,  ceded  at  Bale,  231  n.
Sansculottes,  origin  of  name,  II.,  56.
Sanson,  C.  H.,  executes  Louis  XVI.,  II.,  399  and  n.
Sanson,  H.,  son  of  the  above,  executes  Mme  Roland,  III.,  118.
Santerre,  A.  J.,  notice  of,  I.,  172  and  n. ;  commander  of  National  Guard,

216  n. ;  at  Bastille  siege,  242  ;  speaks  for  the  Nancy  mutineers,  II.,  19  ;

on  guard  at   Tuileries,  56  ;    favourite  of  mob,  63   and  n. ;    at  sack  of

Vincennes,  64  ;  at  Fete  of  Chdtean-Vieux,  207  ;  at  June  20th,  215  sqq. ;

welcomes  Marscillais,  240  ;  commander  of  National  Guard,  245  and  «. ;

does    nothing  to  stop  massacres,  314,  324  n. ;  suggests  hanging  dogs,

361 ;    escorts    King  to    Convention,   377 ;     at    theatre    riot,    385 ;    at

King's  execution,  398 ;  at  February  riot,  III.,  5  n. ;  his  failure  in  Vendee,

88 ;  nearly  sacrificed  with  Hebert,  170  n. ;    at  insurrection  of  Prairial,

244.
Sapel,  B.,  Fersen's  coachman,  II.,  100,  101  and  n.
Sapinaud,  Le  Chevalier  de,  holds  out  in  Vendee,  III.,  231  n.
Sapinaud,  Mme  de,  '  Memoires  de,'  III.,  318.
Sardinia,  arming  against  France,  II.,  296,
Sardou,  V.,  dramatist,  on  difference  between  an  eniente  and  a  revolution,  I.,

250  w.
Sarrelouis,  Chdteau-Vicnx  ordered  to,  II.,  20.
Sartines,  A.  R.  de,  his  reforms  in  Navy,  III.,  311,  313.
Sauce,  procureur  at  Varennes,  II.,  121  sqq. ;  expects  vengeance,  295.
Saumur,  taken  by  Vendeens,  III.,  321.
Savenay,  rout  of  Vendcens  at,  III.,  323.
Savonnieres,  M.  de,  bodyguard,  wounded,  I.,  323.
Savoy,  invasion  and  incorporation  of,  II.,  345  and  n.
Saxe,  Marechal  de,  campaigns  of,  I.,  10  n. ;  real  inventor  of  the  new  tactics,

357  n. ;  his  criticism  on  French  officers,  III.,  298.
Saxe-Teschen,  Duke  Albert  of,  besieging  Lille,  II.,  339  n. ;  beaten  by  Du-

mouriez,  367-8  and  n.
Saxony,  Frederick  II. 's  invasion  of,  I.,  28  n.

Sceaux,  reported  meeting  of  Dan  ton  and  Girondists  at,  III.,  18  and  n.
Scellier,  J.  T.,  Vice-president  of  Tribunal,  III.,  215  n. ;  executed,  238  n.
Scepeaux,  M.  P.  A.,  Vendean  leader.  III.,  231  n.
Scheldt,  river,  declared  open,  II.,  368  ».,  401  and  n.
Scherer,  B.  L.  I.,  General,  retakes  Valenciennes,  III.,  81  n. ;    in  Eastern

Pyrenees,  153  w.
Schiller  naturalised  a  Frenchman,  II.,  278  n.
Schmidt,  A.,  '  Tableaux  de  la  Revolution  Fran9aise,'  I.,  8  n.
Schneider,  E.,  public  accuser  at  Strasbourg,  III.,  148  n.
Schools,  before  and  after  1789,  III.,  166  n.
Seance-Royale  (of  June  23rd),  I.,  205  sqq.  nn. ;  II.,  127.


INDEX  419

Sections  of  Paris,  the  forty-eight,  replace  the  districts,  I.,  382  ;  sit  permanent,
II.,  103  and  n. ;  not  to  be  allowed  to  petition,  131  n. ;  send  deputation
to  Assembly,  214  ;  sit  permanent,  237 ;  on  Aug.  loth,  245,  249  and  «. ;
various  tempers  of.  III.,  11  n.;  slow  to  respond  to  Danton's  call  for
volunteers,  24-5  and  n. ;  changes  of  name  frequent,  48 ;  central  com-
mittees of,  prohibited,  144  «. ;  wages  of,  159 ;  committees  of,  reduced
and  restrained,  221  and  n.

Sedan,  municipality  of,  II.,  269  ;  Dumouriez  holds  review  at,  293.

Sdgur,  L.  P.,  Comte  de.  Foreign  Office  offered  to,  II.,  170  n.

Segur,  P.  H.,  Marquis  de,  Mar^chal,  father  of  the  above,  visited  by  Besenval,
I.,  97  ;  his  reforms  in  Army,  III.,  295  sqq. ;  his  ordinance  of  1781,  303.

Seine,  river,  floating  battery  on,  at  Federation,  I.,  422  ;  gunboring  in  barges
on,  III.,  150.

Sellieres,  Voltaire's  first  burial-place,  II.,  80  n.

S^nac  de  Meilhan,  G.,  '  Portraits  et  Caracteres,'  I.,  6  «.  ;  '  Le  Gouvernement
de  la  France  avant  la  Revolution,'  8  n.  ;  candidate  for  Ministry,  100  n.  ;
on  Mirabeau,  192  w.

Senart,  the  wood  of,  I.,  27.

Shu'chaussi'cs,  origin  of,  III.,  289.

Sens,  Lom^nie  becomes  Archbishop  of,  I.,  99  n.  ;  Lomdnie  is  ill-treated  at,
140.

Sentinelle,  La,  Louvet's  placarded  newspaper,  II.,  238  ;  approves  massacres,
327  n.

September,  victims  of  massacres  of,  number  of,  II.,  317  and  n. ;  burial  of
victims  of,  324-5  ;  responsibility  for,  324-5  and  n.  ;  attitude  of  Girondists
towards,  355  and  n.

Serapis,  British  warship,  I.,  378.

Sergent,  A.  F.,  member  of  Commune,  I.,  429  n.  ;  II.,  167  m.  ;  on  Aug.  loth,
249  ;  steals  an  agate,  280,  316  ;  on  Comite  de  Surveillance,  287  n.  ;  pre-
pares massacres,  300,  320  «.,  324  «.  ;  signatory  of  September  circular,
325  n.

Servan,  J.,  notice  of,  II.,  201  w.,  205  ;  proposes  the  '  Camp  of  Twenty
Thousand,'  210  ;  second  Ministry  of,  267  and  n.  ;  orders  Dumouriez  to
occupy  Argonne,  293  «.,  297  n.

Seventy-three,  protest  of  the,  III.,  80  and  w.,  98,  102  m.,  222  and  n.

Sevre-Nantaise,  river  in  Vendee,  III.,  320.

Sevre-Niorlaise,  river  in  Vendee,  III.,  320.

Sevres,  cannons  on  bridge  of,  I.,  215  ;  march  of  women  through,  412  ;  Mme
de  la  Motte's  Memoires  burnt  at,  II.,  191  «. ;  '  Precis  Historique  de  la
Maison  d'arret  de  la  Rue  de  S.,'  III.,  197  n.

Shakespeare,  offspring  of  Catholicism,  I.,  14 ;  typical  of  Teutonic  spirit,
III.,  250.

Siam,  cannon  given  to  Louis  XIV.  by  King  of,  at  Bastille  siege,  I.,  228,  241
and  n.

Sicard,  I'Abbe  R.  A.  C,  notice  of,  II.,  290  and  «.  ;  escapes  massacre,  302;
'  Relation  Historique  sur  les  journ^es  du  2  et  3  Septembre,'  307  and  n.

Sicilian  Vespers,  II.,  318.

Sieyes,  I'Abbe  E.  J,,  his  famous  pamphlet,  notice  of,  I.,  148  and  n. ;  deputy
for  Paris,  his  remark  about  politics,  182 ;  his  motions  for  constituting
the  Assembly,  204  and  n.,  207  n. ;  at  Seance-Royale,  212 ;  on  Constitu-
tional Committee,  262  «.,  273  and  n. ;  his  powerlessness,  266-7;  his
speeches,  356;  main  author  of  the  new  administrative  system,  361  n.;
sniffs  at  Maury,  367 ;  receives  the  '  human  race '  in  Assembly,  412 ;  at
work  in  Champ -de-Mars,  417;  member  of  Cercle-Social,  II.,  44  «. ;  on


420  INDEX

Comite  de  Defense  Genemle,  279  n. ;  in  Convention,  327  and  n. ;  on  first
Constitutional  Committee,  349  n. ;  votes  King's  death,  389  ;  becomes  a
Modere,  III.,  217  n. ;  on  Comite  de  Salut  Public,  219  n. ;  estimate  of  his
position  in  1795,  III.,  250  and  n. ;  '  Notice  sur  la  vie  et  travaux  de,
^crite  par  lui-meme,'  251  n.

Sillery,  A.  B.  Marquis  de,  husband  of  Mme  de  Genlis,  I.,  380-1 ;  notice  of,
III.,  16  n. ;  trial  of,  103  n.  sqq. ;  confesses  to  Fauchet,  105  n.

Simarre,  the  Chancellor's  robe,  I.,  100  and  n.

Simon,  A.,  cobbler,  on  Aug.  loth,  II.,  250  n. ;  Municipal  Commissioner  at
Temple,  268  n. ;  interrogates  royal  children,  III.,  98  n. ;  witness  at
Queen's  trial,  99  «. ;  end  of,  215-6.

Simonneau,  J.  H.,  Maire  of  Etampes,  murder  of,  II.,  168  ;  Fite  of,  207.

Slavery,  abolished  in  colonies,  I.,  364  n.

Smith,  Adam,  imbued  with  physiocratic  doctrines,  I.,  38  «.,  190  n. ;  on
Gilds,  69  n. ;  on  slavery  in  French  colonies,  364  n.

Soap,  riots  about.  III.,  4  sqq.

Societe  des  Amis  des  Noirs,  I.,  364  n. ;  II.,  169.

Societe  Fraternelle,  III.,  43.

Societe  Patriotique  de,  1789,  I.,  392  n.

Societe  Publicole,  I.,  202.

Societes  populaires,  not  to  be  confused  with  clubs,  I.,  392  n.

Soissons,  camp  at,  II.,  210  «.,  224  and  n.,  225,  234;  church  of  Saint-Jean-
des-Vignes  at,  239  and  n.

Sombreuil,  C.  F.  V.  Marquis  de.  Governor  of  the  Invalides,  I.,  233,  237 ;
imprisoned,  II.,  290  ;  his  daughter's  devotion  saves  him,  306  and  n. ;
his  execution.  III.,  195.

Sombreuil,  C,  second  son  of  above,  shot  as  Emigre  at  Quiberon,  III.,  232.

Sorbonne,  notice  of,  I.,  15  m.,  16  w. ;  Turgot  scholar  in,  113.

Sorel,  A.,  '  L'Europe  et  la  Revolution  Fran^aise,'  I.,  56  n. ;  '  Bonaparte  et
Hoche,'  218  n.

Soubrany,  P.  A.  de,  in  insurrection  of  Prairial,  III.,  243-4  »• ;  executed,  245  n.

Soucis,  Mme  de,  takes  refuge  in  King's  room,  I.,  336  n.

Souham,  J.,  wins  battle  of  Turcoing,  III.,  162  «. ;  his  origin,  301.

Soulavie,  I'Abbe,  J.  L.  G.,  '  Memoires  du  Marechal  de  Richelieu,'  I.,  22  n.

Soult,  N.  J.  de  D.,  officer  in  Volunteers,  II.,  185  w.

Soupers  Fraternels,  III.,  187  and  n.

Sourigni^res  de  Saint-Marc,  author  of  '  Reveil  du  People,'  III.,  227  n.

Spain,  uneasy,  II.,  180,  296 ;  suggestion  to  send  King  to,  363  n. ;  pleads  for
King,  384 ;  war  declared  on,  401 ;  invades  France,  III.,  22  and  ».,  89 ;
is  invaded,  152-3  and  n. ;  intercedes  for  Dauphin,  190  n. ;  peace  of  B41e
with,  231  and  n. ;  her  naval  strength,  316.

Spencer,  Herbert,  his  preface  to  'A  Plea  for  Liberty,'  III.,  2.

Speyer,  Bishop  of,  complains  to  Diet,  II.,  179  n. ;  taken  by  Custine,  345-6
and  71.

Spithead,  mutiny  of  English  sailors  at.  III.,  314.

Staal,  Mme  la  Baronne  de,  on  Liberty,  I.,  383  and  n.

Stadtholder  of  Holland  escapes  to  England,  III.,  229  and  n.

Stael-Holstein,  Baron  de,  comes  to  Paris,  III.,  150  n.

Stael-Holstein,  Mme  la  Baronne  de,  Necker's  daughter,  I.,  60 ;  on  the  open-
ing of  the  States-General,  '  Considerations  sur  la  Revolution  Fran^aise,'
169  and  n.  ;  on  Mirabeau,  174  ;  on  helplessness  of  Government,  II.,  90;
leans  on  arm  of  Narbonne,  141 ;  meets  idle  deputies,  147  ;  her  relations
with  Narbonne,  175  ;  her  intrigues,  176,  203 ;  at  Fete  of  Federation,
232  ;  procures  Narbonne's  escape,  288  and  n. ;  escapes  herself,  289  «.


INDEX  421

Staghounds,  Louis  XVI.'s,  I.,  83  n.

Stahremberg,  Austrian  Ambassador,  I.  27  n.

Stanislas  Leszczynski,  King  of  Poland,  remembered  in  Lorraine,  IL,  15

and  «.
States-General,  demanded  in  Notables,  L,  93  n. ;  demanded  in  Parlement,

106;  promised,  115  and  «.,  137;  opinions  for  and  against,  145  and  n.  ;

question  of  form  of,  151  «. ;  numbers  of  deputies  to,  165  and  n. ;  costume

of  deputies  to,  167  and  n. ;  of  1614,  IIL,  284,
Stenay,  alarm  of  Austrian  troops  at,  IL,  14 ;  Bouille  at,  no  sqq.
Stephens,  H.  Morse,  on  Marat,  L,  67  «. ;  '  The  Principal  Speeches  of  the

Orators  of  the  French  Revolution,'  196  n.
Sterne,  L.,  '  Tristram  Shandy,'  IL,  158.
Stock  Exchange  'tuned'  by  Calonne,  L,  88.
Stockmar,  Baron,  '  Ludwig  XVI.  und  Marie  Antoinette  und  der  Flucht  nach

Montm^dy,'  IL,  90  n.
Stoflflet,  N.,  Vendean  leader,  IL,  285  ;  IIL,  23,  321 ;  his  campaigns,  323-5.
Stourm,  R.,  '  Les  Finances  de  I'Ancien  Regime  etde  la  Revolution,'  IIL,  331.
Strasburg,  specially  represented  in  States-General,  L,  152  n.  ;  riots  at,  284  ;

Reign  of  Terror  at,  IIL,  148  n.  ;  in  danger,  155-6  and  nn. ;  revenue  of

bishopric  of,  343.
Suard,  J.  B, ,  former  press  censor,  I.,  380.
Snbdelt'gues,  IIL,  290.
Subvention  territoriale,  L,  93,  105  «.,  107.
Suffren,  P.  A.    Bailli   de,  his  fights  in  East  Indian  Waters,  his  castle  of

Jales,  L,  58.
Sugar,  rise  in  price  of,  L,  364  n. ;  II. ,  168,  170  and  n.
Sulleau  (or  Suleau),  F.  L.,  journalist,  IL,  40,  183,  238  ;  murder  of,  252  and

n. ;  contributor  to  Actes  dcs  Apotres,  289  n.
Sullivan,  Mrs.,  her  home  in  Rue  de  Clichy,  IL,  96  w.,  100.
Sully,  M.  de  B.  Baron,  introduces  heredity  of  office  in  Parlement,  IIL,  284.
'  Sun,  Companies  of  the,'  IIL,  238.
Suppleans,  Deputes,  IIL,  ii  and  n.

Suspect,  law  of  the,  IIL,  94-5  and  n. ;  ridiculed  by  Desmoulins,  172.
Sweden,  remains  in  alliance  with  France,  II. ,  402  n.  ;  [not]  cut  off  from

France,  IIL,  149  and  «.,  150  n.  ;  proposed  arbitration  of  King  of,  230  n.
Switzerland,  protests  against  release  of  convicts,  IL,  207  n.  ;  remains  in

alliance  with  France,  402  n.  ;  pours  goods  into  France,  159  n.
Sybel,  Heinrich  von,  '  History  of  the  French  Revolution,'  English  translation,

I.,  18  «.

Taille,  arbitrary  increase  of,  prohibited,  IIL,  330;  account  and  amount  of,

334-5-

Taine,  '  Origines  de  la  France  Contemporaine,'  on  Marat,  I.,  68  n.  ;  on
Bastille  Day,  on  riots,  234-5  n.

Talleyrand-Perigord,  I'Abb^  C.  M.  de,  his  mot  on  the  Bourbons,  L,  43  n. ;
warns  Mirabeau,  92  ;  notice  of,  147  n. ;  Bishop  of  Autun,  186  ;  friendship
for  Mirabeau,  191  n. ;  in  Constitutional  Committee,  262  n. ;  his  motion
for  confiscating  lands  of  clergy,  360  n. ;  a  '  symbol  of  faith,'  362  ;  at
Fete  of  Federation,  424-5  ;  excommunicated  by  Pope,  IL,  92  and  n. ;
his  missions  to  London,  146  and  n. ;  in  Directory  of  Department  of
Seine,  167  n. ;  his  '  treason '  revealed  by  Iron  Press,  374 ;  goes  to
America,  401  and  «.  ;  on  Ecclesiastical  Committee,  IIL,  343;  takes
oath  to  Civil  Constitution,  345.

Tallien,  J.  L.,  notice  of,  L,  373  «. ;  '  sub-editor,'  387 ;  editor  of  Ami  des


4-22  INDEX

Citoyens,  II.,  183  and  ji. ;  in  Commune,  195,  280,  325  n. ;  on  Aug.  loth,
249,  250  n. ;  Mme  de  Stael  pleads  with,  288-9  and  n. ;  in  Convention,
327 ;  report  on  Lyons,  III.,  14  n. ;  in  Committee  ot  Insurrection,  27  n.,
53  n.  ;  at  Bordeaux,  76  «.,  92,  123  and  n. ;  defends  Rossignol,  122  m.  ;
falls  in  love  with  Mme  de  Fontenai,  123-4  ^nd  n. ;  President  of  Con-
vention, 175  n. ;  in  danger,  201-2-3 ;  will  strike,  204,  206-7  and  n. ;
leader  at  Thermidor,  208  sqq.  and  nn.;  after  Thermidor,  217  «. ;  on
Comite  de  Saint  Public,  219  and  11. ;  his  power,  222 ;  his  loss  of
influence,  224  and  n. ;  gets  Hoche  to  murder  royalist  prisoners,  232  n.

Talma,  actor,  visited  by  Mirabeau,  I.,  192  n. ;  by  Dumouriez,  II.,  345  and  n.

Tarbe,  L.  H.,  Minister,  imprisoned,  II.,  282  n.

Tardivet-du-Repaire,  bodyguard,  saves  the  Queen,  I.,  336;  emigrates,  II.,  56.

Target,  G.  J.  B.,  Secretary  to  Jacobins,  I.,  133  n. ;  speaker  for  Tiers-Etat  in
Conferences,  198  n.,  203  n. ;  on  second  Constitutional  Committee,  262  n. ;
declines  to  defend  King,  II.,  379  and  n.

Tariff,  a  new,  inaugurated,  III.,  338.

Taschereau-Fargues,  P.  A.,  '  fipitre  a  Maximilien  Robespierre  aux  enfers,'
III.,  104  n.

Tassin,  Colonel  in  National  Guard,  tramples  on  'black  cockade,'  I.,  305;
succeeds  Mandat  as  Commander,  II.,  252  n. ;  accompanies  King  to
Assembly,  261  n.

Taxes,  produce  of,  III.,  334-5-6 ;  unpaid,  338.

Telegraphe  aerien.  III.,  160-1.

Temple,  Tour  du.  Royal  family  sent  to,  II.,  267  and  n. ;  description  of,  268  n.

Tennis-Court  at  Versailles,  occupied  by  Assembly,  I.,  207  sqq.  and  n.

Tennis-Court  Club,  sends  deputation  to  Assembly,  I.,  410.

Terrage  (or  Champart)  {see  also  Feudal  Rights),  I.,  276  n.

Terrasson,  witness  at  Queen's  trial.  III.,  99  n.

Terray,  I'Abbe  J,  M.,  Finance  Minister,  I.,  6  and  n. ;  III.,  329,  331.

Terror,  'the  order  of  the  day,'  III.,  108  and  n.;  hateful  to  the  nation,  145  ».;
no  connection  with  victory,  148  n. ;  the  '  White  Terror,'  238-9  and  n. ;
false  idea  that  France  prospered  under  the,  247  and  n.

Terrorists  after  Thermidor,  III.,  217  n.

Teutonic  spirit  contrasted  with  Gaelic,  III.,  230.

Thcatins,  riot  at  church  of,  II.,  86-7  and  n.

Theatres,  absurdity  and  dulness  of,  during  the  Terror,  III.,  113  and  n.

Thedtre-Audinot,  III.,  227  n.

Thedtre-Feydeau,  III.,  113  n.,  227  and  n.,  233.

Thi'dtre-Frangais,  Beaumarchais  crowned  in,  I.,  78  ;  performance  stopped  by
people  at,  222  n. ;  arrest  of  actors  of,  III.,  113  n.

Thedtre-Frangais,  Section  of,  I.,  391  n.

Thedtre-de-la-Nation,  riot  at,  II.,  361  w.,  385  and  n.

Thedtre-de-la-Republiqne,  III.,  113  n.

Thedtre-des-Varietes,  I.,  219;  II.,  39  n.

Thedtre-de-Vaiideville,  royalists  at,  II.,  56,  58.

Thhnistocle,  ship,  blown  up  at  Toulon,  III.,  131.

Theot,  Catherine,  '  prophetess,'  I.,  398  n.  ;  notice  of.  III.,  193  and  n. ;  report
on,  201  and  n.

Thermidor,  approach  of  Revolution  of,  III.,  196  n. ;  Revolution  of,  207  sqq.

Thermidorians,  composition  of  party  of,  III.,  217  n. ;  Comite  filled  up  by,
219  and  n.

Thermometre-du-jour,  newspaper,  approves  massacres,  II.,  372  n.

Theroigne,  A.  J.  ^demoiselle,'  notice  of,  I.,  170;  in  march  of  women,  311
sqq.;  as  Pallas  Athene,  320  sqq.;  visits- Liege,  II.,   127;   at  jfacobin


INDEX  42a

Club,  198,  206;  on  Aug.  loth,  247  sqq.,  259  ;  ^ogg^Ahy  Jacobin  women,
373  ;  III.,  48-9  and  n. ;  keeps  her  carriage,  III.,  22.

Thibaudeau,  A.  R.  H.,  '  Mdmoires  de,'  III.,  200  w. ;  on  Constitutional  Com-
mittee, 1795,  251  n.

Thiebault,  D.,  '  Memoires  de,'  III.,  309.

Thiers,  '  Histoire  de  la  Revolution  Fran9aise,'  I.,  183  n.

Thionville,  Siege  of,  II.,  286,  296,  336,  339.

Thornton,  Colonel,  '  Sporting  Tour  in  France,'  I.,  83  n.

Thorwaldsen,  his  monument  to  the  Swiss  Guards,  II.,  262  and  n.

Thouars,  captured  by  Vendeans,  III.,  321.

Thouret,  J.  G.,  on  second  Constitutional  Committee,  I.,  262  n. ;  notice  of,
357  and  n. ;  author  of  new  judicial  system,  361 ;  on  revision  of  Con-
stitution, II.,  138-9 ;  presides  at  last  session  of  Constituent,  144 ;
execution  of,  III.,  184;  was  against  election  of  judges  in  all  cases,
292.

Thouvenot,  P.,  consulted  by  Dumouriez,  II.,  296;  escapes  with  Dumouriez,
III.,  40  n.

Thugut,  Baron,  Austrian  Minister,  III.,  22  n. ;  his  wretched  policy,  64  n.,  131  ;
his  half-hearted  defence  of  Belgium,  162  «. ;  wishes  to  avoid  recognising
any  King  of  France,  190  n. ;  betrays  Pichegru,  253  n.

Thuriot  de  la  Rosiere,  J.  A.,  leading  Elector,  I.,  221  and  ». ;  notice  of,  238
and  n. ;  in  Legislative  Assembly,  II.,  154 ;  moves  to  disband  staff  of
National  Guard,  220  n. ;  on  Commission  of  Twenty-five,  279  n. ;  on
King's  trial,  382  ;  on  second  Comite  de  Saint  Public,  resigns.  III.,  71  n. ;
supports  worship  of  Reason,  139  n. ;  President  of  Convention,  208-9
and  n.;  on  CorniU  de  Salut  Public,  2ig  n.  ;  arrested,  237  n. ;  escapes
and  organises  Prairial,  242  n.

Tiers-Etat,  number  of  deputies  of,  I.,  165 ;  costume  of,  167  and  n. ;  com-
position of,  182 ;  attitude  to  Crown,  195-6 ;  shy  of  holding  conferences,
197-8  nn.

Tiffauge, , Republicans  concentrate  at,  III.,  322.

Timbre,  Editdii,  I.,  105  and  n.,  107.

Tissot,  police  spy,  at  Queen's  trial.  III.,  99  n.

Tithe,  discussion  in  Notables  on,  I.,  102  and  n.  ;  abolished,  271.

Tocqueville,  A.  de,  '  L'Ancien  Regime  et  la  Revolution,'  I.,  18  n. ;  on  Marquis
de  Mirabeau,  igo  n. ;  on  Feudal  Rights,  274  n. ;  on  cumbrous  judicial
system,  III.,  290;  on  Civil  Constitution  of  Clergy,  344.

Tom,  Choiseul's  jockey,  II.,  125.

Torn^,  P.  A.,  '  Bishop'  of  the  Department  of  the  Cher,  II.,  192  and  n.

Torture  abolished,  I.,  125  and  n.

Toulon,  insurrection  at.  III.,  74  and  n. ;  surrenders  to  English,  89  and  n. ;
its  fall  celebrated  at  Lyons,  127  M. ;  siege  of,  128;  fall  of,  130;  massacres
at,  130-1  and  nn. ;  name  changed  to  Port  de  la  Montague,  131  n. ;  '  White
Terror'  at,  238  m.  ;  Jacobin  insurrection  at,  239  and  w. ;  Societe  des
adoreurs  de  la  Libcrtc,  etc.,  at,  312,  314.

Toulongeon,  F.  E.  Marquis  de,  '  Histoire  de  France  depuis  la  Revolution  de
1789,'  I.,  102  n. ;  some  account  of  his  book,  357  n.

Toulouse,  Lomenie  resigns  See  of,  I.,  99  n. ;  Parlement  of,  III,,  285-6.

Tournay,  French  movement  towards,  II.,  209  «.  ;  Mme  de  Genlis  at,  III.,
17  n. ;  Parlement  of,  286.

Tournay,  Louis,  old  soldier  at  siege  of  Bastille,  I.,  240.

Tonrnelle,  La,  III.,  282.

Tourneux,  M.,  *  Les  Promenades  a  la  Mode,'  I.,  225  n. ;  '  Bibliographic
de  I'Histoire  de  Paris  pendant  la  Revolution,'  I.,  382  n.


424  INDEX

Tournois,  •  Histoire  de  L.  P.  J.  Due  d'Orleans  et  du  parti  d'Orleans,'  II.,
174  n.

Tours,  in  danger  from  Vendeans,  III.,  321.

Tourzel,  La  Marquise  de,  takes  refuge  in  King's  room,  I.,  336  n.  ;  escapes
with  royal  family,  II.,  96  sqq.  ;  '  Memoires  de,'  102  n. ;  not  imprisoned,
291.

Toussaint-Louverture,  III.,  96  ti.

Traites,  account  and  amount  of,  III.,  335-6  and  n.

*  Trees  of  Liberty,'  account  of,  I.,  423  n.  ;  procession  to  plant  on  Feuillants
terrace,  II.,  214  sqq.

Treilhard,  J.  B.,  supports  war  of  propaganda^  II.,  313  n.  ;  on  first  Comite  de
Salut  Public,  III.,  34  n.  ;  Convention  Commissioner  to  Bordeaux,  76  w.  ;
on  second  Constitutional  Committee,  82  n.  ;  elected  to  Comite  de  Salut
Public,  219  n.  ;  on  Ecclesiastical  Committee,  343-4.

Trenck,  Friedrich  Baron  von,  notice  of,  I.,  377  and  n,  ;  Forster  sees  him  in
Paris,  III.,  22.

Tresoriers,  function  of.  III.,  289-90.

Trianon,  the  little,  Louis  XV.  taken  ill  at,  I.,  4.

Tribout,  General  A.  J.,  beaten  by  Vendeens,  III.,  323.

Tribunal  Criminel  Extraordinaire,  II.,  267  n.,  281  and  n. ;  III.,  29  n.

Tribunal  Rcvohitionnaire,  account  of.  III.,  32  and  n,  ;  Marat  before,  44  n.  ;
busy,  95  ;  Bulletin  de  T.  R.,  99  ;  freed  from  forms  of  law,  103  and  n.  ;
divided  into  four  sections,  194  and  n. ;  suspended,  219  n.  ;  abolished,
238  n.

Tribunaux  de  Commerce,  III.,  293.

Tribunaux-d' Exception,  to  be  abolished,  I.,  125  n.

Tribunaux-Presidiaux,  to  be  created,  I.,  125  m.  ;  III.,  289-90.

Tricolor,  origin  of,  I.,  228  n. ;  slow  growth  of  use  of,  301  n.

Tricoteuses,  II.,  373,  382;  III.,  234.

Trier,  Elector  of,  ordered  to  disperse  Emigres,  II.,  179  n.,  181  m.  ;  at  mercy
of  French  Army,  346  71. ;  Hoche  ought  to  have  seized.  III.,  229  n.

Triumvirate,  separates  from  extreme  Left,  II.,  131  and  n.,  132,  138  and  n.

Tronchet,  F.  D.,  on  second  Constitutional  Committee,  I.,  262  «. ;  defends
King,  notice  of,  II.,  379  and  n. ;  pleads  for  delay,  391.

Tronson-Ducoudray,  G.  A.,  counsel  for  Queen,  III.,  98  n.

Troude,  '  Batailles  Navales  de  la  France,'  III.,  310.

Troyes,  Parlement  banished  to,  I.,  109;  Parlement  finds  it  dull  at,  113  n.  ;
Danton  escapes  to,  II.,  136  n.

Tuetey,  '  Repertoire  Generale  des  Sources  MSS.  de  I'Histoire  de  Paris,'  I.,
164  ». ;  '  L' Assistance  Publique  a  Paris,'  287  n.

Tuileries,  balloon  ascent  from  garden  of,  I.,  66;  dragoon-charge  in  garden
of,  224  ;  place  of  public  resort,  225  n. ;  repainted,  etc.,  for  royal  family,
352  ;  Dauphin  gardening  at,  353  ;  internal  arrangements  of,  355  and  n. ;
escape  of  royal  family  from,  II.,  98  n. ;  seals  placed  on,  103  ». ;  King
complains  of  discomfort  of,  104  n. ;  guard  at,  130,  131  and  n. ;  first  in-
vasion of,  217  sqq.  nn.;  shutting  of  gardens  of,  238;  preparations  for
defence  of,  244  ;  defenders  of,  246  and  n. ;  second  invasion  and  massacre
at,  262  sqq.  nn. ;  Convention  will  sit  in  theatre  of,  338  «. ;  report  on
papers  found  in,  369  «.,^374-5  n. ;  Convention  in.  III.,  45  and  n. ;  forges  in
garden  of,  94  ;  FHe  of  Etre- Supreme  in  garden  of,  192  and  n.

Tuileries,  Section  of,  III.,  47,  211.

Turcoing,  victory  of.  III.,  162  n.

Turgot,  A.  R.  J.,  Controller-General,  notice  of,  I.,  38  and  ».,  39  «. ;  on  free-
trade  and  Guerre-des-Farines,  44-5  and  m.  ;  dismissal  of,  52-3  and  ».;  his


INDEX  425

epigram  on  Franklin,  56  n. ;  on  Gilds,  69  n. ;  copied  by  Calonne,  90,
93  n. ;  death  of,  113  ;  opposed  to  idea  of  States-General,  145  n. ;  leader
of  physiocrats,  igo  n. ;  trained  as  an  Intendant,  258  n. ;  his  financial
reforms,  330,  332,  336.

Turin,  d'Artois  emigrates  to,  L,  252  n. ;  Leopold  writes  from,  II.,  180.

Turreau,  L.  M.,  General,  in  Eastern  Pyrenees,  III.,  153  «. ;  attacked  by
Phelippeaux,  i6g  n. ;  '  M^moires  pour  servir  a  I'Histoire  de  la  Guerre
de  la  Vendue,'  318 ;  his  barbarous  method  of  warfare,  324.

'  Two-Chamber  Royalists,'  I.,  272  and  n.

Udon,  Mme  d',  gives  breakfasts,  II.,  166,  186,  igg.
Ushant,  English  victory  at,  I.,  57-8  and  n.
Uzes,  riots  at,  II.,  53,  158-9.

Vacations,  Chamhte  des,  in  Parlement,  I.,  146  n. ;  its  duties.  III.,  282,  292.

Vadier,  M.  G.  A.,  in  Comite  de  Siirete  Generate,  III.,  72  n. ;  notice  of,  145
and  n. ;  report  against  C.  Th^ot,  201  ;  first  denunciation  of,  233-4  5
ordered  to  transportation,  235.

*  Vainqueurs  de  la  Bastille,'  incorporated  in  National  Guard,  I.,  216  w. ;  de-
putation to  Assembly,  410.

Vaison,  Maire  of,  buried  alive,  II.,  161.

Valady,  Marquis  de,  notice  of,  I.,  170  and  n. ;  formerly  officer  in  Gardes-
Franqaises,  218;  suspected  of  debauching  them,  219;  escapes  firom
arrest,  III.,  62  ;  end  of,  106.

Valaze,  C.  E.  Dufriche  de,  notice  of,  II.,  150  andn. ;  his  report  on  '  crimes  '  of
King,  368,  369  n. ;  votes  King's  death,  391  n. ;  meetings  at  his  home,
III.,  51  and  n. ;  shows  courage  on  May  31st,  54  n. ;  trial  of,  102  sqq.  nn.  ;
suicide  of,  104.

Valence,  C.  M.  A.  Comte  de,  his  bravery  at  Neerwinden,  III.,  29  n.

Valenciennes,  Dumouriez'  designs  on.  III.,  29  n.,  37  ;  retreat  on,  40 ;  siege
of,  63,  64  n. ;  fall  of,  81  and  n. ;  re-besieged,  154 ;  garrison  of,  in  La
Vendee,  322.

Valliere,  J.  F.,  Marquis  de,  his  reforms  in  scientific  warfare.  III.,  296.

Valmy,  mill  of,  II.,  113;  battle  of,  335-6-7-9  and  ««. ;  proportion  between
regulars  and  volunteers  at,  307.

Valogne,  on  Commission  of  Twelve,  III.,  47  n.

Valori,  F.  F.  Comte,  '  Precis  Historique  du  voyage  entrepris  par  sa  Majesty
Louis  XVI,'  etc.,  II.,  90;  his  share  in  the  flight  to  Varennes,  108  and
n,  sqq. ;  his  trial  unfinished,  137  n.

Vandamme,  D.  R.,  his  valour  at  Hondschoote,  III.,  121  n.

Vane,  Sir  H.,  his  efforts  to  prolong  power  of  Long  Parliament,  III.,  252  n.

Vannes,  Naval  School  at.  III.,  311.

Var,  Department  of,  II.,  354.

Varennes,  authorities  on  the  '  Flight  to  Varennes,'  II.,  9o«. ;  stages  on  the
journey  to,  109  n. ;  topography  of,  119  n.,  120;  municipality  of,  122,
124  «. ;  return  of  royal  family  from,  128  and  «. ;  the  flight  hushed  up,
140 ;  expects  vengeance,  295  ;  fatal  effect  on  Army  of  flight  to,  300,  303.

Varigny,  officer  in  bodyguard,  massacred,  I.,  335,  337.

Varlet,  J.,  in  Convention,  II.,  327  n. ;  notice  of,  384  n. ;  rioter  against  the
Girondists,  III.,  5,  27,  47;  arrested,  50;  released,  52  and  «. ;  on  Com-
mittee of  Insurrection,  53  n. ;  in  Commune,  146.

Vassau,  Mdlle,  marries  the  Marquis  de  Mirabeau,  I.,  190  n.

Vatel,  C.,  '  Vie  de  Vergniaud,'  II.,  150  «.

Vauban,  S.  Le  P.  de,  originator  of  idea  oilmpot  unique.  III.,  335.
VOL.  III.  27*


426  INDEX

Vauban,  J.  A.  J.  le  P.  Comte  de,  '  Histoire  de  la  guerre  de  la  Vend6e,'  III.,

231  n.

Vaublanc,  V.  M.  V.  Comte  de,  notice  of,  II.,  152  n. ;  escapes  from  Assembly,

245  and  n.
Vauchelet,  '  Guadeloupe,  ses  enfants  celebres:  Dugommier,'  III.,  129  n.
Vaucluse,  Department  of,  III.,  151  n.
Vaudreuil,  '  Correspondance  du  Comte  de  Vaudreuil  avec  le  Comte  d'Artois,'

I-,  343  n.
Vaugirard,  cemetery  of,  II.,  317.

Vaultier,  M.  C,  'Souvenirs  de  I'lnsurrection  Normande,'  III.,  63  n,
Vautibault,  G.  de,  '  Les  d'Orl^ans,'  III.,  115  n.
Vautrait,  Le  (theboarhounds),  suppressed,  I.,  83  and  n.,  120.
Vauvilliers,  J.  F.,  in  municipal  office,  I.,  155  n.
Venaissin,  civil  war  in  the,  II.,  159  and  n.  sqq.
Vendee,  war  of  La  V.  foreshadowed,    I.,  362;    nonjurors  stirring  up,  II.,

167-8 ;    growling,    186,   285-6 ;   Mallet  du   Pan  mistrusts,   III.,    12   n. ;

garrison  of  Mainz  sent  to,  21  n.  ;  news  of  insurrection  in,  23  and  «. ;

Santerre  in,  63 ;  neglected  by  allies,  64  n. ;  the  insurgents  expected  in

Paris,  77  ». ;  cruelties  committed  in,  122  n. ;  Napoleon  nearly  sent  to,

225  n. ;  pacification  of,  by  Hoche,  231  n.;  insurgents  from,  at  Quiberon,

232  n. ;  appendix  on,  318  sqq.
Veneti,  ancestors  of  Vendeens,  III.,  319.
Vengeur,  legend  of  the  ship.  III.,  158  and  w.,  159.

Verdun,  siege  of,  II.,  286  and  n.,  293-4  and  n. ;  execution  of  the  '  Virgins  of
V.'  294  n. ;  fall  of,  297  ;  evacuation  of,  339  n.

Vergennes,  C.  G.  Comte  de,  called  to  Ministry  by  Maurepas,  L,  39  n. ;
against  a  closer  alliance  with  Austria,  56  n. ;  notice  of,  82  and  n. ;  his
death  a  blow  to  Calonne,  91  «.,  95  ;  always  distrusted  Mirabeau,  191  n.

Vergniaud,  P.  V.,  notice  of,  II.,  150  and  n. ;  on  amnesty  to  murderers,  164
and  n. ;  accused  of  venality,  173  n. ;  speech  of  Jan.  loth,  1792,  185  n. ;
occasionally  wakes  up,  194 ;  speech  of  March  loth,  1792,  199  n. ;
denounces  King,  214 ;  proposes  to  admit  mob  to  Assembly,  216  n. ;
comes  to  Tuileries,  218  n. ;  speech  of  July  3rd,  1792,  224  ».,  226  n. ;  on
Aug.  loth,  264  sqq.  and  nn. ;  at  end  of  Legislative,  276  ;  on  Commission
of  Twenty-five,  279  n. ;  speech  of  Sept.  2nd,  1792,  298  n. ;  denounces
Robespierre's  language,  357  n. ;  his  laziness,  371 ;  his  visions  fulfilled,
348 ;  on  first  Constitutional  Committee,  349  n. ;  on  King's  trial,  382  n.,
389  and  n.;  his  votes,  389,  391  n.,  392;  at  Lepelletier's  funeral,  400;
his  eloquence.  III.,  9;  on  suppleans,  11  «. ;  his  speech  of  March  13th,
I793»  27  and  n. ;  of  April  loth,  1793,  43  n. ;  his  cowardice,  53  ;  his
arrest,  58  and  n.,  61 ;  his  trial,  102  sqq.  nn. ;  his  death,  105.

Vermond,  L'Abb^  J.  de,  reader  to  the  Queen,  notice  of,  I.,  95-6  and  n. ;
burnt  in  effigy,  141 ;  his  absence  lamented  by  Mercy,  253  w.

Vermorel,  A.,  *  (Euvres  de  Robespierre,'  II.,  185  n.

Verney,  turnkey  at  Luxembourg,  executed.  III.,  238  n.

Vernier,  T.,  forced  into  President's  chair  on  ist  Prairial,  III.,  244  n.  ;
proposes  to  liquidate  Assignats,  340.

Vernon,  skirmish  at.  III.,  75-6  and  n.

Versailles,  Louis  XV.  carried  dying  to  chateau  of,  I.,  4 ;  Quartier-Saint-
Louis  in,  21  n. ;  treaties  of,  28  n. ;  Louis  XV l.'s  petit-cabinet  in  chateau
of,  40  n. ;  Guerre  des  Farines  at,  44-5  and  n.  ;  Notables  meet  at,  91  ;
lit -de-justice  at,  107  ;  procession  at,  166  sqq. ;  municipality  of.  National
Guard  of,  300-1-2  and  n. ;  view  over  the  neighbourhood  of,  316-7;
monarchical  views  of  municipality  of,  325-6 ;  patriotic  society  of,  410  ». ;


INDEX  427

deputation  of  jf-acobins  at,  II.,  59;  massacre  of  Orleans  prisoners  at,
322  and  n. ;  \Vomen  of,  III.,  48.

Veto,  discussion  on  King's  right  of,  I.,  272  and  «.,  297  and  n. ;  on  laws
against  priests  and  Emigres^  II.,  i8g,  190-1  and  nn.

Vexin,  mutiny  in  Regiment  du,  III.,  302.

Viard  (or  Viart),  A.,  accuses  Mme  Roland,  II.,  385-6  and  n.

Vic,  Regiment  de  Salm  cantoned  at,  II.,  17.

Vicars-Superior,  III.,  342  «.,  343.

Victime,  Bah  a  la,  III.,  225,

Victoire  {see  also  Mesdames  de  France),  flight  of  Mme,  II.,  60-1.

Viet,  postmaster  at  Chalons,  II.,  112  n.,  114  n,

Viger,  L.  F.  S.,  on  Commission  of  Twelve,  III.,  47  w. ;  arrest  of,  58  and  n. ;
trial  of,  103  n.  sqq.

Vilate,  J.,  '  Causes  Secretes  de  la  Revolution  de  Thermidor,'  III.,  100  «. ;  at
Fite  oil  Eire  Supreme,  204  n. ;  trial  and  execution  of,  237-8  and  n.

Villaret-Joyeuse,  L.  T.  Comte  de,  on  '  First  of  June,'  III.,  157  n. ;  on  the
badness  of  his  captains,  312  ;  his  helpless  condition,  315.

Villars-Cotterets,  palace  of  d'Orleans,  I.,  58  n.,  118.

Villaume,  Mme  et  Mdlle,  milliners,  II.,  285.

Ville-de-Paris,  battleship  presented  to  Crown,  I.,  57;  taken  by  Rodney,
58.

Villedeuil,  L.  de,  Controller-General,  1.,  98  and  n. ;  against  double  Turs-
£tat  in  Council,  152  n.

Villejuif,  Brissot  arrested  at.  III.,  58  «.

Villeneuve,  P.  C.  S.  de,  his  sarcastic  letter  to  Napoleon,  III.,  310.

Villequier,  L.  M.  A.  Due  de  (afterwards  Due  d'Aumont),  gives  tickets
of  entry  to  Tuileries,  II.,  64;  his  letter  to  Lafayette,  emigrates,
68  and  n. ;  his  apartment  in  the  Tuileries,  96-7  and  nn.

Villette,  C.  Marquis  de  la,  friend  of  Voltaire,  II.,  80  n.

Villette,  Mme  de  la,  wife  of  above,  I.,  338  n.

Vimeux,  General,  succeeds  Turreau  in  Vendee,  III.,  324.

Vincennes,  dungeon  of,  Mirabeau  in  prison  at,  I.,  175,  190  n. ;  II.,  62;
attacked  by  mob,  62  sqq.  nn. ;  telegraph  at,  III.,  160.

Vincent,  F.  N.,  henchman  of  Hubert,  notice  of,  II.,  42  «. ;  leader  of  atheist
movement,  III.,  135  ;  arrested  and  released,  138  n. ;  in  Revolutionary
Army,  141;  in  Commune,  146;  arrest  of,  169;  end  of,  173-4.

Vingtiemes,  the  'second'  to  be  reimposed,  I.,  114;  the  three  Vingtihnes,
account  and  amount  of.  III.,  335.

Virgil,  quoted,  II.,  362  and  n.

Viroflay,  Club  of,  I.,  197.

Vitry,  Foulon  discovered  at,  I.,  256.

Vivarais,  Provincial  Assembly  in,  I.,  66.

Vivier,  N.  J.,  President  of  Jacobin  Club,  III.,  213  n. ;  executed  with
Robespierre,  220  n.

Vizille,  Assembly  of,  I.,  119  n.

Voltaire,  hails  the  golden  age,  I.,  39 ;  his  reception  and  death  at  Paris,
53-4  and  n.;  was  in  favour  of  Lomenie,  99  ;  always  hostile  to  Parlements,
125  w. ;  his  epigram  on  Pompignan,  233  and  n. ;  translation  of  his  relics
the  first  non-Catholic  fete,  408  n. ;  II.,  80  n. ;  on  La  Revolution,  III.,
167  n. ;  typical  of  Gaelic  spirit,  230  ;  condemns  the  restoration  of  Parle-
ments, 285.

Volunteers  levied,  II.,  185  n.,  233-4  and  n. ;  III.,  305-6-7-8-9.

Vouland,  H.,  in  Comite  de  Sitrete  Generate,  III.,  72  n.

Viihrer,  '  Histoire  de  la  Dette  Publique  de  la  France,'  III.,  331.


428  INDEX

Wahl,  M.,  '  Les  Premieres  Annies  de  la  Revolution  a  Lyon,'  II.,  48  n.

Wallon,  ♦  La  Terreur,'  II.,  287  n.

Warren,  Sir  J.  B.,  commands  English  squadron  at  Quiberon,  III.,  324.

Washington,  naturalised  a  Frenchman,  II.,  278  «.;  Paine  narrates  his  escape
to.  III.,  213  n.

Wattignies,  battle  of,  III.,  154  and  n.

Weber, '  Memoires  de,'  their  real  author,  I.,  32  «.;  frightened  at  the  prospect
of  bankruptcy,  138 ;  awakened  on  night  of  Oct.  5th,  332 ;  sees  a  man
aim  at  Queen,  340  ;  believes  d'Orleans  guilty,  344  ;  accompanies  Queen
to  Paris,  345  ;  in  National  Guard,  II.,  211 ;  on  the  Marseillais,  229  ;  on
duty  at  Tuileries,  241 ;  on  Marie-Antoinette,  III.,  loi.

Weissembourg,  lines  of,  III.,  81  and  «.,  155  and  n.,  156  n.

Westermann,  F.  J.,  at  Committee  of  Sections,  II.,  237 ;  on  Aug.  loth,  250-1
and  «. ;  in  Vendee,  III.,  121 ;  in  prison,  171,  178  and  n. ;  urges  Danton
to  act,  176 ;  his  rashness  in  the  field,  322-3.

Westphalia,  peace  of,  I.,  28  n.

Whigs,  deputation  of,  from  London,  II.,  198.

Williams,  H.  M.,  '  Letters  from  France,'  II.,  295  n.

Wimpffen,  F.  Baron  de,  notice  of.  III.,  62  w.;  becomes  royalist,  75-6  and  n.

Winter  of  1788,  the  terrible,  I.,  159.

Wisdom,  statue  of,  III.,  192  n.

Witt,  P.  de,  '  Une  invasion  Prussienne  en  Hollande,'  I.,  114-5  w.

Wolf-hounds,  suppressed,  I.,  83  and  «.,  120.

Wordsworth,  his  sonnet  on  the  Revolution,  II.,  337  n.

Worms,  taken  by  Custine,  II.,  346  n.

Worth,  Prussians  advance  to,  III.,  155  n.

Wiirmser,  drives  Custine  out  of  Palatinate,  III.,  21  n. ;  at  Weissembourg,
155-6  and  n. ;  tells  Thugut  of  Pichegru's  treachery,  253  n.

Wurtemburg,  Duke  of,  complains  to  Diet,  II.,  179  n.

Yeu,  lie  d',  English  and  Emigre  descent  on,  III.,  325.

York,  Duke  of,  Commander  of  English  Army,  III.,  22  and  n.  ;  besieging
Valenciennes,  63  ;  and  Dunkirk,  64  n.  ;  takes  Valenciennes,  81  and  n.  ;
retreat  of,  154  and  n.  ;  abandons  defence  of  Holland,  229  and  n.

Young,  A.,  '  Travels  during  the  years  1787-8-9,'  notice  of,  I.,  5  n.  ;  at
Liancourt,  63  and  «.  ;  on  pamphlets,  121  n.  ;  on  price  of  bread,  155  n.  ;
on  crisis  of  17th  June,  204  n.  ;  on  crisis  of  27th  June,  213  n.  ;  his  con-
versation with  a  peasant  woman,  279,  280 ;  sees  the  Seigneurs  '  skip,'
282  ;  pestered  by  poachers,  285  ;  on  free  trade,  286  n. ;  visits  Raynal,
289  n. ;  sees  royal  family  in  Tuileries  Gardens,  353.

Ypres,  Pichegru  takes.  III.,  162  n.

Ysabeau,  I'Abbe  C.  A.,  proconsul  at  Bordeaux,  III.,  76%.,  123.

Ziegler  and  Mauss,  breeches-makers  at  Strasburg,  III.,  166  n.

Zisca,  III.,  6.

Zweibriicken,  Duke  of,  complains  to  Diet,  II.,  179  n.


THE   ABERDEEN   UNIVERSITY  PRESS   LIMITED


/


•i^BlK'


DC-

148

.C37

1902

V.3


Carlyle,  Thomas,  1795-1881
The  French  Revolution  :


